Catalog link: https://jainqq.org/explore/003494/1

Page #1 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
In memory of the revered Gurudev Shri Joravarmalji Maharaj, this is organized by
the Coordinator and Chief Editor, Yuvacharya Shri Ma Ekara Mana Trini
Chedasatraani. [Dasha-shruta-skandha, Brihat-kalpa-sutra, Vyavahar-sutra]
(Original translation, commentary, notes, and Pati-tata included)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
sva0 pUjya gurudeva zrI jorAvaramala jI mahArAja kI smRti meM Ayojita saMyojaka
evaM pradhAna sampAdaka yuvAcArya zrI mA ekara mAna trINi cedasatrANi. [
dazAzrutaskandha, bRhatkalpasUtra, vyavahArasUtra] (mUla anuvAda-vivecana-
TippaNa-pATITATa yukta) neration international Pe Personal use only

Page #2 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
‡•ê Aham Jinagam-Granthamala: Granthank 32-A {In the auspicious memory of the most
revered Gurudev Pujya Shri Joravarmalji Maharaj, sponsored Triini Chhedsutrani
Dasashrutaskandha - Brihatkalpa Vyavaharsutra [Original Text, Hindi Translation,
Commentary, Notes] Inspiration (Self) Up-Promoter Shasanasevi Swami Shri
Bajlalji Maharaj Coordinator and First Editor (Self) Yuvacharya Shri Mishrimalji
Maharaj 'Madhukar' Translator - Commentator - Editor Anuyogapravartka Muni Shri
Kanhaiyalalji M. 'Kamal' Gitarya Shri Tilockmuniji M. Publisher Shri Agam
Prakashan Samiti, Byawar (Rajasthan)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
OM ahaM jinAgama-granthamAlA : granthAGka 32-A {paramazraddheya gurudeva pUjya
zrI jorAvaramalajI mahArAja ko puNyasmRti meM prAyojita trINi chedasUtrANi
dazAzrutaskandha - bRhatkalpa vyavahArasUtra [mUlapATha, hindI anuvAda,
vivecana, TippaNa yukta] preraNA (sva.) upapravartaka zAsanasevI svAmI zrI
bajalAlajI mahArAja saMyojaka tathA prAdya sampAdaka (sva0) yuvAcArya zrI
mizrImalajI mahArAja 'madhukara' anuvAdaka - vivecaka-sampAdaka
anuyogapravartaka muni zrI kanhaiyAlAlajI ma. 'kamala' gItArya zrI tilokamunijI
ma0 prakAzaka zrI AgamaprakAzana samiti, byAvara (rAjasthAna)

Page #3 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Jinagam-Granthamala: Granthaang 32-A / Nirdeshan _ Sadhvi Shri Umravakuvar
'Archana' / Sampadakamandal Anuyogapravarttak Muni Shri Kanhaiyalalji 'Kamal'
Upadhyay Shri Devendramuni Shastri Shri Ratnamuni 0 Samprerak Muni Shri
Vinaykumar 'Bheem' Shri Mahendramuni 'Dinakar' [Pratham Sanskaran Veer Nirvan
San. 2517 Vikram San. 2048 January 1992 E. / Prakashk Shri Agam Prakashan Samiti
Shri Braj-Madhukar Smriti Bhavan, Pipaliya Bazaar, Byawar (Rajasthan)
Pin-305901] Mudrak Satishchandra Shukla Vaidik Yantraalay, Kesargunj,
Ajmer-305001 D Mulya 160) Rupane: .

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
jinAgama-granthamAlA : granthAGa 32-A / nirdezana _ sAdhvI zrI umarAvakuvara
'arcanA' / sampAdakamaNDala anuyogapravartaka muni zrI kanhaiyAlAlajI 'kamala'
upAcArya zrI devendramuni zAstrI zrI ratanamuni 0 sampreraka muni zrI
vinayakumAra 'bhIma' zrI mahendramuni 'dinakara' [prathama saMskaraNa vIra
nirvANa saM02517 vikrama saM0 2048 janavarI 1992 I. / prakAzaka zrI
AgamaprakAzana samiti zrI braja-madhukara smRti bhavana, pIpaliyA bAjAra,
byAvara (rAjasthAna) pina-305901 ] mudraka satIzacandra zukla vaidika
yaMtrAlaya, kesaragaMja, ajamera-305001 D mUlya 160) rupAne : .

Page #4 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Published at the Holy Remembrance occasion of Rev. Guru Shri Joravarmalji
Maharaj **TREENI CHHEDSUTRANI** Dashashrutskandha Brihatkalpa Vyavhar Sutras
(Original Text with Variant Readings, Hindi Version, Notes and Annotations etc.)
Inspiring Soul (Late) Up-pravartaka Shasansevi Rev. Swami Shri Brijlalji Maharaj
Convener & Founder Editor (Late) Yuvacharya Shri Mishrimalji Maharaj 'Madhukar'
Translator-Annotator-Editor Anuyoga Pravartaka Muni Shri Kanbaiyalalji 'Kamal'
Geetarth Shri Tilokmuniji Publishers Shri Agam Prakashan Samiti Beawar (Raj.)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
Publisbed at the Holy Remembrance occasion of Rev. Guru Shri Joravarmalji
Maharaj TREENI CHHEDSUTRANI Dashashrutskandha Brihatkalpa Vyavhar Sutras (
Original Text with Variant Readings, Hindi Version, Notes and Annotations etc. ]
Inspiring Soul (Late) Up-pravartaka Shasansevi Rev. Swami Shri Brijlalji Maharaj
Convener & Founder Editor (Late) Yuvacharya Shri Mishrimalji Maharaj 'Madhukar'
Trabslator-Annotator-Editor Anuyoga Pravartaka Muni Shri Kanbaiyalalji 'Kamal'
Geetarth Shri Tilokmuniji Publishers Shri Agam Prakashan Samiti Beawar (Raj.)

Page #5 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Jinagam Granthmala Publications No. 32-B O Direction Sadhwi Shri Umravkunwar
'Archana' Board of Editors Anuyogapravartaka Muni Shri Kanbaiyalalji 'Kamal'
Upacharya Shri Devendra Muni Shastri Shri Ratan Muni O Promotor Muni Shri
Vinayakumar 'Bhima' Sri Mahendra Muni 'Dinakar' First Edition Vir-Nirvana Samvat
2517 Vikram Samvat 2048, January 1992. O Publisher Shri Agam Prakashan Samiti,
Shri Brij-Madhukar Smriti Bhawan, Pipaliya Bazar, Beawar (Raj.) Pin 305 901 O
Printer Satish Chandra Shukla Vedic Yantralaya Kesarganj, Ajmer Price Rs Gtd
+75|

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
Jinagam Granthmala Publicatios No. 32-B O Direction Sadhwi Shri Umravkunwar
'Archana' Board of Editors Anuyogapravartaka Muni Shri Kanbaiyalalji 'Kamal'
Upacharya Shri Devendra Muni Shastri Shri Ratan Muni O Promotor Muni Shri
Vinayakumar 'Bhima' Sri Mahendra Muni 'Dinakar' First Edition Vir-Nirvana Samvat
2517 Vikram Samvat 2048, January 1992. O Publisher Shri Agam Prakashan Samiti,
Shri Brij-Madhukar Smriti Bhawan, Pipaliya Bazar, Beawar (Raj.) Pin 305 901 O
Printer Satish Chandra Shukla Vedic Yantralaya Kesarganj, Ajmer Price Rs Gtd
+75|

Page #6 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
At the lotus feet of all the Shrutadhara Sthaviras of the past, present and
future, who are constantly engaged in the practice of Samarpana Niratichaar and
Samyama Sadhana.  Samarpana Anuyogpravartan Muni Kanhaiyalal 'Kamal' Geetaarth
Tilokmuni.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
samarpaNa niraticAra saMyamasAdhanA meM satata saMlagna rahane vAle atIta,
anAgata aura vartamAna ke sabhI zrutadhara sthaviroM ke karakamaloM meN|
samarpaka anuyogapravartaka muni kanhaiyAlAla 'kamala' gItArtha tilokamuni

Page #7 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Please provide the text you would like translated. I need the text to translate
it into English.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================


Page #8 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Under the heading "Three Chhedamutra", the Dasha-Shruta-Skandha, Brihat-Kalpa
and Vyavahar, these three Chhedamutra are published. Due to the large number of
pages, the Nisha-th-amutra has been published as a separate volume. The
translation, commentary, editing, etc. of these four Chhedasutra has been done
with great effort, dedication and concentration by Muni Shri Tilokmuniji in the
presence of Anuyog-Pravartak Muni Shri Kanhaiyalalji M. 'Kamal'. Therefore,
readers should contact Muni Shri Tilokmuniji for the solution of their queries
related to Chhedamutra. The Chhedasutra are included in the last section of the
Agambattisi. With their publication, the publication work of all the Agamas has
been completed. Therefore, as a token of gratitude, the committee presents its
request. When Yuvacharya Shri Sw. Shraddhey Madhukaramuniji M. Sa. was studying
the Agamas with his revered Gurudev Shri Joravarmalji M. Sa., Gurudev Shri had
expressed his feelings many times that if the Agamas were made available in a
simple and understandable language and style along with their commentaries, it
would be very useful for reading and studying. Yuvacharya Shri was inspired by
these feelings of Gurudev Shri. He discussed with his elder Guru-mata Swami Shri
Hazarimlalji M., Swami Shri Brijlalji M., made plans and when he completed the
plan on his own, he also informed the learned Muni Rajas and learned Sadhvis
about his ideas. He consulted with the pious householders. In this way, the plan
was approved by everyone and the committee. Then, on Vaishakh Shukla 10, Vikram
Samvat 2036, the day of the Nirvana of Bhagwan Mahavir, the announcement was
made to start the editing and publication of Bhagwan's teachings in the form of
Agambattisi, and the work started according to the prescribed rules and
regulations. On the day of Yuvacharya's Chhadar-Pradan Mahatmav, the
Gracharangamutra was presented to the readers as Jinagam Granthamala Granthank 1
for their study. This publication tradition was going on at a rapid pace when a
terrible incident occurred. Deep waves of sadness engulfed the committee. The
planner Yuvacharya Shri passed away. This was a great loss. But, with the
strength of the courage and the blessings of Sw. Yuvacharya Shri, the committee
remained committed to its work. It is the result of this that the great work of
publishing Agambattisi, which was started, has been completed as per the rules.
The committee is grateful to Adhyatmayogini Vidushi Mahamathi Shri
Umravakoovarji M. Sa. "Archana" for her guidance and for inspiring the committee
to complete the work by filling the void left by Yuvacharya Shri. Padmashri
Mohanmalji...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
prakAzakIya "trINi chedamutrANi' zIrSaka ke antargata dazAzrutaskandha,
bRhatkalpa aura vyavahAra ye tIna chedamUtra prakAzita hai| pRSTha maryAdA
adhika hone se nizIthamutra ko pRthaka granthAMka ke rUpa meM prakAzita kiyA hai
/ ina cAroM chedasUtroM kA anuvAda. vivecana, saMpAdana aAdi kA kArya mukhya
rUpa se anuyogapravartaka muni zrI kanhaiyAlAlajI ma. 'kamala' ke sAnnidhya meM
gItArtha muni zrI tilokamunijI ne vahuta parizrama. lagana aura manoyogapUrvaka
kiyA hai| atAva pAThakagaNa chedamtroM sambandhI apanI jijJAsAnoM ke samAdhAna
ke lie muni zrI tilokamunijI se saMparka bnaayeN| AgamabattImI ke aMtima varga
meM chadasUtroM kA samAveza hai| inake prakAzana ke sAtha sabhI AgamoM kA
prakAzana kArya saMpanna ho gayA hai / atAva upamahAra ke rUpa meM mamiti apanA
nivedana prastuta karatI hai zramaNamaMdha ke yuvAcAryazrI sva. zraddhaya
madhukaramunijI ma. sA. jaba apane mahAmahima gurudevazrI jorAvaramalajI ma. sA.
meM prAgamoM kA adhyayana karate the taba gurudevazrI ne aneka bAra apane udgAra
vyakta kiye the ki prAgamoM ko unakI TIkAnoM kA mArAMza lekara sarala subodha
bhASA, zailI meM upalabdha karAyA jAye to paThana-pAThana ke liye vizeSa upayogI
hogaa| gurudevazrI ke ina udagAroM meM bavAcAryazrI jI ko preraNA milii| apane
jyeSTha gahamrAtA svAmIjI zrI hajArImalajI ma., svAmIjI zrI brajalAlajI ma. se
carcA karate, yojanA banAte aura jaba apanI ora me yojanA ko pUrNa pada diyA
taba vidvadvarya munirAjoM, viduSI sAdhviyoM ko bhI apane vicAroM meM avagata
kraayaa| sadgRhasthoM se parAmarza kiyA / ima prakAra mabhI aura meM yojanA kA
anumodana ho gayA taba vi. saM. 2036 vaizAkha zuklA 10 zramaNabhagavAna mahAvIra
ke kaivalyadivasa para bhagavAna kI dezanA rUpa pAgamabattIsI ke saMpAdana,
prakAzana ko prArambha karane kI ghoSaNA kara dI gaI aura nirdhArita rIti-nIti
ke anusAra kArya prArambha ho gyaa| yuvAcArya cAdara-pradAna mahAtmava divasa
para grAcArAMgamtra ko jinAgama granthamAlA granyAMka 1 ke rUpa meM pAThakoM ke
adhyayanArtha prastuta kiyaa| yaha prakAzana-parampaga pravAdha gati meM cala
rahI thI ki dAruNaprasaMga upasthita ho gayA. avasAda kI gaharI ghaTAyeM ghira
graaii| yojanAkAra yuvAcAryazrI divaMgata ho gye| yaha mAmika grAghAta thaa|
kintu sAhama aura sva. yuvAcAryazrI ke varada pAzIrvAdoM kA saMbala lekara
samiti apane kArya meM tatpara rhii| isI kA suphala hai ki grAgamavatIsI ke
prakAzana ke jisa mahAna kArya ko prArambha kiyA thA, vaha yathAvidhi sampanna
kara sakI hai| mamiti adhyAtmayoginI viduSI mahAmatI zrI umarAvakUvarajI ma. sA.
"arcanA" kI kRtajJa hai| apane mArga-darzana aura yuvAcAryazrI ke rikta sthAna
kI puti kara kArya ko pUrNa karane kI preraNA dii| padmazrI mohanamalajI

Page #9 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Sa. Chordia, Shri Chimmatsinghji Lodha, Shri Pukharajji Shishodia, Shri
Chandmalji Binaykia, Pandit Shri Shobhachandraji Bharill, etc. and other Ajat
Karma·π≠ MahƒÅyogƒ´yas who are no longer amongst us, are remembered and paid homage
to. Finally, the committee thanks each member of its supporting family. With
their cooperation, the four-fold growth of Jain literature has been achieved. We
are merely playing the role of ordinary executors under their guidance.
Ratanchand Modi, Acting President, Amarchand Modi, Sayaramal Chordia, General
Secretary, Shri ƒÄgam PrakƒÅ≈õan Samiti, Pipaliya BƒÅzƒÅr, BƒÅwar-305901, Amarchand
Modi, Minister.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
sA. coraDiyA, zrI cimmatasiMhajI lor3hA, zrI pukharAjajI zizodiyA, zrI
cAMdamalajI binAyakiyA, paNDita zrI zobhAcandrajI bhArilla aAdi va anyAnya ajAta
karmaTha mahayogIyoM kA jo aba hamAre bIca nahIM haiM, smaraNa kara zraddhAMjali
samarpita karatI hai| aMta meM samiti apane sahayogI parivAra ke pratyeka
sadasya ko dhanyavAda detI hai| inake sahakAra meM jaina vAGamaya kI caturdika-
caturgaNita zrIvRddhi kara makI hai| hama to inake mArgadarzana meM mAmAnya
kAryavAhaka kI bhUmikA kA nirvAha kara rahe haiN| ratanacanda modI kAryavAhaka
adhyakSa amaracanda modI sAyaramala coraDiyA mahAmaMtrI zrI Agama prakAzana
samiti, pIpaliyA bAjAra, byAvara-305901 amaracanda modI maMtrI

Page #10 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Editorial Note: A Critical Review of the Cheda-Sutras  The Jain tradition, as
understood by the SthƒÅnakavƒÅsƒ´, recognizes 32 ƒÄgamas as the word of the
liberated ones (Vƒ´tarƒÅga-vƒÅ·πáƒ´). These are: eleven Angas, twelve Upangas, four
M≈´las, four Chedas, and one PrƒÅva≈õyaka.   The ≈övetƒÅmbara M≈´rti-p≈´jaka tradition,
however, recognizes forty-five ƒÄgamas. The number of Angas, Upangas, etc.
remains the same. However, they include MahƒÅni≈õƒ´tha and Pa√±cakalpa along with
Ni≈õƒ´tha, Da≈õƒÅ≈õrutaskandha, B·πõhatkalpa, and VyavahƒÅras≈´tra in the Prakƒ´r·πáakas and
Cheda-s≈´tras.  The ƒÄgamas, including Angas, Upangas, etc., encompass all aspects
of literature: religion, philosophy, ethics, culture, civilization, history,
art, etc. However, they primarily focus on elaborating Jain philosophy,
religious principles, and ethical practices. The Angas, Upangas, and M≈´la-varga
primarily deal with theoretical concepts. ƒÄcƒÅrƒÅ·πÖga, UpƒÅsaka Da≈õƒÅ·πÖga, and
PrƒÅva≈õyaka S≈´tras extensively discuss ethical practices. The Cheda-s≈´tras are
the embodiments of rules and regulations for ethical purity. This note provides
some insights into the Cheda-s≈´tras.  Why the name Cheda-s≈´tra? The term "Cheda"
is not new to the Jain tradition. The second of the five types of conduct is
called Chedopa sthƒÅpanƒÅcƒÅritra. While the general meaning of "Cheda" is the
piercing of body parts like ears, nose, etc., the meaning of "Cheda" in the
context of religion is as follows:  "VajjhƒÅ·πáu·π≠ƒÅ·πáe·πáam je·πáa ·πáa bƒÅhijjjae taje
·πáiyaya. Sambhavaƒ´ ya parisuddha' so pu·πáa dhammammƒ´ cheutti."  This means that
"Cheda" is that which does not hinder religion through external actions and
leads to increased purity. Therefore, the characteristic of Chedopa sthƒÅpanƒÅ is
to establish the soul in the five types of Yama-like Dharma, namely non-
violence, etc., by abandoning the old, cautious practices. Or, Chedopa sthƒÅpanƒÅ-
samyama is the abandonment of actions like violence, theft, etc., with their
respective distinctions, and the purification through atonement, etc., when a
vow is broken. This is of two types: Nirati-cƒÅra and SƒÅti-cƒÅra.  In Nirati-cƒÅra
Chedopa sthƒÅpanƒÅ, the practitioner is established in the five great vows, namely
non-violence, etc., by separating them from the previous Samayika conduct, which
involved the complete abandonment of all actions. In SƒÅti-cƒÅra Chedopa
sthƒÅpanƒÅcƒÅritra, atonement is necessary along with criticism for re-
establishment (puna·∏• sthƒÅpita). This atonement is based on the severity of the
transgression. There are ten types of atonement, of which Cheda-prƒÅya≈õcitta is
the seventh. There are seven atonements, from critical atonement to Cheda-
prƒÅya≈õcitta. These are given to the clothed ascetics. The last three are given
to the unclothed ascetics.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
sampAdakIya cheda-sUtra : samIkSAtmaka vivecana pAgamoM kI saMkhyA sthAnakavAsI
jaina paraMparA jina AgamoM ko vItarAga-vANI ke rUpa meM mAnatI hai, unakI
saMkhyA 32 hai| vaha isa prakAra hai-gyAraha aMga, bAraha upAMga, cAra mUla,
cAra cheda aura eka Avazyaka / zvetAmbara mUrti-pUjaka paraMparA ke anusAra
paiMtAlIsa Agama haiN| aMga, upAMga Adi kI saMkhyA to samAna hai| kintu
prakIrNakoM aura chedasUtroM meM nizItha, dazAzrutaskandha, bRhatkalpa va
vyavahArasUtra ke sAtha mahAnizItha aura paMcakalpa ko adhika mAnA hai| aMga,
upAMga Adi AgamoM meM dharma, darzana, AcAra, saMskRti, sabhyatA, itihAsa, kalA
Adi sAhitya ke sabhI aMgoM kA samAveza hai / parantu mukhya rUpa se jaina
darzana aura dharma ke siddhAntoM aura AcAroM kA vistAra se varNana kiyA gayA
hai| aMga, upAMga, mUlavarga meM prAyaH saiddhAntika vicAroM kI mukhyatA hai|
AcArAMga, upAsaka dazAMga aura prAvazyaka sUtroM meM prAcAra kA vistAra se
varNana kiyA hai| chedasUtra AcArazuddhi ke niyamopaniyamoM ke prarUpaka haiN|
prastuta meM chedasUtroM sambaMdhI kucha saMketa karate haiN| chedasUtra nAma
kyoM? cheda zabda jaina paramparA ke liye navIna nahIM hai| cAritra ke pAMca
bhedoM meM dUsare kA nAma chedopasthApanAcAritra hai / kAna, nAka prAdi avayavoM
kA bhedana to cheda zabda kA sAmAnya artha hai, kintu dharma-sambandhI cheda kA
lakSaNa isa prakAra hai vajjhANuTANeNaM jeNa Na bAhijjae taye nniyyaa| saMbhavai
ya parisuddha' so puNa dhammammi cheutti / jina bAhyakriyAoM se dharma meM bAdhA
na AtI ho aura jisase nirmalatA kI vaddhi ho, use cheda kahate haiN| ataeva
chedopasthApanA kA lakSaNa yaha huA-purAnI sAvadha paryAya ko chor3akara ahiMsA
prAdi pAMca prakAra ke yamarUpa dharma meM AtmA ko sthApita karanA
chedopasthApanAsaMyama hai| athavA jahA~ hiMsA, corI ityAdi ke bheda pUrvaka
sAvadha kriyAoM kA tyAga kiyA jAtA hai aura vratabhaMga ho jAne para isakI
prAyazcitta Adi se zuddhi kI jAtI hai, usako chedopasthApanA saMyama kahate
haiN| yaha niraticAra aura sAticAra ke bheda se do prakAra kA hai| niraticAra
chedopasthApanA meM pUrva ke sarvasAvadyatyAga rUpa sAmAyika cAritra ke pRthaka-
pRthaka ahiMsA Adi paMca mahAvrata rUpa bheda karake sAdhaka ko sthApita kiyA
jAtA hai| sAticAra chedopasthApanAcAritra meM upasthApita (pUna: sthApita)
karane ke liye AlocanA ke sAtha prAyazcitta bhI Avazyaka hai| yaha
prAyazcittavidhAna skhalanAoM kI gaMbhIratA ko dekhakara kiyA jAtA hai|
prAyazcitta dasa prakAra ke haiN| inameM chedaprAyazcitta sAtavAM hai| AlocanAI
prAyazcitta se chedAha prAyazcitta paryanta sAta prAyazcitta hote haiN| ye
veSayukta zramaNa ko diye jAte haiN| aMtima tIna veSamukta zramaNa ko diye jAte
haiN|

Page #11 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The **Chhedaprayaschitta** is the final **prayaschitta** (atonement) given to a
**veshamukta shraman** (Jain monk who has renounced all worldly possessions). It
encompasses the six previous **prayaschittas**. The **moolah**,
**anavasthapyai**, and **parinchikai** **prayaschittas** are considered minor,
while the **prayaschittas** from **alocanaah** to **chedah** are considered
major. Due to their extensive nature, the **Dasha-shruta-skandha**
(**Acharadasa**), **Brihatkalpa**, **Vyavahar**, and **Nishith** **Agamas** are
referred to as **Chhedasutras**.  The general subject matter of the
**Chhedasutras** can be understood from the above statement. They address how to
avoid and rectify any faults committed by a **sadhak** (spiritual aspirant)
during their **sadhanamay** (spiritual) life. From this perspective, the topics
of the **Chhedasutras** can be divided into four parts:  1. **Utsargamarga**
(Path of Renunciation) 2. **Apavadamarga** (Path of Exception) 3. **Doshasevan**
(Commission of Faults) 4. **Prayaschittavidhan** (Atonement Regulations)  1.
**Utsargamarga**: This path refers to the rules that are mandatory for **sadhu-
sadhvi** (Jain monks and nuns). It involves adhering to the **samachari**
(conduct) without any deviation or alteration. This path emphasizes the practice
of **nirdosha charitra** (blameless conduct). Following this path fosters
**aprammatta** (mindfulness) in the **sadhak** and makes them worthy of praise
and respect.  2. **Apavadamarga**: This path refers to special rules or
exceptions. It is of two types: (1) **Nirdosha visheshvidhi** (blameless special
rule) and (2) **Sadosha visheshvidhi** (faulty special rule). Special rules are
stronger than general rules. **Apavadic** rules are based on reasons. The
**praagars** (precepts) that are kept in **uttaragunapratyakhyan** (rejection of
higher qualities) are all **nirdosha apavad** (blameless exceptions). An action
or tendency that does not violate **prajna** (wisdom) is considered
**nirdosha**. However, due to strong reasons, even if the mind is unwilling, one
may be compelled to commit a fault. This is considered **sadosha apavad**
(faulty exception). **Prayaschitta** (atonement) purifies such faults. This path
protects the **sadhak** from **praart-raudr dhyan** (meditation that is harsh
and violent). While not praiseworthy, this path is not so reprehensible as to
cause public criticism. **Anachar** (immoral conduct) cannot be considered a
part of the **apavadvidhi** (exceptional rule) in any form. Engaging in
**swaichar** (self-indulgence) out of free will and desire, violating
boundaries, prioritizing one's own interests, ego, and pride, disregarding the
**sangha** (community), exhibiting arrogance, and breaking discipline are all
considered **anachar**. This is unthinkable, but **anachari** (immoral person)
resorts to tricks and tactics to make it thinkable. Such a person, a **sadhak**,
cannot be purified by any method and is not worthy of purification.  3. & 4.
**Doshasevan** and **Prayaschittavidhan**: **Doshasevan** refers to the
violation of the **Utsargamarga** and **Apavadamarga**. **Prayaschitta** is the
method used to purify such violations. When a fault is committed unintentionally
due to strong reasons, forgetfulness, or negligence, **prayaschitta** is
necessary for purification. This is the general outline of the **Chhedasutras**.
The **prayaschitta** is mandatory for the purification of faults. This is
evident from the above statement. In this context, some specific points are
highlighted. [10]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
veSamukta zramaNa ko diye jAne vAle prAyazcittoM meM chedaprAyazcitta aMtima
prAyazcitta hai| isake sAtha pUrva ke chaha prAyazcitta grahaNa kara liye jAte
haiN| mUlAha, anavasthApyAI aura pAriJcikAI prAyazcitta vAle alpa hote haiN|
AlocanAha se chedAha paryanta prAyazcitta vAle adhika hote haiN| isaliye unakI
adhikatA se sahasrAmravana nAma ke samAna dazAzrutaskandha (AcAradasA)
bRhatkalpa, vyavahAra, nizItha AgamoM ko chedasUtra kahA jAtA hai| chedasUtroM
kA sAmAnya varNya-viSaya uparyukta kathana se yaha jJAta ho jAtA hai ki
sAdhanAmaya jIvana meM yadi sAdhaka ke dvArA koI doSa ho jAye kaise bacA jAye,
usakA parimArjana kaise kiyA jAye, yaha chedasUtroM kA sAmAnya varNya-viSaya
hai| isa dRSTi se chedasUtroM ke viSayoM ko cAra bhAgoM meM vibhAjita kiyA jA
sakatA hai - 1. utsargamArga, 2. apavAdamArga, 3. doSasevana, 4
prAyazcittavidhAna / 1. jina niyamoM kA pAlana karanA sAdhu-sAdhvIvarga ke liye
anivArya hai| binA kisI honAdhikatA, parivartana ke samAna rUpa se jisa samAcArI
kA pAlana karanA avazyaMbhAvI hai aura isakA prAmANikatA se pAlana karanA
utsargamArga hai| nirdoSa cAritra kI prArAdhanA karanA isa mArga kI vizeSatA
hai| isake pAlana karane se sAdhaka meM apramattatA banI rahatI hai tathA isa
mArga kA anusaraNa karane vAlA sAdhaka prazaMsanIya evaM zraddheya banatA hai|
2. apavAda kA artha hai vizeSavidhi / vaha do prakAra kI hai(1) nirdoSa
vizeSavidhi aura (2) sadoSa vizeSavidhi / sAmAnyavidhi se vizeSavidhi balavAna
hotI hai| ApavAdika vidhi sakAraNa hotI hai| uttaraguNapratyAkhyAna meM jo
prAgAra rakhe jAte haiM, ve saba nirdoSa apavAda haiN| jisa kriyA, pravatti se
prAjJA kA atikramaNa na hotA ho, vaha nirdoSa hai, parantu prabalatA ke kAraNa
mana na hote hue bhI vivaza hokara jisa doSa kA sevana karanA par3atA hai yA
kiyA jAye, vaha sadoSa apavAda hai / prAyazcitta se usakI zuddhi ho jAtI hai|
yaha mArga sAdhaka ko prArta-raudra dhyAna se bacAtA hai| yaha mArga
prazaMsanIya to nahIM hai kintu itanA nindanIya bhI nahIM ki lokApavAda kA
kAraNa bana jaaye| anAcAra to kisI bhI rUpa meM apavAdavidhi kA aMga nahIM
banAyA yA mAnA jA sakatA hai| svecchA aura svacchandatA se svairAcAra meM
pravRta honA, maryAdA kA atikramaNa karate hue apane svArtha, mAna-abhimAna ko
sarvopari sthApita karanA, saMgha kI avahelanA karanA, uddaNDatA kA pradarzana
karanA, anuzAsana bhaMga karanA anAcAra hai| yaha akalpanIya hai, kintu anAcArI
kalpanIya banAne kI yukti-prayuktiyoM kA sahArA letA hai| aisA vyakti, sAdhaka
kisI bhI prakAra kI vidhi se zuddha nahIM ho sakatA hai aura na zuddhi ke yogya
pAtra hai| 3, 4-doSa kA artha hai utsarga aura apavAda mArga kA bhaMga karanA
aura usa bhaMga ke zuddhikaraNa ke liye kI jAne vAlI vidhi, prAyazcita kahalAtI
hai| prabalakAraNa ke hone para anicchA se, vismRti aura pramAdavaza jo doSa
sevana ho jAtA hai, usakI zuddhi ke liye prAyazcitta se zuddha honA, yahI
chedasUtroM ke varNana kI sAmAnya rUparekhA hai| prAyazcita ko anivAryatA
doSazuddhi ke liye prAyazcitta kA vidhAna hai, uparyukta kathana se yaha jJAta
ho jAtA hai| isI saMdarbha meM yahA~ kucha vizeSa saMketa karate haiN| [10]

Page #12 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The reason for placing Charitraachar amidst the five principles of Anugardharma
is that it is the only means by which the combined practice of Jnanaachar,
Darshanachar, and Tapaachar-Veeryachar can be accomplished without hindrance.
Charitraachar has eight divisions: five Samitis and three Guptis. The five
Samitis are like a retreat-oriented tendency in a disciplined life, while the
three Guptis are purely retreat-oriented. Their role in Anugardharma practice is
evident in an unprecedented joy and enthusiasm. However, due to the influence of
worldly attachments, passions, and aversions, if the boundaries of Samitis,
Guptis, and Mahavrats are occasionally transgressed, violated, or exceeded, then
Prayashchitta acts as a protective wall. The implication is that if there is a
persistent attachment to the original qualities (Moolgunas) and the subsequent
qualities (Uttargunas), then Prayashchitta is mandatory for their removal. The
reason for the prominence of Chhed Prayashchitta is that there are ten types of
Prayashchitta. The first six Prayashchittas are for the purification of general
faults, while the last four are for the purification of strong faults. Chhedarha
Prayashchitta is the first of the last four Prayashchittas. The commentators,
while explaining it, have presented an allegory from Ayurveda. Its essence is
that if a person's limbs or organs become so contaminated by disease or poison
that there is no possibility of recovery through treatment, then it is
appropriate to amputate that limb or organ through surgery. However, the disease
or poison should not be allowed to spread throughout the body. Because if this
is not done, untimely death is inevitable. But before amputation, it is the duty
of the physician to explain to the patient and his close relatives that the limb
or organ has become so contaminated by disease that there is no possibility of
recovery through nourishing treatment. If they want to protect their life and be
free from pain, they should have the limb or organ amputated through surgery.
Although there will be intense pain during the surgery, it will be for a short
time, but the rest of their life will be free from the current pain. If, after
this explanation, the patient and his guardians agree to the amputation, then it
is the duty of the physician to amputate the limb or organ and protect the body
and life from the disease. In the same way, the Acharya and other Anugars should
be explained that due to the persistent attachment to faults, your subsequent
qualities have become so contaminated that their purification is no longer
possible through ordinary Prayashchittas like criticism, etc. Now, if you wish,
the days of persistent attachment can be amputated and the rest of your
disciplined life can be secured. Otherwise, neither Samadhi death nor liberation
from the cycle of birth and death will be possible. If, after this explanation,
the Anugar abandons persistent attachment and accepts Chhed Prayashchitta, then
the Acharya should purify him by giving him Chhed Prayashchitta. It should be
noted here that Chhed Prayashchitta only purifies the faults attached to the
subsequent qualities. The faults attached to the original qualities are purified
by Moolha, etc., three Prayashchittas. The style of description in Chhed Sutras:
There are three types of Charitraachar described in Chhed Sutras: (1) Heyaachar,
(2) Jneyaachar, (3) Upadeyaachar. Upon careful consideration of these, the
following forms emerge: (1) Vidhik‡§≤‡•ç‡§™, (2) Nishedhak‡§≤‡•ç‡§™, (3) Vidhinisedhak‡§≤‡•ç‡§™,
(4) Prayashchittakalp, (5) Prakirnak. Of these, there will be four divisions of
the other Vidhi-kalp, etc., besides Prayashchittakalp. [11]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
anagAradharma ke pAMca prAcAroM ke bIcoMbIca cAritrAcAra ko sthAna dene kA yaha
hetu hai ki jJAnAcAradarzanAcAra tathA tapAcAra-vIryAcAra kI samanvita sAdhanA
nirvighna sampanna ho, isakA eka mAtra sAdhana cAritrAcAra hai / cAritrAcAra ke
ATha vibhAga haiMpAMca samiti, tIna gupti / pA~ca samitiyAM saMyamI jIvana meM
nivRttimUlaka pravRttirUpA haiM aura tIna guptiyAM to nivRttirUpA hI haiN| inakI
bhUmikA para anagAra kI sAdhanA meM eka apUrva ullAsa, utsAha ke darzana hote
haiN| kintu viSaya-kaSAyavaza, rAga-dveSAdi ke kAraNa yadi samiti, gupti aura
mahAvratoM kI maryAdAoM kA atikrama, vyatikrama yA aticAra yadA-kadA ho jAye to
surakSA ke liye prAyazcitta prAkAra (parakoTA) rUpa hai| phalitArtha yaha hai ki
mUlaguNoM, uttaraguNoM meM pratisevanA kA dhuna laga jAye to usake parihAra ke
liye prAyazcitta anivArya hai| chedaprAyazcitta kI mukhyatA kA kAraNa
prAyazcitta ke dasa prakAra haiN| inameM prAraMbha ke chaha prAyazcitta sAmAnya
doSoM kI zuddhi ke liye haiM aura aMtima cAra prAyazcitta prabala doSoM ko
zuddhi ke liye haiN| chedArha prAyazcitta meM aMtima cAra prAyazcittoM meM
prathama prAyazcitta hai| vyAkhyAkAroM ne isakI vyAkhyA karate hae Ayurveda kA
eka rUpaka prastuta kiyA hai| usakA bhAva yaha haikisI vyakti kA aMga-upAMga
roga yA viSa se itanA adhika dUSita ho jAye ki upacAra se usake svastha hone kI
saMbhAvanA hI na rahe to zalyakriyA se usa aMga-upAMga kA chedana karanA ucita
hai, para roga yA viSa ko zarIra meM vyApta nahIM hone denA caahiye| kyoMki aisA
na karane para akAlamRtyu avazyaMbhAvI hai| kintu aMgachedana ke pUrva vaidya kA
kartavya hai ki rugNa vyakti aura usake nikaTa saMbaMdhiyoM ko samajhAye ki
aMga-upAMga roga se itanA dUSita ho gayA hai ki aba poSadhopacAra se svastha
hone kI saMbhAvanA nahIM hai| jIvana kI surakSA aura vedanA kI mukti cAheM to
zalyakriyA se aMga-upAMga kA chedana karavA leN| yadyapi zalyakriyA se aMga-
upAMga kA chedana karate samaya tIvra vedanA hogI para hogI thor3I dera, kintu
zeSa jIbana vartamAna jaisI vedanA se mukta rhegaa| isa prakAra samajhAne para
vaha rugNa vyakti aura usake abhibhAvaka aMga-chedana ke liye sahamata ho jAye
to cikitsaka kA kartavya hai ki aMga-upAMga kA chedana kara zarIra aura jIvana
ko vyAdhi se bacAve / isa rUpaka kI taraha prAcArya Adi anagAra ko samajhAyeM ki
doSa pratisevanA se Apake uttaraguNa itane adhika dUSita ho gaye haiM ki aba
unakI zuddhi AlocanAdi sAmAnya prAyazcittoM se saMbhava nahIM hai| aba Apa cAheM
to pratisevanAkAla ke dinoM kA chedana kara zeSa saMyamI jIvana ko surakSita
kiyA jaaye| anyathA na samAdhimaraNa hogA aura na bhavabhramaNa se mukti hogii|
isa prakAra samajhAne para vaha anagAra yadi pratisevanA kA parityAga kara
chedaprAyazcitta svIkAra kare to prAcArya use chedaprAyazcitta dekara zuddha
kreN| yahA~ yaha vizeSa jAnanA cAhiye ki chedaprAyazcitta se kevala uttaraguNoM
meM lage doSoM kI zuddhi hotI hai| mUlaguNoM meM lage doSoM kI zuddhi mUlAha Adi
tIna prAyazcittoM se hotI hai| chedasUtroM kI varNanazailI chedasUtroM meM tIna
prakAra ke cAritrAcAra pratipAdita haiM(1) heyAcAra, (2) jJeyAcAra, (3)
upAdeyAcAra / inakA vistRta vicAra karane para yaha rUpa phalita hotA hai (1)
vidhikalpa, (2) niSedhakalpa, (3) vidhiniSedhakalpa, (4) prAyazcittakalpa, (5)
prakIrNakaH / inameM se prAyazcittakalpa ke atirikta anya vidhi-kalpAdika ke
cAra vibhAga hoMge [11]

Page #13 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(1) Legal precepts for the Nirgranthas, (2) Legal precepts for the Nigranthis,
(3) Legal precepts for the Nirgrantha-Nigranthis, (4) General legal precepts /
Similarly, one should also understand the prohibitive precepts, etc. / The
sutras in which the word 'Kappar' is used are the legal precepts. Those in which
the word 'No Kappar' is used are the prohibitive precepts. Those in which both
'Kappar' and 'No Kappar' are used are the legal-prohibitive precepts and those
in which neither 'Kappar' nor 'No Kappar' is used are the legal precepts. There
is a clear mention of the atonement ordinance in the sutras for the atonement
ordinance. After mentioning the legal-prohibitive precepts from the general in
the Cheda Sutras, a clear indication of the legal and prohibitive precepts for
the Nirgranthas has been given. Similarly, the statement of the legal-
prohibitive precepts for the Nirgranthi is there. It is not possible to give a
detailed list here of what and what form of legal-prohibitive precepts are for
both and how much atonement ordinance is there for each in case of
transgression. Readers should know this from the study of the scriptures. The
atonement ordinance is the ordinance of atonement for the removal of the fault
of the giver and the receiver. There is a detailed description of the
eligibility of the taker and the giver in the Cheda Sutras. We are giving some
indication of its brief summary here. Atikram, Vyatikram, Atichar, Anachar are
the causes of transgression / But those who do not criticize the faults due to
crookedness and inertia, they can never become eligible for purification / Even
if someone criticizes deceitfully, then also his criticism is not fruitful. If
his mind is not ready to criticize, then doing atonement is like a sky flower.
The essence of the above statement is that the critic should be righteous, free
from deceit. He should have a feeling of repentance within him, only then he
will be able to be ready for the removal of the fault. Similarly, the one who
listens to the criticism of the critic and is entitled to help in his
purification is the one who knows the essence of the atonement ordinance, is
neutral, knows the feelings of others, is able to know the situation, is himself
innocent, is impartial, is a worthy speaker. Such a senior practitioner can make
the guilty innocent. Can discipline the Sangha and remove public slander,
misconceptions. Based on this brief introduction, we now present a brief
introduction to the three Cheda Sutras compiled in this book - 1.
Dasashrutaskandha, 2. Brihatkalpa and 3. Vyavahar. (1) Dasashrutaskandha or
Pracharadasha Samavayanga, Uttaradhyayanasutra and Avasyaksutra have been called
Ayardasa (Acharadasha) or name before Kalpa and Vyavaharsutra. Therefore, this
is the first Cheda Sutra in the Cheda Sutras. Since its ten chapters are
mentioned in the tenth place of the Stanangasutra, the name 'Dasashrutaskandha'
has become more popular. The names of the ten chapters are as follows - 1.
Asamadhisthan, 2. Sabaldosha, 3. Ashatana, 4. Ganisampada, 5. Chittsamadhisthan,
6. Upasakpratima, 7. Bhiksapratima, 8. Paryushanakalpa 9. Mohaniyasthan and 10.
Ayatisthan / In these ten chapters, Asamadhisthan, [12]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
(1) nirgranthoM ke vidhikalpa, (2) nigraMthiyoM ke vidhikalpa, (3) nigrantha-
nirgranthiyoM ke vidhikalpa, (4) sAmAnya vidhikalpa / isI prakAra niSedhakalpa
Adi bhI samajhanA cAhiye / jina sUtroM meM 'kappaI' zabda kA prayoga hai, ve
vidhikalpa ke sUtra haiN| jinameM 'no kappaI' zabda prayoga hai, ve niSedhakalpa
ke sUtra haiN| jinameM 'kappaI' aura 'no kappaI' donoM kA prayoga hai ve vidhi-
niSedhakalpa ke sutra haiM aura jinameM 'kappaI' aura 'nokappaI' donoM kA
prayoga nahIM hai ve vidhAnasutra haiN| prAyazcittavidhAna ke liye sUtroM meM
yathAsthAna spaSTa ullekha hai| chedasUtroM meM sAmAnya se vidhi-niSedhakalpoM
kA ullekha karane ke bAda nirgranthoM ke liye vidhikalpa aura niSedhakalpa kA
spaSTa saMketa kiyA gayA hai| isI prakAra nirgranthI ke vidhi-niSedhakalpa kA
kathana hai| donoM ke liye kyA aura kauna vidhi-niSedhakalpa rUpa hai aura
pratisevanA hone para kisakA kitanA prAyazcitta vidhAna hai, usakI yahAM vistRta
sUcI denA saMbhava nahIM hai| granthAvalokana se pAThakagaNa svayaM jJAta kara
leN| prAyazcittavidhAna ke dAtA-AdAtA kI yogyatA doSa ke parimArjana ke liye
prAyazcitta vidhAna hai| isake lene aura dene vAle kI pAtratA ke sambandha meM
chedasUtroM meM vistRta varNana hai| jisake saMkSipta sAra kA yahAM kucha
saMketa karate haiN| atikrama, vyatikrama, aticAra, anAcAra doSa sevana ke
kAraNa haiM / kintu jo vakratA aura jar3atA ke kAraNa doSoM kI AlocanA
sahajabhAva se nahIM karate haiM, ve to kabhI bhI zuddhi ke pAtra nahIM bana
sakate haiM / yadi koI mAyApUrvaka AlocanA karatA hai taba bhI usakI AlocanA
phalaprada nahIM hotI hai| usakI manobhUmikA aAlocanA karane ke liye tatpara
nahIM hotI to prAyazcitta karanA AkAzakusumabat hai| ukta kathana kA sArAMza
yaha huA ki Alocaka Rju, chalakapaTa se rahita manasthitivAlA honA caahiye|
usake aMtar meM pazcAttApa kI bhAvanA ho, tabhI doSaparimArjana ke liye tatpara
ho skegaa| isI prakAra prAlocanA karane vAle kI AlocanA sunane vAlA aura usakI
zuddhi meM sahAyaka hone kA adhikArI vahI ho sakegA jo prAyazcittavidhAna kA
marmajJa ho, taTastha ho, dUsare ke bhAvoM kA vettA ho, paristhiti kA parijJAna
karane meM sakSama ho, svayaM nirdoSa ho, pakSapAta rahita ho, prAdeya vacana
vAlA ho| aisA variSTha sAdhaka doSI ko nirdoSa banA sakatA hai| saMgha ko
anuzAsita evaM lokApavAda, bhrAMta dhAraNAoM kA zamana kara sakatA hai| isa
saMkSipta bhUmikA ke AdhAra para aba isa grantha meM saMkalita-1.
dazAzrutaskandha, 2. bRhatkalpa aura 3. vyavahAra, ina tIna chedasUtroM kA
saMkSipta paricaya prastuta karate haiN| (1) dazAzrutaskandha athavA prAcAradazA
samavAyAMga, uttarAdhyayana aura AvazyakasUtra meM kalpa aura vyavahArasUtra ke
pUrva AyAradasA (AcAradazA) yA nAma kahA gayA hai| ataH chedasUtroM meM yaha
prathama chedasUtra hai| sthAnAMgasUtra ke dasaveM sthAna meM isake dasa
adhyayanoM kA ullekha hone se 'dazAzrutaskandha' yaha nAma adhika pracalita ho
gayA hai| dasa adhyayanoM ke nAma isa prakAra haiM1. asamAdhisthAna, 2,
sabaladoSa, 3. aAzAtanA, 4. gaNisampadA, 5. cittasamAdhisthAna, 6.
upAsakapratimA, 7. bhikSapratimA, 8. paryuSaNAkalpa 9. mohanIyasthAna aura 10.
AyatisthAna / ina dasa adhyayanoM meM asamAdhisthAna, [12]

Page #14 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The elements compiled in the Chittasamadhi Sthana, Mohaniya Sthana and Ayati
Sthana are actually related to Yoga Vidya. If compared with Yoga Shastra, it
will be known that these four studies are very important in the ten studies of
the Pracharadasha for concentrating and unifying the mind. The Upasakapratima
and Bhikhuapratima impart knowledge of the highest rules of the most rigorous
practice of the Shravak and Shraman. In the Paryushana Kalpa, it has been
discussed in detail how to observe Paryushana, how to celebrate it, and when to
celebrate it. The two Dashaanas, Sabaldosha and Ashatana, discuss the daily
rules of Sadhu life and state that these rules should be followed. What is to be
abandoned should be abandoned firmly and what is to be adopted should be
followed. The fourth Dashaganisampada describes the personality, influence and
physical influence of the person sitting on the Acharya Pad in a very useful
way. Those who are interested in the Acharya Pad must study this before taking
the Acharya Pad. Thus, this Dasha Shruta Skandha (Acharadasha) holds a very
important place in the Shraman life. In other words, the subject matter of the
Dasha Shruta Skandha can also be mentioned in this way: The first three
Dashaanas and the last two Dashaanas describe the Heyachar of the Sadhak. The
fourth Dasha describes the Gneyachar of the Agitart Anugar and the Upadeyachar
for the Gitart Anugar. The fifth Dasha describes the Upadeyachar. The sixth
Dasha describes the Jayachar for the Anugar and the Upadeyachar for the Sagar
(Shramanopasak). The seventh Dasha describes the Upadeyachar for the Anugar and
the Gneyachar for the Sagar. The eighth Dasha describes some Gneyachar, some
Heyachar and some Upadeyachar for the Anugar. Thus, this Acharadasha-Dasha
Shruta Skandha is useful for both Anugar and Sagar. The Heya, Gney and Upadeya
Prachar have also been mentioned in the Cheda Sutras like Kalpa, Vyavahar etc.
(2) The word Kalpa in the Brihatkalpasutra is indicative of many meanings. This
word is found in Vedic literature. There are six limbs of the Veda, one of which
is the limb that contains the rules of rituals like Yajna, that limb is called
Kalpa. The word Kalpa is also used for time. The time of fourteen Manvantaras is
known by the word Kalpa. Four billion, thirty-two crore years pass in it. This
long period of time is called Kalpa. The word Kalpa is also used in a similar
sense, such as Shraman Kalpa, Rishi Kalpa etc. The word Kalpa is also used for
the tree that gives the desired fruit, it is called Kalpavriksha. The word Kalpa
is also used for the limits of the kingdom. There are limits of politics up to
the twelfth Devaloka. For this reason, those Devalokas are called 'Kalpa
Devalokas'. Whoever lives life according to the legal rules, he surely becomes
rich in happiness and wealth. The word Kalpa, which is used to describe the
present scripture, is completely different from the above meanings. [13]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
cittasamAdhisthAna, mohanIyasthAna aura AyatisthAna meM jina tattvoM kA
saMkalana kiyA gayA hai, ve vastutaH yogavidyA se saMbaddha haiN| yogazAstra se
unakI tulanA kI jAye to jJAta hogA ki citta ko ekAgra tathA samAhita karane ke
lie prAcAradazA ke dasa adhyayanoM meM ye cAra adhyayana atyanta mahattvapUrNa
hai / upAsakapratimA aura bhikSupratimA zrAbaka va zramaNa kI kaThoratama
sAdhanA ke uccatama niyamoM kA parijJAna karAte haiM / paryuSaNAkalpa meM
paryuSaNa raba karanA cAhiye, kaise manAnA cAhiye...? kaba manAnA cAhiye, isa
viSaya para vistAra se vicAra kiyA gayA hai| sabaladoSa aura AzAtanA ina do
dazAnoM meM sAdhujIvana ke dainika niyamoM kA vivecana kiyA gayA hai aura kahA
gayA hai ki ina niyamoM kA paripAlana honA hI caahiye| inameM jo tyAjya haiM,
unakA dRr3hatA se tyAga karanA cAhiye aura jo upAdeya haiM, unakA pAlana karanA
caahiye| caturtha dazAgaNisaMpadA meM AcAryapada para virAjita vyakti ke
vyaktitva, prabhAva tathA usake zArIrika prabhAva kA atyanta upayogI varNana
kiyA gayA hai| prAcAryapada kI lipsA meM saMlagna vyaktiyoM ko prAcAryapada
grahaNa karane ke pUrva inakA adhyayana karanA Avazyaka hai| isa prakAra yaha
dazAzrutaskandha (AcAradazA) satra zramaNajIvana meM atyanta mahattvapUrNa
sthAna rakhatA hai| prakArAntara se dazAzrataskandha kI dazAoM ke pratipAdya kA
ullekha isa rUpa meM bhI ho sakatA haiprathama tIna dazAnoM aura aMtima do
dazAoM meM sAdhaka ke heyAcAra kA pratipAdana hai| cauthI dazA meM agItArtha
anagAra ke jJeyAcAra kA aura gItArtha anagAra ke liye upAdeyAcAra kA kathana
hai| pAMcavI dazA meM upAdeyAcAra kA nirUpaNa hai| chaThI dazA meM anagAra ke
liye jayAcAra aura sAgAra (zramaNopAsaka) ke liye upAdeyAcAra kA kathana hai|
sAtavI dazA meM anagAra ke liye upAdeyAcAra aura sAgAra ke liye jJeyAcAra kA
kathana kiyA hai| AThavIM dazA meM anagAra ke liye kucha jJeyAcAra, kucha
heyAcAra aura kucha upAdeyAcAra hai| isa prakAra yaha AcAradazA-dazAzrutaskaMdha
anagAra aura sAgAra donoM ke liye upayogI hai| kalpa, vyavahAra Adi chedasUtroM
meM bhI heya, jJeya aura upAdeya prAcAra kA kathana kiyA gayA hai| (2)
bRhatkalpasUtra kalpa zabda aneka arthoM kA bodhaka hai, isa zabda kA prayoga
vaidika sAhitya meM upalabdha hotA hai| veda ke chahaH aMga haiM unameM eka vaha
aMga hai jisameM yajJa prAdi karmakANDoM kA vidhAna hai, vaha aMga kalpa
kahalAtA hai| kAlamAna ke liye bhI kalpa zabda kA prayoga milatA hai| caudaha
manvantaroM kA kAlamAna kalpa zabda se jAnA jAtA hai| usameM cAra araba, battIsa
karor3a varSa bIta jAte haiN| itane lambe kAla kI saMjJA ko kalpa kahA hai|
sadRza artha meM bhI kalpa zabda kA prayoga kiyA jAtA hai, jaise ki
zramaNakalpa, RSikalpa ityAdi / kalpa zabda usa vRkSa ke lie bhI prayukta hotA
hai jo vRkSa manovAMchita phala dene vAlA hai, vaha kalpavRkSa kahalAtA hai|
rAjyamaryAdA ke lie bhI kalpa zabda kA prayoga kiyA jAtA hai| bArahaveM devaloka
taka rAjanIti kI maryAdA hai| isI kAraNa una devalokoM ko 'kalpa devaloka' kahA
jAtA hai| maryAdA vaidhAnikarIti se jo bhI koI jIvana calAtA hai, vaha avazya hI
sukha aura sampatti se samRddha bana jAtA hai| prastuta zAstra kA nAma jisa
kalpa zabda se caritArtha kiyA hai, vaha uparyukta arthoM se bilkula bhinna hai|
[13]

Page #15 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
In this context, the word "Kalpa" refers to Dharma-Maryada (religious norms and
boundaries).  Sadhu Achar (conduct of a monk) is Dharma-Maryada.  Any scripture
that describes Dharma-Maryada is called Kalpa, as the name reflects the subject
matter.  A name that accurately reflects the subject matter of a scripture is
called a "Yatharth Naam" (true name).  A scripture that provides instructions
and boundaries for the internal and external conduct of a Sadhu is called Kalpa.
The scripture that contains the life stories of Bhagwan Mahavir, Parshvanath,
Arishtanemi, and Rishabhdev, has a final chapter that describes the conduct of a
Sadhu.  This scripture is called "Paryushana Kalpa" and is considered a "Lahu
Kalpa" (smaller Kalpa).  In comparison, a scripture that describes Sadhu-Maryada
in detail is called "Bhatva Kalpa" (larger Kalpa).  It generally describes the
rules and regulations of the three types of conduct: Samayik,
Chhedopasthapaneya, and Parihar Vishuddhi.  It is essential for those who follow
these types of conduct to adhere to all the descriptions in the Brihat Kalpa
scripture.  The scripture that describes the various norms of Sadhu and Sadhvi
is called "Bhat Kalpa Sutra".  In Prakrit language, it is called "Bihakkappa
Suttam".  Are the present "Kappsuttam" (Kalpa Sutra) and "Kappsury" (Kalpa
Shruta) the same or different?  This doubt is irrelevant because "Kappsuttam" is
a Kalik Agam (scripture of the time).  The eighth study of Acharadasha (conduct)
or Dasha Shruta Skandha is "Paryushana Kalpa", which only describes the conduct
during the rainy season.  A few centuries ago, this "Paryushana Kalpa" was
combined with the life stories of Tirthankaras and the list of elders
(Sthaviravali).  Gradually, it became known as "Kalpa Sutra" among the general
public.  To differentiate the present Kalpa Sutra from this one, the present
Kalpa Sutra is called "Bhat Kalpa Sutra".  In reality, there is no mention of a
scripture named "Bhat Kalpa Sutra" in any other scripture.  In the Nandisutra,
it is called "Kapo".  There are two divisions of "Kappsury": "Chullakappsury"
and "Mahakappsury".  Similarly, "Kappiyakappiyan" is also an Utkalik Agam
(scripture of the time).  All these are scriptures that prescribe atonement, but
they are fragmented, according to the historians of Jain literature.  The
original text of the present "Kappsuttam" is in prose and contains 473 Anushtup
Shlokas.  It contains 81 rules and prohibitions (Vidhi-Nishedhakalpa).  All
these Kalpas are related to the five Samitis (vows) and five Mahavratas (great
vows).  Therefore, they are classified here.  The scriptures that are related to
more than one Samiti or more than one Mahavrat are placed under the heading
"Samiti and Mahavrat's combined rules and prohibitions" and "Mahavrat Kalpa".
According to Uttaradhyayanasutra Chapter 24, the subject of Iryasamiti is very
broad, so the scriptures that appear to be generally related to knowledge,
perception, or conduct, etc., are placed under the heading "Iryasamiti's rules
and prohibitions".  The classification chart is as follows: (1) Iryasamiti's
rules and prohibitions: 1. Charsutra, 2. Adhwagaman Sutra, 3. Aryakshetra Sutra,
4. Mahandi Sutra, 5. Bairajya-Viruddha Rajya Sutra, 6. Antagruhastha, 7. Vachana
Sutra, 8. Sanjnapya Sutra, 9. Ganantaropa Sampat Sutra, 10. Kalpasthiti Sutra.
1. Abhidhan Rajendra: Volume 3, page 239 discusses the word "Kappsury".  [14]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
prastuta prasaMga meM kalpa zabda kA artha dharma-maryAdA hai| sAdhu AcAra hI
dharma-maryAdA hai| jisa zAstra meM dharmamaryAdA kA varNana ho baha kalpa hai,
nAma viSayAnurUpa hI hai| jisa zAstra kA jaisA viSaya ho vaisA nAma rakhanA
yathArtha nAma kahalAtA hai| sAdhudharma ke Antarika aura bAhya-AcAra kA nirdeza
evaM maryAdA batAne vAlA zAstra kalpa kahalAtA hai| jisa sUtra meM bhagavAna
mahAvIra, pArzvanAtha, ariSTanemi aura RSabhadeva kA jIvanavRtta hai, usa zAstra
ke aMtima prakaraNa meM sAdhu samAcArI kA varNana hai| vaha paryuSaNAkalpa hone
se laghukalpa hai| usakI apekSA se jisameM sAdhu-maryAdA kA varNana vistRta ho,
vaha vahatvalpa kahalAtA hai| isameM sAmAyika, chedopasthApanIya aura
parihAravizuddhi ina tInoM cAritroM ke vidhi vidhAnoM kA sAmAnya rUpa se varNana
hai / bRhatkalpa zAstra meM jo bhI varNana hai una sabakA pAlana karanA ukta
cAritrazIloM ke liye avazyaMbhAvI hai / vividha sUtroM dvArA sAdhu sAdhvI kI
vividha maryAdAoM kA jisameM varNana kiyA gayA hai, use bahatkalpasUtra kahate
hai / prAkRta bhASA meM bihakkappasuttaM rUpa banatA hai| prastuta "kappasuttaM"
(kalpasUtra) aura "kappasuya" (kalpazruta) eka haiM yA bhinna haiM ? yaha AzaMkA
aprAsaMgika hai, kyoMki "kappasuttaM" kAlika Agama hai| aAcAradazA arthAt
dazAzrutaskandha kA AThavAM adhyayana "paryuSaNAkalpa" hai, isameM kevala
varSAvAsa kI samAcArI hai| kucha zatAbdiyoM pahale isa "paryuSaNAkalpa" ko
tIrthaMkaroM ke jIvanacaritra tathA sthavirAvalI se saMyukta kara diyA gayA
thaa| yaha zanaiH-zanai: kalpasUtra ke nAma se janasAdharaNa meM prasiddha ho
gyaa| isa kalpasUtra se prastuta kalpasUtra kA nAma bhinna dikhAne ke lie
prastuta kalpasUtra kA nAma bahatkalpasUtra diyA gayA hai| vAstava meM
bRhatkalpasUtra nAma ke Agama kA kisI Agama meM ullekha nahIM hai| nandIsatra
meM isakA nAma "kappo" hai / kappasuyaM ke do vibhAga haiM "cullakappasuyaM"
aura "mahAkappasurya" / isI prakAra "kappiyAkappiyaM" bhI utkAlika Agama hai| ye
saba prAyazcitta-vidhAyaka Agama haiM, para ye vicchinna ho gaye haiM aisA
jainasAhitya ke itihAsajJoM kA abhimata hai| kalpa vargIkaraNa prastuta
"kalpasuttaM" kA mUla pATha gadya meM hai aura 473 anuSTupa zloka pramANa hai /
isameM 81 vidhi-niSedhakalpa haiM / ye sabhI kalpa pAMca samiti aura pAMca
mahAvratoM se sambandhita haiM / ataH inakA vargIkaraNa yahA~ kiyA gayA hai|
jina sUtroM kA eka se adhika samitiyoM yA eka se adhika mahAvratoM se sambandha
hai, unakA sthAna samiti aura mahAvrata ke saMyukta vidhi-niSedha aura
mahAvratakalpa zIrSaka ke antargata hai| uttarAdhyayana a0 24 ke anusAra
IryAsamiti kA viSaya bahuta vyApaka hai, isalie jo sUtra sAmAnyatayA jJAna,
darzana yA cAritra Adi se sambandhita pratIta hue haiM unako "IryAsamiti ke
vidhi-niSedhakalpa" zIrSaka ke nIce sthAna diyA hai| vargIkaraNadarzaka prArUpa
isa prakAra hai (1) IryAsamiti ke vidhi-niSedha kalpa--1. cArasUtra, 2.
adhvagamanasUtra, 3. AryakSetrasUtra, 4. mahAnadIsUtra, 5. bairAjya-
viruddharAjyasUtra, 6. antagRhasthA, 7. vAcanAsUtra, 8. saMjJApyasUtra, 9.
gaNAntaropasampatsUtra, 10. kalpasthitisUtra / 1. abhidhAna rAjendra : bhAga
tRtIya pRSTha 239 para "kappasuyaM" zabda kA vivecana / [14]

Page #16 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(2) Joint Law-Prohibition-Formulas of the *Iryasamiti* and
*Paristhapanikasamiti* - 11. *Vicharbhumiviharbhumisutra* / (3) Law-Prohibition-
Formulas of the *Bhasha-Samiti* - 12. *Vachanasutra*, 13. *Prastarasutra*, 14.
*Antarigrihasthanadisutra*, (4) Law-Prohibition-Formulas of the *Eshan asamiti*
[ *Aharashana* ] 15. *Prlambasutra*, 16. *Ratribhaktasutra*, 17.
*Sankhatisutra*, 18. *Sagarik-Pariharikasutra*, 19. *Ahutika-Nihati Kasutra*,
20. *Anshikasutra*, 21. *Kalakshetrattikrantasutra*, 22.
*Kalpasthitakalpasthitasutra*, 23. *Sanstrita-Nivichikitsasutra*, 24.
*Udgarsutra*, 25. *Graharavidhisutra*, 26. *Parivasitasutra*, 27.
*Pulakabhaktasutra*, 28. *Kshetravagrahpramanasutra*, 29. *Rodhaka* (Army)
*Sutra* (*Panashana*) 30. *Panakavidhisutra*, 31. *Aneshniyasutra*, 32.
*Moksutra*, (*Vastrashana*) 33. *Chilimilika Sutra* 34.
*Ratrivastaradigranhasutra*, 35. *Hatahatasutra*, 36. *Upadhisutra*, 37.
*Vastrasutra*, 38. *Nishrasasutra*, 39. *Trikritsnachaturkritsnasutra*, 40.
*Samavasaranasutra*, 41. *Yatharatnaadhikasutra*, (*Vastra-Pashana*) 42.
*Pravagrah Sutra*, (*Pashana*) 43. *Ghatimaatraka Sutra*, (*Rajoharanaishana*)
44. *Rajoharanasutra*, (*Chamaishana*) 45. *Charmasutra*, (*Shayyaa-
Sanstarakeishana*) 46. *Shayyaa-Sanstaraakasutra*, 47. *Yatharatnaadhikashayyaa-
Sanstaraaka-Paribhajanasutra*, (*Sthaneshana*) 48. *Avagrahasutra*,
(*Upashrayeishana*) 49. *Apanagrih-Rathyaamukhasutra*, 50. *Chitrakarm Sutra*,
51. *Sagarik Nidhasutra*, 52. *Sagarik Upashrayasutra*, 53. *Pratibaddha
Shayyaasutra*, 54. *Gathapatikulmadhyavasasutra*, 55. *Upashrayasutra*, 56.
*Upashrayavidhisutra*, (*Vasatinivas*) 57. *Masakalp Sutra*, 58. *Vagadasutra*,
*Mahavato* who are not eligible 59. *Pravajanasutra* (*Mahavrat Prarupan*) 60.
*Mahavatsutra*, Law-Prohibition-Formulas of the First *Mahavrat* 61.
*Adhikaranasutra*, 62. *Vyavshamanasutra*, Law-Prohibition-Formulas of the First
and Third *Mahavrat* 63. *Avasthappasutra*, Law-Prohibition-Formulas of the
First-Fourth *Mahavrat* 64. *Dakatirasutra*, 65. *Anudghatikasutra*, Law-
Prohibition-Formulas of the Fourth *Mahavrat* 66. *Upashray-Praveshasutra*, 67.
*Apavritadwar Upashrayasutra*, 68. *Avagrahanantak-Pravagrahpattakasutra*, 69.
*Brahmapaayasutra*, 70. *Brahmarakshasutra*, 71. *Paranchikasutra*, 72.
*Kantakad-Uddharanasutra*, 73. *Durgsutra*, 74. *Kshiptchittaadisutra*,
*Tapakalp* 75. *Kritikarm Sutra* 76. *Glanasutra*, 77. *Pariharikasutra* 78.
*Vyavaharasutra*, Post-Death Rituals 79. *Vishvambhanasutra*, Joint Formulas of
*Mahavrat* and *Samiti* 80. *Parimanthasutra* Through this classification, every
knowledgeable reader can understand the usefulness of this *Agam*. How important
these Law-Prohibition-Formulas are for the life of a *Shraman*. Only through
their study and contemplation can the true practice of the five vows be
possible. This is the opinion of the *Agam* experts, and it is self-evident that
only those who know these Law-Prohibition-Formulas will be able to prevent the
violation of the *Kalpa*. (3) *Vyavaharasutra* The presented *Vyavaharasutra* is
the third *Chhedasutra* / It has ten *Uddeshaka*. The last (*fifth*) *sutra* of
the tenth *Uddeshaka* has the names of five *Vyavahara*. The naming of this
*sutra* is also done by considering the five *Vyavahara* as the main ones. 1. As
many *sutras* as there are in the *Upashray* Law-Prohibition-Formulas, they are
mostly also the Law-Prohibition-Formulas of the fourth *Mahavrat*. 2. These
*sutras* are the ones that prescribe the *Vinaya* *Yavaty* and *Prayaschitta*
etc. internal austerities. 3. The first *Chhedasutra* is *Dasha* (*Ayaradasha
Dasha-Shruta-Skandha*), the second *Chhedasutra* is *Kalpa* (*Brihatkalpa*) and
the third *Chhedasutra* is *Vyavahara* / See *Sama* 26 *sutra* 2 / Or *Utta* *A*
31, *Ga* 17 / The commentator's opinion is that the fifth *sutra* of the tenth
*Uddeshaka* of the *Vyavaharasutra* is the last *sutra*. As many *sutras* as
there are from *Purushaprakar* to *Dasavidhavaiyaavaty*, they are all
*Parivadhit* or *Chulikarup*. [ 15 ]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
(2) IryAsamiti aura pariSThApanikAsamiti ke saMyukta vidhi-niSedhakalpa-11.
vicArabhUmivihArabhUmisUtra / (3) bhASA-samiti ke vidhi-niSedhakalpa-12.
vacanasUtra, 13. prastArasUtra, 14. antaragRhasthAnAdisUtra, (4) eSaNAsamiti ke
vidhi-niSedhakalpa [AhAraSaNA] 15. pralambasUtra, 16. rAtri bhaktasUtra, 17.
saMkhatisUtra, 18. sAgArika-pArihArikasUtra, 19. AhutikA-nihati kAsUtra, 20.
aMzikAsUtra, 21.kAlakSetrAtikrAntasUtra, 22. kalpasthitAkalpasthitasUtra, 23.
saMstRta-nivicikitsasUtra, 24. udgArasUtra, 25. grAhAravidhisUtra, 26.
parivAsitasUtra, 27. pulAkabhaktasUtra, 28. kSetrAvagrahapramANasUtra, 29.
rodhaka (senA) sUtra (pANaSaNA) 30. pAnakavidhisUtra, 31. aneSaNIyasUtra, 32.
mokasUtra, (vastraMSaNA) 33. cilimilikA sUtra 34. rAtrivastrAdigrahaNasatra, 35.
hatAhatAsUtra, 36, upadhisUtra, 37. vastrasutra, 38. nizrAsUtra, 39.
trikRtsnacatuHkRtsnasUtra, 40. samavasaraNasUtra, 41. yathAratnAdhika
vastraparibhAjakasUtra, (vastra-pASaNA) 42. pravagrahasUtra, (pASaNA) 43.
ghaTImAtraka sUtra , (rajoharaNaiSaNA) 44. rajoharaNasUtra, (camaiSaNA) 45.
carmasUtra, (zayyA-saMstArakeSaNA) 46. zayyA-saMstArakasUtra, 47.
yathAratnAdhika zayyA-saMstAraka-paribhAjanasUtra, (sthAneSaNA) 48.
avagrahasUtra, (upAzrayaiSaNA) 49. ApaNagRha-rathyAmukhasUtra, 50.
citrakarmasUtra, 51. sAgArika nidhAsUtra, 52. sAgArika upAzrayasUtra, 53.
pratibaddha zayyAsUtra, 54. gAthApatikulamadhyavAsasUtra, 55. upAzrayasUtra, 56.
upAzrayavidhisUtra, (vasatinivAsa) 57. mAsakalpasUtra, 58. vagaDAsUtra,
mahAvatoM ke anadhikArI 59. pravrAjanAsUtra (mahAvrata prarUpaNa) 60.
mahAvatasUtra, prathama mahAvata ke vidhiniSedhakalpa 61. adhikaraNasUtra, 62.
vyavazamanasUtra, prathama aura tRtIya mahAvata ke vidhiniSedhakalpa 63.
AvasthAppasUtra, prathama-caturtha mahAvata ke vidhiniSedhakalpa 64.
dakatIrasUtra, 65. anudghAtikasUtra, caturthamahAvata ke vidhiniSedhakalpa 66.
upAzraya-pravezasUtra, 67. apAvRtadvAra upAzrayasUtra, 68. avagrahAnantaka-
pravagrahapaTTakasUtra, 69. brahmApAyasUtra, 70. brahmarakSAsUtra, 71.
pArAJcikasutra, 72. kaNTakAdi-uddharaNasUtra, 73. durgasUtra, 74.
kSiptacittAdisUtra, tapakalpa' 75. kRtikarmasUtra 76. glAnasUtra, 77.
pArihArikasUtra 78. vyavahArasUtra, maraNottaravidhi 79. vizvambhavanasUtra,
mahAvata aura samiti ke saMyuktakalpa 80. parimanthasatra isa vargIkaraNa se
pratyeka vijJapAThaka isa Agama kI upAdeyatA samajha sakate haiN| zrAmaNya
jIvana ke lie ye vidhi-niSedhakalpa kitane mahattvapUrNa haiN| inake svAdhyAya
evaM cintana-manana se hI paMcAcAra kA yathArtha pAlana sambhava hai| yaha
pAgamajJoM kA abhimata hai tathA ina vidhi-niSedhakalpoM ke jJAtA hI kalpa
viparIta pAcaraNa ke nivAraNa karane meM samartha ho sakeMge, yaha svataH siddha
hai| (3) vyavahArasUtra prastuta vyavahArasUtra tRtIya chedasUtra hai / isake
dasa uddezaka haiN| dasaveM uddezaka ke aMtima (pAMcaveM) sUtra meM pAMca
vyavahAroM ke nAma hai / isa sUtra kA nAmakaraNa bhI pA~ca vyavahAroM ko
pramukha mAnakara hI kiyA gayA hai| 1. upAzraya vidhi-niSedha-kalpa ke jitane
sUtra haiM ve prAyaH caturtha mahAvata ke vidhi-niSedha-kalpa bhI haiN| 2.
vinaya yAvatya aura prAyazcitta prAdi grAbhyantara tapoM kA vidhAna karane vAle
ye satra haiN| 3. prathama chedasUtra dazA, (AyAradazA dazAzrutaskandha),
dvitIya chedasUtra kalpa (bRhatkalpa) aura tRtIya chedasUtra vyavahAra / dekhie
sama0 26 sUtra2 / athavA utta0 a0 31, gA0 17 / bhASyakAra kA mantavya hai-
vyavahArasUtra ke dasaveM uddezaka kA pAMcavAM sUtra hI antima sUtra hai|
puruSaprakAra se dasavidhavaiyAvatya paryanta jitane sUtra haiM, ve saba
parivadhita haiM yA cUlikArUpa hai| [ 15 ]

Page #17 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The word "vyavahar" is formed from the combination of the prefixes "vi" and "av"
and the root "har". "Vi" indicates diversity or method, "av" indicates doubt,
and "har" indicates the action of removing. Therefore, "vyavahar" refers to the
removal of various doubts related to a matter of dispute. This is the specific
meaning of the word "vyavahar".  The main topics of the "vyavahar sutra" are: 1.
"vyavahar" (conduct), 2. "vyavahari" (one who conducts), and 3. "vyavahartavya"
(that which is to be conducted).  The last sutra of the tenth udde≈õaka states
that there are five "vyavahar karan" (means of conduct). The "vyavahari" (those
who conduct the action of conduct) are the "geetarth" (teachers, etc.) who
purify the "gan" (community). The "shraman" and "shramanis" (monks and nuns) are
the "vyavahartavya" (those who are to be conducted). This means that the
"vyavaharajna" (one who knows conduct) conducts the action of purifying the
"gan" from transgressions. Just as a potter (doer) uses a wheel, a stick, clay,
and a thread, etc. (means) to make a pot (action), similarly, the "vyavaharajna"
uses "vyavahar" (conduct) to purify the "vyavahartavya" (community) from
transgressions.  There are two main interpretations of "vyavahar": 1. "laukika"
(worldly) and 2. "loko‡§§‡•ç‡§§‡§∞" (transcendental). The "laukika" interpretation is of
two types: 1. "samanya" (general) and 2. "vishesh" (specific). The general
interpretation is conduct with others or the exchange of money. The specific
interpretation is the entire process of litigation, i.e., justice.  There are
some words related to this specific interpretation that have been in use since
ancient times in the Vedic tradition of "shruti" (revealed knowledge) and
"smriti" (remembered knowledge). These include:  1. "vyavaharshastra" (law
code): This deals with the rules made collectively by the state government on a
particular subject, the decisions made on those rules, and the punishments given
for breaking those rules.  1. "Vi" for "nanartha" (various meanings), "av" for
"sandeha" (doubt), "haran" is called "har" (removal). "Vyavahar" is the
situation because of the removal of various doubts. - Katyayana  2. "There are
four types of men, as stated in the "ganasohikare" (community purification)
sutra. One of them is not a "manakare" (one who is not a monk). - "Vyavahar"
(conduct) "purushaprakar" (types of men) sutra  3. "The "vahari" (one who
conducts) is the doer, the "vyavahar" is the means. The "vahariyavva" (that
which is to be conducted) is the action, like the making of a pot. - "Vyavahar"
"bhadyapithika" (commentary) "gatha" (verse) 2  4. "No one is a friend of
anyone, and no one is an enemy of anyone. Friends and enemies are created
through conduct. - "Hitopade≈õa" (moral stories) "Mitra" (friend) 72  5. "The
arrangement of words in the case of mutual disagreement among humans regarding
their own interests is called "vyavahar". - "Mitakshara" (commentary on the
Yajnavalkya Smriti) [16]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
vyavahAra-zabdaracanA vi+va+ha-+dhA / 'vi' aura 'ava' ye do upasarga haiN| haja-
haraNe dhAtu hai / 'ha' dhAtu se 'pA' pratyaya karane para hAra banatA hai|
vi+va+hAra-ina tInoM se vyavahAra zabda kI racanA huI hai| 'vi'vividhatA yA
vidhi kA sUcaka hai| 'prava'saMdeha kA sUcaka hai| 'hAra'-haraNa kriyA kA sUcaka
hai| phalitArtha yaha hai ki vivAda viSayaka nAnA prakAra ke saMzayoM kA jisase
haraNa hotA hai vaha 'vyavahAra' hai| yaha vyavahAra zabda kA vizeSArtha hai|
vyavahArasUtra ke pramukha viSaya 1. vyavahAra, 2. vyavahArI aura 3.
vyavahartavya-ye tIna isa sUtra ke pramukha viSaya haiN| _ dasaveM uddezaka ke
antima sUtra meM pratipAdita pAMca vyavahAra karaNa (sAdhana) haiM, gaNa kI
zuddhi karane vAle gItArtha (prAcAryAdi) vyavahArI (vyavahAra kriyA pravartaya)
kartA haiM, aura zramaNa zramaNiyAM vyavahartavya (vyavahAra karane yogya) haiM
/ arthAt inakI aticAra zuddhirUpa kriyA kA sampAdana vyavahArajJa vyavahAra
dvArA karatA hai| jisa prakAra kumbhakAra (kartA), cakra, daNDa mRttikA sUtra
Adi karaNoM dvArA kumbha (karma) kA sampAdana karatA hai-isI prakAra
vyavahArajJa vyavahAroM dvArA vyavahartavyoM (gaNa) kI aticAra zuddhi kA
sampAdana karatA hai| vyavahAra-vyAkhyA vyavahAra kI pramukha vyAkhyAyeM do haiM
/ eka laukika vyAkhyA aura dUsarI lokottara vyAkhyA / laukikA vyAkhyA do prakAra
kI hai1. sAmAnya aura 2. vizeSa / sAmAnya vyAkhyA hai-dUsare ke sAtha kiyA jAne
vAlA AcaraNa athavA rupaye-paisoM kA lena-dena / vizeSa vyAkhyA hai-abhiyoga kI
samasta prakriyA arthAta nyAya / isa viziSTa vyAkhyA se sambandhita kucha zabda
pracalita haiN| jinakA prayoga vaidika paramparA kI zrutiyoM evaM smRtiyoM meM
cirantana kAla se calA mA rahA hai| yathA 1. vyavahArazAstra-(daNDasaMhitA)
jisameM rAjya-zAsana dvArA kisI vizeSa viSaya meM sAmUhika rUpa se banAye gaye
niyamoM ke nirNaya aura niyamoM kA bhaMga karane para diye jAne vAle daNDoM kA
vidhAna va vivecana hotA hai| 1. 'vi' nAnArthe ''va' saMdehe, 'haraNaM' hAra
ucyate / nAnA saMdehaharaNAda, vyavahAra iti sthitiH 1-kAtyAyana / nAnA vivAda
viSayaH saMzayo hiyate'nena iti vyavahAraH / 2. cattAri purisajAyA paNNattA, taM
jahAgaNasohikare nAma ege no maannkre|.... vyava0 puruSaprakAra sUtra 3. gAhA-
vahArI khalu kattA, vavahAro hoI karaNabhUto u| vahariyavvaM kajja, kubhAdi
tiyassa jaha siddhI / / vya0 bhAdhyapIThikA gAthA 2 4. na kazcit kasyacinmitraM,
na kazcit kasyacid ripuH / vyavahAreNa jAyante, mitrANi ripavastathA / / -hito0
mi0 72 5. parasparaM manuSyANAM, svArthavipratipattiSu / vAkyAnayAyAd
vyavasthAna, vyavahAra udAhRtaH / / mitaakssraa| [16]

Page #18 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
2. A **VyavahƒÅrj√±a** (judge) who is knowledgeable in **VyavahƒÅr≈õƒÅstra** (law) is
the one who considers and decides on accusations, etc., with discernment.  There
are two types of **loko‡§§‡•ç‡§§‡§∞** interpretations: 1. General and 2. Specific. / The
general interpretation is the conduct of one **ga·πáa** (group) with another
**ga·πáa**, or the conduct of one **≈õrama·πáa** (ascetic) with another **≈õrama·πáa**,
or the conduct of one **ƒÅcƒÅrya**, **upƒÅdhyƒÅya**, etc., with another **ƒÅcƒÅrya**,
**upƒÅdhyƒÅya**, etc. / The specific interpretation is the "**vapan**" (sowing) of
**tapa** (austerities) and other practices through the **sarvaj√±okta vidhi**
(method of the omniscient) and the removal of **atiƒçƒÅrajanaya pƒÅpa** (sin
arising from transgression) is **vyavahƒÅra**. The commentator instructs that the
word **vyavahƒÅra** is created by combining the word **hƒÅra** with the word
**vyav** in place of the word **vivƒÅpa**. There are two types of **vyavahƒÅra**:
1. **vidhi vyavahƒÅra** and 2. **avidhi vyavahƒÅra**. / **Avidhi vyavahƒÅra** is
against **mok·π£a** (liberation), therefore it is not the subject of this s≈´tra,
but **vidhi vyavahƒÅra** is its subject. There are four types of **vyavahƒÅra**:
1. **nƒÅma vyavahƒÅra**, 2. **sthƒÅpanƒÅ vyavahƒÅra**, 3. **dravya vyavahƒÅra**, and
4. **bhƒÅva vyavahƒÅra**. 1. **NƒÅma vyavahƒÅra** - a particular person being named
**vyavahƒÅra**. / 2. **SthƒÅpanƒÅ vyavahƒÅra** - the true or false representation of
a person named **vyavahƒÅra**. / 3. **Dravya vyavahƒÅra** has two divisions: from
**ƒÅgama** (scripture) and from **noƒÅgama** (non-scripture). From **ƒÅgama** - the
knower of the **vyavahƒÅra** word which is unsuitable (useless). / From
**noƒÅgama** - **dravya vyavahƒÅra** is of three types: 1. **j√±a≈õarƒ´ra**, 2.
**bhavyasarƒ´ra**, and 3. **tadvyatirikta**. / **J√±a≈õarƒ´ra** - the dead body of
the knower of the **vyavahƒÅra** word. / **Bhavyasarƒ´ra** - the future body of
the knower of the **vyavahƒÅra** word. / **Tadvyaitirikta** **dravya vyavahƒÅra**
- **vyavahƒÅra** scripture or book. / This is of three types: 1. **laukika**, 2.
**loko‡§§‡•ç‡§§‡§∞**, and 3. **kuprƒÅvanika**. The development of **laukika** **dravya
vyavahƒÅra** began with the development of humans from the **bhogabh≈´mi** (land
of enjoyment). Even in that ancient time, men lived as husbands and women as
wives, but their sexual desire was very limited. They had only two children (at
once) in their entire life. Of these, one was a boy and one was a girl. "We two,
our two" was the motto of their worldly life. They would become husband and wife
in their youth. 1. **Vyav. BhƒÅ·π£ya. Pƒ´·π≠hikƒÅ GƒÅ. 4** / 2. **Vyav. BhƒÅ·π£ya. Pƒ´·π≠hikƒÅ
GƒÅ. 4** / 3. **Vyav. BhƒÅ·π£ya. Pƒ´·π≠hikƒÅ GƒÅthƒÅ-6** / [17]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
2. vyavahArajJa(nyAyAdhIza) jo vyavahArazAstra kA jJAtA hotA hai vahI kisI
abhiyoga Adi para vivekapUrvaka vicAra karane vAlA evaM daNDanirNAyaka hotA hai|
lokottara vyAkhyA bhI do prakAra kI hai.-1 sAmAnya aura 2 vizeSa / sAmAnya
vyAkhyA hai--eka gaNa kA dUsare gaNa ke sAtha kiyA jAne vAlA AcaraNa / athavA
eka zramaNa kA dUsare zramaNa ke sAtha, eka AcArya, upAdhyAya Adi kA dUsare
AcArya , upAdhyAya Adi ke sAtha kiyA jAne vAlA AcaraNa / vizeSa vyAkhyA hai
-sarvajJokta vidhi se tapa prabhRti anuSThAnoM kA "vapana" yAne bonA aura usase
aticArajanya pApa kA haraNa karanA vyavahAra hai'| 'vivApa' zabda ke sthAna meM
'vyava' Adeza karake 'hAra' zabda ke sAtha saMyukta karane para vyavahAra zabda
kI sRSTi hotI hai yaha bhASyakAra kA nirdeza hai| vyavahAra ke bheda-prabheda
vyavahAra do prakAra kA hai--1 bidhi vyavahAra aura 2 avidhi vyavahAra / avidhi
vyavahAra mokSa-virodhI hai, isalie isa sUtra kA viSaya nahIM hai, apitu vidhi
vyavahAra hI isakA viSaya hai| vyavahAra cAra prakAra ke haiM-1 nAmavyavahAra 2
sthApanAvyavahAra 3 dravyavyavahAra aura 4 bhaavvyvhaar| 1. nAmavyavahAra--kisI
vyakti vizeSa kA 'vyavahAra' nAma honA / 2. sthApanAvyavahAra-vyavahAra nAma
vAle vyakti kI sat yA asat pratikRti / 3. dravyavyavahAra ke do bheda haiM--
Agama se aura noAgama se| Agama se anupayukta (upayogarahita) vyavahAra pada kA
jJAtA / noAgama se--dravyavyavahAra tIna prakAra kA hai-1 jJazarIra 2
bhavyazarIra aura 3 tadvyatirikta / jJazarIra-vyavahAra pada ke jJAtA kA
mRtazarIra / bhavyazarIra-vyavahAra pada ke jJAtA kA bhAvIzarIra / tavyatirikta
dravyavyavahAra-vyavahAra zruta yA pustaka / yaha tIna prakAra kA hai-1 laukika,
2 lokottara aura kupraavnik| laukika dravyavyavahAra kA vikAsakrama mAnava kA
vikAsa bhogabhUmi se prArambha huA thaa| usa AdikAla meM bhI puruSa pati rUpa
meM aura strI patnI rUpa meM hI rahate the, kintu donoM meM kAma-vAsanA atyanta
sImita thii| sAre jIvana meM unake kevala do santAne (eka sAtha) hotI thiiN|
unameM bhI eka bAlaka aura eka bAlikA hii| "hama do hamAre do" unake sAMsArika
jIvana kA yahI sUtra thaa| ve bhAI-bahina hI yuvAvasthA meM pati-patnI rUpa meM
rahane lagate the| 1. vyava0 bhASya0 pIThikA gA0 4 / 2. vyava0 bhASya0 pIThikA
gA0 4 / 3. vyaya0 bhASya0 pIThikA gAthA-6 / [ 17 ]

Page #19 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Their means of livelihood were Kalpavriksha / Sitting on gold in their shade,
eating fruits, drinking the nectar of trees / They wore bark and listened to the
music of trees every moment / They did not work, nor did they have any kind of
worry, therefore they were long-lived and very happy. They did not do Dharma,
nor did they do sinful deeds, there was no speaker, no listener, they were not
arrogant, no one punished them, there was no ruler, nor were they ruled. Such
was the life of the couple / The cycle of time was moving. The land of enjoyment
was beginning to turn into the land of karma. The means of livelihood,
Kalpavriksha, were disappearing. The problems of eating, drinking, and sleeping
were beginning to torment them. What to eat and drink? Where to live, where to
sleep? Above was the sky, below was the earth. How to protect oneself from cold,
heat, and rain?  Many such worries had surrounded man. There was a scramble for
food and drink. Premature deaths began to occur and the life of the couple
(husband and wife) became unmatched. The first Sushma-Sushma period and the
second Sushma period had ended. The two divisions of the third Sushma-Dushma
period had also ended. The third division's vicious cycle was going on / It was
a time of transition / For the sake of happiness, peace, and order, the first
five Kulkaras first tortured the criminals with the 'Hat' verbal punishment, but
after some time this punishment became ineffective. This was the first principle
of the suppression policy of punishment. The era of implanting violence in the
human heart began here. The second five Kulkaras influenced the attackers by
torturing them with the "Mat" verbal punishment, but this punishment also became
ineffective as time passed / The third five Kulkaras ruled and suppressed those
who spread unrest with the "Dhik" verbal punishment. Although these three
punishments of the punishable were only verbal punishments, but the punishment,
synonymous with violence, did not make man gentle but cruel, not merciful but
wicked. The name of the first Kulkar was "Sumati". He was to use "Shaman" for
the happiness and prosperity of mankind, but influenced by the crooked cycles of
time, he also started the vicious cycle of "Daman". The last Kulkar was Shri
Rishabhdev. When the punishment policy of condemnation also failed, the Karma
Tripdi "1 Asi, 2 Masi, 3 Krishi" emerged from the mouth of Lord Rishabhdev
(Adinath). The sunrise of human social life took place / Human society was
divided into two classes / One class of rulers and one class of ruled. The
minority ruling class began to discipline the majority ruled class. Lord
Adinath's son Bharat became the emperor / He also began to use the suppression
policy inherited from his ancestors on his brothers. When the original source of
Upshamars, Lord Adinath (Rishabhdev), encouraged Bahubali and others for an
eternal (spiritual) kingdom, they agreed. Because the humans of that era were of
'righteous nature'. The burning desire for the kingdom in the hearts of the
brothers was completely extinguished by the invincible stream of non-violence.
[18]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
unake jIvana-nirvAha ke sAdhana the kalpavRkSa / sonA-baiThanA unakI chAyA meM,
khAnA phala, pInA vRkSoM kA madajala / pahanate the valkala aura sunate the
vRkSavAdya pratipala / na ve kAma-dhandhA karate the, na unheM kisI prakAra kI
koI cintA thI, ataH ve dIrghajIvI evaM atyanta sukhI the| na ve karate the
dharma, na ve karate the pApakarma, na thA koI vaktA, na thA koI zrotA, na the
ve uddaNDa, na unheM koI detA thA daNDa, na thA koI zAsaka, na the ve shaasit|
aisA thA yugalajana-jIvana / kAlacakra cala rahA thaa| bhogabhUmi karmabhUmi meM
pariNata hone lagI thii| jIvana-yApana ke sAdhana kalpavRkSa vilIna hone lage
the| khAne-pIne aura sone-baiThane kI samasyAyeM satAne lagI thiiN| kyA khAyeM-
pIyeM ? kahA~ raheM, kahA~ soyeM ? Upara AkAza thA, nIce dharatI thii| sardI,
garmI aura varSA se baceM to kaise baceM? ityAdi aneka cintAoM ne mAnava ko
ghera liyA thaa| khAne-pIne ke lie chInA-jhapaTI calane lgii| akAla mRtyue~ hone
lagI aura jor3e (pati-patnI) kA jIvana bejor3a hone lgaa| prathama suSama-
suSamAkAla aura dvitIya suSamAkAla samApta ho gayA thaa| tRtIya suSamA-
duSamAkAla ke do vibhAga bhI samApta ho gaye the| tRtIya vibhAga kA duzcakra
cala rahA thA / vaha thA saMkramaNa-kAla / sukha, zAnti evaM vyavasthA ke lie
sarvaprathama prathama pAMca kulakaroM ne aparAdhiyoM ko 'hat'isa vAgdaNDa se
pratAr3ita kiyA, para kucha samaya bAda yaha daNDa prabhAvahIna ho gyaa| daNDa
kI damana nIti kA yaha prathama sUtra thaa| mAnava hRdaya meM hiMsA ke
pratyAropaNa kA yuga yahIM se prArambha huaa| dvitIya pAMca kulakaroM ne
AtatAyiyoM ko "mata" isa vAgdaNDa se pratAr3ita kara prabhAvita kiyA, kintu yaha
daNDa bhI samaya ke sopAna pAra karatA huA prabhAvahIna ho gayA / tRtIya pAMca
kulakaroM ne azAnti phailAne vAloM ko "dhika" isa vAgdaNDa se zAsita kara
nigraha kiyaa| yadyapi daNDanIya ke ye tInoM daNDa vAgdaNDa mAtra the, para
hiMsA ke paryAyavAcI daNDa ne mAnava ko komala na banAkara krUra banAyA, dayAlu
na banAkara duSTa bnaayaa| prathama kulakara kA nAma yadyapi "sumati" thaa|
mAnava kI sukha-samRddhi ke lie use "zamana" kA upayoga karanA thA para kAla ke
kuTila kucakroM se prabhAvita hokara usane bhI "damana" kA duzcakra claayaa|
antima kulakara zrI RSabhadeva the| dhikkAra kI daNDanIti bhI asaphala hone lagI
to bhagavAna RSabhadeva (AdinAtha) ke zrImukha se karma tripadI "1 asi, 2 masi,
3 kRSi' prasphurita huii| mAnava ke sAmAjika jIvana kA sUryodaya huA / mAnava
samAja do vargoM meM vibhakta ho gayA / eka varga zAsakoM kA aura eka varga
zAsitoM kaa| alpasaMkhyaka zAsaka varga bahusaMkhyaka zAsita varga para
anuzAsana karane lgaa| bhagavAna AdinAtha ke suputra bharata cakravartI bane /
pUrvajoM se virAsata meM milI damananIti kA prayoga ve apane bhAiyoM para bhI
karane lge| upazamarasa ke Adizrota bha0 AdinAtha (RSabhadeva) ne bAhabalI Adi
ko zAzvata (AdhyAtmika) sAmrAjya ke lie protsAhita kiyA to ve mAna gye| kyoMki
usa yuga ke mAnava 'Rjujar3a prakRti ke the| ahiMsA kI amogha amIdhArA se
bhAiyoM ke hRdaya meM prajvalita rAjyalipsA kI lobhAgni sarvathA zAnta ho gii|
[18]

Page #20 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
From the time of Bhagwan Ajitanath to Bhagwan Parshvanath, it was the era of
'Rijprajna' humans. During the reign of eleven Chakravartis, nine Baldevs, nine
Vasudevas and nine Prativa-sudevas, the cycle of punishment was so oppressive
that people almost forgot the gentle path of Shraman-niti. The policies of
inducement, punishment and division were widely propagated. Now, the era of
'Vakrajada' humans has arrived. The human heart is dominated by crookedness and
inertia. Punishment (suppression) has been considered essential for social
order. Mutilation and capital punishment have become commonplace. Penal codes
and instruments of punishment have been created. Criminal courts and criminology
have also developed. In the past, weapons like Agniyastra and in the present,
weapons like nuclear bombs have been used to suppress people through cruel
punishment. In ancient literature, there is a description of a Dandapani (Yama
Raja), but today, many Dandapanis can be seen walking around everywhere. This is
worldly material interaction. Lokottara Dravyavyavahar - the interaction of free
Shramans who disregard the teachings of Acharyas, etc., with other free
Shramans, such as the exchange of food, etc. Lokottara Bhavyavyavahar - this is
of two types: 1. From Pagam and 2. From Nomagam. From Agam - the one who knows
the meaning of the word 'Upayukta Vyavahar'. From Nomagam, there are five types
of behavior: 1. Agam, 2. Shruta, 3. Agyan, 4. Dharana, 5. Jeet. 1. Where there
is Pagam, establish behavior from Pagam. 2. Where there is no Agam, but Shruta,
establish behavior from Shruta. 3. Where there is no Shruta, but Prajna,
establish behavior from Prajna. 4. Where there is no Prajna, but Dharana,
establish behavior from Dharana. 5. Where there is no Dharana, but Jeet,
establish behavior from Jeet. Establish behavior from these five: 1. Pagam, 2.
Shruta, 3. Prajna, 4. Dharana and 5. Jeet. Wherever any of these exist,
establish behavior from that. Question: Bhanta! What have the Pagambalik Shraman
Nirgranthas said (regarding these five behaviors)? Answer: (Ayushman Shramans)
In these five behaviors, whenever there is a particular behavior in a particular
matter, the Shraman Nirgrantha, remaining neutral (middle ground), behaves
correctly and becomes a follower of the command! 1. Pragamato Vyavahar
Padarthajnata Tatra Chopayukta 'Upayogo Bhava Nikshepa' iti Vachanat. - Vyav.
Bha. Peethika Gatha 6 1. Tanam-5. U. 2 0 421/Tatha Bhag. Sha. 8. U. 8. Su. 8, 9.
[19]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
bha0 ajitanAtha se lekara bha. pArzvanAtha paryanta 'RjaprAjJa' mAnavoM kA yuga
rahA / gyAraha cakravartI, no baladeva, no vAsudeva aura nau prativAsudevoM ke
zAsana meM daNDanIti kA itanA damanacakra calA ki saumya zamananIti ko loga
prAyaH bhUla gye| dAma- pralobhana, daNDa aura bheda - ina tIna nItiyoM kA hI
sarva sAdhAraNa meM adhikAdhika pracAra-pramAra hotA rahA / aba AyA "vakrajar3a"
mAnavoM kA yuga / mAnava ke hRdayapaTala para vakratA aura jar3atA kA sAmrAjya
chA gyaa| sAmAjika vyavasthA ke lie daNDa (damana) anivArya mAna liyA gyaa|
aMga-bhaMga aura prANadaNDa sAmAnya ho gye| daNDasaMhitAyeM banI, daNDa-yantra
bane / daNDanyAyAlaya aura daNDavijJAna bhI vikasita haa| AgneyAstra Adi aneka
prakAra ke astra-zastroM ne atIta meM aura vartamAna meM aNubama Adi aneka
astroM dvArA nRzaMsa daNDa se damana kA prayoga hotA rahA hai| paurANika sAhitya
meM eka daNDapANi (yamarAja) kA varNana hai para Aja to yatra-tatra-sarvatra
anekAneka daNDapANi hI calate phirate dikhAI dete haiM / yaha laukika
dravyavyavahAra hai| lokottara dravyavyavahAra-prAcAryAdi kI upekSA karanevAle
svacchanda zramaNoM kA anya svacchanda zramaNoM ke sAtha azanAdi AdAna-pradAna
kA pArasparika vyavahAra / lokottara bhAvavyavahAra-1 yaha do prakAra kA hai ?
pAgama se aura 2 nomAgama se / Agama se- upayogayukta vyavahAra pada ke artha kA
jJAtA' / nogrAgama se pAMca prakAra ke vyavahAra haiM 1. Agama, 2. zruta, 3.
AjJA, 4. dhAraNA, 5. jIta / 1. jahA~ pAgama ho vahA~ pAgama se vyavahAra kI
prasthApanA kreN| 2. jahA~ Agama na ho, zruta ho, vahA~ zruta se vyavahAra kI
prasthApanA kreN| 3. jahA~ zruta na ho, prAjJA ho, vahA~ prAjJA se vyavahAra kI
prasthApanA kreN| 4. jahA~ prAjJA na ho, dhAraNA ho, vahA~ dhAraNA se vyavahAra
kI prasthApanA kareM / 5. jahA~ dhAraNA na ho, jIta ho, vahA~ jIta se vyavahAra
kI prasthApanA kreN| ina pAMcoM se vyavahAra kI prasthApanA kareM:-1. pAgama, 2.
zruta, 3. prAjJA, 4. dhAraNA aura 5. jIta se| inameM se jahA~-jahA~ jo ho
vahA~-vahA~ usI se vyavahAra kI prasthApanA kreN| pra0 bhaMte ! pAgamabalika
zramaNa nirgranthoM ne (ina pAMca vyavahAroM ke sambandha meM) kyA kahA hai?
u0--(AyuSmana zramaNo) ina pAMcoM vyavahAroM meM se jaba-jaba jisa-jisa viSaya
meM jo vyavahAra ho taba-taba usa usa viSaya meM anizritopAzrita ...
(madhyastha) rahakara samyak vyavahAra karatA huA zramaNa-nirgrantha AjJA kA
pArAdhaka hotA hai ! 1. prAgamato vyavahArapadArthajJAtA tatra copayukta
'upayogo bhAva nikSepa' iti vacanAt / -vyava0 bhA0 pIThikA gAthA 6 1. TANaM-5.
u0 2 0 421/tathA bhaga0 za0 8. u0 8. sU0 8, 9 / [19]

Page #21 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Agamvyavahar** is the method of conduct and prohibitions practiced or
formulated by Kevalgyanis, Manahparyavgyanis, and Avadhigyanis. The method of
conduct and prohibitions practiced or formulated by the fourteen, ten, and nine
Purvadhars are also Agamvyavahar.  **Shrutavyavahar** is the method of conduct
and prohibitions practiced or formulated by the eight Purna and the ninth
Aapurnna Purvadhars. The method of conduct and prohibitions prescribed by the
Dasha (Ayara Dasha - Dasha Shruta Skandha), Kalpa (Brihat Kalpa), Vyavahar,
Achar Prakalpa (Nishita), etc. Cheda Shruta (Shastra) are also Shrutavyavahar.
**Agyavvyavahar** is when two Geetarth Shramans are traveling in different
distant lands and are not likely to meet in the near future. If one of them
needs to perform penance for a Kalpika Pratiseshana, they should send their
transgression to the Geetarth Shishya. If there is no Geetarth Shishya, then
they should send their transgression in a symbolic language to the distant
Geetarth Muni through a Dharanakushal Ageetarth Shishya. The Geetarth Muni
should then consider the Dravya, Kshetra, Kala, Bhava, Sanhanan, Dhairya, Bal,
etc. and go there themselves to perform the penance. Alternatively, they can
send the Geetarth Shishya to explain the situation. If there is no Geetarth
Shishya, then they should send a message of penance for the transgression in
symbolic language along with the person who brought the message of the
transgression. This is Agyavvyavahar.  **Dharnavvyavahar** is when a Geetarth
Shraman performs penance for a transgression based on Dravya, Kshetra, Kala, and
Bhava. The Shraman who remembers this penance should perform the same penance
for someone who commits the same transgression.  **Agamvyavahar** can be divided
into three categories based on the concept of Dharna: Utkrishta, Madhyama, and
Jaghanya.  1. **Utkrishta Agamvyavahar** is the method of conduct and
prohibitions practiced or formulated by Kevalgyanis, as Kevalgyan is complete
direct knowledge.  2. **Madhyama Agamvyavahar** is the method of conduct and
prohibitions practiced or formulated by Manahparyavgyanis and Avadhigyanis, as
these two types of knowledge are partial (Desha) direct knowledge, but they are
still self-relative.  3. **Jaghanya Agamvyavahar** is the method of conduct and
prohibitions practiced or formulated by the fourteen, ten, and nine Purvadhars,
as they are specific Shruta, but they are indirect knowledge.  **[20]**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
AgamavyavahAra kevalajJAniyoM, manaHparyavajJAniyoM aura avadhijJAniyoM dvArA
Acarita yA prarUpita vidhi-niSedha AgamavyavahAra hai| nava pUrva, daza pUrva
aura caudaha pUrvadhAriyoM dvArA Acarita yA prarUpita vidhi-niSedha bhI
AgamavyavahAra hI hai| zrutavyavahAra ATha pUrva pUrNa aura navama pUrva
apUrNadhArI dvArA Acarita yA pratipAdita vidhi-niSedha bhI zrutavyavahAra hai|
dazA (AyAradazA-dazAzrutaskandha), kalpa (bRhatkalpa), vyavahAra, AcAraprakalpa
(nizItha) Adi chedazrata (zAstra) dvArA nirdiSTa vidhi-niSedha bhI
zrutavyavahAra hai / AjJAvyavahAra do gItArtha zramaNa eka dUsare se alama dUra
dezoM meM vihAra kara rahe hoM aura nikaTa bhaviSya meM milane kI sambhAvanA na
ho| unameM se kisI eka ko kalpikA pratisevanA kA prAyazcitta lenA ho to apane
aticAra doSa kahakara gItArtha ziSya ko bheje / yadi gItArtha ziSya na ho to
dhAraNAkuzala agItArtha ziSya ko sAMketika bhASA meM apane aticAra kahakara
dUrastha gItArtha mUni ke pAsa bheje aura usa ziSya ke dvArA kahI gaI AlocanA
sanakara vaha gItArtha muni dravya, kSetra, kAla, bhAva, saMhanana, dhairya,
bala Adi kA vicAra kara svayaM vahA~ Ave aura prAyazcitta de| athavA gItArtha
ziSya ko samajhAkara bheje| yadi gItArtha ziSya na ho to AlocanA kA sandeza lAne
vAle ke sAtha hI sAMketika bhASAoM meM aticAra-zuddhi ke lie prAyazcitta kA
saMdeza bheje-yaha prAjJAvyavahAra hai / 2 dhAraNAvyavahAra kisI gItArtha
zramaNa ne dravya, kSetra, kAla aura bhAva kI apekSA se jisa aticAra kA jo
prAyazcitta diyA hai, usakI dhAraNA karake jo zramaNa usI prakAra ke aticAra
sevana karane vAle ko dhAraNAnusAra prAyazcitta AgamavyavahAra kI kalpanA se
tIna bheda kiye jA sakate hai utkRSTa, madhyama aura jaghanya / 1.
kevalajJAniyoM dvArA Acarita yA prarUpita vidhi-niSedhapUrNa utkRSTa
AgamavyavahAra hai, kyoMki kevalajJAna sakala pratyakSa hai| 2.
manaHparyavajJAna aura avadhijJAna yadyapi vikala (deza) pratyakSa haiM phira
bhI ye donoM jJAna Atma-sApekSa haiM, isaliye mana:paryavajJAniyoM yA
avadhijJAniyoM dvArA Acarita yA prarUpita vidhi-niSedha (madhyama)
AgamavyavahAra hai| 3. caudaha pUrva, daza pUrva aura nava pUrva (sampUrNa)
yadyapi viziSTa zruta haiM, phira bhI parokSa haiM, ataH inake dhAraka dvArA
prarUpita yA Acarita vidhi-niSedha bhI AgamavyavahAra hai, kintu yaha jaghanya
AyamavyavahAra hai| 2. so vavahAra vihaNNU, aNumajjittA suttovaeseNa / sIsassa
dei appaM, tassa imaM dehi pacchittaM / / --vyava0 bhA0 u0 10 gA0661 / [20]

Page #22 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
"Dhar·πáƒÅvyavahƒÅra" is the practice of accepting and adhering to a particular
conduct. Alternatively, "VaiyƒÅvatya" refers to the service rendered by a ≈örama·πáa
to the Ga·πáa. If such a ≈örama·πáa is unable to learn the "Chheda≈õruta," the Guru
MahƒÅrƒÅja makes him undertake certain "PrƒÅya≈õcitta" practices, which is also
considered "Dhar·πáƒÅvyavahƒÅra." "Jƒ´tavyavahƒÅra" encompasses "Sthiti," "Kalpa,"
"MaryƒÅdƒÅ," and "VyavasthƒÅ," all synonyms of "Jƒ´ta." Pure conduct, as prescribed
by "Gƒ´ta-ƒÅrtha," is "Jƒ´tavyavahƒÅra." "Jƒ´tavyavahƒÅra" also includes performing
"PrƒÅya≈õcitta" practices that are either less or more than what is prescribed in
the ≈öruta, but are traditionally followed. If, in addition to the reasons
mentioned in the S≈´tra, other reasons arise, and the resulting "AticƒÅra" is
addressed through "PrƒÅya≈õcitta" practices as prescribed by various "Gƒ´ta-ƒÅrtha,"
it is also considered "Jƒ´tavyavahƒÅra." "Jƒ´tavyavahƒÅra" also includes the rules
and prohibitions established by various "Gƒ´ta-ƒÅrtha" and unanimously agreed
upon.  If, while "ƒÄgamavyavahƒÅra" is applicable for the "PrƒÅya≈õcitta" of
violating the "VyavahƒÅrapa√±caka," a ≈örama·πáa resorts to "≈örutavyavahƒÅra," he is
liable for the "PrƒÅya≈õcitta" of four "Guru." Similarly, if, while
"≈örutavyavahƒÅra" is applicable, a ≈örama·πáa resorts to "PrƒÅj√±ƒÅvyavahƒÅra," or if,
while "YƒÅj√±ƒÅvyavahƒÅra" is applicable, he resorts to "Dhar·πáƒÅvyavahƒÅra," or if,
while "Dhar·πáƒÅvyavahƒÅra" is applicable, he resorts to "Jƒ´tavyavahƒÅra," he is
liable for the "PrƒÅya≈õcitta" of four "Guru." The "VyavahƒÅrapa√±caka" must be
applied in a sequential order, starting from the beginning, and applying them in
reverse order is strictly prohibited. An "ƒÄgamavyavahƒÅrƒ´" should only practice
"ƒÄgamavyavahƒÅra" and not other practices like "≈öruta" etc., because just as the
light of the sun renders the light of a lamp unnecessary, so too, the "ƒÄgama" is
the primary source of guidance.  "Pu·πáo gu·πáo vaes≈ç, vavahƒÅrƒÅssa u ciu pasatthƒÅsmƒÅ
/ Eso bhe parikahio, duvƒÅlasangƒÅssa gav·πáƒ´yam / -Vyav. U. 10 BhƒÅ·π£ya GƒÅthƒÅ 724 /
Jan jƒ´tam sƒÅvajja, na te·πá jƒ´e·πá hoi bavahƒÅr≈ç. Jan jƒ´yam asƒÅvajja·πÅ, te·πá u jƒ´e·πá
vavahƒÅr≈ç // -Vyav. U. 10 BhƒÅ·π£ya GƒÅthƒÅ 715 / Ja jassa pacchittƒÅ·πÅ, pƒÅyiriya
parampƒÅrƒÅe avi·πõuddha / JogƒÅ ya bahu vigappƒÅ, emo khalu jƒ´takappo / / -Vyav.
BhƒÅ·π£ya Pƒ´bikƒÅ GƒÅthƒÅ 12 / Jan jƒ´yam as≈çhikara·πÅ, pƒÅsatta-pamatta-sanjayƒÅi·πá·πáƒÅ·πÅ /
Jai vi mahƒÅjanƒÅinnƒÅ, na te·πá jƒ´e·πá bavahƒÅr≈ç // Jan jƒ´yam s≈çhikara, sanvega
parƒÅya·πáena datte·πá / Ege·πá vi pƒÅi·πá·πáƒÅ·πÅ, te·πá u jƒ´e·πá bavahƒÅr≈ç // .-Vyav. U. 10 BhƒÅ·π£ya
GƒÅthƒÅ 720, 721 / [21] "

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
detA hai, vaha dhAraNAvyavahAra hai| athavA -vaiyAvatya arthAta sevAkAryoM se
jisa zramaNa ne gaNa kA upakAra kiyA hai vaha yadi chedazruta na sIkha sake to
guru mahArAja use katipaya prAyazcitta padoM kI dhAraNA karAte haiM yaha bhI
dhAraNAvyavahAra hai| jItavyavahAra sthiti, kalpa, maryAdA aura vyavasthAye
'jIta' ke paryAyavAcI haiM / gItArtha dvArA pravartita zuddha vyavahAra
jItavyavahAra hai| zrutokta prAyazcitta se hIna yA adhika kintu paramparA se
Acarita prAyazcitta denA jItavyavahAra hai| sUtrokta kAraNoM ke atirikta kAraNa
upasthita hone para jo aticAra lage haiM unakA pravartita prAyazcitta aneka
gItArthoM dvArA Acarita ho to vaha bhI jItavyavahAra hai| aneka gItArthoM dvArA
nirdhArita evaM sarvasammata vidhi-niSedha bhI jItavyavahAra hai|'
vyavahArapaMcaka ke kramabhaMga kA prAyazcitta AgamavyavahAra ke hote huye yadi
koI zrutavyavahAra kA prayoga karatA hai to cAra guru ke prAyazcitta kA pAtra
hotA hai| isI prakAra zratavyavahAra ke hote huye prAjJAvyavahAra kA
prayogakartA, yAjJAvyavahAra ke hote haye dhAraNAvyavahAra kA prayogakartA tathA
dhAraNAvyavahAra ke hote huye jItavyavahAra kA prayogakartA cAra guru ke
prAyazcitta kA pAtra hotA hai| vyavahArapaMcaka kA prayoga pUrvAnupUrvIkrama se
arthAt anukrama se hI ho sakatA hai kintu pazcAnupUrvIkrama se arthAt
viparItakrama se prayoga karanA sarvathA niSiddha hai| AgamavyavahArI
AgamavyavahAra se hI vyavahAra karate hai; anya zrutAdi vyavahAroM se nahIM
kyoMki jisa samaya sUrya kA prakAza ho usa samaya dIpaka ke prakAza kI
AvazyakatA nahIM rhtii| ki puNa guNovaeso, vavahArassa u ciu pasatthasma / eso
bhe parikahiyo, duvAlasaMgassa gavaNIyaM / -vyava0 u0 10 bhASya gAthA 724 / jaM
jItaM sAvajja, na teNa jIeNa hoi bvhaaro| jaM jIyamasAvajjaM, teNa u jIeNa
vvhaaro|| -vyava0 u0 10 bhASya gAthA 715 / ja jassa pacchittaM,
pAyariyaparaMparAe aviruddha / jogA ya bahu vigappA, emo khalu jItakappo / /
-vyava0 bhASya pIbikA gAthA 12 / jaM jIyamasohikaraM, pAsattha-pamatta-
saMjayAINNaM / jai vi mahAjaNAinna, na teNa jIeNa bvhaaro|| jaM jIyaM sohikara,
saMvegaparAyaNena datteNa / egeNa vi pAiNNaM, teNa u jIeNa bvhaaro|| .-vyava0 u0
10 bhASya gAthA 720, 721 / [21]

Page #23 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
"The conduct of a Jina (as long as the fourfold assembly exists) remains / Other
conduct ceases. If the conduct of a non-Jain involves violence to living beings
in grains, juices, fruits, and flowers, then purification is achieved by licking
ghee. If one steals cotton, silk, wool, animals with one or two hooves, birds,
fragrant substances, medicines, and ropes, etc., then purification is achieved
by drinking milk for three days. A Brahmin who has memorized the Rig Veda, even
if he kills all three worlds or eats anywhere, does not incur any sin. In the
summer, one should perform the five-fire penance, in the rainy season, one
should sit in the shade of a tree during the rain, and in the autumn, one should
wear wet clothes - in this way, one should gradually increase the penance. /
"The terms 'vyavahari', 'vyavaharajna', and 'vyavaharta' are synonymous. One who
is devoted to the Dharma, firm in the Dharma, detached, fearful of sin,
knowledgeable of the sutras, and free from attachment and aversion (impartial)
is a 'vyavahari'. If one gives the atonement prescribed by the scriptures
according to the transgression, considering the substance, place, time, feeling,
the person who is a transgressor, and the nature of the transgression, then the
'vyavaharajna' (giver of atonement) is a 'aradhaka'. 1. Gatha -
Suttamangayavisayam, Khettam Kalam cha Papp Vavharo. Hohiti na Ailla, Ja Tittham
Tav Jito U / / - Vyav. 10 Bhashya Gatha 55 / Annadyajanam Sattvanam, Rasajanam
cha Sarvasha / Falapushpodhbhavanam cha, Ghritprashso Vishodhanam // - Manu. A.
11/143 / Kasakijtjirnanam, Dwishaphaikashaphasy cha / Pakshigandhaushdhinam cha,
Rajjvaschaiva Tyahm Payah / / - Manu. A. 11/16 / 4. Hatva Lokanapi Imamshtri,
Nashyannapi Yatastatah / Rigvedam Dharayanvipro, Nainah Prapnoti Kinchan // .-
Manu. A. 11/261 / Grishme Panchatapasthustsyadvarsha Svabhraavakashikah /
Ardravassastu Hemante, Kramasho Vardhayastapah || - Manu. A. 6/23 / 6.
K-Piyadhhamma Dadhadhamma, Sanvigga Cheva Dajjabhiru A. Suttattha Tadubhayaviuu,
Anissiya Vavharakari Ya / / Vy. Bhashya Peethika Gatha 14 / Kh‚Äì1 Pracharavan, 2
Aadharavan, 3 Vyavaharavan, 4 Apnidak, 5 Prakari, 6 Aparishravi, 7 Niryaphak, 8
Apayadarshi, 9 Priyadharmmi, 10 Dridhadharmmi. Thanam. 10, Su. 733 / G-Vyav. U.
10 Bhashya Gatha 243 / 245 / 246 / 247 / 298 / 300 / [ 22 ]"

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
jItavyavahAra tIrtha (jahA~ taka caturvidha saMgha rahatA hai vahA~ taka)
paryanta rahatA hai / anya vyavahAra vicchinna ho jAte haiN|'
kuprAvanikavyavahAra anAja meM, rasa meM, phala meM aura phala meM hone vAle
jIvoM kI hiMsA ho jAve to ghI cATane se zuddhi ho jAtI hai| kapAsa, rezama, Una,
ekakhura aura dokhura vAle pazu, pakSI, sugandhita padArtha, auSadhiyoM aura
rajju Adi kI corI kare to tIna dina dUdha pIne se zuddhi ho jAtI hai| Rgveda
dhAraNa karane vAlA vipra tInoM loka ko mAre yA kahIM bhI bhojana kare to use
kisI prakAra kA pApa nahIM lagatA hai| grISmaRtu meM paMcAgni tapa karanA,
varSARtu meM varSA barasate samaya bitA chAyA ke baiThanA aura zaradaRtu meM
mIle vastra pahane rahanA-isa prakAra kramazaH tapa bar3hAnA cAhiye / "
vyavahArI vyavahArajJa, vyavahArI, vyavahartA-ye samAnArthaka haiN| jo
priyadharmI ho, dRr3hadharmI ho, vairAgyavAna ho, pApabhIru ho, sUtrArtha kA
jJAtA ho aura rAga-dveSarahita (pakSapAtarahita) ho vaha vyavahArI hotA hai|
dravya, kSetra, kAla, bhAva, aticArasevI puruSa aura pratisevanA kA cintana
karake yadi kisI ko aticAra ke anurUpa prAgamavihita prAyazcitta detA hai to
vyavahArajJa (prAyazcittadAtA) aArAdhaka hotA hai| 1. gAhA-suttamaNAgayavisayaM,
khettaM kAlaM ca pappa vvhaaro| hohiti na AillA, jA titthaM tAva jIto u / /
-vyava0 10 bhASya gAthA 55 / annAdyajAnAM sattvAnAM, rasajAnAM ca sarvazaH /
phalapuSpodbhavAnAM ca, ghRtaprAzo vizodhanam // -manu0 a0 11/143 /
kAsakITajIrNAnAM, dvizaphaikazaphasya ca / pakSigandhauSadhInAM ca, rajjvAzcaiva
tyahaM payaH / / -manu0 a0 11/16 / 4. hatvA lokAnapImAMstrI, nazyannapi
yatastataH / RgvedaM dhArayanvipro, nainaH prApnoti kiJcana // .-manu0 a0 11/261
/ grISme paJcatapAstusyAdvarSA svabhrAvakAzikaH / ArdravAsAstu hemante, kramazo
vrdhystpH|| -manu0 a0 6/23 / 6. ka-piyadhammA daDhadhammA, saMviggA ceva
dajjabhIrU a| suttattha tadubhayaviU, aNissiya vavahArakArI ya / / vya0 bhASya
pIThikA gAthA 14 / kha-1 prAcAravAn, 2 aAdhAravAn, 3 vyavahAravAn, 4 apanIDaka,
5 prakArI, 6 aparizrAvI, 7 niryApaka, 8 apAyadarzI, 9 priyadharmI, 10
dRddh'dhrmii| ThANaM0 10, sU0 733 / ga-vyava0 u010 bhASya gAthA 243 / 245 / 246
/ 247 / 298 / 300 / [ 22 ]

Page #24 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
"A practitioner (penitent) who performs minor and major penances with attachment
and aversion, without contemplating the substance, field, etc., is
contradictory." The practices to be performed are non-scriptural. These are of
many types. There are four types of non-scriptural: 1. It is one-time but heavy-
karma, therefore it is a non-worshipper of Dharma. 2. It is one-time and light-
karma, therefore it is a worshipper of Dharma. 3. It is one-time and heavy-
karma, therefore it is a non-worshipper of Dharma. 4. It is one-time and light-
karma, therefore it is a worshipper of Dharma. Similarly, there are four types
of non-scriptural women. There are five types of non-scriptural: 1. Pulaka -
whose disciplined life is like straw, without essence. Although he has faith in
the truth, he also performs rituals, but he also uses the benefits obtained from
penance and maintains a conduct that seems like knowledge transgression. 2.
Bakusha - these are of two types: instrument-bakusha and body-bakusha. One who
is engaged in decorating instruments and body and is desirous of prosperity and
fame. He consumes transgressions worthy of hole penance. 3. Kushil - this is of
two types: 1. Pratisevna Kushil and 2. Kashaya Kushil. Pratisevna Kushil who
transgresses in the post-qualities like Pindashuddhi etc. Kashaya Kushil - who
is not able to remain stable in his natural state due to the occasional rise of
agitated passions. 4. Nimranth - pacified-delusion non-scriptural. 5. Graduate,
Yogikevali and Ayogikevali. There are many varieties of these five non-
scriptural. All these are practicable. As long as the knowledge of the first
restraint and fourteen previous births remained, the aforementioned ten penances
were given. Their 1. Gaha which is well-composed, is well-explained and well-
known. In the context of conduct, it is the measure of well-behaved ones. The
context of conduct is the ultimate knowledge of the well-behaved. One who
understands this from the truth, is a well-behaved one. 2. One who is big in the
initiation stage. 3. One who is small in the initiation stage. Thanam 04, U. 3,
Sutra 320. - Vyav. U. 10 Commentary Verse 605, 607 >> [ 23 ]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
dravya, kSetra prAdi kA cintana kiye binA rAga-dveSapUrvaka hInAdhika
prAyazcitta detA hai vaha vyavahArajJa (prAyazcittadAtA) virAdhaka hotA hai|'
vyavahartavya vyavahartavya vyavahAra karane yogya nirgrantha haiN| ye aneka
prakAra ke haiN| nirgrantha cAra prakAra ke haiM1. ekarAnika hotA hai kintu
bhArIkarmA hotA hai, ata: vaha dharma kA anArAdhaka hotA hai| 2. ekarAnika hotA
hai aura halukarmA hotA hai, ataH vaha dharma kA pArAdhaka hotA hai|| 3. eka
avamarAtnika hotA hai aura bhArIkarmA hotA hai, ataH vaha dharma kA anArAdhaka
hotA hai / 4. eka avamarAnika hotA hai kintu halukarmA hotA hai, ata: vaha
dharma kA ArAdhaka hotA haiN| isI prakAra nirgranthiyA~ bhI cAra prakAra kI hotI
haiN| 4 nirgrantha pAMca prakAra ke haiM. 1. pulAka--jisakA saMyamI jIvana bhUse
ke samAna sArarahita hotA hai| yadyapi tattva meM zraddhA rakhatA hai,
kriyAnuSThAna bhI karatA hai, kintu tapAnuSThAna se prApta labdhi kA upayoga bhI
karatA hai aura jJAnAticAra lageaisA bartana-vyavahAra rakhatA hai| 2. bakuza-ye
do prakAra ke hote haiMupakaraNabakuza aura zarIrabakuza / jo upakaraNoM ko evaM
zarIra ko sajAne meM lagA rahatA hai aura Rddhi tathA yaza kA icchuka rahatA hai
/ chedaprAyazcitta yogya aticAroM kA sevana karatA hai| 3. kuzIla- yaha do
prakAra kA hai-1 pratisevanAkuzIla aura 2 kaSAyakuzIla / pratisevanAkuzIla jo
piNDazuddhi Adi uttaraguNoM meM aticAra lagAte haiM / kaSAyakuzIla-jo yadA kadA
saMjvalana kaSAya ke udaya se svabhAvadazA meM sthira nahIM raha pAtA / 4.
nimrantha-upazAntamoha nirgrantha / 5. snAtakasayogIkevalI aura ayogiikevlii|
ina pAMca nirgranthoM ke aneka bheda-prabheda haiN| ye saba vyavahArya haiN|
jaba taka prathama saMhanana aura caudaha pUrva kA jJAna rahA taba taka pUrvokta
dasa prAyazcitta diye jAte the| inake 1. gAhAjo suyamahijjai, bahaM suttatthaM
ca niuNaM vijANAi / kappe vavahAraMmi ya, so u pamANaM suyaharANaM / / kappassa
ya nijjutti vavahArassa va paramaniuNassa / jo atthato viyANai, bavahArI so
annunnnnaato|| 2. jo dIkSAparyAya meM bar3A ho / 3. jo dIkSAparyAya meM choTA ho
/ ThANaM04, u0 3, sUtra 320 / -vyava0 u010 bhASya gAthA 605, 607 >> [ 23 ]

Page #25 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
When a person becomes *vichchhanna*, the *anavastapya* and *paranchik*
*prƒÅya≈õchitta* also become *vichchhanna* - meaning that these two *prƒÅya≈õchitta*
are not given. The remaining eight *prƒÅya≈õchitta* will be given until the
*tƒ´rtha* (fourfold assembly). *PulƒÅka* was given six *prƒÅya≈õchitta* until
*vyutsarma*. *Pratisevaka-bakusha* and *pratisevaka-kushila* are given all ten
*prƒÅya≈õchitta*. *Sthavira* are not given *anavastapya* and *paranchik*
*prƒÅya≈õchitta*; the remaining eight *prƒÅya≈õchitta* are given. *Nirgrantha* can
only be given two *prƒÅya≈õchitta* - 1 *ƒÅlochanƒÅ*, 2 *viveka* / *SnƒÅtaka* only
takes one *prƒÅya≈õchitta* - *viveka* / They are not given any *prƒÅya≈õchitta*. 1
Those with *sƒÅmƒÅyika-chƒÅritra* are given eight *prƒÅya≈õchitta* without *ched* and
*m≈´la*. 2 Those with *chedopasthƒÅpanƒ´ya-chƒÅritra* are given all ten
*prƒÅya≈õchitta*. 3 Those with *parihƒÅra-vishuddhi-chƒÅritra* are given *pƒÅ·π≠ha*
*prƒÅya≈õchitta* until *m≈´la*. 4 Those with *s≈´k·π£ma-samparƒÅya-chƒÅritra* and 5
those with *yathƒÅkhyƒÅta-chƒÅritra* are given only two *prƒÅya≈õchitta* 1 *ƒÅlochanƒÅ*
and 2 *viveka* / All these are practical / 2 When a *vyavahƒÅra-j√±a* (knower of
conduct) uses the conduct from one of the five conducts with a *vyavahartavya*
(a *≈õrama·πáa* or *≈õrama·πáƒ´* who is worthy of conduct), then he gives
*prƒÅya≈õchitta* to the one who prohibits the conduct or the one who makes the
prohibition a conduct, then the word *vyavahƒÅra* becomes synonymous with the
*tapa* in the form of *prƒÅya≈õchitta*. Therefore, a brief introduction to *tapa*
in the form of *prƒÅya≈õchitta* is given here. 1 *guruk*, 2 *laghuk*, 3
*laghusvaka* / There are three types of *guruk* 1 *guruk*, 2 *gurutarak* and 3
*yathƒÅguruk* / *GƒÅhƒÅ* - *pƒÅloya·πáa-pa·∏çikkamanƒì, mƒ´sa-vivƒìgƒì tahƒìva viussaggƒì /
aƒìchchha pacchittƒÅ, p≈´lƒÅganiyantƒÅy bodhavvƒÅ / / bauspa·∏çisƒìvagƒÅ·πáam, pƒÅyachchinnƒÅ
havam ti savvƒì vi / bhavƒì kappƒì, ji·πáakappƒì ahƒÅ hoti / / pƒÅloya·πáƒÅ vivƒìgo ya,
niyantassƒÅ duvƒì bhavƒì / vivƒìgo ya si·πáƒÅyassƒÅ, ƒìmƒìyƒÅ pa·∏çivattito* || - *Vyav* 10
*BhƒÅ·π£ya GƒÅthƒÅ* 357, 58, 59 *SƒÅmƒÅiyasanjayƒÅ·πáam, pƒÅyachchittƒÅ, chƒìda-
m≈´larahƒ´yat·π≠hƒÅ / thƒìrƒÅ·πáam ji·πáƒÅ·πáam pu·πá, m≈´lata avhƒÅ hoƒ´* || *ParihƒÅravisuddhiƒì,
m≈´lam tƒÅ a·π≠·π≠ƒÅti pacchittƒÅ. ThƒìrƒÅ·πáam ji·πáƒÅ·πáam pu·πá, javiham chƒìyƒÅdivajja vƒÅ / /
pƒÅloya·πáƒÅ-vivƒìgo ya taiyam tu na vijjatƒ´. Suhumƒìya samparƒÅƒì, ahukkƒÅƒì tahƒìva ya
//* - *Vyav* *U* 10 *BhƒÅ·π£ya GƒÅthƒÅ* 361-62-63-64 / [ 24 ]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
vicchanna hone para anavasthApya aura pArAMcika prAyazcitta bhI vicchanna ho
gaye -arthAt ye donoM prAyazcitta ava nahIM diye jAte haiN| zeSa ATha
prAyazcitta tIrtha (caturvidhasaMgha) paryanta diye jaayeNge| pulAka ko
vyutsarmaparyanta chaha prAyazcitta die jAte the| pratisevakabakuza aura
pratisevanAkuzIla ko dasoM prAyazcitta diye jAte haiN| sthaviroM ko anabasthApya
aura pArAMcika prAyazcitta nahIM diye jAte; zeSa ATha prAyazcitta diye jAte
haiN| nirgrantha ko kevala do prAyazcitta diye jA sakate haiM-1 AlocanA, 2
viveka / snAtaka kevala eka prAyazcitta letA hai-viveka / unheM koI prAyazcitta
detA nahIM hai|' 1 sAmAyikacAritra vAle ko cheda aura mUla rahita ATha
prAyazcitta diye jAte haiN| 2 chedopasthApanIyacAritra vAle ko dasoM prAyazcitta
diye jAte haiN| 3 parihAravizuddhicAritra vAle ko mUlaparyanta pATha prAyazcitta
diye jAte haiN| 4 sUkSmasaMparAyacAritra vAle ko tathA 5 yathAkhyAtacAritra vAle
ko kevala do prAyazcita diye jAte haiM1 aAlocanA aura 2 viveka / ye saba
vyavahArya haiM / 2 vyavahAra ke prayoga vyavahArajJa jaba ukta vyavahArapaMcaka
meM se kisI eka vyavahAra kA kisI eka vyavahartavya (vyavahAra karane yogya
zramaNa yA zramaNI) ke sAtha prayoga karatA hai to vidhi ke niSedhaka ko yA
niSedha ke vidhAyaka ko prAyazcitta detA hai taba vyavahAra zabda prAyazcitta
rUpa tapa kA paryAyavAcI ho jAtA hai| ataH yahA~ prAyazcitta rUpa tapa kA
saMkSipta paricaya diyA gayA hai| 1 gurukaH, 2 laghuka, 3 laghusvaka / guruka ke
tIna bheda 1 guruka, 2 gurutaraka aura 3 yathAguruka / gAhA-pAloyaNapaDikkamaNe,
mIsa-vivege taheva viussagge / eecha pacchittA, pUlAganiyaMThAya bodhavvA / /
bausapaDisevagANaM, pAyacchinnA havaM ti savve vi / bhave kappe, jiNakappe ahA
hoti / / pAloyaNA vivego ya, niyaMThassa duve bhave / vivego ya siNAyassa, emeyA
pddivttito|| -vyava0 10 bhASya gAthA 357, 58, 59 sAmAiyasaMjayANaM, pAyacchittA,
cheda-mUlarahiyaTThA / therANaM jiNANaM puNa, mUlata avhA hoii||
parihAravisuddhIe, mUlaM tA aTTAti pcchittaa| therANaM jiNANaM puNa, javihaM
cheyAdivajja vA / / pAloyaNA-vivego ya taiyaM tu na vijjtii| suhumeya saMparAe,
ahakkhAe taheva ya // -vyava0 u010 bhASya gAthA 361-62-63-64 / [ 24 ]

Page #26 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Types of *Laghu* and *Laghusvak*  **Laghu** has three types:  1. *Laghuk* 2.
*Laghutarak* 3. *Yathalaghuk*  **Laghusvak** has three types: 1. *Laghusvak* 2.
*Laghusvatarak* 3. *Yathalaghusvak*  **Guru Prayaschitta** is a type of *Maha
Prayaschitta* and is considered *Anudhatik*. The duration of this *Prayaschitta*
is fixed, and the *Tap* (austerity) is completed within that time. This *Tap* is
only given to those who practice *Pika Pratisevna*.  **Guru Prayaschitta
Practices:**  1. **Guru Prayaschitta:** One month, *Attham Tela* (three days of
fasting) 2. **Gurutar Prayaschitta:** Four months, *Dasham Chola* (four days of
fasting) 3. **Gurutar Prayaschitta:** Six months, *Dwadashm Pachola* (five days
of fasting)  **Laghuk Practices/Prayaschitta Tap:**  1. **Laghu Prayaschitta:**
Thirty days, *Chhadar Bela* (two days of fasting) 2. **Laghutar Prayaschitta:**
Twenty-five days, *Chautha* (one day of fasting) 3. **Yathalaghu Prayaschitta:**
Twenty days, *Achaml*  **Laghusvak Prayaschitta:**  1. **Laghusvak
Prayaschitta:** Fifteen days, *Ek Sthanak* (one *Egalthano*) 2. **Laghusvatarak
Prayaschitta:** Ten days, *Purvardh* (two *Porsi*) 3. **Yathalaghusvak
Prayaschitta:** Five days, *Nivritik* (food without *Vikriti*)  **Duration of
*Prayaschitta*:**  1. One month has twenty-four days of *Tapascharya* and eight
days of *Parana*. If the last *Parana* day is excluded, then one month (thirty-
one days) is considered *Guru Prayaschitta*. 2. One month has twenty-four days
of *Tapascharya* and six days of *Parana*. This makes one month (thirty days) of
*Guru Prayaschitta*. 3. One month has twenty-five days of *Tapascharya* and five
days of *Parana*. This makes one month (thirty days) of *Guru Prayaschitta*. 4.
Thirty days have ten *Chhut* (breaks) with twenty days of *Tapascharya* and ten
days of *Parana*. 5. Thirteen days of *Tapascharya* and twelve days of *Parana*.
The last *Parana* day is not included here. 6. Twenty days have ten *Achaml*
with ten days of *Tapascharya* and ten days of *Parana*. 7. Fifteen days of *Ek
Sthanak* are performed continuously. 8. Ten days of *Purvardh* are performed
continuously. 9. Five days of *Nivritik* are performed continuously. 10. *Vah*
*Udde* 5 *Bhashya* *Gatha* 6039-6044 11. [25]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
laghu ke tIna bheda 1. laghuka, 2. laghutaraka aura 3. yathAlaghuka / laghusvaka
ke tIna bheda 1. laghusvaka, 2. laghusvataraka aura 3. yathAlaghusvaka / guru
prAyazcitta mahA prAyazcitta hotA hai usakI anadadhAtika saMjJA hai| isa
prAyazcitta ke jitane dina nizcita haiM aura jitanA tapa nirdhArita hai vaha
tapa utane hI dinoM meM pUrA hotA hai| yaha tapa pikApratisevanA vAloM ko hI
diyA jAtA hai| guruka vyavahAra : prAyazcita tapa 1. guru prAyazcitta-eka mAsa
paryanta aTThama telA (tIna dina upavAsa) 2. gurutara prAyazcitta- cAra mAsa
paryanta dazama '.-colA (cAra dina kA upavAsa) 3. gurutara prAyazcitachaha mAsa
paryanta dvAdazama3-pacolA (pAMca dina kA upvaas)| laghuka vyavahAra/prAyazcita
tapa 1. laghu prAyazcittatIsa dina paryanta chadrabelA (do upavAsa) 2. laghutara
prAyazcitta-pacIsa dina paryanta cauttha' - upavAsa / 3. yathAlaghu prAyazcita--
bIsa dina paryanta AcAmla / ' 1. laghusvaka prAyazcitta-pandraha dina paryanta
eka sthAnaka (egalaThANo) 2. laghusvataraka prAyazcitta-dasa dina paryanta-
pUrvArdha (do porasI) 3. yathAlaghusvaka prAyazcitta-pAMca dina
paryantanivikRtika (vikRtirahita AhAra) / 1. eka mAsa meM pATha adrama hote
haiM- inameM cauvIsa dina tapazcaryA ke aura ATha dina pAraNA ke| antima pAraNe
kA dina yadi chor3a deM to eka mAma (ikatIsa dina) guru prAyazcitta kA hotA hai|
meM chaha dasama hote haiM inameM caubIsa dina tapazcaryA ke aura chaha dina
pAraNe ke isa prakAra eka mAsa (tIsa dina) guru prAyazcitta kA hotA hai / 3. eka
mAsa meM pA~ca dvAdazama hote haiM-inameM pacIsa dina tapazcaryA ke aura pA~ca
dina pAraNe ke isa prakAra eka mAsa (tIsa dina) guru prAyazcitta kA hotA hai| 4.
tIsa dina meM dasa chuTTa hote haiM- inameM bIsa dina tapazcaryA ke aura dasa
dina pAraNe ke hote haiN| meM teraha upavAsa hote haiM. inameM teraha dina
tapazcaryA ke aura bAraha dina pAraNe ke / antima pAraNe kA dina yahA~ nahIM
ginA hai| 6. bIsa dina meM dasa AcAmla hote haiM-inameM dasa dina tapazcaryA ke
aura dasa dina pAraNe ke hote haiM / 7. pandraha dina eka sthAnaka nirantara
kiye jAte haiN| 8. dasa dina pUrvArdha nirantara kiye jAte haiN| 9. pAMca dina
nirvikRtika AhAra nirantara kiyA jAtA hai| 10. vaha0 udde0 5 bhASya gAthA
6039-6044 / [25]

Page #27 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Guru Prayaschitta Tap has three divisions: 1. Jaghanya, 2. Madhyama, and 3.
Utkrishta.   1. Jaghanya Guru Prayaschitta - One month and two months.  2.
Madhyama Guru Prayaschitta - Three months and four months.  3. Utkrishta Guru
Prayaschitta - Five months and six months.   Jaghanya Guru Prayaschitta Tap is
to continuously perform Attam Tap for one or two months. Madhyama Guru
Prayaschitta Tap is to continuously perform Dasham Tap for three or four months.
Utkrishta Guru Prayaschitta Tap is to continuously perform Dwadashma Tap for
five or six months.   Similarly, there are three divisions each for Lagh
Prayaschitta Tap and Laghuswak Tap. The worship of Tap is also done in the
aforementioned month order.   There are three divisions of Utkrishta Guru
Prayaschitta: 1. Utkrishta-Utkrishta, 2. Utkrishta-Madhyama, 3. Utkrishta-
Jaghanya.   1. Utkrishta-Utkrishta Guru Prayaschitta - To continuously perform
Dwadashma Tap for five or six months.  2. Utkrishta-Madhyama Guru Prayaschitta -
To continuously perform Dwadashma Tap for three or four months.  3. Utkrishta-
Jaghanya Guru Prayaschitta - To continuously perform Dwadashma Tap for one or
two months.   Similarly, there are three divisions each for Madhyama Guru
Prayaschitta and Jaghanya Guru Prayaschitta. The worship of Tap is also done in
the aforementioned order.   There are three divisions each for Utkrishta Lagh
Prayaschitta, Madhyama Lagh Prayaschitta, Jaghanya Lagh Prayaschitta, and
Utkrishta Laghuswak Prayaschitta, Madhyama Laghuswak Prayaschitta, and Jaghanya
Laghuswak Prayaschitta. The worship of Tap is also done in the aforementioned
month order.   For further details, one should study the Vyavahar Bhashya.
**Vyavahar (Prayaschitta) Ko Upadeyata**  **Question:** Bhagwan! What is the
benefit of Prayaschitta to a Jiva?   **Answer:** Prayaschitta purifies the
sinful karma and makes the character pure. By performing Prayaschitta in the
right way, the path (Samyagdarshan) and the fruit of the path (knowledge) are
purified. The conduct and the fruit of conduct (Mokshamarg) are purified.   1.
(a) Uttara Adhyayan 29  (b) Pavam Chhidai Jamha, Payachchittan Tu Bhannae Tenam
/ Paaen Va Vichittan, Visohae Tenam Pachchittan // - Vyav. Bhashya Peethika,
Gatha 35  (c) Prayah Papam Samuddishtan, Chittan Tasy Vishodhanam / Yada Prayasy
Tapas: Chittan Nishchay Iti Smriti.  (d) Prayasy Papasy Chittan Vishodhanam
Prayaschittan / [26]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
guru prAyazcita tapa ke tIna vibhAga1. jaghanya, 2. madhyama aura 3. utkRSTa /
1. jaghanya guru prAyazcitta-eka mAsika aura dvaimAsika / 2. madhyama guru
prAyazcittatraimAsika aura cAturmAsika / 3. utkRSTa guru prAyazcitta-pAMcamAsika
aura pANmAsika / jaghanya guru prAyazcitta tapa haieka mAsa yA do mAsa paryanta
nirantara aTTama tapa krnaa| madhyama guru prAyazcitta tapa hai--tIna mAsa yA
cAra mAsa paryanta nirantara dazama tapa krnaa| utkRSTa guru prAyazcitta tapa
hai-pA~ca mAsa yA chaha mAsa paryanta nirantara dvAdazama tapa krnaa| isI
prakAra lagha prAyazcitta tapa ke aura laghasvaka tapa ke bhI tIna-tIna vibhAga
haiN| tathA tapa kI ArAdhanA bhI pUrvokta mAsa krama se hI kI jAtI hai| utkRSTa
guru prAyazcitta ke tIna vibhAga 1. utkRSTa-utkRSTa, 2. utkRSTa-madhyama, 3.
utkRSTa-jaghanya / 1. utkRSTa-utkRSTa guru prAyazcita-pA~ca mAsa yA chaha mAsa
paryanta nirantara dvAdazama tapa karanA / 2. utkRSTa-madhyama guru prAyazcitta-
tIna mAsa yA cAra mAsa paryanta nirantara dvAdazama tapa karanA / 3. utkRSTa-
jaghanya guru prAyazcitta-eka mAsa yA do mAsa paryanta nirantara dvAdazama tapa
karanA / isI prakAra madhyama guru prAyazcitta ke tIna vibhAga aura jaghanya
guru prAyazcitta ke bhI tIna vibhAga haiN| tapArAdhanA bhI pUrvokta krama se hI
kI jAtI hai| utkRSTa lagha prAyazcitta, madhyama lagha prAyazcitta, jaghanya
lagha prAyazcitta ke tIna, tIna vibhAga tathA utkRSTa laghusvaka prAyazcitta,
madhyama ladhusvaka prAyazcitta aura jaghanya laghusvaka prAyazcitta ke bhI
tIna, tIna vibhAga haiN| tapArAdhanA bhI pUrvokta mAsakrama se hai| vizeSa
jAnane ke liye vyavahAra bhASya kA adhyayana karanA caahiye| vyavahAra
(prAyazcitta) ko upAdeyatA pra0-bhagavana ! prAyazcitta se jIva ko kyA lAbha
hotA hai ? u0--prAyazcitta se pApakarma kI vizuddhi hotI hai aura cAritra
niraticAra hotA hai| samyak prakAra se prAyazcitta karane para mArga
(samyagdarzana) aura mArgaphala (jJAna) kI vizuddhi hotI hai| prAcAra aura
prAcAraphala (muktimArga) kI zuddhi hotI hai|' 1. (ka) utta0 a0 29 (kha) pAvaM
chidai jamhA, pAyacchittaM tu bhannae teNaM / pAeNa vA vicittaM, visohae teNa
pacchittaM // -vyava. bhASya pIThikA, gAthA 35 (ga) prAyaH pApaM samuddiSTaM,
cittaM tasya vizodhanam / yadA prAyasya tapasa: cittam nizcaya iti smRtii| (gha)
prAyasya pApasya cittaM vizodhanam prAyazcittam / [ 26 ]

Page #28 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Types of Atonement (Prayschitta)  1. **Jnana Prayschitta:** Atonement for
transgressions of knowledge, achieved through self-criticism and other means. 2.
**Darshan Prayschitta:** Atonement for transgressions of perception, achieved
through self-criticism and other means. 3. **Charitra Prayschitta:** Atonement
for transgressions of conduct, achieved through self-criticism and other means.
4. **Viyatt Kicchapaayachchitte:** This fourth type of atonement has two
interpretations:     * **Viyattkicchapaayachchitte:** Atonement for explicit
actions.         * This has two meanings:             * **Explicit:** The
atonement act prescribed by the Acharya is the remedy for the sin. This means
that when an Acharya prescribes atonement, they consider the transgressor's
possessions, location, time, and emotions. Whether the prescribed atonement is
mentioned in the Dashakalpa-Vyavahar or not, it still purifies the soul.
* **Explicit:** Atonement act clearly specified in the sutras.     *
**Chiyattkicchapaayachchitte:** Atonement for abandoned actions.         *
**Chiyatt:** This word also means "pleasing." Acts pleasing to the Acharya, such
as repentance, are also forms of atonement.  **Ten Types of Atonement:**  1.
**Palochana Yogya:** Atonement for transgressions that can be purified through
self-criticism. 2. **Atikram:** Transgression of fundamental principles. 3.
**Vyatikram:** Deviation from fundamental principles. 4. **Atichara:**
Transgression. 5. **Anaacharasevi:** Those who commit transgressions.
**Punishment vs. Atonement:**  * Punishment is harsh, while atonement is
relatively gentle. * Punishment is accepted unwillingly, while atonement is
accepted willingly. * Punishment suppresses desires, while atonement mitigates
them.  **Number of Transgressions:**  * **Jnana:** 14 transgressions *
**Darshan:** 5 transgressions * **Charitra:** 106 transgressions     * 25
transgressions from the five great vows     * 2 transgressions from abstaining
from nighttime meals     * 4 transgressions from Iryasamiti     * 2
transgressions from Bhashasamiti     * 47 transgressions from Eshan asamiti
* 2 transgressions from Adan Nikshepanasamiti     * 10 transgressions from
Paristhapanasamiti     * 9 transgressions from the three Guptis     * 5
transgressions from Sanlekhana  **Note:** The Sanskrit equivalent of "Chiyatt"
meaning "pleasing" is not found. (Source: Ardhamagadhi Kosh, Part 2, Chiyatt
word, page 628)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
prAyazcitta ke bheda-prabheda 1. jJAna-prAyazcitta-jJAna ke aticAroM kI zuddhi
ke liye AlocanA Adi prAyazcitta krnaa|' 2. darzana-prAyazcitta-darzana ke
aticAroM kI zuddhi ke liye AlocanA Adi prAyazcitta krnaa| 3. cAritra
prAyazcitta-cAritra ke aticAroM kI zuddhi ke liye AlocanA Adi prAyazcitta karanA
/ 3 4. viyatta kiccapAyacchitte-isa caturtha prAyazcita ke do pAThAntara haiM 1.
viyattakiccapAyacchitte-vyaktakRtya prAyazcita / 2. ciyattakiccapAyacchitte-
tyaktakRtya prAyazcita / ka-vyaktakRtya prAyazcitta ke do artha haiM(1) vyakta-
arthAta AcArya unake dvArA nirdiSTa prAyazcitta kRtya pApa kA parihAraka hotA
hai| tAtparya yaha hai ki AcArya yadA-kadA kisI ko prAyazcitta dete haiM to ve
aticArasevI ke dravya, kSetra, kAla, bhAva Adi dekhakara dete haiN| prAcArya
dvArA diye gaye prAyazcitta kA ullekha dazAkalpa-vyavahAra Adi meM ho yA na ho
phira bhI usa prAyazcitta se Atmazuddhi avazya hotI hai| _khavyakta arthAt
spaSTa cheda sUtra nirdiSTa prAyazcitta kRtya / bhinna bhinna aticAroM ke
bhinna-bhinna (mAlocanAdi kRtya) prAyazcitta / ka-tyakta kRtyaprAyazcitta -jo
kRtya tyakta haiM unakA prAyazcitta / kha--ciyatta--kA eka artha 'prItikara' bhI
hotA hai| prAcArya ke prItikara kRtya vaiyAvRtya Adi bhI prAyazcitta rUpa haiN|
dasa prakAra ke prAyazcitta(1) pAlocanA yogya-jina aticAroM kI zUddhi prAlocanA
se ho sakatI hai aise aticAroM kI AlocanA (Ga) jisa prakAra laukika vyavahAra
meM sAmAjika yA rAjanaitika aparAdhiyoM ko daNDa dene kA vidhAna hai--isau
prakAra mUlaguNa yA uttaraguNa sambandhI (1) atikrama, (2) vyatikrama, (3)
aticAra aura (4) anAcAraseviyoM ko prAyazcitta dene kA vidhAna hai| sAmAnyatayA
daNDa aura prAyazcitta samAna pratIta hote haiM, kintu daNDa krUra hotA hai aura
prAyazcitta apekSAkRta komala hotA hai| daNDa anicchApUrvaka svIkAra kiyA jAtA
hai aura prAyazcitta svecchApUrvaka svIkAra kiyA jAtA hai / daNDa se bAsanAoM kA
damana hotA hai aura prAyazcitta se zamana hotA hai| 1. jJAna ke caudaha aticAra
/ 2. darzana ke pA~ca aticAra / 3. cAritra ke ekasau chaha (106) aticAra pAMca
mahAvrata se paccIsa aticAra / rAtribhojana tyAga ke do aticaar| iryAsamiti ke
cAra aticAra / bhASAsamiti ke do aticaar| eSaNA samiti ke seMtAlIsa aticaar|
AdAna nikSepaNA samiti ke do ati cAra / pariSThApanA samiti ke dasa praticAra /
tIna gupti ke 9 aticaar| saMlekhanA ke 5 aticAra 4. 'ciyatta' kA 'prItikara'
arthasUcaka saMskRta rUpAntara milatA nahIM hai| -ardhamAgadhIkoza bhAga 2
ciyattazabda pR0 628 [ 27 ]

Page #29 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Translation:  **(1)** **Aalochana Yogya:**  A transgression that is worthy of
Aalochana (criticism) is a type of atonement.  Transgressions of the Eshana
Samiti and Paristhapana Samiti are often worthy of Aalochana.  **(2)**
**Pratikramana Yogya:**  Transgressions that can be purified through
Pratikramana (confession and repentance) are worthy of Pratikramana.
Transgressions of Samitis and Guptis are often worthy of Pratikramana.  **(3)**
**Ubhay Yogya:**  Transgressions that can be purified by both Aalochana and
Pratikramana are worthy of both types of atonement. Transgressions committed by
misidentifying Ekendriyadi Jivas (beings with one sense organ) or by causing
them to migrate are worthy of both Aalochana and Pratikramana.  **(4)** **Viveka
Yogya:**  Transgressions that are purified by Viveka (discernment) or Parityaag
(renunciation) are worthy of Viveka (renunciation) atonement. If one consumes
food that is considered Adhakarma (unsuitable for a Jain), then renouncing it is
the Viveka Yogya atonement.  **(5)** **Vyutsarga Yogya:**  Transgressions that
are purified by restraining bodily actions and stabilizing the mind in the
intended goal are worthy of Vyutsarga atonement. The Kayotsarga (body restraint)
performed after crossing a river is a Vyutsarga Yogya atonement.  **(6)** **Tap
Yogya:**  Transgressions that can only be purified by Tap (austerity) are worthy
of Tap atonement. Transgressions mentioned in the Nishisuthra are often worthy
of Tap (Murumas, Laghumas) atonement.  **(7)** **Chhed Yogya:**  Transgressions
that can be purified by Diksha Chhed (breaking the vow of initiation) are worthy
of Chhed atonement. Some transgressions of the five Mahavratas (great vows) are
worthy of Chhed atonement.  **(8)** **Mool Yogya:**  Transgressions that can
only be purified by re-taking the Mahavratas are worthy of Mool atonement.  The
transgression of one or more Mahavratas is worthy of Mool atonement.  **(9)**
**Anvasthapya Yogya:**  Transgressions that can only be purified by renouncing
the vows and the attire are worthy of Anvasthapya atonement.  Unjustified
criticism, indulgence in the path of transgression, repeated transgression of a
single act, and transgression of multiple acts simultaneously are worthy of
Chhed atonement. Just as the amputation of a diseased limb is necessary to
protect the remaining body, similarly, the removal of a corrupted vow is
necessary to protect the remaining vows.  **(2)**  A person who kills one or
more Panchendriya Pranis (beings with five senses), breaks their vows, speaks
falsehood with a deliberate and impure mind, takes what is not given, possesses
possessions, adopts the attire of a Parivrajaka (ascetic) or a Grihastha
(householder), is worthy of Mool atonement.  **(3)**  There are three types of
Anvasthapya Yogya transgressions:      1. Stealing from a Sadhmika (a fellow
Jain)     2. Stealing from an Anyarmika (a non-Jain)     3. Striking with a
stick, fist, or other weapon.      - Thaanang 3, Uo 4, Su 201 [28]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
karanA AlocanA yogya prAyazcitta hai| eSaNA samiti aura pariSThApanA samiti ke
aticAra prAyaH AlocanA yogya haiN| (2) pratikramaNayoMgya-jina aticAroM kI
zuddhi pratikramaNa se ho sakatI hai, aise aticAroM kA pratikramaNa karanA--
pratikramaNa yogya hai| samitiyoM evaM guptiyoM ke aticAra prAyaH pratikramaNa
yogya haiN| (3) ubhayayogyajina aticAroM kI zuddhi AlocanA aura pratikramaNa-
donoM se hI ho sakatI hai aise aticAroM kI AlocanA tathA unakA pratikramaNa
karanA-ubhaya yogya prAyazcitta hai| ekendriyAdi jIvoM kA abhidhAna karane se
yAvata sthAnAntaraNa karane se jo aticAra hote haiM ve ubhaya prAyazci yogyatta
haiN| (4) vivekayogya-jina aticAroM ko zuddhi viveka arthAt parityAga se hotI
hai aise aticAroM kA parityAga karanA viveka (tyAga) yogya prAyazcitta hai|
AdhAkarma AhAra yadi A jAya to usakA parityAga karanA hI vivekayogya prAyazcitta
hai|| (5) vyutsarga yogya-jina aticAroM kI zuddhi kAyika kriyAoM kA avarodha
karake dhyeya meM upayoga sthira karane se hotI hai aise aticAra vyutsarga
prAyazcitta yogya haiN| nadI pAra karane ke bAda kiyA jAne vAlA kAyotsarga
vyutsarga yogya prAyazcitta hai| (6) tapayogya-jina aticAroM kI zUddhi tapa se
hI ho sakatI haiaise aticAra tapa prAyazcitta yogya haiN| nizIthasUtra nirdiSTa
aticAra prAyaH tapa (murumAsa, laghumAsa) prAyazcitta yogya haiN| (7)
chedayogya-jina aticAroM kI zuddhi dIkSA cheda se ho sakatI hai ve aticAra cheda
prAyazcitta yogya haiN| pA~ca mahAvratoM ke katipaya aticAra cheda prAyazcitta
yogya haiN| (8) mUlayogya-jina aticAroM kI zuddhi mahAvratoM ke puna: AropaNa
karane se hI ho sakatI hai, aise anAcAra mUla prAyazcitta ke yogya hote haiM /
eka yA eka se adhika mahAvratoM kA hone vAlA mUla prAyazcitta yogya hai / (9)
anavasthApyayogya-jina anAcAroM kI zuddhi vrata evaM veSa rahita karane para hI
ho sakatI hai-aise anAcAra anavasthApya prAyazcitta yogya hote haiM / akAraNa
apavAda mArga sevana meM Asakta, eka aticAra kA aneka bAra AcaraNakartA, tathA
eka sAtha aneka aticAra sevanakartA cheda prAyazcitta yogya hotA hai| jisa
prakAra zeSa aMga kI rakSA ke liye vyAdhivikRta aMga kA chedana atyAvazyaka hai-
isI prakAra zeSa vrata paryAya kI rakSA ke liye dUSita vrata paryAya kA chedana
bhI atyAvazyaka hai| 2. eka bAra yA aneka bAra paMcendriya prANiyoM kA vadha
karane vAlA, zIla bhaMga karane vAlA, saMkliSTa saMkalpapUrvaka mRSAvAda bolane
vAlA, adattAdAna karane vAlA, parigraha rakhane vAlA, para-liMga (parivrAjakAdi
kA veSa) dhAraNa karane vAlA tathA gRhasthaliMga dhAraNa karane vAlA mUla
prAyazcitta yogya hotA hai| 3. anavasthApya prAyazcitta yogya tIna haiM 1.
sAdhamika kI corI karane vAlA, 2. anyarmiyoM kI corI karane vAlA, 3. daNDa,
lAThI yA mukke Adi se prahAra karane vaalaa| -ThANaM0 3, u04 sU0 201 [28]

Page #30 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(10) **ParƒÅ·πÉcik**-worthy transgressions, which can only be purified by adopting
the garb of a householder and performing the prescribed austerities for a very
long time, are **ParƒÅ·πÉcik**-penance worthy. A person undergoing this penance is
excluded from the shelter, village, and country. The main reasons for penance
are: 1. **Atikrama** - the intention to commit a transgression / 2.
**Vyatikrama** - collecting the means to commit a transgression / 3.
**AtichƒÅra** - initiating a transgression. 4. **AnƒÅchƒÅra** - committing a
transgression. There are three types of **Atikrama**: 1. **Atikrama** of
knowledge, 2. **Atikrama** of perception, 3. **Atikrama** of conduct. Similarly,
there are **Vyatikrama**, **AtichƒÅra**, and **AnƒÅchƒÅra** of knowledge. There are
also three types each of perception and conduct. **Atikrama** of knowledge is of
three types: 1. **Jaghanya**, 2. **Madhyama**, 3. **Utk·πõ·π£·π≠a**. Similarly, there
are **Vyatikrama**, **AtichƒÅra**, and **AnƒÅchƒÅra** of knowledge. There are also
three types each of perception and conduct. If **Atikrama** of knowledge, etc.,
has occurred, then one should criticize oneself in front of the guru, perform
**pratikramƒÅ·πáa**, and purify oneself by means of censure, deep reflection, etc.,
make a firm resolve not to commit the transgression again, and perform penance
in the form of austerities. Similarly, one should purify **Vyatikrama**, etc.,
of knowledge, and **Atikrama**, etc., of perception and conduct. 1. **·π¨hƒÅ·πáa·πÉ**
6, **S≈´** 489 / **·π¨hƒÅ·πáa·πÉ** 8, **S≈´** 605 / **·π¨hƒÅ·πáa·πÉ** 9, **S≈´** 688 / **·π¨hƒÅ·πáa·πÉ**
10, **S≈´** 733 / There are five **ParƒÅ·πÉcik**-penance worthy transgressions: 1.
One who creates discord among those in the same lineage (**gaccha**). 2. One who
creates discord among those in the same group (**ga·πáa**). 3. One who is inclined
towards violence. 4. One who is a fault-finder. 5. One who repeatedly uses the
**pra≈õna≈õƒÅstra**. - **·π¨hƒÅga·πÉ** 5, **U** 1 **S≈´** 398 / There are three
**ParƒÅ·πÉcik**-penance worthy transgressions: 1. **Du·π£·π≠a** **ParƒÅ·πÉcik** 2.
**Pramatta** **ParƒÅ·πÉcik** 3. **Anyo'nya** **Maithanasevƒ´** **ParƒÅ·πÉcik** / For
specific knowledge regarding **AnvasthƒÅpya** and **ParƒÅ·πÉcik** penance, one
should refer to the **VyavahƒÅra BhƒÅ·π£ya**. 2. (a) **·π¨hƒÅ·πáa·πÉ** 3 **U** 4 **S≈´** 195
/ (b) To resolve to study during the time of non-study is **Atikrama** of
knowledge / To go to get a book is **Vyatikrama** of knowledge / To begin
studying is **AtichƒÅra** of knowledge. To complete the study is **AnƒÅchƒÅra** of
knowledge. Similarly, one should understand **Atikrama**, etc., of perception
and conduct. [29]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
(10) pArAMcika yogya-jina anAcAroM kI zuddhi gRhastha kA veSa dhAraNa karAne
para aura bahuta lambe samaya taka nirdhArita tapa kA anuSThAna karAne para hI
ho sakatI hai aise anAcAra pArAMcikaprAyazcitta yogya hote haiN| isa prAyazcitta
vAlA vyakti upAzraya, grAma aura deza se bahiSkRta kiyA jAtA hai| prAyazcitta ke
pramukha kAraNa 1. atikrama-doSasevana kA saMkalpa / 2. vyatikrama-doSasevana ke
sAdhanoM kA saMgraha karanA / 3. aticAra-doSasevana prArambha krnaa| 4.
anAcAra-~-doSasevana kara lenaa| atikrama ke tIna bheda1. jJAna kA atikrama, 2.
darzana kA atikrama, 3. cAritra kA atikrm| isI prakAra jJAna kA vyatikrama,
aticAra aura anAcAra haiM / darzana aura cAritra ke bhI tIna-tIna bheda haiN|
jJAna kA atikrama tIna prakAra kA hai 1. jaghanya, 2. madhyama, 3. utkRSTa / isI
prakAra jJAna kA vyatikrama, aticAra aura anAcAra haiN| darzana aura cAritra ke
bhI tIna-tIna bheda haiN| jJAnAdi kA atikrama ho gayA ho to guru ke samakSa
AlocanA karanA, pratikramaNa karanA tathA nindA, gahare Adi karake zuddhi
karanA, punaH doSasevana na karane kA dRr3ha saMkalpa karanA tathA prAyazcitta
rUpa tapa karanA / isI prakAra ke jJAna ke vyatikramAdi tathA darzana-cAritra ke
atikramAdi kI zuddhi karanI caahie|' 1. ThANaM0 6, sU0 489 / ThANaM0 8, sU0 605
/ ThANaM0 9, sU0 688 / ThANaM0 10, sU0 733 / pArAMcika prAyazcitta yogya pA~ca
haiM1. jo kula (gaccha) meM rahakara paraspara kalaha karAtA ho| 2. jo gaNa meM
rahakara paraspara kalaha karAtA ho| 3. jo hiMsAprekSI ho, 4. jo chidrapremI ho,
5. praznazAstra kA bArambAra prayoga karatA ho| -ThAgaM 5, u01 sU0 398 /
pArAMcika prAyazcitta yogya tIna haiM1. duSTa pArAMcika 2. pramatta pArAMcika 3.
anyo'nya maithanasevI pArAMcika / anavasthApya aura pArAMcika prAyazcitta ke
sambandha meM vizeSa jAnane ke liye vyavahArabhAzya dekhanA caahiye| 2. (ka)
ThANaM 3 u04 sU0 195 / (kha) asvAdhyAyakAla meM svAdhyAya karane kA saMkalpa
karanA jJAna kA atikrama hai / pustaka lene jAnA- jJAna kA vyatikrama hai /
svAdhyAya prArambha karanA jJAna kA aticAra hai| pUrNa svAdhyAya karanA jJAna kA
anAcAra hai| isI prakAra darzana tathA cAritra ke atikramAdi samajhane caahie|
[29]

Page #31 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Ten Types of Consumption (Pratisevna)  1. **Darp Pratisevna:** Consumption of
non-virtuous food with ego. 2. **Pramad Pratisevna:** Consumption of non-
virtuous food due to five types of negligence (like sleepiness). 3. **Anabhog
Pratisevna:** Consumption of virtuous food unwillingly due to forgetfulness. 4.
**Pratur Pratisevna:** Consumption of non-virtuous food during illness. 5.
**Apatti Pratisevna:** Consumption of non-virtuous food due to reasons like
famine. 6. **Sankit Pratisevna:** Consumption of virtuous food with doubt. 7.
**Sahsaakar Pratisevna:** Consumption of virtuous food suddenly or forcefully.
8. **Bhay Pratisevna:** Consumption of non-virtuous food due to fear. 9.
**Pravas Pratisevna:** Consumption of non-virtuous food due to hatred. 10.
**Vimarsh Pratisevna:** Consumption of virtuous food for testing a disciple.
These types of consumption are broadly classified into two: **Dapika** and
**Kalpika**.  **Dapika Pratisevna:** Consumption of non-virtuous food with
attachment and aversion. The consumer becomes **viraadhak** (one who hinders
spiritual progress).  **Kalpika Pratisevna:** Consumption of virtuous food
without attachment and aversion, or consumption that happens due to
circumstances. The consumer becomes **araadhak** (one who helps spiritual
progress).  ## Six Types of Knowledge Transgression (Jnana Atichaar)  1. **Kala
Atichaar:** Studying scriptures at an inappropriate time. 2. **Vinaya
Atichaar:** Not respecting the teacher's instructions due to pride in one's
caste or lineage while studying scriptures. 3. **Bahuman Atichaar:** Not
respecting the scriptures and the teacher. 4. **Upadhana Atichaar:** Engaging in
activities like scratching or applying ointment while reciting scriptures. 5.
**Nihnava Abhidhana Atichaar:** Hiding the teacher's name. 6. **Vyanjana
Atichaar:** Pronouncing more or fewer syllables than required. 7. **Artha
Atichaar:** Not understanding the meaning of the scriptures in context, or
understanding it in a contrary way. 8. **Ubhaya Atichaar:** Pronouncing short
vowels as long and long vowels as short, or pronouncing high tones as low and
low tones as high.  **Atikram, Vyatikrama, and Atichaar** are three types of
transgressions that arise from the influence of the three passions (sanjvalana
kshaya). They are purified through various types of atonement, starting from
**Aalocana** (self-reflection) and ending with **Tapoham** (intense penance).
**Chhed, Mula, Anvasthapy, and Paranchik** are four types of transgressions that
are eligible for atonement. They arise from the influence of the remaining
twelve passions (Anantanubandhi 4, Apratyakhyani 4, Pratyakhyani 4).
**Quotes:**  1. "**Gaaha raagaddosaanugaya, tu dappiya kappiya tu tadbhaava.
Praaraadhana u kappe, viraadhana hoti dappe·πá**" - Brihadkalpa Sutra 4, Bhashya
Matha 4943 2. "**Savve vi aiyaara sanjalanaa·πáam udayo honti**" - Abhidhana
Kosha, 'Aiyaar' word 3. [30]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
pratisevanA ke dasa prakAra 1. darpapratisevanA-ahaMkArapUrvaka akRtya sevana /
2. pramAdapratisevanA-nidrAdi pAMca prakAra ke pramAdavaza akRtya sevana / 3.
anAbhoga pratisevanAvismRtipUrvaka anicchA se prakRtya sevana / 4.
prAturapratisevanA-rugNAvasthA meM akRtya sevana / 5. ApattipratisevanA-
dubhikSAdi kAraNoM se akRtya sevana / 6. zaMkita pratisevanA-AzaMkA se prakRtya
sevana / 7. sahasAkAra pratisevanA-akasmAt yA balAtkAra se prakRtya sevana / 8.
bhayapratimevanA-bhaya se akRtya sevana / 9. pravaSapratisevanA-dveSabhAva se
akRtya sevana / 10. vimarzapratisevanA-ziSya kI parIkSA ke nimitta prakRtya
sevana / ye pratisevanAyeM saMkSepa meM do prakAra kI haiM-dapikA aura kalpikA /
rAga-dveSa pUrvaka jo akRtya sevana kiyA jAtA hai vaha dapikA pratisevanA hai|
isa pratisevanA se pratisevaka virAdhaka hotA hai| rAga-dveSa rahita pariNAmoM
se jo pratisevanA ho jAtI hai yA kI jAtI hai vaha kalpikA pratisevanA hai| isakA
pratisevaka ArAdhaka hotA hai| pATha prakAra ke jJAnAticAra1. kAlAticAra-akAla
meM svAdhyAya karanA / 2. vinayAticAra-zruta kA adhyayana karate samaya jAti
aura kula mada se guru kA vinaya na krnaa| 3. bahumAnAticAra-zruta aura guru kA
sanmAna na krnaa| 4. upadhAnAticAra-zruta kI vAcanA lete samaya prAcAmlAdi
tapana krnaa| 5. nihnavanAbhidhAnAticAra-guru kA nAma chipaanaa| 6.
vyaMjanAticAra-hInAdhika akSaroM kA uccAraNa krnaa| 7. arthAticAra-prasaMga
saMgata artha na karanA / arthAta viparIta artha krnaa| 8. ubhayAticAra-hasva kI
jagaha dIrgha uccAraNa karanA, dIrgha kI jagaha hrasva uccAraNa karanA / udAtta
ke sthAna meM anudAtta kA aura anudAtta ke sthAna meM udAtta kA uccAraNa karanA
/ atikrama, vyatikrama aura aticAra ye tIna saMjvalana kaSAya ke udaya se hote
haiM-inakI zuddhi AlocanAha se lekara tapo'haMparyanta prAyazcittoM se hotI hai
/ cheda, mUlA, anavasthApya aura pArAMcika prAyazcitta yogya aticAra aura
anAcAra zeSa bAraha kaSAyoM (anantAnubandhI 4, apratyAkhyAnI 4, pratyAkhyAnI 4)
ke udaya se hote haiN| 1. gAhArAgaddosANugayA, tu dappiyA kappiyA tu tdbhaavaa|
prArAdhaNA u kappe, virAdhaNA hoti dappeNa // -bRha0 u04 bhASya mAthA 4943 / 2.
savve vi aiyArA saMjalaNANaM udayao hoMti // -abhi0 koSa-'aiyAra' zabda / [30]

Page #32 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
There are four types of ‡§∂‡•ç‡§∞‡§Æ‡§£-‡§∂‡•ç‡§∞‡§Æ‡§£‡§ø‡§Ø‡§æ‡§Å who consume the four types of faults:
‡§Ö‡§§‡§ø‡§ï‡•ç‡§∞‡§Æ, ‡§µ‡•ç‡§Ø‡§§‡§ø‡§ï‡•ç‡§∞‡§Æ, ‡§Ö‡§§‡§ø‡§ö‡§æ‡§∞ and ‡§Ö‡§®‡§æ‡§ö‡§æ‡§∞, which are both manifest and concealed.
1. Some ‡§∂‡•ç‡§∞‡§Æ‡§£-‡§∂‡•ç‡§∞‡§Æ‡§£‡§ø‡§Ø‡§æ‡§Å consume these faults openly, without concealing them. 2.
Some ‡§∂‡•ç‡§∞‡§Æ‡§£-‡§∂‡•ç‡§∞‡§Æ‡§£‡§ø‡§Ø‡§æ‡§Å consume these faults in a concealed manner, without
revealing them. 3. Some ‡§∂‡•ç‡§∞‡§Æ‡§£-‡§∂‡•ç‡§∞‡§Æ‡§£‡§ø‡§Ø‡§æ‡§Å consume these faults both openly and in
a concealed manner. 4. Some ‡§∂‡•ç‡§∞‡§Æ‡§£-‡§∂‡•ç‡§∞‡§Æ‡§£‡§ø‡§Ø‡§æ‡§Å do not consume these faults either
openly or in a concealed manner.  Those who fall under the first category are
‡§∂‡•ç‡§∞‡§Æ‡§£-‡§∂‡•ç‡§∞‡§Æ‡§£‡§ø‡§Ø‡§æ‡§Å who are not disciplined, are undisciplined, free-willed,
deceitful, and shameless. They are not afraid of sin and therefore consume
faults openly.  Those who fall under the second category are of two types:  *
‡§∂‡•ç‡§∞‡§Æ‡§£-‡§∂‡•ç‡§∞‡§Æ‡§£‡§ø‡§Ø‡§æ‡§Å with a clear understanding, if they occasionally consume these
faults, they do so in a concealed manner. This is because they consume faults
due to their own weakness, and they think that if others see them consuming
faults, they will also consume faults. Therefore, they consume faults in a
concealed manner. * ‡§∂‡•ç‡§∞‡§Æ‡§£-‡§∂‡•ç‡§∞‡§Æ‡§£‡§ø‡§Ø‡§æ‡§Å with a unclear understanding, who are
deceitful, do not consume these faults openly out of fear of public shame or out
of the desire to maintain the faith of the devotees in them. Instead, they
consume them in secret.  Those who fall under the third category are
‡§∂‡•ç‡§∞‡§Æ‡§£-‡§∂‡•ç‡§∞‡§Æ‡§£‡§ø‡§Ø‡§æ‡§Å who are deceitful in nature. They consume ordinary faults
openly, but they consume powerful faults in a concealed manner. If someone sees
them consuming ordinary faults, they say, "Ordinary faults are common to
everyone in this world. Therefore, it is impossible to avoid these faults."
Those who fall under the fourth category are ‡§∂‡•ç‡§∞‡§Æ‡§£-‡§∂‡•ç‡§∞‡§Æ‡§£‡§ø‡§Ø‡§æ‡§Å who are truly
detached, seekers of liberation, and devoted to self-study. Therefore, they do
not consume these faults either openly or in a concealed manner.  The
‡§™‡•ç‡§∞‡§æ‡§Ø‡§∂‡•ç‡§ö‡§ø‡§§‡•ç‡§§-‡§µ‡§ø‡§ß‡§æ‡§® (penance) prescribed in the ‡§µ‡•ç‡§Ø‡§µ‡§π‡§æ‡§∞‡§∏‡•Ç‡§§‡•ç‡§∞ (practical rules) is
for the purification of the faults consumed by the first three categories of
‡§∂‡•ç‡§∞‡§Æ‡§£-‡§∂‡•ç‡§∞‡§Æ‡§£‡§ø‡§Ø‡§æ‡§Å. The last category of ‡§∂‡•ç‡§∞‡§Æ‡§£-‡§∂‡•ç‡§∞‡§Æ‡§£‡§ø‡§Ø‡§æ‡§Å are the keepers of the
‡§®‡§ø‡§∞‡§§‡§ø‡§ö‡§æ‡§∞ ‡§ö‡§æ‡§∞‡§ø‡§§‡•ç‡§∞ (faultless conduct), and therefore there is no provision for
any kind of penance for them.  The ‡§µ‡•ç‡§Ø‡§µ‡§π‡§æ‡§∞‡§∂‡•Å‡§¶‡•ç‡§ß‡§ø (purification of conduct) is
both difficult and easy. In the ‡§ß‡§∞‡•ç‡§Æ‡§∂‡§æ‡§∏‡§® (religious teachings) of the first
Tirthankara, Bhagwan ‡§ã‡§∑‡§≠‡§¶‡•á‡§µ ‡§Ü‡§¶‡§ø‡§®‡§æ‡§•, ‡§∂‡•ç‡§∞‡§Æ‡§£-‡§∂‡•ç‡§∞‡§Æ‡§£‡§ø‡§Ø‡§æ‡§Å were mostly straightforward
and simple, but they were also dull (with limited intellectual development).
Therefore, they were unable to fully understand and follow the ‡§∏‡§Æ‡§æ‡§ö‡§æ‡§∞‡•Ä (conduct)
prescribed in the s≈´tras (texts). This was the only reason why their
‡§µ‡•ç‡§Ø‡§µ‡§π‡§æ‡§∞‡§∂‡•Å‡§¶‡•ç‡§ß‡§ø was difficult to achieve.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
prakaTa aura pracchanna doSa sevana atikrama, vyatikrama, aticAra aura anAcAra-
ina cAra prakAra ke doSoM kA sevana karane vAle zramaNazramaNiyAM cAra prakAra
ke haiM 1. kucha zramaNa-dhamaNiyA~ ina ukta doSoM kA sevana prakaTa karate haiM
arthAt pracchanna nahIM karate haiN| 2. kucha zramaNa-zramaNiyA~ ina ukta doSoM
kA sevana pracchanna karate haiM arthAt prakaTa nahIM karate haiN| 3. kucha
zramaNa-zramaNiyA~ ina ukta doSoM kA sevana prakaTa bhI karate haiM aura
pracchanna bhI karate haiN| 4. kucha zramaNa-zramaNiyA~ ina ukta doSoM kA sevana
na prakaTa karate haiM aura na pracchanna karate haiN|' prathama bhaMga vAle--
zramaNa-zramaNiyA~ anuzAsana meM nahIM rahane vAle avinIta, svacchanda, prapaMcI
evaM nirlajja hote haiM aura ve pApabhIrU nahIM hote haiM ataH doSoM kA sevana
prakaTa karate haiN| dvitIya bhaMga vAle-zramaNa-zramaNiyA~ do prakAra ke hote
haiM-ata: doSa kA sevana prakaTa karate haiM / yathA prazasta bhAvanA vAle-
zramaNa-zramaNiyA~ yadi yadA-kadA ukta doSoM kA sevana karate haiM to pracchanna
karate haiM, kyoMki ve svayaM paristhitivaza Atmika' durbalatA ke kAraNa doSoM
kA sevana karate haiM isalie aisA socate haiM ki mujhe doSa-sevana karate haye
dekhakara anya zramaNa-zramaNiyA~ doSa-sevana na kareM ataH ve doSoM kA sevana
pracchanna karate haiN| aprazasta bhAvanA vAle...mAyAvI zramaNa-zramaNiyA~ loka-
lajjA ke bhaya se yA zraddhAlujanoM kI zraddhA mere para banI rahe isa saMkalpa
se ukta doSoM kA sevana prakaTa nahIM karate haiM apitu chipakara karate haiN|
tRtIya bhaMga vAle-zramaNa-zramaNiyA~ vaMcaka prakRti ke hote haiM ve sAmAnya
doSoM kA sevana to prakaTa karate haiM kintu sazakta (prabala) doSoM kA sevana
pracchanna karate haiM / _yadi unheM koI sAmAnya doSa sevana karate huye dekhatA
hai to ve kahate haiM-'sAmAnya doSa to isa paMcamakAla meM sabhI ko lagate haiN|
ata: ina doSoM se bacanA asambhava hai|' caturtha bhaMga bAle-zramaNa-zramaNiyAM
sacce vairAgya vAle hote haiM, mumukSu aura svAdhyAyazIla bhI hote haiM prataH
ve ukta doSoM kA sevana na prakaTa karate haiM, na pracchanna karate haiM /
prathama tIna bhaMga vAle zramaNa-zramaNiyoM dvArA sevita doSoM kI zUddhi ke lie
hI vyavahArasutra nirdiSTa prAyazcitta-vidhAna hai| aMtima caturtha bhaMga vAle
zramaNa-zramaNiyA~ niraticAra cAritra ke pAlaka hote haiM ataH unake lie kisI
bhI prakAra ke prAyazcitta kA vidhAna nahIM hai| vyavahArazuddhi kaThina bhI,
sarala bhI prathama tIrthaMkara bhagavAna RSabhadeva AdinAtha ke dharmazAsana
meM zramaNa-zramaNiyA~ prAyaH Rju-sarala hote the para jaDa (alpabauddhika
vikAsa vAle) hote the| ataH ve sUtra siddhAnta nirdiSTa samAcArI kA paripUrNa
jJAna tathA paripUrNa pAlana nahIM kara pAte the| unakI vyavahAra zuddhi
duHsAdhya hone kA ekamAtra yahI kAraNa thaa| 1. ThANaM-4, u. 1, sU. 272 [31]

Page #33 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The 22 Tirthankaras (from Bhagwan Ajitanatha to Bhagwan Parshvanatha) and their
Shraman-Shramani were mostly righteous and wise (simple and enlightened). They
were always striving to have complete knowledge and complete adherence to the
principles laid down in the Sutras. Therefore, their conduct was very simple.
The Shraman-Shramani of the last Tirthankara, Bhagwan Mahavira, are mostly
crooked and dull. Even though they have detailed knowledge of the Shruta,
including Dasha, Kalpa, and Vyavahar, each Gachchha presents a different
interpretation of the principles. The observance of great religious festivals
like Paryushana Parva and Samvatsari Parva, Pakkhi, and Chaumasi Alochana are
also performed on different days. Due to their crookedness and dullness, they do
not readily criticize the transgressions that occur in the Mulaguna and
Uttargana. Therefore, their conduct is very difficult to purify.   Palochana and
Alochak: Alochana is the act of revealing transgressions (which occur due to
ignorance, ego, carelessness, or circumstances) to the Guru. An Alochak is one
who reveals the transgressions that have occurred due to the aforementioned
reasons to the Guru. If the Alochak is deceitful and performs Palochana
deceitfully, then he will not receive good results from the Alochana. If the
Alochak is not deceitful and performs Alochana without deceit, then he will
receive good results from the Alochana.   It is essential to criticize
transgressions for the purification of conduct and the purification of the self
(Atma). However, there are different categories of seekers. One category does
not criticize transgressions at all. They say, "We have committed transgressions
(Akruti), we are committing them, and we will continue to commit them. Because
the country, time, and physical-mental conditions are such that our disciplined
life cannot be free from transgressions. It is not possible for us, so what is
the benefit of Alochana? It is like the process of bathing an elephant.
Transgressions occur, we criticize them, and then transgressions occur again.
This cycle continues." Their thinking is unwise because if we wear clothes, we
wear them, and we will continue to wear them, then the clothes we wear are
soiled, they are soiled, and they will continue to be soiled. Then what is the
benefit of purifying the clothes? How can this be considered appropriate? As
long as we wear clothes, it is our duty to keep them clean. Because there are
many benefits to purifying clothes - clothes that are purified daily do not
become soiled, and clean clothes also contribute to good health.   Similarly, as
long as the activities of the Yogas are present and the Kshayas are intense or
mild, the accumulation of Karmic dirt due to transgressions is certain.   1.
Gatha - Purimanam Dubbisoho U, Charimanam Durano Palo. Kappo Majjhimagnam Tu,
Suvishoho Supalo / Utt. A. 23, Gatha 27 / [32]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
bAvIsa tIrthaMkaroM (bhagavAn ajitanAtha se bha0 pArzvanAtha paryanta) ke
zramaNa-zramaNI prAyaH Rju-prAjJa (sarala aura prabuddha) hote the| ve sUtra
siddhAnta pratipAdita samAcArI kA paripUrNa jJAna tathA paripUrNa pAlana karane
meM sadA prayatnazIla rahate the ataH unakI vyavahAra zUddhi ati sarala thii|
antima tIrthaMkara bhagavAna mahAvIra kI paramparA ke zramaNa-zramaNI prAyaH
vakrajaDa haiN| dazA, kalpa, vyavahAra prAdi meM vizada zruta samAcArI ke hote
huye bhI pratyeka gaccha bhinna-bhinna samAcArI kI prarUpaNA karatA hai|
paryuSaNaparva tathA saMvatsarI parva jaise mahAna dhArmika parvo kI ArAdhanA,
pakkhI, caumAsI AlocanA bhI vibhinna dinoM meM kI jAtI hai| vakratA aura jar3atA
ke kAraNa mUlaguNa tathA uttaragaNoM meM lagane vAle aticAroM kI AlocanA bhI ve
sarala hRdaya se nahIM karate ataH unakI vyavahAra zuddhi ati kaThina hai|'
pAlocanA aura Alocaka AlocanA-ajJAna, ahaMkAra, pramAda yA paristhitivaza jo
utsarga mArga se skhalana arthAta aticAra hotA hai--use guru ke samakSa prakaTa
karanA AlocanA hai aura Alocaka vaha hai jo pUrvokta kAraNoM se lage huye
aticAroM ko guru ke samakSa prakaTa karatA hai / _ yadi Alocaka mAyAvI ho aura
mAyApUrvaka pAlocanA karatA ho to usako AlocanA kA use acchA phala nahIM milatA
hai| yadi pAlocaka mAyAvI nahIM hai aura mAyArahita AlocanA karatA hai to usakI
AlocanA kA use acchA phala milatA hai| vyavahArazuddhi ke liye tathA nizcaya
(Atma) zuddhi ke liye lage haye aticAroM kI AlocanA karanA anivArya hai kintu
sAdhakoM ke vibhinna varga haiN| unameM eka varga aisA hai jo aticAroM kI
pAlocanA karatA hI nahIM hai| unakA kahanA hai-hamane aticAra (akRtya) sevana
kiye haiM, karate haiM aura karate rheNge| kyoMki deza, kAla aura zArIrika-
mAnasika sthitiyAM aisI haiM ki hamArA saMyamI jIvana niraticAra rahe.-aisA
hameM saMbhava nahIM lagatA hai ata: AlocanA se kyA lAbha hai yaha to hastisnAna
jaisI prakriyA hai| aticAra lage AlocanA kI aura phira aticAra lageyaha cakra
calatA hI rahatA hai| unakA yaha cintana avivekapUrNa hai kyoMki vastra pahane
haiM, pahanate haiM aura pahanate raheMge to pahane gaye vastra malina huye
haiM, hote haiM aura hote raheMge'phira vastra zuddhi se kyA lAbha hai !'-yaha
kahanA kahA~ taka ucita hai ? ba taka vastra pahananA hai taba taka unheM zuddha
rakhanA bhI eka kartavya hai. kyoMki vastrazuddhi ke bhI kaI lAbha haiM-
pratidina zuddha kiye jAne vAle vastra prati malina nahIM hote haiM aura svaccha
vastroM se svAsthya bhI samRddha rahatA hai / isI prakAra jaba taka yogoM ke
vyApAra haiM aura kaSAya tIvra yA manda hai taba taka aticAra janya karmamala
laganA nizcita hai| 1. gAhA-purimANaM dubbisojho u, carimANaM durnnupaalo| kappo
majjhimagANaM tu, suvisojho supAlo / utta. a. 23, gAthA 27 / [ 32]

Page #34 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Constantly criticizing transgressions does not purify the soul from karmic
impurities and keeps it in a state of emotional distress. As the practice of
yoga is obstructed and the passions become weaker, the occurrence of
transgressions becomes less frequent. The second category is those who do not
criticize transgressions out of fear of disgrace, reproach, censure, or
condemnation, or out of fear of losing fame, reputation, or worship and respect.
The third category is those who criticize but do so hypocritically. They think,
"If I don't criticize, my present life will be ruined and my future life will
also be miserable. If I criticize, my present and future life will be
prosperous, or if I criticize, I will attain knowledge, vision, and good
conduct." The scriptures prescribe double penance for hypocritical critics. The
fourth category is those who criticize without hypocrisy. They are: 1. well-
born, 2. of noble lineage, 3. humble, 4. knowledgeable, 5. insightful, 6.
virtuous, 7. forgiving, 8. self-controlled, 9. free from attachment, 10. free
from regret. This is the category of such seekers. Their conduct and conviction
are both pure. Whether the critic is a seeker of liberation or not, they should
always criticize in front of a seeker of liberation. In the absence of a seeker
of liberation, in front of whom should they criticize? There is a sequence for
this, which can be known by studying the Chhedasutras. Why is the editing of the
Vyavaharsutra the ultimate goal of the life of restrained souls? - "Purity of
conviction," that is, complete liberation of the soul (from karmic impurities),
and for this, the purity of conduct prescribed by the Vyavaharsutra is
essential. Just as physical health requires purification of the stomach, and
purification of the stomach requires purification of food, similarly, spiritual
well-being requires purity of conviction, and purity of conviction requires
purity of conduct. Because without purity of conduct, purity of conviction is
absolutely impossible. In worldly life, transactions are conducted only with
those who are honest (in giving and taking money). Similarly, in spiritual life,
actions like worship and veneration are performed only with a seeker of pure
conduct. 1. Gatha - Payiriyapayamulam, Ganturna Sai Parakkama / Tahe Savvena
Attasohi, Kayavva Es Uvaeso. / Jah Sakusalo Vi Vejjo, Annassa Kahei Attano Vahi
/ Vejjassa Ya So Souto, Padikamma Samarabhate // Jayante Na Vi Evam,
Payachchittavihimapano Niunam / Tah Vi Ya Pagadatarayam, Paloedevvayam Hoi / Jah
Balo Jappanto, Kajjamakajjam Cha Ujjuyam Bhanai / Tam Tah Paloija Mayaamaya
Vippamukko U / -Vyav. U. 10 Bhashya Gatha 460-471 / [ 33 ]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
pratidina aticAroM kI aAlocanA karate rahane se AsmA karmamala se pratimalina
nahIM hotA hai aura bhAvaprArogya rahatA hai| jyoM jyoM yogoM kA vyApAra
avaruddha hotA hai aura kaSAya mandatama hote jAte haiM, tyoM tyoM aticAroM kA
laganA pralpa hotA jAtA hai| dvitIya varga aisA hai jo ayaza-akIti, avarNa
(nindA) yA avajJA ke bhaya se ayavA yaza-kIrti yA pUjA-satkAra kama ho jAne ke
bhaya se aticAroM kI AlocanA hI nahIM krte| tRtIya varga aisA hai jo AlocanA to
karatA hai para mAyApUrvaka karatA hai / vaha socatA hai maiM yadi pAlocanA
nahIM karUgA to merA vartamAna jIvana gahita ho jAyagA aura bhAvI jIvana bhI
vikrata ho jAya karUMgA to merA vartamAna evaM bhAvI jIvana prazasta ho jAyagA
athavA pAlocanA kara lUgA to jJAna darzana evaM cAritra kI prApti ho jaaygii|
mAyAvI Alocaka ko dugunA prAyazcitta dene kA vidhAna prArambha ke sUtroM meM
hai| cauthA varga aisA hai jo mAyArahita AlocanA karatA hai, vaha 1.
jAtisampanna, 2. kulasampanna, 3. vinayasampanna, 4. jJAnasampanna, 5.
darzanasampanna, 6. cAritrasampanna, 7. kSamAzIla, 8. nigrahazIla, 9, amAyI, 10.
apazcAttApI / aise sAdhakoM kA yaha varga hai / inakA vyavahAra aura nizcaya
donoM zuddha hote haiM / pAlocaka gItArtha ho yA agItArtha, unheM AlocanA sadA
gItArtha ke sAmane hI karanI cAhiye / gItArtha ke abhAva meM kina ke sAmane
karanA caahiye|' unakA eka krama haijo chedasUtroM ke svAdhyAya se jAnA jA
sakatA hai| vyavahArasUtra kA sampAdana kyoM saMyamI AtmAoM ke jIvana kA carama
lakSya hai -"nizcayazuddhi' arthAt AtmA kI (karma-mala se) sarvathA mukti aura
isake liye vyavahArasUtra pratipAdita vyavahArazuddhi anivArya hai| jisaprakAra
zArIrika svAsthyalAbha ke liye udarazuddhi Avazyaka hai aura udarazuddhi ke liye
AhArazuddhi atyAvazyaka hai-isI prakAra prAdhyAtmika ArogyalAbha ke lie
nizcayazuddhi Avazyaka hai aura nizcayazuddhi ke liye vyavahArazuddhi Avazyaka
hai| kyoMki vyavahArazuddhi ke binA nizcayazuddhi sarvathA asaMbhava hai|
sAMsArika jIvana meM vyavahArazuddhi vAle (rupaye-paisoM ke dene lene meM
prAmANika) ke sAtha hI lena-dena kA vyavahAra kiyA jAtA hai| AdhyAtmika jIvana
meM bhI vyavahArazuddha sAdhaka ke sAtha hI kRtikarmAdi (vandana-pUjanAdi)
vyavahAra kiye jAte haiN| 1. gAhA-pAyariyapAyamUlaM, gaMtUrNa sai parakkame /
tAhe savveNa attasohI, kAyavvA esa uveso|| jaha sakusalo vi vejjo, annassa kahei
attaNo vAhi / vejjassa ya so souto, paDikamma samArabhate // jAyAMteNa vi evaM,
pAyacchittavihimappaNo niuNaM / taha vi ya pAgaDatarayaM, pAloedavvayaM hoi /
jaha bAlo jappaMto, kajjamakajjaM ca ujjuyaM bhaNai / taM taha pAloijjA mAyAmaya
vippamukko u / .-vyava0 u0 10 bhASya gAthA 460-471 / [ 33 ]

Page #35 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The conduct of restrained souls is purified (free from the stain of sin arising
from transgression) by the five conducts expounded in the Vyavahar Sutra. Some
thoughts have been expressed for the Chhed Sutras published in the Granth. In
this writing, I have included essential excerpts from the Ayara Dasha,
Kappasuttam Chhed Sutras edited by me earlier, Pandit Ratna Muni Shri
Vijaymuniji Shastri's "Prachar Dasha: An Exercise" and Upadhyay Muni Shri
Phoolchandji 'Shraman's "Brihat Kalpasutra Ki Uththanika". For this, I express
my heartfelt gratitude to both the Munis. The work of writing detailed
discussions etc. has been done by Shri Tilockmuniji M. Therefore, readers are
requested to kindly contact Munishri for the solution of their inquiries. Muni
Kanhaiyalal "Kamal" [34]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
vyavahArasUtra pratipAdita pAMca vyavahAroM se saMyamI prAtmAoM kA
vyavahArapakSa zuddha (aticArajanya pApamala-rahita) hotA hai| grantha meM
prakAzita chedasUtroM ke liye katipaya vicAra vyakta kiye haiN| isa lekhana meM
mere dvArA pUrva meM sampAdita aAyAradasA, kappasuttaM chedasUtroM meM
paNDitaratna muni zrI vijayamunijI zAstrI ke "prAcAradazA: eka anuzIlana" aura
upAdhyAya muni zrI phUlacandajI 'zramaNa ke "bRhatkalpasUtra kI utthAnikA" ke
prAvazyaka lekhAMzoM kA samAveza kiyA hai| etadartha munidvaya kA sadhanyavAda
AbhAra mAnatA huuN| vistRta vivecana Adi likhane kA kArya zrI tilokamunijI ma.
ne kiyA hai| ataeva pAThakagaNa apanI jijJAsAnoM ke samAdhAna ke liye munizrI se
saMparka karane kI kRpA kreN| muni kanhaiyAlAla "kamala" [ 34 ]

Page #36 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Introduction: Three Chhed Sutras: A Critical Study  The place of the Vedas in
the Vedic tradition, the Tripitaka in the Buddhist tradition, the Bible in
Christianity, and the Quran in Islam is the same as that of the Agam literature
in the Jain tradition. The significant difference between the Vedas and the
Buddhist and Jain Agam literature is that the sages of the Vedic tradition
emphasized the protection of words, while the Jain and Buddhist traditions
emphasized the meaning. This is why the words of the Vedas have been largely
preserved, but they have not been able to establish a consensus on meaning. The
Jain and Buddhist traditions have been completely opposite in this regard.
There, the protection of meaning has been emphasized, and meaning has been
considered more important than words. This is why there are variations in the
texts of the Agams, but there is rarely a difference in meaning. The words of
the Vedas have been imbued with mantras, which has preserved the words but
destroyed their meaning. The Jain Agam literature, not being imbued with mantra
power, has preserved the meaning completely. The Vedas do not represent the
views of any particular sage, while the Jain Ganipitaka and the Buddhist
Tripitaka represent the words of Lord Mahavira and the Tathagata Buddha
respectively. The Tirthankaras have been the formulators of the meaning of the
Jain Agams, and the Ganadharas have been the authors of the Sutras. The culture
of the Jain and Vedic traditions has been distinct. The folk culture is
primarily spiritual. The Jain Agams have primarily resonated with a spiritual
tone, while the Vedas have expressed a worldly tone. It should not be forgotten
that the things mentioned in the Jain Agams about atomic science, biology,
botany, etc., two thousand five hundred years ago, are still astonishing to
scientists today. The Jain Agam... literature has been important from many
perspectives. Some time ago, the Western and Eastern scholars believed that the
Vedas were the original source of the Agams and the Tripitaka, but the ruins
found in the excavations of Mohenjo-daro and Harappa have radically changed the
scholars' belief that the culture that existed in India before the arrival of
the Aryans was fully developed and it was a Shraman culture. Impartial thinkers
have unanimously accepted the fact that the Vedic tradition has accepted the
five great vows of non-violence, truth, non-stealing, celibacy, and non-
possession due to the influence of the Shraman culture. Today, the Vedic...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
prastAvanA trINi chedasUtrANi : eka samIkSAtmaka adhyayana vaidika paramparA meM
jo sthAna veda kA hai, bauddha paramparA meM jo sthAna tripiTaka kA hai, IsAI
dharma meM jo sthAna bAIbila kA hai, islAma dharma meM jo sthAna kurAna kA hai,
vahI sthAna jainaparamparA meM Agama-sAhitya kA hai| veda tathA bauddha aura
jaina Agama-sAhitya meM mahattvapUrNa bheda yaha rahA hai ki vaidika paramparA
ke RSiyoM ne zabdoM kI surakSA para adhika bala diyA jabaki jaina aura bauddha
paramparA meM artha para adhika bala diyA gayA hai| yahI kAraNa hai ki vedoM ke
zabda prAya: surakSita rahe haiM aura artha kI dRSTi se ve eka mata sthira nahIM
kara sake haiN| jaina aura bauddha paramparA meM isase bilkula hI viparIta rahA
hai| vahA~ artha kI surakSA para adhika bala diyA gayA hai, zabdoM kI apekSA
artha adhika mahattvapUrNa mAnA gayA hai| yahI kAraNa hai ki AgamoM ke
pAThabheda milate haiM, para unameM prAyaH arthabheda nahIM hai| veda ke zabdoM
meM maMtroM kA prAropaNa kiyA gayA hai jisase zabda to surakSita rahe, para
usake artha naSTa ho gae / jaina Agama-sAhitya meM maMtra-zakti kA Aropa na hone
se artha pUrNa rUpa se surakSita rahA hai| veda kisI eka RSi vizeSa ke vicAroM
kA pratinidhitva nahIM karate, jaba ki jaina gaNipiTaka evaM bauddha tripiTaka
kramaza: bhagavAna mahAvIra aura tathAgata buddha kI vANI kA pratinidhitva
karate haiN| jaina AgamoM ke artha ke prarUpaka tIrthakara rahe haiM aura sUtra
ke racayitA gaNadhara haiN| jaina aura vaidika paramparA kI saMskRti pRthaka-
pRthaka rahI hai| janasaMskRti adhyAtma pradhAna hai| jaina AgamoM meM adhyAtma
kA svara pradhAna rUpa se jhaMkRta rahA hai, vedoM meM laukikatA kA svara
mukharita rahA hai| yahA~ para yaha bAta bhI vismaraNa nahIM honI cAhie ki Aja
se paccIsa sau varSa pUrva aNa-vijJAna, jIva-vijJAna, banaspati-vijJAna Adi ke
sambandha meM jo bAteM jaina AgamoM meM batAI gaI haiM, unheM par3hakara Aja kA
vaijJAnika bhI vismita hai| jaina Agama... sAhitya kA ina aneka dRSTiyoM se bhI
mahattva rahA hai| kucha samaya pUrva pAzcAtya aura paurvAtya vijJoM kI yaha
dhAraNA thI ki veda hI Agama aura tripiTaka ke mUla srota haiM, para
mohanajodar3o aura har3appA kI khudAI se prApta dhvaMsAvazeSoM ne vijJoM kI
dhAraNA meM AmUlacUla parivartana kara diyA hai ki AryoM ke Agamana se pUrva
bhArata meM jo saMskRti thI vaha pUrNa rUpa se vikasita thI aura vaha
zramaNasaMskRti thii| niSpakSa vicArakoM ne yaha satya-tathya eka mata se
svIkAra kiyA hai ki zramaNasaMskRti ke prabhAva se hI vaidika paramparA ne
ahiMsA, satya, asteya, brahmacarya aura aparigraha mahAvratoM ko svIkAra kiyA
hai| Aja jo vaidika { 35 ]

Page #37 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The description of ahimsa and other principles in tradition is a contribution of
Jain culture. The word 'Agam' has many meanings. I have discussed it in detail.
In Acharang, the word 'Pagam' is used in the sense of knowing. "Agametta-
Anavizza"2 means to know and be wise. One who knows the brevity of Agam is
called 'Laghavanga Agammane'. In Vyavahar Bhashya, Sanghadasagani, while
describing Pragam-Vyavahar, has divided it into two categories: direct and
indirect. Direct includes Avadhi, Manaparyav and Keval knowledge, and indirect
includes fourteen previous and lesser Shruta knowledge. This also makes it clear
that knowledge is Pragam. The teachings given by the omniscient and all-seeing
Tirthankaras are also Pragam because they are knowledge. In Bhagavati,
Anuyogadwar and Sthanang, the word Pragam is used in the sense of scripture.
There, four types of evidence are mentioned: Pratyaksha, Anuman, Upaman and
Pragam. Pragam is also divided into two categories: Laukik and Lokottar. Laukik
Pagam includes Bharat, Ramayana etc., and Lokottar Pagam includes Achar,
Sutrakrut etc. Lokottar Agam is also divided into three categories: Suttagam,
Aththagam and Tadubhayagam. From another perspective, there are three types of
Agam: Pratmagam, Anantaragam and Paramparagam. There are two types of Agam:
Arthrup and Sutrap. Tirthankar Prabhu teaches Arthrup Pragam, hence Arthrup Gram
is called Pratmagam of Tirthankaras, because it is their own Arthagam, they have
not taken it from anyone else, but the same Arthagam has been received by the
Ganadharas from the Tirthankaras. There is no interference of any third person
between Ganadhar and Tirthankar, hence for Ganadharas, that Arthagam is called
Anantaragam, but based on that Arthagam, Ganadharas themselves create Sutra-rup.
Therefore, Sutragam is called Pratmagam for Ganadharas. The direct disciples of
Ganadharas receive Sutragam directly from Ganadharas, there is no interference
between them. Therefore, for those disciples, Sutragam is Anantaragam, but
Arthagam is Paramparagam. Because they received it from their Dharma Guru
Ganadharas. But this was not Pratmagam for Ganadharas. They received it from
Tirthankaras. The disciples of Ganadharas and 1. Four Chapters of Culture: p.
125 - Ramdhari Singh "Dinakar" 2. Pracharang 124 Jnatva Prajnapayet 3. Acharang
116 / 3 Laghavanga Agamyan Avabudhyamanah 4. Vyavahar Bhashya Ga. 201 5.
Bhagavati 5 / 3 / 192 6. Anuyogadwar 7. Sthanang 338, 228, 8. Anuyogadwar 49-50
p. 68, Punyavijayaji edited, published by Mahavira Vidyalaya, Mumbai 9. Ahva
Agame Tibihe Panatte, Tam Jaha-Suttagame Ya Aththagame Ya Tadubhayagame Ya /
~Anuyogadwarsutra 470, p. 179 10. Ahva Pragame Tivihe Panatte, Tam Jaha
Attagame, Anantaragame Paramparagame Ya / Anuyogadwarsutra 470, p. 179 11. (a)
Shrichandriya Sangrahni Ga. 112 (b) Aavashyakaniyukti Ga. 92 [ 36 ]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
paramparA meM ahiMsAdi kA varNana hai vaha jainasaMskRti kI dena hai / ' Agama
zabda ke aneka artha haiN| usa para maiMne vistAra se carcA kI hai| AcArAGga meM
jAnane ke artha meM pAgama zabda kA prayoga hamA hai| "AgamettA-ANavejjA"2
jAnakara prAjJA kre| lAghavaM AgamamANe laghutA ko jAnane vAlA / vyavahArabhASya
meM saMghadAsagaNI ne prAgama-vyavahAra kA varNana karate hue usake pratyakSa
aura parokSa ye do bheda kiye haiN| pratyakSa meM avadhi, manAparyava aura
kevala jJAna hai aura parokSa meM caturdaza pUrva aura unase nyUna zrutajJAna kA
samAveza hai| isase bhI spaSTa hai ki jo jJAna hai vaha prAgama hai| sarvajJa
sarvadarzI tIrthaMkaroM ke dvArA diyA gayA upadeza bhI jJAna hone ke kAraNa
prAgama hai| bhagavatI, anuyogadvAra aura sthAnAGga meM prAgama zabda zAstra ke
artha meM prayukta huA hai| vahA~ para pramANa ke cAra bheda kiye gaye haiM-
pratyakSa, anumAna, upamAna aura prAgama / prAgama ke bhI laukika aura lokottara
ye do bheda kie gae haiN| laukika pAgama bhArata, rAmAyaNa prAdi haiM aura
lokottara pAgama AcAra, sUtrakRta prAdi haiN| lokottara Agama ke suttAgama,
atthAgama aura tadubhayAgama ye tIna bheda bhI kie gae haiN| eka anya daSTi se
Agama ke tIna prakAra aura milate haiM-prAtmAgama, anantarAgama aura
paramparAgama / aAgama ke artharUpa aura satrarUpa ye do prakAra haiN|
tIrthaMkara prabhu artharUpa prAgama: kA upadeza karate haiM ata: artharUpa
grAmama tIrthaMkaroM kA prAtmAgama kahalAtA hai, kyoMki vaha arthAgama unakA
svayaM kA hai, dUsaroM se unhoMne nahIM liyA hai, kintu vahI arthAgama
gaNadharoM ne tIrthaMkaroM se prApta kiyA hai / gaNadhara aura tIrthaMkara ke
bIca kisI tIsare vyakti kA vyavadhAna nahIM hai etadartha gaNadharoM ke lie vaha
arthAgama anantarAgama kahalAtA hai, kintu usa arthAgama ke AdhAra se svayaM
gaNadhara sUtrarUpa racanA karate haiN| isalie sUtrAgama gaNadharoM ke lie
prAtmAgama kahalAtA hai| gaNadharoM ke sAkSAt ziSyoM ko gaNadharoM se sUtrAgama
sIdhA hI prApta hotA hai, unake madhya meM koI bhI vyavadhAna nahIM hotaa|
isalie una ziSyoM ke lie sUtrAgama anantarAgama hai, kintu arthAgama to
paramparAgama hI hai| kyoMki vaha unhoMne apane dharmaguru gaNadharoM se prApta
kiyA hai| kintu yaha gaNadharoM ko bhI prAtmAgama nahIM thaa| unhoMne
tIrthaMkaroM se prApta kiyA thaa| gajadharoM ke praziSya aura 1. saMskRti ke
cAra adhyAya : pR. 125 -rAmadhArIsiMha "dinakara" 2. prAcArAMga 124 jJAtvA
prAjJApayet 3. AcArAMga 116 / 3 lAghavaM Agamayan avabudhyamAnaH 4.
vyavahArabhASya gA. 201 5. bhagavatI 5 / 3 / 192 6. anuyogadvAra 7. sthAnAGga
338, 228, 8. anuyogadvAra 49-50 pR. 68, puNyavijayajI sampAdita, mahAvIra
vidyAlaya, bambaI dvArA prakAzita 9. ahavA Agame tibihe paNNatte, taM jahA-
suttAgame ya atthAgame ya tadubhayAgame ya / -~anuyogadvArasUtra 470, pR. 179
10. ahavA prAgame tivihe paNNatte, taM jahAattAgame, aNaMtarAgame paraMparAgame
ya / anuyogadvArasUtra 470, pR. 179 11. (ka) zrIcandrIyA saMgrahaNI gA. 112
(kha) Avazyakaniyukti gA. 92 [ 36 ]

Page #38 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The translation preserving the Jain terms is as follows:  The sutras and artha-
parampara (traditional interpretation) are for other disciples and students in
their tradition. The Ganadhara (chief disciples) compiled the sutras of the
sacred discourses of Shraman Bhagavan Mahavira, which became known as the
Angasahitya (Canonical Literature). It has twelve divisions: Acharanga,
Sutrakrta, Sthana, Samavaya, Bhagavati, Jnata, Upasakadasa, Antakrddasa,
Anuttaropapatika, Prasnavyakarana, Vipaka, and Drstivada. Drstivada is a
division of the Purva literature. According to the Avasyaniyukti, the Ganadhara
created the Chaturdasha Shastras (Fourteen Scriptures) based on the
Arhadbhashita Matrikapadas (Aphoristic Statements of the Arhat), which encompass
the entire Shruta (Canonical Knowledge). These Chaturdasha Shastras are known as
the Chaturdasha Purva.  The analytical method of these Purvas was highly
complex, and therefore, they were accessible only to the most intellectually
gifted practitioners. For the common practitioners and for the benefit of women,
the Dvadashanga (Twelve Angas) was composed. Acharya Jinabhadragani
Kshamasramana has written that the study of Drstivada was prohibited for women,
as they are of a frivolous nature, prone to pride, have unstable senses, and
have weaker intellect compared to men. Therefore, the great compassionate
Tirthankaras prohibited the study of Utthana, Samutthana, and other
extraordinary and miraculous aspects of the Drstivada for women.  The same view
is expressed in the Brhatkalpa-niyukti. However, the statements of
Jinabhadragani Kshamasramana and Maladharin Hemachandra regarding the perversion
of women's nature and the weakness of their intellect do not seem entirely
justified, as there are many women who are more intellectually gifted and
serious than men, as evident from the descriptions in the scriptures.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
unakI paramparA meM hone vAle anya ziSya aura praziSyoM ke lie sUtra aura artha
paramparAgama haiM / 2 zramaNa bhagavAna mahAvIra ke pAvana pravacanoM kA sUtra
rUpa meM saMkalana-prAkalana gaNadharoM ne kiyA, vaha aMgasAhitya ke nAma se
vizruta huprA / usake AcAra, sUtrakRta, sthAna, samavAya, bhagavatI, jJAtA,
upAsakadazA, antakRddazA, anuttaropapAtika, praznavyAkaraNa, vipAka aura
dRSTibAda ye bAraha vibhAga haiN| dRSTibAda kA eka vibhAga pUrva sAhitya hai|
Avazyakaniyukti ke anusAra gaNadharoM ne arhadbhASita mAtRkApadoM ke AdhAra se
caturdaza zAstroM kA nirmANa kiyA, jisameM sampUrNa zruta kI avatAraNA kI gii|
ye caturdaza zAstra caturdaza pUrva ke nAma se vizruta hue / ina pUrvo kI
vizleSaNa-paddhati atyadhika kliSTa yI ataH jo mahAn pratibhAsampanna sAdhaka
the unhIM ke lie vaha pUrva sAhitya grAhaya thA / jo sAdhAraNa pratibhAsampanna
sAdhaka the unake lie evaM striyoM ke upakArArtha dvAdazAMgI kI racanA kI gii|
AcArya jinabhadragaNI kSamAzramaNa ne likhA hai ki daSTibAda kA adhyayana-
paThana striyoM ke lie bajya thaa| kyoMki striyAM tuccha svabhAva kI hotI haiM,
unheM zIghra ho garva prAtA hai| unakI indriyAM caMcala hotI haiN| unakI medhA-
zakti puruSoM kI apekSA durbala hotI hai etadartha utthAna-samutthAna prabhRti
atizaya yA camatkAra yukta adhyayana aura dRSTivAda kA jJAna unake lie nahIM
hai|14 maladhArI prAcArya hemacandra ne prastuta viSaya kA spaSTIkaraNa karate
hae likhA hai ki striyoM ko yadi kisI taraha dRSTivAda kA adhyayana karA diyA
jAe to tuccha prakRti ke kAraNa "maiM dRSTivAda kI adhyetA hUM" isa prakAra mana
meM ahaMkAra Akara puruSa ke paribhava-tiraskAra prabhRti meM pravRtta ho jAye
jisase usakI durgati ho sakatI hai etadartha dayA ke avatAra mahAn paropakArI
tIrthaMkaroM ne utthAna, samutthAna Adi atizaya camatkAra yukta adhyayana evaM
dRSTivAda ke adhyayana kA striyoM ke lie niSedha kiyaa| 5 bRhatkalpaniyukti meM
bhI yahI bAta AI hai / jinabhadragaNI kSamAzramaNa ne aura maladhArI hemacandra
ne striyoM kI pravRtti kI vikRti va medhA kI durbalatA ke sambandha meM jo likhA
hai vaha pUrNa saMgata nahIM lagatA hai / ve bAteM puruSa meM bhI sambhava haiN|
aneka striyAM puruSoM se bhI adhika pratibhAsampanna va gambhIra hotI haiN| yaha
zAstra meM pAye hae varNanoM se bhI spaSTa hai / / 12. titthagarANaM atthassa
attAgame, gaNaharANaM suttassa attAgame, atthassa aNaMtarAgame, gaNaharasIsANaM
suttassa aNaMtarAgame atthassa paraMparAgame teNaM paraM suttassa vi atthassa vi
No attAgame No aNaMtarAgame, paramparAgame -anuyogadvAra 470, pR0 179 13.
dhammovAo pavayaNamahabA pubvAI desayA tassa / sabbaMjiNA | gaNaharA,
codasapuvvA u te tassa / / sAmAiyAiyAvA vayajIvanikAya bhAvaNA paDhamaM / eso
dhammovAdo jiNehi savvehi ubailo / / -~-Avazyakaniyukti gA0 292-293 14. tucchA
gArababahulA calidiyA dubbalA dhiIe ya / iti pAisesajjhayaNA bhUyAvAyo ya no
sthINaM // ..."iha bicitrA jagati prANinaH tatra ye durmedhasaH te pUrvANi
nAdhyetumIzate, pUrvANAmatigambhIrArthatvAta teSAM ca durmedhatvAt strINAM
pUrvAdhyayanAnAdhikAra eva tAsAM tucchatvAdi doSabahulatvAt /
-vizeSAvazyakabhASya gAthA 55 kI vyAkhyA pR0 48 prakAzaka-prAgamodaya samiti
bambaI [ 37 ]

Page #39 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
When a woman can attain the highest spiritual position of a Tirthankara, and can
acquire Kevalgyan, then scholars should contemplate with an impartial
perspective on the weaknesses pointed out for the study of Drashtivad, and the
weaknesses due to which women were not considered eligible for Drashtivad. In my
view, the knowledge of the previous literature was attainable. To acquire that
knowledge, only study and reading were not enough, some specific practices were
also mandatory for the seeker. For those practices, the seeker had to stay alone
in a secluded and peaceful place for some time. The physical body of women is
not such that they can stay alone in seclusion and perform long practices. From
this perspective, the study of Drashtivad was prohibited for women. This is more
rational and logical. In my view, this is also the reason for the non-
availability of the Aharaksharir of women. Based on the Anga texts compiled by
the Ganadharas, other sthaviras later created texts, which are called Angabahya.
Anga and Angabahya, these Agam texts are the fundamental pillars of the reign of
Bhagwan Mahavir. They are the key to Jain practice, the unique treasure of Jain
thought, the dignity of people's culture, and the glory of Jain literature. It
should be remembered that the process of including Angabahya texts in the Agam
has not been the same in both the Svetambar and Digambar traditions. In the
Digambar tradition, the number of Angabahya Agams is very small, but in the
Svetambars, this tradition continued for a long time, which resulted in a larger
number of Angabahya texts. It is very important that the various studies of
Praavasyak, Dashavkalik, Uttaradhyayanasutra, and Nishita, etc., are equally
accepted in both traditions. The Svetambar scholars believe that the original
form of Agam literature has been lost to a great extent, but not completely, it
still remains. In the three compilations of Angas and Angabahya Bhagams, there
has definitely been some change in its original form. Later events and
deliberations have also been included. For example, the description of seven
Nihnvas and Navaganas in the Stananga. The subject hinted at in the
Prashnavyakaran is not available at present, however, most of the Agams are
original, completely original. From the perspective of language and style of
writing, it is very ancient. Present-day linguists consider the first
Shrutaskandha of Acharanga and the first Shrutaskandha of Sutrakrutanga to be
two thousand five hundred years old. They also consider Stananga, Bhagavati,
Uttaradhyayanasutra, Dashavkalik, Nishita, and Kalpa to be ancient. There is no
doubt that the original of the Pragam is still preserved. From the perspective
of the Digambar tradition, Anga literature has been lost. Therefore, they
created new texts and considered them as evidence like Agams. The Digambar
tradition does not consider the Pragam literature of the Svetambars as evidence,
and the Svetambar tradition does not consider the texts of the Digambar
tradition as valid, but when I contemplate with an impartial perspective, it is
clear that there is no significant difference in the original perspective of the
Pragam texts of both traditions. The philosophical views, Jivavichar,
Karmavichar, Lokavichar, Gyanavichar are the same in both the Pragam texts.
There is no difference from a philosophical perspective. Even if we contemplate
from the perspective of the practice tradition, there is no significant
difference, even though there is some difference of opinion regarding the use of
clothes. In the texts of the Digambar tradition, nudity has been emphasized, but
in practice, the number of naked monks has been very few, and the number of
Digambar Bhattarakas, etc.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
jaba strI adhyAtma-sAdhanA kA sarvoccapada tIrthaMkara nAmakarma kA anubandha
kara sakatI hai, kevalajJAna prApta kara sakatI hai taba dRSTivAda ke
adhyayanArtha jina durbalatAoM kI ora saMketa kiyA gayA hai aura jina
durbalatAoM ke kAraNa striyoM ko daSTivAda kI adhikAriNI nahIM mAnA gayA hai una
para vijJoM ko taTastha daSTi se gambhIra cintana karanA caahie| merI dRSTi se
pUrva-sAhitya kA jJAna labdhyAtmaka thA / usa jJAna ko prApta karane ke lie
kevala adhyayana aura par3hanA hI paryApta nahIM thA, kucha viziSTa sAdhanAeM
bhI sAdhaka ko anivArya rUpa se karanI par3atI thiiN| una sAdhanAoM ke lie usa
sAdhaka ko kucha samaya taka ekAnta-zAnta sthAna meM ekAkI bhI rahanA Avazyaka
hotA thaa| striyoM kA zArIrika saMsthAna isa prakAra kA nahIM hai ki ve ekAnta
meM ekAkI raha kara dIrgha sAdhanA kara skeN| isa dRSTi se striyoM ke lie
dRSTivAda kA adhyayana niSedha kiyA gayA ho| yaha adhika tarkasaMgata va yukti-
yukta hai / merI dRSTi se yahI kAraNa striyoM ke AhArakazarIra kI anupalabdhi
prAdi kA bhI hai| gaNadharoM dvArA saMkalita aMga granthoM ke AdhAra se anya
sthaviroM ne bAda meM granthoM kI racanA kI, ve aMgabAhya khlaaye| aMga aura
aMgabAhya ye Agama grantha hI bhagavAn mahAvIra ke zAsana ke AdhArabhUta stambha
haiN| jaina prAcAra kI kuJjI haiM, jaina vicAra kI advitIya nidhi haiM,
janasaMskRti kI garimA haiM aura jaina sAhitya kI mahimA haiN| yaha smaraNa
rakhanA cAhie ki aMgabAhya granthoM ko Agama meM sammilita karane kI prakriyA
zvetAmbara aura digambara donoM hI paramparAoM meM eka samAna nahIM rahI hai|
digambara paraMparA meM aMgabAhya AgamoM kI saMkhyA bahuta hI svalpa hai kintu
zvetAmbaroM meM yaha paramparA lambe samaya taka calatI rahI jisase aMgabAhya
granthoM kI saMkhyA adhika hai| yaha bahuta hI mahattvapUrNa bAta hai ki
prAvazyaka ke vividha adhyayana, dazavakAlika, uttarAdhyayana aura nizItha prAdi
donoM hI paramparAoM meM samAna rUpa se mAnya rahe haiN| _ zvetAmbara vidvAnoM
kI yaha mAnyatA hai ki Agama-sAhitya kA maulika svarUpa bahuta bar3e parimANa
meM lupta ho gayA hai para pUrNa nahIM, aba bhI vaha zeSa hai| aMgoM aura
aMgabAhya bhAgamoM kI jo tIna bAra saMkalanA huI usameM usake maulika rUpa meM
kucha avazya hI parivartana huA hai| uttaravartI ghaTanAoM aura vicAraNAmoM kA
samAveza bhI kiyA gayA hai| jaise sthAnAMga meM sAta nihnava aura navagaNoM kA
varNana / praznavyAkaraNa meM jisa viSaya kA saMketa kiyA gayA hai vaha
bartamAna meM upalabdha nahIM hai, tathApi AgamoM kA adhikAMza bhAga maulika
hai, sarvathA maulika hai| bhASA va racanA zailI kI dRSTi se bahuta hI prAcIna
hai| vartamAna bhASAzAstrI AcArAMga ke prathama zrutaskandha ko aura
sutrakRtAMga ke prathama zrutaskandha ko DhAI hajAra varSa prAcIna batalAte haiM
/ sthAnAMga, bhagavatI, uttarAdhyayana, dazavakAlika, nizItha aura kalpa ko bhI
ve prAcIna mAnate haiN| isameM kisI bhI prakAra kA sandeha nahIM hai ki prAgama
kA mUla prAja bhI surakSita hai| digambara paramparA kI dRSTi se aMga sAhitya
lupta ho cukA hai| ata: unhoMne navIna granthoM kA sRjana kiyA aura unheM AgamoM
kI taraha pramANabhUta mAnA / zvetAmbaroM ke prAgama-sAhitya ko digambara
paramparA pramANabhUta nahIM mAnatI hai to digambara paramparA ke granthoM ko
zvetAmbara paramparA mAnya nahIM karatI hai, para jaba maiM taTastha dRSTi se
cintana karatA to spaSTa jJAta hotA hai ki donoM hI paramparAoM ke prAgama
granthoM meM maulika dRSTi se koI vizeSa antara nahIM hai| donoM ke pAgama
granthoM meM tattvavicAra, jIvavicAra, karmavicAra, lokavicAra, jJAnavicAra
samAna hai| dArzanika dRSTi se koI antara nahIM hai| prAcAra paramparA kI dRSTi
se bhI cintana kareM to vastra ke upayoga ke sambandha meM kucha matabheda hone
para bhI vizeSa antara nahIM rhaa| digambara paramparA ke granthoM meM nagnatva
para atyadhika bala diyA gayA, kintu vyavahAra meM nagna muniyoM kI saMkhyA
bahuta hI kama rahI aura digambara bhaTTAraka Adi kI saMkhyA

Page #40 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Jain Kalpa was given more importance than the Stavira Kalpa in the
Svetambara Pragama literature, but from a practical point of view, it was
prohibited after the Aryajambhu. The Digambara tradition prohibits women from
attaining liberation, but the Digambara tradition-accepted Shatkhandagama states
that human women are adequately present in the Samyagmithyadristi,
Asanyatasamyagdristi, Sanyatasanyata, and Sanyata Gunasthanas. In this, the word
"Sanjad" has been given in the commentary by the editors, the gist of which is
that a human woman cannot be in the "Sanyata" Gunasthan, and if she is in the
Sanyata Gunasthan, then she can attain liberation. A strong atmosphere of
opposition arose in the Digambara community regarding the present question, then
the editors of the text, Pandit Heerlalji Jain, etc., again explained it in the
"Preface to the Third Part of the Pakhandagama", but when the scholars saw the
original copy of the Pakhandagama in Moodbidri (Karnataka), they also found the
word "Sanjad" in it. Vadkar Swami, in his Mulachar, while analyzing the conduct
of the Prayikas, has said that the Sadhus or Dharayikas who conduct themselves
in this way attain worship, fame, and happiness in the world and attain
liberation. This also mentions the Prayikas attaining liberation. But later, the
commentators prohibited women's liberation in their commentaries. Of all the
rules of conduct, the most important rule is that of Uddishta Tyaga, which has
been equally important in both traditions. In the Svetambara Pragama literature
and its explanatory literature, there is a special description of the
exceptional path regarding conduct, but there is no description of the exception
in the Digambara tradition, but on deep reflection, it appears that there must
have been exceptions in the Digambara tradition as well, if there were no
exceptions from the beginning, then how would the name of Nishita come in the
Angavahy list? In the Svetambara tradition, the study of exceptions has been
prohibited for every individual by codifying them. Only a Shraman with special
qualifications is considered eligible to read them. The number of Svetambara
Shramans has been very high from the beginning, which led to the creation of
Chhedasutras for the smooth functioning of society. The Chhedasutras explain the
hidden secrets and subtle activities of Shramanachar. Many favorable and
unfavorable situations arise in the life of a Shraman, the Chhedasutras tell how
to make decisions in such difficult situations. The description of rules and
sub-rules regarding conduct, as is available in the Chhedasutras in the Jain
tradition, is also found in the Vinayapitaka in the Buddhist tradition and in
the Kalpasutra, Shrotasutra, and Grihasutras in the Vedic tradition. There were
also Chhedasutras in the Digambara tradition, but they are not available today.
The Chhedasutra is not mentioned in the Mandisutra. The first use of "Chhed
Sutra" is in Praavshak Niyukti 16. Sammamicchhaittthi Asanjad Sammaittthi
Sanjdasanjad (Atra Sanjad iti Pathasheesh: Prabhati) Ththane Niyama Pajjattiaao.
- Shatkhandagama, Part 1 Sutra 93 p. 332, Praka..-Seth Lakshmichand Shitabaray
Jain Sahityoddhark Fund Office Amravati (Berar) 1939 17. Evam Vidhanchariyam
Charitam Je Sadhavo Ya Ajjaayo / Te Jagpujj Kitti Suham Cha Lan Sizhati / /
-Mulachar 4/196, p. 168 [39]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
unase bahata adhika rhii| zvetAmbara pAgama sAhitya meM jinakalpa ko
sthavirakalpa se adhika mahattva diyA gayA kinta vyavahArika dRSTi se Arya jambU
ke pazcAt jinakalpa kA niSedha kara diyA gyaa| digambara paramparA meM strI ke
nirvANa kA niSedha kiyA hai kintu digambara paramparA mAnya SakhaNDAgama meM
manuSya-striyAM samyagamithyAdRSTi, asaMyatasamyagadaSTi, saMyatAsaMyata aura
saMyata guNasthAnoM meM niyama se paryAptaka hotI haiM / 16 isameM "saMjada"
zabda ko sampAdakoM ne TippaNa meM diyA hai, jisakA sArAMza yaha hai ki manuSya-
strI ko "saMyata" guNasthAna na ho sakatA hai aura saMyata guNasthAna hone para
strI mokSa meM jA sakatI hai| prastuta prazna ko lekara digambara samAja meM
prabala virodha kA bAtAvaraNa samutpanna huA taba grantha ke sampAdaka
paM.hIralAlajI jaina Adi ne pUnaH usakA spaSTIkaraNa "pakhaNDAgama ke tRtIya
bhAga kI prastAvanA" meM kiyA kintu jaba vijJoM ne mUDabidrI (karNATaka) meM
paTakhaNDAgama kI mUla prati dekhI to usameM bhI "saMjada" zabda milA hai|
vadakarasvAmI viracita mUlAcAra meM prAyikAmoM ke prAcAra kA vizleSaNa karate
hue kahA hai jo sAdhu athavA dhAryikA isa prakAra AcaraNa karate haiM ve jagat
meM pUjA, yaza va sukha ko pAkara mokSa ko pAte haiN| isameM bhI prAyikAoM ke
mokSa meM jAne kA ullekha hai / kintu bAda meM TIkAkAroM ne apanI TIkAoM meM
strI nirvANa kA niSedha kiyA hai| prAcAra ke jitane bhI niyama haiM unameM
mahattvapUrNa niyama uddiSTa tyAga kA hai, jisakA donoM hI paramparAmoM meM
samAna rUpa se mahattva rahA hai| zvetAmbara prAgama-sAhitya meM aura usake
vyAkhyA sAhitya meM prAcAra sambandhI apavAda mArga kA vizeSa varNana milatA hai
kintu digambara paramparA ke anyoM meM apavAda kA varNana nahIM hai, para
gaharAI se cintana karane para aisA pratIta hotA hai ki digambara paramparA meM
bhI apavAda rahe hoMge, yadi prArambha se hI apavAda nahIM hote to aMgavAhya
sUcI meM nizItha kA nAma kaise AtA ? zvetAmbara paramparA meM 'apavAdoM ko
sUtrabaddha karake bhI usakA adhyayana pratyeka vyakti ke lie niSiddha kara diyA
gyaa| vizeSa yogyatA vAlA zramaNa hI usake par3hane kA adhikArI mAnA gayA /
zvetAmbara zramaNoM kI saMkhyA prArambha se hI atyadhika rahI jisase samAja kI
suvyavasthA hetu chedasUtroM kA nirmANa haa| chedasUtroM meM zramaNAcAra ke
nigUr3ha rahasya aura sUkSma kriyA-kalApa ko samajhAyA gayA hai| zramaNa ke
jIvana meM anekAneka anukUla aura pratikUla prasaMga samupasthita hote haiM,
aisI viSama paristhiti meM kisa prakAra nirNaya lenA cAhie yaha bAta chedasUtroM
meM batAI gaI hai| prAcAra sambandhI jaisA niyama aura upaniyamoM kA varNana
jaina paramparA meM chedasUtroM meM upalabdha hotA hai vaisA hI varNana bauddha
paramparA meM vinayapiTaka meM milatA hai aura vaidika paramparA meM ke
kalpasUtra, zrotasUtra aura gRhasUtroM meM milatA hai| digambara paramparA meM
bhI chetrasUtra bane the para Aja ve upalabdha nahIM haiN| chedasUtra kA
nAmollekha mandIsUtra meM nahIM huA hai| "cheda sUtra" kA sabase prathama
prayoga prAvazyakaniyukti 16. sammAmicchAiTThi asaMjadasammAiTThi saMjadAsaMjada
(atra saMjada iti pAThazeSaH pratibhAti) TThANe NiyamA pjjttiyaao|
-SaTkhaNDAgama, bhAga 1 sUtra 93 pR. 332, prakA..-seTha lakSmIcaMda zitAbarAya
jaina sAhityoddhAraka phaNDa kAryAlaya amarAvatI (barAra) san 1939 17. evaM
vidhANacariyaM caritaM je sAdhavo ya ajjAyo / te jagapujja kitti suhaM ca laNa
sijhati / / -mUlAcAra 4/196, pR. 168 [ 39]

Page #41 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
It is green. 18 After that, this word has also been used in
*VisheshAvashyakBhashya* and *NishithBhashya*. The implication is that if we
consider *AvashyakNiyukti* to be the work of the brother of the astrologer
Varahamihira, the second Bhadrabaahu, then he lived in the sixth century Vikram.
He has used it. It is clear that the word "Chhedasutta" was used before
"Mulasutta". Why were certain *Pragamas* given the name "Chhedasutra"? The
answer to this question is not directly and clearly available in ancient texts.
However, it is clear that the sutras that have been called "Chhedasutta" are
*Prayashchitta* sutras. In *Sthananga*, five *charitras* are mentioned for the
*Shramanas* (1) *Samayik*, (2) *Chhedopasthapaniya*, (3) *PariharVishuddhi*, (4)
*SookshmaSamparaya*, (5) *Yayakhyata* / 22 Of these, the last three *charitras*
have been discontinued in the present time. The *Samayik* *charitra* is short-
lived, the *Chhedopasthapanik* *charitra* lasts for life. *Prayashchitta* is
also related to this *charitra*. It is possible that the *Prayashchitta* sutras
were given the name *Chhedasutra* keeping this *charitra* in mind. In
*Malayagiri*‚Äôs *AvashyakVritti* 23, the term *pad-vibhaga*, *samachari* has been
used for *Chhedasutras*. Both the words *pad-vibhaga* and *Chhed* have been
kept. Because in *Chhedasutras*, one sutra is not connected to another sutra.
All the sutras are independent. Their interpretation is also done from the
*Chhed-drishti* or *vibhaga-drishti*. *DashaShrutaSkandha*, *Nishith*,
*Vyavahar* and *BrihatKalpa* these sutras have been quoted from the ninth
*Pratyakhyana* before, 24 they have been given the name *Chhedasutra* by cutting
them off, i.e., separating them, this is also possible / 25 *Chhedasutras* have
been considered as the best *Shruta*. The *Bhashyakaras* also support this
statement. 26 *Chanikara* Jinadas Mah‡§§‡•ç‡§§‡§∞ himself raises the question that why
are *Chhedasutras* the best? Then he himself solves it by saying that the
*Prayashchitta* method is described in the *sutra*, it purifies the *charitra*,
for this reason this *Shruta* is considered the best. 18. *Jan cha
Mahakappasuyam, jani asesani Chheasuttani / Charanakarananuprago ti kaliyatthe
uvamyani / / -AvashyakNiyukti 777 -VisheshAvashyakBhashya 2265 20. (a)
*ChhedasuttaniSihaadi, atyo ya gato ya Chhedasuttaadi / MantanimittoSahipahude,
ya gati annath / / NishithBhashya 5947 (b) See also Canonical Literature p. 36.
21. *JainAgamDhar* and *Prakrit Vangmay* -Author Punyavijayaji, ‚Äî-Muni
Hazarimala SmritiGranth, p. 718 22. (a) *SthanangaSutra* 5, *Uddeshak* 2,
*Sutra* 428 (b) *VisheshAvashyakBhashya* Ga. 1260-1270 23. *Padvibhaga,
Samachari Chhedasutrani / -AvashyakNiyukti 665, MalayagiriVritti 24. *Kataram
Suttam? Dasaukappo Vabaharo ya / Kataraato uddhrtam? Uchyate pacchakkhana-
puthavaao. -DashaShrutaSkandhaChuni, Patra 2 25. *Nishith* 19 / 17 26.
*ChheyasuyamuttamSuyam / -NishithBhashya, 6148 [40]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
meM harA hai|18 usake pazcAt vizeSAvazyakabhASya aura nizIthabhASya' mAdi meM
bhI yaha zabda vyavahRta huA hai| tAtparya yaha hai ki hama aAvazyakaniyukti ko
yadi jyotirvida varAhamihira ke bhrAtA dvitIya bhadrabAha kI kRti mAnate haiM to
ve vikrama kI chaThI zatAbdI meM hue haiN| unhoMne isakA prayoga kiyA hai|
spaSTa hai ki "chedasutta" zabda kA prayoga "mUlasutta" se pahale huA hai| amuka
prAgamoM ko "chedasUtra" yaha abhidhA kyoM dI gaI ? isa prazna kA uttara prAcIna
granthoM meM sIdhA aura spaSTa prApta nahIM hai| hA~ yaha spaSTa hai ki jina
sUtroM ko "chedasutta" kahA gayA hai ve prAyazcittasUtra haiN| sthAnAGga meM
zramaNoM ke lie pAMca cAritroM kA ullekha hai (1) sAmAyika, (2)
chedopasthApanIya, (3) parihAravizuddhi, (4) sUkSmasaMparAya, (5) yayAkhyAta /
22 inameM se vartamAna meM tIna antima cAritra vicchinna ho gaye haiN| sAmAyika
cAritra svalpakAlIna hotA hai, chedopasthApanika cAritra hI jIvana paryanta
rahatA hai| prAyazcitta kA sambandha bhI isI cAritra se hai| saMbhavata: isI
cAritra ko lakSya meM rakhakara prAyazcittasUtroM ko chedasUtra kI saMjJA dI gaI
ho| malayagiri kI AvazyakavRtti 23 meM chedasUtroM ke lie pada-vibhAga, samAcArI
zabda kA prayoga hamA hai| pada-vibhAga aura cheda ye donoM zabda rakhe gaye
hoN| kyoMki chedasUtroM meM eka sUtra kA dUsare sUtra se sambandha nahIM hai|
sabhI sUtra svataMtra haiN| unakI vyAkhyA bhI cheda-daSTi se yA vibhAga-daSTi se
kI jAtI hai| dazAzrutaskandha, nizItha, vyavahAra aura bRhatkalpa ye sUtra
nauveM pratyAkhyAna pUrva se uddhRta kiye gaye haiM,24 usase chinna arthAt
pRthak karane se unheM chedasUtra kI saMjJA dI gaI ho, yaha bhI sambhava hai /
25 chedasUtroM ko uttama zruta mAnA gayA hai| bhASyakAra bhI isa kathana kA
samarthana karate haiN|26 caNikAra jinadAsa mahattara svayaM yaha prazna
upasthita karate haiM ki chedasUtra uttama kyoM haiM ? phira svayaM hI usakA
samAdhAna dete kidasatra meM prAyazcittavidhi kA nirUpaNa hai, usase cAritra kI
vizuddhi hotI hai, etadartha yaha zrata uttama mAnA 18. jaM ca mahAkappasuyaM,
jANi asesANi cheasuttANi / caraNakaraNANuprogo ti kAliyatthe uvamayANi / /
-Avazyakaniyukti 777 -vizeSAvazyakabhASya 2265 20. (ka) chedasuttaNisIhAdI, atyo
ya gato ya chedasuttAdI / maMtanimittosahipAhUDe, ya gAti aNNAttha / /
nizIthabhApya 5947 (kha) kenonikala liTarecara pR. 36 bhI dekhie| 21.
jainAgamadhara aura prAkRta vAGmaya -lekhaka puNyavijayajI, ---muni hajArImala
smRtigrantha, pR. 718 22. (ka) sthAnAMgasUtra 5, uddezaka 2, sUtra 428 (kha)
vizeSAvazyakabhASya gA. 1260-1270 23. padavibhAga, samAcArI chedasUtrANi /
-Avazyakaniyukti 665, malayagirivRtti 24. kataraM suttaM ? dasAukappo vabahAro
ya / katarAto uddhRtaM ? ucyate pcckkhaann-putthvaao| -dazAzrutaskaMghacUNi,
patra 2 25. nizIdha 19 / 17 26. cheyasuyamuttamasuyaM / -nizIthabhASya, 6148
[40]

Page #42 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
It has gone. A comprehensive discussion of the practice of the Shraman life is
available only in the Cheda Sutras. What are the limitations of the seeker, what
is his duty? Such questions have been pondered upon in them. To cut out the
element of unrestraint from life, to cleanse the practice of its impurities, to
be fully vigilant to avoid mistakes, to take atonement and rectify them if
mistakes are made, all this is the work of the Cheda Sutras. / In Samachari
Shatak, Time Sundargani has stated the number of Cheda Sutras to be six: (1)
Mahanishith, (2) Dasha Shruta Skandha, (3) Vyavahar, (4) Brihat Kalp, (5)
Nishith, (6) Jit Kalp / Except for Jit Kalp, the names of the remaining five
Sutras are also found in Nandi Sutra. Jit Kalp is the work of Jinbhadragani
Kshamasraman, therefore it cannot be placed in the category of Agam. / The
present version of Mahanishith is a restoration by Acharya Haribhadra (8th
century AD). It had been consumed by termites before that. Therefore, the
Mahanishith available today also does not find a place in the category of Agam.
Thus, there are only four original Cheda Sutras - (1) Dasha Shruta Skandha, (2)
Vyavahar, (3) Brihat Kalp and (4) Nishith / The Jain Agams have been created in
two ways (1) Krit, (2) Ni! Hit / The Agams that have been created independently
are called Krit Agams. For example, the Dvadasangi was created by the Ganadharas
and the Upanga literature was created by different sthaviras, they are all Krit
Pagams. Ni! Hit Agams are considered to be - (1) Acharachula (2) Dashakalik (3)
Nishith (4) Dasha Shruta Skandha (5) Brihat Kalp (6) Vyavahar (7)
Uttaradhyayanas's Parisha Adhyayan. Acharachula has been elaborated by
Chaturdashapurvi Bhadrabahu, this fact has become clear through investigation
today. The style of Acharachula is completely different from that of Acharang.
It was created after Acharang. The Acharang-Niyuktikar has considered it to be
sthavir. The meaning of sthavir has been given as Ganadhar by Charnikar. 1.
Cheyasuyam kamha uttamasuttam? Bhannami jamha ettham sapayachitto vidhi
bhannati, jamha etegaracharanvishuddham kareti, tamha tam uttamasuttam / Nishith
Bhashya 6184's Chuni 2. Samachari Shatak, Agam Sthapanadhikari. 3. Kaliyam
anegavihann pannattam, tam jaha dasao, kappo, vavharo, niseeh, mahaniseeh /
-Nandi Sutra 77 4. Agamyug ka Jain Darshan, p. 21-22, Pan. Dalsukh Bhai
Malvaniya - Prakashan Sanmati Gyanpeeth, Agra 5. Therehi'anuggahatta, sisehi hou
pagauttham cha / Ayarao aththo, payarangesu pavibhatto // -Acharangniyukti Ga.
287 6. There Ganadhara. Acharangchuni, p. 326 [ 41 ]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
gayA hai| zramaNa-jIvana kI sAdhanA kA sarvAGgINa vivecana chedasUtroM meM hI
upalabdha hotA hai| sAdhaka kI kyA maryAdA hai, usakA kyA karttavya hai ? ityAdi
praznoM para unameM cintana kiyA gayA hai| jIvana meM se asaMyama ke aMza ko
kATakara pRthaka karanA, sAdhanA meM se doSajanya malinatA ko nikAlakara sApha
karanA, bhUloM se bacane ke lie pUrNa sAvadhAna rahanA, bhUla ho jAne para
prAyazcitta grahaNa kara usakA parimArjana karanA, yaha saba chedasUtroM kA
kArya hai / samAcArIzataka meM samayasundaragaNI ne chedasUtroM kI saMkhyA chaha
batalAI hai:(1) mahAnizItha, (2) dazAzrutaskaMdha, (3) vyavahAra, (4)
bRhatkalpa, (5) nizItha, (6) jItakalpa / jItakalpa ko chor3akara zeSa pAca
sUtroM ke nAma nandIsUtra meM bhI pAye haiN| jItakalpa jinabhadragaNI
kSamAzramaNa kI kRti hai, etadartha use Agama kI koTi meM sthAna nahIM diyA jA
sakatA / mahAnizItha kA jo vartamAna saMskaraNa hai, vaha AcArya haribhadra (vi.
8 vIM zatAbdI) ke dvArA punaruddhAra kiyA huA hai| usakA usake pUrva hI dImakoM
ne udarastha kara liyA gayA thaa| ataH vartamAna meM upalabdha mahAnizItha bhI
Agama kI koTi meM nahIM paataa| isa prakAra maulika chedasUtra cAra hI haiM-(1)
dazAzrutaskandha, (2) vyavahAra, (3) bRhatkalpa aura (4) nizItha / nie hita
Agama jaina AgamoM kI racanAeM do prakAra se huI hai(1) kRta, (2) ni! hita /
jina AgamoM kA nirmANa svataMtra rUpa se huA hai ve Agama kRta kahalAte haiN|
jaise gaNadharoM ke dvArA dvAdazAMgI kI racanA kI gaI hai aura bhinna-bhinna
sthaviroM ke dvArA upAMga sAhitya kA nirmANa kiyA gayA hai, ve saba kRta pAgama
haiN| ni! hita Agama ye mAne gaye haiM - (1) AcAracUlA (2) dazavakAlika (3)
nizItha (4) dazAzrutaskandha (5) bRhatkalpa (6) vyavahAra (7) uttarAdhyayana kA
parISaha adhyyn| prAcAraculA yaha caturdazapUrvI bhadrabAhu ke dvArA nirvRhaNa
kI gaI hai, yaha bAta aAja anveSaNA ke dvArA spaSTa ho cukI hai| prAcArAMga se
prAcAracUlA kI racanA-zailI sarvathA pRthak hai| usakI racanA AcArAMga ke bAda
huI hai| AcArAMga-niyuktikAra ne usako sthavirakRta mAnA hai|' sthavira kA artha
carNikAra ne gaNadhara kiyA hai| 1. cheyasuyaM kamhA uttamasuttaM ? bhaNNAmi
jamhA etthaM sapAyacchitto vidhI bhaNNati, jamhA etegaccaraNavizuddhaM kareti,
tamhA taM uttamasuttaM / nizIthabhASya 6184 kI cUNi 2. samAcArIzataka, Agama
sthaapnaadhikaar| 3. kAliyaM aNegavihaM paNNattaM, taM jahAdasAo, kappo,
vavahAro, nisIha, mahAnisIha / -nandIsUtra 77 4. Agamayuga kA jainadarzana, pR0
21-22, paM0 dalasukhabhAI mAlavaNiyA -prakAzaka sanmati jJAnapITha, AgarA 5.
tharehi'NuggahaTThA, sIsahi hou pAgautthaM ca / AyArAo attho, pAyAraMgesu
pavibhatto // -AcArAMganiyukti gA0 287 6. there gnndhraa| AcArAMgacUNi, pR0 326
[ 41 ]

Page #43 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
And the commentator has done the fourteen ‡§™‡•Ç‡§∞‡•ç‡§µ‡•Ä, but the name of the ‡§∏‡•ç‡§•‡§µ‡§ø‡§∞ has
not come in them. The opinion of the learned is that the word ‡§∏‡•ç‡§•‡§µ‡§ø‡§∞ here is
used for the fourteen ‡§™‡•Ç‡§∞‡•ç‡§µ‡•Ä ‡§≠‡§¶‡•ç‡§∞‡§¨‡§æ‡§π‡•Å. To express the profound meaning of the
‡§Ü‡§ö‡§æ‡§∞‡§æ‡§Ç‡§ó, the "‡§Ü‡§ö‡§æ‡§∞‡§ö‡•Ç‡§≤‡§æ" has been created. The commentator has indicated the
‡§®‡§ø‡§∞‡•ç‡§Ø‡§π‡•Ç‡§£‡§∏‡•ç‡§•‡§≤ of the five ‡§ö‡•Ç‡§≤‡§æ. The ‡§¶‡§∂‡§µ‡§ï‡§æ‡§≤‡§ø‡§ï fourteen ‡§™‡•Ç‡§∞‡•ç‡§µ‡•Ä ‡§∂‡§Ø‡•ç‡§Ø‡§Ç‡§≠‡§µ has been
‡§®‡§ø!‡§π‡§£ by the various ‡§™‡•Ç‡§∞‡•ç‡§µ‡•ã. For example, the fourth study is taken from the
‡§Ü‡§§‡•ç‡§Æ‡§™‡•ç‡§∞‡§µ‡§æ‡§¶ ‡§™‡•Ç‡§∞‡•ç‡§µ, the fifth study from the ‡§ï‡§∞‡•ç‡§Æ‡§™‡•ç‡§∞‡§µ‡§æ‡§¶ ‡§™‡•Ç‡§∞‡•ç‡§µ, the seventh study
from the ‡§∏‡§§‡•ç‡§Ø‡§™‡•ç‡§∞‡§µ‡§æ‡§¶ ‡§™‡•Ç‡§∞‡•ç‡§µ, and the remaining studies are taken from the third
‡§µ‡§∏‡•ç‡§§‡•Å of the ‡§™‡•ç‡§∞‡§§‡•ç‡§Ø‡§æ‡§ñ‡•ç‡§Ø‡§æ‡§® ‡§™‡•Ç‡§∞‡•ç‡§µ. According to the second opinion, the ‡§¶‡§∂‡§µ‡§ï‡§æ‡§≤‡§ø‡§ï
‡§ó‡§£‡§ø‡§™‡§ø‡§ü‡§ï is quoted from the ‡§¶‡•ç‡§µ‡§æ‡§¶‡§∂‡§æ‡§Ç‡§ó‡•Ä. The ‡§®‡§ø‡§∂‡•Ä‡§• has been ‡§®‡§ø!‡§π‡§£ from the ninth
‡§™‡•Ç‡§∞‡•ç‡§µ called ‡§™‡•ç‡§∞‡§§‡•ç‡§Ø‡§æ‡§ñ‡•ç‡§Ø‡§æ‡§®. The ‡§™‡•ç‡§∞‡§§‡•ç‡§Ø‡§æ‡§ñ‡•ç‡§Ø‡§æ‡§® ‡§™‡•Ç‡§∞‡•ç‡§µ has twenty ‡§µ‡§∏‡•ç‡§§‡•Å, i.e.,
‡§Ö‡§∞‡•ç‡§•‡§æ‡§ß‡§ø‡§ï‡§æ‡§∞. The name of the third ‡§µ‡§∏‡•ç‡§§‡•Å is ‡§Ü‡§ö‡§æ‡§∞. It also has twenty
‡§™‡•ç‡§∞‡§æ‡§≠‡•É‡§§‡§ö‡•ç‡§õ‡•á‡§¶, i.e., subdivisions. The ‡§®‡§ø‡§∂‡•Ä‡§• has been ‡§®‡§ø'‡§π‡§£ from the twentieth
‡§™‡•ç‡§∞‡§æ‡§≠‡•Ç‡§§‡§ö‡•ç‡§õ‡•á‡§¶. According to the ‡§™‡§Ç‡§ö‡§ï‡§≤‡•ç‡§™‡§ö‡•Ç‡§£‡§ø, the ‡§®‡§ø‡§∞‡•ç‡§Ø‡•Å ‡§π‡§ï of ‡§®‡§ø‡§∂‡•Ä‡§• is
‡§≠‡§¶‡•ç‡§∞‡§¨‡§æ‡§π‡•Å‡§∏‡•ç‡§µ‡§æ‡§Æ‡•Ä. This opinion has also been supported by the ‡§™‡•ç‡§∞‡§æ‡§ó‡§Æ‡§™‡•ç‡§∞‡§≠‡§æ‡§µ‡§ï
‡§Æ‡•Å‡§®‡§ø‡§∂‡•ç‡§∞‡•Ä ‡§™‡•Å‡§£‡•ç‡§Ø‡§µ‡§ø‡§ú‡§Ø‡§ú‡•Ä. 1. "‡§∏‡•ç‡§•‡§µ‡§ø‡§∞‡•à‡§É" ‡§∂‡•ç‡§∞‡•Å‡§§‡§µ‡•É‡§¶‡•ç‡§ß‡§∂‡•ç‡§ö‡§§‡•Å‡§∞‡•ç‡§¶‡§∂‡§™‡•Ç‡§∞‡•ç‡§µ‡§µ‡§ø‡§¶‡•ç‡§≠‡§ø‡§É  /  2.
‡§¨‡§ø‡§Æ‡§∏‡•ç‡§∏ ‡§Ø ‡§™‡§Ç‡§ö‡§Æ‡§è, ‡§Ö‡§ü‡•ç‡§†‡§Æ‡§ó‡§∏‡•ç‡§∏ ‡§¨‡§ø‡§á‡§Ø‡§Ç‡§Æ‡§ø ‡§â‡§¶‡•ç‡§¶‡•á‡§∏‡•á  /  ‡§≠‡§£‡§ø‡§ì ‡§™‡§ø‡§°‡•ã ‡§∏‡§ø‡§ú‡•ç‡§ú‡§æ, ‡§µ‡§§‡•ç‡§•‡§Ç ‡§™‡§æ‡§â‡§ó‡•ç‡§ó‡§π‡•ã
‡§ö‡•á‡§µ  /  /  ‡§™‡§Ç‡§ö‡§Æ‡§ó‡§∏‡•ç‡§∏ ‡§ö‡§â‡§§‡•ç‡§•‡•á ‡§á‡§∞‡§ø‡§Ø‡§æ, ‡§µ‡§£‡§ø‡§ú‡•ç‡§ú‡§à ‡§∏‡§Æ‡§æ‡§∏‡•á‡§£‡§Ç  /  ‡§õ‡•Å‡§ü‡•ç‡§†‡§∏‡•ç‡§∏ ‡§Ø ‡§™‡§Ç‡§ö‡§Æ‡§è,
‡§≠‡§æ‡§∏‡§ú‡•ç‡§ú‡§æ‡§Ø‡§Ç ‡§µ‡§ø‡§Ø‡§æ‡§£‡§æ‡§π‡§ø  /  ‡§∏‡§§‡•ç‡§§‡§ø‡§ï‡•ç‡§ï‡§ó‡§æ‡§£‡§ø ‡§∏‡§§‡•ç‡§§‡§µ‡§ø, ‡§®‡§ø‡§ú‡•ç‡§ú‡§¢‡§æ‡§à ‡§Æ‡§π‡§æ‡§™‡§∞‡§ø‡§®‡•ç‡§®‡§æ‡§ì‡•§ ‡§∏‡§§‡•ç‡§•‡§™‡§∞‡§ø‡§®‡•ç‡§®‡§æ
‡§≠‡§æ‡§µ‡§£, ‡§®‡§ø‡§ú‡•ç‡§ú‡•Ç‡§¢‡§æ‡§®‡•ã ‡§ß‡•Å‡§Ø‡§µ‡§ø‡§Æ‡•Å‡§§‡•ç‡§§‡•Ä  /  /  ‡§Ü‡§Ø‡§æ‡§∞‡§™‡§ï‡§™‡•ç‡§™‡•ã ‡§™‡•Å‡§£, ‡§™‡§ö‡•ç‡§ö‡§ï‡•ç‡§ñ‡§æ‡§£‡§∏‡•ç‡§∏ ‡§§‡§á‡§Ø‡§µ‡§§‡•ç‡§•‡•Ç‡§™‡•ç‡§∞‡•ã‡•§
‡§Ü‡§Ø‡§æ‡§∞‡§®‡§æ‡§Æ‡§ß‡§ø‡§ú‡•ç‡§ú‡§æ, ‡§µ‡•Ä‡§∏‡§á‡§Æ‡§æ ‡§™‡§æ‡§π‡•Å‡§°‡§ö‡•ç‡§õ‡•á‡§Ø‡§æ  //  -‡§™‡•ç‡§∞‡§æ‡§ö‡§æ‡§∞‡§æ‡§Ç‡§ó‡§®‡§ø‡§Ø‡•Å‡§ï‡•ç‡§§‡§ø ‡§ó‡§æ‡•¶ 288-291 3.
‡§™‡§æ‡§Ø‡§™‡•ç‡§™‡§µ‡§æ‡§Ø ‡§™‡•Å‡§¨‡•ç‡§µ‡§æ ‡§®‡§ø‡§ú‡•ç‡§ú‡•Ç‡§¢‡§æ ‡§π‡•ã‡§á ‡§ß‡§Æ‡•ç‡§Æ‡§™‡§®‡•ç‡§®‡§§‡•Ä‡•§ ‡§ï‡§Æ‡•ç‡§™‡§™‡•ç‡§™‡§µ‡§æ‡§Ø ‡§™‡•Å‡§¨‡•ç‡§¨‡§æ ‡§™‡§ø‡§Ç‡§°‡§∏‡•ç‡§∏ ‡§â ‡§è‡§∏‡§£‡§æ
‡§§‡§ø‡§µ‡§ø‡§ß‡§æ  /  /  ‡§∏‡§ö‡•ç‡§ö‡§Ø‡•ç‡§™‡§µ‡§æ‡§Ø ‡§™‡•Å‡§µ‡•ç‡§µ‡§æ ‡§®‡§ø‡§ú‡•ç‡§ú‡•Ç‡§¢‡§æ ‡§π‡•ã‡§á ‡§¨‡§ï‡•ç‡§ï‡§∏‡•Å‡§¶‡•ç‡§ß‡•Ä ‡§â  /  ‡§Ö‡§µ‡§∏‡•á‡§∏‡§æ ‡§®‡§ø‡§ú‡•ç‡§ú‡§¢‡§æ
‡§®‡§µ‡§Æ‡§∏‡•ç‡§∏ ‡§â ‡§§‡§á‡§Ø‡§µ‡§§‡•ç‡§•‡•Ç‡§Ø‡•ã‡•§ -‡§¶‡§∂‡§µ‡§ï‡§æ‡§≤‡§ø‡§ï‡§®‡§ø‡§Ø‡•Å‡§ï‡•ç‡§§‡§ø ‡§ó‡§æ‡•¶ 16-17 ‡§¨‡•Ä‡§Æ‡•ã‡§Ω‡§µ‡§ø ‡§Ö ‡§Ü‡§è‡§∏‡•ã, ‡§ó‡§£‡§ø‡§™‡§ø‡§°‡§ó‡§æ‡§ì
‡§¶‡•Å‡§µ‡§æ‡§≤‡§∏‡§Ç‡§ó‡§æ‡§Ø‡•ã‡•§ ‡§è‡§Ö‡§Ç ‡§ï‡§ø‡§∞ ‡§£‡§ø‡§ú‡•ç‡§ú‡•Ç‡§¢‡§Ç ‡§Æ‡§£‡§ó‡§∏‡•ç‡§∏ ‡§Ö‡§£‡•Å‡§ó‡§æ‡§π‡§ü‡§æ‡§è  /  - ‡§¶‡§∂‡§µ‡§ï‡§æ‡§≤‡§ø‡§ï‡§®‡§ø‡§Ø‡•Å‡§ï‡•ç‡§§‡§ø ‡§ó‡§æ. 18
‡§£‡§ø‡§∏‡•Ä‡§π‡§Ç ‡§£‡§µ‡§Æ‡§æ ‡§™‡•Å‡§¨‡•ç‡§µ‡§æ ‡§™‡§ö‡•ç‡§ö‡§ï‡•ç‡§ñ‡§æ‡§£‡§∏‡•ç‡§∏ ‡§§‡§§‡§ø‡§Ø‡§µ‡§§‡•ç‡§•‡•Ç‡§ì‡•§ ‡§Ü‡§Ø‡§æ‡§∞ ‡§®‡§æ‡§Æ‡§ß‡•á‡§ú‡•ç‡§ú‡§æ, ‡§µ‡•Ä‡§∏‡§§‡§ø‡§Æ‡§æ ‡§™‡§æ‡§π‡•Å‡§°‡§ö‡•ç‡§õ‡•á‡§¶‡§æ
/  ‚Äî‡§®‡§ø‡§∂‡•Ä‡§•‡§≠‡§æ‡§∑‡•ç‡§Ø 6500 6. ‡§≤‡•á‡§£ ‡§≠‡§ó‡§µ‡§§‡§æ ‡§Ü‡§Ø‡§æ‡§∞‡§™‡§ï‡§™‡•ç‡§™-‡§¶‡§∏‡§æ-‡§ï‡§™‡•ç‡§™-‡§µ‡§µ‡§π‡§æ‡§∞‡§æ ‡§Ø ‡§®‡§µ‡§Æ‡§™‡•Å‡§¨‡§®‡•Ä‡§∏‡§Ç‡§¶‡§≠‡•Ç‡§§‡§æ
‡§®‡§ø‡§ú‡•ç‡§ú‡•Ç‡§¢‡§æ  /   ‡§™‡§Ç‡§ö‡§ï‡§≤‡•ç‡§™‡§ö‡•Ç‡§£‡§ø, ‡§™‡§§‡•ç‡§∞ 1 (‡§≤‡§ø‡§ñ‡§ø‡§§) 7. ‡§¨‡•É‡§π‡§§‡•ç‡§ï‡§≤‡•ç‡§™‡§∏‡•Ç‡§§‡•ç‡§∞, ‡§≠‡§æ‡§ó 6, ‡§™‡•ç‡§∞‡§∏‡•ç‡§§‡§æ‡§µ‡§®‡§æ
‡§™‡•É. 3 [42]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
aura vRttikAra ne caturdazapUrvI kiyA hai kintu unameM sthavira kA nAma nahIM
AyA hai| vijJoM kA abhimata hai ki yahA~ para sthavira zabda kA prayoga
caturdazapUrvI bhadrabAhu ke lie hI huA hai| AcArAMga ke gambhIra artha ko
abhivyakta karane ke lie "AcAracUlA" kA nirmANa huA hai / niyuktikAra ne pAMcoM
cUlAoM ke niryahUNasthaloM kA saMketa kiyA hai| dazavakAlika caturdazapUrvI
zayyaMbhava ke dvArA vibhinna pUrvo se ni!haNa kiyA gayA hai / jaise-caturtha
adhyayana AtmapravAda pUrva se, paMcama adhyayana karmapravAda pUrva se, saptama
adhyayana satyapravAda pUrva se aura zeSa adhyayana pratyAkhyAna pUrva kI tRtIya
vastu se uddhata kiye gaye haiN|' dvitIya abhimatAnusAra dazavakAlika gaNipiTaka
dvAdazAMgI se uddhRta hai| nizItha kA ni! haNa pratyAkhyAna nAmaka nauveM pUrva
se huA hai| pratyAkhyAna pUrva ke bIsa vastu arthAt arthAdhikAra haiN| tRtIya
vastu kA nAma AcAra hai| usake bhI bIsa prAbhRtaccheda arthAt upavibhAga haiN|
bIsaveM prAbhUtaccheda se nizItha kA ni' haNa kiyA gayA hai| paMcakalpacUNi ke
anusAra nizItha ke niryu haka bhadrabAhusvAmI hai| isa mata kA samarthana
prAgamaprabhAvaka munizrI puNyavijayajI ne bhI kiyA hai| 1. "sthaviraiH"
zrutavRddhazcaturdazapUrvavidbhiH / 2. bimassa ya paMcamae, aTThamagassa
biiyaMmi uddese / bhaNio piDo sijjA, vatthaM pAuggaho ceva / / paMcamagassa
cautthe iriyA, vaNijjaI samAseNaM / chuTThassa ya paMcamae, bhAsajjAyaM viyANAhi
/ sattikkagANi sattavi, nijjaDhAI mhaaprinnaao| satthaparinnA bhAvaNa,
nijjUDhAno dhuyavimuttI / / AyArapakappo puNa, paccakkhANassa tiyvtthuupro|
AyAranAmadhijjA, vIsaimA pAhuDaccheyA // -prAcArAMganiyukti gA0 288-291 3.
pAyappavAya pubvA nijjUDhA hoi dhmmpnntii| kampappavAya pubbA piMDassa u esaNA
tividhA / / saccaypavAya puvvA nijjUDhA hoi bakkasuddhI u / avasesA nijjaDhA
navamassa u tiyvtthuuyo| -dazavakAlikaniyukti gA0 16-17 bImo'vi a Aeso,
gaNipiDagAo duvaalsNgaayo| eaM kira NijjUDhaM maNagassa aNugAhaTAe / -
dazavakAlikaniyukti gA. 18 NisIhaM NavamA pubvA paccakkhANassa ttiyvtthuuo|
AyAra nAmadhejjA, vIsatimA pAhuDacchedA / --nizIthabhASya 6500 6. leNa bhagavatA
AyArapakappa-dasA-kappa-vavahArA ya navamapubanIsaMdabhUtA nijjUDhA /
paMcakalpacUNi, patra 1 (likhita) 7. bRhatkalpasUtra, bhAga 6, prastAvanA pR. 3
[42]

Page #44 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
"The Dasha-Shruta-Skandha, Brihat-Kalpa and Vyavahar, all three are considered
to be abridged versions of the original fourteen Purvas by Bhadra-Bahu Swami.
According to the Dasha-Shruta-Skandha's own statement, the currently available
Dasha-Shruta-Skandha is shorter than the original Dasha-Shruta-Skandha found in
the Angas. This abridgment was done by the Sthaviras for the benefit of their
disciples. According to the Churni, the name of the Sthavira is Bhadra-Bahu.
The second study of the Uttaradhyayanas is also considered to be an Anga-
Prabhava. According to Bhadra-Bahu, the author of the abridgment, it is an
excerpt from the seventeenth Prabhrit of the Karma-Pravada-Purva. In addition to
these, a large part of the extra-Anga literature, especially the Karma
literature, is considered to be abridged from the original.  It is important to
clarify the meaning of the term "niyuhita" (abridged) in relation to these
works. The Tirthankaras are the ones who provide the essence of the meaning, the
Sutrakara (author of the Sutras) is Ganadhara, and the ones who are credited
with the current abridged form are the ones whose names are inscribed or known.
For example, the author of the Dasha-Kalika is Shayambhava, and the author of
the Kalpa, Vyavahar, Nishita and Dasha-Shruta-Skandha is Bhadra-Bahu.  Both the
Svetambara and Digambara sects agree on the number of Jain Anga literature. They
both accept twelve Angas. However, this is not the case with the number of
extra-Anga Agamas, as they have different opinions. Some consider the number of
Agamas to be 84, some 45, and some 32. The list of Agamas given in the Nandi-
Sutras does not include all the Agamas that are currently available. The
Svetambara Murtipujak community considers 45 Agamas, including some abridgments
along with the original Agamas, while some consider 84. The Stanakvasi and
Terapanthi traditions consider only 32 to be authoritative. The Digambara
community believes that all the original Agamas have been lost.  1. Vandami
Bhaddabahum, Pai·πáam Chariya SayalasuyƒÅ·πái / So Suttasssa Karagamisan (·πáam) Dasasu
Kappe Ya VavahƒÅre / Dasha-Shruta-Skandha Niyukti Ga.1, Patra 1 2. Dahariyo U
ImƒÅno, Ajja·πáesu Mahaiyo Angesu / Chhasu NƒÅyƒÅdiyesu, Vatthavibh≈´sƒÅvasƒÅ·πáamiv //
Dahariyo U ImƒÅo, Nijj≈´·∏çhƒÅyo A·πáuggaha·π≠·π≠ƒÅe. Tharehi·πÅ Tu DasƒÅno, Jo DasƒÅ JƒÅ·πáao Jƒ´vo
/ ‚ÄîDasha-Shruta-Skandha Niyukti 5-6 Dasha-Shruta-Skandha Churni / 3.
Kamppappayapubve Sattarase PƒÅhu·∏çammi Jam Suttam / Sa·πáayam SodahƒÅra·πáam Tam Cheva
Ihampi GƒÅyabvam / / -Uttaradhyayanas Niyukti Ga.69 4. (a) Tattvartha-Sutras
1-20, Shruta-Sagariyavritti. (b) Shatkhandaga (Dhavla Tika) Khand 1, p. 6 5.
Barah Angavijjha /"

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
dazAzrutaskandha, bRhatkalpa aura vyavahAra, ye tInoM pAgama caturdazapUrvI
bhadrabAhusvAmI ke dvArA pratyAkhyAnapUrva se niyUMDha haiN|' dazAzrutaskandha
kI niyukti ke mantavyAnusAra vartamAna meM upalabdha dazAzrutaskaMdha
aMgapraviSTa AgamoM meM jo dazAeM prApta haiM, unase laghu haiN| inakA niyUhaNa
ziSyoM ke anugrahArtha sthaviroM ne kiyA thaa| cUrNi ke anusAra sthavira kA nAma
bhadrabAhu hai| _ uttarAdhyayana kA dUsarA adhyayana bhI aMga-prabhava mAnA jAtA
hai / niyuktikAra bhadrabAhu ke matAnusAra vaha karmapravAdapUrva ke satrahaveM
prAbhRta se uddhRta hai| inake atirikta Agametara sAhitya meM vizeSataH
karmasAhitya kA bahuta-sA bhAga pUrvoddhRta mAnA jAtA hai| niyU hita kRtiyoM ke
sambandha meM yaha spaSTIkaraNa karanA Avazyaka hai ki usake artha ke prarUpaka
tIrthaMkara haiM, sUtra ke racayitA gaNadhara haiM aura jo saMkSepa meM usakA
vartamAna rUpa upalabdha hai usake kartA vahI haiM jina para jinakA nAma aMkita
yA prasiddha hai| jaise dazavakAlika ke zayyaMbhava; kalpa, vyavahAra, nizItha
aura dazAzrutaskaMdha ke racayitA bhadrabAhu haiN| jaina aMga-sAhitya kI saMkhyA
ke sambandha meM zvetAmbara aura digambara sabhI ekamata haiN| sabhI aMgoM ko
bAraha svIkAra karate haiN| parantu aMgabAhya AgamoM kI saMkhyA ke sambandha meM
yaha bAta nahIM hai, unake vibhinna mata hai / yahI kAraNa hai ki AgamoM kI
saMkhyA kitane hI 84 mAnate haiM, koI-koI 45 mAnate haiM aura kitane hI 32
mAnate haiM / nandIsUtra meM AgamoM kI jo sUcI dI gaI hai, ve sabhI Agama
vartamAna meM upalabdha nahIM haiN| zvetAmbara mUrtipUjaka samAja mUla prAgamoM
ke sAtha kucha niyuktiyoM ko milAkara 45 Agama mAnatA hai aura koI 84 mAnate
haiN| sthAnakavAsI aura terApaMthI paramparA battIsa ko hI pramANabhUta mAnatI
hai| digambara samAja kI mAnyatA hai ki sabhI prAgama vicchinna ho gaye haiN| 1.
vaMdAmi bhaddabAhuM, pAINaM cariya sayalasuyaNANi / so suttassa kAragamisaM
(NaM) dasAsu kappe ya vavahAre / dazAzrutaskaMdha niyukti gA.1, patra 1 2.
DaharIo u imAno, ajjhayaNesu mahaIo aMgesu / chasu nAyAdIesu,
vatthavibhUsAvasANamiva // DaharIyo u imAo, nijjUDhAyo annugghttttaae| tharehiM
tu dasAno, jo dasA jANao jIvo / --dazAzrutaskaMdhaniyukti 5-6
dazAzrutaskaMdhacUNi / kampappavAyapubve sattarase pAhuDaMmi jaM suttaM /
saNayaM sodAharaNaM taM ceva ihaMpi gAyabvaM / / -uttarAdhyayananiyUkti gA.69 5.
(ka) tattvArthasUtra 1-20, zrutasAgarIya vRtti| (kha) SaTkhaNDAgama (dhavalA
TIkA) khaNDa 1, pR. 6 bAraha aMgavijjhA /

Page #45 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Dasha Shruta Skandha is a Cheda Sutra. The Cheda Sutra has two functions: to
protect from faults and to provide atonement for faults committed inadvertently.
It contains provisions for avoiding faults. In the Thananga, it is known as
Prachar Dasha. The Dasha Shruta Skandha has ten studies, hence its name. The
Dasha Shruta Skandha has 1830 Anushtup Shlokas in the available text. It has 216
Gadyasutras and 52 Padya Sutras. The first Uddeshak describes 20 Asamadhi
Sthanas. Samadhi is the state of mind that is peaceful and remains on the path
of liberation through knowledge, vision, and conduct. Asamadhi is the state of
mind that is disturbed and restless, and leads the soul away from the path of
liberation through knowledge, vision, and conduct. There are twenty types of
Asamadhi. These include: walking quickly, walking at night without worship,
performing bodily functions without purpose, disrespecting elders, and slander.
These actions lead to Asamadhi in oneself and other beings. The seeker's soul
becomes polluted and their pure conduct becomes tainted. Therefore, they are
called Asamadhi Sthanas. The second Uddeshak describes 21 Shabala Doshas, which
destroy the purity of conduct. When conduct becomes impure, it becomes tainted.
Therefore, they are called Shabala Doshas. The word "Shabala" means "colored".
Shabala Doshas include: masturbation, touching women, eating and performing
actions at night, being a Pradhakarmi, consuming food for a specific purpose,
breaking a vow, and consuming Maya Sthanas. Conduct becomes Shabala by
committing four faults in the Uttargunas, and three faults in the Mulagunas, in
addition to Anachar. The third Uddeshak describes 33 types of Ashatanas. The
Jain Acharyas have given a beautiful explanation of the word Ashatana. The
attainment of spiritual qualities like Samyag Darshan is called "Aaya" and
"Shatana" means "destruction". Disrespecting great men like Sadgurudev leads to
the destruction of good qualities like Samyag Darshan. The thirty-three types of
Ashatanas include: walking, standing, or sitting in front of the Guru, in the
same row, or very close to the Guru; speaking to someone else before the Guru;
disregarding the Guru's words; not criticizing after returning from begging; and
so on. The fourth Uddeshak describes the eight types of Ganisampadas. A
community of Shramans is called a Gan. The head of the Gan is called the Gani.
The eight types of Ganisampadas are: Prachar Sampada, Shruta Sampada, Sharira
Sampada, Vachan Sampada, Vachana Sampada, Mati Sampada, Prayogmati Sampada, and
Sangrahparijnan Sampada. The four types of Prachar Sampada are: being virtuous
and disciplined, being free from ego, being of unsteady nature, and being of old
nature (unchanging nature).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
dazAzrutaskandha dazAzrutaskaMdha chedasUtra hai / chedasUtra ke do kArya haiM-
doSoM se bacAnA aura pramAdavaza lage hae doSoM kI zuddhi ke lie prAyazcitta kA
vidhAna krnaa| isameM doSoM se bacane kA vidhAna hai / ThANAMga meM isakA
aparanAma prAcAradazA prApta hotA hai| dazAzrutaskaMdha meM daza adhyayana haiM,
isalie isakA nAma dazAzrutaskaMdha hai| dazAzrutaskaMgha kA 1830 anuSTupa zloka
pramANa upalabdha pATha hai / 216 gadyasUtra haiM / 52 padyasUtra haiN| prathama
uddezaka meM 20 asamAdhisthAnoM kA varNana hai| jisa satkArya ke karane se citta
meM zAMti ho, prAtmA jJAna-darzana-cAritra rUpa mokSamArga meM rahe, vaha
samAdhi hai aura jisa kArya se citta meM aprazasta evaM azAMta bhAva hoM, jJAna-
darzana-cAritra Adi mokSamArga se AtmA bhraSTa ho, vaha asamAdhi hai| asamAdhi
ke bIsa prakAra haiN| jaisejaldI-jaldI calanA, binA pUje rAtri meM calanA, binA
upayoga saba daihika kArya karanA, gurujanoM kA apamAna, nindA Adi krnaa| ina
kAryoM ke AcaraNa se svayaM va anya jIvoM ko asamAdhibhAva utpanna hotA hai|
sAdhaka kI AtmA dUSita hotI hai / usakA pavitra cAritra malina hotA hai| ataH
use asamAdhisthAna kahA hai| dvitIya uddezaka meM 21 zabala doSoM kA varNana
kiyA gayA hai, jina kAryoM ke karane se cAritra kI nirmalatA naSTa ho jAtI hai|
cAritra malaklinna hone se vaha karbura ho jAtA hai| isalie unheM zabaladoSa
kahate haiM / 2 "zabalaM karburaM citram" zabala kA artha citravarNA hai|
hastamaithuna, strI-sparza Adi, rAtri meM bhojana lenA aura karanA, prAdhAkarmI,
auddezika pAhAra kA lenA, pratyAkhyAnabhaMga, mAyAsthAna kA sevana karanA Adi-
Adi ye zabala doSa haiN| uttaraguNoM meM atikramAdi cAra doSoM kA evaM mUlaguNoM
meM anAcAra ke atirikta tIna doSoM kA sevana karane se cAritra zabala hotA hai|
tIsare uddezaka meM 33 prakAra kI AzAtanAoM kA varNana hai| jainAcAryoM ne
AzAtanA zabda kI nirukti atyanta sundara kI hai| samyagdarzanAdi AdhyAtmika
guNoM kI prApti ko Aya kahate haiM aura zAtanA kA artha khaNDana hai|
sadagurudeva Adi mahAn puruSoM kA apamAna karane se samyagdarzanAdi sadguNoM kI
AzAtanA-khaNDanA hotI hai|3| ziSya kA muru ke Age, samazreNI meM, atyanta samIpa
meM gamana karanA, khar3A honA, baiThanA Adi, guru, se pUrva kisI se sambhASaNa
karanA, guru ke vacanoM ko jAnakara avahelanA karanA, bhikSA se lauTane para
AlocanA na karanA, prAdi-Adi pAzAtanA ke tetIsa prakAra haiN| caturtha uddezaka
meM prakAra kI gaNisampadAoM kA varNana hai| zramaNoM ke samudAya ko gaNa kahate
haiN| gaNa kA adhipati gaNI hotA hai| gaNisampadA ke ATha prakAra
haiMprAcArasampadA, zrutasampadA, zarIrasampadA, vacanasampadA, vAcanAsampadA,
matisampadA, prayogamatisampadA aura saMgrahaparijJAnasampadA / prAcArasampadA
ke saMyama meM dhra vayogayukta honA, ahaMkArarahita honA, aniyatavRtti honA,
vRddhasvabhAvI (acaMcalasvabhAvI)-ye cAra prakAra haiN| samAdhAnaM
samAdhi:-cetasaH svAsthya, mokSamArge'vasthitirityartha: na
samAdhirasamAdhistasya sthAnAni AzrayA bhedAH paryAyA asamAdhi-sthAnAni /
-AcArya haribhadra zabalaM-kaburaM cAritraM yaH kriyAvizeSairbhavati te
zabalAstadyogAtsAdhavo pi| -abhayadevakRta samavAyAMgaTIkA 3. Aya:-
samyagdarzanAdyavAptilakSaNastasya zAtanA-khaNDanA niruktAdAzAtanA / .--prAcArya
abhayadevakRta samavAyAMgaTIkA

Page #46 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The **Shruta Sampada** has four types: **Bahushruta**, **Parichita Shruta**,
**Vichitra Shruta**, and **Ghosh Vishuddhikarakta**. The **Sharira Sampada** has
four types: **Samyak Anupat** (proper proportion of height and width of the
body), **Alajjaspad Sharira** (a body that is not shameful), **Sthir Sangathan**
(stable organization), and **Pratipoorna Indriyata** (complete senses). The
**Vachan Sampada** has four types: **Pradeyavachan** (speech that is worthy of
being received), **Madhur Vachan** (sweet speech), **Anishrit** (unrestricted),
and **Asandhight Vachan** (unambiguous speech). The **Vachana Sampada** has four
types: **Vicharpoork Vachya Vishay Ka Uddeshya Nirdeshan** (purposeful direction
of the subject matter of speech), **Vicharpoork Vachan** (purposeful speech),
**Upayukt Vishay Ka Hi Vivechan** (discussion of only the appropriate subject),
and **Arth Ka Sunishchit Roop Se Nirupan** (definite representation of meaning).
The **Mati Sampada** has four types: **Avgrah**, **Iha**, **Avay**, and
**Dharana**.  **Avgrah** has six types: **Kshipragrahan** (quick grasping),
**Bahuggrahan** (grasping many things), **Bahuviggrahan** (grasping many
different things), **Dhravgrahan** (firm grasping), **Anishritgrahan**
(unrestricted grasping), and **Asandhightgrahan** (unambiguous grasping).
Similarly, **Iha** and **Avay** also have six types each. **Dharana** has six
types: **Bahudharan** (holding many things), **Bahubidhdharan** (holding many
different things), **Puratanadharan** (holding old things), **Durddhardharan**
(holding firmly), **Anidhidharan** (holding without being taught), and
**Asandhightdharan** (holding unambiguously).  **Prayogmati Sampada** has four
types: **Swayan Ki Shakti Ke Anusar Vad-Vivad** (debate according to one's own
strength), **Parishad Ko Dekhkar Vad-Vivad** (debate by looking at the
assembly), **Kshetra Ko Dekhkar Vad-Vivad** (debate by looking at the field),
and **Kal Ko Dekhkar Vad-Vivad** (debate by looking at the time).
**Sangrahparijna Sampada** has five types: **Varshakal Mein Sabhi Muniyon Ke
Niwas Ke Liye Yogyasthan Ki Pareeksha** (examination of a suitable place for the
residence of all monks during the rainy season), **Sabhi Shramanon Ke Liye
Pratiharik Peet, Falak, Shayya, Sanstark Ki Vyavastha** (arrangement of seats,
platforms, beds, and bedding for all ascetics), **Niyamit Samay Par Pratiyek
Kary Karna** (doing every task at the appointed time), **Apne Se Jyest Shramanon
Ka Satkar-Samman Karna** (honoring and respecting senior ascetics).  After
describing the **Gani Sampada**, the text discusses **Chaturvidh Vinay-
Pratipatti** (four types of acceptance of discipline) related to it. These are:
**Achar Vinay**, **Shruta Vinay**, **Vikshepan Av Vinay**, and **Dosha Nirghat
Vinay**. This **Chaturvidh Vinay-Pratipatti** is called **Guru Sambandhi Vinay-
Pratipatti** (acceptance of discipline related to the teacher). Similarly,
**Shishya Sambandhi Vinay-Pratipatti** (acceptance of discipline related to the
student) has four types: **Upakaranotpadanta** (production of tools),
**Sahayta** (assistance), **Varnasanjvalanta** (praise of qualities), and
**Bharpratyavarohaanta** (reduction of burden). Each of these has four types
again. Thus, the presented **Uddeshak** (chapter) analyzes a total of 32 types
of **Vinay-Pratipatti**.  The fifth **Uddeshak** describes ten types of **Chitta
Samadhi** (mental absorption). These are: **Dharma Bhavana** (feeling of
Dharma), **Swapna Darshan** (dream vision), **Jati Smaran Gyan** (knowledge of
past lives), **Dev Darshan** (vision of gods), **Avadhi Gyan** (clairvoyance),
**Avadhi Darshan** (clairvoyance), **Manah Paryavgyan** (knowledge of the minds
of others), **Keval Gyan** (omniscience), **Keval Darshan** (omniscience), and
**Kevalmaran** (Nirvana). The text also sheds light on the specific nature of
**Mohaniya Karma** (karma that binds to the mind) along with the description of
these ten stages.  The sixth **Uddeshak** describes eleven types of **Upasak
Pratimaan** (models of devotees). Before describing the **Pratimaan**, the text
depicts the nature of **Mithyadrishti** (wrong belief) and explains that it
gives punishment without any consideration of justice or injustice. This
includes: **Sampattiharan** (theft of property), **Mudan** (shaving), **Tarjan**
(threatening), **Tadan** (beating), **Andukbandhan** (binding with a rope),
**Nigadbandhan** (binding with chains), **Kasthbandhan** (binding with wood),
**Charakbandhan** (imprisonment), **Nigadyugal Sankutan** (binding limbs
together), **Hast, Pad, Karn, Nasika, Ashth, Shirsha, Mukh, Ved Adi Ka Chhedan**
(cutting of hands, feet, ears, nose, teeth, head, mouth, and Vedas), **Hriday-
Utpatana** (extraction of the heart), **Nayanadi Utpatana** (extraction of
eyes), **Ullamban** (hanging from a tree), **Gharshan** (rubbing), **Gholan**
(mixing), **Shulaayan** (hanging on a spike), **Shulabhedan** (piercing with a
spike), **Ksharavartan** (sprinkling salt on wounds), **Darbavartan** (causing
pain with grass), **Singhpuchan** (lion's tail), **Vrushabhpuchan** (bull's
tail), **Davaagnidagdhan** (burning with fire), **Bhaktapananirodh** (stopping
food and water), etc. It experiences joy by giving such punishments. But
**Samyagdristi** (right belief) is **Praastik** (believing in the existence of
the soul) and becomes a **Upasak** (devotee) and practices the eleven
**Pratimaan**. These eleven **Upasak Pratimaan** have already been described in
**Upasakdasang**.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
zrutasampadA ke bahuzrutatA, paricitazrutatA, vicitrazrutatA,
ghoSavizuddhikArakatA-ye cAra prakAra haiN| zarIrasampadA ke zarIra kI lambAI va
caur3AI kA samyaka anupAta, alajjAspada zarIra, sthira saMgaThana, pratipUrNa
indriyatA-ye cAra bheda haiN| vacanasampadA ke prAdeyavacana- grahaNa karane
yogya vANI, madhura vacana, anizrita- pratibandharahita, asaMdigdha vacana-ye
cAra prakAra haiN| vAcanAsampadA ke vicArapUrvaka vAcyaviSaya kA uddezya nirdeza
karanA, vicArapUrvaka vAcana karanA, upayukta viSaya kA hI vivecana karanA,
artha kA sunizcita rUpa se nirUpaNa karatA-ye cAra bheda haiN| matisampadA ke
avagraha, IhA, avAya aura dhAraNA-ye cAra prakAra haiM / avagraha matisampadA ke
kSipragrahaNa, bahugrahaNa, bahuvidhagrahaNa, dhra vagrahaNa, anizritagrahaNa
aura asaMdigdhagrahaNaye chaha bheda haiN| isI prakAra IhA aura avAya ke bhI
chaha-chaha prakAra haiM / dhAraNA matisampadA ke bahudhAraNa, bahubidhadhAraNa,
purAtanadhAraNa, durddharadhAraNa, anidhitadhAraNa aura asaMdigdhadhAraNa-....ye
chaha prakAra haiN| prayogamatisampadA ke svayaM kI zakti ke anusAra vAda-vivAda
karanA, pariSada ko dekhakara vAda-vivAda karanA, kSetra ko dekhakara vAda-
vivAda karanA, kAla ko dekhakara vAda-vivAda karanA--ye cAra prakAra haiN|
saMgrahaparijJAsampadA ke varSAkAla meM sabhI muniyoM ke nivAsa ke lie
yogyasthAna kI parIkSA karanA, sabhI zramaNoM ke lie prAtihArika pITha, phalaka,
zayyA, saMstAraka kI vyavasthA karanA, niyamita samaya para pratyeka kArya
karanA, apane se jyeSTha zramaNoM kA satkAra-sammAna karanA-ye bheda haiN|
gaNisampadAoM ke varNana ke pazcAt tatsambandhI caturvidha vinaya-pratipatti
para ciMtana karate hue AcAravinaya, zrutavinaya, vikSepaNAvinaya aura
doSanirghAtavinaya batAye haiN| yaha catuvidha vinayapratipatti hai jo
gurusambandhI vinayapratipatti kahalAtI hai| isI prakAra ziSya sambandhI vinaya
pratipatti bhI upakaraNotpAdanatA, sahAyatA, varNasaMjvalanatA (guNAnuvAditA),
bhArapratyavarohaNatA hai / ina pratyeka ke punaH cAra-cAra prakAra haiN| isa
prakAra prastuta uddezaka meM kula 32 prakAra kI vinaya-pratipatti kA vizleSaNa
hai| pAMcaveM uddezaka meM daza prakAra kI cittasamAdhi kA varNana hai|
dharmabhAvanA, svapnadarzana, jAtismaraNajJAna, devadarzana, avadhijJAna,
avadhidarzana, manaHparyavajJAna, kevalajJAna, kevaladarzana, kevalamaraNa
(nirvANa) ina daza sthAnoM ke varNana ke sAtha mohanIyakarma kI viziSTatA para
prakAza DAlA hai| chaThe uddezaka meM gyAraha prakAra kI upAsaka pratimAnoM kA
varNana hai| pratimAoM ke varNana ke pUrva mithyAdRSTi ke svabhAva kA citraNa
karate hue batAyA hai ki vaha nyAya kA yA anyAya kA kicinamAtra bhI binA khyAla
kiye daMDa pradAna karatA hai| jaise sampattiharaNa, muDana, tarjana, tAr3ana,
aMdukabandhana (sAMkala se bAMdhanA), nigaDabandhana, kASThabandhana,
cArakabandhana (kArAgRha meM DAlanA), nigaDayugala saMkuTana (aMgoM ko mor3akara
bAMdhanA), hasta, pAda, karNa, nAsikA, aSTha, zIrSa, mukha, veda Adi kA chedana
karanA, hRdaya-utpATana, nayanAdi utpATana, ullaMbana (vRkSAdi para laTakAnA),
gharSaNa, gholana, zUlAyana (zUlI para laTakAnA), zUlAbhedana, kSAravartana
(jakhmoM Adi para namakAdi chir3akanA), darbhavartana (ghAsAdi se pIr3A
pahuMcAnA), siMhapuchana, vRSabhapuchana, dAvAgnidagdhana, bhaktapAnanirodha
prabhRti daMDa dekara Ananda kA anubhava karatA hai| kintu samyagdRSTi prAstika
hotA hai va upAsaka bana ekAdaza pratimAoM kI sAdhanA karatA hai| ina gyAraha
upAsaka pratimAoM kA varNana upAsakadazAMga meM bhI A cukA hai| [ 45 ]

Page #47 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Some preceptors believe that a lay follower who has completed the pratima
(ritual) takes sannyasa (renunciation). It is mentioned that Kartik Seth had
taken the pratima 100 times. The seventh udde≈õaka (chapter) describes the
pratima of the ≈õrama·πáa (ascetic). These are 12 types of pratima for monks. The
first pratima-dhari (one who performs the pratima) monk is allowed to take one
datti (gift) of food and one datti of water. The datti is the continuous flow of
food and water given by the donor to the ≈õrama·πáa. It is allowed to take food
from a place where food is prepared for one person. It is not allowed to take
food from a place where food is prepared for two, three, or more people. The
duration of this pratima is one month. The second pratima is also for one month.
In this, two datti of food and two datti of water are taken. Similarly, in the
third, fourth, fifth, sixth, and seventh pratima, three, four, five, six, and
seven datti of food and the same amount of datti of water are taken
respectively. Each pratima lasts for one month. Only due to the increase in
datti, they are called trimasik (three months), caturmasik (four months),
pancmasik (five months), sha·∏çmasik (six months), and saptamasik (seven months)
respectively. The eighth pratima is for seven days and nights. In this, one has
to observe a four-meal fast (caturvihar). One has to stand facing the sky
outside the village, lie on one side, and sit in vi·π£adyƒÅsana (with legs
straight) and endure any upsarga (illness) with a calm mind. The ninth pratima
is also for seven nights. In this, the four meals are taken separately (bele-
bele). One has to meditate in a secluded place outside the village in da·πá·∏çƒÅsana,
laghu·∏çƒÅsana, or utka·π≠akƒÅsana. The tenth pratima is also for seven nights. In
this, the four meals are taken separately (tele-tele). One has to meditate
outside the village in godohƒÅsana, vƒ´rƒÅsana, and ƒÅmrƒÅkubjƒÅsana. The eleventh
pratima is for one day and night. Its practice is done until the fourth prahar
(watch). The four meals are taken separately (caturvihar). One has to stand
outside the city with both hands stretched towards the knees like a staff and
perform kƒÅyoatsarga (relaxation of the body). The twelfth pratima is for only
one night. Its practice is done with tele (oil). One has to stand outside the
village in the cremation ground, slightly bending the head, focusing on one
particle, and performing kƒÅyoatsarga with closed eyes with certainty. One has to
endure any upsarga with equanimity. There are many rules for the ≈õrama·πáa who is
in these pratima. For example, if a person is a pratima-dhari nirgrantha (one
who has renounced all possessions), then he should take alms in three parts -
ƒÅdi (beginning), madhya (middle), and charma (end). One should not go for alms
in the middle and end parts after going for alms in the beginning part. A
≈õrama·πáa who is in a monthly pratima can stay for one night where he is known. He
can stay for two nights where he is not known. If he stays for more than that,
he has to perform a penance of the same number of days or perform tapas
(austerities). Similarly, other strict rules can be imposed. For example, if
someone sets fire to the upƒÅ≈õraya (shelter), he should not go there. If someone
tries to pull him out by force, he should not resist but should carefully come
out. Similarly, if a mad elephant, horse, bull, dog, tiger, etc. comes in front
of him, he should not take a step back out of fear. He should patiently endure
cold and heat. The eighth udde≈õaka (chapter) describes the paryushana kalpa
(ritual). The word paryushana is derived from the prefix "pari" and the root
"vas" [46]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
pratimAdhAraka zrAvaka pratimA kI pUrti ke pazcAt saMyama grahaNa kara letA hai
aisA kucha prAcAryoM kA abhimata hai| kArtika seTha ne 100 bAra pratimA grahaNa
kI thI aisA ullekha prApta hotA hai| sAtaveM uddezaka meM zramaNa kI pratimAoM
kA varNana hai| ye bhikSupratimAeM 12 haiN| prathama pratimAdhArI bhikSa ko eka
datti anna kI aura eka datti pAnI kI lenA kalpatA hai| zramaNa ke pAtra meM dAtA
dvArA diye jAne vAle anna aura jala kI dhArA jaba taka akhaNDa banI rahatI hai,
use datti kahate haiN| jahA~ eka vyakti ke lie bhojana banA ho vahA~ se lenA
kalpatA hai| jahAM do, tIna yA adhika vyaktiyoM ke lie banA ho vahA~ se nahIM le
sktaa| isakA samaya eka mAsa kA hai| dUsarI pratimA bhI eka mAsa kI hai| usameM
do datti prAhAra kI aura do datti pAnI kI lI jAtI haiM / isI prakAra tIsarI,
cauthI, pAMcavIM, chaThI aura sAtavI pratimAnoM meM kramazaH tIna, cAra, pAMca,
chaha aura sAta datti anna kI aura utanI hI datti pAnI kI grahaNa kI jAtI haiN|
pratyeka pratimA kA samaya eka-eka mAsa hai| kevala dattiyoM kI vRddhi ke kAraNa
hI trimAsika se sAtamAsika kramaza: kahalAtI haiN| AThavI pratimA sAta dina-rAta
kI hotI hai| isameM ekAntara cauvihAra upavAsa karanA hotA hai| gAMva ke bAhara
AkAza kI ora muha karake sIdhA dekhanA, eka karavaTa se leTanA aura viSadyAsana
(pairoM ko barAbara karake) baiThanA, upasarga Ane para zAntacitta se sahana
karanA hotA hai| nauvI pratimA bhI sAta rAtri kI hotI hai| isameM cauvihAra
bele-bele pAraNA kiyA jAtA hai| gAMva ke bAhara ekAnta sthAna meM daNDAsana,
laguDAsana yA utkaTakAsana karake dhyAna kiyA jAtA hai| . dasabI pratimA bhI
sAta rAtri kI hotI hai| isameM cauvihAra tele-tele pAraNA kiyA jAtA hai| gAMva
ke bAhara godohAsana, vIrAsana aura AmrakubjAsana se dhyAna kiyA jAtA hai|
gyArahavIM pratimA eka ahorAtri kI hotI hai| pATha prahara taka isakI sAdhanA kI
jAtI hai| caubihAra belA isameM kiyA jAtA hai / nagara ke bAhara donoM hAthoM ko
ghuTanoM kI ora lambA karake daNDa kI taraha khar3e rahakara kAyotsarga kiyA
jAtA hai| bArahavIM pratimA kevala eka rAtri kI hai| isakA aArAdhana tele se
kiyA jAtA hai| gAMva ke bAhara zmazAna meM khar3e hokara mastaka ko thor3A
jhukAkara kisI eka pudagala para dRSTi rakhakara ninimeSa netroM se nizcitatA
pUrvaka kAyotsarga kiyA jAtA hai| upasarga Ane para samabhAva se sahana kiyA
jAtA hai| ina pratimAoM meM sthita zramaNa ke lie aneka vidhAna bhI kiye haiN|
jaise-koI vyakti pratimAdhArI nirgrantha hai to use bhikSAkAla ko tIna vibhAga
meM vibhAjita karake bhikSA lenI cAhiye--Adi, madhya aura carama / Adi bhAga meM
bhikSA ke lie jAne para madhya aura carama bhAga meM nahIM jAnA cAhiye / mAsikI
pratimA meM sthita zramaNa jahA~ koI jAnatA ho vahA~ eka rAta raha sakatA hai|
jahAM use koI bhI nahIM jAnatA vahA~ vaha do rAta raha sakatA hai| isase adhika
rahane para utane hI dina kA cheda athavA tapa prAyazcitta lagatA hai| isI
prakAra aura bhI kaThora anuzAsana kA vidhAna lagAyA jA sakatA hai| jaise koI
upAzraya meM Aga lagA de to bhI use nahIM jAnA caahie| yadi koI pakar3akara use
bAhara khIMcane kA prayatna kare to use haTha na karate hue sAvadhAnIpUrvaka
bAhara nikala jAnA cAhie / isI taraha sAmane yadi madonmatta hAthI, ghor3A,
baila, kuttA, vyAghra prAdi A jAeM to bhI use unase Darakara eka kadama bhI
pIche nahIM haTanA caahiye| zItalatA tathA uSNatA ke parISaha ko dhairyapUrvaka
sahana karanA caahiye| AThaveM uddezaka (dazA) meM paryuSaNA kalpa kA varNana
hai / paryuSaNa zabda "pari" upasarga pUrvaka vas dhAtu se [46 ]

Page #48 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
"Ana·∏•" is a suffix used to form this word. It means self-immersion, self-
delight, or being in one's own self. / The second meaning of Paryushana Kalpa is
to reside in one place. It is of two types: Salamban and NirƒÅvalamban. Salamban
means with a cause, and NirƒÅvalamban means without a cause. / NirƒÅvalamban has
two divisions: Jghanya (inferior) and Utkrushta (superior). The synonyms of
Paryushana are as follows: (1) PariyƒÅya Vatthava·πáƒÅ, (2) Pajjosama·πáƒÅ, (3)
PƒÅgaiyƒÅ, (4) ParivasanƒÅ, (5) PajjusanƒÅ, (6) VƒÅsƒÅvƒÅsa, (7) Padhamasamosaran, (8)
Thava·πáƒÅ, and (9) Jetthoggha. All these names have the same meaning, but there is
a slight difference in meaning based on the difference in etymology. This
difference in meaning demonstrates the importance of various traditions related
to Paryushana and the actions performed during that specific time. / These
meanings also reveal some historical facts. / The seniority and juniority of
Dikshaparaya are calculated based on the Paryushana period. Paryushana period is
considered a type of year count. Therefore, Paryushana is considered the cause
of the state of Dikshaparaya. / During Varshavas, certain special actions
related to different types of substances, fields, time, and emotions are
performed. Therefore, Paryushana is also called Pajjosama·πáƒÅ. Third, because it
is to be worshipped equally by householders and others, it is called "PƒÅgaiyƒÅ,"
meaning natural. During this fixed period, the seeker tries to stay closer to
the soul, so it is also called ParivasanƒÅ. Paryushana also means service. During
this period, the seeker serves and worships the qualities of the soul, such as
knowledge and vision. Therefore, it is called PajjusanƒÅ. In this Kalpa, the
Shraman resides in one place for four months. Therefore, it is called VƒÅsƒÅvƒÅsa
Varshavas. If there is no specific reason, entry into the area suitable for
Chaturmas is made only during the rainy season (Pravrit). Therefore, it is
called Prathamasamavasaran. / Its boundaries vary depending on the seasonal
period. Therefore, it is called Thava·πáƒÅ (establishment). / There is a field
acquisition for each month during the seasonal period, but for four months
during the rainy season. Therefore, it is called Jetthoggha (Jyeshthaavagraha).
If the Sadhu has arrived at the designated place by Ashadhi Purnima and declared
Varshavas, then Varshavas begins from Shravan Krishna Panchami. If the suitable
area is not found, then Varshavas should be started on Shravan Krishna Dashami.
If a suitable area is still not found, then Varshavas should be started on
Shravan Krishna Panchadashi-Amavasya. If a suitable area is not found even then,
then it is considered mandatory to start Varshavas by Bhadrapad Shukla Panchami,
increasing by five days each time. If a suitable area is not found even by this
time, then Paryushana Kalpa should be performed under a tree. / However, this
date should not be violated under any circumstances. The current Paryushana
Kalpasutra is the eighth study of the Dasha Shruta Skandha. The oldest copies of
Dasha Shruta Skandha, which are from before the fourteenth century, contain the
complete Kalpasutra in the eighth study. This clearly proves that the Kalpasutra
is not an independent work but the eighth study of the Dasha Shruta Skandha. /
[47]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
"anaH" pratyaya lagakara banA hai| isakA artha hai, prAtmamajjana, AtmaramaNa yA
Atmastha honA / paryuSaNakalpa kA dUsarA artha hai eka sthAna para nivAsa krnaa|
vaha sAlaMbana yA nirAvalaMbana rUpa do prakAra kA hai| sAlaMbana kA artha hai
sakAraNa aura nirAvalaMbana kA artha hai kAraNarahita / nirAvalaMbana ke
jaghanya aura utkRSTa do bheda haiN| paryuSaNA ke paryAyavAcI zabda isa prakAra
haiM-(1) pariyAya vatthavaNA, (2) pajjosamaNA, (3) pAgaiyA, (4) parivasanA, (5)
pajjusaNA, (6) vAsAvAsa, (7) paDhamasamosaraNa, (8) ThavaNA aura (9) jettttoggh|
ye sabhI nAma ekArthaka haiM, tathApi vyutpatti-bheda ke AdhAra para kiMcit
arthabheda bhI hai aura yaha arthabheda paryuSaNA se sambandhita vividha
paramparAoM evaM usa niyata kAla meM kI jAne vAlI kriyAoM kA mahattvapUrNa
nidarzana karAtA hai / ina arthoM se kucha aitihAsika tathya bhI vyakta hote
haiM / paryuSaNA kAla ke AdhAra se kAlagaNanA karake dIkSAparyAya kI jyeSThatA
va kaniSThatA ginI jAtI hai| paryuSaNAkAla eka prakAra kA varSamAna ginA jAtA
hai| ata: paryuSaNA ko dIkSAparyAya kI avasthA kA kAraNa mAnA hai / varSAvAsa
meM bhinna-bhinna prakAra ke dravya-kSetra-kAla-bhAva sambandhI kucha vizeSa
kriyAoM kA AcaraNa kiyA jAtA hai ata: paryuSaNA kA dUsarA nAma pajjosamaNA hai|
tIsarA, gRhastha Adi ke lie samAnabhAvena ArAdhanIya hone se yaha "pAgaiyA" yAni
prAkRtika kahalAtA hai| isa niyata avadhi meM sAdhaka AtmA ke adhika nikaTa
rahane kA prayatna karatA hai ataH vaha parivasanA bhI kahA jAtA hai| paryuSaNA
kA artha sevA bhI hai| isa kAla meM sAdhaka AtmA ke jJAnadarzanAdi guNoM kI sevA
upAsanA karatA hai ataH use pajjusaNA kahate haiN| isa kalpa meM zramaNa eka
sthAna para cAra mAsa taka nivAsa karatA hai ataeva ise vAsAvAsavarSAvAsa kahA
gayA hai| koI vizeSa kAraNa na ho to prAvRT (varSA) kAla meM hI cAturmAsa karane
yogya kSetra meM praveza kiyA jAtA hai ataH ise prathamasamavasaraNa kahate haiM
/ RtubaddhakAla kI apekSA se isakI maryAdAeM bhinna-bhinna hotI haiN| ataeva
yaha ThavaNA (sthApanA) hai / RtubaddhakAla meM eka-eka mAsa kA kSetrAvagraha
hotA hai kintu varSAkAla meM cAra mAsa kA hotA hai ataeva ise jeTThoggaha
(jyeSThAvagraha) kahA hai| agara sAdhu ASAr3hI pUrNimA taka niyata sthAna para A
pahuMcA ho aura varSAvAsa kI ghoSaNA kara dI ho to zrAvaNa kRSNA paMcamI se hI
varSAvAsa prArambha ho jAtA hai| uparyukta kSetra na milane para zrAvaNa kRSNA
dazamI ko, phira bhI yogya kSetra kI prApti na ho to zrAvaNa kRSNA paMcadazamI-
amAvasyA ko varSAvAsa prArambha karanA cAhie / itane para bhI yogya kSetra na
mile to pAMca-pAMca dina bar3hAte hue antataH bhAdrapada zuklA paMcamI taka to
varSAvAsa prArambha kara denA anivArya mAnA gayA hai| isa samaya taka bhI
upayukta kSetra prApta na ho to vRkSa ke nIce hI payUSaNAkalpa karanA cAhie /
para isa tithi kA kisI bhI paristhiti meM ullaMghana nahIM karanA caahie|
vartamAna meM jo paryuSaNA kalpasUtra hai, vaha dazAzrutaskandha kA hI AThavAM
adhyayana hai| dazAzrutaskandha kI prAcInatama pratiyAM, jo caudahavIM zatAbdI
se pUrva kI haiM, unameM AThaveM adhyayana meM pUrNa kalpasUtra AyA hai| jo yaha
spaSTa pramANita karatA hai ki kalpasUtra svatantra racanA nahIM kintu
dazAzrutaskandha kA hI AThavAM adhyayana hai / [47 ]

Page #49 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Secondly, the appointment of the second Bhadrabahu, which is mentioned in the
Dasha-Shruta-Skandha and dates back to the sixth century BCE, provides an
explanation for the terms used in the text. Muni Shri Punyavijayaji believes
that the commentary on the Dasha-Shruta-Skandha is approximately sixteen hundred
years old. The first sutra of the Kalpa Sutra states, "Te·πáam kƒÅle·πáam te·πáam
samae·πáam sama·πáo bhagavƒÅ mahƒÅvƒ´re.............." and the last sutra states,
"..............bhujjo bhujjo uvadamsei." The same text is found in the eighth
udde≈õaka [chapter] of the Dasha-Shruta-Skandha. Here, the remaining text has
been abbreviated under the word "jav." The text currently available only
describes the Panch Kalyanak, which has no connection to the Paryushana Kalpa.
Therefore, it is clear that the Paryushana Kalpa was the complete Kalpa Sutra in
this study. The authors of both the Kalpa Sutra and the Dasha-Shruta-Skandha are
Bhadrabahu. Therefore, since both are works of the same author, it can be said
that the Kalpa Sutra is a textual study of the Dasha-Shruta-Skandha. This is
clearly evidenced by the commentary, churni, Prithvichandatippan, and other
commentaries on the Kalpa Sutra. The ninth udde≈õaka describes 30 maha-mohaniya
(greatly deluding) places. The pudgala karmas (karmic particles) that bind the
soul are called karmas. Mohaniya karma (deluding karma) is the most prominent
among them. There is no limit to the causes of mohaniya karma bandha (binding of
deluding karma), but the scriptural authors have mentioned thirty types of
causes that lead to mohaniya karma bandha. Among them, the intensity and cruelty
of durdhyavasa (stubbornness) are so great that sometimes maha-mohaniya karma is
bound, causing the soul to wander in the world for 70 ko·π≠i-ko·π≠i sƒÅgaropam
(billions of billions of oceans). Acharya Haribhadra and Jinadasagani use only
the word mohaniya. The Uttaradhyayanasutra, Samavayangasutra, and Dasha-Shruta-
Skandha also refer to mohaniya sthana (deluding places). However, the word
"mahamoham pakuvvai" (greatly deluding) is used in the description of the types.
These places include drowning living beings in water, killing them by
suffocating them, killing them by tying wet leather on their heads, engaging in
illicit sex in secret, falsely accusing someone, claiming to be a celibate even
though one is not, criticizing a Kevalajnani (omniscient), claiming to be a
scholar even though one is not, practicing magic, repeatedly using sexually
suggestive language, etc. The tenth udde≈õaka is called "Ayati Sthana" (Place of
Effort). It describes various nidanas (causes). Nidana means the resolution that
arises from the desire for fulfillment due to the influence of delusion, which
leads to the desire for objects like lust, etc. When desires arise in the human
mind due to the strong influence of delusion, he makes a firm resolution to
fulfill them. This particular resolution is nidana. Due to nidana, human desires
continue to exist even in the future, preventing him from being liberated from
the cycle of birth and death. From the perspective of future birth and death,
this udde≈õaka is called Prayati Sthana (Place of Effort). Prayati means birth or
caste. It is considered Ayati Sthana because it is the cause of nidana. In other
words, if "ti" is separated from Ayati, "pay" remains. Pray means benefit. The
nidana that benefits birth and death is called Ayati. This chapter describes how
Bhagavan Mahavira arrived in Rajagaha. King Shrenik and Queen Chelna arrived to
pay their respects to the Bhagavan. Seeing the divine and magnificent form and
great prosperity of King Shrenik, the Shramanas began to think, "Shrenik appears
to be like a god himself. If we also have the fruits of our austerities, rules,
and restraint, then we too can 1. Tisan moha-thanai-abhikkhanam-abhikkhanam
ayaremane va samaayaremane va mohanijjatae kammam pakarei. Dasha-Shruta-Skandha,
p. 321-Upa. Atmaramji Maharaj [48]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
dUsarI bAta dazAzrutaskandha para jo dvitIya bhadrabAha kI niyukti hai, jinakA
samaya vikrama kI chaThI zatAbdI hai, usameM aura usa niyukti ke AdhAra se
nirmita pracalita hai, usake padoM kI vyAkhyA milatI hai| muni zrI puNyavijayajI
kA abhimata hai ki dazAzrutaskandha kI cUNi lagabhaga solaha sau varSa purAnI
hai| kalpasUtra ke pahale sUtra meM "teNaM kAleNaM teNaM samaeNaM samaNo
bhagavaM mahAvIre.............."aura aMtima sUtra meM .............."bhujjo
bhujjo uvadaMsei" pATha hai| vahI pATha dazAzrutaskandha ke AThaveM uddezaka
[dazA] meM hai| yahAM para zeSa pATha ko "jAva" zabda ke antargata saMkSepa kara
diyA hai| vartamAna meM jo pATha upalabdha hai usameM kevala paMcakalyANaka kA
hI nirUpaNa hai, jisakA paryuSaNAkalpa ke sAtha koI sambandha nahIM hai| ataH
spaSTa hai ki paryuSaNAkalpa isa adhyayana meM pUrNa kalpasUtra thaa| kalpasUtra
aura dazAzrutaskandha ina donoM ke racayitA bhadrabAha haiN| isalie donoM eka hI
racanAkAra kI racanA hone se yaha kahA jA sakatA hai ki kalpasUtra
dazAzrutaskandha kA pAThavA adhyayana hI hai / vRtti, cUNi, pRthvIcaMdaTippaNa
aura anya kalpasUtra ko TIkAoM se yaha spaSTa pramANita hai| nauveM uddezaka meM
30 mahAmohanIya sthAnoM kA varNana hai| AtmA ko prAvata karane vAle pudagala
karma kahalAte haiN| mohanIyakarma una saba meM pramukha hai|
mohanIyakarmabaMdha ke kAraNoM kI koI maryAdA nahIM hai, tathApi zAstrakAra ne
mohanIya karmabaMdha ke hetubhUta kAraNoM ke tIsa bhedoM kA ullekha kiyA hai|
unameM duradhyavasAya kI tIvratA aura krUratA itanI mAtrA meM hotI hai ki kabhI
kabhI mahAmohanIyakarma kA bandha ho jAtA hai jisase AtmA 70 koTA-koTi
sAgaropama taka saMsAra meM paribhramaNa karatA hai| AcArya haribhadra tathA
jinadAsagaNI mahattara kevala mohanIya zabda kA prayoga karate hai|
uttarAdhyayana, samavAyAMga aura dazAzrutaskandha meM bhI mohanIthasthAna kahA
hai|' kintu bhedoM ke ullekha meM "mahAmohaM pakuvvai" zabda kA prayoga huA hai|
ve sthAna jaise ki trasa jIvoM ko pAnI meM DabAkara mAranA, unako zvAsa Adi roka
kara mAranA, mastaka para gIlA camar3A Adi vA~dhakara mAranA, guptarIti se
anAcAra kA sevana karanA, mithyA kalaMka lagAnA, bAlabrahmacArI na hote hue bhI
bAlabrahmacArI kahalAnA, kevalajJAnI kI nindA karanA, bahuzruta na hote hue bhI
bahuzruta kahalAnA, jAdU-TonA Adi karanA, kAmotpAdaka vikathAoM kA bAra-bAra
prayoga karanA Adi haiN| dazaveM uddezaka dizA kA nAma "AyatisthAna" hai| isameM
vibhinna nidAnoM kA varNana hai| nidAna kA artha hai-moha ke prabhAva se kAmAdi
icchAoM kI utpatti ke kAraNa hone vAlA icchApUrtimUlaka saMkalpa / jaba mAnava
ke antarmAnasa meM moha ke prabala prabhAva se vAsanAeM udabhUta hotI haiM taba
vaha unakI pUrti ke lie dRr3ha saMkalpa karatA hai| yaha saMkalpavizeSa hI
nidAna hai| nidAna ke kAraNa mAnava kI icchAeM bhaviSya meM bhI nirantara banI
rahatI haiM jisase vaha janma-maraNa kI paramparA se mukta nahIM ho paataa|
bhaviSyakAlIna janma-maraNa kI dRSTi se prastuta uddezaka kA nAma prAyatisthAna
rakhA gayA hai| prAyati kA artha janma yA jAti hai| nidAna kA kAraNa hone se
AyatisthAna mAnA gayA hai| dUsare zabdoM meM kaheM to Ayati meM se "ti" pRthaka
kara lene para 'pAya" avaziSTa rahatA hai| prAya kA artha lAbha hai| jisa nidAna
se janma-maraNa kA lAbha hotA hai usakA nAma Ayati hai| isa dazA meM varNana hai
ki bhagavAn mahAvIra rAjagaha pdhaare| rAjA zreNika va mahArAnI celanA bhagavAna
ke vandana hetu phuNce| rAjA zreNika ke divya va bhavya rUpa aura mahAn samRddhi
ko nihAra kara zramaNa socane lagezreNika to sAkSAt devatulya pratIta ho rahA
hai| yadi hamAre tapa, niyama aura saMyama Adi kA phala ho to hama bhI 1. tIsaM
moha-ThaNAI-abhikkhaNaM-abhikkhaNaM AyAremANe vA samAyAremANe vA mohaNijjatAe
kammaM pakareI / dazAzrutaskandha, pR. 321-upA. AtmArAmajI mahArAja [48 ]

Page #50 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
They wished to become like Chelna. Seeing the beautiful, radiant form and
splendor of Queen Chelna, a resolve arose in the minds of the Shramanis that if
their practice bore fruit, they would become like Chelna in their next birth.
The Antaryami Mahavira knew their resolve and asked the Shramanas and Shramanis
if such a resolve had arisen in their minds. They replied in affirmation, "Yes,
Bhagavan! This is true." The Bhagavan said, "The Nirgrantha-Pravachana is the
best, it is complete, it destroys all karmas. Those Shramanas or Shramanis who,
turning away from Dharma, are attracted by splendor and other things and make
Nidana, if they complete their lifespan without atonement, are born in the
Devaloka and from there they are reborn in the Manavloka. Due to Nidana, they do
not attain Kevali Dharma. They remain forever engrossed in worldly matters." The
Shastrakar has described 9 types of Nidanas and explained that the Nirgrantha
Pravachana is the only means to liberate from all karmas. Therefore, one should
not make Nidana, and if one has made it, one should become free by doing
Alochana-Prayaschitta. In conclusion, the biography of Bhagavan Mahavira is
found in detail in the Pathvi Dasha of this Pragama. There is a beautiful
description of Chittasamadhi and Dharma Chinta. There is also a description of
the differences between Upasaka-Pratima and Bhikshu-Pratima. The Brihatkalpa has
a glorious place in the Cheda Sutras. Like other Cheda Sutras, this Sutra also
contemplates on the rules and prohibitions, Utsarga-Apabad, Tapas, Prayaschitta,
etc. regarding the conduct of Shramanas. It has six Uddesakas, 81 Adhikars, and
473 Shlokas in the available original text. There are 206 Sutra numbers. The
first Uddesaka has 50 Sutras. The first five Sutras are about Tal-Prlamb. It is
forbidden for Nirgranthas and Nirgranthis to take Tal and Prlamb. It is stated
that one should not take unripe Tal fruit and Tal root, but it is permissible to
take split, ripe Tal-Prlamb, etc. The rules regarding Masakalpa state that
Shramanas should stay in one place for a maximum time of 8 months during the
Hemant and Grishma seasons. It is not permissible for Shramanas to stay together
for more than one month in the following 16 types of places, except during the
rainy season, with Parikshepa, i.e., with Prachira and outside the Prachira. 1.
Gram [where 18 types of taxes are levied by the state] 2. Magar [where 18 types
of taxes are not levied] 3. Khet [which has an earthen wall around it] 4. Karbat
[where few people live] 5. Madamb [where there is no village for two and a half
Kos] [49]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
isa jaise bneN| mahArAnI celanA ke sundara salaune rUpa va aizvarya ko dekhakara
zramaNiyoM ke antarmAnasa meM yaha saMkalpa huA ki hamArI sAdhanA kA phala ho to
hama AgAmI janma meM calanA jaisI baneM / antaryAmI mahAvIra ne unake saMkalpa
ko jAna liyA aura zramaNa-zramaNiyoM se pUchA ki kyA tumhAre mana meM isa
prakAra kA saMkalpa huA hai? unhoMne svIkRti sUcaka uttara diyA"hAM, bhagavan !
yaha bAta satya hai|" bhagavAn ne kahA-"nirgrantha-pravacana sarvottama hai,
paripUrNa hai, sampUrNa karmoM ko kSINa karane vAlA hai| jo zramaNa yA
zramaNiyAM isa prakAra dharma se vimukha hokara aizvarya Adi ko dekhakara lubhA
jAte haiM aura nidAna karate haiM ve yadi binA prAyazcitta kie Ayu pUrNa karate
haiM to devaloka meM utpanna hote haiM aura vahAM se ve mAnavaloka meM punaH
janma lete haiN| nidAna ke kAraNa unheM kevalI dharma kI prApti nahIM hotii| ve
sadA sAMsArika viSayoM meM hI mugdha bane rahate haiN|" zAstrakAra ne 9 prakAra
ke nidAnoM kA varNana kara yaha batAyA ki nirgrantha pravacana hI saba karmoM se
mukti dilAne vAlA ekamAtra sAdhana hai / ataH nidAna nahIM karanA cAhie aura
kiyA ho to AlocanA-prAyazcitta karake mukta ho jAnA caahie| upasaMhAra isa
prakAra prastuta prAgama meM bhagavAna mahAvIra kI jIvanI vistAra se pAThavI
dazA meM milatI hai| cittasamAdhi evaM dharmacintA kA sundara varNana hai /
upAsakapratimAoM va bhikSupratimAoM ke bheda-prabhedoM kA bhI varNana hai|
bRhatkalpa bRhatkalpa kA chedasUtroM meM gauravapUrNa sthAna hai / anya
chedasUtroM kI taraha isa sUtra meM bhI zramaNoM ke AcAraviSayaka vidhi-niSedha,
utsarga-apabAda, tapa, prAyazcitta Adi para cintana kiyA gayA hai| isameM chaha
uddezaka haiM, 81 adhikAra haiM, 473 zlokapramANa upalabdha mUlapATha hai / 206
sUtrasaMkhyA hai| prathama uddezaka meM 50 sUtra haiM / pahale ke pAMca sUtra
tAlapralaMba viSayaka hai| nirgrantha aura nirgranthiyoM ke lie tAla evaM
pralaMba grahaNa karane kA niSedha hai| isameM akhaNDa evaM apakva tAlaphala va
tAlamUla grahaNa nahIM karanA cAhie kintu vidArita, pakva tAla pralaMba lenA
kalpya hai, aisA pratipAdita kiyA gayA hai, Adi-Adi / mAsakalpa viSayaka niyama
meM zramaNoM ke RtubaddhakAla-hemanta aura grISma Rtu ke 8 mahinoM meM eka
sthAna para rahane ke adhikatama samaya kA vidhAna kiyA hai| zramaNoM ko
saparikSepa arthAt saprAcIra evaM prAcIra se bAhara nimnokta 16 prakAra ke
sthAnoM meM varSARtu ke atirikta anya samaya meM eka sAtha eka mAsa se adhika
ThaharanA nahIM klptaa| 1. grAma [jahAM rAjya kI aora se 18 prakAra ke kara liye
jAte hoM] 2. magara [jahAM 18 prakAra ke kara na lie jAte hoM 3. kheTa [jisake
cAroM ora miTTI kI dIvAra ho] 4. karbaTa [jahAM kama loga rahate hoM] 5. maDamba
[jisake bAda DhAI kosa taka koI gA~va na ho] [ 49 ]

Page #51 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
6. Pattana [where all things are available] 7. Aakar [where all things are
available] 8. Dronamukha [where there is a path connecting water and land, where
sea goods are unloaded] 9. Nigam [where merchants reside] 10. Rajdhani [where
the king's palace etc. are] 11. Prashram [where ascetics etc. live] 12. Nivesh
Sannivesh [where merchants unload their goods] 13. Sambadh-Sambah [where farmers
live or where people from other villages stay in mountains, caves etc. for the
protection of their wealth etc. from their village] 14. Ghosh [where Gujar
people-Gwalas who graze cows etc. live] 15. Anshika [half, third or fourth part
of a village] 16. Putbhadan [where merchants of the village come to sell their
goods]. They can stay inside and outside the city walls for one month each.
While staying inside, they should take alms from inside and while staying
outside, they should take alms from outside. Shramanis can stay inside for two
months and outside for two months. Where there is only one gate of the city
wall, Nirgranth and Nirgranthis are prohibited from staying together, but they
can stay if there are many gates. Where there are many shops and many gates
around the Upashraya, Sadhvis should not stay there, but Sadhu can stay there
with effort. Where the place is completely open and there are no gates, Sadhvis
should not stay there. If there is no Upashraya-place by way of exception, they
can stay by putting up a curtain. Nirgranths are allowed to stay in an open
place. Nirgranth and Nirgranthis are allowed to keep and use a mosquito net made
of cloth. Nirgranth and Nirgranthis are not allowed to stand, sit, lie down,
sleep, eat, drink, study etc. near a water body. Shraman-Shramanis are not
allowed to stay where there are pictures that arouse passions. They are not
allowed to stay without the permission of the house owner. Shraman-Shramanis
should not stay in a house where there is a passage in the middle - where
householders live. If there is a quarrel between an Acharya, Upadhyaya, Shraman
or Shramani of a Shraman, they should apologize to each other. He who is calm is
a worshiper. The essence of Shram Dharma is Upsham - "Uvasamsaram Samannam".
Vihar is prohibited during Varshavas, but it is prescribed during Hemant and
Grishma seasons. Nirgranth-Nirgranthis are prohibited from wandering repeatedly
in unfavorable areas. Because there is a possibility of violation of restraint.
Therefore, there is a provision for atonement. [50]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
6. pattana [jahAM saba vastueM upalabdha hoM] 7. Akara [jahAM saba vastueM
upalabdha hoM] 8. droNamukha [jahA~ jala aura sthala ko milAne vAlA mArga ho,
jahAM samudrI mAla prAkara utaratA ho] 9. nigama [jahAM vyApAriyoM kI vasati ho]
10. rAjadhAnI [jahAM rAjA ke rahane ke mahala Adi hoM] 11. prAzrama [jahAM
tapasvI Adi rahate hoM] 12. niveza sanniveza [jahAM sArthavAha pAkara utarate
hoM] 13. sambAdha-saMbAha [jahAM kRSaka rahate hoM athavA anya gAMva ke loga
apane gAMva se dhana Adi kI rakSA ke nimitta parvata, guphA Adi meM Akara
Thahare hue hoM] 14. ghoSa [jahAM gAya Adi carAne vAle gUjara loga-gvAle rahate
hoM] 15. aMzikA [gAMva kA ardha, tRtIya athavA caturtha bhAga] 16. puTabhedana
[jahAM para gAMva ke vyApArI apanI cIjeM becane Ate hoM] nagara kI prAcIra ke
andara aura bAhara eka-eka mAsa taka raha sakate haiN| andara rahate samaya
bhikSA andara se lenI cAhie aura bAhara rahate samaya bAhara se| zramaNiyAM do
mAsa andara aura do mAsa bAhara raha sakatI haiN| jisa prAcIra kA eka hI dvAra
ho vahAM nirgrantha aura nirgranthiyoM ko eka sAtha rahane kA niSedha kiyA hai,
para aneka dvAra hoM to raha sakate haiN| jisa upAzraya ke cAroM ora aneka
dukAneM hoM, aneka dvAra hoM vahAM sAdhviyoM ko nahIM rahanA cAhie kintu sAdhu
yatanApUrvaka raha sakatA hai / jo sthAna pUrNa rUpa se khulA ho, dvAra na hoM
vahAM para sAdhviyoM ko rahanA nahIM klptaa| yadi apavAdarUpa meM upAzraya-
sthAna na mile to paradA lagAkara raha sakatI haiN| nirgranthoM ke lie khule
sthAna para bhI rahanA kalpatA hai| nirgrantha aura nirgranthiyoM ko kapar3e kI
maccharadAnI [cilimilikA rakhane va upayoga karane kI anumati pradAna kI gaI
hai| nirgrantha va nirgranthiyoM ko jalAzaya ke sannikaTa khar3e rahanA,
baiThanA, leTanA, sonA, khAnA-pInA, svAdhyAya Adi karanA nahIM kalpatA / jahAM
para vikArotpAdaka citra hoM vahAM para zramaNa-zramaNiyoM ko rahanA nahIM
klptaa| makAna mAlika kI binA anumati ke rahanA nahIM klptaa| jisa makAna ke
madhya meM hokara rAstA ho- jahAM gRhastha rahate hoM, vahAM zramaNa-zramaNiyoM
ko nahIM rahanA cAhie / kisI zramaNa kA AcArya, upAdhyAya, zramaNa yA zramaNI se
paraspara kalaha ho gayA ho, paraspara kSamAyAcanA karanI caahie| jo zAMta hotA
hai vaha ArAdhaka hai| zramaNadharma kA sAra upazama hai-"uvasamasAraM
saamnnnnN"| varSAvAsa meM vihAra kA niSedha hai kintu hemanta va grISma Rtu meM
vihAra kA vidhAna hai| jo pratikUla kSetra hoM vahA~ nirgrantha-nirgranthiyoM ko
bAra-bAra vicaranA niSiddha hai| kyoMki saMyama kI virAdhanA hone kI sambhAvanA
hai| isalie prAyazcitta kA vidhAna hai| [ 50 ]

Page #52 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
If a householder wishes to give clothes, vessels, blankets, etc. to a monk who
has gone out for alms or for bodily needs, then the monk should take and keep
them only after obtaining permission from the Acharya. Similarly, the permission
of the Pravartini is necessary for the Dharmni. It is forbidden for monks and
nuns to take food, etc. at night or at an inappropriate time. Similarly, it is
forbidden to take clothes, vessels, blankets, and cleaning materials. As an
exception, if a thief has stolen the clothes of monks and nuns and they have
been recovered, they can be taken at night. If the clothes have been worn by
thieves, cleaned, dyed, or perfumed with fragrant substances, they can also be
taken. It is forbidden for Nirgranth and Nirgranthis to travel at night or at an
inappropriate time. If it is necessary to go for Uccarabhumi, etc., as an
exception, they should not go alone but should take Sadhus with them. The
boundaries of the travel area for Nirgranth and Nirgranthis have been
considered. In the past, the Aryakshetra extended from Angadesh and Magadhadesh
in the east, to Kausambi in the south, to Sthuna in the west, and to Kunala in
the north. Traveling in the Aryakshetra increases knowledge and vision. If there
is no possibility of loss of the Ratna-tray by going to the Anaryakshetra, then
one can go. In the second Uddeshak, 12 sutras on Upashraya have been explained.
It has been stated that monks and nuns should not stay even for a short time in
an Upashraya where rice, barley, green gram, black gram, etc. are scattered.
However, if they are piled up in one place, it is permissible to stay there
during the winter and summer seasons. If they are stored safely in a storehouse,
etc., it is permissible to stay there even during the rainy season. Sadhus and
Sadhvis should not stay even for a short time in a place where Suravikat,
Sauviravikat, etc. are kept. If, due to circumstances, no other place is
available even after searching, the monk can stay for two nights, but not more.
Staying for more than that will result in the atonement of Chhed or Parihar.
Similarly, one should not stay in an Upashraya that has a cold water well, a hot
water well, a lamp, a lamp, etc. Similarly, one should not take food, etc. from
the owner of one or more houses. If there is one main owner, then one can take
from the rest. Here, the Shayatar is the main one whose permission has been
taken. The various aspects of Shayatar have been considered. Nirgranth-
Nirgranthis can take clothes in five ways: Jangik, Bhangik, Sanak, Potak, and
Tiritpattak. 1. Suravikatam Pishta-nishpannam Sauviravikatam tu Pishta-
vanguladidravya-nishpannam. / Kshema-kirti-krita-vriti, page 10952 2. "Chhedo
va" Pancharatrindivadih "Pariharo va" Masalghukadis-tapovishesho bhavatiti
sutrarthah. / / -Ibid. 3. Jangamah Trasah Tadavayavanishpannam Jangamikam, Bhaga
Atasi Tanmayam Bhangikam, Sansutramayam Sanakam, Potak Karyasikam Tiri:
Vrikshavisheshastasyayaha Patto Valkal Kshanatnishpanna Tiri-pattakam na
Panchamam. / -U.2, Su.24 [51]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
gahastha ke yahAM bhikSA ke lie yA zaucAdi ke lie zramaNa bAhara jAya usa samaya
yadi koI gRhastha vastra, pAtra, kambala Adi denA cAhe to AcArya kI anumati
prApta hone para use lenA rakhanA caahie| vaise hI dhamaNI ke lie pravartinI kI
AjJA Avazyaka hai| zramaNa-zramaNiyoM ke lie rAtri ke samaya yA asamaya meM
AhArAdi grahaNa karane kA niSedha kiyA gayA hai| isI taraha vastra, pAtra,
kambala, rajoharaNa grahaNa kA niSedha hai| apavAdarUpa meM yadi taskara
zramaNa-zramaNiyoM ke vastra curAkara le gayA ho aura ve punaH prApta ho gaye
hoM to rAtri meM le sakate haiN| yadi ve vastra taskaroM ne pahane hoM, svaccha
kiye hoM, raMge hoM yA dhUpAdi sugandhita padArthoM se vAsita kiye hoM to bhI
grahaNa kara sakate haiN| nirgrantha va nirgranthiyoM ko rAtri ke samaya yA
vikAla meM vihAra kA niSedha kiyA gayA hai| yadi uccArabhUmi Adi ke lie apavAda
rUpa meM jAnA hI par3e to akelA na jAya kintu sAdhuoM ko sAtha lekara jAya /
nirgrantha va nirgranthiyoM ke vihAra kSetra kI maryAdA para cintana kiyA gayA
hai / pUrva meM aMgadeza evaM magadhadeza taka, dakSiNa meM kausAmbI taka,
pazcima meM sthUNA taka va uttara meM kuNAlA taka-ye AryakSetra haiN|
prAryakSetra meM vicarane se jJAna-darzana kI vRddhi hotI hai| yadi anAryakSetra
meM jAne para ratnatraya kI hAni kI sambhAvanA na ho to jA sakate haiN| dvitIya
uddezaka meM upAzraya viSayaka 12 sUtroM meM batAyA hai ki jisa upAzraya meM
zAlI, vIhi, mUga, ur3ada Adi bikhare par3e hoM vahAM para zramaNa-zramaNiyoM ko
kiMcit samaya bhI na rahanA cAhie kintu eka sthAna para Dhera rUpa meM par3e hue
hoM to vahAM hemanta va grISma Rtu meM rahanA kalpatA hai| yadi koSThAgAra Adi
meM surakSita rakhe hue hoM to varSAvAsa meM bhI rahanA kalpatA hai| jisa sthAna
para surAvikaTa, sauvIravikaTa Adi rakhe hoM vahA~ kiMcit samaya bhI sAdhu-
sAdhviyoM ko nahIM rahanA caahie|' yadi kAraNavazAt anveSaNA karane para bhI
anya sthAna upalabdha na ho to zramaNa do rAtri raha sakatA hai, adhika nhiiN|
adhika rahane para cheda yA parihAra kA prAyazcitta AtA hai / 2 / isI taraha
zItodakavikaTakubha, uSNodakavikaTakubha, jyoti, dIpaka aAdi se yukta upAzraya
meM nahIM rahanA caahie| isI taraha eka yA aneka makAna ke adhipati se AhArAdi
nahIM lenA caahie| yadi eka mukhya ho to usake atirikta zeSa ke yahAM se le
sakate haiN| yahAM para zayyAtara mukhya hai jisakI prAjJA grahaNa kI hai|
zayyAtara ke vividha pahaluoM para cintana kiyA gayA hai| nimrantha-nirganthiyoM
ko jAMgika, bhA~gika, sAnaka, potaka aura tiriTapaTTaka ye pA~ca prakAra se
vastra lenA 1. surAvikaTaM piSTaniSpannam sauvIravikaTaM tu
piSTavaa~guMDAdidravya niSpannam / kSemakIrtikRta vRti, pRSTha 10952 2. "chedo
vA" paMcarAtrindivAdiH "parihAro vA" mAsalaghukAdistapovizeSo bhavatIti
sUtrArthaH / / -vahI 3. jaMgamAH trasAH tadavayavaniSpannaM jAMgamikam, bhagA
atasI tanmayaM bhAMgikam, sanasUtramayaM sAnakam, potaka kAryAsikam tirITa:
vRkSavizeSastasya yaH paTTo valkala kSaNastaniSpanna tirITapaTTakaM nA paMcamam
/ ~-u02, sU024 [ 51 ]

Page #53 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
It is permissible to have five types of "rajoharan": au·πáik, prau·π£·π≠rik, sƒÅnak,
vaccakcipphak, and m≈´jccipphak. In the third udde≈õaka, it is not permissible for
nirgranthas to sit, sleep, eat, drink, study, meditate, or perform kayotsarga in
the shelter of nirgranthis. Similarly, it is not permissible for nirgranthis to
sit, eat, drink, etc. in the shelter of nirgranthas. The next four s≈´tras
discuss the rules regarding clothing, consumption, etc. Regarding clothing, it
is stated that they should not be colored, but should be white. The rules
regarding what items to wear or not wear are laid out. The rules regarding
clothing at the time of initiation are also described. It is forbidden to take
clothes during the rainy season, but there is no obstacle to taking clothes
during the winter and summer seasons if necessary. The division of clothing is
also considered in this regard. It is not permissible for nirgranthas and
nirgranthis to take pratihƒÅrik items and travel elsewhere without giving them to
their owner. If someone steals an item, it should be investigated and returned
to the owner if found. If necessary, it can be used with the owner's permission.
In the fourth udde≈õaka, the rules for atonement are laid out for offenses
related to abrahmasevan, night-time meals, etc. A pandaka, napu·π£aka, and vƒÅtika
are ineligible for pravrajyƒÅ. Even having sexual intercourse with them, eating
together, etc. is forbidden. It is inappropriate to teach scriptures to an
avinƒ´ta, rasalolopi, or krodhi. The three types of people who are ineligible for
pravrajyƒÅ and teaching are du·π£·π≠a, m≈´·∏çha, and duvidagdha. If a nirgranthi is ill
or for any other reason needs the support of their father, brother, son, etc. to
get up or sit down, and desires the support of a sƒÅdhaka, they receive a
cƒÅturmƒÅsika prƒÅya≈õcitta. Similarly, if a nirgranthi mother, wife, etc. needs
support and desires the support of a sƒÅdhvi, they also receive a cƒÅturmƒÅsika
prƒÅya≈õcitta. This is because there is a possibility of violating the fourth
vrata, so atonement is prescribed. It is not permissible for nirgranthas and
nirgranthis to accept kalƒÅtikrƒÅnta, k·π£etrƒÅtikrƒÅnta, pra≈õnƒÅdi, etc. It is not
permissible to keep food brought by the first pauru·π£ƒ´ until the fourth pauru·π£ƒ´.
If it is forgotten, it should be given away. There is a rule for atonement if it
is used. If, by mistake, an ane·π£a·πáƒ´ya, snigdha pra≈õnƒÅdi, etc. has come in the
alms, it should be given to a ≈õrama·πáa who has not established the mahƒÅvrata. If
there is no such ≈õrama·πáa, it should be given away in a blameless place. Food,
etc. prepared for ≈õrama·πáas who are in the state of ƒÅchelakya, etc. is
permissible for ≈õrama·πáas who are not in that state. Food, etc. prepared for
≈õrama·πáas who are not in that state is not permissible for ≈õrama·πáas who are in
that state. Here, "kalpasthita" means "pancayƒÅmadharmapratipanna" and
"akalpasthita" means "cƒÅturyƒÅmadharmapratipanna". 1. "au·πáik" means
"≈´ranikƒÅnƒÅm≈´r·πáƒÅbhiniv·πõttam", "prau·π£·π≠rik" means "u·π£·π≠romabhiniv·πõttam", "sƒÅnak"
means "sanav·πõk·π£avalkƒÅd jƒÅtam", "vƒÅcak" means "t·πõ·πáavi≈õe·π£astasy", "cipphak" means
"ku·π≠·π≠ita·∏• tvag≈´pa·∏• tena ni·π£panna vaccakcipphakam", "muja·∏•" means
"≈õarastambastasy", "cipphakƒÅd jƒÅtam m≈´jccipphak" is the fifth. - U. 2, S≈´. 25
[52]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
kalpatA hai aura auNika, prauSTrika, sAnaka, vaccakacippaka, mUjacippaka ye
pAMca prakAra ke' rajoharaNa rakhanA kalpatA hai| tRtIya uddezaka meM
nirgranthoM ko nirgranthiyoM ke upAzraya meM baiThanA, sonA, khAnA, pInA,
svAdhyAya, dhyAna, kAyotsarga karanA nahIM kalpatA / isI prakAra nirgranthiyoM
ko nirgranthoM ke upAzraya prAdi meM baiThanA, khAnA, pInA Adi nahIM kalpatA /
prAge ke cAra sUtroM meM carma viSayaka, upabhoga Adi ke sambandha meM
kalpAkalpa kI carcA hai| vastra ke sambandha meM kahA hai ki ve raMgIna na hoM,
kintu zveta hone caahie| kaunasI-kaunasI vastueM dhAraNa karanA yA na karanA-
isakA vidhAna kiyA gayA hai| dIkSA lete samaya vastroM kI maryAdA kA bhI varNana
kiyA gayA hai| varSAvAsa meM vastra lene kA niSedha hai kintu hemanta va grISma
RtU meM AvazyakatA hone para vastra lene meM bAdhA nahIM hai aura vastra ke
vibhAjana kA isa sambandha meM bhI cintana kiyA hai| nirgrantha-nirgranthiyoM ko
prAtihArika vastueM usake mAlika ko binA diye anyatra vihAra karanA nahIM
klptaa| yadi kisI vastu ko koI curA le to usakI anveSaNA karanI cAhiye aura
milane para zayyAtara ko de denI cAhie / yadi AvazyakatA ho to usakI AjJA hone
para upayoga kara sakatA hai / caturtha uddezaka meM abrahmasevana tathA rAtri-
bhojana Adi vratoM ke sambandha meM doSa lagane para prAyazcitta kA vidhAna kiyA
gayA hai| paMDaka, napusaka evaM vAtika pravrajyA ke lie ayogya hai| yahAM taka
ki unake sAtha saMbhoga eka sAtha bhojana-pAnAdi karanA bhI niSiddha hai|
avinIta, rasalolupI va krodhI ko zAstra par3hAnA anucita hai| duSTa, mUDha aura
duvidagdha ye tIna pravrajyA aura upadeza ke anadhikArI haiN| nigraMnthI rugNa
avasthA meM yA anya kisI kAraNa se apane pitA, bhAI, putra Adi kA sahArA lekara
uThatI yA baiThatI ho aura sAdhu ke sahAre kI icchA kare to cAturmAsika
prAyazcita pAtA hai| isI taraha nirgrantha mAtA, zrI Adi kA sahArA lete hue
tathA sAdhvI ke sahAre kI icchA kare to use bhI cAturmAsika prAyazcitta AtA hai|
isameM caturtha vrata ke khaMDana kI sambhAvanA hone se prAyazcitta kA vidhAna
kiyA hai| nirgrantha va nirganthiyoM ko kAlAtikrAnta, kSetrAtikrAnta prazanAdi
grahaNa karanA nahIM klptaa| prathama pauruSI kA lAyA huA AhAra caturtha pauruSI
taka rakhanA nahIM klptaa| yadi bhUla se raha jAya to paraTha denA caahie|
upayoga karane para prAyazcitta kA vidhAna hai| yadi bhUla se aneSaNIya, snigdha
prazanAdi bhikSA meM A gayA ho to anapasthApita zramaNa- jinameM mahAvratoM kI
sthApanA nahIM kI hai unheM de denA caahie| yadi vaha na ho to nirdoSa sthAna
para paraTha denA caahie| Acelakya prAdi kalpa meM sthita zramaNoM ke lie
nirmita AhArAdi akalpasthita zramaNoM ke lie kalpanIya hai| jo AhArAdi
akalpasthita zramaNoM ke lie nirmita ho vaha karUpasthita zramaNoM ke lie
akalpya hotA hai| yahAM para kalpasthita kA tAtparya hai
"paMcayAmadharmapratipanna" aura akalpasthita dharma kA artha hai
"caaturyaamdhrmprtipnn"| 1. "auNika" UraNikAnAmUrNAbhinivRttam, "pauSTrika"
uSTromabhinivRttam, "sAnaka" sanavRkSavalkAd jAtam "vAcakaH" tRNavizeSastasya
"cippakaH'' kuTTitaH tvagUpaH tena niSpanna vaccakacippakam "mujaH"
zarastambastasya cippakAd jAtaM mujacippaka nAma paMcamamiti / -u0 2, sU0 25 [
52

Page #54 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
If a Nigrantha wishes to be ordained in another gana due to knowledge or other
reasons, the permission of the Acharya is required. Similarly, if a Pracharaya,
Upadhyaya, Ganavachchedak, etc., wishes to be ordained in another gana, they
should join the other gana only after making suitable arrangements in their own
community. If a Shraman or Shramani attains Kaladharma during the evening or
night, other Shraman-Shramanis should keep the dead body carefully throughout
the night. In the morning, they should bring bamboo, etc., from a householder's
house, tie the deceased with it, and place it on a harmless land in the forest.
They should then return the bamboo, etc., to the householder. If a Shraman has
quarreled with a householder, he should not engage in begging until the
householder is pacified. To explain the method of accepting
Pariharavishuddhacharitra, on the day of Parana, the Acharya and Upadhyaya
themselves go to the Shraman, provide him with food, and after returning to
their own place, explain the method of observing Pariharavishuddhacharitra.
Shraman-Shramanis should not cross more than one of the five great rivers,
Ganga, Yamuna, Sarayu, Koshika, and Mahi, in a month. Shallow rivers like
Airavati, etc., can be crossed two or three times a month. Shraman-Shramanis
should stay in harmless huts made of grass, where they cannot stand properly,
during the Hemant and Grishma seasons. If the hut is made of harmless grass,
etc., and is less than two hands high, they cannot stay there during the rainy
season. If it is more than two hands high, they can stay there during the rainy
season. The Pancham Uddeshak states that if a deva takes the form of a woman and
holds the hand of a Sadhu, and the Sadhu considers her soft touch pleasurable,
he incurs the sin of Mithuna Pratisevan and has to perform Chaturmasik Guru-
Prayaschitta. Similarly, if a Sadhvi experiences the touch of a man and
considers it pleasurable, she also incurs Chaturmasik Guru-Prayaschitta. If a
Shraman joins another gana without resolving a conflict and the Acharya of that
gana learns that he has come there after quarreling, he should be given a five-
night punishment and then pacified and sent back to his own gana. If a strong or
weak Shraman takes food, etc., thinking that the sun has risen or has not yet
set, and then learns that the sun has not yet risen or has already set, he
should immediately abandon the food, etc. He does not incur the sin of night
food. One who takes food, etc., with doubt about sunrise and sunset incurs the
sin of night food. Shraman-Shramanis should spit out any food, etc., that comes
into their mouth through belching, etc., at night. If a Dwindriya, etc.,
creature falls into food, etc., it should be carefully removed and the food,
etc., should be consumed. If it cannot be removed, it should be placed in a
secluded, harmless place. If drops of water fall into food, etc., while eating,
and the food is hot, there is no fault in eating it. [53]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
kisI nigrantha ko jJAna Adi ke kAraNa anya gaNa meM upasampadA lenI ho to AcArya
kI anumati prAvazyaka hai| isI prakAra prAcArya, upAdhyAya, gaNAvacchedaka Adi
ko bhI yadi anya gaNa meM upasampadA lenI ho to apane samudAya kI yogya
vyavasthA karake hI anya gaNa meM sammilita honA caahie| saMdhyA ke samaya yA
rAtri meM koI zramaNa yA zramaNI kAladharma ko prApta ho jAya to dUsare zramaNa-
zramaNiyoM ko usa mRta zarIra ko rAtri bhara sAvadhAnI se rakhanA caahie| prAtaH
gRhastha ke ghara se bAMsa Adi lAkara mRtaka ko usase bAMdhakara dUra jaMgala
meM nirdoSa bhUmi para prasthApita kara denA cAhie aura puna: bAMsa Adi gahastha
ko de denA caahie| zramaNa ne kisI gahastha ke sAtha yadi kalaha kiyA ho to use
zAMta kiye binA bhikSAcaryA karamA nahIM klptaa| parihAravizuddhacAritra grahaNa
karane kI icchA vAle zramaNa ko vidhi samajhAne hetu pAraNe ke dina svayaM
cArya, upAdhyAya usake pAsa jAkara AhAra dilAte haiM aura svasthAna para Akara
parihAravizuddhacAritra kA pAlana karane kI vidhi batalAte haiN| zramaNa-
zramaNiyoM ko gaMgA, yamunA, sarayU, kozikA, mahI ina pAMca mahAnadiyoM meM se
mahIne meM eka se adhika bAra eka nadI pAra nahIM karanI caahie| airAvatI Adi
chichalI nadiyAM mahIne meM do-tIna bAra pAra kI jA sakatI haiN| zramaNa-
zramaNiyoM ko ghAsa kI aisI nirdoSa jhopar3I meM, jahAM para acchI taraha se
khar3A nahIM rahA jA sake, hemanta va grISma Rtu meM rahanA baya' hai| yadi
nirdoSa tRNAdi se banI huI do hAtha se kama UMcI jhopar3I hai to varSARtu meM
vahAM nahIM raha sakate / yadi do hAtha se adhika UMcI hai to vahAM varSARtu meM
raha sakate haiN| paMcama uddezaka meM batAyA hai ki yadi koI deva strI kA rUpa
banAkara sAdhu kA hAtha pakar3e aura vaha sAdhu usake komala sparza ko sukharUpa
mAne to use maithuna pratisevana doSa lagatA hai aura use cAturmAsika guru-
prAyazcitta AtA hai| isI prakAra sAdhvI ko bhI usake viparIta puruSa sparza kA
anubhava hotA hai aura use sukharUpa mAne to cAturmAsika guru-prAyazcitta AtA
hai| koI zramaNa binA kleza ko zAMta kie anya gaNa meM jAkara mila jAya aura usa
gaNa ke prAcArya ko jJAta ho jAya ki yaha zramaNa bahAM se kalaha karake AyA hai
to use pAMca rAtadina kA cheda denA cAhie aura use zAnta kara apane gaNa meM
punaH bheja denA caahie| sazakta yA azakta zramaNa sUryodaya ho cukA hai yA abhI
asta nahIM huyA hai aisA samajhakara yadi AhArAdi karatA hai aura phira yadi use
yaha jJAta ho jAya ki abhI to sUryodaya huA hI nahIM hai yA asta ho gayA hai to
use AhArAdi tatkSaNa tyAga denA caahie| use rAtribhojana kA doSa nahIM lgtaa|
sUryodaya aura sUryAsta ke prati zaMkAzIla hokara AhArAdi karane vAle ko
rAtribhojana kA doSa lagatA hai| zramaNa-zramaNiyoM ko rAtri meM DakArAdi ke
dvArA muha meM anna Adi A jAya to use bAhara thUka denA cAhie / yadi pAhArAdi
meM dvIndriyAdi jIva gira jAya to yatanApUrvaka nikAla kara AhArAdi karanA
caahie| yadi nikalane kI sthiti meM na ho to ekAnta nirdoSa sthAna meM
paristhApana kara de| aAhArAdi lete samaya sacitta pAnI kI bUdeM AhArAdi meM
gira jAeM aura vaha AhAra garama ho to use khAne meM kicita mAtra bhI doSa nahIM
hai| [53 ]

Page #55 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Because the drops that fall in it become unmindful / If the food is cold, one
should neither eat it oneself nor feed it to others, but should place it in a
secluded place. For a Nirgranthi, to live alone, to remain naked, to be without
possessions, to take sunbath outside the village, to sit in Utkatukasana,
Virasana, Dandasana, Lagudshayi and other asanas and perform Kayotsarga is the
way. - It is inconceivable for Nirgranthis to take the Mok (urine or saliva) of
each other, but it can be taken due to reasons like illness / If a Bhikshu in
the form of a Parihar has to go elsewhere on the orders of a Sthavir, etc., he
should go quickly and return after completing the work. If there is any kind of
fault in the character, then one should purify oneself by performing atonement.
In the sixth Uddeshak, it is stated that Nirgranthis should not speak six types
of words: Alik (false) words, Heelitavachan, Khisitavachan, Parushavachan,
Garhasthikavachan, Vyavashmitodiranavachan (words that stir up a settled
dispute). One who accuses someone of Pranatipat, Mrishvad, Adattadan, Avirati-
Abrahma, Napusak, Das, etc., receives atonement. If a thorn pricks the foot of a
Nirgranthi and he is unable to remove it, then a Nirgranthi can remove it as an
exception. Similarly, if there is a situation of drowning, falling, slipping,
etc. in a river, etc., then a Sadhu or Sadhvi can save him by holding his hand /
Similarly, a Nirgranthi with a disturbed mind can be taken to his place by
holding his hand, in the same way, a Sadhvi can also take him by holding his
hand. It should be remembered that these are exceptional sutras. There is no
feeling of depravity in this, but a feeling of protecting each other's
restraint. The name of the Sadhu's code of conduct is Kalpasthiti / It is of six
types - Samayik-Sanyatakalpasthiti, Chhedopasthapaniya Sanyatakalpasthiti,
Nirvishamanakalpasthiti, Nivishtakayikakalpasthiti, Jinkalpasthiti and
Sthavirakalpasthiti. _In this way, Brihatkalpa sheds light on many important
facts related to the life and conduct of Shraman-Shramani. This is the special
feature of this scripture. Vyavaharsutra Brihatkalpa and Vyavahar are both
complementary to each other / Vyavahar is also a Chhedasutra which is
Charananuyogamaya. It has ten Uddeshak / 373 Anushtup shlokas are the available
original text / 267 are the number of sutras. In the first Uddeshak, a Shraman
who consumes a fault worthy of monthly atonement and criticizes that fault to
the Acharya, etc. without deceit, receives a monthly atonement, while if he does
it with deceit, he becomes a participant in a bi-monthly atonement. A Sadhak who
criticizes a fault worthy of bi-monthly atonement without deceit receives a bi-
monthly atonement, and if he does it with deceit, he receives a three-month
atonement / In this way, three, four, five and six months [ 54 ]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
kyoMki usameM par3I huI bUMdeM acitta ho jAtI haiM / yadi AhAra zItala hai to na
svayaM khAnA cAhie aura na dUsaroM ko khilAnA cAhie apitu ekAnta sthAna para
paristhApana kara denA caahie| nirgranthI ko ekAkI rahanA, nagna rahanA,
pAvarahita rahanA, grAmAdi ke bAhara AtApanA lenA, utkaTukAsana, vIrAsana,
daNDAsana, laguDazAyI Adi Asana para baiThakara kAyotsarga karanA vayaM hai| -
nirgrantha-nirgranthiyoM ko paraspara moka (pezAba yA thUka) kA Acamana karanA
akalpya hai kintu rogAdi kAraNoM se grahaNa kiyA jA sakatA hai / parihArakarUpa
meM sthiti bhikSa ko sthavira Adi ke Adeza se anyatra jAnA par3e to zIghra jAnA
cAhie aura kArya karake punaH lauTa AnA caahie| yadi cAritra meM kisI prakAra kA
doSa lage to prAyazcitta lekara zuddha kara lenA caahie| chaThe uddezaka meM
yaha batAyA hai ki nirgrantha-nirgranthiyoM ko alIka (jhUTha) vacana,
hIlitavacana, khisitavacana, paruSavacana, gArhasthikavacana,
vyavazamitodIraNavacana (zAMta hue kalaha ko ubhAranevAlA vacana), ye chaha
prakAra ke vacana nahIM bolanA caahie| prANAtipAta, mRSAvAda, adattAdAna,
avirati-abrahma, napusaka, dAsa Adi kA Aropa lagAne vAle ko prAyazcitta pAtA
hai| nirgantha ke paira meM kAMTA laga gayA ho aura vaha nikAlane meM asamartha
ho to use apavAdarUpa meM nirgranthI nikAla sakatI hai| isI prakAra nadI Adi meM
DUbane, girane, phisalane Adi kA prasaMga Aye to sAdhu sAdhvI kA hAtha
pakar3akara bacAye / isI prakAra vikSiptacitta nirgranthI ko apane hAtha se
pakar3akara usake sthAna para pahuMcA de, vaise hI bhI sAdhvI hAtha pakar3akara
pahuMcA sakatI hai| yaha smaraNa rakhanA cAhie ki ye ApavAdika sUtra haiN|
isameM vikArabhAvanA nahIM kintu paraspara ke saMyama kI surakSA kI bhAvanA hai|
sAdhu kI maryAdA kA nAma kalpasthiti hai / yaha chaha prakAra kI hai--sAmAyika-
saMyatakalpasthiti, chedopasthApanIya saMyatakalpasthiti,
nirvizamAnakalpasthiti, niviSTakAyikakalpasthiti, jinakalpasthiti aura
sthvirklpsthiti| _isa prakAra bRhatkalpa meM zramaNa-zramaNiyoM ke jIvana aura
vyavahAra se sambandhita aneka mahattvapUrNa tathyoM para prakAza DAlA hai| yahI
isa zAstra kI vizeSatA hai| vyavahArasUtra bRhatkalpa aura vyavahAra ye donoM
eka dUsare ke pUraka haiM / vyavahAra bhI chedasUtra hai jo caraNAnuyogamaya
hai| isameM daza uddezaka haiM / 373 anuSTupa zloka pramANa upalabdha mUla pATha
hai / 267 sUtra saMkhyA hai| prathama uddezaka meM mAsika prAyazcitta ke yogya
doSa kA sevana kara usa doSa kI prAcArya Adi ke pAsa kapaTarahita AlocanA karane
vAle zramaNa ko ekamAsika prAyazcitta pAtA hai jabaki kapaTasahita karane para
dvimAsika prAyazcitta kA bhAgI hotA hai| dvimAsika prAyazcitta ke yogya doSa kI
sAdhaka niSkapaTa AlocanA karatA hai to use dvimAsika prAyazcitta pAtA hai aura
kapaTasahita karane se tIna mAsa kA / isa prakAra tIna, cAra, pAMca aura chaha
mAsa ke [ 54 ]

Page #56 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
There is a provision for atonement. The provision for atonement is for a maximum
of six months. One who has committed many offenses should be criticized in order
and then atonement should be taken for all together. Even while doing atonement,
if the offense is committed again, then atonement should be done again. The
Shraman who is taking atonement should get up and sit with other Sadhus only
after taking permission from the Sthavir etc. If he sits with someone in
violation of the permission, then his Dikshaparaya for that many days is
reduced, which is called a hole in the Agamic language. He can go to another
place for the service of Sthavir etc. by abandoning the Pariharakalp / A Shraman
wanders alone by abandoning the Gan, and if he feels unable to follow the pure
conduct, then he should be criticized and a hole or new Diksha should be taken /
The same rule applies to the single-dwelling Ganavchhedak, Acharya and
Shithilachari Shraman as is generally for the single-dwelling Shraman. Criticism
should be done in front of the Pracharya, Upadhyay and atonement should be taken
to become pure. If they are absent, then criticism should be done in front of
their Sambhogi, Sarmic, Bahushrut etc. If they are not nearby, then criticism
should be done by going to the Sambhogi, Bahushrut etc. Shraman of another
community wherever they are and atonement should be taken. If they are also not
there, then atonement should be taken by going to the Sarupik (Sadoshi) but
Bahushrut Sadhu. If he is also not there, then atonement should be taken by
going to the Bahushrut Shramanopasak, and if he is also absent, then atonement
should be taken by going to the Samyagdristi Gahesth / In the absence of all
these, stand facing the east or north direction outside the village or city,
fold both hands and criticize your offense / It is said in the second Uddeshak
that if two Sarmic are together with the same Samachari and one of them has
committed an offense, then atonement should be taken in front of the other. The
burden of service etc. of the one doing atonement remains on the other Shraman.
If both have committed the offense, then they should criticize each other, take
atonement and serve. If one Shraman has committed an offense out of many
Shramans, then atonement should be given to only one / If all have committed an
offense, then all except one should take atonement and purify themselves, and
after their atonement is complete, he should also be given atonement and
purified. It is not considered appropriate to remove the Pariharakalp-situated
Shraman from the Gachch if he becomes ill / It is the duty of the Ganavchhedak
to make him recite the Bayavritti until he becomes healthy, and after becoming
healthy, he should take atonement because he served in the Sadoshav‡§∏‡•ç‡§•‡§æ.
Similarly, the one who is doing Anvasthapy and Paranchik atonement should not be
removed from the Gachch in the state of illness. The Viksiptchitt should also
not be removed from the Gachch, and until his mind becomes stable, he should be
served completely, and after becoming healthy, he should be given nominal
atonement. Similarly, the Deeptchitt (whose mind has become inflamed with
pride), Unmadprapt, Upsargprapt, Sadhikarana, Saprayaschitt etc. should not be
removed from the Gachch. The ninth Anvasthapy atonement-taking Sadhu should be
reinstated in Sanjam without making him wear Mrihsthalang [ 55 ]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
prAyazcitta kA vidhAna hai| adhika se adhika chaha mAsa ke prAyazcitta kA
vidhAna hai| jisane aneka doSoM kA sevana kiyA ho use kramazaH pAlocanA karanI
cAhie aura phira sabhI kA sAtha meM prAyazcitta lenA caahie| prAyazcitta karate
hue bhI yadi punaH doSa laga jAya to usakA punaHprAyazcitta karanA caahie|
prAyazcitta kA sevana karane vAle zramaNa ko sthavira Adi kI anujJA lekara hI
anya sAdhuoM ke sAtha uThanAbaiThanA caahie| AjJA kI avahelanA kara kisI ke
sAtha yadi vaha baiThatA hai to utane dina kI usakI dIkSAparyAya kama hotI hai
jise Agamika bhASA meM cheda kahA gayA hai| parihArakalpa kA parityAga kara
sthavira Adi kI sevA ke lie dUsare sthAna para jA sakatA hai / koI zramaNa gaNa
kA parityAga kara ekAkI vicaraNa karatA hai aura yadi vaha apane ko zuddha
prAcAra ke pAlana karane meM asamartha anubhava karatA hai to use AlocanA kara
cheda yA navIna dIkSA grahaNa karavAnI cAhie / jo niyama sAmAnya rUpa se
ekalavihArI zramaNa ke lie hai vahI niyama ekalavihArI gaNAvacchedaka, AcArya va
zithilAcArI zramaNa ke lie hai| AlocanA prAcArya, upAdhyAya ke samakSa kara
prAyazcitta lekara zuddha honA caahie| yadi ve anupasthita hoM to apane
saMbhogI, sArmika, bahuzruta Adi ke samakSa AlocanA karanI caahie| yadi ve pAsa
meM na hoM to anya samudAya ke saMbhogI, bahuzruta Adi zramaNa jahA~ hoM vahA~
jAkara AlocanA kara prAyazcitta grahaNa karanA caahie| yadi vaha bhI na hoM to
sArUpika (sadoSI) kintu bahuzruta sAdhu hoM to vahA~ jAkara prAyazcitta lenA
caahie| yadi vaha bhI na hoM to bahuzruta zramaNopAsaka ke pAsa aura usakA bhI
abhAva ho to samyagdaSTi gahastha ke pAsa jAkara prAyazcitta karanA cAhie / ina
sabake abhAva meM gA~va yA nagara ke bAhara jAkara pUrva yA uttara dizA ke
sammukha khar3e hokara donoM hAtha jor3akara apane aparAdha kI pAlocanA kare /
dvitIya uddezaka meM kahA hai ki eka samAna samAcArI vAle do sArmika sAtha meM
hoM aura unameM se kisI eka ne doSa kA sevana kiyA ho to dUsare ke sanmukha
prAyazcitta lenA caahie| prAyazcitta karane vAle kI sevA Adi kA bhAra dUsare
zramaNa para rahatA hai| yadi donoM ne doSasthAna kA sevana kiyA ho to paraspara
AlocanA kara prAyazcitta lekara sevA karanI caahie| aneka zramaNoM meM se kisI
eka zramaNa ne aparAdha kiyA ho to eka ko hI prAyazcitta de / yadi sabhI ne
aparAdha kiyA hai to eka ke atirikta zeSa sabhI prAyazcitta lekara zuddhikaraNa
kareM aura unakA prAyazcitta pUrNa hone para use bhI prAyazcitta dekara zuddha
kreN| parihArakalpasthita zramaNa kadAcit rugNa ho jAya to use gaccha se bAhara
nikAlanA nahIM kalpatA / jaba taka vaha svastha na ho jAya taba taka bayAvRtya
karavAnA gaNAvacchedaka kA kartavya hai aura svastha hone para usane
sadoSAvasthA meM sevA karavAI ataH use prAyazcitta lenA caahie| isI taraha
anavasthApya evaM pArAMcika prAyazcitta karane vAle ko bhI rugNAvasthA meM
gaccha se bAhara nahIM karanA caahie| vikSiptacitta ko bhI gaccha se bAhara
nikAlanA nahIM kalpatA aura jaba taka usakA citta sthira na ho jAya taba taka
usakI pUrNa sevA karanI cAhie tathA svastha hone para nAmamAtra kA prAyazcitta
denA caahie| isI prakAra dIptacitta (jisakA citta abhimAna se udadIpta ho gayA
hai), unmAdaprApta, upasargaprApta, sAdhikaraNa, saprAyazcitta grAdi ko gaccha
se bAhara nikAlanA nahIM klptaa| nauvAM anavasthApya prAyazcitta karane vAle
sAdhu ko mRhasthaliMga dhAraNa karAye binA saMyama meM punaH sthApita [ 55 ]

Page #57 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
It should not be done, because its offense is so great that without doing so,
its full atonement cannot be done, and nor is fear generated in the minds of
other Shramans towards that type of offense. Similarly, after dressing the
Shraman with the tenth Paranchik atonement in the garb of a householder, he
should be re-established in restraint / This right is in the hands of the
atonement giver that he can also dress him in another type of garb without
dressing him in the garb of a householder. It is not appropriate for Pariharic
and Apariharic Shramans to eat together / Apariharic Shramans should not eat
with Pariharic Shramans without completing their tapas, because those who are
ascetics, after completing their tapas, cannot eat with them before one month of
tapas has passed for five days and six months of tapas for one month, because
during those days they need a special type of food which is not necessary for
others / The third Uddeshak states that if a Shraman has a desire in his mind to
wander independently, but he is not knowledgeable about Acharang etc., then even
if he has disciples etc. with his family, it is not appropriate to be
independent by forming a separate gana. If he is knowledgeable about Acharang
etc., then he should wander after taking permission from the sthavir, the one
who wanders without the permission of the sthavir has to be a part of the chhed
or Pariharic atonement for as many days as he has wandered in this way. Only one
who has been initiated for at least three years, is proficient in the practice
of Nirgranth, is proficient in restraint, is proficient in Acharang Pradi
Pravachanshastras, is fully capable of giving atonement, is skilled in deciding
the field etc. for the Sangha, is virtuous, is learned etc. can become an
Upadhyay / One who is skilled in the practice of Shraman, is eloquent in
preaching, is knowledgeable about Dashashrutaskandha-Kalpa-Brihatkalpavyavahar
and has been initiated for at least five years can become an Acharya / Acharya,
Upadhyay, Pravartini, Sthavir, Gani, Ganavchhedak can be given to one who is
skilled in the practice of Shraman, is proficient in preaching, is unattached in
mind and is knowledgeable about Stananga-Samavayanga. In an exception, a sadhu
who has been initiated for one day can also be established in the position of
Acharya, Upadhyay. Such a sadhu must be a believer, patient, trustworthy,
impartial, joyful, permitted, majority and of high birth and endowed with
qualities. One should follow restraint only with the permission of the Acharya
or Upadhyay / One who consumes non-Brahma is ineligible for the position of
Acharya etc. / If he has done such a deed after abandoning the Gachchha, then
after taking re-initiation and three years have passed, if his mind is stable,
his vices are calm, there is no lack of kashaya etc., then he can be established
in the position of Acharya. The fourth Uddeshak states that there should be at
least one other sadhu with the Acharya or Upadhyay in the Hemant and Grishma
seasons and two with the Ganavchhedak / In the rainy season, it is necessary to
have two sadhus with the Acharya and Upadhyay and three with the Ganavchhedak. [
56 ]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
nahIM karanA cAhie, kyoMki usakA aparAdha itanA mahAna hotA hai ki binA vaisA
kiye usakA pUrA prAyazcitta nahIM ho pAtA aura na anya zramaNoM ke antarmAnasa
meM usa prakAra ke aparAdha ke prati bhaya hI utpanna hotA hai| isI prakAra
dasaveM pAraMcika prAyazcitta vAle zramaNa ko bhI gahastha kA veSa pahanAne ke
pazcAta puna: saMyama meM sthApita karanA cAhie / yaha adhikAra prAyazcittadAtA
ke hAtha meM hai ki use gahastha kA veSa na pahanAkara anya prakAra kA veSa bhI
pahanA sakatA hai| pArihArika aura apArihArika zramaNa eka sAtha AhAra kareM,
yaha ucita nahIM hai / pArihArika zramaNoM ke sAtha binA tapa pUrNa hue
apArihArika zramaNoM ko AhArAdi nahIM karanA cAhie, kyoMki jo tapasvI haiM unakA
tapa pUrNa hone ke pazcAt eka mAsa ke tapa para pAMca dina aura chaha mahIne ke
tapa para eka mahInA vyatIta ho jAne ke pUrva unake sAtha koI AhAra nahIM kara
sakatA, kyoMki una dinoM meM unake lie vizeSa prakAra ke pAhAra kI AvazyakatA
hotI hai jo dUsaroM ke lie Avazyaka nahIM / tRtIya uddezaka meM batAyA hai ki
kisI zramaNa ke mAnasa meM apanA svataMtra gaccha banAkara paribhramaNa karane
kI icchA ho para vaha AcArAMga Adi kA parijJAtA nahIM ho to ziSya Adi
parivArasahita hone para bhI pRthak gaNa banAkara svacchandI honA yogya nhiiN|
yadi vaha AcArAMga Adi kA jJAtA hai to sthavira se anumati lekara vicara thavira
kI binA anumati ke vicarane bAle ko jitane dina isa prakAra vicarA ho utane hI
dina kA cheda yA pArihArika prAyazcitta kA bhAgI honA par3atA hai| upAdhyAya
vahI bana sakatA hai jo kama se kama tIna varSa kI dIkSAparyAya vAlA hai,
nirgrantha ke prAcAra meM niSNAta haiM, saMyama meM pravINa hai, AcArAMga prAdi
pravacanazAstroM meM pAraMgata hai, prAyazcitta dene meM pUrNa samartha hai,
saMgha ke lie kSetra Adi kA nirNaya karane meM dakSa hai, cAritravAna hai,
bahuzruta hai Adi / prAcArya vaha bana sakatA hai jo zramaNa ke prAcAra meM
kuzala, pravacana meM paTu, dazAzrutaskandha-kalpa-bRhatkalpavyavahAra kA jJAtA
hai aura kama se kama pAMca varSa kA dIkSita hai / AcArya, upAdhyAya,
pravartinI, sthavira, gaNI, gaNAvacchedaka pada use diyA jA sakatA hai jo
zramaNa ke prAcAra meM kuzala, pravacanadakSa, asaMkliSTamanA va sthAnAMga-
samavAyAMga kA jJAtA hai| apavAda meM eka dina kI dIkSAparyAya vAle sAdhu ko bhI
prAcArya, upAdhyAya ke pada para pratiSThita kiyA jA sakatA hai| usa prakAra kA
sAdhu pratItikArI, dhairyazIla, vizvasanIya, samabhAvI, pramoda kArI, anumata,
bahumata va ucca kulotpanna evaM guNasaMpanna honA Avazyaka hai| AcArya athavA
upAdhyAya kI AjJA se hI saMyama kA pAlana karanA cAhie / abrahma kA sevana
karane vAlA prAcArya Adi padavI ke ayogya hai / yadi gaccha kA parityAga kara
usane vaisA kArya kiyA hai to punaH dIkSA dhAraNa kara tIna varSa bItane para
yadi usakA mana sthira ho, vikAra zAMta ho, kaSAya Adi kA abhAva ho to prAcArya
pada para pratiSThita kiyA jA sakatA hai| caturtha uddezaka meM kahA hai ki
prAcArya athavA upAdhyAya ke sAtha hemanta aura grISma Rtu meM kama se kama eka
anya sAdhu honA cAhie aura gaNAvacchedaka ke sAtha do / barSARtu meM prAcArya
aura upAdhyAya ke sAtha do va gaNAvacchedaka ke sAtha tIna sAdhuoM kA honA
Avazyaka hai| [ 56 ]

Page #58 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
This text sheds light on the importance of the Acharya and explains how to
conduct oneself in their absence. If the Acharya or Upadhyaya are severely ill
and their life expectancy is low, all other Shramans should be called together
and the Acharya should declare that upon his passing, a particular Sadhu should
be bestowed with a particular position. If, after the Acharya's death, that
Sadhu does not appear to be suitable, another can be appointed. If the Sadhu is
deemed worthy, he should be appointed. If another worthy Shraman is not yet
proficient in the Acharanga and other texts, then with the consent of the
Acharya and others, the Sadhu can be temporarily appointed to any position. Upon
finding a suitable candidate, the previous individual should relinquish their
position. Failure to do so will result in a penance. If two Shramans are
traveling together, they should conduct themselves as senior and junior
according to their merit and respect each other. The same applies to the Acharya
and Upadhyaya. In the fifth Uddeshak, it is stated that the Pravartini should
travel from village to village during the cold and hot seasons with at least two
other Sadhvis, and the Ganavachhedaka should be accompanied by three other
Sadhvis. During the rainy season, the Pravartini should be accompanied by three
and the Ganavachhedaka by four Sadhvis. The same rules regarding the death of
the Pravartini and the appointment of a successor that apply to Shramans should
also be understood for Shramanis. The general rule for Vaiavrittya is that a
Shraman should not perform Vaiavrittya for a Shramani, and vice versa. However,
they can serve each other as an exception. In exceptional circumstances, such as
a snakebite, service can be obtained from a householder. This rule applies to
Sthavirakalpis. There is no provision for service for Jinakalpis. If they seek
service, they must perform a Pariharic penance. The sixth Uddeshak states that
one should not visit their relatives without the permission of the Sthaviras.
Shramans and Shramanis who are of limited knowledge and experience should not
visit their relatives alone. If they must visit, they should do so with a
Shraman or Shramani who is well-versed in knowledge and experience. Any food
that is prepared before the arrival of a Shraman is acceptable, but anything
that is not prepared is not acceptable. When the Acharya or Upadhyaya arrive at
the Upashraya from outside, their feet should be wiped clean. Their belongings,
such as their small bag, should be carefully placed on the ground. They should
be served with Vaiavrittya as much as possible. They should be accompanied
within the Upashraya. When they leave the Upashraya, they should be accompanied.
The Ganavachhedaka should be accompanied within the Upashraya and when leaving.
Shramans and Shramanis are expected to live with Shramans and Shramanis who are
knowledgeable in the Acharanga and other Agamas. Living with those who are not
knowledgeable will result in penance. If Shramans and Shramanis from other
Gachchas come for a specific reason, and they are innocent, virtuous, free from
major faults, untouched by anger and other vices, and self-critical, then they
should be treated with equality. Otherwise, they should not be. [ 57 ]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
AcArya kI mahattA para prakAza DAlakara yaha batAyA gayA hai ki unake abhAva meM
kisa prakAra rahanA cAhie ? AcArya, upAdhyAya yadi adhika rugNa hoM aura jIvana
kI AzA kama ho to anya sabhI zramaNoM ko bulAkara prAcArya kahe ki merI Ayu
pUrNa hone para amuka sAdhu ko amuka padavI pradAna karanA / unakI mRtyu ke
pazcAt yadi vaha sAdhu yogya pratIta na ho to anya ko bhI pratiSThita kiyA jA
sakatA hai aura yogya ho to use hI pratiSThita karanA caahie| anya yogya zramaNa
AcArAMga Adi par3hakara dakSa na ho jAya taba taka AcArya Adi kI sammati se
asthAyI rUpa se sAdhu ko kisI bhI pada para pratiSThita kiyA jA sakatA hai aura
yogya padAdhikArI prApta hone para pUrvavyakti ko apane pada se pRthaka ho jAnA
caahie| yadi vaha vaisA nahIM karatA hai to prAyazcitta kA bhAgI hotA hai| do
zramaNa sAtha meM vicaraNa karate hoM to unheM yogyatAnusAra choTA aura bar3A
hokara rahanA cAhie aura eka-dUsare kA sammAna karanA cAhie / isI prakAra
AcArya, upAdhyAya ko bhii| pAMcaveM uddezaka meM pravartinI ko kama se kama do
anya sAdhviyoM ke sAtha zItoSNakAla meM grAmAnugrAma vicaraNa karanA cAhie aura
gaNAvacchedikA ke sAtha tIna anya sAdhviyAM honI cAhie / varSA Rtu meM
pravartinI ke sAtha tIna aura gaNAvacchedikA ke sAtha cAra sAdhviyAM honI
caahie| pravartinI prAdi kI mRtyU aura padAdhikArI kI niyukti ke sambandha meM
jaisA zramaNoM ke lie kahA gayA hai vaisA hI zramaNiyoM ke lie bhI samajhanA
caahie| vaiyAvRtya ke lie sAmAnya vidhAna yaha hai ki zramaNa, zramaNI se aura
zramaNI, zramaNa se bayAvRtya na karAve kintu apavAdarUpa meM paraspara sevA-
zuzrUSA kara sakate haiN| sarpadaMza Adi koI viziSTa paristhiti paidA ho jAya to
apavAdarUpa meM gahastha se bhI sevA karavAI jA na sthavirakalpiyoM ke lie hai|
jinakalpiyoM ke lie sevA kA vidhAna nahIM hai| yadi ve sevA karavAte haiM to
pArihArika taparUpa prAyazcitta karanA par3atA hai| chaThe uddezaka meM batAyA
hai ki apane svajanoM ke yahAM binA sthaviroM kI anumati prApta kie nahIM jAnA
caahie| jo zramaNa-zramaNI alpazruta va alpa-prAgamI haiM unheM ekAkI apane
sambandhiyoM ke yahAM nahIM jAnA cAhie / yadi jAnA hai to bahuzruta va
bahuprAgamadhArI zramaNa-zramaNI ke sAtha jAnA caahie| zramaNa ke pahuMcane ke
pUrva jo vastu paka kara taiyAra ho cukI hai vaha grAhya hai aura jo taiyAra
nahIM huI hai vaha agrAhya hai| prAcArya, upAdhyAya yadi bAhara se upAzraya meM
AveM to unake pAMva poMchakara sApha karanA caahie| unake laghunIta Adi ko
yatanApUrvaka bhUmi para paraThanA caahie| yathAzakti unakI vaiyAvRtya karanI
cAhie / upAzraya meM unake sAtha rahanA caahie| upAzraya ke bAhara jAveM taba
unake sAtha jAnA cAhie / gaNAvacchedaka upAzraya meM raheM taba sAtha rahanA
cAhie aura upAzraya se bAhara jAeM to sAtha jAnA caahie| zramaNa-zramaNiyoM ko
prAcArAMga Adi AgamoM ke jJAtA zramaNa-zramaNiyoM ke sAtha rahana kalpatA hai
aura binA jJAtA ke sAtha rahane para prAyazcitta kA bhAgI bananA par3atA hai|
kisI vizeSa kAraNa se anya gaccha se nikalakara Ane vAle zramaNa-zramaNI yadi
nirdoSa haiM, AcAraniSTha haiM, sabaladoSa se rahita haiM, krodhAdi se
asaMspRSTa haiM, apane doSoM kI AlocanA kara zUddhi karate haiM, to unake sAtha
samAnatA kA vyavahAra karanA kalpatA hai, nahIM to nhiiN| [ 57 ]

Page #59 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The seventh Uddeshak states that a Sadhu should not initiate a woman and a
Sadhvi should not initiate a man. If a woman in a place where there is no Sadhvi
nearby feels a desire for renunciation, then she can be initiated on the
condition that she will be entrusted to a Sadhvi as soon as possible. Similarly,
a Sadhvi can also initiate a man. It is not considered appropriate for Shramanis
to wander in places where thieves, rogues, or wicked people are prevalent, as
there is a fear of theft of clothes and other belongings, and violation of vows.
There is no such restriction for Shramans. If a Shraman has a feud with another
Shraman who resides in a dangerous place (a place inhabited by thieves, etc.),
then he should go there and apologize to him, but not while staying in his own
place. However, a Shramani can apologize from her own place. It is not
considered appropriate for Sadhus and Sadhvis to wander freely without the
control of the Acharya and Upadhyaya. The eighth Uddeshak highlights that a
Sadhu should bring bedding and other necessities that can be carried in one
hand, and should be brought from a distance that can be covered in three days.
For a bound Nirgranth, it is considered appropriate to bring necessities from a
distance that can be covered in five days, if needed. The following equipment is
considered appropriate for a Sthavir: Danda, Bhand, Chatra, Matrika, Lasthik
(pillow or cushion to be kept behind the back), a cushion for meditation, Chel
(cloth), Chel-Chilimilika (cloth curtain), Charm, Charmkosh (leather bag),
Charm-Palich (piece of leather for wrapping). Those items that cannot be carried
along can be kept at the home of a householder near the Upashraya and used from
time to time. If there are many Shramans in a place, and one of them forgets an
item at a householder's place, and another Shraman goes there, then the
householder should tell the Shraman that this item belongs to a saint of your
community. The saint should then take the item and return to his own place and
give it to the one who owns it. If the item does not belong to any saint, then
he should neither use it himself nor give it to others to use, but should
abandon it in a harmless place. If the Shraman has already left from there, then
he should search for him and deliver it to him personally. If his exact
whereabouts are not known, then he should leave it in a secluded place. While
discussing Pahar, it is mentioned that one who eats eight morsels is called Alp-
Yahari, one who eats twelve morsels is called Aparthavmaudrik, one who eats
sixteen morsels is called Dvibhagaprapt, one who eats twenty-four morsels is
called Praptavamoudrik, one who eats thirty-two morsels is called
Pramanopetatari, and one who eats one morsel less than thirty-two is called
Avamoudrik. The ninth Uddeshak states that if a Shramatar has ownership or some
right over food, then that food is not acceptable for Shramans and Shramanis. It
also mentions the Bhikshu-Pratimans, which we have already discussed in the
description of the Dasha-Shruta-Skandha. The tenth Uddeshak describes the form
of Yavamdhyachandra-Pratima or Vanamdhyachandra-Pratima, stating that one which
is thick in the middle like a barley grain and thin on both sides is called
Yavamdhyachandra-Pratima. One which is thin in the middle like a forest and
thick on both sides is called Vajramdhyachandra-Pratima. The holder of
Yavamdhyachandra-Pratima is called Vamdhyachandra-Pratima. One who is like a
forest [ 58 ]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
sAtaveM uddezaka meM yaha vidhAna hai ki sAdhU strI ko aora sAdhvI puruSa ko
dIkSA na de| yadi kisI aise sthAna meM kisI strI ko vairAgya bhAvanA jAgrata haI
ho jahAM sannikaTa meM sAdhvI na ho to vaha isa zarta para dIkSA detA hai ki
vaha yathAzIghra kisI sAdhvI ko supurda kara degaa| isI taraha sAdhvI bhI puruSa
ko dIkSA de sakatI hai| jahAM para taskara, badamAza yA duSTa vyaktiyoM kA
prAdhAnya ho vahAM zramaNiyoM ko vicaranA nahIM kalpatA, kyoMki vahAM para
vastrAdi ke apaharaNa va vratabhaMga zrAdi kA bhaya rahatA hai| zramaNoM ke lie
koI bAdhA nahIM hai| kisI zramaNa kA kisI aise zramaNa se vaira-virodha ho gayA
hai jo vikaTa dizA (corAdi kA nivAsa ho aisA sthAna) meM hai to vahA~ jAkara
usase kSamAyAcanA karanI cAhie, kintu svasthAna para rahakara nhiiN| kintu
zramaNI apane sthAna se bhI kSamAyAcanA kara sakatI hai| sAdhu-sAdhviyoM ko
AcArya, upAdhyAya ke niyantraNa ke binA svacchanda rUpa se paribhramaNa karanA
nahIM klptaa| AThaveM uddezaka meM isa bAta para prakAza DAlA gayA hai ki sAdhU
eka hAtha se uThAne yogya choTe-moTe zayyA saMstAraka, tIna dina meM jitanA
mArga taya kara sake utanI dUra se lAnA kalpatA hai| kisI baddha nirgrantha ke
lie mAvazyakatA par3ane para pAMca dina meM jitanA cala sake utanI dUrI se lAnA
kalpatA hai / sthavira ke lie nimna upakaraNa kalpanIya haiM--daNDa, bhANDa,
chatra, mAtrikA, lASThika (pITha ke pIche rakhane ke lie takiyA yA pATA),
dhyAyAdi ke lie baiThane kA pATA), cela (vastra), cela-cilimilikA (vastra kA
pardA), carma, carmakoza (camar3e kI thailI), carma-palicha (lapeTane ke lie
camar3e kA ttukdd'aa)| ina upakaraNoM meM se jo sAtha meM rakhane ke yogya na
hoM unheM upAzraya ke samIpa kisI gRhastha ke yahAM rakhakara samaya-samaya para
unakA upayoga kiyA jA sakatA hai| kisI sthAna para aneka zramaNa rahate hoM,
unameM se koI zramaNa kisI gRhastha ke yahAM para koI upakaraNa bhUla gayA ho
aura anya zramaNa vahAM para gayA ho to gRhastha zramaNa se kahe ki yaha
upakaraNa Apake samudAya ke saMta kA hai to saMta usa upakaraNa ko lekara
svasthAna para Aye aura jisakA upakaraNa ho use de de| yadi vaha upakaraNa kisI
saMta kA na ho to na svayaM usakA upayoga kare aura na dUsaroM ko upayoga ke lie
de kintu nirdoSa sthAna para usakA parityAga kara de| yadi zramaNa vahAM se
vihAra kara gayA ho to usakI anveSaNA kara svayaM use usake pAsa pahuMcAve /
yadi usakA sahI patA na lage to ekAnta sthAna para prasthApita kara de| pAhAra
kI carcA karate hue batAyA hai ki ATha grAsa kA AhAra karane vAlA alpa-yAhArI,
bAraha grAsa kA AhAra karane vAlA apArdhAvamaudarika, solaha grAsa kA AhAra
karane vAlA dvibhAgaprApta, caubIsa grAsa kA AhAra karane vAlA
prAptAvamaudarika, battIsa grAsa kA AhAra karane vAlA pramANopetAhArI evaM
battIsa grAsa se eka hI grAsa kama khAne vAlA avamaudarika kahalAtA hai| nauveM
uddezaka meM batAyA hai ki zayyAtara kA AhArAdi para svAmitva ho yA usakA kucha
adhikAra ho to vaha prAhAra zramaNa-zramaNiyoM ke lie grAhya nahIM hai| isameM
bhikSupratimAnoM kA bhI ullekha hai jisakI carcA hama dazAzrutaskandha ke
varNana meM kara cuke haiN| dasaveM uhe zaka meM yavamadhyacandra pratimA yA
vanamadhyacandrapratimA kA svarUpa pratipAdita karate hue kahA gayA hai ki jo
yava (jau) ke kaNa samAna madhya meM moTI ora donoM ora patalI ho vaha
yavamadhyacandrapratimA hai| jo vana ke samAna madhya meM patalI aura donoM aura
moTI ho vaha vajramadhyacandrapratimA hai| yavamadhyacandrapratimA kA dhAraka
vamadhyacandrapratimA hai| jo vana [ 58 ]

Page #60 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
A Shraman, for a period of one month, renounces attachment to his body and bears
all favorable and unfavorable circumstances related to Devas, humans, and
animals with equanimity. On the first day of the bright fortnight, he takes one
datti of food and one datti of water. On the second day, he takes two datti of
food and two datti of water. In this way, he increases by one datti each day,
taking 15 datti of food and 15 datti of water on the full moon day. In the dark
fortnight, he decreases by one datti each day and observes a fast on the new
moon day. This is called Yavam‡§ß‡•ç‡§Ø‡§ö‡§®‡•ç‡§¶‡•ç‡§∞‡§™‡•ç‡§∞‡§§‡§ø‡§Æ‡§æ. In Vajram‡§ß‡•ç‡§Ø‡§ö‡§®‡•ç‡§¶‡•ç‡§∞‡§™‡•ç‡§∞‡§§‡§ø‡§Æ‡§æ, 15
datti of food and 15 datti of water are taken on the first day of the dark
fortnight. This is decreased daily until one datti of food and one datti of
water are taken on the new moon day. In the bright fortnight, one datti is
increased each day until a fast is observed on the full moon day. Thus, in each
30-day pratima, food is taken according to datti for 29 days and a fast is
observed on the last day. There are five types of ‡§µ‡•ç‡§Ø‡§µ‡§π‡§æ‡§∞: ‡§Ü‡§ó‡§Æ, ‡§∂‡•ç‡§∞‡•Å‡§§, ‡§Ü‡§ú‡•ç‡§û‡§æ,
‡§ß‡§æ‡§∞‡§£‡§æ, and ‡§ú‡•Ä‡§§‡§µ‡•ç‡§Ø‡§µ‡§π‡§æ‡§∞. ‡§Ü‡§ó‡§Æ is the first and the others are discussed in detail
in the commentary. There are three types of ‡§∏‡•ç‡§•‡§µ‡§ø‡§∞: ‡§ú‡§æ‡§§‡§ø‡§∏‡•ç‡§•‡§µ‡§ø‡§∞, ‡§∏‡•Ç‡§§‡•ç‡§∞‡§∏‡•ç‡§•‡§µ‡§ø‡§∞, and
‡§™‡•ç‡§∞‡§µ‡•ç‡§∞‡§ú‡•ç‡§Ø‡§æ‡§∏‡•ç‡§•‡§µ‡§ø‡§∞. A Shraman who is 60 years old is called ‡§ú‡§æ‡§§‡§ø‡§∏‡•ç‡§•‡§µ‡§ø‡§∞ or
‡§µ‡§Ø‡§É‡§∏‡•ç‡§•‡§µ‡§ø‡§∞. One who knows ‡§†‡§æ‡§£‡§æ‡§Ç‡§ó and ‡§∏‡§Æ‡§µ‡§æ‡§Ø‡§æ‡§Ç‡§ó is called ‡§∏‡•Ç‡§§‡•ç‡§∞‡§∏‡•ç‡§•‡§µ‡§ø‡§∞, and one who
has been initiated for 20 years and is ‡§®‡§ø‡§∞‡•ç‡§ó‡•ç‡§∞‡§®‡•ç‡§• is called ‡§™‡•ç‡§∞‡§µ‡•ç‡§∞‡§ú‡•ç‡§Ø‡§æ‡§∏‡•ç‡§•‡§µ‡§ø‡§∞.
There are three types of ‡§∂‡•à‡§ï‡•ç‡§∑ ‡§≠‡•Ç‡§Æ‡§ø‡§Ø‡§æ‡§Ç: ‡§∏‡§™‡•ç‡§§-‡§∞‡§æ‡§§‡•ç‡§∞‡§ø‡§¶‡§ø‡§®‡•Ä, ‡§ö‡§æ‡§§‡•Å‡§∞‡•ç‡§Æ‡§æ‡§∏‡§ø‡§ï‡•Ä, and
‡§∑‡§£‡•ç‡§Æ‡§æ‡§∏‡§ø‡§ï‡•Ä. It is not permissible to initiate children below the age of eight
years. Those who are young are not eligible to study ‡§™‡•ç‡§∞‡§æ‡§ö‡§æ‡§∞‡§æ‡§Ç‡§ó‡§∏‡•Ç‡§§‡•ç‡§∞. It is
permissible to teach ‡§Ü‡§ö‡§æ‡§∞‡§æ‡§Ç‡§ó to a sadhu who has been initiated for at least
three years. It is permissible to teach ‡§∏‡•Ç‡§§‡•ç‡§∞‡§ï‡•É‡§§‡§æ‡§Ç‡§ó to one who has been
initiated for four years, ‡§¶‡§∂‡§æ‡§∂‡•ç‡§∞‡•Å‡§§‡§∏‡•ç‡§ï‡§®‡•ç‡§ß, ‡§ï‡§≤‡•ç‡§™ (‡§¨‡•É‡§π‡§§‡•ç‡§ï‡§≤‡•ç‡§™), and ‡§µ‡•ç‡§Ø‡§µ‡§π‡§æ‡§∞ to one
who has been initiated for five years, ‡§∏‡•ç‡§•‡§æ‡§®‡§æ‡§Ç‡§ó and ‡§∏‡§Æ‡§µ‡§æ‡§Ø‡§æ‡§Ç‡§ó to one who has been
initiated for eight years, ‡§µ‡•ç‡§Ø‡§æ‡§ñ‡•ç‡§Ø‡§æ‡§™‡•ç‡§∞‡§ú‡•ç‡§û‡§™‡•ç‡§§‡§ø (‡§≠‡§ó‡§µ‡§§‡•Ä) to one who has been
initiated for ten years, ‡§≤‡§ò‡•Å‡§µ‡§ø‡§Æ‡§æ‡§®-‡§™‡•ç‡§∞‡§µ‡§ø‡§≠‡§ï‡•ç‡§§‡§ø, ‡§Æ‡§π‡§æ‡§µ‡§ø‡§Æ‡§æ‡§®‡§™‡•ç‡§∞‡§µ‡§ø‡§≠‡§ï‡•ç‡§§‡§ø, ‡§Ö‡§Ç‡§ó‡§ö‡•Ç‡§≤‡§ø‡§ï‡§æ,
‡§¨‡§Ç‡§ó‡§≤‡§ø‡§ï‡§æ, and ‡§µ‡§ø‡§µ‡§æ‡§π-‡§ö‡•Ç‡§≤‡§ø‡§ï‡§æ to one who has been initiated for eleven years,
‡§Ö‡§£‡•ã‡§∞‡•Å‡§™‡§™‡§æ‡§§‡§ø‡§ï, ‡§ó‡§∞‡•Å‡§≤‡•ã‡§™‡§™‡§æ‡§§‡§ø‡§ï, ‡§ß‡§∞‡§£‡•ã‡§™‡§™‡§æ‡§§‡§ø‡§ï, ‡§µ‡•à‡§∂‡•ç‡§∞‡§Æ‡§£‡•ã‡§™‡§™‡§æ‡§§‡§ø‡§ï, and ‡§µ‡•à‡§≤‡§Ç‡§ß‡§∞‡•ã‡§™‡§™‡§æ‡§§‡§ø‡§ï to one
who has been initiated for twelve years, ‡§â‡§™‡§∏‡•ç‡§•‡§æ‡§®‡§∂‡•ç‡§∞‡•Å‡§§, ‡§¶‡•á‡§µ‡•á‡§®‡•ç‡§¶‡•ç‡§∞‡•ã‡§™‡§™‡§æ‡§§, and
‡§®‡§æ‡§ó‡§™‡§∞‡§ø‡§Ø‡§æ‡§™‡§®‡§ø‡§ï‡§æ (‡§®‡§æ‡§ó‡§™‡§∞‡§ø‡§Ø‡§æ‡§µ‡§£‡§ø‡§ó‡•ç‡§∞‡§æ) to one who has been initiated for thirteen
years, ‡§∏‡•ç‡§µ‡§™‡•ç‡§®‡§≠‡§æ‡§µ‡§®‡§æ to one who has been initiated for fourteen years, ‡§ö‡§æ‡§∞‡§£‡§≠‡§æ‡§µ‡§®‡§æ
to one who has been initiated for fifteen years, ‡§µ‡•á‡§¶‡§®‡•Ä‡§∂‡§§‡§ï to one who has been
initiated for sixteen years, ‡§™‡§æ‡§∂‡•Ä‡§µ‡§ø‡§∑‡§≠‡§æ‡§µ‡§®‡§æ to one who has been initiated for
seventeen years, ‡§¶‡•É‡§∑‡•ç‡§ü‡§ø‡§µ‡§ø‡§ß‡§≠‡§æ‡§µ‡§®‡§æ to one who has been initiated for eighteen
years, ‡§¶‡•É‡§∑‡•ç‡§ü‡§ø‡§µ‡§æ‡§¶ to one who has been initiated for nineteen years, and all types
of scriptures to one who has been initiated for twenty years. ‡§µ‡•à‡§Ø‡§æ‡§µ‡•É‡§§‡•ç‡§Ø
(service) is said to be of ten types: 1. ‡§Ü‡§ö‡§æ‡§∞‡•ç‡§Ø ‡§ï‡•Ä ‡§µ‡•à‡§Ø‡§æ‡§µ‡•É‡§§‡•ç‡§Ø, 2. ‡§â‡§™‡§æ‡§ß‡•ç‡§Ø‡§æ‡§Ø ‡§ï‡•Ä
‡§µ‡•à‡§Ø‡§æ‡§µ‡•É‡§§‡•ç‡§Ø, 3. ‡§∏‡•ç‡§•‡§µ‡§ø‡§∞ ‡§ï‡•Ä, 4. ‡§§‡§™‡§∏‡•ç‡§µ‡•Ä ‡§ï‡•Ä, 5. ‡§∂‡•à‡§ï‡•ç‡§∑-‡§õ‡§æ‡§§‡•ç‡§∞ ‡§ï‡•Ä, 6. ‡§ó‡•ç‡§≤‡§æ‡§®-‡§∞‡•Å‡§ó‡•ç‡§£ ‡§ï‡•Ä, 7.
‡§∏‡§æ‡§Æ‡§ø‡§ï ‡§ï‡•Ä, 8. ‡§ï‡§≤ ‡§ï‡•Ä, 9. ‡§ó‡§£ ‡§ï‡•Ä, and 10. ‡§∏‡§Ç‡§ò ‡§ï‡•Ä ‡§µ‡•à‡§Ø‡§æ‡§µ‡•É‡§§‡•ç‡§Ø. The above ten types of
‡§µ‡•à‡§Ø‡§æ‡§µ‡•É‡§§‡•ç‡§Ø lead to ‡§Æ‡§π‡§æ‡§®‡§ø‡§∞‡•ç‡§ú‡§∞‡§æ. In conclusion, this sutra has many special
features. It emphasizes ‡§∏‡•ç‡§µ‡§æ‡§ß‡•ç‡§Ø‡§æ‡§Ø. [59]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
zramaNa eka mAsa paryanta apane zarIra ke mamatva ko tyAga kara deva, manuSya
aura tiryaJca sambandhI anukUla yA pratikUla upasargoM ko samabhAvapUrvaka
sahana karatA hai aura zuklapakSa kI pratipadA ko eka datti AhAra kI aura eka
datti pAnI kI, dvitIyA ko do datti AhAra kI aura do datti pAnI kI grahaNa karatA
hai| isa prakAra kramazaH eka-eka datti bar3hAtA huA pUrNimA ko 15 datti AhAra
kI aura 15 datti pAnI kI grahaNa karatA hai| kRSNapakSa meM kramaza: eka datti
kama karatA jAtA hai aura amAvasyA ke dina upavAsa karatA hai| ise
yavamadhyacandrapratimA kahate haiN| vajramadhyacandrapratimA meM kRSNapakSa kI
pratipadA ko 15 datti pAhAra kI aura 15 dati pAnI kI grahaNa kI jAtI hai| use
pratidina kama karate hue yAvat amAvasyA ko eka datti prAhAra kI aura eka datti
pAnI kI grahaNa kI jAtI hai / zuklapakSa meM kramaza: eka-eka datti bar3hAte hue
pUrNimA ko upavAsa kiyA jAtA hai / isa prakAra 30 dina kI pratyeka pratimA ke
prArambha ke 29 dina datti ke anusAra pAhAra aura antima dina upavAsa kiyA jAtA
hai| vyavahAra ke Agama, zruta, AjJA, dhAraNA aura jItavyavahAra, ye pAMca
prakAra haiN| inameM pAgama kA sthAna prathama hai aura phira kramazaH inakI
carcA vistAra se bhASya meM hai| sthavira ke jAtisthavira, sUtrasthavira aura
pravrajyAsthavira, ye tIna bheda haiN| 60 varSa kI Ayu vAlA zramaNa jAtisthavira
yA vayaHsthavira kahalAtA hai| ThANAMga, samavAyAMga kA jJAtA sUtrasthavira aura
dIkSA dhAraNa karane ke 20 varSa pazcAta kI dIkSA vAle nirgrantha
pravrajyAsthavira kahalAte haiN| zaikSa bhUmiyAM tIna prakAra kI haiM-sapta-
rAtridinI cAturmAsikI aura ssnnmaasikii| ATha varSa se kama umra vAle bAlaka-
bAlikAoM ko dIkSA denA nahIM klptaa| jinakI umra laghu hai ve prAcArAMgasUtra ke
par3hane ke adhikArI nahIM haiN| kama se kama tIna varSa kI dIkSAparyAya vAle
sAdhu ko AcArAMga par3hAnA kalpya hai / cAra varSa kI dIkSAparyAya vAle ko
sUtrakRtAMga, pA~ca varSa kI dIkSAparyAya vAle ko dazAzrutaskandha, kalpa
(bRhatkalpa) aura vyavahAra, ATha varSa kI dIkSA vAle ko sthAnAMga aura
samavAyAMga, dasa varSa kI dIkSA vAle ko vyAkhyAprajJapti (bhagavatI), gyAraha
varSa kI dIkSA vAle ko laghuvimAna-pravibhakti, mahAvimAnapravibhakti,
aMgacUlikA, baMgalikA aura vivAha-cUlikA, bAraha varSa kI dIkSA vAle ko
aNorupapAtika, garulopapAtika, dharaNopapAtika, vaizramaNopapAtika aura
vailaMdharopapAtika, teraha varSa kI dIkSA vAle ko upasthAnazruta,
devendropapAta aura nAgapariyApanikA (nAgapariyAvaNigrA), caudaha varSa kI dIkSA
vAle ko svapnabhAvanA, pandraha varSa kI dIkSA vAle ko cAraNabhAvanA, solaha
yarSa kI dIkSA vAle ko vedanIzataka, satraha varSa kI dIkSA vAle ko
pAzIviSabhAvanA, aThAraha varSa kI dIkSA vAle ko dRSTividhabhAvanA, unnIsa varSa
kI dIkSA vAle vAle ko dRSTivAda aura bIsa varSa kI dIkSA vAle ko saba prakAra ke
zAstra par3hAnA kalpya hai| vaiyAvRtya (sevA) dasa prakAra kI kahI gaI hai1.
AcArya kI vaiyAvRtya, 2. upAdhyAya kI vaiyAvRtya, usI prakAra, 3. sthavira kI,
4. tapasvI kI, 5. zaikSa-chAtra kI, 6. glAna-rugNa kI, 7. sAmika kI, 8. kala kI.
9. gaNa kI aura 10. saMgha kI vaiyAvRtya / uparyukta dasa prakAra kI vayAvRtya
se mahAnirjarA hotI hai| upasaMhAra isa prakAra prastuta sUtra kI aneka
vizeSatAeM haiN| isameM svAdhyAya para vizeSa rUpa se bala diyA gayA hai| [ 59 ]

Page #61 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Furthermore, studying during an inappropriate time is prohibited. The concept of
an inappropriate time for study has been discussed. The limits of study among
monks and nuns have been defined. There is a description of the types of food
intake: Kavalahari, Alpahari, and Unodari. Rules for the conduct of the Acharya
and Upadhyaya in the Bihar have been laid down. There is a detailed discussion
of the methods of criticism and atonement. The rules and regulations regarding
the residence, study, conduct, and organization of the nuns have been discussed.
The author of this work is believed to be Shrutakevali Bhadrabahu.   To
understand the profound secrets of the Agam literature, various commentaries
have been created. This vast body of Agam commentary can be divided into five
parts: (1) Niyuktis (Nijjutti), (2) Bhashyas (Bhas), (3) Chuniyas (Chunni), (4)
Sanskrit commentaries, and (5) Commentaries written in vernacular languages.
The first commentaries written in Prakrit language, known as Niyuktis, are
famous. In Niyuktis, instead of commenting on every verse of the original text,
the focus is primarily on explaining technical terms. Its style is that of the
Niksepa method, which has been highly favored in jurisprudence. In the Niksepa
method, after presenting multiple possible meanings of a single verse, the
inappropriate meanings are rejected, and the appropriate meaning is accepted.
The renowned German scholar, Sharpeentier, defined Niyukti as follows: "Niyuktis
serve only as an index to their main part. They briefly mention all the detailed
events." Bhadrabahu is considered the author of Niyuktis. We have written
extensively about who he was in other introductions. Ten Niyuktis of Bhadrabahu
are available. Among them is the Dasashrutaskandhaniyukti.   The
Dasashrutaskandhaniyukti begins with salutations to the first Shrutakevali
Bhadrabahu, followed by a description of the rights of the ten studies. The
first study, Asamadhisthan, discusses the relationship between dravya and bhava
samadhi, and describes fifteen Niksepas: the name of the place, establishment,
dravya, area, faith, upward, conduct, residence, restraint, acceptance, warrior,
immovable, counting, institution (sanghan), and bhava. The second study
considers four Niksepas, starting with the name Shabala. The third study
analyzes Ashatana. The fourth study, while considering the Niksepa perspective
on "Gani" and "Sampada," states that Gani and Guni are synonymous. Prachar is
the first Ganisthan. Sampada has two divisions: dravya and bhava. The body is
dravya sampada, and conduct is bhava sampada. The fifth study considers the
Niksepa perspective on chitta samadhi. There are four types of samadhi. When the
mind is free from attachment and aversion, and is absorbed in focused attention,
then it is bhava samadhi. The sixth study considers the Niksepa perspective on
the Upasaka and the image. There are four types of Upasaka: dravyopasaka,
tadarthopaasaka, mohopaasaka, and bhavopaasaka. Only one whose life is
illuminated by the light of Samyagdarshan can be a Bhavopaasaka. Here, the
eleventh [60] ...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
sAtha hI ayogyakAla meM svAdhyAya karane kA niSedha kiyA gayA hai| anadhyAyakAla
kI vivecanA kI gaI hai| zramaNazramaNiyoM ke bIca adhyayana kI sImAeM nirdhArita
kI gaI haiN| AhAra kA kavalAhArI, alpAhArI aura UnodarI kA varNana hai /
prAcArya, upAdhyAya ke lie bihAra ke niyama pratipAdita kiye gaye haiN| AlocanA
aura prAyazcitta kI vidhiyoM kA isameM vistRta vivecana hai / sAdhviyoM ke
nivAsa, adhyayana, vaiyAvatya tathA saMgha-vyavasthA ke niyamopaniyama kA
vivecana hai| isake racayitA zrutakevalI bhadrabAha mAne jAte haiN|
vyAkhyAsAhitya Agama sAhitya ke guru gambhIra rahasyoM ke udghATana ke liye
vividhavyAkhyAsAhitya kA nirmANa hayA hai ! usa virATa Agama vyAkhyAsAhitya ko
hama pAMca bhAgoM meM vibhakta kara sakate haiM (1) niyuktiyAM (nijjutti)| (2)
bhASya (bhAsa) / (3) cUNiyAM (cunnnni)| (4) saMskRta ttiikaaeN| (5) lokabhASA
meM likhita vyAkhyAsAhitya / sarvaprathama prAkRta bhASA meM jo padyabaddha
TIkAeM likhI gaI ve niyuktiyoM ke nAma se vizruta haiN| niyuktiyoM meM mUla
grantha ke pratyeka pada para vyAkhyA na kara mukhya rUpa se pAribhASika zabdoM
kI vyAkhyA kI gaI hai / usakI zailI nikSepapaddhati kI hai| jo nyAyazAstra meM
atyadhita priya rhii| nikSepapaddhati meM kisI eka pada ke sambhAvita aneka
artha karane ke pazcAt unameM se aprastuta arthoM kA niSedha kara prastuta artha
grahaNa kiyA jAtA hai| suprasiddha jarmana vidvAn zArapeNTiyara ne niyukti kI
paribhASA isa prakAra kI hai"niyuktiyA~ apane pradhAna bhAga ke kevala iNDeksa
kA kAma karatI haiM / ve sabhI vistAra yukta ghaTanAvaliyoM kA saMkSepa meM
ullekha karatI haiN|" niyuktikAra bhadrabAha mAne jAte haiN| ve kauna the isa
sambandha meM hamane anya prastAvanAoM meM vistAra se likhA hai / bhadrabAhu kI
dasa niyuktiyAM prApta haiM / usameM dazAzrutaskandhaniyukti bhI eka hai|
dazAzrutaskandhaniyukti prathama zratakevalI bhadrabAha ko namaskAra kiyA gayA
hai phira daza adhyayanoM ke adhikAroM kA varNana hai| prathama asamAdhisthAna
meM dravya aura bhAva samAdhi ke sambandha meM cintana kara sthAna ke nAma,
sthApanA, dravya, kSetra, zraddhA, Urdhva, caryA, vasati, saMyama, pragraha,
yodha, acala, gaNana, saMsthAna (saMghANa) aura bhAva ina pandraha nikSepoM kA
varNana hai| dvitIya adhyayana meM zabala kA nAma Adi cAra nikSepa se vicAra
kiyA hai| tRtIya adhyayana meM AzAtanA kA vizleSaNa hai| caturtha adhyayana meM
"gaNi" aura "sampadA" para nikSepa dRSTi se cintana karate hue kahA gayA hai ki
gaNi aura guNI ye donoM ekArthaka haiN| prAcAra hI prathama gaNisthAna hai|
sampadA ke dravya aura bhAva ye do bheda haiM / zarIra dravyasampadA hai aura
AcAra bhAvasampadA hai| paMcama adhyayana meM cittasamAdhi kA nikSepa kI daSTi
se vicAra kiyA gayA hai| samAdhi ke cAra prakAra haiN| jaba citta rAga-dveSa se
mukta hotA hai, prazastadhyAna meM tallIna hotA hai taba bhAvasamAdhi hotI hai|
SaSTha adhyayana meM upAsaka aura pratimA para nikSepa daSTi se cintana kiyA
gayA hai| upAsaka ke dravyopAsaka, tadarthopAsaka, mohopAsaka aura bhAvopAsaka
ye cAra prakAra hai| bhAvopAsaka vahI ho sakatA hai jisakA jIvana samyagdarzana
ke Aloka se jagamagA rahA ho| yahAM para zramaNopAsaka kI ekAdaza [60 ]

Page #62 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
This is a representation of the paradigms. In the seventh study, while
contemplating the Shraman pratima, five types have been mentioned: Samadhi
pratima, Bhava-bhraman pratima, Upadhan pratima, Viveka pratima, and Prati-
sanlin pratima. In the eighth study, while contemplating the Paryushana kalpa,
Paryavasana, Paryushana, Payu-pashmana, Varshavas, Pratham-samavasaran,
Sthapana, and Jyestha graha have been described as synonyms. The Shraman resides
in one place during Varshavas and wanders for the remaining months. In the ninth
study, while considering the Mohaniya-sthana, its synonyms for Moha have been
mentioned: Pap, Bary, Vaer, Pank, Panak, Kshobh, Asat, Sang, Shalya, Atr,
Nirati, and Dharty. In the tenth study, while contemplating the root causes of
birth and death, the means to be liberated from them have been explained. After
the Niyukti literature, the Bhashya literature was created, but no Bhashya was
written on the Dasha-shruta-skandha. After the Bhashya literature, the Churni
literature was created. This is a prose-based explanatory literature. It
contains explanations written in pure Prakrit and a mixture of Prakrit and
Sanskrit. The name of Churnikar Jinadasagani Mahttar is particularly noteworthy
in the Churni literature. The Dasha-shruta-skandha-churni is based on the Dasha-
shruta-skandha Niyukti. This Churni begins with a Mangalacharan. After that, the
chapters of the ten studies have been discussed. It is simple and easy to
understand. There are some differences between the original text and the Churni-
approved text. This Churni is primarily in the Prakrit language. Sanskrit words
and sentences are also used here and there. After the Churni, the era of
Sanskrit commentaries came. In that era, commentaries were written in Sanskrit
on many Agamas. Brahmamuni (Brahmarshi) wrote a commentary on the Dasha-shruta-
skandha, and Acharya Ghasilalji M. wrote an explanation in Sanskrit on the
Dasha-shruta-skandha. Acharya Samrat Atmaramji M. wrote a commentary in Hindi on
the Dasha-shruta-skandha. And Acharya Amolkarishiji M. wrote the first Hindi
translation. The Dasha-shruta-skandha, including the original Niyukti and
Churni, was published in Vikrama Samvat 2011 by Mani-vijayji Gani Granthamala,
Bhavnagar. The Hindi translation of the Dasha-shruta-skandha by Amolkarishiji
was published in Vira Samvat 2445 by Sukhdevsahay Jwalaprasad, Hyderabad. The
Hindi commentary by Acharya Atmaramji M. was published in 1936 by the Jain
Shastramala office, Saidmittha Bazaar, Lahore. The Dasha-shruta-skandha by
Ghasilalji M. was published in 1960 by the Jain Shastroddhar Samiti, Rajkot,
along with the Sanskrit explanation and Hindi translation. The original-based
translation, under the name "Prayar-Dasha," was published in 1981 by Agam Anuyog
Prakashan, Sanderao. Special meanings have also been given in it here and there.
This edition has been done by the knowledgeable Mahamanishi Muni Shri
Kanhaiyalalji M. "Kamal," an expert in the literature of the Pragama. This
edition is not only beautiful but also extremely beautiful. He has presented a
neutral, thought-provoking solution to the mysteries of the Agam and the various
entangled questions of Shramanachar, based on ancient explanatory literature. In
a few words [ 61 ]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
pratimAnoM kA nirUpaNa hai| saptama adhyayana meM zramaNapratimAoM para cintana
karate hue bhAvabhramaNapratimA ke samAdhipratimA, upadhAnapratimA,
vivekapratimA, pratisaMlInapratimA aura vivekapratimA ye pA~ca prakAra batAye
haiN| aSTama adhyayana meM paryuSaNAkalpa para cintana kara parivasanA,
paryuSaNA, payu pazamanA, varSAvAsa, prathama-samavasaraNa, sthApanA aura
jyeSTha graha ko paryAyavAcI batAyA hai| zramaNa varSAvAsa meM eka sthAna para
sthita rahatA hai aura pATha mAha taka vaha paribhramaNa karatA hai| navama
adhyayana meM mohanIyasthAna para vicAra kara usake pApa, barya, vaira, paMka,
panaka, kSobha, asAta, saMga, zalya, atara, nirati, dhartya ye moha ke
paryAyavAcI batAe gaye haiN| dazama adhyayana meM janmamaraNa ke mUla kAraNoM
para cintana kara usase mukta hone kA upAya batAyA gayA hai| niyuktisAhitya ke
pazcAt bhASyasAhitya kA nirmANa huA, kintu dazAzrutaskandha para koI bhI bhASya
nahIM likhA gyaa| bhASyasAhitya ke pazcAt cUrNisAhitya kA nirmANa huaa| yaha
gadyAtmaka vyAkhyAsAhitya hai / isameM zuddha prAkRta aura saMskRta mizrita
prAkRta meM vyAkhyA likhI gaI hai| cUrNikAra jinadAsagaNi mahattara kA nAma
cuNisAhitya meM vizeSa rUpa se ullekhanIya hai| dazAzrutaskandhacUrNi kA mUla
AdhAra dazAzrutaskandha niyukti hai| isa cUNi meM prathama maMgalAcaraNa kiyA
gayA hai| usake pazcAt dasa adhyayanoM ke adhikAroM kA vivecana kiyA gayA hai|
jo sarala aura sugama hai| mUlapATha meM aura cUrNisammata pATha meM kucha
antara hai| yaha caNi mukhya rUpa se prAkRta bhASA meM hai| yatra-tatra saMskRta
zabdoM va vAkyoM ke prayoga bhI dikhAI dete haiM / cUNi ke pazcAt saMskRta
TIkAoM kA yuga aayaa| usa yuga meM aneka AgamoM para saMskRta bhASA meM TIkAeM
likhI gaI / brahmamuni (brahmarSi) ne dazAzrutaskandha para eka TIkA likhI hai
tathA prAcArya ghAsIlAlajI ma. ne dazAzrutaskandha para saMskRta meM vyAkhyA
likhI aura AcArya samrATa AtmArAmajI ma. ne dazAzrataskandha para hindI meM TIkA
likhii| aura AcArya amolakaRSijI ma. ne sarvaprathama hindI anuvAda likhaa|
maNivijayajI gaNi granthamAlA bhAvanagara se dazAzrutaskandha mUla niyukti cUNi
sahita vi. saM. 2011 meM prakAzita huaa| sukhadevasahAya jvAlAprasAda
haidarAbAda se vIra saM. 2445 ko amolakaRSijI kRta hindI anuvAda
dazAzrutaskandha kA prakAzita huprA / jaina zAstramAlA kAryAlaya saidamiTThA
bAjAra lAhaura se prAcArya prAtmArAmajI ma. kRta san 1936 meM hindI TIkA
prakAzita huii| saMskRta vyAkhyA va hindI anuvAda ke sAtha jaina zAstroddhAra
samiti rAjakoTa se san 1960 meM ghAsIlAlajI ma. kA dazAzrutaskandha prakAzita
huaa| Agama anuyoga prakAzana sANDerAva se prAyAra-dazA ke nAma se mUlasparzI
anuvAda sana 1981 meM prakAzita hamA / yatra-tatra usameM vizeSArtha bhI diyA
gayA hai| prastuta sampAdana-prAgama sAhitya ke marmajJa mahAmanISI muni zrI
kanhaiyAlAlajI ma. "kamala" ne kiyA hai| yaha sampAdana sundara hI nahIM, ati
sundara hai| Agama ke rahasya kA tathA zramaNAcAra ke vividha ulajhe hue praznoM
kA unhoMne prAcIna vyAkhyA sAhitya ke prAdhAra se taTastha cintanaparaka
samAdhAna prastuta kiyA hai| svalpa zabdoM meM [ 61 ]

Page #63 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Clarifying the subject is a characteristic of the editor Muni. His profound
scholarship is evident throughout this edition. The commentary on the
Brihatkalpa is written in the style of the Brihatkalpaniyukti-Dasashrutaskandha,
similar to the Brihatkalpaniyukti. It begins by paying homage to the
Tirthankaras, then contemplates the various types of knowledge, highlighting the
inherent unity of knowledge and auspiciousness. It examines the Anuyoga through
the seven deposits of name, establishment, substance, field, time, speech, and
emotion. The Anuyoga is the post-existent yoga, or the subtle form of yoga. The
four gateways to Anuyoga are the beginning, deposit, following, and perspective
of the Kalpa. The wise, learned, long-ordained, contemplative, unwavering,
established, non-procrastinating, knowledgeable, authorized, and emotionally-
transformative saint contemplates the study of Kalpa and practice. It elaborates
on the Tal-Pralamb, and prescribes atonement for its acceptance. It also
contemplates the deposits of terms like village, city, Kheda, Karbatak, Madamb,
port, Akar, Dronamukha, Nigama, capital, Pashram, Nivesh, Sambadh, Ghosh,
Anshika, etc. It sheds light on the Jainic and the non-Jainic perspectives.
While considering the term "Aarya," it contemplates the twelve deposits of name,
establishment, substance, field, caste, lineage, karma, language, craft,
knowledge, vision, and character. Wandering in the Aarya field leads to the
growth of knowledge, vision, and character. Wandering in non-Aarya fields
increases the possibility of acquiring various faults. This fact is clarified by
citing the example of Skandacharya. It also instructs on wandering in non-Aarya
fields for the growth of knowledge, vision, and character, and provides the
example of King Samprati. The conduct, thoughts, food, and movement of Shramans
and Shramanis are beautifully described in brief. The commentary is presented
throughout using the deposit method. This Niyukti is not independent but is
integrated into the Brihatkalpa Bhashya. The Brihatkalpa-Ladhubhashya-
Brihatkalpa Ladhubhashya is a very important work of Sanghadasagani. It
elaborates on the verses of the Brihatkalpasutra. Despite being a Ladhubhashya,
it has 6490 verses. It is divided into six objectives. The Bhashya begins with a
detailed preface, which has 805 verses. This Bhashya compiles and assesses
important cultural material from India. Dr. Motichand, in his book "Sarthavah,"
has beautifully assessed "Travelers and Sarthavahs" based on some aspects of
this cultural material. Its content is particularly useful for studying ancient
Indian culture and civilization. The heart-touching, subtle, and logical
analysis of the conduct of Jain Shramans is a significant feature of this
Bhashya. The preface discusses the auspiciousness, the context of Shrutagyan in
the Panchakgyan, the sequence of attaining Samyaktva, and the nature of
Praupashmik, Sasvadan, Kshayopashmik, Vedak, and Kshayik Samyaktva. It explains
the nature of Anuyoga and contemplates it through twelve types of gateways,
including deposits. It contemplates Kalpavyavahar from various perspectives,
using examples to clarify the subject. The commentary on the first objective
explains various types of faults and atonement related to the Tal-tree,
exceptions related to the acceptance of Tal-Pralamb, the reasons and methods for
Shramans and Shramanis to travel to other countries, the rules and regulations
for the illness of Shramans, and the types of texts of Vaishyas. It explains the
conduct of Shramans and Shramanis in special circumstances like famine, etc.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
viSaya ko spaSTa karanA sampAdaka munijI kI vizeSatA hai| isa sampAdana meM
unakA gambhIra pANDitya yatra-tatra mukharita huA hai| bRhatkalpa kA
vyAkhyAsAhitya bRhatkalpaniyukti-dazAzrutaskandha kI taraha bRhatkalpaniyukti
likhI gaI hai| usameM sarvaprathama tIrthaMkaroM ko namaskAra kara jJAna ke
vividha bhedoM para cintana kara isa bAta para prakAza DAlA hai ki jJAna aura
maMgala meM kathaMcit abheda hai / anuyoga para nAma, sthApanA, dravya, kSetra,
kAla, vacana aura bhAva ina sAta nikSepoM se cintana kiyA hai / jo pazcAdbhUta
yoga hai vaha anuyoga hai athavA jo stoka rUpa yoga hai vaha anUyoga hai| kalpa
ke upakrama, nikSepa, anugama aura naya ye cAra anuyogadvAra haiM / kalpa aura
vyavahAra kA adhyayana cintana karane vAlA medhAvI santa bahuzruta,
cirapravajita, kalpika, acaMcala, avasthita, aparizrAvI, vijJa prAptAnujJAta
aura bhAvapariNAmaka hotA hai| isameM tAla-pralamba kA vistAra se varNana hai,
aura usake grahaNa karane para prAyazcitta kA bhI vidhAna hai| grAma, nagara,
kher3a, karbaTaka, maDamba, pattana, Akara, droNamukha, nigama, rAjadhAnI,
pAzrama, niveza, saMbAdha, ghoSa, aMzikA, Adi padoM para bhI nikSepadRSTi se
cintana kiyA hai| jinakalpika aura sthavirakalpika para bhI prakAza DAlA hai|
Arya pada para vicAra karate hue nAma, sthApanA, dravya, kSetra, jAti, kula,
karma, bhASA, zilpa, jJAna, darzana, cAritra ina bAraha nikSepoM se cintana kiyA
hai| pAryakSetra meM vicaraNa karane se jJAna, darzana aura cAritra kI
abhivaddhi hotI hai| anArya kSetroM meM vicaraNa karane se aneka doSoM ke lagane
kI sambhAvanA rahatI hai| skandakAcArya ke dRSTAnta ko dekara isa tathya ko
spaSTa kiyA gayA hai| sAtha hI jJAna-darzana-cAritra kI vRddhi hetu anArya
kSetra meM vicaraNa karane kA Adeza diyA hai aura usake lie rAjA samprati kA
dRSTAnta bhI diyA gayA hai / zramaNa aura zramaNiyoM ke prAcAra, vicAra, AhAra,
vihAra kA saMkSepa meM bahuta hI sundara varNana kiyA gayA hai| sarvatra
nikSepapaddhati se vyAkhyAna kiyA gayA hai| yaha niyukti svatantra na rahakara
bRhatkalpabhASya meM mizrita ho gaI hai| bRhatkalpa-ladhubhASya-bRhatkalpa
ladhubhASya saMghadAsagaNI kI eka bahuta hI mahattvapUrNa kRti hai| isameM
bRhatkalpasUtra ke padoM kA vistAra ke sAtha vivecana kiyA gayA hai| laghabhASya
hone para bhI isakI gAthA saMkhyA 6490 hai| yaha chaha uddezyoM meM vibhakta
hai| bhASya ke prArambha meM eka savistRta pIThikA dI gaI hai| jisakI gAthA
saMkhyA 805 hai| isa bhASya meM bhArata kI mahattvapUrNa sAMskRtika sAmagrI kA
saMkalana-Akalana huA hai| isa sAMskRtika sAmagrI ke kucha aMza ko lekara DaoN.
motIcanda ne apanI pustaka "sArthavAha" meM "yAtrI aura sArthavAha" kA sundara
prAkalana kiyA hai| prAcIna bhAratIya saMskRtika aura sabhyatA kA adhyayana
karane ke lie isakI sAmagrI vizeSa upayogI hai| jaina zramaNoM ke AcAra kA
hRdayagrAhI, sUkSma, tArkika vivecana isa bhASya kI mahattvapUrNa vizeSatA hai|
pIThikA meM maMgalavAda, jJAnapaMcaka meM zrutajJAna ke prasaMga para vicAra
karate hue samyaktvaprApti kA krama aura praupazamika, sAsvAdana, kSAyopazamika,
vedaka aura kSAyika samyaktva ke svarUpa kA pratipAdana kiyA gayA hai / anuyoga
kA svarUpa batAkara nikSepa Adi bAraha prakAra ke dvAroM se usa para cintana
kiyA hai| kalpavyavahAra para vividha daSTiyoM se cintana karate hue yatra-tatra
viSaya ko spaSTa karane ke lie dRSTAntoM kA bhI upayoga huA hai| pahale uddezaka
kI vyAkhyA meM tAla-vRkSa se sambandhita vividha prakAra ke doSa aura
prAyazcitta, tAla-pralamba ke grahaNa sambandhI apavAda, zramaNa-zramaNiyoM ko
dezAntara jAne ke kAraNa aura usakI vidhi, zramaNoM kI asvasthatA ke vidhi-
vidhAna, vaiSoM ke pATha prakAra batAye haiN| duSkAla prabhRti vizeSa paristhiti
meM zramaNa-zramaNiyoM ke eka dUsare [ 62 ]

Page #64 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
This text describes the method of living in the field of non-attachment, its 144
transgressions and related atonement, etc. It discusses terms like village,
city, hamlet, Karbatak, Madamb, port, rampart, Dronamukha, Nigama, capital,
ashram, investment, Sambadha, Anshika, Putbhedan, Shankar, etc. It describes the
Nakshatra month, Chandra month, Ritu month, Aditya month and Abhidhit month. It
discusses the actions of Jinakalpika and Sthavirakalpika, Samvasarana,
Tirthankara, Ganadhara, Aharakshariri, Anuttardeva, Chakravarti, Baldeva,
Vasudeva, etc., their auspicious and inauspicious karma natures, the
transformation of the Tirthankara's language into different languages,
Afnagrigha, Rathiyamukha, Shringatak, Chatushk, Chatvar, Antaraphna, etc. It
sheds light on the potential faults that may befall the Shramanis residing in
the Upashrayas built in those places. The commentator has described twelve types
of Dravya Gram (1) Uttanakamallaka, (2) Avaang Mukhamallaka, (3) Samputamallaka,
(4) Uttanakhandamallaka, (5) Avaang Mukhkhandamallaka, (6) Samputakhandamallaka,
(7) Bhiti, (8) Padali, (9) Valabhi, (10) Akshatak, (11) Ruchka, (12) Kashyapak.
Jinakalpika Munis exist only during the time of Tirthankara, Ganadhara and
Kevali. The Samachari of Jinakalpika Muni is described through twenty-seven
doors: (1) Shruta, (2) Sanhanan, (3) Upsarga, (4) Atanka, (5) Vedana, (6)
Katijan, (7) Sthandila, (8) Vasati, (9) Kiyaachir, (10) Ucchaar, (11) Prasravan,
(12) Avakash, (13) Trunphalaka, (14) Sanrakshanata, (15) Sansthapanata, (16)
Prabhriti, (17) Praagni, (18) Deep, (19) Avadhan, (20) Vatsyaksha, (21)
Bhikshacharya, (22) Panak, (23) Lepalepa, (24) Lepa, (25) Prachaaml (26)
Pratima, (27) Masakalp / While contemplating the state of Jinakalpika, light has
been shed through these doors: field, time, character, pilgrimage, cycle,
scripture, Veda, Kalpa, Linga, Leshya, meditation, calculation, acceptance,
renunciation, shaving, atonement, cause, Nishpratikarma and devotion. After
this, the nature of Pariharavishuddhik and Yathalndik Kalpa is explained. The
pravrajya, education, earning, irregular residence and outcome of
Sthavirakalpika are all the same as Jinakalpika. While shedding light on the
conduct of Shramanas, it describes the time of conduct, the area suitable or
unsuitable for residence and sustenance of the Gachchha before conducting, the
selection of supervisors, how to travel for the transcription of the area, the
conduct route and Sthandila land, water, resting place, alms, residence,
disturbance, etc., the method of entering the transcribable area, examining the
inner mind of the humans there through alms, the knowledge of ease and
difficulty in obtaining alms, medicine, etc., the permission of the head of the
residence before conducting, seeing auspicious omens before conducting, etc. The
Samachari of Sthavirakalpika sheds light on these points: 1. Transcription - the
time of transcription of clothes, etc., the faults of transcription and their
atonement / 2. Exit - the time of exiting the Upashraya / 3. Prabhriti - whether
or not to stay in the house prepared for the householder. The related method and
atonement / [63]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
ke avagahIta kSetra meM rahane kI vidhi, usake 144 bhaMga aura tatsambandhI
prAyazcitta Adi kA varNana hai| grAma, nagara, kheDa, karbaTaka, maDamba,
pattana, prAkara, droNamukha, nigama, rAjadhAnI, Azrama, niveza, saMbAdha,
aMzikA, puTabhedana, zaMkara prabhRti padoM para viyecana kiyA hai|
nakSatramAsa, candramAsa, RtumAsa, AdityamAsa aura abhivadhitamAsa kA varNana
hai| jinakalpika aura sthavirakalpika kI kriyAeM, samavasaraNa, tIrthakara,
gaNadhara, AhArakazarIrI, anuttaradeva, cakravartI, baladeva, vAsudeva Adi kI
zubha aura azubha karmaprakRtiyAM, tIrthakara kI bhASA kA vibhinna bhASAoM meM
pariNamana, AphNagRha, rathyAmukha, zRGgATaka, catuSka, catvara, antarAphNa Adi
padoM para prakAza DAlA gayA hai aura una sthAnoM para bane hue upAzrayoM meM
rahane vAlI zramaNiyoM ko jina doSoM ke lagane kI sambhAvanA hai unakI carcA kI
gaI hai| bhASyakAra ne dravya grAma ke bAraha prakAra batAye hai (1)
uttAnakamallaka, (2) avAGa mukhamallaka, (3) sampuTamallaka, (4)
uttAnakakhaNDamallaka, (5) avAGa mukhakhaNDamallaka, (6) sampuTakhaNDamallaka,
(7) bhiti, (8) paDAli, (9) valAbhi, (10) akSATaka, (11) rucaka, (12) kaashypk|
tIrthakara, gaNadhara aura kevalI ke samaya hI jinakalpika muni hote haiN|
jinakalpika muni kI samAcArI kA varNana sattAIsa dvAroM se kiyA hai- (1) zruta,
(2) saMhanana, (3) upasarga, (4) AtaMka, (5) vedanA, (6) katijana, (7)
sthaMDila, (8) vasati, (9) kiyAccira, (10) uccAra, (11) prasravaNa, (12)
avakAza, (13) tRNaphalaka, (14) saMrakSaNatA, (15) saMsthApanatA, (16)
prAbhRtikA, (17) prAgni, (18) dIpa, (19) avadhAna, (20) vatsyakSa, (21)
bhikSAcaryA, (22) pAnaka, (23) lepAlepa, (24) lepa, (25) prAcAmla (26) pratimA,
(27) mAsakalpa / jinakalpika kI sthiti para cintana karate hae kSetra, kAla,
cAritra, tIrtha, paryAya, Agama, veda, kalpa, liMga, lezyA, dhyAna, gaNanA,
abhigraha, pravrAjanA, muNDApanA, prAyazcitta, kAraNa, niSpratikarma aura bhakta
ina dvAroM se prakAza DAlA hai| isake pazcAt parihAravizuddhika aura
yathAlandika kalpa kA svarUpa batAyA hai| sthavirakalpika kI pravrajyA, zikSA,
arthagrahaNa, aniyatavAsa aura niSpatti ye sabhI jinakalpika ke samAna haiN|
zramaNoM ke vihAra para prakAza DAlate hae vihAra kA samaya, vihAra karane se
pahale gaccha ke nivAsa evaM nirvAha yogya yA ayogya kSetra, pratyupekSakoM kA
nirvAcana, kSetra kI pratilekhanA ke lie kisa prakAra gamanAgamana karanA cAhie,
vihAra mArga evaM sthaMDila bhUmi, jala, vizrAmasthAna, bhikSA, vasati, upadrava
Adi kI parIkSA, pratilekhanIya kSetra meM praveza karane kI vidhi, bhikSA se
vahA~ ke mAnavoM ke antarmAnasa kI parIkSA, bhikSA, auSadha Adi kI prApti meM
saralatA va kaThinatA kA parijJAna, vihAra karane se pUrva vasati ke adhipati kI
anumati, vihAra karane se pUrva zubha zakUna dekhanA Adi kA varNana hai|
sthavirakalpikoM kI samAcArI meM ina bAtoM para prakAza DAlA hai1. pratilekhanA-
vastra Adi kI pratilekhanA kA samaya, pratilekhanA ke doSa aura unakA prAyazcita
/ 2. niSkramaNa- upAzraya se bAhara nikalane kA samaya / 3. prAbhRtikA- gRhastha
ke lie jo makAna taiyAra kiyA hai, usameM rahanA cAhie yA nahIM rahanA caahie|
tatsambandhI vidhi va prAyazcitta / [63 ]

Page #65 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Translation:  **4. Time for Accepting Alms and Essential Items Related to
Alms**  **5. Method of Cleaning the Kalpaka-patra (Alms Bowl), Lepita
(Lacquered) and Alapita (Unlacquered) Patra, Benefits of Patra-Lep (Lacquer)**
**6. Gachchashatikadi - Religious, Swagrihayatimishra (Mixed with Household),
Swagrihapashaandamishra (Mixed with Household Heresy), Yavadathikamishra (Mixed
with Yavadathika), Kritakrit (Purchased), Putikarmika (Made with Foul Material),
and Pratmarthakrit (Made for Self-Interest) and their Sub-categories**  **7.
Description of the Anuyan Rath Yatra (Procession of the Anuyans) and its
Associated Faults**  **8. Purakarma - Faults Incurred by Cleaning Hands, etc.,
with Water Containing Mind-Stuff Before Accepting Alms**  **9. Glan-Glan-Rugna
(Sick) Shraman's Service, Nirjara (Loss of Energy) Due to it, Investigation of
Pathya (Dietary Regimen), Method of Taking the Sick Shraman to a Vaidya
(Physician), Manner of Talking to the Vaidya, Providing Shelter to the Sick
Shraman, Faults Incurred by the Acharya (Preceptor) Leaving the Sick Shraman in
a Lane, etc., and the Provisions for their PrƒÅya≈õcitta (Atonement)**  **10.
Gachchpratibandha Yathalandaika - Conduct, Including Vandana (Salutation), with
Yathalandaika Kalpadharis (Followers of the Yathalandaika Kalpa) Who Maintain a
Connection with the Gachch Due to Reasons like Vachana (Scriptural Texts), etc.,
and the Limits of Masakalpa (Monthly Observances)**  **11. Uparidosha - Faults
Incurred by Staying in One Area for More Than One Month During Times Other Than
the Rainy Season**  **12. Apvada - Exceptional Reasons for Staying in One Area
for More Than One Month, Light Shed on the Method of Bhikshacharya (Practice of
Accepting Alms) for Shraman and Shramani (Male and Female Ascetics). It is also
Explained that if a Village, City, etc., is Divided into Two Parts, Inside and
Outside a Fort, then Light is Shed on the Rules and Regulations Regarding the
Acharya's Conduct for Shramanis Inside and Outside. It Explains the Limits of
Masakalpa for Nirgranthi (One Who Has Abandoned All Attachments), Vihar-vidhi
(Rules of Conduct), the Head of the Community and his Qualities, Recording of
the Area by Him, Abduction of Shramanis by Buddhist Shravakas (Followers) in
Bharouch, Suitable Areas for Shramanis, Residence, Protection from Harassment by
Non-believers, Number of Shramanis Going for Bhiksha (Alms), Maximum Time a
Shramani Can Stay in One Place Outside the Rainy Season, and its Provisions.
Considering Both Sthavirakalpa (Rules for Elders) and Jinakalpa (Rules for
Jains), the Commentary Accepts the Prominence of Both from the Perspectives of
Nispaddaka (Executor) and Nispann (Accomplished). From the Perspectives of
Sutra-artha (Meaning of the Sutra), etc., Sthavirakalpa is the Nispaddaka of
Jinakalpa. Jinakalpa is Nispann from the Perspectives of Jnana (Knowledge),
Darshan (Vision), Charitra (Conduct), etc. To Clarify the Subject, Examples of
Guhasingh, Two Women, and Two Groups are Presented. It is Elaborated that
Nirgandha-Nirgranthis (Those Who Have Abandoned All Attachments) Should Not Stay
in Villages, Cities, etc., with One Entrance and One Courtyard. Various
Perspectives are Considered Regarding Where Shraman and Shramani Should Stay. In
the Vyasaman Prakrut Sutra, it is Considered that if There is Discord Among
Shramans, Then One Should Adopt Upa≈õaman (Pacification) and Calm the Distress.
One Who Adopts Upa≈õaman is Paradharka (One Who Protects Others), and One Who
Does Not is Viradharka (One Who Opposes Others). There is a Provision for
PrƒÅya≈õcitta for the Acharya for Neglecting to Pacify Distress Among Shraman and
Shramani. The Method of Pacifying Disputes Among Them is Presented.**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
4. bhikSA-bhikSA ke lene kA samaya aura bhikSA sambandhI prAvazyaka vastueM / 5.
kalpakaraNa-pAtra ko svaccha karane kI vidhi, lepakRta aura alepakRta pAtra,
pAtra-lepa se lAbha / 6. gacchazatikAdi-AdhArmika, svagRhayatimizra,
svagRhapASaNDamizra, yAvadAthikamizra, krItakRta, pUtikArmika aura
prAtmArthakRta tathA unake avAntara bheda / 7. anuyAna rathayAtrA kA varNana
aura usa sambandhI doSa / 8. pura:karma-bhikSA lene se pUrva sacitta jala se
hAtha Adi sApha karane se lagane vAle doSa / 9. glAna-glAna-rugNa zramaNa kI
sevA se hone vAlI nirjarA, usake lie pathya kI gaveSaNA, cikitsA ke lie baidya
ke pAsa le jAne kI vidhi, vaidya se vArtAlApa karane kA tarIkA, rugNa zramaNa ko
upAzraya, galI Adi meM chor3akara cale jAne vAle prAcArya ko lagane vAle doSa
aura unake prAyazcitta kA vidhAna / 10. gacchapratibaddha yathAlaMdika-vAcanA
Adi kAraNoM se gaccha se sambandha rakhane vAle yathAladika kalpadhAriyoM ke
sAtha vandana Adi vyavahAra tathA mAsakalpa kI maryAdA / 11. uparidoSa-varSARtu
ke atirikta samaya meM eka kSetra meM eka mAsa se adhika rahane se lagane vAle
doSa / 12. apavAda-eka kSetra meM eka mAsa se adhika rahane ke prApavAdika
kAraNa, zramaNa-zramaNiyoM kI bhikSAcaryA kI vidhi para bhI prakAza DAlA hai|
sAtha hI yaha bhI batAyA hai ki yadi grAma, nagara Adi durga ke andara aura
bAhara do bhAgoM meM vibhakta ho to andara aura bAhara zramaNiyoM ke
prAcArasambandhI vidhi-vidhAnoM para prakAza DAlate hae batAyA hai ki nirgranthI
ke mAsakalpa kI maryAdA, vihAra-vidhi, samudAya kA pramukha aura usake guNa,
usake dvArA kSetra kI pratilekhanA, bauddha zrAvakoM dvArA bhar3auca meM
zramaNiyoM kA apaharaNa, zramaNiyoM ke yogya kSetra, vasati, vidharmI se
upadrava kI rakSA, bhikSAhetu jAne vAlI zramaNiyoM kI saMkhyA, varSAvAsa ke
atirikta zramaNI ko eka sthAna para adhika se adhika kitanA rahanA, usakA
vidhAna haiN| sthavirakalpa aura jinakalpa ina donoM avasthAoM meM kaunasI
avasthA pramukha hai, isa para cintana karate hue bhASyakAra ne niSpAdaka aura
niSpanna ina donoM dRSTiyoM se donoM kI pramukhatA svIkAra kI hai| sUtra artha
Adi dRSTiyoM se sthavirakalpa jinakalpa kA niSpAdaka hai| jinakalpa jJAna-
darzana-cAritra prabhRti dRSTiyoM se niSpanna hai| viSaya ko spaSTa karane kI
dRSTi se guhAsiMha, do mahilAeM aura do vargoM ke udAharaNa prastuta kiye haiN|
_eka prAcaura aura eka dvAra vAle grAma-nagara Adi meM nirgandha-nirgranthiyoM
ko nahIM rahanA cAhie, isa sambandha meM vistAra se vivecana kiyA hai| zramaNa-
zramaNiyoM ko kisa sthAna meM rahanA cAhie, isa para vividha dRSTiyoM se cintana
kiyA gayA hai| vyavazamana prakRta sUtra meM isa bAta para cintana kiyA hai ki
zramaNoM meM paraspara vaimanasya ho jAye to upazamana dhAraNa karake kleza ko
zAnta karanA caahie| jo upazamana dhAraNa karatA hai vaha pArAdhaka hai, jo
nahIM karatA hai vaha virAdhaka hai| prAcArya ko zramaNa-zramaNiyoM meM kleza
hone para usakI upazAnti hetu upekSA karane para prAyazcitta kA vidhAna hai|
paraspara ke jhagar3e ko zAnta karane kI vidhi pratipAdita kI gaI hai|

Page #66 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Four Nature Sutras state that monks and nuns should not travel from one
village to another during the rainy season. If they do, they incur a penance. If
there is an exceptional reason to travel, they should do so with great care. The
Avagraha Sutra states that when a monk is going for alms or to the ground for
sanitation, etc., and a householder requests him to take clothes, bowls,
blankets, etc., he should take them and give them to the preceptor, etc., and
use them only after obtaining their permission. The Ratribhakt Prakrut Sutra
states that one should not consume food or drink at night or during the twilight
hours, nor should one accept clothes, etc. Traveling at night and during the
twilight hours is also prohibited. There are two types of paths: panth and marg.
Panth is a path where there is nothing between, such as a village, town, etc.,
and marg is a path where there are villages and towns in between. There are five
types of merchants: bhandi, bahilka, bharavah, praudarik, and karpatik. There
are eight types of merchants and eight types of merchant managers. For travel,
the Aryan region is particularly suitable. The term "Aryan" has been considered
in terms of twelve deposits, including name, etc. There are six Aryan races:
Ambastha, Kalinda, Vaideha, Vidak, Harit, and Tantun. There are also six types
of Aryan families: Ugra, Bhog, Rajanya, Kshatriya, Jnat-Kaurava, and Ikshvaku.
Further, in the discussion related to the upashraya, the obstacles to the
upashraya have been elaborated upon. A monk should not stay in a place where
grains like rice and barley, etc., are scattered, nor should he stay in a place
where there are jars of liquor, jars of cold water, light, lamps, food, milk,
yogurt, butter, etc. The method of abandoning the food offered by the Sagarik,
the method of donating food brought from another place, the method of accepting
food from the Samarik, the method of accepting food, utensils, etc., made for
specific individuals, and the method of accepting menstruation offerings have
been explained. There are five types of clothes: (1) jangik, (2) bhangik, (3)
sanak, (4) potak, (5) tiri·π≠pat·π≠ak, and five types of menstruation offerings: (1)
au·πáik, (2) prau·π£·π≠rik, (3) sanak, (4) vakcakcippik, (5) mujcippik. Their nature
and method of acceptance have been explained. The third Uddeshak explains the
method of entering the upashraya of the nirgranth and the nirgranthis. The
acceptance of clothes, etc., which are whole and not whole, different and not
different, and the contemplation on the title of newly initiated monks and nuns
have been discussed. The method of accepting the title, the method of bowing,
etc., have been established. While contemplating on the violence and non-
violence involved in tearing clothes, the violence of substance and the violence
of feeling have been considered. The more intense the passion, etc., in
violence, the more intense the karmic bondage. The karmic bondage due to
knowledge and ignorance in the violent, the diversity of karmic bondage due to
the diversity of the locus, etc., have been contemplated. The fourth Uddeshak
establishes the penance for manual labor, etc. The feeling of sexual desire can
never be free from passion, etc. Therefore, it is not an exception. The
initiation of the Pandak, etc., into the order is prohibited. The fifth Uddeshak
sheds light on the matters related to the gachchha, the remembrance of the
scriptures, and the obstacles related to the subject, the faults incurred by
staying in the gachchha with a troubled mind or by abandoning one's own gachchha
and going to another gachchha, and their penance, the unhesitant and hesitant
night meals, the faults related to belching, vomiting, etc., and their penance,
the effort for food, etc. Special rules and regulations have been laid down for
nuns. The sixth Uddeshak describes the use of harmless words and the non-use of
false words, the penance for taking life, etc., the removal of thorns, the
faults arising from misinterpretation, the exception to penance. Monks and nuns
should use [65]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
cAra prakRta sUtra meM batAyA hai ki zramaNa-zramaNiyoM ko varSARtu meM eka
gAMva se dUsare gAMva nahIM jAnA caahie| yadi mamana karatA hai to use
prAyazcitta pAtA hai| yadi ApavAdika kAraNoM se vihAra karane kA prasaMga
upasthita ho to use yatanA se gamana karanA caahie| avagrahasUtra meM batAyA hai
ki bhikSA yA zaucAdi bhUmi ke lie jAte hue zramaNa ko gRhapati vastra, pAtra,
kambala Adi grahaNa karane kI prArthanA kare to use lekara prAcArya Adi ko
pradAna kare aura unakI AjJA prApta hone para usakA upayoga kre| rAtribhakta
prakRta sUtra meM batAyA hai ki rAtri yA vikAla meM prazana pAna Adi grahaNa
karanA nahIM cAhie aura na vastra Adi ko grahaNa karanA caahie| rAtri aura
vikAla meM adhvagamana kA bhI niSedha kiyA gayA hai / adhva ke do bheda haiM--
pantha aura mArga / jisake bIca meM grAma, nagara Adi kucha bhI na pAe vaha
pantha hai aura jisake bIca grAma nagara Aye vaha mArga hai| sArtha ke bhaMDI,
bahilaka, bhAravaha, praudarika, kArpaTika ye pAMca prakAra haiN| ATha prakAra
ke sArthavAha aura pATha prakAra ke sArtha-vyavasthApakoM kA ullekha hai| vihAra
ke lie AryakSetra hI vizeSa rUpa se upayukta hai| Arya pada para nAma Adi bAraha
nikSepoM se vicAra kiyA hai / Arya jAtiyAM ambaSTha, kalinda, vaideha, vidaka,
harita, tantuNa ye chaha haiM aura Arya kula bhI ugra, bhoga, rAjanya, kSatriya,
jJAta-kaurava aura ikSvAku yaha chaha prakAra ke haiN| Age upAzraya sambandhI
vivecana meM upAzraya ke vyAghAtoM para vistAra se prakAza DAlA hai| jisameM
zAli brIhi Adi sacitta dhAnya kaNa bikhare hue hoM usa bIjAkIrNa sthAna para
zramaNa ko nahIM rahanA cAhie aura na surAvikaTa kumbha, zItodakavikaTakumbha,
jyoti, dIpaka, piNDa, dugdha, dahI, navanIta Adi padArthoM se yukta sthAna para
hI rahanA caahie| sAgArika ke pAhAradi ke tyAga kI vidhi, anya sthAna se AI huI
bhojanasAmagrI ke dAna kI vidhi, sAmArika kA piNDagrahaNa, viziSTa vyaktiyoM ke
nimitta banAye hue bhakta, upakaraNa Adi kA grahaNa, rajoharaNa grahaNa karane
kI vidhi batAI hai| pAMca prakAra ke vastra-(1) jAMgika, (2) bhAMgika, (3)
sAnaka, (4) potaka, (5) tirITapaTTaka, pAMca prakAra ke rajoharaNa-(1) auNika,
(2) prauSTrika, (3) sAnaka, (4) vakcakacippaka, (5) mujacippaka-inake svarUpa
aura grahaNa karane kI vidhi batAI gaI hai| tRtIya uddezaka meM nirgrantha aura
nirgranthiyoM ke paraspara upAzraya meM praveza karane kI vidhi batAI hai|
kRtsna aura akRtsna, bhinna aura abhinna vastrAdi grahaNa, navadIkSita zramaNa-
zramaNiyoM kI upadhi para cintana kiyA hai| upadhigrahaNa kI vidhi, vandana Adi
kA vidhAna kiyA hai| vastra phAr3ane meM hone vAlI hiMsA-ahiMsA para cintana
karate hue dravyAhiMsA aura bhAvahiMsA para vicAra kiyA hai| hiMsA meM jitanI
adhika rAga Adi kI tIvratA hogI utanA hI tIvra karmabandhana hogaa| hiMsaka meM
jJAna aura ajJAna ke kAraNa karmabaMdha, adhikaraNa kI vividhatA se karmabaMdha
meM vaividhya Adi para cintana kiyA gayA hai| caturtha uddezaka meM hastakarma
Adi ke prAyazcitta kA vidhAna hai| mathunabhAva rAgAdi se kabhI bhI rahita nahIM
ho sktaa| ata: usakA apavAda nahIM hai / paNDaka Adi ko pravrajyA dene kA
niSedha kiyA hai| paMcama uddezaka meM gaccha sambandhI, zAstra smaraNa aura
taviSayaka vyAghAta, klezayukta mana se gaccha meM rahane se athavA svagaccha kA
parityAga kara anya gaccha meM cale jAne se lagane vAle doSa aura unakA
prAyazcitta, niHzaMka aura sazaMka rAtribhojana, udgAra-vamana grAdi viSayaka
doSa aura usakA prAyazcitta, pAhAra Adi ke lie prayatna Adi para prakAza DAlA
gayA hai| zramaNiyoM ke lie vizeSa rUpa se vidhi-vidhAna batAye gaye haiN|
SaSTha uddezaka meM nirdoSa vacanoM kA prayoga aura mithyA vacanoM kA aprayoga,
prANAtipAta Adi ke prAyazcitta, kaNTaka ke uddharaNa, viparyAsajanya doSa,
prAyazcitta apavAda kA varNana hai| zramaNa-zramaNiyoM ko viSama [65 ]

Page #67 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
One should not deviate from the path. Understanding the reasons behind the
deranged state of a nirgranthi, the text discusses the arrangements for their
care and the rules and prohibitions regarding their treatment, etc. / For
Shramanas, six types of Parimanu Vyadhat are considered - (1) Kautkucit (2)
Moukharik (3) Chakshulol (4) Titinik (5) Ichchalom (6) Bhijjanidanakaran - their
nature, faults, exceptions, etc. are contemplated. _ In Kalpasthiti Prakrut, six
types of Kalpasthitis are discussed - (1) Samayikkalpasthiti, (2)
Chhedopasthanayakalpasthiti, (3) Nivishmanakalpasthiti, (4)
Nivishtakayikakalpasthiti, (5) Jinkalpasthiti, (6) Stavirakalpasthiti.
Chhedopasthanayakalpasthiti has ten Kalpas - Achelky, Prauddeshik, etc. Its
possessors and non-possessors are also contemplated. In this commentary, there
are scattered Subhashitas, such as "O humans! Be ever vigilant, the intellect of
a vigilant human develops, he who is awake is always blessed." "Jagarah Nara
Nicham, Jagaramanasas Badhate Buddhi / So Suvati // So Dhanam, Jo Jagati So Saya
Dhanno //"  "Character and modesty are the ornaments of a woman. A woman's body
cannot be adorned with ornaments like necklaces, etc. Her ornament is only
character and modesty." "In a gathering, speech devoid of good conduct and
improper is not considered praiseworthy." Thus, this commentary presents a very
subtle analysis of the conduct and thoughts of Shramanas from a logical
perspective. It also sheds considerable light on the social, cultural,
religious, and political conditions of that era. There is beautiful analysis
from a psychological perspective in many places. This 'Grantharatna' has an
unparalleled and unique place not only in the history of Jain literature but
also in Indian literature. Brihatkalpachurni is the primary source and
Laghubhashya of this Churni. / The initial part of Dasashrutaskandhachurni and
Brihatkalpachurni is almost similar. Linguists believe that Dasashrutaskandhani
is older than Brihatkalpachurni. It is possible that both these Churnis belong
to the same Acharya. This Churni has a preface and six Uddeshak. / In the
beginning, the nature of knowledge is contemplated. / While stating that
Abhidhan and Abhidhey are sometimes different and sometimes the same, six
synonyms for the word 'Vriksh' are given in different languages. What is called
'Vriksh' in Sanskrit is called 'Rukkh' in Prakrit, 'Prodan' in Magadhi, 'Kar' in
Lat, 'Chor' in Tamil, and 'Idaku' in Andhra. The Churni mentions texts like
Tattvarthadhigama, Visheshavashyakabhashya, Karmaprakriti, Mahakala,
Govindaniyanti, etc. The language is Sanskrit-mixed Prakrit. The name of the
author is not mentioned in the Churni from beginning to end.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
mArga se nahIM jAnA caahie| jo nirgranthI vikSiptacitta ho gaI hai usake kAraNoM
ko samajhakara usake dekha-rekha kI vyavasthA aura cikitsA grAdi ke vidhi-
niSedhoM kA vivecana kiyA gayA hai / zramaNoM ke lie chaha prakAra ke parimanyu
vyAdhAta mAne gaye haiM--(1) kautkucita (2) maukharika (3) cakSulola (4)
titiNika (5) icchAloma (6) bhijjAnidAnakaraNa-inakA svarUpa, doSa aura apavAda
Adi para cintana kiyA hai| _ kalpasthiti prakRta meM chaha prakAra kI
kalpasthitiyoM para vicAra kiyA hai-(1) sAmAyikakalpasthiti, (2)
chedopasthAnIyakalpasthiti, (3) nivizamAnakalpasthiti, (4)
niviSTakAyikakalpasthiti, (5) jinakalpasthiti, (6) sthavirakalpasthiti |
chedopasthApanIyakalpasthiti ke Acelakya, prauddezika prAdi dasa kalpa haiN|
usake adhikArI aura anadhikArI para bhI cintana kiyA gayA hai| prastuta bhASya
meM yatra-tatra subhASita bikhare par3e haiM, yathAhe mAnavo ! sadA-sarvadA
jAgrata raho, jAgrata mAnava kI buddhi kA vikAsa hotA hai, jo jAgatA hai vaha
sadA dhanya hai| "jAgaraha narA NicaM, jAgaramANassa bar3hate buddhi / so suvati
// so dhaNaM, jo jaggati so sayA dhaNNo // zIla aura lajjA hI nArI kA bhUSaNa
hai| hAra Adi prAbhUSaNoM se nArI kA zarIra vibhUSita nahIM ho sktaa| usakA
bhUSaNa to zIla aura lajjA hI hai| sabhA meM saMskAra rahita asAdhUvAdinI vANI
prazasta nahIM kahI jA sktii| isa prakAra prastuta bhASya meM zramaNoM ke
prAcAra-vicAra kA tArkika dRSTi se bahuta hI sUkSma vivecana kiyA gayA hai| usa
yuga kI sAmAjika sAMskRtika dhArmika rAjanItika sthitiyoM para bhI khAsA acchA
prakAza par3atA hai| aneka sthaloM para manovaijJAnika dRSTi se sundara
vizleSaNa huA hai| jaina sAhitya ke itihAsa meM hI nahIM, apitu bhAratIya
sAhitya meM isa' grantharatna kA apUrva aura anUThA sthAna hai| bRhatkalpacUNi
isa cUNi kA prAdhAra mUlasUtra va laghubhASya hai / dazAzrutaskandhacUNi kA aura
bRhatkalpacUrNi kA prArambhika aMza prAyaH milatA-julatA hai| bhASAvijJoM kA
mantavya hai ki bRhatkalpacaNi se dazAzru taskandhaNi prAcIna hai| yaha sambhava
hai ki ye donoM hI caNiyAM eka hI AcArya kI hoN| prastutaH cUNi meM pIThikA aura
chaha uddezaka hai / prArambha meM jJAna ke svarUpa para cintana kiyA gayA hai /
abhidhAna aura abhidheya ko kathaMcita bhinna aura kathaMcit abhinna batAte hue
vakSa zabda ke chaha bhASAoM meM paryAya diye haiN| jise saMskRta meM vRkSa
kahate haiM vahI prAkRta meM rukkSa, magadha meM prodaNa, lATa meM kara, damila-
tamila meM cora aura Andhra meM iDAku kahA jAtA hai| caNi meM tattvArthAdhigama,
vizeSAvazyakabhASya, karmaprakRti, mahAkalpa, govindaniyaMkti Adi granthoM kA
ullekha kiyA hai| bhASA saMskRtamizrita prAkRta hai| caNi meM prArambha se anta
taka lekhaka ke nAma kA nirdeza nahIM huA hai|

Page #68 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
This commentary is on the *Brihatkalpa* and its *Niyukti* written by Bhadrabaahu
Swami and the *Laghubhashya* written by Sanghdasagani. Acharya Malayagiri could
only write his commentary up to verse 606 of the *Peethika*. He did not write
any further commentary. The remaining commentary was completed by Acharya
Kshemakirti, as acknowledged by Kshemakirti himself. At the beginning of the
commentary, the commentator has paid homage to Jinesvara Deva and remembered his
Sadgurudev, and expressed gratitude to the commentator and the *Churnikara*. The
commentator has written about the creators of the *Brihatkalpa* and *Vyavahara
Sutra* that the fourteen *Purvadhara* Bhadrabaahu Swami created the *Kalpa* and
*Vyavahara* for the benefit of the *Shramanas* so that there would be no
interruption in the *Prayaschitta*. He created the *Niyukti* to clarify the
profound secrets of the *Sutra*. The commentator created the *Bhashya* for those
of limited intellect who lack brilliance. The *Niyukti* and *Bhashya* both
reveal the meaning of the *Sutra* and thus became one text. The commentary uses
Prakrit verses as quotations and cites Prakrit stories to make the subject
matter easier to understand. The present *Malayagiri Vritti* has 4600 verses.
Thus, we see that Acharya Malayagiri was a profound scholar of the scriptures.
The deep discussion and analysis of various philosophies found in his
commentaries is not available anywhere else. He was a great philosopher,
renowned commentator, and a great lecturer of his time. His ability to present
the profound secrets of the *Agamas* in a logical style was amazing and unique.
Saubhagyasagar wrote a commentary on the *Brihatkalpa* in Sanskrit. The
*Brihatkalpa Niyukti*, *Laghubhashya*, and the commentaries of Malayagiri and
Kshemakirti were published from 1933 to 1941 by the Jain Pratmananda Sabha,
Bhavnagar, Saurashtra. The present text was edited by Chaturvijayji and
Punyavijayji. This edition can be considered excellent from the perspective of
editing skills. The *Brihatkalpa* was published with a commentary by an unknown
commentator by the Samyakgyan Pracharak Mandal, Jodhpur. In 1923, it was
published with German commentary, etc., by W. Schubring, Leipzig, 1905: original
only in Nagari script - Pune, 1923. In 1915, Dr. Jivraj Ghelabhai Doshi
published it with a Gujarati translation from Ahmedabad, and Acharya
Amolakrishiji M. published it with a Hindi translation by Sukhdevsahay
Jwalaprasad Jauhari, Hyderabad. In 1977, it was published by Agam Anuyog
Prakashan, Sanderao, under the name "Kappsuttam" with a literal translation and
special meaning. The present editor of this text is Muni Shri Kanhaiyalalji M.
'Kamal', the founder of Agam Anuyog. His word-by-word translation and editing
are captivating. Based on ancient commentary literature, the editor has
attempted to clarify many hidden secrets. The commentary literature on the
*Vyavahara Sutra* is a vibrant commentary on the practice of *Shraman* life. In
the *Vyavahara Niyukti*, the *Utsarga* and *Apavada* are as follows: 1. Shri
Malayagiri Prabhavo, Yam Kattu Mupakramant Matimantah / Sa Kalpashastra Teeka
Maya Anusandhoyate Alpadhiyaa / - Brihatkalpa Peethikavritti, p. 177 [67]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
vRhatkalpapIThikAvRtti prastuta vRtti bhadrabAhu svAmI viracita
bRhatkalpaniyukti evaM saMghadAsagaNI biracita laghubhASya para hai| AcArya
malayagiri pIThikA kI bhASya gAthA 606 paryanta hI apanI vRtti likha ske| Age
unhoMne vRtti nahIM likhI hai| Age kI vRtti prAcArya kSemakIrti ne pUrNa kI hai|
jaisA ki svayaM kSemakIrti ne bhI svIkAra kiyA hai|' vRtti ke prArambha meM
vRttikAra ne jinezvara deva ko praNAma kara sadgurudeva kA smaraNa kiyA hai
tathA bhASyakAra aura cUrNikAra ke prati bhI kRtajJatA vyakta kI hai| vRttikAra
ne bRhatkalpa evaM vyavahArasUtra ke nirmAtAoM ke sambandha meM likhA hai ki
caturdaza pUrvadhara bhadrabAha svAmI ne zramaNoM ke anugrahArtha kalpa aura
vyavahAra kI racanA kI jisase ki prAyazcitta kA vyavaccheda na ho / unhoMne
sUtra ke gambhIra rahasyoM ko spaSTa karane ke liye niyukti kI hI racanA kI hai
aura jinameM pratibhA kI tejasvitA kA abhAva hai una alpabuddhi vAle vyaktiyoM
ke lie bhASyakAra ne bhASya kA nirmANa kiyA hai| vaha niyukti aura bhASya sUtra
ke artha ko prakaTa karane vAle hone se donoM eka grantha rUpa ho gye| vatti meM
prAkRta gAthAoM kA uddharaNa ke rUpa meM prayoga haA hai aura viSaya ko subodha
banAne kI dRSTi se prAkRta kathAe~ uddhRta kI gaI haiN| prastuta malayamiri
vRtti kA granthamAna 4600 zloka pramANa hai| isa prakAra hama dekhate haiM ki
prAcArya malayagiri zAstroM ke gambhIra jJAtA the| vibhinna darzanazAstroM kA
jaisA aura jitanA gambhIra vivecana evaM vizleSaNa unakI TIkAoM meM upalabdha
hai, vaisA anyatra kahIM para bhI upalabdha nahIM hai / ve apane yuga ke mahAn
tattvacintaka, prasiddha TIkAkAra aura mahAn vyAkhyAtA the| AgamoM ke
gurugambhIra rahasyoM ko tarkapUrNa zailI meM prastuta karane kI unakI kSamatA
adbhuta thI, anUThI thii| saubhAgyasAgara ne bRhatkalpa para saMskRta bhASA meM
eka TIkA likhii| bRhatkalpaniyukti, laghubhASya tathA malayagiri, kSemakIrti
kRta TIkA sahita san 1933 se 1941 taka zrI jaina prAtmAnanda sabhA bhAvanagara
saurASTra se prakAzita huii| prastuta grantha kA sampAdana caturavijayajI aura
puNyavijayajI ne kiyaa| sampAdana kalA kI dRSTi se yaha sampAdana utkRSTa kahA
jA sakatA hai| vRhatkalpa eka ajJAta TIkAkAra kI TIkA sahita samyakajJAna
pracAraka maNDala jodhapura se prakAzita haa| sana 1923 meM jarmana TippaNI Adi
ke sAtha W. Schubring Lepizig 1905 : mUla mAtra nAgarIlipi meM-pUnA, 1923 / san
1915 meM DaoN. jIvarAja ghelAbhAI dozI ne gujarAtI anuvAda sahita ahamadAbAda se
prakAzita kiyA, aura AcArya amolakaRSijI ma. ne hindI anuvAda sahita
sukhadevasahAya jvAlAprasAda jauharI haidarAbAda se prakAzita kiyaa| I. san 1977
meM Agama anuyoga prakAzana sANDerAva se "kappasuttaM" ke nAma se mUlAnusparzI
anuvAda aura vizeSa artha ke sAtha prakAzita huaa| prastuta sampAdana prastuta
prAgama ke sampAdaka Agama anuyoga pravartaka muni zrI kanhaiyAlAlajI ma.
'kamala' haiN| jinakA zabdAnulakI anuvAda aura sampAdana mana ko lubhAne vAlA
hai| prAcIna vyAkhyA sAhitya ke AdhAra para aneka nigUr3ha rahasyoM ko sampAdaka
munivara ne spaSTa karane kA prayAsa kiyA hai| vyavahArasUtra vyAkhyAsAhitya
vyavahAra zramaNa jIvana kI sAdhanA kA eka jIvanta bhASya hai| vyavahAraniyukti
meM utsarga aura apavAda 1. zrI malayagirI prabhavo, yAM kattu mupAkramanta
matimantaH / sA kalpazAstra TIkA mayA'nusandhoyate'lpadhiyA /
-bRhatkalpapIThikAvRtti, pR. 177 [67 ]

Page #69 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
This is a discussion. There is also a commentary on this appointment. Which is
more detailed. The appointments of the Brihatkalpa and Vyavahar are very similar
in terms of style, sentiment and language. The facts and principles of sadhana
are almost the same in both. This appointment has been merged into the
commentary. We have already mentioned in the past that the name of the author of
the Vyavahar Bhashya has not yet been known. Like the Brihatkalpa Bhashya, this
Bhashya also sheds light on the conduct and thoughts of the Nirgrantha and
Nirgranthis. First of all, the nature of Vyavahar, Vyavhari and Vyavhartavya has
been discussed in the preface. From the point of view of faults in conduct, the
meaning, difference, cause, special study, Tadah Parshad etc. of atonement have
been discussed and many examples have also been given to clarify the subject.
After this, contemplation has been done from the point of view of deposit on the
words like Bhikshu, Masparihar, Sthanapratisevana, Alochana etc. There is a
separate provision of atonement for Atikram, Vyatikrama, Atichar, Anachar
related to Adhakarma. The purity of both Mulaguna and Uttaraguna is done by
atonement. For Atikram, there is a provision of Masaguru and Kalalghu atonement,
for Atichar, Tapoguru and Kalaguru and for Anachar, Chaturguru atonement.
Pindavishuddhi Samiti Bhavana Tap Pratima and Abhiggraha are all in Uttaraguna.
They have forty-two, eighty, twenty-five, twelve, twelve and four differences
respectively. There are two types of the man who does atonement: Nirgat and
Vartaman. Those who have crossed the Atikrant by Tapohr atonement are Nirgat and
those who are present are Vartaman. Their differences have also been made. There
are four types of men who are eligible for atonement: 1. Ubhaytara who can serve
others while practicing the sadhana of restraint and penance. 2. Atmatara - who
can only do penance. 3. Paratara - who can only serve. 4. Anyatara - who can
only practice one of penance and service at a time. Malochana Palochanaha and
Alochak do not happen without. Alochanaha is itself Acharavan, Pradharavan,
Vyavharavan, Apvridak, Prakurbhi, Niryapak, Apayadarshi and Aparishrabi, endowed
with these qualities. The Alochak is also endowed with these ten qualities:
Jatisampanna, Kulsampanna, Vinayasampanna, Gyanasampanna, Darshanasampanna,
Charanasampanna, Kshata, Danta, Amayi and Apachchattpi. Along with this, the
Bhashyakar has also contemplated on the faults of Alochana, the substance that
is the subject of it, etc., the method of giving atonement, etc. In the
description of Pariharatap, the analysis of service has been done and examples
of Subhadra and Mugawati have also been given. The five types of Aroopana:
Prasthapanika, Sthapita, Kritsna, Akritsna and Hadhada have been told and
discussed in detail. There is a description of various types of atonements for
leaving the Gachch due to laxity and rejoining the Gachch. The nature of
Parsvastha, Yathachchanda, Kushil, Pravasanna and Sansakta has been highlighted.
[68]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
kA vivecana hai| isa niyukti para bhASya bhI hai| jo adhika vistRta hai|
bRhatkalpa aura vyavahAra kI niyukti paraspara zailI bhAva-bhASA kI dRSTi se
bahuta kucha milatI-julatI hai| donoM meM sAdhanA ke tathya va siddhAnta prAyaH
samAna haiM / yaha niyukti bhASya meM vilIna ho gaI hai| vyavahArabhASya hama
pUrva meM hI batA cuke haiM ki vyavahArabhASya ke racayitA kA nAma abhI taka
jJAta nahIM ho sakA hai| bRhatkalpabhASya ke samAna hI isa bhASya meM bhI
nirgrantha aura nirgranthiyoM ke AcAra-vicAra para prakAza DAlA hai|
sarvaprathama pIThikA meM vyavahAra, vyavahArI evaM vyavahartavya ke svarUpa kI
carcA kI gaI hai| vyavahAra meM doSa lagane kI dRSTi se prAyazcitta kA artha,
bheda, nimitta, adhyayana vizeSa, tadaha parSada Adi kA vivecana kiyA gayA hai
aura viSaya ko spaSTa karane ke liye aneka dRSTAnta bhI diye gaye haiN| isake
pazcAt bhikSu, mAsaparihAra, sthAnapratisevanA, AlocanA Adi padoM para nikSepa
dRSTi se cintana kiyA hai| AdhAkarma se sambandhita atikrama, vyatikrama,
aticAra, anAcAra ke lie pRthaka-pRthaka prAyazcitta kA vidhAna hai| mUlaguNa
aura uttaraguNa ina donoM kI vizuddhi prAyazcitta se hotI hai| atikrama ke lie
mAsaguru aura kAlalaghu, aticAra ke lie tapoguru aura kAlaguru aura anAcAra ke
liye caturguru prAyazcitta kA vidhAna hai| piNDavizuddhi samiti bhAvanA tapa
pratimA aura abhigraha ye sabhI uttaraguNa meM haiN| inake kramaza: bayAlIsa,
bhATha, paccIsa, bAraha, bAraha aura cAra bheda hote haiN| prAyazcitta karane
vAle puruSa ke nirgata aura vartamAna ye do prakAra haiN| jo taporha prAyazcitta
se atikrAnta ho gaye haiM ve nirgata haiM aura jo vidyamAna haiM ve vartamAna
haiN| unake bhI bheda-prabheda kiye gaye haiN| prAyazcitta ke yogya puruSa cAra
prakAra ke hote haiM1. ubhayatarajo saMyama tapa kI sAdhanA karatA huA bhI
dUsaroM kI sevA kara sakatA hai / 2. Atmatara-jo kevala tapa hI kara sakatA hai|
3. paratara-jo kevala sevA hI kara sakatA hai| 4. anyatara-jo tapa aura sevA
donoM meM se kisI eka samaya meM eka kA hI sevana kara sakatA hai| mAlocanA
pAlocanAha aura Alocaka ke binA nahIM hotii| aAlocanAha svayaM AcAravAna,
prAdhAravAna, vyavahAravAna, apavrIDaka, prakurvI, niryApaka, apAyadarzI aura
aparizrAbI, ina guNoM se yukta hotA hai / Alocaka bhI jAtisampanna,
kulasampanna, vinayasampanna, jJAnasampanna, darzanasampanna, caraNasampanna,
kSAnta, dAnta, amAyI aura apazcAttApI ina dasa guNoM se yukta hotA hai| sAtha hI
AlocanA ke doSa, tadaviSayabhUta dravya Adi, prAyazcitta dene kI vidhi Adi para
bhI bhASyakAra ne cintana kiyA hai| parihAratapa ke varNana meM sevA kA
vizleSaNa kiyA gayA hai aura subhadrA aura mugAvatI ke udAharaNa bhI diye gaye
haiN| AropaNA ke prasthApanikA, sthApitA, kRtsnA, akRtsnA aura hADahaDA ye pAMca
prakAra batAye haiM tathA ina para vistAra se carcA kI hai| zithilatA ke kAraNa
gaccha kA parityAga kara punaH gaccha meM sammilita hone ke lie vividha prakAra
ke prAyazcittoM kA varNana hai| pArzvastha, yathAcchanda, kuzIla, pravasanna
aura saMsakta ke svarUpa para prakAza DAlA hai| [ 68]

Page #70 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
While discussing the conduct of Shramans, solitary conduct has been prohibited
and the faults associated with it have been described.  The text lays down the
rules for serving ascetics of various types and those afflicted with diseases,
highlighting the psychological approach to serving those with agitated minds
(Kshiptachitt) and those with excited minds (Deeptachitt). The three causes of
an agitated mind are attachment, fear, and insult. The cause of an excited mind
is honor. When honored, pride arises in such a person. Due to this pride, they
become excited (Deeptachitt) after defeating their enemies. The main difference
between an agitated mind and an excited mind is that an agitated mind usually
remains silent, while an excited mind speaks even without purpose. The
commentator has considered the qualifications of those who hold the positions of
Ganavachchedak, Pracharaya, Upadhyaya, Pravartak, Sthavir, Pravatini, etc. Those
who are knowledgeable in the eleven Angas, knowledgeable in the Navam Purva, are
Kritayogi, Bahushruta, knowledgeable in many Agamas, experts in Sutra-artha, are
patient, are Shruta-nigharsha, and are Mahajan, are the only ones who can hold
the distinguished positions of Pracharaya, etc. While discussing the rules and
regulations regarding the conduct of Shramans, it has been stated that how many
saints should an Acharya, Upadhyaya, etc. stay with at least, etc. various rules
and regulations have been described. An Acharya and Upadhyaya have five duties,
which Shramans should pay special attention to: 1. Cleaning their feet when they
go out. 2. Placing their utterance and excretion in a clean place. 3. Following
their wishes. 4. Staying with them inside the shelter. 5. Going out with them. A
Shraman can initiate a woman and after initiation, she should be handed over to
a Sadhvi. A Sadhvi cannot initiate any man. She should be sent to a qualified
Shraman for initiation. A Shramani who has been initiated in one group should
not be initiated in another group. She should be initiated where she wants to
stay, but there is no such rule for Shramans. An Upadhyaya with three years of
initiation can become an Acharya with five years of initiation. The text
describes a place suitable for Varshavas, where there is no excessive mud, no
abundance of two-sense and other beings, the land is fertile, there are two or
three habitable settlements, there is an abundance of juice, there are many
physicians, medicines are easily available, there is an abundance of grain, the
king governs the people properly, there are few hypocritical saints, begging is
easy, and there is no obstacle in self-study. Shramans should not stay where
there are many dogs. While contemplating the qualities and faults of those who
take initiation, the commentary states that some individuals are inherently
flawed due to their country's nature. A person born in Andhra is cruel. A person
born in Maharashtra is talkative, and a person born in Kosala is inherently
wicked. It is very rare to find such qualities absent in individuals.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
zramaNoM ke vihAra kI carcA karate hue ekAkI vihAra kA niSedha kiyA hai aura
unako lagane vAle doSoM kA nirUpaNa kiyA hai| vividha prakAra ke tapasvI va
vyAdhiyoM se saMsakta zramaNa kI sevA kA vidhAna karate hae kSiptacitta aura
dIptacitta kI sevA karane ko manovaijJAnika paddhati para prakAza DAlA hai|
kSiptacitta ke rAga, bhaya aura apamAna tIna kAraNa hai| dIptacitta kA kAraNa
sammAna hai| sammAna hone para usameM mada paidA hotA hai| zatruoM ko parAjita
karane ke kAraNa baha mada se unmatta hokara dIptacitta ho jAtA hai| kSiptacitta
aura dIptacitta meM mukhya antara yaha hai ki kSiptacitta prAyaH mauna rahatA
hai aura dIptacitta binA prayojana ke bhI bolatA rahatA hai| bhASyakAra ne
gaNAvacchedaka, prAcArya, upAdhyAya, pravartaka, sthavira, pravatinI grAdi
padaviyoM ko dhAraNa karane vAle kI yogyatAnoM para vicAra kiyA hai| jo gyAraha
aMgoM ke jJAtA haiM, navama pUrva ke jJAtA haiM, kRtayogI haiM, bahuzruta hai,
bahuta AgamoM ke parijJAtA haiM, sUtrArtha vizArada haiM, dhIra haiM,
zrutanigharSa haiM, mahAjana haiM ve viziSTa vyakti hI prAcArya Adi viziSTa
padaviyoM ko dhAraNa kara sakate haiN| zramaNoM ke vihAra sambandhI
niyamopaniyamoM para vicAra karate hae kahA hai ki AcArya, upAdhyAya grAdi
padavIdAroM ko kama se kama kitane santoM ke sAtha rahanA cAhie, Adi vividha
vidhi-vidhAnoM kA nirUpaNa hai| prAcArya, upAdhyAya ke pAMca pratizaya hote
haiM, jinakA zramaNoM ko vizeSa lakSya rakhanA cAhie 1. unake bAhara jAne para
pairoM ko sApha krnaa| 2. unake uccAra-prasravaNa ko nirdoSa sthAna para
paraThanA / 3. unakI icchAnusAra vaiyAvRtya karanA / 4. unake sAtha upAzraya ke
bhItara rhnaa| 5. unake sAtha upAzraya ke bAhara jaanaa| zramaNa kisI mahilA ko
dIkSA de sakatA hai aura dIkSA ke bAda use sAdhvI ko sauMpa denA caahie| sAdhvI
kisI bhI puruSa ko dIkSA nahIM de sakatI / use yogya zramaNa ke pAsa dIkSA ke
lie preSita karanA caahie| zramaNI eka saMgha meM dIkSA grahaNa kara dUsare
saMgha meM ziSyA bananA cAhe to use dIkSA nahIM denI caahie| use jahA~ para
rahanA ho vahIM para dIkSA grahaNa karanI cAhie, kintu zramaNa ke lie aisA
niyama nahIM hai / tIna varSa kI dIkSAparyAya vAlA upAdhyAya aura 5 varSa kI
dIkSAparyAya vAlA prAcArya bana sakatA hai| varSAvAsa ke lie aisA sthAna zreSTha
batAyA hai, jahA~ para adhika kIcar3a na ho, dvIndriyAdi jIvoM kI bahulatA na
ho, prAsuka bhUmi ho, rahane yogya do tIna bastiyAM hoM, gorasa kI pracuratA ho,
bahuta koI vaidya ho, auSadhiyAM saralatA se prApta hotI hoM, dhAnya kI
pracuratA ho, rAjA samyak prakAra se prajA kA pAlana karatA ho, pAkhaNDI sAdhu
kama rahate hoM, bhikSA sugama ho aura svAdhyAya meM kisI bhI prakAra kA vighna
na ho| jahA~ para kutte adhika hoM vahA~ para zramaNa ko vihAra nahIM karanA
caahie| bhASya meM dIkSA grahaNa karane vAle ke guNa-doSa para cintana karate
hue likhA hai ki kucha vyakti apane dezasvabhAva se hI doSayukta hote haiN|
AMdhra meM utpanna vyakti krUra hotA hai| mahArASTra meM utpanna huA vyakti
vAcAla hotA hai aura kozala meM utpanna hayA vyakti svabhAva se hI duSTa hotA
hai| isa prakAra kA na honA bahata hI kama vyaktiyoM meM sambhava hai|

Page #71 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The commentary further explains the method of collecting and returning materials
for purposes like lying down, etc. It sheds light on the limitations of diet,
stating that a monk who eats eight morsels is called an *alpahƒÅri*, one who eats
twelve, sixteen, twenty-four, thirty-one, and thirty-two morsels is called an
*apƒÅr·∏çhƒÅri*, *ar·∏çhƒÅri*, *prƒÅptƒÅvamoudarya*, and *prama·πáƒÅhƒÅri* respectively. The
ninth *uddesaka* discusses the food intake of monks in relation to their
relatives, friends, and other visitors, highlighting various paradigms. The
tenth *uddesaka* focuses specifically on *yavamƒÅdhyapratimƒÅ* and
*vanamƒÅdhyapratimƒÅ*. It also explains five types of conduct, the method of
*bƒÅladikshƒÅ*, ten types of *vaiyƒÅv·πõtti*, etc. Stories of *PrƒÅya·πÅ rakshit*, *ƒÄrya
kƒÅlak*, King *SƒÅtavƒÅhana*, *Pradyot*, *Murunda*, *CƒÅ·πáakya*, *CilƒÅtaputra*,
*Avanti*, *SukumƒÅla*, *Rohiney*, *PrƒÅrya samudra*, *ƒÄrya mangu*, etc. are
included. This commentary is significant in many ways. A *c≈´·πáƒ´* was also written
on conduct. After the *c≈´·πáƒ´*, *ƒÄcƒÅrya Malayagiri* wrote a *v·πõtti* on conduct.
The *v·πõtti* clearly reflects the profound scholarship of *ƒÄcƒÅrya Malayagiri*.
The depth of the subject, the simplicity of the language, the elegance of the
style, and the clarity of the analysis are noteworthy. The beginning of the text
has a preface in the form of a *pƒ´·π≠hikƒÅ*, which discusses topics like *kalpa*,
conduct, faults, atonement, etc. The commentator, with devotion, has paid homage
to *Arhat Ari·π£·π≠anemi*, his revered guru, and the commentator of the
*vyavahƒÅras≈´tra*, etc. The commentator, while clarifying the difference between
the *B·πõhatkalpa* and *vyavahƒÅra*, writes that the study of *kalpa* deals with
atonement, but it does not include the method of giving atonement, whereas
*vyavahƒÅra* includes both the method of giving atonement and the method of
criticism. This is the special feature of *vyavahƒÅra* compared to *B·πõhatkalpa*.
Analyzing *vyavahƒÅra*, *vyavahƒÅri*, and *vyavahartavya*, he writes that
*vyavahƒÅri* is the doer, *vyavahƒÅra* is the cause, and *vyavahartavya* is the
action. The cause-like *vyavahƒÅra* is of five types: *prƒÅgama*, *≈õruta*, *ƒÅj√±ƒÅ*,
*dhƒÅra·πáƒÅ*, and *jƒ´ta*. The *c≈´·πõ·πáikƒÅra* calls all five types of conduct *kara·πáa*.
The commentator considers *s≈´tra*, *artha*, *jƒ´takalpa*, *mƒÅrga*, *nyƒÅya*,
*apsytavya*, *prƒÅcarita*, and *vyavahƒÅra* to be synonymous. One who knows the
essence of conduct and has the ability to explain the nature of conduct to
others is called a *gƒ´tartha*. For a *gƒ´tartha*, the use of conduct is
essential. Both the giver of atonement and the receiver of atonement should be
*gƒ´tartha*. There are four meanings of atonement: *pratisevƒÅ*, *manyajanƒÅ*,
*grƒÅropa·πáƒÅ*, and *parik≈´canƒÅ*. There are ten types of atonement in the form of
*pratisevƒÅ*. (1) *ƒÄlocana*, (2) *pratikramƒÅ·πáƒÅ*, (3) *tadu-bhaya*, (4) *viveka*,
(5) *utsarga*, (6) *tapa*, (7) *chedha*, (8) *m≈´la*, (9) *anavasthƒÅpya*, and
(10) *pƒÅrƒÅ√±cƒ´ka*. These ten types of atonement have been discussed in detail. If
we compare these types of atonement with the atonement method found in the
*Vinayapitaka*, we will find a surprising similarity. It is essential that the
officer or *ƒÅcƒÅrya* who gives atonement be a *bahu≈õruta* and serious. In front
of everyone, 1. *Vinayapitaka* diagnosis [70]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
Age bhASya meM zayanAdi ke nimitta sAmagrI ekatrita karane aura punaH lauTAne kI
vidhi batalAI hai| AhAra kI maryAdA para prakAza DAlate hue kahA hai--ATha kaura
khAne vAlA zramaNa alpAhArI, bAraha, solaha, caubIsa, ikatIsa aura battIsa grAsa
grahaNa karane vAlA zramaNa kramaza: apArdhAhArI, ardhAhArI, prAptAvamaudarya
aura pramANAhArI hai / navama uddezaka meM zayyAtara ke jJAtika, svajana, mitra
prabhati pAgantuka vyaktiyoM se sambandhita AhAra ko lene aura na lene ke
sambandha meM vicAra kara zramaNoM kI vividha pratimAnoM para prakAza DAlA hai|
- dazama uddezaka meM yavamadhyapratimA aura vanamadhyapratimA para vizeSa rUpa
se cintana kiyA hai| sAtha hI pAMca prakAra ke vyavahAra, bAladIkSA kI vidhi,
dasa prakAra kI vaiyAvRtya Adi viSayoM kI vyAkhyA kI gaI hai| prAyaM rakSita,
Arya kAlaka, rAjA sAtavAhana, pradyota, muruNDa, cANakya, cilAtaputra, avanti,
sukumAla, rohiNeya, prArya samudra, Arya maMgu Adi kI kathAeM AI haiN| prastuta
bhASya aneka dRSTiyoM se mahattvapUrNa hai| vyavahAra para eka cUNi bhI likhI
gaI thii| cUNi ke pazcAt vyavahAra para prAcArya malayagiri ne vRtti likhii|
vatti meM AcArya malayagiri kA gambhIra pANDitya spaSTa rUpa se jhalakatA hai|
viSaya kI gahanatA, bhASA kI prAMjalatA, zailI kA lAlitya aura vizleSaNa kI
spaSTatA prekSaNIya hai| grantha ke prArambha meM prAkkathana ke rUpa meM
pIThikA hai| jisameM kalpa; vyavahAra, doSa, prAyazcitta prabhRti viSayoM para
cintana kiyA hai| vRttikAra ne prArambha meM arhat ariSTanemi ko, apane
sadguruvarya tathA vyavahArasUtra ke caNikAra Adi ko bhaktibhAvanA se vibhora
hokara namana kiyA hai| vRttikAra ne bRhatkalpa aura vyavahAra ina donoM
prAgamoM ke antara ko spaSTa karate hue likhA ki kalpAdhyayana meM prAyazcitta
kA nirUpaNa hai kintu usameM prAyazcitta dene kI vidhi nahIM hai, jabaki
vyavahAra meM prAyazcitta dene kI aura pAlocanA karane kI ye donoM prakAra kI
vidhiyAM haiN| yaha bahatkalpa se vyavahAra kI vizeSatA hai| vyavahAra,
vyavahArI aura vyavahartavya tInoM kA vizleSaNa karate hue likhA hai-vyavahArI
kartArUpa hai, vyavahAra kAraNarUpa hai aura vyavahartavya kAryarUpa hai|
kAraNarUpI vyavahAra prAgama, zruta, AjJA, dhAraNA aura jIta rUpa se pAMca
prakAra kA hai / cUrNikAra ne pAMcoM prakAra ke vyavahAra ko karaNa kahA hai|
bhASyakAra ne sUtra, artha, jItakalpa, mArga, nyAya, epsitavya, prAcarita aura
vyavahAra inako ekArthaka mAnA hai| jo svayaM vyavahAra ke marma ko jAnatA ho,
anya vyaktiyoM ko vyavahAra ke svarUpa ko samajhAne kI kSamatA rakhatA ho vaha
gItArtha hai| jo gItArtha hai usake lie vyavahAra kA upayoga hai / prAyazcitta
pradAtA aura prAyazcitta saMgrahaNa karane vAlA donoM gItArtha hone caahie|
prAyazcitta ke pratisevanA, maMyojanA, grAropaNA aura parikUcanA, ye cAra artha
haiN| pratisevanA rUpa prAyazcitta ke dasa bheda haiN| (1) AlocanA, (2)
pratikramaNA, (3) tadubhaya, (4) viveka (5) utsarga, (6) tapa, (7) cheda, (8)
mUla, (9) anavasthApya aura (10) pArAMcika / ina dasoM prAyazcittoM ke sambandha
meM vizeSa rUpa se vivecana kiyA gayA hai| yadi hama ina prAyazcitta ke prakAroM
kI tulanA vinayapiTaka' meM AyI huI prAyazcittavidhi ke sAtha kareM to
Azcaryajanaka samAnatA milegii| prAyazcitta pradAna karane vAlA adhikArI yA
prAcArya bahuzruta ba gambhIra ho, yaha Avazyaka hai| pratyeka ke sAmane 1.
vinayapiTaka nidAna [ 70 ]

Page #72 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Criticism is prohibited. Both criticism and atonement should be done in front of
a worthy person, so that it can remain confidential. / In the Buddhist
tradition, there is a provision for atonement in front of the community of
monks. The Vinaya Pitaka states that on the Krishna Chaturdashi and Purnima of
every month, all monks should gather in the Uposathagar. The Tathagata Buddha
told his successor Sangha. Therefore, a learned monk is appointed to the post of
head of the assembly and the Patimokkha is recited. At the end of each case, the
question is asked whether all the monks present are pure in the said matters? If
any monk wants to criticize his fault in this regard, the Sangha contemplates on
it and purifies him. The same question is repeated for the second and third
time. After everyone's approval, one by one cases are read further. Similarly,
the nuns recite the Bhikkhuni Patimokkha. It is true that the atonement methods
of both traditions are different. But both have psychological aspects. Both
traditions expect the purity of heart and simplicity of thoughts of the seeker
who is atoning. In the first objective, two types of atonement are mentioned:
original atonement and subsequent atonement. / Original atonement is of five
types: violence, falsehood, stealing, sexual misconduct, and attachment.
Subsequent atonement is of ten types. Subsequent atonement is in the form of
future, past, with a limit, controlled, concrete, abstract, quantified,
complete, symbolic and non-acceptance. In the above words, the ten types of
subsequent atonement are: Pindavishuddhi, five samitis, external penance,
internal penance, Bhikshapratima and Abhigha. Original atonement and subsequent
atonement are also of two types: Darya and Kalpya. Atonement without reason is
Dapka and atonement with reason is Kalpika. The commentator has presented
discussions at various places to clarify the subject. / The present commentary
has 34625 verses. After the commentary, short commentaries explaining the
meanings of the Pragama in simple and easy-to-understand language have been
written, whose language is a mixture of ancient Gujarati-Rajasthani. This is
known as Balavabodh and Tabba. / Dharmasimha Muni of the Stanakvasi tradition
has also written Tabba on the Vyavahar Sutra, but it is still unpublished. The
Hindi translation of the Vyavahar Sutra by Acharya Amolkarishiji Maharaj has
been published. Jivraj Ghelabhai Doshi has also published a Gujarati
translation. Shubing Leipzig wrote it in 1918 with German commentary. / Which
was published in 1923 by the Jain Sahitya Samiti, Pune. Pujya Ghasilalji M. has
published the Cheda Sutras only with Sanskrit commentary. The Vyavahar Sutra was
published in 1980 from Agam Anuyog Prakashan, Sanderao. Which was edited by
Agammarmgy Muni Shri Kanhaiyalalji M. "Kamal". The present editor, Muni Shri
Kanhaiyalalji M. "Kamal", had earlier edited and published the three Ved Sutras:
Prayar-Dasha, Kappasuttam and Bahar Suttam. Based on the same, the present three
Agamas are being edited and published in more detail. Nishita has already been
published. This publication of the four Cheda Sutras with original, meaning and
discussion is glorious in itself. With the publication of these three Pragama,
[71]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
pAlocanA kA niSedha kiyA gayA hai| pAlocanA aura prAyazcita donoM hI yogya
vyakti ke samakSa hone cAhie, jisase ki vaha gopanIya raha sake /
bauddhaparamparA meM sAdhusamudAya ke sAmane prAyazcitta grahaNa kA vidhAna hai|
vinayapiTaka meM likhA haipratyeka mahIne kI kRSNa caturdazI aura pUrNamAsI ko
sabhI bhikSu uposathAgAra meM ekatrita ho tathAgata buddha ne apanA
uttarAdhikArI saMgha ko batAyA hai| ata: kisI prAjJa bhikSu ko sabhA ke pramukha
pada para niyukta kara pAtimokkha kA vAcana kiyA jAtA hai aura pratyeka
prakaraNa ke upasaMhAra meM yaha jijJAsA vyakta kI jAtI hai ki upasthita sabhI
bhikSu ukta bAtoM meM zuddha haiM ? yadi koI bhikSu tatsambandhI apane doSa kI
mAlocanA karanA cAhatA hai to saMgha usa para cintana karatA hai aura usakI
zuddhi karavatA hai| dvitIya aura tRtIya bAra bhI usI prazna ko duharAyA jAtA
hai| sabhI kI svIkRti hone para eka-eka prakaraNa Age par3he jAte haiN| isI
taraha bhikSuNiyAM bhikkhunI pAtimokkha kA vAcana karatI haiN| yaha satya hai ki
donoM hI paramparAnoM kI prAyazcitta vidhiyAM pRthak-pRthak haiN| para donoM meM
manovaijJAnikatA hai| donoM hI paramparAoM meM prAyazcitta karane vAle sAdhaka
ke hRdaya kI pavitratA, vicAroM kI saralatA apekSita mAnI hai| prathama uddezaka
meM pratisevanA ke mUlapratisevanA aura uttarapratisevanA ye do prakAra batAye
haiM / mUlaguNaaticArapratisevanA prANAtipAta, mRSAvAda, adattAdAna, maithuna,
parigraha rUpa pAMca prakAra kI hai| uttaraguNAticAra pratisevanA dasa prakAra
kI hai| uttaragUNa anAgata, atikrAnta, koTisahita, niyantritaH sAkAra, anAkAra,
parimANakRta, niravazeSa, sAMketika aura adrA pratyAkhyAna ke rUpa meM hai|
Upara zabdoM meM uttaraguNoM ke piNDavizuddhi, pAMca samiti, bAhya tapa,
pAbhyAntara tapa, bhikSapratimA aura abhigraha isa taraha dasa prakAra haiN|
mUlaguNAticArapratisevanA aura uttaraguNAticArapratisevanA inake bhI darya aura
kalpya ye do prakAra haiN| binA kAraNa pratisevanA dapikA hai aura kAraNa yukta
pratisevanA kalpikA hai| vRttikAra ne viSaya ko spaSTa karane ke lie sthAna-
sthAna para vivecana prastuta kiyA hai / prastuta vRtti kA granthamAna 34625
zloka pramANa hai| vRtti ke pazcAt janabhASA meM sarala aura subodha zailI meM
prAgamoM ke zabdArtha karane vAlI saMkSipta TIkAeM likhI gaI haiM, jinakI bhASA
prAcIna gujarAtI-rAjasthAnI mizrita hai| yaha bAlAvabodha va TabbA ke nAma se
vizrata haiM / sthAnakavAsI paramparA ke dharmasiMha muni ne vyavahArasUtra para
bhI TabbA likhA hai, para abhI taka vaha aprakAzita hI hai| prAcArya
amolakaRSijI mahArAja dvArA kRta hindI anuvAda sAhita vyavahArasUtra prakAzita
huA hai| jIvarAja ghelAbhAI dozI ne gujarAtI meM anuvAda bhI prakAzita kiyA hai|
zubiMga lipajiga ne jarmana TippaNI ke sAtha san 1918 meM likhA / jisako jaina
sAhitya samiti pUnA se 1923 meM prakAzita kiyA hai| pUjya ghAsIlAlajI ma. ne
chedasUtroM kA prakAzana kevala saMskRta TIkA ke sAtha karavAyA hai| Agama
anuyoga prakAzana sANDerAva se san 1980 meM vyavahArasUtra prakAzita haa| jisakA
sampAdana AgamamarmajJa muni zrI kanhaiyAlAlajI ma. "kamala" ne kiyaa| prastuta
sampAdana-muni zrI kanhaiyAlAlajI ma. "kamala" ne pahale prAyAra-dasA,
kappasuttaM aura bahArasuttaM ina tInoM vedasUtroM kA sampAdana aura prakAzana
kiyA thaa| usI para aura adhika vistAra se prastuta tIna AgamoM kA sampAdana
kara prakAzana ho rahA hai| isake pUrva nizItha kA prakAzana ho cukA hai| cAroM
chedasUtroM para mUla, artha aura vivecana yukta yaha prakAzana apane Apa meM
gauravapUrNa hai| ina tIna prAgamoM ke prakAzana ke sAtha hI [71]

Page #73 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The publication of the thirty-two *pagama* accepted by the *sthƒÅnakavƒÅsƒ´*
tradition is also being completed from this present *ƒÅgama* series. The
commendable vision of the late revered *yuvacharya* Shri Madhukar Muni Ji
Maharaj has been given concrete form due to many editor *munis*, *mahƒÅsatis* and
scholars. This is a matter of supreme joy. The *chedas≈´tras* elaborate on the
code of conduct of the *shramans*. The *chedas≈´tras* describe the path of
*utsarga* and *apvƒÅda*. I was thinking of writing about these in great detail,
but due to the responsibility of the *shraman* community and being extremely
busy with that work, and due to the very crowded environment, I could not write.
I have this thought myself. I have written a very brief introductory preface. I
hope that the discerning reader will understand the essence that remains in the
*ƒÅgama*. As a result of the boundless grace of the great *rƒÅ·π£·π≠rasanta*
*ƒÅchƒÅryasamrƒÅt* Shri Anand Rishi Ji Maharaj and the most revered *p≈´jya*
*gurudev* *upƒÅdhyƒÅya* Shri Pushkar Muni Ji Maharaj, I have been able to do some
work in the field of literature, and I am happy that I have been able to give
concrete form to their inspiration by writing prefaces on *ƒÅgama* literature. I
not only hope but have complete faith that discerning readers will enrich their
lives by studying the *ƒÅgamas*. *UpƒÅchƒÅrya* Devendra Muni Kot, Pipard City, Date
22-10-91 [72]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
prastuta AgamamAlA se sthAnakavAsI paramparA mAnya battIsa pAgamoM kA prakAzana
kArya bhI sampanna ho rahA hai| svargIya zraddheya yuvAcArya zrI madhukara
munijI ma. kI kamanIya kalpanA ko aneka sampAdaka muniyoM, mahAsatiyoM aura
vidvAnoM ke kAraNa mUrta rUpa mila gayA hai| yaha parama pAhlAda kA viSaya hai|
chedasUtroM meM zramaNoM kI prAcArasaMhitA kA vistAra se nirUpaNa hA hai|
chedasUtroM meM utsarga aura apavAda mArga kA nirUpaNa hai| maiM bahuta hI
vistAra se ina para likhane kA soca rahA thA, para zramaNasaMghIya vyavasthA kA
dAyitva A jAne se usa kArya meM atyadhika vyasta rahane ke kAraNa aura atyadhika
bhIr3a bharA vAtAbaraNa hone ke kAraNa nahIM likha sakA / isakA mujhe svayaM ko
vicAra hai| bahata hI saMkSipta meM paricayAtmaka prastAvanA likhI hai| AzA hai,
sujJa pAThaka Agama meM rahe hue marma ko smjheNge| mahAmahita rASTrasanta
AcAryasamrATa zrI AnandaRSijI ma. aura paramazraddheya pUjya gurudeva upAdhyAya
zrI puSkaramunijI ma. kI asIma kRpA ke phalasvarUpa hI maiM sAhitya ke kSetra
meM kucha kArya kara sakA hU~ aura svargIya yuvAcArya zrI madhukara munijI ma.
kI preraNA se Agama sAhitya para prastAvanAeM likhakara unakI preraNA ko
mUrtarUpa de sakA hai, isakA mana meM santoSa hai| AzA hI nahIM apitu pUrNa
vizvAsa hai ki sujJa pAThakagaNa AgamoM kI svAdhyAya kara apane jIvana ko dhanya
bnaayeNge| upAcArya devendramuni koTa, pIpAr3asiTI dinAMka 22-10-91 [72 ]

Page #74 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
261 269 272 276 280 Vyavahar Sutra [256-458] First Uddeshak The method of giving
penance to the critic with and without deceit The method of the Pariharakalp
situated Bhikshu for Vyavritti The method of the solitary wanderer for returning
to the gana The method of the Parsvastha-vihary etc. for returning to the gana
The method of the one who has left the Samyama for returning to the gana The
order of Palochana The summary of the first Uddeshak Second Uddeshak The method
of Pariharatapas for the wandering Sarmiks The prohibition of removing sick
Bhikshus from the gana The establishment of Anvasthapy and Paranchik Bhikshus
The accusation of Akrityasevan and the method of its decision The resolution of
abandoning Samyama and returning The method of giving a position to a one-sided
Bhikshu The mutual food-related behavior of Parihariks and Apariharis The
summary of the second Uddeshak 286 288 290 294 295 297 299 303 307 [78]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
261 269 272 276 280 vyavahArasUtra [256-458] prathama uddezaka kapaTasahita
tathA kapaTarahita aAlocaka ko prAyazcitta dene kI vidhi parihArakalpasthita
bhikSu kA vaiyAvRtya ke lie vihAra akele vicarane vAle kA gaNa meM punarAgamana
pArzvastha-vihArI Adi kA gaNa meM punarAgamana saMyama chor3akara jAne vAle kA
gaNa meM punarAgamana pAlocanA karane kA krama prathama uddezaka kA sArAMza
dUsarA uddezaka vicarane vAle sArmika ke parihAratapa kA vidhAna rugNa bhikSuoM
ko gaNa se nikAlane kA niSedha anavasthApya aura pArAMcika bhikSu kI upasthApanA
akRtyasevana kA AkSepa aura usake nirNaya kI vidhi saMyama tyAgane kA saMkalpa
evaM punarAgamana ekapakSIya bhikSu ko pada dene kA vidhAna pArihArika aura
apArihArikoM ke paraspara AhAra-sambandhI vyavahAra dUsare uddezaka kA sArAMza
286 288 290 294 295 297 299 303 307 [78]

Page #75 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Third Uddeshak**  * **Method and Prohibition of Holding the Third Uddeshak
Gan** * **Method and Prohibition of Giving the Upadhyaya, Pradi, and Pada** *
**Regulation for Giving Pada to those with Alpa-Diksha-Paryaya** * **Prohibition
of Nirgrantha-Nirgranthi Staying without the Leadership of Acharya** * **Method
and Prohibition of Giving Pada to Abrahma-Sevi** * **Method and Prohibition of
Giving Pada to those who have Abandoned Samyama** * **Prohibition of Giving Pada
to Papa-Jivi Bahushruta** * **Summary of the Third Uddeshak**  **Fourth
Uddeshak**  * **Number of Nirgranthas Staying with Acharya, etc.** * **Duty of
Remaining Sadhus when the Leading Sadhu Passes Away** * **Instruction for Giving
Pada by Glana Acharya, etc.** * **Instruction for Giving Pada by Acharya, etc.
to those who have Abandoned Samyama** * **Regulation of Upasthapan** *
**Discretion of a Bhikshu who has Gone to Another Gan** * **Method and
Prohibition of Going to Abhinicharika** * **Duty of Champra-Vritta and Charya-
Nirvritta Bhikshus** * **Conduct of Shaiksha and Ratna-Adhik** * **Regulation of
Considering Ratna-Adhik as the Leading One** * **Summary of the Fourth
Uddeshak**  **Fifth Uddeshak**  * **Number of Nirgranthis Staying with
Pravatini, etc.** * **Duty of Sadhvi when the Leading Sadhvi Passes Away** *
**Instruction for Giving Pada by Pravatini** * **Method and Prohibition of
Giving Pada to Achar-Prakalp-Vismrul** * **Regulation for Repeating Achar-
Prakalp for Sthavir** * **Method and Prohibition of Mutual Criticism** *
**Method and Prohibition of Mutual Service** * **Method and Prohibition of
Snakebite Treatment** * **Summary of the Fifth Uddeshak**  **Sixth Uddeshak**  *
**Method and Prohibition of Going to Gochari in Swajan-Parajan-Gah** * **Excess
of Acharya, Pradi, etc.**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
r m mmmm 311 321 324 333 335 338 345 346 348 MY tIsarA uddezaka gaNa dhAraNa
karane kA vidhi-niSedha upAdhyAya prAdi pada dene ke vidhi-niSedha
alpadIkSAparyAya vAle ko pada dene kA vidhAna nirgrantha-nirgranthI ko AcArya ke
netRtva binA rahane kA niSedha abrahmasevI ko pada dene ke vidhi-niSedha saMyama
tyAgakara jAne vAle ko pada dene ke vidhi-niSedha pApajIvI bahuzrutoM ko pada
dene kA niSedha tIsare uddezaka kA sArAMza cauthA uddezaka AcAryAdi ke sAtha
rahane vAle nirgranthoM kI saMkhyA agraNI sAdhu ke kAla karane para zeSa sAdhuoM
kA kartavya glAna AcAryAdi ke dvArA pada dene kA nirdeza saMyama tyAga kara jAne
vAle AcAryAdi ke dvArA pada dene kA nirdeza upasthApana ke vidhAna anya gaNa meM
gaye bhikSu kA viveka abhinicArikA meM jAne ke vidhi-niSedha cA~praviSTa evaM
caryAnivRtta bhikSu ke kartavya zaikSa aura ratnAdhika kA vyavahAra ratnAdhika
ko agraNI mAnakara vicarane kA vidhAna cauthe uddezaka kA sArAMza pAMcavAM
uddezaka pravatinI Adi ke sAtha vicarane vAlI nirgranthiyoM kI saMkhyA agraNI
sAdhvI ke kAla karane para sAdhvI kA kartavya pravartinI ke dvArA pada dene kA
nirdeza AcAra-prakalpa-vismRla ko pada dene kA vidhi-niSedha sthavira ke lie
prAcAra-prakalpa ke pUnarAvartana karane kA vidhAna paraspara AlocanA karane ke
vidhi-niSedha paraspara sevA karane kA vidhi-niSedha sarpadaMzacikitsA ke vidhi-
niSedha pAMcaveM uddezaka kA sArAMza chaTThA uddezaka svajana-parajana-gaha meM
gocarI jAne kA vidhi-niSedha AcArya prAdi ke atizaya M M MY 355 358 359 kAnidaza
363 368 372 374 376 [ 79]

Page #76 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
379 380 -382 386 387 388 390 391 392 395 Rules and prohibitions for the
residence of AgitƒÅrthas and their atonement Rules and prohibitions for the
residence of a single monk Atonement for the expulsion of Shukrapudgala
Prohibition of including someone who has come from another gana into the gana
Summary of the sixth Uddesaka Seventh Uddesaka Mutual questioning regarding the
keeping of a Sadhvi who has come from another gana Rules and prohibitions
regarding the severance of relationships Rules and prohibitions regarding
initiation, etc. Rules and prohibitions regarding the instructions of a Guru,
etc., who resides in a distant area Rules and prohibitions for the pacification
of strife Rules and prohibitions for the study of the scriptures for Nirgrantha-
Nirgranthis in times of crisis Rules and prohibitions for Nirgrantha-Nirgranthis
to study the scriptures Rules and prohibitions for studying the scriptures when
there is physical inability The need for the appointment of an Acharya-Upadhyaya
for a Nirgranthi The method of burying the dead body of a Shraman and accepting
the instruments The decision regarding the Pariharaniya Shayatar The method of
accepting Prajna The method of accepting permission in a change of state Summary
of the seventh Uddesaka Eighth Uddesaka The method of accepting a sleeping place
The method of bringing a Shayya-Sanstharak The method of a solitary sthavira
accepting food and going to Gochari The method of seeking permission again for a
Shayya-Sanstharak The method of accepting a Shayya-Sanstharak The request for a
fallen or forgotten instrument The method of bringing an additional vessel The
quantity of food for Unodari Summary of the eighth Uddesaka 397 398 399 400 401
402 404 405 406 407 408 409 411 Ninth Uddesaka Rules and prohibitions for
accepting food made for servants and relatives for the sake of Shayatar 417
Rules and prohibitions for accepting food from shops that are part of Shayatar
420 The seven-seven-day Bhiksha-Pratimas 424 [80 ]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
379 380 -382 386 387 388 390 391 392 395 agItArthoM ke rahane kA vidhi-niSedha
aura prAyazcitta akele bhikSu ke rahane kA vidhi-niSedha zukrapudgala nikAlane
kA prAyazcitta sUtra anya gaNa se Aye hae ko gaNa meM sammilita karane kA
niSedha chaThe uddezaka kA sArAMza sAtavAM uddezaka anya gaNa se AI sAdhvI ke
rakhane meM paraspara pRcchA sambandhaviccheda karane sambandhI vidhi-niSedha
pravrajita karane Adi ke vidhi-niSedha dUrastha kSetra meM rahe hae guru Adi ke
nirdeza kA vidhi-niSedha kalaha upazamana ke vidhi-niSedha vyatikRSTa kAla meM
nirgrantha-nirgranthiyoM ke liye svAdhyAya kA vidhi-niSedha nirgrantha-
nirgranthI ko svAdhyAya karane kA vidhi-niSedha zArIrika asvAdhyAya hone para
svAdhyAya kA vidhi-niSedha nirganthI ke liye prAcArya-upAdhyAya kI niyukti kI
AvazyakatA zramaNa ke mRta zarIra ko paraThane kI aura upakaraNoM ko grahaNa
karane kI vidhi pariharaNIya zayyAtara kA nirNaya prAjJA grahaNa karane kI vidhi
rAjya-parivartana meM AjJA grahaNa karane kA vidhAna sAtaveM uddezaka kA sArAMza
pAThavAM uddezaka zayanasthAna ke grahaNa kI vidhi zayyA-saMstAraka ke lAne kI
vidhi ekAkI sthavira ke bhaNDopakaraNa aura gocarI jAne kI vidhi zayyA-
saMstAraka ke liye punaH AjJA lene kA vidhAna zayyA-saMstAraka grahaNa karane kI
vidhi patita yA vismRta upakaraNa kI eSaNA atirikta pAtra lAne kA vidhAna AhAra
kI unodarI kA parimANa AThaveM uddezaka kA sArAMza 397 398 399 400 401 402 404
405 406 407 408 409 411 navama uddezaka zayyAtara ke pAhaNe naukara evaM
jJAtijana ke nimitta se bane AhAra ke lene kA vidhi-niSedha 417 zayyAtara ke
bhAgIdArI vAlI vikrayazAlAoM se prAhAra lAne kA vidhi-niSedha 420 saptasaptatikA
Adi bhikSa-pratimAeM 424 [80 ]

Page #77 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Mok-pratima-vidhan Datti-praman nirupan three types of aahar avagrihit aahar ke
prakar navam ud‡§¶‡•á‡§∂‡§ï ka saransh 425 427 429 429 440 443 445 446 dasvan ud‡§¶‡•á‡§∂‡§ï do
prakar ki chandrapratimaen panch prakar ke vyavahar vividh prakar se gan ki
vaiyavaty karne vale dharmadridhata ki chaubhangiyaan aacharya evam shishyon ke
prakar sthavir ke prakar badi diksha dene ka kalpraman balak balika ko badi
diksha dene ka vidhi-nishedh balak ko aacharprakalp ke adhyayan karane ka
nishedh diksha paryay ke sath agamon ka adhyayanakram baiyabritty ke prakar evam
maha nirjara dasven ud‡§¶‡•á‡§∂‡§ï ka saransh upasanshar 448 449 450 450 451 455 457
[81]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
moka-pratimA-vidhAna datti-pramANa nirUpaNa tIna prakAra kA AhAra avagRhIta
AhAra ke prakAra navama uddezaka kA sArAMza 425 427 429 429 440 443 445 446
dasavAM uddezaka do prakAra kI candrapratimAeM pAMca prakAra ke vyavahAra
vividha prakAra se gaNa kI vaiyAvatya karane vAle dharmadRDhatA kI caubhaMgiyAM
AcArya evaM ziSyoM ke prakAra sthavira ke prakAra bar3I dIkSA dene kA
kAlapramANa bAlaka bAlikA ko bar3I dIkSA dene kA vidhi-niSedha bAlaka ko
AcAraprakalpa ke adhyayana karAne kA niSedha dIkSA paryAya ke sAtha AgamoM kA
adhyayanakrama baiyAbRtya ke prakAra evaM mahA nirjarA dasaveM uddezaka kA
sArAMza upasaMhAra 448 449 450 450 451 455 457 [81]

Page #78 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Shri Agam Prakashan Samiti, Bayar (Executive Committee) President: Shri
Sagarmalji Betala Acting President: Shri Ratanchandji Modi Vice President: Shri
Dhanrajji Vinaykia Indore: Shri Parsamalji Chordia Bayar: Shri Hukmichandji
Parkh Bayar: Shri Dulichandji Chordia Madras: Shri Jasrajji Sa. Parkh Jodhpur:
Shri G. Sayarmalji Chordia Madras: Shri Amarchandji Modi Dug: Shri Gyanrajji
Mootha Maha Mantri: Shri Gyanchandji Vinaykia Mantri: Shri Javrilalji Shishodia
Madras: Shri R. Prasannachandji Chordia Bayar: Shri Manakchandji Sancheti Bayar:
Shri S. Sayarmalji Chordia Bayar: Shri Motichandji Chordia Madras: Shri
Mulchandji Surana Jodhpur: Shri Tejarajji Bhandari Jodhpur: Shri Bhanwarlalji
Gothi Jodhpur: Shri Prakashchandji Chopra Madras: Shri Jatanrajji Mehta Bayar:
Shri Bhanwarlalji Shrisrimal Madras: Shri Chandanmalji Chordia Madras: Shri
Sumermalji Medtiya Pali: Shri Pasulalji Bohra Co-Secretary: Shri Motichandji
Chordia Treasurer: Shri Mulchandji Surana Jodhpur: Shri Tejarajji Bhandari
Advisor: Shri Bhanwarlalji Gothi Executive Member: Shri Prakashchandji Chopra
Madras: Shri Jatanrajji Mehta Madras: Shri Bhanwarlalji Shrisrimal Nagaur: Shri
Chandanmalji Chordia Jodhpur: Shri Sumermalji Medtiya Madras: Shri Pasulalji
Bohra Bayar: Shri Motichandji Chordia Medta City: Shri Mulchandji Surana Durg:
Shri Tejarajji Bhandari Madras: Shri Bhanwarlalji Gothi Jodhpur: Shri
Prakashchandji Chopra Jodhpur: Shri Jatanrajji Mehta

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
zrI Agama prakAzana samiti, byAvara (kAryakAriNI samiti) adhyakSa kAryavAhaka
adhyakSa upAdhyakSa indaura byAvara byAvara madrAsa jodhapura madrAsa duga
mahAmaMtrI maMtrI zrI sAgaramalajI betAlA zrI ratanacandajI modI zrI dhanarAjajI
vinAyakiyA zrI pArasamalajI coraDiyA zrI hukmIcandajI pArakha zrI dulIcandajI
corar3iyA zrI jasarAjajI sA. pArakha zrI jI. sAyaramalajI coraDiyA zrI
amaracandajI modI zrI jJAnarAjajI mUthA zrI jJAnacandajI vinAyakiyA zrI
javarIlAlajI zizodiyA zrI Ara. prasannacandrajI coraDiyA zrI mANakacandajI
saMcetI zrI esa. sAyaramalajI coraDiyA zrI motIcandajI coraDiyA zrI mUlacandajI
surANA zrI tejarAjajI bhaNDArI zrI bhaMvaralAlajI goThI zrI prakAzacandajI
copar3A zrI jatanarAjajI mehatA zrI bhaMvaralAlajI zrIzrImAla zrI candanamalajI
coraDiyA zrI sumeramalajI mer3atiyA zrI pAsUlAlajI boharA madrAsa byAvara pAlI
byAvara byAvara madrAsa sahamaMtrI koSAdhyakSa jodhapura parAmarzadAtA
kAryakAriNI sadasya madrAsa madrAsa nAgaura jodhapura madrAsa byAvara
mer3atAsiTI durga madrAsa jodhapura jodhapura

Page #79 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Vyavahar Sutra

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
vyavahArasUtra

Page #80 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Please provide the text you would like translated. I need the text to translate
it into English.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================


Page #81 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Method of Atonement for a Critic, with or without Deceit, who has been
Pacified by Conduct  1. A **Bhikkhu** who has been pacified by conduct for one
**Mas** (month), if he is a **critic** without deceit, should atone for one
**Mas**, and if he is a **critic** with deceit, should atone for two **Mas**. 2.
A **Bhikkhu** who has been pacified by conduct for two **Mas**, if he is a
**critic** without deceit, should atone for two **Mas**, and if he is a
**critic** with deceit, should atone for three **Mas**. 3. A **Bhikkhu** who has
been pacified by conduct for three **Mas**, if he is a **critic** without
deceit, should atone for three **Mas**, and if he is a **critic** with deceit,
should atone for four **Mas**. 4. A **Bhikkhu** who has been pacified by conduct
for four **Mas**, if he is a **critic** without deceit, should atone for four
**Mas**, and if he is a **critic** with deceit, should atone for five **Mas**.
5. A **Bhikkhu** who has been pacified by conduct for five **Mas**, if he is a
**critic** without deceit, should atone for five **Mas**, and if he is a
**critic** with deceit, should atone for six **Mas**. Beyond that, whether he is
a **critic** without deceit or with deceit, he should atone for six **Mas**. 6.
A **Bhikkhu** who has been pacified by conduct for many **Mas**, if he is a
**critic** without deceit, should atone for one **Mas**, and if he is a
**critic** with deceit, should atone for two **Mas**. 7. A **Bhikkhu** who has
been pacified by conduct for many **Do Mas** (two months), if he is a **critic**
without deceit, should atone for two **Mas**, and if he is a **critic** with
deceit, should atone for three **Mas**. 8. A **Bhikkhu** who has been pacified
by conduct for many **Te Mas** (three months), if he is a **critic** without
deceit, should atone for three **Mas**, and if he is a **critic** with deceit,
should atone for four **Mas**. 9. A **Bhikkhu** who has been pacified by conduct
for many **Chau Mas** (four months), if he is a **critic** without deceit,
should atone for four **Mas**, and if he is a **critic** with deceit, should
atone for five **Mas**. 10. A **Bhikkhu** who has been pacified by conduct for
many **Panch Mas** (five months), if he is a **critic** without deceit, should
atone for five **Mas**, and if he is a **critic** with deceit, should atone for
six **Mas**. Beyond that, whether he is a **critic** without deceit or with
deceit, he should atone for six **Mas**.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
vyavahArasUna prazama uddezaka kapaTa-sahita tathA kapaTa-rahita Alocaka ko
prAyazcitta dene kI vidhi 1. je bhikkhU mAsiyaM parihArahANaM paDisevittA
AloejjA, apaliuMciyaM pAloemANassa mAsiyaM, paliuMciyaM AloemANassa domAsiyaM /
2. je bhikkhU vomAsiyaM parihAraTThANaM paDisevittA pAloejjA, apaliuMciyaM
AloemANassa domAsiyaM, paliuMciyaM pAloemANassa temAsiyaM / 3. je bhikkhU
temAsiyaM parihAraTThANaM paDisevittA pAloejjA, apaliuMciyaM pAloemANassa
temAsiyaM, paliuMciyaM AloemANassa cAummAsiyaM / 4. je bhikkhU cAummAsiyaM
parihAraTThANaM paDisevittA pAloejjA, apaliuMciyaM AloemANassa cAummAsiyaM
paliuMciyaM, AloemANassa paMcamAsiyaM / 5. je bhikkhU paMcamAsiyaM
parihAraTThANaM paDisevittA AloejjA, apaliuMciyaM AloemANassa paMcamAsiyaM,
paliuMciyaM AloemANassa chammAsiyaM / teNa paraM paliuMcie vA, apaliuMcie vA te
ceva chammAsA / 6. je bhikkhU bahuso vimAsiyaM parihAraTThANaM paDisevittA
pAloejjA, apaliuMciyaM AloemANassa mAsiyaM, paliuMciyaM AloemANassa dobhAsiyaM /
7. je bhikkhU bahuso vidomAsiyaM parihAraTThANaM paDisevittA AloejjA, apaliuMcie
pAloemANassa domAsiyaM, paliuMciyaM AloemANassa temAsiyaM / 8. je bhikkhU bahuso
vi temAsiyaM parihAraTThANaM paDisevittA AloejjA, apaliuMciyaM AloemANasa
temAsiyaM, paliuMciyaM pAloemANassa cAummAsiyaM / 9. je bhikkhU bahuso vi
cAummAsiyaM parihAraTThANaM paDisevittA pAloejjA, apaliuMciyaM pAloemANassa
cAummAsiyaM, paliMuMciyaM AloemANassa paMcamAsiyaM / 10. je bhikkhU bahuso vi
paMcamAsiyaM parihAraTThANaM paDisevittA AloebjA, apaliuMciyaM pAloemANassa
paMcamAsiyaM, paliuMciyaM pAloemANassa chammAsiyaM / teNa paraM paliuMcie vA
apaliuMcie vA te ceva chammAsA /

Page #82 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[262] 11. If a monk, having practiced one type of *parihara-·π≠·π≠hƒÅna* for one
month or up to five months, practices another *parihara-·π≠·π≠hƒÅna*, he should be
considered to have practiced the former *parihara-·π≠·π≠hƒÅna* for one month or up to
five months, or, if he has practiced it for two months or up to six months, he
should be considered to have practiced it for six months. 12. If a monk, having
practiced one type of *parihara-·π≠·π≠hƒÅna* for many months or up to many five
months, practices another *parihara-·π≠·π≠hƒÅna*, he should be considered to have
practiced the former *parihara-·π≠·π≠hƒÅna* for one month or up to five months, or,
if he has practiced it for two months or up to six months, he should be
considered to have practiced it for six months. 13. If a monk, having practiced
one type of *parihara-·π≠·π≠hƒÅna* for four months, or for four months with
*sƒÅirega*, or for five months, or for five months with *sƒÅirega*, practices
another *parihara-·π≠·π≠hƒÅna*, he should be considered to have practiced the former
*parihara-·π≠·π≠hƒÅna* for four months or for four months with *sƒÅirega*, or for five
months or for five months with *sƒÅirega*, or, if he has practiced it for five
months or for five months with *sƒÅirega*, or for six months, he should be
considered to have practiced it for six months. 14. If a monk, having practiced
one type of *parihara-·π≠·π≠hƒÅna* for many four months, or for many four months with
*sƒÅirega*, or for many five months, or for many five months with *sƒÅirega*,
practices another *parihara-·π≠·π≠hƒÅna*, he should be considered to have practiced
the former *parihara-·π≠·π≠hƒÅna* for four months or for four months with *sƒÅirega*,
or for five months or for five months with *sƒÅirega*, or, if he has practiced it
for five months or for five months with *sƒÅirega*, or for six months, he should
be considered to have practiced it for six months. 15. If a monk, having
practiced one type of *parihara-·π≠·π≠hƒÅna* for four months, or for four months with
*sƒÅirega*, or for five months, or for five months with *sƒÅirega*, practices
another *parihara-·π≠·π≠hƒÅna* ... ... he should be considered to have practiced the
former *parihara-·π≠·π≠hƒÅna* for the duration he has practiced it. If he has
practiced it for the duration he has practiced it, he should be considered to
have practiced it for the duration he has practiced it. 1. If he has practiced
it in the past, he should be considered to have practiced it in the past. 2. If
he has practiced it in the future, he should be considered to have practiced it
in the future. 3. If he has practiced it in the future, he should be considered
to have practiced it in the past. 4. If he has practiced it in the future, he
should be considered to have practiced it in the future. 1. If he has practiced
it in the past, he should be considered to have practiced it in the past. 2. If
he has practiced it in the past, he should be considered to have practiced it in
the future. 3. If he has practiced it in the future, he should be considered to
have practiced it in the past. 4. If he has practiced it in the future, he
should be considered to have practiced it in the future. He should be considered
to have practiced all of this himself. If he practices it with this
understanding, he should be considered to have practiced it correctly.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
262] ghiaass 11. je bhikkhU mAsiyaM vA jAva paMcamAsiyaM vA eesiM
parihAraTThANANaM aNNayaraM parihAraTThANaM paDisevittA AloejjA, apaliuMciyaM
AloemANassa mAsiyaM vA jAva paMcamAsiyaM vA, paliuMciyaM AloemANassa do mAsiyaM
vA jAva chammAsiyaM vaa| teNa paraM paliuMcie vA apaliuMcie vA te ceva chammAsA
/ 12. je bhikkhU bahuso vi mAsiyaM vA jAva bahuso vi paMcamAsiyaM vA eesiM
parihAraTThANANaM aNNayaraM parihAraTThANaM paDisevittA AloejjA, apaliuMciyaM
AloemANassa mAsiyaM vA jAva paMcamAsiyaM vA, paliuMciyaM AloemANassa do mAsiyaM
vA jAba chammAsiyaM vaa| teNa paraM paliuMcie vA apaliuMcie vA te ceva
chmmaasaa| 13. je bhikkhU cAummAsiyaM vA, sAirega-cAummAsiyaM vA, paMcamAsiyaM
vA, sAirega-paMcamAsiyaM vA, eesiM parihAraTThANANaM aNNayaraM parihAraTThANaM
paDisevittA AloejjA, apaliuMciyaM AloemANassa cAummAsiyaM vA sAirega-cAummAsiyaM
vA, paMcamAsiyaM vA sAirega-paMcamAsiyaM vA, paliuMciyaM pAloemANassa
paMcamAsiyaM vA sAirega paMcamAsiyaM vA chammAsiyaM vaa| / teNa paraM paliuMcie
vA apaliuMcie vA te ceva chmmaasaa| 14. je bhikkhU bahuso vi cAummAsiyaM vA,
bahuso vi sAirega-cAummAsiyaM vA bahuso vi paMcamAsiyaM vA bahuso vi sAirega-
paMcamAsiyaM vA eesiM parihAraTThANANaM aNNayaraM parihAraTThANaM paDisevittA
AloejjA, apaliuMciyaM AloemANassa cAummAsiyaM bA, sAirega-cAummAsiyaM vA,
paMcamAsiyaM vA, sAirega-paMcamAsiyaM vA, paliuMciyaM AloemANassa paMcamAsiyaM
vA, sAirega-paMcamAsiyaM mA chammAsiyaM vaa| teNa paraM paliuMcie vA apaliUMcie
vA te ceva chmmaasaa|| 15. je bhikkhU cAummAsiyaM vA, sAirega-cAummAsiyaM vA,
paMcamAsiyaM vA, sAirega-paMcamAsiyaM vA, eesiM parihAraTThANANaM aNNayaraM
parihArahANaM paDisevittA AloejjA ..... .. apaliuMciyaM AloemANe ThavaNijjaM
ThavaittA karaNijjaM beyAvaDiyaM / Thavie vi paDisevittA, se vi kasiNe tattheva
Araheyave siyaa|| 1. puTviM paDiseviyaM pubdhi pAloiyaM, 2. puTviM paDiseviyaM
pacchA pAloiyaM, 3. pacchA paMDiseviyaM puTivaM AloiyaM, 4. pacchA paDiseviyaM
pacchA AloiyaM / 1. apaliuMcie apaliuMciyaM, 2. apaliuMcie paliuMciyaM, 3.
paliuMcie apaliuMciyaM, 4. paliuMcie paliuMciyaM / AloemANassa savvamemaM
sakayaM sAhaNiya (Aruheyavve siyaa)| je eyAe paThThavaNAe pavie nivyisamANe
paDisevei, se vikasiNe tattheva Alheyavye siyaa|

Page #83 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## [263 First Objective]  16. If a monk, having practiced one of the four
*parihara-sthƒÅnas* (CaturmƒÅsya, Sairag-CaturmƒÅsya, Pa√±camƒÅsya, Sairag-
Pa√±camƒÅsya), practices another *parihara-sthƒÅna* and observes it, and then,
while observing it, he is to be established, established, and made to practice,
or if he practices it, then he will be worthy of *ar≈´hya* (attainment) in that
very place.   1. If he practices it first and observes it first, 2. If he
practices it first and observes it later, 3. If he practices it later and
observes it first, 4. If he practices it later and observes it later.  1. If he
is not established and is not established, 2. If he is not established and is
established, 3. If he is established and is not established, 4. If he is
established and is established.  If he is observing it, he will be worthy of
*ar≈´hya* (attainment) himself, if he practices it with the intention of
attaining *ar≈´hya* (attainment) and is established in it, then he will be worthy
of *ar≈´hya* (attainment) in that very place.  17. If a monk, having practiced
one of the four *parihara-sthƒÅnas* (CaturmƒÅsya, Sairag-CaturmƒÅsya, Pa√±camƒÅsya,
Sairag-Pa√±camƒÅsya), practices another *parihara-sthƒÅna* and observes it, and
then, while observing it, he is to be established, established, and made to
practice, or if he practices it, then he will be worthy of *ar≈´hya* (attainment)
in that very place.  1. If he practices it first and observes it first, 2. If he
practices it first and observes it later, 3. If he practices it later and
observes it first, 4. If he practices it later and observes it later.  1. If he
is not established and is not established, 2. If he is not established and is
established, 3. If he is established and is not established, 4. If he is
established and is established.  If he is observing it, he will be worthy of
*ar≈´hya* (attainment) himself, if he practices it with the intention of
attaining *ar≈´hya* (attainment) and is established in it, then he will be worthy
of *ar≈´hya* (attainment) in that very place.  18. If a monk, having practiced
one of the four *parihara-sthƒÅnas* (CaturmƒÅsya, Sairag-CaturmƒÅsya, Pa√±camƒÅsya,
Sairag-Pa√±camƒÅsya), practices another *parihara-sthƒÅna* and observes it, and
then, while observing it, he is to be established, established, and made to
practice, or if he practices it, then he will be worthy of *ar≈´hya* (attainment)
in that very place.  1. If he practices it first and observes it first, 2. If he
practices it first and observes it later, 3. If he practices it later and
observes it first, 4. If he practices it later and observes it later.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
[263 prathama uddezaka] 16. je bhikkhU cAummAsiyaM vA, sAirega-cAummAsiyaM vA,
paMcamAsiyaM vA, sAiregapaMcamAsiyaM vA, eesiM parihAraTThANANaM aNNayaraM
parihAraTThANaM paDisevittA pAloejjA, paliuMciyaM AloemANe ThavaNijja ThavaittA
karaNijja vyAvaDiyaM / Thavie vi paDisevittA, se vikasiNe tattheva Araheyamve
siyaa| 1. pugviM paDiseviyaM puvviM pAloiyaM, 2. pubdhi paDiseviyaM pacchA
pAloiyaM, 3. pacchA paDiseviyaM pusviM AloiyaM, 4. pacchA paDiseviyaM pacchA
AloiyaM / 1. apaliuMcie apaliciyaM, 2. apaliuMcie paliuMciyaM, 3. paliuMcie
apaliuMciyaM, 4. paliuMcie paliuMciyaM / pAloemANassa samvameyaM sakayaM
sAhaNiya (Aruheyabve siyA) je eyAe paTThavaNAe pavie nivvisamANe paDisevei, se
vikasiNe tattheva Araheyadhve siyaa| 17. je bhikkhU bahuso vi cAummAsiyaM vA,
bahuso vi sAirega-cAumbhAsiyaM vA, bahuso vi paMcamAsiyaM vA, bahuso vi sAirega-
paMcamAsiyaM vA, eesiM parihAraTThANANaM aNNayaraM parihArahANaM paDisevittA
AloejjA, apaliuMciya pAloemANe ThavaNijja ThavaittA karaNi veyAvaDiyaM / Thavie
vi paDisevittA se vi kasiNe tattheva AraheyaTave siyaa| 1. puTviM paDiseviyaM
pubbiM AloiyaM, 2. punviM paDiseviyaM pacchA AloiyaM, 3. pacchA paDiseviyaM
punviM AloiyaM, 4, pacchA paDiseviyaM pacchA pAloiyaM / 1. apaliuMcie
apaliuMciyaM, 2. apaliuMcie paliuMciyaM, 3. paliuMcie apaliuMciyaM, 4. paliuMcie
paliuMciyaM / bhAloemANassa samvameyaM sakayaM sAhaNiya (prAruheyabve siyA) je
eyAe paThThavaNAe pavie nivvasamANe paDisevei, se vikasiNe tattheva pAruheyamve
siyaa| 18. je bhikkhU bahuso vi cAummAsiyaM vA, bahuso vi sAirega-cAummAsiyaM
vA, bahuso vi paMcamAsiyaM vA, bahuso vi sAirega paMcamAsiyaM vA, eesi
parihAraTThANANaM aNNayaraM parihAraTThANaM paDisevittA AloejjA, paliuMciyaM
AloemANe ThavaNijja ThavaittA karaNijjaM veyAvaDiyaM / Thavie vi paDisebittA se
vi kasiNe tattheva prAruheyanve siyaa| 1. pugviM paDiseviyaM puzviM AloiyaM, 2.
pugviM paDiseviyaM pacchA pAsoiyaM, 3. pacchA paDiseviyaM pugviM AloiyaM, 4.
pacchA paDiseviyaM pacchA pAloiyaM /

Page #84 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[264] [Vyavahar Sutra 1. Apaliunchie Apaliunchiyam, 2. Apaliunchie Paliunchiyam,
3. Paliunchie Apaliunchigam, 4. Paliunchie Paliunchiyam / Aaloemaanass
Savvameyam Sakayam Saahaniy (Aaruheyamve Sia) Je Eyaae Patthavanaae Pavie
Nivisaamane Padisavei, Se Vikasine Tatthev Aaruheyamve Sia. 1.  A monk who
criticizes after observing a monthly *parihara* once, incurs a one-month
*pratyaksha* for *maya*-free criticism and a two-month *pratyaksha* for
*maya*-filled criticism. / 2. A monk who criticizes after observing a bi-monthly
*parihara* once, incurs a bi-monthly *pratyaksha* for *maya*-free criticism and
a tri-monthly *pratyaksha* for *maya*-filled criticism. 3. A monk who criticizes
after observing a tri-monthly *parihara* once, incurs a tri-monthly *pratyaksha*
for *maya*-free criticism and a four-month *pratyaksha* for *maya*-filled
criticism. 4. A monk who criticizes after observing a four-month *parihara*
once, incurs a four-month *pratyaksha* for *maya*-free criticism and a five-
month *pratyaksha* for *maya*-filled criticism. / 5. A monk who criticizes after
observing a five-month *parihara* once, incurs a five-month *pratyaksha* for
*maya*-free criticism and a six-month *pratyaksha* for *maya*-filled criticism.
Thereafter, for both *maya*-filled and *maya*-free criticism, the same six-month
*pratyaksha* is incurred. 6. A monk who criticizes after observing a monthly
*parihara* many times, incurs a one-month *pratyaksha* for *maya*-free criticism
and a two-month *pratyaksha* for *maya*-filled criticism. 7. A monk who
criticizes after observing a bi-monthly *parihara* many times, incurs a bi-
monthly *pratyaksha* for *maya*-free criticism and a tri-monthly *pratyaksha*
for *maya*-filled criticism. 8. A monk who criticizes after observing a tri-
monthly *parihara* many times, incurs a tri-monthly *pratyaksha* for *maya*-free
criticism and a four-month *pratyaksha* for *maya*-filled criticism. /

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
264] [vyavahArasUtra 1. apaliuMcie apaliuMciyaM, 2. apaliuMcie paliuMciyaM, 3.
paliuMcie apaliuMcigaM, 4. paliuMcie paliuMciyaM / AloemANassa savvameyaM
sakayaM sAhaNiya (Aruheyamve siyA) je eyAe paTThavaNAe pavie nivisamANe
paDisevei, se vikasiNe tattheva Araheyamve siyaa| 1. jo bhikSu eka bAra mAsika
parihArasthAna kI pratisevanA karake AlocanA kare to use mAyArahita AlocanA
karane para eka mAsa kA prAyazcitta AtA hai aura mAyAsahita AlocanA karane para
do mAsa kA prAyazcitta AtA hai / 2. jo bhikSu eka bAra dvimAsika parihArasthAna
kI pratisevanA karake AlocanA kare to use mAyArahita AlocanA karane para
dvimAsika prAyazcitta pAtA hai aura mAyA-sahita pAlocanA karane para traimAsika
prAyazcitta prAtA hai| 3. jo bhikSu eka bAra traimAsika parihArasthAna kI
pratisevanA karake AlocanA kare to use mAyArahita AlocanA karane para traimAsika
prAyazcitta pAtA hai aura mAyAsahita AlocanA karane para cAturmAsika prAyazcitta
pAtA hai| 4. jo bhikSu eka bAra cAturmAsika parihArasthAna kI pratisevanA karake
AlocanA kare to use mAyArahita AlocanA karane para cAturmAsika prAyazcitta pAtA
hai aura mAyAsahita AlocanA karane para paMcamAsika prAyazcitta AtA hai / 5. jo
bhikSu eka bAra paMcamAsika parihArasthAna kI pratisevanA karake AlocanA kare to
use mAyArahita AlocanA karane para paMcamAsika prAyazcitta AtA hai aura
mAyAsahita AlocanA karane para chamAsI prAyazcitta pAtA hai| isake uparAnta
mAyAsahita yA mAyArahita AlocanA karane para bhI vahI chamAsI prAyazcitta pAtA
hai| 6. jo bhikSu aneka bAra mAsika parihArasthAna kI pratisevanA karake AlocanA
kare to use mAyArahita AlocanA karane para eka mAsa kA prAyazcitta pAtA hai aura
mAyAsahita AlocanA karane para dvaimAsika prAyazcitta AtA hai| 7. jo bhikSu
aneka bAra dvimAsika parihArasthAna kI pratisevanA karake AlocanA kare to use
mAyArahita AlocanA karane para dvimAsika prAyazcitta AtA hai aura mAyAsahita
AlocanA karane para traimAsika prAyazcitta pAtA hai| 8. jo bhikSu aneka bAra
traimAsika parihArasthAna kI pratisevanA karake AlocanA kare to use mAyArahita
AlocanA karane para traimAsika prAyazcitta AtA hai aura mAyAsahita AlocanA
karane para cAturmAsika prAyazcitta AtA hai /

Page #85 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Direct Objective [265 9. A monk who criticizes after observing the
Chaturmasik Pariharasthan many times, receives Chaturmasik Prayaschitta for
criticism without Maya and Panchamasik Prayaschitta for criticism with Maya. 10.
A monk who criticizes after observing the Panchamasik Pariharasthan many times,
receives Panchamasik Prayaschitta for criticism without Maya and Panchmasik
Prayaschitta for criticism with Maya. Thereafter, for criticism with or without
Maya, the same Panchmasik Prayaschitta is received. 11. A monk who criticizes
after observing any one Pariharasthan from the monthly to Panchamasik
Pariharasthan once, receives monthly to Panchamasik Prayaschitta according to
the observed Pariharasthan for criticism without Maya and Dvimasi to Panchmasik
Prayaschitta according to the observed Pariharasthan for criticism with Maya.
Thereafter, for criticism with or without Maya, the same Panchmasik Prayaschitta
is received. 12. A monk who criticizes after observing any one Pariharasthan
from the monthly to Panchamasik Pariharasthan many times, receives monthly to
Panchamasik Prayaschitta according to the observed Pariharasthan for criticism
without Maya and Dvimasi to Panchmasik Prayaschitta according to the observed
Pariharasthan for criticism with Maya. Thereafter, for criticism with or without
Maya, the same Panchmasik Prayaschitta is received. 13. A monk who criticizes
after observing any one Pariharasthan from Chaturmasik or slightly more than
Chaturmasik, Panchamasik or slightly more than Panchamasik once, receives
Chaturmasik or slightly more than Chaturmasik, Panchamasik or slightly more than
Panchamasik Prayaschitta according to the observed Pariharasthan for criticism
without Maya and Panchamasik or slightly more than Panchamasik or Panchmasik
Prayaschitta according to the observed Pariharasthan for criticism with Maya.
Thereafter, for criticism with or without Maya, the same Panchmasik Prayaschitta
is received. 14. A monk who criticizes after observing any one Pariharasthan
from Chaturmasik or slightly more than Chaturmasik, Panchamasik or slightly more
than Panchamasik many times, receives Chaturmasik or slightly more than
Chaturmasik, Panchamasik or slightly more than Panchamasik Prayaschitta
according to the observed Pariharasthan for criticism without Maya and
Panchamasik or slightly more than Panchamasik or Panchmasik Prayaschitta
according to the observed Pariharasthan for criticism with Maya. Thereafter, for
criticism with or without Maya, the same Panchmasik Prayaschitta is received.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
prayama uddezaka] [265 9. jo bhikSu aneka bAra cAturmAsika parihArasthAna kI
pratisevanA karake AlocanA kare to use mAyArahita pAlocanA karane para
cAturmAsika prAyazcitta pAtA hai aura mAyAsahita pAlocanA karane para
paMcamAsika prAyazcitta prAtA hai / 10. jo bhikSu aneka bAra paMcamAsika
parihArasthAna kI pratisevanA karake AlocanA kare to use mAyArahita AlocanA
karane para paMcamAsika prAyazcitta AtA hai aura mAyAsahita pAlocanA karane para
pANmAsika prAyazcitta AtA hai| isake uparAnta mAyAsahita yA mAyArahita AlocanA
karane para bhI vahI pANmAsika prAyazcitta AtA hai| 11. jo bhikSu mAsika yAvat
paMcamAsika parihArasthAnoM meM se kisI parihArasthAna kI eka bAra pratisevanA
karake AlocanA kare to use mAyArahita AlocanA karane para prAsevita
parihArasthAna ke anusAra mAsika yAvat paMcamAsika prAyazcitta AtA hai aura
mAyAsahita AlocanA karane para Asevita parihArasthAna ke anusAra dvimAsika yAvat
pANmAsika prAyazcitta AtA hai / isake uparAnta mAyAsahita yA mAyArahita AlocanA
karane para vahI pANmAsika prAyazcitta prAtA hai| 12. jo bhikSu mAsika yAvat
paMcamAsika ina parihArasthAnoM meM se kisI eka parihArasthAna kI aneka bAra
pratisevanA karake AlocanA kare to use mAyArahita aAlocanA karane para prAsevita
parihArasthAna ke anusAra mAsika yAvat paMcamAsika prAyazcitta pAtA hai aura
mAyAsahita AlocanA karane para prAsevita parihArasthAna ke anusAra dvimAsika
yAvat pANmAsika prAyazcitta pAtA hai / isake uparAnta mAyAsahita yA mAyArahita
AlocanA karane para vahI pANmAsika prAyazcitta AtA hai| 13. jo bhikSu
cAturmAsika yA kucha adhika cAturmAsika, paMcamAsika yA kucha adhika paMcamAsika
ina parihArasthAnoM meM se kisI eka parihArasthAna kI eka bAra pratisevanA
karake AlocanA kare to use mAyArahita AlocanA karane para Asevita parihArasthAna
ke anusAra cAturmAsika yA kucha adhika cAturmAsika, paMcamAsika yA kucha adhika
paMcamAsika prAyazcitta pAtA hai aura mAyAsahita AlocanA karane para Asevita
parihArasthAna ke anusAra paMcamAsika yA kucha adhika paMcamAsika yA pANmAsika
prAyazcitta AtA hai| isake uparAnta mAyarasahita yA mAyArahita mAlocanA karane
para bhI vahI pANmAsika prAyazcitta AtA hai| 14. jo bhikSu aneka bAra
cAturmAsika yA aneka bAra kucha adhika cAturmAsika, aneka bAra paMcamAsika yA
aneka bAra kucha adhika paMcamAsika ina parihArasthAnoM se se kisI eka
parihArasthAna kI pratisevanA karake pAlocanA kare to use mAyArahita AlocanA
karane para Asevita parihArasthAna ke anusAra cAturmAsika yA kucha adhika
cAturmAsika, paMcamAsika yA kucha adhika paMcamAsika

Page #86 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[266] [Vyavahar Sutra Praayaschitta comes and on criticizing with Maya,
according to the Praasevit Pariharasthan, one gets Panchmaasik or some more
Panchmaasik or Chah-maasik Praayaschitta / After this, on criticizing with Maya
or without Maya, the same Panchmaasik Praayaschitta is obtained. 15. The Bhikshu
who criticizes after observing one of these Pariharasthan, Chaaturmaasik or some
more Chaaturmaasik, Panchmaasik or some more Panchmaasik, should be established
in Praayaschitta-rupa Parihar-tap according to the observed Pariharasthan, and
his appropriate Vyaavrutty should be done. If he observes any kind of
Pariharasthan even after being established in Parihar-tap, then his entire
Praayaschitta should also be included in the previously given Praayaschitta. 1.
If the criticism is done earlier for the previously observed fault, 2. If the
criticism is done later for the previously observed fault, 3. If the criticism
is done earlier for the later observed fault, 4. If the criticism is done later
for the later observed fault. 1. If the criticism is done without Maya with the
intention of criticizing without Maya, 2. If the criticism is done with Maya
with the intention of criticizing without Maya, 3. If the criticism is done
without Maya with the intention of criticizing with Maya, 4. If the criticism is
done with Maya with the intention of criticizing with Maya. In any of these
types of violation, the Praayaschitta of all his committed offenses should be
combined and included in the previously given Praayaschitta. _ If he observes
any kind of Pariharasthan again while being established in this Praayaschitta-
rupa Parihar-tap and carrying it, then his entire Praayaschitta should also be
imposed on the previously given Praayaschitta. 16. The Bhikshu who criticizes
after observing one of these Pariharasthan, Chaaturmaasik or some more
Chaaturmaasik, Panchmaasik or some more Panchmaasik, should be established in
Praayaschitta-rupa Parihar-tap according to the observed Pariharasthan, and his
appropriate Vyaavrutty should be done. If he observes any kind of Pariharasthan
even after being established in Parihar-tap, then his entire Praayaschitta
should also be included in the previously given Praayaschitta. 1. If the
criticism is done earlier for the previously observed fault, 2. If the criticism
is done later for the previously observed fault,

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
266] [vyavahArasUtra prAyazcitta AtA hai aura mAyAsahita aAlocanA karane para
prAsevita parihArasthAna ke anusAra paMcamAsika yA kucha adhika paMcamAsika yA
chahamAsika prAyazcitta pAtA hai / isake uparAnta mAyAsahita yA mAyArahita
pAlocanA karane para vahI pANmAsika prAyazcitta prAtA hai| 15. jo bhikSu
cAturmAsika yA kucha adhika cAturmAsika, paMcamAsika yA kucha adhika paMcamAsika
ina parihArasthAnoM meM se kisI eka parihArasthAna kI eka bAra pratisevanA
karake AlocanA kare to use mAyArahita AlocanA karane para Asevita pratisevanA ke
anusAra prAyazcitta rUpa parihAratapa meM sthApita karake usakI yogya vaiyAvRtya
karanI caahie| yadi vaha parihAratapa meM sthApita hone para bhI kisI prakAra kI
pratisevanA kare to usakA sampUrNa prAyazcitta bhI pUrvapradatta prAyazcitta meM
sammilita kara denA caahie| 1. pUrva meM pratisevitadoSa kI pahale AlocanA kI
ho, 2. pUrva meM pratisevitadoSa kI pIche AlocanA kI ho, 3. pIche se
pratisevitadoSa kI pahale AlocanA kI ho, 4. pIche se pratisevittadoSa kI pIche
se AlocanA kI ho| 1. mAyArahita AlocanA karane kA saMkalpa karake mAyArahita
AlocanA kI ho, 2. mAyArahita AlocanA karane kA saMkalpa karake mAyAsahita
AlocanA kI ho, 3. mAyAsahita AlocanA karane kA saMkalpa karake mAyArahita
AlocanA kI ho, 4. mAyAsahita AlocanA karane kA saMkalpa karake mAyAsahita
AlocanA kI ho| inameM se kisI bhI prakAra ke bhaMga se AlocanA karane para usake
sarva svakRta aparAdha ke prAyazcitta ko saMyukta karake pUrvapradatta
prAyazcitta meM sammilita kara denA caahie| _ jo isa prAyazcitta rUpa
parihAratapa meM sthApita hokara vahana karate hue bhI puna: kisI prakAra kI
pratisevanA kare to usakA sampUrNa prAyazcitta bhI pUrvapradatta prAyazcitta meM
Aropita kara denA caahie| 16. jo bhikSu cAturmAsika yA kucha adhika cAturmAsika,
paMcamAsika yA kucha adhika paMcamAsika ina parihArasthAnoM meM se kisI eka
parihArasthAna kI pratisevanA karake AlocanA kare to use mAyAsahita AlocanA
karane para prAsevita pratisevanA ke anusAra prAyazcitta rUpa parihAratapa meM
sthApita karake usakI yogya vaiyAvRtya karanI caahie| yadi vaha parihAratapa meM
sthApita hone para bhI kisI prakAra kI pratisevanA kare to usakA sampUrNa
prAyazcitta bhI pUrvapradatta prAyazcitta meM sammilita kara denA caahie| 1.
pUrva meM pratisevita doSa kI pahale AlocanA kI ho, 2. pUrva meM pratisevita
doSa kI pIche AlocanA kI ho,

Page #87 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## First Objective [267 3. Criticism of the previously committed offense from
the back, 4. Criticism of the previously committed offense from the back. 1.
Criticism without Maya (illusion) by resolving to do so, 2. Criticism with Maya
by resolving to do so without Maya. 3. Criticism without Maya by resolving to do
so with Maya, 4. Criticism with Maya by resolving to do so with Maya / In case
of any kind of violation, the atonement for the universally accepted offense
should be combined and included in the previously given atonement. If someone,
while being established in this atonement-form of Pariharatapas, commits any
kind of offense again, then their entire atonement should also be included in
the previously given atonement. 17. If a monk criticizes by committing the
offense of Pratisesvana (repetition) many times in one of these Pariharasthanas
(places of atonement) - Chaturmasik (four months), or slightly more than
Chaturmasik, Panchmasik (five months), or slightly more than Panchmasik - then
they should be established in the Pariharatapas according to the Pratisesvana
committed for criticism without Maya, and their appropriate Vayavaty (penance)
should be done. If they commit any kind of offense even after being established
in the Pariharatapas, then their entire atonement should also be included in the
previously given atonement / 1. Criticism of the previously committed offense
from the front, 2. Criticism of the previously committed offense from the back,
3. Criticism of the previously committed offense from the back, 4. Criticism of
the previously committed offense from the back. 1. Criticism without Maya by
resolving to do so without Maya, 2. Criticism with Maya by resolving to do so
without Maya, 3. Criticism without Maya by resolving to do so with Maya, 4.
Criticism with Maya by resolving to do so with Maya / In case of any kind of
violation, the atonement for the universally accepted offense should be combined
and included in the previously given atonement. If someone, while being
established in this atonement-form of Pariharatapas, commits any kind of offense
again, then their entire atonement should also be included in the previously
given atonement / 18. If a monk criticizes by committing the offense of
Pratisesvana (repetition) many times in one of these Pariharasthanas (places of
atonement) - Chaturmasik (four months), or slightly more than Chaturmasik,
Panchmasik (five months), or slightly more than Panchmasik - then they should be
established in the Pariharatapas according to the Pratisesvana committed for
criticism without Maya, and their appropriate Vayavaty (penance) should be done.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
prathama uddezaka [267 3. pIche se pratisevita doSa kI pahale AlocanA kI ho, 4.
pIche se pratisevita doSa ko pIche se AlocanA kI ho| 1. mAyArahita AlocanA
karane kA saMkalpa karake mAyArahita AlocanA kI ho, 2. mAyArahita AlocanA karane
kA saMkalpa karake mAyAsahita AlocanA kI ho. 3. mAyAsahita AlocanA karane kA
saMkalpa karake mAyArahita aAlocanA kI ho, 4. mAyAsahita AlocanA karane kA
saMkalpa karake mAyAsahita AlocanA kI ho / inameM se kisI prakAra ke bhaMga se
grAlocanA karane para usake sarva svakRta aparAdha ke prAyazcitta ko saMyukta
karake pUrvapradatta prAyazcitta meM sammilita kara denA caahie| jo isa
prAyazcitta rUpa parihAratapa meM sthApita hokara vahana karate hue bhI punaH
kisI prakAra ko pratisevanA kare to usakA sampUrNa prAyazcitta bhI pUrvapradatta
prAyazcitta meM Aropita kara denA caahie| 17. jo bhikSu cAturmAsika yA kucha
adhika cAturmAsika, paMcamAsika yA kucha adhika paMcamAsika ina parihArasthAnoM
meM se kisI eka parihArasthAna kI aneka bAra pratisevanA karake AlocanA kare to
use _mAyArahita AlocanA karane para prAsevita pratisevanA ke anusAra prAyazcitta
rUpa parihAratapa meM sthApita karake usakI yogya vaiyAvatya karanI caahie| yadi
vaha parihAratapa meM sthApita hone para bhI kisI prakAra kI pratisevanA kare to
usakA sampUrNa prAyazcitta bhI pUrvapradatta prAyazcitta meM sammilita kara denA
cAhie / 1. pUrva meM pratisevitadoSa kI pahale AlocanA kI ho, 2. pUrva meM
pratisevitadoSa kI poche AlocanA kI ho, 3. pIche se pratise vitadoSa kI pahale
AlocanA kI ho, 4. pIche se pratisevitadoSa ko pIche AlocanA kI ho| 1. mAyArahita
AlocanA karane kA saMkalpa karake mAyArahita AlocanA kI ho, 2. mAyArahita
AlocanA karane kA saMkalpa karake mAyAsahita pAlocanA kI ho, 3. mAyAsahita
AlocanA karane kA saMkalpa karake mAyArahita AlocanA kI ho, 4. mAyAsahita
AlocanA karane kA saMkalpa karake mAyAsahita pAlocanA kI ho / inameM se kisI bhI
prakAra ke bhaMga se AlocanA karane para usake sarva svakRta aparAdha ke
prAyazcitta ko saMyukta karake pUrvapradatta prAyazcitta meM sammilita kara denA
caahie| jo isa prAyazcitta rUpa parihAratapa meM sthApita hokara vahana karate
hue bhI puna: kisI prakAra kI pratisevanA kare to usakA sampUrNa prAyazcitta bhI
pUrvapradatta prAyazcitta meM prAropita kara denA cAhie / 18. jo bhikSu
cAturmAsika yA kucha adhika cAturmAsika, paMcamAsika yA kucha adhika paMcamAsika
ina parihArasthAnoM meM se kisI eka parihArasthAna kI aneka bAra pratisevanA
karake pAlocanA kare to use

Page #88 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[268] According to the Prasevita, when criticizing with Maya, one should
establish the appropriate Pariharatapas as a form of atonement and perform the
necessary Vyavavritti. If, even after being established in the Pariharatapas,
one commits any kind of Pratisesvana, then their entire atonement should be
included in the previously given atonement. / 1. If the previously committed
offense was criticized earlier, 2. If the previously committed offense was
criticized later, 3. If the later committed offense was criticized earlier, 4.
If the later committed offense was criticized later. / 1. If one resolved to
criticize without Maya and criticized without Maya, 2. If one resolved to
criticize without Maya and criticized with Maya, 3. If one resolved to criticize
with Maya and criticized without Maya, 4. If one resolved to criticize with Maya
and criticized with Maya. In any of these cases of transgression in criticizing,
the atonement for the entire acknowledged offense should be combined and
included in the previously given atonement. If one, having been established in
this Pariharatapas as a form of atonement, commits any kind of Pratisesvana
while undergoing it, then their entire atonement should also be imputed to the
previously given atonement. Discussion - A Bhikshu or Bhikshuni, by observing
restraint without transgression, naturally performs pure Paradhna. However, if,
due to physical or other circumstances, they are compelled to consume something
that is transgressive, even after a long period of practice, they can still
purify themselves through criticism and atonement and continue their practice of
restraint. / These sutras mention Pratisesvana, Alochana, Prayaschitta-sthana,
Prasthapana, Praropana, etc. There are eighteen such sutras in the Nisitha
Uddesaka 20. There, a detailed discussion of all these topics related to these
sutras has been given. The commentator on the Pariharasthana mentioned in the
sutras has given two meanings: 1. That which is to be abandoned, i.e., the place
of the fault, and 2. That which is to be held, i.e., the atonement tapas. In
these eighteen sutras, the word is used in the sense of "place of the fault,"
and in the concluding sutra of each Uddesaka of the Nisitha, it is used in the
sense of "atonement tapas." / The conduct of Pariharikas and Apariharikas
regarding Nishadya, etc. 19. If many Pariharikas and many Apariharikas, out of
desire, wish to eat or drink something, or if they have already eaten or drunk
something, then they should not be allowed to eat or drink anything without
asking the Thera. If the Thera, without being asked, allows them to eat or drink
something, then they should not be allowed to eat or drink anything.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
268] [vyavahArasUtra mAyAsahita AlocanA karane para prAsevita ke anusAra
prAyazcitta rUpa parihAratapa meM sthApita karake yogya vaiyAvRtya karanI
caahie| yadi vaha parihAratapa meM sthApita hone para bhI kisI prakAra kI
pratisevanA kare to usakA sampUrNa prAyazcitta bhI pUrvapradatta prAyazcitta meM
sammilita kara denA cAhie / 1. pUrva meM pratisevita doSa kI pahale AlocanA kI
ho, 2. pUrva meM pratisevita doSa kI pIche AlocanA kI ho, 3. pIche se
pratisevita doSa kI pahale AlocanA kI ho, 4. pIche se pratisevita doSa kI pIche
AlocanA kI ho / 1. mAyArahita AlocanA karane kA saMkalpa karake mAyArahita
AlocanA kI ho, 2. mAyArahita AlocanA karane kA saMkalpa karake mAyAsahita
AlocanA kI ho, 3. mAyAsahita AlocanA karane kA saMkalpa karake mAyArahita
pAlocanA kI ho, 4. mAyAsahita AlocanA karane kA saMkalpa karake mAyAsahita
AlocanA kI ho| inameM se kisI bhI prakAra ke bhaMga se AlocanA karane para usake
sarva svakRta aparAdha ke prAyazcitta ko saMyukta karake pUrvapradatta
prAyazcitta meM sammilita kara denA caahie| jo isa prAyazcitta rUpa parihAratapa
meM sthApita hokara vahana karate hue punaH kisI prakAra kI pratisevanA kare to
usakA sampUrNa prAyazcitta bhI pUrvapradatta prAyazcitta meM Aropita kara denA
caahie| vivecana-bhikSa yA bhikSuNI aticArarahita saMyama kA pAlana karake to
zuddha pArAdhanA karate hI haiM kintu sAdhanA ke laMbe kAla meM kabhI zArIrika
yA anya kisI prakAra kI paristhitiyoM se vivaza hokara yadi unheM aticArAdi kA
sevana karanA par3e to bhI ve AlocanA evaM prAyazcitta dvArA zuddhi karake
saMyama kI ArAdhanA kara sakate haiM / ina sUtroM meM pratisevanA, AlocanA,
prAyazcittasthAna, prasthApanA, prAropaNA Adi kA kathana kiyA gayA hai| nizItha
uddezaka 20 meM aise hI aThAraha sUtra haiN| vahAM ina sUtroM se saMbaMdhita
ukta sabhI viSayoM kA vistRta vivecana kara diyA gayA hai| sUtrokta
parihArasthAna ke bhASyakAra ne do artha kiye haiM 1. parityAga karane yogya
arthAt doSasthAna aura 2. dhAraNa karane yogya arthAt praayshcitttp| prastuta
aThAraha sUtroM meM 'doSasthAna' artha meM isa zabda kA prayoga kiyA gayA hai
aura nizItha ke pratyeka uddezaka ke upasaMhArasUtra meM 'prAyazcittatapa' artha
meM isakA prayoga kiyA gayA hai / pArihArika aura apArihArikoM kA niSadyAdi
vyavahAra 19. bahave pArihAriyA bahave apArihAriyA icchejjA egayao abhinisejjaM
vA, abhinisIhiyaM vA ceittae, no se kappada there aNApucchittA egayano
abhinisejjaM vA, abhinisIhiyaM vA ceittae / kappar3a NaM there ApucchittA egayao
abhinisejjaM vA, abhinisIhiyaM vA ceittae /

Page #89 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## First Objective] [269 Theras should not be separated, and it is not proper
for one to stay or sit together with them, whether they are in the state of
Abhinisejja or Abhinisihiya. Theras should not be separated, and it is not
proper for one to stay or sit together with them, whether they are in the state
of Abhinisejja or Abhinisihiya. / If one stays or sits together with Theras
without their permission, whether they are in the state of Abhinisejja or
Abhinisihiya, then they are liable to a penance or a Parihara. 19. If many
Pariharic Bhikkhus and many Apariharic Bhikkhus wish to stay or sit together,
then it is not proper for them to do so without asking the Sthavir. / They can
only stay or sit together after asking the Sthavir. If the Sthavir gives
permission, then it is proper for them to stay or sit together. If the Sthavir
does not give permission, then it is not proper for them to stay or sit
together. / If they stay or sit together without the Sthavir's permission, then
they are liable to a penance of Dikshached or Tap ‡§∞‡•Ç‡§™ for violating the rules.
Discussion‚ÄîThe detailed method of performing Pariharatap is mentioned in Nisith
U. 4, and some description is also given in U. 20 and Brihatkalp U. 4. / The
food, residence, study, bed, and sitting of a Pariharic Bhikkhu are all separate
even when they are living in a group. / Therefore, if a Sadhu needs to sit with
a Pariharic for any particular reason, then it is necessary to take permission
from the Sthavir, etc., who are the leaders of the group. / If the Sthavir deems
it appropriate, then they give permission, otherwise, they prohibit it. Even
after being prohibited, if someone sits together, they violate the rules, and if
they sit together without asking or behave in any other way, they are violating
the rules, which makes them liable for penance. The reason for not interacting
with a Pariharic is that they should purify themselves by performing penance
alone and achieve special Nirjara. The reason for making them perform penance
while living in a group is to create fear in other Sadhus, so that they avoid
committing sins. The residence of a Bhikkhu in the state of Pariharakalp for the
purpose of Vyavritti 20. A Pariharakappattiya Bhikkhu should go to the residence
of the Theras for Vyavritti, and the Theras should allow them. If they wish to
stay in a place that is close to a statue, a well, a direction, or other
Sahammiya Bhikkhus, then they should stay in that place. It is not proper for
them to stay there for the purpose of Viharavattiya. / It is proper for them to
stay there for the purpose of Karanavattiya, and if they have completed the
reason, then they should ask permission from another person, saying, "May I stay
here today? Near or far?" / It is proper for them to stay near or far. / It is
not proper for them to stay near or far without asking permission from another
person. / If they stay near or far without asking permission, then they are
liable to a penance or a Parihara. 21. A Pariharakappattiya Bhikkhu should go to
the residence of the Theras for Vyavritti, and the Theras should not allow them.
If they wish to stay in a place that is close to a statue, a well, a direction,
or other Sahammiya Bhikkhus, then they should stay in that place.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
prathama uddezaka] [269 therA ya NaM viyarejjA, evaM NaM kappai egayao
abhinisejjaM vA, abhinisohiyaM vA ceitte| therA ya NaM No viyarejjA, evaM no
kappai egayo abhinisejjaM vA, abhinisIhiyaM vA ceittae / jo NaM therehi aviiNNe,
abhinisejjaM vA, abhinisIhiyaM vA ceei, se saMtarA chee vA parihAre vaa| 19.
aneka pArihArika bhikSu aura aneka apArihArika bhikSu yadi eka sAtha rahanA yA
baiThanA cAheM to unheM sthavira ko pUche binA eka sAtha rahanA yA eka sAtha
baiThanA nahIM kalpatA hai / sthavira ko pUcha karake hI ve eka sAtha raha
sakate haiM yA baiTha sakate haiN| yadi sthavira prAjJA deM to unheM eka sAtha
rahanA yA eka sAtha baiThanA kalpatA hai| yadi sthavira AjJA na deM to unheM eka
sAtha rahanA yA baiThanA nahIM kalpatA hai / sthavira kI AjJA ke binA ve eka
sAtha raheM yA baiThe to unheM maryAdA ullaMghana kA dIkSAcheda yA tapa rUpa
prAyazcitta AtA hai| vivecana--parihAratapa vahana karane kI vistRta vidhi
nizItha u. 4 meM kahI hai tathA u. 20 evaM bRhatkalpa u. 4 meM bhI kucha varNana
kiyA gayA hai / pArihArika bhikSu kA AhAra, vihAra, svAdhyAya, zayyA, niSadyA
Adi sabhI kArya samUha meM rahate hue bhI alaga-alaga hote haiM / ataH kisI
sAdhu ko kisI vizeSa kAraNa se pArihArika ke sAtha baiThanA ho to sthavira Adi,
jo gaNa meM pramukha hoM, unakI AjJA lenA Avazyaka hotA hai / sthavira ko ucita
lage to ve AjJA dete haiM anyathA ve niSedha kara dete haiN| niSedha karane ke
bAda bhI yadi koI u sAtha baiThatA hai, vaha maryAdA kA bhaMga karatA hai tathA
binA pUche usake sAtha baiThe yA anya kisI prakAra kA vyavahAra kare to maryAdA-
bhaMga karane vAlA hotA hai, jisase vaha prAyazcitta kA bhAgI hotA hai|
pArihArika ke sAtha vyavahAra na rakhane kA kAraNa yaha hai ki vaha akelA
rahakara prAyazcitta se vizeSa nirjarA karatA huA apanI Atmazuddhi kare aura
samUha meM rahate hue usa prAyazcitta tapa ko vahana karAne kA kAraNa yaha hai
ki anya sAdhuoM ko bhI bhaya utpanna ho, jisase ve doSasevana karane se bacate
rheN| parihArakalpasthita bhikSu kA vaiyAvRtya ke lie vihAra 20.
parihArakappaTTie bhikkhU bahiyA therANaM veyAvaDiyAe gacchejjA, therA ya se
srejjaa| kappaha se egarAiyAe paDimAe japaNaM jaNNaM disaM anne sAhammiyA
viharaMti taNNaM taNNaM visaM ulitte| no se kappai tattha vihAravattiyaM vatthae
/ kappai se tattha kAraNavattiyaM vasthae, taMsi ca NaM kAraNaMsi niTTiyaMsi
paro vaejjA--'vasAhi ajjo! egarAyaM vA durAyaM vA / ' evaM se kappai egarAyaM vA
durAyaM vA vathae / no se kappar3a paraM egarAyAo vA durAyAo vA vathae / je
tattha egarAyAno vA durAyAo vA paraM vasai, se saMtarA chee vA parihAre thaa|
21. parihArakappaTTie bhikkhU bahiyA therANaM veyAvaDiyAe gacchejjA, therA ya se
no sarejjA kappai se nivisamANassa egarAiyAe paDimAe jaNNaM jagaNaM disaM anne
sAhammiyA viharaMti taNNaM taNNaM visaM ulitte|

Page #90 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[270] If it is not permissible for him to stay there for the purpose of
traveling, then it is permissible for him to stay there for the purpose of a
cause. If the cause is fulfilled, then a Vaidya (physician) should say, "O Arya!
Stay here for one or two nights." If it is permissible for him to stay there for
one or two nights, then it is not permissible for him to stay there for more
than one or two nights. Whoever stays there for more than one or two nights, he
incurs the penalty of Diksha-Chhed or Tapa-Prayashchitta for violating that
rule. 22. A Bhikshu who is in Parihar-Kalpa should go to another place for the
service of a sick Thera (elder) with the permission of the Thera. If the Thera
remembers him, or does not remember him, it is permissible for him to stay in a
village or town on the way for one night, and to go in the direction where the
sick Bhikshu is. It is not permissible for him to stay there for the purpose of
traveling, but it is permissible for him to stay there for the purpose of a
cause. If the cause is fulfilled, then a Vaidya (physician) should say, "O Arya!
Stay here for one or two nights." If it is permissible for him to stay there for
one or two nights, then it is not permissible for him to stay there for more
than one or two nights. Whoever stays there for more than one or two nights, he
incurs the penalty of Diksha-Chhed or Tapa-Prayashchitta for violating that
rule. 20. A Bhikshu who is in Parihar-Kalpa should go to another place for the
service of a sick Bhikshu with the permission of the Thera. If the Thera does
not remember him, or does not give him permission to leave Parihar-Tapa, then it
is permissible for him to stay in a village or town on the way for one night,
and to go in the direction where the sick Bhikshu is. It is not permissible for
him to stay there for the purpose of traveling, but it is permissible for him to
stay there for the purpose of a cause. If the cause is fulfilled, then a Vaidya
(physician) should say, "O Arya! Stay here for one or two nights." If it is
permissible for him to stay there for one or two nights, then it is not
permissible for him to stay there for more than one or two nights. Whoever stays
there for more than one or two nights, he incurs the penalty of Diksha-Chhed or
Tapa-Prayashchitta for violating that rule.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
270] [vyavahArasUtra no se kappai tattha vihAravattiyaM vatthae / kappai se
tattha kAraNavattiyaM vatthae / tasi ca NaM kAraNasi niTThiyaMsi paro
vaejjA--'vasAhi ajjo ! egarAyaM vA durAyaM vA / ' evaM se kappai egarAyaM vA
durAyaM vA vasthae / no se kappai paraM egarAyAo vA durAyAo vA vtthe| je tattha
egarAyAo vA durAyAo vA paraM vasai, se saMtarA chae vA parihAre vaa| 22.
parihAra-kappaTTie bhikkhU bahiyA therANaM veyAvaDiyAe gacchejjA, therA ya se
sarejjA vA, no sarejjA vA, kappai se nivisamANassa egarAiyAe paDimAe jaNaM
jaNNaM disaM anne sAhammiyA viharaMti taNNaM taNNaM disaM uvlitte| no se kappai
tattha vihAravattiyaM vatthae / kappar3a se tattha kAraNavattiyaM vatthae /
taMsi ca NaM kAraNaMsi niTTiyaMsi paro vaejjA, 'vasAhi ajjo ! egarAyaM vA
durAyaM vaa|' evaM kappai egarAyaM vA durAyaM vA vatthae / no se kappai paraM
egarAyAno vA durAyAno vA vtthe| je tattha egarAyAo vA durAyAo vA paraM vasai, se
saMtarA chee vA parihAre vaa| 20. parihArakalpa meM sthita bhikSu (sthavira kI
AjJA se) anyatra kisI rugNa sthavira kI vaiyAvatya (sevA) ke lie jAve usa samaya
sthavira ko smaraNa rahe arthAt sthavira use parihAratapa chor3ane kI anumati de
to use mArga ke grAmAdi meM eka-eka rAtri vizrAma karate hue jisa dizA meM
sArmika rugNa bhikSu ho, usI dizA meM jAnA kalpatA hai| _ mArga meM vicaraNa ke
lakSya se ThaharanA nahIM kalpatA hai, kintu rogAdi ke kAraNa rahanA kalpatA
hai| kAraNa ke samApta hone para yadi koI vaidya prAdi kahe ki 'he Arya ! tuma
yahAM eka-do rAta aura Thaharo' to use eka-do rAta aura rahanA kalpatA hai,
kintu eka-do rAta se adhika rahanA use nahIM kalpatA hai| jo vahAM eka-do rAtri
se adhika rahatA hai, use usa maryAdA-ullaMghana kA dIkSAcheda yA tapa
prAyazcitta AtA hai| 21. parihArakalpasthita bhikSu (sthavira kI AjJA se)
anyatra kisI rugNa bhikSu kI vaiyAvRtya ke lie jAe, usa samaya yadi sthavira use
smaraNa na dilAve arthAt parihAratapa chor3ane kI anumati na de to parihAratapa
vahana karate hue tathA mArga ke grAmAdi meM eka rAtri vizrAma karate hue jisa
dizA meM rugNa sAdharmika bhikSu hai usa dizA meM jAnA kalpatA hai / mArga meM
use vicaraNa ke lakSya se rahanA nahIM kalpatA hai| kintu rogAdi ke kAraNa
rahanA kalpatA hai / usa kAraNa ke samApta ho jAne para yadi koI vaidya Adi kahe
ki 'he Arya! tuma yahAM eka-do rAta aura raho to use vahAM eka-do rAta aura
rahanA kalpatA hai kintu eka-do rAta se adhika rahanA nahIM kalpatA hai / jo
vahAM eka-do rAtri se adhika rahatA hai use usa maryAdA ullaMghana kA cheda yA
tapa prAyazcitta AtA hai|

Page #91 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## First Objective] [271 22. A Pariharakalp Bhikshu (with the permission of the
Sthavir) goes to another sick Sthavir for Vyavritti, at that time the Sthavir
may remind him or not, i.e. give permission to leave the Pariharatap or not,
then it is Kalpta for him to go in the direction of the sick Sthavir, resting
for one night in the villages etc. on the way, and if possible, carrying the
Pariharatap. It is not Kalpta for him to stay on the way for the purpose of
wandering, but it is Kalpta to stay due to illness etc. / If, after the cause is
over, a Vaidya etc. says, "O Arya! Stay here for another one or two nights,"
then it is Kalpta for him to stay there for another one or two nights, but it is
not Kalpta to stay for more than one or two nights. / He who stays there for
more than one or two nights incurs the Chhed or Tap Prayschitta for that
violation of the limit. / In the previous Sutra, the prohibition and exception
regarding the behavior of the Nishdya etc. with the Bhikshu performing
Pariharatap has been mentioned. / In the present Sutra-trika, the sending of the
Pariharic Bhikshu for the service of the Sthavir due to circumstances has been
described. The Pariharic Bhikshu can go for service while performing his
Prayschitta Tap or even by leaving the Tap. / The first Sutra states that if the
Sthavir asks him to leave the Tap, then he should leave the Tap and go. The
second Sutra states that if the Sthavir does not ask him to leave the Tap, then
he should go carrying the Prayschitta Tap. / The third Sutra states that whether
the Sthavir asks or not, if possible, he should go carrying the Pariharatap, and
if not possible, then he should go after taking permission and leaving the
Pariharatap. Whether the Pariharic Bhikshu goes performing the Tap or leaving
the Tap, he should not stay at one place for more than one night on the way for
rest. He cannot stay longer on the way for Dharma Pravahana or at someone's
request, but if he wants to stay longer due to his own weakness or illness, then
he can stay. If he stays for 5-10 days due to illness and needs treatment, then
he can stay, and after recovering, he can stay for another one or two days at
the behest of a Vaidya or a well-wisher. He does not incur any Prayschitta. /
If, after recovering, he stays for more than two days voluntarily or at
someone's behest, then he becomes eligible for the Tap or Chhed Prayschitta as
per the violation of the limit. See the discussion of this Sutra-ansh in
Brihatkalpasutra U. 2, Su. 4. _ One should go for Vyavritti by the direct path
to the destination which is in accordance with the rules of restraint, but one
should not go by any arbitrary path, spending more time.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
prathama uddezaka] [271 22. parihArakalpa sthita bhikSu (sthavira kI AjJA se)
anyatra kisI rugNa sthavira ko vaiyAvRtya ke lie jAve, usa samaya sthavira use
smaraNa dilAve yA na dilAve arthAt parihAratapa chor3akara jAne kI svIkRti de yA
na de to use mArga ke grAmAdi meM eka rAtri vizrAma karate hue aura zakti ho to
parihAratapa vahana karate hue jisa dizA meM rugNa sthavira hai usa dizA meM
jAnA kalpatA hai| mArga meM use vicaraNa ke lakSya se rahanA nahIM kalpatA hai
kintu rogAdi ke kAraNa rahanA kalpatA hai / kAraNa ke samApta ho jAne para yadi
koI vaidya Adi kahe ki "he Arya ! tuma yahAM eka-do rAta aura raho" to use vahAM
eka-do rAta aura rahanA kalpatA hai kintu eka-do rAta se adhika rahanA nahIM
kalpatA hai / jo vahAM eka-do rAtri se adhika rahatA hai use usa maryAdA-
ullaMghana kA cheda yA tapa prAyazcitta pAtA hai / . vivecana-pUrvasUtra meM
parihAratapa karane vAle bhikSu ke sAtha niSadyA Adi ke vyavahAra kA niSedha
evaM apavAda kahA gayA hai / prastuta sUtratrika meM paristhitivaza pArihArika
bhikSu ko sthavira kI sevA ke lie bhejane kA varNana kiyA gayA hai| pArihArika
bhikSu apane prAyazcitta tapa kI ArAdhanA karatA huA bhI sevA meM jA sakatA hai
athavA tapa kI ArAdhanA chor3akara bhI jA sakatA hai / prathama sUtra meM batAyA
gayA hai ki sthavira tapa chor3ane kA kaheM to tapa chor3akara jaave| dUsare
sUtra meM batAyA gayA hai ki sthavira tapa chor3ane kA na kaheM to prAyazcitta
tapa vahana karate hue jAve / tIsare sUtra meM batAyA gayA hai ki sthavira kaheM
yA na kaheM, yadi zakti ho to parihArataya vahana karate hue hI jAve aura zakti
na ho to svIkRti lekara parihAratapa choDakara jaave| pArihArika bhikSu tapa
karate hue jAve yA tapa chor3akara jAve to vizrAMti ke lie use mArga meM eka
jagaha eka rAtri se adhika nahIM rukanA caahie| dharma prabhAvanA ke lie yA kisI
kI prArthanA-Agraha se vaha mArga meM adhika nahIM ruka sakatA hai kintu svayaM
ko prazakti yA bImArI ke kAraNa adhika rukanA cAhe to vaha ruka sakatA hai| yadi
bImArI ke kAraNa 5-10 dina taka rahe aura usakA upacAra bhI karanA par3e to
Thahara sakatA hai aura svastha hone ke bAda kisI vaidya yA kisI hitaiSI
gahastha ke kahane se eka yA do dina aura bhI ruka sakatA hai| usakA koI
prAyazcitta nahIM pAtA hai / svastha hone ke bAda svecchA se yA kisI ke kahane
para do dina se adhika ruke to vaha maryAdAullaMghana ke kAraNa yathAyogya tapa
yA cheda prAyazcitta kA pAtra hotA hai| "se saMtarA chee vA parihAre vA" isa
sUtrAMza kA vivecana bRhatkalpasUtra u. 2, sU. 4 meM dekheN| _ gaMtavya sthAna
kA jo sIdhA mArga saMyama-maryAdA ke anusAra ho to usI se vaiyAvRtya ke lie jAnA
cAhie kintu adhika samaya vyatIta karate hue yatheccha mArga se nahIM jAnA
caahie|

Page #92 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  272] [Vyavahar Sutra: The Return of a Solitary Wanderer to the Order]  23.
If a monk, having left the order, practices solitary wandering, and later wishes
to rejoin the same order, he should fully examine and perform *pratikramana* for
his previous state. He should accept the *chhed* or *tapas* penance given by the
*acharya* after listening to his criticism.  24. If a *ganavachchedak*, having
left the order, practices solitary wandering, and later wishes to rejoin the
same order, he should fully examine and perform *pratikramana* for his previous
state. He should accept the *chhed* or *tapas* penance given by the *acharya*
after listening to his criticism.  25. If an *ayariya* or *upajjhaya*, having
left the order, practices solitary wandering, and later wishes to rejoin the
same order, he should fully examine and perform *pratikramana* for his previous
state. He should accept the *chhed* or *tapas* penance given by the *acharya*
after listening to his criticism.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
272] [vyavahArasUtra akele vicarane vAle kA gaNa meM punarAgamana 23. bhikkhU ya
gaNAo avakkamma egallavihArapaDima uvasaMpajjittANaM viharejjA, se ya icchejjA
doccaM pi tameva gaNaM uvasaMpajjittANaM viharittae, puNo AloejjA, puNo
paDikkamejjA, puNo cheya-parihArassa uvtttthaaejjaa| 24. gaNAvaccheie ya gaNAmro
pravakkamma egallavihArapaDimaM uvasaMpajjittANaM viharejjA, se ya icchejjA
doccaM pi tameva gaNaM uvasaMpajjittANaM viharittae, puNo pAloejjA, puNo
paDikkamejjA, puNo cheya-parihArassa uvtttthaaejjaa| 25. Ayariya-uvajjhAe ya
gaNAmro avakkamma egallavihArapaDimaM uvasaMpajjittANaM viharejjA, se ya
icchejjA doccaM pi tameva gaNaM uvasaMpajjittANaM viharittae, puNo AloejjA, puNo
paDikkamejjA, puNo cheya-parihArassa uvAejjA / 23. yadi koI bhikSa gaNa se
nikalakara ekalavihAracaryA dhAraNa karake vicaraNa kare, bAda meM vaha puna:
usI gaNa meM sammilita hokara rahanA cAhe to usa pUrva avasthA kI pUrNa pAlocanA
evaM pratikramaNa kare tathA prAcArya usakI AlocanA sunakara jo bhI cheda yA
tapa rUpa prAyazcitta de use svIkAra kre| 24. yadi koI gaNAvacchedaka gaNa se
nikalakara ekalavihAracaryA ko dhAraNa karake vicaraNa kare aura bAda meM vaha
punaH usI gaNa meM sammilita hokara rahanA cAhe to usa pUrva avasthA kI pUrNa
mAlocanA evaM pratikramaNa kare tathA prAcArya usakI AlocanA sunakara jo bhI
cheda yA tapa rUpa prAyazcitta de use svIkAra kre| 25. yadi koI prAcArya yA
upAdhyAya gaNa se nikalakara ekalavihAracaryA ko dhAraNa karake vicaraNa kare
aura bAda meM vaha punaH usI gaNa meM sammilita hokara rahanA cAhe to usa pUrva
avasthA kI pUrNa AlocanA evaM pratikramaNa kare tathA prAcArya usakI AlocanA
sunakara jo cheda yA tapa rUpa prAyazcitta de use svIkAra kre| vivecanaina
sUtroM meM gaNa se nikalakara ekAkI vihAracaryA karane vAle bhikSu, prAcArya,
upAdhyAya evaM gaNAvacchedaka kA kathana hai| ye ekala vihArI bhikSu yadi ekAkI
vihAracaryA chor3akara punaH gaNa meM sammilita honA cAheM to unako gaNa meM
sammilita kiyA jA sakatA hai, kintu unako ekAkI vihAracaryA meM lage doSoM kI
pAlocanA pratikramaNa karanA Avazyaka hotA hai aura gacchapramukha unake ekAkI
vicaraNa kA prAyazcitta tapa yA dIkSAcheda jo bhI de use svIkAra karanA bhI
Avazyaka hotA hai| ina sUtroM ke vidhAnAnusAra bhikSu, prAcArya, upAdhyAya evaM
gaNAvacchedaka pratimAdhArI nahIM haiM, yaha spaSTa hai| phira bhI sUtroM meM jo
"pratimA" zabda kA prayoga kiyA gayA hai vaha kevala sUtra-zailI hai| kyoMki Age
ke sUtroM meM pArzvastha Adi ke lie evaM anya mata ke liMga ko dhAraNa karane
vAle ke liye

Page #93 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[First Objective] [273 also the word "Pratima" has been used / It would be
completely inappropriate to imagine those who are Pratimadhari. There is a
definite period for those who hold the twelve Pratimadharis or other
Pratimadharis. They remain in Paradhna for that long. The terms "Dochchhapi" and
"Ichchhajja" used in the Sutra are unnecessary for them / They practice various
types of tapasya-sadhana etc. only after they take Pratima / Therefore, there is
no reason to leave Pratima in between and it is also not appropriate to imagine
the provision of tapasya or chhed pratyachit for the Pratimadhari bhikshu to
come to the gachch after completing the Pratimadhari / Because the Shravaks who
take Pratima are also so strong-willed that they do not keep any kind of praagar
in their rules, i.e. even the praagar of the king etc. does not remain for them
/ Then how can the possibility of the Pratimadhari bhikshu being fickle-minded
and being blamed be considered? In Sutra 31, there is a statement like "Nasti
Kei Chhae Wa Parihare Wa, Nannasti Egaae Paloyanaae" for the ordinary bhikshu
who takes the ling of other opinion, then the Pratimadhari bhikshu is of a much
higher level of practice than that. Therefore, it is appropriate to understand
that the provision and pratyachit done in these Sutras is in relation to those
who leave the gachch voluntarily and take up eklavicharcharya / There are two
types of eklavichara mentioned in the Agamas (1) Aparisthitika (2)
Saparisthitika / Aparisthitika - The solitary stay of the bhikshus who take
Pratimadharis is only for the purpose of nirjara, that is Aparisthitika
eklavichara / The bhikshus who take Pratima do eklavichara with respect and with
the permission of the Acharya of the gachch, therefore they are counted in the
property of the Acharya / They are the knowers of the nine pasts / After
completing the Pratima in eight months, they come to the gana with respect.
Saparisthitika - due to physical-mental reasons, due to the disparity of nature,
due to the non-availability of a cooperative partner who follows pure restraint,
or due to the inability to follow the restraint method completely, the
eklavichara that is taken voluntarily is called 'Saparisthitika eklavichara'.
The bhikshu who follows Saparisthitika eklavicharcharya is not counted in the
property of the Acharya. His leaving the gachch is not by permission or with
respect, but by the indifference or opposition of the sangha. For the bhikshu
who follows Saparisthitika eklavicharcharya, it is not mandatory to take
Pratima, to be an excellent geetarth, or to have special qualifications,
however, a navadishit (one who has taken diksha for less than three years), a
balak (one who is less than 16 years old), and a tarun (one who is less than 40
years old) should not be an eklavichari. Because in Vyavaharsutra U. 3, there is
a provision for these three to stay under the leadership of the Acharya
Upadhyaya.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
prathama uddezaka] [273 bhI "pratimA" zabda kA prayoga kiyA gayA hai / jinake
pratimAdhArI hone kI kalpanA karanA sarvathA anucita hogaa| bhikSu kI bAraha
pratimA yA anya pratimAeM dhAraNa karane vAloM kI nizcita avadhi hotI hai| ye
utane samaya taka pArAdhanA karate rahate haiN| unake lie sUtra meM prayukta
"doccapi" aura "icchejjA" pada anAvazyaka hai / ve aneka prakAra kI tapa-sAdhanA
Adi kA abhyAsa karake hI pratimA dhAraNa karate haiM / ataH bIca meM pratimA
chor3akara Ane kA koI kAraNa nahIM hotA hai tathA pratimAdhArI bhikSu ke lie
pratimA pUrNa karake gaccha meM Ane para tapa yA cheda prAyazcitta ke vidhAna kI
kalpanA karanA bhI ucita nahIM hai / kyoMki pratimA dhAraNa karane vAle zrAvaka
bhI itane dRDha manobala vAle hote haiM ki ve apane niyamoM meM kisI prakAra ke
prAgAra nahIM rakhate haiM arthAt rAjA Adi kA prAgAra bhI unake nahIM rahatA hai
/ taba pratimAoM ko dhAraNa karane vAle bhikSu ke calacitta hone kI evaM doSa
lagAne kI sambhAvanA hI kaise kI jA sakatI hai ? sUtra 31 meM anyamata kA liMga
dhAraNa karane vAle sAmAnya bhikSu ke lie bhI "nasthi keI chae vA parihAre vA,
nannastha egAe pAloyaNAe" aisA kathana hai to pratimAdhArI bhikSu to usase bhI
bahuta uccakoTi kI sAdhanA karane vAle hote haiN| ataH ina sUtroM meM kiyA gayA
vidhAna evaM prAyazcitta svecchAvaza gaccha se nikalakara ekalavihAracaryA
dhAraNa karane vAloM kI apekSA se hai, aisA samajhanA ho ucita hai / AgamoM meM
kahe gae ekalavihAra do prakAra ke haiM(1) aparisthitika (2) saparisthitika /
aparisthitika-pratimAoM ko dhAraNa karane vAle bhikSuoM kA akelA rahanA kevala
nirjarAhetu hotA hai, vaha aparisthitika ekalavihAra hai / pratimA dhAraNa
karane vAle bhikSu gaccha ke prAcArya kI AjJA lekara Adara sahita ekalavihAra
karate haiM, ataH ye AcArya kI sampadA meM gine jAte haiM / ye nau pUrva ke
jJAtA hote haiM / ATha mahinoM meM pratimA pUrNa karane ke bAda sammAna pUrvaka
gaNa meM Ate haiN| saparisthitika-zArIrika-mAnasika kAraNoM se, prakRti kI
viSamatA se, zuddha saMyama pAlana karane vAle sahayogI ke na milane se athavA
pUrNatayA saMyamavidhi kA pAlana na kara sakane se, jo svecchA se ekalavihAra
dhAraNa kiyA jAtA hai, vaha 'saparisthitika ekalavihAra' hai| saparisthitika
ekalavihAracaryA vAlA bhikSu prAcArya kI sampadA meM nahIM ginA jAtA hai| usakA
gaccha se nikalanA AjJA se athavA AdarapUrvaka nahIM hotA hai, kintu saMgha kI
udAsInatA yA virodhapUrvaka hotA hai| saparisthitika ekala vihAracaryA vAle
bhikSu ke lie pratimA dhAraNa karanA, utkRSTa gItArtha honA athavA viziSTa
yogyatAoM kA honA to anivArya nahIM hai, tathApi navadIkSita (tIna varSa se alpa
dIkSA paryAya vAlA), bAlaka (16 varSa se kama vaya vAlA) evaM taruNa (40 varSa
se alpa vaya vAle) bhikSu ko ekalavihArI nahIM honA caahie| kyoMki
vyavahArasUtra u. 3 meM ina tInoM ko AcArya upAdhyAya ke netRtva meM hI rahane
kA vidhAna hai|

Page #94 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  **Chapter 274:  On the solitary conduct of monks**  **Solitary conduct
without any specific circumstances**  **Sources:**  1. **Eleven types of
solitary conduct for monks.** - Dasha Da. 7 2. **The practice of solitary
conduct.** - Bahutkalp U. 6 3. **Prohibition of seeking treatment even for a
snakebite for a solitary monk.** - Vyav. U. 5 4. **The desire for solitary
conduct.** - Thaan A. 3 5. **The qualities of solitary conduct.** - Thaan A. 8
6. **Sitting, standing, sleeping, and walking alone.** - Suy. Shru. 1, A. 2, U.
2 7. **The result of rejecting communal meals (Samyoga).** - Uttara. A. 29 8.
**The result of rejecting assistance.** - Uttara. A. 29 9. **The teacher's
liberation from the debt to the student by teaching the student solitary
conduct.** - Dasha Da. 4 10. **Leaving the group is considered internal
penance.** - Uvvai. Su. 30/ Bhagavati. Sh. 25, U. 7 11. **Solitary conduct with
vows related to clothing.** - A. Shru. 1, A. 8, U. 4-5-6-7  **Note:**  Even in
the practices of Moy-pratima, Datti-pariman tapas, and many other vows, the
rejection of the group or communal meals is practiced.  **Solitary conduct with
specific circumstances**  **Sources:**  1. **Solitary conduct for self-
protection.** - Thaan A. 3 2. **Gargacharya's solitary conduct due to the lack
of concentration in his students.** - Uttara. A. 26 3. **Instruction for
solitary conduct in the absence of a suitable assistant monk.** - Uttara. A. 32
4. **The entire Chulika is called 'Vivitacharya' and it contains many teachings
about solitary conduct.** - Dashava. Chu. 2 5. **Praise for the solitary conduct
of a monk who is engaged in pure research.** - Aacha. Shru. 1, A. 6, U. 2 6.
**Motivation for solitary conduct to avoid the faults of Pradhakarma and the
description of its path to liberation.** - Suy. Shru. 1, A. 10 7. **The
provision for a suitable dwelling for a solitary monk.** - Vyav. U. 6 8. **The
exceptional life of a solitary monk in old age.** - Vyav. U. 8 9. **Thaan A. 5
mentions the proper reasons for leaving the group, and Bahutkalp U. 4 prohibits
joining a group that harms the qualities of restraint. Therefore, solitary
conduct is recommended for monks in such situations.** 10. **The method of
criticism and atonement for a solitary monk in the presence of an Arihant
Siddha.** - Vyav. U. 1, Su. 33  **Inappropriate solitary conduct and its
prohibition**  **Sources:**  1. **The corrupt solitary conduct of the extremely
angry, arrogant, and deceitful.** - Aacha. Shru. 1, A. 5, U. 1

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
274] [vyavahArasUtra aparisthitika ekalavihAracaryA sambandhI prAgamasthala 1.
bhikSu ko gyAraha prtimaa| -dazA da. 7 2. jinklpsaadhnaa| -bahatkalpa u.6 3.
jinakalpI ko sarpa kATane para bhI upacAra karAne kA niSedha / -vyava. u. 5 4.
ekalavihAra kA mnorth| ThANaM a. 3 5. ekalavihAra ke pATha guNa / -ThANaM a. 8
6. akele baiThe, khar3A rahe, sove evaM vicre| -sUya. zru. 1, a. 2, u. 2 7.
saMbhoga (sAmUhika AhAra) pratyAkhyAna kA phl| -uttarA. a. 29 8. sahAya-
pratyAkhyAna kA phala / -uttarA. a. 29 9. ziSya ko ekalavihArasamAcArI kI zikSA
dene se prAcArya kA ziSya ke RNa se mukta honaa| -dazA . da. 4 10. gaNatyAga
karanA Abhyantara tapa kahA hai| uvavAI. sU. 30/ bhagavatI. za. 25, u.7 11.
vastra sambandhI pratijJAyukta eklvihaar| -A. zru. 1, a.8, u. 4-5-6-7 moya-
pratimA tathA datti-parimANa tapa evaM aneka abhigrahoM meM bhI samUha kA yA
sAmUhika AhAra kA tyAga kiyA jAtA hai| saparisthitika ekalavihAracaryA sambandhI
vidhAna karane vAle Agamasthala 1. AtmasurakSA ke lie ekala vihaar| -ThANaM. a.
3 2. ziSyoM dvArA utpanna asamAdhi se gargAcArya kA ekalavihAra / -uttarA. a. 26
3. yogya sahAyaka bhikSu ke abhAva meM ekala vihAra kA nirdesh| -uttarA. a. 32
4. pUrI cUlikA kA nAma hI 'viviktacaryA' hai evaM usameM ekalavihAra ke nirdeza
ke sAtha aneka zikSAprada vacana kahe haiN| -dazavai. cU. 2 5. zuddha gaveSaNA
karane vAle bhikSu ke ekala vihAra kI prazaMsA / AcA. zru. 1, a. 6, u. 2 6.
prAdhAkarma doSa se bacane ke lie ekalavihAra kI preraNA evaM usase mokSaprApti
kA prarUpaNa / -suya. zru. 1, a. 10 7. ekalavihArI ke nivAsayogya upAzraya kA
vidhAna / -vyava. u. 6 8. ekalavihArI kI vRddhAvasthA kA prApavAdika jIvana /
-vyava. u. 8 9. ThANaM a. 5 meM gaNatyAga ke prazasta kAraNa kahe haiM evaM
bRhatkalpa u. 4 meM saMyama guNa kI hAni ho aise gaNa meM jAne kA niSedha hai|
ata: aisI paristhiti vAle bhikSu kA ekala vihaar| 10. arihaMta siddha kI sAkSI
se ekalavihArI bhikSu ko AlocanA evaM prAyazcitta grahaNa karane kI vidhi|
-vyava. u. 1, sU. 33 aprazasta ekalavihAra evaM usakA niSedha karane vAle
Agamasthala 1. atyantakrodhI-mAnI evaM dhUrta kA dUSita ekalavihAra / AcA. zru.
1, a. 5, u. 1

Page #95 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  **Translation:**  **[Direct Objective]**  **275 2. The solitary dwelling of
one who is expelled from the order for not accepting the appropriate
atonement.**  / / **Brihatkalpa. U. 4 3. The solitary dwelling of one who is of
an unmanifest and tranquil nature, but is in a state of crisis.** - **Pracha.
Shru. 1, A. 5, U. 4 4. The prohibition of solitary dwelling for one who is
averse to following the rules of restraint.** / - **Pracha. Shru. 1, A. 5, U. 6
5. The prohibition of solitary dwelling for an unmanifest monk, using the
analogy of a perfect wingless bird.** / **Suy. Shru. 1, A. 14 6. The prohibition
of a newly initiated, child, or young monk from dwelling without the guidance of
a preceptor.** / - **Vyav. U. 3 7. The prohibition of those who hold the
positions of preceptor and teacher from dwelling alone.** / - **Vyav. U. 4.
Description of solitary dwelling in the appointment and commentary 1.
Brihatkalpa Bhashya, verses 690 to 693. One who has memorized the Acharaanga and
Nitish Sutra, which are of the lowest level of scriptural knowledge, is called a
"Jghanya Geetaarth". One who has memorized the Acharaanga, Sayagadaanga, and the
four Cheda Sutras, which are of the middle level of scriptural knowledge, is
called a "Madhyama Geetaarth". One who knows from the Navapurva to the 14th
Purva, and so on, is called an "Utkrisht Geetaarth".** / **Any of these types of
Geetaarth can be a preceptor, teacher, or solitary dweller. Because solitary
dwelling of a Geetaarth and the dwelling of a Geetaarth in the order under the
guidance of a preceptor, these two types of dwelling are permitted in Jainism.
The solitary dwelling of an Ageetaarth and the dwelling of an Ageetaarth in the
order under the guidance of a preceptor are both prohibited in Jainism. The
explanation of the Jghanya, Madhyama, and Utkrisht Bahushruta is the same as the
explanation of the Geetaarth in Nitish Chuni, verse 404. 2. In the last sutra of
Vyavahar Bhashya, U. 1, solitary dwelling is done for the following reasons: 1.
Illness 2. Famine 3. Royal enmity 4. Fear 5. Physical or mental debility 6. For
the growth of knowledge, vision, or character 7. Upon the death of a fellow monk
8. When sent by the preceptor or elder.** / **There are solitary dwelling monks
who leave the order because there is not a single qualified holder of the five
positions of preceptor, teacher, promoter, elder, and Ganavachchedak in the
order. There is a provision to criticize the monks who become solitary dwellers
for the above reasons, with the witness of the Arihant Siddha. 3. In the
Propaniyukti, solitary dwelling is said to be of two types, with and without
reason: 1. The solitary dwelling of a Geetaarth done for the growth of
knowledge, vision, and character, or for other circumstances mentioned in the
scriptures, is called "Sakaaran Ekala Vihaar".**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
prayama uddezaka] [275 2. yogya prAyazcitta svIkAra na karane se jo gaccha-
niSkAsita ho, usakA ekalavihAra / / bRhatkalpa. u. 4 3. avyakta evaM prazAnta
svabhAva vAle kA saMkaTayukta eklvihaar| -prAcA. zru. 1, a. 5, u. 4 4. saMyama-
vidhi ke pAlana meM aruci vAle ke lie ekalavihAra kA niSedha / -prAcA. zru. 1,
a. 5, u. 6 5. paripUrNa paMkharahita pakSI kI upamA se avyakta bhikSu ke lie
ekalavihAra kA niSedha / sUya. zru. 1, a. 14 6. navadIkSita, bAlaka evaM taruNa
bhikSu ko prAcArya kI nizrA binA rahane kA niSedha / -vyava. u. 3 7. prAcArya,
upAdhyAya pada dhAraNa karane vAloM ko akele vihAra karane kA niSedha / -vya
va.u.4 . niyukti tathA bhASya meM ekalavihAra kA varNana 1. bRhatkalpabhASya
gAthA. 690 se 693 taka jaghanyagItArtha-AcArAMga evaM nizIthasUtra ko kaNThastha
dhAraNa karane vaalaa| madhyamagItArtha-AcArAMga, sayagaDAMga evaM cAra
chedasatroM ko kaNThastha karane vaalaa| utkRSTagotArtha-navapUrva se 14 pUrva
taka ke jJAnI Adi / inameM se kisI bhI prakAra kA gItArtha hI prAcArya,
upAdhyAya yA ekalavihArI ho sakatA hai| kyoMki gItArtha kA ekAkI vihAra evaM
gItArtha AcArya kI nizrAyukta gacchavihAra, ye do vihAra hI jinazAsana meM
anujJAta haiN| tIsarA agItArtha kA ekAkI vihAra evaM agItArtha kI nizrAyukta
gacchavihAra bhI jinazAsana meM niSiddha hai| nizIthacUNi gA. 404 meM ukta
gItArtha kI vyAkhyA ke samAna hI jaghanya, madhyama evaM utkRSTa bahuzruta kI
bhI vyAkhyA kI gaI hai| 2. vyavahArabhASya u. 1 ke antima sUtra meM 1. rogAtaMka
2. durbhikSa 3. rAjadveSa 4. bhaya 5. zArIrika yA mAnasika glAnatA 6. jJAna
darzana yA cAritra kI vRddhi hetu 7. sAthI bhikSu ke kAla-dharma prApta hone
para 8. prAcArya yA sthavira kI AjJA se bhejane para, ityAdi kAraNoM se
ekalavihAra kiyA jAtA hai| _ gaccha meM AcArya, upAdhyAya, pravartaka, sthavira
evaM gaNAvacchedaka ina pAMca padavIdharoM meM se eka bhI yogya padavIdhara ke
na hone ke kAraNa gaccha tyAga karane vAle ekalavihArI bhikSu hote haiN| ukta
kAraNoM se ekalavihArI hue bhikSuoM ko arihaMta siddha kI sAkSI se AlocanA
karane kA vidhAna hai| 3. propaniyukti meM sakAraNa evaM akAraNa ke bheda se
ekalavihAra do prakAra kA kahA hai 1. jJAna darzana cAritra ko vRddhi ke lie yA
Agamokta anya paristhitiyoM se kiyA gayA gItArtha kA ekalavihAra 'sakAraNa
ekalavihAra' hai|

Page #96 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[276] [Vyavahar Sutra 2. A solitary wandering undertaken due to fear of the
discipline of the Acharya etc., or to obtain a place, region, food, clothing
etc. that is agreeable to the mind, or to see many places, is also called
'unjustified solitary wandering', and the solitary wandering of all those who
are not on a pilgrimage is called 'unjustified solitary wandering'. In the
present set of Sutras, the rules for solitary wandering and return to the group
by the Acharya, Upadhyaya, Ganavachchedak and ordinary monks have been laid
down. In essence, solitary wandering is of two types: justified and unjustified.
Therefore, solitary wandering is both prohibited and prescribed in the Agamas.
Solitary wandering undertaken for the reasons mentioned in the Agamas is
justified and prescribed by the Agamas. Solitary wandering of those who are not
on a pilgrimage, those who are not well-versed in the scriptures, and those who
are not enlightened is strictly prohibited, and all three terms are synonymous.
A monk who is lax in his vows, not vigilant, and has an abundance of passions
like anger, pride etc., is considered to be engaged in unjustified solitary
wandering, and it is called 'condemned solitary wandering'. Any solitary
wandering monk, whether justified or unjustified, who wishes to return to the
group, can be admitted to the group after proper examination and performance of
appropriate penance. This is the essence of the three Sutras. The return to the
group of those who are wandering in the vicinity etc. is as follows: 26. A monk
who is wandering in the vicinity of the group, having been admitted to the
group, if he wishes to return to the same group, having been admitted, and if
there is any reason for it, he should be welcomed, readmitted, and his
shortcomings should be rectified. 27. A monk who is wandering away from the
group, having been admitted to the group, if he wishes to return to the same
group, having been admitted, and if there is any reason for it, he should be
welcomed, readmitted, and his shortcomings should be rectified. 28. A monk who
is wandering away from the group, having been admitted to the group, if he
wishes to return to the same group, having been admitted, and if there is any
reason for it, he should be welcomed, and his shortcomings should be rectified.
29. A monk who is wandering away from the group, having been admitted to the
group, if he wishes to return to the same group, having been admitted, and if
there is any reason for it, he should be welcomed, readmitted, and his
shortcomings should be rectified. 30. A monk who is wandering away from the
group, having been admitted to the group, if he wishes to return to the same
group, having been admitted, and if there is any reason for it, he should be
welcomed, readmitted, and his shortcomings should be rectified.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
276] [vyavahArasUtra 2. prAcAryAdi ke anuzAsana se ghabarAkara athavA sthAna,
kSetra, AhAra, vastra prAdi-manonukUla prApta karane hetu athavA aneka sthaloM
ko dekhane hetu kiyA gayA gItArtha kA ekalavihAra bhI 'akAraNa ekalavihAra' hai
tathA sabhI agItArthoM kA ekala vihAra to 'akAraNa ekala vihAra' hI kahA jAtA
hai| prastuta sUtratrika meM AcArya, upAdhyAya, gaNAvacchedaka evaM sAmAnya
bhikSutroM ke ekalavihAra karane kA evaM gaNa meM punarAgamana kA vidhAna kiyA
gayA hai| sArAMza yaha hai ki ekalavihAra prazasta aprazasta donoM prakAra kA
hotA hai| ataeva ekalavihAra AgamoM meM niSiddha bhI hai evaM vihita bhI hai /
gItArtha kA Agamokta kAraNoM ke upasthita hone para kiyA gayA prazasta
ekalavihAra Agamavihita hai| agItArtha, abahuzruta aura avyakta kA ekalavihAra
ekAnta niSiddha hai aura ye tInoM hI zabda ekArthaka bhI haiN| saMyama meM
zithila, ajAgarUka evaM krodha, mAna Adi kaSAyoM kI adhikatA vAle bhikSu kA .
ekalavihAra aprazasta hai evaM vaha nidita ekalavihAra kahA gayA hai / ye
prazasta aprazasta koI bhI ekAkIvihArI bhikSa puna: gaccha meM Akara rahanA cAhe
to ucita parIkSaNa karake evaM yogya prAyazcitta dekara gaccha meM rakhA jA
sakatA hai / yaha tInoM sUtroM kA sAra hai| pArzvastha-vihArI Adi kA gaNa meM
punarAgamana 26. bhikkhU ya gaNAo avakkamma pAsatyavihArapaDima
uvasaMpajjittANaM viharejjA, se ya icchejjA voccaM pi tameva gaNaM
uvasaMpajjittANaM viharittae, asthi ya ittha sese, puNo AloejjA, puNo
paDikkamejjA, puNo cheyaparihArassa uvttttaaejjaa| 27. bhikkhU ya gaNAo
pravakkamma ahAchaMdavihArapaDimaM uvasaMpajjittANaM viharejjA, se ya icchejjA
doccaM pi tameva gaNaM uvasaMpajjitANaM viharittae, atthi ya ittha sese, puNo
pAloejjA, puNo paDikkamejjA, puNo cheyaparihArassa uvtttthaaejjaa| _28. bhikkhU
ya gaNAmro avakphamma kusIlavihArapaDima uvasaMpajjittANaM viharejjA, se ya
icchejjA doccaM pi tameva gaNaM uvasaMpajjittANaM viharittae, asthi ya itya
sese, puNo AloejjA, puNo cheyaparihArassa uvtttthaaejjaa| 29. bhikkhU ya gaNAo
avakphamma prosannavihArapaDimaM uvasaMpajjittANaM viharejjA, se ya icchejjA
doccaM pi tameva gaNaM uvasaMpajjittANaM viharittae, atthi ya ittha sese, puNo
pAloejjA, puNo paDikkamejjA puNo cheyaparihArassa uvtttthaaejjaa| 30. bhikkhU ya
gaNAo avakkama saMsattavihArapaDimaM uvasaMpajjittANaM viharejjA, se ya icchejjA
doccaM pi tameva gaNaM uvasaMpajjittANaM viharittae, atthi ya ittha sese, puNo
Aloe jjA, puNo paDikkamejjA, puNo cheyaparihArassa ubttttaaejjaa|

Page #97 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## [Direct Objective] [277 26. If a monk leaves the order and adopts the PƒÅrsva-
sthavi-vihƒÅra-caryƒÅ and later wants to return to the same order after abandoning
the PƒÅrsva-sthavi-vihƒÅra, then if his conduct is somewhat remaining, he should
perform a complete review and repentance of his previous state and accept
whatever penance in the form of Diksha-chheda or tapas that the Acharya gives
after listening to his review. 27. If a monk leaves the order and adopts the
Yatha-chanda-vihƒÅra-caryƒÅ and later wants to return to the same order after
abandoning the Yatha-chanda-vihƒÅra, then if his conduct is somewhat remaining,
he should perform a complete review and repentance of his previous state and
accept whatever penance in the form of Diksha-chheda or tapas that the Acharya
gives after listening to his review. 28. If a monk leaves the order and adopts
the Ku≈õila-vihƒÅra-caryƒÅ and later wants to return to the same order after
abandoning the Ku≈õila-vihƒÅra, then if his conduct is somewhat remaining, he
should perform a complete review and repentance of his previous state and accept
whatever penance in the form of Diksha-chheda or tapas that the Acharya gives
after listening to his review. 29. If a monk leaves the order and adopts the
Avasanna-vihƒÅra-caryƒÅ and later wants to return to the same order after
abandoning the Avasanna-vihƒÅra, then if his conduct is somewhat remaining, he
should perform a complete review and repentance of his previous state and accept
whatever penance in the form of Diksha-chheda or tapas that the Acharya gives
after listening to his review. 30. If a monk leaves the order and adopts the
Samsakta-vihƒÅra-caryƒÅ and later wants to return to the same order after
abandoning the Samsakta-vihƒÅra, then if his conduct is somewhat remaining, he
should perform a complete review and repentance of his previous state and accept
whatever penance in the form of Diksha-chheda or tapas that the Acharya gives
after listening to his review.  /  The previous s≈´tras mention the return of a
solitary monk to the order, and these s≈´tras mention the return of monks with
relaxed conduct like PƒÅrsva-sthavi etc. to the order.  /  These s≈´tras also make
it clear that the restraint mentioned in the previous s≈´tras for solitary monks
is not relaxed, but they are those who follow pure conduct. When PƒÅrsva-sthavi
etc. want to return to the order, if their restraint has not been completely
destroyed by their corrupt tendencies, i.e., if any of the qualities of
restraint remain, then they can be admitted to the order after giving them
penance in the form of tapas or chheda.  _ This statement about the remaining
restraint is not found in the previous s≈´tras, all other provisions are the same
in both places. Therefore, these should be understood as before.  /  These
s≈´tras provide an alternative provision for penance in the form of tapas or
chheda, i.e., a solitary monk or PƒÅrsva-sthavi etc. can be admitted to the order
after giving them tapas penance, and someone can also be given Diksha-chheda
penance, therefore, it should not be understood as a single provision.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
prayama uddezaka] [277 26. yadi koI bhikSu gaNa se nikalakara
pAvasthavihAracaryA ko aMgIkAra karake vicare aura bAda meM vaha
pArzvasthavihAra chor3akara usI gaNa meM sammilita hokara rahanA cAhe to yadi
usakA cAritra kucha zeSa ho to pUrva avasthA kI pUrNa AlocanA evaM pratikramaNa
kare tathA prAcArya usakI pAlocanA sunakara jo bhI dIkSAcheda yA tapa rUpa
prAyazcitta deM, use svIkAra kre| 27. yadi koI bhikSu gaNa se nikalakara
yathAchandavihAracaryA aMgIkAra karake vicare aura bAda meM vaha
yathAchandavihAra chor3akara usI gaNa meM sammilita hokara rahanA cAhe to yadi
usakA cAritra kucha zeSa ho to vaha usa pUrva avasthA kI pUrNa AlocanA evaM
pratikramaNa kare tathA AcArya usakI AlocanA sunakara jo bhI dIkSAcheda yA tapa
rUpa prAyazcitta deM, use svIkAra kare / 28. yadi koI bhikSu gaNa se nikalakara
kuzIlavihAracaryA ko aMgIkAra karake vicare aura bAda meM vaha kuzIla vihAra
chor3akara usI gaNa meM sammilita hokara rahanA cAhe to yadi usakA cAritra kucha
zeSa ho to vaha usa pUrva avasthA kI pUrNa AlocanA evaM pratikramaNa kare tathA
AcArya usakI AlocanA sunakara jo bhI dIkSAcheda yA tapa rUpa prAyazcitta deM,
use svIkAra kre| 29. yadi koI bhikSu gaNa se nikalakara avasannavihAracaryA ko
aMgIkAra karake vicare aura bAda meM vaha avasanavihAra chor3akara usI gaNa meM
sammilita hokara rahanA cAhe to yadi usakA cAritra kucha zeSa ho to vaha usa
pUrva avasthA kI pUrNa pAlocanA evaM pratikramaNa kare tathA prAcArya usakI
pAlocanA sunakara jo bhI dIkSAcheda yA tapa rUpa prAyazcitta deM, use svIkAra
kre| 30. yadi koI bhikSa gaNa se nikalakara saMsaktavihAracaryA ko aMgIkAra
karake vicare aura bAda meM vaha saMsaktavihAra ko chor3akara usI gaNa meM
sammilita hokara rahanA cAhe to yadi usakA cAritra kucha zeSa ho to vaha usa
pUrva avasthA kI pUrNa pAlocanA evaM pratikramaNa kare tathA prAcArya usakI
AlocanA sunakara jo bhI dIkSAcheda yA tapa rUpa prAyazcitta deM, use svIkAra
kre| vivecanapUrva ke sUtroM meM ekalavihArI bhikSu ke punaH gaccha meM Ane kA
kathana hai aura ina sUtroM meM zithila AcAra vAle pArzvastha Adi bhikSuoM kA
punaH gaccha meM Ane kA kathana hai / ina sUtroM se yaha bhI spaSTa ho jAtA hai
ki pUrvasUtroM meM varNita ekalavihAra vAle saMyama meM zithila nahIM haiM,
kintu zuddha prAcAra kA pAlana karane vAle haiN| pArzvastha Adi jaba punaH
gaccha meM pAnA cAheM taba unakI dUSita pravRtiyoM ke dvArA saMyama pUrNa naSTa
na huA ho arthAt kucha bhI saMyama ke guNa zeSa rahe hoM to unheM tapa yA cheda
kA prAyazcitta dekara gaccha meM sammilita kiyA jA sakatA hai| _ yaha saMyama
zeSa rahane kA kathana pUrvasUtroM meM nahIM hai, anya sabhI vidhAna donoM
jagaha samAna haiN| ataH inakA vivecana pUrvavat samajhanA cAhie / ina sUtroM
meM prAyazcitta ke lie tapa yA cheda kA vaikalpika vidhAna kiyA gayA hai arthAt
kisI ekalavihArI yA pArzvastha Adi ko tapa prAyazcitta dekara gaccha meM
sammilita kiyA jA sakatA hai aura kisI ko dIkSAcheda kA prAyazcitta bhI diyA jA
sakatA hai, ataH ekAnta vidhAna nahIM samajhanA caahie|

Page #98 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  [278] It is extremely important to test and gather information about the
discipline of any monk seeking re-entry into the Gachchha, whether they follow
strict or relaxed practices.   1. It is crucial to assess whether a monk who
wishes to live independently can abide by the Gachchha's conduct, thoughts, and
disciplinary rules.  2. Why does he desire to return to the Gachchha, leaving
behind Par≈õvasthavihƒÅra, etc.? Is it due to pure or impure motives?  3. Is he
seeking re-entry out of fear of Pari·π£aha-upsarga, humiliation, etc.?  4. What
are his future intentions and how will he achieve them?  5. Are his intentions
to remain in the Gachchha stable or not?   After considering these points, a
decision should be made that benefits both the monk and the Gachchha. To make
the right decision, the monk can be kept under observation for a period of time,
even up to six months, without formally admitting him into the Gachchha. This
allows for a proper assessment of whether to accept him or not.   The reason for
these considerations is to prevent the monk from harming the Gachchha, its other
monks, or the Sangha. This includes causing discord, criticizing the Gachchha or
its leaders, leaving the Gachchha again, misleading other monks to leave the
Gachchha, etc. Such actions would lead to harm for the monk, the Gachchha, and
Jainism. Therefore, it is essential to carefully consider all aspects before
accepting a returning monk.   Similar precautions should be taken for monks
visiting from other Gachchhas.   For a detailed explanation of Par≈õvasth,
Avasanna, Ku≈õƒ´la, and Sansakta, refer to Ni≈õƒ´tha U. 4.   For a detailed
explanation of Yathachanda, refer to Ni≈õƒ´tha U. 10.   Here is a brief
explanation:  1. **Par≈õvasth:** One who does not strive for knowledge,
philosophy, and virtuous conduct, but instead indulges in excesses and
misconduct, is called a "Par≈õvasth." 2. **Yathachanda:** One who follows self-
made interpretations or practices contrary to the Agamas is called a
"Yathachanda." 3. **Ku≈õƒ´la:** One who engages in forbidden activities like
learning, mantras, divination, or healing, which are incompatible with a
disciplined life, is called a "Ku≈õƒ´la." 4. **Avasanna:** One who deviates from
the rules of disciplined conduct or follows them partially is called an
"Avasanna." 5. **Sansakta:** One who follows the strict practices of those with
high conduct and becomes lax with those who follow relaxed practices is called a
"Sansakta."  These Par≈õvasth, etc., are considered lax because they have flaws
in their discipline. However, Bhagavati...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
278] [vyavahArasUtra kisI bhI sAdhu ko punaH gaccha meM sammilita karane ke lie
usake saMyama kI parIkSA karanA evaM jAnakArI karanA atyanta Avazyaka hotA hai,
cAhe vaha zuddha-prAcAra vAlA ho athavA zithila-prAcAra vAlA ho / 1. svataMtra
rahane vAlA bhikSu gaccha ke AcAra-vicAra evaM vinaya-anuzAsana meM raha sakegA
yA nahIM, yaha dekhanA atyaMta Avazyaka hai| 2. vaha pArzvasthavihAra Adi
chor3akara puna: gaccha meM kyoM pAnA cAhatA hai-vizuddha pariNAmoM se yA
saMkliSTa pariNAmoM se ? 3. parISaha-upasarga evaM apamAna Adi se ghabarAkara
pAnA cAhatA hai ? 4. bhaviSya ke lie usake aba kyA kaise pariNAma haiM ? 5.
usake gaccha meM rahane ke pariNAma sthira haiM yA nahIM ? ityAdi vicAraNAoM ke
bAda usakA evaM gaccha kA jisameM hita ho, aisA nirNaya lenA caahie| sahI
nirNaya karane ke lie usa bhikSu ko kucha samaya taka yA utkRSTa chaha mahIne
taka gaccha meM sammilita na karake parIkSArtha rakhA jA sakatA hai, jisase use
rakhane yA na rakhane kA sahI nirNaya ho ske| ina vicAraNAoM kA kAraNa yaha hai
ki vaha bhikSu gaccha kA yA gaccha ke anya sAdhu-sAdhviyoM kA athavA saMgha kA
kucha bhI ahita kara baiThe, bAta-bAta meM kalaha kare, gaccha yA
gacchapramukhoM kI niMdA kare yA punaH gaccha ko chor3a de, anya sAdhuoM ko bhI
bhramita kara gaccha chur3A de, ityAdi pariNAmoM se usakI yA gaccha kI evaM
jinazAsana kI holanA hotI hai| ataH sabhI viSayoM kA pUrvApara vicAra karake hI
prAgaMtuka bhikSu ko rakhanA cAhie / anya gaccha ke AgaMtuka bhikSu ke lie bhI
aisI hI sAvadhAniyAM rakhanA Avazyaka samajha lenA caahie| pArzvastha, avasanna,
kuzIla aura saMsakta-ina cAroM kA vistRta vivecana nizItha u. 4 meM dekheM /
yathAchaMda kA vistRta vivecana nizItha u. 10 meM dekheM / saMkSipta vivecana
isa prakAra hai 1. pAzrvastha-jo jJAna darzana cAritra kI ArAdhanA meM
puruSArtha nahIM karatA apitu unake aticAroM evaM anAcAroM meM pravRtti karatA
hai, vaha 'pArzvastha' kahA jAtA hai| 2. yathAchaMda-jo AgamaviparIta manamAnA
prarUpaNa yA AcaraNa karatA hai, vaha yathAchaMda kahA jAtA hai| 3. kuzIla-jo
vidyA, maMtra, nimitta-kathana yA cikitsA Adi saMyamI jIvana ke niSiddha kArya
karatA hai, vaha 'kuzIla' kahA jAtA hai| 4. avasanna-jo saMyamasamAcArI ke
niyamoM se viparIta yA alpAdhika AcaraNa karatA hai, vaha 'pravasanna' kahA jAtA
hai| 5. saMsakta-unnata prAcAra vAloM ke sAtha unnata AcAra kA pAlana karatA hai
aura zithilAcAra vAloM ke sAtha zithilAcArI ho jAtA hai, vaha 'saMsakta' kahA
jAtA hai / saMyama meM doSa lagAne ke kAraNa ye pArzvastha Adi zithilAcArI kahe
jAte haiN| kintu bhagavatI

Page #99 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[First Objective] [279 Sutra Sh. 25 U. 6 describes Bakush and Pratisevnakushila
Nirgranth. They are called Nirgranth even though they consume dosha. The reason
for this is - 1. The monk who consumes dosha without any compelling
circumstance. 2. The one who does not purify himself after consuming dosha in a
compelling circumstance. 3. The one who accepts contrary conduct to the limits
of restraint forever is called "Shithilachari Parsvasthadi". The monk who
consumes dosha due to a compelling circumstance, later purifies himself by
performing atonement. Upon being relieved of the special circumstance, he
abandons the sinful tendencies, he is not called "Shithilachari Parsvasthadi"
but is called Bakush or Pratisevna Nirgranth and pure-conduct. In deciding
between pure-conduct and Shithilachari, it is also worth considering that the
one who does not follow the limits of restraint which are clearly stated in the
Agamas, can be called Shithilachari, but the one who does not follow the limits
which are not stated in the Agamas, which are prevalent by tradition or are
determined and practiced by the Gachch community or individual, it is completely
inappropriate to consider such a person as Shithilachari. It is necessary for
the members of the community or Gachch to follow the rules of their Gachch or
community for discipline. Because the one who does not follow the rules of his
Gachch is a Gachch Samachari and a violator of the Guru's command. But a Sadhu
Sadhvi belonging to a different Gachch cannot be called Shithilachari or a
violator of the Guru's command for following those rules. A list of such
Samachari rules is given in Nisith U. 13. The inquisitive reader should
carefully look at it. The order of these five Sutras of Parsvasthadi etc. in
Nisith Sutra Uddeshak 4 and Uddeshak 13 is as follows: 1. Parsvastha 2. Avasanna
3. Kushila 4. Sansakta 5. Nityaka / But the order in the present Sutra and its
commentary is as follows: 1. Parsvastha 2. Yathachanda 3. Kushila 4. Avasanna 5.
Sansakta / It is not known whether this difference in order is from the original
composition or from the passage of time or from a scribal error / No
consideration has been given to this matter in the commentary. The commentary
states that many Parsvasthadi wander around self-deprecating and praising the
virtuous, many Parsvasthadi take shelter in the time and place to defend their
lax conduct and build their reputation through knowledge, mantras, means etc.
and also criticize the virtuous. Parsvasthadi etc. are also in the
Mahavidehakshetra and are also in the reign of all Tirthankaras. _ Among these
Parsvasthadi etc., Yathachanda Sadhu is the one who does the most harm to
himself and to the Jinasasana.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
prathama uddezaka] [279 sUtra za. 25 u. 6 meM bakuza aura pratisevanAkuzIla
nirgrantha kA varNana hai| ve doSa kA sevana karate hue bhI nirgrantha kahe jAte
haiN| isakA kAraNa yaha hai- 1. jo bhikSu anivArya paristhiti ke binA doSa
sevana karatA hai| 2. anivArya paristhiti meM doSa sevana karake zuddhi nahIM
karatA hai| 3. saMyama kI maryAdAoM se viparIta AcaraNoM ko sadA ke lie svIkAra
kara letA hai, vaha "zithilAcArI pArzvasthAdi" kahA jAtA hai| jo bhikSa kisI
anivArya paristhiti se vivaza hokara doSa sevana karatA hai, bAda meM
prAyazcitta lekara doSoM kI zuddhi kara letA hai| vizeSa paristhiti se nivRtta
hone para sadoSa pravRttiyoM kA parityAga kara detA hai, vaha "zithilAcArI
pArzvasthAdi" nahIM kahA jAtA hai kintu bakuza yA pratisevanA nirgrantha evaM
zuddhAcArI kahA jAtA hai| zuddhAcArI evaM zithilAcArI kA nirNaya karane meM eka
vikalpa yaha bhI dhyAna meM rakhane yogya hai ki saMyama kI jina maryAdAoM kA
AgamoM meM spaSTa kathana hai, unakA jo akAraNa pAlana nahIM karatA hai use to
zithilAcArI kahA jA sakatA hai, kintu AgamoM meM jina maryAdAoM kA kathana nahIM
hai, jo paramparA se pracalita haiM yA gaccha samudAya yA vyakti ke dvArA
nirdhArita evaM Acarita haiM, aisI samAcArI ke na pAlane se kisI ko zithilAcArI
mAnanA sarvathA anucita hai| jisa samudAya yA gaccha kI jo maryAdAeM haiM usa
gaccha yA samudAya vAloM ke lie anuzAsana hetU unakA pAlana karanA Avazyaka hai|
kyoMki apane gaccha kI maryAdA kA pAlana na karane vAlA gacchasamAcArI evaM guru
AjJA kA bhaMga karane vAlA hotA hai| kintu usa gakcha se bhinna gaccha vAle
sAdhu sAdhvI ko una niyamoM ke pAlana karane para zithilAcArI yA guru AjJA kA
bhaMga karane vAlA nahIM kahA jA sakatA / aisI sAmAcArika maryAdAoM kI eka sUcI
nizItha u. 13 meM dI gaI hai| jijJAsu pAThaka use dhyAna se dekheN| pArzvastha
Adi ke ina pAMca sUtroM kA krama nizIthasUtra uddezaka 4 evaM uddezaka 13 ke
mUla pATha evaM bhASya meM isa prakAra hai 1. pArzvastha 2. avasanna 3. kuzIla
4. saMsakta 5. nityaka / kintu prastuta sUtra evaM usake bhASya meM krama isa
prakAra hai 1. pArzvastha 2. yathAchaMda 3. kuzIla 4. avasanna 5. saMsakta /
yaha kramabheda maulika racanA se hai yA kAlakrama se hai yA lipidoSa se hai,
yaha jJAta nahIM ho sakA hai / bhASya meM bhI isa viSaya meM koI vicAra nahIM
kiyA gayA hai| bhASya meM batAyA gayA hai ki kaI pArzvasthAdi aAtmanindA evaM
susAdhuoM kI prazaMsA karate hue vicaraNa karate haiM, kaI pArzvasthAdi kSetra-
kAla kI oTa lekara apane zithilAcAra kA bacAva karate haiM evaM vidyA, mantra,
nimitta Adi se apanI pratiSThA banAte haiM aura susAdhuoM kI nindA bhI karate
haiN|| pArzvastha Adi mahAvidehakSetra meM bhI hote haiM evaM sabhI tIrthaMkaroM
ke zAsana meM bhI hote haiN| _ ina pArzvastha Adi meM bhI yathAchanda sAghu
apanA aura jinazAsana kA atyadhika ahita karane vAlA hotA hai|

Page #100 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Translation:  **280] It should be understood that the meaning of these
[Vyavahar Sutra] is that all those who are like Parsva [i.e., those who have
taken refuge in the Jain faith] are worthy of compassion and if they wish to
join the assembly of the virtuous after attaining right understanding, they can
be included in the Gachchha after assessing their eligibility.  **  **31. If a
monk leaves the assembly and lives in another gender due to some specific
circumstance and wishes to rejoin the assembly after the cause is over, then he
should be allowed to live in the same assembly after rejoining. There is no need
for any atonement like Diksha-Chhed or Tapas for him, except for the censure for
changing gender. **  **Discussion:** If a monk leaves the assembly due to the
influence of passions and adopts another gender, and later wishes to rejoin his
own Gachchha, then he can be included in the Gachchha only after giving him
atonement like Diksha-Chhed or the original initiation. However, the meaning of
the prohibition of atonement like Diksha-Chhed etc. in the present Sutra is that
if a monk, due to unbearable troubles, changes his physical gender to protect
his inner restraint, or if the king of a country is hostile to the Jain religion
and the non-scriptural monks, then he changes his gender for the time he has to
stay in that area or to travel through that area. Later, if he wants to live
with the monks of the Gachchha after adopting his original gender, then he is
not given any atonement like Chhed or Tapas for changing gender, except for the
censure for changing gender. The statement in Bhagavati Sutra, Chapter 25, Verse
7, about the Chhed-Upastapaniya-Charitra in the case of a householder's gender
and another gender, is also in this context. Here, in the Sutra, the word
'Parapasand' is used along with the word 'Padim', yet this is not the 'Bhikshu
Pratima' mentioned in the Sutra, but it should be understood as a specific style
of using words in the ancient tradition. For more information, see the
discussion of Sutra 23. **  **32. If a monk leaves the assembly due to lack of
restraint and wishes to rejoin the same assembly after attaining right
understanding, then he should be allowed to live in the same assembly after
rejoining. There is no need for any atonement like Chhed or Tapas for him,
except for the censure for leaving the assembly. **

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
280] [vyavahArasUtra ye sabhI pArzvasthAdi anukampA ke yogya haiM tathA
sadbuddhi Ane para yadi ye suvihita gaNa meM AnA cAheM to unakI yogyatA kA
nirNaya karake inheM gaccha meM sammilita kiyA jA sakatA hai, yaha ina sUtroM kA
Azaya samajhanA caahie| anyaliMgagrahaNa ke bAda gaNa meM punarAgamana 31.
bhikkhU ya gaNAo abakkamma parapAsaMDayaDima uvasaMpajjittANaM viharejjA, se ya
icchejjA voccaM pi tameva gaNaM upasaMpajjitANaM viharittae, nasthi NaM tassa
tappattiyaM kei chae vA parihAre vA, nannatya egAe paaloynnaae| 31. yadi koI
bhikSu gaNa se nikalakara kisI vizeSa paristhiti se anya liMga ko dhAraNa karake
vihAra kare aura kAraNa samApta hone para punaH svaliMga ko dhAraNa karake gaNa
meM sammilita hokara rahanA cAhe to use liMgaparivartana kA pAlocanA ke atirikta
dIkSAcheda yA tapa rUpa koI prAyazcitta nahIM AtA hai| vivecanayadi koI bhikSu
kaSAyavaza gaNa ko chor3akara anyaliMga dhAraNa karatA hai evaM kAlAntara meM
punaH svagaccha meM pAnA cAhatA hai to use dIkSAcheda yA mUla dIkSA Adi
prAyazcitta dekara hI gaccha meM sammilita kiyA jA sakatA hai / kintu prastuta
sUtra meM jo dIkSAcheda Adi prAyazcitta kA niSedha kiyA gayA hai, usakA Azaya
yaha hai asahya upadravoM se udvigna hokara koI bhikSu bhAvasaMyama kI rakSA ke
lie dravyaliMga kA parivartana karatA hai athavA kisI deza kA rAjA AItadharma se
evaM nirgrantha zramaNoM se dveSa rakhatA hai, usa kSetra meM kisI bhikSu ko
jitane samaya rahanA ho yA usa kSetra ko vihAra karake pAra karanA ho, taba vaha
liMgaparivartana karatA hai| bAda meM punaH svaliMga ko dhAraNa kara gaccha ke
sAdhuoM ke sAtha rahanA cAhatA hai taba use liMgaparivartana ke lie kevala
aAlocanA prAyazcitta ke sivAya koI cheda yA tapa prAyazcitta nahIM diyA jAtA
hai| bhagavatI sUtra za. 25 u. 7 meM gRhasthaliMga evaM anyaliMga meM
chedopasthApanIyacAritra kA jo kathana hai, vaha bhI isI apekSA se hai| yahAM
sUtra meM 'parapAsaMDa' zabda ke sAtha 'paDima' zabda kA prayoga kiyA gayA hai
phira bhI yaha sUtrokta 'bhikSu pratimA' nahIM hai, kiMtu zabdaprayoga karane kI
yaha viziSTa prAgama-zailI hai, aisA samajhanA caahie| vizeSa jAnakArI ke lie
sUtra 23 kA vivecana dekheM / saMyama chor3akara jAne vAle kA gaNa meM
punarAgamana 32. bhikkhU ya gaNAo avakkamma ohAvejjA, se ya icchejjA doccaM pi
tameva gaNaM uvasaMpajjittANaM viharittae, natthi NaM tassa tappattiyaM keI chee
vA parihAre vA, nannattha egAe chenovtttthaavnniyaae|

Page #101 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## First Objective] 261 32. If a monk leaves the order and abandons his vows,
and later wishes to be accepted back into the same order, the only atonement for
him is "Chhedopasthapana" (re-initiation). He is not given any other atonement
like Dikshachhed or Parihar Tap etc. Discussion - If a monk, due to fear of the
restrictions of vows and the hardships of the path, or due to the influence of
passions, abandons his vows and takes up the life of a householder, and later
wishes to accept the vows again, and it seems beneficial to give him initiation,
then he can be re-initiated. But he is not given any atonement for leaving the
order and abandoning his vows, because re-initiation itself becomes his complete
atonement. In the first chapter of the Dashavakalik Sutra, the eighteen stages
are described in detail and in a heart-wrenching manner to stabilize the
unsteady mind in the path of vows. In the end, it is said that this suffering
arising in the path of vows is temporary and insignificant compared to the
suffering of hell for countless years, and for those who delight in the path of
vows, even that suffering becomes a great source of happiness. Therefore, one
should delight in the path of vows. The pleasures of the senses are not
permanent, but they only increase the chain of suffering. Therefore, the seeker
should firmly resolve that "Chaijj Deha Na Hu Dhammasasanam", meaning "Even if I
have to give up my entire body, I will never abandon the Dharma-Shasan, i.e.,
the path of vows." Monks who abandon their vows or do not delight in the path of
vows experience great remorse in the future. Other scriptures also advise to
remain steadfast in the path of vows and not to accept back the household life
and worldly pleasures that were abandoned under any circumstances. Therefore, if
during the time of practicing vows, the thought of abandoning vows arises due to
worldly desires, passions, or intolerance, then it should be immediately
nullified by the many teachings of the scriptures.   ## Criticism 33. (1) If a
monk wishes to be criticized, having served another place of penance, where he
has not been able to practice his own vows, then he should be criticized until
he performs the atonement for his wrong deeds. (2) If he has not been able to
practice his own vows, but has been able to practice the vows of the community,
many times, then he should be criticized until he performs the atonement for his
wrong deeds. (3) If he has not been able to practice the vows of the community,
many times, but has been able to practice the vows of another community, many
times, then he should be criticized until he performs the atonement for his
wrong deeds. (4) If he has not been able to practice the vows of another
community, many times, but has been able to practice the vows of the righteous,
many times, then he should be criticized until he performs the atonement for his
wrong deeds.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
prathama uddezaka] 261 32. yadi koI bhikSu gaNa se nikalakara saMyama kA tyAga
kara de aura bAda meM vaha usI gaNa ko svIkAra kara rahanA cAhe to usake lie
kevala "chedopasthApanA" (naI dIkSA) prAyazcitta hai, isake atirikta use
dIkSAcheda yA parihAra tapa Adi koI prAyazcitta nahIM diyA jAtA hai| vivecana-
yadi koI bhikSu saMyama-maryAdAoM tathA parISaha-upasargoM se ghabarAkara
indriyaviSayoM kI abhilASA se athavA kaSAyoM ke vazIbhUta hokara saMyama kA
tyAga kara detA hai evaM gRhasthaliMga dhAraNa kara letA hai, vahI kabhI punaH
saMyama svIkAra karanA cAhe aura use dIkSA denA lAbhapradra pratIta ho to use
punaH dIkSA dI jA sakatI hai| kintu use gaccha evaM saMyama tyAgane saMbaMdhI
pravRtti kA koI prAyazcitta nahIM diyA jAtA hai / kyoMki puna: naI dIkSA dene se
hI usakA pUrNa prAyazcitta ho jAtA hai| dazavakAlikasUtra kI prathama cUlikA meM
saMyama meM asthira citta ko punaH sthira karane ke lie aThAraha sthAnoM dvArA
vistRta evaM hRdayadrAvaka varNana kiyA gayA hai| anta meM kahA gayA hai ki
saMyama meM utpanna yaha duHkha kSaNika hai aura asaMkhya varSoM ke naraka ke
duHkhoM se nagaNya hai tathA saMyama meM ramaNa karane vAle ke lie vaha duHkha
bhI mahAn sukhakArI ho jAtA hai| isalie saMyama meM ramaNa karanA cAhie /
indriyaviSayoM ke sukha bhI zAzvata rahane vAle nahIM hote, kintu ve sukha to
duHkha kI paramparA ko bar3hAne vAle hI hote haiN| ata: sAdhaka ko aisA dRDha
nizcaya karanA cAhie ki "caijja deha na hu dhammasAsaNaM" arthAt 'zarIra kA
sampUrNa tyAga karanA par3a jAya to bhI dharma-zAsana arthAt saMyama kA tyAga
kadApi nahIM karUgA / saMyama tyAgane vAle yA saMyama meM ramaNa nahIM karane
vAle bhikSu bhaviSya meM atyanta pazcAttApa ko prApta hote haiN| anya prAgamoM
meM bhI saMyama meM sthira rahane kA evaM kisI bhI paristhiti meM tyAga kiye
gRhavAsa evaM viSayoM ko punaH svIkAra nahIM karane kA upadeza diyA gayA hai|
ataH saMyamasAdhanAkAla meM viSaya-kaSAyavaza yA asahiSNutA Adi kAraNoM se
saMyama chor3ane kA saMkalpa utpanna ho jAya to unheM AgamoM ke aneka upadeza-
vAkyoM dvArA tatkAla niSphala kara denA caahie| AlocanA karane kA krama 33. (1)
bhikkhU ya annayaraM prakiccaTThANaM paDisevittA icchejjA Aloettae, jattheva
appaNI Ayariya-uvajjhAe pAsejjA, tassaMtie AloejjA jAva prahArihaM tavokammaM
pAyacchittaM pddivjjejjaa| (2) no ceva gaM appaNo prAyariya-uvajjhAe pAsejjA,
jattheva saMbhoiyaM sAhammiyaM pAsejjA bahussuyaM babbhAgama, tassaMtie pAloejjA
jAva ahArihaM tavokammaM pAyacchittaM pddivjjejjaa| (3) no ceva NaM saMbhoiyaM
sAhimmayaM bahussuyaM babbhAgamaM pAsejjA, jattheva annasaMbhoiyaM sAhammiyaM
pAsejjA bahussuyaM babbhAgama, tassaMtie AloejjA jAva ahArihaM tavokammaM
pAyacchittaM pddivjjejjaa| (4) no ceva NaM annasaMbhoiyaM sAhammiyaM pAsejjA
bahussuyaM babbhAgamaM, jattheva sArUviyaM pAsejjA bahussuyaM babbhAgama,
tassaMtie pAloejjA jAva ahArihaM tavokammaM pAyacchittaM paDivajjejjA /

Page #102 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[282] (5) If a monk does not find a *sar≈´pya* (similarly-practicing) monk who is
*bahu≈õruta* (well-versed in the scriptures) and *bahumƒÅgam* (knowledgeable of
many *ƒÅgamas*), he should approach a *pa≈õcƒÅtk·πõta* (lapsed) *≈õrama·πáopƒÅsaka* (lay
follower) who is *bahu≈õruta* and *bahumƒÅgam* and confess his misdeed to him. If
he does not do so, he should perform the appropriate *prƒÅya≈õcitta* (penance) and
*tapo-karma* (austerity). (6) If he does not find a *pa≈õcƒÅtk·πõta* *≈õrama·πáopƒÅsaka*
who is *bahu≈õruta* and *bahumƒÅgam*, he should approach a *samyak-bhƒÅvita*
(rightly-minded) *j√±ƒÅnƒ´-puru·π£a* (knowledgeable person) and confess his misdeed
to him. If he does not do so, he should perform the appropriate *prƒÅya≈õcitta*
and *tapo-karma*. (7) If he does not find a *samyak-bhƒÅvita* *j√±ƒÅnƒ´-puru·π£a*, he
should go outside the village or city, facing east or north, with his palms
joined and his head bowed, and say, "I am a *pravaraha* (one who has gone
astray), I am *pravaraddha* (one who has fallen from the path)." He should then
confess his misdeed to the *arihantƒÅs* (liberated souls) and *siddhas*
(perfected beings). If he does not do so, he should perform the appropriate
*prƒÅya≈õcitta* and *tapo-karma*.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
282] [vyavahArasUtra (5) no ceva NaM sArUviyaM pAsejjA bahussuyaM babhAgamaM,
jattheva samaNovAsagaM pacchAkaDaM pAsejjA bahussuyaM babhAgama, tassaMtie
AloejjA jAva prahArihaM tavokammaM pAyacchittaM pddivjjejjaa| (6) no ceva NaM
samaNovAsagaM pacchAkaDaM pAsejjA bahussuyaM babbhAgama, jattheva samma bhAviyAI
ceiyAI pAsejjA, tassaMtie AloejjA jAva prahArihaM tavokammaM pAyacchittaM
pddivjjejjaa| (7) no caiva NaM samma bhAviyAI ceiyAI pAsejjA, bahiyA gAmassa vA
jAva rAyahANIe vA pAINAbhimuhe vA udoNAbhimuhe vA karayalapariggahiyaM
sirasAvattaM matthae aMjali kaTu evaM vaejjA "evaiyA me pravarAhA, evaikkhutto
ahaM pravaraddho" arihaMtANaM siddhANaM antie AloejjA jAva ahArihaM tavokammaM
pAyacchittaM pddivjjejjaa| (1) bhikSu kisI akRtyasthAna kA pratisevana karake
usakI AlocanA karanA cAhe to jahAM para apane AcArya yA upAdhyAya ko dekhe,
vahAM unake samIpa AlocanA kare yAvat yathAyogya prAyazcitta rUpa tapaHkarma
svIkAra kre| (2) yadi apane AcArya yA upAdhyAya na mileM to jahAM para
sAmbhogika (eka mAMDalika AhAra vAle) sAdharmika sAdhu mileM jo ki bahuzruta
evaM bahumAgamajJa hoM, unake samIpa AlocanA kare yAvat yathAyogya prAyazcitta
rUpa tapaHkarma svIkAra kre| (3) yadi sAmbhogika sArmika bahuzruta bahuaAgamajJa
sAdhu na mile to jahAM para anya sAmbhogika sArmika sAdhu mile-"jo bahuzruta ho
aura bahuAgamajJa ho", vahAM usake samIpa AlocanA kare yAvat yathAyogya
prAyazcitta rUpa tapaHkarma svIkAra kare / (4) yadi anya sAmbhogika sArmika
bahuzruta aura bahuAgamajJa sAdhu na mile to jahAM para sArUpya sAdhu mile, jo
bahuzruta ho aura bahuaAgamajJa ho, vahAM usake samIpa AlocanA kare yAvat
yathAyogya prAyazcitta rUpa tapaH karma svIkAra kare / (5) yadi sArUpya
bahuzruta aura bahuaAgamajJa sAdhu na mile to jahAM para pazcAtkRta
(saMyamatyAgI) zramaNopAsaka mile, jo bahuzruta aura bahuAgamajJa ho vahAM usake
samIpa AlocanA kare yAvat yathAyogya prAyazcitta rUpa tapaHkarma svIkAra kare /
(6) yadi pazcAtkRta bahuzruta aura bahumAgamajJa zramaNopAsaka na mile to jahAM
para samyak bhAvita jJAnI puruSa (samabhAvI-sva-para-vivekI samyagdRSTi vyakti)
mile to vahAM usake samIpa AlocanA kare yAvat yathAyogya prAyazcitta rUpa
tapaHkarma svIkAra kre|| (7) yadi samyak bhAvita jJAnI puruSa na mile to grAma
yAvat rAjadhAnI ke bAhara pUrva yA uttara dizA kI ora abhimukha ho, karatala
jor3akara mastaka ke prAvartana kare aura mastaka para aMjali karake isa prakAra
bole

Page #103 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## First Objective:  **[283 "I have so many faults and I have indulged in them
so many times," by saying this, one should criticize in front of Arihants and
Siddhas until they accept the appropriate penance in the form of tapasya. When,
due to circumstances or negligence, one who is practicing restraint violates the
boundaries of Shraman Dharma, and commits an act that is not in accordance with
the Dharma, then it is essential to criticize oneself promptly and without
negligence. This is an essential part of a life of restraint. This is the first
type of internal penance.**  **Uttara. A. 29 states that the fruit of criticism
is that the critic, by criticizing themselves, removes the internal thorns, the
faults that hinder the path to liberation, and the karmas that increase the
cycle of endless births and deaths from their soul, i.e., destroys them. Both
the critic and the listener of the criticism should be endowed with the
qualities mentioned in the Agamas. Only then will the desired worship be
successful. Nisitha U. 20 provides information about many topics related to
criticism, including location references, which the reader can refer to. The
present sutra provides a sequence of who one should criticize in front of. This
means that, as far as possible, one should criticize in this sequence. If one
criticizes in reverse order, the commentary on page 126 (one hundred twenty-six)
mentions Guruchaumasi and Laghuchaumasi penance. Therefore, a monk who wishes to
criticize should first criticize in front of their Acharya or Upadhyaya. If, for
any reason, the Acharya or Upadhyaya is not available, i.e., they are ill or
away, and the monk's own lifespan is short, then they should criticize in front
of a Sambhogik Sadhu who shares their food and conduct. However, this ordinary
monk should also be endowed with the qualities of listening to criticism, be
well-versed (proficient in the Cheda Sutras), and knowledgeable about many
Agamas (a student of many Sutras and their meanings). If such a qualified
Sambhogik Sadhu is not available, then one should criticize in front of an
Asambhogik (one who does not share food) monk who is well-versed and possesses
other qualities. This Asambhogik monk should be virtuous. If a virtuous
Asambhogik Sadhu is also not available, then one should criticize in front of a
monk of the same gender who is well-versed and possesses other qualities. Here,
the meaning of "same gender" is that regardless of their conduct, one can
criticize in front of them. If such a monk is not available, then one can
criticize in front of someone who has abandoned restraint and is following the
Shramanopasakaparyaya, and who is well-versed and possesses other qualities. Up
to this point, it has been stated that one should criticize in front of someone
who knows about penance and purify oneself. In the previous two options, the
critic themselves accepts the penance. In the first option, one should criticize
in front of someone who is a Samyagdarshi, who is deeply affected by the Jina's
teachings, or someone who is impartial, gentle in nature, and understanding. The
second option states that if such a person is not available, then one should
criticize outside the village, etc.**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
prathama uddezaka] [283 "itane mere doSa haiM aura itanI bAra maiMne ina doSoM
kA sevana kiyA hai," isa prakAra bolakara arihantoM aura siddhoM ke samakSa
AlocanA kare yAvat yathAyogya prAyazcitta rUpa tapaHkarma svIkAra kre| vivecana
saMyamasAdhanA karate hue paristhitivaza yA pramAdavaza kabhI zramaNa-dharma kI
maryAdAoM kA ullaMghana karane vAle akRtyasthAna kA AcaraNa ho jAya to zIghra hI
apramattabhAva se pAlocanA karanA saMyama jIvana kA Avazyaka aMga hai / yaha
Abhyantara taparUpa prAyazcitta kA prathama bheda hai| uttarA. a. 29 meM AlocanA
karane kA phala batAte hue kahA hai ki Alocaka apanI AlocanA karake AtmazalyoM
ko, mokSamArga meM vighna karane vAle doSoM ko aura ananta saMsAra kI vRddhi
karAne vAle karmoM ko prAtmA se alaga kara detA hai arthAt unheM naSTa kara detA
hai| AlocanA karane vAlA evaM AlocanA sunane vAlA ye donoM hI Agamokta guNoM se
sampanna hone caahie| aisA karane para hI icchita ArAdhanA saphala hotI hai|
nizItha u. 20 meM AlocanA se sambandhita Agamokta aneka viSayoM kI jAnakArI
sthalanirdeza sahita dI gaI hai, pAThaka vahIM dekheN| prastuta sUtra meM
pAlocanA kisake samakSa karanI cAhiye, isakA eka krama diyA gayA hai| isakA
tAtparya yaha hai ki jahAM taka sambhava ho isI krama se pAlocanA karanI caahie|
vyutkrama se karane para bhASya meM pR. 126 (eka sau chabbIsa) para gurucaumAsI
evaM laghucaumAsI prAyazcitta kahA gayA hai| isalie AlocanA karane ke icchuka
bhikSu ko sarvaprathama apane AcArya yA upAdhyAya ke pAsa AlocanA karanI caahie|
yadi kisI kAraNa se AcArya upAdhyAya kA yoga sambhava na ho arthAt ve rugNa hoM
yA dUra hoM evaM svayaM kA Ayu alpa ho to sammilita AhAra-vyavahAra vAle
sAmbhogika sAdhu ke samakSa prAlocanA karanI cAhie, kinta vaha sAmAnya bhikSa
bhI aAlocanA sanane ke guNoM se susampanna evaM bahuzruta (chedasUtroM meM
pAraMgata) tathA bahuaAgamajJa (aneka sUtroM evaM artha kA adhyetA) honA caahie|
ukta yogyatAsampanna sAMbhogika sAdhu na ho yA na mile to asAMbhogika (sammilita
AhAra nahIM karane vAle) bahuzruta Adi yogyatAsampanna bhikSu ke samakSa AlocanA
karanI cAhie / vaha asAMbhogika bhikSu AcArasampanna honA caahie| / yadi
AcArasampanna asAMbhogika sAdhu bhI na mile to samAna liMga vAle bahuzruta Adi
guNoM se sampanna bhikSu ke pAsa AlocanA karanI caahie| yahAM samAna liMga
kahane kA Azaya yaha hai ki usakA prAcAra kaisA bhI kyoM na ho, usake pAsa bhI
AlocanA kI jA sakatI hai| ukta bhikSu ke na milane para jo saMyama chor3akara
zramaNopAsakaparyAya kA pAlana kara rahA hai aura bahuzruta Adi guNoM se
sampanna hai to usake pAsa AlocanA kI jA sakatI hai| yahAM taka ke krama meM
prAyazcitta ke jAnakAra ke samakSa AlocanA kara zuddhi karane kA kathana kiyA
gayA gayA hai| prAge ke do vikalpoM meM pAlocaka svayaM hI prAyazcitta grahaNa
karatA hai| prathama vikalpa meM jo samyaka rUpa se jinapravacana meM bhAvita
samyagdRSTi ho athavA jo samabhAva vAlA, saumya prakRti vAlA, samajhadAra vyakti
ho usake pAsa pAlocanA kara lenI caahie| dvitIya vikalpa meM batAyA gayA hai ki
kabhI aisA vyakti bhI na mile to grAmAdi ke bAhara

Page #104 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[284] In a secluded place, one should criticize the Arhats or Siddhas in their
memory, speaking in a loud voice, and should accept the appropriate atonement
oneself. The last two options should be understood for the Gƒ´tartha Bhikshu,
because the Agƒ´tartha Bhikshu is incapable of accepting atonement himself. In
the BhƒÅ·π£ya·π≠ƒ´kƒÅ, this s≈´tra is explained as follows: "Suttami·πáam kƒÅra·πáiyam,
ƒÅriyƒÅdƒ´·πá jaththagacchammƒ´ / Pa√±ca·πáha·πÅ hƒ´ asati, ego ca tahi·πÅ na vasiyavvam //
·π¨ƒ´kƒÅ-s≈´tramidam adhik·πõtam kƒÅranika, kƒÅrane bhavam kƒÅranika·πÅ, kƒÅrane
satyekƒÅkƒ´vihƒÅravi·π£ayam ityƒÅrtha·∏• / IyamatrƒÅ bhavanƒÅ bah≈´nƒ´ khalu a≈õivƒÅdƒ´nƒ´
ekƒÅkƒ´tva kƒÅra·πáƒÅnƒ´, tata·∏• kƒÅranava≈õato yo jƒÅta·∏• ekƒÅkƒ´ tadvi·π£ayamidam s≈´tram iti
na ka≈õcid do·π£a·∏•. A≈õivƒÅdƒ´nƒ´ tu kƒÅra·πáƒÅnƒ´ muktvƒÅ ƒÅcƒÅryƒÅdivirahitasyƒÅ na vartate
vastu.  TathƒÅ ƒÅha-yatra gacche pa√±cƒÅnƒÅm
ƒÅcƒÅryopƒÅdhyƒÅyaga·πáƒÅvacchedƒ´prav·πõtisthadhirar≈´pƒÅ·πáƒÅm asadbhavo yadi vƒÅ yatra
pa√±cƒÅnƒÅm anyatamo'pyeko na vidyate tatra na vasatavyam anekadosa sambhavƒÅt /  In
this explanation, the s≈´tra's injunction is said to be for a Bhikshu who is
solitary due to a reason, and many reasons for being solitary are also mentioned
/  which has been explained in the discussion of s≈´tras 23-25. The meaning of
the words "ƒÅlocanƒÅ" etc. used in the s≈´tra is as follows: "ƒÄloejjƒÅ" - to reveal
transgressions etc. by speech / "Pa·∏çikkamejjƒÅ" - to admit one's mistakes and
wrong deeds / "NidejjƒÅ" - to condemn one's misconduct to oneself, i.e. to feel
remorse in one's heart / "GarehejjƒÅ" - to condemn one's misconduct to one's
Guru, to express remorse / "ViuddejjƒÅ" - to refrain from misconduct /
"VisohejjƒÅ" - to purify oneself, i.e. to completely refrain from misconduct /
"Prakara·πáayƒÅe anmu·π≠·π≠hajjƒÅ" - to make a firm resolve not to repeat the act of
misconduct / "PrahƒÅriha·πÅ tavokamma·πÅ pƒÅyacchitta·πÅ pa·∏çivajjejjƒÅ" - to accept
atonement such as penance according to the nature of the fault. Only by
performing the entire process from criticism to accepting atonement does one
achieve self-purification, and only then does criticism become meaningful. The
explanation of the 16 words "grƒÅma" etc. that appear in the s≈´tra is given in
Ni≈õƒ´tha U. 4 and B·πõhatkalpa U. 1, so see them there. The order of criticism
mentioned in the s≈´tra is as follows: 1. PrƒÅcƒÅrya UpƒÅdhyƒÅya, 2. SƒÅrmaka
SƒÅmbhogika Bahu≈õruta Bahu-ƒÅgamaj√±a Bhikshu, 3. SƒÅrmaka Anya SƒÅmbhogika Bahu≈õruta
Bahu-prƒÅgamaj√±a Bhikshu, 4. SƒÅr≈´pika Bahu≈õruta Bahu-ƒÅgamaj√±a Bhikshu, 5.
Pa≈õcƒÅtk·πõta

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
284] [vyavahArasUtra nirjana sthAna meM uccasvara se arihaMtoM yA siddhoM ko
smRti meM rakha kara unake sAmane AlocanA karanI cAhie evaM svayaM hI yathAyogya
prAyazcitta grahaNa kara lenA caahie| antima donoM vikalpa gItArtha bhikSu ke
lie samajhanA cAhie kyoMki, agItArtha bhikSu svayaM prAyazcitta grahaNa karane
ke ayogya hotA hai| bhASyaTIkA meM isa sUtra ke viSaya meM isa prakAra kahA hai
suttamiNaM kAraNiyaM, AyariyAdINa jatthagacchammi / paMcaNhaM hI asati, ego ca
tahiM na vasiyavvaM // TIkA-sUtramidamadhikRtaM kAraNika, kAraNe bhavaM
kAraNikaM, kAraNe satyekAkIvihAraviSayaM ityarthaH / iyamatra bhAvanAbahUni
khalu azivAdIni ekAkitvakAraNAni, tataH kAraNavazato yo jAtaH ekAkI
tadviSayamidaM sUtramiti na kazcid dossH| azivAdIni tu kAraNAni muktvA
AcAryAdivirahitasya na vartate vstu| tathA cAha-yatra gacche
paJcAnAmAcAryopAdhyAyagaNAvacchedipravartisthadhirarUpANAmasadbhAvo yadi vA
yatra paJcAnAmanyatamopyeko na vidyate tatra na vasatavyam anekadoSasaMbhavAt /
isa vyAkhyAMza meM sUtrokta vidhAna ko sakAraNa ekAkI vicaraNa karane vAle
bhikSu kI apekSA hone kA kahA gayA hai aura ekAkI hone ke aneka kAraNa bhI kahe
haiM / jisakA spaSTIkaraNa sUtra 23-25 ke vivecana meM kara diyA gayA hai| sUtra
meM prayukta AlocanA Adi zabdoM kA artha isa prakAra hai AloejjA-aticAra Adi ko
vacana se prakaTa kare / paDikkamejjA-mithyA duSkRta de-apanI bhUla svIkAra kre|
nidejjA-AtmasAkSI se asadAcaraNa kI niMdA kare arthAt aMtarmana meM kheda kre|
garahejjA-gurusAkSI se asadAcaraNa kI niMdA kare, kheda prakaTa kre| viuddejjA-
asadAcaraNa se nivRtta ho jaae| visohejjA-AtmA ko zuddha kara le arthAt
asadAcaraNa se pUrNa nivRtta ho jaae| prakaraNayAe anmuTThajjA-usa akRtyasthAna
ko punaH sevana nahIM karane ke lie dRDha saMkalpa kre| prahArihaM tavokammaM
pAyacchittaM paDivajjejjA-usa doSa ke anurUpa tapa Adi prAyazcitta svIkAra kre|
AlocanA se lekara prAyazcitta svIkAra karane taka kI sampUrNa prakriyA karane
para hI aAtmavizuddhi hotI hai evaM tabhI AlocanA karanA sArthaka hotA hai|
sUtra meM Ae grAma Adi 16 zabdoM kI vyAkhyA nizItha u. 4 tathA bRhatkalpa u. 1
meM dI gaI hai, ataH vahAM dekheN| sUtrokta AlocanA kA krama isa prakAra hai 1.
prAcArya upAdhyAya, 2. sArmika sAmbhogika bahuzruta bahu-AgamajJa bhikSu, 3.
sArmika anya sAmbhogika bahuzruta bahu-prAgamajJa bhikSu, 4. sArUpika bahuzruta
bahu-AgamajJa bhikSu, 5. pazcAtkRta

Page #105 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## First Objective:  [285 Bahushruta Bahu-Agamjna Shravak, 6. Samyak Bhavit
Jnani, i.e. Samyagdristi, a wise person, 7. Go outside the village, etc., and
criticize in the presence of Arihant Siddhas / Here, Bahushruta Bahu-Agamjna is
not present in three positions (1) Acharya Upadhyaya are generally Bahushruta
Bahu-Pagamjna, therefore, there is no need for this adjective for them. In
Brihatkalpa Bhashya Ga. 691-692, it is said that Acharya, etc., degree holders
are generally Geetaarth / General Bhikshu are of both Geetaarth and Ageetartha
types / (2) Samyagdristi or a wise person does not necessarily have to be
Bahushruta. He is only eligible to listen to criticism and the Geetaarth critic
Bhikshu himself accepts the atonement. (3) Arihant-Siddh Bhagwan are omniscient
and all-seeing. There is no need for this adjective for them. The word "Samm
Bhaviai Cheiyaai" is used in the sutra, which the commentator has interpreted as
"Tasyapyabhave Yatrava Samyagbhavitani-Jinavachanavasitaantaha Karanani
Devataani Pashyati Tatragatva Teshamantrike Palocheyat / In the absence of
Shramanopasak, if one sees such a deity whose heart is perfumed by the words of
Jina, then go to him and criticize him / Here, the commentator has interpreted
the word "Cheiyaai" as "DevatƒÅ" and called him the one whose inner self is
influenced by the words of Jina / Many meanings of the word "Cheiy" are given in
the dictionary. In it, the meanings of "Jnani", "Bhikshu", etc., are also for
the word "Cheiy" / In many sutras, the word "Cheiy" is used for Tirthankara
Bhagwan Mahavira Swami, where that word is used to call Bhagwan "Jnani". In
Upasakadasha A. 1, there is a vow related to the samkrit of Shramanopasak. In
it, there is a prohibition on accepting Chetya, i.e., the virtuous, from other
than the Tirthika, and on bowing, saluting, and talking to them, and on giving
them food and water / There, the word "Cheiy" is clearly used in the sense of
Bhikshu. The word "Cheiy" used in the present sutra also means "the idol of
Arihant Bhagwan" belonging to the idol-worshipping community, but it is contrary
to the meaning of the commentator and also contradicts the previous and
subsequent sutras. Because the commentator has used the word "Antahkaran" here,
it cannot be in the idol / The sutra says to go outside the village, etc., for
the sake of Arihant Siddha's witness in the absence of Samyak Bhavit Chaitya. If
the meaning of Arihant Chaitya was a temple, then there would have been a
statement to criticize in the temple itself in the presence of Arihant Siddha,
there would have been no need to give a separate option to go outside the
village. Therefore, it is appropriate to interpret the word "Cheiy" in the
present case as "Jnani or wise man".

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
prathama uddezaka] [285 bahuzruta bahu-AgamajJa zrAvaka, 6. samyak bhAvita jJAnI
arthAt samyagdRSTi yA samajhadAra vyakti, 7. grAma Adi ke bAhara jAkara arihaMta
siddhoM kI sAkSI se AlocanA kare / yahAM tIna padoM meM bahuzruta bahu-AgamajJa
nahIM hai (1) prAcArya upAdhyAya to niyamata: bahuzruta bahu-pAgamajJa hI hote
haiM ataH inake lie isa vizeSaNa kI AvazyakatA hI nahIM hotI hai| bRhatkalpa
bhASya gA. 691-692 meM kahA hai ki prAcAryAdi padavIdhara to niyamataH gItArtha
hote haiM / sAmAnya bhikSu gItArtha agItArtha donoM prakAra ke hote haiM / (2)
samyagdRSTi yA samajhadAra vyakti kA bahuzruta honA Avazyaka nahIM hai| vaha to
kevala AlocanA sunane ke yogya hotA hai aura gItArtha aAlocaka bhikSu svayaM hI
prAyazcitta svIkAra karatA hai| (3) arihaMta-siddha bhagavAn to sarvajJa
sarvadarzI haiN| unake lie isa vizeSaNa kI AvazyakatA nahIM hai| sUtra meM
"samma bhAviyAI ceiyAI" zabda kA prayoga kiyA gayA hai, jisakA artha TIkAkAra ne
isa prakAra kiyA hai "tasyApyabhAve yatrava samyagbhAvitAni-jinavacanavAsitAMtaH
karaNAni devatAni pazyati tatra gatvA teSAmaMtike pAlocayet / zramaNopAsaka ke
abhAva meM jinavacanoM se jinakA hRdaya suvAsita hai, aise devatA ko dekhe to
usake pAsa jAkara apanI pAlocanA kare / yahAM TIkAkAra ne "ceiyAI" zabda kA
"devatA" artha kiyA hai tathA use jinavacanoM se bhAvita antaHkaraNa vAlA kahA
hai / "ceiya" zabda ke aneka artha zabdakoza meM batAye gaye haiN| usameM
jJAnavAn, bhikSu Adi artha bhI "ceiya" zabda ke liye haiM / aneka sUtroM meM
tIrthakara bhagavAna mahAvIra svAmI ke lie "ceiya" zabda kA prayoga kiyA gayA
hai, vahAM usa zabda se bhagavAn ko "jJAnavAn" kahA hai| upAsakadazA a. 1 meM
zramaNopAsaka kI samakita sambandhI pratijJA hai| usameM anyatIthika se grahaNa
kiye cetya arthAt sAdhu ko vandana-namaskAra evaM pAlApa-saMlApa karane kA tathA
AhAra-pAnI dene kA niSedha hai / vahAM spaSTa rUpa se "ceiya" zabda kA bhikSu
artha meM prayoga kiyA gayA hai| prastuta sUtra meM prayukta 'ceiya' zabda kA
artha mUrtipUjaka samudAya vAle "arihaMta bhagavAna kI mUrti" bhI karate haiM,
kintu vaha TIkAkAra ke artha se viparIta hai tathA pUrvApara sUtroM se viruddha
bhI hai| kyoMki TIkAkAra ne yahAM antaHkaraNa zabda kA prayoga kiyA hai, vaha
mUrti meM nahIM ho sakatA hai / sUtra meM samyak bhAvita caitya kA abhAva hone
para arihaMta siddha kI sAkSI ke lie gAMva Adi ke bAhara jAne kA kahA hai| yadi
arihaMta caitya kA artha mandira hotA to mandira meM hI arihaMta siddha kI sAkSI
se AlocanA karane kA kathana hotA, gAMva ke bAhara jAne ke alaga vikalpa dene kI
AvazyakatA hI nahIM hotii| ataH 'ceiya' zabda kA prastuta prakaraNa meM 'jJAnI
yA samajhadAra puruSa' aisA artha karanA hI upayukta hai|

Page #106 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Summary of the First Uddeshak of Vyavahar Sutra (Sutras 1-14, 15-18, 19,
20-22, 23-25, 26-30)  **Criticism:**  * If a monk criticizes another without
deceit, after observing the *prƒÅya≈õcitta* (penance) for one to six months, once
or multiple times, he incurs a *prƒÅya≈õcitta* of the same duration. * If the
criticism is deceitful, he incurs one month more *prƒÅya≈õcitta*. * If the
*prƒÅya≈õcitta* is for six months or more, the *prƒÅya≈õcitta* remains six months. *
If a monk, while undergoing *prƒÅya≈õcitta*, criticizes another with any of the
four *cƒÅubhangƒ´* (types of criticism), he should be accused after completing the
*prƒÅya≈õcitta*.  **ParivƒÅrika and AparivƒÅrika Monks:**  * *ParivƒÅrika* and
*aparivƒÅrika* monks should not sit, stay, or engage in activities together. * If
necessary, they can do so with the permission of the *sthavira* (elders). * If a
*parivƒÅrika* monk is capable, he should serve while undergoing penance. * If he
is not capable, he can abandon penance with the permission of the *sthavira*. *
He should not travel or stay anywhere for the sake of wandering. * He can stay
longer due to illness or other reasons. * Otherwise, he can stay for one night
only.  **Returning to the *Gaccha* (Order):**  * If an *ekalavihƒÅrƒ´* (solitary
monk), *ƒÅcƒÅrya* (teacher), *upƒÅdhyƒÅya* (preceptor), *ga·πáƒÅvacchedaka* (leader of
a group), or ordinary monk wishes to return to the *gaccha*, he should be
accepted after undergoing penance or *ched* (purification). * If *pƒÅr≈õvasthƒÅ*
(those who have deviated from the path) and others wish to return and have some
remaining *samyama* (self-control), they should be accepted after undergoing
penance or *ched*.  **Other Situations:**  * A monk who wears the clothes of the
opposite gender due to specific circumstances incurs no *prƒÅya≈õcitta* other than
criticism. * A monk who abandons *samyama* and accepts the life of a
householder, and wishes to return, incurs no *prƒÅya≈õcitta* other than a new
initiation.  **Criticism of *Ak·πõtyasthƒÅna* (Wrong Conduct):**  * If a monk needs
to criticize *ak·πõtyasthƒÅna*, he should:     1. Approach his *ƒÅcƒÅrya* or
*upƒÅdhyƒÅya*.     2. In their absence, approach another *bahu≈õruta* (learned)
monk of his *gaccha*.     3. In their absence, approach a *bahu≈õruta* monk or
*ƒÅcƒÅrya* of another *gaccha*.     4. In their absence, approach a *bahu≈õruta*
monk who is only wearing the robes.     5. In their absence, approach a
*bahu≈õruta* *≈õrama·πáopƒÅsaka* (lay follower) who has abandoned initiation.     6.
In their absence, approach a *samyagd·πõ·π£·π≠i* (right-seeing) or *samabhƒÅvi*
(equanimous) *j√±ƒÅnƒ´* (knower) and accept the *prƒÅya≈õcitta* himself.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
206] [vyavahArasUtra prathama uddezaka kA sArAMza sUtra 1-14 15-18 19 20-22
23-25 eka mAsa se lekara chaha mAsa taka prAyazcittasthAna kA eka bAra yA aneka
bAra sevana karake koI kapaTarahita AlocanA kare to use utane mAsa kA
prAyazcitta AtA hai aura kapaTayukta aAlocanA kare to use eka mAsa adhika kA
prAyazcitta AtA hai aura chaha mAsa yA usase adhika prAyazcitta hone para bhI
chaha mAsa kA hI prAyazcitta prAtA hai| prAyazcitta vahana karate hae pUnaH doSa
lagAkara do caubhaMgI meM se kisI bhI bhaMga se AlocanA kare to usakA
prAyazcitta dekara AropaNA kara denI caahiye| pArihArika evaM apArihArika bhikSu
ko eka sAtha baiThanA, rahanA Adi pravRtti nahIM karanA cAhie evaM Avazyaka ho
to sthaviroM kI AjJA lekara aisA kara sakate haiM / pArihArika bhikSu zakti ho
to tapa vahana karate hue sevA meM jAve aura zakti alpa ho to sthavirabhagavanta
se prAjJA prApta karake tapa chor3akara bhI jA sakatA hai| mArga meM vicaraNa kI
dRSTi se use kahIM jAnA yA ThaharanA nahIM caahie| roga Adi ke kAraNa jyAdA bhI
Thahara sakatA hai / anyathA saba jagaha eka rAtri hI ruka sakatA hai|
ekalavihArI prAcArya, upAdhyAya, gaNAvacchedaka yA sAmAnya bhikSu punaH gaccha
meM Ane kI icchA kare to use tapa yA cheda prAyazcitta dekara gaccha meM rakha
lenA caahie| pArzvasthAdi pAMcoM yadi gaccha meM punaH AnA cAheM aura unake
kucha saMyamabhAva zeSa rahe hoM to tapa yA cheda kA prAyazcitta dekara unheM
gaccha meM sammilita kara lenA caahie| kisI vizeSa paristhiti se anyaliMga
dhAraNa karane vAle bhikSu ko AlocanA ke atirikta koI prAyazcitta nahIM AtA hai|
koI saMyama chor3akara gRhasthaveza svIkAra kara le aura punaH gaccha meM AnA
cAhe to use naI dIkSA ke sivAya koI prAyazcitta nahIM pAtA hai| yadi kisI bhikSu
ko akRtyasthAna kI AlocanA karanI ho to1. apane prAcArya upAdhyAya ke pAsa kare
/ 2. unake abhAva meM svagaccha ke anya bahuzruta sAdhu ke pAsa AlocanA kre| 3.
unake abhAva meM anyagaccha ke bahuzruta bhikSu yA prAcArya ke pAsa pAlocanA
kre| 4. unake abhAva meM kevala veSadhArI bahuzruta bhikSu ke pAsa AlocanA kare
/ 5. usake abhAva meM dIkSA chor3e hue bahuzruta zramaNopAsaka ke pAsa AlocanA
kre| 6. usake abhAva meM samyagdRSTi yA samabhAvI jJAnI ke pAsa AlocanA kare
evaM svayaM prAyazcitta svIkAra kre| 26-30

Page #107 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[First Objective] [Chapter 7. And in the absence of that, outside the village,
with the Arihant Siddha Prabhu as witness, criticize and accept self-penance.
Upasamhar Sutra 1-14 15-18 20-22 23-30 This objective mentions the topics of
giving penance, making someone bear penance, dealing with Pariharic, going to
the service of his sthavir, returning to the Gachchha of an Eklavichari or
Pavasthadi, wearing another gender, the desire of one who wants to leave the
Vesh and return to the Gan, the order of criticism, etc.  /  ŸÖ WWW ŸÖ ÿ≥  //
First Objective ends  /  /

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
prathama uddezaka] [raka7 7. evaM usake abhAva meM grAma ke bAhara arihaMta
siddha prabhu ko sAkSI se AlocanA karake svayaM prAyazcitta svIkAra kara le|
upasaMhAra sUtra 1-14 15-18 20-22 23-30 isa uddezaka meMprAyazcitta dene kA,
prAyazcitta vahana karAne kA, pArihArika ke sAtha vyavahAra karane kA, usake
sthavira kI sevA meM jAne kA, ekalavihArI yA pAvasthAdi ke punaH gaccha meM Ane
kA, anyaliMga dhAraNa karane kA, veza chor3akara punaH gaNa meM Ane kI icchA
vAle kA, AlocanA karane ke krama kA, ityAdi viSayoM kA ullekha kiyA gayA hai / m
WWW m s // prathama uddezaka samApta / /

Page #108 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Rules for the Performance of Parihara Tapa by Fellow Sadhus  1. If two
Sadhus are traveling together and one of them criticizes another by engaging in
an Ak·πõtyasthƒÅna, then the other Sadhu should establish the criticizing Sadhu in
Parihara Tapa and perform the VyƒÅvartya for him.  2. If two Sadhus are traveling
together and both of them criticize each other by engaging in an Ak·πõtyasthƒÅna,
then one of them should be established as the KalpƒÅka (leader) and the other
should perform the Parihara Tapa. After the completion of the Parihara Tapa, the
KalpƒÅka should also perform the Parihara Tapa.  3. If many Sadhus are traveling
together and one of them criticizes another by engaging in an Ak·πõtyasthƒÅna, then
the senior Sthavira among them should establish the criticizing Sadhu in
Parihara Tapa and appoint another Sadhu to perform the VyƒÅvartya for him.  4. If
many Sadhus are traveling together and all of them criticize each other by
engaging in an Ak·πõtyasthƒÅna, then one of them should be established as the
KalpƒÅka (leader) and the rest should perform the Parihara Tapa. After the
completion of the Parihara Tapa, the KalpƒÅka should also perform the Parihara
Tapa.  5. If a Bhikkhu who is performing Parihara Tapa criticizes another by
engaging in an Ak·πõtyasthƒÅna, then he should be allowed to continue his Parihara
Tapa. If he is able to control himself, then he should be established in
Parihara Tapa and the VyƒÅvartya should be performed for him. If he is unable to
control himself, then he should be subjected to Anu-Parihara. If he is able to
control himself during Anu-Parihara, then he should be allowed to continue his
Parihara Tapa. If he is unable to control himself, then he should be subjected
to Ko·πõamƒÅ·πáa. If he is able to control himself during Ko·πõamƒÅ·πáa, then he should be
allowed to continue his Parihara Tapa. If he is unable to control himself, then
he should be subjected to SƒÅijja. If he is able to control himself during
SƒÅijja, then he should be allowed to continue his Parihara Tapa. If he is unable
to control himself, then he should be subjected to ƒÄruheyabva.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
dUsarA uddezaka vicarane vAle sAdharmikoM ke parihAratapa kA vidhAna 1. do
sAhammiyA egayano viharaMti, ege tattha annayaraM akiccaTThANaM paDisevittA
AloejjA, ThavaNijjaM ThabaittA karaNijjaM veyAvaDiyaM / 2. do sAhammiyA egayano
viharaMti, do vi te annayara prakiccaTThANaM paDisevittA AloejjA, egaM tattha
kappAgaM ThavaittA ege nivisejjA, aha pacchA se vi nivisejjaa| 3. bahave
sAhammiyA egayao viharaMti, ege tattha annayaraM akiccaTThANaM paDisevittA
AloejjA, ThavaNijjaM ThavaittA karaNijjaM veyAvaDiyaM / 4. bahave sAhammiyA
egayano viharaMti, samve vi te annayaraM akiccaTThANaM paDisevittA AloejjA, egaM
tattha kappAgaM ThabaisA avasesA nivisejjA, aha pacchA se vi nivisejjaa| 5.
parihArakappaTTie bhikkhU gilAemANe annayaraM akiccaTThANaM paDisevittA
paaloejjaa| se ya saMtharejjA ThavaNijja ThavaittA karaNijjaM veyAvaDiyaM / se
ya no saMtharejjA aNuparihArieNaM tassa karaNijjaM veyAvaDiyaM / se ya saMte
bale aNuparihArieNaM koramANaM veyAvaDiyaM sAijjejjA, se vi kasiNe tattheva
Aruheyabve siyaa| 1. do sAmika sAdhu eka sAtha vicarate hoM aura unameM se yadi
eka sAdhu kisI akRtyasthAna kI pratisevanA karake AlocanA kare to use
prAyazcitta tapa meM sthApita karake sArmika bhikSu ko usakI vaiyAvRtya karanI
caahie| 2. do sArmika sAdhu eka sAtha vicarate hoM aura ve donoM hI sAdhu kisI
prakRtyasthAna kI pratisevanA karake AlocanA kareM to unameM se eka ko kalpAka
(agraNI) sthApita kare aura eka parihAratapa rUpa prAyazcitta ko vahana kare
aura usakA prAyazcitta pUrNa hone ke bAda vaha agraNI bhI prAyazcitta ko vahana
kre| 3. bahuta se sArmika sAdhu eka sAtha vicarate hoN| unameM eka sAdhu kisI
akRtyasthAna kI pratisevanA karake AlocanA kare to (unameM jo pramukha sthavira
ho vaha) use prAyazcitta bahana karAve aura dUsare bhikSu ko usakI vaiyAvRtya ke
lie niyukta kre| 4. bahuta se sArdhAmaka sAdhu eka sAtha vicarate hoM aura ve
saba kisI akRtyasthAna kI pratisevanA karake AlocanA kareM to unameM se kisI eka
ko agraNI sthApita karake zeSa saba prAyazcitta vahana kareM bAda meM vaha
agraNI sAdhu bhI prAyazcitta vahana kare /

Page #109 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Second Objective] [289 5. A monk who is undergoing Pariharatapaschitta (penance
in the form of Pariharatapas) and criticizes the service provided by a
practitioner of a particular system of medicine when he is ill, should be given
Pariharatapaschitta penance by the Acharya (spiritual teacher) and others, and
his necessary service should be provided, if he is capable of performing
Pariharatapas. If he is not capable, then the Acharya and others should appoint
an Anupariharic (attendant) monk for his care. If the Pariharic (penitent) monk,
despite being strong, takes care from the Anupariharic monk, then his penance
should also be imposed along with the previous penance. Discussion - The method
of performing Pariharatapas under the guidance of the Acharya and others has
been described in the previous objective and in the Brihatkalpa U. 4. These
sutras prescribe the automatic performance of Pariharatapas by two or more
wandering Sarmic (Jain) monks. If two wandering Sarmic monks are Gitarya (those
who have taken the vow of silence) and are wandering in a distant area away from
the Acharya and others, or are wandering without the guidance of any Acharya,
and one of them needs to perform Pariharatapas for the purification of a fault,
then the other Gitarya monk becomes his Anupariharic and Kalpak (one who takes
the lead). If both of them have committed a fault together and both need to
perform Pariharatapas for purification, then after one monk completes his tapas,
the other monk can perform tapas. That is, both cannot perform Pariharatapas
together, because one needs to be Kalpak or Anupariharic. If many Sarmic monks
are wandering, then the same should be understood regarding the performance of
Pariharatapas by one or more of them, that is, one can be kept as Kalpak and the
rest of the monks can perform Pariharatapas. The fifth sutra states specifically
that if the Pariharic monk is slightly ill and has committed a fault, then the
penance related to that fault should also be imposed in the previous tapas. If
he does not have the strength to perform tapas, then he should stop performing
tapas and after regaining strength, he should perform that penance and complete
it. If the Pariharic monk is generally ill and can perform tapas with the
service of an Anupariharic, then the penance obtained again should be imposed
along with the previous tapas and service should be provided as needed. If the
ill monk becomes healthy or strong in between, then he should not be served.
Even after becoming healthy and strong, if he takes service, then he also incurs
penance, because a monk performing Pariharatapas cannot take help or service
from anyone through the Utsarga (renunciation) ritual.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
dUsarA uddezaka] [289 5. parihAratapa rUpa prAyazcitta vahana karane vAlA bhikSu
yadi rugNa hone para kisI prakRtyasthAna kI pratisevanA kara AlocanA kare to
yadi vaha parihAratapa karane meM samartha ho to prAcAryAdi use parihAratapa
rUpa prAyazcitta deM aura usakI Avazyaka sevA kraaveN|| yadi vaha samartha na ho
to prAcAryAdi usakI vaiyAvRtya ke lie anupArihArika bhikSu ko niyukta kreN| yadi
vaha pArihArika bhikSu sabala hote hue bhI anupArihArika bhikSu se vaiyAvRtya
karAve to usakA prAyazcitta bhI pUrva prAyazcitta ke sAtha Aropita kreN|
vivecana-pUrva uddezaka meM evaM bRhatkalpa u. 4 meM prAcAryAdi ke netRtva meM
parihAratapa vahana karane kI vidhi kA varNana kiyA gayA hai| ina sUtroM meM do
yA do se adhika vicaraNa karane vAle sArmika bhikSutroM ke svataH parihAratapa
vahana karane kA vidhAna hai| vicaraNa karane vAle do sArmika bhikSu yadi
gItArtha haiM aura prAcArya Adi se dUra kisI kSetra meM vicaraNa kara rahe haiM
athavA kisI AcAryAdi ke netRtva vinA vicaraNa kara rahe haiN| unameM se kisI eka
sAdhu ko kisI doSa kI zuddhi ke lie parihAratapa vahana karanA ho to dUsarA
gItArtha bhikSu usakA anuparihArika evaM kalpAka (pramukhatA karane vAlA) banatA
hai| _ yadi donoM ne eka sAtha doSa sevana kiyA hai aura donoM ko zuddhi ke lie
parihAratapa vahana karanA hai to eka bhikSu ke tapa pUrNa karane ke bAda dUsarA
bhikSu tapa vahana kara sakatA hai / arthAt donoM eka sAtha parihAratapa nahIM
kara sakate haiM, kyoMki eka ko kalpAka yA anuparihArika rahanA Avazyaka hotA
hai| aneka sArmika bhikSu vicaraNa kara rahe hoM to unameM se eka yA aneka ke
parihAratapa vahana karane ke viSaya meM bhI isI prakAra samajha lenA cAhie,
arthAt eka ko kalpAka rakha kara zeSa sabhI sAdhu parihAratapa vahana kara
sakate haiN| pAMcaveM sUtra meM yaha vizeSa kathana hai ki yadi pArihArika
bhikSu kucha rugNa hai evaM usane koI doSa kA sevana kiyA hai to usa doSa
saMbaMdhI prAyazcitta kI prAropaNA bhI pUrva tapa meM kara denI caahie| yadi
usake tapa vahana karane kI zakti na ho to vaha tapa karanA chor3a de aura punaH
sazakta hone ke bAda usa prAyazcitta ko vahana karake pUrNa kara le| yadi vaha
pArihArika bhikSu sAmAnya rugNa ho aura kisI anuparihArika dvArA sevA karane
para tapa vahana kara sakatA ho to pUrvatapa ke sAtha hI punaH prApta
prAyazcitta Aropita kara denA cAhie aura yathAyogya sevA karavAnI caahie| usake
bIca meM yadi rugNa bhikSu svastha yA sazakta ho jAya to use sevA nahIM karavAnI
caahie| svastha evaM sazakta hone ke bAda bhI yadi vaha sevA karavAtA hai to
usakA bhI use prAyazcitta AtA hai, kyoMki parihAratapa vAlA bhikSu utsargavidhi
se kisI kA sahayoga evaM sevA Adi nahIM le sktaa|

Page #110 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 290] [Vyavahar Sutra - Prohibition of Expelling Sick Monks from the Sangha]
6. A monk suffering from *Parihara Kappattiya* (a type of illness) should not be
expelled from the Sangha due to his illness. He should be taken care of until he
recovers from the illness. After his recovery, he should be treated with respect
and called by the name *Ahalahu* (meaning "one who has recovered").  7. A monk
suffering from *Anavatthappa* (a type of illness) should not be expelled from
the Sangha due to his illness. He should be taken care of until he recovers from
the illness. After his recovery, he should be treated with respect and called by
the name *Ahalahu* (meaning "one who has recovered").  8. A monk suffering from
*Paranciya* (a type of illness) should not be expelled from the Sangha due to
his illness. He should be taken care of until he recovers from the illness.
After his recovery, he should be treated with respect and called by the name
*Ahalahu* (meaning "one who has recovered").  9. A monk suffering from *Khitta
Chitta* (a type of illness) should not be expelled from the Sangha due to his
illness. He should be taken care of until he recovers from the illness. After
his recovery, he should be treated with respect and called by the name *Ahalahu*
(meaning "one who has recovered").  10. A monk suffering from *Ditta Chitta* (a
type of illness) should not be expelled from the Sangha due to his illness. He
should be taken care of until he recovers from the illness. After his recovery,
he should be treated with respect and called by the name *Ahalahu* (meaning "one
who has recovered").  11. A monk suffering from *Jakkhaila* (a type of illness)
should not be expelled from the Sangha due to his illness. He should be taken
care of until he recovers from the illness. After his recovery, he should be
treated with respect and called by the name *Ahalahu* (meaning "one who has
recovered").  12. A monk suffering from *Ummaya Patta* (a type of illness)
should not be expelled from the Sangha due to his illness. He should be taken
care of until he recovers from the illness. After his recovery, he should be
treated with respect and called by the name *Ahalahu* (meaning "one who has
recovered").  13. A monk suffering from *Uvasagga Patta* (a type of illness)
should not be expelled from the Sangha due to his illness. He should be taken
care of until he recovers from the illness. After his recovery, he should be
treated with respect and called by the name *Ahalahu* (meaning "one who has
recovered").  14. A monk suffering from *Sahigaranbha* (a type of illness)
should not be expelled from the Sangha due to his illness. He should be taken
care of until he recovers from the illness. After his recovery, he should be
treated with respect and called by the name *Ahalahu* (meaning "one who has
recovered").

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
290] [vyavahArasUtra rugNa bhikSuoM ko gaNa se nikAlane kA niSedha 6.
parihArakappaTThiyaM bhikkhu gilAyamANaM no kappai tassa gaNAvaccheiyassa
nijjUhittae, agilAe tassa karaNijja beyAvaDiyaM jAva tao rogAyaMkAo vippamukko,
tao pacchA tassa ahAlahusae nAma vavahAre paTTaviyabve siyaa| 7. aNavaThThappaM
bhikkhu gilAyamANaM no kappai tassa gaNAvaccheiyassa nijjUhittae, agilAe tassa
karaNijjaM beyAvaDiyaM jAva tao rogayaMkAno vippamuSako, tao pacchA tassa
ahAlahusae nAmaM bavahAre paTTaviyabve siyaa| 8. pAraMciyaM bhikkhu gilAyamANaM
no kappai tassa gaNAvaccheiyassa nijjUhittae, agilAe tassa karaNijjaM
veyAvaDiyaM jAva tao rogAyaMkAo viSpamukko, tamo pacchA tassa ahAlahusae nAmaM
vavahAre paTTaviyanve siyaa| 9. khittacittaM bhikkhu gilAyamANaM no kappai tassa
gaNAvaccheiyassa nijjUhittae, agilAe tassa karaNijjaM veyAvaDiyaM jAva tao
rogAyaMkAo vippamukko, tano pacchA tassa prahAlahusae nAmaM vavahAre
paTTaviyanve siyaa| 10. dittacittaM bhikkhu gilAyamANaM no kappai tassa
gaNAvaccheiyassa nijjUhittae, agilAe tassa karaNijja veyAvaDiyaM jAva tao
rogAyaMkAo viSpamukko, tao pacchA tassa ahAlahusae nAmaM vavahAre paTTaviyabve
siyaa| 11. jakkhAilai bhikkhu gilAyamANaM no kappai tassa gaNAvaccheiyassa
nijjahittae, agilAe tassa karaNijjaM veyAvaDiyaM jAva to rogAyaMkAyo vippamukko,
tao pacchA tassa ahAlahusae nAmaM vavahAre paTTaviyabve siyaa| 12. ummAyapattaM
bhikkha gilAyamANaM no kappai tassa gaNAvaccheiyassa nijjU hittae, agilAe tassa
karaNijjaM veyAvaDiyaM jAva tao rogAyaMkAyo vippamukko, to pacchA tassa
prahAlahusae nAmaM vavahAre paTTaviyanve siyaa| 13. uvasaggapattaM bhikkhu
gilAyamANaM no kappai tassa gaNAvaccheiyassa nijjUhittae, agilAe tassa
karaNijjaM veyAvaDiyaM jAva tao rogAyaMkAo viSpamukko, to pacchA tassa
prahAlahusae nAma vavahAre paTTaviyabve siyaa| 14. sAhigaraNaMbhikkhu
gilAyamANaM no kappai tassa gaNAvaccheiyassa nihittae, agilAe tassa karaNijjaM
veyAvaDiyaM jAva tao rogAyaMkAyo viSpamukko, tao pacchA tassa prahAlahusae nAmaM
vavahAre paTTaviyabve siyaa|

Page #111 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Second Objective:  **15.** If a monk who is undergoing the *SƒÅpayacchitta*
penance becomes ill, the *Ga·πáavacchedaka* should not expel him from the *Ga·πáa*.
Instead, he should care for him with compassion until he is free from the
illness. After that, the *Ga·πáavacchedaka* should reinstate him in the *Ga·πáa*
with a minimal penance.  **16.** If a monk who is undergoing the *Bhatta-PƒÅ·πáa-
Pa·∏çiƒÅikkhiya* penance becomes ill, the *Ga·πáavacchedaka* should not expel him
from the *Ga·πáa*. Instead, he should care for him with compassion until he is
free from the illness. After that, the *Ga·πáavacchedaka* should reinstate him in
the *Ga·πáa* with a minimal penance.  **17.** If a monk who is undergoing the
*A·π≠·π≠hajƒÅya* penance becomes ill, the *Ga·πáavacchedaka* should not expel him from
the *Ga·πáa*. Instead, he should care for him with compassion until he is free
from the illness. After that, the *Ga·πáavacchedaka* should reinstate him in the
*Ga·πáa* with a minimal penance.  **6.** If a monk who is undergoing the
*ParihƒÅratap* penance becomes ill, the *Ga·πáavacchedaka* should not expel him
from the *Ga·πáa*. Instead, he should care for him with compassion until he is
free from the illness. After that, the *Ga·πáavacchedaka* should reinstate him in
the *Ga·πáa* with a minimal penance.  **7.** If a monk who is undergoing the
*AnvavasthƒÅpya* penance becomes ill (and is unable to complete the penance), the
*Ga·πáavacchedaka* should not expel him from the *Ga·πáa*. Instead, he should care
for him with compassion until he is free from the illness. After that, the
*Ga·πáavacchedaka* should reinstate him in the *Ga·πáa* with a minimal penance.
**8.** If a monk who is undergoing the *PƒÅra√±citta* penance becomes ill, the
*Ga·πáavacchedaka* should not expel him from the *Ga·πáa*. Instead, he should care
for him with compassion until he is free from the illness. After that, the
*Ga·πáavacchedaka* should reinstate him in the *Ga·πáa* with a minimal penance.
**9.** The *Ga·πáavacchedaka* should not expel a monk who is suffering from a
mental illness from the *Ga·πáa*. Instead, he should care for him with compassion
until he is free from the illness. After that, the *Ga·πáavacchedaka* should
reinstate him in the *Ga·πáa* with a minimal penance.  **10.** The
*Ga·πáavacchedaka* should not expel a monk who is suffering from a mental illness
from the *Ga·πáa*. Instead, he should care for him with compassion until he is
free from the illness. After that, the *Ga·πáavacchedaka* should reinstate him in
the *Ga·πáa* with a minimal penance.  **11.** The *Ga·πáavacchedaka* should not
expel a monk who is suffering from a mental illness from the *Ga·πáa*. Instead, he
should care for him with compassion until he is free from the illness. After
that, the *Ga·πáavacchedaka* should reinstate him in the *Ga·πáa* with a minimal
penance.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
dUsarA uddezaka] [291 15. sapAyacchittaM bhikkhu gilAyamANaM no kappai tassa
gaNAvaccheiyassa nijjUhittae, agilAe tassa karaNijjaM veyAvaDiyaM jAva tao
rogAyaMkAo vippamukko, to pacchA tassa ahAlahusae nAmaM vavahAre paviyamve
siyaa| 16. bhatta-pANa-paDiyAikkhiyaM bhikkhu gilAyamANaM no kappai tassa
gaNAvaccheiyassa nijjUhittae, agilAe tassa karaNijjaM veyAvaDiyaM jAva tao
rogAyaMkAo vippamukko, tao pacchA tassa ahAlahusae nAma bavahAre paTThaviyabve
siyaa| 17. aTThajAyaM bhikkhu gilAyamANaM no kappai tassa gaNAvaccheyaissa
nijjUhittae, agilAe tassa karaNijja veyAvaDiyaM jAva tao rogAyaMkAyo vippamukko,
tao pacchA tassa ahAlahusae nAmaM vavahAre pachaviyabve siyaa| 6. parihAratapa
rUpa prAyazcitta vahana karane vAlA bhikSu yadi rogAdi se pIDita ho jAya to
gaNAvacchedaka ko use gaNa se bAhara karanA nahIM kalpatA hai, kintu jaba taka
baha roga-AtaMka se mukta na ho taba taka usakI aglAnabhAva se vaiyAvRtya karanI
caahie| bAda meM gaNAvacchedaka usa pArihArika bhikSu ko atyalpa prAyazcitta meM
prasthApita kre| 7. anavasthApyabhikSu (navameM prAyazcitta ko vahana karane
vAlA sAdhu) yadi rogAdi se pIDita ho jAya (usa prAyazcitta ko bahana na kara
sake) to gaNAvacchedaka ko use gaNa se bAhara karanA nahIM kalpatA hai, kintu
jaba taka vaha roga-aAtaMka se mukta na ho taba taka usakI aglAnabhAva se
vaiyAvRtya karanI cAhie / bAda meM gaNAvacchedaka usa anavasthApyasAdhu ko
atyalpa prAyazcitta meM prasthApita kre| 8. pAraMcittabhikSu (dasaveM
prAyazcitta ko vahana karane vAlA sAdhu) yadi rogAdi se pIDita ho jAya to
gaNAvacchedaka ko use gaNa se bAhara karanA nahIM kalpatA hai, kintu jaba taka
vaha roga-AtaMka se mukta na ho taba taka usakI aglAnabhAva se vaiyAvRtya karanI
caahie| bAda meM gaNAvacchedaka usa pAraMcitabhikSu ko atyalpa prAyazcitta meM
prasthApita kre| 9. vikSiptacitta glAna-bhikSu ko gaNa se bAhara nikAlanA usake
gaNAvacchedaka ko nahIM kalpatA hai| jaba taka vaha usa roga-aAtaMka se mukta na
ho taba taka usakI aglAnabhAva se sevA karanI caahie| usake bAda use
gaNAvacchedaka atyalpa prAyazcitta meM prasthApita kre| 10. diptacitta glAna-
bhikSu ko gaNa se bAhara nikAlanA usake gaNAvacchedaka ko nahIM kalpatA hai /
jaba taka vaha usa roga-AtaMka se mukta na ho taba taka usakI aglAnabhAva se
sevA karanI cAhie / usake bAda use gaNAvacchedaka atyalpa prAyazcitta meM
prasthApita kare / 11. yakSAviSTa glAna-bhikSu ko gaNa se bAhara nikAlanA usake
gaNAvacchedaka ko nahIM kalpatA hai| jaba taka vaha usa roga-AtaMka se mukta na
ho taba taka usakI aglAnabhAva se sevA karanI caahie| usake bAda use
gaNAvacchedaka atyalpa prAyazcitta meM prasthApita kre|

Page #112 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 292] [Vyavahar Sutra 12. Expelling a Glana-Bhiksu suffering from Unmada
(mania) from the gana does not pertain to his Ganavcchedak / Until he is free
from that disease-terror, he should be served with A-Glana-bhava. After that,
the Ganavcchedak should establish him in an Atyalp Prayschitta. 13. Expelling a
Glana-Bhiksu suffering from Upsarga (affliction) from the gana does not pertain
to his Ganavcchedak. Until he is free from that disease-terror, he should be
served with A-Glana-bhava. After that, the Ganavcchedak should establish him in
an Atyalp Prayschitta / 14. Expelling a Glana-Bhiksu suffering from Kalaha
(quarrel) from the gana does not pertain to his Ganavcchedak. Until he is free
from that disease-terror, he should be served with A-Glana-bhava. After that,
the Ganavcchedak should establish him in an Atyalp Prayschitta. 15. Expelling a
Glana-Bhiksu suffering from Prayschitta (penance) from the gana does not pertain
to his Ganavcchedak / Until he is free from that disease-terror, he should be
served with A-Glana-bhava. After that, the Ganavcchedak should establish him in
an Atyalp Prayschitta. 16. Expelling a Glana-Bhiksu suffering from Bhakta-
Pratyakhyani (rejection of devotion) from the gana does not pertain to his
Ganavcchedak. Until he is free from that disease-terror, he should be served
with A-Glana-bhava. After that, the Ganavcchedak should establish him in an
Atyalp Prayschitta. 17. Expelling a Glana-Bhiksu suffering from Prayojana-vista
(desire-filled) from the gana does not pertain to his Ganavcchedak. Until he is
free from that disease-terror, he should be served with A-Glana-bhava. After
that, the Ganavcchedak should establish him in an Atyalp Prayschitta.
Discussion- These sutras mention Bhikshus in twelve different states. All these
Bhikshus are also ill along with their states / If the Bhikshus serving them
experience regret, even then it is the duty of the responsible Geetarth
Ganavcchedak to not neglect the service of that Bhiksu and not separate him from
the Gachchha, but to have him served with A-Glana-bhava by other service-minded
Bhikshus / In the Bhashya, A-Glana-bhava is defined as serving with interest or
enthusiasm, or serving with the understanding of one's duty / These sutras
emphasize the following qualities: 1. Service, 2. Compassion for the Glana, 3.
Reputation of the Sangha / Service is a prominent quality in the life of
restraint and it is an inner penance, which is discussed in detail in Nishita U.
10. In Thananga Sutra A. 3 U. 4 and Bhag Sha. 8 U. 8, three are said to be
worthy of compassion: 1. Tapasvi (one who performs severe penance), 2. Glana, 3.
Navadishita / These present sutras also state that in any situation or during
the period of penance, if a Bhiksu is ill, he should not be neglected and should
not be expelled from the gana.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
292] [vyavahArasUtra 12. unmAdaprApta glAna-bhikSu ko gaNa se bAhara nikAlanA
usake gaNAvacchedaka ko nahIM kalpatA hai / jaba taka vaha usa roga-prAtaMka se
mukta na ho taba taka usakI aglAnabhAva se sevA karanI caahie| usake bAda use
gaNAvacchedaka atyalpa prAyazcitta meM prasthApita kre| 13. upasargaprApta
glAna-bhikSu ko gaNa se bAhara nikAlanA usake gaNAvacchedaka ko nahIM kalpatA
hai| jaba taka vaha usa roga-aAtaMka se mukta na ho taba taka usakI aglAnabhAva
se sevA karanI caahie| usake bAda use gaNAvacchedaka atyalpa prAyazcitta meM
prasthApita kare / 14. kalahayukta glAna-bhikSu ko gaNa se bAhara nikAlanA usake
gaNAvacchedaka ko nahIM kalpatA hai| jaba taka vaha usa roga-AtaMka se mukta na
ho taba taka usakI aglAnabhAva se sevA karanI caahie| usake bAda use
gaNAvacchedaka atyalpa prAyazcitta meM prasthApita kre| 15. prAyazcittaprApta
glAna-bhikSu ko gaNa se bAhara nikAlanA usake gaNAvacchedaka ko nahIM kalpatA
hai / jaba taka vaha usa roga-AtaMka se mukta na ho taba taka usakI aglAnabhAva
se sevA karanI caahie| usake bAda use gaNAvacchedaka atyalpa prAyazcitta meM
prasthApita kre| 16. bhaktapratyAkhyAnI glAna-bhikSu ko gaNa se bAhara nikAlanA
usake gaNAvacchedaka ko nahIM kalpatA hai| jaba taka vaha usa roga-AtaMka se
mukta na ho taba taka usakI aglAnabhAva se sevA karanI caahie| usake bAda use
gaNAvacchedaka atyalpa prAyazcitta meM prasthApita kre| 17. prayojanAviSTa
(AkAMkSAyukta) glAna-bhikSu ko gaNa se bAhara nikAlanA usake gaNAvacchedaka ko
nahIM kalpatA hai| jaba taka vaha usa roga-AtaMka se mukta na ho taba taka usakI
aglAnabhAva se sevA karanI caahie| usake bAda use gaNAvacchedaka atyalpa
prAyazcitta meM prasthApita kre| vivecana-ina sUtroM meM bAraha prakAra kI
vibhinna avasthAoM vAle bhikSuoM kA kathana hai| ye sabhI bhikSu apanI una
avasthAoM ke sAtha-sAtha rugNa bhI haiM / yadi unakI sevA karane vAle bhikSu
kheda kA anubhava karate hoM to bhI jimmedAra gItArtha gaNAvacchedaka kA yaha
kartavya hotA hai ki vaha usa bhikSu kI sevA kI upekSA na kare aura na hI use
gaccha se alaga kare, kintu anya sevAbhAvI bhikSuoM ke dvArA usakI aglAnabhAva
se sevA karavAve / bhASya meM aglAnabhAva kA artha yaha kiyA gayA hai ki
rucipUrvaka yA utsAhapUrvaka sevA karanA, athavA svayaM kA kartavya samajha kara
sevA karanA / ina sUtroM meM nimna guNoM kI pramukhatA hai 1. sevAkArya, 2.
glAna ke prati anukaMpA bhAva, 3. saMgha kI pratiSThA / sevAkArya saMyamajIvana
meM pramukha guNa hai evaM yaha eka Abhyantara tapa hai, jisakA vistRta vivecana
nizItha u. 10 meM kiyA gayA hai| ThANAMga sUtra a. 3 u. 4 meM tathA bhaga za. 8
u. 8 meM tIna ko anukaMpA ke yogya kahA hai1. tapasvI (vikaTa tapa karane vAlA),
2. glAna, 3. navadIkSita / prastuta sUtroM meM bhI yahI batAyA gayA hai ki kisI
bhI paristhiti meM yA prAyazcitta kAla meM yadi bhikSu rugNa ho to usakI upekSA
nahIM karanA cAhie aura na hI use gaNa se nikAlanA caahie|

Page #113 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The second objective [293] states that proper arrangements for the service
(**Vyayavritti**) of **Glan-Bhikshus** (sick monks) enhance the reputation of
the **Gachchha** (order) and **Jinshasan** (Jain religious system) and promote
the influence of Dharma (religion). However, in the absence of proper
arrangements, neglecting the service of a sick monk, becoming disheartened and
abandoning service, expelling him from the **Gachchha**, or handing him over to
other family members, leads to disrespect or criticism of the **Gachchha** and
**Jinshasan**. Therefore, these chapters clarify that even monks in these
conditions should not be neglected in their illness, but should be served with
**Aglan-bhav** (without aversion). If they are not sick, they can be expelled
from the **Gachchha** if necessary. The twelve conditions mentioned in the
sutras are as follows: 1. **Pariharatappa** (performing penance for minor
offenses). 2. **Navma Anvasthapy Prayaschitta** (performing penance for the
ninth category of offenses). 3. **Dasva Paranchik Prayaschitta** (performing
penance for the tenth category of offenses). 4. **Unmatta** (disturbed mind due
to extreme sorrow or fear). 5. **Unmatta** (confused mind due to excessive joy).
6. **Yakshavesha** (afflicted by spirits or ghosts). 7. **Mohodaya** (madness
due to delusion). 8. **Upsarga** (afflicted by a deity, animal, or king). 9.
**Kashaya-Kalha** (afflicted by intense passions). 10. **Prayaschitta-prapta**
(obtained penance for a major offense). 11. **Prajeevan Anashan** (vowed
lifelong fasting). 12. **Vyakul** (disturbed by desires like seeking
discipleship, position, etc.). The commentator interprets the word
"**Nijjhittae**" used in these sutras not as expulsion from the **Gachchha**,
but as simply not neglecting their service. He further explains the word
"**Attajayam**" as "a monk who desires wealth for his distressed family
members." The commentator considers it appropriate to interpret the word
"**Arth-jat**" in the context of the above eleven conditions and the provisions
mentioned in the sutras as "a monk who is overwhelmed by desires." While
explaining the sutra "**Prahalahusae namam vavhare pattaviyatve sia**," the
commentator has categorized various types of **Yatha-Ladhu** (minor) and
**Yatha-Guru** (major) **Vavhar** (conduct) and has provided guidance on the
time and penance to be performed for them. While explaining the word
"**Vavhar**" in the sutras, he has stated that **Vavhar**, **Palochana**
(criticism), **Vishuddhi** (purification), and **Prayaschitta** (penance) are
synonymous. The word "**Parihar**" in the initial sutras of the first objective
also denotes the meaning of penance, as in "**Bhikkhu ya masiyam pariharatthanam
padisavitta paloezzja**" (A monk should criticize himself after performing
penance for a month for a punishable offense). The word "**Parihar**" is also
used in the sense of penance in the last sutra of the 19 objectives of the
**Nishisth Sutra**.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
dUsarA uddezaka [293 glAna-bhikSu kI vaiyAvRtya (sevA) kI samucita vyavasthA
hotI ho to gaccha kI evaM jinazAsana kI pratiSThA bar3hatI hai evaM dharma kI
prabhAvanA hotI hai| kiMtu samucita vyavasthA ke abhAva meM, rugNa bhikSu kI
sevA karane karAne meM upekSA vRtti hone para, khinna hokara sevA chor3a dene
para, gaccha se nikAla dene para athavA anya pArivArika janoM ko sauMpa dene
para gaccha kI evaM jinazAsana kI avahelanA yA niMdA hotI hai| ataH ina satroM
meM yaha spaSTa kiyA gayA hai ki ina avasthAnoM vAle bhikSoM kI bhI rugNaavasthA
meM upekSA na karake aglAnabhAva se sevA karanI caahie| yadi ye rugNa na hoM to
Avazyaka ho jAne para gaccha se nikAlA jA sakatA hai| sUtrokta bAraha avasthAeM
isa prakAra haiM- 1. parihAratapa vahana karane vaalaa| 2. navamA anavasthApya
prAyazcitta vahana karane vaalaa| 3. dasavAM pArAMcika prAyazcitta vahana karane
vaalaa| 4. atyaMta zoka yA bhaya se vikSiptacitta vAlA-unmata / 5. harSAtireka
se bhramitacitta vAlA-unmata / 6. yakSAveza (bhUta-preta Adi kI pIDA) se pIDita
/ 7. mohodaya se unmatta-pAgala / 8. kisI deva, pazu yA rAjA Adi ke upasarga se
pIDita / 9. tIvra kaSAya-kalaha se pIDita / . 10. kisI bar3e doSa ke sevana se
prAyazcittaprApta / 11. prAjIvana anazana svIkAra kiyA huaa| 12. ziSyaprApti,
padalipsA Adi kisI icchA se vyAkula banA huaa| bhASyakAra ne ina sUtroM meM
prayukta 'nijjahittae' zabda se gaccha se nikAlane kA artha na karake kevala
usakI sevA meM upekSA nahIM karane kA hI artha kiyA hai tathA 'aTTajAyaM' zabda
se 'saMkaTagrasta pArivArika janoM ke lie dhanaprApti kI AkAMkSA vAlA bhikSu'
aisA artha karate hue vistRta vyAkhyA kI hai| uparyukta gyAraha avasthAoM ke
sAtha evaM sUtrokta vidhAna meM 'artha-jAta' zabda kA 'icchAoM se vyAkula
bhikSu' aisA artha karanA prasaMgasaMgata pratIta hotA hai| 'prahAlahusae nAmaM
vavahAre paTTaviyatve siyA' isa sUtrAMza kI vyAkhyA karate hue bhASyakAra ne
yathA-ladhu evaM yathA-guru ke aneka bheda-prabheda kiye haiM tathA unakA samaya
evaM usameM kiye jAne vAle tapa kA nirdeza kiyA hai| sUtrokta 'vavahAra' zabda
kI vyAkhyA karate hue batAyA hai ki vyavahAra, pAlocanA, vizuddhi aura
prAyazcitta, ye ekArthaka zabda haiN| prathama uddezaka ke prArambhika sUtroM
meM parihAra' zabda bhI prAyazcitta artha kA dyotaka hai / yathA 'bhikkhu ya
mAsiyaM parihAraTThANaM paDisevittA pAloejjA' arthAt bhikSu eka mAsa ke
prAyazcittayogya doSasthAna kA sevana karake AlocanA kre| nizIthasUtra ke 19
uddezakoM ke antima sUtra meM bhI prAyazcitta artha meM 'parihAra' zabda
prayukta hai|

Page #114 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  294] [Meaning of _Yathalghushk_ PrƒÅya≈õcitta in VyavahƒÅras≈´tra _  He
completes the _Yathalghushk_ conduct by performing the five-day _nirvik·πõti_ /
If, in the _Yathalghushk_ conduct, the _pratipanna_ conduct is to be
established, then the _tapas_ prƒÅya≈õcitta is performed only by way of _ƒÅlocanƒÅ_
and _dƒÅna_, because of the diligent service to the cause / ‚ÄîCommentary/Bha. Ga.
96 Meaning- The _laghu_ prƒÅya≈õcitta is of five days, which is completed by
abandoning the transgressions. Or, if the transgression is committed due to
diligent service to the cause, or if the transgression is committed due to a
very small violation, or if the transgression is committed due to helplessness,
then it can be purified only by the _ƒÅlocanƒÅ_ prƒÅya≈õcitta, i.e., it is not given
the _tapas_ prƒÅya≈õcitta. And since it is the first of the ten types of
prƒÅya≈õcittas, it is called 'Yathalghushk', i.e., _laghu_ (the most
insignificant) prƒÅya≈õcitta. _In these s≈´tras and in the following s≈´tras, the
instruction of the _ga·πáƒÅvacchedaka_ is given instead of the instruction of the
_ƒÅcƒÅrya_ _upƒÅdhyƒÅya_ / This makes it clear that the _ga·πáƒÅvacchedaka_ is
primarily responsible for the tasks of service and prƒÅya≈õcitta in the _gaccha_ /
The establishment of the _anavasthƒÅpya_ and _pƒÅra·πÉcƒ´ka_ monks 18.
_Pra·πáava·π≠·π≠hapanna·πÉ bhikku apihibh≈´ya·πÉ no kappati tassa ga·πáƒÅvaccheiyassa
uva·π≠·π≠hƒÅvittae_. 19. _A·πáava·π≠·π≠hapanna·πÉ bhikku gihibh≈´ya·πÉ kappati tassa
ga·πáƒÅvaccheiyassa uva·π≠·π≠hƒÅvittae_. 20. _PƒÅra·πÉciya·πÉ bhikku aghihibh≈´ya·πÉ no kappati
tassa ga·πáƒÅvaccheiyassa uva·π≠·π≠hƒÅvittae_. 21. _PƒÅra·πÉciya·πÉ bhikku gihibh≈´ya·πÉ kappati
tassa ga·πáƒÅvaccheiyassa uva·π≠·π≠hƒÅvittae_ / 22. _A·πáava·π≠·π≠hapanna·πÉ bhikku pƒÅra·πÉciya·πÉ
vƒÅ bhikku aghihibh≈´ya·πÉ vƒÅ gihibh≈´ya·πÉ vƒÅ, kappati tassa ga·πáƒÅvaccheiyassa
uva·π≠·π≠hƒÅvittae, jahƒÅ tassa ga·πáassa pattiya·πÉ siyƒÅ_. 18. It is not permissible for
the _ga·πáƒÅvacchedaka_ to re-establish the monk who is eligible for the ninth
prƒÅya≈õcitta called _anavasthƒÅpya_ without making him wear the householder's
garb. 19. It is permissible for the _ga·πáƒÅvacchedaka_ to re-establish the
_anavasthƒÅpya_ monk after making him wear the householder's garb. _20. It is not
permissible for the _ga·πáƒÅvacchedaka_ to re-establish the monk who is eligible
for the tenth prƒÅya≈õcitta called _pƒÅra·πÉcƒ´ka_ without making him wear the
householder's garb. 21. It is permissible for the _ga·πáƒÅvacchedaka_ to re-
establish the _pƒÅra·πÉcƒ´ka_ monk after making him wear the householder's garb. 22.
It is permissible for the _ga·πáƒÅvacchedaka_ to re-establish the _anavasthƒÅpya_
monk and the _pƒÅra·πÉcƒ´ka_ monk (due to circumstances) after making him wear the
householder's garb

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
294] [vyavahArasUtra yathAlaghuSka prAyazcitta kA artha _ yathAlaghuSkavavahAraM
paMcadinaparimANa nirvikRtika kurvan pUrayati / yadi vAyathAlaghuSke vyavahAre
prasthApayitavyaM ya pratipannavyavahAraH tapaH prAyazcitta evamevAlocanA-
pradAna-mAtrataH zuddhaH kriyate, kAraNe yatanayA pratisevanAt / --TIkA/bhA. gA.
96 bhAvArtha-laghu prAyazcitta pAMca dina kA hotA hai jo vigayoM kA tyAga karake
pUrNa kiyA jAtA hai| athavA kAraNa se yatanApUrvaka doSa kA sevana karane para,
atyalpa maryAdA bhaMga karane para, paravaza avasthA meM maryAdA bhaMga ho jAne
para kevala AlocanA prAyazcitta mAtra se usakI zuddhi kI jA sakatI hai arthAt
use taparUpa prAyazcitta nahIM diyA jAtA hai aura dasa prakAra ke prAyazcittoM
meM prathama Alo. canA prAyazcitta hone se ise 'yathAlaghuSka' arthAt laghu
(sarvajaghanya) prAyazcitta kahA jAtA hai| _ina sUtroM meM evaM Age ke sUtroM
meM prAcArya upAdhyAya kA nirdeza na karake gaNAvacchedaka kA nirdeza kiyA hai /
isase yaha spaSTa hotA hai ki gaccha meM sevA evaM prAyazcitta ke kAryoM kI
pramukha jimmedArI gaNAvacchedaka kI hotI hai / anavasthApya aura pArAMcika
bhikSu kI upasthApanA 18. praNavaTThappaM bhikkhu apihibhUyaM no kappai tassa
gaNAvaccheiyassa uvtttthaavitte| 19. aNavaThThappaM bhikkhu gihibhUyaM kappai
tassa gaNAvaccheiyassa uvtttthaavitte| 20. pAraMciyaM bhikkhuagihibhUyaM no
kappai tassa gaNAvaccheiyassa uvtttthaavitte| 21. pAraMciyaM bhikkhu gihibhUyaM
kappai tassa gaNAvaccheiyassa uvaTThAvittae / 22. aNavaThThappaM bhikkhu
pAraMciyaM vA bhikkhu agihibhUyaM vA gihibhUyaM vA, kappai tassa
gaNAvaccheiyassa uvaTThAvittae, jahA tassa gaNassa pattiyaM siyaa| 18.
anavasthApya nAmaka nauveM prAyazcitta ke pAtra bhikSu ko gRhasthaveSa dhAraNa
karAe vinA punaH saMyama meM upasthApana karanA gaNAvacchedaka ko nahIM kalpatA
hai| 19. anavasthApyabhikSu ko gRhasthaveSa dhAraNa karAke punaH saMyama meM
upasthApana karanA gaNAvacchedaka ko kalpatA hai| _20. pAraMcita nAmaka dasaveM
prAyazcitta ke pAtra bhikSu ko gRhasthaveSa dhAraNa karAe vinA punaH saMyama meM
upasthApana karanA gaNAvacchedaka ko nahIM kalpatA hai| 21. pAraMcitabhikSu ko
gRhasthaveSa dhAraNa karavAkara puna: saMyama meM upasthApana karanA
gaNAvacchedaka ko kalpatA hai| 22. anavasthApyabhikSu ko aura pAraMcitabhikSu ko
(paristhitivaza) gRhastha kA veSa dhAraNa

Page #115 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Second Objective] [295 It is permissible for the Ganavacchedaka to reinstate
a householder into the order of monks even without making him wear the garb of a
householder, so that the welfare of the Gan can be achieved. In the ninth and
tenth pratyakshita-yogya bhik·π£u, a specific penance in the form of tapas is
given to the bhik·π£u for six months in the case of a minor offense and for twelve
years in the case of a major offense. After the completion of the tapas, he is
made to wear the garb of a householder once. After that, he is given the
chhedopasthapanƒ´ya charitra. In the above four sutras, the provision of making
him wear the garb of a householder has been stated, and in the fifth sutra, an
exception has been stated. The meaning of this is that if it seems appropriate
not to make a particular person a householder, then the Ganavacchedaka can do so
according to his own decision. That is, he can do whatever is most beneficial to
the Gachchha or the Jinasasana. The commentator has stated some reasons for not
making him a householder: 1. The one who has made a king favorable to the
Sangha. 2. The one for whom a king has requested that he should not be made a
householder. 3. The one who has been given this pratyakshita by the sadhus of
the Gan due to false accusations out of hatred, and he goes to another Gan and
criticizes them. 4. The one who has many disciples who request that the
pratyakshita-prapta bhik·π£u or the acharya should not be made a householder. 5.
The one who has many disciples who are ready to leave the order due to the harsh
pratyakshita given to their benefactor. 6. The one who has a dispute with two
Gans regarding the pratyakshita. In such circumstances, and for other such
reasons, the bhik·π£u should be reinstated without making him a householder.   ##
Accusation of Ak·πõtyasevana and the Method of Deciding It 23. Two sƒÅh‡§Æ‡•ç‡§Æ‡§ø‡§Ø‡§æ are
wandering together, one of them criticizes the other for serving an
ak·πõtyasthƒÅna.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
dUsarA uddezaka] [295 karAke yA gRhastha kA veSa dhAraNa karAe vinA bhI punaH
saMyama meM upasthApita karanA gaNAvacchedaka ko kalpatA hai, jisase ki gaNa kA
hita saMbhava ho| vivecananauveM aura dasaveM prAyazcitta yogya bhikSu ko
jaghanya chaha mAsa, utkRSTa bAraha varSa taka kA viziSTa tapa rUpa prAyazcitta
diyA jAtA hai aura usa tapa ke pUrNa hone para use eka bAra gRhastha kA veSa
dhAraNa karavAyA jAtA hai / tatpazcAt use chedopasthApanIya cAritra diyA jAtA
hai| uparyukta cAra sUtroM meM gRhastha kA veSa pahanAne kA vidhAna karake
pAMcaveM sUtra meM apavAda kA kathana kiyA gayA hai / jisakA bhAva yaha hai ki
kisI viziSTa vyakti ko gRhastha nahIM banAnA hI ucita lage to gaNAvacchedaka
apane nirNayAnusAra kara sakatA hai / arthAt jisa taraha karane meM use gaccha
kA yA jinazAsana kA atyadhika hita saMbhava ho vaisA hI kara sakatA hai|
bhASyakAra ne gRhastha na banAne ke kucha kAraNa ye kahe haiM1. jisane kisI rAjA
ko saMgha ke anukUla banAyA ho / 2. jise gRhastha na banAne ke lie kisI rAjA kA
Agraha ho| 3. gaNa ke sAdhuoM ne jise dveSavaza asatya AkSepa se vaha
prAyazcitta dilavAyA ho aura vaha anya gaNa ke pAsa punaH AlocanA kare to| 4.
usa prAyazcittaprApta bhikSu yA prAcArya ke aneka ziSyoM kA Agraha ho / 5. apane
upakArI ko kaThora prAyazcitta dene ke kAraNa unake aneka ziSya saMyama chor3ane
ko udyata hoN| 6. usa prAyazcitta ke saMbaMdha meM do gaNoM meM vivAda ho /
ityAdi paristhitiyoM meM tathA anya bhI aise kAraNoM se usa bhikSu ko gRhastha
banAye binA bhI upasthApana kara denA caahie| akRtyasevana kA AkSepa evaM usake
nirNaya karane kI vidhi 23. do sAhammiyA gayao viharaMti, ege tattha annayaraM
akiccaTThANaM paDisevittA pAloejjA ahaM NaM bhaMte ! amugeNaM sAhuNA siddhi
imammi kAraNammi pddisevii| se ya pucchiyavve "ki paDisevI, apaDisevI" ? se ya
vaejjA-"paDisevI" prihaarptte| se ya vaejjA-"no paDisevI" no prihaarptte| jaM se
pamANaM vayai se pamANAmro gheyanve / pa0-se kimAhu bhaMte ? u0--saccapainnA
vvhaaraa| 23. do sArmika eka sAtha vicarate hoM, unameM se eka sAdhu kisI
akRtyasthAna kI pratisevanA karake AlocanA kare

Page #116 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**The Conduct Sutra**  "O Bhagavan! I have consumed a transgression with such
and such a Sadhu due to such and such a reason." (Upon hearing this) one should
ask the other Sadhu, "Are you a *pratisevi* or an *apratisevi*?" If he says, "I
am a *pratisevi*," then he is eligible for atonement. If he says, "I am not a
*pratisevi*," then he is not eligible for atonement, and one should make a
decision based on whatever evidence he provides.  **Question:** O Bhagavan! What
is the reason for saying this?  **Answer:** The atonement depends on the
truthful statement of the *bhikshus* who have taken the vow of truth.
**Discussion:** If a *bhiksu* finds out while wandering and criticizes another
*Sadhu* by saying that he has consumed a transgression, then this statement may
be motivated by hatred towards the other *Sadhu* or by a desire to make him
appear inferior in the *dikshaparaya*. Therefore, he makes a false accusation
and pretends to be guilty himself in order to prove his accusation true. The
commentator has also said that he may even admit to sexual misconduct with
himself and other *bhikshus* while criticizing. In this way, he wants to defame
the other *Sadhu* by deceit.  In such a situation, the scriptural scholar has
given the following measures for making a wise decision:  The *geetarth*
*bhiksu* who hears the criticism should not make any decision until he has
obtained complete information from the other *bhiksu*. If, upon questioning, the
other *bhiksu* does not admit to consuming the transgression and provides some
explanation, then he should listen carefully. Thereafter, one should inquire
about the place (field) of the transgression or the person involved in the
transgression from the accuser. Then, one should make a decision after carefully
considering the statements and evidence of both. If there is no strong evidence,
then the *bhiksu* who denies the transgression should not be given any
atonement. Whether the accuser has consumed the transgression or not, he is
liable for atonement for making a false accusation.  If the critic is speaking
the truth, but the other *bhiksu* does not admit his fault and the critic cannot
prove it, then the one who denies the fault cannot be given any atonement. This
is because *bhikshus* are bound by the vow of truth. Therefore, atonement can
only be given if he admits it himself. He cannot be given atonement simply on
the basis of someone else's statement without evidence.  The critic must prove
the truth of his statement, and the *geetarth* atonement giver must understand
the truth of the evidence and the *bhiksu* involved must admit the fault, only
then is atonement given. If, even after the fault is proven, the *bhiksu*
involved does not admit it, then the atonement giver should seek the advice of
other *geetarth* *bhikshus* of the *gachchha*.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
[vyavahArasUtra 'he bhagavan ! maiMne amuka sAdhu ke sAtha amuka kAraNa ke hone
para doSa kA sevana kiyA hai| (usake isa prakAra kahane para) dUsare sAdhu se
pUchanA cAhie 'kyA tuma pratisevI ho yA apratisevI ?' yadi vaha kahe ki 'maiM
pratisevI haiM' to vaha prAyazcitta kA pAtra hotA hai| yadi vaha kahe ki 'maiM
pratisevI nahIM hU~', to vaha prAyazcitta kA pAtra nahIM hai aura jo bhI vaha
pramANa de, unase nirNaya karanA caahie| pra0-he bhagavan ! aisA kahane kA kyA
kAraNa hai ? u0-satya pratijJA vAle bhikSuSoM ke satya kathana para vyavahAra
(prAyazcitta) nirbhara hotA hai / vivecana yadi koI bhikSu vicaraNa karake pAe~
aura apanI AlocanA karate hue, koI dUsare sAdhu ko bhI doSasevana karane vAlA
kahe to aisA kahane meM usa sAdhu kA dUsare sAdhu ke prati dveSa ho sakatA hai
yA dIkSAparyAya meM use kisI se choTA banAne kA saMkalpa ho sakatA hai| isalie
vaha asatya AkSepa karatA hai aura apane AkSepa ko satya siddha karane ke lie
vaha svayaM bhI doSI banakara AlocanA karane kA dikhAvA karatA hai| bhASyakAra
ne yaha bhI kahA hai ki vaha AlocanA karate hue apanA aura anya bhikSu kA
maithunasevana karanA taka bhI svIkAra kara letA hai| isa prakAra chala karake
dUsare sAdhu ko kalaMkita karanA cAhatA hai / aisI paristhiti meM zAstrakAra ne
vivekapUrvaka nirNaya karane ke nimna upAya batAye haiM AlocanA sunane vAlA
gItArtha bhikSu anya bhikSu se jaba taka pUrNa jAnakArI na kara le taba taka use
kisI prakAra kA nirNaya nahIM karanA caahie| yadi pUchane para anya bhikSu
doSasevana karanA svIkAra nahIM kare aura kucha spaSTIkaraNa kare to use
sAvadhAnIpUrvaka sunanA caahie| tadanantara AkSepa lagAne vAle se doSa-sevana kA
sthAna (kSetra) yA usa doSa se sambandhita vyakti kI jAnakArI karanA caahie|
phira una donoM ke kathana evaM pramANoM para pUrNa vicAra karake nirNaya karanA
caahie| koI prabala pramANa na ho to doSasevana ko asvIkAra karane vAle bhikSu
ko kisI prakAra kA prAyazcitta nahIM denA caahie| AkSepakartA ne doSasevana kiyA
ho yA na kiyA ho to asatya AkSepa karane para use usa doSasevana kA prAyazcitta
AtA hI hai| yadi AlocanA karane vAlA satya kathana kara rahA ho, kintu anya
bhikSu apanA doSa svIkAra na kare aura Alocaka use pramANita bhI na kara sake,
taba bhI doSa asvIkAra karane vAle ko koI prAyazcitta nahIM diyA jA sktaa|
kyoMki bhikSu satya vacana kI pratijJA vAle hote haiN| ataH svayaM ke svIkAra
karane para hI use prAyazcitta diyA jA sakatA hai| pramANa ke binA kevala kisI
ke kahane se use prAyazcitta nahIM diyA jA sakatA hai / AlocanA karane vAlA
apane kathana kI satyatA ko pramANita kara de evaM gItArtha prAyazcittadAtA ko
una pramANoM ko satyatA samajha meM A jAya aura usase sambandhita bhikSu doSa ko
svIkAra kara le tabhI use prAyazcitta diyA jAtA hai| kadAcit doSa pramANita hone
para bhI sambandhita bhikSu use svIkAra na kare to prAyazcittadAtA gaccha ke
anya gItArtha bhikSuoM kI salAha

Page #117 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Second Objective] [297 can declare his penance and can also separate him from
the Gachchha if he refuses the penance. The statement of giving the same penance
to the one who makes false accusations is in the Brihatkalpa Uddeshak 6 and the
statement of separating the one who does not accept the penance given by the
Geetaarth or the Acharya from the Gachchha is in the Brihatkalpa Uddeshak 4. The
implication is that the Gachchha leader should not make a decision and behave
based on the statement of only one party, but should listen to the statements of
both parties and make a proper decision and give penance. In a doubtful
situation, i.e., if the decision is not made properly, the guilty person should
not be given penance. In doing so, the penancer does not incur any guilt, but
the guilty person himself receives the fruit of his violation of restraint. If
the consumption of the fault is proved by evidence and a clear decision is made,
then it becomes mandatory to give penance even if the guilty person refuses,
otherwise there will be disorder in the Gachchha and there will also be public
criticism. Therefore, the Geetaarth monks and the Gachchha leaders should decide
to give the penance as prescribed in the Sutras with discretion. /  The
intention to abandon restraint and return 24. If a monk leaves the Gachchha due
to the intention to abandon restraint and later comes back without consuming
unrestraint and wants to rejoin his Gachchha, then (regarding taking him into
the Gachchha) if there is a dispute among the elders (they start saying to each
other) do you know if he is a pratisevi or an apratisevi? (In such a situation,
the Agama's provision is that the elders should) ask the monk himself - are you
a pratisevi or an apratisevi? If he says - "I am a pratisevi." then he is
eligible for penance. If he says - "I am not a pratisevi." then he is not
eligible for penance. /  Whatever evidence he gives, the evidence should be
taken. /  50 - What do you say, Bhante? A - True conduct. 24. If a monk leaves
the Gachchha due to the intention to abandon restraint and later comes back
without consuming unrestraint and wants to rejoin his Gachchha, then (regarding
taking him into the Gachchha) if there is a dispute among the elders (they start
saying to each other) do you know if he is a pratisevi or an apratisevi? (In
such a situation, the Agama's provision is that the elders should) ask the monk
himself - are you a pratisevi or an apratisevi? If he says - "I am a pratisevi."
then he is eligible for penance. If he says - "I am not a pratisevi." then he is
not eligible for penance. /  Whatever evidence he gives, the evidence should be
taken. /  50 - What do you say, Bhante? A - True conduct.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
dUsarA uddezaka] [297 lekara usakA prAyazcitta ghoSita kara sakate haiM evaM
prAyazcitta ko asvIkAra karane para use gaccha se alaga bhI kara sakate haiN|
asatya AkSepa lagAne vAle ko vahI prAyazcitta dene kA kathana bRhatkalpa
uddezaka 6 meM hai tathA gItArtha yA prAcArya pradatta Agamokta prAyazcitta ke
svIkAra na karane vAle ko gaccha se alaga karane kA kathana bRhatkalpa uddezaka
4 meM hai| tAtparya yaha hai ki gacchapramukha kevala eka pakSa ke kathana se
nirNaya evaM vyavahAra na kare, kintu ubhaya pakSa ke kathana ko sunakara ucita
nirNaya karake prAyazcitta de| saMdigdhAvasthA meM arthAt samyak prakAra se
nirNaya na hone para doSI vyakti ko prAyazcitta nahIM denA caahie| aisA karane
meM prAyazcittadAtA ko koI doSa nahIM lagatA hai, kintu doSI vyakti svayaM hI
apanI saMyamavirAdhanA ke phala ko prApta kara letA hai| doSasevana pramANoM se
siddha ho jAe evaM spaSTa nirNaya ho jAe to doSI ke asvIkAra karane para bhI
prAyazcitta denA anivArya ho jAtA hai, anyathA gaccha meM avyavasthA phaila jAtI
hai aura lokanindA bhI hotI hai| ataH gItArtha bhikSuoM ko evaM gacchapramukhoM
ko vivekapUrvaka sUtrokta prAyazcitta dene kA nirNaya karanA cAhie / saMyama
tyAgane kA saMkalpa evaM punarAgamana 24. bhikkhU ya gaNApro avakkamma
ohANuppehI bajejjA, se ya aNohAie icchejjA doccaM pi tameva gaNaM
uvasaMpajjittANaM biharittae, tattha NaM therANaM imeyArave vivAe samuppajjitthA
'imaM bho ! jANaha ki paDisevI, apaDisevI ?' se ya pucchiyavve.-ki paDisevI,
apaDisevI ?' se ya vaejjA-'paDisevI' parihArapatte / se ya vaejjA-'no paDisevI'
no parihArapatte / jaM se pamANaM vayai se pamANAmro gheyamve / 50-se kimAhu
bhaMte ? u0-saccapainnA vvhaaraa| 24. saMyama tyAgane kI icchA se yadi koI sAdhu
gaNa se nikalakara jAe aura bAda meM asaMyama sevana kie binA hI vaha Aye aura
punaH apane gaNa meM sammilita honA cAhe to ( gaNa meM lene ke sambandha meM )
sthaviroM meM yadi vivAda utpanna ho jAe (ve paraspara kahane lage ki) kyA tuma
jAnate hoyaha pratisevI hai yA apratisevI ? (aisI sthiti meM Agama kA vidhAna
hai ki sthaviroM ko) usa bhikSu se hI pUchanA cAhiekyA tuma pratisevI ho yA
apratisevI ? yadi vaha kahe ki-"maiM pratisevI huuN|" to vaha prAyazcitta kA
pAtra hotA hai| yadi vaha For Private & Personal use only

Page #118 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[298] The *Vyavahar Sutra* states, "I am not a *pratisevi*." Then he is not
subject to *prayaschitta* and the decision should be made based on the evidence
he provides. Q: O Bhagavan! What is the reason for saying this? A: The
*vyavahar* (atonement) depends on the truthful statement of the monks who have
taken the vow of truth. The discussion in the 32nd Sutra of the First Uddeshak
states that a monk who has abandoned *samyama* and become a householder can be
re-initiated into the *gana* after returning. This Sutra states that a monk who
has abandoned *samyama* and gone elsewhere due to a change of mind can return.
This fickle-minded monk can return on the same day, after one or two nights, or
even after many days. When the returning monk wants to stay in the *gachchha*,
he should explain his change of mind and its reasons. At that time, if the
*geetarth* elders of the *gachchha* do not agree, i.e., if someone doubts that
he may have indulged in some fault during this period, the *gachchha* leader
should question the monk or inquire from someone else and make a decision. If no
authentic information is available, the decision should be made according to the
monk's answer. If he admits to indulging in the fault, he should be given
*prayaschitta* for it. If he does not admit to the fault, he should not be given
*prayaschitta* simply because someone doubts him. However, he can be given
appropriate *prayaschitta* for the intention to abandon *samyama* and for going
elsewhere due to that intention, and he can be included in the *gachchha*. The
description of not having the intention to abandon *samyama*, the description of
the reasons for abandoning *samyama*, and the description of the examination
upon returning to the *gana* can be found in the discussion of the 32nd Sutra of
the First Uddeshak. Here, the commentator has mentioned some specific reasons
for the intention to abandon *samyama*, which are related to the previous Sutra
23, and has also mentioned some reasons for the change of mind. Reasons for
abandoning *samyama*: 1. A person who has been falsely accused may become
disheartened and decide to abandon *samyama*. 2. A person who speaks the truth
may not be able to prove his statement, and he may become distressed by
injustice and decide to abandon *samyama*. 3. A monk who has indulged in a fault
may want to hide it, but if it is revealed and proven by someone else, he may
feel ashamed and decide to abandon *samyama*. 4. If the *geetarth* elders make a
wrong decision due to someone's deception, a person may become dissatisfied and
decide to abandon *samyama*.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
298] [vyavahArasUtra kahe ki "maiM pratisevI nahIM huuN|" to vaha prAyazcitta kA
pAtra nahIM hotA hai aura jo vaha pramANa deve unase nirNaya karanA caahie| pra0
--he bhagavan ! aisA kahane kA kyA kAraNa hai ? u0-satya pratijJA vAle bhikSuoM
ke satya kathana para vyavahAra (prAyazcitta) nirbhara hotA hai|
vivecanaprathama uddezaka ke 32veM sUtra meM saMyama kA parityAga karake
gRhastha bana jAne vAle bhikSu ke punaH gaNa meM Akara dIkSita hone kA kathana
hai aura isa sUtra meM saMyama tyAgane ke saMkalpa se anyatra jAkara vicAroM meM
parivartana A jAne se punaH lauTa kara Ane vAle bhikSu kA kathana hai / vaha
calacitta bhikSu punaH usI dina A sakatA hai, eka do rAtri vyatIta karake bhI A
sakatA hai aura aneka dinoM ke bAda bhI lauTakara A sakatA hai| lauTakara Ane
vAlA bhikSu apane vicAra-parivartana kA evaM unake kAraNoM kA spaSTIkaraNa
karatA huyA gaccha meM rahanA cAhe to usa samaya yadi gaccha ke gItArtha
sthaviroM ke vicAroM meM ekarUpatA na ho arthAt kisI ko yaha sandeha ho ki yaha
isa avadhi meM kisI na kisI doSa kA sevana karake AyA hogA, usa samaya
gacchapramukha usa bhikSu ko pUche yA anya kisI se jAnakArI karake nirNaya kare
/ yadi prAmANika jAnakArI na mile to usa bhikSu ke uttara ke anusAra hI nirNaya
karanA cAhie arthAt vaha doSasevana karanA svIkAra kare to use usakA prAyazcitta
deve| yadi vaha doSa svIkAra na kare to kisI ke sandeha karane mAtra se use
prAyazcitta na de| kintu saMyama tyAgane ke saMkalpa kA evaM usa saMkalpa se
anyatra jAne kA use yathocita prAyazcitta diyA jA sakatA hai evaM use gaccha meM
sammilita kiyA jA sakatA hai| saMyama chor3ane ke saMkalpa na karane kA varNana
aura saMyama chor3ane ke kAraNoM kA varNana tathA puna: gaNa meM Ane para
parIkSaNa karane kA varNana prathama uddezaka ke 32veM sUtra ke vivecana meM
dekheN| yahAM bhASyakAra ne saMyama chor3ane ke saMkalpa ke kucha vizeSa kAraNa
kahe haiM, jinakA sambandha pUrva sUtra 23 se kiyA hai tathA vicAroM ke puna:
parivartana hone ke bhI kucha kAraNa kahe haiN| saMyama tyAgane ke karANa 1.
asatya prAkSepa lagAne vAlA svayaM hI daNDita ho jAne se khinna hokara saMyama
chor3ane kA saMkalpa kara sakatA hai| 2. satya kahane vAlA kabhI apane kathana
ko pramANita nahIM kara pAtA hai, taba anyAya se udvigna hokara saMyama tyAgane
kA saMkalpa kara sakatA hai| 3. koI sAdhu doSa-sevana kara chipAnA cAhatA ho
kintu dUsare ke dvArA prakaTa kara dene se evaM pramANita kara dene se lajjita
hokara vaha saMyama tyAgane kA saMkalpa kara sakatA hai| 4. kisI ke chala-
chadmoM se bhI gItArthoM dvArA yadi galata nirNaya ho jAe, jisase asantuSTa
hokara koI saMyama tyAgane kA saMkalpa kara sakatA hai|

Page #119 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Second Objective [299 Reasons for Returning to the Order]  1. Persuasion by
the monks sent with him. 2. Persuasion by a prominent person from the community.
3. Persuasion by family members. 4. Through contemplation, meditation, or
recollection of the renunciatory Agamasutras. 5. Due to the subsidence of
passions and conflicts. 6. Upon learning of the death of his wife, if he was
attached to her. 7. Upon learning of the complete destruction of his wealth. 8.
Upon learning that his family will not keep him at home. 9. If he had abandoned
his vows due to lack of faith in Dharma, and then regained faith upon witnessing
something. 10. If he becomes severely ill on the way, or faces hardship or
adversity, and realizes that abandoning his vows will lead to the destruction of
his merit and the rise of demerit, and therefore decides that it is better to
uphold his vows. 11. Due to the advice of a friend or a deity.  The commentator
has also clarified that if a monk intends to abandon his vows, he should inform
the head of the order. The head of the order should then try to stabilize him
through various means. If the monk still wishes to leave, 1-2 skilled monks
should be sent with him to accompany him for 1-2 nights or until he reaches his
destination. They should advise him appropriately along the way and finally
reach his destination. If, during this time, his thoughts become stable again,
he should be brought back and entrusted to the head of the order. Even if he
does not return, the monks who accompanied him should inform the head of the
order about the events that transpired during the journey. If the monk changes
his mind after the accompanying monks have returned, and he returns alone, then
the situation described in the sutra may arise. A monk who intends to abandon
his vows may leave after informing the order or without informing them. Both
types of monks may return without abandoning their vows or may return after
abandoning them. This sutra deals with the situation of a monk who returns
without abandoning his vows.  **The provision for granting a position to a
unilateral monk:**  25. A unilateral monk, i.e., a monk who has received
initiation and studied scriptures from only one teacher, may be granted a
position in the order, whether he has been ordained formally or informally,
whether he has been accepted or not, as long as he is worthy of the order.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
dUsarA uddezaka] [299 punaH gaNa meM Ane ke kAraNa 1. usake sAtha bheje gae
sAdhunoM ke samajhAne se / 2. prAmAdi ke kisI pramukha vyakti ke samajhAne se /
3. pArivArika logoM ke samajhAne se| 4. cintana-manana karate-karate yA
vairAgyaprada AgamasUtroM ke smaraNa hone se / 5. kaSAya evaM kalaha ke upazAMta
ho jAne se / 6. viSayecchA se jAne vAle ko sva-strI ke kAladharma prApta hone kI
jAnakArI mila jAne se| 7. ghara kA sampUrNa dhana vinaSTa hone kI jAnakArI hone
se / 8. parivAra ke loga ghara meM nahIM rakheMge, aisA jJAta hone se / 9.
dharma kI azraddhA ho jAne para saMyama tyAgane vAle ko phira kabhI kisI dRzya
ke dekhane para punaH dharma meM zraddhA ho jAne se| 10. mArga meM hI atyanta
bImAra ho jAne se athavA kaSTa yA upasarga A jAne se yaha vicAra pAe ki saMyama
tyAgane ke saMkalpa se puNya naSTa hokara pApa kA udaya ho rahA hai, ataH
saMyamapAlana karanA hI zreyaskara hai| 11. koI mitra deva ke pratibodha dene se
/ bhASyakAra ne yaha bhI spaSTa kahA hai ki bhikSu yadi saMyamatyAga ke saMkalpa
kI jAnakArI gacchapramukhoM ko deve to gacchapramukha use aneka upAyoM se sthira
kre| taduparAMta bhI vaha jAnA cAhe to use pahu~cAne ke lie 1-2 kuzala bhikSuoM
ko sAtha bheje, jo use 1-2 rAtri taka yA gaMtavyasthAna taka paha~cAne jaaeN| ve
mArga meM bhI use yathocita salAha deveM aura anta meM usake gaMtavyasthAna
jaaeN| isa bIca kabhI bhI usake vicAra punaH saMyama meM sthira ho jAe~ to use
sAtha lAkara gacchapramukha ke supurda kara deN| usake puna: na Ane para bhI
sAtha meM bheje sAdhu gacchapramukha ko mArga meM huI bAtoM kI pUrI jAnakArI
deN| sAtha bheje gae bhikSuoM ke lauTane ke bAda vicAroM meM parivartana hone
para vaha pIche se akelA yA jAe taba sUtrokta vivAda kI sthiti utpanna ho sakatI
hai| saMyama tyAgane ke saMkalpa vAlA bhikSu sUcanA dekara bhI jA sakatA hai
aura sUcanA diye vinA bhI jA sakatA hai| donoM prakAra se jAne vAlA bhikSu
saMyama tyAga kiye vinA punaH A sakatA hai aura saMyama tyAga kara bhI punaH pA
sakatA hai / prastuta sUtra meM saMyama kA tyAga kiye vinA Ane vAle bhikSu ke
sambandha meM sArA vidhAna kiyA gayA hai| ekapakSIya bhikSu ko pada dene kA
vidhAna 25. egapakkhiyassa bhikkhussa kappai Ayariya-uvajjhAyANaM ittariya disaM
vA aNudisaM vA uddisittae vA, dhArettae vA, jahA vA tassa gaNassa pattiyaM
siyaa| 25. ekapakSIya arthAt eka hI prAcArya ke pAsa dIkSA aura zruta grahaNa
karane vAle bhikSu ko

Page #120 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Translation:  **[300]** It is appropriate to establish or hold the position
of Acharya or Upadhyaya for a short period or for life, or it can be done in
circumstances where it is in the best interest of the Gan.    **Discussion:** To
ensure the smooth functioning of the Sangha in the Acharya's or Upadhyaya's
presence, a suitable Acharya and Upadhyaya should be appointed.   **Reasons for
short-term appointment:**  1. The current Acharya needs to be relieved of the
Sangha's responsibilities for treatment of a specific illness or for performing
specific tapasya for overcoming attachment. 2. The Acharya needs to go to
another Acharya or Upadhyaya for study or to teach and assist them. 3. The
Acharya needs to temporarily abandon their vows due to circumstances. 4. The
necessary studies of a qualified monk are incomplete at the time of appointment.
**Reasons for life-long appointment:**  1. The Acharya or Upadhyaya knows their
death is approaching. 2. The Acharya or Upadhyaya is very old or has a long-term
incurable illness. 3. The Acharya or Upadhyaya needs to perform specific
practices like studying the Jina Kalpa. 4. The Acharya needs to completely
abandon their vows. 5. The Acharya is unable to follow Brahmacharya. 6. The
Acharya needs to leave their own Gachchha and join another.  In these
situations, a qualified monk is appointed to the position of Acharya for life.
**The commentator mentions two types of Acharyas:**  1. **Sapeksha (Relative):**
An Acharya who appoints a qualified monk to their position at the appropriate
time during their lifetime. 2. **Nirapeksha (Absolute):** An Acharya who does
not appoint a qualified monk at the appropriate time, neglecting their duty and
passing away, or appointing an unqualified person.  This is because after their
death, the Gachchha experiences an increase in kshaya (negative emotions),
conflict, etc., leading to the disruption of the Gachchha's order.  **The Sutra
uses the term "Ekpakshi" (one-sided). The commentary explains it as:**  "Duviho
ya egpakshi, pavajja sue ya hoi nayancho / Suttammi egvayana, pavajjaaye
kulivaadi."  **Meaning:**  "Ekpakshi is of two types: 1. From Shruta (scripture)
and 2. From Pravrajya (renunciation)."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
300] [vyavahArasUtra alpakAla ke lie athavA yAvajjIvana ke lie prAcArya yA
upAdhyAya pada para sthApita karanA yA use dhAraNa karanA kalpatA hai athavA
paristhitivaza kabhI jisameM gaNa kA hita ho vaisA bhI kiyA jA sakatA
vivecanaprAcArya upAdhyAya ko apanI upasthiti meM hI saMgha kI vyavasthA
barAbara banI rahe, isake lie yogya AcArya aura upAdhyAya kI niyukti kara denA
caahie| alpakAlika padaniyukti ke kAraNa 1. vartamAna AcArya ko kisI viziSTa
roga kI cikitsA karane ke lie athavA mohacikitsA hetu viziSTa tapasAdhanA karane
ke lie saMghabhAra se mukta honA ho, 2. anya prAcArya upAdhyAya ke pAsa
adhyayana karane hetu jAnA ho, athavA unheM adhyayana karAne evaM sahayoga dene
jAnA ho, 3. paristhitivaza alpakAla ke lie saMyama chor3anA Avazyaka ho, 4.
padaniyukti ke samaya para yogya bhikSu kA Avazyaka adhyayana apUrNa ho, ityAdi
paristhitiyoM meM alpakAlika pada diyA jAtA hai| jIvanaparyaMta padaniyukti ke
kAraNa 1. AcArya upAdhyAya ko apanA maraNa-samaya nikaTa hone kA jJAna hone para
/ 2. ativRddhatA yA dIrghakAlIna asAdhya roga ho jAne para / 3. prAcArya
upAdhyAya ko jinakalpa Adi koI viziSTa sAdhanA karanA ho| 4. prAcArya ko saMyama
kA pUrNatayA tyAga karanA ho / 5. brahmacarya kA pAlana karanA azakya ho| 6.
svagaccha kA tyAga kara anyagaccha meM jAnA ho| ina sthitiyoM meM AcArya
padayogya bhikSu ko jIvanaparyaMta ke lie pada diyA jAtA hai / bhASyakAra ne
yahAM do prakAra ke prAcArya kahe haiM-1. sApekSa, 2. nirapekSa / jo apane
jIvanakAla meM hI ucita avasara para yogya bhikSu ko apane pada para niyukta
kara detA hai, vaha 'sApekSa' kahA jAtA hai| jo ucita avasara para yogya bhikSu
ko apane pada para niyukta nahIM karatA hai aura upekSA karatA huaA kAla kara
jAtA hai yA ayogya ko niyukta karatA hai, vaha "nirapekSa" kahA jAtA hai /
kyoMki usake kAla karane ke bAda gaccha meM kaSAya kalaha Adi kI vaddhi ho jAtI
hai, jisase gaccha kI vyavasthA bhaMga ho jAtI hai| sUtra meM kahe gae
ekapAkSika zabda kI vyAkhyA duviho ya egapakkhI, pavajja sue ya hoI nAyanco /
suttammi egavAyaNa, pavajjAe kulivaadii|| vyava. bhASya gA. 325 bhAvArtha-
ekapAkSika do prakAra kA hotA hai-1. zruta se 2. pravrajyA se /

Page #121 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The second objective, 301, states that a monk who has received teachings from a
single guru, or whose knowledge of scriptures and their meaning is similar to
that of the Acharya and other teachers, without any difference, is called
**ekapakshika** from the perspective of **shruta** (scriptural knowledge). A
monk who has been ordained in a single **kula** (lineage), **gana** (group), and
**sangha** (community) and has remained stable, or who has resided and studied
with a single **gachcha** (lineage) of monks, is called **ekapakshika** from the
perspective of **pravrajya** (ordination).  The commentator has explained these
two terms by dividing them into four categories:  1. **Ekapakshika** from both
**pravrajya** and **shruta**. 2. **Ekapakshika** from **pravrajya** but not from
**shruta**. 3. **Ekapakshika** from **shruta** but not from **pravrajya**. 4.
Not **ekapakshika** from either **pravrajya** or **shruta**.  Only a monk
belonging to the first category should be appointed to a position. The other
categories are not fully **ekapakshika**. The last sentence of the sutra also
mentions an exception, stating that if there is no fully **ekapakshika** and
eligible monk in a particular situation, the **gana-pramukhas** (leaders of the
group) can decide what is appropriate for the **gana**.  The commentator
clarifies that even in exceptional circumstances, a monk belonging to the third
category, who is fully **ekapakshika** from **shruta**, should be appointed to a
position. However, appointing a monk belonging to the second or fourth category
would result in the Acharya incurring the **guru-chaumasi** (a type of penance)
and facing the consequences of **prajna-bhang** (loss of wisdom) and other
faults. Therefore, a monk who is not **alpasruta** (having limited knowledge)
but **bahushruta** (having extensive knowledge) and **ekapakshika** from
**shruta** can be appointed to a position in such situations.  The commentator
has also stated in **ga. 333** that a monk who is **alpasruta** is not
**ekapakshika** but **anekapakshika** (having multiple perspectives).  The
disadvantages of not being **ekapakshika** from **shruta** are:  1. Due to
different interpretations, the monk cannot satisfy the students on various
topics. 2. Different interpretations can lead to disputes within the
**gachcha**. 3. Different interpretations can lead to conflicts and
fragmentation of the **gachcha**. 4. If the monk has limited knowledge, they
cannot resolve questions and answers, forcing students to seek answers from
other **gachchas**. 5. Monks from other **gachchas** can attract students with
**agit-artha** (meaning not found in the scriptures) or **git-artha** (meaning
found in the scriptures) by using **shruta** as a means, leading to harm,
unrest, and disorder in the **gana**.  The disadvantages of not being
**ekapakshika** from **pravrajya** are:  1. An Acharya who has been ordained in
a different **kula** and **gana** may not consider the monks of the **gana** as
their own.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
dUsarA uddezaka 301 jisane eka guru ke pAsa hI vAcanA grahaNa kI ho athavA
jisakA zrutajJAna evaM arthajJAna prAcAryAdi ke samAna ho, unameM bhinnatA na
ho, vaha zruta se ekapAkSika kahA jAtA hai| jo eka hI kula gaNa evaM saMgha meM
pravajita hokara sthiratA se rahA ho athavA jisane eka gacchavartI sAdhuoM ke
sAtha nivAsa adhyayanAdi kiyA ho vaha pravrajyA se ekapAkSika kahA jAtA hai|
bhASyakAra ne ina do padoM se cAra bhaMga isa prakAra kiye haiM 1. pravrajyA
aura zruta se ekpaakssik| 2. pravrajyA se ekapAkSika, zruta se nhiiN| 3. zruta
se ekapAkSika kintu pravrajyA se nahIM / 4. pravrajyA evaM zruta donoM se
ekapAkSika nhiiN| inameM prathama bhaMga vAle ko hI pada para niyukta karanA
cAhie, anya bhaMga vAlA pUrNa rUpa se ekapAkSika nahIM hotaa| sUtra meM antima
vAkya se prApavAdika vidhAna bhI kiyA hai ki kisI vizeSa paristhiti meM pUrNa
ekapAkSika evaM padayogya bhikSu na ho to jaisA gaNa-pramukhoM ko gaNa ke lie
ucita lage vaisA kara sakate haiN| bhASyakAra ne yahAM yaha spaSTa kiyA hai ki
ApavAdika sthiti meM bhI tRtIya bhaMgavartI ko arthAt jo zruta se sarvathA
ekapAkSika ho to use pada para niyukta karanA caahie| kintu dUsare aura cauthe
bhaMgavartI ko pada paraniyukta karane se AcArya ko gurucaumAsI prAyazcitta pAtA
hai tathA vaha prAjJA-bhaMga Adi doSoM ko prApta karatA hai| ataH jo alpazruta
na ho kintu bahuzruta ho evaM zruta se ekapAkSika ho, use paristhitivaza pada
para niyukta kiyA jA sakatA hai / bhASyakAra ne gA. 333 meM alpazruta ko bhI
ekapAkSika na kaha kara anekapAkSika kahA hai| zruta se ekapAkSika na hone ke
doSa 1. bhinna vAcanA hone se aneka viSayoM meM ziSyoM ko saMtuSTa nahIM kara
sakatA hai| 2. bhinna prakAra se prarUpaNA karane para gaccha meM vivAda utpanna
hotA hai| 3. bhinna-bhinna prarUpaNAoM ke prAgraha se kalaha utpanna hokara
gaccha chinna-bhinna ho jAtA hai| 4. alpazruta ho to prazna-pratipraznoM kA
samAdhAna nahIM kara sakatA, jisase ziSyoM ko anya gaccha meM jAkara pUchanA
par3atA hai / 5. anya gaccha vAle agItArtha yA gItArtha ziSyoM ko zruta ke
nimitta se prAkRSTa kara apanI nizrA meM kara sakate haiM, jisase gaNa meM
kSati, azAnti evaM avyavasthA utpanna ho jAtI hai| pravajyA se ekapAkSika na
hone ke doSa 1. anya kula gaNa kI pravrajyA vAlA AcArya bana jAne para bhI gaNa
ke sAdhuoM ko apanA nahIM mAnatA hai|

Page #122 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Translation:  **302]** [Vyavahar Sutra 2. Many sadhus in a gana do not accept
an acharya who is not their own. 3. Due to the lack of complete intimacy between
them, there is no increase in love or discipline, but rather neglect and
indiscipline. 4. Due to the lack of mutual intimacy, selfishness and greed for
disciples lead to conflicts, which harm the Jain religion. 5. The commentator
has also stated that even after a long time, the feeling of estrangement does
not disappear, which leads to divisions in the gachchha. Therefore, the first
bhangavarti, a one-sided bhik·π£u, should be established in the position of
acharya etc. for a short period or for life.   While explaining the exceptional
provisions in the sutra, the commentator has first stated that the third bhang,
i.e., the one-sided bhik·π£u from the Shruta, should be appointed to the position.
In the absence of a qualified sadhu of the first or third bhang, if it becomes
necessary to give someone the position of acharya etc., then the second or
fourth bhang can be given the position in order. Because in a gana where there
is a community of many sadhus and sadhvis, and where there are newly ordained,
young, or child-like sadhus and sadhvis, it is completely forbidden for them to
be without an acharya, upadhyaya, or pravarti. There it is also stated that
Shraman Nirgranth remain under the supervision of two degree holders, and
Shramani Nirgranthis remain under the leadership of three degree holders. If,
due to circumstances, a multi-sided bhik·π£u of any bhang is given the position of
acharya etc., then he should possess these qualities: 1. He should be naturally
gentle. 2. All the sadhus and sadhvis of the gachchha should agree to him being
their acharya. 3. He should be virtuous and well-versed in the Vinaya. ... 4.
The acharya sadhu etc. should be related to his family from his householder
life, or many sadhus and sadhvis should be related to his householder life. 5.
He should have established intimacy in the gana through his conduct.   If he
possesses many such qualities, then that multi-sided bhik·π£u can also be
appointed to the position of acharya etc. In a gana where there are many
geetarth bhik·π£us who are accomplished in discipleship etc., one should be
appointed as the main acharya and another with similar qualities should be
appointed as the upadhyaya. After that, the one who is full of disciples and
possesses the qualities of an acharya should also be appointed to the positions
of acharya or upadhyaya etc., and if he does not possess those qualities, he
should be adorned with the position of sthavir etc. But those who do not have
many disciples should remain under the discipline of one main acharya.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
302] [vyavahArasUtra 2. gaNa ke kaI sAdhu AcArya ko apanA nahIM mAnate haiN| 3.
donoM ke hRdaya meM pUrNa AtmIyatA na hone se prema yA anuzAsana meM vRddhi
nahIM hotI hai, kintu upekSAbhAva evaM anuzAsanahInatA kI vRddhi hotI hai / 4.
paraspara prAtmIyabhAva na hone se svArthavRtti evaM ziSyalobha se kalaha Adi
utpanna hote haiM, jisase jinazAsana kI hIlanA hotI hai| 5. bhASyakAra ne yaha
bhI batAyA hai adhika lambA samaya bIta jAne para bhI donoM meM parAyepana kA
bhAva naSTa nahIM hotA hai, jisase gaccha meM bheda utpanna ho jAte haiN| isalie
prathama bhaMgavartI ekapAkSika bhikSu ko hI AcAryAdi pada para alpakAla ke liye
yA jIvanaparyaMta ke lie sthApita karanA cAhie / sUtragata prApavAdika vidhAna
kI vyAkhyA karate hue bhASyakAra ne sarvaprathama tIsare bhaMga vAle arthAt
zruta se ekapAkSika bhikSu ko hI pada para niyukta karane ko kahA hai| prathama
evaM tRtIya bhaMga vAle yogya sAdhu ke abhAva meM jaba kisI ko prAcArya Adi pada
denA Avazyaka ho jAya taba krama se dUsare yA cauthe bhaMga vAle ko bhI pada
diyA jA sakatA hai| kyoMki jisa gaNa meM aneka sAdhu-sAdhviyoM kA samudAya ho
aura jisameM navadIkSita, taruNa yA bAlavaya vAle sAdhusAdhvI hoM, unheM
prAcArya upAdhyAya yA pravartinI ke binA rahane kA vyava. u. 3 sU. 11-12 meM
sarvathA niSedha kiyA hai| vahAM yaha bhI batAyA hai ki zramaNa nirgrantha do
padavIdharoM ke adhInastha hI rahate haiM aura zramaNI nirgranthiyAM tIna
padavIdharoM ke netRtva meM rahatI haiN| yadi paristhitivaza kisI bhI bhaMga
vAle anekapAkSika bhikSu ko AcArya Adi pada diyA jAya to vaha ina guNoM se yukta
honA cAhie 1. prakRti se komala svabhAva vAlA ho| 2. gaccha ke samasta sAdhu-
sAdhviyAM usake prAcArya hone meM sammata hoN| 3. vaha vinayaguNa-saMpanna ho|
.. ... 4. prAcArya sAdhu Adi ke gRhasthajIvana kA svajana saMbaMdhI ho athavA
aneka sAdhu-sAdhviyAM usake gRhasthajIvana ke saMbaMdhI hoN| 5. jisane gaNa meM
apane vyavahAra se prAtmIyatA sthApita kara lI ho| ityAdi aneka guNoM se
saMpanna ho to usa anekapAkSika bhikSu ko bhI prAcArya prAdi pada para niyukta
kiyA jA sakatA hai| jisa gaNa meM aneka gItArtha bhikSu ziSyAdi kI Rddhi se
saMpanna hoM to eka ko mUla prAcArya evaM usake sadRza guNasaMpanna eka ko
upAdhyAya pada para niyukta karanA caahie| usake bAda jo ziSyasaMpadA se
paripUrNa ho evaM prAcArya ke lakSaNoM se yukta ho use bhI prAcArya yA upAdhyAya
Adi padoM para niyukta karanA cAhie aura vaise lakSaNa yukta na ho to sthavira
Adi pada se vibhUSita karanA caahie| kiMtu jinake prabhUta ziSya na hoM, unako
eka mukhya prAcArya ke anuzAsana meM hI rahanA caahie|

Page #123 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Second Objective] [303 Main Preceptors who are higher in the *Deeksha
Paryaya* and also possess *Shruta Sampada*, but are not eligible for the
position of *Acharya* or *Upadhyaya*, should be honored with the position of
*Sthavir* etc. If there are no other monks who are higher in the *Deeksha
Paryaya* than the Preceptor or who do not possess *Shruta Sampada*, then all the
monks should remain under the discipline of the same *Acharya* and *Upadhyaya*.
/  Behavior regarding food between *Pariharika* and *Apariharika*  _ 26. If many
*Pariharika* and many *Apariharika* wish to eat together for one month, two
months, three months, four months, five months, or six months, then they should
eat together, they should not eat together for a month, then after that, all of
them should eat together. 27. A *Pariharika* monk should not accept food, drink,
or anything else from an *Apariharika*. If the *Thera* says to him, "Come on,
*Prajjo*, you should take this from him or accept it from him," then he should
accept food or anything else from him. If he accepts it, he should ask
permission, "May I accept it, *Bhanta*?" and then he should accept it and eat
it.  /  28. A *Pariharika* monk should go to the *Thera*‚Äôs place for food, and
the *Thera* should say to him, "Come on, *Prajjo*, I will eat or drink with
you." Then he should accept it. In this case, he should not accept food, drink,
or anything else from an *Apariharika* monk. He should accept it himself, or he
should accept it from his own *Paddagha*, or he should accept it from his own
*Palasa*, or he should accept it from his own *Kamandalu*, or he should accept
it from his own *Khubbagha*, or he should accept it from his own *Panisi*, and
he should eat or drink it himself. This is the rule for an *Apariharika* monk.
29. A *Pariharika* monk should go to the *Thera*‚Äôs place for food, and the
*Thera* should say to him, "Come on, *Ajjo*, you will eat or drink with us
later." Then he should accept it. In this case, he should not accept food,
drink, or anything else from an *Apariharika* monk.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
dUsarA uddezaka] [303 mukhya prAcArya se jo dIkSA paryAya meM adhika hoM evaM
zrutasaMpadA se saMpanna bhI hoM, kiMtu AcArya upAdhyAya pada ke yogya na hoM to
unheM sthavira Adi pada se sammAnita karanA caahie| yadi anya bhikSu prAcArya se
adhika dIkSA paryAya vAle na hoM yA zrutasampadA vAle na hoM to sabhI sAdhuoM ko
eka hI prAcArya upAdhyAya ke anuzAsana meM rahanA cAhie / pArihArika aura
apArihArikoM ke paraspara AhAra-sambandhI vyavahAra _ 26. bahave pArihAriyA
bahave apArihAriyA icchejjA egayao egamAsaM vA, dumAsaM thA, timAsaM vA,
cAumAsaM vA, paMcamAsaM vA, chammAsaMvA vathae, te annamannaM saMbha jaMti,
annamannaM no saMbhujaMti, mAsaM te, tao pacchA savve vi egayao sNbhujNti| 27.
parihArakappaTThiyassa bhikkhussa no kappai asaNaM vA jAva sAimaM vA dAuM vA
aNuppadAuM vaa| therA ya NaM vaejjA-'imaM tA prajjo ! tuma eesi dehi vA
aNuppadehi vA / ' evaM se kappai dAuM vA, aNuppadAuM vaa| kappai se levaM
aNujANAvettae, 'aNujANaha bhaMte ! levAe' evaM se kappaDa levaM samAsevittae /
28. parihArakappar3hie bhikkhU saeNaM paDiggaheNaM bahiyA appaNo veyAvaDiyAe
gacchejjA, therA yaNaM vaejjA 'paDiggAhehi prajjo! - ahaM pi bhokkhAmi vA pAhAmi
vA', evaM se kappai pddiggaahette| tattha se no kappai aparihArieNaM
parihAriyassa paDiggahaMsi asaNaM vA jAba sAimaM vA bhottae vA pAyae vaa| kappai
se sayaMsi vA paDiggahaMsi, sayaMsi vA palAsagaMsi, sayaMsi vA kamaNDalaMsi,
sayaMsi yA khubbhagaMsi, sayaMsi vA pANisi uddhaTu-uddhaTu bhottae vA pAyae vaa|
esa kappo aparihAriyassa prihaariyaano| 29. parihArakampaTThie bhikkhU therANaM
paDiggaheNaM bahiyA therANaM veyAvaDiyAe gacchejjA, therA yaNaM
vaejjA'paDiggAhehi ajjo ! tumaMpi pacchA bhokkhasi vA pAhisi vA', evaM se kappai
pddiggaahette| tattha se no kappai parihArieNaM aparihAriyassa paDiggahaMsi
asaNaM vA jAva sAimaM vA bhottae vA pAyae vaa|

Page #124 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[304] If a monk is in the Parihara Kalpa, he should not accept food or drink
from anyone, whether it is offered directly or indirectly, through a bowl, a
vessel, a pitcher, a hand, or any other means. This rule is considered to be
non-negotiable. 26. If many monks, both Pariharika and Apariharika, wish to stay
together for one, two, three, four, five, or six months, then the Pariharika
monks can eat together with other Pariharika monks, and the Apariharika monks
can eat together with other Apariharika monks. However, Pariharika monks cannot
eat with Apariharika monks. All monks (Pariharika and Apariharika) can eat
together after six months of Tapas and one month of Parana. 27. It is not
permissible for an Apariharika monk to offer food or drink to a Pariharika monk,
even if it is delicious or offered with an invitation. However, if a Sthavira
(senior monk) says, "O Arya! You should offer this food to these Pariharika
monks, or invite them to eat," then it is permissible to offer food or invite
them to eat. If a monk in the Parihara Kalpa wishes to consume ghee or other
similar substances, he should seek permission from the Sthavira. He should say,
"O Bhagavan! Please grant me permission to consume ghee or other similar
substances." After receiving permission from the Sthavira, he can consume ghee
or other similar substances. 28. A monk in the Parihara Kalpa should take his
own bowl and go to collect food for himself. If, upon seeing him, the Sthavira
says, "O Arya! Please bring me some food and water as well, I will also eat and
drink," then it is permissible for him to bring food for the Sthavira. However,
it is not permissible for an Apariharika Sthavira to eat or drink from the bowl
of a Pariharika monk. He can eat or drink from his own bowl, a Palasaka
(measuring vessel), a water vessel, or by holding the food or drink in both
hands or one hand. This is considered to be the proper conduct for an
Apariharika monk in relation to a Pariharika monk. 29. If a monk in the Parihara
Kalpa takes the bowls of the Sthavira and goes to collect food and water for
them, and the Sthavira says, "O Arya! Please bring some for yourself as well,
and eat and drink later," then it is permissible for him to bring food and water
for himself in the bowls of the Sthavira.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
304] [vyavahArasUtra kappaha se sayaMsi vA paDiggahaMsi, sayaMsi vA palAsagaMsi,
sayaMsi vA kamaNDalaMsi, sayaMsi vA khumbhagaMsi, sayaMsi vA pANisi udghaTu-
uddhaTTa bhottae bA pAyae baa| esa kappo parihAriyassa aprihaariyaao| 26. aneka
pArihArika aura aneka apArihArika bhikSu yadi eka, do, tIna, cAra, pAMca, chaha
mAsa paryanta eka sAtha rahanA cAheM to pArihArika bhikSu pArihArika bhikSu ke
sAtha aura apArihArika bhikSu apArihArika bhikSu ke sAtha baiThakara AhAra kara
sakate haiM, kintu pArihArika bhikSu apArihArika bhikSu ke sAtha baiThakara
nahIM kara sakate / ve sabhI (pArihArika aura apArihArika) bhikSu chaha mAsa
tapa ke aura eka mAsa pAraNe kA bItane para eka sAtha baiThakara AhAra kara
sakate haiN| 27. apArihArika bhikSu ko pArihArika bhikSu ke lie azana yAvat
svAdima AhAra denA yA nimantraNa karake denA nahIM kalpatA hai| yadi sthavira
kahe ki- "he Arya ! tuma ina pArihArika bhikSuoM ko yaha AhAra do yA nimantraNa
karake do|" aisA kahane para use AhAra denA yA nimantraNa karake denA kalpatA
hai| parihArakalpasthita bhikSu yadi lepa (ghRtAdi vikRti) lenA cAhe to sthavira
kI prAjJA se use lenA kalpatA hai| "he bhagavan ! mujhe ghRtAdi vikRti lene kI
AjJA pradAna kreN|" isa prakAra sthavira se prAjJA lene ke bAda use ghRtAdi
vikRti kA sevana karanA kalpatA hai| 28. parihArakalpa meM sthita bhikSu apane
pAtroM ko grahaNa kara apane lie AhAra lene jAve aura use jAte hue dekhakara
yadi sthavira kahe ki "he prArya ! mere yogya AhAra-pAnI bhI lete AnA, maiM bhI
khaauuNgaa-piiuuNgaa|" aisA kahane para use sthavira ke lie pAhAra lAnA kalpatA
hai| vahAM apArihArika-sthavira ko pArihArika bhikSu ke pAtra meM prazana yAvat
svAdya khAnA-pInA nahIM kalpatA hai| kintu use apane hI pAtra meM, palAsaka
(mAtraka) meM, jalapAtra meM, donoM hAtha meM yA eka hAtha meM le-le kara khAnA-
pInA kalpatA hai / yaha apArihArika bhikSu kA pArihArika bhikSu kI apekSA se
prAcAra kahA gayA hai| 29. parihArakalpa meM sthita bhikSu sthavira ke pAtroM ko
lekara unake lie AhAra-pAnI lAne ko jAve, taba sthavira use kahe "he prArya !
tuma apane liye bhI sAtha meM le AnA aura bAda meM khA lenA, pI lenaa|" aisA
kahane para use sthavira ke pAtroM meM apane lie bhI AhAra-pAnI lAnA kalpatA hai
/

Page #125 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Second Objective [305]  A Pariharic Bhikshu is not allowed to eat or drink
from the bowl of an Apariharic Sthavir. However, he is allowed to eat or drink
from his own bowl, from a Palasak, from a Kamandalu, or by holding the food in
both hands or in one hand. This is called the "Prachar" of a Pariharic Bhikshu
in comparison to an Apariharic Bhikshu.  **Discussion:**  When Apariharic
Bhikshus live with Bhikshus who are performing Pariharatapas, some of them eat
separately and some eat together. A Bhikshu who performs a one-month
Pariharatapas eats separately until the completion of the one-month tapas and
for five days after the Parana. After that, he eats a Mandalik Aahar. Similarly,
a Bhikshu who performs a two-month Pariharatapas eats separately for two months
and ten days, a three-month tapas Bhikshu for three months and fifteen days, a
four-month tapas Bhikshu for four months and twenty days, a five-month tapas
Bhikshu for five months and twenty-five days, and a six-month tapas Bhikshu for
six months and thirty days (one month). In this way, after one month from the
completion of the Pariharatapas, all Pariharic and Apariharic Bhikshus eat
together.  A Bhikshu performing Pariharatapas brings his own food and is not
allowed to take food from anyone. This is the general rule. If he becomes weak
while performing tapas, the Sthavir should tell the other Bhikshus, "O Aryas!
You should give food to this Parihari Bhikshu or invite him." Upon being told
this, he can be given food. If he needs ghee or other Vigaya, he can consume it
after receiving permission again. However, he cannot consume Vigaya just by
being given permission to eat food.  **General Rule:**  A Pariharic Bhikshu who
lives in a Vyayavritta with an Apariharic Sthavir goes separately to get food
for himself and for the Sthavir. This is the general rule. However, if the
Sthavir gives permission for any reason, he can bring food for the Sthavir along
with his own food in their respective bowls. He can also bring his own food in
the Sthavir's bowl along with the Sthavir's food. If any Vigaya gets mixed with
his rough food while doing so, he can eat it with the Sthavir's permission.
**Sutras:**  The Sutras state that these Bhikshus should not eat from each
other's bowls. They should eat from their own bowls or by holding the food in
their hands. This rule implies that they should keep their bowls separate and
cannot eat the food brought together collectively. The reason for this is
that...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
dUsarA uddezaka] [305 vahAM apArihArika sthavira ke pAtra meM pArihArika bhikSu
ko prazana yAvat svAdya khAnA-pInA nahIM kalpatA hai| kintu use apane hI pAtra
meM, palAsaka meM, kamaNDalu meM, donoM hAtha meM yA eka hAtha meM le-lekara
khAnA-pInA kalpatA hai| yaha pArihArika bhikSu kA apArihArika bhikSu kI apekSA
se prAcAra kahA gayA hai / vivecana-parihAratapa karane vAle bhikSutroM ke sAtha
apArihArika bhikSu rahe to unameM se kaI to alaga-alaga AhAra karate haiM aura
kaI sammilita AhAra karate haiN| eka mAsa parihAratapa vAlA bhikSa eka mAsa tapa
pUrNa hone taka alaga aAhAra karatA hai aura 5 dina pAraNe kI apekSA alaga AhAra
karatA hai, usake bAda vaha eka mAMDalika AhAra kara vaha eka mAMDalika AhAra
karatA hai| isI prakAra do mAsa parihAratapa vAlA bhikSu do mAsa aura dasa dina
taka alaga AhAra karatA hai, tIna mAsa tapa vAlA bhikSu tIna mAsa aura pandraha
dina, cAra mAsa tapa vAlA bhikSu cAra mAsa aura bIsa dina, pAMca mAsa tapa vAlA
bhikSu pAMca mAsa aura paccIsa dina, chaha mAsa tapa vAlA bhikSu chaha mAsa aura
tIsa dina (eka mAsa) taka alaga AhAra karatA hai| isa prakAra parihAratapa kI
samApti ke eka mAsa bAda pArihArika-apArihArika sabhI eka sAtha AhAra karate
haiN| parihAratapa karane vAlA bhikSu apanA AhAra svayaM lAtA hai, use kisI se
AhArAdi lenA nahIM kalpatA hai, yaha sAmAnya vidhAna hai| yadi vaha tapa karatA
huA azakta ho jAya to sthavira anya bhikSuoM ko kahe ki "he Aryo ! tuma isa
parihArI bhikSu ko AhAra do yA nimantraNa karo, aisA kahane para use pAhAra diyA
jA sakatA hai| yadi use ghRtAdi vigaya kI AvazyakatA ho to vaha punaH AjJA
milane para vigaya sevana kara sakatA hai, kintu kevala AhAra dene kI AjJA se
vigaya sevana nahIM kara sktaa| _ kisI apArihArika sthavira ko vaiyAvRtya meM
rahane vAlA pArihArika bhikSu sthavira ke lie aura apane lie AhAra lene alaga-
alaga jAtA hai, yaha sAmAnya vidhAna hai| kintu kabhI kisI kAraNa se sthavira
prAjJA de to apane pAtroM meM apane AhAra ke sAtha unake lie bhI AhArAdi lA
sakatA hai aura unake pAtroM meM unake AhAra ke sAtha apanA AhAra bhI lA sakatA
hai| aisA karane meM usake rUkSa AhAra ke koI vigaya kA lepa laga jAya to vaha
sthavira kI AjJA se khA sakatA hai| sUtra meM una bhikSuoM ke AhAra karane kI
yaha maryAdA kahI gaI hai ki ve paraspara kisI ke pAtra meM AhAra na kareM,
kintu apane pAtra meM yA hAtha meM lekara phira khaaveN| isa vidhAna se yaha
phalita hotA hai ki unheM apane-apane pAtra alaga-alaga rakhane hote haiM evaM
zAmila lAye gaye pAhAra ko sammilita hokara nahIM khA sakate haiN| isakA kAraNa
yaha hai ki vaha alaga

Page #126 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The *Vyavaharsutra* states that a *Pariharic* monk is one who adheres to the
rules of conduct. Bringing food along due to circumstances or by order is an
exception, but it is necessary to follow the general rule of not having any
obstacle in taking the bowl and eating together. The monk's body is an aid to
restraint and austerity, therefore, it is necessary to provide him with food,
etc. Even an act done for one's own body without attachment is a cause of
*nirjara*, therefore, the *sutra* uses the word "Appano Veyavadaiae", meaning
"for one's own *veyavrutya*". The *sutra* uses these words for the means of
eating food: 1. In one's own (food-taking) bowl. 2. In one's own "palasak"
(measure). 3. In one's own *kamandalaka* (water-taking vessel). 4. In one's own
*khobe*, meaning in the cupped hands. 5. In one's own hand, meaning in the palm
of one hand. Here, the commentator has interpreted "one's own *palasak*" as "a
dona made of *dhaka* leaves". The word "sayansi" is used with each word in the
*sutra*. The monk's own bowl is the one that is always with him and which is
*pragamoct*. It is forbidden in the *agama* to keep a dona made of *palasa*
leaves, and it is not suitable for long-term use. Therefore, it is appropriate
to understand "one's own *palasak*" as "measure", and keeping a measure is also
*agamasammat*. - *Dasha. Da. 8 Sutra* reveals that if the monks are *unodari* of
the bowl, they can eat by taking it in their own measure, hand, or *khobe*
(cupped hands). In this *Vyavaharsutra* composed by Shri Bhadrabahu Swami of the
*Chaudaspurva*, three names have been mentioned from the perspective of the
bowl. This implies that a monk can generally keep many bowls, therefore, the
historical statement of keeping only one bowl cannot be considered
*agamasammat*. Considering the abundance of statements regarding *parihara*
austerity and *pariharik* monks in the *Chhedasutras*, it does not seem
appropriate to consider this method as discontinued. The main *agamasammat*
rules of this method are: "To live with the *acharya* etc. in silence with
*ayambil*, fasting, and solitude, to renounce assistance and sexual pleasure,
etc.", which are possible to follow in the present time. The interpretations
have considered it discontinued and have also stated it as forbidden for nuns,
but there is no mention of this in the *agamas* nor is it proven by any *agama*
rule.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
[vyavahArasUtra vyavahAra rakhane vAlA pArihArika bhikSu hai| kAraNa se evaM
AjJA se AhAra sAtha lAnA paristhitijanya apavAda hai, kintu pAtra lene evaM
sAtha meM AhAra khAne ke alagAva meM koI bAdhA na hone se usake sAmAnya vidhAna
kA hI pAlana karanA Avazyaka hotA hai| bhikSa kA zarIra saMyama aura tapa meM
sahAyaka hotA hai, ata: ise AhAra denA Adi pravRtti karanA Avazyaka hai|
anAsakta bhAva se sva-zarIra hetu kI gaI pravRtti bhI nirjarA kA hetu hai, ataH
sUtra meM "appaNo veyAvaDiyAe" arthAt apanI vaiyAvRtya ke lie" aise zabda kA
prayoga kiyA gayA hai| sUtra meM AhAra karane ke sAdhanarUpa meM pAtroM ke lie
ina zabdoM kA prayoga kiyA gayA hai1. svayaM ke (AhAra lene ke) pAtra meN| 2.
svayaM ke "palAsaka" (mAtraka) meN|| 3. svayaM ke kamaNDalaka (pAnI lene ke
pAtra) meM / 4. svayaM ke khobe meM arthAt donoM hAthoM se banI aMjali meM / 5.
svayaM ke hAtha meM arthAt eka hAtha kI pasalI meM / yahAM svayaM ke palAsaka kA
artha TIkAkAra ne "DhAka ke pattoM se banA donA" aisA kiyA hai| sUtra meM
"sayaMsi" pada pratyeka zabda ke sAtha hai| sAdhu ke svayaM kA pAtra vahI hotA
hai jo sadA usake pAsa rahatA hai evaM jo prAgamokta ho|| palAsa ke pattoM kA
donA rakhanA Agama meM niSiddha hai aura vaha adhika samaya dhAraNa karane yogya
bhI nahIM hotA hai / ataH "svayaM kA palAsaka" yaha kathana "mAtraka" ke lie hI
samajhanA upayukta hai evaM mAtraka rakhanA Agamasammata bhI hai| -dazA. da. 8
sUtra ke vidhAna se hI aisA jJAta hotA hai ki ve bhikSu yadi pAtra kI UnodarI
karane vAle hoM to svayaM ke mAtraka meM, hAtha meM yA khobe (aMjalI) meM le-
lekara bhI khA sakate haiN| caudahapUrvI zrIbhadrabAhu svAmI dvArA racita isa
vyavahArasUtra meM pAtra kI dRSTi se tIna nAma kahe gaye haiM / isase yaha
phalita hotA hai ki bhikSu sAmAnyatayA bhI aneka pAtra rakha sakatA hai, ataH
eka pAtra hI rakhane kI paramparA kA aitihAsika kathana Agamasammata nahIM kahA
jA sakatA / / chedasUtroM meM parihAra tapa evaM pArihArika bhikSu sambandhI
nirdezoM ke kathana kI bahulatA ko dekhate hue isa vidhi kA viccheda mAnanA bhI
ucita pratIta nahIM hotA hai / isa vidhi ke mukhya Agamasammata niyama ye
haiM-"AyaMbila, upavAsa evaM ekAMtavAsa se maunapUrvaka AcArya Adi ke sAtha
sAtha rahanA, sahAya-pratyAkhyAna evaM sambhoga-pratyAkhyAna karanA, ityAdi
haiM, jinakA ki vartamAna meM pAlana karanA sambhava hai / vyAkhyAoM meM isakA
viccheda mAnA hai evaM sAdhvI ke lie bhI niSiddha kahA hai, kintu aisA ullekha
aAgamoM meM nahIM hai aura na hI kisI AgamavidhAna se aisA siddha hotA hai|

Page #127 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Second Uddeshak (Objective)  **Summary:** The carrying of Pariharatapas
(penance) by two or more wandering monks can be done. Sick monks should not be
neglected or expelled from the Gachchha (community), but should be properly
served. A monk who has received the ninth or tenth Prayaschitta (atonement)
should be given Upasthapana (ordination) only after wearing the Grihastha-linga
(householder's mark). However, it may be possible to give Diksha (initiation)
without the Grihastha-linga, depending on the decision of the Gachchha-pramukh
(head of the community). In cases of accusation and dispute, Prayaschitta should
be given only after clear proof. If there is no proof, Prayaschitta should be
given only after accepting one's own fault. A monk whose Shruta (scriptural
knowledge) and Diksha (initiation) are one-sided should be given the position of
Acharya (teacher). Even after the completion of Pariharatapas, the food should
be taken separately for some days. For a period of up to one month, the food
should be taken separately so that he can consume food without Samvibhaga (equal
distribution). Pariharatapas can be given only with the knowledge of the Sthavir
(elder monk), and he can consume Vigaya (special food) only after obtaining
special permission. A Pariharic (penitent) monk who is serving the Sthavir can
bring both their Gochari (food) together, but should not eat together. He should
eat separately, using his own hand or bowl.  **Conclusion:** This Uddeshak
discusses the rules regarding the carrying of Pariharatapas, serving sick monks
without neglecting them, the Upasthapana of those who have received the ninth or
tenth Prayaschitta, the decision-making process in case of disputes, the
appointment of a one-sided Acharya, and other related topics.  **End of the
Second Uddeshak**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
dUsarA uddezaka [307 6-17 18-22 23-24 dUsare uddezaka kA sArAMza vicaraNa karane
vAle do yA do se adhika bhikSuoM dvArA parihAratapa vahana kiyA jA sakatA hai|
rugNa bhikSuoM kI upekSA nahIM karanA cAhie yA unheM gaccha se nahIM nikAlanA
cAhie, kintu unako yathocita sevA karanI-karavAnI caahie| navame-dasaveM
prAyazcitta prApta bhikSu ko gRhastha-liMga dhAraNa karavAkara hI upasthApanA
karanI cAhie / kadAcit binA gahastha-liMga ke bhI dIkSA denA gaccha-pramukha ke
nirNaya para nirbhara rahatA hai| AkSepa evaM vivAda pUrNa sthiti meM spaSTa
pramANita hone para hI prAyazcita denA evaM pramANita na hone para svayaM ke
doSa svIkAra karane para hI prAyazcitta denA / jisakI zruta evaM dIkSA paryAya
ekapAkSika ho aise bhikSu ko pada denaa| parihAratapa pUrNa hone ke bAda bhI
kucha dina AhAra alaga rahatA hai, utkRSTa eka mAsa taka bhI pAhAra alaga rakhA
jAtA hai, jisase binA samavibhAga ke vaha vikRti kA sevana kara ske|
parihAratapa vAle ko sthavira kI prAjJA hone para hI pAhAra diyA jA sakatA hai
evaM vizeSa prAjJA lekara hI vaha kabhI vigaya kA sevana kara sakatA hai|
sthavira kI sevA meM rahA huaA pArihArika bhikSu kabhI AjJA hone para donoM kI
gocarI sAtha meM lA sakatA hai, kintu use sAtha meM nahIM khAnA cAhie / alaga
apane hAtha yA pAtra meM lekara hI khAnA caahie| 28-29 upasaMhAra isa uddezaka
meM - sUtra 1-5, 26-29 18:22 23-24 25 parihAratapa vahana sambandhI vidhAnoM kA,
rugNa bhikSuoM kI aglAnabhAva se sevA karane kA, navame dasaveM prAyazcitta vAle
kI upasthApanA kA, vivAda kI sthiti meM nirNaya karane kA, ekapAkSika ko hI
prAcArya pada dene kA, ityAdi viSayoM kA varNana kiyA gayA hai| // dUsarA
uddezaka samApta //

Page #128 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Third Uddeshak  1. If a Bhikkhu desires to hold a Gan (group) i.e. to be a
leader, and he is devoid of Sutra-knowledge and other qualifications, then it is
not permissible for him to hold a Gan. If the Bhikkhu is endowed with Sutra-
knowledge and other qualifications, then it is permissible for him to hold a
Gan.  2. If a qualified Bhikkhu desires to hold a Gan, then it is not
permissible for him to hold a Gan without seeking permission from the Theras
(elders). If the Theras grant permission, then it is permissible to hold a Gan.
If the Theras do not grant permission, then it is not permissible to hold a Gan.
If someone holds a Gan without seeking permission from the Theras, then due to
this violation of the code of conduct, he becomes liable for Diksha-Chhed
(excommunication) or Tap-Prayaschitt (penance). However, those Sarmic Sadhus
(devout monks) who live under his leadership are not liable for Diksha-Chhed or
Tap-Prayaschitt.  **Explanation:**  Holding a Gan happens in two ways:  1.
Leading a group of Sadhus or observing Chaturmas (four-month rainy season
retreat) with them. This is the first type of holding a Gan. Such a Bhikkhu is
called a Gan-dhar, Gan-pramukh, Sanghatak-pramukh, Mukhiya, or leader. In the
commentary, he is also called "Spardhak-pati".  2. Being the head of a group of
Sadhus, i.e., holding the position of Acharya (teacher) etc. This is called
Acharya, Upadhyaya, Gan-dhar, Gachch-adhipati, Gani, etc.  The meaning is that
those who hold a position and those who lead are called "Gan-dhar". The two
Sutras presented here refer to the first type of Gan-dhar, because they mention
seeking permission from the Theras to hold a Gan and the liability for penance
for holding a Gan without permission. This rule is not applicable to those who
hold the position of Acharya. The position of Acharya is given by the Theras of
the Gan or by the permission of the current Acharya, or by the Sadhus, Sadhvis,
and the four-fold Sangha of the Gachch. However, no one can take the position on
their own.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
tIsarA uddezaka 1. bhikkhU ya icchejjA gaNaM dhArettae, bhagavaM ca se
apalicchanne evaM se no kappA gaNaM dhArittae, bhagavaM ca se palicchanne, evaM
se kappai gaNaM dhArettae / 2. bhikkhu ya icchejjA gaNaM dhAresae, no se kappai
there praNApucchittA gaNaM dhArettae / kappai se there ApucchittA gaNaM
dhArettae, therA ya se viyarejjA evaM se kappA gaNaM dhArettae, therA ya se no
kappA gaNaM dhaarette| jaM NaM therehi aviiNNaM gaNaM dhArei se santarA chae vA
parihAre vA, je sAhammiyA uTThAe viharaMti, nasthi NaM tesi kei chae vA parihAre
vaa| 1. yadi koI bhikSa gaNa ko dhAraNa karanA arthAt agraNI honA cAhe aura vaha
sUtrajJAna Adi yogyatA se rahita ho to use gaNa dhAraNa karanA nahIM kalpatA
hai| yadi vaha bhikSu sUtrajJAna Adi yogyatA se yukta ho to use gaNa dhAraNa
karanA kalpatA hai / 2. yadi yogya bhikSa gaNa dhAraNa karanA cAhe to use
sthaviroM se pUche binA gaNa dhAraNa karanA nahIM kalpatA hai| yadi sthavira
anujJA pradAna kareM to gaNa dhAraNa karanA kalpatA hai| yadi sthavira anujJA
pradAna na kareM to gaNa dhAraNa karanA nahIM kalpatA hai| yadi koI sthaviroM kI
anujJA prApta kie binA hI gaNa dhAraNa karatA hai to vaha usa maryAdAullaMghana
ke kAraNa dIkSA-cheda yA tapaprAyazcitta kA pAtra hotA hai, kintu jo sArmika
sAdhu usakI pramukhatA meM vicarate haiM ve dIkSA-cheda yA tapaprAyazcitta ke
pAtra nahIM hote haiN| vivecana-gaNa ko dhAraNa karanA do prakAra se hotA hai-1.
kucha sAdhunoM ke samUha kI pramukhatA karate hue vicaraNa karanA yA cAturmAsa
karanA yaha prathama prakAra kA gaNa dhAraNa hai / aise bhikSu ko gaNa dhAraNa
karane vAlA, gaNadhara, gaNapramukha, saMghATakapramukha, mukhiyA yA agraNI kahA
jAtA hai| bhASya meM ise "spardhakapati" bhI kahA gayA hai / 2. sAdhuoM ke
samUha kA adhipati arthAt prAcAryAdi pada dhAraNa karane vAlA / jise prAcArya,
upAdhyAya, gaNadhara, gacchAdhipati, gaNI Adi kahA jAtA hai / tAtparya yaha hai
ki pada vAloM ko evaM pramukha rUpa meM vicarane vAle ko "gaNadhara" kahA jAtA
hai| prastuta donoM sUtroM meM prathama prakAra ke gaNadhAraka kA kathana hai /
kyoMki yahAM sthaviroM kI prAjJA lekara gaNa dhAraNa karanA aura binA AjJA gaNa
dhAraNa karane para prAyazcitta kA pAtra honA kahA gayA hai / aisA vidhAna
prAcArya pada dhAraNa karane vAle ke lie upayukta nahIM hotA hai| AcArya pada
gaNa ke sthavira dete haiM yA vartamAna AcArya kI AjJA se AcArya pada diyA jAtA
hai athavA gaccha ke sAdhu-sAdhvI yA caturvidha saMgha milakara prAcArya pada
dete haiM, kintu koI svayaM hI pada

Page #129 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[The Third Uddeshak] [309 The idea that someone could take on the role of a
Pracharaya without asking the sthavira or even without asking at all is
completely incongruous. Therefore, the subject of these two sutras is the
conduct of the Sanghataka in the role of a leader. The discussion of the
expectations of the Acharya and other positions is addressed in later sutras. If
a monk wishes to conduct themselves as the head of the monastic community, they
must be palichhanna. This means they must possess both the qualities of a
disciple (shi‡§∑‡•ç‡§Ø‡§∏‡§Æ‡•ç‡§™‡§¶‡§æ) and the knowledge of the scriptures (‡§∂‡•ç‡§∞‡§§‡§∏‡§Æ‡•ç‡§™‡§¶‡§æ). The
commentator has described four categories of these qualities, and according to
the first category, only someone who possesses both qualities should conduct
themselves as a leader. If there is no tradition of having separate disciples,
then a monk who is knowledgeable in the scriptures (‡§ó‡•ç‡§∞‡§æ‡§ó‡§Æ‡§µ‡•á‡§§‡•ç‡§§‡§æ) and wise can
lead a group of monks. A monk who has one or more disciples is considered to
have the quality of a disciple (‡§∂‡§ø‡§∑‡•ç‡§Ø‡§∏‡§Æ‡•ç‡§™‡§¶‡§æ). A monk who has memorized the
essential sutras, the Dashavaikalika Sutra, the Uttaradhyayanasutra, the
Acharangasutra, and the Nishitthasutra, along with their meanings, and has also
memorized the meanings of these sutras from a Pracharaya or Upadhyaya, and who
can still recall these scriptures, is considered to be knowledgeable in the
scriptures (‡§∂‡•ç‡§∞‡•Å‡§§‡§∏‡§Æ‡•ç‡§™‡§®‡•ç‡§®). A monk who has no disciples and has not studied the
aforementioned scriptures is unfit to lead a monastic community. Similarly, a
monk who has disciples but is not wise or knowledgeable in the scriptures, or
has forgotten the scriptures they have memorized, is also unfit to lead a
monastic community. However, if a monk has forgotten the scriptures due to old
age (over 60 years), they are still considered knowledgeable in the scriptures
(‡§∂‡•ç‡§∞‡•Å‡§§‡§∏‡§Æ‡•ç‡§™‡§®‡•ç‡§®) and can lead a monastic community. The phrase "‡§≠‡§ó‡§µ‡§Ç ‡§ö ‡§∏‡•á" is used
in this sutra. The presence of "‡§ö" and "‡§∏‡•á" with the word "‡§≠‡§ó‡§µ‡§Ç" indicates that
this is not a form of address. Therefore, this phrase is used for the Anugara
who desires to lead a monastic community. The words "‡§™‡§≤‡§ø‡§ö‡•ç‡§õ‡§®‡•ç‡§®‡•á" and
"‡§Ö‡§™‡§≤‡§ø‡§ö‡•ç‡§õ‡§®‡•ç‡§®‡•á" are added to this phrase to establish two types of qualifications.
Therefore, the meaning of "‡§≠‡§ó‡§µ‡§Ç ‡§ö ‡§∏‡•á" is "if that monk (Anugara Bhagavant)" and
the meaning of "‡§™‡§≤‡§ø‡§ö‡•ç‡§õ‡§®‡•ç‡§®‡•á" is "possessing the qualities of a disciple and
knowledge of the scriptures." The commentator has referred to someone with the
quality of a disciple as "‡§¶‡•ç‡§∞‡§µ‡•ç‡§Ø‡§™‡§≤‡§ø‡§ö‡•ç‡§õ‡§®‡•ç‡§®" and someone with knowledge of the
scriptures as "‡§≠‡§æ‡§µ‡§™‡§≤‡§ø‡§ö‡•ç‡§õ‡§®‡•ç‡§®." Based on this four-fold analysis, only someone who
is "‡§≠‡§æ‡§µ‡§™‡§≤‡§ø‡§ö‡•ç‡§õ‡§®‡•ç‡§®" is considered fit to lead a monastic community. In essence,
someone who is knowledgeable in the essential scriptures and wise can lead a
monastic community. The commentator has also clarified that: 1. While leading,
they should be capable of purifying their own knowledge, vision, and conduct, as
well as that of other monks. 2. They should be able to bring ordinary people
closer to Dharma through their knowledge, speech, and behavior.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
tIsarA uddezaka] [309 lenA cAhe aura sthavira ko pUche ki 'maiM prAcArya bana ?'
athavA binA pUche hI prAcArya bana jAe, aise artha kI kalpanA sarvathA asaMgata
hai| ataH ina donoM sUtroM kA viSaya haisaMghATaka ke pramukha rUpa meM vicaraNa
karanA / AcAryAdi pada kI apekSA kA kathana to Age ke sUtroM meM kiyA gayA hai /
yadi koI bhikSu gaNapramukha ke rUpa meM vicaranA cAhe to usakA palichanna honA
Avazyaka hai| prarthAta jo ziSyasampadA aura zratasampadA sampanna hai, vahI
pramukha rUpa meM vicaraNa kara sakatA hai| yahAM bhASyakAra ne ziSyasampadA
evaM zratasampadA ke cAra bhAMge kahe haiM, unameM se prathama bhaMga ke anara
donoM prakAra kI sampadA se yukta ho use hI pramukha rUpa meM vicaraNa karanA
caahie| yadi pRthaka-pRthaka ziSya karane kI paramparA na ho to zrutasampanna
(grAgamavettA) evaM buddhimAna bhikSugaNa ke kucha sAdhuoM kI pramukhatA karatA
huA vicaraNa kara sakatA hai / jisa bhikSu ke eka yA aneka ziSya hoM vaha
ziSyasampadA yukta kahA jAtA hai| jo AvazyakasUtra, dazavaikAlikasUtra,
uttarAdhyayanasUtra tathA AcArAMgasUtra aura nizIthasUtroM ke mUla evaM artha ko
dhAraNa karane vAlA ho arthAta jisane itanA mUla zrata upAdhyAya kI nizrA se
kaMThastha dhA evaM prAcArya yA upAdhyAya se ina sUtroM ke artha kI vAcanA
lekara use bhI kaMThastha dhAraNa kiyA ho evaM vartamAna meM vaha zruta use
upasthita ho to vaha zrutasampanna kahA jAtA hai| jisake eka bhI ziSya nahIM hai
evaM uparyukta zruta kA adhyayana bhI jisane nahIM kiyA hai, vaha gaNa dhAraNa
ke ayogya hai / yadi kisI bhikSu ke ziSyasampadA hai, kintu vaha buddhimAn evaM
zrutasampanna nahIM hai athavA dhAraNa kie hue zruta ko bhUla gayA hai, vaha bhI
gaNa dhAraNa ke ayogya hai| kintu yadi kisI ko vRddhAvasthA (60 varSa se adhika)
hone ke kAraNa zruta vismRta ho gayA ho to vaha zrutasampanna hI kahA jAtA hai
evaM gaNa dhAraNa kara sakatA hai| isa sUtra meM "bhagavaM ca se" isa pada kA
prayoga kiyA gayA hai| isameM "bhagavaM" zabda ke sAtha "ca" aura "se" hone se
yaha "sambodhana" rUpa nahIM hai| isalie yaha zabda gaNa dhAraNa karane kI icchA
vAle anagAra ke lie hI prayukta hai tathA isake sAtha "palicchanne aura
apalicchanne" zabdoM ko jor3akara do prakAra kI yogyatA kA vidhAna kiyA gayA
hai| isalie "bhagavaM ca se" isa pada kA artha hai yadi vaha bhikSu (anagAra
bhagavaMta) aura "palicchanne" isa pada kA artha hai-ziSya evaM zrutasampadA-
sampanna / bhASyakAra ne ziSyasampadA vAle ko "dravyapalicchanna" aura zruta
sampanna ko "bhAvapalicchanna" kahA hai / usa caubhaMgI yukta vivecana se
bhAvapalicchanna ko hI gaNa dhAraNa karake vicarane yogya kahA hai| jisakA
sArAMza yaha hai ki jo Avazyaka zruta se sampanna ho evaM buddhisampanna ho,
vaha gaNa dhAraNa karake vicaraNa kara sakatA hai| bhASyakAra ne yaha bhI spaSTa
kiyA hai 1. vicaraNa karate hue vaha svayaM ke aura anya bhikSuoM ke jJAna
darzana cAritra kI zuddha ArAdhanA karane karavAne meM samartha ho / 2.
janasAdhAraNa ko apane jJAna tathA vANI evaM vyavahAra se dharma ke sanmukha
kara sakatA ho|

Page #130 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[310] A monk who is capable of giving appropriate answers to any person who
comes to discuss matters from another perspective, can wander as the head of the
group, i.e., as the head of the Sanghataka. These qualities of speech are
essential for the head monk who wanders with the aim of spreading Dharma, but
for the monk who wanders with the aim of general welfare, it is sufficient to be
a Shruta-sampanna as described in the sutras, with the exception of Abhigraha
images, silent meditation, etc. Even if he does not possess the qualities of
speech, he can still wander as the head and practice self-restraint. According
to the second sutra, no Shruta-sampanna monk can wander as the head of the group
at will, but can only take charge of the group with the permission of the senior
monk of the Gachchha. He should ask the senior monk, "O Bhagavan! I wish to
wander with some monks." Then, the senior monk, knowing his qualifications and
seeing the appropriate opportunity, can grant permission for him to take charge
of the group. If, for any reason, the senior monk does not grant permission, he
should not take charge of the group and should wait for the appropriate
opportunity.  In the context of the provision in the sutra for obtaining
permission from the senior monk, it should be understood that the word "senior"
refers to all those who have the authority to give orders, including the
Acharya, Upadhyaya, Pravartaka, etc. The word "senior" is very broad and
includes all monks who hold a position and are in charge. In the Bagams, the
word "There Stavir" is used for the Ganadhara Gautam Sudharmaswami and also for
the Tirthankaras. Therefore, the meaning of this provision is that it is
necessary to obtain the permission of any senior monk of the Gachchha to take
charge of the group, and it is also necessary to be proficient in Shruta-
sampada, etc. If a monk, due to intense desire, wanders with his disciples or
other monks who are under his care for study, etc., without obtaining permission
or approval, he is liable for atonement. The disciples who are with him or the
monks who are under his care for any reason, such as study, etc., are not liable
for atonement as they are following his orders. This is also clarified in the
second sutra.  The sutra, while providing for atonement for a monk who takes
charge of the group without permission, states, "Se Santara Chheye Va Parihare
Va." The commentator, explaining the meaning of this, clarifies that the monk,
due to his offense, receives the appropriate atonement of Chhed (five days,
etc.) or the atonement of monthly or other Pariharatapas or general tapas. This
atonement is given to him, according to the sutra, for the sake of discipline,
whether he is criticized or not. This provision is made in the sutra for the
monk. Similarly, the entire provision should be understood for the Sadhvi. She
should also obtain permission from the senior monk or Pravartiini to wander.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
310] [vyavahArasUtra 3. anya mata se bhAvita koI bhI vyakti prazna-carcA karane
ke lie A jAya to yathAyogya uttara dene meM samartha ho, aisA bhikSu
gaNapramukha ke rUpa meM arthAt saMghATakapramukha hokara vicaraNa kara sakatA
hai| dharmaprabhAvanA ko lakSya meM rakhakara vicaraNa karane vAle pramukha
bhikSu meM ye bhASyokta guNa honA Avazyaka haiM, kintu abhigraha pratimAeM evaM
mauna sAdhanA Adi kevala AmakalyANa ke lakSya se vicaraNa karane vAle ko
sUtrokta zrutasampanna rUpa palicchanna honA hI paryApta hai| bhASyokta guNa na
hoM to bhI vaha pramukha hokara vicaraNa karatA huA AtmasaMyama-sAdhanA kara
sakatA hai| dvitIya sUtra ke anusAra koI bhI zrutasampanna yogya bhikSu svecchA
se gaNapramukha ke rUpa meM vicaraNa karane ke lie nahIM jA sakatA hai, kintu
gaccha ke sthavira bhagavaMta kI anumati lekara ke hI gaNa dhAraNa kara sakatA
hai arthAta sthavira bhagavanta se kaheM ki-"he bhagavan ! maiM kucha bhikSoM ko
lekara vicaraNa karanA cAhatA huuN|" taba sthavira bhagavanta usakI yogyatA
jAnakara evaM ucita avasara dekhakara svIkRti deveM to gaNa dhAraNa kara sakatA
hai| yadi ve sthavira kisI kAraNa se svIkRti na deM to use gaNa dhAraNa nahIM
karanA cAhiye evaM yogya avasara kI pratIkSA karanA caahie| _ sUtra meM sthavira
bhagavanta se prAjJA prApta karane kA jo vidhAna kiyA gayA hai usake sandarbha
meM yaha samajhanA cAhie ki yahAM sthavira zabda se prAcArya upAdhyAya
pravartaka Adi sabhI AjJA dene vAle adhikArI sUcita kiye gaye haiN| kyoMki
sthavira zabda atyanta vizAla hai| isameM sabhI padavIdhara aura adhikArIgaNa
bhikSuoM kA samAveza ho jAtA hai / bAgamoM meM gaNadhara gautama sudharmAsvAmI
ke lie evaM tIrthakaroM ke lie bhI "there sthavira" zabda kA prayoga hai / ataH
isa vidhAna kA Azaya yaha hai ki gaNa dhAraNa ke lie gaccha ke kisI bhI adhikArI
bhikSu kI AjJA lenA Avazyaka hai evaM svayaM kA zrutasaMpadA prAdi se sampanna
honA bhI Avazyaka hai| yadi koI bhikSa utkaTa icchA ke kAraNa AjJA liye binA yA
svIkRti mile binA bhI apane ziSyoM ko yA anya apanI nizrA meM adhyayana prAdi ke
lie rahe hue sAdhuoM ko lekara vicaraNa karatA hai to vaha prAyazcitta kA pAtra
hotA hai| usake sAtha ziSya rUpa rahane vAle yA adhyayana prAdi kisI bhI kAraNa
se usakI nizrA meM rahane vAle sAdhu usakI AjJA kA pAlana karate hue usake sAtha
rahate haiM, ve prAyazcitta ke pAtra nahIM hote haiN| yaha bhI dvitIya sUtra meM
spaSTa kiyA gayA hai / AjJA ke binA gaNa dhAraNa karane vAle bhikSu ke lie
prAyazcitta kA vidhAna karate hue sUtra meM kahA gayA hai ki "se saMtarA chee vA
parihAre vA", isakA artha karate hue vyAkhyAkAra ne yaha spaSTa kiyA hai ki vaha
bhikSu apane usa aparAdha ke kAraNa yathAyogya cheda (pAMca dina Adi)
prAyazcitta ko athavA mAsika Adi parihAratapa yA sAmAnya tapa rUpa prAyazcitta
ko prApta hotA hai| arthAt pAlocanA karane para yA AlocanA na karane para bhI
anuzAsana-vyavasthA hetu use yaha sUtrokta prAyazcitta diyA jAtA hai| sUtra meM
bhikSu ke lie yaha vidhAna kiyA gayA hai| isI prakAra sAdhvI ke lie bhI saMpUrNa
vidhAna samajha lenA caahie| use vicaraNa karane ke lie sthavira yA pravartinI
kI AjJA lenI caahie|

Page #131 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Third Uddeshak [311 Upadhyaya Adi Pad Dene Ke Vidhi-Nishedh]  **3.** A
Shraman Niggranth with a three-year Dikshaparaya, who is skilled in
Acharakushal, Sanjamakushal, Pravachanakushal, Prajnaptikushal, Sangrahkushal,
and Uvaggahkushal, and possesses Akshat Charitra, Abhinna Charitra, Asabal
Charitra, and Asanklishta Achar, is Bahushrut and Bahuagmagnya, and adheres to
the minimum Achar-Prakalp, is eligible for the Upadhyaya Pad.  **4.** The same
Shraman Niggranth with a three-year Dikshaparaya, who is not skilled in Achar,
Sanjam, Pravachan, Prajnapti, Sangrah, and Uvaggah, and possesses Kshat, Bhinna,
Shabal, and Sanklishta Achar, is Alpashrut and Alpaagmagnya, is not eligible for
the Upadhyaya Pad.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
tIsarA uddezaka] [311 upAdhyAya Adi pada dene ke vidhi-niSedha _3. tivAsapariyAe
samaNe niggatheprAyArakusale, saMjamakusale, pabayaNakusale, paNNattikusale,
saMgahakusale, uvaggahakusale, akkhayAyAre, abhinnAyAre, asabalAyAre,
asaMkilihAyAre, bahussue babhAgame, jahaNeNaM AyArappakappa-dhare, kappai
uvajjhAyattAe uddisittae / 4. sacceva NaM se tivAsapariyAe samaNe niggathe no
AyArakusale, no saMjamakusale, no pavayaNa kusale, no paNNattikusale, no
saMgahakusale, no uvaggahakusale, khayAyAre, bhinnAyAre, sabalAyAre,
saMkiliTThayAre, appasue, appAgame no kappai uvajjhAyattAe udisitte| 5.
paMcavAsapariyAe samaNe jiggaMthe-AyArakusale, saMjamakusale, pavayaNakusale,
paNNattikusale, saMgahakusale, uvaggahakusale, akkhayAyAre, abhinnAyAre,
asabalAyAre, asaMkilihAyAre, bahussue, babbhAgame, jahaNNeNaM dasA-kappa-
vavahAradhare, kappai prAyariya-uvajjhAyattAe uddisitte| 6. sacceNa NaM se
paMcavAsapariyAe samaNe niggaMthe-no AyArakusale, no saMjamakusale, no
pavayaNakusale, no paNNattikusale, no saMgahakusale, no uvaggahakusale,
khayAyAre, bhinnAyAre, sabalAyAre, saMkiliTThAyAre, appasue, appAgame no kappai
Ayariya-uvamAyattAe udisitte| 7. aTThavAsapariyAe samaNe niggaMthe-pAyArakusale,
saMjamakusale,,pavayaNakusale, paNNattikusale, saMgahakusale, uvaggahakusale,
akkhayAyAre, abhinnAyAre, asabalAyAre, asaMkiliTThAyAre, bahussue, babbhAgame,
jahaNaNaM ThANa-samavAya-dhare, kappai AyariyattAe uvajjhAyattAe
gaNAvaccheiyattAe uddisitte| 8. sacceva NaM se aTThavAsapariyAe samaNe NiggaMthe
no prAyArakusale no saMjamakusale, no pavayaNakusale, no pannattikusale, no
saMgahakusale, no uvaggahakusale, khayAyAre, bhinnAyAre, sabalAyAre,
saMkiliTThAyAre, appasue appAgame, no kappai AyariyattAe, uvajjhAyattAe,
gaNAvaccheiyattAe udisitte| 3. tIna varSa kI dIkSAparyAya vAlA zramaNa
nirgranthayadi AcArakuzala, saMyamakuzala, pravacanakuzala, prajJaptikuzala,
saMgrahakuzala aura upagraha karane meM kuzala ho tathA akSata caritra vAlA,
abhinna cAritra vAlA, azabala cAritra vAlA aura asaMkliSTa AcAra vAlA ho,
bahuzruta evaM bahuAgamajJa ho aura kama se kama AcAra-prakalpa dhAraNa karane
vAlA ho to use upAdhyAya pada denA kalpatA hai| 4. vahI tIna varSa kI
dIkSAparyAyavAlA zramaNa-nirgrantha-yadi AcAra, saMyama, pravacana, prajJapti,
saMgraha aura upagraha meM kuzala na ho tathA kSata, bhinna, zabala aura
saMkliSTa prAcAra vAlA ho, alpazruta evaM alpa AgamajJa ho to use upAdhyAya pada
denA nahIM kalpatA hai|

Page #132 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  [312] [Vyavahar Sutra 5. A Shraman Nirgranth with a five-year dikshaparaya -
if he is skilled in conduct, restraint, preaching, knowledge, collection and
support, and has an unblemished character, an undivided character, a strong
character and an unmixed conduct, is well-versed in scriptures and has knowledge
of many scriptures, and has at least mastered the Dasha Shruta Skandha, Brihat
Kalpa and Vyavahar Sutra, then it is appropriate to give him the position of
Acharya or Upadhyaya. / 6. The same Shraman Nirgranth with a five-year
dikshaparaya - if he is not skilled in conduct, restraint, preaching, knowledge,
collection and support, and has a blemished character, a divided character, a
weak character and a mixed conduct, is less-versed in scriptures and has
knowledge of few scriptures, then it is not appropriate to give him the position
of Acharya or Upadhyaya. 7. A Shraman Nirgranth with an eight-year dikshaparaya
- if he is skilled in conduct, restraint, preaching, knowledge, collection and
support, and has an unblemished character, an undivided character, a strong
character and an unmixed conduct, is well-versed in scriptures and has knowledge
of many scriptures, and has at least mastered the  Sthananga-Samavayanga Sutra,
then it is appropriate to give him the position of Acharya, Upadhyaya and
Ganavcchedak. 8. The same Shraman Nirgranth with an eight-year dikshaparaya - if
he is not skilled in conduct, restraint, preaching, knowledge, collection and
support, and has a blemished character, a divided character, a weak character
and a mixed conduct, is less-versed in scriptures and has knowledge of few
scriptures, then it is not appropriate to give him the position of Acharya,
Upadhyaya and Ganavcchedak. Discussion - In a Gachchha where there are many
Sadhus and Sadhvis, where many Sanghatakas (Sanghade) wander separately, or
where there are newly initiated, young or adolescent Sadhus and Sadhvis, it is
absolutely necessary to have many holders of positions, and it is absolutely
essential to have at least two holders of positions, Acharya and Upadhyaya. But
in a Gachchha where there are only 2-4 Sadhus or 2-4 Sadhvis, where only one or
two Sanghatakas wander separately, and where there are no newly initiated, young
or adolescent Sadhus and Sadhvis, then their management can be done by the
elders based on their age or dikshaparaya without any holder of positions. Here,
in the first two sutras, the eligibility for the position of Upadhyaya, in the
second two sutras, the eligibility for the position of Acharya and Upadhyaya,
and in the third two sutras, the eligibility for other positions has been stated
based on dikshaparaya, study of scriptures and various qualities. In which, the
minimum limit of dikshaparaya and study of scriptures has been stated to be
higher for Acharya than Upadhyaya, and higher for Ganavcchedak than them. /
Apart from this, these positions can also be given to anyone with a medium or
excellent dikshaparaya and study of scriptures. The qualities of being skilled
in conduct, etc., have been stated to be the same for all holders of positions.
/ Therefore, these qualities are essential in every monk who is eligible for a
position. Dikshaparaya - The Bhashyakar has stated that according to
dikshaparaya, experience, ability and competence develop, which enables the monk
to fulfill the responsibilities of those positions.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
312] [ vyavahArasUtra 5. pAMca varSa kI dIkSAparyAya vAlA zramaNa nirgrantha-
yadi AcArakuzala, saMyamakuzala, pravacanakuzala, prajJaptikuzala,
saMgrahakuzala aura upagrahakuzala ho tathA akSata cAritra vAlA, abhinna va
vAlA, azabala cAritra vAlA aura asaMkliSTa prAcAra vAlA ho, bahazrata evaM
bahayAgamajJa ho evaM kama se kama dazAzrutaskaMdha, bRhatkalpa evaM
vyavahArasUtra ko dhAraNa karane vAlA ho to use prAcArya yA upAdhyAya pada denA
kalpatA hai / 6. vahI pAMca varSa kI dIkSAparyAya vAlA zramaNa nigraMtha-yadi
prAcAra, saMyama, pravacana, prajJapti, saMgraha aura upagraha meM kuzala na ho
tathA kSata, bhinna, zabala aura saMkliSTa prAcAra vAlA ho, alpazruta aura alpa
prAgamajJa ho to use prAcArya yA upAdhyAya pada denA nahIM kalpatA hai| 7. ATha
varSa kI dIkSAparyAya vAlA zramaNa nirgrantha-yadi AcArakuzala, saMyama kuzala,
pravacanakuzala, prajJaptikuzala, saMgrahakuzala aura upagrahakuzala ho tathA
akSata cAritra vAlA, abhinna cAritra vAlA azabala cAritra aura asaMkliSTa AcAra
vAlA ho, bahuzrata evaM bahuprAgamajJa ho evaM kama se kama sthAnAMga-
samavAyAMga sUtra ko dhAraNa karane vAlA ho to use prAcArya, upAdhyAya aura
gaNAvacchedaka pada denA kalpatA hai| 8. vahI pATha varSa kI dIkSAparyAya vAlA
zramaNa nigraMtha yadi prAcAra, saMyama, pravacana, prajJapti, saMgraha aura
upagraha meM kuzala na ho tathA kSata, bhinna, zabala aura saMkliSTa AcAra vAlA
ho, alpazruta aura alpa prAgamajJa ho to use prAcArya, upAdhyAya aura
gaNAvacchedaka pada denA nahIM kalpatA vivecana-jisa gaccha meM aneka sAdhu-
sAdhviyAM haiN| jisake aneka saMghATaka (saMghAr3e) alagaalaga vicarate hoM
athavA jisa gaccha meM navadIkSita, bAla yA taruNa sAdhu-sAdhviyAM hoM, usameM
aneka padavIdharoM kA honA atyAvazyaka hai evaM kama se kama AcArya, upAdhyAya
ina do padavIdharoM kA honA to nitAMta Avazyaka hai| kintu jisa gaccha meM 2-4
sAdhu yA 2-4 sAdhviyAM hI hoM, jinake eka yA do saMghATaka hI alaga-alaga
vicarate hoM evaM unameM koI bhI navadIkSita bAla yA taruNa vaya vAlA na ho to
padavIdhara ke binA hI kevala vaya yA paryAya sthavira se unakI vyavasthA ho
sakatI hai| yahAM prathama sUtradvika meM upAdhyAya pada, dvitIya sUtradvika meM
prAcArya-upAdhyAya pada aura tRtIya sUtradvika meM anya padoM ke yogyAyogya kA
kathana dIkSAparyAya, zruta-adhyayana evaM aneka guNoM ke dvArA kiyA gayA hai|
jisameM dIkSAparyAya aura zruta-adhyayana kI jaghanya maryAdA to upAdhyAya se
prAcArya kI aura unase gaNAvacchedaka kI adhika adhikatara kahI hai / isake
sivAya madhyama yA utkRSTa koI bhI dIkSAparyAya evaM zruta-adhyayana vAle ko bhI
ye pada diye jA sakate haiN| prAcArakuzala prAdi anya guNoM kA sabhI
padavIdharoM ke lie samAna rUpa se nirUpaNa kiyA gayA hai / ataH pratyeka pada-
yogya bhikSu meM ve guNa honA Avazyaka haiN| dIkSAparyAya-bhASyakAra ne batAyA
hai ki dIkSAparyAya ke anusAra anubhava, kSamatA, yogyatA kA vikAsa hotA hai,
jisase bhikSu una-una padoM ke uttaradAyitva ko nibhAne meM sakSama hotA hai|

Page #133 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Third Objective:  [313] The primary responsibility of the Upadhyaya is to
impart education, which includes overseeing all aspects of the disciples'
studies. Therefore, it is considered essential for this position to have a
minimum of three years of *dokshaparyaya*.   The Acharya is responsible for the
entire management of the *gachchha*. They also deliver discourses on *artha* and
*paramartha*. Therefore, considering their greater experience and capabilities,
a minimum of five years of *dokshaparyaya* is considered necessary for them.
The *ganavachchedak* fulfills numerous duties related to the *gan* and relieves
the Acharya of their concerns. The *ganavachchedak* is responsible for the
service, movement, and atonement arrangements for the *gachchha* monks.
Although the Acharya is fully responsible for discipline, the *ganavachchedak*
has a greater responsibility for management and operations. Therefore, it is
considered essential for them to have a minimum of one year of *dokshaparyaya*.
## Other Qualities:  These sutras mention ten qualities, including *prachar-
kushlata*. Their explanation in the *bhashya* is as follows:  1.
**Acharakushal:** One who is skilled in both *jnanaachar* and *vinayaachar* is
called *pracharakushal*. For example, they stand up when the guru or others
arrive, offer them a seat and a stool, greet them with respect in the morning,
seek their blessings, remain close to them in thought or deed, inspire disciples
and *praticchhakas* (those who come from other *gachchhas* to study) to respect
the guru, follow the four types of *vinayapratipatti* (physical, verbal, mental,
and financial) properly, act proactively, please the guru and others with
appropriate worship, devotion, respect, and hospitality, avoid harsh words, have
a simple and straightforward nature, maintain a stable demeanor free from
distorted gestures of hands, feet, and mouth, avoid deceitful behavior with
others, engage in timely transcription, *pratikraman*, and self-study, practice
appropriate austerities, cultivate and purify knowledge, etc., are meditative,
and always respect the guru. Such a virtuous monk is called "pracharakushal."
2. **Sanyamkushal:** (1) One who diligently practices restraint with respect to
the five stationary, three partially mobile, and five mobile beings, uses
inanimate objects judiciously only when necessary, carefully observes every
movement, including walking and sitting, maintains indifference or neutrality
towards those who indulge in unrestrained behavior, performs *pramarjan*
(purification) appropriately and timely, fully adheres to the rules of the
*paristhapana samiti*, and refrains from harmful thoughts, words, and actions.
One who is proficient (skilled) in practicing these seventeen types of restraint
is *sanyamkushal*. (2) Or, one who maintains a comfortable posture while holding
or lifting objects, and in matters of *eshana* (desire), *shayya* (bed),
*prasan* (seat), *upadhi* (clothing), and *aahar* (food), avoids uncomfortable
postures. (3) One who controls the senses and passions, i.e., does not develop
attachment or aversion towards pleasant or unpleasant objects, and prevents the
arising of passions. One who completely eliminates the fetters of violence,
etc., is *sanyamkushal*.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
tIsarA uddezaka] [313 upAdhyAya kA mukhya uttaradAyitva adhyayana karAne kA hai,
jisameM ziSyoM ke adhyayana sambandhI sabhI prakAra kI vyavasthA kI dekha-rekha
unheM rakhanI par3atI hai| ataH isa pada ke lie jaghanya tIna varSa kI
dokSAparyAya honA Avazyaka kahA hai / prAcArya para gaccha kI saMpUrNa
vyavasthAoM kA uttaradAyitva rahatA hai| ve artha-paramArtha kI vAcanA bhI dete
haiM / ata: adhika anubhava kSamatA kI dRSTi se unake lie nyUnatama pAMca varSa
kI dokSAparyAya honA prAvazyaka kahA hai| gaNAvacchedaka gaNa saMbaMdhI aneka
kartavyoM ko pUrNa karake unakI cintA se prAcArya ko mukta rakhatA hai arthAt
gaccha ke sAdhuoM ko sevA, vicaraNa evaM prAyazcitta Adi vyavasthAnoM kA
uttaradAyitva gaNAvacchedaka kA hotA hai / yadyapi anuzAsana kA pUrNa
uttaradAyitva prAcArya kA hotA hai tathApi vyavasthA tathA kAryasaMcAlana kA
uttaradAyitva gaNAvacchedaka kA adhika hone se inakI dIkSAparyAya kama se kama
pATha varSa kI honA Avazyaka kahA hai| _ anyaguNa-prAcAra-kuzalatA Adi dasa
guNoM kA kathana ina sUtroM meM hai| unakI vyAkhyA bhASya meM isa prakAra hai-
1. AcArakuzala-jJAnAcAra meM evaM vinayAcAra meM jo kuzala hotA hai vaha
prAcArakuzala kahA jAtA hai / yathA--guru Adi ke Ane para khar3A hotA hai, unheM
Asana caukI prAdi pradAna karatA hai, prAtaHkAla unheM vandana karake prAdeza
mAMgatA hai, dravya se athavA bhAva se unake nikaTa rahatA hai, ziSyoM ko evaM
pratIcchakoM (anya gaccha se adhyayana ke lie Aye hoM) ko guru ke prati
zraddhAnvita karane vAlA kAyikI Adi cAra prakAra kI vinayapratipatti ko
yathAvidhi karane vAlA, prAka karane vAlA, guru Adi kI yathAyogya pUjA, bhakti,
Adara-satkAra karake unheM prasanna rakhane vAlA, paruSa vacana nahIM bolane
vAlA, amAyAvI-sarala svabhAvI, hAtha-pAMva-mukha aAdi kI vikRta ceSTA se rahita
sthira svabhAva vAlA, dUsaroM ke sAtha mAyAvI AcaraNa arthAt dhokhA na karane
vAlA, yathAsamaya pratilekhana pratikramaNa evaM svAdhyAya karane vAlA,
yathocita tapa karane vAlA, jJAnAdi kI vRddhi evaM zuddhi karane vAlA,
samAdhivAn aura sadaiva guru kA bahumAna karane vAlA, aisA guNanidhi bhikSu
"prAcAra. kuzala" kahalAtA hai| 2. saMyamakuzala(1) pA~ca sthAvara, tIna
vikalendriya evaM paceMndriya jIvoM kI samyak prakAra se yatanA karane vAlA,
Avazyaka hone para hI nirjIva padArthoM kA vivekapUrvaka upayoga karane vAlA,
gamanAgamana Adi kI pratyeka pravRtti acchI taraha dekhakara karane vAlA,
asaMyama pravRtti karane vAloM ke prati upekSA yA mAdhyastha bhAva rakhane vAlA.
yathAsamaya yathAvidhi pramArjana karane : vAlA, pariSThApanA samiti ke niyamoM
kA pUrNa pAlane karane vAlA, mana vacana kAyA ko azubha pravRtti ko tyAgane
vAlA, ina sattaraha prakAra ke saMyama kA pAlana karane meM nipuNa (dakSa), (2)
athavA koI vastu rakhane yA uThAne meM tathA eSaNA, zayyA, prAsana upadhi, AhAra
Adi meM yathAzakti prazasta yoga rakhane vAlA, aprazasta yogoM kA parityAga
karane vAlA, (3) indriyoM evaM kaSAyoM kA nigraha karane vAlA arthAt zubhAzubha
padArthoM meM rAgadveSa nahIM karane vAlA aura kaSAya ke udaya ko viphala kara
dene vAlA, hiMsA Adi pAzravoM kA pUrNa nirodha karane

Page #134 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
1. Samyamakushal - The monk who has renounced the inauspicious yoga (activity)
and inauspicious dhyana (meditation), i.e., arta-raudra dhyana, and remains
absorbed in the auspicious yoga and dharma-shukla dhyana, who always keeps his
soul-transformations pure, who is free from the fear of this world and the next,
is a "Samyamakushal" (adept in restraint).  2. Pravachanakushal - The one who is
the knower of the Jina's teachings and a skilled preceptor, who understands the
meaning, the ultimate meaning, the connection and distinction of the sutras, the
manifold excellent meanings, and the wondrous meanings, who knows the tradition
of scriptural learning and meaning, who comprehends the nature of substances
through valid knowledge, logical viewpoints, and scriptural references, who is
replete with the jewels of scriptural learning, who has properly grasped and
contemplated the scriptures in the right manner, who has determined their
flawlessness, and who has extensively and purely retained their meanings through
discussions with the erudite, such a virtuous monk is "Pravachanakushal" (adept
in expounding the scriptures).  3. Prajnaptikushal - The monk who has rightly
ascertained the secular scriptures, Vedas, Puranas, and his own doctrines, who
is the right knower of religious discourses and explanations of meanings, who is
skilled in describing the nature and distinctions of the living and non-living,
the causes of karmic bondage and liberation, the movement in the four gatis
(realms of existence) and their causes, and the resulting happiness and
suffering, who can properly refute the wrong views of opponents and is adept at
explaining his own doctrines, is "Prajnaptikushal" (adept in scriptural
knowledge).  4. Samgrahakushal - The monk who is skilled in accumulating,
through substance, the accessories, disciples, etc., and through disposition,
the scriptures, meanings, and virtues within the self, who remembers to
compassionately serve the sick, aged, etc. according to time and place, who
provides recitation to the sick preceptors, who disciplines the monks who
violate the code of conduct or are prone to passions, who renders guru-devotion
through food discipline, etc., who performs the internal activities of the
monastic order or brings the outsiders into it, who fulfills the necessary
requirements of food, accessories, etc. for each, who is skilled in living
together and accommodating others, and who is skilled in sewing, anointing,
etc., is a "Samgrahakulsal" (adept in harmonious conduct).  5. Upagrahakushal -
The monk who provides bedding, seating, accessories, food, medicine, etc. to the
young, old, sick, ascetic, and incapable monks, who serves them personally or
has others serve them, who conveys the instructions or messages of the
preceptors to the designated monks, and who guides those without preceptors with
affection, is "Upagrahakushal" (adept in rendering assistance).  6. The monk who
partakes of pure food free from defects of action, speech, and thought, and who
observes perfect conduct.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
314] [vyavahArasUtra vAlA, aprazasta yoga aura aprazasta dhyAna arthAt Arta-
raudra dhyAna kA tyAga kara zubha yoga aura dharmazukla dhyAna meM lIna rahane
vAlA, AtmapariNAmoM ko sadA vizuddha rakhane vAlA, ihalokAdi AzaMkA se rahita,
aisA guNanidhi bhikSu "saMyamakuzala' hai| 3. pravacana kuzala-jo jinavacanoM kA
jJAtA evaM kuzala upadeSTA ho vaha pravacanakuzala hai, yathA-sUtra ke anusAra
usakA artha, paramArtha, anvaya-vyatireka yukta sUtrAzaya ko, aneka atizaya
yukta arthoM ko evaM AzcaryakArI arthoM ko jAnane vAlA, mUla evaM artha kI
zrutaparamparA ko bhI jAnane vAlA, pramANa-naya-nikSepoM se padArthoM ke svarUpa
ko samajhane vAlA, isa prakAra zruta evaM artha ke nirNAyaka hone se jo zruta
rUpa ratnoM se pUrNa hai tathA jisane samyak prakAra se zruta ko dhAraNa karake
usakA punarAvartana kiyA hai, pUrvApara sambandha pUrvaka cintana kiyA hai,
usake nirdoSa hone kA nirNaya kiyA hai aura usake artha ko bahuzrutoM ke pAsa
carcA-vArtA Adi se vipula vizuddha dhAraNa kiyA hai, aise guNoM ko dhAraNa
karane vAlA aura ukta adhyayana se apanA hita karane vAlA, anya ko hitAvaha
upadeza karane vAlA evaM pravacana kA avarNavAda bolane vAloM kA nigraha karane
meM samartha aisA guNasampanna bhikSu "pravacanakuzala" hai| 4.
prajJaptikuzalalaukika zAstra, veda, purANa evaM svasiddhAMta kA jisane samyag
vinizcaya kara liyA hai, jo dharma-kathA, artha-kathA Adi kA samyakjJAtA hai
tathA jIva-ajIva ke svarUpa evaM bhedoM kA, karma baMdha evaM mokSa ke kAraNoM
kA, cAroM gati meM gamanAgamana karane kA evaM unake kAraNoM kA tathA unase
utpanna duHkha-sukha kA, ityAdi kathana karane meM kuzala, paravAdiyoM ke
kudarzana kA samyak samAdhAna karake unase kudarzana kA tyAga karAne meM
samartha evaM svasiddhAMtoM ko samajhAne meM kuzala bhikSu "prajJaptikuzala"
hai| 5. saMgrahakuzala-dravya se upadhi, ziSyAdi kA aura bhAva se zruta evaM
artha tathA guNoM kA AtmA meM saMgraha karane meM jo kuzala (dakSa) hotA hai
tathA kSetra evaM kAla ke anusAra viveka rakha kara glAna vRddha Adi kI
anukampApUrvaka vaiyAvRtya karane kI smRti rakhane vAlA, AcAryAdi kI rugNAvasthA
ke samaya vAcanA dene vAlA, samAcArI bhaMga karane vAle yA kaSAya meM pravRtta
hone vAle bhikSuoM ko yathAyogya anuzAsana karake rokane vAlA, AhAra vinaya Adi
ke dvArA gurubhakti karane vAlA, gaNa ke antaraMga kAryoM ko karane vAlA athavA
gaNa se bahirbhAva vAloM ko antarbhAvI banAne vAlA, AhAra, upadhi Adi jisako jo
Avazyaka ho usakI pUrti karane vAlA, paraspara sAtha rahane meM evaM anya ko
rakhane meM kuzala, sIvana, lepana Adi kArya karane karAne meM kuzala, isa
prakAra niHsvArtha sahayoga dene ke savabhAva vAlA guNanidhi bhikSu
"saMgrahakuzala hai| 6. upagrahakuzala-bAla, vRddha, rogI, tapasvI, asamartha
bhikSu Adi ko zayyA, prAsana, upadhi, AhAra, auSadha Adi detA hai, divAtA hai
tathA inakI svayaM sevA karatA hai anya se karavAtA hai, guru Adi ke dvArA dI
gaI vastu yA kahI gaI vArtA nirdiSTa sAdhuoM taka pahuMcAtA hai tathA anya bhI
unake dvArA nirdiSTa kAryoM ko kara detA hai athavA jinake prAcAryAdi nahIM
haiM, unheM AtmIyatA se dizAnirdeza karatA hai, vaha "upagrahakuzala" hai / 7.
akSata-AcAra-AdhAkarma Adi doSoM se rahita zuddha prAhAra grahaNa karane vAlA
evaM paripUrNa prAcAra kA pAlana karane vaalaa|

Page #135 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  [315 Third Uddeshak]  8. **Abhinnaachar:** One who perfectly observes all
five aachars without engaging in any kind of atichaar (transgression).  9.
**Ashbalachar:** One whose conduct is free from any flaws in conduct, behavior,
language, appearance, etc., or one who is free from shbal doshas (minor
transgressions).  10. **Asanklishta-achar:** A monk who does not desire worldly
or otherworldly pleasures, or one who has abandoned anger, etc., and is free
from sanklishta (impure) results.  The meaning of terms like "Kshat-achar"
should be understood in the opposite sense, such as:  1. One who engages in
doshas like adha karma (half-hearted actions). 2. One who engages in atichaars
and finds fault with the five aachars or five mahavrats (great vows). 3. One who
lacks discernment in conduct, language, etc., and engages in shbal doshas. 4.
One who desires praise, reputation, respect, and material pleasures, or one who
has sanklishta results due to anger, etc.  **Bahushrut:** One who knows many
sutras and their meanings is called "Bahushrut" or "Bahupragamjna".  The use of
these terms varies in different pragams (texts). For example:  1. One who
possesses qualities like depth, discernment, and intelligence. 2. One who is
skilled in discussing and debating Jain principles or one who knows the main
principles. 3. One who practices many sutras. 4. One who is proficient in the
Cheda Sutras. 5. One who is skilled in aachar and prayashchitta (penance)
practices. 6. There are three types of Bahushrut: Jghanya (lowest), Madhyama
(middle), and Utkrishta (highest).  (1) **Jghanya Bahushrut:** One who memorizes
the Aacharaang and Nisihtha Sutra with their meanings. (2) **Madhyama
Bahushrut:** One who memorizes the Aacharaang, Sutra Kritang, and four Cheda
Sutras with their meanings. (3) **Utkrishta Bahushrut:** One who holds the
Drishtivad, i.e., from Navapurvi to 14 Purvi, all are considered Bahushrut.
**Abahushrut:** One who is of low intelligence, excessively kind, inexperienced,
and has studied few pragams is called "Abahushrut" or "Abahupragamjna".
**Prabahushrut:** One who has not studied and memorized at least the Aacharaang,
Nisihtha, Aavashyak, Dasha Vaikalik, and Uttaraadhyaayan Sutra with their
meanings is called "Prabahushrut" or "Abahuagmjna".  **Aachar Prakalp:**  (1)
The present third sutra lays down the rule for being an "Aachar Prakalp Dhari".
(2) The tenth Uddeshak lays down the rule for reciting the "Aachar Prakalp"
study for the first time.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
[315 tosarA uddezaka] 8. abhinnAcAra-kisI prakAra ke aticAroM kA sevana na
karake pAMcoM AcAroM kA paripUrNa pAlana karane vaalaa| 9. azabalAcAra-vinaya,
vyavahAra, bhASA, gocarI Adi meM doSa na lagAne vAlA athavA zabala doSoM se
rahita AcaraNa vaalaa| 10. asaMkliSTa-AcAra-ihaloka-paraloka sambandhI sukhoM kI
kAmanA na karane vAlA athavA krodhAdi kA tyAga karane vAlA saMkliSTa pariNAma
rahita bhikSu / "kSata-AcAra" Adi zabdoM kA artha isase viparota samajha lenA
cAhie, yathA1. AdhAkarmAdi doSoM kA sevana karane vaalaa| 2. aticAroM kA sevana
kara pAMca prAcAra yA pAMca mahAvrata meM doSa lagAne vaalaa| 3. vinaya, bhASA
Adi kA viveka nahIM rakhane vAlA, zabala doSoM kA sevana karane vaalaa| 4.
prazaMsA, pratiSThA, Adara aura bhautika sukhoM kI cAhanA karane vAlA athavA
krodhAdi se saMkliyTa pariNAma rakhane vaalaa| bahuzruta-bahuAgamajJa-aneka
sUtroM evaM unake arthoM ko jAnane vAlA 'bahuzruta yA bahuprAgamajJa' kahA jAtA
hai / prAgamoM meM ina zabdoM kA bhinna-bhinna apekSA se prayoga hai / yathA 1.
gambhIratA vicakSaNatA evaM buddhimattA Adi guNoM se yukt| 2. jinamata kI carcA-
vArtA meM nipuNa yA mukhya siddhAntoM kA jJAtA / 3. aneka sUtroM kA abhyaasii|
4. chedasUtroM meM pAraMgata / 5. prAcAra evaM prAyazcitta vidhAnoM meM kuzala /
6. jaghanya, madhyama yA utkRSTa bahuzruta / (1) jaghanyabahuzrutaprAcArAMga
evaM nizIthasUtra ko artha sahita kaNThastha karane vaalaa| (2)
madhyamabahuzruta-AcArAMga, sUtrakRtAMga aura cAra chedasUtroM ko artha sahita
kaNThastha dhAraNa karane vaalaa| (3) utkRSTabahuzru tadRSTivAda ko dhAraNa
karane vAlA arthAt navapUrvI se 14 pUrvI taka ! sabhI bahuzruta kahe gaye haiN|
jo alpabuddhi, atyadhika bhadra, alpa anubhavI evaM alpayAgamaabhyAsI hotA hai,
vaha 'abahuzruta abahuprAgamajJa' kahA jAtA hai tathA kama se kama pAcArAMga,
nizItha, Avazyaka, dazavaikAlika aura uttarAdhyayana sUtra ko artha sahita
adhyayana karake unheM kaNThastha dhAraNa nahIM karane vAlA "prabahuzruta
abahuAgamajJa" kahA jAtA hai| AcAraprakalpa(1) prastuta tIsare sUtra meM
"prAcAraprakalpadhArI hone kA vidhAna hai| (2) dazave uddezaka meM sarvaprathama
"prAcAraprakalpa nAmaka adhyayana" kI vAcanA dene kA vidhAna hai|

Page #136 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
10. The **Vyavahar Sutra** (3) in the fifth **uddeshak** has a provision for
**prƒÅya≈õcitta** (penance) for young **sadhus** and **sadhvis** who forget the
**prƒÅcƒÅrpraklap** study. Thus, the **Vyavahar Sutra** mentions **mƒÅcƒÅrpraklap**
or **prƒÅcƒÅrpraklap-adhyayan** a total of sixteen times, namely - once each in
**uddeshak** sutra 3, 10, 17, 21, 22, 23, twice each in 15, 16, 18, 17, 18. The
**Nandi Sutra** lists the names of 71 **ƒÅgamas** in the **kƒÅlik** and
**utkƒÅlik** sutras. None of them mention any sutra named **prƒÅcƒÅrpraklap** or
**prƒÅcƒÅrpraklap-adhyayan**. Therefore, it becomes necessary to understand and
consider for which sutra this **prƒÅcƒÅrpraklap** is designated and how its name
has changed due to the change in time. In this regard, the views of the
**vyƒÅkhyƒÅkar** (commentators) and **p≈´rvaƒÅcƒÅryas** (ancient teachers) are found
as follows: (1) **Pa√±cavihe ƒÅyarappakappe pa·πá·πáatte**, **ta·πÅ jaha** - 1. **mƒÅsiƒì
ugghaie**, 2. **mƒÅsiƒì a·πáugdhaie**, 3. **cƒÅumƒÅsiƒì ugghaie**, 4. **cƒÅumƒÅsiƒì
a·πáugdhaie**, 5. **pƒÅrovana**. **Toka ƒÅcƒÅrasya prathamƒÅ·πÅgasya
padavibhƒÅgasamƒÅcƒÅrƒ´lak·π£a·πáaprak·πõ·π£·π≠akalpƒÅbhidhƒÅyakatvƒÅt praklapƒÅ·∏• ƒÅcƒÅrpraklapƒÅ·∏•
ni≈õƒ´thƒÅdhyayanam / sa ca pa√±cavidha·∏•, pa√±cavidhaprƒÅya≈õcittƒÅbhidhƒÅyakatvƒÅt. -
**·π¨hƒÅ·πáƒÅ·πÅga**. A. 5 (2) **ƒÄcƒÅra·∏• prathamƒÅ·πÅga·∏•**, **tasya praklapƒÅ·∏•
adhyayanavi≈õe·π£ƒÅ·∏•**, **ni≈õƒ´tham iti aparƒÅbhidhƒÅnasya /** - **SamavƒÅyƒÅ·πÅga**. 28
(3) **A·π£·π≠ƒÅvi·πÅ≈õatividha·∏• prƒÅcƒÅrpraklapƒÅ·∏• ni≈õƒ´thƒÅdhyayanam ƒÅcƒÅrƒÅ·πÅgam ity artha·∏• /
sa ca eva·πÅ (1) satyaparƒ´·πá·πáƒÅ jƒÅva (25) vimutti, (26) ugdhaie, (27) a·πáugdhaie (28)
prƒÅr≈çva·πáƒÅ tivihamo ni≈õƒ´ha·πÅ tu, iti a·π≠·π≠hƒÅvi≈õaviho pƒÅyarappakappana·πÅmo tti**. -
**RƒÅjendra Ko≈õa BhƒÅ**. 2, p. 349, "**ƒÅyarappakappa**" ≈õabda / -
**Pra≈õnavyƒÅkara·πáa Sutra** A. 10. (4) **ƒÄcƒÅra·∏• prƒÅcƒÅrƒÅ·πÅgam, praklapƒÅ·∏•-
ni≈õƒ´thƒÅdhyayanam, tasya eva pa√±camaculƒÅ / ƒÅcƒÅre·πáa sahita·∏• praklapƒÅ·∏• ƒÅcƒÅrpraklap,
pa√±cavi·πÅ≈õati adhyayanƒÅtmakatvƒÅt pa√±cavi·πÅ≈õatividha·∏• ƒÅcƒÅra·∏•, 1. ugdhatima·πÅ, 2.
anugdhatima·πÅ 3. ƒÅrovana iti tridhƒÅ praklap≈çmilane a·π£·π≠ƒÅvi·πÅ≈õatividha·∏•**. - **Abhi.
RƒÅ. Ko.** BhƒÅga 2 p. 350, '**pƒÅyarappakappa**' ≈õabda Here, the original text of
**SamavƒÅyƒÅ·πÅgasutra** and **Pra≈õnavyƒÅkara·πáasutra** mentions twenty-eight types of
**prƒÅcƒÅrpraklap**, which includes 25 studies of the entire **pƒÅcƒÅrƒÅ·πÅgasutra**
and the **ni≈õƒ´thasutra**.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
10 [vyavahArasUtra (3) pAMcaveM uddezaka meM "prAcAraprakalpa adhyayana" ko
bhUla jAne vAle taruNa sAdhu-sAdhviyoM ko prAyazcitta dene kA vidhAna hai| isa
prakAra isa vyavahArasUtra meM kula solaha bAra "mAcAraprakalpa" yA
"prAcAraprakalpa-adhyayana" kA kathana hai, yathA- uddezaka sUtra 3, 10 meM eka-
eka bAra, 17 meM eka bAra, 21, 22, 23 meM eka-eka bAra 15, 16, 18 meM do-do bAra
17, 18 meM do-do bAra naMdIsUtra meM kAlika utkAlika sUtroM kI sUcI meM 71
AgamoM ke nAma diye gaye haiN| unameM "prAcAraprakalpa" yA "prAcAraprakalpa-
adhyayana" nAma kA koI bhI sUtra nahIM kahA gayA hai| ata: yaha samajhanA evaM
vicAranA Avazyaka ho jAtA hai ki yaha "prAcAraprakalpa" kisa sUtra ke liye
nirdiSTa hai aura kAlaparivartana se isakA nAma parivartana kisa prakAra huA
hai| isa viSaya meM vyAkhyAkAra pUrvAcAryoM ke maMtavya isa prakAra ullikhita
milate haiM (1) paMcavihe AyArappakappe paNNatte, taM jahA-1. mAsie ugghAie, 2.
mAsie aNugdhAie, 3. cAumAsie ugghAie, 4. cAumAsie aNugghAie 5. paarovnnaa|
TokAAcArasya prathamAMgasya
padavibhAgasamAcArIlakSaNaprakRSTakalpAbhidhAyakatvAt prakalpaH AcAraprakalpaH
nizIthAdhyayanam / sa ca paMcavidhaH, paMcavidhaprAyazcittAbhidhAyakatvAt
|-tthaannaaNg. a. 5 (2) AcAraH prathamAMgaH, tasya prakalpo adhyayanavizeSo,
nizItham iti aparAbhidhAnasya / samavAyAMga. 28 (3) aSTAviMzatividhaH
prAcAraprakalpaH nizIthAdhyayanam AcArAMgam ityarthaH / sa ca evaM(1)
satyapariNNA jAva (25) vimuttI, (26) ugdhAi, (27) aNugdhAi (28) prArovaNA
tivihamo nisIhaM tu, iti aThThAvIsaviho pAyArappakappanAmo tti| -rAjendra koza
bhA. 2, pR. 349, "AyArapakappa" zabda / -praznavyAkaraNa sUtra a. 10. (4) AcAraH
prAcArAMgam, prakalpo-nizIthAdhyayanam, tasyaiva paMcamacUlA / AcAreNa sahitaH
prakalpaH AcAraprakalpa, paMcaviMzati adhyayanAtmakatvAt paMcaviMzatividhaH
AcAraH, 1. udghAtimaM, 2. anudghAtimaM 3. ArovaNA iti tridhA prakalpomIlane
assttaaviNshtividhH|| -~-abhi. rA. ko. bhAga 2 pR. 350, 'pAyArapakappa' zabda
yahAM samavAyAMgasUtra evaM praznavyAkaraNasUtra ke mUla pATha meM aTThAIsa
prakAra ke prAcAraprakalpa kA kathana kiyA gayA hai, jisameM sampUrNa
pAcArAMgasUtra ke 25 adhyayana aura nizIthasUtra ke

Page #137 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The third Uddeshak [317] mentions the sum of twenty-eight by including three
divisions. The present Sutra mentions "Pracharprakalp" sixteen times and
emphasizes its study. It seems appropriate to understand both the currently
famous Sutras from it. Because if only the Pracharang Sutra is accepted, the
word "Prakalp" becomes meaningless, and if only the Nishisth Sutra is
understood, then studying the Nishisth Sutra without studying the Acharang would
be considered inappropriate. The reason for this is that it is necessary to
study the Prachar-vidhans before studying the Prayaschitt-vidhans. In the
Samavayang and Prashnavyakaran Sutra, the Sutrakar has also counted twenty-eight
studies by mentioning twenty-five studies related to Prachar along with the
Prayaschitt form of study. At the time of the creation of the Nandistra, the
twenty Uddeshak of the three divisions of Prayaschitt-vidhayak had completely
separated from the Pracharang Sutra and were named "Nishisth Sutra". Due to
this, no Sutra named "Prakalp" or "Acharprakalp" is mentioned in the Nandi
Sutra, and in the Sutras written before the Nandi Sutra, "Pracharprakalp" is
mentioned in many places, but the name "Nishisth Sutra" is not there. In the
above-mentioned commentary of the Samavayang Sutra, the commentator has
clarified that "Prachar means the first Ang-Yacharang Sutra and Prakalp means
its special study, which is also known as the Nishisth Sutra". Thus, both the
Sutras together constitute the complete Pracharprakalp Sutra. The alternative
meanings of the word "Prachar-Prakalp" are as follows: 1. The Sutra that lays
down the rules of Prachar and Prayaschitt, the Nishisth-Adhyayan-Yukta-
Pracharang Sutra. 2. The Sutra that is the prototype of Prayaschitt for Achar-
vidhans - Nishisth Sutra. 3. The study that mentions Prayaschitt related to
Achar-vidhans after them - Pracharprakalp Adhyayan - Nishisth Adhyayan. 4. The
Sutra or study that is a separate section or division from the Pracharang -
Pracharprakalp Adhyayan - Nishisth Sutra. In the number-based Thanang and
Samavayang Sutras, many forms have been made from many expectations. It is not
appropriate to understand it from a single expectation. For example, the
Nishisth Sutra has 20 Uddeshak, but they have been counted from different
expectations (three or five). In the Thanang Sutra, three Anudghatik have also
been mentioned, and five Anudghatik have also been mentioned. Similarly, five
divisions of Pracharprakalp have also been mentioned, and twenty-eight divisions
have also been mentioned. There are many such examples, therefore, instead of
insisting on the statement of a small number, the larger number, i.e., twenty-
eight, should be considered complete. In summary, the Nishisth Sutra available
from a concise perspective has been called Acharprakalp in Agam and
interpretations, and the Acharang and Nishisth Sutra available from a detailed
and complete perspective have been called Acharprakalp together. Therefore, the
conclusion is that these two are two divisions of the same Sutra.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
tIsarA uddezaka [317 tIna vibhAga kA samAveza karake aTThAIsa kA yoga batAyA
hai| prastuta sUtra meM solaha bAra "prAcAraprakalpa" kA kathana hai aura usake
adhyayana ko atyadhika mahattva diyA hai| usase bhI vartamAna meM prasiddha
donoM hI sUtroM ko samajhanA ucita pratIta hotA hai| kyoMki kevala
prAcArAMgasUtra grahaNa kareM to "prakalpa' zabda nirarthaka ho jAtA hai aura
kevala nizIthasUtra samajhe to AcArAMga kA adhyayana kiye binA nizIthasUtra kA
adhyayana karanA mAnanA hogA, jo ki sarvathA anucita hai| isakA kAraNa yaha hai
ki prAyazcitta-vidhAnoM ke adhyayana ke pUrva prAcAra-vidhAnoM kA adhyayana
karanA Avazyaka hotA hai / samavAyAMga aura praznavyAkaraNasUtra meM bhI
sUtrakAra ne prAcAra sambaMdhI paccIsa adhyayana ke sAtha hI prAyazcitta rUpa
adhyayana kaha kara aTThAIsa adhyayana ginAe haiN| naMdIstra kI racanA ke samaya
prAyazcittavidhAyaka tIna vibhAgoM ke bIsa uddezaka prAcArAMgasUtra se pUrNataH
pRthak ho cuke the aura unakA nAma "nizIthasUtra" rakha diyA gayA thaa| isI
kAraNa naMdIsUtra meM "prakalpa" yA "AcAraprakalpa" nAmaka koI sUtra nahIM kahA
gayA hai aura naMdIsUtra ke pUrvaracita sUtroM meM aneka jagaha prAcAraprakalpa
kA kathana hai kintu vahAM "nizIthasUtra" nAma nahIM hai| _ samavAyAMgasUtra ke
uparyukta TIkAMza meM TIkAkAra ne spaSTa kiyA hai ki "prAcAra kA matalaba
prathamAMga-yAcArAMgasUtra aura prakalpa kA matalaba usakA adhyayana vizeSa /
jisakA ki prasiddha dUsarA nAma nizIthasUtra hai", isa prakAra donoM sUtra
milakara hI sampUrNa prAcAraprakalpasUtra hai| 'prAcAra-prakalpa' zabda ke
vaikalpika artha isa prakAra hote haiM1. prAcAra aura prAyazcittoM kA vidhAna
karane vAlA sUtra nizItha-adhyayanayukta-prAcArAMga suutr| 2. AcAravidhAnoM ke
prAyazcitta kA prarUpaka sUtra-nizIthasUtra / 3. AcAravidhAnoM ke bAda
tatsaMbaMdhI prAyazcittoM ko kahane vAlA adhyayanaprAcAraprakalpa adhyayana-
nizItha adhyayana / 4. prAcArAMga se pRthak kiyA gayA khaMDa yA vibhAga rUpa
sUtra athavA adhyayana-prAcAraprakalpa adhyayana-nizothasUtra / saMkhyApradhAna
ThANAMga aura samavAyAMga sUtra meM aneka apekSAoM se aneka prarUpaNa kiye gaye
haiN| use ekAMtaapekSA se samajhanA ucitta nahIM hai| yathA-nizIthasUtra ke 20
uddezaka haiM kintu unheM vibhinna apekSAmoM se (tIna yA pAMca) hI ginAye gaye
haiN| ThANAMgasUtra meM tIna anudghAtika bhI kahe gaye haiM aura pAMca
anudghAtika bhI kaha die haiM / isI prakAra prAcAraprakalpa ke pAMca vibhAga bhI
kahe gaye haiM aura aTThAIsa vibhAga bhI kahe gaye haiN| aise aneka udAharaNa
haiM, ataH alpasaMkhyA ke kathana kA Agraha na rakhakara adhika saMkhyA arthAt
aTThAIsa ko pUrNa mAnanA caahie| sArAMza yaha hai ki saMkSipta-apekSA se
upalabdha nizIthasUtra ko Agama aura vyAkhyAoM meM AcAraprakalpa kahA gayA hai
aura vistRta evaM paripUrNaapekSA se upalabdha AcArAMga aura nizIthasUtra donoM
ko milAkara AcAraprakalpa kahA gayA hai| ataH niSkarSa yaha hai ki ye donoM eka
hI sUtra ke do vibhAga haiN|

Page #138 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[318] It is possible that the *Nishƒ´tha S≈´tra* was separated from the *VyavahƒÅra
S≈´tra* and named *Nishƒ´tha* at the time of its composition. Prior to that, there
is no evidence of the name *Nishƒ´tha* in any of the previous texts. It was only
referred to as *PrƒÅcƒÅra-prakalpa* or *PrƒÅcƒÅra-prakalpa-adhyayana*. Due to the
separation of the *Nishƒ´tha S≈´tra*, there have been various opinions regarding
its author, such as: 1. It was quoted from the *P≈´rva* by Vi≈õƒÅkhaga·πái. 2.
PƒÅryaraksita composed it due to the need of the time. 3. The fourteenth *P≈´rva*
Bhadrabahu SvƒÅmƒ´ quoted all four *Chheda S≈´tras* from the *P≈´rva*, etc. These
are some of the speculations. The *VyavahƒÅra S≈´tra* mentions *PrƒÅcƒÅra-prakalpa-
adhyayana* and states that both monks and nuns should memorize it. The
*VyavahƒÅra S≈´tra* is composed by the fourteenth *P≈´rva* Bhadrabahu SvƒÅmƒ´.
Therefore, it is clearly against the *P≈´rva* to speculate that Vi≈õƒÅkhaga·πái and
ƒÄrya Rak·π£ita, who came after Bhadrabahu SvƒÅmƒ´, composed *PrƒÅcƒÅra-prakalpa*. If
we accept that one of these two *ƒÄcƒÅryas* quoted from the *P≈´rva*, then the
*Nishƒ´tha S≈´tra* would have to be considered a part of the *P≈´rva*. However, the
*VyavahƒÅra S≈´tra* states that nuns should memorize it, and nuns are prohibited
from studying the *P≈´rva*. Therefore, the option of these two *ƒÄcƒÅryas* quoting
from the *P≈´rva* is also not true. However, it is certain that this *PrƒÅcƒÅra-
prakalpa* was available in a form different from the *P≈´rva* even before these
*ƒÄcƒÅryas*. Bhadrabahu SvƒÅmƒ´ did not compose four *Chheda S≈´tras*, but only
three. This is clear from the first verse of the *Da≈õƒÅ≈õruta-skandha S≈´tra* which
states: "I bow to Bhadrabahu, the last of the wise, who has mastered all the
good knowledge. He has separated the *S≈´tra* into ten chapters, and also in the
*Da≈õƒÅ-k·π£apa-vyavahƒÅra*." The composer of the *Da≈õƒÅ≈õruta-skandha*, the second
Bhadrabahu SvƒÅmƒ´, has bowed to the first Bhadrabahu SvƒÅmƒ´, calling him the
ancient Bhadrabahu, and has stated that he composed three *S≈´tras*. If
Bhadrabahu SvƒÅmƒ´ had composed the *Nishƒ´tha S≈´tra*, then instead of using the
term *PrƒÅcƒÅra-prakalpa* sixteen times in the *VyavahƒÅra S≈´tra*, or mentioning it
in the context of the order of study, he would have mentioned *Nishƒ´tha*
somewhere. However, *Nishƒ´tha* is not mentioned in the order of study either.
Only *PrƒÅcƒÅra-prakalpa* and *Da≈õƒÅ-k·π£apa-vyavahƒÅra* are mentioned. Therefore, it
is not evidence-based to say that Bhadrabahu composed the *Nishƒ´tha S≈´tra*. All
these considerations prove that it is not a composition by anyone, but rather a
separation of the study of the *ƒÄcƒÅrƒÅ·πÖga* for some purpose. We do not have any
basis to know when and by whom it was separated, how long it was called
*PrƒÅcƒÅra-prakalpa*, and when it became *Nishƒ´tha*. However, it is certain that
it was separated at the time of the composition of the *Nandis≈´tra*, and its
name was also fixed as *Nishƒ´tha S≈´tra*. The *PrƒÅcƒÅra...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
318] [vyavahArasUtra naMdIsUtra kI racanA ke samaya usakA vibhakta honA evaM
nizotha nAmakaraNa ho jAnA saMbhava hai| usake pUrva aneka prAgama sthAnoM meM
nizotha nAma kA koI astitva nahIM hai, kevala 'prAcAraprakalpa' yA
'prAcAraprakalpa-adhyayana' ke nAma se vidhAna kiye haiN| nizIthasUtra ke alaga
ho jAne ke kAraNa usake racanAkAra ke saMbaMdha meM aneka vicAra pracalita hue
haiM, yathA 1. yaha vizAkhAgaNi dvArA pUrvo se uddhRta kiyA gayA hai| 2. samaya
kI AvazyakatA ko lekara pAryarakSita ne isakI racanA kI hai / 3. caudahapUrvI
bhadrabAhusvAmI ne nizotha sahita cAroM chedasUtroM ko pUrvo se uddhRta kiyA
hai, ityAdi kalpanAeM kI gaI hai| vyavahArasUtra meM 'prAcAraprakalpa-
DAdhyayana' kA varNana hai aura use sAdhu-sAdhvI donoM ko kaMThastha rakhane kA
kathana hai aura vyavahArasUtra caudahapUrvI bhadrabAhusvAmo ke dvArA racita
(niyUMDha) hai / ataH bhadrabAhusvAmI ke bAda meM hone vAle vizAkhAgaNi aura
Arya rakSita ke dvArA prAcAraprakalpa kI racanA karane kI kalpanA karanA to
spaSTa hI pAgama se viparIta hai| una donoM prAcAryoM meM se kisI eka ke dvArA
pUrvazruta se uddha ta karanA mAna lene para nizIthasUtra ko pUrvazruta kA aMza
mAnanA hogaa| jabaki vyavahArasUtra meM sAdhviyoM ko usake kaMThastha rakhane kA
vidhAna hai aura sAdhviyoM ko pUrvo kA adhyayana vajita bhI hai / ataH ina donoM
prAcAryoM ke dvArA pUrvo se uddha ta karane kA vikalpa bhI satya nahIM hai.
kintu una prAcAryoM ke pahale bhI yaha prAcAraprakalpa pUrvI se bhinna zruta
rUpa meM upalabdha thA, yaha nizcita hai| bhadrabAhusvAmI ne cAra chedasUtroM kI
racanA nahIM kI thI kintu tIna chedasUtroM ko ho racanA ko thI, yaha
dazAzrutaskaMdhasUtra kI niyukti kI prathama gAthA se spaSTa hai gAthA-vaMdAmi
bhaddabAhuM, pAINaM carima-sagala-suya-NANi / suttassa phAragamisi, dasAsu kappe
ya vavahAre // dazAzrutaskaMdha ke niyuktikartA dvitIya bhadrabAhusvAmI ne
prathama bhadrabAhusvAmI ko prAcIna bhadrabAhu ke nAma se vaMdana karake unheM
tIna sUtroM kI racanA karane vAlA kahA hai| bhadrabAhusvAmI ne yadi nizIthasUtra
kI racanA kI hotI to ve vyavahArasUtra meM solaha bAra 'prAcAraprakalpa' kA
prayoga karane ke sthAna meM yA adhyayanakrama kahane ke varNana meM kahIM
nizItha kA bhI nAma nirdeza kara dete| kintu adhyayanakrama meM bhI nizItha kA
nAma nahIM diyA gayA hai, prAcAraprakalpa aura 'dasA-kappa-vavahAra' nAma diye
haiN| ataH nizothasUtra ko bhadrabAhu ko racanA kahanA bhI pramANasaMgata nahIM
haiN| ina saba vicAraNAoM se yaha siddha hotA hai ki yaha kisI ko racanA nahIM
hai kintu AcArAMga ke adhyayana ko kisI Azaya se pRthaka kiyA gayA hai| kaba
kisane pRthak kiyA, kaba taka prAcAraprakalpa nAma rahA aura kaba nizItha nAma
humA, yaha jAnane kA AdhAra nahIM milatA hai| tathApi naMdIsUtra ko racanA ke
samaya yaha pRthakho gayA thA aura isakA nAma bhI nizIthasUtra nizcitta ho gayA
thA tathA prAcAra

Page #139 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Third Uddeshak [319]  No Sutra by the name of "Prakalpa Nama" was prevalent
at that time, yet many rules under the name of "Prachar Prakalpa" are still
available in the Agamas today. The first Sutra in the present Dwika lays down
the rule for a Bhikshu eligible for the Upadhyaya position to study it and
memorize it with its meaning. This is a necessary Jghanya Shruta for a Bhikshu
eligible for the Upadhyaya position. If he does not memorize it, he is
considered ineligible to be established in the Upadhyaya position.  In the
second Sutra Dwika of the Dasha-Kapa-Vavahar-Dhara, while stating the
eligibility and ineligibility for the Acharya position, it is said that it is
necessary to memorize at least three Chhed Sutras after mentioning all the
qualities from the five years of Diksha Paryaya and other Bahushruta. The word
"Chhed Sutra" is not used in the original text, nor are they called Chhed Sutras
in the Sutra list mentioned in the Nandi Sutra. The word "Chhed Sutra" is not
used in other Agamas either. The word "Chhed Sutra" is found in commentaries
like Bhashya, Chuni, etc. Therefore, these Sutras became known as "Chhed Sutras"
during the time of the commentators after the composition of Nandi. In Nishith
Sutra, U. 19, in the explanation of the instruction "Uttama Shruta", Drishti Vad
or Chhed Sutras are considered "Uttama Shruta", where the Sutra states that
there is a penance for teaching "Uttama Shruta" before teaching Prachar Shastra.
Here, the word "Dasha" refers to Dasha Shruta Skandha Sutra, "Kapa" refers to
Brihat Kalpa Sutra, and "Vavahar" refers to Vavahar Sutra. These three Sutras
are undoubtedly composed by the first Bhadra Bahu Swami of the Chaudas Purvi
(Niyundh). There is a specific style available in the Agamas, where the name of
the same Sutra is given in the Sutra itself. For example, the name Nandi Sutra
is given in Nandi Sutra, the name Samavayanga Sutra is given in Samavayanga
Sutra. Similarly, in the present Vavahar Sutra, the instruction for studying
Vavahar Sutra is given in two places: in the present Sutra 5 and in the study
sequence of the tenth Uddeshak. In addition to this specific style, there may
also be some historical reason behind it. The Bahushruta investigator should try
to reveal some mystery by contemplating this subject.  In the third Sutra Dwika
of the Thana-Samavay-Dhara, while stating the eligibility and ineligibility of a
Bhikshu for the Ganavchhedak position, it is said that it is necessary to
memorize at least the Thanaanga Sutra and Samavayanga Sutra after mentioning all
the qualities from eight years of Diksha Paryaya and Bahushruta. Although the
Ganavchhedak position is of special importance from the Acharya and Upadhyaya
positions, the scope of the Ganavchhedak is vast in terms of work and Gan-Chita.
Therefore, the minimum Diksha Paryaya and Jghanya Shruta have also been
mentioned for them. In the Sutra, along with the Ganavchhedak, other positions
have also been collected in many copies, the total number of which is also found
to be 6 or 7 in some copies. In commentaries like Bhashya, etc., it is said that
it is necessary to have five position holders in each large Gachchha. Otherwise,
that Gachchha is considered to be of Sadhus...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
tIsarA uddezaka] [319 prakalpa nAma kA koI bhI sUtra usa samaya prasiddhi meM
nahIM rahA thA phira bhI prAcAraprakalpa ke nAma se aneka vidhAna to Aja taka
bhI AgamoM meM upalabdha haiN| prastuta prathama sUtra dvika meM upAdhyAya pada
yogya bhikSu ke lie isake adhyayana karane kA aura artha sahita kaNThastha
dhAraNa karane kA vidhAna hai| yaha upAdhyAya pada yogya bhikSu ke lie Avazyaka
jaghanyazruta hai / isake kaNThastha na hone para vaha upAdhyAya pada para
sthApita karane ke ayogya kahA gayA hai| dasA-kappa-vavahAradhare dvitIya
sUtradvika meM AcArya pada ke yogyAyogya kA kathana karate hue jaghanya pAMca
varSa kI dIkSAparyAya evaM anya bahuzruta payaMta ke sabhI guNoM ko kaha kara
kama se kama tIna chedasUtroM ko dhAraNa karanA Avazyaka kahA hai| mUla pATha
meM inake lie 'chedasUtra' zabda kA prayoga nahIM hai tathA naMdIsUtra meM kahI
gaI sUtrasUcI meM bhI inheM chedasUtra nahIM kahA gayA hai| anya AgamoM meM bhI
'chedasUtra' zabda kA prayoga nahIM hai / bhASya, cUNi Adi vyAkhyAnoM meM
'chedasUtra' zabda kA prayoga milatA hai| ataH naMdI kI racanA ke bAda
vyAkhyAkAroM ke samaya meM ina sUtroM kI 'chedasUtra' saMjJA ho gaI hai /
nizIthasUtra u. 19 meM Aye "uttama zruta' nirdeza kI vyAkhyA meM dRSTi vAda
athavA chedasUtroM ko 'uttamazruta' mAnA gayA hai, vahAM sUtra meM prAcArazAstra
kA adhyayana karAne ke pUrva 'uttamazruta' kA adhyayana karAne para prAyazcitta
kahA hai| yahAM 'dasA' zabda se dazAzrutaskaMdhasUtra, 'kappa' zabda se
bRhatkalpasUtra aura 'vavahAra' zabda se vyavahArasUtra kA kathana kiyA gayA
hai| ye tInoM sUtra caudahapUrvI prathama bhadrabAhusvAmI dvArA racita
(niyUMDha) haiM, yaha nirvivAda hai| AgamoM meM eka vizeSa prakAra kI zailI
upalabdha hai, jisase kinhIM sUtroM meM svayaM usI.sUtra kA nAma diyA gayA hai /
yathA-naMdIsUtra meM naMdIsUtra kA nAma, samavAyAMgasUtra meM samavAyAMgasUtra
kA nAma / isI prakAra prastuta vyavahArasUtra meM bhI vyavahArasUtra ke
adhyayana kA nirdeza do rathaloM meM kiyA gayA hai prastuta sUtra 5 meM tathA
dasaveM uddezaka ke adhyayanakrama meM / vizeSa prakAra kI zailI ke atirikta
isameM koI aitihAsika kAraNa bhI ho sakatA hai| anveSaka bahuzruta isa viSaya kA
manana karake kucha na kucha rahasyodghATana karane kA prayatna kreN| ThANa-
samavAyadharetRtIya sUtradvika meM gaNAvacchedaka pada ke yogyAyogya bhikSu kA
kathana karate hue ATha varSa kI dIkSAparyAya evaM bahuzruta paryaMta ke sabhI
guNoM ko kahakara kama se kama ThANAMgasUtra aura samavAyAMgasUtra ko kaNThastha
dhAraNa karanA Avazyaka kahA hai / yadyapi gaNAvacchedaka se AcArya aura
upAdhyAya ke pada kA vizeSa mahattva hai tathApi kAryoM kI apekSA evaM gaNa-citA
kI apekSA gaNAvacchedaka kA kSetra vizAla hotA hai| ataH inake lie jaghanya
dIkSAparyAya evaM jaghanyazruta bhI adhika kahA gayA hai| yahAM sUtra meM
gaNAvacchedaka ke sAtha-sAtha anya padaviyoM kA bhI saMgraha kaI pratiyoM meM
kiyA gayA hai, jinakI kula saMkhyA kucha pratiyoM meM 6 yA 7 bhI milatI hai /
bhASyAdi vyAkhyAnanthoM meM kahA hai ki pratyeka vizAla gaccha meM pAMca
padavIdharoM kA honA Avazyaka hai| anyathA usa gaccha ko sAdhunoM ke

Page #140 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Translation:  [320] The *Vyavahar Sutra* defines five *gachchas* (orders) as
unfit, disorganized, and to be abandoned for staying in *samadhi*. These five
orders are: (1) *Pracharya*, (2) *Upadhyaya*, (3) *Pravartaka*, (4) *Sthavira*,
(5) *Ganavacchedaka*.    The duties, rights, etc. of the holders of these four
orders, except *Pravartaka*, are mentioned in many *Agamas*. For example: (1) It
is forbidden for young *sant*s to stay without the guidance of *Pracharya* and
*Upadhyaya*. (2) There are certain essential duties that are prescribed to be
performed after consulting the *Sthavira*. (3) It is stated that acts like
performing *prƒÅya≈õcitta* (penance) or separating from the *gachcha* should be
done according to the instructions of the *Ganavacchedaka*.   *BhƒÅ·π£ya* and other
explanatory texts state that the duty of the *Pravartaka* is to guide *≈õrama·πáa*s
towards *samƒÅcƒÅrƒ´* (right conduct).   In addition to these five, the *Sutras*
also mention the *Ganƒ´* and *Ganadhara* positions. The *Ganadhara* is explained
in the first *uddesaka* of this *uddesaka*, and the word *Ganƒ´* is a synonym for
*Pracharya*, meaning the one who holds the *gana-gachcha* is the *Ganƒ´* or
*Pracharya*.  (See *Tha·πáƒÅ* 3, 8; *Uttara* 3; and *Vyavahar* 1/
*AbhidhƒÅnaratnakosa* 3, p. 823).  Alternatively, under the guidance of a
prominent *ƒÄchƒÅrya*, there are many other smaller *ƒÄchƒÅryas* (with a few
disciples), who are called *Ganƒ´*.   The provisions of these two sections (7-8)
are appropriate for *Ganavacchedaka* and *Sthavira*, but the eight-year *dƒ´k·π£ƒÅ-
paryƒÅya* and memorization of the mentioned *≈õruta* may not be mandatory for
*Ganƒ´*, *Ganadhara*, and *Pravartaka*. Because their competence can be assessed
after three or five years of *dƒ´k·π£ƒÅ-paryƒÅya*.   The *Sthavira* can be included
in the *Ganavacchedaka*, as *Ganavacchedaka*s are usually *Sthavira*s who have
memorized the *≈õruta*.   Therefore, this third *sutra* is related to the
*Ganavacchedaka*. The collection of other positions at the end of the *sutra*
may have been added later by someone. This is possible because the available
copies contain these words in excess or deficiency and they are not contextually
relevant.   Although the three *sutra-dvayas* mention (1) *Pracharya-prakalpa*,
(2) *Dasha-kappa-vyavahar*, (3) *Tha·πáƒÅ·πÖga*, *SamvƒÅyƒÅ·πÖga*, memorization and study
of *jaghanya-≈õruta*, respectively, the provisions of the tenth *uddesaka* on the
order of study and the *prƒÅya≈õcitta* provisions and their explanation in the
*Nƒ´≈õƒ´tha* *uddesaka* 19 prove that:  (1) For *Upadhyaya*:  (1) *≈örƒÅva≈õyaka-
sutra*, (2) *Dashavaikalika-sutra*, (3) *Uttara-adhyayana-sutra*, (4)
*ƒÄchƒÅrƒÅ·πÖga-sutra*, (5) *Nƒ´≈õƒ´tha-sutra*, at least five *sutras* must be
memorized.  (2) For *Pracharya*: (1) *ƒÄva≈õyaka*, (2) *Dashavaikalika*, (3)
*Uttara-adhyayana*, (4) *ƒÄchƒÅrƒÅ·πÖga*, (5) *Nƒ´≈õƒ´tha*, (6) *Sutra-k·πõtƒÅ·πÖga*, (7)
*Da≈õa-≈õruta-skandha*, (8) *B·πõhat-kalpa*, (9) *Vyavahar-sutra*, at least nine
*sutras* must be memorized.  (3) For *Ganavacchedaka*: The above nine *sutras*
plus *Tha·πáƒÅ·πÖga-sutra* and *SamvƒÅyƒÅ·πÖga-sutra*, at least eleven *sutras* must be
memorized.   For specific explanations related to the study of *sutras*, see
*Nƒ´≈õƒ´tha* *uddesaka* 19.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
320] [vyavahArasUtra samAdhi se rahane ke ayogya, avyasthita aura tyAjya gaccha
kahA hai| ve pAMca padaviyAM ye haiM(1) prAcArya, (2) upAdhyAya, (3) pravartaka,
(4) sthavira, (5) gaNAvacchedaka / inameM se pravartaka ke atirikta cAra
padavIdharoM ke kartavya, adhikAra Adi kA kathana aneka AgamoM meM hai| yathA(1)
prAcArya aura upAdhyAya ke netRtva ke binA bAla taruNa saMtoM ko rahanA hI
niSiddha hai / (2) kucha aise Avazyaka kartavya hote haiM jo "sthavira" ko
pUchakara karane kA vidhAna hai| (3) prAyazcita denA yA gaccha se alaga karanA
Adi kArya gaNAvacchedaka ke nirdezAnusAra kie jAne kA kathana hai / bhASyAdi
vyAkhyAgranthoM meM pravartaka kA kArya zramaNa-samAcArI meM pravRtti karAne kA
kahA gayA hai| ina pAMca ke atirikta sUtroM meM gaNI aura gaNadhara pada ke
pATha bhI milate haiN| inameM se "gaNadhara" kI vyAkhyA isa uddezaka ke prathama
sUtra meM kI gaI hai aura gaNI zabda prAcArya kA hI paryAyavAcI zabda hai arthAt
gaNa-gaccha ko dhAraNa karane vAlA "gaNI" yA prAcArya hotA hai| yathA ThANA. a.
3, a. 8; uttarA. a. 3 aura vyava. u.1/abhi. rA. koza bhA. 3, pR. 823 / _ athavA
eka pramukha AcArya kI nizrA meM anya aneka choTe prAcArya (kucha ziSyoM ke)
hote haiM, ve gaNI kahe jAte haiN| prastuta satradvaya (7-8) kA vidhAna
gaNAvacchedaka aura sthavira ke lie to ucita hai, kintu gaNI gaNadhara aura
pravartaka ke lie ATha varSa kI dIkSAparyAya aura ukta zruta kA kaNThastha honA
anivArya nahIM ho sktaa| kyoMki tIna yA pAMca varSa kI dIkSAparyAya se hI unakI
yogyatA aMkita kI jA sakatI hai| sthavira kA samAveza to gaNAvacchedaka meM ho
sakatA hai, kyoMki gaNAvacchedaka zruta kI apekSA sthavira hI hote haiM / ataH
yaha tIsarA sUtra dvika gaNAvacchedaka se sambandhita hai| zeSa padaviyoM kA
sUtra ke anta meM jo saMgraha milatA hai, ve zabda kabhI kAlAntara se kisI ke
dvArA adhika jor3a diye gaye haiN| aisA bhI sambhava hai, kyoMki upalabdha
pratiyoM meM ye zabda hInAdhika milate haiM aura prasaMgasaMgata bhI nahIM haiN|
yadyapi tInoM sUtradvika meM kramaza: (1) prAcAraprakalpa, (2) dasA-kappa-
vavahAra, (3) ThANAMga, samavAyAMga, jaghanyazruta-adhyayana evaM dhAraNa karanA
kahA gayA hai, tathApi adhyayanakrama ke dasaveM uddezaka ke vidhAna se evaM
nizItha uddezaka 19 ke prAyazcitta-vidhAnoM evaM usakI vyAkhyA se yaha siddha
hotA (1) upAdhyAya ke lie-~~1. zrAvazyakasUtra 2, dazavaikAlikasUtra, 3.
uttarAdhyayanasUtra, 4. AcArAMgasUtra 5 nizIthasUtra, yoM kama se kama pAMca
sUtroM ko kaNThastha dhAraNa karanA anivArya hai| (2) prAcArya ke lie-1.
aAvazyaka, 2. dazavaikAlika, 3. uttarAdhyayana, 4. AcArAMga, 5. nizItha, 6,
sUtrakRtAMga, 7. dazAzrutaskandha, 8. bRhatkalpa, 9. vyavahArasUtra, yoM kama se
kama kula 9 sUtroM ko kaNThastha dhAraNa karanA Avazyaka hai| (3) gaNAvacchedaka
ke lie-uparyukta 9 aura ThAgAMNasUtra, samavAyAMgasUtra, yoM kama se kama
gyAraha sUtroM ko kaNThastha dhAraNa karanA anivArya hai| sUtrAdhyayana
sambaMdhI vizeSa spaSTIkaraNa ke lie nizItha udde. 19 dekheN|

Page #141 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Third Objective] [321. The rule for giving the position to one with a short
period of initiation] 9. If a Shraman Niggranth with a short period of
initiation is ordained, he should be given the position of Acharya or Upadhyaya
on that very day. Q - Why is that so, Bhagavan? A - There are many families of
Theras who are well-disposed, steadfast, trustworthy, agreeable, joyful,
approved and have a majority. From those well-disposed, steadfast, trustworthy,
agreeable, joyful, approved and majority families, if a Shraman Niggranth with a
short period of initiation is ordained, he should be given the position of
Acharya or Upadhyaya on that very day. 10. If a Shraman Niggranth with a short
period of initiation is ordained after the Acharya or Upadhyaya has attained
Kal-Dharma (death), he should be given the position of Acharya or Upadhyaya. If
he has some portion of the Acharya's teachings left to study and he resolves to
complete it and does complete it, he should be given the position of Acharya or
Upadhyaya. But if he does not complete it even after resolving to do so, he
should not be given the position of Acharya or Upadhyaya. 9. If a Shraman
Niggranth with a short period of initiation is ordained, he should be given the
position of Acharya or Upadhyaya on that very day. Q - Why is that so, Bhagavan?
A - There are many families of Theras who are well-disposed, steadfast,
trustworthy, agreeable, joyful, approved and have a majority. From those well-
disposed, steadfast, trustworthy, agreeable, joyful, approved and majority
families, if a Shraman Niggranth with a short period of initiation is ordained,
he should be given the position of Acharya or Upadhyaya on that very day. 10. If
a Shraman Niggranth with a short period of initiation is ordained after the
Acharya or Upadhyaya has attained Kal-Dharma (death), he should be given the
position of Acharya or Upadhyaya. If he has some portion of the Acharya's
teachings left to study and he resolves to complete it and does complete it, he
should be given the position of Acharya or Upadhyaya. But if he does not
complete it even after resolving to do so, he should not be given the position
of Acharya or Upadhyaya. / Discussion - The previous six sutras described the
qualities of a monk who is eligible to be given the position of Acharya etc. and
stated the Utsarga ritual. This pair of sutras mentions exceptions related to
the period of initiation and the study of scriptures.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
tIsarA uddezaka] [321 alpadIkSAparyAya vAle ko pada dene kA vidhAna 9.
niruddhapariyAe samaNe niggaMthe kappai tadivasaM pAyariya-uvajJAyattAe
udisitte| pa0-se kimAhu bhNte| u0-asthi NaM therANaM tahArUvANi kulANi, kaDANi,
pattiyANi, thejjANi vesAsiyANi, sammayANi, sammuikarANi, aNumayANi, bahumayANi
bhvNti| tehi kaDehi, tehi pattiehi, tehi thegjehi, tehi vesAsiehi, tehi
sammaehi, tehi sammuikarehi, tehi aNumahi, tehi bahumahiM / jaM se
niruddhapariyAe samaNe niggaMthe kappai Ayariya-uvajjhAyattAe uddisittae
taddivasaM / 10. niruddhavAsapariyAe samaNe NiggaMthe kappai Ayariya-
uvajjhAyattAe uddisittae, samuccheyakappaMsi / tassa NaM AyAra-pakappassa dese
avaTThie, se ya ahijjissAmi tti ahijjejjA, evaM se kappai Ayariya-uvajjhAyattAe
uddisitte| se ya ahijjissAmi ti no ahijjejjA, evaM se no kappaI Ayariya-
uvajjhAyattAe uddisitte| 9. niruddha (alpa) paryAya vAlA zramaNa nirgrantha jisa
dina dIkSita ho, usI dina use prAcArya yA upAdhyAya pada denA kalpatA hai|
pra0-he bhagavan ! aisA kahane kA kyA kAraNa hai ? u0-sthaviroM ke dvArA
tathArUpa se bhAvita prItiyukta, sthira, vizvasta, sammata, pramudita, anumata
aura bahumata aneka kula hote haiN| una bhAvita prItiyukta, sthira, vizvasta,
sammata, pramudita, anumata aura bahumata kula se dIkSita jo niruddha (alpa)
paryAya vAlA zramaNa nirgrantha hai, use usI dina prAcArya yA upAdhyAya pada
denA kalpatA hai| 10. AcArya yA upAdhyAya ke kAla-dharmaprApta (maraNa) ho jAne
para niruddha (alpa) varSa paryAya vAle zramaNa nirgrantha ko prAcArya yA
upAdhyAya pada denA kalpatA hai| _usake prAcAraprakalpa kA kucha aMza adhyayana
karanA zeSa ho aura vaha adhyayana pUrNa karane kA saMkalpa rakhakara pUrNa kara
le to use prAcArya yA upAdhyAya pada denA kalpatA hai| kintu yadi vaha zeSa
adhyayana pUrNa karane kA saMkalpa rakhakara bhI use pUrNa na kare to use
prAcArya yA upAdhyAya pada denA nahIM kalpatA hai / vivecana-pUrva ke chaha
sUtroM meM prAcArya Adi pada dene yogya bhikSu ke guNoM kA varNana karate hue
utsargavidhi kA kathana kiyA gayA hai| isa sUtradvika meM dIkSAparyAya evaM
zruta-adhyayana sambandhI apavAda

Page #142 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Translation:  [322] The **Vyavahar Sutra** method has been stated. That is,
in the previous Sutras, it has been stated that a minimum of three years and
five years of **dikshaparaya** are mandatory for **upaadhyaya** and **acharya**
respectively. And in these Sutras, the **diksha** received on the same day, or
the one with less than the mandatory years of **dikshaparaya**, or the one whose
required **shruta** study is incomplete, such a monk is given the position of
**acharya** or **upaadhyaya** due to circumstances. The meaning of these Sutras
is that if someone has all the other qualities worthy of the position mentioned
in the Sutras, then in a particular situation, the incompleteness of **shruta**
holding or **dikshaparaya** can be considered negligible, because with all other
qualities present, the lack of **shruta** and **dikshaparaya** can be fulfilled
even after being given the position. In the ninth Sutra, while stating the
giving of the position to the monk who received **diksha** on the same day, the
highest level of religious devotion and nobility of his family is indicated, and
at the end of the Sutra, the concluding statement is made about giving the
position on the same day to the monk who received **diksha** from such a family
with such qualities. In the tenth Sutra, the condition of completing the
incomplete study of **shruta** is mentioned, that is, it is said that it is
necessary to complete the remaining **shruta** either before or after giving the
position. These Sutras have been stated keeping in mind two types of
**ganasthiti** - (1) There is no one in the **gana** who is capable of handling
the unanimous consent and discipline, at that time the **diksha** of a capable
and talented person from a worthy family is indicated. (2) There is no one
worthy of the position among the **sadhus** in the **gana** who have long
**dikshaparaya** and are well-versed in **shruta**, but a monk with short
**paraya** and incomplete **shruta** is worthy, in such circumstances, it is
indicated to appoint him to the position. The family qualities of the newly
ordained monk mentioned in the Sutras are: 1. A family influenced by
**dharmabhavna** by **sthaviras** who are skilled in **tatharupa**. 2.
**Pattiyani** - '**pritikarani, vainayikani kritani**' - a family with
**vinaya**. 3. **Thejjani** - '**pritikarataya gachchitaayaam pramanabhutani**'
- a family that is a proof in the work of the **gachch** due to their love for
the **gachch**. 4. **Vesasiyani** - '**atmanam anyesham gachchvasina
mayarahitani kritataya visvasasthanani**' - a family that is trustworthy and
simple-natured, with no deceit towards all the **sadhus** of the **gachch**. 5.
**Sammayani** - '**teshu teshu prayojneshu istani**' - a family that is desired
in many tasks of the **sangha**. 6. **Sammuikrani** - '**bahuso vigrahesthu
samutpannethu ganasy samuditam akarshith**' - a family that keeps the **gachch**
happy by calming the troubles that arise in the **gachch**. 7. **Anamayani** -
'**bahumayani**' - a family that is respected by all in the **gachch**,
including children, the weak, and the elderly, and has words that are worthy of
respect.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
322] [vyavahArasUtra vidhi kA kathana kiyA gayA hai| arthAt pUrva sUtroM meM
kama se kama tIna varSa evaM pAMca varSa kI dIkSAparyAya kA honA kramaza:
upAdhyAya evaM AcArya ke lie anivArya kahA gayA hai aura ina sUtroM meM usI dina
ke dIkSita bhikSu ko yA anivArya varSoM se kama varSa kI dIkSAparyAya vAle ko
athavA Avazyaka zruta-adhyayana apUrNa ho aise bhikSu ko paristhitivaza AcArya
upAdhyAya pada dene kA vidhAna kiyA hai| ina sUtroM kA tAtparya yaha hai ki yadi
kisI meM sUtrokta pada ke yogya anya sabhI guNa hoM to kisI vizeSa paristhiti
meM zruta-dhAraNa kI yA dIkSAparyAya kI apUrNatA ko nagaNya kiyA jA sakatA hai,
kyoMki anya sabhI guNa vidyamAna hone se zruta aura dIkSA-paryAya kI kamI kI
pUrti to pada dene ke bAda bhI ho sakatI hai| nauveM sUtra meM usI dina ke
dIkSita bhikSu ko pada dene kA kathana karate hue usake parivAra kI dharmaniSThA
evaM kulInatA kI parAkASThA sUcita kI gaI hai evaM sUtra ke aMta meM aise
guNasaMpanna kuloM se dIkSita hone vAle bhikSu ko usI dina pada dene kA
upasaMhAra-vAkya kahA gayA hai / dasaveM sUtra meM apUrNa sUtra ke adhyayana ko
pUrNa karane kI zarta kahI gaI hai arthAt pada dene ke pUrva yA pazcAt zIghra hI
avazeSa zruta ko pUrNa karanA Avazyaka kahA hai| ina sUtroM meM do prakAra kI
gaNasthiti ko lakSya meM rakha kara kathana kiyA gayA hai-(1) gaNa meM rahe hue
sAdhuoM meM sarvAnumata evaM anuzAsanavyavasthA saMbhAlane yogya koI bhI nahIM
hai, usa samaya kisI yogya bhAvita kula ke pratibhAsaMpanna vyakti kA dIkSita
honA sUcita kiyA gayA hai| (2) gaNa meM dIrgha dIkSAparyAya vAle evaM
zrutasaMpanna sAdhuoM meM koI bhI pada-yogya nahIM hai, kiMtu alpaparyAya vAlA
evaM apUrNa zruta vAlA bhikSu yogya hai, aisI paristhitiyoM meM use pada para
niyukta karanA sUcita kiyA hai| navadIkSita bhikSu ke sUtraNita pArivArika guNa
1. tathArUpa kuzala sthaviroM dvArA dharmabhAvanA se bhAvita kiye gaye kula / 2.
pattiyANi-'prItikarANi, vainayikAni kRtAni'-vinayasaMpanna kula / 3.
thejjANi-'prItikaratayA gacchacitAyAM pramANabhUtAni-gaccha meM prIti hone se
gaccha ke kAryasampAdAna meM pramANabhUta / 4. vesAsiyANi-AtmAnaM anyeSAM
gacchavAsinA mAyArahitAni kRtatayA vizvAsasthAnAnigaccha ke samasta sAdhuoM ke
vizvAsayogya sarala svbhaavii| 5. sammayANiteSu teSu prayojaneSu iSTAni-saMgha
ke aneka kAryoM meM iSTa / 6. sammuikarANi-bahuzo vigraheSu samutpanneSu gaNasya
samuditaM akArSIt-gaccha meM utpanna kleza ko zAMta karake gaccha ko prasanna
rakhane vaale| 7. aNamayANi-bahumayANi-gacchagata bAla mlAna vRddha Adi sabhI ko
mAnya, bahumAnya prAdeya vacana vaale|

Page #143 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Third Objective] 8. If a monk who is about to take initiation is from a family
that is fully accepting (of Jainism), then he can be given the Acharya and
Upadhyaya positions on the same day of his initiation. The commentary explains
this sutra by saying that if a person who was forcibly taken home by his family
due to attachment or selfishness, and later gets initiated again, then he can be
given the position on the same day. However, this interpretation is not in line
with the meaning of the sutra. Because the sutra does not mention any qualities
or achievements related to his previous initiation, but rather describes the
complete religious devotion of his family. It is not appropriate to imagine that
such virtuous family members would forcibly abduct someone out of attachment or
selfishness. Therefore, the newly initiated monk from such a virtuous family is
the one who is intended by the term "niruddha-paryaya".  The commentary explains
the tenth sutra by saying that a monk who has had his initiation period cut
short due to committing some kind of fault in his restraint, and is therefore
not eligible for the position, can be given the position. However, this
interpretation of the subject of the sutra does not seem appropriate either.
Because it is not right to give the position to someone whose conduct has been
broken by such faults that make him eligible for the termination of initiation.
The sutra also mentions the incompleteness of his Acharya-prakalpa study. This
also proves that it is referring to someone who has a short initiation period
from a young age. Because it would not be appropriate or progressive to give the
position to a dull-witted monk who has completed a long initiation period but
whose Acharya-prakalpa study is not complete, and who has received atonement for
the termination of initiation. In fact, such a person is completely ineligible
for all positions according to the previous sutras. There is no exception for
him in the sutra.  Therefore, the word "niruddha" used in these sutras should
not be interpreted as "restriction" or "termination" of previous initiation, but
rather as "short initiation period" and "very short restraint period", meaning
that the position should be given on the first day of initiation. The word
"niruddha" has been used in the Agamas in the sense of "short" or "very short".
For example: 1. Sanniruddhammi Aue - This human being with a very short
lifespan, 2. Niruddhayu - Short lifespan, 3. Niruddhabhavpavache Samsarabhraman
- Whose worldly wandering has become short, 4. Niruddhavas - One who has a short
restraint period than the required years. Words have many meanings, some are
etymological, some are idiomatic. Sometimes the idiomatic meaning is relevant,
sometimes the etymological meaning is relevant, and sometimes both or many
meanings are relevant depending on the context. Therefore, the meaning of the
sutra and the words should be interpreted in such a way that it is in line with
the meaning of the sutra and does not contradict other Agamic provisions.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
tIsarA uddezaka] 8. tehi kahi jAba tehiM bahumahi-aise bhAvita yAvat saba ko
mAnya parivAra vAle sadasyoM meM se koI dIkSA lene vAlA bhikSu ho to use kappai
Ayariya-uvajjhAyattAe uddisittae tadivasaMusI dina dIkSA dekara prAcArya
upAdhyAya pada diyA jA sakatA hai| bhASya meM isa sUtra kI vyAkhyA karate hue
mohavaza yA svArthavaza pArivArika logoM dvArA balAt dIkSA chur3avA kara ghara
le jAye gaye vyakti ke kAlAMtara se punaH dIkSita hone para use usI dina pada
dene kA saMbaMdha batAyA hai, kiMtu yaha kalpanA sUtra ke prAzaya ke anukUla
nahIM hai| kyoMki sUtra meM usake pUrva dIkSAparyAya saMbaMdhI guNoM yA
upalabdhiyoM kA koI kathana nahIM kiyA gayA hai, apitu pArivArika logoM kI pUrNa
dharmaniSThA kA varNana kiyA hai / zAstrakAra dvArA aise sadguNoM se sampanna
pArivArika janoM ke dvArA balAt moha se svArthavaza apaharaNa kI kalpanA karanA
upayukta nahIM hai / ataH aise zreSTha guNasaMpanna bhAvita kula se dIkSita hone
vAlA navadIkSita bhikSu hI 'niruddhaparyAya' zabda se abhISTa hai|| bhASya meM
dasaveM sUtra kI vyAkhyA karate hue batAyA gayA hai ki saMyama meM kisI prakAra
ke doSoM ko sevana karane para jisakI dIkSAparyAya kA chedana kara diyA gayA ho,
jisase usakI dIkSAparyAya padaprApti ke yogya nahIM rahI ho aise bhikSu ko pada
dene kA varNana hai| kiMtu sUtra ke viSaya kI isa prakAra saMgati karanA bhI
upayukta nahIM lagatA hai| kyoMki aise dIkSAchedana yogya doSoM se khaMDita
AcAra bAle ko pada denA hI ucita nahIM hai| satra meM usake prAcAraprakalpa
adhyayana kI apUrNatA bhI kahI hai| isase bhI alpavarSa kI prArambhika
dIkSAparyAya vAle kA hI kathana siddha hotA hai / kyoMki adhika dIkSAparyAya
taka bhI jisakA prAcAraprakalpa-adhyayana pUrNa na ho aise jaDabuddhi aura
dIkSAcheda ke prAyazcitta ko prApta bhikSu ko pada denA zobhAjanaka evaM
pragatikAraka nahIM ho sakatA aura vAstava meM aisA vyakti to pUrva sUtroM ke
anusAra sabhI padoM ke sarvathA ayogya hotA hai| usake lie to sUtra meM
apavAdavidhAna bhI nahIM hai| ataH ina sUtroM meM prayukta niruddha' zabda se
'pUrva dIkSA kA nirodha' yA 'chedana' artha na karake 'alpa varSa kI
dIkSAparyAya' evaM 'atyaMta alpa saMyamaparyAya' arthAta dIkSA ke prathama dina
pada dene kA pra karanA caahie| AgamoM meM 'niruddha' zabda 'alpa' yA 'atyalpa'
artha meM prayukta huA hai| yathA1. sanniruddhammi Aue-atyaMta alpa Ayu vAle isa
manuSya bhava meM, 2. niruddhAyu-alpa Ayu, 3. niruddhabhavapavaMce
saMsArabhramaNa jisakA alpa raha gayA hai, 4. niruddhavAsa-Avazyaka varSoM se
alpa varSa paryAya vaalaa| zabdoM ke aneka artha hote haiM, kaI vyutpattiparaka
bhI hote haiM, kaI rUDha artha bhii| unameM se kahIM rUDha artha prAsaMgika hotA
hai, kahIM vyutpattiparaka artha prAsaMgika hotA hai aura kahIM donoM yA aneka
artha bhI apekSA se ghaTita ho jAte haiM / ataH jo artha sUtrAzaya ke anukUla ho
evaM anya bhAgamavidhAnoM se aviruddha ho, aisA hI sUtra kA evaM zabdoM kA
artha-bhAvArtha karanA caahie|

Page #144 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[324] The *Vyavahar Sutra* is different from the *Sutras* and their meaning and
the *Bhashya* in this regard. Although the *Bhashya* generally collects many
possible meanings and indicates which meaning is primarily in line with the
meaning of the *Sutras* using the word 'Suttanivato' in the *Gatha*, in some
places, the explanation of a *Sutra* is completed in the *Bhashya* with only one
meaning, which is not against the *Agamas*. Therefore, it was necessary to
interpret the meaning differently from the *Bhashya* in the following places,
such as: (1) *Nishith Sutra* U. 2, S. 1 'Padaponchan' (2) *Nishith Sutra* U. 2,
S. 8 'Visuyavei' (3) *Nishith Sutra* U. 3, S. 73 'Golehaniasu' (4) *Nishith
Sutra* U. 3, S. 80 'Anuggaesurie' (5-6) *Nishith Sutra* U. 19, S. 1 and 6
'Viyad' and 'Galei' (7) *Vyavahar* U. 2, S. 17 'Pratthajay' (8) *Vyavahar* U. 3,
S. 1-2 'Ganadharana' (9) *Vyavahar* U. 9, S. 31 'Sodiyasala' (10) *Vyavahar* U.
10, S. 22 'Tivaspariyae' (11) *Vyavahar* U. 3, S. 10 'Palasgansi' (12-13) and in
the present two *Sutras* 'Niruddhapariyae, Niruddhavaspariyae'. For detailed
information on these topics, see the discussion of the indicated places.  It is
forbidden for a *Nirgrantha* to remain without a *Nirgranthi* without the
guidance of an *Acharya*. 11. If the *Pracharaya* and *Upadhyaya* of a newly
initiated, child or young *Nirgrantha* die, it is not permissible for him to
remain without a *Pracharaya* and *Upadhyaya*. He should first seek out an
*Acharya* and then an *Upadhyaya*. 50. What do you say, *Bhanta*? A. A
*Nirgrantha* who is in the company of two, such as: 1. *Pracharaya* and 2.
*Upadhyaya*. 12. If the *Pracharaya* and *Upadhyaya* of a newly initiated, child
or young *Nirgranthi* die, it is not permissible for him to remain without an
*Acharya* and *Upadhyaya*. He should first seek out an *Acharya* and then an
*Upadhyaya* and then a *Pavatti*. 50. What do you say, *Bhanta*? A. A
*Nirgranthi* who is in the company of three, such as: 1. *Pracharaya*, 2.
*Upadhyaya*, and 3. *Pavatti*. 11. If the *Pracharaya* and *Upadhyaya* of a
newly initiated, child or young *Nirgrantha* die, it is not permissible for him
to remain without a *Pracharaya* and *Upadhyaya*.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
324] [vyavahArasUtra isI prAzaya se sUtrArtha evaM bhAvArtha bhASya se bhinna
prakAra kA kiyA hai| yadyapi bhASya meM prAyaH sarvatra aneka saMbhAvita arthoM
kA saMgraha kiyA jAtA hai aura pramukha rUpa se sUtrAzaya ke anurUpa artha
kaunasA hai, ise bhI 'suttanivAto' zabda se gAthA meM sUcita kiyA jAtA hai /
tathApi kahIM-kahIM kisI sUtra kI vyAkhyA meM kevala eka hI artha bhAvArtha meM
vyAkhyA pUrNa kara dI jAtI hai, jo ki Agama se aviruddha bhI nahIM hotI hai|
isalie aise nimnAMkita sthaloM para bhASya se sarthathA bhinna artha-vivecana
karanA par3A haiyathA-(1) nizIthasUtra u. 2, sU. 1 'pAdapoMchana' (2)
nizIthasUtra u. 2, sU. 8 'visuyAvei' (3) nizIthasUtra u. 3, sU. 73
'golehaNiyAsu' (4) nizIthasUtra u. 3, sU. 80 'aNuggaesUrie' (5-6) nizIthasUtra
u. 19, sU. 1 aura 6 'viyaDa' aura 'gAlei' (7) vyavahAra u. 2, sU. 17
'praTThajAya' (8) vyavahAra u. 3, sU. 1-2 'gaNadhAraNa' (9) vyavahAra u. 9, sU.
31 'soDiyasAlA' (10) vyavahAra u. 10, sU. 22 'tivAsapariyAe' (11) vyavahAra u.
3, sU. 10 palAsagaMsi' (12-13) tathA prastuta donoM sUtra meM 'niruddhapariyAe,
niruddhavAsapariyAe / ina viSayoM kI vistRta jAnakArI ke lie sUcita sthaloM ke
vivecana dekheN| nirgrantha nirgranthI ko AcArya ke netRtva binA rahane kA
niSedha 11. niggaMthassa NaM nava-Dahara-taruNassa prAyariya-uvajjhAe
vIsubhejjA, no se kappar3a praNAriya-uvajjhAie hotte| kappai se puThavaM
AyariyaM uddisAvettA tano pacchA uvajjhAyaM / 50-se kimAhu bhaMte ! u0-du-
saMgahie samaNe niggaMthe, taM jahA-1. prAyarieNa ya, 2. uvajjhAeNa ya / 12.
niggaMthIe NaM nava-Dahara-taruNIe Ayariya-uvajjhAe, pattiNI ya vIsu bhejjA, no
se kappai aNAyariya-uvajjhAiyAe apavittiNiyAe hotte| kappai se puvvaM AyariyaM
uddisAvettA tao uvajjhAyaM tao pacchA pavattiNi / pa0-se kimAhu bhaMte ? u0--ti-
saMgahiyA samaNI niggaMthI, taM jahA1. pAyarieNa ya, 2. uvajjhAeNa ya, 3.
pavattiNIe ya / 11. navadIkSita, bAlaka yA taruNa nirgrantha ke prAcArya aura
upAdhyAya kI yadi mRtyu ho jAe to use prAcArya aura upAdhyAya ke binA rahanA
nahIM kalpatA hai|

Page #145 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Third Objective] [325 He should only stay after accepting the *nishra*
(subordination) of the *pracharaya* first and then the *upaadhyaaya*. Q- O
Bhagavan! What is the reason for saying this? A- The *shraman* *nirgrantha* stay
under the leadership of two, namely- 1. *Aachaarya* and 2. *Upaadhyaaya*. / 12.
If the *pracharaya*, *upaadhyaaya* and *pravartini* of the *navadishita*,
*balika* or *taruni* *nirgrantha* die, then it is not permissible for her to
stay without the *pracharaya*, *upaadhyaaya* and *pravartini*. She should only
stay after accepting the *nishra* (subordination) of the *pracharaya* first,
then the *upaadhyaaya* and then the *pravartini*. Q- O Bhagavan! What is the
reason for saying this? A- The *shramani* *nirgranthi* stays under the
leadership of three, namely- 1. *Pracharaya*, 2. *Upaadhyaaya* and 3.
*Pravartini*. Discussion- The clear meaning of *nav*, *dahar*, *tarun* has been
given in the *bhaashya* as follows: *Tivarisso hoi navo, praasolasagan tu
daharagan beti / Taruno chattaloso, sattari un majjhimo, thero seso /* A
*navadishita* is called so until the completion of three years of *diksha*
*paryaaya*. From four years to sixteen years of age, he is called *dahar-bal*.
From sixteen years of age to forty years of age, he is called *tarun*. One less
than seventy years, i.e., sixty-nine years, is called *madhyam* (adult). All
those who are older than seventy years are called *sthavir*. - *Bhaashya* Ga.
220 and *tika*. In the *aagam*, a sixty-year-old is called *sthavir*. - *Vyav.
U. 10.-Thaan* A. 3. *Bhaashya* Ga. 221 clarifies that whether the *navadishita*
monk is a child or a young man, an adult or an elder, it is not permissible for
him to stay or wander without the *nishra* of the *pracharaya* and
*upaadhyaaya*. If a monk with more *diksha* *paryaaya* is less than forty years
old, then it is not permissible for him to stay without the *nishra* of the
*pracharaya* and *upaadhyaaya*. The implication is that whether the child or
young man monk and the *navadishita* monk are one or many, it is necessary for
them to stay under the *nishra* of the *aachaarya* and *upaadhyaaya*. / In the
*gachch* where the *aachaarya* and *upaadhyaaya* have attained *kaladharma* or
in the *gachch* where there is no *pracharaya* and *upaadhyaaya*, it is not
permissible for the child-young man-*navadishita* monks to stay even for a
moment without the *pracharaya* and *upaadhyaaya* or in a *gachch* without the
*pracharaya* and *upaadhyaaya*. / They should first appoint their own
*aachaarya* and then appoint an *upaadhyaaya*. / The *sutra* asks a question- "O
Bhagavan! What is the intention of saying that one should not stay without the
*aachaarya* and *upaadhyaaya*?"

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
tIsarA uddezaka] [325 use pahale prAcArya kI aura bAda meM upAdhyAya ko nizrA
(adhInatA) svIkAra karake hI rahanA caahie| pra0-he bhagavan ! aisA kahane kA
kyA kAraNa hai ? u0zramaNa nirgrantha do ke netRtva meM hI rahate haiM, yathA-1.
AcArya aura 2. upAdhyAya / 12. navadIkSitA, bAlikA yA taruNI nirgranthoM ke
prAcArya, upAdhyAya aura pravatinI kI yadi mRtyu ho jAve to use prAcArya
upAdhyAya aura pravartinI ke binA rahanA nahIM kalpatA hai| use pahale prAcArya
kI, bAda meM upAdhyAya kI aura bAda meM pravartinI kI nizrA (adhInatA) svIkAra
karake hI rahanA caahie| pra0-he bhagavan ! aisA kahane kA kyA kAraNa hai ?
u0-zramaNI nirgranthI tIna ke netRtva meM hI rahatI hai, yathA-1. prAcArya, 2.
upAdhyAya aura 3. prvrtinii| vivecana-nava, Dahara, taruNa kA spaSTArtha bhASya
meM isa prakAra kiyA gayA hai tivariso hoi navo, prAsolasagaM tu DaharagaM beti
/ taruNo cattAloso, sattari uNa majjhimo, therao seso / tIna varSa kI dIkSA
paryAya paryaMta navadIkSita kahA jAtA hai| cAra varSa se lekara solaha varSa kI
umra paryaMta Dahara-bAla kahA jAtA hai / solaha varSa kI umra se lekara cAlIsa
varSa paryaMta taruNa kahA jAtA hai| sattara varSa meM eka kama arthAt
unasattara (69) varSa paryanta madhyama (prauDha) kahA jAtA hai| sattara varSa
se Age zeSa sabhI vaya vAle sthavira kahe jAte haiN| -bhASya gA. 220 evaM
ttiikaa| Agama meM sATha varSa vAle ko sthavira kahA hai| -vyava. u. 10.-ThANaM
a. 3. bhASyagAthA 221 meM yaha spaSTa kiyA gayA hai ki navadIkSita bhikSu bAla
ho yA taruNa ho, madhyama vaya vAlA ho athavA sthavira ho, use prAcArya
upAdhyAya kI nizrA ke binA rahanA yA vicaraNa karanA nahIM kalpatA hai| adhika
dIkSAparyAya vAlA bhikSa yadi cAlIsa varSa se kama vaya vAlA ho to use bhI
prAcArya upAdhyAya kI nizrA binA rahanA nahIM kalpatA hai| tAtparya yaha hai ki
bAla yA taruNa vaya vAle bhikSa aura navadIkSita bhikSa eka hoM yA aneka hoM,
unheM AcArya aura upAdhyAya kI nizrA meM hI rahanA Avazyaka hai / jisa gaccha
meM AcArya upAdhyAya kAladharma prApta ho jAe athavA jisa gaccha meM prAcArya
upAdhyAya na hoM to bAla-taruNa-navadIkSita bhikSa oM ko prAcArya upAdhyAya ke
binA yA prAcArya upAdhyAya rahita gaccha meM kiMcit bhI rahanA nahIM kalpatA hai
/ unheM prathama apanA AcArya niyukta karanA cAhie tatpazcAt upAdhyAya niyukta
karanA cAhie / sUtra meM prazna kiyA gayA hai-- "he bhagavAn ! AcArya upAdhyAya
binA rahanA hI nahIM, aisA kahane kA kyA Azaya hai ?"

Page #146 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Translation:  [326] [Vyavahar Sutra] It has been resolved that these
aforementioned young ascetics (Niggrantha) who are not yet fully ordained, must
always be accompanied by two leaders: 1. Acharya and 2. Upadhyaya. This means
that under the guidance of the Acharya, they maintain their restraint and
concentration, and under the guidance of the Upadhyaya, they study
systematically according to the scriptures.   The second Sutra states the same
rule for the young, middle-aged, and senior Sadhvis (female ascetics). They too
cannot live without the guidance of three: Acharya, Upadhyaya, and Pravartini.
This Sutra also asks a question and answers that these aforementioned Sadhvis
are always safe under the guidance of these three.   The Sutra uses the terms
"Niggranthass Nav-Dahar-Tarungass" and "Nigganthie Nav-Dahar-Tarunie," which are
singular forms, not plural or collective. This indicates that this rule applies
to each individual "Nav Dahar Tarun" ascetic.   Therefore, in a Gachchha
(community) where there are no Acharya and Upadhyaya, it is not permissible for
the aforementioned young ascetics to reside. Similarly, if there is no
Pravartini in addition to these two, it is not permissible for the
aforementioned young Sadhvis to reside there.   The implication is that every
Gachchha with these ascetics must have two leaders: Acharya and Upadhyaya. If
such a Gachchha establishes only one leader or appoints no leader at all, and
relies solely on the guidance of the Ratnadhik (treasurer), then such a practice
is against the scriptures.   These Sutras clearly state that the presence of
Acharya and Upadhyaya is essential, whether in a small or large Gachchha. This
is the injunction of the Jinas.   If a Gachchha has only 2-4 ascetics, and none
of them are "Nav Dahar Tarun" (i.e., all are mature and senior), then they can
wander without an Acharya or Upadhyaya. However, if there are "Nav Dahar Tarun"
among them, they must reside under the guidance of the Acharya and Upadhyaya of
any Gachchha. Otherwise, their conduct is against the scriptures.   Similarly,
if there are 5-10 Sadhvis who have no Acharya, Upadhyaya, or Pravartini, or if
they have left the Gachchha due to some circumstance, and there are young
Sadhvis among them, then they must also accept the guidance of an Acharya and
Upadhyaya and appoint their own Pravartini. Otherwise, their conduct is also
against the scriptures.   These Sutras also clarify that according to the second
aspiration of a monk mentioned in the Sthananga Sutra, Chapter 3, or according
to any other vow taken by a monk, and according to the "Saparistithik Prashast
Ekalvihar" (appropriate solitary wandering with circumstances) mentioned in
Dasavaika Churnika, Chapter 2, Gatha 10; Uttaradhyayanasutra, Chapter 32, Gatha
5; Prachchhanna Shruti, Chapter 1, Prashna 6, Uttara 2; and Suyagada Shruti,
Chapter 1, Adhyaya 10, Gatha 11, even a monk who wanders alone is against the
scriptures if he is "Nav Dahar" or "Tarun."   Therefore, the aforementioned
scripturally sanctioned solitary wandering can only be practiced by mature and
senior monks who are not newly initiated.   The implication is that it is not
appropriate to engage in any form of solitary wandering or leaving the Gachchha
before completing three years of initiation and reaching the age of forty. Such
actions are against the scriptures.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
326] [vyavahArasUtra _ isakA samAdhAna yaha kiyA gayA hai ki ye ukta vaya vAle
zramaNa nirgrantha sadA do se saMgrahIta hote haiM arthAt inake liye sadA do kA
netRtva honA atyanta Avazyaka hai1. AcArya 2. upAdhyAya kA / tAtparya yaha hai
ki prAcArya ke netRtva se inakI saMyamasamAdhi rahatI hai aura upAdhyAya ke
netRtva se inakA AgamAnusAra vyavasthita adhyayana hotA hai| dUsare sUtra meM
nava, Dahara evaM taruNa sAdhvI ke liye bhI yahI vidhAna kiyA gayA hai| unheM
bhI prAcArya, upAdhyAya aura pravartinI ina tIna kI nizrA ke binA rahanA nahIM
kalpatA hai| isa sUtra meM bhI prazna karake uttara meM yahI kahA gayA hai ki ye
ukta baya vAlI sAdhviyAM sadA tona kI nizrA se hI surakSita rahatI haiN| sUtra
meM "niggaMthassa nava-Dahara-taruNagassa" aura "NiggaMthIe Nava-Dahara-taruNIe"
isa prakAra kA prayoga hai, yahAM bahavacana kA yA gaNa kA kathana nahIM hai,
jisase yaha vidhAna pratyeka 'nava Dahara taruNa' bhikSa ke liye samajhanA cAhie
/ ataH jisa gaccha meM prAcArya aura upAdhyAya do padavIdhara nahIM haiM, vahAM
ukta nava Dahara taruNa sAdhuoM ko rahanA nahIM kalpatA hai aura ina do ke
atirikta pravartino na ho to vahAM ukta nava Dahara taruNa sAdhviyoM ko rahanA
nahIM kalpatA hai / / tAtparya yaha hai ki ukta sAdhunoM se yukta pratyeka
gaccha meM prAcArya upAdhyAya do padavIdhara honA Avazyaka hai| yadi aise gaccha
meM kevala eka padavIdhara sthApita kare yA eka bhI padavIdhara niyukta na kare
kevala ratnAdhika kI nizrA se rahe to isa prakAra se rahanA Agama-viparIta hai|
kyoMki ina sUtroM se yaha spaSTa hai ki alpasaMkhyaka gaccha meM yA vizAla
gaccha meM prAcArya aura upAdhyAya kA honA Avazyaka hai, yahI jinAjJA hai| yadi
kisI gaccha meM 2-4 sAdhu hI hoM aura unameM koI sUtrokta nava Dahara taruNa na
ho arthAt sabhI prauDha evaM sthavira hoM to ve binA AcArya upAdhyAya ke
vicaraNa kara sakate haiM, kintu yadi unameM nava Dahara taruNa hoM to unheM
kisI bhI gaccha ke AcArya upAdhyAya kI nizrA lekara hI rahanA cAhie anyathA
unakA vihAra Agamaviruddha hai| _ isI prakAra sAdhviyA~ bhI 5-10 hoM, jinake koI
prAcArya upAdhyAya yA pravartinI na ho yA unhoMne kisI paristhiti se gaccha kA
tyAgakara diyA ho aura unameM nava Dahara taruNa sAdhviyA~ hoM to unheM bhI kisI
AcArya aura upAdhyAya kI nizrA svIkAra karanA Avazyaka hai evaM apanI pravartinI
niyukta karanA bhI Avazyaka hai / anyathA unakA vihAra bhI Agamaviruddha hai /
ina sUtroM se yaha bhI spaSTa ho jAtA hai ki sthAnAMga a. 3 meM kahe gaye bhikSu
ke dUsare manoratha ke anusAra athavA anya kisI pratijJA ko dhAraNa karane vAlA
bhikSu aura dazavai. cU. 2, gA. 10; uttarA. a. 32, gA. 5; prAcA. zru. 1, pra. 6,
u. 2; sUya. zru. 1, a. 10 gA. 11 meM kahe gaye saparisthitika prazasta
ekalavihAra ke anusAra akelA vicaraNa karane vAlA bhikSu bhI yadi nava Dahara yA
taruNa hai to usakA vaha vihAra Agamaviruddha hai| ataH uparyukta Agamasammata
ekalavihAra bhI prauDha evaM sthavira bhikSa hI kara sakate haiM jo navadIkSita
na hoN| tAtparya yaha hai ki tIna varSa kI dIkSAparyAya aura cAlIsa varSa kI
umra ke pahale kisI bhI prakAra kA ekalavihAra yA gacchatyAga karanA ucita nahIM
hai aura vaha AgamaviparIta hai|

Page #147 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Third Objective] [327 A 20-year-old *diksha* eligible *paryaya sthavir* can, at
the age of 29, take the *prachar* knowledge and practice solitary *sadhana*.
However, he cannot practice solitary *sadhana* with *paristithik* or leave the
*gachchha*. Even though such clear *sutras* and meanings are available, the
following practices or traditions prevalent in society cannot be considered
appropriate: (1) Running the *gachchha* only with the *prachar* position and not
appointing an *upaadhyaay* position. (2) Running a large *gachchha* in a
disorganized manner by insisting on not appointing any position. (3) Leaving the
*gachchha* before the aforementioned age. Doing so is clearly a disregard for
the aforementioned *pragam* provisions. The harms caused by this disregard are
as follows: 1. The *gachchha* *sadhus* experience various defects such as
disorder in *vinaya*, study, conduct, and *samyama* meditation. 2. The *sadhus*
become independent and their *prachar* and thoughts differ, leading to the
decline of the *gachchha* instead of its development. 3. Love and *samyama*
meditation are lost among the *sadhus* and *kleshas* increase. 4. Ultimately,
the *gachchha* also becomes fragmented. Therefore, it is necessary to appoint
someone to both the *prachar* and *upaadhyaay* positions in every *gachchha*. If
someone insists on keeping the *gachchha* without positions forever, considering
the *prachar* and *upaadhyaay* positions to be ego-inducing and causing an
increase in *kleshas*, and expresses their desire to be free of ego by doing so,
then such a belief and action are completely inappropriate and also a disregard
and disrespect of *jinaagya*. Because *jinaagya* is to appoint a *prachar* and
*upaadhyaay*, and these two independent positions are also mentioned in the
*namaskaaramantra*. Therefore, the aforementioned insistence reveals an ego that
considers one's own understanding to be superior to the *sutra* provisions. If
all those belonging to large *gachchhas* think that they can be free of ego and
*kleshas* in the absence of the *prachar* and *upaadhyaay* positions, then the
existence of the two positions in the *namaskaaramantra* will become
meaningless. This will also render all the *aagam* provisions regarding position
appointments insignificant. Therefore, instead of insisting on one's own
thoughts or traditions, one should simply follow the *pragam* provisions.
Summary: (1) Every newly ordained young *sadhu* should stay in a *gachchha* with
two *padavƒ´dhara*s, and every *sadhvi* should stay in a *gachchha* with three
*padavƒ´dhara*s. (2) One should not stay in a *gachchha* without these
*padavƒ´dhara*s.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
tIsarA uddezaka] [327 bIsa varSa kI dIkSAparyAya vAlA paryAyasthavira hone se 29
varSa kI vaya meM vaha prAcArya kI prAjJA lekara ekalavihAra sAdhanAe~ kara
sakatA hai| kintu saparisthitika ekala vihAra yA gacchatyAga nahIM kara sktaa|
aise spaSTa vidhAna vAle sUtra evaM artha ke upalabdha hote hue bhI samAja meM
nimna pravatiyAM yA paramparAeM calatI haiM, ve ucita nahIM kahI jA sakatIM /
yathA- (1) kevala prAcArya pada se gaccha calAnA aura upAdhyAya pada niyukta na
karanA / (2) koI bhI pada niyukta na karane ke Agraha se vizAla gaccha ko
avyavasthita calAte rhnaa| (3) ukta vaya ke pUrva hI gacchatyAga krnaa|| aisA
karane meM spaSTa rUpa se ukta prAgamavidhAna kI svamati se upekSA karanA hai|
isa upekSA se hone vAlI hAniyAM isa prakAra haiM 1. gacchagata sAdhuoM ke
vinaya, adhyayana, AcAra evaM saMyamasamAdhi kI avyavasthA prAdi aneka doSoM kI
utpatti hotI hai| 2. sAdhuoM meM svacchandatA evaM prAcAra-vicAra kI bhinnatA ho
jAne se kramazaH gaccha kA vikAsa na hokara adhaHpatana hotA hai| 3. sAdhutroM
meM prema evaM saMyamasamAdhi naSTa hotI hai aura klezoM kI vRddhi hotI hai / 4.
antataH gaccha bhI chinna-bhinna hotA rahatA hai| ataH pratyeka gaccha meM
prAcArya upAdhyAya donoM padoM para kisI ko niyukta karanA Avazyaka hai / yadi
koI prAcArya upAdhyAya padoM ko lenA yA gaccha meM ye pada niyukta karanA
abhimAnasUcaka evaM klezavRddhi karAne vAlA mAnakara sadA ke liye padarahita
gaccha rakhane kA Agraha rakhate haiM aura aisA karate hue apane ko nirabhimAna
honA vyakta karate haiM, to aisA mAnanA evaM karanA unakA sarvathA anucita hai
aura jinAjJA kI avahelanA evaM prAsAtanA karanA bhI hai / kyoMki jinAjJA
prAcArya upAdhyAya niyukta karane kI hai tathA namaskAramaMtra meM bhI ye do
svatantra pada kahe gaye haiN| ataH uparyukta Agraha meM sUtravidhAnoM se bhI
apanI samajha ko sarvopari mAnane kA ahaM siddha hotA hai| yadi prAcArya
upAdhyAya pada ke abhAva meM nirabhimAna aura klezarahita honA sabhI vizAla
gaccha vAle soca leM to namaskAra maMtra ke do padoM kA honA hI nirarthaka
siddha hogaa| jisase pada-niyukti sambandhI sAre AgamavidhAnoM kA bhI koI
mahattva nahIM rhegaa| isaliye apane vicAroM kA yA paramparA kA Agraha na
rakhate hue saralatApUrvaka prAgamavidhAnoM ke anusAra hI pravRtti karanA
caahie| sArAMza (1) pratyeka nava Dahara taruNa sAdhu ko do- aura sAdhvI ko tIna
padavIdharayukta gaccha meM hI rahanA caahie| (2) ina padavIdharoM se rahita
gaccha meM nahIM rahanA caahie|

Page #148 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[328] (3) One should not wander independently before the age mentioned in the
Sutras, even if it is a solitary journey or leaving the Gachchha. (4) If there
is a special circumstance, one should wander under the protection of the
Gachchha, along with other Acharya and Upadhyaya. (5) The Gachchha leaders
should not leave their Gachchha vacant for two or three positions.   **Rules
regarding giving positions to those who have committed the act of Brahma-
violation:**  13. If a Bhikkhu commits the act of Brahma-violation, he is not
eligible for the position of Acharya or Upadhyaya for three years, or until he
is expelled from the Gachchha, or until he is reinstated.  14. If a Bhikkhu
commits the act of Brahma-violation after being expelled from the Gachchha, he
is not eligible for the position of Acharya or Upadhyaya for his entire life, or
until he is expelled from the Gachchha, or until he is reinstated.  15. If a
Bhikkhu commits the act of Brahma-violation after being reinstated in the
Gachchha, he is not eligible for the position of Acharya or Upadhyaya for three
years, or until he is expelled from the Gachchha, or until he is reinstated.
After three years, he can be eligible for the positions of Thiya, Uvasanta,
Uvaraya, Padiviraya, or Nivvagara.  16. If a Bhikkhu commits the act of Brahma-
violation after being appointed as Acharya or Upadhyaya, he is not eligible for
the position of Acharya or Upadhyaya for his entire life, or until he is
expelled from the Gachchha, or until he is reinstated.  17. If a Bhikkhu commits
the act of Brahma-violation after being reinstated as Acharya or Upadhyaya, he
is not eligible for the position of Acharya or Upadhyaya for three years, or
until he is expelled from the Gachchha, or until he is reinstated. After three
years, he can be eligible for the positions of Thiya, Uvasanta, Uvaraya,
Padiviraya, or Nivvagara.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
328] [vyavahArasUtra (3) sUtrokta vaya ke pUrva ekalavihAra yA gacchatyAga kara
svatantra vicaraNa bhI nahIM karanA caahie| (4) koI paristhiti vizeSa ho to anya
prAcArya evaM upAdhyAya se yukta gaccha kI nizrA lekara vicaraNa karanA caahie|
(5) gacchapramukhoM ko cAhie ki ve apane gaccha ko 2 yA 3 pada se kabhI bhI
rikta na rkheN| abrahmasevI ko pada dene ke vidhi-niSedha 13. bhikkhU ya gaNAmo
avakkamma mehuNadhamma paDisevejjA, tiNi saMvaccharANi tassa tappattiyaM no
kappai AyariyataM vA jAva gaNAvaccheiyattaM vA udisittae vA dhArettae vaa| tihi
saMvaccharehi vIikkatehi cautthagaMsi saMvaccharaMsi paTTiyaMsi Thiyassa,
uvasaMtassa, uvarayassa, paDivirayassa, nivvagArassa, evaM se kappai
prAyariyattaM vA jAva gaNAvaccheiyattaM yA uhisittae vA dhArettae vaa| 14.
gaNAvaccheie ya gaNAvaccheyattaM anikkhivittA mehuNadhamma paDisevejjA,
jAvajjIvAe tassa tappattiyaM no kappai AyariyataM vA jAva gaNAvaccheiyattaM vA
uddisittae vA dhArettae vA / 15. gaNAvacchehae ya gaNAvaccheiyattaM nikkhivittA
mehuNadhamma paDisevejjA, tiNi saMvaccharANi tassa tappattiyaM no kappai
AyariyattaM vA jAva gaNAvaccheiyattaM vA uddisittae vA dhArettae vaa| tihi
saMvaccharehi vIikkatehiM cautthagaMsi saMvaccharaMsi paTTiyaMsi Thiyassa
uvasaMtassa, uvarayassa, paDivirayassa, nivigArassa, evaM se kappai AyariyattaM
vA jAva gaNAvaccheiyattaM vA uddisittae vA dhArettae vaa| 16. Ayariya-uvajjhAe
ya Ayariya-uvajJAyattaM anikkhivittA mehaNadhamma paDisevejjA, jAvajjIvAe tassa
tappattiyaM no kappai AyariyattaM vA jAva gaNAvaccheiyattaM vA uddisittae vA
dhArettae vaa| 17. Ayariya-uvajjhAe ya Ayariya-uvajjhAyattaM nikkhivittA
mehuNadhamma paDisevejjA, tiNi saMvaccharANi tassa tappattiyaM no kappai
pAyariyattaM vA jAva gaNAvaccheiyattaM vA uddisittae vA dhArettae vaa| tihiM
saMvaccharehi vIikkatehiM cautthagaMsi saMvaccharaMsi paTThiyaMsi Thiyassa
uvasaMtassa, uvarayassa, paDivirayassa, nivAgArassa, evaM se kappai AyariyattaM
vA jAva gaNAvaccheiyattaM vA uddisittae vA dhArettae vaa|

Page #149 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Third Uddeshaka] [329 13. If a monk leaves the monastic community and engages
in sexual intercourse, i.e., practices maithunaservana, then for the said
reason, he is not eligible to be given or hold the position of acharya up to
ganaavacchedaka for three years. After the passage of three years and upon
entering the fourth year, if he becomes free from the arising of sexual desire,
attains disgust towards sexual intercourse, and becomes devoid of sense-
pleasures, then he becomes eligible to be given or hold the position of acharya
up to ganaavacchedaka.  14. If a ganaavacchedaka engages in sexual intercourse
without leaving his position, then for the said reason, he is not eligible to be
given or hold the position of acharya up to ganaavacchedaka for life.  15. If a
ganaavacchedaka leaves his position and engages in sexual intercourse, then for
the said reason, he is not eligible to be given or hold the position of acharya
up to ganaavacchedaka for three years. After the passage of three years and upon
entering the fourth year, if he becomes tranquil, restrained, abstinent, and
free from passion, then he becomes eligible to be given or hold the position of
acharya up to ganaavacchedaka.  16. If an acharya or upadhyaya engages in sexual
intercourse without leaving his position, then for the said reason, he is not
eligible to be given or hold the position of acharya up to ganaavacchedaka for
life.  17. If an acharya or upadhyaya leaves his position and engages in sexual
intercourse, then for the said reason, he is not eligible to be given or hold
the position of acharya up to ganaavacchedaka for three years. After the passage
of three years and upon entering the fourth year, if he becomes tranquil,
restrained, abstinent, and free from passion, then he becomes eligible to be
given or hold the position of acharya up to ganaavacchedaka.  The scriptures
have greatly extolled the virtue of brahmacharya (celibacy), and its observance
has also been described as difficult. For the scriptural references, see
Nishitha Uttara 6. Among the five great vows, brahmacharya mahavrata is the
foremost.  Therefore, for its violation, the most severe penance has been
prescribed here. In Nishitha Uttara 6-7, the transgressions and misconduct of
this great vow have been prescribed the penance of guruChaumasi, and here, only
the bestowal or non-bestowal of the positions of acharya, etc. have been
mentioned as the penance.  That is, the maithunaservana (engaging in sexual
intercourse) not only attracts the guruChaumasi penance as per the Nishitha
Sutra, but the person also becomes ineligible for the positions of acharya, etc.
for a minimum of three years or more, or even for life, as stated in these
sutras. A monk who engages in sexual intercourse with a woman, even once or
multiple times, while maintaining the appearance of asceticism, becomes
ineligible to hold the positions of acharya, etc. for at least three years,
despite possessing the qualities worthy of those positions.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
tIsarA uddezaka] [329 13. yadi koI bhikSu gaNa ko chor3akara maithuna kA
pratisevana kare arthAt maithunasevana kare to use ukta kAraNa se tIna varSa
paryanta prAcArya yAvat gaNAvacchedaka pada denA yA usako dhAraNa karanA nahIM
kalpatA hai| tIna varSa vyatIta hone para aura cauthe varSa meM praveza karane
para yadi vaha vedodaya se upaza maithuna se nivRtta, maithunasevana se
glAniprApta aura viSaya-vAsanA-rahita ho jAe to use prAcArya yAvat
gaNAvacchedaka pada denA yA dhAraNa karanA kalpatA hai| 14. yadi koI
gaNAvacchedaka apanA pada chor3e binA maithuna kA pratisevana kare to use ukta
kAraNa se yAvajjIvana prAcArya yAvat gaNAvacchedaka pada denA yA ise dhAraNa
karanA nahIM kalpatA hai / 15. yadi koI gaNAvacchedaka apanA pada chor3akara
maithuna kA pratisevana kare to use ukta kAraNa se tIna varSa paryanta prAcArya
yAvat gaNAvacchedaka pada denA yA dhAraNa karanA nahIM kalpatA hai| tIna varSa
vyatIta hone para aura cauthe varSa meM praveza karane para yadi vaha upazAnta,
uparata, prativirata aura nirvikAra ho jAe to use prAcArya yAvat gaNAvacchedaka
pada denA yA dhAraNa karanA kalpatA hai| 16. yadi koI prAcArya yA upAdhyAya
apane pada ko chor3e binA maithuna kA pratisevana kare to use ukta kAraNa se
yAvajjIvana prAcArya yAvat gaNAvacchedaka pada denA yA dhAraNa karanA nahIM
kalpatA 17. yadi koI prAcArya yA upAdhyAya apane pada ko chor3akara maithuna kA
pratisevana kare to use ukta kAraNa se tIna varSa paryanta prAcArya yAvat
gaNAvacchedaka pada denA yA dhAraNa karanA nahIM kalpatA hai| tIna varSa vyatIta
hone para aura cauthe varSa meM praveza karane para yadi vaha upazAnta, uparata,
prativirata aura nirvikAra ho jAe to use prAcArya yAvat gaNAvacchedaka pada denA
yA dhAraNa karanA kalpatA hai| vivecana AgamoM meM brahmacarya kI bahuta mahimA
kahI gaI hai evaM isakA pAlana bhI duSkara kahA gayA hai| inake pramANasthaloM
ke liye ni. u. 6 dekheN| pAMca mahAvratoM meM bhI brahmacarya mahAvrata pradhAna
hai / ataH isake bhaMga hone para yahAM kaThoratama prAyazcitta kahA gayA hai|
nizItha u. 6-7 meM isa mahAvata ke aticAra evaM anAcAroM kA gurucaumAsI
prAyazcitta kahA gayA hai aura yahAM kevala prAcArya Adi padaviyAM dene, na dene
ke rUpa meM prAyazcitta kahe gaye haiM / arthAta maithunasevo ko nizothasUtrokta
gurucaumAsI prAyazcitta to AtA hI hai sAtha hI vaha tIna varSa yA usase adhika
varSa athavA jIvana bhara prAcAryAdi pada ke ayogya ho jAtA hai, yaha ina sUtroM
meM kahA gayA hai| jo bhikSu saMyamaveza meM rahate hue strI ke sAtha eka bAra
yA aneka bAra maithunasevana kara letA hai to vaha AcArya Adi padoM ke yogya
guNoM se sampanna hote hue bhI kama se kama tIna varSa taka pada dhAraNa karane
ke ayogya ho jAtA hai /

Page #150 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Vyavahara Sutra] Therefore, the prohibition of conferring the position and
holding it has been made. Due to this, the monk cannot wander around as the head
for three years, because the sutra prohibits becoming a "Ganadhara." See the
special meaning of the word "Ganadhara" in the first sutra of this topic. A monk
who, after sexual indulgence or after purification through penance, becomes
completely free from sexual desire and leads a spotless life for three years,
this is the most inferior limit for him. If during this period, he again
indulges in transgressions or misconduct of the great vow of celibacy, or acts
contrary to the given penance, then this three-year limit is extended further,
and by doing so, he may become unfit for position attainment for life.  The
Acharya, Upadhyaya or Ganavatschhedaka, etc. are highly respected in the Gachcha
and society, and they are the ideal forms for other monks and nuns. Due to being
established in the position, they have a special responsibility of Jinashasan.
By implication, positions like Pravartaka, Pravartini, etc. should also be
understood.  Engaging in sexual activity while holding these positions is an
unpardonable offense. Therefore, without any alternative, they cannot hold any
position for life. They have to always remain under the control of others and
practice restraint. If a position-holder realizes that 'I am incapable of
observing celibacy' and then renounces the position by openly declaring his
incapacity or generally expressing his inability to observe restraint, and
appoints another suitable monk in the position, and then engages in sexual
activity, he does not get the penance for the entire life but only the penance
of remaining position-less for three years.  The talk of sexual indulgence even
by a common monk causes disrepute and disrespect to Jinashasan, and his prestige
is also not maintained. However, the talk of sexual indulgence by a position-
holder like Acharya, etc. greatly disrespects Jinashasan, and that position-
holder also has to face extreme shame.  Therefore, if a common monk or any
position-holder considers himself incapable of observing celibacy, he should
follow the gradual spiritual practice mentioned in Pravacanasara 1, Adhyayana 5,
Upadesha 4, or should conduct himself according to Pravacanasara 1, Adhyayana 8,
Upadesha 4. But he should not tarnish his own and Jinashasan's well-being by
engaging in sexual activity while leading a life of restraint.  Even if the
intense spiritual practice mentioned in Acarangasutra is not possible for
someone, and the intense passions are not subdued, it is still completely
inappropriate to tarnish the life of restraint and disrespect Jinashasan.
Instead, it is better to renounce restraint and perform religious practices in a
limited householder life. If even that is not possible, then the other methods
mentioned in the commentary are worth knowing for the understanding of the
meaning of the verses.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
330] [vyavahArasUtra ataH use pada dene kA evaM dhAraNa karane kA niSedha kiyA
gayA hai| jisase vaha bhikSu tIna varSa taka pramukha bana kara vicaraNa bhI
nahI kara sakatA hai, kyoMki sUtra meM "gaNadhara" banane kA niSedha kiyA hai|
"gaNadhara" zabda kA vizeSArtha isI uddezaka ke prathama sUtra meM dekheN| jo
bhikSu maithunasevana ke bAda yA prAyazcitta se zuddhi kara lene ke bAda
sarvathA maithunabhAva se nivRtta ho jAtA hai aura tIna varSa paryanta vaha
niSkalaMka jIvana vyatIta karatA hai, usa bhikSu kI apekSA se yaha jaghanya
maryAdA hai| yadi usa avadhi meM bhI punaH brahmacarya mahAvrata ke aticAra yA
anAcAroM kA sevana karatA hai, athavA diye gaye prAyazcitta se viparIta AcaraNa
karatA hai, to yaha tIna varSa kI maryAdA Age bar3hA dI jAtI hai aura aisA
karane se kabhI jIvanaparyanta bhI vaha pada prApti ke ayogya raha jAtA hai| _
prAcArya, upAdhyAya yA gaNAvacchedaka Adi gaccha meM evaM samAja meM atyadhika
pratiSThita hote haiM tathA ye anya sAdhu-sAdhviyoM ke lie Adarza rUpa hote
haiN| pada para pratiSThita hone se ina para jinazAsana kA vizeSa dAyitva hotA
hai| upalakSaNa se ina tIna ke atirikta pravartaka, pravartinI Adi padoM ke lie
bhI samajha lenA caahie| _ina padavIdharoM ke dvArA pada para rahate hue
maithunasevana karanA akSamya aparAdha hai| ataH binA kisI vikalpa ke jIvana
bhara ve kisI bhI pada ko dhAraNa nahIM kara skte| unheM sadA anya ke adhIna
rahakara hI vicaraNa karate hue saMyama pAlana karanA par3atA hai| yadi koI
padavIdhara yaha jAna le ki 'maiM brahmacarya kA pAlana karane meM asamartha
hUM' aura taba vaha apanA asAmarthya prakaTa karake yA sAmAnya rUpa se apanI
saMyamapAlana kI akSamatA prakaTa karake padatyAga kara detA hai aura yogya anya
bhikSu ko pada para niyukta kara detA hai, usake bAda maithunasevana karatA hai
to use ukta jIvana paryanta kA prAyazcitta nahIM pAtA hai kintu tIna varSa taka
padamukta rahane kA hI prAyazcitta pAtA hai| sAmAnya bhikSu ke maithanasevana kI
vArtA se bhI lokApavAda evaM jinazAsana kI avahelanA hotI hai aura usa bhikSu kI
pratiSThA bhI nahIM rahatI hai / tathApi prAcArya Adi padavIdhara dvArA
bhaithunasevana kI vArtA se to jinazAsana ko atyadhika avahelanA hotI hai evaM
usa padavIdhara ko bhI atyadhika lajjita honA par3atA hai| _ ataH sAmAnya bhikSu
yA koI padavIdhara brahmacarya pAlana karane meM apane Apako asamartha mAne to
unheM prAcA. zru. 1 a. 5 u. 4 meM kahI gaI kramika sAdhanA karanI cAhiye yA
pAcA. zru. 1 a. 8 u.4 ke anusAra AcaraNa karanA caahie| kintu saMyamI jIvana meM
maithunasevana karake svayaM kA evaM jinazAsana kA ahita nahIM karanA caahiye| _
aAcArAMgasUtra meM kathita utkaTa aArAdhanA yadi kisI se saMbhava na ho evaM
tIvra mohodaya upazAMta na ho to bhI saMyamI jIvana ko kalaMkita karake
jinazAsana kI avahelanA karanA sarvathA anucita hai| usakI apekSA saMyama
tyAgakara maryAdita gRhasthajIvana meM dharma-ArAdhanA karanA zreyaskara aisA
bhI saMbhava na ho to anya vidhi jo bhASya meM kahI gaI hai yaha gItArthoM ke
jAnane yogya hai

Page #151 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Third Objective] [331 and if necessary, sometimes the knowledge of the meaning
of the songs can be known by other monks and nuns and can be acted upon
according to the circumstances. The meaning of the two terms, Uddisittae and
Dharettae, found in the present sutra, is that an Abrahamsavi monk should not be
appointed to the post and if, due to lack of knowledge, someone appoints him to
the post, he should not accept it. The sutra uses many adjectives for a monk who
has renounced the thoughts of sexual intercourse / The commentator has explained
the meaning of these adjectives with some difference. As it is, the result of
the situation, the calm-sexual-tendency-renounced, the stopped-sexual-thoughts-
renounced, the averse-sexual-enjoyment-completely-renounced, the non-changing-
completely-free-from-defects, the pure-brahmacharya-practicing / - Vyav. Bhashya
Tika / The one who leaves the restraint, the rules of the post-prohibition 18.
Bhikkhu ya ganano avakkammo ohaaejja, tinni sanvachcharani tassa tappattiyam no
kappi aayariyattam va jav ganavaccheiyattam va udisittae va dharettae tha. Tihi
sanvachcharehi viikkatehi, chautthagansi sanvachcharansi patthiyansi thiyassa,
uvasantassa, uvarayassa, padivirayassa, nibigaraassa evam se kappi
praayariyattam va jav ganavaccheiyattam va udisittae va dharettae va. 19.
Ganavaccheiye ya ganavaccheiyattam anikkhivitta pohaaejja, javajjivaae tassa
tappattiyam no kappad paayariyattam va jav ganavaccheiyattam va uddisittae va
dharettae va. 20. Ganavaccheiye ya ganavaccheiyattam nikkhivitta mohaaejja, tini
sanghchcharani tassa tappattiyam no kappi aayariyattam va jav ganavaccheiyattam
va uddisittae va dharettae va. Tihi sanvachcharehi voiikkatehi, chauttygansi
sanvachcharansi patthiyansi thiyassa, uvasantassa, uvarayassa, padivirayassa,
nivigaraassa evam se kappi aayariyattam va jav ganavaccheiyattam va uddisittae
va dharettae va. 21. Paayari-uvajjaae ya aayari-uvajjaayattam nikkhivitta
pohaaejja, tini sanvachcharani tassa tappattiyam no kappi praayariyattam va jav
ganavaccheiyattam va uddisittae va dharettae tha. 22. Aayari-uvajjaae ya
praathariy-uvajjaayattam nikkhivitta ohaaejja, tinni sanvachcharani tassa
tappattiyam no kappi paayariyattam va jav ganavaccheiyattam va uddisittae va
dharettae va.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
tIsarA uddezaka] [331 evaM Avazyaka hone para kabhI gItArthoM kI nizrA se anya
sAdhu-sAdhviyoM ke bhI jAnane yogya evaM paristhitivaza AcaraNa karane yogya ho
sakatI hai| prastuta sUtra meM pAe uddisittae aura dhArittae, ina do padoM kA
Azaya yaha hai ki abrahmasevI bhikSu ko pada para niyukta nahIM karanA cAhie
aura yadi jAnakArI ke abhAva meM koI usako pada para niyukta kara bhI de to use
svIkAra nahIM karanA caahie| sUtra meM maithuna ke saMkalpoM se nivRtta bhikSu
ke lie aneka vizeSaNoM kA prayoga kiyA gayA hai / TIkAkAra ne unake artha meM
kucha antara batAte hue vyAkhyA kI hai| yathA sthitasthita pariNAma vAle
upazAMta-maithunapravRtti se nivRtta uparatamaithuna ke saMkalpoM se nivRtta
prativirata-maithuna sevana se sarvathA virakta nirvikArI pUrNa rUpa se
vikArarahita, zuddha brahmacarya pAlane vAlA / - vyava. bhASya TIkA / saMyama
tyAgakara jAne vAle ko pada ke vidhi-niSedha 18. bhikkhU ya gaNAno avakkamma
ohAejjA, tiNNi saMvaccharANi tassa tappattiyaM no kappai AyariyattaM vA jAva
gaNAvaccheiyattaM vA udisittae vA dhArettae thaa| tihiM saMvaccharehi
vIikkatehiM cautthagaMsi saMvaccharaMsi paTThiyaMsi Thiyassa, uvasaMtassa,
uvarayassa, paDivirayassa, nibigArassa evaM se kappai prAyariyataM vA jAva
gaNAvaccheiyattaM vA udisittae vA dhArettae vaa| 19. gaNAvaccheie ya
gaNAvaccheiyattaM anikkhivittA pohAejjA, jAvajjIvAe tassa tappattiyaM no kappada
pAyariyattaM vA jAva gaNAvaccheiyattaM vA uddisittae vA dhArettae vaa| 20.
gaNAvaccheie ya gaNAvaccheiyattaM nikkhivittA mohAejjA, tiNi saMghaccharANi
tassa tappattiyaM no kappai AyariyattaM vA jAva gaNAvaccheiyattaM vA uddisittae
vA dhArettae vaa| tihi saMvaccharehi voikkatehi, cautyagaMsi saMvaccharaMsi
paTThiyaMsi Thiyassa, uvasaMtassa, uvarayassa, paDivirayassa, nivigArassa evaM
se kappai AyariyataM vA jAva gaNAvaccheiyattaM vA uddisittae vA dhArettae vaa|
21. pAyariya-uvajjhAe ya Ayariya-uvajjhAyattaM nikkhivitta pohAejjA, tiNi
saMvaccharANi tassa tappattiyaM no kappai prAyariyattaM vA jAva
gaNAvaccheiyattaM vA uddisittae vA dhArettae thaa| 22. Ayariya-uvajjhAe ya
prAthariya-uvajjhAyattaM nikkhivittA ohAejjA, tiNNi saMvaccharANi tassa
tappattiyaM no kappai pAyariyattaM vA jAva gaNAvaccheiyattaM vA uddisittae vA
dhArettae vaa|

Page #152 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[332] A monk who has renounced the *gana* and *samyama* and abandoned the
*vesha* and later becomes re-initiated, is not eligible to be given or hold the
position of *acharya* or *ganavacchedaka* for three years due to the
aforementioned reason. After three years, upon entering the fourth year, if he
becomes *upashanta*, *uparata*, *prativirata*, and *nirvikar*, then he is
eligible to be given or hold the position of *acharya* or *ganavacchedaka*. 18.
If a *ganavacchedaka* renounces *samyama* and abandons the *vesha* without
relinquishing his position and later becomes re-initiated, he is not eligible to
be given or hold the position of *acharya* or *ganavacchedaka* for the rest of
his life due to the aforementioned reason. 19. If a *ganavacchedaka*
relinquishes his position and renounces *samyama* and abandons the *vesha* and
later becomes re-initiated, he is not eligible to be given or hold the position
of *acharya* or *ganavacchedaka* for three years due to the aforementioned
reason. After three years, upon entering the fourth year, if he becomes
*upashanta*, *uparata*, *prativirata*, and *nirvikar*, then he is eligible to be
given or hold the position of *acharya* or *ganavacchedaka*. 20. If an *acharya*
or *upaadhyaya* renounces *samyama* and abandons the *vesha* without
relinquishing his position and later becomes re-initiated, he is not eligible to
be given or hold the position of *acharya* or *ganavacchedaka* for the rest of
his life due to the aforementioned reason. 21. If an *acharya* or *upaadhyaya*
relinquishes his position and renounces *samyama* and abandons the *vesha* and
later becomes re-initiated, he is not eligible to be given or hold the position
of *acharya* or *ganavacchedaka* for three years due to the aforementioned
reason. After three years, upon entering the fourth year, if he becomes
*upashanta*, *uparata*, *prativirata*, and *nirvikar*, then he is eligible to be
given or hold the position of *acharya* or *ganavacchedaka*. 22. The previous
five *sutras* lay down the rules for *prƒÅya≈õcitta* regarding the position of a
monk and *acharya* etc. who are unable to practice *brahmacarya*. This set of
five *sutras* lays down the rules for giving or not giving a position to a monk
etc. who has renounced *samyama* and later becomes re-initiated.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
332] [vyavahArasUtra tihiM saMvaccharehi vIikkatehi cautyagaMsi saMvaccharaMsi
paTThiyaMsi Thiyassa, uvasaMtassa, uvarayassa, paDivirayassa, nivigArassa evaM
se kappai AyariyataM vA jAva gaNAvaccheiyattaM vA uddisittae vA dhArettae vaa|
18. yadi koI bhikSu gaNa aura saMyama kA parityAga karake aura veSa ko
chor3akara ke calA jAe aura bAda meM punaH dIkSita ho jAe to use ukta kAraNa se
tIna varSa paryanta prAcArya yAvat gaNAvacchedaka pada denA yA dhAraNa karanA
nahIM kalpatA hai| tIna varSa vyatIta hone para aura cauthe varSa meM praveza
karane para yadi vaha upazAMta, uparata, prativirata aura nirvikAra ho jAe to
use prAcArya yAvat gaNAvacchedaka pada denA yA dhAraNa karanA kalpatA hai| 19.
yadi koI gaNAvacchedaka apanA pada chor3e binA saMyama kA parityAga karake aura
veSa chor3akara calA jAe aura bAda meM punaH dIkSita ho jAe to use ukta kAraNa
se yAvajjIvana AcArya yAvat gaNAvacchedaka pada denA yA dhAraNa karanA nahIM
kalpatA hai / 20. yadi koI gaNAvacchedaka apanA pada chor3akara ke tathA saMyama
kA parityAga karake aura veSa chor3akara calA jAe aura bAda meM punaH dIkSita ho
jAe to use ukta kAraNa se tIna varSa paryanta prAcArya yAvat gaNAvacchedaka pada
denA yA dhAraNa karanA nahIM kalpatA hai| tIna varSa vyatIta hone para aura
cauthe varSa meM praveza karane para yadi vaha upazAnta, uparata, prativirata
aura nirvikAra ho jAe to use prAcArya yAvat gaNAvacchedaka pada denA yA dhAraNa
karanA kalpatA hai| 21. yadi koI prAcArya yA upAdhyAya apanA pada chor3e binA
saMyama kA parityAga karake aura veSa chor3akara calA jAe aura bAda meM punaH
dIkSita ho jAe to use ukta kAraNa se yAvajjIvana AcArya yAvat gaNAvacchedaka
pada denA yA dhAraNa karanA nahIM kalpatA hai / 22. yadi koI prAcArya yA
upAdhyAya apanA pada chor3akara ke tathA saMyama aura veSa kA parityAga karake
calA jAe aura bAda meM punaH dIkSita ho jAe to use ukta kAraNa se tIna varSa
paryanta prAcArya yAvat gaNAvacchedaka pada denA yA dhAraNa karanA nahIM kalpatA
hai| tIna varSa vyatIta hone para aura cauthe varSa meM praveza karane para yadi
vaha upazAnta, uparata, prativirata aura nirvikAra ho jAe to use prAcArya yAvat
gaNAvacchedaka pada denA yA dhAraNa karanA kalpatA hai| vivecanapUrva
sUtrapaMcaka meM brahmacarya pAlana meM asamartha bhikSu evaM AcArya prAdi ke
lie padavI sambandhI prAyazcitta kA vidhAna kiyA gayA hai aura isa sUtrapaMcaka
meM sAmAnya rUpa se saMyama pAlana meM asamartha bhikSu Adi ke saMyama tyAgakara
jAne ke bAda punaH dIkSA svIkAra karane para use padavI dene yA na dene kA
vidhAna kiyA gayA hai|

Page #153 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Third Objective] [333 There can be many reasons for abandoning the vows of
restraint, such as parosha or upsarga, etc. / It can also be a reason for the
inability to observe the great vows like Brahmacharya, etc. If anyone abandons
restraint for any reason and takes re-initiation, then he should also be
understood as not being given the rank for three years or for life, as described
in the previous Sutra Panchak, and the meaning of the words should also be
understood in the same way. In many Agamas, abandoning restraint and accepting
abandoned enjoyments has been clearly prohibited. In the first Chulika of the
Dasha Vaikalika Sutra, many apaya (sorrows) that occur due to abandoning
restraint have been mentioned, inspiring one to remain steadfast in restraint.
That Chulika is also named "Rati Vakya", which means education-words that create
interest in restraint / Therefore, by contemplating and meditating on that
study, one should always keep the mind steady in restraint. Prohibition of
giving rank to sinful Bahushruta 23. Bhikkhu ya bahussuae babbhagame bahuso
bahu-agaadha-gaadhesu kaaranesu mai musabai, asui, paavjeevi, jaavjeevaae tass
tappattiyam no kappi aayariyattam va jaav ganavachcheiyattam va uddissitae va
dharettane va. 24. Ganavachcheiae ya bahussuae babbhagame bahuso bahu-
bhaagaadha-gaadhesu kaaranesu mai musabai, asui, paavjeevi, jaavjeevaae tass
tappattiyam no kappi paayariyattam va jaav ganavachcheiyattam va uddissitae va
dharettane va.  _ 25. Paayari-uvjjaae ya bahussuae babbhagame bahuso bahu-
agaadha-gaadhesu kaaranesu mai musabai, asui, paavjeevi, jaavjeevaae tass
tappattiyam no kappi paayariyattam va jaav ganavachcheiyattam va uddissitae va
dharettane va  /  26. Bahvae bhikkhuno bahussuyaa babbhagama bahuso bahu-
agaadha-gaadhesu kaaranesu mai musavaai, asui, paavjeevi, jaavjeevaae tesi
tappattiyam no kappi aayariyattam va jaav ganavachcheiyattam va uddissitae va
dharettane va. 27. Bahvae ganavachcheiyaa bahussuyaa babbhagama bahuso bahu-
agaadha-gaadhesu kaaranesu mai musavaai, prasui, paavjeevi, jaavjeevaae tesi
tappattiyam no kappi aayariyattam va jaav ganavachcheiyattam va uddissitae va
dharettane tha. 28. Bahvae praayari-uvjshayaa bahussuyaa babbhagama bahuso bahu-
agaadha-gaadhesu kaaranesu mai musavaai, prasui, paavjeevi jaavjeevaae tesi
tappattiyam no kappi aayariyattam va jaav ganavachcheiyattam va uddissitae va
dharettane va.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
tIsarA uddezaka] [333 saMyama ke tyAgane meM paroSaha yA upasarga Adi kaI kAraNa
ho sakate haiM / brahmacarya Adi mahAvrata pAlana kI akSamatA kA bhI kAraNa ho
sakatA hai| kisI bhI kAraNa se saMyama tyAgane vAlA yadi puna: dIkSA grahaNa
kare to use bhI tIna varSa taka yA jIvanaparyanta padavI nahIM dene kA varNana
pUrva sUtrapaMcaka ke samAna yahAM bhI samajha lenA cAhie tathA zabdArtha bhI
usI ke samAna samajha lenA caahie| aneka AgamoM meM saMyama tyAgane kA evaM
parityakta bhogoM ko punaH svIkAra karane kA spaSTa niSedha kiyA gayA hai|
dazavaikAlikasUtra kI prathama cUlikA meM saMyama tyAgane para hone vAle aneka
apAyoM (dukhoM) kA kathana karake saMyama meM sthira rahane kI preraNA dI gaI
hai| usa cUlikA kA nAma bhI "rativAkya" hai, jisakA artha hai saMyama meM ruci
paidA karane vAle zikSA-vacana / ataH usa adhyayana kA cintana-manana karake
sadA saMyama meM citta sthira rakhanA caahie| pApajIvI bahuzrutoM ko pada dene
kA niSedha 23. bhikkhu ya bahussue babbhAgame bahuso bahu-AgADhA-gADhesu
kAraNesu mAI musAbAI, asuI, pAvajIvI, jAvajjIvAe tassa tappattiyaM no kappai
AyariyattaM vA jAva gaNAvaccheiyattaM vA uddisittae vA dhArettae vaa| 24.
gaNAvaccheie ya bahussue babhAgame bahuso bahu-bhAgADhA-gADhesu kAraNesu mAI
musAbAI, asuI, pAvajIvI, jAvajjIvAe tassa tappattiyaM no kappai pAyariyattaM vA
jAva gaNAvaccheiyattaM vA uddisittae vA dhArettae vaa| _ 25. pAyariya-uvajjhAe
ya bahussue babbhAgame bahuso bahu-AgADhA-gADhesu kAraNesu mAI musAbAI, asuI,
pAvajIvI, jAvajjIvAe tassa tappattiyaM no kappai pAyariyattaM vA jAva
gaNAvaccheiyattaM vA uddisittae vA dhArettae vA / 26. bahave bhikkhuNo bahussuyA
babbhAgamA bahuso bahu-AgADhA-gADhesu kAraNesu mAI musAvAI, asuI, pAvajIvI,
jAvajjIvAe tesi tappattiyaM no kappai AyariyattaM vA jAva gaNAvaccheiyattaM vA
uddisittae vA dhArettae vaa| 27. bahabe gaNAvaccheiyA bahussuyA babhAgamA bahuso
bahu-AgADhA-gADhesu kAraNesu mAI musAvAI, prasuI, pAvajIvI, jAvajjIvAe tesi
tappattiyaM no kappai AyariyattaM vA jAva gaNAvaccheiyattaM vA uddisittae vA
dhArettae thaa| 28. bahave prAyariya-uvajzAyA bahussuyA babbhAgamA bahuso bahu-
AgADhA-gADhesu kAraNesu mAI musAvAI, prasuI, pAvajIvI jAvajjIvAe tesi
tappattiyaM no kappai AyariyattaM vA jAva gaNAvaccheiyattaM vA uddisittae vA
dhArettae vaa|

Page #154 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## ‡§µ‡•ç‡§Ø‡§µ‡§π‡§æ‡§∞‡§∏‡•Ç‡§§‡•ç‡§∞ 29:  **29. Many monks, many *Ganavachcheiyas*, many *Apariyu-
Uvzahayas*, many *Babbagamas*, many *Bahupragaadha-Gaadhes* in many strong
reasons, if they speak falsely with *Maya* or live life with impure
*Papacharanas*, then it is not appropriate to give them the position of
*Aacharya* or *Ganavachcheiyas* for life, or to hold them in such positions,
even if it is intended or considered.**  **23. A *Bahushruta*, *Bahuaagamjna*
monk, if he speaks falsely with *Maya* many times or lives life with impure
*Papacharanas* due to many strong reasons, then it is not appropriate to give
him the position of *Aacharya* or *Ganavachcheiyas* for life, or to hold him in
such positions, due to those reasons.**  **24. A *Bahushruta*, *Bahuaagamjna*
*Ganavachcheiyas*, if he speaks falsely with *Maya* many times or lives life
with impure *Papacharanas* due to many strong reasons, then it is not
appropriate to give him the position of *Aacharya* or *Ganavachcheiyas* for
life, or to hold him in such positions, due to those reasons.**  **25. A
*Bahushruta*, *Bahupraagamjna* *Aacharya* or *Upadhyaya*, if he speaks falsely
with *Maya* many times or lives life with impure *Papacharanas* due to many
strong reasons, then it is not appropriate to give him the position of
*Aacharya* or *Ganavachcheiyas* for life, or to hold him in such positions, due
to those reasons.**  **26. Many *Bahushruta*, *Bahuaagamjna* monks, if they
speak falsely with *Maya* many times or live life with impure *Papacharanas* due
to many strong reasons, then it is not appropriate to give them the position of
*Aacharya* or *Ganavachcheiyas* for life, or to hold them in such positions, due
to those reasons.**  **27. Many *Bahushruta*, *Bahuaagamjna* *Ganavachcheiyas*,
if they speak falsely with *Maya* many times or live life with impure
*Papacharanas* due to many strong reasons, then it is not appropriate to give
them the position of *Aacharya* or *Ganavachcheiyas* for life, or to hold them
in such positions, due to those reasons.**  **28. Many *Bahushruta*,
*Bahuaagamjna* *Aacharyas* and *Upadhyayas*, if they speak falsely with *Maya*
many times or live life with impure *Papacharanas* due to many strong reasons,
then it is not appropriate to give them the position of *Aacharya* or
*Ganavachcheiyas* for life, or to hold them in such positions, due to those
reasons.**  **29. Many *Bahushruta*, *Bahuaagamjna* monks, many
*Ganavachcheiyas*, or many *Aacharyas* and *Upadhyayas*, if they speak falsely
with *Maya* many times or live life with impure *Papacharanas* due to many
strong reasons, then it is not appropriate to give them the position of
*Aacharya* or *Ganavachcheiyas* for life, or to hold them in such positions, due
to those reasons.**  **Discussion:** These sutras lay down the *Prayaschitta*
(penance) for not giving the position of *Aacharya* etc. to a *Bahushruta*
*Bahuaagamjna* monk. Therefore, this *Prayaschitta* is not applicable to monks
who are *Alpagyana* (less knowledgeable) and *Alpa-Shruta* (less learned),
because they are not fully aware of the *Jinaagya* (Jain teachings) and the
principles of *Sanyammarg* (path of self-control) in the form of *Utsarga*
(liberation) and *Apavad* (exceptions). Therefore, they are unfit for positions
due to their latent or immature nature, and it is also not possible for them to
commit the faults mentioned in these sutras. If they happen to commit any
partial fault, then their purification can be achieved through the
*Tapprayaschitta* (penance) mentioned in the *Nishith Sutra*.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
[vyavahArasUtra 29. bahave bhikkhuNo bahave gaNAvaccheiyA bahave Apariya-
uvajhAyA bahussuyA babbhAgamA bahuso bahu-prAgADhA-gADhesu kAraNesu mAI musAvAI,
asuI, pAvajIvI jAvajjIvAe tesi tappattiyaM no kappai AyariyattaM vA jAva
gaNAvaccheiyattaM vA uddisittae vA dhArettae vaa| 23. bahuzruta, bahuaAgamajJa
bhikSu aneka pragADha kAraNoM ke hone para yadi aneka bAra mAyApUrvaka mRSA bole
yA apavitra pApAcaraNoM se jIvana vyatIta kare to use ukta kAraNoM se
yAvajjIvana AcArya yAvat gaNAvacchedaka pada denA yA dhAraNa karanA nahIM
kalpatA hai| 24. bahuzruta, bahuaAgamajJa gaNAvacchedaka aneka pragADha kAraNoM
ke hone para aneka bAra mAyApUrvaka mRSA bole yA apavitra pApAcaraNoM se jIvana
vyatIta kare to use ukta kAraNoM se yAvajjIvana prAcArya yAvat gaNAvacchedaka
pada denA yA dhAraNa karanA nahIM kalpatA hai| 25. bahuzruta, bahuprAgamajJa
prAcArya yA upAdhyAya aneka pragADha kAraNoM ke hone para yadi aneka bAra
mAyApUrvaka mRSA bole yA apavitra pApAcaraNoM se jIvana vyatIta kare to use ukta
kAraNoM se yAvajjIvana prAcArya yAvat gaNAvacchedaka pada denA yA dhAraNa karanA
nahIM kalpatA hai / 26. bahuzruta, bahuAgamajJa aneka bhikSu aneka pragADha
kAraNoM ke hone para yadi aneka bAra mAyApUrvaka mRSA boleM yA apavitra
pApAcaraNoM se jIvana vyatIta kareM to unheM ukta kAraNoM se yAvajjIvana
prAcArya yAvat gaNAvacchedaka pada denA yA dhAraNa karanA nahIM kalpatA hai /
27. bahuzruta, bahanAgamajJa aneka gaNAvacchedaka aneka pragADha kAraNoM ke hone
para bhI yadi aneka bAra mAyApUrvaka mRSA boleM yA apavitra pApAcaraNoM se
jIvana vyatIta kareM to unheM ukta kAraNoM se yAvajjIvana AcArya yAvat
gaNAvacchedaka pada denA yA dhAraNa karanA nahIM kalpatA hai| 28. bahuzruta,
bahuAgamajJa aneka AcArya upAdhyAya aneka pragADha kAraNoM ke hone para yadi
aneka bAra mAyApUrvaka mRSA bole yA apavitra pApAcaraNoM se jIvana vyatIta kareM
to unheM ukta kAraNoM se yAvajjIvana prAcArya yAvat gaNAvacchedaka pada denA yA
dhAraNa karanA nahIM kalpatA hai| 29. bahuzruta, bahuaAgamajJa aneka bhikSa,
aneka gaNAvacchedaka yA aneka prAcArya upAdhyAya aneka pragADha kAraNoM ke hone
para yadi aneka bAra mAyApUrvaka mRSA boleM yA apavitra pApAcaraNoM se jIvana
vyatIta kareM to unheM ukta kAraNoM se yAvajjIvana prAcArya yAvat gaNAvacchedaka
pada denA yA dhAraNa karanA nahIM kalpatA hai| vivecana-ina sUtroM meM bahuzruta
bahumAgamajJa bhikSu ko prAcArya Adi pada na dene ke prAyazcitta kA vidhAna hai|
ataH alpajJa alpazruta bhikSutroM ke lie isa prAyazcitta kA vidhAna nahIM hai,
kyoMki ve jinAjJA evaM saMyamamArga ke utsarga-apavAda rUpa prAcaraNoM evaM
siddhAntoM ke pUrNa jJAtA nahIM hote haiM / ataH ve avyakta yA aparipakva hone
se padaviyoM ke ayogya hI hote haiM tathA unake dvArA ina sUtroM meM kahe gaye
doSoM kA sevana karanA sambhava bhI nahIM hai / kadAcit ve aisA koI aAMzika doSa
sevana kara bhI leM to unakI zuddhi nizIthasUtrokta tapa prAyazcittoM se hI ho
jAtI hai /

Page #155 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Third Objective] [335] Although all the ordained monks, including the Acharya,
Upadhyaya, and others, are generally considered to be Bahushruta (well-versed in
scriptures) and Bahuaagamajna (knowledgeable in many scriptures), the use of
these terms for them is merely descriptive or may be due to a scribal error. For
example, in the first objective, during the Palochana Sastra, these epithets are
not attributed to the Acharya and Upadhyaya, but are applied to other monks.
However, in many copies, there have been scribal errors regarding these
epithets. The implication of these verses with epithets is that Bahushruta monks
are responsible individuals for the Jain religion. Their indulgence in major
transgressions leads to extreme disregard for the Jain religion, making their
mistakes unforgivable. Therefore, a provision has been made to keep them
permanently removed from the position of Dharma Shasana as a form of penance.
Hence, Bahushruta monks, etc., who engage in the conduct mentioned in these
verses, have no right to roam around as Acharya or even head of the Gan (group)
for the rest of their lives. The verses use the terms "many times" and "many
profound reasons." Therefore, if a monk commits the aforementioned conduct only
once, the penance mentioned in the verses does not apply, and only a penance of
Tapas (austerity) is given. If the monk commits these transgressions without
many strong reasons, he receives the penance of Deeksha Chhed (expulsion from
monastic life). In essence, this penance should be understood as applicable only
when the transgressions are committed many times and for many profound reasons.
The previous ten verses also contain provisions regarding penance, rules, and
prohibitions related to the position of Acharya, etc., and these seven verses
also describe the same. The difference is that the previous verses describe it
in relation to the violation of celibacy or the abandonment of the monastic
attire, while these verses describe it in relation to transgressions related to
the first, second, or fifth Mahavratas (great vows). In other words, a monk who
repeatedly indulges in lying, deceit, manipulation, cheating others, false
accusations, etc., or who causes harm to others through tantra, mantra, etc., or
who practices astrology, medicine, etc., is called a "Paapjeevi" (sinful) in the
verses. Due to his polluted mind and corrupt conduct, he becomes completely
unfit for any kind of prominence or position. The intention of these seven
verses in establishing the penance is that whether it is one monk or many, or
one ordained monk or many, if they collectively indulge in the transgressions
mentioned in the verses, they all become subject to penance. For information
about profound reasons, refer to the commentary. The essence of the third
objective of verses 1-2 is that a wise, discerning monk who has completed three
years of initiation and has memorized the Praacharaang Nishaath Sastra with its
meaning can roam around as a leader. However, if he roams around without the
permission of the Gachchha leader, Acharya, etc., he becomes eligible for
penance in the form of Tapas or Chhed, as appropriate.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
tIsarA uddezaka] [335 AcArya upAdhyAya Adi sabhI padavIdhara bhikSu to niyamataH
bahuzruta bahuAgamajJa hote haiM phira bhI unake lie ina zabdoM kA prayoga
kevala svarUpadarzaka hai athavA lipipramAda se ho jAnA sambhava hai| jaise ki
pahale uddezaka meM pAlocanAsatra meM prAcArya upAdhyAya ke yaha vizeSaNa nahIM
haiM anya bhikSoM ke lie yaha vizeSaNa lagAye gaye haiM tathApi vahAM kaI
pratiyoM meM ina vizeSaNa sambandhI lipipramAda huyA hai| vizeSaNayukta ina
sUtroM kA tAtparya yaha hai ki bahuzruta bhikSu jinazAsana ke jimmedAra vyakti
hote haiN| inake dvArA bar3e doSoM kA sevana jinazAsana ko atyadhika avahelanA
kA kAraNa hone se unakI bhUla akSamya hotI hai| jisase unheM prAyazcitta rUpa
meM jIvana bhara ke lie dharmazAsana ke pada se mukta rakhane kA vidhAna kiyA
gayA hai| ataH ina sUtroM meM kahe gaye AcaraNoM ko karane vAle bahuzruta bhikSu
Adi ko jIvana bhara prAcArya yAvat gaNapramukha banakara vicaraNa karane kA koI
adhikAra nahIM rahatA hai| sUtra meM 'bahuta bAra' aura 'bahu AgADha kAraNa' ina
do zabdoM kA prayoga kiyA gayA hai / ataH eka bAra ukta AcaraNa karane para yaha
sUtrokta prAyazcitta nahIM AtA hai, kintu use kevala tapa prAyazcitta hI diyA
jAtA hai| baha grAgADha arthAta aneka prabala kAraNoM ke binA hI yadi ukta
bhikSa ina doSoM kA sevana kare to use dIkSAcheda rUpa prAyazcitta pAtA hai|
sArAMza yaha hai ki aneka bAra doSa sevana karane para aura aneka AgADha kAraNa
hone para hI yaha prAyazcitta samajhanA caahie| pUrva ke dasa sUtroM meM bhI
prAcArya Adi padavI ke sambandha meM prAyazcittarUpa vidhi-niSedha kiye gaye
haiM aura ina sAta sUtroM meM bhI yahI varNana hai / antara yaha hai ki vahAM
brahmacaryabhaMga yA veSa tyAgane kI apekSA se varNana hai aura yahAM prathama,
dvitIya yA paMcama mahAvrata sambandhI doSoM kI apekSA varNana hai| arthAt jo
bhikSu jhUTha, kapaTa, prapaMca dUsaroM ke sAtha dhokhA, asatya doSAropaNa Adi
AcaraNoM kA aneka bAra sevana karatA hai yA tantra, mantra Adi se kisI ko kaSTa
detA hai athavA vidyA, mantra, jyotiSa, vaidyakakarma Adi kA prarUpaNa karatA
hai, aise bhikSu ko sUtra meM "pApajIvI' kahA hai| vaha kaluSita citta aura
kuzIla prAcAra ke kAraNa sabhI prakAra kI pramukhatA yA padavI ke sarvathA
ayogya ho jAtA hai| yahAM sAta sUtroM dvArA prAyazcittavidhAna karane kA yaha
prAzaya hai ki eka bhikSu ho yA aneka athavA eka padavIdhara ho yA aneka, ye
milakara bhI sUtrokta doSa sevana kareM to ve sabhI prAyazcitta ke bhAgI hote
haiM / AgADha kAraNoM kI jAnakArI ke lie bhASya kA adhyayana kreN| sUtra 1-2
tIsare uddezaka kA sArAMza buddhimAna, vicakSaNa, tIna varSa kI dIkSA paryAya
vAlA aura prAcArAMga nizIthasatra ko artha sahita kaMThastha dhAraNa karane vAlA
aisA "bhAva palicchanna" bhikSu pramukha banakara vicaraNa kara sakatA hai,
kintu gacchapramukha prAcAryAdi kI AjJA binA vicaraNa karane para vaha
yathAyogya tapa yA cheda rUpa prAyazcitta kA pAtra hotA hai|

Page #156 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[336] [Vyavahar Sutra Sutra 3.4 5-6 7-8] A monk who has completed at least three
years of *dikshaparaya* and is virtuous, wise, discerning, well-versed in
scriptures, proficient in the impact of *Jin-pravachan*, and has memorized at
least the *Acharaang* and *Nishhoth Sutra* with their meanings, can be appointed
to the position of *Upadhyaya*. A monk who has completed three years of
*dikshaparaya* but does not possess these qualities cannot be appointed to the
position of *Upadhyaya*.    Besides the qualities required for an *Upadhyaya*,
if a monk has completed five years of *dikshaparaya* and has memorized at least
the *Acharaang*, *Sutrakritang*, and *Char Cheda Sutra* with their meanings, he
can be appointed to the position of *Pracharaya*. They should also be well-
versed in scriptures and other knowledge. A monk who has completed five years of
*dikshaparaya* but does not possess these qualities cannot be appointed to the
position of *Pracharaya*.  A monk who possesses the above qualities, has
completed at least eight years of *dikshaparaya*, and has memorized the
*Thanang-Samavayang Sutra* along with the aforementioned *Agamas*, can be
appointed to the position of *Ganavchhedak*. A monk who has completed eight
years of *dikshaparaya* but does not possess these qualities cannot be appointed
to the position of *Ganavchhedak*.  In special circumstances, if a monk
possesses other qualities and is deemed suitable, he can be appointed to the
positions of *Pracharaya* or *Upadhyaya* even if he has not completed the
required *dikshaparaya* or memorized the scriptures. This provision should be
understood only when no other monk in the *Gachch* is suitable and it becomes
absolutely necessary. This provision allows for a newly initiated monk to be
appointed as *Acharya* on the same day.  Sadhus and Sadhvis who are less than 72
years old and have not completed at least three years of *dikshaparaya* are not
allowed to wander or reside independently without the guidance of a *Pracharaya*
or *Upadhyaya*. These Sadhus should not reside in a *Gachch* without a
*Pracharaya* and *Upadhyaya*, and Sadhvis should not reside in a *Gachch*
without a *Pracharaya*, *Upadhyaya*, and *Pratini*. If any of these individuals
pass away, it is necessary to appoint someone else to their position.  If a monk
appointed to the position of *Acharya* or any other position breaks the fourth
vow, he is declared ineligible for all positions for life. If a monk breaks the
fourth vow after relinquishing his position or if a regular monk breaks the
fourth vow, he can be appointed to any position after three years if he becomes
eligible. 9-10 11-12 13-17

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
336] [vyavahArasUtra sUtra 3.4 5-6 7-8 kama se kama tIna varSa kI dIkSAparyAya
vAlA bhikSu AcArasampanna, buddhisampanna, vicakSaNa, bahuzruta, jina-pravacana
kI prabhAvanA meM dakSa tathA kama se kama AcArAMga evaM nizothasUtra ko artha
sahita dhAraNa karane vAlA ho, use upAdhyAya pada para niyukta kiyA jA sakatA
hai| jo bhikSu tIna varSa kI dIkSA paryAya vAlA ho, kintu ukta guNasampanna na
ho to use upAdhyAya pada para niyukta nahIM kiyA jA sktaa| upAdhyAya ke yogya
guNoM ke sivAya yadi dIkSAparyAya pAMca varSa aura arthasahita kaNThastha zruta
meM kama se kama AcArAMga, sUtrakRtAMga aura cAra chedasUtra hoM to use prAcArya
pada para niyukta kiyA jA sakatA hai tathA ve pATha saMpadA Adi se sampanna bhI
hone caahie| pAMca varSa kI dIkSAparyAya vAlA bhikSu ukta guNoM se sampanna na
ho to use prAcArya pada para niyukta nahIM kiyA jA sakatA hai| uparyukta
guNasampanna evaM kama se kama ATha varSa kI dIkSAparyAya vAlA tathA pUrvokta
AgamoM sahita ThANAMga-samavAyAMgasUtra ko kaNThastha dhAraNa karane vAlA bhikSu
gaNAvacchedaka pada para niyukta kiyA jA sakatA hai / ATha varSa kI dIkSAparyAya
vAlA ukta guNasampanna na ho to use gaNAvacchedaka pada para niyukta nahIM kiyA
jA sakatA hai / kisI vizeSa paristhiti meM anya guNoM se sampanna yogya bhikSa
ho to use Avazyaka dIkSAparyAya aura zruta kaMThastha na ho to bhI prAcArya
upAdhyAya pada para niyukta kiyA jA sakatA hai / gaccha meM anya kisI bhikSu ke
yogya na hone para evaM atyanta prAvazyaka ho jAne para hI yaha vidhAna
samajhanA cAhie / isa vidhAna se 'navadIkSita' bhikSu ko usI dina AcArya banAyA
jA sakatA hai| cAsIsa varSa kI umra se kama umra vAle evaM tIna varSa kI
dIkSAparyAya se kama saMyama vAle sAdhu-sAdhviyoM ko prAcArya upAdhyAya kI nizrA
binA svatantra vicaraNa karanA yA rahanA nahIM kalpatA hai tathA ina sAdhuoM ko
prAcArya aura upAdhyAya se rahita gaccha meM nahIM rahanA cAhie aura sAdhviyoM
ko prAcArya upAdhyAya evaM pratinI ina tIna se rahita gaccha meM nahIM rahanA
caahie| inameM se kisI ke kAladharma prApta ho jAne para bhI usa pada para anya
ko niyukta karanA Avazyaka hai| AcAryAdi pada para niyukta bhikSu kA caturtha
vrata bhaMga ho jAe to use AjIvana sabhI pada ke ayogya ghoSita kara diyA jAtA
hai| pada tyAga karake caturtha vrata bhaMga karane para yA sAmAnya bhikSu ke
dvArA caturtha vrata bhaMga karane para vaha tIna varSa ke bAda yogya ho to kisI
bhI pada para niyukta kiyA jA sakatA hai| 9-10 11-12 13-17

Page #157 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Third Uddeshak] [337 Sutra 18-22 If a *padavƒ´dhara* leaves the *sanÃÑyama*
without appointing someone else to the position, then they cannot be given any
position upon re-initiation. / If someone leaves their position by handing it
over to another or a *saÃÑmaÃÑnya bhik·π£u* leaves the *sanÃÑyama*, then after re-
initiation, if they are eligible, they can be given any position after three
years, as per the appropriate time. If a *bahu≈õruta bhik·π£u* or *praÃÑcƒÅrya* etc.
commits many acts of lying, deceit, trickery, false accusation, etc., which are
impure and sinful, due to strong reasons, or if many *bhik·π£us*, *praÃÑcƒÅrya* etc.
together commit such an act, then they become ineligible for all types of
positions for life, and there is no other option in this. 23-29 Conclusion 1-2
9-10 11 12 In this *uddeshak*, the *kalpya-akalpya* of wandering as the head,
the eligibility and ineligibility for giving a position, giving a position in a
situation of limited eligibility, the staying of young or newly initiated
*saÃÑdhu*s under the leadership of two, *praÃÑcƒÅrya* and *upaÃÑdhyaÃÑya*, the
staying of young or newly initiated *saÃÑdhvi*s under the leadership of three,
*praÃÑcƒÅrya*, *upaÃÑdhyaÃÑya*, and *pravartini*, the rules and prohibitions of
giving a position to those who have broken the fourth vow, the rules and
prohibitions of giving a position to those who have left the *sanÃÑyama* and
taken re-initiation, the complete prohibition of giving a position to those who
commit lying, deceit, trickery, etc., and other topics have been described. ||
Third *uddeshak* ends // 13-17 18-22 23-29

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
tIsarA uddezaka] [337 sUtra 18-22 yadi padavIdhara kisI anya ko pada para
niyukta kiye binA saMyama chor3akara calA jAya to use punaH dIkSA aMgIkAra
karane para koI pada nahIM diyA jA sakatA / yadi koI apanA pada anya ko sauMpa
kara jAve yA sAmAnya bhikSu saMyama tyAga kara jAve to punaH dIkSA lene ke bAda
yogya ho to use tIna varSa ke bAda koI bhI pada yathAyogya samaya para diyA jA
sakatA hai| bahuzruta bhikSu yA prAcArya Adi prabala kAraNa se aneka bAra
jhUTha-kapaTa-prapaMcaasatyAkSepa Adi apavitra pApakArI kArya kare yA aneka
bhikSu, prAcArya Adi milAkara aisA kRtya kareM to ve jIvana bhara ke lie sabhI
prakAra kI padaviyoM ke ayogya ho jAte haiM aura isameM anya koI vikalpa nahIM
hai| 23-29 upasaMhAra 1-2 9-10 11 12 isa uddezaka meMpramukha banakara vicaraNa
karane ke kalpyAkalpya kA, pada dene ke yogyAyogya kA, paristhitivaza alpa
yogyatA meM pada dene kA, prAcArya, upAdhyAya do ke netRtva meM taruNa yA
navadIkSita sAdhuoM ko rahane kA, prAcArya, upAdhyAya, pravartinI ina tIna ke
netRtva meM taruNa yA navadIkSita sAdhviyoM ke rahane kA, caturthavrata bhaMga
karane vAloM ko pada dene ke vidhi-niSedha kA, saMyama tyAga kara punaH dIkSA
lene vAloM ko pada dene ke vidhi-niSedha kA, jhUTha-kapaTa-prapaMca Adi karane
vAloM ko pada dene ke sarvathA niSedha kA, ityAdi viSayoM kA varNana kiyA gyaa|
||tiisraa uddezaka samApta // 13-17 18-22 23-29

Page #158 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Fourth Uddeshak: Number of Nirgranthas residing with Acharya etc.  1. **No**
**Kappar** for **Ayariy-Uvajjhayas** and **Agganiyyas** in **Hemant-Gimhasu**
(winter-summer) for **Chaare** (four months). 2. **Kappar** for **Payariy-
Uvajjhayas** and **Appabiyyas** in **Hemant-Gimhasu** (winter-summer) for
**Chaare** (four months). 3. **No** **Kappar** for **Ganavaccheiyas** and
**Appabiyyas** in **Hemant-Gimhasu** (winter-summer) for **Chaare** (four
months). 4. **Kappar** for **Ganavaccheiyas** and **Appataiyyas** in **Hemant-
Gimhasu** (winter-summer) for **Chaare** (four months). 5. **No** **Kappar** for
**Ayariy-Uvajjhayas** and **Appabiyyas** in **Vasavasan** (rainy season) for
**Vatthae** (one month). 6. **Kappar** for **Prayariy-Uvajjhayas** and
**Appataiyyas** in **Vasavasan** (rainy season) for **Vatthae** (one month). 7.
**No** **Kappar** for **Ganavaccheiyas** and **Appataiyyas** in **Vasavasan**
(rainy season) for **Vatthae** (one month). 8. **Kappar** for **Ganavaccheiyas**
and **Appac-Uttas** in **Vasavasan** (rainy season) for **Vatthae** (one month).
9. In **Gamansi** (village) or **Rayahanisi** (city), **many** **Payariy-
Uvajjhayas** and **Appabiyyas**, **many** **Ganavaccheiyas** and **Appataiyyas**
can **Kappar** in **Hemant-Gimhasu** (winter-summer) for **Chaare** (four
months), **Annam-Annam** (one after another). 10. In **Gamansi** (village) or
**Rayahanisi** (city), **many** **Ayariy-Uvajjhayas** and **Appataiyyas**,
**many** **Ganavaccheiyas** and **Appac-Uttas** can **Kappar** in **Vasavasan**
(rainy season) for **Vatthae** (one month), **Annam-Annam** (one after another).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
cauthA uddezaka AcAryAdi ke sAtha rahane vAle nirgranthoM kI saMkhyA 1. no
kappai Ayariya-uvajjhAyassa egANiyassa hemanta-gimhAsu cArae / 2. kappai
pAyariya-uvajjhAyassa appabiiyassa hemanta-gimhAsu cArae / 3. no kappai
gaNAvaccheiyassa appabiiyassa hemanta-gimhAsu cArae / 4. kappai gaNAvaccheiyassa
appataiyassa hemanta-gimhAsu cArae / 5. no kappai Ayariya-uvajjhAyassa
appabiiyassa vAsAvAsaM vatthae / 6. kappai prAyariya-uvajjhAyassa appataiyassa
vAsAvAsaM vatthae / 7. no kappai gaNAvaccheiyassa appataiyassa vAsAvAsaM vatthae
/ 8. kappaDa gaNAvaccheiyassa appaca utthassa vAsAvAsaM vatthae / 9. se gAmaMsi
vA jAva rAyahANisi vA bahUNaM pAyariya-udhajjhAyANaM appabiiyANaM, bahUrNa
gaNAvaccheiyANaM appataiyANaM kappaDa hemaMta-gimhAsu cArae, annamannaM nissAe /
10. se gAmaMsi vA jAva rAyahANisi vA bahUNaM Ayariya-uvajjhAyANaM appataiyANaM,
bahUNaM gaNAvaccheiyANaM appacautthANaM kappai vAsAvAsaM vatthae annamannaM
nissAe / 1. hemanta aura grISma Rtu meM prAcArya yA upAdhyAya ko akelA vihAra
karanA nahIM kalpatA hai| 2. hemanta aura grISma Rtu meM prAcArya yA upAdhyAya
ko eka sAdhu ko sAtha lekara vihAra karanA kalpatA hai| 3. hemanta aura grISma
Rtu meM gaNAvacchedaka ko eka sAdhu ke sAtha vihAra karanA nahIM kalpatA hai| 4.
hemanta aura grISma Rtu meM gaNAvacchedaka ko do anya sAdhuoM ko sAtha lekara
vihAra karanA kalpatA hai| 5. varSAkAla meM prAcArya yA upAdhyAya ko eka sAdhu
ke sAtha rahanA nahIM kalpatA hai /

Page #159 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Translation:  **[Fourfold Purpose]**  6. During the rainy season, it is
prescribed for an Acharya or an Upadhyaya to stay with two other Sadhus.  7.
During the rainy season, it is not prescribed for a Ganavacchedak to stay with
two Sadhus.  8. During the rainy season, it is prescribed for a Ganavacchedak to
stay with three other Sadhus.  9. During the Hemant and Grishma seasons, it is
prescribed for many Acharyas or Upadhyayas to travel in a group, each with one
Sadhu, and for many Ganavacchedaks to travel in a group, each with two Sadhus,
in a village or even a capital city.  10. During the rainy season, it is
prescribed for many Acharyas or Upadhyayas to stay in a group, each with two
Sadhus, and for many Ganavacchedaks to stay in a group, each with three Sadhus,
in a village or even a capital city.   **Discussion:**  These sutras lay down
the rules regarding the travel and Chaturmas (four-month rainy season retreat)
of Acharyas, Upadhyayas, and Ganavacchedaks. There are no rules laid down here
for Pravartak, Sthavir, or other holders of such positions, or for ordinary
monks.   Other Agamas do not have any such rules for them. Only for an
unmanifested or immature monk is independent travel prohibited, and the negative
consequences of independent travel are explained, and the rule of traveling in
the presence of a Guru is laid down in Pracha. Shru. 1 A. 5 U. 4 and Suy. Shru.
1 A. 14 Ga. 3-4.   There is no rule in the Agamas for a manifested, mature, and
Gƒ´tƒÅrttha monk to stay alone, but there are rules for various types of Abhig·πõha,
Pratima, Jinkalpa, Sambhoga-pratyƒÅkhyƒÅna, SƒÅhaya-pratyƒÅkhyƒÅna, etc., and for
staying alone for the sake of Samyamasamadhi or Chittasamadhi, as well as for
the desire to travel alone in the second stage of a monk's aspirations.   The
mention of both Acharya and Upadhyaya together here and elsewhere implies that
both are endowed with external and internal wealth in the Gachchha, and it is
absolutely necessary for both these holders of positions to be present in every
Gachchha, according to the Agamas. In other words, according to the Agamas, it
is not appropriate for any Gachchha or community of Sadhus to travel without
these two.   The position of Ganavacchedak is also necessary in large Gachchhas,
but it is not mandatory in every Gachchha like Acharya and Upadhyaya. Therefore,
separate sutras are given here for them.   According to the rules of these
sutras, these three holders of positions cannot travel alone or observe
Chaturmas alone, but it is necessary for them to have at least one or more
Sadhus with them. The rules for the Sadhus who are to be kept with them are as
follows:   Acharya and Upadhyaya can travel with at least one Sadhu, i.e., in a
group of two, during the Hemant and Grishma seasons, and can observe Chaturmas
with two other Sadhus, i.e., in a group of three. This rule implies that they
cannot travel alone and cannot observe Chaturmas with only one Sadhu, i.e., in a
group of two.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
cauyA uddezaka] 6. varSAkAla meM prAcArya yA upAdhyAya ko anya do sAdhunoM ke
sAtha rahanA kalpatA hai| 7. varSAkAla meM gaNAvacchedaka ko do sAdhuoM ke sAtha
rahanA nahIM kalpatA hai| 8. varSAkAla meM gaNAvacchedaka ko anya tIna sAdhuoM
ke sAtha rahanA kalpatA hai / 9. hemanta aura grISma Rtu meM aneka AcAryoM yA
upAdhyAyoM ko grAma yAvat rAjadhAnI meM apanI-apanI netrAya meM eka-eka sAdhu ko
aura aneka gaNAvacchedakoM ko do-do sAdhuoM ko rakhakara vihAra karanA kalpatA
hai| 10. varSARtu meM aneka AcAryoM yA upAdhyAyoM ko grAma yAvat rAjadhAnI meM
apanI-apanI nezrAya meM do-do sAdhuoM ko aura aneka gaNAvacchedakoM ko tIna-tIna
sAdhuoM ko rakhakara rahanA kalpatA hai| vivecana-ina sUtroM meM prAcArya,
upAdhyAya evaM gaNAvacchedaka ke vicaraNa evaM cAturmAsa-nivAsa sambandhI
vidhAna kiyA gayA hai| pravartaka, sthavira Adi anya padavIdhara yA sAmAnya
bhikSuoM ke liye yahAM vidhAna nahIM kiyA gayA hai / anya AgamoM meM ina ke lie
aisA koI vidhAna nahIM hai| kevala avyakta yA aparipakva bhikSa ko svatantra
vicaraNa karane kA niSedha kiyA gayA hai evaM usake svatantra vicaraNa kA
duSpariNAma batAkara guru ke sAnnidhya meM vicaraNa karane kA vidhAna prAcA.
zru. 1 a. 5 u. 4 tathA sUya. zru. 1 a. 14 gA. 3-4 meM kiyA gayA hai| _vyakta,
paripakva evaM gItArtha bhikSu ke lie koI ekAMta niyama pAgama nahIM hai, apitu
aneka prakAra ke abhigraha, pratimAeM, jinakalpa, saMbhoga-pratyAkhyAna, sahAya-
pratyAkhyAna Adi tathA paristhitivaza saMyamasamAdhi yA cittasamAdhi ke lie
ekala vihAra kA vidhAna kiyA gayA hai evaM bhikSu ke dvitIya manoratha meM bhI
nivRtta hokara akele vicaraNa karane kI icchA rakhane kA vidhAna hai| yahAM
tathA anyatra prAcArya-upAdhyAya ina do padoM kA jo eka sAtha kathana kiyA gayA
hai, isakA tAtparya yaha hai ki ye donoM gaccha meM bAhya-Abhyantara
Rddhisampanna hote haiM tathA ina donoM padavIdharoM kA pratyeka gaccha meM honA
nitAnta Avazyaka bhI hai, aisA AgamavidhAna hai| arthAt ina do ke binA kisI
gaccha kA yA sAdhusamudAya kA vicaraNa karanA AgamAnusAra ucita nahIM hai|
vizAla gacchoM meM gaNAvacchedaka pada bhI Avazyaka hotA hai, kintu prAcArya-
upAdhyAya ke samAna pratyeka gaccha meM anivArya nahIM hai / ata: yahAM unake
lie vidhAna karane vAle sUtra alaga kahe haiN| ina sUtroM ke vidhAnAnusAra ye
tInoM padavIdhara kabhI bhI akele nahIM vicara sakate aura cAturmAsa bhI nahIM
kara sakate, kintu kama se kama eka yA aneka sAdhuoM ko sAtha rakhanA inheM
Avazyaka hotA hai| sAtha rakhe jAne vAle una sAdhuoM kI maryAdA isa prakAra hai
prAcArya-upAdhyAya hemanta grISma Rtu meM kama se kama eka sAdhu ko sAtha
rakhate hue arthAt do ThANA se vicaraNa kara sakate haiM aura anya do sAdhu ko
sAtha rakhakara kula tIna ThANA se cAturmAsa kara sakate haiN| isase yaha niyama
phalita ho jAtA hai ki ve kabhI bhI akele vihAra nahIM kara sakate aura eka
sAdhu ko sAtha lekara kevala do ThANA se cAturmAsa bhI nahIM kara skte|

Page #160 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[340] The *Vyavahar Sutra* (ninth and tenth sutras) clearly states that even if
there are many *pracharayas* and *upaadhyaayas* together during the *Hemant*,
*Greeshma* seasons or *Chaturmas*, each *pracharaya* and *upaadhyaaya* must have
the required number of *sants* in their respective *nishra* as mentioned in the
sutras. This means that a *sadhu* who is under the *nishra* of one *pracharaya*
or *upaadhyaaya* cannot stay with another *pracharaya* or *upaadhyaaya*. This
implies that even if two or three *acharyas* or *upaadhyaayas* want to stay
together without any other *sadhu*, they cannot do so. Similarly, they cannot
stay together with fewer *sadhus* than the required number, as it would violate
the rules mentioned in the sutras.  A *ganavachchedak* can travel with a minimum
of two *sadhus* during the *Hemant* and *Greeshma* seasons, covering a total of
three *thanas*. During *Chaturmas*, they can stay with three other *sadhus*,
covering a total of four *thanas*. It is forbidden for a *ganavachchedak* to
stay with fewer *sadhus*. Therefore, they cannot travel with two *thanas* or
stay for *Chaturmas* with three *thanas*.  According to the ninth and tenth
sutras, even if there are many *ganavachchedaks* together, they must still have
the required number of *sants* in their respective *nishras* as mentioned above.
They cannot count other *ganavachchedaks*, their accompanying *sants*, or
themselves as part of their *nishra*.  If these three *padavidharas* want to
travel independently, carrying images or possessions, or if they are forced to
travel alone due to special circumstances, they must relinquish their positions
as *pracharaya* or *upaadhyaaya* and appoint someone else to the position.
*Pracharayas* and *upaadhyaayas* are esteemed *padavidharas* of the *sangh*.
Their independent travel and *Chaturmas* with two *thanas* is not considered
appropriate for the *sangh*.  Although the *ganavachchedak* is a working
position under the leadership of the *acharya*, the number of *sadhus*
accompanying them is mentioned as being greater than the *acharya*. This is
because their area of work is larger. Having more *sadhus* for service,
organization, and other tasks provides them with convenience.  The number of
*sadhus* mentioned in the sutras should not be understood as a prohibition on
having more *sadhus*. If it is convenient for *sannyam*, more *sants* can stay
together. However, if staying with more *sants* leads to a loss of *sannyam*,
such as a violation of *eshana samiti* or *paristhapanika samiti*, then it is
better to travel with fewer *sants*.  When the leading *sadhu* passes away, the
remaining *sadhus* have the following duty: 11. "If a monk who was previously
staying in a particular place passes away, then the remaining monks should
gather together. If there are others who are eligible to become *upasampanna*,
then they should become *upasampanna*. If there are no others who are eligible
to become *upasampanna*, then the remaining monks should stay in their own *k
appa* according to their own *samatta*. They should travel in different
directions, keeping a distance of eleven *padamas* between them. They should
travel in different directions, keeping a distance of one *tana* between them."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
340] [vyavahArasUtra navaveM-dasaveM sUtra meM yaha bhI spaSTa kara diyA gayA
hai ki jahAM hemanta grISma Rtu meM yA cAturmAsa meM aneka prAcArya-upAdhyAya
sAtha meM hoM to bhI pratyeka prAcArya-upAdhyAya kI apanI-apanI nizrA meM sUtra
meM kahe anusAra santa sAtha meM honA Avazyaka hai, arthAt eka prAcArya-
upAdhyAya ke nizrAgata sAdhu ya prAcArya-upAdhyAya ko rahanA nahIM kalpatA hai|
isase yaha phalita hotA hai ki anya kisI sAdhu ke binA kevala 2-3 AcArya-
upAdhyAya hI sAtha meM rahanA cAheM to nahIM raha sakate haiM yA Avazyaka
sAdhuoM se kama sAdhu sAtha rakhakara bhI aneka prAcArya-upAdhyAya sAtha meM
nahIM raha sakate aura rahane para sUtrokta maryAdA kA ullaMghana hotA hai /
gaNAvacchedaka hemanta aura grISma Rtu meM kama se kama do sAdhuoM ko sAtha
rakhakara kula tIna ThANA se vicaraNa kara sakate haiM aura anya tIna sAdhuoM ko
sAtha lekara kula cAra ThANA se cAturmAsa kara sakate haiN| isase kama sAdhuoM
se rahanA gaNAvacchedaka ke lie niSiddha hai / ata: ve do ThANA se vicaraNa
nahIM kara sakate aura tIna ThANA se cAturmAsa nahIM kara skte| navave evaM
dasaveM sUtra ke anusAra aneka gaNAvacchedaka sAtha ho jAeM to bhI unheM apanI-
apanI nizrA meM Upara kahI gaI saMkhyA ke santoM ko rakhanA Avazyaka hai| ve
anya gaNAvacchedaka Adi ko yA unake sAtha rahe santoM ko apanI nizrA meM
ginakara nahIM raha sakate evaM svayaM ko bhI anya kI nizrA meM ginakara nahIM
raha skte| ye tInoM padavIdhara koI pratimAeM yA abhigraha dhAraNa kara
svatantra ekAkI vicaraNa karanA cAheM athavA anya vizeSa paristhitiyoM se vivaza
hokara ekAkI vicaraNa karanA cAheM to unheM apane prAcArya Adi pada kA tyAga
karanA Avazyaka ho jAtA hai tathA anya kisI ko usa pada para niyukta karanA bhI
Avazyaka hotA hai| prAcArya-upAdhyAya saMgha ke pratiSThita padavIdhara hote
haiN| inakA ekAkI vicaraNa evaM do ThANA se cAturmAsa karanA saMgha ke lie
zobhAjanaka nahIM hotA hai| yadyapi gaNAvacchedaka AcArya ke netRtva meM
kAryavAhaka pada hai, tathApi inake sAtha ke sAdhuoM kI saMkhyA AcArya se adhika
kahI gaI hai| isakA kAraNa yaha hai ki inakA kAryakSetra adhika hotA hai / sevA,
vyavasthA Adi kAryoM meM adhika sAdhu sAtha meM hoM to unheM suvidhA rahatI hai|
sUtra meM nirdiSTa saMkhyA se adhika sAdhuoM ke rahane kA niSedha nahIM
samajhanA cAhie / saMyama kI suvidhAnusAra adhika santa bhI sAtha rahanA cAheM
to raha sakate haiN| kintu adhika santoM ke sAtha rahane meM saMyama kI kSati
arthAt eSaNAsamiti evaM pariSThApanikAsamiti prAdi bhaMga hotI ho to alpa santoM
se vicaraNa karanA caahie| agraNI sAdhu ke kAla karane para zeSa sAdhuoM kA
kartavya 11. gAmANugAmaM dUijjamANe bhikkhU jaM purano kaTTa viharai, se ya
Ahacca vIsubhejjA, asthi ya ittha aNNe kei uksaMpajjaNArihe se uvasaMpajjiyanve
/ natthi ya ittha aNNe kei uvasaMpajjaNArihe tassa ya appaNo kappAe asamatte
kappai egArAiyAe paDimAe jagaNaM-jaNNaM disaM aNNe sAhammiyA viharaMti taNaM-
taNNaM disaM uvlitte|

Page #161 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Fourth Uddeshak  [341] If it is not appropriate for him to stay there for the
sake of traveling, then it is appropriate for him to stay there for the sake of
the cause. If the cause is finished, then someone else should say, "Stay here, O
Arya! for one or two nights." Then it is appropriate for him to stay for one or
two nights. It is not appropriate for him to stay there for more than one or two
nights. If someone stays there for more than one or two nights, then he is
liable for the penance of Dikshached or Tap.  12. If a monk who has stayed for
the Varshavas, is staying with someone as his leader, and that leader dies, then
the remaining monks should choose a suitable monk as their leader. If there is
no other suitable monk, and the monk himself has not completed the study of
Nishita etc., then he should stay for one night at a time for rest on the way,
and should go in the direction where other fellow-religionists are. It is not
appropriate for him to stay there for the sake of traveling. It is appropriate
for him to stay there for the sake of the cause. If the cause is finished, then
someone else should say, "Stay here, O Arya! for one or two nights." Then it is
appropriate for him to stay for one or two nights. It is not appropriate for him
to stay there for more than one or two nights. If someone stays there for more
than one or two nights, then he is liable for the penance of Dikshached or Tap.
11. If a monk is traveling from village to village, and he is staying with
someone as his leader, and that leader dies, then the remaining monks should
choose a suitable monk as their leader. If there is no other suitable monk, and
the monk himself has not completed the study of Acharprakalp, then he should
stay for one night at a time for rest on the way, and should go in the direction
where other fellow-religionists are. It is not appropriate for him to stay there
for the sake of traveling. It is appropriate for him to stay there for the sake
of the cause. If the cause is finished, then someone else should say, "Stay
here, O Arya! for one or two nights." Then it is appropriate for him to stay for
one or two nights. It is not appropriate for him to stay there for more than one
or two nights. If someone stays there for more than one or two nights, then he
is liable for the penance of Dikshached or Tap.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
cauthA uddezaka] [341 no se kappai tattha vihAravattiyaM vatthae / kappai se
tattha kAraNavattiyaM batthae / taMsi ca NaM kAraNaMsi niTThiyaMsi paro
vaejjA"vasAhi ajjo ! egarAyaM vA, durAyaM vA", evaM se kappai egarAyaM vA
durAyaM vA vatthae / no se kappai paraM egarAyAno vA durAyAno vA vatthae / je
tattha egarAyAo vA durAyAo vA paraM vasai se saMtarA chee vA parihAre vaa| 12.
vAsAvAsaM pajjosavio bhikkhU jaM purao kaTTa viharai se ya Ahacca vIsubhejjA,
asthi ya itya aNNe kei avasaMpajjaNArihe se uvasaMpajjiyanve / nasthi ya ittha
aNNe kei uvasaMpajjaNArihe tassa ya appaNo kappAe asamatte kappai se egarAiyAe
paDimAe jaNaM-jaNNaM disaM aNNe sAhammiyA viharaMti taNNaM-taNaM disaM uvalitae
/ no se kappai tattha vihAravattiyaM vtthe| kappai se tattha kAraNavattiyaM
vtthe| taMsi ca NaM kAraNaMsi niyaMsi paro vaejjA-"vasAhi prajjo ! egarAyaM vA,
durAyaM vA" evaM se kappai egarAyaM vA durAyaM vA vatthae, no se kappai paraM
egarAyAo vA durAyAno vA vsthe| je tattha egarAyAno vA durAyAno vA paraM vasai,
se saMtarA chee vA parihAre vA / 11. grAmAnugrAma vihAra karatA humA bhikSu,
jinako agraNI mAnakara vihAra kara rahA ho aura vaha yadi kAladharma-prApta ho
jAya to zeSa bhikSutroM meM jo bhikSu yogya ho, use agraNI banAnA caahie| yadi
anya koI bhikSu agraNI hone yogya na ho aura svayaM (ratnAdhika) ne bhI
AcAraprakalpa kA adhyayana pUrNa na kiyA ho to use mArga meM vizrAma ke lie eka
rAtri Thaharate hue jisa dizA meM anya svadharmI vicarate hoM, usa dizA meM jAnA
kalpatA hai| mArga meM use vicarane ke lakSya se ThaharanA nahIM kalpatA hai /
yadi rogAdi kA kAraNa ho to adhika ThaharanA kalpatA hai / rogAdi ke samApta
hone para yadi koI kahe ki- "he Arya ! eka yA do rAta aura Thaharo" to use eka
yA do rAta ThaharanA kalpatA hai, kintu eka yA do rAta se adhika ThaharanA nahIM
kalpatA hai| jo bhikSu vahAM (kAraNa samApta hone ke bAda) eka yA do rAta se
adhika ThaharatA hai, vaha maryAdA ullaMghana ke kAraNa dIkSAcheda yA tapa rUpa
prAyazcitta kA pAtra hotA hai| 12. varSAvAsa meM rahA huA bhikSu, jinako agraNI
mAnakara raha rahA ho aura vaha yadi kAladharma-prApta ho jAya to zeSa bhikSuSoM
meM jo bhikSu yogya ho use agraNI banAnA caahiye| yadi anya koI bhikSu agraNI
hone yogya na ho aura svayaM (ratnAdhika) ne bhI nizItha Adi kA adhyayana pUrNa
na kiyA ho to use mArga meM vizrAma ke lie eka-eka rAtri Thaharate hue jisa dizA
meM anya svadharmI hoM usa dizA meM jAnA kalpatA hai|

Page #162 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[342] It is not permissible for a monk to stay in a place with the intention of
wandering in the path of the *Vyavahar Sutra*. If there is a reason like
illness, then staying longer is permissible. After the illness is over, if
someone says, "O Arya! Stay for one or two nights," then it is permissible for
him to stay for one or two more nights. But it is not permissible to stay for
more than one or two nights. A monk who stays for more than one or two nights is
liable to *Deekshached* or *Taparoop* atonement due to violation of the rules.
There must be a *Kalpak*, i.e., a leader of the *Sanghara*, among the monks who
are wandering or observing *Chaturmas*. For this, the *Uddeshak* 3 Su. 1 has
called him a *Gana Dharan* (one who holds the *Gana*), and it is said that he
must be proficient in *Shruta* and *Deekshaparaya*. Therefore, only one who has
completed three years of *Deekshaparaya* and has memorized the *Acharang Sutra*
and *Nishita Sutra* can hold the *Gana*. The rest of the monks consider him as
their leader and abide by his orders.   Besides this leader, there may be one or
more other monks in the *Sanghara* who are eligible to be *Sanghara* leaders,
i.e., they may have completed more *Deekshaparaya* and have sufficient knowledge
of *Shruta*. Sometimes, all the monks except the leader may be *Agitarth* or
newly initiated.   If the leader of the *Sanghara* who is wandering or observing
*Chaturmas* attains *Kaladharma* (death), then the monk with the most *Ratna*
(virtues) among the remaining monks should accept the leadership position. If he
himself is not proficient in *Shruta*, then he should appoint another eligible
monk to the leadership position.   If there is not a single monk among the
remaining monks who is eligible to be a leader, then it is not permissible for
them to stay for *Chaturmas* or to wander. However, they should go to the
vicinity of other eligible *Sarmic* monks in the direction where they are
located. In such a situation, it becomes necessary to wander even during
*Chaturmas*, and even if permission has been given to stay longer during the
*Hemant* and *Greeshma* seasons, it becomes necessary to wander from there.
Until they reach other *Sarmic* monks, it is not permissible for them to stay
longer anywhere except for one day's rest on the way. If someone develops a
physical ailment, they can stay for treatment. After the ailment is over, they
can stay for another 1-2 days at the behest of the physician, etc. After
recovering, staying for more than two days attracts appropriate atonement.   The
essence of the subject matter of these *Sutras* is that an eligible disciple
should quickly memorize the necessary *Shruta* (like *Prachar Prakalp*, etc.)
along with their meaning, because if it remains incomplete, he cannot become the
leader of the *Gana* (Sanghara). And if the leader attains *Kaladharma*, then he
must wander even during *Chaturmas*, and he cannot stay anywhere for even a
single day with the intention of wandering or at someone's request. But if he
has completed the aforementioned *Shruta*, then he can assume the leadership
position mentioned in the *Sutras* at any time. He can also wander independently
and observe *Chaturmas*.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
342] [vyavahArasUtra mArga meM use vicarane ke lakSya se ThaharanA nahIM kalpatA
hai| yadi rogAdi kA kAraNa ho to adhika ThaharanA kalpatA hai| rogAdi ke samApta
hone para yadi koI kahe ki~~"he Arya ! eka yA do rAta Thaharo" to use eka yA do
rAta aura ThaharanA kalpatA hai / kintu eka yA do rAta se adhika ThaharanA nahIM
kalpatA hai / jo bhikSu eka yA do rAta se adhika ThaharatA hai, vaha maryAdA-
ullaMghana ke kAraNa dIkSAcheda yA taparUpa prAyazcitta kA pAtra hotA hai /
vivecana-vicaraNa yA cAturmAsa karane vAle bhikSutroM meM eka kalpAka arthAt
saMghAr3A-pramukha honA Avazyaka hai| jisake lie uddezaka 3 sU. 1 meM
gaNadhAraNa karane vAlA arthAt gaNadhara kahA hai tathA use zruta evaM
dIkSAparyAya se saMpanna honA Avazyaka kahA gayA hai / ataH tIna varSa kI
dIkSAparyAya aura AcArAMgasUtra evaM nizIthasUtra ko kaNThastha dhAraNa karane
vAlA hI gaNa dhAraNa kara sakatA hai| zeSa bhikSu usako pramukha mAnakara usakI
AjJA meM rahate haiM / usa pramukha ke sivAya usa saMghATaka meM anya bhI eka yA
aneka saMghAr3A-pramukha hone ke yogya ho sakate haiM arthAt ve adhika
dIkSAparyAya evaM paryApta zruta dhAraNa karane vAle ho sakate haiN| kabhI eka
pramukha ke atirikta sabhI sAdhu agItArtha yA navadIkSita hI ho sakate haiN|
vicaraNa yA cAturmAsa karane vAle saMghATaka kA pramukha bhikSu yadi kAladharma
ko prApta ho jAya to zeSa sAdhunoM meM se ratnAdhika bhikSu pramukha pada
svIkAra kare / yadi vaha svayaM zruta se saMpanna na ho to anya yogya ko
pramukha pada para sthApita kare / yadi zeSa rahe sAdhuoM meM eka bhI pramukha
hone yogya na ho to unheM cAturmAsa meM rahanA yA vicaraNa karanA nahIM kalpatA
hai, kintu jisa dizA meM anya yogya sArmika bhikSa nikaTa hoM, unake samIpa meM
pahuMca jAnA cAhiye / aisI sthiti meM cAturmAsa meM bhI vihAra karanA Avazyaka
ho jAtA hai tathA hemaMta grISma Rtu meM bhI adhika rukane kI svIkRti de dI ho
to bhI vahAM se vihAra karanA Avazyaka ho jAtA hai| jaba taka anya sAmika
bhikSutroM ke pAsa na pahuMce taba taka mArga meM eka dina kI vizrAMti lene ke
atirikta kahIM para bhI adhika rukanA unheM nahIM kalpatA hai| kisI ko koI
zArIrika vyAdhi ho jAya to upacAra ke lie ThaharA jA sakatA hai| vyAdhi samApta
hone ke bAda vaidya Adi ke kahane se 1-2 dina aura bhI Thahara sakatA hai /
svastha hone ke bAda do dina se adhika Thaharane para yathAyogya prAyazcitta AtA
hai / ina sUtroM ke pratipAdya viSaya kA sAra yaha hai ki yogya ziSya ko
Avazyakazruta-adhyayana (prAcAraprakalpa Adi) zIghra arthasahita kaMThastha
dhAraNa kara lenA cAhie, kyoMki usake apUrNa rahane para vaha bhikSu gaNa
(saMghATaka) kA pramukha nahIM ho sakatA evaM pramukha ke kAladharma prApta ho
jAne para cAturmAsa meM bhI use vihAra karanA Avazyaka ho jAtA hai aura eka bhI
dina vaha kahIM vicaraNa ke bhAva se yA kisI kI vinatI se nahIM raha sakatA hai|
kintu yadi ukta zruta pUrNa kara liyA ho to vaha bhikSu kabhI bhI sUtrokta
pramukha pada dhAraNa kara sakatA hai / svataMtra vicaraNa evaM cAturmAsa bhI
kara sakatA hai|

Page #163 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Fourth Objective [343]  Therefore, every monk and nun should consider the
study of scriptures as their primary goal, following the order prescribed in the
scriptures. The instruction for appointing a successor by a sick Acharya, etc.,
is as follows:  **13. "Arya! When I pass away, appoint such and such monk to my
position."** If the monk designated by the Acharya is worthy of being appointed
to that position, then he should be appointed. If he is not worthy of being
appointed to that position, then he should not be appointed. If there is another
monk in the Sangha who is worthy of that position, then he should be appointed.
If there is no other monk in the Sangha who is worthy of that position, then the
monk designated by the Acharya should be appointed to that position. After he is
appointed to that position, if any Gƒ´tartha monk says, "Arya! You are unworthy
of this position, therefore give up this position," (upon saying this) if he
gives up that position, he is not liable for Diksha-Chheda or Tapa-rupa
PrƒÅya≈õcitta. If the SƒÅr·πÅika monks do not ask him to give up the position of
Acharya, etc., according to the Kalpa, then all those SƒÅr·πÅika monks are liable
for Diksha-Chheda or Tapa-rupa PrƒÅya≈õcitta due to that reason.  **Discussion:**
In the third objective, the qualities of a monk worthy of the position of
Acharya-Upadhyaya were discussed in detail. Here, when a sick Acharya-Upadhyaya,
knowing his end is near, designates a monk for the position of Acharya-
Upadhyaya, the duty of the elders at that time is explained.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
cauthA uddezaka [343 isalie pratyeka sAdhu-sAdhvI ko Agamokta krama se zruta-
adhyayana kA pramukha lakSya rakhanA caahie| glAna AcAryAdi ke dvArA pada dene
kA nirdeza 13. Ayariya-uvajjhAe gilAyamANe annayaraM vaejjA-"prajjo! mamaMsi NaM
kAlagayaMsi samANaMsi ayaM samukkasiyanve / " se ya samukkasaNArihe
samukkasiyavve, se ya no samukkasaNArihe no samukkasiyagve, asthi ya ittha aNNe
kei samukkasaNArihe se samukkasiyave / nasthi ya ittha aNNe kei samukkasaNArihe
se ceva samukkasiyabve, taMsi ca NaM samukkiTThasi paro vaejjA"dussamukkiTTha te
ajjo ! nivikhavAhi !" tassa NaM nikkhivamANassa natthi kei chae vA parihAre vaa|
je sAhammiyA prahAkappeNaM no uTThAe viharaMti samvesi tesi tappattiyaM chee vA
parihAre vaa| 13. rogagrasta AcArya yA upAdhyAya kisI pramukha sAdhu se kahe ki-
"he prArya ! mere kAlagata hone para amuka sAdhu ko mere pada para sthApita
krnaa|" yadi AcArya dvArA nirdiSTa vaha bhikSu usa pada para sthApana karane
yogya ho to use sthApita karanA caahie| yadi vaha usa pada para sthApana karane
yogya na ho to use sthApita nahIM karanA caahie| yadi saMgha meM anya koI sAdhu
usa pada ke yogya ho to use sthApita karanA caahie| yadi saMgha meM anya koI bhI
sAdhu usa pada ke yogya na ho to prAcArya-nirdiSTa sAdhu ko hI usa pada para
sthApita karanA caahie| usako usa pada para sthApita karane ke bAda koI gItArtha
sAdhu kahe ki- "he Arya ! tuma isa pada ke ayogya ho ataH isa pada ko chor3a do"
(aisA kahane para) yadi vaha usa pada ko chor3a de to dIkSAcheda yA tapa rUpa
prAyazcitta kA pAtra nahIM hotA hai| jo sArmika sAdhu kalpa ke anusAra use
prAcAryAdi pada chor3ane ke lie na kahe to ve sabhI sArmika sAdhu ukta kAraNa se
dIkSAcheda yA tapa rUpa prAyazcitta ke pAtra hote haiN| vivecana-tIsare uddezaka
meM AcArya-upAdhyAya pada ke yogya bhikSu ke guNoM kA vistRta kathana kiyA gayA
hai| yahAM para rugNa prAcArya-upAdhyAya apanA antima samaya samIpa jAna kara
prAcAryaupAdhyAya pada ke lie kisI sAdhu kA nAma nirdeza kareM to usa samaya
sthaviroM kA kyA kartavya hai, isakA spaSTIkaraNa kiyA gayA hai|

Page #164 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[344] The [Vyavahar Sutra] instructs that the monk nominated by a sick Acharya
to become the next Acharya may be qualified or unqualified. This means that
their statement may be narrow-minded due to their illness or their emotional
state. Therefore, the responsibility of deciding who should be given the
position of Acharya or Upadhyaya rests with the remaining monks of the Gachchha
after the Acharya's Kaladharma is attained. This means that if the monk
nominated by the Acharya possesses all the qualifications mentioned in the third
Uddeshak, then he should be appointed to the position, and no other option is
necessary. If he is not qualified according to the scriptures and another monk
is qualified, then the nominated monk should not be considered mandatory for the
position, and the qualified monk should be appointed instead. If no one else is
qualified, then the nominated monk, whether qualified or not, should be
appointed to the Acharya position. If many other monks are also qualified for
the position and are even more virtuous than the nominated monk, but the
nominated monk is qualified, then he should be made Acharya. After appointing
any qualified monk, whether nominated or not, or even a monk with limited
qualifications due to circumstances, if it is observed that the Gachchha's
administration is not functioning well, the monks' restraint and meditation are
disturbed, the external environment is agitated, and other qualified monks have
emerged in the Gachchha, then the senior monks or prominent Sadhus and Sadhvis
of the Gachchha can request the Acharya to relinquish the position and appoint
another qualified monk. In such a situation, if they do not want to relinquish
the position or another Sadhu supports them and obstructs the process, then all
of them are liable for atonement. This Sutra-based Agam-Prajna should be
understood well, and actions like giving, taking, or requesting to relinquish
the position should be performed with simplicity. All other Sadhus and Sadhvis
should also support the prominent senior saints, but it is not appropriate to
try to remove someone from the position or obtain it through deceit and cunning
for the sake of proving one's own opinions. It is the duty of the previous
Acharya who managed the Gachchha's responsibilities and the other prominent
senior saints of the Gachchha to appoint a monk who possesses the qualities
mentioned in the Agam with impartiality and a broad perspective, considering the
welfare of the Gachchha and Jainism. Some monks themselves resolve to become
Acharya, and they are the ones who sometimes create or cause unrest and
distress. However, a monk who is engaged in the practice of liberation should
remain pure like a lotus in water, immersed in the feeling of oneness, etc.
Desiring any position or being eager for it is also a defilement of restraint.
This desire involves the desire for external Siddhis, which falls under the sin
of greed, and fulfilling that desire also involves resorting to various actions
contrary to restraint, such as crooked policies, etc., which leads to the loss
and contradiction of restraint. It also greatly strengthens the pride and ego.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
344] [vyavahArasUtra rugNa AcArya ne AcArya banAne ke lie jisa ke nAma kA
nirdeza kiyA hai, vaha yogya bhI ho sakatA hai aura ayogya bhI ho sakatA hai
arthAt unakA kathana rugNa hone ke kAraNa yA bhAva ke kAraNa saMkucita dRSTikoNa
vAlA bhI ho sakatA hai| ataH unake kAladharma prApta ho jAne para "prAcArya yA
upAdhyAya pada kisa ko denA"- isake nirNaya kI jimmedArI gaccha ke zeSa sAdhuoM
kI kahI gaI hai| jisakA bhAva yaha hai ki yadi AcAryanirdiSTa bhikSu tIsare
uddezaka meM kahI gaI sabhI yogyatAmoM se yukta hai to use hI pada para niyukta
karanA cAhie, dUsarA koI vikalpa aAvazyaka nahIM hai| yadi vaha zAstrokta
yogyatA se saMpanna nahIM hai aura anya bhikSu yogya hai to AcAryanirdiSTa
bhikSu ko pada denA anivArya na samajha kara usa yogya bhikSu ko hI pada para
niyukta karanA caahie| yadi anya koI bhI yogya nahIM hai to AcAryanirdiSTa
bhikSu yogya ho athavA yogya na ho, use hI AcAryapada para niyukta karanA cAhie
/ anya aneka bhikSu bhI pada ke yogya haiM aura ve prAcAryanirdiSTa bhikSu se
ratnAdhika bhI haiM kintu yadi AcAryanirdiSTa bhikSu yogya hai to use hI AcArya
banAnA caahiye| AcAryanirdiSTa yA anirdiSTa kisI bhI yogya bhikSu ko athavA
kabhI paristhitivaza alpa yogyatA vAle bhikSu ko pada para niyukta karane ke
bAda yadi yaha anubhava ho ki gaccha kI vyavasthA acchI taraha nahIM cala rahI
hai, sAdhuoM kI saMyama samAdhi evaM bAhya vAtAvaraNa kSubdha ho rahA hai,
gaccha meM anya yogya bhikSu taiyAra ho gaye haiM to gaccha ke sthavira yA
pramukha sAdhu-sAdhviyAM Adi milakara AcArya ko pada tyAgane ke liye nivedana
karake anya yogya ko pada para niyukta kara sakate haiM / aisI sthiti meM yadi
ve pada tyAganA na cAheM yA anya koI sAdhu unakA pakSa lekara prAgraha kare to
ve sabhI prAyazcitta ke pAtra hote haiN| _ isa sUtrokta Agama-prAjJA ko
bhalIbhAMti samajhakara saralatApUrvaka pada denA, lenA yA chor3ane ke lie
nivedana karanA Adi pravRttiyAM karanI cAhiye tathA anya sabhI sAdhu-sAdhviyoM
ko bhI pramukha sthavira saMtoM ko sahayoga denA cAhie, kintu apane-apane
vicAroM kI siddhi ke liye nindA, dveSa, kalaha yA saMghabheda Adi anucita
tarIkoM se pada chur3AnA yA kapaTa-cAlAkI se prApta karane kI koziza karanA
ucita nahIM hai| gaccha-bhAra saMbhAlane vAle pUrva ke prAcArya kA tathA gaccha
ke anya pramukha sthavira saMtoM kA yaha kartavya hai ki ve niSpakSa bhAva se
tathA vizAla dRSTi se gaccha evaM jinazAsana kA hita socakara AgamanirdiSTa
guNoM se sampanna bhikSu ko hI pada para niyukta kreN| kaI sAdhu svayaM hI
prAcArya banane kA saMkalpa kara lete haiM, ve hI kabhI azAMta evaM kleza kI
sthiti paidA karate haiM yA karavAte haiM, kintu mokSa kI sAdhanA ke lie
saMyamarata bhikSu ko jala-kamalavat nirlepa rahakara ekatva Adi bhAvanA meM
tallIna rahanA cAhiye / kisI bhI pada kI cAhanA karanA yA pada ke lie lAlAyita
rahanA bhI saMyama kA dUSaNa hai / isa cAhanA meM bAhya Rddhi kI icchA hone se
isakA samAveza lobha nAmaka pApa meM hotA hai tathA usa icchA kI pUrti meM aneka
prakAra ke saMyamaviparIta saMkalpa evaM kuTilanIti Adi kA avalaMbana bhI liyA
jAtA hai, jisase saMyama kI hAni evaM virAdhanA hotI hai| sAtha hI mAnakaSAya kI
atyadhika puSTi hotI hai|

Page #165 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Fourth Objective] Nishƒ´tha Uddesa. 17 states that one who exhibits the
characteristics of a preceptor is eligible for atonement. Therefore, a virtuous
monk immersed in the practice of restraint, if instructed or commanded by the
preceptor or other senior monk of the Gachchha to take on the responsibility of
the Gachchha, should consider his own capabilities and the opportunity and
accept it. However, it is completely inappropriate to be determined to attain
the position of Acharya oneself and to abandon the Gachchha if it is not
obtained.  Thus, understanding all the information specified in this Sutra, the
position should be conferred according to the method specified in the Sutra, and
other ineligible and inappropriate paths should not be accepted.  _ This Sutra
also clarifies that in the Vƒ´tarƒÅgamƒÅrga, which follows the SyƒÅdvƒÅda principle,
there are also many-sided provisions in the conduct of Vinaya and obedience. In
other words, Vinaya is not just a "command." For this reason, the right to
consider the eligibility and ineligibility of a monk designated or not
designated by the Acharya and to appoint him has been indicated. Even with such
ƒÄgama provisions, it is a path of all-round decline of the Gachchha and
Jina≈õƒÅsana to act contrary to the ƒÄgama due to the prejudice of tradition or to
fulfill the saying "BƒÅbƒÅvƒÅkyam PramƒÅ·πáam" or to accept virtuous and skillful,
all-jewel-like monks as heads of the Gachchha.  Therefore, having attained the
SyƒÅdvƒÅda path, one should not give prominence to tradition and decisions
contrary to the ƒÄgama, but should always give prominence to JinƒÅj√±ƒÅ and
≈öƒÅstraj√±ƒÅ. The instruction to confer the position by the Acharya, etc., who is
leaving after abandoning restraint, is found in 14. ƒÄriya-UvajjhƒÅe OhayamƒÅ·πáe
Annayaram VaejjƒÅ - "Ajjo! Mamasi Na·πÅ PohƒÅviyansi SamƒÅ·πáasi Ayam Samukkasƒ´yabbƒì /
" Se Y Samukkasanaarihe Samukkasƒ´yadhve, Se 4 No Samukkasanaarihe No
Samukkasƒ´yanve / Asthi Y Ittha A·πá·πáe Keƒ´ Samukkasanaarihe Se Samukkasƒ´yadhve /
Ta·πÅ Si Ca Na·πÅ Samukki·π≠·π≠hasi Paro VaejjƒÅ - "Dussamukki·∏∑a·πÅ Te Ajjo! Nivƒ´khavahi."
Tassa Na·πÅ NikkhivamƒÅ·πáassa Natthi Keƒ´ Chhae VƒÅ ParihƒÅre VƒÅ. Je SƒÅhammƒ´yƒÅ
Ahakappe·πáam No U·∏çƒÅe Viharati / Savvesƒ´ Tesƒ´ Tappattiyam Chhae VƒÅ ParihƒÅre VƒÅ.
14. If the Acharya or UpƒÅdhyƒÅya who is leaving after abandoning restraint tells
a prominent monk, "O ƒÄrya, after I leave, you should establish such and such a
monk in my position," then if the Acharya-designated monk is fit to be
established in that position, he should be established. If he is not fit to be
established in that position, he should not be established. If there is another
monk in the Sangha who is fit for that position, he should be established. If
there is no other monk in the Sangha who is fit for that position, then the
Acharya-designated monk should be established in that position. After
establishing him in that position, if the virtuous monk says, "O ƒÄrya! You are
unfit for this position, therefore abandon this position," (upon saying this)
if...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
cauthA uddezaka] nizItha udde. 17 meM apane prAcAryatva ke sUcaka lakSaNoM ko
prakaTa karane vAle ko prAyazcitta kA pAtra kahA gayA hai| ataH saMyamasAdhanA
meM lIna guNasaMpanna bhikSu ko yadi prAcArya yA anya gacchapramukha sthavira hI
gacchabhAra sambhAlane ke lie kaheM yA AjJA deM to apanI kSamatA kA evaM avasara
kA vicAra kara use svIkAra karanA cAhie kintu svayaM hI AcAryapadaprApti ke liye
saMkalpabaddha honA evaM na milane para gaNa kA tyAga kara denA Adi sarvathA
anucita hai| isa prakAra isa sUtra meM nirdiSTa sampUrNa sUcanAoM ko samajha
kara sUtranirdiSTa vidhi se pada pradAna karanA cAhie aura isase viparIta anya
ayogya evaM anucita mArga svIkAra nahIM karanA caahie| _ isa sUtra se yaha bhI
spaSTa hotA hai ki syAdvAda siddhAMta vAle vItarAgamArga meM vinayavyavahAra
evaM AjJApAlana meM bhI anekAMtika vidhAna haiM. arthAta vinaya ke nAma se
kevala "bA kA nirdeza nahIM hai| isI kAraNa prAcArya dvArA nirdiSTa yA anirdiSTa
bhikSu kI yogyatA-ayogyatA kI vicAraNA evaM niyukti kA adhikAra sUcita kiyA gayA
hai| aise AgamavidhAnoM ke hote huye bhI paramparA ke prAgraha se yA "bAbAvAkyaM
pramANam" kI ukti caritArtha kara ke AgamaviparIta pravRtti karanA athavA
bhadrika evaM akuzala sarvaratnAdhika sAdhuoM ko gacchapramukha rUpa meM svIkAra
kara lenA gaccha evaM jinazAsana ke sarvatomukhI patana kA hI mArga hai / ataH
syAdvAdamArga ko prApta karake AgamaviparIta paraMparA evaM nirNaya ko
pramukhatA na dekara sadA jinAjJA evaM zAstrAjJA ko hI pramukhatA denI caahiye|
saMyama tyAga kara jAne vAle AcAryAdi ke dvArA pada dene kA nirdeza 14. Ayariya-
uvajjhAe ohAyamANe annayaraM vaejjA-"ajjo! mamaMsi NaM pohAviyaMsi samANasi ayaM
samukkasiyabbe / " se ya samukkasaNArihe samukkasiyadhve, se 4 no
samukkasaNArihe no samukkasiyanve / asthi ya ittha aNNe kei samukkasaNArihe se
samukkasiyadhve / taM si ca NaM samukkiTThasi paro vaejjA-"dussamukkiLaM te
ajjo! nivikhvaahi|" tassa NaM nikkhivamANassa natthi kei chae vA parihAre vaa|
je sAhammiyA ahAkappeNaM no uDAe viharati / savvesi tesi tappattiyaM chae vA
parihAre vaa| 14. saMyama kA parityAga karake jAne vAle prAcArya yA upAdhyAya
kisI pramukha sAdhu se kaheM ki "he Arya mere cale jAne para amuka sAdhu ko mere
pada para sthApita krnaa|" to yadi AcAryanirdiSTa vaha sAdhu usa pada para
sthApana karane yogya ho to use sthApita karanA caahiye| yadi vaha usa pada para
sthApita karane yogya na ho to use sthApita nahIM karanA caahiye| yadi saMgha
meM anya koI sAdhu usa pada ke yogya ho to use sthApita karanA caahiye| yadi
saMgha meM anya koI bhI sAdhu usa pada ke yogya na ho to prAcAryanirdiSTa sAdhu
ko hI usa pada para sthApita karanA caahiye| usa ko usa pada para sthApita
karane ke bAda yadi gItArtha sAdhu kaheM ki"he Arya ! tuma isa pada ke ayogya
ho, ata: isa pada ko chor3a do" (aisA kahane para) yadi

Page #166 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[346] If a *vyavaharsutra* abandons his position, he is not liable to
*dikshached* or *taparupa* penance. If the *sarmic* monks do not ask him to
leave the position of *acharya* etc. according to the *kalpa*, then all the
*sarmic* monks are liable to *dikshached* or *taparupa* penance for that reason.
**Discussion:** In the previous *sutra*, it was considered appropriate according
to *agaman* to act with discretion if a sick or dying *acharya-upaadhyaya* had
indicated to a monk to give him *acharya* etc. The same rule applies in this
*sutra*. The difference is that here, the *acharya-upaadhyaya* who is willing to
abandon *sanjaya* in terms of both substance and feeling is described. Due to
ill health, a weakening of the feeling of *vairagya*, the strong emergence of
*vedamohiya*, or other *parishah* afflictions, the intention to abandon
*sanjaya* may arise. If this is not prevented, such a situation may arise for
ordinary monks or those who have received degrees. The description of this
situation and its discretion can be seen in *Udde. 3 Su. 28*. All other
discussions should be understood according to *Purvasutra 13*.  **Presentation
of the rule:**  15. If an *acharya* or *upaadhyaya* remembers, but does not
present a monk eligible for *badiksha* for *badiksha* even after four or five
nights, and at that time, if there is a delay in the *badiksha* of any venerable
person of that newly initiated person, then he does not receive any *dikshached*
or *taparupa* penance. If there is no venerable person worthy of *badiksha* for
that newly initiated person, then he receives *dikshached* or *taparupa* penance
for violating four or five nights.  16. If an *acharya* or *upaadhyaya* does not
remember and does not present a monk eligible for *badiksha* for *badiksha* even
after four or five nights, and at that time, if there is a delay in the
*badiksha* of any venerable person of that newly initiated person, then he does
not receive any *dikshached* or *taparupa* penance. If there is no venerable
person worthy of *badiksha* for that newly initiated person, then he receives
*dikshached* or *taparupa* penance for violating four or five nights.  17. If an
*acharya* or *upaadhyaya* remembers or does not remember, but does not present a
monk eligible for *badiksha* for *badiksha* even after ten nights, and at that
time, if there is no venerable person worthy of *badiksha* for that newly
initiated person, then he receives *dikshached* or *taparupa* penance for
violating ten nights.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
346] [vyavahArasUtra vaha usa pada ko chor3a de to dIkSAcheda yA tapa rUpa
prAyazcitta kA pAtra nahIM hotA hai| jo sArmika sAdhu kalpa ke anusAra use
prAcAryAdi pada chor3ane ke lie na kaheM to ve sabhI sArmika sAdhu ukta kAraNa
se dIkSAcheda yA tapa rUpa prAyazcitta ke pAtra hote haiN| vivecana-pUrva sUtra
meM rugNa yA maraNAsanna prAcArya-upAdhyAya ne kisI bhikSu ko prAcAryAdi dene kA
sUcana kiyA ho to unake kathana kA vivekapUrvaka AcaraNa karanA AgamAnusAra
ucita mAnA gayA hai / isa sUtra meM bhI vahI vidhAna hai / antara yaha hai ki
yahAM dravya evaM bhAva se saMyaya kA parityAga karane ke icchuka prAcArya-
upAdhyAya kA varNana hai| zarIra asvastha hone se, vairAgya kI bhAvanA maMda ho
jAne se, vedamohanIya ke prabala udaya se yA anya parISaha upasarga se saMyama
tyAgane kA saMkalpa utpanna ho sakatA hai| usakA nivAraNa na hone se sAmAnya
bhikSu yA padavIdharoM ke lie bhI aisI paristhati utpanna ho sakatI hai| isa
paristhiti kA evaM usake viveka kA varNana udde. 3 sU. 28 meM dekheN| anya
sampUrNa vivecana pUrvasUtra 13 ke anusAra samajha lenA caahiye| upasthApana ke
vidhAna 15. pAyariya-uvajjhAe saramANe paraM caurAya-paMcarAyAo kappAgaM bhikkhu
no uvaTThAvei kappAe, atthiyAI se kei mANaNijje kappAe natthi se kei chae vA
parihAre vaa| NasthiyAI se kei mANaNijje kappAe se santarA chee vA parihAre vaa|
16. Ayariya-uvajjhAe asaramANe paraM caurAya-paMcarAyAno kappAgaM bhikkhu no
uvaTThAvei kappAe, atthiyAiM se kei mANaNijje kappAe, nasthi se keI chee vA
parihAre vA / NasthiyAiM se kei mANaNijje kappAe, se saMtarA chae vA parihAre
vaa| 17. Ayariya-uvajjhAe saramANe vA asaramANe vA paraM dasarAya kappAo
kappAgaM bhikkhu no uvaTThAvei kappAe, atthiyAI se kei mANaNijje kappAe nathi se
kei chae vA parihAre vaa| * 15. prAcArya yA upAdhyAya smaraNa hote hue bhI
bar3IdIkSA ke yogya bhikSa ko cAra-pAMca rAta ke bAda bhI bar3IdIkSA meM
upasthApita na kare aura usa samaya yadi usa navadIkSita ke koI pUjya puruSa kI
bar3IdIkSA hone meM dera ho to unheM dIkSAcheda yA tapa rUpa koI prAyazcitta
nahIM pAtA hai| yadi usa navadIkSita ke bar3IdIkSA lene yogya koI pUjya puruSa
na ho to unheM cAra-pAMca rAtri ullaMghana karane kA cheda yA tapa rUpa
prAyazcitta AtA hai| 16. prAcArya yA upAdhyAya smRti meM na rahane se bar3IdIkSA
ke yogya bhikSa ko cAra-pAMca rAta ke bAda bhI bar3IdIkSA meM upasthApita na
kare, usa samaya yadi vahAM usa navadIkSita ke koI pUjya puruSa kI bar3I dIkSA
hone meM dera ho to unheM dIkSAcheda yA tapa rUpa koI prAyazcitta nahIM AtA hai|
yadi usa navadIkSita ke bar3IdIkSA lene yogya koI pUjya puruSa na ho to unheM
cAra-pAMca rAtri ullaMghana karane kA dIkSAcheda yA tapa rUpa prAyazcitta pAtA
hai|

Page #167 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Fourth Objective] [347 17.    Even if the Acharya or Upadhyaya forgets or
does not forget, they should not initiate a worthy Bhik·π£u into the Great
Initiation after ten days. If, at that time, there is a delay in the Great
Initiation of any venerable person who is eligible for the Great Initiation,
then they do not incur any PrƒÅya≈õcitta (penance) in the form of Dƒ´k·π£ƒÅched
(breaking of initiation) or Tapas (austerity). If there is no venerable person
eligible for the Great Initiation for that newly initiated Bhik·π£u, then they are
not eligible to be appointed to the position of Acharya or Ganavacchedaka for
one year due to the transgression of ten nights.  **Discussion:** In the reign
of the first and last Tirthankaras, Bhik·π£us are given the initiation of
SamƒÅyikcƒÅritra (minor initiation) and then the Great Initiation of
ChhedopasthƒÅpanƒ´yacƒÅritra. Its minimum time limit is seven days and nights,
meaning that in terms of time, the newly initiated Bhik·π£u is called KalpƒÅka
(eligible for the Great Initiation) after seven nights. In terms of qualities,
they are called KalpƒÅka when they have memorized the necessary s≈´tras completely
with their meaning and method, have acquired general knowledge of Jƒ´vƒÅdi (living
beings) and Samitis (assemblies), have memorized the meaning and recitation of
the four studies of the Da≈õavakƒÅlika S≈´tra, and have practiced some daily
activities like writing, etc.  Thus, when the newly initiated Bhik·π£u becomes
KalpƒÅka (eligible for the Great Initiation) and other tests are completed, they
are given the Great Initiation (UpasthƒÅpana). According to Ni. U. 11 S≈´. 84,
PrƒÅya≈õcitta is incurred if the Great Initiation is given before the eligibility.
If the Acharya or Upadhyaya does not give the Great Initiation to the eligible
KalpƒÅka Bhik·π£u at the time mentioned in the s≈´tras, they incur PrƒÅya≈õcitta. This
PrƒÅya≈õcitta rule makes it clear that the Acharya or Upadhyaya alone has the
right to give new initiation or the Great Initiation, and they are the ones who
incur PrƒÅya≈õcitta if there is any error in it. Other Sadhus, Sadhvƒ´s, or
Pravartakas, Pravarti·πáƒ´s can also give initiation with the permission of the
Acharya or Upadhyaya, but the main responsibility for determining their
eligibility lies with the Acharya or Upadhyaya. Generally, according to the
ƒÄgamas, all Sadhus and Sadhvƒ´s have the responsibility to guide others, but the
instructions regarding the arrangements for the ChhedopasthƒÅpanƒ´yacƒÅritra are
within the authority of the Acharya or Upadhyaya. Therefore, they are the ones
who are liable for PrƒÅya≈õcitta if there is any misconduct in this regard.  Here,
three options are mentioned in these three s≈´tras regarding the Great
Initiation: (1) transgression of the limit due to forgetfulness, (2)
transgression of the limit while remembering, (3) special transgression of the
limit due to forgetfulness or non-forgetfulness.  When a Bhik·π£u becomes KalpƒÅka
in terms of time and qualities, they can be given the Great Initiation within
four or five nights, meaning within four nights and by the fifth day. This is
the meaning of the word "ChaurƒÅya PancharƒÅya·πáo" in the s≈´tra. This allowance
includes many reasons like travel, auspicious days, monthly periods, illness,
etc.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
cauthA uddezaka] [347 17. prAcArya yA upAdhyAya smRti meM rahate hue yA smRti
meM na rahate hue bhI bar3IdIkSA ke yogya bhikSa ko dasa dina ke bAda bar3I
dIkSA meM upasthApita na kare, usa samaya yadi usa navadIkSita ke koI pUjya
puruSa kI bar3IdIkSA hone meM dera ho to unheM dIkSAcheda yA tapa rUpa koI
prAyazcitta nahIM AtA hai| yadi usa navadIkSita ke bar3IdIkSA ke yogya koI pUjya
puruSa na ho to unheM dasa rAtri ullaMghana karane ke kAraNa eka varSa taka
prAcArya yAvat gaNAvacchedaka pada para niyukta karanA nahIM kalpatA hai|
vivecana-prathama evaM antima tIrthakara ke zAsana meM bhikSa oM ko
sAmAyikacAritra rUpa dIkSA dene ke bAda chedopasthApanIyacAritra rUpa bar3IdIkSA
dI jAtI hai| usakI jaghanya kAlamaryAdA sAta ahorAtra kI hai arthAt kAla kI
apekSA navadIkSita bhikSa sAta rAtri ke bAda kalpAka (bar3IdIkSA ke yogya) kahA
jAtA hai aura guNa kI apekSA AvazyakasUtra sampUrNa artha evaM vidhi sahita
kaMThastha kara lene para, jIvAdi kA evaM samitiyoM kA sAmAnya jJAna kara lene
para, dazavakAlika sUtra ke cAra adhyayana kI artha sahita vAcanA lekara
kaMThastha kara lene para evaM pratilekhana Adi dainika kriyAoM kA kucha abhyAsa
kara lene para 'kalpAka' kahA jAtA hai| _isa prakAra kalpAka (bar3IdIkSAyogya)
hone para evaM anya parIkSaNa ho jAne para usa navadIkSita bhikSa ko bar3IdIkSA
(upasthApanA) dI jAtI hai| yogyatA ke pUrva bar3IdIkSA dene para ni. u. 11 sU.
84 ke anusAra prAyazcitta AtA hai| ukta yogyatAsaMpanna kalpAka bhikSa ko
sUtrokta samaya para bar3IdIkSA na dene para prAcAryaupAdhyAya ko prAyazcitta
prAtA hai| isa prAyazcittavidhAna se yaha spaSTa hotA hai ki kisI ko naI dIkSA
yA bar3odIkSA dene kA adhikAra prAcArya yA upAdhyAya ko hI hotA hai evaM usameM
kisI prakAra kI traTi hone para prAyazcitta bhI unheM hI AtA hai| anya sAdhu,
sAdhvI yA pravartaka, pravartinI bhI prAcArya-upAdhyAya kI AjJA se kisI ko dIkSA
de sakate haiM kintu usakI yogyatA ke nirNaya kI mukhya jimmedArI prAcArya-
upAdhyAya kI hI hotI hai| sAmAnya rUpa se to AgamAnusAra pravRtti karane kI
jimmedArI sabhI sAdhu-sAdhvI ko hotI hI hai, phira ccha ke vyavasthA sambandhI
nirdeza prAcArya-upAdhyAya ke adhikAra meM hote haiN| ataH tatsambandhI viparIta
AcaraNa hone para prAyazcitta ke pAtra bhI ve prAcAryAdi hI hote haiN| yahAM ina
tIna sUtroM meM bar3IdIkSA ke nimitta se tIna vikalpa kahe gaye haiM(1)
vismaraNa meM maryAdA-ullaMghana, (2) smRti hote hue maryAdA-ullaMghana, (3)
vismaraNa yA avismaraNa se vizeSa maryAdA-ullaMghana / kAla se evaM guNa se
kalpAka bana jAne para usa bhikSa ko cAra yA pAMca rAtri ke bhItara arthAt cAra
rAtri aura pAMcaveM dina taka bar3IdIkSA dI jA sakatI hai| yaha sUtra meM Aye
"caurAya paMcarAyAno" zabda kA artha hai / isa chUTa meM vihAra, zubha dina,
mAsika dharma kI asvAdhyAya, rugNatA Adi aneka kAraNa nihita haiN|

Page #168 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Translation:  **[340] Vyavahar Sutra:** Therefore, after seven days of
initiation, the Great Initiation can be given on the eighth, ninth, tenth,
eleventh, or twelfth day, and there is no atonement for it. If the twelfth night
is violated, then according to Sutras 15-16, atonement is received in the form
of appropriate penance or termination of initiation, which is said to be five
nights of minor atonement in the commentary. If the initiation's seven nights
are violated, then in addition to the appropriate penance or termination of
initiation, he is exempted from the Acharya-Upadhyaya position for one year as
atonement.  Here, another concession is mentioned in the rules and atonement of
the Great Initiation, which is that if the newly initiated monk's parents or any
other honorable or benefactor are present, and there is a delay in their
becoming Kalpaka, then for their sake, the Great Initiation can be delayed for
up to six months, and there is no atonement for it. In the Thanangadi Agamas,
seven nights are called the minor Shaikshakala. Therefore, even if eligible, the
Great Initiation cannot be given before the completion of seven nights, because
until then he is called Shaiksha and Akalpa. Six months are called the
"excellent Shaikshakala." Therefore, even for honorable men, the Great
Initiation should not be delayed beyond six months. In these Sutras, it is said
that the atonement for violating the limit of 4-5 days due to memory or
forgetfulness is the same. In the allowance of four to five days, in addition to
auspicious days or travel, etc., the reason for non-study due to menstruation,
etc., is also included, which can be easily resolved in the allowance of 4-5
days.  **18. The discernment of a monk who has gone to another gana:** If a monk
leaves his own gana and accepts another gana to live, and if he meets a fellow
monk at that time, and asks: "O Arya! Are you living under someone's guidance?"
Then he should name the one who is the eldest in that gana in terms of
initiation.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
340] vyivahArasUtra _ ataH dIkSA ke sAta dina bAda AThaveM, nauveM, dasaveM,
gyArahaveM yA bArahaveM dina taka kabhI bhI bar3IdIkSA dI jA sakatI hai aura
usakA koI prAyazcitta nahIM pAtA hai| bArahavIM rAtri kA ullaMghana karane para
sUtra 15-16 ke anusAra yathAyogya tapa yA dIkSAcheda rUpa prAyazcitta pAtA hai|
jisakA bhASya meM jaghanya prAyazcitta pAMca rAtri kA kahA gayA hai| dIkSA kI
satta noM rAtri kA ullaMghana karane para yathAyogya tapa yA cheda prAyazcitta
ke atirikta eka varSa taka use prAyazcitta rUpa meM prAcArya-upAdhyAya pada se
mukta kara diyA jAtA hai| yahAM bar3IdIkSA ke vidhAna evaM prAyazcitta meM eka
chUTa aura bhI kahI gaI hai, vaha yaha ki usa navadIkSita bhikSa ke mAtA-pitA
Adi koI bhI mAnanIya yA upakArI puruSa hoM aura unake kalpAka hone meM dera ho
to unake nimitta se usako bar3IdIkSA dene meM chaha mAsa taka kI bhI pratIkSA kI
jA sakatI hai aura usakA koI prAyazcitta nahIM pAtA hai| ThANAMgAdi AgamoM meM
sAta rAtri kA jaghanya zaikSakAla kahA gayA hai| ataH yogya ho to bhI sAta rAtri
pUrNa hone ke pUrva bar3IdIkSA nahIM dI jA sakatI hai, kyoMki usa samaya taka
vaha zaikSa evaM akalpAka kahA gayA hai| chaha mAsa kA "utkRSTa zaikSakAla" kahA
gayA hai| ataH mAnanIya puruSoM ke lie bar3IdIkSA rokane para bhI chaha mAsa kA
ullaMghana nahIM karanA caahie| ina sUtroM meM smRti rahate hue evaM vismaraNa
se 4-5 dina kI maryAdA ullaMghana kA prAyazcitta samAna kahA gayA hai| cAra-
pAMca dina kI chUTa meM zubha dina yA vihAra Adi kAraNa ke atirikta Rtudharma
Adi asvAdhyAya kA bhI jo kAraNa nihita hai, usakA nivAraNa 4-5 dina kI chUTa meM
saralatA se ho sakatA hai| anyagaNa meM gaye bhikSu kA viveka 18. bhikkhU ya
gaNAmro pravakkamma aNNaM gaNaM uvasaMpajjittANaM viharejjA, taM ca kei sAhammie
pAsittA vaejjA 50-kaM prajjo ! uvasaMpajjittANaM viharasi ? u0-je tattha
savyarAiNie taM vaejjA / pa0-'aha bhante ! kassa kappAe ?' u0-je tattha savva-
bahussue taM vaejjA, jaM vA se bhagavaM vakkhai tassa ANA-uvavAya-vayaNaniddese
citttthissaami| 18. viziSTa jJAnaprApti ke lie yadi koI bhikSu apanA gaNa
chor3akara anya gaNa ko svIkAra kara vicara rahA ho to usa samaya use yadi koI
svadharmI bhikSu mile aura pUche ki pra0-'he Arya ! tuma kisI kI nizrA meM
vicara rahe ho? u0taba vaha usa gaNa meM jo dIkSA meM sabase bar3A ho usakA nAma
kahe /

Page #169 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Fourth Objective [349 Question - If asked again, "O Venerable one! Under
whose leadership are you residing?" Answer - Then, name the one who is the most
learned in that order, and say, "I will abide by the instructions of those whose
command I am under, and I will reside near them and follow their teachings."
Discussion - It is essential for every order to have a learned Acharya-
Upadhyaya. However, it is natural for there to be differences in the Upadhyayas'
attainment of liberation and their teaching skills. / In a particular order, a
disciple of a learned elder Acharya may be sharp-witted and well-versed in
scriptures, fulfilling all the responsibilities of the Acharya. Or, the Guru or
the Dikshit father of a learned Acharya, etc., may be of a good nature but less
learned, and they may be a gem in the order. In such a case, one should
understand the subject matter as mentioned in the sutras regarding a monk who
goes to study in that order. A monk who is studying may have heard or known
about the teaching skills of another monk from a different order and gone to
study in that order. / While wandering there, he may encounter a monk from his
previous order who is traveling for alms or other purposes. If he asks, "O Arya!
Under whose guidance are you wandering?" Then, in response, he should name the
Acharya, Guru, or Dikshit father of the learned one, etc., who are the gems in
that order. / But, if the questioner is not satisfied, thinking that there are
more knowledgeable saints in his own order, and wondering why he left his own
order to come to this one, then, for accurate information, he should ask again,
"O Bhagavan! Who is your Kalpak? In other words, under whose leadership are you
wandering and studying, and who is skilled in teaching in this order?" In
response, he should name the one who is the most learned there, i.e., the one
who is the head among all the learned ones and the leader of the order. He
should say, "All the monks in this order reside and study under their guidance,
and I am also wandering and studying according to their instructions."   ##
Regarding the rules for going on an "Abhinicharica" 19. If many Sarmic monks
wish to go on an "Abhinicharica" together, it is not permissible for them to do
so without asking the elder monks. But, if they ask the elder monks, then it is
permissible for them to go on an "Abhinicharica" together. / If they are not
separated from the elder monks, then it is permissible for them to go on an
"Abhinicharica" together. If they are separated from the elder monks, then it is
not permissible for them to go on an "Abhinicharica" together. / Those who go on
an "Abhinicharica" without being separated from the elder monks should be either
in a group or under the protection of someone.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
cauthA uddezaka] [349 pra0-yadi punaH pUche ki-'he bhadanta ! kisa bahuzruta kI
pramukhatA meM raha rahe ho ? u.-taba usa gaNa meM jo sabase adhika bahuzruta
ho-usakA nAma kahe tathA ve jinakI AjJA meM rahane ke lie kaheM, unakI hI AjJA
evaM unake samIpa meM rahakara unake hI vacanoM ke nirdezAnusAra maiM rahU~gA
aisA khe| vivecana-pratyeka gaccha meM bahuzruta AcArya-upAdhyAya kA honA
Avazyaka hI hotA hai| phira bhI upAdhyAyoM ke kSayopazama meM aura adhyApana kI
kuzalatA meM aMtara honA svAbhAvika hai / kisI gaccha meM bahuzruta vRddha
prAcArya kA ziSya prakhara buddhimAn evaM zrutasaMpanna ho sakatA hai jo
prAcArya kI sabhI jimmedAriyoM ko nibhA rahA ho athavA kisI bahuzruta prAcArya
ke guru yA dIkSita pitA Adi bhadrika pariNAmI alpazruta hoM aura ve gaccha meM
ratnAdhika hoM to aise gaccha meM adhyayana karane ke liye jAne vAle bhikSu ke
saMbaMdha meM sUtrakathita viSaya samajha lenA caahie| koI adhyayanazola bhikSa
kisI bhI anyagacchIya bhikSu kI adhyApana-kuzalatA kI khyAti suna kara yA
jAnakara usa gaccha meM adhyayana karane ke lie gayA ho / vahAM vicaraNa karate
hue kabhI koI pUrva gaccha kA sArmika bhikSu gocarI Adi ke lie bhramaNa karate
hue mila jAe aura vaha pUche ki 'he Arya ! tuma kisa kI nizrA (AjJA) meM
vicaraNa kara rahe ho ?' taba uttara meM vahAM jo ratnAdhika AcArya, guru yA
bahuzruta ke dIkSita pitA Adi hoM unakA nAma batAve / kiMtu jaba praznakartA ko
saMtoSa na ho ki inase to adhika jJAnI saMta apane gaccha meM bhI haiM, phira
apanA gaccha chor3a kara inake gaccha meM kyoM AyA hai ? ata: sahI jAnakArI ke
lie punaH prazna kare ki.-'he bhagavana ! ApakA kalpAka kauna hai ? arthAt kisa
pramukha kI AjJA meM pApa vicaraNa evaM adhyayana Adi kara rahe ho, isa gaccha
meM kauna adhyApana meM kuzala hai ? isake uttara meM jo vahAM sabase adhika
bahazrata ho arthAta sabhI bahuzrutoM meM bhI jo pradhAna ho aura gaccha kA
pramukha ho, unake nAma kA kathana kare aura kahe ki 'unakI nizrA meM gaccha ke
sabhI sAdhu rahate haiM evaM adhyayana karate haiM aura maiM bhI unakI
AjJAnusAra vicaraNa evaM adhyayana kara rahA huuN|' abhinicArikA meM jAne ke
vidhi-niSedha 19. bahave sAhammiyA icchejjA egayao abhinicAriyaM cArae no NaM
kappai there aNApucchittA egayao abhinicAriyaM cArae, kappai NaM thera
prApucchittA egayao abhinicAriyaM caare| therA ya se viyarejjA-evaM NaM kappai
egayao abhinicAriyaM caare| therA ya se no viyarejjA-evaM no kappai egayao
abhinicAriyaM cArae / je tattha therehi aviiNNe egayao abhinicAriyaM caraMti, se
santarA chae vA parihAre vaa| 19. aneka sArmika sAdhu eka sAtha 'abhinicArikA'
karanA cAheM to sthavira sAdhuoM ko pUche binA unheM eka sAtha 'abhinicArikA'
karanA nahIM kalpatA hai, kintu sthavira sAdhuoM se pUcha lene para unheM eka
sAtha 'abhinicArikA' karanA kalpatA hai /

Page #170 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
According to the Vyavahar Sutra, it is considered appropriate to perform
'Abhinicharika' if a Sthavir Sadhu gives permission. If a Sthavir Sadhu does not
give permission, then it is not considered appropriate to perform
'Abhinicharika'. If one performs 'Abhinicharika' without obtaining permission
from the Sthavirs, they are liable for Dikshached or Parihar Prayschitta.
**Explanation:**  The term 'Abhinicharika Gaman' refers to the practice of a
Sadhu, who is weak, unable to perform austerities, and has a thin body due to
austerities, going to a nearby village of cowherds to consume milk and other
non-vegetarian food.  If any monk or group of monks needs to go to an area where
such non-vegetarian food is easily available, it is necessary to obtain
permission from the Gachchha-pramukh Acharya or Sthavir. They grant permission
for 'Abhinicharika' only if they deem it necessary, otherwise, they may refuse.
In Sutra 4, it is stated that performing Prayschitta is necessary for consuming
non-vegetarian food without the specific permission of the Acharya-Upadhyaya.
Here, it is stated that performing Prayschitta is necessary for going to
'Vajika' without permission. Therefore, one should not go without permission.
The Bhashya explains that if the Acharya-Upadhyaya has a large number of Sadhus,
many Pratichchak Sadhus from other Gachchhas have come for study, there is a lot
of coming and going of guest Sadhus, or there are many compassionate Sadhus like
Baddha, etc., then due to any of these reasons, if the monks do not get the
necessary non-vegetarian food after studying or performing austerities or after
performing Prayschitta, and their bodies become thin, then they are given
permission to go to 'Vajika' for a fixed number of days, such as 5 days. The
entire structure of the Sutra is based on this expectation.  The statement about
obtaining permission for general wandering is found in Sutra 2 of Udde. 3.
**Duties of a Charya-Pravesht and Charya-Nivritt Bhikshu:**  20. A Charya-
Pravesht Bhikshu should go to the Thera for four or five days, and should be
truthful in his speech, truthful in his actions, and should be respectful to his
elders. He should not be arrogant or proud.  21. A Charya-Pravesht Bhikshu
should go to the Thera for four or five days, and should be respectful to him,
should be truthful in his actions, and should be ready to accept any punishment
or reprimand. He should be humble and respectful to his elders.  If he says,
"Bante! I will always be respectful and humble, and I will always follow the
rules," then he should be careful about his body.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
[vyavahArasUtra yadi sthavira sAdhu aAjJA deM to unheM 'abhinicArikA' karanA
kalpatA hai| yadi sthavira sAdhu AjJA na deM to unheM 'abhinicArikA' karanA
nahIM kalpatA hai / yadi sthaviroM se AjJA prApta kiye binA 'abhinicArikA' kare
to ve dIkSAcheda yA parihAraprAyazcitta ke pAtra hote haiN| vivecana-AcArya-
upAdhyAya jahAM mAsakalpa Thahare hoM, ziSyoM ko sUtrArtha kI vAcanA dete hoM,
vahAM se glAna asamartha evaM tapa se kRza zarIra vAle sAdhu nikaTa hI kisI
gopAlaka bastI meM dugdhAdi vikRti sevana ke lie jAeM to unakI caryA ko yahAM
'abhinicArikA gamana' kahA gayA hai| kisI bhI bhikSu ko yA aneka bhikSuoM ko
aise dugdhAdi kI sulabhatA vAle kSetra meM jAnA ho to gaccha-pramukha prAcArya
yA sthavira Adi kI AjJA lenA Avazyaka hotA hai| ve Avazyaka lagane para hI unheM
abhinicArikA meM jAne kI AjJA dete haiM anyathA manA kara sakate haiN| ni. u. 4
meM prAcArya-upAdhyAya kI viziSTa prAjJA binA vikRti sevana karane kA
prAyazcitta kahA gayA hai aura yahAM para AjJA binA 'vajikA' meM jAne kA
prAyazcitta kahA gayA hai / ataH AjJA na milane para nahIM jAnA cAhie / bhASya
meM batAyA gayA hai ki prAcArya-upAdhyAya ke pAsa sAdhuoM kI saMkhyA adhika ho,
anya gaccha se adhyayana hetu Aye aneka pratIcchaka sAdhu hoM, pAhune sAdhunoM
kA AvAgamana adhika ho athavA baddha Adi kAruNika sAdhu adhika hoM, ityAdi kisI
bhI kAraNa se bhikSuoM ko adhyayana yA tapa upadhAna ke bAda yA prAyazcitta
vahana karane ke bAda Avazyaka vikRtika padArthoM ke na milane para kRzatA
adhika bar3hatI ho to una bhikSuoM ko niyata dina ke liye arthAt5 dina Adi
saMkhyA kA nirdeza kara 'vajikA' meM jAne kI AjJA dI jAtI hai| usI apekSA se
sUtra kA saMpUrNa vidhAna hai / sAmAnya vicaraNa karane hetu prAjJA lene kA
kathana udde. 3 sUtra 2 meM hai| caryApraviSTa evaM caryAnivRtta bhikSu ke
kartavya 20. cariyApaviThe bhikkhU jAva caurAya-paMcarAyAno there pAsejjA,
sacceva AloyaNA, sacceva paDikkamaNA, sacceva oggahassa pubvANugNavaNA ciTTai
ahAlaMdamavi proggahe / 21. cariyApaviTThe bhikkhU paraM caurAya-paMcarAyAo
there pAsejjA, puNo pAloejjA, puNo paDikkamejjA, puNo cheyaparihArassa
uvtttthaaejjaa| bhikkhubhAvassa aTThAe doccaMpi oggahe aNunavayamve siyaa||
kappai se evaM vadittae, 'aNujANaha bhaMte ! mioggahaM ahAlaMdaM dhuvaM nitiyaM
veuTTiyaM / ' tao pacchA kaay-sNkaasN|

Page #171 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Fourth Objective  **[351 22.** A *charia-niyatta* monk, if he sees (meets)
the *theras* within a period of four or five nights, the same *aloyana*, the
same *padikkama*, and the same *avagraha* permission for staying until the
*kalpa* remains for him. He is in *ahalandam* *avagraha*. **23.** A *charia-
niyatta* monk, if he sees (meets) the *theras* after four or five nights, he
should again do *aloyana-padikkama* and be present in the necessary *diksha-
ched* or *tapa* form of *prayaschitta*. For the sake of *bhikkhu-bhava*, he
should take permission for *avagraha* for the second time. He should request in
this way - 'O *bhadant*! Give me permission to stay in *mitavagraha*, to do
according to *kalpa*, for the fixed rules, that is, to do daily activities, and
give me permission to come again.' Saying this, he should touch their feet.
**20.** A monk who has entered *charia*, if he sees (meets) the *theras* within
a period of four or five nights, the same *aloyana*, the same *padikkama*, and
the same *avagraha* permission for staying until the *kalpa* remains for him.
**21.** A monk who has entered *charia*, if he sees (meets) the *theras* after
four or five nights, he should again do *aloyana-padikkama* and be present in
the necessary *diksha-ched* or *tapa* form of *prayaschitta*. For the sake of
*bhikkhu-bhava*, he should take permission for *avagraha* for the second time.
He should request in this way - 'O *bhadant*! Give me permission to stay in
*mitavagraha*, to do according to *kalpa*, for the fixed rules, that is, to do
daily activities, and give me permission to come again.' Saying this, he should
touch their feet. **22.** A monk who has withdrawn from *charia*, if he sees
(meets) the *theras* within a period of four or five nights, the same
*palochana*, the same *padikkama*, and the same *avagraha* permission for
staying until the *kalpa* remains for him. **23.** A monk who has withdrawn from
*charia*, if he sees (meets) the *theras* after four or five nights, he should
again do *aloyana-padikkama* and be present in the necessary *diksha-ched* or
*tapa* form of *prayaschitta*. For the sake of *bhikkhu-bhava*, he should take
permission for *avagraha* for the second time. He should request in this way -
'O *bhadant*! Give me permission to stay in *mitavagraha*, to do according to
*kalpa*, for the fixed rules, that is, to do daily activities, and give me
permission to come again.' Saying this, he should touch their feet.
**Discussion:**  In this set of four sutras, the word 'charia' has been used
with two meanings: (1) *vajika-gaman* as mentioned in the previous sutras, (2)
going to a foreign country or a distant land. Here, two types of *charia* have
been mentioned: (1) *pravist* - a monk who has stayed in *vajika* for the time
for which he has received permission, or a monk who has been on a journey to a
foreign country or a distant land.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
- cauthA uddezaka] [351 22. cariyAniyaTTe bhikkhU jAva caurAya-paMcarAyAo there
pAsejjA, sacceva AloyaNA, sacceva paDikkamaNA, sacceva oggahassa punvANunnavaNA
ciTThai, ahAlaMdamavi ogghe| 23. cariyAniyaTTe bhikkhU paraM caurAya-paMcarAyAo
there pAsejjA, puNo pAloejjA, puNo paDikkamejjA, puNo cheyaparihArassa
uvddhaaejjaa| bhikkhUbhAvassa aTTAe doccaM pi oggahe aNunnaveyavve siyaa| kappai
se evaM vaittae-'aNujANaha bhaMte ! mioggahaM ahAlaMdaM dhuvaM nitiyaM veuTTiyaM
/ ' tao pacchA kAya-saMphAsaM / 20. caryA meM praviSTa bhikSu yadi cAra-pAMca
rAta kI avadhi meM sthaviroM ko dekhe (mile) to una bhikSuoM ko vahI AlocanA,
vahI pratikramaNa aura kalpaparyaMta rahane ke liye vahI avagraha kI pUrvAnujJA
rahatI hai| 21. caryA meM praviSTa bhikSu yadi cAra-pAMca rAta ke bAda sthaviroM
ko dekhe (mile) to vaha punaH aAlocanA-pratikramaNa kare aura Avazyaka
dIkSAcheda yA tapa rUpa prAyazcitta meM upasthita ho|| bhikSubhAva (saMyama kI
surakSA) ke lie use dUsarI bAra avagraha kI anumati lenI cAhie / vaha isa
prakAra prArthanA kare ki-'he bhadanta ! mitAvagraha meM vicarane ke lie, kalpa
anusAra karane ke lie, dhruva niyamoM ke liye arthAt dainika kriyAyeM karane ke
lie prAjJA deM tathA punaH Ane kI anujJA diijie|' isa prakAra kahakara vaha
unake caraNa kA sparza kare / 22. caryA se nivRtta koI bhikSu yadi cAra-pAMca
rAta kI avadhi meM sthaviroM ko dekhe (mile) to use vahI pAlocanA vahI
pratikramaNa aura kalpa paryanta rahane ke liye vahI avagraha kI pUrvAnujJA
rahatI hai| 23. caryA se nivRtta bhikSu yadi cAra-pAMca rAta ke bAda sthaviroM
se mile to vaha punaH AlocanA-pratikramaNa kare aura Avazyaka dIkSAcheda yA
taparUpa prAyazcitta meM upasthita ho| bhikSubhAva (saMyama kI surakSA) ke liye
use dUsarI bAra avagraha kI anumati lenI cAhie / vaha isa prakAra se prArthanA
kare ki- 'he bhadanta ! mujhe mitAvagraha kI, yathAlandakalpa kI dhruva, nitya
kriyA karane kI aura punaH pAne kI anumati diijie|' isa prakAra kahakara vaha
unake caraNoM kA sparza kre| vivecanaprastuta sUtracatuSka meM 'carikA' zabda ke
do artha vivakSita kie gaye haiM(1) pUrvasUtrokta vajikAgamana (2) videza yA
dUradeza gamana yahAM ina donoM prakAra kI carikA ke do prakAra kahe gaye haiM
(1) praviSTa-jitane samaya kI AjJA prApta huI hai, utane samaya ke bhItara
vajikA meM rahA huA yA dUra deza evaM videza kI yAtrA meM rahA huA bhikSu /

Page #172 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 352] [Vyavahar Sutra (2) A monk who has returned from Nivritta-Jika-Vihar or
a distant land, having returned from wandering, should again seek permission and
wander in the vicinity. / These Sutras lay down the rules of Vinaya-Vyavahar for
monks who have entered and returned from Charika, having obtained permission. /
In which a limit of 4-5 days has been set. If the opportunity to meet the Guru,
Acharya, etc. arises before these stipulated days, then wandering can be done
only with the previous permission, but after these stipulated days, i.e., after
10-20 days or a few months, if the opportunity to meet arises, then permission
should be obtained again according to the method mentioned in the Sutras.  Four
to five days is a practical limit, as in the case of going to Gochari without
knowing the location of the establishment and the king's palace, the dairy,
etc., there is a provision for atonement in Nishi. U. 4 and U. 9. There also, a
grace period of 4-5 nights has been given. In Sutra 15 of this Uddeshak, a grace
period of 4-5 nights has also been given for the establishment. Therefore, even
in the present case, it should be considered necessary to obtain permission
again from the Guru, etc., after 4-5 days.  The conduct of Shaiksha and
Ratnaadhik 24. Two monks wander together, one with a shorter period of
initiation and the other with a longer period of initiation. If the one with a
shorter period of initiation is learned and has disciples, and the one with a
longer period of initiation is not learned and does not have disciples, then the
one with a shorter period of initiation should still follow the rules of Vinaya
Vyavahar for the one with a longer period of initiation, bring him food, stay
near him, and give him disciples to wander with, etc. / 25. Two monks wander
together, one with a shorter period of initiation and the other with a longer
period of initiation. If the one with a longer period of initiation is learned
and has disciples, and the one with a shorter period of initiation is not
learned and does not have disciples, then the one with a longer period of
initiation may, if he wishes, follow the rules of Vyavahar for the one with a
shorter period of initiation, or he may not, if he wishes. / He may, if he
wishes, bring him food, or he may not, if he wishes.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
352] [vyavahArasUtra (2) nivRtta-jikA-vihAra se nivRtta yA dUra deza ke vicaraNa
se nivRtta hokara punaH AjJA lekara Asa-pAsa meM vicaraNa karane vAlA bhikSu /
ina sUtroM meM praviSTa evaM nivRtta carikA vAle AjJAprApta bhikSu ko vinaya-
vyavahAra kA vidhAna kiyA gayA hai / jisameM 4-5 dina kI maryAdA kI gaI hai| ina
maryAdita dinoM ke pUrva guru prAcArya aAdi kA punaH milane kA avasara prApta ho
jAya to pUrva kI AjJA se hI vicaraNa kiyA jA sakatA hai kiMtu ina maryAdita
dinoM ke bAda arthAt 10-20 dina se yA kucha mahInoM se milane kA avasara prApta
ho to punaH sUtrokta vidhi se AjJA prApta kara lenI caahie| cAra-pAMca dina kA
kathana eka vyAvahArika sImA hai, yathA-sthApanAkula aura rAjA ke koThAra,
dugdhazAlA Adi sthAnoM kI jAnakArI kie binA gocarI jAne para nizI. u. 4 tathA u.
9 meM prAyazcitta vidhAna hai| vahAM para bhI 4-5 rAtri kI chUTa dI gaI hai| isa
uddezaka ke sUtra 15 meM upasthApanA ke lie bhI 4-5 rAtri kI chUTa dI gaI hai|
ataH prastuta prakaraNa se bhI 4-5 dina ke bAda guru Adi se milane para punaH
vidhiyukta AjJA lenA Avazyaka samajhanA caahiye| zaikSa aura ratnAdhika kA
vyavahAra 24. do sAhambhiyA egayao viharaMti, taM jahAsehe ya, rAiNie y| tattha
sehatarAe palicchanne, rAiNie apalicchanne, sehatarAeNaM rAiNie
uvasaMpajjiyanve, bhikkhobavAyaM ca dalayai kappAgaM / 25. do sAhammiyA egayao
viharaMti, taM jahA-sehe ya, rAiNie ya / tattha rAiNie palicchanne sehatarAe
apalicchanne / icchA rAiNie sehatarAgaM upasaMpajjejjA, icchA no uvasaMpajjejjA,
icchA bhikkhovavAyaM dalejjA kappAgaM, icchA no dalejjA kappAgaM / 24. do
sArmika bhikSu eka sAtha vicarate hoM, yathA-alpa dIkSAparyAya vAlA aura adhika
dIkSAparyAya vaalaa| unameM yadi alpa dIkSAparyAya vAlA zrutasampanna tathA
ziSyasampanna ho aura adhika dIkSAparyAya vAlA zrutasampanna tathA ziSyasampanna
na ho to bhI alpa dIkSAparyAya vAle ko adhika dIkSAparyAya vAle kI vinaya
vaiyAvRtya karanA, AhAra lAkara denA, samIpa meM rahanA aura alaga vicarane ke
lie ziSya denA ityAdi kartavyoM kA pAlana karanA cAhiye / 25. do sArmika bhikSu
eka sAtha vicarate hoM, yathAalpa dIkSAparyAya vAlA aura adhika dIkSAparyAya
vaalaa| unameM yadi adhika dIkSAparyAya vAlA zrutasampanna tathA ziSyasampanna
ho aura alpa dIkSAparyAya vAlA zrutasampanna tathA ziSyasampanna na ho to adhika
dIkSAparyAya vAlA icchA ho to alpa dIkSAparyAya vAle kI vaiyAvRtya kare, icchA
na ho to na kare / icchA ho to AhAra lAkara de, icchA na ho to na de|

Page #173 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Fourth Objective] [353 If there is a desire, keep it close, if there is no
desire, do not keep it / If there is a desire, give a disciple to wander
separately, if there is no desire, do not give. Discussion - These sutras state
the optional and necessary duties of Ratnaadhikas and Shaiksh Sarmaikas. Here,
the monk with a lesser period of initiation is called Shaiksh in comparison to
Ratnaadhikas, therefore, from this perspective, even a monk with many years of
initiation can be called Shaiksh. (1) If the Ratnaadhikas monk is endowed with
disciples etc. and the Shaiksh monk is not endowed with disciples etc., then
giving him a disciple to wander or arranging food etc. for him and doing other
services is considered optional for the Ratnaadhikas, i.e. they can do so if
they deem it appropriate or if they desire. (2) If the Shaiksh monk is endowed
with disciples etc. and the Ratnaadhikas monk is not endowed with disciples etc.
and he wants to wander or wants to get some service done, then it becomes the
duty of the Shaiksh endowed with disciples etc. to honor the Ratnaadhikas and
act according to their instructions. This statement is made here from the
perspective of duty and right. But if there is a need for service, then it is
also necessary for the Ratnaadhikas to serve or get the Shaiksh served as
appropriate. If he does not do so, he is liable to atonement. Therefore, it
should be understood that the ordinance mentioned in the sutras is in relation
to the general situation. The ordinance of wandering with the Ratnaadhikas as
the leader is 26. Two monks wander together, it is not appropriate for them to
wander together being endowed with each other, it is appropriate for them to
wander together being endowed with each other for food and drink / 27. Two
Ganavachcheiyas wander together, it is not appropriate for them to wander
together being endowed with each other, it is appropriate for them to wander
together being endowed with each other for food and drink. 28. Two Ayariy-
Uvajhaayas wander together, it is not appropriate for them to wander together
being endowed with each other / it is appropriate for them to wander together
being endowed with each other for food and drink / 29. Many monks wander
together, it is not appropriate for them to wander together being endowed with
each other. It is appropriate for them to wander together being endowed with
each other for food and drink. 30. Many Ganavachcheiyas wander together, it is
not appropriate for them to wander together being endowed with each other / it
is appropriate for them to wander together being endowed with each other for
food and drink. 31. Many Ayariy-Uvajhaayas wander together, it is not
appropriate for them to wander together being endowed with each other / it is
appropriate for them to wander together being endowed with each other for food
and drink /

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
cauthA uddezaka] [353 icchA ho to samIpa meM rakhe, icchA na ho to na rakhe /
icchA ho to alaga vicarane ke liye ziSya de, icchA na ho to na de| vivecana-ina
sUtroM meM ratnAdhika aura zaikSa sArmika bhikSuoM ke aicchika evaM Avazyaka
kartavyoM kA kathana kiyA gayA hai| yahAM ratnAdhika kI apekSA alpa dIkSAparyAya
vAle bhikSu ko zaikSa kahA gayA hai, ataH isa apekSA se aneka varSoM kI
dIkSAparyAya vAlA bhI zaikSa kahA jA sakatA hai| (1) ratnAdhika bhikSu ziSya Adi
se sampanna ho aura zaikSa bhikSu ziSya Adi se sampanna na ho to use vicaraNa
karane ke liye ziSya denA yA usake liye AhAra Adi maMgavA denA aura anya bhI
sevAkArya karavA denA ratnAdhika ke liye aicchika kahA gayA hai arthAt unheM
ucita lage yA unakI icchA ho vaisA kara sakate haiN| (2) zaikSa bhikSa yadi
ziSya Adi se sampanna ho evaM ratnAdhika bhikSa ziSyAdi se sampanna na ho aura
vaha vicaraNa karanA cAhe yA koI sevA karAnA cAhe to ziSyAdisampanna zaikSa kA
kartavya ho jAtA hai ki vaha ratnAdhika ko bahumAna dekara unakI AjJAnusAra
pravRtti kre| yaha kathana yahAM kartavya evaM adhikAra kI apekSA se kiyA gayA
hai| kintu sevA kI AvazyakatA hone para to ratnAdhika ko bhI zaikSa kI
yathAyogya sevA karanA yA karavAnA Avazyaka hotA hai| na karane para vaha
prAyazcitta kA pAtra hotA hai| ata: sUtrokta vidhAna sAmAnya sthiti kI apekSA se
hai, aisA samajhanA caahiye| ratnAdhika ko agraNI mAnakara vicarane kA vidhAna
26. do bhikkhuNo egayao viharaMti, no NaM kappai aNNamaNNaM uvasaMpajjittANaM
viharittae, kappai NaM ahArAiNiyAe aNNamaNNaM uvasaMpajjittANaM viharitae / 27.
do gaNAvaccheiyA egayao viharaMti, no NaM kappai aNNamaNNaM uvasaMpajjittANaM
viharittae, kappai NaM ahArAiNiyAe aNNamaNNaM upasaMpajjittANaM vihritte| 28. do
Ayariya-uvajjhAyA egayao viharaMti, no NaM kappai aNNamaNNaM upasaMpajjitANaM
virittae / kappai NaM ahArAiNiyAe aNNamaNNaM uvasaMpajjittANaM viharittae / 29.
bahave bhikkhuNo egayao viharaMti no NaM kappai aNNamaNNaM uvasaMpajjittANaM
vihritte| kappai NaM ahArAiNiyAe aNNamaNNaM uvasaMpajjittANaM vihritte| 30.
bahave gaNAvaccheiyA egayao viharaMti, no NaM kappai aNNamaNNaM uvasaMpajjitANaM
viharittae / kappai NaM ahArAiNiyAe aNNamaNNaM uvasaMpajjittANaM vihritte| 31.
bahave Ayariya-uvajjhAyA egayao viharaMti, no NaM kappai aNNamaNNaM
uvasaMpajjitANaM viharittae / kappai NaM ahArAiNiyAe aNNamaNNaM
uvasaMpajjittANaM viharittae /

Page #174 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
26. If two bhikkhus (monks) are wandering together, it is not proper for them to
live together as equals. However, it is proper for them to live together with
the senior (ratnadhika) as the leader.  27. If two ganavatshedikas (group
leaders) are wandering together, it is not proper for them to live together as
equals. However, it is proper for them to live together with the senior
(ratnadhika) as the leader.  28. If two acharyas (preceptors) or two upadhyayas
(teachers) are wandering together, it is not proper for them to live together as
equals. However, it is proper for them to live together with the senior
(ratnadhika) as the leader.  29. If many bhikkhus are wandering together, it is
not proper for them to live together as equals. However, it is proper for them
to live together with the senior (ratnadhika) as the leader.  30. If many
ganavatshedikas (group leaders) are wandering together, it is not proper for
them to live together as equals. However, it is proper for them to live together
with the senior (ratnadhika) as the leader.  31. If many acharyas (preceptors)
or upadhyayas (teachers) are wandering together, it is not proper for them to
live together as equals. However, it is proper for them to live together with
the senior (ratnadhika) as the leader.  32. If many bhikkhus, many
ganavatshedikas (group leaders), and many acharyas (preceptors) or upadhyayas
(teachers) are wandering together, it is not proper for them to live together as
equals. However, it is proper for them to live together with the senior
(ratnadhika) as the leader.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
354] [vyavahArasUtra 32. bahave bhikkhuNo bahave gaNAvaccheiyA, bahave Ayariya-
uvajzAyA egayao viharaMti, no NaM kappai aNNamaNNaM upasaMpajjittANaM viharittae
/ kappai NaM ahArAiNiyAe aNNamaNNaM upasaMpajjittANaM viharittae / 26. do bhikSu
eka sAtha vicarate hoM to unheM paraspara eka dUsare ko samAna svIkAra kara
sAtha meM vicaranA nahIM kalpatA hai| kintu ratnAdhika ko agraNI svIkAra kara
sAtha vicaranA kalpatA hai / 27. do gaNAvacchedaka eka sAtha vicarate hoM to
unheM paraspara eka dUsare ko samAna svIkAra kara sAtha meM vicaranA nahIM
kalpatA hai| kintu ratnAdhika ko agraNI svIkAra kara sAtha vicaranA kalpatA hai|
28. do prAcArya yA do upAdhyAya eka sAtha vicarate hoM to unheM paraspara eka
dUsare ko samAna svIkAra kara sAtha vicaranA nahIM kalpatA hai| kintu ratnAdhika
ko agraNI svIkAra kara sAtha vicaranA kalpatA hai| 29, bahuta se bhikSu eka
sAtha vicarate hoM to unheM paraspara eka dUsare ko samAna svIkAra kara sAtha
vicaranA nahIM kalpatA hai| kintu ratnAdhika ko agraNI svIkAra kara sAtha
vicaranA kalpatA hai| 30. bahuta se gaNAvacchedaka eka sAtha vicarate hoM to
unheM paraspara eka dUsare ko samAna svIkAra kara sAtha vicaranA nahIM kalpatA
hai| kintu ratnAdhika ko agraNI svIkAra kara sAtha vicaranA kalpatA hai| 31.
bahuta se prAcArya yA upAdhyAya eka sAtha vicarate hoM to unheM paraspara eka
dUsare ko samAna svIkAra kara sAtha vicaranA nahIM kalpatA hai| kintu ratnAdhika
ko agraNI svIkAra kara vicaranA kalpatA hai| 32. bahuta se bhikSu, bahuta se
gaNAvacchedaka aura bahuta se prAcArya yA upAdhyAya eka sAtha vicarate hoM to
unheM paraspara eka dUsare ko samAna svIkAra kara sAtha vicaranA nahIM kalpatA
hai| kintu ratnAdhika ko agraNI svIkAra kara vicaranA kalpatA hai| vivecana-do
yA aneka bhikSu yadi eka sAtha raheM athavA eka sAtha vicaraNa kareM aura ve
kisI ko bar3A na mAne arthAt prAjJA lenA, vandana karanA Adi koI bhI vinaya evaM
samAcArI kA vyavahAra na kareM to unakA isa prakAra sAtha rahanA ucita nahIM
hai| kintu unheM ratnAdhika sAdhu kI pramukhatA svIkAra karake unake sAtha
vinaya-vyavahAra rakhate hue rahanA cAhie aura pratyeka kArya unakI AjJA lekara
hI karanA caahie| ratnAdhika ke sAtha rahate hue bhI unakA vinaya evaM
AjJApAlana na karane se jJAna-darzana-cAritra ko unnati nahIM hotI hai apitu
svacchandatA kI vRddhi hokara AtmA kA adhaHpatana hotA hai aura saMyama ko
virAdhanA hotI hai| janasAdhAraNa ko jJAta hone para jinazAsana kI hIlanA hotI
hai| ataH

Page #175 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
It is the essential duty of a [355 Avamaratnik (Shaiksh) Bhikku] to remain with
the [Ratnaadhik] accepting their leadership. Similarly, two or more [Pracharys],
[Upadhyays], or [Ganavchhedaks] should remain or travel together, and in such a
case, the senior [Prachary] etc. should be treated with due respect according to
the [Deekshaparaya]. This rule is applicable to [Sam Bhogic Sadhus] who take
[Mandalik Ahar], it should be understood. If, at any time, other [Sam Bhogic
Sadhus], [Pracharys], [Upadhyays], or [Ganavchhedaks] happen to meet in the same
[Upashray] in a village or elsewhere, and there is an occasion to stay together
for some time, they can stay together with due respect and love, but the rule of
accepting [Sutrokta Upsampada (leadership)] should not be understood here. If it
is necessary to travel or observe [Chaturmas] with other [Sam Bhogic Sadhus], or
to study, then their [Alpakalin Upsampada (leadership)] should also be accepted.
The essence of the fourth [Uddeshak] of [Sutra 18 9-10] is that [Pracharys] and
[Upadhyays] should not travel alone, and they should not observe [Chaumas] in
two [Thananas], but they can travel in two [Thananas] and observe [Chaturmas] in
three [Thananas]. [Ganavchhedaks] should not travel in two [Thananas] and should
not observe [Chaturmas] in three [Thananas], but they can travel in three
[Thananas] and observe [Chaturmas] in four [Thananas]. If many [Pracharys] etc.
have to travel together, they should travel keeping the appropriate number of
[Sadhus] in their respective [Nishra], and they should also stay in [Chaturmas]
with the same discretion. If, during the time of travel or [Chaturmas], the
[Bhikku] who was leading that [Singhade] attains [Kal-Dharma], then the
remaining [Sadhus] should accept the leadership of the one who is qualified in
[Shruta] and [Paryaya]. If no one is qualified, then [Chaturmas] or travel
should be postponed and they should immediately reach the presence of qualified
leading [Sadhus] or [Prachary]. When [Achary-Upadhyay] attains [Kal-Dharma] or
leaves [Sanayam], the one whom they designate to be appointed to the position of
[Achary-Upadhyay] should be established in that position. If that person is not
qualified and another is qualified, then the [Bhikku] designated by the [Achary]
should be appointed to the position.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
cauyA uddezaka] [355 avamarAtnika (zaikSa) bhikSu kA yaha Avazyaka kartavya hai
ki vaha ratnAdhika ko pramukhatA svIkAra karake hI unake sAtha rhe| usI prakAra
do yA aneka prAcArya, upAdhyAya, gaNAvacchedaka bhI eka sAtha raheM yA vicaraNa
kareM to dIkSAparyAya se jyeSTha prAcArya Adi kA ucita vinaya-vyavahAra karate
hue raha sakate haiN| yaha vidhAna eka mAMDalika AhAra karane vAle sAmbhogika
sAdhuoM kI apekSA se hai, aisA samajhanA caahiye| yadi kabhI anya sAmbhogika
sAdhu, prAcArya, upAdhyAya yA gaNAvacchedaka kA kisI grAmAdi meM eka hI upAzraya
meM milanA ho jAya aura kucha samaya sAtha rahane kA prasaMga A jAya to ucita
vinayavyavahAra aura premasambandha ke sAtha rahA jA sakatA hai, kintu sUtrokta
upasampadA (netRtva) svIkAra karane kA vidhAna yahAM nahIM samajhanA caahie|
yadi anya sAmbhogika ke sAtha vicaraNa yA cAturmAsa karanA ho athavA adhyayana
karanA ho to unakI bhI alpakAlIna upasampadA (netRtva) svIkAra karake hI rahanA
caahie| sUtra 18 9-10 cauthe uddezaka kA sArAMza prAcArya evaM upAdhyAya ko
akele vicaraNa nahIM karanA cAhie aura do ThANA se caumAsA bhI nahIM karanA
cAhie, kintu ve do ThANA se vicaraNa kara sakate haiM aura tIna ThANA se
cAturmAsa kara sakate haiN| gaNAvacchedaka ko do ThANA se vicaraNa nahIM karanA
cAhie aura tIna ThANA se cAturmAsa nahIM karanA caahie| kintu ve tIna ThANA se
vicaraNa kara sakate haiM evaM cAra ThANA se cAturmAsa kara sakate haiM / aneka
prAcArya Adi ko eka sAtha vicaraNa karanA ho to bhI upayukta sAdhusaMkhyA apanI-
apanI nizrA meM rakhate hue hI vicaraNa karanA cAhie aura isI viveka ke sAtha
unheM cAturmAsa meM bhI rahanA caahie| vicaraNakAla meM yA cAturmAsakAla meM
yadi usa siMghAr3e kI pramukhatA karane vAlA bhikSu kAla-dharma ko prApta ho
jAya to zeSa sAdhunoM meM jo zruta evaM paryAya se yogya ho, usakI pramukhatA
svIkAra kara lenI caahie| yadi koI bhI yogya na ho to cAturmAsa yA vicaraNa ko
sthagita karake zIghra hI yogya pramukha sAdhuoM ke yA prAcArya ke sAnnidhya meM
pahuMca jAnA caahie| AcArya-upAdhyAya kAladharma prApta karate samaya yA saMyama
chor3akara jAte samaya jise prAcArya-upAdhyAya pada para niyukta karane ko
kaheM, use hI pada para sthApita karanA caahie| vaha yogya na ho aura anya yogya
ho to usa prAcAryanirdiSTa bhikSu ko pada 11-12 13-14

Page #176 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Translation:  **[Vyavahar Sutra Sutra 15-17 15 20-23]**  A monk who has been
given a position, or who has been given a position but is not suitable, can be
removed and another suitable monk can be given the position. Those who support
the wrong side are all subject to atonement. If a newly ordained monk becomes
suitable soon, he should be given the great ordination before the 12th night. If
this is violated, the Acharya-Upadhyaya incurs atonement in the form of tapas or
chhed. If the 17th night is violated, in addition to tapas or chhed atonement,
there is also atonement of being removed from the position for one year. If the
violation of the time of the great ordination is due to the ordination of the
parents or other revered persons of the newly ordained, then even if the
ordination is delayed for six months, there is no atonement. A monk who has gone
to another gana for study, etc., should, when asked by someone, first mention
the name of the Sarvaratnaadhi. After that, if necessary, the name of the
Sarvabahushruta should be mentioned. Before going to Vajika (Gopalak Basti) for
the consumption of Vikriti, it is necessary to take the permission of the
sthavira, i.e., the guru, etc. It is only permissible to go after obtaining
permission. A monk who has entered or left the charika should, after obtaining
permission, meet the guru, etc., within 4-5 days. He should then continue to
wander or reside according to the previous permission. However, if he meets the
guru, etc., after 4-5 days, i.e., after the time of obtaining permission, he
should obtain permission again according to the sutra and then wander. It is
optional for a Ratnaadhi monk to serve or assist an Avamarani monk, but it is
necessary for an Avamarani monk to serve or assist a Ratnaadhi monk. If the
Ratnaadhi monk does not want to be served or assisted, it is not necessary. If
the Avamarani monk is ill, then the Ratnaadhi monk must also serve or assist
him. If many monks, many Acharyas-Upadhyayas, and many Ganavachchedakas, etc.,
wander together, they should not remain equal to each other. Instead, they
should accept the prominence of the one who is Ratnaadhi among them and live
with proper vinaya and samacharivyaavahar.  **[24-25 26-32 Conclusion]**  In
this udde≈õaka, the number of sadhus in the wandering of the Acharya, Upadhyaya,
and Ganavachchedaka, as per Sutra 1-10...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
[vyavahArasUtra sUtra 15-17 15 20-23 na dekara yA de diyA ho to use haTAkara
anya yogya bhikSu ko pada diyA jA sakatA hai| jo usakA khoTA pakSa kareM, ve
sabhI prAyazcitta ke pAtra hote haiN| navadIkSita bhikSu ke zIghra hI yogya ho
jAne para 12vIM rAtri ke pUrva bar3IdIkSA de denI caahiye| usake ullaMghana
karane para prAcArya-upAdhyAya ko yathAyogya tapa yA cheda prAyazcitta AtA hai
evaM sattarahavIM rAtri kA ullaMghana karane para tapa yA cheda prAyazcitta ke
atirikta eka varSa ke lie padamukta hone kA prAyazcitta bhI AtA hai| yadi
bar3IdIkSA ke samaya kA ullaMghana karane meM navadIkSita ke mAtA-pitA Adi pUjya
puruSoM kI dIkSA kA kAraNa ho to utkRSTa chaH mAsa taka dIkSA rokane para bhI
prAyazcitta nahIM pAtA hai| anya gaNa meM adhyayana Adi ke liye gaye bhikSu ko
kisI ke dvArA pUchane para prathama sarvaratnAdhika kA nAma batAnA cAhiye /
usake bAda Avazyaka hone para sarvabahuzruta kA nAma nirdeza karanA caahie|
vajikA (gopAlaka bastI) meM vikRti sevana hetu jAne ke pUrva sthavira kI arthAt
guru Adi kI prAjJA lenA Avazyaka hai, AjJA milane para hI jAnA kalpatA hai /
carikApraviSTa yA carikAnivRtta bhikSu ko prAjJAprApti ke bAda 4-5 dina meM guru
Adi ke milane kA prasaMga pA jAya to usI pUrva kI AjJA se vicaraNa yA nivAsa
karanA cAhie, kintu 4-5 dina ke bAda arthAt AjJAprApti se adhika samaya bAda
guru Adi ke milane kA prasaMga yA jAya to sUtrokta vidhi se puna: AjJA prApta
karake vicaraNa kara sakatA hai| ratnAdhika bhikSu ko avama rAnika bhikSu kI
sAmAnya sevA yA sahayoga karanA aicchika hotA hai aura avamarAnika bhikSu ko
ratnAdhika bhikSu kI sAmAnya sevA yA sahayoga karanA Avazyaka hotA hai /
ratnAdhika bhikSu yadi sevA-sahayoga na lenA cAhe to Avazyaka nahIM hotA hai|
avamarAnika bhikSu glAna ho to ratnAdhika ko bhI usakI sevA yA sahayoga karanA
Avazyaka hotA hai / aneka bhikSu, aneka AcArya-upAdhyAya evaM aneka
gaNAvacchedaka Adi koI bhI yadi sAtha-sAtha vicaraNa kareM to unheM paraspara
samAna bana kara nahIM rahanA cAhie, kintu jo unameM ratnAdhika ho usakI
pramukhatA svIkAra karake ucita vinaya evaM samAcArIvyAvahAra ke sAtha rahanA
caahie| 24-25 26-32 upasaMhAra isa uddezaka meMAcArya upAdhyAya gaNAvacchedaka
ke vicaraNa karane meM sAdhuoM kI saMkhyA kA, sUtra 1-10

Page #177 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Fourth Uddesak Sutra 11-12 13-14 15-17 [357 This chapter discusses the proper
duty upon the attainment of Kaladharma by the senior monk Singhadara, the
appointment of a worthy successor upon the passing or renunciation of the
Acharya, the determination of the time for granting the Great Initiation, the
discernment of a monk who has gone to another gana, the discernment of a monk
who has arrived at a Vaji or is engaged in a Charika, the duties of a Ratnadhik
and Avamaratnik, and the Vinaya-viveka regarding traveling together, etc. /
19-23 24-25 26-32 // Fourth Uddesak ends //

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
cauthA uddezaka sUtra 11-12 13-14 15-17 [357 siMghAr3Apramukha bhikSu ke
kAladharma prApta hone para ucita kartavya kA, prAcArya ke divaMgata hone para
yA saMyama tyAgane para yogya ko pada para niyukta karane kA, bar3IdIkSA dene
sambandhI samaya ke nirdhAraNa kA, gaNAntara meM gaye bhikSu ke viveka kA,
vajikAgamana evaM carikA pravRtta yA nivRtta bhikSu ke viveka kA, ratnAdhika
evaM avamarAtnika ke kartavyoM kA, sAtha meM vicaraNa karane sambandhI vinaya-
viveka kA, ityAdi viSayoM kA kathana kiyA gayA hai / 19-23 24-25 26-32 // cauthA
uddezaka samApta //

Page #178 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
1. It is not permissible for a Pravarti≈Üi Sadhvi to travel with another Sadhvi
during the Hemant and G·πõi·π£ma seasons. 2. It is permissible for a Pravarti≈Üi
Sadhvi to travel with two other Sadhvis during the Hemant and G·πõi·π£ma seasons. 3.
It is not permissible for a Ga·πáƒÅvacchedinƒ´ Sadhvi to travel with two other
Sadhvis during the Hemant and G·πõi·π£ma seasons. 4. It is permissible for a
Ga·πáƒÅvacchedinƒ´ Sadhvi to travel with three other Sadhvis during the Hemant and
G·πõi·π£ma seasons. 5. It is not permissible for a Pravarti≈Üi Sadhvi to stay with
two other Sadhvis during the VƒÅsƒÅvƒÅsa. 6. It is permissible for a Pravarti≈Üi
Sadhvi to stay with three other Sadhvis during the VƒÅsƒÅvƒÅsa. 7. It is not
permissible for a Ga·πáƒÅvacchedinƒ´ Sadhvi to stay with three other Sadhvis during
the VƒÅsƒÅvƒÅsa. 8. It is permissible for a Ga·πáƒÅvacchedinƒ´ Sadhvi to stay with four
other Sadhvis during the VƒÅsƒÅvƒÅsa. 9. In a village or in a city, it is
permissible for many Pravarti≈Üi Sadhvis and many Ga·πáƒÅvacchedinƒ´ Sadhvis to
travel together during the Hemant and G·πõi·π£ma seasons, provided they are not more
than four in number. 10. In a village or in a city, it is permissible for many
Pravarti≈Üi Sadhvis and many Ga·πáƒÅvacchedinƒ´ Sadhvis to stay together during the
VƒÅsƒÅvƒÅsa, provided they are not more than five in number.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
pAMca uddezaka pravartinI Adi ke sAtha vicarane vAlI nirgranthiyoM kI saMkhyA 1.
no kappai pavattiNIe appabiiyAe hemaMta-gimhAsu caare| 2. kappai pavattiNIe
appataiyAe hemanta-gimhAsu caare| 3. no kappai gaNAvaccheiNIe appataiyAe
hemaMta-gimhAsu caare| 4. kappai gaNAvaccheiNIe appacautthAe hemaMta-gimhAsu
caare| 5. no kappai pavattiNIe appataiyAe vAsAvAsaM vatthae / 6. kappai
pavattiNIe appacautthAe vAsAvAsaM vtthe| 7. no kappaDa gaNAvaccheiNIe
appacautthAe vAsAvAsaM vatthae / 8. kappai gaNAvacchedaNIe appapaMcamAe
vAsAvAsaM vatthae / 9. se gAmaMsi vA jAva rAyaNisi vA bahUNaM pavattiNINaM
appataiyANaM bahUNaM gaNAvaccheiNoNaM appa-cautthANaM kappai hemaMta-gimhAsu
cArae aNNamaNNaM niisaae| 10. se gAmaMsi vA jAva rAyahANisi vA bahaNaM
pavattiNINaM appacautthANaM bahUNaM gaNAvacche. iNoNaM appa-paMcamANaM kappai
vAsAvAsaM vatthae aNNamaNNaM niisaae| 1. hemanta aura grISma Rtu meM pravartinI
sAdhvI ko, eka anya sAdhvI ko sAtha lekara vihAra karanA nahIM kalpatA hai| 2.
hemanta aura grISma Rtu meM pravatinI ko, anya do sAdhviyAM sAtha lekara vihAra
karanA kalpatA hai| 3. hemanta aura grISma Rtu meM gaNAvacchedinI ko anya do
sAdhviyAM sAtha lekara vihAra karanA nahIM kalpatA hai| 4. hemanta aura grISma
Rtu meM gaNAvacchedinI ko anya tIna sAdhviyAM sAtha lekara vihAra karanA kalpatA
hai| 5. varSAvAsa meM pravartinI ko anya do sAdhviyoM ke sAtha rahanA nahIM
kalpatA hai /

Page #179 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Fifth Objective  **[359 6.** It is prescribed for a Pravartini to stay with
three other Sadhvis during the rainy season. **7.** It is not prescribed for a
Ganavacchedini to stay with three other Sadhvis during the rainy season. **8.**
It is prescribed for a Ganavacchedini to stay with four other Sadhvis during the
rainy season. **9.** During the Hemant and Grishma seasons, it is prescribed for
many Pratinis to travel in their own Nishra with two other Sadhvis each, and for
many Ganavacchedinis to travel with three other Sadhvis each, in villages or up
to the capital. **10.** During the rainy season, it is prescribed for many
Pratinis to stay in their own Nishra with three other Sadhvis each, and for many
Ganavacchedinis to stay with four other Sadhvis each, in villages or up to the
capital.  **Discussion:** In the first ten sutras of the fourth objective, the
number of Sadhus who stay together during the travels and Chaturmas of the
Pracharaya, Upadhyaya, and Ganavacchedak is mentioned. Here, the number of
Sadhvis who stay with the Pravartini and Ganavacchedini is prescribed. In
Brihatkalpa Uhe. 5, it is forbidden for a Sadhvi to stay alone, and here it is
forbidden for a Pratini to travel with only one other Sadhvi. Therefore, a
Pratini should not travel with one Sadhvi, but should travel with two Sadhvis
and stay with three Sadhvis during Chaturmas. The Ganavacchedini is the main
assistant of the Pravartini. Her area of work is as vast as that of the
Ganavacchedak, and she oversees all the work of the Sadhvis, such as their
arrangement, service, and penance, under the orders of the Pravartini.
Therefore, the Ganavacchedini should travel with three other Sadhvis and stay
with four other Sadhvis during Chaturmas. From the prescriptions of Brihatkalpa
Udde. 5 and the descriptions of these sutras, it becomes clear that a Sadhvi
should not travel alone, but two Sadhvis can travel together or stay together
during Chaturmas. Because there is no prohibition in any prescription of the
Agam for them to travel with two. However, according to the prescriptions of the
Sampradayik Samachariyas, it is considered forbidden for two Sadhvis to travel
and stay together during Chaturmas. At the same time, going and coming with two
Sadhvis for the purpose of service, etc., under the orders of the Pravartini,
etc., is also considered Agam-sammat. Other necessary discussions should be
understood in the same way as the ten sutras of the fourth objective.  **Duty of
a Sadhvi when the leading Sadhvi is performing Kal:**  **11.** If a Nigganthi,
who is a Duijjamani, travels in front of a village, she is also a Visubhejjya.
If there is someone here who is eligible for Upasampada, she should be
Upasampadit. If there is no one here who is eligible for Upasampada, then she
should perform her own Kappan according to her ability. She should perform it in
a way that is appropriate for a single person, and she should travel in all
directions, seeing all the people, and she should travel in all directions,
seeing all the people.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
pAMcavAM uddezaka] [359 6. varSAvAsa meM pravartinI ko anya tIna sAdhviyoM ke
sAtha rahanA kalpatA hai / 7. varSAvAsa meM gaNAvacchedinI ko anya tIna
sAdhviyoM ke sAtha rahanA nahIM kalpatA hai / 8. varSAvAsa meM gaNAvacchedinI ko
anya cAra sAdhviyoM ke sAtha rahanA kalpatA hai / 9. hemanta aura grISma Rtu meM
aneka pratiniyoM ko grAma yAvat rAjadhAnI meM apanI-apanI nizrA meM do-do anya
sAdhviyoM ko sAtha lekara aura aneka gaNAvacchedinIyoM ko, tIna tIna anya
sAdhviyoM ko sAtha lekara vihAra karanA kalpatA hai / 10. varSAvAsa meM aneka
pratiniyoM ko yAvat rAjadhAnI meM apanI-apanI nizrA meM tIna-tIna anya sAdhviyoM
ko sAtha lekara aura aneka gaNAvacchedinIyoM ko cAra-cAra anya sAdhviyoM ko
sAtha lekara rahanA kalpatA hai| vivecana-cauthe uddezaka meM prArambha ke dasa
sUtroM meM prAcArya, upAdhyAya, gaNAvacchedaka ke vicaraNa meM evaM cAturmAsa
meM sAtha rahane vAle sAdhunoM kI saMkhyA kA ullekha kiyA gayA hai aura yahAM
pravartinI aura gaNAvacchedikA ke sAtha rahane vAlI sAdhviyoM kI saMkhyA kA
vidhAna hai| bRhatkalpa uhe. 5 meM sAdhvI ko akelI rahane kA niSedha hai aura
yahAM pratinI ko do ke sAtha vicarane kA niSedha hai / ataH pratinI eka sAdhvI
ko sAtha meM rakhakara na vicare, do sAdhviyoM ko sAtha lekara vicare aura tIna
sAdhviyoM ko sAtha meM rakhakara cAturmAsa kre| gaNAvacchedinI pravartinI kI
pramukha sahAyikA hotI hai| isakA kAryakSetra gaNAvacchedaka ke samAna vizAla
hotA hai aura yaha pravartinI kI AjJA se sAdhviyoM kI vyavasthA, sevA
prAyazcitta Adi sabhI kAryoM kI dekha-rekha karatI hai| ataH gaNAvacchedinI anya
tIna sAdhviyoM ko sAtha lekara vicare aura cAra anya sAdhviyoM ko sAtha meM
rakhakara cAturmAsa kre| bRhatkalpa udde. 5 ke vidhAna se aura ina sUtroM ke
varNana se yaha spaSTa ho jAtA hai ki akelI sAdhvI vicaraNa na kare kintu do
sAdhviyAM sAtha meM vicaraNa kara sakatI haiM yA cAturmAsa kara sakatI haiN|
kyoMki Agama ke kisI bhI vidhAna meM unake liye do se vicarane kA niSedha nahIM
hai| kintu sAmpradAyika samAcAriyoM ke vidhAnAnusAra do sAdhviyoM kA vicaraNa
evaM cAturmAsa karanA niSiddha mAnA jAtA hai, sAtha hI sevA Adi ke nimitta
pravartinI Adi kI AjJA se do sAdhviyoM ko jAnA. aAnA Agama-sammata bhI mAnA jAtA
hai / anya Avazyaka vivecana cauthe uddezaka ke dasa sUtroM ke samAna samajha
lenA caahiye| agraNI sAdhvI ke kAla karane para sAdhvI kA kartavya 11.
gAmANugAmaM dUijjamANI NiggaMthI ya jaM purao kAuMviharai, sA ya Ahacca
vIsubhejjA asthi ya istha kAi aNNA upasaMpajjaNArihA sA upasaMpajjiyavvA / natya
ya ittha kAi aNNA upasaMpajjaNArihA tIse ya apaNo kappAe asamate evaM se kappai
egarAiyAe paDimAe jaNNaM-jaNNaM disaM aNNAo sAhammiNolo viharaMti taNNa-taNNaM
disaM uvalittae /

Page #180 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
360. If a *sadhvi* is not staying in a place for the purpose of *vihar*
(travel), then it is permissible for her to stay there for the purpose of
*karan* (reason). If the reason for staying is over, then someone should tell
her, "O *Arye*, stay for one or two nights." If she stays for one or two nights,
then it is permissible. But if she stays for more than one or two nights, then
it is not permissible. If a *sadhvi* stays for more than one or two nights, then
she is liable for *diksha-chhed* (loss of initiation) or *tap* (penance) as a
*parihara* (atonement). 12. If a *sadhvi* who is leading a group of *sadhvis*
during *vasa-vas* (rainy season retreat) dies, then the remaining *sadhvis*
should choose a suitable *sadhvi* to lead them. If there is no other suitable
*sadhvi* and the remaining *sadhvi* has not completed the study of *prachar-
prakalp* (canonical texts), then she should travel in the direction where other
*sadhvis* are traveling, staying one night at each place. It is not permissible
for her to stay for the purpose of *vihar*. If there is a reason for staying,
such as illness, then it is permissible. When the reason for staying is over, if
someone tells her, "O *Arye*, stay for one or two nights," then it is
permissible for her to stay for one or two nights. But it is not permissible for
her to stay for more than one or two nights. If a *sadhvi* stays for more than
one or two nights, then she is liable for *diksha-chhed* or *tap* as a
*parihara*. 11. If a group of *sadhvis* are traveling from village to village
and the *sadhvi* who is leading them dies, then the remaining *sadhvis* should
choose a suitable *sadhvi* to lead them. If there is no other suitable *sadhvi*
and the remaining *sadhvi* has not completed the study of *nisith* (canonical
texts), then she should travel in the direction where other *sadhvis* are
traveling, staying one night at each place. It is not permissible for her to
stay for the purpose of *vihar*. If there is a reason for staying, such as
illness, then it is permissible. When the reason for staying is over, if someone
tells her, "O *Arye*, stay for one or two nights," then it is permissible for
her to stay for one or two nights. But it is not permissible for her to stay for
more than one or two nights. If a *sadhvi* stays for more than one or two
nights, then she is liable for *diksha-chhed* or *tap* as a *parihara*.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
360 [vyavahArasUtra no se kappai tattha vihAravattiyaM vatthae / kappA se tattha
kAraNavatiyaM vasthae / taMsi ca NaM kAraNaMsi nidviyaMsi paro vaejjA--'vasAhi
prajje ! egarAyaM vA durAyaM vA', evaM se kappai egarAyaM vA durAyaM vA vatthae
/ no se kappai paraM egarAyAo vA durAyAo vA vsthe| jA tastha egarAyAo vA burAyAo
vA paraM vasai sA santarA chae vA parihAre vaa| 12. vAsAvAsaM pajjosaviyA
NiggaMthI ya ja purao kAuM viharai, sA ya Ahacca vIsubhejjA, asthi ya ittha kAi
aNNA uvasaMpajjaNArihA sA upasaMpajjiyavvA / natthi ya itya kAi aNNA
uvasaMpajjANArihA tose ya appaNo kappai asamase evaM se kappai egarAiyAe paDimAe
jaNNaM-jaNNaM disaM aNNAo sAhammiNIzro viharaMti taNNaM-taNNaM disaM uvlitte| no
se kappai tattha vihAravattiyaM vatthae / kappai se tattha kAraNavattiyaM btthe|
taMsi ca NaM kAraNaMsi niTThiyaMsi paro vaejjA--'vasAhi ajje ! egarAyaM vA
durAyaM vA', evaM se kappai egarAyaM vA durAyaM vA vatthae / no se kappai paraM
egarAyAo vA durAyAno vA vatthae / jA tattha egarAyAno vA durAyAo vA paraM vasai
sA saMtarA chae vA parihAre vaa| 11. grAmAnugrAma vihAra karatI huI sAdhviyAM,
jisako agraNI mAnakara vihAra kara rahI hoM unake kAladharma prApta hone para
zeSa sAdhviyoM meM jo sAdhvI yogya ho use agraNI banAnA caahiye| yadi anya koI
sAdhvI agraNI hone yogya na ho aura svayaM ne bhI nizItha Adi kA adhyayana pUrNa
na kiyA ho to use mArga meM eka-eka rAtri Thaharate hue jisa dizA meM anya
sAdharmiNI sAdhviyAM vicaratI hoM, usa dizA meM jAnA caahie| mArga meM use
vicarane ke lakSya se ThaharanA nahIM kalpatA hai / yadi rogAdi kA kAraNa ho to
ThaharanA kalpatA hai| rogAdi ke samApta hone para yadi koI kahe ki-'he Arye !
eka yA do rAta aura Thaharo', to unheM eka yA do rAta aura ThaharanA kalpatA
hai| kintu eka yA do rAta se adhika ThaharanA nahIM kalpatA hai / jo sAdhvI eka
yA do rAta se adhika ThaharatI hai, vaha maryAdA-ullaMghana ke kAraNa dIkSAcheda
yA tapa rUpa prAyazcitta kI pAtra hotI hai| 12. varSAvAsa meM rahI huI sAdhviyAM
jisako agraNI mAnakara raha rahI hoM usake kAladharma prApta hone para zeSa
sAdhviyoM meM jo sAdhvI yogya ho, use agraNI banAnA caahiye| yadi anya koI
sAdhvI agraNI hone yogya na ho aura svayaM ne bhI prAcAra-prakalpa kA adhyayana
pUrNa na kiyA ho to use mArga meM eka-eka rAtri Thaharate hue jisa dizA meM anya
sArdhAmaNI sAdhviyAM vicaratI hoM usa dizA meM jAnA kalpatA hai| mArga meM use
vicarane ke lakSya se ThaharanA nahIM kalpatA hai|

Page #181 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Fifth Objective] [361 If it is necessary to stay due to illness or other
reasons, it is permissible. If, after the illness or other reasons have
subsided, someone says, "O Arya! Stay for one or two more nights," then it is
permissible to stay for one or two more nights. But it is not permissible to
stay for more than one or two nights. A Sadhvi who stays for more than one or
two nights is liable to Dikshached or Tap ‡§∞‡•Ç‡§™ PrƒÅya≈õcitta due to violation of
the rules. Discussion - The eleventh and twelfth sutras of the fourth objective
describe the attainment of Kaladharma by the leading Sadhu, and here the
attainment of Kaladharma by the leading Sadhvi is described. The discussion of
other Sadhvis becoming or being made the leading Sadhvi or going on Vihar should
be understood in the same way as the fourth objective. In the sutra, "Tise Ya
Appano Kappae" and "Vasahi Ajje" etc., the use of the singular is directed
towards the leading Sadhvi, and because the description of becoming or being
made the leading Sadhvi is present, the presence of many Sadhvis is also clear
from the sutra. The instruction to give the position by Pratino is 13. Pavattini
Ya Gilayamani Annyar Vaejja - "Mae Nan Ajje! Kalagyae Samanie Iyam
Samukkasivava." Sa Ya Samukkasinaritha Samukkasivva, Sa Ya No Samukkasinaritha
No Samukkasianya / Asthi Ya Itth Anna Kai Samukkasinaritha Sa Samukkasianva /
Nasthi Ya Itth Anna Kai Samukkasinaritha Sa Chev Samukkasivva / Tae Chan Nan
Samukkitthae Para Vaejja "Dussamukkitth Te Ajje / Nikkhivahi" Tae Nan
Nivakhamanaae Nasthi Kei Chhae Va Parihaare Va / Jamo Sahammineo Ahakkappam No
Utthae Viharanti Savvassi Tasi Tappattiyam Chhae Va Parihaare Va. 14, Pavattini
Ya Ohayamani Annyaram Vaejja "Mae Nan Ajje! Pohaviae Samanie Iyam Samukkasivva /
" Sa Ya Samukkasinaritha Samukkasivva, Sa Ya No Samukkasinaritha No Samukkasivva
/ Atthi Ya Itth Anna Kai Samukkasinaritha Sa Samukkasivva / Natthi Ya Itth Anna
Kai Samukkasinaritha Sa Chev Samukkasivya / Tae Chan Nan Samukkitthae Para
Vaejja - "Dussamukkil Te Prajje! Nikkhivahi / " Tae Nan Nikkhivamanaae Nasthi
Kei Chhae Va Parihaare Va.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
pAMcavAM uddezaka] [361 yadi rogAdi kA kAraNa ho to ThaharanA kalpatA hai|
rogAdi ke samApta hone para yadi koI kahe ki''he Arya ! eka yA do rAta aura
Thaharo',' to use eka yA do rAta aura ThaharanA kalpatA hai| kintu eka yA do
rAta se adhika ThaharanA nahIM kalpatA hai| jo sAdhvI eka yA do rAta se adhika
ThaharatI hai, vaha maryAdA-ullaMghana ke kAraNa dIkSAcheda yA tapa rUpa
prAyazcitta kI pAtra hotI hai| vivecana-cauthe uddezaka ke gyArahaveM bArahaveM
sUtra meM agraNI sAdhu ke kAladharma-prApta ho jAne kA varNana hai aura yahAM
agraNI sAdhvI ke kAladharma-prApta ho jAne kA varNana hai| anya sAdhvI ko agraNI
banane yA banAne kA athavA vihAra karane kA vivecana cauthe uddezaka ke samAna
samajhanA caahie| sUtra meM"tIse ya appaNo kappAe" aura "vasAhi ajje" Adi
ekavacana ke prayoga pramukha sAdhvI ko lakSya karake kiye gaye haiM aura
pramukha banane yA banAne kA varNana hone ke kAraNa aneka sAdhviyoM kA honA bhI
sUtra se hI spaSTa ho jAtA hai| pratino ke dvArA pada dene kA nirdeza 13.
pavattiNI ya gilAyamANI annayara vaejjA-"mae NaM ajje ! kAlagayAe samANIe iyaM
smukksiyvaa|" sA ya samukkasiNArihA samukkasiyavvA, sA ya no samukkasiNArihA no
samukkasiyanyA / asthi ya ittha aNNA kAi samukkasiNArihA sA samukkasiyanvA /
nasthi ya ittha aNNA kAi samukkasiNArihA sA ceva samukkasiyavvA / tAe ca NaM
samukkiTThAe parA vaejjA "dussamukkiTTha te ajje / nikkhivAhi" tAe NaM
nivikhakmANAe nasthi kei chae vA parihAre vA / jAmo sAhammiNIo ahAkappaM no
uTThAe viharaMti savvAsi tAsi tappattiyaM chae vA parihAre vaa| 14, pavattiNI ya
ohAyamANI annayaraM vaejjA"mae NaM ajje ! pohAviyAe samANIe iyaM samukkasiyavvA
/ " sA ya samukkasiNArihA samukkasiyavvA, sA ya no samukkasiNArihA no
samukkasiyavvA / atthi ya ittha aNNA kAi samukkasiNArihA sA samukkasiyavvA /
natthi ya ittha aNNA kAi samukkasiNArihA sA ceva samukkasiyavyA / tAe ca NaM
samukkiTThAe parA vaejjA-"dussamukkiLaM te prajje ! nikkhivAhi / " tAe NaM
nikkhivamANAe nasthi kei chae vA parihAre vaa|

Page #182 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## ‡§µ‡•ç‡§Ø‡§µ‡§π‡§æ‡§∞‡§∏‡•Ç‡§§‡•ç‡§∞  **13.** If a *pravartini* (leader) who is about to die tells a
prominent *sadhvi* (nun), "O *Arye*! When I pass away, please appoint *[name of
sadhvi]* to my position." If the *sadhvi* designated by the *pravartini* is
qualified for the position, she should be appointed. If she is not qualified,
she should not be appointed. If there is another *sadhvi* in the community who
is qualified, she should be appointed. If there is no other qualified *sadhvi*
in the community, the *sadhvi* designated by the *pravartini* should be
appointed. After she is appointed, if a *geetarth* *sadhvi* (nun who sings
devotional songs) says, "O *Arye*! You are not qualified for this position,
therefore, please relinquish it," and she relinquishes the position, she is not
liable for *dikshached* (loss of initiation) or *tap* (penance). If the
*svadharmini* *sadhvis* (nuns who follow their own dharma) do not ask her to
relinquish the position of *pravartini* or other positions according to the
*kalp* (duty), then all the *svadharmini* *sadhvis* are liable for *dikshached*
or *tap* for this reason.  **14.** If a *pravartini* who is about to abandon
*sanjam* (self-restraint) tells a prominent *sadhvi*, "O *Prarthe*! When I
leave, please appoint *[name of sadhvi]* to my position." If she is qualified
for the position, she should be appointed. If she is not qualified, she should
not be appointed. If there is another *sadhvi* in the community who is
qualified, she should be appointed. If there is no other qualified *sadhvi* in
the community, the *sadhvi* designated by the *pravartini* should be appointed.
After she is appointed, if a *geetarth* *sadhvi* says, "O *Prarthe*! You are not
qualified for this position, therefore, please relinquish it," and she
relinquishes the position, she is not liable for *dikshached* or *tap*. If the
*svadharmini* *sadhvis* do not ask her to relinquish the position of
*pravartini* according to the *kalp*, then all the *svadharmini* *sadhvis* are
liable for *dikshached* or *tap* for this reason.  **Discussion:** The *acharya*
(spiritual leader) is the religious leader of all the *sadhus* and *sadhvis* of
their *gachch* (lineage). Therefore, their specific decisions must be accepted
by all the *sadhvis*, meaning they must follow their instructions.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
[vyavahArasUtra _jAo sAhammiNoo ahAkappaM no uvaTThAe viharaMti savvAsi tAsi
tappattiyaM chee vA parihAre vaa| 13. rugNa pravartinI kisI pramukha sAdhvI se
kahe ki- "he Arye ! mere kAlagata hone para amuka sAdhvI ko mere pada para
sthApita krnaa|" yadi pravatinI-nirdiSTa vaha sAdhvI usa pada para sthApana
karane yogya ho to use sthApita karanA caahie| yadi vaha usa pada para sthApana
karane yogya na ho to use sthApita nahIM karanA cAhie / yadi samudAya meM anya
koI sAdhvI usa pada ke yogya ho to sthApita karanA cAhie / yadi samudAya meM
anya koI bhI sAdhvI usa pada ke yogya na ho to pravartinI-nirdiSTa sAdhvI ko hI
usa pada sthApita karanA caahie| usako usa pada para sthApita karane ke bAda koI
gItArtha sAdhvI kahe ki-"he AyeM ! tuma isa pada ke ayogya ho ataH isa pada ko
chor3a do", (aisA kahane para) yadi vaha usa pada ko chor3a de to vaha
dIkSAcheda yA tapa rUpa prAyazcitta kI pAtra nahIM hotI hai| jo svarmiNI
sAdhviyAM kalpa (uttaradAyitva) ke anusAra use pravartinI Adi pada chor3ane ke
lie na kaheM to ve sabhI svarmiNI sAdhviyAM ukta kAraNa se dIkSAcheda yA tapa
rUpa prAyazcitta kI pAtra hotI haiN| 14. saMyama-parityAga kara jAne vAlI
pravatinI kisI pramukha sAdhvI se kahe ki-'he prArthe ! mere cale jAne para
amuka sAdhvI ko mere pada para sthApita krnaa|" yadi vaha sAdhvI usa pada para
sthApana karane yogya ho to use usa pada para sthApana karanA caahie| yadi vaha
usa pada para sthApana karane yogya na ho to use sthApita nahIM karanA caahie|
yadi samudAya meM anya koI sAdhvI usa pada ke yogya ho to use sthApita karanA
caahie| yadi samudAya meM anya koI bhI sAdhvI usa pada ke yogya na ho to
pravartinI-nirdiSTa sAdhvI ko hI usa pada para sthApita karanA caahie| usako usa
pada para sthApita karane ke bAda koI gItArtha sAdhvI kahe ki- 'he prArthe !
tuma isa pada ke ayogya ho, ata: isa pada ko chor3a do", (aisA kahane para) yadi
vaha usa pada ko chor3a de to vaha dIkSAcheda yA tapa rUpa prAyazcitta kI pAtra
nahIM hotI hai| jo svadharmiNI sAdhviyAM kalpa (uttaradAyitva) ke anusAra use
pratinI pada chor3ane ke lie na kaheM to ve sabhI svardhAmaNI sAdhviyAM ukta
kAraNa se dIkSAcheda yA tapa rUpa prAyazcitta kI pAtra hotI haiN| vivecana-
AcArya apane gaccha ke sampUrNa sAdhu-sAdhviyoM ke dharmazAsaka hote haiN| ataH
unakA viziSTa nirNaya to sabhI sAdhviyoM ko svIkAra karanA hotA hI hai, arthAt
unake nirdezAnusAra

Page #183 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
A Sadhvi can be appointed to the Pravartiini position, but according to the
Sutras, Sadhvis or Pravartiinis can also appoint other qualified Sadhvis to the
Pravartiini position, unlike the general rules. This is clear from these Sutras.
Other discussions should be understood in the same way as Sutras 13-14 of the
fourth Uddeshak.   **15. If a newly initiated, young, or adolescent Nirgrantha
forgets the Acharaprakalp (Acharanga-Nishƒ´thas≈´tra), he should be asked, "O
Arya! For what reason have you forgotten the study of the Acharaprakalp? Did you
forget due to some reason or due to negligence?"**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
pAMcavAM uddezaka pravartinI pada para kisI sAdhvI ko niyukta kiyA jA sakatA
hai, kintu sAmAnya vidhAna kI apekSA sUtrAnusAra sAdhviyAM yA pravartinI Adi bhI
anya yogya sAdhvI ko pravartinI Adi pada para niyukta kara sakatI haiN| yaha ina
sUtroM se spaSTa hotA hai| anya vivecana cauthe uddezaka ke sUtra 13-14 ke
samAna samajha lenA caahie| AcAraprakalpa-vismRta ko pada dene kA vidhi-niSedha
15. niggaMthassa NaM nava-Dahara-taruNassa AyArakapappe nAmaM ajjhayaNe
parimbhaThe siyA, se ya pucchiyavve "keNa te kAraNeNa ajjo! prAyArapakappe nAma-
ajjhayaNe paribhaTThe ? ki prAbAheNaM udAhu pamAeNaM ?" se ya vaejjA-"no
prAbAheNaM, pamAeNaM," jAvajjIvaM tassa tappattiyaM no kappai pAyariyata vA jAva
gaNAvaccheiyattaM vA uddisittae vA dhArettae vA / se ya vaejjA-"AbAheNaM, no
pamAeNaM, se ya saMThavessAmi ti" saMThavejjA evaM se kappar3a AyariyattaM vA
jAva gaNAvaccheiyattaM vA uddisittae vA dhArettae vaa| se ya "saMThavessAmi" ti
no saMThavejjA, evaM se no kappai pAyariyattaM vA jAva gaNAvaccheiyattaM vA
uddisittae vA dhArettae vaa| 16. niggaMthIe NaM nava-Dahara-taruNAe AyArapakappe
nAmaM anmayaNe parimbhaThe siyA, sA ya pucchiyavyA "keNa bhe kAraNeNaM ajje !
AyArapakappe nAmaM prAyaNe paribho ? kiM prAbAheNaM, udAhu pamAeNaM ?" sAya
vaejjA "no prAbAheNaM, pamAeNaM", jAvajjIvaM tIse tappattiyaM no kappai
pavattiNitaM vA gaNAvaccheiNitaM vA uddisittae vA, dhArettae vaa|| sA ya
vaejjA-"AbAheNaM, no pamAeNaM sA ya saMThavessAmi ti" saMThavejjA evaM se kappA
pavattiNitti vA gaNAvaccheiNitaM vA uddisisae vA dhArettae baa| sAya
"saMThavessAmi" ti no saMThavejjA, evaM se no kappai payattiNitaM vA
gaNAvaccheiNitaM vA uddisittae vA dhArettae vaa| 15. navadIkSita, bAla evaM
taruNa nirgrantha ke yadi AcAraprakalpa (AcArAMga-nizIthasUtra) kA adhyayana
vismRta ho jAe to use pUchA jAe ki "he Arya ! tuma kisa kAraNa se
prAcAraprakalpa-adhyayana ko bhUla gae ho, kyA kisI kAraNa se bhUle ho yA
pramAda se ? "

Page #184 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[364] [Vyavahar Sutra] If he says that he has forgotten due to carelessness and
not for any reason, then he is not eligible to be given or hold the position of
Acharya or Ganavcchedak for life. If he says, "I have forgotten due to such and
such reason, not due to carelessness, and I will now memorize the Pracharprakalp
again," and memorizes it, then he is eligible to be given or hold the position
of Acharya or Ganavcchedak. If he says that he will memorize the Pracharprakalp
again but does not memorize it, then he is not eligible to be given or hold the
position of Acharya or Ganavcchedak. 16. If a newly initiated, young, or
adolescent Nirgranthi forgets the study of Pracharprakalp, then he should be
asked, "O dear! Why have you forgotten the study of Pracharprakalp? Have you
forgotten due to any reason or due to carelessness?" If he says, "I have
forgotten due to carelessness and not for any reason," then he is not eligible
to be given or hold the position of Pravartini or Ganavcchedini for life. If he
says, "I have forgotten due to such and such reason, not due to carelessness,
and I will now memorize the Pracharprakalp again," and memorizes it, then he is
eligible to be given or hold the position of Pravartini or Ganavcchedini. If he
says that he will memorize the Pracharprakalp again but does not memorize it,
then he is not eligible to be given or hold the position of Pravartini or
Ganavcchedini. / Discussion - In the third Sutra of the third Uddeshak, a
Shraman who has completed three years of Dikshaparaya is asked to memorize the
"Pracharprakalp." These Sutras state that it is necessary for every Shraman and
Shramani to memorize the Acharprakalp and keep it memorized. It is also stated
that it is the duty of the leading Shramans of the Gachchha to check from time
to time whether any Shraman has forgotten the Acharprakalp. If he has forgotten,
then the reason should be ascertained. The Sutra also states that if a Shraman
or Shramani who has forgotten the Acharprakalp is newly initiated, young, or
adolescent, then he or she receives the prescribed atonement. There are two
types of atonement, namely (1) If he forgets due to a reason, then he cannot
hold any position until he memorizes it again, and he cannot wander around as a
(Singhadarapramukh). (2) If he forgets due to carelessness, then he cannot hold
any position for life, and he cannot wander around as a (Singhadarapramukh).
"Pracharprakalp" here refers to Acharang and Nishisth Sutra. Detailed
explanation regarding this should be known from the discussion of Uddeshak 3
Sutra 3.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
364] [vyavahArasUtra yadi vaha kahe ki kisI kAraNa se nahIM apitu pramAda se
vismRta huA hai", to use ukta kAraNa se jIvanaparyanta AcArya yAvat
gaNAvacchedaka pada denA yA dhAraNa karanA nahIM kalpatA hai| yadi vaha kahe ki
"amuka kAraNa se vismRta huA hai-pramAda se nahIM / aba maiM prAcAraprakalpa
punaH kaNThastha kara lUgA"-aisA kahakara kaNThastha kara le to use prAcArya
yAvat gaNAvacchedaka pada denA yA dhAraNa karanA kalpatA hai / yadi vaha
prAcAraprakalpa ko punaH kaNThastha kara lene ko kahakara bhI kaNThastha na kare
to use prAcArya yAvat gaNAvacchedaka pada denA yA dhAraNa karanA nahIM kalpatA
hai / 16. navadIkSita, bAla evaM taruNa nirgranthI ko yadi prAcAraprakalpa-
adhyayana vismRta ho jAe to use pUchanA cAhie ki _ "he prArthe ! tuma kisa
kAraNa se prAcAraprakalpa-adhyayana bhUla gaI ho? kyA kisI kAraNa se bhUlI ho yA
pramAda se ?" yadi vaha kahe ki-"kisI kAraNa se nahIM apitu pramAda se vismRta
huA hai" to use ukta kAraNa se jIvanaparyanta pravartinI yA gaNAvacchedinI pada
denA yA dhAraNa karanA nahIM kalpatA hai / yadi vaha kahe ki-"amuka kAraNa se
vismRta huA hai, pramAda se nahIM, maiM punaH prAcAraprakalpa ko kaNThastha kara
lagI"-aisA kahakara kaNThastha kara le to use pravartinI yA gaNAvacchedinI pada
denA yA dhAraNa karanA kalpatA hai / yadi vaha prAcAraprakalpa ko punaH
kaNThastha kara lene ko kahakara bhI kaNThastha na kare to use pravartinI yA
gaNAvacchedinI pada denA yA dhAraNa karanA nahIM kalpatA hai / / vivecana-tIsare
uddezaka ke tIsare sUtra meM tIna varSa kI dIkSAparyAya vAle zramaNa ko
"prAcAraprakalpa" kaNThastha dhAraNa karane kA kahA gayA hai aura ina sUtroM meM
pratyeka zramaNa-zramaNI ko AcAraprakalpa kaNThastha karanA evaM use kaNThastha
rakhanA Avazyaka kahA gayA hai| sAtha hI gaccha ke pramukha zramaNoM kA yaha
kartavya batAyA gayA hai ki ve samaya-samaya para yaha jAMca bhI karate raheM ki
kisI zramaNa ko prAcAraprakalpa vismRta to nahIM ho rahA hai| yadi vismRta huA
hai to usake kAraNa kI jAnakArI karanI caahie| sUtra meM yaha bhI kahA gayA hai
ki AcAraprakalpa ko bhUlane vAlA zramaNa yA zramaNI yadi navadIkSita hai,
bAlavaya yA taruNavaya vAlA hai to use sUtrokta prAyazcitta pAtA hai / vaha
prAyazcitta do prakAra kA hai, yathA (1) sakAraNa bhUlane para punaH kaNThastha
karane taka vaha kisI bhI padavI ko dhAraNa nahIM kara sakatA tathA
(siMghAr3Apramukha) bana kara vicaraNa bhI nahIM kara sktaa| (2) pramAdavaza
bhUla jAya to vaha jIvanaparyanta kisI padavI ko dhAraNa nahIM kara sakatA tathA
siMghAr3Apramukha bana kara vicaraNa bhI nahIM kara sktaa| "prAcAraprakalpa" se
yahAM AcArAMga aura nizIthasUtra kA nirdeza kiyA gayA hai| isa sambandhI vistRta
vyAkhyA udde. 3 sUtra 3 ke vivecana se jAna lenI caahie|

Page #185 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Fifth Objective] _ In these sutra-statements of three and five, the importance
of the _Pracharprakalpa_ is explained. Keeping this in mind and considering it,
if a decision is made about its creation, it is easily decided that the author
of this _Vyavaharsutra_, _Sthavir_ Bhadrabahu Swami, or some _Sthavir_ after
him, did not create the 'Pracharprakalpa', but it is _Ganadhar_ created and from
the beginning, it is a scripture that all the _sadhu-sadhvi_ of the _Jinshasan_
have to study.  /  Currently, this scripture is indicative of both _Acharang_ +
_Nishit_ sutras. The _niyuktikar_ of _Dashashrutskandh_ has, in the first verse
of the _niyukti_, honored _Sthavir_ Shri Pratham Bhadrabahu Swami, saluting him
and calling him 'the creator of the three _chedasutras_ ( _Dashashrutskandh_,
_Brihatkalp_ and _Vyavaharsutra_)'. And Shri Bhadrabahu Swami, in this
_Vyavaharsutra_ composed by him ( _nirydh_), has directed the _Pracharprakalpa_
sixteen times, making many kinds of provisions. Even though this is so clear,
due to historical misconceptions, present-day historians present their doubtful
views about the author of this sutra and his time, which is a matter of great
regret. The provisions of the _Vyavaharsutra_ related to _Pracharprakalpa_ make
it clear that it is absolutely essential for every _sadhu-sadhvi_ to memorize
the _Acharang-Nishit_ sutra with its meaning and purpose, and it is also
necessary to keep it memorized through _swadhyay_ etc.  /  Any _shraman_ or
_shramani_ who is not capable of studying it, or does not study it, or after
studying it, forgets it by not doing _swadhyay_, they are the _shraman_ or
_shramani_ who are ineligible to take any position in the _Jinshasan_ or to hold
a previously held position, i.e. they cannot be given any position and if they
are already in a position, they are removed from the position. They do not have
the right to wander even as _singhadarapramukh_, and they cannot do any kind of
_ganavyutsarg_ sadhana, i.e. _ekalvihar_, _sanbhog-pratyakhyan_ etc. sadhanas.
The monk who holds the _Pracharprakalpa_ is called _jghanya geetarth_ or
_jghanya bahushrat_. He alone is worthy of independent wandering or _gochari_.
The use of materials obtained from the investigation of _abahu-shrut_ or _agi-
tath_ is also prohibited in _bhap_ and _prayashchit_ is said. Currently, it is
_agam_ -compliant to believe that the knowledge of the _purva_ is broken, but it
cannot be said that the other sutras are broken.  /  Therefore, it is completely
inappropriate to believe that the conduct of these _Vyavaharsutra_ -stated
provisions is broken based on the area or time.  /  Because if the many young
_shraman-shramani_ who are being initiated today get qualified teachers, they
can definitely memorize this much study in three years. But it is with great
regret that I have to say that due to indifference in the field of study, out of
the approximately ten thousand (10,000) Jain _sadhu-sadhvi_ currently present,
not even ten _sadhu-sadhvi_ are holding this _Pracharprakalpa_ memorized with
its meaning. Still, there are many _prachar_ , _upaadhyay_ in society, and many
are eager to get positions. There are also many _sadhu-sadhvi_ who wander as
_singhadarapramukh_, and they also consider themselves to be wandering according
to _pagman_.  /  But according to _agam_, how is the arrangement of study,
wandering and positions of the _gachch_

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
pAMcavAM uddezaka] _ udde. tIna aura pAMca ke ina sUtra-vidhAnoM meM
prAcAraprakalpa kA jo mahattva batAyA gayA hai, use lakSya meM rakhakara evaM
anuprekSA karake yadi usakI racanA ke viSaya meM nirNaya kiyA jAya to sahaja hI
yaha nirNaya ho jAtA hai ki isa vyavahArasUtra ke racayitA sthavira
bhadrabAhusvAmI ne yA unake bAda ke kisI sthavira ne 'pAcAraprakalpa' kI racanA
nahIM kI hai kintu yaha gaNadhararacita hai aura prAraMbha se hI jinazAsana ke
sabhI sAdhu-sAdhviyoM ko Avazyaka rUpa se adhyayana karAyA jAne vAlA zAstra hai
/ vartamAna meM yaha zAstra AcArAMga+nizItha ubhaya sUtroM kA sUcaka hai|
dazAzrutaskaMdha ke niyuktikAra ne niyukti kI prathama gAthA meM hI sthavira zrI
prathama bhadrabAhusvAmI ko vaMdana-namaskAra karate hue unheM 'tIna chedasUtroM
(dazAzrutaskaMdha, bRhatkalpa aura vyavahArasUtra) kI racanA karane vAle' aise
vizeSaNa se vibhUSita kiyA hai aura zrIbhadrabAhusvAmI ne apane dvArA racita
(niryaDha) isa vyavahArasUtra meM solaha bAra prAcAraprakalpa kA nirdeza karate
hae aneka prakAra ke vidhAna kie haiN| itanA spaSTa hote hue bhI aitihAsika
bhrAntiyoM ke kAraNa vartamAna ke itihAsajJa isa sUtra ke racanAkAra aura unake
samaya ke viSaya meM apane saMdigdha vicAra prastuta karate haiM, yaha atyaMta
kheda kA viSaya hai| prAcAraprakalpa saMbaMdhI vyavahArasUtra ke vidhAnoM se
yaha spaSTa ho jAtA hai ki adhyayana-vyavasthA meM AcArAMga-nizIthasUtra ko
artha-paramArtha sahita kaMThastha karanA pratyeka sAdhu-sAdhvI ke liye atyaMta
Avazyaka hai tathA svAdhyAya Adi ke dvArA use kaNThastha rakhanA bhI Avazyaka
hai / jo koI bhI zramaNa yA zramaNI isake adhyayana kI yogyatA vAle nahIM hote
haiM yA isakA adhyayana nahIM karate haiM athavA adhyayana karane ke bAda usakA
svAdhyAya na karake vismRta kara dete haiM, ve hI zramaNa yA zramaNI jinazAsana
ke kisI bhI pada ko grahaNa karane meM yA pUrva grahIta ko dhAraNa karane ke
ayogya hote haiM, arthAt unheM koI pada nahIM diyA jA sakatA hai aura pahale se
kisI pada para hoM to unheM pada se haTA diyA jAtA hai| ve siMghAr3Apramukha
banakara bhI vicaraNa karane kA adhikAra nahIM rakhate haiM tathA kisI bhI
prakAra kI gaNavyutsargasAdhanA arthAt ekalavihAra, saMbhoga-pratyAkhyAna Adi
sAdhanAe~ bhI nahIM kara sakate haiN| prAcAraprakalpa kA dhAraka bhikSu hI
jaghanya gItArtha yA jaghanya bahuzrata kahA gayA hai| vahI svataMtra vihAra yA
gocarI ke yogya hotA hai| abahuzruta yA agItArtha kI gaveSaNA se prApta
padArthoM ke upayoga karane kA bhI bhApya meM niSedha kiyA gayA hai evaM
prAyazcitta kahA gayA hai| vartamAna meM pUrvo kA jJAna viccheda mAnanA to
Agamasammata hai, kintu anya sUtroM kA viccheda honA nahIM kahA jA sakatA hai /
ataH kSetra yA kAla kI aoTa lekara ina vyavahArasUtrakathita vidhAnoM ke AcaraNa
kA viccheda mAnanA sarvathA anucita hai / kyoMki vartamAna meM dIkSita hone vAle
aneka navayuvaka zramaNa-zramaNiyoM ko yadi yogya adhyApana karAne vAle mileM to
ve tIna varSa meM itanA adhyayana kaMThastha avazya kara sakate haiN| kintu
atyaMta kheda ke sAtha yaha kahanA par3atA hai ki adhyayana ke kSetra meM
udAsInatA ke kAraNa vidyamAna lagabhaga dasa hajAra (10,000) jaina sAdhu-
sAdhviyoM meM kevala dasa sAdhu-sAdhviyAM bhI isa prAcAraprakalpa ko arthasahita
kaNThastha dhAraNa karane vAle nahIM haiN| phira bhI samAja meM aneka prAcArya,
upAdhyAya haiM aura aneka pada prApti ke liye lAlAyita rahane vAle bhI haiN|
saMghAr3Apramukha banakara vicaraNa karane vAle bhI aneka sAdhu-sAdhvI haiM aura
ve svayaM ko pAgamAnusAra vicaraNa karane vAle bhI mAnate haiM / kintu
AgamAnusAra adhyayana, vicaraNa tathA gaccha ke padoM kI vyavasthA kisa

Page #186 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[366] Those who do not make an effort to understand and follow the *Vyavahar
Sutra* through the examination of these *Chhed Sutras* are simply neglecting the
*Agam* teachings. Therefore, the current *Padavihars* and *Gachchhapramuks* must
pay attention to this and maintain the study system of the *Agam* uninterrupted.
That is, every newly initiated young *Sant-Sati* should be made fully competent
in *Agam* study and self-aware *Samyam* observance for at least three to five or
ten years with proper arrangements. This is the paramount duty of every
*Padavihars*, *Gachchhapramuks* and *Guru*. Only by doing so can they benefit
their disciples. In *Dasha. Da. 4*, similar duties towards the disciple are
mentioned for the *Prachar* etc., and it is said that they should be freed from
their debt by fulfilling these duties. See the discussion there. Are the many
*Padavihars* who do not do this today aware of their duties? And are they
grateful to *Jinshasan*? Or are they satisfied with gaining prestige through
positions? After deep reflection on this matter, those who are self-interested
seekers dedicated to *Jinshasan* should make arrangements for the study,
teaching and bestowing of positions according to the *Agam*, and strive to make
the distorted tradition conform to the *Agam*. Currently, there is also a belief
that if one has heard the recitation of the *Pracharang* and *Nishith Sutra*
once from a *Guru*, then one can become a *Pra‡§Æ‡•Å‡§ñ* and wander or hold a
position, and by doing so, one is following the *Sutra* teachings. However, upon
deeply understanding the provisions made in these two *Sutras*, the above belief
is proven to be merely a self-imagined fantasy. Because these *Sutras* clearly
state that every *Sadhu-Sadhvi* should memorize the *Prachar Prakalp* due to the
provisions regarding forgetting it, etc. Many *Prachar* also believe that "the
study and teaching of the *Nishith Sutra* is prohibited for *Sadhvi* by *Arya
Rakshit*". This is also a contrary imagination to the *Agam*. Because the
present sixteenth *Sutra* clearly states that *Sadhvi* should memorize the
*Prachar Prakalp*. No *Prachar* has the right to establish a tradition by giving
teachings contrary to the *Agam* teachings, and *Sadhe Navpurvi Arya Rakshit
Swami* could not have given such an order. Nevertheless, many such incongruous
fantasies become prevalent in the name of history. Therefore, one should be wary
of imagined fantasies and give prominence to the *Sutra* teachings. The
provision for the *Sthavir* to repeat the *Achar Prakalp* is as follows: 17.
*Theranang Therabhumipattanang Ayarpakappe Nama Ajzhayane Paribhatte Sia, Kappai
Tessi Santhavettang Va, Asanthavettang Va Prayariyattan Va Jav
Ganavachcheiyattan Va Uddisittae Va Dharettae Va*. 18. *Theranang
Therabhumipattanang Ayarpakappe Nama Ajzhayane Parismathe Sia, Kappai Tessi

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
366] [vyavahArasUtra prakAra karanI cAhie, yaha ina chedasUtroM ke vivecana se
saralatApUrvaka jAnane evaM pAlana karane kA prayatna nahIM karate haiM / yaha
pAgamavidhAnoM kI upekSA karanA hai| _ ata: vartamAna ke padavIdharoM aura
gacchapramukhoM ko avazya hI isa ora dhyAna dekara Agama kI adhyayanapraNAlI ko
avichinna banAye rakhanA cAhie / arthAt pratyeka navadIkSita yuvaka saMta-satI
ko ucita vyavasthA ke sAtha kama se kama tIna yA pAMca dasa varSa taka Agama-
adhyayana evaM AtmajAgRtiyukta saMyamapAlana meM pUrNa yogya banAnA caahie| yaha
pratyeka padavIdhara kA, gacchapramukha kA aura guru kA parama kartavya hai /
aisA karane se hI ve ziSyoM ke upakAraka ho sakate haiN| dazA. da. 4 meM bhI
prAcAryAdi ke liye ziSya ke prati aise hI kartavyoM kA kathana karake unake RNa
se uRNa honA kahA gayA hai, jisakA vivecana vahIM para dekheM / vartamAna meM
aisA na karane vAle ye aneka padavIdhara kyA apane kartavyoM ke prati sajaga
haiM ? evaM jinazAsana ke prati kRtajJa haiM ? athavA padoM ke dvArA kevala
pratiSThA prApta karake saMtuSTi karane vAle haiM ? isa viSaya meM gaharA vicAra
karake jinazAsana ke prati kartavyaniSThA rakhane vAle AtmArthI sAdhakoM ko
AgamAnusAra adhyayana-adhyApana evaM padapradAna karane kI vyavasthA karanI
cAhie evaM vikRta paraMparA ko AgamAnusArI banAne meM prayatnazIla honA caahie|
vartamAna meM yaha mAnyatA bhI pracalita hai ki-'prAcArAMga evaM nizIthasUtra kA
yadi gurumukha se eka bAra vAcana-zravaNa kara liyA to pramukha banakara
vicaraNa yA padavIdhAraNa kiyA jA sakatA hai aura aisA karane para sUtrAjJA kA
pAlana ho jAtA hai| kintu ina do sUtroM meM kie gae vidhAnoM ko gaharAI se
samajhane para uparyukta dhAraNA kevala svamatikalpita kalpanAmAtra siddha hotI
hai| kyoMki ina sUtroM meM prAcAraprakalpa ke vismRta hone Adi ke vidhAna se
pratyeka sAdhu-sAdhvI ko kaMThastha dhAraNa karanA hI siddha hotA hai| kaI
prAcAryoM kI yaha bhI mAnyatA hai ki--'sAdhvI ko nizIthasUtra kA adhyayana-
adhyApana Arya rakSita ke dvArA niSiddha hai', yaha bhI AgamaviparIta kalpanA
hai / kyoMki prastuta solahaveM sUtra meM sAdhvI ko prAcAraprakalpa ke
kaNThastha rakhane kA spaSTa vidhAna hai| prAgamavidhAnoM se viparIta prAjJA
dekara paraMparA calAne kA adhikAra kisI bhI prAcArya ko nahIM hotA hai aura
sAr3he navapUrvI AryarakSitasvAmI aisI AjJA de bhI nahIM sakate haiM, phira bhI
itihAsa ke nAma se aisI kaI asaMgata kalpanAe~ pracalita ho jAtI haiN| ataH
kalpita kalpanAmoM se sAvadhAna rahakara sUtrAjJA ko pramukhatA denI cAhaye /
sthavira ke lie AcAraprakalpa ke punarAvartana karane kA vidhAna 17. therANaM
therabhUmipattANaM AyArapakappe nAma ajjhayaNe paribhaTTe siyA, kappai tesi
saMThavettANa vA, asaMThavettANa vA prAyariyattaM vA jAva gaNAvaccheiyattaM vA
uddisittae vA dhArettae vaa| 18. therANaM therabhUmipattANaM AyArapakappe nAma
ajJayaNe parismaThe siyA, kappai tesi

Page #187 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Fifth Objective] [367] The name *Ayarappakka* is given to the study of the
*Sanni·π£a·πá·πáƒÅ·πáa*, *SantuyƒÅ·πáa*, *UttƒÅ·πáayƒÅ·πáa*, or *PƒÅsillƒÅyƒÅ·πáa* whether it is
remembered or not, whether it is questioned or not. 17. If a *sthavira* (elder)
who has attained *sthaviratva* (old age) forgets the study of the *ƒÅcƒÅra-
prakalpa* (rules of conduct), they are still eligible to be given or to hold the
position of *ƒÅcƒÅrya* or *ga·πáƒÅvacchedaka*. 18. If a *sthavira* who has attained
*sthaviratva* forgets the study of the *ƒÅcƒÅra-prakalpa*, they are still eligible
to remember and repeat the study of the *ƒÅcƒÅra-prakalpa* two or three times
while sitting, lying down, sleeping in the *uttƒÅnƒÅsana* position, or lying on
their side. / _Discussion_ - The subject matter of the previous two s≈´tras is
being stated here with respect to *sthavira* monks and nuns. In the commentary,
a person between forty and sixty-seven years of age is called *prau·∏çha*
(mature), and a person over sixty-seven years of age is called *sthavira*.
However, in the *·π¨hƒÅnƒÅ·πÖgas≈´tra* and the *VyavahƒÅras≈´tra* (Objective 10, etc.), a
person sixty years of age is called *sthavira*. Therefore, a person between
forty and sixty-nine years of age should be considered *prau·∏çha*. The present
two s≈´tras make an exception for *sthavira* monks, which cannot be understood
for *prau·∏çha*. Therefore, the inclusion of *prau·∏çha* in the previous two s≈´tras
should be understood by implication or by the *parise·π£a-nyƒÅya* (rule of
residue). Because, until that age, the ability to retain the scriptures in
memory does not decline much. It is more likely that memory will decline after
the age of sixty. Therefore, it should be understood that the atonement for
forgetting the *ƒÅcƒÅra-prakalpa* by *prau·∏çha* monks and nuns is also implied in
the previous two s≈´tras. The seventeenth s≈´tra states that if a *sthavira* monk
forgets the *ƒÅcƒÅra-prakalpa* and is able to recall it or not, they can be given
any position and can also hold the position previously given to them. / The
intention of these s≈´tras is that a *sthavira* monk should still try to recall
the *ƒÅcƒÅra-prakalpa*, but if they are unable to recall it, they do not incur any
atonement. The eighteenth s≈´tra also clarifies that they can listen to the
s≈´tras from other monks while lying down or sitting, or they can ask if they
have forgotten any part of it. / Thus, this s≈´tra indicates that even in old
age, a monk should be fond of studying. The use of the phrase "therƒÅ·πáam
therabh≈´mipattƒÅ·πáam" in the s≈´tra indicates that this exception should be
understood with respect to those who are *sthavira* in age but who have reached
old age, i.e., whose physical strength and sensory abilities have declined.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
pAMcavAM uddezaka] [367 sannisaNNANa vA, saMtuyANa vA, uttANayANa vA,
pAsillayANa vA AyarapakappaM nAmaM ajjhayaNaM doccaMpi taccapi paDipucchittae
vA, paDisArettae vaa| 17. sthaviratva (vRddhAvasthA) prApta sthavira yadi
prAcAraprakalpa-adhyayana vismRta ho jAe (aura punaH kaNThastha kare yA na kare)
to bhI unheM AcArya yAvat gaNAvacchedaka pada denA yA dhAraNa karanA kalpatA
hai| 18. sthaviratvaprApta sthavira yadi pAcAraprakalpa-adhyayana vismRta ho jAe
to unheM baiThe hue, leTe hue, uttAnAsana se soye hue yA pArzvabhAga se zayana
kiye hue bhI AcAraprakalpa-adhyayana do-tIna bAra pUchakara smaraNa karanA aura
punarAvRtti karanA kalpatA hai / _ vivecana-pUrva sUtradvika ke kahe gaye viSaya
kA hI yahAM sthavira sAdhu-sAdhvI kI apekSA kathana kiyA gayA hai| bhASya meM
cAlIsa se unasattara varSa kI vaya vAle ko prauDha kahA hai aura sattara varSa
se adhika vaya vAle ko sthavira kahA gayA hai| kintu ThANAMgasUtra evaM
vyavahArasUtra udde. 10 Adi prAgamoM meM 60 varSa kI vaya vAle ko sthavira kahA
gayA hai / ataH cAlIsa se unasaTha varSa taka kI vaya vAle ko prauDha samajhanA
caahie| prastuta sUtradvaya meM sthavira bhikSutroM ke liye ApavAdika vidhAna
kiyA hai, jo prauDha ke liye nahIM samajhA jA sktaa| ata: prauDha kA samAveza
pUrva sUtradvika meM upalakSaNa se yA parizeSanyAya se samajha lenA caahie|
kyoMki usa avasthA taka zruta kaMThastha dhAraNa karane kI zakti kA adhika hrAsa
nahIM hotA hai| smaraNazakti kA hrAsa sATha varSa kI vaya ke bAda honA adhika
saMbhava hai / ataH prauDha sAdhusAdhviyoM ke prAcAraprakalpa vismaraNa kA
prAyazcitta bhI pUrva sUtradvika meM aMtanihita hai, aisA samajha lenA caahie|
sattarahaveM sUtra meM yaha kahA gayA hai ki sthavira bhikSu yadi AcAraprakalpa
vismRta ho jAye aura vaha use punaH upasthita kara sake yA upasthita na bhI kara
sake to unheM koI bhI pada diyA jA sakatA hai aura pUrvapradatta pada ko ve
dhAraNa bhI kara sakate haiM / prastuta sUtroM kA Azaya yaha hai ki sthavira
bhikSu ko bhI AcAraprakalpa punaH upasthita karane kA prayatna to karanA hI
cAhie, kintu puna: upasthita na ho sakane para unheM koI bhI prAyazcitta nahIM
AtA hai| aThArahaveM sUtra meM bhI yaha spaSTa kiyA gayA hai ki ve sUtra ko
punaH kaNThastha rakhane ke liye kabhI leTe hue yA baiThe hue bhI anya sAdhuoM
se sUtra kA zravaNa kara sakate haiM yA bIca ke koI sthala vismRta hoM to unheM
pUcha sakate haiM / isa prakAra isa sUtra meM bhikSu ko vRddhAvasthA meM bhI
svAdhyAyapriya honA sUcita kiyA gayA hai| sUtra meM "therANaM
therabhUmipattANaM" zabda prayoga se yaha sUcita kiyA gayA hai ki vayaHsthavira
hote hue bhI jinheM bur3hApA A cukA hai arthAt jinakI zarIrazakti aura
indriyazakti kSINa ho cukI hai, unakI apekSA hI yaha ApavAdika vidhAna samajhanA
caahie|

Page #188 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[368] [On the Conduct Sutra, Mutual Criticism, Methods and Prohibitions 19. If a
monk and a nun are in a Saambhogika relationship, they should not criticize each
other in each other's presence. If there is someone worthy of criticism on their
own side, then it is permissible to criticize in their presence. If there is no
one worthy of criticism on their own side, then it is permissible for the monk
and nun to criticize each other. 19. If a monk and a nun are in a Saambhogika
relationship, they should not criticize each other in each other's presence. If
there is someone worthy of criticism on their own side, then it is permissible
to criticize in their presence. If there is no one worthy of criticism on their
own side, then it is permissible for the monk and nun to criticize each other.
Discussion - The Brihatkalpa Sutra, in its fourth Uddesaka, describes twelve
Saambhogika behaviors, and states that, according to the Utsargika method, six
Saambhogika behaviors should be maintained with nuns. Accordingly, there is no
behavior of a Maandalik Pahaar with nuns, and there is also no exchange of food,
etc., with them without a strong reason, yet they are still considered
Saambhogika because they are under the command of a single Acharya and belong to
the same Gachchha. Even for such Saambhogika monks and nuns, it is forbidden to
engage in mutual criticism, repentance, atonement, etc. That is, the monk should
only criticize his faults, perform atonement, etc., in the presence of the
Acharya, Upadhyaya, Stavira, etc., and the nun should only criticize her faults,
perform atonement, etc., in the presence of the Pravartini, Stavira, etc.,
worthy Shramanis. This is the Vidhimarg or Utsargmarg. According to the
Apavadmarg, if there is no one worthy of criticism or atonement in a particular
gana, then, due to circumstances, the monk can criticize, repent, and atone in
the presence of a nun of his own Gachchha, and the nun can criticize, etc., in
the presence of a monk of her own Gachchha. This rule makes it clear that, in
general, even monks and nuns of the same Gachchha should not criticize or atone
for each other. In the commentary, explaining the negative consequences of
mutual criticism, it is stated that if a monk or nun has to criticize someone
regarding a violation of the fourth vow, and the monk or nun listening to the
criticism is also overcome by lust, then on such an occasion, he or she may get
an opportunity to express his or her feelings and may say, "You have to perform
atonement anyway, so fulfill my desire once, then we can perform atonement
together." Thus, there is a possibility of further downfall of each other due to
mutual criticism. Even when criticizing other faults, there is a possibility of
such faults arising due to repeated contact between the monk and nun in
seclusion.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
368] [vyavahArasUtra paraspara AlocanA karane ke vidhi-niSedha 19. je niggaMthA
ya niggathIo ya saMbhoiyA siyA, no NaM kappai aNNamaNNassa aMtie aaloitte| asthi
ya ittha NaM kei pAloyaNArihe kappai NaM tassa aMtie paaloitte| natthi ya ittha
NaM kei AloyaNArihe evaM NaM kappai aNNamaNNassa aMtie aaloitte| 19. jo sAdhu
aura sAdhviyAM sAmbhogika haiM, unheM paraspara eka dUsare ke samIpa AlocanA
karanA nahIM kalpatA hai / yadi svapakSa meM koI AlocanA sunane yogya ho to
unake samIpa hI AlocanA karanA kalpatA hai| yadi svapakSa meM AlocanA sunane
yogya koI na ho to sAdhu-sAdhvI ko paraspara AlocanA karanA kalpatA hai|
vivecana-bRhatkalpasUtra ke cauthe uddezaka meM bAraha sAMbhogika vyavahAroM kA
varNana karate hue autsargika vidhi se sAdhviyoM ke sAtha chaha sAMbhogika
vyavahAra rakhanA kahA gayA hai| tadanusAra sAdhviyoM ke sAtha eka mAMDalika
pAhAra kA vyavahAra nahIM hotA hai tathA AgADha kAraNa ke binA unake sAtha
AhArAdi kA lena-dena bhI nahIM hotA hai, to bhI ve sAdhu-sAdhvI eka prAcArya kI
AjJA meM hone se aura eka gaccha vAle hone se sAMbhogika kahe jAte haiN| aise
sAMbhogika sAdhu-sAdhviyoM ke lie bhI AlocanA, pratikramaNa, prAyazcitta Adi
paraspara karanA niSiddha hai, arthAt sAdhu apane doSoM kI AlocanA, prAyazcitta
prAcArya, upAdhyAya, sthavira Adi ke pAsa hI kareM aura sAdhviyAM apanI AlocanA,
prAyazcitta pravartinI, sthavirA Adi yogya zramaNiyoM ke pAsa hI kareM, yaha
vidhimArga yA utsargamArga hai| apavAdamArga ke anusAra kisI gaNa meM sAdhu yA
sAdhviyoM meM kabhI koI AlocanAzravaNa ke yogya na ho yA prAyazcitta dene yogya
na ho taba paristhitivaza sAdhu svagacchIya sAdhvI ke pAsa AlocanA,
pratikramaNa, prAyazcitta kara sakatA hai aura sAdhvI svagacchIya sAdhu ke pAsa
AlocanA Adi kara sakatI hai| isa vidhAna se yaha spaSTa hai ki sAmAnyatayA eka
gaccha ke sAdhu-sAdhviyoM ko bhI paraspara pAlocanA, prAyazcitta nahIM karanA
caahie| paraspara AlocanA kA duSphala batAte hue bhASya meM kahA gayA hai ki
sAdhu yA sAdhvI ko kabhI caturthavrata bhaMga saMbaMdhI AlocanA karanI ho aura
AlocanA sunane vAlAsAdhU yA sAdhvI bhI kAmavAsanA se parAbhUta ho to aise
avasara para use apane bhAva prakaTa karane kA avasara mila sakatA hai aura vaha
kaha sakatA hai ki 'tumheM prAyazcitta to lenA hI hai to eka bAra merI icchA bhI
pUrNa kara do, phira eka sAtha prAyazcitta ho jaayegaa| isa prakAra paraspara
AlocanA ke kAraNa eka dUsare kA adhikAdhika patana hone kI saMbhAvanA rahatI hai
/ anya doSoM kI AlocanA karate samaya bhI ekAMta meM punaH-punaH sAdhu-sAdhvI kA
saMparka hone se aise doSoM ke utpanna hone kI saMbhAvanA rahatI hai /

Page #189 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Fifth Objective:  For the same reasons, apart from self-study or reading, all
types of contact between sadhus and sadhvis is prohibited. Therefore, they
should not visit each other's shelters for general conversation, mere darshan,
or for the sake of tradition. Visiting for service, as specified in the
Sthananga Sutra, or in other such circumstances, is permissible according to the
Agamas. A detailed description of the prohibition of mutual contact between
sadhus and sadhvis can be found in the discussion of Brihatkalpa Sutra 3, Sutra
1. This Sutra prohibits many activities, including sitting, standing, etc., in
each other's shelters. The rules regarding mutual service are as follows:  **20.
"Jao sadhu aaro sadhviya sambhogika hai, unhe paraspar ek dusre ki vaiyaavrutya
karna nahin kalpata hai. Yadi swapksh mein koi vaiyaavrutya karne wala ho to usi
se vaiyaavrutya karana kalpata hai. Yadi swapksh mein vaiyaavrutya karne wala
koi nahin ho to sadhu-sadhvi ko paraspar vaiyaavrutya karna kalpata hai."**
**20. "If a sadhu and a sadhvi are sambhogika, they should not perform
vaiyaavrutya for each other. If there is someone in their own group who can
perform vaiyaavrutya, then they should perform it with that person. If there is
no one in their own group who can perform vaiyaavrutya, then the sadhu and
sadhvi can perform vaiyaavrutya for each other."**  **Discussion:** The previous
Sutra prohibited mutual criticism between sadhus and sadhvis, and this Sutra
prohibits performing each other's tasks. For the sake of their samayam, sadhus
and sadhvis should first try to perform all necessary tasks related to their
bodies and equipment themselves. If they are unable to do so, they can ask other
sadhus or sadhvis for help. This is the proper way. If, due to illness or other
reasons, they are unable to perform a necessary task, they can, with discretion,
ask another sadhu or sadhvi for help. This is an exception. Therefore, without a
specific reason, sadhus and sadhvis should not perform any tasks for each other.
The main reason for prohibiting these mutual interactions is that they can lead
to excessive contact, increase attachment, and ultimately cause a lapse in
brahmacharya. Additionally, seeing such unnecessary mutual contact can create
various doubts in the minds of the general public. Therefore, sadhus and sadhvis
should conduct themselves according to the rules laid out in the Sutras.
**Examples of service that can be performed mutually:**  1. Bringing and
receiving food and water, or inviting each other. 2. Requesting and providing
clothing, utensils, or other equipment.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
pAMcavAM uddezaka] aise hI kAraNoM se svAdhyAya yA vAcanA Adi ke sivAya sAdhu-
sAdhvI ko paraspara sabhI prakAra kA saMparka vajita hai / isaliye unheM eka
dUsare ke upAzraya meM sAmAnya vArtAlApa yA kevala darzana hetu athavA
paramparA-pAlana ke liye nahIM jAnA caahie| sthAnAMgasUtra-nidiSTa sevA Adi
paristhitiyoM se jAnA to Agamasammata hai| sAdhu-sAdhviyoM ke paraspara
saMparkaniSedha kA vizeSa varNana bRha. u. 3 sUtra 1 ke vivecana meM dekheN| usa
sUtra meM paraspara eka dUsare ke upAzraya ke baiThane, khar3e rahane Adi aneka
kAryo kA niSedha hai| paraspara sevA karane kA vidhi-niSedha 20. je niggaMthA ya
niggaMthIyo ya saMbhoiyA siyA, no gaM kappai aNNamaNNaNaM veyAvaccaM kaarvette|
asthi ya ittha NaM ke veyAvaccakare kappai NaM teNaM veyAvaccaM kAravettae,
natyi ya itya NaM kei veyAvaccakare, evaM NaM kappai aNNamaNNeNaM veyAvaccaM
kaarvette| 20. jo sAdhu aura sAdhviyAM sAMbhogika haiM, unheM paraspara eka
dUsare kI vaiyAvRtya karanA nahIM kalpatA hai| yadi svapakSa meM koI vaiyAktya
karane vAlA ho to usI se vaiyAvRtya karAnA kalpatA hai| yadi svapakSa meM
vaiyAvRtya karane vAlA koI na ho to sAdhu-sAdhvI ko paraspara vaiyAvRtya karanA
kalpatA hai| vivecana-pUrvasUtra meM sAdhu-sAdhviyoM ke paraspara AlocanA karane
kA niSedha kiyA gayA hai aura prastuta sUtra meM paraspara eka dUsare ke kAryoM
ko karane kA niSedha kiyA gayA hai| sAdhu-sAdhvI ke saMyama hetu zarIra
sambandhI aura upakaraNa sambandhI jo bhI Avazyaka kArya ho vaha prathama to
svayaM hI karanA cAhie aura kabhI koI kArya sAdhu-sAdhunoM se aura sAdhviyAM
sAdhviyoM se bhI karavA sakatI haiM, yaha vidhimArga hai|| roga Adi kAraNoM se
yA kisI Avazyaka kArya ke karane meM asamartha hone se paristhitivaza
vivekapUrvaka sAdhu sAdhvI paraspara bhI apanA kArya karavA sakate haiM, yaha
apavAdamArga hai| ataH vizeSa paristhiti ke binA sAdhu-sAdhvI ko paraspara koI
bhI kArya nahIM karanA cAhie / ina sUtroM ke pArasparika vyavahAroM ke niSedha
kA mukhya kAraNa yaha hai ki ina pravRttiyoM se atisamparka, mohavRddhi hone se
kabhI brahmacarya meM asamAdhi utpanna ho sakatI hai aura isa prakAra kA
paraspara anAvazyaka pratisamparka dekhakara jana-sAdhAraNa meM kaI prakAra kI
kuzaMkAeM utpanna ho sakatI haiN| ataH sUtrokta vidhAna ke anusAra hI sAdhu-
sAdhviyoM ko AcaraNa karanA caahie| paraspara kiye jAne vAle sevAkArya (1)
AhAra-pAnI lAkara denA yA lenA athavA nimaMtraNa krnaa| (2) vastra-pAtra Adi
upakaraNoM kI yAcanA karake lAkara denA yA svayaM ke yAcita upakaraNa denaa|

Page #190 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 370] [Vyavahar Sutra (3) The work of tools - sewing, joining, applying
medicine, etc. (4) Washing clothes, cleaning, etc. (5) Making and giving tools
for cleaning, etc. (6) Doing transcription, etc. /  Many such tasks should be
understood as much as possible. It is not appropriate for Sadhus and Sadhvis to
do or have these tasks done without proper circumstances, and doing or having
them done results in Guruchaumasi Pratikraman. Even those with the title of
Acharya, etc., cannot perform services like transcription, etc., for Sadhvis,
except to show devotion / If Acharya, etc., have their work done without reason,
they are also subject to Guruchaumasi Pratikraman. The implication is that
Sadhus who live together and can do service work should not have it done by
Sadhvis, similarly, Sadhvis should not have any work done by Sadhus unless other
Sadhvis are available to do it.   **Rules and prohibitions regarding snakebite
treatment**  21. If a Niggranth or Niggranthi is bitten by a snake at night or
in the evening (twilight), and at that time a woman Niggranth treats the
snakebite of a man Niggranthi, or a man Niggranthi treats the snakebite of a
woman Niggranth, then this type of treatment is permissible for them / This type
of treatment does not affect their Niggranth status, and they are not subject to
Pratikraman / This is the conduct of Sthavirkalpi Sadhus. It is not permissible
for Jinkalpi Sadhus to receive this type of treatment, and if they do, they lose
their Jinkalp status and are subject to Pratikraman. This is the conduct of
Jinkalpi Sadhus.  **Discussion**  The Brihatkalpasutra mentions 6 types of
Kalpasthiti in its 6th Uddeshak, meaning 6 types of conduct. There, the conduct
of Sthavirkalpi and Jinkalpi is described differently / An example of this
difference in conduct is explained in this Sutra. The main difference between
the two is that Sthavirkalpi can follow the path of exception, as per the
situation, in matters of bodily care, medical treatment, and circumstances, but
Jinkalpi strictly follow the path of Utsarga. They do not engage in any kind of
medical treatment, bodily care, etc.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
370] [vyavahArasUtra (3) upakaraNoM kA parikarma kArya-sInA, jor3anA, rogAnAdi
lgaanaa| (4) vastra, rajoharaNa Adi dhonaa| (5) rajoharaNa Adi upakaraNa
banAkara denaa| (6) pratilekhana Adi kara denA / ityAdi aneka kArya
yathAsambhava samajha lene caahie| inheM AgAr3ha paristhitiyoM ke binA paraspara
karanA karavAnA sAdhu-sAdhviyoM ko nahIM kalpatA hai evaM karane-karavAne para
gurucaumAsI prAyazcitta AtA hai| prAcArya Adi padavIdharoM ke bhI pratilekhanA
Adi sevA kArya kevala bhakti pradarzita karane ke liye sAdhviyAM nahIM kara
sakatI haiM / yadi prAcArya Adi isa taraha apanA kArya akAraNa karavAveM to ve
bhI gurucaumAsI prAyazcitta ke pAtra hote haiN| tAtparya yaha hai ki sAtha meM
rahane vAle sAdhu jo sevAkArya kara sakate hoM to sAdhviyoM se nahIM karAnA
cAhie, usI prakAra sAdhviyoM ko bhI jaba taka anya sAdhviyAM karane vAlI hoM
taba taka sAdhuoM se apanA koI bhI kArya nahIM karavAnA caahie|
sarpadaMzacikitsA ke vidhi-niSedha 21. niggathaM ca NaM rAo vA viyAle vA
dohapuTTho lUsejjA, itthI vA purisassa omAvejjA, puriso vA itthIe promAvejjA,
evaM se kappai, evaM se ciTTai, parihAraM ca se no pAuNai, esa kappo ther-
kppiyaannN| evaM se no kappai, evaM se no ciTThai, parihAraM ca se pAuNai, esa
kappe jiNakappiyANaM / 21. yadi kisI nirgrantha yA nirgranthI ko rAtri yA vikAla
(sandhyA) meM sarpa Dasa le aura usa samaya strI nirgrantha kI aura puruSa
nirgranthI kI sarpadaMza cikitsA kare to isa prakAra upacAra karAnA unako
kalpatA hai / isa prakAra upacAra karAne para bhI unakI nirgranthatA rahatI hai
tathA ve prAyazcitta ke pAtra nahIM hote haiM / yaha sthavirakalpI sAdhuoM kA
AcAra hai| jinakalpa vAloM ko isa prakAra upacAra karAnA nahIM kalpatA hai, isa
prakAra upacAra karAne para unakA jinakalpa nahIM rahatA hai aura ve prAyazcitta
ke pAtra hote haiN| yaha jinakalpI sAdhuoM kA AcAra hai| vivecanabRhatkalpasUtra
ke cha8 uddezaka meM 6 prakAra kI kalpasthiti kahI gaI hai, arthAt 6 prakAra kA
AcAra kahA gayA hai| vahAM para sthavirakalpI aura jinakalpI kA AcAra bhinna-
bhinna sUcita kiyA hai / usa prAcAra-bhinnatA kA eka udAharaNa isa sUtra meM
spaSTa kiyA gayA hai| donoM ke prAcAra meM mukhya antara yaha hai ki
sthavirakalpI yathAvasara zarIraparikarma, auSadhaupacAra tathA paristhiti vaza
kisI bhI apavAdamArga kA anusaraNa kara sakate haiM, kintu jinakalpI
dRr3hatApUrvaka utsargamArga para hI calate haiN| ve kisI bhI prakAra kA
auSadha-upacAra, zarIraparikarma,

Page #191 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[371 Fifth Uddeshak] They cannot protect their bodies, etc., and they also
follow many other types of specific Samachari. The present Sutra states that if
a Sthavirakalpi Bhikshu is bitten by a snake, he can have the snake's poison
removed by a Mantravadi. He can also get treatment for snakebite at night, and a
Sadhvi can get treatment for snakebite from a man at night, and a Sadhu can get
treatment from a woman at night. If any Sthavirakalpi is strong-willed and does
not want to get treatment, it is up to him, i.e., the dispensation given in the
Sutras or the dispensation implied by the Sutras is always optional for the
Sthavirakalpi. There is no choice of free will in the Sadhana of a Jinakalpi. He
has to follow the vows taken without attachment to the body throughout his life.
Even the consumption of Nirvady Apavad breaks their Jinakalp, for which they are
liable to atonement. The Sthavirakalpi does not have to atone for the
consumption of Nirvady Apavad due to circumstances, and in some circumstances,
the consumption of Savad Apavad also requires very little atonement. But they
also have to undergo special atonement for violating the limits without reason.
The specific Samachari followed by a Jinakalpi are: 1. Going out for Gochari
only in the third Prahar and also going out for Vihar only in the third Prahar.
2. Eating only rough and uncoated food, going out for Gochari with Abhigha, and
taking food, etc., from one of the last five Pindeshana. 3. Taking clothes,
utensils, etc., only from the third or fourth Vastraishana-Patraishana (Padima).
4. Not keeping any auxiliary title, therefore not keeping a Sanstarakpatta or an
Asana. 5. Mostly doing Kayotsarga or spending time in Utkuta Asana except for
the third Prahar. 6. Using only a Pat, Sanstarak or Prithvishila that is laid
down. 7. Staying in a place suitable for observing restraint for the whole month
and not going out for Vihar in Chaturmas for any reason. 8. Following two
Samachari out of ten types of Samachari. 9. Parthana only on land that is free
from the 10 defects of Sthandila, otherwise not Parthana. 10. Not cleaning the
house, covering or closing holes, not opening or closing doors. 11. Not taking
anything without the wish of the householder or not behaving in a way that is
unpleasant to them. 12. Not staying in a house if someone asks, "How many Sadhus
are you, how long will you stay?" with such intentions.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
[371 pAMcavAM uddezaka] zarIrasaMrakSaNa Adi nahIM kara sakate haiM tathA anya
bhI aneka prakAra kI viziSTa samAcArI kA ve pAlana karate haiN| prastuta sUtra
meM batAyA gayA hai ki sthavirakalpI bhikSu ko sAMpa kATa khAe to vaha
mantravAdI se sAMpa kA jahara utaravA sakatA hai| rAtri meM bhI vaha sarpadaMza
kA upacAra karA sakatA hai tathA sAdhvI, puruSa se aura sAdhu, strI se bhI rAtri
meM sarpadaMza kA upacAra karA sakatA hai| koI sthavirakalpI bhI dRr3ha manobalI
ho aura cikitsA na karAve to yaha usakI icchA para nirbhara hai arthAt sUtroM
meM dI gaI chUTa yA sUtroM se pratidhvanita hone vAlI chUTa kA sevana
sthavirakalpI ke lie sadA aicchika hotA hai| jinakalpI kI sAdhanA meM svecchA kA
koI vikalpa nahIM hai| use to zarIra-nirapekSa hokara grahaNa kI gaI pratijJAyoM
ko jIvanaparyanta pAlana karanA hotA hai| nirvadya apavAda sevana se bhI inakA
jinakalpa bhaMga ho jAtA hai, jisase ve prAyazcitta ke bhAgI hote haiM /
sthavirakalpI ko paristhitivaza nirvadya apavAda sevana kA prAyazcitta nahIM AtA
hai aura kabhI kisI paristhiti meM sAvadha apavAda sevana kA bhI atyalpa
prAyazcitta hI AtA hai| kintu akAraNa maryAdA kA ullaMghana karane para unheM
bhI vizeSa prAyazcitta AtA hai / jinakalpI ko viziSTa samAcArI 1. tIsare prahara
meM hI gocarI karanA evaM vihAra bhI tIsare prahara meM hI krnaa| 2. rUkSa evaM
lepa rahita padArthoM kA AhAra karanA, abhigraha yukta gocarI karanA evaM antima
pAMca piMDeSaNAoM meM se kisI eka piMDeSaNA se AhArAdi grahaNa krnaa| 3. vastra-
pAtra Adi bhI tIsarI cauthI vastraiSaNA-pAtraiSaNA (paDimA) se grahaNa krnaa| 4.
aupagrahika upadhi nahIM rakhanA, ataH saMstArakapaTTa yA Asana bhI nahIM
rkhnaa| 5. tIsare prahara ke atirikta prAyaH sadA kAyotsarga karanA yA
utkuTukAsana se samaya vyatIta krnaa| 6. bichAe hue pATa, saMstAraka yA
pRthvIzilA mila jAya to hI upayoga meM lenaa| 7. saMyama pAlana yogya kSetra meM
pUrNa mAsakalpa rahanA aura cAturmAsa meM kisI bhI kAraNa se vihAra nahIM krnaa|
8. dasa prakAra kI samAcArI meM se do samAcAriyoM kA pAlana krnaa| 9. sthaMDila
ke 10 doSa-rahita bhUmi ho to hI paraThanA anyathA nahIM prtthnaa| 10. makAna kA
pramArjana, biloM ko DhakanA, banda karanA Adi nahIM karanA, na daravAje
kholanA, na banda krnaa| 11. gRhastha kI icchA binA kucha bhI nahIM lenA yA
unheM aprItikara ho, aisA kucha bhI vyavahAra nahIM karanA / 12. makAna dete
samaya koI pUche-"tuma kitane sAdhu ho, kitanA Thaharoge" aise bhAvoM se pUchane
para nahIM tthhrnaa|

Page #192 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Translation:  **372]** [Vyavahar Sutra 13. Do not stay where fire or a lamp
is burning or its light is present for even a short time / 14. Do not perform
the 12 Padimas of a Bhikshu and other Bhadra-MahaBhadra etc. Padimas / 15.
Divide the houses in the village for Gochari into six sections, then perform
Gochari in only one section in a day, and do not go back to that section for six
days. 16. Do not go to that section if another Bhikshu goes for Gochari. 17.
Take Guruchaumasi Pratikraman for even the mere thought of transgressions like
Atikraman etc. / 18. Do not initiate anyone, but you can give them Pratibodh.
19. Do not remove the dirt from the nails etc. / 20. When the thighs become weak
in old age, do not call it Vihar, but follow all other rules of Jinakalp / etc.
There are many other rules, which should be known from the Bhashya etc. or from
Abhidhan Rajendra Kosh Part 4 'Jinakalp' word page 1473 (19). Abhidhan Rajendra
Kosh has defined Jinakalp as follows (1) Jina: Gachhanirgat Sadhu Vishesha:
Tesham Kalp: Samachar: / 'Jinanamiv Kalpo Jinakalp Ugravihar Vishesh: Ugravihari
Gachhanirgat Sadhu Jinakalp are called and their Samachari rules are called
Jinakalp. Therefore, in the present Sutra, even if a snake bites, there is a
prohibition on seeking treatment / According to the present Sutra Vidhan, the
restraint practice of Sthavirakalpi is both body-related and body-independent,
but Jinakalp practice is only body-independent / The summary of the fifth
Uddeshak is Sutra 1-10 Pravatini should wander with two Sadhvis and perform
Chaturmas with three Sadhvis. _Ganavachhedhika should wander with three Sadhvis
and perform Chaturmas with four Sadhvis. Even if many Pravartinis or
Ganavachhedhikas are together, each should stay according to the above number.
11-12 When the Pramukha Sadhvi attains Kaladharma, the remaining Sadhvis should
make another eligible Sadhvi the Pramukha and wander. If there is no eligible
Sadhvi, they should leave the Vihar and quickly join another Sangh. 13-14 Give
the designated eligible Sadhvi the title of Pravatini, if she is not eligible,
appoint another eligible Sadhvi to the position. 15-16 Acharang Nisith Sutra
Every Sadhu-Sadhvi should memorize and keep these Sutras with their meaning. The
Acharya etc. should also keep asking them from time to time. If someone forgets
these Sutras, then they should not be given any kind of

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
372] [vyavahArasUtra 13. alpa samaya bhI agni yA dIpaka jale yA usakA prakAza
Ave vahAM nahIM ThaharanA / 14. bhikSu kI 12 paDimA tathA anya bhadra-mahAbhadra
Adi paDimA nahIM karanA / 15. gAMva meM gocarI ke gharoM ko chaha vibhAga meM
vibhAjita karanA, phira eka dina meM kisI eka vibhAga meM hI gocarI karanA,
chaha dinoM ke pUrva punaH vahAM gocarI nahIM jaanaa| 16. anya koI bhikSu gocarI
jAe, usa vibhAga meM nahIM jaanaa| 17. atikrama Adi doSoM ke saMkalpamAtra kA
bhI gurucaumAsI prAyazcitta lenA / 18. kisI ko dIkSA na denA, kintu pratibodha
de sakate haiN| 19. prAMkha Adi kA maila nahIM nikAlanA / 20. vRddhAvasthA meM
jaMghAvala kSINa hone para vihAra nahIM kahanA, kintu anya sabhI jinakalpa kI
maryAdAoM kA pAlana karanA / ityAdi aura bhI aneka maryAdAeM haiM, jinheM
bhASyAdi se athavA abhi. rAjendra koSa bhAga 4 'jinakalpa' zabda pR. 1473 (19)
se jAna lenA caahie| abhi. rAjendra koSa meM jinakalpa kA artha isa prakAra kiyA
hai(1) jinAH gacchanirgatasAdhuvizeSAH teSAM kalpa: samAcAraH / 'jinAnAmiva
kalpo jinakalpa ugravihAravizeSaHugravihArI gacchanirgata sAdhu jinakalpI kahe
jAte haiM aura unakI samAcArImaryAdAoM ko jinakalpa kahA jAtA hai| isaliye hI
prastuta sUtra meM unheM sAMpa kATa jAya to bhI cikitsA karAne kA niSedha hai /
prastuta sUtravidhAna ke anusAra sthavirakalpI kI saMyamasAdhanA zarIrasApekSa
yA zarIranirapekSa donoM prakAra kI hotI hai, kintu jinakalpa-sAdhanA
zarIranirapekSa hI hotI hai / pAMcaveM uddezaka kA sArAMza sUtra 1-10 pravatinI
do sAdhviyoM ko sAtha lekara vicaraNa kare aura tIna sAdhviyoM ko sAtha lekara
cAturmAsa kre| _gaNAvacchedikA tIna sAdhviyoM ko sAtha lekara vicaraNa kare evaM
cAra sAdhviyoM ko sAtha lekara cAturmAsa kre| aneka pravartinI yA gaNAvacchedikA
sammilita hoveM to bhI uparyukta saMkhyA ke anusAra hI pratyeka ko rahanA
caahie| 11-12 pramukhA sAdhvI ke kAladharma prApta ho jAne para zeSa sAdhviyAM
anya yogya ko pramukhA banAkara vicaraNa kreN| yogya na ho to vihAra karake
zIghra anya saMghAr3e meM mila jaaveN| 13-14 pravartinI-nirdiSTa yogya sAdhvI ko
padavI denA, vaha yogya na ho to anya yogya sAdhvI ko pada para niyukta krnaa|
15-16 AcArAMga nizIthasUtra pratyeka sAdhu-sAdhvI ko artha sahita kaNThastha
dhAraNA karanA aura unheM upasthita rakhanA caahie| AcAryAdi ko bhI yathAsamaya
pUchatAcha karate rahanA caahie| yadi kisI ko ye sUtra vismRta ho jAye to use
kisI prakAra ke

Page #193 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Fifth Uddeshak  [373 Sutra 17-18] Do not place the [Sutra] on the [person]
nor allow them to wander around as the leader. If someone forgets the Sutra due
to illness, they can be given the [Sutra] again after memorizing it upon
recovery. For a senior monk, forgetting the memorized Sutra due to old age is
forgivable, and there is no penance even if they cannot remember it again. An
elderly monk can recite, listen to, or ask about the Sutra while lying down or
sitting. Without special circumstances, monks and nuns should not criticize or
perform penance for each other. Monks and nuns should not perform any service
for each other. They can serve each other in special circumstances as mentioned
in the Agamas. If a snake bites, it is permissible for a monk following the
[Sthavira] tradition to seek mantra treatment, but it is not permissible for a
monk following the [Jina] tradition to seek or provide treatment. There is no
penance for a monk following the [Sthavira] tradition for seeking such
treatment. A monk following the [Jina] tradition incurs penance for doing so.
**Summary Sutra 1-10, 11-12, 13-14, 15-18, 19-20:** This Uddeshak discusses the
number of nuns who wander with the [Pravartini] etc., the necessary duties of
the leading nun, the giving of [Sutra] to a designated [Pravartini] or other
qualified nun, the memorization of the [Pracharaprakalpa], the prohibition of
service and criticism between monks and nuns, the treatment of snakebite, etc.
// Fifth Uddeshak ends //

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
pAMcavAM uddezaka] [373 sUtra 17-18 pada para na rakheM na hI use pramukha bana
kara vicaraNa karane kI AjJA deN| yadi koI rogAdi ke kAraNa se sUtra bhUla jAya
to svastha hone para punaH kaNThastha karane ke bAda pada Adi diye jA sakate
haiN| vaddhAvasthA vAle sthavira ke dvArA ye kaNThastha sUtra bhUla jAnA kSamya
hai tathA puna: yAda karate hue bhI yAda na hove to koI prAyazcitta nahIM hai|
vRddha bhikSu kabhI leTe hue yA baiThe hue sUtra kI punarAvRtti, zravaNa yA
pRcchA Adi kara sakate haiN| vizeSa paristhiti ke binA sAdhu-sAdhvI ko paraspara
eka dUsare ke pAsa AlocanA, prAyazcitta nahIM karanA caahie| sAdhu-sAdhvI ko
paraspara eka dUsare kA koI bhI sevAkArya nahIM karanA caahie| Agamokta vizeSa
paristhitiyoM meM ve eka dUsare kI sevAparicaryA kara sakate haiN| sAMpa kATa
jAya to sthavirakalpI bhikSu ko mantracikitsA karAnA kalpatA hai, kintu
jinakalpI ko cikitsA karanA yA karAnA nahIM kalpatA hai| sthavirakalpI ko usa
cikitsA karAne kA prAyazcitta bhI nahIM hai| jinakalpI ko aisA karane para
prAyazcitta AtA hai| upasaMhAra sUtra 1-10 11-12 13-14 15-18 19-20 isa prakAra
isa uddezaka meMpravartinI Adi ke sAtha vicaraNa karane vAlI sAdhviyoM kI
saMkhyA kA, pramukhA sAdhvI ke kAla karane para Avazyaka kartavyoM kA,
pravatino-nirdiSTa yA anya yogya sAdhvI ko pada dene kA, prAcAraprakalpa
kaNThastha rakhane kA, sAdhu-sAdhvI ko paraspara sevA, mAlocanA nahIM karane kA,
sarpadaMzacikitsA kA, ityAdi viSayoM kA kathana kiyA gayA hai| // pAMcavAM
uddezaka samApta //

Page #194 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Sixth Uddeshak: Rules and Prohibitions for Visiting Relatives and Home  1. If
a _bhikkhu_ desires to visit their relatives' home, it is not permissible to do
so without asking the _theras_. It is permissible to visit their relatives' home
after asking the _theras_. If the _theras_ give permission, it is permissible to
visit their relatives' home. If the _theras_ do not give permission, it is not
permissible to visit their relatives' home. If someone goes to their relatives'
home without the _theras_' permission, they are subject to _dikshachhed_ or
_tapas_ as atonement.  It is not permissible for an _alpa≈õruta_ and _alpaƒÅgamna_
_bhikkhu_ or _bhikkhuni_ to visit their relatives' home alone. However, it is
permissible to visit their relatives' home with a _bahu≈õruta_ and _bahuƒÅgamna_
_bhikkhu_ in the community.  If someone goes to their relatives' home, they
should offer _puva_ (food) first and then _chƒÅuloda·πáa_ (rice). They should offer
_bhilings≈´va_ (clothes) after _chƒÅuloda·πáa_. It is not permissible to offer
_bhilings≈´va_ before _chƒÅuloda·πáa_. If someone goes to their relatives' home,
they should offer _bhilings≈´va_ first and then _chƒÅuloda·πáa_. It is permissible
to offer _bhilings≈´va_ before _chƒÅuloda·πáa_, but not _chƒÅuloda·πáa_ before
_bhilings≈´va_.  If someone goes to their relatives' home, they should offer two
_puva_ and two _bhilings≈´va_. If someone goes to their relatives' home, they
should not offer two _bhilings≈´va_ after offering two _puva_. If someone goes to
their relatives' home and offers _puva_ first, it is permissible to offer
_bhilings≈´va_. If someone goes to their relatives' home and offers _chƒÅuloda·πáa_
first, it is not permissible to offer _bhilings≈´va_.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
chaThA uddezaka svajana-parijana-gRha meM gocarI jAne kA vidhi-niSedha . 1.
bhikkhu ya icchejjA nAyavihiM ettae, no se kappai se there aNApucchittA
nAyavihiM ette| kappai se there pApucchitA nAyavihi ette| therA ya se viyarejjA,
evaM se kappai nAyavihiM ette| therA ya se no viyarejjA, evaM se no kappai
nAyavihiM ette|| je tattha therehi aviiNNe nAyavihiM ei, se saMtarA chae vA
parihAre vaa| no se kappai appasuyassa appAgamassa egANiyassa nAyavihiM ette|
kappai se je tattha bahussue babbhAgame teNa saddhi nAyavihiM ette| tattha se
puvAgamaNeNaM puvAutte cAulodaNe, pacchAuta bhiliMgasUve, kappar3a se cAulodaNe
paDigAhittae, no se kappai bhiliMgasUve pddigaahitte| tattha se puzvAgamaNeNaM
puSpAutte bhiliMgasUve, pacchAutte cAulodaNe, kappai se miliMgasUve
paDigAhittae, no se kappai cAulodaNe pddigaahitte|| tattha se puvAgamaNeNaM do
vi puyAuttAI kappar3a se dovi pddigaahitte| tattha se puvAgamaNeNaM do vi
pacchAuttAI no se kappai do vi pddigaahitte| je se tattha puvAgamaNeNaM puvAutte
evaM se kappai paDigAhittae / je se tattha puvAgamaNeNaM pacchAutte no se kappai
paDigAhitae / 1. bhikSu yadi svajanoM ke ghara gocarI jAnA cAhe to sthaviroM se
pUche binA svajanoM ke ghara jAnA nahIM kalpatA hai| sthaviroM se pUchakara
svajanoM ke ghara jAnA kalpatA hai| sthavira yadi AjJA de to svajanoM ke ghara
jAnA kalpatA hai| sthavira yadi AjJA na de to svajanoM ke ghara para jAnA nahIM
kalpatA hai| sthaviroM kI AjJA ke binA yadi svajanoM ke ghara jAe to ve
dIkSAcheda yA tapa rUpa prAyazcitta ke pAtra hote haiN| _ alpazruta aura
alpAgamajJa akele bhikSu aura akelI bhikSuNI ko svajanoM ke ghara jAnA nahIM
kalpatA hai| kintu samudAya meM jo bahuzruta aura bahuaAgamajJa bhikSu hoM,
unake sAtha svajanoM ke ghara jAnA kalpatA hai|

Page #195 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Sixth Uddeshak [375]  If rice is cooked before the arrival of the Nirgrantha-
Nirgranthis at the house of a relative, and lentils are cooked afterwards, then
it is permissible to take rice, but not lentils. If lentils are cooked before
the arrival, and rice is cooked afterwards, then it is permissible to take
lentils, but not rice. If both lentils and rice are cooked before the arrival,
then it is permissible to take both. If both are cooked afterwards, then it is
not permissible to take either. Thus, it is permissible to take food that has
been kept away from fire, etc., before the arrival of the monk at the house of a
relative. It is not permissible to take food that has been kept away from fire
after the arrival.  **Discussion:** Just as the general guidance of the Guru is
taken for taking food, so also, according to Nishita U. 4, it is necessary to
take specific guidance from the Acharya, etc., for taking food that is not
suitable. Similarly, in this sutra, in addition to receiving general permission
for begging, it is stipulated that specific permission must be obtained to go to
the homes of one's family members. A monk who is Bahushruta can go to the homes
of his relatives for begging on his own initiative after receiving permission.
But a monk who is Abahushruta and has been ordained for less than three years
cannot go on his own initiative even after receiving permission, but can only go
to the homes of his relatives with a Bahushruta monk.  The word "Nayavihi" is
used in the sutra. It encompasses all purposes for going to the homes of
relatives. Therefore, it is necessary to follow the method described in this
sutra for going for any purpose, such as going for a visit. If this method is
violated, the monk is liable to perform the appropriate penance or Chhed-rupa
Praayaschitta.  The latter part of the sutra contains reflections on begging.
This type of reflection is not mentioned in the 42 faults of investigation, nor
in the Pindeshana study of the Acharanga Sutra and the Dashavaikalika Sutra.
However, along with the rules for visiting the homes of relatives, this detailed
rule is presented in this sutra and in Dasha. Da. 6 and Dasha Da. 8. Therefore,
this is not a fault of Eshana, but a fault related to the homes of relatives.
The meaning of this sutra here is that there is a lot of devotion or affection
in the homes of relatives. For this reason, Pracha. Shra. 2 A. 1 U. 9 also
prohibits going to these homes a second time if the time for visiting is not
appropriate, and Nishita U. 2 mentions penance for going to the homes of
relatives a second time. However, there is no prohibition or penance for going
to other homes a second time, because this rule is not included in the general
rules of Eshana.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
chaTThA uddezaka] [375 jJAtijana ke ghara meM nimrantha-nirgranthiyoM ke Agamana
se pUrva cAvala raMdhe hue hoM aura dAla pIche se raMdhe to cAvala lenA kalpatA
hai, kintu dAla lenA nahIM kalpatA hai| vahAM Agamana se pUrva dAla raMdhI hue
ho aura cAvala pIche se raMdhe to dAla lenA kalpatA hai kintu cAvala lenA nahIM
kalpatA hai| vahAM prAgamana se pUrva dAla aura cAvala donoM raMdhe hue hoM to
donoM lene kalpate haiM / aura donoM bAda meM raMdhe hoM to donoM lene nahIM
kalpate haiM / isa prakAra jJAtijana ke ghara bhikSu ke Agamana se pUrva jo
AhAra agni Adi se dUra rakhA huA ho, vaha lenA kalpatA hai / jo Agamana ke bAda
meM agni se dUra rakhA gayA ho, vaha lenA nahIM kalpatA hai / vivecana-jisa
prakAra AhAra lene ke lie jAne kI sAmAnya rUpa se guru-prAjJA lI jAtI hai to bhI
nizItha u. 4 ke anusAra vigayayukta AhAra grahaNa karane ke lie prAcAryAdi kI
viziSTa prAjJA lenA Avazyaka hotA hai| usI prakAra prastuta sUtra meM bhikSAcarI
hetu sAmAnya AjJA prApta karane ke atirikta apane pArivArika logoM ke gharoM meM
gocarI jAne ke lie viziSTa prAjJA prApta karane kA vidhAna kiyA gayA hai| jo
bhikSu bahuzruta hai, vaha AjJA prApta karane ke bAda svayaM kI pramukhatA se
jJAtijanoM ke gharoM meM bhikSArtha jA sakatA hai| kintu jo bhikSu abahuzruta
hai evaM alpa dIkSAparyAya vAlA (tIna varSa se kama) hai, vaha prAjJA prApta
karake bhI svayaM kI pramukhatA se nahIM jA sakatA, kintu kisI bahuzruta bhikSu
ke sAtha hI apane jJAtijanoM ke ghara jA sakatA hai / sUtra meM "NAyavihi" zabda
kA prayoga hai| usameM jJAtijanoM ke ghara jAne ke sabhI prayojana samAviSTa
haiM / ata: gocarI Adi kisI bhI prayojana se jAnA ho to usake lie isa sUtrokta
vidhi kA pAlana karanA Avazyaka hai| ukta vidhi ko bhaMga karane para vaha
yathAyogya tapa yA cheda rUpa prAyazcitta kA pAtra hotA hai| _sUtra ke
uttarArdha meM bhikSAcarI sambandhI viveka nihita hai| gaveSaNA ke 42 doSoM meM
evaM AcArAMgasUtra aura dazavaikAlikasUtra ke piMDeSaNA adhyayana meM sUcita
aneka doSoM meM isa prakAra kA viveka sUcita nahIM kiyA hai| kintu jJAtijanoM ke
ghara gocarI jAne ke vidhAna ke sAtha hI isa kA vistRta vidhAna prastuta sUtra
meM evaM dazA. da. 6 aura dazA da. 8 meM kiyA gayA hai| ataH yaha eSaNA kA doSa
nahIM hai, kintu jJAtijanoM ke ghara se sambandhita doSa hai| yahAM isa sUtra kA
prAzaya yaha hai ki jJAtijanoM ke ghara meM bhakti kI adhikatA yA anurAga kI
adhikatA rahatI hai| isI kAraNa se prAcA. zra. 2 a. 1 u. 9 meM bhI ina gharoM
meM gocarI kA samaya na hunmA ho to dUsarI bAra jAne kA niSedha kiyA hai aura
nizItha u. 2 meM jJAtijanoM ke gharoM meM dubArA jAne para prAyazcitta kahA hai|
kintu jJAtijanoM ke atirikta anya gharoM meM dubArA jAe to yaha niSedha evaM
prAyazcitta nahIM hai, kyoMki eSaNA ke sAmAnya niyamoM meM yaha niyama nahIM
hai|

Page #196 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
In addition to this, it is essential to understand that this discretion should
also be exercised in homes where there is great devotion and affection. Because
there is always a possibility of such faults occurring there as well. This
section of the sutra explains that after entering a family home for a gochari,
one should not accept any food that has been prepared or removed from the stove,
such as rice, lentils, bread, milk, etc. Whether the sadhu is the cause of the
removal of that food or not, such food is unacceptable in a known family. One
should only accept food that has been prepared or removed from the stove before
entering the home. There is no prohibition in the sutra against accepting such
food in unfamiliar or slightly familiar homes. The reason for this is that
devotees, relatives, etc., may sometimes act in a way that violates the agnikaya
due to their devotion to the sadhu, but this fault is not likely in slightly
familiar or less devoted homes. Therefore, this rule is not applicable in those
families. That is why this rule is only associated with the families of
relatives in the scriptures. There are five ati≈õayas of the ƒÅcƒÅrya and upƒÅdhyƒÅya
in the gana, as follows: 1. The ƒÅcƒÅrya and upƒÅdhyƒÅya, while inside the upƒÅ≈õraya,
may wipe or clean their feet, which are covered in dust, with a cloth, without
violating the maryaada (jina-ƒÅj√±ƒÅ).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
{saag isake atirikta jina gharoM meM adhika bhakti evaM anurAga ho to upalakSaNa
se vahAM bhI yaha viveka rakhanA Avazyaka samajha lenA caahie| kyoMki vahAM bhI
aise doSoM ke lagane kI sambhAvanA to rahatI hI hai| isa sUtrAMza meM yaha
batAyA gayA hai ki pArivArika logoM ke ghara meM gocarI ke lie praveza karane ke
bAda koI bhI khAdya padArtha niSpAdita ho yA culhe para se cAvala dAla yA roTI
dUdha Adi koI bhI padArtha haTAyA jAe to use nahIM lenA caahie| usa padArtha ke
haTAne meM sAdhu kA nimitta ho yA na ho, jJAta kula meM aise padArtha agrAhya
hai| vahAM ghara meM praveza karane ke pahale hI jo padArtha niSpanna ho yA
cUlhe para se utarA huA ho, vahIM lenA caahie| aparicita yA alpaparicita gharoM
meM ukta padArtha lene kA sUtra meM niSedha nahIM hai| _ isakA kAraNa yaha hai
ki anurAgI jJAtijana Adi bhaktivaza kabhI sAdhu ke nimitta bhI vaha pravRtti
kara sakate haiM jisase agnikAya kI virAdhanA honA sambhava hai, kintu
alpaparicita yA alpAnurAgI gharoM meM ukta doSa ko sambhAvanA nahIM rahatI hai|
ata: una kuloM meM ukta niyama kI upayogitA nahIM hai| isIlie yaha vidhAna
AgamoM meM kevala jJAtijanoM ke kula ke sAtha hI jor3A gayA hai| AcArya Adi ke
atizaya 2. Ayariya-uvajjhAyassa gaNaMsi paMca aisesA paNNattA, taM jahA 1.
Ayariya-uvajjhAe aMto uvassayassa pAe nigijjhiya-nigijjhiya papphoDemANe vA
pamajjemANe vA nAikkamai / 2. Ayariya-uvajzAe aMto uvassayassa uccAra-pAsavaNaM
vigicamANe vA visohemANe vA nAikkamai / 3. Ayariya-uvajjhAe pabhU veyAvADiyaM,
icchA karejjA, icchA no krejjaa| 4. Ayariya-uvajjhAe aMto uvassayassa egarAyaM
vA durAyaM vA ego vasamANe nAikkamai / 5. Ayariya-uvajjhAe bAhi uvassayassa
egarAyaM vA durAyaM vA egano vasamANe naaikkmi| 3. gaNAvaccheiyassa NaM garNasi
do aisesA paNNattA, taM jahA 1. gaNAvaccheie aMto uvassayassa egarAyaM vA
durAyaM vA egao vasamANe nAikkamai / 2. gaNAvaccheie bAhiM uvassayassa egarAyaM
vA durAyaM vA ego vasamANe naaikkmi| gaNa meM prAcArya aura upAdhyAya ke pAMca
atizaya kahe gaye haiM, yathA 1. AcArya aura upAdhyAya upAzraya ke andara dhUla
se bhare apane pairoM se Akara ke kapar3e se poche yA pramArjana kareM to
maryAdA (jinAjJA) kA ullaMghana nahIM hotA hai|

Page #197 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Sixth Objective] [377 2. If an Acharya or Upadhyaya discards waste like
excreta and urine inside the Upashraya, it does not violate the code of conduct.
3. If a strong Acharya or Upadhyaya desires to perform service, they may do so,
and if they do not desire, they may not do so, still, it does not violate the
code of conduct. 4. If an Acharya or Upadhyaya stays alone for one or two nights
inside the Upashraya due to a special reason, it does not violate the code of
conduct. 5. If an Acharya or Upadhyaya stays alone for one or two nights outside
the Upashraya due to a special reason, it does not violate the code of conduct.
3. Two Ati≈õaya (extraordinary privileges) are mentioned for the Ganavacchedaka
in the Gan, namely: 1. If the Ganavacchedaka stays alone for one or two nights
inside the Upashraya (due to a special reason), it does not violate the code of
conduct. 2. If the Ganavacchedaka stays alone for one or two nights outside the
Upashraya (due to a special reason), it does not violate the code of conduct.
Some special features of the Vivecanacarakalpa are indicated here by the word
"Ati≈õaya". In the fifth and seventh studies of the Thananga Sutra, five and
seven Ati≈õaya of the Acharya-Upadhyaya are also mentioned. There, the five
Ati≈õaya are similar to the present Sutra, and two special ones are mentioned,
namely (1) Upakaranati≈õaya and (2) Bhaktapanati≈õaya. In the Bhashya, five
special Ati≈õaya are mentioned in place of these two, namely: Bhatte, Pane,
Dhuvane, Pasansana Hatthapaysoe Ya. Payarie Ati≈õesa, Pranati≈õesa Anayarie // 229
// The Bhashya Gatha from 230 to 246 discusses this, its summary is as follows:
(1) Giving the Acharya food free from all defects, suitable for the region and
time, (2) Giving the Acharya pure water free from bitter, pungent, sour, etc.
tastes, (3) Giving them clothes, etc. that are pleasing to the Acharya's mind,
body, and senses, and cleaning their equipment as needed when they become
soiled. (4) Praising them for the qualities they possess, such as profound,
gentle, forgiving, etc. qualities, possessing many virtues of restraint,
learned, grateful, giver, born of a noble family, free from disturbances,
peaceful, well-versed, ascetic, etc. (5) Keeping their hands, feet, mouth, and
eyes clean by washing them. The Bhashya Gatha from 238 to 246 explains with
examples that if the Acharya has a strong body, is naturally pure, is brilliant
and glorious, then they should not be served with the above-mentioned Ati≈õaya
practices.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
chaTThA uddezaka] [377 2. AcArya aura upAdhyAya upAzraya ke andara mala-mUtrAdi
kA tyAga va zuddhi kareM to maryAdA kA ullaMghana nahIM hotA hai| _3. sazakta
AcArya yA upAdhyAya icchA ho to sevA ke kArya kareM aura icchA na ho to na
kareM, phira bhI maryAdA kA ullaMghana nahIM hotA hai| 4. prAcArya aura
upAdhyAya upAzraya ke andara kisI vizeSa kAraNa se yadi eka-do rAta akele raheM
to bhI maryAdA kA ullaMghana nahIM hotA hai| 5. prAcArya aura upAdhyAya upAzraya
ke bAhara kisI vizeSa kAraNa se yadi eka-do rAta akele raheM to bhI maryAdA kA
ullaMghana nahIM hotA hai| 3. gaNa meM gaNAvacchedaka ke do atizaya kahe gaye
haiM, yathA 1. gaNAvacchedaka upAzraya ke andara (kisI vizeSa kAraNa se) yadi
eka-do rAta akele raheM to maryAdA kA ullaMghana nahIM hotA hai| 2.
gaNAvacchedaka upAzraya ke bAhara (kisI vizeSa kAraNa se) yadi eka-do rAta akele
raheM to maryAdA kA ullaMghana nahIM hotA hai| vivecanAcArakalpa ko kucha
vizeSatAoM kA yahAM "atizaya" zabda se nirdeza kiyA gayA hai| ThANAMgasUtra ke
pAMcaveM aura sAtaveM adhyayana meM bhI prAcArya-upAdhyAya ke pAMca aura sAta
atizaya kahe gaye haiM / vahAM pAMca atizaya to prastuta sUtra ke samAna haiM
aura do vizeSa kahe gaye haiM, yathA(1) upakaraNAtizaya aura (2)
bhaktapAnAtizaya / bhASya meM inhIM do atizayoM ke sthAna para pAMca atizaya
vizeSa kahe haiM, yathA bhatte, pANe, dhuvaNe, pasaMsaNA hatthapAyasoe y|
pAyarie atisesA, praNAtisesA aNAyarie // 229 // bhASya gA. 230 se 246 taka isakA
vivecana kiyA gayA hai, usakA sArAMza isa prakAra hai(1) kSetra-kAla ke anukUla
sarvadoSamukta AhAra AcArya ko denA, (2) tikta kaTuka amla Adi rasoM se rahita
acitta jala AcArya ko denA, (3) prAcArya ke manonukUla tanonukUla evaM
janonukUla vastrAdi unheM denA evaM malina ho jAne para unake upakaraNa
yathAsamaya prakSAlana kara zuddha krnaa| (4) gambhIra, mRdu, kSamAdi guNoM se
sampanna, aneka saMyamaguNoM ko khAna, zrutavAn, kRtajJa, dAtA, uccakulotpanna,
upadravoM se rahita, zAMtamUrti, bahuzruta, tapasvI ityAdi guNoM meM se ve jina
guNoM se yukta hoM, una vidyamAna guNoM se unakI prazaMsA krnaa| (5) hAtha,
pAMva, mukha, nayana kA prakSAlana kara zuddha rkhnaa| bhASyagAthA 238 se 246
taka dRSTAnta dekara yaha spaSTa kiyA hai ki yadi AcArya dRr3ha deha vAlA ho,
svAbhAvika hI nirmala deha vAlA ho, tejasvI evaM yazasvI ho to uparyukta atizaya
ke AcaraNoM kA sevana unheM nahIM karanA caahie|

Page #198 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[378] [Vyavahar Sutra] Other sadhus should make a living from ordinary food,
etc., but due to reasons like illness, even an ordinary bhik·π£u can accept these
practices. The meaning of the five ati≈õayas mentioned in the sutra is: - (1)
ƒÄcƒÅrya, etc., can purify themselves by washing their feet even within the
upƒÅ≈õraya. (2) Even when there is a pure and suitable place outside the village,
etc., they can defecate in a place adjacent to the upƒÅ≈õraya. (3) They can
perform many collective tasks like going to the pasture, etc., or service tasks
like washing clothes, etc., if they wish, otherwise, even if they have the
strength, they can have it done by others.  /  (4-5) For the repetition of vidyƒÅ
mantras, etc., or for any other reason, they can stay alone for one or two days
in a secluded part of the upƒÅ≈õraya or outside the upƒÅ≈õraya. The use of these
vidyƒÅ mantras is prohibited in the ƒÄgama for householders, but sadhus and
sƒÅdhvƒ´s can use them at any time. The practical meaning of these ati≈õayas is
that an ordinary bhik·π£u should behave in the following way in these matters: (1)
When entering the upƒÅ≈õraya, if necessary, wash your feet outside the upƒÅ≈õraya.
(2) If a suitable place is available and there is physical suitability, do not
defecate in the upƒÅ≈õraya.  /  (3) In the presence of the guru-praj√±a or even
without being told, they should always strive to perform service tasks. They
should engage in svƒÅdhyƒÅya, etc., only in the remaining time.  /  (4-5) They
should always sleep and eat near the ratnƒÅdhika guru or in a place where they
can see them.  /  However, a gƒ´tartha-bahu≈õruta bhik·π£u can behave according to
suitability and according to instructions.  /  The bhƒÅ·π£ya elaborates on these
topics, mentioning many virtues and vices, as well as losses and gains.  /
Interested readers should refer to it. The sutra mentions five ati≈õayas for both
the ƒÅcƒÅrya and the upƒÅdhyƒÅya, and the last two ati≈õayas of the ganavacchedaka
are mentioned separately in the second sutra.  /  This means that the first
three ati≈õayas are not necessary for the ganavacchedaka, because the
ganavacchedaka position is not a position of wealth but a position of service.
Therefore, the last two ati≈õayas are sufficient for them.  /  In special
circumstances, any sadhu or ganavacchedaka can practice all the ati≈õaya
practices. Generally, the ƒÅcƒÅrya and upƒÅdhyƒÅya are prohibited from staying alone
in udd. 4. Here, it is a rule rather than an ati≈õaya.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
378] [vyavahArasUtra anya sAdhuoM ko sAmAnya AhAra Adi se jIvana nirvAha karanA
cAhie, kintu rogAdi kAraNoM se sAmAnya bhikSu bhI ukta prAcaraNoM ko svIkAra
kara sakatA hai| sUtrokta pAMca atizayoM kA tAtparya yaha hai:- (1) AcArya Adi
upAzraya ke bhItara bhI pAMva kA pramArjana kara zuddhi kara sakate haiN| (2)
grAmAdi ke bAhara zuddha yogya sthaMDila ke hote hue bhI ve upAzraya se saMlagna
sthaMDila meM malatyAga kara sakate haiN| (3) gocarI Adi aneka sAmUhika kArya yA
vastraprakSAlana Adi sevA ke kArya ve icchA ho to kara sakate haiM anyathA zakti
hote hue bhI anya se karavA sakate haiM / (4-5) vidyA mantra Adi ke
punarAvartana hetu athavA anya kinhIM kAraNoM se ve upAzraya ke kisI ekAnta
bhAga meM athavA upAzraya se bAhara akele eka yA do dina raha sakate haiN| ina
vidyA mantroM kA upayoga gRhastha hetu karane kA Agama meM niSedha hai tathApi
sAdhu sAdhvI ke lie ve kabhI inakA upayoga kara sakate haiN| ina atizayoM kA
phalitArtha yaha hai ki sAmAnya bhikSu uparyukta viSayoM meM isa prakAra AcaraNa
kare (1) upAzraya meM praveza karate samaya pAMvoM kA pramArjana yadi Avazyaka
ho to upAzraya ke bAhara hI kara le| (2) yogya sthaMDila upalabdha ho aura
zArIrika anukUlatA ho to upAzraya meM malatyAga na kare / (3) guru-prAjJA hone
para yA binA kahe bhI unheM sadA sevA ke kAryoM ko karane meM prayatnazIla
rahanA caahiye| zeSa samaya meM hI svAdhyAya Adi karanA cAhiye / (4-5)
ratnAdhika guru ke samIpa yA unake dRSTigata sthAna meM hI sadA zayana-prAsana
karanA cAhie / kintu gItArtha-bahuzruta bhikSu anukUlatA-anusAra evaM AjJAnusAra
AcaraNa kara sakatA hai / bhASya meM ina viSayoM para vistRta vivecana karate
hue aneka guNa-doSoM evaM hAni-lAbha kA kathana kiyA hai / jijJAsu pAThaka vahAM
dekheN| sUtra meM prAcArya-upAdhyAya donoM ke pAMca-pAMca atizaya kahe haiM aura
gaNAvacchedaka ke antima do atizaya dvitIya sUtra meM alaga se kahe gaye haiM /
isakA tAtparya yaha hai ki prathama tIna atizaya gaNAvacchedaka ke lie Avazyaka
nahIM hote haiM, kyoMki gaNAvacchedaka-pada Rddhisampanna pada na hokara
kAryavAhaka pada hai| ataH unake liye antima do atizaya hI paryApta haiM /
vizeSa paristhiti meM to koI bhI sAdhu yA gaNAvacchedaka ukta sabhI atizayoM kI
pravRttiyoM kA AcaraNa kara sakate haiN| sAmAnyatayA prAcArya-upAdhyAya ko akele
rahane kA niSedha udde. 4 meM kiyA gayA hai| yahAM atizaya kI apekSA vidhAna
hai|

Page #199 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Sixth Uddeshak [379 AgitƒÅrthas]  **4.** It is not appropriate for many
*Agadsuyas* (those who have not memorized the *AchƒÅrƒÅ·πÖga* and *Nƒ´≈õƒ´tha* s≈´tras
with their meanings) to reside together in a single-walled, single-gated,
single-entrance-exit *upa≈õraya* (monastery) in a village, town, or capital (or
in a *sannƒ´ve≈õa*). If there is a *PrƒÅcƒÅrƒÅprakalpadhara* (one who has received
the *PrƒÅcƒÅrƒÅprakalpa* vows) among them, they are not subject to *dƒ´k·π£ƒÅched*
(loss of ordination) or *tapa* (penance) as a consequence. If there is no
*PrƒÅcƒÅrƒÅprakalpadhara* among them, they are subject to *dƒ´k·π£ƒÅched* or *tapa* as
a consequence of violating this rule.  **5.** It is not appropriate for many
*Agadsuyas* to reside together in a multi-walled, multi-gated, multi-entrance-
exit *upa≈õraya* in a village, town, or capital (or in a *sannƒ´ve≈õa*). If a
*PrƒÅcƒÅrƒÅprakalpadhara* stays with them for three days, they are not subject to
*dƒ´k·π£ƒÅched* or *tapa*. If a *PrƒÅcƒÅrƒÅprakalpadhara* does not stay with them for
three days, all of them are subject to *tapa* or *ched* as a consequence of
violating this rule.  **Discussion:** In these s≈´tras, *Agadsuyas* are referred
to as those who have not memorized the *AchƒÅrƒÅ·πÖga* and *Nƒ´≈õƒ´tha* s≈´tras with
their meanings. In other words, a *bhik·π£u* who has not studied and memorized the
necessary texts (such as *Uttara-adhyayana*, *Da≈õavaikƒÅlika*, *AchƒÅrƒÅ·πÖga*, and
*Nƒ´≈õƒ´tha* s≈´tras) to become qualified to lead others is called an *Agadsuya*. It
is forbidden for one or more such *bhik·π£us* to wander about, as stated in the
first s≈´tra of the third *Uddeshak*.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
chaTThA uddezaka [379 agItArthoM ke rahane kA vidhi-niSedha aura prAyazcitta 4.
se gAmaMsi vA jAva rAyahANisi vA (sannivesaMsi vA) egavagaDAe egaduvArAe
eganikkhamaNa-pavesAe (uvassae) no kappai bahUNaM agaDasuyANaM egayao vatthae /
asthi yAI kei AyArapakappadhare, nasthi NaM kei chae vA parihAre vaa| nasthi yAI
NaM kei pAyArapakappadhare se saMtarA chee vA parihAre vaa| 5. se gAmaMsi vA
jAva rAyahANisi vA (sagnivesaMsi vA) abhinivvagaDAe abhiniduvArAe
abhinivakhamaNa-pavesAe (uvassae) no kappai bahUNaM agaDasuyANaM egayano vtthe||
asthi yAI NaM kei AyArapakappadhare, je tattiyaM raNi saMvasai, natthi NaM kei
chae vA parihAre vaa| natyi yAI NaM keiAyArapakappadhare je tattiyaM raNi
saMvasai, sabvesi tesi tappattiyaM chae vA parihAre vaa| 4. grAma yAvat
rAjadhAnI meM (sanniveza meM) eka prAkAra vAle, eka dvAra vAle aura eka
niSkramaNa-praveza vAle upAzraya meM aneka akRtazruta (alpajJa) bhikSutroM ko
eka sAtha rahanA nahIM kalpatA hai| yadi unameM koI prAcAraprakalpadhara ho to
ve dIkSAcheda yA tapa rUpa prAyazcitta ke pAtra nahIM hote haiN| yadi unameM koI
prAcAraprakalpadhara na ho to ve maryAdA-ullaMghana ke kAraNa dIkSAr3heda yA
tapa rUpa prAyazcitta ke pAtra hote haiM / 5. grAma yAvat rAjadhAnI (sanniveza)
meM aneka prAkAra vAle, aneka dvAra vAle aura aneka niSkramaNa-praveza vAle
upAzraya meM aneka akRtazruta (alpajJa) bhikSuoM ko eka sAtha rahanA nahIM
kalpatA hai| yadi koI AcAraprakalpadhara tIsare dina unake sAtha rahe to ve
dIkSAcheda yA tapa rUpa prAyazcittake pAtra nahIM hote haiN| yadi koI prAcAra
prakalpadhara tIsare dina bhI vahAM nahIM rahatA ho to una sabhI ko usa
maryAdAullaMghana kA tapa yA cheda prAyazcitta pAtA hai| vivecana-ina sUtroM meM
prAcArAMga evaM nizIthasUtra arthasahita kaNThastha dhAraNa nahIM karane vAle
abahuzruta bhikSutroM ko "agaDasuya"-prakRtazruta-kahA gayA hai / arthAt
pramukha banakara vicaraNa karane kI yogyatAprApti ke lie (Avazyaka,
uttarAdhyayana, dazavaikAlika, AcArAMga aura nizIthasUtra) kA adhyayana evaM
kaNThastha dhAraNa nahIM karane vAlA bhikSu prAgamika zabdoM meM "agaDasuya'
kahA gayA hai| .. aise eka yA aneka bhikSuoM ke vicaraNa karane kA niSedha
uddezaka tIna ke prathama sUtra meM kiyA

Page #200 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Translation:  [380] The Sutra of Conduct has been stated. This Sutra
explains that a multi-learned monk should not reside in a village or similar
place if there are monks who are not well-versed in the Sutras.  The Sutra
clarifies this point by considering the different possibilities of the location
of the monastery. If the monastery has only one entrance and exit, then it is
not permissible for a "Agadsuyo" (one who is not well-versed in the Sutras) to
stay there even for a single day. If the monastery has multiple entrances and
exits, then it is permissible for a "Agadsuyo" to stay for one or two days.
Staying for a third day would incur penance. The implication is that every
eligible monk should study the Sutras worthy of being learned, memorize them,
and become fully qualified so that they can wander and participate in assemblies
as needed. Because these Sutras explicitly prohibit staying and wandering with
those who are not well-versed in the Sutras, and those who violate this rule are
considered liable for penance. Therefore, it is the essential duty of every
newly ordained eligible monk, as well as their assembly leaders, teachers, and
preceptors, to prioritize the study and teaching of the Agamas, not giving
precedence to other interests and tendencies. They should focus on becoming and
making others proficient in the rules of restraint. No monk should wander alone
or engage in other activities without being proficient in the teachings and
well-versed in the Sutras.  Detailed information regarding the study of the
Sutras, as per the ancient scriptures, is provided in the discussions of Nisitha
Udde. 19 and Vyav. Udde. 3 and Udde. 5.  One should carefully study and
contemplate this information and make it a primary goal to study and teach the
Sutras according to the Agamas. Only by doing so can one truly follow the
teachings of the Jinas, and the development of the seeker souls and the Jain
religion can be all-encompassing.  **The rules regarding a monk staying alone
are as follows:**  6. In a village, city, or assembly with multiple entrances,
exits, and pathways, it is not permissible for a multi-learned and well-versed
in the Agamas monk to stay alone. How can it be permissible for a monk who is
not well-versed in the Sutras and Agamas to stay alone?  It is not permissible.
7. In a village, city, or assembly with a single entrance, exit, and pathway, it
is permissible for a multi-learned and well-versed in the Agamas monk to stay
alone, for a period of two days, as long as he is mindful of his monkhood.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
380] [vyavahArasUtra gayA hai| prastuta sUtra meM batAyA gayA hai ki kisI
grAmAdi meM aise akRtasUtrI bhikSuoM ko chor3akara bahuzruta bhikSu vihAra kara
jAya to ve agItArtha bhikSu vahAM raha bhI nahIM sakate / isI viSaya ko upAzraya
kI avasthiti ke vikalpoM se sUtra meM spaSTa kiyA gayA hai_ yadi upAzraya meM
nikalane kA tathA usameM praveza karane kA mArga eka hI ho to vahAM 'agaDasuyo'
(agItArtha) ko eka dina bhI rahanA nahIM kalpatA hai / yadi usa upAzraya meM
jAne-mAne ke aneka mArga hoM to agItArthoM ko eka yA do dina rahanA kalpatA hai|
tIsare dina rahane para unheM prAyazcitta AtA hai| tAtparya yaha hai ki pratyeka
yogya bhikSu ko yathAsamaya bahuzruta hone yogya zruta kA adhyayana kara evaM
unheM kaNThastha dhAraNa kara pUrNa yogyatAsampanna ho jAnA cAhie, jisase
yathAvasara vicaraNa evaM gaNadhAraNa Adi kiye jA skeN| kyoMki ina sUtroM meM
aneka abahuzrutoM ke sAtha meM rahane evaM vicaraNa karane kA spaSTataH niSedha
kiyA gayA hai aura sAtha hI isa maryAdA kA bhaMga karane vAloM ko prAyazcitta kA
pAtra kahA gayA hai| ataH pratyeka navadIkSita yogya bhikSu kA evaM unake
gaNapramukha prAcArya-upAdhyAya Adi kA yaha Avazyaka kartavya hai ki ve anya
ruciyoM evaM pravRttiyoM ko pramukhatA na dekara Agamokta adhyayana-adhyApana ko
pramukhatA deM evaM saMyamavidhiyoM meM pUrNa kuzala banane va banAne kA dhyAna
rkheN| prAcArakuzala evaM zrutasaMpanna bane binA kisI bhI bhikSu ko alaga
vicarane meM yA anya kAryoM meM pravRtta nahIM honA caahie| adhyayana sambandhI
prAgamasammata aneka prakAra kI jAnakArI nizItha udde. 19 tathA vyava. udde. 3
evaM udde. 5 ke vivecana meM dI gaI hai| usakA dhyAnapUrvaka adhyayana manana
kara AgamAnusAra zruta-adhyayana karane evaM karavAne kA pramukha lakSya banAnA
caahie| aisA karane para hI jinAjJA kA yathokta pAlana ho sakatA hai tathA
sAdhaka AtmAoM kA evaM jinazAsana kA sarvatomukhI vikAsa ho sakatA hai| akele
bhikSu ke rahane kA vidhi-niSedha 6. se gAmaMsi vA jAva rAyahANisi vA
(sannivesaMsi vA) abhinivvagaDAe abhinidubArAe abhinikkhamaNa-pavesaNAe
(uvassae) no kappai bahusuyassa banbhAgamassa egANiyassa bhikkhassa vatthae,
kimaMga puNa appasuyassa appAgamassa ? 7. se gAmaMsi vA jAva rAyahANisi vA
(sagnivesaMsi vA) egavagaDAe, egaduvArAe, eganikkhamaNa-pavesAe (uvassae) kappai
bahusuyassa babbhAgamassa egANiyassa bhikkhussa batthae, ubhayo kAlaM
bhikkhubhAvaM paDijAgaramANassa ! 6. grAma yAvat rAjadhAnI (sanniveza) meM aneka
vagaDA vAle, aneka dvAra vAle aura aneka niSkramaNa-praveza vAle upAzraya meM
akele bahuzruta aura bahuaAgamajJa bhikSu ko bhI rahanA nahIM kalpatA hai,
alpazruta aura alpAgamajJa akele bhikSu ko vasanA kaise kalpa sakatA hai ?
arthAt nahIM kalpatA hai /

Page #201 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Sixth Objective] [381 7. It is appropriate for a solitary, multi-learned and
multi-knowledgeable monk to reside in an *upa≈õraya* with one *vag·∏çƒÅ*, one door,
and one entrance-exit in a village or capital (assembly), while maintaining
awareness of restraint at both times. In the previous *s≈´tradvaya*, a statement
was made regarding the residence of *ak·πõtas≈´trƒ´-agƒ´tƒÅ·πõtha* monks, and in the
present *s≈´tradvaya*, a regulation is made for a solitary, multi-learned and
multi-knowledgeable monk regarding what kind of *upa≈õraya* to reside in, in a
village or elsewhere, and how to reside. In the *bhƒÅ·π£ya*, while explaining the
*s≈´tras* related to *agƒ´tƒÅ·πõtha* and these solitary monks, they are called
*ni≈õrƒÅgat* of the *gaccha*, and a detailed discussion is made by relating the
adjectives "one *vag·∏çƒÅ*" etc. to the *upa≈õrayas*. However, it appears that the
word " *uvas≈õaya* " is missing due to a scribal error in the available copies.
Therefore, the meaning and discussion have been done here by including the word
" *uvas≈õaya* ". From the present *s≈´tradvaya*, it is inferred that: 1. A
solitary, multi-learned monk who wanders should not reside in an *upa≈õraya* with
many doors and many paths. 2. However, a multi-learned monk can reside in an
*upa≈õraya* with one door and one path. 3. A solitary monk should reside with the
growth of religious sentiment through religious awakening, which strengthens the
qualities of detachment and restraint at both times (while sleeping and waking
up, or during the day and night). 4. An *alpa≈õruta* (less learned), *alpa-
prƒÅgamj√±a* (less knowledgeable), *agƒ´tƒÅ·πõtha* monk should not reside alone in any
kind of *upa≈õraya*. It is clear from this *s≈´tra* or other *bhƒÅgam-vidhƒÅna* that
a multi-learned and multi-knowledgeable monk should reside alone, however, the
intention of these *s≈´tras* is to regulate which *upa≈õraya* to reside in or not,
or how to be aware. To understand what kind of faults are likely to occur when a
multi-learned and multi-knowledgeable monk resides alone in different types of
*upa≈õrayas*, or when many *agƒ´tƒÅ·πõthas* reside together, the inquisitive should
observe the *bhƒÅ·π£ya*. The *prƒÅgamkara* himself has explained some of the same
intention in the later *s≈´tras*. In the *vyavahƒÅra bhƒÅ·π£ya*, the essence of this
objective is given in Gujarati language, in which the meaning of these four
*s≈´tras* is also related to the *upa≈õraya*. It is not appropriate to interpret
the meaning related to the village etc., because it is impossible to follow such
a regulation in the wandering of those who practice solitary meditation like
*pratimƒÅdhƒÅrƒ´ jina-kalpƒ´* etc., and those who practice solitary meditation due
to circumstances. Therefore, it is appropriate and in accordance with the
*ƒÅgama* to interpret the meaning related to the *upa≈õraya* by considering the
meaning explained by the *bhƒÅ·π£yakƒÅra* as authentic.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
chaTThA uddezaka] [381 7. grAma yAvat rAjadhAnI (sanniveza) meM eka vagaDA vAle,
eka dvAra vAle, eka niSkramaNapraveza vAle upAzraya meM akele bahuzruta aura
bahuAgamajJa bhikSu ko donoM samaya saMyamabhAva kI jAgRti rakhate hue rahanA
kalpatA hai| vivecana-pUrva sUtradvika meM akRtasUtrI-agItArtha bhikSuoM ke
nivAsa se sambandhita kathana kiyA gayA hai aura prastuta sUtradvika meM
bahazruta-gItArtha akele bhikSa ko grAmAdi meM kisa prakAra ke upAzraya meM kisa
prakAra se rahanA yA nahIM rahanA, yaha vidhAna kiyA gayA hai| bhASya meM
agItArtha se sambandhita sUtroM kA aura ina ekAkI bhikSuoM se sambandhita sUtroM
kA spaSTIkaraNa karate hue inheM gaccha kI nizrAgata honA kahA hai aura
"egavagaDA" Adi vizeSaNoM ko upAzrayoM se sambandhita karake vistRta vivecana
kiyA hai| kintu upalabdha pratiyoM meM 'uvassaya' zabda lipidoSa se chUTa gayA
hai, aisA pratIta hotA hai / isIlie yahAM 'uvassaya' zabda ko rakhate hue artha
evaM vivecana kiyA hai| prastuta sUtradvika se yaha phalita hotA hai ki 1.
bahuzruta ekAkI vicaraNa karane vAle bhikSu ko aneka dvAra evaM aneka mArga vAle
upAzraya meM nivAsa nahIM karanA cAhie / 2. kintu eka dvAra, eka mArga vAle
upAzraya meM bahuzruta bhikSu raha sakatA hai| 3. ekalavihArI bhikSu ko
ubhayakAla (sote aura uThate samaya athavA dina meM aura rAtri meM) vairAgya
evaM saMyamaguNoM ko puSTa karane vAlI dharma-jAgaraNA se dharma-bhAvanA kI
vRddhi karate hue rahanA caahie| 4. alpazruta alpa-prAgamajJa-agItArtha bhikSu
ko kisI bhI prakAra ke upAzraya meM akelA nahIM rahanA caahie| gItArtha
bahazrata bhikSa ko akelA rahanA to isa satra se yA anya bhAgama-vidhAnoM se
spaSTa siddha ho jAtA hai, tathApi kisa upAzraya meM nivAsa karanA yA na karanA
athavA kisa taraha jAgarUka rahanA, yaha vidhAna karanA ina sUtroM kA prAzaya
hai / vibhinna prakAra ke upAzrayoM meM gItArtha bhikSu ke akele rahane para
athavA aneka agItArthoM ke rahane para kina-kina doSoM kI sambhAvanA rahatI hai,
yaha samajhane ke lie jijJAsuoM ko bhASya kA avalokana karanA caahiye| usI
prAzaya kA kucha spaSTIkaraNa Age ke sUtroM meM svayaM prAgamakAra ne kiyA hai|
vyava. bhASya meM isa uddezaka kA sAra gujarAtI bhASA meM diyA hai, usameM bhI
ina cAroM sUtroM kA artha upAzraya se saMbaMdhita kiyA hai| grAmAdi se
saMbaMdhita artha karanA saMgata bhI nahIM hotA hai, kyoMki pratimAdhArI
jinakalpI Adi ekalavihAra sAdhanA karane vAloM ke tathA paristhitika ekalavihAra
karane vAloM ke vicaraNa meM aise vidhAna kA pAlana honA bhI azakya hotA hai|
ataH bhASyakArakRta artha vivecana ko prAmANika mAnakara upAzraya se saMbaMdhita
artha karanA hI ucita hai evaM Agamasammata hai|

Page #202 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
8. Where many women and men indulge in sexual intercourse, if a Jain ascetic
(Shramana Nirgranthi) extracts the semen-pudgala from any inanimate source with
the intention of manual work, he incurs an anutghƒÅtika (non-obstructive) monthly
prƒÅya≈õcitta (expiation).  9. Where many women and men indulge in sexual
intercourse, if a Jain ascetic (Shramana Nirgranthi) extracts the semen-pudgala
from any inanimate source with the intention of sexual intercourse, he incurs an
anutghƒÅtika (non-obstructive) four-monthly prƒÅya≈õcitta.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
382] [vyavahArasUtra zukra-pudgala nikAlane kA prAyazcittasUtra 8. jattha ee
bahave itthIo ya purisA ya paNhAveMti, tattha se samaNe niggaMthe annayaraMsi
acittaMsi soyaMsi sukkapoggale nigghAemANe hatthakammapaDisevaNapatte Avajjai
mAsiyaM parihAraTThANaM aNugghAiyaM / 9. jattha ee bahave itthIo ya purisA ya
paNhAveMti tattha se samaNe NiggaMthe annayaraMsi acittaMsi soyaMsi sukkapoggale
nigdhAemANe mehuNapaDisevaNapatte Avajjai cAummAsiyaM parihAraTThANaM
annugghaaiyN| 8. jahAM para ye aneka strI-puruSa maithunasevana karate haiM,
vahAM jo zramaNa nirgrantha hastakarma ke saMkalpa se kisI pracitta srota meM
zukrapudgala nikAle to use anudghAtika mAsika prAyazcitta prAtA hai| 9. jahAM
para ye aneka strI-puruSa maithunasevana karate haiM, vahAM jo zramaNa
nirgrantha maithanasevana ke saMkalpa se kisI acitta srota meM zukra-pudgala
nikAle to use cAturmAsika anudghAtika prAyazcitta prAtA hai| vivecana-ekAkI
bhikSu ke rahane ke sthAnasaMbaMdhI evaM kalpasaMbaMdhI vidhi-niSedha ke
anaMtara ina sUtroM meM brahmacarya mahAvrata ke bhaMga karane kI sthiti kA do
prakAroM se kathana kiyA gayA hai| isa prakAra kI dUSita pravRtti kI saMbhAvanA
ekAMta sthAna meM hI adhika saMbhava rahatI hai / yadi aneka agItArtha bhikSu
gItArtha kI nizrA binA rahate hoM to gItArtha kA saMrakSaNa na hone se unameM
bhI aisI dUSita pravRtti kA honA saMbhava hai tathA gItArtha bhikSu bhI yadi
akelA rahe to ekAMta sthAna meM sUtrokta dUSita pravRtti kI adhika saMbhAvanA
rahatI hai| isalie agItArtha vihAra aura ekAkI vihAra saMbaMdhI sUtra ke
anaMtara hI yaha prAyazcitta vidhAyaka sUtra kahA gayA hai / dazavakAlikasUtra
cUlikA 2 gA. 10 meM bhI paristhitivaza ekalavihAra kA vidhAna prathamadvitIya
caraNa meM karane ke sAtha hI zAstrakAra ne tRtIya-caturtha caraNa meM pApoM ke
parityAga karane kI aura kAmabhogoM meM Asakta na hote hue vicaraNa karane kI
zikSA dI hai / ata: sAmAnya taruNa sAdhakoM ko aura vizeSakara ekAkI bhikSutroM
ko isa viSaya meM vizeSa sAvadhAna rahanA cAhie / arthAt AgamasvAdhyAya Adi ke
dvArA saMyama bhAvoM kI atyadhika puSTi karate hue rahanA caahie| gacchasthita
sAdhUtroM ke ukta pravRtti karane meM gaccha kI yA gacchasthita sAdhuoM kI lajjA
Adi ke kAraNa bhI kucha surakSA ho jAto hai, kintu ekAko bhikSu ke liye ukta
sUtragata dUSita pravRtti ke karane meM pUrNa svataMtratA rahatI hai / donoM
sUtroM meM kahI gaI pravRtti ko karane meM bhikSu ko kisI vyakti yA strI kI
AvazyakatA nahIM hotI hai, kyoMki donoM sUtroM meM acitta srota (sthAna) kA
kathana hai| vaha acitta sthAna koI bhI ho sakatA hai, kintu vicAroM kI pariNati
evaM pravRtti meM hastakarma aura maithunakarma ke doSa ko bhinnatA hone se
usakA prAyazcitta alaga-alaga kahA gayA hai|

Page #203 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Sixth Objective] [383 To avoid the resolutions of the contaminated
tendencies, the monk should also take the following precautions: (1) Not
consuming nutritious substances like milk, curd, ghee, sweets, mawa, etc., and
also abstaining from nuts like almonds, pistachios, etc. If absolutely
necessary, consume these substances in small quantities and avoid continuous
consumption for many days. (2) Perform at least four days of Ayambil or fasting
penance in a month. (3) Always practice Unodari, i.e., not consuming a full meal
at any time. (4) Avoid or minimize food intake in the evening. (5) If health
permits, do not consume more than one meal or a maximum of two meals. (6)
Minimize the quantity of ingredients in a single meal. (7) Minimize the intake
of chili and spices in food, avoid pickles, and other condiments. (8) Avoid
fried food. (9) Avoid powdered or sour substances. (10) Avoid chemical medicines
or heat-generating medicines. Possibly avoid other medicines as well. (11)
Practice Porisi for at least 10-15 days in a month and consume rough or normal
food for at least 15 days, i.e., abstain from Vigaya. (12) If food and beverages
are extremely hot, cool them down before consuming. Avoid tea and coffee. (13)
Avoid close contact with women and refrain from showing interest in their limbs
and appearance. (14) Do not sleep during the day. (15) Do not bend over or sleep
after meals. (16) Engage in physical activities like walking, begging, etc., or
practice penance or standing. (17) Regularly study, read, and contemplate the
Uttaradhyayanasutra, Praacharaangasutra, Suyagadangasutra, and
Dashavaalikasutra. (18) Regularly perform Bhaktaamarastrot or devotion to the
Lord and Pranayama. (19) Engage in self-reflection for a while before sleeping
and after waking up.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
chaTThA uddezaka] [383 ukta dUSita pravRtti ke saMkalpoM se bacane ke lie bhikSu
ko nimna sAvadhAniyAM bhI rakhanI cAhie (1) dUdha-dahI, ghRta, miSTAnna, mAvA
Adi pauSTika padArthoM kA sevana nahIM karanA evaM bAdAma pistA prAdi meve ke
padArthoM kA bhI tyAga krnaa| kabhI atyAvazyaka ho to ina padArthoM ko alpamAtrA
meM lenA aura unakA aneka dinoM taka niraMtara sevana nahIM krnaa| (2) eka
mahIne meM kama se kama cAra dina AyaMbila yA upavAsAdi tapasyA avazya karanA /
(3) sadA UnodarI karanA arthAt kisI bhI samaya paripUrNa bhojana nahIM krnaa|
(4) zAma ke samaya AhAra nahIM karanA yA atyalpa krnaa| (5) svAsthya anukUla ho
to eka bAra se adhika prAhAra nahIM karanA athavA do bAra se adhika nahIM krnaa|
(6) eka bAra ke AhAra meM bhI dravyoM kI alpatama maryAdA krnaa| (7) AhAra meM
mirca-masAloM kI mAtrA atyalpa lenA, acAra, athANA Adi kA sevana nahIM krnaa|
(8) tale hue khAdya padArthoM kA sevana nahIM karanA / (9) cUrNa yA khaTTe
padArthoM kA sevana nahIM karanA / (10) rAsAyanika auSadhiyoM yA USmAvardhaka
auSadhiyoM kA sevana nahIM krnaa| saMbhavataH anya auSadha kA sevana bhI nahIM
karanA / (11) mahine meM kama se kama 10-15 dina porisI karanA evaM kama se kama
15 dina rUkSa pAhAra yA sAmAnya pAhAra karanA arthAt vigaya kA tyAga karanA /
(12) khAdya aura peya padArtha atyaMta uSNa hoM to zItala karake khAnA yA pInA,
cAya kAphI kA sevana nahIM krnaa| (13) striyoM kA nikaTa saMparka nahIM karanA
evaM unake aMgopAMga aura rUpa ko dekhane kI ruci nahIM rkhnaa| (14) dina ko
nahIM sonA / (15) bhojana ke bAda kamara jhukAkara nahIM baiThanA aura na hI
sonA / (16) vihAra yA bhikSAcarI prAdi zrama avazya karanA athavA tapazcaryA yA
khar3e rahane kI pravRtti rkhnaa| (17) uttarAdhyayanasUtra, prAcArAMgasUtra,
sUyagaDAMgasUtra evaM dazavakAlikasUtra kA svAdhyAya, vAcanA, anuprekSA Adi
karate rahanA / (18) niyamita bhaktAmarastrota yA prabhubhakti evaM prANAyAma
avazya krnaa| (19) sote samaya aura uThate samaya kucha dera Atmacintana avazya
karanA /

Page #204 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 384] [Vyavahar Sutra (20) When the occasion of anger arises, practice
remaining silent and not speaking in a heated manner. (21) Practice self-study,
meditation, and Kayotsarga as needed. The Prashnavyakaran Sutra also provides
the following information on this subject: A man who follows Brahmacharya should
abandon these actions:   * **Activities that increase attachment to objects,
attachment to loved ones, hatred, and delusion:** carelessness, laxity in
conduct, massaging oneself with oil, bathing with oil, repeatedly washing the
armpits, head, hands, feet, and face, massaging, pressing the feet, etc., foot
massage, rubbing, massaging the whole body, applying oil, perfuming the body
with fragrant powders, offering incense, adorning the body, making it beautiful,
engaging in frivolous activities, grooming nails, hair, and clothes, laughing
and joking, speaking in a way that is full of vices, listening to songs and
musical instruments, watching the performances of actors, dancers, rope walkers,
and wrestlers, and other similar activities that partially or completely destroy
austerity, self-restraint, and Brahmacharya. A Brahmachari should abandon all
such activities forever.  * **Activities that affect the inner self:** not
bathing, not brushing teeth, wearing dirt or other impurities, observing
silence, combing hair, forgiveness, control of senses, being naked or wearing
minimal clothing, enduring hunger and thirst, having few possessions, enduring
cold and heat, sleeping on a wooden bed or on the ground, going to the houses of
householders for alms, and accepting or rejecting alms with equanimity, enduring
honor, dishonor, and slander, and enduring the pain of bites and stings,
acquiring wealth, etc., and affecting the inner self through austerity,
fundamental virtues, and humility, which makes the vow of Brahmacharya very
strong.  * **All young monks, whether they live in a community or alone, should
be very careful about these things.** By living a life guided by these
precautions, the possibility of the aforementioned negative situations arising
is almost eliminated. The negative tendencies mentioned in the sutras corrupt
the health and self-restraint of the monk, and their merit diminishes, leading
to a life full of suffering. Therefore, one should practice pure Brahmacharya
with all the precautions mentioned.  * **Prohibition of admitting someone from
another group into the group:** 10. No Kappi Nigganthaanaa va Nigganthii naa va
Niggathi annaganaao aagayam khuyaayaaram, sabalaayaaram, bhinnaayaaram,
sankiliththaayaaram tassa thaanas sa analoyaa vetaa apadddikkamaa vetaa, anidaa
vetaa, agarahaa vetaa, aviuuttaa vetaa, avisohaa vetaa, akarnaae anabhuttaa
vetaa, aharinham paayachchhittam.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
384] [vyavahArasUtra (20) krodha ke prasaMga upasthita hone para mauna rakhanA,
Avezayukta na bolane kA abhyAsa krnaa| (21) yathAsamaya svAdhyAya, dhyAna aura
kAyotsarga avazya krnaa| praznavyAkaraNasUtra meM bhI isa viSaya meM nimna
sUcanA kI gaI haibrahmacarya kA anupAlana karane vAle puruSa ko ina kAryoM kA
tyAga karanA cAhie viSayarAga, sneharAga, dveSa aura moha kI vRddhi karane vAlA
pramAda tathA pArzvastha-zithilAcArI sAdhanoM kA zIla-prAcAra, ghatAdi kI mAliza
karanA, tela lagAkara snAna karanA, bAra-bAra bagala, zira, hAtha-paira aura
muMha dhonA, mardana karanA, paira Adi dabAnA, pagacampI karanA, parimardana
karanA, sAre zarIra ko malanA, vilepana karanA, sugandhita cUrNa-pAuDara se
zarIra ko suvAsita karanA, agara Adi kA dhUpa denA, zarIra ko sajAnA, suzobhita
banAnA, bAkuzika karma karanA, nakhoM, kezoM evaM vastroM ko saMvAranA, haMsI-
majAka karanA, vikArayukta bhASaNa karanA, gIta, vAditra sunanA, naToM,
natyakAroM, rasse para khela dikhalAne vAloM aura kuztIbAjoM kA tamAzA dekhanA
tathA isI prakAra kI anya bAteM jinase tapazcaryA, saMyama evaM brahmacarya kA
AMzika vinAza yA pUrNataH vinAza hotA hai, vaisI samasta pravRttiyoM kA
brahmacArI puruSa ko sadaiva ke lie tyAga kara denA caahie| ina tyAjya
vyavahAroM ke sAtha Age kahe jAne vAle vyApAroM se antarAtmA ko bhAvita karanA
cAhiye, yathA snAna nahIM karanA, dantadhAvana nahIM karanA, jame hue yA isase
bhinna maila ko dhAraNa karanA, maunavrata dhAraNa karanA, kezoM kA lucana,
kSamA, indriyanigraha, acela (vastrarahita) honA athavA alpavastra dhAraNa
karanA, bhUkha-pyAsa sahanA, alpa upadhi rakhanA, sardI-garmI sahanA, kASTha kI
zayyA yA jamIna para prAsana karanA, bhikSAdi ke lie gRhastha ke ghara meM jAnA
aura prApti yA aprApti ko samabhAva se sahanA, mAna-apamAna-nindA ko evaM
daMzamazaka ke kleza ko sahana karanA, dravyAdi sambandhI abhigraha karanA, tapa
tathA mUlaguNa Adi evaM vinaya pravRttiyoM se antaHkaraNa ko bhAvita karanA,
jisase brahmacaryavrata atyanta dRDha ho| gacchagata aura ekAkI vihArI sabhI
taruNa bhikSuoM ko ye sAvadhAniyAM rakhanA atyaMta hitakara haiM / ina
sAvadhAniyoM se yukta jIvana vyatIta karane para prastuta sUtrokta dUSita sthiti
ke utpanna hone kI prAyaH saMbhAvanA nahIM rahatI hai| sUtragata duSita pravRtti
se bhikSu kA svAsthya evaM saMyama dUSita hotA hai evaM puNya kSINa hokara
sarvathA du:khamaya jIvana bana jAtA hai / ataH sUcita sabhI sAvadhAniyoM ke
sAtha zuddha brahmacarya kA pAlana karanA caahie| anya-gaNa se Aye hue ko gaNa
meM sammilita karane kA niSedha 10. no kappai niggaMthANa vA niggaMthINa vA
niggathi aNNagaNAo AgayaM khuyAyAraM, sabalAyAraM, bhinnAyAraM, saMkiliTThAyAraM
tassa ThANassa aNAloyAvettA apaDikkamAvettA, anidAvettA, agarahAvettA,
aviuTTAvettA, avisohAvettA, akaraNAe aNabhuTThAvettA, ahArihaM pAyacchittaM

Page #205 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Sixth Uddesaka] [385] It is not permissible for a Nirgrantha or Nirgranthis to
reinstate, engage in sexual relations with, or keep company with a Nirgrantha
who has come from another gana with a broken, weak, fragmented, or corrupted
conduct, until they have been criticized for their transgressions, performed
pratikramna, been censured, been subjected to gardha, been expelled, and have
been purified, and have made a vow not to repeat the transgression in the future
and have accepted the appropriate atonement. It is also not permissible to give
them directions or to keep them for a short period of time. 11. It is not
permissible for a Nirgrantha or Nirgranthis to reinstate, engage in sexual
relations with, or keep company with a Nirgrantha who has come from another gana
with a broken, weak, fragmented, or corrupted conduct, until they have been
criticized for their transgressions, and have accepted the appropriate
atonement. It is also not permissible to give them directions or to keep them
for a short period of time.   Discussion: If a monk or nun leaves their own gana
due to a transgression like sexual misconduct, or if they are expelled from
their gana, the rules regarding whether or not they can be kept are presented in
these sutras. The meaning of terms like "kshata-prachar" is explained in the
third Uddesaka. The sutras state that a monk or nun with corrupted conduct
should be reinstated, and it is also necessary to purify them through criticism
and atonement. Only after they have been purified and reinstated can they be
allowed to share food, live together, etc., and only then can they be given
instructions by a pracharaya, upadhyaya, or guru. The sutras use the words
"disam va anudisam va uddisittae va dhareettae va" to refer to giving
instructions from a pracharaya, upadhyaya, or guru. It is not appropriate to
interpret these words as meaning that a monk with corrupted conduct can be given
the position of pracharaya, etc. because the Agamas state that only a monk with
unblemished conduct is worthy of such positions. Therefore, the meaning of
giving directions or keeping them for a short period of time should be
understood as informing them who their pracharaya, upadhyaya, or pravartiini is.
The commentator has also interpreted these words in the same way.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
chaTThA uddezaka] [385 apaDivajjAvettA uvaTThAvettae vA, sabhujittae vA,
saMvasittae vA tIse ittariyaM disaMvA aNudisaM vA uddisittae vA dhArettae vaa|
11. no kappai niggaMthANa vA niggaMthINa vA niggaMthaM annagaNAo AgayaM
khuyAyAraM jAva saMkiliTThAyAraM, tassa ThANassa aNAloyAvettA jAva ahArihaM
pAyacchittaM apaDivajjAvettA uvaTThAvettae vA sabhujittae vA saMvasittae vA
tassa ittariyaM disaM vA aNudisaM vA uddisittae vA dhArettae vaa| 10. khaNDita,
zabala, bhinna aura saMkliSTa AcAra vAlI anya gaNa se AI huI nirgranthI ko
sevita doSa kI AlocanA, pratikramaNa, nindA, gardA, vyutsarga evaM prAtma-zuddhi
na karA leM aura bhaviSya meM punaH pApasthAna sevana na karane kI pratijJA
karAke doSAnurUpa prAyazcitta svIkAra na karA leM taba taka nirgrantha-
nirgranthiyoM ko use punaH cAritra meM upasthApita karanA, usake sAtha
sAmbhogika vyavahAra karanA aura sAtha meM rakhanA nahIM kalpatA hai tathA use
alpakAla ke lie dizA yA anudizA kA nirdeza karanA yA dhAraNa karanA bhI nahIM
kalpatA hai| 11. khaNDita yAvat saMkliSTa AcAra vAle anya gaNa se Aye hue
nirgrantha ko sevita doSa kI AlocanA yAvat doSAnurUpa prAyazcitta svIkAra na
karA leM taba taka nirgrantha-nirgranthiyoM ko use punaH cAritra meM upasthApita
karanA, usake sAtha sAmbhogika vyavahAra karanA aura sAtha meM rakhanA nahIM
kalpatA hai tathA use alpakAla ke lie dizA yA anudizA kA nirdeza karanA yA
dhAraNa karanA bhI nahIM kalpatA hai| vivecana brahmacaryabhaMga Adi ke kAraNa
koI sAdhu-sAdhvI svataH gaccha chor3akara kisI ke pAsa Ave athavA gaccha vAloM
ke dvArA gaccha se nikAla diye jAne para Ave to use rakhane kA vidhi-niSedha
prastuta sUtroM meM kiyA gayA hai / kSata-prAcAra Adi zabdoM kA spaSTArtha
tIsare uddezaka meM dekheN| sUtra meM duSita prAcAra vAle sAdhu-sAdhvI ko
upasthApita karane kA kahA gayA hai, sAtha hI AlocanA, prAyazcitta ke dvArA
usakI zuddhi karanA bhI Avazyaka kahA hai| isa prakAra zuddhi karake upasthApanA
karane ke bAda hI usake sAtha AhAra sahanivAsa Adi kiye jA sakate haiM aura
tabhI usake lie prAcArya, upAdhyAya yA guru kA nirdeza kiyA jA sakatA hai /
sUtra meM prAcArya, upAdhyAya kA nirdeza karane ke lie yA unakI nizrA svIkAra
karane ke liye "disaM vA aNudisaM vA uddisittae vA dhArettae vA" zabdoM kA
prayoga kiyA gayA hai| una zabdoM meM kSatAcAra vAle bhikSu ko AcArya Adi pada
dene-lene kA artha karanA ucita nahIM hai| kyoMki akSata-AcAra vAle bhikSu ko hI
Agama meM prAcArya Adi padoM ke yogya kahA gayA hai| ataH dizA, anudizA kA
uddeza karane kA tAtparya yaha samajhanA cAhie ki usa upasthApita sAdhu yA
sAdhvI ke prAcArya, upAdhyAya yA pravartinI kauna haiM, yaha nirdeza karanA /
bhASyakAra ne bhI yahI artha ina zabdoM kA kiyA hai /

Page #206 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[386] Due to scribal errors and other reasons, there are variations in the
original texts of different manuscripts in place of the two sutras presented in
the Vyavahar Sutra. In some places, there are two sutras for Sadhvi, while in
others, there are four sutras for Sadhu and Sadhvi. However, based on the
commentary, the first sutra is attributed to Sadhvi and the second to Sadhu. The
summary of the sixth Uddeshak is as follows:  Sutra 1: One should obtain
specific knowledge from the Acharya, etc., before entering the homes of
relatives. An AgitƒÅrtha or Abahushru Bhikshu should not go alone, but should go
with a GitƒÅrtha Bhikshu. Upon reaching the house, one should only take what has
been prepared beforehand, but not what has been prepared later. There are five
ati≈õaya (special qualities) related to the conduct of the Acharya-Upadhyaya, and
two ati≈õaya for the Ganavachchedak. An Akrit Sutra (AgitƒÅrtha) is not eligible
to reside in many places, but due to circumstances, they can stay for one or two
nights in an Upashraya. Staying for longer than that makes them liable for
PrƒÅya≈õcitta. A solitary Bhikshu should not stay in an Upashraya with many vagad,
doors, or paths, and even in an Upashraya with one vagad, door, or path, they
should practice Dharmajagarana at both times. A Bhikshu who engages in sexual
intercourse with a woman, even without ejaculation, or who ejaculates due to the
effects of hand-job or Kushila-sevan, incurs a PrƒÅya≈õcitta of Guru-mƒÅsik or
Guru-chaumƒÅsi respectively.  [10-11] A Sadhu or Sadhvi who has come from another
Gachchha and is suffering from Kshata-pƒÅchƒÅra can be accommodated after being
fully examined and made to perform PrƒÅya≈õcitta. One can share food or residence
with them, and their Acharya, Upadhyaya, Guru, etc., can be informed.
Conclusion: This Uddeshak discusses the entry into the homes of relatives, the
ati≈õaya of the Acharya, etc., the residence of GitƒÅrtha and AgitƒÅrtha Bhikshus,
the residence of a solitary Bhikshu, the PrƒÅya≈õcitta for ejaculation, the
accommodation of Sadhus and Sadhvis who have come from another Gachchha and are
suffering from Kshata-pƒÅchƒÅra, etc.  // Sixth Uddeshak ends // 2-3

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
386] [vyavahArasUtra prastuta sUtradvaya ke sthAna para lipidoSa Adi kAraNoM se
vibhinna pratiyoM ke mUla pAThoM meM bhinnatA ho gaI hai| kahIM para sAdhvI ke
do sUtra haiM, kahIM para sAdhu-sAdhvI ke cAra sUtra haiN| kintu bhASyavyAkhyA
ke AdhAra se prathama sAdhvI kA aura dvitIya sAdhu kA sUtra rakhA gayA hai|
chaThe uddezaka kA sArAMza sUtra 1 jJAtijanoM ke gharoM meM jAne ke liye
prAcAryAdi kI viziSTa prAjJA prApta karanI caahie| agItArtha yA abahuzru ta
bhikSu ko akele nahIM jAnA cAhie, gItArtha bhikSu ke sAtha meM hI jAnA caahie|
vahAM ghara meM pahuMcane ke pUrva banI huI vastu hI lenI cAhie, kintu bAda meM
niSpanna huI vastu nahIM lenI caahie| AcArya-upAdhyAya ke AcAra sambandhI pAMca
atizaya (vizeSatAeM) hote haiM aura gaNAvacchedaka ke do atizaya hote haiN|
akRtasUtra (agItArtha) aneka sAdhuoM ko kahIM nivAsa karanA bhI nahIM kalpatA
hai, kintu paristhitivaza upAzraya meM eka-do rAta raha sakate haiM, adhika
rahane para ve sabhI prAyazcitta ke pAtra hote haiN| aneka vagar3a, dvAra yA
mArga vAle upAzraya meM ekAkI bhikSu ko nahIM rahanA cAhie aura eka vagar3a,
dvAra yA mArga vAle upAzraya meM bhI ubhayakAla dharmajAgaraNA karate hue rahanA
caahie| strI ke sAtha maithunasevana na karate hue bhI hastakarma ke pariNAmoM
se aura kuzIlasevana ke pariNAmoM se zukrapudgaloM ke nikAlane para bhikSu ko
kramaza : gurumAsika yA gurucaumAsI prAyazcitta pAtA hai / 10-11 anya gaccha se
Aye hue kSata-pAcAra vAle sAdhu-sAdhvI ko pUrNa pAlocanA, prAya zcitta karAne ke
sAtha upasthApita kiyA jA sakatA hai, usake sAtha AhAra yA nivAsa kiyA jA sakatA
hai aura usake prAcArya, upAdhyAya, guru Adi kI nizrA nizcitta kI jA sakatI hai|
upasaMhAra isa uddezaka meMsUtra 1 jJAtakula meM praveza karane kA, prAcAryAdi
ke atizayoM kA, 4-5 gItArtha agItArtha bhikSutroM ke nivAsa kA, ekala vihArI
bhikSu ke nivAsa kA, 8-9 zukrapudgala niSkAsana ke prAyazcitta kA, 10-11
kSatAcAra vAle Ae hue sAdhu-sAdhviyoM ko rakhane kA, ityAdi viSayoM kA kathana
kiyA gayA hai| // chaTThA uddezaka samApta // 2-3

Page #207 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Seventh Uddeshak: Regarding Keeping a Sadhvi from Another Gan  1. **If a
Niggantha and Nigganthi are in Sambhoga, it is not permissible for the Nigganthi
to keep a Nigganthi from another Gan who has broken or is in a state of broken
conduct, without asking the Niggantha, and without criticizing her previous
conduct or making her accept the appropriate PrƒÅya≈õcitta. It is also not
permissible to ask her questions, give her Vaachana, re-establish her in the
Charitra, eat with her, or keep her company. It is also not permissible to give
her directions for a short time, or to hold her.**  2. **If a Nigganthi from
another Gan who has broken or is in a state of broken conduct comes to a
Niggantha, it is permissible for the Niggantha to ask the Nigganthis, or even
without asking, to criticize her previous conduct or make her accept the
appropriate PrƒÅya≈õcitta. It is also permissible to ask her questions, give her
Vaachana, re-establish her in the Charitra, allow her to eat with them, and keep
her company. It is also permissible to give her directions for a short time, or
to hold her. However, if the Nigganthis do not wish to keep her, she should
return to her own Gan.**  **Discussion:** The previous Uddeshak dealt with the
rules for criticizing and making a Niggantha or Nigganthi with broken conduct
accept PrƒÅya≈õcitta when they come from another Gan. These two Sutras deal
specifically with the rules for asking a Sambhogik Shraman or Shramani when a
Sadhvi comes from another Gan. If such a Sadhvi comes to a Nigganthi, she can
only keep her, give her Vaachana, re-establish her in the Charitra, or eat and
sit with her after asking her Sambhogik Sadhus, such as the Acharya and
Upadhyaya, and receiving their permission. However, it is not permissible to do
any of these things without asking or consulting.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
sAtavAM uddezaka anya-gaNa se AI sAdhvI ke rakhane meM paraspara pacchA 1. je
niggaMthA ya niggaMthIo ya saMbhoiyA siyA, no kappai niggaMthINaM niggaMthe
aNApucchittA niggathi annagaNAo prAgayaM khuyAyAraM jAva saMkiliTThAyAraM tassa
ThANassa aNAloyAvettA jAva ahArihaM pAyacchittaM apaDivajjAvettA pucchittae vA,
vAettae thA, uvaTThAvettae vA, saMbhu jittae thA, saMvasittae vA, tIse ittariyaM
disaM vA, aNudisaM vA uddisittae vA dhArettae vaa| 2. kappai niggaMthANaM
niggaMthIo ApucchittA vA, praNApucchittA vA, niggaMthIM annagaNAo prAgayaM
khuyAyAraM jAva saMkiliDhAyAraM tassa ThANassa AloyAvettA jAva pAyacchittaM
paDivajjAvettA pucchittae vA, vAettae vA, uvaTThAvettae vA, saMbhu jittae vA,
saMvasittae vA, tIse ittariyaM disaM vA, aNudisaM vA uddisittae vA dhArettae vA
taM ca niggaMthIo no icchejjA, sayameva niyaM ThANe / 1. jo nirgrantha-
nirganthiyAM sAmbhogika haiM aura yadi kisI nimrantha ke samIpa koI anya gaNa se
khaNDita yAvat saMkliSTa prAcAra vAlI nirgranthI pAe to nirgrantha ko pUche binA
aura usake pUrvasevita doSa kI AlocanA yAvat doSAnurUpa prAyazcitta svIkAra
karAye binA usase prazna pUchanA, use vAcanA denA, cAritra meM punaH upasthApita
karanA, usake sAtha baiThakara bhojana karanA aura sAtha meM rakhanA nahIM
kalpatA hai tathA use alpakAla ke lie dizA yA anudizA kA nirdeza karanA yA
dhAraNa karanA bhI nahIM kalpatA hai| 2. nirgrantha ke samIpa yadi koI anya gaNa
se khaNDita yAvat saMkliSTa AcAra vAlI nirgranthI Ae to nirgranthiyoM ko
pUchakara yA binA pUche bhI sevita doSa kI AlocanA yAvat doSAnurUpa prAyazcitta
svIkAra karAke usase prazna pUchanA, use vAcanA denA, cAritra meM punaH
upasthApita karanA, usake sAtha baiThakara bhojana karane kI aura sAtha rakhane
kI AjJA denA kalpatA hai tathA use alpakAla kI dizA yA anudizA kA nirdeza karanA
yA dhAraNa karanA kalpatA hai, kintu yadi nirgranthiyAM use na rakhanA cAheM to
use cAhie ki vaha punaH apane gaNa meM calI jAe / vivecana-pUrva uddezaka meM
khaNDita prAcAra vAle nirgrantha-nirgranthI ke anya gaNa se Ane para usake
AlocanA prAyazcitta karane kA vidhAna kiyA gayA hai aura prastuta sUtradvaya meM
kevala sAdhvI ke Ane para sAmbhogika zramaNa yA zramaNI ko pUchane sambandhI
vidhAna kiyA gayA hai| yadi nirgranthI ke pAsa aisI sAdhvI Ave to vaha apane
sAmbhogika sAdhuoM ko arthAt prAcAryaupAdhyAya Adi ko pUchakara, unakI AjJA hone
para hI usa sAdhvI ko rakha sakatI hai, use vAcanA denA-lenA kara sakatI hai,
upasthApita kara sakatI hai athavA usake sAtha AhAra yA sAtha meM baiThanA Adi
vyavahAra kara sakatI hai| kintu pUche binA, salAha lie binA aisI sAdhvI ke
sAtha ukta kArya karanA

Page #208 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
388] It is not appropriate to give a definitive answer or a ‡§µ‡•ç‡§Ø‡§µ‡§π‡§æ‡§∞‡§∏‡•Ç‡§§‡•ç‡§∞. If the
Acharya etc. are elsewhere, one should wait until their permission is obtained.
_ If a Sadhvi comes to the Nirgranthi, i.e., to the Acharya etc., they can make
a decision for her by asking the Sadhvis, i.e., the Pravartini, or sometimes
they can make a decision without asking and entrust her to the Pratini, and they
can also instruct the Acharya, Upadhyaya or Pravartini to take care of her
quickly. If, after that, the Pratini is unable to keep her due to some reason
like an adverse nature etc., she should be released so that she can go back to
her former place on her own. _ It is necessary for the Nirgranthi to ask the
Acharya etc. because they can know about her deceit and tricks or the obstacles
that may come, and they can also know about her future from her characteristics.
If the Pratini does not keep the Sadhvi who has been placed by the Acharya etc.,
the reason for this could be that she has a friendship or enmity with the former
Pravartini, or she may be afraid of some harm from that Sadhvi, etc. Many
reasons are explained in detail in the commentary. Generally, one should keep
the Sadhvi only after consulting the Pravartini etc.  3. If a Nirgranthi and a
Nirgranthi are Saambhogik, it is not appropriate for the Nirgranthi to stop the
Saambhogik behaviour in Paroksha and make her Visambhogik, but it is appropriate
to stop the Saambhogik behaviour in Pratyaksha and make her Visambhogik.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
388] [vyavahArasUtra yA nirNAyaka uttara denA nahIM kalpatA hai| prAcArya Adi
yadi anyatra hoM to unakI AjJA prApta hone taka pratIkSA karanI caahie| _ yadi
nimrantha ke pAsa arthAt prAcAryAdi ke pAsa aisI sAdhvI Ae to ve usake liye
sAdhviyoM ko arthAt pravartinI ko pUchakara nirNaya le sakate haiM athavA kabhI
binA pUche bhI nirNaya kara usa sAdhvI ko pratinI ke supurda kara sakate haiM
aura usa sAdhvI ke itvarika prAcArya, upAdhyAya yA pravartinI kA nirdeza bhI
kara sakate haiN| usake bAda viSama prakRti Adi kisI bhI kAraNa se pratinI use
na rakha sake to use mukta kara denA cAhie, jisase vaha svataH apane pUrvasthAna
meM calI jAve / nirgranthI ke lie prAcArya Adi ko pUchanA Avazyaka isalie hai ki
ve usake chala-prapaMcoM ko yA Ane vAle vighnoM ko jAna sakate haiM aura usa
sAdhvI ke lakSaNoM se usake bhaviSya ko bhI jAna sakate haiN| prAcAryAdi ke
dvArA rakhI gaI sAdhvI ko yadi pratinI nahIM rakhatI ho to usakA kAraNa yaha ho
sakatA hai ki pUrva pravartinI ke sAtha unakI mitratA ho yA zatrutA ho athavA
usa sAdhvI se kisI aniSTa kA bhaya ho, ityAdi aneka kAraNa bhASya meM vistAra se
batAye gaye haiN| sAmAnyatayA to pravatinI Adi kI salAha lekara hI sAdhvI ko
rakhanA caahie| sambandhaviccheda karane sambandhI vidhi-niSedha 3. je niggaMthA
ya niggaMthIyo ya saMbhoiyA siyA, no NaM kappai niggaMthANaM pArokkhaM pADiekkaM
saMbhoiyaM visaMbhogaM karettae / kappai NaM paccakkhaM pADiekkaM saMbhoiyaM
visaMbhogaM krette| _ jattheva aNNamaNNaM pAsejjA tattheva evaM vaejjA-~-"ahaM
NaM ajjo ! tumae saddhi imaMmi kAraNammi paccakkhaM pADiekkaM saMbhoiyaM
visaMbhogaM karemi / " se ya paDitappejjA, evaM se no kappai paccakkhaM
pADiekkaM saMbhoiyaM visabhogaM karettae / se ya no paDitappejjA, evaM se kappai
paccakkhaM pADiekkaM saMbhoiyaM visaMbhogaM karettae / 4. je niggaMthA ya
niggaMthIo ya saMbhoiyA siyA, no NaM kappai niggaMthINaM paccakkhaM pADiekkaM
saMbhoiyaM visaMbhogaM karettae / kappai NaM pArokkhaM pADiekkaM saMbhoiyaM
visaMbhogaM krette| jattheva tAo appaNo Ayariya-uvajjhAe pAsejjA tattheva evaM
vaejjA--"ahaM NaM bhaMte ! pramugIe ajjAe saddhi imammi kAraNammi pArokkhaM
pADiekkaM saMbhoiyaM visaMbhogaM karemi / " sAya paDitappejjA, evaM se no kappai
pArokkhaM pADiekkaM saMbhoiyaM visaMbhogaM karettae / sAya no paDitappejjA evaM
se kappai pArokkhaM pADiekkaM saMbhoiyaM visaMbhogaM karettae / 3. jo
nirgrantha-nirgranthiyAM sAMbhogika haiM, unameM nirgrantha ko parokSa meM
sAmbhogika vyavahAra banda karake visambhogI karanA nahIM kalpatA hai, kintu
pratyakSa meM sAmbhogika vyavahAra banda karake use visambhogI karanA kalpatA
hai /

Page #209 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Seventh Uddeshak [389]  When meeting each other, one should say, "O Prary, I
am ending the Sambhogik behavior with you due to such and such reason, and
making you Visambhogi." If the other person repents afterwards, it is not
permissible to end the Sambhogik behavior with them directly and make them
Visambhogi. If they do not repent, then it is permissible to end the Sambhogik
behavior with them directly and make them Visambhogi.  4. For Nirgranthi
Nirgranthis who are Sambhogik, it is not permissible to end the Sambhogik
behavior with the Nirgranthi directly and make them Visambhogi. However, it is
permissible to end the Sambhogik behavior with them indirectly and make them
Visambhogi. When they reach their Acharya or Upadhyaya for service, they should
say, "O Bhanta, I want to end the Sambhogik behavior with such and such Arya
indirectly due to such and such reason, and make them Visambhogi." If the
Nirgranthi repents (of their service-related fault) in the presence of the
Acharya-Upadhyaya, then it is not permissible to end the Sambhogik behavior with
them indirectly and make them Visambhogi. If they do not repent, then it is
permissible to end the Sambhogik behavior with them indirectly and make them
Visambhogi.  **Discussion:** These two sutras explain the method of ending
Sambhogik behavior. If a Bhikshu wants to end their behavior with another
Bhikshu, they can tell them to end the behavior by clearly stating the faults.
The word "Bhikshu" used in the sutra should be understood as "Acharya" here.
Because the Acharya is the disciplinarian of the Gachchha. It is not appropriate
to end the behavior with any Sadhu without informing the Acharya. Sadhvis must
make a request in the presence of a Sadhu, i.e., in the presence of the Acharya,
etc. However, the Acharya, etc., can make any Sadhu-Sadhvi Asambhogik without
consulting the Sadhu-Sadhvis. Bhikshus should tell the Acharya, etc., in the
presence of the Sadhus who are to be made Visambhogi, and Sadhvis should tell
the Acharya, etc., in the absence of the Sadhvis who are to be made Visambhogi.
Then they should inquire from them. This is the meaning of the direct and
indirect Visambhog mentioned in both sutras. After such a request, if the faulty
Sadhu or Sadhvi repents of their faults and adopts simplicity and humility, then
they can be given PrƒÅya≈õcitta and their relationship can be maintained. If they
do not repent, then the relationship is severed. The reasons for ending Sambhog
are mentioned in the Thananga Sutra, Chapter 3 and Chapter 9, and many such
reasons are also mentioned in the Bhashya. Their essence is that: 1. Neglecting
the Mahavrata, Samiti, Gupti, and Samachari, and the fourth...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
sAtavAM uddezaka] [389 jaba eka dUsare se mileM taba isa prakAra kahe ki-'he
prArya ! maiM amuka kAraNa se tumhAre sAtha sAmbhogika vyavahAra banda karake
tumheM visambhogI karatA huuN|" isa prakAra kahane para vaha yadi pazcAttApa
kare to pratyakSa meM bhI usake sAtha sAmbhogika vyavahAra banda karake use
visambhogI karanA nahIM kalpatA hai / yadi vaha pazcAttApa na kare to pratyakSa
meM usake sAtha sAmbhogika vyavahAra banda karake use visambhogI karanA kalpatA
hai / 4. jo nirgrantha nirgranthiyAM sAmbhogika haiM, unameM nimranthI ko
pratyakSa meM sAmbhogika vyavahAra banda karake visambhogI karanA nahIM kalpatA
hai / kintu parokSa meM sAmbhogika vyavahAra banda karake use visaMbhogI karanA
kalpatA hai / jaba ve apane prAcArya yA upAdhyAya kI sevA meM pahuMce taba unheM
isa prakAra kahe ki-"he bhaMte! maiM amuka AryA ke sAtha amuka kAraNa se parokSa
rUpa meM sAmbhogika vyavahAra banda karake use visambhogI karanA cAhatI huuN|"
taba vaha nirgranthI yadi (AcArya-upAdhyAya ke samIpa apane sevitadoSa kA)
pazcAttApa kare to usake sAtha parokSa meM bhI sAmbhogika vyavahAra banda karanA
va use visambhogI karanA nahIM kalpatA hai| yadi vaha pazcAttApa na kare to
parokSa meM usake sAtha sAmbhogika vyavahAra banda karake use visambhogI karanA
kalpatA hai| vivecana-ina do sUtroM meM sAmbhogika vyavahAra ke viccheda karane
kI vidhi batAI gaI hai| bhikSu ko yadi bhikSu ke sAtha vyavahAra banda karanA ho
to usake samakSa doSoM kA spaSTa kathana karate hue ve vyavahAra banda karane ko
kaha sakate haiN| sUtra meM prayukta "bhikSu" zabda se yahAM "prAcArya"
samajhanA caahie| kyoMki prAcArya hI gaccha ke anuzAstA hote haiN| unheM
jAnakArI die binA kisI bhI sAdhu ko anya sAdhu ke sAtha vyavahAra banda karanA
ucita nahIM hai| sAdhviyoM ko sAdhu ke samakSa arthAt prAcAryAdi ke samakSa
nivedana karanA Avazyaka hotA hai, kintu prAcAryAdi sAdhu-sAdhviyoM kI salAha
liye binA hI kisI bhI sAdhu-sAdhvI ko asAmbhogika kara sakate haiN| bhikSu
visaMbhoga kie jAne vAle sAdhuoM ke samakSa prAcAryAdi ko kaheM aura sAdhviyAM
visaMbhoga kI jAne vAlI sAdhviyoM kI anupasthiti meM prAcAryAdi se kaheM / taba
ve unase pUcha-tAcha kareM, yaha donoM sUtroM meM Aye pratyakSa aura parokSa-
visaMbhoga kA tAtparya hai| isa prakAra nivedana ke pazcAt sadoSa sAdhu yA
sAdhvI. apane doSoM kA pazcAttApa karake saralatA evaM laghutA dhAraNa kara le
to use prAyazcitta dekara usake sAtha saMbaMdha kAyama rakhA jA sakatA hai /
pazcAttApa na karane para saMbaMdhaviccheda kara diyA jAtA hai| ThANAMgasUtra a.
3 tathA a. 9 meM saMbhogaviccheda karane ke kAraNa kahe gaye haiM aura bhASya
meM bhI aise aneka kAraNa kahe haiN| unakA sArAMza yaha hai ki 1. mahAvrata,
samiti, gupti evaM samAcArI meM upekSApUrvaka cauthI

Page #210 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[390] A *Nigganthi* (Jain monk) is to be disassociated from a *Sadhu* or
*Sadhvi* (Jain ascetic) if they: 1. repeatedly accuse them, 2. repeatedly
associate with them in a way that is inappropriate for their stage of spiritual
development, or 3. show opposition towards their *Guru* (spiritual teacher) or
other respected figures.  **Regarding the rules for initiating someone into the
order:**  5. It is not permissible for a *Nigganthi* to initiate another
*Nigganthi* into the order for their own benefit, by: ordaining them, shaving
their head, educating them, re-establishing them in their vows, living with
them, sharing meals with them, giving them directions for a long period of time,
or giving them directions for a short period of time in the direction of the
wind or against the direction of the wind.  6. It is permissible for a
*Nigganthi* to initiate another *Nigganthi* into the order for the benefit of
another, by: ordaining them, up to and including sharing meals with them, giving
them directions for a long period of time, or giving them directions for a short
period of time in the direction of the wind or against the direction of the
wind.  7. It is not permissible for a *Nigganthi* to initiate another
*Nigganthi* into the order for their own benefit, by: ordaining them, up to and
including sharing meals with them, giving them directions for a long period of
time, or giving them directions for a short period of time in the direction of
the wind or against the direction of the wind.  8. It is permissible for a
*Nigganthi* to initiate another *Nigganthi* into the order for the benefit of
another, by: ordaining them, up to and including sharing meals with them, giving
them directions for a long period of time, or giving them directions for a short
period of time in the direction of the wind or against the direction of the
wind.  **Discussion:**  Generally, the initiation of a *Sadhu* is performed by a
*Pracharaya* (head of a monastic order) or *Upadhyaya* (teacher), and the
initiation of a *Sadhvi* is performed by a *Pracharaya*, *Upadhyaya*, or
*Pravarti* (female teacher). However, a *Geetarth* *Sadhu* (a *Sadhu* who has
attained a high level of spiritual understanding) can initiate any *Sadhu* or
*Sadhvi*.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
390] [vyavahArasUtra bAra doSa lagAne para, 2. pAvasthAdi ke sAtha bArambAra
saMsarga karane para tathA 3. guru grAdi ke prati virodhabhAva rakhane para usa
sAdhu-sAdhvI ke sAtha saMbaMdhaviccheda kara diyA jAtA hai| pravajita karane Adi
ke vidhi-niSedha 5. no kappaDa niggaMthANaM nimagaMthI appaNo aTTAe pavAvettae
vA, muMDAvettae vA, sehAvettae vA, uvaTThAvettae vA, saMvasittae vA, saMbhu
jittae vA, tose ittariyaM disaM vA, aNuvisaM vA uddisittae vA dhArettae vaa| 6.
kappai niggaMthANaM niggaMthi annesi aTTAe pavAvettae vA jAva saMbhujittae vA,
tIse ittariyaM disaM vA, aNudisaM vA uddisittae vA dhArettae baa| 7. no kappai
niggaMthINaM niggaMthaM appaNo aDhAe pavAvettae vA jAva saMbhujittae vA, tIse
ittariyaM disaMvA aNuvisaM vA uddisittae vA dhArettae vaa| 8. kappai
niggaMthINaM niggathaM aNNesi aTTAe pabyAvettae vA jAva saMbha jittae vA, tose
ittariyaM disaM vA aNudisaM vA uddisittae vA dhArettae vaa| 5. nirgranthI ko
apanI ziSyA banAne ke lie prajita karanA, muDita karanA, zikSita karanA, cAritra
meM punaH upasthApita karanA, usake sAtha rahanA aura sAtha baiThakara bhojana
karane ke lie nirdeza karanA nigrantha ko nahIM kalpatA hai tathA alpakAla ke
lie usake dizA yA anudizA kA nirdeza karanA evaM use dhAraNa karanA nahIM
kalpatA hai| 6. anya kI ziSyA banAne ke lie kisI nirgranthI ko pravrajita karanA
yAvat sAtha baiThakara bhojana karane ke lie nirdeza karanA nirgrantha ko
kalpatA hai tathA alpakAla ke lie usakI dizA yA anudizA kA nirdeza karanA evaM
use dhAraNa karanA kalpatA hai| 7. nirgrantha ko apanA ziSya banAne ke lie
pravajita karanA yAvat sAtha baiThakara bhojana karane ke lie nirdeza karanA
nirgranthI ko nahIM kalpatA hai tathA alpakAla ke lie usakI dizA yA anudizA kA
nirdeza karanA evaM use dhAraNa karanA nahIM kalpatA hai| 8. nirgrantha ko anya
kA ziSya banAne ke lie pravrajita karanA, sAtha baiThakara bhojana karane ke lie
nirdeza karanA nirgranthI ko kalpatA hai tathA alpakAla ke lie usakI dizA yA
anudizA kA nirdeza karanA evaM use dhAraNa karane ke lie anujJA denA kalpatA
hai| vivecanasAmAnyatayA sAdhu kI dIkSA prAcArya, upAdhyAya ke dvArA evaM sAdhvI
kI dIkSA prAcArya, upAdhyAya yA pravartinI ke dvArA dI jAtI hai| tathApi kabhI
koI gItArtha sAdhu kisI bhI sAdhu yA sAdhvI ko dIkSita kara sakatA hai / usI

Page #211 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Seventh Uddeshak [391]  Any Sadhvi can initiate any Sadhu or Sadhvi into the
order, but they must take the permission of the Acharya. If a Sadhu is to be
initiated, it can be done by the Acharya, Upadhyaya, or Pravarti. If a Sadhvi is
to be initiated, it can be done by the Acharya, Upadhyaya, or Pravarti. However,
a Sadhu cannot initiate a Sadhvi for themselves, and a Sadhvi cannot initiate a
Sadhu for themselves.  The commentary explains that initiating each other in
this way can lead to various doubts among the general public, which can harm the
Sadhu, Sadhvi, or even the Jain religion.  **Difficult words:**  *
**Pavvavetae:** To initiate * **Mundavetae:** To shave the head *
**Sikkhavetae:** To teach, including reading the Dashakalika Sutra in the Grahan
Shiksha and teaching the rituals, clothing, and other practices in the Asevan
Shiksha * **Uvadavetae:** To give the great initiation * **Sambu Jittae:** To
give food and other necessities * **Sanvasittae:** To keep company *
**Itteriyan:** Short-term * **Disan:** Acharya * **Anudisam:** Upadhyaya and
Pravarti * **Uddisittae:** To give instructions for the Nishra * **Dharittae:**
To accept the Acharya and Upadhyaya as one's own  **Regarding the instructions
of a Guru who is in a distant area:**  * **9. No Kappi Nigganthinam Viikittiyam
Disam Va Anuvisam Va Uddisittae Va Dharettae Va:** It is not permissible for a
Niggantha to accept instructions from a distant Pravarti or Guru. * **10. Kappi
Nigganthanam Viikittiyam Disam Va Anuvisam Va Uddisittae Va Dharettae Va:** It
is permissible for a Niggantha to accept instructions from a distant Acharya or
Guru.  **Discussion:**  The previous Sutra discussed the rules for initiating
others, and this Sutra provides some specific rules on the same topic.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
sAtavAM uddezaka] [391 prakAra koI bhI gItArtha sAdhvI kisI bhI sAdhu yA sAdhvI
ko dIkSita kara sakatI hai| kintu unheM prAcArya kI prAjJA lenA Avazyaka hotA
hai / kisI bhI sAdhu ko dIkSita karanA ho to prAcArya, upAdhyAya ke lie dIkSita
kiyA jA sakatA hai aura sAdhvI ko do kSita karanA ho to AcArya, upAdhyAya yA
pravartinI ke lie dIkSita kiyA jA sakatA hai| kiMtu sAdhu apane lie sAdhvI ko
aura sAdhvI apane liye sAdhu ko dIkSita nahIM kara sktii| _ bhASya meM batAyA
gayA hai ki isa prakAra se paraspara eka-dUsare ke lie dIkSita karane para
janasAdhAraNa meM aneka prakAra ko AzaMkAeM utpanna ho sakatI haiM, jisase usa
sAdhu-sAdhvI kI athavA jinazAsana kI hIlanA hotI hai| kaThina-zabdArtha
"pavvAvettae" = dIkSita karanA / "muMDAvettae" = lucana krnaa| "sikkhAvettae" =
grahaNa zikSA meM dazavakAlikasUtra par3hAnA, Asevana zikSA meM prAcAravidhi
vastra-paridhAna Adi kAryoM kI vidhi batAnA / uvadAvettae = bar3I dIkSA denaa|
saMbhu jittae = AhArAdi denaa| saMvAsittae-sAtha rakhanA / "ittariyaM-alpakAlIna
/ "disaM"= prAcArya "aNudisaM" = upAdhyAya aura pratinI / "uddisittae = nizrA kA
nirdeza karanA / dhArittae = navadIkSita bhikSu ke dvArA apanI dizA anudizA kA
dhAraNa karanA / darastha kSetra meM rahe hue guru Adi ke nirdeza kA vidhi-
niSedha 9. no kappai niggaMthINaM viikiTThiyaM disaM vA aNuvisaM vA uddisittae
vA dhArettae vA / 10. kappai niggaMthANaM viikiTThiyaM disaM vA aNudisaM vA
uddisittae vA dhArettae vaa| 9. nirgranthiyoM ko dUrastha pratinI yA guruNI kA
uddeza karanA yA dhAraNa karanA nahIM kalpatA hai| 10. nirgrantha ko dUrastha
prAcArya yA guru Adi kA uddeza karanA yA dhAraNa karanA kalpatA hai / vivecana-
pUrvasUtra meM anya ke lie dIkSita karane kA vidhAna kiyA gayA hai aura prastuta
sUtra meM bhI usI viSaya kA kucha vizeSa vidhAna hai|

Page #212 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Translation:  [392] It is not permissible for a Sadhvi to be initiated by a
Guru who resides very far away, even if she is instructed to do so by someone
from that area. This is because she cannot travel alone, and due to the long
distance, no one can accompany her. There is a possibility of many doubts,
anxieties, and afflictions arising during the long journey, especially if her
Guru falls ill or passes away. For these reasons, it is forbidden for a Sadhvi
to be initiated by a Guru who resides very far away. Similarly, it is not
permissible for a common monk to be initiated by an Acharya or Guru who resides
far away. This is because the same potential problems that apply to a Sadhvi can
also arise for a monk. However, the second Sutra provides an exception, which is
explained in the Bhashya. It states that if the monk to be initiated is
completely healthy, knowledgeable, and committed to the Dharma, and his Acharya
is also similarly committed, then he can be initiated by someone in a distant
area. The Bhashya states that such a monk, even if he travels alone, will not be
susceptible to the aforementioned vices like Mithyatva (false belief), etc.
Therefore, he can be initiated by a distant Acharya or Upadhyaya. Here, the
meaning of "Disam-Anudisam" is misinterpreted to refer to travel. This should be
understood as a misinterpretation.  **Methods for Resolving Disputes**  11. It
is not permissible for Nirgranthas to reconcile or apologize while they are in
separate locations.  12. It is permissible for Nirgranthas to reconcile or
apologize even while they are in separate locations.  **Discussion:**  The
Brihatkalpa (U. 4) prohibits Sadhus and Sadhvis from engaging in activities like
traveling without first apologizing for any conflict. However, if one of them
leaves for a distant land due to unresolved conflict, and later, either
spontaneously or through someone's influence, the feeling of apologizing arises
in their mind, then the Sadhvi should be allowed to apologize even if she is in
a very distant location.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
392] [vyavahArasUtra kisI bhI sAdhvI ko kahIM para bhI dIkSita honA ho to usa
kSetra se atyanta dUra rahI huI pravatinI kA nirdeza karake kisI ke pAsa dIkSita
honA nahIM kalpatA hai, kyoMki vaha svayaM akelI jA nahIM sakatI, adhika dUra
hone se koI pahu~cA nahIM skte| lambe samaya ke antargata usakA bhAva pariNamana
ho jAya, usakI garuNI bImAra ho jAya yA kAla kara jAya ityAdi sthitiyoM meM
aneka saMkalpa-vikalpa yA kleza, azAMti utpanna hone kI saMbhAvanA rahatI hai,
ityAdi kAraNoM se atidUrastha guruNI prAdi kA nirdeza kara kisI ke pAsa dIkSita
honA sAdhvI ke lie niSedha kiyA gayA hai| sAmAnya bhikSu ko bhI dUrastha AcArya
Adi kI nizrA kA nirdeza kara kisI ke pAsa dIkSita honA nahIM kalpatA hai, aisA
samajhanA caahie| kyoMki sAdhvI ke lie kahe gaye doSoM kI saMbhAvanA sAdhu ke
lie bhI ho sakatI hai| phira bhI dvitIya sUtra meM jo chUTa dI gaI hai, usakA
Azaya bhASya meM yaha batAyA gayA hai ki yadi dIkSita hone vAlA bhikSu pUrNa
svastha evaM jJAnI, saMvigna aura svayaM dharmopadezaka hai tathA usakA prAcArya
bhI aisA hI saMvigna hai to dUrastha kSetra meM kisI ke pAsa dIkSita ho sakatA
hai| aise bhikSu ke lie bhASya meM kahA hai ki micchattAdi dosA, je vuttA te u
gacchato tassa / egAgissavi na bhave, iti dUragate vi uddisnnaa|| bhA. gA.142
usa yogya guNasaMpanna bhikSu ke akele jAne para bhI pUrvokta mithyAtvAdi doSoM
kI saMbhAvanA nahIM rahatI hai, ata: use dUrastha prAcArya, upAdhyAya kA nirdeza
karake dIkSA dI jA sakatI hai / yahAM 'disaM-aNudisaM' ke artha-bhrama ke kAraNa
ina sUtroM kA vicaraNa se saMbaMdhita artha kiyA jAtA hai / use bhrAMtipUrNa
artha samajhanA caahie| kalaha-upazamana ke vidhi-niSedha 11. no kappada
niggaMthANaM vikiTThAI pAhuDAI viprosvette| 12. kappai niggaMthINaM viikiTThAI
pAhuDAI viosvette| 11. nirgranthoM meM yadi paraspara kalaha ho jAe to unheM
dUra kSetra meM rahe hue hI upazAnta honA yA kSamAyAcanA karanA nahIM kalpatA
hai / 12. nirgranthiyoM meM yadi paraspara kalaha ho jAe to unheM dUravartI
kSetra meM rahate hue bhI upazAMta honA yA kSamAyAcanA karanA kalpatA hai /
vivecana-sAdhu-sAdhvI ko kalaha hone ke bAda kSamAyAcanA kiye binA vihAra Adi
karane kA niSedha bRhatkalpa u. 4 meM kiyA gayA hai / tathApi kabhI donoM meM se
eka kI anupazAMti ke kAraNa koI vihAra karake dUra deza meM calA jAya aura bAda
meM usa anupazAMta sAdhu-sAdhvI ke mana meM svata: yA kisI kI preraNA se
kSamAyAcanA kA bhAva utpanna ho to sAdhvI ko kSamApaNA ke lie atidUra kSetra

Page #213 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Seventh Uddeshak] [393 One should not go but should send a message of apology
with another monk who is going, but the monk should go to the place and
apologize. / The reason for this separate rule should be understood as stated in
the previous sutra, that the Sadhvi's going is dependent on others and the
Sadhu's going alone is also possible. If the area is nearby, the Sadhvi should
also go there with other Sadhvis and apologize. / The rule stated in the sutra
is with respect to a distant area. It is explained in the commentary that if
there is a war of kings, famine, etc. in the middle areas, then the monk should
also apologize if he is staying in a very distant area. Apology is so important
in religious life that if one does not feel apologetic and dies in such a state,
then he becomes a Viradhak. / It is of two types, based on substance and feeling
- (1) If there is a feeling of anger or resentment towards someone, then say
directly to him - "I forgive you and I am happy with you." If someone is angry
due to someone's mistake, then say to him - 'I made a mistake, please forgive
me, I will not behave like this again'. (2) From feeling - make the heart
completely pure with peace, simplicity and humility. Apologizing and asking for
forgiveness with such behavior and with purity of feelings and purity of heart
is the complete process of apology. / If it is not possible due to
circumstances, then according to Brih. U. 1 Su. 34, one can also achieve worship
by calming oneself completely, but if there is no peace and purity in the heart,
then even after external rituals like Sanlekhana, 15 days of Santhara and
apology, worship cannot be achieved, this is clear from the description of
Abhicikumar in Bhagavati Sutra. The law of study for Nirgranth-Nirgranthis in
difficult times 13. No Kappa Nigganthanam Viigithe Kale Sajjhayam Karetae. 14.
Kappae Nigganthoonam Viigithe Kale Sajjhayam Karetae Nigganthnisaae / 13. It is
not appropriate for Nirgranths to study (the study of Kalik Agam in the study
period of Utkalik Agam) in difficult times. 14. It is appropriate for Nirgranths
to study in difficult times under the protection of a Nirgranth. / Discussion -
The time in which the study of Agams is prohibited is called Vyatikrisht Kal for
those Agams. Sadhu-Sadhvi should not recite the original text of Agam at such a
time! Those times are mentioned in many ways in Nisith Uddeshak 19.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
sAtavAM uddezaka] [393 meM nahIM jAnA cAhie kiMtu anya kisI jAne vAle bhikSu ke
sAtha kSamAyAcanA kA sandeza bheja denA cAhie, kintu bhikSu ko yathAsthAna
jAkara hI kSamAyAcanA karanA cAhie / isa alaga-alaga vidhAna kA kAraNa
pUrvasUtra meM kahe anusAra hI samajha lenA cAhie ki sAdhvo kA jAnA parAdhIna
hai aura sAdhu kA akelA jAnA bhI saMbhava hai| yadi nikaTa kA kSetra ho to
sAdhvI ko bhI anya sAdhviyoM ke sAtha vahIM jAkara kSamApaNA karanA cAhie /
sUtrokta vidhAna pratidUrastha kSetra kI apekSA se hai| bhASya meM batAyA gayA
hai ki bIca ke kSetroM meM yadi rAjAoM kA yuddha, durbhikSa Adi kAraNa utpanna
ho gae hoM to bhikSu ko bhI atidUra kSetra meM rahe hue ho kSamApaNA kara lenA
caahie| kSamApaNA kA dhArmika jIvana meM itanA adhika mahattva hai ki yadi kisI
ke sAtha kSamApaNA bhAva na Ae aura aise bhAvoM meM kAladharma prApta ho jAya to
vaha virAdhaka ho jAtA hai / vaha kSamApaNa dravya evaM bhAva ke bheda se do
prakAra kA hai--(1) dravya se yadi kisI ke prati nArAjagI kA bhAva yA roSabhAva
ho to use pratyakSa meM kahanA ki-"maiM Apako kSamA karatA hai aura Apake prati
prasannabhAva dhAraNa karatA huuN|" yadi koI vyakti kisI kI bhUla ke kAraNa
ruSTa ho to usase kahanA ki-'merI galatI huI Apa kSamA kareM, puna: aisA
vyavahAra nahIM kruuNgaa"| (2) bhAva se-zAMti saralatA evaM namratA se hRdaya ko
pUrNa pavitra banA lenaa| isa prakAra ke vyavahAra se tathA bhAvoM ko zuddhi-
evaM hRdaya kI pavitratA ke sAtha kSamA karanA aura kSamA mAMganA yaha pUrNa
kSamApaNAvidhi hai / paristhitivaza aisA sambhava na ho to bRha. u. 1 sU. 34 ke
anusAra svayaM ko pUrNa upazAMta kara lene se bhI ArAdhanA ho sakatI hai, kintu
yadi hRdaya meM zAMti, zuddhi na ho to bAhya vidhi se saMlekhanA, 15 dina kA
saMthArA aura kSamApaNA kara lene para bhI ArAdhanA nahIM ho sakatI hai, aisA
bhagavatIsUtra meM Aye abhIcikumAra ke varNana se spaSTa hotA hai|
vyatikRSTakAla meM nirgrantha-nirgranthiyoM ke lie svAdhyAya kA vidhi-niSedha
13. no kappA niggaMthANaM viigiThe kAle sajjhAyaM krette| 14. kappai
niggaMthoNaM viigiThe kAle sajjhAyaM karettae niggaMthanissAe / 13. nirgranthoM
ko vyatikRSTa kAla meM (utkAlika Agama ke svAdhyAyakAla meM kAlika Agama kA)
svAdhyAya karanA nahIM kalpatA hai| 14. nirgrantha kI nizrA meM nirgranthiyoM ko
vyatikRSTakAla meM bho svAdhyAya karanA kalpatA hai / vivecana-jina AgamoM kA
svAdhyAya jisa kAla meM niSiddha hai, vaha kAla una AgamoM ke lie vyatikRSTa
kAla kahA jAtA hai| sAdhu-sAdhvI ko aise samaya meM svAdhyAya arthAt Agama ke
mUla pATha kA uccAraNa nahIM karanA cAhie ! ve kAla nizItha uddezaka 19 meM
aneka prakAra ke kahe gae haiM /

Page #214 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
In the present chapter of the Vyavahar Sutra, only the second and third praharas
of the day and night should be understood as the Vyatikrushta Kala, meaning that
the study of the Kalik Sutra is prohibited during these four praharas. The Nandi
Sutra states that the number of Kalik Sutras is 12 + 30 = 42, and the number of
Utkalik Sutras is 29. The Anuyogadwar Sutra refers to the Aavashyak Sutra as
Utkalik. Thus, a total of 42 + 30 = 72 Agam Shrutajnana are mentioned. The study
of the available Kalik Sutras in the Utkal is prohibited in the first Sutra, but
the second Sutra provides an exception for Sadhvis to study near Nirgranthas.
The reason for this is that sometimes, it becomes necessary for Pravartinis or
Sadhvis to listen to the original text from Upadhyayas, etc., so that the
tradition of the original text remains consistent among other Sadhus and
Sadhvis. The time for mutual study and recitation of Agams by Sadhus and Sadhvis
is suitable only in the second and third praharas, hence this concession is
given, it should be understood. The study of Utkalik Sutras in the four
Sandhyakalas is also prohibited, therefore, the study of Dashakalik or Nandi
Sutra cannot be done in the Sandhyakalas or at noon. In some traditions, the
study of fifty gathas of the Nandi Sutra and two chulikas of the Dashavaikalik
is done even during the time of Asvadhyay. Regarding this, it is believed that
these compositions are not original. They have been added by someone other than
the author. But this belief is erroneous and inappropriate, because the author
of the Nandi Sutra is Devvachak Shri Devadhiggani Kshamasraman, this is
undisputed. Devvachak is his epithet. The charnikar and tikaakar of the Nandi
Sutra have accepted Devvachak or Devadhiggani as the author of the Nandi Sutra.
Even in the 50 gathas of Nandi, at the end, Dushyagani is praised by bowing to
him. Therefore, Devvachak Shri Devadhiggani, the disciple of Dushyagani, is the
author of the Sutra. In the last verse of the last verse, it is said, "Naanas
paruvaan vochch" = Now I will describe the form of knowledge. This also makes it
clear that the author of Nandi is also the author of the 50 gathas. Therefore,
it is not evidence-based to consider the 50 gathas as being added by someone
other than the author of the Sutra, and it is completely inappropriate to study
or recite the 50 gathas of the Nandi Sutra in the Sandhyakalas or during the
time of Asvadhyay. Regarding the chulikas of the Dashavaikalik Sutra, there is a
fictional story or legend that "these chulikas were brought by the sister of
Sthuli Bhadra from the Mahavideha region." But the authenticity of this story is
also doubtful. Because some texts mention the bringing of two chulikas, while
others mention the bringing of four chulikas. -~-Parishista Parva, Parva 9, Aav.
Chu. Page 188

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
[vyavahArasUtra prastuta prakaraNa meM vyatikRSTa kAla se kevala dina aura rAtri
kI dUsarI tIsarI pauriSI samajhanI cAhie arthAt ina cAroM pauriSI kAloM meM
kAlikasUtra kA svAdhyAya karane kA niSedha hai| naMdIsUtra meM kAlikasUtroM kI
saMkhyA 12+30 = 42 kahI hai aura utkAlika sUtroM kI saMkhyA 29 kahI hai|
anuyogadvArasUtra meM AvazyakasUtra ko utkAlika kahA gayA hai / isa prakAra kula
42+30 =72 Agama zrutajJAna meM kahe gae haiN| inameM se upalabdha kAlikasUtroM
kA utkAla meM svAdhyAya karanA prathama sUtra meM niSiddha hai, kintu dUsare
sUtra meM sAdhvI ke lie nirgranthoM ke pAsa svAdhyAya karane kA prApavAdika
vidhAna kiyA gayA hai| usakA kAraNa yaha hai ki kabhI-kabhI pravartinI yA
sAdhviyoM ko mUlapATha upAdhyAya Adi ko sunanA Avazyaka ho jAtA hai, jisase ki
anya sAdhu-sAdhviyoM meM mUlapATha kI paramparA samAna rhe| sAdhu-sAdhviyoM ke
paraspara AgamoM ke svAdhyAya kA evaM vAcanA kA samaya dUsarA-tIsarA prahara hI
yogya hotA hai, isalie yaha chUTa dI gaI hai, aisA samajhanA cAhie / utkAlika
sUtroM kA cAra saMdhyAkAla meM svAdhyAya karanA bhI niSiddha hai, ataH
dazakAlika yA naMdIsUtra kA svAdhyAya saMdhyAkAla meM yA dopahara ke samaya
nahIM kiyA jA sktaa| kisI paramparA meM naMdIsUtra kI pacAsa gAthA tathA
dazavai. kI do cUlikA kA svAdhyAya, asvAdhyAyakAla ke samaya bhI kiyA jAtA hai /
isa viSaya meM aisA mAnA jAtA hai ki ye racanAeM maulika nahIM haiN| racanAkAra
ke atirikta kisI ke dvArA jor3I gaI haiN| kintu yaha dhAraNA bhrAMta evaM
anucita hai, kyoMki naMdIsUtra ke racanAkAra devavAcaka zrI devaddhigaNi
kSamAzramaNa haiM, yaha nirvivAda hai / devavAcaka unakA vizeSaNa hai|
naMdIsUtra ke carNikAra evaM TIkAkAra ne devavAcaka yA devaddhigaNI ko hI
naMdIsUtra kA kartA svIkAra kiyA hai| naMdI kI 50 gAthAoM meM bhI anta meM
dUSyagaNI ko vaMdana karake unakA guNagAna kiyA haiN| ataH dUSyagaNI ke ziSya
devavAcaka zrI devaddhigaNI hI sUtra ke racanAkAra haiM / antima gAthA ke antima
caraNa meM yaha kahA gayA hai ki "NANassa parUvaNaM voccha" = aba maiM jJAna kI
prarUpaNA karUgA / isase bhI yaha spaSTa ho jAtA hai ki naMdI ke kartA hI 50
gAthAoM ke kartA haiM / ataH 50 gAthAoM ko sUtrakAra ke atirikta kisI ke dvArA
sambaddha mAnanA pramANasaMgata nahIM hai tathA naMdIsUtra kA saMdhyA samaya meM
yA asvAdhyAya samaya meM uccAraNa nahIM karake usako 50 gAthAoM kA akAla meM
svAdhyAya karanA yA uccAraNa karanA sarvathA anucitta hai| dazavaikAlikasUtra kI
cUlikA ke viSaya meM kalpita kathAnaka yA kiMvadantI pracalita hai ki"mahAvideha
kSetra se sthUlibhadra kI bahina dvArA ye cUlikAyeM lAI gaI haiN|" kintu isa
kathAnaka kI prAmANikatA bhI saMdigdha hai / kyoMki kisI grantha meM do cUlikAeM
lAne kA varNana hai to kisI meM cAra cUlikA lAne kA bhI varNana hai|
-~-pariziSTaparva, parva 9, Ava. cU pR. 188

Page #215 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Seventh Uddeshak] [395 From these texts, the Churni of the Dasha Vaikalik Sutra
is also ancient / Its author, Shri Agastya Singh Suri, while explaining the
Chulika, has clearly stated that "Now, further, the Sutrakar Shri
Shayambhavacharya says thus." The Churnikar Shri Agastya Singh Suri has fully
explained both the Chulikaas and has affirmed that they were composed by
Shayambhavacharya. But he has not made any statement about their being brought
from Mahavideha. For proof, see Chulika. 2 Ga. 14-15 Churni p. 265 / Therefore,
this legend has been propagated by someone after the Churnikar for some reason.
It has been written in later texts / Therefore, it is completely inappropriate
to consider these two Chulikaas as connected by anyone and to study them during
Sandhyasamaya or Asvadhyaya time / Doing so will also lead to PrƒÅya≈õcitta
according to Nishƒ´tha U. 19. The method of studying Nirgrantha-Nirgranthis is as
follows: 15. No Kappi Nigganthaan va Nigganthoon va Asajjhaie Sajjhaayam
Karettae / 16. Kappi Nigganthaan va Nigganthiin va Sajmaie Sajjhaayam Karettae /
15. It is not appropriate for Nirgranthas and Nirgranthis to study during
Asvadhyaya time / 16. It is appropriate for Nirgranthas and Nirgranthis to study
during SvƒÅdhyƒÅya time. Asvadhyaya related to discussion time 12, Asvadhyaya
related to Praudarik 10 and Asvadhyaya related to Akash 10, thus a total of 32
Asvadhyayas are prohibited from studying in the present Sutra and in the
previous Sutra, studying during the time of Utkal (second and third Prahar) of
Kalik Sutras is prohibited / For detailed discussion on Asvadhyaya, one should
study Nishƒ´tha Uddeshak, 19. In the other Sutra, it is stated that if there is
no Asvadhyaya of any kind, then Sadhusadhvis should study. From the description
of the excesses of knowledge and from the PrƒÅya≈õcitta provision of Nishƒ´tha
Uddeshak. 19 Sutra 13 and from the third chapter of Shraman Sutra, it becomes
clear that Nirgrantha-Nirgranthis must study during SvƒÅdhyƒÅya time. To fulfill
this SvƒÅdhyƒÅya provision, in some tradition, the study of seventeen verses of
Dasha Vaikalik is done along with Pratikraman, this tradition is inappropriate.
Because the time of Pratikraman is Asvadhyaya, therefore, studying along with it
is also against Shraagam and it is also necessary to study many Kalik Vagams
like Acharang Nishƒ´tha Sutra etc. which are memorized.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
sAtavAM uddezaka] [395 ina granthoM se bhI dazavaikAlika sUtra kI cUNi prAcIna
hai / usake racanAkAra zrI agastyasiMhasUri ne cUlikA kI vyAkhyA karate hue
spaSTa kahA hai ki "aba Age sUtrakAra zrI zayyaMbhavAcArya isa prakAra kahate
haiN|" cUrNikAra zrI agastyasiMhasUri ne donoM cUlikAoM kI pUrNa vyAkhyA kI hai
aura usameM zayyabhavAcArya dvArA racita honA hI sacita kiyA hai| lekina
mahAvideha se lAI jAne kI bAta kA koI kathana unhoMne nahIM kiyaa| pramANa ke
lie dekheM cUlikA. 2 gA. 14-15 kI cUrNi pR. 265 / ataH yaha kiMvadantI cUrNikAra
ke bAda kisI ne kisI kAraNa se pracArita kI hai| jo bAda ke granthoM meM likha
dI gaI hai / ataH ina donoM cUlikAoM ko kisI ke dvArA sambaddha mAnakara
saMdhyAsamaya meM yA asvAdhyAyakAla meM inakI svAdhyAya karanA sarvathA anucitta
hai / aisA karane se nizItha u. 19 ke anusAra prAyazcitta bhI AtA hai|
nirgrantha-nirgranthI ko svAdhyAya karane kA vidhi-niSedha 15. no kappai
niggaMthANa vA niggaMthoNa vA asajjhAie sajjhAyaM karettae / 16. kappai
niggaMthANa vA niggaMthINa vA sajmAie sajjhAyaM karettae / 15. nirgranthoM aura
nirgranthiyoM ko asvAdhyAya kAla meM svAdhyAya karanA nahIM kalpatA hai / 16.
nirgranthoM aura nirgranthiyoM ko svAdhyAyakAla meM svAdhyAya karanA kalpatA
hai| vivecana-kAla sambandhI asvAdhyAya 12, praudArika sambandhI asvAdhyAya 10
aura AkAza sambandhI asvAdhyAya 10, isa prakAra kula 32 asvAdhyAya meM svAdhyAya
karane kA prastuta sUtra meM niSedha kiyA gayA hai aura pUrva sUtra meM kAlika
sUtroM kI utkAla (dUsare tIsare prahara) ke samaya svAdhyAya karane kA niSedha
kiyA gayA hai / asvAdhyAya sambandhI vistRta vivecana ke lie nizItha udde, 19 kA
adhyayana karanA caahie| dUsare sUtra meM yaha vidhAna kiyA gayA hai ki yadi
kisI prakAra kA asvAdhyAya na ho to sAdhusAdhviyoM ko svAdhyAya karanA caahie|
jJAna ke aticAroM ke varNana se evaM nizItha udde. 19 sUtra 13 ke prAyazcitta
vidhAna se tathA zramaNasUtra ke tIsare pATha se yaha spaSTa ho jAtA hai ki
svAdhyAya ke samaya nirgrantha-nirgranthiyoM ko avazya svAdhyAya karanA caahie|
isa svAdhyAyavidhAna kI pUrti ke lie kisI paramparA meM pratikramaNa ke sAtha
dazavakAlika kI sattaraha gAthAoM kA svAdhyAya kara liyA jAtA hai, yaha
paramparA anucitta hai| kyoMki pratikramaNa kA samaya to asvAdhyAya kA hotA hai,
ataH usake sAtha svAdhyAya karanA zrAgamaviruddha bhI hai tathA AcArAMga
nizIthasUtra Adi aneka kaNThastha kie hue kAlikavAgamoM kA svAdhyAya karanA bhI
zrAvazyaka hotA hai|

Page #216 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  396] [Vyavahar Sutra] Therefore, after the completion of the evening
Pratikraman, one should engage in Swadhyay for the entire Prahar after
transcribing the time (sky). Similarly, it should be understood that the Agam
Vidhan is to engage in Swadhyay in the fourth Prahar of the night before taking
the permission for the morning Pratikraman. However, it is an inappropriate
tradition to be satisfied by engaging in Swadhyay only of those 17 Gathas of the
Dasavai during the time of Aswadhyay. Not engaging in Swadhyay in all four
Prahar is an excess of knowledge and is a place for the Laghu Chaumasi
Pratikshepa. Knowing this, if Swadhyay is not done at any time, one should
accept its Pratikshepa. However, if time has been spent in service or Guru
Prajna, then there is no Pratikshepa even if Swadhyay is not done in all four
Prahar. Similarly, other exceptional reasons such as illness should be
understood. Spending time in Vikathas while expecting Swadhyay without reason is
contrary to the conduct of Samyam Maryada and is the consumption of excess
knowledge.  **17. No Kappi Nigganthan Va Nigganthiin Va Appano Asajjhaie
Sajshayam Karetae / Kappian Annam Annass Vaayan Dalitae / 17. It is not
appropriate for Nirgranthas and Nirgranthis to engage in Swadhyay when they have
Aswadhyay related to their own body, but it is appropriate to give each other
Vaachana.**  **Discussion:** The general prohibition of engaging in Swadhyay
during the ten Audarik Aswadhyay is mentioned in Sutra 16. However, the reason
for prohibiting it again here is that the Aswadhyay related to menstruation or
other wounds continues, and it is not appropriate to stop or interrupt any
ongoing Vaachana of the Sutra during that time. If there is a collective
Vaachana of many Sadhus and Sadhvis, then the reason for Aswadhyay may be for
one person at one time and for another person at another time. In this way, many
days can pass and it can lead to disorder in the Vaachana of the Sutras.
Therefore, this Sutra makes an exceptional provision in the case of the
aforementioned Aswadhyay related to menstruation and other wounds, stating that
Sadhus and Sadhvis can exchange Vaachana with each other after properly
considering the blood, pus, etc. In this way, clear permission is given here to
give and receive Vaachana during the Aswadhyay of menstruation. However,
engaging in self-Swadhyay or listening to it is prohibited by the previous part
of the Sutra. The Bhashyakar and Tikakar, while explaining this Sutra, have
explained in detail the method of giving and receiving Vaachana during the time
of menstruation and in the case of wounds, etc. They have also mentioned the
Pratikshepa for engaging in Swadhyay and for giving and receiving Vaachana
according to the method. For more information, see the discussion of Sutra 15 in
Nisheeth Udde. 19. Although the Sutra states the provision of giving Vaachana
during one's own Aswadhyay, it should be understood that both giving and
receiving Vaachana are included. Because the disorder that is possible in not
giving Vaachana is even greater...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
396] [vyavahArasUtra ataH sAyaMkAlIna pratikramaNa ke pUrNa ho jAne para kAla kA
(AkAza kA) pratilekhana karane ke bAda pUre prahara taka svAdhyAya karanA
caahie| usI prakAra subaha ke pratikramaNa kI AjJA lene ke pUrva rAtri ke cauthe
prahara meM svAdhyAya karane kA AgamavidhAna hai, aisA samajhanA cAhie / kintu
kevala dazavai. kI unhIM 17 gAthAoM kA asvAdhyAyakAla meM svAdhyAya karake
santoSa mAnanA anucita paraMparA hai| cAroM prahara meM svAdhyAya na karanA yaha
jJAna kA aticAra hai evaM laghucaumAsI prAyazcitta kA sthAna hai / aisA jAnakara
yadi kabhI svAdhyAya na ho to usakA prAyazcitta grahaNa karanA caahie| kintu
sevA yA guruprAjJA meM kahIM samaya vyatIta huA ho to cAroM prahara meM
svAdhyAya na karane para bhI prAyazcitta nahIM AtA hai / usI prakAra rugNatA Adi
anya bhI ApavAdika kAraNa samajha lene caahie| akAraNa svAdhyAya kI apekSA kara
vikathAoM meM samaya vyatIta karane para saMyamamaryAdA ke viparIta AcaraNa hotA
hai evaM jJAna ke aticAra kA sevana hotA hai| zArIrika asvAdhyAya hone para
svAdhyAya kA vidhi-niSedha 17. no kappai niggaMthANa vA niggaMthINa vA apapNo
asajjhAie sajzAyaM karettae / kappaiNaM aNNamaNNassa vAyaNaM dalaittae / 17.
nirgranthoM evaM nirganthiyoM ko svazarIra sambandhI asvAdhyAya hone para
svAdhyAya karanA nahIM kalpatA hai, kintu paraspara eka dUsare ko vAcanA denA
kalpatA hai / vivecana-dasa audArika asvAdhyAya meM svAdhyAya karane kA sAmAnya
niSedha sUtra 16 meM kiyA gayA hai, tathApi yahAM puna: niSedha karane kA kAraNa
yaha hai ki mAsikadharma saMbaMdhI yA anya vraNa saMbaMdhI apanA asvAdhyAya
niraMtara cAlU rahatA hai, utane samaya taka koI bhI sUtra kI vAcanA cala rahI
ho use baMda karanA yA bIca meM chor3anA upayukta nahIM hai / aneka sAdhu-
sAdhviyoM kI sAmUhika vAcanA cala rahI ho to kabhI kisI ke aura kabhI kisI ke
asvAdhyAya kA kAraNa ho to isa prakAra aneka dina vyatIta ho sakate haiM aura
usase sUtroM kI vAcanA meM avyavasthA ho jAtI hai / ataH yaha sUtra ukta
mAsikadharma aura anya vraNa saMbaMdhI asvAdhyAya meM prApavAdika vidhAna karatA
hai ki rakta-pIpa AdikA ucita viveka karake sAdhu yA sAdhvI paraspara vAcanA kA
lena-dena kara sakate haiN| isa prakAra yahAM mAsikadharma ke prasvAdhyAya meM
sUtroM kI vAcanA dene-lene kI spaSTa chUTa dI gaI hai| kintu vAcanA ke atirikta
svata: svAdhyAya karanA yA sunanA to sUtra ke pUrvAddha se niSiddha hI hai|
bhASyakAra aura TIkAkAra ne isa sUtra kI vyAkhyA karate hue Rtu-dharmakAla meM
evaM vraNa Adi ke samaya meM sUtroM kI vAcanA lene-dene kI vidhi kA vistAra se
spaSTIkaraNa kiyA hai| sAtha hI svAdhyAya karane kA tathA pravidhi se vAcanA
lene-dene kA prAyazcitta kahA hai / adhika jAnakArI ke lie nizItha. udde. 19
sUtra 15 kA vivecana dekheN| sUtra meM apane asvAdhyAya meM vAcanA dene kA
vidhAna hai to bhI vAcanA denA aura lenA donoM hI samajha lenA caahie| kyoMki
vAcanA na dene meM jo avyavasthA saMbhava rahatI hai, usase bhI adhika

Page #217 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Seventh Uddeshak] [397] It is more difficult to pronounce than to listen in
one's own asvadhyaya, and there is a lack of order in not taking the recitation.
Therefore, taking the recitation is self-evident in the permission to give the
recitation. Nevertheless, one should definitely pay attention to following the
method of purifying the blood, etc., of the speaker and applying the cloth
patch. The need for the appointment of an Acharya-Upadhyaya for a Nirgranthi 18.
Thirty years of Shramanaparyaya Nirgranthi should accept a three-year
Shramanaparyaya Nirgranthi as Upadhyaya. 19. Sixty years of Shramanaparyaya
Nirgranthi should accept a five-year Shramanaparyaya Nirgranthi as Acharya or
Upadhyaya. Discussion-Uddeshak 3 Sutra 11-12 states that it is necessary for
Sadhvis to stay under the protection of these three: Acharya, Upadhyaya and
Pravartini, and it is necessary for Sadhus to stay under the protection of these
two: Acharya, Upadhyaya. This provision is made for Sadhus and Sadhvis who are
up to forty years old and have three years of Dikshaparaya. In the present
Sutra, it is said that a Sadhvi with thirty years of Dikshaparaya should be
appointed as Upadhyaya and a Sadhvi with sixty years of Dikshaparaya should be
appointed as Acharya. This means that it is not permissible for Sadhvis with up
to thirty years of Dikshaparaya to remain without Upadhyaya and Pravartini, and
it is not permissible for Sadhvis with up to sixty years of Dikshaparaya to
remain without Acharya. In the Bhashya and Tika, it is explained that by adding
ten years before Diksha to the above number of years, Sadhvis up to forty years
of age should not remain without the protection of Upadhyaya and Pravartini, and
Sadhvis up to seventy years of age should not remain without the protection of
Acharya. After the above number of years, if the degree holder attains
Kaladharma or becomes a lax practitioner by leaving the Gachchha, then it is not
necessary to appoint Acharya etc. for such Sadhvis. In the Bhashya, Sadhvis are
compared to 'Lata' i.e. just as Lata remains only with the support of trees,
similarly, it is necessary for Sadhvis to remain under the Acharya for the
protection of Samyamsamadhi.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
sAtavAM uddezaka] [397 avyavasthA vAcanA na lene meM ho jAtI hai aura apane
asvAdhyAya meM zravaNa karane kI apekSA uccAraNa karanA adhika bAdhaka hotA hai
/ ataH vAcanA dene kI chUTa meM vAcanA lenA to svata: siddha hai| phira bhI
bhASyokta rakta Adi ko zuddhi karane evaM vastrapaTa lagAne kI vidhi ke pAlana
karane kA dhyAna avazya rakhanA caahie| nirgranthI ke lie AcArya-upAdhyAya kI
niyukti kI AvazyakatA 18. tivAsapariyAe samaNe niggaMthe tIsaM vAsapariyAe
samaNIe niggaMthIe kappar3a uvajjhAyattAe uddisitte| 19. paMcavAsapariyAe samaNe
niggaMthe saTTivAsapariyAe samaNIe niggaMthIe kappai AyariyauvajhAyattAe
uddisittae / 18. tIsa varSa kI zramaNaparyAya vAlI nirgranthI ko upAdhyAya ke
rUpa meM tIna varSa ke zramaNaparyAya vAle nirgrantha ko svIkAra karanA kalpatA
hai| 19. sATha varSa kI zramaNaparyAya vAlI nirgranthI ko prAcArya yA upAdhyAya
ke rUpa meM pAMca varSa ke zramaNaparyAya vAle nirgrantha ko svIkAra karanA
kalpatA hai| vivecana-uddezaka 3 sUtra 11-12 meM sAdhviyoM ko AcArya, upAdhyAya
evaM pravartinI ina tIna kI nizrA se rahanA Avazyaka kahA hai tathA sAdhuoM ko
prAcArya, upAdhyAya ina do kI nizrA se rahanA Avazyaka kahA hai / vaha vidhAna
tIna varSa kI dIkSAparyAya evaM cAlIsa varSa kI umra taka ke sAdhusAdhviyoM ke
lie kiyA gayA hai| prastuta sUtradvika meM tIsa varSa kI dIkSAparyAya vAlI
sAdhvI ke lie upAdhyAya kI niyukti aura sATha varSa kI dIkSAparyAya vAlI sAdhvI
ke lie prAcArya kI niyukti karanA kahA hai| isakA tAtparya yaha hai ki tIsa
varSa taka kI dIkSAparyAya vAlI sAdhviyoM ko upAdhyAya evaM pravartinI ke binA
rahanA nahIM kalpatA hai aura sATha varSa taka kI dIkSAparyAya vAlI sAdhviyoM ko
prAcArya ke binA rahanA nahIM kalpatA hai| bhASya evaM TIkA meM ukta
varSasaMkhyA meM dIkSA ke pUrva ke dasa varSa aura milAkara yaha batAyA hai ki
40 varSa taka kI umra vAlI sAdhviyoM ko upAdhyAya evaM pravartinI kI nizrA binA
nahIM rahanA cAhie aura 70 varSa taka kI umra vAlI sAdhviyoM ko prAcArya kI
nizrA binA nahIM rahanA cAhie / ukta varSasaMkhyA ke bAda yadi padavIdhara
kAladharma ko prApta ho jAe~, yA gaccha chor3akara zithilAcArI bana jAe~ to aisI
paristhitiyoM meM una sAdhviyoM ko prAcArya Adi kI niyukti karanA Avazyaka nahIM
rahatA hai|| bhASya meM sAdhviyoM ko 'latA' kI upamA dI hai arthAt latA jisa
taraha vRkSAdi ke avalaMbana se hI rahatI hai usI prakAra sAdhviyoM ko bhI
prAcArya ke adhIna rahanA saMyamasamAdhi-surakSA ke lie Avazyaka hai|

Page #218 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[398] In the *Vyavahar Sutra Brihatkalpa Uddesa 1*, it is stated that when
staying in a village or any other place, they should only stay with the
assurance of protection and assistance from the householder, etc. From the
perspective of the *Agamas*, it is not necessary for the *Sadhvis* to have a
*Pracharya* after 60 years of *diksha* or an *Upadhyaya* after 30 years of
*diksha*. The detailed description of the appointment of a *Bhikshu* with three
years of *diksha* to the position of *Upadhyaya* and a *Bhikshu* with five years
of *diksha* to the position of *Pracharya* should be known from the third
*Uddesaka*. The method of disposing of the dead body of a *Shraman* and
accepting their equipment is as follows:  **20.** If a *Bhikshu* dies while
traveling from village to village and another *Bhikshu* sees his body and knows
that there are no householders nearby, then it is appropriate to dispose of the
body of the deceased *Shraman* in a secluded, lifeless place after performing
the rituals of *pratilekhan* and *pramardjan*. If any of the deceased
*Shraman's* equipment is usable, then it is appropriate to accept them as
*sagarkrit* and use them again after obtaining the permission of the *Acharya*,
etc.  **Discussion:** In the *Brihatkalpa Uddesaka 4*, the method of disposing
of a *Sadhu* who has attained *kaladharma* in an *upashraya* is mentioned. In
the present *sutra*, the method of disposing of the body of a *Bhikshu* who has
attained *kaladharma* while traveling is described. If a *Bhikshu* traveling
alone attains *kaladharma* and one or more *Sarmic* *Sadhus* see his body, then
they should take it to a secluded place and dispose of it according to the
proper procedure. "**Ma Sagariy**" - The *Bhikshu* should know that there are no
householders nearby who would perform the funeral rites. In this situation, the
*Sadhus* should take the body to a secluded, lifeless place and dispose of it.
If the deceased *Bhikshu* has any usable equipment, then they can accept it
after obtaining the permission of the *Pracharya*. They can then keep and use
the equipment that the *Pracharya* allows them to keep. If one or more
*Bhikshus* leave the body of the deceased *Bhikshu* on the road for any reason,
then they are all liable for the *Guruchaumasi* atonement.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
398] .[vyavahArasUtra bRhatkalpa udde. 1 meM kisI grAmAdi meM Thaharane ke lie
bhI unheM gRhasvAmI Adi kI nizrA se rahane kA arthAt surakSA sahAyatA kA
AzvAsana lekara hI rahane kA vidhAna kiyA gayA hai| AgamakAra kI dRSTi se 60
varSa kI dIkSAparyAya ke bAda prAcArya kA aura tIsa varSa kI dIkSA ke bAda
upAdhyAya kA honA una sAdhviyoM ke lie Avazyaka nahIM hai| tIna varSa kI
dIkSAparyAya vAle bhikSu kI upAdhyAya pada para niyukti evaM pAMca varSa kI
dIkSAparyAya vAle bhikSu kI prAcArya pada para niyukti saMbaMdhI vistRta varNana
tIsare uddezaka se jAnanA caahie| zramaNa ke mRtazarIra ko paraThane kI aura
upakaraNoM ko grahaNa karane kI vidhi _ 20. gAmANugAmaM dUijjamANe bhikkhU ya
Ahacca vIsubhejjA, taM ca sarIragaM kei sAhammie pAsejjA, kappai se taM
sarIragaM 'mA sAgAriya' ti kaTu egaMte acitte bahuphAsue thaMDile paDilehittA
pamajjittA pridvvette| asthi ya istha kei sAhammiyasaMtie uvagaraNajAe
pariharaNArihe, kappaha se sAgArakaDaM gahAya doccaMpi oggahaM aNunavettA
parihAraM parihArittae / 20. grAmAnugrAma vihAra karatA huA bhikSu yadi akasmAt
mArga meM hI mRtyu ko prApta ho jAe aura usake zarIra ko koI zramaNa dekhe aura
yaha jAna le ki yahAM 'koI gRhastha nahIM hai' to usa mRta zravaNa ke zarIra ko
ekAnta nirjIva bhUmi meM pratilekhana va pramArjana karake paraThanA kalpatA
hai| yadi usa mRta zramaNa ke koI upakaraNa upayoga meM lene yogya hoM to unheM
sAgArakRta grahaNa kara puna: AcAryAdi kI AjJA lekara upayoga meM lenA kalpatA
hai| vivecana-bRhatkalpa uddezaka 4 meM upAzraya meM kAladharma ko prApta hone
vAle sAdhu ko paraThane saMbaMdhI vidhi kahI gaI hai aura prastuta sUtra meM
vihAra karate hue koI bhikSu mArga meM hI kAladharma ko prApta ho jAya to usake
mRta zarIra ko paraThane kI vidhi batAI hai| _ vihAra meM kabhI akelA calatA huA
bhikSu kAladharma ko prApta ho jAya aura usake mRtazarIra ko koI eka yA aneka
sArmika sAdhu dekheM to unheM vidhipUrvaka ekAMta meM le jA kara paraTha denA
caahie| 'mA sAgAriya'--bhikSu yaha jAna le ki vahAM pAsa-pAsa meM koI gRhastha
nahIM hai jo (usa zarIra kA mRta-saMskAra kare, taba usa sthiti meM sAdhunoM ko
use uThAkara ekAMta acitta sthAna meM paraTha denaa| caahie| yadi usa mRta
bhikSu ke koI upakaraNa upayoga meM Ane yogya hoM to prAcArya kI AjJA kA AgAra
rakhate hue unheM grahaNa kara sakate haiN| phira jina upakaraNoM ko rakhane kI
prAcArya AjJA deM unheM rakha sakate haiM aura upayoga meM le sakate haiN| yadi
koI eka yA aneka bhikSu kisI bhI kAraNa se usa kAladharmaprApta bhikSu ke
mRtazarIra ko mArga meM yoM hI chor3akara cale jAe~ to ve sabhI gurucaumAsI
prAyazcitta ke pAtra hote haiN|| .

Page #219 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Seventh Uddeshak] For other information related to Pari·π£·π≠hƒÅpana, see
Brihatkalpa Uddeshak 4 and for detailed information, refer to the BhƒÅ·π£ya.
**Regarding the decision of avoiding a Shayyaatar:**  21. If the Shayyaatar
(landlord) rents out the dwelling and tells the tenant, "Shraman Nirgranth are
staying in this place," then the landlord is a Sagarik (Shayyaatar) and
therefore, it is not appropriate to take food etc. from his house. If the
Shayyaatar does not say anything, but the tenant says so, then he is a
Shayyaatar and therefore, should be avoided. If both the landlord and the tenant
say so, then both are Shayyaatar and therefore, both should be avoided.  22. If
the Shayyaatar sells the dwelling and tells the buyer, "Shraman Nirgranth are
staying in this place," then he is a Shayyaatar and therefore, should be
avoided. If the seller does not say anything, but the buyer says so, then he is
a Sagarik and therefore, should be avoided. If both the seller and the buyer say
so, then both are Sagarik and therefore, both should be avoided.
**Discussion:** This sutra clarifies who is considered a Shayyaatar when a monk
stays in a house that is either rented or sold. If the buyer or the tenant
allows the monk to stay in their house willingly, then they are considered a
Shayyaatar. If they are indifferent towards the monk staying there and do not
give permission, but the previous owner of the house allows the monk to stay,
then...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
sAtavAM uddezaka] pariSThApana saMbaMdhI anya jAnakArI bRhatkalpa udde. 4 meM
dekheM evaM vistRta jAnakArI ke lie bhASya kA avalokana kreN| pariharaNIya
zayyAtara kA nirNaya 21. sAgArie uvassayaM vavakaeNaM pauMjejjA se ya vakkaiyaM
vaejjA-'imammiya imammiya provAse samaNA NiggaMthA parivasaMti / se sAgArie
paarihaarie| se ya no vaejjA vakkahae vaejjA, se sAgArie pArihArie / do vi te
vaejjA, do vi sAgAriyA pArihAriyA / 22. sAgArie uvassayaM vikkiNejjA, se ya
kaiyaM vaejjA'imammi ya imammi ya provAse samaNA niggaMthA parivasaMti', se
sAgArie pArihArie / se ya no vaejjA, kaie vaejjA, se sAgArie pArihArie / vo vi
te vaejjA, do vi sAgAriyA paarihaariyaa| 21. zayyAdAtA yadi upAzraya kirAye para
de aura kirAye para lene vAle ko yaha kahe ki 'itane-itane sthAna meM zramaNa
nirgrantha raha rahe haiN|' isa prakAra kahane vAlA gRhasvAmI sAgArika
(zayyAtara) hai, ataH usake ghara AhArAdi lenA nahIM kalpatA hai| yadi zayyAtara
kucha na kahe, kintu kirAye para lene vAlA kahe to vaha zayyAtara hai, ataH
parihArya hai| yadi kirAye para dene vAlA aura lene vAlA donoM kaheM to donoM
zayyAtara haiM, ataH donoM parihArya haiN| 22. zayyAtara yadi upAzraya bece aura
kharIdane vAle ko yaha kahe ki-'itane-itane sthAna meM zramaNa nirgrantha rahate
haiM, to vaha zayyAtara hai| ataH vaha parihArya hai| _ yadi upAzraya kA vikretA
kucha na kaheM, kintu kharIdane vAlA kahe to vaha sAgArika hai, ataH vaha
parihArya hai| yadi vikretA aura kretA donoM kahe to donoM sAgArika haiM, ataH
donoM parihArya haiM / vivecana-bhikSu jisa makAna meM ThaharA huA hai, usakA
mAlika use kirAye para deve yA use beca de to aisI sthiti meM bhikSu kA
zayyAtara kauna rahatA hai, yaha prastuta sUtra meM spaSTa kiyA gayA hai| yadi
kharIdane vAlA yA kirAye para lene vAlA vyakti bhikSa ko apane makAna meM
prasannatApUrvaka Thaharane kI AjJA detA ho to vaha zayyAtara kahA jAtA hai|
yadi vaha bhikSu ko ThaharAne meM upekSAbhAva rakhatA hai evaM AjJA bhI nahIM
detA hai| kintu makAna kA pUrva mAlika hI use bhikSu ke rahane kA

Page #220 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[400] The *Vyavahar Sutra* explains that "the monk will stay for a certain time,
after which that place will also become yours." In such a situation, the former
*shayyadata* remains the *shayyatar*. The meaning of the *shayyatar* decision is
that the food, etc., of the house of the one who will be the *shayyatar* will be
called *shayyatarpind*. If the former *shayyadata* also says, "I have the
authority," and the new *swami* also says, "I also have the authority," then
both should be considered *shayyatar*. If they understand upon explanation, then
it is appropriate to follow the authority of only one. Because in *Brihatkalpa*
U. 2 Su. 13, the rule of taking the authority of one *swami* in a house with
many *swamis* is given. For specific information regarding *shayyatar* and
*shayyatarpind*, see the discussion in *Nishith* U. 2 Su. 46. In the *sutra*,
the word *upashraya* is used for the house of the householder. The reason for
this is that both the houses where the monk is staying or where he is to stay
are called *upashraya* by the *Agam* scriptures. Therefore, in *Brihatkalpa*
Udd. 2 Su. 1-10, the house of the householder where water pots, *sura* or
*sauvira* pots, and grains and food items are kept is also called *upashraya*.
Due to the same method, here also the house of the householder is called
*upashraya* because the monk is already staying there. In the present social
*upashraya*, it is not possible to sell or rent a place where a *sadhu* is
staying. Therefore, here the word *upashraya* should be understood as the house
of the householder. The method of taking authority: 23. *Vihavadh≈´yƒÅ
nƒÅyakulavƒÅsinƒ´ sƒÅ vi yƒÅvi proggha·πÅ a·πáunnaveyyamvƒÅ, kimang pu·πá piyƒÅ vƒÅ, bhƒÅyƒÅ vƒÅ,
putte vƒÅ, se vi yƒÅ vi ogghahe progevvhiagve* / 24. *Pahevi proggha·πÅ
a·πáunnaveyyavve* / 23. The authority of a widowed girl living in her father's
house can also be taken, then what to say of the father, brother, son, i.e.,
their authority can also be taken. 24. If one has to stay on the way, then the
authority of that place should also be taken. Discussion: The subject matter of
the first *sutra* is which members of the household can be taken authority from,
and the subject matter of the second *sutra* is that one should sit only after
taking authority at any place. The first *sutra* states that the authority of
the father, son, brother can also be taken, i.e., any sensible member of the
joint family, whether male or female, can be taken authority from. Authority
cannot be taken from a married girl. But the girl who, for any reason, always
stays with her father...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
400] [vyavahArasUtra spaSTIkaraNa kara detA hai ki "amuka samaya taka bhikSu
raheMge, usake bAda vaha sthAna bhI tumhArA ho jaayegaa|" aisI sthiti meM pUrva
zayyAdAtA hI zayyAtara rahatA hai| zayyAtara ke nirNaya kA Azaya yaha hai ki jo
zayyAtara hogA usI ke ghara kA AhAra Adi 'zayyAtarapiMDa' khlaaegaa| kabhI pUrva
zayyAdAtA bhI kahe ki "merI prAjJA hai" aura nUtana svAmI bhI kahe ki "merI bhI
aAjJA hai" taba donoM ko zayyAtara mAnanA caahie| yadi samajhAne para unake
samajha meM A jAya to kisI eka kI hI AjJA rakhanA ucita hai| kyoMki bRhatkalpa
u. 2 sU. 13 meM aneka svAmiyoM vAle makAna meM kisI eka svAmI kI AjJA lene kA
vidhAna kiyA gayA hai| zayyAtara sambandhI evaM zayyAtarapiMDa sambandhI vizeSa
jAnakArI nizItha u. 2 sU. 46 ke vivecana meM dekheN| sUtra meM gRhastha ke ghara
ke liye upAzraya zabda kA prayoga kiyA gayA hai| isakA kAraNa yaha hai ki jahAM
bhikSu ThaharA huA ho yA jahAM use ThaharanA ho, una donoM hI makAnoM ko
AgamakAra upAzraya zabda se kahate haiM / isIlie bRhatkalpa udde. 2 sU. 1-10 meM
pAnI ke ghar3e, surA yA sauvIra ke ghar3e aura dhAnya evaM khAdyasAmagrI rakhe
gRhastha ke ghara ko bhI upAzraya kahA gayA hai| saMpUrNa rAta-dina jahAM agni
arthAt bhaTTiyAM jalatI hoM yA dIpaka jalate hoM, aise gRhastha ke
prArambhajanya kArakhAne Adi sthAna ko bhI upAzraya kahA gayA hai| usI paddhati
ke kAraNa yahAM bhI gRhastha ke ghara meM bhikSu pahale se ThaharA huA hone se
use upAzraya kahA hai / vartamAna meM pracalita sAmAjika upAzraya meM sAdhu
ThaharA huA ho, use kisI ke dvArA becanA yA kirAye para denA sambhava nahIM hotA
hai| ataH yahAM upAzraya zabda se gRhastha kA makAna artha samajhanA caahie|
AjJAgrahaNa karane kI vidhi 23. vihavadhUyA nAyakulavAsiNI sA vi yAvi proggahaM
aNunnaveyamvA, kimaMga puNa piyA vA, bhAyA vA, putte vA, se vi yA vi oggahe
progevhiyagve / 24. pahevi proggahaM aNunnaveyavve / 23. pitA ke ghara para
jIvana yApana karane vAlI vidhavA lar3akI kI bhI AjJA lI jA sakatI hai, taba
pitA, bhAI, putra kA to kahanA hI kyA arthAt unako bhI AjJA grahaNa kI jA sakatI
hai| 24. yadi mArga meM ThaharanA ho to usa sthAna kI bhI AjJA grahaNa karanI
caahie| vivecana-ghara ke kina-kina sadasyoM kI prAjJA lI jA sakatI hai, yaha
prathama sUtra kA pratipAdya viSaya hai aura kisI bhI sthAna para AjJA lekara hI
baiThanA cAhie yaha dUsare sUtra kA pratipAdya viSaya hai| prathama sUtra meM
batAyA gayA hai ki pitA, putra, bhAI kI bhI AjJA lI jA sakatI hai arthAt
saMyukta parivAra kA koI bhI samajhadAra sadasya ho, cAhe vaha strI ho yA
puruSa, unakI AjJA lI jA sakatI hai| vivAhita lar3akI ko zrAjJA nahIM lI jA
sktii| kintu jo lar3akI kisI bhI kAraNa se sadA pitA

Page #221 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Seventh Uddeshak  [401] If you are staying in the same house, you can take
permission from the owner. Similarly, if there is a wise and responsible
servant, you can take permission from them. If you are sitting in an open space
outside the house (veranda, etc.) and the owner has locked the house and gone
somewhere, you can take permission from a passerby or a neighbor. According to
the second Sutra, if a monk has to stay on the way or under a tree while
wandering, they should also take permission for that place. A monk cannot sit
there without permission. At that time, if any traveler is passing by or any
person is sitting there, their permission can be taken. If there is no one to
give permission, the monk can stay there by saying, "This is the permission of
Shakendra." But in no way should one stay anywhere without taking permission,
this is the meaning of the second Sutra. If one forgets to take permission, they
should do Pratikraman for that. In the manuscripts, there are two types of words
"Phae Vi" and "Pahiye Vi". But according to the Bhashya, the reading "Phae Vi"
is correct here, which means that if you have to sit on the path, i.e., on the
way, you should also take permission. The use of "Pahiye Vi" should be
considered a scribal error.  The rule for taking permission in the case of a
change of government is as follows:  25. If a new king is crowned after the
death of the king, but the kingdom remains undivided and unattacked by enemies,
the royal lineage remains unbroken, and the administration remains the same,
then the previous permission remains valid for the monks and nuns.  26. If a new
king is crowned after the death of the king, and at that time the kingdom is
divided or attacked by enemies, the royal lineage is broken, or the
administration changes, then the monks and nuns should take permission again for
the sake of their monkhood, i.e., (the limits of restraint).  **Discussion:**
The monks should take permission from the owner of the kingdom, i.e., the king,
etc., where they want to wander. After taking permission, if the king changes,
there are two situations:

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
sAtavAM uddezaka] .[401 ke ghara meM hI rahatI ho to usakI bhI AjJA lI jA sakatI
hai| isI prakAra jo samajhadAra evaM jimmedAra naukara ho, usakI bhI AjJA lI jA
sakatI hai| _ makAna ke bAhara kA khulA sthAna (barAmadA) Adi meM baiThanA ho
aura makAna-mAlika ghara banda karake kahIM gayA huA ho to kisI rAhagIra yA
par3ausI kI bhI AjJA lI jA sakatI hai| dvitIya sUtrAnusAra bhikSu ko vihAra
karate hue kabhI mArga meM yA vRkSa ke nIce ThaharanA ho to usa sthAna kI bhI
AjJA lenI caahie| binA AjJA lie bhikSu vahAM bhI nahIM baiTha sakatA hai| usa
samaya yadi koI bhI pathika udhara se jA rahA ho yA koI vyakti vahAM baiThA ho
to usakI prAjJA lI jA sakatI hai| yadi koI bhI AjJA dene vAlA na ho to usa
sthAna meM Thaharane ke lie "zakeMdra kI AjJA hai" aisA uccAraNa karake bhikSa
Thahara sakatA hai| kintu kisI bhI prakAra se prAjJA lie binA kahIM para bhI
nahIM ThaharanA cAhie, yaha dUsare sUtra kA Azaya hai| yadi prAjJA lenA bhUla
jAe to usakI AlocanA pratikramaNa kara lenA caahie| pratiyoM meM "pahe vi" aura
"pahie vi" aise do taraha ke zabda milate haiN| kintu bhASya ke anusAra yahAM
"pahe vi" aisA pATha zuddha hai, jisakA artha hai ki patha meM arthAt mArga meM
baiThanA ho to usakI bhI AjJA lenI cAhie / "pahie vi" prayoga ko lipidoSa hI
samajhanA caahie| rAjyaparivartana meM AjJA grahaNa karane kA vidhAna 25. se
rajjapariyaTTesu, saMthaDesu, anvogaDesu, anvocchinnesu, aparapariggahiesu,
sacceva oggahassa puSvANunnavaNA ciTThai ahAlaMdamavi proggahe / 26. se
rajjapariyaTesu, asaMthaDesu, bogaDesu, vocchinnesu, parapariggahiesu
bhikkhubhAvassa aTThAe doccapi oggahe aNunaveyavve siyaa| 25. rAjA kI mRtyu ke
bAda naye rAjA kA abhiSeka ho kintu avibhakta evaM zatruoM dvArA anAkrAnta rahe,
rAjavaMza avichinna rahe aura rAjyavyavasthA pUrvavat rahe to sAdhu-sAdhviyoM ke
lie pUrvagRhIta AjJA hI avasthita rahatI hai| 26. rAjA kI mRtyu ke bAda naye
rAjA kA abhiSeka ho aura usa samaya rAjya vibhakta ho jAya yA zatruoM dvArA
AkrAnta ho jAya, rAjavaMza vicchinna ho jAya yA rAjyavyavasthA parivartita ho
jAya to sAdhu-sAdhviyoM ko bhikSu-bhAva arthAt (saMyama kI maryAdA) kI rakSA ke
lie dUsarI bAra AjJA le lenI caahie| vivecana-jisa rAjya meM bhikSuoM ko
vicaraNa karanA ho usake svAmI arthAt rAjA Adi kI AjJA le lenI caahie| AjJA lene
ke bAda yadi rAjA kA parivartana ho jAya taba do prakAra kI sthiti hotI hai

Page #222 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  402] [Vyavahar Sutra (1) If the prince or descendant of the former king
becomes the king, or only the person changes, but there is no change in the
other royal authority, system, and laws, then one can wander with the previous
permission, there is no need to seek permission again. (2) If a completely new
king is made, and the state system has changed, then it becomes necessary to
seek permission again to wander there. If the royal permission for wandering of
all the Sadhus and Sadhvis of all the Jain Sanghas is obtained by one prominent
person, then there is no need for any individual Sant-Sati to seek permission
separately. Sutra 1-2 3-4 The summary of the seventh Uddeshak is that a
Nirgranthi with contaminated practices from another Gachchha cannot be kept by
Pravartini etc. Sadhvis without asking the Acharya etc. and without purifying
her faults, but the Acharya etc. can keep her in the Gachchha even without
asking the Pravartini etc. Sadhvis after purifying her faults. If a Sadhu-Sadhvi
repeatedly commits the fault of Eshanadosha more than three times by neglecting,
or breaks the rules, then the food relationship with that Sadhu-Sadhvi can be
abandoned. Sadhvis cannot directly talk about this, but Sadhus can talk
directly. A Sadhu can sometimes give Diksha to a Sadhvi, and a Sadhvi can
sometimes give Diksha to a Sadhu, but they can do it under the protection of
Acharya etc., not under their own protection. A Sadhvi should not accept Diksha
under the protection of a very distant Acharya or Pravartini, but should accept
the protection of a nearby Acharya or Pravartini. A Sadhu can accept Diksha even
under the protection of a distant Acharya. Another Sadhvi can apologize to a
Sadhvi who has gone very far, but a Sadhu needs to meet directly to apologize. /
In the Bhashya, it is said that a Sadhu should also apologize from a distance in
certain circumstances. One should not study the Kalik Sutra in the Utkal (second
or third watch), but a Sadhvi can sometimes recite the study to the Upadhyaya
etc. One should not study when there are thirty-two types of Asvadhyaya times,
but one should definitely study when there is no Asvadhyaya. / One should not
study in one's own physical Asvadhyaya, but Sadhus and Sadhvis can recite the
Sutra-artha to each other. 9-10 11-12 13-14 15-16

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
402] [vyavahArasUtra (1) pUrva rAjA kA rAjakumAra yA usake vaMzaja rAjA bane hoM
athavA kevala vyakti kA parivartana huA ho, anya rAjasattA, vyavasthA aura
kAnUnoM kA koI parivartana na hA ho to pUrva grahaNa kI huI AjJA se vicaraNa
kiyA jA sakatA hai, puna: AjJA lene kI AvazyakatA nahIM rahatI hai| (2) yadi koI
sarvathA nayA hI rAjA banA ho, rAjyavyavasthA kA parivartana ho gayA ho to vahAM
vicaraNa karane ke lie punaH prAjJA lenA Avazyaka ho jAtA hai| sabhI jaina
saMghoM ke sAdhu-sAdhviyoM ke vicaraNa karane kI rAjAjJA eka pramukha vyakti ke
dvArA prApta kara lI jAya to phira pRthaka-pRthaka kisI bhI saMta-satI ko AjJA
lene kI AvazyakatA nahIM rahatI hai| sUtra 1-2 3-4 sAtaveM uddezaka kA sArAMza
anya gaccha se AI huI dUSita prAcAra vAlI nirgranthI ko pravartinI Adi sAdhviyAM
prAcArya Adi se pUche binA evaM usake doSoM kI zuddhi karAye binA nahIM rakha
sakatIM, kintu prAcArya Adi usake doSoM kI zuddhi karavAkara pravartinI Adi
sAdhviyoM ko pUche binA bhI gaccha meM rakha sakate haiN| upekSApUrvaka tIna
bAra se adhika eSaNAdoSa sevana yA vyavasthAbhaMga Adi karane para usa sAdhu-
sAdhvI ke sAtha AhAra-sambandha kA parityAga kiyA jA sakatA hai| aisA karane ke
lie sAdhviyAM pratyakSa vArtA nahIM kara sakatIM, kintu sAdhu pratyakSa vArtA
kara sakate haiN| sAdhu kabhI sAdhvI ko dIkSA de sakatA hai aura sAdhvI kabhI
sAdhu ko dIkSA de sakatI hai, kintu ve use prAcArya Adi kI nizrA meM kara sakate
haiM, apanI nizrA meM nhiiN| sAdhvI atidUrastha AcArya yA pravartinI kI nizrA
svIkAra karake dIkSA na leve, kintu sannikaTa prAcArya yA pravartinI kI hI nizrA
svIkAra kre| sAdhu dUrastha prAcArya kI nizrA svIkAra karake bhI dIkSA le sakatA
hai| atidUra gaI huI sAdhvI se anya sAdhvI kSamAyAcanA kara sakatI hai, kintu
sAdhu ko kSamApanA karane ke lie pratyakSa milanA Avazyaka hotA hai / bhASya meM
paristhitivaza sAdhu ko bhI dUrastha kSamApanA karanA kahA hai| utkAla meM
(dUsare-tIsare prahara meM) kAlika sUtra kA svAdhyAya nahIM karanA cAhie, kintu
kabhI sAdhvI upAdhyAya Adi ko svAdhyAya sunA sakatI hai| battIsa prakAra ke
asvAdhyAya kAla hoM taba svAdhyAya nahIM karanA aura jaba asvAdhyAya na ho taba
avazya svAdhyAya karanA / apanI zArIrika asvAdhyAya meM svAdhyAya nahIM karanA,
kintu sAdhu-sAdhvI paraspara sUtrArtha vAcanA de sakate haiN| 9-10 11-12 13-14
15-16

Page #223 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Seventh Uddeshak  **18-19, 20** [403] Sadhvis with a dikshaparaya of 30 years
or less should not stay without an Upadhyaya Pravartini, and Sadhvis with a
dikshaparaya of 60 years or less should not stay without an Acharya. If a dead
body of a Sadhu is found on the path while traveling, it should be disposed of
properly and in a suitable place. If they have useful equipment, they can be
taken and used with the permission of the Pracharaya. If they want to sell or
rent the Shayyatar house, they can take the permission of the new Swami, the
previous Swami, or both. They can also stay with the permission of a family
member or a responsible servant. The permission of a married daughter who always
stays at her father's house can also be taken. If they want to sit on the path,
they should also sit with permission. If the king or the state system changes,
it is necessary to take permission again to travel in that state. If the prince
or other descendants of the same king become king, they can travel with the
previous permission.  **21-22, 23, 24, 25-26**  **Upasangar Sutra 1-2, 5-8,
9-10, 11-12, 13-17, 18-19, 20, 21-24, 25-26**  This Uddeshak describes the
following topics: accepting a Sadhvi from another Gachchha into the Gachchha,
mutual Sambhogavichched, mutual Diksha, taking Nishra from a distant Pracharaya,
etc., seeking forgiveness from a distant person or not, doing Swadhyaya or not,
accepting Pracharaya and Upadhyaya by a Sadhvi, disposing of the dead body of a
Sadhu, taking permission for places to stay, taking new permission to travel in
a state, etc.  **// Seventh Uddeshak ends //**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
sAtavAM uddezaka] 18-19 20 [403 tIsa varSa kI dIkSAparyAya taka kI sAdhviyoM ko
upAdhyAya pravartinI ke binA nahIM rahanA cAhie aura 60 varSa taka kI
dIkSAparyAya vAlI sAdhviyoM ko binA AcArya ke nahIM rahanA caahie| vihAra karate
hue mArga meM sAdhu kA mRtadeha par3A huA dikha jAya to use yogya vidhi se evaM
yogya sthAna meM paraTha denA caahie| yadi unake upayogI upakaraNa ho to unheM
grahaNa kara prAcArya kI AjJA lekara upayoga meM liyA jA sakatA hai| zayyAtara
makAna ko bece yA kirAye para deve to nUtana svAmI kI yA pUrva svAmI kI yA donoM
kI AjJA lI jA sakatI hai| ghara ke koI sadasya kI yA jimmedAra naukara kI AjJA
lekara bhI ThaharA jA sakatA hai / sadA pitA ke ghara rahane vAlI vivAhita beTI
kI bhI AjJA lI jA sakatI hai| mArga meM baiThanA ho to bhI AjJA lekara hI
baiThanA caahie| rAjA yA rAjyavyavasthA parivartita hone para usa rAjya meM
vicaraNa karane ke lie punaH prAjJA lenA Avazyaka hai| yadi usI rAjA ke
rAjakumAra Adi vaMzaja rAjA baneM to pUrvAjJA se vicaraNa kiyA jA sakatA hai|
21-22 23 24 25-26 upasaMhAra sUtra 1-2 5-8 9-10 11-12 13-17 18-19 20 21-24 25-26
isa uddezaka meManya gaccha se AI sAdhvI ko gaccha meM lene kA, paraspara
saMbhogaviccheda karane kA, paraspara dIkSA dene kA, dUrastha prAcAryAdi kI
nizrA lene kA, dUrastha se kSamApanA karane yA na karane kA, svAdhyAya karane yA
na karane kA, sAdhvI ko prAcArya upAdhyAya svIkAra karane kA, sAdhu ke
mRtazarIra ko paraThane kA, Thaharane ke sthAnoM kI AjJA lene kA, rAjya meM
vicaraNa kI nUtana AjJA lene kA, ityAdi viSayoM kA varNana kiyA gayA hai / //
sAtavAM uddezaka samApta /

Page #224 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The eighth objective is the method of accepting a sleeping place. 1. The verse
says, "Whatever bed or bedding is available, let it be mine." If the Thera
(senior monk) permits, then it is acceptable. If the Thera does not permit, then
it is not acceptable. Thus, the acceptance of a bed or bedding is dependent on
the Thera's permission. 1. If one has stayed in a house during the winter or
summer, then one should accept whatever suitable place or bedding is available
in that house. If such a resolution is made, and the Thera gives permission for
that place, then it is acceptable to use the bed or bedding. If the Thera does
not give permission, then it is not acceptable to use the bed or bedding. If the
Thera does not give permission, then it is acceptable to accept the bed or
bedding in the order of seniority (from the highest to the lowest) according to
the order of initiation. Discussion: When staying in a house or shelter, one
should decide on the place to sit or sleep with the permission of the Guru or
the head. This ensures proper order and discipline. The Acharanga Sutra (2.2.3)
states the method of accepting a sleeping place (bedding) by saying that "after
giving suitable places to the Acharya, Upadhyaya, and other holders of such
positions, as well as to the young, old, sick, newly initiated, and guests
(visitors), the remaining monks should accept sleeping places in the order of
their discipline." The commentary elaborates on the proper order of the Acharya,
etc., and the conditions of the bed, such as even-uneven, with or without a
pillow. The Pracharya Sutra (2.2.3) instructs on remaining equanimous in various
types of suitable and unsuitable beds. The Uttaradhyayanasutra (2.2) states that
a monk should consider what will happen in one night and bear that situation
with equanimity. The Brihadkatha (3) also prescribes the acceptance of bed and
bedding in the order of seniority, which is a rule of renunciation, as it is not
necessary to follow it in cases of illness, etc.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
AThavAM uddezaka zayanasthAna ke grahaNa kI vidhi 1. gAhA uU pajjosavie, tAe,
gAhAe, tAe paesAe, tAe uvAsaMtarAe "jamiNaM jamiNaM sejjAsaMthAragaM labhejjA
tamiNaM tamiNaM mameva siyaa|" therA ya se aNujANejjA, tasseva siyA / therA ya
se no aNujANejjA no tasseva siyaa| evaM se kappai ahArAiNiyAe sejjAsaMthAragaM
paDiggAhittae / 1. hemanta yA grISma kAla meM kisI ke ghara meM Thaharane ke lie
rahA ho, usa ghara ke kisI vibhAga ke sthAnoM meM "jo-jo anukUla sthAna yA
saMstAraka mileM ve-ve meM grahaNa kruu|" _isa prakAra ke saMkalpa hone para bhI
sthavira yadi usa sthAna ke liye prAjJA de to vahAM zayyAsaMstAraka karanA
kalpatA hai / yadi sthavira AjJA na de to vahAM zayyA-saMstAraka grahaNa karanA
nahIM kalpatA hai| sthavira ke AjJA na dene para yathAratnAdhika-(dIkSAparyAya
se jyeSTha-kaniSTha) krama se zayyA sthAna yA saMstAraka grahaNa karanA kalpatA
hai| vivecana-kisI bhI ghara yA upAzraya prAdi meM Thaharane ke samaya yA bAda
meM apane baiThane yA sone ke sthAna kA guru yA pramukha kI prAjJA se nirNaya
karanA caahie| jisase vyavasthA evaM anuzAsana kA samyak pAlana hotA rahe /
AcArAMga zru. 2 a. 2 u. 3 meM zayanAsana (zayyAbhUmi) grahaNa karane kI vidhi kA
kathana karate hue batAyA hai ki "prAcArya upAdhyAya Adi padavIdhara evaM bAla,
vRddha, rogI, navadIkSita aura Agantuka (pAhuNe) sAdhunoM ko Rtu ke anukUla evaM
icchita sthAna yathAkrama se diye jAne ke bAda hI zeSa bhikSu saMyamaparyAya ke
krama se zayanasthAna grahaNa kreN| prAcArya Adi kA yathocita krama tathA sama-
viSama, savAta-nirvAta Adi zayyA kI avasthAoM kA bhASya meM vistRta vivecana
kiyA gayA hai| prAcA. zru. 2 a. 2 u. 3 meM aneka prakAra kI anukUla pratikUla
zayyAoM meM samabhAvapUrvaka rahane kA nirdeza kiyA gayA hai aura uttarA. a. 2
meM zayyAparISaha ke varNana meM kahA hai ki bhikSu isa prakAra vicAra kare ki
eka rAtri meM kyA ho jAegA, aisA socakara usa sthiti ko samabhAva se sahana kre|
bR. u. 3 meM bhI ratnAdhika ke krama se zayyA-saMstAraka grahaNa karane kA
vidhAna kiyA gayA hai jo utsargavidhAna hai, kyoMki rugNatA Adi meM usakA pAlana
karanA Avazyaka nahIM hotA hai|

Page #225 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Eighth Objective  **(1) GƒÅha -** House, dwelling, residence.  **(2) U≈´ -**
Hemant (winter) and Grishma (summer) seasons. **(3) Pajjosavie -** A monk who
has arrived or stayed in a house or residence. **(4) TƒÅe GƒÅhƒÅe -** In that
house. **(5) TƒÅe PaesƒÅe -** In a particular section or room of that house. **(6)
TƒÅe UvƒÅsantarƒÅe -** In a specific limited space within that room or section.
**Method of Bringing Bedding:**  **2.** A monk should seek bedding that is as
light as possible, so light that it can be carried in one hand. Such bedding can
be sought from the same village for one, two, or three days, with the intention
that it will be used during the Hemant or Grishma seasons.  **3.** A monk should
seek bedding that is as light as possible, so light that it can be carried in
one hand. Such bedding can be sought from the same village or a nearby village
for one, two, or three days, with the intention that it will be used during the
Varshavas (rainy season).  **4.** A monk should seek bedding that is as light as
possible, so light that it can be carried in one hand. Such bedding can be
sought from the same village or a distant village for one, two, three, four, or
five days, with the intention that it will be used during the BuddhavƒÅs (old
age).  **Discussion:**  The previous sutra discussed the method of taking
possession of a place using the term "bedding," while these sutras describe the
method of obtaining things like cloth.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
AThavAM uddezaka] [405 sUtra meM prayukta zabdoM ke artha(1) gAhA-gRha, makAna,
upAzraya / (2) uU-hemanta-grISma Rtu / (3) pajjosavie-gRha yA upAzraya meM
pahuMcA huyA yA ThaharA huA bhikSu / (4) tAe gAhAe-usa ghara meN| (5) tAe
paesAe-usa ghara ke eka vibhAga-kamare Adi meM / (6) tAe uvAsaMtarAe-usa kamare
Adi kI amuka sImita jagaha meN| zayyAsaMstAraka ke lAne kI vidhi 2. se ya
ahAlahusagaM sejjAsaMthAragaM gavesejjA, jaM cakkiyA egeNa hattheNa ogijjha jAva
egAhaM vA duyAhuM vA, tiyAhaM vA parivahittae, "esa me hemanta-gimhAsu bhvissi|"
3. se ya ahAlahusagaM sejjAsaMthAragaM gavesejjA, jaM cakkiyA egeNaM hattheNaM
ogijjha jAva egAhaM vA, duyAhaM vA, tiyAhaM vA addhANaM parivahittae, "esa me
vAsAvAsAsu bhvissi|" 4. se ya prahAlahusagaM sejjAsaMthAragaM gabesejjA, jaM
cakkiyA egeNaM hattheNaM ogijma jAva egAhaM vA, duyAhaM vA, tiyAhaM vA, cauyAhaM
thA, paMcAhaM vA, dUramavi addhANaM parivahitae, "esa me buDDAvAsAsu bhavissai /
" 2. zramaNa yathAsambhava halke zayyA-saMstAraka kA anveSaNa kare, vaha itanA
halkA ho ki use eka hAtha se grahaNa karake lAyA jA sake / aise zayyA-saMstAraka
eka, do yA tIna dina taka usI bastI se gaveSaNA karake lAyA jA sakatA hai, isa
prayojana se ki yaha zayyAsaMstAraka mere hemanta yA grISma Rtu meM kAma aaegaa|
3. zramaNa yathAsambhava halke zayyA-saMstAraka kA anveSaNa kare, vaha itanA
halkA ho ki use eka hAtha se grahaNa karake lAyA jA ske| aisA zayyA-saMstAraka
eka do yA tIna dina taka usI bastI se yA nikaTa kI anya bastI se gaveSaNA karake
lAyA jA sakatA hai, isa prayojana se ki--yaha zayyA saMstAraka mere varSAvAsa
meM kAma aaegaa| 4. zramaNa yathAsambhava halke zayyA-saMstAraka kI yAcanA kare,
vaha itanA halkA ho ki use eka hAtha se uThAkara lAyA jA ske| aisA zayyA-
saMstAraka eka, do, tIna, cAra yA pAMca dina taka usI bastI se yA anya dUra kI
bastI se bhI gaveSaNA karake lAyA jA sakatA hai, isa prayojana se ki yaha
zayyAsaMstAraka mere vRddhAvAsa meM kAma aaegaa| vivecanapUrva sUtra meM zayyA-
saMstAraka zabda se sthAna grahaNa karane kI vidhi kahI hai aura ina sUtroM meM
pATa Adi grahaNa karane kA vidhAna kiyA hai|

Page #226 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[406] The Pat and other things are accepted only as a matter of convenience and
only when needed, because it is not a general requirement for a Sadhu. The
commentary mentions the atonement for accepting Pat etc. during the Hemant
season due to unnecessary circumstances and calls the one who does not accept it
during the rainy season as deserving of atonement. These commentary provisions
show the main expectation of life preservation and physical peace. Therefore,
the monk should decide to accept or not accept Pat etc. wisely, keeping those
expectations in mind. These sutras state that whatever Pat etc. is brought
should be so light that it can be lifted with one hand. The search for the
necessary Pat etc. for the Hemant-summer season can be done in the same village
for three days, for the rainy season it can be done in the same village or in
another nearby village for three days, and for the permanent residence, the
search for Pat etc. can be done in the same village for five days or even in a
distant village. This is clearly stated in these three separate sutras. The
first sutra does not have the word "addhanam", the second sutra has "pradhanam"
and the third sutra has the word "duram avi pradhanam", which is why there is
some difference in the meaning of the three sutras. See Ni. U. 2 and Uddeshak 5
for further discussion of the bed-cover. See 5. Theranam Therabhumipattanam
Kappi Dandaye Va, Bhandaye Va, Chhataye Va, Mattae Va, Latthia Va, Bhishe Va,
Chele Va, Chelchilimili Ba, Chamme Va, Chammakose Va, Chammapalichcheyane Va
Avirahiye Ovase Thavetta Gahavaikulam Pindavayapdiaye Pavisittae Va,
Nikkhamittae Va / Kappi Nan Sanniyattacharinan Dochchampi Uggaham Anunnavetta
Pariharittae / 5. It is permissible for a monk who has attained the status of a
monk (alone) to go to a householder's house for food, keeping his staff, vessel,
umbrella, mat, stick, wooden seat, cloth, cloth-chilimili, leather, leather bag
and leather cover in a place where there is no one to take care of them. It is
permissible to take them again after returning from begging, with the permission
of the person who was looking after them. This sutra describes a monk who
wanders alone, who is a solitary dweller as described in Pracha. Shru. 1 A. 6 U.
2, Suy. Shru. 1 A. 10, Uttara. A. 32 Ga. 5 and Dashavan. Chu. 2 Ga. 10. He is
also old or approaching old age, a monk who is eligible for the status of a
monk, a general monk, and due to karmic association, he is living alone even in
old age, observing restraint as much as possible.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
406] [vyavahArasUtra pATa Adi ko prAtihArika hI grahaNa kiyA jAtA hai aura
AvazyakatA hone para hI grahaNa kiyA jAtA hai / kyoMki yaha sAdhu kI sAmAnya
upadhi nahIM hai / bhASya meM anAvazyaka paristhiti se hemanta Rtu ke pATa Adi
ke grahaNa karane kA prAyazcitta kahA hai aura varSAkAla meM grahaNa nahIM
karane vAle ko prAyazcitta kA pAtra kahA hai| ina bhASya-vidhAnoM meM jIvarakSA
evaM zArIrika samAdhi kI mukhya apekSA dikhAI gaI hai| ata: una apekSAoM ko
dhyAna meM rakhakara hI bhikSu ko vivekapUrvaka pATa Adi ke grahaNa karane yA na
karane kA nirNaya karanA caahie| ina sUtroM meM yaha batAyA gayA hai ki jo bhI
pATa aAdi lAveM, vaha itanA halkA honA cAhie ki eka hAtha se uThAkara lAyA jA
ske| hemanta-grISma kAla ke lie Avazyaka pATa Adi kI gaveSaNA tIna dina taka usI
prAmAdi meM kI jA sakatI hai, varSAvAsa ke lie usI prAmAdi meM yA anya nikaTa ke
grAmAdi meM tIna dina taka gaveSaNA kI jA sakatI hai aura sthaviravAsa ke lie
pATa Adi kI gaveSaNA utkRSTa pAMca dina taka usI grAmAdi meM yA dUra ke grAmAdi
meM bhI kI jA sakatI hai / aisA ina pRthak-pRthak tIna sUtroM meM spaSTa kiyA
gayA hai| prathama sUtra meM "addhANaM" zabda nahIM hai, dUsare sUtra meM
"praddhANaM" hai aura tIsare sUtra meM 'dUramavi praddhANaM' zabda hai, isI se
tInoM sUtroM ke artha meM kucha-kucha antara hai| zayyA-saMstAraka kA anya
vivecana ni. u. 2 tathA uddezaka pAMca meM dekheN| ekAkI sthavira ke
bhaNDopakaraNa aura gocarI jAne kI vidhi 5. therANaM therabhUmipattANaM kappai
daNDae vA, bhaNDae vA, chattae vA, mattae vA, laTThiyA vA, bhise vA, cele vA,
celacilimili bA, camme vA, cammakose vA, cammapaliccheyaNae vA avirahie ovAse
ThavettA gAhAvaikulaM piNDavAyapaDiyAe pavisittae vA, nikkhamittae vA / kappai
NaM sanniyaTTacArINaM doccaMpi uggahaM aNunnavettA pariharittae / 5.
sthaviratvaprApta (ekAkI) sthaviroM ko daNDa, bhANDa, chatra, mAtraka, lAThI,
kASTha kA Asana, vastra, vastra ko cilamilikA, carma, carmakoSa aura
carmaparicchedanaka avirahita sthAna meM rakhakara arthAt kisI ko sambhalAkara
gRhastha ke ghara meM AhAra ke lie jAnA-pAnA kalpatA hai / bhikSAcaryA, karake
punaH lauTane para jisakI dekha-rekha meM daNDAdi rakhe gaye haiM, usase dUsarI
bAra AjJA lekara grahaNa karanA kalpatA hai| vivecana isa sUtra meM aise ekAkI
vicaraNa karane vAle bhikSu kA varNana hai jo prAcA. zru. 1 a. 6 u. 2, sUya.
zru. 1 a. 10, uttarA. a. 32 gA. 5 tathA dazavaM. cU. 2 gA. 10 meM nirdiSTa
saparisthitika ekalavihArI hai| sAtha hI zarIra kI apekSA vRddha yA prativRddha
hai, sthavirakalpI sAmAnya bhikSu hai aura karmasaMyoga se vRddhAvasthA taka bhI
vaha akelA rahakara yathAzakti saMyama pAlana kara rahA hai /

Page #227 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Eighth Objective [407]  Due to physical reasons, he has to keep many
auxiliary instruments. He cannot go for begging or other activities carrying all
those instruments. If he finds an unsafe place to stay, leaving those
instruments there, children or dogs might break them or take them away, or
thieves might steal them. Due to such reasons, the sutra states that the elderly
monk should appoint someone to protect his instruments or inform someone sitting
nearby before leaving and inform them again upon returning, saying "I have
arrived." Only then should he take his instruments.  The exceptions stated in
this sutra for an elderly monk who is physically compelled to be alone, clearly
show the extremely liberal and anekanta vision of the sutra author or Jainism.
The elderly monk mentioned in the sutra carries a staff or stick for support
while walking, an umbrella for protection from heat, etc., and keeps many
containers due to ailments like stool, urine, phlegm, etc. He also keeps earthen
pots and other vessels, extra clothes and utensils, a mosquito net, a straw or
wooden seat for support while sitting, leather pieces, leather bags (upanaha,
shoes, etc.) or leather cutters, i.e., he keeps any instrument that is necessary
for his use.  The sutra states this rule for those instruments that are not
needed while going for begging. Padma-dhari or Jina-kalpi monks who have
specific practices do not use auxiliary instruments, and such a situation
mentioned in the sutra is not possible for a Gachchhagat monk. Because there are
many people in the Gachchha who perform various activities. Therefore, it is
clear from this sutra that even a common Bahushruta monk, due to circumstances,
can live alone for life and follow the rules of restraint as much as possible.
The rule of taking permission again for the bed-maker is as follows:  6. It is
not permissible for a monk, a nun, a Padhariya, a Sagariya, or a bed-maker to
take any instrument without informing them.  7. It is permissible for a monk, a
nun, a Padhariya, a Sagariya, or a bed-maker to take any instrument after
informing them.  8. It is not permissible for a monk, a nun, a Padhariya, a
Sagariya, or a bed-maker to take any instrument without informing them, even if
it is small.  9. It is permissible for a monk, a nun, a Padhariya, a Sagariya,
or a bed-maker to take any instrument after informing them, even if it is small.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
AThavAM uddezaka [407 zArIrika kAraNoM se use aneka aupagrahika upakaraNa
rakhane par3a rahe haiN| una sabhI upakaraNoM ko sAtha lekara gocarI Adi ke lie
vaha nahIM jA sakatA hai| use asurakSita sthAna rahane ko milA ho to vahAM una
upakaraNoM ko chor3akara jAne para bacce yA kutte unheM tor3a-phor3a deM yA
lekara cale jAeM athavA cora curA leM ityAdi kAraNoM se sUtra meM yaha vidhAna
kiyA gayA hai ki vaha vRddha bhikSu apane upakaraNoM kI surakSA ke lie kisI ko
niyukta karake jAe yA pAsa meM hI koI baiThA ho to use sUcita karake jAe aura
punaH Ane para use sUcita kara de ki 'maiM A gayA hUM' usake bAda hI una
upakaraNoM ko grahaNa kare / zArIrika sthitiyoM se vivaza akele vRddha bhikSu ke
lie bhI isa sUtra meM jo apavAdoM kA vidhAna kiyA gayA hai, isase yaha spaSTa
hotA hai ki sUtrakAra kI yA jinazAsana kI atyanta udAra evaM anekAMta dRSTi hai|
sUtrokta vRddha bhikSu calate samaya sahAre ke lie daNDa yA lAThI rakhatA hai,
garmI Adi se rakSA ke lie chatra rakhatA hai, mala-matra-kapha Adi vikAroM ke
kAraNa aneka mAtraka rakhatA hai. miTTI ke ghaDe Adi bhAMDa bhI rakhatA,
atirikta vastra-pAtra rakhatA hai, macchara Adi ke kAraNa maccharadA baiThane
meM sahAre ke lie bhUsikA-kASTha Asana karatA hai, carmakhaNDa, carmakoSa
(upAnaha jUtA Adi) yA carmachedanaka bhI rakhatA hai arthAt apane Avazyaka
upayogI koI bhI upakaraNa rakhatA hai / unameM se jina upakaraNoM kI gocarI jAne
ke samaya AvazyakatA na ho unake lie sUtra meM yaha vidhAna kiyA gayA hai|
viziSTa sAdhanA vAle paDimAdhArI yA jinakalpI bhikSu aupagrahika upakaraNa
rakhane Adi ke apavAdoM kA sevana nahIM karate haiM aura gacchagata bhikSu kI
aisI sUtrokta paristhiti honA sambhava bhI nahIM hai| kyoMki gaccha meM aneka
vaiyAvRtya karane vAle hote haiN| ata: paristhitivaza sAmAnya bahuzruta bhikSu
bhI jIvanaparyanta ekAkI rahakara yathAzakti saMyamamaryAdA kA pAlana karate hue
vicaraNa kara sakatA, yaha isa sUtra se spaSTa hotA hai| zayyA-saMstAraka ke lie
punaH AjJA lene kA vidhAna 6. no kappai niggaMthANa vA niggaMthINa vA
pADihAriyaM vA, sAgAriyasaMtiyaM vA sejjAsaMthAragaM voccapi oggahaM
aNaNunnavettA bahiyA niihritte| 7. kappai nigaMthANa vA niggaMthINa vA
pADihAriyaM vA, sAgAriyasaMtiyaM vA sejjAsaMthAragaM voccaMpi oggahaM
aNunnavettA bahiyA noharittae / 8. no kappai niggaMthANa vA niggaMthINa vA
pADihAriyaM vA, sAgAriyasaMtiyaM vA sejjAsaMthAragaM savvappaNA appiNittA docca
pi oggahaM aNaNunavettA ahidvitte| 9. kappai niggaMthANa vA niggaMthINa vA
pADihAriyaM vA, sAgAriyasaMtiyaM vA sajjAsaMthAragaM savvappaNA appiNittA doccaM
pi ora

Page #228 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Translation:  **408]**   **6.** It is not proper to take a *pratiharic* bed-
spread or bed-spread of a non-Jain householder, brought from outside, to another
place without seeking permission a second time.   **7.** It is proper to take a
*pratiharic* bed-spread or bed-spread of a non-Jain householder, brought from
outside, to another place only after seeking permission a second time.  **8.**
It is not proper to use a *pratiharic* bed-spread or bed-spread of a non-Jain
householder, brought from outside, after it has been completely handed over,
without seeking permission a second time.  **9.** It is proper to use a
*pratiharic* bed-spread or bed-spread of a non-Jain householder, brought from
outside, after it has been completely handed over, only after seeking permission
a second time.  **Discussion:** If it becomes necessary to take any *pratiharic*
equipment, such as a bed-spread or other household items, from the house where
it was received to another house, it is necessary to obtain permission from its
owner or inform him. For more information, see the discussion of *Ni. U. 2 Su.
53*. If any equipment, such as a *pa·π≠a* (cloth), has been brought, it can be
left in the *upa≈õraya* (shelter) under one's own care if it is not needed for a
short period of time. However, if it becomes necessary to take it back again, it
is necessary to seek permission again. This is the meaning of the second
*s≈´tra*. For more information, see the discussion of *Ni. U. 5 Su. 23*.
**Method of receiving a bed-spread:**  **10.** It is not proper to first receive
the bed-spread from the *nirgrantha* or *nirgranthi* and then seek their
permission.  **11.** It is proper to first seek permission from the *nirgrantha*
or *nirgranthi* and then receive the bed-spread.  **12.** However, one should
know this: If it is difficult to obtain a *pratiharic* bed-spread from the
*nirgrantha* or *nirgranthi*, then it is proper to first receive the bed-spread
and then seek their permission. "May it be well, sir! Please give it." This
should be said in a respectful and polite manner.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
408] [vyavahArasUtra 6. nirgrantha-nirgranthiyoM ko bAhara se lAyA huA
prAtihArika zayyA-saMstAraka yA zayyAtara kA zayyA-saMstAraka dUsarI bAra prAjJA
lie binA anyatra le jAnA nahIM kalpatA hai / 7. nirgrantha-nirgranthiyoM ko
bAhara se lAyA huA prAtihArika zayyA-saMstAraka yA zayyAttara kA zayyA-
saMstAraka dUsarI bAra AjJA lekara hI anyatra le jAnA kalpatA hai| 8.
nirgrantha-nirgranthiyoM ko bAhara se lAyA hA prAtihArika zayyA-saMstAraka yA
zayyAtara kA zayyA-saMstAraka sarvathA sauMpa dene ke bAda dUsarI bAra AjJA lie
binA kAma meM lenA nahIM kalpatA hai / 9. nirgrantha-nirgranthiyoM ko bAhara se
lAyA hA zayyA-saMstAraka yA zayyAtara kA zayyAsaMstAraka sarvathA sauMpa dene ke
bAda dUsarI bAra AjJA lekara hI kAma meM lenA kalpatA hai / vivecana-zayyAtara
kA yA anya gahastha kA zayyA-saMstAraka Adi koI bhI prAtihArika upakaraNa jisa
makAna meM rahate hue grahaNa kiyA gayA hai, usako dUsare makAna meM le jAnA
Avazyaka ho to usake svAmI se prAjJA prApta karanA yA use sUcanA karanA Avazyaka
hai| adhika jAnakArI ke lie ni. u. 2 sU. 53 kA vivecana dekheN| kisI kA pATa Adi
koI bhI upakaraNa lAyA gayA ho, use alpakAla ke lie Avazyaka na hone se upAzraya
meM hI apanI nizrA se chor3A jA sakatA hai kiMtu use jaba kabhI punaH lenA
Avazyaka ho jAya to dubArA AjJA lenA jarUrI hotA hai, yaha dUsare sUtrAdvika kA
zrAzaya hai / vizeSa jAnakArI ke lie ni. u. 5 sU. 23 kA vivecana dekheN| zayyA-
saMstAraka grahaNa karane kI vidhi 10. no kappA niggaMthANa vA niggaMthINa vA
puvAmeva oggahaM ogihittA tao pacchA annunvette| 11. kappai niggaMthANa vA
niggaMthINa vA puyAmeva oggahaM aNunnavettA tano pacchA progihitte| 12. aha puNa
evaM jANejjA-iha khalu nimgaMthANa vA niggaMthINa vA no sulabhe pADihArie sejjA
saMthArae tti kaTu evaM NaM kappai punvAmeva oggahaM ogiNhittA tao pacchA
annunnvette| "mA vahau ajjo! biiyaM" tti vai aNulomeNaM aNulomeyavve siyaa| 10.
nirgrantha-nirgranthiyoM ko pahale zayyA-saMstAraka grahaNa karanA aura bAda meM
unakI AjJA lenA nahIM kalpatA hai| 11. nirgrantha-nirgranthiyoM ko pahale prAjJA
lenA aura bAda meM zayyA-saMstAraka grahaNa karanA kalpatA hai|

Page #229 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Seventh Uddeshak] [409 12. If it is known that a Nirgrantha-Nirgranthi does not
have a suitable bed-spread available here, then it is permissible to first take
a place or bed-spread and then seek permission later. (But if there is any kind
of conflict between the Sannyasins and the owner of the bed-spread, then the
Acharya should tell them - 'O Aryas! On the one hand, you have taken residence
here, on the other hand, you are speaking harsh words to them') "O Aryas! You
should not behave in such a double-faulting manner with them." In this way, the
Acharya should appease the owner of the residence with kind words. Discussion -
If one has to sit or stay at any place, then the monk should first seek
permission, and only then should he stay there. Similarly, if one has to take
any material like cloth or grass, then one should first seek permission, and
only then should one take it or use it. Taking anything without seeking
permission first and then seeking permission is against the rules / This
violates the third Mahavrata. However, in the sutra, keeping in mind the
scarcity of houses, an exception has been given to take it in this way in
certain circumstances. This exception should not be overused or misused except
in special circumstances, and it should also be kept in mind that the decision
of the exceptional situation can only be made by the Geetaarth (Bahushruta)
monk. If an Alpgyan Abahushruta-Ageetartha monk does this, then this is his
unauthorized act. However, they can perform this exception under the guidance of
Geetaarth-Bahushruta. In the explanation of the last sentence of this sutra, it
is said that - "In a village where there is a rare bed, some Sadhagas go there
and stay in a suitable house without seeking permission, and the owner of the
house becomes angry and starts arguing. Then, other monks or the Acharya arrive
from behind and say to that Sadhu with anger that "Oh Arya! Why are you
committing this double crime / You are staying in their house, and you are also
arguing with them. Be quiet, keep quiet / " In this way, scolding him, then
appease the house owner and politely talk to him and get permission. For more
discussion, see Dasha. D. 2 / Request for a spoiled or forgotten tool 13.
Nigganthassam Gahavaikulam Pindavaaya Padiyaaye Anupavitthassam Annayare
Ahalahusae Uvagaranjaaye Paribhathe Sia. Tam Cha Keey Sahammiye Pasejja, Kappi
Se Sagarakadam Gahaya Jatheva Annammannam Pasejja Tatheva Evam Vaejja 50- "Ime
Bhe Ajjo! Ki Parinaaye?" Uo Se Ya Vaejja "Parinaaye" Tasseva Padinijjaayevave
Sia. Se Ya Vaejja- "No Parinaaye" Tam No Appana Paribhujejjana No Annammannass
Daavae, Egante Bahufasue Thandhile Paritthaveyavve Sia.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
sAtavAM uddezaka] [409 12. yadi yaha jAne ki nirgrantha-nirgranthiyoM ko yahAM
prAtihArika zayyA-saMstAraka sulabha nahIM hai to pahale sthAna yA zayyA-
saMstAraka grahaNa karanA aura bAda meM AjJA lenA kalpatA hai| (kintu aisA
karane para yadi saMyatoM ke aura zayyA-saMstAraka ke svAmI ke madhya kisI
prakAra kA kalaha ho jAya to prAcArya unheM isa prakAra kahe-'he Aryo ! eka ora
to tumane inako vasati grahaNa kI hai, dUsarI ora inase kaThora vacana bola rahe
ho") "he Aryo ! isa prakAra tumheM inake sAtha aisA duharA aparAdhamaya
vyavahAra nahIM karanA caahie|" isa prakAra anukala vacanoM se prAcArya usa
vasati ke svAmI ko anukUla kre| vivecana--kisI bhI sthAna para baiThanA yA
ThaharanA ho to bhikSu ko pahale prAjJA lenI cAhie, bAda meM hI vahAM ThaharanA
caahie| isI prakAra pATa Adi athavA taNa Adi anya koI bhI padArtha lene hoM to
unako pahale prAjJA lenA cAhie, bAda meM hI use grahaNa karanA yA upayoga meM
lenA caahie| kisI bhI vastu kI AjJA lene ke pahale grahaNa karanA aura phira
prAjJA lenA avidhi hai / isase tRtIya mahAvrata dUSita hotA hai| tathApi sUtra
meM makAna kI durlabhatA ko lakSya meM rakhate hue paristhitivaza kabhI isa
prakAra pravidhi se grahaNa karane kI prApavAdika chUTa dI gaI hai| vizeSa
paristhiti ke atirikta isa chUTa kA ati upayoga yA durupayoga nahIM karanA cAhie
tathA yaha bhI dhyAna rakhanA cAhie ki prApavAdika sthiti kA nirNaya gItArtha
(bahuzruta) bhikSu hI kara sakate haiN| alpajJa abahuzruta-agItArtha bhikSu yadi
aisA kare to usakI yaha anAdhikAra ceSTA hai| phira bhI gItArtha-bahuzruta kI
nizrA se ve isa apavAda kA pAcaraNa kara sakate haiN| isa sUtra ke antima vAkya
kI vyAkhyA meM batAyA gayA hai ki- "jahAM durlabha zayyA ho usa gAMva meM kucha
sAdhAge jAe~ aura kisI upayukta makAna meM AjJA lie binA makAna kA mAlika ruSTa
hokara vAda-vivAda karane lge| taba pIche se anya bhikSu yA prAcArya pahuMca
kara usa sAdhu ko AkrozapUrvaka kaheM ki "are Arya ! tU yaha dugutA aparAdha
kyoM kara rahA hai / eka to inake makAna meM ThaharA hai, dUsare inhIM se vAda-
vivAda kara rahA hai| cupa raha, zAMti rakha / " isa prakAra DAMTa kara phira
makAna-mAlika ko prasanna karate hue namratA se vArtAlApa karake AjJA prApta
kreN| adhika vivecana ke lie dazA. da. 2 dekheM / patita yA vismRta upakaraNa kI
eSaNA 13. niggaMthassa NaM gAhAvaikulaM piNDavAya paDiyAe aNupaviTThassa
aNNayare ahAlahusae uvagaraNajAe paribhaThe siyaa| taM ca keI sAhammie pAsejjA,
kappai se sAgArakaDaM gahAya jattheva aNNamaNNaM pAsejjA tattheva evaM vaejjA
50-"ime bhe ajjo! ki pariNAe ?" u0 se ya vaejjA"pariNAe" tasseva paDiNijjAeyavve
siyaa| se ya vaejjA-"no pariNAe" taM no appaNA paribhujejjA no aNNamaNNassa
dAvae, egaMte bahuphAsue thaNDile pariTTaveyavve siyaa|

Page #230 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 13. If a Niggrantha householder enters a house for food and drops a small
item, and a Sarmic Shraman sees it, he should take it with the intention of
returning it to its owner. When he encounters another Shraman, he should ask,
"Arya, do you recognize this item?" If the Shraman replies, "Yes, I recognize
it," then he should return the item. If the Shraman replies, "I don't recognize
it," then the Niggrantha should neither use it himself nor give it to anyone
else, but should leave it on a secluded, lifeless ground.  ## 14. If a
Niggrantha drops a small item while going to or from the Vyavahara-bhoomi or the
Vihar-bhoomi, and a Sarmic Shraman sees it, he should take it with the intention
of returning it to its owner. When he encounters another Shraman, he should ask,
"Arya, do you recognize this item?" If the Shraman replies, "Yes, I recognize
it," then he should return the item. If the Shraman replies, "I don't recognize
it," then the Niggrantha should neither use it himself nor give it to anyone
else, but should leave it on a secluded, lifeless ground.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
410] [vyavahArasUtra 14. niggaMthassa gaM bahiyA viyArabhUmi vA, vihArabhUmi vA
nikkhantassa aNNayare ahAlahusae uvagaraNajAe paribhaTThe siyaa| taM ca kei
sAhammie pAsejjA, kappai se sAgArakaDaM gahAya jattheva aNNamaNNaM pAsejjA
tattheva evaM vaejjA 50"ime bhe ajjo ! ki pariNNAe ?" u0-se ya vaejjA-"pariNAe"
tassava paDiNijjAeyavve siyaa|| se ya vaejjA-"no pariNAe" taM no appaNA
paribhujejjA, no aNNamaNNassa dAvae, egate bahuphAsue thaNDile pariTheveyavve
siyaa| 15. niggaMthassa NaM gAmANugAma dUijjamANassa aNNayare uvagaraNajAe
parimbhalai siyaa| taM ca keI sAhammie pAsejjA, kappai se sAgArakaDaM gahAya
dUramavi addhANa parivahittae, jattheva aNNamaNNaM pAsejjA tattheva evaM vaejjA
pa0"ime bhe ajjo ! ki pariNAe ?" u.-se ya vaejjA "pariNAe" tasseva
paDiNijjAeyavve siyaa| se ya vaejjA-"no pariNAe" taM no appaNA paribhujejjA, no
aNNamaNNassa dAvae, egate bahuphAsue thaNDile pariveyabve siyaa| 13. nirgrantha
gRhastha ke ghara meM AhAra ke lie praveza kare aura kahIM para usakA koI laghu
upakaraNa gira jAe, usa upakaraNa ko yadi koI sArmika zramaNa dekhe to 'jisakA
yaha upakaraNa hai use de dUMgA' isa bhAvanA se lekara jAe aura jahAM kisI
zramaNa ko dekhe, vahAM isa prakAra kahe pra0-'he Arya ! isa upakaraNa ko
pahacAnate ho ?' (arthAt yaha ApakA hai ?) u0-vaha kahe-'hAM pahacAnatA hU~'
(arthAt hAM yaha merA hai) to usa upakaraNa ko use de de| yadi vaha kahe-'maiM
nahIM pahacAnatA huuN|' to usa upakaraNa kA na svayaM upayoga kare aura na anya
kisI ko de kintu ekAMta prAsuka (nirjIva) bhUmi para use paraTha de / 14.
svAdhyAyabhUmi meM yA uccAra-prasravaNa-bhUmi meM jAte-pAte hue nirgrantha kA
koI laghu upakaraNa gira jAe, usa upakaraNa ko yadi koI sArmika zramaNa dekhe
to-'jisakA yaha upakaraNa hai, use de dUMgA' isa bhAvanA se lekara jAe aura
jahAM kisI zramaNa ko dekhe, vahAM isa prakAra kahe pra0'he Arya ! isa upakaraNa
ko pahacAnate ho ?' u0-vaha kahe-'hAM pahacAnatA hU~'-to usa upakaraNa ko use de
de| yadi vaha kahe-'maiM nahIM pahacAnatA hUM to usa upakaraNa kA na svayaM
upayoga kare aura na anya kisI ko de kintu ekAnta prAsuka bhUmi para use paraTha
de|

Page #231 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Eighth Precept:  **[411 15. If a non-Jain's equipment falls while traveling
from village to village, and a SƒÅrmika ≈örama·πáa sees it and thinks, "I will give
it to its owner," he should carry it even a long distance. When he sees another
≈örama·πáa, he should ask, "ƒÄrya, do you recognize this equipment?" If the other
≈örama·πáa says, "Yes, I recognize it," he should give it to him. If he says, "I
don't recognize it," he should neither use it himself nor give it to anyone
else, but should leave it on a secluded, suitable ground. **  **Discussion:** If
a monk's small equipment, such as clothing, falls while going for contemplation,
walking, etc., and another monk sees it on the same path, he should pick it up
and think, "Whose equipment is this?" Then he should show the equipment to those
monks and ask, and give it to the owner. If none of the nearby monks claim it,
he should leave it if it is small or not very useful. If it is a large
equipment, such as a broom, he should carry it with him for some distance while
walking, etc., and ask other monks when he meets them. If the owner of the
equipment cannot be found, and it is useful and needed, he can use it after
taking permission from the Guru and other householders. However, he should not
use it before inquiring, investigating, or seeking permission. If it is known to
be a monk's clothing, etc., but it could also belong to a householder, it is
necessary to seek permission from the householder again. Generally, one should
not use such equipment of unknown ownership. Because there is a possibility of
distress, etc., being caused by its owner later. Or, if someone has deliberately
enchanted the equipment and left it on the path, it could also be harmful to
use. If the found equipment is in good condition, it should not be broken and
left. But it should be left intact in a suitable place or with a suitable
person, with an explanation.  **Additional Rule for Bringing Extra Utensils:**
**16. If a monk or a non-Jain has an extra utensil for the benefit of another,
even if it is far away, and he thinks, "He will carry it, or I will carry it, or
someone else will carry it," he should not give it to another without asking or
informing. He should give it to another only after asking and informing.**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
AThavAM uddezaka] [411 15. grAmAnugrAma vihAra karate hue nirgrantha kA koI
upakaraNa gira jAe, usa upakaraNa ko yadi koI sArmika zramaNa dekhe aura 'jisakA
yaha upakaraNa hai, use de dUMgA' isa bhAvanA se vaha usa upakaraNa ko dUra taka
bhI lekara jAe aura jahAM kisI zramaNa ko dekhe, vahAM isa prakAra kahe pra.'he
Arya ! isa upakaraNa ko pahacAnate ho?' u.-vaha kahe--'hAM pahacAnatA hU~ to usa
upakaraNa ko use de de| yadi vaha kahe 'maiM nahIM pahacAnatA hU~ to usa
upakaraNa kA na svayaM upayoga kare aura na anya kisI ko de, kintu ekAnta
prAsuka bhUmi para use paraTha de / vivecana-gocarI, vihAra Adi ke lie jAte-pAte
samaya bhikSu kA koI choTA-sA upakaraNa vastrAdi gira jAya aura usI mArga se
jAte hue kisI anya bhikSu ko dikha jAya to use uThA lenA cAhie aura yaha anumAna
karanA cAhie ki 'yaha upakaraNa kisa kA hai ?' phira una-una bhikSuoM ko vaha
upakaraNa dikhAkara pUchanA cAhie aura jisakA ho use de denA caahie| yadi vahAM
Asa-pAsa upasthiti sAdhUtroM meM se koI bhI use svIkAra na kare to yadi
upakaraNa choTA hai yA adhika upayogI nahIM hai to use paraTha denA cAhie /
bar3A upakaraNa rajoharaNAdi hai to kucha dUra taka vihArAdi meM sAtha lekara
jAve aura anya sAdhu jahAM mileM, vahAM unase pUcha lenA caahie| yadi usa
upakaraNa kA svAmI jJAta na ho sake aura vaha upayogI upakaraNa hai evaM usakI
AvazyakatA bhI hai to guru evaM anya gRhastha kI AjJA lekara apane upayoga meM
liyA jA sakatA hai / kintu anumAna se pUchatAcha yA gaveSaNA karane ke pUrva
evaM prAjJA lene ke pUrva upayoga meM nahIM lenA caahie| koI vastrAdi sAdhu kA
mAlUma par3e, parantu vaha gRhastha kA bhI ho sakatA hai, ataH punaH gRhastha kI
bhI AjJA lenA Avazyaka ho jAtA hai| sAmAnyatayA to aise ajJAta svAmI ke
upakaraNa ko upayoga meM lenA hI nahIM cAhie / kyoMki bAda meM usake svAmI dvArA
kleza Adi utpanna hone kI saMbhAvanA rahatI hai| athavA kabhI kisI ne jAnabUjha
kara maMtrita karake usa upakaraNa ko mArga meM chor3A ho to bhI upayoga meM
lene para ahita ho sakatA hai / yadi vaha prApta upakaraNa acchI sthiti meM hai
to use chinna-bhinna karake nahIM paraThanA cAhie / kintu akhaMDa hI kahIM yogya
sthAna yA yogya vyakti ke pAsa spaSTIkaraNa karate hue chor3a denA caahie|
atirikta pAtra lAne kA vidhAna 16. kappA niggaMthANa vA niggaMthINa vA
airegapaDiggahaM aNNamaNNassa aTThAe dUramavi addhANaM pariyahittae, 'so vA gaM
dhAressai, ahaM vA NaM dhAressAmi, aNNo vA NaM dhAressai', no se kappai te
aNApucchiya, aNAmaMtiya aNNamaNesi dAuM vA aNuppadAuM vaa| kappai se te
Apucchiya AmaMtiya aNNamosa vAuM vA aNuppadAuM vaa|

Page #232 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 412 //  [Vyavahar Sutra 16. It is not proper to take the extra Patra meant
for Nirgranth-Nirgranthis for oneself or to give it to someone else. / 'He will
take it, I will keep it, or if someone else needs it, I will give it to them.'
Thus, it is not proper to give or invite someone else to take the Patra meant
for someone else without asking them or inviting them. / It is proper to give or
invite someone else after asking or inviting them. / The quantity and measure of
each Upadhi of a Vivechan-Bhikshu is fixed. If the quantity of any Upadhi is not
available in the Agam, then its quantity is determined according to the Gan-
Samachari. The number of Patra is not clearly stated in the Agam. In the Niyukti
Bhashya etc., one Patra or two Patra including a unit is determined, but since
keeping many Patra is proven by the Agam, according to the current Gan-
Samachari, there are different traditions of keeping 4-6 or more. The rule here
is to take Patra in excess of the limit of the Gan, or to order extra Patra from
where it is available. When taking such Patra, the Acharya-Upadhyaya or the
particular person whose instruction is given to the householder should be given
first and invited. Later, it can be given to someone else. / In Nishita U. 14
Sutra 5, there is a description of taking Patra for the purpose and purpose of
the Gani, and there, in Sutra 6-7, there is a provision for giving extra Patra
only to the incapable. Therefore, allowing to take extra Patra is the subject of
the authority of the Acharya etc. Gitas. For a special description, see the
discussion of Nishita U. 14. The quantity of Unodari of food is 17. 1. Eating
food with one Kavala equal to the size of one's mouth is called Alpahar. 2.
Eating food with twelve Kavala equal to the size of one's mouth is called Ardho-
Unodarika.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
412 // [vyavahArasUtra 16. nirgrantha-nirgranthiyoM ko eka-dUsare ke lie adhika
pAtra bahuta dUra le jAnA kalpatA hai / 'vaha dhAraNa kara legA, maiM rakha lUgA
athavA anya ko AvazyakatA hogI to use de duuNgaa|' isa prakAra jinake nimitta
pAtra liyA hai, unheM lene ke lie pUche binA, nimantraNa kiye binA, dUsare ko
denA yA nimantraNa karanA nahIM kalpatA hai / unheM pUchane ke nimantraNa karane
ke bAda anya kisI ko denA yA nimantraNa karanA kalpatA hai / vivecana-bhikSu kI
pratyeka upadhi kI koI na koI saMkhyA evaM mApa nizcita hotA hai| yadi kiso
upadhi kA parimANa Agama meM upalabdha nahIM hotA hai to usake viSaya meM gaNa-
samAcArI ke anusAra parimANa kA nirdhAraNa kiyA jAtA hai| pAtra ke viSaya meM
saMkhyA kA nirdhAraNa Agama meM spaSTa nahIM hai| niyukti bhASyAdi meM eka pAtra
athavA mAtraka sahita do pAtra kA nirdhAraNa milatA hai, kintu Agama se aneka
pAtra rakhanA siddha hone se vartamAna gaNa-samAcArI anusAra 4-6 yA aura adhika
rakhane kI bhinna-bhinna paraMparAeM pracalita haiN| jisa gaNa kI jo bhI maryAdA
hai, usase atirikta pAtra grahaNa karane kA yahAM vidhAna kiyA gayA hai athavA
jahAM upalabdha ho vahAM se atirikta pAtra maMgAye jAte haiN| aise pAtra grahaNa
karate samaya jisa AcArya-upAdhyAya kA yA vyakti vizeSa kA nirdeza gRhastha ke
samakSa kiyA ho, unheM hI pahale denA evaM nimaMtraNa karanA caahie| bAda meM
anya kisI ko diyA jA sakatA hai / nizItha u. 14 sU. 5 meM gaNI ke uddeza evaM
samuddeza se pAtra grahaNa karane kA varNana hai aura vahIM para sUtra 6-7 meM
asamartha ko hI atirikta pAtra dene kA vidhAna hai| ataH atirikta pAtra grahaNa
karake kI anumati denA prAcAryAdi gItArthoM ke adhikAra kA viSaya hai| vizeSa
varNana ke lie nizItha u. 14 kA vivecana dekheN| AhAra kI UnodarI kA parimANa
17. 1. aTTha kukkuDiaMDagappamANamette kavale AhAraM prAhAremANe appaahaare| 2.
duvAlassa kukkuDiaMDagappamANamette kavale AhAraM AhAremANe avaDDhomoriyA / 3.
solasa kukkuDiaMDagappamANamette kavale AhAraM AhAremANe dubhAgapatte,
addddhomoyriyaa| 4. cauvvIsaM kukkuDiaMDagappamANamette kavale AhAraM pAhAremANe
tibhAgapatte, aNsiyaa| 5. egatIsaM kukkuDiaMDagappamANamette kavale AhAraM
pAhAremANe kiNcuunnomoyriyaa| 6. battIsaM kukkuDiaMDagappayANamette kavale
AhAraM pAhAremANe pamANapatte / 7. etto ekeNa vi kavaleNa UNagaM prAhAraM
prAhAremANe samaNe niggaMthe no pakAmabhoi tti vattanvaM siyaa| 17. 1. apane
mukhapramANa pATha kavala AhAra karane se alpAhAra kahA jAtA hai| 2. apane
mukhapramANa bAraha kavala AhAra karane se kucha adhika ardha UnodarikA kahI
jAtI hai|

Page #233 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Eighth Objective [413]  3. Eating sixteen kavals of food according to one's
mouth-measure is called **dvibhaga-prapta aahar** (two-part obtained food) and
**ardha-unodari** (half-unodari).  4. Eating twenty-four kavals of food
according to one's mouth-measure is called **tribhaga-prapta aahar** (three-part
obtained food) and **eka-bhaga-unodarika** (one-part unodarika).  5. Eating
thirty-three kavals of food according to one's mouth-measure is called
**kinchit-unodarika** (slightly unodarika).  6. Eating thirty-two kavals of food
according to one's mouth-measure is called **pramana-prapta aahar** (measure-
obtained food). A Shraman who eats even one kaval less than this is not called
**nirgrantha prakama-bhoji** (a liberated one who eats according to the rules).
**Discussion:**  The Bhagavati Sutra, Shatak 7 and Shatak 25, as well as the
Uvvaiya Sutra, also mention similar statements regarding the **unodari**
penance. Along with the nature of **aahar-dravya-unodari** (food-substance
unodari), they also explain the distinctions of **upakarana-unodari**
(instrument unodari) etc.  The Uttara Adhyayana 30, in its description of
penance, only mentions **aahar-unodari**. It does not discuss the distinctions
of **upakarana-unodari** etc. It mentions five types of **aahar-unodari**: (1)
**dravya** (substance), (2) **kshetra** (field), (3) **kal** (time), (4)
**bhav** (feeling), and (5) **paryaya** (alternative).  (1) **Dravya** - Eating
less than one's full quota of food.  (2) **Kshetra** - Acquiring things related
to a village or other area, or acquiring things like a begging bowl in six
shapes while wandering for alms.  (3) **Kal** - Acquiring things in the form of
the time of bringing and eating food, like a watch or an hour.  (4) **Bhav** -
Acquiring things from the house, or acquiring things based on the caste,
clothes, or feelings of men and women.  (5) **Paryaya** - Acquiring one thing
from each of the above four types of **dravya** etc. is included in those
respective distinctions. Acquiring many things from these four types together is
called **paryaya-unodari**.  The present Sutra describes the first type,
**dravya-unodari**, through the following five distinctions:  (1) **Alpa-aahar**
(less food) - Eating one kaval, two kavals, or up to the prescribed kaval
measure is called **alpa-aahar-unodari**.  (2) **Aparadh-unodari** (less than
half unodari) - Eating nine to twelve kavals or fifteen kavals is considered
eating less than half the quota. This is called **aparadh-unodari**. This is the
first type of **unodari** called **alpa-aahar**, and the second type is called
**unodari** because it is less than half the quota.  (3) **Dvibhaga-prapta-
unodari** (two-part obtained unodari) - Eating sixteen kavals is considered
eating half the quota. When the full quota is divided into four parts, this is
two parts. Therefore, the Sutra calls it **dvibhaga-prapta-unodari**. Since it
is two parts of the unodari, it can also be called **ardha-unodari**.  (4)
**Tribhaga-prapta-anshika-unodari** (three-part obtained unodari) - Eating
twenty-four kavals (twenty-seven to thirty kavals) is considered three-part food
and one-part unodari. The Sutra uses the term **anshika-unodari** for this. In
this, three parts of the four parts of food are eaten, so it is **tribhaga-
prapta-aahar-rupa-unodari**. Or it can also be called **pav-unodari**.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
AThavAM uddezaka [413 3. apane mukhapramANa solaha kavala AhAra karane se
dvibhAgaprApta AhAra aura arddha UnodarI kahI jAtI hai| 4. apane mukhapramANa
caubIsa kavala AhAra karane se tribhAgaprApta AhAra aura eka bhAga UnodarikA
kahI jAtI hai| 5. apane mukhapramANa ekatIsa kavala AhAra karane se kiMcit
UnodarikA kahI jAtI hai| 6. apane mukhapramANa battIsa kavala AhAra karane se
pramANa prApta AhAra kahA jAtA hai| isase eka bhI kavala kama pAhAra karane vAlA
zramaNa nirgrantha prakAmabhojI nahIM kahA jAtA hai / vivecana-bhagavatIsUtra
zataka 7 tathA za. 25 evaM uvavAIsUtra meM bhI UnodarI tapa ke viSaya meM aisA
hI kathana hai| 'AhAradravya-UnodarI' ke svarUpa ke sAtha hI vahAM upakaraNa-
UnodarI Adi bhedoM kA bhI spaSTIkaraNa kiyA gayA hai / uttarA. a. 30 ke tapa-
varNana meM AhAra-UnodarI kA hI kathana kiyA hai| upakaraNa-UnodarI Adi bhedoM
kI vivakSA vahAM nahIM kI hai| vahAM para AhAra-UnodarI ke 5 bheda kahe haiM-(1)
dravya, (2) kSetra, (3) kAla, (4) bhAva aura (5) paryAya se / (1) dravya seapanI
pUrNa khurAka se kama khAnA / (2) kSetra se grAmAdi kSetra saMbaMdhI abhigraha
karanA athavA bhikSAcarI meM bhramaNa karane ke mArga kA peTI Adi cha: AkAra meM
abhigraha karanA / (3) kAla se--gocarI lAne va khAne kA prahara, ghaMTA Adi rUpa
meM abhigraha karanA / (4) bhAva se-ghara meM rahe padArthoM se yA strI puruSoM
ke varNa, vastra-bhAva Adi se abhigraha karanA / (5) paryAya se- uparokta
dravyAdi cAra prakAroM meM se eka-eka kA abhigraha karanA una-una bhedoM meM
samAviSTa hai aura ina cAra meM se aneka abhigraha eka sAtha karanA 'paryAya
UnodarI' hai| prastuta sUtra meM ina pAMcoM meM se prathama dravya UnodarI kA
nimna pAMca bhedoM dvArA varNana kiyA hai (1) alpAhAra-eka kavala, do kavala
yAvat pATha kavala pramANa AhAra karane para alpAhAra UnodarI hotI hai| (2)
apArdha-UnodarI-nava se lekara bAraha kavala athavA pandraha kavala pramANa
AhAra karane para prAdhI khurAka se kama AhAra kiyA jAtA hai| use "apArddha
UnodarI" kahate haiM, arthAt pahalI alpAhAra rUpa UnodarI hai aura dUsarI AdhI
khurAka se kama AhAra karane rUpa UNodarI hai| (3) dvibhAgaprApta UnodarI
(arddha UnodarI)-16 kavala pramANa pAhAra karane para arddha khurAka kA AhAra
kiyA jAtA hai jo pUrNa khurAka ke cAra bhAga vivakSita karane para do bhAga rUpa
hotI hai, ataH ise sUtra meM "dvibhAgaprApta UnodarI" kahA hai aura do bhAga kI
UnodarI hone se ise "arddha UnodarI" bhI kaha sakate haiN| (4) tribhAgaprApta-
aMsikA UnodarI24 kavala (27 se 30 kavala) pramANa AhAra karane para tribhAga
AhAra hotA hai aura eka bhAga AhAra kI UnodarI hotI hai| isake lie sUtra meM
"aMzikA-UnodarI" zabda kA prayoga kiyA gayA hai| isameM AhAra ke cAra bhAga meM
se tIna bhAga kA pAhAra kiyA jAtA hai, ataH yaha tribhAgaprApta AhArarUpa
UnodarI hai| athavA ise 'pAva UnodarI' bhI

Page #234 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[414] The Vyavahar Sutra can be cited. Due to scribal errors, there are
variations in the text of the manuscripts at this place, therefore the text has
been corrected from other Agamas. / In the manuscripts, readings like
'promoyarie' and 'pattomoyarie' are available. (5) On examining the evidence of
the Kicchit-Unodari-31 Kaval, it is found that there is only one Kaval of
Unodari, which is called 'Kicchit Unodari' because it is less than the 32 Kaval
diet. / The last part of the Sutra clarifies that a monk who performs any of
these five types of Unodari is not a Prakamabhoji (one who eats to his fill).
One who consumes a full diet of 32 Kavals is called a Pramanapraptabhoji. / He
does not even have a Kicchit Unodari. It is essential for a monk to always
perform Unodari tapas for sensory restraint and Brahmacharya Samadhi, i.e., he
should never eat to his fill. In Aacha. Shru. 1 A. 9 U. 4, while describing the
diet and conduct of Bhagwan Mahavira Swami, it is said that even in a healthy
state, Bhagwan always consumed food with Unodari tapas. / As it is said,
"Promoyariam chaei apuche vi Bhagavam rogehin". / In Ga. 1 Niti, it is also
said, "Sant Sati ne Surama, Chauthi Vidhava Nar. Aita to Bhookha Bhala Dhaya
Kare Utpat". // In the Sutra, the term 'Kukkuttiandakpraman' has been used to
clarify the Kavalpraman. In this regard, the following explanations have been
given in the commentary texts: (1) Nijakasyaharasy sada yo dvatrimshattamo bhago
tat kukkutipramane - the thirty-second part of one's own diet is always called
the Kukkuttiandakpraman, i.e., the Kaval of that day. (2) Kutsita kuti-kukkutii
sharirmityarthaha. Tasyah sharirrupaayaah kukkutayah andakamiv andakam mukha
asuchi may - this body itself is the Kukkutti, its mouth is called the egg of
the Kukkutti. (3) Yavatpramanamaatrena kavalena mukhe prakshipyamanena mukha na
vikritam bhavat tatstala kukkutaandak-pramanam - one should understand a Kaval
of such a size that when placed in the mouth, the mouth does not appear
distorted. / The inner shape of the mouth that is formed for the inclusion of
that Kaval should be understood as the Kukkuttiandakpraman. / (4) Ayamanayah
vikalpah kukkuta andakopame kavale athava kukudi ke ande ke praman jitna kaval,
yah bhi arth ka ek vikalpah hai. - 'Unoryaria' - Abhi. Ra. Kosh Bha. 2, p. 1182.
Considering the above-mentioned explanations, it is known that even without the
word 'Kukkuttiandang', the meaning of the Sutra becomes clear, and this word is
also misleading, therefore this word should never be used.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
414] [vyavahArasUtra kaha sakate haiN| isa sthala para lipi doSa se pratiyoM ke
pAThabheda ho gaye haiM, ataH yahAM anya AgamoM se pATha sudhArA gayA hai /
pratiyoM meM 'promoyarie' 'pattomoyarie' aise pATha upalabdha hote haiN| (5)
kicit-UnodarI-31 kavala pramANa pAhAra karane para eka kavala kI hI UnodarI hotI
hai jo 32 kavala AhAra kI apekSA alpa hone se 'kiMcit UnodarI' kahA gayA hai /
sUtra ke aMtima aMza se yaha spaSTa kiyA gayA hai ki ina pAMca meM se kisI bhI
prakAra kI UnodarI karane vAlA bhikSu prakAmabhojI (bharapeTa khAne vAlA) nahIM
hotaa| 32 kavala rUpa pUrNa AhAra karane vAlA pramANaprAptabhojI kahA gayA hai /
usake kiMcit bhI UnodarI nahIM hotI hai| bhikSu ko indriyasaMyama evaM
brahmacaryasamAdhi ke lie sadA UnodarI tapa karanA Avazyaka hai, athAt use kabhI
bharapeTa AhAra nahIM karanA caahie| AcA. zru. 1 a. 9 u. 4 meM bhagavAna
mahAvIra svAmI ke AhAra-vihAra kA varNana karate hue kahA gayA hai ki bhagavAn
svastha avasthA meM bhI sadA UnodarItapa yukta AhAra karate the / yathA
promoyariyaM cAei apuche vi bhagavaM rogehiM / gA. 1 nIti meM bhI kahA gayA hai
ki saMta satI ne sUramA, cauthI vidhavA naar| aitA to bhUkhA bhalA dhAyA kare
utpAta // sUtra meM kavalapramANa ko spaSTa karane ke lie 'kukkuTiaMDakapramANa'
aisA vizeSaNa lagAyA gayA hai| isa viSaya meM vyAkhyAgranthoM meM isa prakAra
spaSTIkaraNa kiye gae haiM (1) nijakasyAhArasya sadA yo dvAtriMzattamo bhAgo tat
kukkuTIpramANeapanI AhAra kI mAtrA kA jo sadA battIsavAM bhAga hotA hai, vaha
kukkuTIaMDakapramANa prarthAt usa dina kA kavala kahA jAtA hai (2) kutsitA kuTI-
kukkuTI shriirmityrthH| tasyAH zarIrarUpAyAH kukkuTyA aMDakamiva aMDakaM mukhaM
azuci maya yaha zarIra hI kukuTI hai, usakA jo mukha hai vaha kukuTI kA aMDaka
kahA gayA hai| (3) yAvatpramANamAtreNa kavalena mukhe prakSipyamANena mukhaM na
vikRtaM bhavati tatsthalaM kukkuTaaMDaka-pramANam-jitanA bar3A kavala mukha meM
rakhane para mukha vikRta na dikhe utane pramANa kA eka kavala samajhanA cAhie /
usa kavala ke samAveza ke liye jo mukha kA bhItarI AkAra banatA hai, use
kukkuTIaMDakapramANa samajhanA cAhie / (4) ayamanyaH vikalpaH kukkuTa aMDakopame
kavaleathavA kukaDI ke aMDe ke pramANa jitanA kavala, yaha bhI artha kA eka
vikalpa hai| -'UNoyariyA' -abhi. rA. koSa bhA. 2, pR. 1182 uparyukta
vyAkhyAsthaloM para vicAra karane se yaha jJAta hotA hai ki 'kukkuDiaDaMga'
itanA zabda na hone para bhI sUtrAzaya spaSTa ho jAtA hai aura yaha zabda
bhramotpAdaka bhI hai, ata: yaha zabda kabhI

Page #235 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Eighth Objective] 415 This has been projected by someone and the commentators
have tried to harmonize it by understanding it as the original text. The
commentary also states that one who takes a full meal once a day is a
'Prakambhoji', one who takes a full meal for many days is a 'Nikambhoji' and one
who eats more than 32 kavals is an 'Atibhoji'. Here a question arises: is the
complete measure mentioned for 32 kavals of food in relation to each meal or in
relation to multiple meals? And how are milk, buttermilk, and other beverages
included in these 32 kavals? Solution - From the observation of the Praachara
Shastras, it becomes clear that eating once a day is the pure Utsarga Praachara
of a monk. The rules for eating at other times mentioned in the Agamas should be
understood as exceptions. Accepting exceptional conduct as a permanent tendency
is laxity in conduct. Therefore, eating multiple times due to a reason or eating
in the morning and evening is an exceptional path. The Utsargamarga is to eat
only once. Therefore, this rule is in relation to the Prautsargik food taken
once a day as mentioned earlier. The complete quantity, which fills the stomach
completely, provides full satisfaction, or which does not leave a desire to eat
more or to remain hungry, should be divided into 32 kavals. Milk, bread, fruits,
etc., should all be included in this. The number of kavals that can be consumed
without feeling hungry should be considered as the Unodari. Generally, the
monk's food on the Utsargamarga is free from impurities, therefore, it becomes
easier to understand 32 kavals in relation to bread, etc. Based on this, it is
concluded that the total amount of food taken multiple times due to a reason
should be 32 kavals. Therefore, if one has to eat multiple times, then 32 kavals
should be divided and understood accordingly. By eating a normal, impurity-free
meal once a day for many days, the total amount of food can be measured in terms
of the number of breads. Sutra 1 2-4 _ Summary of the Eighth Objective: To
accept the Shayanasanabhoomi with the permission of the Sthavir Guru, etc. The
Pat, etc., should be brought easily, such that it can be lifted with one hand.
Its investigation can be done for three days, and the investigation of the Pat
according to the Sthavirvas can be done for five days and can also be brought
from a longer distance. If an Eklavichari old monk has many types of Propagrahic
equipment, then he should leave them in the care of someone while going for
alms, etc., and inform them upon returning and then take them.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
AThavAM uddezaka] 415 kisI ke dvArA prakSipta kiyA gayA ho aura vyAkhyAkAroM ne
ise maulika pATha samajha kara jyoM-tyoM karake saMgati karane kI koziza kI ho|
vyAkhyA meM yaha bhI kahA gayA hai ki eka dina pUrNa pAhAra karane vAlA
'prakAmabhojI' hai, aneka dina pUrNa pAhAra karane vAlA 'nikAmabhojI' hai aura
32 kavala se bhI adhika khAne vAlA 'atibhojI hai| yahAM eka prazna upasthita
hotA hai ki battIsa kavala ke prAhAra se jo saMpUrNa mApa kahA gayA hai vaha
pratyeka bAra ke bhojana kI apekSA se hai yA aneka bAra ke bhojana kI apekSA se
? tathA dUdha, chAcha Adi peya padArthoM kA samAveza ina 32 kavala meM kisa
prakAra hotA hai ? samAdhAna-prAcArazAstroM ke avalokana se yaha spaSTa ho jAtA
hai ki dina meM eka bAra bhojana karanA hI bhikSu kA zuddha utsarga prAcAra hai
/ AgamoM meM aneka jagaha anya samaya meM AhAra karane kA jo vidhAna hai, use
ApavAdika vidhAna samajhanA cAhie / ApavAdika AcaraNa ko sadA ke lie pravRtti
rUpa meM svIkAra kara lenA zithilAcAra hai| ataH kAraNavaza aneka bAra yA subaha
zAma AhAra karanA hI apavAdamArga hai| utsargamArga to eka bAra khAne kA hI hai|
ataH prAgamokta eka bAra ke prautsargika AhAra karane kI apekSA yaha vidhAna
hai| jitane AhAra se peTa pUrNa bhara jAya, pUrNa tRpti ho jAya athavA jisase
bhUkha rahane kA yA aura kucha khAne kA mana na ho, aisI saMpUrNa mAtrA ko 32
kavala meM vibhAjita kara lenA cAhie / isameM dUdha roTI phala Adi sabhI ko
samAviSTa samajhanA caahie| anumAna se jitane-jitane kavala pramANa bhUkha rakhI
jAya, utanI-utanI UnodarI samajhanI caahie| samAnyatayA utsargamArga se bhikSu
kA prAhAra vigayarahita hotA hai, ataH roTI Adi kI apekSA 32 kavala samajhanA
aura bhI sarala ho jAtA hai| isI ke AdhAra se yaha phalita hotA hai ki kAraNa se
aneka bAra kiye jAne vAle AhAra kA kula yoga 32 kavala honA cAhie / ataH aneka
bAra AhAra karanA ho to 32 kavaloM ko vibhAjita karake samajha lenA cAhie /
aneka dinoM taka eka vakta vigayarahita sAmAnya AhAra karake kula khurAka kA
mApa roTI kI saMkhyA meM kAyama kiyA jA sakatA hai| sUtra 1 2-4 _ AThaveM
uddezaka kA sArAMza sthavira guru Adi kI AjJA se zayanAsanabhUmi grahaNa karanA
/ pATa Adi eka hAtha se uThAkara saralatA se lAyA jA sake, vaisA hI lAnA / usakI
gaveSaNA tIna dina taka kI jA sakatI hai aura sthaviravAsa ke anukUla pATa kI
gaveSaNA pAMca dina taka kI jA sakatI hai evaM adhika dUra se bhI lAyA jA sakatA
hai| ekalavihArI vRddha bhikSu ke yadi aneka prakAra ke propagrahika upakaraNa
hoM to unheM bhikSAcArI yAdi jAte samaya kisI kI dekharekha meM chor3akara jAnA
evaM punaH Akara use sUcita karake grahaNa karanA /

Page #236 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[416] [Vyavahar Sutra Sutra 6.9] If a householder needs to take a bed, bedding,
or other shelter (house) from another householder, then they should ask for
their permission again. If they have left a mat or other shelter for a short
time, then they should ask for permission again to take it, but they should not
take it without permission. Because it has been left for a short time under
their protection. 10-12 _ It is necessary to ask for permission for a house,
mat, etc. before taking it. _ In the case of a rare bed, it can be taken first
with discretion and then permission can be sought. _ 13-15 If a monk's equipment
falls on the road while traveling and another monk finds it, they should inquire
and give it to the owner. _ If no one claims it, they should leave it. If it is
a large piece of equipment like a dustpan, etc., then they should take it
further and inquire. If additional utensils have been taken under the
instructions of the Acharya, etc., then they should be given to them or
entrusted to them. _ They should not give it to anyone they wish to give it to.
_ If the name of the person to whom it is to be given has been instructed, then
they should give it to them first after taking permission from the Acharya. They
should always practice some form of Unodari tapas. One who practices Unodari is
not called a Prakamabhoji. Conclusion: In this Uddeshak, Sutras 1-4, 6-12
discuss the taking of a bed, seat, mat, etc., the solitary elder, 13-15 the lost
equipment, 16 the bringing and giving of additional utensils, the Unodari of
food, etc. // Eighth Uddeshak ends //

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
416] [vyavahArasUtra sUtra 6.9 kisI gRhastha kA zayyA-saMstAraka Adi anya
upAzraya (makAna) meM le jAnA ho to usakI puna: prAjJA lenaa| kabhI alpakAla ke
lie koI pATa Adi upAzraya meM hI chor3a diyA ho to use grahaNa karane ke liye
punaH AjJA lenA, kintu binA prAjJA grahaNa nahIM krtaa| kyoMki use apanI nizrA
se kucha samaya ke lie chor3a diyA gayA hai| 10-12 _ makAna pATa Adi kI pahale
aAjJA lenA bAda meM grahaNa karanA / kabhI durlabha zayyA kI paristhiti meM
vivekapUrvaka pahale grahaNa karake phira AjJA lI jA sakatI hai / 13-15 calate
samaya mArga meM kisI bhikSu kA upakaraNa gira jAya aura anya bhikSu ko mila
jAya to pUchatAcha kara jisakA ho use de denA / koI bhI use svIkAra na kare to
paraTha denaa| rajoharaNAdi bar3e upakaraNa hoM, to adhika dUra bhI le jAnA aura
pUchatAcha krnaa| atirikta pAtra prAcAryAdi ke nirdeza se grahaNa kie hoM to
unheM hI denA yA supurda karanA / jise dene kI icchA ho, unheM svataH hI nahIM
denA / jisakA nAma nirdeza karake liyA ho to AcArya kI AjJA lekara pahale use hI
denaa| sadA kucha na kucha UnodarI tapa karanA caahie| UnodarI karane vAlA
prakAmabhojI nahIM kahA jAtA haiN| upasaMhAra isa uddezaka meMsUtra 1-4, 6-12
zayanAsana pATa grAdi ke grahaNa karane Adi kA, ekAkI vRddha sthavira kA, 13-15
khoe gae upakaraNoM kA, 16 atirikta pAtra lAne dene kA, AhAra kI UnodarI kA,
ityAdi viSayoM kA kathana kiyA gayA hai| // AThavAM uddezaka samApta //

Page #237 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Rules for consuming food offered by guests, servants, and relatives:  1. If a
**Sagari** (Jain monk) is offered food from inside the house, and the food is
prepared by a **Padihari** (attendant), then it is permissible to consume it. 2.
If a **Sagari** is offered food from inside the house, and the food is prepared
by a non-**Padihari**, then it is permissible to consume it. 3. If a **Sagari**
is offered food from outside the house, and the food is prepared by a
**Padihari**, then it is permissible to consume it. 4. If a **Sagari** is
offered food from outside the house, and the food is prepared by a
non-**Padihari**, then it is permissible to consume it. 5. If a **Sagari** is
offered food from inside the house, and the food is prepared by a **Dasa**
(servant), **Pesa** (worker), **Bhaya** (brother), or **Bhainna** (sister), then
it is not permissible to consume it. 6. If a **Sagari** is offered food from
inside the house, and the food is prepared by a **Dasa**, **Pesa**, **Bhaya**,
or **Bhainna**, then it is permissible to consume it. 7. If a **Sagari** is
offered food from outside the house, and the food is prepared by a **Dasa**,
**Pesa**, **Bhaya**, or **Bhainna**, then it is not permissible to consume it.
8. If a **Sagari** is offered food from outside the house, and the food is
prepared by a **Dasa**, **Pesa**, **Bhaya**, or **Bhainna**, then it is
permissible to consume it. 9. If a **Sagari** is offered food from inside the
house, and the food is prepared by a **Sagari** who is not a **Nay** (leader),
and the food is prepared by a **Sagari** who is not a **Nay**, then it is not
permissible to consume it. 10. If a **Sagari** is offered food from inside the
house, and the food is prepared by a **Sagari** who is not a **Nay**, and the
food is prepared by a **Sagari** who is a **Nay**, then it is not permissible to
consume it. 11. If a **Sagari** is offered food from outside the house, and the
food is prepared by a **Sagari** who is not a **Nay**, and the food is prepared
by a **Sagari** who is not a **Nay**, then it is not permissible to consume it.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
nAma uddezaka zayyAtara ke pAhuNe, naukara evaM jJAtijana ke nimitta se bane
AhAra ke lene kA vidhi-niSedha 1. sAgAriyassa Aese anto vagaDAe bhujae, niTThie
nisaTThe pADihArie, tamhA dAvae, no se kappai pddiggaahette| 2. sAgAriyassa
pAese aMto vagaDAe bhujae, niTThie nisaTTe apADihArie, tamhA dAvae evaM se
kappai pddiggaahette| 3. sAgAriyassa pAese bAhiM vagaDAe bhujai, niTThie nisaThe
pADihArie, tamhA dAvae, no se kappai pddiggaahette| 4. sAgAriyassa pAese bAhiM
vagaDAe bhujai, nidie nisaTTe apADihArie, tamhA dAvae evaM se kappai
pddiggaahette| 5. sAgAriyassa dAse vA, pese vA, bhayae vA, bhaiNNae vA aMto
vagaDAe bhujai nidie nisaThe pADihArie, tamhA dAvae no se kappai pddiggaahette|
6. sAgAriyassa bAse vA, pese vA, bhayae vA, bhaiNNae vA anto vagaDAe bhujai,
niTie nisaTTe apADihArie, tamhA dAvae evaM se kappai pddiggaahette| 7.
sAgAriyassa dAse vA, pese vA, bhayae vA, bhaiNNae vA bAhiM bagaDAe bhujai,
niTThie nisaTTe pADihArie, tamhA vAvae no se kappai paDiggAhettae / 8.
sAgAriyassa dAse vA, pese vA, bhayae vA, bhaiNNae vA bAhiM vagaDAe bhujai,
niTThie nisaTThe apADihArie, tamhA dAvae, evaM se kappai pddiggaahette| 9.
sAgAriyassa NAyae siyA sAgAriyassa egavagaDAe aMto sAgAriyassa egapayAe,
sAgAriyaM covajIvai, tamhA dAvae no se kappai paDiggAhettae / 10. sAgAriyassa
NAyae siyA sAgAriyassa egavagaDAe aMto sAgAriyassa abhinipayAe sAgAriyaM
covajIvai, tamhA dAvae no se kappai paDiggAhettae / 11. sAgAriyassa NAyae siyA
sAgAriyassa egavagaDAe bAhiM sAgAriyassa egapayAe sAgAriyaM covajIvai, tamhA
dAvae no se kappai pddiggaahette|

Page #238 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[418] [Vyavahar Sutra 12. If the food is for a Sagariy, and it is given to the
Sagariy as a gift, and the Sagariy is eating it inside the house, then the
Sagariy should not accept it from the guest. 13. If the food is for a Sagariy,
and it is not given to the Sagariy as a gift, and the Sagariy is eating it
inside the house, then the Sagariy should accept it from the guest. 14. If the
food is for a Sagariy, and it is not given to the Sagariy as a gift, and the
Sagariy is eating it inside the house, then the Sagariy should accept it from
the guest. 15. If the food is for a Sagariy, and it is not given to the Sagariy
as a gift, and the Sagariy is eating it outside the house, then the Sagariy
should not accept it from the guest. 16. If the food is for a Sagariy, and it is
not given to the Sagariy as a gift, and the Sagariy is eating it outside the
house, then the Sagariy should not accept it from the guest. 1. If food is
prepared for a guest at the house of a householder, and it is given to the guest
as a gift, and the guest is eating it inside the house, then the monk should not
accept it from the guest. 2. If food is prepared for a guest at the house of a
householder, and it is not given to the guest as a gift, and the guest is eating
it inside the house, then the monk should accept it from the guest. 3. If food
is prepared for a guest at the house of a householder, and it is given to the
guest as a gift, and the guest is eating it outside the house, then the monk
should not accept it from the guest. 4. If food is prepared for a guest at the
house of a householder, and it is not given to the guest as a gift, and the
guest is eating it outside the house, then the monk should accept it from the
guest. 5. If food is prepared for the servant, messenger, hired worker, or
employee of a householder, and it is given to them as a gift, and they are
eating it inside the house, then the monk should not accept it from them. 6. If
food is prepared for the servant, messenger, hired worker, or employee of a
householder, and it is not given to them as a gift, and they are eating it
inside the house, then the monk should accept it from them. 7. If food is
prepared for the servant, messenger, hired worker, or employee of a householder,
and it is given to them as a gift, and they are eating it outside the house,
then the monk should not accept it from them.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
418] [vyavahArasUtra 12. sAgAriyassa NAyae siyA sAgAriyassa egavagaDAe bAhiM
sAgAriyassa abhinipayAe sAgAriyaM covajIvai, tamhA dAvae no se kappai
pddiggaahette| 13. sAgAriyassa gAyae siyA sAgAriyassa abhinivvagaDAe egaduvArAe
eganikkhamaNapavesAe aMto sAgAriyassa egapayAe sAgAriyaM covajIvai tamhA dAvae
no se kappai paDiggAhettae / 14. sAgAriyassa gAyae siyA sAgAriyassa
abhinivvagaDAe egaduvArAe eganikkhamaNapavesAe aMto sAgAriyassa abhinipayAe
sAgAriyaM covajIvai tamhA dAvae no se kappai pddiggaahette| 15. sAgAriyassa
NAyae siyA sAgAriyassa abhinivvagaDAe egaduvArAe eganikkhamaNapavesAe bAhiM
sAgAriyassa egapayAe sAgAriyaM covajIvai, tamhA vAvara no se kappai
pddiggaahette| 16. sAgAriyassa NAyae siyA sAgAriyassa abhinivvagaDAe egaduvArAe
eganikkhamaNa-pavesAe bAhiM sAgAriyassa abhinipayAe sAgAriyaM covajIvai, tamhA
dAvae no se kappai pddiggaahette| 1. zayyAtara ke yahAM kisI prAgantuka ke liye
pAhAra banAyA gayA ho, use prAtihArika diyA gayA ho, vaha usake ghara ke bhItarI
bhAga meM jImatA ho, usa AhAra meM se vaha Agantuka de to sAdhu ko lenA nahIM
kalpatA hai| 2. zayyAtara ke yahAM kisI Agantuka ke liye AhAra banAyA gayA ho,
use aprAtiharika diyA gayA ho, vaha usake ghara ke bhItarI bhAga meM jImatA ho,
usa AhAra meM se vaha Agantuka de to sAdhu ko lenA kalpatA hai| 3. zayyAtara ke
yahAM kisI Agantuka ke liye AhAra banAyA gayA ho, use khAne ke lie prAtihArika
diyA gayA ho, vaha usake ghara ke bAhyabhAga meM jImatA ho, usa AhAra meM se
vaha Agantuka de to sAdhu ko lenA nahIM kalpatA hai / 4. zayyAtara ke yahAM kisI
Agantuka ke liye ghara ke bAhyabhAga meM prAhAra banAyA gayA ho, use khAne ke
liye aprAtihArika diyA gayA ho, vaha usake ghara ke bAhyabhAga meM jImatA ho,
usa AhAra meM se vaha Agantuka de to sAdhu ko lenA kalpatA hai / 5. zayyAtara ke
dAsa, preSya, bhRtaka aura naukara ke lie AhAra banA ho, use prAtihArika diyA
gayA ho, vaha usake ghara ke bhItarI bhAga meM jImatA ho, usa grAhAra meM se
vaha sAdhu ko de to lenA nahIM kalpatA hai| 6. zayyAtara ke dAsa, preSya,
bhRtaka aura naukara ke lie AhAra banA ho, use aprAtihArika diyA gayA ho, vaha
usake ghara ke bhItarI bhAga meM jImatA ho, usa pAhAra meM se vaha sAdhu ko de
to lenA kalpatA hai| 7. zayyAtara ke dAsa, preSya, bhRtaka aura naukara ke lie
AhAra banA ho, use prAtihArika

Page #239 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Ninth Uddeshak] [419] If it is given, he lives outside the house, from that
food, if he gives it to the Sadhu, then it is not permissible to take it. 8. If
food is made for the servant, messenger, wanderer, and worker of the Shayatar,
it is given as A-pratiharic, he lives outside the house, from that food, if he
gives it to the Sadhu, then it is permissible to take it. 9. The relative of the
Sagarik (Shayatar) lives in the Sagarik's house, on the same stove of the
Sagarik, with the same material of the Sagarik, and makes food for a living. If
he gives that food to the Nirgranth-Nirgranthis, then it is not permissible for
them to take it. 10. If the relative of the Sagarik lives in the Sagarik's
house, on a different stove from the Sagarik's stove, with the same material of
the Sagarik, and makes food for a living. If he gives that food to the
Nirgranth-Nirgranthis, then it is not permissible for them to take it. 11. The
relative of the Sagarik lives outside the Sagarik's house, on the same stove of
the Sagarik, with the same material of the Sagarik, and makes food for a living.
If he gives that food to the Nirgranth-Nirgranthis, then it is not permissible
for them to take it. 12. The relative of the Sagarik lives outside the Sagarik's
house, on a different stove from the Sagarik's stove, with the same material of
the Sagarik, and makes food for a living. If he gives that food to the
Nirgranth-Nirgranthis, then it is not permissible for them to take it. 13. The
relative of the Sagarik lives in a different part of the Sagarik's house, and in
a house with one entrance and exit, on the same stove of the Sagarik, with the
same material of the Sagarik, and makes food for a living. If he gives that food
to the Nirgranth-Nirgranthis, then it is not permissible for them to take it.
14. The relative of the Sagarik lives in a different part of the Sagarik's
house, and in a house with one entrance and exit, on a different stove from the
Sagarik's stove, with the same material of the Sagarik, and makes food for a
living. If he gives that food to the Nirgranth-Nirgranthis, then it is not
permissible for them to take it. 15. The relative of the Sagarik lives in a
different part of the Sagarik's house, and in a house with one entrance and
exit, outside the house, on the same stove of the Sagarik, with the same
material of the Sagarik, and makes food for a living. If he gives that food to
the Nirgranth-Nirgranthis, then it is not permissible for them to take it. 16.
The relative of the Sagarik lives in a different part of the Sagarik's house,
and in a house with one entrance and exit, outside the house, on a different
stove from the Sagarik's stove, with the same material of the Sagarik, and makes
food for a living.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
navama uddezaka] [419 diyA gayA ho, vaha ghara ke bAhyabhAga meM jImatA ho, usa
AhAra meM se vaha sAdhu ko de to lenA nahIM kalpatA hai| 8. zayyAtara ke dAsa,
preSya, bhataka aura naukara ke lie AhAra banA ho, use aprAtihArika diyA gayA
ho, vaha ghara ke bAhyabhAga meM jImatA ho, usa AhAra meM se vaha sAdhu ko de to
lenA kalpatA hai| 9. sAgArika (zayyAtara) kA svajana sAgArika ke ghara meM
sAgArika ke eka hI cUlhe para sAgArika kI hI sAmagrI se AhAra niSpanna kara
jIvana nirvAha karatA hai| yadi vaha usa AhAra meM se nirgrantha-nirgranthiyoM
ko detA hai to unheM lenA nahIM kalpatA hai| 10. sAgArika kA svajana yadi
sAgArika ke ghara meM hI sAgArika ke cUlhe se bhinna cUlhe para sAgArika kI hI
sAmagrI se AhArAdi niSpanna kara jIvana nirvAha karatA hai| yadi vaha usa AhAra
meM se nimrantha-nirgranthiyoM ko detA hai to unheM lenA nahIM kalpatA hai / 11.
sAgArika kA svajana sAgArika ke ghara ke bAhya vibhAga meM sAgArika ke hI cUlhe
para sAgArika kI hI sAmagrI se AhAra niSpanna kara usase jIvana nirvAha karatA
hai / yadi vaha usa pAhAra meM se nirgrantha-nirganthiyoM ko detA hai to unheM
lenA nahIM kalpatA hai / 12. sAgArika kA svajana sAgArika ke ghara ke
bAhyavibhAga meM sAgArika ke cUlhe se bhinna cUlhe para sAgArika kI hI sAmagrI
se AhAra niSpanna kara usase jIvananirvAha karatA hai| yadi vaha usa pAhAra meM
se nirgrantha-nimranthiyoM ko detA hai to unheM lenA nahIM kalpatA hai| 13.
sAgArika kA svajana sAgArika ke ghara ke bhinna gRhavibhAga meM tathA eka
niSkramaNa-praveza dvAra vAle gaha meM sAgArika ke hI cUlhe para sAgArika kI hI
sAmagrI se AhAra niSpanna kara usase jIvana nirvAha karatA hai / yadi vaha usa
AhAra meM se nirgrantha-nirgranthiyoM ko detA hai to unheM lenA nahIM kalpatA
hai / 14. sAgArika kA svajana sAgArika ke ghara ke bhinna gRhavibhAga meM tathA
eka niSkramaNa-pravezadvAra vAle gRha meM sAgArika ke cUlhe se bhinna cUlhe para
sAgArika kI hI sAmagrI se AhAra niSpanna kara usase jIvana nirvAha karatA hai|
yadi vaha usa AhAra meM se nirgrantha-nirgranthiyoM ko de to unheM lenA nahIM
kalpatA hai| 15. sAgArika kA svajana sAgArika ke gRha ke vibhinnagRhavibhAga meM
tathA eka niSkramaNapraveza-dvAra vAle gRha ke bAhya bhAga meM sAgArika ke cUlhe
para sAgArika kI hI sAmagrI se pAhAra niSpanna kara usase jIvananirvAha karatA
hai / yadi vaha usa AhAra meM se nirgrantha-nirgranthiyoM ko detA hai to unheM
lenA nahIM kalpatA hai| 16. sAgArika kA svajana sAgArika ke gRha ke bhinna gRha
vibhAga meM tathA eka niSkramaNa-pravezadvAra vAle gRha ke bAhyabhAga meM
sAgArika ke cUlhe se bhinna cUlhe para sAgArika kI hI sAmagrI se AhAra

Page #240 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[420] A monk who earns a living by fulfilling the duties of a householder should
not accept food from his relatives if they are not independent.  /  A monk may
accept food from guests and servants if the householder has provided them with a
full meal according to their needs.  /  A monk should not accept food if the
guests or servants are given only a small amount and are allowed to take more if
needed, and if they can return any leftovers.  /  A monk should not accept food
from relatives who depend entirely on the householder for their livelihood.  /
This is the meaning of the texts from (9 to 16).  /  The intention is that
whether the relatives of the householder cook their food inside or outside the
house, on a separate stove or a shared one, a monk should not accept their food.
/  This means that a monk may accept food from relatives or others who are given
a limited amount of money for expenses and the householder is not responsible
for their spending.  /  For more information on the relationship with the
householder, see Nishƒ´tha U. 2, B·πõhatkalpa U. 2, Da≈õa. D. 2, and Vyav. U. 6.  /
The rules for accepting food from shops in which the householder has a share are
as follows:  /  17. A monk should not accept food from a shop that is owned by
the householder and is profitable.  /  18. A monk may accept food from a shop
that is owned by the householder and is not profitable.  /  19. A monk should
not accept food from a shop that is owned by the householder and is profitable.
/  20. A monk may accept food from a shop that is owned by the householder and
is not profitable.  /  21. A monk should not accept food from a shop that is
owned by the householder and is profitable.  /  22. A monk may accept food from
a shop that is owned by the householder and is not profitable.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
420] [vyavahArasUtra niSpanna kara usase jovananirvAha karatA hai| yadi vaha usa
pAhAra meM se nirgrantha-nirgranthiyoM ko detA hai to unheM lenA nahIM kalpatA
hai / vivecana-zayyAtara kA aAhAra pAhuNoM (mehamAnoM) ke evaM naukaroM ko
niyata kiye anusAra paripUrNa de diyA gayA ho to usameM se bhikSu grahaNa kara
sakatA hai / yadi pAhuNoM ko yA naukaroM ko thor3A-thor3A diyA jA rahA hai evaM
AvazyakatA hone para ve punaH le sakate haiM aura avazeSa rahane para lauTA bhI
sakate haiM, aisA AhAra sAdhu nahIM le sakatA hai| zayyAtara ke sahayoga se hI
jo jJAtijana jIvana vyatIta karate hoM arthAt unakA sampUrNa kharca zayyAtara hI
detA ho to bhikSu usake AhAra ko grahaNa nahIM kara sakatA / yahI artha (9 se
16) pATha sUtroM meM kahA gayA hai / prAzaya yaha hai ki ve jJAtijana zayyAtara
ke ghara ke andara yA bAhara kisI cUlhe para bhojana banAveM evaM usakA caukA
alaga ho yA zAmila ho, kisI bhI vikalpa meM usakA AhArAdi nahIM kalpatA hai| -
isase yaha tAtparya samajhanA cAhie ki zayyAtara ke jJAtijana yA anya ko
maryAdita kharca diyA jAtA ho aura ghaTa-badha kA jimmevAra vaha zayyAtara nahIM
ho to unakA AhArAdi grahaNa kiyA jA sakatA hai| zayyAtarapiMDa saMbaMdhI anya
jAnakArI nizItha u. 2, bRhatkalpa u. 2, dazA. da. 2 evaM vyava. u. 6 meM dekheN|
zayyAtara ke bhAgIdArI vAlI vikrayazAlAoM se AhAra lene kA vidhi-niSedha 17.
sAgAriyassa cakkiyAsAlA sAhAraNavakkaya-pauttA, tamhA dAvae no se kappai
pddiggaahette| 18. sAgAriyassa cakkiyAsAlA nissAhAraNa-vakkaya-pauttA, tamhA
dAvae evaM se no kappar3a pddiggaahette| 19. sAgAriyassa goliyasAlA
sAhAraNavakkaya-pauttA, tamhA dAvae, no se kappar3a pddiggaahette| 20.
sAgAriyassa goliyasAlA nissAhAraNavakkaya-pauttA, tamhA dAvae, evaM se kappai
pddiggaahette| 21. sAgAriyassa bodhiyasAlA sAhAraNavakkaya-pauttA, tamhA dAvae,
no se kappai pddiggaahette| 22. sAgAriyassa bodhiyasAlA nissAhAraNavakkaya-
pauttA, tamhA dAvae evaM se kappA pddiggaahette|

Page #241 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Ninth Uddeshak] [421 23. If a Sagariyassa Doshiyassa gives oil to Nirgrantha-
Nirgranthis from a Sagariyassa's share in a Cakrikashala (oil shop), then they
should not accept it. 24. If a Sagariyassa Doshiyassa gives oil to Nirgrantha-
Nirgranthis from a non-Sagariyassa's share in a Cakrikashala (oil shop), then
they should accept it. 25. If a Sagariyassa Sottiyassa gives oil to Nirgrantha-
Nirgranthis from a Sagariyassa's share in a Cakrikashala (oil shop), then they
should not accept it. 26. If a Sagariyassa Sottiyassa gives oil to Nirgrantha-
Nirgranthis from a non-Sagariyassa's share in a Cakrikashala (oil shop), then
they should accept it. 27. If a Sagariyassa Bondiyassa gives oil to Nirgrantha-
Nirgranthis from a Sagariyassa's share in a Cakrikashala (oil shop), then they
should not accept it. 28. If a Sagariyassa Bondiyassa gives oil to Nirgrantha-
Nirgranthis from a non-Sagariyassa's share in a Cakrikashala (oil shop), then
they should accept it. 29. If a Sagariyassa Gandhiyassa gives oil to Nirgrantha-
Nirgranthis from a Sagariyassa's share in a Cakrikashala (oil shop), then they
should not accept it. 30. If a Sagariyassa Gandhiyassa gives oil to Nirgrantha-
Nirgranthis from a non-Sagariyassa's share in a Cakrikashala (oil shop), then
they should accept it. 31. If a Sagariyassa Sondiyassa gives oil to Nirgrantha-
Nirgranthis from a Sagariyassa's share in a Cakrikashala (oil shop), then they
should not accept it. 32. If a Sagariyassa Sondiyassa gives oil to Nirgrantha-
Nirgranthis from a non-Sagariyassa's share in a Cakrikashala (oil shop), then
they should accept it. 33. If a Sagariyassa gives Osahio Santhadao to
Nirgrantha-Nirgranthis, then they should not accept it. 34. If a Sagariyassa
gives Prosahino Asanthadao to Nirgrantha-Nirgranthis, then they should accept
it. 35. If a Sagariyassa gives Ambphala Santhadao to Nirgrantha-Nirgranthis,
then they should not accept it. 36. If a Sagariyassa gives Ambphala Asanthadao
to Nirgrantha-Nirgranthis, then they should accept it. 37. If a Sagarik
(Shayatar) gives oil to Nirgrantha-Nirgranthis from their share in a
Cakrikashala (oil shop), then they should not accept it.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
navama uddezaka] [421 23. sAgAriyassa dosiyasAlA sAhAraNavakkaya-pauttA, tamhA
dAvae, no se kappai pddiggaahette| 24. sAgAriyassa dosiyasAlA
nissAhAraNavakkaya-pauttA, tamhA dAvae, evaM se kappai pddiggaahette| 25.
sAgAriyassa sottiyasAlA sAhAraNavakkaya-pauttA, tamhA dAvae, no se kappai
pddiggaahette| 26. sAgAriyassa sottiyasAlA nissAhAraNavakkaya-pauttA, tamhA
dAvae evaM se kappai pddiggaahette| 27. sAgAriyassa boMDiyasAlA sAhAraNavakkaya-
pauttA, tamhA dAvae, no se kappar3a pddigmaahette| 28. sAgAriyassa boMDiyasAlA
nissAhAraNavakkaya-pauttA, tamhA dAvae, evaM se kappai pddiggaahette| 29.
sAgAriyassa gaMdhiyasAlA sAhAraNavakkaya-pauttA, tamhA dAvae, no se kappai
pddiggaahette| 30. sAgAriyassa gaMdhiyasAlA nissAhAraNavakkaya-pauttA, tamhA
dAvae evaM se kappai pddiggaahette| 31. sAgAriyassa soMDiyasAlA sAhAraNavakkaya-
pauttA, tamhA dAvae, no se kappA pddiggaahette| 32. sAgAriyassa soMDiyasAlA
nissAhAraNavakkaya-pauttA, tamhA dAvae, evaM se kappai pddiggaahette| 33.
sAgAriyassa osahIo saMthaDAo, tamhA dAvae, no se kappai pddiggaahette| 34.
sAgAriyassa prosahIno asaMthaDAo, tamhA dAvae evaM se kappai pddiggaahette| 35.
sAgAriyassa ambaphalA saMthaDAo, tamhA dAvae, no se kappai paDiggAhettae / 36.
sAgAriyassa ambaphalA asaMthaDA, tamhA dAvae evaM se kappai pddiggaahette| 17.
sAgArika (zayyAtara) kI hissedArI vAlI cakrikAzAlA (tela kI dukAna) meM se
sAgArika kA sAjhIdAra nirgrantha-nirgranthiyoM ko tela detA hai to unheM lenA
nahIM kalpatA hai|

Page #242 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[422] [Vyavahar Sutra 18. If the partner of a Sagarika who has a share (seer) in
an oil shop gives oil from the shop to a Sadhu without the Sagarika's consent,
then it is permissible for the Sadhu to accept it. 19. If the partner of a
Sagarika who has a share (seer) in a jaggery shop gives jaggery to Nirgrantha-
Nirgranthis, then it is not permissible for them to accept it. 20. If the
partner of a Sagarika who has a share (seer) in a jaggery shop gives jaggery
from the shop to a Sadhu without the Sagarika's consent, then it is permissible
for the Sadhu to accept it. 21. If the partner of a Sagarika who has a share
(seer) in a Bodhiyashala (grocery shop) gives grocery items to Nirgrantha-
Nirgranthis, then it is not permissible for them to accept it. 22. If the
partner of a Sagarika who has a share (seer) in a grocery shop gives grocery
items from the shop to a Sadhu without the Sagarika's consent, then it is
permissible for the Sadhu to accept it. 23. If the partner of a Sagarika who has
a share (seer) in a Dosiyasala (cloth shop) gives clothes to Nirgrantha-
Nirgranthis, then it is not permissible for them to accept it. 24. If the
partner of a Sagarika who has a share (seer) in a cloth shop gives clothes from
the shop to a Sadhu without the Sagarika's consent, then it is permissible for
the Sadhu to accept it. 25. If the partner of a Sagarika who has a share (seer)
in a Sut (thread) shop gives thread to Nirgrantha-Nirgranthis, then it is not
permissible for them to accept it. 26. If the partner of a Sagarika who has a
share (seer) in a Sut (thread) shop gives thread from the shop to a Sadhu
without the Sagarika's consent, then it is permissible for the Sadhu to accept
it. 27. If the partner of a Sagarika who has a share (seer) in a Bodiyashala
(cotton shop) gives cotton to Nirgrantha-Nirgranthis, then it is not permissible
for them to accept it. 28. If the partner of a Sagarika who has a share (seer)
in a cotton shop gives cotton from the shop to a Sadhu without the Sagarika's
consent, then it is permissible for the Sadhu to accept it. 29. If the partner
of a Sagarika who has a share (seer) in a Gandhiyashala (perfume shop) gives
fragrant substances to Nirgrantha-Nirgranthis, then it is not permissible for
them to accept it. 30. If the partner of a Sagarika who has a share (seer) in a
Gandhiyashala (perfume shop) gives fragrant substances from the shop to a Sadhu
without the Sagarika's consent, then it is permissible for the Sadhu to accept
it. 31. If the partner of a Sagarika who has a share (seer) in a Misthanna-shala
(sweet shop) gives sweets to Nirgrantha-Nirgranthis, then it is not permissible
for them to accept it.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
422] [vyavahArasUtra 18. sAgArika kI sIra (hissedArI) vAlI tela kI dukAna meM se
sAgArika kA sAjhIdAra sAgarika ke binA sIra kA tela detA hai to sAdhu ko lenA
kalpatA hai| 19. sAgArika ke sIra vAlI gur3a kI dukAna meM se sAgArika kA
sAjhIdAra nirgranthanirgranthiyoM ko gur3a detA hai to unheM lenA nahIM kalpatA
hai / 20. sAgArika ke sIra vAlI gur3a kI dukAna meM se sAgArika kA sAjhIdAra
sAgArika ke binA sIra kA gur3a detA hai to sAdhu ko lenA kalpatA hai| 21.
sAgArika ke sIra vAlI bodhiyazAlA (kirANe kI dukAna) meM se sAgArika kA
sAjhIdAra nirgrantha-nirgranthiyoM ko kirANe kI vastu detA hai to unheM lenA
nahIM kalpatA hai / 22. sAgArika ke sIra vAlI kirANe kI dukAna meM se sAgArika
kA sAjhIdAra sAgArika ke binA sIra kI kirANe kI vastu detA hai to unheM lenA
kalpatA hai| 23. sAgArika ke sIra vAlI dosiyazAlA (kapar3e kI dukAna) meM se
sAgArika kA sAjhIdAra nirgrantha-nirgranthiyoM ko vastra detA hai to unheM lenA
nahIM kalpatA hai| 24. sAgArika ke sIra vAlI kapar3e kI dukAna meM se sAgArika
kA sAjhIdAra sAgArika ke binA sIra kA kapar3A detA hai to sAdhu ko lenA kalpatA
hai| 25. sAgArika ke sIra vAlI sUta (dhAge) kI dukAna meM se sAgArika kA
sAjhIdAra nimranthanirgranthiyoM ko sUta detA hai to unheM lenA nahIM kalpatA
hai / 26. sAgArika ke sIra vAlI sUta kI dukAna meM se sAgArika kA sAjhIdAra
sAgArika ke binA sIra kA sUta detA hai to sAdhu ko lenA kalpatA hai| 27.
sAgArika ke sIra vAlI boDiyazAlA (rUI kI dukAna) meM se sAgArika kA sAjhIdAra
nirgrantha-nirgranthiyoM ko rUI detA hai to unheM lenA nahIM kalpatA hai| 28.
sAgArika ke sIra vAlI rUI kI dukAna meM se sAgArika kA sAjhIdAra sAgArika ke
binA sIra kI rUI detA hai to lenA kalpatA hai / 29. sAgArika ke sIra vAlI
gandhiyazAlA meM se sAgArika kA sAjhIdAra nirgrantha-nirgranthiyoM ko sugandhita
padArtha detA hai to unheM lenA nahIM kalpatA hai / 30. sAgArika ke sIra vAlI
gandhiyazAlA meM se sAgArika kA sAjhIdAra sAg2Arika ke binA sIra kA sugandhita
padArtha detA hai to sAdhu ko lenA kalpatA hai| 31. sAgArika ke sIra vAlI
miSThAnnazAlA meM se sAgArika kA sAjhIdAra nirgranthanirgranthiyoM ko miThAI
detA hai to lenA nahIM kalpatA hai /

Page #243 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Ninth Uddeshak] 32. If a partner of a Sagarika gives sweets from a Sagarika's
shop without the Sagarika, it is permissible to accept them. 33. If a partner of
a Sagarika gives food to Nirgranthinirgranthis from a Sagarika's food shop, it
is not permissible to accept it. 34. If a partner of a Sagarika gives food from
a Sagarika's food shop from the share received in the distribution, it is
permissible for the Sadhu to accept it. 35. If a partner of a Sagarika gives
mangoes and other fruits from a Sagarika's shop to Nirgranthinirgranthis, it is
not permissible to accept them. 36. If a partner of a Sagarika gives mangoes and
other fruits from a Sagarika's shop to Nirgranthinirgranthis from the share
received in the distribution, it is permissible to accept them.   Discussion:
The previous sutras have laid down the rules for accepting and not accepting
from the houses of Shayatarapindas. These sutras lay down the rules for
accepting and not accepting food or other articles from shops. The meaning of
these sutras is that if a Shayatar's ownership is not involved in any divided
goods in a collective shop of Shayatar and Ashayatar (other householders), or if
any article is independently owned by another householder, then there is no
fault of Shayatarapinda in accepting it. Therefore, such articles from the shops
mentioned in the sutras can be accepted with discretion when invited by a
householder or when necessary. The articles from the shops mentioned in the
sutras are as follows: (1) oil etc., (2) jaggery etc., (3) any un-chitt articles
of grains and groceries, (4) clothes, (5) thread, (6) cotton, (7) fragrant oils
and perfumes (as medicine for illness), (8) sweets, (9) food items, (10) mangoes
and other un-chitt fruits (boiled or without kernels).   These sutras make it
clear that Sadhus and Sadhvis can accept Kalpyavastu from shops besides houses.
In Dashav. A. 5 U. 1 Ga. 72, it is also forbidden to accept food items
containing Raj from shops, i.e., they can be accepted if they are Raj-free.
Here, the commentator has clarified that one must definitely be mindful of the
environment, time, person, and general public. Otherwise, accepting articles
from shops can harm the Sadhu or even the Jain religion. "Sodiyasala -"Sukhado"
Tiprsidhmisthannavicrayasala Kandavikapan Ityarthah" - A shop of Kandoi. - Ni.
Bhashya (Ghasi.)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
navama uddezaka] 32. sAgArika ke sIra vAlI miSThAnnazAlA meM se sAgArika kA
sAjhIdAra sAgArika ke binA sIra kI miThAI detA hai to unheM lenA kalpatA hai|
33. sAgArika ke sIra vAlI bhojanazAlA meM se sAgArika kA sAjhIdAra
nirgranthanirgranthiyoM ko AhAra detA hai to lenA nahIM kalpatA hai| 34.
sAgArika ke sIra vAlI bhojanazAlA se sAgArika kA sAjhIdAra baMTavAre meM prApta
khAdya sAmagrI meM se detA hai to sAdhu ko lenA kalpatA hai / 35. sAgArika ke
sIra vAle aAmra Adi phaloM meM se sAgArika kA sAjhIdAra nirgranthanirgranthiyoM
ko aAmrAdi detA hai to unheM lenA nahIM kalpatA hai / 36. sAgArika ke sIra vAle
AmrAdi phaloM meM se sAgArika kA sAjhIdAra baMTavAre meM prApta Amra Adi phala
yadi nimrantha-nirgranthiyoM ko detA hai to unheM lenA kalpatA hai / vivecana-
pUrva sUtroM meM zayyAtarapiMDa gharoM meM se lene, na lene kA vidhAna kiyA gayA
hai aura ina sUtroM meM vikrayazAlA arthAt dukAnoM meM se khAdyapadArtha yA anya
vastrAdi lene, na lene kA vidhAna kiyA gayA hai| ina sUtroM kA Azaya yaha hai ki
zayyAtara evaM azayyAtara (anya gRhastha) kI sAmUhika vikrayazAlA kabhI-koI
vibhAjita vasta meM zayyAtara kA svAmitva na ho yA koI padArtha anya gRhastha ke
svatantra svAmitva kA ho to use grahaNa karane para zayyAtarapiMDa kA doSa nahIM
lagatA hai| ataH sUtrokta dukAnoM se ve padArtha gRhastha ke nimantraNa karane
para yA Avazyaka hone para vivekapUrvaka grahaNa kiye jA sakate haiN| sUtragata
vikrayazAlA ke padArtha isa prakAra haiM (1) tela Adi, (2) gur3a Adi, (3) anAja
kirANA ke koI acitta padArtha, (4) vastra, (5) sUta, (dhAge), (6) kapAsa (rUI),
(7) sugaMdhita tela itrAdi (glAna hetu auSadha rUpa meM), (8) miSThAnna (9)
bhojanasAmagrI (10) AmrAdi acitta phala (ubale hue yA guThalI rahita khaNDa) /
ina sUtroM se yaha spaSTa ho jAtA hai ki sAdhu-sAdhvI gharoM ke atirikta kabhI
kahIM dukAna se bhI kalpyavastu grahaNa kara sakate haiN| dazava. a. 5 u.1 gA.
72 meM bhI raja se yukta khAdyapadArtha hoM to vikrayazAlA se lene kA niSedha
kiyA gayA hai, arthAt rajarahita hoM to ve grahaNa kie jA sakate haiN| yahAM
TIkAkAra ne spaSTa kiyA hai ki kSetra, kAla, vyakti evaM janasAdhAraNa ke
vAtAvaraNa kA avazya hI viveka rakhanA cAhie / anyathA dukAnoM se padArtha
grahaNa karane meM sAdhu kI yA jinazAsana kI hIlanA ho sakatI hai|
"soDiyasAlA-"sukhaDo" tiprasiddhamiSThAnnavikrayazAlA kAMdavikApaNa ityarthaH
kaMdoI kI dukaan| -ni. bhASya (ghAsI.)

Page #244 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[424] The term "madhyashala" has been interpreted in the Vyavahar Sutra Bhashya,
but Sadhus and Sadhvis have no contact with alcohol or meat, because these
substances are mentioned in the Agam as causes of hell. Therefore, the above
interpretation is appropriate. For more information on this topic, see the
discussion in Nishita U. 19 Su. 1.   37. The Sapta-Saptamika (seven-seven-day)
Bhikshu-Pratima is observed for ninety days with one hundred sixty-nine
Bhikshadattis, according to the Sutra and the Jina's command.  38. The Atta-
Attamika (eight-eight-day) Bhikshu-Pratima is observed for sixty-four days with
two hundred eighty-eight Bhikshadattis, according to the Sutra and the Jina's
command.  39. The Nava-Navamika (nine-nine-day) Bhikshu-Pratima is observed for
ninety-one days with four hundred five Bhikshadattis, according to the Sutra and
the Jina's command.  40. The Das-Dasamika (ten-ten-day) Bhikshu-Pratima is
observed for one hundred days with five hundred fifty Bhikshadattis, according
to the Sutra and the Jina's command.   Discussion: These Sutras describe four
Pratimas, which both Sadhus and Sadhvis can observe. The eighth chapter of the
Antagad Sutra describes the observance of these Bhikshu-Pratimas by Sukrushna
Prarya. In these Pratimas, Sadhvis also bring their own Gochari, in which the
prescribed limits of Bhikshadatti are observed for the specified days. In these
Pratimas, less than the prescribed number of Dattis can be accepted, or Anashan
Tapasya can also be performed. However, for any reason, more than the prescribed
number of Dattis cannot be accepted.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
424] [vyavahArasUtra bhASyAdi meM "madyazAlA" artha kiyA hai, kintu sAdhu-
sAdhviyoM kA madya-mAMsa se koI samparka hI nahIM hotA hai, kyoMki ve padArtha
Agama meM naraka ke kAraNabhUta kahe gaye haiM / ataH uparyukta artha hI saMgata
hai| isa viSaya kI adhika jAnakArI nizItha u. 19 sU. 1 ke vivecana meM dekheN|
saptasaptatikA Adi bhikSupratimAeM 37. satta-sattamiyA NaM bhikkhupaDimA
egaNapannAe rAiMdiehi egeNaM channaueNaM bhikkhAsaeNaM ahAsuttaM jAva ANAe
aNupAlittA bhavai / 38. aTTha-aTThamiyA NaM bhikkhupaDimA causaTThIe rAidiehiM
dohi ya aTTAsiehi bhikkhAsahi ahAsutaM jAva ANAe aNapAlittA bhavai / 39. nava-
navamiyA NaM bhikkhupaDimA egAsIe rAiviehi cahi ya paMcuttahiM bhikkhAsaehi
ahAsuttaM jAva prANAe aNupAlittA bhavai / 40. dasa-dasamiyA NaM bhikkhupaDimA
egeNaM rAiMdiyasaeNaM addhachohi ya bhikkhAsahi jAva ANAe aNupAlittA bhavai /
37. saptasaptamikA-sapta-saptadivasIya bhikSupratimA unacAsa ahorAtra meM eka
sau chiyAnavai bhikSAdattiyoM se sUtrAnusAra yAvat jinAjJA ke anusAra pAlana kI
jAtI hai / 38, aTTaaTTamiyA-aSTa-aSTadivasIya bhikSupratimA causaTha ahorAtra
meM do sau aThAsI bhikSAdattiyoM se sUtrAnusAra yAvat jinAjJA ke anusAra pAlana
kI jAtI hai| 39. navanavamiyA-nau-naudivasIya bhikSupratimA ikyAsI ahorAtra meM
cAra sau pAMca bhikSAdattiyoM se sUtrAnusAra yAvat jinAjJA ke anusAra pAlana kI
jAtI hai / 40. dasadasamiyA daza-dazadivasIya bhikSupratimA sau ahorAtra meM
pAMca sau pacAsa bhikSAdattiyoM se sUtrAnusAra yAvat jinAjJA ke anusAra pAlana
kI jAtI hai| vivecana-ina sUtroM meM cAra pratimAnoM kA varNana kiyA gayA hai,
jinakI ArAdhanA sAdhusAdhvI donoM hI kara sakate haiN| aMtagaDasUtra ke AThaveM
varga meM sukRSNA prAryA dvArA ina bhikSupratimAnoM ko ArAdhanA karane kA
varNana hai| ina pratimAoM meM sAdhvI bhI svayaM apanI gocarI lAtI hai, jisameM
nirdhArita dinoM taka bhikSAdatti kI maryAdA kA pAlana kiyA jAtA hai| ina
pratimAoM meM nirdhArita dattiyoM se kama dattiyAM grahaNa kI jA sakatI haiM yA
anazana tapasyA bhI kI jA sakatI hai| kintu kisI bhI kAraNa se maryAdA se adhika
datti grahaNa nahIM kI jA sakatI hai|

Page #245 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Ninth Uddeshak  [425 In these models, it is not necessary to perform
austerities like fasting, etc., naturally, Unodari Tapa often happens by itself
/ The Sapta-Saptathika Bhiksha-Pratima - for the first seven days, one Datti
each, for the next seven days, two Dattis each, and so on, in the seventh
Saptak, seven Dattis each are taken / In this way, there are 49 days in seven
Saptaks and the total maximum number of Bhiksha-Dattis is 196 / These Dattis are
in relation to Pahar / It should be understood that the same number of Dattis
are also in relation to water. Similarly, the Ashta-Ashtamika Bhiksha-Pratima -
text is completed in 64 days from Ashtak / In which, on the first day, one Datti
of food and one Datti of water are taken / Increasing in this way, in the eighth
Ashtak, eight Dattis of food and eight Dattis of water can be taken daily. In
this way, there are a total of 64 days and 288 Bhiksha-Dattis. Similarly, the
"Nava-Navamika" and Dasava-Samika Pratima - should also be understood according
to the number of days and Dattis mentioned in the Sutra. In Brihatkalpa U. 5, a
Sadhvi is also prohibited from going to Gochari alone / Therefore, in these
models, it is necessary to keep other Sadhvis with the Sadhvi who brings
independent Gochari, but she herself performs Gochari. These Pratimas are also
indicated by the word "Bhikshu-Pratima" in the Sutra / Still, to observe them,
there is no need for knowledge of the previous twelve Bhikshu-Pratimas or
specific endurance.  ## Mok-Pratima-Vidhan 41.  Two Padimas Pannattano, Tam Jaha
- 1. Khuddiya Va Moypadima, 2. Mahalliya Va Moypadima / Khuddiyam Nam Moypadim
Padhivanassa Anagarassa Kappi Padham-Saray-Kalasamayanssi Va Charim-Nidaha-
Kalasamayanssi Va, Bahiya Gamassa Va Jav Rayhaanie Va Varnssi Va Vanaduggansi Va
Panvayanssi Va Pavyayaduggansi Va / Bhocca Aaru Bhai, Choisamenam Parei, Abhocca
Aaru Bhai, Solasamenam Parei / Jaeajaea Moe Aagachchai, Taea-Taea Aiyaavve /
Diya Pragachchai Aiyaavve, Ratti Pragachchai No Aiyaavve / Sapaane Matte
Aagachchai No Paiyagve, Apaane Matte Aagachchah Aiyaavve / Sabiea Matte
Aagachchai No Aiyanve, Abiea Matte Aagachchai Aiyaavve / Sasnidde Bhatte
Pragachchad No Aiyaavve Asasnidde Matte Pagachchai Aiyaavve / Sasarakke Matte
Aagachchai No Praiyanve, Asasarakke Matte Aagachchad Aiyaavve / Javaieajavaiea
Moe Aagachchai, Tavaiea-Tavaiea Savve Aiyadhve, Tam Jaha Appe Va, Bahue Va /
Evam Khalu Esa Khuddiya Moypadima Ahasuttam Jav Aanaae Anupalitta Bhavai / 42.
Mahalliyam Nam Moypadim Padhivanassa Anagarassa Kappi Padham-Saray-
Kalasamayanssi Va, Charam-Nidaha-Kalasamayanssi Va, Bahiya Gamassa Va Jav
Rayhaanie Va Vananssi Va Vanaduggansi Va

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
navama uddezaka] [425 ina pratimAnoM meM upavAsa Adi tapa karanA Avazyaka nahIM
hotA hai, svAbhAvika hI prAyaH sadA UnodarI tapa ho jAtA hai / saptasaptatikA
bhikSapratimA-prathama sAta dina taka eka-eka datti, dUsare sAta dina taka do-do
datti, yoM kramazaH sAtaveM saptaka meM sAta-sAta datti grahaNa kI jAtI hai /
isa prakAra sAta saptaka ke 49 dina hote haiM aura bhikSAdatti kI kula
adhikatama saMkhyA 196 hotI hai / ye dattiyAM pAhAra kI apekSA se haiM / pAnI kI
apekSA bhI itanI hI dattiyAM samajha lenI caahie| isI prakAra aSTapraSTamikA
bhikSapratimA-pATha aSTaka se 64 dinoM meM pUrNa kI jAtI hai / jisameM prathama
pATha dina meM eka datti AhAra kI evaM eka hI datti pAnI kI lI jAtI hai / isa
prakAra bar3hAte hue pAThaveM aSTaka meM pratidina pATha datti AhAra kI evaM
ATha datti pAnI kI lI jA sakatI hai| isa prakAra kula 64 dina aura 288
bhikSAdatti ho jAtI haiN| isI prakAra "navanavamikA" aura dasavasamikApratimA-ke
bhI sUtrokta dina aura dattiyoM kA pramANa samajha lenA caahie| bRhatkalpa u. 5
meM sAdhvI ko akele gocarI jAne kA bhI niSedha kiyA hai / ataH ina pratimAnoM
meM svatantra gocarI lAne vAlI sAdhvI ke sAtha anya sAdhviyoM ko rakhanA
Avazyaka hai, kintu gocarI to vaha svayaM hI karatI hai| ina pratimAoM ko bhI
sUtra meM "bhikSupratimA" zabda se hI sUcita kiyA gayA hai / phira bhI inako
dhAraNa karane meM bAraha bhikSupratimAoM ke samAna pUrvo kA jJAna yA viziSTa
saMhanana kI AvazyakatA nahIM hotI hai| moka-pratimA-vidhAna 41. do paDimAo
paNNattAno, taM jahA-1. khuDDiyA vA moyapaDimA, 2. mahalliyA vA moyapaDimA /
khuDDiyaM NaM moyapaDimaM paDivanassa aNagArassa kappai paDhama-saraya-
kAlasamayaMsi vA carimanidAha-kAlasamayaMsi vA, bahiyA gAmassa vA jAva rAyahANIe
vA varNasi vA vaNaduggaMsi vA panvayaMsi vA pavyayaduggaMsi vA / bhoccA Arubhai,
coisameNaM pArei, abhoccA Arubhai, solasameNa pArei / jAejAe moe Agacchai, tAe-
tAe AIyavve / diyA prAgacchai AIyavve, ratti prAgacchai no AIyavve / sapANe
matte Agacchai no pAIyagve, apANe matte Agacchaha AIyabve / sabIe matte Agacchai
no AIyanve, abIe matte Agacchai AIyavve / sasaNiddhe bhatte prAgacchada no
AIyavve asasaNiddhe matte pAgacchai AIyaTve / sasarakkhe matte Agacchai no
prAIyanve, asasarakkhe matte Agacchada AIyagve / jAvaiejAvaie moe Agacchai,
tAvaie-tAvaie savve AIyadhve, taM jahAappe vA, bahue vA / evaM khalu esA
khuDDiyA moyapaDimA ahAsuttaM jAva ANAe aNupAlittA bhavai / 42. mahalliyaM NaM
moyapaDimaM paDivanassa aNagArassa kappai paDhama-saraya-kAlasamayaMsi vA,
carama-nidAha-kAlasamayaMsi vA, bahiyA gAmassa vA jAva rAyahANie vA vaNaMsi vA
vaNaduggasi vA

Page #246 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The *Vyavahar Sutra* on *Prasravan* Practices:  **Two *Prasravan* Practices
are mentioned:**  1. **Small *Prasravan* Practice:** This practice is undertaken
in the beginning of autumn or at the end of summer, outside the village or
capital, in a forest, forest fortress, on a mountain, or in a mountain fortress.
The *anagari* (non-householder) should undertake this practice. If the *anagari*
eats food on the day they begin the practice, they should complete it with six
fasts. If they begin the practice without eating, they should complete it with
seven fasts.   **Rules for the *Prasravan* Practice:**  * The *bhiksu* (monk)
should drink their urine whenever it comes. They should drink it during the day,
but not at night. * They should not drink urine that contains worms, but they
should drink urine that is free of worms. * They should drink urine that
contains semen, but they should not drink urine that is free of semen. * They
should not drink urine that contains oil, but they should drink urine that is
free of oil. * They should not drink urine that contains blood, but they should
drink urine that is free of blood. * They should drink all the urine that comes,
whether it is little or much.  This small *Prasravan* practice should be
followed according to the *sutra* and the knowledge of the *Jina*.  2. **Large
*Prasravan* Practice:** This practice is undertaken in the beginning of autumn
or at the end of summer, outside the village or capital, in a forest, forest
fortress, on a mountain, or in a mountain fortress. The *anagari* should
undertake this practice. If the *anagari* eats food on the day they begin the
practice, they should complete it with seven fasts. If they begin the practice
without eating, they should complete it with eight fasts.   **Rules for the
*Prasravan* Practice:**  * The *bhiksu* should drink their urine whenever it
comes. They should drink it during the day, but not at night.  This large
*Prasravan* practice should be followed according to the *sutra* and the
knowledge of the *Jina*.  **Discussion:**  This *sutra* describes two *bhiksu*
practices. Only *nirgrantha* (those who have renounced all worldly possessions)
can undertake these practices. *Nirgranthi* women cannot undertake these
practices. These practices are undertaken in isolation, outside the village, in
the forest or mountains, for seven to eight days.   The *bhasya* (commentary)
states that only those who have completed three *sanhanan* (stages of spiritual
development) and are *purvadhari* (those who have renounced all worldly
possessions) can undertake these practices. These practices are undertaken in
the months of *Prashtadha* (July-August) or *Mrigashirsha* (November-December).
One of the two *Prasravan* practices involves seven nights of *kayotsarga* (a
practice of complete relaxation and stillness), and is called the small
*Prasravan* practice. The other practice involves eight nights of *kayotsarga*,
and is called the large *Prasravan* practice.  Both practices can be started
with a fast on the first day, or by eating food on the first day. Those who eat
food on the first day have one less day of fasting, but the duration of
*kayotsarga* is the same for everyone.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
[vyavahArasUtra hIM pInA pamvayaMsi vA panvayadurgasi vA, bhoccA Arubhai,
solasameNaM pArei, abhoccA prArubhai, aTThArasameNaM pArei / jAe-jAe moe
prAgacchai, tAe-tAe AIyavve / diyA Agacchai prAIyabve, ratti prAgacchai no
AIyabve jAva evaM khalu esA mahalliyA moyapaDimA ahAsutaM jAva ANAe aNupAlittA
bhavai / 41. do pratimAeM kahI gaI haiM, yathA1. choTI prasravaNapratimA, 2.
bar3I prasravaNapratimA / choTI prasravaNapratimA zaratkAla ke prArambha meM
athavA grISmakAla ke anta meM grAma ke bAhara yAvat rAjadhAnI ke bAhara vana meM
yA vanadurga meM, parvata para yA parvatadurga meM anagAra ko dhAraNa karanA
kalpatA hai| yadi vaha bhojana karake usa dina isa pratimA ko dhAraNa karatA hai
to chaha upavAsa se ise pUrNa karatA hai / yadi bhojana kiye binA arthAt upavAsa
ke dina isa pratimA ko dhAraNa karatA hai to sAta upavAsa se ise pUrNa karatA
hai / isa pratimA meM bhikSu ko jitanI bAra mUtra Ave utanI bAra pI lenA caahie|
dina meM Ave to pInA cAhie, kintu rAta meM Ave to nahIM pInA ddaahie| kRmiyukta
pAve to nahIM pInA cAhie, kintu kRmirahita yAve to pInA cAhie / vIryasahita pAve
te cAhie, kintu vIryarahita Ave to pInA caahie| cikanAIsahita Ave to nahIM pInA
cAhie, kintu cikanAIrahita Ave to pInA caahie| raja (raktakaNa) sahita Ave to
nahIM pInA cAhie, kintu rajarahita pAve to pInA caahie| jitanA-jitanA mUtra Ave
utanA-utanA saba pI lenA cAhie, vaha alpa ho yA adhik| isa prakAra yaha choTI
prasravaNapratimA sUtrAnusAra yAvat jinAjJAnusAra pAlana kI jAtI hai| 42. bar3I
prasravaNapratimA zaratkAla ke prArambha meM yA grISmakAla ke anta meM grAma ke
bAhara yAvat rAjadhAnI ke bAhara vana meM yA vanadurga meM, parvata para yA
parvatadurga meM anagAra ko dhAraNa karanA kalpatA hai / yadi vaha bhojana
karake usI dina isa pratimA ko dhAraNa karatA hai to sAta upavAsa se ise pUrNa
karatA hai| yadi bhojana kiye binA arthAt upavAsa ke dina isa pratimA ko dhAraNa
karatA hai to ATha upavAsa se ise pUrNa karatA hai| isa pratimA meM bhikSu ko
jaba-jaba mUtra aAve, taba-taba pI lenA caahie| yadi dina meM Ave to pInA cAhie,
kintu rAta meM Ave to nahIM pInA cAhie yAvat isa prakAra yaha bar3I
prasravaNapratimA sUtrAnusAra yAvat jinAjJAnusAra pAlana kI jAtI hai| vivecana
isa sUtradvika meM do bhikSupratimAoM kA varNana kiyA gayA hai| inheM kevala
nirgrantha hI svIkAra kara sakatA hai| nirgranthiyAM ina pratimAoM ko dhAraNa
nahIM kara sktiiN| kyoMki ye pratimAeM grAmAdi ke bAhara athavA jaMgala yA
pahAr3oM meM jAkara sAta-ATha dina taka ekAkI rahakara rAta-dina pAlana kI jAtI
hai / ataH bhASya meM isakA adhikArI tIna saMhanana vAle pUrvadhArI ko hI batAyA
hai| ye pratimAeM prASADha mAsa yA mRgazIrSa (migasara) mAsa meM hI dhAraNa kI
jAtI haiM / donoM prasravaNapratimAoM meM se eka pratimA sAta rAtri kAyotsarga
kI hotI hai, use choTI prasravaNapratimA kahA gayA hai| dUsarI pATha rAtri
kAyotsarga kI hotI hai, use bar3I prasravaNapratimA kahA hai / ina donoM
pratimAoM ko prathama dina upavAsa tapa karake prArambha kiyA jA sakatA hai
athavA eka bAra bhojana karake bhI prArambha kiyA jA sakatA hai / bhojana karane
vAle ke eka dina kI tapasyA kama hotI hai, kintu kAyotsarga karane kA kAla to
sabhI ke samAna hI hotA hai /

Page #247 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Ninth Uddeshak [427]  After holding these images, all four types of food are
abandoned, only drinking one's own urine remains open, meaning that on those
days, whenever and however much urine comes, it is drunk following the
prescribed rules. / The rules are as follows: (1) Drink during the day, not at
night. (2) If it is mixed with worms, semen, menstrual fluid, or oil, it should
not be drunk. / If it is pure, it should be drunk. / The commentator has stated
that the aforementioned blood, oiliness, etc., of the image-holding monk may be
due to some disease or due to austerity and the heat of the sun. / Sometimes
this happens for the purification of the body's disorders by drinking urine
alone. / Although this image-holder practices austerity and remains in
Vyutsargatap throughout the day and night, yet when there is an obstruction of
urine, he abandons Kayotsarg, abandons the flow in Matrak, transcribes it and
drinks it. / Then he becomes stable again in Kayotsarg. / This is the method of
this image. / The one who follows this image worships the path of liberation. /
Along with that, his physical diseases are removed and he gets a strong body
with the color of gold. After the image-paradhan, he returns to the Upashraya. /
The commentary describes the gradual method of taking food and water for 49 days
during his parana. In common practice, urine is considered secluded, impure, and
unclean, but in medical texts it is called Sarvoshadhi, Shivaambu, etc., and in
Jain Agamas, the monk is called "Moyasmayare" and the householder is called
"Shuchisamachari". In the Abhidhana Ratnakosha, the word "Nishakalpa" is
described as being useful for the sadhu to use it for Achaman in place of water
at night. / Drinking one's own urine according to the prescribed method and
applying it to the skin of the body removes many incurable diseases. It is a
successful medicine for skin diseases or any kind of injury, wound, etc. /
Therefore, in the Agamas, urine is not considered secluded, impure, or unclean,
but is considered drinkable and impure according to the situation. The
commentator has also stated that the general public is cleanliness-oriented and
considers urine to be secluded and impure, therefore the image-holding monk
should drink urine with such discretion that no one sees him transcribing it
around. / Accordingly, other monks should also have the discretion to do any
activity related to excretion in a way that is unseen and unknown to the general
public. / In the present time, the importance of urine therapy has increased a
lot, independent books on this subject have also been published, which also
mention the relief of incurable diseases like cancer, TB, etc. Datti-
Pramannirupan 43. Sankhadatt's monk, who holds the image (Gahavaakulan Pindavai-
Padiae, Anupavitu) goes on and on, whatever images he has taken, he should give
them to Datti, that is the truth.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
navama uddezaka [427 ina pratimAoM ko dhAraNa karane ke bAda cAroM prakAra ke
AhAra kA tyAga kara diyA jAtA hai, kevala svamUtrapAna karanA khulA rahatA hai
arthAt una dinoM meM jaba-jaba jitanA bhI mUtra Ave, use sUtrokta niyamoM kA
pAlana karate hue pI liyA jAtA hai / niyama isa prakAra haiM-(1) dina meM pInA,
rAtri meM nhiiN| (2) kRmi, vIrya, raja yA cikanAI yukta ho to nahIM pInA cAhie /
zuddha ho to pInA cAhie / pratimAdhArI bhikSu ke ukta rakta, snigdhatA Adi
vikRtiyAM kisI roga ke kAraNa yA tapasyA evaM dhUpa kI garmI ke kAraNa ho sakatI
haiM, aisA bhASya meM batAyA gayA hai / kabhI mUtrapAna se hI zarIra ke vikAroM
kI zuddhi hone ke lie bhI aisA hotA hai| _ yadyapi isa pratimA vAlA cauvihAra
tapasyA karatA hai aura rAta-dina vyutsargatapa meM rahatA hai, phira bhI vaha
mUtra kI bAdhA hone para kAyotsarga kA tyAga kara mAtraka meM prasravaNa tyAga
karake usakA pratilekhana karake pI letA hai / phira punaH kAyotsarga meM sthira
ho jAtA hai / yaha isa pratimA kI vidhi hai / isa pratimA kA pAlana karane vAlA
mokSamArga kI ArAdhanA karatA hai / sAtha hI usake zArIrika roga dUra ho jAte
haiM aura kaMcanavarNI balavAn zarIra ho jAtA hai| pratimA-pArAdhana ke bAda
punaH upAzraya meM A jAtA hai / bhASya meM usake pAraNe meM AhArapAnI kI 49 dina
kI kramika vidhi batAI gaI hai| loka-vyavahAra meM mUtra ko ekAMta azucimaya
evaM apavitra mAnA jAtA hai, kintu vaidyaka granthoM meM ise sarvoSadhi, zivAMbu
Adi nAmoM se kahA gayA hai aura jainAgamoM meM bhikSu ko "moyasamAyAre" kaha
kara gRhasthoM ko zucisamAcArI vAlA kahA gayA hai| abhi. rA. koza meM
"nizAkalpa" zabda meM sAdhu ke lie rAtri meM pAnI ke sthAna para ise prAcamana
karane meM upayogI honA batAyA hai / svamUtra kA vidhipUrvaka pAna karane para
evaM isakA zarIra kI tvacA para abhyaMgana karane para aneka asAdhya roga dUra
ho jAte haiN| carmaroga ke lie yA kisI prakAra ko coTa bharoMca Adi ke lie yaha
eka saphala auSadha hai / ataH AgamoM meM mUtra ko ekAMta apavitra yA azucimaya
nahIM mAnakara apekSA se peya evaM apekSA se azucimaya bhI mAnA hai| bhASyakAra
ne yaha bhI batAyA hai ki janasAdharaNa zaucavAdI hote haiM aura mUtra ko ekAMta
apavitra mAnate haiM, ataH pratimAdhArI bhikSu cAroM ora pratilekhana karake koI
bhI vyakti na dekhe, aise viveka ke sAtha mUtra kA pAna kare / tadanusAra anya
bhikSuoM ko bhI prasravaNa saMbaMdhI koI bhI pravRtti karanI ho to janasAdhAraNa
se adRSTa evaM ajJAta rakhate hue karane kA viveka rakhanA caahie| vartamAna meM
bhI mUtracikitsA kA mahattva bahuta bar3hA hai, isa viSaya ke svataMtra grantha
bhI prakAzita hue haiM, jinameM kaiMsara, TI. bI. prAdi asAdhya rogoM ke
upazAMta hone ke ullekha bhI haiN| datti-pramANanirUpaNa 43. saMkhAdattiyassa
bhikkhussa paDiggahadhArissa (gAhAvAkulaM piMDavAya-paDiyAe, aNupaviTussa)
jAvaiyaM-jAvaiyaM kei anto paDiggahaMsi uvaittA dalaejjA tAvaiyAo tAo dattIno
vattamvaM siyaa|

Page #248 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[428] If the food is offered to the bowl by one, two or many, all of it should
be considered as one *datti*. If many people offer food to the bowl, all of it
should be considered as one *datti*. 44. If a *karpaatra-bhoji* *nirgrantha*
householder enters a house for food, and the householder offers food to the
*bhikkhu's* hand, then the number of times the householder offers food should be
counted as the number of *dattis*. If the householder offers food to the
*bhikkhu's* hand using a ladle, cloth or sieve without stopping, then all of it
should be considered as one *datti*. If many householders offer food to the
*bhikkhu's* hand, all of it should be considered as one *datti*. 43. If a
*paatra-dhari* *nirgrantha* householder enters a house for food, and the
householder offers food to the bowl, then the number of times the householder
offers food should be counted as the number of *dattis*. If the householder
offers food to the bowl using a ladle, cloth or sieve without stopping, then all
of it should be considered as one *datti*. If many householders offer food to
the bowl, all of it should be considered as one *datti*.  /  Discussion - The
*Sapta-Saptathika* and other *bhikkhu* images describe the number of *dattis*
for receiving food. This *sutra* explains the nature of *datti*.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
428] bibhaag tattha se kei chavvaeNa vA, dUsaeNa vA, vAlaeNaM vA anto
paDiggahaMsi uvaittA dalaejjA, savvA vi NaM sA egA dattI vattavvaM siyA / tattha
se bahave bhujamANA savve te sayaM sayaM piNDaM sAhaNiya anto paDiggahaMsi
uvaittA dalaejjA, savvA vi NaM sA egA datto vattavvaM siyaa| 44.
saMkhAdattiyassa gaM bhikkhussa pANi paDiggahiyassa (gAhAvaikulaM piNDavAya-
paDiyAe aNupaviTThassa) jAvaiyaM-jAvaiyaM kei anto pANisi uvaittA dalaejjA
tAvaiyAno tAto battIo pattagvaM siyaa| tattha se kei chabbaeNa vA, dUsaeNa vA,
vAlaeNa vA anto pANisi uvaittA dalaejjA, savvA vi NaM sA egA dattI vattavvaM
siyA / tattha se bahave bhujamANA sabve te sayaM sayaM piNDaM sAhaNiya anto
pANisi uvaittA dalaejjA savvA vi NaM sA egA dattI vattavaM siyaa| 43. dattiyoM
kI saMkhyA kA abhigraha karane vAlA pAtradhArI nirgrantha gRhastha ke ghara meM
AhAra ke lie praveza kare, isa samaya 1. AhAra dene vAlA gRhastha pAtra meM
jitanI bAra jhukAkara pAhAra de, utanI hI "dattiyAM" kahanI caahie| 2. pAhAra
dene vAlA gRhastha yadi chabar3I se, vastra se yA cAlanI se binA ruke pAtra meM
jhukAkara de, vaha saba "eka datti" kahanI caahie| 3. AhAra dene vAle gRhastha
jahAM aneka hoM aura ve saba apanA-apanA AhAra sammilita kara binA ruke pAtra
meM jhukAkara deM to vaha saba "eka datti" kahanI caahie| 44. dattiyoM kI
saMkhyA kA abhigraha karane vAlA karapAtrabhojI nirgrantha gRhastha ke ghara meM
AhAra ke lie praveza kare, isa samaya 1. AhAra dene vAlA gRhastha jitanI bAra
jhukAkara bhikSu ke hAtha meM AhAra de, utanI ho 'dattiyAM" kahanI caahie| 2.
AhAra dene vAlA gRhastha yadi chabar3I se, vastra se yA cAlanI se binA ruke
bhikSu ke hAtha meM jitanA AhAra de vaha saba "eka datti" kahanI caahie| 3.
AhAra dene vAle gRhastha jahAM aneka hoM aura ve saba apanA-apanA pAhAra
sammilita kara binA ruke bhikSu ke hAtha meM jhukAkara deM, vaha saba "eka
datti' kahanI cAhie / vivecana-saptasaptatikA prAdi bhikSupratimAoM meM dattiyoM
kI saMkhyA se AhAra grahaNa karane kA varNana kiyA gayA hai aura isa sUtradvika
meM datti kA svarUpa batAyA gayA hai|

Page #249 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Ninth Uddeshak [429]  A 'datti' is the amount of food or water given to a
sadhu in one go, without breaking the flow of the offering. It doesn't matter if
the datti is given by hand, from a vessel, or from a soup bowl, etc. It doesn't
matter if it is given in small amounts or in large amounts without stopping. All
of this is considered a single datti. If food is kept in multiple vessels or in
the hands of multiple people, and it is collected into one vessel or one hand
and given to the sadhu, it is still considered a single datti. For a kar-patri
bhikku (who does not carry a vessel), the amount of food given in one go, using
the methods described above, is considered a datti.  ## Three Types of Food [45]
There are three types of food:  1. **Falitopharit:** Food that is mixed with
various ingredients, such as sweets, savory dishes, etc. 2. **Shuddhopharit:**
Pure, unmixed food that is not smeared, such as chickpeas, mamra, puffed rice,
etc. 3. **Sansrushttopharit:** Pure, smeared food that is not mixed with other
ingredients, such as rice, roti, ghat, khichdi, etc.  ## Types of Avagrit Food
[46]  There are three types of Avagrit food:  1. **Jhanch Proginhai:** Food that
is taken for serving. 2. **Jhanch Saharai:** Food that is being carried for
serving. 3. **Jhanch Asamanshi (Thasaganshi) Pakkhivai:** Food that is being
served in a vessel.  Some acharyas say that there are only two types of Avagrit
food:  1. **Jhanch Oginhai:** Food that is taken for serving. 2. **Jhanch
Asaganshi (Thasaganshi) Pakkhivai:** Food that is being served in a vessel.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
navama uddezaka] [429 dAtA eka hI bAra meM dhAra khaMDita kiye binA jitanA
pAhAra yA pAnI sAdhu ke pAtra meM de use eka 'datti' pramANa AhAra yA pAnI kahA
jAtA hai| vaha eka datti AhAra-pAnI hAtha se de yA kisI bartana se de athavA
kisI sUpa, chAbar3I Adi se de, alpamAtrA meM dekara ruka jAya yA binA ruke
adhika mAtrA meM de, vaha saba eka bAra meM diyA gayA AhAra yA pAnI eka datti hI
kahA jAtA hai| kabhI koI khAdya padArtha aneka bartanoM meM yA aneka vyaktiyoM
ke hAtha meM alaga-alaga rakhA ho, use eka bartana meM yA eka hAtha meM ikaTThA
karake eka sAtha pAtra meM de diyA jAe to vaha bhI eka datti hI samajhanA
caahie| pAtra nahIM rakhane vAle arthAt kara-pAtrI bhikSu ke hAtha meM uparyukta
vidhiyoM se jitanA AhAra Adi eka sAtha diyA jAya, vaha unake lie eka datti
samajhanA caahie| tIna prakAra kA AhAra 45. tivihe uvahaDe paNNate, taM jahA-1.
phaliprovahaDe, 2. suddhovahaDe, 3. saMsaTThovahaDe / 45. khAdyapadArtha tIna
prakAra kA mAnA gayA hai, yathA1. phalitopahRta aneka prakAra ke vyaMjanoM se
mizrita khAdyapadArtha / 2. zuddhopahRta-vyaMjanarahita zuddha alepya
khAdyapadArtha / 3. saMsRSTopahata vyaMjanarahita salepya khAdyapadArtha /
vivecana-bhikSA meM tIna prakAra ke khAdyapadArtha grahaNa kiye jAte haiM,
jisameM sabhI prakAra ke grAhya padArthoM kA samAveza ho jAtA hai| (1) aneka
padArthoM ke saMyoga se saMskArita miSThAnna, namakIna zAka-bhAjI Adi ko
phalitopahRta kahA hai| (2) zuddha alepya cane, mamare, phUlI Adi ko
zuddhopahRta kahA hai| (3) zuddha salepya bhAta, roTI, ghATa, khicar3I grAdi
prasaMskArita gIle sAmAnya padArtha ko saMsRSTopahRta kahA hai / abhigraha
dhAraNa karane vAle bhikSu inameM se kisI bhI prakAra kA abhigraha kara sakate
haiN| avagahIta AhAra ke prakAra 46. tivihe proggahie paNNatte, taM jahA-1. jaM
ca progiNhai, 2. jaM ca sAharai, 3. jaM ca AsamaMsi (thAsagaMsi) pakkhivai, ege
evmaahNsu| _ ege puNa evamAhaMsu, duvihe oggahie paNNatte, taM jahA-1. jaM ca
ogiNhai, 2. jaM ca AsagaMsi (thAsagaMsi) pkkhivi| 46. avagRhIta pAhAra tIna
prakAra kA kahA gayA hai, yathA1. parosane ke lie grahaNa kiyA humA / 2.
parosane ke lie le jAtA huA / 3. bartana meM parosA jAtA huA, aisA kucha
prAcArya kahate

Page #250 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[430] These are the rules of conduct. However, some teachers say that there are
two types of food that is not to be accepted, namely: 1. Food that is being
taken for serving. 2. Food that is being served in a vessel. Discussion - In the
previous sutra, three types of food were mentioned, and in the present sutra,
three stages of accepting food by the giver are mentioned: (1) Food is being
taken from the place where it is kept or prepared and placed in another vessel.
(2) Food is being taken and carried for serving. (3) Food has been served in a
plate or similar vessel, but eating has not begun. / The commentator has said
that all three stages are forms of the sixth type of *pi·πá·∏çe·π£a·πáƒÅ*. In many
manuscripts, the word "prƒÅsagansƒ´" is available for the third type, which has
two meanings: (1) Food being put into the mouth for eating. (2) Food being put
into the mouth of the vessel. Both these meanings are not relevant here because
in the sixth type of *pi·πá·∏çe·π£a·πáƒÅ*, the third type of food being taken for eating
is the food that is served in a plate or similar vessel, which is the
appropriate meaning. / This is also conceivable because it is the stage before
eating begins. / However, taking food that is being put into the mouth for
eating is inappropriate and impractical, and food that is being put into the
mouth of the vessel is not a form of the sixth type of *pi·πá·∏çe·π£a·πáƒÅ* and is
therefore not relevant in the sequence. / Therefore, it is likely that due to a
scribal error, the word "prƒÅsagansƒ´" has become a substitute for the word
"thƒÅsagansƒ´" or "thƒÅlagansƒ´". In the *Bhagavati S≈´tra*, chapter 11, verse 11,
page 1951 (published from SailƒÅna), the words "thƒÅl" and "thƒÅsag" are used,
which are interpreted as "thƒÅlƒ´" (plate) and "tƒÅstarƒ´" (plate) respectively.
Therefore, here the word "thƒÅsagansƒ´" or "thƒÅlagansƒ´" is considered correct and
the meaning is explained accordingly. In the second part of the sutra, two types
of food taken for eating are mentioned from the perspective of alternative
expectations, namely: taking from the original vessel and serving in a plate or
similar vessel. / In this alternative, it is expected that the food is taken
from one vessel and served in a plate or similar vessel while sitting at the
place where the food is kept, but there is no intention of walking or taking it
far away for serving. The sutra uses the phrase "age pu·πá evamƒÅhansu". This
creates the possibility of a difference of opinion, but it should be understood
that the structure of the sutra is based on two expectations. Because it is
difficult to imagine that there would be a difference of opinion among the
previous teachers about such a common matter and that it would be included in
the sutra.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
430] vyavahArasUtra haiN| parantu kucha prAcArya aisA bhI kahate haiM
kiavagRhIta AhAra do prakAra kA kahA gayA hai, yathA1. parosane ke lie grahaNa
kiyA jAtA huaa| 2. bartana meM parosA jAtA huaa| vivecana-pUrvasUtra meM
khAdyapadArtha ke tIna prakAra kahe gaye haiM aura prastuta sUtra meM dAtA ke
dvArA AhAra ko grahaNa karane kI tIna avasthAoM kA kathana kiyA gayA hai (1)
jisameM khAdyapadArtha par3A hai yA banAyA gayA hai, usameM se nikAla kara anya
bartana meM grahaNa kiyA jA rahA ho| (2) grahaNa karake parosane ke lie le jAyA
jA rahA ho| (3) thAlI Adi meM parosa diyA gayA ho, kintu khAnA prArambha nahIM
kiyA ho / bhASyakAra ne yahAM tInoM avasthAoM kA chaTThI piMDeSaNA rUpa hone kA
kahA hai| aneka pratiyoM meM tIsare prakAra ke lie "prAsagaMsi" zabda upalabdha
hotA hai, jisake do artha kie jAte haiM (1) khAne ke lie mukha meM DAlA jAtA
huaaa| (2) bartana ke mukha meM DAlA jAtA huaa| ye donoM hI artha yahAM
prasaMgasaMgata nahIM haiM kyoMki chaTThI piMDeSaNA meM bhojana karane ke lie
grahaNa kI jAne vAlI tIna avasthAoM (tIna prakAroM) kA kramazaH tIsarA prakAra
thAlI Adi meM parosA jAtA huA AhAra aisA artha karanA hI upayukta hai / jo khAnA
prArambha karane ke pUrva kI avasthA hone se kalpanIya bhI hai / kintu mukha meM
khAne ke lie DAlA jAtA huA AhAra grahaNa karanA to anupayukta evaM avyavahArika
hai aura bartana ke mukha meM DAlA jAtA huA pAhAra chaTThI piMDeSaNA rUpa nahIM
hone se krama-prApta prAsaMgika nahIM hai / ataH sambhAvanA yaha hai ki lipidoSa
se 'thAsagaMsi yA thAlagaMsi' zabda ke sthAna para kadAcit 'pAsagaMsi' zabda
bana gayA hai| bhagavatIsUtra za. 11 u. 11 pR. 1951 (sailAnA se prakAzita) meM
thAla aura thAsaga zabdoM kA prayoga kiyA hai, jinakA kramazaH thAlI aura
tastarI (pleTa) artha kiyA gayA hai| ata: yahAM thAsagaMsi yA thAlagaMsi zabda
ko zuddha mAna kara artha spaSTa kiyA hai| satra ke dvitIya vibhAga meM
vaikalpika apekSA se bhojana karane hetu grahaNa kie hue AhAra ke do prakAra
kahe gaye haiM, yathA-mUla bartana meM se nikAlate hue aura thAlI Adi meM
parosate hue / isa vikalpa meM jahAM AhAra rakhA ho vahIM para baiThe hue eka
bartana meM se nikAlakara thAlI Adi meM parosane kI apekSA kI gaI hai kintu
mArga meM calane kI yA dUra le jAkara parosane kI vivakSA isameM nahIM kI gaI
hai| sUtra meM "ege puNa evamAhaMsu" zabda kA prayoga kiyA gayA hai| isase
mAnyatAbheda kI kalpanA utpanna hotI hai, kiMtu yahAM do apekSAnoM ko lekara
sUtra kI racanA-paddhati hai, aisA samajhanA caahie| kyoMki aisI sAmAnya bAta ke
lie pUrvadharoM meM mAnyatAbheda ho jAnA evaM sUtra meM saMkalita kiyA jAnA
kliSTa kalpanA hai|

Page #251 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Ninth Uddeshak] [431 While such phrases are in the form of many commands at the
beginning of the Jivaabhigamsutra, there are two, three, four, etc. distinctions
of beings mentioned there. That statement should not be understood as a
difference of opinion, but rather as different perspectives. The commentator has
also explained it in the same way. Therefore, even though the words "age pun
evamasu" are used here, it should not be understood as a difference of opinion.
The commentator has also defined it as "pradesh" and explained that it refers to
different perspectives that have come down from many debates. Therefore, both
parts of the present sutra should be understood as "aadesh". The summary of the
ninth Uddeshak is as follows: Sutras 1-8, 17-36, 37-40, 41-42: A monk can take
food from the servants or guests of a Shayatar, if it is given by the
Praatiharik (with the option to return the remaining food), but should not take
it if it is not given by the Praatiharik. It is not proper to take food from the
relatives of a Shayatar who earn their livelihood with his help, even if they
cook or eat it. If there are any items in the shops owned by a Shayatar that are
not part of the partnership, they can be taken from the partner. Or, if the
partnership is dissolved, any item can be taken. By accepting alms according to
the limits of the seven-septak, eight-ashtak, nine-navak, and ten-dashak, monks
and nuns can worship four types of Bhikku pratima. The small and large pratima
of self-urine drinking are worshipped for seven and eight days respectively. In
this, the completely pure and sutra-prescribed urine is drunk only during the
day, not at night. Food, etc., given in one continuous stream into the hand or
vessel of a monk is called one datti. There are three types of food: (1)
processed food, (2) pure un-anointed food, (3) pure anointed food. Any of these
can be accepted. There are three stages of food suitable for the sixth
Pindeshana, called "pragaheet": (1) while taking it out of the vessel, (2) while
taking it to serve, (3) while serving it on a plate, etc. Or, from a
perspective, there can be two stages of that food: (1) while taking it out of
the vessel, (2) while serving it on a plate, etc. 43-44, 45, 56.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
navama uddezaka] [431 jabaki aise vAkyaprayoga jIvAbhigamasUtra ke prArambha meM
aneka AdezAtmaka prarUpaNA ke haiM, vahAM apekSA se jIvoM ke do, tIna, cAra
prAdi bheda kahe haiN| vaha kathana bhI mAnyatAbheda na samajhakara vibhinna
apekSA rUpa hI samajhA jAtA hai / vahAM TIkAkAra ne bhI vaisA hI spaSTIkaraNa
kiyA hai| ata: yahAM bhI "ege puNa evamAsu" zabdoM kA prayoga hote hue bhI
mAnyatAbheda honA nahIM samajhanA cAhie / bhASyakAra ne bhI ise prAdeza kahakara
usakI yaha paribhASA batAI hai ki aneka bahazratoM se calI AI bhinna-bhinna
apekSAyoM ko Adeza kahate haiN| isalie prastuta sUtra ke donoM vibhAgoM ko Adeza
hI samajhanA caahie| navama uddezaka kA sArAMza sUtra 1-8 17-36 37-40 41-42
zayyAtara ke naukara yA pAhuNoM ko pUrNa rUpa se diye gaye AhAra meM se bhikSu
le sakatA hai, yadi prAtihArika diyA ho (zeSa AhAra lauTAne kA ho) to nahIM lenA
cAhie / zayyAtara ke sahayoga se jIvananirvAha karane vAle usake jJAtijana yadi
khAnA banAveM yA khAveM to unase lenA nahIM kalpatA hai / zayyAtara ke bhAgIdArI
(sAjhedArI) vAlI dukAnoM meM yadi koI padArtha binA bhAgIdArI vAlI kA ho to
usake bhAgIdAra se lie jA sakate haiM / athavA vibhakta ho jAne para koI bhI
padArtha lie jA sakate haiN| sAta-saptaka, ATha-aSTaka, nava-navaka aura daza-
dazaka meM dattiyoM kI maryAdA se bhikSA grahaNa karake cAra prakAra kI bhikSu
pratimAoM kA ArAdhana sAdhu-sAdhvI kara sakate haiM / svamUtrapAna kI choTI va
bar3I pratimA sAta evaM ATha dina meM pArAdhana kI jAtI hai| isa meM pUrNa
zuddha evaM sUtrokta prasravaNa dina meM hI piyA jAtA hai, rAtri meM nhiiN| eka
bAra meM akhaMDa dhAra se sAdhu ke hAtha meM yA pAtra meM diye jAne vAle AhArAdi
ko eka datti kahA jAtA hai| tIna prakAra ke khAdya padArtha hote haiM (1)
saMskArita padArtha, (2) zuddha alepya padArtha, (3) zuddha salepya padArtha /
inameM se koI bhI abhigraha dhAraNa kiyA jA sakatA hai| "pragahIta' nAmaka
chaTThI piMDeSaNA ke yogya prAhAra kI tIna avasthAeM hotI haiN| (1) bartana meM
se nikAlate hue, (2) parosane liye le jAte hue, (3) thAlI Adi meM parosate hue /
athavA apekSA se usa AhAra kI do avasthA kahI jA sakatI haiM(1) bartana meM se
nikAlate hue, (2) thAlI Adi meM parosate hue / 43-44 45 56

Page #252 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[432] [Vyavahar Sutra Upasamhar 37-42 In this Uddeshak, the subject of
Kalyakalpya and Akalyakalpya food items for Shayatar, the Datti-Parimana of
Pratimas, the Prasravana-Pana Pratimas, the Datti Swaroop, the types of food
suitable for Abhigraha, etc. have been discussed. // Ninth Uddeshak ends //
45-46

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
432] [vyavahArasUtra upasaMhAra 37-42 isa uddezaka meMzayyAtara ke
khAdyapadArtha ke kalpyAkalpya kA, datti-parimANa pratimAoM kA evaM prazravaNa-
pAna pratimAoM kA, dattisvarUpa kA, abhigraha yogya AhAra ke prakAroM kA, ityAdi
viSayoM kA kathana kiyA gayA hai / // navama uddezaka samApta // 45-46

Page #253 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The tenth Uddeshak (chapter) describes two types of Chandrapratima (moon
images): 1. Two types of Padhima (images) - 1. Javmajjha Chandrapratima (moon
image with a full moon), 2. Vairamjjha Chandrapratima (moon image with a
crescent moon).  The Javmajjha Chandrapratima is for the Pravrajya
(renunciation) of an Anugara (lay follower) who is constantly observing the
month of Vosa·π≠·π≠aka (the month of fasting) with a pure body.  If any
Pari·π£ahovasagga (circumstances) arise, whether divine, human, animal, Anuloma
(favorable), or Padiloma (unfavorable), then in the case of Anuloma, one should
offer Vandana (salutation), Namaskara (prostration), Sakkara (respect), Sammana
(honor), and wish for their well-being and prosperity. In the case of Padiloma,
one should not retaliate with a stick, bone, fire, weapon, or any other means.
One should tolerate, forgive, endure, and be patient.  The Javmajjha
Chandrapratima is suitable for the Pravrajya of an Anugara who is observing the
Sukkapakkha (bright fortnight) of the month. It is suitable for accepting one
gift of food, one gift of drink, and for accepting food and drink from the seven
types of Aharakkha (food and drink) that are permitted. Many Samanas (monks) and
Vanimagas (merchants) have observed this practice.  It is suitable for accepting
one gift of food from a single person, not two, three, four, or five. It is not
suitable for accepting gifts from a pregnant woman, a child, or a woman who is
menstruating. It is not suitable for accepting gifts from a woman who is in
labor, even if she is only a few days away from giving birth. It is not suitable
for accepting gifts from a woman who is in labor, even if she is only a few days
away from giving birth.  However, it is acceptable to accept gifts from a woman
who is in labor if she is only a few days away from giving birth, as long as she
is not in pain.  The second type of Chandrapratima is suitable for accepting two
gifts of food and two gifts of drink.  The third type of Chandrapratima is
suitable for accepting three gifts of food and three gifts of drink.  The fourth
type of Chandrapratima is suitable for accepting four gifts of food and four
gifts of drink.  The fifth type of Chandrapratima is suitable for accepting five
gifts of food and five gifts of drink.  The sixth type of Chandrapratima is
suitable for accepting six gifts of food and six gifts of drink.  The seventh
type of Chandrapratima is suitable for accepting seven gifts of food and seven
gifts of drink.  The eighth type of Chandrapratima is suitable for accepting
eight gifts of food and eight gifts of drink.  The ninth type of Chandrapratima
is suitable for accepting nine gifts of food and nine gifts of drink.  The tenth
type of Chandrapratima is suitable for accepting ten gifts of food and ten gifts
of drink.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
dasavAM uddezaka do prakAra kI candrapratimAeM 1. do paDimAo paNNattAo, taM
jahA1. javamajhA ya caMdapaDimA, 2. vairamajjhA ya caMdapaDimA / javamajha NaM
caMdapaDimaM paDivanassa aNagArassa niccaM mAsaM vosaTTakAe ciyattadehe / je kei
parIsahovasaggA samuppajjejjA divvA vA, mANussagAvA, tirikkhajoNiyA vA, aNulomA
vA, paDilomA vA, tattha aNulomA tAva vaMdejjA vA, namaMsijjA vA, sakkArejjA vA,
sammANejjA vA, kallANaM maMgalaM devayaM ceiyaM pajjuvAsejjA, paDilomA tAva
annayareNaM daMDeNa vA, aTThiNA vA, joteNa vA, vetteNa vA, kaseNa vA kAe
AuTejjA, te savve uppanne samma sahejjA, khamejjA, titikkhejjA, ahiyaasejjaa|
javamajhaM gaM caMdapaDima paDikannassa praNagArassa, sukkapakkhassa pADivae se
kappai egA dattI bhoyaNassa paDigAhettae, egA pANassa, samvehi duppayaM
cauppayAiehi AhAra-kakhohi sattehi paDiNiyatehi, annAyauMchaM suddhovahaDaM
nijjUhittA bahave samaNa jAva vnniimgaa| kappaDa se egassa bhujamANassa
paDiggAhettae no doNhaM, no tiNhaM, no cauNhaM, no pNcnnhN| no mugviNIe, no
bAlavacchAe, no dAragaM pejjamANIe / no aMto eluyassa do vi pAe sAhaTu dalamANIe
no bAhiM eluyassa do vi pAe sAhaTu dlmaanniie| aha puNa evaM jANejjA-egaM pAyaM
aMto kiccA, egaM pAyaM bAhiM kiccA eluyaM vikkhambhaittA dalayai, evaM se kappai
pddiggaahitte| biiyAe se kappai doNNi dattIo bhoyaNassa paDigAhettae, doNi
pANassa / taiyAe se kappai tiNi dattIo bhoyaNassa paDigAhettae, tiNi pANassa /
cautthIe se kappai cau dattIo bhoyaNassa paDigAhettae, cau pANassa / paMcamIe se
kappai paMca dattIo bhoyaNassa paDigAhettae, paMca pANassa / chaTThIe se kappai
cha vattIo bhoyaNassa paDigAhettae, cha pANassa / sattamoe me kappA satta dattIo
bhoyaNassa paDigAhettae, satta pANassa / aTThamIe se kappai aTu dattopo
bhoyaNassa paDigAhettae, aTTa pANassa / navamIe se kappaha nava vattIo
bhoyaNassa paDigAhettae, nava pANassa / dasamIe se kappai vasa dattIo bhoyaNassa
paDigAhettae, dasa pANassa /

Page #254 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[434] From the eleventh day of the dark fortnight, eleven *dattis* are the
measure of food, eleven *paanas* / From the twelfth day, twelve *dattis* are the
measure of food, twelve *paanas* / From the thirteenth day, thirteen *dattis*
are the measure of food, thirteen *paanas* / From the fourteenth day, fourteen
*dattis* are the measure of food, fourteen *paanas*. From the fifteenth day,
fifteen *dattis* are the measure of food, fifteen *paanas* / From the *bahula
pakkha* (the day before the full moon), fourteen *dattis* are the measure of
food, fourteen *paanas* / From the second day, thirteen *dattis* are the measure
of food, thirteen *paanas* / From the third day, twelve *dattis* are the measure
of food, twelve *paanas* / From the fourth day, eleven *dattis* are the measure
of food, eleven *paanas* / From the fifth day, ten *dattis* are the measure of
food, ten *paanas* / From the sixth day, nine *dattis* are the measure of food,
nine *paanas* / From the seventh day, eight *dattis* are the measure of food,
eight *paanas* / From the eighth day, seven *dattis* are the measure of food,
seven *paanas* / From the ninth day, six *dattis* are the measure of food, six
*paanas*. From the tenth day, five *dattis* are the measure of food, five
*paanas* / From the eleventh day, four *dattis* are the measure of food, four
*paanas* / From the twelfth day, three *dattis* are the measure of food, three
*paanas* / From the thirteenth day, two *dattis* are the measure of food, two
*paanas* / From the fourteenth day, one *datti* is the measure of food, one
*paana*. On the new moon, there is no food / Thus, the measure of food, from the
waxing moon to the full moon, is observed in this way / 2. In the waning
fortnight, from the full moon to the new moon, for a *nigara* (a person who has
taken the vow of non-attachment), the measure of food is always the same, as it
is for a *ciyatta deha* (a person who has taken the vow of non-violence), for
those who are in the *parishovasagga* (the state of being attached to the
world), until they reach the state of *ahiyasajja* (the state of being free from
attachment). In the waning fortnight, from the full moon to the new moon, for a
*nigara*, from the *bahula pakkha* (the day before the full moon), fifteen
*dattis* are the measure of food, fifteen *paanas*, until the moon is completely
eclipsed and disappears, then the measure of food is reduced accordingly. From
the second day, fourteen *dattis* are the measure of food, fourteen *paanas* /
From the third day, thirteen *dattis* are the measure of food, thirteen
*paanas*. From the fourth day, twelve *dattis* are the measure of food, twelve
*paanas* / From the fifth day, eleven *dattis* are the measure of food, eleven
*paanas* / From the sixth day, ten *dattis* are the measure of food, ten
*paanas* /

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
434] [vyavahArasUtra egArasamIe se kappar3a egArasa battIpo bhoyaNassa
paDigAhettae, egArasa pANassa / bArasamIe se kappai bArasa dattoo bhoyaNassa
paDigAhettae, bArasa pANassa / terasamIe se kappai terasa dattIo bhoyaNassa
paDigAhettae, terasa pANassa / coddasamIe se kappaI coddasa dattIo bhoyaNassa
paDigAhettae, coisa paannss| pannarasamIe se kappai pannarasa vattIyo bhoyaNassa
paDigAhettae, pannarasa pANassa / bahulapakkhassa pADivae se kappai coisa
dattIyo bhoyaNassa paDigAhettae, coisa pANassa / biiyAe se kappai terasa dattIo
bhoyaNassa paDigAhettae, terasa pANassa / taiyAe se kappai bArasa dattIo
bhoyaNassa paDigAhettae, bArasa pANassa / cautthIe se kappai ekkArasa dattIo
bhoyaNassa paDigAhettae, ekkArasa pANassa / paMcamIe se kappai dasa dattoo
bhoyaNassa par3igAhettae, dasa pANassa / chaTThIe se kappai nava dattIo
bhoyaNassa paDigAhettae, nava pANassa / sattamIe se kappai aTTa dattoo
bhoyaNassa paDigAhettae, aTTha pANassa / aTThamIe se kappai satta dattIo
bhoyaNassa paDigAhettae, satta pANasta / navamIe se kappai cha dattoo bhoyaNassa
paDigAhettae, cha paannss| dasamIe se kappada paMca dattIo bhoyaNassa
paDigAhettae, paMca pANassa / ekkArasamIe se kappai cau dattIo bhoyaNassa
paDigAhettae, cau pANassa / bArasamIe se kappai tiNi dattIo bhoyaNassa
paDigAhettae, tipiNa pANassa / terasamIe se kappai do dattIo bhoyaNassa
paDigAhettae, do pANassa / caudasamIe se kappai egA dattI bhoyaNassa
paDigAhettae, egA paannss| amAvAsAe se ya abhattaThe bhavai / evaM khalu
javamajjhacaMdapaDimA prahAsuttaM jAva aNNAe aNupAliyA bhavai / 2. vairamajha
NaM caMdapaDima paDivanassa aNagArassa niccaM mAsaM vosaTakAe ciyattadehe je
keha parIsahovasaggA samuppajjejjA jAva ahiyaasejjaa| vairamajjhaM NaM
caMdapaDima paDivanassa aNagArassa, bahulapakkhassa pADivae se kappai pannarasa
dattIo bhoyaNassa paDigAhettae, pannarasa pANassa jAva eluyaM vivakhaMbhaittA
dalayai evaM se kappai pddiggaahitte| biiyAe se kappai cauddasa dattIpo
bhoyaNassa paDigAhettae, cauddasa pANassa / taiyAe se kappai terasa dattIo
bhoyaNassa paDigAhettae, terasa paannss| cautthIe se kappai bArasa dattIo
bhoyaNassa paDigAhettae, bArasa pANassa / paMcamIe se kappai egArasa dattIo
bhoyaNassa paDigAhettae, egArasa pANassa / chaTThIe se kappai dasa dattIo
bhoyaNassa paDigAhettae, dasa pANassa /

Page #255 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Baswan Uddeshak] [On the 7th day of the dark fortnight, 9 *dattis* of food are
to be given, 9 *paanas* / On the 8th day, 8 *dattis* of food are to be given, 8
*paanas* / On the 9th day, 7 *dattis* of food are to be given, 7 *paanas* / On
the 10th day, 6 *dattis* of food are to be given, 6 *paanas* / On the 11th day,
5 *dattis* of food are to be given, 5 *paanas* / On the 12th day, 4 *dattis* of
food are to be given, 4 *paanas* / On the 13th day, 3 *dattis* of food are to be
given, 3 *paanas* / On the 14th day, 2 *dattis* of food are to be given, 2
*paanas* / On the Amavasya, 1 *datti* of food is to be given, 1 *paana* / On the
first day of the bright fortnight, 2 *dattis* of food are to be given, 2
*paanas* / On the second day, 3 *dattis* of food are to be given, 3 *paanas* /
On the third day, 4 *dattis* of food are to be given, 4 *paanas* / On the 4th
day, 5 *dattis* of food are to be given, 5 *paanas* / On the 5th day, 6 *dattis*
of food are to be given, 6 *paanas* / On the 6th day, 7 *dattis* of food are to
be given, 7 *paanas* / On the 7th day, 8 *dattis* of food are to be given, 8
*paanas* / On the 8th day, 9 *dattis* of food are to be given, 9 *paanas* / On
the 9th day, 10 *dattis* of food are to be given, 10 *paanas* / On the 10th day,
11 *dattis* of food are to be given, 11 *paanas* / On the 11th day, 12 *dattis*
of food are to be given, 12 *paanas* / On the 12th day, 13 *dattis* of food are
to be given, 13 *paanas* / On the 13th day, 14 *dattis* of food are to be given,
14 *paanas* / On the 14th day, 15 *dattis* of food are to be given, 15 *paanas*
/ On the Purnima, this practice should be continued. Thus, this is the practice
of the *chandapradima* in the *bahramjja* from the *aanaa* to the *aanaa*. / 1.
Two *pradimas* are mentioned, namely: 1. *Yavamdhyachandrapradima*, 2.
*Vajramdhyachandrapradima*. The one who accepts the *Yavamdhyachandrapradima*
should remain for one month without any bodily activity and without attachment
to the body. / During that time, whatever *dev*, *manushya*, and *tiryanch*
*krit* *anukul* or *pratikul* *parisah* and *upsarg* arise, such as *anukul*
*parisah* and *upsarg*, one should offer *vandana*, *namaskaar*, *satkaar*,
*samman*, and *paryupasana* considering them to be auspicious, beneficial,
divine, and knowledgeable.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
basavAM uddezaka] [435 sattamIe se kappai nava dattIyo bhoyaNassa paDigAhettae,
nava pANassa / aTThamIe se kappai aTTha dattIo bhoyaNassa paDigAhettae, aTTha
pANassa / navamIe se kappai satta dattImo bhoyaNassa paDigAhettae, satta pANassa
/ dasamIe se kappai cha vattIyo bhoyaNassa paDigAhettae, cha pANassa /
egArasamIe se kappai paMca dattIo bhoyaNassa paDigAhettae, paMca pANassa /
bArasamIe se kappai cau dattImro bhoyaNassa paDigAhettae, cau pANassa /
terasamIe se kappai tinni dattopo bhoyaNassa paDigAhetae, tinni pANassa /
caudasamIe se kappai do dattoo bhoyaNassa paDigAhettae, do pANassa / amAvAsAe se
kappai egA datto bhoyaNassa paDigAhettae, egA pANaMssa / sukkapakkhassa pADiyae
se kappAi do battIo bhoyaNassa paDigAhettae, do pANassa / biiyAe se kappai tinni
vattIo bhoyaNassa paDigAhettae, tinni pANassa / taiyAe se kappai cau dattIpo
bhoyaNassa paDigAhettae, cau paannss| cautthIe se kappai paMca dattopo
bhoyaNassa paDigAhettae, paMca pAsassa / paMcamIe se kappai cha dattIso
bhoyaNassa paDigAhettae, cha pANassa / chaTThIe se kappA satta dattIo bhoyaNassa
paDigAhettae, satta pANassa / sattamIe se kappai aTTha dattIo bhoyaNassa
paDigAhettae, aTTha paannss| aTTamIe se kappai nava dattIgro bhoyaNassa
paDigAhettae, nava paannss| navamIe se kappai vasa dattIo bhoyaNassa
paDigAhettae, vasa pANassa / vasamIe se kappai egArasa dattoo bhoyaNassa
paDigAhettae, egArasa paannss| egArasamoe se kappai bArasa dattoo bhoyaNassa
paDigAhettae, bArasa pANassa / bArasamIe se kappai terasa vattIo bhoyaNassa
paDigAhettae, terasa paannss| terasamIe se kappai cauddasa dattImo bhoyaNassa
paDigAhettae, cauddasa pANassa / cauddasamIe se kappada pannarasa dattoo
bhoyaNassa paDigAhettae, pannArasa pANassa / puNNimAe se ya prabhattaThe bhvi|
evaM khalu esA baharamajjhA caMdapaDimA ahAsuttaM jAva ANAe aNupAliyA bhavai /
1. do pratimAyeM kaho gaI haiM, yathA-1. yavamadhyacandrapratimA, 2.
vjrmdhycndrprtimaa| yavamadhyacandrapratimA svIkAra karane vAlA anagAra eka mAsa
taka zarIra ke parikarma se tathA zarIra ke mamatva se rahita hokara rahe / usa
samaya jo koI bhI deva, manuSya evaM tiryaMcakRta anukUla yA pratikUla parISaha
evaM upasarga utpanna hoM, yathA anukUla parISaha evaM upasarga ye haiMkoI
vandanA namaskAra kare, satkAra-sammAna kare, kalyANarupa, maMgalarUpa, devarUpa
aura jJAnarUpa mAnakara paryupAsanA kre|

Page #256 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 436 [Vyavahar Sutra]  **Adverse Parosha and Upsarga** are inflicted by any
means like a stick, bone, fire, cane or whip on the body. One should bear all
these favorable and unfavorable arising Parosha and Upsarga with equanimity,
without being pleased or displeased. One should be forgiving towards that
person, bear it bravely and with peace, experiencing joy.  **The ascetic who
worships the Yavamdhyachandra image** should take one datti each of food and
water on the first day of the Shukla Paksha. He should take food with a thin
layer of pure substance from an unknown place after all bipeds, quadrupeds, etc.
who desire food have returned.  **He should take food when many Shramanas or
beggars have returned with food**, i.e., when they are not standing there.  **It
is permissible to take food from one person's meal**, but not from two, three,
four or five people's meals.  **It is not permissible to take food from the
hands of a pregnant woman, a woman with a small child or a woman who is
breastfeeding.**  **It is not permissible to take food from a giver whose both
feet are inside or outside the threshold.**  **If it is known that the giver is
giving with one foot inside the threshold and one foot outside, keeping the
threshold between his feet, then it is permissible to take food from his hand.**
**On the second day of the Shukla Paksha, the ascetic who holds the image should
take two dattis each of food and water.**  **On the third day, he should take
three dattis each of food and water.**  **On the fourth day, he should take four
dattis each of food and water.**  **On the fifth day, he should take five dattis
each of food and water.**  **On the sixth day, he should take six dattis each of
food and water.**  **On the seventh day, he should take seven dattis each of
food and water.**  **On the eighth day, he should take eight dattis each of food
and water.**  **On the ninth day, he should take nine dattis each of food and
water.**  **On the tenth day, he should take ten dattis each of food and
water.**  **On the eleventh day, he should take eleven dattis each of food and
water.**  **On the twelfth day, he should take twelve dattis each of food and
water.**  **On the thirteenth day, he should take thirteen dattis each of food
and water.**  **On the fourteenth day, he should take fourteen dattis each of
food and water.**  **On the full moon day, he should take fifteen dattis each of
food and water.**  **On the first day of the Krishna Paksha, he should take
fourteen dattis each of food and water.**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
436 [vyavahArasUtra pratikUla paroSaha evaM upasarga ye haiM kisI daNDa, haDDI,
jota, beMta athavA cAbuka se zarIra para prahAra kre| vaha ina saba anukUla-
pratikUla utpanna hue parISahoM evaM upasagoM ko prasanna yA khinna na hokara
samabhAva se sahana kare, usa vyakti ke prati kSamAbhAva dhAraNa kare,
vIratApUrvaka sahana kare aura zAMti se AnandAnubhAva karate hue sahana kre||
yavamadhyacandrapratimA ke ArAdhaka aNagAra ko, zuklapakSa kI pratipadA ke dina
AhAra aura pAnI kI eka-eka datti grahaNa karanA kalpatA hai| AhAra kI AkAMkSA
karane vAle sabhI dvipada, catuSpada Adi prANI AhAra lekara lauTa gaye hoM taba
use ajJAta sthAna se zuddha alpalepa vAlA AhAra lenA kalpatA hai| aneka zramaNa
yAvat bhikhArI AhAra lekara lauTa gaye hoM arthAt vahAM khar3e na hoM to AhAra
lenA kalpatA hai| _ eka vyakti ke bhojana meM se AhAra lenA kalpatA hai, kiMtu
do, tIna, cAra yA pAMca vyakti ke bhojana meM se lenA nahIM kalpatA hai /
garbhavatI, choTe bacce vAlI aura bacce ko dUdha pilAne vAlI ke hAtha se AhAra
lenA nahIM kalpatA hai| dAtA ke donoM paira dehalI ke andara hoM yA bAhara hoM
to usase AhAra lenA nahIM kalpatA hai / yadi aisA jAne ki dAtA eka paira dehalI
ke andara aura eka paira dehalI ke bAhara rakhakara dehalI ko pairoM ke bIca meM
karake de rahA hai to usake hAtha se AhAra lenA kalpatA hai| zuklapakSa ke
dvitIyA ke dina pratimAdhArI aNagAra ko bhojana aura pAnI kI do-do dattiyAM lenA
kalpatA hai| tIja ke dina bhojana aura pAnI kI tIna-tIna dattiyAM grahaNa karanA
kalpatA hai| cautha ke dina bhojana aura pAnI kI cAra-cAra dattiyAM grahaNa
karanA kalpatA hai / pAMcama ke dina bhojana aura pAnI kI pAMca-pAMca dattiyAM
grahaNa karanA kalpatA hai| chaTha ke dina bhojana aura pAnI kI chaha-chaha
dattiyAM grahaNa karanA kalpatA hai / sAtama ke dina bhojana aura pAnI kI sAta-
sAta dattiyAM grahaNa karanA kalpatA hai| pAThama ke dina bhojana aura pAnI kI
pATha-ATha dattiyAM grahaNa karanA kalpatA hai| navamI ke dina bhojana aura pAnI
kI nava-nava dattiyAM grahaNa karanA kalpatA hai / dasamI ke dina bhojana aura
pAnI kI dasa-dasa dattiyAM grahaNa karanA kalpatA hai / gyArasa ke dina bhojana
aura pAnI kI gyAraha-gyAraha dattiyAM grahaNa karanA kalpatA hai| bArasa ke dina
bhojana aura pAnI kI bAraha-bAraha dattiyAM grahaNa karanA kalpatA hai| terasa
ke dina bhojana aura pAnI kI teraha-teraha dattiyAM grahaNa karanA kalpatA hai|
caudasa ke dina bhojana aura pAnI kI caudaha-caudaha dattiyAM grahaNa karanA
kalpatA hai| pUrNimA ke dina bhojana aura pAnI ko pandraha-pandraha dattiyAM
grahaNa karanA kalpatA hai kRSNapakSa kI pratipadA ke dina bhojana aura pAnI kI
caudaha-caudaha dattiyAM grahaNa karanA kalpatA hai|

Page #257 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Tenth Uddeshak  **Yavamdhyachandrapratima:**  * On the second day, it is
prescribed to take thirteen-thirteen dattis of food and water. * On the third
day, it is prescribed to take twelve-twelve dattis of food and water. * On the
fourth day, it is prescribed to take eleven-eleven dattis of food and water. *
On the fifth day, it is prescribed to take ten-ten dattis of food and water. *
On the sixth day, it is prescribed to take nine-nine dattis of food and water. *
On the seventh day, it is prescribed to take eight-eight dattis of food and
water. * On the eighth day, it is prescribed to take seven-seven dattis of food
and water. * On the ninth day, it is prescribed to take six-six dattis of food
and water. * On the tenth day, it is prescribed to take five-five dattis of food
and water. * On the eleventh day, it is prescribed to take four-four dattis of
food and water. * On the twelfth day, it is prescribed to take three-three
dattis of food and water. * On the thirteenth day, it is prescribed to take two-
two dattis of food and water. * On the fourteenth day, it is prescribed to take
one-one datti of food and water. * On the Amavasya day, one observes a fast.
This is how the Yavamdhyachandrapratima Sutra is followed, according to the
Jina's instructions.  **Vajramdhyachandrapratima:**  * An Anugara who accepts
the Vajramdhyachandrapratima should remain free from bodily activities and
attachment to the body for one month, and should bear any trials and
tribulations with equanimity. * On the pratipada of the Krishna Paksha, it is
prescribed for the Anugara who accepts the Vajramdhyachandrapratima to take
fifteen-fifteen dattis of food and water, and to take food with the threshold
between their feet. * On the second day, it is prescribed to take fourteen-
fourteen dattis of food and water. * On the third day, it is prescribed to take
thirteen-thirteen dattis of food and water. * On the fourth day, it is
prescribed to take twelve-twelve dattis of food and water. * On the fifth day,
it is prescribed to take eleven-eleven dattis of food and water. * On the sixth
day, it is prescribed to take ten-ten dattis of food and water. * On the seventh
day, it is prescribed to take nine-nine dattis of food and water. * On the
eighth day, it is prescribed to take eight-eight dattis of food and water. * On
the ninth day, it is prescribed to take seven-seven dattis of food and water. *
On the tenth day, it is prescribed to take six-six dattis of food and water. *
On the eleventh day, it is prescribed to take five-five dattis of food and
water. * On the twelfth day, it is prescribed to take four-four dattis of food
and water.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
dasavAM uddezaka] [437 dvitIyA ke dina bhojana aura pAnI kI teraha-teraha
dattiyAM grahaNa karanA kalpatA hai / tIja ke dina bhojana aura pAnI kI bAraha-
bAraha dattiyAM grahaNa karanA kalpatA hai / cautha ke dina bhojana aura pAnI kI
gyAraha-gyAraha dattiyAM grahaNa karanA kalpatA hai| pAMcama ke dina bhojana
aura pAnI kI daza-daza dattiyAM grahaNa karanA kalpatA hai / chaTha ke dina
bhojana aura pAnI kI nava-nava dattiyAM grahaNa karanA kalpatA hai| sAtama ke
dina bhojana aura pAnI kI ATha-pATha dattiyAM grahaNa karanA kalpatA hai| AThama
ke dina bhojana aura pAnI kI sAta-sAta dattiyAM grahaNa karanA kalpatA hai /
navamI ke dina bhojana aura pAnI kI chaha-chaha dattiyAM grahaNa karanA kalpatA
hai| dasamI ke dina bhojana aura pAnI kI pAMca-pAMca dattiyAM grahaNa karanA
kalpatA hai| gyArasa ke dina bhojana aura pAnI kI cAra-cAra dattiyAM grahaNa
karanA kalpatA hai / bArasa ke dina bhojana aura pAnI kI tIna-tIna dattiyAM
grahaNa karanA kalpatA hai| terasa ke dina bhojana aura pAnI kI do-do dattiyAM
grahaNa karanA kalpatA hai / caudasa ke dina bhojana aura pAnI kI eka-eka datti
grahaNa karanA kalpanA hai| amAvasa ke dina vaha upavAsa karatA hai| isa prakAra
yaha yavamadhyacandrapratimA sUtrAnusAra yAvat jinAjJA ke anusAra pAlana kI jAtI
2. vajramadhyacandrapratimA svIkAra karane vAlA anagAra eka mAsa taka zarIra ke
parikarma se tathA zarIra ke mamatva se rahita hokara rahe aura jo koI parISaha
evaM upasarga ho yAvat unheM zAMti se sahana kre| vajramadhyacandrapratimA
svIkAra karane vAle aNagAra ko, kRSNapakSa kI pratipadA ke dina pandraha-
pandraha dattiyAM bhojana aura pAnI kI lenA kalpatA hai yAvat dehalI ko pairoM
ke bIca meM karake de to usase AhAra lenA kalpatA hai / dvitIyA ke dina bhojana
aura pAnI kI caudaha-caudaha dattiyAM grahaNa karanA kalpatA hai| tIja ke dina
bhojana aura pAnI kI teraha-teraha dattiyAM grahaNa karanA kalpatA hai / cautha
ke dina bhojana aura pAnI kI bAraha-bAraha dattiyAM grahaNa karanA kalpatA hai /
pAMcama ke dina bhojana aura pAnI kI gyAraha-gyAraha dattiyAM grahaNa karanA
kalpatA hai / chaTha ke dina bhojana aura pAnI kI daza-daza dattiyAM grahaNa
karanA kaletA hai| sAtama ke dina bhojana aura pAnI kI nava-nava dattiyAM
grahaNa karanA kalpatA hai| AThama ke dina bhojana aura pAnI kI ATha-ATha
dattiyAM grahaNa karanA kalpatA hai / navamI ke dina bhojana aura pAnI kI sAta-
sAta dattiyAM grahaNa karanA kalpatA hai| dasamI ke dina bhojana aura pAnI kI
chaha-chaha dattiyAM grahaNa karanA kalpatA hai| gyArasa ke dina bhojana aura
pAnI kI pAMca-pAMca dattiyAM grahaNa karanA kalpatA hai / bArasa ke dina bhojana
aura pAnI kI cAra-cAra dattiyAM grahaNa karanA kalpatA hai|

Page #258 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
It is prescribed to consume three *dattis* each of food and water on the
thirteenth day of the *vyavaharsutra*. On the fourteenth day, it is prescribed
to consume two *dattis* each of food and water. On the *amavasya* (new moon)
day, it is prescribed to consume one *datti* each of food and water. On the
first day of the bright fortnight, it is prescribed to consume two *dattis* each
of food and water. On the second day, it is prescribed to consume three *dattis*
each of food and water. On the third day, it is prescribed to consume four
*dattis* each of food and water. On the fourth day, it is prescribed to consume
five *dattis* each of food and water. On the fifth day, it is prescribed to
consume six *dattis* each of food and water. On the sixth day, it is prescribed
to consume seven *dattis* each of food and water. On the seventh day, it is
prescribed to consume eight *dattis* each of food and water. On the eighth day,
it is prescribed to consume nine *dattis* each of food and water. On the ninth
day, it is prescribed to consume ten *dattis* each of food and water. On the
tenth day, it is prescribed to consume eleven *dattis* each of food and water.
On the eleventh day, it is prescribed to consume twelve *dattis* each of food
and water. On the twelfth day, it is prescribed to consume thirteen *dattis*
each of food and water. On the thirteenth day, it is prescribed to consume
fourteen *dattis* each of food and water. On the fourteenth day, it is
prescribed to consume fifteen *dattis* each of food and water. On the *purnima*
(full moon) day, he observes a fast. Thus, this is followed according to the
*vajramadhyachandrapratima sutra* and as per the knowledge of the Jinas.
**Discussion:** Just as the phases of the moon increase in the bright fortnight
and decrease in the dark fortnight, similarly, the number of *dattis* of food in
these two *pratiamas* is decreased and increased in accordance with the order of
the lunar days. Therefore, these two *pratiamas* are called "Chandrapratima".
Just as a grain of barley (cereal) is thin at one end, then thick in the middle,
and thin at the end, similarly, the *pratima* in which one *datti* is consumed
at the beginning, fifteen *dattis* in the middle, one *datti* at the end, and
then a fast is observed, is called "Yavamadhyachandrapratima". Just as a vajra
gem or a *damaru* (drum) has a wide end, a narrow middle part, and a wide other
end, similarly, the *pratima* in which fifteen *dattis* are consumed at the
beginning, one *datti* in the middle, fifteen *dattis* at the end, and then a
fast is observed, is called "Vajramadhyachandrapratima". These two *pratiamas*
can only be observed by a monk who is particularly strong and has a good past.
In these *pratiamas*, the *dattis* of food and water are consumed in accordance
with the *sutra*, gradually decreasing and increasing. Along with the number of
*dattis* of food and water, the monk observing these *pratiamas* must also
follow the following rules:

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
[ vyavahArasUtra terasa ke dina bhojana aura pAnI ko tIna-tIna dattiyAM grahaNa
karanA kalpatA hai| caudasa ke dina bhojana aura pAnI kI do-do dattiyAM grahaNa
karanA kalpatA hai| amAvasyA ke dina bhojana aura pAnI kI eka-eka datti grahaNa
karanA kalpatA hai| zuklapakSa kI pratipadA ke dina bhojana aura pAnI kI do-do
dattiyAM grahaNa karanA kalpatA hai / dvitIyA ke dina bhojana aura pAnI kI tIna-
tIna dattiyAM grahaNa karanA kalpatA hai| tIja ke dina bhojana aura pAnI kI
cAra-cAra dattiyAM grahaNa karanA kalpatA hai| cautha ke dina bhojana aura pAnI
ko pAMca-pA~ca dattiyAM grahaNa karanA kalpatA hai| pAMcama ke dina bhojana aura
pAnI kI chaha-chaha dattiyAM grahaNa karanA kalpatA hai| chaTha ke dina bhojana
aura pAnI kI sAta-sAta dattiyAM grahaNa karanA kalpatA hai / sAtama ke dina
bhojana aura pAnI kI ATha-pATha dattiyAM grahaNa karanA kalpatA hai| AThama ke
dina bhojana aura pAnI kI nava-nava dattiyAM grahaNa karanA kalpatA hai| navamI
ke dina bhojana aura pAnI kI daza-daza dattiyAM grahaNa karanA kalpatA hai|
dasamI ke dina bhojana aura pAnI kI gyAraha-gyAraha dattiyAM grahaNa karanA
kalpatA hai / gyArasa ke dina bhojana aura pAnI kI bAraha-bAraha dattiyAM
grahaNa karanA kalpatA hai| bArasa ke dina bhojana aura pAnI kI teraha-teraha
dattiyAM grahaNa karanA kalpatA hai| terasa ke dina bhojana aura pAnI kI
caudaha-caudaha dattiyAM grahaNa karanA kalpatA hai / caudasa ke dina bhojana
aura pAnI kI pandraha-pandraha dattiyAM grahaNa karanA kalpatA hai| pUrNimA ke
dina vaha upavAsa karatA hai| isa prakAra yaha vajramadhyacandrapratimA
sUtrAnusAra yAvat jinAjJAnusAra pAlana kI jAtI hai| vivecana-jisa prakAra
zuklapakSa meM candra kI kalAeM bar3hatI haiM aura kRSNapakSa meM ghaTatI haiM,
usI prakAra ina donoM pratimAoM meM AhAra kI dattiyoM kI saMkhyA tithiyoM ke
krama se ghaTAI aura bar3hAI jAtI haiM / isalie ina donoM pratimAoM ko
"candrapratimA" kahA gayA hai| jisa prakAra jau (dhAnya) kA eka kinArA patalA
hotA hai, phira madhya meM sthUla hotA hai evaM anta meM patalA hotA hai, usI
prakAra jisa pratimA ke prArambha meM eka datti, madhya meM pandraha datti, anta
meM eka dattI aura bAda meM upavAsa kiyA jAtA hai, use "yavamadhyacandrapratimA"
kahA jAtA hai| jisa prakAra vajraratna yA DamarU kA eka kinArA vistRta,
madhyabhAga saMkucita aura dUsarA kinArA vistRta hotA hai, usI prakAra jisa
pratimA ke prArambha meM pandraha datti, madhya meM eka datti, anta meM pandraha
datti aura bAda meM upavAsa kiyA jAtA hai, use "vajramadhyacandrapratimA" kahA
jAtA hai| ye donoM pratimAeM viziSTa saMhanana vAlA evaM pUrvadhara bhikSu hI
dhAraNa kara sakatA hai| ina pratimAoM meM prAhAra-pAnI kI dattiyAM sUtranusAra
kramaza: ghaTAte-bar3hAte hue grahaNa kI jAtI haiM / AhAra pAnI kI dattiyoM kI
saMkhyA ke sAtha-sAtha ina pratimAoM ko dhAraNa karane vAle bhikSu ko
nimnalikhita niyamoM kA pAlana karanA Avazyaka hotA hai-

Page #259 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The 8th Uddeshak:  **(1)** Renunciation of bodily attachment, meaning
abstaining from all bodily activities except for the consumption of regulated,
limited food and the use of medicines.   **(2)** Not retaliating or avoiding any
harm inflicted by gods, humans, or animals.  **(3)** Maintaining equanimity and
not feeling pleased when receiving respect or veneration.  **(4)** Entering a
house for food only after animals have finished grazing and birds have finished
eating, if they are present in the path or outside the house.  **(5)** Accepting
food from unknown houses where the resident is unaware of the arrival of the
Padimadhari or where no one is waiting for them.  **(6)** Consuming coarse food
devoid of any impurities or defects.  **(7)** Consuming food that is pure and
free from any external substances.  **(8)** Not going to the same place where
other mendicants are seeking alms.  **(9)** Accepting food from only one person,
not from multiple people.  **(10)** Not accepting alms from a pregnant woman.
**(11)** Not accepting alms from someone carrying a young child.  **(12)** Not
accepting alms from a woman breastfeeding a child.  **(13)** Not accepting alms
from anyone standing outside the threshold of the house.  **(14)** Accepting
alms from a donor sitting or standing with one foot inside and one foot outside
the threshold.  It is essential for Padimadharis to follow the 42 faults of
Eshana and other methods mentioned in the scriptures. These two Chandrapratima
are worshipped once a month. If food is received according to these rules, it
should be accepted; if not, one should fast that day. The Padimadhari monk
determines the time for alms and the number of houses to visit and travels
accordingly. If food is not received, it becomes an excellent one-month penance.
However, they do not make any exceptions to these rules.  The commentary states
that only a monk who has completed 20 years of initiation, has undergone three
Sanhananas, and possesses the knowledge of the nine previous births can wear
these two Pratiamas. The commentary also reveals that the text "Sabvehi dupppay-
chaupppay-maiyehi aahar kankhihin sattehi padiniyhi" was not available to the
commentator. They explained the words and sentences individually but did not
interpret this particular sentence. The meaning of this sentence is...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
basavAM uddezaka] [439 (1) zArIrika mamatva kA tyAga karanA arthAt niyamita
parimita AhAra ke atirikta auSadhabheSaja ke sevana kA aura sabhI prakAra ke
zarIraparikarma kA tyAga krnaa| (2) deva, manuSya yA tiryaMca dvArA kie gae
upasargoM kA pratikAra na karanA aura na unase bacane kA prayatna karanA / (3)
kisI ke vandanA yA Adara-satkAra kiye jAne para prasanna na honA, apitu
samabhAva meM lIna rhnaa| (4) jisa mArga meM yA jisa ghara ke bAhara pazu yA
pakSI hoM to pazuoM ke cArA cara lene ke bAda aura pakSiyoM ke cuggA cuga lene
ke bAda paDimAdhArI ko AhAra lene ke lie ghara meM praveza krnaa| (5)
paDimAdhArI ke Ane kI sUcanA yA jAnakArI na ho yA unakI koI pratIkSA karatA na
ho, aise ajJAta gharoM se AhAra grahaNa krnaa| (6) uMcha-vigayarahita rUkSa
pAhAra grahaNa karanA / (7) zuddhopahRta-lepa rahita AhArAdi grahaNa karanA /
(8) anya bhikSa zramaNAdi jahAM para khaDe hoM, vahAM bhikSA ke liye na jaanaa|
(9) eka vyakti kA AhAra ho usameM se lenA, adhika vyaktiyoM ke AhAra meM se
nahIM lenaa| (10) kisI bhI garbhavatI strI se bhikSA na lenaa| (11) jo choTe
bacce ko lie hue ho, usase bhikSA na lenaa| (12) jo strI bacce ko dUdha pilA
rahI ho, usase bhikSA na lenaa| (13) ghara kI dehalI ke atirikta anya kahIM para
bhI khar3e hue se bhikSA nahIM lenaa| (14) dehalI ke bhI eka pAMva andara aura
eka pAMva bAhara rakha kara baiThe hue yA khar3e hue dAtA se bhikSA grahaNa
krnaa| eSaNA ke 42 doSa evaM anya bhAgamokta vidhiyoM kA pAlana karanA to ina
pratimAdhArI ke lie bhI Avazyaka hI samajhanA caahie| ina donoM candrapratimAoM
kI ArAdhanA eka-eka mAsa meM kI jAtI hai| ina ukta niyamoM ke anusAra yadi
aAhAra mile to grahaNa kare aura na mile to grahaNa na kare arthAt usa dina
upavAsa kre| pratimAdhArI bhikSu bhikSA kA samaya yA ghara kI saMkhyA nirdhArita
kara letA hai aura utane samaya taka yA utane hI gharoM meM bhikSArtha bhramaNa
karatA hai / AhArAdi ke na milane para utkRSTa eka mAsa kI tapazcaryA bhI ho
jAtI hai| kintu kisI bhI prakAra kA apavAda sevana vaha nahIM karatA hai| bhASya
meM batAyA hai ki ye donoM pratimAeM bIsa varSa kI dIkSAparyAya vAlA, tIna
saMhanana vAlA aura nava pUrva ke jJAna vAlA bhikSu hI dhAraNa kara sakatA hai|
bhASya ke adhyayana se yaha bhI jJAta hotA hai ki "sabvehi duppaya-cauppaya-
mAiehiM AhAra kaMkhIhiM sattehi paDiNiyahi" itanA pATha bhASyakAra ke sAmane
nahIM thA / unhoMne kramazaH zabdoM kI evaM vAkyoM kI vyAkhyA kI hai| kintu isa
vAkya kI vyAkhyA nahIM kI hai aura isa vAkya ke bhAvArtha ko

Page #260 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
English translation with Jain terms preserved:  The Vyavahara Sutra has
explained the aphorism "Nijjuhita bahave..." In this explanation, the meaning of
certain words is as follows:  Vyutsrishtakaya - Abandoning the care and
treatment of the body Chiyattadehe - Abandoning bodily activities (anointing,
massaging) and not resisting or protecting oneself when subjected to violence or
bondage  The five types of Vyavahara (conduct) are: 1. Agama 2. Suta 3. Prana 4.
Dharana 5. Jiva  1. If there are Agama-knowers (omniscient or less than
omniscient) present, one should conduct oneself according to their instructions.
2. If there are no Agama-knowers, then one should conduct oneself according to
the instructions of Suta-knowers (less than omniscient with limited scriptural
knowledge). 3. If there are no Suta-knowers, then one should conduct oneself
according to the command of Gitartha (the meaning of scriptures). 4. If the
Gitartha-prajna (understanding of the meaning of scriptures) is not available,
then one should conduct oneself according to the Dharana (tradition) of the
Sthaviras (senior monks). 5. If the Dharana of the Sthaviras is not known, then
one should conduct oneself according to the universally accepted tradition.  One
should conduct oneself according to these five Vyavaharas, namely: 1. Agama, 2.
Suta, 3. Ajna, 4. Dharana, 5. Jiva.  Wherever the Agama-knowers, Suta-knowers,
Gitartha-prajna, Dharana of the Sthaviras, and tradition are available, one
should conduct oneself accordingly in that order.  Question: Bhante, why is this
said?

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
440] [vyavahArasUtra Age Ae "NijjuhitA bahave..." isa sUtrAMza kI vyAkhyA meM
spaSTa kiyA hai| katipaya zabdoM kA artha isa prakAra hai-vyutsRSTakAya--zarIra
kI zuzrUSA evaM auSadha kA tyAga / ciyattadehe-zarIraparikarma (abhyaMgana,
mardana) kA tyAga karanA evaM vadha-bandhana kiye jAne para pratIkAra yA surakSA
nahIM karanA / pAMca prakAra ke vyavahAra 3. paMcavihe vavahAre paNNate, taM
jahA-1. Agame, 2. sue, 3. prANA, 4. dhAraNA, 5. jIe / 1. jahA se tattha Agame
siyA, AgameNaM vavahAraM pttttvejjaa| 2. No se tattha Agame siyA, jahA se tattha
sue siyA, sueNaM vavahAraM pttttvejjaa| 3. No se tattha sue siyA, jahA se tattha
ANA siyA, ANAe vavahAraM pttttvejjaa| 4. No se tattha ANA siyA, jahA se tattha
dhAraNA siyA, dhAraNAe vavahAraM pttttvejjaa| 5. No se tattha dhAraNA siyA, jahA
se tattha jIe siyA, jIeNaM vavahAraM pttttvejjaa| icceehiM paMcahi vavahArehi
vavahAraM paTTavejjA, taM jahA-1. AgameNaM, 2. sueNaM, 3. ANAe, 4. dhAraNAe, 5.
jIeNaM / jahA-jahA se Agame, sue, prANA, dhAraNA, jIe tahA-tahA bavahAraM
pttttvejjaa| pa.se kimAha bhaMte ? u0prAgamabaliyA samaNA niggNthaa| icceyaM
paMcavihaM vavahAraM jayA-jayA, jahi-hi, tayA* tayA, tahi-tahiM aNissiovassiyaM
vavahAraM vavaharamANe samaNe niggaMthe ANAe ArAhae bhavai / 3. vyavahAra pAMca
prakAra kA kahA gayA hai, yathA-1. Agama, 2. zruta, 3. prAjJA, 4. dhAraNA, 5.
jIta / 1. jahAM Agama (kevalajJAnadhAraka yAvat naupUrvadhAraka) jJAnI hoM,
vahAM unake nirdezAnusAra vyavahAra kreN| 2. jahAM prAgamajJAnI na hoM to vahAM
zrutajJAnI (jaghanya aAcAraprakalpa, utkRSTa navapUrva se kucha kama jJAnI)
nirdezAnusAra vyavahAra kreN| 3. jahAM zrutajJAnI na hoM, to vahAM gItArtha kI
AjJAnusAra vyavahAra kreN| 4. jahAM gItAthe kI prAjJA na ho vahAM sthaviroM kI
dhAraNAnusAra vyavahAra kreN| 5. jahAM sthaviroM kI dhAraNA jJAta na ho to vahAM
sarvAnumata paramparAnusAra vyavahAra kreN| ina pAMca vyavahAroM ke anusAra
vyavahAra kreN| yathA-1. pAgama, 2. zruta, 3. AjJA, 4. dhAraNA, 5. jIta /
prAgamajJAnI, zrutajJAnI, gItArtha-prAjJA, sthaviroM kI dhAraNA aura paramparA,
ina meM se jisa samaya jo upalabdha ho, usa samaya usI se kramaza: vyavahAra
kreN| pra0-bhaMte ! aisA kyoM kahA?

Page #261 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Tenth Uddeshak [41]  **Shraman-Nirgranth are prominent in the conduct of
Agamanyavahar.** Among these five types of conduct, whenever and in whatever
subject, whichever conduct is available, the Shraman-Nirgranth who conducts
himself with that conduct in that subject with a middle path, is a transgressor
of Jina-gyan.  **Discussion:** The word "Vyavahar" in the Sutra is used in the
sense of atonement. It has also been used in this sense in other Agamas, such as
"Ahalahusae namam vavhare pattaviamve sia" - as in the Laghushk (very small)
atonement should be established. - Brihatkalp Uddeshak 4.  The decision of
atonement should be made only according to the order mentioned in the Sutras
like "Pagam" etc. Special faults should be criticized only in the presence of
Pagamvyavahari. If they are not available, then the atonement should be taken by
criticizing in the presence of those who possess the maximum number of Sutras
available in the Sutras and are worthy of listening to criticism. If this is not
done, i.e., if it is done in reverse, then atonement has been stated in the
commentary.  Five conducts are mentioned in the Sutra as the decisive basis of
atonement. The one who possesses them is called Vyavahari.  (1)
**Agamvyavahari:** Knowers of 9 Purvas to 14 Purvas, Avadhigyani,
Manahparyavgyani and Kevalgyani. These are called "Pragamvyavahari".  (2)
**Shrutavyavahari:** Those who have memorized the root, meaning, and ultimate
truth of the minor Acharang and Nishit Sutra, and those who have memorized the
excellent 9 Purvas or less, are called "Shrutavyavahari".  (3) **Agyavavahari:**
One who gives atonement based on the order of an Agamvyavahari or
Shrutavyavahari is called "Agyavavahari".  (4) **Dharanavavahari:** If the
multi-learned have made some limits of atonement according to the Shrutis and
made a worthy monk adopt them, the one who adopts them well is called
"Dharanavavahari".  (5) **Jitavavahari:** In matters where there is no clear
basis of the Sutra, if the multi-learned monk makes limits of atonement for a
worthy monk, which are not against the Sutra and are conducive to restraint, the
one who adopts them well is called "Jitavavahari".  **Jangiyamsohikaram, passath
pamatt sanjayaingam / Jai vi mahajanainnam, na ten jien vavharo // 720 //**
**Jam jiyam sohikaram, sanvegaparayanen danten / Egen vi prainn, ten u jien
vavharo // 721 //**  **-~-Vyav. Bhashya. Uddeshak 10**  **A detached, single-
minded, multi-learned person who is served by even one subdued-minded person can
be a Jitavavahar, conducive to restraint-purity.** But the one who is served by
a nearby, careless, and exceptional monk, is not a Jitavavahar.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
dasavAM uddezaka] [41 u.-zramaNa-nirgrantha AgamanyavahAra kI pramukhatA vAle
hote haiN| ina pAMca prakAra ke vyavahAroM meM se jaba-jaba, jisa-jisa viSaya
meM jo pramukha vyavahAra upalabdha ho taba-taba, usa-usa viSaya meM madhyastha
bhAva se usa vyavahAra se vyavahAra karane vAlA zramaNa-nirgrantha jinAjJA kA
pArAdhaka hotA hai| vivecana -sUtra meM "vyavahAra" zabda prAyazcitta artha meM
prayukta hai| anya AgamoM meM bhI isa artha meM prayoga huA hai /
yathA"ahAlahusae nAmaM vavahAre paTTaviyamve siyA"-yathA laghuSka (atyalpa)
prAyazcitta kI prasthApanA karanI caahie| -bRhatkalpa uddezaka 4 prAyazcitta kA
nirNaya "pAgama" Adi sUtroktakrama se hI karanA caahie| vizeSa doSoM ko AlocanA
pAgamavyavahArI ke pAsa hI karanI caahie| yadi ve na hoM to jo upalabdha sUtroM
meM se adhikatama sUtroM ko dhAraNa karane vAle hoM evaM AlocanA-zravaNa ke
yogya hoM unake pAsa pAlocanA kara prAyazcitta grahaNa karanA caahie| aisA na
karane para arthAt vyutkrama se karane para bhASya meM prAyazcitta kA kathana
kiyA gayA hai| sUtra meM prAyazcitta ke nirNAyaka prAdhAra pAMca vyavahAra kahe
gaye haiN| unheM dhAraNa karane vAlA vyavahArI kahA jAtA hai| (1)
AgamavyavahArI-9 pUrva se lekara 14 pUrva ke jJAnI, avadhijJAnI,
manaHparyavajJAnI aura kevalajJAnI. ye "prAgamavyavahArI" kahe jAte haiN| (2)
zrutavyavahArI-jaghanya AcArAMga evaM nizIthasUtra mUla, artha, paramArtha
sahita kaNThastha dhAraNa karane vAle aura utkRSTa 9 pUrva se kama zruta ko
dhAraNa karane vAle "zrutavyavahArI" kahe jAte haiN| (3) AjJAvyavahArI-kisI
AgamavyavahArI yA zrutavyavahArI kI AjJA prApta hone para usa prAjA ke AdhAra se
prAyazcitta dene vAlA "AjJAvyavahArI" kahA jAtA hai / (4) dhAraNAvyavahArI-
bahuzrutoM ne zrutAnusArI prAyazcitta kI kucha maryAdA kisI yogya bhikSu ko
dhAraNa karA dI ho, unako acchI taraha dhAraNa karane vAlA "dhAraNAvyavahArI"
kahA jAtA hai| (5) jItavyavahArI-jina viSayoM meM koI spaSTa sUtra kA prAdhAra
na ho usa viSaya meM bahuzruta bhikSu sUtra se aviruddha aura saMyamapoSaka
prAyazcitta kI maryAdAeM kisI yogya bhikSu ko dhAraNa karA de| unheM acchI
taraha dhAraNa karane vAlA "jItavyavahArI" kahA jAtA hai / jaMjIyamasohikaraM,
pAsastha pamatta saMjayAiNNaM / jai vi mahAjaNAiNNaM, na teNa jIeNa
vvhaaro||720|| jaM jIyaM sohikaraM, saMvegaparAyaNena daMteNa / egeNa vi
prAinna, teNa u jIeNa vavahAro / / 721 // -~-vyava. bhASya. udde. 10 vairAgyavAn
eka bhI damitendriya bahuzruta dvArA jo sevita ho, vaha jItavyavahAra saMyama-
zuddhi karane vAlA ho sakatA hai / kintu jo pArzvastha pramatta evaM
apavAdaprApta bhikSu se prAcIrNa ho, vaha jIta

Page #262 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[442] [The conduct-sutra cannot be purified by being served by many, therefore
one should not engage in it. So, one who does not perform the pratikramna of the
pacchakkhanakala or the svadhyayakala, etc., who remains without a mouth-cloth
on his mouth or speaks, and who does not cover water, incurs the pratyaksha of
the nivi, all this is jitavyavahar / The "muhantagfidia" in the gatha is
explained as "mukhapotikaya sphititaayaam, mukhapotikamantaretiyartha".] _ The
pratyaksha given by these five vyavaharis is called agamvyavahar or
jitavyavahar. The meaning of this sutra-vidhan is that the first mentioned
vyavahar and vyavahari is the main one. In his absence, the later mentioned
vyavahar and vyavahari can be given prominence. That is, in matters where
shrutvyavahar is available, one should not give prominence to dharana or
jitavyavahar in making decisions. Giving prominence in reverse order leads to
selfishness or attachment-aversion, etc., and there is no impartiality. To
convey this meaning, the last part of the sutra encourages one to engage in
vyavahar in accordance with the order, free from attachment-aversion and
partiality, and those who engage in vyavahar in the order specified in the sutra
and with impartiality are called araadhak. Therefore, it is clear that one who
engages in vyavahar with partiality and in reverse order is a viraadhak. Even
when the word vyavahar is interpreted broadly by upalakshana, it is fruitful
that if one has to make a decision on any practical matter related to the life
of a samayami, or if one has to make a decision on any dispute arising in
relation to a principle formulated by the agam, then one should do so in this
order, i.e., if there is an agamvyavahari, then one should accept his decision
and end the dispute / If there is no agamvyavahari, then one should accept the
decision based on the available shrut-agam / When the evidence of the sutra is
available, one should not give prominence to prajna, dharana or tradition,
because shrutvyavahar is more important than prajna, dharana or tradition / In
the present time, the agams have the highest place, followed by the
interpretations and texts, and then the memorized dharana or tradition held by
the sthaviras. Even in interpretations or texts, the creations of the earlier
acharyas have a prominent place. Therefore, in the present time, the decisive
shastras are the first, and interpretations and texts that say the opposite
meaning are not important. Similarly, when shastra-pramana is available, dharana
or tradition also has no importance / Therefore, it is the duty of an araadhak
to decide any matter by giving prominence to shastra, text, dharana and
tradition in order, with discretion, and to avoid any partiality.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
442] [vyavahArasUtra vyavahAra anekoM ke dvArA sevita hone para bhI zuddhi nahIM
kara sakatA hai, ataH usa se vyavahAra nahIM karanA caahie| so jahakAlAdINaM
apaDikaMtassa nikhigaIyaMtu / muhaNaMtagaphiDiya, pANaga asaMvareNa, evamAdIsu
// 709 // -vyava. bhASya. udde. 10 jo paccakkhANakAla yA svAdhyAyakAla Adi kA
pratikramaNa nahIM karatA hai| mukha para mukhavastrikA ke binA rahatA hai
athavA bolatA hai aura pAnI ko nahIM DhakatA hai, use nIvI kA prAyazcitta AtA
hai, yaha saba jItavyavahAra hai / gAthA meM Ae 'muhaNaMtagaphiDiya' ko TIkA-
"mukhapotikAyA sphiTitAyAM, mukhpotikaamNtrnnetyrth"| _ ina pAMca vyavahAriyoM
dvArA diyA gayA prAyazcitta AgamavyavahAra yAvat jItavyavahAra kahA jAtA hai|
isa sUtravidhAna kA prAzaya yaha hai ki pahale kahA gayA vyavahAra aura
vyavahArI pramukha hotA hai| usakI anupasthiti meM hI bAda meM kahe gae
vyavahAra aura vyavahArI ko pramukhatA dI jA sakatI hai| arthAt jisa viSaya meM
zrutavyavahAra upalabdha ho usa viSaya ke nirNaya karane meM dhAraNA yA
jItavyavahAra ko pramukha nahIM karanA caahie| vyutkrama se pramukhatA dene meM
svArthabhAva yA rAga-dveSa Adi hote haiM, niSpakSabhAva nahIM rahatA hai| isI
prAzaya ko sUcita karane ke lie sUtra ke aMtima aMza meM rAga-dveSa evaM
pakSapAtabhAva se rahita hokara yathAkrama vyavahAra karane kI preraNA dI gaI
hai, sAtha hI satranidiSTa krama se evaM niSpakSabhAva se vyavahAra karane vAloM
ko ArAdhaka kahA gayA hai| ataH pakSabhAva se evaM vyutkrama se vyavahAra karane
vAlA virAdhaka hotA hai, yaha spaSTa hai| vyavahAra zabda kA upalakSaNa se
vistRta artha karane para bhI phalita hotA hai ki saMyamIjIvana se sambandhita
kisI bhI vyavahArika viSaya kA nirNaya karanA ho yA koI bhI pAgama se prarUpita
tattva ke sambandha meM utpanna vivAda kI sthiti kA nirNaya karanA ho to isI
krama se karanA cAhie arthAta yadi AgamavyavahArI ho to usake nirNaya ko svIkAra
karake vivAda ko samApta karanA cAhie / yadi AgamavyavahArI na ho to upalabdha
zruta-pAgama ke AdhAra se jo nirNaya ho, use svIkAra karanA cAhie / sUtra kA
pramANa upalabdha hone para prAjJA, dhAraNA yA paramparA ko pramukha nahIM
mAnanA cAhie, kyoM prAjJA, dhAraNA yA paramparA kI apekSA zrutavyavahAra
pramukha hai / vartamAna meM sarvopari pramukha sthAna AgamoM kA hai, usake bAda
vyAkhyAoM evaM granthoM kA sthAna hai tatpazcAt sthaviroM dvArA dhArita
kaMThastha dhAraNA yA paramparA kA hai| vyAkhyAoM yA granthoM meM bhI pUrva-
pUrva ke prAcAryoM kI racanA kA pramukha sthAna hai| ataH vartamAna meM
sarvaprathama nirNAyaka zAstra haiM, usase viparIta artha ko kahane vAle vyAkhyA
aura grantha kA mahattva nahIM hai| usI prakAra zAstrapramANa ke upalabdha hone
para dhAraNA yA paramparA kA bhI koI mahattva nahIM hai / isalie zAstra,
grantha, dhAraNA aura paramparA ko bhI yathAkrama vivekapUrvaka prabhu khatA
dekara kisI bhI tatva kA nirNaya karanA ArAdhanA kA hetu hai aura kisI bhI
pakSabhAva ke kAraNa vyutkrama

Page #263 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[The Tenth Uddeshak] .[To decide from 443 is the cause of contradiction.
Therefore, understanding the meaning of this sutra, one should decide the
previous elements impartially / This sutra is also in Bhagavati Sutra Sh. 8 U. 8
and Thanang A. 5 U. 2 / Some discussion has also been done there on this subject
/ The summary is that the atonement or other elements should be decided
sequentially by these five practices, not in reverse. Therefore, in any subject,
it should be considered completely inappropriate to insist on belief or
tradition while having a previous text. 4. Four types of virtuous men have been
said / For example-1. Some virtuous person does work, but does not believe / 2.
Some believe, but do not work. 3. Some do work and also believe / 4. Some do not
work and do not believe. 5. (Again) Four types of virtuous men have been said /
For example-1. Some do the work of the Gan, but do not believe / 2. Some
believe, but do not do the work of the Gan / 3. Some do the work of the Gan and
also believe. 4. Some do not do the work of the Gan and do not believe. 6.
(Again) Four types of virtuous men have been said. For example-1. Some collect
for the Gan, but do not believe / 2. Some believe, but do not collect for the
Gan. 3. Some collect for the Gan and also believe / 4. Some do not collect for
the Gan and do not believe either.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
dasavAM uddezaka] .[443 se nirNaya karanA virAdhanA kA hetu hai| ataH isa sUtra
ke prAzaya ko samajha kara niSpakSabhAva se prAgama tattvoM kA nirNaya karanA
cAhie / bhagavatIsUtra za. 8 u. 8 meM tathA ThANAMga a. 5 u. 2 meM bhI yaha
sUtra hai / vahAM bhI isa viSayaka kucha vivecana kiyA gayA hai / sArAMza yaha
hai ki prAyazcittoM kA yA anya tatvoM kA nirNaya ina pAMca vyavahAroM dvArA
kramapUrvaka karanA cAhie, vyutkrama se nhiiN| isalie kisI viSaya meM
prAgamapATha ke hote hue dhAraNA yA paraMparA ko pramukhatA dekara aAgraha
karanA sarvathA anucita samajhanA caahie| vividhaprakAra se gaNa kI vaiyAvRtya
karane vAle 4. cattAri purisajAyA paNNattA, taM jahA-1. aTTakare nAma ege, no
mANakare, 2. mANakare nAmaM ege, no aTukare, 3. ege aTukare vi, mANakare vi, 4.
ege no aTThakare, no maannkre| 5. cattAri purisajAyA paNNattA, taM jahA-1.
gaNaTakare nAma ege, no mANakare, 2. mANakare nAmaM ege, no gaNaTukare, 3. ege
gaNaTukare vi, mANakare vi, 4. ege no gaNaTTakare, no maannkre| 6. cattAri
purisajAyA paNNattA, taM jahA-1. gaNasaMgahakare nAma ege, no mANakare, 2.
mANakare nAma ege, no gaNasaMgahakare, 3. ege gaNasaMgahakare vi, mANakare vi,
4. ege no gaNasaMgahakare, no maagkre| 7. cattAri purisajAyA paNNattA, taM
jahA-1. gaNasohakare nAma ege, no mANakare, 2. mANakare nAma ege, no
gaNasohakare, 3. ege gaNasohakare vi, mANakare vi, 4. ege no gaNasohakare, no
mANakare / 8. cattAri purisajAyA paNNatA, taM jahA-1. gaNasohikare nAmaM ege, no
mANakare, 2. mANakare nAma ege, no gaNasohikare, 3. ege gaNasohikare vi,
mANakare vi, 4. ege no gaNasohikare, no maannkre| 4. cAra prakAra ke sAdhu
puruSa kahe gae haiM / jaise-1. koI sAdhu kArya karatA hai, kintu mAna nahIM
karatA hai / 2. koI mAna karatA hai, kintu kArya nahIM karatA hai| 3. koI kArya
bhI karatA hai aura mAna bhI karatA hai / 4. koI kArya bhI nahIM karatA hai aura
mAna bhI nahIM karatA hai| 5. (punaH) cAra prakAra ke sAdhu puruSa kahe gaye
haiM / jaise--1. koI gaNa kA kAma karatA hai, parantu mAna nahIM karatA hai / 2.
koI mAna karatA hai, parantu gaNa kA kAma nahIM karatA hai / 3. koI gaNa kA kAma
bhI karatA hai aura mAna bhI karatA hai| 4. koI na gaNa kA kAma karatA hai aura
na mAna karatA hai| 6. (punaH) cAra prakAra ke sAdhu puruSa kahe gaye haiN|
jaise-1. koI gaNa ke lie saMgraha karatA hai, parantu mAna nahIM karatA hai / 2.
koI mAna karatA hai, parantu gaNa ke lie saMgraha nahIM karatA hai| 3. koI gaNa
ke lie saMgraha bhI karatA hai aura mAna bhI karatA hai / 4. koI na gaNa ke lie
saMgraha karatA hai aura na mAna hI karatA hai|

Page #264 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Translation:  **[444] [Vyavahar Sutra 7. (Again)] Four types of Sadhu
Purushas have been mentioned. For example:**  1. **Someone enhances the glory of
the Gan but does not have pride.** 2. **Someone has pride but does not enhance
the glory of the Gan.** 3. **Someone enhances the glory of the Gan and also has
pride.** 4. **Someone neither enhances the glory of the Gan nor has pride.**
**8. (Again) Four types of Sadhu Purushas have been mentioned. For example:**
1. **Someone purifies the Gan but does not have pride.** 2. **Someone has pride
but does not purify the Gan.** 3. **Someone purifies the Gan and also has
pride.** 4. **Someone neither purifies the Gan nor has pride.**  **Discussion:**
Every individual has different qualities. Therefore, five categories have been
mentioned for the restrained individuals, considering these differences. They
include the following topics:  1. **Atta:** Any service work. 2. **Gan?:** Work
related to the organization of the Gachchha. 3. **Ganasangrah:** Increasing the
number of Sadhu-Sadhvi, Shravak-Shravika in the Gan, making food, water,
clothes, utensils, bedding, and other necessities easily available, increasing
the number of such areas, and fostering religious interest and a spirit of
giving in people. 4. **Gansoha:** Enhancing the glory of the Gan through tapasya
(austerity), restraint, knowledge, meditation, preaching, and skillful conduct.
5. **Gansohi:** Removing the impurities in the conduct and behavior of Sadhu-
Sadhvi or Shravak-Shravika with wisdom. Correcting the disorder in the Sangha
organization through appropriate measures and establishing a better system.
These qualities and pride have been related to each other in the description of
these categories. Some Sadhus, even after performing the aforementioned tasks
for the Gan, do not have pride. Such Sadhus are the best. Every seeker should
strive to live according to this first category. The second category is
completely inferior and despicable for the soul. Because doing nothing and
having pride is completely inappropriate. The third category is moderate,
meaning it is not as harmful to the soul as the second category, and it is
natural for such behavior to occur in beings who are in a state of delusion.
Pride in work during spiritual practice is also a vice. It does not lead to the
development of spiritual qualities. The fourth category is compared to ordinary
Sadhus. It has neither qualities nor vices. Such monks can focus on their own
worship if they are careful in their restraint, but they are not active in the
work of the Gan. Therefore, those in this category do not perform many virtuous
actions, and they do not have significant karma-bondage or loss of merit.  By
contemplating these categories and examining oneself, one should develop the
power of the soul in a purer and purer state. That is, one should contribute to
the benefit of the Gachchha and the influence of Jainism according to one's
capacity for overcoming karmic obstacles. At the same time, one should maintain
a sense of humility in the soul and avoid self-exaltation and the contempt and
criticism of others. Because the primary goal of spiritual practice is to
achieve the cessation of passions and peace of mind. The opposite of this is the
increase of the passion of pride.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
444] [vyavahArasUtra 7. (punaH) cAra prakAra ke sAdhu puruSa kahe gaye haiN|
jaise-1. koI gaNa kI zobhA bar3hAtA hai, kintu mAna nahIM karatA hai| 2. koI
mAna karatA hai, kintu gaNa kI zobhA nahIM bar3hAtA hai / 3. koI gaNa kI zobhA
bhI bar3hAtA hai aura mAna bhI karatA hai / 4. koI na gaNa kI zobhA bar3hAtA hai
aura na mAna hI karatA hai| 8. (punaH) cAra prakAra ke sAdhu puruSa kahe gaye
haiN| jaise-1. koI gaNa kI zuddhi karatA hai, parantu mAna nahIM karatA hai / 2.
koI mAna karatA hai, parantu gaNa kI zuddhi nahIM karatA hai| 3. koI gaNa kI
zuddhi bhI karatA hai aura mAna bhI karatA hai / 4. koI na gaNa kI zuddhi karatA
hai aura na mAna hI karatA hai| vivecana-pratyeka vyakti meM bhinna-bhinna guNa
hote haiM / ataH yahAM bhinna-bhinna ko lekara saMyamI puruSoM ke lie pAMca
caubhaMgiyAM kahI haiM, unameM nimna viSaya hai-(1) aTTa-kucha bhI sevA kArya,
(2) gaNa?-gaccha ke vyavasthA saMbaMdhI kArya, (3) gaNasaMgraha-gaNa ke lie
sAdhu-sAdhvI zrAvaka zrAvikAoM kI vRddhi ho, AhAra, pAnI, vastra, pAtra, zayyA-
saMstAraka Adi sulabha hoM, aise kSetroM kI vRddhi karanA, logoM meM dhArmika
ruci evaM dAna bhAvanA kI vRddhi krnaa| (4) gaNasoha-tapa-saMyama, jJAna-dhyAna,
upadeza evaM vyavahArakuzalatA se gaNa kI zobhA kI vRddhi karanA / (5) gaNasohi
sAdhu-sAdhvI yA zrAvaka-zrAvikA ke prAcAra-vyavahAra kI azuddhiyoM ko viveka se
dUra karanA / saMghavyavasthA kI avyavasthA ko ucita upAyoM dvArA sudhAra kara
uttama vyavasthA karanA / ina guNoM ko aura abhimAna ko saMbaMdhita karake
caubhaMgiyoM kA kathana kiyA gayA hai / kucha sAdhu gaNa ke lie ukta kArya
karake bhI abhimAna nahIM karate haiN| aise sAdhu hI sarvazreSTha hote haiN|
pratyeka sAdhaka ko isa prathama bhaMga ke anusAra rahane kA prayatna karanA
cAhie / dUsarA bhaMga AtmA ke lie pUrI taraha nikRSTa evaM heya hai| kyoMki
kArya to kucha karanA nahIM aura vyartha meM ghamaMDa karanA sarvathA anucita
hai / tIsarA bhaMga madhyama hai arthAta dusare bhaMga kI apekSA tIsarA bhaMga
prAtmA kA adhika ahita karane vAlA nahIM hai tathA chadamastha jIvoM meM aisA
honA svAbhAvika hai| adhyAtmasAdhanA meM kAma ka ghamaMDa karanA bhI eka avaguNa
hai / isa se AtmaguNoM kA vikAsa nahIM hotA hai| cauthA bhaMga sAmAnya sAdhunoM
kI apekSA se hai| isameM guNa nahIM hai to avaguNa bhI nahIM hai, aise bhikSu
saMyama meM sAvadhAna hoM to apanI ArAdhanA kara sakate haiM, kiMtu ve gaNahita
ke kAryoM meM sakriya nahIM hote| isa kAraNa isa bhaMga vAle adhika nirjarA bhI
nahIM karate tathA unake vizeSa karmabaMdha aura puNyakSaya bhI nahIM hotA hai|
ina bhaMgoM kA ciMtana karake prAtmaparIkSA karate hue zuddha se zuddhatara
avasthA meM prAtmazakti kA vikAsa karanA caahie| arthAt apane kSayopazama ke
anusAra gacchahita evaM jinazAsana kI prabhAvanA meM yogadAna denA caahie| sAtha
hI prAtmA meM laghutA kA bhAva upasthita rakhate hue svayaM kA utkarSa aura
dUsaroM kA tiraskAra-niMdA Adi nahIM karanA caahie| kyoMki kaSAyoM kI upazAMti
aura AtmazAMti kI prApti karanA hI sAdhanA kA pramukha lakSya hai, usake
viparIta mAnakaSAya kI vRddhi honA

Page #265 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The 8th Uddeshak [445]  No action yields good results, only bad ones.
Therefore, it is essential to be mindful.  **Fourfold Classification of
Individuals (based on their adherence to Dharma)**  **1. Based on Form (Rupa)
and Dharma:**  * **Type 1:**  One who abandons form (external appearance) but
not Dharma. * **Type 2:** One who abandons Dharma but not form. * **Type 3:**
One who abandons both form and Dharma. * **Type 4:** One who abandons neither
form nor Dharma.  **2. Based on Dharma and Community (Ganasanthis)**  * **Type
1:** One who abandons Dharma but not the community's principles. * **Type 2:**
One who abandons the community's principles but not Dharma. * **Type 3:** One
who abandons both Dharma and the community's principles. * **Type 4:** One who
abandons neither Dharma nor the community's principles.  **3. Based on Love for
Dharma (Piyadhamma) and Firmness in Dharma (Dhadhamma)**  * **Type 1:** One who
is attached to Dharma but not firm in it. * **Type 2:** One who is firm in
Dharma but not attached to it. * **Type 3:** One who is both attached to and
firm in Dharma. * **Type 4:** One who is neither attached to nor firm in Dharma.
**Discussion:**  These fourfold classifications describe the different levels of
a seeker's adherence to Dharma. They discuss:  1. External appearance (Rupa) and
Dharma. 2. Dharma and the community's principles (Ganasanthis). 3. Love for
Dharma (Piyadhamma) and firmness in Dharma (Dhadhamma).  The first
classification highlights that some individuals, regardless of the situation,
never abandon their Dharma and external appearance. They navigate challenging
circumstances with unwavering commitment. This represents the highest state of a
seeker's soul.  Others, overwhelmed by fear, abandon their external appearance
and adherence to principles, but maintain their Dharma and faith. Such seekers
may miss out on spiritual progress but are not destined for a bad fate.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
basavAM uddezaka [445 kisI bhI puruSArtha kA acchA pariNAma nahIM hai, apitu
duSpariNAma hai| isalie isakA viveka rakhanA Avazyaka hai| dharmadRDhatA kI
caubhaMgiyAM 9. cattAri purisajAyA paNNattA, taM jahA-1. rUvaM nAmamege jahai,
no dhamma, 2. dhamma nAmamege jahai, no rUvaM, 3. ege rUvaM vi jahai, dhamma vi
jahai, 4. ege no rUvaM jahai, no dhammaM jahai / 10. cattAri purisajAyA
paNNattA, taM jahA--1. dhammaM nAmamege jahai, no gaNasaMThiiM, 2. gaNasaMThiiM
nAmamege jahai, no dhammaM, 3. ege gaNasaMThiI vi jahai, dhamma vi jahai, 4. ege
no gaNasaMThiiM jahai, no dhammaM jhi| 11. cattAri purisajAyA paNNatA, taM
jahA-1. piyadhamme nAmamege, no Dhadhamme, 2. daDhadhamme nAmamege, no
piyadhamme, 3. ege piyadhamme vi, daDhadhamme vi, 4. ege no piyadhamme, no
daDhadhamme / 9. cAra jAti ke puruSa kahe gaye haiM, jaise-1. koI rUpa
(sAdhuveSa) ko chor3a detA hai, para dharma ko nahIM chor3atA hai / 2. koI
dharma ko chor3a detA hai para rUpa ko nahIM chor3atA hai| 3. koI rUpa bhI
chor3a detA hai aura dharma bhI chor3a detA hai / 4. koI na rUpa ko chor3atA hai
aura na dharma ko chor3atA hai| 10. puna: cAra jAti ke puruSa kahe gaye haiM /
jaise-1. koI dharma ko chor3atA hai, para gaNa kI saMsthiti arthAt gaNamaryAdA
nahIM chor3atA hai / 2. koI gaNa kI maryAdA bhI chor3a detA hai, para dharma ko
nahI chor3atA hai| 3. koI gaNa kI maryAdA bhI chor3a detA hai aura dharma bhI
chor3a detA hai| 4. koI na gaNa kI maryAdA hI chor3atA hai aura na dharma hI
chor3atA hai| 11. punaH cAra jAti ke puruSa kahe gaye haiM, jaise 1. koI
priyadharmA hai para dRDhadharmA nahIM hai / 2. koI dRDhadharmA hai, para
priyadharmA nahIM hai| 3. koI priyadharmA bhI hai aura dRDhadharmA bhI hai| 4.
koI na priyadharmA hI hai aura na dRDhadharmA hI hai| vivecanaina caubhaMgiyoM
meM sAdhaka kI dharmadRDhatA Adi kA kathana kiyA gayA hai / jisameM nimna
viSayoM kI carcA hai 1. sAdhuveza aura dharmabhAva, 2. dharmabhAva aura
gaNasamAcArI kI paramparA, 3. dharmaprema aura dharmadRDhatA / prathama
caubhaMgI meM yaha batAyA gayA hai ki kaI vyakti kisI bhI paristhiti meM apane
dharmabhAva aura sAdhuveza donoM ko nahIM chor3ate aura gambhIratA ke sAtha
vikaTa paristhiti ko pAra kara lete haiN| yaha sAdhaka AtmAoM kI zreSTha avasthA
hai| zeSa bhaMgavartI koI sAdhaka ghabarAkara bAhyaveSabhUSA kA aura saMyama-
prAcAra kA parityAga kara detA hai, kintu dharmabhAvanA yA samyazraddhA ko
kAyama rakhatA hai| aisA sAdhaka Atmonnati se vaMcita rahatA hai, kintu durgati
kA bhAgI nahIM hotA hai|

Page #266 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Translation:  **[446]** Some abandon the *Dharmabhava* (religious
sentiment), meaning they give up the practice of *Samyama* (self-control) and
the pacification of *Kshayas* (passions), but they do not abandon the
*Sadhuvesha* (robe of a monk). Many practitioners abandon both when faced with
circumstances. These three types are considered *Bhanga* (fallen) and have
deviated from the path. However, a practitioner with two *Bhanga* can still be a
devotee of *Dharma*. In this *Chaubhangi* (fourfold classification), the
practitioner with four *Bhanga* is the worst.  The second *Chaubhangi* with four
*Bhanga* states that many practitioners, regardless of circumstances, do not
deviate from the *Pragamasamachari* (follower of the ancient tradition) or
*Gachchasamachari* (follower of the current tradition) but adhere to the
*Sampoorna Samachari* (complete follower) with firmness and discernment. They
are the best practitioners. The remaining three *Bhanga* practitioners are
considered less successful. They deviate from some *Samachari* due to
circumstances. These *Bhanga* combinations should be understood similarly to the
previous *Chaubhangi*.  The third *Chaubhangi* discusses the firmness in
*Dharmacharana* (practice of *Dharma*) and the inner love for *Dharma*.
*Dharmaddhata* (firmness in *Dharma*) indicates a steady mind and seriousness,
while *Dharmaprema* (love for *Dharma*) is related to deep faith or devotion.
Some practitioners possess both qualities, some possess one, and some lack both
or have them in a weakened state.  **Summary:** In the first *Chaubhangi*, the
fourth *Bhanga* is the worst. In the second *Chaubhangi*, the fourth *Bhanga* is
also the worst. In the third *Chaubhangi*, the third *Bhanga* is the worst.
**Types of Acharyas (Teachers) and Shishyas (Students):**  **12.** There are
four types of *Acharyas*:  1. *Pavaavana Acharyas* (purifying teachers) but not
*Uvadhavana Acharyas* (awakening teachers). 2. *Uvadhavana Acharyas* (awakening
teachers) but not *Pavaavana Acharyas* (purifying teachers). 3. Both *Pavaavana
Acharyas* (purifying teachers) and *Uvadhavana Acharyas* (awakening teachers).
4. Neither *Pavaavana Acharyas* (purifying teachers) nor *Uvadhavana Acharyas*
(awakening teachers) - *Dharma Acharyas* (teachers of *Dharma*).  **13.** There
are four types of *Shishyas*:  1. *Uddesa Shishyas* (students who receive
instructions) but not *Vayana Shishyas* (students who study). 2. *Vayana
Shishyas* (students who study) but not *Uddesa Shishyas* (students who receive
instructions). 3. Both *Uddesa Shishyas* (students who receive instructions) and
*Vayana Shishyas* (students who study). 4. Neither *Uddesa Shishyas* (students
who receive instructions) nor *Vayana Shishyas* (students who study) - *Dharma
Shishyas* (students of *Dharma*).  **14.** There are four types of *Antevasis*
(residents of a monastery):  1. *Pavaavana Antevasis* (purifying residents) but
not *Uvadhavana Antevasis* (awakening residents). 2. *Uvadhavana Antevasis*
(awakening residents) but not *Pavaavana Antevasis* (purifying residents). 3.
Both *Pavaavana Antevasis* (purifying residents) and *Uvadhavana Antevasis*
(awakening residents). 4. Neither *Pavaavana Antevasis* (purifying residents)
nor *Uvadhavana Antevasis* (awakening residents) - *Dharma Antevasis* (residents
of *Dharma*).  **15.** There are four types of *Antevasis* (residents of a
monastery):

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
446] [vyavahArasUtra koI dharmabhAva kA parityAga kara dete haiM arthAt
saMyamAcaraNa aura kaSAyoM kI upazAMti ko chor3a dete hai, kintu sAdhuveSa nahIM
chor3ate haiN| kaI sAdhaka paristhiti Ane para donoM hI chor3a baiThate haiN| ye
tInoM bhaMga vAle mArgacyuta hote haiM / phira bhI dUsare bhaMga vAlA dharma kA
ArAdhaka ho sakatA hai / isa caubhaMgI meM cauthe bhaMga vAlA sAdhaka
sarvazreSTha hai| dvitIya caubhaMgI ke cauthe bhaMga meM batAyA hai ki kaI
sAdhaka kisI bhI paristhiti meM prAgamasamAcArI aura gacchasamAcArI kisI kA bhI
bhaMga nahIM karate kintu dRDhatA evaM viveka ke sAtha sampUrNa samAcArI kA
pAlana karate haiM, ve zreSTha sAdhaka haiM / zeSa tIna bhaMga meM kahe gaye
sAdhaka alpa saphalatA vAle haiM / ve paristhitivaza kisI na kisI samAcArI se
cyuta ho jAte haiN| una bhaMgoM kI saMyojanA pUrva caubhaMgI ke samAna samajha
lenA caahie| tIsarI caubhaMgI meM dharmAcaraNoM kI dRDhatA aura dharma ke prati
antaraMga prema, ina do guNoM kA kathana hai| dharmadaDhatA sthiracittatA evaM
gambhIratA kI sUcaka hai aura dharmaprema pragADha zraddhA yA bhakti se
sambandhita hai| kisI sAdhaka meM ye donoM guNa hote haiM, kisI meM koI eka guNa
hotA hai aura kisI meM donoM hI guNoM kI maMdatA yA abhAva hotA hai| sArAMza-
prathama caubhaMgI meM cauthA bhaMga uttama hai, dvitIya caubhaMgI meM bhI
cauthA bhaMga uttama hai aura tIsarI caubhaMgI meM tIsarA bhaMga uttama hai|
AcArya evaM ziSyoM ke prakAra 12. cattAri AyariyA paNNatA, taM jahA 1.
pavAvaNAyarie nAmege, no uvaTThAvaNAyarie, 2. uvaDhAvaNAyarie nAmege, no
pavAvaNAyarie, 3. ege pavvAvaNAyarie vi, uvaTThAvaNAyarie vi, 4. ege no
pandhAvaNAyarie, no uvtttthaavnnaayrie-dhmyaayrie| 13. cattAri AyariyA paNNattA,
taM jahA 1. uddesaNAyarie nAmege, no vAyaNAyarie, 2. vAyaNAyarie nAmege, no
uddesnnaayrie| 3. ege uddesaNAyarie vi, vAyaNAyarie vi, 4. ege no uddesaNAyarie,
no vaaynnaayrie-dhmmaayrie| 14. cattAri aMtevAsI paNNattA, taM jahA 1.
pamvAvaNaMtevAsI nAmege no uvaTThAvaNaMtevAsI, 2. ubaTThAvaNaMtevAsI nAmege, no
pavvAvaNaMtevAsI, 3. ege pavvAvaNaMtevAsI vi uvaTThAvaNaMtevAsI vi, 4. ege no
panvAvaNaMtevAsI, no uvtttthaavnnNtevaasii-dhmmNtevaasii| 15. cattAri aMtevAsI
paNNatA, taM jahA

Page #267 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Tenth Uddeshak [447]  1. Some are Uddeshan-antevasi but not Vayana-antevasi.
2. Some are Vayana-antevasi but not Uddeshan-antevasi. 3. Some are both
Uddeshan-antevasi and Vayana-antevasi. 4. Some are neither Uddeshan-antevasi nor
Vayana-antevasi, but only Dharma-antevasi.  **Explanation:**  These four
categories describe the relationship between the guru and the disciple in the
following aspects:  1. Guru who gives Diksha (initiation) and the disciple. 2.
Guru who gives Badi Diksha (higher initiation) and the disciple. 3. Guru who
teaches the original text of the Agam and the disciple. 4. Guru who teaches the
meaning of the Sutras and the disciple. 5. Guru who gives enlightenment and the
disciple.  It is not necessary for a specific Acharya (teacher), Upadhyaya
(preceptor), or any other Shraman (monk) or Shramani (nun) to be responsible for
giving Diksha, Badi Diksha, or enlightenment to a disciple. Any of them can do
so under the guidance of the Guru.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
dasavAM uddezaka] [447 1. uddesaNaMtevAsI nAmege, no vAyaNaMtevAsI, 2.
vAyaNaMtevAsI nAmege, no uddesaNaMtevAsI, 3. ege uddesaNaMtevAso vi
vAyaNaMtevAsI vi, 4. egeno uddesaNaMtevAsI, no vaaynnNtevaasii-dhmmNtevaasii|
12. cAra prakAra ke prAcArya kahe gaye haiM, yathA 1. koI prAcArya (kisI eka
ziSya kI apekSA) pravrajyA dene vAle hote haiM, kintu mahAvatoM kA prAropaNa
karane vAle nahI hote haiM / 2. koI AcArya mahAvratoM kA AropaNa karane vAle
hote haiM, kintu pravrajyA dene vAle nahIM hote haiN| 3. koI prAcArya pravrajyA
dene vAle bhI hote haiM aura mahAvatoM kA AropaNa karane vAle bhI hote haiM / 4.
koI prAcArya na pravrajyA dene vAle hote haiM aura na mahAvratoM kA AropaNa
karane vAle hote haiM, ve kevala dharmopadeza dene vAle hote haiM / 13. cAra
prakAra ke prAcArya kahe gaye haiM, yathA-1. koI prAcArya (kisI eka ziSya kI
apekSA malapATha kI vAcanA dene vAle hote haiM. kinta artha kI vAcanA dene vAle
nahIM hote haiN| 2. koI prAcArya artha kI vAcanA dene vAle hote haiM, kintu
mUlapATha kI vAcanA dene vAle nahIM hote haiM / 3. koI prAcArya mUlapATha kI
vAcanA dene vAle bhI hote haiM aura artha kI bAcanA dene vAle bhI hote haiN| 4.
koI prAcArya mUlapATha kI vAcanA dene vAle bhI nahIM hote haiM aura artha kI
vAcanA dene vAle bhI hote haiM, ve kevala dharmAcArya hote haiM / 14. antevAsI
(ziSya) cAra prakAra ke kahe gaye haiM, jaise-1. koI pravrajyAziSya hai, parantu
upasthApanAziSya nahIM hai| 2. koI upasthApanAziSya hai, parantu pravrajyAziSya
nahIM / 3. koI pravajyAziSya bhI hai aura upasthApanAziSya bhI hai / 4. koI na
pravrajyAziSya hai aura na upasthApanA ziSya hai / kintu dharmopadeza se
pratibodhita ziSya hai| 15. punaH antevAsI cAra prakAra ke kahe gaye haiM,
jaise-1. koI uddezana-antevAsI hai, parantu vAcanA-antevAsI nahIM hai / 2. koI
vAcanA-antevAsI hai, parantu uddezana-antevAsI nahIM hai| 3. koI uddezana-
antevAsI bhI hai aura vAcanA-antevAsI bhI hai| 4. koI na uddezana-antevAsI hai
aura na vAcanA-antevAsI hai| kintu dharmopadeza se pratibodhita ziSya hai /
vivecana-ina caubhaMgiyoM meM guru aura ziSya se sambandhita nimnalikhita
viSayoM kA kathana kiyA gayA hai 1. dIkSAdAtA guru aura ziSya / 2.
bar3IdIkSAdAtA guru aura ziSya / 3. Agama ke mUlapATha kI vAcanAdAtA guru aura
ziSya / 4. sUtrArtha kI vAcanAdAtA guru aura ziSya / 5. pratibodha-dene vAlA
guru aura ziSya / kisI bhI ziSya ko dIkSA, bar3IdIkSA yA pratibodha dene vAle
pRthak-pRthak prAcArya nirdhArita nahIM hote haiM arthAt prAcArya, upAdhyAya yA
anya koI bhI zramaNa-zramaNI guru kI AjJA se kisI ko bhI

Page #268 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[448] The *Vyavahar Sutra* can grant *Deeksha*, *Badi Deeksha* or *Pratibodh* /
They are indicated by the term "Ayari" in this Sutra. Similarly, the disciple is
also indicated by different terms / The same monk can perform all the five
aforementioned tasks of *Deekshadata* etc. or he can be the doer of some lesser
or greater tasks, and some monks are also ordinary monks who are devoid of all
five states, i.e., they have a different state / The monks who perform all the
five tasks are indicated by the term "Prayari" in the first two *Chaubhangis*
and their disciples are indicated by the later two *Chaubhangis*. Thus, these
*bhangs* of these *Chaubhangis* are only knowable, i.e., no *bhang* of these
*Chaubhangis* can be called praiseworthy or unpraiseworthy. Types of *Sthavir*
16. *Tamo Therabhuminono Pannatao*, *Tan Jaha*-1. *Jai-There*, 2. *Suy-There*,
3. *Pariyay-There*. 1. *Sattivasajae Samane Nigganthae Jai-There* / 2. *Than-
Samavayanga-Dhare Samane Nigganthae Suy-There*. 3. *Vivasavas-Pariyae Samane
Nigganthae Pariyay-There*. 16. *Sthavir* are said to be of three types,
namely-1. *Vay-Sthavir*, 2. *Shrut-Sthavir*, 3. *Paryay-Sthavir* / 1. *Shraman-
Nirgranth* who are 60 years old, including the time spent in the womb, are *Vay-
Sthavir*. 2. *Shraman-Nirgranth* who are the holders of *Sthanang* and
*Samavayang* are *Shrut-Sthavir*. 3. *Shraman-Nirgranth* who are the holders of
*Vivasavas-Pariyay* for twenty years are *Paryay-Sthavir*. Discussion-The word
"Bhoomi" is used here in the sense of "state" / Those who become stable in
nature are not incomplete or fickle / Therefore, they are called *Sthavir* / (1)
In the *Vay-Sthavir* Sutra, those who are 60 years old, including the time spent
in the womb, are indicated as *Vay-Sthavir* and in *Vyav. Bhashya Udde 3 Sutra
11*, a 70-year-old is called *Sthavir*. There, the previous state is called the
adult state / These two statements are relative, they should not be understood
as contradictory / (2) *Shrut-Sthavir*-One who has memorized the *Sthanang* and
*Samavayang* Sutras, i.e., one who has memorized the four *Angas*, four *Chhed*
and *Uttaraadhyayayan*, *Dashavaikalik* and *Aavashyak* Sutras with their
meanings, is called *Shrut-Sthavir* in terms of *Shrut-gyan*. (3) *Paryay-
Sthavir*-A monk is called "Paryay-Sthavir" after completing twenty years of
*Sanayam-Paryay*. These three types of *Sthavir* are independent of each other,
i.e., they are independent. In this Sutra, these three types of *Sthavir* are
mentioned in relation to the *Sadhu-Sadhvi*.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
448] [vyavahArasUtra dIkSA, bar3I dIkSA yA pratibodha de sakate haiM / unako isa
sUtra ke "Ayariya" zabda se sUcita kiyA gayA hai| isI taraha ziSya ko bhI
bhinna-bhinna zabdoM se sUcita kiyA hai / _ eka hI bhikSu dIkSAdAtA Adi pUrvokta
pAMcoM kA kArya sampanna kara sakatA hai athavA koI hInAdhika kAryoM kA kartA ho
sakatA hai aura koI bhikSu pAMcoM hI avasthAoM se rahita bhinna avasthA vAlA
arthAt sAmAnya bhikSu bhI hotA hai / ukta pAMcoM kArya sampanna karane vAle
sAdhunoM ko prathama do caubhaMgiyoM meM "prAyariya" zabda se sUcita kiyA hai
aura unake ziSyoM ko bAda kI do cobhaMgiyoM se sUcita kiyA hai| isa prakAra ina
caubhaMgiyoM ke ye bhaMga kevala jJeya haiM, arthAta ina caubhaMgiyoM ke kisI
bhaMga ko prazasta yA aprazasta nahIM kahA jA sakatA hai| sthavira ke prakAra
16. tamo therabhUmIno paNNatAo, taM jahA-1. jAi-there, 2. sUya-thede, 3.
priyaay-there| 1. saTTivAsajAe samaNe niggaMthe jAi-there / 2. ThANa-
samavAyAMgadhare samaNe niggathe suy-there| 3. vIsavAsapariyAe samaNe niggaMthe
priyaay-there| 16. sthavira tIna prakAra ke kahe gaye haiM, yathA-1. vaya-
sthavira, 2. zruta-sthavira, 3. paryAyasthavira / 1. sATha varSa kI Ayu vAle
zramaNa-nirgrantha vayasthavira haiN| 2. sthAnAMga-samavAyAMga ke dhAraka
zramaNa-nirgrantha zrutasthavira haiN| 3. bIsa varSa kI dIkSA-paryAya ke dhAraka
zramaNa-nirgrantha paryAyasthavira haiN| vivecana-"bhUmi" zabda yahAM "avasthA"
artha meM prayukta hai / jo sthira svabhAva vAle ho jAte haiM ve apUrNa yA
caMcala nahIM hote haiM / ataH ve sthavira kahe jAte haiM / (1)
vayasthavirasUtra meM garbhakAla sahita 60 varSa kI umra vAloM ko vayasthavira
sUcita kiyA hai aura vyava. bhASya udde 3 sUtra 11 meM 70 varSa kI vaya vAle ko
sthavira kahA hai| vahAM usake pUrva kI avasthA ko prauDha avasthA kahA hai / ye
donoM kathana sApekSa haiM, inameM virodha nahIM samajhanA cAhie / (2)
zrutasthavira-sthAnAMga, samavAyAMgasUtra ko kaMThastha dhAraNa karanevAlA
arthAt AcArAMgAdi cAra aMga, cAra cheda evaM uttarAdhyayana, dazavaikAlika aura
Avazyaka sUtra ko arthasahita kaNThastha dhAraNa karane vAlA zrutajJAna kI
apekSA zrutasthavira kahA jAtA hai| (3) paryAyasthavira-saMyamaparyAya ke bIsa
varSa pUrNa ho jAne para bhikSu "paryAyasthavira" kahA jAtA hai| ye tInoM
prakAra ke sthaviratva paraspara nirapekSa haiM arthAt svataMtra haiN| isa sUtra
meM ye tInoM prakAra ke sthavira sAdhu-sAdhviyoM kI apekSA se hI kahe gaye haiN|

Page #269 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Vasavaan Uddeshak] The commentary explains how one should behave towards these
elders. (1) One should provide food to the Janmasthavir according to the time
and nature, give him a suitable title, bedding, and bedding materials, i.e., a
place with ventilation and a soft bedding according to the season, and show
compassion by carrying his equipment and water in the monastery, etc. / (2) One
should show respect and honor to the Shruthasthavir, rise to greet him, perform
services, offer him a seat, wash his feet, praise him directly or indirectly,
not sit on a higher seat in his presence, and act according to his instructions.
/ (3) One should show respect and honor to the Paryayasthavir, rise to greet
him, bow to him, offer him Khamasamana, accept his staff and other equipment,
and show proper humility. / These elders are the wealth of the community. To
disrespect them, show them disaffection, etc., is a cause of Viradhana, and by
doing so, one incurs the Guruchaumasi Pratikramana. The time limit for giving
the Great Initiation is 17. There are three Shaiksha-Bhoomis for the newly
initiated disciple, namely: 1. Saptratri, 2. Chaturmasik, 3. Panmasiki. The best
is to initiate into the Mahavrata after six months. / The medium is to initiate
into the Mahavrata after four months. / The worst is to initiate into the
Mahavrata after seven days and nights. The intermediate state between the
initiation and the Upasthapana is called Shaiksha-Bhoomi. The worst Shaiksha-kal
is seven days and nights, so the Great Initiation can be given after at least
seven nights have passed, i.e., on the eighth day. Other discussions related to
Upasthapana are in Vyav. Uddeshak 4 Sutra 15. The medium and best Shaiksha-kal
may be due to the non-completion of Pratikramana and Samachari studies, or it
may be due to the presence of some honorable and respected person who is being
initiated at the same time. The worst Shaiksha-kal is necessary for everyone. In
this time, many intimate things are learned, testing is done, and knowledge of
Pratikramana and Samachari can be completed. There is also a tradition of giving
the Great Initiation on the seventh day due to some expectation, but according
to the sutras, it is not proper to give the Great Initiation before seven nights
have passed. See U. 4 Su. 15 for a special discussion on this topic.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
vasavAM uddezaka] ina sthaviroM ke prati kyA-kyA vyavahAra karanA cAhie, isakA
bhASya meM isaprakAra spaSTIkaraNa kiyA gayA hai| (1) janmasthavira ko kAla-
svabhAvAnusAra AhAra denA, usake yogya upadhi, zayyAsaMstAraka denA arthAt Rtu
ke anukUla savAta-nirvAta sthAna aura mRdu saMstAraka denA tathA vihAra meM
usake upakaraNa aura pAnI uThAnA ityAdi anukampA karanI cAhie / (2)
zrutasthavira kA Adara-satkAra, abhyutthAna, kRtikarma, AsanapradAna, pAda-
pramArjana karanA ke pratyakSa yA parokSa meM guNakIrtana-prazaMsA karanA, unake
samakSa ucca zayyA Asana se nahIM baiThanA, unake nirdezAnusAra kArya karanA /
(3) paryAyasthavira kA Adara-satkAra, abhyutthAna, vaMdana karanA, khamAsamaNA
denA, unakA daNDAdi upakaraNa grahaNa karanA evaM ucita vinaya karanA / ye
sthavira gaNa kI RddhirUpa hote haiN| inakA tiraskAra, abhakti Adi karanA
virAdhanA kA kAraNa hai, aisA karane se gurucaumAsI prAyazcitta pAtA hai| bar3I
dIkSA dene kA kAlapramANa 17. to sehabhUmIo paNNattAo, taM jahA-1. sattarAIdiyA,
2. cAummAsiyA, 3. chmmaasiyaa| chammAsiyA ukkosiyaa| cAummAsiyA majjhamiyA /
sattarAIdiyA jahanniyA 17. navadIkSita ziSya ko tIna zaikSa-bhUmiyAM kahI gaI
haiM, jaise1. saptarAtri, 2. cAturmAsika, 3. paannmaasikii| utkRSTa chaha mAsa
se mahAvrata AropaNa karanA / madhyama cAra mAsa se mahAvata AropaNa karanA /
jaghanya sAta dina-rAta ke bAda mahAvrata AropaNa krnaa| vivecana-dIkSA dene ke
bAda evaM upasthApanA ke pUrva kI madhyagata avasthA ko yahAM zakSa-bhUmi kahA
gayA hai| jaghanya zaikSakAla sAta ahorAtra kA hai, isalie kama se kama sAta
rAtri vyatIta hone para arthAta AThaveM dina bar3I dIkSA dI jA sakatI hai|
upasthApanA saMbaMdhI anya vivecana vyava. udde. 4 sUtra 15 meM pratikramaNa
evaM samAcArI adhyayana ke pUrNa na hone ke kAraNa madhyama aura utkRSTa zaikSa-
kAla ho sakatA hai, athavA sAtha meM dIkSita hone vAle koI mAnanIya pUjya puruSa
kA kAraNa bhI ho sakatA hai| jaghanya zaikSa-kAla to sabhI ke lie Avazyaka hI
hotA hai| itane samaya meM kaI aMtaraMga jAnakAriyAM ho jAtI haiM, parIkSaNa bhI
ho jAtA hai aura pratikramaNa evaM samAcArI kA jJAna bhI pUrNa karAyA jA sakatA
hai| kisI apekSA ko lekara sAtaveM dina bar3I dIkSA dene kI paramparA bhI
pracalita hai, kiMtu sUtrAnusAra sAta rAtri vyatIta hone ke pUrva bar3I dIkSA
denA ucita nahIM hai| isa viSayaka vizeSa vivecana u. 4 sU. 15 meM dekheN|

Page #270 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Translation:  **450] [Vyavahar Sutra: The Method and Prohibition of Giving
the Great Initiation to Boys and Girls] 18. It is not proper for Nirgranthas or
Nirgranthis to give the great initiation to a boy or girl who is less than eight
years old, or to eat with them. 19. It is proper for Nirgranthas or Nirgranthis
to give the great initiation to a boy or girl who is more than eight years old,
or to eat with them.**  **Discussion:** In the previous Sutra, the statement of
the Shaiksha-bhoomi was said to be the time of initiation, and here the
statement of the Ksullaka-Ksullaka, that is, the initiation of a young boy or
girl, has been made. If, for some reason, a young boy is initiated with his
parents, etc., then the great initiation should not be given before the age of
eight years, including the gestation period, that is, nine years. After this
time has been completed, the great initiation can be given. Generally, the
initiation should not be given before this age. Therefore, this Sutra-stated
initiation ordinance is expected to be in exceptional circumstances. Or, it can
also be understood that both initiation and great initiation are indicated by
initiation. It is natural for a very young child to be unstable and restless,
and it is possible for him to lose his composure due to situations like being
stubborn, crying, playing, and urinating and defecating without discretion. For
this reason, there is a prohibition and atonement ordinance for giving
initiation or great initiation before the age of nine years. The verb
"sanbhujitte" is also in the Sutra, which means that a newly initiated Sadhu
cannot be given a Mandalik meal before initiation. Because until then he is a
Samayikcharitra. After the great initiation, he becomes a Chhedopasthapaneya
charitra. It should be understood that it is a rule to eat a Mandalik meal with
him.  **20. It is not proper for Nirgranthas or Nirgranthis to teach a boy or
girl who is less than eight years old the name of the Acharaprakalpa. 21. It is
proper for Nirgranthas or Nirgranthis to teach a boy or girl who is more than
eight years old the name of the Acharaprakalpa.**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
450] [vyavahArasUtra bAlaka-bAlikA ko bar3I dIkSA dene kA vidhi-niSedha 18. no
kappai NiggaMdhANa vA NiggaMthINa vA khuDagaM vA khuDDiyaM vA UNavAsajAyaM
uvaTThAvettae vA saMbhu jittae vaa| 19. kappai NiggaMthANa yA NiggaMthINa vA
khuDDagaM vA khuDDiyaM vA sAirega aTThavAsajAyaM uvaTThAvettae vA saMbhujittae
thaa| 18. nirgrantha-nirgranthiyoM ko aATha varSa se kama umra vAle bAlaka-
bAlikA ko bar3I dIkSA denA aura unake sAtha AhAra karanA nahIM kalpatA hai| 19.
nirgrantha-nirgranthiyoM ko ATha varSa se adhika umra vAle bAlaka-bAlikA ko
bar3I dIkSA denA aura unake sAtha AhAra karanA kalpatA hai| vivecana-pUrva sUtra
meM zaikSa-bhUmi ke kathana se upasthApanA kAla kahA gayA hai aura yahAM para
kSullaka-kSullikA arthAt choTI umra ke bAlaka-bAlikA kI upasthApanA kA kathana
kiyA gayA hai / yadi mAtA-pitA Adi ke sAtha kisI kAraNa se choTI umra ke bAlaka
ko dIkSA de dI jAya to kucha bhI adhika ATha varSa arthAt garbhakAla sahita nau
varSa ke pUrva bar3I dIkSA nahIM denI caahie| itanA samaya pUrNa ho jAne para
bar3I dIkSA dI jA sakatI hai| sAmAnyatayA to isa vaya ke pUrva dIkSA bhI nahIM
denI caahie| ata: yaha sUtrokta upasthApanA kA vidhAna prApavAdika paristhiti kI
apekSA se hai, aisA samajhanA cAhie / athavA upasthApanA se dIkSA yA bar3I dIkSA
donoM hI sUcita hai, aisA bhI samajhA jA sakatA hai| atyadhika choTI umra ke
bAlaka kA asthiracitta evaM caMcala honA svAbhAvika hai evaM usakA jidda karanA,
ronA, khelanA, aviveka se TaTTI pezAba kara denA Adi sthitiyoM se saMyama kI
hAni honA saMbhava rahatA hai / isI kAraNa se nau varSa kI umra ke pUrva dIkSA
yA bar3I dIkSA dene kA niSedha evaM prAyazcitta vidhAna hai| sUtra meM
"saMbhujittae" kriyA pada bhI hai, usakA tAtparya yaha hai ki upasthApanA ke
pUrva navadIkSita sAdhu ko eka mAMDalika AhAra nahIM karAyA jA sakatA hai|
kyoMki taba taka vaha sAmAyikacAritra vAlA hotA hai / bar3I dIkSA ke bAda vaha
chedopasthApanIya cAritra vAlA ho jAtA hai| usI ke sAtha eka mAMDalika pAhAra
karane kA vidhAna hai, aisA samajhanA caahie| bAlaka ko AcAraprakalpa ke
adhyayana karAne kA niSedha 20. no kappaDa niragaMthANa vA niggaMthINa vA
khuDDagassa vA khuDDiyAe vA avaMjaNajAyassa prAyArapakappe NAmaM ajjhayaNe
uddisitte| 21. kappai niggaMthANa vA niggaMthINa vA khuDDagassa vA khuDDiyAe vA
vaMjaNajAyassa AyArapakappe NAmaM ajjhAyaNe uddisittae /

Page #271 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  [Vasa Vasa Uddesaka] 20. It is not appropriate for a Nirgrantha or
Nirgranthis to teach the study called Acharaprakalpa to a child monk or nun who
has not attained puberty (Avyanjanajat). 21. It is appropriate for a Nirgrantha
or Nirgranthis to teach the study called Acharaprakalpa to a monk or nun who has
attained puberty (Vyanjanajat).   **Discussion:** Here, Acharaprakalpa refers to
the Acharangasutra and Nishitasutra. The study of these texts is prohibited for
sadhus and sadhvis under the age of sixteen. For a complete discussion on this
topic, see Nishita Uddesaka 19, Sutra 20.  **The order of study of the Agamas
along with the Dikshaparaya:**  22. It is appropriate for a Samana Niggantha who
has completed three years of initiation (Tivas-Pariyaya) to study the
Acharaprakalpa.  23. It is appropriate for a Samana Niggantha who has completed
four years of initiation (Chauvaas-Pariyaya) to study the Anga called Suyagada.
24. It is appropriate for a Samana Niggantha who has completed five years of
initiation (Panchavas-Pariyaya) to study the Dasakappa-Vavahara. 25. It is
appropriate for a Samana Niggantha who has completed eight years of initiation
(Atthavas-Pariyaya) to study the Thana-Samavaaya. 26. It is appropriate for a
Samana Niggantha who has completed ten years of initiation (Dasavas-Pariyaya) to
study the Anga called Viyahe. 27. It is appropriate for a Samana Niggantha who
has completed eleven years of initiation (Ekkaraasavas-Pariyaya) to study the
following texts: Khuddiya Vimanapavibhatti, Mahalliya Vimanapavibhatti,
Angachuliya, Vaggachuliya, and Viyahachuliya. 28. It is appropriate for a Samana
Niggantha who has completed twelve years of initiation (Baarasavas-Pariyaya) to
study the following texts: Arunovaavae, Varunovaavae, Garulovaavae,
Dharanokwaae, Vesamanovaavae, and Velandharovaavae. 29. It is appropriate for a
Samana Niggantha who has completed thirteen years of initiation (Terasavas-
Pariyaya) to study the following texts: Utthanasue, Samutthanasue, Deviva
Pariyavanie, and Nagapariyavanie. 30. It is appropriate for a Samana Niggantha
who has completed fourteen years of initiation (Chaudasavas-Pariyaya) to study
the text called Sumina Bhavana. 31. It is appropriate for a Samana Niggantha who
has completed fifteen years of initiation (Pannarasavas-Pariyaya) to study the
text called Charana Bhavana. 32. It is appropriate for a Samana Niggantha who
has completed sixteen years of initiation (Sollasavas-Pariyaya) to study the
text called Teyanisagge.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
vasavAM uddezaka] 20. avyaMjanajAta arthAt aprApta yauvana vAle bAlaka bhikSu yA
bhikSuNI ko AcAraprakalpa nAmaka adhyayana par3hAnA nirgrantha aura
nirgranthiyoM ko nahIM kalpatA hai| 21. vyaMjanajAta arthAt yauvana prApta
bhikSu yA bhikSuNI ko prAcAraprakalpa nAmaka adhyayana par3hAnA nirgrantha aura
nigraMnthiyoM ko kalpatA hai| vivecana-yahAM para AcArAMgasUtra aura
nizIthasUtra ko AcAraprakalpa kahA gayA hai / isakA adhyayana solaha varSa se
kama umra vAle sAdhu-sAdhvI ko karAne kA niSedha kiyA gayA hai / isa viSayaka
saMpUrNa vivecana nizItha udde. 19 sUtra 20 meM dekheM / dIkSAparyAya ke sAtha
AgamoM kA adhyayanakrama 22. tivAsa-pariyAyassa samaNassa niggaMthassa kappai
AyArapakappe nAma ajjhayaNe uddisitte| 23. cauvAsa-pariyAyassa samaNassa
NiggaMthassa kappai sUyagaDe nAma aMge uddisittae / 24. paMcavAsa-pariyAyassa
samaNassa NiggaMthassa kappai dasA-kappa-vavahAre uddisittae / 25. aTThavAsa-
pariyAyassa samaNassa NiggaMthassa kappai ThANa-samavAe uddisitte| 26. dasavAsa-
pariyAyassa samaNassa NiggaMthassa kappai viyAhe nAmaM aMge uddisitte| 27.
ekkArasavAsa-pariyAyassa samaNassa NiggaMthassa kappai khuDDiyA
vimANapavibhattI, mahalliyAvimANapavibhattI, aMgacUliyA, vaggacUliyA,
viyAhacUliyA nAmaM ajjhayaNe uddisitte| 28. bArasavAsa-pariyAyassa samaNassa
NiggaMthassa kappai aruNovavAe, varuNovavAe, garulovavAe, dharaNokvAe,
vesamaNovavAe, velaMdharovavAe, nAmaM ajmayaNe uddisittae / 29. terasavAsa-
pariyAyassa samaNassa NiggaMthassa kappai uTThANasue, samuTThANasue,
devivapariyAvaNie, nAgapariyAvaNie nAma ajjhayaNe uhisittae / 30. codasavAsa-
pariyAyassa samaNassa NiggaMthassa kappai sumiNabhAvaNAnAma ajjhayaNe uddisitte|
31. pannarasavAsa-pariyAyassa samaNassa NiggaMthassa kappai cAraNabhAvaNAnAma
ajjhayaNe uddisitte| 32. solasavAsa-pariyAyassa samaNassa NiggaMthassa kappA
teyaNisagge nAmaM ajjhayaNe uddisitte|

Page #272 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[452] [Vyavahar Sutra 33. A Shraman-Niggranth with a 17-year Diksha-Pariyay is
eligible to study Aachar Prakalp. 34. A Shraman-Niggranth with an 18-year
Diksha-Pariyay is eligible to study Diddhi Visbhavana. 35. A Shraman-Niggranth
with a 19-year Diksha-Pariyay is eligible to study the Anga called Ditti Vay.
36. A Shraman-Niggranth with a 20-year Diksha-Pariyay is eligible to study all
the Sutras. 22. A Shraman-Niggranth with a 3-year Diksha-Pariyay is eligible to
study Prachar Prakalp. 23. A Shraman-Niggranth with a 4-year Diksha-Pariyay is
eligible to study Sutra Kritang. 24. A Shraman-Niggranth with a 5-year Diksha-
Pariyay is eligible to study Dasha, Kalp, and Vyavahar Sutra. 25. A Shraman-
Niggranth with an 8-year Diksha-Pariyay is eligible to study Stanang and
Samavayang Sutra. 26. A Shraman-Niggranth with a 10-year Diksha-Pariyay is
eligible to study Vyakhya Prajnapti. 27. A Shraman-Niggranth with an 11-year
Diksha-Pariyay is eligible to study Ksullaka Viman Pravibhakti, Mahallaka Viman
Pravibhakti, Ang Chulika, Varga Chulika, and Vyakhya Chulika. 28. A Shraman-
Niggranth with a 12-year Diksha-Pariyay is eligible to study Arunopapat,
Varunopapat, Garudopapat, Dharanopapat, Vaishramanopapat, and Velandhropapat.
29. A Shraman-Niggranth with a 13-year Diksha-Pariyay is eligible to study
Utthan Shrut, Samutthan Shrut, Devendra Pariyapanika, and Nag Pariyapanika. 30.
A Shraman-Niggranth with a 14-year Diksha-Pariyay is eligible to study Swapna
Bhavana. 31. A Shraman-Niggranth with a 15-year Diksha-Pariyay is eligible to
study Charan Bhavana.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
452] [vyavahArasUtra 33. sattarasavAsa-pariyAyassa samaNassa NiggaMthassa kappai
AsIvisabhAvaNANAmaM ajjhayaNe uddisitte| 34. aTThArasavAsa-pariyAyassa samaNassa
jiggaMthassa kappai diddhivisabhAvaNANAmaM ajmayaNe uddisitte| 35.
egUNavIsavAsa-pariyAyassa samaNassa NiggaMthassa kappai diTTivAya nAma aMge
uddisittae / 36. vIsavAsa-pariyAe samaNe NiggaMthe savvasuyANuvAI bhavai / 22.
tIna varSa kI dIkSAparyAya vAle (yogya) zramaNa-nirgrantha ko prAcAraprakalpa
nAmaka adhyayana par3hAnA kalpatA hai| 23. cAra varSa kI dIkSAparyAya vAle
zramaNa-nirgrantha ko sUtrakRtAMga nAmaka dUsarA aMga par3hAnA kalpatA hai| 24.
pAMca varSa kI dIkSAparyAya vAle zramaNa-nirgrantha ko dazA, kalpa, vyavahAra
sUtra par3hAnA kalpatA hai| 25. ATha varSa kI dIkSAparyAya vAle zramaNa-
nirgrantha ko sthAnAMga aura samavAyAMgasUtra par3hAnA kalpatA hai| 26. daza
varSa kI dIkSAparyAya vAle zramaNa-nirgrantha ko vyAkhyAprajJapti nAmaka aMga
par3hAnA kalpatA hai| 27. gyAraha varSa kI dIkSAparyAya vAle zramaNa-nirgrantha
ko kSullikA vimAnapravibhakti, mahallikA vimAnapravibhakti, aMgacUlikA,
vargacUlikA aura vyAkhyAcUlikA nAmaka adhyayana par3hAnA kalpatA hai| 28. bAraha
varSa kI dIkSAparyAya vAle zramaNa-nirgrantha ko aruNopapAta, varuNopapAta,
garuDopapAta, dharaNopapAta, vaizramaNopapAta, velandharopapAta nAmaka adhyayana
par3hAnA kalpatA hai| 29. teraha varSa kI dIkSAparyAya vAle zramaNa-nirgrantha
ko utthAnazruta, samutthAnazruta, devendrapariyApanikA aura nAgapariyApanikA
nAmaka adhyayana par3hAnA kalpatA hai / 30. caudaha varSa kI dIkSAparyAya vAle
zramaNa-nirgrantha ko svapnabhAvanA nAmaka adhyayana par3hAnA kalpatA hai| 31.
pandraha varSa kI dIkSAparyAya vAle zramaNa-nirgrantha ko cAraNabhAvanA nAmaka
adhyayana par3hAnA kalpatA hai|

Page #273 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Tenth Uddeshak [453]  32. It is appropriate for a Shraman-Nirgranth with a
16-year Dikshaparaya to study the Tejonisarg named study.  33. It is appropriate
for a Shraman-Nirgranth with a 17-year Dikshaparaya to study the Asivishabhavana
named study.  34. It is appropriate for a Shraman-Nirgranth with an 18-year
Dikshaparaya to study the Drishti Vishabhavana named study.  35. It is
appropriate for a Shraman-Nirgranth with a 19-year Dikshaparaya to study the
Drishtivad named twelfth Ang.  36. A Shraman-Nirgranth with a 20-year
Dikshaparaya becomes capable of holding the Sarvasruta.   **Discussion:** These
fifteen sutras describe the study of Agamas in relation to the Dikshaparaya,
covering the period from three to twenty years. This study sequence is based on
the Shruta available during the time of the author of this sutra, Shri
Bhadrabahu Swami. Later composed and established sutras are not mentioned in
this study sequence. Therefore, the study sequence of the 12 Upangasutras like
Uvvai, etc., and the Malasutras is not discussed here. However, after studying
Pracharashastra, i.e., after studying the Chedasutras, and before or after
studying the Thanang, Samavayang, and Bhagavati Sutra, one should understand
that the study of those remaining sutras can be done at any time. The study of
the Aavashyakasutra is done before the Upasthapana, and the Bhashya instructs to
study the Dashavakalik and Uttaraadhyayana Sutra before Pracharang and Nishita.
The relevant quotations have been given in the third Uddeshak, and Nishita U. 19
discusses this topic.   1. There is a belief regarding the Dashavakalik Sutra
that Shayambhav Swami composed this sutra for his son "Manak" before Bhadrabahu
Swami. Then, at the request of the Sangha, it was not merged back into the
Purvas and was allowed to remain independent.  2. Similarly, there is a
tradition regarding the Uttaraadhyayana Sutra that these 36 studies were
delivered by Bhagwan Mahavira Swami in his final Deshana. At that time, a
Sthavir, upon hearing the Deshana, compiled it into a sutra form. However, due
to the fact that Bhadrabahu Swami did not include these two sutras in the
present Agam study sequence, and upon carefully examining those historical
statements, it is easily concluded that these beliefs related to these two
sutras are imaginary. In reality, these sutras were compiled after Bhadrabahu
Swami and sometime before the time of Devadhiggani.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
dasavAM uddezaka ] [ 453 32. solaha varSa kI dIkSAparyAya vAle zramaNa-
nirgrantha ko tejonisarga nAmaka adhyayana par3hAnA kalpatA hai| 33. sattaraha
varSa kI dIkSAparyAya vAle zramaNa-nirgrantha ko AsIviSabhAvanA nAmaka adhyayana
par3hAnA kalpatA hai| 34. aThAraha varSa kI dIkSAparyAya vAle zramaNa-nirgrantha
ko dRSTi viSabhAvanA nAmaka adhyayana par3hAnA kalpatA hai| 35. unnIsa varSa ko
dIkSAparyAya vAle zramaNa-nirgrantha ko dRSTivAda nAmaka bArahavAM aMga par3hAnA
kalpatA hai| 36. bIsa varSa kI dIkSAparyAya vAlA zramaNa-nigrantha sarvazruta ko
dhAraNa karane vAlA ho jAtA hai| vivecana-ina pandraha sUtroM meM kramazaH
AgamoM ke adhyayana kA kathana dIkSAparyAya kI apekSA se kiyA gayA hai| jisameM
tIna varSa se lekara bIsa varSa taka kA kathana hai|| yaha adhyayanakrama isa
sUtra ke racayitA zrI bhadrabAhusvAmI ke samaya upalabdha zrutoM ke anusAra hai
/ usake bAda meM racita evaM niyUMDha sUtroM kA isa adhyayanakrama meM ullekha
nahIM hai / ataH uvavAI Adi 12 upAMgasatra evaM malasatroM ke adhyayanakrama kI
yahAM vivakSA nahIM kI gaI hai| phira bhI prAcArazAstra ke adhyayana kara lene
para arthAt chedasUtroM ke adhyayana ke bAda aura ThANAMga, samavAyAMga tathA
bhagavatIsUtra ke adhyayana ke pahale yA pIche kabhI bhI una zeSa sUtroM kA
adhyayana karanA samajha lenA caahie| AvazyakasUtra kA adhyayana to upasthApanA
ke pUrva hI kiyA jAtA hai tathA bhASya meM prAcArAMga va nizItha ke pUrva
dazavakAlika aura uttarAdhyayanasUtra ke adhyayana karane kA nirdeza kiyA gayA
hai| usase sambandhita uddharaNa tIsare uddezaka meM de diye gaye haiM tathA
nizI. u. 19 meM isa viSaya meM vinecana kiyA hai| 1. dazavakAlikasUtra ke viSaya
meM aisI dhAraNA pracalita hai ki bhadrabAhusvAmI se pUrva zayyaMbhavasvAmI ne
apane putra "manaka" ke lie isa sUtra kI racanA kI thii| phira saMgha ke Agraha
se ise punaH pUrvo meM vilIna nahIM kiyA aura svataMtra rUpa meM rahane diyA /
2. uttarAdhyayanasUtra ke lie bhI aisI paramparA pracalita hai ki ye 36
adhyayana bha. mahAvIra svAmI ne aMtima dezanA meM pharamAye the / usa samaya
dezanA sunakara kisI sthavira ne unakA sUtra rUpa meM guthana kiyaa| kintu
prastuta Agamaadhyayanakrama meM bhadrabAhusvAmI dvArA ina donoM sUtroM ko
sthAna nahIM die jAne ke kAraNa evaM una aitihAsika kathanoM kA sUkSmabuddhi se
parizIlana karane para sahaja hI yaha niSkarSa nikalatA hai ki ye donoM sUtroM
se saMbaMdhita dhAraNAeM kAlpanika haiM / vAstava meM ye sUtra bhadrabAhusvAmI
ke bAda meM aura devaddhigaNI ke samaya taka kisI bhI kAla meM saMkalita kie gae
haiN|

Page #274 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[454] There have been many speculations about the history of the Vyavahar Sutra
over time. For example, it has been claimed that the Niyukti, Bhashya, and
Churnis are actually texts composed by the Acharyas after the composition of the
Nandi Sutra. However, these texts are known to have been composed by the 14
Eastern or 3 Eastern, etc., which are fictional accounts. The statement that two
or four Chulika were brought from the Mahavideha region by the sister of Sthuli-
bhadras is found in different texts like the Parishishta Parva, etc. These texts
were composed 800-900 years after the time of Sthuli-bhadras. The commentators
and Churnikars who came before the authors of these texts did not imagine that
these Chulika were brought from Mahavideha, but accepted them as original
compositions. The Paryushana Kalpa Sutra did not even have a name in the
12th-13th century. It was also propagated to have been composed by the 14th
Eastern Bhadrabahu Swami, see the discussion in Dasha. Da. 8. Therefore, there
is no objection to accepting that the Uttaradhyayanasutra and the Dashakalika
Sutra were composed after the Vyavahar Sutra. However, if they are accepted to
have been composed by the earlier Acharyas, then their absence in the study
sequence of the Vyavahar Sutra is a matter of consideration, and the prevailing
historical traditions on this subject are also not logical when considered. The
statement of three years of Paryaya, etc., in these Sutras can be interpreted in
two ways: (1) To study these Agamas after the completion of three years of
Diksha Paryaya. (2) A qualified monk should study or be made to study at least
these Agamas during the three years of Diksha Paryaya. The second meaning is in
accordance with the Agamas, its explanation is given in the discussion of U. 3
Su. 3. The reader should understand it from there. Most of the Sutras mentioned
for study after the ten years of Diksha Paryaya were available in the form of
Kalika Shruta at the time of the composition of the Nandi Sutra. However, none
of these Sutras are available today. Only the study called 'Teinisarga' is
available in the 15th century of the Bhagavati Sutra. The Anga Sutras like the
Jnata Sutra, etc., are not mentioned in the present study. The reason for this
is that these Sutras mainly describe Dharmakatha, which does not require any
sequence. They can be studied or taught at any time as needed. The description
of Ashrava-Samvara available in the Prashnavyakaran Sutra is not composed by
Gandhar, but was compiled after the composition of the Sutra. The names of the
Agamas mentioned in these Sutras are as follows: (1-2) Pracharanga Sutra and
Nishita Sutra, (3) Suyagada Anga Sutra, (4, 5, 6) Dasha Shruta Skandha Sutra,
Brihat Kalpa Sutra and Vyavahar Sutra, (7, 8) Thana Anga Sutra, Samavaya Anga
Sutra, (9) Bhagavati Sutra. (10-14) Kshullika Vimana Pravibhakti, Mahallika
Vimana Pravibhakti, Anga Chulika, Varga Chulika, Vyakhya Chulika.  Jain
Education International

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
454] [ vyavahArasUtra itihAsa ke nAma se samaya-samaya para aisI kaI kalpanAeM
pracalita huI haiM yA kI gaI haiN| jaise ki--niyukti, bhASya, cUNiyAM Adi
vAstava meM to naMdIsUtra kI racanA ke bAda prAcAryoM dvArA racita grantha haiN|
phira bhI inake viSaya meM 14 pUrvI yA tIna pUrvI Adi ke dvArA racita hone ke
kalpita itihAsa prasiddha kie gae haiN| mahAvidehakSetra se sthUlibhadra kI
bahana ke dvArA do athavA cAra cUlikA lAne kA kathana pariziSTaparva Adi bhinna-
bhinna granthoM meM hai / ve grantha sthUlibhadra ke samaya se 800-900 varSa
bAda race gae haiN| una granthakAroM ke pUrva hue TIkAkAra, cUrNikAra Adi una
cUlikAoM ke lie mahAvideha se lAne saMbaMdhI koI kalpanA na karake unheM maulika
racanA honA hI svIkAra karate haiN| paryuSaNAkalpasUtra kA 12vIM-terahavIM
zatAbdI saka nAma bhI nahIM thaa| use bhI 14 pUrvI bhadrabAhusvAmI dvArA racita
honA pracArita kara diyA, dekheM dazA. da. 8 kA vivecana / _ ata:
uttarAdhyayana, dazavakAlika ina donoM sUtroM kI racanA vyavahArasUtra kI racanA
ke bAda mAnane meM koI Apatti nahIM hai| kintu usake pahale ke prAcAryoM dvArA
racita mAnane para isa vyavahArasUtra ke adhyayanakrama meM inakA nirdeza na
honA vicAraNIya rahatA hai evaM isa viSayaka pracalita itihAsaparaMparAeM bhI
vicAra karane para tarkasaMgata nahIM hotI haiN| ina sUtroM meM jo tIna varSa
paryAya Adi kA kathana kiyA gayA hai, usakA do taraha se artha kiyA jA sakatA
hai (1) dIkSAparyAya ke tIna varSa pUrNa hone para una AgamoM kA adhyayana
krnaa| (2) tIna varSoM ke dIkSAparyAya meM yogya bhikSu ko kama se kama AgamoM
kA adhyayana kara lenA yA karA denA caahie| ina donoM arthoM meM dUsarA artha
AgamAnusArI hai, isakA spaSTIkaraNa u. 3 sU. 3 ke vivecana meM kiyA gayA hai /
pAThaka vahAM se samajha leN| dasa varSa kI dIkSAparyAya ke bAda meM adhyayana
karane ke lie kahe gae sUtroM meM se prAyaH sabhI sUtra naMdIsUtra kI racanA ke
samaya meM kAlika zrutarUpa meM upalabdha the| kintu vartamAna meM unameM se koI
bhI sUtra upalabdha nahIM hai / kevala 'teyanisarga' nAmaka adhyayana
bhagavatIsUtra ke paMdrahaveM zataka meM upalabdha hai| jJAtAsUtra Adi
aMgasUtroM kA prastuta adhyayana meM nirdeza nahIM kiyA gayA hai, isakA kAraNa
yaha hai ki ina sUtroM meM prAyaH dharmakathA kA varNana hai, jinake krama kI
koI AvazyakatA nahIM rahatI hai| yathAvasara kabhI bhI inakA adhyayana kiyA yA
karAyA jA sakatA hai| praznavyAkaraNasUtra meM upalabdha Azrava-saMvara kA
varNana gaNadhararacita nahIM hai, kintu sUtra kI racanA ke bAda meM saMkalita
kiyA gayA hai / ina sUtroM meM sUcita kiye gaye AgamoM ke nAma isa prakAra haiM
(1-2) prAcArAMgasUtra evaM nizIthasUtra, (3) sUyagaDAMgasUtra, (4, 5, 6)
dazAzrutaskadhasUtra, bRhatkalpasUtra aura vyavahArasUtra, (7, 8) ThANAMgasUtra,
samavAyAMgasUtra, (9) bhgvtiisuutr| (10-14) kSullikA vimAnapravibhakti,
mahallikA vimAnapravibhakti, aMgacUlikA, vargacUlikA, vyAkhyAcUlikA / Jain
Education international

Page #275 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Tenth Uddeshak  **[455 (15-20) Arunopapat, Varunopapat, Garudopapat,
Dharanopapat, Vaishramanopapat, Velandharopapat, (21-24) Utthanashrut,
Samutthanashrut, Devendrapariyapanika, Nagpariyapanika, (25) Swapnabhavana
Adhyayan, (26) Charanabhavana Adhyayan, (27) Tejanisarg Adhyayan, (28)
Ashivishbhavana Adhyayan, (29) Drishtivishbhavana Adhyayan, (30) Drishtivad
Ang.**  Sutras from 10 to 29 were either part of the Anga called Drishtivad or
separate Sutras derived from it. All of these are mentioned in the list of
Kalikashrut in the Nandi Sutra. At the end of these Sutras, it is mentioned that
one should complete the study of the entire Samputashrut within twenty years of
initiation. Accordingly, even today, every eligible monk should complete the
study of all available Agamashrut within twenty years. After that, one should
engage in Pravachanaprabhavana or remain in Nivrittimaya Sadhana, engaging in
self-realization through Swadhyaya, Dhyana, Kayotsarg, etc. The eligible
disciple should be given the above Agamas in order, as described in detail in
Nishi. U. 19.  **Types of Vaiyavritya and Mahanirjara**  **37. Ten types of
Vaiyavritya are mentioned, such as:**  1. **Aacharya-Vaiyavritya** 2.
**Upadhyaya-Vaiyavritya** 3. **Sthavir-Vaiyavritya** 4. **Tapasvi-Vaiyavritya**
5. **Shaiksh-Vaiyavritya** 6. **Glan-Vaiyavritya** 7. **Sarmik-Vaiyavritya** 8.
**Kul-Vaiyavritya** 9. **Gan-Vaiyavritya** 10. **Sangh-Vaiyavritya**  **1.
Aacharya-Vaiyavritya** is performed by a Samana Niggantha who is a Mahanirjara
and a Mahapajjavasa. **2. Upadhyaya-Vaiyavritya** is performed by a Samana
Niggantha who is a Mahanirjara and a Mahapajjavasa. **3. Sthavir-Vaiyavritya**
is performed by a Samana Niggantha who is a Mahanirjara and a Mahapajjavasa.
**4. Tapasvi-Vaiyavritya** is performed by a Samana Niggantha who is a
Mahanirjara and a Mahapajjavasa. **5. Shaiksh-Vaiyavritya** is performed by a
Samana Niggantha who is a Mahanirjara and a Mahapajjavasa. **6. Glan-
Vaiyavritya** is performed by a Samana Niggantha who is a Mahanirjara and a
Mahapajjavasa. **7. Sarmik-Vaiyavritya** is performed by a Samana Niggantha who
is a Mahanirjara and a Mahapajjavasa. **8. Kul-Vaiyavritya** is performed by a
Samana Niggantha who is a Mahanirjara and a Mahapajjavasa. **9. Gan-
Vaiyavritya** is performed by a Samana Niggantha who is a Mahanirjara and a
Mahapajjavasa. **10. Sangh-Vaiyavritya** is performed by a Samana Niggantha who
is a Mahanirjara and a Mahapajjavasa.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
dasavAM uddezaka] [ 455 (15-20) aruNopapAta, varuNopapAta, garuDopapAta,
dharaNopapAta, vaizramaNopapAta, velandharopapAta, (21-24) utthAnazruta,
samutthAnazruta, devendrapariyApanikA, nAgapariyApanikA, (25) svapnabhAvanA
adhyayana, (26) cAraNabhAvanA adhyayana, (27) tejanisarga adhyayana, (28)
AzIviSabhAvanA adhyayana, (29) dRSTiviSabhAvanA adhyayana, (30) dRSTivAda aNg|
sUtrAMka 10 se 29 taka ke Agama dRSTivAda nAmaka aMga ke hI adhyayana the athavA
usase alaga niyUMDha kiye gaye sUtra the| ina sabhI kA nAma naMdIsUtra meM
kAlikazruta kI sUcI meM diyA gayA hai| ina sUtroM ke aMta meM yaha batAyA gayA
hai ki bIsa varSa kI dIkSAparyAya taka saMpUrNazruta kA adhyayana kara lenA
caahie| tadanusAra vartamAna meM bhI pratyeka yogya bhikSu ko upalabdha sabhI
pAgamazruta kA adhyayana bIsa varSa meM paripUrNa kara lenA caahie| usake bAda
pravacanaprabhAvanA karanI cAhie athavA nivRttimaya sAdhanA meM rahakara
svAdhyAya, dhyAna, kAyotsarga prAdi meM lIna rahate hue AtmasAdhanA karanI
caahie| uparyukta AgamoM kI vAcanA yogya ziSya ko yathAkrama se hI denI cAhie,
ityAdi vistRta varNana nizI. u. 19 meM dekheN| vaiyAvRtya ke prakAra evaM
mahAnirjarA 37. dasavihe veyAvacce paNNatte, taM jahA-1. Ayariya-veyAvacce, 2.
uvamAya-yAvacce, 3. thera-veyAvacce, 4. tavassi-veyAvacce, 5. seha-yAvacce, 6.
gilANa-veyAvacce, 7. sAhammiyabeyAvacce, 8. kula-veyAvacce, 9. gaNa-ceyAvacce,
10. sNgh-veyaavcce| 1. Ayariya-veyAvaccaM karemANe samaNe niggathe mahAnijjare,
mahApajjavasANe bhavai / 2. uvajjhAya-veyAvaccaM karemANe samaNe niggaMthe
mahAnijjare, mahApajjavasANe bhavai / 3. thera-beyAvaccaM karemANe samaNe
niggaMthe mahAnijjare, mahApajjavasANe bhavai / 4. tavassi-veyAvaccaM karemANe
samaNe niggaMthe mahAnijjare, mahApajjavasANe bhavai / 5. seha-yAvaccaM karemANe
samaNe niggaMthe mahAnijjare, mahApajjavasANe bhavai / 6. gilANa-veyAvaccaM
karemANe samaNe niggathe mahAnijjare, mahApajjavasANe bhavai / 7. sAhammiya-
veyAvaccaM karemANe samaNe niggathe mahAnijjare, mahApajjavasANe bhvi| . 8.
kula-yAvaccaM karemANe samaNe niggaMthe mahAnijjare, mahApajjavasANe bhavai / 9.
gaNa-veyAvaccaM karemANe samaNe niggaMthe mahAnijjare, mahApajjavasANe bhavai /
10. saMgha-veyAvaccaM karemANe samaNe niggathe mahAnijjare, mahApajjavasANe
bhavai / 37. vaiyAvRtya dasa prakAra kA kahA gayA hai, jaise-1. prAcArya-
vaiyAvRtya, 2. upAdhyAyavaiyAvRtya, 3. sthavira-vaiyAvRtya, 4. tapasvI-
vaiyAvRtya, 5. zaikSa-vaiyAvRtya, 6. glAna-vaiyAvRtya, 7. sArmika-vaiyAvRtya, 8.
kula-vaiyAvRtya, 9. gaNa-vaiyAvRtya, 10. saMgha-vaiyAvRtya /

Page #276 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
456] [Vyavahar Sutra - 1. A Shraman-Nirgranth who serves the Acharya is destined
for Maha Nirjara and Maha Paryavasana. 2. A Shraman-Nirgranth who serves the
Upadhyaya is destined for Maha Nirjara and Maha Paryavasana. 3. A Shraman-
Nirgranth who serves the Sthavir is destined for Maha Nirjara and Maha
Paryavasana. 4. A Shraman-Nirgranth who serves the Tapasvi is destined for Maha
Nirjara and Maha Paryavasana. 5. A Shraman-Nirgranth who serves the Shaiksha is
destined for Maha Nirjara and Maha Paryavasana. 6. A Shraman-Nirgranth who
serves the Glana is destined for Maha Nirjara and Maha Paryavasana. 7. A
Shraman-Nirgranth who serves the Sarmic is destined for Maha Nirjara and Maha
Paryavasana. 8. A Shraman-Nirgranth who serves the Kula is destined for Maha
Nirjara and Maha Paryavasana. 9. A Shraman-Nirgranth who serves the Gan is
destined for Maha Nirjara and Maha Paryavasana. 10. A Shraman-Nirgranth who
serves the Sangha is destined for Maha Nirjara and Maha Paryavasana. The
previous Sutra mentioned Swadhyaya as the primary means of Nirjara, while this
Sutra states that Vyavavritti leads to Maha Nirjara and Maha Paryavasana,
meaning liberation. Here, the mention of Acharya and others encompasses all
Sadhus who are eligible for Vyavavritti. This Vyavavritti is described in the
Bhashya as thirteen types, namely: (1) Ahar - Bringing and giving appropriate
food to the Acharya and others. (2) Pani - Searching for and bringing and giving
water. (3) Shayanasan - Arranging the bed, spreading the bedding, or searching
for and bringing it, and cleaning the bed area. (4) Pratilekhan - Copying and
purifying the writing materials. (5-7) Bringing and giving medicines, or
cleaning the feet.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
456 ] [ vyavahArasUtra - 1. prAcArya kI vaiyAvRtya karane vAlA zramaNa-
nirgrantha mahAnirjarA aura mahAparyavasAna vAlA hotA hai| 2. upAdhyAya kI
vaiyAvRtya karane vAlA zramaNa-nirgrantha mahAnirjarA aura mahAparyavasAna vAlA
hotA hai| 3. sthavira kI vaiyAvRtya karane vAlA zramaNa-nirgrantha mahAnirjarA
aura mahAparyavasAna vAlA hotA hai| 4. tapasvI kI vaiyAvRtya karane vAlA
zramaNa-nirgrantha mahAnirjarA aura mahAparyavasAna vAlA hotA hai| 5. zaikSa kI
vayAvRtya karane vAlA zramaNa-nirgrantha mahAnirjarA aura mahAparyavasAna vAlA
hotA hai| 6. glAna kI vaiyAvRtya karane vAlA zramaNa-nirgrantha mahAnirjarA aura
mahAparyavasAna vAlA hotA hai| 7. sArmika kI vaiyAvRtya karane vAlA zramaNa-
nirgrantha mahAnirjarA aura mahAparyavasAna vAlA hotA hai 8. kula kI vaiyAvRtya
karane vAlA zramaNa-nirgrantha mahAnirjarA aura mahAparyavasAna vAlA hotA hai|
9. gaNa kI baiyAvRtya karane vAlA zramaNa-nirgrantha mahAnirjarA aura
mahAparyavasAna vAlA hotA hai| 10. saMgha kI vaiyAvRtya karane vAlA zramaNa-
nirgrantha mahAnirjarA aura mahAparyavasAna vAlA hotA hai| vivecanapUrvasUtra
meM nirjarA ke pramukha sAdhana rUpa svAdhyAya kA kathana kiyA gayA hai aura
prastuta sUtra meM vaiyAvRtya se mahAnirjarA evaM mahAparyavasAna arthAt
mokSaprApti kA kathana kiyA gayA hai / yahAM prAcArya Adi dasoM ke kathana meM
vaiyAvRtya ke pAtra sabhI sAdhuoM kA samAveza kara diyA gayA hai| yaha
vaiyAvRtya bhASya meM teraha prakAra kA kahA gayA hai, yathA(1) AhAra-ukta
AcArya Adi ke liye yathAyogya AhAra lAnA va denA Adi / (2) pAnI-pAnI kI gaveSaNA
karanA evaM lAnA-denA aadi| (3) zayanAsana zayanAsana kI niyukti karanA,
saMstAraka bichAnA yA gaveSaNA karake lAnA tathA zayyA bhUmi kA pramArjana
krnaa| (4) pratilekhana upakaraNoM kA pratilekhana karanA va zuddhi krnaa| (5-7)
pAeauSadha, bheSaja lAnA-denA yA pAdapramArjana krnaa|

Page #277 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Tenth Uddeshak  **(8)**  Carrying the Upadhi (attributes) in Marg-Vihar
(conduct) and other activities, and walking along with them.  **(9)**  Removing
aversion towards Rajadvist (enemies of the king) and other kings. **(10)**
Protecting oneself from Sten (thief) and others. **(11)**  Receiving the Danda
(staff) and other objects from the hands of the Dandaggaha (guards) while
entering or leaving the Upashraya (monastery). Or, receiving the Danda and other
objects upon entering the Upashraya. **(12)**  Taking care of the Glan (sick) in
various ways, inquiring about their well-being. **(13)**  Purifying the Matrak
(objects used for speech, excretion, and play) by discarding them in a secluded
place.  The Bhashyakar (commentator) has explained that the term "Pracharaya"
mentioned in the Sutra should be understood to include the Tirthankara as well.
Because the Ganadhar Gautam Swami used the term "Dharmacharaya" for the Bhagwan
(Lord). - Bhag.Sh.2, U.1 Skandhak Varnan  **Kula (lineage):** A lineage of one
Guru. **Gan (group):** A lineage of one prominent Pracharaya. **Sangh
(community):** A group of all the Gachchas (sects).  Other descriptions related
to Vyavrittya (conduct) are mentioned in Uddeshak 5.  **Summary of Sutra 1-2 of
the Tenth Uddeshak:**  A Shruta-Sampanna (learned) Bhikshu (monk) can perform
Paradhan (offering) for the Yavamdhyachandrapratima (image with a moon in the
middle of barley) and Vajramdhyachandrapratima (image with a moon in the middle
of a diamond) according to the prescribed method in the Sutra. These images are
for one month each. The amount of food and water offered to them is increased or
decreased. Along with this, many other rules are followed, Abhigraha
(acceptance) is done, and the Parishha Upsargas (trials) are endured with
patience, being detached from the body.  From the five practices of Aagam
(scripture), Shruta (learning), Aajna (command), Dharana (meditation), and Jit
(conquest), one should use whichever is available at the time, impartially, for
Prashchitta (atonement) and Tattva Nirnay (realization of truth). One should not
use them in reverse order due to selfishness, insistence, or neglect. This means
that one should not give more importance to Dharana alone, but prioritize the
rules and prohibitions of the Aagams.  There are five Chaubhangis (fourfold
classifications) regarding performing Seva Karya (service) and Gan Karya (group
work) and showing respect or not. There are two Chaubhangis regarding those who
remain steadfast in Dharma (religion), Prachar (conduct), and Ganasamachari
(group conduct), or those who abandon them.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
dasavAM uddezaka] [457 (8) mArga-vihAra Adi meM upadhi vahana Adi upagraha
karanA tathA unake sAtha-sAtha calanA aadi| (9) rAjadviSTa-rAjAdi ke dveSa kA
nivAraNa krnaa| (10) stena-cora Adi se rakSA karanA / (11) daMDaggaha-upAzraya
se bAhara gamanAgamana karate samaya unake hAtha meM se daMDa pAtra Adi grahaNa
karanA / athavA upAzraya meM Ane para unake daMDa Adi grahaNa krnaa| (12) glAna-
bImAra kI aneka prakAra se sambhAla karanA, pUchatAcha karanA / (13) mAtraka-
uccAra, prasravaNa, khela mAtraka kI zuddhi karanA arthAt una padArthoM ko
ekAMta meM visarjana krnaa| bhASyakAra ne batAyA hai ki sUtra meM kahe gaye
prAcArya pada se tIrthakara kA bhI grahaNa samajha lenA caahie| kyoMki gaNadhara
gautamasvAmI bhagavAna ke lie "dharmAcArya" zabda kA nirdeza karate the|
-bhaga.za.2,u.1skandhaka varNana / kula-eka guru kI paramparA kula hai| gaNa-eka
pramukha prAcArya kI paramparA "gaNa" hai / saMgha-sabhI gacchoM kA samUha
"saMgha" hai| vaiyAvRtya sambandhI anya varNana udde. 5 meM kiyA gayA hai| sUtra
1-2 dasaveM uddezaka kA sArAMza yavamadhyacandrapratimA aura
vajramadhyacandrapratimA kA sUtrokta vidhi se viziSTa saMhanana vAle
zrutasampanna bhikSu pArAdhana kara sakate haiN| ye pratimAe~ eka-eka mAsa kI
hotI haiN| inameM AhAra-pAnI kI datti kI hAni-vRddhi kI jAtI hai / sAtha hI anya
aneka niyama, abhigraha kie jAte haiM evaM parISaha upasargoM ko dhairya ke
sAtha zarIra ke prati nirapekSa hokara sahana kiyA jAtA hai / Agama, zruta,
AjJA, dhAraNA, jIta ina pAMca vyavahAroM meM se jisa samaya jo upalabdha hoM,
unakA kramazaH niSpakSa bhAva se prAyazcitta evaM tattva nirNaya meM upayoga
karanA caahie| svArtha, Agraha yA upekSA bhAva ke kAraNa vyutkrama se upayoga
nahIM karanA cAhie arthAt kevala dhAraNA ko hI adhika mahattva na dekara AgamoM
ke vidhiniSedha ko pramukhatA denI caahie| sevAkArya evaM gaNakArya karane ke
sAtha mAna karane yA na karane kI pAMca caubhaMgiyoM kA kathana hai| dharma meM,
prAcAra meM aura gaNasamAcArI meM sthira rahane vAloM yA usakA tyAga dene vAloM
sambandhI do caubhaMgiyAM haiN| 9-10

Page #278 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
458 [Vyavahar Sutra 11 12-15 18-19] This is a four-fold classification regarding
Dridhdharmi and Priyadharm. The Dikshadata, the Big Dikshadata, the reader of
Mula-Pagam, the reader of Artha-Agam, and their respective disciples are said to
be four such classifications, and with their final bhang, the Dharmacharaya
(Pratibodhadata) etc. are mentioned. There are three types of sthavira. The
Shaiksha has three stages before the Upasthapana. / One should not give Diksha
to anyone before the age of 9 years, including the time spent in the womb. / If
Diksha is given due to some reason, then one should not give the Big Diksha. One
should not give the reading of Pracharang-Nishith to the Avyakt (those under 16
years of age), but should make them study other things. One should complete the
reading of the Sutra-Ukt Agams to the eligible disciples until the age of 20
years, which is the Dikshaparaya. One should perform the Bhava-yukt Vyayavritti
of the Pracharya etc. ten. / Through their Vyayavritti, there is a great
reduction in karmas and attainment of liberation. 20-21 22-36 Upasanshar 1-2
4-15 In this Uddeshak, there is a mention of two Chandra-Pratimans, five
Vyavahars, many Chaubhangis, types of Sthavira, stages of Shaiksha, the rules
and prohibitions of Baldiksha, the order of Pragam-study, Vyayavritti, etc. //
Tenth Uddeshak ends // 18-19 20-36

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
458 [vyavahArasUtra 11 12-15 18-19 dRDhadharmI aura priyadharmI sambandhI eka
caubhaMgI hai| dIkSAdAtA, bar3I dIkSAdAtA, mUla-pAgama ke vAcanAdAtA, artha-
Agama ke vAcanAdAtA kI evaM inase sambandhita ziSyoM kI kula cAra caubhaMgiyAM
kahI gaI haiM evaM unake antima bhaMga ke sAtha dharmAcArya (pratibodhadAtA) Adi
kA kathana kiyA gayA hai| tIna prakAra ke sthavira hote haiN| zaikSa ko
upasthApanA ke pUrva kI tIna avasthAeM hotI haiM / garbhakAla sahita 9 varSa ke
pUrva kisI ko dIkSA nahIM denA / kAraNavaza dIkSA dI gaI ho to bar3I dIkSA nahIM
denA caahie| avyakta (16 varSa se kama vaya vAle) ko prAcArAMga-nizItha kI
vAcanA na denA, anya adhyayana kraanaa| bIsa varSa kI dIkSAparyAya taka yogya
ziSyoM ko sUtrokta AgamoM kI vAcanA pUrNa kraanaa| prAcAryAdi daza kI bhAvayukta
vaiyAvRtya karanA / inakI vaiyAvRtya se mahAn karmoM kI nirjarA evaM mukti kI
prApti hotI hai| 20-21 22-36 upasaMhAra 1-2 4-15 isa uddezaka meMdo
candrapratimAnoM kA, pAMca vyavahAra kA, aneka caubhaMgiyoM kA, sthavira ke
prakAroM kA, zaikSa ko avasthAoM kA, bAladIkSA ke vidhi-niSedha kA, prAgama-
adhyayanakrama kA, vaiyAvRtya kA, ityAdi viSayoM kA kathana kiyA gayA hai / //
dasavAM uddezaka samApta // 18-19 20-36

Page #279 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  AnadhyƒÅyakƒÅla [Quoted from Nandƒ´ S≈´tra, compiled by ƒÄcƒÅrya Pravara ≈örƒ´
PrƒÅtmƒÅrƒÅmji MahƒÅrƒÅja]  One should study the scriptures only during the time
prescribed in the ƒÄgamas for study.  Study during AnadhyƒÅyakƒÅla is prohibited.
The Manusm·πõti and other Sm·πõtis also describe AnadhyƒÅyakƒÅla in detail.  The Vedic
people also mention the AnadhyƒÅyas of the Vedas.  Similarly, other ƒÄrya
scriptures are also considered to have AnadhyƒÅyas.  Since the Jain ƒÄgamas are
also Sarvaj√±okta, DevƒÅdhi·π£·π≠hita, and SvaravidyƒÅ combined, their AnadhyƒÅyakƒÅla is
also described in the ƒÄgamas, such as:  **Ten ƒÄkƒÅ≈õa-related AnadhyƒÅyas:**  1.
UkkƒÅvƒÅte (Meteor shower) 2. DisidƒÅghe (Fiery sky) 3. Gajjite (Thunder) 4.
NigdhƒÅte (Lightning) 5. Juvate (Earthquake) 6. JakkhƒÅlitte (Strong wind) 7.
Dh≈´mita (Smoke) 8. Mahita (Fog) 9. Rayugghaate (Heavy rain) 10.  AsajjhƒÅye
Pa·πá·πáatte (Unfavorable time)  **Ten AudƒÅrika ≈öarƒ´ra-related AnadhyƒÅyas:**  1.
A·π≠·π≠hi (Bones) 2. Ma·πÅsa·πÅ (Flesh) 3. So·πáitte (Blood) 4. As≈´tisƒÅmante (Death) 5.
SusƒÅ·πáasƒÅmante (Cemetery) 6. CandovƒÅrƒÅte (Lunar eclipse) 7. S≈´rovƒÅrƒÅte (Solar
eclipse) 8. Pa·∏çane (Fall) 9. RƒÅyavugghe (War) 10. Uvassayassa Anto OrƒÅlie
Sarƒ´rage (Death of a body)  **Four MahƒÅpratipadƒÅ AnadhyƒÅyas:**  1.
ƒÄsƒÅ·∏çhapratipadƒÅ 2. IndamahƒÅpratipadƒÅ 3. KattiyapratipadƒÅ 4. SugimhapratipadƒÅ
**Four MahƒÅpratipadƒÅ P≈´r·πáimƒÅ AnadhyƒÅyas:**  1. Pa·∏çimƒÅte (Full moon of ƒÄsƒÅ·∏çha) 2.
PacchimƒÅte (Full moon of KƒÅrttika) 3. Majjha·πáe (Full moon of MƒÅgha) 4.
A·∏ç·∏çharatte (Full moon of Vai≈õƒÅkha)  **Four SandhyƒÅ AnadhyƒÅyas:**  1. Pu·π≠ava·πáe
(Dawn) 2. Avara·πáe (Sunset) 3. Panose (Morning) 4. Pacch≈´se (Evening)  According
to the above S≈´tra-pƒÅ·π≠ha, thirty-two AnadhyƒÅyas are considered: ten ƒÄkƒÅ≈õa-
related, ten AudƒÅrika ≈öarƒ´ra-related, four MahƒÅpratipadƒÅ, four MahƒÅpratipadƒÅ
P≈´r·πáimƒÅ, and four SandhyƒÅ.  **Brief Description of AnadhyƒÅyas:**  **1. UkkƒÅvƒÅte
(Meteor shower):** If there is a major meteor shower, one should not study the
scriptures for one prahara (three hours).  **2. DisidƒÅghe (Fiery sky):** One
should not study the scriptures as long as the sky appears red, as if it is on
fire.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
anadhyAMyakAla [sva0 AcAryapravara zrI prAtmArAmajI ma0 dvArA sampAvita
nandIsUtra se uddhRta] svAdhyAya ke lie AgamoM meM jo samaya batAyA gayA hai,
usI samaya zAstroM kA svAdhyAya karanA cAhie / anadhyAyakAla meM svAdhyAya
varjita hai| manusmRti Adi smRtiyoM meM bhI anadhyAyakAla kA vistArapUrvaka
varNana kiyA gayA hai| vaidika loga bhI veda ke anadhyAyoM kA ullekha karate
haiN| isI prakAra anya ArSa granthoM kA bhI anadhyAya mAnA jAtA hai| jainAgama
bhI sarvajJokta, devAdhiSThita tathA svaravidyA saMyukta hone ke kAraNa, inakA
bhI pAgamoM meM anadhyAyakAla varNita kiyA gayA hai, jaise ki dasavidhe
aMtalikkhite asajjhAe paNNatte, taM jahA-ukkAvAte, disidAghe, gajjite, nigdhAte,
juvate, jakkhAlitte, dhUmitA, mahitA, rayaugghAte / dasavihe orAlite
asajjhAtite, taM jahA-aTThI, maMsaM, soNitte, asutisAmaMte, susANasAmaMte,
caMdovarAte, sUrovarAte, paDane, rAyavuggahe , uvassayassa aMto orAlie sriirge|
-sthAnAGgasUtra, sthAna 10 no kappati niggaMthANa vA, niggaMthINa vA cauhi
mahApADivaehi sajjhAyaM karittae, taM jahAAsADhapADivae, iMdamahApADivae,
kattiapADivae, sugimhapADivae / no kappai niggaMthANa vA niggaMthINa vA, cauhi
saMjhAhiM sajjhAyaM karettae, taM jahA-paDimAte, pacchimAte, majhaNhe,
aDDharatte / kappai niggaMthANaM vA niggaMthINa vA, cAukkAlaM sajjhAyaM
karettae, taM jahA-puTavaNhe, avaraNhe, panose, paccUse / -sthAnAGga sUtra,
sthAna 4, uddeza 2 uparokta sUtrapATha ke anusAra, dasa AkAza se sambandhita,
dasa audArika zarIra se sambandhita, cAra mahApratipadA, cAra mahApratipadA kI
pUrNimA aura cAra sandhyA isa prakAra battIsa anadhyAya mAne gaye haiM / jinakA
saMkSepa meM nimna prakAra se varNana hai, jaiseAkAza sambandhI basa anadhyAya
1. ulkApAta-tArApatana yadi mahat tArApatana huA hai to eka prahara paryanta
zAstrasvAdhyAya nahIM karanA caahie| 2. digdAha-jaba taka dizA raktavarNa kI ho
arthAt aisA mAlUma par3e ki dizA meM Aga-sI lagI hai, taba bhI svAdhyAya nahIM
karanA cAhie /

Page #280 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 3-4:  Unfavorable Times for Study  **1. Thunder and Lightning:**
Thunder and lightning are often caused by seasonal changes. Therefore, the
period from the Parda constellation to the Swati constellation is not considered
unfavorable for study.  **2. Nirdhaat:** If there is a loud thunderclap in a
cloudless sky, or if there is thunder and lightning in a cloudy sky, then there
is an unfavorable period for study for two praharas (approximately 3 hours).
**3. Yupaka:** In the bright fortnight (Shukla Paksha), the first, second, and
third days are called Yupaka, when the light of the evening and the moon
combine. During these days, one should not study until night.  **4.
Yakshadeepta:** When there is a flash of light in a particular direction,
followed by a faint light after a short interval, it is called Yakshadeepta. One
should not study until the Yaksha-like light disappears from the sky.  **5.
Dhumika Krishna:** From Kartik to Magh (October-February), the time is
considered the gestation period for clouds. During this time, a fine, water-like
mist of a smoky color falls, which is called Dhumika Krishna. One should not
study until this mist stops falling.  **6. Mihika Shweta:** In winter, a fine,
water-like mist of white color falls, which is called Mihika. One should not
study until this mist stops falling.  **7. Raj UdghƒÅt:** Due to wind, dust
spreads throughout the sky. One should not study until the dust settles.  These
ten reasons are related to unfavorable times for study due to atmospheric
conditions.  **8. Audarik (Related to Living Beings):**  **9. Bones, Flesh, and
Blood:** If bones, flesh, and blood of a five-sensed animal are visible, then
one should not study until these items are removed. Commentators consider a
radius of 60 hands (approximately 90 feet) around the location of these items as
unfavorable for study. Similarly, the presence of bones, flesh, and blood of a
human being is also considered unfavorable for study. However, the unfavorable
period for these is considered to be 100 hands (approximately 150 feet) and
lasts for one day and night.  **10. Menstruation:** The unfavorable period for
study during a woman's menstruation is three days.  **11. Birth of a Child:**
The unfavorable period for study after the birth of a boy is seven days, and for
a girl, it is eight days.  **12. Impurity:** One should not study until the
sight of excrement and urine is removed.  **13. Cremation Ground:** The area
around a cremation ground, up to 100 hands (approximately 150 feet) in all
directions, is considered unfavorable for study.  **14. Lunar Eclipse:** During
a lunar eclipse, one should not study for eight praharas (approximately 12
hours) for a minor eclipse, twelve praharas (approximately 18 hours) for a
medium eclipse, and sixteen praharas (approximately 24 hours) for a major
eclipse.  **15. Solar Eclipse:** During a solar eclipse, one should not study
for eight praharas (approximately 12 hours) for a minor eclipse, twelve praharas
(approximately 18 hours) for a medium eclipse, and sixteen praharas
(approximately 24 hours) for a major eclipse.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
anadhyAyakAla 3-4.--gajita-vidyut-garjana aura vidyuta prAyaH Rtu svabhAva se hI
hotA hai / ataH pArdA se svAti nakSatra paryanta anadhyAya nahIM mAnA jaataa| 5.
nirdhAta-binA bAdala ke AkAza meM vyantarAdikRta ghora garjana hone para yA
bAdaloM sahita AkAza meM kar3akane para do prahara taka asvAdhyAyakAla hai| 6.
yUpaka- zukla pakSa meM pratipadA, dvitIyA, tRtIyA ko sandhyA kI prabhA aura
candraprabhA ke milane ko yUpaka kahA jAtA hai / ina dinoM prahara rAtri
paryanta svAdhyAya nahIM karanA caahie| 7. yakSAdIpta-kabhI kisI dizA meM bijalI
camakane jaisA, thor3e thor3e samaya pIche jo prakAza hotA hai vaha yakSAdIpta
kahalAtA hai / ataH AkAza meM jaba taka yakSAkAra dIkhatA rahe taba taka
svAdhyAya nahIM karanA caahie| 8. dhUmikA kRSNa-kArtika se lekara mAgha taka kA
samaya meghoM kA garbhamAsa hotA hai / isameM dhUmra varNa kI sUkSma jalarUpa
dhudha par3atI hai / vaha dhUmikA-kRSNa kahalAtI hai| jaba taka yaha ghudha
par3atI rahe, taba taka svAdhyAya nahIM karanA caahie| 9. mihikAzveta-zItakAla
meM zveta varNa kI sUkSma jalarUpa dhundha mihikA kahalAtI hai| jaba taka yaha
giratI rahe, taba taka asvAdhyAya kAla hai / 10. raja udghAta-vAyu ke kAraNa
AkAza meM cAroM ora dhUli chA jAtI hai| jaba taka yaha dhUli phailI rahatI hai ,
svAdhyAya nahIM karanA caahie| uparokta dasa kAraNa AkAza sambandhI asvAdhyAya
ke haiN| audArika sambandhI dasa anadhyAya 11-12-13. haDDI mAMsa aura rudhira-
paMcedriya tiryaca kI haDDI, mAMsa aura rudhira yadi sAmane dikhAI deM, to jaba
taka vahA~ se yaha vastueM uThAI na jAe~ jaba taka asvAdhyAya hai / vRttikAra
Asa pAsa ke 60 hAtha taka ina vastuoM ke hone para asvAdhyAya mAnate haiN| isI
prakAra manuSya sambandhI asthi mAMsa aura rudhira kA bhI anadhyAya mAnA jAtA
hai / vizeSatA itanI hai ki inakA asvAdhyAya so hAtha taka tathA eka dina rAta
kA hotA hai / strI ke mAsika dharma kA prasvAdhyAya tIna dina taka / bAlaka evaM
bAlikA ke janma kA svAdhyAya kramazaH sAta evaM pATha dina paryanta kA mAnA jAtA
hai / 14. azuci-mala-mUtra sAmane dikhAI dene taka asvAdhyAya hai| 15. zmazAna-
zmazAnabhUmi ke cAroM ora sau-sau hAtha paryanta asvAdhyAya mAnA jAtA hai / 16.
candragrahaNacandragrahaNa hone para jaghanya ATha, madhyama bAraha aura utkRSTa
solaha prahara paryanta svAdhyAya nahIM karanA cAhie / 17. sUryagrahaNa-
sUryagrahaNa hone para bhI kramazaH ATha, bAraha aura solaha prahara paryanta
asvAdhyAyakAla mAnA gayA hai|

Page #281 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Anadhyayakala] 18. Patan - When a great king or a national leader dies, one
should not perform *svadhyaya* until his cremation is completed. Or, one should
perform *svadhyaya* gradually until another official takes over. 19.
Rajavyudgraha - When there is a war between nearby kings, one should not perform
*svadhyaya* for one day and night even after peace is restored. 20. Audarik
Sharira - When a five-sense being dies within the *upaashraya*, one should not
perform *svadhyaya* as long as the body remains there, and for 100 *haath* (a
unit of measurement) if the lifeless body is lying there. These 10 reasons for
not performing *svadhyaya* are related to the *audarik sharira*. 21.28 Four
Mahotsav and Four Mahapratipada - Ashadh Purnima, Ashwin Purnima, Kartik
Purnima, and Chaitra Purnima are the four *mahotsav*. The *pratipada* that comes
after these *purnimas* is called *mahapratipada*. *Svadhyaya* is prohibited
during these days. 29-32. Pratah Sayam Madhyahn and Ardharatri - One should not
perform *svadhyaya* one *ghadi* (a unit of time) before and after sunrise, one
*ghadi* before and after sunset, one *ghadi* before and after noon, and one
*ghadi* before and after midnight.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
anadhyAyakAla] 18. patana-kisI bar3e mAnya rAjA athavA rASTra puruSa kA nidhana
hone para jaba taka usakA dAhasaMskAra na ho taba taka svAdhyAya na karanA
caahie| athavA jaba taka dUsarA adhikArI sattArUDha na ho taba taka zanaiH
zanaiH svAdhyAya karanA caahie| 19. rAjavyudgraha-samIpastha rAjAoM meM
paraspara yuddha hone para jaba taka zAnti na ho jAe, taba taka usake pazcAt bhI
eka dina-rAtri svAdhyAya nahIM kreN| 20. audArika zarIra-upAzraya ke bhItara
paMcendriya jIva kA vadha ho jAne para jaba taka kalevara par3A rahe, taba taka
tathA 100 hAtha taka yadi nirjIva kalevara par3A ho to svAdhyAya nahIM karanA
caahie| asvAdhyAya ke uparokta 10 kAraNa praudArika zarIra sambandhI kahe gaye
haiN| 21.28 cAra mahotsava aura cAra mahApratipadA-aASADhapUNimA, Azvina-
pUrNimA, kArtikapUrNimA aura caitra-pUrNimA ye cAra mahotsava haiN| ina
pUNimAnoM ke pazcAt Ane vAlI pratipadA ko mahApratipadA kahate haiM / isameM
svAdhyAya karane kA niSedha hai| 29-32. prAtaH sAyaM madhyAhna aura ardharAtri-
prAtaH sUrya ugane se eka ghar3I pahile tathA eka ghar3I pIche / sUryAsta hone
se eka ghar3I pahile tathA eka ghar3I pIche / madhyAhna arthAt dopahara meM eka
ghar3I Age aura eka ghar3I pIche evaM ardharAtri meM bhI eka ghar3I Age tathA
eka ghar3I pIche svAdhyAya nahIM karanA caahie|

Page #282 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Please provide the text you would like translated. I need the text to translate
it into English.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================


Page #283 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Shri Bhagamprakashan Samiti, Byawar**  **Arthsahyogee Members' Auspicious Name
List**  **Mahastamh Sanrakshak**  1. Shri Seth Mohanmalji Chordia, Madras 2.
Shri Birdichandji Prakashchandji Telesara, Pali 3. Shri Gulabchandji Mangilalji
Surana, Sikandrabad 4. Shri Premrajji Jatanrajji Mehta, Medta City 5. Shri
Pukairajji Shishodia, Byawar 6. Shri Sha. Jadawmalji Manakchandji Betala,
Bagalkot 7. Shri Sayermalji Jethamalji Chordia, Bangalore 8. Shri Premrajji
Bhanwarlalji Shrishrimal, Durg 9. Shri Hiralalji Pannalalji Chopra, Byawar 10.
Shri S. Kishanchandji Chordia, Madras 11. Shri Mohanlalji Nemichandji Lalwani,
Changaitola 12. Shri Kanwarlalji Betala, Gohati 13. Shri Seth Khivrajji Chordia,
Madras 14. Shri Deepchandji Chandanmalji Chordia, Madras 15. Shri Gumanmalji
Chordia, Madras 16. Shri S. Badalchandji Chordia, Madras 17. Shri J. Dulichandji
Chordia, Madras 18. Shri S. Ratanchandji Chordia, Madras 19. Shri J. Annarajji
Chordia, Madras 20. Shri S. Sayerchandji Chordia, Madras 21. Shri R.
Shantillalji Uttamchandji Chordia, Madras 22. Shri Siremalji Hirachandji
Chordia, Madras 23. Shri J. Hukmichandji Chordia, Madras  **Stambh Sadasy**  1.
Shri Agarchandji Fatechandji Parekh, Jodhpur 2. Shri Jasrajji Ganeshmalji
Sancheti, Jodhpur 3. Shri Tilokchandji Sagarmalji Sancheti, Madras 4. Shri
Poosalalji Kisturchandji Surana, Katangi 5. Shri R. Prasannachandji Chordia,
Madras 6. Shri Deepchandji Chordia, Madras 7. Shri Mulchandji Chordia, Katangi
8. Shri Vardhaman Industries, Kanpur 9. Shri Mangilalji Mishrilalji Sancheti,
Durg 10. Shri Bastimalji Mohanlalji Bohra, Jadan 11. Shri Thanchandji Mehta,
Jodhpur 12. Shri Bhairudanji Labhchandji Surana, Nagaur 13. Shri Khubchandji
Gadiya, Byawar 14. Shri Mishrilalji Dhanrajji Vinaykia, Byawar 15. Shri
Indrachandji Baid, Rajnandgaon 16. Shri Ravatmalji Bhikamchandji Pagaria,
Balaghat 17. Shri Ganeshmalji Dharmicandji Kankaria, Tangla 18. Shri
Suganchandji Bokardia, Indore 19. Shri Harkachandji Sagarmalji Betala, Indore
20. Shri Raghunathmalji Lakshmi Chandji Lodha, Changaitola 21. Shri
Siddhakarnaji Shikharchandji Baid, Changaitola  **_Note:_** The term
"Arthsahyogee" refers to a member who contributes financially to the
organization. "Mahastamh Sanrakshak" and "Stambh Sadasy" are titles given to
members based on their level of contribution.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
zrI bhAgamaprakAzana-samiti, byAvara arthasahayogI sadasyoM kI zubha nAmAvalI
mahAstambha saMrakSaka 1. zrI seTha mohanamalajI corar3iyA , madrAsa 1. zrI
biradIcaMdajI prakAzacaMdajI talesarA, pAlI 2. zrI gulAbacandajI mAMgIlAlajI
surANA, 2. zrI jJAnarAjajI kevalacandajI mUthA, pAlI sikandarAbAda 3. zrI
premarAjajI jatanarAjajI mehatA, mer3atA siTI 3. zrI pukharAjajI zizodiyA,
byAvara 4. zrI za0 jaDAvamalajI mANakacandajI betAlA, 4. zrI sAyaramalajI
jeThamalajI coraDiyA, baiMgalora bAgalakoTa 5. zrI premarAjajI bhaMvaralAlajI
zrIzrImAla, durga 5. zrI hIrAlAlajI pannAlAlajI caupar3A, byAvara 6. zrI esa.
kizanacandajI coraDiyA, madrAsa 6. zrI mohanalAlajI nemIcandajI lalavANI, 7. zrI
kaMvaralAlajI baitAlA, gohATI cAMgATolA 8. zrI seTha khIMvarAjajI coraDiyA
madrAsa 7. zrI dIpacaMdajI candanamalajI coraDiyA, madrAsa 9. zrI gumAnamalajI
corar3iyA, madrAsa 8. zrI pannAlAlajI bhAgacandajI botharA, cAMgA10. zrI esa.
bAdalacandajI coraDiyA, madrAsa TIlA 11. zrI je. dulIcandajI coraDiyA, madrAsa
9. zrImatI sirekuvara bAI dharmapatnI sva. zrI sugana12. zrI esa. ratanacandajI
coraDiyA, madrAsa candajI jhAmar3a, madurAntakam 13. zrI je. annarAjajI
coraDiyA, madrAsa 10. zrI bastImalajI mohanalAlajI boharA 14. zrI esa.
sAyaracandajI coraDiyA, madrAsa (K. G. F.) jAr3ana / 15. zrI Ara. zAntilAlajI
uttamacandajI 11. zrI thAnacandajI mehatA, jodhapura coraDiyA, madrAsa 12. zrI
bhairudAnajI lAbhacandajI surANA, nAgaura 16. zrI siremalajI hIrAcandajI
corar3iyA, madrAsa 13. zrI khUbacandajI gAdiyA, byAvara 17. zrI je. hukmIcandajI
coraDiyA, madrAsa 14. zrI mizrIlAlajI dhanarAjajI vinAyakiyA stambha sadasya
byAvara 1. zrI agaracandajI phatecandajI pArakha, jodhapara 15. zrI indracandajI
baida, rAjanAMdagAMva 2. zrI jasarAjajI gaNezamalajI saMcetI, jodhapura 16. zrI
rAvatamalajI bhIkamacandajI pagAriyA, 3. zrI tilokacaMdajI, sAgaramalajI
saMcetI, madrAsa bAlAghATa 4. zrI pUsAlAlajI kistUracaMdajI surANA, kaTaMgI 17.
zrI gaNezamalajI dharmIcandajI kAMkariyA, TaMgalA 5. zrI Ara. prasannacandajI
coraDiyA, madrAsa 18. zrI suganacandajI bokar3iyA, indaura 6. zrI dIpacandajI
coraDiyA, madrAsa 19. zrI harakacandajI sAgaramalajI betAlA, indaura 7. zrI
mUlacandajI coraDiyA, kaTaMgI 20. zrI raghunAthamalajI likhamIcandajI lor3hA, 8.
zrI varddhamAna iNDasTrIja, kAnapura _ cAMgATolA 9. zrI mAMgIlAlajI mizrIlAlajI
saMcetI, durga 21. zrI siddhakaraNajI zikharacandajI baida, cAMgATolA

Page #284 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Member List  **Members**  1. Shri Sagarmalji Nortamlaji Pincha, Madras 2.
Shri Phoolchandji Gautamchandji Kanthad, Pali 3. Shri Mohanrajji Mukanchandji
Baliya, Ahmedabad 4. Shri K. Pukharajji Bafna, Madras 5. Shri Rooparajji
Jodhrajji Motha, Delhi 6. Shri Keshrimalji Janvarilaji Talesara, Pali 7. Shri
Mohanlalji Mangalchandji Pagaria, Raipur 8. Shri Ratanchandji Uttamchandji Modi,
Byawar 9. Shri Nathmalji Mohanlalji Luniya, Chandawal 10. Shri Dharmicandji
Bhagchandji Bohra, Jhata 11. Shri Bhanwarlalji Gautamchandji Pagaria, Dondi
Lohara Kushalpura 12. Shri Uttamchandji Mangilalji, Jodhpur 13. Shri Moolchandji
Parkh, Jodhpur 14. Shri Sumermalji Medtiya, Jodhpur 15. Shri Ganeshmalji
Nemichandji Tantia, Jodhpur 16. Shri Udayrajji Pukharajji Sancheti, Jodhpur 17.
Shri Badarmalji Pukharajji Bant, Kanpur 18. Smt. Sundarbai Gothi w/o Shri
Tarachandji Gothi, Jodhpur 19. Shri Raichandji Mohanlalji, Jodhpur 20. Shri
Dhevarchandji Rooparajji, Jodhpur 21. Shri Bhanwarlalji Manakchandji Surana,
Madras 22. Shri Jalmachandji Rikhbachandji Bafna, Agra 23. Shri Janvarilaji
Amarchandji Kothari, Byawar 24. Shri Manakchandji Kishnalalji, Medtacity 25.
Shri Mohanlalji Gulabchandji Chatar, Byawar 26. Shri Jasrajji Janvarilaji
Dhariawal, Jodhpur 27. Shri Mohanlalji Champalalji Gothi, Jodhpur 28. Shri
Nemichandji Dakalia Mehta, Jodhpur 29. Shri Tarachandji Kevalchandji Karnavat,
Jodhpur 30. Shri Prasumal & Co., Jodhpur 31. Shri Pukharajji Lodha, Jodhpur 32.
Shri Amarchandji Bothra, Madras 33. Shri Bhanwarlalji Moolchandji Surana, Madras
34. Shri Badalchandji Jugrajji Mehta, Indore 35. Shri Lalchandji Mohanlalji
Kothari, Gothan 36. Shri Hiralalji Pannalalji Chopra, Ajmer 37. Shri Mohanlalji
Parsamalji Pagaria, Bangalore 38. Shri Bhanwarimalji Chordia, Madras 39. Shri
Bhanwarlalji Gothi, Madras 40. Shri Ghevarchandji Pukharajji Bhurt, Guwahati 41.
Shri Jabarchandji Gelda, Madras 42. Shri Jadavamalji Suganchandji, Madras 43.
Shri Pukharajji Vijayrajji, Madras 44. Shri Chenmalji Surana Trust, Madras 45.
Shri Lanakaranji Rikhbachandji Lodha, Madras 46. Shri Surajmalji Sajjanrajji
Mehta, Koppal  **Associate Members**  1. Shri Devkaranji Shrichandji Dosa,
Medtacity 2. Smt. Chaganibai Vinaykia, Byawar 3. Shri Poonamchandji Nahta,
Jodhpur 4. Shri Bhanwarlalji Vijayrajji Kankaria, Villipuuram 5. Shri
Bhanwarlalji Chopra, Byawar 6. Shri Vijayrajji Ratnalalji Chatar, Byawar 7. Shri
B. Gajrajji Bokdia, Salem 8. Smt. Suganibai W/o Shri Mishrilalji Sand, Jodhpur
9. Shri Bachharaji Surana, Jodhpur 10. Shri Harkachandji Mehta, Jodhpur 11. Shri
Devrajji Labhchandji Medtiya, Jodhpur 12. Shri Kanakrajji Madanrajji Golia,
Jodhpur 13. Shri Ghevarchandji Parsamalji Tantia, Jodhpur 14. Shri Mangilalji
Chora, ...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
[sadasya-nAmAvalI 22. zrI sAgaramalajI noratamalajI pIMcA, madrAsa 8. zrI
phUlacandajI gautamacandajI kAMTheDa, pAlI 23. zrI mohanarAjajI mukanacandajI
bAliyA, 9. zrI ke. pukharAjajI bAphaNA, madrAsa ahamadAbAda 10. zrI rUparAjajI
jodharAjajI mUthA, dillI 24. zrI kezarImalajI jaMvarIlAlajI talesarA, pAlI 11.
zrI mohanalAlajI maMgalacaMdajI pagAriyA, rAyapura 25. zrI ratanacandajI
uttamacandajI modI, byAvara 12. zrI nathamalajI mohanalAlajI lUNiyA, caNDAvala
26. zrI dharmIcandajI bhAgacandajI boharA, jhaThA 13. zrI bhaMvaralAlajI
gautamacandajI pagAriyA, 27. zrI chogamalajI hemarAjajI lor3hA DoMDIlohArA
kuzAlapurA 28. zrI guNacaMdajI dalIcaMdajI kaTAriyA, bellArI 14. zrI
uttamacaMdajI mAMgIlAlajI, jodhapura 29. zrI mUlacandajI sujAnamalajI saMcetI,
jodhapUra 15. zrI mUlacandajI pArakha, jodhapura 30. zrI sI0 amaracandajI
botharA, madrAsa 16. zrI sumeramalajI mer3atiyA, jodhapUra 31. zrI
bhaMvaralAlajI mUlacaMdajI surANA, madrAsa 17. zrI gaNezamalajI nemIcandajI
TAMTiyA, jodhapura 32. zrI bAdalacaMdajI jugarAjajI mehatA, indaura 18. zrI
udayarAjajI pukharAjajI saMcetI, jodhapura 33. zrI lAlacaMdajI mohanalAlajI
koThArI, goThana 19. zrI bAdaramalajI pukharAjajI baMTa, kAnapura 34. zrI
hIrAlAlajI pannAlAlajI caupar3A, ajamera 20. zrImatI sundarabAI goThI w/o zrI
tArAcaMdajI 35. zrI mohanalAlajI pArasamalajI pagAriyA, goThI, jodhapura
baiMgalora 21. zrI rAyacandajI mohanalAlajI, jodhapura 36. zrI bhaMvarImalajI
corar3iyA, madrAsa 22. zrI dhevaracandajI rUparAjajI, jodhapura 37. zrI
bhaMvaralAlajI goThI, madrAsa 23. zrI bhaMvaralAlajI mANakacaMdajI surANA,
madrAsa / 38. zrI jAlamacaMdajI rikhabacaMdajI bAphanA. aAgarA 24. zrI
javarIlAlajI amaracandajI koThArI. byAvara 39. zrI ghevaracaMdajI pukharAjajI
bhuraTa, gohATI 25. zrA mANakaca 25. zrI mANakacandajI kizanalAlajI, mer3atAsiTI
40. zrI jabaracandajI gelar3A, madrAsa 26. zrI mohanalAlajI gulAbacandajI
catara, byAvara 41. zrI jar3AvamalajI suganacandajI, madrAsa 27. zrI jasarAjajI
jaMvarIlAlajI dhArIvAla, jodhapura 28. zrI mohanalAlajI campAlAlajI goThI,
jodhapura 42. zrI pukharAjajI vijayarAjajI, madrAsa 43. zrI cenamalajI surANA
TrasTa, madrAsa 29. zrI nemIcaMdajI DAkaliyA mehatA, jodhapura 44. zrI
laNakaraNajI rikhabacaMdajI lor3hA, madrAsa / 30. zrI tArAcaMdajI kevalacaMdajI
karNAvaTa, jodhapura 45. zrI sUrajamalajI sajjanarAjajI mahetA, koppala 21 - 31.
zrI prAsUmala eNDa ke0, jodhapura 32. zrI pukharAjajI loDhA, jodhapura sahayogI
sadasya 33. zrImatI suganIbAI W/o zrI mizrIlAlajI 1. zrI devakaraNajI zrIcandajI
DosA, mer3atAsiTI sAMDa, jodhapura 2. zrImatI chaganIbAI vinAyakiyA, byAvara 34.
zrI baccharAjI surANA, jodhapura 3. zrI pUnamacandajI nAhaTA, jodhapura 35. zrI
harakacandajI mehatA, jodhapura 4. zrI bhaMvaralAlajI vijayarAjajI kAMkariyA,
36. zrI devarAjajI lAbhacaMdajI mer3atiyA, jodhapura villIpuram 37. zrI
kanakarAjajI madanarAjajI goliyA, 5. zrI bhaMvaralAlajI caupar3A, byAvara
jodhapura 6. zrI vijayarAjajI ratanalAlajI catara, byAvara 38. zrI
ghevaracandajI pArasamalajI TAMTiyA, jodhapura 7. zrI bI. gajarAjajI bokaDiyA,
selama 39. zrI mAMgIlAlajI corA

Page #285 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Member List 40. Shri Sardarmalji Surana, Bhilai 69. Shri Hiralalji Hastimalji
Deshlhara, Bhilai 41. Shri Prokchandji Hemrajji Soni, Durg 70. Shri Vardhaman
Sthanakwasi Jain Shravak Sangh, Dalli-Rajhara 42. Shri Surajkaranji Surana,
Madras 71. Shri Champalalji Buddharajji Bafna, Beawar 43. Shri Ghisulalji
Lalchandji Parkh, Durg 72. Shri Gangaramji Indrachandji Bohra, Kuchera Jodhpur
73. Shri Fatehrajji Nemichandji Karnavat, Kolkata 44. Shri Pukharajji Bohra,
(Jain Transport Co.) 74. Shri Balchandji Thanchandji Bharat, Bangalore 45. Shri
Champalalji Saklecha, Jalna 75. Shri Sampatrajji Kataria, Jodhpur 46. Shri
Premrajji Mithalalji Kamdar, Kolkata 76. Shri Janvarilalji Shantilalji Surana,
Bolaram 47. Shri Bhanwarlalji Motha & Sons, Jaipur 77. Shri Kanmalji Kothari,
Dadia Mettpalayam 48. Shri Lalchandji Motilalji Gadia, Bangalore 78. Shri
Pannalalji Motilalji Surana, Pali 49. Shri Bhanwarlalji Navratnamalji Sankhla,
79. Shri Manakchandji Ratnalalji Munot, Tangla 50. Shri Pukharajji Chhallani,
Karanguli 80. Shri Chimman Singhji Mohansinghji Lodha, Beawar 51. Shri
Asakaranji Jasrajji Parkh, Durg 81. Shri Riddhakaranji Ravatmalji Bhurt,
Guwahati 52. Shri Ganeshmalji Hemrajji Soni, Bhilai 82. Shri Parsamalji
Mahavirchandji Bafna, Goth _ Medtacity 53. Shri Amritrajji Jaswantrajji Mehta,
83. Shri Fakirchandji Kamalchandji Shrishrimal, Kuchera 54. Shri Ghevarchandji
Kishoramalji Parkh, Jodhpur 84. Shri Mangilalji Madanlalji Chordia, Bhairund 55.
Shri Mangilalji Rekhchandji Parkh, Jodhpur 85. Shri Soh‡§®‡§≤‡§æ‡§≤ji Lunakaranji
Surana, Kuchera 56. Shri Munnilalji Mulchandji Gulechha, Jodhpur 86. Shri
Ghisulalji, Parsamalji, Janvarilalji Kothari, Gothan City 57. Shri Ratnalalji
Lakhpatrajji, Jodhpur 87. Shri Sardarmalji & Company, Jodhpur 58. Shri Jivrajji
Parsamalji Kothari, Medta 88. Shri Champalalji Hiralalji Bagrecha, Jodhpur 59.
Shri Bhanwarlalji Rikhabchandji Nahta, Nagaur 89. Shri Dhukharajji Kataria,
Jodhpur 60. Shri Mangilalji Prakashchandji Runwal, Mysore 90. Shri Indrachandji
Mukanchandji, Indore 61. Shri Pukharajji Bohra, Pipaliya Kalan 91. Shri
Bhanwarlalji Bafna, Indore 62. Shri Harkachandji Jugrajji Bafna, Bangalore 92.
Shri Jethmalji Modi, Indore 63. Shri Chandanmalji Premchandji Modi, Bhilai 93.
Shri Balchandji Amarchandji Modi, Beawar 64. Shri Bhiraji Baghmar, Kuchera 94.
Shri Kundanmalji Parsamalji Bhandari, Bangalore 65. Shri Tilakchandji
Premprakashji, Ajmer 95. Smt. Kamal Kanwar Lalwani, wife of Late Shri Parsamalji
Lalwani, Gothan 66. Shri Vijaylalji Premchandji Mulechha, Rajnandgaon 96. Shri
Akhechandji Lunakaranji Bhandari, Kolkata 67. Shri Ravatmalji Chajed, Bhilai 97.
Shri Suganchandji Sancheti, Rajnandgaon 68. Shri Bhanwarlalji Dungarmalji
Kankaria, Bhilai

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
sadasya-nAmAvalI 40. zrI saradAramalajI surANA, bhilAI 69. zrI hIrAlAlajI
hastImalajI dezalaharA, bhilAI 41. zrI prokacaMdajI hemarAjajI sonI, durga 70.
zrI varddhamAna sthAnakavAsI jaina zrAvakasaMgha, 42. zrI sUrajakaraNajI surANA,
madrAsa dallI-rAjaharA 43. zrI ghIsUlAlajI lAlacaMdajI pArakha, durga 71. zrI
campAlAlajI buddharAjajI bAphaNA, byAvara 44. zrI pukharAjajI boharA, (jaina
TrAnsaporTa kaM.) 72. zrI gaMgArAmajI indracaMdajI boharA, kucerA jodhapura 73.
zrI phateharAjajI nemIcaMdajI karNAvaTa, kalakattA 45. zrI campAlAlajI sakalecA,
jAlanA 74. zrI bAlacaMdajI thAnacandajI bharaTa, 46. zrI premarAjajI mIThAlAlajI
kAmadAra, kalakattA baiMgalora 75. zrI sampatarAjajI kaTAriyA, jodhapura 47. zrI
bhaMvaralAlajI mUthA eNDa sansa, jayapura 76. zrI jaMvarIlAlajI zAMtilAlajI
surANA, 48. zrI lAlacaMdajI motIlAlajI gAdiyA, baiMgalora bolArama 49. zrI
bhaMvaralAlajI navaratnamalajI sAMkhalA, 77. zrI kAnamalajI koThArI, dAdiyA
meTTapAliyama 78. zrI pannAlAlajI motIlAlajI surANA, pAlI 50. zrI pukharAjajI
challANI, karaNagullI 79. zrI mANakacaMdajI ratanalAlajI muNota, TaMgalA 51. zrI
AsakaraNajI jasarAjajI pArakha, durga 80. zrI cimmanasiMhajI mohanasiMhajI
loDhA, byAvara 52. zrI gaNezamalajI hemarAjajI sonI, bhilAI 81. zrI
riddhakaraNajI rAvatamalajI bhuraTa, gohATI 53. zrI amRtarAjajI jasavantarAjajI
mehatA, 82. zrI pArasamalajI mahAvIracaMdajI bAphanA, goTha _ mer3atAsiTI 83.
zrI phakIracaMdajI kamalacaMdajI zrIzrImAla, 54. zrI ghevaracaMdajI kizoramalajI
pArakha, jodhapura kucerA 55. zrI mAMgIlAlajI rekhacaMdajI pArakha, jodhapura
84. zrI mAMgIlAlajI madanalAlajI corar3iyA, bhairUMda 56. zrI munnIlAlajI
mUlacaMdajI gulecchA, jodhapura 85. zrI sohanalAlajI lUNakaraNajI surANA, kucerA
57. zrI ratanalAlajI lakhapatarAjajI, jodhapura 86. zrI ghIsUlAlajI,
pArasamalajI, jaMvarIlAlajI 58. zrI jIvarAjajI pArasamalajI koThArI, mer3atA
koThArI, goThana siTI 87. zrI saradAramalajI eNDa kampanI, jodhapura 59. zrI
bhaMvaralAlajI rikhabacaMdajI nAhaTA, nAgaura 88. zrI campAlAlajI hIrAlAlajI
bAgarecA, 60. zrI mAMgIlAlajI prakAzacandajI rUNavAla, maisUra jodhapura 61. zrI
pukharAjajI boharA, pIpaliyA kalAM 89. zrI dhukharAjajI kaTAriyA, jodhapura 62.
zrI harakacaMdajI jugarAjajI bAphanA, baiMgalora 90. zrI indracandajI
mukanacandajI, indaura 63. zrI candanamalajI premacaMdajo modI, bhilAI 91. zrI
bhaMvaralAlajI bAphaNA, indaura 64. zrI bhIvarAjajI bAghamAra, kucerA 92. zrI
jeThamalajI modI, indaura 65. zrI tilokacaMdajI premaprakAzajI, ajamera 93. zrI
bAlacandajI amaracandajI modI, byAvara 66. zrI vijayalAlajI premacaMdajI
mulecchA, 94. zrI kundanamalajI pArasamalajI bhaMDArI, baiMgalora rAjanAMdagA~va
65. zrImatI kamalAkaMvara lalavANI dharmapatnI zrI 67. zrI rAvatamalajI
chAjer3a, bhilAI sva. pArasamalajI lalavANI, goThana 68. zrI bhaMvaralAlajI
DUMgaramalajI kAMkariyA, 96. zrI akhecaMdajI laNakaraNajI bhaNDArI, kalakattA
bhilAI 97. zrI suganacandajI saMcetI, rAjanAMdagAMva

Page #286 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Member List 98. Shri Prakashchandji Jain, Nagaur 116. Shrimati Ramkunwarbai,
wife of Shri Chandamalji 99. Shri Kushalchandji Rikhabchandji Surana, Lodha,
Bombay Bolaram 117. Shri Mangilalji Uttamchandji Bafna, Bangalore 100. Shri
Lakshmichandji Ashok Kumarji Shrisrimal, 118. Shri Sanchalalji Bafna, Aurangabad
Kuchera 119. Shri Bhikhamchandji Manakchandji Khabia, 101. Shri Guddamalji
Champalalji, Gothan (Kuddalore) Madras 102. Shri Tejarajji Kothari,
Mangaliyaavas 120. Shrimati Anopkunwar, wife of Shri Champalalji 103.
Sampatrajji Chordia, Madras / Sanghvi, Kuchera 104. Shri Amarchandji Chajed,
Padu Bari 121. Shri Soh‡§®‡§≤‡§æ‡§≤ji Sojatiya, Thanvala 105. Shri Jugrajji Dhanrajji
Barmecha, Madras 122. Shri Champalalji Bhandari, Calcutta 106. Shri Pukharajji
Naharmalji Lalvani, Madras 123. Shri Bhikhamchandji Ganeshmalji Chaudhary, 107.
Shrimati Kanchandevi and Nirmaladevi, Madras 108. Shri Dulerajji Bhanwarlalji
Kothari, 124. Shri Pukharajji Kish‡§®‡§≤‡§æ‡§≤ji Tated, Kushalpur Secunderabad 109. Shri
Bhanwarlalji Mangilalji Betala, Deh 125. Shri Mishrilalji Sajjanlalji Kataria
110. Shri Jeevarajji Bhanwarlalji Chordia, Secunderabad Bhairooda 126. Shri
Present Jain Shravak Sangh, 111. Shri Mangilalji Shantilalji Runwal, Bagar Nagar
Harsolav 127. Shri Pukharajji Parsamalji Lalvani, 112. Shri Chandamalji
Dhanrajji Modi, Ajmer Bilada 113. Shri Ramprasanna Gyanprasar Kendra, Chandrapur
128. Shri T. Parsamalji Chordia, Madras 114. Shri Bhurmalji Dulichandji
Bokardia, Medta 129. Shri Motilalji Asulalji Bohra City & Co., Bangalore 115.
Shri Mohanlalji Dh–∞riwal, Pali 130. Shri Sampatrajji Surana, Manmad 00 Dh–∞lia]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
[sadasya-nAmAvalI 98. zrI prakAzacaMdajI jaina, nAgaura 116. zrImatI
rAmakuMvarabAI dharmapatnI zrI cAMdamalajo 99. zrI kuzAlacaMdajI rikhabacandajI
surANA, loDhA, bambaI bolArama 117. zrI mAMgIlAlajI uttamacaMdajI bAphaNA,
baiMgalora 100. zrI lakSmIcaMdajI azokakumArajI zrIzrImAla, 118. zrI sAMcAlAlajI
bAphaNA, auraMgAbAda kucerA 119. zrI bhIkhamacandajI mANakacandajI khAbiyA, 101.
zrI gUdaDamalajI campAlAlajI, goThana (kuDAlora) madrAsa 102. zrI tejarAjajI
koThArI, mAMgaliyAvAsa 120. zrImatI anopakuMvara dharmapatnI zrI campAlAlajI
103. sampatarAjajI corar3iyA, madrAsa / saMghavI, kucerA 104. zrI amaracaMdajI
chAjer3a, pAdu bar3I 121. zrI sohanalAlajI sojatiyA, thAMvalA 105. zrI
jugarAjajI dhanarAjajI baramecA, madrAsa 122. zrI campAlAlajI bhaNDArI,
kalakattA 106. zrI pukharAjajI nAharamalajI lalavANI, madrAsa 123. zrI
bhIkhamacandajI gaNezamalajI caudharI, 107. zrImatI kaMcanadevI va nirmalAdevI.
madrAsa 108. zrI dulerAjajI bhaMvaralAlajI koThArI, 124. zrI pukharAjajI
kizanalAlajI tAter3a, kuzAlapurA sikandarAbAda 109. zrI bhaMvaralAla jI
mAMgIlAlajI betAlA, Deha 125. zrI mizrIlAlajI sajjanalAlajI kaTAriyA 110. zrI
jIvarAjajI bhaMvaralAlajI coraDiyA, sikandarAbAda bhairUdA 126. zrI vartamAna
sthAnakavAsI jaina zrAvaka saMgha, 111. zrI mAMgIlAlajI zAMtilAlajI rUNavAla,
bagar3Inagara harasolAva 127. zrI pukharAjajI pArasamalajI lalavANI, 112. zrI
cAMdamalajI dhanarAjajI modI, ajamera bilAr3A 113. zrI rAmaprasanna jJAnaprasAra
kendra, candrapura 128. zrI TI. pArasamalajI coraDiyA, madrAsa 114. zrI
bhUramalajI dulIcaMdajo bokar3iyA, mer3atA 129. zrI motIlAlajI AsUlAlajI boharA
siTI eNDa kaM., baiMgalora 115. zrI mohanalAlajI dhArIvAla, pAlI 130. zrI
sampatarAjajI surANA, manamAr3a 00 dhaliyA

Page #287 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Published by the **Nama Agama Prakashan Samiti, Byawar**, the following
**Agama** translations and editors are available:  * **Acharaangasutra** (Two
Parts) - **Shri Chand Surana 'Saras'** * **Upasakadasangasutra** - **Dr.
Chaganlal Shastri (M.A., Ph.D.)** * **Jnatadharmakathangasutra** - **Pandit
Shobhachand Bharill** * **Antakrddasangasutra** - **Sadhvi Divyaprabha (M.A.,
Ph.D.)** * **Anuttarovvaiysutra** - **Sadhvi Muktiprabha (M.A., Ph.D.)** *
**Sthanangasutra** - **Pandit Hiralal Shastri** * **Samavayangasutra** -
**Pandit Hiralal Shastri** * **Sutrakrtangasutra** - **Shri Chand Surana
'Saras'** * **Vipaksutra** - **Translation by Pandit Roshanlal Shastri, Edited
by Pandit Shobhachand Bharill** * **Nandisutra** - **Translation by Sadhvi
Umravkavar 'Archana', Edited by Kamala Jain 'Gigi' M.A.** * **Aupapatik Sutra**
- **Dr. Chaganlal Shastri** * **Vyakhyaprajnaptisutra** (Four Parts) - **Shri
Amarmuni** * **Rajprashniyasutra** - **Vani Bhushan Ratnamuni, Edited by
Devkumar Jain** * **Prajnapanasutra** (Three Parts) - **Jain Bhushan Gyanmuni**
* **Prashnavyakaranasutra** - **Translation by Muni Pravin Rishi, Edited by
Pandit Shobhachand Bharill** * **Uttaradhyayanasutra** - **Shri Rajendramuni
Shastri** * **Niryavalikasutra** - **Shri Devkumar Jain** * **Dashakalikasutra**
- **Mahasati Pushpavati** * **Aavashyakasutra** - **Mahasati Suprabha** *
**Jambudeep Prajnaptisutra** - **Dr. Chaganlal Shastri** * **Anuyogadwarasutra**
- **Upadhyay Shri Kevalmuni, Edited by Devkumar Jain** * **Surya Prajnapti,
Chandra Prajnapti Sutra** - **Edited by Muni Shri Kanhaiyalalji 'Kamal'** *
**Jivajivaabhigamasutra** (First Part) - **Shri Rajendramuni** *
**Jivajivaabhigamasutra** (Second Part) - **Shri Rajendramuni** *
**Nishitasutra** - **Muni Shri Kanhaiyalalji 'Kamal', Shri Tilakmuni** * **Trini
Chhedasutraani**  For more information, please contact:  **Shri Agama Prakashan
Samiti** **Shri Braj-Madhukar Smriti Bhavan** **Pipaliya Bazaar, Byawar-305901**
**Education International**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
nAma AgamaprakAzana samiti, byAvara dvArA adyAvadhi prakAzita Agama-sA
anuvAdaka-sampAdaka AcArAMgasUtra do bhAga zrIcanda surAnA 'sarasa'
upAsakadazAMgasUtra DaoN. chaganalAla zAstrI (ema.e., pI-eca. DI.)
jJAtAdharmakathAMgasUtra paM. zobhAcandra bhArilla antakRddazAMgasUtra sAdhvI
divyaprabhA (ema.e., pI-eca.DI.) anuttarovavAiyasUtra sAdhvI muktiprabhA
(ema.e., pI-eca.DI.) sthAnAMgasUtra paM. hIrAlAla zAstrI samavAyAMgasUtra paM.
hIrAlAla zAstrI sUtrakRtAMgasUtra zrIcanda surAnA 'sarasa' vipAkasUtra anu. paM.
rozanalAla zAstrI sampA. paM. zobhAcandra bhArilla nandIsUtra anu. sAdhvI
umarAvakaMvara 'arcanA' sampA. kamalA jaina 'jIjI' ema. e. aupapAtikasUtra DaoN.
chaganalAla zAstrI vyAkhyAprajJaptisUtra [cAra bhAga] zrI amaramuni
rAjapraznIyasUtra vANIbhUSaNa ratanamuni, saM. devakumAra jaina prajJApanAsUtra
[tIna bhAga] jainabhUSaNa jJAnamuni praznavyAkaraNasUtra anu. muni pravINaRSi
sampA. paM. zobhAcandra bhArilla uttarAdhyayanasUtra zrI rAjendramuni zAstrI
nirayAvalikAsUtra zrI devakumAra jaina dazavakAlikasUtra mahAsatI puSpavatI
AvazyakasUtra mahAsatI suprabhA jambUdvIpaprajJaptisUtra DaoN. chaganalAla
zAstrI anuyogadvArasUtra upAdhyAya zrI kevalamuni, saM. devakumAra jaina
sUryaprajJapti, candraprajJaptisUtra sampA. muni zrI kanhaiyAlAlajI 'kamala'
jIvAjIvAbhigamasUtra [pra. bhAga] zrI rAjendramuni jIvAjIvAbhigamasUtra dvi.
bhA.] nizIthasUtra munizrI kanhaiyAlAlajI 'kamala', zrI tilokamuni
trINichedasUtrANi vizeSa jAnakArI ke liye samparkasUtra zrI Agama prakAzana
samiti zrI braja-madhukara smRti bhavana, pIpaliyA bAjAra, byAvara-305901 in
Education International

