Catalog link: https://jainqq.org/explore/034350/1

Page #1 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**K**  Maharshi Shri Haribhadracharya Ji Pranit Che Ke Je Hak Che? Ji Ha Che Ke
Je Koi Cho? Shri Yogadrushtisamucchya Savivechan Yo: Nyatah Shreshtha,
Yochitamali: Par: - Shri Haribhadrasuri Pachi Aa Che? Chha Vik : Vivechan Karta:
Dr. Bhagwandas Man:sukhbhai Mehta Ri Che To Te Bhag - 1 Che Ki Chha Che Jo fwei
1975 Ti I Kari Che? Ro Ro Hak : Prakashka: Shri Mahavir Jain Vidyalaya Shri
Vasupujya Swami Mandir Marg, C.D. Barfivala Marg, Juhu Lane, Andheri (West),
Mumbai-400058. Pi Ji Mulyah: Rupaya 250 (

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ka maharSi zrI haribhadrAcAryajI praNIta che ke je haka che ? jI hA che ke je
koI cho ? zrI yogadRSTisamuccaya savivecana yo: nyataH zreSTha, yozcitAmaLi:
para: - zrI haribhadrasUri pachI A che ? cha vika : vivecana kartA : DaoN.
bhagavAnadAsa manaHsukhabhAI mahetA rI che to te bhAga - 1 che kI cha ka che jo
fwei 1975 TI I karI che ? ro ro haka : prakAzaka: zrI mahAvIra jaina vidyAlaya
zrI vAsupUjya svAmI maMdira mArga, sI.DI. baraphIvAlA mArga, juhU lena, aMdherI
(vesTa), muMbaI-400058. pI jI mUlyaH rUpiyA 250 (

Page #2 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Publisher:** Hitesh Chimanlal Doshi, Mukesh Bhaichand Mehta, Hasmukh Ugarchand
Gatecha, Hon'ble Ministers  **Shri Mahavir Jain Vidyalaya** Shri Vasupujyaswami
Mandir Marg, C.D. Barfiwala Marg, Juhu Lane, Andheri (West), Mumbai-400058.
Email: headoffice@smiv.org  **Availability:** (1) Shri Mahavir Jain Vidyalaya
Shri Vasupujyaswami Mandir Marg, C.D. Barfiwala Marg, Juhu Lane, Andheri (West),
Mumbai-400 058. Phone No. 022-26718641 Email: headoffice@smjv.org Shri Mahavir
Jain Vidyalaya, Hill Drive, Talaja Road, Bhavnagar-364 002. Phone No.
0278-2563969, Email: bhavnagar@smjv.org  **First Edition:** 1950 AD - 2006 VS -
2475 Veer Nirvan Samvat **Second Edition:** 1978 AD - 2034 VS - 2503 Veer Nirvan
Samvat **Third Edition:** Part - 1 2018 AD - 2074 VS - 2543 Veer Nirvan Samvat
**Price:** 250/- per copy  **Printer:** Vinayak Printers, Vignapan Bhavan, Tar
Office Opposite, Bhadra, Ahmedabad-380 001. (Mob.) 9979206060

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prakAzaka : hiteza cImanalAla dozI mukeza bhAyacaMda mahetA hasamukha
ugaracaMda gaTecA mAnad maMtrIzrIo zrI mahAvIra jaina vidyAlaya zrI
vAsupUjayasvAmI maMdira mArga, sI.DI. baraphIvAlA mArga, juhU lena, aMdherI
(vesTa), muMbaI-400058. Email: headoffice@smiv.org prApti sthAnoH (1) zrI
mahAvIra jaina vidyAlaya zrI vAsupUjyasvAmI maMdira mArga, sI.DI. baraphIvAlA
mArga, juhU lena, aMdherI (vesTa), muMbaI-400 058. phona naM. 022-26718641
Email: headoffice@smjv.org zrI mahAvIra jaina vidyAlaya hIla DrAIva, taLAjA
roDa, bhAvanagara-364 002. phona naM. 0278-2563969, Email: bhavnagar@smjv.org
pahelI AvRtti: I.saM. 1950- vi.saM. 2006 vIra nirvANa saMvata : 2475 dvitIya
AvRttiH I.saM. 1978 - vi.saM. 2034 vIra nirvANa saMvata : 2503 tRtIya AvRtti:
bhAga - 1 I.saM. 2018 - vi.saM. 2074 vIra nirvANa saMvata : 2543 kiMmata :
250/nakala : paOO mudraka : vinAyaka prinTarsa vijJApana bhavana, tAra oNphisa
sAme, bhadra, amadAvAda-380 001. (mo.) 9979206060

Page #3 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Publisher's Statement**  According to the Jain Shastra, the primary goal of a
Jiva is to attain liberation (Moksha), which is the state of supreme bliss. To
achieve this state, aspirants (Mumukṣus) must strive for spiritual development
through the path of Yoga and Adhyatma.  The practice of acquiring knowledge is
achieved through the study of rare texts and Yoga. To facilitate this, revered
Acharyas have graciously provided numerous texts for self-study. Among these,
the Yogadṛṣṭisamuccaya, authored by the revered Acharya Haribhadrasuriśvara,
stands as a pinnacle. This text outlines the path of gradual spiritual
development for the benefit of aspirants.  To help seekers understand the
essence of this text, the late Dr. Bhagvandas Man:sukhbhai Mehta had written a
beautiful commentary many years ago. This was published in book form in 1950
(first edition) by Seth Shri Mansukh Bhai Tarachand Mehta in memory of the late
Shrimati Lilavatiben.  The family of the commentator, the late Dr. Bhagvandas
Man:sukhbhai Mehta, is currently without any members. The family of the
publisher, the late Seth Shri Mansukh Bhai Tarachand Mehta, has agreed to
republish the Yogadṛṣṭisamuccaya text, recognizing its religious significance.
This decision has been made by his daughter Kokilaben V. Parekh and Shrimati
Arunaben. We wholeheartedly applaud their generous spirit.  This new edition is
the auspicious result of the inspiration of the revered Kanakchandra Shah and
the generous support of the Shri Jain Dharma Pedhi, Shri Shrimali Pol Jain
Sangh, Bharuch. We are deeply grateful to the Sangh for this noble endeavor.  We
express our gratitude to the learned Pandit Shri Pravinchandra Mataji, the
commentator of many texts of the Shri Gitārtha Ganga, for granting permission to
print the "Bhed Prabhed Vṛkṣa" table from his published work in this
publication.  We are indebted to Shri Nautambhai Ratilal Shah for the beautiful
printing work and to Shri Shrenikbhai Kirtibhai Shah for the equally beautiful
work of proofreading.  The Shri Mahavira Jain Vidyalaya holds a unique position
in the Jain community and educational institutions. Through the publication of
numerous books related to Jinaagamas and Jain philosophy, the Shri Mahavira Jain
Vidyalaya carries out the work of spreading knowledge as a manifestation of the
influence of the Jinasasana.  We are delighted to publish the third edition of
the Yogadṛṣṭisamuccaya text. We have faith that this text will be a source of
well-being in the lives of our devout student brothers and sisters, that it will
foster the growth of spiritual aspirants, and that it will help everyone to
develop inner qualities and achieve equality.  With faith,  Yours truly,  Hitesh
Chimanlal Doshi, Mumbai. Mukesh Bhaichand Mehta, Date: 02/03/2018 Hasmukh
Ugarchand Gatecha, Dhuleti Honourable Ministers

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prakAzakIya nivedana jina zAsana anusAra jIvanuM mukhya lakSya
paramAnaMdasvarUpa mokSa pAmavAnuM che. A pada pAmavA mumukSuoe yoga ane
adhyAtmanI sAdhanAnA mArge vikAsa sAdhavAno che. jJAna saMpAdananI sAdhanA
virala graMthonA adhyayana ane yogathI ja thAya che. A mATe AcArya pravaroe
anugraha karI svAdhyAya mATe aneka graMtho ApyA che. pU. AcArya
haribhadrasUrIzvarajI racita yogadRSTisamuccaya e saumAM ziramora samAna che.
AtmAnA kramika vikAsanI keDI A graMtha dvArA mumukSuonA lAbhArthe cIMdhavAmAM
AvI che. sAdhakavarga A graMthanA marmane pAme e mATe varSo agAu mAnanIya sva.
DaoN. bhagavAnadAsa manaHsukhabhAI mahetAe suMdara vivecana karyuM hatuM. Ane
zeThazrI manasukhabhAI tArAcaMda mahetAe sva. zrImatI lIlAvatIbahenanA
smaraNArthe graMtha svarUpe varSa 1950mAM (prathama AvRtti) prakAzita karyuM.
vivecaka sva. DaoN. bhagavAnadAsa manaHsukhabhAI mahetAnA parivAramAM hAla koI
nathI. prakAzaka sva. zeThazrI manasukhabhAI tArAcaMda mahetAnA parivAramAM
temanA suputrI kokilAbahena vi. pArekha tathA zrImatI arUNAbahene zrI
yogadaSTisamuccaya graMthanI dhArmika dRSTie mahattA jANI, zrI mahAvIra jaina
ene pharIthI prakAzita karavAnI udAra bhAvanA sAthe saMmati Apela che. jenI amo
bhUri bhUri anumodanA karIe chIe. A navasaMpAdana pU. kanakacaMdra zAhanI
preraNAthI zrI jaina dharma peDhI, zrI zrImALI poLa jaina saMgha, bharUcanI
udAra sahAyanuM zubha pariNAma che. A umadA kArya mATe zrI saMghanA ame atyaMta
AbhArI chIe. zrI gItArtha gaMgAnA aneka graMthonA vivecanakartA paMDitavarya zrI
praviNacaMdra mAtAjIno AbhAra mAnIe chIe ke emaNe emanA prakAzita graMthamAMthI
"bheda prabheda vRkSa" koSTaka A prakAzanamAM chApavAnI anumati ApI che.
punaHmudraNa kArya ati suMdara rIte karanAra zrI nautamabhAI ratilAla zAhanA ane
prupha rIDIMganuM vikaTa kArya paNa eTalI ja suMdara rIte karavA mATe zrI
zreNIkabhAI kIrtibhAI zAhanA RNi chIe. zrI mahAvIra jaina vidyAlaya e jaina
samAja ane zaikSaNika saMsthAomAM AgavuM sthAna dharAve che. jinazAsananI
prabhAvanAnA kArya rUpe jinAgamo temaja jaina tattvajJAnane lagatAM aneka
pustakonuM prakAzana dvArA zrI mahAvIra jaina vidyAlaya jJAna prasAranuM kArya
kare che. zrI yogadRSTisamuccaya graMthanI trIjI AvRtti prakAzana karatAM amo
harSanI lAgaNI anubhavIe chIe. dharmAnurAgI abhyAsu bhAI-bahenonA jIvanamAM A
graMtha kalyANanuM kAraNa bane, AdhyAtmika mumukSuono vikAsa thAya ane
AMtaraprakatti vikasAvI sau samatA prApta kare evI zradhdhA saha.. li. bhavadIya
hiteza cImanalAla dozI sthaLa : muMbaI. mukeza bhAyacaMda mahetA tA. 02/03/2018
hasamukha ugaracaMda gaTecA dhULeTI mAnad maMtrIzrIo

Page #4 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Pages 6 to 15, 46 to 63. No. 9 0 49 89 Index Publisher's Statement (on the
occasion of the third edition) Publisher's Statement (on the occasion of the
first edition) - Upadyat Yogadrishtisamucchya Bhed - Prabhed Vriksh Shlok No.
Subject Mangalacharan and Prayojandi 2 to 5 Ichchayog, Shaastrayog,
Samarthyayog's brief description 6 to 8 Methods of attaining Kevalgyan based on
Pratibhagyan The form of two bheds of Samarthyayog In the second Apoorvakaran,
the attainment of the first Samarthyayog, and from Ayojayakaran onwards, the
attainment of the second Samarthyayog Ayog Yog, the best of all Yogs The
relationship of the three Yogs (Ichchadi) with eight Drishtis Names of the eight
Drishtis The form of Ogh Drishti with an example The form of Bodh present in the
eight Drishtis Eight Yogangas The removal of eight Doshas (Kheddi) and the
relationship of eight Gunas (Adveshadi) with the eight Drishtis The
characteristic of Drishti 18 Eight bheds of Drishti from sthul and many bheds
from vishesh The first four Drishtis are pratipatyukt and sapay The next four
Drishtis are apratipatyukt and nirapay In the last four Drishtis, there is no
disruption in the journey of Yogmarg due to the attainment of Devbhav Shloks 21
to 40 Description of Mitradrishti The form of Mitradrishti The acceptance of
Yogbeej in Mitradrishti The form of Jinkushalchittdi Yogbeej The purification of
Chitt from Charmapudgalparavart and the ripening of Bhavyatva The form of Shuddh
Kushalchitt 26 to 29 The form of other Shuddh Yogbeej The form of Yogbeej The
acceptance of Yogbeej from the destruction of Bhavamal The destruction of
Bhavamal in Charmapudgalparavart The form of Jeevs who are Charmapudgalparavart
The combination of Shubh Nimit from the rise of Avnchak The form of Avnchaktray
The smallness of Bhavamal, the purpose of attaining Avnchaktray The non-
attainment of Avnchaktray in Ghanbhavamal 102 109 110 115 117 127 145 148 148
145. 158 164 166 km

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 6 thI 15 pa6 thI 63 pAnA naM. n 9 y 0 y 49 by by by by y 89 anukramaNikA
prakAzakIya nivedana (trIjI AvRtti prasaMge) prakAzakanuM nivedana (pahelI
AvRtti prasaMge) - upodyAta yogadaSTisamuccaya bheda - prabheda vRkSa zloka naM.
viSaya maMgalAcaraNa ane prayojanAdi 2 thI 5 icchAyoga, zAstrayoga,
sAmarthyayoganuM alpa varNana 6 thI 8 prAtibhajJAnanA AdhAre kevalajJAnanI
prAptinA upAyo sAmarthyayoganA be bhedanuM svarUpa dvitIya apUrvakaraNamAM
prathama sAmarthyayoganI prApti, ane AyojayakaraNathI urdhvamAM dvitIya
sAmarthyayoganI prApti sarva yogothI zreSTha ayoga yoga. IcchAdi traNa yogono
ATha dRSTio sAthe saMbaMdha ATha daSTionAM nAmo ogha dRSTinuM svarUpa
dRSTAntathI ATha dRSTiomAM vartatA bodhanuM svarUpa ATha yogAMga. khedAdi ATha
doSono parihAra ane adveSa Adi ATha guNonA saMbaMdhathI ATha dRSTiono bheda
daSTinuM lakSaNa 18 sthUlathI daSTinA ATha bhedo ane vizeSathI aneka bhedo
prathamanI cAra dRSTio pratipAtayukta ane sApAya pAchaLanI cAra dRSTio
apratipAtayukta ane nirapAya chellI cAra daSTiomAM devabhavanI prAptithI yoga
mArgamAM prayANanA bhaMgano abhAva zloka 21 thI 40 sudhI mitrAdaSTinuM nirUpaNa
mitrA dRSTinuM svarUpa mitrA dRSTimAM yogabIjonuM grahaNa jinakuzalacittadi
yogabIjonuM svarUpa caramapudagalaparAvartamAM tathA bhavyatvanAM pAkathI
cittanI saMzuddhi saMzuddha kuzalacittanuM svarUpa 26 thI 29 anya saMzuddha
yogabIjonuM svarUpa yogabIjonuM svarUpa bhAvamalanA kSayathI yogabIjonuM grahaNa
caramapudgalaparAvartamAM bhAvamalano kSaya caramapudgalaparAvartavartI jIvonuM
svarUpa avaMcakanA udayathI zubha nimitono saMyoga avaMcakatrayanuM svarUpa
avaMcakatrayanI prAptinA heturUpa bhAvamalanI alpatA ghanabhAvamalamAM
avaMcakatrayanI aprApti jI re = 0 102 109 110 115 117 127 ja ra GU = GU 0 U 0
145 148 148 145. 158 164 166 GU U da km

Page #5 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Translation:  **0** **5** **167 169 171 171** **0** **e** **41** **177 188
196** **20)** **208 216 222 226 227** **54** **0** **56** **is**  Understanding
the attainment of the path of yoga in the state of **alpatva** of **bhavamala**,
the attainment of **yogabīja** etc. in **charma-yatha-pravṛttikaraṇa**, the
acceptance of **charma-yatha-pravṛttikaraṇa** as **apūrva-rūpa**, the
**guṇasthānaka** of **mithyā-aṣṭi** from the perspective of yoga.  **Verses 41
to 48** describe **tārā-deṣṭi**. The nature of **tārā-deṣṭi** is described in
verses 42 to 45. The nature of other **guṇas** is described in verse 46. The
nature of the **jijñāsā** that manifests in **tārā-deṣṭi** and the nature of the
fear that arises from the defect in **svakriyā** are described in verses 47 and
48. The nature of **tattva-viṣayak** **ūhā-poha** is also described.  **Verses
49 to 56** describe **balā-deṣṭi**. The nature of **balā-deṣṭi** is described in
verse 48. The nature of **sukhāsana** is described in verses 50-51. The nature
of the **para-pada** **śuśruṣā** **guṇa** is described.  The attainment of
**karma-kṣaya** through the **śuśruṣā** **guṇa** even in the absence of the
action of **śravaṇa** is described. The nature of **apaguṇa** and other
**guṇas** are described.  **Verses 50 to 86** describe **dīprā-deṣṭi**. The
nature of **dīprā-deṣṭi** is described in verse 47.  The nature of **bhāva-
recakā** etc. is described in verses 49 to 60. The nature of **dharma-rāga**
that exists in **dīprā-deṣṭi** is described in verses 61-62. The nature of the
**tattva-śravaṇa** **guṇa** is described in verse 63. The fruit of the **tattva-
śravaṇa** **guṇa** is described.  The special fruit of the **tattva-śravaṇa**
**guṇa** is described in verse 65. The nature of **vedya-sanvedya-pada** is
described in verses 66-67. The reasons for the absence of **sūkṣma-bodha** in
the four **deṣṭis** are described in verse 68. The absence of **sūkṣma-bodha**
due to the **apāya-śakti** of **naraka** etc. is described.  The absence of
**tāttvika-bodha** up to the four **deṣṭis** even from **śāstra** is described
in verse 70. The **pāpa-pravṛtti** of **vedya-sanvedya-pada** is described as
being similar to the **sapta-loha-pada-nyāsa**.  The **charma-pāpa-pravṛtti**
due to the excessive **sanvedanā** in **vedya-sanvedya-pada** is described. The
rejection of **avedya-sanvedya-pada** as a **pada** from the perspective of
**paramārtha** and the acceptance of **vedya-sanvedya-pada** as a **pada** are
described in verses 73-74.  The nature of **vedya-sanvedya-pada** is described.
The nature of **avedya-sanvedya-pada** is described in verse 76. The nature of
the **bhāva-abhinandī** **jīva** is described.  The ugliness of the **bodha** of
**bhāva-abhinandī** **jīvas** is described in verses 78-82. The nature of
**bhāva-abhinandī** **jīvas** from the perspective of **phala** is described in
verses 83-84. The **pravṛtti** of **bhāva-abhinandī** **jīvas** is described in
verse 85. The remedy for conquering the **adyasanvedya-pada** that remains in
**yogīs** up to the four **deṣṭis** is described.  **58** **234 238 240 245 253
254 261 263 268 27) 272 276 281** **75** **282 291 295 298 30 314 320**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 o 0 o 5 167 169 171 171 o e 41 177 188 196 20) 208 216 222 226 227 54 0 pa6 che
bhAvamalanI alpatAmAM yogamArganI prAptinI samaja caramayathApravRttakaraNamAM
yogabIjAdinI prApti caramayathApravRttikaraNano apUrvarUpe svIkAra yoganI
dRSTithI guNI evuM mithyASTi guNasthAnaka zloka 41 thI 48 sudhI tArAdeSTinuM
nirUpaNa tArA dRSTinuM svarUpa 42 thI 45 anya guNInuM svarUpa 46 tArA daSTimAM
pragaTa thatI jijJAsAnuM svarUpa ane svakriyAnI kSatimAM thatAM saMtrAsanuM
svarUpa 47 thI 48 tattvaviSayaka UhApohanuM svarUpa zloka 49 thI 56 sudhI
balAdeSTinuM nirUpaNa 48 balAdaSTinuM svarUpa 50-51 sukhAsananuM svarUpa para-
pa3 zuzruSA guNanuM svarUpa zravaNanI kriyAnA abhAvamAM paNa zuzruSA guNathI
karmakSayanI prApti papa apaguNanuM svarUpa anyaguNonuM svarUpa zloka 50 thI 86
sudhI dIprA dRSTinuM nirUpaNa pa7 dIprA dRSTinuM svarUpa bhAvarecakAdi traNanuM
svarUpa pa9 thI 60 dIprA dRSTimAM vartatA dharmarAganuM svarUpa 61-62
tattvazravaNa guNanuM svarUpa 63 tattvazravaNa guNanuM phaLa tattvazravaNa
guNanuM vizeSaphaLa 65 vedyasaMvedyapadanuM svarUpa 66-67 cAra dRSTiomAM sUkSma
bodhanA abhAvanA kAraNo 68 narakAdi apAyazaktinA kAraNae sUkSma bodhanA abhAva
zAstrathI paNa cAra dRSTi sudhI tAttvika bodhanA abhAva 70 vedyasaMvedyapadanI
saptalohapadanyAsatulya pApapravRtti vedyasaMvedyapadamAM saMvedanA atizayane
kAraNe carama pApapravRtti paramArthathI avedyasaMvedyapadano padarUpe asvIkAra
ane vedyasaMvedyapadano padarUpe svIkAra 73-74 vedyasaMvedyapadanuM svarUpa
avedyasaMvedyapadanuM svarUpa 76 bhavAbhinaMdI jIvanuM svarUpa bhavAbhinaMdI
jIvonA bodhanI asuMdaratA 78-82 phalathI bhavAbhinaMdI jIvonuM svarUpa 83-84
bhavAbhinaMdI jIvanI pravRtti 85 cAra dRSTi sudhI yogIomAM rahela
adyasaMvedyapadane jItavAno upAya 58 234 238 240 245 253 254 261 263 268 27) 272
276 281 75 282 291 295 298 30 314 320

Page #6 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
卐 *

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Wan  *

Page #7 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Preface to the First Edition  66 **The first edition preface**  "He who has
destroyed the roots of attachment, aversion, and delusion, like the sprout of a
seed, is worthy of my salutations, whether he be a Brahmavadi or a Vishnuvadi."
- Shri Hemachandracharya.  "...All that is external is the source of sorrow, all
that is internal is the source of happiness; This is the essence of the self,
this is the true nature of the self. Tell me, what is happiness?" - Shri
Yashavijayaji, January 26, 1950.  On this auspicious day, I begin writing this
preface. Today, this land of Bharat, the sacred land of Shri Yageshvara, is
celebrating the unprecedented festival of complete independence. This worldly
independence reminds us of the transcendental, inner freedom of the soul. It
makes us ponder: This soul, burdened by the heavy weight of the eternal
ignorance, is bound by the chains of karma, and thus experiences the great
suffering of dependence. How can this soul, by discarding the shackles of
ignorance, the root cause of this suffering, attain the 'unprecedented
opportunity' of self-rule, the kingdom of the soul, the abode of happiness? When
will this soul-being, freed from the shackles of dependence, experience the
unique joy of liberation? How can the soul attain the supreme bliss of complete
inner freedom? When will the soul, dwelling in its own home, play and revel in
its own home, filled with joy? When will this soul-ocean overflow with the
nectar of joy, and the auspicious victory cry resound?"  66 "You will break
through the barriers within my heart, the auspicious victory cry will resound;
The soul-ocean will overflow with joy, the nectar of bliss will flow..."
Padmaprabha Jin! What will break through the barriers within my heart, O Lord?"
- Shri Anandghanaji. "The soul dwells in its own home, its own home is filled
with joy." - Shri Devchandraji.  The answer to all these questions lies in one
single path. The one who liberates us from dependence and grants us the
unparalleled achievement of inner freedom, who makes the soul Shiva, who grants
the soul the 'true self' - the supreme self-realization, the 'self-state' - if
there is anyone who can do this, it is Yaga. And the right way to this Yaga, the
path to the true nature of the self, is the path of complete non-violence...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 66 prathamAvRtti prastAvanA bhavabIjAGkurajananA rAgAdayaH kSayamupAgatA yasya
/  trahmA vA viSNuvAdo bino vA namastamaiM  /  '...zrI hemaca'drAcArya che. : "
saghaLuM paravaza te du:khalakSaNa, nijavaza te sukha lahiye; e dRSTa Atama guNa
pragaTe, kahe| sukha te kRNa kahiye ? ''-zrI yazAvijayajI 26mI jAnyuArI 1950 !--
AjanA A maMgala dine A prastAvanA lakhavAne prAraMbha karuM chuM. zrImad
yAgIzvarAnI puNyabhUmi A bhAratavaSa Aje pUrNa svAtaMtryanA apUrva utsava ujavI
rahyo che. A laukika strAta'tryanI vAta parathI alaukika evA AtmasvAtaMtryanu`
saheja smaraNa thAya che ane vicAra sphure che ke-A AtmA anAdi avidyArUpa
parazAsananA mahAbhAra taLe dabAI gayA che, parabhAvarUpa kamanI jajIrAthI
jakaDAI gayA che, ane tethI pArataMtryanuM mahAdu:kha anubhavI rahyo che. A
paravazatA du:khanA mULarUpa avidyA-maiAhanA paraza sanane phagAvI daI,
sukhadhAmarUpa nijayaza svazAsananA- AtmarAjyanA 'apUrva avasara ' jIvane kema
prApta thAya? kaparataMtratAnI bhR'khalAmAMthI mukta thaI A Atma-puruSa
muktatvanA ananya ullAsa kayAre anubhave ? pUrNa AtmasvAtatryanA parama dhanya
mahotsava jIvane zI rIte prApta thAya ? Atama ghara Atama rame' ne nija ghara
magalamAla ' kayAre pragaTe ? * AnaMdadhana rasapUra'thI A jIva-sarAvara
chalakAI jaI 'vAjaze. ma'gala tUra ' kayAre thAya ? : 66 tuja muja aMtara aMtara
bhAMjaze, vAjaze maoNMgala tura; jIva sAvara atizaya vAdhaze, AnaMdaghana
rasapUra.... padmaprabha jina ! tuja muja AMtaru' kima bhAMje bhagavaMta ? "--
zrI AnadaghanajI. "Atama ghara Atama rame re, nija ghara maMgala thAya re. "--
zrI devaca'drajI. " A samasta praznanA uttara eka caiAgamAM ja rahyo che.
kama`pArata'tryamAMthI mukta karI AtmasvAta'tryanI anupama siddhi karAvanAra,
jIvane ziva' banAvanAra, AtmAne icche che je jogIjana ' evuM mULa zuddha te
Atmapada '-paramAtmapadma pamADanAra jo koi hAya te te yAga ja che. ane A
AtmasvabhAva-yujanarUpa yAganA sadupAyane sakala avila

Page #8 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Vidhi sange pagpane je pradarshit kare te yogashastra chhe. Ane temam pan aneka
yogashastrana navanitrupa aa yogadrishtisamucchaya shastranun sthan anupam chhe;
aneka navi na ane maulik vichardhara aona raju kari apurva "gadishta'rupa divya
nayanana unmilanarupani mal bandha prakashah relavana ara granthratna nun sthan
ananya chhe. Sagaranun manthan kari vibhudhae (devae) amrita vavyun hatutam
shastrasamudranu manthan kari mahavibhudh (prajnya) maharshi
haribhadraacharyajie aa gamrita valya chhe,–jenun yathapatra yatheccha pana kari
aatmathi mumukshu "jegijane " amritatvane pame chhe. Ane aa nirvanarupaamritatva
pamavu ane pamadvun e j aa yugapathapradarshak granthanu vaktashrota ubhay
aashrayi paramparaprayo jana chhe, em aana mangalaacharanama j aa mahaan
yugaacharyoma spashta prakaryu chhe. Aa parahi takanira ta shastrakare mana-
puja–keertiaadi tuchcha kamanaathi rahit eva a shuddha aashayathi kevala eka
aatmaarthe j aa satvahitaartha paramartha pravrutti kari chhe,–je paramparae
nirvananu avaddhya bija chhe, mokshanun amegha karana chhe. Ane "kama eka
aatmaarthanu, bijo nahi mana rega—e mahasuttra hrudayama dharana kari je kai
sacho aatmathi mumukshu shrotaajana aa shastranun parishilana karashe, te pan
yathochitapane atra yogama j pravrutti karashe,–je tene pan nirvanana avaddhya
bijarupa thai padashee; karana ke aa gadrishti aatmana aadhyaatmika vikasanun
mapa chhe, aatmadasha mapak "thermometer" chhe. Etale enun svarupa samyak
prakare jani vichakshana shrotaa te parathi potana aatmani aadhyaatmika pragati
ne, aatmadashane, aatmana gunasthanane kayaas kaadhi shakshee. Hu pote kyi
drishtime varttu" chhu? Maharama te te drishti na kahya chhe teva gun-lakshanaa
chhe ke nahi? Na hoy to te praapta karava hare kem pravartaavu? Ityaadi prakaare
antarmun khani reekshana (Introspection) kari aatmagunavruddhi ni prerana pamava
mate aa yogadrishti aatmathi shrotane param upayogi–param upakaari thai
padashee, ane tatharupaa yathayogya aacharanarupaa yugapravrutti thi tene pan
paramparae mokshanun achuk karana thai padashee. Aam aa satushastra vaktaa-
shreta ubhayane aatmakalyaanane amegha hetu chhe, aatmasvatanatryane achuk
sadupaya chhe. "Pakshapaata na je vira, 2 : vitaagi suvimaanam, taa chaarya
parishadah"—shri haribhadrasuri Vira prati mane pakshapaata nathi ane kapila
aadi prati mane dvesha nathi, yuktivaaLu jenun vachan hoy tenun j grahana karava
yogya chhe."—eva prakaare nishpaksha nyaayamurtijema madhyastha
tattvapareekshani viragarjana karanara ane mata-darshanana aagrahathi para eva
aa param praamaannika aacharya aa praachin bhaaratavarshanaa bhushanaru pa
samartha tattvajnanionu

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 vidhi sAMge pagapaNe je pradazita kare te yogazAstra che. ane temAM paNa aneka
yogazAstranA navanItarUpa A yogadaSTisamuccaya zAstranuM sthAna anupama che;
aneka navIna ane maulika vicAradhArAo rajU karI apUrva "gadiSTa'rU5 divya
nayananA unmIlanarUpa nimala baMdha prakAza relAvanAra A graMtharatnanuM sthAna
ananya che. sAgaranuM maMthana karI vibudhee (devee) amRta vAvyuM hatuMtema
zAstrasamudranuM maMthana karI mahAvibudha (prAjJa) maharSi haribhadrAcAryajIe A
gAmRta vaLyuM che,-jenuM yathApAtra yatheccha pAna karI AtmAthI mumukSu
"jegIjane " amRtatvane pAme che. ane A nirvANarUpa amRtatva pAmavuM ane
pamADavuM e ja A yugapathapradarzaka graMthanuM vaktA-zrotA ubhaya AzrayI
paraMpara (Ultimate) prayojana che, ema AnA maMgalAcaraNamAM ja A mahAn
yugAcAryomAM spaSTa prakAryuM che. A parahitakanirata zAstrakAre mAna-pUjA-kItti
Adi tuccha kAmanAthI rahita evA zuddha AzayathI kevaLa eka AtmArthe ja A
satvahitArtha paramArtha pravRtti karI che,-je paraMparAe nirvANanuM avadhya
bIja che, mekSanuM amegha kAraNa che. ane "kAma eka AtmArthanuM, bIjo nahiM mana
rega--e mahAsUtra hRdayamAM dhAraNa karI je kaI sAco AtmAthI mumukSu zrotAjana A
zAstranuM parizIlana karaze, te paNa yathocitapaNe atre yogamAM ja pravRtti
karaze,-je tene paNa nirvANunA avaMdhya bIjarUpa thaI paDaze; kAraNa ke A
gadaSTi AtmAnA AdhyAtmika vikAsanuM mApa che, AtmadazA mApaka "tharmomITara
(Thermometer) che. eTale enuM svarUpa samyak prakAre jANI vicakSaNa zrotA te
parathI potAnA AtmAnI AdhyAtmika pragatine, AtmadazAne, AtmAnA guNasthAnane
kayAsa kADhI zakaze. huM pote kayI daSTimAM vatta" chuM? mahArAmAM te te dRSTinA
kahyA che tevA guNa-lakSaNa che ke nahiM? na hoya to te prApta karavA hAre kema
pravartAvuM? ItyAdi prakAre aMtamuM khanirIkSaNa (Introspection) karI
AtmaguNavRddhinI preraNA pAmavA mATe A yogadaSTi AtmAthI zrotAne parama upayogI-
parama upakArI thaI paDaze, ane tathArUpa yathAyogya AcaraNarUpa yugapravRttithI
tene paNa paraMparAe mokSanuM acUka kAraNa thaI paDaze. Ama A satuzAstra vaktA-
zretA ubhayane AtmakalyANane amegha hetu che, AtmasvAtaMtryane acUka sadupAya
che. "pakSapAta na je vIra, 2 H viTAgi suvimAnaM , tA #Arya pariSadaH "--zrI
haribhadrasUri vIra pratye mane pakSapAta nathI ane kapila Adi pratye mane dveSa
nathI, yuktivALuM jenuM vacana hoya tenuM ja grahaNa karavA yogya che."--evA
prakAre niSpakSa nyAyamUrti jema madhyastha tattvaparIkSAnI vIragarjanA karanArA
ane mata-dazananA AgrahathI para evA A parama prAmANika AcArya A prAcIna
bhAratavarSanA bhUSaNarUpa samartha tatvajJAnIonI

Page #9 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The first line is occupied by the great luminaries. The supreme mystery of the
Hudshan, the renowned "Shatudana-vetta" Haribhadrasuri, who has sensed it, has
shown a new direction of the Gamamarg, which challenges all doctrines and
philosophies and harmonizes all philosophies with the "Shatu Darshan Jin Ang
Bhanje". In his vast, ocean-like expanse, he has embraced all with ease,
offering a supremely profound and generous "divine vision". This Tatvadrashta
Gacharya has invited all philosophers to a universal, vast platform with love,
bringing them together in a spirit of equality and brotherhood. He has condemned
the false quarrels that are carried out in the name of religion with prejudice,
and has connected the Gidh Dharma, which is imbued with the unique spirit of
world brotherhood, to the eternal Atma Dharma. The discerning reader will be
amazed to see how this divine visionary developed the noble spirit of equality
towards all philosophies, devoid of attachment and aversion, on the
philosophical platform twelve years ago! And this is the main characteristic
among the many unique features of this gem of a book.  In the auspicious moment
of the year 1943, I was fortunate enough to come across this excellent book.
While studying it, I spontaneously felt the urge to write a detailed commentary
on this true scripture. Therefore, I have decided to undertake this project to
give concrete form to this inner inspiration to write a detailed commentary that
would enhance the essence and glory of this scripture: (1) The original text in
the Gujarati form of poetic translation. (2) The literal meaning for the people.
(3) A literal translation of Sri Haribhadrasuriji's Paz Vritti in the footnotes.
(4) A continuous and detailed commentary that encompasses and enriches the
essence of the text and the Vritti (called "Sumanandani Bahutika"). (5) A new
creation of Kalashka, which is the essence and support of each chapter in each
chapter. - Thus, I have set a five-pronged plan and have been actively engaged
in this sacred activity according to the above plan. With full enthusiasm, I
have been moving forward, sometimes at a fast pace and sometimes at a slow pace,
and I completed this work of commentary at the end of 1945. I am delighted to
place this book in the hands of the discerning, intellectual, and philosophical
readers. If any success is evident in this humble effort, which has been
undertaken with a pure heart, it is solely due to the grace of the
knowledgeable, virtuous men, without whose powerful support of the nectar of
their words, this effort would have been like a cripple's attempt to reach the
fruit, which is beyond his reach!  I have given some direction to the subject
matter of this book in the introduction. Its detailed explanation in the form of
a tree is discussed in the respective chapters of the vision. For guidance,
there is no space here. * The knowledge of the ignorant is like a boat without a
rudder. | The audience, therefore, should be aware of this.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prathama paMktimAM birAjanArA mahAna jyotirdhara thaI gayA che. hUdazananuM
parama paramArtharahasya saMvedanArA A suprasiddha "SaTUdanavettA"
haribhadrasUrie, sarva mata-darzanane Agraha cheDAvanArI ane "SaDU darizana jina
aMga bhaNaje' evI sarva darzanane samanvaya karanArI gamArganI navI dizA atra
dAkhavI che. potAnA sAgaravaragaMbhIra" vizALa paTamAM sarvane sugamatAthI
samAveza karatI parama gaMbhIra udAra AzayavALI "divya daSTi" arpaNa karI, A
tatvadraSTA gAcArye sarvamAnya vizALa gabhUmikA para sarvadarzanavAdIone saprema
AmaMtraNa karI samAnadhamIM-sAdharmika baMdhutvabhAve ekatra karyA che; ane
dharmane nAme kadAgrahathI cAlatA mithyA jhaghaDAone AtyaMtika niSedha karI,
vizvabaMdhutvanI ananya bhAvanA prabhAvanArA gidharmane-sanAtana Atmadharmane
sabaMdha karyo che. sujJa vAMcakane e jeIne sAnaMdAzcarya thaze ke
sarvadarzanasamabhAvanI-rAgadveSa rahita sahiSNutAnI udAtta bhAvanA AjathI bAra
varSa pUrve A divya draSTA gIzvare tAtvika bhUmikA para kevI vikasita karI che !
ane e ja A graMtharatnanI anekavidha viziSTatAo madhyenI mukhya viziSTatA che.
I. sa. 1943nA varSanI keI subhaga paLe Avo A uttama graMtha avagAhavAnuM
sadbhAgya mane prApta thayuM; ane tene svAdhyAya karatAM, A satazAstra para
vizada vivecana karavAnI mane svayaMbhU skuraNa thaI. eTale A sazAstrane Azaya
parikruTa karI tenuM guNagaurava-bahumAna vadhAre evuM bahata TIkArUpa savistara
vivecana karavAnI A hArI aMtar preraNAne mUrta AkAra ApavA A upakrama-janA meM
niyata karI : (1) mULa kane kAvyAnuvAda-gUjarAtI deharAmAM. (2) lokane zabdazaH
artha. (3) zrI haribhadrasUrijInI pajha vRttino akSaraza: anuvAda phuTanaTamAM.
(4) leka ane vRttinA Azayane parikruTa ane paripuSTa karatuM saLaMga savistara
vivecana ("sumanaMdanI' bahaTIkA nAmaka). (5) pratyeka adhikAra prAMte te te
adhikAranA sArasaMha ane puSTirUpa kalazakAnI nava racanA.-Ama paMcAMgI yojanA
niyata karI ukta upakrama pramANe A satapravRttimAM huM pUrNa utsAhathI pravRtta
thaye, ane yathAvakAza kavacit tIvra-kavacit maMda vege akhaMDa prayANa karatAM
A vivecanAdi kAryanI pUrNAhuti me 1945 nA aMtabhAgamAM karI. tenA
phalaparipAkarUpa A graMtha sujJa vivekI tattvarasika vAcakavRndanA
karakamalamAM mUkatAM mane AnaMda thAya che. AtmAthe karavAmAM AvelA A namra
prayatnamAM vigatamatsara guNadoSajJa sajajanene jo kaMI paNa saphaLatA
bhAsyamAna thAya, te te kevaLa guNanidhAna jJAnI satpuruSanA kRpAprasAdane ja
AbhArI che,jenA parama samartha vacanAmRtanI prabaLa bhittinA avalaMbana vinA ma
A prayatna "prAMzulabhya' phala pratye paMguceSTA jevuM ja banyA hota! A
graMthanI bIjabhUta vastune kaMIka nideza meM upaghAtamAM karyo che. tene
vRkSarUpa vistAra te te daSTinA adhikAramAM carcavAmAM Avela che,-jenA nirdeza
mATe atra avakAza * jJAte nirvAgataDAno taravAH | prekSAgatAM taddI vivA pAvate
,dAsa,

Page #10 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
No. (See Table of Contents). From the essence of each right, as well as from the
new structure I have made of the essence and confirmation of that right, the
wise reader will be able to understand the subject matter of this book. I have
shown the detailed consideration of each subject specified here in the
commentary - 'Sumananda's Bhatiatika'. Especially in it, Ichayaeg, Shastraag,
Samarthyaweg, Ahimsaad, Yama, Nimitt and Upadaan, Gabija, Avachakatrayi,
Samapatti, Vedya Sanvedya Pad, Adya Sanvedya Pad, Visham Kutka Graha, Sarvagna
Tattva Abhed, Akshapak Gnan, Asang Anushthan, Dhyata Dhyan and Dhyeya, Samadhi,
Mukta Tattva, Ichayamaadi, Kulgi, Pravritt Chakghi, etc. I have done a special
Mimamsa on these extremely interesting and original new topics in my
'Sumananda's Tika', which will be interesting to the seeker of truth 'Sumana'.
The original text on those topics is often in the form of a brief summary, only
suggesting the ultimate purpose, but this book has become so voluminous!
However, this voluminousness is forgivable in the face of the virtues and glory
of this presented gem of a book. I have been given this 'unprecedented
opportunity' to show my devotion to the scriptures as much as possible through
self-study, so I feel blessed, and I invite every seeker of truth with love to
immerse themselves in this devotional rasa and taste the nectar of truth. “It is
good that I have sung the virtues of the Lord, and my taste buds have tasted the
fruit; Devchandra says to my mind, my chariot is straight.” - Shri Devchandraji.
5, Pati Road, Dr. Bhagwandas Mansukh Bhai Mehta Mumbai, 7 M.B.B.S.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 nathI. (juo viSayAnukramaNikA). pratyeka adhikAranA prAMte tene sAra Ape che te
parathI, tema ja te te adhikAranA sArasaMha ane puSTirUpa kaLazanI meM karelI
navaracanA parathI paNa A graMthanI vastune sujJa vAcakane vizeSa khyAla AvI
zakaze. atre nirdiSTa karela pratyeka viSayano savistara vicAra meM vivecanamAM-
sumanaMdanI bahATIkA'mAM dAkhavyuM che. temAM paNa khAsa karIne IchAyega,
zAstrAga, sAmarthyavega, ahiMsAdi yama, nimitta ane upAdAna, gabIja,
avaMcakatrayI, samApatti, vedyasaMvedyapada, adyasaMvedyapada, viSama kutaka
graha, sarvajJa tatva abheda, AkSepaka jJAna, asaMga anuSThAna, dhyAtA dhyAna
ane dhyeya, samAdhi, mukta tatva, IcchAyamAdi, kulagI, pravRttacakagI e Adi
atyaMta rasamaya ne maulika navIna viSaye paratve te meM atra mahArI
"sumanaMdanI TIkAmAM viziSTa mImAMsA karI che, je tattvapipAsu "sumane ne
rasaprada thaI paDaze. te te viSaye mULa graMthamAM prAyaH sUvarUpa saMkSepa
nirdezamAtra heI, tene parama paramArthagaMbhIra Azaya'nuM sUcana mAtra karatAM
ATaluM graMthagaurava vadhI gayuM che ! tathApi A graMthagaurava paNuM prastuta
graMtharatnanA guNagaurava bahumAnarUpa hAI kSamya che. atre svAdhyAyamaya
yathAzakti zrutabhakti dAkhavavAne "apUrva avasara" mane prApta thaye tethI nija
dhanyatA anubhavI, A bhaktirasa jAtImAM nimajajana karI tatvasudhArasapAnane
rasAsvAda levAnuM pratyeka tattvarasika sajajanane saprema AmaMtraNa karuM chuM.
"bhaluM thayuM meM prabhu guNa gAyA, rasanAne phala lIdhe re; devacaMdra kahe
mahArA manane, sakla mane ratha sIdhe re."--zrI devacaMdrajI. 5, pATI roDa, Do.
bhagavAnadAsa manasukhabhAI mahetA muMbaI, 7 ema. bI. bI. esa.

Page #11 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##    **The Essence of Liberation**  **AIA** ) ) ) **SYAIVAASA** EN ) AY ( ની )
**KIY** ( ૪) AAAAAAAA ( ૪) 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 UNA " येनात्माऽबुध्यतात्मैव परत्वेनैव
चापरम् । અક્ષયાનન્તવવાર, તબૈ સિદ્ધાત્મને નમઃ | ”—શ્રી પૂજ્યપાદસ્વામી  Before
delving into the subject matter of this treatise, "Yoga-Dristi-Samuchaya
Shastra," it is essential to understand the nature of bondage, the cause of
suffering, and liberation, the cause of happiness. This will pave the way for a
clear understanding of the essence of Yoga and the subject matter of this text.
We will explore this in three main sections: (I) Introduction, (II) Subject
Matter, (III) Significance.  **I. Introduction**  1. **The Nature of Bondage and
Liberation:** All beings naturally desire happiness and abhor suffering.
Everyone strives to avoid suffering and attain happiness, yet they fail to
achieve this. Why? This question has led to profound philosophical inquiries by
many wise thinkers. The cycle of birth, death, and rebirth, the endless
suffering of the "Bhava-Bhraanti" (delusion of existence), how can it be ended?
The profound contemplation of this truth led the enlightened beings like Lord
Mahavira to discover the ultimate solution. This compassionate ocean of wisdom,
for the welfare of the world, has revealed the truth. Through their own
experience, they have established the true nature of reality: the eternal,
imperishable soul, distinct from the body and all other material possessions.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 nI ) AY EN ) ) ) SYAIVAASA AIA ja ( 4) u pe 6 ghA ta KIY AAAAAAAA ( 4) 0 0 0 0
0 0 0 UNA " yenAtmA'budhyatAtmaiva paratvenaiva cAparam  /  akSayAnantavavAra,
tabai siddhAtmane namaH | "--zrI pUjyapAdasvAmI A yogadaSTisamuccaya zAstranA
abhidheya viSayanuM svarUpa vicArIe te pUrve sAmAnya pIThikArUpe AtmAne
duHkhakAraNarUpa pAtaMtrya zuM ? ane zAthI? tathA sukhakAraNarUpa svAtaMtrya zuM
ane zAthI? te vicAravAnuM prApta thAya che, ke jethI yoganuM ane A graMthanA
viSayanuM svarUpa samajavuM sugama thaI paDe. atre mukhya traNa vibhAgamAM
vicAra karazuM: (I) sAmAnya pIThikA, (II) abhidheya viSaya, (III) tAtparya
bodha. I. pIThikA 1, AtmasvAtaMtrya sukha ane kamapAtaMtrya duHkha, sarva jIvane
sukha priya che ane duHkha apriya che. duHkha TALavA ane sukha meLavavA mATe
sarvane prayatna che, chatAM tene te duHkha TaLatuM nathI ane sukha maLatuM
nathI tenuM zuM kAraNa? e parathI aneka samartha tattvajJAnIonA vicAranI utpatti
thaI che. punaH punaH janmavuM, punaH puna: maravuM, punaH punaH mAtAnA udaramAM
zayana karavuM, punarapi jJAnaM puSi maLe punA jJAna , -A anaMta duHkhamaya
janmamaraNaparaMparArUpa bhavabhrAMtine aMta kema Ave? enuM parama gaMbhIra
tattvamaMthana karatAM bhagavAna mahAvIrAdi parama samartha tatvadraSTAone je
yathArtha bodharUpa samAdhAna prApta thayuM, te niSkAraNa karuNarasasAgara te
bhagavaMtae jagajajanA kalyANArthe beThuM che. teoe svAnubhavathI samyapha tatva
nirNaya karyo ke A dehAdithI bhinna evI ajara amara

Page #12 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
There is a thing called "Atma" which is 11 imperishable conscious form, and it
has been afflicted by the suffering of this cycle of birth and death due to the
association of inert matter (Tadanaya) with it. When this Atma gets separated
from the association of this other thing called Karma, it will be freed from the
suffering of this cycle of birth and death; it will be freed from the bondage of
Karma, which is the abode of suffering, and attain liberation, which is the
abode of happiness and self-independence. "Kanako Palavat Padi Purush Tani, Jedi
Anadi Swabhav; Anya Sagi Jya Lagi Atma, Sansari Kehvaay...Padma Prabh." Shri
Anandghanaji. A natural question arises here: Atma is conscious and Karma is
inert, the result of consciousness is consciousness and the result of inertness
is inertness. Thus, these two things are different, then how can there be a
combination-bond between them? And how is that bond arranged? The solution is
that the bond occurs due to the Karma-related maturity of the Atma, which is
conducive to the Karma-relationship, and it does not occur without such
suitability. This Karma-related maturity of the Atma is called "Mal" -
Bhavamal*. It pollutes the pure nature of the Atma, makes it impure, that is why
it is called "Mal". This Mal is inherent in the Atma, it is Anadi, therefore the
Karma-bond arising from it is also Anadi - just as the moments of the past are
Anadi in the flow of time. (See Gabindu). And from this, the arrangement of the
bond also occurs inevitably, because the Atma's interest-oriented maturity-
enjoyment towards the external influence is the form of Bhavamal. Thus, this -
Bhavamal is the result of the Atma, therefore it is Bhavakam. Therefore, the
Atma is the doer of this bond, which is the cause-effect of Bhavakam. Due to the
arrangement of this conscious Bhavakarma, the inert Pudgal Dravya takes the form
of Jeevviya and becomes eight types of Dravyakarma, namely Jnanavarniyaadi. As
said in Shri Atmasiddhi, "Bhavkam Nij Kalpana, Mate Chetanarup; Jeevviriya Ni
Kurana, Grahan Kare * (1) This Atma is known as "Purush" by the Jains and
Vedantins, Buddhists call it "Jnana", and Sankhya calls it "Kshetravid". (2)
Tadanaya - Jain calls this other thing "Karma", Buddhists and Vedantins call it
"Avidya", and Sankhya calls it "Prakriti". (3) And the association with it,
which is called "Bond", is called "Bhrant" by Buddhists and Vedantins, and
"Pravritti" by Sankhya. (4) This Karma-related suitability, which is Bhavamal,
is called "Diksha" - the desire to see Prakriti Vikaran by Sankhya, "Bhavbeej"
by Sho, "Avidya" which is Bhrant by Vedantins, and "Vasana" which is Anadi Klesh
by Saumya. Thus, despite the difference in terminology due to the difference in
views, the substance is not different. This is the truth of all Darshanas. "Atma
Tanyatha Sanft Tadriyaora: I a gva Mu Ghani Ja Vastramaadyaachora zatha." (See
Shri Haribhadrasuri's Gabindu)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 11 avinAzI caitanya svarUpa "AtmA" nAmanI vastu che, ane tene tenAthI anya
(tadanya) evI jaDa vastunA sAgathI ja A bhavaparibhramaNa duHkha sAMpaDayuM che.
te karmanAmaka anya vastunA sagane viyega thAya te ja A AtmA paribhramaNa
du:khathI chUTe; dukhadhAma karmapArataMgyarUpa baMdhathI mukta thaI sukhadhAma
AtmasvAtaMtryarUpa mukti pAme. kanako palavata paDi puruSa taNI, jeDI anAdi
svabhAva; anya sagI jyAM lagI AtamA, saMsArI kahevAya...padmaprabha." zrI
AnaMdaghanajI. atre sahaja prazna tha saMbhave che ke AtmA cetana che ane karma
jaDa che, cetananA pariNAma cetana hoya ane jaDanA pariNAma jaDa hoya. Ama A
banne vastu bhinna che, te pachI A bene saMyoga-baMdha kema ghaTe? ane te
baMdhanI vyavasthA kevA prakAre ? tenuM samAdhAna e che ke-karmasaMbaMdhane
anukULa evI AtmAnI pariNatirUpa karmasaMbaMdhacogyatAthI ja tevA prakAre baMdha
ghaTe che, tevA prakAranI yogyatA sivAya ghaTato nathI. AtmAnI A kamasaMbaMdha
gyatAne "mAla"-bhAvamala* kahe che. AtmAnA zuddha svabhAvanuM malana-viSkabhana
kare che, malinapaNuM kare che, eTalA mATe ja A "mAla" kahevAya che. "maDhanAr
ma ra " A mala AtmAne svabhAvabhUta hoI anAdi che, eTale tajajanya karmabaMdha
paNa anAdi che,-atItakAlanI kSaNa aparA5ra krame pravAhApekSAe anAdi che tema.
(juo gabindu). ane A parathI baMdhanI tAvika vyavasthA paNa avikalapaNe ghaTe
che, kAraNa ke parabhAva pratye AtmAnI ruciyukta pariNati-ramaNatA e ja
bhAvamalanuM svarUpa che. Ama A - bhAvamala AtmAnA pariNAmarUpa hoI bhAvakama
che. eTale AtmA A baMdhanI tAvika bhAvakane pariNAma-pariNAmI bhAve kartA che. A
cetanarUpa bhAvakarmanA vyavasthA nimitte jaDa evuM pudgala dravya jIvavIyanI
kuraNuM grahaNa karI svayaM jJAnAvaraNIyAdi ATha dravyakarmarUpe pariName che.
zrI AtmasiddhimAM kahyA pramANe "bhAvakama nija kalpanA, mATe cetanarUpa;
jIvavIryanI kuraNA, grahaNa kare * (1) A AtmAne jana ane vedAMtI "puruSa' nAme
oLakhe che, bauddha tene "jJAna" kahe che, ane sAMkhya "kSetravid' kahe che. (2)
tadanya-te AmAthI anya evI vastune jaina "kama'' kahe che, bauddha ane vedAMtI
"avidyA' kahe che, ane sAMkhya "prakRti' kahe che. (3) ane tenA saMgane jene
"baMdha" nAma ApyuM che, bauddha ane vedAMtIe "bhrAMti" nAma ApyuM che, ane
sAMkhe "pravRtti" nAma ApyuM che. (4) A karmasaMbaMdha yogyatArUpa bhAvamalane
sAMkhyo "dikSA'-prakRtivikarAne dekhavAnI IcchA kahe che, zo "bhavabIja' kahe
che, vedAMtIo bhrAMtirUpa "avidyA' kahe che, saumate anAdi klezarUpa "vAsanA
kahe che. Ama darzanabhede paribhASArUpa nAmabheda chatAM vastu meda nathI. A
sarva dazanasaMmata vastutatva che. " AtmA tanyathAsaMeft tadriyora: I a gva mu
ghaNI ja vastrAmADyAcorazthA . (juo zrI haribhadrasUrikRta gabindu)

Page #13 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 12  **The Inert Group.** This means that the soul is the doer in a relative
and conditional way, due to the material cause. Here, the example of a goldsmith
is relevant. The goldsmith makes ornaments due to the relative and conditional
nature of his thoughts, and he is the doer in a consequential way, due to his
own happiness, joy, etc. From this material cause, the body and other things are
produced, and the soul, residing in the body, experiences the arising of the
material cause. When this arises, if the soul becomes involved in the emotions
of attachment, aversion, and delusion, it becomes the cause of a new emotion,
and due to this emotion, the material cause arises again. Thus, the cycle of
rebirth and death continues. In Jain terminology, the emotion is called 'mal'
and the material cause is called 'raj'. Just as dirt sticks to a sticky
substance, similarly, due to the attachment and affection, which are like sticky
substances, the material cause, which is like dirt, sticks to it. Thus, due to
the mutual relative and conditional nature of the cause and effect, the emotion
and the material cause are interdependent. The emotion gives rise to the
material cause, and the material cause gives rise to the emotion, thus creating
a vicious circle. Due to this, the cycle of birth and death, with its various
forms, continues to revolve.  Thus, the emotion of attachment, which is the root
cause of all suffering, is the cause of the cycle of rebirth. Therefore, the
root cause of worldly existence is the ignorance of the true nature of the soul,
which is the ignorance of the soul's true nature. The mistaken identification of
the self with the body and other external objects is the biggest mistake of the
soul, and this mistaken identification gives rise to the cycle of rebirth.
Because, due to the imagination of the self in external objects, attachment,
aversion, and delusion arise due to those objects. Therefore, due to the
protection of those objects, passions arise, and in this way, the eighteen types
of sins are born. Due to this fundamental delusion of identifying the self with
the body, the activities of the mind, speech, and body become conducive to
external objects and emotions. The path is lost, and the goal is missed. The
mind becomes filled with thoughts about external objects and emotions, speech
becomes filled with false words about external objects and emotions, and the
body becomes involved in activities to obtain external objects and emotions.
Thus, the evil activities of the mind, speech, and body, which are like
'sucintitra hummasim stuiti', give rise to 'suchyu', which is evil deeds.  "Due
to the attachment to external objects, the mind becomes filled with passion, and
the body becomes stained with the blood of others. Due to the desire to protect
external objects, the soul becomes attached to them." - Shri Devchandraji  Thus,
the delusion of identifying the self with external objects arises, the true
knowledge becomes false, and the good conduct becomes bad conduct. Due to the
delusion of the self, the delusion of conduct arises, and intense passions like
'anatanubandhi' etc. begin to arise. Due to these two types of delusions, the
nature of the soul becomes corrupted, and its liberation becomes impossible.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 12 jaDa grUpa.' eTale AtmA A dravyaka'nA nimitta-naimittikabhAve kartA che.
atre suvarNakAra zilpInu dRSTAMta ghaTe che. seAnI kuDalAdi bhAvanA nimitta-
naimittikabhAve karyAM che, ane peAtAnA sukha-harSa Adi bhAvAne pariNAma-
pariNAmIbhAve kartA che. A dravyakama thI dehArdi utpanna thAya che, ane dehamAM
sthiti karatA AtmAne dravyakamanA udaya thAya che. te uya thaye jo AtmA rAga-
dveSa-mAharUpa vibhAva bhAve pariName te te bhAvamalarUpa navIna bhAvakanA adha
kare che, ane A bhAvakanA nimitte puna: dravyakama aMdhAya che, ane tethI punaH
dehadhAraNAdi bhavaparipATI hAya che. jaina pirabhASAmAM bhAvakane mATe * mala'
ane dravyakane mATe 'raja' evI yathArtha saMjJA che. jema mala-cIkAza hAya teA
raja cAMTe, tema bhAvamalarUpa Asakti-sneha-cIkAzane lIdhe dravyakama rUpa raja
cAMTe che. Ama paraspara nimitta-naimittikabhAve araghaTTaghaTTInyAye bhAvakama-
dravyakama nA anukha'dha thayA kare che, bhAvakamAMthI dravyakama ane draSTakama
thI bhAvakamAM ema duSTa cakra (Vicious circle) cAlyA kare che, ane tethI
janmamaraNunA Avatta rUpa-pherArUpa bhavacakra paNa ghUmyA kare che. Ama
parabhAvamAM AsaktirUpa bhAvamala kama badhanuM mULa kAraNa che, ane kama e
bhavabhramaNanu kAraNa che, eTale sasAranu mULa kAraNa avidyArUpa AtmabrAMti ja
che, AtmasvarUpanuM ajJAna e ja che. dehAda paravastumAM AtmasrAMti e ja A
jIvanI meTAmAM meTI mUlagata bhUla che ane A AtmabrAMtithI ja bhavabhrAMti upajI
che. kAraNa ke ema parabhAvane viSe AtmabhAvanI kalpanAne (Imagination) lIdhe te
parabhAva nimitte rAga-dveSa-mahAdi vibhAva upajyA, eTale te te viSayanA
ceAgakSemAthe -viSayasa rakSaNArthe kaSAya upajyA, ane A ja prakAre aDhAre
pApasthAnakanI utpatti thai. dehamAM AtmabuddhirUpa A mUlagata bhrAMtine lIdhe
mana-vacana-kAyAnA ceAganI pravRtti paNa parabhAva-vibhAvane anukULa thai.
upayAga cUkayeA eTale yeAga cUkayA. manathI parabhAva-vibhAvanA ciMtanarUpa
dudhdhi'tita thavA lAgyuM, vacanathI parabhAva-vibhAva mhArA che evu' mRSA
vacanarUpa durbhASita uccarAvA lAgyuM, ane kAyAthI parabhAva-vibhAvanI prApti
mATenI pravRttirUpa dudhyeSTita AcarAvA lAgyuM. Ama 'suciMtitra hummAsima
sTuiida' rUpa mana-vacana-kAyAnA ceganI duSTa pravRttirUpa 'suchyuM ' duSkRta
ubharAvA lAgyuM. " parapariNati rAgIpaNe, pararasa raMge rakta re; paragrAhaka
rakSakapaNe, parabhAve Asakta re."--zrI devaca`drajI, Ama paravastumAM
mu'jhAvArUpa mAha-darzanameAha upajyeA, dana mithyA thayu, eTale sarva jJAna
ajJAnarUpa banyu, ane sa` cAritra paNa kucAritra thai paDyuM. danamAha upajgyA
eTale cAritramAha upajyuM, ane anatAnubaMdhI Adi tIvra kaSAya prakAronI utpatti
thavA lAgI. A dvividha mAharUpa ghAti prakRtinA khadha thayA, eTale tenA ava

Page #14 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
13 The nature of the other, the killer, is knowledge-obscuring, vision-
obscuring, and an obstacle, and it also begins to bind. Similarly, the painful,
life, name, and body, these non-killer natures also begin to bind. And the
liberated soul, originally pure in nature, becomes bound by the tight bonds of
the eightfold karma, suffering in the cycle of existence, in an endless cycle of
birth and death. Thus, when the commander of the army of vision-delusion
(mithyatva) enters, the entire army of karma, following it, attacks the soul,
makes a strong attack on the soul's territory, and destroys its field! The king
of kings, delusion-king, entered the city of consciousness with great pomp, so
the entire family of karma, shouting his victory, followed him and surrounded
the soul's territory! And for the crime of transgressing the father's field of
matter, the soul was imprisoned and thrown into the hell of the world! "The
retribution for the enemy!" "There are infinite types, of which the main eight,
of which the main delusion, the killer, I say the lesson. Karma, delusion, two
divisions, vision, character, name; Two kill, non-attachment, the infallible
remedy thus." Shri Atmasiddhi. The soul, having pierced its own nature, its own
dharma, moved towards the other, therefore the other, the adharma, clung to it,
and thus karma-Rahu eclipsed the soul-moon, causing terrible consequences, the
soul was forced to join its father; for the sin of interfering in the other's
field, the punishment is received, "What you do with your hands, you will suffer
in your heart!" "The house is in turmoil!" This is a very big mistake of the
living being, a serious mistake like "a mistake of a mountain in a sesame seed!"
The father forgot the father, what other darkness is greater than this? "You
forgot your own, what darkness is this!" With this fundamental mistake of the
soul-consciousness in the body, a complex web of other incidental mistakes also
arose. "The principal and the interest have increased greatly!" What a terrible
consequence of a single mistake! Or, in another way, consider that there are two
divisions of the so-called delusion-karma that entangles the world in the web of
delusion-maya. Vision-delusion and character-delusion. Of these, (1) due to the
vision-delusion of the soul-consciousness in the body and other objects, the
living being has mithyatva or false vision, and therefore character-delusion
also arises. (2) Therefore, because of the soul-consciousness in the other, the
living being does not become detached from the other and remains restless. (3)
Thus, because of its movement and transformation towards the other, it attains
the corruption of its form, the delusion. (4) And because of the attainment and
non-attainment of the other, it performs the passions of anger, etc., and
creates the emotions of attachment and aversion, etc.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 13 Ilene Itara ghAtI prakRti jJAnAvaraNIya, darzanAvaraNIya, aMtarAya paNa
baMdhAvA lAgI, tema ja vedanIya, Ayu, nAma, getra e aghAti prakRtine paNa baMdha
thavA lAgyA. ane mULa zuddha svabhAve mukta AtmA aSTavidha karmanI beDInA gADhA
baMdhane baMdhAI saMsAracakramAM anaMta janmamaraNaparaMparArUpa paribhramaNa
duHkha pAmI rahyo. Ama darzanameha-mithyAdarzana (mithyAtva) senAnAyake praveza
karatAM, tenI anugAminI samasta karma-senAe AtmA para AkramaNa (Invasion)
karyuM, Atmapradeza para joradAra hale karyo ane tenA kSetrane khedAnamedAna
karI nAkhyuM ! rAjAdhirAja meha-rAye dabadabAbharI rIte caitanya-puramAM praveza
karyo, eTale tenI jaya pokAratA samasta karma parivAre potAnA te annadAtAnI
pAchaLa pAchaLa anupraveza karI Atmapradezane gherI lIdhe! ane pitAnA pudgala-
kSetramAM atikramaNa (Transgression, Trespass) karavAnA aparAdha badala AtmAne
baMdivAna banAvI saMsAranI heDamAM pU! ne "veranI vasulAta" karI ! ka" anaMta
prakAranA, temAM mukhya ATha temAM mukhya mehanIya, haNAya te kahuM pATha. karma
mohanIya bheda be, darzanacAritra nAma; haNe be vItarAgatA, acUka upAya Ama."
zrI Atmasiddhi. svabhAvarUpa svadharmane cheDI AtmAe parabhAva pratye gamana
karyuM, tethI vibhAvarUpa adharma tene vaLage, ane tethI karIne karma--rAhue
Atma-caMdranuM grahaNa-sana karyuM, tene dAruNa vipAka AtmAne pitAne ja bhegava
paDyo; pArakA kSetramAM hastakSepa karavArUpa pApa-aparAdhane badale maLe,
"hAthanAM karyA haiye vAgyAM!" "gharagha macAva" thaI paDyo! A jIvanI ghaNI moTI
bhUla-"eka telAmAM maNanI bhUla" jevI gaMbhIra bhUla thaI ! pite pitAne bhUlI
gaye, AnAthI te moTuM bIju aMdhera kayuM? "Apa ApakuM bhUla gayA, Inase kyA
adhera !" dehamAM AtmabuddhirUpa A mUlagata bhUlane laIne bIjI AnuSaMgika
bhUlanI paNa bhUlabhUlAmaNIrUpa jaTila jAla jAmI gaI. "mUla De ne vyAjaDe ghaNe"
vadhI paDyo ! eka ja bhUlanuM kevuM bhayaMkara pariNAma ! athavA prakArAMtare
vicArIe te jagatanI meha-mAyAjAlamAM lapaTAvanAra nAmacIna mahanIya karmanA be
bheda che. darzana meha ane cAritrameha. temAM (1) dehAdi paravastumAM
AtmabrAMtirUpa darzanamehane lIdhe jIvane mithyAdarzana athavA mithyAtva hoya
che, ane tethI cAritramoha paNa upaje che. (2) eTale parabhAvamAM Atmabuddhi
hovAthI jIva parabhAvathI virAma pAmate nathI ne avirati rahe che. (3) Ama
parabhAva pratye gamana-pariNamana karate hevAthI te svarUpa-bhraSTatArUpa
pramAdane pAme che. (4) ane te parabhAvanI prApti-aprAptinA nimitte te krodhAdi
kaSAya karI rAgadveSAdi vibhAva bhAvane

Page #15 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
14 He worships. (5) And thus, the activities of his mind, speech, and body,
which are affected by it, also primarily act in accordance with that external
influence for the attainment of that external influence. Thus, due to the
original ignorance-like self-delusion, the five asrava-laden karma-influx
channels of mithyatva, aviriti, pramada, kshaya, and vega remain open.
Therefore, the soul is bound by karma due to these binding causes, and the bound
soul experiences the suffering of transmigration. On the other hand, (1) when
the self-delusion, which is the self-consciousness in the external influence, is
abandoned, and the soul becomes self-conscious in the soul itself, then
mithyatva is avoided, darshanamoha is destroyed, and samyagdarshan is revealed.
(2) Then, the aviriti defect is avoided, and there is cessation from all
external influences - bhavavirati occurs. (3) Therefore, the pramada defect,
which is the corruption from the self-nature, is avoided, and there is a state
of apramada-apramatta (non-negligence) in the self-nature. (4) Therefore, there
is no kshaya due to external influence, no staining by raga-adi vibhava, and
there is complete nishkshaya-purna vitraga. (5) And with the destruction of
kshaya-generated agitation, the yoga of mind, speech, and body also becomes
conducive to self-stability, and finally, the ayoga state is attained. Thus,
there is sanvara, which is the closing of the asrava-doors for the influx of
karma. With the destruction of darshanamoha, charitramoha is also destroyed in
sequence; bodha is the sure remedy for destroying darshanamoha, and vitraga is
the sure remedy for destroying charitramoha. This arrangement of the three types
of mohaniya karma, the leading karma of darshanamoha-charitramoha, and the five
binding causes, which are its subdivisions, clearly explains the entire
arrangement of the fourteen gunasthanas, because the constitution of these
gunasthanas is primarily based on the attainment and abandonment of these mohas.
As the amount of moha decreases and the nishkshaya vitraga maturity of the soul
increases, the true saadhutva-sadhakatva, which is the development of the soul's
qualities, is revealed. Thus, it is clear from the understanding of karma-bandha
and its binding causes that self-delusion is the root of this suffering of
transmigration. When does this self-delusion cease? The root cause, this self-
delusion, ceases. Because, as we have seen, there is an arrangement in which
bhavamokhsa is connected to dravyakarma, and dravyakarma is connected to
bhavakarma, and the vicious circle of binding continues, and therefore, due to
the principle of cyclical rotation, the cycle of births and deaths also
continues. When does this chain of karma-bandha break? When does this vicious
cycle end? When bhavakarma, which is self-delusion, ceases, then this chain
breaks and this vicious cycle ends. In other words, when the soul refuses to
have the feeling of self in the body and other external influences, when it
"rejects" and abandons the vibhava that results in the opposite feeling of raga-
dvesha-moha, then bhavakarma is not bound, and due to the absence of that cause,
dravyakarma is also not bound, and this chain of karma-bandha...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 14 bhaje che. (5) ane tethI kSebha pAmelA tenA mana-vacana-kAyAnA caganI
pravRtti paNa te parabhAvanI prApti arthe tadanukUlapaNe mukhyapaNe pravarte
che. Ama mULa avidyArUpa AtmabrAMtine lIdhe ja mithyAtva, avirati, pramAda,
kaSAya ane vega e pAMca AzravadvAna kamaAgamananA garanALA khullA rahe che.
eTale te baMdhahetuothI AtmA karmathI baMdhAya che, ane karmanI beDIthI
baMdhAyele A jIva bhavabhramaNaduHkha pAme che. AthI ulaTuM (1) parabhAvamAM
AtmabuddhirUpa je AtmabrAMti che, te cheDI daI jIva je AtmAmAM ja Atmabuddhi
kare, to mithyAtva TaLe, darzanamoha naSTa thAya ane samyagadarzana pragaTe. (2)
eTale pachI avirati doSa TaLe ne sarva parabhAvamAMthI virAma pAme-bhAvavirati
thAya. (3) eTale tene AtmasvarUpathI bhraSTatArUpa pramAda deSa TaLe ane
svarUpane viSe apramAdaapramatta sthiti hoya. (4) eTale parabhAva nimitte kaSAya
kare nahiM, rAgAdi vibhAvathI raMgAya nahiM ane niSkaSAya-pUrNa vItarAga thAya.
(5) ane kaSAyajanya saMkSobha naSTa thavAthI mana-vacana-kAyAnA yoga paNa
AtmasthiratAne anukULapaNe vara, ane chevaTe ayoga dazA prApta thAya, Ama
karmane AvavAnA Azrava-daravAjA baMdha thavArUpa saMvara thAya che. darzanamoha
naSTa thatAM anukrame cAritramoha paNa naSTa thAya che; darzanamehane haNa vAne
acUka upAya bodha che, ne cAritrahane haNavAne acUka upAya vItarAgatA che. AvI A
karmonA agraNI darzanamoha-cAritrameha ema trividha mohanIya karmanI, ane tenA
upabhedarUpa A pAMca baMdhahetuonI vyavasthA parathI cauda guNasthAnakanI
samagra vyavasthA paNa zIdhra samajAI jAya che, kAraNa ke A guNasthAnakanuM
baMdhAraNa (Constitution) mukhyapaNe AtmAnA A mehaapagama para racAyeluM che.
mehanI mAtrA jema jema ghaTatI jAya ne AtmAnI nizkaSAya vItarAga pariNati jema
jema vadhatI jAya, tema tema AtmAnA guNavikAsarUpa sAcI sAdhutA-sAdhakatA
pragaTatI jAya che. Ama karmabaMdhanI ane tenA baMdhahetuonI saMkalanA parathI
spaSTa samajAya che keAtmabrAMti e ja A bhavabhramaNaduHkhanuM mULa che. A
bhavabhrAMti kayAre TaLe? tenA mULa kAraNarUpa A AtmabrAMti TaLe che. kAraNa ke
ApaNe joyuM tema bhAvamokSanI tAtvika karmathI dravya karma ane dravyakarmathI
bhAvakama ema saMkalana thayA kare vyavasthA che ane baMdhanuM duSTa caka
(Vicious circle ) cAlyA kare che, ane tethI cakrabhramaNanyAye bhavane cakA paNa
cAlyA kare che. AvI A karmabaMdhanI sAMkaLa (chain) kayAre zUTe? A duSTa cakrane
aMta kyAre Ave? AtmabhrAMtirUpa bhAvakama DyUTe to A sAMkaLa tUTe ane A duzcaka
baMdha paDe. arthAt jIva je dehAdi ane rAgAdi parabhAva pratye AtmabhAva
dharavAnI nA pADe, "pratyAkhyAna' kare, rAga-dveSa-moharUpa viparIta bhAve
pariNamavArUpa vibhAva choDI dIe, te bhAvakarma na baMdhAya, eTale tene nimitta
abhAve dravyakama paNa na baMdhAya, ane A karmabaMdhanI

Page #16 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  English Translation:  15. The chain breaks. Thus, the reins of breaking this
bondage are in the hands of the soul, not as a result of the feeling of
detachment, but as a result of the effort to press the brake (Chui-k) of non-
attachment, the secret key (Master-key) of effort is in the possession of the
soul itself. The meaning is that the soul does not become attached to passion,
aversion, or affection due to external influences, but remains detached, this is
the key. Thus, the effort of the soul bound by karma is always open. It is only
a matter of time before the soul abandons the false attachments of worldly
existence and engages in true effort. This is the call to the lion-like soul,
the master of infinite power, to roar and destroy the Shugal (evil). The soul
only needs to rise. As Shrimad Rajchandraji has roared, "When the soul rises,
then the color will be seen." 3tti Dottiz Sakar! The awakened soul, through the
wisdom of discrimination, realizes the pure form of the father, abandons the
inferior form of detachment, and embraces the eternal Dharma of the soul, then
it will surely attain liberation, "The soul will reside in its true form."
"That which is the ultimate goal, is the true effort; Do not abandon the soul's
purpose, even if you take the name of worldly existence." Shri Atmasiddhi. From
this arrangement of bondage and liberation, the nine principles enunciated by
Lord Mahavira become clear. This soul is bound by karma, which is non-soul.
There are two divisions of this non-soul karma: virtue and vice. The cause of
karma is the five asravas (influx) of wrong belief, etc. When asravas occur,
bondage happens. Asravas can be stopped by samvara, which is like closing the
doors to new karma. Old karma can be destroyed by tapas (austerity) like
meditation. By continuously destroying karma, the soul attains liberation, which
is the pure state of the soul. Only the pure "Advaita" (non-dual) soul is the
true form of liberation.  "Trishlata also contemplated in her mind, increased
her knowledge, discrimination, and thought, and constantly emphasized the nine
principles, with excellent understanding and many pronouncements." Shri Meksha
Mala.  To understand these nine principles with proper discrimination, one
should know the four aspects of the medical science: First, one should know what
the disease (Disease) is. This is the disease that needs to be cured. Second,
one should know the cause (Aetiology) of the disease. This is the cause of the
disease. Third, one should know the cure (Normal healthy condition, cure).  _* "
हेयं दुःखमनागतम् । दृष्टश्ययोः संयोगो हेयहेतुः। तदभावात् संयोगाभावो हानं तद्
દશે: ચૈત્રયમ્ ! વિવાહયાતિરવિજીવા દાનોપાય | પાતંજલ યંગસુત્ર, ૨.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 15 sAMkaLa tuTe. Ama A baMdhasaMkalana troDavAnI lagAma AtmAnA hAthamAM che, e
vibhAvarUpa bhAvakarma pariNAme nahiM pariNamavAnI chUIka (Brake) dabAvavArUpa
puruSArthanI rahasya cAvI (Master-key) puruSanA (AtmAnA) potAnA gajavAmAM ja
che. tAtparya ke jIva parabhAva nimitte rAga dveSa-meha na kare, vibhAvabhAve na
pariName te mikSa hatheLImAM ja che. Ama karmanibaddha AtmAnA (puruSanA)
puruSArthane mAga sadAya sAva khule paDayo che. bhavasthiti Adi khoTA nhAnA
cheDI daI jIva satya puruSArtha kare eTalI ja vAra che. A anaMta zaktinA svAmI
puruSa-siMhane huMkAra karya-zugAlane nasADavA mATe basa che ! mAtra AtmA UTha
joIe. zrImad rAjacaMdrajIe vIragarjanA karI che tema "jaba jAeMge AtamA, taba
lAgege raMga." 3tti dottijha sAkara ! mohanidrAmAMthI jAgele AtmA
vivekakhyAtivaDe pitAnA zuddha svarUpanuM bhAna pAmI, vibhAvarUpa adhamane tyajI
AtmasvabhAvarUpa sanAtana Atmadharmane bhaje, to avazya mekSa pAme, "puruSanuM
svarUpamAM avasthAna thAya." "je I paramArtha te, kare satya puruSArtha;
bhavasthiti. Adi nAma laI, chede nahiM AtmArtha." zrI Atmasiddhi. A baMdha-
mekSanI vyavasthA parathI bhagavAna mahAvIre praNIta karelA nava tatvanI adbhuta
avikala saMkalanA paNa spaSTa samajAI jAya che. A jIva ajIva evA karmathI
baMdhAyela che, puNya-pApa A ajIva karmanA aMtargata be bheda che; karmanA
AvavAnuM kAraNa mithyAtvAdi pAMca Azrava che, Azrava thaye baMdha thAya che,
Azravane-navAM karmanA Agamanane AzradvAra saMvRta karavArUpa saMvarathI rokI
zakAya che, ane junAM kamene dhyAnAdi tapavaDe nirjarAthI kheravI zakAya che,
ane ema nirjarA karatAM karatAM sarva karmane kSaya thaye zuddha
AtmasvabhAvarUpa mokSa thAya che, kevala eka zuddha "advaita" AtmA ja sAkSAt
mokSasvarUpa bane che. te trizalAtoye mana ciMtavI, jJAna viveka vicAra vadhA
nitya vizedha karI nava tatvane, uttama bodha aneka uccArUM." zrI mekSamALA. A
nava tatvane hepAdeya viveka samajavA mATe cikitsAzAstra prasiddha cAra vAnAM
jANavA joIe; prathama te roga (Disease) zuM ? e jANavuM joIe; A roga heya-
atyajavA yogya che. bIju rogane hetu ( Aetiology) zuM? e jANavuM joIe; A heya
hetu che. trIju Arogya (Normal healthy condition, cure ) _* " heyaM
duHkhamanAgatam  /  dRSTazyayoH saMyogo heyhetuH| tadabhAvAt saMyogAbhAvo hAnaM
tad daze: caitrayam ! vivAhayAtiravijIvA dAnopAya | pAtaMjala yaMgasutra, 2.

Page #17 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 16  What? One should know its form; this is the disease. And what is the
fourth remedy for the disease (Therapeutic treatment)? One should know that;
this is the purpose of the disease. Thus, here (1) the ajiva karma and the
samsara arising from it are the disease, therefore they are to be avoided. (2)
The purpose of this karma disease, which is to be avoided, is asrava and bandha,
this is the purpose of the disease to be avoided. (3) The remedies for removing
the purpose of this karma disease are samvara and nirjara. (4) And the removal
of the karma disease is moksha, that is, the health of the soul. In this way,
the Bhagwan Vitrag, the physician of the bhavyadhis, has shown the amegh
chikitsa of this maha-bhavarega of the jiva, and by establishing this jagatarak
tirtharup shuddha "dharmachakra", he has made his name "tirthankara" meaningful.
"Because of the cause, the bandha is bound, because of the cause, the mukti is
released; Asrava samvara, by name, in order, O Padeya, listen....Padma Prabhu 0"
Shri Anandghanji.  Thus, samsara is the biggest disease of the soul, and its
cause is karma, so being under the control of karma is the root of the bhavarega
dukha. To be free from this karma parakhanti - karma bandha - is the ultimate
happiness, that is, the pure nature of the soul, "healthy" state of health is
the sukhadham moksha.  ## 2. The main definition of yoga and the unity of the
path of moksha  "This is the yogi, the form of infinite happiness; the original
pure soul, the companion of the jina form. The jina pad and the nij pad are one,
there is no difference. To become the lakshya, they are called sukhadayi by the
scriptures." - Shrimad Rajchandra. And this pure nature of the soul, "healthy"
state of health, which is moksha, is called "yoga". The word yoga is derived
from the root "yuj". Yuj means to go, to join (To unite). It is called "yoga"
because it unites the jiva with moksha. "Mokshena roganatu chora" is its main
definition. Thus, the process by which the soul attains the moksha pad or
nirvana pad, which is the pure atmasiddhi, is called yoga. This moksha, which is
the ultimate goal, may be known by any name, some call it shivpad, some call it
jinapad, some call it buddhapada, some call it siddhapada, some call it ahanta,
some call it parabrahma, some call it parameshthipada, some call it
parmatmapada, some call it tathata, some call it siddhatma - but despite the
difference in words, there is no difference in the ultimate meaning, in the
natural form of the soul, in the pure atmaswarup pad. There is only one Ganga
river, some call it Bhagirathi, some call it Surnadi, some call it Tripathga,
some call it Mandakini, some call it Jahnavi...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 16 zuM? tenuM svarUpa jANavuM joIe; A hAna che. ane cothuM reganuM auSadha
(Therapeutic treatment ) zuM ? e jANavuM joIe; A hAna hetu che. tema atre (1)
ajIva karma ane tajajanya saMsAra e rega che, mATe heya che. (2) heya evA A
karmareganA hetu Azrava ane baMdha che, A heya hetu che. (3) A kama seganA hAna
hetumaTADavAnA upAya saMvara ane nirjarA che. (4) ane karma roganuM hAna-maTI
javuM te makSa arthAt AtmAnuM Arogya che. AvA prakAre jIvanA A mahAbhavareganI
amegha cikitsA bhavavyAdhinA bhiSavaro bhagavAna vitarAgae batAvI che, ane AvA
jagatAraka tIrtharUpa zuddha "dharmacaka'nuM pravartana karIne potAnA
"tIrthakara' nAmane sArthaka karyuM che. kAraNujage ho bAMdhe baMdhane, kAraNa
mugati mUkAya; Azrava saMvara nAma anukrame, he pAdeya suNAya....padmaprabha0"
zrI AnaMdaghanajI. Ama saMsAra e ja AtmAno meTAmAM moTo roga che ane tenuM
kAraNa karma che, eTale kama parataMtrya e ja bhavaroga duHkhanuM mULa che. A
karmapArakhaMthI -karmabaMdhathI chUTavuM-mukta thavuM e ja AtmasvAtaMtryarUpa
parama sukhamaya Arogya che, arthAt AtmAnI zuddha svabhAvarUpa "svastha " Arogya
avasthA e ja sukhadhAma mokSa che. 2. yoganI mukhya vyAkhyA ane mokSamArganI
ekatA ie che je jogIjana, anaMta sukha svarUpa; mULa zuddha te Atma56, saMgI
jinasvarUpa. jinapada nija pada ekatA, bhedabhAva nahiM kAMIka lakSa thavAne
tehane, kahyAM zAstra sukhadAyi."--zrImad rAjacaMdra, ane AtmAnI AvI A zuddha
svabhAvamaya "svastha" Aregya avasthArUpa mekSane vega prApta karAve tenuM nAma
ja "ga". yeAga zabda "yuja' dhAtu parathI nikaLe che. yuja eTale javuM-joDavuM
(To unite). mokSa sAthe jana-joDANa karAve che teTalA mATe te "ga" kahevAya che.
"mokSeNa roganATu cor:' ema tenI mukhya vyAkhyA che. Ama je prakriyA vaDe karIne
AtmA zuddha AtmasiddhirUpa mokSapada athavA nirvANapadane pAme tenuM nAma yoga.
A mokSarUpa paraMtatva bhale game te nAme oLakhAtuM hoya keI tene zivapada kahe
ke kaI jinapada kahe, keI buddhapada kahe ke kaI siddhapada kahe, koI ahaMta
kahe che ke parabrahma kahe, kaI parameSTipada kahe che ke paramAtmapada kahe,
kaI tathAtA kahe ke koI siddhAtmA kahe --paNa zabdabheda chatAM paramArthathI
tene sahajAmasvarUpamAMsahaja evA zuddha AtmasvarUpa padamAM bheda paDatuM
nathI. eka ja gaMgA nadI che, tene koI bhAgIrathI kahe, ke suranadI kahe, kaI
tripathagA kahe, kaI maMdAkinI kahe, koI jAhnavI

Page #18 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
17 Say, but in essence, there is no change in that thing. Similarly, even if
this Nirvanu-jnata pada, which is infinite in its qualities, is known by any
name that is a combination of its qualities, in essence, there is no difference
from the Paramatma. “What is the difference in words, O Kissoji? If the ultimate
truth is one; whether you call it Ganga or Suraniji, the thing is not
different.” — Shri Yashovijayji. The meaning is that this ‘Parantattva’, which
is beyond the world and beyond which there is nothing, is the common, non-
dualistic definition of this Yaga, which is connected to everything. And the
fruit of this is that the soul’s union with its own pure nature—its innate
nature—is the manifest, clear form of this Yaga. “What the yogi desires”—what
the yogi yearns for. To attain this Atmapada, which is the pure form of infinite
bliss, is the sole purpose of this Yaga. And this pure Atmasvarupa, the unity of
the Jinapada and the Nijapatta, is without any difference, and to attain this is
the purpose of all scriptures, which are conducive to happiness.  Thus, the path
to attain the supreme peace, which is Moksha, is Yaga, and Moksha is the
definite goal of all beings, so the means to attain it, this Yaga path, is also
one, and it is only in the Shantima, for those who are Shmapa-rayana,
Shmanishtha, those who are seeking liberation. This Shma means the ultimate
self-evolution, the single Shmanishtha, the state of being free from attachment
and aversion, equanimity. Shri Kundakundacharya has defined Shantima as the
state of being free from the Ma-Aabha, the result of the soul, that is called
Sama. Or Shma means samya, that is, to become equal to the Atmaguna, as it is,
in its true form. That which is samya is Dharma, and ‘Vahyusaddavo Dhamma’ the
nature of the thing is Dharma. This Dharma is Charitra, and ‘Svarupe Chala
Pashtr’ to walk in the form—to dwell in the Atmasvarupa—is Charitra. Thus,
Charitra=Dharma=Samya=Sama=Shma are synonymous words. The meaning is that to
reside in samya, that is, in the Atmasvarupa, to understand the form and to
dwell in the form, is Shma, to be free from the influence of others and to rest
in the self-nature is Shanti, and that is the Shmanishtha path or the Shantima
path. Mahagita Chougishwar Anandghanji has sung the unparalleled form of this
Shantima. For example— “Our Atmabhava, which is pure Chetanadhar; With the union
of all beings, it is the essence of our own family... Shanti Jin.” Those who
desire to go towards that Paratattva, all the Mumukhus, desire to attain that
one Shantima, so they are one, like the waves on the shore of the ocean of time,
even though there are differences in their states.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 17 kahe, paNa tattvathI te vastumAM kAMI phera paDeteA nathI. tema anaMta
guniyAna A nirvANusa jJita padane tenA game te guNavAcaka guNaniSpanna nAmathI
oLakhavAmAM Ave tApaNu tattvathI-paramA thI temAM bheda paDatA nathI. "
zabdabheda jhaghaDA kisseAjI ? jo paramAratha eka; kahA gaMgA kaheA suranIjI,
vastu fi nahi cheka. ''--zrI yazovijayajI. tAtparya ke saMsArathI para ane
jenAthI para keAI nathI evA A 'paraMtattva' sAthe ceAje-joDe te yAga ema tenI
sadanasa'mata samAnya avisa'vAdI vyAkhyA che. ane Ane phalitA e che ke AtmAnu
nija zuddha svabhAva sAthe--sahajAtmasvarUpa sAthe yujana thavuM te ja ceAganuM
pragaTa spaSTa svarUpa che. icche che je jogIjana '--jogIjanA je jhaMkhe che,
evu. A anaMta sukha svarUpa'mULa zuddha te Atmapada pamADavuM e ja A yAganu eka
mAtra pratyeAjana che. ane AvA zuddha AtmasvarUpa jinapadanI ane nijapattanI
ekatA che, emAM kAMIpaNa bhedabhAva nathI, enA lakSa thavAne ja sukhadAyaka evA
sarva zAstraonu pratyeAjana che. . Ama meAkSarUpa parama zAMti pAmavAne mArga e
ja yAga che, ane mekSa e ja sarvAM daneAnuM eka nizcita sAdhya-dhyeya (Goal)
che, eTale tenA sat sAdhanarUpa A yAgamAga paNa eka ja che, ane te teA
zamaparAyaNa-zamaniSTha eve mumukSuone eka zAMtimA ja che. A zama eTale
niSkaSAya AtmapariNati, eka ja zamaniSTha rAgadveSa rahitapaNuM, samabhAva. zrI
kuMdakuMdAcAryajIe vyAkhyA karI che zAMtimA tema mAha-AAbha rahita je AtmAnA
pariNAma te sama kahevAya che. ' athavA zama eTale sAmya, arthAt jema che tema
yathAvat AtmaguNunI samAna thavuM te sAmya. je sAmya che te dharma che, ane
'vahyusaddAvo dhammA' vastunA svabhAva te dhama che. A dharma che te cAritra
che, ane 'svarUpe caLa pAztri' svarUpamAM caravuM-AtmasvarUpamAM vattavu te
cAritra che. Ama cAritra=dhama =sAmya=sama=zama e zabdo samAnA vAcaka che.
tAtparya ke sAmyamAM arthAt sahuja AtmasvarUpamAM sthiti karavI, svarUpa samajI
svarUpamAM zamAvuM e ja zama che, parabhAva vabhAvathI virAma pAmI AtmabhAvamAM
vizrAMta thavuM e ja zAMti che, ane te ja zaniSTha mArga athavA zAMtimAga che.
mahAgItA ceAgIzvara AnadaghanajIe A zAMtimAnuM anupama svarUpa sa`gIta karyu
che. jemake-- " ApaNA AtamabhAva je, zuddha cetanAdhAra re; avara savi sAthe
sayeAgathI, e nija parikara sAra re....zAMti jina" te para tattva pratye javA
icchanArA sarva mumukSue te ja eka zAMtimA pAmavAne icche che, eTale te sanA mA
sAgaranA tIramAganI peThe eka ja che, pachI bhale avasthAbhedanA

Page #19 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Due to the 18 distinctions, some are closer to the arrow-target and some are
farther away.  Meaning, all are devotees-worshippers-adorers of the one
undivided, indivisible, supreme, nectar-ocean, form of the Mokshamarg, they are
all brothers in Dharma. "एक एव तु मार्गोऽपि तेषां शमपरायणः । સવથમેમેસેડર ગઢવી
તીમrian I” –Shri Agadashtisamucchya. This supreme peaceful Mokshamarg, the
jewel-triad, the supremely beautiful plan, has been shown by Jin Bhagwan.
"સગવાનજ્ઞાનરાત્રિાણિ મોક્ષમા ' Samyagdarshan-Jnana-Charitra, the oneness of
these three, is the "Moolamarg" of the Jins. "The soul is different from the
body, etc., it is always useful, imperishable.... Listen to the Moolamarg of the
Jins. As if the Sadguru has taught, the knowledge is called Moola. The knowledge
that is known, its conduct is called pure Pratit Moola. Bhagwan has said that
Darshan is called Moola. Its other name is Samyak....Moola. As this Pratit comes
to the soul, it is known to be different from all, unattached....Moola. That
stable nature which arises, its name is Charitra, it is called
Analingam....Moola. These three are undivided, the result of which, when it
conducts, is the soul-form....Moola. That path of the Jins is attained, or the
self-form is attained....Moola." –Shrimad Rajchandra. Thus, this Shamaprayan,
Shantimarg, Agammarg, Mokshamarg, "Jin's Moolamarg", which leads to the
Paramatattva-Moksha, beyond the Bhavatit-Samsara.  Those who are truly Mumukhs,
who have a selfless, inner desire to be free from the bondage of Bhava, are the
ones who are eligible for this Mokshamarg.  Those who have attained the
pacification of Kshaya, who have no other desire than Moksha, who have disgust
and boredom towards the world, and who have compassion for all beings, such a
soul-being is fit to attain this Yogmarg.  Until the soul attains this "G"
state, it will not attain the Mokshamarg, nor will its inner disease be cured.
"Pacification of Kshaya, only Moksha desire; Disgust towards Bhava, compassion
for beings, there the soul resides. Until that state, the soul does not attain
the Yog; It does not attain the Mokshamarg, the inner disease is not cured."
–Atmasiddhi. On the contrary, those who are Bhava-abhinandi are ineligible.
Those who are attached to the world, who hail Bhava, who are attached to
objects, are ineligible.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 18 bhedane lIdhe koI te tIranI-mekSanI nikaTa hoya ne kaI dUra hoya. arthAta te
sarva eka akhaMDa abheda parama amRtarasasAgara svarUpa mekSamArganA bhakto-
ArAdhake-upAsake che, sAdhamika baMdhuo che. "eka eva tu mArgo'pi teSAM
zamaparAyaNaH  /  savathamemeseDara gaDhavI tImarian I" -zrI egadaSTisamuccaya.
A parama zAMtimaya mokSamArganI ratnatrayIrUpa parama suMdara yejanA jina
bhagavAne dAkhavI che. "sagavAnajJAnarAtriANi mokSamA ' samyagadarzana-jJAna-
cAritra e traNenI abheda ekatA e ja jinane "mULa mArga" che. "che dehAdithI
bhinna AtamA re, upayogI sadA avinAza.... mULa mAraga sAMbhaLo jinane re. ema
jANe sadguru upadezathI re, kahyuM jJAna tenuM nAma khAsa mULa0 je jJAna karIne
jANiyuM re, tenI varte che zuddha pratItamULa kahyuM bhagavaMte darzana tehane
re, jenuM bIjuM nAma samakita....mULa0 jema AvI pratIti jIvanI re, jANe sarvethI
bhinna asaMga....mULa0 te sthira svabhAva je upaje re, nAma cAritra te
aNaliMgamULa0 te traNe abheda pariNAmathI re, jyAre vartaja te AtmArUpa....mULa0
teha mAraga jinano pAmiye re, kivA pAmyo te nija svarUpamULa" -zrImad rAjacaMdra
Ama bhavAtIta-saMsArathI para evA paraMtattva-makSa pratye laI janAro A
zamaparAyaNa zAMtimAga, egamArga, mokSamArga, "jinane mULamAga' che. AvA
mokSamArganA adhikArI paNa je kharekharA mumukSa-bhavabaMdhanathI chUTavAnI
nirdabha aMtaraMga icchAvALA hoya te ja hoya. jene kaSAyanI upazAMtatA thaI
hoya, mAtra mekSa sivAya bIjI abhilASA jene na hoya, saMsAra pratye jene kheda-
kaMTALe upa hoya, ane sarva prANa pratye jene anukaMpA vartAtI hoya, evo AtmAthI
jIva ja A yogamArga pAmavAne yogya che. AvI "ga" dazA jyAM lagI jIva pAme nahiM,
tyAM lagI te mokSamArgane pAme nahiM ne tene aMtarga paNa maTe nahiM. "kaSAyanI
upazAMtatA, mAtra mokSa abhilASa; bhave kheda prANa dayA, tyAM AtmArtha nivAsa.
dazA na evI jyAMlagI, jIva lahe nahi joga; mokSamArga pAme nahi, maTe na aMtar
roga."--Atmasiddhi AthI ulaTuM bhavAbhinaMdI jI atra anadhikArI che. "saMsAra
bhale che, rUDe che" ema saMsArathI rAcanArA, bhavane abhinaMdanArA (Hailing)
evA viSayAsakta bhavA

Page #20 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
19  Even a Bhava-abhinandi, who desires to attain liberation, cannot attain it.
Moreover, as stated in the Gabindu, a Bhava-abhinandi being hungry for worldly
gains and recognition, sits in the "Lokapankti," meaning he performs virtuous
actions with a tainted mind to please worldly desires. This leads him to a
disastrous and irreversible outcome. Because, to deceive the world and gain
worldly benefits, the Bhava-abhinandi uses even Dharma-kriya (righteous
actions), which are meant to be performed solely for the sake of the soul, for
worldly purposes. He uses such great Dharma-kriya for trivial worldly gains like
honor, worship, and respect, thus degrading it and ultimately insulting it. He
then expects liberation. Such Lokapankti, which is driven by worldly desires,
and Atma-kalyan (self-liberation), which is driven by the soul's true purpose,
can never meet. And if we think about it from the ultimate perspective, the
value of worldly gains compared to the soul's true purpose, which is liberation,
is like a grain of sand compared to the vast ocean. Yet, it is a great wonder
that a Bhava-abhinandi, for the sake of a fleeting, imagined benefit in this
life, considers the infinite suffering of future lives as insignificant, thus
living up to his name!  Similarly, those who are driven by desires for worldly
gains and worship, yet speak of knowledge and "detached yoga," are like scholars
without wisdom. As stated by Haribhadrasuri in the Gabindu, just as worldly
possessions like children and spouses are the "samsara" (cycle of birth and
death) for the ignorant, "Shastra-samsara" (cycle of knowledge) is the samsara
for scholars without wisdom. Thus, whether ignorant or learned, those who
cherish worldly suffering and whose hearts are filled with desires for worship,
how can such Bhava-abhinandi be eligible to hear the path of liberation?  "Those
who hear the path of liberation, let their minds be steadfast and unwavering.
Those who are attached to worldly desires, their hearts are filled with the
suffering of future lives."  "I have tried endlessly to deceive the world, but I
have not succeeded. Because the cycle of birth and death and its causes are
still evident. The suffering of one life will be eliminated, but it will be
replaced by the suffering of countless future lives. I speak with humility, and
this is my endeavor." - Shrimad Rajchandraji  "Infinite love, through which the
world is illuminated, is the ultimate truth. It is the essence of the Supreme
Being, and it reveals the unity of all beings." - Shri Devchandraji  *"For the
sake of worldly gains, with a tainted mind, virtuous actions are performed, and
this is called Lokapankti. A Bhava-abhinandi, with a low view of great Dharma-
kriya, uses it for worldly gains, and wise people know this."*  *"Worldly
possessions like children and spouses are the samsara for the ignorant. For
those without wisdom, the cycle of knowledge is their samsara."*

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 19 bhinaMdI jI A mekSamAga pAmavA dhAre te paNa pAmI zake nahi. vaLI gabindumAM
kahyuM che tema bhavAbhinadI jIva mAnArthane-lokeSaNAne bhUkhyo hoI
"lekapaMktimAM * besanAre hoya che, arthAt lekArAdhana hetuolekane rIjhavavA
khAtara malina aMtarAtmAthI satakriyA kare che, ane tethI te ene
mahAanarthaMkara-duraMta phaladAyI thaI paDe che; kAraNa ke jagatane rUDuM
dekhADI dhamImAM khapavA khAtara bhavAbhinaMdI jIva, kevaLa AtmAthe ja karavA
yogya evI dharmakriyAne paNa mAnAthe upayoga kare che, ane tuccha evA laukika
mAna-pUjA-satkArAdi khAtara mahatuM evI te dharmakriyAnuM lIlAma karavA jevo
hIna upayoga kare che ane Ama tenuM khulluM apamAna karI ghera AzAtanA kare che.
AvI lekeSaNArUpa lekapaMkti ane kettara evuM AtmakalyANa e bene kadI maLatI pANa
Ave nahiM. ane paramAthe vicArIe te lekottara kalyANarUpa AtmArtha pAse
lekeSaNarUpa mAnArthanuM mUlya be badAmanuM pazu nathI, chatAM mahad Azcarya che
ke eka bhavanA tuccha kalpita lAbhanI khAtara anaMta bhavanuM duHkha vahAluM
gaNI "bhavAbhinaMdI" potAnA nAmane sArthaka kare che ! e ja prakAre aMtamAM jene
bhegAdinI ne pUjAdinI kAmanA banyA kare che chatAM mukhethI je jJAnanI ne
"anAsakta yoganI vAta kare che, te sagarahita vidvAnonI-paMDitamanI paNa e ja
dazA che! gabiMdumAM haribhadrasUrijIe kahyuM che tema mUDha janane jema putra-
dArAdi saMsAra che, tema saga rahita vidvAnonaX "zAasaMsAra" che ! Ama mUDha
hoya ke vidvAna haya, jene aMtaramAM bhavadu:kha vahAluM hoya ane pUjAdinI
kAmanA aMtarUmAM vasya karatI hoya, e bhavAbhinaMdI jIva mekSanA A mULa mArganA
zravaNane paNa adhikArI kema hoya? mULa mAraga sAMbhaLe jinane re, karI vRtti
akhaMDa sanmukha.mULa0 neya pUjAdinI je kAmanA re, no'ya vahAluM aMtara
bhavaduHkha...mULa0 "jagane rUDuM dekhADavA anaMtavAra prayatna karyuM; tethI
rUDuM thayuM nathI, kemake paribhramaNa ane paribhramaNanA hetuo haju pratyakSa
rahyA che. eka bhava je AtmAnuM rUDuM thAya tema vyatIta karavAmAM jaze, te
anaMta bhavanuM sATuM vaLI raheze; ema huM ladhutvabhAve samaye chIM; ane tema
karavAmAM ja mArI pravRtti che. "--zrImad rAjacaMdrajI. prIti anaMtI para thakI,
je trADe te jeDe eha; parama puruSathI rAgatA, ekatvatA ho dAkhI guNageha."--zrI
devacaMdrajI. x" lokArAdhanahetoryA malinenAntarAtmanA, kriyate sakkiyA sAtra
lokapaMktirudAhRtA  /  /  bhavAbhinandino lokapaMktyA dharmakriyAmapi, mahato
hInadRSTayoccairdurantAM tadvido viduH  // " *" putradArAdisaMsAraH pusA
sNmuuddhcetsaam| viduSAM zAstrasaMsAraH sadyogarahitAtmanAma  // "

Page #21 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The translation preserving the Jain terms is as follows:  The meaning is - only
the mumukshu (one desiring liberation) who wants to be free from the bondage of
the cycle of birth and death (bhavabandha) can attain liberation, but how can
one who desires to be bound be liberated? The one who desires liberation should
follow this mokshamarga (path to liberation), the yogamarga (path of spiritual
discipline), and attain right conduct (samyagparinam). However, if the jiva
(living being), whether learned or unlearned, who actually desires to be bound
in the cycle of birth and death (bhavabhimandi) tries to practice yoga, then it
will result in the opposite, just like consuming unwholesome food. This is
because the yoga of such a person is tainted by impure desires related to sense
objects, their inner transformation and mental tendencies are absorbed in
delusion, and the result is uneven. Therefore, even the yogic practice of the
bhavabhimandi becomes "ayoga" (non-yoga). Thus, the endeavors of the
bhavabhimandi are futile, and their "awakened understanding" is also bound in
ignorance due to the inauspicious result. That is why such a person is called
"nishphalarambhi" (one whose endeavors are fruitless) in this text.  The yoga
tainted by desire for sense objects, uneven transformation, is not yoga. -
Shrimad Rajchandra One who reads the Jain scriptures, but whose inner
transformation and mental tendencies are absorbed in delusion, their practice
does not become true. - Shri Devachandraji  Thus, it is established that the
subject of this text is moksha (liberation), and its primary audience is the
mumukshu (one desiring liberation). There is no difference in the yoga
philosophy of any darshana (philosophical system), but as mentioned by Shri
Govindji, one should diligently investigate whether the hetu (cause) of this
yoga, its gochara (object), svarupa (nature), and phala (result) are pure and
appropriate for self-welfare. Purity means: (1) First, one should seek the true,
pure nature of the atma (self), which is the object of this yoga. The atma
cannot be considered either entirely impermanent and transforming, or entirely
permanent and non-transforming; it must be understood as a permanent,
transforming atma for the yoga path to be possible. (2) We must also examine
whether the yoga sadhana (spiritual practice) we wish to undertake is truly
atmasadhaka (conducive to the self) or not.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 20 tAtparya ke-bhavabaMdhanathI chUTavA mAgatA hoya te ja chUTe, paNa baMdhAvA
mAgatA hoya te kema chUTI zake ? chUTavA mAgato hoya te mumukSu ja chUTavAnA
upAyarUpa A mekSamArgane, yogamAgane seve, ane tene ja te samyaphapaNe pariName.
paraMtu kharekhara chUTavA ja na mAgato hoya ane legmamAM mAMkhInI jema
AsaktithI bhavamAM baMdhAvA mAgatuM hoya e vidvAna ke avidvAn bhavAbhinaMdI *
jIva te yoga sevavAnI ceSTA karavA jAya, to paNa tene viSamizrita annanI jema
viparIta paNe pariName. kAraNa ke tenI matinA yoga viSayavikArayukta
durvAsanAmaya che, aMtaraMga pariNati-vRtti vibhAvamAM rAcI rahI che, pariNAmanI
viSamatA varte che, eTale tene yoga paNa "ayoga thaI paDe che. Ama
bhavAbhinaMdInI yogakriyA paNa niSphaLa hoya che, ane "vAsita bodha AdhAra' rUpa
asat pariNAmathI anuviddha hovAthI tene baMdha paNa abodharUpa hoya che. eTale
ja bhavAbhinaMdInA badhA maMDANa niSphaLa hovAthI tene A graMthamAM "niSphala
AraMbhI" kahela che. viSaya vikArasahita je, rahyA matinA yoga; pariNAmanI
viSamatA, tene yoga aga."- zrImad rAjacaMdra " dravya kriyA sAdhana vidhi yAcI,
je jina Agama vAMcI; pariNati vRtti vibhAve rAcI, tiNe navi thAye sAcI. " zrI
devacaMdrajI. Ama gaX e mokSane hetu che ane tenA pAtra mukhyapaNe mumukSu che e
siddha thayuM. A bA. kaI paNa darzananA yogazAstramAM bheda nathI, paraMtu zrI
gabiMdumAM kahyuM che tema A yoganuM kSahetupaNuM sat evA gocara, svarUpa ne
phalathI sAdhya sAdhanAdi saMzuddha che ke kema te AtmahitAthI e atra yatnathI
zodhavuM joIe. zuddhi arthAt (1) prathama te jenA saMbaMdhI A badhe
yogasamAraMbha che, je yogane gocara-viSaya che, evA AtmAnuM sata "-jema che
tema yathAvat zuddha svarUpa zodhavuM joIe. ekAMte anitya-pariNAmI ke ekAMte
nitya-apari NAmI AtmA mAnavAmAM Ave che temAM yogamArgane saMbhava nathI,
pariNAmI nitya AtmA mAnavAmAM Ave te ja yogamArgane saMbhava che. Ama
gocarazuddhi jevI joIe. (2) ApaNe je yogasAdhana karavA mAgIe chIe te svarUpathI
"sa" che ke kema? arthAt A gasAdhana kharekhara AtmasAdhaka thAya che ke kema?
te tapAsavuM joIe. * " kSudro lAbharatirdIno matsarI bhayavAn zaThaH  /  ajJo
bhavAbhinandI syA nniSphalArambhasaMgataH  //  ityasatpariNAmAnuviddho bodho na
sundaraH  /  tatsaMgA deva niyamAdviSasaMpRktakAnnavat  // " x " mokSaheturyato
yogo bhidyate na tataH kvacit  /  sAdhyAbhedAttathAbhAve tUktibhedo na kAraNam
/  / " mokSahetutvamevAsya kiMtu yatnena dhIdhanaiH  /  sadgocarAdisaMzuddhaM
mRgyaM svahitakAMkSibhiH  /  /  jojana varSa 8 cari gucA gahya thokAratoDazuM
mulyANArthayora: " gabindu

Page #22 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
21 (3) Is this *chog* pure? In other words, what is the true nature of the pure
fruit in the form of *meksha*? And is this *yag* pure, leading to *atmasiddhi*
in the form of *sal* and *samapa*? This should be examined. Thus, the three
types of *yagshuddhi* - *sadhya*, *sadhana*, and *siddhi* - must be observed
here. Because, keeping the true *sadhya* in mind, serving the true *sadhana*,
leads to true *siddhi*; keeping the pure *atmaswaroop* as the constant goal,
serving the pure *atmasadhana*, leads to pure *atmasiddhi*. In other words, by
achieving the *av'chak* *chog-chogav'chak* of the true *atmaswaroop*, performing
the *av'chak* *yogakriya-kriyav'chak* that is conducive to the *atmaswaroop*,
one attains the *av'chak* *ful-felav'chak* in the form of pure *atmasiddhi*.
From this, it is concluded that for the soul who desires to perform
*chogsadhana*, the practitioner must necessarily investigate whether the
*sadhana* we are serving is truly conducive to *moksha*? Does it lead to the
desired *atmasiddhi* in the form of the *sadhya* at the center? Are these *chog-
kriya-kul* of mine not becoming empty, like a mine without a goal, missing the
*sadhya* target? Does it remain *av'chak*? Thus, only that *yag* which is
endowed with *gacharsuddhi*, *swaroopsuddhi*, and *lasuddhi* has its true
*mokshahetupanam*. If this is accepted, then there is no difference in the
*chogshastra* of any *darshan* in *yagmag*. Because, there is no difference in
the true *sadhya* in the form of the pure *atma*, there is no difference in the
*sadhana* in the form of *shamparayan* *mokshamana*, and there is no difference
in the *siddhi* in the form of the pure *atmisiddhi* - *meksha*, and therefore,
there is no difference in all the *munimukhus* who are dedicated to achieving
*atmasiddhi*. There may be differences in names, etc., but this does not create
any difference in the *chog*’s *parama*. And thus, only that *yag* where the
purity of the true *sadhya*, *sadhana*, and *siddhi* exists is the true *chog* -
the real *chog*; and in it alone, the true characteristic of *yag* in the form
of *mokshahetupanam* - *mokshelan cholanar yo* - is truly present. This *samyak*
purity, where the aforementioned characteristics of *chog* are present, is the
true touchstone of *yag*, and the other definitions of *chog* also have this as
their foundation. Keeping this in mind, let us now examine the other
definitions. 3. Examination and Reconciliation of Various *Chog* Definitions.
(1) All Pure *Dharmavyapar* is *Chog* “All *dharmavyapar* that is pure due to
its connection with *moksha* is *yag*” - this is the definition of *yag* given
by Shri Haribhadrasuriji in Shri *Chogvishika*, which is also concluded from the
3

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 21 (3) A ceAganu phUla zuddha che ke kema ? arthAt mekSarUpa zuddha phalanu sat
svarUpa zuM che? ane A yAga te zuddha AtmasiddhirUpa sala samape evA che ke kema
? A cAkasI karavI joie. Ama sAdhyuM, sAdhana ane siddhi e traNa prakAranI
yegazuddhi atra avazya jovI joie. kAraNake sat sAdhya lakSamAM rAkhI, sat
sAdhana seve, te sasiddhi thAya; zuddha AtmasvarUpane niraMtara lakSya rAkhI,
zuddha AtmasAdhana seve, te zuddha Atmasiddhi thAya. arthAt sat evA
AtmasvarUpanA ava'caka cega-ceAgAva'caka sAdhI, te AtmasvarUpanI sAdhaka evI sat
ava'caka yogakriyA-kriyAva'caka kare, te zuddha AtmasiddhirUpa sat ava'caka
phula-phelAva'cakanI prApti thAya. A uparathI A paramA phalita thAya che ke
cegasAdhana karavA icchatA AtmAthI sAdhake eTaluM avazya gaveSavA ceAgya che ke
ApaNe je A sAdhana sevIe chIe te kharekhara meAkSaheturUpa thai paDe che ke kema
? iSTa AtmasiddhirUpa sAdhya madhyabiMdu pratye lai jAya che ke kema ? sAdhya
lakSyabiMduM cUkI jaI, lakSya vinAnA khANanI peThe, A mhArA cega-kriyA-kula
vAMcaka tA nathI thai paDatA ne ? ava'caka ja rahe che ne ? Ama gAcarazuddhi,
svarUpazuddhi ane lazuddhithI yukta eve yAga hAya aa tenu ja yathA
mAkSahetupaNuM ghaTe. A vastu svIkAravAmAM Ave teA pachI atre yAgamAga'mAM kai
paNa darzananA ceogazAstranA bheda rahetA nathI. kAraNa ke zuddha AtmArUpa sat
sAdhyane abheda che, tenA sAdhanarUpa zamaparAyaNu mAkSamAnA abheda che, ane
sAdhanAnA saLarUpa zuddha AtmisiddhinA-mekSanA abheda che, ane tethI
Atmasiddhine sAdhanArA zaniSTha sarva mumukSuonA paNa abheda che. nAmAdinA bheda
bhale hA, paNa tethI kAMi ceAganA paramAmAM bheda paDatA nathI. ane Ama sat evA
sAdhya, sAdhana ane siddhinI zuddhi jyAM varte che evA yega ja satcAga-vAstavika
cAga che; ane temAM ja * mokSeLa colanAr yo: 'evu mAkSahetupaNArUpa yAganu
sadanasa`mata lakSaNa samyapaNuM ghaTe che. AvI samyak zuddhithI A yatheAkta
cAgalakSaNa jyAM ghaTe e ja yAganI kharekharI kaseTI ( Touch-stone ) che, ane
ceAganI bIjI vyAkhyAe paNa A mukhya vyAkhyAnI agabhUta hAi tenI seATI paNa A ja
che. A sRSTi lakSamAM rAkhI have A khIjI vyAkhyAonI paNa kaiMka samIkSA karIe.
3. vividha ceAJavyAkhyAenI mImAMsA ane samanvaya. (1) sarva parizuddha
dharmavyApAra te coga meAkSa sAthe ceAjanane lIdhe parizuddha evA sarva dharma
vyApAra te yAga '-ema zrI cAgavi'zikAmAM zrI haribhadrasUrijIe yAganI vyAkhyA
karI che, tene phalitAtha paNa 3

Page #23 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 22  This is it. Dharma is the nature of things, "Valluraavo Gamo" according
to this great profound sutra, the nature of the soul is its Atmadharma. Such
pure, all-pervading pure Atmasvabhavaroop Dharma + activity-action-conduct is
Yoga. The soul's conduct in the pure vision-knowledge-filled nature of the
father is the true Dharma, it is the character, and it is the Yoga. This
Atmadharma is inherent to the soul, it is eternal, it is everlasting, it is
trikalaabadhit. This is the true "Sanatan Dharma". Jina Dharma is its synonym,
because the pure soul that has attained the pure inherent nature, its true name
is "Jin" meaning the Vitrag Prabhu. And such Jin-Vitrag's-pure soul's Dharma is
the Jina Dharma or Atmadharma. This eternal Atmadharma, the conduct in one's own
nature, is the soul's "Swadharma"-Swasamay, and conduct in other influences-
divisions, different from the soul, is "Paradharma"-Parsamay. It is better to
die in this "Swadharma" which is the nature of the soul, but "Paradharma" which
is conduct in other influences is truly "fearful"! "Vadh Nidhanam Yah Paradharmo
Machav:".  Everyone in the world wanders around doing Dharma, but they don't
know Dharma; after taking refuge in the feet of Jineshwar, no one binds
themselves to karma. The experience of the pure soul is always, it is the
enjoyment of Swasamay, The shadow that falls from the other, it is the dwelling
of Parsamay." Shri Anandghanji. This Dharma resides in the soul of the father
and it is to be manifested-revealed from it, or this soul itself is Dharma, they
don't understand this simple straightforward thing, and they wander around with
firmness in Dharma in other's homes, but they don't see that Dharma is in the
father's home and they behave like the musk deer! This Dharmamoorti, the soul-
like "Param Nidhan Pragat Mukh Aagal" is revealed, they have gone out in search
of it, violating it!  You wander around doing Dharma in other's homes, there is
no Dharma in your own home! Just like the musk deer doesn't know, the musk
deer's fragrance is its essence." Shri Yashovijayji. "Param Nidhan Pragat Mukh
Aagal, the world violates it! Without caste, see! Jagdish's, the blind flee!"
Shri Anandghanji.  Just as purity is the nature of the crystal, it is its
Dharma, similarly, the purity of the absence of passions is the pure nature of
the soul, it is the soul's Dharma. Meaning, +"Mukkhan Joyanaao Jogo Sambo Vi
Dhammavaavaro. Parishuddho Vinego, Kaalarunaago Vishele II"

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 22 e ja che. dharma eTale vastusvabhAva, "vallurAvo ghamo " A mahA
tatvagaMbhIra sUtra pramANe Atmavastuno svabhAva te Atmadharma. AvA parizuddha-
sarvathA zuddha AtmasvabhAvarUpa dharma +vyApAra-pravRtti-AcaraNa te yoga. AtmA
pitAnA zuddha darzanajJAnamaya svabhAvamAM varte te ja vAstavika dharma che, te
ja cAritra che, ane te ja yoga che. A Atmadharma AtmAne svabhAvabhUta hoI
sanAtana che, zAzvata che, trikAlAbAdhita che. vAstavika "sanAtana dharma" e ja
che. jinadharma e enuM paryAya nAma che, kAraNa ke zuddha sahajAtmasvarUpane
prApta thayelA zuddha AtmA tenuM tattavAcaka nAma ja "jina" arthAt vItarAga
prabhu che. ane evA te jina-vItarAgano-zuddha AtmAno dharma te ja jina dharma
athavA Atmadharma che. nija AtmasvabhAvamAM vartAvArUpa A sanAtana Atmadharma e
ja AtmAne "svadharma'-svasamaya che, ane AtmAthI anya evA parabhAva-vibhAvamAM
vartavuM e ja "paradharma"--parasamaya che. A AtmasvabhAvarUpa "svadharma'mAM
vattatAM nidhana-mRtyu thAya te zreya che, paNa parabhAvamAM vavArUpa
paradharma' kharekhara "bhayAvaha" che ! "vadha nidhanaM yaH paradharmo macAva:
' dharama dharama karate sahu jaga phire, dharma na jANe ho mama; dharma
jinezvara caraNa grahyA pachI, keI na bAMdhe che kama. zuddhAtama anubhava sadA,
te svasamaya vilAsa re, para vaDI chAMyaDI je paDe, te parasamaya nivAsa re."
zrI AnaMdaghanajI. A dharma te pitAnA AtmAmAM ja rahyo che ane temAMthI ja
AvirbhUta-pragaTa karavAne che, athavA A AtmA pote ja dharma che, eTalI sIdhI
sAdI vAta leka samajatA nathI, ane pArake ghera dharma draDhatA phare che, paNa
pitAnA ghera ja dharma che te dekhatA nathI ane kasturIA mRga jevuM AcaraNa kare
che ! A dharmamUtti AtmArUpa " parama nidhAna pragaTa mukha AgaLa' khulle paDayo
che, tene ullaMghI jaIne teo tenI zodhamAM bahAra nIkaLI paDayA che! para ghare
jatAM re dharma tume phare, nija ghara na ho re dharma ! jema navi jANe re mRga
kastUrI, mRgamada parimala marma."--zrI yazovijayajI. "parama nidhAna pragaTa
mukha AgaLa, jagata ulaMghI ho jAya ! jAti vinA jue! jagadIzanI, adhe aMdha
palAya! "--zrI AnaMdaghanajI. jema nirmalatA e sphaTika ranano svabhAva hoI tene
dharma che, tema kaSAyaabhAvarUpa nimalatA e ja AtmAne zuddha svabhAva hoI
AtmAne dharma che. arthAt +"mukkhaNa joyaNAo jogo sambo vi dhmmvaavaaro|
parizuddho vinego, kALArUnAgo vizeLe II "

Page #24 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 23  The pure soul is the only religion, self-purification is the only
religion, therefore the opposite is irreligion. But just as a crystal gem,
though inherently pure, becomes covered with an overlay due to external
impurities like a red flower, similarly, the purity of the soul is obscured by
the generation of raga-shreshtha-mahadi-vibhav, resulting from external
impurities in the form of karma. When these impurities are removed, just as the
crystal shines in its own pure, natural form, similarly, when raga-adi-vibhav
impurities are removed, the soul shines in its own pure, natural form. The
soul's pure, inherent nature is always present, unaffected by the three times
(past, present, future), it is simply revealed when the covering is removed.
Thus, the extent to which the covering is removed, the vibhav impurities are
eliminated, and the state of being free from impurities is attained, to that
extent the attainment of this soul-religion is achieved. And this state of being
free from impurities manifests progressively, starting from the state of samyag-
darshan and culminating in liberation. Therefore, this process of revealing the
pure soul-nature is the essence of all pure religious practices, this definition
is completely true.  Just as purity is the nature of the crystal, so is it the
nature of the soul; just as the Jina-Vira illuminates the religion, so is the
absence of strong passions. The extent to which Shri Simandhar is free from
impurities, that is the religion; from the state of samyag-darshan, one attains
liberation. - Shri Yashovijayaji.  "The way the soul attains its own nature is
the way of religion. The way the soul attains another nature is the way of
something else, not the way of religion." - Shrimad Rajchandra, Patranka 329.
(43)  The five-fold yoga, as described in Jain scriptures, is a shining example
of this pure religious practice, where the main definition "the union with
liberation" truly applies. This yoga, with its five stages, is described as
adhyaya, bhavana, dhyana, samata, and vritti-kshaya, progressively becoming more
excellent (see Babindu 358-367).  The action that is done with one's own nature
is called adhyatma, the action that is done with another's nature is not called
adhyatma... Shri Shreyansak's name is adhyatma, the essence of dhyana, the
essence of dravya is adhyatma; the essence of bhavana is with one's own
qualities, that is firm. - Shri Anandghanaji.  (2) The suppression of mental
activities is yoga, according to the sage Patanjali, this definition also points
to the same purpose, because when mental activities are suppressed...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 23 niSkaSAya zuddha AtmA e ja dharma che, Atmazuddhi e ja dharma che, tethI
viparIta te adharma che. paNa sphaTika ratnane svabhAva nirmala chatAM, pAse
rAtuM phUla vagere bAhya upAdhine lIdhe tenI nirmalatAmAM uparAgarUpa AvaraNa
Ave che, tema kamarUpa bAhya upAdhine lIdhe rAgazreSa-mahAdi vibhAva pariNAmenI
utpattithI AtmAnI nirmaLatA avarAya che. te upAdhi dUra thaye sphaTika jema
svayameva zuddha sahaja svarUpe prakAze che, tema rAgAdi vibhAva upAdhi dUra
thaye AtmA svayaM zuddha sahaja svarUpe prakAze che. AtmAne nirmala zuddha
svabhAva te trikAlAbAdhita ne svayaM sthita ja che, AvaraNa dUra thayuM ke te
basa pragaTa ja che. Ama eTale jeTale aMze AvaraNa dUra thAya, vibhAva upAdhi
TaLe, nipAdhipaNuM Ave, eTale teTaluM aMze A AtmadharmanI siddhi che; ane tevuM
nirupAlikapaNuM samyagdaSTi guNasthAnathI mAMDIne mokSaprApti paryata
uttarottara pragaTatuM jAya che. eTale Ama parizuddha AtmasvabhAvane pragaTa
karate sarva parizuddha dharmavyApAra e vega che, e vyAkhyA sarvathA yathArtha
che. jima nirmalatA re rana phaTikANI, temaja jIva svabhAva; te jina vIre re
dharma prakAzio, prabaLa kaSAya abhAva. zrI sImaMdhara je je aMze re
nirupAdhikapaNuM, te te jANe re dharma; samyagudaSTi guNaThANAthakI, jAva lahe
zivaza."-zrI yazovijayajI. "je je prakAre AtmA AtmabhAva pAme che te prakAra
dharmanA che. AtmA je prakAre anyabhAva pAme te prakAra anyarUpa che, dharmarUpa
nathI."- zrImad rAjacaMdra, patrAMka 329. (43) mekSanI sAthe je te yuga" e
mukhya vyAkhyA jyAM yathArtha paNe lAgu paDe che evA A parizuddha
dharmavyApAranuM javalaMta udAharaNa jainazAstrokta A paMcavidha yoga che
adhyAe, bhAvanA, dhyAna, samatA ane vRttikSaya ema uttarottara zreSTha e A pAMca
tabakakAvALo ( tag" s) yoga kahyo che (jue babiMdu . 358-36 7) nija svarUpa je
kariyA sAthe, te adhyAtama kahiye re, je kiriyA karI cauti sAdhe, te na
adhyAtama lahiye re.... zrI zreyAMsaka nAma adhyAtama ThavaNa haka dhyAnama,
dravya adhyAtama chaDe re; bhAva adhyAtama nija guNa sAdhe, te tehazuM daDha
re'- zrI AnaMdaghanajI. (2) cittavRttinirodha te yoga jo attanodha:'
cittavRttino virodha te ega, evI muni paMtajalie karelI gavyAkhyA paNa e ja
prayeAjana dAkhave che, kAraNa ke cittanirodha thAya tyAre

Page #25 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 24  **In the form of**  **Position**  **Dhyana** (of the Purusha-Atma) is to
be understood as **Vedavasthanam** (Pa. Che.). Thus, this explanation also
confirms the previous one. This explanation aims to include **Samprajñata** and
**Asamprajñata** and **Samadhi** in the definition of **Yoga**. As mentioned
earlier, the five types of **Yoga** according to Jain scriptures, this
**Samprajñata** and **Asamprajñata** and **Samadhi** are easily attained in the
fifth type, **Vrittikshaya**. These **Vrittis** are the activities of the Atma,
which are **sthula** and **sukshma**. Their main purpose is to **karsha** (to
attract) the **sache** (right) **gyan** (knowledge). The **Vrittikshaya** is the
complete eradication of these **karsha** and **aksarsha** (attraction and
repulsion) through **akarna niyam** (non-attachment). This specific
**Vrittikshaya** occurs in the first two types of **Shuddhyana**, where
**Samprajñata Samadhi** is attained, because there is **gyan** (knowledge) of
the **Vritti** in the form of **samyak karsha**. The attainment of **kevalgyan**
at the end of the **kshapka shreni** (series of karmas) is **Asamprajñata
Samadhi**, because there is an absence of **samyak gyan** due to the
**avagraha** (non-grasping) of the **bhavanavritti** (thought-waves) which have
the nature of **graha** (grasping) and **grahana** (acceptance).   Thus, this
definition of **Yoga** from Patanjali aligns with the Jain definition. Not only
that, but there is also a surprising similarity in some of the technical terms!
The definition mentioned in the Gita, **"Samahan Yoga Uchyate"**, also aligns
with the fourth type of **Yoga**, **Samata Yoga**.  **B**  **F**  The process of
**Yoga** is as follows: When the **chitta** (mind) becomes **kshinavritti**
(with diminished **Vrittis**), then the **parmatmaswaroop** (true nature of the
soul) is attained. **Samapatti** (attainment) means **sparshan** (touching)
through **dhyan** (meditation). The **sparshan** (touching) of the form of that
which is being meditated upon, the **samyak aapatti** (attainment) of its form,
becoming like that, is **samapatti**. Like a crystal... the **nil chitta ratna**
(pure mind) reflects the image of that which it meditates upon. Because when the
**chitta** becomes **nilkshanu** (without **Vrittis**), **paradarshak**
(transparent), **swachchh** (pure) like a crystal, then it becomes **sthira**
(stable) and **ekagrapashu** (focused) because it does not run towards other
**Vrittis**. And when it is...  * **"Samadhiresh evanyai Samprajñato'bhidhiyate
| Samyak karsharoopena vrittyarthajnanavastatha || Asamprajñato esho'pi
samaadhirigeyate paraih | Niruddha sheshavrittya datatswaroopanuvethatha ||"**
For more details, see **Shri Haridrasurisकृत Yagabindu** and the **Param
Samviveka** commentary on **Patanjal Yoga Sutras** by **Shri Yovijayaji**. In
these works, these great souls have shown the **vikramta** (excellence) of the
definition of **Yoga** from **Patanjal Sutras** and have shown its **samanyava**
(alignment) with **Jain Shastras** with their **gunamadi** (virtuous) and
**vishal drishti** (broad vision). They have introduced us to their
**kushatramudda** (skillful intellect) and **mahanubhav udarata** (greatness and
generosity).  * **"Vitarkavicharananda smitaroopānugamātsambhajnataḥ |"** (Pa.
Su.) This can be compared to the names of **Shukladhyan** (white meditation):
(1) **Prithvitark** (earth-thought), (2) **Ekatvavitarak** (one-thought), etc.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 24 svarUpamAM avasthAna deSTAnnu' ( puruSa-AtmAnuM thAya. tAravuM veDavasthAnam
/ ' (pA. ce. ) Ama A vyAkhyA paNa pUrvokta sarva ane puSTa kare che. A
vyAkhyAthI sa'prajJAta ane asa'prajJAta e ane samAdhine yAganI vyAkhyAmAM
samAveza karavAne Azaya che. jainazAstrokta adhyAtmAdi pAMca bhedavALA yAga
uparamAM kahyo, tenA pAMcamA vRttisa'kSaya bhedamAM A saMprajJAta ane
asa'prajJAta e anne samAdhine atyaMta sugamatAthI avatAra thAya che. sthUla-sUma
evI AtmAnI ceSTAe te vRttio che; teonA mUla hetu kama sace gayeAgyatA che; A
AtmAnI ka`sayeAgayeAgyatAne akaraNaniyamathI apagama thavA, samULagu' dUra
thavuM te vruttikSaya. Ave viziSTa vRttikSaya jyAM thAya che te zudhyAnanA
prathama be bhedamAM sa'prajJAta X samAdhi avatare che, kAraNa ke tyAM vRtti
arthAnu' samyak prakarUpathI jJAna haiAya che. kSapakazreNInI parisamApti veLAye
kevalajJAna lAbha te asa'prajJAta samAdhi che, kAraNa ke tyAM grAha-
grahaNAkAravALI bhAvamaneAvRttienA avagrahAdikrame samyak pijJAnane abhAva hoya
che. ityAdi prakAre A pAtajaleAkta yAga vyAkhyAnA jainazAstrokta vyAkhyA sAthe
sumeLa maLe che, eTaluM ja nahi. paNa keTalAka pAribhASika zabdonu paNa Azcaya
janaka sAmya dRzya thAya che! samahaM yoga ucyate' e gItAmAM kahelI vyAkhyA paNa
ukta pAMca bhedanA ceAthA samatA cega sAthe samanvaya sAdhe che. 'B F A yAganI
prakriyA A prakAre: citta jyAre kSINavRttivALuM thaI jAya, tyAre temAM
paramAtmasvarUpanI samApatti thAya. samApatti eTale dhyAnadvArA sparzana. jenuM
dhyAna karavAmAM Ave che, tenA svarUpanuM dhyAnathI sparzIna-anubhazrvana
thavuM, tadrupatAnI samyak Apatti-prApti thavI, tadrupapaNuM' pAmavu' te
samApatti, sphaTika jevu... nila cittaratna jenuM dhyAna dhare che, tenI tevI
chAyA temAM paDe che. kAraNa ke citta jyAre nilakSNu. vRttivALuM, sphaTika jevuM
pAradarzaka svaccha (Crystal clear ) thaI jAya, tyAre te anya vRtti pratye
doDatu nahi hAvAthI sthira thaI ekAgrapazu. sAme; ane rAma jyAre te . *
samAdhireSa evAnyai saMprajJAto' bhadhIyate  /  samyak karSarUpeNa vRttyarthajJa
navastathA  //  asaMprajJAta eSo'pi samAdhirgIyate paraiH  /  niruddhaH
zeSavRttyA dattatsvarUpAnuvedhataH  //  " vizeSa mATe jue zrI haridrasUriSkRta
yAgabindu, ane zrI yovijayajIe karelI pAta jala ye sunI parama sama vivekavALI
vyAkhyA, jemAM e mahAtmAoe madhyaprapaNe kacit pAtaMjala sUtrokta vyAkhyAnI
vikamratA darzAvI ApI, guNamADI vizAla daSTithI jaina zAstrokta yuga sAthe tene
dbhuta samanvaya sAdhI batAvI, peAtAnI kuzAtramuddA ane mahAnubhAva udAratAnA
ApaNune paricaya karAvye che. * 'vitarkavicArAnandA smitArUpAnugamAtsaMbhajJataH
/  i (pA. sU.) tenI sAthe sarakhAvA zukaladhyAnanA nAma-(1) pRthavitarka
savicAra, (2) ekatvavitaka aviyAra. tyAdi

Page #26 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
25 ' When one attains one-pointedness, then only does one attain the state of
being absorbed in the object of contemplation. When the mind becomes pure, it
becomes steady, and when it becomes steady, it becomes absorbed in the object of
contemplation, and only then does liberation occur. Abandoning the outward-
looking attitude, one attains the inward-looking attitude, and with a steady
mind, one contemplates, "The soul is the Supreme Soul." This contemplation
becomes a reflection of the Supreme Soul in the mirror of the pure, unchanging
mind, and liberation occurs. Thus, the process of liberation is: cessation of
mental activities → liberation, spiritual grace → knowledge of the truth → the
state of being beyond knowledge → liberation, the process of yoga. 66 41 Abandon
the outward-looking attitude, attain the inward-looking attitude, become steady
in the form of the Supreme Soul. Contemplate the Supreme Soul, surrender to the
Supreme Soul. With a pure mind, surrender to the Supreme Soul, like a mirror,
unchanging. '' Shri Anandghanji. (3) The practice of secrecy, ordinary dharma,
and business is yoga. 6 In Jain scriptures, the term 'eight yogas' is used for
mind, speech, and body, which is indicative and conveys the same meaning.
Similarly, 'usage' is a special term in Jain terminology. This usage is divided
into two types: usage of knowledge and usage of action. 'Thirty-five yogas are
essential' (Tattvartha Sutra). These eight yogas are closely related to each
other. When the soul becomes steady in the state of pure knowledge and vision,
its mind, speech, and body are steady, and when the mind, speech, and body are
steady, the soul's instability is removed, and the usage also becomes steady.
The soul, in the form of usage, is in a state of being united with this body
like milk and water, but it is different from the body like a sword from its
sheath. How to attain it? How to make the usage not cease? Through the right
yoga of mind, speech, and body. To practice such right yoga of mind, speech, and
body, to demonstrate such skill, so that the soul does not become an obstacle in
its self-realization but becomes a facilitator. 'Four: The skill of the mind'
(Gita). And the method for this is to make the usage of mind, speech, and body
so concise that the soul's form is primarily steady in relation to the body; and
this steadiness of the soul is such that it does not end due to fear of any kind
of danger or attack. Thus, to perfect, to shorten the usage of mind, speech, and
body, they are given the names of mind-secrecy, speech-secrecy, and body-secrecy
in Jain terminology. The usage of mind, speech, and body *;ortate temnant
chaitra mahaahmeshu tatsthata danjanata samaratiḥ | ××× ta tra sajnaḥ samadhiḥ |
vicaradhairghedbabbamabghatuḥ | tamara tantra prajna ||3 i. pat'jal che. su. 2.
41-5a

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 25 ' ekAgrapaNu pAme tyAre ja te tanmaya bhAvane pAme, tAtparyaM ke citta
nirmala thAya te sthira thAya ne sthira thAya te tanmaya thAya, ane tyAre ja
samApatti thAya. bahirAtmabhAva tyajI daI, aMtarAtmabhAva pAmI, sthira bhAvathI
' AtmA te paramAtmA ' evu' bhAvana kare te avikAra evA nila citta darpaNamAM
paramAtmAnuM aNu thAya, pratibiMba paDe, samApatti thAya. Ama
cittavRttinirodha-- samApatti adhyAtmaprasAda~~~~ RtabharA prajJA--
tattvasa'skAra--> asa`prajJAta samAdhi-- kaivalya,-yeAgaprakriyAne A krama che,
66 41 ahirAtama taja atara Atama,rUpa thai thirabhAva; paramAtamanu' hai| Atama
bhAvavuM, Atama arapaNa dAva. sumati caraNakaja AtamaarapaNA, darapaNu jima
avikAra. ''zrI AnaMdaghanajI. (3) samiti gupti sAdhAraNa dharma vyApAra te yoga
6 mana, vacana, kAyAne mATe jainazAstramAM 8 ceAga ' evI saMjJA prayeAjAya che,
te paNu sUcaka ane te ja arthanI vAcaka che. temaja upayoga ' e jaina
paribhASAnA viziSTa zabda che. daneApayeAga ane jJAneyAga ema be prakAre
vibhakta thayele A upayega chatranuM svalakSaNa che. '35yogo maLa nauvazya ' (
ta. sU ). A cega-upayogane paraspara ghaniSTha saMbaMdha che. AtmA zuddha jJAna-
darzanasvarUpa upayAgamAM sthira thAya te tenA manAdi ceAga sthira hoya ane
manAdi cega sthira heAya te upayeAganI ca'calatAnuM kAraNa asthira yAga dUra
thavAthI upayoga paNa sthira thAya. upayegasvarUpa AtmA A dehanI sAthe
kSIranIravat ekakSetrAvagAha sthiti karI rahyo che, chatAM te detuthI A AtmA
myAnathI talavAranI jema bhinna che, tene kema prApta karavA ? te ke upayega na
cUkAya e rIte mana-vacana-kAyAnA samyak yegadhI. A mana-vacana-kAyAnA evA samyak
cega karavA, evu ka kauzala dAkhavavuM, ke jethI te AtmAne svarUpasAdhanamAM
khAdhaka na thatAM sAdhaka thaI paDe. 'co: manu kauzam ' ( gItA ). ane tene
mATenI vidhi A che ke mana-na-kAyAnA yAganI evI saMkSiptatA karavI ke jethI
karIne dehaparyaMta AtmAnI svarUpane viSe mukhyapaNe sthiratA vatta; ane A
AtmasthiratA evI hAya ke game tevA ghera parIDa ke upasaCnA bhayathI tene aMta
Ave nisDa'. Ama manavacana-kAyAnA yAgane saphApta karavA, Tu'kAvavA, tene ja
jaita paribhASAmAM anegupti, vacanagupti ane kAyagupti evA cA nAma ApyA che.
mana-vacana-kAyAnA ceganu *;orTe temanata caitra mahAhmeSu tatsthatadaJjanatA
samAratiH  /  xxx tA tra sajJa: samAdhiH | vicAradhairagheDabbAmabaghATuH  /
tamarA taMtra prajJA ||3 i. pAta'jala ce. su. 2. 41-5aa

Page #27 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The translation preserving the Jain terms is as follows:  It is necessary to
perform Guptapana (secret protection) with skill, to maintain Yatana
(vigilance), so that the Upayoga-svarupa (active nature) of the Atma (soul)
becomes stable and attains Svarupa-gupta (protection of one's own nature). As
long as the Deha (body) exists, some activity of Mana (mind), Vachana (speech),
and Kaya (body) is bound to occur. Then, how should one perform it so that it
does not obstruct the stability of the Atma? One should perform the activities
of Mana-Vachana-Kaya in such a way that it maintains Samyama (self-control) with
respect to the Svarupa (nature) of the Atma, and that too by constantly keeping
the focus on one's own Svarupa and under the guidance of the Apta Purusha
(enlightened being), not by one's own whims. This right activity of Mana-
Vachana-Kaya performed with the intention of Samyama is called Samiti. The five
well-known Samitis are Irya-samiti (carefulness in walking), Bhasha-samiti
(carefulness in speech), Eshana-samiti (carefulness in accepting alms), Adana-
nikshepana-samiti (carefulness in accepting and discarding), and Parishthapana-
samiti (carefulness in eliminating impurities). This right activity also
gradually diminishes and ultimately merges into one's own Svarupa.  The
stability of the Atma is mainly established through three concise Yogas
(spiritual practices): 1) Enduring severe Parishahas (hardships) and Upsargas
(adversities) without being shaken. 2) Performing Tyaga (renunciation) with the
intention of Samyama, under the guidance of the Jina's (Enlightened One's)
instructions, and 3) This state also gradually diminishes and ultimately merges
into one's own Svarupa.  When will such a rare opportunity arise? - as stated by
Shrimad Rajchandra.  Further, from the perspective of the highest truth, to
become completely absorbed and 'gupta' (protected) in the Svarupa of the Atma,
to contemplate on the Atma's Svarupa, is the true Gupti (protection). Constantly
maintaining the awareness of 'I am the Atma, distinct from the Deha' is Irya-
samiti. Uttering words that are in accordance with the ultimate truth, while
being focused on the Atma-svarupa, is Bhasha-samiti. Desiring nothing other than
the Atma-svabhava (inherent nature of the soul) is Eshana-samiti. Accepting the
Atma-svabhava and renouncing all other dispositions is Adana-nikshepana-samiti.
And finally, firmly establishing the Atma in its completely pure nature and
dedicating the pure Atma-vastu (essence of the soul) is Paristhapana-samiti or
Utsarga-samiti. These three Guptis and five Samitis together are called the
'Ashta Pravchan Mata' (the eight essential practices), and they are universal
and common to all spiritual endeavors. As per the explanation given by Shri
Yashavijayji, this is the correct definition of the activities of the Chaaritra
(right conduct).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 26 evuM kauzalayukta guptapaNu-saMrakSaNa karavuM, yatanA-jALavaNI karavI ke
jethI upayAgasvarUpa AtmA svarUpane viSe sthira thAya, 'svarUpagupta ' thAya.
have jyAM sudhI dehu che tyAM sudhI te mana-vacana-kAyAnA ceganI kai ne kai
pravRtti thavAnI ja. tyAre te kema karavI ke jethI karIne AtmasthiratAne Adha na
Ave ? te ke mana-vacana-kAyAnA yAganI pravRtti karavI paDe te evI sabhyapha
karavI ke jethI AtmAnuM svarUpane viSe sayamana rahe evA ekAMta AtmasaMyamanA
hetuthI ja mana-vacana-kAyAnI samyak pravRtti karavI, ane te paNa nija svarUpane
niraMtara lakSa rAkhIne tathA Apta puruSanI AjJAne AdhInapaNe ja,-AtmasvarUpane
lakSa cUkIne ke svacchaMde nahi ja. AvI je saMyamahetuka mana-vacana-kAyAnI
samyak pravRtti tene 'samiti ' evu. yathArtha nAma ApyuM che. eTale ke yatanAthI
cAlavuM, yatanAthI khela, patanAthI icchavuM, cUtanAthI levuM-mUkavu', catanAthI
utsarga karavA, te iyaMsamiti Adi pAMca samiti prasiddha che. ane AvI je
samyakpravRtti te paNa kSaNa kSaNu ghaTatI jAya ane chevaTe nija svarUpane viSe
lIna thAya. AtmasthiratA traNa saMkSipta yAganI, mukhyapaNe te varte deha pa ta
jo; gheAra parISahu ke upasarga bhaye karI, AvI zake nahiM te sthiratAneA ata jo
...apUrva 64 saMyamanA hetuthI ceAga pravarttanA, svarUpa lakSe jinaAjJA AdhIna
jo; te paNa kSaNa kSaNu ghaTatI jAtI sthitimAM, aMte thAye nija svarUpamAM lIna
jo. ....apUrva avasara evA kayAre Avaze ?"--zrImad rAjacadrajI, ane paramAthI
vicArIe te AtmAnu svarUpa viSe savarathI sa'vRta thavu' gupta thavu' te ja
gupti, AtmAnu svarUpane viSe vicaravu. te iryAMsamiti, dehAthiI minna evA huM
AtmA chuM e niraMtara dRSTisanmukha rAkhI sApekSa paramAsata satya vacana
uccAravuM te bhASAsamiti, AtmasvabhAva sivAya anya vastu na icchatrI te
eSaNAsamiti, svabhAvanuM AdAna-grahaNa karavuM ane visAtra-parabhAvane! tyAga
karavA te AdAnanikSepa samiti, ane Ama AtmAne sarvathA zuddha svabhAvamAM
paristhApana karI zuddha strabhAvasthita Atmavastune utsaga karaveza-Atmasiddhi
karavI te pAriSThApanikA athavA utsa samiti. A traNa gupti ane pAMca samiti
maLIne * aSTa pravacana mAtA' kahevAya che, ane te samasta dharmavyApAramAM
sAdhAraNa-vyApaka che, eTale zrI yazavijayajIe karela vyAkhyA pramANe ' same
tenuM taNAvALa dharmayAtre coLattva' e ceganuM ukta lakSaNa samyak che. A
'vALavuM ne vahemUda: jovadhyAmanAma vat  /  sAmyameduhAnuM na thavA
niSkala,hmanAm  /  --samAdhizataka,

Page #28 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(4) Mental stability-Chittasamadhi, that yoga or steadiness, is also a
definition of yoga. Because the meaning of the root word "yuuj" is to attain
samadhi. Therefore, Chittasamadhi-mental stability is yoga. This is also true.
As long as the thoughts of the mind wander here and there, the mind will not
become stable, and until it becomes stable, it will not attain samadhi-self-
absorption. When the mind becomes pure, it becomes stable, and when it becomes
stable, it attains samadhi-self-absorption. In this yoga, conquering the mind,
controlling the mind, is the main thing. This mind is truly "difficult to
control, difficult to please-to subdue." The Gita says, "This fickle mind is
restless and extremely powerful. It is very difficult to control it like the
wind." The tricks of this mind-monkey are heavy! This "mind" is neuter, but it
beats-pushes all men! On the other hand, it is "masculine" and capable, but this
mind cannot be controlled by anything! "The mind does not stop, O Kunthujin! The
mind does not stop; as much as I try to keep it, it runs away. Kunthujin! I have
known that it is neuter, it takes all men; on the other hand, the man is
capable, but it cannot be controlled by anything." - Shri Anandghanji. To subdue
this mind-monkey, first it should be tied somewhere or given some work to do, so
that this poor monkey can climb up and down! For example, the one who has
conquered his mind, the Supreme Being, the Vitarag Prabhu, should be tied to the
pillar of his feet with the chain of love, so that this child cannot move
around. Or, let it loose to play in the Shruta-Skandha, so that it can climb up
and down in it! Let it eat as much as it wants of the fruit of the soul! Let it
pick the leaves of the vow! Let it swing on the branches of the knowledge! Let
it dance and jump in the vast root part! Or, as Shri Pujyapadaswami has shown
the easy and best method of mind-samadhi in Samadhishatak, it is this: "Separate
the soul from the mind with speech and body, and abandon the actions of speech
and body with the mind." etc. By the power of detachment-study *"चञ्चलं हि मनः
कृष्ण, प्रमाथि बलवद् दृढम् । तस्याहं निग्रहं मन्ये, वायोरिव सुदुष्करम् ॥"
x“युञ्जीत मनसात्मानं, वाक्कायाभ्यां वियोजयेत् । मनसा व्यवहारं तु
त्यजेत्वाक्काययोजितम् ॥"

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (4) manaHsthiratA-cittasamAdhi te yoga athavA sthirapaNuM e yoga ema paNa
yoganI vyAkhyA che. kAraNa ke yuja dhAtuno samAdhi pAmavI e artha paNa thAya
che. eTale cittasamAdhi-mana sthiratA te yuga. A paNa yathArtha che. cittavRttio
jyAM sudhI jyAM tyAM deDyA kare tyAM sudhI citta sthira thAya nahi, ane sthira
thAya nahiM tyAM sudhI samAdhi-AtmalInatA pAme nahiM. citta nirmala thAya te
sthira thAya ne sthira thAya te samAdhi-Atmalaya pAme. A yugamAM manane jaya
kare, manane sAdhavuM e ja mukhya vastu che. A mana kharekhara ! "durArAdhya
che, rIjhavavuM-vaza karavuM muzkela che. * gItAmAM kahyuM che ke "A caMcala
mana mathana karanAruM ne atyaMta baLavAna che. vAyunI jema tene nigraha karavo
ghaNuM kaThina che." A manamarkaTanA tarakaTa bhArI che! A "manaDu" che te
napuMsakaliMgI, paNa e badhAya maradane Tele mAre che-Thebe caDAve che ! bIjI
vAte te "puruSa" samartha che, paNa A manaDAne kaI jera" karI zakatuM nathI !
manaDuM kimahI na bAjhe he kuMthujina ! manaDuM kimahI na bAjhe; jima jima
jatana karIne rAkhuM, tima tima alaguM bhAje che. kuMthujina. ! meM jANyuM e
liMga napuMsaka, sakala maradane le; bIjI vAta samaratha che nara, ehane kaI na
jele ho. kuMthu."--zrI AnaMdaghanajI. A manamarkaTane vaza karavA mATe prathama
te ene kayAMya bAMdhI rAkhavuM joIe athavA enA joNuM kAMI kAma seMpI devuM joIe,
eTale e vAMdaruM bicAruM bhale caDhautara karyA kare ! dA. ta. jeNe te manane
jaya karyo che evA paramAtmA vItarAga prabhunA caraNarUpa thAMbhalA sAthe A
manane premanI sAMkaLathI bAMdhI devuM, eTale e bApaDuM ADuMavaLuM casI zake
nahiM. athavA te ene zrutaskaMdhamAM ramavA mATe chUTuM mUkI devuM, eTale temAM
te bhale ArohaNa-avarohaNa karyA ja kare ! bhale AtmArtharUpa phaLa dharAI
dharAIne khAvA hoya teTalA khAya! bhale vacanarUpa pAMdaDA cUMTI kADhe ! bhale
nayarUpa zAkhAomAM laTakI laTakIne hIMcakA khAya! bhale vizAlamatirUpa
mUlabhAgamAM nAcyA kUdyA kare ! athavA manaHsamAdhine sugama ne zreSTha vidhi
samAdhizatakamAM zrI pUjyapAdasvAmIjIex pradarzita karyA pramANe A che ke-AtmAne
mananI sAthe ja vAka-kAyAthI vijo , ane vAkAyAe je vyavahAra manathI choDI de.
ItyAdi prakAre vairAgya-abhyAsanA balathI *"caJcalaM hi manaH kRSNa, pramAthi
balavad dRDham  /  tasyAhaM nigrahaM manye, vAyoriva suduSkaram  // " x"yuJjIta
manasAtmAnaM, vAkkAyAbhyAM viyojayet  /  manasA vyavahAraM tu
tyajetvAkkAyayojitam  // "

Page #29 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 28 This adorable mind, which brings it to the 'place' where it is stable,
connects it to the place of the soul, it cultivates this mind, and the mind is
cultivated. It has cultivated everything. 'Thus, as the shadow merges in the
vast expanse, so the soul attains samatva and enters its own nature, meaning the
form of the mind also disappears, i.e., the citta attains samadhi, merging into
the soul. 66 66 'As the shadow merges in the vast expanse, So the mind's form
disappears when it enters its own nature.' — Shrimad Rajchandraji. II The
subject of this Chaugdashtasamucchya Shastra. 1. General guidance on Yagdashtin
'The ultimate cause and the ultimate result, the culmination of existence;
Faults disappear and vision opens, O Bhatti, the attainment of the teachings of
the scriptures.' — Shri Anandghanji. ', ' Thus, here, generally, in the form of
a foundation, having discussed the meaning of Yag, now we come to the subject of
this Yagdashtasamucchya Shastra: — At the beginning of this text, in the form of
an introduction, the ultimate heart-touching, interesting, and enlightening form
of Ichchhayag, Shastrachhayag, and Samyag, which are described as having the
purpose of liberation, has been mentioned. Without repeating it here, I
recommend that the intelligent seeker should look at the entire introductory
chapter (R, 12). Without directly relying on this triad of Ichchhayag, etc.,
especially the Chaugdashtin arising from them, is mentioned here: Mitra, Tara,
Ala, Dipr, Stira, Kanta, Prabha, Pan. These are the true names of Chaugdashtin.
For example, Mitra is the one who has a feeling of friendship towards the entire
world, etc. To understand how these Yags are differentiated, an example of
Chaugdashtin has been presented." 'I am dense and solid in the day, empty, weak,
and bewildered; Just as the eyes see differently, so are the different
perspectives of Chaugdashtin.' — Ya. Sajjay, Thus, even in the vision of a
single worldly scene, just as different perspectives of Chaugdashtin arise due
to the difference in the object of vision, food, and livelihood, so too in the
transcendental realm, due to the peculiarity of the state of being, there are
different types of attainment, different types of perception, and different
types of knowledge. Just as the diaphragm of a camera opens less, so the field
of vision increases or decreases; similarly, depending on the increase or
decrease in the state of being, the more the covering is removed, the more the
doors are opened, the less the knowledge is received by the person with
Chaugdashtin.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 28 A durArAdhya manane je 'ThekANe' lAve che, sthira evA AtmasthAnamAM joDe
che, te A manane sAdhe che, ane mana sAdhyuM. teNe saghaLuM sAdhyuM. ' Ama bahu
sama dezamAM Avye jema chAyA samAi jAya che, tema samatva pAmI AtmA svabhAvamAM
Ave, eTale mananu svarUpa paNa jAya che, arthAt citta AtmAmAM lInatArUpa samadhi
pAme che. 66 66 Avye bahu sama dezamAM, chAyA jAya samAI; Avye tema svabhAvamAM,
mana svarUpa paNa jAi. '--zrImad rAjacaMdrajI. II A ceAgadaSTisamuccaya zAstranA
abhidheya viSaya. 1. yAgadaSTinu sAmAnya digdarzana caramAvatta ha| carama
karaNa tathA re, bhavapariNati paripAka; doSa TaLe ne dRSTi khUle bhaTTI re,
prApati pravacana vAka. "--zrI Ana'daghanajI. ', ' Ama atre pIThikArUpe
sAmAnyapaNe, yAganI vyAkhyAnI mImAMsA karI, have ApaNe A yAgadaSTisamuccaya
zAstranA abhidheya viSaya para AvIeH--A graMthanI AdimAM ja bhUmikArUpe yAganu
ukta meAkSahetupaNuM caritArtha karatA evA icchAyAga, zAzrcayAga ane sAma
yAganuM parama hRdayaMgama rasaprada edhaprada svarUpa kahyu che. tenuM atra
piSTapeSaNa nahiM karatAM sujJa jijJAsune te AkhuM bhUmikA prakaraNa ( rR, 12 )
avaleAkavAnI bhalAmaNa karuM chuM. A icchAyAgAdi cagatrayIneA sIdhesIdhA Azraya
karyA vinA paNa vizeSe karIne temAMthI ja udbhava pAmelI A A gadaSTi atra kahI
che: mitrA, tArA, alA, dIprA, sthirA, kAMtA, prabhA, paNa. A ceAgaSTinA
yathArtha nAma che. jemake sakala jagat pratye maitrI bhAvavALI te mitrA, i. A
yeganA bheda kema paDe che te samajavA mATe eghadRSTinu' dRSTAMta rajU karyuM"
che. huM saghana aghana dina rayaNimAM, khAla vikala ne anerA re; atha jUe jema
jUjUA, tema egha najaranA pherA re. "--yA. sajjhAya, Ama eka ja laukika dRzyanA
darzanamAM paNa citra khAdya upAdhibhedathI kSayApazama pramANe jema eghadRSTinA
bheda paDe che, tema pAralaukika prameyamAM paNu kSaye|pazamanI vicitratAne
kAraNe judA judA pratipattibheda hAya che, STibheda-danabheda hAya che. jema
kemerAnA paDade (Diaphragm ) echevatto khulle, tema dRSTimaryAdAnu kSetra
((Field of vision) vadhaghaTa thAya che; te ja prakAre jevI kSayeApazamanI
vadhaghaTa-taratamatA hAya, jeTalu kama` AvaraNu khasyu' hAya, kanA paDo khUlyA
hAya, teTalu echuMvattu dana cegaSTivALA puruSane thAya che.

Page #30 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
29 The worldly vision of the worldly objects, which is the common vision of the
layman, who is carried away by the flow of the world and who welcomes the world,
is called **Oghdristi** (Vision of a layman); and the divine vision of the non-
worldly objects, which is the divine vision of the liberated soul, the
**Mumukṣu** with **Samyagdṛṣṭi**, is called **Gadṛṣṭi** (Vision of Yogi).  The
method of **Oghdṛṣṭi** is worldly, practical, flowing, following the past, like
the flow of a herd of cattle, and is according to the world; the method of
**Gadṛṣṭi** is non-worldly, transcendental, according to the path of liberation,
and is knowledge-seeking. Due to the peculiarity of the destruction of the
**Kṣaya**, there is a difference in vision, which the **Oghdṛṣṭi** and the
**Mithyāṣṭi** people argue about, but the **Samyagdṛṣṭi** **Gīpuruṣa** with
**Yogadṛṣṭi** does not argue about it, this difference in vision does not reside
in the minds of the great souls, they do not get carried away by the insistence
of opinions and visions like the ordinary people. They see only one path of
liberation, only **Yogadṛṣṭi**, only **Ātmadṛṣṭi**. All these visions are
encompassed in the root of the one **Ātmatattva**, only the "**Dṛṣṭi**" is
different, they believe this with a true heart. They know the six visions as
parts of **Jīnādṛṣṭi** or as parts of pure **Ātmadṛṣṭi**, so they do not get
involved in the debate of refutation and affirmation, on the contrary, they
worship the six visions as relatives of the soul with **Samyagdṛṣṭi**. Because
they are aware of the true limits of small expectations, they know how to divide
the **Naya** appropriately, so these impartial, non-violent **Samyagdṛṣṭi** men
with the ultimate liberal and **anekānta** vision, do not examine these visions
in the middle, they see these visions as one **Jīnādṛṣṭi** or as parts of pure,
**Ātmadṛṣṭi** man.  "Different opinions are seen, different visions are seen; in
the root of one principle, all are encompassed, believe that." - **Śrīmad
Rājacandrajī**. "The six visions are like the limbs of the **Jīn**, the **Naya**
is the means with which they are connected; the devotees of the **Nami
Jīnavara** worship the six visions." - **Śrī Ānandghanajī**  Similarly, the
activities of these **Samyagdṛṣṭi** saints, who are pure, wise, non-violent,
compassionate, etc., and who are inspired by compassion and have a very deep and
liberal intention, are also for the sake of others, so these **Avadhūta**
"impartial, rare ones" remain neutral to all visions, and remain absorbed in
their own nature, and serve the pure purpose of guiding all beings to the right
path with the "**Sanjīvanīcāra Nyāya**" which is beneficial to all. Father to...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 29 lekapravAhamAM taNAtA ane saMsArane abhinaMdanArA bhavAbhinaMdI prAkRta
janenuM je laukika padArtha saMbaMdhI laukika dRSTie oghadarzana-sAmAnya darzana
te oghadaSTi (Vision of a layman) che; ane bhavavirakta mumukSu samyagadaSTi
gIpuruSanuM je alaukika padArtha saMbaMdhI alaukika divya darzana te gadaSTi
(Vision of Yogi) che. ghadRSTinI danapaddhati laukika rItinI, vyAvahArika,
pravAhapatita, gatAnugatika gADarIA pravAha jevI ne bhavamAnujAriNI hoya che;
gadaSTinI darzanapaddhati alaukika, pAramArthika, mokSamArganusAriNI ne
tavaMgrahiNI hoya che. kSaye pazamanI vicitratAne kAraNe darzanabheda thAya che,
te bAbata eghadaSTi mithyASTi jane paraspara vivAda kare, paNa yogadaSTisaMpanna
samyagadaSTi gIpuruSa te vivAda karatA ja nathI, A darzanabheda te mahAnubhAnA
manamAM vasatA ja nathI, prAkRta jananI jema teo mata-darzananA AgrahamAM taNAI
jatA nathI. te samyaguSTi mahAjane te eka yugamAgane ja dekhe che, yogadarzanane
ja-Atmadarzanane ja dekhe che. eka ja AtmatattvanA mULamAM A sarva darzane
vyApta che, mAtra "dRSTi" ja bheda che, ema teo kharA aMtaHkaraNathI mAne che.
teo Sadarzanane jinadarzananA aMgarUpa athavA zuddha AtmadarzananA aMgarUpa jANe
che, eTale tenA khaMDanamaMDananI kaDAkaTamAM utaratA nathI, ulaTA te chae
dazanane AtmabaMdhurUpa jANuM samyagadaSTithI ArAdhe che. kAraNa ke teone nAnI-
apekSAvizeSanI yathArtha maryAdAnuM bhAna hoya che, yathAyogya nayavibhAga teo
karI jANe che, eTale A parama udAra anekAMta daSTivALA niSpakSapAta nirAgrahI
samyagdaSTi puruSane te te darzananI madhyastha parIkSA karatAM te te dazane eka
jinadarzana athavA zuddha, AtmadarzanarUpa puruSanA aMgarUpa ja bhAse che.
bhinna bhinna mata dekhiye, bheda dRSTine evuM; eka tattvanA mULamAM, vyApyA
mAno teha" je gAyo te saghaLe eka, sakaLa dazane e ja viveka; samajAvyAnI relI
karI, yaduvAda samajaNa paNa kharI."- zrImad rAjacaMdrajI. "SaDU darizaNa jina
aga lIje, nyAsa varDaga je sAdhe re; nami jinavaranA caraNa upAsaka, pa darizana
ArAdhe re."--zrI AnaMdaghanajI temaja zuddha bodhavaMta, nirAgrahI, matrI Adi
bhAvanAthI bhAvitAtmA ane parama gabhIra udAra AzayavALA A samyagadaSTi
saMtajananI pravRtti paNa parArthe hoya che, eTale A avadhUta "niSpakSa viralAo"
sarva dazanane naya-sadaMza rahe che, ane Apa svabhAvamAM sadA magna rahe che,
ane kene kalyANakArI e "saMjIvanIcAra nyAya' ne cAro carAvI sanmArge utAravAno
nirmaLa puruSArtha seve che. pitAne

Page #31 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
30 This yogi, with pure selfless love that benefits both the soul and other
souls, performs actions that are supremely blessed. “All the visions of the
world are embraced by the vision of the self, and it remains in its own nature.
It is the life-giving force for all beings, and it nourishes all.” - Yo. Sajjay.
This Radudristi vision is of eight types. To explain it clearly, this analogy
has been given, which makes the meaning of this vision easily understandable.
These eight visions are (1) the vision of the fire of grass, (2) the vision of
the fire of dung, (3) the vision of the fire of wood, (4) the vision of the
light of a lamp, (5) the vision of the light of a gem, (6) the vision of the
light of a star, (7) the vision of the light of the sun, and (8) the vision of
the light of the moon. From the fire of grass to the light of the moon, there is
an increasing intensity of light. Similarly, from the vision of a friend to the
vision of the supreme, there is an increasing intensity of the light of
knowledge. The author has explained how this analogy applies perfectly to each
vision (see pp. 63-64). The great and powerful seer, Shrimad Rajchandraji, has
compared this vision to a thermometer, which is also a very appropriate analogy.
Just as a thermometer can measure the heat of the body, this vision can measure
the spiritual progress of the soul, the state of the soul, and the level of the
soul's qualities. The fourteen Gunasthanas are a well-known measure of the
soul's development of qualities, and this development depends on the decrease of
attachment. As the darkness of attachment decreases, the Gunasthanas increase.
Similarly, this vision is also a measure of spiritual development, and it
depends on the opening of the vision of knowledge. As the light of knowledge
increases, the quality of the soul increases. These two are like two sides of
the same coin. The decrease of attachment is the yardstick of the Gunasthanas,
and the light of knowledge is the yardstick of the yogic vision. By observing
the characteristics of this vision, a seeker can measure the state of their soul
and receive inspiration to work for the development of qualities they have not
yet attained and to maintain the qualities they have attained. Thus, this vision
becomes a source of supreme nectar for the soul. The first four visions
correspond to the first Gunasthanaka, which is called "Nirupcharit." This
Gunasthanaka is attained through the vision of the fire of grass, the vision of
the fire of dung, the vision of the fire of wood, and the vision of the light of
a lamp. Here...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 30 je AtmA-paramArthane lAbha thaye, te anya AtmAthI jIvane paNa thAya evA
zuddha paramArtha premathI A samadaSTi yogIpuruSe parama dhanya kahitakara
paramArtha pravRtti kare che. " darzana sakalanA naya grahe, Apa rahe nija bhAve
re, hitakarI janane saMjIvanI, cAro te carAve che."--yo. sajajhAya. A
rAduddaSTinI daSTi aSTa prakAranI che, tenuM kavarUpa barAbara samajAvavA mATe
udAharaNarUpa A upamA ApI che, je uparathI ja te te dRSTino ghaNokharo artha
saheje samajAI jAya che. A ATha daSTione anukrame (1) tRNa agnikaNanI, (2)
chANAnA agnikanI, (3) kASTha agnikanI, (4) dIpaprabhAnI (5) ratnaprabhAnI, (6)
tArAprabhAnI, ( 7) sUrya prajAnI ane (8) caMdra prabhAnI,-ema upamA ApI che.
tRNa agnikaNathI mAMDIne caMdraprabhA sudhI uttarottara prakAzanI taratamatA
che, tema mitrA daSTithI mAMDIne parA dRSTi sudhI uttarottara bedha-prakAzanI
taratamatA che. A upamA pratyeka daSTimAM kevI rIte sopAMga saMpUrNapaNe ghaTe
che te atra parama suMdara recaka zailIthI graMthakartAe batAvI ApyuM che (juo
pR. 63-64 I.). mahAsamartha tattvadraSTA zrImad rAjacaMdrajIe A gadaSTine
tharmomITaranI (Thermometer)-uSNatAmApaka yaMtranI upamA ApI che, te paNa
yathAyogyapaNe atyaMta baMdhabesatI che. jema tharmomITarathI zarIranI
uSNatAnuMgaramInuM mApa nIkaLI zake che, tema A gadaSTi uparathI AtmAnI
AdhyAtmika pragatinuM, AtmadazAnuM, AtmAnA guNasthAnanuM mApa nIkaLI zake che.
cauda guNasthAnakanI prasiddha janA jema AtmAnA guNavikAsanuM mApa che, ane te
guNavikAsa paNa mehaapagama para nirbhara hoI jema jema mohAMdhakAra ochA thatA
jAya tema tema AmAnuM guNasthAna vadhatuM jAya che tema A gadaSTinI yejanA paNa
AdhyAtmika guNavikAsanuM mApa che, ane te samyam jJAnadaSTinA unmIlana para
nirbhara hoI jema jema bedhaprakAza vadhate jAya che tema tema AtmAnI guNadazA
vadhatI jAya che. A baMne uttama bhejanA eka sIkkAnA be pAsA jevI che. mehanAza
e guNasthAnakanI phUTapaTTI (Yard-stick) ane bedhaprakAza e yogadaSTinI
phUTapaTTI che. te te dRSTinA yakta lakSaNa parathI aMtarmukha nirIkSaNa
(Introspection) karatAM AtmAthI mumukSu pitAnI AtmadazAnuM mApa kADhI zake che,
ane tethI AtmaguNavRddhinI preraNuM (Inspiration ) pAmI aprApta guNanA yoga mATe
tathA prApta guNanA kSema mATe yathAyogyapaNe pravartI zake che. Ama A gadaSTi
AtmAthIne parama amRta lAbha ApanArI thaI paDe che. AmAM prathama cAra daSTi
paryata mukhya-nirupacarita evuM paheluM "guNasthAnaka" hoya che, ane tene
praka-parAkASThA thI dIprA dRSTimAM prApta thAya che. atre

Page #32 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
31 ‘Gunasthan’ means to understand the meaning of the true place of the
qualities. It means that in the four perspectives of Mitra, etc., the proportion
of Mithyatva decreases progressively, and therefore the proportion of the
qualities that arise increases. After that, from the fifth perspective of
Sthira, there is no Mithyatva, only Samyag Darshan. The Samyag Darshan in the
fifth perspective, like the Medha Prakash Ratna Prabha, is stable, which is why
it is rightly called ‘Sthira’. This Samyag Darshan Ratna Deepak has manifested
in the temple of my mind, and the enemy of darkness is destroyed! The
destruction of all darkness! And the brilliance of experience! The lamp of
Samyag Darshan Ratna has been lit, it will never be extinguished! Not only that,
but its brilliance, its radiance, and its peak, like the stars, the sun, and the
moon, increase progressively, becoming more stable and more powerful! “Sahelaan
hai kuchh Jineshwar Dev! Ratna Deepak ati pata hai laal; Sa. Muj man darmahi,
aave jo abil jipta hai. Laal, Sa. Mite te meh andhaar, anubhav teje jhalhale ho
laal, Sa. Dhum kshaya na rek, charan chitramnu nav chale hai. Laal.”—Shri
Yashovijayji. Thus, although the first four perspectives of Mitra, etc., are
Mithyatva, why are they considered Sad-Dristi-Samyag Dristi? The solution is
that the four perspectives of Mitra, etc., are the cause of the Amegh-Achuk of
the Sabhyashti. Therefore, due to the effect in the cause, Mitra, etc., are also
considered Samyag Dristi. To understand this, there is the example of the making
of pure sugar from sugarcane: To reach the state of pure sugar (Refined
crystallised sugar), one has to go through all the processes (Various processes)
from sugarcane to pure sugar, only then can the production of granulated sugar
take place. Similarly, for pure Atma Siddhi, the stages of gradual growth of the
soul, like Mitra, etc., are also useful in thirteen ways, because they are the
cause of Samyag Dristi. This Mitra, etc., state is truly like Itu, etc., because
it results in the nectar-like sweetness of the supreme Samaveg. Therefore, those
who are not like Itu, etc., are like the false, and therefore they never
experience Samaveg, and they are all eager to attain the perspective of Mitra,
etc. And on the other hand, even those who are Bhajya, until they experience
Samaveg, the perspective of Mitra, etc., does not manifest; when they are dyed
with Samaveg, only then does the perspective of Mitra, etc., manifest. * This
perspective is consistent with all the teachings of the Chek-ing-dana. From the
beginning, with the removal of the obstacles, the perspective of the Chek-ing-
dana, which is full of Cheg, is consistent with the perspective of the Muni
(Patanjali, etc.), who are the place of the qualities of Advesha, etc., in
order. This is the eight perspectives! Here, in order, are Yama, Niyama, Asana,

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 31 ' guNasthAna ' eTale kharekhara yathAkta guNunu sthAna ema bhAva samajavA.
eTale mitrA vagere cAra dRSTimAM uttarAttara mithyAtvanuM pramANa ghaTatuM jAya
che ne tethI upajatA guNanu pramANa vadhatu jAya che. tyArapachI pAMcamI sthirA
dRSTithI mAMDIne mithyAtvane sathA abhAva hoya che, samyagdaztana ja heAya che.
pAMcamI dRSTinA samyagdarzanarUpa medhaprakAza ratnaprabhA jevA sthira hoya che,
eTalA mATe ja ene ' sthira' evuM yathArtha nAma Apyu che. A samyagdarzanarUpa
ratnadIpaka manemadiramAM pragaTyo ke khasa zatruala khalAsa ! mAhaaMdhakAranA
sarvanAza ! ne anubhavatejane jhaLahaLATa ! samyagdarzanaratnanA dIvA jAgyA te
jAgyA ! elavAya ja nahui ! eTaluM ja nahi paNa tenu teja kAMtA, prabhA ne
parASTimAM tArA, sUrya ne caMdraprabhAnI jema uttarAttara sthiratara ne
maLavattara banI vadhatuM ja jAya che ! " sAhelAM hai kuchu jinezvara deva !
ratnadIpaka ati patA haiA lAla; sA. muja mana daramAMhi, Ave jo abila jIpatA
hai| lAla, sA. miTe te meha aMdhAra, anubhava teje jhaLahaLe heA lAla, sA. dhUma
kaSAya na rekha, caraNa citrAmaNuM nava caLe hai| lAla."--zrI yazovijayajI. Ama
mitrA Adi prathama cAra dRSTi paMta mithyAtva chatAM tene saddaSTi-samyag
dRSTimAM kema gaNI ? tenuM samAdhAna ema che ke mitrA Adi cAra dRSTie che, te
sabhyaSTinA amegha-acUka kAraNarUpa thAya che. eTalA mATe kAraNamAM kAryAMnA
upacArathI te mitrAdinI paNa samyagdaSTimAM gaNanA karI che. A samajavA mATe
kSumAMthI zuddha sAkaranI banAvaTanuM dRSTAMta che: zuddha sAkaranI (Refined
crystallised sugar) avasthAe pahoMcavAmAM zeraDIthI mAMDIne zuddha sAkara
sudhInI saghaLI prakriyAmAMthI (Various processes) pasAra thavuM ja paDe che,
tyAre ja khaDI sAkaranI niSpatti thAya che. tema zuddha Atmasiddhine mATe mitrA
Adi AtmAnA kramika gruvikAsanI avasthAe paNa tetrA prakAre upayAganI che, kAraNa
ke te samyagdaSTinuM kAraNa thAya che. A mitrA Aphri avasthAe kharekhara ! itu
Adi jevo che, kAraNa ke temAM parama amRta samA savegarUpa mAdhunI niSpatti
thAya che. AthI uDu' anavye tenala jevA-kharU jevA che, tethI karIne ja temane
koI kALe savegamAya nahi nIpajatuM hoi teeA mitrAdi dRSTi pAmavA sarvathA mAgya
che. ane bIjAe!-bhajye paNa jyAM lagI sa MvegamA pAmatA nathI tyAM lagI mitrAdi
STi spatA nathI; jyAre savegaragathI ra'gAya che, tyAre ja-cAvamAM ja A
mitra:kri dRSTi sparze che. * A hRSTi sakala cekiMgadanAne sa'mata che, eka
AdinA parihArathI cama mADhi cegathI yuktane anukrame adveSAdri guNunu sthAna
evI A sRSTimunione (pataMjali adine) su'mata che.' je A! aSTa dRSTi hI tene!
ahIM anukrame yama, niyama, Asana,

Page #33 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The text describes the eight limbs of yoga (Ashtanga Yoga) and their alignment
with the eight yogic insights (Yogadristi). It explains that the first limb of
yoga, Yama, corresponds to the first insight, Mitra Dristi, and so on.   The
text then lists eight mental afflictions (Chittadosha) that need to be overcome
to attain the eight limbs and insights. These afflictions are: Khed (sorrow),
Udveg (anxiety), Shep (greed), Utthan (arrogance), Bhrānti (delusion), Anyamud
(attachment to others), Run (anger), and Asang (attachment).   The text further
explains that these eight insights are the foundation for eight virtues: Advesha
(non-hatred), Jijñāsā (curiosity), Shushrusha (service), Shravan (listening),
Bedha (understanding), Mimānsā (reflection), Pratipatti (realization), and
Pravritti (action).   The text emphasizes that these insights (Dristi) are like
a vision that gradually unfolds, similar to how the physical eye opens and
expands its field of vision. As the yogic vision (Yogadristi) develops, it
reveals more and more of the truth, ultimately leading to complete
enlightenment.   The text also clarifies the meaning of the term "Dristi" as a
true understanding (Bedha) that arises from the abandonment of false actions
(Asatupravritti) and leads to the path of righteous actions (Sat Pravritti). It
emphasizes that this understanding must be based on true faith (Satshrddha) and
not on false beliefs (Asat Shrddha).   Finally, the text compares the individual
who lacks true faith to a person with eye disease, highlighting the importance
of true understanding and the dangers of false beliefs.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 32 prANAyAma, pratyAhAra, dhAraNA, dhyAna ane samAdhi e aSTAMga yogax Adi sAthe
samanvaya darzAvyA che. eTale ke (1) mAM yoganuM prathama aMga yama hoya tyAM
prathama mitrA daSTi hoya; jyAM yoganuM bIjuM aMga niyama hoya, tyAM bIjI tArA
daSTi heya, I. (juo koSTaka pR. 83) (2) kheda, udvega, zepa, utthAna, bhrAMti,
anyamud, run ane AsaMga e ATha cittadoSa che. tene tyAga karavAmAM AvatAM
anukrame yeganA ATha aMganI ane ATha yogadaSTinI prApti hoya che. (3) A ATha
daSTi anukrame adveSa, jijJAsA, zuzruSA, zravaNa, bedha, mImAMsA, pratipatti ane
pravRtti e ATha guNanuM sthAna che. A ATha gAMga, ATha cittadoSa, ATha guNanA
svarUpa mATe juo pR. 83 thI 88. Ama gAMganA sevanathI, cittadevanA parihArathI
ane gaguNanA pragaTapaNAthI A "gadaSTi" anukrame vikAsa pAmatI jAya che. A daSTi
eTale darzana, sAkSAt dekhavuM-sAkSAtkAra che,- pachI bhale A theDI ughaDI hoya
ke jhAjhI. atre AMkhanuM-carmacakSunuM daSTAMta ghaTe che. A AMtarucakSurUpa
divyacakSu-yogadaSTi paNa jema jema ughaDatI jAya che, umIlana pAmatI jAya che,
khUlatI jAya che, tema tema tenI daSTimaryAdAnuM kSetra (Field of yogic vision)
vadhatuM jAya che. vadhAre ne vadhAre vizALa "darzana" thatuM jAya che, ne
chevaTe saMpUrNa "dRSTi" khUlatAM anaMta "darzana thAya che. Ama gadaSTi athavA
darzana ekarUpa che, chatAM AvaraNa TaLavAnA bhedane lIdhe tenA unmIlana aMza
pramANe-ughaDavA pramANe tenA A ATha sthala vibhAga pADyA che; bAkI
karmaAvaraNanA pazamAdi anusAra sUkama bheda te ghaNA ghaNA che, ke je kahetAM
pAra na Ave. A dRSTi' zabdano artha ? sAsaMgata bedha te daSTi kahevAya che, ane
te asatupravRttinA vyAghAtathI sat pravRtti padAvaha e hoya che. ahIM
"satazraddhA" ema khAsa karIne kahyuM, te svacchada matika panArUpa asat
zraddhAne apavAda-niSedha karavA mATe che. satzAstranA AdhAravALI, satzAstrane
anukULa, Apta puruSanI AgamarUpa AjJAne anusaranArI evI satuzraddhA-sAcI tAtvika
zraddhA hoya te ja te bodhane "dRSTi" nAma ghaTe che. AthI ulaTuM satuzraddhA
vinAno je bedha che, athavA svaccheda kalapanArUpa asat zraddhAvALe ke
daSTirAgavALe je bodha che te "daSTi" athavA "darzana' kahI zakAya nahiM. kAraNa
ke AMkha ughaDI na hoya tyAMsudhI jema aMdha paNuM ja che, dekhavApaNuM nathI,
darzana nathI, athavA mithyAdarzana ke daSTirAga ja che, tema
satazAstrazraddhAthI jyAM lagI AMtaradaSTi ughaDI nathI, unmIlana pAmI nathI,
tyAM sudhI dRSTiaMdhapaNuM ja che, dekhavApaNuM nathI, darzana nathI, athavA
mithyAdarzana ke daSTirAga ja ( coloured vision) che A jIvane netrarogInI upamA
ghaTe che, kAraNa ke tene dRSTi aMdhapaNane-mithyASTipaNAne gADha roga lAgu
paDyo che, tene je koI tevA * copAnuSThAnA zuddhikSa jJAnItivivevalyA
"-pAtaMjala che. sU. 28

Page #34 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
33 If a person with divine yogadristi, a discerning expert (Expert) in all types
of medicine, is found, he will correctly diagnose the color of the eye and
provide appropriate treatment. By applying the ointment of knowledge, the
person's vision will gradually improve, the divine eye will open, and the eye
disease will completely disappear. But if, by mistake, one encounters a blind
quack, he will tear out the eye and create a situation like "half-blind".  This
faith-based knowledge-illuminated yogadristi activity stops, and the
sattvaprakruti state comes closer. The vaidya (doctor) and vaidya pad (self-
realization, samyagdarshan) or yogadristi are both sattvaprakruti-related. Here,
the word "avahu" (to bring) is very significant. Like a leech, the attraction of
this yogadristi is so powerful that it draws the "padma" (makshapada) closer and
closer. Once this yogadristi, the "divine eye", is touched, it's over! By the
touch of this parashmani (touchstone) of vision, the iron of the body becomes
pure gold!  It is said that the first four dristi (vision) - mitra, etc. - are
either pratipati (receding) or apratipati (non-receding) in this mahamahimavan
(greatly glorious) yogadristi. But the last four dristi - sthira, etc. - are
always apratipati. This is the rule. The first four dristi, if they are
pratipati, they recede and go back, and they can also lead to sapaach-naraka
(hell) etc. If they are not pratipati, they do not recede after coming, and they
do not lead to naridu:kha (suffering) etc. Therefore, when sthira, etc. dristi,
which are not pratipati, are attained, the journey towards liberation continues
uninterruptedly, and liberation is eventually attained.  The asat (non-being)
sapravritti pad (state of activity) of the jiva (soul) is the shaileshi pad
(state of being like a mountain). This 66 "In the four dristi, etc., the journey
towards liberation does not break. Like the sun's rays, it removes all
suffering, and it gives happiness to both gods and humans." - Shri Che. Sajay.
Here, the form is a lotus with eight petals. This yogadristi is its petals, and
the place where the petals meet is the yogakarnica, which is the nature of the
self. In this karnica, which is the nature of the self, the Bhagavan (Lord)
Atma-chaitanya (consciousness of the soul) Dev Parbrahma (Supreme Brahman)
resides. As the yogadristi petals develop, the yogakamal (lotus of yoga) also
develops. With the opening of each yogarupa (yoga-related) petal, one
chittadoosha (mental defect) is eliminated, one guna (quality) develops, and one
yoganga (limb of yoga) is revealed. Thus, as yogadristi unfolds, the yogarupa
kamal (lotus of yoga) reaches full bloom.  The mitra dristi is like a spark of
fire! The development of yogadristi, which began with this spark of light,
continues to grow, and in the pada dristi, it blooms fully like a full moon.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 33 divya yAgadaSTisa'panna * dhRSTA' sadgururUpa niSNAta ( Expert ) sarvaidyane
joga maLe, ne te tenA raMganuM barAbara nidAna karI ceAgya cikitsA kare, jJAna-
aMjana AMje, tA dhIre dhIre te dRSTidhanI dRSTi khUlatI Aya, * divya nayana '
ughaDe ne te netraroga sAva maTI jAya. paNa bhUlecUke jo te ApaDAne TiTivaheNa
AMdhaLA asadgurUpa UMTavaidyane (Quack) bheTo thai jAya te te te tenI AMkha ja
phADI nAMkhe ne 'adhAadha palAya' jevI sthiti thAya ! A sazraddhAsa'gata
edharUpa jJAnaprakAzavatI cegaSTinA pravRtti aTakI jAya che, ane
sattaprakRttipada nikaTa Ave che. vedyasa vedya pada ( AtmAnubhUtirUpa
samyagdarzana ) athavA yegaSTi te satpravRttipadAtrahA che. ahI' ' Avahu ' eTale
lAvI ApanAra e zabda yAyA che te atya'ta sUcaka che. leAcu'bakanI jema
AkarSaNuzaktivALI A cogadRSTinuM' AkaSa~Nu ja evuM prabaLa che ke te 'padma'(
mekSapada ) enI meLe khe'cAtuM kheMcAtu' samIpa prApta thatuM jAya che. eka
vakhata A cegardaSTirUpa 'divya nayana ne spaza karyo ke eDA pAra ! A dRSTirUpa
pArasamaNinA sparzathI chavarUpa leAha zuddha suvarNa anI jAya che ! AvI. A
mahAmahimAvAn ADe bhedavALI AyeAgadaSTimAM mitrA Adi pahelI cAra dRSTi
pratipAtI-AvIne pAchI paDI jAya evI hoya ke apratipAtIna paDe evI hAya, ema
bhajanA che; paNa sthirA Adi chellI cAra dRSTi te aprati pAtI ja hAya, A niyama
che. pahelI cAra dRSTi kaDhI te je pratipAta-bhraMza pAme, AvIne pAchI cAlI
jAya, tA te sApAca-narakAdi apAyavALI paNa hAya; je pratipAta na pAme, AvyA
pachI paDe niThuM, te nara iduHkharUpa apAya-bAdhA paNa na heAya. eTale
apratipAtI nahi* paDatI evI sthirA Adi dRSTi prApti thaye, muktimArga pratyenuM
prayANa akhaMDa-abha`gapaNe cAlyA ja kare che, cAvat muktinI prApti hoya che.
phalarUpe jIvanI asat A sapravRttipada eTale zailezIpada che. A 66 dRSTi
cirAdika cAramAM, mugati prayANu na bhAMje re, rayaNI zayana jima zrama hare,
sura nara sukha tima cha.je re "-zrI ce. sajhAya. atre rUpaghaTanA karIe te
cerUpa aSTa kamaladalavALuM kamala che. A ArDa cegaSTirUpa tenI A pAMkhaDI-
kamaladala che, ane te pAMkhaDInuM milanastheAna AtmasvabhAvayu*janarUpa yeAga-
karNikA che. te AtmatrabhAvarUpa karNikAmAM bhagavan AtmA-caitanya deva
parabrahma birAje che. cegaSTirUpa dala jema jema vikAsane pAme che, tema tema
cegakamala vikAsa pAmatu' jAya che. ekeka yAgarUpa pAMkhaDI khUlatAM anukrame
ekekacittadoSa nivRtta thatA jAya che, ekeka guNa vikAsa pAmatA jAya che, ane
ekeka ye gAMga pragaTatu jAya che Ama sa'ceSTi unsIlana pAmatAM cegarUpa adala
kamala sapU vikAsane pAme che. mitrA dRSTimAM tRtyu agnikaNu sama!
edhaprakAzathI zarU thayele yegadRSTivikAsa uttarottara vadhate jai, pA dRSTimAM
pUrNa caMdra samA sALe kaLAe khIlI UThe

Page #35 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
34 This young lotus, which has blossomed as if it has witnessed the gentle sight
of the full, moon-like, knowledge-named world-illuminating, perfect,  *bedha-
chandra*, appears to have attained full bloom! (See the figure on the front
page.) “Like the moon, the *gadashti* opens gradually; Attaining full *yoga-
kala*, it plays in the form of God.” – *Gadashtikalash* (self-composed) or
*Garupurusha* is the one who has eight *gangas* as his eight limbs. Among them,
*yama-niyama* are the two feet, *asana-pranayama* are the two hands,
*pratyahara* is the abdomen, *dharana* is the chest, *dhyana* is the neck, and
*samadhi* is the head. The fullness and non-duality of these eight limbs is the
non-dual fullness of the *Garupurusha*, just as it is for a man with non-dual,
complete limbs. Any deficiency or incompleteness in even one limb is a
deficiency or incompleteness of the *Garupurusha*, just as it is for a man with
a deficient limb, a cripple. Just as each limb in the human body has its proper
place and usefulness, so too does each *ganga* in this *yoga-sharira* have its
proper place and usefulness. Just as all the limbs and parts of the body work
together in coordination to perform all the actions related to the body, so too
do all the limbs of the *Garupurusha* work together in coordination (organic
unit) to perform the actions of a *yoga-purusha*. Just as air is the body and
the body and breath are one, so too is the soul the *Garupurusha* and the
*gangas* are its essence. As the *gadashti* develops and each *ganga* manifests
and becomes stronger, the soul becomes more and more established in its nature.
When the eighth *gadashti* develops, the eight-limbed *yogapurusha* attains its
peak development and the soul is fully active in its nature. “The eighth
*gadashti* is the essence of *samadhi*, its name is ‘*para*’ I know; Its nature
is fully active, like the moon, I praise it twice.” – Shri K.D. Saxena. And
thus, when the moon-like *gadashti* blooms in full bloom and the *Garupurusha*
attains full development, the fullness of the *gachakra* leads to the “fullness”
of this *bhavachakra*, that is, the end of this *bhavachakra*. The eight
*gangas* are the spokes of this *gachakra*, they are closely connected to the
*gana* which is the form of the soul, and they revolve around it, that is, they
are active as the instruments of the soul’s nature. This *gachakra* is truly the
invincible “*Sudarshan Chakra*” that raises the *bhavachakra*. This pure
“*Dharmachakra*” that destroys the enemy of *bhavachakra* is called “*Arihant*”
by the true name of the supreme *cheminath* who creates it, and by attaining the
state of the soul, he makes the name “*Siddha*” meaningful.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 34 che; jJAna- nAmAM vizvane havarAvanArA A pUrNa bedha-caMdranA saumya darzane
jANe praphullita thayeluM A yaMga-kamala pUrNa vikasvarapaNAne prApta thayeluM
daSTa thAya che ! (juo mukhapRSTha paranI AkRti.) bIjanA caMdramA jevI, gadaSTi
khulya krame; pUrNa yogakalA pAmI, bhagavAna svarUpe rame."--gadaSTikalaza
(svaracita) athavA garUpa puruSa che. tenA aSTa gAMgarUpa ATha aMga che. temAM
yama-niyamarUpa be caraNa che, Asana-prANAyAma be hAtha che, pratyAhAra udara
che, dhAraNA vakSasthaLa (chAtI) che, dhyAna grIvA (Doka ) che, samAdhi
uttamAMga-mastaka che. A AThe aMganuM saMpUrNa paNuM-avikalapaNuM thAya te ja
gapuruSanI avikala saMpUrNatA che,-jema avikala saMpUrNa aMgopAMgavALA puruSanI
hoya che tema. eka paNa aMganI vikalatAthI-apUrNatAthI gapuruSanI vikalatA-
apUrNatA che,-jema hIna aMgavALA, kheDakhAMpaNavALA, puruSanI hoya che tema.
puruSazarIramAM pratyeka aMganuM jema yathAyogya samucita sthAna ne upayogIpaNuM
hoya che, tema A yogazarIramAM paNa pratyeka gAMganuM yathAyogya samucita sthAna
ne upayogI paNuM che. jema zarIranA sarva aMga-pratyaMga eka bIjA sAthe
sahakArathI-sahagathI ekapaNe vattI (Co-ordination) eka zarIra saMbaMdhI sarva
kiyA sAdhe che, tema gapuruSanA A sarva aMga eka bIjA sAthe sahakArathI-
sahagathI ekapaNe vattI (Organic unit) eka yoga-puruSanI sAdhaka evI prakriyA
kare che. vAyu e ja zarIrane ane zarIra ane prANa che, tema AtmA e ja A ga-
puruSane ane tene gAMgeno bhAvaprANa che. jema jema egadaSTine vikAsa thatuM
jAya che, ane ekeka gAMga pragaTatA pAmI jema jema puSTa thatuM jAya che, tema
tema AtmA uttarottara svabhAvane viSe ora ne era sthiti karato jAya che. yAvat
AThamI para daSTimAM aSTAMga yugapuruSane vikAsa parAkASTAne prApta thaye
AtmasvabhAvamAM pUrNa pravRtti hoya che. daSTi AThamI sAra samAdhi, nAma "para"
tasa jANuM che; ApasvabhAve pravRtti pUraNa, zazi sama be vakhANuM che."-zrI ke.
da. sakjhA. ane Ama jyAre caMdra samI gadaSyi pUrNa kaLAe khIlI UThe che, ane
gapuruSa pUrNa vikAsane pAme che tyAre gacakranI pUrNatA thatAM A bhavacakranI
paNa "pUrNatA" thAya che, arthAt A bhavacakano aMta Ave che. aSTa gAMga e A
cogacakranA ArA che, te AtmasvabhAvathuM janarUpa e ganI dharI sAthe gADha
saMbaddha hoI tenI AsapAsa phare che, arthAt te AtmasvabhAvanA ja sAdhaka thaI
pravRtta che. AvuM A gacakra kharekhara ! bhavacakano ucherI karanAruM amogha
"sudarzana caka" che. bhava-arine haNa nAMkhanAruM A zuddha "dharmacakra'
prajanArA parama ceminAtha "arihaMta evA yathArtha nAmane pAme che, ane
AtmasvarUpanI siddhi karIne "siddha' nAmane sArthaka kare che.

Page #36 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 35 Here, on the title page, by glancing at the main figure of this book, the
wise reader will understand the complete subject of this book at first glance.
Also, for the convenience of the inquisitive student, I have planned 21 other
figures and 16 tables in their respective places, which will also be of some use
to him. Thus, in brief, the subject of this auspicious compilation has been
guided, and the wise reader will know the details of the book himself.  ## 2.
Gabij: The Importance of Bhakti Yoga. "जिनेषु कुशलं चित्तं तन्नमस्कार एव च ।
gTIમાઃિ ૫ સંગુઠું નવીનમનુત્તમ ” - Shri Haribhadracharya. "जो जाणइ अरिहंते,
दव्वगुणपज्जवेहि य ।। સો નાઇનિર પ્રણા, મોરે ૩ વાર તરસ ત્રયં ” - Shri
Kundakundaacharya.  And this path is primarily based on devotion, as is
indicated here by the special description of Gabij, which the sage, the author
of this scripture, has called the foundation of the first friend's vision. This
gives rise to some thought on this occasion. Prabhubhakti, Sadgurubhakti,
Samrutbhakti, Sahaja Bhairagya, etc. are called the best Gabij here, which
become the infallible means of Nirvana. These Amegh Gabij, projected in the mind
of the seeker, sprout and successively give the fruit of the supreme nectar,
which is liberation. And that  The first and foremost seed in Gabij is the
supreme seed, the devotion to the supreme self, Shri Jinendra, the Vitaraga
Deva. "To have a mind filled with good and auspicious feelings towards Shri Jin
Bhagwan, to offer salutations and pure reverence, is the best Gabij." By
establishing the Siddha Atma, who has attained liberation, the pure nature of
the supreme Lord, in the ideal place, and by performing his single-minded
worship, it becomes the main Gabij, there is no doubt about it. The example of a
lion cub living in a flock of sheep for a long time is relevant here. By seeing
the form of the Lord, the devotee becomes aware of his own form, and thinks,
"How good it would be if I could manifest such a pure Atma form, full of bliss,
like Jin Bhagwan?" With such an intense desire, which is a deep-seated taste, he
becomes a pure, selfless soul in the end, turns towards self-realization, and
practices the ideal form of the supreme self. The achievement is like the ideal
that is worshipped. Just as a skilled sculptor, keeping the model constantly in
front of his eyes, creates a work of art, so too the seeker, keeping the pure
consciousness, the Lord, who is the ideal form of the established deity,
constantly in front of his eyes, creates the complete artistic manifestation of
his own self. But he sees his own form in the mirror of the unchanging form of
the Lord.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 35 atre mukhapRSTha para meM jelI A graMthanI sArabhUta mukhya AkRti para daSTi
pheravatAM sujJa vAMcakane prathama dazane ja A graMthanI saMpUrNa vastune
khyAla AvI jaze. temaja jijJAsu abhyAsInI sugamatAthe atre anya 21 AkRti ane 16
keSTakanI meM yathAsthAne yejanA karI che, te paNa tene kaMIka upayogI thaI
paDaze. Ama saMkSepamAM A sukalAtmaka saMkalanAmaya graMthanI vastunuM
digadarzana karyuM, vizeSa te graMtha avelekanathI sujJa vAMcaka svayaM jANaze.
2. gabIjaH bhaktiyoganuM prAdhAnya. "jineSu kuzalaM cittaM tannamaskAra eva ca
/  gTImAHi 5 saMguThuM navInamanuttama " zrI haribhadrAcAryajI. "jo jANai
arihaMte, davvaguNapajjavehi ya  /  /  so nAinira praNA, more 3 vAra tarasa
trayaM " -zrI kuMdakuMdAcAryajI. ane A gamArga mukhyapaNe bhaktipradhAna ja che
e atre zAstrakartA maharSie prathama mitrA daSTinA pAyArUpa kahelA gabIjanA
viziSTa varNana parathI ja sUcita thAya che. teno atre prasaMgathI kaMIka vicAra
karavAnuM prApta thAya che. prabhubhakti, sadgurubhakti, samRtabhakti, sahaja
bhavairAgya Adine atre uttama gabIja kahyA che ke je nirvANunA avaya-acUka hetu
thaI paDe che. mumukSunI cittabhUmimAM prakSipta thayelA A amegha gabIja
aMkurita thaI anukrame mokSarUpa parama ISTa amRta phala Ape ja che. ane te
gabIjamAM sauthI prathama ane sauthI pradhAna evuM parama bIja pragaTa
paramAtmasvarUpa zrI jinezvaranI-vItarAga devanI bhakti che. "zrI jina bhagavAna
pratye kuzala-zubha bhAvasaMpanna citta rAkhavuM, namaskAra ane saMzuddha
prAmAdi karavA te anuttama gabIja che. " evA parama gIzvara sAkSAta zuddha
svabhAvamaya mokSane pAmelA siddha AtmAne Adarza sthAne sthApI, tenI ekaniSTha
ArAdhanA karavI te pradhAna gabIja thaI paDe emAM jarAya Azcarya nathI. gheTAnA
TeLAmAM cirakAlathI vaselA siMhazizunuM daSTAMta atra ghaTe che. prabhunA
svarUpadarzanathI bhaktajanane nija svarUpanuM bhAna thatAM, AvuM jina bhagavAna
jevuM paramAnaMdamaya zuddha AtmasvarUpa mane pragaTe to kevuM sAruM ? evI
aMtaraMga rucirUpa tIvra IcchAthI te para pariNatimAM nirIha-niSkAma e aMtarAtmA
banI, AtmapariNati bhaNI vaLe che, ane Adarza ( Ideal) paramAtmasvarUpanI
sAdhanA kare che. je upAsya Adarza tevI siddhi thAya che. kuzala zilpI jema
Adazane (Model) niraMtara daSTisanmukha rAkhI pitAnI kalAkRti ghaDe che, tema
mumukSu AtmA paNa pratiSThadasthAnIya-AdarzarUpa zuddha caitanyamUtti prabhune
niraMtara daSTisanmukha rAkhI nija AtmasvarUpanI pUrNa kalAmaya ghaTanA kare
che. paNa jima avikAra" prabhunA rUpa darpaNamAM nija svarUpanuM darzana kare
che.

Page #37 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
36 The verse states that the pure devotion (Chegkhīj) is the devotion that is
offered to the Jina Raja (the victorious one) with the feeling of a seeker,
experiencing the state of Devchandra (the moon god) and the pure radiance. Shri
Devchandraji here refers to pure devotion, not impure devotion. Shri
Haribhadrasuriji says that we are talking about serving this extraordinary Lord
in an extraordinary way. We are talking about serving this transcendental Lord
by knowing and understanding the profound secrets and mysteries of his service,
and by offering service that is a manifestation of spiritual qualities. Many
beings serve this transcendental Lord in a worldly way without understanding his
true nature. They serve him with the desire for worldly rewards, both in this
life and the next. Or they serve him with the ten karmas (vices) like anger,
pride, deceit, greed, etc. This kind of service offered to a transcendental Lord
with worldly desires is not pure service, and it is not Chegkhīj. Pure service
is that which is offered (1) with the understanding that the Lord is the
ultimate object of worship, (2) without the ten karmas, and (3) without any
desire for worldly or otherworldly rewards. This kind of pure service is what is
called Chegkhīj.  Therefore, (1) first and foremost, we should develop the
understanding that this Vitaraga (free from attachment) Supreme Being is the
most worthy of respect, worship, and adoration in the entire universe. We should
consider him as the ultimate object of worship, whose glory and virtues are
infinitely greater than anything else in the universe. We should consider him as
the ultimate teacher, the ultimate God, the ultimate beloved. "Serve him above
all else!" This means that we should be more eager to serve this compassionate
ocean of virtues, the "Arhat" (worthy one), who is infinitely more glorious than
any other object in the universe, than we are to serve anyone else. (2) Second,
pure devotion is characterized by the absence of the ten karmas, including the
desire for food, anger, etc. In pure devotion, even the desire for food is
forgotten, fear disappears, lust becomes useless, attachment dies, anger is
pacified, pride is extinguished, deceit is abandoned, greed is eliminated, wrong
belief is replaced by true understanding, and there is no concern for worldly
praise. This is the kind of pure devotion that a seeker of liberation should
practice. As Shri Yovijayaji said, "When one meets the cool Jina, one's mind
becomes pure." (3) Third, pure devotion should be free from any desire for
worldly or otherworldly rewards. Any action performed with the desire for
worldly rewards like wealth, fame, or praise, destroys the true self and becomes
a poisonous action, as it is motivated by hope. Similarly, any action performed
with the desire for otherworldly rewards also becomes a poisonous action, as it
is motivated by fear. Therefore, we should...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 36 pratiSTha'de pratiSTha'de jinarAjanA heAjI, karatAM sAdhaka bhAva; deva'dra
devacaMdrapada anubhave hAjI, zuddhAtama prAbhAva."--zrI devaca'drajI atre
'sa'zu' bhaktine ja cegakhIja kahyuM che,-nahi' ke asa'zuddha bhaktine zrI
haribhadrasUrijI kahe che ke atre ame je kahevA mAgIe chIe te tenA alaukika rIte
A alaukika prabhune sevavAnI vAta kahevA mAgIe chIe, A leAkeAttara prabhunI
sevAnA 'taryaMta bheda-rahasya-mama jANIne samajIne AdhyAtmika guNaprakAzarUpa
sevAnI vAta kahevA mAgIe chIe. A leAkeAttara devane ghaNA jIve temanu' svarUpa
samajyA vinA laukika rItathI seve che, A leAka-paraleAka saMbaMdhI laukika
phUlanI AkAMkSAthI-AzAthI seve che. athavA krodha-mAna-mAyA-leNa Adi daza sa`jJA
sahitapaNe seve che. Ama alaukika devanI laukika lakAmanAthI laukikapaNe karAtI
sevA te zuddha sevA nathI, ane te caigakhIja nathI. zud sevA tA (1) prabhu
pratye parama upAdeya buddhipUrvaka, (2) AhArAdi dazasa'jJAnA nidha sahitapaNe.
(3) A leAka-paraleAka-sa'kha'dhI kAmanA rahitapaNe karavAmAM Ave te ja thAya.
evI je sa'zuddha sevA che, te ja atre ce!gabIjarUpa thaI paDe che. eTale (1)
sauthI prathama te A vItarAga paramAtmA AkhA jagatmAM khIjA badhAya karatAM
vadhAre AdaravA yogya che, ArAdhavA-upAsavA yaigya che evI parama upAdeyabuddhi
aMtamAM pragaTavI joie; AkhA jagat karatAM paNa jenu' guNagaurava anaMtaguNu
adhika che evA te parama jagadguru parameSThi parama iSTa lAgavA joie.
'sabhavadeva te dhura seve! save re.' arthAt jaganA anya koi paNa padArtha
karatAM anaMta anaMtagaNuA mahimAva'na evA A parama upakArI karuNAsiMdhu 'arhat'
prabhune parama dhRjAnA pAtra, parama pUjya, parama ArAdhya, parama upAsya, ane
parama sevya guNI, tenI pUjAmAM, tenI ArAdhanAmAM tenI sevanAmAM bIjA khadhA kA
karatAM sauthI prathama tatpara thai javu joie. (ra) bIju-AhAra, krodhiMda daza
sa'jJAnu viSNubhana-nirAdha, udaya abhAva hAvA e sazuddha bhaktinu bIju lakSaNa
che. jyAM khAvA pIvAnu` paNa bhUlAI jAya, bhaya bhAgI jAya, kAma nakAmA thaI
paDe, mamatA marI jAya, krodha zamI jAya, mAnanuM mAna na rahe, kapaTanuM kapaTa
cAle nahi', leAbhanA lAbha thAya nahi, adhazraddhA TaLIne sAcI samajaNa hAya,
ane leAkanI vAhavAhanI bIlakula paravA na heAya, evI sazuddha bhakti ja mumukSu
jogIjane kare. zrI yovijayajIe kahyu' che tema zrI zItala jina bheTiye, karI
bhakate cAkakhuM citta hA.' (3) trIjuM-A leAka paraleAkasabaMdhI phulakAmanA
rahitapaNu -niSkAmapaNu' hevu joie. A leAkasabaMdhI dhana-kIrtti-pUjAsatkAra Adi
kulakAmanAthI je karavAmAM Ave, te sacittane mArI nAMkhatu hAvAthI ane mahat
evAM sat anuSThAnanI AzAtanArUpa thatuM heAvAthI, AtmAne viSarUpe pariNamI
viSaanuSThAna thai paDe che; ane paraleAkasa badhI lakAmanAthI karavAmAM AvatuM
anuSThAna paNa te ja kAraNathI AtmAne gararUpe (Slow poison) pariNamI
garanuSThAna thai paDe che. mATe A anne

Page #38 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## English Translation:  37 Abandoning the practice of poison, which is like the
deadly poison Halahala, from afar, the seeker should practice only selfless
devotion with a true understanding, and should tread the path of Amrita
Anushthan, which transforms the soul into the form of nectar. Such pure devotion
and other practices are the means to liberation. “The path of the nectar of the
qualities of the Jinas… the means to the action of the nectar of the mind… the
action of the nectar of the future… the mind becomes the nectar of the soul.” –
Shri Devchandraji. “It is possible, O God, to remove the dust from the heart, to
obtain the service of the Lord, the service is the first step, the fearless, the
infinite. The fruit of worship is said to be the joy of the mind, the worship is
unbroken, without deceit, the self becomes the treasure of joy.” – Shri
Anandghanji.  Others, who are deluded and confused, believe that the service of
the Lord is easy, beautiful, and convenient. “They think that by performing
rituals, offerings, or making donations, the Lord is pleased! But the Lord is
not so easily pleased, and His service is not easy, but very difficult; because
until the “deceit of the heart” of the living being is gone, there will be no
love with the Lord; therefore, the seeker should, as much as possible, abandon
the pursuit of worldly things and should climb the ladder of pure contemplation
of the devotion of the self-realized God, that is, the form of this God is the
same as the form of this great soul. Thus, with pure conviction, all beings are
equal to the liberated ones, but it happens as they understand it in the right
way. And the cause of this happening is the command of the true Guru, the state
of the Jinas, etc. But those who abandon this unparalleled cause by taking the
name of the material cause, never attain liberation and remain in delusion.
“All beings are equal to the liberated ones, it happens as they understand it;
the command of the true Guru, the state of the Jinas, are the causes. Those who
abandon this cause by taking the name of the material cause, never attain
liberation and remain in delusion.” – Shri Atmasiddhi.  Some people talk about
the material cause without understanding, and unknowingly consider the cause to
be secondary and make it a subject of debate. This is due to their
misunderstanding, their false delusion; because the material cause and the cause
are not contradictory or opposing, but are inseparable and cooperative.
Awareness and purification of the material cause is certainly a duty, and the
goal of pure devotion is also the same.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 37 prakAranA viSaanuSThAnane hAlAhala viSa jevA AtmaghAtaka jANa dUrathI tyajI
daI, mumukSue kevaLa niSkAma bhakti tAtvika samajaNapUrvaka karatA rahI, AtmAne
amRtarUpe pariNamatuM evuM tatu vA amRtAnuSThAna pAdaravuM joIe, ane evuM
saMzuddha bhakti Adi anuSThAna ja gasiddhinuM sAdhaka thAya che. "jina guNa
amRta pAthI re....mana amRta kriyAne upAya re....bhavi. amRta kriyA anuSThAnathI
re....mana Atama amRta thAya re."--zrI devacaMdrajI. "saMbhava deva re dhura se
save re, lahI prabhu sevana bheda, sevana kAraNa pahelI bhUmikA re, abhaya aSa
akheda. citta prasane re pUjana phala kahyuM re, pUjA akhaMDita eha; kapaTa
rahita thaI Atama apaNA re, AnaMdaghana pada raha."-zrI. AnaMdaghanajI. bAkI
mugdha-bheLA jana te ema mAne che ke prabhunI sevA sahelI che, sohalI che,
sugama che. "je je je je kya ke TIlA TapakAM ke cAMdalA karyA, ke naivedya bhoga
dhaya eTale basa patyuM ! prabhu prasanna! paNa prabhu kAMI evA bheLA nathI ne
enI sevA paNa evI rahelI-sahalI nathI, paNa ghaNI ja dohalI che; kAraNa ke
jIvanA "dilanuM kapaTa" jAya nahiM tyAM lagI prabhu sAthe prIti joDAya nahiM;
mATe mumukSue te jema bane tema para pariNatine parityAga karI te ahaMta-siddha
bhagavAnanI bhaktinA avalaMbane paNa zuddha svarUpaciMtana para caDhavAnuM che
ke-jevuM A bhagavAnanuM svarUpa che, tevuM ja A mahArA AtmAnuM svarUpa che. Ama
zuddha nizcayathI te sarva jIva siddha samAna che, paNa te te je samyapha
prakAre samaje te thAya. ane tema thavAmAM nimitta kAraNarUpa sadguru AjJA,
jinadazA Adi che. paNa upAdAnanuM nAma laI je A anupama nimittane choDI de che,
te kadI siddhapaNuM pAmatA nathI ane bhrAMtimAM ja sthiti kare che. "sarva jIva
che siddha sama, je samaje te thAya; sadaguru AjJA jinadazA, nimitta
kAraNamAMya. upAdAnanuM nAma laI, je e tyaje nimitta; pAme nahi siddhatvane,
rahe brAMtimAM sthita." zrI Atmasiddhi. keTalAka leke samajyA vinA upAdAnanI
vAta karyA kare che, ane jANe ajANe nimittanI ekAMte gauNatA gaNI tene apalApa-
nidbhava kare che. te temanI aNasamajarUpa mithyA bhrAMtine doSa che; kAraNa ke
upAdAna ane nimitta e kAMI paraspara virodhI nathI ke pratipakSI nathI, paNa
aviruddha sahakArI ane sahayogI che. upAdAnanI jAgRti ane zuddhi te avazya
kartavya che, ane zuddha nizcayanA sevanane uddeza-lakSya paNa te ja

Page #39 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
38 It is true, but these great souls forget that for the sake of purity and
awareness of the *upādāna*, it is essential to manifest the *upādāna* as the
cause of the *upādāna*, and for this, the indispensable need for the dependence
on the *padma* (lotus) like *jinabhakti* (devotion to the Jinas) and other
beneficial causes. The service of the Lord is the strong *lakshana* (sign) that
manifests the *upādāna* (soul) as the cause of the *upādāna*. The scriptural
scholars have repeatedly proclaimed that the *jinarāja* (king of the Jinas), the
mine of the nectar of equality, is the ultimate cause, and his dependence is the
attainment of *niyama* (discipline). The great soul, *matthātmā* (great soul)
*daivacandraji* (a Jain saint) and others have sung with devotion:  “The
*upādāna* is the soul, O friend, the strong *lakshana* is the Lord… worship the
Jinas! The *upādāna* is the cause, O friend, the service of the Lord manifests
it… worship the Jinas! The *jinarāja* is the ultimate cause, the mine of the
nectar of equality; the dependence on the Lord is the attainment of *niyama*,
this is the proclamation.” – *Śrī Daivacandraji*.  66 “If the work is done due
to the cause, there is no argument in that; but to say that the cause is Vishnu
and to accomplish the work, is the delusion of one’s own opinion.” – *Śrī
Anandghanaji*.  It is extremely difficult to ascend directly (directly) through
the series of forms without such a strong dependence on the cause. But for those
who have manifested the *ātmasvarūpa* (true nature of the soul), it becomes easy
to ascend through that series by depending on the meditation of the *sahujātmā*
(one who is the same as the soul) *aham* (I) *ta-siddh* (self-realized) Lord.
Because, as *Śrīmad Rājacandraji* has said, “To contemplate the form of the Lord
is to contemplate the form of the *parama dṛṣṭivān puruṣa* (the man of supreme
vision) from a secondary perspective. Just as the *ātmasvarūpa* of the perfected
Lord is, so is the *ātmasvarūpa* of all beings; therefore, the noble being
should have an interest in perfection.” If we look at it from the fundamental
perspective, the worship of the Jinas is the worship of the *ātmasvarūpa*. *Śrī
Daivacandra* has said, “The worship of the Jinas is the worship of oneself.”
Someone might say, “What is the use of this cause? We should directly cling to
the *upādāna* soul, and only contemplate the *adhyātmasvarūpa* (spiritual
form).” But this belief is wrong, because such contemplation of the
*adhyātmasvarūpa* without the *lakshana* is for the excellent *adhikārī*
(qualified person) who has attained the very high, un-distracted state; but
without such a high state of *adhikārī*, reading the *adhyātmashastra*
(spiritual scriptures) with one’s own imagination, and talking about the
contemplation of the *adhyātmasvarūpa* in the name of the *upādāna*, there are
many dangers. For example, sometimes it causes *vyāmoha* (delusion) in the
being. Even though one has not attained such a state of *śyātmā* (self-
realized), one develops a delusion of such a state, and instead of “I am
Brahman,” one becomes “I am delusion!” Sometimes, due to the lack of the
sweetness of *bhaktirasa* (devotional feeling), dryness sets in, and one becomes
a dry spiritualist, and in speech, one acts as if one is in a state of
*mahāveśa* (great trance), and thus develops a dry intellectualism, and
therefore…  plays, but pure *dandachāra* (conduct)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 38 che, paNa upAdAnanI zuddhi-jAgRti arthe, upAdAnane upAdAna-kAraNapaNe
pragaTAvavA athe paNu jinabhakti Adi padma upakArI nimitta kAraNanA avalaMbananI
anivArya AvazyakatA che, e A mahAnubhAveA bhUlI jAya che. prabhusevA e AtmArUpa
upAdAnane upAdAna-kAraNapaNe pragaTAvavA puSTa lakhanarUpa puSTa nimitta che.
zAstrakAre tA peAkArI pokArIne kahyu che ke-samatA amRtanI khANu evA jinarAja ja
parama nimitta hetu che, ane tenA avalakhane ja 'niyamA' siddhi haiAya che.
bhaktazirAmaNuM maTThAtmA daivaca'drajI Adie bhAvathI gAyu che ke-- " upAdAna
AtamA sahI re, puSTAlakhana deva....jinavara pUjo ! upAdAna kAraNapaNe re,
pragaTa kare prabhu seva....jinavara pUjo ! nimitta hetu jinarAja, samatA amRta
khANI; prabhu avala khana siddhi, niyamA ehu vakhANI.'--zrI devaca'drajI. 66
kAraNu joge hA kAraja nIpaje, emAM keI ne vAda; paNa kAraNu viSNu kahe kAraja
sAdhIe, e nija mata unmAda, ''- zrI AnaddaghanajI. AvA prakhala nimitta
avalaMbana vinA sIdhesIdhu. ( Drtctly ) svarUpazreNIe caDhavu ati ati duSkara
che. paNa jene pragaTa AtmasvarUpa pragaTayuM che evA sAkSAt sahujAtmasvarUpI
ahaM ta-siddha prabhunA dhyAnAlaMbanathI te zreNIe caDhavuM sugama thaI paDe
che. kAraNa ke zrImad rAjacadrajIe kahyu' che tema 'bhagavAnanA svarUpanuM
ciMtana karavu te paramA dRSTivAna puruSAne gauNatAthI svarUpanu' ja citavana
che. jevuM siddha bhagavAnanuM AtmasvarUpa che, tevu' sarvAM jIvAnu AtmasvarUpa
che; te mATe bhavya jIvee siddhatvane viSe ruci karavI. jo mathA mULa dRSTithI
joIe te jinanI pUjA te AtmasvarUpanu' pUjana che. ' zrI devaca'drasvAmIe kahyu
che ke * jinavara pUjA re te nija pUjanA re.' koi kaheze ke A nimittanuM zuM
kAma che? ApaNe te sIdhA upAdAna AtmAne ja vaLagIe, mAtra adhyAtmasvarUpanuM ja
ciMtana karIe. paNa A temanuM mAnavuM bhUlabhareluM che, kAraNu ke lakhana
vinAnuM tevuM adhyAtmasvarUpa ci'tana te| ati ucca apramatta dazAne pAmelA
uttama adhikArIe mATe che; paNa tevI tathArUpa ucca adhikAra dazA vinA
adhyAtmazAstro svamatikalpanAe vAMcI, upAdAnanA nAme mAtra adhyAtmasvarUpa
ci'tananI vAte karavAmAM aneka doSarUpa bhayasthAne rahelA che. jemake-kavacit
tethI jIvane vyAmeAha upaje che. peAtAnI tevI zyAtmadazA thaI nahiM chatAM
peAtAnI tevI dazAnI 'kalpanArUpa' bhrAMti upaje che, 'ahaM brahmAsmi'ne badale
bhramAsmi thai jAya che! kavacit bhaktirasanI AdratAnA abhAve zuSkatA AvI jAya
che, zuSka adhyAtmIpaNuM thAya che, madha-mAkSa teA kalpanA che ema vANImAM
peAte tA mahAvezamAM varte che, evuM zuSkajJAnIpaNuM upaje che, ane tethI khele
che, paNa svaccha MdAcAra

Page #40 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
English Translation (preserving Jain terms):  39 There may be delusion, or an
insane prattle in the form of undigested knowledge or non-transformation. The
mala (karmic impurities) has not been removed, 'the entire world is seen as a
garland or known as a dream', and such a non-mala state of knowledge has not
arisen, yet it displays 'verbal knowledge' like a madman, saying 'I am the
knower, not the ignorant, how can I be liberated?' Similarly, artificiality,
hypocrisy, and duality also arise. In this way, the possibility of many defects
arises in solitary spiritual contemplation. But through devotion to the
Bhagavān, there is no possibility of any such defects, and the soul ascends the
natural spiritual qualities.  The great souls who are desirous of their own
nature have understood the worship of the Jina Bhagavān and the Siddha Bhagavān
as the means to attain the nature (svabhāva). The state of Kṣīṇamala
(destruction of karmic impurities) is the strong support for the soul's
contemplation of its own nature. Further, only the contemplation of the
spiritual nature gives rise to the soul; it makes many souls attain dryness, or
generates willfulness, or produces a state of insane prattle. Through the
meditation on the form of the Bhagavān, a devotional perspective arises, and the
spiritual perspective becomes secondary. Thus, dryness, willfulness, and insane
prattle do not occur. By the establishment of the natural state of the soul,
natural spiritual predominance occurs. The soul naturally engages in the highest
qualities, so defects like dryness do not arise. And there is no aversion
towards the path of devotion. The natural state of the soul attains absorption
in its own nature, where the mind engages in the nature of the soul without the
support of the contemplation of the form, qualities, and modifications.  As
stated by Ācārya Kundakunda in the Pravacana-sāra, "One who knows the Bhagavān
in terms of the body, object, qualities, and modifications, knows the nature of
one's own soul and, by ascertaining it, attains the destruction of mala." Thus,
by following the path of devotional spirituality or spiritual devotion, one does
not fall into the state of the aforementioned defects. By predominantly
following the devotional path, one gradually touches the higher and higher
spiritual stages, the 'Suddha' spiritual state manifests from the experience of
the qualities of the manifest Guṇin (the enlightened being), and finally, one
attains the complete spiritual development. Thus, the contemplation and
meditation on the form of the Lord is an easy and direct means for the soul to
attain its own nature. Just as the lamp becomes the light by worshiping the
lamp, the soul becomes the Supreme Soul by worshiping the Supreme Soul. The
worshiper becomes the worshipped through the worship of the worshipped.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 39 paNuM heAya che, athavA jJAnanA ajINu rUpa-apariNamanarUpa unmatta pralApa
thAya che. ata meha chUTayo nathI, 'sakala jagat te eThavatu athavA svapna
samAna N jANyuM nathI, ane evI ameharUpa jJAnadazA upajI nathI, chatAM unmattanI
jema 'vAcAjJAna " dAkhave che ke 'hama teA jJAnI hai, adhelA ja nahiM te mukta
kaise hAve ?' temaja kRtrimatA, dAMbhikata,dvi doSa paNa upaje che. ityAdi
prakAre aneka doSanI upapatti ekalA nirAlakhana adhyAtmaciMtanamAM saMbhave che.
paNa bhagaktinA AlakhanathI tevA kei paNa deSanI sabhAvanA nathI haitI, ane AtmA
svAbhAvika evI adhyAtma guNazreNIe AreAhaNa karatA jAya che. " svarUpa AkAMkSI
mahAtmAee ema jina bhagavAnanI tathA siddha bhagavAnanI upAsanA svarUpaprAptine
hetu jANyA che. kSINameha guNusthAnaka paMta te svarUpa ci'tanA jIvane prakhaLa
avala'bana che. x xx vaLI mAtra ekyu. adhyAtmasvarUpa ciMtavana jIvane jyAmAha
upajAve che; ghaNA jIvAne zuSkatA prApta karAve che, athavA svecchAcAripaNuM
utpanna kare che; athavA unmatta pralApa dazA utpanna kare che. bhagavAnanA
svarUpanA dhyAnAvala'khanathI bhaktipradhAna dRSTi cAya che, ane adhyAtma dRSTi
gauNu thAya che. jethI zuSkatA, svecchAcArapaNu ane unmattapralApatA thatAM
nathI. AtmadazAkhaLa thavAthI svAbhAvika adhyAtmapradhAnatA thAya che. AtmA
svAbhAvika ucca guNaeNne bhaje che, eTale zuSkatAdi doSA utpanna thatA nathI.
ane bhaktimArga pratye paNa jugupsata thatA nathI. svAbhAvika AtmadazA
svarUpalInatA pAmatI jAya che. jyAM arju'tAdinA svarUpa-dhyAnAvalaMbana vagara
vRtti AtmAkAratA bhaje chaeN. '' zrImad rAjacaMdra, patrAMka 692, (753) maharSi
kuMdakuMdAcAryajIe pravacanasAramAM kahyuM che ke je bhagavAna ahu 'tanu
svarUpa, draSya, guNu ane paryAyathI jANe, te peAtAnA AtmAnu svarUpa jANe ane
tene nizcaye karIne meha nAza pAme ' eTale Ama bhaktimaya adhyAtma athavA
adhyAtmamaya bhaktinA mAge caDhatAM ukta deSarUpa patanasthAne ( Pi:-fails )
nathI hAtA. bhaktipradhAnapaNe vatAM 01 anukrame ucca ucca dhyAtma gurusthAnA
sparzatA jAya che, vyakta guNInA guNucAkhathI ' saDuja ' adhyAtma dazA pragaTe
che, ane chevaTe pUrNa AtmazuvikAsane pAme che. Ama * puSTa nimitte ' rUpa
prabhunu aAlakhana-dhyAna AtmAne svarUpA haNa karavAne sugama ne ebDa upAya che,
rAjamAga che. vATa dIvAnI upAsanA karatAM pote dIve bane che, tema AtmA
paramAtmAnI upAsanA karatAM svayaM paramAtmA thAya che. upAsyanI upAsanAthI
upAsaka pete upAsya bane che. tame muja! me mahA gItA nadaghanajIe gAyelI parana
dhanya dazA prApta thAya che. pote Atmanana karI paramAtmA bane che, jema jhADa
peAtAne mathIne muja !' evI athavA AtmA pete agni * dha mitra vAnanuMrAmya mA po
male chAMdarAH  /  ghI copAya bhinA ati lAdI |"--zrI pUjyapAda svAmI

Page #41 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
40 It is possible; but this is a one-pointed path suitable for a capable yogi,
and it requires the use of extraordinary strength. Even dying after struggling
is difficult to attain the supreme state without the support of the manifest
Supreme Self; but with the support of that Supreme Person, it becomes very easy.
The world, which is like a vast ocean, becomes like a small step with the
support of the Lord! Therefore, great saints like Shri Devchandraji have sung:
"By clinging to the Jin, we become free from clinging and become self-reliant,
therefore, we will enjoy the pure garden of our own qualities by clinging to
that capable Lord." To the extent that the self-essence, endowed with its own
wealth, is not complete, I will always serve the feet of this Jagguru Dev, I
will not abandon his support until the end of the 12th subtle-merit quality-
state. The world, which is like a vast ocean, becomes like a small step with the
support of the Lord! "By clinging to the Jin, we become free from clinging and
become self-reliant, therefore, we will enjoy the pure garden of our own
qualities by clinging to that capable Lord." "Until the pure essence of our own
wealth is complete, I will always serve the feet of this Jagguru Dev." - Shri
Devchandraji. Thus, devotion has been praised by all the scriptural scholars
with one voice. *The Gita also says: "Of all the devotees, the one who worships
Me with faith, who has attained Me in his heart, is the most dear to Me."
Devotion is the royal path to liberation. "Jinpati bhakti mukti ne marg"
(Devotion to the Jin is the path to liberation), says the king of devotees,
Devchandraji. "Without Jin-bhaav, one cannot escape from suffering," says the
supreme soul, Shrimad Rajchandraji. While studying the ocean of scriptures, I
found this essence: "Devotion to God is the seed of supreme bliss and wealth," -
this is the saying of Shri Yashvijayji, who is proficient in all scriptures.*
Just as Jin-bhakti is the best seed, so is Sadguru-bhakti the best yoga seed.
Shri Haribhadrasuriji says: "To have pure skillful mind, etc., towards those who
are full of devotion, such as the Acharya, Upadhyaya, Sadhu, Tapasvi, etc., is
the seed, - not towards the Dravyaacharya, etc." Here, the scriptural scholar
emphasizes the word "bhaav" (devotion). Devotion - the one whose soul has yoga
as a result of the ultimate goal. The one who is truly devoted, who is a pure
self-knower and is a true guru, who has the true ideal qualities of devotion as
described in the scriptures, which should be present in the Acharya, etc., such
a true Bhavaacharya - Bhavasadhu, etc., is the best character worthy of worship,
- not the Dravyaacharya - Dravyasadhu, etc.; therefore, "Like the names of the
yonis, The names of the faithful are also dear to Me." - Gita "Tamyat tadau
shraddhapradano matim avato vike paramanandaula." Yes. Yes.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 40 bane che tema; paNa A te koI samartha yogI vizeSane yogya evo ekapadIrUpa
mArga che, ane temAM atizaya asAdhAraNa baLa vAparavuM paDe che. mathI mathIne
marI jAya te paNa pragaTa paramAtmasvarUpanA avalaMbana vinA pitAnI meLe
paramapadanI prApti durghaTa che; paNa te parama puruSanA avalaMbane te sAva
sughaTa-sugama thaI paDe che. je saMsAra samudra samAna tara ati dustara che, te
prabhunA avalaMbane gaSpada samAna banI jAya che! eTalA mATe zrI devacaMdrajI
jevA bhaktaziromaNi mahAtmA gAI gayA che ke-jinaAlaMbanI nirAlaMbatA pAmI nija
AlaMbanI thAya che, tethI ame te te samartha prabhunuM prabaLa avalaMbana grahI
nija guNanA zuddha naMdanavana mAM ramazuM. te eTale sudhI ke nija saMpadAyukta
Atmatattva jyAM sudhI saMpUrNa nahiM thAya tyAMsudhI huM A jagaguru devanA
caraNa sadAya sevyA karIza, thAvat bAramAM kSINameha guNasthAnanA aMtapayata
tenuM avalaMbana huM choDIza nahiM. ati dustara je jaladhi same saMsAra jo, te
gepada sama kIdhe prabhu avalaMbane re ; jina alabanI nirAlaMbanI thAye je, tiNe
hama ramazuM nija guNa zuddha naMdanavane re le. zuddha tatva nija saMpadA, jyAM
lagI pUrNa na thAya re; tyAM lagI jagaguru devanA, evuM caraNa sadAya re."---zrI
devacaMdrajI. Ama bhaktine sarva zAstrakAroe ekI avAje vakhANI che. *gItAmAM
paNa kahyuM che ke-"sarva vegIomAM paNa mane pAmelA aMtarAtmAthI je zraddhAvAna
mane bhaje che, te mane yuktatama mata che." bhakti e muktine rAjamArga che.
"jinapati bhakti muktine mAraga" ema bhaktarAja devacaMdrajI kahe che, "jina
bhAva vinA kabU' nahiM chUTatA duHkhadAva" ema parama bhAvitAtmA zrImad
rAjacaMdrajInuM anubhavavacana bhAkhe che. zAstrasamudranuM avagAhana karatAM
mane A sAra maLyo ke bhagavanI bhakti e ja paramAnaMda saMpadAonuM bIja che, "--
ema sarva zAstra pAraMgata zrI yazavijayajInuM subhASita che.* jema jinabhakti
uttama gabIja che, tema saddagurubhakti paNa uttama yogabIja che. zrI
haribhadrasUrijI kahe che ke "bhAvagI evA bhAva AcArya, bhAvaupAdhyAya,
bhAvasAdhu, bhAvatapasvI Adi pratye paNa je vizuddha kuzala cittAdi levuM te
gabIja che,-nahi ke dravyAcArya Adi pratye." ahIM "bhAva" zabda para zAstrakAre
khAsa bhAra mUke che bhAvathI-paramArthanI jenA AtmAmAM yoga pariName che. je
sAcA bhAvagI che, je zuddha AtmajJAnI hoI sAcA guru che, jenAmAM AcArya AdimAM
hovA yogya evA zAstrokta yathArtha Adarza bhAva-guNa vatta che, evA kharekharA
bhAvAcArya-bhAvasAdhu Adi ja vaMdana karavA yogya uttama pAtra che,-nahi ke
dravyAcArya-dravyasAdhu Adi; mATe yoninAmA jevAM madUte nAmanA | zraddhAvAna
mAte yo mAM tame to mataH | >> gItA " tamayA TadauM zratApearridanAno matimAvato
vIke paramAnaMuMulAi " hA. hA.

Page #42 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 41  The supreme reverence and respect for the Bhavacharyas, etc., has been
stated by Shri Haribhadrasuri. Therefore, what kind of extraordinary, detached,
and calm state of being should be the self-state and the state of qualities of
the Bhagwan Acharyas, etc., who have been given a glorious place in the Panch
Parameshthis? A discerning seeker should carefully examine this with wisdom and
understanding. He should perform pure service and devotion towards the
Bhavacharyas, etc., who are like awakened Jinas, who are the embodiment of Yoga,
and in whom the feeling of self-knowledge is manifested. This is the best seed.
"The self-knower is called a Shraman, others are material beings. The one who
illuminates the object in the past, is the treasure of bliss, the companion of
the soul." - Shri Anandghanaji.  Constant devotion is also the best seed.
Writing, worship, charity, listening, publication, and self-study of the
scriptures are the young seeds. The knowers have left behind a priceless legacy
of knowledge for us. How much is this world indebted to the person who removes
the illusion of the world and enriches it with the wealth of the ultimate goal?
How much are we indebted? How can we repay this debt of the ultimate goal? This
is a matter of duty. "There is no one who is not a debtor." Similarly, the state
of the wealth of the ultimate goal in the form of knowledge is the same. Either
it is given away, accumulated, or it is destroyed. Only one who is a student of
knowledge can give the gift of knowledge, only then the flow of knowledge
continues. It can be achieved by enjoying the spiritual nectar of knowledge with
relish and reaping the desired bliss. If that doesn't happen, then only the
third state remains. Therefore, we should enjoy the legacy of the knower with
utmost respect and honor. As the Vedic religionists say, we can repay the debt
towards the living beings and the knowers only through continuous self-study.
Therefore, to repay this debt, we should use the wonderful treasure of knowledge
of the supremely benevolent knowers for the benefit of the self and the world,
and spread the influence of the ultimate scriptures generously. In other words,
we should constantly and regularly perform the continuous knowledge-sacrifice
through self-study, and instill the essence of the scriptures in the soul. Only
those who have such a soul, who are like diamonds, will be able to open the
treasure of knowledge with the key of wisdom, and gradually spread it in the
world. When the rich and the wise come together in this noble work, when the
river of knowledge of the wise merges with the river of wealth of the rich, and
creates the confluence of Saraswati, then by immersing oneself in this triveni
sangam, the world will become pure. Then, the world will resound with the
victory of the words of the knower, and the virtuous souls who have benefited
from this seed will also be victorious. - This understanding is revealed here.
Thus, the scripture-makers emphasize devotion above all. Devotion to the Lord,
...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 41 bhAvAcArya AdinuM ja parama mAnyapaNuM-vaMdyapaNuM zrI haribhadrasUrie
kahyuM che. eTale jene paMca parameSThimAM gauravabharyuM sthAna ApavAmAM AvyuM
che evA bhagavAna AcAryAdinI AtmadazA-guNasthAnasthiti kevI addabhuta, kevI
vItarAga, kevI prazamapradhAna hovI joIe? enI viveka vicArapUrvaka samyapha
parIkSA karI vicakSaNa mumukSu te jenAmAM AtmajJAnarUpa bhAva-I pragaTayo che,
evA jAgatI jata jevA sAkSAt yegIsvarUpa bhAvaAcAryAdi pratye saMzuddha
sevAbhakti-vaiyAvacca kare,A uttama gabIja che. AtamajJAnI zramaNa kahAve, bIjA
te dravyaliMgI re, vatugate je vastu prakAze, AnaMdaghana mata saMgI re."--zrI
AnaMdaghanajI. temaja satazrata bhakti e paNa uttama gabIja che. sastuzAstranAM
lekhana, pUjana, dAna, zravaNa, prakAzana, svAdhyAya Adi e yaMgabIja che. jJAnIo
ApaNA mATe amUlya jJAnavArase mUkI gayA che. jagatnuM mithyAtva dArigha dUra
karI tene paramArthasaMpattithI samRddha karanAra puruSanuM A jagatuM keTaluM
badhuM RNI che? ApaNe keTalA badhA rANI chIe? ApaNe A paramArthaDaNa kema cUkAvI
zakIe ? e vicAra kartavya che. "naM mono nArAhato jAtaka: vittAya' tema
jJAnarUpa pAramArthika dhananI paNa e ja sthiti che. kAM te enuM dAna thAya,
bhegA thAya, nahiM te nAza thAya. jJAnanuM dAna paNa pite jJAnano abhyAsI hoya
te ja karI zake, te ja jJAna pravAha vahete rahe. bhaga te rasapUrvaka te
jJAnanA adhyAtmarasane upabhega karI yatheccha AnaMda lUMTavAthI thaI zake. tema
na thAya te tenI trIjI gati ja zeSa rahe che. mATe ApaNe je jJAnIne vAraso
sAcavI rAkhavo hoya, te ApaNe parama gaurava-bahumAnapUrvaka tene rasAsvAda levA
joie. vaidika dharmavALA kahe che tema ApaNe jIvitrANa-jJAnI puruSa pratyenuM
RNa mAtra niraMtara svAdhyAyathI cUkavI zakIe eTale te cUkavavA mATe ApaNe
parama upakArI jJAnIonA adbhuta jJAnanidhAnane pitAnA upakArArthe AtmahitakArI
sadupayoga karI, jagatumAM udArapaNe te parama zrutanI prabhAvanA karavI joIe.
arthAt niraMtara niyamapUrvaka svAdhyAyathI-akhaMDa jJAnayajJathI te
vacanAmRtanI pitAnA AtmAmAM prabhAvanA-prakRSTa bhAvanA karavI joIe. ane Ama
karyuM haze te ja AvA bhAvitAtmA dhImaMta ja A jJAnabhaMDAra pitAnI prajJArUpa
cAvIthI khAlI temAMthI graMtharatno saMze dhIre jagatamAM tene prabhAvanA karI
zakaze. AvA puya kAryamAM jyAre zrImaMta-dhImaMtano uttama saDakAra jAmaze,
jyAre dhImAtAnI jJAnagaMgA zrImatonI dhanayamunA sAthe bhaLI sarasvatIno saMgama
sAdhaze, tyAre te triveNI saMgamamAM nimajajana karI jagat pAvana banaze, tyAre
jagatumAM jJAnInI vANIno jayajayakAra thaze, ane AthI ye gabIjane parama lAbha
pAmelA puNyavaMta AtmAone paNa jayajayakAra thaze !-A bodha atre phalita thAya
che. Ama bhakti upara zAstrakAra bhagavAne sauthI vizeSa bhAra mUke che.
prabhubhakti,

Page #43 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  English Translation:  42  Devotion to the Sadguru (true teacher) and
devotion to the Shrutis (sacred scriptures) are the primary means to attain
liberation (Moksha). Because the Lord, the ultimate goal, who is the embodiment
of perfection, always resides in the heart, constantly reminding the soul of its
true nature and its ultimate goal. The Sadguru, the perfect guide, the
embodiment of the path to liberation, is a virtuous soul, a true sage, a living
embodiment of the awakened state, a living Yogi, who inspires the soul to become
its true self. And in the absence of such a Sadguru, or in accordance with their
teachings, the scriptures also become the ultimate guide, benefiting the soul
that is worthy and capable of receiving their teachings. These two forms of
devotion, like a stream of pure, detached consciousness, nourish the soul,
leading to its gradual development and ultimately, to the attainment of
liberation.   Just as a branch cannot exist without a root, a tree cannot exist
without a trunk, and a building cannot stand without a foundation, similarly,
the edifice of liberation cannot be built without the foundation of devotion.
This foundation is the "abhaya, advesha, akheda" (fearlessness, non-hatred, non-
attachment) which is the first step in the path of liberation.   If we wish to
build this magnificent edifice of liberation, we must lay a strong foundation of
universal compassion, and upon this foundation, we must plant the seed of
devotion, which will grow into a strong pillar. Only then can the edifice be
built, and only then can the higher stages of liberation be attained. Otherwise,
it would be like building a house in the sky, without any support or foundation.
Therefore, O noble souls, O seekers of liberation, first build this foundation
of devotion, which will lead to the construction of the magnificent edifice of
liberation. Then, you will be able to place the pot of liberation upon it, and
achieve the ultimate goal of realizing your true nature. You will then be able
to reside permanently in this magnificent abode of liberation.   Thus, the
scriptures, like a wise sage, are urging the seekers to embark on this journey
of devotion.  Bhakti Yoga (the path of devotion) is the best and the first among
all paths to liberation. Bhakti Yoga, Karma Yoga (the path of action), and Jnana
Yoga (the path of knowledge) are not truly different or contradictory, but
rather three facets of the same path, interconnected and complementary to each
other.   Because, devotion with understanding of the ultimate reality is Bhakti
Yoga, action with devotion to the ultimate reality is Karma Yoga, and the
practice of self-realization, which is the path to liberation, is Jnana Yoga.
Jnana Yoga is the practice of knowledge, which is the ultimate realization of
the self, achieved through devotion and action.   Devotion without understanding
is like a ritual without meaning.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 42 sadgurubhakti ane zrutabhakti e ceAgamAga pAmavAnA mukhya sAdhana che.
kAraNa ke pR siddhasvarUpa prabhu-ArAdhya sadaiva Adaza`sthAne hAi, jIvane iSTa
lakSyanuM niraMtara bhAna karAve che; sadguru, meAkSamAga rUpa sanmAnA parama
sAdhaka sAdhucarita satpuruSa sAkSAt jIvaMta mUrtti pratyakSa jIvatA jAgatA jogI
heAi, jIvane parama avala banarUpa thaI paDI preraNAkhala Ape che; ane tathArUpa
sadgurunA virahe athavA temanI AjJAe satuzAstra paNa parama AlekhanarUpa banI
AtmAthI adhikArI supAtra jIvane parama upakArI thAya che. jItranI niCla
cittabhUmimAM rApAyelA A ceAgamIja savega-vairAgyajalathI abhisi`cita thai,
anukrame vikAsa pAmI anupama meAkSala Ape che. nahi te 'mUtyuM nAsti to rAlA'
mULa na hoya te zAkhA kayAMthI hAya ? khIja vinA jhADa kema thAya ? kAraNa ke
keI paNa makAna pAyA vinA caDDAya nahi', prathama bhUmikA adhAyA vinA upakSI
bhUmikA baMdhAya nahi', A niyama che. tema ceAgarUpa mahAprAsAdanuM caNatara
paNa tene A mitrAdaSTirUpa pAye yeAgakhIjathI pUrAyA vinA thAya nahi, tenI A
'abhaya adveSa akheda'vALI 'sevana kANu pahelI bhUmikA' vinA upalI bhUmikA
badhAya nahi. jo A yAgarUpa bhavya prAsAda bAMdhavA hAya, te sakala jagat pratye
jyAM anupama maitrI vatte' che evI mitrAdaSTirUpa tene majabUta pAye nAMkhavA
joie, ane temAM A sadbhaktimaya yeAgabIjanuM pUraNu karI vAlepa dRDha
pIDikAba`dha khAMdhave joie; te ja pachI tenu sAnukha'dha caNatara thayA kare,
te ja tenI upalI bhUmikAonuM sarjana thAya. nahiM te AkAzamAM addhara nirAdhAra-
niravalaMba makAna kema UbhuM' thAya ? mATe ahe ! bhavyajane ! mekSanA kAmI evA
mumukSue ! tame prathama A yegaprAsAdanI bhaktirUpa dRDha bhUmikA AMdhA, ke
jethI karIne anubaMdhathI te cegarUpa mahA divya prAsAdanu sAMge pAMga nirmANu
sa pUrNa karI, tenA para muktirUpa kalaza caDhAvI, vastusvarUpanI siddhirUpa
'vAstu' karAvI, te anupama prAsAdamAM niraMtara nivAsa karavAnuM parama
saubhAgya tame prApta karA!-ema jANe A yAtrabIjanuM uddhedhana karatA A
zAstrakattA~ maharSinA dig dhvani mumukSuene saprema AhvAna karI rahyo che ! Ama
bhaktiyeAga e sarva caiAgamAM zreSTha ane prathama che. bhaktiyoga, kama yAga
ane jJAnayeAga e traNe vAstavika rIte viruddha ke vibhinna nathI, paNa eka ja
ceganA traNu pAsA (Facets) che, ane paraspara gADha saMbaddha hAI eka bIjAnA
pUraka ane samaka che; kAraNa ke tAttvika samajaNapUrvaka paratattvanI bhakti te
bhaktiyega, paratattvanI bhaktipUrvaka tAttvika samajaNudhI meAkSasAdhaka
dharmakriyA-nija svarUpanI sAdhaka evI AtmapariNatimaya aghyAtma kriyA te
kayeAga, ane paratane paramatidhAna jema bhaktithI hRzyamAM dhAraNa karI
tathArUpa adhyAtmakriyA cuktapaNe jJAnanI-anubhavayeAganI ananya upAsanA te
jJAnayuga. jJAna arthAt tAttvika samajacu vagaranI bhakti-kriyA jema anunaSThAna

Page #44 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
43 Just as a form without substance is not fruitful, so too knowledge without
devotional action is not fruitful. Thus, these three yagas are in harmony. 3.
Knowledge Yoga and Action Yoga And from this, the great mysterious formula,
"Moksha is from knowledge-action, "Jnanashiyamyaam Moksha," is also revealed.
That is, knowledge is primarily the knowledge of the pure self, the knowledge of
the soul, and action is primarily the action of the soul, the action of the
soul's character, the character of the soul, and when these two are in harmony,
then moksha is attained. X Knowledge and action are like the two wheels of a
chariot; if one of these wheels is missing, the chariot of dharma will not move.
Action without knowledge is blind, and knowledge without action is useless. If a
fire is burning, a blind person will be destroyed even if he sees it, and a
useless person will be destroyed even if he runs. But if the useless person is
placed on the shoulders of the blind person, and the blind person walks
according to his instructions, both will cooperate and harmonize, and they will
be saved. Similarly, in order to escape from the fire of the world, the seeker
should harmonize knowledge and action accordingly. Here, knowledge is placed
first and action is placed second, which suggests that action should be in
accordance with knowledge, with a theoretical understanding, and that is why the
practice of action is called "Anushthan." The first is knowledge and then
compassion, "Vadamana Nal To Cha'e," the secret of this great formula is also
the same. ( The knowledge of substance and the action of substance also have
their rightful place here. Because the knowledge of substance and the action of
substance that cause the birth of emotion also become the cause of moksha by
tradition, but the knowledge-action that does not cause such emotion is
unsuccessful in terms of the fruit of moksha. Shri Haribhadrasuri has shown the
meaning of the word "substance" in the Pancha-Sharkshastra, from which this
ultimate meaning is revealed: (1) One substance is non-principal, without such
emotion. For example, an acharya who is devoid of the qualities prescribed in
the scriptures, such as being a good speaker, is called a "dravyacharya," and
similarly, in the context of action, the action that is done mechanically,
without any use, without any emotion, is also an example of non-principal
substance. (2) The second meaning of substance is the ability to generate
emotion; the substance that causes emotion, the substance from which emotion
manifests, is the other type, which is the principal substance. It is the one
that produces emotion. This principal substance is praised and is presented here
in moksha. That is why the principal substance is praised - X " फलं
ज्ञानक्रियायोगे सर्वमेवोपपद्यते । चोविस तद्माववामांचैत ना अन्यथा II ”—Shavya-
Vartasamuchchay,

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 43 rUpa hoI yathAtha" phaladAyinI nathI, tema bhakti-kriyA vagaranuM jJAna paN
yathA phaladAya thatu nathI. Ama A traNe yAgane samanvaya che. 3. jJAnayeAga ane
kamacAga ane A uparathI ' jJAna--kriyAthI mekSa che, ' jJAziyAmyAM mokSaH 'e
mahArahasyapUrNa sUtra paNa ciratA khane che. arthAt jJAna eTale mukhyapaNe
bhAvazrutajJAna-zuddha AtmajJAna ane kriyA eTale mukhyapaNe AtmapariNatimaya
bhAvakriyA-bhAvacAritra-AtmacAritra e anene jyAre samanvaya thAya tyAre ja
mekSanI prApti thAya. X jJAna ane kriyA e banne eka rathanA e cakra jevA che;
emAMnu eka paNa cakra na heAya te dharmAMratha cAle ja nahi jJAna vinAnI kriyA
AMdhaLI che ne kriyA vinAnuM jJAna pAMgaLuM che. dAvAnala lAgyA hoya tyAM
dekhatAM chatAM pAMgaLe! naSTa thAya ne doDatAM chatAM AMdhaLA naSTa thAya; paNa
pAMgaLAne khAMdhe besADI AMdhaLA jo tenA sUcana mujaba cAle, banne sahakAra karI
samanvaya sAdhe te| ane bacI jAya. tema bhava-dAvAnalamAMthI khacavA mATe
sAdhake jJAna ane tadanusArI kriyA e bannene yathAyeAgya samanvaya sAdhavA joIe.
atre jJAnanuM sthAna prathama ane kriyAnuM sthAna pachI mUkayu te ema sUcave che
ke kriyA jJAnane anukUlaanusaratI tAttvika samajaNavALI hAvI joie, ane eTalA
mATe ja kriyAnuM * anuSThAna evuM nAma prasiddha che. pahelu jJAna ane pachI
dayA * vaDhamaM nALa to cA'e mahAsUtranuM rahasya paNa e ja che. ( dravya
zrutajJAna ane dravyakriyAne paNa atre enuM yathAyeAgya sthAna che ja. kAraNa ke
je dravya zrutajJAna ane dravya kriyA bhAvanI utpattinu kAraNa thAya te paNa
paraMparAe meAkSanA kAraNarUpa thai paDe che, paNa je tathArUpa bhAvanuM kAraNa
na thAya te jJAna-kriyA te meAkSa pratyayI phaLa paratve niSphaLa ja che. zrI
haribhadrasUrie pa'cAzarkazAstramAM ' dravya ' zabdanA e atha pradazita karyA
che te parathI A ja paramArtha phalita thAya che : ( 1 ) eka te dravya eTale
apradhAna, tathArUpa bhAvihIna. jemake-AcArya'mAM hAvA cAgya zAstrokta guNuthI
rahita hAya te dravyAcAya kahevAya, temaja kriyAnI khAkhatamAM joIe te je kriyA
yaMtravat kriyAjaDapaNuM, anupayeAgapaNe, kaMi paNa bhAvaraNArUpa atabheda vinA
karavAmAM Ave che, te paNu apradhAna dravyanuM udAharaNa che. ( 2 ) dravyanA
bIjo artha bhAvajanana ceAgyapaNuM che; je dravya bhAvanuM kAraNa thAya che, je
dravyathI bhAva pragaTe che, te drazyane pradhAna evA khIjo prakAra che. bhAvane
utpanna karanArUM evu. A pradhAna dravya prazasta hoi atra meAkSamAmAM prastuta
che. eTalA mATe ja pradhAnarUpa dravya stavanA-- X " phalaM jJAnakriyAyoge
sarvamevopapadyate  /  covica tadmAvavAmAMcaita nAnyathA II "--
zAvyavArtAsamuccaya,

Page #45 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Translation:  44.  Sri Haribhadrasuri has clearly stated that only those
*mumukṣus* who have attained the special state of *apūnabhandhakādi* (and other
such states) are entitled to the authority of *dravya ājñā*. These *mumukṣus*
are characterized by qualities like lightness, mild passions, mild objects of
attachment, extremely subtle results, deep-seated dispassion, true seekers of
the path, intense thirst for the truth. This is because the primary *dravya*
action itself is capable of generating the specific emotions. The state of
*apūnabhandhakādi* is preceded by the state of *samṛdu-bhandhakādi*, which is a
non-primary *dravya* action. This is because it performs the action of following
*dravya ājñā* in a sluggish manner, and therefore, they are not even qualified
for the path of liberation through *dravya*.  The definition of *dravya* as
"non-use" - "being without use" - also confirms all the above. Thus, the
scriptures have given a place in the path of liberation only to the primary
*dravya* action that generates specific emotions, and not to the non-primary
*dravya* action that is sluggish due to non-use. The secret behind considering
*dravya* in the path of liberation even in the first four perspectives like
*mitrādiṣṭi*, despite the *dravya* being praised, is that it involves the
primary *dravya* action capable of generating emotions. Thus, such *dravya*
action also has its rightful place here, because the ultimate goal of *dravya*
is also emotion, and the support of *dravya* is also to climb onto emotion, and
it is inevitable to reach emotion. This emotion is the emotion of the self, the
manifestation of knowledge, perception, character, and other virtues in the
self, the transformation of the nature of the self. The entire path of Jainism
is primarily based on this emotion. Emotion is its life, without it, it remains
empty and hollow.  "The pure emotion and the emotionless action are as far apart
as the sun and the firefly." - Sri Gadadharasamucchayakara, comparing *dravya*
and emotion. "Pure emotion and emotionless action, how vast is the distance
between them? The blazing sun and the fireflies, their brilliance is
incomparable." - *Daśaśāstra*.  "The *dravya* action awakens the interest, the
emotion is devoid of interest; even the teacher is helpless, what can he do to
the new soul? - *Chandranan*." - Sri Devchandraji.  "From *apūnabhandhak* to the
ultimate virtues, the path is known through the language of emotion, depending
on the emotion." - Sri Yashovijayaji.  Just as this is true for *dravya* action,
it is also true for *dravyaśruta* knowledge. Because the scriptures are the best
means and instruments for attaining knowledge, they are called knowledge by
convention. Therefore, dry knowledge like the mere study of *dravyaśruta*
knowledge does not lead to any knowledge. But when the soul attains its best
means, it transforms itself into knowledge, that is, "These are not the
*ahigarin* (those who have not attained liberation), here even the *dravya* is
not the same." - *Sri Pañcāśaka*.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 44 dravya AjJAno adhikAra-haLukamI, maMdakaSAyI, maMdaviSayI, atItrapariNAmI,
aMtaraMga vairAgyavAsita, sAcA mArgajijJAsu, tIvra tattvapipAsu, evA uttama
guNalakSaNasaMpanna apunabaMdhakAdix dazAvizeSane pAmelA mumukSuone ja che ema
zrI haribhadrasUrie cakakhe cakakhuM kahyuM che, kAraNa ke tevI pradhAnarUpa
dravya kriyA ja kathArUpa viziSTa bhAva utpanna karavAne gya evI hoya che. A
apunabaMdhakAdi dazA pUrve samRdu-baMdhakAdine te apradhAnarUpa dravya kriyA
hoya che, kAraNa ke te dravya AjJAnuM pAlana paNa anupagapaNekriyAjaDapaNa kare
che, eTale teo dravyathI paNa atre mokSamArganI yogyatA dharAvatA nathI.
anupayogo drazai" anupayoga-upayoga rahitapaNuM te dravya e vyAkhyA paNa ukta
sarva vastune puSTa kare che. Ama viziSTa bhAvane utpanna karanArI pradhAna
dravya kriyAne ja zAstrakAre gamArgamAM sthAna ApyuM che,-nahiM ke
anupayegavaMta kiyAjaDa evI apradhAna dravya kiyAne. mitrAdaSTi Adi pahelI cAra
dRSTimAM dravya vaMdanAdi chatAM tene yegamArgamAM gaNI tenuM rahasya paNa e ja
che ke temAM bhAvajanana megyatAvALI pradhAna dravya kriyA hoya che. Ama AvI
dravya kriyAne paNa atra yathAyogya sthAna che ja, kAraNa ke dravyane sAdhya
lakSya paNa bhAva ja che, dravyanA AlaMbane paNa bhAva para ja caDhavAnuM che,
ane bhAva para AvyuM ja chUTake che. A bhAva eTale AtmabhAva, AtmAmAM tathArUpa
jJAnadarzana-cAritrAdi guNanuM bhavana-pariNamana, AtmasvabhAva pariNati. Akho
jinamArga mukhyapaNe A bhAva para racAyela che, bhAva e ja enuM jIvana che, te
na hoya te khAlI khokhuM ja rahe che. "mAriyAH pratidaDhatti mAvazUnyA: ' dravya
ane bhAvanI tulanA karatAM zrI gadaSTisamuccayakAre kahyuM che ke zuddha bhAva
ane bhAvazUnya kriyA e benI vacce sUrya ane AgIA jeTaluM aMtara che.
"zuddhabhAva ne zUnI kiriyA, bahumAM aMtara ketejI? jhaLahaLato sUraja ne
khajuo, tAsa tejamAM tejI."--. da. sajhAya. dravya kriyA ruci jIvaDA re, bhAva
dhama rucihIna; upadezaka paNa tehavA re, zuM kare jIva navIna ?caMdrAnana."--
zrI devacaMdrajI, apunabaMdhakathI mAMDIne, jAva carama guNaThANa; bhAva
apekSAye jinaANA, mAraga bhASe jANu."- zrI yazovijayajI. jeTaluM A dravya kriyA
mATe satya che teTaluM ja dravyazrutajJAna mATe paNa che, kAraNa ke zAstra e
jJAnaprAptinA uttama nimittarUpa-sAdhanarUpa hoI upacArathI tene jJAna kahyuM
che, mATe ekalA dravyazrutajJAnanA zukapATha jevA zuSka jJAnathI kAMI jJAna
thayuM kahevAtuM nathI, paNa je tenuM uttama nimitta pAmI AtmA pote jJAnarUpe
pariName arthAta "ete ahigAriNo iha Na sesA davvao vi jaM esaa| rUcI koyANa
retALa 3 ghAtti | " zrI paMcAzaka,

Page #46 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The translation preserving the Jain terms is as follows:  The Atma (soul)
manifests Bhavtapasya (introspective spiritual practice), and Atmajnana (self-
knowledge) arises. This is called Vastavika Jnana (true knowledge); as Sri
Haribhadrasuri has said, just as Samsara (worldly existence) is for the deluded
people like women and children, similarly, Shastras (scriptures) are Samsara for
the learned. It is also important to remember that the Shastragnana (scriptural
knowledge) without Adhyatmarasa Parinati (spiritual maturity) is just a burden.
Just as a donkey carries the burden of sandalwood, but it is the fortunate one
who experiences its fragrance; similarly, many carry the burden of Shastras, but
only a few rare ones taste the Adhyatmarasa (spiritual essence). The only
difference is that the donkey carries the burden on its body, while this
Shastra-Gardabha (donkey of scriptures) carries the burden on its mind! But the
burden-bearing capacity of both is the same!  "Veranyadhavi, Damanamakavidata
Mathamrddhonaati, Vasti Nam:" - Sri Yashovijayaji.  "Tima Thatapathi Panditaku
Pani, Pravachana Kahata Ajnana Re;  Saar Lahya Vina Bhaar Kahyo Shrata, Khar
Drishyanta Pramana" - Sri Chidanandaji  There is a vast difference between the
Pustakpandita (scholar of books) and the Atmanubbavi Jnani (experiential knower
of the self). Even if one knows everything, but does not know the Atma, that
Shastravetya Vidvan (scholar of scriptures) is still an Ajnani (ignorant). And
one who knows only the Atma and may not know anything else, that Avidvan
(unlearned) is a Jnani (knower). Thus, the distinction between Vidvan and Jnani
is evident. Or, from the ultimate perspective, only the Atmajnani is the true
Vidvan or Panditajan, while the rest of the so-called learned are to be counted
as Ajnanis or children. Even an illiterate can be a Jnani, and a literate can be
an Ajnani - this extraordinary fact can only be understood by the discerning
individuals. Even in this text, while using the term Shrutajnani (knower of
scriptures), the specific term "Jnani" is used, which suggests that even the
Shrutajnani-Agamadhari (bearer of scriptural knowledge) may be Ajnani at times.
Therefore, the scriptures have also said that one who has studied even nine
Purvas (ancient Jain texts) but has not realized the Atma, is an Ajnani. Thus,
if such a Shukhajnani (dry knower) with vast scriptural knowledge is called
Ajnani due to the lack of Adhyatmarasa Parinati, then what to say of other
verbally knowledgeable ones? The knowledge of all scriptures is worthless if the
essential Atmatattva (nature of the self) is not grasped - it is like empty
husks without the grain. "The Atma has not come into one's hand, all those are
just empty husks without the grain!" And "All knowledge is just a blazing fire."
Thus, it is the integration of such Jnana (knowledge) and Kriya (spiritual
practice) that leads to Moksha (liberation), as the Jnanis have said. Yet, some
remain stubbornly attached to mere external activities, becoming "Kriyajada"
(inert in their practices).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 45 AtmAmAM bhAvathatapaNuM pragaTe-AtmajJAna upaje, te ja vAratavika jJAna
thayuM kahevAya che; nahi te zrI haribhadrasUrijIe kahyuM che tema strI-putrAdi
jema mohamUddha janone saMsAra che, tema zAstra e vidvAnone saMsAra chevaLI e
paNa khAsa yAda rAkhavA jevuM che ke adhyAtmarasa pariNati vinAnuM je
zAstrajJAna te bhArarUpa ja che. gadheDo caMdanane bhAra upADe che, paNa teno
bhaMga te kaI bhAgyazALI ja pAme che; tema zAstrane bhAra te aneka vahe che,
paNa tene adhyAtmarasa to kaI viralA ja cAkhe che. pharaka mAtra eTale ja che
ke-gadheDe pitAnA zarIra para be UThAve che, ane A zAstra-gardabha potAnA mana
para bejo UThAve che! paNa bannenuM bhAravAhakapaNuM sarakhuM che !
"verAnyAhnavi, damaNamAkavitA mAthamRddhonAnAti, vasti naM : "-zrI yazovijayajI.
"tima thatapAThI paMDitaku paNa, pravacana kahata ajJAna re; sAra lahyA vinA
bhAra kahyo zrata, khara dRSTAMta pramANa"-zrI cidAnaMdajI pustakapaMDitarUpa
vidvAnamAM ane AtmAnubhavI jJAnImAM AkAza-pAtAlanuM aMtara che. bAkI badhuMya
jANatA hoya, paNa eka AtmAne na jANatuM hoya, te te zAstravettA vidvAna paNa
ajJAnI che. ane eka AtmAne jANatA hoya ne bIjuM kAMI na paNa jANato hoya te te
avidvAna paNa jJAnI che. Ama vidvAn ne jJAnImAM pragaTa bheda che. athavA
paramArthathI AtmajJAnI e ja sAco vidvAna athavA paMDitajana che, bAkI bIjA
kahevAtA vidvAnonI gaNanA paNa ajJAnI athavA bAla mAM ja che. nirakSara paNa
jJAnI hoI zake ne sAkSara paNa ajJAnI hoI zake evI A vilakSaNa vAta vivekI jano
ja samajI zake che. A graMthamAM paNa IcchAganA lakSaNamAM zrutajJAnI zabda
mUkyA chatAM "jJAnI" evuM khAsa vizeSaNa kyuM, te paNa ema sUcave che ke
zrutajJAnI-Agamadhara" hoya chatAM kadAca ajJAnI paNa hoya. eTalA mATe ja
zAstramAM paNa kahyuM che ke-jo dravyathI nava pUrva paNa bhaNela hoya, paNa je
AtmAne na jAryo hoya, te te ajJAnI che. Ama jyAM nava pUrva jeTaluM kRta bhaNelo
evo adhyAtmarasa pariNati vinAne zuSkajJAnI bahuzrata paNa ajJAnI kahyo che, te
pachI anya apakRta vAcAjJAnIonI te zI vAta karavI ? sarva zAstranuM jJAna paNa
je eka Atmavastu hAtha na AvI te zUnyarUpa ja che, moTA mIMDArUpa ja che. "gho
-AtmA hAthamAM na AvyA te te badhA ekaDA vinAnA mIMDA che! "ne paf kALarU che
sarva jJALarU " Ama ukta svarUpavALA jJAna-kriyAnA samanvayathI ja mokSa che,
ema jJAnIoe kahyuM che. chatAM koI ja prAyaH kevaLa bAhya kriyAnA AgrahI
"kriyAjaDa' thaI rahyA

Page #47 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
46 If someone claims to be a Keval-Shushkgyani and believes they are practicing
the path to liberation, but their actions evoke compassion in others, it
indicates a contradiction. They are likely focused on external practices,
mistaking the means for the end, and forgetting the true goal. They engage in
mechanical external actions without realizing the importance of internal self-
transformation, the true essence of spiritual practice. They remain untouched by
the experience of non-duality and even discourage the pursuit of knowledge. Such
Shushkgyanis engage in dry, superficial discussions about Ad-meksha and other
concepts, but remain trapped in their own ego and self-righteousness. They cling
to words and reject all practical actions. They haven't attained true knowledge
and have abandoned the path of practice. Association with such "name-only
spiritual" Shushkgyanis leads to spiritual downfall.  X 66 t Those who haven't
attained knowledge and haven't engaged in practice, Those who associate with
them, drown in the ocean of existence. Hearing the words of liberation,
abandoning practice is a mistake; Keeping liberation in mind, practice
diligently. ''—Shri Atmasiddhi  Thus, those who are action-oriented are attached
to external practices and lack true liberation. Similarly, Shushkgyanis are
attached to knowledge and reject external practices, making them ineligible for
liberation. Both action-oriented and Shushkgyanis are driven by the belief "My
way is right," but lack the true understanding of "My way is the right way." The
true self, however, harmonizes liberation with its means, the right practice.
One should not abandon the right practice after hearing the words of liberation,
but should constantly keep liberation in mind and engage in the right practice.
This way, knowledge and action, both paths, become mutually supportive. The
union of pure self-knowledge and action free from attachment and aversion, the
pure self-transformation, leads to the attainment of liberation, the true nature
of the self. As Shri Yashavijayji said in his teachings, one should practice
action-yoga, embrace knowledge-yoga, ascend to meditation-yoga, and finally
attain liberation-yoga.  “Those who reject external practices based on words are
false, those who embrace external practices along with words are true. Those who
reject external practices based on words are like flowers of the world, they may
be admired but offer no real benefit.” —Shri Anandghanji.  "By practicing
action-yoga, embracing knowledge-yoga, ascending to meditation-yoga, one attains
liberation-yoga." —Shri Adhyatmasar.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 46 che, teA keAI kevaLa - zuSkajJAnI ' thaI paDayA che, ne pAte meAkSamArga
ArAdhe che ema mAne che,je dekhI parama kRpALu sahRdaya saMtajanene karuNA upaje
che. atre je kriyAjaDa leka che te prAyaH bAhya vyavahAra sAdhanane sAdhya mAnI
beThA che ne mukhya nizcaya sAdhyane bhUlI gayA che. eTale teo anupayeAgapaNe
kriyAjaDapaNe yaMtravat bAhya dravya kriyA karyAM kare che, paNa nija svarUpanI
sAdhaka evI aMtaraMga AtmapariNatirUpa bhAvakriyAneadhyAtmakriyAne prAye
sparzatA nathI, kaMI paNa atabheda anubhavatA nathI, vaLI teo jJAnamAga nA
niSedha kare che. ane je zuSkajJAnI janeA che, te zuSkajJAnanI sukkI lUkhI
'vAteA' ja kare che, adha-mekSa Adi kalpanA che ema kahe che, paNa pAte te
mehAvezamAM ne svaccha de vatta che; tee nizcayanaya * mAtra zabdanI mAMhya'
grahe che ane sarvyavahAranA leApa kare che; teo jJAnadazA pAmyA nathI ne
sAdhanadazA cheDI dye che; AvA 'nAma adhyAtmI 'zuSkajJAnIonA je saMga pAme te
paNa mUDI jAya. X 66 t jJAnadazA pAmyA nahi, sAdhana dazA na kAMI; pAme tenA
sa`ga je, te bUDa bhavamAMhi. nizcaya vANI sAMbhaLI, sAdhana tajavAM neya;
nizcaya rAkhI lakSamAM, sAdhana karavAM seAya. ''--zrI Atmasiddhi Ama kriyAjaDa
jIvA vyavahAranA AgrahI heAI nizcayanirapekSa hAya che, tethI mAkSamAganA
adhikArI che; ane zuSkajJAnI jIvA nizcayanA AgrahI heAi vyavahAra-nirapekSa
varte che, tethI teo paNa meAkSamAnA anadhikArI ja che. A kriyAjaDa ane
zuSkajJAnI banneya 'mhAruM te sAcuM' ema mAnanArA matAthI ja che, paNa 'sAcuM te
mhAruM' ema mAnanArA AtmAthI nathI. paNa sAcA AtmAthI hoya te te paramArtha rUpa
nizcaya ane tenA sAdhaka sadvyavahAraneA sumeLa ja sAdhe; nizcayavANI sAMbhaLI
sat sAdhana cheADI dIe nahi, paNa nizcayane nira Mtara lakSyamAM rAkhI, te ja
sat sAdhane sevyAM kare ane Ama jJAna ne kriyA e banne nayanI paraspara tIvra
maitrI karavI, zuddha AtmajJAna ne rAgadveSarahita niSkaSAya zuddha
AtmapariNatirUpa kriyAne-cAritraneA samanvaya sAdhe, te avazya zuddha
AtmasvabhAvarUpa meAkSanI siddhi thAya. zrI yazAvijayajIe subhASitamAM kahyu che
tema krayAganA samyak abhyAsa karI, jJAnayeAgane samAzrita thayelA puruSa
dhyAnayeAga para caDhI mAkSayeAgane pAme, ' x " vacana nirapekSa vyavahAra jUTho
kahyo, vacana sApekSa vyavahAra sAthe; vacananirapekSa vyavahAra sa`sAra phula,
sAMbhaLI AdarI kAMI rAce '"--zrI AnaMdaghanajI. karmayogaM samabhyasya,
jJAnayogaM samAzritaH  /  dhyAnayogaM samAruhya, mokSayogaM prapadyate  /  /  "
--zrI adhyAtmasAra.

Page #48 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
47 III The essence is the divine guidance of the right vision. Thus, the true
vision of the path of devotion, knowledge, and action, as a proper system, is
possible only through the right vision; only through this divine eye can the
divine vision of the path of the Jinas be attained. Without this ultimate
vision, everything is darkness. "Darkness without eyes, that is the state of
affairs here in the path of ultimate truth, it seems quite true. Until blindness
is avoided, the vision of the spiritual path of liberation or the original path
of the Jinas cannot be attained; for the Jinas to see this spiritually dominant
path of ultimate truth, this divine right vision must be opened, and the
blindness of the soul must be avoided. The vision of this inner path cannot be
attained through the external right vision like the Gadariya stream. Therefore,
to remove the worldly right vision of the soul, which is like the Gadariya
stream, and to give spiritual vision with the true vision of the divine path of
the Jinas, and in the realm of Yoga-bindu, "O, stand firm, O seeker!" - as if to
fulfill this fatherly blessing, the sage Maharshi Haribhadracharya has created
this "Right Vision Collection" text, it seems. Because in the absence of such
vision, even the supernatural spiritual path is seen through the worldly vision
of the past, present, and future - through the right vision! Mahatma Anandghanji
has said, "The path is like a blind eye, the whole world is lost." But the Jinas
- the liberated ones - have the original path in the form of the three jewels,
which is primarily a spiritual path, a path of ultimate truth, an inner path of
feeling. Whatever is in harmony with this path of liberation, which leads to the
soul, regardless of caste or appearance, attains liberation. That is, knowing
the pure soul, having faith, and practicing it, keeping this eternal, certain,
attainable goal in mind, constantly fixing one's vision on the "Pure Light of
Knowledge," which is the essence of all twelve categories, serving the pure
conduct that is the means of its attainment, harmonizing determination and
conduct, is the one who attains liberation. Because it is due to the corruption
of the form that the soul has been revolving in the world, and the main purpose
of all conduct is to bring the soul back to its form and establish it in its
"own home." Therefore, conduct is the right vision - conduct in the form of
knowledge and conduct - through the progressive purification of the three
jewels, this form, which is our own, attains the first stage, the state of our
own, the soul becomes the seeker and the practitioner of the path of liberation,
which is the three jewels, and progressively touches the higher and higher
stages - states - on the path of liberation, moving forward. *"If one does not
desire to abandon the worldly conduct, what is the use of the pilgrimage?" - an
ancient saying. "The pure is to be explained to the pure, not to those who are
not pure, who are not seekers of the ultimate truth." - Shri Samayasar, verse
12.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 47 III tAtparya egadaSTithI divya vegamArgadarzana. Ama bhaktiyoga, jJAnayoga
ne kamaganI samyaka vyavasthArUpa gamArganuM yathArtha darzana samyaka evI
yugadaSTithI ja thAya che; A divya nayanathI ja jinamArganuM divya darzana thAya
che. A paramArtha daSTi vinA te badhuMya aMdhArUM che. "AMkha vinAnuM aMdhAruM
re e lekti ahI paramArthamAgamAM sAva sAcI jaNAya che. daSTiaMdhatA TaLI na hoya
tyAMsudhI AdhyAtmika evA mokSamArganuM athavA jinanA mULamArganuM darzana thAya
nahiM; jinane A adhyAtmapradhAna paramArthamAga dekhavA mATe te A divya
gadaSTinuM unmIlana thavuM joIe, ane jIvanI dRSTiaMdhatA TaLavI joIe. A
aMtaraMga mArganuM darzana gADarIA pravAha jevI bahiraMga evadaSTithI na ja thaI
zake. eTalA mATe jIvanI e gatAnugatika gADarIA pravAha jevI laukika oghadRSTi
dUra karAvI, divya jinamArganA yathArtha darzanAthe AdhyAtmika draSTi apavA mATe
ja, ane yogabindunA prAMte "o: stAvo Dhovara " leka yogadaSTivALe thAo !--e
pitAnA Azirvacanane jANe caritArtha karavAne arthe ja ArSadraSTA maharSi
haribhadrAcAryajIe A "gadaSTisamuccaya' graMthanuM nirmANa kareluM dazya thAya
che. kAraNa ke tevI daSTinA abhAve alaukika AdhyAtmika mAgane paNa gatAnugatika
leko laukika dRSTie-ghadRSTie dekhe che ! mahAtmA AnaMdaghanajI pikAra karI gayA
che ke "carama nayaNu karI mAraga jevate re, bhUlyA sayala saMsAra." paNa
jinane-vItarAgane ratnatrayIrUpa mULamA te kevaLa zuddha AtmapariNatirUpa hoI
mukhyapaNe AdhyAtmika mArga che, paramArtha mArga che, aMtaraMga bhAvamAge che.
jAti-veSanA bheda vinA je kaMI paNa A yakta mokSamArga sAdhe che, AtmAmAM
pariNamAve che, te ja mokSa pAme che. arthAt zuddha AtmAne jANa, zraddhA ne
Acare e ja eka sanAtana nizcaya sAdhya lakSyamAM rAkhI, samasta dvAdazAMgIne
sArarUpa "zuddha nayadIpikA' pratye niraMtara dRSTi TheravI, tenA
satasAdhanarUpa paramArtha sAdhaka zuddha vyavahArane je seve che, nizcaya-
vyavahArane samanvaya sAdhe che, te ja mokSa pAme che. kAraNa ke svarUpabhraSTa
thavAthI ja AtmAnuM saMsAra paribhramaNa thayuM che, ane samasta vyavahAranuM
paNa pradhAna ne eka ja projana AtmAne svarUpamAM ANI "nija ghara"
padharAvavAnuM che. eTale vyavahA2 samyagadarzana-jJAnacAritrarUpa vyavahAra
ratnatrayInI uttarottara zuddhi dvArA A svarUpa ApaNarUpa prathama bhUmikA nija
pada prApta karI, jIva nizcayaratnatrayIrUpa mokSamArgane sAdhaka-sAdhu banI,
uttarottara ucca ucca bhUmikAone-dazAone sparzate sparza mokSamArge AgaLa *"jaha
jiNamayaM pavajjaha mA vavahAraNicchae muyae  /  Uaa vinA 4i= tirthaM aomLa ? "
- ArSavacana "suddho suddhAdeso NAyavvo paramabhAvadarisIhiM  /  vavANiyA kuLa
ne Tu divA mAge che - zrI samayasAra, gA. 12

Page #49 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
48 It keeps increasing and finally, attaining the ultimate peak of self-
purification, that supreme yogi attains the ultimate liberation, the pure self-
realization - becomes Siddha. This is what the Samat Yogashastra proves. "Just
as the fuel of pure Nay burns the bondage of ego and attachment, the lamp of
pure Nay leads to the path of liberation, pure Nay is the foundation for the
sadhu. Pure Nay meditation always leads to that which has pure conduct. Just as
saffron is in the midst of dirt, so is the conduct of the mind free from the
taint of the world." - Shri Yashovijayji Thus, the true vision of the path
leading to the ultimate goal can only be achieved through this divine Nayana,
which is like a magnifying glass. As the supreme soul Anandghanji has said, "The
Nayana that sees the path, that Nayana is divine thought." How is this divine
Nayana attained? It is attained from one who has attained it. A lamp is lit from
another lamp. What is in the well comes out into the air. One who sees shows the
way. How can a blind person show the way? A blind person falls into a pit and
causes others to fall. Therefore, this divine Nayana is attained only from a
true seer, a Bhavagi Sadguru, who has attained this divine eye, which is like a
magnifying glass, and not from an Asadguru, who is blind. To expect divine
Nayana from a blind guru, who is like a blind man following another blind man,
is like expecting flowers from the sky. In the words of Shri Anandghanji, "The
blind man runs away from the experience of the guru lineage. Because as long as
the Mithyatva is not removed, the vision is not clear, and the Samyagdasti is
not opened, until then, blindness from the ultimate goal is appropriate. This
Mithyatva-like blindness is worse than birth blindness; a birth-blind person
does not see, but a Mithyatva-blind person sees evil! Therefore, such a blind
Asadguru, being on the wrong path himself, leads others astray and throws them
into the pit, into the abyss of evil; therefore, to go on the right path, one
needs the guidance of the Sadguru's Nayana. Moreover, if the vision is colored
by the desire for vision, it is tainted, clouded, or if one wears colored
glasses, then the vision is also colored (Coloured vision), it is not real.
Similarly, if the vision of the soul is colored by the desire for vision, then
its vision is also colored - distorted, it is not Samyag. Many times, people
mistakenly believe that the affirmation of the desire for vision is also
Samyagdasti, but it is a completely different thing, because the vision that
arises from the desire for vision is colored by that desire and is tainted and
therefore Asamyag, and the vision that arises from Samyagdasti is free from the
desire for desire, pure and clean, and therefore Samyag. For example, the
father's family duty...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 48 vadhatuM jAya che, ane chevaTe AtmazuddhinI parama parAkASTAne prApta karI
te parama yogI zuddha AtmasiddhirUpa mokSane pAme che-siddha bane che. A samata
yogazAstranuM nirUpaNa e ja vAta siddha kare che. jeha ahaMkAra mamakAranuM
baMdhana, zuddha naya te dahe dahana jema iMdhana; zuddha naya dIpikA mukti
mAraga bhaNI, zuddha naya Athi che sAdhune ApaNI. zuddha naya dhyAna tehane sadA
pariName, jehane zuddha vyavahAra hoyaDe rame; malina vacce yathA rAga kuMkuma
tahIna vyavahAra citta eDathI navi guNa."-zrI yazovijayajI Ama
paramArthapratyayI gamArganuM yathArtha darzana A gaSTirUpa divya nayanathI ja
thaI zake. parama bhAvitAtmA AnaMdaghanajIe bhAkhyuM che tema "jiNe nayaNe karI
mAraga joIe re, nayana te divya vicAra.' A divya nayananI prApti kema thAya? je
pAmela hoya tenI pAsethI pamAya. dIvAmAMthI dIvo thAya. kuvAmAM hoya te
havADAmAM Ave. dekhate hoya te ja mArga dekhADe. AMdhaLe kema dekhADe? AMdhaLe
te pote khADamAM paDe ne bIjAne pADe. eTale A diraya nayananI prApti te
gadaSTirUpa divya cakSune pAmelA sAkSAt dRSTA evA bhAvagI saddaguruthI ja thAya,
nahi ke daSTiaMdha evA asadUguruthI. AMdhaLAnI pAchaLa AMdhaLA doDayA jAya evI
asaddagururUpa aMdha puruSaparaMparA pAsethI divya nayananI AzA rAkhavI te
AkAzakusumavat che. zrI AnaMdaghanajInA zabdomAM "puruSaparaMpara anubhava
jevatAM re aoaMdha palAya. kAraNa ke jyAM lagI mithyAtva TaLyuM nathI, darzana
dUra thayA nathI ane samyagadaSTi khUlI nathI, tyAMlagI paramArthathI
dRSTiaMdhapaNuM ja kahevA yogya che A mithyAtvarUpa daSTiaMdhapaNuM te
janmAMdhapaNA karatAM paNa kharAba che; janmAMdha che ane dekhato ja nathI, paNa
mithyAdaSTi aMdha che ane anartha dekhe che! eTale AvA dRSTiaMdha asaddaguru to
pote unmArge jatA hoI bIjAne unmArge dorI khADamAM pADe, durgatinI gartAmAM
nAMkhe; mATe sanmArge javA mATe te sadgurunuM ja nayana-doravaNI joIe. vaLI
daSTi dRSTirAgathI raMgAyelI heya, kamaLAvALI hoya, athavA ADe raMgIna kAca
dharyo hoya te darzana paNa tevuM ja raMgAyeluM (Coloured vision) thAya che,
yathArtha thatuM nathI. tema chavanI dRSTi jo daSTirAgathI raMgAyelI hoya, te
tenuM darzana paNa tevuM ja raMgAyeluM-viparyasta hoya che, samyapha hetuM
nathI. ghaNI vakhata leke daSTirAganI puSTine paNa samyaga daSTipaNuM mAnI
levAnI bhrAMtigata bhUla kare che paNa e bane kevaLa jUdI ja vastu che, kAraNa
ke daSTirAgathI je darzana thAya che te tevA rAgabhAvathI raMgAyeluM ne malina
hoI asamyapha hoya che, ane samyagadaSTithI je darzana thAya che te rAgabhAvanA
anaraMjana vinAnuM nirmala ne svaccha hAI samyapha hoya che. dAkhalA tarIke-
pitAnA kuladharmanA

Page #50 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## English Translation:  49 It is a clear manifestation of *dristirag*
(attachment to one's own view) to consider someone a Guru, even if they lack the
qualities of self-knowledge, *vitragata* (freedom from attachment), etc., simply
because of their adherence to their own sect or out of egoistic attachment to
their lineage. Similarly, believing that only a particular individual is true
and everything else is false is also a form of *dristirag*. It is very difficult
to overcome this *dristirag*. Shri Hemchandracharya Ji has lamented, "Oh Lord!
It is easy to give up *sneharag* (attachment to loved ones) and *kamrag*
(attachment to desires), but this evil *dristirag* is difficult to overcome, it
is very difficult." However, when one has a *sambhyashti* (right perception),
there is no attachment, and one sees things as they truly are. One understands
the true nature of the universe, the true nature of the *sadguru*, and the true
nature of everything. This understanding leads to a true and unwavering belief.
In *taap* (delusion) or *dristirag*, there is belief in one's own opinion, while
in *samyagdristi* (right perception), there is belief in the truth. The
*dristiragi* (one with attachment to their own view) believes that "mine" is
true, while the *samyagdristi* believes that "true... is mine." There is a clear
difference between the two. Therefore, the wise do not get confused.  "The
nature of *dristirag* is like a mirror, it does not know its own nature, it does
not know the way of *syadvad* (the doctrine of maybe)." - Shri Devchandraji
Therefore, the *mumukṣu* (seeker of liberation) who desires *samyagdristi*
should abandon *dristirag* and *dristiadhapasu* (blind faith), and reject the
ignorant and *asadguru* (false guru) who is blind to the truth. They should seek
the guidance of a *samyagdristi* (right perception) possessing, knowledgeable,
*vitrag* (free from attachment) *sadguru*. Because, what is invisible to the
physical eye, "cannot be seen without the divine eye," "cannot be obtained
without the divine eye," but "by serving the feet of the *sadguru*, one obtains
it directly." - The scriptures also become inaccessible without the guidance of
the *guru*. Because the scriptures are the words of the self-realized,
knowledgeable person, only the *parmarthic* (spiritual) *sadguru*, who is a
self-realized, experienced soul, can understand their meaning, their heart, and
their secrets. And only they are capable of revealing them. Therefore, the
*sadguru*, holding the *prajnarup* (wisdom) *shalaka* (measuring rod) and the
*pravachanarup* (divine) *anjan* (collyrium), applies the "knowledge-collyrium
measuring rod" to the soul, only then the *dristirag* of the soul is removed,
only then the divine eye opens, only then the divine vision is revealed, and
only then the pure soul, the *shushunidhan* (ultimate abode), the
*madgadhimavan* (greatly powerful), the *meru* (mountain) like, is realized.  66
"The *sadguru* applies the *pravachan* (discourse) *anjan* (collyrium), and one
sees the ultimate abode; the heart's eye beholds the Lord of the universe, whose
glory is like Mount Meru." - Shri Anandghanaji  There is a great mystery in the
scriptures considering the Gita as the ultimate authority on the *guru*. This
confirms the same point. Because the Gita is not just a collection of verses,
but it is a song of the ultimate truth, a song of the heart, a song that has
been deeply internalized, like music, it is a song that resonates with the soul.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 49 guru, sadgurumAM avazya hAvA yeAgya evA AtmajJAna-vItarAgatA Adi lakSaNathI
rahita hAya, chatAM peAtAnA mata-sa'pradAyanA AgrahathI ane peAtAnA mAnI lIdhelA
kuladharmAMnA mamatvajanya rAgathI tene guru mAnavA te pragaTa dRSTirAgapaNuM
che; athavA jenA pratye peAtAne rAga che evA amuka puruSavizeSa ja sAcA che ne
temAM ja sarvasva che, bIjA badhA khATA che ne temAM kAMi nathI te paNa
dRSTirAgane prakAra che. A dRSTirAga cheDavA ghaNuM muzkela che. zrI
hemacadrAcAya jIe te vItarAga pAse peAkAra pADayo che ke-he bhagavan ! sneharAga
cheADavA helo che, kAmarAga cheDavA sTelA che, paNa A duSTa dRSTirAga cheDavA
sa'tene paNa dAhile che, dusyaja che. paNa sabhyaSTipaNAmAM tavA rAga hAtA
nathI, eTale temAM te vastunuM vastusvarUpe darzana thAya che. sadevanu,
sadgurunu', sahunuM samyak svarUpa samajI tenuM tathArUpa pratItimaya mAnyapaNu
hoya che. tApa ke dRSTirAgamAM ' mata nuM mAnyapaNuM che, ane samyagdaSTimAM
'sat'nu mAnyapaNu che. dRSTirAgI 'mAruM' te sAcu'' mAne che, ane samyagdaSTi
'sAcuM... te mAruM' mAne che. Ama e bannene pragaTa bheda che. eTale sujJa temAM
brAMti pAme nahi * dRSTirAganA pAtra teha samakita gaNuM, syAdavAdanI rIta na
jANuM nijapaNuM. '--zrI devaca'drajI : C mATe samyagdaSTi IcchanArA mumukSue te
dRSTirAga ne dRSTiadhapazuArUpa adhazraddhAne cheDI dRI, dRSTiaMdha evA ajJAnI
asadgurune tyajI samyagdaSTisapanna jJAnI vItarAga saddagurunuM ja Alakhana
bhajavuM joIe. kAraNa ke carmacakSune ageAcara evI * binA nayanakI bAta' * binA
nayana pAve nahi -divya nayana vinA pAme nahui', paNa seve sadguru ke carana,
seA pAye sAkSAta. '-Agama paNa gurugama vinA agama thai paDe che. kAraNa ke
Agama e AtmAnubhavI jJAnI puruSanA vacana heAi, sAkSAta anubhavajJAnIAtmAnubhavI
evA pAramArthika sadguru ja tenA mA~ne-hRdayane-rahasyane pAme che, ane te ja
eka te batAvavAne samartha che. eTale prajJArUpa zalAkAmAM pravacanarUpa divya
ajana lai sadguru AMje, 'jJAna-a'janazalAkA ' kare, teA ja jIvanA A dRSTirAga
dUra thAya, te ja A divya nayana unmIlana pAme, te ja A divya cakSu ughaDe ane
sanmAnI prApti thai meru samA madgADimAvAna parama zuzunidhAna zuddha AtmAnuM
sAkSAt da na thAya, 66 pravacana aMjana te sadguru kare, dekhe parama nidhAna;
hRdaya nayana nihALe jagadhaNI, mahimA meru samAna. 'zrI AnaMdaghanajI,
zAstramAM gItAne ja gurupaNAne adhikAra kahyo che emAM ghaNuM rahasya che ane te
e ja vAtane puSTa kare che; kAraNa ke gItA eTale keTalAka leke mAtra sUtrapAThI
samaje che ema nahi', paNa jeNe zAstranA-sUtrane a-paramArthagIta karyAM che,
atyaMta hRdayagata-pariNata karyA che, saMgItanI jema avisavAdIpaNe AtmAmAM
tanmaya-ekatAra

Page #51 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
50. He who has done it, has done self-reflection, has done self-realization, is
"Gitarth"; that is, he who has sung, experienced the ultimate decisive ultimate
truth of the self, is Gitarth. Such a Gitarth self-realized wise man is eligible
to become a Guru. Otherwise, an ignorant Guru without such Gitarth becomes
"Guru" (heavy) due to his karma burden. The ignorant walks according to his own
will, wanders without any direction; the ignorant walks on the path he chooses,
he is an endless samsari. Jinji! Just as many learned, many people agree, many
disciples are nurtured; just as they follow the Jin Shaasan, they are those who
are not firm in their resolve. Jinji! The Gitarth who speaks the truth, who
finds it in the Agam, the wise man who is well-equipped with the meaning of the
self, how can he remain silent without saying it? - Shri Yashovijayji. Thus, the
true Gitarth, the wise, the self-realized Sadguru, is the only one from whom the
ultimate devotional Guru-grace is obtained. In this regard, there is a beautiful
saying: There is a well of nectar in the middle of the sky-dome-consciousness,
that is, the peaceful, virtuous, timeless soul resides there. He who has found
the Sadguru, he alone drinks from that well of nectar, fills himself with peace
and virtue, his thirst is quenched, that is, his worldly thirst is quenched, and
by drinking that nectar, he attains that nectar-like state. Otherwise, he who
has not found the Sadguru, he is deprived of the benefit of drinking nectar, he
walks thirsty, that is, his worldly thirst is not quenched and he attains only
death, that is, he continues to go through the cycle of birth and death, his
birth and death do not end. "There is a well in the middle of the sky-dome,
there resides the nectar; he who has a Guru drinks it in abundance, he who does
not have a Guru goes thirsty... O Avadhu! Those hundred yogis are my Guru, I
offer my salutations to their feet." - Shri Anandghanji. "He who shows the truth
nectar, the four-armed one meets him, he drinks the nectar of the Nirjan, he
lives for ages and ages." - Shrimad Rajchandraji. When Lord Mahavira gave Shri
Gautam Swami the right vision, the meaning of the Vedas was also understood
correctly. If the vision is right, even the wrong scriptures are interpreted
correctly, and if the vision is wrong, even the right scriptures are interpreted
wrongly. The secret of seeing is also understood if the vision is right.
Therefore, the vision should be right. And its attainment is, as mentioned
above, dependent on Shri Sadguru. Such a visionary man is able to show the true
form of things by giving divine vision. But such people who speak the truth
about things, who are knowledgeable by personal experience, are rare, they are
like a famine in the world. Anandghanji has...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 50. karyo che, AtmAkAra karyo che, AtmAnubhUtimaya karyo che te "gItArtha;
arthAt jeNe parama nizcayarUpa paramArtha Atmatatva gIta karyuM che, anubhUta
karyuM che te gItArtha. evA gItArtha AtmAnubhavI jJAnI puruSa ja guru thavAne
gya che. bAkI tathArUpa gyatA vinAnA ajJAnI gurue te karmabhArathI "guru"
(bhAre) bane che. ajJAnI nija chaMde cAle, tasa nizrAe vihArI; ajJAnI je
gacchane calave, te te anaMta saMsArI che. jinajI! jima jima bahuzruta
bahujanasaMmata, bahu ziSya paravariye; tima tima jinazAsanane vayarI, je navi
nizcaya dariye re. jinajI! samabhASI gItAratha nANI, AgamamAMhe lahiye re, Atama
arathI zubhamati sajajana, kahe te viNa kema rahiye re ?"--zrI yazovijayajI. Ama
sAcA gItArtha, jJAnI, AtmAnubhavI sadguru pAsethI ja pAramArthika bhAvagurugama
prApta thAya che. A aMge suMdara anyokita che ke-gaganamaMDala-cidAkAza tenI
madhye eka amRtane kuve che, eTale amRtasvarUpI zAMtasudhArasamaya AtmAne tyAM
vAsa che. jene sadguru maLyA che, te ja te amRtakUpamAMthI zAMtasudhArasa bharI
bharIne pIe che, temanI tRSA chIpe che arthAt bhavatRSNa zAMta thAya che, ane te
amRtapAnathI te amRtapaNAne pAme che. bAkI jene sadgurune yega nathI maLyuM, te
te amRtapAnanA lAbhathI vaMcita rahe che, tarasyA cAlyA jAya che, eTale temanI
bhavatRSNa bUjhAtI nathI ane te mRtapaNane ja pAme che, arthAt
janmamaraNaparaMparA karyA kare che, tenA janmamaraNane cheDe AvatuM nathI.
"gagana maMDaLameM adhabica kUvA, uhA he amIkA vAsa; sagurA hoe se bhara bhara
pIve, nagurA jAve pyAsA... avadhU ! so jogI guru merA, usa padakA kare re
nIveDA." zrI AnaMdaghanajI. "vaha satya sudhA darazAvahiMge, caturaMgula he
damase mila che, rasadeva niraMjanake pivahI, gaha jaga jugAjuga se jivahI"
-zrImad rAjacaMdrajI. zrI gautamasvAmIjIne bhagavAna mahAvIra deve samyaga netra
ApyAM tyAre vedanA artha paNa samyapaNe samajAyA. daSTi samyapha hoya te mithyA
zAstra paNa samyaphapaNe pariName che ane dRSTi mithyA hoya te samyaphazAstra
paNa mithyApaNe pariName che. vadarzananuM rahasya paNa daSTi samyaku hoya te
samajAya che. mATe daSTi samyapha joIe. ane tenI prApti te upara kahyuM tema zrI
sadgurune AdhIna che. tevA daSTA puruSa ja divya daSTi apI vastunuM yathAvat
svarUpadarzana karAvavAne samartha hoya che. paNa AvA vastugate vastu kahenArA
Apta anubhavajJAnIo te virala ja che, jagat mAM temane te dukALa ja che.
AnaMdaghanajIe

Page #52 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
As it has been said, "Rare are those who speak of things as they are, in
accordance with their true nature." The rest, without any true, experiential
knowledge of the object, merely speak of it in a hypothetical way. They are all
dry and empty.  It is sad that in this country, in this community, where
spirituality has been reduced to a mere material concept, without any real
understanding of its true nature, there is a great deal of confusion. People are
merely following their emotions and sentiments, without any real understanding
of the true nature of spirituality. They are merely grasping at the tail of
spirituality, without knowing its true essence. They are not seeking to know the
soul, but are merely pursuing their own selfish interests. As a result, they
will only harm the country and their own families. - Shri Mansukh Bhai
Kirtuchanda Mehta.  Because the divine eye has been deprived of the ability to
contemplate the true nature of things, "The divine eye has been deprived of the
contemplation of things, and is left in a state of uncertainty." Therefore,
there is no true contemplation of the true nature of things. Just as without
right vision (eyesight), one cannot see external objects in their true form, so
too, without right vision, one cannot see the true form of the soul and other
subtle objects. Without this divine eye, no matter how many hypothetical and
abstract thoughts one may have about the entire universe, they are all
ultimately empty and meaningless. Because, who am I? What is my true nature?
This fundamental and central question is rarely contemplated with peace and
discernment. Therefore, one tries to know the entire lake, but does not even try
to know the nature of the soul-god residing in the body-temple! This right
vision of the contemplation of the true nature of the soul, which is the primary
objective, is primarily dependent on the guidance of a true, knowledgeable, and
virtuous guru. And it is through this spiritual yogic vision that one sees the
divine path of yoga.  Therefore, as the saying goes, "As the vision is, so is
the creation," and "As the vision is, so is the creation," the yogi, who has
this vision, desires to walk the divine path of yoga (Ichcha Yoga). Therefore,
according to the principle of "Chattaram Puran Darshan," the "Drista" man, with
his unwavering determination, indomitable enthusiasm, and single-minded
devotion, walks the path of righteousness (Pravritti). He faces the obstacles
that come his way with extraordinary courage and continues to walk the path with
peace and stability (Sthira Yoga). And finally, having reached his desired
destination, he completes his journey on the path of yoga and achieves
unparalleled success (Siddhi Yoga).  The meaning is that the "Jogi Jan," who
walks the path of yoga, constantly remains vigilant and alert to prevent the
distortion of the true nature of the soul by external influences. He observes
the five restraints of non-violence, truthfulness, non-stealing, celibacy, and
non-possessiveness, both in thought and deed. He also observes the five
observances of purity,

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 51 kahyuM che tema "abhimate vastu vastugate kahe re te viralA jaga joya.' bAkI
tathArUpa tAttvika anubhava vinA vastunI mAtra khAlI kalpita vAta karanArA
jananA kAMI te nathI. temane te sarvatra sukALa ja che. kheda thAya che ke
nagada mAlarUpe ( Materially) adhyAtmanuM svarUpa jANyAsamajyA vinA hAla
adhyAtmIone vyavahAra kaTimAM adhogati pAmatA A dezamAM, A komamAM rAphaDo
phATayo che, kevaLa khyAla-bhramaNa-gatAnugatikatvane ( Sentimentalism) anusarI
zuddha varatugate vasturUpane jANyA samajyA vinA adhyAtmanuM puMchaDuM
pakaDanArA A che, nathI AtmAne oLakhavAnA, paNa vyavahAra-paramArthathI patita
thaI dezane ane pitAne pariNAme dhakko ja pahoMcADaze."--zrI manasukhabhAI
kiratucaMda mahetA. kAraNa ke vastuvicAranI bAbatamAM divya nayanane viraha
paDyo che, "vastu vicAre re divya nayana taNe, viraha paDayo niradhAra,' eTale
yathArtha vastuvicAra thato nathI. jema samyagadaSTi (cakSu ) vinA bAhya
padArthonuM yathArtha darzana thatuM nathI, tema samyagadaSTi vinA AtmAdi
atIndriya padArthanuM samyapha svarUpadarzana thatuM nathI. e divya nayana vinA
AkhA brahmAMDa saMbaMdhI game teTalA kalpanArUpa svaccheda vicAra kare to paNa
paramArthathI zUnya ja che, moTuM mIMDuM ja che. kAraNa ke huM pote koNa chuM?
mahArUM svarUpa zuM che? e eka mULabhUta kendrastha vastune jIve zAMtabhAve
vivekapUrvaka bhAgye ja vicAra karyo che. eTale e AkhA lekane jANavAnI ceSTA
kare che, paNa deha-devaLamAM birAjamAna AtmadevanA svarUpane jANavAnI tamA
karatuM nathI ! A mukhya prajanabhUta AtmavastunA vicAranI samyagRSTi paNa
mukhyapaNe sAcA jJAnI sadUgurunA avalaMbane pUle che, ane te AdhyAtmika
yogadaSTithI ja yegamArganuM divya darzana thAya che. eTale pachI jevI "daSTi
tevI sRSTi', jevuM darzana tevuM sarjana e nyAye te daSTA jogI jana' te divya
yogamArge gamana karavA "Icche che" (IcchAyoga). eTale daSTipUraM cattAruM e
sUtra pramANe vegamArge dRSTipUta padanyAsa karate karato te " dRSTA" puruSa
apUrva AtmapurUSArthathI, adamya utsAhathI ne ananya saMvegathI te sanmArge
gamana kare che, pravRtti Adare che (pravRtti ). vacce naDatA vidgone A vIra
puruSa addabhuta zauthI sAmano karI jaya kare che ane zAMta sthirapaNe mArge
cAlyo jAya che (sthiraga). ane aMte ISTa dayeya sthAne AvI pahoMcI te gamArgane
pravAsa pUro karI anupama siddhi sAdhe che. (siddhiyoga). tAtparya ke-egamArge
pravartate "jogIjana' parabhAva-vibhAvathI AtmasvarUpanuM hiMsana na thavA
devAno niraMtara jAgrata upayoga rAkhI, dravyathI ane bhAvathI ahiMsA, satya,
asteya, brahmacarya ane niSparigraha e pAMca yamanuM paripAlana kare che; zauca,

Page #53 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## English Translation:  **52**  He practices the five vows of non-violence,
austerity, self-study, and devotion to God; abandoning the body-consciousness,
which is the seat of the external, he establishes himself in the consciousness
of the Self; he purges the external emotions and practices the breath-control of
the inner consciousness, which is like the filling and emptying of a vessel; he
withdraws the senses from the objects of sense and draws the soul back from the
external, which is called *pratyahara*; he holds the soul in its own nature,
which is called *dharana*; he becomes steady in mind and steady in wisdom, and
meditates on the soul with one-pointed concentration, and experiences the
supreme absorption in the pure Self, which is called *samadhi*. And thus, those
who desire the infinite abode of bliss, the *susanta-gindras*, remain in its
contemplation day and night, and they attain that supreme, pure, and blissful
abode, where infinite peace flows, which is like the nectar of immortality. “The
abode of bliss is infinite, the *susanta* desires it, he remains in its
contemplation day and night; that supreme, infinite, blissful peace, I bow to
that abode, I praise it, I celebrate it.” – Shrimad Rajchandraji.  **(2)** The
author of this scripture, the great sage Haribhadracharya, has shown us the true
nature of the path of yoga, which is full of ultimate purpose, with his divine
yogic vision. Let us conclude with a few words about the holy character of this
scripture writer: In this land of India, there have been a few true saints who
have been above the insistence of different philosophies, and among them, Shri
Haribhadracharya was a unique saint and a true knower of the truth, who shone
with a different light; he was a great influencer, a sage with a vision, who
truly embraced the all-embracing, impartial, and multi-faceted vision of
*anekanta*, which harmonized all philosophies. This *yakini* (certain) great
man, who lived in the 8th and 9th centuries, is well-known. According to the
information available to us from the *Prabhavacharita* and other sources, he was
a resident of Chitrakoot (Chittorgarh), a great scholar of all scriptures, and a
learned Brahmin; he was also the honored priest of the king Jitarina. He had
excelled in all fourteen types of knowledge, but he had become proud of his
knowledge. This arrogant man, who did not respect his father, made a foolish
vow, saying, “I will become a disciple of anyone whose words I cannot
understand.” Thus, Haribhadra, the best of the twice-born, was proud but also a
symbol of simplicity and a seeker of truth. One day, he was passing by the
*upaashraya* (Jain temple) when he heard an old *sadhviji* (Jain nun) named
*yakini* Mahottara reciting the following verse in a sweet voice:  "चक्की दुगं
हरिपणगं पणगं चक्कोण केसवा चक्क । केसव चक्की केसव दुचक्की केसी य चक्की य ।।"

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 52 saMteSa, tapa, svAdhyAya ane IzvarapraNidhAna e pAMca niyamanuM sevana kare
che; parabhAvanI beThakarUpa dehAdhyAsa choDI daI, AtmabhAvamAM Asana jamAve
che; bAhya bhAvanuM virecana karI aMtarAtmabhAvanA pUraNa-kuMbhanarUpa
bhAvaprANAyAma sAdhe che; viSayavikAramAMthI iMdriyane pratyAhata karI
parabhavamAMthI AtmAne pAchuM kheMcI levArUpa pratyAhAra kare che;
AtmasvabhAvamAM AtmAne dhArI rAkhavArUpa dhAraNuM dhare che; sthiracitta ane
sthitaprajJa thaI AtmAnuM ekAgra dhyAna dhyAve che ane zuddha AtmasvarUpamAM
lIna thaI javArUpa-samAI javArUpa parama AtmasamAdhi anubhave che. ane Ama je
anaMta sukhadhAma padane IcchatA susaMte-gIndro dinarAta tenA dhyAnamAM rahe
che, ane jyAM anaMta evI sudhAmaya parama zAMti pravahe che, evA te parama
amRtavarUpa zuddha parama padane A gIrAja sAkSAtu pAme che. "sukha dhAma anaMta
susaMta cahI, dinarAta rahe tada dhyAna mahIM; para zAMti anaMta sudhAmaya je,
praNamuM pada te, vara te, jaya te."- zrImada rAjacaMdrajI. (2) zAstraka7
maharSi haribhadrAcAryajI. Ama divya yogadaSTithI paramArthamaya yogamArganuM
yathArtha darzana karAvanAra A zAstrakartA maharSinA pavitra caritra saMbaMdhI
be zabda kahI aMtya maMgalarUpa upasaMhAra karIe :-A bhArata bhUmimAM mata-
darzananA AgrahathI para evA je gaNyAgAMThayA "nirpakSa viralA keI' sAcA saMta
puruSa thayA che, temAM zrI haribhadrAcArya keI anerI bhAta pADanArA vilakSaNa
saMta tattvajJa thaI gayA; sarva darzanano sAdharmika baMdhutvabhAve samanvaya
karanArI parama udAra nirAgraha anekAMta daSTine yathArtha paNe jhIlanArA
mahAprabhAvaka jyotidhara ArSa daSTA thaI gayA. vikramanA AThamA navamA saikAmAM
thaI gayelA A yAkinI mahattA sUna' tarIke suprasiddha haribhadrasUrinA jIvana
saMbaMdhI je ati apa mAhitI zrI prabhAvacaritra Adi parathI ApaNane upalabdha
thAya che te pramANe- teozrI citrakUTanA ( cittoDanA ) nivAsI sarvazAstra
pAraMgata mahApaMDita brAhmaNa hatA; ane tyAMnA rAjA jitArinA saMmAnita pureDita
hatA. te caturdaza vidhAsthAnamAM prakarSane pAmelA hatA, paNa temane potAnI
vidyAne mada caDyo hato. pitAne kalisakalagnapaNe mAnatA A ghamaMDI viSe dutara
pratijJA karI hatI ke "atre jenuM kahevuM huM na samajI zake, tene huM ziSya
thaI jAuM, ' Ama dvija zreSTha haribhadra purahita abhimAnI chatAM saralatAnI
mUrti ane satyatattvagaveSaka hatA. eka divasa te mahApaMDita ke upAzraya
pAsethI pasAra thatA hatA, tyAM eka "yAkinI" mahattarA nAmanA vRddha sAdhvIjIne
nIcenI gAthAno madhura svare pATha karatAM teNe sAMbhaLyA "cakkI dugaM
haripaNagaM paNagaM cakkoNa kesavA cakka  /  kesava cakkI kesava ducakkI kesI ya
cakkI ya  /  / "

Page #54 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
53 Haribhadra tried hard to find the meaning of this verse, but he couldn't
figure it out. So he went to the old woman and mockingly asked, "Hey, old lady!
What are you doing, chirping like that?" The old woman replied, "Son, the newly
learned chirp like this. 'Navahita viviayate.' (Meaning, you are also a new
student in the field, a novice, so all this might seem like chirping to you, but
it's not.)" With this poignant reply, Haribhadra's mockery was turned back on
him, and he was left speechless.   Seeing this miracle, the truthful and
steadfast Sarlaazma Haribhadra became humble and respectfully asked, "Oh,
mother! Please explain the meaning of this lesson you gave. I don't understand
it. I am your disciple." The holy nun said, "Oh, Bhadra! We don't have the
custom of taking a man as a disciple, but since you are curious, go to our
Dharma Acharya." So Haribhadra went to the priest Jinbhaṭṭācārya, told him
everything, and became his disciple. Then, upon touching the touchstone of
Jinadana, the truth-testing Haribhadra's soul was dyed with its color. Thus, the
yogini 'Yakini' who was the reason for his life's transformation and the
ultimate benefactor who granted him the attainment of the ultimate goal, was
considered by Haribhadra as his Dharma mother, the one who gave him the Dharma
birth, the true 'Dwij' who made him a true seeker. He started identifying
himself as 'Yakini Mahattasu' and even in his immortal works, he preserved this
memory of her, which is still visible today.   The sharp-witted Swami Haribhadra
became proficient in all the Jina scriptures in a short time, and his Guru,
recognizing his brilliance, established him in his own position.   His nephew,
Hansa and Paramhansa, took initiation from him. These two great intellectuals,
proficient in logic, went to a Buddhist city in disguise to study Buddhist
logic, even though their Guru had not permitted them to do so. Later, when their
presence was discovered, the Buddhists killed Hansa, but Paramhansa barely
escaped and reached his Guru. When he revealed the truth, he too died of grief.
Thus, Haribhadra Suri, who was immersed in sorrow due to the loss of such
excellent disciples, was overcome by a momentary fit of anger. But the three
verses, 'Zulsail Shilamma', etc., which his Guru had taught him, immediately
calmed him down. He deeply regretted his momentary outburst and sought
atonement.   Then, the great seeker, who was deeply affected by the loss of his
disciples and who was seeking liberation from this sorrowful cycle of existence
with intense detachment, was motivated by the unparalleled and astonishing
efforts of the scholar 'Shastrasati' Sri Haribhadracharya. The three verses that
his Guru had given him...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 53 A gAthAne atha besADavA haribhadra ghaNu mathyA, paNa kAMI ghaDa beThI nahi.
eTale temaNe pAse jaine upahAsamAM vRddhAne pUchyuM-ahA ! mAjI ! A tame cik cik
zu karyu ? tyAre ginIe javAkha ApyuM-beTA ! navu li'peluMcik cit thAya.
'navahita viviAyate  /  ' ( arthAt bya*gamAM tuM paNa navA nizALIe che, zikhAu
aNughaDa che, eTale A badhuM tane cik cik lAgatuM haze, paNa tema nathI. ) AvA
mArmika uttarathI upahAsa karavA gayelA haribhadranA upahAsa thai gayA ne te
cATa paDI gayA. eTale camatkAra pAmelA satyapratijJa saralAjhmA haribhadraM
vinamra banI vinayathI pUchayu-ahe| mAtAjI ! tame je A pATha karyA tenA atha Apa
samajAve, huM te a samajatA nathI, huM Apane ziSya chuM. tyAre pavitra sAdhvIjIe
kahyuM-he bhadre ! puruSane ziSya karavAne amAre| AcAra nathI, paNa thArI
jijJAsA hoya te| tuM amArA dharmAMcA pAse jA. eTale haribhadra purohita
jinabhaTAcArya pAse jai temane samasta nivedana karI temanI pAse dIkSita thayA.
pachI te| jinadanarUpa pArasamaNunA sparza thatAM, satyatattvaparIkSaka
haribhadrane AtmA tenA raMgathI hADAhADa ra'gAi gayA Ama jenA nimittathI
peAtAneA A jIvanapalaTA thayA, ane parama dhabIjanI prAptirUpa parama upakAra
thayA, evA te yeAginI 'yAkinI' mahattarAne potAne saddharma saMskArarUpa dhama
janma ApanArA, sAcA paramArtha 'dvija' banAvanArA peAtAnA dharmamAtA mAnI,
kRtajJazirAmaNi haribhadra peAtAne yAkinI mahattAsU nu * tarIke oLakhAvavA
lAgyA, ane peAtAnI amara kRtiomAM paNa te puNya smRti temaNe jALavI rAkhelI
adyApi dRzya thAya che. kuzAgrabuddhinA svAmI haribhadra alpa samayamAM samasta
jinAgamanA pAragAmI thayA ne tene cAgya jANI gurue svapade sthApana karyAM. *
temanA e bhANeja haMsa ane paramahaMse temanI samIpe dIkSA lIdhI.
pramANuzAstramAM pAragata A be mahAbuddhimAn ziSyA, gurunI anujJA nahi chatAM,
bauddha pramANuzAstrAnA abhyAsAthe gupta veSe bauddha nagare gayA. tyAM
pAchaLathI khabara paDI jatAM bauddhoe haMsane haNI nAMkhyA, paNa paramahaMsa
nAsI chUTI mAMDa guru pAse pahoMcyA, ane hakIkata nivedana karatAM te paNa
vibhedathI maraNa pAmyA eTale AvA e uttama ziSyaratnAnA virahathI zekanimagna
thayelA haribhadrasUrine kSaNika AvezarUpa kApa vyApe che; paNa temanA gurue
pAThavelI jhuLaseLa zilammA' i. traNa gAthAthI tenuM tatkSaNu zamana thAya che,
ane temane peAtAnA kSaNika AvezarUpa kApanA pArAvAra pazcAttApa thAya che ane
prAyazcitta yAce che. pachI ziSyasa'tatine viraha jene vedAtA hatA ane AvA
duHkhamaya sasArasvarUpa pratye tItra vairAgyathI je 'bhavavaraha' gaveSatA
hatA, evA A bhAvitAtmA mahAmumukSu tIvra saMvegaragI zrI haribhadrAcAya
zAstrasa'tati 'nA atula parama Azcaya kArI puruSArthathI pravRtta thayA. gurue
je traNa sarjanArthe anupama khIjabhUta gAthA 7 4

Page #55 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Haribhadrasuri, known for his 54 melis, composed the extensive
"Sangarangatarangini Sami Samraishchakaha" (Samradditya Katha).  Furthermore,
this supremely fearful, liberated soul, seeking liberation, created a unique
1400-chapter text, solely for the purpose of mental or physical atonement.  The
loss of his father, who was a scholar, and the longing for his father's presence
in the next life, are immortalized in his father's lineage of scholarly
descendants, "Virad," as a testament to his father's legacy.  For example, in
the same text, "Bharavihelo," he restored the completely dilapidated Maha
Nishita Shastra. (So far, only about 75 of his texts are available.)  Such a
saintly character, with his virtuous conduct, has become immortal in his written
form, his "Akshara Atma" (soul of letters) truly immortal.  The saying of Sri
Bhatruhari, "Those poets who are not afraid of the fear of decay, are
victorious," is literally true in the context of this saintly poet's immortal
words.  Haribhadrasuri, the creator of 1400 great texts, like Hemachandracharya,
the creator of 350 million verses of literature, the omniscient of the Kali
Yuga, became an extraordinary literary giant, a colossal poet-Brahma, a seer, a
great sage.  His immortal works, each more beautiful than the last, resonate
with a divine sound, filled with such nectarous sweetness that one never tires
of reading them.  Haribhadrasuri, the tranquil, virtuous, ocean of knowledge, is
a treasure trove of inexhaustible, divine sound and nectar.  This divine sound
is the inner voice of this seer, and the unwavering devotion that flows through
each verse is a reflection of his supremely devoted heart.  Each text, woven
together in a beautiful word-picture, with a refined, elegant, and perfect
style, demonstrates the extraordinary skill of this great sage in composing
texts.  Furthermore, his intention is so profound that it is impossible to
measure or fathom, like the ocean.  Because behind each of his words lies an
immense knowledge of scriptures, unique philosophical thought, and the strong
support of supreme spiritual experience.  Therefore, to truly understand the
intention of the work of such a great soul, who has attained such a high state
of yoga, is the task of a great soul like him, who has attained a similar state.
Only they can do justice to it, only they can truly evaluate it, just as only a
skilled gem expert can test a true gem.  Because Sri Haribhadracharya, a master
of the unique art of weaving texts with concise, sutra-like, profound
intentions, has condensed an ocean of discourse into a single point, with his
extraordinary power of synthesis.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 54 melI hatI te parathI temaNe vistArathI saMgaraMgataraMgiNa samI
samarAIzcakahA" (samarAditya kathA) racI, ane taduparAMta mAtra mAnasika ke
pAzanA prAyazcitta arthe A parama bhavabhIru mumukSu mahAtmAe 1400 prakaraNa
graMthanuM ananya sarjana karyuM ! pitAne vedAyelo saziSyaviraha, ane pite
jhaMkhelo bhavaviraha temaNe pitAnI ciMrajIva' zAstrasaMtatimAM "virADa" aMkathI
amara karele dazya thAya che. dA. ta. mavaravara di ne seva sAruM' athavA A ja
graMthamAM "bhAraviheLo,' temaNe sarvathA jarjarita mahAnizItha zAstrano
jIrNoddhAra karyo. (haju sudhI temanA lagabhaga 75 jeTalA graMthe ja upalabdha
thayA che.) AvA A sAdhucarita saMtanA akSaradehamAM emane akSara AtmA akSarapaNe
amara rahyo che. "jenI yazaskAyamAM jarAmaraNajanya bhaya lAgatuM nathI evA
sukRtI kavio jayavaMta che,' 'nAtti ceSa : rAmAnaM mayaM ' e zrI bhatRharinI
ukti A ASa daSTA saMta kavinI amRtavANI saMbaMdhamAM akSaraza: sAcI paDe che.
caudasa (1400) graMtha jeTalA mahAna graMtharAzinuM maulika sarjana karanArA A
"yAkinImahattarAsUnu" haribhasUri, sADA traNa kroDa kalekapramANu sAhityanA
sarjaka kalikAlasarvajJa hemacaMdrAcAryanI jema, asAdhAraNa kaTinA sAhityasvAmI
(Literary giant) thaI gayA, virATa (Collosus) kavi-brahmA, ArSa daSTA maharSi
(Seer, great sage ) thaI gayA. emanI eka ekathI sarasa evI amara kRtiomAM
gUMjato emane divya dhvani eTalI badhI amRtamAdhurIthI bharyo che ke tenuM pAna
karatAM tRpti thatI nathI. zAMtasudhArasajalanidhi evo A haribhadrasUrine divya
nAda akhUTa rasavALo akSayanidhi che; A divya dhvani A ArSa daSTAnA aMtarAtmAne
nAda che, emAM pade pade nirjharatI para zratabhakti emanA parama bhakta
hRdayanuM pratibiMba pADanArUM darpaNa che. suzliSTa, suziSTa ane sumiSTa
zailIthI uttama kalAmaya rIte suMdara zabdacitramAM guMthela ekeka graMtha A
mahAnigraMtha munIzvaranuM adbhuta graMthanimaNukauzalya dAkhave che. vaLI emane
Azaya te eTale badhe paramArthagaMbhIra che ke sAgaranI jema tenuM mApa kADhavuM
ke tAga le te azakya vastu che. kAraNake temanA ekeka vacana pAchaLa agAdha
zAstrajJAna ne ananya tatvaciMtana uparAMta uttama AtmAnubhavanuM samartha
pIThabaLa rahyuM che. eTale AvA ucca yogadazAne pAmelA mahAtmAnI kRtino Azaya
yathArthapaNe avagAhI pragaTa kare, te te temanA jevI ucca AtmadazAne pAmelA
mahAtmA gIzvarenuM kAma che. teo ja tene yathAyogya nyAya ApI zake, teo ja tenuM
yathAyogya mUlyAMkana karI zake, sAcA ratnanI parIkSA nipuNa ratnaparIkSaka ja
karI zake; kAraNa ke sAgaravaragaMbhIra AzayavALA sUtrAtmaka saMkSepathI graMtha
gUMthavAnI ananya kalAmAM siddhahasta zrI haribhadrAcAryajIe, anna adbhuta
samAsazaktithI bindumAM pravacanasiMdhu samAcaeN che.

Page #56 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
“From a single drop of water, the Shruta Sagar expands; Blessed are the Jinas,
who, like the ocean, are vast, yet contained in a single drop”—Shri Chidanandji.
?? 55 Therefore, it is the task of insightful critics, who are bold in their
thinking, to delve into the depths of such profound discourses.  “Is this the
essence of the three-fold heroism?”  Such critics, with their insightful minds,
have, to the best of their ability, attempted to dive into this collection of
Yaga-Dristi, the jewel of literature, and to understand the essence of
“Sumananand’s” critique.  May this effort bring joy to the minds of the noble!
Virtues, whatever they may be, are the essence of the holy, and faults, whatever
they may be, are mine, a mere mortal. May the swan of good sense, with its pure
vision, discard the faults and embrace the virtues!  With this humble request,
I, Bhagwandas, offer my heartfelt gratitude. 5, Chopatti Road, Mumbai, Chaitra
Vadi 5th, VS 2006 } Dr. Bhagwandas Mansukh Bhai Mehta. M.B.B.S.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 " eka khuMdajaLathI e pragaTayA, zrutasAgara vistArA; dhanya jInAne ulaTa
udadhiku', eka buMdame DArA "--zrI cidAna'dajI. ?? 55 eTale AvA AzayagabhIra
pravacanasidhumAMthI aMratnA kheALI kADhavAnuM kAma U'DI vicAra hUkhakI mAranArA
avagAhaka vivecakonuM che. 'trIsyAmavIryaviSArtha ? Ama mati TIkAkAra vivecake
paNa yathAzakti-yathAmati A yAgadaSTisamuccaya graMtharatnAkaramAM
'sumaneAna'danI TIkA 'rUpa DUbakI mArI arane khALavAnA yatakicita prayatna
karyAM che, te sumana sajjanAnA manane Ana'dita kare ! guNA je kai 'hyAM te
sakala gaNujo saMtajananA, ane doSo ke te sakala paNa huM pAmara taNA; karI dASA
dUre suguNu carajo haMsa sumati ! amI dRSTi dhArI suNI ja bhagavAnadAsa vinati
5, copATI roDa, muMbaI, caitra vadI 5'camI, vi. sa'. 2006 } Do. bhagavAnadAsa
manasukhabhAi mahetA. ema. bI. bI. esa.

Page #57 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Yoga-Dristi-Samuccaya/Bhed-Prabhed-Tree **56** **Yoga-Dristi-Samuccaya**
**Bhed-Prabhed** **Verses 2 to 10:** -: Three types of Yoga: Iccha Yoga, etc.
**Iccha Yoga** **Iccha Yoga** **Shastra Yoga** **Samarm-Yoga** **Dharma-Sannyasa
Samarm-Yoga** **Yoga-Sannyasa Samarthya-Yoga** **A-Tatvik Dharma-Sannyasa
Samarthya-Yoga** **Tatvik Dharma-Sannyasa Samarthya-Yoga** - **Pravajya-
Yogyatha-16** - **Verse 10:** 1. Arya-Deshotpanna 2. Vishist-Jati-Kula-Anvit 3.
Kshina-Praya Karma-L 4. Kshina-Praya Karma-Malathi Vimala-Buddhi 5. Avgat-
Sansar-Nargunya 6. Sansar-Virakt 7. Pratanu-Kshaya 8. Alp-Hasya-Adi 9. Krit-Gnya
10. Vinit 11. Raja-Amatya-Paur-Jan-Bahumat 12. Adroh-Kari 13. Kalyana-Ang 14.
Shraddha 15. Sthir 16. Samup-Sampanna **Verse 14:** -: The nature of Pararth-
Pravritti of Sthir-Yogi, etc. Yogis - 5: Shuddha-Bodha-Yukta Agraha-Shunyata
Maiya-Adi Paratantra Charis-Sanjivani Nyaya-Thi Gambhir Udhar Aashaya-Yukta

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 yogadaSTisamuccaya/bheda-prabhedaTrI 56 yogadaSTisamuccayA bheda-prabheda
zloka-2 thI 10: -: icchAyoga Adi traNa yoga : icchAyoga icchAyoga zAstrayoga
sAmarmayoga dharmasaMnyAsa sAmarmayoga yogasaMnyAsa sAmarthyayoga atAttvika
dharmasaMnyAsa sAmarthyayoga tAttvika dharmasaMnyAsa sAmarthyayoga -
pravajyAyogyatA-16 - zloka-10 : 1. Aryadezotpanna 2. viziSTajAtikulAnvita 3.
kSINaprAya karmala 4. kSINaprAya karmamalathI ja vimalabuddhi 5.
avagatasaMsArarnarguNyA 6. saMsAravirakta 7. pratanukaSAya : 8. alpahAsyaAdi 9.
kRtajJa 10. vinIta 11. rAjA-amAtya-paurajanabahumata 12. adrohakArI 13.
kalyANAMga 14. zrAddha 15. sthira 16. samupasaMpanna zloka-14 : -: sthirayogI
Adi yogInI parArthapravRttinuM svarUpa-5: zuddhabodhayukta AgrahazunyatA maiyAdi
pArataMtrya cArisaMjIvanI nyAyathI gaMbhIra udAra Azayayukta

Page #58 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  **Chapter 47**  **Yoga-drishti Samuccaya/Bhed-Prabhed/Tree -:** The form of
knowledge of the eight, starting with Mitra-drishti:  **Verse 15:**  * **Trina-
agni-kana-sadash:** Like the flame of dry grass, * **Kasha-agni-kana-sadash:**
Like the flame of wood, * **Ratna-prabhasa-sadash:** Like the brilliance of a
jewel, * **Surya-abhasa-sadash:** Like the radiance of the sun, * **Gomaya-agni-
kana-sadash:** Like the flame of cow dung, * **Deepa-prabhasa-sadash:** Like the
light of a lamp, * **Tara-abhasa-sadash:** Like the light of a star, *
**Chandrika-abhasa-sadash:** Like the light of the moon.  **Verse 15:** - The
form of knowledge of Mitra-drishti:  * **Tattva-thi:** From the truth, *
**Trina-agni-kana-sadash:** Like the flame of dry grass, * **Samya-prayoga-kala-
anavasthayi:** Unstable in the time of right practice, * **Pahu-smriti-bija-
sanskara-vikalpa-prayoga-yukt:** With the seed of memory, impressions, and wrong
practice, * **Alp-vary-adhana-akshama:** Unable to give even a little, *
**Vandana-adi-abhisht-kary-akshama:** Unable to perform desired actions like
worship.  **Verse 15:** - The form of knowledge of Tara-drishti:  * **Gomaya-
agni-kana-sadash:** Like the flame of cow dung, * **Prayoga-kala-ma:** In the
time of practice, * **Smriti-ni:** Of memory, * **Apatu-ta:** The imperfection,
* **Vishist-sthiti-virya-rahit:** Lack of special stability and strength, *
**Smriti-na-abhave:** Due to the lack of memory, * **Prayoga-nu-vaikaly:** The
practice is distorted, * **Tatha:** And, * **Prakara-na-kary-na-abhav:** The
lack of various types of actions.  **Verse 15:** - The form of knowledge of
Bala-drishti:  * **Kasha-agni-kana-sadash:** Like the flame of wood, * **Mana-
ku:** The mind, * **Sthiti-virya:** Stability and strength, * **Pamaya-smriti:**
Measured memory, * **Yatna-shash-dhav:** Effort and determination, * **Artha-
prayoga-matra:** Only the practice of meaning, * **Priti:** Love.  **Verse 15:**
- The form of knowledge of Deepa-drishti:  * **Deepa-prabhasa-sadash:** Like the
light of a lamp, * **Deepa-prabhasa-drish:** Seeing the light of the lamp, *
**Paddhati-kt:** Methodical, * **Patu-smriti-yukt:** With sharp memory, *
**Pratham-gujaratha-nayak:** The first leader of Gujarat, * **Pratham-guna-
sthana-ka-prakar-sha:** The first excellence of the qualities of the place, *
**Ud-grast-sthiti-virya:** With rising stability and strength, * **Bhav-yukt:**
With feelings, * **Hota-chhata:** Even though, * **Dravya-vandana-adi:** Worship
of substances, etc.  **Verse 15:** - The form of knowledge of Sthira-drishti:  *
**Ratna-prabhasa-sadash:** Like the brilliance of a jewel, * **Pravardha-man:**
Increasing, * **Na-apar-anparita-apakrut:** Not affected by external influences,
* **Pranidhana-yoni:** The source of dedication, * **Tadu-bhav-aprati-pati:**
Not opposing the feelings, * **Nirapay:** Without any obstacle, * **Paritosha-
hetu:** The cause of satisfaction.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pa7 yogadaSTisamuccaya/bheda-prabheda/TrI -: mitrAdaSTi Adi AThanA bodhanuM
svarUpa : zloka-1pa : tRNAgnikaNasadeza | kASThAgnikaNasadaza ratnaprabhAsadeza
| sUryaAbhAsadaza gomayAgnikaNasadaza dIpaprabhAsadaza tArAAbhAsadeza
caMdrikAAbhAsaMdaza zloka-15: -: mitrAdaSTinA bodhanuM svarUpa : tattvathI
tRNAgnikaNasadaza | samyaprayogakAlaanavasthAyI | pahusmRtibIjasaMskAra-
vikalaprayogayukta alpavarya AdhAnaakSama vaMdanAdi abhISTakAryaakSama zloka-15H
- tArAdaSTinA bodhanuM svarUpa : gomayaagnikaNasadaza prayogakAlamAM smRtinI
apaTutA viziSTa sthitivIryarahita smRtinA abhAve prayoganuM vaikalya hovAthI
tathA prakAranA kAryano abhAva zloka-15 : -: balAdaSTinA bodhanuM svarUpa -
kASThAgnikaNasadaza manAku sthitivIrya pamAyasmRti yatnazasadbhAva
arthaprayogamAtra prIti zloka-15H -: dIprAdaSTinA bodhanuM svarUpa :
dIpakabhAsadA | dIpaprabhAsadRza paddhatikta paTusmRtiyukta prathama
gujarathAnAyaka prathama guNasthAnakaprakarSa udagrasthitivIrya bhAvayukta hovA
chatAM dravyavaMdanAdi zloka-15: -: sthirAdaSTinA bodhanuM svarUpa :
ratnaprabhAsadeza pravardhamAna na aparaMparitApakRt praNidhAnayoni
tadubhAvaapratipAti nirapAya paritoSahetu

Page #59 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  58 **Yoga-Dristi-Samuchaya/Bhed-Prabhed/Tree Shloka-15: - The nature of
Kanta-Dristi's knowledge:**  Like the light of a star | free from attachment,
practiced with dedication | distinguished, free from negligence, focused on
application With a serious and generous nature, situated in accordance with pure
usage **Shloka-15: - The nature of Prabha-Dristi's knowledge:**  Like the halo
of the sun | | other scriptures are insignificant | | benevolence Unwavering,
always the purpose of meditation | practiced with samadhi, appropriate action
towards the disciple Disciplinary, excellent, calming, often free from
alternatives, in proximity, the destruction of hatred, etc. Shloka-15? - The
nature of Para-Dristi's knowledge:  Like the light of the moon and its rays,
knowledge is free from alternatives, the mind | formless, unwavering Connected
with the soul, always the form of the right path, the attainment of supreme
happiness Benevolence according to magnificence Shloka-15: - The intensity of
the urge in the eight Dristi's:  Maschandi Varsholak Ishwar Rasa Shloka-16:  Gud
Kakkab Khand Sharkara - Yogaanga:  Dharma Yama Asana Asana Pratyahara Pratyahara
Pranayama Dhyana | Niyama Dharana Samadhi

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 58 yogadaSTisamuccaya/bheda-prabheda/TrI zloka-15: -: kAMtAdaSTinA bodhanuM
svarUpa : tArAnA prakAza samAna | niraticAra anuSThAnayukta | viziSTa
apramAdayukta viniyogapradhAna gaMbhIra-udAra svabhAvathI sthita zuddha
upayogAnusArI Azayayukta zloka-15: -: prabhAdaSTinA bodhanuM svarUpa : sUryaAbhA
samAna| | anya zAstro akiMcitkara | | paropakAritA avaMdhya sarvadA dhyAnahetu |
samAdhiyukta anuSThAna ziSyaprati ucita sankriyAyukta anuzAsanakArI zreSTha
prazamayukta prAyaH vikalpazUnya sAMnidhyamAM vairAdinAza zloka-15? - parASTinA
bodhanuM svarUpa : caMdracaMdrikAAbhA samAna bodha nirvikalpa mana | nirAcAra
pada avaMdhya sa&iyAyukta sadA saddhayAnaMrUpa uttama sukhaprApti bhavyatAnusAre
paropakAritA zloka-15H - ATha daSTiomAM saMvegamAdhuryanI mAtrA : mascanDI
varSolaka izu rasa zloka-16: guDa kakkaba khAMDa zarkarA - yogAMga : dhama yama
Asana Asana pratyAhAra pratyAhAra pAna dhyAna | niyama prANAyAma dhAraNA samAdhi

Page #60 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Verse 59, Shloka 16:  **Yoga-Dristi Samuchaya/Bhed-Prabhedayi - Eight
Dristi's and Eight Defects of Chitta**  **Khed** (Regret) **Kshep** (Projection)
**Bhrānti** (Delusion) **Udveg** (Anxiety) **Uthān** (Arousal) **Anyamudde**
(Other-mindedness) **Asang** (Attachment)  ## Verse 21:  **Five Yamas:**
**Ahimsa** (Non-violence) **Satya** (Truthfulness) **Asteya** (Non-stealing)
**Brahmacharya** (Celibacy) **Aparigraha** (Non-attachment)  ## Verse 21-22:
**Qualities of a Yogi with Mitra-Dristi:**  **A-khed** (Absence of regret),
**A-dvesh** (Absence of hatred) in **Ichchha** (Desire) and other states, in
**Devakarya** (Divine work), **Guru-karya** (Teacher's work), **Adevakarya**
(Non-divine work), **Yoga-bija** (Seed of Yoga), **Ahimsa** (Non-violence) and
other **Yamas**.  ## Verse 23-24:  **Mitra-Dristi and Chitta related to Dev-Guru
etc.:**  **Kushal-chitta** (Virtuous mind) **Akushal-chitta** (Non-virtuous
mind) **Sanshuddh-kushal-chitta** (Pure virtuous mind) **Asanshuddh-kushal-
chitta** (Impure virtuous mind)  ## Verse 23 to 29:  **Yoga-bija in Mitra-
Dristi:**  1. **Kushal-chitta** in **Jineshu** (Jinas) 8. **Bhav-udveg** (Fear
of rebirth) 15. **Granth-ugrah** (Attachment to scriptures) 2. **Jin-namaskaar**
(Salutation to Jinas) 9. **Aushadh-danadi abhigraha-palan** (Observance of
taking and giving medicine etc.) 16. **Granth-prakasana** (Publication of
scriptures) 3. **Jin-pranam** (Bowing to Jinas) 10. **Granth-lekhana** (Writing
scriptures) 17. **Swadhyay** (Self-study) 4. **Kushal-chitta** in **Aacharya**
(Teachers) etc. 11. **Granth-pujana** (Worship of scriptures) 18. **Chintana**
(Contemplation) 5. **Namaskar** to **Aacharya** (Teachers) etc. 12. **Granth-
dan** (Giving scriptures) 19. **Bhavana** (Meditation) 6. **Pranam** to
**Aacharya** (Teachers) etc. 13. **Granth-shravan** (Listening to scriptures)
20. **Beej-shruti** (Seed-hearing) **Sanveg** (Arousal) 7. **Vyayavrujya**
(Conduct) of **Aacharya** (Teachers) etc. 14. **Granth-vachana** (Reading
scriptures) 21. **Beej-shruti-upadeya-bhav** (Feeling of being taught by seed-
hearing)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 59 zloka-16H yogadaSTisamuccaya/bheda-prabhedAyI - ATha daSTiomAM cittanA ATha
doSono viccheda - kheda | kSepa bhrAMti ga, udvega utthAna anyamudde AsaMga
zloka-21 : -: pAMca yama : ahiMsA satya asteya brahmacarya aparigraha
zloka-21-22 : - mitrAdaSTivALA yogInA guNo - icchAdi avasthAvALA devakArya-
gurukArya adevakAryAdimAM yogabIja ahiMsAdi yamo vageremAM akheda adveSa upAdAna
zloka-23-24: -: mitrAdi daSTio deva-guru Adi viSayaka citta : kuzalacitta
akuzalacitta saMzuddhakuzalacitta asaMzuddhakuzalacitta zloka-23 thI 29 : -
mitrAdi daSTiomAM paDatAM yogabIja : 1. jineSu kuzalacitta 8. bhavaudvega 15.
graMthaugraha 2. jinanamaskAra 9. auSadhadAnAdi abhigrahapAlana 16.
graMthaprakAzanA 3. jinapraNAma 10. graMthalekhanA 17. svAdhyAya 4. AcAryAdimAM
kuzalacitta |11, graMthapUjanA 8. ciMtanA pa. AcAryAdine namaskAra 12.
graMthadAna 19. bhAvanA 6. AcAryAdine praNAma 13, graMthazravaNa 20. bIja
zrutimAM saMvega 7. AcAryAdinuM vaiyAvRjya [14. graMthavAcanA 21. bIja
zrutiupAdeyabhAva

Page #61 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 60 Yogadashtisamuccaya/Bhed-Prabhed/Tree Shloka-37: - Dharma Yoni - Shraddha
Sukha Vignpti Vrittivriti) Shloka-63-64: Shraddha Sukha Vividisha Vignpti - :
Guru Bhakti thi Prapt Fal: Sanubandh Dharma Prapti Samapatti Aadi Bhed thi
Tirthankar nu Darshan Tirthankar Naamakarma Bandh Bhavtirthankarpad Prapti
Tirthankar Naamakarma Vipak Shloka-71: - Pad - Vedya Sanvedya Pad Avedya
Sanvedya Pad Naishchayik Vedya Sanvedya Pad Vyavaharik Vedya Sanvedya Pad
Shloka-76: - Bhavabhinandi na Aath Lakshano: Shudra Lobharati Din Matsari
Bhayavan Shath Agn Niṣkalarambhi Shloka-78 thi 84: - Avedh Sanvedh Parwala Jeevo
nu Swaroop: Viparayas Pradhan Bhavabhinandi Asachcheṣṭayukt Hitahit Vivekanand
Kanyakavivekhin Dharma Bij Vapan Prayatna Shunya Vartaman ne Jonaara Duhkha ma
Sukh Budhi Tuchch Sukha ma Asakt Shloka-85: - Avedh Sanvedh Pad Jitwana na Upay:
Aagam Jnasatsang Aagam Bodh

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
60 yogadaSTisamuccaya/bheda-prabheda/TrI zloka-37: -: dharmayoni - zraddhA sukhA
vijJapti vRttivRti) zloka-63-64: zraddhA sukhA vividiSA vijJapti -:
gurubhaktithI prApta phaLa : sAnubaMdha dharmaprApti samApatti Adi bhedathI
tIrthakaranuM darzana tIrthaMkara nAmakarmabaMdha bhAvatIrthaMkarapadaprApti
tIrthaMkara nAmakarma vipAka zloka-71 : - pada - vedyasaMvedyapada
avedyasaMvedyapada naizcayika vedyasaMvedyapada vyavahArika vedyasaMvedyapada
zloka-76: -: bhavAbhinaMdInAM ATha lakSaNo : zudra lobharati dina matsarI
bhayavAna zaTha ajJa niSkalAraMbhI zloka-78 thI 84: -: avedhasaMvedhaparavALA
jIvonuM svarUpa : viparyAsapradhAna bhavAbhinaMdI asacceSTAyukta
hitAhitavivekaaMdha kanyAkavivekahIna dharmabIja vapanaprayatnazUnya vartamAnane
jonArA duHkhamAM sukhabuddhi tuccha sukhamAM Asakta zloka-85 : -:
avedhasaMvedhapada jItavAnA upAya : AgamajJasatsaMga Agamabodha

Page #62 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
61 Yogadashtisamuccaya/Bhed-Prabhedadhee Shlok-85-86: -: Avedhasamvedhapad's
form: Mahamihyatvanibandhan Pashu-Shabdava Andhabhavaroop Shlok-87:
Durgatipatakari -: Kutark's characteristics: Bodharog - Shamapaya Shraddha-bhang
Abhimanakrut Shlok-88-89: -: Saabhinivesh's subjects - Samadhi Pararthakaran
Shrut Shlok-90: Sheel (Paradrohaviriti) -: Kutark's Vikalp: Shabdavikalp
Arthavikalp Shlok-100: - Atiindriya Arthajnan's characteristics - Yogatattpar
Agampradhan Shlok-101: Sachchhadh (Prajn) Sheelavan (Paradrohaviritiman) -:
Uttam Tattv's attainment's remedies - Agam Agam Anuman Yogabhyasarasa Shlok-110:
: Devtattv's Bhakti - Chitraabhakti Achitraabhakti Shlok-120: -: Bodh:
Buddhipurvak Gnanapurvak Asanmohapurvak

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
61 yogadaSTisamuccaya/bheda-prabhedADhI zloka-85-86-: -: avedhasaMvedhapadanuM
svarUpa : mahAmithyAtvanibaMdhana pazu-zabdavA aMdhabhAvarUpa zloka-87 :
durgatipAtakArI -: kutarkanAM lakSaNo : bodharoga - zamApAya zraddhAbhaMga
abhimAnakRt zloka-88-89 : -: saabhinivezanA viSayo - samAdhi parArthakaraNa
zruta zloka-90: zIla(paradrohavirati) -: kutarkamAM thatA vikalpa : zabdavikalpa
arthavikalpa zloka-100: - atIndriya arthajJanAM lakSaNo - yogatatpara
AgamapradhAna zloka-101H sacchAddha(prAjJa) zIlavAna (paradrohaviratimAna) -:
uttama tattvanI prAptinA upAyo - Agama Agama anumAna yogAbhyAsarasa zloka-110 :
: devatattvanI bhakti - citrAbhakti acitrAbhakti zloka-120 : -: bodha :
buddhipUrvaka jJAnapUrvaka asaMmohapUrvaka

Page #63 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 22 Yoga Dasti Samuchaya/Bhed-Prabhed/Tree Shlok-123:  **Six characteristics
of Sanusthan:** Sampadagam, Jijnasa, Tajjnas Seva, Aadar, Shlok-142?  **In
Karan, Preti, Avipna:** The language of the noble ones - Asandigdha, Shlok-150
to 152.  **Sarayukt Pararthakaran Shil:** Eight types of universally accepted
Dharma:  * Dev Puja * Tapodhan Puja * Karuna towards the sinful * Parapida
Parihar * Sada Paropkar Vritti * Brahman Puja * Mata-Pitadi ni Puja * Yati Puja,
Shlok-100  **Bhog:** Pramadkari Bhog, Shuddha Dharma thi Apyabhog, Shlok-111.
**First sign of Yoga Pravritti:** Aloulya, Kanti, Aarogya, Anishfarat, Shubh
Gandh, Alp Mutra Purish.  **Thirteen signs of a Nishpann Yogi:** Prasaad,
Swarasoumyata, Shlok-161.  1. Maitri Adi Yukt Chitt 2. Vishayo Prati Achet 3.
Prabhavvant 4. Dhairya Vant 5. Dvandr Wade Adhrushyatva 6. Abhisht Labh 7.
Janpriyatna 8. Dosha Vyapy 9. Param Tripti 10. Ouchitya Yog 11. Guv Samata 12.
Viradi Nash 13. Ritambhara Buddhi

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
22 yogadaSTisamuccaya/bheda-prabheda/TrI zloka-123: : sanuSThAnanAM cha lakSaNo
: saMpadAgama jijJAsA tajajJasevA Adara zloka-142 ? karaNamAM prIti avipna :
sajanonI bhASA - asaMdigdha zloka-150 thI 15raH sArayukta parArthakaraNazIla :
sarvamAnya dharmanA 8 prakAro: | devapUjA | | tapodhanapUjA pApI pratye karuNA
parapIDAparihAra sadA paropakAravRtti | brAhmaNapUjA | mAtA-pitAdinI pUjA
yatipUjA zloka-100: bhoga : pramAdakArI bhoga zuddhadharmathI Apyabhoga
zloka-111 : yoga pravRttinuM prathama cihna: alaulya kAMti Arogya aniSpharata |
zubhagaMdha alpamUtrapurISa : niSpannayogInAM 13 cihno : prasAda svarasaumyatA
zloka-161: 1. maitrIAdiyukta citta 2. viSayo prati aceta 3. prabhAvavaMta 4.
dhairyavaMta 5. dvandra vaDe adhRSyatva 6. abhISTa lAbha 7. janapriyatna 8.
doSavyapAya 9. parama tRpti 10. aucitya yoga 11. guva samatA 12. vairAdinAza |
13. RtaMbharA buddhi

Page #64 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
63 Yogadashtisamuccaya/Bhed-Prabhed/Tree Shlok-175: : The form of Asanga
Anushthan: Mahapath Prayan. Anagami Padaavah (Nitya Pad Prapak) Sa-Vritti Pad
Shlok-176: : Other known names for Asanga Anushthan: Prasanta Vahitha (Sankhyas)
Visbhaga Parikshay (Buddhas): 4 types of Yogis - Shivavatma (Shaivas)
Dhruvaadhva (Mahavratis) Shlok-208: Gotrayogi Kulyogi Pravritta Chayogi Nishpann
Yogy Shlok-210: * Kulyogi: Bhava Kulyogi Dravya Kulyogi Shlok-12-213 Pravritta
Chakra Yogy's 8 Lakshanas: Ichchayamayukt Pravrittimayukt Sthiryamayarthi
Siddhimayarthi Yogavachka Pamela Kriyavachka Pamnara Falavachka Pamnara

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
63 yogadaSTisamuccaya/bheda-prabheda/TrI zloka-175 : :asaMgaanuSThAnanuM svarUpa
: mahApathaprayANa. anAgamipadAvaha (nityapadaprApaka) sa-vRttipada zloka-176: :
asaMgaanuSThAnanAM anya darzana prasiddha nAmo : prazAMtavAhitA (sAMkhyo)
visabhAgaparikSaya (bauddho) : yogInA 4 prakAro - zivavatma (zaivo) dhruvAdhva
(mahAvratI) zloka-208 : gotrayogI kulayogI pravRttacayogI niSpannayogI zloka-210
: * kulayogI : bhAvakulayogI dravyakulayogI zloka-12-213 pravRttacakrayogInAM 8
lakSaNo : icchAyamayukta pravRttimayukta sthirayamaarthI siddhiyamaarthI
yogAvaMcaka pAmelA kriyAvaMcaka pAmanArA phalAvaMcaka pAmanArA

Page #65 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
OLD List HOLDEO DOWNGod and if SEA, )(x) is Charyaji Pranee year Shri Heerbhadan
Yogdaishti Charmaracharya Vivechan | Para Anasang Prabha Mitra Arog | Pravritti
Akhed Addal N Pratipatti Pt Samadhi | Aatm 1 terephef Dif Meemansa Yog Niyam
Jijnasa Tara :1 Anudeg Swabhaav 721911 - Asano eleft+m?" Shukrayaa Akhep Shravan
'Abhranti -Anuyana Ala Thira 1K 1} Wingunchka: Ë, Bhagwanadas Manah Ramukh Bhai
Mehta inder safety similar and the Grenadi nes :

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
OLD List HOLDEO DOWNGod ane jo SEA, )(x) che cAryajI praNI varSa zrI hIrabhadANa
yogadaiSTi carmaracarya vivecana | parA anAsaMga prabhA mitrA aroga | pravRtti
akheda addala na pratipatti pta samAdhi | Atma 1 terephef Dif mImAMsA yoga
niyama jijJAsA tArA :1 anudega svabhAva 721911 - Asano eleft+ma?" zukrayA akSepa
zravaNa 'abhrAMti -anuyAnA alA thirA 1K 1} viMgUMcaka: E,bhagavAnadAsa manaH
ramukhabhAI mahetA inder safety similar and the Grenadi nes :

Page #66 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Please provide the text you would like translated. I need the text to translate
it into English.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
_

Page #67 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Namo Jinaya. Sri Haribhadracharya's Sri Yogadrishtisamuccaya. The commentary on
the Yogadrishtisamuccaya, which is close to the Gantantra, begins. And here, at
the very beginning, the Acharya, for the sake of maintaining the tradition of
the disciples, for the sake of the pacification of the learned obstacles, and
for the sake of the exposition of the creation etc., presents the Lakshana-
sutra:  "Bowing to the supreme Jina, who is attainable by the yoga of desire, I
shall expound the yoga in brief, according to the division of the views." (1)
Humbly bowing to the heroic, attainable, supreme Jina, I shall explain the yoga
in brief, according to the division of the views.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
ja * * phra`aaccht`ngcch`ngphra`ngkhcchat`nge`ngngngngngngng ka ka *** kaja 37
namaH jinAya. zrI haribhadrAcAryajI prata zrI yogadaSTisamuccaya. sa vi ve ca na
44440 4444 maMgalAcaraNa gataMtrane nikaTavatI evA cagadaSTisamuccayanI vyAkhyA
prAraMbhavAmAM Ave che. ane ahI zarUAtamAM ja AcArya, ziSTa saMpradAyanA pAlana
arthe, viddha-aMtarAyanI upazAMti arthe, ane prajana AdinA pratipAdana arthe,
lekasUtra upanyasta (rajU) kare che - natvecchAyogato'yogaM yogigamyaM
jinottamam / vIraM vakSye samAsena yogaM tadRSTibhedataH // 1 // deharA
(kAvyAnuvAda) icchAge vIra jina namI, gigamya agara gadaSTi bheda karI, kahuM
saMkSepa yoga, artha egI, gigamya, jinettama evA vIrane icchAgathI namI, huM
yoga te yogadaSTinA bhede karIne, saMkSepathI kahIza.

Page #68 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Translation:  **Commencement of the Commentary on the Collection of Gadaṣṭi
Sūtras**  It is a customary practice to mention auspiciousness, purpose,
subject, and relationship at the beginning of a commentary. Following this
tradition, these learned Ācāryas have presented this first sūtra.    This sūtra
has the following objectives:  1. To uphold the tradition of the learned
community. 2. To pacify obstacles. 3. To encourage the activity of the
discerning. 4. To reveal the three aspects of purpose, subject, and
relationship.  (See the commentary below)  In this sūtra, the learned Ācārya,
with a desire to honor the victorious ones who are worthy of being known and who
have attained liberation, has offered a salutation to the supreme deity
(auspiciousness).  And then, by considering the different perspectives of the
Gadaṣṭi, the Ācārya has briefly mentioned the three aspects of purpose, subject,
and relationship. This is the overall meaning of this collection of sūtras.
Here is the specific meaning:  **Translation of the Commentary by Śrīharibhadra
Ācārya:**  The objectives of this collection of sūtras are as follows:  1. **To
uphold the tradition of the learned community:** The learned community always
engages in auspicious activities and reverently salutes the supreme deity. This
Ācārya is also a learned person, and therefore, this sūtra is presented to
uphold the tradition of the learned community.  It is said, "Learned people
always engage in auspicious activities and reverently salute the supreme deity."
2. **To pacify obstacles:**  Auspicious actions are often fraught with
obstacles. It is said, "Even great people face many obstacles in auspicious
actions, while those engaged in inauspicious actions may find their obstacles
easily overcome." This chapter is intended to guide towards right knowledge and
is therefore auspicious and beneficial.  Therefore, this sūtra is presented to
pacify obstacles.  3. **To encourage the activity of the discerning:** This
sūtra is intended to encourage the activity of those who are discerning and who
contemplate and act accordingly.  4. **To reveal the three aspects of purpose,
subject, and relationship:**  It is said, "How can one understand any scripture
or any action without knowing its purpose?"  It is impossible to state the
purpose of something that does not exist, and it is impossible to state the
purpose of something that has no subject.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
gadaSTisamuccaya vivecana graMthaprAraMbhe maMgala, prajana, abhidheya viSaya,
saMbaMdha Adi kahevA joIe, evI ziSTa praNAlikA che. tene anusarIne A ziSTa
AcAryo A prathama kasUtra rajU karyuM che. eTale ke (1) ziSTa saMpradAyanA
pAlana mATe, (2) vidananI upazAMti mATe, (3) vicAravaMtanI pravRtti mATe, (4)
prayajana-viSaya-saMbaMdha e traNa batAvavA mATe A ka-sUtrane uddeza che. (juo
nIce vRtti). temAM- agI, gigamya, jinettama evA vIrane IcchAgathI namI',-e
uparathI ISTadevatA stava (maMgala) kahyuMane "ga tenA dRSTibhede karIne
saMkSepathI kahIza',-e uparathI prajanAdi traNa kahyA. Ama A kaleka sUtrano
samuccayArtha che. vizeSArtha A prakAre: zrIharibhadrAcAryajIkRta vRttino
anuvAda : temAM (A bleka sUtranA uddeza A pramANe che:-) 1. ziSTa jone A
saMpradAya che ke-ziSTo kyAMya ISTa vastumAM prarvatatAM, ISTa devatAnA
namaskArapUrvaka pravarte che. A AcArya paNa ziSTa nathI ema nathI (ziSTa ja
che), ethI karIne te saMpradAyanA pratipAlana arthe. ane tevA prakAre kahyuM che
ke "ziSTAnAmeva samayaste sarvatra zubhe kila / pravartatte
saivedavatAstavapUrvam !" ityAdi. 2. tathA zAM ivavidanAri" zreya kAryo bahu
vinavALA hoya che. kahyuM che ke _ "zreyAMsi bahuvighnAni bhavanti mahatAmapi /
azreyasi pravRttAnAM kvApi yAnti vinAyakAH // mahAjanone paNa zreya kAryomAM
ghaNAM vibe heya che; ane azreyamAM pravRtta thayelA janonA vibeaMtarAyo te
kyAMya cAlyA jAya che ! ane A prakaraNa te samyajJAnanA hetupaNAe karIne
zreyabhUta-kalyANarUpa che. ethI karIne viba ma he" eTalA mATe vina-aMtarAyanI
upazAMti athe. 3. tathA prekSAva tenI-joIvicArI vartanArA vivekIonI pravRttine
athe. 4. ane prayojana AdinA pratipAdana arthe. ane tevA prakAre kahyuM che ke
"sarve zAstranuM athavA koI paNa kamanuM jayAM lagI prayojanana kahevAmAM AvyuM
hoya, tyAM lagI te kAnAthI grahaNa thaI zake vAsa? ane ahIM je aviSaya hoya
tenuM prayojana kahevuM zakya nathI, je viSaya hoya ja nahiM tenuM

Page #69 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Here, as soon as we say "Nami" (bowing), all the souls (atma-pradesh) are
completely bowed down (parinamana), all the souls are completely bowed down in
devotion, and the mind, speech, and body become the same, that is true "naman"
(bowing). If even one such true namaskar (salutation) happens, then there is
liberation (kalyana). Regarding this, it is said: *"Ikkovi namukkaroo
jinavaravasahass vadhmaanass. Sansanasagaroo taroo na va naari va"* - Shri
Pratikramana Sutra *Ekkovi namokaro sammakato sammbhavato cheva / Tare vadhostam
nimel EUR yudishriharibhadrasurrikrutshri dharmasangrahni ga, 888* One time
bowing to the Lord, according to the Agam, happens; because the truth is the
work, the achievement is realized. By knowing the Lord, the pure qualities are
realized; with the vision of the goal, the means are also realized, the blessed
person is praised... Shri Sambhava. - Shri Devchandraji and the scholars have
also bowed down with the same supreme feeling here. - This "ichcha" (desire)
means - Jinavarvrushabha = Vardhamana (Mahavira) even one namaskar (salutation)
saves a man or woman from the ocean of samsara (worldly existence). It means
that even one namaskar (salutation) done with samyaktva (right faith, right
knowledge, right conduct) is enough to save you from the cycle of birth and
death (apaadha-pul-paravarta), then what to say about praise? (This is the
extraordinary greatness of devotion to the Lord). Regarding this, the
inquisitive should read the "Lalit Vistara Granth" by Shri Haribhadracharya,
who, with extraordinary devotion, sings the divine song of the extraordinary
greatness of the Lord and devotion to the Lord. - This writer-critic has been
fortunate to offer a small offering of devotion in the form of a critical
commentary on this entire book, "Chihemvidhi ni tika". - He sings the immortal
glory of Shri Haribhadracharya, "Lalitvistara" is a unique book of devotion. How
can it be called an attempt? Because, like the examination of a crow's teeth,
its experiment cannot be achieved, it is impossible. [This is called "Kakadanta
Pariksha Nyaya". Where anything is impossible, improbable, pointless, this
applies. From the word "Adi", "Poora naati to Rana" etc.]. This is called the
"fal" (result) relationship. And in that statement, the subject of the statement
is implied, it is contained; therefore, no one says that relationship, etc." In
it, "Navechhalatodo chonchi vinottammam viran - A yogi, gigamy, jinettmam such a
hero, bowing down with desire, - above that, the praise of the desired deity is
said.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
maMgalAcaraNa ahIM "namI' ema kahetAMnI sAthe ja sarva AtmapradezanuM tathArUpa
pari-namana (pariNamana) thAya, sarva Atmapradeza bhaktibhAve pariName-sarvathA
namI paDe, ne mana-vacanabhAva - kAyA tadrupa bane, e sAcuM "namana" che. evo
eka paNa sAce namaskAra thAya to kelyANa thaI jAya che. A aMge kahyuM che ke -
*" ikkovi namukkAro jiNavaravasahassa vddhmaannss| saMsAnasAgaro tArU na va nArI
vA "--zrI pratikramaNa sUtra *ekkovi namokAro sammakato sammabhAvato ceva / tAre
vaDhosTama nimeLa EUR yuDIzrIharibhadrasUrikRtazrI dharmasaMgrahaNI gA, 888 eka
vAra prabhu vaMdanA re, Agama rIte thAya; kAraNa satye kAryanI re, siddhi
pratIta karAya. prabhupaNe prabhu oLakhI re, amala vimala guNageha; sAdhyadaSTi
sAdhakapaNe re, vade dhanya nara teha...zrI saMbhava."--zrI devacaMdrajI ane
zAstrakAre paNa atre tevA ja parama bhAvathI namasakAra karyo che,-e "icchA
arthAta-jinavaravRSabha = vardhamAnane (mahAvIrane) eka paNa namaskAra nara vA
nArIne saMsArasAgarathI tAre che. arthAtasamyaphabhAvathI ja samyaphapaNe
karavAmAM AveluM A eka paNa namaskAra apAdhapulaparAvarta madhye
(ardhapudgalaparAvartAnI aMdara) tAre ja che, te pachI stutinuM to pUchavuM ja
zuM? (Avo adbhuta che mahimAtizaya A bhagavadbhaktina). A aMge vizeSa jijJAsue
bhagavad ane bhagavadbhaktinA AvA asAdhAraNa mahimAtizayanuM apUrva
bhaktiullAsathI divya gAna gAtA parama bhAvitAtmA zrI haribhadrAcAryajInA
"lalita vistaragraMthanuM avalokana karavuM,-je A saMpUrNa graMtha para
vivecanAtmaka "cihemavidhinI TIkA lakhavArUpa svalpa bhakita kusumAMjali
arpavAnuM sadabhAgya A lekhaka vivecakane prApta thayuM che,-te A zrI
haribhadrAcAryajInI amarakIrtigAthA gAto "lalitavistarA bhaktiyegane apUrva
graMtha che. prayajana kema kahI zakAya? kAraNa ke kAgaDAnA dAMtanI parIkSA
vagerenI jema, tenA prayoganI siddhi thaI zakatI nathI,-asaMbhava che mATe. [A
"kAkadaMta parIkSA nyAya' kahevAya che. jyAM kyAMya azakya, asaMbhava,
nirarthaka vAta heya tyAM A lAgu paDe che. Adi zabdathI 'pUruM nAti to rANA'
ityAdi]. AnuM A phala' ema je bega te saMbaMdha kahevAya che. ane te kathanamAM
--abhidheya viSayamAM antargata che-samAI jAya che; eTalA mATe koI te
saMbaMdhane je kahetA nathI, ItyAdi." temAM--"navechALatoDo caoNnci vinottamam
vIraM - ayogI, gigamya, jinettama evA vIrane IcchAgathI namI,-e uparathI ISTa
devatAnuM stava kahyuM.

Page #70 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The word "**Icchayog**" has been used. The inner desire, the true, innocent
devotion, the supreme love that is primarily needed in bowing down to the Lord,
is definitely present in us, our conscience bears witness to it, therefore the
word "**Icchayog**" has been boldly used. Because, being captivated by the
supreme wonderful qualities of the Lord, and having supreme love for him, a
natural desire to bow down to the beloved Lord arose in them. "**Hasa bha
Jineshwar Pritam Maro Re, Aer Na Chahun Re Kant; Rizayo Sahib Sang Na Parihare
Re, Bhage Saadi Anant.**" Shri Anandghanji has used the word "**Icchayog**" here
intentionally. Therefore, the **Shastrayog** and **Samarthayog** have been
excluded. This author, being a great soul, a great scholar, a great
**Samarthayog** man, the word "**Icchayog**" that is used for the father,
reveals his supreme humility along with his supreme, serious, generous
intention. Because, he says that such **Shastrayog** and **Samarthayog** are not
entitled to it, therefore, specifically, "**Icchayog**" is used, and in brief, I
will say it according to the vision - above that, three things have been said -
purpose, etc. Thus, the meaning of the **Glak Sutra** is collective, and the
meaning of the parts (the meaning of each word separately) is as follows:
**Naty** - bowing down, **Pranami** - bowing down, **Vi** - the hero,
**Pranami** - bowing down. In what way is he bowing down? It is said -
**Icchayog** - with **Icchayog**, that is, as if there is **Icchayog**. This
adjective is for the exclusion of **Shastrayog** and **Samarthayog**, and it is
desirable to exclude them because of their lack of entitlement. At the beginning
of the chapter, by abandoning falsehood, this exclusion has been said by
demonstrating the activity of universal propriety (appropriate-suitable) at the
beginning. And the form of these three (**Icchayog**, **Shastrayog**, and
**Samarthayog**) will be said immediately after this. To whom is he bowing down,
what kind of hero? For that, it is said - **Vinottam Jinottam** - this is an
adjective for a specific thing. Here, all those who are victorious over
**Ragadi** (victorious) are called **Jin** like **Ritajin**, **Avadhijin**,
**Man:paryayajnana Jin**, and **Kevali Jin**. Among them, that hero is superior
because of his **Kevalipana** and **Tirthankarpana**. This adjective
"**Jinottam**" refers to the **Karmakaya** state, which is the result of the
**Tirthankar** name-karma, which is the result of the **Bhagavant**'s actions,
and which is the ultimate purpose. The **TathaBhavya** attracted **Var
Badhilaabh** is within him, and the **Tirthankar** name-karma is the result of
the **Anuttar Punya** form earned from the **Ahndavastha**. This is given the
adjective - **Ayog** - such a hero. **Shavvaaman Jarm Cho:** The karma of mind,
speech, and body is **Yog**. He who does not have **Yog** is **Ag** - such a
hero. And from this, the **Bhagavant**'s **Shaileshi** state, which is to be in
the future, the removal of all karma, the **TathaBhavya**'s **Parikshay** from
which the supreme knowledge-bliss arises, and the **Kritakritayata** from which
the **Nishkitarth** form arises, is the ultimate fruit-like **Tavakaya** state.
Therefore, it is said -

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
yogadaSTisamuccaya ga" zabbI sUcavyuM che. prabhu pratyenI namanakriyAmAM
pradhAnapaNe je aMtaraMga IcchA, sAce niSkapaTa bhaktibhAva, parama prema joIe,
te te amane avazya che, ema emane aMtarAtmA sAkSI pUre che, tethI "IcchAyegathI"
e zabda bedhaDakapaNe kahyo che. kAraNa ke prabhunA parama adbhuta guNathI rIjhI
tenA pratye parama prema kuratAM, priyatama evA te prabhu pratye sahaja
AtmabhAve namaskAra karavAnI temane sahaja IcchA thaI AvI che. "haSabha
jinezvara prItama mAro re, era na cAhuM re kaMta; rIjhayo sAhiba saMga na
parihare re, bhAge sAdi anaMta." zrI AnaMdaghanajI A icchAga' zabda atre
hetupUrvaka che. ethI karIne zAstroga ne sAmarthyacaga-e be vegane apavAda karyo
che. A graMthakAra jevA mahAtmA, mahAzAstrajJa, mahAsamartha icchAga 5. vegI
puruSa pitAnA mATe mAtra IrachAyega' e zabda je che, te temanI parama laghutA "
sAthe parama gaMbhIra udAra AzayavALI mahAnubhAvatA pragaTa kare che. kAraNa ke,
teozrI kahe che ke-tevA zAstraga-sAmarthayeganuM te mahAruM anadhikArIpaNuM che,
eTale khAsa 'IrachAyega vacce samAna co tameivata:oga tenA daSTibhede karIne
saMkSepathI kahIza -e uparathI prayojana vagere traNa kahyA. Ama glaeNka sUtrane
samudAya artha che, ane avayava artha (padepadane chUTo artha) to A pramANe
:natya-namIne, praNamIne, vI-vIrane, praNamIne ema saMbaMdha che. kevA prakAre
praNamIne ? te kechAyonara:-IcachAyogathI, evuM kriyAvizeSaNa kahyuM,-eTale ke
jema IrachAyoga hoya tema. A vizeSaNa zAsUga ane sAmarthya gana vyavaheda athe
(apavAda karavA mATe) che, ane te yugane anadhikArIpaNue karIne A vyavasacheda-
apavAda ISTa che. prakaraNa prAraMbhe mRSAvAdanA tyAga vaDe karIne, sarvatra
aucitya AraMbhavALI (ucita-yathAyogya) pravRttinA pradarzanAthe A vyavaheMda-
apavAda kahyo che. ane A traNeya gonuM (IcchAyega, zAsUga ane sAmarthyayoga)
svarUpa have pachI tarata ja kaheze. kevA viziSTa vIrane praNamIne? te mATe
kahyuM-vinottama jinottamane, evuM vastuvizeSaNa che. ahIM rAgAdinA jetApaNAthI
(jItanArapaNAthI) sarveya viziSTa kRtadhara Adi jina kahevAya che. jema ke-
Rtajine, avadhijine, mana:paryAyajJAna jino, ane kevali jine. temAM te vIra
kevalipaNAne lIdhe ane tIrthaMkarapaNAne lIdhe uttama che. A "jinettama"
vizeSaNa uparathI bhagavaMtanI tIrthaMkara nAmakarmanA vipAka phalarUpa evI
parama parArthe saMpAdana karanArI karmakAya avasthA kahI. tathAbhavyatavathI
AkSipta (AkarSAyela) vara badhilAbha jenI aMdara hoya che, evA ahaMdavAsathathI
upArjana karela anuttara puyasvarUpa te tIrthaMkaranAmakamane vipAka hoya che.
Ane ja vizeSaNa Ape che- ayoga evA vIrane. zAvavAmana jarma co: mana-vacana-
kAyAnuM kama te yoga che. jene yoga vidyamAna nathI, te aga,-evA te vIrane. ane
A uparathI bhagavaMtanI-zailezI avasthAnA uttarakALe honArI, samasta karmanA
dUra thavArUpa, tathAbhavyatvanA parikSayathI uddabhavela parama jJAnasukharUpa
lakSaNavALI, ane kRtakRtyatAthI niSkitArtha svarUpa evI parama phalarUpa
tavakAya avasthA kahI. eTalA mATe ja kahyuM -

Page #71 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
I would not deviate from the word "Mangalacharan" or speak in a way that would
make it seem like I am defeated, for that would be false speech, and that is not
right to do, it should be avoided. Otherwise, how could the great "Munimunu"
remain if even one false word is uttered without thinking? Therefore, this word
usage is appropriate, it is the right thing to do. And this is said to show an
example of how a seeker should act appropriately with their soul in all places.
Wherever, whatever, however it may be, if it is appropriate, then understand and
act accordingly, that is called "aucitya" or appropriateness. What a wonderful
creation! What a depth of meaning! What sincerity! "Wherever, whatever is
appropriate, understand it there, act accordingly there, with your soul, oh
people." Shrimad Rajchandraji's Shri Atmasiddhi. Thus, by using a single word,
the author, the great sage, has skillfully and subtly indicated many purposes.
(1) He has shown supreme love and devotion with a desire-driven approach. (2) He
has indicated the father's knowledge of the scriptures, including right
understanding, according to the characteristics of the desire-body. (3) He has
asserted his own authority to weave the science of Yoga-understanding from
above. (4) He has frankly stated his own lack of authority in the scriptures and
the strength of the scriptures, introducing the father's supreme humility,
effortless simplicity, and the truthfulness of the ultimate goal. (5) He has set
an example of acting appropriately everywhere, encouraging others to do the
same. "Sonche - Chogigamyune. It is understandable to those who are yogis, to
those who are virtuous. Yogis here have accepted the principles of
righteousness, etc. From above, again, the false-sighted ones have been told
about the understanding of the Lord (negation). Because their curiosity also
lies in the final realization of their own nature, therefore, their absence is
there (it does not diminish). And - "Veeran" - the virtuous, this is a proper
name (a name according to the exact meaning of the word). The one who is
valiant, who is powerful through his great strength, who has conquered his
enemies like passions, etc., through penance and the destruction of karma, and
who has attained the supreme state of enlightenment, that is the virtuous one.
Thus, from above, the description of these qualities, which are extraordinary to
others, is the form of the true feeling - the praise of the beloved deity. And
the belovedness is due to the excellence of the Lord's qualities (his
extraordinary nature), and the divinity is due to the attainment of the supreme
state. In between, the same four, the same: - I will briefly explain it
according to their different perspectives - from above, three things have been
said. How? It is said: "V" - I will say, "Cho" - the yoga with the
characteristics of friendship, etc.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
maMgalAcaraNa zabdathI je tene apavAda na karuM athavA tenAthI hAruM yuktapaNuM
kahuM, te rakhene mRSAvAda-asatya bhASaNa thaI jAya; ane te te hAre karavuM
yogya nathI, durathI pariharavuM che, nahiM to vagara vicAryuM eka paNa asatya
vacana uccAruM te mahAruM "munimaNuM" kema rahe? eTalA mATe e zabdaprayoga karyo
che, te ucita ja che, aucitya pravRttirUpa ja che; ane sarva sthaLe AtmAthI
mumukSue ucitapaNe ja pravartavuM gya che enuM udAharaNa batAvavA mATe A kahela
che. jyAM jyAM je je jema ghaTe, ucita hoya, tyAM tyAM te te tema samajavuM ane
AcaravuM, tenuM nAma aucitya athavA ucitapaNuM che. kevI adbhuta nirmAnitA! kevI
bhavabhIrutA ! kevI nikhAlasatA ! "jyAM jyAM je je yogya che, tihAM samajavuM
teha, tyAM tyAM te te Acare, AtmAthI jana eha." zrImad rAjacaMdrajI praNIta zrI
Atmasiddhi. Ama eka chAga zabda yojIne graMthakAra maharSie atyaMta kuzaLatAthI
ekI sAthe aneka hetu garbhitapaNe sUcavyA che. (1) IcchApradhAnapaNathI parama
prItiyukta bhakti batAvI. (2) IcchAganA lakSaNa pramANe pitAnuM samyagadaSTi
sahita zrutajJAnIpaNuM sUcavyuM. (3) te uparathI yogadaSTizAstra guMthavAnuM
potAnuM adhikArIpaNuM dhvanita karyuM. (4) zAstraga ne sAmarthayeganuM potAnuM
anadhikArIpaNuM nikhAlasapaNe kahI, pitAnI parama laghutAno, nirdabha saraLatAne
ne paramArtha sat satyavAditAne paricaya karAvyo. (5) sarvatra ucita pravRtti
karavAne dAkhale besADI bIjAne tema karavAne baMdha karyo. soncei -cogigamyune.
yegIone gamyu te gigamya, evA te vIrane. yogIo atre Rtajina Adi grahyA che. A
uparathI vaLI agI (egI nahi evA) mithyAdaSTiene bhagavaMtanA gamyapaNane
vyavacheda kahyo (niSedha kace). kAraNa ke enI jijJAsAnuM paNa chellA
yathApravRttakaraNamAM hovApaNuM che, eTale anya samaye tenI anupatti che (te
ghaTatuM nathI). ane- vIraM-vIrane, A anvatha saMjJA che, (zabdanA barAbara
artha pramANe nAma che). mahAvIryavaDe virAjanathI, tapa vaDe karmanA
vidyAraNathI, kaSAya Adi zatruonA jayathI ane kevalazrInA svayaMgrahaNathI je
vikrAMta-parAkramavaMta te vIra, evA tene. Ama A uparathI, anyane asAdhAraNa evA
yathAbhUta-jevA che tevA guNonuM utkIrtana e bhAvastavanuM svarUpa hovAthI--
iSTadevatA stava kahyuM. ane guNathI iSTapaNuM bhagavaMtanA
guNaprakarSarUpapaNuthI (atizayavaMtapaNAthI) che, ane devatApaNuM parama gatinI
prAptithI che. vacce samAna covaM tadameivata :-oga tenA daSTibhede karIne
saMkSepathI kahIza,-e uparathI projana vagere traNa kahyA. kevA prakAre ? te
kahevAmAM Ave che : va -kahIza, co-mitrA Adi lakSaNavALo yoga,

Page #72 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Here, with salutations, we inquire about the true nature of the revered Lord
Vira. The three epithets applied to this Vira Bhagavan are (1) Jinottma, (2) Ag,
(3) Gigamya. Their true meaning is as follows: Jinottma - the most excellent
among Jinas. The one who has conquered the internal enemies like raga, dvesha,
maha, etc. is called a Jin (Arihant-Vitrag). There are different stages of Jinas
based on the progressive manifestation of their inner qualities: Kritajin,
Avadhijin, Man:paryaya-jnana Jin, and Kevali Jin. And among them, Vira Bhagavan
is the most excellent, the most sublime, the most supreme, because he is a
Kevali, and also a Tirthankara. The process of attaining the Tirthankara state
is as follows: Attracted by the inherent potential (Tathabhavya) of the being,
the excellent Badhi-bija was obtained by him in a previous birth. At that time,
he served the excellent Sthanakas with devotion, preaching, affection, etc., and
performed excellent worship. He thought with the feeling of a Bodhisattva: "I
will deliver these unfortunate beings who are suffering in this deep, dark world
of Samsara, by the light of this Dharma, and I will make all beings enjoy the
taste of the righteous Dharma." Then, with the qualities of Karuna, etc., in a
concise and detailed manner, it has been described by the previous teachers in
Uttaraadhyaayan-Yoganirnay, etc. You too, through the different perspectives of
Yoga. Here, the immediate purpose of the Yoga discourse is to explain the Yoga,
while the ultimate purpose is Nirvana. Because, with pure intention, this is a
type of activity for the benefit of beings, and this activity is the seed of
Nirvana, which is unhindered and certain. The subject of Abhidheya is the same,
it is the relationship with the characteristics of Sadhu-Sadhana. This path is
clear, well-cultivated, and well-known. And the immediate purpose of the
listeners is to understand the meaning of the discourse; the ultimate purpose is
also Nirvana, because due to the understanding of the meaning of the discourse,
there is appropriate activity here, and this activity is also the unhindered and
certain seed of Nirvana.   "मोहान्धकारगहने संसारे दुःखिता बत  /  सत्त्वाः
परिभ्रमन्त्युच्चैः सत्यस्मिन्धर्मतेजसि  //  अहमेतानतः कृच्छ्राद्यथायोगं कथंचन  /
अनेनोत्तारयामीति वरबोधिसमन्वितः  /  /  करुणादिगुणोपेतः परार्थव्यसनी सदा  /  तथैव
चेष्टते धीमान्वर्धमानमहोदयः  /  /  तत्तत्कल्याणयोगेन कुर्वन्सत्त्वार्थमेव सः।
तीर्थकृत्वमवाप्नोति परं सत्वार्थसाधनम्  // "  Sri Haribhadracharya's Sri
Yogabindu.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
yogadaSTisamuccaya Ama atre namaskAra karI, zrI vIra bhagavAna kevA che? enuM
yathArtha svarUpa darzAvatA vizeSaNa ahIM jyAM che. A vIra bhagavaMtane (1)
jinottama, (2) aga, (3) gigamya e traNa vizeSaNa ApyA che, tenuM yathArtha paNuM
A pramANe - jinettama-jinamAM je uttama che. rAga-dveSa-maha Adi AMtara zatruone
jeNe jaya karyo che te jina (arihaMta-vItarAga) kahevAya che. uttarottara
AtmaguNanA pragaTapaNA pramANe te jinanA-kRtajina, avadhijina, mana:paryAyajJAna
jina, kevalI jina-ema bheda che. ane temAM paNa vIra bhagavAna uttama-utkRSTa-
sarvazreSTha che, kAraNa ke te kevalI che, tema ja tIrthaMkara paNa che. te
tIrthakara padaprAptino upakrama A prakAre che :-jIvanI tathArUpa yogyatAthI
(tathAbhavyatAthI) AkarSAIne uttama badhibIja temane pUrvajanmamAM prApta thayuM
ane tyAre abhakti-pravacana vAtsalya vagere uttama sthAnakenI temaNe uttama
sevanA karI, utkRSTa ArAdhanA karI. tathA "A mehAMdhakArathI gahana saMsAramAM
paribhramaNa duHkha pAmI rahelA A bicArA prANIone, huM A dharmarUpa teja-
prakAzavaDe karIne A duHkhamAMthI game tema karI yathAyogapaNe pAra utAruM, huM
A sarva jIvane saddharmazAsana-rasika karu evA prakAre te va2 bodhi pAmele
"bodhisatva" bhAvanA bhAve che. ane pachI "karuNuM" vagere guNathI samAna-
samAsathI, saMkSepathI -vistArathI te pUrvAcAryothI ja uttarAdhyayana-
yoganirNaya AdimAM kahevAmAM Avyo che. tameivata -te yogadaSTinA bhedathI. temAM
atre saMkSepathI yogakathana te kartAnuM anaMtara prayojana che, paraMparA
prayojana to nirvANa ja che, kAraNa ke zuddha AzayathI A tevA prakAranI
satvahita pravRtti che, ane A sahita pravRtti nirvANanA avaMdhya-acUka bIjarUpa
che. abhidheya kahevAno viSaya ga ja che, sAdhu-sAdhanarUpa lakSaNavALe te
saMbaMdha che. ema A mArga kSaNu che,-sArI peThe khUMdAyele-kheDAyela-jANItuM
che. ane zrotAone anaMtara prayojana te prakaraNanA arthanuM parijJAna che;
paraMparA prayajana te eonuM paNa nirvANa ja che, kAraNa ke prakaraNane arthanA
parijJAnane lIdhe aucityathI-ucitapaNuthI atre ja pravRtti hoya che, ane A
pravRtti paNa nirvANanA avaMdhya-amodha bIjarUpa hoya che. "mohAndhakAragahane
saMsAre duHkhitA bata / sattvAH paribhramantyuccaiH satyasmindharmatejasi //
ahametAnataH kRcchrAdyathAyogaM kathaMcana / anenottArayAmIti
varabodhisamanvitaH / / karuNAdiguNopetaH parArthavyasanI sadA / tathaiva
ceSTate dhImAnvardhamAnamahodayaH / / tattatkalyANayogena kurvansattvArthameva
sH| tIrthakRtvamavApnoti paraM satvArthasAdhanam // " zrI haribhadrAcAryajIkRta
zrI yogabindu.

Page #73 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
"Mangalacharan" endowed, that Supreme Merciful, Great Soul, always bound by
selfless service and benevolence, acts in such a way. And by doing so, his great
compassion and supreme store of merit and virtues increase. Thus, by performing
benevolence towards all beings, he attains the state of a Tirthankara, which is
the ultimate means of conquering life. The great devotees have sung: "In the
third existence, he performed austerities, and attained the name of Jin; O
future beings! He attained the Siddhachakra-pad." - Shri Yashvijayji (Shri Shri
Palras) "In the third existence, he played with virtues, with Jin-bhakti as the
chief virtue; abandoning the desires for sensual pleasures, he served the
Staanaka for twenty years. With great passion, he was attracted to the feelings
of the mind; I will rule over all beings, such feelings arose in his mind." -
Shri Devchandraji's Snana Puja. This "Jinettma" epithet is used to describe the
state of karma-kaya, that is, the state of the embodied form born of karma,
where the Tirthankara-nama-karma arises. And despite this embodied state, the
state of supreme knowledge, which is the inherent nature of the Lord, is so
extraordinary that it is as if he is beyond the body! "Even with a body, his
state is beyond the body; to the feet of that Knower, countless salutations." -
Shrimad Rajchandraji's Shri Atmasiddhi. The karma of mind, speech, and body is
yoga, which is not yoga is ayoga. This epithet is used to describe the state of
Siddha, that is, the state where the pure self is the only body. This state of
pure self, which arises immediately after the shedding of the physical body, is
free from all karma, and the supreme bliss of knowledge is experienced beyond
the cycle of births and deaths. Having performed all actions, there is a feeling
of fulfillment, and by attaining the supreme fruit, it is a state of complete
fulfillment and Siddha. This state of karma-free, formless, and pure self is
described by the epithet "Ag" to praise the Lord's state of Siddha. "He who is
truly self-reliant, becomes Ag." - Shri Anandghanji.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
maMgalAcaraNa yukta e te parama kRpALu mahAmati, sadA parArthavyasanI-
paropakArano baMdhANI banI, tema ja pravRtti kare che. ane tema karatAM tene
mahadaya-parama puNyarAzi ne guNarAzi vardhamAna thata jAya che. Ama te te
kalyANagavaDe prANIo pratye paropakAra karatAM te tIrthakarapaNuM pAme che, ke
je tIrthakara paNuM jIvana para pakAranuM parama sAdhana che." bhaktaziromaNi
mahAtmAo gAI gayA che ke - "trIje bhava vara thAnaka tapa karI, jeNe bAMdhyuM
jinanAma; re bhavikA! siddhacakrapada vada."--zrIyazavijayajI-(zrI zrIpALarAsa)
"bhava trIje samakita guNa ramyA, jinabhakti pramukha guNa pariNamyA; tajI
iMdriya sukha AzaMsanA, karI sthAnaka vIzanI sevanA. ati rAga prazasta
prabhAvatA, mana bhAvane evI bhAvatA; savi jIva karuM zAsanarasI, IsI bhAvadayA
mana udbhasI." zrIdevacaMdrajIkRta snAtra pUjA AvA tIrthaMkaranAmakarmane jyAM
udaya che, evI karmakAya avasthAnuM eTale ke karma janya sAkAra dehadhArI sagI
avasthAnuM A "jinettama" vizeSaNathI grahaNa karyuM che. ane A dehadhArI avasthA
chatAM, bhagavAnanI sahajAnmasvarUpa sthitivALI parama jJAnadazA evI te apUrva
hoya che ke jANe teo dehAtIta vartatA hoyanI! deha chatAM jenI dazA, varte
dehAtIta; te jJAnInA caraNamAM, he vaMdana agaNita." zrImad rAjacaMdrajI praNIta
zrI Atmasiddhi ayoga-mana-vacana-kAyAnuM karma te yoga che. jene te yoga nathI
te ayoga che. A vizeSaNa uparathI bhagavAnanI tasvakAya avasthAnuM eTale ke
zuddha Atmatatva mAtra ja jenI kAyA che evI siddha avasthAnuM grahaNa karyuM. A
zuddha Atmatattavamaya aga avasthA, zailezIkaraNa pachI tarata ja upaje che; ane
tyAre temAM samasta karma dUra thaI gayA hoya che, tathAbhavyatvanA parikSayathI
parama jJAnasukha uparyuM hoya che. samasta kRtya karI lIdhAM hovAthI tyAM
kRtakRtyatA anubhavAya che, ane mekSarUpa parama phalanI prAptithI te
niSkitArtharUpa-siddhadazArUpa hoya che. AvI niSkarma, nirAkAra, niSkala zuddha
Atmatatvamaya dazA "aga' vizeSaNathI sUcavI bhagavAnanA siddhapadanI stuti karI.
zUrapaNe Atama upayegI, thAya tiNe agI re."--zrI AnaMdaghanajI.

Page #74 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The **Gadashisuchya** is comprehensible only to those who have **Samyagjnana**
(right knowledge) - those who have attained **Samyam** (self-control) and
**Jnana** (knowledge) like **Shramana** (ascetic) and **Jina** (conqueror). It
is not comprehensible to those who have not yet attained **Samyam** and are
still in **Mithyadristi** (false perception). This is because the desire to know
and inquire arises only in the final stage of **Yathapravrittakaran** (right
conduct) and not at any other time. Therefore, the question of understanding the
nature of **Jineshwara** (the Jina) is far away. Thus, it is comprehensible only
to those who have **Samyagjnana**, hence the epithet **Gigamya**.  Such
**Bhagwan** (Lord) are **Veer** (heroic). This is an **Anvartha** (secondary
meaning) name, meaning that the word **Veer** is derived from its meaning and is
truly applicable. They are truly **Veer** because they are **Bhagwan** (Lord)
who are **Parmatmaveer** (supremely heroic). They have **Veer** (heroically)
overcome **Karma** (action) through **Tap** (austerity), conquered **Kashaya**
(passions) and other internal enemies, and **Kevallakshmi** (supreme fortune)
has chosen them, the **Purushottama** (supreme man), because of their **Uttama
Guna** (excellent qualities). Thus, because they possess all the qualities of
**Vikramvant** (brave) and **Atmaparakramvant** (heroic), the name **Veer** is
truly fitting for **Bhagwan**.  Because **Veerapan** (heroism) is **Atma Thane**
(within oneself), **Janyun Tumchi Vane Re** (known through your own wisdom).
**Kam Veeraya Vashye Jim Bhogi, Tim Thaye Atma Bhogi Re** (Just as one enjoys
through the power of heroism, so one becomes a true enjoyer). **Veerji Ne
Charane Lagun, Veerapan Te Magun Re** (I seek refuge at the feet of the heroic,
I seek heroism). **Mithya Moh Timir Bhay Bhagun, Jit Nagaroo Vanun Re** (I
overcome the darkness of false attachment and fear, I proclaim the victory of
the Jina). - **Shri Anandghanaji**  **Shuddhata Ekata Tinata Bhavthi, Moh Ripu
Jiti Jay Padha Vayo** (With purity, unity, and intensity, the enemy of
attachment is conquered, and victory is proclaimed). - **Shri Devchandraji**
**Namo Durvara Ragadaivairivaranivarine / Gate Yoninath Mahaviraaya Ta**
(Salutations to the one who overcomes the enemies of attachment and other
passions, the Lord of all beings, the great Mahavir). - **Shri
Hemchandracharya**'s **Shri Yogashastra**  This style of narration, where each
word is explained in detail and its relationship to the whole is shown, is worth
contemplating. It is very useful for the student of knowledge. **Shri
Haribhadrasuriji** has written this text with great care, weighing each word and
syllable, and with deep philosophical contemplation. Even the meter is
purposeful. Therefore, keeping this style of narration in mind, one should read
and contemplate this **Satashastra** (true scripture) patiently and calmly, and
one will experience greater joy. This intention of the text is also mentioned at
the beginning of each chapter, usually in the first paragraph, and then
elaborated upon in the subsequent commentary.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
gadaSisasucaya gigamya--ane evA te aAgI bhagavAna gIone-samyagajJAnadaSTivALA
puruSane ja gamya che, pAmI-jANI zakAya evA che jegI eTale jene samyam
jJAnadaSTi ughaDI che evA zratajina vagere samajavA. paNa je haju yegI nathI
thayA evA yogigaya agI mithyAdaSTine to te gamya che ja nahi; kAraNa ke enA
saMbaMdhI jijJAsA-jANavAnI IcchA paNa chellA yathApravRttakaraNamAM upaje che,
bIjA samaye upajatI nathI, to pachI e jinezvaranA svarUpane oLakhavA-jANavAnI
vAta te kyAMya dUra rahI. Ama samyagadaSTi bhegIone ja te gamya heI, gigamya"
vizeSaNa kahyuM.+ evA bhagavAna "vIra" che. A anvartha nAma che, eTale ke "vIra'
zabdanI vyutpatti artha pramANe te barAbara yathArtha paNe ghaTe che. te
sAcesAcA ke vIra' che, kAraNa ke te vIra bhagavaMta parama AtmavIryathI
virAjamAna che; tapa vaDe temaNe karmanuM vidAraNa vIra karyuM che, kaSAya
vagere aMtaraMga vairIo upara vijaya meLavyuM che, ane evA parama
parAkamavaMtane uttama guNathI rIjhIne kevalalakSmI te puruSottamane svayaM varI
che. Ama vikramavaMta-AtmaparAkamavaMtanA samasta lakSaNa hovAthI, bhagavaMtane
"vIra nAma barAbara chAje che. kAraNa ke "vIrapaNuM te Atama ThANe, jANyuM
tumacI vANe re. kAma vIrya vaze jima bhogI, tima thaye AtamabhogI re. vIrajIne
caraNe lAguM, vIrapaNuM te mAguM re; mithyA moha timira bhaya bhAguM, jIta
nagArU vANuM re."--zrI AnaMdaghanajI. zuddhatA ekatA tINatA bhAvathI, moha ripu
jItI jaya paDaha vAyo."-zrI devacaMdrajI. " namo durvArarAgAdivairivAranivAriNe
/ gate yoninAtha mahAvIrAya tA i."--zrI hemacaMdrAcAryajIkRta zrIyogazAstra, +
vRttimAM pade pada vivarIne teno yathAnakrame avaya saMbaMdha batAvavAnI zrImAna
A kathanazailI manana karavA jevI che, ane abhyAsI vidyAthIne bahu upayogI che.
zrI haribhadrasUrijIe eke eka akSara telI tolIne-mApI mApIne cA che, UMDA
tatvaciMtanapUrvaka lakhyo che, tene kAne mAtrA paNa saprayojana che. eTale A
kathanapaddhati lakSamAM rAkhI dhIrajathI svasthapaNe-zAMtapaNe jema jema A
satazAstrano Azaya "cAvI cAvIne vAMcavA-vicAravAmAM Avaze, tema tema adhika
AnaMda thaze, evI sAmAnya sUcanA che. ane A vRttine Azaya paNa atre pratyeka
zlekanA vivecananA prAraMbhe prAyaH prathama pArigrAphamAM vaNI dIdhe che ane
pachI te upara sphaTa vivecana karyuM che.

Page #75 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Mangalacharan**  Salutation to the **Ishtadeva** (beloved deity).  Here, at
the beginning of the scripture, we offer a devotional salutation to the
**Ishtadeva**, because it is considered appropriate to sing the praises of the
extraordinary and unique qualities of the **Vira** (hero), who is not ordinary.
Here, too, the **Ishtadeva** is being praised with the epithet **Ishtadeva**
**stava** (hymn), which signifies the qualities of the **Ishtadeva**. The
**Ishtadeva** is considered **Ishta** (beloved) due to the supreme qualities of
the **Parmatma** (Supreme Soul), and **deva** (deity) due to the attainment of
the supreme divine state of **moksha** (liberation). Thus, the **Vira** is truly
the **Ishtadeva**.  Furthermore, this **Vira** **Prabhu** (Lord) has taught the
**yoga** **dristi** (yogic perspective), which is the cause of **moksha**
**sukha** (liberation bliss). In remembrance of this favor, we offer salutations
to the **Vira** **Prabhu**.  “**Shiva** **sukha** **karan** **upadishi**,
**gat** **ad** **diththi** **re**; **te** **gun** **thani** **jin** **viran**,
**karashu** **dharma** **ni** **puththi** **re........vira** **jinesar**
**desh** **na**.” – **Shri** **Yashovijayaji** **krit** **yoga** **dristi**
**szaya** -11 **prajna** **adi**  Thus, after offering the **mangalacharan**, we
have mentioned the three aspects: **prajna** (knowledge), **vishaya** (subject),
and **sambandha** (relationship). Here, the subject of discussion is **yoga**.
The relationship is that of **sadhya** (goal) and **sadhana** (means). The
immediate objective of the author is to briefly describe **yoga**, and the
ultimate objective is **moksha**. This is because the author engages in this
altruistic activity of **sattva** **hita** (welfare of beings) with pure
intention, devoid of any desire for honor, worship, fame, etc. Such pure
activity, performed with a pure heart, is the seed of **moksha**, which is
inevitable and certain. Just as a seed, when planted, grows into a tree over
time, similarly, the seed of this altruistic activity, in the form of this
scripture, will inevitably lead to the fruit of **nirvana** (liberation) –
**moksha**. This is the ultimate objective of the author.  The immediate
objective of the listeners is to understand the meaning of this chapter on
**yoga**. Their ultimate objective is also **moksha**. This is because, as the
knowledge of the meaning of the chapter increases, so does the appropriate
activity in **yoga**. This activity is also the seed of **moksha**, which is
inevitable and certain. From this seed, the fruit of **moksha** will inevitably
be obtained over time.  “**Eh** **nu** **phal** **dey** **bhed** **sunije**,
**anantar** **ne** **parampra** **re**; **anapalana** **chitt** **prasanni**,
**mugati** **gati** **suramndir** **re......suvidhi** **jinesar**” – **Shri**
**Anandghanaji**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
maMgalAcaraNa ISTadevastava-Ama AvA vIrane namaskAra karI atre zAstra prAraMbhe
maMgalarUpa ISTa devatAnuM bhAvastiva kahyuM, kAraNa ke anyane sAdhAraNa nahiM
evA asAdhAraNa-ananya yathAbhUta guNonuM saMkIrtana karavuM te bhAvatava
kahevAya che; ane atre paNa bhagavAnane ISTadeva stava jevA che tevA guNavAcaka
vizeSaNa vaDe ISTa devanuM bhAvastava karyuM che. AmAM bhagavAnanuM ISTapaNuM
atizayavaMta evA paramettama guNagaNane lIdhe che, ane devatApaNuM parama divya
gatinI-muktinI prAptine lIdhe che. Ama bhagavAna kharekharA "ISTa deva" che.
temaja mokSasukhanA kAraNarUpa A yogadaSTi paNa A vIra prabhue upadezI che, te
upakAranI smRti arthe paNa atre te bhagavAnane namaskAra karyo che. "zivasukha
kAraNa upadizI, gata aDa diThThI re; te guNa thaNI jina vIrana, karazuM dharmanI
puThThI re........vIra jinesara dezanA." -zrI yazovijayajIkRta yogadaSTisajhAya
-11 prajanAdi Ama maMgalAcaraNa karI ahIM prajana, viSaya, saMbaMdha e traNa
kahyA che. ahIM kahevAne viSaya ga ja che. sAdhya-sAdhanarUpa te saMbaMdha che.
graMthakartAnuM anaMtara-tAtkAlika (Immediate) prayajana saMkSepamAM yoganuM
kathana karavuM te che ane paraMparA projana (Remote, Ultimate) mekSa che,
kAraNake zAstrakAra zuddha AzayathI A sattvahitarUpa paropakAra pravRtti kare
che, ane mAna-pUjA-kIti Adi kAmanAthI rahitapaNe kevaLa zuddha AtmAthe karavAmAM
AvatI AvI zuddha pravRtti mokSanA avaMdhya-acUka bIjarUpa che bIja hoya to
kALAMtare phAlIkUlIne vRkSa thAya, tema zuddha AzayathI karavAmAM AvelI A
sanzAstrarUpa papakAra pravRttinA bIjamAMthI paraMparAe nirvANa-makSa phaLanI
avazya prApti e zAstrakAranuM paraMparA prayajana che. ane zrotAonuM anaMtara
prayojana to A yoga prakaraNanA arthanuM parijJAna thavuMsArI peThe samajavuM e
che; emanuM paNa paraMparAprayeAjana te mokSa ja che, kAraNa ke prakaraNa
arthanA jJAnathI jema ghaTe tema ucitapaNe atre ja yogamAM pravRtti hoya che,
ane A gapravRtti paNa mokSanA avaMdhya-acUka bIjarUpa che, temAMthI paNa
kALAMtare avazya mokSarUpa phaLa maLaze ja. "ehanuM phaLa deya bheda suNIje,
anaMtara ne paraMpara re; ANapAlana citta prasannI, mugati gati suramaMdira
re...... suvidhi jinesara" -zrI AnaMdaghanajI

Page #76 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(10) The collection of Gadasthi thus praises the Ishta Devata, and explains the
Prajan etc., and in the chapter, it tells a relevant story that is beneficial -
इहैवेच्छादियोगानां, स्वरूपमभिधीयते  /  योगिनामुपकाराय, व्यक्तं योगप्रसङ्गतः  //
2 //  The nature of the Yoga of Iccha etc. is described here; for the benefit of
the Yogis, it is clearly stated in the context of Yoga. 2, Meaning - Here, the
nature of the Yoga of Iccha etc. is clearly stated for the benefit of the Yogis,
in the context of Yoga. The discussion now focuses on the nature of Iccha,
Shastra, and Samvega, which are the heart of the Yoga, and are beneficial to the
current topic. Mitra etc. Gadasthis have a close relationship with it, they are
included in it, therefore, it is necessary to mention it in this context.
Therefore, it has been said for the benefit of the two types of Yogis, Kulagi
and Pravrittachakra, and that too clearly, explicitly, openly, and openly. But
the accomplished Siddha Yogis may not benefit from this. The nature that has
been described is for the benefit of the Yogis, so that they may know the
secret-mystery of Yoga, which is the essence of all Yoga, etc. Here, Yogis are
to be understood as the two types of Yogis, Kulagi and Pravrittachakra, not the
accomplished Siddhas; because their work is already complete, they have attained
the heart of Yoga, and their nature is here, in the process, in the current
topic. What? That is - the nature of the Yoga of Iccha etc., Shastra, and
Samarthya. What is the reason for this? That is - it is described for the
benefit of the Yogis. The Yogis here are Kulagis and Pravrittachakra Yogis
(whose nature will be described), not the accomplished Siddhas (whose nature
will also be described). Because they do not benefit from this, therefore, it is
for the benefit of other Kulagi and Pravrittachakra Yogis. And the benefit from
this is to understand the heart of Yoga (its secret-mystery). How is it
described? That is - clearly, explicitly (openly), and it is not irrelevant (out
of place), therefore, it is said - in the context of Mitra etc. Yoga. It means
that it has been attracted and drawn in by the Tantra technique called
"Prasanga". The diseases, the Iccha

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
(10) gadaSThisamuccaya Ama ISTa devatAnuM stava karI, ane prajana vagere kahI
batAvI, prakaraNamAM upakAraka evuM prAsaMgika kathavA kahe che -
ihaivecchAdiyogAnAM, svarUpamabhidhIyate / yoginAmupakArAya, vyaktaM
yogaprasaGgataH // 2 // icchA Adika yoganuM, kathAya AMhi svarUpa; upakArArthe
yoginA, prasaMgathI phuTa rUpa. 2, artha -ahIM ja IcchA vagere yoganuM svarUpa,
yogIonA upakAra mATe, ganA prasaMgathI, vyaktapaNe spaSTapaNe kahevAmAM Ave che.
vivecana have ahIM cAlu viSayamAM upayogI evA yugabhUmikArUpa-ganA hRdayarUpa
icchAga zAstraga ne sAmaveganuM svarUpa kahevAmAM Ave che. mitrA vagere
gadaSTione tenI sAthe nikaTane saMbaMdha che, te daSTie temAM aMtarbhAva pAme
che, tethI tenA prasaMgathI ane tenuM kathana Avazyaka che. eTale te kulagI ne
pravRttacaka e be prakAranA yogIonA upakArArthe kahyuM che, ane te paNa
vyaktapaNe, spaSTapaNe, agopyapaNe, khullekhulluM kahyuM che. paNa
niSpannasiddha yogIone AthI upakAra ke saMbhavato nathI. A svarUpa je kahyuM che
te yogIjanonA upakArane mATe che, teone yeganuM rahasya-marma kula yogI Adi ja
aLasa jANavArUpa thAya te mATe che. ahI yegIo eTale kalagI ne pravRttacaka e be
koTinA yegIo samajavA,-nahiM ke niSpanna-siddhagIo; kAraNa ke teonuM kArya te
paripUrNa siddha thaI cUkyuM che, teo te yuganuM hRdaya pAmI vRtti -rUdaiva-ahIM
ja, prakramamAM, cAlu viSayamAM. zuM? te ke-rUchAvAnAM-IcchA Adi yoganuM-
chAyega, zAstroga, ane sAmarthyoganuM. ethI zuM ? te ke as wImIyate-svarUpa-
svalakSaNa kahevAmAM Ave che. zA mATe ? to ke- yoninAmuvArA -gIonA upakAra
arthe. yogIo atre ulagIo ane pravRttacakragIo grahyA che (jenuM lakSaNa
kahevAmAM Avaze), nahiM ke niSpanna gIo-(jenuM lakSaNa paNa kahevAmAM Avaze.)
kAraNake teone AnA thakI upakArane abhAva che, eTale temAMthI anya evA kalayogI
ne pravRttacakanA upakAra athe. ane A thakI upakAra eTale yoganA hRdayane
(rahane-marmane) baMdha te che. kevI rIte kahevAmAM Ave che ? te ke raca-
vyaktapaNe, spaSTapaNe (agokhapaNe), ane A aprastuta (asthAne) paNa nathI, eTalA
mATe kahyuM-yogAsatta:-mitrA Adi yuganA prasaMgathI. "prasaMga" nAmanI
taMtraktithI AkSipta-AkarSAIne A AvI paDeluM che, ema artha che. rogonuM, icchA

Page #77 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The 11 *Irchayaagadi* (liberated souls) have already become *Siddhahasta Yogis*
(perfect yogis) and have mounted their *Garuda* (mythical bird) on *Jag-Girig*
(the mountain of the world). Therefore, such great souls do not need any benefit
from this. What is the use of attaining something for someone who has already
attained it? What is the use of climbing for someone who has already climbed?
Only those who are capable of benefiting from this are the *Kulgi* (born yogis)
and the *Pravrittachakra Yogis* (active yogis). "The *Kulgi* and the
*Pravrittachakra* are the ones who benefit from this." This is what the
*Gadasti* text says. "Those who have climbed the mountain, their path is
different." - Shri K.D. Saksay. The author, the great sage, will explain the
nature of these three types of *GIs* in detail later. But in brief, "A *Kulgi*
is one who is born into the lineage of *Yogis*, that is, one who has attained
the *Yogi* dharma from birth, one who is a *GI* from birth (Born Yogis), and
others who are naturally inclined to the *GI* dharma, who follow it, are also
*Kulgi*, but no one else. Those who perform *havan* (fire sacrifice) in the fire
of knowledge, who are experts in spiritual scriptures, and who are residents of
the village of the Supreme Brahman, who are constantly immersed in the principle
of "Ekamevadvitiyam" (one without a second) and rule the three worlds, and who
make sweet sounds like cuckoos in the forest of contentment, and who sit at the
root of the tree of thought and constantly eat the fruit of Brahman, such *GIs*
are born into the lineage of *GIs*." - *Jnanaeshwari Gita* by Saint Jnanaeshwar
Maharaj. "Those who go to the *GI* school, those who follow the dharma, are
*Kulgi*; such *Gurus*, *Devas*, and *Dvijas* are beloved, compassionate, and
helpful." - Shri K.D. Saksay. *"Or, the mother who gives birth to a son is also
considered to be a *GI*. This birth is very rare in the world. If one is
fortunate enough to be born in such a lineage, then one gets the association of
wisdom from the previous life." - *Gita* Chapter 6.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
irachAyAgAdi (11) siddhahasta yogI banI cUkyA che, jega-giriga para gArUDha thaI
gayA che. eTale tevA te mahAnubhAvone AthI kAMI upakAra thavAne abhAva ja che.
pAmelAne pAmavAnuM zuM ? caDhelAne caDhavAnuM zuM ? je koIne AthI upakAra
thavAne saMbhava hoya, te sAdhaka dazAvALA evA kulagIone ane pravRttacaka
yegIone ja che. "kulagI ne pravRttacakra je, teha taNe hita hete che." gadaSTi
graMtha hita have, tiNe kahI e vAta che." Arohe ArUDha girine, tima ehanI gati
nyArI jI." -zrI ke. da. sakjhAya. A traNa prakAranA gIonuM svarUpa graMthakAra
maharSi AgaLa upara vistArathI kahevAnA che. paNa saMkSepathI- "kulagI eTale jeo
yegIonA kulamAM janmyA che, eTale ke janmathI ja je te yegIne dhamane pAmelA
che, je janmathI ja bhegI che (Born Yogis) te ane bIjAo paNa je prakRtithI gI-
dharmane anugata hoya che, anusaranArA hoya che, te paNa kulagI che, bAkI bIjA
nahiM. jJAnarUpa agnimAM havana karanAra, adhyAtmazAstramAM niSNAta ane
parabrahmarUpa gAmanA vatanadAra, jeo "ekamevAdvitIyaM" nA siddhAntamAM nitya
nimagna rahIne tribhuvananuM rAjya karatA hoya che, ane saMtoSarUpa vanamAM
kokila samAna madhura dhvani karyA kare che ane jeo vicAravRkSanA mULamAM besIne
brahmarUpa phaLanuM nitya sevana karatA hoya che evA bhegInA * kuLamAM te
gabhraSTa puruSa janma dhAraNa kare che." ItyAdi. saMtazrI jJAnezvara
mahArAjakRta jJAnezvarI gItA. "gIkule jAye tasa dharma, anugata te kulagI ; aSI
guru-deva-dvija priya, dayAvaMta upayogI che." ItyAdi-zrI ke. da. sajhAya. *"
athavA yoninAmeva suje mAta dhanatAm | etaddhi durlabhataraM loke janma yadI
dRzam / / tatra taM buddhisaMyoga labhate paurva dehikam / rAte ja tato mUyaH
saMsiddha kurjara -gItA a. 6.

Page #78 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Bhūmikā icchāga śāstragga and sāmarthyogga icchāganu svaru̥pa pratipādana karavā
māṭe kahē chē– kartumicchōḥ śrutārthasy a, jñāninō'pi pramādataḥ / vikalō
dharmayōgō yaḥ, sa icchāyōga ucyatē //  3  //  Icchaka kṛtajña jñānine, paṇa
pramāda pasāya; vikala jē dharmārōga tē, icchāga kathāya. 3. Artha –dharma
karavānē icchhatā, and āgama-artha jēṇē śravaṇa karyō chē ēvā (kṛtārtha) jñānīnō
paṇa, pramādanē līdhē jē vikala–asampūrṇa dharmaga, tē icchāga kahēvāya chē.
Vivēcana ahīṃ icchāganu svaru̥pa spaṣṭapanē kahyuṃ chē. Jyāṃ dharma kartavya
karavānī sācī antaraṃga kṛtti-stumirō –karavānā icchū-icchaka, tēvā prakārānā
kṣapśama bhāvathī nirbhājapanē janirdabhapanē ja karavānē icchhatā ēvā kōīnē.
Ānē ja viśēṣaṇa āpē chē. Ā cikṛdharma karavānī icchāvālē kē viśiṣṭa hōya? tē kē
tārtha –mṛtārtha, eṭalē jēṇē artha-āgama śruta karyuṃ chē, śravaṇa karyuṃ chē
ēvō. Kāraṇakē artha śabdanē artha āgama vacana chē, tē and ta" ānāvaḍē karīnē
tava arthāya chē, śōdhāya chē, eṭalā māṭē. Ā mṛtārtha_śrutajñānī paṇa kadācit
ajñānī ja hēya-kṣayōpaśamanā vicitra-panānē līdhē. Eṭalā māṭē kahyuṃ -
jñānanōḍaji-jñānīnē paṇa, anuṣṭhāna karavā yōgya–ācaravā yōgya tattvārthapara-
mārtha jēṇē jāṇēlā chē, samajēlā chē ēvā jñānīnē paṇa. Ēvā prakāranē hētāṃ paṇa
śuṃ? tō kē kamāvataḥ–pramādanē līdhē, vikathaā ādi pramādē karīnē, virā-vikala,
kāḷa vagerē vikalanatānē āthī vikala–asampūrṇa, dharmacakrā –dharmaga,
dharmavyāpāra, -jē, vandana ādi viṣayī, rūchāyō ucattē tē "icchāga kahēvāya chē
and ānuṃ icchāpradhānapaṇuṃ tēvā prakārē akāla ādimāṃ paṇa karavā thakī chē. Ā
icchāga-śāstragga-sāmarthyogganē viṣaya eṭalē badhē rasaprada badhaprada chē kē
śrī haribhadra-ācāryajīē pāsē ā aṃgēnā ā nava ślēka pōtānī ā yōgadaṣṭisamuracaya
pachīnī saṃbhavati uttara kati-bhagavadbhaktinu adbhuta rahasy a prakāśatī amara
kṛti "lalita vistarāmāṃ avatāryā chē. Jūō–ā lēkhaka vivēcakē karēlā cihēmavid
hīnī ṭīkā nāmak vivēcana samēta prasiddha thayēlā ā śrī haribhadra-ācāryajīnā
amara kīrti kalaśa samō bhaktiyōgano apūrva graṃtha lalitavistarā.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
bhUmikA icchAga zAstraga ane sAmarthyoga IcchAganuM svarUpa pratipAdana karavA
mATe kahe che- kartumicchoH zrutArthasya, jJAnino'pi pramAdataH / vikalo
dharmayogo yaH, sa icchAyoga ucyate // 3 // icchaka kRtajJa jJAnine, paNa
pramAda pasAya; vikala je dharmaroga te, IcchAga kathAya. 3. artha -dharma
karavAne icchatA, ane Agama-artha jeNe zravaNa karyo che evA (kRtArtha) jJAnIno
paNa, pramAdane lIdhe je vikala-asaMpUrNa dharmaga, te IcchAga kahevAya che.
vivecana ahIM IcchAganuM svarUpa spaSTapaNe kahyuM che. jyAM dharma kartavya
karavAnI sAcI aMtaraMga kRtti-stumiro -karavAnA Icchu-Icchaka, tevA prakAranA
kSapazama bhAvathI nirbhAjapaNe janirdabhapaNe ja karavAne icchatA evA koIne.
Ane ja vizeSaNa Ape che. A cika6dharma karavAnI IcchAvALe ke viziSTa hoya? te ke
tArtha -mRtArtha, eTale jeNe artha-Agama zrata karyuM che, zravaNa karyuM che
evo. kAraNake artha zabdane artha Agama vacana che, te ane ta" AnAvaDe karIne
tava arthAya che, zodhAya che, eTalA mATe. A mRtArtha_zrutajJAnI paNa kadAcita
ajJAnI ja heya-kSayopazamanA vicitrapaNAne lIdhe. eTalA mATe kahyuM -
jJAnanoDaji-jJAnIne paNa, anuSThAna karavA yogya-AcaravA yogya
tattvArthaparamArtha jeNe jANela che, samajela che evA jJAnIne paNa. evA
prakArane hetAM paNa zuM? to ke kamAvataH-pramAdane lIdhe, vikathA Adi pramAde
karIne, virA-vikala, kALa vagere vikalatAne AthI vikala-asaMpUrNa, dharmacakA
-dharmaga, dharmavyApAra, -je, vaMdana Adi viSayI, rUchAyoA ucatte te "icchAga
kahevAya che ane AnuM IcchApradhAnapaNuM tevA prakAre akAla AdimAM paNa karavA
thakI che. A icchAga-zAstroga-sAmarthyogane viSaya eTale badhe rasaprada
badhaprada che ke zrI haribhadrAcAryajIe pAse A aMgenA A nava zleka potAnI A
yogadaSTisamuracaya pachInI saMbhavatI uttara kati-bhagavadbhaktinuM adabhuta
rahasya prakAzatI amara kRti "lalita vistarAmAM avatAryA che. juo-A lekhaka
vivecake karelA cihemavidhinI TIkA nAmaka vivecana sameta prasiddha thayela A
zrI haribhadrAcAryajInA amara kIrti kalaza samo bhaktiyogano apUrva graMtha
lalitavistA,

Page #79 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Icchayog (13)  The predominance of desire is called "Icchayog". A man with
Icchayog is a scholar and a Samyagjnani, but despite that, due to Vikatha
(delusion) and other distractions, his Dharmavyapar (religious practice) is
incomplete and flawed.   Here are the main characteristics of a man with
Icchayog:  1. **Desire to practice Dharma:** Firstly, he must have a true,
genuine, selfless, innocent, and disinterested desire to practice Dharma. Just
as in worldly affairs, any action begins with a desire, similarly, in the
pursuit of liberation, the first step is to cultivate a true desire to practice
Dharma. This deep desire, intense interest, love, devotion, and noble attachment
are essential for genuine interest in Dharma. Without them, Dharma practice
becomes a dry, mechanical, and lifeless activity like "plastering on mud". It
lacks the joy and satisfaction. Just as the sweetness of a pond filled with
nectar is only experienced by the thirsty, the true sweetness of Dharma is only
experienced by those who are truly hungry for it. Therefore, a genuine desire,
longing, and attraction for Dharma are essential. This is the first requirement
for a true seeker.  2. **Kritarth-Shrutajnani:** He is a knower of the
scriptures and has achieved his goal. 3. **Samyagjnani and Samyagrusti:** He is
a perfect knower and has attained perfect faith. 4. **Vikalpa due to
distractions:** Despite all this, he still experiences distractions and
delusions.  **Desire to practice Dharma:** The first requirement is that the
seeker must have a true, genuine, selfless, innocent, and disinterested desire
to practice Dharma. Just as in worldly affairs, any action begins with a desire,
similarly, in the pursuit of liberation, the first step is to cultivate a true
desire to practice Dharma. This deep desire, intense interest, love, devotion,
and noble attachment are essential for genuine interest in Dharma. Without them,
Dharma practice becomes a dry, mechanical, and lifeless activity like
"plastering on mud". It lacks the joy and satisfaction. Just as the sweetness of
a pond filled with nectar is only experienced by the thirsty, the true sweetness
of Dharma is only experienced by those who are truly hungry for it. Therefore, a
genuine desire, longing, and attraction for Dharma are essential. This is the
first requirement for a true seeker.   What is the desire of a true seeker?
"Their desire is for the pure, original Atmapad (Self-realization) and the pure
Dharma and liberation. A seeker does not have any other desire. Their only goal
is the Self. They have no other mental desires. The seeker desires the infinite
bliss of the original, pure Atmapad, the true form of the Jina." "Their desire
is for the Self, not for anything else."  "My dear friend, I urge you to
cultivate a desire to become a seeker. Make the thirsty thirsty. Arouse the
curiosity of the non-thirsty to become thirsty." - Shrimad Rajchandraji

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
IcchAyoga (13) IcchAnuM pradhAnapaNuM-mukhyapaNuM che, tenuM nAma "IcchAga" che.
tevA IcchAyegavALo puruSa zAstravettA ane samyagajJAnI hoya che, paNa tema hovA
chatAM haju vikathA vagere pramAdane lIdhe, tene te dharmavyApAra vikala eTale
ke kheDakhAMpaNavALa-asaMpUrNa che. Ama IcchAgI puruSanAM mukhya lakSaNa A che
-(1) dharma karavAnI IcchA, (2) kRtArtha-zrutajJAnIpaNuM. (3) samyajJAnIpaNuM,
samyagRSTipaNuM. (4) chatAM pramAdajanya vikalapaNuM. 1. dharma karavAnI icchA-
prathama te te puruSa dharmakArya karavAnI sAcesAcI, kharekharI, nirdabha,
niSkapaTa, nirvyAja aMtaraMga icchAvALo dharma karavAnI hovo joIe. kAraNake jema
saMsAra-vyavahAramAM prathama koI paNa kRtya IcchA karavAnI IcchA thAya che, ne
te pachI ja temAM pravRtti thAya che, tema paramArthamAM paNa prathama te
dharmakRtya karavAnI sAcI aMtaraMga IcchA upajavI joIe, te dharmanuM paheluM
pagathiyuM che. dharma pratyenI eTale ke makSasAdhana pratyenI tevI aMtaraMga
IcchA, parama ruci, parama prIti, bhakti bhAva, prazasta rAga, sAce "raMga" jyAM
lagI na hoya, tyAM lagI dharmakriyAmAM sAro rasa upajatuM nathI, "chAra para
lipaNa" jevI nIrasa zuSka kriyA yaMtravat jaDapaNe thayA kare che, paNa temAM
joIe tevI majA AvatI nathI. amRtasarovara bharyuM hoya, paNa tenI ora mIThAza te
tRSAturane ja Ave che. bhejananI kharI mIThAza sAcI bhUkha lAgI hoya tene ja Ave
che, mATe dharmanI sAcI IcchA, tamannA, laganI lAgavI joIe, e sauthI prathama
jarUranuM che. eTale je sAcA jogIjana' che, temanAmAM te tenI sAcI IcchA hovI ja
joIe, e ganI prathama bhUmikA che. ane te jogIjanane IcchA paNa zI che? "mULa
zuddha te Atmapada' rUpa zuddha dharmanI-mokSanI prApti sivAya bIjI icchA te
mumukSu AtmAthI jogIjanone hotI ja nathI. teone te eka AtmArthanuM ja kAma hoya
che, bIje manaroga hoto nathI. Icche che je jogIjana, anaMta sukhasvarUpa mULa
zuddha te Atmapada, sagI jinavarUpa." "kAma eka AtmArthanuM, bIje nahi
manarega." paricayI ! tamane huM bhalAmaNa karuM chuM ke tame gya thavAnI
tamArAmAM IcchA utpanna karo." tRSAturane pAyAnI mahenata karo, atRSAturane
tRSAtara thavAnI jijJAsA pedA karaje." ItyAdi. -zrImad rAjacaMdrajI

Page #80 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(14) The Gadakitasamudaya, Shri Pratikraman, and other sutras, many of them
begin with the word "chchhami" or "ra" which are indicative of desire. The
reason behind this is that every religious action should begin with desire. For
example, "Suchchhami varamalo, suzazarena sanhisadu mavan" etc. Similarly, the
mangalacharan of this text also mentions this desire, implicitly suggesting that
desire is the mangalacharan of yoga, the first step of yoga, the gateway to
yoga. And this religious desire should be completely innocent, free from Maya;
it should not be hypocritical, deceitful, or pretentious, it should not be a
facade for personal gain. Only then can it be called true religious desire or
liberation. "Free from deceit, surrender yourself, the path of Anandghan..." -
Shri Anandghanji. "The weak, the naked, and the fasting, who are colored by
Maya; they too will take infinite births, they are another limb." - Shri
Yashovijayji's "Saada Tinsoo Gatha" Stotra. "Aatmarthina tatas tyajyo
dambho'narthanibandhanam // Shudva yadanumootchettyan pratipaditam" - Shri
Yashovijayji's Adhyatmasar. Meaning - Therefore, one should abandon hypocrisy,
which is the cause of evil, for the sake of the soul. The pure, simple man is
pure, as stated in the scriptures. 2. Shrutagyan - Secondly, one should have
Shrutagyan. One should have heard the meaning of the scriptures from a Sadguru
or a Saltamra. One should have knowledge of the scriptures, Shrutagyan. Here,
"Shravan" does not mean merely listening to the words through the ears, but also
understanding the meaning with feeling. This is true Shravan. Because the name
of that which reveals the truth is Artha or Agama-Shruta. Therefore, one who
listens to this Artha-Agama-Shruta also listens to its meaning, which is easily
understood. "Kayotsargadisatraanam shraddhaamedhadibhavatha // Ichchadiyogesa
phalayam deshasarvavrataspruasam //" - Shri Adhyatmasar. "Hiassa jaha khanam avi
vicchijjai nev bhoane ichcha. Evam mokkhatthina chhijjai ichcha na kajjam mi." -
Shri Yashovijayji's Yatilkshanasamucchya.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
(14) gadakiTasamudAya zrI pratikamaNa vagere sUtramAM ghaNusUtro "cchAmi "rA'
vagere IcchA pradarzaka padathI zarU thAya che, enI pAchaLa paNa e ja rahasya
raheluM che, ke pratyeka dharmakriyAmAM prathama IcchAga hovo joIe. jemake
"succhAmi vAramaLo, sujhAjhAreNa saMhisadu mAvana 0] ItyAdi temaja A graMthanA
maMgalAcaraNamAM paNa te IcchAga ja kahyo che, te paNa garbhitapaNe ema sUcave
che ke IchAyoga e ja yoganuM maMgalAcaraNa che, yoganuM prathama pagathiyuM che,
yeganuM pravezadvAra che. ane A dharma- IcchAmAM paNa bIlakula niSkapaTapaNuM,
mAyAcAra rahitapaNuM hovuM joIe; dAMbhika DoLaghAlupaNuM, dharmaDhegIpaNuM,
bagalAbhagatapaNuM na ja hovuM joIe, dhamImAM khapavA khAtarano daMbha na ja
hovo joIe; ne te ja te sAcI dharmaicchA-mumukSatA kahI zakAya. kapaTa rahita
thaI Atama arapaNA re, AnaMdaghana pada reha......."--zrI AnaMdaghanajI. durbala
nagna ne mAsa upavAsI, je che mAyA raMga re; te paNa garbha anaMtA leze, bole
bIju aMga che." -zrI yazovijayajIkRta sADA traNaso gAthAnuM stavana "AtmArthinA
tatastyAjyo daMbho'narthanibandhanam / / zudva yAdanumUtacetyAna pratipAditam
"_zrI yazovijayajI kRta adhyAtmasAra arthAt -eTalA mATe AtmAthIe anarthanA
kAraNarUpa daMbha-gIpaNuM choDI devuM joIe. ajunI-saraLatAvaMta puruSanI zuddhi
hoya che, ema AgamamAM kahyuM che. 2. zrutajJAna-bIjuM, tenAmAM zrutajJAna hovuM
joIe. sadgurumukhe ke saltAmramukhe teNe zrutanuM arthanuM zravaNa kareluM hovuM
joIe, tene AgamanuM jANapaNuM zratajJAna hovuM joIe. atre "zravaNa" eTale mAtra
kaNe driyadvArA zabdanuM sAMbhaLavuM ema nahIM, paNa sAMbhaLavAnI sAthe bhAvathI
arthagrahaNa paNa karI levuM te ja sAcuM zravaNa che. kAraNake jenA dvArA tatva
arthAya-dhAya tenuM nAma ja artha athavA Agama-zruta che. eTale A artha-Agama-
zruta je zravaNa kare, te tenA arthagrahaNarUpa zravaNa paNa kare, e saheje
samajAya ema che. x "kAyotsargAdisatrANAM zraddhAmedhAdibhAvataH / icchAdiyoge
sAphalyaM dezasarvavrataspRzAm // " - zrI adayAtmasAra "hiassa jahA khaNamavi
vicchijjai Neva bhoaNe icchaa| evaM mokkhatthINaM chijjai icchA Na kajjaM mi||"
zrI yazovijayajIkRta yatilakSaNasamuccaya

Page #81 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Translation:  **Icchayag (15) 3.**  Even though one may possess Samyagdasti
(right faith), Jnana (knowledge) and Shastrajnana (scriptural knowledge), and
know all the Agamas, they may still be ignorant. Therefore, the term "Jnani"
(knowledgeable) is specifically used for Icchayag, emphasizing the importance of
Samyagdasti. An Icchayag is a Samyagudashti (right faith) purusha (man), an
Atmajnan (self-realized) individual who has attained Samyagjnana (right
knowledge). Without Samyagdarshan (right vision), all knowledge is considered
ignorance.    Even though one may have crossed the ocean of scriptures and
become a learned Vibudh (wise), if they do not know the true nature of the Ishta
(the object of worship) that is worthy of being practiced, they are still
considered ignorant.    Just as the Vibudh (deity) churned the ocean with Mount
Mandara to obtain the precious jewel and the nectar of immortality, as described
in the Puranas, similarly, in the context of Adhyatma (spiritual knowledge), the
Vibudh (learned) churns the ocean of scriptures with the Mandarachal (Mount
Mandara) of Adhyatma Shastra (spiritual scriptures). If they do not attain the
Atmatattva (self-realization), the nectar of immortality, their wisdom remains
ignorance.   The fifth Anga (scripture), Shri Bhagavati Sutra, clearly states:
"Even if one has studied for nine previous births, but does not know the Jiva
(soul), they are ignorant."    "Even if one has studied for nine previous
births, but does not know the Jiva, they are considered ignorant, as the Agamas
testify. This is a special statement about all the previous scriptures. To
purify the Jiva, the Jina (liberated soul) calls it knowledge, let all the noble
ones listen. Knowledge is not found in scriptures, nor in the cleverness of
poets, nor in mantras and tantras, nor in language. Knowledge is not found in
any other place. Knowledge is an art in the Jnani (knowledgeable), the Jina
calls it knowledge, let all the noble ones listen." - Shrimad Rajchandraji.
Therefore, an Icchayag "Jnani" purusha must possess Atmajnan (self-realization).
An Icchayag purusha is a Samyagdasti, Samyagdarshni, and Atmajnan.  **4.**
**Pramadjanaya Vikalata (Disturbance due to carelessness):**  Although an
Icchayag Samyagdrushti Atmajnan has overcome the obstacle of Darshan (vision),
there is still a possibility of Charitra (conduct) being affected. Therefore,
they do not yet possess a completely undisturbed state of Atmasthiti (self-
stability) and an unbroken Charitra (conduct) that is in harmony with the Atma
(soul). This is because Pramad (carelessness) can lead to a deviation from the
Atmaswaroop (true nature of the soul), and occasions of Vikatha (idle talk) and
other forms of Pramad can affect their Charitra.   * "Adhyatmashastra
Namamithivara: Muya Kulnarne Prant Vivurdharna Vim Shri Yashovijayajikrit
Adhyatmasar"

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
IcchAyAga (15) 3. samyagadaSTi-jJAnIpaNuM-zAstrajJAna haya, sarva Agama jANate
hoya; chatAM kadAcane ajJAnI paNa hoya; eTalA mATe icchAgI "jJAnI" hovo joIe
samyagadaSTi- evuM khAsa vizeSaNa mUkayuM. icchAyegI samyagudaSTi puruSa hoya,
samya jJAnIpaNuM gudanane prApta thayela AtmajJAnI heya. samyagadarzana vinAnuM
badhuMya jJAna ajJAnarUpa ja che. kAraNake zAstrasamudrane pAra pAmIne vidvAna-
vibudha thaye hAya. paNa anuSThAna karavA yaMgya evuM ArAdhya ISTa tatva na
jANyuM hoya, te te ajJAnI ja kahevAya. vibudhee (deva) maMdara parvatavaDe
sAgaramaMthana karI sArabhUta ratnanI ne temAM paNa sArabhUta amRtanI prApti
karI, ema purANakti che. te rUpakane atre 4 adhyAtma paribhASAmAM ghaTAvIe, to
vibudha (vidvajane) adhyAtmazAstrarUpa maMdarAcalavaDe zAstrasamudranuM maMthana
karI, temAMthI sArabhUta tatva-ratna khoLI kADhI, parama amRtarUpa Atmatatvane
na pAme, to te temanuM vibudhapaNuM abudhapaNArUpa ja che, ajJAnapaNArUpa ja
che. pAMcamA aMgamAM-zrI bhagavatIsUtramAM spaSTa kahyuM che ke "nava pUrva
sudhI bhaNe hoya paNa je jIvane na jANe che te ajJAnI che." "je hoya pUrva
bhaNela nava paNa, jIvane jANe nahIM, to sarva te ajJAna bhAkhyuM, sAkSI che
Agama ahIM; e pUrva sarva kahyA vizeSa, jIva karavA nirmaLa, jinavara kahe che
jJAna tene, sarva bhavya sAMbhaLe. nahIM graMthamAMhi jJAna bhAkhyuM, jJAna
nahiM kavi-cAturI, nahiM maMtrataMtro jJAna dAkhyAM, jJAna nahiM bhASA TharI;
nahIM anya sthAne jJAna bhAkhyuM, jJAna jJAnImAM kaLA, jinavara kahe che jJAna
tene, sarva bhavya sAMbhaLo." jaba jA nija rUpake, taba jA saba leka; nahiM
jAnyo nija rUpake, saba jA sa pheka."-zrImada rAjacaMdrajI. eTalA mATe icchAgI
"jJAnI" puruSamAM AtmajJAna avazya hoya; IcchAgI puruSa samyagadaSTi,
samyagdarzanI, AtmajJAnI hoya. 4. pramAdajanya vikalatA-Ama A IchAyegI
samyagadRSTi AtmajJane darzana meha te dUra thayo che, paNa cAritramehanI haju
saMbhAvanA che, eTale haju pramAdathI tene tevI saMpUrNa avikala Atmasthiti hotI
nathI, akhaMDa AtmAnucaraNarUpa vikalatA cAritra hotuM nathI. kAraNake pramAdane
sadbhAva hovAthI AtmasvarUpathI pramatta cuta thaI javAya che, vikathA vagere
pramAdanA prasaMgathI tenA cAritrabhAvamAM * "adhyAmazAstranAmithivArA : mUyAM
kuLanArane prAnta vivurdharna vim zrI yazovijyajIkRta adhyAtmasAra,

Page #82 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(16) The defect of the perception of the object (grahasthi) arises, and
therefore, it is called a defective (vikalpa) spiritual activity (yoga-dharma-
vyapara). Due to the transgressions (atichara-dosha) in the forms of lack of
restraint (kala-vinaya) and others in the conduct of knowledge (jnanachara), its
impurity occurs. Here, 'pramada' does not mean mere laziness, but the wide
meaning is that by which the soul deviates from its true nature (atma-svarupa-
sthiti) and becomes distracted, corrupted, and deluded. And the five main types
of pramada that make the soul deviate from its true nature are: (1) intoxication
(mada), (2) sense objects (visaya), (3) passions (kasaya), (4) sleep (nidra),
and (5) idle talk (vikatha). Or, in another classification, it has eight types:
(1) ignorance (ajnana), (2) doubt (samsaya), (3) false knowledge (mithyajnana),
(4) attachment (raga), (5) aversion (dvesa), (6) delusion of intellect (mati-
bhramsa), (7) disrespect for dharma, and (8) improper conduct of mind, speech,
and body. And due to this pramada, there is a possibility of deficiency in the
observance of the five conduct (pancha-achara) like jnanachara, etc. Yet, the
aspirant (mumukshu) who is intent on liberation (icchayogi) necessarily has the
intense inner desire to perform the dharma-kartavya (duties of dharma), and
according to that desire, they engage in the spiritual activities (yoga-dharma-
vyapara) and the pursuit of dharma is always ongoing for them. Because, unlike
the common worldly people who are prone to pramada and laziness, the wise person
(jnani-purusa) is not pramadi (prone to pramada) in that sense; they do not
simply sit idle like a creeper. Compared to the common worldly people, they have
progressed infinitely further, because their passions (kasaya) have become
subtle, their attachment to sense pleasures has diminished, and their attachment
and aversion, etc., the defects of pramada have become mild. And after knowing
and understanding their true nature (atma-svarupa), the efforts, endeavors, and
desires of the right-visioned (samyag-drsti) wise person are directed towards
the removal of pramada. But as long as even a trace of pramada remains, they are
still considered 'pramadi' (prone to pramada). And to the extent that the defect
of pramada is reduced, to that extent their state of being (atma-dasa) and the
intensity of their desire (icchayoga) increases. Thus, with the progressive
decrease of pramada, the right-visioned (samyag-drsti) self-realized (atma-
jnani) aspirant (mumukshu) falls into three categories: (1) avirati-samyag-
drsti, (2) desa-virata-samyag-drsti (bhava-sravaka), and (3) sarva-virata-
samyag-drsti (bhava-sadhu). "The faith and knowledge have been attained, but one
who has not yet attained the state of restraint (samyama) is like a barren tree.
Sing, sing, O Vira, the world-teacher has sung."—Shri Yashovijayaji * "Pramada
is the enemy of the wise; therefore, one should strive to eliminate it."—Shri
Shankaracharya

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
(16) gadaSTisamuccaya vikalapaNuM-khAmI AvI jAya che, ane tethI ja tene yoga-
dharmavyApAra vikala-khAmIvALo heI, jJAnAcAra vagerenA kALa-vinaya vagere
prakAremAM aticAra -doSathI tenI khalana thAya che. atre pramAda eTale
ALasupaNuM evo mAtra sAmAnya artha nathI; paNa pramAda eTale je kaMI vaDe karIne
jIva pitAnI AtmasvarUpa sthitithI pramatta thAya, bhraSTa pramAdanA prakAra
thAya, vyuta thAya, te vizALa artha che. ane jIvane svarUpabhraSTa karanArA A
pramAdanA mukhya pAMca prakAra cheH (1) mada, (2) viSaya, (3) kaSAya, (4) nidrA,
(5) vikathA. athavA prakArAMtare tene ATha bheda cheH (1) ajJAna, (2) saMzaya,
(3) mithyAjJAna, (4) rAga, (5) dveSa, (6) matibhraMza, (7) dharmamAM anAdara, 8)
mana-vacana-kAyAnA ganuM dupraNidhAna. ane A pramAdane lIdhe jJAnAcAra vagere
paMca AcAranA sabhyapAlanamAM kSati thavAno saMbhava che chatAM, IcchAyegI
mumukSune IcchApradhAnapaNuM te avazya che ja, eTale te kSasAdhaka
dharmakartavya karavAnI satata aMtaraMga IcchA dharAve ja che, ane te icchA
pramANe vega-dharma vyApAradharma pravRtti paNa kare che, tene dharma puruSArtha
to cAlu ja hoya che. kAraNake anya sAmAnya koTinA che jema pramAdI-ALasu hoya
che, tevA arthamAM te jJAnI puruSa pramAdI deto nathI, te kAMI pAdaprasArikA
karIne ALasu besI rahetuM nathI. tevA sAmAnya-prAkRtajana karatAM te te
anaMtagaNa AgaLa vadhI gayo hoya che, kAraNa ke tene kaSAya pAtaLA paDI gayA
hoya che, viSayarasa-viSayAsakti maMda paDI gayA hoya che, rAga dveSa Adi
pramAdadeSa moLA paDI gayA hoya che, ane AtmasvarUpa jANyA samajyA pachI te
jJAnI samyagadaSTi puruSane prayatna, puruSArtha, IcchA paNa pramAda dUra karavA
bhaNI ja hoya che. paraMtu upara kahelA kAraNone lIdhe upajate pramAdana aMza
paNa jyAM lagI hoya, tyAM lagI te "pramAdI" ja-pramatta ja kahevAya che. ane
jeTalA jeTalA aMze tene pramAdadoSa dUra thata jAya che, teTalA teTalA aMze tenI
Atmasthiti- AtmadazA vadhatI jAya che, tene IcchAga baLavattara banato jAya che.
Ama pramAdanI uttarettara nyUnatA (ochAza) pramANe te IcchAyogI samyagadaSTi
AtmajJanA traNa vibhAga paDe cheH (1) avirati samyagRSTi, (2) dezavirati
samyagudaSTi, (bhAvazrAvaka), (3) sarvavirati samyagRSTi (bhAvasAdhu). "zraddhA
jJAna lahyA che te paNa, je navi jAya pamAya re vaMdhya taru upama te pAme,
saMyama ThANa je nAye re... gA gA re, bhale vIra jagataguru gAyo."--zrI
yazovijayajI * "ra pramArAnaDa jJAnine avazvAsa: to tataDadUdhIta vaMdhatte
vyathA II -zrI za karAca

Page #83 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Icchaag (17)** “Pamaayam karmamaa hansu appamaayam tahaavaram / Tadmaavaano
vaari vaaru uchiv va” – Shri Sutrakrutanga, Pramada is called karma by
Tirthankaradeva, and Apramada is called Atmaswaroop, which is the other, i.e.,
Akarma. The ignorant and the knowledgeable are of this type of distinction.” –
Shrimati Rajchandra. Thus, the four characteristics of Icchaag are mentioned,
these characteristics are interconnected. (1) First, it generates the desire for
Dharma, (2) then, to know its form, it is heard from the mouth of Shri Sadguru,
(3) after hearing the correct meaning, knowledge is gained, (4) even after
gaining knowledge, due to Pramada, there is a deviation in character. And thus,
this Icchaayeegi Purush – (1) is truly a Dharma seeker, a true Mumukshu, from
the soul, (2) is a Shastrashrota-Shrutajna, (1) is a Samyagdristi Atmajnaani,
(4) yet is still Pramadawant-Pramatt. Moreover, here, with the excellence of
words, the Shastrakar Maharshi has included the karmachang bhakti and the aspect
of knowledge in ‘Icchaag’ with great skill. It is of this type – (1) the word
‘katum’ signifies the acceptance of karmavega, (2) the word ‘Iccha’ indicates
bhaktiyoga, (3) and the word ‘jnaani’ indicates jnanag. In addition, it is also
to be understood that – if one has taken up the main task of Maaksasadhan, which
is pervasive, even if one is Pramadawant, if one does it even a little bit with
karma-sange, with feet, without deviation, with purity, then he is also included
in this Icchaag. And here, the main thing is Iccha, so it is to be understood
from above, by implication, that – even if there is a true, unblemished desire
to do pure Dharma-karma, then it is also included in Icchaayeegi, by way of
treatment, in practice. x “Saangamapyek karma pratipanne pramadinah / Naazayogi
rut vaatr mate 1 – Shri Yashovijayajikrit Katrishat Dwaarvishika. *
“Tattpanchamagunastanaadaarabhyaivaitadiच्छति / Nishchay kayavaharattu
poorvamgavaavarat chhe”—-Shri Adhyatmasar, etc.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
IcchAga (17) "pamAyaM kammamA haMsu appamAyaM tahAvaraM / tadamAvAno vAri vAruM
uciva vA " -zrI sUtrakRtAMga, pramAdane tIrthaMkaradeva karma kahe che, ane
apramAdane tethI bIjuM eTale akarmarUpa evuM AtmasvarUpa kahe che. tevA bhedanA
prakArathI ajJAnI ane jJAnInuM svarUpa che." -zrImad rAjacaMdra. Ama IcchAganA
cAra lakSaNa kahyA, te lakSaNone paraspara saMbaMdha che. (1) prathama te
dharmanI IcchA upaje, (2) eTale pachI tenuM svarUpa jANavA mATe zrI sadguru
mukhe zravaNa thAya, (3) samyapha artha grahaNarUpa zravaNa thayA pachI jJAna
thAya, (4) jJAna thayA chatAM paNa haju pramAdane lIdhe cAritramAM vikalatA
hoya. ane Ama A IcchAyegI puruSa-(1) sAce dharma Icchaka, kharekhara mumukSu,
AtmAthI hoya, (2) zAstrazrotA-zrutajJa hoya, (1) samyagdaSTi AtmajJAnI hoya, (4)
chatAM haju pramAdavaMta-pramatta hoya. vaLI atre zabdanI khUbIthI gUMthaNI karI
zAstrakAra maharSie "icchAga'mAM karmacaMga bhaktiga ne jJAnanA aMzane atyaMta
kuzaLatAthI samAveza karI dIdhuM che. te A prakAre-(1) katuM karavA mATe e
zabdathI karmaveganuM grahaNa che, (2) "IcchA" zabdathI bhaktiyeganuM sUcana
che, (3) ane "jJAnI" zabdathI jJAnagano nirdeza che. te uparAMta e paNa
samajavAnuM che ke-bakAlavyApI evuM mAkSasAdhana jevuM pradhAna kArya mAthe
lIdhuM hoya, temAM pramAdavaMta chatAM, jo te thoDuM paNa karmasAge pagapaNe-
avikalapaNeparizuddhapaNe karato hoya, to tene paNa A IcchAgamAM samAveza thAya
che temaja atre IcchAnuM pradhAnapaNuM che, eTale e uparathI upalakSaNathI e
samajavAnuM che ke-DuM paNa zuddha dharmakartavya karavAnI je sAcI nirdabha
icchA paNa hoya, to tene paNa vyavahArathI atre IrachAyegamAM upacArathI
aMtarbhAva thAya che. x "sAGgamapyeka karma pratipanne pramAdinaH / naajhAyojIta
rUti vAtra mate 1 -zrI yazovijayajIkRta kAtrizata dvArvizikA. * "
tatpaJcamaguNasthAnAdArabhyaivaitadicchati / nizcaya kayavahAratu
pUrvamagvavArata che"---zrI adhyAtmasAra, ItyAdi.

Page #84 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(18) With the desire to know the form of the *Yogadrishtisamurchya Shastra*, it
is said - *Shastrayoga* is to be known here as much as possible by the non-
negligent / The *Shraddhakya* there is intense, with the *Vachana* (scripture) /
4 / The second *Shraddha* is according to the ability of the non-negligent, with
intense *Mrutbedha* (understanding of the scriptures), and it is also *Avikala*
(unbroken), 4 / Meaning: - And *Shastrayoga* is to be known here by the
*Shraddhavant* (devotee) who is non-negligent as much as possible; and it is
done by the intense *Mrutbedha* of the *Agam* (scripture) and (by the *Avikala*
of time etc.) it is *Avikala* (unbroken). In this commentary, the form of the
second "Shastrayoga" has been clearly stated in the terminology of the
*Gashashtra*. *Shastrapradhan* is *Shastrayoga*. Where the *Shastra* is the main
thing, that *Shastra* is called *Shastrayoga*. In this *Shastrayoga*, there is
so much intensity - sharpness of *Agam* knowledge - *Mrutbedha*, so much skill -
expertise - proficiency, that it is *Avikala* (unbroken) by *Shastra* knowledge.
And due to such *Shastra* proficiency, there is also knowledge of even the most
subtle *Atichara* (transgression) *Dosha* (fault) here, and that *Dosha* is
removed with subtle *Upga* (effort) and self-awareness. Therefore, *Jnanaachar*
(conduct of knowledge), *Darshanaachar* (conduct of vision), *Charitraachar*
(conduct of character), *Tapaachar* (conduct of austerity), and *Vichar*
(conduct of thought) - these five *Aachar* (conduct) are followed properly, even
in their subtle forms like time, *Vinaya* (discipline) etc. Therefore, this
*Shastrayoga* is also *Avikala* (unbroken), without any defect, *Niratichar*
(without transgression).   **Explanation of the terms:**  *
**Yogadrishtisamurchya Shastra:** A Jain scripture that deals with the
principles of *Yoga* and *Drisht* (vision). * **Shastrayoga:** The practice of
*Yoga* based on the teachings of the scriptures. * **Shraddhakya:** A person who
has *Shraddha* (faith) in the scriptures. * **Avikala:** Unbroken, continuous,
without any interruption. * **Mrutbedha:** Understanding of the scriptures. *
**Agam:** The Jain scriptures. * **Shastrapradhan:** Where the *Shastra* is the
main thing. * **Atichara:** Transgression, violation of principles. * **Dosha:**
Fault, defect. * **Upga:** Effort, exertion. * **Jnanaachar:** Conduct of
knowledge. * **Darshanaachar:** Conduct of vision. * **Charitraachar:** Conduct
of character. * **Tapaachar:** Conduct of austerity. * **Vichar:** Conduct of
thought. * **Aachar:** Conduct, behavior. * **Vinaya:** Discipline, restraint. *
**Niratichar:** Without transgression.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
(18) yogadaSTisamuracaya zAstranuM svarUpa thavAnI IcchAthI kahe che -
zAstrayogastviha jJeyo yathAzaktyapramAdinaH / zrAddhakya tatravadhena
varasavistAra | 4 | bIjo zrAddha apramAdIne zakti taNe anusAra, tIvrabaMdha mRta
zrutakI, vaLI te avikala dhAra, 4, artha :-ane zAstraga te ahIM yathAzakti
apramAdI evA zrAddhane zraddhAvaMtane jANa; ane te tIvra bodhavALA Agama-vacana
vaDe karIne tathA (kAla AdinI avikalatA vaDe karIne) avikala-akhaMDa e hoya che.
vivecana ahI gazAstranI paribhASAmAM bIjA "zAstroga"nuM svarUpalakSaNa
spaSTapaNe kahyuM che. zAstrapradhAnaga te zAstroga. zAstranuM jyAM
pradhAnapaNuM che te zAstrazAstroga cega kahevAya che. A zAstragamAM
AgamajJAnanuM-mRtabedhanuM eTaluM badhuM tIvrapaNuM-tIrNapaNuM hoya che, eTaluM
badhuM paTutva-nipuNapaNuM-kuzalapaNuM hoya che, ke te zAstrajJAnavaDe karIne e
avikala-akhaMDa hoya che. ane tevA zAstrapaTupaNane lIdhe, sUkSmamAM sUkSma
aticAra deSanuM paNa ahIM jANapaNuM hoya che, tathA sUkSama
upagapUrvakaAtmajAgRtipUrvaka te te doSa dUra karavAmAM Ave che. eTale
jJAnAcAra, darzanAcAra, cAritrAcAra, tapAcAra, ne vIcAra e paMca AcAranA kAla,
vinaya vagere sUkSma prakAranuM paNa yathAvat barAbara pAlana karavAmAM Ave che.
ethI karIne paNa A zAstraga avikala-akhaMDa hoya che, khoDakhAMpaNa vinAne,
niraticAra hoya che. kRtti:-rAjayonag-zAstraga te, zAstrapradhAnayoga te
zAsavega, eTale prakramathI (cAlu viSayamAM) dharmavyApAra ja, te vaLI- ahIM,
gataMtramAM, joyaH-jA . kAno? kevo che te mATe kahyuM yathAzakti-yathAzakti,
zaktine anurUpa, zakti pramANe. kamAna -apramAdI, vikathA vagere pramAdathI
rahita, AnuM ja vizeSaNa Ape che - zrAddhakya-zrAddhane-zraddhALune, tevA
prakArane moha dUra thavAthI saMpratyayAtmika-samyaka pratItivALI Adi zraddhA
dharAvanArane-zraddhAtane. tatravothera-tIvrabodhavALA, hetubhUta evA paTu-
nipuNa bodhavALA. varasA-vacanathI, AgamathI, aviza8:-avikala, akhaMDa. tathA-
tema ja kAla AdinI vikalatAnI abAdhAe karIne paNa avikala-akhaMDa, kAraNa ke
apaTu (akuzaLa) heya te aticAra deSanA jJAtA-jANanAra heya nahi, aticAra deSa
jANe nahiM.

Page #85 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(19) To whom does this Shastra belong? What kind of person possesses it? It
belongs to the one who is devoted to the Shraddha, who is diligent to the best
of their ability. Thus, a Shastri Purusha (1) is one who has a deep
understanding of the Shastra, (2) is devoted to the Shraddha, (3) is diligent to
the best of their ability. In this way, one who has a deep understanding of the
Shastra, has a sharp understanding of the principles of this Shastra. Due to
their sharp intellect, they have a deep understanding of the subtle and profound
secrets of the Shastra. Shastra is the word of the Shastra Purusha, the
authoritative person. The Shastra is that which governs the Jiva, giving them
instructions regarding actions and their consequences, and through its pure
governance, protects the Jiva from the fear of the world. This is the
etymological meaning of "Shastra," and such a Shastra can only be the word of
the pure, non-attached, omniscient being, and not of anyone else.
"Shaananaatraalaraajesh: Raann Nikr | Vachanam Veetaraagasy Tacha Naanyasya
Kasyachit //" - Shri Yashovijayji Kaniit Adhyatma Panishad. It is very difficult
to cross this ocean of Shastra. Even the greatest minds get tired in it, or get
lost and fall into delusion. This ocean of Shastra is the "difficulty of the
Jina's teachings." Through the grace and support of the Shri Sadguru, through
the Guru's guidance, this difficult Agam becomes easy. "Jina Pravachan
Dugamyaata, Thaake Ati Matimaan; Avalamban Shri Sashuru, Sugam Ane Sukh Khaan."
- Shrimad Rajchandraji. "Mahamaatibhinishaeshasiddhantapathpaaragai:.। Kriyate
Yatra Digmohastatra Ko'nyah Prasarpati  /  / " - Shri Shubhachandraacharyaji's
Shri Gyaanarnava. Even this difficult Agam-Sagar, through the grace of the Shri
Sadguru, has been crossed, its profound knowledge has been attained, and the
secret of all Shrautas is to know and recognize the pure soul. "Dvaadashaangi 4
Shri Jineshvare Kahi Chhe, Temaan Pan Ek Aatma J Aadey-Grahan Karva Yogya Chhe,
Ane Baaki Beeju Badhu Hey-Tyajva Gya Chhe." This is the ultimate essence, the
main point. Such knowledge of Bhava-Shruta, "Vatta Ninaitkramen, Shratan
Todayanemeant Tasminnupadeyataya Chidaatma, Sheshan Tu Heyatvadhiyaaabhyadhaayi
//" - Padhi Panchvinshatika.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
zAstraga (19) A A zAstraga kone hoya che? kevA pAtrane hoya che? zrAddha-
zraddhAvaMta evA yathAzakti apramAdIne te hoya che. Ama zAstrI puruSa (1) tIvra
zAstrabodhavALo, (2) zrAddha-zraddhALu, (3) yathAzakti apramAdI heya. te A
prakAre- tava zAstrabodhavALe-A zAaogIne siddhAMtane tIvra bodha-tIkSaNa bodha
hoya che. kuzAgra buddhinA pratApe zAstranuM sUkSmamAM sUkSma rahasyabhUta gUDha
jJAna tene tIvra bodha hoya che, UMDAmAM UMDA AzayavALI tenI samajaNa hoya che.
zAstra eTale zAstA puruSanuM-Ata pramANabhUta puruSanuM vacana. jIvane
kAryakArya vagere saMbaMdhI je zAsana-AjJA kare, ane te nirdoSa zAsanavaDe
karIne je jIvanuM trANa eTale saMsArabhayathI rakSaNa kare, te "zAstra" che, ema
tene vyutpatti artha che ane AvuM zAstra te nirdoSa evA vItarAga sarvajJanuM ja
vacana hoI zake, bIjA koInuM nahiM. "zANanAtrALarAjeza : rAnna nikra | vacanaM
vItarAgasya tacca nAnyasya kasyacit // " -zrI yazovijayajIkaNIta
adhyAtmapaniSaduH A zAstrasamudrane pAra pAmavo ghaNe duSkara che. moTA moTA
matima te paNa temAM thAkI jAya, athavA gothuM khAI jaI dimehane prApta thAya,
evI te zAstrasamudra "jina pravacananI durgasthatA" che. zrI sadgurunA
kRpAprasAdathI, avalaMbanathI, gurugamathI ja te durgama Agama paNa sugama thaI
paDe che. jina pravacana dugamyatA, thAke ati matimAna; avalaMbana zrI sazuru,
sugama ane sukhakhANa."-zrImad rAjacaMdrajI
"mhaamtibhiniHshesssiddhaantpthpaargaiH|| kriyate yatra digmohastatra ko'nyaH
prasarpati / / " -zrI zubhacaMdrAcAryajI kRta zrI jJAnArNava. evA durgama Agama-
sAgarane paNa zrI sadgurukRpAprasAdathI A zAstranI ulaMghI gayela hoya che,
tenuM rahasyabUta jJAna pAmI gayela hoya che, ane sarva zratanuM rahasya paNa
kevala eka zuddha AtmAne jANavo-oLakha-pAmavA e ja che. " dvAdazAMgI4 zrI
jinezvare kahI che, temAM paNa eka AtmA ja Adeya-grahaNa karavA yogya che, ane
bAkI bIjuM badhuMya heya-tyajavA gya che." e ja parama sArabhUta mukhya vAta
kahI che. AvuM bhAvazrutajJAna * "vattA ninaitkramena, zrataM toDAyanemenTa
tasminnupAdeyatayA cidAtmA, zeSaM tu heyatvadhiyAbhyadhAyi // " padi
paMcaviMzatikA.

Page #86 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The collection of scriptures, or *Gadasti Samuchaya*, is the pure knowledge of
the self, which constantly plays in the heart of the scripture-knower, and has
become extremely fruitful. Thus, with the intense penetration of the material-
emotional condition, this scripture-knower is a man of *Samyagudashti*, a knower
of scriptures. "He who goes to the good, only his self is pure / The
Lekapradeepkar Rishis call him *Shrutakevali* // He who knows all the good
knowledge, the Jin Bhagwan calls him *Shrutakevali*. Knowledge is all his self,
therefore he is *Shrutakevali*." - Shri Kundakundaacharya's Shri Samyasar. "If
you don't have the *nadu*, then you have all the knowledge, if you don't have
all the *nadu*, then you have a lot of *gajaru*." - Shri Acharangasutra.  He who
knows the pure self through *kritavada*, is called *Shrutakevali* by the
Lekapradeepkar Rishis. And he who knows all the *shruta* knowledge is called
*Shrutakevali* by the Jin Bhagwan, because all knowledge is his self, therefore
he is *Shrutakevali*. He who knows one (the self) knows all, he who knows all,
knows one (the self)." And thus, because of the intense penetration of *shruta*
knowledge, this scripture-knower, a wise man, can act with subtle *amepag* and
*paga* - constantly with self-awareness, without any doubt. And that is why this
scripture is called *avikal* and *akhand*. *Shraddha* - *Shraddhanant* - This
scripture-knower is *shraddhavant*, he has faith. What is the use of knowledge
if there is no faith? But this scripture-knower has intense perception, he has
faith in the ultimate goal, the truth, the self, the *apta* *agama*, and the
faith in the true *sadguru* and the true *satpurusha*. Thus, it is clear that he
is a man of *Samyagdarshan*. And the faith of the scripture-knower is
*sampraatyayatmika* - *samyag* truth perception, or other types of
*ajnapradhan*. *Sampraatyayatmika* faith is the faith that arises from the
*samyag* perception of the truth, from true certainty. Such faith arises from
the proper examination and testing of the truth (searching investigation), like
gold is tested. *Kash-ched* - "Faith is the mother of the nectar of immortality!
The eight-limbed *samyagdarshan* is free from the three types of ignorance." -
Shri Samantabhadracharya's Shri Ratnakarandi Shravakachar.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
gadaSTisamuccaya eTale ke zuddha AtmajJAna A zAstragInA hRdayamAM niraMtara ramI
rahyuM hoya che, atyaMta pariNamI gayuM hoya che. Ama dravya-bhAva zratanA tIvra
bedhavALe A zAstrAgI puruSa . AtmajJAnI samyagudaSTi evo zAstrajJAtA hoya che.
"jo hi sueNahigacchai, appANamiNaM tu kevalaM suddhaM / taM suyakevalimisiNo
bhaNaMti loyappaIvayarA // jo suyaNANa savvaM jANA, suyakevali tamAhu jinnaa|
NANa appA savvaM jahmA suyakevalI tamhA / " -zrI kuMdakuMdAcAryajIkaNIta
zrIsamayasAra. "no ghai nADuM, to savaeN jJAnarU, no savaeN nALarU, to ghaNAM
gAjarU -zrI AcArAMgasUtra arthAtaje kRtavaDe karIne kevala zuddha evA A AtmAne
jANe che, tene lekapradIpakara RSio "zrutakevalI' kahe che. ane je sarva
zratajJAna jANe che tene jina bhagavAna "zrutakevalI" kahe che, kAraNa ke sarve
jJAna te AtmA che, tethI te zrutakevalI che." je ekane (AtmAne) jANe che te
sarvane jANe che, je sarvane jANe che, te ekane (AtmAne) jANe che." ane Ama
zratajJAnane tIvra bedha hovAthI ja, A zAstrayegI jJAnI puruSa, jJAnAcAra
vagerenA pAlanamAM sUkSama AmepagapUrvaka-satata AtmajAgRtipUrvaka avikalapaNe
pravattI zake che, ane tethI ja atre A zAstrane avikala-akhaMDa kahyo che.
zrAddha-zraddhAnaMta-A zAstrogI puruSa zrAddha eTale zraddhAvaMta hoya che.
jJAna hoya paNa zraddhA na hoya to zuM kAmanuM? paNa A zAstramI puruSa to tIvra
pratItivALI RtabedhavALo heI, tene paramArthanI-tattvArthanI, AtanI, Apta
AgamanI zraddhA ne sadguru satparupanI zraddhA + avazya hoya che. Ama te
samyagadarzanI puruSa hoya che ema spaSTa karyuM che. ane zAstrogInI te zraddhA
saMpratyayAtmaka-samyapha tatvapratItirUpa athavA anya prakAranIAjJApradhAna
hoya che. saMpratyayAtmaka zraddhA eTale tattvanI samyapha pratItithI,
kharekharI khAtrIthI upajelI zraddhA. AvI zraddhA tatvanI barAbara cakAsaNa-
parIkSA karavAthI (Searching investigation), sonAnI jema kasoTI karavAthI upaje
che. kaSa-cheda- + "zraddhAnaM vajUthanAmAtAjamatAmRtAma !
trimUDhApoDhamaSTAGgaM samyagdarzanamasmayam // " -zrI samaMtabhadrAcAryajIkRta
zrI ratnakaraMDa zrAvakAcAra.

Page #87 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**(21) Just as gold is tested by heat, so the eternal form of the Suvarna is
examined by discerning men. And since this scholar is a man of sharp intellect,
strong in his ability to understand, and endowed with great brilliance, he is
extremely suitable for carrying out such an examination. This is the type of
cross-section-heat test - just as an army is first tested on a touchstone, so he
examines whether a particular scriptural injunction is valid (whether it is a
true principle) or not. This is the cross-section test. Perhaps the gold may
appear fine on the surface, but there may be deception or adulteration inside,
perhaps the army is gold on the outside but brass inside, how would one know?
Therefore, it is cross-sectioned, cut open, and in doing so, any flaws are
revealed. Similarly, this examining man verifies whether the scriptural
injunctions presented are truly reflected in the actions described within. This
is the cross-section test. Perhaps the gold passes the initial test, but its
examination is not yet complete, because those who adulterate are so cunning
that they mix another metal (alloy) with the gold, atom by atom. This is tested
by heating the gold; by the heat of fire, the gold is melted, and its impurities
are revealed. Similarly, the examiner, relying on all knowledge, with a strong
intellect like fire, scrutinizes the scriptures, tests the scriptures, and
examines whether there are any impurities or flaws in the meaning. This is the
heat test. Thus, through cross-section and heat, this discerning man examines
the gold of the scriptures; and he does so without any attachment to any
particular opinion or view, with utmost impartiality, solely based on the
principles. Like an honest judge, upholding justice, he examines without any
bias, with a pure heart. By carrying out such an examination, he arrives at the
true conclusion - the principle - "क्षति वछेर्ता: सा वथा ज्ञनाः | शws वलवाशुद्धि
पलंत तथा वुधाः " etc. (For details, see) - Shri Yashovijayji-krit Adhyatma
Upanishad, क "साक्षात् वत्तविवारेy निषत्रावनिमः | विभजन्ति गुणान् दोषान् धन्याः
स्वच्छेन चेतसा  // " - Shri Shubhachandracharya-krit Shri Gnanarnava. "पक्षपात न
मे वीरे. न दृष' पाgि त्तिम वरनं , ता # guहा" - Paramnaya-murti Shri
Haribhadrasuri.**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
zAsrayAga (21) tApathI jema sonAnI cokasAI karavAmAM Ave che, tema
zAzvatasvarUpa suvaNanI cekakasa parIkSA vicakSaNa puruSo kare che. ane A zAstrI
te tIvra bedhavALe prabaLa kSopazamIpratibhAsaMpanna puruSa hoI, AvI parIkSA
karavAne atyaMta yaMgya hoya che. te A prakArekaSacheda-tApa parIkSA - senAne
jema prathama te upara uparathI kasoTI patthara para kasI jue che, tema kaI eka
zAstranA vidhiniSedha eka adhikAravALA (eka mekSitattvane gecara) che ke nahiM,
tenI te parIkSA kare che, A kaSa parIkSA che. kadAca sonuM upara uparathI te
barAbara hoya, paNa aMdaramAM dago ke bheLaseLa hoya, uparamAM senAno DheLa hoya
ne aMdara pIttaLa hoya, te zuM khabara paDe? eTalA mATe ene cheda (cross-
section) karavAmAM Ave che, kApa mUkavAmAM Ave che, ane ema karatAM pola hoya te
pakaDAI jAya che. tema A parIkSApradhAnI puruSa ekasAI kare che ke emAM je
vidhiniSedha batAvyA che, tene yena-kSema kare evI kriyA enI aMdara kahI che ke
kema? A chedaparIkSA che. kadAca senuM uparanI bane kasoTImAMthI pAra utare,
paNa tenI parIkSA haju pUrNa thatI nathI, kAraNa ke bheLaseLa karanArA eTalA
badhA cAlAka hoya che ke senAnI sAthe aNue aNue bIjI dhAtu (Alloy) bheLavI de
che. AnI parIkSA te senAne tapAvavAthI thAya; agnitApathI senuM gALavAmAM Ave,
te tenI melAzanI azuddhinI khabara paDe. tema parIkSaka cekasI paNa sarva
nayanuM avalaMbana karatA vicArarUpa prabala agnivaDe karIne, zAstranI tAvaNI
kare che, zAstrane tAvI jue che ane temAM tAtparyAnI azuddhi ke melAza che ke
nahi te tapAse che. A tApaparIkSA che. Ama kaSacheda-tApavaDe zAstrarUpa sonAnI
parIkSA A vicakSaNa puruSa kare che; ane te paNa kaI paNa mata-dazananA Agraha
vinA, atyaMta madhyasthatAthI, kevaLa tattvagaSakapaNe ja kare che. prAmANika
nyAyAdhIzanI jema nyAyatulA barAbara jALavIne, te koI paNa prakAranA pakSapAta
vinA, svaccha aMtaHkaraNathI te parIkSA kare che. AvI parIkSA karatAM tene
tatvanirNaya-tattva * "kSati vacheratA: sA vathA jJanAH | zaws vaLavAzuddhi
palaMta tathA vudhAH " ityAdi. (vizeSa mATe juo) -zrI yazovijayajIkRta
adhyAtmaupaniSada, ka "sAkSAt vattavivArey niSatrAvanimaH | vibhajanti guNAn
doSAn dhanyAH svacchena cetasA // " - zrI zubhacaMdrAcAryajIkRta zrI jJAnArNava.
"pakSapAta na me vIre. na dRSa' pAgi ttima varanaM , tA # guhA"-paramanyAyamUrti
zrI haribhadrasUri.

Page #88 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(22) The collection of **gadapshti** is determined, and thus it generates a
precise inner faith that is firmly established in the heart, with **samyak
praiti** (right perception) and real conviction. This is called
**sampraatyayatmika shraddha** (faith based on understanding). Alternatively,
this faith can also be of another type, **aajna pradhan** (based on command).
Some individuals are **apt** (worthy), trustworthy, and reliable. This faith
arises from the **purusha praman** (authority of the person) of such **aajna
pradhan** individuals. And this **apt shraddha** (faith in the worthy) can only
be from a **nirdosh** (blameless), **nirvikar** (passionless), **vitrag** (free
from attachments) individual, who is free from **rag** (attachment), **dvesh**
(aversion), **meh** (affection), and other **doshas** (faults). Therefore, the
word of such a **apt purusha** (worthy person) is the ultimate authority, worthy
of ultimate faith, and deserving of **tahatti** (acceptance). This is because it
is believed that the truth spoken by a **vitrag** is **tatvasum** (true and
complete), cannot be refuted by any arguments, and is **aajna grahya** (worthy
of acceptance based on command), because a **vitrag** would not speak otherwise.
Therefore, it is not appropriate to allow even a seed of doubt to sprout in the
word of a **vitrag**. Due to the limitations of time, the severance of excellent
knowledge, the dullness of intellect, or any other reason, this truth may not be
understood by me. However, the **ahant bhagvant** (the enlightened one) has not
spoken even a fraction of anything that is **maya yukta** (illusory) or false.
Because they were **niragi** (free from attachment), **tyagi** (renouncer), and
**nisprihi** (devoid of desire). They had no reason to speak falsely. Moreover,
being **sarvagya** (omniscient) and **sarvadashi** (all-pervasive), they would
not speak falsely even out of ignorance. "Whose word is true to be accepted?
Believe the statement of the blameless person who has experienced it." The seed
of doubt will not sprout within, for those who understand the words of the
**Jina**, their kingdom is always my desire, I will strive to attain liberation.
- **Shrimad Rajchandraji**'s **Shri Moksha Mala**. This is also the firm
conviction of Rajchandra's mind; "We will become the form that is commanded by
the Lord... a unique opportunity." - **Shrimad Rajchandraji**. "Without **aajna
aradhana** (worship of the command), how can **guna siddhi** (spiritual
perfection) be attained?" "Charity, austerity, conduct, and vows, without the
grace of the Lord, become obstacles and cause worldly attachments." "Devchandra
plays in the **aanama** (formless), his excellence is known throughout the
world." - **Shri Devchandraji**. *"The subtle truth revealed by the **Jina**
cannot be refuted by any arguments. It is worthy of acceptance based on command,
because the **Jina** would not speak otherwise."* - **Alap Padhdhati**. *"That
alone is the truth, without any doubt, which is spoken by the **Jina**."* -
**Shri Acharangasutra**.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
(22) gadaSTisamuccaya vinizcaya thAya che, ane tethI karIne tene samyapha
pratItivALI, kharekharI khAtrIvALI (Real conviction) aMtarAtmAmAM hRdayamAM
ThasI jAya evI sacoTa aMtaraMga zraddhA upaje che. AnuM nAma saMpratyayAtmaka
zraddhA che. athavA to A zraddhAne bIje AjJA pradhAna prakAra paNa A zAstrogIne
hoya che. amuka puruSa Apta che, vizvAsapAtra che, vizvAsa rAkhavA gya che, evA
AjJA pradhAna puruSaprAmANyathI-puruSapratItithI A zraddhA upaje che. ane te
Apta zraddhA puruSa to rAga-dveSa-meha Adi doSathI rahita evo nirdoSa nirvikAra
vItarAga puruSa ja hoI zake, eTale evA Apta puruSanuM vacana parama pramANa che,
parama pratIti yogya che, "tahatti' karavA yogya che, evI tene zraddhA hoya che.
kAraNa ke te ema bhAve che ke vItarAge kaheluM tattvasUma che, hetuothI te haNI
zakAtuM nathI, ane te AjJA grAhya (AjJAthI grahaNa karavA yogya) che, kAraNa ke
vItarAga anyathA kahe nahi." mATe hAre e vItarAga vacanamAM saMzayanuM bIja paNa
UgavA devuM yogya nathI. kALanI hInatAthI, uttama jJAnanA viccheda javAthI,
buddhinI maMdatAthI ke evA kaI anya kAraNathI mArA samajavAmAM te tattva AvatuM
nathI, paraMtu ahaMta bhagavaMte aMzamAtra paNa mAyAyukta ke asatya kahyuM nathI
ja. kAraNa eo nirAgI, tyAgI ane nispRhI hatA. mRSA kahevAnuM kaMI kAraNa emane
hatuM nahiM. tema eo sarvajJa, sarvadazI hovAthI ajJAnathI paNa mRSA kahe nahi."
"te prApta karavA vacana konuM satya kevaLa mAnavuM? nirdoSa naranuM kathana
mAne teha jeNe anubhavyuM." saMzaya bIja uge nahiM aMdara, je jinanA kathana
avadhArUM, rAjya sadA muja e ja manoratha, dhAra thaze apavarga utAruM." zrImad
rAjacaMdrajIpraNIta zrI mokSamALA. te paNa nizcaya rAjacaMdra manane rahyo;
prabhu AjJAe thAzuM te ja svarUpa je..apUrva avasara"_zrImad rAjacaMdrajI "AjJA
ArAdhana vinA, kima guNasiddhi thAya?" "dAna tapa zIla vrata, nAtha Azu vinA,
thaI bAdhaka kare bhava upAdhi." "devacaMdra ANAmeM khele, uttama yuhi prasiddha
re" -zrI devacaMdrajI *"sUkSma jinoditaM tattvaM hetubha va hanyate / AjJAgrAhya
hi tad grAhyaM nAnyathA hAdinI jinAH // " - AlApapaddhati, " tameva saccaM
niHsaMkaM jaM jiNehiM pvei|" zrI AcArAMgasutra,

Page #89 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(23) Thus, the man who is devoted to the command considers the command of the
Lord as the most important, placing it on his head, and that is the way, he
believes. And this devotion to the command is not just any ordinary thing, it is
"Sarvasampakari" - fulfilling all purposes. It destroys self-will, brings about
the strong support of the Supreme Being, and has many other benefits. Also, it
is not that there is a lack of examination in it, it is also present in it to
the best of one's ability. Although the devotion of the one who is devoted to
the examination is stronger, the ability to examine in that way is not the goal
of everyone. Only a rare, capable, and self-controlled man can do it, and even
they do not abandon the reliance on the command, they only try to make it known
while keeping it in mind. In any case, the scholar must have true faith
(Sampratyayatmak) in the correct principle. And this is extremely essential.
Because until such faith is established, true faith does not arise, an indelible
"impression" is not made in the soul, until then, knowing and doing everything
becomes like "plastering on mud." What is the purity of God, Guru, and Dharma?
What is it? It does not bring pure faith; without pure faith, whatever actions
are performed, they are like plastering on mud. The beauty of the sword, the
beauty of the fourteenth Tirthankara's feet." - Shri Anandghanji And this faith
is extremely rare. Shri Uttaradhyayanasutra says, "Faith is extremely rare.
Humanity, action, faith, and restraint - these four are increasingly rare in
beings." "Sadhdhan Parmahurja!" "Chattari paramanghani dullhahaniha jantune /
Manunatt guru dhdha sanayammi virachan" - Shri Uttaradhyayanasutra Here, the
scholar has already attained faith and faith, which is shown here by the two
adjectives "Tivra Mrutbedhaval" and "Shraddha." Now, to show how his self-power
shines in restraint, it is said that - to the best of his ability, he is
diligent - and it is because he is faithful that this scholar is diligent. True,
unwavering faith that has spread throughout the bones and marrow, after that, he
acts with indomitable enthusiasm, full zeal, and diligence in that way, what is
surprising? Because -

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
zAstroga (23) Ama prabhunI AjJAne ja pradhAna mAnI, tene zirasAvaMgha gaNI mAthe
caDhAvavI, e ja gya che, ema A AjJApradhAnI puruSa mAne che. ane A AjJApradhAna
zraddhA paNa kAMI jevI tevI vastu nathI, te "sarvasaMpakarI'-sarva arthane
siddha karanArI che. temAM svachaMdane nAza thAya che, parama puruSanuM prabala
avalaMbana prApta thAya che, ItyAdi aneka lAbha hoya che. temaja temAM kAMI
parIkSAne abhAva hoya che ema nathI, gauNapaNe te paNa yathAzakti temAM hoya
che. jo ke parIkSA pradhAnInI zraddhA baLavattara hoya che, paNa tevI tathArUpa
parIkSAnuM sAmarthya kAMI badhAyanuM hetuM nathI. viralA samartha kSaye
pazamavaMta puruSe ja te karI zake che, ane teo paNa AjJAnuM avalaMbana cheDI
detA nathI, gauNapaNe te mAnya rAkhI te prasiddha karavA mathe che eTaluM ja. A
game te prakAre paNa zAstrIne samyaka tatvapratItivALI (saMpratyayAtmaka)
zraddhA avazya hoya che ja. ane A hevI parama Avazyaka che. kAraNa ke jyAM sudhI
tevI zraddhA caeNTe nahiM, sAcI AsthA upaje nahiM, AtmAmAM na bhUMsAya evI
"chApa paDe nahiM, tyAM sudhI badhuMya jANavuM-karavuM "chAra para lipaNa" jevuM
thaI paDe che. deva guru dharmanI zuddhi kaha kima rahe? kima rahe? zuddha
zraddhA na ANe; zuddha zraddhAna viNa jeha kiriyA karI, chAra para liMpaNo teha
jANe. dhAra talavAranI sohalI, dohalI caudamA jinataNI caraNa sevA." -zrI
AnaMdaghanajI ane A zraddhA prApta thavI parama durlabha che. zrI uttarAdhyayana
sUramAM kahyuM che ke"zraddhA parama durlabha che. manuSyapaNuM, kRti, zraddhA
ane saMyamamAM virya--e cAra vAnAM prANIone uttarottara parama durlabha che."
saddhAM paramahurjA !" " cattAri paramaMgANi dullahANiha jaMtuNe / mANunatta
gurU ddhA saMyamami vIracaM" -zrI uttarAdhyayana sUtra AmAM zAstrogI puruSane
aiti ane zraddhA te prApta thaI cUkyA che, e atre "tIvra mRtabedhavALa" ane
"zrAddha" e be vizeSaNathI batAvI dIdhuM. have saMyamamAM tenuM
vIyaAtmasAmarthya kevuM phure che, te batAvavA mATe kahyuM ke- yathAzakti
apramAdI-ane e zraddhALu hovAthI ja A zAstrogI apramAdI hoya che.
asthimajajAparyata hADohADa vyApI gayelI sAcI vajalepa zraddhA apramAda hoya, te
pachI te pramANe adamya utsAhathI, pUrNa umaMgathI, apramAdathI e tathArUpa
kriyAmAM pravarte, emAM zuM navAI ? kAraNa ke-

Page #90 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(24) The faith and knowledge that are grasped by the *Gadastisamuccaya*, those
are the actions that are performed...O merciful one! When the action, the
interest, and the doer become one, the cause and effect are reversed...O
merciful one! The soul dwells in its own home, and its own home becomes
auspicious...O merciful one, I pray to the *Yugamandhar*... - As Shri
Devchandraji and the above explanation have stated, the state of the soul being
corrupted and distracted from its true nature is called " *pramad* ". The one
who is not *pramad*, who remains in the state of the soul's true nature, is
called *apramat* or *apramadi*. This *apramat* soul is free from *mad*,
*vishaya*, *kashaya*, *vikath*, *raga-dvesha*, etc., types of *pramad*. Because
it resides in the high, *nilenpa*, *udasina*, pure state of the soul, which
*pramad* cannot touch; and in that state, it is eternally immersed, eternally
satisfied and content, and in that state, it attains supreme happiness. Where
can there be *prasad* for such a soul-contented soul? The worldly, sensual,
*indriya-rami* is bound, the *muni* is *atma-rami* in virtue; the one who is
primarily *atma-rami* is called *nishkama*... - Shri Shreyansth, Shri
Anandghanji. This *atma-rami* soul is extremely *atma-payagavant*, constantly in
self-awareness, and does not allow anything to interfere with the pure
substance-emotion observance of the five great vows, does not allow even a trace
of transgression in the five conducts, behaves without *raga-dvesha* in the five
objects, properly observes the five *samiti-trigupti*, etc., defeats the four
*kashayas* of anger, etc., keeps all *pramad* conduct far away, and remains in a
state of equanimity everywhere, performing all actions according to the
scriptures. According to the scriptures, the one who performs *bhavik* actions
is known by his pure character... - Shri Anandghanji. And how this ideal
substance-emotion *nirgath* *apramat* yogi acts with great courage in destroying
the *charitra-meha*, the previous poem, which presents a very beautiful word-
picture of this, cannot be resisted from being quoted here: "With all emotions,
he makes the attitude of *udasinya*, only the body is for the purpose of
restraint, nothing else is conceived for any other reason, even in the body, not
even a little bit of *mooch* is accepted... When will such an unprecedented
opportunity come? When will we become *bahiyantrar* *nigranth*? When the
*darshan-meha* is overcome and the *upa-bodh* is attained, the knowledge of the
pure consciousness that is different from the body; therefore, by rejecting the
*charitra-meha*, the contemplation of the pure form is practiced... - *aprava*

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
(24) gadaSTisamuccaya zraddhA jJAne je grahyo re, tehI ja kArya karAya
re....dayAlarAya ! kArya ruci kartA thaye re, kAraka savi palaTAya
re...dayAlarAya ! Atama ghara Atama rame re, nija ghara maMgala thAya
re...dayAla zrI yugamaMdhara vinavuM re" -zrI devacaMdrajI ane uparamAM vyAkhyA
karI hatI te pramANe, jenAvaDe karIne AtmA svarUpasthitithI bhraSTa-pramatta
thAya, tenuM nAma " pramAda" che. te pramAda jene nathI, je AtmasvarUpamAM
sthiti kare che, te apramatta athavA apramAdI che. A apramatta puruSa mada,
viSaya, kaSAya, vikathA, rAga-dveSa vagere pramAda prakArothI para hoya che.
kAraNa ke pramAda na spazI zake evA UMcA, nileMpa, udAsIna, zuddha AtmapadamAM
te birAjamAna hoya che; ane emAM ja te nitya rata, nitya saMtuSTa ne tRpta hoya
che, emAM ja tene parama sukha prApta thAya che. AvA AtmArAma puruSane prasAda
kayAMthI hoya? saMyela saMsArI iMdriyarAmI, muni guNa AtamarAmI re; mukhyapaNe
je AtamarAmI, te kahIye niSkAmI re.... zrI zreyAMsaTha" zrI AnaMdaghanajI A
AtmArAma puruSa atyaMta AtmApayegavaMta hoI, satata AtmajAgRtimaya hoI, paMca
mahAvratanA zuddha dravya-bhAva pAlanamAM kaMI paNa khalanA AvavA deto nathI,
paMca AcAramAM leza paNa aticAra lAgavA detuM nathI, paMca viSayamAM rAga-dveSa
rahita varte che, paMca samititrigupti Adi barAbara sAcave che, krodhAdi cAra
kaSAyane parAjaya kare che, sarva pramAda AcaraNa dUrathI vaje che, ane sarvatra
samabhAva bhAvata rahI yathAsUtra sarva AcaraNa kare che. sUtra anusAra je
bhavika kiriyA kare, tehane zuddha cAritra parikho...dhAra talavAranI" -zrI
AnaMdaghanajI ane A Adarza dravya-bhAva nirgatha apramatta yogI, cAritramehano
nAza karavAmAM kevA zUravIrapaNe pravarte che, tenuM tAdaza parama suMdara
zabdacitra rajU karatuM pUrva kAvya atre TAMkavAnI lAlaca rokI zakAtI nathI :
"sava bhAvathI audAsInya vRtti karI, mAtra deha te saMyama hetu hoya che, anya
kAraNe anya kazuM kalpa nahIM, dehe paNa kiMcit mUcha nava jaya ja.... apUrva
apUrva avasara evo kyAre Avaze? kayAre thaIzuM bAhyAMtara nigraMtha jo?
darzanameha vyatIta thaI upa bodha je, deha bhinna kevala caitanyanuM jJAna je;
tethI prakSINa cAritrameha vilekiye, varte evuM zuddha svarUpanuM dhyAna je.,
apUrva

Page #91 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Scriptural Self-Stability: Three Concise Points  **Firstly**, observe this
stability in the body: even in the face of severe trials or fearsome obstacles,
it remains unshaken. This stability is the result of unwavering restraint,
fueled by the pursuit of the ultimate goal, and guided by the teachings of the
Jinas. It is a state that, moment by moment, gradually diminishes, ultimately
merging into one's true nature.  **Secondly**, observe this stability in the
five senses: free from attachment and aversion, it remains undisturbed by the
five distractions. It transcends the limitations of matter, space, and time, and
is characterized by a constant state of equanimity.  **Thirdly**, observe this
stability in one's nature: towards anger, it exhibits a gentle disposition;
towards pride, it displays humility; towards delusion, it maintains a state of
witnessing; towards greed, it remains free from greed itself. Towards those who
inflict suffering, it harbors no ill will; even towards the cycle of birth and
death, it remains unattached. It transcends the limitations of the body, and is
characterized by a strong foundation of unwavering determination.
**Furthermore**, observe this stability in one's actions: it is characterized by
nakedness, shaved head, and abstinence from bathing, tooth-brushing, etc. It is
free from hair, beard, nails, or any other bodily adornment, and is a testament
to the restraint and discipline of the Nigrantha.  **Moreover**, observe this
stability in one's attitude: towards enemies and friends alike, it maintains
equanimity. It remains unaffected by honor or dishonor, and is characterized by
a pure and unwavering equanimity in the face of life and death, and throughout
the cycle of existence.  **Finally**, observe this stability in one's conduct:
it is characterized by solitude, wandering in cremation grounds, or dwelling in
mountains alongside tigers and lions. It is characterized by a steady posture
and a mind free from agitation, and is a testament to the attainment of the
ultimate friend.  **Furthermore**, observe this stability in one's inner state:
it is characterized by a mind free from agitation, both in the midst of
austerity and in the face of pleasure. It views dust particles and celestial
beings, as well as the riches and flying chariots of the gods, with the same
equanimity, recognizing them all as mere particles of matter.  **Ultimately**,
observe this stability in one's resolve: it is characterized by the complete
eradication of the attachment to virtue, and is a testament to the attainment of
an extraordinary state of being. It is characterized by a pure and unwavering
focus, and is a testament to the attainment of the highest state of being.
**Srimad Rajchandraji**, with unwavering determination, strives to overcome the
attachment to virtue, utilizing all his strength and resources. He is committed
to the destruction of the enemy of joy, with unwavering dedication and
determination. He is fully engaged in this endeavor, with unwavering resolve.
The phrase "to the best of one's ability" is used here with a specific purpose.
It signifies acting according to one's capacity, without exceeding it. It
implies two things:  1. **Not exceeding one's capacity:** This means not acting
beyond one's limits, and not exceeding one's capabilities. It implies refraining
from impossible actions, and acting within the limits of one's mental, verbal,
and physical capabilities. 2. **Acting according to one's capacity:** This means
utilizing all one's available strength and resources. It implies acting in
accordance with one's capabilities, and utilizing all one's potential.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
zAstraga AtmasthiratA traNa saMkSipta ganI, mukhyapaNe te va deha paryata jo;
ghora parISaha ke upasarga bhaye karI, AvI zake nahIM te sthiratAno aMta
je...apUrva saMyamanA hetuthI yega pravartAna, svarUpalakSe jina AjJA AdhIna je;
te paNa kSaNa kSaNa ghaTatI jatI sthitimAM, aMte thAye nija svarUpamAM lIna
je...apUrva paMca viSayamAM rAgadveSa virahitatA, paMca pramAde na maLe manano
kSobha jo; dravya kSetra ne kALa bhAva pratibaMdha vaNa vicaravuM udayAdhIna
paNa vItalobha je...apUrva krodha pratye te vatte koi svabhAvatA, mAna pratye te
dInapaNAnuM mAna je; mAyA pratye mAyA sAkSI bhAvanI, lobha pratye nahIM lobha
samAna che....apUrva bahu upasargakartA pratye paNa koi nahIM, vaMde cakrI
tathApi na maLe mAna je; deha jAya paNa mAyA thAya na romamAM, lebha nahIM cho
prabaLa siddhi nidAna je. apUrva nagnabhAva muMDabhAva saha asnAnatA,
adaMtadhAvana Adi parama prasiddha che; keza, rema, nakha ke aMge gAra nahI,
dravya-bhAva saMyamamaya nigraMtha siddha je....apUrva zatru mitra pratye vate
samadazitA, mAna-amAne varte te ja svabhAva je; jIvita ke maraNe nahiM
nyUnAdhikatA, bhava mekSe paNa zuddha varte samabhAva je...apUrva ekAkI vicarate
vaLI smazAnamAM, vaLI parvatamAM vAgha siMha saMga je; aDola Asana ne manamAM
nahIM kSebhatA, parama mitrane jANe pAmyA ga je....apUrva ghera tapazcaryAmAM
manane tApa nahIM, sarasa ane nahIM manane prasanna bhAva je, rajakaNa ke riddhi
vaimAnika devanI, sarve mAnyA pudgala eka ravabhAva je....apUrva ema parAjaya
karIne cAritramohane, AvuM tyAM jyAM karaNa apUrva bhAva je, zreNuM kSepakataNuM
karIne ArUDhatA, ananya ciMtana atizaya zuddha svabhAva je....apUrva -zrImad
rAjacaMdrajI Ama A apramatta bhegI cAritramehane parAjaya karavAne mATe
yathAzakti-pitAnI samasta zakti pramANe pravRtta thAya che, parama
AtmapuruSArthapUrvaka pramAdazatruno saMhAra karavAne kaTibaddha thAya che,
"bheTha bAMdhIne', 'raDha lagADIne maMDI paDe che. atre yathAzakti" zabda kahyo
che te sahetuka kahyo che. yathAzakti eTale jevI zakti hoya te pramANe,
yUnAdhika nahiM ema zaktine anusarIne. AnA be artha yathAzakti che: (1) eka te
potAnI zaktinuM ullaMghana karIne, zakti uparavaTa thaIne, eTale? potAnA gajA
uparAMta na karavuM te yathAzakti che. azakya anuSThAna na karavuM, ane pitAnA
mana-vacana-kAyAnI zakti lakSamAM rAkhI zakya anuSThAna karavuM, e A uparathI
sUcavyuM che. (2) bIjo artha e che ke-jeTalI potAnI zakti che

Page #92 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(26) Having spent all the accumulated wealth, one should perform [spiritual
practices] with all one's soul, without hiding any strength. To perform without
hiding the strength and vigor of the father, the non-destructive, is to perform
to the best of one's ability. Thus, this scriptural man is (1) sharp-witted, (2)
faithful, (3) diligent to the best of his ability. Here, "sharp-witted" implies
right knowledge, "faithful" implies right faith, and "diligent" implies right
conduct. Thus, this scriptural man is the best devotee-practitioner of the path
to liberation, which is in the form of right faith, right knowledge, and right
conduct. And such a man's scripture is unwavering and unbroken. The
characteristic of *samarthyayoga* is stated:   "The means indicated by the
scripture, and that which goes beyond it,  Due to the strength of the power,
especially, this is the best,  Called *samarthyayoga*." (5)  Meaning: That which
is indicated as a means by the scripture, and which is beyond even that
scripture, due to the strength of the power, is this *samarthyayoga*, which is
the best.  **Commentary:** Now, the form of the third *samaga* is described
here. *Samaga* means the *samarthyayoga*-dominant stage. It is said that the
*atmasamarthya* - the strength of the soul - is the main thing in this stage.
The scripture states that the *samarthyayoga* is the means, because its
statement in the scripture is general.   **Explanation:** That which is beyond
the scripture, due to the strength of the power, is beyond the scripture. (That
which goes beyond even the scripture. Why? It is said that due to the strength
of the power, it is beyond the scripture, due to its strength and power. It is
beyond the scripture, especially, not generally. Because the scripture is
general in its nature. This *samarthyayoga* is the best, the most important.
Because due to its being the cause of liberation, it quickly and directly leads
to the fruit of liberation.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
(26) gadaSTisamuccaya teTalI sava kharacI nAMkhIne, sarvAtmAthI karavuM, kaMI
paNa zakti gopavyA vinA"anizivaravariyo pitAnuM bala-vIrya gopavyA vinA-karavuM
te yathAzakti che. Ama A zAstrogI puruSa-(1) tIvra zrutabodhavALo, (2)
zraddhAvaMta, (3) yathAzakti apramAdI hoya che. AmAM tIvra dhutabodha" uparathI
samyaga jJAna, zraddhAvata'uparathI samyagadarzana, 'apramAdI" uparathI
sammacAritra sUcita thAya che. Ama A zAstrI puruSa samyaggadarzanajJAna-
cAritrarUpa mokSamArgano uttama ArAdhaka-sAdhaka hoya che. ane tevA puruSano A
zAstraga avikala-akhaMDa hoya che. sAmarthyatheganuM lakSaNa kahe che :
zAstrasaMdarzitopAyasyatadatikrAntagocaraH / zaktyu drekAdvizeSeNa
sAmarthyAkhyo'yamuttamaH // 5 // zAstramAMhi darzAviye, je yogane upAya; ne
tethI paNa para vaLI, viSaya jehane jAya; prabaLapaNathI zaktinA, vizeSe karI
Ama; te A uttama vega che, sAmarthya jenuM nAma, 5. artha :-zAstramAM jene upAya
darzAvelo che, ane te zAstra karatAM paNa vizeSathI jene viSaya-zaktinA udrekane
lIdhe-prabalapaNane lIdhe-para che, te A "sAmarthya nAmane uttama ga che.
vivecana have trIjA sAmaganuM svarUpa ahIM khecAnuM kahyuM che. sAmaga eTale
sAmarthyapradhAna yuga. AtmasAmarthyanuM-AtmAnA samartha paNAnuM jemAM
pradhAnapaNuM-mukhyapaNuM kRtti sANaMtivAda-sAmAnyathI zAstramAM jene upAya
darzAvela che, kahyo che; kAraNa ke zAstramAM tenuM kathana sAmAnyathI che.
tAtiwto:-te zAstrathI jene viSaya atikrAMta che-para che. (zAstra karatAM paNa
jene viSaya AgaLa vadhI jAya che. zA kAraNathI ? te mATe kahyuM zarayutta-
zakitanA ukathA, zaktitA prAbalyathI-prakhalapaNAthI. viroLa-vizeSathI,-nahi ke
sAmAnyathI tene viSaya zAstrathI para che. kAraNa ke zAstranuM sAmAnyathI
lipayavasAnapaNuM che. sAnathoDazaMA sAmarthyaga nAmano yoga, 3ttamada-uttama,
sarvapradhAna che. kAraNa ke tabhAvanA gabhAvanA hovApaNAne lIdhe, te akSepa
karIne-avilaMbe ja-zIdhrapaNe pradhAnaphalanuM-mekSanuM kAraNa hoya che.

Page #93 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
There are 27 **Saachdhyog** (auspicious conjunctions), and their name is
**Samarthya** (power). This **Yug** (era) is the best of all **Yugs**. There are
two characteristics of this **Yug**: (1) The remedy is generally shown in the
scriptures, (2) This **Yug** is more focused on the subject than the scriptures
themselves, due to the strength of power. This is how it is: The scriptures show
the remedy for this **Samarthya**, but they only show it generally, not
specifically. In this, the purpose of the scriptures is only guidance and
direction. Just as a knowledgeable person who asks for directions on a road, the
one who shows the way points with a general finger, but does not guide them all
the way, similarly, the scriptures also guide the **Mumukṣu** (aspirant) in this
**Yogmarg** (path of yoga) generally, saying, "Look! If you do this remedy, you
will achieve the desired goal." But it is the **Mumukṣu** with a pure mind who
walks on that path according to the instructions and makes the effort to travel.
And because they do this, they continue to progress further and further on the
**Yogmarg**, attaining higher and higher states of self-realization. And as they
do this, they also surpass the limitations of the scriptures, and they continue
to move forward, attaining subjects that are beyond the scriptures, subjects
that are not known to the scriptures. Because the scriptures only show the path
generally up to a certain point, saying, "Go in this direction with this
**Atmasamarthya** (self-power)." Then, it is up to the **Samarthya** to progress
further, to know the form of the path with their own **Atmasamarthya**. And this
kind of ability to progress, this **Samarthya**, this power, has come to this
**Yogi**. This **Vihang** (bird) who flies freely in the sky has developed so
much **Atmabal** (inner strength) that it is able to fly high at will on its
own. Therefore, it moves rapidly on the path of progress, and as it progresses
further, it sees the path ahead directly, the path that was visible from afar
becomes clear as it approaches, and what is directly perceived through
**Atmaanubhav** (self-experience) is clearly visible. In this, what other help
does it need besides **Atmasamarthya**? Thus, this **Samarth** (powerful)
**Yogi** has found the true path directly, and doubt has been removed, so they
move forward fearlessly, without any doubt, with firm determination, with the
**Atmabal** that they have cultivated through their own efforts, conquering the
peaks of the mountains one by one, and climbing higher and higher. * "**Vifa
Varṇita Śāśanamati: Pathi .. Jñānavō Yugota Iśeṣoparapa – Śrī Yaśovijayajīkṛta
Adhyātmapaniṣad**"

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
sAcadhyoga (27) che, tenuM nAma sAmarthya che. A yuga sarva yugamAM uttama yoga
che. AnA be lakSaNa kahyA -(1) zAstramAM Ano upAya sAmAnyapaNe darzAvyo che, (2)
vizeSapaNe te zAstra karatAM paNa A yogane viSaya para che,-zaktinA
prabalapaNAne lIdhe. te A prakAre - zAstramAM A sAmagane upAya batAve te che,
paNa te mAtra sAmAnyapaNe batAvyo che,-vizeSapaNe nahiM. AmAM zAstranuM
prayojana te mArgadarzana-dizAdarzana pUratuM che. jema zAstranuM kaI vaTemArgu
koI jANakArane rasto pUche, te rasto batAvanAra tene lAbethI sAmAnya AMgaLI
cIMdhIne te batAve che, paNa te kAMI tene TheTha vaLAvavA jete mArgadarzana
nathI tema zAsa paNa mumukSu sAmagrIne A yogamArgamAM gamana karavAnI sAmAnyathI
dizA sUjhADe che ke-juo ! A A upAya karaze to AgaLane mAga pAmaze. paNa tenI
sUcanA pramANe te mArge cAlavAnuM-gamanane puruSArtha karavAnuM kAma te te
nirmala mativALA mumukSunuM che. ane te tema kare che eTale ja te yogamArgamAM
AgaLa ne AgaLa prayANa karato jAya che, uttarettara vadhatI AtmadazAne-
guNasthAnane-pAmato jAya che. ane ema karatAM karatAM te zAkta maryAdAne paNa
vaTAvI jAya che, ane vizeSathI zAstrane agocara-zAstrathI para evA viSayane
pAmato pAmate AgaLa dhapatA jAya che. kAraNa ke zAstra te amuka hada sudhI
sAmAnyapaNe mArga batAve che ke-"A AtmasAmarthyathI phalANa dizAe cAlyA jAo."
pachI vizeSapaNe te sAmarthayegIe pragati potAnA AtmasAmarthyathI ja mArganuM
svarUpa jANI AgaLa vadhavAnuM rahe che. ane evA prakAre AgaLa vadhavAnuM
sAmarthya- samartha paNuM A yogImAM AvI gayuM hoya che, ga-gaganamAM muktapaNe
viharanArA A vihaMgamAM eTaluM badhuM Atmabala vRddhi pAmyuM hoya che, ke te
potAnI meLe ja yatheccha UMce UDavAne samartha thAya che. eTale te saDasaDATa
vegamArge cAlyo jAya che, ane te jema jema vizeSa karIne AgaLa jate jAya che,
tema tema potAnI meLe ja tene AgaLano bhAga pratyakSa dekhAte jAya che, je mArga
lAMbethI barAbara heta dekhAte te nikaTa AvatAM sAva spaSTa dekhAvA mAMDe che,
ane je mArA pratyakSa AtmAnubhavagamyapaNe cekakhece dekhAto hoya, temAM pachI
AtmasAmarthya sivAya bIjI zI sahAyanI tene apekSA rahe? Ama AvA samartha bhegIne
pratyakSa sAco mArga maLI gayo che, ne saMdeha chUTI gayuM che, eTale te
nirbhayapaNe-niHzaMkapaNe-daDha nizcaya paNe, potAnA aMdhAvelathI japitAnA
AtmabalathI ja, ga-parvatanI eka pachI eka bhUmikAo kRdAvato jAya che, ne ema
caDhato * "viphA varNitA zAzanamati: pathi .. jJAnavo yuaota izeSopa4rapa -zrI
yazovijyajIkRta adhyAtmapaniSadda

Page #94 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(28) The collection of virtues, the *gadashtis*, ultimately reaches the peak of
the *yoga-giri* (mountain of yoga), and a sound arises within its soul, saying,
"The path is found, doubts are dispelled; those waters are gone, the self is
distinct." - Shrimad Rajchandraji. Such a *samarthya-yogi* (capable yogi) has
the strength to move forward due to his self-power. He possesses such immense
self-power, cultivated through restraint, that it overflows. The source of this
overflowing power, this accumulation of energy, is his consistent practice of
*yoga* according to the ideal *shakti* (power) method. He has accumulated
immense power through the *yoga* of self-restraint. Because before reaching this
stage of *samarthya-yogi*, he first became truly desirous. He attained *ichchha*
(desire), *shravana* (hearing), etc., achieved *samyagdarshan* (right vision),
and attained self-knowledge. But he still had a degree of *pramada*
(distraction) in his character and restraint. He was a *pramatt yogi*
(distracted yogi). Then he became a *shastra-yogi* (scriptural yogi). Having
known the complete secrets of the scriptures, he became extremely devout and
free from distraction, a *samyat yogi* (restrained yogi). Thus, he progressively
increased his restraint. He stopped the dissipation of the soul's energy, which
was being wasted by the *pramatt yoga* of mind, speech, and body. He restrained
the soul as much as possible in its true form, keeping it restrained, and thus
accumulated immense self-power (mobilization). Even now, as he journeys on the
path of *yoga* in this *samarthya-yogi* stage, he remains intensely self-
confident, continuously increasing his infinite restraint and accumulating
intense self-power. This generates an outburst of power within him, and the
power that does not fit within his body propels him forward. "The power of
restraint, you said, is the mark of a wise and skillful person; the seeker, with
a heart full of the object of attainment, plays his own role. Our mind is
captivated by the Lord's qualities. Unbound by desire, he becomes unbound by
non-desire; abiding in the one principle, he contains the perishable power..." -
Shri Devchandraji. "Gradually, restraint touches him, he attains the perishable
state; the series of restraints blossoms, he worships the liberated state." -
Shri Yashovijayaji. And such a *samarthya-yogi* is the best, the chief, in all
ages.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
(28) gadaSTisamuccaya caDhate chevaTe yoga-girinA zRMga para pahoMcI jAya che,
ane tenA aMtarAtmAmAM anubhavegArarUpa dhvani UThe che ke - mAraga sAcA mila
gayA chUTa gaye saMdeha; hatA se te jala gayA, bhinna kiyA nija deha."-zrImad
rAjacaMdrajI AvA A sAmarthyathegImAM Ama AtmabalathI ja AgaLa vadhavAnuM
sAmarthya hoya che, tenuM kAraNa Atmazaktine uka-prabalapaNuM che. tenAmAM eTalI
badhI Atmazakti AvI gaI saMyamathI hoya che ke te ubharAI jAya che, ane A
ubharAI jatI zaktinuM mUla zakitasaMcaya kAraNa paNa tenI atyAra sudhInI Adarza
zAkta rIti pramANenI yega- sAdhanA che, AtmasaMyamanA yoge atyaMta zaktisaMcaya
karyo che-zakti jamA karI che te che. kAraNa ke A sAmarthyAganI bhUmikAe
pahoMcatAM pahelAM prathama te te sAce IcchAyegI thayo hato. IcchA-zravaNAdi
prApta thayA, samyagadarzana thayuM, AtmajJAna uparyuM, paNa tathArUpa
cAritramAM saMyamamAM haju tene pramAda hato, te pramatta yogI hatA. pachI te
zAstrayegI bane. zAstranA saMpUrNa rahasyane jJAtA thaye, atyaMta zraddhALu ne
apramAdI thaye, apramatta saMyata gI thaI gaye. Ama te uttarottara saMyamanI
vRddhi karato gayo. mana-vacana-kAyAnA pramatta yegathI AtmAnI veDaphAI jatI-
cArekora veraNa cheraNa thatI zaktine teNe aTakAvI; ane jema bane tema
AtmasvarUpamAM AtmAnuM saMyamana karI, AtmAne saMyamI rAkhI-rokI rAkhI, teNe
AtmavIryanI atyaMta jamAvaTa ( Mobilisation) karI. ane hamaNAM paNa A
sAmarthyogamAM legamArge prayANa karatA te tIrNa AtmapayegavaMta rahI, samaye
samaye anaMtA saMyama vardhamAna karate jaI AtmavIryanI ugra jamAvaTa karI rahyo
che. Ama tene zaktiudreka upaje che, ane aMgamAM nahiM samAtI te zakti ja tene
AgaLa vadhavAne prere che. saMyamanA yoge virya te, tame kIdhA paMDita dakSa re;
sAdhyarasI sAdhakapaNe, abhisaMdhi rame nija lakSa che. mana mohyuM amAruM
prabhuguNe. abhisaMdhi abaMdhaka nIpane, anabhisaMdhi abaMdhaka thAya re; sthira
eka tattvatA varatata, te kSAyika zakti samAya re....mana"--zrI devacaMdrajI
"anukrame saMyama sparzateja, pAmya kSAyika bhAva; saMyamazreNI phUlajI, pUjuM
pada niSpAva." -zrI yazovijyajI ane AvA A samarthagIno A sAmaga sarva yugomAM
uttama che, pradhAna che,

Page #95 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Samarthya Yoga (29) is the best. Because the definition of the word Yoga is
that which is with Moksha. Accordingly, this Samarthya Yoga, without delay,
without wasting time, is with the best fruit, which is Moksha, and quickly
becomes the cause of liberation. Therefore, this Samarthya Yoga is the supreme
Yoga, the Jagat Shiromani, the peak of the Agapravata. In support of this, it is
said - Siddhyakhyapad-samprapti-hetu-bheda na tattvatah / Shastradeva-
avagamyante, sarvathaiva-iha yogibhih // 6 // Siddhi-pad-prapti-hetu-bheda,
tattvatah, ahi; matra shastra-thi ja sarvatha, gamya gine nahi, 6. Meaning - The
differences in the causes of attaining the state called Siddhi are not known to
the Yogis from the scriptures, but only from the scriptures. In support of the
above discussion, it is said here that - the causes of attaining the state of
Siddhi, such as Samyak-darshan, knowledge, and conduct, are not known to the
Yogis, the true saints, and the virtuous, only through the scriptures. The
limitation of the scriptures is that some types can be known from the
scriptures, but not all. Because the differences in these causes of Samyak-
darshan, etc., are infinite, which is beyond speech, "where speech returns
from." Therefore, the scriptures are not all-powerful in relation to attaining
liberation, nor are they useless. Some types of Samyak-darshan, etc., which are
the causes of Moksha, can be known from the scriptures, but not all. Thus, the
scriptures are not useless, nor are they all-powerful, they are a guide to a
certain extent. Therefore, further, one has to grow through experience, the
friend, and the self-power, which is Samarthya Yoga. That is the meaning. Where
the scriptures end, Samarthya Yoga begins. Because, Kriti Siddhi-yara Karitu-
mera - the differences in the causes of attaining the state called Siddhi, the
special causes of attaining the state called Moksha - Samyak-darshan, etc. What?
That is - tattvatah - not from the true nature, from the ultimate truth. Ratri
Desavakyant - from the scriptures only. And yet, the scriptures are not useless,
not useless, not useless, therefore it is said - sarvave chommi - all here, to
the Yogis, that is, all types here - in this world, to the saints, are not
known; because the differences in these causes of Samyak-darshan, etc., are
infinite.**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
sAmarthyathAga (ra9) zreSTha che. kAraNa ke mokSanI sAthe je-jeDe te ga", ema
yoga zabdanI vyAkhyA che. e pramANe A sAmaga vagara vilaMbe, kALakSepa vinA,
mekSarUpa pradhAna uttama ga phala sAthe je che, zIdhrapaNe muktinuM kAraNa
thAya che. eTalA mATe A sAmaga parama yoga che, jegaziromaNi che, egaparvatanuM
zikhara che. AnA samarthana athe ja kahe che -
siddhayAkhyapadasaMprAptihetubhedA na tattvataH / zAstrAdevAvagamyante,
sarvathaiveha yogibhiH // 6 // siddhipada prApti hetunA, bheda tatvathI AMhi;
mAtra zAsathI ja sarvathA,gamya gine nahi, 6. artha - siddhi' nAmanA padanI
saMprAptinA hetubhedo ahIM tatvathI, yogIone zAstra dvArA ja, sarvathA ja
jANavAmAM AvatA nathI. vivecana upara je kahyuM tenA samarthana mATe-puSTi mATe
atre kahe che ke-ekSapadanI prAptinA je samyagadarzana-jJAna-cAritra vagere
hetuo che, kAraNavizeSa che, tenuM jJAna yogIone sAcA saMta sAdhupuruSane mAtra
zAstradvArA ja sarva prakAre thaI zake nahiM. zAstranI maryAdA hA, keTalAka
prakAro zAstrathI avazya jANI zakAya, paNa badhAya nahi. kAraNa ke te
samyagadarzanAdi hetabhedonA bheda anaMta che,-ke je vANIne acara che, "jo vAre
nivase jyAMthI vANI pAchI vaLe che. mATe muktiprApti saMbaMdhamAM zAstra
sarvathA samartha nathI, temaja vyartha paNa nathI. mekSanA heturUpa
samyagadarzanAdinA keTalAka prakAre ja zAstrathI jANI zakAya che, badhAya nahi.
Ama zAstranuM vyarthapaNuM paNa nathI, temaja sarvathA samarthapaNuM paNa nathI,
amaka maryAdA sudhI tenuM digadarzana che. tethI AgaLa to anubhava mitra
AtmasAmarthyarUpa sAmagathI vadhavAnuM che. e tAtparya che. zAstramaryAdA jyAM
pUrI thAya che, tyAM sAmarthyoga zarU thAya che. kAraNa kRtti siddhayArA
kAritumerA -siddhi nAmanA padanI saMprAptinA hetubhedo, mekSa nAmanA padanI
saMprAptinA kAraNavizeSa-samyagudarzanAdi. zuM ? te ke- tattvataH-nathI
tavabhAvathI, paramArtha thI. rAtrI desAvAkyanta-zAstrathakI ja jANavAmAM AvatA.
ane ema chatAM zAstranuM vaiyacyuM-vyarthapaNuMkAgaTapaNuM nathI, eTalA mATe
kahyuM-sarvave commi -sarvathA ja ahIM yogIone, eTale sarveya prakArathI ahIM-
lekamAM sAdhuone jANavAmAM AvatA nathI; kAraNa ke te samyaggadarzanAdi
utabhedonA anaMta bheda che.

Page #96 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(30) The collection of scriptures known as *Gadasti* does not go beyond
providing direction. It simply says, "Brother, go in this direction in this
way."  This is the extent of the guidance that the scriptures offer to the
capable *yogi*. They cannot speak of the unspeakable. Therefore, the capable
*yogi* must rely on the power of *jnanayoga* - the knowledge gained through
self-realization. This *yoga* alone can lead him to the state of *kaivalya*
(liberation). This experience, this friend, makes him a pure being, a pure
consciousness, a true self.  "The scriptures only point the way, they do not go
beyond that. It is *jnanayoga* that takes me to the other shore, not mere
words!" - *Shri Adhyatma Panishad*  "The knowledge that remains only as
experience... is a rare opportunity." - *Shrimad Rajchandraji*  "The scriptures
show the way, but they cannot speak of the unspeakable. The path is clear, free
from obstacles. Experience is the true guide." - *Veer Jineshwar Parmeshwar*
"Oh, the cleverness of experience! Oh, the joy of realization! The inner
knowing, the divine within, keeps the path clear." - *Veer*  "Through
experience, one finds the Lord. All desires are fulfilled. The state of
liberation is attained through experience. The great *Mahavira* is a treasure of
joy." - *Ogirāj Anandghanaji*  It is believed that all knowledge is ultimately
derived from scriptures. This is a fallacy.   "All knowledge is ultimately
derived from direct experience, not from scriptures. The scriptures only serve
as a guide. The realization of the true self, the knowledge of the all-knowing,
and the attainment of liberation are all achieved through direct experience." -
*Verse 7*  In other words, the scriptures are only a means to an end. The true
goal is to achieve direct experience. This is the only way to attain liberation.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
(30) gadaSTisamuccaya ke zAstra te dizAdarzanathI AgaLa DagaluMya cAlatuM
nathI,-"bhAI ! amuka dizAe amuka rIte cAlyA jAo." eTalI ja dizA sAmAnyapaNe A
samartha yegIne sUjhADIne zAstra aTakI jAya che, vacana agocara vAta te kahI
zakatuM nathI. eTale pachI to A samartha gIne sAmarthyaveganuM-AtmAnubhavarUpa
jJAnayoganuM ja avalaMbana rahe che, ane te yaMga ja tene TheTha kaivalya pada
sudhI pahoMcADe che, te anubhava mitra tene sahaja AtmasvarUpa, zuddha
caitanyasvAmI banAve che. " padamAtraM hi nAnveti zAstraM digdarzanottaram /
jJAnayogo mune, pArthamAdaiva na murati ! -zrI adhyAtmapaniSadda "anubhavagecara
mAtra rahyuM te jJAna je....apUrva avasara."-zrImad rAjacaMdrajI "dizi dekhADI
re zAstra savi rahe, na lahe agocara vAta kAraja sAdhaka bAdhaka rahita che,
anubhava mitta vikhyAta. vIra jinezvara paramezvara . aho caturAI re anubhava
mittanI, aho tasa prIta pratIta, aMtarajAmI svAmI samIpa te, rAkhI mitra
rIta....vIra. anubhava saMge re raMge prabhu maLyA, saphaLa phaLyAM savi kAja;
nija pada saMpada je te anubhave re AnaMdaghana mahArAjavIra." -ogIrAja
AnaMdaghanajI sarvathA tene pariccheda (parijJAna) zAsathakI ja mAnavAmAM
AvatAM, doSa kahe che - sarvathA tatparicchedAtsAkSAtkAritvayogataH /
tatsarvajJatvasaMsiddhestadA siddhipadAptitaH // 7 // sarvathA ja jo zAsathI,
jJAna tehanuM heya; te sAkSAtakAritvane, joga tehane sahAya, jUtti -sarvathA -
sarvathA, akSepe-avilaMbe phasAdhakapaNa vagere sarva prakArethI, taravariSThatA
- zAstrathakI ja te siddhi nAmanA padanI prAptinA hetubhedonA paricchedane
lIdhe-parijJAnane lIdhe, zuM ? te ke -sAkSAritrayonara -kevala tethI ja
sAkSAtkAriNae karIne vegathI-kAraNathI, (pratyakSapaNAnA kAraNe), tarAvasaMvile-
te zrotA yogInA sattapaNAnI siddhine lIdhe-prastuta hetubhedone AnAvaDe karIne
sathA paridarUpa ga thaze eTalA mATe, ane tethI karIne tavA-tyAre ja, zravaNu
kAle ja, riddhiAti :siddhi padanI-muktipadanI prApti thaze tene lIdhe, kAraNa ke
agi kevalIpaNAno paNa zAthI ja sadabhAva jANavAno prasaMga prApta thaze eTalA
mATe, arthAta ameza kevalIpaNuM 5Na zAstrathI ja javAze, eTale siddhipadanI
prApti paNa thaI jaze ! (Ama A doSa prApta thAya che).

Page #97 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(31) Therefore, when omniscience is attained, the attainment of the Siddhi-pad
(state of liberation) also happens. 7, Meaning - The knowledge of Samyakdarshan
(right faith) etc. is attained through scriptures, and this will be combined
with the direct experience of the realization of the self. And when this
happens, due to the attainment of the state of omniscience, the attainment of
the Siddhi-pad will happen. (Thus, a contradiction arises).  Now, the
contradiction arises when it is assumed that the knowledge of the cause of the
attainment of the Siddhi-pad is attained through scriptures. This is explained
here - 1) When this happens, there will be direct experience of all the
emotions, (2) Therefore, omniscience will be attained, (3) And in the same way,
liberation will also be attained by simply listening. (1) When all the types of
Samyakdarshan etc. are known through scriptures, then all the emotions are
realized, all the emotions are seen directly. (2) Therefore, after listening,
the listener Yogi will attain omniscience! Knowing from scriptures - listening,
immediately Kevalgyan! All other five-fold activities and confusion disappear!
(3) And when this happens, at the time of listening, the attainment of the
Siddhi-pad will also happen! Direct liberation will be attained! Because, the
scriptures provide the opportunity to know the Ayogik-Kevali (liberated without
effort). Therefore, according to the above logic, Siddhi should happen as soon
as one knows! But this is not seen happening, and all this is directly
contradictory, undesirable, and affected by the obstacles of the eight karmas.
Because (1) All the emotions are not seen directly through scriptures, they are
seen indirectly. The subject of Shrutagyan (scriptural knowledge) is indirect,
not direct. (2) Thus, direct knowledge is not attained through scriptures,
therefore, omniscience is not attained through them. (3) Similarly, the
attainment of the Siddhi-pad is also not seen happening. Therefore, the
principle is established that the objects of Samyakdarshan etc. cannot be known
in all ways through scriptures. This is not derived from the knowledge of
scriptures etc., but from experiential knowledge.  "It may be that Shrimad
Rajchandraji will say this, but what is the harm in that? Therefore, it is said
here -

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
sAmaga (31) tethI sarvajJatvanI, siddhi sAMpaDatAM ya; prApti siddhi pada taNI,
tyAre ja thaI jAya ! 7, artha -sarvathA zAstradvArA ja te samyagadarzanAdinuM
parijJAna thAya, te sAkSAtkAri paNAno pratyakSapaNAne yoga thaze, ane tema
thatAM tene sarvapaNAnI saMsiddhine lIdhe tyAre ja siddhipadanI prApti thaI jaze
! (Ama deSa Ave che). vivecana have je zAsathakI ja te siddhipadanI prAptinA
kAraNavizenuM sarvathA jJAna thAya ema mAnavAmAM Ave, te ze virodha Ave che?
tene ahIM khulAso karyo che -1) je ema thAya te sarva bhAvanuM pratyakSapaNuM
thaze, (2) eTale tyAre ja sarvajJapaNuM sAMpaDaze, (3) ane tevI ja rIte tyAre
zravaNa thatAM ja mukti paNa maLaze ! (1) je zAstrathI ja samyagadarzana
vagerenA sarva prakAro jANavAmAM AvI jAya, te pachI te sarva bhAvone sAkSAtkAra
thAya, te sarva bhAva pratyakSa dekhAya. (2) eTale pachI zravaNa karatAM ja
sAMbhaLatAM veMta ja te zrotA yogIne sarvajJApaNuM sAMpaDI jAya ! zAstrathI
jANyuM-sAMbhaLyuM ke tarata kevalajJAna ! bIjI badhI paMcAta ne mAthAkUTa maTI
jAya ! (3) ane tema thAya te tyAre ja-sAMbhaLatI veLAe ja tene siddhipadanI
prApti paNa thaI jAya ! sAkSAt mokSa maLI jAya ! kAraNa ke zAstrathI ja
ayogikevalipaNAne paNa jANavAno prasaMga bane che. eTale ukta nyAye tema jANatAM
ja siddhi thaI javI joIe ! paNa tema banatuM dekhAtuM nathI ane A badhuM
pratyakSa viruddha che, aniSTa che, daSTaISTa bAdhita che. kAraNa ke (1) zAstra
dvArA te sarvabhAva sAkSAt-pratyakSa eTale AtmAnubhavagamyapaNe dekhAtA nathI,
parekSapaNe ja dekhAya che. zrutajJAnano viSaya parokSa che, pratyakSa nathI.
(2) Ama zAsathI pratyakSa jJAna thatuM nathI, eTale te thakI sarvajJapaNuM paNa
ghaTatuM nathI. (3) tema ja siddhipadanI prApti paNa thatI dekhAtI nathI. mATe
zAstradvArA ja samyagadarzanAdi kSahetuo sarvathA sarva prakAre jANI zakAya
nahi, e siddhAnta daDha thaye. zAstrAdikanA jJAnathI nIveDo nathI, paNa
anubhavajJAnathI nIvaDe che." -zrImad rAjacaMdrajI e haze, ema paNa bhale he,
emAM amane zI bAdhA che? eTalA mATe atre kahe che--

Page #98 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(32) **Gadastisamuccaya**  Not this way, because it is not possible to say that
the **Samarthyayoga** is **avachy** (indescribable) which is associated with
**Pratibhajnana** (intuitive knowledge) and is the means for **Sarvajnatva**
(omniscience) etc. 8 //  **Meaning:**  This is not the case, because the
**Samarthyayoga** which is associated with **Pratibhajnana** cannot be described
as **avachy** (indescribable), as it is the means for **Sarvajnatva**
(omniscience) etc.   **Commentary:** Someone might say, "Well, if **siddhi**
(liberation) is achieved through **shastra** (scripture) alone, what is the
problem?" The answer is given here: "Brother, that is not the case. If
**siddhi** were achieved through **shastra** alone, what problem would we have?
What is more obvious than the direct contradiction? What is more crude than
that? But it does not appear to be so, there is a contradiction in direct
evidence. Because indirect knowledge of **agipana** (non-attachment) comes from
**shastra**, but no one becomes truly **agipana** through it. This is because
**agipana** and **kevalapana** (omniscience) are not achieved through
**shastra** alone, but through **siddhi** (liberation). And because this is the
case, the **Samarthyayoga** which is associated with **Pratibhajnana**
(intuitive knowledge) and is **marganusari** (according to the path) and
**prakrusht** (excellent) is **avachy** (indescribable). It is
**samarthyapradhan** (powerful) and **yog** (practice). This is because the
**kshayapashreni** (series of destruction) of **dharmavyapar** (religious
activity) continues. This **Samarthyayoga** is **avachy** (indescribable), it
cannot be described, it is **sanvedanasiddha** (experienced through the senses)
and **atmanubhavgamya** (understandable through self-experience) for the
**yogi** (practitioner). It is the means for **sarveshwasaadhan** (all-pervasive
means) and **sarvajnatva** (omniscience) etc. It leads to **sarvottapana**
(highest liberation) without delay.   **Doubt:** Someone might doubt, "This
**Pratibhajnana** (intuitive knowledge) is also **shrautjnana** (scriptural
knowledge)." No, it is not **shrautjnana**, because it is a different kind of
knowledge. And it is not **keval** (omniscience), because it is the result of
**samayoga** (coincidence).   **Conclusion:** The **siddhi** (liberation) is
achieved through **shastra** (scripture) alone. This is not **shrautjnana**
(scriptural knowledge), nor **keval** (omniscience), nor any other kind of
knowledge. It is like the night, day, and dawn. Dawn is not different from night
and day, nor is it one of the two. Similarly, this **Pratibhajnana** (intuitive
knowledge) is not one of the two, nor is it one of the two. Because of the
**utkrusht** (excellent) **kshayapashma** (destruction of karma) at that moment,
it is **asambavyavaharya** (incomprehensible) in terms of **shrautjnana**
(scriptural knowledge). And because of the **kshayopashma** (destruction of
karma), it is not **keval** (omniscience) because it is not the subject of
**ashesh** (all) **dravya-paryaya** (categories of matter). And this
**Pratibhajnana** (intuitive knowledge) is **vachya** (describable) through
words like **tarakjnana** (liberating knowledge) and **nirikshanjnana**
(observational knowledge). It is also **ishta** (desirable) for others.
Therefore, it is **adosh** (faultless).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
(32) gadaSTisamuccaya na caitadevaM yattasmAtprAtibhajJAnasaMgataH /
sAmarthyayogo'vAcyo'sti, sarvajJatvAdisAdhanam // 8 // ne A ema nate thakI,
sahita pratibhA jJAna; sAmarthya roga avAgya che, sarvatAdi nidAna, 8 artha--ane
kAraNa ke e ema nathI, teTalA mATe pratibha jJAnathI saMgata eve sAmaga avAcya
na kahI zakAya evuM che, ke je sarvajJapaNA vagerenA sAdhanarUpa che. vivecana
koI kaheze ke "bhalA ! zAstrathI ja siddhi padanI prApti bhalene thaI jatI hoya
! emAM ApaNane zI harakata che ?" teno ahIM javAba Ape che ke-bhAI ! ema nathI.
je zAstrathI ja siddhi maLI jatI hota, te amane zI harakata hoya ? pratyakSa
virodha te enA jevuM saheluM bIjuM zuM? ene jevuM rUDuM zuM ? paNa ema te thatuM
dekhAtuM nathI, pratyakSa pramANane temAM virodha Ave che. kAraNa ke agIpaNAnuM
parokSa jJAna zAstrathI thAya che, paNa keI tethI karIne sAkSAt agIpaNuM vRtti -
jaitavaM--ane A-hamaNAM ja je upara kahyuM te ema nathI. kAraNa ke zAstrathakI
agi kevalapaNAne baMdha thaye paNa, siddhinI asiddhi che, (siddhi prApta thatI
nathI). ane Ama che teTalA mATekArimajJAnataMtaH-pratibhajJAnathI saMgata,
mArgAnusArI prakRSTa "ha" nAmanA jJAnathI yukata, zuM ? te kesAmarthakonaH-
sAmarthyapradhAna yoga te sAmarthyavega. eTale prakramathI-cAlu viSayamAM
kSapakazreNIgata dharmavyApAra ja rahyo che. A-vALotti-avAcya che, kahI zakAya
evo nathI, tenA yogIne saMvedanasiddha arthAta AtmAnubhavagamya che,
sarvezavAsAdhana-savajJapaNa AdinuM sAdhana che,-akSepa karIne (vagara vilaMbe)
AnA thakI sarvottaparNanI siddhi hoya che teTalA mATe. koI zaMkA kare_ A
pratibhAna paNa zratajJAna ja che. nahi te jhA jJAnano prasaMga AvI paDaze. ane
A kevala paNa nathI, kAraNa ke e sAmayoganA kAryarUpa che. ane Ama siddhi nAmanA
padanI saMprAptinA hetabhedo tatvathI zAstrathakI ja jANavAmAM Ave che. atre
samAdhAna karavAmAM Ave cheH A nathI zrata, nathI kevala, ke nathI jJAnAMtara
(bIjuM kaI jJAna),-rAtrI, divasa ne arUNodayanI jema. kAraNa ke aruNodaya nathI
rAtri-divasathI jUdo, tema ja nathI te bemAMthI eka paNa kahI zakAte. ema A
prAtijJAna paNa nathI te bethI ja, tema ja nathI; te bemAMthI eka paNa kahI
zakAtuM. kAraNa ke tatkALe ja tevA prakAranA utkRSTa kSayapazamavALA bhAvane
lIdhe, mRtapaNe tatvathI tenuM asaMvyavahAryapaNuM che (zratarUpe tene thI e
zrata nathI: ane kSAyopathamikapaNAne lIdhe, azeSa dravya-paryAyanA aviSayapaNAe
karIne (sarva dravya-paryAya nathI jaNAtA) te kevala paNa nathI, eTalA mATe. ane
A tArakajJAna-nirIkSaNa jJAna Adi zabadathI vAcya (oLakhAtuM) evuM prAtija jJAna
bIjAone (anyadarzanIeAne) paNa ISTa che. eTalA mATe adoSa che.

Page #99 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(23) I have not seen or heard of anyone attaining the state of liberation
without a body, or reaching the state of Siddhi. And if there were a scripture
through which direct knowledge of the past could be obtained, then that person
should have directly attained the state of Siddhi. But that does not seem to be
happening. And this is why the Samarthya Yoga is indescribable, cannot be spoken
of, and is beyond the reach of scriptures. Because the subject of scriptures is
indirect, and the subject of Samarthya Yoga is direct, that is, it is
experienced by the soul, it is an indescribable realization. That is why this
Samarthya Yoga has been called self-realized, experienced by the soul. This "G"
refers to the category of Kshapaka, which is the Dharmavyapar, that is, the
Dharmavyapar of the Samarthayogi who has initiated the Kshapaka series, who is
engaged in the Dharma, which is the nature of the soul, is called Samarthya
Yoga. In it, there is a predominance of self-realization, knowledge of self-
awareness, which is why it is called Samarthya Yoga. "Revealed experience, taste
of the essence." "The experience of the past, the garden of joy, the treasure of
joy." - Shri Devchandraji  This Samarthya Yoga is "associated with, combined
with, Pratijnaan, and it becomes the means, the cause, of omniscience, etc. It
is as follows: Pratijnaan is the knowledge that arises from Pratibha, knowledge
that is endowed with Pratibha. Pratibha is extraordinary light, brilliance,
radiance. In which the extraordinary experience of the soul shines, radiates,
glows, that is Pratijnaan. In which the power of consciousness is
extraordinarily intense, Pratijnaan, wonder, unique experience, light,
brilliance, is revealed, is experienced, is called "Pratijnaan". Such Pratijnaan
is present in Samarthya Yoga. It is also called "Uha" (unique philosophical
contemplation) according to the path, because according to the path, it is the
unique philosophical contemplation of the "Drshtanta" who is walking on the path
of liberation, following the pure path. For example - the inert becomes
conscious, the nature of matter is different, both are understood clearly; the
form of consciousness is itself inert, it is only a relationship, or it is also
in matter; that experience is illuminated, the inert becomes detached, it
becomes self-awareness; the body is forgotten, Maya is pacified in the form of
Maya, for the Nigrantha, this is the path, the end of existence, the remedy." -
Shrimad Rajchandraji

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
sAmarthyoga (23) deharahita mukta avasthA pAmI, siddhipadane prApta thate dITho
ke sAMbhaLyuM nathI. ane je zAstradvArA agIpaNAnuM pratyakSa jJAna thatuM hota,
te te pratyakSapaNe tene siddhipadanI prApti thavI joItI hatI. paNa tema te
banatuM dekhAtuM nathI. ane Ama che eTalA mATe ja, sAmarthyoga je che te avAcya
che, kaho jAya evo nathI, zAstravANIne agocara che. kAraNa ke zAstrane viSaya
parokSa che, ane sAmarthya gane viSaya pratyakSa eTale ke AtmAnubhavagocara che,
sAkSAtkArarUpa avAcya che. eTale ja A sAmarthyoga tenA megIne
svasaMvedanasiddha, AtmAnu bhavagamya kahyo che. A "ga" eTale kSapakazreNIgata
gIne dharmavyApAra ja che, arthAt kSapakazreNI jeNe AraMbhelI che evA samartha
yegIne AtmasvabhAvarUpa dharmamAM vartanArUpa je dharmavyApAra che, tenuM nAma
ja sAmaga che. emAM AtmAnubhavanuM-svasaMvedanajJAnanuM pradhAnapaNuM hoya che,
eTale ja ene sAmarthyaga kahela che. "pragaTe anubhava rasa AsvAda." vAsI
anubhava naMdanavananA, bhegI AnaMdaghananA." -zrIdevacaMdrajI A A sAmarthyaga
"prAtijajJAnathI saMgata-saMyukta hoya che, ane te sarvajJapaNa AdinA
sAdhanarUpa-kAraNarUpa thAya che. te A pramANe prAtijJAna eTale pratibhAthI
upajatuM jJAna, pratibhAsaMpanna jJAna. pratibhA eTale asAdhAraNa prakAza,
jhaLaka, camakAro. jemAM asAdhAraNa AtmAnubhavane prakAza jhaLake che camake che
te prAtija jJAna. jemAM caitanyazaktine asAdhAraNa atizayavaMta prAtija jJAna
camatkAra, apUrva anubhava prakAza pratibhAse che, pragaTa jaNAya che-anubhavAya
che, tenuM nAma "prAtibha jJAna" che. AvuM prAtija jJAna atre sAmarthyayegamAM
hoya che. ene mArgAnusArI prakRNa "Uha" (ananya tattvaciMtana) nAmanuM jJAna
paNa kahe che, kAraNa ke mArthAnusArI eTale sAkSAt mekSamArge cAlyA jatA "daSTA"
gInuM atre zuddha mArgane anusaratuM ananya tattvaciMtana hoya che. jemake -
jaDa ne cetana bane dravyane svabhAva bhinna, supratItapaNe baMne jene samajAya
che; svarUpa cetana nija jaDa te saMbaMdha mAtra, athavA te ya paNa para
dravyamAMya che; e anubhavane prakAza ullAsita thaye, jaDathI udAsI tene
AtmavRtti thAya che; kAyAnI visArI mAyA svarUpe zamAyA evA, nigraMthane paMtha
bhava aMtane upAya che." -zrImad rAjacaMdrajI

Page #100 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(3) **Gadashtīsamuccaya** - This **pratibhajñāna**-like, great, luminous lamp
(Search-Light) illuminates the path ahead, making it self-luminous and radiant.
Thus, with the strength of **yogi**, the path becomes visible and the **yogi**
progresses forward, ascending the **kṛpaśreṇī** and gradually destroying the
**karma** nature. “Thus, by conquering the **chāritrameha**, reaching that state
where the **karaṇa** is devoid of previous **bhāva**, ascending the **śreṇī**
with the **kṣepaka** of **āruḍhatā**, with unique contemplation and extremely
pure nature... an unprecedented opportunity. The **meha** swims like a self-born
ocean, reaching a state where the **guṇasthāna** is diminished, at that time,
becoming completely **vītarāga**, revealing the treasure of **kevalajñāna**...
an unprecedented opportunity.” – **Śrīmad Rājacandrajī**. Further, this
**sāmavega** is the means and cause of **sarvajñapana**-**siddhapada**, etc.
Because, through it, without any will, the attainment of
**sarvajñāna**-**kevalajñāna**, etc., occurs. This **yogi**, endowed with
**prātibhājñāna**, ascends the **kṣepakaśreṇī** and at the end of the **śreṇī**,
attains **kevalajñāna**. With the rise of the **kevalajñāna** sun, the **yogi**
becomes **sarvajña**-**sarvadashī**. And then, when the lifespan of this last
body is complete, the **yogi** becomes **ayogi kevalī-siddha**, the physical
form is destroyed.” The four **karma** are completely destroyed, the seeds of
**bhavana** are completely destroyed, the **sarvabhāva** knower becomes
completely pure, the **kṛtakṛtya** **prabhu** has infinite light... an
unprecedented opportunity. The four **karma** of **vedanā**, etc., are
destroyed, leaving only the form like a burnt cinder; the state of the body is
dependent on the lifespan, when the lifespan is complete, the physical form is
destroyed... unprecedented.” – **Śrīmad Rājacandrajī**. And perhaps one may
doubt, from where does this sixth knowledge, **prātibhājñāna**, come? It does
not diminish, because knowledge is only of five types. And this
**prātibhājñāna** is not **kevalajñāna**, because **kevalajñāna** is like the
result of the work of **sāmagāna**, it is the form-fruit, the result, because
the work and the result are not one. Therefore, this **prātibhājñāna** is
**śruta-jñāna**.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
(3) gadaSTisamuccaya - A pratibhajJAnarUpa mahAtejasvI pradIpanA (Search-Light)
prakAzathI AgaLa mAga svayaM prakAzamAna dekhAya che-jhaLahaLI rahe che, eTale
sAmarthyayegI pragaTa mAga dekhato dekhate AgaLa dhape che, kRpazreNI para
caDhatA jAya che, ane karma prakRtiene kSaya karato jAya che. "ema parAjaya
karIne cAritramehane, AvuM tyAM jyAM karaNa apUrva bhAva je; zreNI kSepaka taNI
karIne ArUDhatA, ananya ciMtana atizaya zuddha svabhAva je... apUrva avasara.
meha svayaMbhUramaNa samudra tarI karI, sthiti tyAM jyAM kSINa guNasthAna che,
atasamaya tyAM pUrNa svarUpa vItarAga thaI, pragaTAvuM nija kevalajJAna nidhAna
je... apUrva avasara." -zrImad rAjacaMdrajI vaLI A sAmavega, sarvajJapaNuM-
siddhapada vagerenuM sAdhana che, kAraNa che. kAraNa ke enA vaDe karIne vagara
vilae, sarvajJANA-kevalajJAna vagerenI siddhi thAya che. prAtibha jJAnathI yukta
evA sAmarthyagathI kSapakazreNI para caDhate caDhate A yegI, sarvajJatAdinuM te
zreNInA aMte kevalajJAna pAme che, ne kevalajJAna bhAnune udaya thatAM sAdhana
te sarvajJa-sarvadazI bane che. ane pachI A chellA dehanuM AyuSya pUrNa thaye,
te ayogI kevalI-siddha thAya che, daihika pAtra maTI jAya che." cAra karma
ghanaghAtI te vyavacacheda jyAM, bhavanA bIja taNe AtyaMtika nAza je, sarvabhAva
jJAtA dachA saha zuddhatA, kRtakRtya prabhu vIrya anaMta prakAza je....apUrva
vedanIyAdi cAra karma vate jahAM, baLI sIMdarIvat AkRti mAtra je; te dehAyuSa
AdhIna jenI sthiti che, AyuSa pUNe maTiye daihika pAtra .apUrva" -zrImad
rAjacaMdrajI ane kadAca ema zaMkA thAya ke-A chaThuM jJAna prAtija jJAna kyAMthI
kaI? te te ghaTe nahiM, kAraNa ke jJAna te pAMca prakAranA ja che. ane A
prAtibha jJAna kevaLajJAna paNa nathI, kAraNa ke kevalajJAna te sAmaganA kArya
saMdhyA jevuM rUpa-phaLa pariNAmarUpa che, kAraNa ke kArya baMne eka hAya nahiM.
mATe A prAtija jJAna zrutajJAna ja che.

Page #101 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Translation:  **Samarthyoga (35)**  Its resolution is this: This pratibha-
jnana is not shruta-jnana, nor is it kevala-jnana, nor is it any other
knowledge. Just as the dawn is distinct from night and day, yet it is not one of
the two; similarly, this pratibha-jnana is the knowledge of the junction between
shruta and kevala, it is distinct from both, yet it is not one of the two. (1)
It cannot be called shruta-jnana, because it has such an excellent pratibha-
sampanna lopa-shma, that it cannot be dealt with as shruta-jnana. (2) Nor can it
be called kevala-jnana, because pratibha-jnana is lapa-shmik-upa-shma bhavarupa,
and kevala-jnana is kshayik bhavarupa. And in pratibha-jnana, all dravya-paryaya
cannot be known, while in kevala they can be known. Thus, there is a clear
distinction between the two.   "Chenaiznitah sa tu katimëjnit: Ladya vinatrikhya
vghu thai chhe" - Shri Adhyatma Upanishad and other darshanas also agree with
this "pratibha-jnana". They call it "tarak-nirikshan" etc. Tarak means the one
that saves from the ocean of births. Nirīkṣaṇa means the direct vision of the
dṛṣṭa puruṣa. Thus, there is no fault in believing this pratibha-jnana, that is,
it is true and right.  To explain the difference in samarthyoga, it is said:
"Dvidhayam dharmasannnyasayogasannnyasasangnitaha / Kshayopa-shamika dharmaha,
yogah kayadi karma tu // 9 //"  This samarthyoga has two types: first, dharma-
sannnyasa, and second, yoga-sannnyasa. Those dharmas which are kshapa-shmik are
called dharma-sannnyasa; karma like kaya etc. is called yoga-sannnyasa. 9
**Vritti:**  These two types are called samarthyoga. How? Because the name
"dharma-sannnyasa" arises from the combination of dharma-sannnyasa and
sannnyasa. Similarly, the name "yoga-sannnyasa" arises from the combination of
yoga and sannnyasa. And here, it is recognized in such a way that it is clearly
identified, therefore it is considered as such. What are these dharmas? It is
said that they are kshapa-shmik dharmas. These are dharmas like kshama etc.
which arise from kshaya and upashma. And yoga is the activity of kaya etc. -
karma like sarvakaran etc.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
sAmarthyoga (35) tenuM samAdhAna ema che ke-A pratibha jJAna grutajJAna nathI,
kevalajJAna nathI, tema ja bIjuM koI paNa jJAna nathI. jema aruNodaya rAta-
divasathI jUdo nathI, tema ja te bemAMthI eka paNa nathI; tema A pratibhajJAna
zruta-kevalanI vaccenI saMdhinuM jJAna che, te te bethI jU paNa nathI, tema ja
te bemAMthI eka paNa nathI. (1) tene zrutajJAna paNa na kahI zakAya, kAraNa ke
temAM evo koI utkRSTa pratibhAsaMpanna lopazama hoya che, ke tene zrutajJAnapaNe
vyavahAra thaI zake nahiM. (2) tema ja te kevalajJAna paNa na kahevAya, kAraNa
ke prAtija jJAna lApazamika-upazama bhAvarUpa che, ane kevalajJAna te kSAyika
bhAvarUpa che. tathA pratibhA jJAnamAM sarva dravya-paryAya jANI zakAtA nathI,
ne kevalamAM jANI zakAya che. Ama e banene pragaTa ceko bheda che. cenAIjhanitaH
sa tu kAtimaejJita: laDyA vinAtrikhya vaghu thai che " -zrIadhyAtmaupaniSada ane
anya darzanIone paNa A "prAtijajJAna" saMmata che. teo tene "tAraka - nirIkSaNa
Adi nAmathI oLakhe che. tAraka eTale bhavasamudrathI tAranAruM. nirIkSaNa eTale
daSTA puruSanuM sAkSAt darzana. Ama A prAtija jJAna mAnavAmAM kaI paNa doSa
nathI, eTale ke te mAnavuM yathArtha che, samyapha che. sAmaganA bheda kahI
batAvavA mATe kahe che - dvidhAyaM dharmasaMnyAsayogasaMnyAsasaMjJitaH /
kSAyopazamikA dharmA, yogAH kAyAdikarma tu // 9 // eha sAmarthanA , prakAra che
A khAsa pahele dharmasaMnyAsa ne, bIje yogasaMnyAsa, kSApazamika heya je dharmo
teha kahoya; kAya AdinuM karma te, yoga atra kathAya. 9 vRtti -driSA be
prakArane vaya-A, sAmayoga che. kevA prakAre? te ke-
dharmasaMnyAsayogasaMnyAhajJitA-dharmasaMnyAsa ane saMnyAsa saMjJAthI (nAmathI)
yukta AnI dharmasaMnyAsa' saMjJA upajI che, eTalA mATe dhamasanyAsasaMtita. ema
"gasaMnyAsa' saMjJA AnI upajI che, eTalA mATe yogasaMnyAsasaMti. ane ahIM tevA
prakAre te saMjJAta thAya che-barAbara oLakhAya che, eTalA mATe te tasvarUpe ja
prahAya che. A dharmo kayA? te mATe kahyuM ke sAvAmi dharmA:-kSApazamika te
dharmo. kSaye pazamathI nIpajelA evA kSamA Adi te dharmo che. - thoDAH
jAyArmitu-ane yoge te kAyaAdinA vyApAre che,-kAe sarmakaraNa Adi. .. -

Page #102 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(3) **Gadashtīsamuccaya** meaning - There are two types of this Samag-Dharma-
Sannyasa and Yoga-Sannyasa, named as such. Those which are Kshapashmik (arising
from Kshayopaśama भाव) are Dharmas, and the karma of Kaya etc. is "Ga". There
are two divisions of this Samag - (1) Dharma-Sannyasa, named as such, (2)
"Gasbhyasa", named as such. Here, Dharmas are Kshayopaśama भावs, and Go is the
karma-vyāpār of man-vacan-kāya, kāyothsarga-karaṇa etc. Here, the word "Sanjna"
is used intentionally, because that by which something becomes known in its form
- is known correctly, is recognized properly - that is Sanjna. Dharma-Sannyasa-
yoga - in which there is Sannyasa, i.e. renunciation of Dharmas, is Dharma-
Sannyasa. Here, "Dharmas" are to be understood as all types of Kshapashmik भावs
- भावs arising from Kshapashma. The भावs which arise from Kshayopaśama भाव, like
Kshama etc., are those Dharmas. Here, there is Sannyasa - renunciation of these
Kshayopaśama-rupa Dharmas, because these Mahatmas, being Samarthya-yogi, are
established on Kshapanī, and as they consume - consume - destroy - destroy the
karmas, they progress, hence they produce Kshavik भावs arising from karma-
kshaya, Kshavik Samyaktva-darshan-jnana-charitra etc. qualities manifest. Thus,
as Kshavik भावs arise, Kshayopaśama भावs are abandoned. "Kshavik Darshan Jnana,
Charan Guna Upannya Re; Adik Bahu Guna Sasy, Atamghar Nipjya Re....Shri Nami
Jinavar Sev, Ghanaghan Unmyo Chhe." - Shri Devchandraji Gasannyasa Yoga -
Gasannyasa is that in which there is Sannyasa - renunciation of Yogas, i.e. of
the karmas of man-vacan-kāya. Where there is absence of the Yogas of man-vacan-
kāya, where that Agi अवस्था is, that is Yugasannyasa. "Man Vachan Kaya Ne Kamni
Vagan, Chute Jahan Sakal Pudgal Sambandh Chhe; Evu "Agi" Gunasthanak Tyahan
Vartatu, Mahabhagya Sukhdayak Purna Bandh Je...Apurva." - Shrimad Rajchandraji
Thus, these two names are given, which is true. When that is there, then it is
said, thus, to show that these Samarthya-yogas are of two types:

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
(3) gadaSTisamuccaya artha -A sAmaga-dharmasaMnyAsa ane yogasaMnyAsa evI saMjJAo
(nAme) karIne be prakAra che. kSApazamika (kSayopazama bhAvathI upajatA) te
dharmo che, ane kAya vagerenuM kama te "ga" che. vivecana A sAmaganA be bheda
che-(1) dharmasaMnyAsa evI saMjJAvALa, (2) gasabhyAsa" evI saMjJAvALo. atre
dharmo eTale kSAyopathamika bhAvo, ane go eTale manavacana-kAyAnuM karma-
vyApAra, kAyotsarga karaNa Adi. atre "saMjJA" zabda hetupUrvaka kahyo che,
kAraNa ke jenA vaDe karIne amuka vastu tenA svarUpe saMjJAta thAya-samyak
prakAre jANavAmAM Ave, barAbara oLakhAya te saMjJA. dharmasaMnyAsayoga'--jemAM
dharmone saMnyAsa eTale tyAga hoya che te dharmasaMnyAsa. ahIM "dharmo eTale
sarva prakAranA zApathamika bhAva-kSapazamathI upajatA bhAvo samajavA. kSaye
pazama bhAvathI kSamA vagere je je bhAva upaje che, te te dharmo che. A
kSayopazamarUpa dharmone ahIM saMnyAsa-tyAga hoya che, kAraNa ke A mahAtmA
sAmarthyayogI kSapaNI para ArUDha thaI, karmone khapAvate khapAvate-khatama
karate karate AgaLa vadhe che, eTale tene karmakSayathI utpanna thatA
kSAvikabhAva upaje che, kSAyika samyakatva-darzana-jJAnacAritra Adi guNe pragaTe
che. Ama kSAyika bhAva upajatAM kSaye pazama bhAvo tyajAtA jAya che. "kSAyika
darisana jJAna, caraNa guNa upanyA re; Adika bahu guNa sasya, Atamaghara nIpajyA
re....zrI nami jinavara seva, ghanAghana unamyo che." -zrI devacaMdrajI
gasaMnyAsa yoga-gasaMnyAsa eTale jemAM yogono eTale ke mana-vacana-kAyAnA
karmone saMnyAsa-tyAga hoya che te. mana-vacana-kAyAnA yugane jyAM abhAva che,
evI agI avasthA jyAM hoya che, te yaMgasaMnyAsa che. "mana vacana kAyA ne kamanI
vagaNa, chuTe jahAM sakaLa pudgala saMbaMdha che; evuM "agI" guNasthAnaka tyAM
vartatuM, mahAbhAgya sukhadAyaka pUrNa baMdha je...apUrva." -zrImad rAjacaMdrajI
Ama A banne nAma ApyA che te yathArtha che. che. temAM je jyAre hoya che, te
tyAre kahI ema A sAmarthyoga be prakAra batAvavA mATe kahe che :

Page #103 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Dharma Sannyasa Yoga (37)  **Verse 10:** In the second pre-action, the first
is tattvika; after the initiation, the second, so say the knowers.
**Explanation:** In the second pre-action, the first Dharma Sannyasa Yoga is
tattvika; and after the initiation, the second Dharma Sannyasa Yoga is present,
so say the knowers. In the second pre-action, the second is accepted as an
exception to the first pre-action, which is the cause of the bondage, because
the first pre-action lacks the ability to achieve the goal. "Pre-action" is that
auspicious pre-result which is not present in the beings of the infinite cycle
of births and deaths, even in the Dharma-sthana, and whose fruit is the bondage,
etc. In this first pre-action, the bondage is present, and the fruit of this
bondage is right faith. And right faith is the first self-realization with the
initial sign of the linga. It is said: "**"Atha pramanjanikana pustiyam,
vyarthila tarvayeshradhanam sabhyapuranam!"** - Right faith, whose object is the
manifestation of calmness, enthusiasm, detachment, compassion, and faith, is
right faith. According to the order of importance, this explanation is arranged,
and it is beautiful in reverse order, so say the scriptures. And this second
pre-action, which is present in the state of karma, which is like the ocean of
countless births, what is it? It is tattvika in the second pre-action. The first
is tattvika, which is known as Dharma Sannyasa Yoga, which is transcendental.
And it is present in the yogi who has the series of destructions, because he has
renounced the Dharma like forgiveness, etc., which are destructive. (The Dharma
like forgiveness, etc., have been destroyed in the form of destruction.)
Therefore, this is the explanation. The Dharma Sannyasa Yoga, which is tattvika,
is also present during the time of initiation, because there is renunciation of
the Dharma, which is characterized by activity, and this initiation is the
acceptance of the knowledge yoga. Therefore, this initiation is said to be the
right of the one who is detached from the world. It is said: "**"Atha
pravrajjyaai aaryadeshotpanna, vishistajatikulanvita, kshina prayakarmamala, ata
eva vimala buddhi"** -

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
dhama sanyAsayega (37). dvitIyApUrvakaraNe prathamastAttviko bhavet /
AyojyakaraNAdUrdhva, dvitIya iti tadvidaH // 10 // bIjA karaNa apUrvamAM, pahele
tAttvika heya; AjyakaraNanI pachI, taja bIjo jaya, 10 artha -bIjA
apUrvakaraNamAM tAtvika evo prathama ga-dharmasaMnyAsaga hoya; ane A
jyakaraNathI AgaLamAM bIje gagasaMnyAsa yoga hoya, ema tenA jJAtA-jANakAro
vRtti-dvitIyApUrvAo-bIjA apUrvakaraNamAM, graMthibhedanA kAraNarUpa pahelA
apUrvakaraNanA vyavachaMda-apavAda athe bIjAnuM grahaNa karyuM; kAraNa ke pahelA
apUrvakaraNamAM prastuta sAmarthyAganI asiddhi hoya che. "apUrvakaraNa" e te
zubha evo apUrva pariNAma kahevAya che - ke je anAdi saMsAramAM paNa te te
dharmasthAnomAM varNa nA jIvane tevA prakAre pUrva upa hoto nathI, ane jenuM
phala graMthibheda Adi che. temAM A prathama apUrvakaraNamAM graMthabheda te la
che, ane A graMthibhedanuM phala samyagadarzana che. ane samyagadarzana che te
prathama Adi liMga-cinhavALe AtmapariNAma che. kahyuM che ke
-"barAmAMjanikAnapustiyAmi vya4iLa taravAyaeNzraddhAnaM sabhyapUnama !"
-prazama, saMvega, nirveda, anukaMpA ane AstiyanI abhivyakti (pragaTapaNuM) e
jenuM lakSa che, evuM tattvArdhazraddhAna te samyaggadarzana che.
yathAprAdhAnya-pradhAnapaNA pramANe A upanyAsa (anukrame goThavaNI) che, ane te
zrAnupUrvathI-UlaTA krame suMdara che, ema samayavide-zAstro kahe che. ane A
bIjuM apUrvakaraNa, ke je tevA prakAranI karmasthitimAMthI tevA saMkhyaya
sAgaropama vyatIta thaye hoya che,-te bIjA apUrvakaraNamAM zuM ? te ke
kathamasattAritro mata' prathama tAvika hoya che. prathama eTale dharma saMnyAsa
nAmathI oLakhAte mega tAvika-pAramArthika evo hoya che. ane e kSapakazreNIvALA
yogIne hoya che, kAraNa ke kSApazamika evA kSamA vagere dharmonI ene nivRtti
hoya che. (kSamA vagere kSaye pazabharU5 bhAve -dharmo dUra thaI gayA hoya che.)
eTalA mATe A Ama upanyAsa-rajUAta che. atAvika evo dharmasaMnyAsayega te
pratrajyAkALe paNa heya che, kAraNa ke pravRttilakSaNa dharmone tyAM saMnyAsa-
yAga che, evI pravrayA-dIkSA jJAnayoganI pratipattirUpa-aMgIkArarUpa che. eTalA
mATe ja A pravrayAne bhavaviraktane ja adhikArI kahyo che. kahyuM che ke : "
atha pravrajyAI Aryadezotpanna :, viziSTajAtikulAnvitaH, kSINaprAyakarmamalaH,
ata eva vimalabuddhiH;

Page #104 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(38) The text divides the ability to contemplate the collection of yogic
practices into two sections: Dharma-Sannyasa (renunciation of worldly duties)
and Sannyasa (renunciation of all attachments). Here, we will explain when each
occurs: (1) The first type, Dharma-Sannyasa, is characterized by a detachment
from worldly desires and occurs during the second stage of the spiritual journey
(Dvitiya Apurvakarana). (2) The second type, Sannyasa, is characterized by a
complete detachment from all attachments and occurs after the stage of
Ayojyakarana (the stage of self-control and purification).   The text then
quotes a passage from the scriptures: "Rare is the human birth, birth and death
are inevitable, wealth is fleeting, worldly pleasures are the cause of
suffering, union is followed by separation, death is imminent, and the
consequences of karma are severe." This understanding of the impermanence and
suffering of the world leads to detachment from it. This detachment is further
characterized by the following qualities:   * **Pratanukashaya:**  A gradual
reduction of karmic tendencies. * **Alpahasya:**  A decrease in laughter and
amusement. * **Kritagnya:**  Gratitude. * **Vinit:**  Humility. * **Kari:**
Diligence. * **Jnanyajnanavaddhuta:**  One who is devoted to the knowledge of
the self. * **Gova:**  One who is free from attachment to possessions. *
**Vala:**  One who is free from attachment to the body. * **Shraddha:**  Faith.
* **Samupana:**  One who is devoted to the practice of meditation.  The text
then explains that this type of person is the one who is capable of practicing
Jnana Yoga (the path of knowledge). It is impossible for someone who does not
possess these qualities to practice Jnana Yoga, and it is equally impossible for
someone who does possess these qualities to not practice Jnana Yoga. This is the
clear message of the scriptures.   The text then explains the meaning of
Ayojyakarana: It is the stage where, through the power of Kevala Jnana
(omniscience), one is able to completely destroy the karmic tendencies that bind
them to the cycle of birth and death. This is achieved through a complete
detachment from all attachments and a complete surrender to the divine. The
result of this stage is the attainment of the state of Shashi (a state of
complete liberation).   The text then explains the meaning of Sannyasa: It is
the state of complete detachment from all attachments, which is achieved after
the stage of Ayojyakarana. This state is characterized by a complete absence of
any desire or attachment to the world. This is the true meaning of Sannyasa, as
explained by the scriptures.   The text then quotes a passage from the
scriptures that further explains the meaning of Sannyasa: "The first stage of
the spiritual journey is characterized by the destruction of the karmic
tendencies that bind us to the cycle of birth and death. The second stage is
characterized by the complete destruction of all karmic tendencies. The third
stage is characterized by the complete liberation of the soul from the cycle of
birth and death. This is the true meaning of Sannyasa."   The text concludes by
stating that this is the true meaning of Sannyasa, as explained by the
scriptures.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
(38) yogadakTisamuccaya vivecana sAmarthyaganA dharmasaMnyAsa ne saMnyAsa ema be
vibhAga pADyA, te pratyeka kyAre hoya che, te ahIM batAvyuM che :-(1) prathama
prakArano sAmaga-tAvika evo dharmasanyAsa ga dvitIya apUrvakaraNamAM hoya che,
(2) bIjA prakArano sAmaga-cAgasaMnyAsa ga AyeAjyakaraNathI AgaLamAM hoya che.
'durlabhaM mAnuSyaM, janma maraNanimittaM, saMpadazcapalAH, viSayA
duHkhahetavaH, saMyoge viyogaH, pratikSaNaM maraNaM, dAruNo vipAkaH,'
ityavagatasaMsAranairguNyaH, tata eva tadviraktaH, pratanukaSAyaH, alpahAsyAdiH,
kRtajJaH, vinIta, kAri jJAnayajJanavaduta, govA, vALA, zraddhA, samupanA " (
artha mATe juo upara vivecana.) kAraNa ke Avo na hoya te jJAnayoga ArAdhe nahiM,
ane Avo hoya te na ArAdhe ema hoya nahiM(ArAdhe ja), ema sarvajJavacana-Agama
bhAvavA egya che. tethI A anirUpita artha nathI. jayAtUrthe-AyojyakaraNathI
AgaLamAM kevalAbhegathI acityavIryapaNAe karIne AyojIne, tevA tevA prakAre
tatkAla khapAvI devAya ema bhapagrAhI karmanI tathA prakAranA avasthAnA bhAvamAM
kRti, te AyojyakaraNa che. (kevalAbhegathI AyojIne bhopagrAhI kamanI sthiti
tarata khapAvI devAya evI karI devI te A yakaraNa che). AnuM phala zazI avasthA
che. eTalA mATe ja kahyuM ditI rUtti tabUi-bIjo "gasaMnyAsa' nAmane sAmaga heya
che, ema tenA jJAtAojANakAro kahe che, kAraNa ke zilezI avasthAmAM ane bhAva-
hevApaNuM che. A sarva Agamika vastu che. ane tevA prakAre ene saMvAdI (maLata)
artha-Agamavacana che - "vAM kAvatta rAmaLicaTTimeva mavALA iyaresiM paDhama
ciya bhagai karaNaM ti pariNAma / jA gaNThI tA paDhamaM gaNThiM samaccha o bhave
bIyaM / aNiyaTTIkaraNaM puNa sammattapurakaDe jIve / gaNThitti sudunbheo
kakkhaDaghaNarUDhagUDhagaNThitra / jIvassa kamma jaNio ghaNarAgadesipariNAma / /
etto vivajI khalu bhiNNe eyammi samaNANaM tu / thovaM pi suparisuddhaM
saJcAsammohahe ratti // sammattaMmi u laddhe paliyapuhatteNa sAvao hAi /
caraNovasamakhayANaM sAgarasaMkhantarA honti // " ItyAdi lezathI A paribhAvita
arthavALuM che. (artha mATe juo upara vivecana.)

Page #105 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Dharma-Sannyasa Yoga (39) - Tatvik Dharma-Sannyasa Yoga  This yoga, first,
involves Dharma-Sannyasa, and that too of the Tatvik-Paramarthik kind. Second,
it manifests at the time of the second A-poorvakarana. Here, what is said about
the second A-poorvakarana is purposeful. Because the first A-poorvakarana, which
is the cause of Granthi-bhed, cannot be this presented Dharma-Sannyasa,
therefore, it is mentioned as an exception in the second A-poorvakarana. These
A-poorvakaranas are two: (1) the cause of Granthi-bhed, (2) the time of the
Kshapaka-shreni. What is this A-poorvakarana? "A-poorva" means the auspicious
and excellent Atma-parinam which has never been attained before in the endless
cycle of births and deaths. Granthi-bhed etc. are the fruits of this
A-poorvakarana. The fruit of the first A-poorvakarana is Granthi-bhed, and the
fruit of that Granthi-bhed is Samyag-darshan.  Granthi-bhed - Granthi means
knot. Like the hard knot of a bamboo, which is difficult to break, so too is the
dense knot of Karma, which is the result of Raga-dvesha, where it breaks, that
is called Granthi-bhed. "And when this powerful mountain of Karma-granthi is
broken by the sharp weapon of A-poorvakarana-rupa Bhava-vajra, then this great
soul experiences immense Tatvik joy - just as a sick person experiences joy when
their illness is controlled by excellent medicine. And this breaking of the
Granthi is such that it does not happen again in the same way. Once it breaks,
that's it! It will never rise again in that form, it will never be tied again,
that is called bhed, because after such Granthi-bhed, there is no rise of
intense Kshaya etc. "This Granthi-bhed always leads to the goal of Nirvana. Just
as a blind man, when he gets the auspicious merit of sight, experiences the
benefit of sight (he sees clearly), so too, when this Granthi is broken, he
experiences Samyag-darshan - he sees the true nature of things."  * " तथा च
भिन्ने दुर्भेदे कर्मग्रन्थिमहाबले । तीक्ष्णेन भाववज्रेग बहुसंक्लेशकारिणि ॥
आनन्दो जायतेऽत्यन्तं तात्त्विकोऽस्य महात्मनः । सद्वथाध्यभिभवे यद्वद् व्याधितस्य
महौषधात् ॥ भेदोऽपि चास्य विज्ञेयो न भूयो भवनं तथा । तीव्रसंक्लेशविगमात्सदा
निःश्रेयसावहः ॥ जात्यन्धस्य यथा पुसश्चक्षुर्लाभे शुभोदये । सद्दर्शनं तथैवास्य
ग्रथिभेदेऽपरे जगुः " – Maharshi Haribhadracharya's Gabindu

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dhamasanyAsayoga (39) - tAvika dharmasaMnyAsa yoga - temAM prathama,
dharmasaMnyAsa ane te paNa tAtvika-paramArthika koTine dharmasaMnyAsa, bIjA
apUrvakaraNanA samaye pragaTe che. ahIM bIjA apUrvakaraNamAM ema je kahyuM che
te sahetuka che. kAraNa ke paheluM apUrvakaraNa ke je graMthibhedanuM kAraNa
che, bIjA apUrva- temAM A prastuta dharmasaMnyAsa hoI zake nahiM eTalA mATe
bIjAmAM karaNamAM ema kahI tene apavAda sUcavyuM. A apUrvakaraNa be cheH-(1)
graMthibhedanA kAraNarUpa, (2) kSapakazreNI veLAnuM. A apUrvakaraNa eTale zuM?
"apUrva" eTale anAdi kALanA bhavabhramaNamAM je kadI paNa pUrve prApta thayo
nathI, e zubha-prazasta AtmapariNAma. graMthibheda vagere A apUrvakaraNanuM
phaLa che. temAM pahelA apUrvakaraNanuM phaLa graMthibheda che, ane te
graMthibhedanuM phaLa samyagadarzana che. graMthibheda-graMthi eTale gAMTha.
vAMsanI kaThaNa gAMTha jevI durbheda-bhedavI muzkela, evI gADha
rAgadveSapariNAmarUpa karmanI gAMTha jyAM bhedAya che, tenuM nAma graMthibheda
che. "ane A duda - karmagraMthirUpa mahAbalavAna parvata jyAre apUrvakaraNarUpa
tINa bhAva-vAthI graMthibheda bhUdAI jAya che, tyAre A mahAtmAne atyaMta tAtvika
AnaMda upaje che-jevo regIne uttama auSadhathI rega kAbUmAM AvatAM upaje che
tevo. ane A graMthine bheda paNa evo hoya che ke tenuM punaH tevA prakAre
hovApaNuM hotuM nathI. te eka vAra tUTI eTale basa DyUTI! khalAsa! te pharIne
tevA svarUpamAM pAchI ubhI thavA pAme ja nahiM, saMdhAya ja nahiM, tenuM nAma
bheda che, kAraNa ke tevo graMthibheda thayA pachI tIvra kaSAyAdine udaya hotuM
nathI. "Avo A graMthibheda sadAya kalyANane-nirvANano hetu thAya che. jema
janmAMdha puruSane zubha puNyane udaya thatAM cakSune lAbha thaye saddarzana
thAya che (barAbara dekhAya che), tema ja Ane graMthine bheda thatAM sadarzana-
samyagadarzana thAya che, eTale vastunuM yathArtha svarUpa dekhAya che." * "
tathA ca bhinne durbhede karmagranthimahAbale  /  tIkSNena bhAvavajrega
bahusaMklezakAriNi  //  Anando jAyate'tyantaM tAttviko'sya mahAtmanaH  /
sadvathAdhyabhibhave yadvad vyAdhitasya mahauSadhAt  //  bhedo'pi cAsya vijJeyo
na bhUyo bhavanaM tathA  /  tIvrasaMklezavigamAtsadA niHzreyasAvahaH  //
jAtyandhasya yathA pusazcakSurlAbhe zubhodaye  /  saddarzanaM tathaivAsya
granthibhede'pare jaguH " - maharSi haribhadrAcAryajIkRta gabiMdu

Page #106 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(40) The collection of right views (Samyag Darshan) arises as the fruit and
result of the separation of the knot (Granthi Bhed). Faith in the meaning
(Tarth) is Samyag Darshan. The knowledge of the nine principles - Jiva, Ajeeva,
Pushya, Pap, Aav, Sanvar, Nirjara, Bandh, and Moksha - and their true nature is
Samyag Darshan. "In the garland of many beads representing these nine
principles, there is a golden thread of the soul (Atma Tattva) hidden for a long
time. The person with right views (Samyag Drishti Purush) discovers and
experiences this pure soul." Jiva and Ajeeva are bound by karma, the cause of
which is punya and papa. The cause of the arrival of punya and papa is asrava.
Asrava leads to bondage. Sanvar can stop the arrival of new karma, and Nirjara
can remove old karma. By continuously practicing Nirjara, all karma is
destroyed, leading to Moksha, the state of pure soul consciousness. Only the
pure soul attains Moksha. This understanding of the principles is what arises in
the person with right views. Thus, the knowledge and experience of the pure
soul, distinct from the body and other external objects, as eternal and
indestructible, is Samyag Darshan. Its other name is Samkiti.   "There is
nothing in the three realms, in the three times, that is equal to right views
(Samyaktva) in terms of benefit, and nothing is equal to wrong views (Mithyatva)
in terms of harm." - Shri Samantabhadracharya  "Like gold submerged in a garland
of pearls, the nine principles are hidden. But when they are seen clearly, they
appear as one." - Shri Amritchandracharya, Samyatsar Kalash

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (40) gadaSTisamuccaya samyagadarzana-Ama graMthibhedanA phaLa-pariNAmarUpe
samyagadarzana upaje che. tArthanuM zraddhAna te samyagadarzana che. jIva,
ajIva, puSya, pApa, Ava, saMvara, nirjarA, baMdha ane mekSa e nava tattva che,
tenA bhUtAInuM-paramArthanuM zraddhAna thavuM, zraddhA samyagadarzana upajavI,
pratIti thavI te samyagadarzana che. "A nava tattvarUpa aneka vaNanI mALAmAM eka
AtmatatvarUpa suvarNasUtrasonAne dore parovAyeluM che, cirakALathI chupAIne
rahelo che. tene khoLI kADhI samyagRSTi puruSa zuddha AtmatattvanuM darzana kare
che, anubhava kare che." A jIva, ajIva karmathI baMdhAyela che, tenuM kAraNa
puNyapApa che; puNya-pApanA AvavAnuM kAraNa Azrava che; Azrava thaye baMdha
thAya che; AzravanenavA karmanA Agamanane saMvarathI rokI zakAya che jUnA
karmone nirjarAthI kheravI zakAya che; ane ema nirjarA karatAM karatAM sarva
karmane kSaya thaye, zuddha AtmavibhAvarUpa mokSa thAya che, kevala eka zuddha
AtmA ja mokSarUpa bane che;-AvI tAtvika pratIti te samyagadaSTi puruSane upaje
che. Ama dehAdi samasta paravastuthI bhinna, upayogavaMta ne avinAzI evA zuddha
AtmAnuM bhedajJAna thavuM, anubhUti thavI, "AtmakhyAti" thavI te samyagadarzana
che, ane enuM bIju nAma samakita che. che dehAdithI bhinna AtamA re, upayogI
sadA avinAza... mULa mAraga sAMbhaLo jinane re. ema jANe sadguru upadezathI re,
kahyuM jJAna tenuM nAma khAsa...mULa0 je jJAna karIne jANiyuM re, tenI varte che
zuddha pratItamULa kahyuM bhagavaMte darzana tehane re, jenuM bIjuM nAma
samakita..mULa -zrImad rAjacaMdrajI "na samyakatvasamaM kiMcittraikAlye
trijagatyapi  /  thoDA mithyAvarama nAcatta-mRtAm zrI samaMtabhadrAcAryajI
arthAt -traNe kALamAM, traNeya lekamAM, samyaktva samuM prANIonuM kaMI zreya
nathI, ane mithyAtva samuM kaI azreya nathI." x "rimiti
navatarava8nnamunnIyamAnam, kanakamiva nimagnaM varNamAlAkalApe  /  atha
satataviviktaM dRzyatAmekarUpam , baripabimAmaleritamAnanu che ? -zrI
amRtacaMdrAcAryajIta samayasArakalaza

Page #107 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Dharma-Sannyasa Yoga  (41) And thus, with the breaking of the knots (granthi-
bhed) and the attainment of Samyak Darshan, the realization of the soul, which
brings supreme bliss, the following spontaneous expressions of the Samyak Darshi
Yogi arise:  “It is certain that the soul has attained knowledge; the breaking
of the knots is a truth in all three times. All knowers have also accepted
this.”  “Salutations to the auspicious Samyak Darshan, which transformed the
knowledge that was destined for endless cycles of birth and death into a single
moment, making it the cessation of birth and death.”  - Shrimad Rajchandraji
says that this auspicious Samyak Darshan is attained after the breaking of the
knots through the unique (apuurvakaran) means. And this Samyak Darshan has five
signs (ling), which are its manifest characteristics: (1) Prasham (tranquility),
(2) Sanveg (zeal), (3) Nirved (dispassion), (4) Anukampa (compassion), (5)
Astikya (faith).  According to their primary importance, these characteristics
of Samyaktava have this sequential order, but according to their reverse order,
they are beautiful and radiant, say those who know the secrets of the
scriptures. Because,  If there is no Astikya, then Prasham, etc., will not
appear beautiful or good, they will not be attractive, etc. This should be
understood in reverse order. And it should be understood that the first
characteristic leads to the next characteristic in reverse order. It is like
this:  First, there is Prasham, the cessation of passions, which gives space for
the thought of discrimination (viveka), then Sanveg, the desire for liberation
alone, arises, from which Nirved, the weariness of the world, arises, and
Anukampa, compassion for oneself and others, arises. When these four qualities
manifest in the soul, the capacity and eligibility to attain the fifth quality,
Astikya, is revealed. (This is the reverse order.)  Cessation of passions,
desire for liberation alone; sorrow for birth, compassion for beings, dwelling
in the self, such a state is not there until, the soul does not get the right
path; it does not attain the path of liberation, the disease of the heart does
not subside.”  - Shrimad Rajchandraji’s Shri Atmasiddhi  Or, in reverse order,
Astikya, the faith in the existence of the soul, the principle of life, etc.,
arises, the true nature is known, then Anukampa arises, knowing this soul, etc.,
a tremor arises in the soul, which is compassion for oneself, compassion for the
soul of the father, arises, that - Oh!

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dharmasaMnyAsayoga (41) ane Ama graMthibheda thaI, AtmAnubhUtirUpa
samyagadarzananI prAptithI jene parama AnaMdavalAsa upa che, evA samyagadaSTi
yogI puruSanA AvA sahaja anubhava udgAra nIkaLI paDe che - AtmA jJAna pAme e te
ni:saMzaya che; graMthibheda thaye e traNe kALamAM satya vAta che. sarva jJAnIoe
paNa e vAta svIkArI che." anaMta kALathI je jJAna bhavahetu thatuM hatuM, te
jJAnane eka samaya mAtramAM jAtyaMtara karI jeNe bhavAnivRttirUpa karyuM, te
kalyANamUrti samyagadarzanane namaskAra." -zrImad rAjacaMdrajI AvuM kalyANamUrti
samyagadarzana apUrvakaraNa vaDe graMthibheda thayA pachI prApta thAya che. ane
A samyagadarzanane pAMca liMga eTale pragaTa cihna che :-(1) prazama, (2)
saMvega, (3) nirveda, (4) anukaMpA, (5) Astikya. pradhAnapaNuM pramANe A
samyakatvanA lakSaNone Ama pUrvanupUrva anukrama che, paNa pazcAnupUrvathI eTale
UlaTA cinha anukrame e suMdara-rUDA che, ema zAstranuM rahasya jANanArA kahe
che. kAraNa ke Astikya na hoya te prazama Adi suMdara-sArA na lAge, zobhe nahi,
ItyAdi UlaTA krame samajavuM. ane sulaTA krame prathamanuM lakSaNa hoya te
pachInuM lakSaNa Ave ema samajavuM. te A prakAre - prathama te prazama eTale
kaSAyanuM upazAMtapaNuM thAya, te viveka vicArane avakAza thatAM saMvega eTale
mAtra mekSAbhilASa pAme, tethI nirveda eTale saMsArathI kaMTALo upaje, ane
svadayA-paradayArUpa anukaMpA Ave. A cAra guNa jyAre jIvamAM pariName tyAre
pAMca Astikaya guNa pAmavAnI yogyatA-pAtratA tenAmAM pragaTe. ( Ama sulaTA krame
che. ) kaSAyanI upazAMtatA, mAtra mokSa abhilASa; bhave kheda prANI dayA, tyAM
AtmArtha nivAsa, dazA na evI jyAM lagI, jIva lahe nahiM joga; mokSamArga pAme
nahiM, maTe na aMtara roga." - zrImad rAjacaMdrapraNIta zrI Atmasiddhi athavA
UlaTA krame Astika eTale jIvAjIva Adi tatvanA astitvanI-hevApaNAnI AsthA-aMtar
pratIti upaje, svarUpa jANe, te anukaMpA upaje A jIvAdi jANI tene anusarato
kaMpa AtmAmAM thAya, eTale svadayA-pitAnA AtmAnI anukaMpa upaje ke-are !

Page #108 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(42) I have been playing in the world of objects, due to the contact with
objects, until now! I did not go to play. Such a feeling of sorrow and trembling
arises in the soul, that is compassion. For example - "I left my own form and
played on the bridge, I turned back and wandered in the water of the object of
desire" - Shri Devchandraji Such true compassion arises, then there is extreme
disgust with the world of objects. In this world, which is like a cage of
charcoal, I do not want to stay even for a moment with the feeling of the soul,
so he gets up from the world. And from that disgust, which arises from
detachment, the emotion, that is, the intense desire for liberation, arises,
when will I be free from this worldly bondage, such a pure feeling arises, he
becomes a firm seeker of liberation, and as a result, calmness manifests, the
calmness of the object-passions, detachment from the other, non-attachment comes
and he merges in the self-nature. Such a five-characteristic right faith is
obtained by the living being first due to the power of the previous karma. And
then, after crossing countless oceans like the number of karmas, this second
Previous karma - the previous self-result is obtained, then this is the
essential dharma. It is for the capable one who is climbing the series of
renunciation in the dharma-renunciation. Renunciation because he is free from
the dharmas of forgiveness, etc., which are in the form of renunciation, and It
tends towards the destructive feeling of destroying all the karma-natures like
anger, etc., from the root. And such a "dharma-renunciation" is called, it is
truly the essential, transcendental "dharma-renunciation". "Essential dharma-
renunciation" also occurs at the time of the initiation of the ascetic, because
in which there is renunciation of the dharmas in the form of activity, it is
called the initiation of renunciation. Sin To go from there to the pure feet,
that is "initiation". The shaving of the evil feelings like the object-passions,
etc., is called "initiation". Dharma-renunciation (initiation-renunciation) is
the acceptance of the knowledge-yoga, therefore Only the one who is truly
disgusted with the world from the inner result, who has become extremely
detached in the mind, is said to be the eligible candidate for such initiation,
which is the attainment of knowledge. To go to initiation, to go to accept the
monk's dharma, what kind of special characteristics should the living being
have, it is said here - (1) who was born in the Aryan country, (2) who has a
special caste-family, (3) whose karma is almost exhausted, (4) therefore, who is
pure

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (42) gadaSTisamuccaya huM atyAra sudhI A paravastunA saMsargathI paravastumAM
ramyo ! te ramavA gya nahotuM. evo kSobha-kaMpa AtmAmAM thAya te anukaMpA.
jemake - huM choDI nijarUpa ramya para pule, jhI UlaTa ANI viSaya tRSNa jale
viharamAna" -zrIdevacaMdrajI evI sAcI anukaMpA upaje, eTale niveda-saMsArathI
atyaMta kaMTALo AvI jAya. A kAjaLanI keTaDI jevA saMsAramAM mahAre have eka
kSaNa paNa AtmabhAve rahevuM nathI, ema saMsArathI te ubhage. ane e nirveda-
kaMTALe upajatAM, saMvega eTale mokSano tIvravegI abhilASa upaje, A saMsAra
baMdhanathI huM kyAre chUTuM evI zuddha bhAvanA bhAvato te daDha mumukSu bane,
ane tenA pariNAme prazama pragaTe, viSaya-kaSAyanuM prazAMtapaNuM thAya,
parabhAvathI virati thAya, vItarAgatA Ave ane tene AtmA svasvarUpamAM samAI
jAya. AvA pAMca lakSaNavALuM samyagadarzana jIvane pahelA apUrvakaraNanA pratApe
graMthibheda thaye sAMpaDe che. ane pachI kama sthitimAMthI saMkhyAta sAgaropama
vyatIta thaye, A bIju apUrvakaraNa-apUrva AtmapariNAma prApta thAya che, tyAre A
tAtvika tAtvika dharma. dharmasaMnyAsaga kSapakazreNImAM caDhatA sAmarthyAgIne
hoya che, saMnyAsa kAraNa ke te kSepaka thegI kSamA vagere kSe pazamarUpa
dharmothI nivaryo che, ane kodhAdi kaSAyarUpa sarva karma prakRtine jaDamULathI
khapAvavArUpa kSAyikabhAva bhaNI pravarte che. ane Avo je "dharma saMnyAsa"
nAmane sAmaga che, te ja kharekhara tAtvika, pAramArthika "dharmasaMnyAsa' ga
che. atAvika dharmasaMnyAsa" te pradhvajyA-dIkSA avasare paNa hoya che, kAraNa
ke jemAM pravRttirUpa dharmone saMnyAsa-tyAga hoya che, te nivRttirUpa pravajyA-
dIkSA kahevAya che. pApa mAMthI prakarSe karIne zuddha caraNagamAM vrajana-
gamana te "pravajyA" che. atAvika viSayakaSAyAdi duSTa bhAvonuM muMDana-
chelaNakriyA tenuM nAma "dIkSA che. dharma saM. A prayA (dIkSA-saMnyAsa)
jJAnayoganA aMgIkArarUpa che eTalA mATe ja saMsArathI je aMtaraMga pariNAmathI
kharekhara virakta thaye haya, cittamAM atyaMta vairAgyavaMta thayuM hoya, te ja
tevI jJAnaganI pratipattirUpa dIkSAno adhikArI pAtra kahyo che. dIkSAne gya,
munidharma grahaNa karavAne gya pAtra jIva kevA viziSTa khAsa lakSaNavALe hevo
joIe, te ahIM kahyA che - (1) je Arya dezamAM utpanna thayo hoya, (2) viziSTa
jAti-kulavALe hoya, (3) jene kamala kSIprAya-lagabhaga kSINa thavA AvyuM hoya,
(4) ethI karIne ja je vimala

Page #109 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(43) One who is endowed with intelligence, (5) for whom human birth is rare,
which is the cause of birth and death, the path of spiritual development is
fickle, the objects are the causes of sorrow, there is separation in
relationships, death is imminent at every moment, the fruits of karma are
dreadful - one who has understood the worthlessness, faultlessness, emptiness,
and triviality of the worldly existence, (6) it is only due to this that one has
become detached from the worldly existence, (7) whose passions have become
extremely subtle, thin, and weak - who is free from the intoxication of
passions, (8) in whom laughter, attachment-aversion, etc. are minimal, (9) who
is grateful, appreciative of the good deeds and qualities of others, (10) who is
humble and endowed with the quality of humility, (11) who was respected and
honored even before taking diksha, such as a king, minister, and city dweller,
whose words carry weight in the society, (12) who is non-hostile, not
antagonistic towards deities, gurus, religion, king, country, society, etc.,
(13) who has auspicious characteristics, whose mere sight creates an impression
that this is a virtuous and noble being, (14) who is faithful, has right faith,
is a devotee, (15) who is stable, not fickle in temperament, (16) who is well-
established, i.e., one who has completely surrendered to the true guru. For
example - "I take refuge in the Lord's feet, I am devoid of the self; whatever
the Lord gives, I accept willingly. From today, this body and all else are under
the Lord's control; I am the servant of the servants, I am the humble one of the
Lord." - Shrimad Rajchandra's Atmasiddhi Those who do not possess these
characteristics do not engage in the spiritual practice of knowledge, and those
who possess these characteristics cannot remain without being worshipped, as per
the words of the omniscient Lord. Therefore, all that has been said here is
true. Thus, it is clearly explained that there is the renunciation of the
inessential dharma at the time of initiation, and the renunciation of the
essential dharma in the Ksepaka series. And in this way, the Ksepaka series has
this spiritual renunciation called the Yoga of the Renunciation of the Essential
Dharma as the next unprecedented accomplishment. It is called "unprecedented
accomplishment" because it involves the unprecedented accomplishment of these
five things: (1) Destruction of the state (2) Destruction of the taste, (3)
Series of qualities, (4) Transference of qualities, (5) Bondage of state. In
this way...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (43) buddhivALA heAya, (5) * manuSyapaNuM durlabha che, janma maraNanuM kAraNu
che, saMpadIkSAnA dAe capala che, viSayeA duHkhanA hetu che, saMcAgamAM viyeAga
che, pratikSaNe adhikArI maraNu che, karmanA vipAka dAruNa che'-ema jeNe
saMsAranu nizuMpaNuM-naguNApaNuM, niHsArapaNuM, tucchapaNuM jANyuM hAya, (6)
tethI karIne ja te sa'sArathI je virakta thayeA hAya, (7) jenA kaSAya atyaMta
kuza, pAtaLA, dubaLA paDI gayA hAya-je madakaSAyI hAya, (8) jenAmAM hAsya rati-
arati vagere alpa hAya, (9) je kRtajJa-karelA upakArane, guNane jANavAvALA
kadaradAna heAya, (10) vinIta-vinayaguNusa'panna heAya, (11) dIkSA letAM pahelAM
paNa je rAjA, maMtrI ane nagarajane ne bahumata-mAnItA hAya, jenuM samAjamAM
paNa vajana paDatu hoya evA pratiSThita-mAnanIya hAya, (12) adrohakArI-deva,
guru, dharma, rAja, deza, samAja vagerenA je droha karanAra na heAya, (13) je
kalyANa aMgavALA-bhadramUtti hAya, ke jene dekhatAM ja chApa paDe ke A bhadra-
bhalA-rUDA jIva che, evA hAya, (14) zrAddha, samyak zraddhAvata, zraddhALu hAya,
(15) sthira hAya, caLavicaLa pariNAmI na heAya, (16) samupapanna hAya, eTale
samyak prakAre sadgurune zaraNe Avele AtmasamarpaNa karanArA hAya. jemake--
dhama sanyAsayeAga "zuM prabhu caraNu kane dharU', AtmAthI sahu hIna; te tA.
prabhue Apie, vatu" caraNAdhIna. A dehAdi AjathI, varatA prabhu AdhIna; dAsa
dAsa hu' dAsa chuM', Apa prabhunA dIna. '' --zrImad rAjacaMdrajIpraNIta
zrIAtmasiddhi AvA lakSaNavALA na hoya te jJAnayega ArAdhe nahiM, ane AvA
lakSaNavALA hAya te ArAdhyA vinA rahe nahi, ema zrI sarvajJadevanu vacana che.
tethI A upara je kahyu. te badhuya yathArtha che. Ama pravrajyA samaye atAttvika
dharmasa'nyAsa, ane kSepakazreNImAM tAttvika dharmasaMnyAsa hAya che, ema spaSTa
karyuM. ane Ama kSapakazreNIgata ceAgIne bIjA apUrva karaNamAM' A tAttvika dhama
sanyAsa nAmanA sAmarthya yoga hoya che. Ane apUrvakaraNa eTalA mATe khIju
kahevAmAM Ave che ke-temAM apUrva evuM A pAMca vastuenuM karaNa-nina
apUrNAMkaraNa karavApaNuM) hAya cheH-(1) sthitighAta (ra) rasaghAta, (3)
guNazreNI, (4) guNasakrama, (5) sthitibadha. te A prakAre (1-2) moTA pramANavALI
jJAnAvaraNIya vagere kamanI sthitinuM ahIM apUrva khaMDanaghAta karavAmAM Ave
che,-cheda uDAvavAmAM Ave che; tathA karmAMnA pracura rasanuM apUrva khaMDana

Page #110 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(44) The **Yoga-darsti-samuccaya** is completely destroyed, making it extremely
**a-upapanna**. Thus, due to the **prakrushta-pana** of **vishuddhi**, this
**sthiti-ghat-rasa-ghat** is **aparva** compared to the previous two **guna-
sthana**. (3) Also, here, due to the immense power of **vishuddhi**, the
creation of the **guna-shreni** is **aparva**, as if the **kama-dali** are
arranged to be thrown away quickly. (4) And the **shubha-prakruti** that is
bound, taking away the **ashubha-dali** with countless **guna-vridhi** in
anticipation, this **guna-sankrama** is also **aparva** here. (5) And the
**karma** that used to bind for a long time due to **ashuddha-pana** before the
**sthiti**, here, due to **aparva-karana** and extreme **vishuddha-pana**, it
binds for a very short time. Thus, these five things are **aparva** here,
therefore the name "**aparva-karana**" is meaningful.  The **yogi-purusha** who
attains this **aparva** **atma-samarthy** in the form of **aparva-karana**, and
who ascends the **kshapka-shreni**, has this **tattivak dharma-sanyasa-yoga**,
because he progresses while destroying the **kshapka-shreni** in the form of
**dharmas**, completely destroying the **karma-prakruti**, while destroying the
**kshapka-shreni**, while throwing it away, he ascends the **guna-sthana-
shreni**. And thus, while destroying the **karma-shatru**, this supremely
powerful **vira-purusha** surpasses the 8th, 9th, 10th, and 12th **guna-
sthana**, and reaches the 13th **sagi-kevali-guna-sthana**, manifesting his own
**kevala-jnana-nidhana**.  – **Basanyasa-yoga** – And the other **samarthy-
yoga** called "**Bagasanyasa**" is after **ajyaka-karana**. It is like this –
Due to **achintya-virya-pana**, with extraordinary **atma-samarthy**, the
**kevali-bhagavan** performs **samud-ghat**, before which he performs **ajyaka-
karana**. What is **ajyaka-karana**? The **gavyapara** that is done now, this
**ajyaka-karana**, this limit – the limit seen by the **kevali**, according to
the **ajyaka-karana** measure, **jan=javu** it, the **shubha-yoga**'s
**vyaparan-pravartan**; **karana=parinam** special, **samarthy-vishesh**.
According to the limit seen by the **kevali-bhagavan**, to project the **bhava-
upagrahi-kama** in the **udirana-avali** is **ajyaka-karana**. That is, in the
last **bhava**, the remaining **vedaniya** etc. four **karmas** to be
experienced, in which the **sthiti** of **vedaniya** etc. is more than the
**ayushya**, the **kevali-bhagavan** performs **udirana**, **jyaka-karana**, so
that with **samud-ghat**, he can quickly destroy those **karmas** and bring them
to an equal **sthiti**.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (44) yogadaSTisamuccaya ghAta karI atyaMta a955NuM karI devAmAM Ave che. Ama
vizuddhinA prakRSTapaNathI A sthitighAta-rasaghAta e banne AgalA guNasthAnakanI
apekSAe aparva hoya che. (3) temaja atre atyaMta vizuddhinA sAmarthyathI
guNazreNInI viracanA evI apUrva kare che, ke kamanA daLIA jhapATAbaMdha TapoTapa
uDAvI devA mATe goThavAI gayA hoya che. (4) tathA baMdhAtI zubha prakRtiemAM
azubha daLIAnuM pratikSaNe asaMkhya guNavRddhithI laI javuM-saMkramaNa karavuM,
te guNasaMkrama paNa ahIM apUrva hoya che. (5) ane karmonI sthiti pUrve
azuddhapaNAne lIdhe ghaNI lAMbI bAMdhato hato, te ahIM apUrvakaraNamAM atyaMta
vizuddha paNAne lIdhe ghaNI TUMkI bAMdhe che. Ama A pAMca vAnAM atre apUrva hoya
che, eTalA mATe "apUrvakaraNa" nAma sArthaka che. A apUrvakaraNarUpa apUrva
AtmasAmarthya pAmIne je yogI puruSa kSapakazreNI para ArUDha thAya che, tene A
tAttivaka dharmasaMnyAsayoga hoya che, kAraNa ke te kSapazamarUpa dharmonuM
kSapaNa karate karate AgaLa vadhe che, karma prakRtiene sarvathA khapAvate
khapAvata, kSapakazraNa khatama karate karate, UDAvate UDAvate, guNasthAnakanI
zreNI para caDhato jAya che. ane Ama karmazatrune kSaya karatA karatA, A parama
samartha vIra puruSa 8-9-10-12 guNasthAnane vaTAvI jaI, teramAM sagI kevali
guNasthAne pahoMcI "nija kevalajJAna nidhAna" pragaTAve che. - basaMnyAsa yoga -
ane bIje je bagasaMnyAsa" nAmano sAmarthyoga che, te AjyakaraNanI pachI hoya
che. te A prakAre - aciMtya vIryapaNue karIne, asAdhAraNa AtmasAmarthyathI
kevalI bhagavAna samudaghAta kare che, te pahelAM AyeAjyakaraNa kare che.
AyakaraNa eTale zuM? AjIne karavAmAM Avate gavyApAra te AyeAjyakaraNa A maryAdA
-kevalIe dIThela maryAdA AyojyakaraNa pramANe jana=javuM te, zubha yoganuM
vyApAraNa-pravartana; karaNa=pariNAma vizeSa, sAmarthyavizeSa. kevalI bhagavAne
dIThelI maryAdA pramANe, udIraNAAvalimAM bhavopagrAhI kamene prakSepa karavo te
AyojyakaraNa che. eTale ke A chelA bhavamAM bhogavavAnA je bAkI rahelA vedanIya
vagere cAra karma che, temAM je vedanIya vagerenI sthiti AyuSya karatAM vadhAre
hoya, te tene sama-sarakhI karavA mATe kevalI bhagavAna udIraNa kare che,
jyakaraNa kare che, ke jethI karIne samudraghAta vaDe te te karmone jaldI
khapAvI daI sarakhI sthitimAM lAvI mUkAya.

Page #111 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Samudghāt  (45) By organizing in this way, the Kevali Bhagwan performs
Samudghāt. Not all Kevali Bhagwan perform Samudghāt, but those whose Vedaniya,
etc. karmas have a lifespan longer than the Kevali lifespan, they perform
Samudghāt to equalize those karmas. This is done so that those karmas can be
quickly mixed and disposed of immediately. Leaving the original body behind, the
exit of the Jiva-pinda, the Atma-pradesh-samuh, from the body is called
Samudghāt. Samudghāt means Sam - Ughāt, Sam means Samyak, i.e. Apunarbhav, not
again, Ut = Prabhalya, with strength, Ghāt means destruction, annihilation,
decay of karma. The strong effort in which karma is destroyed, annihilated, in a
way that it does not arise again, is Samudghāt. In this Kevali-Samudghāt, the
Atma-pradesh expands, taking on a Virat form, and with that Atma-pradesh, the
entire lake is filled in the form of Dand-Kapāt-Pratar, and that karma-pradesh
is touched, quickly experienced, and destroyed. Then, that Atma-pradesh is
concluded in reverse order. This entire process is completed in just eight
moments! This supremely wonderful, inconceivable power is expressed by this
supreme Samarthayagi!!  And the result of this organization and Samudghāt is
Sheleshikaran, meaning that Sheleshikaran is attained immediately after. In it,
the speed of mind, speech, and body is completely suppressed, and this supremely
powerful Yagi, meditating on the fourth Shukla-dhyana, attains the state of
Sheleshikaran, like the Shelesh-Meru-Parvat, a state of unshakeable stillness.
Or, the Shelesh, which is the form of complete Samadhi, becomes Ish. Thus, this
state of Shelesh-Meru, like a still, Meg-nirodh, of this secret, supreme Yagi,
is Sheleshikaran; or, the state of this Shelesh-Yagishwar, who has attained
supreme Samadhi, is Sheleshikaran. This Shelesh state lasts as long as the five
short vowels (a, i, u, l) are pronounced, and immediately after the last moment,
this supreme Yagi ascends to Siddha-pada.  "Utkrushta Viraj Nivesh, Gkriya Navi
Pase Re; Yog Tani Dhruvata Sheleshe, Aatmashakti Na Base Re....Virajine Charane
Lagun." –Shri Anandghanaji  * "Mulasariramchchhandiy Uttar Dehass Jivapindass.
Nigam Reha Hriyar Samudvar Gam" –Shri Nemichandra Siddhantachkravarji Krit
Gamdhasar

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 basaMnyAsayega (45) AvuM AyeAjyakaraNa karIne kevalI bhagavAna samudaghAta kare
che. sarva kevalI bhagavAna samuddaghAta karatA nathI, paNa jenA vedanIya vagere
karmanI sthiti AyuSya kevalI- karatAM vadhAre hoya che, teo ja te karmonA
samIkaraNa mATe samuddaghAta samudraghAta kare che, ke jethI karIne te karmone
zIdhra bheLavI laI tene tatkAla nikAla karI devAya. mULa zarIrane choDyA vinA,
uttara deharUpa jIvapiMDanuM-AtmapradezasamUhanuM dehamAMthI bahAra nIkaLavuM
tenuM nAma samudyAta che. samudraghAta eTale sam - ughAta, sama samyaphapaNe
eTale apunarbhAvapaNe, pharI na hoya e rIte, ut = prAbalyathI, prabalapaNathI
ghAta karmanuM hanana, pralaya, kSaya. pharI na upaje evI rIte prabalapaNe je
prayatnavizeSamAM karmane pralaya thAya-ghAta thAya, te samudraghAta che. A
kevalisamuddaghAtamAM Atmapradezano vistAra karI-virATa svarUpa dhAraNa karI, te
AtmapradezavaDe Akho leka daMDa-kapATapratara AkAre pUrI devAmAM Ave che, ane te
te karma pradezane sparza, zIdhra bhogavI laI kheravI nAMkhavAmAM Ave che, ane
pachI te Atmapradezane UlaTA krame upasaMhAra karAya che. A badhe vidhi mAtra
ATha samayamAM pUro thAya che ! AvuM parama adbhuta aciMtya sAmarthya A parama
samathayegI atra vyakta kare che !! ane A AyojyakaraNa ne samudraghAtanuM phaLa-
pariNAma zilezIkaraNa che, eTale ke te pachI taratamAM zelezIkaraNa prApta thAya
che. temAM mana-vacana-kAyAnA vegane sarvathA nirodha karI, A parama samartha
yegI cothuM zukaladhyAna dhyAvata sata, zileza-meruparvata zelezIkaraNa jevI
niSpakaMpa aDola avasthAne prApta thAya che. athavA sarva saMvararUpa
samAdhAnarUpa je zIla, tene Iza bane che. Ama A svarUpagupta parama yegInI
zeleza-meru jevI niSkapa meganirodharUpa avasthA te zelezIkaraNa; athavA parama
samAdhi pAmelA A zIleza yegIzvaranI avasthA te zelezIkaraNa A zaleSI avasthA,
pAMca hRsva akSara (a, I, u, , la) uccArAya teTale kALa rahe che ane tenA chellA
samaya pachI tarata ja A parama AyegI thegI Urdhvagamana karI siddhapadamAM
birAje che. utkRSTa viraja niveza, gakriyA navi pese re; yoga taNI dhruvatA
zileze, Atamazakti na bese re....vIrajIne caraNe lAguM." -zrI AnaMdaghanajI * "
mUlasarIramacchaMDiya uttara dehassa jiivpiNddss| nigAma rehA hRAra samudvAra
gAma " -zrI nemicaMdra siddhAMtacakavarjI kRta gamaDhasAra

Page #112 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(46) With the collection of Gadasti, the power of destruction is swift and
agile, the consciousness is purified and made pure; The feeling of attachment
has become completely inactive, destroying the four bodies and their remnants.”
Shri Devchandraji “The count of mind, speech, body and karma, where all the
material connections are released; Such an unयोगी state of being exists there, a
great fortune, a blissful, complete bondage, which is unprecedented, only a
single atom, not touched, completely free from blemishes, unwavering, like the
sun, pure, unstained, conscious awareness, unique, without beginning or end,
subtle, natural, in the form of a state...unprecedented -Shrimad Rajchandraji
Thus, this state of complete renunciation is attained in the state of Shilesh. –
As per the practice of the karmas – The Bhavyas attain all three karmas, namely,
Yathapravrittakaran, Apoovarakaran and Anivrittikaran, and the others, that is,
the Abhavya, only have the first karma, Yathapravrittakaran, the other karmas
can never be attained by them. Here, karma means result. (Verse 1). Just as a
stone from a mountain and a river, when rubbed, ground, pounded, beaten, by the
law of friction and pulverization, becomes round and smooth, so too, the
wandering, wandering soul in the endless cycle of existence, sometimes, somehow,
As the feeling of attachment diminishes and the Bhavyata matures, some special
Yathapravrittakaran, self-result, occurs, some state of karma arises, which
produces a dullness in the taste, Or it comes close to the knot. “As it has been
coming, in this way, in the endless flow of time, the soul, which is constantly
moving, sometimes, a little bit, a feeling of excitement, which is common
(Ordinarily), that is the Yathapravrittakaran. Such Yathapravrittakaran, it
makes the soul and the body, and it comes close to the infinite knot. But it is
only a general, ordinary effort, and due to the weakness of the self-power, it
returns without breaking the knot. This karma is attained by both the Bhavyas
and the Abhavya, but the other two karmas are attained only by the Bhavyas, not
by the Abhavya, that is why they cannot enter the path of liberation. And the
Bhavyas also, until they attain the unprecedented (Unprecedented) self-resultant
feeling, perform unprecedented self-effort, with unique effort, with
extraordinary (Extraordinary effort) effort, with all their might (With all his
might), bravely, with unprecedented effort, “Yahoom” to do, to break the
impenetrable fortress of the knot, with all their soul, until then, they too do
not succeed in that task. Because for the difficult task of breaking the knot,
an unusual, extraordinary effort is needed. In it, the previous Yathapravritta,
like

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (46) gadaSTisamuccaya vIya kSAyika bale capaLatA ganI, dhI cetana karyo zuci
alezI; bhAva zelezIme parama akriya thaI, kSaya karI cAra tanu kamazeSI." zrI
devacaMdrajI "mana-vacana-kAyA ne karmanI vagaNa, chUTe jahAM sakaLa pudgala
saMbaMdha jo; evuM ayogI guNasthAnaka tyAM vartatuM, mahAbhAgya sukhadAyaka
pUrNa baMdha je apUrva eka paramANu mAtranI maLe na sparzatA, pUrNa kalaMka
rahita aDola ravarUpa je zuddha niraMjana caitanyamUtti ananyamaya, agurulaghu
amUrta sahaja padarUpa jo....apUrva -zrImad rAjacaMdrajI Ama A bagasaMnyAsa lega
zilezI avasthAmAM prApta thAya che. - yathApravRttakaraNa Adi - bhavyane
yathApravRttakaraNa apUrvakaraNa ane anivRttikaraNa ema traNeya karaNa prApta
thAya che, ane bIjAone eTale ke abhavyone paheluM yathApravRttakaraNuM ja hoya
che, bIjA karaNa tene kadI paNa prApta thaI zake nahi. atre karaNa eTale
pariNAma. (gAthA 1). jema giri-nadIno patthara ghasAtAM, pIsAtAM, kUTAtAM,
pITAtAM, gharSaNa-cUrNana nyAye goLa lIse thAya che, tema anAdi saMsAramAM
rakhaDatA AthaDatA jIvane kavacit kavacit keme karIne bhAvamalanI kSINatA thatAM
tathAbhavyatAne paripAka thaye, e koI viziSTa yathApravRttakaraNa AtmapariNAma
thaI Ave che, evI koI karma sthiti rasanI maMdatA upaje che, ke te graMthinI
nikaTa AvI paDe che. "Aguse calI AtI he e rIte anAdi kALapravAhamAM pravartatAM
pravartatAM jIvane je kavacit kiMcit bhAvacamakArA jevuM sAmAnya paNe
(Ordinarily) pravarte che evuM pUrvAnupUrvakaNa te yathApravRttakaraNa che. AvuM
yathApravRttakaraNa te jIva ane tavAra kare che, ne anaMtavAra graMthinI nikaTa
Ave che. paNa te mAtra sAmAnya-sAdhAraNa prayatnarUpa hoI AtmavIryanI maMdatAne
lIdhe te graMthibheda karyA vinA pAcho vaLI jAya che. A karaNa bhavya -abhavya
banene prApta thAya che, paNa bIjA be karaNa ekalA bhavyane ja prApta thAya che,
abhane nahi, eTale ja te mokSamArgamAM pravezI zakato nathI. ane bhavya paNa
jyAM lagI apUrva (Unprecedented) AtmA pariNAmarUpa bhAvane pAmI, apUrva
AtmapuruSArtha kurAvI, ananya prayatnathI asAdhAraNa (Extraordinary effort)
prayAsathI, potAnA sarva sAmarthyathI (With all his might) zUravIrapaNe apUrva
puruSArtha "yAhoma karIne', graMthirUpa durbhedya durgane bheda karavA
sarvAtmAthI pravartate nathI, tyAMlagI te paNa te kAryamAM saphaLa thatuM nathI.
kAraNa ke graMthibhedarUpa durdhaTa kArya mATe, asAmAnya-asAdhAraNa prayatnanI
jarUra che. temAM pUrvAnupUrva yathApravRtta jevo

Page #113 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
As per the existing karma, etc. (47) That effort will not work. Just as in a
war, to conquer a strong fort, a strong weapon must be used to make a heavy
attack (Mass attack), so to conquer the knot-like impenetrable fortress, an
unprecedented self-effort-like feeling-weight must be used to make a strong
attack. Otherwise, there will be failure in it, that is, one has to "retreat"
from the knot. The knot is in the first gunasthana, its penetration and moving
forward to the fourth, the worldly one, has not been reached. Some beings, by
destroying their karma, come with a high feeling, thinking of getting out of the
first, come close to the knot-breaking. There, the knot's strength becomes so
much on him that he becomes slack in breaking the knot, stops and returns
accordingly. In this way, the being has come close to the knot-breaking and has
returned. Some beings, by strong self-effort, awaken the causal factors, make a
strong effort, break the knot, and move forward, and when they break the knot
and move forward, they come to the fourth, and when they come to the fourth,
they will be liberated sooner or later, such an impression is received by that
being. -Shrimad Rajchandra also, when the being is in the last pudgala, and even
in that, the feeling-mal becomes extremely thin, then the glorious being gets
the last yathapravrittakaran, and he comes very close to the knot-breaking.
Then, with the unprecedented self-effort feeling becoming excited, with the
unprecedented self-effort's enthusiasm, the unprecedented karman gets the
anivrittikaran, anivrittikaran's attainment, unprecedented karman. So, in the
beginningless time, never attained before, that unprecedented self-result and
samyaktv's attainment will not be left behind - will not be reversed, that
anivrittikaran, from the unprecedented karman, the knot-breaking happens, and
from the anivrittikaran, samyaktv happens. In it, as long as there is a knot, as
long as there is yathapravrittakaran, there is unprecedented karman in breaking
- violating the knot, and when the being breaks the knot and faces samyaktv,
there is anivrittikaran. (Verse-2). This knot is extremely impenetrable - a very
hard knot to break. Like a knot of bamboo, which is harsh, dense, rigid and
deep, is difficult to break, so the being's deep knot of attachment-aversion
result is very difficult. (Verse-3). Therefore, to break it, the being must make
unprecedented self-effort. All this will be understood from the figure -
Figure-1 Unprecedented karman! Yathapravrittakaran -> Anivrittikaran > Samyaktv
Knot-breaking

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 yathApravRttakaraNa Adi (47) te prayatna kAma Ave nahiM. jema yuddhamAM
majabUta killo sara karavA mATe baLavAna zastrathI bhArI hale ( Mass attack )
karavo paDe che, tema graMthirUpa durbhedya durgane jItavA mATe apUrva
AtmapuruSArtharUpa bhAva-vajane joradAra hallo laI javo ja joIe. nahi te temAM
niSphaLatA ja maLe che, arthAt graMthi AgaLathI "pIchehaTha ( Retreat) karavI
paDe che. graMthi pahele guNasthAnake che, tenuM bhedana karI AgaLa vadhI cothA
sudhI saMsArI che. pahoMcyA nathI. keI jIva nirjarA karavAthI UMcA bhAve AvatAM,
pahelAmAMthI nIkaLavA vicAra karI, graMthibhedanI najIka Ave che. tyAM AgaLa
gAMThanuM eTaluM badhuM tenA upara jora thAya che ke graMthibheda karavAmAM
zithila thaI jaI aTakI paDe cheane e pramANe meLa thaI pAcho vaLe che. A pramANe
graMthibheda najIka ane tIvAra AvI jIva pAcho pharyo che. keI jIva prabala
puruSArtha karI nimitta kAraNo jega pAmI kaDI karI graMthibheda karI, AgaLa
vadhI Ave che, ane jyAre graMthibheda karI AgaLa vadhyuM ke cethAmAM Ave che,
ane cethAmAM Avyo ke vahele moDo mekSa thaze, evI te jIvane chApa maLe che."
-zrImad rAjacaMdra paNa jIva jyAre chellA pudagalAvamAM vartato hoya che, ne
temAM paNa bhAvamalanI atyaMta kSINatA thAya che tyAre bhavya jIvane chelluM
yathApravRttakaraNa prApta thAya che, ane te graMthibhedanI atyaMta nikaTa Ave
che. eTale pachI tene apUrva AtmaapUrvakaraNa bhAvane ullAsa thatAM, apUrva
AtmapuruSArthanI phuraNAthI apUrvakaraNane anivRttikaraNa anivRttikaraNanI
prApti thAya che apUrvakaraNa. eTale anAdikALamAM pUrve kadI paNa prApta thayela
nathI e apUrva AtmapariNAma ane samyakatvanI prApti karAvyA vinA rahe nahiM-
nivarse nahiM, te anivRttikaraNa, apUrvakaraNathI graMthibheda thAya che ane
anivRttikaraNathI samyaktva thAya che. temAM jyAM sudhI graMthi che, yaMsudhI
yathApravRttakaraNa che, graMthi chedatAM-ullaMghatAM apUrvakaraNa che, ane
graMthibheda karIne jIva samyakUvane sanmukha thAya tyAre anivRttikaraNa che.
(gAthA-2). A graMthi eTale atyaMta durbhedya-bhedanI ghaNI kaThaNa evI gAMTha.
karkaza, ghana, rUDha ne gUDha evI vAMsanI gAMTha jema bhedavI muzkela hoya che,
tema javanI A gADha rAga-dveSa pariNAmarUpa gAMTha jevI ghaNI duSkara che.
(gAthA-3). eTalA mATe ja tene bhedavA mATe jIve apUrva AtmapuruSArtha karavo
Avazyaka che. A sarva A AkRti uparathI samajAze- AkRti-1 apUrvakaraNa !
yathApravRttakaraNa -> anivRttikaraNa > samyakatva graMthibheda

Page #114 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(48) After the collection of yogadristi and thus this knot is broken, this jiva
abandons the deep results of raga-dvesha, its raga etc. become weak, the evil
anantanubandhi kshaya quartet, time-fruit etc. are destroyed, dasanamaha becomes
and samyagdarshan manifests. Because even a little bit of pure samyagjnan is the
goal of true asammoha. (Gatha-4). After attaining samyaktva, the state from two
to nine palyopam in paprthphv, that is, in charitramehaniya karma, is destroyed,
true bhavasravakapan is attained; and when the state of sankhyata sagaropam is
destroyed from that charitrameha, true bhavasadhuapan and upshamshreni-
kshapkshreni are attained respectively. (Gatha-5). Etc. is said here briefly.
The special inquisitive should refer to places like karmagranth etc. Figure-2
Granthibhed First A-purvakaran   Samyaktva. -> Second A-purvakaran Ajyakaran
Kshapkshreni 8 9 10 12 Guna Stha Na| Samudraghat Kevaljnan, Shaileshikarana -
Moksha – It is worth noting here that after attaining samyaktva, the jiva, with
intense speed, continues and increases the a-purva purushartha stream, the more
it destroys the above mentioned palyopam-sagaropama etc. states quickly, it
attains the bhavasravak, bhavasadhu etc. states in a flash, and ascends the
upsham-kshapkshreni, manifests unparalleled kevaljnan, until it attains moksha
in that very bhava. The jiva who is slow in purushartha, will also be slow in
attaining moksha accordingly. Therefore, attaining moksha is dependent on the
jiva's purushartha strength. The sooner the purushartha is done, the sooner
moksha is attained, therefore, the jiva should abandon the false bhava-sthiiti
etc. and remain constantly engaged in true purushartha, as is understood from
the teachings of the wise. Because there is another yoga (g-sanyas) in the next
(urva-forward) from anyakaran, therefore

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (48) yogadaSTisamuccaya ane Ama A gAMTha bhedAI gayA pachI, A jIva gADha rAga-
dveSa pariNAma choDI de che, tenA rAgAdi maMda paDI jAya che, duSTa
anaMtAnubaMdhI kaSAya cokaDI samayaphalvAdi naSTa thAya che, dazanAmaha ra thAya
che ane samyagadarzana pragaTe che. kAraNa ke thoDuM paNa suparizuddha evuM
samyagrajJAna sAcA asaMmohane hetu hoya che. (gAthA-4). samyakatva prApta thayA
pachI, papapRthaphavamAM eTale ke cAritramehanIya karmamAMthI bethI nava
palyopama sudhInI sthiti kSaya thaye, dezaviratipaNuM sAcuM bhAvazrAvakapaNuM
prApta thAya che; ane te cAritramehamAMthI saMkhyAtA sAgaropama sthiti kSaya
thaye, sarvaviratipaNuMsAcuM bhAvasAdhupaNuM tathA upazamazreNI-kSapakazreNI
anukrame prApta thAya che. (gAthA-5). ityAdi atre saMkSepathI kahyuM che. vizeSa
jijJAsue karmagraMtha Adi sthaLa jevA. AkRti-2 graMthibheda prathama
apUrvakaraNa samyakatva. -> bIjuM apUrvakaraNa AjyakaraNa kSapakazreNI 8 9 10 12
guNa sthA na| samudraghAta kevalajJAna, zailezIkaraNa - mokSa - atre eTaluM
lakSamAM rAkhavA yogya che ke samyakatva prApta thayA pachI jIva je
tIvrasavegathI aparva puruSArthadhArA cAlu rAkhe ne vadhAre, te uparokta
palyopama-sAgaropamAdi jeTalI kama sthiti paNa zIghra kSaya karI, jhapATAbaMdha
bhAvazrAvaka, bhAvasAdhu Adi dazAne pAme, ane upazama-kSapakazreNI para ArUDha
thaI, anupama kevalajJAna pragaTAvI, yAvat te ja bhave paNa mekSa pAme. je
jIvane puruSArthamAM maMdatA hoya to te pramANe mokSanI prAptimAM paNa DhIla
thAya. eTale mokSanI prApti jIvanA puruSArthabalane AdhIna che. jaladI
puruSArtha rAve te jaladI mekSa pAme, mATe bhavasthiti Adi khoTA nhAnA cheDI daI
jIve niraMtara satya puruSArthazIla rahevuM joIe ema jJAnI puruSonA upadezane
Azaya samajAya che. kAraNa ke anyakaraNathI Urva-AgaLamAM bIje (gasaMnyAsa) yoga
hoya che, eTalA mATe

Page #115 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## A Yoga of Non-Yoga  (49) Therefore, the non-yoga among yogas is described as
the supreme yoga. It is characterized by the complete renunciation of all, with
the intention of attaining liberation. || 11 ||  Therefore, that which is "non-
yoga" is called the supreme yoga among yogas. (Because) it connects with
liberation and is characterized by complete renunciation.  - As explained
earlier, this non-yoga is the state of complete renunciation. It is devoid of
the activity of mind, speech, and body, and it is the absence of all restrictive
yogas. Therefore, it is called "non-yoga." And this "non-yoga" is the supreme
yoga, the supreme among all yogas, because it is the primary means to
liberation. It is truly "yoga" because it directly connects with liberation. And
it is characterized by complete renunciation, which is the highest purity.
Calling this "non-yoga" the supreme yoga is indeed appropriate, because it
directly connects with liberation, which is the sole ultimate goal of all yogas.
The word "yoga" itself means "connection," and this non-yoga connects with
liberation. Similarly, here there is complete renunciation, which is a higher
purity than renunciation of unrighteousness or righteousness. And now there is
nothing left to renounce, so this non-yoga is the supreme yoga.  Here, even the
slightest touch of an atom does not remain. The pure self-nature, completely
free from impurities, manifests. The unique, pure, and unblemished consciousness
shines forth. The subtle, formless, innate self-nature is attained. This innate
self-nature is the state of complete renunciation, because of the absence of all
yogas (the absence of the yoga of mind, speech, and body). Among the yogas like
friendship, etc., what is the supreme yoga? It is the non-yoga, the primary one,
as stated. How? It is said that it connects with liberation, with the intention
of attaining liberation.  It is said that yoga is due to connection. Its nature
is described as complete renunciation, because it is a higher purity than even
the renunciation of unrighteousness and righteousness.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 yogasanyAsayoga (49) atastvayogA yogAnAM yogaH para udaahRtH|
mokSayojanabhAvena sarvasaMnyAsalakSaNaH  //  11  //  ethI ayoga egamAM, yoga
kahyo pararUpa, mekSa sAtha yojanathakI, sarvasaMnyAsa svarUpa, 11. atha :-eTalA
mATe te je aga" che, tene gomAM parama pega kahyo che. (kAraNa ke) mokSa sAthe
te jana-joDANa kare che ane te sarvasaMnyAsa lakSaNavALo che. - vivecana Ama
gasaMnyAsa nAmane sAmarthyaga zailezI avasthAmAM hoya che ema uparamAM kahyuM.
temAM mana-vacana-kAyAnA vegane abhAva hoya che, nirodha karaayoga vAmAM Ave
che, eTale te "aga" kahevAya che. ane A "ayoga" parama yoga caga sarva yugamAM
parama che, pradhAna che, kAraNa ke te "mokSe banAvyo mokSa sAthe sAkSAt jana
karAvanAra evo kharekharA arthamAM "ga" che, ane te sarvasaMnyAsarUpa
lakSaNavALe che, temAM utkRSTa parizuddhi hoya che. Ane "parama" ega kahyo te
yathArtha che, kAraNa ke sava gonuM je eka mAtra aMtima sAdhya-dayeya mikSa che,
tenI sAthe A ayoga ga ja sAkSAt yojana-joDANa karAve che. mekSa sAthe je-jeDe te
vega kahevAya, ema vyutpattithI A barAbara ghaTe che. tema ja atre sarvasaMnyAsa
hoya che, adharmasaMnyAsa ke dharmasaMnyAsa karatAM utkRSTa parizuddhi hoya che,
ane have kaMI paNa tyajavApaNuM bAkI rahetuM nathI eTale A aAga parama zreSTha
ga che. atre eka paramANu mAtranuM paNa sparzavApaNuM rahetuM nathI. saMpUrNa
niSkalaMka evuM aDela AtmasvarUpa pragaTe che. ananya evI zuddha niraMjana
caitanyamUtti vyakta thAya che. agurulaghu evuM amUrta sahajAnmasvarUpa pada
siddha thAya che. A sahajAnmasvarUpa padane vRtti-bata pava-eTalA mATe ja,
zilethI avasthAmAM vegasaMnyAsarUpa kAraNane lIdhe, -ayoga, yogane abhAva (mana-
vacana-kAyAnA yogane abhAva). cenAM-mitrA Adi yoganI madhye, zuM? te ke-jeja:
pAH-paramaga, pradhAnama, radatta - kahyo che. kevI rIte ? te mATe kahyuM - me
kana pAra-mekSa sAthe jana-bhAvarUpa hetuthI, joDANa karavArUpa bhAvathI. nanAdu
cheH --janane lIdhe yoga, ema samajIne. AnuM svarUpa kahe che:sarvasaMcArakSA
-sarva saMnyAsarUpa lakSaNavALe, kAraNa ke adharmasaMnyAsa ne dharmasaMnyAsa
karatAM paNa ane parizuddhino bhAva che, eTalA mATe.

Page #116 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(20) The state of Yoga-drishti-samuccaya has been seen by Shri Sarvagna Deva in
his knowledge, but even Shri Bhagwan cannot describe its form. How can other
speech describe that form? That knowledge is only experienced by the knower.
“The state that Shri Sarvagna saw in his knowledge, even Shri Bhagwan could not
describe it; what can other speech say about that form? That knowledge remains
only experienced…unprecedented.” –Thus, the journey of Shrimad Rajchandraji
towards the desired destination of liberation, which he started with Iccha, ends
here. Moving forward continuously, sometimes slowly and sometimes at a rapid
pace, he traversed all the stages, starting from Shubhechchha and ending with
Shaileshikaran, and finally arrived at the magnificent gate of the city of
liberation, which is like a purification. And then, he immediately entered the
city. Figure-3 Iccha Yoga Shashga Dharma-sanyasa Samarthya Vega Yoga-sanyasa
Yoga Teevra Icchaadi | Teevra Shashbaedh-Shraddha Prabhaana Kevalgyaan Series
Man-Vachan-Kayatyaga Moksha Shaileshikaran Gunasthan Sapramad Aaprasad Aapramad
Dvi-apoorva Karan V 4 5 6 8 9 10 12 13 Iccha-yagadi’s Keshtka-1 Yoga’s Name
Whose Main Point Main Characteristic Eligible Gi Gunasthan True Dharma Iccha,
Shastra | True Dharma Icchak, 4-5-6 Shravan-Mritadh-Samya-icchaga Iccha-pradhan
Agam Shreta, Samya (from Upalakshan, but still Pramad-janaya Vikalata | Gyaani,
but still Pramad-yukt Vyavharthi 1) Shastra-og Shastra-pradhan Shastra-patuta.
Shraddha, Aapramad Shastra-patu, Shraddhaalu Aapramadi Dharma-sanyasa Samarthya-
pradhan ! Beyond Shastra, Vishay, Prati-swas Vedana- * Anubhav-gyaan. Kshayo-
pasham Dhame ne Tyaga. Kshapak-shreni-gat Yogi And Saghi Kevali 8-9-10-12-13
Samgadh Chag Yoga-sanyasa Samarthya-pradhan | Man-Vachan-Kaya na Yoga no Tyaga-
ayog. Param Yoga Agi Kevali 14 Shaileshi Avस्थाમાં

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (20) yogadaSTisamuccaya zrIsarvajJa deve jJAnamAM dIThuM che, paNa te zrI
bhagavAna paNa tenuM svarUpa varNavI zakatA nathI, te svarUpanuM varNana anya
vANI te kema karI zake? te jJAna te mAtra jJAnIne anubhavagamya che. "je pada
dIThuM zrI sarva jJAnamAM, kahI zakyA nahIM paNa te zrI bhagavAna je; teha
svarUpane anya vANI te zuM kahe ? anubhavagecara mAtra rahyuM te jJAna
je......apUrva." -zrImad rAjacaMdrajI Ama IchAyegIe zarU karelI mokSarUpa ISTa
sthAna bhaNInI musApharI ahIM pUrI thAya che. egamAge akhaMDa prayANa karatAM,
kavacita maMda-kavacita tIvra vege cAlatAM cAlatA cagI, zubhecchAthI mAMDI
zelezIkaraNa paya tanI samasta gabhUmikAo vaTAvI jaIne, aga evA zizIkaraNarUpa
mekSanagaranA bhavya daravAje AvI Ubhe che, ane pachI takSaNa re nagaramAM
praveza kare che. AkRti-3 irachAyoga zAsaga dharmasaMnyAsa sAmarthya vega
yogasaMnyAsayoga tIvra icchAdi | tIvra zAsabedha-zraddhA pratibhAna kevalajJAna
zreNI mana-vacana-kAyatyAga mekSa lezIkaraNa guNasthAna sapramAda aprasAda
apramAda dviapUrva karaNa va 4 5 6 8 9 10 12 13 icchAyAgAdinuM keSTaka-1 yoganuM
nAma kenuM mukhyapaNuM mukhya lakSaNa pAtra gI guNasthAna sAcI dharma IcchI,
zAstra | sAco dharma Icachaka, 4-5-6 zravaNa-mRtadha-samyaIcchAga IcchApradhAna
Agama zretA, samya (upalakSaNathI daSTi, chatAM pramAdajanya vikalatA | jJAnI,
paNa pramAdayukta vyavahArathI1) zAstroga zAtrapradhAna zAstrapaTutA. zraddhA,
apramAda zAstrapaTu, zraddhALu apramAdI dharmasaMnyAsa sAmarthyapradhAna !
zAstrathI para viSaya, prAti-svasa vedana- * anubhavajJAna. kSayopazama dhamene
tyAga. kSapakazreNIgata yogI ane sagI kevalI 8-9-1812-13 sAmagdha cAga
yogasaMnyAsa sAmarthyapradhAna | mana-vacana-kAyAnA yogano tyAga-ayoga. parama
yoga agI kevalI 14 zailezI avasthAmAM

Page #117 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Summary  Thus, here we have described the form of the three yogas:
*Icchayoga*, *Shaastrayoga*, and *Samarthayoga*. To understand this
*Sarasamuccaya* (summary), let's use a school-like analogy:  Imagine a traveler
lost in a terrifying forest, surrounded by dangers on all sides. How intensely
would he desire a way out? Or, imagine a patient suffering from a severe
illness, how desperately would he wish for a skilled physician to restore his
health? Or, imagine someone parched in a barren land during scorching summer,
how much would they crave water?  Similarly, a soul, like a traveler lost in the
terrifying forest of this world, first desires to escape it. He wants to attain
*Moksha* (liberation) and reach the desired destination of *Moksha*. Therefore,
he seeks guidance from a *Sadguru* (spiritual guide), who knows the path. He
listens to the information provided by the *Sadguru* and learns that this is the
path leading in a certain direction. Knowing this, he feels relieved and becomes
knowledgeable. Then, he tries to walk on this designated path with faith.
However, due to the difficulties of the path and his lack of experience, he
sometimes makes mistakes. As a result, his journey may sometimes stop or slow
down, and sometimes it may speed up. Thus, this *Icchayogi* (aspirant) continues
to move forward.  During this journey, the *Shaastra* (scriptures) are like
guides, always accompanying him. By following their instructions, he gains
complete and unadulterated knowledge of the *Shaastra*. With their help, he
moves forward with faith, seeing the path clearly. He progresses steadily,
according to his own strength and the speed allowed by the *Shaastra*.  As he
continues his journey, he crosses the terrifying forest and reaches a beautiful
highway, a straight path. From there, the *Shaastra* guides tell him, "Oh, great
soul, *Shaastrayogi*! Look, this path leads directly to *Moksha*. Walk straight
towards it! This is the general instruction I give you. Follow it. As you move
forward, you will understand more details on your own. Therefore, there is no
need for me to guide you further. You are now capable." Thus ends the story.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 sArasamuccaya 2112HY2214-( Summary) Ama atre icchAyega, zAstroga, ne
sAmarthayega e traNa yoganuM svarUpa kahyuM, ene sArasamuccaya samajavA mATe
skUla rUpaka-ghaTanA karIe: keI bhayaMkara aTavImAM koI musAphara bhUle paDI
gaye hoya, ne cAre kerathI muMjhAI ga hoya, tene temAMthI chUTavAne kaI rasto
batAve evI tenI kevI tIvra IcchA hoya? koI rogI mahAroganA paMjAmAM sapaDAyo
hoya, te kaI kuzaLa vaidya maLI jAya ne Arogya prApti thAya, ema kevuM che?
ujajaDa mabhUmimAM bhara unhALAmAM koI tara thaye hoya, te pANI mATe keTaluM che
? tema A saMsArarUpa bhayaMkara aTavImAM bhUlo paDelo jIvarUpa musAphara
prathama te temAMthI chUTavAnI tIvra IcchA rAkhe che, mekSa meLavavA Icche che,
mokSarUpa ISTa sthAne javA cAhe che. eTale pachI sUMDha DhaMDhato te tene mArga
jANakAra sadgurune pUche che. tenI pAsethI IcchAgI te mAgenI mAhitI meLavI-
sAMbhaLI, amuka dizAmAM A mArga che, ema te jANIne sahe che. Ama te kRtArtha ne
jJAnI bane che. pachI te zraddhApUrvaka te uddiSTa mArge cAlavA prayAsa kare
che. paNa mArganI kaThinatAthI tathA pitAne anubhava haju kAryo hovAthI tene
kavacit pramAda thaI Ave che. eTale musApharI kavacit aTakI jAya che ke dhIrI
paDe che, kavacit vegavaMtI bane che. Ama A IchAyogI AgaLa vadhato jAya che. A
musApharI daramyAna zAstrarUpa bhemIo (Guide) sadA tenI sAthe che, eTale tenI
AjJA pramANe cAlatAM tene zAstranuM saMpUrNa avikala jJAna prApta thAya che, ane
tenI sahAyathI mArga dekhate dekhate te zraddhApUrvaka AgaLa dhape che. potAnI
zakti pramANe, zAstranI pitAnA pagamAM jora hoya teTalA vegathI, te apramAdI
paNa AgaLa pragati karate jAya che. Ama AgaLa ne AgaLa prayANa kare te bhayAnaka
aTavI vaTAvI jaIne, suMdara rAjamArga para-dhorI rastA para AvI jAya che. eTale
AgaLane mokSasthAna bhaNIne raste cokakhecekho dekhAya che. tyAM zAstrarUpa
bhemIo tene kahI de che ke-he mahAnubhAva zAstragI! juo, A mArga sIdhe
saDasaDATa mokSasthAna pratye jAya che. te tarapha sIdhA cAlyA jAo! temAM A A
sAmAnya sUcanA ApuM chuM, te pramANe tame cAlyA jajo. vadhAre vigatanI tame jema
jema AgaLa jaze, tema tema tamane tamArI meLe khabara paDatI jaze. eTale have
hAre tamane AgaLa vaLAvavA AvavAnI jarUra nathI. tame pote "samartha che. mATe
vite kathA |

Page #118 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(p) The yogi, with a grateful heart, says: "Oh, most benevolent one, with the
scriptures as your weapon! How can I express my gratitude to you? You have
bestowed upon me an unimaginable favor. I have reached this point because of
your grace, and I am indebted to you for the valuable guidance you have
provided. I will always be ready to follow your commands. I am confident that
with your blessings, I will soon reach my desired destination, Mekshanagar. You
have taken great pains for me, and I have also strived to the best of my ability
to fulfill your instructions. If any transgression has occurred, please forgive
me. Farewell, salutations!"  Then, the powerful yogi, with self-power, sets off
on the path of liberation with intense fervor, moving with great speed. With the
vision of intuitive knowledge, the path ahead appears clear to him like a bright
lamp. As he progresses towards his desired goal with strength, his enthusiasm
grows. He sheds the shackles of worldly desires, lightening his burden, and thus
moves forward with increasing speed. With unprecedented self-power, he ascends
the ladder of liberation, renouncing the world, and swiftly crosses the 8th,
9th, 10th, and 12th stages of liberation. He reaches the 13th stage, attains
omniscience, and directly perceives all substances and their transformations.
There, he sees Mekshanagar directly. It is as if he has reached his ultimate
destination.  There, he rests for a while (according to his lifespan), and
shares the knowledge he has gained with others, benefiting the world and
performing the highest act of compassion.  Then, as his lifespan comes to an
end, he renounces the attachments of mind, speech, and body. Thus, he performs
yogic renunciation, enters the state of liberation through the magnificent door,
like the peak of Mount Meru, and enters Mekshanagar. He becomes a liberated soul
and dwells eternally in infinite bliss, in an endless state of meditation.
"With the momentum of the previous causes, he ascends to the state of
liberation, the abode of the liberated souls, and dwells eternally in infinite
bliss, with infinite vision, knowledge, and...unprecedented..."  - Shrimad
Rajchandraji

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (pa) gadaSTisamuccaya eTale te yogI vaLatuM kahe che-he parama upakArI
sazAstra! Apane huM kyA zabdomAM AbhAra mAnuM? Ape hArA para aciMtya upakAra
karyo che. ATalI bhUmikAe huM pahoMcyA chuM, te badhuM Apane pratApa che, ne
AgaLa mATenI je Ape kiMmatI sUcanA batAvI te mATe paNa huM Apane trANI chuM, huM
ApanI te AjJAne anusaravA sadA tatpara rahIza, ane mane khAtrI che ke ApanI
kRpAthI huM hArA ISTa sthAne-mekSanagare have thoDA vakhatamAM jaldI pahoMcIza.
Ape hArA mATe ghaNe zrama lIdho che, ne meM paNa ApanI AjJA uThAvavAno
yathAzakti parizrama karyo che, chatAM AjJAbhaMga thayo hoya te kSamA! vAru,
namaskAra! pachI te samartha yogI AtmasAmarthyathI vegamArge tIvra saMvegathI-
atyaMta vegathI jhapATAbaMdha deDaDyo jAya che. prAtila jJAna-anubhavajJAna
daSTithI tene AgaLa mArga cokakhe dIvA jevo dekhAte jAya che, ane jema jema te
ISTa dhyeya prati AgaLa dhapati sAmarthyathegI jAya che, tema tema tene utsAha
atyaMta vadhato jAya che. kSApazamika mene-kSapazama bhAvone phagAvI daI te
potAne bhAra ocho karato jAya che, eTale te era ne era vegathI AgaLa pragati
kare che. Ama apUrva AtmasAmarthyathI kSapakazreNI para caDhI, dharmasaMnyAsa
karate karate, te 8-9-10-12 guNaThANa jhapATAbaMdha vaTAvI de che, ne 13 mA
guNaThANe pahoMce che, kevalajJAna pAmI sarva dravya-paryAya pratyakSa dekhe
che. tyAM te mekSanagara sAkSAt dekhAya che. te jANe tenA parAmAM AvI pahoMce
che. tyAM pachI te zeDo vakhata (AyuSya pramANe) visAme khAya che, te pitAne
thayelA jJAnane lAbha bIjAne-jagane ApI parama paropakAra kare che. pachI
AyuSyanI mudata pUrI thavA AvyuM, te mana-vacana-kAyAnA pegene nirodha kare che-
tyAga kare che, ne Ama yogasaMnyAsa karI, meru jevI niSkapa zailezI avasthArUpa
bhavya daravAjAmAMthI te mokSanagaramAM praveza kare che, ane siddha puruSa banI
sAdi anaMta kALa anaMta samAdhisukhamAM zAzvata sthiti kare che. "pUrva prAgAdi
kAraNanA vegathI, Urdhvagamana siddhAlaya prApta susthita je sAdi anaMta anaMta
samAdhi sukhamAM, anaMta darzana jJAna anaMta sahita je....apUrva " -zrImad
rAjacaMdrajI

Page #119 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Kalasha Kavya of Yogadristi (53) **Yogadristi Kalasha Kavya** Mandakranta
One who gains vision and knowledge through the hearing of the dead, With faith,
they walk and attain liberation; and with strength, supreme talent, dharma, and
renunciation, Leaving behind the mind, speech, and body, they reach the perfect
abode. 1.  The one who is devoted to the desire and the knower, they are both
playful, The one who is devoted to the scriptures, they are very virtuous and
not playful, With the strength of experience, they practice dharma and
renunciation, In the abode of the Lord, they attain liberation. 2.  Those who
desire and inquire, they are awakened, They are pure in mind and soul, they
attain the path and are delighted. 3.  The one who is adorned with desire and
faith, they are adorned with the essence of the scriptures; They attain Srimad
Haribhadra, they attain the supreme, the unattached. 4.  The Lord of pure
consciousness, the natural form; He attains the glory of the Lord, the supreme
bliss. 5.  **|| This is the Kalasha Kavya of Yogadristi, composed by the great
sage Haribhadracharya, and explained by Bhagavandas, the author of the
commentary, with the name "Sumanonandan Brihatti". ||**  This commentary is an
attempt to explain the essence and doubts of the subject matter, as well as to
provide confirmation, through the creation of this new Kalasha Kavya of
Yogadristi.  - This commentary is named "Sumanonandan Ahattika" by the author
and commentator.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 gadaSTi kaLazakAvya (53) yogadaSTi kaLaza kAvya* maMdAkrAntA IcchA pRcchA
mRtazravaNathI darzana jJAna pAme, zraddhA sAthe gamana karatAM niSpamAda- jAme;
ne sAmarthya parama pratibhA dharma saMnyAsa dhAme, choDI ye mana vaca tanu
pahoMcatA pUrNa ThAme. 1. IcchAge kRtayuta ane jJAnI te pramAdI, zAstra hAye
kRtapaTu ati zrAddha ne apramAdI, sAmagye te anubhava bale dharma saMnyAsa
sAdhe, zilezImAM parama prabhune bhegasaMnyAsa lAdhe. 2. anuTupa IcchatA
prIcchatA jegI, jane sAdhaka sIjhatA manaMdana zuddhAtma, padane pAmI rIjhatA 3.
IcchAraMgI zratAsaMgI, sAmaga zRMgane; pAmI zrImad haribhadra, pAme mekSa
asaMgane. 4. zuddha caitanyanA svAmI, sahajAnma svarUpa te; suyazA bhagavAn
pAme, brahmAnaMda anUpa te. 5.  //  iti maharSi haribhadra'cArya racite rit
vandra manumana sugvanaMdanena bhagavAnadAsena + sumanonaMdana bRhatTI
hAnAmavivecanena saprAJca vivecate aa yogadRSTasaccaya zAstre iccha.
yogazAstrayogasAmarthyayogarUpatribhUmikayogasvarUpa.narUpaNAdhikAra  /  /  che
ane pratyeka adhikAranA prAMta ukta viSayanA sArasaMdeha temaja puSTirUpe A
yogadaSTi kalazakAvyanI navaracanA karavAne maMda prayatna A lekhaka
vivecanakAra karyo che. - A lekhaka vivecanakAre karelA A vivecananuM nAma
sumananaMdanI ahata TIkA? rAkhyuM che.

Page #120 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
A General Statement of the Eight Yoga-Dṛṣṭis (12-20) [Names of the Eight Yoga-
Dṛṣṭis—Ghaṭa-Dṛṣṭi and Yoga-Dṛṣṭi—Simile. Eight Yoga-Angas, Eight Āśaya-Deśas,
Eight Gunas. Definition of Dṛṣṭi. Difference from Āvaraṇa. - Pratipāti or
Apratipāti? Pratipāvi is Sāpay, Apratipāti is Nirapay.—Mukti is Ati Akhaṇḍa
Prayāṇa.] Thus, having explained its nature, it is said to be useful in the
ongoing subject matter— Without relying on those three, specifically arising
from them; Eight Yoga-Dṛṣṭis are called, generally speaking. 12, Meaning—Without
relying on those three diseases, specifically arising from them, those Ghaṭa-
Dṛṣṭis are called. And those Dṛṣṭis are eight in general. Commentary The three
Yogas, namely Iccha, Śāstra, and Sāmarthya, which were clearly described above,
are not directly relied upon, but rather, the Ghaṭa-Dṛṣṭis, which are
specifically produced from those three Yogas, are being stated here, and they
are eight in general. These eight Yoga-Dṛṣṭis are included within those three
Yogas. These Ghaṭa-Dṛṣṭi rivers have originated from the Yoga-mountain, so they
have a close relationship with it, and that is why the Vṛtti-Tatra-yam—those
three, namely Iccha-yoga, Śāstra-yoga, and Sāmarthya-yoga, without
Araśritya—relying upon, without Angīkāra—acceptance, Viśeṣa—specifically, “from
this, this” with such a characteristic, specifically. What? That which is
Patadudbhāva—arising from them, produced from those three Yogas, Ghaṭa-Dṛṣṭi-
yanta—Yoga-Dṛṣṭis—Mitra, etc. are called. The words Sāmānyaratu Tā—and generally
speaking, those Dṛṣṭis are eight.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ATha yogadaSTinuM sAmAnya kathana (aa . 12-20) [ ATha yogadaSTinA nAma--
ghadRSTi ne yogadaSTi-upamA. ATha yogAMga, ATha AzayadeSa, ATha guNa. daSTinI
vyAkhyA. AvaraNa apAyathI bheda.-pratipAtI ke aprati pAtI ? pratipAvI te sApAya,
apratipAtI te nirapAya.--mukti ati akhaMDa prayANa.] ema enuM svarUpa kahI
batAvI, prakRta-cAlu viSayamAM upayogI kahe che - etattrayamanAzritya
vizeSeNaitadudbhavAH  /  yogadRSTaya ucyanta aSTau sAmAnyatastu tAH  //  12  //
e traNane AdhyA vinA, vizeSathI tajanya; yogadaSTi kahuM ATha te, sAmAnyathakI
manya. 12, artha -e traNa rogane Azcaya karyA vinA, vizeSa karIne emAMthI ja
uddabhava pAmelI (nIkaLelI) evI gadaSTio kahevAmAM Ave che. ane te draSTie
sAmAnyathI ATha che. vivecana uparamAM je icchAga vagere traNa yoganuM spaSTa
varNana karyuM, tene sIdhesIdhe Azraya karyA vinA, paNa vizeSa karIne e traNa
yogamAMthI ja niSpanna thatI-nIkaLatI, evI cogadaSTienuM ahIM kathana karavAmAM
Ave che, ane sAmAnyathI te ATha che. A ATha yogadaSTie e traNa pegamAM
aMtarbhAva-samAveza pAme che. A gadaSTirUpa nadIo te yoga-parvatamAMthI ja
nIkaLelI che, eTale tenI sAthe ene gADha saMbaMdha che, ane eTalA mATe ja A
yogadaSTinI vRtti-tatrayama-e traNane, eTale IcchAyega, zAstraga ane
sAmarthyogane, arAzritya-Azraya karyA vinA, aMgIkAra karyA vinA, vizA
-vizeSathI, "AmAMthI A' evA lakSaNavALA vizeSa karIne. zuM ? te ke patadudvA
-emAMthI uddabhava pAmelI, e traNa vegamAMthI ja upajelI, nadaSTa 3yanta-
yogadaSTie-mitrA Adi kahevAmAM Ave che. zabdo sAmAnyaratu tA -ane sAmAnyathI te
daSTio ATha che.

Page #121 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## A General Statement on the Eight Yogadrishtis  (55) **Foundation:** To
understand the concept of "Pīḍik" properly, it was essential to first describe
the eight Yogas, including "Īcchā" and others. This is evident from the above
discussion.  And these are:  **"Mitrā, Tārā, Balā, Dīprā, Sthirā, Kāntā, Prabhā,
and Parā - these are the names of the eight Yogadrishtis. Listen to their
characteristics!"**  To explain these eight Yogadrishtis, it is said:  **"Like
the presence or absence of clouds, or like the presence or absence of a fetus,
the eight Yogadrishtis are to be understood as based on the wrong view."**
**Explanation:**  The names "Mitrā," "Tārā," etc., are the actual names of the
eight Yogadrishtis. Listen carefully to their characteristics, which are
described here. The term "Yogadrishti" is used here to exclude "Aghdrishtī."
**Explanation:**  "Aghdrishtī" is of various types due to the unique nature of
the destruction of karma, which obscures knowledge.  **"Sameghā, Ameghā, Rājyā,
etc., like the presence or absence of clouds, or like the presence or absence of
a fetus."**  The word "ādi" (etc.) includes the day, meaning that it refers to
the presence or absence of clouds during the day or night. The word "ādi" (etc.)
also includes the absence of a fetus, meaning that it refers to the presence or
absence of a fetus. Therefore, it is like the presence or absence of a fetus, or
like the presence or absence of a fetus.  **"Jodbdir"** - The general vision,
which is based on the perception of the soul. This means that it is possessed by
the soul who is attached to the world.  **"Shivāditāshā"** - Those who are based
on the wrong view or those who are not based on the wrong view. Those whose
vision is impaired by things like glass (pearl-shell) are those who are based on
the wrong view. Those who are not impaired by it are those who are not based on
the wrong view. This is the literal meaning of the word "Ābh" (sky). The meaning
is as follows:

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zAke yogadaSTinuM sAmAnya kathana (55) AdhArarUpa bhUmikA-pIDika barAbara
samajavA mATe prathama e ukta IcchAgAdi yogonuM varNana atyaMta upayogI ane
Avazyaka hatuM, ema A uparathI phalita thayuM. ane te A che - mitrA tArA balA
dIpA sthiga kAMtA prabhA praa| nAmAni yogadRSTInAM lakSaNaM ca nibodhata  //  13
//  mitrA tAra ne belA, dIprA sthira tema; kAMtA prabhA ane parA, dRSTi ATha che
ema, gadaSTinA nAma e, arthataNe anusAra lakSaNa tenuM sAMbhaLe, have ahIM
kramavAra. 13. artha:-mitrA, tArA, balA, dIprA, sthirA, kAMtA, prabhA ane parA-
ema A yogadaSTionA nAma che. ane eonuM lakSaNa sAMbhaLo ! te eghadaSTi batAvavA
mATe kahe che - sameghAmegharAjyAdau sagrahAdyarbhakAdivat  /  odhaSTiriha
jJeyA, mithyAdRSTItarAzrayA  //  14  //  vRtti -temAM mitrA jevI te mitrA, tArA
jevI te tArA; ItyAdi yathArtha ja nAnAni-nAma, gabdInAcagadaSTionA che. ane enuM
DhakSaUM-lakSaNa je kahevAmAM Ave che te, nita-zravaNa karo. sAMbhaLe! ema artha
che. ahIM edhadaSTino vyavacacheda (apavAda) karavA mATe yogadaSTi ? ema grahaNa
karyuM che. vRttiH--ahIM edhadaSTi, jJAnAvaraNIya Adi karmanA kSapazamanI
vicitratAne lIdhe citra-nAnA prakAranI hoya che. sameghAgharAvyAvIsamegha-
amedha, medhavALA ke megha vinAnA, rAtrI AdimAM. Adi zabdathI divasanuM grahaNa
che, eTale medhavALA ke megha vagaranA rAta ke divasamAM. sArmAliva-saMgraha Adi
ane arbhaka AdinI jema. pahelA Adi zabdathI asahana grahaNa che, bIjA Adi
zabdathI anabhaMkanuM grahaNa che. eTale grahasahita ke graharahita, evA bAla ke
abAlanI jema. (graha=bhUta, jhoDa vagere). jobadira - daSTi, sAmAnya darzana. te
bhAvAbhinaMdI jIvaviSayI che. eTale ke bhabhinaMdI-saMsArathI rAcanArA jIvane A
heAya che. zivAdItAzA-mithyAdRSTi AzrayI ke amithyAdaSTi AzrayI. kAca (motI-
paDala) vagerethI jenI daSTi upahata-bAdhita che te mithyAdi. tenAthI upaghAta
nathI pAmela te amithyAdRSTi, Abha akSaragamanikA (zabdArthanI samajUtI) thaI.
ane bhAvArtha te A che: -

Page #122 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(56) The **yogadakiṭasamuccaya** should be known here as being with or without
**megha** (clouds), in the night or day; with or without **graha** (planets),
like a child, etc., as **oghadṛṣṭi** (perception of the multitude); It is also
to be known as being based on **mithyādrṣṭi** (false perception) or
**amithyādrṣṭi** (true perception). **Vivecana** (Commentary): "In the dense,
cloudy night, the child is blind and confused; like the small, fleeting
glimpses, so are the perceptions of the multitude." - **Vīra** **Śrī
Yaśovijayajīkṛta Śrī K. D. Sažāya 1-2**: One is **samegha** (with clouds) -
perception in a cloudy night, which is somewhat limited in its grasp; the other
is **amegha** (without clouds) - perception in a cloudless night, which is
somewhat more extensive in its grasp; the word **ādi** (etc.) refers to
perception in the day. So, one is **samegha** (with clouds) - perception in a
cloudy day, and the other is **amegha** (without clouds) - perception in a
cloudless day. And there is a difference between these two. This perception is
also that of a **sagṛha** (with planets) - one whose perception is filled with
**bhūta** (elements), etc., and the word **ādi** (etc.) refers to that of an
**agṛha** (without planets) - one whose perception is not filled with planets.
There is also a difference between these two, due to the difference in **citra**
(image) and **vibhrama** (illusion), etc. - This is also the perception of a
**bālaka** (child), and the word **ādi** (etc.) refers to that of an **abālaka**
(adult). There is also a difference between these two, due to the difference in
**viveka** (discrimination) and **viklata** (confusion), etc. This is also the
perception of a **mithyādrṣṭi** (false perception) - one whose perception is
obstructed or covered by **kāca** (glass), **pāla** (pearl), **netraroga** (eye
disease), etc.; and that of an **amithyādrṣṭi** (true perception) - one whose
perception is not obstructed or covered by **kāca** (glass), etc. Just as this
difference in perception - even in the same object - is due to the difference in
**citra** (image) and **upādhi** (conditions), so also in **pāralaūkika
prameya** (knowledge of the other world) - knowledge related to the other world
- there is a difference in **pratipatti** (understanding) due to the difference
in **kṣayopaśama** (destruction and cessation). (There is a difference in
**mānyatā** (belief) and **grahaṇa** (grasp).) For this reason, **darśanabheda**
(difference in perception) - the difference in different perceptions - is said
to be **gāca** (firm). Indeed, this **darśanabheda** (difference in perception)
is not the goal of **sthira** (stable) etc. **drṣṭi** (perception) - those who
have different **granthi** (knots) - **yogī** (ascetics), because they have
**avadhi** (direct knowledge) - true understanding - of the **naya**
(principles) according to the **viṣaya** (object) and **pitṛpatā** (fatherhood).
Their activity is also for the sake of others - they have a desire for pure
**bodha** (knowledge) - therefore, they have become completely free from
**āgraha** (attachment) - therefore, they are subservient to **mitrī**
(friendship) etc. - therefore, and their **āśaya** (intention) is characterized
by **gambhīra** (serious) and **udāra** (generous) **cāricarika** (conduct) -
according to the **sanjīvanī** (life-giving) **carka** (wheel) **cāraṇa**
(movement) **nīti** (ethics) (according to the four **sanjīvanī** and the four
**nyāya** (principles)).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (56) yogadakiTasamuccaya meghasahita me rahita, rAtri divasamAM tema; graha
sahita graha rahita ne, bAla AdinI jema aha: jANavA yogya che, oghadaSTi te
tema; mithyASTi AzrayI, Itara AzrayI ema, 14, artha:-meghavALA ke megha vinAnA
rAta ke divasamAM, rahasahita ke praharahita, evA bAlaka ke abAlakanA jevI ahIM
oghadaSTi jANavI; ane te vaLI mithyAdaSTi AzrayI ke amithyAdaSTi AzrayI paNa
hoya. vivecana "saghana aghana dina rayaNImAM, bAla vikala ne anerA re; aratha
jue jema jUjUA, tima ogha najaranA pherA re.vIra." zrI yazovijayajIkRta zrI ke.
da. sajhAya 1-2 eka to samegha-meghavALI meghalI rAtrImAM daSTi, te kaMIka mAtra
grahaNa karanArI hoya che; bIjI to ameghadha vinAnI rAtrimAM jarA vadhAre adhika
grahaNa karanArI hoya che; Adi zabdathI divasanuM grahaNa che. eTale eka
samegha-melA divasamAM, tathA bIjI amegha-megha vagaranA divasamAM. ane A bemAM
vizeSa che-taphAvata che. A dRSTi vaLI sagraha-rahagrasta (bhUta vagere
bharAyelA) daSTAnI heya, ane Adi zabdathI agrahanI eTale grahagrasta nathI evA
dRSTAnI heya. A bene paNa taphAvata hoya che-citra vibhrama AdinA bhedane lIdhe.
- A vaLI bAlaka dRSTAnI hoya, ane Adi zabdathI abAlakanI paNa hoya. A bannene
paNa vivekaviklatA Adi bhedane lIdhe bheda hoya che. A vaLI mithyAdaSTinI eTale
kAca (pAla-motI-netraroga ) vagerethI jenI dRSTi upahataavarAyelI-DhaMkAyelI che
evAnI heya; ane tenAthI-kAca vagerethI jenI dRSTi upahata-avarAyelI nathI evA
amithyAdRSTinI hoya. jema A dRSTibheda-eka ja dazyamAM paNa,-citra (judA judA
prakAranA) upAdhibhedane lIdhe hoya che, tema pAralaukika prameyamAM-paraleka
saMbaMdhI jJAnaviSayamAM paNa kSayopazamanI vicitratAne lIdhe, citra eTale judA
judA prakAranuM pratipattibheda hoya che. (mAnyatAbheda-grahaNabheda hoya che.)
A kAraNe A darzanabheda eTale judA nA darzanene bheda che, ema gAcA kahe che.
kharekharaA darzanabheda te sthira Adi daSTivALA bhinnagraMthi yogIone heta ja
nathI, kAraNa ke teone yathAviSaya-pitapatAnA viSaya pramANe nayanA bhedone
avadha-sAcI samajaNa hoya che. enI pravRtti paNa parArthe hoya che,-temane
zuddha bodhanuM hevApaNuM che tethI karIne, teone Agraha vinivRtta-atyaMta dUra
thaI gayo hoya che tethI karIne, teonuM mitrI Adine parataMtrapaNuM heya che
tethI karIne, ane cAricarika saMjIvanI carakacAraNa nItithI (cAra saMjIvanI cAra
nyAya pramANe) temanA AzayanuM gaMbhIra udArapaNuM hoya che tethI karIne. gharuM
prona,

Page #123 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Eight Yogic Visions: A General Overview (57)  **Aghdristi:** This refers
to the common vision, the ordinary perception. Agh means flow. Aghdristi is the
vision of one who is caught in the flow of the endless cycle of existence
(samsara) and finds contentment within it. This is the vision of the common
beings, the ordinary souls, who are caught in the flow of the world. The common
perception of worldly objects, as seen by those who follow the flow of the
world, is called Aghdristi (Vision of a layman). This Aghdristi can be of
different types, depending on the degree of obscuration of knowledge (jnana
avaraniya), the ten types of obscurations (dasa avaraniya), and the different
levels of destruction and cessation (kshaya-apashma). For example, a single
scene can be perceived differently:  1. It may appear very faint in a heavily
clouded night. 2. It may appear slightly clearer in a night with less cloud
cover. 3. It may appear even clearer on a cloudy day. 4. It may appear very
clear on a cloudless day. 5. The perception of the viewer can be affected by
external influences like ghosts (bhoot) or mental disturbances (chitta
vibhrama). 6. Even without such influences, the perception of the viewer can
vary. 7. The perception of a child will be different from that of an adult. 8.
The perception of an adult will also vary depending on their level of
understanding. 9. The perception of a viewer whose vision is obscured by
something like a glass (kaach) or dust will be different. 10. The perception of
a viewer whose vision is not obscured will be different.  Thus, even a single
scene can be perceived differently due to various external factors. These
different perceptions are the different types of Aghdristi.  **Chaugdristi:**
Just as there are different types of Aghdristi due to different external factors
in the perception of a single worldly scene, there are also different types of
Chaugdristi, different perceptions, and different understandings, due to the
different levels of destruction and cessation (kshaya-apashma) in the knowledge
of the other world (paraloka), the knowledge of the self (atma tattva), and
other such subjects. Just as the aperture (diaphragm) of a camera can be
adjusted to increase or decrease the field of vision, similarly, the level of
destruction and cessation (kshaya-apashma) can increase or decrease the field of
vision of the yogi (samyakdristi purusha). The more the obscurations are
removed, the more the veil is lifted, the more the aperture is opened, the more
the yogi (samyakdristi purusha) can perceive. Chaugdristi is the vision related
to the yogi, the vision of the yogi (samyakdristi purusha) who follows the path
of yoga. This is the clear distinction between Aghdristi and Chaugdristi.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ATha yogadRSTinu" sAmAnya thana (57) * AghadaSTi ? eTale sAmAnya dRSTi, sAmAnya
daOna. egha eTale pravAha. pravAhapatita dRSTi te eghadaSTi. Ama anAdi
saMsArapravAhamAM taNAi rahelA ane temAM ja rAcanArA evA bhavAbinadI sAmAnya
kATinA jIvonI sRSTi te eSTi che. leAkapravAhane AghadaSTi anusaratA prAkRta
janAnuM je laukika padArtha saMbadhI sAmAnya dana, te eTale ? eghadRSTi che,
(Vision of a layman). ane A eghaSTi paNa jJAnAvaraNIya, daza nAvaraNIya vagere
kanA bhinna bhinna kSayeApazamane lIdhe-(nyUnAdhikatAne lIdhe) jUdA jUdA
prakAranI, vicitra prakAranI heAya che. dAkhalA tarIke keI eka dRzya hoya te (1)
meghalI rAtre ghaNuM ghaNuM jhAMkhu* ka'ika dekhAya, (2) tenA karatAM kaMika
vadhAre megha vinAnI rAtre dekhAya, (3) tenA karatAM paNa ghaNuM vadhAre meghalA
divase dekhAya, (4) ane tenA karatAM paNa ghaNuM ghaNuM vadhAre megha vagaranA
divase dekhAya. ane temAM paNu, (5) dRSTA-jonArA jo bhUta vagere grahathI athavA
citta vibhrama vagere grahathI grahAyelA hAya teA tenA dekhavAmAM, (6) ane tevA
graha rahita jonAranA dekhavAmAM paNa cAkhA le-phera paDe; (7) athavA dekhanArA
khAlaka hAya teA tenA dekhavAmAM, (8) ane pukhta uMmaranA hAya te tenA
dekhavAmAM paNa vivekanA ochAvattA pramANane lIdhe, taphAvata hAya. athavA (9)
kAca (paDala-mAtIe) vagere A hAvAthI dekhanAranI dRSTi jo avarAi-DhakAi heAya
teA tenA dekhavAmAM, (10) ane kAca (paDela) ADA na heAya, teA tenA dekhavAmAM
paNa jarUra phera paDe. Ama eka ja dRzyamAM-jovAnI vastumAM paNa vicitra
upAdhibhedane lIdhe jUdA jUdA dRSTibheda thAya che. A dRSTAMta pramANe, laukika
padArthane, laukika dRSTie dekhavAnA je je bheda che, te te AghadRSTinA prakAra
che. ceAgadaSTi-- --Ama eka ja laukika dazya dekhavAmAM paNa, jUdI jUdI jAtanI
bAhya uSAdhine lIdhe, jema eghadRSTinA bheda paDe che, tema paraleAka sabadhI
jJeyamAM--Atmatattva AdinA jJAnaviSayamAM paNu, kSayApazamanI vicitratAne kAraNe
judA judA prakAranA ceAgadaSTimAnyatAbheda-dRSTibheda hAya che, danabheda heAya
che. jema kaeNmerAnA paDadA (Diaphragm) ochevatto khulle, tema dRSTimaryAdAnuM
kSetra (Field of vision) vadhaghaTa thAya che. te ja prakAre jevI kSayeApazamanI
vadhaghaTa-taratamatA heAya, jeTaluM kama'nuM AvaraNa khasyu' hAya-kanA paDadA
khUlyA hoya, teTaluM ochu Mvattu' dana cAgaSTivALA samakitI puruSane thAya che.
mAma cAgadaSTi' eTale yAga saMbadhI daSTi, yAgamAne anusaratI evI dRSTA yAgI--
samyagdaSTi puruSanI daSTi (Vision of Yogi); eghadRSTi ne cAMgadRSTinA Ama
pragaTa bheda che;--

Page #124 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  The Collection of Yugadristi **Verse 1-3** "The visions that have been seen,
those are just a glance; the differences in the four (types of knowledge), the
Samyak Darshan (right vision) is the one to be followed..." - Veer.
**Comparison of Ghadristi and Yogadristi - Table 2**  | Feature | Ghadristi |
Yogadristi | |---|---|---| | **Subject** | Ordinary Bhava-Abhinandi (worldly)
being | Yogi, Samyak Darshan (right vision) seeker, liberated soul | | **Object
of Vision** |  Worldly | Transcendental, Self-knowledge, etc. | | **Method of
Vision** | Worldly-practical, flowing, like a river | Transcendental, spiritual,
path of Yoga, like a well, grasping the truth | | **Reason for Difference** |
Subtle difference in the destruction of karma | Subtle difference in the
destruction of karma | | **Speciality** |  Possibility of debate regarding the
difference in vision |  Impossibility of debate regarding the difference in
vision |  **Explanation:**  Thus, due to the subtle difference in the
destruction of karma, there is a difference in vision. Therefore, the different
(Vedanta, Jain, etc.) visions have been differentiated. This is the statement of
the Yogacharya.  But those who have a stable vision, the Samyak Darshan (right
vision) seekers with different interpretations, do not have this difference in
vision in their minds. They do not consider this difference in opinions and
visions, they do not give it existence. Like ordinary people, they are not
carried away by the insistence on opinions and visions. They see only one path,
one vision - the vision of the Self. They see only one Self-knowledge, not a
difference. All these visions are rooted in the same Self-knowledge, only the
"vision is different" - they believe this with a pure heart. They know these six
visions as aspects of the pure Self-knowledge or as a means of guidance.
Therefore, they do not engage in the intricacies of refutation and
justification. Instead, they worship these six visions with Samyak Darshan
(right vision). Because,  "All those are one, all visions are the same
understanding; the understanding of the Syadvada is also true. If you ask me
about the original state, I will tell you that it is the same for all."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 yugadaSTisamuccaya darzana je thayA jUjUA, te egha najarane phere re; bheda
thirAdika cAramAM, samakita daSTine here re....vIra." zrI yo, da, sajhAya 1-3
ghadaSTi ane yogadaSTinI tulanA keSTaka-2 1 eSTi | yogadaSTi daSA pAtra sAmAnya
bhavAbhinaMdI jIva yogI samyagadaSTi mumukSu puruSa dazya viSaya laukika
pAralaukika, AtmatatvaAdi parzanapaddhati laukika-vyAvahArika, pravADapatita,
gADarIA pravAha jevI alaukika, pAramArthika, yogamArganuM sAriNI, tattvagrAhiNI
bheda kAraNa che kSayapazamanI vicitra taratamatA kSayopazamanI vicitra
taratamatA vizeSatA darzanabheda bAbata vivAdano saMbhava darzanabheda bAbata
vivAdane asaMbhava ane Ama kSapazamanI vicitra taratamatAne lIdhe darzanabheda
thAya che, tethI karIne ja A jUdA jUdA (vedAMta-jaina vagere) dazanene bheda
paDyo che, ema yogAcAryanuM kathana che. paNa sthira Adi daSTivALA bhinnagraMthi
samyagadaSTi gIone te A darzanabheda manamAM vasate ja nathI. teo AvA mata-
darzananA bhedane lakSamAM letA nathI, tene vajUda ApatA nathI. prAkRta jananI
jema teo mata-darzananA AgrahamAM taNAI jatA mAtra daSTine nathI. teo te eka
gamArgane ja dekhe che, egadarzanane ja-Atmadarzanane bheda ja dekhe che. eka ja
AtmatatvanA mULamAM e sarva darzane vyApta che, mAtra "daSTine ja bheda che,-ema
teo kharA aMta:karaNathI mAne che. teo te SaDradarzanane nidazananA athavA
zuddha AtmadarzananA aMgarUpa jANe che. eTale tenA khaMDanamaMDananI kaDAkUTamAM
utaratA nathI, ulaTA te chae darzanane samyagadaSTithI ArAdhe che. kAraNa ke "je
gAye te saghaLe eka, sakaLa darzane e ja viveka; samajAvyAnI zilI karI, syAdvAda
samajaNa paNa kharI. mULa sthiti jo pUcho mane, te seMpI dauM kegI kane."

Page #125 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
A General Statement on Eight Yogadrishtis  Different opinions are seen, this is
the perspective of difference; In the root of one principle, the definition is
accepted.” Abandoning the opinions of philosophies, their insistence and
alternatives This path is said to be the one that will lead, birth will be
less.” - Shrimad Rajchandraji  “Six philosophies are taught in the Jain
scriptures, along with the six limbs; The devotee of the liberated Jinas,
worships the six philosophies.” - Shri Anandghanji  Thus, the great souls, the
enlightened beings, say this, because they have a proper understanding of the
limits, they know how to divide the Nayas appropriately. It is like this - Nay
means a difference in perspective, it is infinite. From a certain perspective, a
certain thing, from a certain point of view (Angle of vision), its name is
“Nay”. Thus, all the Nayas, their division, their form according to their
subject matter, according to their limited scope, they understand properly.
Therefore, they conclude that These different philosophies that different
philosophers have created, they have done so from different perspectives, from
different points of view. They are correct from that perspective, so why argue?
What is the dispute? The expansion that arises from permutations and
combinations is infinite, it is merely a play of words. As many words as there
are, so many Nayas there are, therefore, we should abandon all these Nayas,
without attachment or aversion, with a pure heart, in the investigation of the
true self, “we should dive in”, that is our only work. If we do that, everything
will be revealed on its own, so why all this talk? This is what the great souls
feel.  Again, the Jagadguru says, “All partiality is false; Attachment and
aversion are also forbidden, dive into the self... Munisuvrat, whoever meditates
on the self, he is known by that name, all else is a play of words, this
principle brings clarity to the mind... Munisuvrat.” - Shri Anandghanji  Again,
if one Nay is held in isolation, with exclusive insistence, it is not a Nay, but
an illusion of a Nay, it is falsehood, this is what the impartial, enlightened
beings with the perspective of Anekanta say.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ATha yogadaSTinuM sAmAnya kathana bhinna bhinna mata dekhIe, bheda daSTine eha;
eka tatvanA mULamAM, vyAkhyA mAne teha." choDI mata darzana taNo, Agraha tema
vikalpa kahyo mArga A sAdhaze, janma tehanA alpa." -zrImad rAjacaMdrajI "Sar
darazana jina aMga bhaNaje, nyAsa SaDaMga je sAdhe re; nami jinavaranA caraNa
upAsaka, SaDa darazana ArAdhe re." -zrI AnaMdaghanajI Ama te mahAnubhAva
samyagadaSTi mahAtmAo vate che, tenuM kAraNa e che ke teone nanI barAbara
maryAdAnuM bhAna hoya che, yathAyogya nayavibhAga teo karI jANe che. te A
prakAre - naya eTale apekSAbheda, te anaMta che. amuka vastune amuka apekSAe-
daSTibinduthI yathAtha (Angle of vision) jevI tenuM nAma "naya" che. Ama sarva
nayanuM nayavibhAga potapotAnA viSaya pramANenuM-maryAdAkSetra pramANenuM
svarUpa teo barAbara samajyA hoya che. eTale teo ema samAdhAna kare che ke A je
judA judA darzanakAree judA judA darzana karyA che, te te judA judA nayanI
apekSAe, judA judA daSTibinduthI karyA che. te te nayanI apekSAe te barAbara
che, mATe emAM jhaghaDe che? vivAda za? nAnA sAgothI (Permutations &
combinations ) upajate vistAra te anaMta che, "zabdAlaMkArarUpa che, mAtra
vAjAlarUpa che. jeTalI vacananI saMkhyA teTalA naya che, mATe ApaNe te badheya
nayapakSapAta cheDI daI, rAga-dveSa-meha rahitapaNe, eka zuddha AtmatattvanA
saMzodhanamAM "raDha lagADIne maMDI paDavuM," eTaluM ja ApaNuM kAma che. ema
karazuM eTale enI meLe badhI khabara paDI jaze, mATe A badhI vANUjAla zI? ema te
mahAnubhAve bhAve che. vaLatuM jagaguru INa pare bhAkhe, pakSapAta saba DI;
rAgadveSa deha paNa varjita, Atama zuM raDha maMDI...munisuvrata Atama dhyAna
dhare je keu, se phira Ime nAve, vAjAla bIjuM sahu jANe, eha tattva cita
lAve....munisuvata" -zrI AnaMdaghanajI vaLI kaI eka nayane ja ekAMta pakSa-
Agraha dharavAmAM Ave, te te naya nathI, paNa nayAbhAsa che, mithyAtva che, ema
te anekAMta daSTivALA niSpakSapAta samyagradaSTi puruSe

Page #126 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(60) They understand the collection of yogic perspectives well, and therefore
they place the term "syad" at the forefront, without rejecting it, and through
this they examine the essence of that philosophy. And by examining the essence
in this way, it becomes clear to the Syadvadi community that all these ten
philosophies are one, in the form of the Jina philosophy, or the pure self-
philosophy, which is the form of the Purusha. In this way, the Jina philosophy,
which is like a wish-fulfilling tree, has Sankhya philosophy and Yoga philosophy
as its two feet; Buddhism and Mimamsa are its two strong arms; the KAyatika view
is its trunk, which is the foundation of its philosophy; and the Jina
philosophy, which is the best of all philosophies, adorns its head in the form
of external and internal perspectives. Thus, by placing the term "dhuri" - the
first position - as the foundation, the followers of the Jina philosophy worship
the six philosophies. Therefore, they are extremely moderate. How can they
refute the limbs of their father? "I praise the feet of the Jina, the Sankhya
and Yoga are different; They explain the power of the self, they are the cause
of suffering and the body, they are not different... Six. The difference and
non-difference of all, the Mimamsa, the Jina's burden is heavy; We worship the
Kalika, we understand it through the Guru... Six. The KAyatika is the womb of
the Jina, the thought that is in it; The philosophy of truth is a good path,
without the Guru, what is the use?... Six. The Jain Jineshwar is the best limb,
the inner and outer; The foundation is the word, the worshiper, he worships with
it... Six." - Shri Anandghanji, etc., in this way, the "philosophy of truth is a
good path" of these great souls continues uninterruptedly, how can these great
souls have any attachment to different views and philosophies? Similarly, the
activities of these great people are also for the sake of others - for the sake
of the Supreme Self. "For the sake of others, for the sake of the Supreme Self"
- these saintly souls' virtues are for the benefit of others. They offer their
father all their limbs on the altar of the sacrifice of the welfare of the
people, they expend all their power of mind, speech, and body for the sake of
others. The benefit that their father receives from the soul - the Supreme Self
- is also received by other beings, with this pure love for the Supreme Self,
these righteous souls perform activities for the sake of the Supreme Self.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (60) yogadaSTisamuccaya sArI peThe samaje che, ane eTale ja teo "syA " padane
nyAsa nirAgraha karIne AgaLa mUkIne te te darzananI madhyastha parIkSA kare che.
ane ema madhyasthatA madhyastha parIkSA karatAM te syAdavAdI mahAjanane cakkasa
bhAse che ke-A badhA dazane eka darzanarUpa ja che, jinadarzana athavA zuddha
AtmadarzanArUpa puruSane aMgarUpa ja che. te A prakAre kalpavRkSa samA te
jinadarzananA be pagane sthAne sAMkhyadarzana ne cagadarzana che; bauddha ane
mImAMsaka e be tene baLavAna hAtha che; kAyatika mata tenI vaDa darisaNu kukSine
sthAne che, jenA darzana bAhyAbhyatara prakAre tenA mastakane sthAnejinaaMga
uttamAMgarUpe zobhe che. Ama "dhuri'-prathama sthA" padarUpa nyAsa akSara
bhaNuje' mUkIne, SadarzananI ArAdhanA jina darzananA ArAdhaka puruSo kare che.
tethI ja teo atyaMta madhyastha hoya che. teo pitAnA aMganuM khaMDana kema karI
zake? "jina surapAdapa pAya vakhANuM, sAMkhya joga deya bhede re; Atama sattA
vivaraNa karatAM, lahe dukha aMga akheda re...SaDa. bheda abheda saugata
mImAMsaka, jinavara kara doya bhArI re, kaleka avalaMbana bhajIe, gurugamathI
avadhArI re..SaDa lekAyatika kukha jinavaranI aMza vicAra je kIje re;
tatvavicAra sudhArasa dhArA, gurugama viNa kima pIje re ?...SaDa jaina jinezvara
vara uttama aMga, aMtaraMga bahiraMge re, akSara nyAsa puri ArAdhaka, ArAdhe
dharI saMge re...SaDao -zrI AnaMdaghanajI ityAdi prakAre jenI "tatvavicAra
sudhArasadhArA' akhaMDapaNe cAlyA kare che, evA A mahAtmA samyagRSTi "jogIjane
"ne jUdA jUdA mata-darzanane Agraha kema hoI zake? tema ja A mahAjananI pravRtti
paNa parArthe-paramAthe hoya che. "pAra para vimUra: A saMtapuruSonI vibhUtio
pare5kArane arthe hoya che. janakalyANanA yajJanI vedI para teo pitAne sarva
aMga hemI de che, mana-vacana-kAyAnI samasta parArthapravRtti zakti khacI nAkhe
che. pitAne je AtmA-paramArthane lAbha thaye, te anya jIvene paNa thAya evA
nirmala paramArtha premathI, A samyagRSTi sapuruSa paramArtha pravRtti kare che.

Page #127 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## A General Statement of the Eight Yogadrishtis (61)  "Jan, Pashu, Lek, Kalyan,
Yash, Par, Hem, Ang, Sah, Mahara." - This is the nature of Saraswati Chandra and
their selfless activities. This is because:  1. **Purity of Knowledge:** The
Samyagdristi Purusha possesses pure knowledge, free from the impurities of raga,
dvesha, and moha. It is pure and untouched by external influences. 2. **Absence
of Attachment:** They are completely free from all kinds of attachments,
including opinions, views, and desires. They are extremely balanced and
impartial. 3. **Subservience to the Meritorious:** They are deeply moved by the
four emotions of Maitri (friendship), Pramoda (joy), Karuna (compassion), and
Upeksha (equanimity). They have friendship towards the entire world. They
experience joy when they see virtue anywhere. "Even a particle of virtue is like
a mountain to these rare saints, who cultivate it deeply in their hearts." They
feel compassion for the suffering world. "These poor creatures of the world are
abandoning the right path and indulging in madness, causing themselves
suffering. I must guide them back to the right path and free them from this
suffering," this is the compassionate thought that arises in their minds. And if
someone has a contrary nature and is unable to understand, they remain
indifferent and maintain a balanced attitude. 4. **Serious and Generous
Intent:** Their intent and mental state are both serious and profound,
unfathomable and immeasurable, like the ocean. Their intent is also generous and
expansive, encompassing everyone like the vast expanse of the ocean. These
Samyagdristi Yogis are like "Sagarpeta" (ocean-like) and "Sarva-valami-mir"
(all-encompassing). 5. **Following the Four Principles of Charisangivani:**
These Samyagdristi individuals with serious and generous intent follow the four
principles of Charisangivani. These are:  - **Four Principles of
Charisangivani:** "Charis Jeevani Charan Naya Esh Satan Matha. Naya Strudhi
Thashe Veladinan!" (Shri Yogabindu, 119) These four principles of Charisangivani
are the principles of the righteous. Those who do not follow them, especially
those who initiate religious activities, will not achieve their desired success.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ATha yogadaSTinuM sAmAnya kathana (61) jana pazu leka kalyANa yaza para, hemuM
aMga sahu mahArA." -sarasvatIcaMdra ane teonI AvI paramArtha pravRtti heya che,
tenA kAraNe A pramANe che: 1. zuddha bodhanuM hovApaNuM-te samyagdaSTi puruSane
bedha zuddha hoya che, rAga-dveSamehanI azuddhithI rahita hoya che, parabhAvanA
sparza vinAno nirmala hoya che. 2. AgraharahitapaNuM-teonA sarva prakAranA
matAthI, darzanAha, abhiniveze. sarvathA dUra thaI gayA hoya che, teo atyaMta
madhyastha ane niSpakSapAta hoya che. 3. merI Adine parataMtrapaNuM-teo mitrI,
pramoda, kAruNya, mAdhya-e cAra bhAvanAothI atyaMta bhAvitAtmA hoya che. teo
samasta jagat sAthe maitrI dharAve che. jyAM kyAMya guNa dekhe tyAM teo pramoda
pAme che. "para guNanA paramANune paNa parvata jevo karI te viralA saMtapuruSo
potAnA hRdayamAM atyaMta vikasita thAya che. " saMsAra duHkhathI duHkhI ne joIne
tenA para temane karuNAbhAva upaje che. A jagatajI bicArA sanmArgane choDI
unmAge gamana karI duHkhI thaI rahyA che, teone huM sanmArgane baMdha karI te
du:khamAMthI choDAvuM, evI karaNuM te parama kRpALune vachUTe che. ane koI
viparIta vRttivALe heI, samajAvya samaje ema na hoya, te tyAM teo upekSA kare
che, madhyastha bhAva dhAraNa kare che. 4. gaMbhIra udAra Azaya-teono Azaya-
cittapariNAma eTale badhe gaMbhIra hoya che, eTale badhe UMDe-agAdha hoya che,
ke te kaLI zakAtuM nathI, tene tAga pamADe nathI, sAgaranI jema tenA UMDANanI
khabara paDatI nathI tema ja te Azaya eTale badhA udAra hoya che, eTalI badhI
udAratAvALe vizALa hoya che ke te samudra jema sarva koIne pitAnA vizALa paTamAM
samAvI de che, te samyagadaSTi yegIo AvA "sAgarapeTA" "sAravALamIra" hoya che.
5. cArisaMjIvanI nyAyanuM anusaraNuM-tevA gaMbhIra -udAra AzayavALA te
samyagadaSTie "cArisaMjIvanI nyAyane anusare che. te A pramANe - - cArisaMjIvanI
cAra nyAya - "cArisa jIvanIcAranyAya eSa satAM mataH  /  nAyAstRddhi thaze
veLAdinAn ! " zrI yogabindu, 119 A cArisaMjIvanI cAra nyAya sanduruSane saMmata
che, nahi te vizeSa karIne dharmakAryanI zarUAta karanArAone ISTa siddhi thAya
nahiM.

Page #128 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(62) The collection of stories here, in the chapter on conduct, is about a
special type of medicine called Sanjeevani, which revives life. This is the
story of Sanjeevani, which illustrates four principles. The meaning of this
story can be understood from the following:  There was a city called
'Swastimati', filled with citizens. In this city, there was a Brahmin's
daughter, and she had a friend who was the object of her unwavering love. Later,
they both got married and started living in different places.  One day, the
Brahmin's daughter started worrying about her friend. So, she went to her
friend's place and saw her immersed in sorrow and grief. She asked her, "Friend,
why is your face so pale?" Her friend replied, "I am unfortunate, because of my
wicked husband." The Brahmin's daughter said, "Don't be sad! There is no
difference between sorrow and poison, sorrow is like poison. I will turn your
husband into a bull using a root." Saying this, she gave her the root and went
to her father's house.  Later, the unhappy Brahmin's daughter gave the root to
her husband, and immediately he turned into a strong bull. Then, she felt
remorse in her heart and thought, "How can this man, who was capable of all
tasks, become like this again?" After that, she started taking him out every day
to graze with a group of bulls.  One day, the bull was resting under a banyan
tree. A couple of celestial beings, who were also resting on the branches of the
tree, started talking to each other. One of the celestial beings said, "This
bull is not like this by nature, but because of a contrary quality. His wife
gave him a root." The other celestial being asked, "How can he become a man
again?" The first celestial being replied, "By using another root." The female
celestial being asked, "Where is it?" He said, "It is under this tree."  Hearing
this, the animal's wife (the Brahmin woman), who was filled with remorse,
started grazing the bull without knowing the secret. She let him graze freely,
and while grazing, he ate the root. Immediately, the bull turned back into a
man.  This is an example that suggests absolute impartiality. It does not favor
any particular philosophy or opinion. But it is a gentle teaching that
encourages all seekers of truth to find the essence of 'Sanjeevani' through
meditation. This policy is excellent for those who are starting on the path of
Dharma, as it encourages them to take rebirth.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (62) gadaSTisamuccaya atre cAritracare, saMjIvanI=saMjIvana kare evo
auSadhivizeSa, cArakacaravuM te. carAmAM saMjIvanI mATe caravuM te cArisaMjIvanI
cAra nyAya-daSTAMta. Ane bhAvArtha A kathA uparathI samajI zakAya che :
svastimatI' nAmanI nagarajanothI bharelI evI nagarI hatI. temAM brAhmaNanI kaI
putrI hatI, tathA tenI eka sakhI hatI, ane te ja tenA niravadhi premanuM parama
pAtra hatI. pachI te baMnene vivAha thaye, eTale baMne judA judA sthAne rahevA
lAgI. pachI eka divasa dvijaputrIne "sakhI kema haze ? " ema ciMtA upajI. eTale
te paNa dAkhala tene tyAM gaI, ne joyuM te tene viSAdamAM-zekamAM DUbI gayelI
dIThI. ethI tene pUchyuM"sakhI ? hArUM mukha ATaluM badhuM kema levAI gayuM
che?" teNe kahyuM-"huM pApaNu patinI bAbatamAM durbhAgI-kamanazIba chuM." sakhI
dvijaputrIe kahyuM-tuM viSAda ma kara ! A viSAdamAM ne viSamAM koI phera nathI,
viSAda (zeka) viSa jevo che. huM hArA patine mULiyAnA prabhAvathI vRSabha
(baLadiye) banAvI daIza." ema kahI tene mULiyuM ApI te pitAnA nivAsasthAne gaI.
pachI te nAkhuza manavALI brAhmaNaputrIe te mULiyuM pitAnA patine ApyuM, ke
tarata ja te bharAvadAra khAMdhavALe baLada banI gayo. eTale pachI pazcAttApathI
te hRdayamAM dilagIra thaI ke-have A puna: sarva kAryomAM samartha evo puruSa
kema thAya? pachI te tene baLadonA jUthanI sAthe roja bahAra cAre carAvavA lAgI.
pachI eka divasa te vRSabha vaDanA jhADa nIce vizrAma lete hatuM. tyAM tenI
zAkhAmAM vizrAMti laI rahelA vidyAdhara yugalane paraspara vArtAlApa cAlavA
lAgyo. temAM vidyAdhara be -"atre A vRSabha che te svabhAvathI nathI, paNa
viparIta guNathI upaje che. tenI patnIe kahyuM -"te punaH puruSa kema thAya ?"
teNe kahyuM - bIjA mULiyAnA upayogathI.' vidyAdharIe pUchyuM te kyAM che?" teNe
kahyuM-"te A jhADanI nIce che." A sAMbhaLIne -jene manamAM pazcAttApa upa hato,
evI te pazu-patnIe (brAhmaNIe) bhedane nahiM jANutA evA te vRSabhane te badho
cAre carAvavA mAMDyo, te caravA mATe chUTa mUkI dIdhe, eTale caratAM caratAM te
mULiyuM khAvAmAM AvatAM, te vRSabha tarata ja puruSa thaI gaye. Ama parama
niSpakSapAtapaNuM sUcavatuM A dRSTAMta che, AmAM koI paNa darzanane-matano
Agraha nathI. paNa cArekora carI-pharI sAcA tatvajijJAsune madhyasthatAthI
"saMjIvanI" tattva jodhI kADhavAne nimala bodha che "Adi karma tene eTale
dharmamArganI zarUAta karanArAne mAge avatAravA mATe A nIti ati uttama che.

Page #129 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## A General Statement of the Eight Yogadrishtis  (63) Following the principle
of "Charisangivani Nyaya" as per the Upanaya-Paramarth, this Samyagdristi, the
perfect vision of the wise, follows the best impartial ethics that advocates the
truth. These "impartial rare ones",  who grasp the essence of all philosophies,
these saintly Avadhutas, remain immersed in their own nature, always impartial
and rare. They serve the pure purpose of uplifting the people by spreading the
"Sangivani Nyaya" in all directions, benefiting and bringing welfare to the
world. This is the supreme blessed activity that the Samyagdristi Mahatmas
perform. "They grasp the essence of all philosophies, they remain in their own
nature; they benefit the people with Sangivani, they spread it in all
directions... Veer."  Sri Ye, Da, Sakzaya, 1-4, we are stating the subject
matter presented in the text, and the nature is the four Yogadrishtis, which are
different from Mitra, etc. And these are of eight types, as stated in the
example:  तृणगोमयकाष्ठाग्निकणदीपप्रभोपमा । रत्नतारार्कचन्द्राभाः
सददृष्टिदृष्टिरष्टया ॥१५॥  Vritti - Here, the authorized-presented vision is
clearly stated based on its meaning. It is explained through the analogy of
examples like grass, cow dung, etc. - The vision of the wise with Samyagdristi
is of eight types, starting from the general:  1. **Mitra:** Similar to grass
and cow dung, it is not capable of performing the desired action due to the
truth. Because: (1) It does not have the state until the time of the correct
experiment, and due to its smallness, the development of the seed of skillful
and firm memory does not occur, it does not have skillful memory-seeds; (2) And
due to the presence of a different experiment, the action of worship, etc., is
different from the feeling, therefore.  2. **Tara:** It is similar to cow dung
and fire. This is also almost the same - due to the alternative of a different
state-power from the truth, therefore, again, due to the lack of memory-power
during the time of the experiment. Due to its absence, the experiment is
different, and therefore, in this way, due to the lack of its function.  3.
**Bala:** This is also like all the wood and fire, and it is somewhat different
from the previous two. Therefore, there is a little state-power here; that is,
there is a skillful memory like a skilled person during the time of the
experiment: and it is, there is a feeling of unity with the object of desire
only due to the love of the object.  4. **Dipa:** It is equal to the light of
the lamp, and it is much more different from the previous three, therefore, and
there is a strong state-power, therefore, the memory is also skillful during the
time of the experiment. Although it is due to feeling, there is an influx of
matter in worship, etc., and due to the type of devotion and the difference in
activity, therefore,

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ATha yogadaSTinuM sAmAnya kathana (63) AvA "cArisaMjIvanI nyAya'nA upanaya-
paramArtha pramANe A samyadRSTi sanduruSe tatvanuM pratipAdana karanArI uttama
niSpakSa nItine anusare che AvA te "nirpakSa viralAo", sarva darzananA naya-
sadaMza grahe che te saMta avadhUte "Apa svabhAvamAM nipakSa viralA sadA magna
rahe che, ane lokene hitakArI-kalyANakArI e "saMjIvanI nyAyane cAre carAvI,
sanmAge utAravAnA nirmaLa puruSArtha seve che. AvI parama dhanya pravRtti te
samyagadaSTi mahAtmA gIo kare che. "darzana sakalanA naya grahe, Apa rahe nija
bhAve re; hitakarI janane saMjIvanI, cAre te carAve re...vIra." zrI ye, da,
sakjhAya, 1-4 prakRta-prastuta viSaya kahIe chIe, ane prakRti te mitrA Adi
bhedathI bhinna evI cogadaSTi che; ane A Ama ATha prakAranI che, ema udAharaNa
mAtra aMgIkAra karIne kahe che : tRNagomayakASThAgnikaNadIpaprabhopamA  /
ratnatArArkacandrAbhAH sadadRSTidRSTiraSTayA  // 15 //  vRtti -ahIM adhikRta-
prastuta dRSTine baMdha spaSTapaNe tenA artha uparathI ja kahI devAya, e rIte
tRNanA agnikaNa Adi udAharaNanA sAdhamyathI nirUpavAmAM Ave che:- sAmAnyathI
saddaSTivALA gInI dhalakSaNa dRSTi ATha prakAranI hoya che: tRNa agnikaNanI
upamAvALI mitrAmAM, gAmaya anikaNanI upamAvALI tArAmAM, kASTa agnikaNanI
upamAvALI malAmAM, dIpaprabhAnI upamAvALI dIpAmAM, ratnanI prabhA jevI
sthiramAM, tArAnI prabhA jevI kAMtAmAM, sUryanI prabhA jevI prabhAmAM, caMdranI
prabhA jevI parAmAM. kULa mArinagarImApamAM ratnatArAnnAma:-evI upamAvALI A ATha
dRSTi che. tevA prakAranA prakAza mAtra vagerethI ahIM sAdhamya--samAna
dharmapaNuM che.-je kahe che 1. mitrAmAM badha tRNa agnikaNa sadaza-sarakhe hoya
che, tatvathI ISTa kAryakSama nathI hoto-ISTa kArya karavA samartha nathI hotuM.
kAraNa ke-(1) samyapha prayogakAla sudhI tenI sthiti nahiM hovAne lIdhe, ane
tenA alpavIyapaNAne lIdhe, 5Tu-daDha smRti bIjanA saMskArAdhAnanI upapatti-
ghaTanA thatI nathI, nipuNakazala smRtisaMskAra pAse nathI, tethI; (2) ane
vikala prayoganA hovApaNAne lIdhe, bhAvathI vaMdanAdi kriyAne alaga hoya che,
tethI. 2. tArAmAM te baMdha gema eTale chANanA agnikaNa sarakhA hoya che. A paNa
lagabhaga evo ja hoya che.-tavathI viziSTa sthiti-vIyanA vikalapaNAne lIdhe,
ethI karIne vaLI prayAgakALe smRtipaTavanI asiddhine lIdhe. tenA abhAve
prayoganI vikalatAne lIdhe, ane tethI karIne tathA prakAre tenA kAryanA abhAvane
lIdhe. 3. balAmAM paNa A badha kASTha agnikaNa jevo, ne ukta be bedha karatAM
kaMIka viziSTa hoya che. tethI atre jarAka rithati-vIya hoya che; eTale ahIM
prayoga samaye pa-nipuNa jevI smRti hoya che: ane te hatAM, arthaprAga mAtranI
prItithI yunalezane bhAva hoya che. 4. dIpAmAM te A bodha dIpaprabhA tulya, ne
ukta traNa bedha karatAM ghaNuM vadhAre viziSTa hoya che, ethI karIne ane udaya
(ugra, Akara) sthiti-vIrya hoya che, tethI prayogasamaye smRti paNa pa-kuzala
hoya che. ema bhAvathI hovA chatAM anne vaMdanAdimAM dravya pravega hoya che,
tathA prakAranI bhaktine lIdhe ane bhedapravRtti hoya che tethI karIne,

Page #130 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Samuccaya of Right Vision  **Trina, gamaya, and wood, like a spark of fire;
the light of a lamp, where is the comparison? Jewels, stars, the sun and the
moon are similar;**  **Thus, the eight types of Right Vision, from the
perspective of Right Vision, are known.**  **15. This is the excellence of the
first Gunasthanaka - the peak, the ultimate limit, as the scriptures of time
say.**  **5. Stable, different granthi - that is, the one whose granthi is
differentiated, only such Samyagdasti has differentiated knowledge. It is like a
bound jewel-light. It has the following qualities: (1) Unopposed - not affected,
(2) Increasing - growing, (3) Without remedy - without obstacles, (4) Not
causing suffering to others, (5) The purpose of Pariteshana, and (6) The
birthplace of Parigyan, etc.**  **6. In Kanta - this knowledge is like the light
of a star. Therefore, it is naturally inherent. Here, the practice is: (1)
Without transgression, (2) Following pure Upanga, (3) Associated with specific
non-negligence, (4) Predominantly engaged, (5) And with a serious and generous
intention.**  **7. In Prabha - it is like the light of the sun, penetrating. (1)
It is always the object of meditation, (2) Here, there is rarely an opportunity
for Vikalpa, and (3) Here, there is the happiness of Prashamsara (that which is
good for Prasham). Here: (4) Other scriptures are Akinchitakara - useless,
unable to do anything, (5) There is Samadhi-based practice, (6) In its presence,
hatred, etc., are destroyed, "Tarani dhau vairaadi naara" (7) It is a
benefactor, (8) It has propriety towards the student, (9) And there is
unwavering, virtuous action.**  **8. In Para - it is like the light of the moon,
bound. It is always considered to be in the form of Sayana, without Vikalpa. (1)
Due to the absence of Vikalpa, there is supreme happiness, (2) Like the ascent
of a climber, here there is no practice of Pratikramana, etc. - what is there to
climb for one who has already climbed? (3) Benevolence - according to Yatha-
bhavya-tva, (4) And there is unwavering, virtuous action as before.**  **Thus,
the vision of Right Vision, from the general to the specific, is of eight types.
Here, it is said that Right Vision is differentiated by granthi. And that
granthi differentiation occurs over a long period of time, after which the
vision of Right Vision is of eight types. How?**  **Solution - Due to the
infallible purpose of Right Vision, the visions of Mitra, etc., are also true.
In the production of pure, refined sugar, sugarcane, juice, Kavu, and Gola are
like Mitra, etc.; and sugar, refined sugar, impure sugar lumps, and pure sugar
crystals are like the other four visions, as the Acharyas say. Because the
transformation of Dhak (sugarcane), etc., occurs in that way.**  **These Mitra,
etc., are only objects of taste, etc. - there is taste, etc., in these Mitra,
etc., because they have the potential for sweetness. And those like Nal, etc.,
are not of that type - due to the absence of sweetness in the form of Sangara. -
From this, it is said that there is no differentiation of vision in the
completely non-resultant or momentary Atmavada. Because there is no potential
for transformation of that type, it is not possible to transform in that way.**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 gadaSTisamuccaya tRNA gemaya ne kASThanA, agnikaNu sama mAna; dIpaprabhAnuM
paNa vaLI, jihAM heya upamAna; ratna tema tArA ane ravi ne zazi samAna; dRSTi
ema saddaSTinI, aSTa prakAre jANa. 15, ATale prathama guNasthAnakane prakarSa
che-parAkASThA, chellI hada che, ema samayavido-zAstro kahe che. 5. sthira te
bhinnagraMthi-eTale jenI graMthi bhedAI che evA samyagadaSTine ja-bhedajJAnane
ja hoya che. tene baMdha ratnaprabhA samAna hoya che. tene bhAva-(1) apratipAtI-
pA paDe nahiM evo, (2) pravardhamAnavRddhi pAmatA jata, (3) nirapAya-apAya
rahita, bAdhA rahita, (4) bIjAne paritApa nahiM pamADanAre, (5) pariteSane hetu
ane (6) parijJAna AdinuM janmasthAna che. 6. kAMtAmAM-A bodha tArAnI prabhA
samAna hoya che. eTalA mATe e prakRtithI-sahaja svabhAvathI sthita ja hoya che.
atre anuSThAna-(1) niraticAra, (2) zuddha upaga anusArI, (3) viziSTa apramAdathI
saMgata, (4) viniyogapradhAna, (5) ane gaMbhIra udAra AzayavALuM hoya che. 7,
prabhAmAM sUryanI prabhA samAna bedha hoya che. (1) te sarvadA dhyAnahetu ja
hoya che, (2) ahIM prAye vikalpane avasara hoto nathI, ane (3) ahIM prazamasAra
(prazama jene sAra che evuM') sukha hoya che. atre- (4) anya zAstro akiMcitakara
hoya che -kaMI nahiM karI zake evA nakAmA thaI paDe che, (5) samAdhiniSTha
anuSThAna hoya che, (6) tenI saMnidhimAM vaira Adine nAza hoya che, "taranidhau
vairAdinArA' (7) parAnugraha kartApaNuM hoya che, (8) vine-ziSya pratye
aucityAga hoya che, (9) tathA avaMdhya evI satakriyA hoya che. 8. parAmAM te
caMdranI caMdrikAnI prabhA samAna baMdha hoya che. sarvadA sayAnarUpa ja e te
vikalparahita mAnavAmAM AvyuM che. (1) te vika95nA abhAvathI uttama sukha hoya
che, (2) ArUDhanA ArehaNanI jema atre pratikramaNa Adi anuSThAna nathI hotuM-
caDhelAne caDhavAnuM zuM ? tenI peThe. (3) paropakArIpaNuM- yathAbhavyatva
pramANe, (4) tathA pUrvavata avaMdaya satakriyA hoya che. ema sAmAnyathI
saMdefggdhA-saddaSTrinI-cogInI dRSTi aSTa prakAranI che. atre zakA-graMthibheda
thaye saddaSTipaNuM hoya. ane te graMthibheda te dIrgha uttarakALe AgaLa upara
ghaNuM lAMbA vakhate hoya che, te pachI saddaSTinI dRSTi ATha prakAranI zI rIte?
samAdhAna-saddaSTinA avaya-acUka hetupaNue karIne mitrA Adi dRSTionuM paNa
satItva-satapaNuM che eTalA mATe. zuddha khaDI sAkaranI niSpattimAM-banAvaTamAM
zeraDI, rasa, kAvo ne goLa jevI A mitrA Adi che; ane khAMDa, sAkara, azuddha
sAkaranA gaThThA, ne zuddha sAkaranA cosalA barAbara bIjI cAra daSTio che, ema
AcAryo kahe che. kAraNa ke dhakSa (zeraDI) vagerenuM ja tathAbhavana-tevA
prakAre pariNamana thAya che. A mitrA Adi ruci Adi gocara ja che.-A mitrA
vageremAM ruci Adi hoya ja che, kAraNa ke ene ja sa viga-mAdhuryanI u5patti hoya
che -emanA IkSa samAnapaNane lIdhe. ane nala vagere jevA tathA prakAranA abhavya
che,-saMgarUpa mAdhuryanA zUnyapaNane lIdhe. - A uparathI sarvathA apariNAmI
athavA kSaNika AtmavAdamAM daSTibhedano abhAva kahyo. kAraNa ke tenA
tathAbhavananI-tevA prakAre pariNamananI anupatti che, aghaTanamApaNuM che, tevA
prakAre pariNumana ghaTatuM nathI, tethI.

Page #131 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Eightfold Vision: A General Statement  (65) Meaning: The vision of a
person with a pure vision is of eight types, where the comparison is made
(respectively) to the diminishing intensity of the light of a fire made with
grass, a fire made with cow dung, a fire made with wood, a lamp, a gem, a star,
the sun, and the moon. For example, the vision of a friend is like the fire made
with grass, the vision of a star is like the fire made with cow dung, and so on.
## Commentary  Here, we come to the core subject of this scripture. This is a
statement about the eightfold vision. To understand it clearly, an example is
given using a comparison. The author, the sage, has used this comparison with
such skill and expertise that the meaning of the vision can be easily understood
from the comparison itself.  These eight visions are compared to (1) the fire
made with grass, (2) the fire made with cow dung, (3) the fire made with wood,
(4) the light of a lamp, (5) the light of a gem, (6) the light of a star, (7)
the light of the sun, and (8) the light of the moon. Just as the intensity of
light increases from grass to the moon, the intensity of vision increases from
the vision of a friend to the vision of the Supreme. Therefore, this comparison
is complete and comprehensive.  The great and powerful sage Shrimad Rajchandraji
has compared this eightfold vision to a thermometer, which is also a very
appropriate and fitting comparison. Just as a thermometer can measure the
temperature of the body, this eightfold vision can measure the spiritual
progress of the soul, its state, and its spiritual qualities.  "In which vision
am I situated? Do I possess the qualities mentioned for that vision? If not, how
should I strive to attain them?" By introspectively examining these questions,
one can receive inspiration for the growth of one's spiritual qualities. This
eightfold vision is a great boon and benefit to the seeker of liberation.  To
understand its nature, the example of a school is given. Its meaning is as
follows:  1. The vision of a friend: "Where there is a friend, there is
attachment, like the fire made with grass." - Shri D. Sakzaya. In the vision of
a friend, the understanding is like the fire made with grass.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ATha egadaSTinuM sAmAnya kathana (65) artha :-tRNane agnikaNa, gomaya-chANAne
agnikaNa, kASThane agnikaNa, dIpakanI prabhA, ratnanI prabhA, tArAnI prabhA,
sUryanI prabhA ane caMdranI prajAnI upamA jyAM (anukrame) ghaTe che,-evI
saddaSTivaMtanI daSTi ATha prakAranI che, jemake-mitrAmAM tRNa agnikaNa jevI,
tArAmAM chANAnA agnikaNa jevI, ItyAdi. vivecana have ahIM A zAstranA mULa viSaya
para Ave che. Ane mULa viSaca gadaSTinuM kathana che. te "gadaSTi" ATha
prakAranI kahI, tenI barAbara samajaNa paDavA mATe ahIM udAharaNurUpe upamA
Apela che; ane te upamA graMthakAra maharSie eTalI badhI khUbIthI kuzaLatAthI ja
che, ke te upamA uparathI ja te te dRSTino ghaNokharo artha saheje samajI
javAya, barAbara khyAlamAM AvI jAya. A ATha dRSTione anukrame (1)
tRNaagnikaNanI, (2) chANanA agnikaNanI, (3) kASTha-lAkaDAnA agnikaNunI, (4)
dIpakanI prajAnI, (5) ratnaprabhAnI, (6) lAza prabhAnI, (7) sUryaprabhAnI, (8)
ane caMdraprabhAnI,-ema upamA ApI che. yogadaSTine tRNathI mAMDIne caMdraprabhA
sudhI uttarottara prakAzanI taratamatA che, tema upamA mitrA dRSTithI mAMDIne
parA daSTi sudhI uttarottara bedharUpa prakAzanI taratamatA che. eTale A upamA
sAMgopAMga saMpUrNa che. mahA samartha tavadeSTA zrImad rAjacaMdrajIe A
gaDhaSTine tharmomITaranI (Thermometer)-uSNatAmApaka yaMtranI upamA ApI che, te
paNa yathAyogyapaNe atyaMta baMdhabesatI che. jema tharmomITarathI zarIranI
uSNutAnuM-garamInuM mApa thaI zake che, tema A cagadaSTi uparathI AtmAnI
AdhyAtmika pragatinuM, AtmadazAnuM, AtmadazAnuM AtmAnA guNasthAnanuM mApa nIkaLI
zake che. huM pote kayI daSTimAM mApaka vartu ? mahArAmAM te te dRSTinA kahyA
che tevA lakSaNa che ke nahiM? na tharmomITara hoya te te prApta karavA mahAre
kema pravartAvuM? ItyAdi prakAre aMtarmukha nirIkSaNa karI, AtmaguNavRddhinI
preraNuM pAmavA mATe A "gadaSTi" AtmAthI mumukSune parama upagI che, parama
upakArI che. Ama tenuM svarUpa samajavA mATe skUla daSTAMta kahela che, tene
bhAvArtha A pramANe che - 1. mitrA dRSTi "jihAM mitrA tihAM baMdha , tRNa
aganise lahIye re."--zrI . da. sakjhAya. mitrA daSTimAM bodha tRNanA agnikaNa
sara hoya che. jema tRNaagnikaNane prakAza

Page #132 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(66) Yoga-drishti-samuccaya This drishti is not capable of showing the desired
object, nor can it show the desired objects through the aetha-tattva (paramath).
Because: (1) Just as a straw fire does not last long enough to get a proper
understanding of the luminous object, so also this drishti does not remain
stable for long enough to properly experience the aetha. (2) Just as the light
of a straw fire is weak and has little power, so also the aetha of this drishti
is weak and has little power. (3) Just as the light of a straw fire comes and
goes in an instant, and therefore does not leave a firm and lasting memory, so
also here the aetha is so short-lived and weak that it does not leave a firm and
lasting memory. (4) And thus, due to the instability and weakness of the aetha,
and the lack of memory, just as a straw fire is completely incapable of
performing any real work, so also this drishti has such an incomplete and flawed
nature that it cannot perform any real work, such as devotion, etc.  Tṛṇu Agni
Sam Mitra 2. Tara Drishti .... - Dan Tara drishti ma....manmahan mere, gamya
agni saman....man.”—Shri Cha. Da. Sajjaya. The aetha in the second drishti,
called Tara, can be compared to a dung fire, because the light of a dung fire is
stronger than that of a straw fire, just as the aetha of Tara drishti is
stronger than that of Mitra drishti, but it is almost the same because it does
not have the nature of a gamya agni. Because: (1) Just as the light of a dung
fire does not last long and is weak, so also here, like Mitra drishti, the
aetha-tattva does not last long and is weak. (2) And therefore, during the
practice of the aetha in life, there is no firmness or skill in memory, and no
firm memory remains. (3) And without such memory, the practice is also flawed
and incomplete. (4) And therefore, such devotion, etc., cannot be achieved, and
there is only material devotion, etc. Thus, except for the absence of aetha,
everything else is the same as Mitra drishti.  3. Khala Drishti “The third
drishti is called Khala, and it is like a wood fire.”—Shri Cheg. Sajjaya.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (66) yogadRSTisamuccaya iSTa padArthanuM darzana karAvavA samartha thatA nathI,
tema A dRSTine bedha tattvathI-paramAtha thI iSTa padArthonuM darzana karAvI
zakatA nathI. kAraNa ke-(1) jema tRNuagnine prakAza padArthanI kaMika barAbara
sUjha paDe teTaleA lAMbe vakhata TakatA nathI, tema A dRSTine edha paNa tene
samyakRpaNe prayAga karI zakAya eTaleA vakhata sthiti karatA nathI-TakatA nathI.
( 2 ) jema tRNuagninA prakAza alpa-mada vIvALA atyata jhAMkhA heAya che, tema A
dRSTinA medha mada vIya vALe-alpa sAmarthyavALA DhAya che. (3) jema tRNuagninA
prakAza kSaNavAramAM hatA-na hatA thai jAya che, ane tethI tenI daDha-paTu
smRtinA saMskAra rahetA nathI, tarata ja bhUlAi jAya che; tema atre paNa edha
eve alpajIvI ne alpavIya hAya che ke-tenA dRDha smRtiSIjarUpa saMskAranuM rApaNa
thavuM ghaTatu` nathI, tenI yAdarUpa dRDha saskAra nIpajatA nathI. (4) ane Ama
sthiti ne vInI maMdatAthI tathAprakAre smRtisa'skAranA abhAvane lIdhe, jema
sarvathA tRNuagni prakAzane prayAga vikala-pAMgaLA hAi tenAthI karIne kaMi
kharUM kArya anavuM sabhavatuM nathI; tema A dRSTimAM edhanu evu. vikalapaNuM-
apUrNa paNuM, pAMgaLApaNuM hAya che ke, tethI atre bhAvathI vaMdana Adi kAnA
yAga banatA nathI, dravyavadanAdi hAya che. tRNu agni sama mitrA 2. tArA dRSTi
.... - dana tArA dRSTimAM....manamAhana mere, gAmaya agni samAna....mana."--zrI
cA. da. sajjhAya. tArA nAmanI bIjI dRSTimAM je bedha hAya che, tene chANAnA
agnikaNu sAthe sarakhAvI zakAya che, kAraNa ke tRNunA agni karatAM chANAnA
agnine prakAza kaika vadhAre hAya che, tema mitrA karatAM tArA dRSTine edha
kaika vadhAre hAya che, paNa tenA gAmaya agni svarUpamAM bheda na heAvAthI te
lagabhaga tenA jevA ja hAya che. kAraNa sasa tArA ke-( 1 ) jema chANAneA
agniprakAza jhAjho vakhata TakatA nathI ane mada khaLavALA hoya che, tema mitrA
dRSTinI peThe atre paNa bedha tattvathI jhAjhI sthitivALA hAtA nathI-lAMbe
vakhata TakatA nathI, ane tenu maLa-vI paNa maMda hAya che. (2) ane tethI karIne
jIvanamAM te medhanA AcaraNarUpa prayAga veLAe smRtinuM paTTupaNuMnipuNapaNuM
hetu nathI, dRDha smaraNa rahetu nathI. (3) ane tevI smRti na heAya te prayAga
paNa vikala-pAMgaLA--khADakhAMpaNavALA hoya che. (4) ane tethI karIne tevA
prakAre bhAvathI vaMdana Adi karttavyanI siddhi thatI nathI, dravya vaMdanAdi
hAya che. Ama atre a'zabheda sivAya badhuya mitrA dRSTine maLatu Ave che. 3.
khalA dRSTi " trIjI dRSTi khalA kahI jI, kASTha agni sama che."--zrI cega.
sajjhAya

Page #133 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Common Nature of the Eight Yogadrishtis  **(67) The third dristi, called
Bala, has a bodha that is likened to the fire of wood, because the bodha here is
slightly more powerful than the bodha of the Mitra and Tara dristi. (1) Just as
the light of a wood fire lasts a little longer, and the wood fire is slightly
more powerful, so too, the bodha of this dristi is slightly more stable and
lasts longer, and is slightly more powerful. (2) Therefore, there is a memory
like that of a skilled person, almost a firm memory. (3) And because of this,
there is some effort in the activity due to the fondness for the practice of the
meaning, the purpose, and the practice.  **4. Deepa Dristi**  "The Deepa Dristi
is like the light of a lamp," says Shri Go Sahaj.  The bodha in the fourth
dristi, called Deepa, is likened to the light of a lamp. Just as the light of a
lamp is much greater than the light of grass, cow dung, or wood fire, so too,
the bodha of this dristi is more powerful than the bodha of the Mitra, Tara, and
Bala dristi. Therefore, (1) this bodha is more stable, like a Deepa, it lasts
longer and is more powerful. (2) And because of this, there is a skilled memory
during the practice of the right conduct. (3) However, here, the actions like
bowing, etc., are still due to the material, not the feeling, because there is a
clear distinction between the material and the feeling due to the nature of the
division:  "Those who serve, bow, and offer salutations, and those who praise
the virtues; the desire for non-duality of feeling, is achieved through the
feeling of others." - Shri Devchandraji  Furthermore, just as the light of a
lamp depends on external causes, it shines as long as there is oil, and it goes
out when the oil runs out, so too, the bodha of this dristi depends on external
motivating causes, and when they are removed, it is possible for it to be
extinguished. The light of a lamp is unstable, it does not have a constant
light, so too, the bodha of this dristi is unstable, it increases and decreases
according to the rate of decay. The light of a lamp can be extinguished by the
wind, so too, here, it is possible for the bodha to be extinguished by adverse
external causes. Thus, in many ways, the Deepa Dristi is similar to the light of
a lamp.  Thus, up to these four dristi, there is the "first Mithyatva
Gunasthanak." Even in it...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ATha yogadaSTinuM sAmAnya thana (67) balA nAmanI trIjI daSTimAM je bedha che,
tene kASThanA-lAkaDAnA agnikaNanI upamA ghaTe che, kAraNa ke mitrA ne tArA e be
daSTi karatAM atre bodha jarA viziSTa-vadhAre baLavALe hoya che, tethI (1) jema
kASThanA agnikaNano prakAza jarA vadhAre vAra Take che, kASTha agni ane jarA
vadhAre baLavIryavALo hoya che, tema A daSTine bodha kaMIka sama balA vadhAre
sthitivALo hoI vadhAre vAra Take che, ane kaMIka vadhAre baLa-sAmarthya vALo
hoya che. (2) eTale ahIM pragasamaye Tu-nipuNa jevI smRti hoya che, lagabhaga
daDha yAdagIrI hoya che, (3) ane tethI artha prayoga-prajanabhUta prayAganI
prItithI sakriyAne kaMIka yatna hoya che 4. dIprA dRSTi gadaSTi thI kahIcha,
dIpa prabhA sama jJAna."--zrI gao sakjhAya cothI dIprA nAmanI dRSTimAM je bodha
hoya che, tene dIpaprabhAnI upamA ghaTe che. jema dIpakane prakAza tRNa, gomaya
(chANA), ne kASThanA agni karatAM ghaNuM vadhAre hoya che, tema A daSTine baMdha
paNa upara kahI te mitrA, tArA ne balA e traNa daSTi karatAM vadhAre dIpa prabhA
vizeSatAvALo hoya che. eTale (1) A bodha vadhAre lAMbI sthitivALe hoya jevI
dIprA che, lAMbA vakhata Take che ane vadhAre baLavAna vIryavALo-sAmarthyavALo
hoya che. (2) ane tethI karIne tathA prakAranA AcaraNarUpa prAga vakhate paTu-
nipuNa mRti rahe che. (3) ema chatAM haju ahIM vaMdana vagere kriyA dravyathI
hoya che, bhAvathI nahiM, kAraNa ke tevA prakAranA vibhAgathI dravya-bhAvane
pragaTa bheda che: "vya seva vaMdana namanAdika, arcana vaLI guNagrAmojI; bhAva
abheda thavAnI IhA, parabhAve nikAmejI."-zrI devacaMdrajI vaLI dIpakano prakAza
jema bAhya kAraNa para avalaMbe che, temAM tela hoya tyAM sudhI te prakAze che,
tela khUTI jatAM olavAI jAya che, tema A dRSTine baMdha paNa bAhya preraka
kAraNone avalaMbato hovAthI, te dUra thatAM, tene apAya thavAno saMbhava che.
dIpakane prakAza asthira hoya che, eka sarakho prakAza nathI, tema A dRSTine
bodha paNa asthira hoya che, kSayezama pramANe nyUnAdhika thayA kare che.
dIpakano prakAza vAyunA sapATAthI olavAI javAne saMbhava che, tema atre paNa
viSama bAhya kAraNonA gathI bodha cAlyA javAne saMbhava che. Ama aneka prakAre
dIpaprabhAnI sAthe dIprA daSTinuM sAdharyuM che. Ama A cAra daSTi sudhI ja
"paheluM mithyAtva guNasthAnaka hoya che. temAM paNa

Page #134 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(68) **The Collection of Yugadristi**  This first Gunasthanak is attained in the
Dipra Dristi, which is the ultimate limit of the four Dristi.  Therefore, in the
four Dristi of Mitra, etc., the proportion of Mithyatva decreases progressively,
and the proportion of the resulting Gun increases progressively. Thus, in the
fourth Dristi, the Gunasthanak has the least amount of Mithyatva and the highest
amount of Gun. Therefore, in the Dipra Dristi, the Gunasthanak with the least
amount of Mithyatva and the highest amount of Mithyatva is found. After that,
from the fifth Sthira Dristi onwards, there is no Mithyatva at all.  **5. Sthira
Dristi**  “Dristi Sthiramahi Darshan Nitya, Ratnaprabha Sam Jane Re.” - Shri, Go
Sazay  The fifth Sthira Dristi is only for the Samyagdristivant Purusha, who has
experienced Granthibhed, i.e., whose knot of Karma, which is the result of Raga-
Dvesha, has been severed. It is only for the Bhedgyani, the Atmajgyani. This
Purusha has the experience of Bhedgyan-Atmajgyan, which is the knowledge of the
pure Ratna-like Atma, which is completely different from the body and all other
external objects. “I am the Atma, who is one, stable, pure, full of Darshan-
Gyan, and always formless. I am not anything else, not even a single Paramanu.”
This is the unshakeable, stable conviction of the Bhedgyani, Atmadristi Purusha.
"Ahamikko Khalu Suddho Dasananamiao Sadaravi. Navi Asthi Majjnya Kinchivi Anna
Paramanumittapi." Shri Kundakundacharya's Shri Samyasar  And that is why this
Dristi is called Sthira. The Bodh that arises in it is said to be like the light
of a gem, which is also appropriate, because the light of a gem is also stable,
it does not waver. Similarly, the Bodh of the Samyagdristi Purusha is also
stable, it does not waver, it does not move. Even when there is a Vajapat* and
the entire universe is trembling with fear, the Samyagdristi Purusha remains
fearless, leaving all doubts behind, knowing that he is not harmed.  *
"Samyagdristi Ev Saahasamidam Kartum Kshamate Param, _ Yadale'pi Patatyami
Bhaychalatrailokyamuktavaani. Sarvamev Nisarganirbhayataya Shankam Vihay Swayam,
Jananta: Syam Avadhya Bodhavashan Bodhaccyavante Na Hi." Shri
Amritchandracharya's Samyasarkalash

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (68) yugadaSTisamuccaya te prathama guNasthAnakane prakarSa parAkASThA-
chellAmAM chellI hada A cethI daSTimAM prApta thAya che. eTale mitrA vagere cAra
dRSTimAM uttarottara mithyAtvanuM pramANa ghaTatuM jAya mithyAtva che, ne tethI
upajatA guNanuM pramANa vadhatuM jAya che. Ama cothI daSTimAM guNasthAnaka
mithyAtvanI mAtrA ochAmAM ochI ne tajajanya guNanI mAtrA vadhAremAM vadhAre hoya
che. eTale dIprA daSTimAM ochAmAM ochA mithyAtvavALuM UMcAmAM UMcuM mithyAtva
guNasthAnaka hoya che. tyAra pachI pAMcamI sthira dRSTithI mAMDIne mithyAtvane
sarvathA abhAva hoya che. 5. sthirA daSTi "daSTi sthirAmAMhi darzana nitya,
ratnaprabhA sama jANe re."--zrI, gao sajhAya pAMcamI sthira dRSTi te jene
graMthibheda thaye che, eTale ke jenI rAga-dveSa pariNAmanI gADha karmanI gAMTha
chedAI gaI che, evA samyaggadaSTivaMta puruSane ja-bhedajJAnIne ja hoya che,
AtmajJAnIne ja hoya che. dehAdi sarva paravastuthI sarvathA bhinna evA zuddha
ratnamabhA AtmAnA anubhavarUpa bhedajJAna-AtmajJAna A puruSane hoya che. "huM
eka sama sthirA zuddha darzana-jJAnamaya ane sadA arUpI e AtmA chuM. anya kaMI
paNa paramANu mAtra paNa hArUM nathI' e akhaMDa sthira nizcaya A bhedajJAnI
AtmadraSTA puruSane hoya che. "ahamikko khalu suddho dasaNaNAmaio sdaaruuvii|
Navi asthi majjJa kiMcivi aNNa prmaannmittpi||" zrI kuMdakuMdAcArya praNIta zrI
samayasAra ane eTalA mATe ja A daSTine sthira kahI che. temAM utpanna thatA
bodhane ratnanI prabhA samAna kahyo che, te paNa yathAyegya che, kAraNa ke
ratnane prakAza paNa sthira hoya che, Dagamaga thatuM nathI, tema samyagUdaSTi
puruSane bedha paNa sthira rahe che, DagamagatuM nathI, caLatuM nathI. jyAre
vajapAta* thatuM hoya ne AkhuM zaileSe bhayathI dhrujatuM hoya tyAre paNa
nisarga nirbhayapaNe sarva zaMkA choDIne, potAne na haNAya evA avadhyA * "
samyagdRSTaya eva sAhasamidaM kartuM kSamate paraM, _ yadaLe'pi patatyamI
bhayacalatrailokyamuktAvani  /  sarvAmeva nisarganirbhayatayA zaGkAM vihAya
svayam, jAnaMtaH syamavadhyabodhavaSaM bodhAccyavaMte na hi||" zrI
amRtacaMdrAcAryajImaNuta samayasArakalaza

Page #135 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The General Statement of the Eight Stages of Insight (9) This right-faith man,
who knows himself as the non-corporeal Self, is not freed from the bonds! This
ultimate feat can only be accomplished by the right-faith man!” Just as the wind
cannot touch or extinguish the steady light of a gem, so too, the upsurges of
the wind of afflictions cannot touch or extinguish the steady ground of the
right-faith, self-knowing one. And that is why this insight is: 1.
**Impregnable** - Just as the gem is impervious to light, never having moved, so
too, this insight is impervious to knowledge, once it has come, it never falls
back. “Just as the wind cannot reach the gem, nor can its fickle nature ever
diminish its brilliance; Just as the gem is always beautiful, its strong
qualities never become weak.” - Shri Yashvijayji 2. **Ever-present** - Just as
the brilliance of a gem shines even more brightly when tested with the
touchstone of experimentation, so too, this right-faith man’s bondlessness, when
tested with the touchstone of self-experience, becomes increasingly powerful and
grows. “The sun’s brilliance never diminishes, even when it is tested; It is the
brilliance of all brilliance, increasing from the beginning.” - Shri Yashvijayji
3. **Independent** - When the oil runs out, the lamp is extinguished, but this
loss (harm) does not affect the gem, so its light is independent, never
extinguished; similarly, here, because there is no dependence on anything else,
it is independent, no harm can reach it, it is never extinguished, never put
out; because it does not depend on anything else that could be lost and cause it
harm, it is self-reliant, self-dependent, and therefore completely free from all
obstacles. This gem-lamp shines in the temple of the mind, destroying all
enemies! It destroys all darkness! And it illuminates the brilliance of
experience! The lamp that is lit, remains lit! It is never extinguished. “O
friend, the Jineshwar Dev, the gem-lamp shines brightly, It shines in the temple
of my mind, destroying all enemies. It destroys all darkness, and the brilliance
of experience shines brightly. There is no smoke of karma, the footprints of the
mind never move. The good karmic matter does not burn, it is in a pure state.” -
Shri Navvijay Sushishya, the reader Yash says this. - Shri Yashvijayji

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ATha pagadaSTinuM sAmAnya kathana (9) bedha-deharUpa svayaM jANI rahelA A
samyagRSTi puruSe ja bedhathI cuta thatA nathI! AvuM parama sAhasa te
samyagRSTie ja karI zake !" ratnanA sthira prakAzane jema vAyu spazI zakatuM
nathI ke elavI zakato nathI, tema samyaggadaSTi AtmajJAnInA sthira dharatnane
upasargarUpa vAyu spazI zakatuM nathI ke olavI zakatuM nathI. ane eTalA mATe ja
A daSTine badha 1. apratipAtI-jema ranane prakAza apratipAtI hoya che-kadI
cAlyuM ja nathI, tema A daSTine bodha paNa apratipAtI hoya che, eka vAra AvyA
pachI pAcho paDI sto nathI. jeha na marutane gamya, caMcalatA je navi lahe he
lAla; jeha sadA che ramya, puSTa guNe navi kRza rahe ho lAla."- zrI yazovijayajI
2. pravartamAna-prayoga vagerenI kasoTIthI jema ratnanI kAMti ora ne era
jhaLakatI jAya che, tema A samyagRSTinA bedhane AtmAnubhavarUpa kaseTIe caDhAvI
prasiddha karatAM te uttarottara baLavattara banatuM jAya che, vRddhi pAmatuM
jAya che. pAtra kare nahiM heTha, sUraja teje navi chiye he lAla, sarva tejanuM
teja, pahelAMthI vAdhe pache he lAla."--zrI yazavijyajI 3. nirapAya-tela khUTI
javAthI dave olavAI jAya che, paNa te tela khUTI javArUpa apAya (hAni ) ratnane
naDatuM nathI, tethI tene prakAza nirapAya-nibaMdha hoya che, kadI olavAta
nathI; tema atre be parAvalaMbanI nahiM hovAthI nirapAya hoya che, tene kaI paNa
hAni-badhA pahoMcatI nathI, te kadI olavAta nathI-bUjhAte nathI; kAraNa ke tene
koI para avalaMbana nathI ke je khasI jatAM tene hAni pahoMce, te te
svAvalaMbanI-AtmAvalaMbanI ja che, eTale te sarvathA bAdhA rahita che. A
ratnadIpaka manamaMdiramAM pragaTa ke basa zatrubala khalAsa! meha aMdhakArane
sarvanAza! ne anubhava tejane jhaLahaLATa ! te dIve jAge te jA ! olavAya ja
nahi. sAhelAM he kuMthu jinezvara deva, ratnadIpaka ati dIpate ho lAla, sAva
muja manamaMdiramAMhI, Ave je aribala jIpate he lAla sAva miTe te meha aMdhAra,
anubhava teje jhaLahaLe che lAla sAva dhUma kaSAya na rekha, caraNa citrAmaNa
navi cale he lAla sArA pudgala tela na khepa, jeha na zuddha dazA dahe he lAla
sA. zrI navijaya suziSya, vAcaka yaza IhI pare kahe ho lAla." -zrI yazeviyajI.

Page #136 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(70) **4. Not Causing Distress to Others** - Just as the light of a gem is cool
and pure, not causing distress to others, so too, this insight, due to the
calming of passions and their objects, is cool and pure, not causing distress or
affliction to others. Not only that, but it also becomes the cause of supreme
peace for other beings by practicing non-violence and other virtues.  **5. The
Purpose of Satisfaction** - Just as the light of a gem brings satisfaction, its
brilliance pleases the eye, and the mind becomes happy, and one does not feel
like looking at trivial things like glass, etc., so too, this insight brings
satisfaction to the soul, creates mental happiness, and having seen the ultimate
self-realization, which was worth seeing, the curiosity to see trivial external
things is extinguished, and the soul remains eternally absorbed in itself,
becoming satisfied and content.  **6. The Birthplace of Examination, etc.** -
(5) Just as the gem's own light reveals all sides of the gem, and also allows
the knowledge of other objects, so too, the radiant light of this insight
reveals the formless soul and other things clearly. Through the light of the two
gems, the self-knowing person with right vision sees things as they are.  "The
object itself is illuminated by the light, the treasure of bliss is the abode."
- Shri Anandghanji. Just as a gem reveals the value of other things like glass,
etc., and one clearly understands how much a piece of glass is worth compared to
a real diamond, so too, the gem of insight reveals the value of other trivial
objects, and in the presence of the unique gem of the soul, other things seem
worthless.  (4) The attainment of a superior gem is considered auspicious, it
increases wealth, happiness, prosperity, etc., and removes evil, so too, the
attainment of this superior gem of insight becomes the cause of all
auspiciousness, welfare, and all good fortune.  "The most radiant of all!"
"Unthinkable power is itself the god, the gem of pure consciousness is itself
the gem of thought." - Shri Samayasarakalash.  "The self-realized person is
always content, the self-realized person is always satisfied." - Gita. "This is
the eternal bliss, always be content, always be in this state." - Shri
Samayasar.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (70) gaSThisamuccaya 4. bIjAne paritApa na pamADanAra-ratnano prakAza jema
ThaMDo ne nirmala hoI, bIjAne paritApa upajAvatA nathI, tema A daSTine bodha
paNa kaSAya-viSaya AdinI upazAMtatAnA kAraNe zItala ne nirmala hoI, bIjAne
paritApa-kaleza pamADatuM nathI. eTaluM ja nahiM paNa anya jIvone paNa ahiMsA
AdivaDe karIne parama zAMtinuM kAraNa thAya che. 5. paritoSahetu- ratnanA
prakAzathI pariteSa upaje che, tenI kAMti dekhIne AMkha Thare che, citta
prasanna thAya che, kAca jevI tuccha vastu vagere dekhavAnuM mana thatuM nathI,
tema A daSTinA bodhathI AtmA paritoSa pAme che, cittaprasannatA upaje che, je
daSTavya hatuM-je dekhavA yogya evuM parama Atmadarzana hatuM te dekhI lIdhuM,
eTale tuccha bAhya vastu dekhavAnuM* kutUhala vyAvRtta thaI jAya che-maTI jAya
che, ne AtmA AtmAmAM ja nitya rata rahI, tRpta thaI jAya che, saMtuSTa thAya
che. 6. parikSAnAdinuM janmasthAna-(5) ratnanA potAnA prakAzathI te rananI sarva
bAju barAbara dekhAya che, tema ja bIjA padArthonuM paNa parijJAna thAya che.
tema A dRSTinA bedharUpa prakAzathI bedhamUrti AtmAnuM ne anya vastunuM barAbara
jJAna thAya che. be dharatnanA prakAzathI samyagRSTi AtmajJAnI puruSa vastune
vastu te dekhe che. vastugate je vastu prakAze, AnaMdaghana mata vAsI re."--zrI
AnaMdaghanajI , () rana dIThe jema bIjA kAca vagerenuM mUlyAMkana thaI jAya che,
sAce hIre dIThe kAcanI kiMmata keTalI che tenI barAbara khabara paDI jAya che,
tema bodhiratna dIThe anya tuccha padArthanuM mUlyAMkana thaI jAya che, ananya
ciMtAmaNiratna samAna AtmAnI AgaLa para vastunI kAMI kiMmata lAgatI nathI.. (4)
uttama jAtivaMta ratnanI prApti maMgaladAyI gaNAya che, aizvarya-sukha-saMpatti
AdinI vRddhi kare che, aniSTane dUra kare che tema A uttama bedharatnanI prApti
sarva maMgalanuM . maMgala ne sarva kalyANanuM kAraNa thaI paDe che. samastranA
sarvAcALajhALuM ! " " acintyazaktiH svayameva devazcinmAtracintAmaNireva yasmAta
/  sarvArthasiddhAtmatA vidharo, jJAnI ciya pariLa che "--zrI samayasArakalaza *
" svAsmaratideva thA ramatRpta mAnavaH | gAmanyA saMtuEdaratara #Artha na
vidyate "--gItA "edahi rado NiccaM saMtuTTho heAhi Niccamedahmi  /  rekha hephi
tiro he ituEUR 3ttamaM varavuM "--zrI samayasAra

Page #137 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The eight yogadristi. Generalization (11) The samandharma of this steady
dristi's medha has been discussed. However, within the son of the kel, there is
a matter within the matter, how can its expanse be done? etc. in many ways, with
Ratnaprabha, as much as possible, in brief comparison is there, it is here, so
the knower's 66 Just as the kel falls, falls, falls; So the knower's mat falls,
falls, falls. 6. Kanta Dristi :: The sixth dristi is now called Kanta, there is
the light of the star. - Shri Yog 0 Sajjay In the sixth Kanta dristi, there is a
light like the light of a star. This 'Kanta' dristi, Kanta means a devoted wife!
There is a supreme feeling. Just as a devoted wife, while doing all the other
work of the house, thinks only of her husband, so the members of this dristi,
like Kanta, may be doing other work, but their mind remains constantly absorbed
in Shrutadharma. Due to the influence of karma, they have to do samsara...bandhi
like the servant of the chitthi, but even in that, there is their non-
attachment. Their supreme attachment-devotion, supreme love is only in
Shrutadharma, that is, 'the knower's relationship with Shravana' Kanta which is
the teaching, etc., dharma, is towards him. "The mind of the woman is on her
beloved, doing other work; so the mind holds firm in the Shruta, the knower's
knowledge..." Dhan Dhan Shasan Shri Jinavartan, 'Shri Yog 0 Sajjay This Kanta
dristi has been compared to the light of a star, which is also very appropriate,
because the light of a star is more than the light of a gem, so the medha of
this dristi is more radiant - more profound than the steady dristi. The light of
a star shines in the sky, remaining naturally - naturally situated, it is like a
Dhruva Kanta, it is always present, unbroken; so the medha of this dristi also
shines in the Chidakasha, remaining naturally situated, it remains Dhruva, it is
always present, unbroken. Star light And that is why there is a feeling of this
kind, practice-active conduct. The activity that follows knowledge is called
'practice'. So this Samyagyani has attained self-knowledge, he performs actions
that are in accordance with that self-knowledge, that is, he constantly strives
to perform actions that are in accordance with the soul, to follow the right
conduct, to maintain the right conduct. This complete practice is full of
worship-devotion, repentance, rejection, criticism, etc. He desires to become
one with the soul, the Lord, and to be free from the influence of others.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ATha yogadRSTinuM. sAmAnya thata ( 11 ) A sthira dRSTinA medhanuM samAnadharma
paNuMvivecyuM che. tathApi keLanA putranI aMdara patra vAtanI aMdara vAta heAya
che, tenA vistAra kema karI zakAya ? ityAdi aneka prakAre ratnaprabhA sAthe
yathAmati saMkSepamAM sarakhApaNuM che, te atre hAya che, tema jJAnInI 66 jaise
kelake pAtame, pAta pAtame' pAta; taise jJAnIkI mAtame, khAta khAtame' khAta. 6.
kAMtA dRSTi HH chaThThI dIThThI re have kAMtA kahu, tihAM tArAbha prakAza."--zrI
yoga0 sajjhAya chaThThI kAMtA dRSTimAM tArAnI prabhA jevA Adha hoya che. A
kAMtA' dRSTimAM kAMtA eTale pativratA strI jeve! paramA bhAva hAya che. jema
pativratA strI gharanAM khIjA' samasta kAma karatAM paNa patinuM ja ciMtana kare
che, tema A dRSTivALA sabhyaSTi kAMtA jevI puruSa bhale bIjuM kAma karatA hAya
tApaNa tenu citta sadA zrutadharmamAM ja lIna rahe che. karmanI preraNAthI
ciThThInA cAkaranI jema tene parANe sa`sAra sa...baMdhI karyAM karavuM paDe,
tepaNa temAM tenI anAsakti ja heAya che. tenI parama Asakti-bhakti, parama prema
teA kevaLa zrutadharmamAM ja eTale ' jJAnI sabaMdhI zravaNurUpa kAMtA je
upadezAdi dhama tenI pratye' ja hoya che. " mana mahilAnuM vahAlA upare, bIjA
kAma ka2ta re; tema zrutame mana dRDha dhare, jJAnAkSepakava'ta ......... dhana
dhana zAsana zrI jinavarataNu, 'zrI yoga. sajjhAya AvI A kAMtA dRSTine tArAnI
prabhAnI upamA ApI che, te paNa atyaMta samucita che, kAraNa ke ratnanI prabhA
karatAM tArAneA prakAza adhikatara hoya che, tema sthirA dRSTi karatAM A dRSTinA
medha vadhAre prakAzamAna-vadhAre gADha hAya che. tArAne prakAza gaganamAM
camakArA karatA rahI prakRtithI-svabhAvathI sthita ja heAya che, dhruva samI
kAMtA hoya che, sadAya akhaMDapaNe meAjUda ja hAya che; tema A dRSTinA medha
paNa sadAya cidAkAzamAM camakatA rahI, sahaja svabhAve sthita ja hoya che,
dhruva rahe che, sadAya akhaMDapaNe hAjarAhajUra ja hAya che. tArA prabhA ane
eTalA mATe ja atre tathAprakAranuM bhAva anuSThAna-sakriyA AcaraNa hoya che.
jJAnane anusaratI je sakriyA tenu'nAma 'anuSThAna' che. eTale A samyajJAnIne je
AtmajJAna thayu che, te AtmajJAnane anurUpa chAje evI AtmAnucaraNarUpa
bhAvakriyA karavAnA- niraticAra saccAritra pALavAneA A puruSa satata
prayatnapUrNAMka puruSAtha seve che. A puru sadanuSTAna SanA vaMdana-bhakti,
pratikramaNa, pratyAkhyAna, AleAcanA Adi bhAvathI hAya che. tene AtmA prabhu
sAthe abheda thavAnI icchA rAkhe che ne parabhAvamAM niSkAma

Page #138 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(72) Yogasthi Samuccaya  Thus, the soul itself becomes filled with devotion. By
turning away from and eliminating all the karmic impurities of the past, the
soul itself becomes repentant. By turning away from and eliminating all the
karmic impurities of the future, the soul itself becomes renunciant. By
constantly observing all the impurities of the present, and by constantly
reflecting on them with self-awareness, the soul itself becomes self-critical.
Thus, by constantly renouncing, constantly repenting, and constantly self-
criticizing, the soul itself becomes virtuous. * Thus, the practice, conduct,
and character of this virtuous person is as follows:  1. Niratichar - Since it
is devoid of any attachment to all beings, there is no transgression in it;
there is no transgression (Transgression) in the form of movement in attachment.
2. Shuddhopayag Anusari - This is the practice of the self-realized person who
follows pure use - the self-nature. Just as the lotus leaf is in water but not
wet, I am also detached. No other feeling enters me. Thus, I am unique. Like the
ocean, my self-nature is eternally organized. Thus, I am constant. Seeing beyond
the cycle of existence, I am undifferentiated - like gold, I am one undivided
substance. Looking at my own nature, I am free from karmic impurities. Thus,
this person contemplates the pure soul, and by contemplating the pure, solitary
soul, he drinks the nectar of non-dualistic bliss.  > "Parayaasthi na drijiye,
ek j kanak abhang re, > "Nivikulp ras pijjiye, shudd nirjan ek re." - Shri
Anandghanji > "Aatm bhavana bhaavta, jeev lahe kevalgyaan re." (Shrimud
Rajchandra)  3. Vishisht Apramad Yukt - Since this virtuous person is filled
with such pure self-awareness, he does not experience any delusion in the form
of a loss of self-nature, and the subtle nature of objects, passions,
attachment, aversion, etc. diminishes. 4. Viniyog Pradhan - This person, having
known, realized, and practiced the knowledge-wisdom, applies it correctly - in
its proper place (Practical application), and connects other beings to Dharma,
so that his own Dharma tradition does not break.  * "Niccam pacchakkhanam kuvvai
nicca ya padikkamadi jo. Niccam bahocey te du akhin varu thya. ||" - Shri
Samaysar * "Jo parasadi appaanam abaddapudham annanayam niyadam. Anilesamaangutt
te mudralaru vichadi." - Shri Samaysar

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ( 72 ) yogaSTisamuccaya hAya che.Ama tene AtmA ja bhaktibhAvamaya banI jAya
che. bhUtakALanA samasta kama doSathI AtmAne pAchA vALI-nivartAvI, tene AtmA
peAte pratikamaNurUpa thAya che. bhaviSyakALanA samarata kadoSathI AtmAne
nivartAvI-pAchA vALI tene AtmA pAte pratyAkhyAnasvarUpa ane che. vartamAnakALanA
samasta deSane dRSTApaNe dekhate rahI--temAM AtmabhAva cheDI AlecatA rahI, tene
AtmA sAkSAt AlAcanArUpa banI jAya che. Ama nitya pratyAkhyAna karatA, nitya
pratikramaNa karatA, nitya AleAcanA karatA, tene AtmA pAte cAritrarUpa bane
che.* Ama hAvAthI A satpuruSanuM anuSThAna AcaraNa-cAritra AvuM hAya che: 1.
niraticAra--samasta para bhAvanA sparzI vinAnuM hovAthI, temAM koi aticAra doSa
hotA nathI; para bhAvamAM gamanarUpa aticaraNa ( Transgression ) thatuM nathI.
ra. zuddopayAga anusArI--zuddha upayegane-AtmasvarUpane anusaranArU A AtmadazI
puruSanuM anuSThAna hoya che. huM jalamAM kamalapatranI jema abadupRSTa x
chuMnile pa chuM, kAi paNa anya bhAvane mhArAmAM praveza nahi. hAvAthI huM
ananya chuM, samudranI jema mhArA AtmasvabhAva nitya vyavasthita hAvAthI huM
niyata chuM, paryAyaSTi cheDIne dekhatAM huM avizeSa chu,-suvarNInI jema eka
akhaDa dravya chuM, mhArA edhamIja svabhAvane apekSIne jotAM huM karmajanya
mehAdathI asayukata chuM. ema zuddha AtmAnI bhAvanA te puruSa bhAvyA kare che,
ne zuddha nirjana eka ' AtmAnuM ciMtana karatAM nivikalpa rasanuM pAna karyA
kare che. 4 paryAyaSTi na drIjiye, eka ja kanaka abhaMga re, "" "nivikalpa rasa
pIjiye, zuddha nirajana eka re."--zrI AnaMdaghanajI Atama bhAvanA bhAvatAM, jIva
lahe kevalajJAna re." (zrImad rAjaca'dra) 3. viziSTa apramAdayukta--AvI zuddha
AtmabhAvanAthI bhAvita heAvAthI, A satpuruSane svarUpacyutirUpa-
svarUpabhraSTatArUpa pramAda thatA nathI, ane viSaya-kaSAya-rAgadveSAdinI
kSINatA vate che 4. viniyeAgapradhAna--je jJAna-dazane karI jANyuM, pratItyuM,
Acayu", tene A puruSa samyak viniyeAga-yathAsthAne niyeAjana karI, (Practical
application) khIjA jIvAne dharmamAM joDe che, jethI peAtAnI dharmapara'parA
tUTatI nathI. * "NiccaM paccakkhANaM kuvvai Nicca ya paDikkamadi jo  /  nityaM
bAhoceya te du akhiM varU thayA  /  /  '"--zrI samayasAra x " jo parasadi
appANaM abaddhapuDhaM aNaNNayaM NiyadaM  /  anilesamaaMgutta teM mudraLaruM
vicAdi | "--zrI samayasAra

Page #139 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Eightfold Right View: A General Statement (73)  5. **Deep and Generous
Intent:** This Right View, the knowledge of the self, is characterized by a deep
and generous intent in the practice of Dharma. The yogi with this view is "as
deep as the ocean." As this realization is the essence of life, Knowing the self
as distinct and unattached...listen to the Jinas, the original path; that stable
nature, it arises, the name is character, it is without form...the origin." -
Shrimad Rajchandraji  7. **Radiant View:** "The radiant view is like the
radiance of the sun, the knowledge is like the radiance of the sun, the object
of meditation is this view." - Shri Gadh Sakzayi In the seventh radiant view,
the sun is like the knowledge. The sun's light is many times greater than the
stars, similarly, the seventh view is many times stronger and deeper than the
sixth view. It is rightly called "radiant" because "pra+bha" means "excellent
light," which is the same as the radiance. Just as the sun's radiance is
extremely bright, so too is the knowledge-radiance of this view. Just as the
sun's light illuminates all objects and the world, so too does the knowledge-
light of this view illuminate all objects. This is the truth of the analogy. And
this view has this excellent knowledge-light, therefore:  1. **Always the Object
of Meditation:** This knowledge is constantly the object of meditation. The yogi
in this state meditates on the self without interruption. 2. **Mostly Without
Thought:** Because this self-meditation is intense and self-sufficient, there is
rarely an opportunity for any thought to arise. 3. **Blissful Peace:** And
because of this thought-free meditation, there is blissful peace, peace that is
the essence, peace that is paramount. From the beginning, the yogi experiences
supreme bliss from the peace of the self and detachment. Because this bliss is
not dependent on anything else, there is no dependence, no subjugation,
therefore there is no cause for suffering; and because it is only self-
dependent, it is independent, therefore only bliss has space. "Everything that
is dependent is a sign of suffering, that which is independent is bliss; that
evil nature of the self is revealed, tell me, is that bliss or suffering? O
seeker! Hold the words of the hero in your mind." - Shri Gadh Sakzayi

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ATha gadaSTinuM sAmAnya kathana (73) 5. gaMbhIra udAra AzayavALuM--A
samyagadaSTi AtmajJAnI puruSanuM A dharmAcaraNa parama gaMbhIra-udAra AzayavALuM
hoya che. A draSTivALA yegI "sAgaravaragaMbhIrA hoya che. jema AvI pratIti
jIvanI re, jANyo sarvethI bhinna asaMga...mULa mAraga sAMbhaLo jinane re; te
sthira svabhAva te upaje re, nAma cAritra te aNaliMga...mULa"--zrImad
rAjacaMdrajI 7. prabhA dRSTi aka prabhA sama bodha prabhAmAM, dhyAnapriyA e
diThThI."--zrI gaDha sakjhAya sAtamI prabhA dRSTimAM sUryanI prajA same bedha
hoya che. tArA karatAM sUryane prakAza anekagaNa adhika hoya che, tema chaThThI
dRSTi karatAM sAtamI dRSTino bAdha aneka gaNe baLavAna hoya che, parama avagADha
hoya che. Ane "prabhA' nAma sUrya prabhA ApyuM che te paNa barAbara che, kAraNa
ke pra+bhA =prakRSTa prakAza jene che sama prabhA te prabhA. jema sUryanI prabhA
ati ugra tejasvI hoya che, tema A dRSTinI bedhaprabhA-prakAza paNa ati ugra
tejasvI hoya che. sUrya prakAzathI jema sarva padArthanuM barAbara darzana thAya
che, vizva prakAzita thAya che, tema A daSTinA bodhaprakAzathI sarva padArthanuM
yathArtha darzana thAya che. Ama A upamAnuM yathArthapaNuM che. ane A daSTine A
prakRSTa badhaprakAza hoya che, eTale ja atre 1. sarvadA dhyAnahetu-A bodha
niraMtara dhyAnane hetu hoya che. ahIM sthiti karato yogI akhaMDa AtmadhyAna
dhyAve che. 2. prAye nirvikalpatA-tIrNa AtmopagavALuM A AtmadhyAna hovAthI,
temAM prAye kaI paNa vikalpa UThavAne avasara hoto nathI. 3. prazamasAra sukha-
ane AvuM nirvikalpa dhyAna hovAthI ja atre prazama jene sAra che evuM
prazamasAra, prazamapradhAna sukha hoya che. prathamathI, parama AtmazAMtithI,
vItarAgatAthI atre yegIne parama sukha upaje che. kAraNa ke A sukhamAM
parAvalaMbana nathI, paravazapaNuM nathI, eTale duHkhanuM leza paNa kAraNa
nathI; ane kevala AtmAvalaMbana che, svAdhInapaNuM ja che, eTale kevala sukhane
ja avakAza che. saghaLuM paravaza te duHkhalakSaNa, nijavaza te sukha lahIe; e
duSTa AtamaguNa pragaTe, kaho sukha te kuNa kahIe re ? bhavikA ! vIra vacana
citta dharIe."-zrI gaDha sajhAya

Page #140 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(74) Yoga-drishti-samuccaya “Ekantik atyanthiko, sahaj akrut svadhin... ho
jinji; nirupchati nidridha sukha, anya ahetuk pin... ho jin.—Shri Devchandraji
4. Any shastro akinchiker—nakam, ankhapana thai pade chhe, karan ke aheen
anubhav-gyan nu—pratibhav gyan nu atyant prabalpanu-samarth panu hoy chhe.
Shastra ne matra mang ne laksh karavi shake chhe, pan atre to sakshat marg ni
prapti chhe, atle shastra nu prayojan rehtu nathi. 5. Samadhi-nishtha
anushtan—aheen sarv anushtan samadhi-nishtha hoy chhe, sarv shudh bhavkia atma-
samadhi ma parinme chhe. 6. Teni sanidhi ma vera na—a drishti ma vatata giraaj
ni aavi yog siddhata thai chhe, e gaprabhav pravarte chhe, ke tena sanni dhan
ma—haajri ma krura hinsak pranio na pan vair-virod vagere nash pami jaay chhe,
jati-vair pan bhulai jaay chhe! 7. Paranugrakhartapanu—a drishti vale yogi
paranugrah—popkar-parayan hoy chhe, bija chhe pratye te kalyan marg ne updesh
kari upkar kare chhe, anugrah kare chhe. 8. Vine (shila) pratye
ouchityag—uchitata vale paramarth sambandh hoy chhe, ke tethi te vinayavan
shishya nu achuk atma-kalyan thai. 9. Avandhya sakriya—atre bhavarup, paramarth-
rup je shudh atma-nucharan-rup sakriya hoy chhe, te avandhya-amegh hoy chhe,
kadi khali jati nathi, achuk mukti-phal aap chhe. 8. Para drishti shti aathami
sar samaadhi, naam par tas jaanu chhe. Aap svabhave pravrutti puran, shashi sam
bodh vakhanu chhe.” Shri ag sajay aathami par drishti ma bodh chandra ni prabha
sarakho hoy chhe. Surya prakash jo ke adhik tejassvi chhe, parantu tap pamade
chhe, ugra lage chhe, ane chandra ne prakash to keval Saumya ne shant hoi
shitalta upjave chhe, param alad aap chhe. Chandra-prabha sam banne nu vishv-
prakashakpanu te saman chhe. Atle chandra na prakash nu sthan par surya karta
adhik manyu chhe. Aam a drishti sarvotkrushta chhe, param chhe, Uncha ma unchi
chhe, ena thi par koi nathi, atle j ena ne “para” kahi chhe. Chandra ni sna
(chandani) jem vishv ma felai rahi tene prakashmay kari muke chhe, prakash ma
nhavraave chhe, tem atre pan badh-chandra ni soley kala khili uthta jnan—vantika

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (74) yogadaSTisamuccaya "ekAMtika atyaMtiko, sahaja akRta svAdhIna... ho
jinajI; nirupacati nidraDha sukha, anya ahetuka pIna... ho jina.--zrI
devacaMdrajI 4. anya zAstro akiMcikara--nakAmA, aNakhapanA thaI paDe che, kAraNa
ke ahIM anubhavajJAnanuM-pratibha jJAnanuM atyaMta prabaLapaNuM-samartha paNuM
hoya che. zAstra ne mAtra mAgane lakSa karAvI zake che, paNa atre to sAkSAt
mArganI prApti che, eTale zAstranuM prayeAjana rahetuM nathI. 5. samAdhiniSTha
anuSThAna-ahIM sarva anuSThAna samAdhiniSTha hoya che, sarva zuddha bhAvakiyA
AtmasamAdhimAM pariName che. da. tenI saMnidhimAM veranA-A daSTimAM vatatA
girAjanI evI yoga siddhatA thAya che, e gaprabhAva pravarte che, ke tenA
sannidhAnamAM-hAjarImAM krUra hiMsaka prANIonA paNa vaira-virodha vagere nAza
pAmI jAya che, jAtivaira paNa bhUlAI jAya che ! 7, parAnugrahakartApaNuM-A
daSTivALe yegI parAnugraha-popakAraparAyaNa hoya che, bIjA cha pratye te kalyANa
mArgane upadeza karI upakAra kare che, anugraha kare che. 8. vine (ziLe) pratye
aucityAga-ucitatAvALe paramArtha saMbaMdha heAya che, ke tethI te vinayavAna
ziSyanuM acUka AtmakalyANa thAya. 9, avaMdhya sakriyA-atre bhAvarUpa,
paramArtharUpa je zuddha AtmAnucaraNarUpa sakriyA hoya che, te avaMdhya-amegha
hoya che, kadI khAlI jatI nathI, acUka muktiphala Ape che. 8. parA dRSTi STi
AThamI sAra samAdhi, nAma para tasa jANuM che. Apa svabhAve pravRtti pUraNa,
zazi sama bodha vakhANuM che." zrI ega sajhAya AThamI para dRSTimAM bodha
caMdranI prabhA sarakho hoya che. sUrya prakAza jo ke adhika tejasvI che,
paraMtu tApa pamADe che, ugra lAge che, ane caMdrane prakAza to kevala saumya ne
zAMta hoI zItalatA upajAve che, parama AlAda Ape che. caMdraprabhA sama baMnenuM
vizvaprakAzakapaNuM te samAna che. eTale caMdranA prakAzanuM sthAna para sUrya
karatAM adhika mAnyuM che. Ama A dRSTi sarvotkRSTa che, parama che, UMcAmAM UMcI
che, enAthI para koI nathI, eTale ja ene parA" kahI che. caMdranI snA (cAMdanI)
jema vizvamAM phelAI rahI tene prakAzamaya karI mUke che, prakAzamAM nhavarAve
che, tema atre paNa badha-caMdranI soLe kaLA khIlI UThatAM jJAna-vaMtikA

Page #141 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
This is the general nature of the Chegashtin (75) * It pervades the entire
universe. Just as the moon remains in the sky and illuminates the earth, without
becoming earth-like; similarly, this Adh-Chandra, residing in the Chidakasha,
illuminates the world like a lamp, but does not become world-like. Because what
remains of the nature of pure perception when it undergoes self-transformation?
Nothing, it becomes the complete nature. And if it becomes another material
form, what would be its nature? No. Because becoming another material form is
not its nature, but a different nature. For example, moonlight illuminates the
earth, but the earth does not become moonlight. Similarly, knowledge always
knows the knowable, but the knowable world never becomes knowledge - the soul. -
'Thus have the wise sages said.' “The moon illuminates the earth, its rays make
the entire earth white, but the moon never becomes earth-like, similarly, this
soul, which illuminates the entire world, never becomes world-like, it always
remains in its pure form of consciousness. The belief that the soul is
inseparable from the world is an illusion.” - Sam Tattvasht Shrimad Rajchandraji
(Ank (833)-760) Thus, this Para-drishti is truly comparable to the moon.
Because, like the moon, it remains in its form and illuminates the world, it
does not pervade the world; it is complete in its own nature, and there is no
entry of any other nature; it is in a pure non-dual state. And because of this,
the meditation of this Para-drishti is Nivikalpa Dhyanasukha Always in its own
form - it is. Here, continuous supreme self-absorption is the only thing. This
Yajishwar has an unbroken state of being, naturally, because the duality of
other nature has been completely removed, therefore, in the state of supreme
pure non-duality, it is only in the form of the self that it naturally and
effortlessly plays. Shuddha Ni-prayas Nij Bhaav Bhagi Yada, Atma Kshetre Nahi'
Anya Rakshan Tada; Ek Asahaay Ni-sang Nindvandvata, Shakti Uts'ni Hay Saho
Vyaktatha....Dharman'shri Devchandrash Nivikalpa - This supreme non-dual
Nivikalpa is the only thing. In this, there is no possibility of any any
alternative arising. Thus, here there is Nivikalpa self-absorption. Dhyata, * **
शुद्धद्रव्यस्वरस भवनात्कि स्वभावस्य शेष मन्यद्रव्यं भवति यदि वा तस्य किं
स्यात्स्त्रभाव: । ज्योत्स्नारूप स्नपयति भुत्र नैत्र तस्यास्ति भूमि - Jnan Hoy
Pati Lara Jneyanaswati Naitra. - Shri Amritchandracharya Chhat Samayasarakalash

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 A cegaSTinu sAmAnya thana (75) * AkhA vizvamAM relAi rahe che. tapi caMdra jema
gaganamAM ja rahI bhUmine prakAze che, kAMI bhUmirUpa te thai jatA nathI; tema
cidAkAzamAM sthiti karatA A edha-caMdra paNa zeyarUpa vizvane prakAze che, paNa
vizvarUpa banI jatA nathI. kAraNa ke zuddha draSyanuM svarasabhavana-pariNamana
thayuM te svabhAvanuM zuM bAkI rahyuM ? kAMi ja nahi, te ja pUrNa svabhAva
thayA. ane anya dravyarUpa te jo thaI jAya, te te zuM ene svabhAva thaye| ?
nahiM ja. kAraNa ke anya dravyarUpa thavu te te svabhAva nahiM, parabhAva ja
che. dRSTAMta-cAMdanI bhUmine nhevarAve che, paNa bhUmi kAMi tenI thaI jatI
nathI. tema jJAna paNa jJeyane sadA jANe che, paNa jJeya vizva jJAnanuM-AtmAnu
kadI khanI jatuM nathI,-' Ama jJAnI mahAtmAee kahyu` che. "cadra bhUmine prakAze
che, tenA kiraNanI kAMtinA prabhAvathI samasta bhUmi zveta thaI jAya che, paNa
kaMi cadra bhUmirUpa koI kALe tema thatA nathI, ema samasta vizvane prakAzaka
evA A AtmA te kacAre paNa vizvarUpa thatA nathI, sadAsadA caitanyasvarUpa ja
rahe che. vizvamAM jIva abhedatA mAna che e ja bhrAMti che. ' --sama tattvaSTA
zrImad rAjacaMdrajI (aMka (833)-760) Ama A parA ' dRSTine caMdranI upamA
kharAkhara ghaTe che. kAraNa ke caMdranI jema svarUpamAM sthita rahI atre
vizvaprakAzakatA hAya che, vizvavyApakatA heAtI nathI; Apa svabhAvamAM ja
paripUrNa pravRtti DhAya che, parabhAvane praveza paNa thatA nathI; zuddha
advaita ' avasthA heAya che. ane Ama heAvAthI A parA dRSTinA medha nivikalpa
dhyAnasukha sadA sAnarUpa ja--hAya che. atre niraMtarapaNe parama AtmasamAdhi ja
te che. A yAgIzvaranI sahajAtmasvarUpe akhaMDa sthiti hoya che, kAraNa ke
parabhAvanu je dvaita hatuM te sarvathA dUra thayu che, eTale parama zuddha
advaitabhAve kevala eka AtmasvarUpamAM ja sahaja niHprayAsa ramaNatA vatta che.
zuddha ni:prayAsa nija bhAva bhAgI yadA, AtmakSetre nahi' anya rakSaNu tadA; eka
asahAya niHsaMga nindvandvatA, zakti utsa'nI hAya sahu vyaktatA....dharmAM'zrI
devaca'draz nivikalpa--A parama bedha nivikalpa ja hAya che. AmAM kayAreya paNa
koi paNa vikalpa UThavAnA asaMbhava che. Ama atre nivikalpa AtmasamAdhi hoya
che. dhyAtA, * ** zuddhadravyasvarasa bhavanAtki svabhAvasya zeSa manyadravyaM
bhavati yadi vA tasya kiM syAtstrabhAva:  /  jyotsnArUpa snapayati bhutra naitra
tasyAsti bhUmi - jJAna hoya pati larA jJeyanasvAti naitra|"--zrI amRtacadrAcArya
chata samayasArakalaza

Page #142 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(76) The distinction between *gadashti* (perception), *samuccaya* (collection),
*dhyan* (meditation), and *dhyeya* (object of meditation) disappears; the three
qualities of *jnana* (knowledge), *darshan* (vision), and *charitra* (conduct)
merge into one indivisible, self-existent form; all duality ceases to exist.
“The meditator, meditation, and the object of meditation are one, we will now
break down the distinctions; like milk and water, they merge into one, the
reader will understand this, and we will be happy.” - Shri Yashovijayji, in his
state of *nivikalpa* (without modification) *samadhi* (meditation), said, “Fear
not, the three qualities are one. Lalana (the devotee) has attained the service
of the Jina, the pure nectar of the *makarand* (honey).” - Bhaktraaj
Devchandraji, in this supreme state of *yoga* (union), attains this *nivikalpa*
state through such unbroken meditation. “I am different from everything in every
way, I am only pure consciousness, the most excellent, inconceivable happiness,
I am only pure experience. Is there any distraction? Is there any modification?
Is there any fear? Is there any regret? What other state is there? Pure, pure,
completely pure, supremely peaceful, I am only *nivikalpa*. I am using my own
form. I become absorbed, peace, peace, peace.” - Shrimad Rajchandra, *Patranka*
(833) 760. And thus, there is no modification at all, therefore, here: 1. There
is supreme happiness. This *samadhi*-based, *parabrahma*-based *yogishwar*
(master of yoga) experiences supreme self-bliss, becoming an “avatar of bliss.”
2. Just as there is no climbing up in the *arehan* (ascent) of the *arudha*
(ascendant), similarly, here there is no *pratikamana* (retrogression) etc.
*anushtan* (practice). Because, what is there to climb for one who has reached
the peak of the mountain? Similarly, this *girajarajeshwar* (king of mountains)
has climbed to the highest peak of the *bhega-giriraj* (mountain of knowledge),
what need does he have for the support of *anushtan* etc.? Because, that
*anushtan* is a means of support for climbing to the next stage. Now, in this
state, that means of support is like a “*vishakumbha*” (poisonous pot), while
*apratikamana* etc. are like “*amritakumbha*” (nectar pot). Therefore, such a
supreme *satpurush* (righteous person) “abandons the means of support, breaks
the *paraparivarti* (transformation), because he awakens as the blissful Lord
through the indestructible *darshan* (vision), *jnana* (knowledge), and
*vairagya* (renunciation).” x “*Padikaman Padi saran Pariharo Dharana Niyatti Ya
| Jinda Garha Sohi Atthavihe | Hai Visakumbho || Apadikamanam Appadisaranam
Apparihag Adharana Cheva | Agiyari 2 Bala Narhya Che Ramchamo Che - Shri
Samayasar Gave 306-307. “*Akshaortu* who is the year *Valamute*.. *Chaugadhasya*
within *Ram* : # *Aranamune* ” - Gita, -3,

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (76) gadaSTisamuccaya dhyAna ne dhyeya e traNane bheda paNa maTI jAya che;
jJAna-darzana-cAritra e triguNa paNa eka abheda AtmasvarUpe pariName che;
samasta dvatabhAva asta pAmI jAya che. "dhyAtA dhyAna dhyeya guNa eke, bheda
cheda karazuM have Teke; kSIra nIra pere tumazuM maLazuM, vAcaka yaza kahe heje
haLazuM."--zrI yazovijayajI nivikalpa susamAdhime hA, bhaye he triguNa abheda.
lalanA jina sevana pAIye ho, zuddhAtama makaraMda lalanA"--bhaktarAja
devacaMdrajI A parama yegI AvI nivikalpa dazA AvA akhaMDa dhyAnathI pAme che -
"sarvathI sarva prakAre huM bhinna cha3, eka kevala zuddha citanyasvarUpa,
paramatkRSTa, aciMtya sukhasvarUpa mAtra ekAMta zuddha anubhavarUpa huM chau'.
tyAM vikSepa che? vikalpa che? bhaya che? kheda che? bIjI avasthA zI? zuddha
zuddha, prakRNa zuddha parama zAMta catI huM mAtra nirvikalpa che. nija
svarUpamaya upayoga karuM chuM. tanmaya thAuM chauM, zAMtiH zAMtiH zAMtiH." -
zrImad rAjacaMdra, patrAMka (833) 760 ane Ama vikalpane sarvathA abhAva hoya
che, eTalA mATe ja atre 1. paramasukha-hoya che. A samAdhiniSTha-
parabrahmaniSTha yogIzvara parama Atmasukhane anubhava kare che, "AnaMdaghana
avatAra' bane che. 2. ArUDhanA ArehaNanI jema anuSThAna abhAva-ArUDhanA
ArohaNanI jema ahIM pratikamaNAdi anuSThAna hotuM nathI. kAraNa ke parvatanA
zikhare caDhI gayelAne caDhavAnuM zuM rahe? tema A girAjarAjezvara bhega-
girirAjanA sarvocca zrega para caDhI gayA, tene anuSThAna vagerenA avalaMbananI
zI jarUra rahe? kAraNa ke te te anuSThAna te AgaLa AgaLanI bhUmikA para caDhavA
mATenuM AlaMbana sAdhana che. have A dazAmAM te te AlaMbana sAdhana "viSakuMbha'
samAna che,* apratikamaNAdi ja "amRtakuMbha" samAna che. mATe AvA parama
satpuruSa te "AlaMbana sAdhanane tyAge che, parapariNatine bhAMge che, kAraNa ke
akSaya darzana-jJAna-vairAgathI te AnaMdaghana prabhu jAge che." x "paDikamaNa
paDisaraNa parihAro dhAraNA NiyattI ya  /  jiMdA garahA sohI atttthvihe| hAi
visakuMbho  //  apaDikamaNaM appaDisaraNaM apparihAga adhAraNA ceva  /  agiyarI
2 baLA narahyA che rAmacamo che - zrI samayasAra gAve 306-307. "AkSorTune je
varSa vALamute.. cogADhasya vacaiva rAma: #AraNamune "--gItA, -3,

Page #143 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The eight yogadristi's common understanding is not: “The tool of alkhana which
is renounced, the consequences are shared; the imperishable gift of knowledge
and detachment, the treasure of joy, the Lord awakens... I fall at the feet of
Veerji.” (77) —Yogiraj Anandghanji 3. Paropkaripanu yathaabhavyaatva
pramane—This supreme virtuous person, supreme sage, supreme merciful God, after
his own karma udya, with selfless compassion, teaches the world beings the pure
path of welfare, and bestows upon them supreme grace and favor. This supreme
four-armed Lord, like a great cloud, showers the nectar of dharma, and brings
about prosperity and happiness in the world. “Karma udya of Jinraj, worship the
religion that helps... the arms of Jishnu are merciful, 66 · The Lord's great
rain, enters into it; Supreme joy and prosperity, have come to my country...
Shri Nami”—Shri Devchandraji Here, yathaabhavyaatva pramane means as it is... as
one's bhavyaatva is—as it is appropriate, the remaining karma from past deeds,
etc., is shared appropriately and exhausted. For example—Shri Tirthankar
Bhagwan, Ganadhar Dev, Mundakevalli Bhagwan, etc., (( - Avadhya sakriya—Here, as
before, there is pure soul-following, self-character, avadhya kriya. There is an
immeasurable, infallible, moksha-giving action. And thus, this Yogirajrajeshwar
Kshidoosha sarvagna mahamuni, the fruit of the attainment is shared, the favor
is bestowed, the Shiva-sukha is attained, the four-armed one is not a beggar; †
the destruction of enemies, the cure of all diseases, the fulfillment of all
Samahiaji, Sa artha yogya sukha tehathi, anantguna nireehaaji.”—Shri Chaug
Sajjay Thus, the author of the scriptures, the great sage, has revealed many
secrets miraculously in a few words, giving appropriate comparisons to these
eight dristi. And those few words are also very profound, so this brief
explanation has been given for their clear understanding. From this, one can get
some idea of these dristi in general. A detailed explanation of the nature of
each dristi will be given later, when it is mentioned. Thus, these eight dristi
are common to the yogi who has the six right conducts.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ATha yogadRSTinuM` sAmAnya na " Alakhana sAdhana je tyAge, parapariNatine bhAge
re; akSaya dana jJAna vairAge, AnaMdaghana prabhu jAge re.........vIrajIne
caraNe lAguM " (77) --yogirAja AnaMdaghanajI 3. paropakAripaNuM yathAbhavyatva
pramANe--A parama satpuruSa, parama sadguru, paramakRpALu deva pachI peAtAnA
kama udaya pramANe, niSkAraNu karuNAthI jagajIvAne zuddha kalyANamAnA upadeza
karI, temanA para parama anugraha-upakAra kare che. A parama ceAgIzvararUpa
mahAmegha paramA` edhAmRtanI vRSTi karI, jagamAM paramAnadarUpa subhikSa sukALa
pravartAve che. " kamA~ udaya jinarAjane, bhajina dharma sahAya re....bAhu
jiSNuda dayAmayI, 66 * prabhu darisaNu mahAmeha, taNe paravezame re; paramAnada
subhikSa, thayA muja dezame re....zrI nami'--zrI devacaMdrajI atre
yathAbhavyatva pramANe eTale jevu' jevu... peAtAnuM bhavyatva che-heAvA
yeAgyapaNu che, pUrva prArabdhajanya zeSa kanuM bhegavavApaNuM vagere che, te
yathAyeAgyapaNe bhAgavIne kSINu kare che. jemake-zrI tIrthaMkara bhagavAna,
gaNadhara deva, muMDakevallI bhagavAna vagere, (( - avadhya sakriyA-atre
pahelAMnI jema ja zuddha AtmAnucaraNurUpa - AtmacAritrarUpa avadhya kriyA heAya
che, ameAdha-acUka meAkSaladAyI kriyA heAya che. ane Ama A yAgirAjarAjezvara
kSIdoSa sarvajJa mahAmuni sa` labdhi phala bhAgIjI, para upagAra karI zivasukha
te, pAme caiAga ayAgIjI; sa+ zatrukSaya sarva vyAdhilaya, pUraNa sarva samIhAjI,
sa artha yeAge sukha tehathI, anaMtaguNa nirIhAjI."--zrI ceAga sajjhAya Ama A
ATha STine yathAyeAgya upamA ApI, zAstrakAra maharSie thADA zabdomAM ghaNu'
rahasya camatkArika rIte khatAvI dIdhuM. ane te thADA zabdo paNa parama agabhIra
hAvAthI, tenI spaSTa samajaNu paDavA mATe sakSepathI ATaluM vivecana karyuM. A
uparathI A dRSTiene sAmAnyapaNe kaMika khyAla AvI zakaze. vizeSa vistArathI teA
pratyeka dRSTinu svarUpa AgaLa upara kaheze tyAre barAbara samajavAmAM AvI jaze.
Ama sAmAnyathI A ATha dRSTi saddaSTivALA yAgIne hAya che.

Page #144 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(78) The concept of *Gadashti* (wrong view) and its various stages, including
*Shankasamādhana* (doubt resolution), *Sad-dashtipana* (right view), and
*Samyag-dashtipana* (perfect view), is a complex one that unfolds over time. It
is only after the *Granthibhed* (breaking of the knot) that these stages become
relevant, and even then, the *Granthibhed* itself is a process that takes place
much later, as it occurs within the fifth *dashti*.   Therefore, the first four
*dashtis* – *Mitra*, etc. – are considered *Mithyadashti* (wrong views). The
question arises: why are there eight *dashtis* – four *Sad-dashti* (right view)
and four *Samyag-dashti* (perfect view)? The answer lies in the fact that the
four *dashtis* – *Mitra*, etc. – act as the *amegh-achuk* (unwavering and
infallible) cause for *Samyag-dashti* (perfect view). Consequently, due to the
influence of the effect on the cause, even the *Mitra*, etc. *dashtis* are
considered to be part of *Samyag-dashti* (perfect view).  To understand this,
consider the following analogy:  In the process of making refined crystallised
sugar from raw sugarcane, even the initial stages are crucial. The final product
doesn't just appear out of thin air. It requires a series of steps, starting
from the sugarcane itself.  The entire process from sugarcane to refined sugar
can be divided into eight stages:  1. **Sugarcane:** This represents the initial
stage, analogous to the *Mitra* *dashti*. 2. **Juice extraction:** This stage
corresponds to the second *dashti*. 3. **Boiling and making *kave* (molasses):**
This stage represents the third *dashti*. 4. **Making *gel* (syrup):** This
stage corresponds to the fourth *dashti*. 5. **Refining and making fine sugar:**
This stage represents the fifth *dashti*, where the *Granthibhed* occurs. 6.
**Making *sharkara* (granulated sugar):** This stage corresponds to the sixth
*dashti*. 7. **Making *ashuddha* (impure) sugar lumps:** This stage represents
the seventh *dashti*. 8. **Making refined crystallised sugar:** This stage
corresponds to the eighth *dashti*, representing the final stage of *Samyag-
dashti* (perfect view).  Thus, before reaching the final stage of refined
crystallised sugar, the process goes through various stages.  The first four
stages, from sugarcane to *gel*, are analogous to the first four *dashtis* –
*Mitra*, etc. – which are considered *Mithyadashti* (wrong views). The remaining
four stages, from fine sugar to refined crystallised sugar, are analogous to the
last four *dashtis*, which are considered *Sad-dashti* (right view) and *Samyag-
dashti* (perfect view).  Just as all the stages in the sugar-making process are
essential for achieving the final product, the *Mitra* *dashti*, etc., are also
crucial for attaining *Samyag-dashti* (perfect view). They act as the cause for
*Samyag-dashti* (perfect view). Therefore, the *Mitra* *dashti*, etc., have
their rightful place within the *Gadashti* (wrong view) framework.  These
*Mitra* *dashtis*, etc., are like the sugarcane, juice, etc., because they lead
to the attainment of *sanvegarup* (emotional) *madhuni* (sweetness). Without the
initial sugarcane, how can the juice be extracted? Without the juice, how can
*gol* (molasses) or sugar be made?  Similarly, these *Mitra* *dashtis*, etc.,
are like the sugarcane, etc., because they inevitably lead to the manifestation
of *paramarth* (ultimate) *premarup* (love-filled) *rasadi* (essence), and the
experience of the sweet *sanveg* (emotion) – like the nectar of *param*
(ultimate) *amrut* (nectar).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (78) gadaSTisamuccaya zaMkA-samAdhAna zaMkA-saddaSTipaNuM-samyaguSTipaNuM te
graMthibheda thayA pachI hoya che, ane te graMthibheda te haju AgaLa upara ghaNA
lAMbA vakhata pachI thavAno che, kAraNa ke te te pAMcamI daSTimAM thAya che.
eTale mitrA vagere cAra te mithyAdaSTi che, te pachI "saddaSTinI-samyagadaSTinI
ATha dRSTi ema kahevAnuM zuM kAraNa? - samAdhAna-je mitrA vagere cAra dRSTie
che, te samyagadaSTinA amegha-acUka kAraNarUpa thAya che, teTalA mATe kAraNamAM
kAryanA upacArathI te mitro vagerenuM paNa samyagadaSTipaNuM ghaTe che, eTale ja
ene samyagadaSTinI aMdara gaNe che. A samajavA mATe A daSTAMta che - zuddha
sAkaranA cosalAnI-khaDI sAkaranI banAvaTamAM tenI AgalI AgalI avasthAe paNa
kAmanI che. kAraNa ke te khaDI sAkara bane che, te kAMI ema ne ema banI jatI
nathI. zeraDIthI mAMDIne zuddha sAkara sudhInI saghaLI prakriyAmAMthI tene
pasAra thavuM zeraDImAMthI paDe che, tyAre ja khaDI sAkaranI prApti thAya che.
te A prakAre-(1) prathama te sAkara-daSTAMta zeraDI hoya, (2) pachI tene rasa
kADhavAmAM Ave, (3) tene ukALIne kAve banAvAya, (4) temAMthI geLa bane, (5)
tyArapachI tene zuddha karatAM karatAM temAMthI bArIka khAMDa thAya, (6) pachI
zarkarA-jhINI sAkara bane, (7) azuddha sAkaranA gaTTA-piMDA thAya, (8) ane
chevaTe zuddha sAkaranA cosalA-khaDI sAkara (Refined crystallised sugar) bane.
Ama zuddha sAkaranI avasthAe pahoMcatAM pahelAM judI judI prakriyAmAMthI
(Various processes) pasAra thavuM ja paDe che. temAM zeraDIthI mAMDIne geLa
banavA sudhInI cAra avarathAo barAbara mitrA vagere pahelI cAra daSTie che; ane
khAMDathI khaDI sAkara sudhInI cAra avasthAe barAbara sthira vagere chellI cAra
dRSTi che. eTale jema zuddha sAkaranI banAvaTamAM zeraDIthI mAMDIne badhI
avasthAo khapanI-kAmanI che, tema zuddha Atmasiddhine mATe mitrA dRSTi vagere
avasthAo paNa tevA prakAre upaganI che; kAraNa ke te samyagadaSTinuM kAraNa
thAya che. Ama mitrA vagere dRSTine atre gadaSTimAM pitA potAnuM yathAyogya
sthAna che ja. A mitrA vagere avasthAo kharekhara ! Isu-zeraDI vagere jevI che,
kAraNa ke temAMthI saMvegarUpa mAdhunI-mIThAzanI prApti thAya che. mULa zeraDI
ja na hoya te rasa kyAMthI nIkaLe? rasa na hoya to goLa vagere kema bane ? mIThI
sAkara kema nIpaje ? paNa A mitrA vagere te zeraDI vagere jevI hoI, temAMthI
avazya paramArtha premarUpa rasAdinI niSpatti thAya che, ne mIThI sAkara jevA-
parama amRta jevA saMveganI madhuratAne anubhava thAya che.

Page #145 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Commonality of the Eight Yogadrishtis (79)  On the contrary, those who
are devoid of the eight yogadrishtis are like inert matter, and therefore, they
never experience the sweet nectar of liberation. Just as inert matter, no matter
how much you squeeze it, will not yield any juice, so too, these individuals, no
matter how much they strive, will not experience the sweet nectar of liberation.
They are like inert matter, devoid of the essence of love, and therefore, they
will never experience the sweet nectar of liberation. Even if these individuals
engage in countless material actions devoid of love, or become great scholars by
studying scriptures, they will never change their nature. Just as a snake does
not become a bird by drinking milk, these individuals will never change their
nature. Because the seed of love never sprouts in their hearts. Therefore, they
are unfit for liberation, and hence, they are called "abhavya" (devoid of the
eight yogadrishtis).   Therefore, according to the principle of "arthapatti"
(inference), such individuals are also unfit to attain the eight yogadrishtis,
because if they were to attain them, they would no longer be "abhavya". Only
those who are "bhavya" (worthy) can attain the eight yogadrishtis, not those who
are "abhavya".  **Abhavya** **Unworthy**  **The Diminishment of Yogadrishtis in
the Resultant Soul:**  As the different dristi (perspectives) evolve and change,
the pure soul emerges and manifests itself. From this, it follows that:  (1) The
eight yogadrishtis do not diminish in the philosophy of the "aparinama" (non-
transformational) soul, which believes that the soul is eternally unchanging.
(2) Similarly, the eight yogadrishtis do not diminish in the philosophy of the
"kshanika" (momentary) soul, which believes that the soul is momentary. This is
because, according to their belief, there is no transformation or evolution of
the soul.  This is because:  1. If the soul is considered to be eternally
unchanging, then how can the eight yogadrishtis be attained? The eight
yogadrishtis are not possible without transformation, and therefore, they cannot
be attained by a soul that is eternally unchanging. Therefore, either the soul
must be considered to be transformable, or the eight yogadrishtis must be
abandoned.   2. If the eight yogadrishtis are abandoned, then where is the place
for liberation in the philosophy of the non-transformational soul? Their concept
of liberation will become a mere "kalpana" (imagination).  **The Philosophy of
the Eternally Unchanging Soul** **Unacceptable**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ATha yogadRSTinuM sAmAnya thata (79) AthI ulaTu, abhavyA teA nala jevA kharU
jevA che, tethI karIne ja temane koi kALe savegarUpa mAya' nIpajatu' nathI.
'nala'-kharU te sAva nIrasa heAya che. eTale ene game teTale pIle tepaNa
temAMthI rasa nIkaLatA nathI, teA pachI temAMthI mIThI sAkaranI prApti te
kayAMya dUra rahI! tema A abhaLye paNa tevA ja nIrasa, 'kArAdhAkADa ' hoya che,
temane game teTalA edhathI paNa paramA premarUpa rasa upajateA nathI, teA pachI
sa'vegarUpa mIThI sAkaranI AzA kayAMthI hoya? AvA abhavye bhale paramAtha prema
vinAnI nIrasa-sAva sukkI evI anaMta dravya kriyA karyA kare, athavA tA khUba
zAstro bhaNI meATA paDita zrutadhara bane, paNa tee pAtAnI prakRtine kadI
cheADatA nathI, -geoLavALu dUdha pIne sApa niSi thAya nahi' tema.' kAraNa ke
teonA hRdayamAM- aMtarAtmAmAM kadI paNa paramA rasanA aMkura phuTatA nathI. Ama
hAvAthI tee meAkSamAga pAmavAne sathA ayeAgya che, eTalA mATe ja te 'abhavya
kahevAya che. eTale arthAMpattinyAyathI tevA puruSA A mitrA vagere dRSTi
pAmavAne paNa yAgya nathI heAtA, kAraNa ke jo te pAme teA te abhavya ' kayAMthI
rahe? A mitrA vagere dRSTi pAme te bhavya ja hAya, abhavya heAya ja nahi'. *
abhavyA apAtra -: pariNAmI AtmAmAM ja yAgadRSTinuM ghaTamAnapaNuM :-- Ama jUdI
jUdI STionu tevA tevA prakAre pariNamana thatAM thatAM, avasthAe badalAtAM
badalAtAM, zuddha AtmArUpa vastune AvirbhAva thAya che, pragaTapaNuM siddha
thAya che. A uparathI vaLI A phalita thAya che ke-- (1) je sarvathA apariNAmI-
pariNAma nahiM pAmate evo AtmA mAne che, evA ariNAmI AtmavAdamAM A kahyo te
dRSTibheda ghaTatA nathI. tema ja, (2 ) je sarvathA kSaNika evA AtmA mAne che,
evA kSaNika AtmavAdamAM pazu ukta dRSTibheda ghaTatA nathI. kAraNa ke temanA ja
abhiprAya pramANe, tathAprakAranu bhavana-pariNamana ghaTatuM nathI. te A
prakAre : 1. jo sarvathA apariNAmI eTale ekAMta nitya ja AtmA mAnavAmAM Ave, te
uttarAttara dRSTinA lAbha kayAMthI thaze ? te te dRSTie tathArUpa pariNamana
vinA sa bhavatI nathI, eTale apariNAmI smAtmAmAM tathArUpa pariNamana vinA te te
dRSTi kayAMthI Ave ? mATe kAM tA pirAmI AtmA mAnavA paDaze, ne kAM te A
cAgadRSTi lAbha cheDI deve paDaze. ane A lAbha jo jatA karyAM, te pachI A
ariNAmavAdInu' yAgamAga mAM sthAna kayAM raheze ? teee mukti athe kalpelA yAgamA
paNa 'kalpanAmAtra bhadraka' thai paDaze ! kalpanAmAtra Na muyai paryADamabhacvA
suhRSi aJjhAiUNa satthANi  /  zutuddhaviniyaMtA na maLayA bitrisA dhruti --zrI
kuMdakuMdAcArya chakRta samayasAr ekAMta apari NAmI vAda ayukta *

Page #146 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(80) The yogadristi samuchaya will seem crude! They will have no place to stand
in this yogamarga, because in this aparinaami vaad, the main benefit of bhav-
moksha will not diminish, either bhav or moksha, one of these two states will
remain. If they believe that only the bhav state remains, then the purpose of
the moksha sadhak yogamarga will fail; and if they believe that only the moksha
state remains, then where is the need for this moksha sadhak gamarga? Thus, many
evils like kritnash and akritagam will arise. Therefore, this ekant aparinaami
vaad - ekant foot-standing nitya atma is inappropriate. " एवं च योगमार्गोऽपि
मुक्तये या प्रकल्प्यते  /  सोडव निर्विवत्त जपनामात्रमः | "- (See) Yogabindu, 0
478-489. One says that the atma tattva is nitya, taking the atma darisan;
kritvinash akritagam dusan, does not see in the mind.-Shri Anandghanaji 2.
Sarvatha kshanikvaad means that the atma is considered to be ekant anitya, then
whose parinaman will happen without an akhand ek vastu? After the kshan, that
atma will be destroyed, so there will be no vastu, then how will this yogadristi
kshanikvaad be attained without that parinaman? It is inappropriate to believe
in the anusandhan-anvaya of kshan after kshan, so kshanikvaad must be abandoned.
Thus, either the parinaami atma must be considered as an ek nitya akhand vastu,
or the yogadristi must be benefited itself. If this yogadristi is benefited,
then kshanikvaad will have no place to stand in the gamarga; bandh-moksha,
sukha-duhkha, etc. arrangements will not diminish. Saugat mati ragi says vaadi,
kshanik is the atma, knows; bandh moksha sukha duhkha does not diminish, this
thought brings the mind.”–Shri Anandghanaji  Again, knowing that which is
kshanik, the one who says, that speaker is not kshanik, from that experience, it
is also certain that the atma is nitya. Never is anything completely destroyed,
only its state changes. And what does the chetan merge into, when it is
destroyed in the form of state change? Investigate that. x “क्षलिाडं तु नैवारा
जादूर्व विना रातः | बचश्यामवाडरिव्यथडवंचमावतः || ”—(See) Gabindu, Shlo 458-477.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
(80) yogadaSTi samucaya rUDo lAgaze! teone A yogamArgamAM ubhavAnuM sthAna ja
nahiM rahe, kAraNa ke A apariNAmI vAdamAM bhava-mokSano mukhya bheTa paNa
ghaTaze nahiM, kAM to bhava ne kAM to mokSa e bemAMthI eka ja avasthA raheze. jo
eka bhava avasthA ja rahe che ema mAnaze, to mokSasAdhaka yugamArganuM projana
niSphaLa thaze; ne je eka mekSa avasthA ja rahe che ema mAnazo te pachI A
makSasAdhaka gamArganI jarUra ja kyAM rahI? Ama kRtanAza ane akRtAgama vagere
aneka dUSaNa Avaze. eTale A ekAMta apariNAmavAda-ekAMta phUTastha nitya AtmA
mAno te ayukta che. " evaM ca yogamArgo'pi muktaye yA prakalpyate / soDava
nirvivatta japanAmAtramaH | "- juo) yogabindu, 0 478-489. eka kahe nitya ja
Atamatatva, Atama darisaNa lIne; kRtavinAza akRtAgama dUSaNa, navi dekhe
matihI.-zrI AnaMdaghanajI 2. sarvathA kSaNikavAda eTale AtmAne je ekAMta anitya
ja mAnavAmAM Ave, te akhaMDa eka vastu vinA pariNamana konuM thaze? kSaNa pachI
te AtmA vinAza pAmI jaze, eTale vastu ja nahiM rahe, to pachI tathArUpa
pariNamana vinA A yogadaSTi kSaNikavAda paNa kone prApta thaze? kSaNa pachI
kSaNanuM anusaMdhAna-anvaya mAnavAmAM ayukta Ave, te kSaNikavAda cheDI devo
paDaze. Ama kAM te pariNAmI AtmAne eka nitya akhaMDa vasturUpa mAnave paDaze, ne
kAM to egadaSTine lAbha jAte karavo paDaze. A gadaSTino lAbha je ja karyo, te
gamArgamAM kSaNikavAdane ubhavAnuM sthAna ja raheze nahiM; baMdha-mekSa, sukha-
duHkha Adi vyavasthA paNa ghaTaze nahi. saugata mati rAgI kahe vAdI, kSaNika e
Atama jANe; baMdha mokSa sukha duHkha na ghaTe, eha vicAra mana ANe."-zrI
AnaMdaghanajI vaLI je kSaNika che ema jANIne je kahe che, te kahenAre pote
kSaNika nathI, e anubhavathI paNa AtmA nitya che ema nizcaya thAya che. kyAreya
paNa kaI paNa vastuno kevaLa sarvathA nAza thatuM nathI, mAtra avasthAMtara
thAya che. ane cetanane je avasthAMtararUpa nAza thatuM hoya te te kemAM bhaLe?
te tapAsI juo. x "kSaLiADaM tu naivArA jAdUrva vinA rAtaH |
bacazyAmavADarivyathADavaMcamAvataH || "--(juo) gabindu, zla0 458-477.

Page #147 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The general statement of the eight yogadrishtis (81) or the knowledge of the
momentary, which is known by the speaker; the speaker does not consider it
momentary, but determines it by experience. When, what thing, is only not
destroyed; the conscious one is destroyed, in what does it merge? Investigate.”
– Shrimad Rajchandraji-pranita Shri Atmasiddhi Parinamivad Yuka + Thus, whether
the soul is considered to be eternally solitary or momentarily solitary, this
yogadrishti does not diminish in that faction. Therefore, by the Artha-patti
Nyaya, “It is possible to have a yogamarga by the concordance of the state
differences in the soul which has a small number of synonyms.” The soul is
eternally from the substance, and it changes from the synonym – from the state
transition, it is momentary, its manifest example-strength, the knowledge of the
three states of youth and old age occurs to the same person. The soul substance
is eternal, it changes by the synonym, the three ages of childhood, etc., the
knowledge occurs to one. – Shri Atmasiddhi Thus, if the soul principle is
considered to be parinamivad, then this yogadrishti, which is of the nature of
parinamana, and the entire occurrence of the yogamarga, occurs without any
doubt, as is evident from the above. Let it be! Be it as it may! Now we proceed
with the “umilan” of the yogadrishti, then it will be known automatically what
the soul principle is. There is no scope for debate in it. And this “drishti” is
common to all yogis, therefore, it is said to show those who are of a certain
type, in the way they are – यमादियोगयुक्तानां खेदादिपरिहारतः  /
अद्वेषादिगुणस्थानं क्रमेणैषा सतां मता  //  16  //  Vritti: – Those who are
united with yama, etc., with speed. Here, “yama”, etc., are called “ga” due to
being a limb of yoga. It is said that – “chamanavamasanapranayama tyaradhara
dhyanama dabdavakania” (Patanjal Yoga Sutra 2, 29). “Yama, niyama, asana,
pranayama, pratyahara, dharana, dhyana and samadhi are the eight limbs.” Thus,
yama, etc., are due to the removal (part) of the intentions which are opposite
to the practice of yoga. And these intentions are also eight. And in that way,
it is said that – + “Nasato vidyate bhavo nabhavo vidyate sat:। Umara
datattvanachattrashimi:”—Gita *"Parinaminiyata nitiya chitra bhaave tathaatmani
//  Avsthamelatya malya hammar: »–Shragbindi

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
ATha yugadaSTinuM sAmAnya kathana (81) athavA jJAna kSaNikanuM, je jANI
vadanAra; vadanAre te kSaNika nahiM, kara anubhava nirdhAra. kyAre kaI vastune,
kevaLa hoya na nAza; cetana pAme nAza te, kemAM bhaLe? tapAsa." -zrImad
rAjacaMdrajIpraNIta zrI Atmasiddhi pariNamIvAda ja yukta +Ama ekAMta nitya ke
ekAMta anitya AtmA mAnavAmAM Ave, te te pakSamAM A gadaSTi lAbharUpa yogamArga
ghaTato nathI. eTale arthapatti nyAyathI "nAnA prakAranA paryAyavALA pariNamI
AtmAmAM * avasthAbhedanI saMgativaDe karIne bhegamArgane saMbhava che." AtmA
dravyathI nitya che, ne paryAyathI-avasthAMtarathI palaTAya che, anitya che,
tenuM pragaTa daSTAMta-bala, yuvAna ne vRddha e traNe avasthAnuM jJAna eka ja
puruSane thAya che. Atma dravya nitya che, paryAye palaTAya bAlAdi vaya
traNyanuM, jJAna ekane thAya."--zrI Atmasiddhi Ama pariNAmI Atmatattva mAnavAmAM
Ave te ja temAM A tathArUpa pariNamanavALI yogadaSTi ne gamArganI samasta
ghaTanA avikalapaNe ghaTe che, ema A uparathI phalita thayuM. astu ! e game tema
ho! ApaNe have yogadaSTi"nA " umIlana' sAthe AgaLa vadhIe, eTale e Atmatattva
kevuM che, tenI ApoApa khabara paDaze. emAM vAdavivAdane avakAza nathI. ane A
"daSTi' sakala gidazanene sAdhAraNa che, eTalA mATe jevAone jevA prakAre hoya
che, tevAone tevA prakAre kahI batAvavA mATe kahe che - yamAdiyogayuktAnAM
khedAdiparihArataH / adveSAdiguNasthAnaM krameNaiSA satAM matA // 16 // vRttiH-
camArA yuvAna-yama vagere vegathI yuktane. ahIM "yama" vagere, yoganA aMgapaNane
lIdhe "ga" kahevAya che. kahyuM che ke - "camanavamAsanaprANAyAma tyAAradhArA
dhyAnamA DabdAvakAniA" (pAtaMjala ye. sU. 2, 29). " yama, niyama, Asana,
prANAyAma, pratyAhAra, dhAraNA, dhyAna ane samAdhi e ATha aMga che." te ema yama
vagere, yoganA pratyanIka-virodhI evA AzayonA parihAra (bhAga) vaDa karIne hoya
che. ane A Azaya paNa ATha ja che. ane tevA prakAre kahyuM che ke - + " nAsato
vidyate bhAvo nAbhAvo vidyate st:| umarA dAttatvanacattarAzimi :"--gItA
*"pariNAminyatA nItyA citrabhAve tathAtmani // avasthAmela tyA mAlya haMmara:
>>-zragabinda

Page #148 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(82) The collection of eight *dṛṣṭis* (perspectives), starting with *mitrā
dṛṣṭi* and ending with *sādhāraṇa dṛṣṭi*, are attained by those who are endowed
with *yama* (restraint) etc., and who have abandoned *bheda* (discrimination)
etc., and who have cultivated the *guṇa-sthānas* (stages of virtue) starting
with *adveṣa* (non-hatred). This is the view of the saints.   **Explanation:**
These eight *dṛṣṭis* are attained by yogis who are endowed with the eight limbs
of *yoga*, namely *yama*, *niyama*, etc. In other words, (1) where *yama*, the
first limb of *yoga*, is present, there is the first *dṛṣṭi*, *mitrā dṛṣṭi*.
Where *niyama*, the second limb of *yoga*, is present, there is the second
*dṛṣṭi*, *tārā dṛṣṭi*. And so on, understand the mutual relationship between the
eight.   Similarly, (2) there are eight types of evil intentions and mental
states, namely *kheda* (regret), *udvega* (anxiety), etc. When these eight are
abandoned, the eight limbs of *yoga* are attained in succession. Thus, when
*bheda* is abandoned, the first limb of *yoga*, *yama*, and the first *dṛṣṭi*,
*mitrā dṛṣṭi*, are attained. When *udvega* is abandoned, the second limb of
*yoga*, *niyama*, and the second *dṛṣṭi*, *tārā dṛṣṭi*, are attained, and so on.
And (3) these eight *dṛṣṭis* are the stages of the virtues *adveṣa* (non-
hatred), *jijñāsā* (inquiry), etc. Thus, the first *dṛṣṭi*, *mitrā dṛṣṭi*, is
the stage where the virtue *adveṣa* manifests, and the second *dṛṣṭi*, *tārā
dṛṣṭi*, is the stage where the virtue *jijñāsā* manifests. And so on, connect
the relationship between the eight.   "Those who are wise should abandon the
mind that is attached to *kheda* (regret), *udvega* (anxiety), *lepa*
(attachment), *utthāna* (arising), *bhranti* (delusion), *anyamudra* (other-
mindedness), and *sanga* (attachment)."  Therefore, these eight *dṛṣṭis* are
attained by abandoning *kheda* (regret) etc., and they are also the stages of
the virtues *aṣa* (non-attachment) etc. This is because there are also eight of
these. It has been said:  "There are eight types of activities in the path of
liberation: 1. *aṣa* (non-attachment), 2. *jijñāsā* (inquiry), 3. *śuśruṣā*
(service), 4. *śravaṇa* (listening), 5. *bheda* (discrimination), 6. *mīmāṁsā*
(reflection), 7. *pariśuddha pratipatti* (pure understanding), and 8. *pravṛtti*
(activity)."  Thus, these eight *dṛṣṭis* are accepted by the saints, such as the
sage Patañjali, the venerable Bhākarabhandu, the venerable Antava, etc. We will
explain the complete details of each *dṛṣṭi* in due course.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
(82) gadakTisamucaya yamAdi gayutane thaye, bedAdi parihAra adveSAdi guNasthAna
A, saMta saMmata kramavAra, 16. artha -kheda AdinA parihArathI-tyAgathI yama Adi
vegathI yukta evA janane anukrame adveSAdi guNanuM sthAna, evI A daSTi tene
saMmata che. vivecana je A ATha daSTi kahI, te anukrame yama-niyama vagere emanA
ATha aMgathI yukta yogIone hoya che. eTale ke (1) jyAM veganuM prathama aMga
yama hoya, tyAM prathama mitrA dRSTi hoya che; jyAM yoganuM bIjuM aMga niyama
hoya, tyAM bIjI 8 gAMga tArA dRSTi hoya che. ema yAvat AThene paraspara
saMbaMdha samaja. tema 8 cittadeSa ja-(2) kheda, udvega, vagere ATha prakAranA
duSTa Azaya-cittavRtti che, 8 guNa tene tyAga karavAmAM AvatAM, anukrame yeganAM
ATha aMganI prApti thAya che. eTale pahelA beda deSane tyAga thatAM, yeganuM
paheluM aMga yama ane pahelI mitrA dRSTi hoya che; bIjA udvega deSane tyAga
thatAM, yeganuM bIjuM aMga niyama ane bIjI tArA daSTi hoya che, ItyAdi. ane (3)
A ATha daSTi anukrame adveSa, jijJAsA vagere guNanuM sthAna che. eTale pahele
adveSa guNa pragaTavAnuM sthAna pahelI mitrA heSTi hoya che, bIje jijJAsA guNa
pragaTavAnuM sthAna bIjI tArA dRSTi hoya che. arthAt pahelI mitrA daSTimAM Ama
pahele adveSa guNa pragaTe che, bIjI tArA daSTimAM bIje jijJAsA guNa pragaTe
che. yAvat AThene saMbaMdha joDe. "khedo
dvegakSepotthAnabhrAntyanyamudrugAsaGgai / yuktAni hi cittAni prapaJcatA
varjayenmatimAn // " kheda, udvega, lepa, utthAna, bhrAMti, anyamudda, saga (
rega)ne AsaMgathI (Asakita) yukta cittane matimAna nizcaya karIne prapaMcathI va
choDI dIe. tethI ema, dAta :- te kheda AdinA parihArathI-tyAgathI paNa krame
karIne A dRSTi ATha prakAranI che. A dRSTi vADhirLasthAna-aSAdi guNanuM sthAna
che eTalA mATe paNa ema che, kAraNa ke A paNa ATha che. kahyuM che ke : "
vijJAsA suzraSA zravanAthamAnatA : | parizuddhA pratipattiH pravRttiraSTAtmikA
tattve // " 1. aSa, 2. jijJAsA, 3. zuzraSA, 4. zravaNa, 5. bedha, 6. mImAMsA, 7.
parizuddha pratipatti 8. pravRtti-ema taravamAM ATha prakAranI pravRtti che. ema
meLa-krame karIne puSa-A saddaSTi satAM-saMtane, munione-bhagavata pataMjali,
bhadaMta bhAkarabaMdhu, bhagavata aMtava (?) Adi yogIone, mA-iSTa-saMmata che.
ane enuM sAkaya-saMpUrNa vistAra pratyeka dRSTimAM ame darzAvazuM.

Page #149 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## General Statement of Eight Yogadrishti:  The eight limbs of yoga are the
eight Yogadrishti, eight Yanga Anga, eight Desh Tyaga, and eight Gunasthan,
which are interconnected. The first Dristi has the first Yoga Anga, the first
Chitta Desh Tyaga, and the first Gun's attainment. This is how it should be
understood. This way, the Bhangi decreases. Here, Yama, etc., are in the form of
limbs, so they are called "G".   **Keshtak-3**  | Dristi | Anga | Desh Tyaga,
Gunasthan | Visheshta | |---|---|---|---| | Yama | Kheda | Advesha | Trun
Agnikan Mithyatva Niyam | | Niyam | Uga | Jijnaasa Gamaya Anikun | Asan | | Asan
| Kshepa Shushrusha | Kasht Agnikan Tara Bala | Pranayama Uthan Shravan Deep
Prabha Deeka | | Pranayama | Stira | Pratyahar | Branti Bodha Ratna Prabha | |
Pratyahar | Sammafataw Kanta Dharan Anyamudda | Mimansa Tara Prabha Prabha |
Dhyan Goo (Rog) Pratipatti - Surya Prabha | | Dhyan | Para | Samadhi | Asanga
Pravritti | Chandra Praman - Yoga's eight limbs' form |  **1. Yama:** Also
called Vrat. There are five: Ahimsa, Satya, Asteya, Brahmacharya, Aparigraha.
Each has four types due to their intensity: Ichchhayam, Pravrittiyam, Stiriyam,
Siddhiyam.  **2. Niyam:** Shaucha, Santosha, Tap, Swadhyay, and Ishwar Dhyan are
the five Niyams.  **3. Asan:** From the material, the body's agility is stopped,
and it becomes stable in one place, like Padmasana, Virasana, etc. From the
feeling, it is the Asan of the other feeling - Adhyas - leaving the sitting,
sitting in the feeling of the self - doing the sitting is Asan.  **4.
Pranayama:** The gross physical Pranayama named Hag's action is not desired
here. Because in it, the air is expelled (Rechan), filled (Puran), and
stabilized like water in a pitcher (Kumbhan); these processes are the body's...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
ATha yogadaSTinuM sAmAnya kathanaH yoganA ATha aMga Ama A ATha yogadaSTi, ATha
yaMga aMga, ATha deSa tyAga, ne ATha guNasthAnane anukrame paraspara saMbaMdha
che. pahelI daSTimAM paheluM yogaaMga, pahelA citta deSano tyAga, pahelA guNanI
prApti hoya che. ema yAvat AnuM samajavuM. Ama A bhaMgI ghaTe che. ahIM yamaAdi
bheganA aMgarUpa che tethI tene "ga" kahyA che. keSTaka-3 gadaSTi | mitrA gaaMga
| doSatyAga, guNasthAna che bedhanI upamA | vizeSatA yama | kheda | adveSa |
tRNa agnikaNa mithyAtva niyama | uga | jijJAsA gamaya anikaNuM Asana | kSepa
zuzruSA ! kASTha agnikaNa tArA balA prANAyAma uthAna zravaNa dIpa prabhA dIkA
sthirA | pratyAhAra | brAMti | bodha | ratnaprabhA | sammaphatava kAMtA dhAraNa
anyamudda mImAMsA tArA prabhA prabhA dhyAna gU (roga) pratipatti - sUrya prabhA
| parA | samAdhi | AsaMga | pravRtti | caMdra pramANa - yoganA ATha aMganuM
svarUpa - 1. yama-tene vrata paNa kahe che. te pAMca che-ahiMsA, satya, asteya,
brahmacarya, aparigraha. te pratyekanA paNa taratamatAnA kAraNe cAra prakAra
che: IcchAyAma, pravRttiyama, sthirayama, siddhiyama, 2. niyama-zauca, saMtoSa,
tapa, svAdhyAya ne IzvaradhyAna-e pAMca niyama che. 3. Asana-dravyathI kAyAnI
capaLatA rokI eka sthAne sthiratArUpa padma, vIra Adi Asana. bhAvathI te
parabhAvanuM Asana-adhyAsa-beThaka choDI, AtmabhAvamAM besavuM-beThaka karavI te
Asana. 4. prANAyAma-sthUla zArIrika prANAyAma nAmanI haganI kriyA atra ISTa
nathI. kAraNa ke temAM vAyune bahAra kADhavAmAM Ave che (recana ), pUravAmAM Ave
che (pUraNa) ane kuMbhamAM pANInI jema sthira karavAmAM Ave che (kuMbhana); A A
prakriyAo zarIra

Page #150 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(84) The accumulation of bodily perception is laborious and causes the mind to
be fickle, hence it is a high form of affliction. Therefore, this external
pranayama is not intended here. Here, the spiritual-feeling pranayama is
presented - in which the feeling that goes towards external objects is expelled,
purged, and defeated, which is the expelling action. In this, the internal
feeling is filled - the feeling of the inner self is filled, which is the
filling action, and that stable state of the inner self is the kumbhaka action.
This feeling pranayama, which is the nature of the self, is desired in the
spiritual path of yoga. "External feeling expelling here, filling internal
feeling; kumbhaka stability by virtue, pranayama nature... Manmohan Jinji! Sweet
is your word." - Shri Gadh D. Sajay 5. Pratyahara - withdrawing the senses from
the objects of the senses is pratyahara. Not connecting the senses to the five
objects of the senses is pratyahara. "The senses do not connect with the objects
of the senses, that is pratyahara." - Shri Yoga Sajay 6. Dharana -
"Rerayashchitt Dhana" (Pa. Che.) Holding the mind to a place is dharana. Holding
the mind to a limited place, such as the contemplation of a certain element, is
dharana. 7. Dhyana - "Tatra Prachaijatana Dhyana" In it, the unity of perception
is dhyana. Dhyana is the cessation of the fluctuating thoughts of the mind. To
contemplate the nature of the self with one-pointedness is dhyana. 8. Samadhi -
To become the nature of the self, to attain the truth, to be absorbed in the
truth is samadhi. Where there is no difference between the meditator, the
meditation, and the object of meditation, all three become one, that is samadhi.
"The meditator, meditation, and object of meditation are one, we will now cut
the difference..." - Shri Yashovijayji - Eight Ashya Desha: When the mind, which
is afflicted with the eight afflictions, abandons the evil intentions, then the
corresponding vision is attained. When the first affliction is abandoned, the
first vision of friendship is attained, and so on. It is essential for the soul,
which is full of intellect, to remove these afflictions with all its efforts,
because victory of the mind is necessary for the attainment of liberation, and
these eight afflictions hinder that victory. When these afflictions are removed,
the virtues manifest. Its concise form is as follows: 1. To become tired, to
become tired while progressing on the auspicious path. When this affliction is
removed, the vision of friendship is attained.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
(84) gadaSTisamuccaya AyAsarUpa ane manane caMcalatAkAraNarUpa hAI kalezarUpa
thAya che, mATe A bAhya prANAyAma atre vivakSita nathI. atre te AdhyAtmika-bhAva
prANAyAma ja prastuta che-ke jemAM bAhya bhAva-paravastu bhaNI jatA bhAvane reca
devAmAM Ave che, julAba devAya che, hAra kaDhAya che tevI recakakriyA hoya che,
jemAM aMtabhAva pUrAya che-aMtarAtmabhAva bharAya che, te-rUpa pUraka kriyA ane
te aMtarAtmabhAvanI sthiratArUpa kuMbhaka kriyA hoya che. A AtmasvabhAvarUpa
bhAvaprANAyAma ja atre adhyAtmarUpa yogamArgamAM ISTa che. "bAhya bhAva recaka
IhAMjI, pUraka aMtara bhAva; kuMbhaka thiratA guNe karIcha, prANAyAma
svabhAva... manamohana jinajI ! mIThI tAharI vANa" zrI gaDha da. sajhAya 5.
pratyAhAra-viSayavikAromAMthI idrine pAchI kheMcavI te pratyAhAra, paMca
viSayanA vikAromAM indriyone na joDavI te pratyAhAra. viSayavikAre na indriya
joDe, te IhAM pratyAhArejI, "-zrI yoga sajhAya 6. dhAraNA-"rerAyazcitta dhANA "
(pA. ce.) cittane dezabaMdha te dhAraNuM. cittane amuka tatvaciMtanAdi maryAdita
sthaLe dhArI rAkhavuM-bAMdhI rAkhavuM, rokI rAkhavuM te dhAraNA. 7. dhyAna-tatra
pracaijatAnA dhyAna " temAM pratyayanI ekatAnatA te dhyAna. ekAgra cittavRttino
niSedha kare te dhyAna. tatvasvarUpane ekAgrapaNe dhyAvavuM te dhyAna. 8.
samAdhi-AtmatatvarUpa ja thaI javuM, tatvane pAmavuM, tatvamAM lIna thaI javuM
te samAdhi. jyAM dhyAtA, dhyAna ne dhyeyane bheda rahe nahi, traNeya ekarUpa
thaI jAya, te samAdhi. dhyAtA dhyAna dhyeya guNa eke, bheda cheda karazuM have
Teke..."--zrI yazovijayajI - ATha Azaya deSa :ATha daSathI yukta Azayane-cittane
duSTa adhyavasAyane jyAre choDI dIe, tyAre anukrame te te dRSTinI prApti heya
che. pahele deSa cheDatAM, pahelI mitrA dRSTi hoya che, ItyAdi. matimAna AtmAthI
jIve jema bane tema sarva prayAsathI te te doSa dUra karavA Avazyaka che, kAraNa
ke ganI siddhimAM mananA jayanI jarUra che, ne majayamAM A ATha doSa naDe che.
te deSa TaLe te guNa pragaTe. tenuM saMkSepa svarUpa A pramANeH 1. kheda thAkI
javuM te zubha sanmArge pravartatAM thAkavuM te. te deSa dUra thatAM mitrA daSTi
hoya che.

Page #151 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Eight Obstacles to Right Conduct: A General Explanation:  **1. Aversion
(Gaddvesha):**  Aversion is a state of weariness arising from eight types of
aversion (85). This weariness leads to a lack of steadfastness in religious
practices, which is essential for spiritual progress, just as water is essential
for agriculture.  "Due to aversion, there is no steadfastness of mind in
religious practices; the main purpose is to attain spiritual progress, just as
water is essential for agriculture." - Shri Anandghanji  **2. Disinterest
(Khed):** Disinterest is a mental aversion or dislike towards virtuous actions.
It arises from a lack of understanding of the true nature of spiritual progress.
This disinterest can manifest even when sitting still, causing agitation and
restlessness. Due to this obstacle, even when performing actions, one rushes
through them like a king's messenger, trying to finish them quickly. "Even when
sitting still, disinterest arises in actions; due to aversion, one performs
actions with the speed of a king's messenger." - Shri Yashovijayji  **3.
Distractedness (Kshepa):** Distractedness is a state of mental agitation and
instability. It involves the mind wandering from one action to another, causing
a lack of focus and concentration. Just as repeatedly pulling up and replanting
seedlings will not yield fruit, distracted actions will not produce pure
results. "The mind wanders to other matters, this is distractedness; just as
repeatedly pulling up and replanting seedlings will not yield fruit, such
distracted actions will not produce pure results." - Shri Yashovijayji  **4.
Apathy (Uthana):** Apathy is a state of disengagement from the path of spiritual
progress. It involves the mind withdrawing from virtuous actions, leading to a
lack of sustained effort. This arises from a lack of inner peace and
tranquility.  The mind may abandon the action, but it cannot be truly
relinquished due to attachment. This is the obstacle of apathy. "Due to a lack
of inner peace, apathy arises; it is not truly relinquished due to attachment."
- Shri Yashovijayji  **5. Delusion (Bhrānti):** Delusion is a state of mental
confusion and misperception. It involves the mind wandering aimlessly, or
mistaking the unreal for the real, like mistaking a shell for silver. This can
lead to performing actions without understanding their true purpose, resulting
in unintended consequences and hindering spiritual progress. "Delusion is like
mistaking a shell for silver; it leads to performing actions without
understanding their true purpose, resulting in unintended consequences and
hindering spiritual progress." - Shri Yashovijayji

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
ATha gadaSTinuM sAmAnya kathAH ATha Azaya deSa (85) kheda pravRtti ho karatAM
thAkIe re."--zrI AnaMdaghanajI AvA khedathI dharmakriyAmAM mananI daDhatA rahetI
nathI, ke je daDhatA, khetImAM pANInI jema, dhamane mukhya hetu che. "kiriyAmAM
bede karI re, daDhatA mananI nAMhi re; mukhya hetu te dhamane re, jema pANI
kRSimahire..prabhu tuja vANI mIThaDI re." -zrI yazovijayajIkRta sA. tra, ga,
sta, 2. uga-sanmArgasAdhaka kriyA pratye mAnasika kaMTALe-aNagama upajo,
sanmAgathI udbhagna thavuM-ubhagavuM te. eTale beThA beThA paNa kriyAmAM udvega-
aNagame upaje che. Ama yoganA TheSane lIdhe, te kriyA kare te paNa rAjaveThanI
jema jhapATAbaMdha ATopI le che-jema tema patAvI de che! beThA paNa je upaje re,
kiriyAmAM udvega, gadveSathI te kriyAre, rAjaTha sama vega reprabhu tuja." 3.
kSepa-cittane vikSepa, asamAdhAna DAmADoLa vRtti. amuka kriyAmAMthI vacce vacce
bIjI kriyAmAM mananuM phekAvuM-cAlyA javuM, jhAMvA-udhAmA te kSepa. jema zAline
UkhaNatAMvAraMvAra UkheDI UkheDIne vAve to phala na thAya, tema AvI kSepavALI
kriyAnuM nirmala phala maLatuM nathI. vice vize bIjA kAjamAM re, jAye mana te
khepa re, UkhaNatAM jima zAlinuM re, phala nahiM tihAM nirlepa re.... prabhu
tuja." 4. utthAna-UThI javuM te uthAna. sanmArgamAMthI eTale ke mokSasAdhaka
yugamAga kiyAmAMthI cittanuM UThI javuM te utthAna. Ama thavAnuM kAraNa
zAMtavAhitAne eTale ke cittanA eka akhaMDa zAMta pravAhano abhAva che. AvA
TharelapaNAnA abhAve jyAMthI mana UThI gayuM che evI te gakriyA choDI devA gya
che; paNa kalajajAdithI cheDI zakAtI nathI. A uthAna deSa che. mamatathI te
pakaDI rAkhe, A uthAna deSa che. zAMtavAhitA viNa have re, je ge utthAna re;
tyAgaga che tehathI re, aNachaDAtuM dhyAna re.....prabhu tuja." 5. bhrAMti-
bhamavuM te, bhrama upaja che. prastuta gakriyAne choDI cittanuM cArekera
bhramaNa-bhrAmaka vRtti, te bhrAMti. athavA chIpamAM rUpAnI jema bhramaNa thavI,
tatvane atava mAnavArUpa viparyAsa thavo te bhrAMti athavA amuka kriyA karI ke
na karI e bhramathI na sAMbhare, eTale evI zubha kriyAthakI paNa arthavirodhI
evuM akAja thAya, ISTa phalarUpa paramArtha kArya na thAya. Ama bhrAMtinuM
svarUpa che.

Page #152 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(86) The one who does not understand the true nature of the soul due to the
delusion of *gadsamurchay*, performs actions that are considered both done and
undone. Such actions are contradictory to the true purpose of *shubh kiriya* and
are like burning coals.  ...O Lord! 6. *Anyamud* - Finding joy in something
other than the true nature of the soul.  It is like finding joy in something
other than the true self, or ignoring the actions that have been started and
finding joy in something else. This is like a shower of burning coals on the
true purpose of the soul.  Ignoring the actions that have been started, finding
joy in something else, knowing the true purpose of the soul, is like a shower of
burning coals...O Lord! 7. *G* - Disease, *rag-dvesh-meh* (attachment, aversion,
and delusion) are the three poisons that cause great suffering.  Or, performing
actions without true understanding leads to the destruction of pure actions.
This creates a *g* that is painful and like a disease.  The fruit of such impure
actions is barren.  Without understanding, with *rag* (attachment), pain and
destruction are the result.  The destruction of pure actions leads to barren
fruit...O Lord! 8. *Asang* - Attachment.  Attachment to external objects and
influences, or becoming attached to a particular action due to its
attractiveness, is *asang*.  The one who performs an action, becomes attached to
it, thinking "this is beautiful," and gets stuck in it, becoming attached to it.
This is the *asang* fault, because the soul gets stuck in one place, unable to
move forward, and progress is not made.  Therefore, the beautiful fruit of
liberation is not attained.  Becoming attached to an action due to its
attractiveness, getting stuck in one place, leads to the inability to attain the
fruit...O Lord!  Thus, in the practice of the path of liberation, the mind
initially experiences discouragement, fatigue, and lack of determination.  This
leads to anxiety, aversion, and forced effort like a slave.  This causes mental
disturbance, instability, and the mind wanders.  These eight faults cause the
mind to wander from the task at hand, and it becomes restless, wandering in all
directions.  As it wanders, it finds pleasure in something else, leading to
*anyamud*.  This destroys pure actions, causing pain and destruction, making the
actions weak, and leading to attachment to a particular place.  "I will only go
to Dwarka!"  Thus, these eight faults can be understood in relation to each
other.  As these faults are overcome, the eight virtues of the soul emerge and
become manifest.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
(86) gadasimuricaya bhramathI jeha na sAMbhare re, kAMI akRta kRta kAja re;
tehathI zubha kiriyAthakI re, arthavirodhI akAja re....prabhu tuja." 6.
anyamudda-bIje ThekANe AnaMda-moda pAme che. Atmatatva karatAM anya sthaLe
AnaMdita thavuM te anyamud, athavA Ama mAMDelI gakriyA avagaNane bIje ThAme
harSa dharavo, te paramArtharUpa ISTa kArya mAM aMgArAnA varasAda jevo che.
mAMDI kiriyA avagaNI re, bIje ThAme harSa, ISTa arthamAM jANIye re, aMgArAne
varSa re....prabhu tuja." 7. ga--roga, rAga-dveSa-meha e tridoSarUpa mahAraga-
bhAvaroga athavA sAcI samajaNa vinA kriyA karavAmAM Ave, te zuddha kiyAne ucheda
thAya, eTale zuddha kriyAne pIDArUpa athavA laMgarUpa evo "ga" upaje. AvI
regiSTa azuddha kriyAnuM phala vAMjhiyuM che. rega hoye samajaNa vinA re, pIDA-
bhaMga surUpa re; zuddha kriyA uchedathI re, teha vadhya phalarUpa re...prabhu
tuja." 8. AsaMga-Asakti. paradravya tathA parabhAvanA saMgamAM Asakti upajavI te
athavA amuka eka ja gakriyAnA sthAnamAM raMga lAgavAthI, te sthAnamAM ja-te ja
kriyAmAM Asakti thaI javI te AsaMga che. je kriyA karato hoya, temAM "Idameva
suMdara' Aja suMdara che-rUDuM e je raMga lAgave, temAM ja guMdarIA thaIne
cuMTayA rahevuM, te AsaMga doSa che, kAraNa ke ema eka ja sthaLe jIva je cUMTI
rahe-maMDayo rahe, te pachI tyAM ja guNaThANe sthiti rahe, AgaLa na vadhe,
pragati (Progress) na thAya. tethI paramArtharUpa suMdara phaLa (mokSa) na maLe.
eka ja ThAme raMgathI re, kiriyAmAM AsaMga re; teha ja guNaThANe thiti re,
tehathI phala nahIM caMga re....prabhu tuja." Ama sanmArgarUpa gamArganI
sAdhanAmAM cittane prathama kheda upaje, thAka lAge, daDhatA na rahe, eTale
temAM udvega upaje-aNagame Ave, veThIAnI jema parANe kare. ethI karIne
cittavikSepa thAya, DAmADoLa vRtti upaje, mana bIje bIje doDyA kare. ATha daSanI
eTale cAlu kAmamAMthI mana UThI jAya, utthAna thAya, ne cAre kera bhamyA
sakalanA kare, brAMti upaje. ema bhamatAM bhamatAM ke anya sthaLe tene lIjajata
Ave-anyamudra thAya. eTale zuddha kriyAne ucheda thAya, pIDArUpa-bhaMgarUpa rega
lAgu paDe, kiyA mAMdI paDe, ne te amuka sthaLe AsaMga-Asakti upaje, "aDreDI
dvArakA ja thaI jAya! Ama A ATha AzayadaSanI pUrvApara saMbaMdharUpa saMkalanA
ghaTADI zakAya che. te deSa jema jema choDAya, tema tema anukrame ATha daSTirUpa
AtmaguNane AvirbhAva thata jAya che, pragaTapaNuM thatuM jAya che.

Page #153 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Eight Obstacles: A General Statement  The eight obstacles are the eight
qualities of an era (87). Or, in other words, in spiritual terminology, these
obstacles can be reduced to:  1. **Kheda:** Lack of firmness in the practice of
self-realization, leading to regret. 2. **Udveg:** Anxiety and aversion in the
practice. 3. **Chittavikshep:** Distracted mind, leading to running after
external objects and influences. 4. **Uththan:** Rising from the state of self-
awareness. 5. **Branti:** Confusion and wandering in all directions due to
external influences. 6. **Anyamudd:** Finding pleasure and enjoyment in these
external influences. 7. **Tridosha:** The three poisons of attachment, aversion,
and delusion, manifesting as a disease. 8. **Aanang-Aasakti:** Attachment and
clinging to external objects and influences.  These obstacles can be explained
in detail in this way. And these obstacles are interconnected and can be
overcome in the following way:  1. **Dhrudhata:** Firmness of mind in religious
practice, without regret. 2. **Udveg-Anugam:** No anxiety or aversion, no
feeling of being stuck. 3. **Vikshep:** No distraction. 4. **Chitta Uththan:**
The mind does not rise from the practice. 5. **Charo Kor Bham:** No wandering in
all directions. 6. **Anand Prasang:** No occasion for pleasure in other places.
7. **Rag:** No attachment to the action. 8. **Aasakti-Aasang:** No attachment or
clinging to any place.  ## The Eight Qualities  1. **Ash:** Absence of aversion.
The absence of hatred and envy towards the true self is the first quality. It is
the first step on the path of righteousness, the first role. "The first role is
the cause of service, fearlessness, and absence of aversion." "Aversion is the
feeling of dislike." - Avadhoot Shri Anandghanji. Thus, aversion towards the
true self is "Shresh," and the absence of this aversion is "Ash." This is a
negative quality. When it arises, then... 2. **Jijnaasa:** An inner desire,
eagerness, longing, and yearning to know the true self. Then... 3.
**Shushrasha:** A strong desire to listen to the true self. Then... 4.
**Shravan:** The ability to listen to the true self. Then... 5. **Badh:**
Understanding the true self, receiving the teachings, and being convinced.
Then... 6. **Mimaansa:** Deep contemplation, reflection, and analysis of the
knowledge received. Subtle discrimination between what is to be abandoned and
what is to be adopted arises. Then... 7. **Pratipatti:** Deep acceptance and
assimilation of the true self. The true self becomes a firm belief in the heart,
and experience arises. Then...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
ATha gadaSTinuM sAmAnya kathana: yuganA ATha guNa. (87) athavA bIjI rIte
adhyAtma paribhASAmAM A deSa ghaTAvIe te-(1) AtmatattvanI sAdhanAmAM jIvanI
daDhatA na rahe-kheda upaje, (2) te sAdhanAmAM udvega-aNagamA Ave, (3) eTale
cittavikSepa pAmI paravastumAM-parabhAvamAM doDyA kare, udhAmA nAkhe, (4) ane
AtmabhAvamAMthI uThI jAya (utthAna), (5) eTale pachI brAMti-viparyAsa pAmI cAre
kora parabhAvamAM bhamyA kare, (6) ne ema karatAM temAM AnaMda pAme-ramaNatA
anubhave (anyamudda), (7) eTale rAga-dveSa-meharUpa tridoSa-sanipAta (roga) lAgu
paDe, (8) ane paravastumAM- parabhAvamAM AnaMga-Asakti upaje. ItyAdi prakAre AnI
yathAmati ghaTanA karI zakAya che . ane A deSa dUra thavAne kama paNa paraspara
saMkaLAyela che, te A pramANe : (1) dharmakriyAmAM prathama te mananI daDhatA
rahe, kheda na thAya, (2) te udvega-aNa game na upaje, TharUpa na lAge; (3)
eTale vikSepa na upaje, (4) ane citta temAMthI UThI na jAya; (5) eTale cAre kora
bhame nahiM, (6) ane anya sthaLe AnaMdane prasaMga bane nahiM; (7) eTale pachI
kriyAne rega lAgu paDe nahiM, (8) ane amuka sthaLe Asakti-AsaMge paNa upaje
nahiM. - ATha guNanuM svarUpa - 1. adveSa-Sa na hove te aSa. sata tattva pratye
dveSa-matsara abhAva e prathama guNa che, sanmArga zreNInuM prathama pagathiyuM
che, prathama bhUmikA che. "sevana kAraNa pahelI bhUmikA re, abhaya aSa akheda."
"Si arocaka bhAva."--avadhUta zrI AnaMdaghanajI Ama "sa" pratye arucibhAva-
aNagamo te zreSa, ane tevI aruci-aNagamAne abhAva te aSa. A nakArAtmaka
(Negative) paNa guNa che. te upaje te pachI 2. jijJAsA-sat tatvane jANavAnI
aMtaraMga IcchA, utkaMThA, tAlAvelI, tamannA upaje eTale pachI- 3. zuzraSA-
tattvane sAMbhaLavAnI utkaTa icchA pragaTe, eTale pachI- 4. zravaNa-satattvane
sAMbhaLavAnuM bane. eTale pachI- 5. badha-tattvane bedha-jJAna thAya, upadeza
lAge-ceTa, pratibaMdha pAme-bUjhe. eTale pachI- 6. mImAMsA-thayelA tatvabodhanuM
mImAMsana-sUma vicAraNA-ciMtana-UhApoha thAya. heya, upAdeya Adine sUkSma viveka
pragaTe. eTale pachI-- 7. pratipatti-Adeya tatvanuM avagADha grahaNa-aMgIkaraNa
thAya, aMtarAtmAthI tatva vinizcayarUpa mAnyapaNuM thAya, anubhavana thAya.
eTale pachI

Page #154 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(88) Yoga-drishti-samuccaya 8. Activity - Activity in the form of Tattva,
Activity in the form of Tad, Conduct, Observance, Character, and Delight. The
soul delights in its own form. "By nature, activity is complete." - Shri Gadh
Sakzaya "That stable nature, it produces, the name character, it is without
gender...the original path." - Shrimad Rajchandraji Thus, these eight qualities
are progressively less, and they are manifested one by one in the eight
drishtis. Summary: Dehara: (8 Yogaanga) - Yogaanga - Yama, Niyama, Asana,
Pranayama; Pratyahara, Dharana, Dhyana, Samadhi - thus. (8 Dosha) - Dosha -
Khed, Udvega, Kshepa, Utthana; Bhrānti, Anyamud, Reg, Asanga - thus. (8 Guna) -
Advesha, Jijnasa, Shushresha, Shravana, Bedha; Mimansa, Pratipatti, Pravritti,
Guna - thus. (8 Drishti) - Mitra, Tara, Bala, Deeka, Sthira, Kanta, Prabha, Para
- thus. In the first drishti, the first anga is Yama; in the first drishti, the
first guna is Tyaga. In the eight drishtis, there are eight angas in order;
eight doshas are to be avoided, and eight gunas are to be cultivated. Now, to
explain the meaning of the word "drishti", it is said - सच्छ्रद्धासंगतो बोधो
दृष्टिरित्यभिधीयते  /  असत्प्रवृत्तिव्याघातात्सत्प्रवृत्तिपदावहः  //  17  //
Vritti: - Sadruddhavantto Godha - Sat Shraddhasangata Bodha. From this, Asat
Shraddha is called Vyavachched - exception. And here, Asat Shraddha means that
which is outside the scriptures, that which is based on the opinion of the
father, and that which is a kind of Asad Uha-like alternative. From the
alternative of such Asat Shraddha - from its absence - "Sat Shraddhasangata,
that kind of Bodha - Avagama (understanding), what is it? It is -
Drishtihittyamthiyar - "Drishti" is called - Darshan is Drishti, knowing this -
Nishthyapay also, (because there is no Al or Avl in it). From the fruit, this is
what is said.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
(88) yogadaSTisamuccaya 8. pravRtti--tattvarUpa pravRtti, tadrupa pravRtti,
AcaraNa, anuSThAna, cAritra, ramaNa thAya. AtmA svarUpamAM ramaNa kare. "Apa
svabhAve pravRtti pUraNa."--zrI gaDha sakjhAya "te sthira svabhAva te upaje re,
nAma cAritra te aNaliMga...mULa mAraga." -zrImada rAjacaMdrajI Ama A ATha guNone
uttarottara kama che, ane te ATha dRSTimAM anukrame ekekapaNe pragaTe che.
sArAMza-( Summary) : deharA :- (8 yogAMga) -oga aMga-cama niyama ne, Asana
prANAyAma; pratyAhAra ne dhAraNA, dhyAna samAdhi--Ama. ( 8 doSa) -Sa-kheda
udvega ne, kSepa tema utthAna; bhrAMti anyamud rega ne, AsaMge Ima jANa; (8
guNa) -adveSa jijJAsA ane, zuzreSA zravaNa bedha; mImAMsA pratipatti ne,
pravRtti guNa zodha. (8 dRSTi) -mitrA tArA ne balA, dIkA sthirA tema kAMtA
prabhA ane parA, daSTi ATha che ema. prathama dRSTimAM veganuM, aMga prathama
yama hoya; prathama daSane tyAga ne, guNa prathama paNa joya. ATha dRSTimAM e
krame, aMga javA ATha; doSa ATha parivarjavA, guNa joDavA ATha. have "STi'
zabdano artha batAvavA mATe kahe che - sacchraddhAsaMgato bodho
dRSTirityabhidhIyate / asatpravRttivyAghAtAtsatpravRttipadAvahaH // 17 //
vRtti:-sadRddhAvaMtto godha-sata zraddhAsaMyukta bodha. A uparathI asat
zraddhAne vyavaccheda-apavAda kahyo. ane ahIM asata zraddhA eTale zAstrabAhya
evI, pitAnA abhiprAyathI tathA prakAranA asadu UharUpavikalparUpa zraddhA
grahavAmAM AvI che. evI te asata zraddhAnA vikalapaNAthI-rahitapaNuthI "sata
zraddhAsaMgata, evA prakArane je bodha-avagama (samajaNa) te zuM ? te ke-
daSTihityamathIyare- "dRSTi" kahevAya che - darzana te dRSTi ema jANIne-
niSThayapAya paNae karIne, (temAM kaI Ala avala AvatI nathI ethI karIne).
phalathI A ja kahe che

Page #155 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The general statement of the eight yogadrishtis: The bodha (89) that is imbued
with sat-shraddha is called "drishti"; it is the attainment of the sat-
pravritti-pada through the cessation of asat-pravritti-baadha. 17. Meaning - The
bodha that is in accordance with sat-shraddha is called "drishti". And it is the
attainment of the sat-pravritti-pada through the cessation (stopping) of asat-
pravritti. Here, the meaning of "drishti" is clearly explained. The bodha that
is imbued with sat-shraddha is called "drishti". Here, "sat-shraddha" is
specifically mentioned to exclude asat-shraddha. The shraddha that is based on
asat-shastra, based on one's own sat-shraddha-based opinion, and that is based
on the father's pure mind, is not "drishti". Asat-shraddha is the shraddha that
is outside of shastra, where asat-tarka, vitarka, and vikalpa are used. Such
asat-shraddha is not present in this "drishti". It is based on sat-shastra, is
in accordance with shastra, and follows the agam-rupa ajna of the apt purusha.
Such sat-shraddha - true shraddha - is present in it. Only such sat-shraddha is
called "drishti". "Drishti" means darshan - to see. It is uninterrupted, there
is no obstacle, therefore it is called "darshan" or "drishti". Whether it is
slightly open or fully open, whatever is seen when it is open is "drishti". It
is seen, it is seen, there is no obstacle. Darshan is thus "drishti", so saying
"drishti" is "darshan" is true. To understand this properly, let's take the
example of the eye, the charmachakshu - when the eye is closed, nothing is seen,
then when the eye is slightly open, the nearby object is seen faintly, then when
it is opened more, it is seen more, as the eye opens, more and more is seen,
finally when the eye is fully open - asat-pravritti-chadhara-asat-pravritti-
vyaaghatha (cessation). That is, due to such shraddha - shraddha-anta-pana - due
to the cessation of shastra-viruddha-pravritti - cessation, what? That is, it
brings about sat-pravritti-pavad - sat-pravritti-pada. That is, it brings about
the pravritti-pada that is not against shastra. It means that it brings about
the ghas-vidya-pada by abandoning the adya-sanvedya-pada. Although the sthira-
adi-drishti is vedya-pada-rupa, it is also adesha due to its general lakshana-
pana. Or, sat-pravritti-pada is the sheleshi-pada from paramartha. That is,
there is no fault in the tat-pada-avah-pana of this drishti, in its attainment
of that pada.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
ATha yogadaSTinuM sAmAnya kathana: satazraddhAyukta bedha (89) sat zraddhAyuta
bedha che, te "dRSTi" kahevAya; asat pravRtti bAdhathI, sapravRtti padadAya. 17.
artha --satuzraddhAthI saMgata e je bodha te "duSTi" kahevAya che. ane te asat
pravRttine vyAghAtathI (aTakavAthI) satapravRttipadAvaha eTale satapravRttipada
pamADanAre e hoya che. vivecana ahIM "daSTi' eTale ? tenI spaSTa vyAkhyA kahI
che. satazraddhAthI yukta eve je bedha tenuM nAma "daSTi che. ahIM "sat zraddhA"
ema khAsa karIne kahyuM, te asat zraddhAno apavAda-niSedha karavA mATe che.
satuzAstrane AdhAra cheDI potAnA sat zraddhAyukta abhiprAye karIne-pitAnA
svaccha karIne, pitAnI matikalpanA pramANe bodha te daSTi jyAM asat beTA tarka
vitarka-vikalpa karavAmAM Ave che, evI zAstrabAhya je zraddhA te asatuzraddhA
che. AvI asat zraddhA A "daSTi"mAM hotI nathI. emAM te satazAstranA AdhAravALI,
sazAstrane anukULa, Apta puruSanI AgamarUpa AjJAne anusaranArI, evI sazraddhA-
sAcI zraddhA ja hoya che. AvI sata zraddhA hoya te ja te bedhane daSTi nAma
ghaTe che. daSTi" eTale darzana-dekhavuM te che. AmAM nipratyAyapaNuM hoya che,
kaI paNa ADakhIlI hotI nathI, eTalA mATe te "darzana" athavA "dRSTi' kahevAya
che. pachI bhale A thoDI ughaDI hoya ke jhAjhI ughaDI hoya, paNa te khUlatAM je
kAMI dekhAya che daSTi eTale te dekhAya che, dIThuM eTale basa dIThuM, temAM kaI
pratyavAya naDatuM nathI. darzana Ama "daSTi" eTale "darzana" ema kahyuM te
yathArtha che. A barAbara sama javA AMkhane carmacakSune dAkhalo laIe - AMkha
baMdha hoya te kAMI dekhAtuM nathI, pachI AMkha jarAka ughaDe te pAsene padArtha
jhAMkho jhAMkho dekhAya che, pachI vadhAre ughaDe te tethI vadhAre dekhAya che,
ema jema jema AMkha khUlatI jAya che, tema tema vadhAre ne vadhAre dekhAtuM jAya
che, chevaTe saMpUrNa AMkha khUlatAM -asahmavRtti cAdhArAtaasata pravRttinA
vyAghAtathI (aTakI javApaNAthI). eTale ke tevA prakAranI zrAddhatAthI-
zraddhAnaMtapaNAthI zAstraviruddha pravRttinA vyAghAtathI-aTakI javApaNAne
lIdhe, zuM? te ke satravRttipAvaDa-satapravRttipadane ANanAre, lAvanAre. eTale
zAstrathI aviruddha evA pravRttipane ANI ApanAra. adyasaMvedyapadanA
parityAgavaDe karIne ghasa vidyapada pamADanAro ema artha che. sthira Adi
daSTinuM vedyapadarUpapaNuM chatAM AnA sAmAnya lakSaNapane lIdhe ema paNa adeSa
che. athavA sata pravRttipada eTale paramArthathI zelezIpada che. eTale A
dRSTinA tatapadAvahapaNAmAM te pada pamADavApaNAmAM koI doSa nathI.

Page #156 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The infinite sky can be seen with a small eye! Similarly, this inner eye,
"gadashti", as it opens, unfolds, and expands, its field of vision increases,
becoming wider and wider, and ultimately, with the opening of complete vision,
infinite "darshan" is experienced. But whatever little or much is seen, it is
all called "darshan" or "dashti"; there is only a difference of degree, not a
difference in darshan. The nature of this darshan is one. Therefore, according
to the sutra "rat pravachanam", the word "drishti" has been used in the
singular. Thus, gadashti or darshan is one, but its divisions have been made
according to the degree of its unfolding. When is this darshan or dashti said to
be open? Its clear limit has been shown here: when there is faith in sat-
shastra. Conversely, the knowledge that is without sat-shraddha, or the
knowledge that is based on asat-shraddha, which is a mere imagination, cannot be
called "dashti" or "darshan", because just as there is only blindness, not
sight, not darshan, until the eye opens, similarly, until the inner vision
opens, unfolds, and is free from the belief in sat-shastra, there is only
dashti-andhpan, not sight, not darshan. This jiva is compared to a person with
eye disease. A person with eye disease cannot open his eyes, he keeps them
closed, and he does not even like the light. If an expert eye specialist treats
him properly, applies collyrium, and gives him medicine, then gradually, there
is a possibility of his eye disease being cured. Until he gets the right
medicine from the right specialist, his disease will not be cured. Similarly,
this jiva has been afflicted with a severe disease of dashti-andhpan, mithya-
dashtipan. He has been lying with his eyes closed. He cannot even see the light
of knowledge! Now, if he gets the right specialist, a sadguru, by the grace of
great merit, and that sadguru diagnoses his disease properly and gives him the
right treatment, applies the collyrium of knowledge, then gradually, the dashti-
andh's vision will open, and ultimately, his eye disease will be completely
cured. But the only condition here is that the sadguru, the specialist, must be
found, and his medicine must be taken with firm faith, along with the proper
diet and regimen. Only then will this great disease of atma-bhrant, the delusion
of the self, be cured. This is how...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
yogadaSTisamuccaya anaMta AkAza paNa te nAnI sarakhI AMkhathI dekhAya che! tema
A AMtaracakSurUpa "gadaSTi" paNa jema jema ughaDatI jAya che, unmIlana pAmatI
jAya che, khUlatI jAya che, tema tema tenI daSTimaryAdAnuM kSetra vadhatuM jAya
che, vadhAre ne vadhAre vizALa "darzana thatuM jAya che, ne chevaTe saMpUrNa
dRSTi" khUlatAM anata "darzana thAya che. paNa A theDuM ke jhAjhuM je kAMI
dekhAya che, te badhuM ya "darzana" athavA "daSTi" kahevAya che; emAM mAtra
mAtrAne-aMzane bheda (Difference of degree) che, darzanabheda nathI. A darzananI
jAti eka che. eTalA mATe "rAta pravacanaM' e sUtra pramANe "dRSTi" ema ekavacanI
prayoga karyo che. Ama gadaSTi athavA darzana eka che, chatAM tenA unmIlana aMza
pramANe-ughaDavA pramANe tenA vibhAga pADyA che. AvuM darzana ke daSTi kyAre
ughaDI kahevAya? tenI atre spaSTa maryAdA batAvI che ke jyAre satazAstranI
zraddhAvALe bedha hoya tyAre." AthI UlaTuM, satuzraddhA vinAne je bodha che,
athavA svaccheda kalpanArUpa asat zraddhAvALe je bedha che, te "daSTi" athavA
"darzana" kahI zakAya nahiM, kAraNa ke AMkha ughaDI na hoya tyAM sudhI jema
aMdhapaNuM ja che, dekhavApaNuM nathI, darzana nathI, tema daSTiadhapaNuM
satazAstra zraddhAthI jyAM lagI AMtaradRSTi ughaDI nathI, unmIlana pAmI nathI,
tyAMsudhI daSTiaMdhapaNuM ja che, dekhavApaNuM nathI, darzana nathI. A jIvane
netrareNInI upamA ghaTe che. netraraMgI eTale ke jene AMkho roga che, evo puruSa
AMkha ughADI zakato nathI, AMkha mIMcI ja rAkhe che, tene ujAsa paNa gamate
nathI. tenI je koI niSNAta netravedya (Eye-specialist) barAbara cikitsA karI
yathAyogya aMjana vagere AMjIne davA (Treatment) kare, te dhIre dhIre tene
netraregInuM rega maTavAno saMbhava che. te sadyane ne tene AdhIna auSadhane
joga dRSTAMta na bane tyAM sudhI tene rega keme karIne maTe nahiM. tema A jIvane
daSTi aMdhapaNane-mithyAdaSTipaNAne gADha roga lAgu paDyo che. te AMkha mIMcIne
ja paDyo che. tenAthI jJAna-prakAza paNa dekhI zakAto nathI! have tene koI
mahApuNyanA jogAnujoge keI tevA saddagururUpa niSNAta savaidyane jega maLe, ne
te tene roganuM barAbara nidAna karI, egya cikitsA kare, jJAnarUpa aMjana Aje,
te dhIre dhIre te daSTiaMdhanI daSTi khUlatI jAya, ne chevaTe te netraroga sAva
maTI jAya. paNa AmAM mAtra zarata eTalI ja che ke-savaidyarUpa saddagurune zodhI
kADhI, tenI davA daDha zraddhAthI, yathAvidhi pathya anupAna sAthe karavAmAM
Ave, te ja te AtmabrAMtirUpa moTAmAM moTo rega jAya, te A pramANe

Page #157 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The general statement of the eight yogadrishtis: Divine vision (91) is not like
the anger of self-awareness, the wise physician is the true guru; the guru's
command is not like medicine, the thought is meditation.” – Shrimad
Rajchandraji's Shri Atmasiddhi “अज्ञानतिमिरान्धानां ज्ञानांजनशलाकया  /
नेत्रमुन्मीलितं येन तस्मै सद्गुरवे नमः  // " The preaching ointment that the
true guru applies, reveals the ultimate treasure; the heart's eye beholds the
Lord of the world, whose glory is like Mount Meru.” – Shri Anandghanji has said
that faith in the scriptures is the foundation of the path, and it implicitly
includes faith in the original author of the scriptures, the As Purusha, as well
as the true guru who explains the meaning of the scriptures. Because without a
true guru, like a waking eye, who will explain the scriptures? The scriptures do
not become self-explanatory! They are understood through the mouth of a
knowledgeable true guru, who has opened the eyes of knowledge, and only then are
they understood; without such a guru, the scriptures become inaccessible!
Because “without the eye, the word is not understood”, “without the eye” – the
guidance of the true guru, it is not understood; and that “divine eye” is
revealed by serving the feet of the true guru. “Without the eye, it is not
obtained, without the eye, the word is not understood; serve the feet of the
true guru, then it is obtained directly. The thirst that is quenched, has a
method of quenching; without the guru's understanding, it is not obtained, this
is the eternal state.” – Shrimad Rajchandraji The ultimate eye makes the path, O
Lord, the whole world is lost, with the eye, we go on the path, the eye is the
divine thought. I have seen the path.” – Shri Anandghanji Thus, here the
scripture writer has concluded with the principle of Arthapatti Nyaya – the
first door to enter this yogadrishti is faith in the scriptures. The scriptures
are the words of the As Purusha. To follow his command with faith is the first
step on the path of yoga, it is the opening of the “vision”, otherwise it is
blindness, therefore, the living being should abandon the free will of
disbelief, abandon the free will of the mind's imagination, and follow the true
scriptures – the command of the true guru, and with true faith, practice this
path of yoga, this is the sound of the teaching. The living being who is free-
willed, will surely attain liberation; those who have attained are infinite, the
faultless Jina has spoken.” – Shrimad Rajchandraji's Shri Atmasiddhi

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
ATha yogadaSTinuM sAmAnya kathanaH divya nayana (91) AtmabrAMti sama rega nahiM,
sadguru vaidya sujANa; guru AjJA sama pathya nahiM, auSadha vicAra dhyAna."
-zrImad rAjacaMdrajIpraNIta zrI Atmasiddhi "ajJAnatimirAndhAnAM
jJAnAMjanazalAkayA / netramunmIlitaM yena tasmai sadgurave namaH // " pravacana
aMjana je sadguru kare, dekhe parama nidhAna; hRdaya nayana nihALe jagadhaNI,
mahimA meru samAna."--zrI AnaMdaghanajI aeo sazAstranI zraddhA kahI che, temAM
te zAstranA mULa praNetA Asa puruSanI, temaja te zAstrano Azaya samajAvanArA
saddagurunI zraddhA paNa garbhitapaNe samAI jAya che. kAraNa ke jAgatI jota jevA
sadguru vinA te zAstra samajAvaze keNa? zAstra kAMI AptanI-sada enI meLe samajAI
jatuM nathI ! te te jene jJAnadaSTi UghaDI che evA gurunI zraddhA pragaTa
gIsvarUpa jJAnI sadgurumukhethI samajavAmAM Ave, te ja samajAya; tevA gurugama
vinA te Agama te agama thaI paDe che! kAraNa ke "binA nayanakI bAta", "binA
nayana'-sadgurunI doravaNI vinA samajAya nahi; ne te "divya nayana" te
saddagurunA caraNa seve te sAkSAt khUle. "binA nayana pAve nahi, binA nayanakI
bAta; seve saruke carana, so pAve sAkSAta. bUjhI cahata je pyAsakI, hai bUjhanI
rIta; pAve nahiM gurugama binA, yehI anAdi sthita."-zrImad rAjacaMdrajI carama
nayana karI mAraga deva re, bhUlyo sayala saMsAra jiNe nayaNe karI mAraga jaIe
re, nayana te divya vicAra. paMthaDe nihALuM re."--zrI AnaMdaghanajI Ama atre
zAstrakAra bhagavate arthapattinyAyathI baMdha karyo ke-A gadaSTimAM praveza
karavAnuM prathama dvAra sazAstranI zraddhA che. zAstra eTale AptapuruSanuM
vacana. tenI AjJAne zraddhAthI anusaravuM e ja yegamArganuM prathama pagathiyuM
che, te ja "dRSTi" khUlaze, nahiM te aMdhapaNuM ja che, mATe jIve svachaMdarUpa
asatuzraddhAne tyAga karI, pitAnI svachaMda matikalpanA choDI daI, satzAstrane-
sapuruSa sadgurunI AjJAne pradhAnapaNe anusarI, satazraddhAthI A yogamArganI
ArAdhanA karavI, ema upadezane dhvani che. reke jIva svachaMda te, pAme avazya
mokSa; pAmyA ema anaMta che, bhAkhyuM jina nirdoSa."- zrImad rAjacaMdrajIkRta
zrIAtmasiddhi

Page #158 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(2) "The collection of virtues, like charity, austerity, conduct, vows, and the
Lord, are essential. Without them, they become obstacles to liberation." - Shri
Devchandraji. What is the fruit of such faith, or vision? It is said that: (1)
It destroys wrong actions, (2) and thus leads to the attainment of right action.
This is how: 1. Destruction of wrong actions - The faith that arises from the
right understanding of the scriptures, then, in every possible way, leads to
right action. That is, the wrong conduct, contrary to the scriptures, is
destroyed - it ends, wrong action stops, wrong action ceases. Wrong action is so
completely destroyed that it falls down, like a person who has been struck by a
thunderbolt! It faints. Because this man of faith, who is an Asannabhavya (near
liberation), wise, and endowed with faith, does not rely on anything other than
the scriptures in matters of the afterlife. He considers the scriptures as the
only authority, and thus cuts off wrong action. Because, "In this ocean of
darkness, the light of the scriptures is the only guide to right action." And
thus, wrong action stops, and therefore, this is all - 2. The attainment of
right action - It is the one that brings about the attainment of right action.
As wrong action ceases, the path of right action comes closer, it is drawn
closer and closer. Here, "Avah" means "the one that brings about," and the word
"Sapravrittipad" is very significant. The attraction of this Yogadristi is so
powerful that it "draws the path closer and closer, and it is attained easily.
It is as if a magical spell has been cast! Thus, this Gadristi draws the path
closer! It attracts with an amazing power of attraction, like a magnet! Once
this divine eye, in the form of Gadristi, touches, it is over! Here,
Sapravrittipad means "the path that is perceived and experienced (Samyaktva)."
This vision's "परलोकविधौ शास्त्रात् प्रायो नान्यदपेक्षते  /  आसन्नभव्यो मतिमान्
श्रद्धाधनसमन्वितः  //  तस्मात्सदैव धर्मार्थी शास्त्रयत्नः प्रशस्यते  /  ચોદે
મોહાપરેડમિન્નાટો: પ્રવર્તે છે ? -Maharshi Haribhadracharya's Shri Gabindu.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
(2) gadaSTisamuccaya dAna tapa zIla vrata nAtha A| vinA, thaI bAdhaka kare bhava
upAdhi."-zrI devacaMdrajI ane AvA satazraddhAvALA baMdhanuM eTale dRSTinuM phala
zuM che? te mATe kahyuM ke- (1) asata pravRttine vyAghAta, (2) ane tethI karIne
sapravRtti padanI prApti , te A prakAre :- 1. asat pravRtti vyAghAta-
sazraddhAvALe bedha je upajyo, te pachI tathA prakAre pravRtti thavAne pratyeka
saMbhava che. eTale sazAstranA bedhathI pratikULa-viruddha AcaraNAne - vyAghAta
thAya che-aMta Ave che, asat pravRtti aTakI paDe che, thaMbhI asatapravRtti jAya
che. asatapravRttine eTale badhe AghAta lAge che ke te bicArI vyAghAta tammara
khAIne paDI jAya che! mUcchavaza thAya che. kAraNa ke A zraddhA dhanavALo*
Asanabhavya (nikaTa mokSagAmI) matimAna puruSa paralokavidhimAM zAstra karatAM
bIjAnI prAye apekSA rAkhatA nathI. tene ja pramANu gaNuM asat pravRtti cheDI dIe
che, kAraNa ke "A mehAMdhakArabharyA lekamAM zAstra prakAza ja sanmArgamAM
pravRtti karAvanAra che." ane Ama asat pravRtti aTakI paDe che, eTalA mATe ja A
badha- 2. sapravRttipadAvaha-hoya che. sapravRttipadane lAvI ApanAra-pamADanAre
hoya che. jema jema asat pravRtti aTakatI jAya che, tema tema satupravRttipada
nikaTa AvatuM jAya che, pAse ne pAse kheMcAtuM jAya che. ahIM "Avaha" eTale lAvI
ApanAra e sapravRttipada zabda ye che te atyaMta sUcaka che. A yogadaSTinuM
AkarSaNa ja evuM prApti prabaLa che ke te "pada enI meLe kheMcAtuM kheMcAtuM
samIpa prApta thAya che. jANe najarabaMdhInuM ajaba jAdU karyuM heyanI ! ema A
gadaSTi te padane kheMcI lAve che! lehacuMbakanI jema addabhuta AkarSaNazaktithI
AkarSe che! eka vakhata A gadaSTirUpa divya nayanano sparza karyo ke beDe pAra !
atre satupravRttipada eTale "vedyasaMvedya pada (samyaktva) samajavuM. A daSTinA
* "paralokavidhau zAstrAt prAyo nAnyadapekSate / Asannabhavyo matimAn
zraddhAdhanasamanvitaH // tasmAtsadaiva dharmArthI zAstrayatnaH prazasyate /
code mohApareDaminnATo: pravarte che ? -maharSi haribhadrAcAryajIkRta zrIgabiMdu

Page #159 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The general statement of the eight yogadrishtis: Due to the power of the
samvritti pad (93), the "asansvedya pad" (mithyatva) is abandoned and the
"ghasavedya pad" is attained. Although the "vedyasansvedya pad" begins with the
fifth stable drishti, there is no fault in stating this generally, as it applies
to all drishttis. Or, if we consider it to be the sapravritti pad, which is the
shileshi pad, there is no contradiction, because ultimately, its attainment is
the satpravritti pad, which is the ultimate action. "Pad" refers to a stable,
immovable place that never shifts. Thus, inevitably, under the influence of this
"drishti," the attainment of the "vedyasansvedya pad" or the shileshi pad, which
is an immovable place, occurs. Through the magical touch of this drishti, which
is like a touchstone, this jiva, which is like a piece of lead, becomes pure
gold! "Niyama kanchanata lahe re...man mohna re lal. Leh kyun paras pam
re...bhavi behnare lal." - Shri Devchandraji. And to show that this drishti is
of eight types due to the difference in the paristthul, and not just many
different types, it is said: "Iyam chavaran apaya bhedad ashtvigha smrita /
Samanyena visheshastu bhuyaansa sukshma bhedatah // 18 //" Meaning: Due to the
difference in the awaran apaya, that is, the difference in the removal of the
awaran, it is said to be of eight types generally. And in terms of specific
differences, there are many, many subtle differences. The "drishti" used in the
above discussion, which is singular, refers to the drishti with the
characteristics mentioned earlier, which is due to the difference in the awaran
apaya, that is, due to the difference in the removal of the awaran. Due to the
difference in the paristthul, the purvacharyas have said that it is of eight
types. Generally, without considering the subtle drishti, the specific
differences of the sad drishti are many, many, due to the subtle differences,
due to the infinite differences in darshan, etc., because their statement is
based on the mutual position of the patitapana.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
ATha yogadaSTinuM sAmAnya kathana : sAmavRtti pada (93) pratApe "asaMvedya pada'
( mithyAtva) chUTI jaI, ghasavedya pada prApta thAya che. je ke "vedyasaMvedya
pada' pAMcamI sthira dRSTithI zarU thAya che, to paNa ahIM daSTinuM-badhanuM
sAmAnyathI kathana heI, A kahyuM che emAM doSa nathI. athavA te sapravRttipada
eTale zilezIpada gaNIe topaNa virodha nathI, kAraNa ke paramArthathI te tenI
prApti thavI e ja paramArtha kAryarUpa satapravRttipada che. "pada" eTale kadI
paNa na khase evuM sthira nizcala sthAna. Ama avazya karIne A "dRSTi"nA prabhAve
"vedyasaMvedyapada" ke zilezIpadarUpa nizcala sthAnanI prApti thAya che. A
dRSTirUpa pArasamaNinA jAduI sparzathI A jIvarUpa leha zuddha suvarNa banI jAya
che! "niyamA kAMcanatA lahe re....mana mohanA re lAla. leha kyuM pArasa pAma
re....bhavi behanAre lAla."--zrI devacaMdrajI ane A daSTi paristhUla bhedathI
ATha prakAranI che, nahiM te bahu bhedavALI che, ema batAvavA mATe kahe che -
iyaM cAvaraNApAyabhedAdaSTavighA smRtA / sAmAnyena vizeSAstu bhUyAMsaH
sUkSmabhedataH // 18 // AvaraNa apAya bhedathI, che A ATha prakAra; sAmAnyathI-
vizeSa te, sUkSma bheda bahu dhAra, 18 artha:-ane A dRSTi-AvaraNa apAyanA eTale
ke aviraNa TaLavAnA bhedane lIdhe, -sAmAnyathI ATha prakAranI kahI che. ane
vizeSa bhede sUmabhedathI ghaNA ghaNA che. vivecana uparamAM je "daSTi" ema
ekavacanI prayoga karyo te daSTi, AvaraNa TaLavAnA bhedane vRtti - -ane A eTale
hamaNuM ja kahyA te lakSaNavALI dRSTi, mAvALATcameta :-AvaraNa apAyanA
bhedathakI, AvaraNa dUra thavAnA bhedane lIdhe-paristhala nItithI, ZvidhA RtA-
pUrvAcAryoe ATha prakAranI kahI che. sAmAnya sAmAnyathI -sUkmakSikAne,
sUkSmadaSTine anAdara karIne (bArIkIthI joyA vinA). vizeSAsuvizeSa te,
saddaSTinA vizeSa bhedo te, mULAM-ati bahu, ghaNuM ghaNuM che, sUkSmameta -
sUmabhedane lIdhe,darzana AdinA anaMtabhedapaNane lIdhe, kAraNa ke paraspara
sthAna patitapaNAe karIne teonuM kathana che,

Page #160 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(94) Due to the collection of *Gadasti*, eight types have been stated generally,
and even that is stated with respect to very gross differences. For example, as
the curtain in front of the eye is removed, more and more of the check is seen,
and finally, when the entire curtain is removed, it is seen completely. Thus,
with respect to the removal of the curtain, different aspects of the same
vision-perception arise. In the same way, as the covering of *karma* nature is
removed, according to the *upshama*, *kshayapashama*, *kshaya*, etc., the
covering of *karma* is removed, the curtain is removed, and more and more clear
and pure vision is seen, and finally, when the entire covering-curtain is
removed, complete vision is seen. Thus, due to the difference in the removal of
the covering, these eight gross differences of vision have arisen generally. But
if we look closely with respect to *sufamabheda*, there are many, many special
differences, infinite, which cannot be described. Because from *mitra* to
*paradristi*, according to the *pashama* etc. of *karma*, the types of vision
are infinite. The *shatrasthanapati* - *shagunananta* difference, the rule of
loss and increase applies here. For example - (1) *anantabhagavrudhi*, (2)
*asanкhyatabhagavrudhi*, (3) *sanкhyatabhagavrudhi*, (4) *sanкhyatgunavrudhi*,
(5) *asanкhyatgunavrudhi*, (6) *anantagunavrudhi*. Similarly - *anantabhaghaani*
etc. six types. Thus, if we assume even a single unit of vision in the smallest
type of *mitra*, then according to this rule, there are infinite permutations
and combinations of loss and increase, resulting in infinite differences. Thus,
the number of *kega* locations is also countless. "In the *alpaviya* field,
*pashama* is less, *avibhaga* is like a *vanarupa*; *vadaguna* is countless,
thus the *rasthan* form is created... Our mind is captivated by the
*prabhuguna*. From the *suhama* *nigadi* *jiva*, go, *sanni* *vara* *pajjatt*
*re*; the locations of *yoga* are countless, immediately captivate the mind." -
Shri Devchandraji Figure-4 0I | | | ' ' Covering is given. And here in *dristi
samuccaya*...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
(94) gadaSTisamuccaya lIdhe, ATha prakAranI sAmAnyathI kahI che ane te paNa
atyaMta sthUla bhedanI apekSAe kahela che. dAkhalA tarIke- AMkha ADene paDado
jema jema dUra thato jAya, tema tema vadhAre ne vadhAre cekanuM dekhAtuM jAya
che, chevaTe saMpUrNa paDado TaLI jatAM pUrepUruM dekhAya che. Ama paDado dUra
thavAnI apekSAe eka ja dRSTinA-darzananA judA judA bheda paDe che. te ja prakAre
AvaraNa apAya karma prakRtinA upazama, kSayapazama, kSaya Adi pramANe jema jema
karmanuM AvaraNa khasatuM jAya che, paDado dUra thato jAya che, tema tema
vadhAre ne vadhAre spaSTa nirmala darzana thatuM jAya che, ne chevaTe saMpUrNa
AvaraNa-paDado TaLI jatAM saMpUrNa darzana thAya che. Ama AvaraNa TaLavAnA
bhedathI, A daSTinA ATha sthUla bheda sAmAnyathI paDayA che. paNa sUphamabhedanI
apekSAe jo bArIkIthI joIe, te tenA vizeSa bheda ghaNA ghaNA che, anaMta che, ke
jene kahetAM pAra na Ave. kAraNa ke mitrAthI mAMDI parAdaSTi sudhI, karmanA
pazama Adi pramANe, darzananA prakAra anaMta che. SaTrasthAnapatita-SaguNaanaMta
bheda hAni-vRddhine niyama ahIM lAgu paDe che. jemake-(1) anaMtabhAgavRddhi, (2)
asaMkhyAtabhAgavRddhi, (3) saMkhyAtabhAgavRddhi, (4) saMkhyAtaguNavRddhi, (5)
asaMkhyAtaguNavRddhi, (6) anaMtaguNavRddhi. temaja-anaMtabhAgahAni Adi cha
prakAra. Ama mitrAnA kaniSThamAM kaniSTha prakAramAM ochAmAM ochuM (Minimum) eka
aMza (Unit) darzana mAnIe, te pachI temAM A niyama pramANe hAni-vRddhinA anaMta
sago (Permutations & Combinations) thatAM, anaMta bheda thAya. Ama keganA sthAna
paNa asaMkhya che. alpavIya kSe pazama ache, avibhAga vaNArUpa re; vaDaguNa ema
asaMkhyathI, thAye rasthAna svarUpa re... mana mohyuM amAruM prabhuguNe. suhama
nigadI jIvathI, jAva sannI vara pajajatta re; yoganA ThANa asaMkhya che,
taratama mohe parAyattare mana" -zrI devacaMdrajI AkRti-4 0I | | | ' ' AvaraNa
apAya. ane ahIM dRSTisamuccayamAM

Page #161 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The general statement of the eight *dṛṣṭis*: *pratipāti*-*apratipāti* *dṛṣṭi*
The first four are *pratipāti*, the next four are not; By *apāya* with
*pratipāti*, these are also not others. 19  **Meaning:** The first four *dṛṣṭis*
are *pratipāti* (liable to fall), the next four are not, and by their
*pratipāti*, these first four *dṛṣṭis* are also *apāya* (liable to fall), the
others are not.  **Discussion:**  Of these eight *dṛṣṭis* mentioned, the first
four, like *mitrā*, are also *pratipāti*, meaning they are liable to fall back.
It is not that the first four are not *pratipāti*, but they are also liable to
fall. And the next four *dṛṣṭis*, like *sthira*, are only *apratipāti*, meaning
they do not fall back after coming, they do not become corrupt, they remain
stable. And the first four mentioned, if they happen to fall back, become
corrupt, meaning that *dṛṣṭi* comes and then goes back, it is *apāya*, meaning
it leads to *naraka* (hell) and other suffering, *bādhā* (obstacles), and *hāni*
(loss).  **Commentary:**  *pratipāti-yuktā* - *pratipāti* yukt, *bhraṃśa* yukt
(liable to fall back), *bāvāścharo* - the first four, *mitrā* etc., the first
four *dṛṣṭis*. These are also of the same type, due to *karma* *vaicimnya*, they
are also *pratipāti* yukt; but they are not only *pratipāti* yukt. Therefore,
from the opposite meaning - *na uttarārūthā* - *uttara* means the next four
*dṛṣṭis*, they are not like that. That is, *sthira* etc., the next four, are not
*pratipāti* yukt (they do not fall). Because this is the case, therefore -
*sāpāvā* *apāya* yukt also - for the purpose of *durgati* (bad destiny), *pratā*
- it is these (the first four *dṛṣṭis*). How? Because - *atipan* - by
*pratipāti*, by *bhraṃśa* (falling back); *netāḥ* - others are not like that,
meaning *sthira* etc., the other *dṛṣṭis* are not *apāya* yukt.  **Doubt:**  Why
are *śreṇika* etc., even though they are *apratipāti*, *apāya*?  **Resolution:**
Due to the power of the *karma* that arose in the absence of this *dṛṣṭi* (in
the past). Therefore, by *pratipāti*, exceeding the possibility - expecting - it
is said "also *sāpāya*". However, due to the special nature of *prāya* *vṛtti*,
this is usually the case, therefore the *sūtra* has this explanation -
arrangement.  Or, even though *sad* *dṛṣṭi* is not affected, it is also *apāya*
and not *apāya*, because, like the weight of a ripe fruit, its intention, even
in the possibility of suffering, has the potential for action (manifestation).
*Yogācārya* is the authority here. (Just as a ripe fruit does not become unripe,
so its mind - intention - does not produce suffering.) Therefore, it is
established that the next four *dṛṣṭis* are not *apāya* yukt by *pratipāti*.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ATha gadaSTinuM sAmAnya kathana : pratipAtI-apratipAtI daSTi
pratipAtayutAzcAdyAzcatasro nottarAstathA  /  sApAyA api caitAstatpratipAtena
netarAH  //  19  /  /  prathama cAra pratipAti che, bIjI cAra na tema; apAyayuta
pratipAtathI, A paNa-anya na ema. 19 artha-pahelI cAra daSTie pratipAtayukta
(paDI jAya evI) che, pAchalI cAra daSTie tema nathI ane tenA pratipAte karIne A
pahelI cAra daSTi apAyavALI paNa hoya che,-bIjI tema nathI. vivecana A je ATha
daSTi kahI, temAMnI mitrA Adi pahelI cAra pratipAtI paNa hoya che, AvIne pAchI
paDI jAya evI "paNa" hoya, eTale ke paDI jAya ja pahelI cAra prati- ema nahi,
paNa paDe paNa kharI, evI hoya che. ane sthira pAtI paNa hoya vagere je pAchalI
cAra daSTi che, te apratipAtI ja che, AvyA pachI paDe ja nahiM, bhraSTa thAya ja
nahiM, sthira ja rahe evI hoya che. ane je pahelI cAra kahI, temAM je kadAca
pratipAta thAya-braza thAya, eTale ke te daSTi AvIne je pAchI cAlI jAya, te
apAya eTale narakAdi duHkharUpa bAdhA-hAni vRttiH-pratipAtayutA-pratipAta yukta,
bhraMzayukta (pAchI paDI jAya evI), bAvAzcaro-Adya cAra, mitrA Adi pahelI cAra
daSTie. A paNa tathAprakAranA karmavaicimane lIdhe, pratipAtayukta paNa hoya
che; paraMtu pratipAtayukta ja hoya ema nathI. tethI-tenA uttara bhAvathI-na
uttarArUthA- uttara eTale pAchaLanI cAra dRSTi tema nathI. eTale sthira Adi cAra
te prakAre pratipAtayukta nathI (paDatI nathI). kAraNa ke Ama che, tethI karIne-
sApAvA apAyayukta paNa che,-durgatinA hetupaNue karIne, pratA -te A ja (pahelI
cAra daSTi) che. kevI rIte? te ke-atipana-pratipAtathI bhraMzavaDe karIne; netAH
-Itara tema nathI, eTale sthira Adi bIjI daSTie apAyukta nathI. zaMkA-zreNika
Adine Ane apratipAta chatAM, apAya kema thayA?. samAdhAna-A dRSTinA abhAvamAM
(pU) upAjelA kAmanA sAmarthyathI. eTalA mATe ja pratipAtavaDa karIne
saMbhavamAtrane adhikata karIne-apekSIne "sApAya paNa ema kahyuM. tathApi
prAyevRttinA viSaSapaNAthIghaNuM karIne Ama hoya che, eTalA mATe sUtrane ema
upanyAsa-goThavaNI che. athavA saddaSTine aghAta hatAM apAya paNa anapAya ja
che, kAraNa ke pAkavaDe karIne vajataMdulanI jema tenA Azayane kAyaduHkhanA
sarbhAvamAM paNu, kriyAnI upapatti hota (rajaAta) che. yogAcArye ja atra pramANa
che. (pAkathI vataMdula na pAke, tema tenA cittane-Azayane du:kha upajatuM
nathI.) eTale pratipAtavaDa karIne bIjI cAra dRSTi apAyayukta nathI ema sthita
thayuM.

Page #162 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(96) The collection of Gadasti also arises. That which is not subject to
Pratipat, does not fall after it has come, is not subject to the suffering of
Naraka, etc. It is also not subject to Apay. Thus, in the first four Dasti,
there are two alternatives - either it is subject to Pratipat or it is not
subject to Pratipat; and if it is subject to Pratipat, it is subject to Apay and
Apay; if it is not subject to Pratipat, it is Nir-Apay, free from Apay, free
from the bondage of Naraka, etc. Here, someone may ask - why did Shrenik
Maharaj, despite being the owner of Kshayik Samyaktv, despite being in the
stable form of A-Pratipat Dasti, suffer the suffering of Naraka, etc.? The
answer is that in the absence of the present Dasti, he had previously performed
Karma of doubt-resolution, and due to its Vipak, such a Samyakdasti Mahatma
experienced the suffering of Naraka, etc. And thus, even if someone with stable
Dasti, etc., experiences Apay, it is not due to Pratipat, but due to the Karma
bound in the past, despite being A-Pratipat. Moreover, the Apay that is said to
be absent here is absent in the sense of being absent in the general sense, so
it is true that it may be present in some exceptional cases. But in any case,
Pratipat is not present in stable Dasti, etc. Or, if we look at it in another
way, such Apay-bandha for great souls like Shrenik, etc., is An-Apay, it is not
Apay, it is not bondage. Because when a weight is placed on a ripe fruit, it
does not affect the fruit, it does not ripen; similarly, even though A-Pratipat
is like the ripening of the body, it does not affect the mind of such a great
person, it is Nir-Apay, it does not cause any suffering. Such an Avadhuta
remains "always absorbed" in the state of absorption! Therefore, from the point
of view of Paramarth, such Samyakdasti, equal-minded yogis, are not touched by
any Apay, they remain like a lotus in water. Because they are beyond all Apay,
beyond all bondage, they are "seated in the high state of self-awareness, which
is indifferent," so the suffering of Apay cannot reach them. Sukhi saheli hai,
akeli udaseenata, Adhyatma ni janani, te udaseenata, - Shrimad Rajchandraji
Sukha dukhrup karam phal jaane, Nishchay ek aanando re, - Shri Anandghanji Thus,
it is proven that the Dasti which is not subject to Pratipat, does not fall
after it has come, remains A-Pratipat, is free from Apay, free from harm and
bondage, free from suffering, there is no question about it. This will be clear
from the figure.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (96) gadaSTisamuccaya paNa upaje. je pratipAta na thAya, AvyA pachI paDe nahiM,
te narakAdi pratipAtI heca duHkharUpa apAya-AdhA paNa na hoya. Ama pahelI cAra
daSTimAM be te ja sApAya vikalpa che-kAM te te pratipAtI hoya, kAM te apratipAtI
heya; ane pratipAtI hoya, te ja sApAya-apAyavALI hoya; apratipAtI te nirapAya
ja-apAya rahita ja, narakAdi bAdhA rahita ja hoya. atre koI prazna kare ke-
zreNika mahArAjA kSAyika samyakatvanA dhaNI chatAM, sthirArUpa apratipAtI
daSTimAM vartatAM chatAM, naraka vagere duHkharUpa apAya-bAdhA kema pAmyA? te
tene uttara e che ke-prastuta dRSTinA abhAvamAM pUrve temaNe tevA prakAre zaMkA-
samAdhAna karma upAryA hatA, tenA vipAka vaze tevA te samyagadaSTi mahAtmAne
tevI narakAdi duHkharUpa apAyanI prApti thaI. ane Ama sthirAdi daSTivALAne
kavacit te apAya hoya, to paNa te kAMI pratipAtathI hoto nathI, paNa apratipAta
chatAM pUrve bAMdhelA karmane lIdhe hoya che. vaLI atre je apAya na hoya ema
kahyuM che te prAyeghaNuM karIne apAya na hoya, e dRSTie kahyuM che, eTale
kavacit apavAdavizeSe tema hoya paNa kharUM. paNa koI paNa saMjogomAM sthirAdi
daSTine pratipAta te na ja hoya. athavA te bIjI rIte joIe te tevA zreNikAdi jevA
mahAnubhAvone A apAyabAdhA te anapAya ja che, apAya ja nathI, bAdhArUpa ja
nathI. kAraNa ke vajana cekhAne pakAvavAthI kAMI tenA para pAkarUpa asara thAya
nahiM, te pAke nahiM; apratipAtI tema zarIradu:kharUpa pAka hovA chatAM, tevA
mahAjananA cittanenirapAya ja Azayane kaMI paNa du:kharUpa asara pahoMcatI
nathI. te avadhUte te "sadA maganamAM" rahe che ! eTale paramArthathI tevA
samyagadRSTi samatAvaMta jogIjanone tevo koI paNa apAya sparza nathI, jalamAM
kamalanI jema teo nilepa ja rahe che. kAraNa ke teo sarva apAyathI-bAdhAthI para
"udAsIna evI AtmadazAnI ucca kakSAe birAjamAna hoya che, ke tevo apAyarUpa
duHkhabhAva temane pahoMcI zakatA nathI. sukhakI sahelI hai, akelI udAsInatA,
adhyAtmanI jananI, te udAsInatA, -zrImad rAjacaMdrajI * sukha duHkharUpa karama
phala jANe, nizcaya eka AnaMdo re, -zrI AnaMdaghanajI Ama je daSTi pratipAtI
nathI, AvyA pachI paDatI nathI, apratipAtI ja rahe che, te te apAyarahita, hAni-
bAdhArahita, duHkharahita ja hoya, emAM kaMI prazna ja rahetuM nathI, ema sAbIta
thayuM. A AkRti uparathI samajAze.

Page #163 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The General Statement of Eight Yogadristi: Liberation is an Unbroken Journey
**(97)**  **Figure-5**  **Liberation**  **6** **8** **Journey** **Unstoppable**
**Helpless** **Unbroken** **|** **2** **|** **J** **T** **W** **The suffering of
the cycle of birth and death** **Unstoppable** **Helpless** **Liberation** **Is
granted** **Stoppable** **False**  Here also -  **"The journey is broken due to
the absence of breaking, like sleep at night. The obstacle arises from the
divine nature of the feet." (20)**  **Commentary:**  **Due to the absence of
breaking the journey, the journey is continuous and uninterrupted towards the
likes of Kanyakubja. This is like sleep at night. What? The obstacle, the
restriction, arises from the divine nature of birth, which gives rise to the
feet, the character, and the various types of compassionate feelings. This leads
to activity again.**  **Just as when sleep is gone, the person going to
Kanyakubja continues to journey, so too (when sleep is gone, he starts walking
again).**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ATha yogadaSTinuM sAmAnya kathana : mukti ati abhaga prayANa (97) AkRti-5 mukti
6 8 prayANa apratipAtI ja nirapAya ja akhaMDa nI | 2 | ja tva
bhavabhramaNadu:kha prati apratipAtI nirapAya mukti sApAya pratipAtI mithyA ahIM
paNa - prayANa bhaGgAbhAvena nizi svApasamaH punaH  /  vighAto
divyabhAvatazcaraNasyopajAyate  //  20  //  prayANa bhaMga abhAvathI, rAtre
zayana samAna; vighAta upaje caraNane, surabhava bhAve nidAna, 20 vRtti-
kathAmAmavera-prayANa bhaMganA abhAvathI, kanyakuja vagere pratye gamanamAM
anavarata-niraMtara prayANuthI (akhaMDa-abhaMga prayANa karatAM), AthI vaLI
nizi-nizAmAM, rAtrine viSe, vApama:-nidrA, zayana samAna. zuM ? te ke-vidhAtA-
vidhAta, pratibaMdha (rokANa, aTakAyata), vizvamAvata -divyabhAva thakI-janmane
lIdhe, vALa2-caraNane, cAritrano, 36nA-upaje che,-tathA prakAranA dayika bhAvanA
vegathI, te punaH-pharIthI temAM ja pravRtti hoya che. jema nidrA dUra thatAM,
kanyakubaje janAranI niraMtara prayANamAM gamanapravRtti hoya che tema, (nidrA
UDI jatAM te pAcho AgaLa cAlavA mAMDe che tema).

Page #164 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Yoga-drishti-samuccaya  **Thus:** Due to the absence of **praayan-bhang**,
the **charan** of sleep at night, like a **charan**, arises from **divya-bhav**
- due to the birth of a god. (98)  ## Commentary  And having attained
**apratipaati** - a vision that does not fall, the journey towards liberation
continues uninterruptedly, until liberation is attained. But if there are any
remaining **karma-bhogavato**, then to experience them, perhaps one may have to
take birth as a god or human, in the form of an **abhang** journey, in between.
Thus, an obstacle in the form of **vidhat-vishrar** arises in **charitra**. But
when that birth is completely experienced, the journey towards liberation
continues.  Just as a man sets out to go to Kanauj, and on the way, he has to
take four or more rests, spend the night, and due to these overnight stays, he
also gets further away from his destination, and then in the morning, the
journey resumes, and through these uninterrupted journeys, he finally reaches
Kanauj; similarly, the **yagi** who is going to the city of liberation, with
this stable vision of **apratipaati**, may have some remaining **karma-bhog**,
then he may have to spend the night in the form of four or more births as a god
or human; when that **kanauj** is overcome, the journey towards liberation
resumes, and through this uninterrupted journey, he finally reaches the city of
liberation, "**swaroop swadesh jaay ja**."  "**Jaashu swaroop swadesh re**" -
**Mahatattva-jna** Shrimad Rajchandraji  "This is the true understanding
(**samyak-tv** arises, after attaining **sthira-drishti**, the being may take
birth, but that birth cannot stop him from going towards liberation; that birth
does not give rise to the cycle of future births. Until true understanding
arises, **samyak-drishti** is not attained, every birth becomes the cause of a
new birth; infinite **anubandh** continue to happen. But when true understanding
arises, this infinite **anubandh** is destroyed; and the previously generated
**karma**, with **sadhya-drishti** of **sabhya-prakar**, are experienced,
exhausted, the previously taken **karma-pudgal** is completely repaid, becoming
free from its debt, one may have to take one, two, or at most fifteen births,
but this does not stop liberation. He has already fallen on the path of
liberation. When true understanding arises, the truth is known as truth, the
falsehood is known as falsehood, he has got **line-clear**."  Shri Man:Sukhbhai
Kir, **Shant-Sudharas** Commentary.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 yogadRSTisamuccaya athaH--prayANabha ganA abhAvane lIdhe, rAtre nidrA jevA
caraNanA vidhAta, divyabhAvathI-devajanmanA kAraNe, upaje che. (98) vivecana ane
apratipAtI-nahiM paDatI evI dRSTi prApta thaye, muktimarga pratyenuM
prayANugamana te akhaDapaNe abha'gapaNe cAlyA ja kare che, yAvat muktinI prApti
hAya che. paNa jo karmanA bheAgavaTo kAMi bAkI hAya, te te bhAgavI levA mATe
vacamAM abha'ga prayANu visAmArUpa deva manuSyanA bhava kadAca dharavA paNa
paDe, Ama cAritramAM vidhAta-viSrarUpa pratibaMdha AvI paDe; paraMtu te te
bhavane te te kautkraya vyatIta thatAM, punaH muktimArge prayANa AgaLa dhape
che. jema koi eka manuSya kaneAja javA nikaLyo hAya, tene lAMbuM cheTuM hAi
vacamAM e, cAra ke vadhAre visAmA karavA paDe, rAtrivAsa karavA paDe, ane te
rAtavAsAthI tene mAzrama paNa dUra thaI jAya, pAchuM savAre prayANa cAlu thAya,
ane rAtavAsA ema akhaDa-abhaMga prayANa karatAM karatAM te chevaTe kanAja
pahAMce; tema jevA bhava apratipAtI evI A sthirA Adi dRSTimAM vartatA yAgI
muktinagare javA nIkaLyo che; tene kadAca kamane bhega avazeSa-khAkI rahyo hAya,
teA deva-manuSyanA e-cAra ke vadhAre bhava karavArUpa zayanavaDe rAtrivAsa
karavA paDe; pAchA kanA udaya dUra thatAM, muktimArge prayANa puna: cAlu thAya,
ane ema akhaMDa abhaMga gamana karatAM te chevaTe muktipure phoMce, 'svarUpa
svadeza jAya ja.' " jAzu` svarUpa svadeza re"--mahAtattvajJa zrImad rAjacaMdrajI
" e sAcI samaja ( samyaktva upajyA pachI, sthirA dRSTi pAmyA pachI jIva bhava
bhale kare, paNa te bhava tene mukti prati jatAM na ja zake; te bhava bIjA bhAvI
bhavanI paripATI na ja upajAve. sAcI samaja na thai hAya, samyagdRSTi na thai
hoya tyAMsudhI pratyeka bhava bIjA navA bhava karavAnAM kAraNa thAya ja; anaMta
anubaMdha thayA ja kare. paNa sAcI samaja Avye e anaMta anuSadha nAza pAme; ane
pUrva upAjelAM karma sabhyaprakAra sAdhyadRSTie, bheAgavI levA, kheravI
nAMkhavA, AgaluM karmAM pudgalanuM lIdheluM pAchuM sarvathA cukAvI ApavA, tenA
deNAthI mAkaLA thavA, ekAda be ke vadhAremAM vadhAre paMdara bhava karavA paDe
te bhale, paNa tethI muktinI aTakAyata na ja thAya. muktinA raste tA te paDI
cUkaye che. sAcI samaja ALye, satyanuM satyarUpe bhAna thaye, asatyanuM
asatyarUpe bhAna thaye, tene lAinakalIara (Line-clear) maLI ja cUkI che.' zrI
mana:sukhabhAi kIra kRta zAMtasudhArasa vivecana

Page #165 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Eight Yogadristi: A Summary  **General Statement:** “In the four of creation,
stability, etc., the journey of liberation does not break; just as the sun and
moon shine, so too does the happiness of the liberated soul.”  **Summary:** (9)
- The eight dristi are included in the three yags, namely, Iccha, Yaga, and
Adhi, which were mentioned earlier. These eight dristi are: Mitra, Tara, Khala,
Dipr, Stira, Kanta, Prabha, and Pa. They can be compared to the increasing
brightness of a straw fire, a village fire, a wood fire, a lamp, a gem, a star,
the sun, and the moon, respectively. The first four dristi are characterized by
mithyatva (false belief), while the fifth dristi, Stira, marks the beginning of
samyaktva (right belief).  Although the first four dristi, Mitra, etc., are
characterized by mithyatva, they are considered sad-dristi (good dristi) because
they are the cause of samyaktva. Just as sugarcane is essential for the
production of pure sugar, the stages of Mitra, etc., are essential for the
attainment of the pure soul and liberation. The Mitra, etc., dristi are like
sugarcane because they provide the sweetness of the right belief.  In these
eight dristi, the eight limbs of the fourfold path, namely, Cham-niyam, etc.,
are attained one by one. The eight types of citta-ashay dosha (mental and
emotional defilements), namely, Udvega, etc., are abandoned one by one, leading
to the attainment of these eight dristi. The eight virtues, namely, Advesha,
Jijnasa, etc., manifest one by one in these eight dristi.  Here, the word
"dristi" refers to a belief that is aligned with the truth and the teachings of
the scriptures. It leads to the cessation of wrong actions and the manifestation
of right actions.  The eight dristi are mentioned in this context from a gross
perspective, considering the removal of the veils. However, from a subtle
perspective, the stages of yaga are infinite.  The first four dristi, Mitra,
etc., are prone to falling back into mithyatva. They can come and go, and if
they do, they can lead to hell, etc. Thus, the first four dristi can be either
pratipati (falling back) or apratipati (not falling back). There is a choice.
However, the last four dristi, Stira, etc., are apratipati. Once they are
attained, they do not fall back, and therefore, they do not lead to hell, etc.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ATha yogadRSTinu' sAmAnya kathana : sArasamuccaya " sRSTi thirAdika cAramAM,
mugati prayANa na bhAMje 2; rayaNIzayana jima zrama hare, suranara sukha tima
chAje re....vI20" 5 sArasamuccaya-(Summary) (9) -zrI yAga0 sajjhAya. pa
prArabhamAM je icchAyAga Adi traNa yAga kahyA, temAM aMtarbhAva-samAveza pAmatI
sAmAnyathI A ATha dRSTi che; mitrA, tArA, khalA, dIprA, sthirA, kAMtA, prabhA,
pA. temAM uttarAttara vadhatA jatA beSa,-tRNuagnikaNu, gAmayaagnikaNu,
kASThaagnikaNu, dIpaka, ratna, tArA, sUrya ane caMdranA prakAza sAthe, anukrame
sarakhAvI zakAya che. A AThamAM pahelI cAra sudhI mithyAtva hAya che, pAMcamI
sthirA dRSTithI samyaktvanA prAraMbha thAya che. mitrA Adi cAramAM mithyAtva
hevA chatAM tene saddaSTimAM gaNI, tenu kAraNa e che ke te samyaktvanA
kAraNarUpa thAya che, eTale kAraNamAM kAnA upacAra karavAmAM AvyeA che. jema
zuddha sAkaranI banAvaTamAM zeraDI vagere avasthAe Avazyaka che, tema zuddha
AtmAnI niSpattimAM siddhimAM mitrA vagere avasthAe-AtmadazAe avazya upayeAgI
heAya che. mitrA Adi dRSTi zeraDI jevI che, kAraNa ke temAMthI saMvegarUpa mAnI-
mIThAzanI prApti thAya che. A ATha dRSTimAM, cama-niyama vagere ceAganA ATha
aMganI anukrame ekeka ema prApti hAya che; khe-udvega vagere ATha prakAranA
citta-Azaya doSane! tyAga thatAM, anukrame A AThe dRSTi sAMpaDe che; ane adveSa-
jijJAsA vagere ATha guNamAMthI ekeka anukrame A ATha dRSTimAM AvirbhAva pAme
che-pragaTe che. atre 'dRSTi' zabdane artha sAzraddhAthI yukta, sadAgamanI
AjJAne anukUla evA edha che; ane tenA phaLarUpe asatpravRtti aTake che, ne
satpravRttipada pragaTe che. A sRSTi ATha kahI, te teA kanA AvaraNa TaLavAnI
apekSAe, sthUla dRSTibinduthI kahI che. bAkI sUkSma rIte joie teA yAganA sthAna
anaMta che. A ATha dRSTimAMthI mitrA Adi je pahelI cAra che, tenA pratipAta-
bhraza thAya paNa kharA; AvIne cAlI paNa jAya, ane jo tema thAya te narakAdi
apAya paNa upaje. Ama pahelI cAra dRSTi pratipAtI-pAchI paDanArI ke apratipAtI
pAchI na paDanArI heAya. ema vikalparUpa bhajanA che. paNa chellI cAra sthira
Adi daSTi te apratipAtI ja hAya-AvyA pachI pAchI paDe ja nahiM evI hAya, ane
tethI temAM narakAdi apAya paNa hAya nahi.

Page #166 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(100) After attaining the Yogadristi Samuccaya and such an unyielding,
unwavering vision, the journey towards the city of liberation continues
uninterrupted and unbroken.  Perhaps along the way, one may have to endure some
suffering, requiring a temporary stay in the form of a few births as a noble
deity or human, but ultimately, one will reach the city of liberation, returning
to one's true home. 7 Gadasti Kalasha Kavya   Mandakranta - in the midst of
friends, the three worlds' companion receives the nectar of speed, and with that
strength, he illuminates, becoming steady like a star, holding love in his
heart, what radiance he possesses, with beauty, the moon, what coolness, gentle
and peaceful. He attains the best, the most excellent vision, a friend like
Jesus, he may attain the sweet, delicious, intoxicating feeling of love; his
purity becomes like refined sugar, pure and refined, and he experiences the
taste of nectar, eternal joy and bliss. Within the soul, the posture of Yama-
Niyama is steady, in Pranayama, he abandons the external form and cultivates the
self; in Pratyahara, he firmly holds onto the self, with unwavering
determination, in Atmadhyana, he becomes one with the unchanging, complete God,
attaining Samadhi. He abandons sorrow, his mind becomes firm, he abandons the
agitation of Yoga, he is not disturbed by distractions, delusion flees far away;
he does not find any fault in other places, disease comes to an end, and without
attachments, he attains the state of being free from attachments, through
progress. This is the first thing to hear, to know, the essence, a good listener
understands the essence through listening, and inquires about the essence with
thought; he takes refuge in the essence with all his soul, with complete
devotion, he constantly engages in activity within it, becoming a seeker of the
essence. The eyes of Yogadristi open, they seek the path of Yoga, with faith, he
becomes free, he sees the true knowledge with great understanding; 10

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (100) yogadaSTisamuccaya ane AvI apratipAtI-pAchI nahi paDatI dRSTi sAMpaDayA
pachI, muktinagara pratyenuM prayANu-gamana akhaMDa abhaMgANe cAlyA kare.
vaccamAM kadAca kamane bhoga bAkI hoya te uttama deva-manuSyanA alpa bhava
karavArUpa rAtavAso karavo paDe to bhale, paNa chevaTe te muktipure pahoMce ja,
"svarUpa svadeze" jAya ja. 7 gadaSTi kaLazakAvya maMdAkrAMtA - mitrAmAMhi
tribhuvanasakhA veganI matrI pAve, ne tArA te balavato karI dIpato sthira thA
kAMtA jevI para prIti dharI, bhAnu zuM teja dhArI, zebhe gI zazi zuM zItale
saumya ne zAMtikArI. pAmI Isu sama sarasa saddaSTi mitrA anUpa, bhale pAme rasa
sumadhure miSTa saMvegarUpI; zuddhi tenI thaI jaI parA zarkarA zuddha pAve, ne
AsvAda anubhava sudhA nitya AnaMda bhAve. AtmAmAMhI yama-niyama Asana te sthira
sAthe, prANAyAme pararUpa tyajI Atmane bhAva vAdhe; pratyAhAre viSayathI haThI
dhAraNuM dhIra sAdhI, AtmadhyAne acala bhagavAna pUrNa pAme samAdhi. kheda tyAgI
mana daDha dhare, yoga udvega tyAge, vikSepe nA khaLabhaLI uThe, bhrAMti te dUra
bhAge; anya sthAne muda nava lahe, rogane aMta Ave, ne AsaMgA viNa pragatithI
mekSa ni:saMga pAve. aSI te prathama suNavA jANavA tattva che, zrotA sAro
zravaNathI bujhI ciMtane tattva prIche; sarvAtmAthI zaraNa bhajata tattvanuM
pUrNa bhAve, temAM nitye pravRtti karatAM tattva taskUpa thA. yogadaSTi nayana
khulatAM yegane mAga bhALe, sazraddhAthI cuta thaI ati bodha sAca nihALe; 10

Page #167 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(101) General statement of the eight *dṛṣṭis*: *Gaṣṭi Kaḷkāvya* All activities
cease, only *satpravṛtti* remains, Attracting the *śivapada* itself, it comes
close and close. 11 Wishing to travel on the path of liberation, the *yogi*
traveler, Makes his journey with pure intention, joyful with his friends; in
between, sometimes he takes rest in divine births, He reaches the abode of
*sacchidānanda*, progressing. 12 *Anuccheda* Having attained *dṛṣṭi*, he is
established in virtue, he abandons his worldly home; the *ātmarāmī* muni attains
the abode of *manandan*. 13 Like the moon in the second fortnight, *gaṣṭi* opens
gradually; Attaining the full *yogakālā*, he plays in the form of God. 14 ||
This *kṛti* is composed by the great sage *Śomidrācāryajīva* in the
*virafūnaman* *kuvanan* with the help of *Mayārāren* *sumane* *Nainī*
*Bṛhasṭoka* named *kavivicene* with the help of *Śrīyogadṛṣṭisamucchayaśāstra*,
the chapter on the general nature of the eight *yogadṛṣṭis*.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (101) ATha pagadaSTinuM sAmAnya kathana : gaSTi kaLakAvya beTI sarve pravRtti
aTakI satapravRtti ja thAve, AkarSatuM zivapada svayaM pAsa ne pAsa Ave. 11
muktimArge gamana karavA IcchI yegI pravAsI, mAMDe mitrAmahiM majala te zuddha
bhAve ulAsI; vacce vacce kavacita karate divya janme visAmA, pahoMce che te
pragati karate saccidAnaMda dhAmA. 12 anucchu daSTi pAmI guNe jAmI, vAmI svadeSa
grAmane; AtmArAmI muni pAme, manaMdana dhAmane. 13 bIjanA caMdramA jevI, gadaSTi
khulya krame; pUrNa yogakalA pAmI, bhagavAna svarUpe rame. 14 | | kRti
maharSizomidrAcAryajIvate viraphUnamana kuvanaMnena mayArArena sumane
nainIbRhsttokaa nAmakavivecanena saprapracaM vivecite
zrIyogadRSTisamuccayazAstre aSTayogadRSTisAmAnya svruupniruupnnaadhikaarH||

Page #168 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Special Feature of the Yogic Perspective 1. Mitra Keshti:  **‘Mitra’**
Now, each perspective, while explaining the process of Yoga, says:  “In Mitra,
the vision is weak, Yama, Iccha, etc. are here; Akheda in Devakarya, etc., and
Advesha elsewhere.” (21)  **Explanation:**  In the Mitra perspective, (1) the
vision is weak, (2) Yama, Iccha, etc. are present, (3) Akheda (non-attachment)
in Devakarya (divine work), etc., and (4) Advesha (non-hatred) elsewhere.  This
is the main characteristic of this creation, which is truly reflected in all
names.  **Analysis:**  Because of the Mitra-bhaava (friendly attitude) towards
the world, the mind is free from hatred. This is why it is said, “Mitra ne
satramuji veru melyu na melyu” (A friend does not get hatred).  **Vritti:**
Mitrayaam - in the Mitra perspective, Darshan melyu - the vision is weak, like
the light of a firefly, a blade of grass, or a spark.  Cham - Yama, Ahimsa, etc.
are the characteristics, and Iccha, etc. are the divisions. It is said,
“Advittaana taiyatracharyaastraa: chanaa” - Ahimsa, Satya, Asteya, Brahmacharya,
and Aparigraha are the five Yamas (restraints). And the divisions of Yama are
Iccha (desire), Pravritti (activity), Stha (state), and Siddhi (achievement),
which will be explained later.  **Vena Revaacho:**  Devakaya, etc. - Akheda, the
word ‘aada’ (etc.) includes Guru (teacher). In such situations, due to the
satisfaction of such needs, there is no Khed (regret), but only activity. Just
like in the case of headache, etc., there is activity in the form of seeking
relief from the pain.  Advesha - and Advesha, Ansar, Gapatra tu - elsewhere,
that is, in places other than Devakarya, etc., there is Advesha. Because, due to
the ignorance of the truth, there is a feeling of ‘me’ and ‘mine’, but due to
the non-arising of the seed of that feeling (because the seed does not sprout),
there is a desire for the realization of the truth. Therefore, there is no worry
elsewhere, and even in the presence of worry, there is a slight spark of
compassion.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 yogadRSTinuM vizeSa thana 1. mitrA kaeNSTi : 'mitrA' have pratyeka dRSTie
ceAga-ceAjanA upaddhati karatAM kahe cheH-- mitrAyAM darzana mandaM yama
icchAdikastathA akhedeo devakAryAdAvadveSazcAparatra tu  //  21  //  darzana
mada mitrAmahIM, yama icchAdika atra; akhedya devakAryAdimAM te adveSa anyatra
21 a:--mitrA dRSTimAM (1) maMda daOna, (2) icchA Adika cama, (3) devakA
vageremAM akheda, (4) ane anyatra-anya sthaLe adveSa hAya che. A sRSTinuM mukhya
lakSaNa sakala nAma yathArtha paNe ghaTe che. vivecana jagat pratye mitrabhAva-
nivra buddhi hovAthI, tene 'mitti ne satramUjI veruM maLyuM na meLapha' evI
vRtti:-mitrAyAM--mitrA dRSTimAM, varzana maLyuM-darzana maMda, svapa meSa,
tRNuagnikaNnA udyota- prakAza sarakhA hoya che. cama:-yama, ahiMsA Adi
lakSacuvALA, phjhAntithA-tathA icchA Adi bhedavALA hAma che. kahyuM che ke-
advittAnA taiyatracaryAztriA: canAH '--ahiMsA, satya, asteya, brahmacaya,
aparigraha e pAMca mama (trata) che. ane A yamanA IcchA, pravRtti, stha, siddhi
--e bheda che, te AgaLa upara kaheze. veNa revAco--devakAya' vageremAM akheda,
Adi zabdathI gurukAnuM grahaNa che. tevA tevA prakAre AvI paDaje, tathAprakAranA
paritoSane lIdhe ahIM kheda nathI hotA, paNa pravRtti ja hoya che;-jema
zireAgurutvamAthuM duHkhavu' vagere doSanA sadbhAvamAM paNa bhAbhinaMdInI
bhAgakA mAM pravRtti hoya che tema. adveSaAE-ane adveSa, anasara, gapatra tu-
anyatra tA, a--devakA vagere anya sthaLe adreSa hoya che. kAraNa ke tevA prakAre
tattvanA ajANapaNAe karIne mAtmaya -vIya khIjanuM hovApaNuM chatAM, te
mAtsa`bhAvanA aMkuranA anudayane lIdhe (masaranA udaya thatA nathI tethI),
tattvAnuSThAnane AzrIte ka`mAM enA Azaya hoya che. ethI karIne ene anyatra te ci
MtA hotI nathI, ane te ciMtAnA hAvApaNAmAM paNa karuNA aMzanA khIjanu' ja jarA
sphuraNu hoya che.

Page #169 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Friend's Vision: The First Limb of Yoga - Yama  (193) The true nature of this
vision is as follows: In this first vision called "Friend's Vision," the weak
perception, bound by the weak faith, is like a straw fire. Just as a straw fire
is unable to see the light of the desired object, this vision, bound by the
limiting factor, cannot see the desired object of ultimate reality. Because just
as a straw fire does not last long enough to perceive the light of the object,
this vision does not remain stable long enough to practice the knowledge
properly. Just as the light of a straw fire is weak and dim, this vision is also
weak and has little power. Just as the light of a straw fire flickers and
disappears, leaving no lasting memory, this vision, being short-lived and weak,
does not leave a lasting impression. And just as a straw fire is completely
flawed and incapable of performing any real work, this vision is also flawed and
incomplete, and therefore cannot perform actions like bowing with devotion. It
only performs actions like bowing to the material.  "On this occasion, I said,
let us now speak of the first vision; where there is a friend, there is a weak
perception, like a straw fire... brave..." - Shri Yoga Darshan - 5  And this
Friend's Vision is the first vision, which means that according to the
previously mentioned rule, it achieves (1) the first limb of Yama, (2) the
abandonment of the first fault called "Regret," and (3) the first virtue called
"Non-hatred." It is as follows:  1. The first limb: Yama. The other name for
Yama is Vrata (vow). There are five Vratas: Ahimsa (non-violence), Satya
(truthfulness), Asteya (non-stealing), Brahmacharya (continence), and Aparigraha
(non-possession). Each of these Vratas has four types due to their varying
intensity: Ichchhayam (desire-based), Pravrittiyam (action-based), Sthiriyam
(stable), and Siddhiyam (perfected). (The nature of these will be explained by
the great author at the end of this text.) A yogi who has the first vision must
follow these Vratas of Ahimsa, etc., whether they are a small vow-taker or a
great vow-taker. They must be truly non-violent, truthful, non-stealing,
continent, and non-possessive. To understand the nature of these Vratas of
Ahimsa, etc., it is essential to know their scriptural definition. Therefore, on
this occasion, we will provide a brief explanation according to the first
Patanjali Yoga Sutra:

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 mitrA daSTi : paheluM yogAMga-yama (193) kharekharI vRtti atra hoya che. A
mitrA nAmanI pahelI dRSTimAM je maMda darzana darzana-satuzraddhAvALe baMdha
hoya che, te maMda-svalpa zaktivALo heI, ene tRNa agnikaNanI upamA ghaTe che.
jema tRNaagnikaNane prakAza ISTa padArthanuM darzana karAvavA samartha thatuM
nathI, tema A daSTine baMdha tatvathI paramArthathI ISTa padArthanuM darzana
karAvI zakato nathI. kAraNa ke jema tRNa agnine prakAza padArthanI kaMIka
barAbara sUjha paDe teTale vakhata TakatA nathI, jotajotAmAM vilaya pAmI jAya
che, tema A dRSTine bodha paNa tene samyapaNe prayoga karI zakAya eTale vakhata
sthiti karato nathI-jhAjhIvAra TakatuM nathI. jema tRNa agnino prakAza alpa-
maMda-jhAMkha hoya che, tema A dRSTine bedha maMda viyavALo alpa sAmarthyavALa
hoya che. jema tRNaagniprakAza camakIne cAlyo jAya che, daDha smRtisaMskAra
rahetA nathI, tema atre paNa bAdha alpajIvI ne alpavIya hovAthI tene paTu
mRtisaMskAra rahevA pAmato nathI. ane Ama tRNaagniprakAza sarvathA vikalapAMgaLo
hAI tenAthI kaMI kharuM kArya banavuM saMbhavatuM nathI, tema A dRSTimAM
bedhanuM vikalapaNuM-apUrNapaNe hoI atre bhAvathI vaMdana Adi kArya banatA
nathI,-dravya vaMdanAdi hoya che. "eha prasaMgathI meM kahyuM, prathama daSTi
have kahIe re; jihAM mitrA tihAM bedha je, tuNa aganise lahIe re..vIra...." -
zrI yogao da sajajhAya -5 ane A mitrA prathama daSTi che, eTale emAM pUrve
kahelA niyama pramANe (1) ganuM prathama aMga-yama, (2) kheda nAmanA prathama
doSane tyAga-akheda, (3) ane adveSa nAmano prathama guNa prApta thAya che. te A
prakAre :- 1. paheluM gAMga: yama yamanuM bIjuM nAma vrata che. te pAMca che-
ahiMsA, satya, asteya, brahmacarya ne apari. graha; ane te pratyekanA vaLI
taratamatAnA kAraNe-vadhatA ochA dazAbhedane lIdhe cAra cAra prakAra che :
IcchAyAma, pravRttiyama, sthirayama ne siddhiyama. (AnuM svarUpa AgaLa upara
graMthanA cheDe mahAtmA graMthakAra kahevAnA che.) prathama dRSTivALe yegI
dezathI ke sarvathI A ahiMsAdi yamanuM avazya pAlana karanAra hoya, aNuvratI ke
mahAvatI hoya. te kharekhara ahiMsaka, satyavAdI, asteyavaMta,
brahmacaryadhAraka ane niSparigrahI hoya. A ahiMsAdi yamasaMpanna gIne ahiMsAdi
yama kevA heya, tenuM svarUpa samajavA mATe tenuM zAkIya lakSaNa avazya jANavuM
joIe. eTale atre prasaMgathI prathama pAtaMjala yogasUtra anusAra tenI kaMIka
vyAkhyA karavAmAM Ave che :

Page #170 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(104) The action that is the cause of the separation of the soul from the body,
which is the collection of the five senses, is violence. The absence of this is
non-violence. Truthfulness of mind and speech is truth. Stealing the property of
others is theft, the absence of which is non-stealing. Restraint of the senses
is celibacy. Renunciation of possessions and attachments is non-possession, non-
attachment. These five vows, being unlimited and undemarcated by direction,
time, caste, etc., are universal and absolute, and are called "mahavrata".  How
are these yamas considered limbs of yoga? Because violence, etc., are the
opposite of the eight limbs of yoga, and these are restrained by the feeling of
their opposites, non-violence, etc. That is, non-violence, etc., do not allow
violence, etc., to arise, or if they arise, they destroy them. How is this
restraint done by non-violence, etc.? Violence, etc., are restrained, so there
is ease in attaining the materials of yoga, i.e., it produces a purity of mind
that makes it easy to attain the materials of yoga. Thus, indirectly, there is
restraint by non-violence, etc., but it is not directly a limb of yoga, like the
direct benefit of concentration, etc.  These twenty-seven types of violence are:
by body, by speech, by mind; done, caused, approved; and mild, moderate, and
extreme - thus, by mutual combination, there are twenty-seven types of violence
(3x3x3=27). By contemplating the infinite consequences of these twenty-seven
types of violence, which are suffering and ignorance, the yamas of non-violence,
etc., become superior, excellent, and refined. And the fruit of such refined
non-violence, etc., is described as follows: In the presence of those who
practice non-violence, there is an abandonment of hatred, and an abandonment of
the killing of snakes, worms, etc., which are naturally hostile and born to
kill. (Yoga Sutra 2.33, etc.). Thus, Patanjali has considered non-violence,
etc., according to the Yoga Sutras.  x "Unlimited, universal, great vow" -
Patanjali Yoga Sutra 2.3. + "Abandonment of violence" - Patanjali Yoga Sutra
2.33, etc. "Restraining the arguments by the feeling of their opposite." - Sri
Yashvijayaji's commentary on the Yoga Sutras, 2.3. * "Truthfulness is the
foundation of action and its fruits. Non-stealing is the foundation of the
possession of all treasures. Celibacy is the foundation of the attainment of the
highest state." - Patanjali Yoga Sutra 2.36-39. "Abandonment of hatred in the
presence of him, and the fruit of his action is not done." - Sri Yashvijayaji's
commentary on the Yoga Sutras, 2.25.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (104) thAgadaSTisamuccaya prANuviyeganA prayajanarUpa vyApAra te hiMsA, tene
abhAva te ahiMsA. manavacananuM yathArthapaNuM te satya. paradhananuM apaharaNa
te teya-cerI, tene abhAva te asteya. upasthane saMyama te brahmacarya.
bhegasAdhanono asvIkAra-agrahaNa te aparigraha-akicanatA. A pAMca vrata dizA,
kALa, jAti AdithI anavacchinna-amaryAdita (Undemarcated) ne sArvabhauma
(Universal & absolute) hoya te te mahAvata" kahevAya che. A yamane yoganuM aMga
zI rIte kahyuM? te ke-hiMsAdi je che te eganA virodhI che, ane A hiMsAdi tenAthI
viruddha pratipakSI evA ahiMsAdinA bhAvanathI * bAdhA pAme che, eTale ke
ahiMsAdi hiMsAdine UThavA detA nathI athavA UThe yamanuM gAMga- te tene upaghAta
kare che-nAza kare che. A prakAre ahiMsAdivaDe karIne paNuM zI rIte? hiMsAdinuM
bApana thAya che, tethI karIne gasAmagrInI prAptinuM sugama paNuM hoya che,
arthAta evI cittazuddhirUpa gyatA upaje che ke jethI yegasAmagrI pAmavI sulabha
thAya che. Ama ADakatarI rIte (Indirectly) ahiMsAdinuM gAMgapaNuM che, paNa
dhAraNA AdinI jema sAkSAt upakArakapaNAthI tenuM sIdhesIdhuM (Directly)
yegAMgapaNuM nathI. A hiMsAdI vitarko ra7 che: kepathI, lebhathI, mehathI; kRta,
kArita, anumoditapaNathI; ane mRdu, madhyama ane adhimAtrapaNAthI,-ema paraspara
saMyegathI hiMsAdinA (3x3x3=27) prakAra thAya che. evA A hiMsAdi vitarkonuM
duHkha-ajJAnarUpa anaMta phala che evuM vibhAvana karatAM, ahiMsAdi yamo
prakarSa pAme che, utkRSTa keTinA bane che. ane evA prakRSTa ahiMsAdinuM phala A
prakAre kahyuM che. ahiMsAnA abhyAsavaMtanI sanidhimAM hAjarImAM) vairane tyAga
hoya che, sahaja virodhI-janmaverI evA sApa-naLIo vagerenA hisapaNane tyAga hoya
che. kitidAya tattanidhI vaicAr: (pAta. 135 ItyAdi *). Ama pAtaMjala che. sU.
pramANe ahiMsAdino vicAra karyo. x " tuSAtirerATinamAnachinnA: sArvamauna
mahAvrata-pAtaMjala yuga sU02-3I. + "vitavAne tijamAvanam"--pAtaM, yogao 2-33,
ityAdi. "bAdhanena vitarkANAM pratipakSasya bhAvanAt  /  saurcaoNADamagi
religvamuditama "--zrI yazovijyajIkRta dvA, DhA, rara-3, * " satyapratiSThAyAM
kriyA phalAzrayatvam  /  asteyapratiSThAyAM sarvaratnopasthA nam  /
brahmacaryapratiSThAyAM vIrghAmA kAsthi majayaMtApa -pA, ye 2-36-39.
"vairatyAgo'ntike tasya phalaM cAkRtakarmaNaH  /  nepathAnasaddIrcara kanu
nusmRti dvA, dvA 2-25.

Page #171 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Friend's Perspective: An Examination of Non-Violence  (105) Jain philosophy
delves deeply into the subtle nuances of non-violence and defines it as follows:
(1) **Violence** is the taking of life through intentional action (motivated by
passion).  (2) **False Speech** is the utterance of untruth, which includes:  *
**Contradiction of Truth:** Denying the truth, concealing the truth, or
presenting a false version of the truth. * **Misinterpretation:** Saying one
thing while meaning another. * **Harsh Speech:** Words that are violent, cruel,
or abusive, even if they are technically true.  (3) **Theft** is the taking of
another's property, even something as small as a blade of grass, with the
intention to steal.  (4) **Sexual Misconduct** is the violation of celibacy.
(5) **Attachment** is the clinging to external objects, whether animate or
inanimate, through the mind. This is also known as "**Mūchchhā**" (obsession).
The **Vows** are the restraint of the mind, speech, and body from these five
forms of violence, false speech, theft, sexual misconduct, and attachment. These
vows can be practiced in two ways:  * **Aṇuvrata:** Restraint from specific
actions. * **Mahāvratā:** Restraint from all actions.  Each vow has five levels
of intensity.  Those who practice these vows must be free from any form of
violence, false speech, theft, sexual misconduct, and attachment, both in their
own actions and in their encouragement of others. They must also be free from:
* **Mayaśalya:** Attachment to illusion. * **Mithyātvashalya:** Attachment to
falsehood. * **Nidānaśalya:** Attachment to the cause of suffering.  They must
be free from fear, desire, and prejudice, and must be impartial.  (This is why
these vows are called **Samyaktvamūla**, meaning they are rooted in
**Samyaktvā** (right conduct). It is only through right conduct that these vows
can truly be fulfilled.)  To illustrate the depth of these definitions, let us
examine the definition of non-violence:  **"Ghamattayogana Kālacharopam Hiṁsā!"
- Tattvārthasūtra**  This means that violence is the taking of life through
intentional action. This definition is all-encompassing.  **Pramatta** refers to
being influenced by passion, hatred, or other forms of delusion. **Yoga** refers
to the actions of the mind, speech, and body. **Prāṇa** refers to the life
force, which can be either physical or mental.  The **five senses**,
**breathing**, **mental strength**, **verbal strength**, **physical strength**,
and **lifespan** are all considered **physical life force**. **Knowledge**,
**insight**, **reflection**, and other qualities of the soul are considered
**mental life force**.  Therefore, violence is the taking of another's physical
or mental life force through the actions of the mind, speech, or body, motivated
by delusion.  **Physical violence** is the taking of physical life force, while
**mental violence** is the taking of mental life force.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 mitrA daSTi : ahiMsAnI mImAMsA (105) jaina darzanamAM paNa A ahiMsAdino ghaNe
sUkSama tAvika viveka karavAmAM Avyo che, ane tenI A vyAkhyA karI che -(1)
pramatta yegathI prANanuM vyaparopaNa (haravuM) te hiMsA. (2) asat kathana te
amRta-asatya, asat eTale sabhAvajana darzanAnu- pratiSedha, arthAntara ane ga.
4. saddabhAvapratiSedha eTale sadbhUtasAra vyAkhyA niva, sat vastu chupAvavI-
LavavI te; athavA abhUtaubhAvana, asabhUta vastunuM udbhAvana karavuM. arthAt
sat "ne asat kahevuM asat ne sat kahevuM te sadbhAva pratiSedha. va. ekane
badale bIjI vastu kahevI te arthAntara. 4. gaha eTale hiMsA, pAruSya
(kaThoratA), pazunya AdithI yukta vacana bhale satya hoya chatAM gahiMta-niMdya
hoI asatya ja che. (3) adattAdAna te steya, arthAta cerInI buddhithI pArakI
aNadIdhelI tRNadi vastunuM paNa AdAna-grahaNa karavuM te teya. (4) maithuna te
abrahmacarya. (5) mUccha (mamatvabuddhi) te parigraha, cetana ke acetana evA
bAhya-atyaMtara dravyomAM mUccha te parigraha. "mUcha paripraduH". AvA A hiMsA,
amRta, steya, abrahma ne parigrahamAMthI mana-vacana-kAyAthI virati te vrata.
"dikSAgRtataiyAtraHpariko viratticaitana" (ta. sU.) A virati ( vimavuM te)
dezathI hoya ke sarvathI hoya; dezavirati te aNuvrata ane sarvavirati te
mahAvrata. A ekeka vratanI sthiratA athe pAMca pAMca bhAvanA kahI che. A
ahiMsAdi vrata dharanAre puruSa manathI, vacanathI ke kAyAthI hiMsAdi kare
nahiM, karAve nahiM ke anumode nahiM; ane te niHzalya hoya. "nirAlyo gratI" (ta.
sU), arthAt mAyAzalya, mithyAtvazalya ane nidAnazalyathI rahita hoya, nirdabhI,
niSkAmI ane samakitI hoya. (ane eTalA mATe ja A vratane samyakatvamUla kahyA
che, enA mUla AdhArabhUta (Basis) samyakatva hoya te ja enuM kharekharuM
vratapaNuM ghaTe che.) A ekeka vyAkhyA kevI parama arthagaMbhIra che, tenA
udAharaNarUpe ahiMsAnI vyAkhyAnI mImAMsA karIeH "ghamattayonA kALacaropam fhaMsA
! -zrI tattvArthasUtra pramatta yogathI prANanuM vyaparopaNa-haravuM te hisA.
ema tenI sarvagrAhI vizAla vyAkhyA che. pramatta=rAga, dveSa, kaSAyAdi
pramAdathI yukta, ga=mana, vacana, kAyAnA vyApAra, prANa dravyaprANa ke
bhAvaprANa,-pitAnA ke paranA. pAMca iMdriya, zvAsocchavAsa, ahiMsAnI manabala,
vacanabala, kAyabala ne Ayu e daza dravyaprANa che. jJAna, darzana mImAMsA Adi
AtmaguNa te bhAvaprANa che. eTale pramAda vaze karIne mana-vacana kAyAnA
vegathI, pitAnA ke paranA dravyaprANanuM ke bhAvaprANanuM haravuM, tenuM nAma
hiMsA che. dravyaprANunuM haravuM te dravya hiMsA ne bhAvaprANunuM haravuM te
bhAvahiMsA che.

Page #172 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Yogaṣṭi Samuccaya (106)  The key to this is in the hands of the soul. If the
soul is harmed, destroyed, then it is all violence. If there is physical
violence, but it is done with compassion, then it is not violence. If there is
violence in the mind, whether there is physical violence or not, it is still
violence. If there is no violence in the mind, whether there is physical
violence or not, it is still non-violence. To be detached from one's true
nature, to be corrupted, to be agitated, or to be affected by passions like
attachment, aversion, and delusion, is the destruction of the soul or mental
violence. Therefore, falsehood, theft, sexual misconduct, and greed are all
causes of the soul's corruption, and therefore all these sins are part of
violence. Conversely, to be in one's true nature, to not be detached from one's
true nature, to not be affected by passions like attachment, aversion, and
delusion, is non-violence, and truthfulness, etc., are its parts. In short, not
allowing passions like attachment, aversion, and delusion to arise is non-
violence, and their arising is violence.  **66**  "Truthful and generous,
compassionate and righteous; compassion is not one without the sun's rays."  "I
am the soul, violence arises from the mind, all sins are born from it; from
that, the opposite, non-violence, the contemplation of its absence...mind." -
Sa, Tr. Ga. St.  Thus, since the mind is the primary factor in all things, it is
the main test for determining violence and non-violence. And from this, some
points emerge: For a person who practices right conduct, violence does not arise
simply from the taking of life, if they are free from passions like attachment,
aversion, and delusion. But if there is a state of delusion, under the influence
of passions like attachment, aversion, and delusion, then whether the being dies
or not, violence still runs ahead. Because the soul, being deluded, first kills
itself with its own mind, then whether or not it kills another being.  *
—Śrīmad Rājacandrajī Praṇīta Mākshamālā  **66**  "Because the soul's
transformation is the cause of violence, all of it is that. False speech, etc.,
are only mentioned to teach the student. Because of the influence of passions,
the taking of life, in the form of the physical body, is definitely violence."
xt  Maharṣi Śrī Amṛtacandracāryakṛta Puruṣārtha Siddhi Upayā  "Even for one who
practices right conduct, violence does not arise simply from the taking of life,
if they are free from passions like attachment, aversion, and delusion. But in a
state of delusion, under the influence of passions like attachment, aversion,
and delusion, whether the being dies or not, violence still runs ahead. Because
the soul, being deluded, first kills itself with its own mind, then whether or
not it kills another being." - Śrī Puruṣārtha Siddhi Upayā

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 yeAgaSTisamuccaya (106) AmAM mukhya cAvI AtmapAimanA hAthamAM che. eTale
AtmapariNAmanuM jo haMsana thatuM hAya, ghAta thatI hAya, te A sava hiMsA che.
dragRhisA, paNa jo bhAvahu'sA thatI hAya tA ja Rsi'sA che, nahi' te nahi.
bhAvirhaMsA hAya, te dravyahisA hAya ke na hAya, tepaNu hiMsA ja che; bhAvahi'sA
na heAya, te dravyahi'sA hAya ke na heAya, tApaNu ahiM'sA ja che.
AtmapariNAmanuM svasvarUpamAM nahAvu', svasvarUpathI cuta thavu-bhraSTa thavu',
pramatta thavu, athavA rAga-dveSa- mAha Adi pramAdathI vikRtabhAvane pAmavuM te
AtmasvarUpanI ghAta athavA bhAvahi'sA che. eTale asatya, cArI, abrahmacarya,
parigraha vagere paNa AtmAnA vikArabhAvanA kAraNa che, mATe te asatyAdi sarva
pApasthAnaka paNa hiMsAnA aMgabhUta che. * ethI UlaTu AtmAnuM svasvabhAvamAM
vavuM, svasvarUpathI cyuta na thavuM, rAgAdithI vikRta bhAvane na pAmavuM te
ahiMsA che, ane satya Adi paNa tenA aMgarUpa che. TUMkAmAM rAgAdine
aprAdurbhAva-na upajavu te ahiMsA che, tenI utpatti te hiMsA che. 66 satya zIla
ne saghaLAM dAna, dayA hAi ne rahyA pramANu; dayA nahi. te e nahi eka, vinA
sUrya kiraNa nahi dekha "" huM AtamabhAva 'isanathI hi'sA, saghaLAye pApasthAna;
teha thakI viparIta advi'sA, tAsa virahanu dhyAna....mana."--sA, tra. gA. sta.
Ama sarvatra AtmabhAvanuM pradhAnapaNu' heAvAthI, e ja hiMsA-ahiMsA nizcita
karavAnI mukhya kaseATI che. ane A uparathI keTalAka muddA nIkaLe cheH--yukta X
AcaraNavALA yatanAva'tane rAgAdi na heAya, teA prANanA vyaparApaNa (haravA)
mAtrathI ja hiMsA lAgatI nathI; paNa rAgAdine vaza evI pramAda avasthA hAya, teA
jIva mare ke na mare tApaNu hiMsA cAsa AgaLa doDe che; kAraNa ke sakaSAya heAi
AtmA prathama te AtmAne ( peAtAne ) AtmAthI haNe che, pachI bhale khIjA prANInI
hiM'sA thatI hAya vA na thatI * --zrImad rAjacaMdrajI praNIta mAkSamALA 66
'AtmapariNAma hiMsanahetutvAtsarvameva hi saitat  /  anRtavacanAdi
kevalamudAhRtaM ziSyabodhAya  //  yat khalu kaSAyayeogAt prANAnAM
dravyabhAvarUpANAm  /  vyaparopaNasya karaNaM sunizcitA bhavati sA hiMsA || " xt
maharSi zrI amRtacaMdrAcArya kRta puruSArtha siddhiupAya 'yuktAcaraNasya sato
rAgAdyAvezamaMtareNApi  /  na hi bhavati hiMsA praannvypre| paNAdeva ||
vyutthAnAvasthAyAM rAgAdInAM vazapravRttAyAm  /  mriyatAM jIvA mA vA dhAvatya
dhruvaM hiMsA || yasmAtkaSAyaH sanhantyAtmA prathamamAtmanAtmAnam  /
pallAkhAceta na vA dvittA prAcaitALAM tu| ''--zrI puruSArtha siddhiupAya

Page #173 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Friend's Perspective: Ahed-Advesha  (107) "It means that the one who commits
violence first commits violence against himself, whether he commits it against
others or not. Thus, continuous violence or resulting in violence is violence.
Therefore, there is always life-preservation in the egg.  And to explain this
philosophical form of violence and non-violence, three types have been mentioned
- Heta Aहिंसा, Swaroop Aहिंसा, Anubandh Aहिंसा. To save the life of a living
being, to take care of its safety, is the purpose of non-violence, therefore it
is non-violence of Heta Aहिंसा. Not to kill a living being, not to take its
life, is Swaroop Aहिंसा. Non-violence resulting from three types of Anubandh is
Anubandh Aहिंसा. In it,  Heta Aहिंसा and Swaroop Aहिंसा give auspicious results
without Anubandh (tradition), but due to strong ignorance, it is attached to
violence. And the one who is devoid of form or is careful, performs the action
with the power of knowledge and gives non-violence through Anubandh, meaning
that the tradition of non-violence continues. That is why it is said - First
knowledge, then compassion.  Heta Aहिंसा in the form of victory, the form of
non-violence towards insects; the form of the fruit that results from it is the
form of Anubandh...  "Manmohan Jinji! You have painted me with your colors."
Heta-Swaroop Aहिंसा gives, auspicious fruit without Anubandh, it gives due to
strong ignorance, Anubandh to violence.. Mind, devoid of form and the one who
is, is careful in action;  Knowledge power gives non-violence, gives Anubandh to
all. Mind" - Sa. 2. Ga. St. etc. In this way, the profound interpretation of
non-violence etc. has been done in Jain philosophy. In it, the importance of
feeling is paramount, and from it, many riddles arising about violence-non-
violence etc. are easily solved. The special inquirer should refer to Shri
Purushartha Siddhi Upay, Sadha Triso Gatha's Stotra, Tattvarth Sutra, Upadeshpad
etc. places.  2. Ahed  The first defect of intention, called Khed, is avoided
here, so there is Ahed. Not doing what you are doing is called Ahed. Here, this
Ahed decreases in Devakarya, Gurukaaya, Dharmkarya etc. When any duty related to
Sadev, Sadguru, or Saddharma comes up, this man with this perspective acts in
that duty with indomitable enthusiasm, full joy, and extreme enthusiasm, and
does not get tired while acting in it, he remains firmly engaged. Just as the
one who enjoys the world - the one who lives in the created world

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 mitrA daSTi: akheda-adveSa (107) hoya." eTale ke hiMsA karanAro sauthI pahelI
potAnI ja hiMsA kare che, pachI bIjAnI kare ke na kare. Ama hiMsAmAM aviramaNa
ke hiMsAmAM pariNamana te hiMsA che. tethI pramatta egamAM prANavyaparopaNa sadA
hoya che. ane AvuM hiMsA-ahiMsAnuM tAtvika svarUpa samajAvavA mATe tenA traNa
prakAra kahyA che-hetu ahiMsA, svarUpa ahiMsA, anubaMdha ahiMsA. jIva-yatanA-
jayaNA karavI, jIva bacAvavAnI kALajI rAkhavI te ahiMsAne hetu che, mATe te hetu
ahiMsAnA ahiMsA che. jIvane ghAta na kara, prANa na haravA te svarUpa ahiMsA
che. traNa prakAra anubaMdhathI ahiMsA phaLarUpe je pariNAme te anubaMdha ahiMsA
che. temAM hetu ahiMsA ne svarUpa ahiMsA anubaMdha (paraMparA) vinAnuM zubha
phaLa Ape che, paNa daDha ajJAnane lIdhe hiMsAne anubaMdha kare che. ane
svarUpathI je nirava hoya athavA sAvadya hoya, te kriyA jJAnazaktivaDe karIne
anubaMdhe ahiMsA Ape che, arthAta tethI ahiMsAnI paraMparA cAlyA kare che. eTalA
mATe ja kahyuM che ke- ghaDha nA to salA paheluM jJAna ne pachI dayA. hetu
ahiMsA jayaNArUpe, jaMtu aghAta svarUpa; phalarUpe je teha pariName, te
anubaMdha svarUpa... manamohana jinajI! tuja vayaNe muja raMga." hetu-svarUpa
ahiMsA Ape, zubha phala viNa anubaMdha dRDha ajJAna thakI te Ape, hiMsAne
anubaMdha..mana svarUpathI nirava tathA je, che kiriyA sAvadya; jJAnazaktithI
teha ahiMsA, die anubaMdhe sagha.mana"-sA. 2. gA. sta. ItyAdi prakAre ahiMsA
AdinI talasparzI mImAMsA jainadarzanamAM karavAmAM AvI che. temAM bhAvanuM
mukhyapaNuM che, ane enA uparathI hiMsA-ahiMsAdi aMge upajatA aneka koyaDAne
saralatAthI nikAla thAya che. vizeSa jijJAsue zrI puruSArthasiddhiupAya, sADA
traNaso gAthAnuM stavana, tattvArtha sUtra, upadezapada vagere sthaLo jevA. 2.
akheda kheda nAmane prathama AzayadoSa atre TaLe che, eTale akheda hoya che.
pravRtti karatAM na thAvuM tenuM nAma akheda che. atre A akheda devakArya,
gurukAya, dharmakArya AdimAM ghaTe che. sadeva, sadguru, ke saddharma saMbaMdhI
kaMI paNa kartavya AvI paDe tyAre A daSTivALo puruSa te te kartavyamAM adamya
utsAhathI, pUrNa ullAsathI, atyaMta ucharaMgathI pravarte che, ane temAM
pravartatAM thAkata nathI, daDhapaNe maMDayo ja rahe che. jema saMsAramAM
rAcanAro-racyApacce rahenAro

Page #174 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(108) Agadashtisamuccaya The soul, who is the recipient of the cycle of birth
and death, is burdened with sorrow and pain. It is engrossed in worldly pursuits
like the objects of sense, etc. However, in this state of mind, the strong,
unbreakable thread of the true religion has been attached, so the soul remains
immersed in the Dharma Kaya. “The first step is to have seven causes,
fearlessness, non-hatred, and non-envy.” “We get tired from the activity of
envy, hatred is an unpleasant feeling.” - Shri Anandghanji “The true color is
that of wealth… in the desert, the other color is that of the kite. The
qualities are like a well.” “The color of Dharma does not digest… the body
digests. The qualities of goodness do not disappear… the form and the creation
disappear. The qualities…” - Shri Yashovijayji “When the soul awakens, then it
will be attached to… that color.” - Shrimad Rajchandraji 3. Non-hatred Even
though there is non-envy towards the gods, etc., there is non-hatred and non-
jealousy towards those who are not gods, etc. That is, there is no hatred or
jealousy towards those who are not involved in any other gods, gurus, or
religions. There is a neutral attitude of indifference. However, there is still
no true knowledge of the Self, so the seeds of jealousy and hatred have not been
destroyed – they are still present. However, the sprouts and shoots of jealousy
and anger do not sprout or rise, they remain dormant. Because here, the soul’s
mind is engaged in virtuous conduct, taking refuge in the practice of the Self.
It remains vigilant and busy in its own affairs. “I will take care of all, I
will not be deceived by anyone.” Understanding this, it takes care of itself, so
it does not have room for the worries of others. And if it does, it does not
give rise to hatred, jealousy, intolerance, or contempt towards them, but rather
a feeling of compassion arises: “Oh, this poor soul! It does not respect the
honorable, so it will suffer endlessly.” This compassion arises in the form of a
desire to cut off the suffering of others. Or, hatred is an unpleasant feeling,
aversion, dislike. Non-hatred is the absence of such hatred, unpleasant
feelings, and aversion towards the virtuous, the true religion, and honor, etc.
This is a negative type of ‘quality’. It is not a small matter. This quality of
non-hatred manifests here. And thus – “The vows also manifest here, there is no
fear in good deeds; There is no hatred, and there is no envy, this quality
resides in the body… hero.” - Shri Chag 0 Sajjay, 1-7 Verses This is said to
show the systematic way in which the world is created.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (108) egadaSTisamuccaya bhavAbhinaMdI jIva, mAthuM bhArI hAya-du:khatu' hAya
tApaNu viSayabhAga vagere sAMsArika prayeAjanamAM pravatta ja che; tema A
dRSTimAM sthiti karatA cegI dharmanA dRDha avihaDa raga lAgyA heAvAthI, dhama
kAya mAM racyApacyA ja rahe che. " sevana kAraNa pahelI bhUmikA re, abhaya
adveSa akheda. ' " kheda pravRtti karatAM thAkIe re, dveSa arocaka bhAva."--zrI
Ana'daghanajI " sAcA raMga te dhane....sAhelaDImAM, bIjo raMga pataMga re.
guNavelaDiAM. " dharma raMga jIraNa nahi....sAhe. deha te jIraNa thAya re. guNa
sAnuM te viNase nahi....sAhe. ghATa ghaDAmaNa jAya re. guNa"--zrI yazovijayajI "
jakha jAgeMge AtamA, takha lAge...ge raMga."--zrImad rAjacaMdrajI 3. adveSa
devakA vageremAM akheda chatAM, devakAya vagere na heAya temAM ahIM adveSa-
amatsara heAya che. eTale ke bIjo keAI deva-guru-dharmAMkAmAM na pravarttA hAya
te tevA jIva pratye atre dveSamatsara hAteA nathI, tiraskAra heAtA nathI, paNa
madhyastha evI upekSA vRtti hAya che. jo ke haju ahI tevA prakAranuM
tattvajANupaNuM nathI, eTale mAtsaryAM-dveSanuM bIja nAza pAmyuM nathI-sattAmAM
che, teApaNu te matsara-khIjanA aMkura-phaNagA phUTate nathI, udaya thatA nathI,
te dakhAI rahe che. kAraNa ke ahIM jIvanuM citta teA tattvaanuSThAnanA Azraya
karI satkamamAM lAgyu rahe che, te te peAtAnA kArTImAM sAvadhAna-mazagUla rahe
che. 'sakha samakI sa'bhALie, mai' merI phoDatA huM" ema samajI te pote peAtAnI
saMbhALe che, eTale tene pArakI pacAtane-ciMtAne avakAza rahetA nathI; ane jo
rahetA hAya te tene khInna pratye dveSa, matsara, asahiSNutA ke tiraskAra te
upajatA ja nathI, paNa UlaTA kaMika karuNAbhAva sphure che ke-are! A bicArA
jIve| sanmAne AdaratA nathI, tethI ana"ta du:khapara parAne pAmaze. ema tene
paraduHkhachedana icchArUpe karuNA' upaje che. athavA dveSa eTale arecaka bhAva-
aruci-aNugamA; saddeva, saddharma, sanmA` Adi pratye tevA dveSa-arAcaka bhAva-
aNagamA na heAvA te adveSa. Ave| A nakArAtmaka (Negative) prakAraneA paNa 'guNu
' che. te kAMi nAnIsUnI vAta nathI. A adveSa guNa ahI' pragaTe che. ane Ama-- "
vrata paNa cama ahIM sa'paje, kheda nahIM zubha kAje re; dveSa nahiM vaLI
avarazuM, eha guNu aMga virAjere....vIra "--zrI cAga0 sajjhAya, 1-7 Jie  A
sRSTimAM vyavasthita yAgI je sAdhe che, te batAvavA mATe kahe che:--

Page #175 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Friend's View: Grasping the Seed  **(109)** He who is established in this
view, takes up the seeds of yoga; the wise know that these are the infallible
causes of liberation.  **Meaning:** One who is established in this view, takes
up the seeds of yoga, which are the infallible causes of liberation. This is
known by the wise.  **Commentary:**  "The seeds of yoga reside here" - Shri G.
Daszai.  One who is established in this view, takes up the seeds of yoga, as
mentioned below. These seeds are the infallible causes of liberation. Just as a
tree grows from a seed and eventually bears fruit, here too, these seeds are
taken up and planted in the mind, which develop into a tree of liberation and
bear the fruit of liberation.  Just as a small banyan seed, when combined with
the right soil, water, etc., grows into a vast banyan tree, so too, a small
mango seed, when planted, grows into a large mango tree and bears sweet mangoes.
Similarly, here too, these seeds are taken up, which, with the right emotions,
water, etc., will eventually lead to liberation and bear the fruit of supreme
bliss.  Thus, these seeds are "infallible" - they are not barren, but will
surely bear the fruit of liberation.  "The seed grows into a tree, spreading
endlessly, with the help of soil and water; my inner wealth is revealed, the
Lord's assembly is manifested." - Shri Devchandraji  "The reader will say, 'I
will hear it,' and it will bear fruit, it is true." - Shri Yashovijayji  By
obtaining these seeds of yoga, the character of this person improves! His inner
emotions change! The obstacles are removed and he becomes virtuous. The emotions
that were previously obstacles, now, due to the power of these seeds,
**Interpretation:**  He - refers to the person who is established in this view.
Takes up - refers to the act of grasping or accepting.  Seeds of yoga - refers
to the principles and practices of yoga that lead to liberation.  Infallible
causes of liberation - refers to the fact that these seeds are guaranteed to
lead to liberation if practiced correctly.  Wise - refers to those who have a
deep understanding of yoga and its principles.  This verse emphasizes the
importance of taking up the seeds of yoga and practicing them diligently in
order to achieve liberation. It also highlights the fact that these seeds are
not barren, but will surely bear the fruit of liberation if nurtured properly.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 mitrA daSTi : gabIja grahaNa (109) karoti yogabIjAnAmupAdAnamihasthitaH  /
avandhyamokSahetUnAmiti yogavido viduH  //  22  //  eha daSTimAM sthira kare,
yoga bIja AdAna; mekSahetu avaMdhya je, jANe yuga sujANa, 22 artha:-ahIM sthiti
karanAro megI yeganA bIjanuM grahaNa kare che, ke je mekSanA avadhya-acUka hetu
che, ema gavettAo jANe che. vivecana yuganA bIja IhAM rahe"--zrI ga0 dasajhAya A
mitrA daSTimAM sthiti karate thegI, A nIce kahyA che te gabInuM grahaNa kare
che. A ga-bIje mekSanA avaMdhya-amegha kAraNa che. jema bIjamAMthI vRkSa nIpaje
ne kALAMtare cekasa phaLanI prApti thAya, tema ahIM evA gabIje grahaNa karAya
che, cittabhUmimAM ropAya che, ke je mekSamArgarUpa vRkSasvarUpe vikAsa pAmI-
phAlIlI, mekSarUpa cakkasa phala Ape ja che. eka nAnuM sarakhuM vaDanuM bIja
paNa yaMgya bhUmi-jala vagereno yega pAmI, kevA vizAla vaTavRkSarUpe phalekUle
che? eka nAnI sarakhI AMbAnI goTalI vAvI hoya, te paNa vakhata jatAM kevaDA moTA
AmravRkSarUpe pariNamI miSTa AmraphaLa Ape che? tema ahIM paNa evA gabIje
grahAya che, ke je gya bhAva-jalasiMcana vagerevaDe AgaLa jatAM mekSatAmAM
pariNamI parama amRta phaLa cokkasa Apaze ja. Ama A rogabIja "avadhya che-
vAMjhiyA nathI, paNa avazya mokSarUpa saphaLa ApanArA thaI paDe che. "bIje vRkSa
anaMtatA re lAla0 pasare bhU-jala yoga re; tima muja AtamasaMpadA re lAla,
pragaTe prabhu saMgaTha" -zrI devacaMdrajI "vAcaka yaza kahe sAMIzuM, phalaze e
muja sAcuM re."--zrI yazovijayajI AvA A yogabIjanA upAdAnarUpa-grahaNarUpa
nimitta pAmIne, A gIpuruSanuM upAdAna"ja sudharI jAya che ! AtmabhAva ja palaTI
jAya che ! bAdhakapaNuM maTIne sAdhakapaNuM thAya che. atyAra sudhI je bhAva
bAdhaka thatA hatA, te have A gabIjanA pratApe vRtti:- reti-kare che,
tattvakaraNavaDe, ravInAnA-gabIjonuM,-jenuM lakSaNa kahevAmAM Avaze te
cogabInuM, vA-grahaNa, susthito-ahIM mitrA dRSTimAM sthita, matra yogI, ema
artha che. kevA viziSTa gabIjonuM? te mATe kahyuM ke-apazcAttApu-avaMya
mekSahetuonuM, mokSanA je amegha- acUka kAraNa che tenuM, kAraNa ke ga-bIja
yoga-phaLavALuM nathI ema nathI (api tu gaphaLavALuM che ja). ane je yoga che
tenuM phaLa mokSa che. kuti bA-ema yogavide, eganA jANakAra evA viziSTa ja
yegAcAryo, viTu-jANe che.

Page #176 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(110) The collection of "gadashti" becomes a means of achieving liberation.
Because this "gini" has attained "dashti" and it is mildly open, it also has
"sat shraddhasangat bodh" as per the characteristics of "dashti." Therefore, it
has faith in the Purusha, the Sadguru, and the Shastra. It considers their
commands as paramount and acts accordingly. It abandons evil actions, bringing
it closer to the path of righteous actions. "The strong master is recognized,
the self becomes strong; the obstructive results are avoided, the liberating
achievement is called...the world-saving Lord is prayed to." -Shri Devchandraji,
thus, through the repetition of this "gabija," this being is reborn! The wrong
path becomes right! The reverse cycle becomes the right cycle. From this seed,
it becomes a "dvija"! It takes birth in the form of "sanskar." And by consuming
this "gabija" which is like a "tirtha" that guides, ultimately, this "jogijan"
becomes liberated and attains the essence of the "tirtha" in the form of its
fruit. "The cyclical Dharma of the "tirtha," the essence of the fruit of the
"tirtha"; whoever serves the "tirtha" receives, the inexhaustible treasure of
joy... The supreme Lord of Dharma." -Shri Anandghanji Now, while explaining the
"yogabija," it says - "Jineshu kusalam chitta tannamaskaar ev cha | Pranamaadi
cha sanshuddh yogabija manuttam || 23 ||" Meaning - A mind that is benevolent
towards the Jinas, a salutation to them, and pure prostrations, etc. - this is
the supreme "gabija." Explanation - A mind that is benevolent towards the Jinas,
towards Bhagavan Arhata, a mind free from hatred, etc., and filled with love,
etc. This is called the "maneyag" attitude. "Tannamasjar" - and a salutation to
the Jinas, and a salutation motivated by various types of devotion. This is
called the "vachanayog" attitude. "Kamaari" and prostrations, etc. - those with
the characteristics of five-fold prostrations, etc. The word "aady" includes
"mandala-pradakshina," etc. "Sanchathu" - "sanshuddh" - this is said in contrast
to "asanshuddh," because it is different from the general "asanshuddh" due to
its ability to act according to its nature, and therefore, its "yogabija" nature
is not diminished. (This is not a pure "pramaadi" seed). All this, in its
entirety or individually, is a "chavinangabija," the cause of liberation-
inducing practices, "anuttam" - the supreme - due to the importance of the
subject. (That which is superior to nothing is "anuttam," the best.)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (110) gadaSTisamuccaya sAdhaka thaI jAya che. kAraNa ke A gIne "daSTi prApta
thaI che, ane te che ke maMdapaNe ughaDI che, te paNa "daSTi"nA kahelA lakSaNa
pramANe tene "sat zraddhAsaMgata bodha" hoya che. eTale tene puruSanI,
sadgurunI, sa@AstranI zraddhA avazya hoya che, tenI AjJAne pradhAna gaNI tene
anukULa pravRtti te kare che, asatupravRtti cheDI dIe che, ke jethI
satpravRttipada nikaTa kheMcAtuM jAya che. "sabaLa sAhiba oLage, Atama sabaLo
thAya re; bAdhaka pariNati savi TaLe, sAdhaka siddhi kahAya re....jagatAraka
prabhu vinavuM." -zrI devacaMdrajI Ama A gabIjanA repaNathI A jIvane avatAra ja
jANe pharI jAya che! avaLI pATha savaLI thAya che ! UlaTuM cakra sUlaTuM thAya
che. A bIjathI te "dvija" bane che! saMskArarUpa no janma dhAraNa kare che. ane
tAraka evA tIrtharUpa gabIjanA sevanathI chevaTe A "jogIjana" tarI jAya che, ne
tIrthanuM sArabhUta tattvarUpa phaLa pAme che. "cakrI dharama tIratha taNe,
tIratha phala tatta sAra re; tIratha seve te lahe, AnaMdaghana niradhAra re....
dharama parama aranAthana."-zrI AnaMdaghanajI have yogabIjane upanyAsa-rajUAta
karatAM kahe che - jineSu kuzalaM cittaM tannamaskAra eva ca  /  praNAmAdi ca
saMzuddhaM yogabIjamanuttamam  //  23  //  jina prati citta kuzala ane, tehane
namaskAra praNAmAdi saMzuddha-e, parama yogabIja sAra. 23 artha-jine pratye
kuzala-zubhabhAvavALuM citta, temanA pratye namaskAra, ane saMzuddha evA praNAma
Adi-e anuttama (parama) gabIja che. vRtti:jino pratye, bhagavAn arhate pratye,
vAruM citta-kuzala citta, TheSa AdinA abhAvathI prIti AdivALuM citta. A uparathI
maneyeganI vRtti kahI. tannamasjara va -ane te jine pratye namaskAra, tathA
prakAranA mAgathI prerita evo namaskAra. A uparathI vacanayoganI vRtti kahI.
kAmAri ane praNAma Adi. paMcAMga praNAma Adi lakSaNavALA. Adi zabdathI maMDala-
pradakSiNA AdinuM jhaDapyuM che. saMcaThuM-saMzuddha-A asaMzuddhanA vyavaccheda
athe kahela che, kAraNa ke te asaMzaddha te sAmAnyathI yathApravRttikaraNanA
bhedarUpa hoItenA yogabIja5NanI anupatti-aghaTamAnapaNuM che,-tenuM gabIjapaNuM
ghaTatuM nathI. (amuM zuddha prAmAdi bIja nathI). A sarvaja samastapaNe ke
pratyeka bhAva5Ne-cAvInaMgabIja, mokSajaka anuSThAnanuM kAraNa, anuttamaM-
anuttama-sarva pradhAna che -viSayanA prAdhAnyane lIdhe. (jenAthI uttama kaI
nathI te anuttama, zreSa.)

Page #177 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Friend's Vision: Pure Devotion to the Lord  **Commentary**  "Jinavar Shuddha
Pranama Re" - Shri Cheg॰ Sajjay  One who has conquered the internal enemies like
attachment, aversion, pride, etc., is the Vitarag Jin Bhagvant, the supreme
object of worship for the entire world. To have a pure, auspicious mind towards
such a Jin Bhagvant, to hold inner love and devotion without even a trace of
aversion or dislike, to perform devotional worship, service, and adoration with
a joyful mind - this is the best seed of devotion. For example:  (111) "Upasana
Jin Charan Ni, Atishay Bhakti Sahit." "Par Prem Pravah Khade Prabhu Se, Sab
Aagam Bhed Suur Khase." - Shrimad Rajchandraji  "Rishav Jineshwar Pritam Mahara
Re, Aer Na Chahun' Re Kat; Rizayo Sahim Sang Na Parihar Re, Bhage Sadi Anant.
Chitt Prasange Re Pujan Fool Khyu?, Puja Akhadit Eh; Kapat Rahit Thayi Atam
Arpana Re, Anandghan Pad Rah." - Shri Anandghanji  "Ajit Jind Shu Pritdi, Mane
Na Game Ha Bijaane Sang Ke; Malati Fule Mohie, Kim Ese Ha Khaval Taru Bhrung
Ke."  "Shri Shital Jin Letie, Kari Bhakte Chakkhun Chit Ha; Tehasu' Keha Chhanu'
Khyu, Jehne Sampya Tan Man Vitta Ha." - Shri Yashavijayji  "Priti Ananti
Parthaki, Je Tade Te Jode Ae; Param Purush Thi Ragta, Ekatvata Hai. Dakhi
Gunageh.... ,, Rishav Jinu Shu' Pritdi." - Shri Devchandraji  And due to the
inspiration of such a pure devotional mind, the salutations to the Jins,
salutations to the virtuous, "Namo Arihantalu", "Namo Nibbal Mitraalu" - such
spontaneous expressions of devotion are also indicative of devotion. And the
physical acts of prostration, five-fold prostration, six-fold prostration,
twelve-fold prostration, etc., which are indicative of devotional feelings, are
all types of pure devotion. These are seeds of devotion because they are
expressions and indications of inner devotion. These salutations, etc., are
"pure" only then they are indicative of devotion. Impure ones have no place
here, because they are merely a form of ordinary behavior, and they do not
contribute to devotion. Thus, (1) a pure mind with auspicious devotional
feelings towards the Jins, (2) salutations to them through words, (3) and pure
prostrations, etc., through the body - these are the supreme, most excellent
seeds of devotion. The reason for calling these the most important and excellent
is that the object of this devotion, salutation, etc., is the Jin, who is the
supreme, most important being in the entire universe.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 mitrA dRSTi : sa'zuddha prabhubhakti vivecana jinavara zuddha praNAmA re"--zrI
cega. sajjhAya rAga-dveSa-mAha vagere aMtaraMga vairIene jeNe sathA jaya karyAM
che, evA vItarAga jina bhagavaMta, sarva jagatnI pUjAnA paramapAtra-
paramapUjanIya ata' che evA jina bhagavata pratye kuzala eTale
zubhabhAvasa'panna citta rAkhavuM, leza paNa dveSa-areAcaka bhAva rAkhyA vinA
aMtaraMga prIti-bhakti Adi dhAraNa karavA, cittaprasannatAthI temanI
bhaktiArAdhanA-- sevanA--upAsanA karavI,-e uttama cAgabIja che. jemake-- (111) "
upAsanA jina caraNanI, atizaya bhakti sahita. '' " para prema pravAha khaDhe
prabhuse, saba Agamabheda suura khase. "--zrImad rAjaca'drajI "RSabha jinezvara
prItama mAharA re, era na cAhuM' re kata; rIjhayo sAhima sa`ga na parihara re,
bhAMge sAdi anaMta. citta prasange re pUjana phUla kahyuM ?, pUjA akhaDita eha;
kapaTa rahita thaI Atama arapaNA re, AnaMdaghana pada raha. ''--zrI Ana
daghanajI " ajita jiMda zuM prItaDI, mane na game hA bIjAne saMga ke; mAlatI
phUle meAhie, kima ese hA khAvaLa taru bhRMga ke. " " zrI zItala jina leTie,
karI bhakte cAkakhuM cita hA; tehazu' kaheA chAnu` kahyuM, jehane sAMpyA tana
mana vitta hA. "--zrI yazAvijayajI " prIti anaMtI parathakI, je tADe te joDe e;
parama puruSathI rAgatA, ekatvatA hai| dAkhI guNageha.... ,, RSabha jiNuM zu'
prItaDI. "--zrI devacaMdrajI ane tevA uttama bhaktibhAvabharyAM mananI preraNAne
lIdhe, jinAne namaskAra hA, satpuruSane namaskAra DhA, 'namo arihaMtALuM' 'namo
nibALa mitrALa -evA je sahaja svAbhAvika vacanAkrUgAra nIkaLI paDe te paNa
yAgamIja sUcave che. ane kAyAe karIne pa'cAMga mana vacana kAyA- praNipAta,
sASTAMga da Davat, dvAdazAvatuM vadana vagere je bhaktibhAva sUcathI sa'zubhakti
vanArA vanaprakAra che, te cAgabIja che, kAraNa ke te aMtaraMga bhaktinA khAdya
AviSkArA-sUcanA che. A praNAma vagere 'sa'zud" hAya tA ja ceAgamIja che.
asa'zuddhane ahI' sthAna nathI, kAraNa ke te te sAmAnyathI yathApravRttikaraNanA
bhedarUpa hAi, tene yeAgakhIjapaNuM ghaTatuM nathI. Ama (1) manathI jina pratye
zubha bhaktibhAvavALuM sa'zuddha citta, (ra) vacanathI temane namaskAra, (3) ane
kAyAthI zuddha praNAma vagere,e anuttama-sarvotkRSTa cAgabIja che. Ane savamAM
pradhAna-utkRSTa kahevAnuM kAraNa e che kejenA pratye te bhakti-namaskAra Adi
karAya che, te jina adbhuta sarva jagatamAM parama pradhAna

Page #178 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(112) The collection of Gadasti is an excellent person, a unique and supreme
being in the world. Therefore, the devotion of an excellent man becomes an
excellent seed, because it causes the practice of joining and connecting with
the Supreme. “With love for excellent qualities, we obtain excellent deeds…
Excellent qualities increase one’s own glory, illuminating the excellent abode…
Qualities”—Shri Yashovijayji “Excellence increases with excellent company, along
with infinite joy; with detachment, we connect with the passions, and attain
liberation from the cycle of births and deaths.”— “The purpose of the Jina is
equality, the nectar of equanimity; the Lord is the support for attainment, the
rules proclaim this.”–Shri Devchandraji Thus, here in the path of yoga—the path
of liberation—the Lord, the scriptural scholar, has given the first place to
devotion to the Lord. To perform devotion to the Supreme Soul, the pure self-
nature, who has manifested the Supreme Self, to the best of one’s ability, is
the first step in the cure for disease, the best seed of the tree of liberation.
One who performs devotion to the Lord with pure intention, is sure to attain the
fruit of liberation. “Devotion to the Jina is the path to liberation, the
unparalleled seed of auspicious happiness.”—Shri Devchandraji “Without devotion,
there is no liberation, nor is there any individual without form.”–Shri
Rupvijayji Because by worshipping the Lord, by chanting the Lord’s name, by
remembering the Lord’s qualities, by praising the Lord, by singing the Lord’s
character, by contemplating the Lord’s form, by meditating on the Lord, and by
feeling oneness with the Lord, the devotee becomes aware of the Jina’s own self-
nature. “The lion’s nature remains in the flock of sheep” A child forgets the
form of its father, but when it sees the lion, it immediately becomes aware of
its true nature. Similarly, when the devotee becomes absorbed in the Lord, his
original pure innate self-nature is remembered. Therefore, truly, devotion and
worship of the Lord with a selfless intention is devotion and worship of the
father’s self-nature. Regarding this, the great souls have said: “In worldly
affairs, the Lord is the Jina, in solitude, I am the Lord; understand this, it
is the imprint of the Jina’s teachings. The Jina’s nature is one’s own nature,
there is no difference, this is the goal, the scriptures have spoken of this
auspiciousness.”—Shrimad Rajchandraji

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
(112) gadaSTisamucaya utkRSTa vyakti che, vizvanI viziSTa zreSTha vibhUti che.
eTale uttama puruSanI bhakti uttama gabIja thaI paDe che, kAraNa ke te mekSa
sAthe janAra-joDanAra anuSThAnanuM kAraNa thAya che. "uttama guNa anurAgathI
sAhe, lahIe uttama kAma re...guNa uttama nija mahimA vadhe sAhela, dIpe uttama
dhAma re...guNava"--zrI yazovijayajI "uttama saMge re uttamatA vadhe, sadhe
AnaMda anatejI;" nIrAgIthI re rAganuM joDavuM, lahIe bhavane pArajI."-- "nimitta
hetu jinarAja, samatA amRta khANI; prabhu avalaMbana siddhi, niyamA eha
vakhANI."-zrI devacaMdrajI Ama atre yegamArgamAM-mokSamArgamAM bhagavAna
zAstrakAre prabhubhaktine prathama sthAna ApyuM che. jeNe parama AtmasvarUpane
pragaTapaNe prApta karyuM che, jene parama pUjya e zuddha AtmasvabhAva pragaTayo
che, evA guNanidhAna vItarAga paramAtmAnI yathAzakti bhakti karavI, e roga-
prAsAdanuM prathama pagathiyuM che, mokSavRkSanuM uttama bIja che. je zuddha
bhAve prabhubhakti kare che, te avazya mokSaphaLa pAme ja che. "jinapati bhakti
muktine mAraga, anupama zivasukha kaMdo re."--zrI devacaMdrajI "bhakti vinA navi
mukti have ke bhaktane, rUpI vinA te te na have koI vyaktane."-zrI rUpavijayajI
kAraNa ke prabhune bhajavAthI, prabhunuM nAma japavAthI, prabhunA guNanuM
smaraNa karavAthI, prabhunuM stavana karavAthI, prabhunA caritranuM saMkIrtana
karavAthI, prabhunuM svarUpa ciMtavavAthI, prabhunuM dhyAna dharavAthI, ne
prabhu sAthe abhedapaNuM bhAvavAthI, bhajanAra bhaktajanane jinapada nija potAnA
AtmasvarUpanuM bhAna thAya che. gheTAnA TeLAmAM rahele siMhapada ekatA" zizu
pitAnuM svarUpa bhUlI gayA hoya che, paNa je te siMhane dekhe che ke tarata tene
potAnA sAcA svarUpanuM bhAna thAya che. tema bhaktajanane prabhu sAthe tanmayatA
sAdhatAM potAnuM mULa zuddha sahaja AtmasvarUpa smRtimAM Ave che. eTale kharI
rIte paramArthathI prabhunI bhakti-ArAdhanA te pitAnA AtmasvarUpanI bhakti
ArAdhanA che. A aMge mahAtmAonA subhASita che ke - vyavahArase deva jina,
nigaeNse huM Apa; cehI banase samaja le, jina pravacanakI chApa. jinapada
nijapada ekatA, bhedabhAva nahi koI, lakSa thavAne tehane, kahyAM zAstra
sukhadAI."--zrImad rAjacaMdrajI

Page #179 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Friend's Perspective: Pure Devotion-Obedience**  (113) "Worship of the Jina is
one's own worship." "The saffron-colored one, the lion of his own path, behold
him; become a devotee of the Lord, take care of your own strength." "Having seen
the perfect one, filled with the essence of Samadhi, The shining self-form of
the timeless one is forgotten." - Shri Devchandraji  The Lord has manifested his
pure self-form, and it remains as power for other beings. Therefore, the
manifested, personal form of the Supreme Being is in the position of a model, an
ideal. Just as a skilled sculptor creates his artwork based on a model, so too,
a devotee skilled in the art of devotion keeps the Lord, the model, constantly
before his eyes, striving to achieve the complete, perfect, and harmonious
fulfillment of his own pure soul.  "Always keeping the Jinaraja as the model,
the seeker feels; Devchandra, Devchandra, experiencing his path, the pure soul's
essence." - Shri Devchandraji  Devotees perform devotion to the Lord in many
ways. Listening to the Lord, chanting his name, remembering him, serving his
feet, offering worship, bowing down, serving him (as a servant), being a friend,
and self-surrender - these are the nine types of devotion mentioned in other
scriptures. In Jain scriptures, these are categorized into two main broad
categories: material and emotional devotion.  Bowing down, prostrating, offering
worship, praising his virtues, etc., are material devotion. The desire to become
one with the Lord, selflessness in the service of others, the manifestation of
the qualities of the soul, becoming like the Lord - these are emotional
devotion. Material devotion arises from emotional devotion, therefore it is a
necessary duty. Here, in the friend's perspective, material devotion is
primarily emphasized.  "Material service, bowing down, prostrating, offering
worship, and praising his virtues; Emotional devotion is the desire to become
one with him, selflessness in the service of others." - Shri Chandraprabha -
Shri Devchandraji  The best way to worship the Lord is to obey his commands,
that is the greatest worship. Obeying the Lord's commands is the best service.
* "The means of worship is always the practice of obedience. As per one's
capacity, with discipline, it is fruitful." Non-violence, truthfulness, non-
stealing, celibacy, non-attachment, knowledge, and faith - these are the eight
virtues. - Shri Haribhadrasuti Ashtak

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 mitrA daSTi : saMzuddha prabhubhakti-AjJAdhana (113) "jinavara pUjA re te nija
pUjanA che." ajakulagata kesarI lahe re, nija pada siMha nihALa; tima
prabhubhakta bhavi lahe re, Atama zakti saMbhALa." "dITho suvidhi niNaMda
samAdhirasa bharyo re, bhAsya AtmasvarUpa anAdino visaryo che."--zrI
devacaMdrajI ' prabhue zuddha AtmasvarUpa vyaktapaNe pragaTa karyuM che, ane
anya jIvone te zaktirUpe rahyuM che. eTale pragaTa vyakti svarUpI paramAtmA
pratiIda sthAne che, AdarzarUpa che, (Ideal). jema kuzala zilpI pratiIda-Adarza
(Model) dekhI, te pramANe pitAnI kalAkRti banAve che, tema bhakti-kalAmAM kuzala
bhaktajana pratidarUpa prabhune Adarza niraMtara dRSTi samakSa rAkhI, potAnA
zuddha AtmAnI sAMgopAMga sakala kalApUrNa niSpatti thAya ema karavA mathe che.
praticha pratiIde jinarAjane hojI, karatAM sAdhaka bhAva; devacaMdra devacaMdra
pada anubhave hojI, zuddhAtama prAgabhAva." - zrI devacaMdrajI bhaktajana
prabhunI bhakti aneka prakAre kare che. prabhunuM zravaNa, kIrtana, smaraNa,
caraNasevana, arcana, vaMdana, dAsya (dAsapaNuM), sakhya (sakhA-mitrabhAva), ane
Atmanivedana- ema navadhA bhakti anya zAstromAM kahI che. jainazAstramAM dravya
ne bhAva bhakti prakAra ema be mukhya vizALa bhedamAM tene samAveza karavAmAM
AvyA che. vaMdana, namana, arcana, pUjana, guNagrAma vagere dravyabhakti che.
prabhu sAthe abheda thavAnI IcchA, parabhAvamAM niSkAmapaNuM, pitAnA AtmAmAM
tathArUpa AtmaguNa-bhAvanuM pariNamavuM-pragaTapaNuM thavuM te bhAvabhakti che.
dravyabhakti bhAvabhaktinuM kAraNe thAya che, mATe avazya kartavya che. atre
mitrA dRSTimAM mukhyapaNe dravyabhakti hoya che. dravya seva vaMdana namanAdika,
arcana vaLI guNa grAmajI; bhAva abheda thavAnI IhA, parabhAve nikAmejI.-zrI
caMdraprabha"--zrI devacaMdrajI - prabhunI ArAdhanAne zreSTha upAya che tenI
AjJAnuM ArAdhana karavuM e ja che, e ja enI moTAmAM moTI pUjA che. prabhunI AjJA
* pALavI e ja enI uttama sevA che. * " yasya cArAdhanopAyaH sadAjJAbhyAsa eva hi
/  yathAzakti vidhAnena niyamAtsa phlprdH|| ahiMsAsatyamasteyaM brhmcrymsnggtaa|
gumAsta jJAnaM sapucvAna jAte" -zrI haribhadrasUti aSTaka

Page #180 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(114) If a servant does not obey his master's orders and says that he is a
servant who obeys orders, how is that possible? This is like the situation of a
servant who says, "I am your servant, but I will not do what you say." A true
servant stands ready to serve his master, always present in his service, and
never disobeys his orders. Similarly, a true devotee is always ready to obey the
Lord's commands; and through ahimsa, satya, asteya, brahmacharya, asangata, guru
bhakti, tapas, and jnana, he worships the Lord. "Good service is done with good
intentions, without any deceit; Being present and obedient in service, one
easily pleases the Lord." - Shri Devchandraji Some ignorant people think that
the service of the Lord is easy, simple, and effortless. "They think that just
by offering a few flowers, a few coins, or a few offerings, the Lord is pleased!
But the Lord is not so easily pleased, and his service is not so easy, simple,
or effortless; it is very difficult. Because, "Ignorant people consider service
easy, but service is difficult and unique; If a servant asks for something, he
receives joy and wealth." - Shri Anandghanji "The path to liberation is
difficult, O Lord, but the path to liberation is easy, O Lord. Abandon all
attachments, then liberation is easy, O Lord. Eliminate all karmas, then
liberation is easy, O Lord. Those who are absorbed in the Lord, and who serve
him with devotion, find liberation easy, O Lord." - Shri Devchandraji This
devotion and worship of the Lord is the greatest thing, and therefore, the glory
of devotion has been sung in all religions. The Gita says, "Of all yogis, he who
is devoted to me, who dwells in me, who is full of faith, and who worships me
with his heart, is the most dear to me." And the great Dharma scholar, Acharya
Shriman Yashovijayji, has said, "I have studied the ocean of scriptures, and
from it, I have found only this truth: devotion to the Lord is the seed of all
happiness and wealth." "Even the gods are not equal to a devotee, A devotee is
considered to be equal to me." - Gita "The devotee who is devoted to the Lord,
He attains the highest happiness." - Shri Yashovijayji

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (114) gadaSTisamuccaya keI nokara hoya te zeThanI AjJA na pALe, ne kahe ke huM
tene sevaka AjJArAdhana chuM, e kema bane ? A te "cAkara terA, kahyA nahiM
karuM" enA sevA dehalI je ghATa thaye ! sAco sevaka hoya, te te khaDe page
zeThanI sevAmAM- khIjamatamAM hAjara rahI, tenI AjJA kadI utthApe nahiM. tema
sAce bhakta sevaka paNa prabhunI AjJAnuM pAlana karavA sadA tatpara rahe che; ne
ahiMsA, satya, asteya, brahmacarya, asaMgatA, gurubhakti, tapa, jJAna e satputhI
prabhunI pUjA kare che. "sArI vidhi sevA sAratAM, ANa na kAMI bhAMje; hukama
hAjara khIjamatI karatAM, saheje nAtha nivAje."--zrI devacaMdrajI bAkI mugdha
bheLA jana te ema mAne che ke prabhunI sevA sahelI che, sehalI che, sugama che.
"je je, je je karyA ke TIlA TapakAM ke cAMdalA karyA, ke naivedya bhoga dharyA
eTale basa patyuM ! prabhu prasanna ! paNa prabhu kAMI evA bheLA nathI, ne enI
sevA paNa evI helI nathI, sehalI nathI, ghaNuM ja dehalI che. kAraNa ke mugadha
sugama karI sevana Adare, sevana agama anUpa; deje kadAcita sevaka yAcanA,
AnaMdaghana rasarUpa..saMbhava-zrI AnaMdaghanajI "zivagati jinavara deva, seva A
dehalI ho lAla, para pariNati parityAga kare, tasu sehalI ho lAla0 Azrava sarva
nivArI, jeha saMvara dhare ho lAla, je jina ANu lIna, pIna sevana kare che
lAla.0-zrI devacaMdrajI AvI A bhagavaMtanI bhakti-upAsanA e sauthI moTI vastu
che, eTalA mATe bhaktine apUrva mahimA sarva dharmomAM ghaNo gAvAmAM Avyo che.
gItAmAM kahyuM che ke-"sarva yegIomAM paNa mane pAmelA-mahArAmAM rahelA
aMtarAtmAthI je zraddhAvAnuM mane bhaje che, te mahAre mana yuktatama che." ane
parama dhama dhuraMdhara nyAyAcArya zrImAna yazovijayajIe te eTale sudhI kahyuM
che ke:-"meM zAstrasamudranuMxx avagAhana karyuM, temAMthI mane ATale ja sAra
maLe che ke-bhagavaMtanI bhakti e ja paramAnaMda saMpadAonuM bIja che." *
"jinAmapi tevAM madatenAttarAmanA zraddhAvAna mAne che mAM ta cutame mataH "--
gItA, xx "sAmetamA zratA gheravAnAttA mAivatI va paramAnaM vAn - zrI
yazovijyajIkRta dvA dvArA

Page #181 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Friend's View:** The state of being a Tathābhāvyā in the last Pudgalāvartta.
**When this is, it is said to be the time for it.**  **In the last
Pudgalāvartta, the ripening of Tathābhāvyatā; this is pure by rule, not at any
other time, so say the knowers.**  **Meaning:** From the ripening of
Tathābhāvyatā, in the last Pudgalāvartta, this (skillful citta) is pure by rule,
not at any other time, so say the knowers.  **Commentary:**  (115)  The pure
skillful citta, etc., the seed of devotion, which was mentioned above in
relation to the Jina, arises when? The time for this is shown here. This pure
citta, etc., is attained in the last Pudgalāvartta. It is like this:  When a
being, through the process of taking and giving up, of acquiring and
relinquishing, has come into contact with all the Pudgalas in the Lokas once,
and they have been gathered together, then one Pudgalāvartta is said to have
occurred. Pudgalāvartta means the revolution of the Pudgala cycle. Thus, in one
Pudgalāvartta, countless births and deaths filled with endless suffering have
occurred; and in this beginningless samsara, while revolving in different
realms, according to the law of cyclical rotation, this being has passed through
countless Pudgalāvarttas. It is said:  “That state which is not understood, but
is understood to be attained, I bow to that state, O Shri Sadguru, Endless
suffering; O Bhagavan.” — Shrimad Rajchandra Composed in Shri Ātmasiddhi
**Explanation:**  In the Dharma, Purūjāvata — the last Pudgalāvartta — means
that there are Pudgalāvarttas (revolutions of Pudgalas) in that way, through the
taking and giving up of the being. And “te cānāto saṁjñā tathāmanyatyāśritāḥ
viviyante pi” — in this beginningless samsara, these Pudgalāvarttas, which are
affected by Tathābhāvyatā, are different for different beings, according to this
statement. In the word “charma,” the name “charmāvartta” is implied. Here also,
the reason is given — “tathāmanyatva” — from the ripening of Tathābhāvyatā. That
is, from the cessation of the bitterness of Mithyātva (the removal of
bitterness), a little bit of faith is achieved, and therefore, this — the
skillful citta, etc., towards the Jina — is pure by rule. “Niyamā” — by rule —
in this way, through the ripening of karma, through Tathābhāvyatā; — not at any
other time, as in the case of purity, because of the absence of impurity here.
(That is, just as purity does not arise at other times, so here, in the
charmāvartta, impurity does not arise; only purity remains.) That is why it is
said — “nānyāvi” — not at any other time, before or after. Because before, there
is the desire for defilement, and after, there is the desire for greater purity.
“Kṛtti dvi” — so say the knowers, the knowers of the Dharma.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 mitrAdaSTiH caramAvatta-tathAbhavyatvapArka jyAre A hAya che, teneA samaya
kathavA mATe kahe checrme pudgalAvarte tathAbhavyatvapAkataH  /
saMzuddhametaniyamAnAnyadApIti tadvidaH  //  24  //  caramAva viSe thaye,
tathAbhavyatA pAka; saMzuddha ehana anyadA, tajjJAnI e vAka, 24 artha
:--tathAbhavyatvanA pAka thakI, chellA puddagalAvattamAM, A (kuzala cittA)i
niyamathI sa'zuddha hAya che,--nahi ke anya vakhate paNu, ema tenA jANakAro kahe
che, vivecana (115) uparamAM je jina pratye sazuddha kuzala citta vagere
cAgabIja kahyuM, te kayAre nIpaje che, tene samaya ahIM batAvyA che. e sa'zuddha
citta Adi carama-chellA pudgalaparAvatamAM prApta thAya che. te A prakAre jyAre
jIvathI grahaNa-tyAgavaDe, levA-mUkavAvaDe karIne, leAkamAM rahelA samasta
pudgale eka vAra sparsAi cUke che, bhegavAi jAya che, tyAre eka pudgalaparAvatta
thayuM kahevAya che. pudgalaparAvatta eTale pudgalane pherA-cakrAvA (Revolution
of Pudgala cycle). Ama eka pudgalaparAvarttamAM anaMta duHkhathI bharelA evA
asaMkhya janmamaraNa thaI cUke che; ane A anAdi sa`sAramAM jUdI jUdI gatimAM
paribhramaNa karatAM, cakrabhramaNa nyAye, A jIve evA anata pudgalaparAvatto
vyatIta karyA che. kahyuM che keH-- " je svarUpa samajyA vinA, pAmyA samajAvyu'
te pada namuM, zrI sadguru du:kha anaMta; bhagavaMta '' --zrImad rAjaca' praNIta
zrI Atmasiddhi vRtti:-dharame purUjAvata--carama eTale chellA pudgalAvatta'mAM,
tevA prakAre tenA tenA grahaNu-tyAgathI puddagalAvatto (pudgalanA pherA) hoya
che. ane "te cAnAto saMjJA tathAmanyatyAzritAH viviyante pi" A anAdi saMsAramAM
tathAbhavyavathI AkSipta thayelA A pudgalAvatto keAIne keTalAka hoya che,' evA
vacananA prAmANyathI. carma padamAM carmAvattanuM nAma dhaTe che. atre paNa
kAraNu kahyuM"-tathAmanyatvanA taHtathAbhavyatvanA pAkathI. eTale temAMthI
mithyAtvarUpa kaTutAnI nivRttithI (kaDavAza dUra thatAM) jarAka mAnI siddhi
thAya che tethI karIne, saMjIddhaneta-sazuddha evu A,-gninA pratye kuzala citta
Adi, heAya che. niyamA--niyamathI,--tathAprakAre karmAMnA tathAbhavyatvapAkanA
bhAve karIne;-anya samaye sazuddhanI jema, atre asazuddhanI anupattine lIdhe.
(eTale ke khIje vakhate jema sazuddha na laDe, tema ahIM caramAvatta'mAM
asazuddha na dhare; sazuddha ja Te.) eTalA mATe ja kahyuM-nAnyAvi-nahi" ke anya
kALe paNa, pUrve ke pachI pazu nahiM. kAraNa ke pUrve` kilaSTa Azcayane ane
pachI vizuddhatara Azayane yAga hoya che. kRtti dvi-ema tenA jJAtAtA kahe che,
yAgavettA kahe che.

Page #182 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The collection of verses says, "Without your vision, I wandered, time endless
and vast; subtle moments in the midst of existence, countless particles of
matter* in the cycle of birth and death; I wandered without understanding, in a
trivial and extreme existence." - Shri Devchandraji. "Thus, we know many
lands... dear friend! Look! The clever ones do not climb up the hand, dear
friend." - Shri Anandghanji.  Thus, as the particles of matter are constantly
changing, and the ripeness of the state of being is achieved, some beings are
left behind in the count. And among those who are left behind, the last one who
turns around is called the ultimate particle of matter. And the reason for this
last turning around is the ripeness of the state of being, the ripeness of the
culmination of the various types of existence. That is, when the state of being
ripens in the being, when the appropriate qualification and eligibility ripens,
then the bitterness of the poison of false belief disappears and some sweetness
of the taste of attainment is achieved. It has been said that -  " योग्यता चेह
विज्ञेया बीजसिद्धयाद्यपेक्षया । અાત્મનઃ સજ્ઞા ત્રિા તથમવ્યમયતઃ !”—શ્રી ગબિન્દુ,
૨૭૮  Meaning - The inherent, small type of qualification of the soul, in
relation to the attainment of the seed and so on, is called the state of being.
The life, that type of qualification, is called the state of being.  Thus, when
the last particle of matter turns around due to the ripeness of that
qualification, the state of being, then the pure mind, etc., is attained towards
the Jina, this is the rule. At no other time, before or after, is this pure
mind, etc., present. Because before it, there is a confused intention, and after
it, there is a more purified intention, so say the knowers of the scriptures.
Without appropriate qualification and eligibility, no work can be done.
Therefore, until the being has not attained that type of qualification, the
state of being, the being cannot attain the virtues. The attainment of the
excellent seeds of devotion to the Lord, etc., is not a trivial or small matter,
but a matter of great fortune of the being. That fortune is attained by the
being when it has its last birth, because then the state of being, the
qualification of the being, ripens, so the amount of bitterness of the poison of
false belief decreases, and some sweetness of the result arises, so that an
unprecedented devotion to the Lord arises.  * " अनादिरेष संसारो नानागतिसमाश्रयः।
પુત્ાાનાં પરાવર્તા બત્રાનમ્નાસ્તથા જતાઃ |–શ્રી ગબિન્દુ, ૭૪.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 gadaSTisamuccaya "tuja darisaNa viNa huM bhamyo, kALa anaMta apAra re; suhUma
nimeda bhave vacce, pudgala pariaTTa anaMta* re; avyavahArapaNe bhamyo, kSullaka
bhava atyaMta re"--zrI devacaMdrajI "ema aneka thala jANIe....sakhI! dekhaNa de
! catura na caDhiye hAtha re. sakhI."-zrI AnaMdaghanajI Ama pudgalAvatta karatAM
karatAM tathAbhavyatvanA pAkathI kaMI jIvane gaNatrImAM Ave tema keTalAka bAkI
rahe che, ane te keTalAkamAM paNa je chelle parAvartA-phare che, te carama
pudagalAva kahevAya che. ane A chellA parAvartanuM kAraNa paNa tathAbhavyatvane
paripAka, tevA tevA prakAranI bhavyapariNatine paripAka che, eTale ke jyAre
jIvamAM tathA prakAranI bhavyatA pAke, tevA prakAranI yegyatA-pAtratA paripakava
thAya, tyAre mithyAtvarUpa viSanI kaDavAza dUra thAya ane kaMIka mAdhuryanI
mIThAzanI siddhi sAMpaDe. kahyuM che ke - " yogyatA ceha vijJeyA
bIjasiddhayAdyapekSayA  /  aAtmanaH sajJA triA tathamavyamayataH !"--zrI
gabindu, 278 artha-bIjasiddhi vagerenI apekSAe AtmAnI je sahaja evI nAnA
prakAranI gyatA, te tathAbhavyatva kahevAya che. jIvana tevA tevA prakAranI
gyatA tenuM nAma tathAbhavyatva. Ama tevI yogyatAnA-tathAbhavyatAnA pAkathI
jyAre chello pudgalaparAvarta vatta te hoya, tyAre jina pratye A saMzuddha citta
Adi prApta thAya, e niyama che. te sivAyanA bIjA samaye, tenI pUrve ke tenI
pAchaLa, A saMzuddha cittAdi na hoya. kAraNa ke tenI pUrve kliSTa Azaya hoya
che, ane tenI pAchaLamAM vadhAre vizuddha Azaya hoya che, ema keganA jANakAronuM
kathana che. yathAyogya yogyatA-pAtratA vinA keI kArya banavuM saMbhavatuM
nathI. eTale jyAM lagI jIvamAM tevA prakAranI tathArUpa yogyatA-pAtratA na AvI
hoya, tyAMlagI jIvane guNanI prApti thavI zakya nathI. prabhubhakti vagere
uttama gabIjanI prApti thavI, e kAMI jevI tevI ke nAnIsUnI vAta nathI, paNa
jIvanA moTA bhAgyanI vAta che. e bhAgyadaya te jIvane jyAre chello bhava-phere
hoya, tyAre sAMpaDe che, kAraNa ke tyAre jIvanI tathA prakAranI bhavyatA-yegyatA
paripakava thAya che, eTale mithyAtvarUpa jheranI kaDavAzanuM pramANa ochuM
thAya che, ane pariNAmanI kaMIka mIThAza nIpaje che, jethI karIne prabhu pratye
apUrva bhaktibhAva kure che. * " anAdireSa saMsAro naanaagtismaashryH| putAAnAM
parAvartA batrAnamnAstathA jatAH |-zrI gabindu, 74.

Page #183 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Friend's View: Pure Characteristic**  (117) "The cycle of existence is the
ultimate cause, and the culmination of existence is its ripeness. When the
blemishes are removed and the vision is clear, then comes the attainment of the
sermon and speech." - This is the statement of Shri Anandghanji Devchandra
Prabhu, which is the result of virtuous devotion and inner experience, and
through which the strength increases day by day. - Shri Devchandraji  Thus, with
the desire to narrate this entire story, it is said:  **Verse 25**  "It is pure,
devoid of any desire for fruit, and accompanied by the complete cessation of
perception."  **Commentary:**  - It is pure because it is completely free from
any attachment to the objects of perception, and it is devoid of any desire for
fruit.  - The perception is completely ceased because it is free from the ten
types of perception, which are: food perception, fear perception, sexual
perception, attachment perception, anger perception, pride perception, deceit
perception, greed perception, hatred perception, and worldly perception.  - The
practice that is accompanied by such perception, although beautiful, leads to
progress (accumulation of merit), but not to liberation (nirvana). This is
because it lacks purity.  - Liberation arises from the intention of detachment
from the cycle of existence, as the yogis say.  - It is devoid of any desire for
fruit because it is free from the desire for any worldly fruit.  **Question:**
- If perception is completely ceased, then how is it possible to have any desire
for fruit?  **Answer:**  - This is true in the context of the fruit of the cycle
of existence. However, here, it is also referring to the fruit of the general
characteristics of gods, etc., which are not related to the cycle of existence.
This is because, due to the unwholesome nature of the desire, the fruit obtained
from it is inherently prone to obstacles.  - This pure, skillful mind, devoid of
any desire for fruit, is the means to liberation. However, due to its inherent
nature of being free from obstacles, it is the one that brings about the state
of liberation, just like the respect of Gautam Swami towards the Lord. This is
because it is the producer and the facilitator.  - Just as a grain of rice will
not sprout if it does not have a seed, so too, liberation will not be attained
if there is no pure mind.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 mitrAdaSTi : sazuddha lakSaNa (117) caramAvarta ho carama karaNa tathA re,
bhava pariNati paripAka, deSa TaLe vaLI daSTi khUle bhalI re, prApati pravacana,
vAka."--zrI AnaMdaghanajI devacaMdra prabhunI ho ke, puNya bhakti saMdhe, Atama
anubhavanI ho ke, nita nita zakti vadhe."- zrI devacaMdrajI ema A samasta samaya
kahI dekhADI, A kathavAnI IcchAthI kahe che - upAdeyaghiyAtyantaM
saMjJAviSkambhaNAnvitam  /  phalAbhisandhirahitaM saMzuddha hyetadIdRzam  //  25
//  upAdeya matithI ati, saMjJA sthaMbhana sAtha; phala abhisaMdhi rahita A
saMzuddha evuM yathArtha. 25 vRtti -kapAyA -upAdeya buddhithI, grahaNa karavA
yogya-AdaravA yogya evI buddhivaDe karIne, atyanta-atyaMtapaNe sarvanA apehathI-
tyAgathI (bIjA badhAne eka kora mUkI daIne, gauNa gaNIne) tathA prakAranA
paripAka thakI, samyajJAnanA pUrvarUpapaNAe karIne, ' saMjJAvimaLAvitaM-saMjJAna
viSThabhaNathI yukta, saMjJAnA sthaMbhanathI-nirodhathI yukta, kSayapazamanI
vicitratAthI AhAraAdi saMjJAnA udaya abhAvathI yukta. saMjJA AhAra Adi bhedathI
daza che. ane tevA prakAre ASa vacana che- "kAvihA NaM bhaMte sannA pnnttaa|
goyamA dasavihA  /  AhArasannA, bhaya sannA, mehaNasannA, parididaNanA, haratA,
mAkhaNanA, mAyANanA, misannA, rohanA, jesanA 2 "he bhagavaMta! saMjJA keTalA
prakAranI kahI che? "he gautama! daza prakAranIH AhArasaMjJA, bhayasaMjJA,
maithunasaMjJA, parigrahasaMjJA, krodhasaMjJA, mAnasaMjJA, mAyA saMsA,
lebhasaMsA, edhasaMjJA, lokasaMjJA." A saMjJAthI saMyukta AzayavALuM anuSThAna
suMdara chatAM abhyadaya (puNyodaya) athe thAya, paNa niHzreyara mokSa prApti
arthe na thAya-parizaddhinA abhAvane lIdhe. A niHzreyasU-mokSa te bhavabhAgamAM
niHspRha Azaya thakI janme che-nIpaje che, ema yogIo kahe che. zAmilaMbiditaM-
phalatI abhisaMdhithI rahita,bhavAntargata (sAMsArika) phalanI abhisaMdhinA-
abhiprAmanA abhAve karIna, phalanI kAmanA vinAnuM (niSkAma ). prazna-saMsAnuM
viSkabhana-sthabhana thaye pUrvokta phalanI abhisaMdhi asaMbhavita ja che.
uttaratabhavaaMtargata eTale ke te bhavasaMbaMdhI phalanI apekSAe A satya che;
paNa ahIM te tenAthI anya bhavAntargata (bIjA bhara saMbaMdhI) evA sAmAnika deva
Adi lakSaNavALA phaLane paNa apekSIne grahyuM che. kAraNa ke tenI abhisaMdhinA-
kAmanAnA asuMdarapaNAne lIdhe, tenAthI upArjana thayelA A phalanuM paNa
svataHApoApa pratibaMdhapradhAnapaNuM che. ane e abhisaMdhithI rahita evuM A
saMzuddha kuzalacitta Adi apavarga-mokSanuM sAdhana che; paNa svapratibaMdhasAra
evuM te te tathAsvabhAvapaNue karIne te sthAnamAM ja rithati karAvanAruM hoya
che, gautama svAmInA bhagavAna pratyenA bahumAnanI jema;-evuM hoya tenuM ja
eniSpAdakapaNuM che gasAdhaka paNuM che teTalA mATe. kharekhara ! zAlibIja na
hoya temAMthI kALe karIne paNa zAline aMkura hAya nahiM.

Page #184 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(118) **Meaning of Yogadristi Saasuchchay:** This pure state is characterized by
an extremely upadaya buddhi (a mind that is highly receptive to the teachings),
the cessation of the distortion of perception (sanjna nidh), and the absence of
desire for fruits (falabhisandhi).  **Explanation:** The pure state of mind,
etc., mentioned above, is further clarified here. This pure state has three main
characteristics: (1) extremely upadaya buddhi, (2) sanjna nidh, (3) absence of
desire for fruits (nishkamapana).  1. **Param Upadaya Buddhi:** Firstly, there
should be an extremely upadaya buddhi towards the Lord. This means that Shri
Jinendra Dev, the liberated soul, is more worthy of respect, acceptance, and
worship than anyone else in the entire world. One should develop this supreme
upadaya buddhi, recognizing that His virtues and glory are infinitely greater
than the entire universe. He should be the supreme guide (Jagadguru), the
supreme being (Parameshthi), and the supreme beloved (Param Ishta). One should
express the utmost respect towards Him. This upadaya buddhi, this supreme
respect, is manifested in its highest form here, because this state is the
precursor, the initial stage of Samyagjnana (right knowledge), due to the
ripeness of such qualities. Therefore, the devotee, the yogi, who possesses this
vision, sees the Lord as the most beloved, the most dear, the most cherished.
"My beloved is the incomparable Jinendra, I desire nothing else. I will not
bring any other deity into my mind's temple, that is my way." - Shri Anandghanji
"The Lord of the three worlds, the self-existent, the worthy of worship." - Shri
Devchandraji  "What have I gained from the virtues of Sumatinath? My heart is
filled with joy. Like a drop of oil spreads beautifully in water..." - Shri
Yashovijayji  However, this skillful mind, etc., devoid of desire for fruits, is
also characterized by the ability to overcome obstacles (abhinagranthi) due to
the power of complete activation (charma yathapravrittikaran) and the ability to
overcome suffering (kshapashamsar). This is like the selfless state of a non-
distracted ascetic (apramat yati) - as the yogacharyas have said:  "The seed of
yoga in the mind of one who is submerged in the ocean of existence is the part
that emerges from the water. It is the cause of the weakening of attachment
(sakta) and the first aversion to the world (prakriti). It is the cause of the
awakening of the mind (samujjasana). It is the cause of the destruction of the
mountain of obstacles (granthi parvat) by the unbreakable rule (niyama). It is
the cause of the destruction of the obstacles (granthi) by the power of the mind
(bhavacarakapalayan). It is the cause of the removal of the obstacles (apasar)."
And so on, in brief. (For meaning, see explanation).  This skillful mind, etc.,
towards the Jina, is like the beginning of the ripening of the fruit (falpak).
It is a natural state (svabhavapana) that arises from the time (kal) and other
factors. (It is like the beginning of the ripening of the fruit).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (118) yogadaSTisAsuccaya artha :-atyaMtapaNe upAdeya buddhivaDe karIne,
saMjJAnA viSkalana-nirodha sahita, ane phalanI abhisaMdhithI-kAmanAthI
rahita,-evuM A saMzuddha AvuM hoya che. vivecana uparamAM je saMzuddha citta
vagerenI vAta kahI, temAM saMzuddha kevuM hovuM joIe, te ahIM spaSTa karyuM che.
saMzuddha hovAmAM A traNa mukhya lakSaNa cheH-(1) atyaMta upAdeya buddhi, (2)
saMjJAnidha, (3) phalAbhisaMdhi rahitapaNuM-niSkAmapaNuM. 1. parama upAdeya
buddhi prathama te prabhu pratye atyaMta upAdeya buddhi hevI joIe. eTale ke zrI
jinezvara devavItarAga paramAtmA AkhA jagatamAM bIjA badhAya karatAM vadhAre
AdaravA yogya che, grahaNa karavA gya che, ArAdhavA-upAsavA gya che, -evI parama
upAdeya buddhi upajavI joIe; AkhA jagat karatAM paNa jenuM guNagaurava
anaMtaguNa adhika che evA te parama jagadaguru parameSTi parama ISTa lAgavA joIe
ane temanA pratye parama Adara pragaTa joIe. AvI upAdeya buddhi-parama
AdarabhAvavALI prabhubhakti ahIM caramAvattamAM upaje che, kAraNa ke tevI
bhavyatAyegyatAnA pAkane lIdhe ahIM samyagajJAnanuM pUrvarUpa-pUrva avasthA hoya
che. ane tethI karIne ja A daSTivALA bhakta jogIjanane bhagavAna AvA
paramapriya-priyatama, parama vahAlA lAge che. aSabha jinezvara prItama mAhare
re, ora na cAhuM re kata" bIje mana maMdira ANuM nahi, e ama kulavaTa rIta."--
zrI AnaMdaghanajI parama ISTa vAhaDA tribhuvana dhaNI re, vAsupUjya svayaMbuddha
"--zrI devacaMdrajI "sumatinAtha guNe zuM milIjI, vAdhe muja mana prIti; tela
bindu yama vistarejI, jalamAMhe bhalI rIti.. sebhAgI jina zuM lAge avihaDa
raMga."--zrI yazovijayajI paraMtu A abhisaMdhi rahita kuzalacittAdi to
abhinagraMthine paNa tyAre carama yathApravRttikaraNanA sAmarthyathI
tathAprakAranA kSapazamasArapaNAne lIdhe, evuM hoya che; A sarAga evA apramatta
yatinA vItarAga bhAva jevuM che - je prakAre yogAcAryoe kahyuM che :
"yogabIjacitaM bhavasamudranimagnasyeSadunmajanAbhAgaH ta
saktayatizayazaithilyakArI prakRteH prathamavipriyekSA tadAkUtakAriNI
smujjaasnaagme|paaynN ca itastaducitacintAsamAvezakRdgranthiparvataparamavajra
niyamAttadbhedakAri bhAvacArakapalAyanakA laghaNTA tadapasArakAriNI  / " ityAdi
saMkSepathI che. (artha mATe juo vivecana) ekalA mATe sASTra dharatIdAna-A jina
pratye kuzala cittAdi saMzaddha AvuM hoya che. ane A tevA prakAranA kAla Adi
bhAvathI te te svabhAvapaNue karIne, phalapAkanA AraMbha sarakhuM che. (phala
pAkavAnI zarUAta jevuM che.)

Page #185 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Friend's View: Ten Sign Restraint  (119) Leaving aside all other tasks,
considering devotion to the Lord as the most worthy of respect, having the
wisdom to be absorbed in devotion to the Lord with pure intention, this is
called *upadeya buddhi*. In the heart of a true devotee, devotion to the Lord
holds the highest place above all other actions, such supreme *upadeya buddhi*
manifests. “With pure intention, steadfastly take up the Lord, who is the one
you call upon; you will attain the boundless infinite, the supreme nectar-like
abode...cool.” – Shri Devchandraji  2. Sign Treasure The second characteristic
of purity is that it should have the absence of the rise and fall of ten types
of signs. These ten signs are: *aharasangna*, *bhayasangna*, *mithunasangna*,
*parigrahasangna*, *krodhasangna*, *manasangna*, *mayasangna*, *lebhasangna*,
*ghasangna*, and *lekasangna*. If none of these signs arise in devotion and
other actions, then that devotion, etc., is considered pure. The feeling of
avoiding these signs is as follows:  *Aharsangna* - In devotion, such
absorption, such immersion occurs that even food, etc., is forgotten, there is
no awareness of eating and drinking, such a frenzy of devotion to the Lord is
felt by this devotee-ascetic. “I chant their name, like a *chatak* bird, thirsty
for rain.” – Shri Yashovijayji  *Bhayasangna* - In devotion, that fear itself
becomes fearful, it flees! It runs away from afar! Then, what fear for the
devotee-king who has taken refuge in the supremely fearless feet of the
supremely powerful Supreme Being? Because – “Pain and suffering are dispelled by
the body, what is the benefit of happiness and wealth? “Who is the one who has
placed a burden on the head of the Lord? Who is the one who is equal to the
elephant? You are the powerful Lord, the pure *Vimlajina*, you are generous to
sinners, you are the one who brings peace to the mind, you are the support of
the soul...*Vimlajina*.” “The great fear of the world is dispelled, by the
seventh *Jina* Lord.” – Shri Anandghanji “Let us obtain the fearless state, let
us remain steadfast in his service.” – Shri Devchandraji “*Mitamya nirita
matthapam*” – Shri Kalyanamandir Stotra. “*Tasthashu naramupati march ma*” –
Shri Bhaktamar Stotra.  *Mithunasangna* - That person will not experience the
rise of trivial lustful desires at that time. Because, the remembrance of the
selfless Supreme Being is also the destroyer of lust. Therefore, that virtuous
man will not even remember lust.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 mitrAdaSTiH daza saMjJA nirodha (119) bIjAM badhAM kAma eka kere mUkI daI-
paDatA mUkI, prabhubhaktine parama AdaravA yogya mAnI, zuddha AzayathI
prabhubhaktimAM lIna thavAnI buddhi rAkhavI, tenuM nAma upAdeya buddhi che. sAcA
bhaktanA hRdayamAM bIjAM badhAM kArya karatAM prabhubhaktinuM sthAna UMcAmAM
UMcuM hAI, AvI parama upAdeya buddhi pragaTe che. "zuddhAzaya thira prabhu
upage, je samare tuma nAmajI; avyAbAdha anaMtuM pAme, parama amRtarasa
dhAma...zItala."-zrI devacaMdrajI 2. saMjJA nidhi saMzuddhanuM bIju lakSaNa e
che ke temAM daza prakAranI saMjJAne nirodha-udaya abhAva ho joIe. daza saMjJA A
che-AhAra saMjJA, bhayasaMjJA, mithunasaMjJA,
parigrahasaMjJA,krodhasaMjJA,mAnasaMjJA, mAyAsaMjJA, lebhasaMjJA, ghasaMjJA ane
lekasaMjJA. AmAMnI keI paNa saMjJAne udaya bhakti Adi kAryamAM na ja thAya, te
ja te bhakti Adi saMzuddha gaNAya che. te saMjJA TALavAnI bhAvanA A prakAre -
AhArasaMjJA-bhaktimAM evI tallInatA, tanmayatA thaI jAya ke AhAra vagere paNa
bhUlAI jAya, khAvA-pIvAnuM paNa bhAna na rahe, evI prabhubhaktinI dhUna A bhakta
jogIjanane lAge che. piyu piyu karI temane japuM re, huM cAtaka tuma meha."---
zrI yazovijayajI bhayasaMjJA-bhaktimAM te bhayane ja bhaya lAgI te bhAgI jAya !
dUrathI ja palAyana karI jAya ! te pachI parama samartha paramAtmA jevAnuM jeNe
parama nirbhaya caraNa-zaraNa grahyuM che, evA bhaktarAjane bhaya zAne ? kAraNa
ke-- duHkha dehaga dare TaLyA re, sukha saMpada zuM bheTa; "dhIga dhaNI mAthe
kiyo re, kuNa gaje nara eTa? vimalajina sAhiba samaratha tuM dhaNI re, pApe
parama udAra, manavizarAmI vAlaha re, Atama AdhAra....vimalajina" "sata
mahAbhaya TALatA re, saptama jinavara deva."--zrI AnaMdaghanajI jasu bhagate
nirabhaya pada lahIe, tenI sevAmAM thira rahIe-zrI devacaMdrajI mItAmaya
niritamaThThApam - zrI kalyANamaMdira stotra. "tasthAzu nArAmupAti marca mA -
zrI bhaktAmara stotra, maithunasaMjJA-tuccha kAmavikArane te vyakti veLAe
uddabhava ghaTe ja nahi. kAraNa ke niSkAma evA paramAtmAnuM nAmasmaraNa paNa
kAmane nAza karanAruM che. eTale e gI puruSa te kAmanuM smaraNa paNa kare nahi.

Page #186 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(120) 66 The state of the Supreme Soul is desireless, desire-annihilating, (C
Even seeing it, you do not increase in detachment from worldly objects. ”—Shri
Devchandraji Where there is desire, there is no Rama, where there is Rama, there
is no desire. "" "" Yogasimuchchay 55 Parigrahas'jna—The fainting of attachment,
the ego-consciousness of considering the external object as one's own, is
removed here, because attachment to the Lord cannot be joined without attachment
to the external object—to the pudgala, etc. And the true devotee prays to the
Lord without ceasing, saying, "O Most Merciful God! Deliver me from this
traditional attachment! Deliver me from this web of external objects!" For such
a person, what is the use of attachment in the path of devotion? 66 ‘Deliver me
from this traditional color, O my Lord!....O Merciful Lord! ” 66 Attachment is
born from the external, he who clings to it, joins with it....Rishabha. Shri
Devchandraji Krodhas'jna—Anger does not arise here. Because anger and devotion,
which is immersion in the supreme peaceful state of mind, do not go together. By
seeing the Supreme Soul, who is immersed in the nectar of peace, anger is
extinguished, and the soul is immersed in the nectar of peace. “Having created a
form that is beyond comparison, no comparison can be made; Immersed in peaceful
state of mind, the king does not see it....Vimala”—Shri Anandghanaji
Upshamarsabhari, Sajans'kari, Smriti Jinrajni Aaj Bheti.”—Shri Devchandraji
Manas'jna—The desire for worldly honor, respect, fame, worship, etc., does not
diminish here in pure devotion, etc.... If it is done with the desire to be
honored and worshipped in the world, or if one has the evil pride of "I am doing
such devotion," then it makes the Chintamani gem like a worthless coin! Because
it makes the precious, excellent devotion secondary, and runs after the lowly,
insignificant honor of the world; that is, it openly insults the supreme
importance of devotion, etc., and makes it a laughingstock. But the true devotee
does devotion to the Lord, etc., only for the sake of his own spiritual welfare.
66 ‘The form of the mind is not small, the vow is taken with pride; Do not take
the Supreme Soul, take worldly honor.”—Shri Atmasiddhi Mayas'jna—There is no
deceit in pure devotion, there is no cunning-deceit like the hypocritical
devotee, there is no hypocrisy, there is no pretense of religion as a cover-up
for one's own faults. *" साम्यं विना यस्य तपः क्रियादेर्निष्ठा
प्रतिष्ठार्जनमात्र एव । Swaye Suchita Maangalanamunamaann Raayaso Jaalavati
Mulyann. ||” —Shri Adhyatmapanishadd + '' Mamindine Hepittyaya Dharmaniyapi.
Mate Himalayo Vavurataan Tandan Vipuh. ||”......Shri Yogabindu, 89,

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (120) 66 paramAtama pada kAmanA, kAmanAzana eThu, (C jotAM paNu jagIja tune, na
vadhe viSayavirAma. "--zrI devA'drajI jihAM kAma tyAM rAma nA, rAma tisAM nahiM
kAma. "" "" yogasimuccaya 55 parigrahasa'jJA--parigrahanI mUrchA, paravastune
peAtAnI mAnavArUpa mamatvabuddhi atre dUra thaI jAya, kAraNa ke paravastu
pratyenI-pudgalAdi pratyenI prIti cheDayA vinA, prabhu sAthe prIti joDAya nahiM.
ane sAcA bhaktajana te prabhune nira'tara prAthe che ke he paramakRpALu deva!
Apa mane A paraMparitaragamAMthI ugAre ! A paravastunI jAlamAMthI cheDAvA ! AvA
puruSane bhaktikAmAM parigraha sAMbhare paNa zene ? 66 ' e paraparaNita raMgathI
re, mujane nAtha ugAra re....dayAlarAya ! " 66 prIti anatI para thakI, je tADe
te joDe eha....RSabha. zrI devaca'drajI krodhasa'jJA--kreAdhaneA udaya ahI' hAya
nahIM. kAraNa ke kredha ane parama zAMtasudhArasamAM nimajajanarUpa bhaktine ane
nahiM. prazamarasanimagna paramAtmAnA darzanathI ja kreAdha zamI jAya, ne AtmA
zAMta amRtarasamAM jhIle. " amiyabharI mUrati racI rai, upamA na ghaTe kAya;
zAMta sudhArasa jhIlatI re, nIrakhata nRpati na heAya....vimala"--zrI
AnaMdaghanajI upazamarasabharI, sajanaza karI, smRti jinarAjanI Aja bheTI."--zrI
devaca'drajI mAnasa'jJA--laukika mAna-meTAInI ke kItti-pUjA vagerenI spRhA ahI
sazuddha bhakti AdimAM ghaTe nahi.... jo lekamAM manAvA-pUjAvAnI kAmanAe te
karavAmAM Ave, athavA huM kevI bhakti karUM chuM evuM duSTa abhimAna dharavAmAM
Ave, te te ciMtAmaNiratnane * kANI koDI jevuM karI mUke che! kAraNa ke amUlya
evA uttama bhaktivyane gauNa karI te pAmara, tuccha nirmAlya mAnanI pAchaLa doDe
che; eTale ke parama mahat evA bhakti Adi dha kAnu khullu' apamAna karI AzAtanA
kare che. paNa sAcA bhaktajana teA kevala eka AtmAthe jaAtmakalyANane mATe ja
prabhubhakti Adi kare- che. 66 'laghuM svarUpa na vRttinuM, grahyuM vrata
abhimAna; grahe nahi' paramAne, levA laukika mAna."--zrI Atmasiddhi mAyAsa'jJA--
zuddha bhaktimAM mAyA-kapaTa na heAya, khagalA bhagata jevI kuTilatA-mAyA cAra
na hAya, daMbha na heAya, peAtAnA doSanA AcchAdanarUpe-DhAMkaNurUpe dhama nA
DhALa-DhAMgIpaNuM *" sAmyaM vinA yasya tapaH kriyAderniSThA pratiSThArjanamAtra
eva  /  svaye sucitAmAMLanAmanuMmAn rAyaso jALavatI mUlyAn  /  / " --zrI
adhyAtmapaniSad + '' mAmindine hepittayA dharmaniyApi  /  mate hImAlayo
vavuMratAM taMdna vipuH ||"......zrI yogabindu, 89,

Page #187 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Mitra-Apti: Dasha Sarjna Niradh (121)  There should not be any pretentiousness,
deception, or hypocrisy. There should not be any self-praise or praise of
others. There should not be any deceitful tendencies like "having a rosary in
the hand but a craving in the mind." There should not be any cunning attempts to
mislead or deceive the world.  The true devotees and ascetics should have a
pure, simple, and sincere heart, with a pure inner intent, and they should
surrender themselves to the Lord's feet without any guile. They should engage in
the practices of the Jain faith, saying:  "I shall cover my faults and engage in
the activities of the Jina's path! I shall not walk the path of faults, which
are dear since beginningless time!"  Abandoning all deceit, they should offer
their self to the Blissful Lord. As stated by Shri Anandghanji:  "As long as
there is any other feeling in the mind, it is futile and deceitful to claim that
I have no feeling for anything other than You. And as long as there is deceit,
how can the self be offered to the Lord's feet? Therefore, by calming all
worldly feelings and making the mental state pure and conscious, when that state
becomes free from any other feeling, then it is considered pure and non-
deceitful. Such a conscious state merged in the Lord is called self-offering."
As stated by Shri Rajchandra in his letter #692:  "How can the Lord be pleased
if your heart is full of deceit? The deceit in your heart must go away."  Shri
Narasinha Mehta's Lalsajna states that the desire for material gains should not
exist in sincere spiritual practice, as it would be like selling the Chintamani
(a wish-fulfilling gem) to buy pebbles. Such devotion is not true, but merely
mercenary. The true devotees have no such desires and perform their devotional
duties without any expectation of rewards.  Shri Devachandraji's Eghsajna states
that here there is no following the common worldly flow like a floating log, no
blind following of tradition, no running behind the blind like the blind.
Rather, there is true understanding and devotion.  "Attain the pure taste of the
principles and engage in the devotion of the Jinendra!" - Shri Devachandraji
The Laksajna states that performing actions to please others or for self-
interest should not be the motivation, as per the teaching of the Bhagavad Gita.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 mitrApti : daza sarajJA nirAdha (121) na hAya, dAMbhika, chetarapiMDIvALI
ThaMgamAjI na heAya, peAtAne ne parane vAMcavArUpa AtmavacanA na hAya, 'hAthamAM
mALA ne manamAM lALA ' evI vaMcaka vRtti na heAya, TIlAM TapakAM tANI jagane
chetaravAnI cAlakhAjI na heAya. sAcA bhakta jogIjana tA cAkakhA citte, nikhAlasa
saraLa hRdaye, zuddha aMtaHkaraNathI, niSkapaTapaNe, prabhucaraNa pratye
AtmApaNu karavAnI bhAvanA bhAve; ne tema karavA pravarte, " avaguNu DhAMkaNu
kAja, karU` jinamata kriyA ! cha uN na avaguNu cAla, anAdinI je priyA
!....viharamAna'-- zrI devacaMdrajI " kapaTa rahita thai Atama arapaNA re,
AnaMdaghanapada raha. zrI AnadaghanajI 77 * jyAMsudhI cittamAM bIjo bhAva hAya
tyAMsudhI tamArA sivAya bIjAmAM mAre kaI paNu bhAva nathI ema dekhADIe te te
vRthA ja che ane kapaTa che, ane jyAMsudhI kapaTa che tyAM sudhI bhagavAnanA
caraNamAM AtmAnuM aNu kayAMthI thAya? jethI sarvAM jagatanA bhAva pratye virAma
pamADI, vRttine zuddha caitanyavALI karavAthI ja te vRttimAM anyabhAva rahyo na
heAvAthI zuddha kahevAya ane te niSkapaTa kahevAya. evI caitanyavRtti
bhagavAnamAM lIna karavAmAM Ave te ja AtmaaNutA kahevAya. x x x je peAte khIje
sthaLe lIna che, tenA apaNu thayelA khIjA jaDa padAtha bhagavAnamAM arpaNu
kayAMthI thai zake ? mATe bhagavAnamAM cittavRttinI lInatA e ja AtmaaNutA che.
"zrImad rAjaca`dra patrAMka, 692. (753) 66 prabhu tane prasanna te kema thAya ?
thArA dilanuM kapaTa nava jAya."--zrI narasiMha mahetA lAlasa'jJA--mane A bhakti
AdithI A sAMsArika lAbha hA, evI lebhavRtti-lAlaca sa'zuddha anuSThAnamAM ghaTe
nahi.... kAraNa ke jo evA tuccha kSaNika namAlA phUlanI icchA rAkhe, te te
anaMtagaNuM moTu phala hArI jAya che, ciMtAmaNi vecI kAMkarA kharIde che ! te tA
bhakti naDhuiM, paNa bhADAyata ja che! paNa sAcA bhaktajana te tevI kAi paNa
lAlaca rAkhe nahiM, te te anAsaktapaNe kAI paNa phaLanI AzA vinA bhakti Adi
karttavya karyAM kare. bhakti nahiM te te bhADAyata, je sevA phaLa jAce." zrI
devaca'drajI eghasa'jJA--sAmAnya prAkRta janapravAhane anusaravArUpa gADarI
pravAha jevI vRtti atra na hAya, gatAnugatikapaNuM na hAya, AMdhaLAnI pAchaLa
AMdhaLA doDatho jAya evu adhazraddhALupaNuM na heAya; paraMtu sAcI
tattvasamajaNapUrvakanI bhakti hAya. 66 nimaLa tattvaruci thai re, karo jinapati
bhakti" zrI devaca'drajI lAkasa jJA----lAkane rIjhavavA mATe, leAnArjana-
ArAdhana arthe kriyA karavI te rmavyevAdhiSThAnte mA hevu rAvana | '"--zrI
bhagavadgItA * '

Page #188 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(122) Yoga-drushti-samuchchaya * Lokasangna is there. Such Lokas'gna-àkeshana in
this pure devotion etc. does not decrease. Because Lokeshana in the form of
Lokapakti * and Lokottara such Atmakalyan never gets a chance to meet it. If the
soul is desired, then the mind should be abandoned, and if the mind is desired,
then the soul should be abandoned. Just as a sword does not fit in a sheath, how
can barking and biting? Just as both actions are together and not, so the soul
and the mind never meet. And if we think about the Supreme, the value of the
people near the soul is not even that of an almond. Similarly, wood is also
difficult to please - it is difficult to please. The one who once showers
flowers of praise, he himself strikes with the whip of censure! Therefore, if
one wants to please the Lord, one should give up the attempt to please the
people, one should give up the worship of the Lokottara God with worldly
feelings. Understanding this, the Chaugipurusha does not even touch Lokas'gna.
66 “ Janmanaranjan Dharma nu, Mul na ek Badam. Shri Chidanandaji " Malrinath tuj
riz, Jan riz na hue. “ Lok Lokottara vat, riz chhe doy juiri, Adaryu aacharan
lok upchar thi, Shastrabhyas pan kai kida; Shuddha shraddhan vali aatm avlamb
Vishnu, teva karya tane kan sidha.”—Shri Devchandraji * “ Lokas'gna thi Lokane
javatu nathi.” 46 ,, Tat chakra ra pujya, Chinta eh huiri.”—Shri Yashovijayji “
Jeh Lokottara dev, namu Laukik thi !” The world was shown the rough and an
attempt was made; therefore, it did not become rough. Because the rotation and
the purpose of the rotation are still directly present. If one life is spent in
making the soul rough, then the infinite lives will remain; I understand this in
a trivial way,”—Mahatattvagna Shrimad Rajchandraji Thus, when these ten types of
sangna are suppressed, then only pure devotion etc. is considered. Otherwise,
even though that practice is beautiful, even though it gives merit-progress-like
divine etc. motion, it does not become the cause of liberation, because there is
a lack of purification. The attainment of liberation arises from pure intention,
which is indifferent to worldly things, say the Chaugijanas. And that is why,
where even eating and drinking is forgotten, fear disappears, lust becomes
useless, affection dies. Anger subsides, pride does not remain, deceit does not
work, greed does not * '' Jo gayanhetoj mahinenaantaramana. Yite sajjia satra
jopattivaadata.।”—Shri Yogamind, 88,

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (122) yogadRSTisamuccaya * leAkasaMjJA che. tevI leAkasa'jJA--akeSaNA A zuddha
bhakti AdimAM ghaTe nahi. kAraNa ke leAkeSaNA rUpa lokapakti * ane lokottara
evuM AtmakalyANa e ene kadI maLatI pANa Ave nahi. jo AtmA joItA hoya teA mAnA
cheADavA joI e, ne mAnA joI tA hoya te AtmA cheDavA joI e. eka myAnamAM jema e
talavAra samAya nahiM, bhasavu' ne leTa phAkavA? e banne kriyA jema sAthe ane
nahi', tema AtmA ne mAnAnA kadI meLa khAya nahi. ane paramA` vicArIe te AtmA
pAse leAkeAnu` mUlya e badAmanuM paNa nathI. tema ja lAka paNa durArAdhya che-
rIjhavavA muzkela che. je eka vAra prazasAnA puSpa vere che, te ja niMdAnA
cAbakhA mAre che! mATe prabhune rIjhavavA hAya-zuddha bhakti karavI hAya te
leAkane rIjhavavAnA prayAsa choDI devA joIe, leAkeAttara devane laukika bhAvathI
bhajavAne tyAga karavA joIe. Ama samajIne A ceAgIpuruSa leAkasa'jJAnA spaza paNa
karatA nathI. 66 " janamanaraMjana dharmanuM, mUla na eka badAma. zrI cidAna
dajI " malrinAtha tuja rIjha, jana rIjhe na huerI. " leAka leAkeAttara vAta,
rIjha che doya juirI, AdaryuM AcaraNa leAka upacArathI, zAsraabhyAsa paNa kAMI
kIdhA; zuddha zraddhAna vaLI Atma avalaMba viSNu, tevA kArya taNe kAna sIdhA."--
zrIdevaca'drajI * lAkasa`jJAthI leAkANe javAtuM nathI." 46 ,, tAta cakra ra
pUjya, ciMtA eha huirI."--zrI yazovijayajI " jeha leAkeAttara deva, namu
laukikathI !" jagane rUDu dekhADavA ane'tavAra prayatna karyuM'; tethI rUDuM
thayu' nathI. kemake paribhramaNa ane paribhramaNanA hetue haju pratyakSa rahyA
che. eka bhava jo AtmAnu rUDu thAya tema vyatIta karavAmAM jaze, teA anata
bhava' sATuM vaLI raheze; ema hu laghutvabhAve samajyA chauM,"--mahAtattvajJa
zrImad rAjacaMdrajI Ama A daza prakAranI saMjJAne thabhAvI devAmAM Ave, te ja
sazuddha bhakti Adi gaNAya. nahiM te te anuSThAna suMdara chatAM bhale puNya-
abhyudayarUpa devAdi gati Ape, paNa meAkSanu kAraNa te na ja thAya, kAraNa ke
parizuddhinA abhAva che. meAkSanI prApti te sAMsArika bhAgeAmAM niHspRha evA
zuddha AzayamAMthI upaje che, ema ceAgIjanA kahe che. ane eTalA mATe ja, jyAM
khAvApIvAnuM paNa bhUlAI jAya, bhaya bhAgI jAya, kAma nakAmA thaI paDe, mamatA
marI jAya. krodha zamI jAya, mAnanuM mAna na rahe, kapaTanuM kapaTa cAle nahiM,
leAbhane leAbha * '' jo gAyanahetoje mahinenAntarAmanA  /  yite sajjiA sAtra
jopattivAdatA ||"--zrI yogaminda, 88,

Page #189 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Friend's View: Detached Devotion (123)  This pure devotion, free from blind
faith, with true understanding, and without any concern for worldly praise or
social norms, is what the truly detached yogis, those who have overcome the
passions, perform. "When Shri Shital Jin is met, the devotee's mind becomes
pure." - Shri Yashovijayji  3. Detachment is the third characteristic of purity.
Pure practice is devoid of desire for results, free from the desire for
devotion, etc., and is selfless. This is considered pure. In the above, the
knowledge of the self is mentioned, and in the absence of the desire for the
self, there is no desire for results. Why then is this separate attainment
considered? The answer is that what was said before was said in expectation of
the results related to this life, and what is being said now is said in
expectation of the results related to the next life. That is, in the next life,
I will attain the state of a common god, etc., due to the influence of this
devotion, etc. - this desire for results related to the next life, is not the
cause or the effect. This is called pure devotion, etc. If there is a desire for
results, it is not considered pure. Because such desire is not good, so the
result obtained from it is also not good, and it becomes an obstacle to the
attainment of liberation. Any practice, including devotion, that is selfless,
without any desire for results, is the means to liberation.  But if there is
self-restriction, that is, if there is restriction in the pure mind, etc.,
towards the Lord, then attachment is maintained there, then the pure mind, etc.,
becomes the cause of staying in that state, it stops there, it does not allow
the soul to progress. Here is a famous example from Shri Gautam Swami. He had a
very pure mind, respect, and strong attachment towards Lord Mahavira. But that
attachment became an obstacle to his liberation! Until that attachment went
away, he did not attain omniscience. As soon as that attachment went away, he
attained omniscience. From this, the essence is to be understood that it is not
enough to stop at just strong attachment towards the Lord, but to constantly
focus on serving the detached and attaining detachment.  "What was detachment,
that pure state without attachment, is the same that removes the fear of
rebirth." - Shri Devchandraji  Thus, such selfless devotion, etc., practice
becomes the means to liberation. Because from a seed that does not have the
essence of the grain, a sprout of the grain will never grow; and the grain - "
प्रतिबन्ध कनिष्ठं तु स्वतः सुन्दरमप्यदः । तस्थारिતિवाचैत्र वीरे पौतमकावत्त છે
”—Shri Yashovijayji's Dvadvadvaan

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 mitrAdaSTi: niSkAma bhakti (123) thAya nahiM, aMdhazraddhA TaLIne sAcI samajaNa
hoya, ane lekanI vAhavAhanI ke laukika rItanI bIlakula paravA na hoya,-evI
saMzuddha bhakti ja A gadaSTivALA kharekharA vairAgI jogIjane kare che. zrI
zItala jina bheTaye, karI bhakate cakhuM citta ho." -zrI yazovijayajI 3.
niSkAmapaNuM saMzuddhanuM trIju lakSaNa dya abhisaMdhi rahitapaNuM che.
saMzuddha anuSThAna phalanI kAmanA vinAnuM hoya, bhakti vagere nidAna rahita,
niSkAma hoya, te ja saMzuddha lekhAya. uparamAM saMjJAnidha ko, temAM
lebhasaMjJAnA abhAve phalakAmanAne abhAva che, te pachI A jUduM phelagrahaNa
kema karyuM? tene uttara e che ke-pahelAM je kahyuM hatuM, te te bhavasaMbaMdhI
phalanI apekSAe kahyuM hatuM, ane A je kahyuM te parabhava saMbaMdhI phalanI
apekSAe kahyuM che. eTale ke-parabhavamAM mane A bhakti vagerenA prabhAve,
sAmAnika deva vagerenI addhi sAMpaDo-ItyAdi parabhava saMbaMdhI phalanI kAmanA,
nidAna-niyANuM na hoya, te ja saMzuddha bhakti Adi kahevAya; phalanI kAmanA-
dAnata hoya, te saMzuddha na kahevAya. kAraNa ke tevI kAmanA sArI nathI, tethI
tenAthI prApta thatuM phala paNa sAruM nathI, ane te ekSaprAptimAM ADA
pratibaMdharUpa--aTakAyatarUpa thaI paDe che. koI paNa prakAranI kAmanA
vinAnuMphaLanI AzA vinAnuM, evuM je niSkAma bhakti Adi anuSThAna che, te ja
mokSanuM sAdhana che. paNa temAM je svapratibaMdha hoya, eTale ke prabhubhaktinA
kuzala citta AdimAM ja pratibaMdha karAya, tyAM ja AsaMge-Asakti rakhAya, to te
kuzalacittAdi paNa te ja sthAne sthiti karAvanAra thaI paDe, tyAM ja aTakAvI de,
jIvanI AtmadazA vadhavA na de. atre zrI gautamasvAmIjInuM prasiddha daSTAMta
che.* temane bhagavAna mahAvIra pratye atyaMta kuzala citta, bahumAna, prazasta
rAga hato. paNa te rAga ja UlaTo temane mukti prAptimAM ava dharUpa-
pratibaMdharUpa thaI paDyo ! jyAM lagI temano te rAga gaye nahiM, tyAMlagI
temane kevaLajJAna thayuM nahiM. je rAga gaye ke tarata kevaLajJAna thayuM. A
uparathI sAra e samajavAne che ke-prabhupratye paNa prazasta rAga mAtrathI aTakI
javAnuM nathI, paNa nIrAgIne sevI nIrAgitA prApta karavAne satata lakSa rAkhI
AgaLa vadhavAnuM che. vItarAga zuM hatuM je rAga vizuddha ke, tehI ja bhava
bhaya vAro. zrI devacaMdrajI Ama AvuM niSkAma bhakti Adi anuSThAna ja
gasiddhinuM sAdhaka thAya che. kAraNa ke je zAlinuM bIja na hoya temAMthI keI
kALe zAline aMkuro phUTe nahi; ane zAli - " pratibandha kaniSThaM tu svataH
sundaramapyadaH  /  tasthAritivAcaitra vIre pautamakAvatta che "--zrI
yazovijayajIkRta dvA dvAna

Page #190 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(124) Just as a seed cannot remain without sprouting, similarly, a disease
cannot sprout without a seed, and a seed cannot remain without sprouting. The
main intention of the wise is that the defects of the soul, such as
svacchedadadi, are easily destroyed by the state of devotion. If even a little
selfless devotion arises in the soul, it is enough to remove many defects.
–Shrimad Rajchandraji He who is completely filled with self-knowledge and who is
completely disgusted with the fruits of karma, finds peace in this world while
sitting at home. But Arjuna, those who are worldly are bound by karma and are
tied to the nail of fruit-gathering by the knot of desire. + x x They keep the
desire for heaven in their minds, they forget the God of yajna-bhakti. Just as
fire is brought into a pile of camphor, or poison is mixed into sweets, or by
divine grace, a pot of nectar is obtained and kicked over, so they destroy the
dharma obtained for the purpose of obtaining fruits. - Shri Jnaneeshwari Gita.
Thus, in this pure devotion, (1) there is supreme knowledge about the Supreme
Being, (2) the rise of consciousness, (3) and selflessness. And such pure
skillful mind etc. is here In the last verse, even though the knot has not yet
been broken, it is there, because of the power of pure devotion or the last
yathapravrittikaran - the influence of such a type There is a kshapsham. Just as
the desire for the unpracticed self-controlled person decreases, so here, even
without the breaking of the knot, pure devotion decreases, the skillful mind
etc. with the seed of yoga - decreases, and therefore, in this friend's vision,
the devoted person, with unique devotion, with great devotion, worships Shri
Jinendra Bhagwan selflessly. Worship of the feet of Jin, with great devotion. -
Shrimad Rajchandraji What is the seed-like mind, the mind that has a seed? The
four acharyas have said about it - (1) It is a little bit of enjoyment for those
who are submerged in the ocean of the world, a little effort to come up to the
surface, and this enjoyment is the world's + "Yu: karun chava sari maneti
naichhiki There is a belief that it has become, then it is necessary" - Gita, A.
P.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (124) yogadaSThisamucaya bIja hoya temAMthI zAline aMkura phUTayA vinA rahe
nahi. tema gabIja na hoya temAMthI rogane aMkura phUTe nahi; ane gabIja hoya
temAMthI ega-akura phUTayA vinA rahe nahi. bhaktipradhAna dazAe vattavAthI
jIvanA svacchedAdi doSa sugamapaNe vilaya thAya che; e pradhAna Azaya jJAnI
puruSane che. te bhaktine viSe niSkAma evI alpa paNa bhakti jo jIvane utpanna
thaI hoya che, te te ghaNA deSathI nivRtta karavAne gya evI hoya che." -zrImad
rAjacaMdrajI AtmajJAnavaDe je pUrNa bharAyele che, ane jene kamaphaLane sarvathA
kaMTALo AvI gayele che, tene A jagamAM ghera beThAM ja zAMti AvIne vare che,
paraMtu he arjuna ! bIje je saMsArI hoya che, te karmabaMdhanavaDe baMdhAIne
abhilASAnI gAMThathI phaLabheganA khIlA sAthe jakaDAI jAya che. + x x teo
svarganI IcchA manamAM rAkhe che, yajJabhaktA je Izvara tene visarI jAya che.
jema kapUrane Dhagale karI temAM agni lAvI mUka, athavA miSTAnamAM kALakUTane
saMcAra kare, athavA daivayoge amRtakuMbha maLe ane tene lAta mArI Udhe vALI
nAMkha, tema phaLaprAptinA hetuthI prApta thayelI dhamane leke hAthe karIne
naSTa karI nAMkhe che."--zrI jJAnezvarI gItA. Ama A saMzuddha bhaktimAM-(1)
paramAtmA pratye parama upAdeya buddhi, (2) saMjJAanudaya, (3) ane niSkAmapaNuM
hoya che ane AvuM saMzuddha kuzala citta Adi ahIM chellA pulAvartAmAM,
graMthibheda haju nahiM thayA chatAM, hoya che, kAraNa saMzuddha bhakti ke
chellA yathApravRttikaraNanA sAmarthyathI-prabhAvathI ahIM tevA prakArano
kSapazama hoya che. jema sarAga evA apramatta saMyamIne vItarAgabhAva ghaTe che,
tema ahIM graMthibheda vinA paNa saMzuddhabhAva ghaTe che, yogabIjavALuM kuzala
cittAdi - ghaTe che, ane tethI karIne ja A mitrA dRSTimAM vattata gIpuruSa
ananyabhAve, atizaya bhakti sahita, zrI jinezvara bhagavAnanI niSkAma upAsanA
kare che. upAsanA jina caraNanI, atizaya bhakti sahita." -zrImad rAjacaMdrajI
gabIja citta gabIjavALuM je citta che te kevuM che? te aMge cogAcAryoe kahyuM
che ke - (1) te saMsAra samudramAM nimagnane-DUbelAne jarA unmajajana vilAsa
che, jarA upara sapATIe AvavArUpa prayAsa che ane te A unmajajana saMsAranI +
"yuH karuM cavA zarimAneti naichikkI thayu mAna che to nivaSya "- gItA, a. pa.

Page #191 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Gabbij Chitt**  (125) It loosens and weakens excessive attachment, it breaks
it down. Just as someone who has drowned in the ocean comes up to the surface,
they experience a clear difference between the state of being submerged and the
state of being above, they feel relief, and the grip of their attachment to the
submerged state loosens. Similarly, when a soul that is drowned in the ocean of
samsara (worldly existence) attains Gabbij, it experiences a sense of relief, as
if it has risen to a higher state, and its attachment to worldly things becomes
weak, loose, and slack.  (2) This Gabbij Chitt is the first unpleasant sight of
the nature (of the soul). When Gabbij is attained, the first unpleasant sight of
nature - the web of Maya - the world - occurs. What seemed sweet before now
begins to taste bitter, acrid, and unpleasant. Just as a man who has drowned in
the sea has no awareness of his surroundings until he is rescued and comes to
the surface, so too here, the soul, while submerged in the ocean of samsara, has
no awareness of its situation. But when it attains Gabbij and rises slightly to
the surface of the ocean of samsara, it begins to see the nature of the world -
the bitter fruit of its own karma - and it is repelled by it. This sight causes
it to fall into contemplation and wonder, "What is this strange and wonderful
world?" Thus, its thinking faculty awakens.  (3) After Gabbij Chitt, it takes
refuge in the means of knowing and understanding the world completely. Having
drunk the salty water of the ocean of samsara with gusto, it now finds it bitter
and poisonous. It wonders how this world can be sustained and seeks a solution.
It delves into the depths of philosophical contemplation. It is inspired to see
the deep cave of philosophy. It asks, "Who am I? Where did I come from? What is
my true nature? What am I attached to? Should I keep it or abandon it?" By
contemplating and analyzing these questions with a calm mind, it experiences the
principles and essence of spiritual knowledge.  (4) Thus, the Gabbij Chitt
becomes like a heavy weight against the mountain of attachment, aversion, and
delusion, and it systematically breaks through and destroys this mountain of
attachment. In this way, it attains Right Vision.  **Explanation:**  * **Gabbij
Chitt:** A state of mind characterized by a loosening of attachment to worldly
things. * **Samsara:** The cycle of birth, death, and rebirth. * **Maya:** The
illusion that obscures the true nature of reality. * **Karma:** The law of cause
and effect. * **Right Vision:** The correct understanding of the nature of
reality.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 birAdaSTi gabIja citta (125) atizaya Asaktine zithila-DhIlI karI nAkhe evuM
che, mALI pADI nAMkhe evuM che. jema keI darIAmAM DUkhyo hoya te jarA upara
sapATIe Ave, te tene DUbelI avasthA ne uparanI avasthA e banneno spaSTa
taphAvata jaNAya, rAhata anubhavAya, eTale DUbelI avasthAnA tenA mehanI pakaDa
DhIlI paDe, tema saMsAra-sAgaramAM DUbele jIva jyAre gabIjane pAme che, tyAre te
upara kaMIka uccadazAe AvavArUpa rAhata anubhave che, ane tenI saMsAra saMbaMdhI
Asakti maMda-zithila-DhIlI banI jAya che. (2) te gabIja citta prakRtinuM
prathama vipriya darzana che. jyAre gabIjanI prApti thAya che tyAre prakRtinuM-
mAyAjAlanuM-saMsAranuM prathama apriya darzana thAya che, je saMsAra pahelAM
mITho lAgatuM hatuM, te ja have kaDa-khAra-akAro lAgavA mAMDe che. jema
samudramAM DUbelA mANasane DUkhyA hoya tyAMsudhI AsapAsanuM kaMI paNa bhAna hoya
nahi, paNa unmajajana thatAM je upara sapATI para Ave ke tarata tene AsapAsanI
prakRtinuM kaMIka darzana thavA lAge; tema ahIM paNa A jIva jyAMsudhI saMsAra
samudranI aMdara DUbele hoya, tyAMsudhI te tene vastusthitinuM kaMI paNa bhAna
nathI hotuM, paNa gabIjanI prApti thatAM je te saMsArasAgaranI sapATI para jarA
UMce Ave ke tarata tene prakRtinuM-viSama karmavipAkarUpa saMsAranuM akAruM
darzana thavA mAMDe che, ane te darzana thatAM, te te saMbaMdhI UhApohamAM-
vicAramAM paDI jAya che ke A badhuM citra-vicitra saMsArasvarUpa zuM haze? Ama
tenI vicAradazA jAgrata thAya che. (3) te gabIja citta pachI te saMsArane
samucacheda jANavA-pAmavAnA upAyane Azraya kare che. je saMsArasamudranuM pANI
mIThuM jANI teNe atyAra sudhI hase hose pIdhuM hatuM, te have khArUM jhera jevuM
lAgatAM, te saMsArane uchera kema thAya? tene upAya jANavA mATe te pravarte che,
ane tene regya evA tatvaciMtanamAM paDe che. "tattvajJAnanI UMDI guphAnA darzana
karavA te prerAya che. jemake - "huM koNa chuM? kyAMthI thayo? zuM svarUpa che
mahArUM kharuM? kenA saMbaMdhI vaLagaNa che? rAkhuM ke e pariharU? enA vicAra
vivekapUrvaka zAMta bhAve je karyA, te sarva Atmika jJAnanA siddhAMtatatva
anubhavyA" -zrImad rAjacaMdrajIpraNIta zrI mekSamALA (4) eTale pachI te
gabIjavALuM citta rAga-dveSa-mohanI gADha graMthirUpa parvata pratye parama vaja
jevuM bane che, ane niyamathI te graMthi parvatane bhede che-cUrI nAMkhe che.
Ama tene samyagadarzananI prApti thAya che. eTale-- ka pAThAMtara-zaphayatizaya
pATha hoya, tyAM saMsAranA zaktiatizayanI zithilatA kare ema artha karo. eTale
saMsAranI zakti meLA paDI jAya, enuM jhAjhuM jora na cAle.

Page #192 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(126) The collection of Gadashti, the great path, is eternal, it is said, Pure,
unblemished, its nature is itself, it is said, The essence of purity, the
meditation, which one cherishes, it is said, That is the state of equanimity,
the master's seal, it is said... Seen by the wise, the state of Samadhi, it is
said.— Muni Shri Devchandraji “Seeing the Jina, there is no doubt, The sun
spreads, darkness is dispelled... Pure Jina, my mind, your lotus feet, Taking
the nectar of virtues, the poor consider the earth a palace, Indra, Chandra,
Nagendra... Pure Jina”—Chougiraj Anandghanji Such pure self-realization happens
here. (5) And then that clouded mind, the prison of the form of existence,
becomes the ‘bell of time’ for escape. Having attained right vision, then
understand that the bell of destruction has rung, which removes the prison of
the form of existence, the bondage, understand that the world has become like
this, because – “Thirst does not come, that is the death of life, The vision
that seizes, Vision is rare, easily available through grace, Anandghan Maharaj.”
You will break my heart, The auspicious sound will ring; The life will increase
immensely, Anandghan, the essence of joy.”—Shri Anandghanji “The self dwells in
the self, The auspicious garland in its own home... Dayalray!” –Shri
Devchandraji Such a pure clouded mind begins to culminate here. Because such
types of time-achievements, etc., are ripe, therefore, due to its nature, this
pure mind is like the beginning of the ripening of the first fruit. Just as the
mango fruit begins to ripen when it is ripe in time, so here, in the last
pudgalavarta, the fruit of liberation begins to ripen. “Having obtained time-
achievement, we will see the path, That hope, that is the life of that person,
Jina! Know, Anandghan, the mango... on the path.” –Shri Anandghanji Such time-
achievement begins to ripen here, so the mango of Anandghanmat is now close to
ripening the fruit of liberation. Whatever that time-achievement is, but the
devotee sings in the fervor of devotion that –

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (126) gadaSTisamuccaya mahAdinI vRmi anAdinI utare ho lAla, amala akhaMDa
alipta, svabhAva ja sAMbhare ho lAla, tattvaramaNa zuci dhyAna, bhaNI je Adare
ho lAla, te samatArasa dhAma, svAmI mudrA vare ho lAla.... dIThe suvidhi jiNaMda
samAdhirase bhaye ho lAla.--munivarya zrI devacaMdrajI "darzana dIThe jinataNe
re, saMzaya na rahe vedha; dinakara karabhara prasaratAM re, aMdhakAra
pratiSedha...vimala jina muja mana tuja pada paMkaje re, lIne guNa makaraMda
raMka gaNe maMdara dharA re, iMdra caMdra nAgendra...vimala jina"-cogIrAja
AnaMdaghanajI AvuM nimala Atmadarzana atre thAya che. (5) ane pachI te
gabIjavALuM citta bhavarUpa bhAva kArAgRhane palAyananI 'kAlaghaMTA bane che.
samyagadarzana prApta thayuM, eTale pachI bhavarUpa kArAgRhane-baMdIkhAnAne dUra
karanArI nAzanI kAlaghaMTA vAgI ema samajavuM, saMsAranuM AvI banyuM ema
jANavuM, kAraNa ke - "tarasa na Ave te maraNa jIvana taNo, sIjhe je darizana
kAja; darizana durlabha sulabha kRpA thakI, AnaMdaghana mahArAja." tuja muja
aMtara aMtara bhAMjaze, vAjaze maMgala sUra; jIva sarevara atizaya vadhaze,
AnaMdaghana rasapUra."--zrI AnaMdaghanajI Atama ghara Atama rame re, nija ghara
maMgalamAla re...dayAlarAya !" -zrI devacaMdrajI AvA saMzuddha gabIja cittane
atre caramAva7mAM prAraMbha thAya che. kAraNa ke tevA prakAranI kALalabdhi
vagerene paripAka thaye hoya che, tethI tenA te svabhAvapaNAe karIne A saMzuddha
citta Adi phaLa pAkavAnI zarUAta jevAM che. jema AmraphaLa tene kALaparipAka
thatAM pAkavA mAMDe che, tema mokSarUpa phaLa ahIM chellA pudgalAvartAmAM
pAkavAnI zarUAta thAya che. kALalabdhi lahI paMtha nihALazuM re, e AzA avalaMba
e jana jIve re jina! jANo re, AnaMdaghana mata aMba....paMthaDe" -zrI
AnaMdaghanajI AvI kALalabdhine pAka atre prAraMbhAI cUke che, eTale
AnaMdaghanamatarUpa AMbAne have mokSarUpa phala pAkavAnI jhAjhI vAra nathI. e
kALalabdhinuM game tema che, paNa bhaktajana te bhaktinA AvezamAM gAya che ke -

Page #193 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Friend's View: Devotion to the Worthy, Beginning with the Acharya  “The
knowledge of time is mine, the knowledge of feelings is yours; Even a young
elephant, though it is weak, roars with the strong elephant.” - Shri
Yashovijayji  And this is not just the seed of devotion, therefore it is said to
cultivate something else -  “Even in the Acharyas and others, those who are pure
in their feelings, Especially in the case of Vyayavratya, with pure intention.”
26.  (127)  Meaning: Even towards the Acharyas and others who are pure in their
feelings, this same pure mind, etc., is the seed of devotion. Similarly, with a
pure intention, Vyayavratya (service) towards them, according to the rules, is
the seed of devotion.  Commentary:  “Service with feeling” - Shri Chag. 40  Even
towards the feeling-Acharya, feeling-Upadhyaya, feeling-Sadhu, feeling-Tapasvi,
etc., this pure mind, etc., which is full of auspicious feelings, devotional
feelings, is the seed of devotion. Here, special emphasis is placed on the word
“feeling”. Those whose souls have been filled with devotion through feeling -
through the ultimate goal, who are true self-knowers, who are true gurus, who
have the qualities of devotion, as taught by the scriptures, in the Acharyas and
others, are the ones who deserve to be worshipped - not those who merely wear
the outward form.  Even towards the Acharyas and others, towards the Acharyas,
Upadhyayas, Tapasvis, etc., this same pure mind, etc., is the seed of devotion.
What kind of special (with special qualities) Acharyas and others are they
towards? They are towards those who are pure in their feelings - not towards
those who are of low birth. Because even in the form of a foot, there is a
definite ugliness of the unrefined mind. Therefore, (it is not right to respect
the ugly).  This is not just the seed of devotion, then what is it? -
Vyayavratya. And Vyayavratya, the feeling of Vyayavratya, which is its
characteristic, - Vyayavratya (service), - by doing things like taking food,
etc., according to the rules - according to the rules mentioned in the
scriptures - with respect to the person, etc., is the seed of devotion. It is
said:  “Towards the feeling-Acharya, etc., Devotion  “The person, knowing his
own benefit and the benefit of his soul, should serve him, remaining without any
hope of reward.” - etc.  Therefore, it is said - “with pure intention” - with a
pure mind, with a pure intention.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 mitrAdaSTi : bhAlAcAya AdinI ja bhakita "kALalabdhi muja mata gaNA, bhAvalabdhi
tuma hAthe re; laDathaDatuM paNa gaja baccuM, gAje gajavara sAthe re."--zrI
yazeAvijayajI  ane A ja kevala cAgabIja nathI, mATe tenAthI bIjuM khatAvavAne
kahe che-- AcAryAdiSvapi tadvizuddha bhAvayogiSu  /  vaiyAvRttyaM ca
vidhivacchuddhAzaya vizeSataH  /  /  26  /  bhAvayogI AcAryajI, Adi prati ya A
zuddha; zuddha Azaya vizeSathI, vaiyAvratya vidhizuddha, 26 (127) artha :--ane
bhAvayegI evA AcAya Adi pratye paNa, vizuddha evuM A ja kuzalacitta Adi, te
cetrakhIja che. tema ja zuddha AzayavizeSathI temanA pratye vidhiyukta
vaiyAvRttva ( vaiyAvacca--sevA) te cAgabIja che. vivecana bhAvAcAraja sevanA '"
--zrI cAga. 40 sajjhAya. 6 bhAvayeAgI evA bhAvaAcArya, bhAvaupAdhyAya,
bhAvasAdhu, bhAvatapasvI vagere pratye paNa je zubhabhAvasa'panna
bhaktibhAvabhayu" vizuddha kuzala citta vagere hAvu, te paNa ceAgakhIja che.
ahIM bhAva ' zabda upara khAsa bhAra mUkayA che. bhAvathI--paramArthathI jenA
AtmAmAM cAga pariNamyA che, je sAcA AtmajJAnI hAI sAcA guru che, jenAmAM AcAya
AdimAM hAvA cAgya evA zAsrApta yathArtha bhAva-guNa vate che, evA kharekharA
bhAvAcAya, bhAvasAdhu vagere ja vaMdananA adhikArI che,-nahi ke dravyaliMga
dhAraNa vRtti:-AASAvi--AcAya Adi pratye paNa, AcAya'-upAdhyAya- tapasvI Adi
pratye pazu; tar--A ja, kuzacitta Adi, vizuddha-sazuddha je hAya, ema atha che.
te AcAryAdi kevA viziSTa ( khAsa guNuvALA ) hAya, tenA pratye ? teA ke-
mAtrayozipu-bhAvayeAgIe evA pratye,--nahi ke adhama janma lakSaNavALA
dravyaAcAya Adi pratye; kAraNa ke phUTarUpamAM akUTamuddhinuM paNa khacita
asuMdarapaNuM che, teTalA mATe, (kUDAne " mAnavuM te rUDuM nathI teTalA mATe). A
ja kevala yAgakhIja nathI, tyAre zu ?-vaiyAvRttva 6-ane vaiyAvRttva, vyAvrutta
bhAva jenuM lakSaNa che evu' vaiyAvruttta (vaiyAvacca ),-AhAra AdivaDe karIne,
vidhivata-vidhi pramANe, sUtrokta vidhiyuktapaNe-puruSa AdinI apekSAe, ema a
che. kahyu che keH bhAvAcAya Adi pratye bhakita "6 " purisaM tassuvayAraM
uvayAraM cappaNeo ya NAUNaM  /  lukhkhA vecArvAkaya gALA niAsaMghe |"--ityAdi.
arthAt--' puruSane, tenA upakArane, ane peAtAnA AtmAnA upakArane jANIne, AjJA
pALavA khAtara, nirAzaMsa ( kAI paNa phaLanI AzA rahita) rahI vaiyAvRttva kare.'
eTalA mATe ja kahyuM --zuddhArAvizeSataHzuddha AzayavizeSathI, zuddha
cittaprabha dhavizeSathI.

Page #194 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(129) Yoga-jissuchchay  Those who practice, who are adorned with the name and
form of Dravya-achaya, Dravya-upaadhyaaya, Dravya-sadhu, Dravya-tapasvi, etc.,
and who have devotion for Bhava-achaya, etc., are the true seeds of yoga, not
those who are Dravya-achaya, etc. Dravya-achaya - Dravya-sadhu, etc., are like
counterfeit rupees, believing in them is like believing a fake rupee to be real,
and it is not real. Therefore, only Bhava-achaya, etc., are valid. Those who are
of the external vision, the natural people, they see the external form, etc.,
and consider it to be sainthood, they are deluded by the superficial appearance,
and they consider the ignorant Dravya-lingis to be their gurus and worship them!
Counterfeit rupees do not yield the value of a paisa when spent! Because - Bhava
is the first ling, Dravya-ling is not the ultimate reality, Bhava is the cause
of guna-daan, as Jin Bhagwan says. The external scriptures are abandoned for the
sake of the purification of Bhava, but the internal abandonment of the
scriptures of raga-dvesha, etc., is nil.  *  But those who are yogis with the
staff of yoga, they do not give any existence to the Bhava-less Dravya-ling,
they only look at the Bhava-atma-parinaam, they give importance to the Bhava-
lingi who is Bhava-atma, they evaluate Darshan-jnana-charitra-tap, etc., based
on the measure of the manifestation of Bhava-ling's self-awareness, they accept
the true, genuine, principal, rupee-like Bhava-lingi. Because they know well
that - the metal is counterfeit and the imprint is counterfeit, or the metal is
counterfeit and the imprint is real, these two types are like counterfeit
rupees, worthless Dravya-lingi sadhus, they are completely invalid and
unacceptable; and the metal is real but the imprint is counterfeit, or the metal
is real and the imprint is also real, these two types are like silver rupees,
true, valuable Bhava-lingi sadhus, and they are completely valid. Therefore,
they accept both types of Bhava-sadhus - those who are sadhus by Dravya and
those who are sadhus by Bhava, or those who are not sadhus by Dravya but are
sadhus by Bhava. How much Atma-guna has manifested in a particular person? How
far have they progressed in yoga? In what stage of yoga are they? What is their
guna-sthana? Is their inner mind (kashya-mundan-rupa) purified or not? Have they
become a true, ultimate, sadhu 'muni' by Atma? etc., they investigate. Because
they are truly aware of its characteristics, they know  x" भावो हि पढमलिंग ण
दव्वलिंगं च जाण परमत्थं । मवेद जारळमू मूळरेमाळ नळ स्थिતિ ।।” etc. Shri
Kundakundaacharya, inspired by Bhava  k तत्र बाला रतो लिंगे वृत्तान्वेषी तु
मध्यमः । पंडितः सर्वयत्नेन शास्त्रतत्त्वं परीक्षते । गृहत्यागादिकं लिंग बाह्य
शुद्धि विना वृथा । न भेषजं बिनारोग्यं वैद्यवेषेण रोगिणः ॥ "  Shri Chaviyat Ha
Dva

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (129) yogajisasuccaya karanArA, veSadhArI-nAmadhArI evA dravyaAcAya,
dravyaupAdhyAya, dravyasAdhu, dravyatapasvI vagere. bhAvAcAya vagerenI bhakti
karavI e ja ceAgabIja che, nahi ke dravyAcAya vagerenI. dravyAcAya -dravyasAdhu
vagere te khATA rUpIA jevA che, tene mAnavA te te phUDAne rUDA mAnavA jevuM che,
ane te rUDuM' nathI. mATe bhAvAcA AdinuM ja mAnyapaNuM che. bAhyadRSTivALA
prAkRta janA te bAhya veSAdi dekhIne sAdhupaNuM ka2e che, mugdha heAi upara
uparanA dekhAvathI bheALavAI jAya che, ane jJAnarahita evA dravyaligIone guru
mAnI besI ArAdhe che! khATA rUpIAne vaTAvatA jatAM koDInI ki`mata upajatI nathI
! kAraNa ke--bhAva ja x prathama liMga che, dravyali'ga paramArtharUpa nathI,
guNa-dAnuM kAraNa bhAva che ema jina bhagavAna kahe che. bhAvanI vizuddhi
nimitte bAhya graMthane tyAga karAya che, paNa abhyaMtara evA rAgadveSAdi
graMthacuktanA mAhya tyAga nila che. ' * paNa je yAgaSTivALA jogIjanA che te tA
bhAvihIna dravyaliMgane kaMi paNa vajUda ApatA nathI, teo te bhAva-AtmapariNAma
pratye ja dRSTi kare che, bhAvitAtmA evA bhAvali'gIne ja mahattva Ape che,
darzana-jJAna-cAritra-tapa Adi bhAvila'ganuM' ja AtmabhAvanA pragaTapaNAnA mApa
uparathI mUlyAMkana kare che, sAcA nagada pradhAnapaNu rUpIAne ja svIkAre che.
kAraNa ke te sArI peThe jANe che ke-dhAtu khATI ane chApa khATI, athavA dhAtu
kheATI ane chApa sAcI, e be prakAra kalainA rUpI jevA anAvaTI (Counterfeit )
mUlyahIna dravyaliMgI sAdhuonA che, te tA sarvathA amAnya-asvIkAya che; ane
dhAtu sAcI paNa chApa khATI, athavA dhAtu sAcI ane chApa paNa sAcI, e be prakAra
cAMdInA rUpI jevA sAcA mUlyavAn bhAvavi'gI sAdhujanAnA che, ane te ja sarvathA
mAnya che. eTale dravyathI tema ja bhAvathI je sAdhu che, athavA dravyathI nahi
chatAM bhAvathI je sAdhu che,-e banne prakAranA bhAvasAdhune ja te mAnya kare
che. amuka puruSamAM keTale AtmaguNa pragaTyo che ? te yAgamAge keTale AgaLa
vadhyA che? te kevI yAgadazAmAM vate che? tenuM guNasthAna kevu che? tenI
aMdaranI muMDa (kaSAyamuMDanarUpa) suDAI che ke nahi? tene AtmA paramArtha sAdhu
'muni' banyA che ke nahi~ ? ityAdi te tapAsI jue che. kAraNa ke tenA lakSaNunuM
tene kharAkhara bhAna che te jANe che x" bhAvo hi paDhamaliMga Na davvaliMgaM ca
jANa paramatthaM  /  maveda jAraLamU muLaremALa naLa sthiti  /  / " ityAdi zrI
kuMdakuMdAcArya chakRta bhAvaprAbhUta k tatra bAlA rato liMge vRttAnveSI tu
madhyamaH  /  paMDitaH sarvayatnena zAstratattvaM parIkSate  /  gRhatyAgAdikaM
liMga bAhya zuddhi vinA vRthA  /  na bheSajaM binArogyaM vaidyaveSeNa rogiNaH
//  " zrI cAviyata hA dvA

Page #195 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Friend's Perspective: The Glory of Devotion to the True Guru  (129) **Ke** -
The one who is self-knowing, equanimous, and free from attachment, who acts
according to their past karma, completely free from desire, with an unhindered
mind, and whose speech is unprecedented, never heard before, is the true
**Sadguru**. The **Chattis Guṇo Guru Makṣ** knows that the one who is self-
knowing, self-experienced, constantly immersed in the self, self-absorbed, who
reveals the true nature of things, who follows the eternal tradition of the wise
and virtuous, who is always unwavering, and who is a person of equanimity,
practicing the **Samvara** (purification) of the **Kiyā** (actions), is the true
**Shraman**, the true **Sadhu**, the true **Muni**, and the true **Nigranth**.
The rest are merely **Dravyalingi** (materialistic) **Veshadhari** (clothed in
disguise). Thus, they recognize and respect only those who are true
**Bhavayogi** (devotees of the essence), like **Bhavacarya** (spiritual teacher)
and others. They do not care if someone wears white clothes, yellow robes, a
loincloth, or is **Digambar** (sky-clad). Because **Dharma** (righteousness) is
not hidden in clothes! Therefore, they do not get caught up in appearances! They
bow down wherever they see true **Bhavasadhu** (spiritual essence), and such
**Bhavagis** (devotees of the essence) are the ones who have a primary place in
this path. Only **Bhavagis** are asked about their **Bhavas** (essence); the
**Dravyacarya** (materialistic teacher) and others are not asked about their
**Dravyas** (material possessions). Because -  “The self-knowing one is called a
**Shraman**, others are **Dravyalingi** (materialistic); the one who reveals the
true nature of things, is the **Anandghan** (treasure of bliss) **Mat Sanghi**
(follower of the path)... **Vasupujya**.” The worldly people are **Indriyarami**
(attached to the senses), the **Muni** is **Atmarami** (absorbed in the self);
the one who is primarily **Atmarami** is called **Nishkami** (selfless)
**Shreyans** (the best). “**Agamdhara** (scriptural) **Guru** of **Samakiti**
(equanimity), **Kiriya** (action) **Samvara** (purification) is the essence;
**Sampradayi** (traditional) **Avachaka** (unwavering) always, **Shuchi** (pure)
**Anubhav** (experience) is the foundation. **Shantijina**” - **Shri
Anandghanji** - Self-knowledge, equanimity, the practice of **Uday** (awakening)
and **Prayog** (experimentation); unprecedented speech, the highest **Thut**
(truth), the characteristics of a **Sadguru** are appropriate. “Where there is
self-knowledge, there is **Muni**-hood, that is the true **Guru**; the rest are
**Kulguru** (traditional guru) **Kalpana** (imagination), not for the
**Atmarthi** (seeker of the self).” - **Shri Atmasiddhi** “**Sammanti**
(agreement) is the path, **Noti** (disagreement) is not the path.” - **Shri
Acharang Sutra** “When the work is done, the **Tinako** (small piece of wood) is
discarded, the mind is **Mund** (empty) and **Mundaya** (emptied) - **Shri
Chidanandji** “The highest **Vahu** (many) understand **Yuddho** (war) and
**Evi** (such) **Mul** (root) **Jali** (net); **Taddhi** (therefore) **Dar**
(look) **Save** (all) **Mul** (root) **Vanti** (turn) **Ni** (not) **Valu**
(turn).” - **Shri Kundakundacharya**'s **Samayasar**
“**Panvihasammacharanavayavavaharayarasamiisajjhae**. **Igasanvega** (egoistic
emotions) **A** (not) **Rao** (arise), **Chattisguna** (thirty-six qualities)
**Guru** **Jayau** (victorious).” - **Shri Vajuvamiprishishya**'s
**Gurugunachhattissi**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 mitrAdaSTi : sadaguru bhaktino mahimA (129) ke-je AtmajJAnI samadazI vItarAga
puruSa hoya, je pUrva prArabdha pramANe sarvathA IcchArahitapaNe apratibaMdha
bhAvathI vicAratA hoya, ane paramazrata evA je puruSanI vANI kadI pUve na
sAMbhaLI hoya evI apUrva hoya, te ja sAcA saddaguru che. chattIta guNo guru
maksa " te jANe che ke-je AtmajJAnI AtmAnubhavI hoya, je niraMtara AtmabhAvamAM
ramaNa karanArA-AtmArAmI hoya, je vastugate vastunuM svarUpa prakAzanArA hoya,
jJAnI sapuruSanA sanAtana saMpradAyane anusaranArA je sadA avaMcaka hoya, ane je
samakitI puruSa sArabhUta evI saMvara kiyAnA AcaranArA hoya, te ja sAcA zramaNa
che, te ja sAcA sAdhu che, te ja sAcA muni* che, te ja sAcA nigraMtha che, bAkI
bIjA te " dravyaliMgI veSadhArIo che. Ama te jANatA hoI, tevA sAcA bhAvayogIone
ja, bhAvAcArya Adine ja te mAne che, temanA Adara-bhakti kare che. te nathI jevA
besatA ke ANe sapheda kapaDA paheryA che ke pILA pItAMbara che ke tAMbara?
laMgoTI che ke digaMbara che? kAraNa ke dharma kAMI kapaDAmAM saMtAI gaye nathI!
eTale temAM te khALavA jatA nathI ! teo te game tyAM sAcuM bhAva-sAdhupaNuM
dekhe tyAM namI paDe che ane AvA bhAvagIne ja mukhyapaNe A mArgamAM sthAna che.
bhAvagIne ja "bhAva" ahIM pUchAya che; dravyAcArya AdinuM kaMI dravya" ahIM
upajatuM nathI! kAraNa ke - "AtamajJAnI zramaNa kahAve, bIjA te dravyaliMgI re;
vastugate je vastu prakAze, AnaMdaghana mata saMgI re....vAsupUjya." sayala
saMsArI iMdriyarAmI, muni guNa AtamarAmI re; mukhyapaNe je AtamarAmI, te kahiye
niSkAmI rezrI zreyAMsa" "Agamadhara guru samakitI, kiriyA saMvara sAra re;
saMpradAyI avaMcaka sadA, zuci anubhava AdhAra re. zAMtijina"--zrIAnaMdaghanajI
AtmajJAna samadazitA, vicare udaya prayoga; apUrvavANI paramathuta, sadguru
lakSaNa yegya." "AtmajJAna tyAM muni paNuM, te sAcA guru hoya; bAkI kulaguru
kalpanA, AtmArthI nahiM jaya."--zrI Atmasiddhi " saMmaMti pAsa, teM noti pAsa"--
zrI AcArAMga sUtra "kAraja siddha bhaye tinako jirNa, aMtara muMDa muMDAya liyA
re."--zrI cidAnaMdajI x"paramaThTho vahu samajo yuddho ne eNvI muLa jALI taddhi
dara sAve muLa vaMti ni vALuM ''zrI kuMdakuMdAcAryajIkRta samayasAra * "
pnnvihsmmcrnnvyvvhaaraayaarsmiisjjhaae| igasaMvegA a rao, chattIsaguNA gurU
jayau  /  / " -zrI vajuvAmIpraziSyakRta guruguNachattIsI,

Page #196 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(130) The highest seed is to have a pure, skillful mind towards the Acharya and
others, like a vigilant observer, with a pure, clear, and direct feeling of
reverence. To bow to them with reverence, etc., is the highest seed. Just as
devotion to the Jinas is the highest seed, so too is devotion to the Sadguru,
the true Guru, the highest seed. This is the ultimate intention of the great
author. The greatness of this devotion to the Sadguru has been sung by the
scriptures to the extent that they have equated the Sadguru with the Jinas. The
Tirthavasa's hymn, "Maru Nigam," (Shri Gachchhachar Panna), and the one who
explains the form of the Jinas is also the Sadguru, so he is considered to be of
great benefit, and therefore even more so. Placing the Arihant and Siddha before
the Panchaparameshthi also indicates the greatness of the direct Sadguru,
because the path of self-welfare is the main highway for the soul. The soul,
through its own efforts, etc., goes through many great continents, but it
reaches the Sadguru's shelter with little effort. The enemies of the soul, such
as pride, etc., are also easily overcome by this. Without the shelter of the
saints' feet, even with infinite effort, the infinite cycle of births and deaths
does not cease, but with the shelter of the saints' feet, it ends in a short
time. These wise men, with their firm determination, have considered devotion to
the Sadguru as the highest seed. Because, "Serve the feet of the Sadguru,
Abandoning your own side, You attain the ultimate goal, Take your own position
as your goal. Without a direct Sadguru, Without the benefit of the Jinas as your
goal, The thought of the self does not arise. Without the teachings of the
Sadguru, The form of the Jinas cannot be understood; Without understanding the
benefit, The time for the form of the Jinas. The direct Sadguru, by his own
will, Stays with you; By other means, It often doubles. Abandoning the
attachment to your own efforts, With the right attitude, He has spoken to you,
Because he has counted the reasons directly. The enemies of pride, etc., Do not
die of their own accord; Going to the shelter of the Sadguru, They go with
little effort." Shrimad Rajchandra's Shri Atmasiddhi And to show reverence to
such great and benevolent, supremely beneficial, Bhavacharya, Bhavamuni, etc.,
to serve them with devotion, is also the highest seed, as is easily understood.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (130) yogadaSTisamuccaya Ama jenAmAM bhAva-dIva pragaTayo che, evA jAgatI jota
jevA sAkSAt gIsvarUpa bhAva AcAryAdi pratye saMzuddha evuM kuzala citta
rAkhavuM, temane bhAvathI namana vagere karavuM, e uttama gabIja che. jema
jinabhakti uttama gabIja che, tema sadaguru-bhakti saddagurubhakti paNa uttama
yogabIja che, ema mahAtmA graMthakArane parama cobIja Azaya che. A
sadagubhaktino mahimA zAstrakAroe atyaMta atyaMta gAya che, te eTale sudhI ke
zrI sadgurune jina tulya kahyA che* tirathavAsano sUra sanna no nigama mArU (zrI
gacchAcAra pannA), ne keI apekSAe jinanuM svarUpa samajAvanAra paNa zrI sadguru
che, eTale tene upakAra adhika che ema samajIne tethI paNa adhika kahyA che.
paMcaparameSThimAM arihaMtapada siddha pahelAM mUkayuM, te paNa pratyakSa
sadgurune mahimA sUcave che, kAraNa ke jIvane AtmakalyANane mukhya dhorI
rAjamArga e ja che, jIvanA svaccheda Adi aneka mahAdeSa sadguruzaraNamAM jatAM
alpa prayAse jAya che, mAna Adi je AtmAne parama vairI che te paNa tethI saheje
TaLe che; saMtacaraNanA Azraya vinA, anaMta sAdhana karatAM chatAM, je anaMta
bhavabhramaNa aTakatuM nathI, tene saMtacaraNa AzrayathI alpa samayamAM aMta Ave
che. A jJAnI puruSane daDha nirdhAra hovAthI, teoe sadgurubhaktine parama gabIja
gayuM che. kAraNa ke seve sadguru caraNane, tyAgI daI nija pakSa te pAme
paramArthane, nija padane le lakSa. pratyakSa sadguru sama nahiM, pakSa jina
upakAra evo lakSa thayA vinA, Uge na Atma vicAra. sagurunA upadeza viNa,
samajAya na jinarUpa; samajyA viNa upakAra ? samaye jinasvarUpa. pratyakSa
sadguru zvegathI, svachaMda te rokAya; anya upAya karyA thakI, prAye bamaNuM
thAya. svaccheda mata Agraha tajI, va sallusalakSa samakita tene bhAkhiyuM,
kAraNa gaNI pratyakSa. mAnAdika zatru mahA, nija chaMde na marAya; jAtAM
saddaghuru zaraNamAM, a9pa prayAse jAya." zrImad rAjacaMdrapraNIta zrIAtmasiddhi
ane AvA mahAmahima vaMta parama upakArI bhAvAcArya, bhAvamuni vagerenuM
vaiyAvRjya karavuM, vaiyAvacca-sevAzuzraSA karavI, te paNa uttama gabIja che,
ema saheje samajI

Page #197 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Friendship's Eye: Service to the Worthy** (131)  Service to a worthy person,
performed according to the proper method, is possible. To find such an
opportunity is a great blessing. In the context of *Vyaavrutya*, a
*Vyaavruttabhav* is a characteristic, meaning a state where ego, attachment, and
other such feelings have been overcome and abandoned.   *Vyaavrutya*-service
should be performed without ego, attachment, or expectation of reward.
Alternatively, it can be defined as "when someone is afflicted with a disease,
etc., to provide them with appropriate resistance and prevention according to
one's ability, is called *Vyaavrutya*-service." Such *Vyaavrutya* should be
performed towards a *Sadguru* (true teacher), *Sadhu* (saint), etc., according
to the methods prescribed in the scriptures, such as offering food, medicine,
etc. In this method, the following points should be carefully considered:  (1)
The specific person to whom the *Vyaavrutya* is being performed - their age,
physical constitution, state, etc., should be taken into account. (2) How can
they be helped? What can be done to ensure that they can continue their
spiritual practice without hindrance? Such considerations should also be kept in
mind. (3) In this way, performing selfless service to a *Muni* (ascetic), etc.,
according to the proper method, even in the physical body, is equivalent to
what? In reality, I am serving the soul of my father. By doing this, I am
rescuing my own soul from the ocean of worldly existence. I am fortunate that
today I have received the opportunity to serve such a worthy, great, and
virtuous person - such thoughts should be cultivated towards the soul of one's
father. (4) The *Vyaavrutya*-service that I am performing should be considered
as an act of obedience to God. (5) This *Vyaavrutya* should be performed
completely without expectation, without any desire for personal gain, without
seeking any reward. I will serve - this *Muni*, etc., will show me some
attainment, some accomplishment, will show me some miraculous *mantra*
(incantation) or *tantra* (ritual), will give me some special blessing like "Go,
child! You will be prosperous, you will attain wealth, sons, etc., worldly
achievements, or in the afterlife, you will attain such and such fruits" - such
expectations related to this life and the next life, such evil and false hopes,
should not be present in *Vyaavrutya*-service. And that is why it is said here
that pure intention should be maintained, only pure mental activity should be
present.  Regarding the service and devotion to the *Sadguru*, Saint
Jnaneshwarji says: "That service to the *Guru* is the birthplace of all things.
Because the soul, which has been sucked dry by the world, is brought back to its
true nature by the *Guru*."  *“Vyaadhyaapun teedapi tevaan vidhiyaa /
Swashaktyaa yatpratikaare vaayaavrutyaan taduchhyate.”*  - *Tattvarthasar*, by
Shri Amritchandracharya

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 mitrAdaSTi : vidhithI puruSanI sevA (131) zakAya che. evI sevAne suavasara
maLavo e parama ahobhAgyanI vAta che. vaiiyAvacca paNa vyAvRtta bhAva e
vaiyAvRjyanuM lakSaNa che, vyAvRttabhAva eTale jemAMthI ahatva gabIja mamatva
Adi bhAve vyAvRtta-nivRtta thayA che, pAchA haThI gayA che te. vaiyA vacca-
sevAdharma evo hovo joIe ke temAM ahaMkAra, mamakAra, AzaMsA (phala-AzA) vagere
duSTa bhAvo dUra thaI gayA hoya. athavA te "teone vyAdhi vagere AvI paDeze, tene
potAnI zakti pramANe samyapha pratIkAra karavo, nivAraNa karavuM, tenuM nAma
vayAvRtya-vaiyAvacca che. AvuM vaiyAvacca sadguru-sasAdhu Adi pratye AhAra-
auSadhadAna vagere vaDe zAstramAM kahela vidhi pramANe karavA gya che. A
vidhimAM khAsa karIne nIcenA muddA vivekapUrvaka lakSamAM rAkhavA gya che - (1)
eka te puruSa vizeSa-je puruSa pratye vaiyAvacca karavAnuM che, tenI vaya,
zarIraprakRti, avasthA-dazA vagere dhyAnamAM rAkhavA joIe. (2) bIjuM tene
upakAra kevA prakAre thaI zake? kema karyuM hoya to A satpaSa AtmasAdhanamAM
nirAbAdhapaNe pravartI zake ? ityAdi apekSA paNa lakSamAM levI joIe. (3) te
prakAre parama nirapekSa, vidhi pramANe dehAdimAM paNa sarvathA niHspRha-nirIha
muni Adi pratye upakAra karatAM eTale zuM ? vAstavika rIte huM A mhArA pitAnA
AtmAne ja upakAra karuM chuM, A vaDe karIne hArA AtmAne ja A
saMsArasamudramAMthI uddhAra karUM chuM; huM dhanya chuM ke Aje mane AvA parama
supAtra mahAtmA sat puruSanI sevA karavAne parama suavasara sAMpaDaye -ItyAdi
prakAre pitAnA ja AtmAne upakAra ciMtavo joIe. (4) A je vaiyAvacca-sevA huM
karuM chuM, te bhagavAnanI AjJAnuM pAlana karuM chuM, ema bhAvavuM joIe. (5) A
vaiyAvacca sarvathA nirAzaMsapaNe koI paNa jAtanI A lekaparalekanI kAmanA
sivAya, phalanI abhisaMdhi vinA, phala tAkyA vagara, karavuM joIe. huM sevA
karIza-te A muni Adi mane kaMI labdhi-siddhi batAvI Apaze, mane kaI tiSa maMtra-
taMtra vagere camatkAra dekhADaze, mane evo koI rUDA AzIrvAda Apaze ke "jA
baccA! hAruM kalyANa thaze, ke jethI karIne huM dhana-putra Adi ehika siddhi
pAmIza, athavA paralokamAM mane AthI karIne AvuM AvuM phala prApta thaze -ItyAdi
prakAre A bhava-parabhava saMbaMdhI AzaMsA, duSTa khoTI AzA vaiyAvaccamAM-
sevAdharmamAM na hovI ghaTe. ane eTalA mATe ja ahIM kahyuM ke AmAM khAsa karIne
zuddha Azaya he joI rakhe, zuddha cittavRtti ja hovI joIe. A sadgurunA sevA-
bhakti aMge saMta jJAnezvarajI kahe che ke-"e gurusevA te sarva bhAgenI
janmabhUmi ja che. kAraNa ke zekavaDe cUsAyelA jIvane e brahmasvarUpa *
"vAdhyApuna teDapi tevAM vidhIya / svazaktyA yatpratIkAre vaiyAvRttyaM taducyate
/  / " -zrI amRtacaMdrAcAryajIkRta tattvArthasAra,

Page #198 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(132) This creates a collection of virtues. Just as the entire water reservoir
of the father merges into the ocean of Guru Seva, or the Shruti enters the
Brahma Pad, or a devoted wife dedicates her life and all her virtues to her
beloved husband, in the same way, one dedicates their inner and outer being to
the Guru Kula, and makes their father's body the abode of the Guru Kula. -
Knowledge stands in service before those who have such unique love for the Guru
Kula. Guru's grace is the rain of nectar, and we are the vessels that receive
it. “We should search and find such holy characters and take care of their food,
drink, clothes, utensils, medicine, and shelter; we should serve them with
devotion. There are such worthy people who are only engaged in the welfare of
their own and others' souls, and who do not even expect anything for their own
body. By giving them donations, serving them with devotion, and obtaining their
blessings, I can benefit my powers. Oh! When will I be fulfilled? We should
always have such good intentions. Shri Mansukh Bhai Kirchand's Dan Dharma
Panchachar, Thus, knowing the infinite and boundless grace of the Guru Bhagwan,
the devoted person serves him with unique devotion. He thinks, "What a
miraculous and wonderful grace has this merciful and compassionate Sadguru
Bhagwan bestowed upon me, a mere mortal! I am completely incapable of repaying
this grace. What can I offer? Then what can I offer at the feet of this Lord?
Because everything else is inferior to the soul, and this soul has been given to
me by this Lord. Therefore, surrendering to his feet is the only remedy."
Thinking this, he surrenders his soul to the Sadguru's feet, becomes obedient,
and becomes a servant, a servant, and dust of his feet. “Oh! Oh! Shri Sadguru,
the ocean of compassion, boundless; This mortal has been graced by the Lord, Oh!
Oh! What grace. What can I offer at the Lord's feet? Everything else is inferior
to the soul; it was given to me by the Lord, so I am surrendered to his feet.
From this day forward, this body and everything else is surrendered to the Lord,
a servant, a servant, I am a servant, I am humble before the Lord.” - Shri
Atmasiddhi

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (132) gadakTisamuccaya banAve che. jevI rIte pitAnA samagra jaLarAzine laI
gaMgA samudramAM gurusevAnI maLe che, kiMvA zruti brahmapadamAM praviSTa thAya
che, athavA pativratA strI prazaMsA pitAnuM jIvita ane potAnA guNAvaguNa sarva
potAnA priyatama patine samapI de che, te ja pramANe potAnuM aMtAkaraNa
AMtarbAhya, gurukuLamAM arpaNa karI dIdhuM che, ane pitAnA zarIrane gurukuLanA
AgArarUpa banAvyuM che.--gurukuLamAM jenI evI ananya prIti rahelI tArA jovAmAM
Ave, tenI AgaLa jJAna tenI sevA karatuM ubheluM hoya che. gurukRpA ja amRtanI
vRSTi che, ane ApaNe gurusevA vRttirUpa repA chIe." ityAdi. "AvA pavitra
satpAtranI ApaNe zodhI zodhI anna-pAna-vastra-pAtra-auSadha-AvAsa AdivaDe
saMbhALa levI joIe; teonI bhakti-zuzraSA karavI joIe. evA supAtra che, jeo
kevaLa potAnA ane pArakA jInA hitamAM ja pravattI rahyA che, ane jeo potAnA
dehanI paNa apekSA nathI rAkhatA, tevA mahApuruSone dAna daI teonI bhakti karI,
teone yega meLavI, mArI zaktione lAbha teone ApI aho ! huM kyAre kRtArtha
thaIza? evI sadbhAvanA ApaNe sadA bhAvavI ghaTe che. * zrI manasukhabhAI
kIracaMdrata dAnadharma-paMcAcAra, Ama A zrImad guru bhagavAnane anaMta apAra
upakAra jANa, A dRSTivALe gIpuruSa tenI ananyabhAve sevA-bhakti kare che. te
ciMtave che ke A parama kRpALu karuNasiMdhu saddaguru bhagavAne A huM pAmara
para parama AzcaryakAraka zuM prabhucaraNa upakAra karyo che! huM te upakArane
badale vALavA sarvathA asamartha chuM, kane dharUM? te pachI huM A prabhune
caraNe zuM dharUM? kAraNa ke AtmAthI bIjI badhI vastu utaratI che ane te AtmA te
A prabhue ja mane A che, mATe emanA caraNAdhInapaNe vastu e ja eka upAya che.
ema ciMtavI te sadgurucaraNe AtmA paNa kare che-Atmanivedana kare che, AjJAdhIna
thaI rahe che, dAsAnudAsa caraNareNu banI jAya che. "aho ! ahA ! zrI sadguru,
karuNAsiMdhu apAra; A pAmara para prabhu karyo, aho ! aho! upakAra. zuM prabhu
caraNa kane dharUM? AtmAthI sau hIna; te to prabhue Api, vatuM caraNAdhIna. A
dehAdi AjathI, vattA prabhu AdhIna dAsa, dAsa, huM dAsa chuM, teha prabhune
dIna."-zrI Atmasiddhi

Page #199 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Friend's View:** Natural Bhava Udvēga  (133) And this pure Āśaya Viśēṣa and
the types of Kālabhāva are present, therefore, the second antra, which has been
almost said, says:  **Bhava Udvēga** is natural and the acceptance of material
possessions is also natural.  Similarly, by following the principles, writing,
etc., is also a seed. 27  **Meaning:** And natural Bhava Udvēga (dispassion
towards the world), the acceptance of material possessions, and writing, etc.,
by following the principles are also seeds.  **Discussion:** Bhava Udvēga is a
seed. - In the Śrī G. 10th chapter, the seeds of devotion to the Lord and
devotion to the Guru were shown, in addition to these, there are other seeds:
(1) Natural Bhava Udvēga, (2) Acceptance of material possessions, (3) Writing,
etc., according to the principles.  1. **Natural Bhava Udvēga:** Dispassion
towards the world, extreme boredom, and inner dispassion are also excellent
seeds. And this dispassion should also be natural, - not due to the loss of a
loved one, bad company, illness, or other suffering. This is a type of hatred.
Such suffering-filled "masāṇiā" dispassion is not even worthy of the name
"dispassion." Because this suffering-filled dispassion is a type of Ārtadhyāna,
therefore, such boredom-like dispassion is not worthy of being a seed of yoga.
But birth, old age, death, fear, sorrow, etc., are the causes of dispassion
towards the world, boredom, and dislike. It is natural, not due to the loss of a
loved one, etc., because it is a form of Ārtadhyāna (dispassion arising due to
the loss of a loved one, etc., is a form of Ārtadhyāna). It has been said that -
"Pratyutpannānnu Suvānni Joṣa Daśaḥ = Vairay" etc., "Dispassion, boredom, and
hatred arising from suffering are not dispassion." Natural Bhava Udvēga is a
seed of yoga, this connection continues.  And **Acceptance of material
possessions:** Acceptance of material possessions, by relying on the giving of
medicines, etc. It is impossible for the feeling of destruction and pacification
to be a single knot, therefore, the acceptance of material possessions is a
seed.  And **Writing, etc., according to the principles:** By relying on the
meaning, the subject matter, which is the principle, - not on the scriptures of
desire, etc., what? Then - according to the principles - according to the
principles, by following the characteristics of the righteous use of wealth,
etc., which is justified by justice; what? Then - writing, etc., is also a seed.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 mitrAdaSTiH sahaja bhava udvega (133) ane A zuddha AzayavizeSa tathA prakAranA
kAlabhAvathI hoya che, eTalA mATe lagabhaga kahevAI cUkeluM bIjAntara kahe che
bhavodve gazca sahajo dravyAbhigrahapAlanam  /  tathA siddhAntamAzritya vidhinA
lekhanAdi ca  //  27  //  bhavaudvega sahaja ane, dravya abhigraha tema;
siddhAnta AzrI vidhivaDe, lekhanAdi paNa ema. 27 artha - ane sahaja evo
bhavaudvega (saMsAra pratye vairAgya), dravya abhigrahanuM pAlana, tathA
siddhAMtane AzrIne vidhithI lekhana Adi paNa gabIja che. vivecana bhava udvega
suThAre."--zrI ga0 dasajhAya uparamAM je prabhubhakti ne sadUgurubhakti e gabIja
batAvyA, te uparAMta bIjA paNa gabIja cheH (1) sahaja bhavaudvega, (2) dravya
abhigrahapAlana, (3) vidhithI siddhAMtanA lekhanAdi. 1. sahaja bhava udvega
saMsAra pratye udvega, atyaMta kaMTALe, aMtaraMga vairAgya upajavo e paNa uttama
gabIja che. ane A vairAgya paNa sahaja eTale ke svAbhAvika hovo joIe, -nahi ke
ISTaviyega, aniSTasaMga, rogaApatti vagere duHkhanAM kAraNethI upajato
duHkhagarbhita vairAgya. te te eka prakArane dveSa che. evA duHkhagarbhita
"masANIA vairAgyane "vairAgya" nAma ja ghaTatuM nathI. kAraNa ke te du:khajanya
vairAgya te ArtadhyAnano prakAra che, mATe tevA kaMTALArUpa vairAgyane yogabIja
paNuM ghaTatuM nathI. paNa janma, jarA, mRtyu, rega, zoka vRttiH-mAdha-saMsAra
pratye udvega, kaMTALA, aNagamo-AnA (saMsAranA) janmAdirUpapaNue karIne-hoya
che. sanesahaja, nahiM ke ISTaviyoga Adi nimittavALe, kAraNa ke tenuM te
ArtadhyAnarUpapaNuM che, (aSTaviyoga vagere kAraNe upajato vairAgya
ArtadhyAnarUpa che ). kahyuM che ke-"pratyutpannAnu suvAnni joSa dazaHT =
vairAya" ItyAdi, "pratyutpanna du:kha thakI nirveda, kaMTALo te te TheSa che,
vairAgya nathI." sahaja bhaThega e yogabIja che, ema saMbaMdha cAlyo Ave che.
tathA drathAmikagiTanaH-dravya abhigahana pAlana,auSadha vagerenA saMpradAnane
AzrIne. viziSTa kSayapazamabhAvarUpa bhAva abhigrahano abhinnagraMthine
asaMbhava che, tethI dravya abhigrahanuM grahaNa che. A paNa gabIja che. tathA
nittamAriyantathA siddhAntarUpa arthane-viSayane AzrIne, -nahiM ke kAma Adi
zAstrone, zuM? to ke-vidhinA-vidhithI, nyAyapAjita dhananA sataprayoga Adi
lakSaNavALA vidhivaDe karIne; zuM? te ke-lunA 2-lekhana Adi paNa anAma gabIja
che.

Page #200 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(134) Considering the true nature of the sorrowful world, as revealed by the
yogic perspective, which includes the collection of all suffering, a natural
aversion arises towards this inherently suffering world. This genuine dispassion
is called "gabij" and is the subject of this discussion. This is because the
discerning individual, with their yogic perspective, clearly perceives the
nature of the world:  “Born, aged, and died, this world is impermanent. All
beings experience karma, and no one can hold onto anything.” –Shri
Vinayavijayajikrit Punyaprakash  “The umbrella that is held over the head, the
staff that is held in the hand, even those are gone, leaving behind the endless
web of Maya.” –Shri Padmavijayaji  “When illness manifests in the body, it
cannot be taken away by anyone else. It is the one self, the one soul, the one
father. This is the wisdom of the wise. The lightning, the wealth, the king, the
moth, the lifespan, the water wave, the Purandari bow, the beautiful colors,
what is the use of these fleeting moments?” –Shrimad Rajchandraji  Thus,
recognizing the nature of the world, the great soul addresses the soul with
compassion: “Oh, living being! You have drunk the milk of countless mothers over
countless births. If you were to gather it all, it would exceed the water of the
ocean! Oh, living being! The tears of countless mothers have flowed at your
death. If you were to gather them all, it would exceed the water of the ocean!
Thus, oh, living being! You have experienced countless births and deaths. Who is
your son, who is your father, who is your wife?”  “The story of the great king,
the king of the universe, is like the water of the ocean. The sorrow of your
death is like the sorrow of countless mothers. The sorrow of your death is like
the sorrow of countless mothers.” –Shri Kundakundacharyajikrit Bhavaprat  “Whose
son, whose father, whose wife? The soul wanders in the ocean of existence,
difficult to cross.” –Shri Amritchandracharyajikrit Shri Tatvarth Saar  “All
relationships arising from the ocean of existence are fraught with suffering.
Humans are born and die, leaving behind nothing but emptiness. The union of
lovers is like a city in the sky, youth and wealth are like the surface of a
cloud, the body of one's family and children are like lightning, fleeting. Know
that the entire cycle of existence is momentary.” –Shri
Shubhachandracharyajikrit Shri Jnanarnava  “The fruits of the tree of birth and
death fall down and perish. The soul wanders in the cycle of birth and death for
a long time.” –Shri Atmanushasan

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (134) gadaSTisamuccaya Adi duHkhamaya saMsAranuM sAcuM yathAtathya svarUpa
vicAratAM, je sahaja-svAbhAvika bhokaeNga-saMsAra pratye aNagamo upaje, khare
vairAgya jaje, tene ja gabIja kahevA yogya che ane te ja atre prastuta che
kAraNa ke A yogadaSTivALA vivekIne mana saMsAranuM AvuM svarUpa spaSTapaNe
saMvedAya che: "janma jarA maraNe karI e, e saMsAra asAra te karyA kama sahu
anubhave e, kaI na rAkhaNahAra to." -zrI vinayavijyajIkRta puNyaprakAza stavana
puhIne je chatra pare kare, merune kare daMDa re; te paNa gayA hAtha ghasatA,
mUkI sarva akhaMDa...mAyAjAla re."zrI padyavijayajI zarIramAM vyAdhi pratyakSa
thAya, te koI anya lai nA zakAya; te bhagave eka sva Atma pita, ekatva ethI naya
sujJa zete. vidyuta lakSmI prabhutA pataMga, AyuSya te te jaLanA taraMga;
puraMdarI cApa anaMga raMga, zuM rAciye tyAM kSaNano prasaMga?" -zrImad
rAjacaMdrajI Ama saMsAra svarUpane vedI rahe te mahAnubhAva pitAnA AtmAne
saMbodhIne bhAve che ke-he jIva! te anaMta janmonI aMdara judI judI jananIonuM
eTaluM dhAvaNa pIdhuM che ke te bheguM karIe te samudranA jala karatAM paNa
vadhI jAya ! hArUM vairAgya bhAvanA maraNa thatAM judI judI mAtAonI AMkhamAMthI
eTaluM pANI vachUTayuM che ke te ekaThuM karIe te sAgarajala karatAM paNa vadhI
jAya! Ama he jIva! hArA anaMta janma-maraNa thayA che. temAM tene putra ne kene
pitA? konI kA jhara " pati thaMchIruM mautanamaMtarASTra kathA aNNANNANa
mahAjasa ! sAyarasalilA hu ahiyayaraM  //  tuha maraNe dukkheNa aNNaNNANaM
aNeyajaNaNINaM  /  MAja jayagIruM sArasasTiDhA du avicAra zrI
kuMdakuMdAcAryajIkRta bhAvaprAta "kasyApatyaM pitA kasya kasyAmbA kasya gehinI
/  eka eva bhavAmbhodhau jIvA bhramati dustare  // " -zrI amRtacaMdrAcAryajIkRta
zrI tatvArtha sAra "bhavAbdhiprabhavA sarva saMbaMdhA vipadAspadam  /
saMbhavaMti manuSyANAM tathA'nte suSTu nIrasAH  //  gagananagarakalpaM saGgamaM
vallabhAnAma, jaladapaTalatalyaM yauvanaM vA dhanaM vA  /  svajanasutazarIrAdIni
vidyuccalAni, kSaNikamiti samasta viddhi saMsAravRttam  // " -zrI
zubhacaMdrAcAryajIracita zrI jJAnArNava, "janmatAladramAjantuphalAni
prcyutaanydhH| gAya mRtyummA mantare yu ciraMjAm | "--zrI AtmAnuzAsana,

Page #201 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Friendship's Perspective: A Feeling of Renunciation**  (135) Mother and wife,
who are they? In this insurmountable ocean of the world, this soul wanders
alone. All the relationships that arise in this ocean of the world become places
of misfortune for humans and ultimately prove to be extremely dull. Oh soul!
Don't you see this from your own experiences? The love and affection in this
world, how much of it is false, illusory, and full of selfish schemes. Don't you
have a strong experience of this? Loved ones are like the celestial city of
Gagananagar, youth and wealth are like clouds, relatives, children, and the body
are like lightning, fickle. Thus, the entire worldly existence is momentary. Oh
soul! You know this, yet why do you rejoice in your mind when you see this
fleeting splendor and family? This fleeting life is like a drop of water on the
tip of a blade of grass. How long will it take for this fleeting life-fruit,
which has fallen from the palm tree of birth, to reach the land of death?
Therefore, oh foolish soul! Seek refuge in the Great One! Seek refuge in the
Great One! Now, be free from this endless, sorrowful world! Be free! "Foolish,
you are deluded, foolish, you are deluded, thinking of your wealth and family in
your heart. Like water on a blade of grass, trembling with the wind, know that
life is worthless."  Shri Vinayavijayjit Shri Shantasudharas.  And so on, by
contemplating in this way, a natural feeling of renunciation arises in him. He
becomes weary of the world, tired, and has a strong desire to escape from this
cycle of birth and death. He desires liberation and truly becomes a seeker.
Then, with renunciation, he searches diligently for a true spiritual guide to
learn the means of liberation. When he finds such a guide, who is rare and has a
pure mind, he considers it a great blessing and with devotion, he acts according
to his instructions. Therefore, when the teachings of the spiritual guide reach
such a renounced soul, he attains right knowledge and other auspicious
traditions, because his mind has become soft due to the water of renunciation,
and knowledge sprouts within him. Thus, true inner renunciation becomes the best
seed for him. And until the color of such inner renunciation is not imprinted on
the mind, the soul does not develop the capacity to attain knowledge. As long as
the mind is hard, theoretical knowledge cannot penetrate it, it only passes over
the surface. But when the mind becomes soft and moist through the watering of
renunciation, then the seed of right knowledge can be sown in it.  Shri Mansukh
Bhai (the revered father of this commentator) has rightly said in the
introduction to Shantasudharas, "Until the mind's activities are cleansed of the
dirt of desires by the purifying agent of renunciation, the soul will not be
able to absorb the nourishing medicine of the teachings, which is like a
chemical, and it will be unsuccessful."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 mitrAdaSTi : vairAgya bhAvanA, (135) mAtA ne kenI strI ? A dustara saMsAra-
sAgaramAM A jIva ekale ja bhame che. A saMsAra samudramAM upajatA sarva
saMbaMdhe manuSyone vipattinA sthAna thaI paDe che ne aMte atyaMta nIrasa nivaDe
che, ema he jIva! tuM hArA rejanA anubhava parathI najare nathI jete? A jagamAM
je prIta-sagAI che te paNa keTalI badhI jUThI, mAyAvI, ne svArtha prapaMcamaya
che, ene kaDe anubhava zuM tane nathI thaya? priyajanone saMgama gagananagara
jevo che, yauvana ne dhana vAdaLA jevA che, svajana-putra-zarIra vagere vijaLI
jevA caMcala che, Ama AkhuM saMsAracaritra kSaNika che, ema he jIva! tuM jANe
che, chatAM A tyAre tuccha vaibhava ne parivAra dekhIne tuM manamAM zAne
malakAya che? DAbhanI aNI para rahelA jalabiMda jevuM A lhArUM jIvana kSaNika
che. janmarUpa tADa-vRkSamAMthI bhraSTa thayelAM A lhArA jIva-phalane
mRtyubhUmie pahoMcatAM keTale vakhata lAgaze? mATe he mUDha jIva! meha ma pAma !
maha ma pAma! have te A anaMta khedamaya saMsArathI virAma pAma! virAma pAma! "
mUDha muhyasi mudhA, mUDha muhyasi mudhA, vibhavamanuciMtya hRdi saparivAram  /
kuzazirasi nIramiva galadanilakaMpitaM, vinaya jAnIhi jIvitamasAram  //  mUDha
// " zrI vinayavijayajIta zrI zAMtasudhArasa. ItyAdi prakAre bhAvanA bhAvatAM
tene sahaja vairAgyanI kuraNa thAya che, te bhavathI kheda pAme che-thAkI jAya
che, ne A janmamaraNa paraMparAnI jALamAMthI chUTavAnI tIvra icachA kare che-
mekSanI abhilASA kare che, ne sAce mumukSu" bane che. eTale pachI te vairAgyathI
mokSane upAya jANavA mATe ghaNA prayAsathI sAcA saddagurunI zodha kare che;
cittabhUminI ane parama durlabha evA tenI prApti thaye, tene parama upakAra gaNI
mana AdratA vacana-kAyAnI ekAgratAthI tenA AjJAdhInapaNe varte che. eTale
sadguruno bodha tevA vairAgyavAsita jIvane lAgatAM, tene samyagujJAna Adi
kalyANaparaMparAnI prApti thAya che, kAraNa ke vairAgya-jalathI tenI cittabhUmi
pacI thaI hovAthI temAM bodha UgI nIkaLe che. Ama sAco aMtaraMga vairAgya tene
uttama gabIjarUpa thaI paDe che. ane tevA aMtaraMga vairAgyano raMga jyAM lagI
cittamAM na lAgyuM hoya, tyAM lagI jIvamAM jJAna pAmavAnI yegyatA paNa AvatI
nathI. jyAM lagI citta-bhUmi kaThaNa hoya tyAM lagI siddhAMtajJAna temAM pravezI
zakatuM nathI, uparachaluM thaIne cAlyuM jAya che. paNa jyAre vairAgya jalanA
siMcanavaDe te citta-bhUmi Adra thaI pocI bane che, tyAre ja temAM
samyagrajJAna-bIjane prakSepa thaI zake che. sva. zrI manasukhabhAIe ( A
vivecakanA pU. pitAzrI) zAMtasudhArasa prastAvanAmAM yathArtha ja jyAMsudhI
vairAgyarUpI recaka dravyathI cittavRttine malina vAsanArUpa maLa sApha thayo
nathI, tyAMsudhI jIvane siddhAMta bodharUpa-rasAyaNarUpa pauSTika auSadha guNa
na kare, niSphaLa jAya,

Page #202 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(136) How can the seed of knowledge, the principle of true knowledge, be sown in
the soil of the mind until it is thoroughly soaked with the water of detachment?
It cannot be sown; yet, even if it is projected there, it will not take root, it
will be in vain.” “Detachment and dispassion do not reside in the mind, and
knowledge does not arise from them; when detachment and dispassion cease, one
forgets one’s true nature. Detachment and dispassion are successful only when
they are accompanied by self-knowledge; and self-knowledge is the cause of their
attainment.” - Shrimad Rajchandraji Prabhu Shri Atmasiddhi rightly calls this
natural urge to be free from worldly anxieties - true inner detachment - the
best seed. And thus, the seeds that have been mentioned so far are as follows:
“The seed of devotion is sown in this world, by offering pure salutations to the
Jinas; by serving the principles of conduct, by being free from worldly
anxieties... - Shri G. Sajjaya 2-8 2. The practice of non-attachment to material
possessions and the practice of non-attachment to material possessions - service
- is also an excellent yogic seed. Giving to worthy recipients such as monks,
etc., pure food, medicine, scriptures, and equipment, giving in accordance with
the right principles, etc., is non-attachment to material possessions, it is a
good intention. Attachment to worthy recipients - the field - is found in those
who have broken the knots, and those who have not yet broken the knots do not
have this attachment, so here the practice of non-attachment to material
possessions has been taken. To give, according to one’s ability, in accordance
with the proper rituals, to a true monk who is immersed in meditation, who does
not even have a single hair on his body, and who has pure intentions in his
journey through life for the sake of self-control, is described in the
scriptures as being of the highest merit. Just as a small banyan seed that falls
on the earth, in time, becomes a large tree that is beautiful with shade and
full of sweet fruit, so too, a small gift of a seed given to a worthy person at
the right time with devotion, in time, becomes a large tree of liberation,
beautiful with the shade of great wealth and full of the sweet fruit of
liberation. x “Just as a banyan seed that falls on the earth, a small gift given
to a worthy person, in time, bears fruit, beautiful with shade and full of sweet
fruit, for those who have bodies.” - Shri Samantabhadracharya’s Ratnakara-
karandashravaka-achara

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (136) yogadaSTisamuccaya athavA cittacaMcaLatArUpa vikAra upajAve jyAM sudhI
vairAgya jaLanA siMcanathI cittabhUmi yatheccha bhIMjAI na hoya, tyAMsudhI
tattvajJAnarUpa siddhAMta bodhanuM bIja temAM kayAMthI vAvI zakAya ? na ja vAvI
zakAya; chatAM te tyAM prakSepavAmAM Ave che te kare nahiM, vyartha jAya." tyAga
virAga na cittamAM, thAya ne tene jJAna; aTake tyAga virAgamAM, te bhUle nija
bhAna. vairAgyAdi saphaLa che, je saha AtamajJAna; tema ja AtamajJAnanI prApti
taNuM nidAna." zrImad rAjacaMdrajI prabhuta zrI Atmasiddhi eTalA mATe A sahaja
bhava udvegane-sAcA aMtaraMga vairAgyane paNa uttama gabIja kahyuM te yathArtha
che. ane Ama atyAra sudhI je bIja kahyA te A pramANe- "ganA bIja Iha grahe,
jinavara zuddha praNAme re; bhAvAcAraja sevanA, bhava udvega suThAme
re....vIra"-zrI ga0 sajajhAya 2-8 2. dravya abhigraha pAlana tathA dravya
abhigrahanuM pAlana-sevana e paNa uttama yogabIja che. nirdoSa AhAra, auSadha,
zAstra, upakaraNa AdinuM muni vagere satpAtrane saMpradAna karavuM,
samyaphaprakAre vidhi pramANe dAna karavuM, ItyAdi dravya abhigraha che, zubha
saMkalpa che. bhAva supAtra-kSetre abhigraha te graMthibheda thayA pachI viziSTa
kSapazamavaMtane hoya che, ane A dAna-bIja daSTivALAne haju graMthibheda thaye
nathI, eTale tene bhAva abhigraha saMbhavate nathI, tethI ahIM dravya
abhigrahanuM grahaNa karyuM che. AtmadhyAnamAM nimagna, dehamAM paNa kiciMtu
mUcha nahi dharAvanArA, ane saMyamanA hetuthI ja dehayAtrAmAtra nirdoSa vRtti
dharAvanArA, evA ekAMta AtmArthane ja sAdhanArA sAcA sAdhu munivarane,
yathAzakti vidhipUrvaka yogya dAna vagere devuM, tene atyaMta mahimA zAstramAM
varNavavAmAM Avyo che. jema pRthvImAM paDeluM nAnuM sarakhuM vaDanuM bIja kALe
karIne, chAyAthI zobhatuM ne ghaNuM phaLathI mIThuM evuM moTuM jhADa banI jAya
che, tema supAtra puruSane yegyakALe bhaktithI ApeluM alpa dAnarUpa bIja paNa
kALe karIne. meTA vaibhavarUpa chAyAthI zobhatA tathA ghaNu phaLathI mIThA evA
mahA mokSamArgarUpa vRkSamAM pariNamI makSa phala Ape che. x " kSitigatamiva
baTabIjaM pAtragataM dAnamalpamapi kAle  /  phalati cchAyAvibhava
bahuphalamiSTaM zarIrabhRtAm  /  / " -zrI samaMtabhadrAcAryajIta
ratnakaraMDazrAvakAcAra

Page #203 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Friend's View: Public Giving  (137) Just as a seed sown in good soil sprouts,
bears countless fruits, and produces infinite seeds, which in turn produce
infinite seeds, thus perpetuating the merit of infinite fruits, similarly,
giving to a worthy soul leads to infinite welfare. If one offers food and drink
with devotion to a worthy sage, it nourishes the body of that worthy soul, and
that worthy soul then teaches others, leading to the welfare of many beings and
creating many more worthy souls. This, in turn, leads to the creation of many
more worthy souls, and so on, resulting in the cause of much and worthy. Thus,
giving to a worthy soul leads to the creation of many worthy souls, which are
the cause of immeasurable welfare for beings.  – Shri Mansukh Bhai Kiratchandra
Mehta, *Daan Dharma* – *Panchachar*  In one way, liberation is achieved through
giving. Because the path to liberation is based on right knowledge, right faith,
and right conduct, it is followed by great sages, and they practice this path
through their bodies. The body survives on food, so giving pure food, drink,
medicine, and other things to worthy sages like munis helps them maintain the
path to liberation. This is what the great sage Padmanandiji said in
*Padmanadipanchavinchati* about the merit of giving. This kind of giving to
worthy souls plants the seeds of such merit in the soul, which is why it is
called *yogabij* (seed of yoga). The influence of giving to worthy souls has
helped many beings cross the ocean of samsara, as evidenced by many examples in
the scriptures, such as Shri Shreyans Kumar, Shri Shalibhadraji, and other great
sages.  Or, giving to the public good is also included here. To spend one's
wealth wisely for the benefit of the poor and suffering, to give charity, to
give loans, to provide pure medicine, to establish hospitals and other public
institutions according to the needs of the time, to provide food and water, to
open schools for giving and receiving charity, and to help people during times
of natural disasters or epidemics, to use all one's physical, mental, and
financial resources to serve the people, especially the poor, is all
praiseworthy and leads to the creation of *yogabij*. Because these acts of
giving, done with a strong foundation, lead to the advancement of preaching,
which in turn leads to the development of generosity and other virtues in
people. This benefits many beings and leads to compassion, so the main intention
here is good will. *And to emphasize the religious nature of this giving, the
Lord himself said, "Giving to the needy, establishing charitable institutions,
etc., all this leads to the advancement of preaching, and thus to the
development of generosity and other virtues. This benefits many beings and leads
to compassion, so the main intention here is good will."*  – Shri Yashovijayji,
*Dva-Dva*

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 mitrAdaSTi: sArvajanika dAnAdi (137) jema sArA kSetramAM vAveluM eka bIja UgI
nIkaLI asaMkhya phaLa ApI, anaMtA bIja pedA karI, te te bIjemAM pAchI anaMtA
bIja pedA karavAnI, ema paraMparAe anaMtAnaMta phaLanI yegyatA Ape che, tema
supAtrane ApeluM dAna anaMta kalyANanuM kAraNa thAya che. eka supAtra maharSine
khAnapAnanuM bhaktipUrvaka dAna dIdhuM hoya, to te supAtranA dehane yatheccha
nirvAha thAya che, ane te supAtra pachI jIvone kalyANamaya upadeza ApI bIjA
aneka supAtro banAve che, je pAchA pratyeka aneka aneka karI, ghaNuM ane supAtra
thavAnAM kAraNika thAya che. Ama eka supAtrane dAna ApavAthI paraMparAe aneka
supAtro nIpaje cheje jIvonAM amegha kalyANanAM kAraNarUpa ja che." -zrI
manasukhabhAI kIratacaMdra mahetAkRta dAnadharma-paMcAcAra eka rIte joIe te
mokSamArganuM pravartana dAnathI ja thAya che. kAraNa ke mokSamArga
samyagajJAna-darzana-cAritrarUpa che, tene dhAraNa karanArA mahAmunIzvare che,
ane dehavaDe karIne teo te dharmamArgane ArAdhe che. deha paNa AhAra hoya te
Take che, mATe nirdoSa AhArapAna-auSadha-zAstra AdinuM dAna je satpAtra muni
Adine kare che, te mokSamArgane dhArI rAkhe che--TakAve che, ema
padmanadipaMcaviMzatikAmAM dAna adhikAre mahAnircatha munIzvara padmanaMdijIe
kahyuM che. ane AvuM satpAtra pratye devAmAM AvatuM dAnAdi AtmAmAM tevA
prakAranI yogyatAnuM ropaNa kare che, tethI tene yogabIja kahyuM che. supAtra
dAnanA prabhAve ghaNA jIvo saMsArasAgara tarI gayA che, enA puSkaLa daSTAMte
zAstramAM maLI Ave che. jema ke zrI zreyAMsakumAra, zrI zAlibhadrajI mahAmuni
Adi. athavA te sArvajanika upagane mATe dAnAdi karma karavuM, tene paNa atra
samAveza thAya che. dIna-duHkhI janatA mATe vivekapUrvaka pitAnA dravyane
yathAzakti vyaya karavo, dAna - devuM, nirdoSa auSadha Adine prabaMdha karavo,
deza-kAlane anusarI davAkhAnA sArvajanika -ispitAla vagere karAvavA, AhAra-
pANInI jogavAI karI ApavI, dAnadAnAdi zAlA ughADavI; temaja rogacALo phATI
nIkaLe tyAre athavA kudaratI kepa thAya tyAre, saMkaTa samaye pitAnA tana-mana-
dhananI sarva zakti khacIne janatAnI-daridranArAyaNanI jeTalI bane teTalI sevA
karavI; A badhuM ya prazasta hoI paraMparAe gabIjanuM kAraNa thAya che. kAraNa
ke puSTa AlaMbanane AzrIne karavAmAM AvelA te dAnAdi karmane lIdhe pravacananI
unnati thAya che, ane tethI karIne lokone bIjAdhAna Adi bhAvanI prApti thAya
che. Ama ghaNA jIvonA upakArathI anukaMpAnuM nimitta bane che, tethI atre mukhya
evo zubhAzayarUpa hetu hoya che. * ane A dAnanuM dharmagapaNuM phuTa karavAne
bhagavAne pote paNa 'puSTAlambanamAzritya dAnazAlAdikarma yat  /  tattu
pravacanonnatyA biijaadhaanaadibhaavtH|| bahUnAmupakAreNa nAnukaMpAnimittatAm  /
atikrAmati tenAtra mukhyA hetuH zubhAzayaH  // " zrI yazovijayajIkRta dvAo dvA

Page #204 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(138) Yoga-shti-samuchaya A year's worth of donations were given before the
renunciation. Oh! Even after taking initiation, the supremely merciful Mahavira
Deva, out of special compassion, gave the Brahmin a divine garment! × 3.
Principles, Writings, etc. by Dharma To write, or cause to be written, relying
on the subject matter of principles, eternal scriptures, and true scriptures, is
also an excellent seed of devotion. But to write, or cause to be written,
relying on the false scriptures like the Kama-shastra, Artha-shastra, etc., is
not a yagya. Therefore, it is said to rely on principles. "False scriptures
delude the mind and throw it directly into the ocean of misery. They may sound
sweet to the ears for a moment, but then they spread the poison of ignorance and
pollute the soul. What is the use of such false scriptures to the soul? When
true scriptures, which are the salvation of the world, exist, why would a wise
person, with a good intellect, torture his own soul with false scriptures?"
Thus, Shubha-chandra-acharya has said in Shri Jnanav. Therefore, false
scriptures are prohibited here. The soul should only engage in writing, etc., of
true scriptures. This writing, etc., of principles should also be done according
to dharma. By dharma, it means that only wealth earned justly, through righteous
and honest means, should be used in such noble deeds. Wealth earned by looting,
exploiting, cheating, black-marketing, and engaging in various kinds of fraud
and dishonesty has no place in such noble deeds. If someone knows that he is
accumulating money through various kinds of deceit and then intends to use it in
such religious activities, he is merely playing in delusion, dwelling in a
fool's paradise! Because wealth earned justly is the primary, primary
characteristic of one who follows the righteous path, it is the first step, the
first role, the first letter of the alphabet. This is what is meant by dharma
here. And that wealth should also be used wisely, for the best purpose. In
whatever way the respect, devotion, glory, and greatness of the principles and
scriptures increase, in whatever way their influence is felt in the soul and in
the world, in that way, one should use discretion in engaging in external and
internal, all-round beautiful practices, writing, etc., that are appropriate and
fitting. This is dharma. Shri Mansukh Bhai has said very meaningful words about
this: By dharma, it means * " धर्माङ्गत्वं स्फुटीकर्तुं दानस्य भगवानपि । अत एव
वतं ग्रहन् ददौ संवत्सरं वसु ॥ " Shri Dvada " ज्ञापकं चात्र भगवान्निष्क्रान्तोऽपि
द्विजन्मने । देवदूष्यं ददद्धीमाननुकंपा विशेषतः ॥ " Shri Haribhadra Suri's
Ashtak.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (138) yogaSTisamuccaya pravrajyA pUrve sa'vatsara dAna dIdhuM hatu.. are! dIkSA
lIdhA pachI paNa te paramakRpALu mahAvIra deve anukaMpAvizeSathI brAhmaNane deva
vastra ApI dIdhu hatu! x 3. vidhithI siddhAnta lekhanAdi siddhAnta, sadAgama,
satzAstrarUpa viSayane AzrIne lekhana Adi karavA, karAvavA te paNa uttama
cAgabIja che; paNu kAmazAstra, arthazAstra vagere asatzAstrane AzrIne lakhavuM-
lakhAvavu vagere te yAgamIja nathI, eTalA mATe siddhAntane AzrI' ema kahyuM.
'asatzAstra tA manane vyAmeAha pamADI ekadama mehasAgaramAM phekI de che,
kSaNabhara kAnane mIThuM lAge che, paNa pachI te avidyAnuM jhera phelAvI jIvane
sUcchita kare che; evA asazAstranuM AtmAthIne zuM prayeAjana ? jagatpnya evuM
satzAstra vidyamAna sate karyA subuddhi puruSa kuzAstrAthI peAtAnA AtmAnI
viDaMbanA kare ?' ema zubhacadrAcAya jIe zrI jJAnAvamAM kahyuM che. eTalA mATe
atre te asatzAstrane niSedha karyAM. AtmAthI teA satzAstranA ja lekhanAviDe tenA
bhakti-mahumAna kare. A siddhAntanA lekhanAdi paNa vidhithI hAvA joI e. vidhithI
eTale nyAyeApArjita -nyAyathI sAcI pramANika nItithI kamAyelA dhananeA ja AvA
satkAmAM sadupayAga thavo joie. leAkeAne lUTIne, cUsIne, chetarIne, kALA bajAra
karIne, aneka prakAranA phUTavaTAva-apramANikatA AcarIne kamAyelA dhanane AvA
satkAryoMmAM sthAna ja nathI. koI ema jANatA hAya ke huM aneka prakAre
chaLaprapa'ca karI hamaNAM tA paisA bhegA karUM, ane pachI AvA dharmAMkAmAM
vAparIza, te te brAMtimAM ja rame che, mUrkhanA svargamAM ja ( Fool's Paradise)
vase che! kAraNa ke nyAyeApArjita dhana e te sanmArgane anusaranAra
mArgAnusArInuM prAthamikamAM prAthamika lakSaNa che, prathama pagathiyu che,
prathama bhUmikA che, kakkAnA pahelA akSara che. e ja atre vidhi kahyo che. ane
te dhananA paNa vivekapUrvaka satprayAga-uttama sadupayoga thavA joie. je je
prakAre te siddhAMta-zAsranuM bahumAna, bhakita, gaurava, mAhAtmya vadhe, je je
prakAre AtmAmAM temaja jagamAM tenI prabhAvanA thAya, te te prakAre te te
satheAne anurUpa-chAje evA bAhyaabhyaMtara sarvAMgasuMdara sAdhanA, lekhanAdimAM
yAjavAnA viveka vAparavA joIe;-e vidhi che. A aMge zrI manasukhabhAie bahu
mananIya zabdo kahyA che:-- vidhithI eTale * " dharmAGgatvaM sphuTIkartuM
dAnasya bhagavAnapi  /  ata eva vataM grahan dadau saMvatsaraM vasu  //  " zrI
dvA dvA " jJApakaM cAtra bhagavAnniSkrAnto'pi dvijanmane  /  devadUSyaM
dadaddhImAnanukaMpA vizeSataH  //  " zrI haribhadrasUriSkRta aSTaka.

Page #205 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Friend's Perspective: Ritualistic Writing of Principles, etc. (139)  We keep
our ornaments, jewelry, money, gems, and precious stones, which we have received
according to our merits, in beautiful cabinets, boxes, chests, or safes. So,
what kind of beautiful paper, printing, binding, and other materials are needed
to preserve and keep the words, which are like the precious gems of the mind,
contained in the scriptures? We need very beautiful, elegant, durable,
attractive, and dignified materials that enhance the glory of the scriptures and
reflect the respect and devotion towards knowledge. Before a living being enters
the scriptures and attains enlightenment, it is enlightened and calmed by the
mere sight of these great scriptures. Nowadays, due to the use of poor quality
paper, bad ink, and flimsy binding, etc., in sacred scriptures, we see a decline
in respect for them everywhere.  ... We hear that a fortunate man (Sangram Soni)
in the past had a copy of the sutras written in gold letters at a cost of lakhs
of rupees. What does this indicate? It indicates the respect for knowledge. -
Shri Shantasudharas, Preface.  66  Thus, writing the principles in a beautiful
and ritualistic way, which enhances the glory, respect, and devotion towards the
scriptures, and creates an impact, is also an excellent practice.  "To maintain
the principle of non-possession, to give medicine, etc., as charity; to support
food and income, and to show respect for writing, etc. - 20" - Shri Chag॰
Sajjay, -9  *  The word "Aadi" means:  "Writing, worship, charity, listening,
reading, taking, publishing, self-study, contemplation, and feeling." - 28
Meaning: We should understand "writing, etc." as including writing, worship,
charity, listening, reading, taking, publishing, self-study, contemplation, and
feeling.  **Discussion**  What is done based on the principles, in the subject
of supreme scriptural knowledge? This is considered a practice. Here, it is
explained:  **Explanation:**  * **Writing:** Writing in a book. * **Worship:**
Worshiping with flowers, clothes, etc. * **Charity:** Giving books, etc. as
charity. * **Listening:** Listening to lectures. * **Reading:** Reading oneself.
* **Taking:** Accepting the principles. * **Publishing:** Publishing the
principles in front of everyone. * **Self-study:** Studying oneself. *
**Contemplation:** Contemplating the meaning of the scriptures. * **Feeling:**
Feeling the emotions related to the principles.  All these are practices.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 mitrAdraSTi : vidhithI siddhAMta lekhanAdi (139) ApaNA puNya mujaba ApaNane
prApta thayela zaNagAra, ghareNAM, paisA, maNi, mANikathAdi javAhIra sAcavavA
ApaNe zeAbhItA kabATa, peTI, paTArA ke tijorI vasAvIe chIe, tA ci'tAmaNiratna
samAna zabdo jemAM rahelA che, te graMtha ane jALavI rAkhavA kevA sundara
kAgaLa, chApa, puMThA, khAiDIMga Adi sAdhana joIe ? bahu suMdara, zeAbhanIka,
TakAu, manahara, graMthanu gaurava jALave-vadhAre evAM, jJAnanA bahumAna-
bhaktibhAvasUcaka-AvAM kAgaLa, chApa, puMThAM Adi joie. jIva graMthamAM praveza
karI edha pAme te pahelAM A mahAranA dekhAvathI ja edha pAmI, TharI jAya che.
hAla pavitra graMthAnI kharAma kAgaLa, kharAba zAhI- chApa, namAlAM puMDAM e
vagerethI piraNAme Thera Thera AzAtanA thatI dekhAya che. x x x suvaNu akSare
hajArA khalke lAkhA rUpiA khacI' sUtranI eka prata pUrvanA kAI bhAgyazALI puruSe
(saMgrAma seAnIe) lakhAvI ApaNe sAMbhaLIe chIe, e zuM sUcave che? jJAna-
mahumAna." --zrI zAMtasudhArasa prastAvanA. 66 Ama siddhAMta-zAstranuM gaurava-
bahumAna-bhakti vadhe, prabhAvanA thAya, evI suMdara vidhithI siddhAMta
lakhAvavA vagere paNa uttama yeAgakhIja che. 'dravya abhigraha pALavA, auSadha
pramukhane dAne 2; Ahara Agama AsarI, likhanAdika bahumAne re. vIra0" zrI cAga.
sajjhAya, -9 * Adi' zabdanA artha kahe che-- lekhanA pUjanA dAnaM zravaNaM
vAcanodgrahaH  /  prakAzanAtha svAdhyAyazcintanA bhAvaneti ca  //  28  //   //
lekhana pUjana dAna ne, zruti vAMcana udgAha; prakAzanA svAdhyAya ne, ciMtana
bhAvana cAha, 28 artha:--lekhanA, pUjanA, dAna, zravaNa, vAMcana, ugrahaNa,
prakAzanA, svAdhyAya, ciMtanA ane bhAvanA-ema lekhanAdeithI samajavu, vivecana
siddhAntane AzrIne, parama zrutajJAnanA viSayamAM, zuM zuM karyuM... hAya ? tA
yAgamIja gaNAya, te ahIM phruTa karyu" che :-- vRtti :- DhelanA-lekhanA,
sapustakAmAM lakhAvavuM te; dhUnana-puSpavastrAdithI pUjana karavuM' te pUjanA.
vArtta-dAna-pustaka AdinuM. vaLa-zravaNu-vyAkhyAnanuM; vAcanA vAcanA, svayameva
vAMcavuM te; AnA uddhaHudbhaha, vidhiyo grahaNa. AnI ja prahArAnA-prakAzanA,
grahaNa karelA siddhAMtAnuM bhavye samakSa prakAzavuM te. atha svAdhyAya-ane-
svAdhyAya, vAcanA Adi, AnI ja cintanA-ciMtanA graMthanA athathI; AnI jamAtrane
te 2-bhAvanA, A ja siddhAMta saMbaMdhI bhAvanA, A yogamIja che, ema sabaMdha
che.

Page #206 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(140) The act of writing down the teachings of the Gadaśṭi, in beautiful books,
is called Lekhanā. It should be done on paper, with ink, and using a stamp, all
of which are worthy of the principles and enhance the glory of the scriptures.
It should also be done with the utmost care in terms of the purity and
arrangement of the letters, syllables, words, and meanings. This is how the
teachings should be written down in a perfect and beautiful book. A seeker who
has attained this yogic vision considers this to be the greatest benefit of the
scriptures and desires to spread its influence as much as possible. Therefore,
they engage in Lekhanā and other activities to the best of their ability. They
understand that the scriptures are the medicine for the disease of sin, the
source of virtue, the eye that travels everywhere, and the means to all ends.
"The scriptures are the medicine for sin, the source of virtue, the eye that
travels everywhere, the means to all ends." - Śrī Yogabindu, 255 Worship - To
worship the scriptures with offerings like flowers, incense, lamps, etc., is
called Pūjanā. This external worship is indicative of internal respect and
devotion. The seeker feels that even offering their entire being for the nectar
of the words of the holy ones is not enough. They desire that the nectar of the
holy ones' words should illuminate their hearts with eternal knowledge. To
praise the virtues of the scriptures with a pure heart is also a form of
worship. For example: "Filled with infinite shades of meaning, the scriptures
are a vast ocean of knowledge. They are the well-wisher of the entire world, the
savior, the guide across the ocean of existence, the ultimate truth. To compare
them to anything else is futile, for they are beyond comparison. Oh, King
Chandra! Those who do not understand the words of the Jineshvara are like
children. Only those who know them truly know." - Śrīmad Rājachandraji-pranita
Śrīmokṣamālā. Donation - To give the scriptures to another soul, or to a worthy
Nigrantha Muniśvara, is called Dāna. It includes the selfless propagation of the
scriptures and the effort to influence others for their own benefit. This is the
donation of knowledge. There is no question of selling knowledge for material
gain, for that is a wicked act. Reading - To read the scriptures oneself is also
a form of worship. It should be done with humility, discernment, and purity of
mind and heart. In the absence of a true Guru, the scriptures become the
ultimate refuge for the seeker. For: "The words of the holy ones are the
embodiment of the scriptures, yet constant interaction with them is not
possible. Therefore, listening to their words...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (140) gadaSTi samuciya lekhanA-sat pustakomAM, suMdara graMthamAM te sazA
lakhAvavA. te te siddhAMtane chAje evA anurUpa kAgaLa, zAhI, chApa, pUMThAM
vagere, zAstranuM gaurava dIpAve evA bAhya AkarSaNarUpa guNethI, temaja akSara,
varNa, zabda, artha AdinI zuddhi-susaMkalanA vagere AtyaMta guNothI yukta, evA
sarvAMgasundara sadagraMthamAM sazAnuM lakhavuM-lakhAvavuM te lekhanA. ane A
yogadRSTi pAmelo mumukSujana te satazrutano parama upakAra gaNI jema bane tema
tenI prabhAvane karavA icche che, eTale te lekhanAdimAM yathAzakita pravarte
che. kAraNa ke te sArI peThe samaje che ke-pApa vyAdhinuM auSadha zAstra che,
puNyanuM nibaMdhana zAstra che, sarvatra gamana karanAruM cakSu zAstra che,
sarva arthanuM sAdhana zAstra che." "pApAmayauSadhaM zAstraM zAstraM
puNyanibandhanam  /  cakSu sarvatra zAa zAa sarvAcasAdhanam | zrI yogabindu, 255
pUjanA-puchapa, vastra, dhUpa, dIpa AdivaDe sazAstranI-paramazratanI pUjA karavI
te pUjanA. A bAhya pUjanA aMtaraMga bahumAna-bhaktinI sUcaka che, kAraNa ke
mumukSu jogI jananA manamAM evo bhAva upaje che ke-A satpuruSanA vacanAmRtane
mATe huM mahArUM sarvasva ovArI nAMkhyuM te paNa ochuM che, A satu puruSanA
vacanAmRta hArA hRdayamAM akhaMDa jJAnadIpaka pragaTAve ! Ama nirmala
aMtaHkaraNathI sazAstranA guNagrAma karavA te paNa pUjAne prakAra che. jemake--
anaMta anaMta bhAva bhedathI bharelI bhalI, anaMta anaMta naya nikSepe vyAkhyAnI
che; sakala jagata hitakAriNI hAriNI meha, tAriNI bhavAbdhi mikSacAriNI pramANa
che; upamA ApyAnI jene tamA rAkhavI te vyartha, ApavAthI nija mati mapAI meM
mAnI che; aho rAjacaMdra ! bAla khyAla nathI pAmatA e, jinezvara taNI vANI jANI
teNe jANI che. -zrImad rAjacaMdrajIpraNIta zrImokSamALA. dAna-anya AtmAthI
mumukSune athavA satpAtra nigraMtha munIzvara Adine sazAstra ApavuM te dAna.
satzAstrane niHsvArtha paNe pracAra kare, paramazrutanI ekAMta AtmakalyANArthe
prabhAvanA karavI, te AmAM samAya che. Ama jJAnanuM te dAna karavAnuM che, te
pachI jJAna vecIne dravya upArjana karavAnI adhama vRttinI vAta te kyAMya dUra
rahI ! vAMcanA-satuzAstranuM pote vAMcana karavuM te A paNa AzAtanA TALI,
vinayavivekapUrvaka, dravya-bhAva zuddhi jALavI thavuM joIe. sadgurunA virahe
sakzAstrane abhyAsa supAtra mumukSu jIvane parama AlaMbanabhUta thAya che.
kAraNa ke te puruSanAM vacane AgamasvarUpa che, to paNa vAraMvAra pitAthI
vacanayoganI pravRtti na thAya tethI, tathA niraMtara samAgamane vega na bane
tethI, tathA te vacananuM zravaNa

Page #207 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Friend-Vision-Principle Writing-Worship etc. (14) Since the memory of the
past does not remain, and since there is a need for reflection to know the form
of some emotions, and in order to increase the power of contemplation, the
Vitarag-Krit-Vitarag Shastra is a powerful and helpful tool. - Shrimad
Rajchandra, Patrank 694 (755)  **Udggraha** - The method of extracting the
essence of the scriptures. This includes the act of initiation. It is the
knowledge-based pure action performed for becoming eligible for the scriptures,
for self-purification. It has the ultimate noble purpose of reverently knowing
and worshipping the principles. But those who consider its sufficiency only in
external pomp and action, forget its original desired purpose, and it becomes
like "the snake is gone, but the stick remains!" "The noise and commotion
continue, but the path to liberation remains far away" (Shri Yashovijayji) -
such a tragic situation arises!  **Prakash** - The principle that was revealed
to the father of light, should be revealed, shown, and made manifest to other
deserving inquisitive, liberated souls, living beings. If a being has strong
destruction-pacification, good understanding, and is humbly studying from a
higher perspective, then he should reveal its meaning through analysis, etc.,
and both the speaker and the listener will benefit, and both self and others
will be benefited. * The speaker will benefit whether the listener benefits or
not; the revelation of the meaning of this scripture is the reason for its
ultimate benefit.  **Swadhyay** - There are four types of this, including
reading, etc. - (1) **Vachana** - To obtain humility, purity, and knowledge, we
should read the sutras and principles from a guru or a virtuous person who knows
the essence of the sutras and principles. This is called Vachana-alamban. (2)
**Pruchchhana** - To gain new knowledge, to guide us on the path of the
Jineshwar Bhagwan, to remove doubts, and to examine the middle ground of others'
teachings, we should ask questions to the guru, etc., with appropriate humility.
This is called Pruchchhana. (3) **Paravartana** - To keep in mind the meaning of
the sutras spoken by the Jinas, we should repeatedly contemplate the meaning,
with pure intention and pure meaning of the sutras. This is called Paravartana-
alamban. (4) **Dharmakatha** - With the same emotions as the Vitarag Bhagwan, we
should adopt, understand, and especially determine those emotions, without
doubt, suspicion, or hesitation, and with the intention of purity, we should
express those emotions in the assembly. This will make the listeners and those
who hear become devotees of the Bhagwan's commands. This is called Dharmakatha-
alamban. - Shri Moksha Mala, Path 75 * "May there be religion, may there be
prosperity, may there be the sound of the three-fold drum, may there be the
sound of the three-fold drum, may there be the sound of the three-fold drum!" -
Shri Umaswati Maharaj

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 mitrAdaSTi-siddhAnta lekhana-pUjanAdi (14) tArazya smaraNamAM na rahe tethI,
tema ja keTalAka bhAvonuM svarUpa jANavAmAM parAvartananI jarUra hoya che tethI,
ane anuprekSAnuM baLa vRddhi pAmavAne arthe vItarAgakRta-vItarAga zAstra eka
baLavAna upakArI sAdhana che."--zrImad rAjacaMdra, patrAMka 694 (755) udUgraha-
vidhipUrvaka zAstrasiddhAMtanuM udgahaNa. AmAM upadhAna kriyAne samAveza thAya
che. te te zAstranA adhikArI thavA mATe, Atmazuddhi athe karavAmAM AvatI te
jJAnapUrvakanI zuddha kiyA che. temAM siddhAntanA bahumAnapUrvaka jJAnArAdhanane
parama udAra hetu rahe che. paNa je mAtra bAhya ADaMbara ne kriyAjaDapaNAmAM ja
tenI paryAptatA mAnavAmAM AvatI hoya, te tene mULa ISTa uddeza visarAI jAya che,
ne "sApa gayA ne lIsoTA rahyA" tenA jevuM thAya che! "dhAmadhUme dhamAdhama
calI, mokSamAraga rahyo dUra re" (zrI yazovijayajI)-tenA jevI karuNa sthiti thaI
paDe che! prakAzanA pitAne je siddhAntane bodha thayo hoya, te bIjA supAtra
jijJAsu, mumukSu, AtmAthI jIva pAse prakAzavo, kahI dekhADavo-pragaTa karavo te.
keI jIvane kSayapazama prabaLa hoya, samajaNa sArI hoya, te nirabhimAnapaNe
UMcethI svAdhyAya karato hoya evI rIte te tenA arthanuM vivecanAdirUpe prakAzana
kare, te vaktA zrotA bannene lAbhakartA thAya che, sva-parane upakArI thAya che.
* zrotAne lAbha thAya ke na thAya, paNa vaktAne te thAya ja che; A graMthanA
arthanuM prakAzana e ja ene paramArthalAbhanuM kAraNa che. svAdhyAya--eTale
sajhAya tenA vAcanA Adi A cAra prakAra che - (1) vAMcanA-eTale vinaya sahita
nirjarA tathA jJAna pAmavAne mATe sUtra siddhAMtanA marmana jANanAra guru ke
sapuruSa samIpe sUtra tattvanuM vAMcana laIe, tenuM nAma vAMcanA AlaMbana. (2)
pRcchanA-apUrva jJAna pAmavA mATe, jinezvara bhagavaMtane mArga dIpAvavAne tathA
zaMkAzalya nivAravA mATe, tema ja anyanA tatranI madhyastha parIkSA mATe,
yathAyogya vinaya sahita gurnAdikane prazna pUchIe tene pRcchanA kahIe. (3)
parAvartAnApUrve jinabhASita sUtrArtha je bhaNyA hoIe te samaraNamAM rahevA
mATe, nijerAne artha, zuddha upaga sahita zuddha sUtrArthanI vAraMvAra sajhAya
karIe, tenuM nAma parAvartanAlaMbana. (4) dharmakathA-vItarAga bhagavAne je
bhAva jevA praNIta karyA che, te bhAva tevA laIne, grahIne, vizeSa karIne,
nizcaya karIne, zaMkA, kaMkhA ane vitigicchA rahitapaNe, pitAnI nirjarAne arthe
sabhA madhye te bhAva tevA praNIta karIe, ke jethI sAMbhaLanAra, sahanAra bane
bhagavaMtanI AjJAnA ArAdhaka thAya, e dharmakathAlaMbana kahIe." -zrI mokSamALA,
pATha 75 * "mavatti dharma hotu: caiAttatA hitazravAra tRtratADanughavudrayA
vaturAttatamavatti ! "--zrI umAsvAti mahArAja

Page #208 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(142) **Contemplation of the Gadaṣṭi Collection** - To contemplate the essence
of the principles that have been read, heard, and accepted, to engage in subtle
reflection, to ponder, to analyze with discernment, this is contemplation.
**Meditation** - To repeatedly meditate on those principles, to chant them, to
turn them over and over in one's mind, to focus on them, so that their imprint
is firmly established in the soul, so that their essence is deeply ingrained in
the soul. **Meditation is like a crucible.** Just as gold is purified by being
placed in a crucible, heated, and repeatedly subjected to the heat of the
crucible, so too is the soul purified by repeatedly contemplating different
things, leading to the purification of knowledge and a true understanding of
reality. **Meditation is the supreme practice for self-purification.** It leads
to complete self-realization. Through meditation, the soul attains Kevalajñāna
(omniscience). This is the ultimate mantra, the ultimate formula: **"Through
meditation, the soul attains Kevalajñāna."** **Writing, reading, etc., of the
principles are also excellent seeds.** To offer worship through writing, to read
with devotion, to focus one's attention, to contemplate and meditate with
love... **"The seed of the scriptures, through the emotion of faith, leads to
firm understanding. The desire to adopt them is pure and great."** (29)
**Commentary:** When the seed of the scriptures is heard, and the connection
with the seed is established, through the emotion of faith, understanding
arises. This understanding is firm, unwavering, and free from the distractions
of the mind. The desire to adopt these principles is pure, leading to the desire
for the fruits of the scriptures. This is the mark of a great soul, who is
motivated by the desire for liberation.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (142) gadaSTi samuccaya ciMtanA-je siddhAMta vAMcyA hoya, zravaNa karyA hoya,
grahaNa karyA hoya, tenuM tatvaciMtana karavuM, sUkSma vicAraNA karavI, UhApoha
kara, hepAdeya viveka vicAra te ciMtanA. bhAvanA-te ne te siddhAMtanuM punaH
punaH bhAvana karavuM, raTaNa karavuM, pharI pharI pheravavuM, dhUna lagAvavI,
ke jethI karIne tenA saMskAranI daDha chApa AtmAmAM paDe, tene daDha
bhAvaavihaDa raMga AtmAmAM lAgI jAya. bhAvanA eTale puTa. jema suvarNane sAva
cekabuM karavuM hoya te saMpuTamAM, kulaDImAM mUkI, pharI pharI tapAvavArUpa
bhAvanA-puTa detAM te zuddha thAya che, athavA suMTha Adine zuddha karavA,
kamAvavA, nimaka ane liMbunA rasanA pharI pharI puTa ApI pharI pharI
sukavavArUpa bhAvanA detAM zuddha thAya che; xx x tema A jIvane paNa judI judI
rIte vastu vicAratAM jJAnanirmaLatA thAya che, vastusthiti yathArtha samajAya
che." zrI manasukhabhAI kIratacaMdrakRta zAMtasudhArasa vivecana, Ama bhAvanA e
Atmazuddhine uttama prayoga che. te eTale sudhI ke tethI ke tethI saMpUrNa
Atmasiddhi sAMpaDe che, AtmabhAvanA bhAvatAM jIva kevalajJAna pAme che. te mATe
parama addabhuta maMtrarUpa sUtravacana che - Atama bhAvanA bhAvatAM jIva lahe
kevalajJAna re." Ama siddhAMtanA lekhana, vAMcanAdi paNa uttama gabIja che.
lekhana pUjana ApavuM, zrata vAcanA udagrAhe re, dhyAna vistAra sajajhAyathI,
ciMtana bhAvana cAho... re vIra" -zrI gasakjhAya, 1-10 tathA-- bIjazrutau ca
saMvegAtpratipattiH sthirAzayA  /  tadupAdeyabhAvazca parizuddho mahodayaH  //
29  //  bIja zravaNe saMvegathI, sthiraAzaya zraddhAna; upAdeya tasa bhAva je,
zuddha mahodayavAna. 29 vRtti -vIjJakRtI ane bIjazruti thatAM, yakta egabIja
saMbaMdhI zravaNa thatAM, saMveTsaMvegathakI, zraddhAvizeSane lIdhe, pratipatti
:-"A ema che" evA rUpe pratipatti-mAnyatA, sthirANAvA-sthira AyavALI-tathA
prakAranA cittaprabaMdhana vistrotasikAnA (ulaTA vaheNanA) abhAvathI karIne,
tAreyamAraane tene upAdeya bhAva-e bIjazrutine upAdeyatA bhAva, (A bIjazruti
grahaNa karavA cagya-AdaravA yogya che evo bhAva), mrizuddha:-parizuddha-phala
ausukathanA-phalanI utsukatAnA abhAvathI, mAtrA :-te ja mahA udayavALA hoya che;
AnuSaMgika evA abhyadayathakI-niHzreyasUnA (mekSanA) sAdhanane lIdhe.

Page #209 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Friend's Perspective: Pure Faith from the Seed  **(143)**  Upon hearing the
seed-story and its essence, the conviction arising from the inner impulse, with
a firm intention, is considered a seed. And the feeling of "this is worthy of
being accepted" (which is also a seed) that arises from this conviction, is a
seed.  **Analysis**  "Having heard the seed-story well, the body is filled with
excitement; From this unwavering age, let us obtain the love of Dharma... Veer"
- The seed mentioned in Shri Dav 11, upon hearing that seed, the conviction that
arises from the inner impulse - the supreme bliss - upon hearing the story of
the subject of Yoga, is also a seed. The love and faith that arises from hearing
the story, the seed-story, is a seed. This love blossoms and says, "What I have
heard is pure faith, it is true," and such spontaneous expressions emerge. This
conviction, belief, acceptance, and inner acceptance is also a seed. And this
conviction-faith is also one with a firm intention. Because the state of mind of
the seeker who walks in this path of Yoga is such that the reverse flow, the
opposite of what was said above, is impossible. The flow of his mind flows
steadily, with a firm belief in the present. The reverse flow does not happen.
And that is why this seeker, when he hears a story of devotion to the Lord,
devotion to the Guru, or devotion to the dead, he immerses himself in the loving
devotional rasa, he enters into supreme bliss, his body trembles with
excitement, his hair stands on end, and he speaks out in the impulse, in the
utmost excitement, "All that is said is true. Devotion to the Lord, etc., is
truly an unparalleled, inconceivable influence." And thus he believes with a
true heart, he has faith. This inner faith-acceptance is absolutely essential.
Because what fruit will the consumption of the seed yield without such faith?
Any action that is performed without pure faith is like "plastering on straw,"
like "a bead without a string." Giraj Anandghanji has roared:  "Tell me, how can
the purity of God, Guru, and Dharma remain? How can it remain? It is obtained
through pure faith; whoever performs an action without pure faith, it is like
plastering on straw, know this, like a sword without a hilt."  The author, the
sage, goes a step further and says that even if there is no faith in the seed-
story, the feeling of "this is worthy of being accepted" is also a seed.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 mitrAdaSTi : bIjathA prIta-zuddha zraddhA (143) artha ane gabIjanuM zravaNa
thatAM, saMvegathakI sthira AzayavALI pratipatti mAnyatA; ane tene parizuddha
evo mahodayavALa upAdeyabhAva (A paNa gabIja che.) vivecana "bIjakathA bhalI
sAMbhaLI, romAMcita hoya deha re; eha avaMcaka yugathI, lahie dharama saneha
re...vIra"-zrI dava 11 uparamAM je gabIja kahyA, te gabIjanuM zravaNa thatAM, te
yoga viSayanI kathA vArtA sAMbhaLatAM saMvegathI-parama bhAlAsathI "A ema ja che
evI je mAnyatA thavI, pratipatti thavI, te paNa gabIja che. te kathA sAMbhaLatAM
evo saMga-bhAvAvezarUpa bIjakathAne prema zraddhAvizeSa upaje, e prema phure
ke-"A meM je zravaNa karyuM te zuddha zraddhA ema ja che, tatti che,' evA sahaja
uddagAra nIkaLI paDe. AvI pratipatti, mAnyatA, sahaNa, aMtarAtmAthI svIkAra the,
te paNa gabIja che. ane A pratipatti-zraddhA paNa sthira AzayavALI hoya. kAraNa
ke A yogadaSTimAM vartanArA mumukSunA cittanI sthiti evI hoya che ke temAM
visrotasikAne eTale ke upara kahyuM tethI UlaTA pravAhane abhAva-asaMbhava hoya
che, tene cittanuM vaheNa ekadhArUM prastuta mAnyatA bhaNuM sthirapaNe vahyA
kare che; tethI UlaTuM- dhuM vaheNa thatuM nathI. ane eTalA mATe ja A mumukSu
jogIjana,jyAre kyAMya paNa prabhubhaktinI, gurubhaktinI ke mRtabhaktinI vArtA
cAlatI hoya, tyAre te premamaya bhaktirasamAM nimagna thAya che, parama
bhAllAsamAM AvI jAya che, tenA zarIramAM romAMca ullase che-rUMvADA khaDA thAya
che, ane saMvegamAM-atyaMta AvezamAM AvI jaIne te bolI UThe che-A je kahevAmAM
Ave che te badhuM ya ema ja che. prabhubhakti Adine kharekhara ! e ja atula
aciMtya prabhAva che. ane Ama te sAcA aMta:karaNathI mAne che, zraddhe che. AvI
aMtaraMga zraddhAsahaNuM atyaMta Avazyaka che. kAraNa ke tevI zraddhA vinAnuM
gabIjanuM sevana zuM phaLa Ape? zuddha zraddhA vinAnI je kaMI kriyA karavAmAM
Ave che te te "chAra paNa lipaNuM" jevuM che, "ekaDA vinAnA mIDA" jevuM che.
gIrAja AnaMdaghanajIe garjanA karI che ke deva guru dharmanI zuddhi kaho kima
rahe? kima rahe? zuddha zraddhAna ANe; zuddha zraddhAna viNa jeha kiriyA kare,
chAra para liMpaNe te jANadhAra taravAranI." graMthakAra maharSi te haju eka
DagaluM AgaLa vadhIne kahe che ke bIjazrutimAM zraddhAnI vAta te dUra rahI, paNa
tenA pratye upAdeya bhAva A grahaNa karavA yogya che evo

Page #210 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(144) Respectful feelings arising from the collection of Gadasti is also a seed,
and it is a big deal. The feeling of being worthy of being taught, that is, the
story of the seed is also worthy of listening to the seed, such respectful
thoughts arising are also commendable. Respectful feelings arising towards
listening to the stories of Jinbhakti or the glory of Sadguru-Satushashtra is
also a seed, because when such a feeling of being worthy of being taught arises
from the color of emotion, then true desire arises from the feeling, and then it
prevails in its acceptance by considering the power of the father. This feeling
of being worthy of being taught should be pure and completely pure. That is, it
should be without any kind of desire for fruit related to this lake-pearl,
without any desire for quick fruit attainment, it should be selfless. Because
patience is the first need in all work. "Mango leaves do not come quickly." And
the fruit of such a selfless, pure feeling of being worthy of being taught is
also very great, it is the cause of great progress. Because it is the means of
liberation, so it is not surprising that the attainment of excellent devadi
motion, which is the fruit of the acquisition of merit, is also achieved along
with it. Just as there are supports behind the jar, so Indrahood-
Chakravattihood, etc., are obtained as the incidental fruit of the means of
liberation. Thus, this feeling of being worthy of being taught towards listening
to the seed ultimately becomes beneficial, then how much more beneficial is the
devotion to Shri Satpurush, Sadguru, and the righteous path they have laid down?
"O Lord, your virtues are infinite! I bow to the infinite virtues, O Lord! I
adore the infinite Lord; O Lord, Devchandra! I rejoice in Devchandra, O Lord! I
desire the supreme great good." "May pure essence-interest become the red of the
mind, O Lord. Do Jinpati devotion, O Lord, the red of the future. You will
attain the position of Devchandra...mind. Supreme great good tactics, O Lord,
the future." Shri Devchandraji Thus, in this friendship, such excellent seeds
are obtained: (1) Good thoughts, salutations, pure prostrations, etc., towards
the Jina. (2) Good thoughts, etc., towards Bhavacharya-Bhavasadhu, etc., who are
full of emotion. (3) Service to Bhavacharya-Bhavasadhu, etc. (4) Natural fear of
the world-inner detachment, (5) Observance of non-attachment to material
possessions. (6) Writing, etc., of the principles, worship, donation, listening,
reading, taking, illuminating, self-study, contemplation, meditation. (7) Firm
belief in listening to the seed story. (8) Pure feeling of being worthy of being
taught. Each of these seeds is also supremely excellent, then when they are all
together, "The flowing knowledge reaches the end, O friends! It is spread among
friends." - Shri Haribhadracharya's Dharmabindu.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (144) gadaSTisamuccaya AdarabhAva upaje, e paNa cagabIja che, e paNa moTI vAta
che. upAdeya bhAva eTale ke yogabIjanuM zravaNa karavA yogya che, gabIjanI
kathA-vArtA paNa yogabIja sAMbhaLavA gya che, evI paNa Adarabuddhi upajavI te
paNa prazasta che. jinabhaktinI kathA ke sadaguru-satuzAstrane mahimA sAMbhaLavA
pratye AdarabhAva pragaTe, te paNa yogabIja che, kAraNa ke saMvegaraMgathI jyAre
Avo upAdeyabhAva upaje che, tyAre bhAvathI atre sAcI icchA utpanna thAya che,
eTale pachI te pitAnI zaktino daDha vicAra karIne tenA grahaNamAM pravarte che.*
A upAdeyabhAva parizuddha-sarvathA zuddha have joIe. eTale ke A leka-paraleka
saMbaMdhI koI paNa prakAranA phalanI utsukatA vinAno, utAvaLe phaLaprAptinI
AkAMkSA-icchA vinAno, niSkAma hovo joIe. kAraNa ke sarva kAryamAM dhIrajanI
prathama jarUra che. "utAvaLe AMbA pAtA nathI.ane AvA nirutsuka niSkAma zuddha
upAdeyabhAvanuM phala paNa mahadayarUpa avazya hoya che, moTA abhyadayanuM
kAraNa hoya che. kAraNa ke te mokSanA sAdhanarUpa che, eTale AnuSaMgikapaNe-
sAthe sAthe puNyopArjananA phaLarUpe uttama devAdi gatirUpa abhyadayanI prApti
paNa thAya, e kAMI moTI navAInI vAta nathI. jema jAranI pAchaLa sAMThA te hoya
ja, tema iMdrapaNuM-cakravatti paNuM e vagere pu rA , mokSasAdhananA AnuSagika
phaLarUpe sAMpaDe che. Ama A gabIjanA zravaNa pratyene upAdeyabhAva paNa chevaTe
parama kalyANakArI thAya che, te pachI zrI satpuruSanI, sadgurunI ne temaNe
bedhelA sanmArganI bhakita te keTalI badhI kalyANakArI thAya? guNa anaMta he
prabhu ! guNa anaMtane vaMda, nAtha ho prabhu ! nAtha anaMtane Adare che;
devacaMdra ho prabhu ! devacaMdrane AnaMda, parama he prabhu ! parama mahadaya
te vare che." "nirmaLa tattvaruci thaI re manamehanA re lAla0 karaje jinapati
bhakti re bhavibehanA re lAla. devacaMdra pada pAmaze re....mana. parama
mahodaya yukti re bhavi" zrI devacaMdrajI Ama A mitrAdaSTimAM ATalA uttama
gabIjanI prApti thAya cheH (1) jine pratye kuzalacitta, namaskAra, saMzuddha
praNamAdi. (2) bhAvagI evA bhAvAcArya-bhAvasAdhu Adi pratye kuzalacittAdi. (3)
bhAvAcArya-bhAvasAdhu AdinI vaiyAvacca-sevA. (4) sahaja evo bhavaudvega-
aMtaraMga vairAgya, (5) dravya abhigraha pAlana. () siddhAntanA
lekhanAdilekhana, pUjana, dAna, zravaNa, vAcanA, ugrahaNa, prakAzanA, svAdhyAya,
ciMtana, bhAvanA. () bIjakathAnuM zravaNuprati sthira mAnyapaNuM. (4) tene
zuddha upAdeyabhAva. AmAnuM ekeka gabIja paNa parama uttama che, te pachI te
samasta sAthe maLyA * "vahetAM jJAvA laMkAte cheDatra AvataH | OM mitro ne
saMtravartate " -zrI haribhadrAcAryajIkRta dharmabindu.

Page #211 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Friendship's Perspective: A Great Deal of Karmic Impurities**  (145)  Why do
you ask that? Here, the scriptures emphasize devotion above all else, because it
is the best way to bring the soul face-to-face with the Supreme Being. Devotion
to the Lord, devotion to the true Guru, and devotion to the scriptures are the
main tools for attaining liberation. Because the fully enlightened Lord, being
the ultimate authority, constantly reminds the soul of its true goal. The true
Guru, the perfect sage, is a living embodiment, a directly experienced, awake
and aware yogi, who becomes the ultimate support for the soul and provides
inspiration. And in their absence, or in accordance with their instructions, the
scriptures also become the ultimate support and bring great benefit.  **The
Glory of Devotion**  This is how the seed of liberation is born, as it were, and
this is how it is described:  "When karmic impurities are diminished, liberation
arises in humans. The unmanifest consciousness does not perform any great work
anywhere." (30)  **Commentary**  **Diminishment**  The scriptures have shown how
the seed of liberation, pure devotion to God and Guru, etc., is acquired. Here,
it is explained: When the soul's karmic impurities, the inner dirt, are greatly
diminished, washed away, then the seed of liberation is planted in the mind, not
when they are only slightly diminished. This is because the karmic impurities
are called "bhavamala" (karmic impurities) because they are naturally connected
to the subtle body, etc. The soul's inherent capacity for liberation is eternal
and natural, and the tendency is that when the seed of liberation is planted, as
mentioned earlier, it is planted in the mind, which is characterized by the
karmic impurities that are connected to the subtle body, etc. These karmic
impurities are diminished, not slightly, but greatly, abundantly, and are the
result of many karmic actions. Liberation arises, manifests, in humans, because
they are the ones who are eligible for it. Therefore, it is said that liberation
arises in humans, not in other beings. This happens in all four states of
existence. When karmic impurities are greatly diminished, not slightly, then it
is said that the unmanifest consciousness, which is devoid of the discrimination
of good and bad, does not perform any great work, such as the performance of
rituals, etc., because it is the manifest consciousness that performs such
actions, when the destruction of karmic impurities is intended.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 mitrAdaSTi : bahu bhAvamala kSINatA (145) hAya tA pUchyuM ja zu? atre bhakti
upara zAsrakAra bhagavAne sauthI vizeSa bhAra mUkayo che, kAraNa ke
prAra'bhakane-zarUAta karanArane mA sanmukha karavAne e ja zreSTha upAya che.
prabhubhakti, sadgurubhakti, ne zrutabhakti e ceAgamAga pAmavAnA mukhya sAdhana
che. kAraNa ke pUrNa siddhasvarUpa prabhu Adeza sthAne hAI, jIvane iSTa lakSyanu
niraMtara bhAna karAve che. sadguru, sanmAnA parama sAdhaka sAdhupuruSa sAkSAt
jIvaMtamUrtti pratyakSa jIvatA jAgatA jogI heAI, jIvane parama avalaMbanarUpa
thaI paDI preraNAkhala Ape che. ane temanA virahe athavA temanI AjJAe satzAstra
paNa parama AlaMbanarUpa banI parama upakArI thAya che. bhaktinA mahimA ema A
cegamIjanuM upAdAna-grahaNa jevA prakAre upaje che, tevA prakAre kahI khatAvavA
mATe kahe che:-- etadbhAvamale kSINe prabhUte jAyate nRNAm  /
karotyavyaktacaitanyo mahatkAryaM na yatkvacit  /  30  //  bhAvamala mahu kSINa
thaye, narane A upaja'ta; kAryaM mahat na kare kadI, avyakta cetanavata, 30 aH--
--A cAgabIja grahaNa, ghaNeA ghaNA bhAvamala kSINa thaI gaye, manuSyane upaje
che, kAraNa ke avyakta cetanavALA hAya, te kadI paNa mahat kA kare nahi.
vivecana kSINatA uparamAM je cAgabIja-zuddha deva-gurunI bhakti vagere kahI
dekhADavA, tenu' grahaNa kathAre thAya, te ahI. atAvyuM che:-jyAre AtmAne
bhAvamala, aMdaranA mela ghaNA ghaNeA kSINa thayeA hAya, dheAvAi gayA haiAya
tyAre A ceAgakhIjanuM grahaNucitta bahu bhAvamala bhUmimAM rApaNa thAya che,
nahi ke thADA kSINa thayeA heAya tyAre. te te pudgalakama vagere sAthe
saMbadhanI yAgyatA te sahaja evA ' bhAmala' kahevAya che. jIvanI A kA~sa badha-
ceAgyatA anAdi ne svAbhAvika ja che, ane vRtti:-tar--A, hamaNAM ja kahyuM te
ceAgabIjanuM grahaNa, mAyamaDhe-te te pudgalAdinA saMbaMdhanI ceAJatArUpa
lakSaNavALA bhAvamala, zrIne-kSINa thaye; te thADA nahiM paraMtu, pramUrta-
puSkaLa, dhaNA pudgalaparAvatta'nA AkSepaka evA. nAyate-upaje che, prAdurbhAva-
pragaTapaNu pAme che, rRLAma-narene, puruSAne, prAye ee adhikArI che, eTalA mATe
naranuM grahaNa che, nahi te| A cAre gatimAM hoya che. dhaNA bhAvamala kSINa
thaye, --nahi ke alpa, eTalA mATe kahyu jAyavya caitanya:-caitanya avyakta che
evA hitAhita vivekazUnya khAla kare, na-nahi, mat AruM-mahat kAya, arthAnuSThAna
Addi mATu' kAma, cat vita kAraNa ke kavacit ; paraMtu vyakta caitanmavALA ja
kare che,-ke jyAre AnA (ghaNA bhAvamalanA ) kSaya abhimata che.

Page #212 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(146) The accumulation of yogadushti (negative karmic tendencies) pollutes and
obstructs the true nature of the soul, hence it is called "mal" (impurity).  It
is deeply rooted in the pudgala (matter) and can only be removed when the
bhavamal (subtle karmic impurities) is eliminated. This bhavamal, which is the
pollution of the soul, needs to be significantly reduced and the mind purified
for the soul to receive the gabij (seed of liberation).  Humans are primarily
the recipients of this gabij, hence the mention of "manushya" (human) here.
However, this reduction of bhavamal can occur in all four gatis (states of
existence), making it possible for the gabij to be received in any of them.
Thus, when the soul's inner impurities are cleansed and the mind is prepared,
the gabij is planted. This is why it is said here: "Avyakt chaitanya mahatu
karya kare nahi" (The unmanifest consciousness cannot perform great deeds).
This means that a young soul, whose consciousness is still unmanifest and not
yet revealed, is incapable of performing the great task of receiving the gabij.
For one who lacks clear awareness of consciousness, who has not yet developed
the understanding of right and wrong, whose soul is still deeply asleep and not
awakened, how can such a young and ignorant soul perform a great deed?  They are
still under the influence of basic instincts like food, sleep, sex, etc., and
are not even fully independent of their parents, so what else can they do?
Similarly, in the Nigada (one-sense) state, the soul is in a deeply unconscious
state.  The Beidriya (two-sense), Teidriya (three-sense), and Chauridiya (four-
sense) states also have an unmanifest state of consciousness.  Even in the
Panchendriya (five-sense) state, the soul is in a similar state of
unconsciousness.  In the actions of the five senses, such as seeing, hearing,
etc., even aquatic, terrestrial, and aerial beings (jalachar, sthalachar, and
khechar) in the Tiryanch (animal) realm rarely have an understanding of the
benefits and drawbacks of the gabij.  They are mostly driven by their instincts.
Devas (gods) are engrossed in their pleasures and luxuries, making them
oblivious to the gabij.  And in Naraka (hell), beings are immersed in suffering,
making them unable to focus on anything else.  Even the best opportunities for
attaining dharma (righteousness) are rare there.  Among humans, it is almost
impossible for the Anarya (non-Aryan) caste to receive the gabij.  Even within
the Arya (Aryan) caste, it is rare to be born into a family with a high level of
dharma and culture.  Even if one is born into such a family, it is extremely
rare to receive the teachings of true dharma.  Even if one hears these
teachings, it is very rare to develop faith in them.  Even if one develops
faith, it is extremely rare to have the strength and determination to practice
self-control.  Thus, the rarity increases with each step.  Only when the
bhavamal is significantly reduced and the highest level of punya (merit) is
manifested, can one receive this supreme yog.  "Sahajantu malam vidyat karma
sambandh yogyataam | Atmano'naadimatve'pi nayame naan vim vina yatah ||
Tasmadavashyameshtvya svaabhavikyeva yogyata | Tasyanaadimatti sa cha malananam
mal uchyate ||"  Shri Gabindu, Black 164-170

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (146) yogaduSTi samuccaya te AtmasvabhAvanuM malana-sthaMbhana kare che, eTalA
mATe te "mAla" kahevAya che. temAM paNa ghaNuM pudgalaparAvatta karAve eTale
bhAvamala dUra thayo hoya tyAre ja A gabIjanI prApti thAya che. A A
AtmamalinatArUpa bhAvamala jyAre ghaNe ghaNe kSINa thaI gayo hAya, ne cittabhUmi
cokakhI thaI hoya, tyAre ja prAye manuSyone A gabIja sAMpaDe che. ahIM manuSyane
ema kahyuM, tenuM kAraNa-ghaNuM karIne teo ja AnA mukhya adhikArI hoya che, -e
che. bAkI te cAre gatimAM A bhAvamalanI kSINatA saMbhave che. eTale cAre gatimAM
gabIjanuM grahaNa hoI zake che. ane Ama AtmAno aMdarane mela ghaNo ghaNe sApha
thaI gaye, citta-bhUmimAM gabIjanuM vAvetara thAya che, eTalA mATe ja ahIM
kahyuM ke-"avyakta caitanya mahatuM kArya kare nahiM; arthAt jenuM caitanya haju
avyakta che-pragaTyuM nathI, e bAla jIva kyAreya paNa A gabIja grahaNa karavA
jevuM moTuM kArya karavA samartha thAya nahiM. kAraNa ke jenAmAM haju caitanyanI
spaSTa kuraNuM-jAgrati thaI nathI, jenAmAM hita-ahitanA vivekanuM bhAna AvyuM
nathI, jene AtmA haju gADha mohanidrAmAM paDyo che, jene AtmA jAgye nathI,-e
bAla ajJAnI jIva kyAreya meTuM kAma kema karI zake ? AhAra-nidrAjya-maithuna Adi
saMjJAne paravaza te bicAre pitAmAMthI ja paravArate na hoya, te bIjuM zuM karI
zake ? te A prakAre. nigadamAM tema ja eke driyamAM jIva atyaMta mUcchita
avasthAmAM hoya che. beIdriya, teidriya, cauridriya e vila avasthAmAM paNa
caitanyanI avyakta dazA hoya che. asalI paMcaMdriyamAM paNa te ja saMmUriSThama
jevI sthiti hoya che. saMjJI paMceMjinadarzanAdi kriyamAM jalacara, sthalacara,
ne khecara vagere tiryaMca paryAne viSe paNa gabIjanI hitAhitanuM bhAna prAye
hotuM nathI, pAmara gamArapaNuM hoya che. devamAM durlabhatA
sukhavilAsanimagnatA-sukhamAM garakAvapaNuM hoya che. ane narakamAM duHkha
nivAsanimagnatA-du:khamAM DUbavApaNuM hoya che, eTale e ADe bIjuM kAMI sUjhatuM
nathI, temaja dharma prAptinA uttama nimitto paNa tyAM maLavA durlabha che.
manuSyamAM paNa anArya jAtine viSe tenI prApti asaMbhavita che. AryajAtimAM paNa
UMcuM dharmasaMskArasaMpanna kula pAmavuM durlabha che. te maLe te paNa satya
dharmanuM zravaNa prApta thavuM mahAdurlabha che. zravaNa thAya te paNa te
pratye zraddhA cuMTavI ghaNI ghaNI durlabha che. zraddhA coMTe te paNa te
pramANe saMyamamAM vIryanI phuraNa thavI parama durlabha che. Ama uttarottara
durlabhatA che. temAM ghaNe bhAvamala kSINa thaye heya, parama puNyadaya
pragaTyo hoya, tyAre ja A uttama yoga sahajaM tu malaM
vidyAtkarmasaMbandhayogyatAm  /  Atmano'nAdimattve'pi nAyamenAM vinA yataH  //
tasmAdavazyameSTavyA svAbhAvikyeva yogyatA  /  tasyAnAdimatI sA ca malanAnaM
mala ucyate  // " zrI gabindu, bleka 164-170

Page #213 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Friend's Perspective: The Rarity of the Seeds of Liberation  (147)  The
attainment of the seeds of liberation is rare; only then does one get the rare
vision of the Lord; only then does one get the materials for the path of
liberation, such as the guidance of a true Guru. Thus, the seeds of liberation,
such as the day of the Jina, devotion to the Jina, etc., are extremely rare.
That is why great souls like Shriman Anandghanji, Shriman Devchandraji, Shriman
Yashovijayji, Shrimad Rajchandraji, etc., who were great saints and devotees,
have sung with great devotion:  “Suhum Nigoad Na Dekhiyo… Sakhi! Dekhan De!
Khader Atihi Vishesh… Sakhi, Pudhavi Aa Na Pekhiya… Sakhi Te Va Na Lesh… Sakhi
Vansapati Ati Ghanu Ha… Sakhi, Ditho Nahi. Ya Didar… Sakhi Biti Charuridi Jal
Liha… Sakhi Sur Tiri Niray Niwasma… Sakhi Apjata Prabhasma… Sakhi, Em Anek Thal
Janiye… Sakhi Aagamthi Mati Aaniye… Sakhi, Gati Sanni Pan Dhar… Sakhi Manuj
Anaraj Sathe… Sakhi, Chatur Na Chadiya Hath… Sakhi, Darisan Vishnu Jin Dev…
Sakhi, Kije Nimal Sev… Sakhi.” – Shri Anandghanji  …Y[ 0  “Jagatarak Prabhu
Vinavu, Vinatdi Avadhar Re; Tuj Darsan Vishnu Hu Bhamhya, Kaal Anant Aapara Re…
Jag, Ayar Bhamhya Prabhu Navi Malyo, Mithya Avirati Jodi Parparinati Ragipane,
Parrasarange Rakt Re; Pargrahak Rakshakpane, Parabhage Aasakt Re… Jag.” – Shri
Devchandraji  “Jinpe Bhav Vina Kabu, Chhutat Nahi Dukhbhav.”  “Jakh Jagege
Aatma, Tam Lagege Rang.” – Shrimad Rajchandraji  “Dithi Ha Prabhu Dithi
Jagadguru Tuj, Murati He. Prabhu Murati Mohanveldi Ji; Kaliyuge He Prabhu
Kaliyuge Dulho Tuj, Darshanu He Prabhu Darishan Lahyu Asha Lijhi.” – Shri
Yashovijayji  **The Importance of Human Birth**  Thus, although the seeds of
liberation, such as devotion to the Jina, are excellent, their attainment is
primarily possible in the human realm. The great souls have called human birth
the best. Because:  The attainment of liberation is extremely rare, and it is
not possible in any other body. It is not possible in the realms of gods, demi-
gods, or hell. Liberation is only possible in the human body.  In any other
body, the complete destruction of all karmas cannot arise, and one cannot enter
the path of liberation. Therefore, we…

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 mitrAdRSTi : jinadazanAdi yAgamIjanI durlabhatA (147 ) khIjanI prApti sa'bhave
che; tyAre ja parama durlabha evu' jana bhagavAnanuM darzana sAMpaDe che; tyAre
ja sadgurunA yega vagere sAmagrI maLe che. Ama satra jinadana--jinabhakti Adi
yAgakhIjanI parama du.bhatA che, eTalA mATe ja jAgatI jyAta jevA zrImAn
AnadaghanajI, zrImAna devacaMdrajI, zrImAn yazovijayajI, zrImad rAjacaMdrajI Adi
parama saMtA-parama bhakta yAgirAjo parama bhakti ullAsathI gAI gayA che ke
"suhuma nigeAda na dekhiyeA....sakhI ! dekhaNa de! khAdara atihi vizeSa...sakhI
puDhavI A na pekhiyA....sakhI te vA na leza....sakhI vanasapati ati ghaNu
hA....sakhI. dITho nahi. ya dIdAra....sakhI biti carUridI jala lihA....sakhI
sura tiri niraya nivAsamAM....sakhI apajatA pratibhAsamAM....sakhI. ema aneka
thala jANiye....sakhI AgamathI mati ANiye....sakhI. gati sanni paNa
dhAra....sakhI manuja anAraja sAthe....sakhI catura na caDhiyA hAtha....sakhI.
darisaNa viSNu jina deva....sakhI kIje nimala seva....sakhI."--zrI Ana'daghanajI
....Y[ 0 jagatAraka prabhu vinavu', vinataDI avadhAra re; tuja darasaNa viSNu
hu` bhamyA, kALa ana`ta apAra re....jaga0 Ayara bhamyA prabhu navi malyA, mithyA
avirati joDI parapariNati rAgIpaNe, pararasaraMge rakta re; paragrAhaka
rakSakapaNe, parabhAge Asakata re....jaga."--zrI devacaMdrajI jinape' bhAva vinA
kabU, chUTata nahiM duHkhabhAva'' "jakha jAgege AtamA, tama lAgeMge raMga."--
zrImad rAjacadrajI dIThI hA prabhu dIThI jagadguru tuja, mUrati he| prabhu
mUrati meAhanavelaDI jI; kaliyuge he prabhu kaliyuge dulaho tuja, darazaNu he
prabhu darizaNa lahyuM AzA lIjI. --zrI yazeAvijayajI manuSya janmanI mahatvatA--
Ama satra jinana-bhakti Adi uttama cAgabIjanI chatAM, tenI prAptineA sabhava
mukhya karIne manuSya gatimAM hoya che. puruSAe manuSya janmane sa zreSTha kahyo
che. kAraNa ke-- atyaMta dula bhatA hAvA eTalA mATe ja jJAnI e mAkSa bIjA kAi
dehathI maLateA nathI. deva, tiya ca, ke naraka e e gatithI mekSa nathI, mAtra
mAnavadehuthI mokSa che. X X koI paNa anya dehamAM pUrNa" sarvivekanA udaya
thatA nathI, ane meAkSanA rAjamArgamAM praveza thaI zakatA nathI, ethI ApaNane

Page #214 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(148) This very rare human body, obtained through a collection of good deeds,
must be made successful. Some foolish people waste this human body in vices,
ignorance, worldly attachments, and various kinds of intoxication; they lose
their invaluable jewel. They are called human beings in name, but in reality,
they are like monkeys.” “Oh, how fortunate is the human being who has obtained
this auspicious body through a collection of great merits! Yet, alas! He does
not escape the cycle of birth and death even once; he loses the happiness he has
attained. Fight for even a moment, for this terrible fear of death, oh! Will you
remain content?” - Shrimad Rajchandraji The author of Shri Moksha Mala,
recognizing that even in this extremely rare and precious human birth, the
opportunity to attain the right path, which is like a seed, is often missed,
advises the seeker to worship with utmost devotion, using the tools of devotion
to the Lord, service to the Guru, etc., and to make this human body meaningful
as quickly as possible. He explains this by saying: चरमे पुद्गलावः
क्षयश्चास्योपपद्यते । जीवानां लक्षणं तत्र यत एतदुदाहृतम् ॥३१॥ In the last
pudgalavarta, this bhavamala is destroyed; Because the characteristic of the
jivas there is as described here - 31 Meaning: - And in the last pudgalavarta,
this bhavamala is destroyed; because the characteristic of the jivas there is as
described here (below). दुःखितेषु दयात्यन्तमद्वेषो गुणवत्सु च । औचित्यात्सेवनं
चैव सर्वत्रैवाविशेषतः ॥ ३२ ॥ Vritti: - 2 Punarav - In the last pudgalavarta, in
the last pudgalavarta with the characteristic of being yakt, this bhavamala is
destroyed. Vivaanaa kshaane tatra - there, in the last pudgalavarta, the
characteristic of the jiva is, chat putatulatamu - because this (what is being
said) is said. Vritti: - Fulllitepu - towards those who are suffering from
bodily pain, etc., yachant - extreme compassion, sympathy, compassion; asha -
asha, amatsara. Towards whom? Towards those who are virtuous, endowed with
virtues like knowledge, etc. Shaunityans evan vaiv - similarly, service with
propriety, service according to the scriptures; satra - everywhere, towards the
poor, etc., avisheshatah - without distinction, generally.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (148) gadarisamuccaya maLele A bahu durlabha mAnavadeha saphaLa karI le e
avazyanuM che. keTalAka mUrNo durAcAramAM, ajJAnamAM, viSayamAM ane aneka
prakAranA madamAM A mAnavadeha vRthA gumAve che; amUlya kaustubha hArI bese che.
A nAmanA mAnava gaNAya, bAkI te vAnararUpa ja che." "bahu puNya kerA puMjathI
zubha deha mAnavane maLyo, teye are ! bhavacakrane AMTo nahiM ekake TaLe; sukha
prApta karatAM sukha TaLe che leza e lakSe laDo, kSaNa kSaNa bhayaMkara
bhAvamaraNe kAM aho ! rAcI rahe ?" -zrImada rAjacaMdrajI praNata zrI mokSamALA
ane Ama parama durlabha ne parama amUlya evA manuSya janmamAM ja prAye
gabIjarUpa sanmArganI prAptine suavasara sAMpaDe che, ema jANI mumukSu jIve
prabhubhakti-satagurusevA Adi sAdhanonI parama bhaktithI upAsanA karI, jema bane
tema utAvaLe A mAnavadehanI sArthakatA karI levI,-evo dhvanirUpa ADakataro sAra
bodha atre mahAtmA zAstrakAre Ape che. te upadarzAvatAM kahe che. carame
pudgalAvaH kSayazcAsyopapadyate  /  jIvAnAM lakSaNaM tatra yata etadudAhRtam  //
31 //  carama pulAvarta mAM, kSaya to ene heya; kAraNa jIvonuM tihAM, lakSaNa
AvuM joya-31 artha :-ane chellA pudagalAvamAM A bhAvamalane A kSaya upaje che;
kAraNa ke temAM vartatA jIvonuM lakSaNa A (nIce kahevAmAM AvatuM ) kahyuM che -
je kahyuM che, te batAvavA mATe kahe che duHkhiteSu dayAtyantamadveSo guNavatsu
ca  /  aucityAtsevanaM caiva sarvatraivAvizeSataH  //  32  //  vRttiH-2
punarAva-carama pudgalAvamAM, yakta lakSaNavALA chellA pudgalAvattamAM,
kSayagrAhyoTTER-A bhAvamalano kSaya upaje che. vIvAnAM kSaNe tatra-tyAM chellA
pulAvartAmAM jIvanuM lakSaNa, cata putatulAtamu-kAraNa ke A (kahevAmAM Ave che
te ) kahyuM che. vRttiH-phullitepu--zarIraAdi du:khathI duHkhIAo pratye,
yAcanta-atyaMtapaNe dayA, sAnuzayapaNuM, anukaMpAbhAva; aSA-aSa, amatsara. kAnA
pratye ? te ke muLavaranuM ja-vidyA vagere guNothI yukta evA guNavaMte pratye.
zaunityAnsevana vaiva-tema ja aucityathI sevana, zAstra anusAre ucitapaNue
karIne sevana; satra-sarvatra ja, dIna vagere pratye, avizeSataH avizeSathI,
sAmAnyathI.

Page #215 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Mitaadashti: Compassion towards the suffering  **(149)**  Compassion towards
the suffering, non-hatred towards the virtuous; Serving appropriately and
without discrimination everywhere.   **Meaning:**  Extreme compassion towards
the suffering, non-hatred towards the virtuous, and serving appropriately and
without discrimination everywhere, are the characteristics of the last stage of
the soul's evolution.  **Explanation:**  The main characteristics of the soul in
the last stage of its evolution, as described in the Yugalfera, are: (1) Extreme
compassion towards the suffering, (2) Non-hatred towards the virtuous, and (3)
Serving appropriately everywhere.  **1. Extreme compassion towards the
suffering:**  Compassion towards those who are suffering from physical ailments
like illness, or mental suffering due to poverty, misfortune, etc., or those who
are suffering due to the afflictions of the body, mind, and senses.  Compassion
towards those who are distressed and tormented by suffering. This is the first
characteristic.    **Compassion** is the feeling of empathy that arises when we
witness the suffering of another being. It is like feeling the pain of another
as if it were our own.  It is like the feeling of compassion that arises when
one part of the body is in pain, and the other parts of the body also feel the
pain.  Compassion is feeling the pain of another as if it were our own.  Just as
a father is always eager to alleviate the suffering of his child, so too should
we be eager to alleviate the suffering of others.  This is true compassion or
mercy.    **Compassion** is the desire to alleviate the suffering of others.
“The desire to alleviate the suffering of others is compassion.” - Shri
Anandghanji  “Oh, Vaishnav Jan, know the pain of others.” - Shri Narasimha Mehta
How can one who desires to cultivate such noble compassion inflict suffering on
others? How can one cause pain?  How can one harm even the most subtle of
beings, who are all interconnected?  How can one harm any being, big or small?
How can one hurt their feelings?  One should always refrain from harming any
being in thought, word, or deed.  Not only that, but one should always strive to
protect all beings.  This compassion is the root of the tree of Dharma, the
essence of all principles, the agreement of all philosophies, the first of all
vows, the source of all happiness and prosperity, and the well-wisher of all
beings.  There is no other Dharma like it.  “Ahimsa Paramo Dharma” - Non-
violence is the highest Dharma.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 mitrAdaSTi : duHkhI prati dayA ati (149) duHkhiA prati dayA ati, guNavata prati
aSa; ucitapaNe sevana vaLI, sarvatra ja avizeSa 32 artha -dukhIAo pratye atyaMta
dayA, ane guNavate pratye aSa, ane sarvatra ja avizeSathI aucitya pramANe
sevana, A chellA pagalAvartAnuM lakSaNa che. vivecana chellA pudgalAvattamAM-
yugalapherAmAM vartatA jIvanA mukhya lakSaNa A cheH-(1) duHkhIA pratye atyaMta
dayA, (2) guNavAna ne pratye adveSa, (3) ane sarvatra aucityathI sevana. te A
pramANe - 1. duHkhIA pratye atyaMta dayA roga vagere zArIrika duHkhathI, tema ja
daridratA-daurbhAgya vagerethI upajatA mAnasika duHkhathI Adhi-vyAdhi-upAdhithI
je bicArA duHkhIA hoya, paritApa pAmI Akula-grAkula thatA hoya, teo pratye
atyaMta dayA-anukaMpA karavI, te atre prathama lakSaNa che. eTale ke te te
du:khathI te jIvane je kaMpa-Atmapradezaparispada thatuM hoya, te tene anusarate
kaMpa potAnA AtmAne viSe thAya, tenuM nAma "anukaMpA che. te duHkha jANe pitAnuM
ja hoya evI bhAvanA upaje, jema zarIranA eka bhAgane duHkha thatAM bIjA bhAgamAM
paNa anukaMpa UThe che, tema bIjAnA duHkhe pote duHkhI thavuM te anukaMpA che.
ane pitAnuM duHkha dUra karavAne jema pote sadA tatpara hoya, tema
paradu:khabhaMjana karavAne sadA tatpara hevuM te ja kharI anukaMpA athavA dayA
che. kAraNa ke paraduHkha chedavAnI je icchA tenuM nAma ja karuNa-dayA che.
"para:dukha chedana IcchA karuNuM." zrI AnaMdaghanajI vaiSNava jana te tene
kahIe, pIDa parAI jANe re."- zrI narasiMha mahetA AvI uttama dayA je pALavA
icchatA hoya, te para jIvane duHkha kema ApI zake ? pIDA kema upajAvI zake?
sUkSamamAM sUkSma jIvane paNa je dUbhavavA I che nahiM, te nAnAmoTA koI paNa
jIvane kema haNI zake? tenI lAgaNI paNa kema dUbhavI zake? te to kyAreya paNa
koI paNa jIvanI mana-vacana-kAyAthI hiMsA karavAthI jema bane tema dUra ja rahe.
eTaluM ja nahiM paNa jema bane tema sarva prayatnathI tenI rakSAmAM ja pravarte.
A dayA dharmavRkSanuM mULa che, sarva siddhAntano sAra che, sarva darzanane
saMmata che, sarva vratamAM prathama che, sarva sukhasaMpadAnI jananI che, sarva
prANInuM hita karanArI che. enA je bIje eke dharma nathI. "ahiMsA paramo
dharma"- ahiMsA parama dharma che.

Page #216 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(15) The collection of virtues like truth, conduct, charity, etc. are like
bodyguards who protect compassion. Without compassion, all of them are
incomplete. The great sages have said: “The essence of Dharma, if you ask me, I
will tell you, The principle that is good for all, beneficial to all. The Lord
spoke in his speech, there is no Dharma like compassion, Giving refuge and
contentment, it is a sin to crush any creature. Truth, conduct, and all charity,
are only complete with compassion; Without compassion, they are nothing, like
the sun without its rays.” - Shri Moksha Mala “Whoever has compassion in their
heart, they will do good deeds, whether they are done or not. - Mahatma Kabirji
“Do not abandon compassion, as long as there is breath in the body.” - Shri
Tulsidasji  2. Non-envy towards the virtuous Non-envy towards the virtuous,
being free from jealousy, is the second characteristic of the last pudgalavarna.
Envy towards virtue is called jealousy, which should not be present here.
Whoever appears superior to oneself in virtues like knowledge, humility,
discernment, wisdom, vision, character, austerity, etc., should not be disliked;
but instead, one should be happy and pleased upon seeing those virtues, and feel
a sense of joy, thinking, “Blessed is this person! How well-developed are their
knowledge, humility, and discernment! What a wise and virtuous person they are!”
Thus, even a tiny atom of virtue in another should be considered like a
mountain, and should always flourish and blossom in the heart like a father’s
love. If one becomes truly devoted to virtue in this way, then it is understood
that this is a sign of the last pudgalavarna. “Considering the atom of virtue in
another as a mountain, always, The mind should be patient and free from envy.” -
Shri Bhartrihari “Let there be an abundance of joy in virtue, let the mind be
inward-focused.” - Shrimad Rajchandraji Seeing the virtue of others and feeling
joy, happiness, and contentment is the characteristic of a virtuous person. The
beautiful word-picture* of how a virtuous person feels this joy is given here:
“May your tongue be eloquent in praising the virtuous, May I be blessed with the
ability to praise others today. May my eyes quickly find joy in seeing the
prosperity of others, May I be free from the suffering of the world.” - Shri
Shantasudharas  *The word-picture is a metaphor for the vivid and detailed
description of the feeling of joy.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (15) gadaSTisamuccaya satya, zIla, dAna vagere paNa dayAnI rakSA karanArA
aMgarakSaka jevA che, dayA vinA e badhA apramANa che. mahAtmA sapuruSe kahI gayA
che ke - dharmatattva je pUchayuM mane, te saMbhaLAvuM nehe tane, je siddhAMta
sakaLane sAra, sarva mAnya sahune hitakAra. bhAkhyuM bhASaNamAM bhagavAna,
dharma na bIje dayA samAna, abhayadAna sAthe saMteSa, gho prANIne daLavA doSa.
satya zIla ne saghaLAM dAna, dayA heIne rahyA pramANa; dayA nahiM to e nahi eka,
vinA sUrya kiraNa nahiM dekha."--zrI mokSamALA "jisake hirade haya bhUtadayA,
vAne sAdhana era kiye na kiye -mahAtmA kabIrajI tulasI dayA na chaDie, jaba laga
ghaTameM prAna." zrI tulasIdAsajI 2. guNavaMta pratye aSa guNavAnuM jana pratye
aSa-amatsara hovo, IrSyA rahitapaNuM hovuM, te A chellA pudgalAvanuM bIjuM
lakSaNa che. guNane dveSa te matsara kahevAya che, te ahIM na hoya. vidyA,
vinaya, viveka, jJAna, darzana, cAritra, tapa vagere guNothI je koI paNa potAnA
karatAM adhika-caDhIyAta dekhAya, te tenA pratye adekhAI na kare; paraMtu te te
guNa joI UlaTo manamAM prasanna thAya, rAjI thAya, pramodabhAva dhare ke- dhanya
che Ane ! AnAmAM vidyA-vinaya-vivekane kevo vikAsa che! A kevo jJAnavAnuM , kevo
cAritravAna che!' Ama paranA paramANu jevaDA guNane paNa parvata jevo gaNI
pitAnA hRdayamAM sadAya vikAsa pAme, praphula thAya, sAco saguNAnurAgI bane, to
samajavuM ke A chelA pudgalAvarNanuM cihna che. " paraguNaparamANUparvatIkRtya
nityaM, nigada vilaMta: khaMti hataH cittaH | "--zrI bhatRhari "guNa pramAda
atizaya rahe, rahe aMtarmukha ga."---zrImad rAjacaMdrajI paraguNa dekhI pramoda
pAmavo, khuzI thavuM, rAjI thavuM e ja sajajananuM lakSaNa che. sajajana te
pramodabhAvathI kevI bhAvanA kare che, tenuM suMdara zabdacitra* atre ApyuM
che.- x"jihve pravIbhava tvaM sukRtisucaritAccAraNe suprasannA,
bhUyAstAmanyakotinutirasikatayA me'dya ko sukau  /  vokSyA nyaprauDhalakSmI
drutamupacinutAM locane rocanatvaM, saMsArimajhAre zaniti maratAM namano mucava
I" -zrI zAMtasudhArasa,

Page #217 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Friendliness: Non-hatred towards the virtuous, service to all with propriety
(151) "Oh tongue! You become pure and prosperous by reciting the good conduct of
virtuous beings. Oh ears! Today, you become successful, meaning fruitful, by
gaining interest in listening to the deeds of others. Oh eyes! Be satisfied, be
filled with joy, and let tears of happiness flow from you upon seeing the
excellent fortune and prosperity of others. Oh tongue! Oh ears! Oh eyes! In this
impermanent world, such feelings are the ultimate meaning of your birth." - Shri
Mansukh Bhai Kartachandra's *Shant Sudharas Vivechan*  "Blessed, blessed is that
being who serves the Lord, who listens to the country, who performs pure
knowledge and action, who experiences it himself, who serves God." - Shri
Devchandraji  "In the past, joy in the virtuous, compassion for suffering
beings, opposite to the attitude of mediation, Oh God! May my soul always be
like that." - Shri Amitagati Acharya's *Samayik Path* (Translated by Dayabhagwan
Das)  3. Service to all without distinction, with propriety, as stated in the
scriptures, is the third characteristic. "Following propriety removes
dissatisfaction and promotes activity, thus leading to the destruction of
karma." Therefore, the soul should do whatever is necessary wherever it is, and
understand whatever is necessary wherever it is.  "Understand wherever what is
appropriate, Act accordingly wherever, with the soul." - Shri Atmasiddhi  And
even more so, without distinction - without any kind of discrimination, serving
all, including the poor, the suffering, etc., as appropriate, is proper service.
Here, propriety, appropriateness, should be understood as follows:  - The
service rendered to a virtuous person, a true saintly character, should be
primarily motivated by devotion. - The service rendered to the suffering, the
poor, the disabled, etc., should be primarily motivated by compassion.  "All are
friendly, like wheat, Compassion is the rain that falls."  "May my soul always
be like that, Opposite to the attitude of mediation."  "Activity should be based
on propriety. - *Santvritti Niyamatra Chatah* - Shri Yogabindu  "Compassion
should be towards the one who needs it, devotion towards the worthy. - *Anyatha
Thirattu Ranamatiwa Saksham* - Shri Yashovijayji's *Dva Dva*

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 mitrAdaSTi : guNIne adveSa, aucityathI sarvanI sevA (151) "he chabha! tuM
puNyazALI jIvonAM sucaritro ucArI pavitra thA, suprasanna thA! bIjAnI kIrtAi
sAMbhaLavAno rasa pAmI mArA baMne kAno Aje sukarNa arthAt saphaLa thAo ! aho !
bIjAnI uttama lakSamI, bIjAnuM aizvarya dekhI mArAM locane Thare, dravo, emAMthI
harSAzru Avo ! he jIbha! he kAna ! he cakSu ! asAra saMsAramAM AvI bhAvanA e ja
tamArA janmanuM parama sArthaka che." -zrI manasukhabhAI karatacaMdrakRta
zAMtasudhArasa vivecana. "dhanya dhanya te jIva prabhu pada sevI che, je dezanA
suNe; jJAna kriyA kare zuddha, anubhavege che nija sAdhakapaNe, sevo Izvara
deva."-zrI devacaMdrajI maitrI bhUtamAM, guNImAM pramoda, duHkhI jIvomAM karuNA
prayoga, mAdhyacya vRtti viparIta pratye, he deva ! dhArA muja Atma nitye." -zrI
amitagati AcArya kRta * sAmAyika pATha (De. bhagavAnadAsa anuvAdita) 3.
aucityathI sarvatra avizeSapaNe sevana zAstramAM je pramANe kahyuM che te
pramANe aucityathI, ucitapaNAthI, jyAM jema ghaTe tema sevA karavI te trIjuM
lakSaNa che. "ucitapaNAne anusaravAthI asaMtRpravRtti dUra thAya che, ne
sapravRttimAM pravartana thAya che, tethI karIne cokkasa karmakSaya thAya che."X
mATe ja AtmAthI hoya te jyAM jyAM je je karavuM ghaTe che, te te kare, ane jyAM
jyAM je je samajavuM ghaTe che, te te samaje. "jyAM jyAM je je yogya che, tihAM
samajavuM te; tyAM tyAM te te Acare, AtmAthI jana eha."--zrI Atmasiddhi ane
temAM paNa avizeSathI-kaI paNa jAtanA bhedabhAva vinA, sAmAnyapaNe dIna-duHkhI
vagere sarva koInI paNa yathArogya sevA karavI, e ucita sevA che. atre
ucitapaNuM, yathAyegyapaNuM Ama samajavuM: muni-sAcA sAdhuguNathI yukta evA sat
pAtra puruSa pratye je sevA karavAmAM Ave, tyAM bhaktibhAvanuM pradhAnapaNuM
ucita che. duHkhI, dIna, apaMga vagere pratye kaMI sevA karavAmAM Ave temAM
anukaMpA bhAvanuM pradhAnapaNuM ucita che. * A dIna-duHkhI (mULa zleka) *
"saravey maitrI kuLig ghauM, dipu nIveSa kRpApAa mAdhyasthyavRtti
viparItavRttau, sadA mamAtmA vidadhAtu deva  // " x
"asyaucityAnusAritvAtpravRtti satI bhavet  /  - saMtavRtti niyamAtraH cataH "--
zrI yogabindu, * " anukaMpA'nukaMpye syAdbhaktiH pAtre tu saGgatA  /  -
anyathAthIratu rANAmativA sakSama "--zrI yazovijayajIkRta dvA dvA

Page #218 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(152) Yoga-drishti-samuccaya  Whoever they may be, whatever their sect, whatever
their caste, they should be served with impartial true compassion. The Jineshwar
Bhagwan has never prohibited this compassion-based giving. To establish
charitable kitchens, dispensaries, hospitals, etc., for the service and care of
the poor, the suffering, the passionate, etc., is beneficial to many beings, it
is the purpose of compassion, it is the cause of good intentions. By relying on
the strong world, this service of giving, etc., elevates the preaching, and it
becomes the cause of welfare.  In this work of giving, etc., it is very
important to maintain propriety. One should consider the substance, the field,
the time, the feeling, etc., and act accordingly. To give with a trivial feeling
like "Take it, animal, take it!" or with the feeling of "keeping one's hand
above," is not proper, but improper. To give to a deserving recipient with the
proper feeling, in the proper way, with respect, so that the recipient does not
feel their own poverty, helplessness, or dependence, so that they do not feel
burdened, so that they do not feel like they are being given alms, but rather
like "the right hand gives and the left hand does not know," is proper. To show
disrespect to the poor and suffering patients in hospitals and dispensaries, to
know that "they are just mortals" and not take proper care of them, is not
proper. But to show special kindness to the poor patient, to take special care
of them, to perform selfless service, is true propriety. Maintaining this
propriety is the duty of the donor householder, and only then can true service
be performed. Even in this, a little service of giving, etc., done at the right
time, in the right substance, field, and feeling, is more beneficial and
fruitful than a lot of service done at the wrong time. In the rain, even one
seed grows many times, but without rain, millions of seeds go to waste.
Therefore, in the service of dharma, it is proper to maintain the right
opportunity. These are all gross examples. Thus, to serve dharma according to
one's ability, as needed, to serve the people to the best of one's ability, is
also a sign of the highest state.  - "Without saying anything, giving, increases
the giver's wealth; "Giving water to the thirsty chatak, makes the cloud
dark..." - Shri Yashavijayaji  Thus, here three main characteristics are
mentioned: compassion for the suffering, non-hatred towards the virtuous, and
impartial proper service to all. Whoever possesses these characteristics, acts
in the highest state, and for them:  "Even a little gain in time is better than
a lot of work out of time. The growth of a seed in water is like that." - Shri
Yashavijayakrut Dva. Dva  "For the sake of explaining the limbs of dharma, even
giving is considered great wisdom. Without giving, one becomes like a dry tree."
- Shri Haribhadrasuri's Ashtak.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (152) yogadRSTisamuccaya vagere game te hAya, game te matasaMpradAyanA hAya,
game te jAtinA hAya, te paNa abhedabhAve sAcI anukaMpAthI sevA karavA cAgya che.
A anukapA dAnane jinezvara bhagavAne kadI paNa niSedha nathI karyA. dIna,
du:khI, rAgI AdinI sevA-zuzrUSArthe dAnazAlA, auSadhAlaya, ispitAla vagerene
prama'dha karavA, te ghaNA jIvone upakArI thaI paDI, anukaMpAneA hetu che, zubha
AzayanuM kAraNa che. puSTa Alamanane AzrI AvI dAnAdi sevAthI pravacananI unnati
thAya che, ane te kalyANanuM kAraNa thaI paDe che. A dAnAdvi kArya mAM paNa
ucitapaNuM jALavavAnI bahu bahu jarUra che. dravya, kSetra, kAla, bhAva vagere
kharAkhara joI vicArIne jema ghaTe tema karavA cagya che. dAna Apavu te pazu-le
rAMkA ! letA jA !" evA tuccha bhAvathI, athavA ' upara hAtha rAkhavA'nA bhAvathI
dAnAdimAM ApavuM,--e ucita nathI, paNa anucita che. yathA ceAgya pAtrane cAgya
ucitapaNu dAna cAgya rIte AdarathI ApaNu, te pAtrane potAnu dIna-lAcArapaNuM na
lAge-na veDhAya, ezIALApaNu' na lAge, ema 'jamaNA hAtha Ape ne DAbA hAtha na
jANe' evI rIte mApavu, te ucitapaNu che. ispitAla-auSadhAlaya vageremAM dIna-
du:khI daradIe pratye anAdara batAvavAmAM Ave, 'A te matI che' ema jANI tenI
kharAkhara kALajI na levAmAM Ave, e aucitya nathI. paNa garIba daradIe pratye te
khAsa hamadI batAvI, tenI era vizeSa kALajI levI, ni:svArtha sevA bajAvavI, e
kharUM citapaNu che. AvuM ucitapaNuM jALavavu' e dAtA sagRhasthanI pharaja che,
ane te jaLavAze tA ja sAcA sevAdhama majAvI zakAze. temAM paNa ceAgya dravya-
kSetra-bhAvamAM ceAgyakALe karelI theADI dAnAdi sevA paNu, jeTalI lAbhakArI
thAya che, jeTalI ugI nIkaLe che, teTalI akALe karelI ghaNI sevA paNa thatI
nathI. varasAdamAM eka dANAnI paNa aneka gaNI vRddhi thAya che, varasAda vagara
karoDo dANA nakAmA jAya che. X mATe sevAdharmAMmAM paNa yeAgya avasara jALavavo,
e ucita che. A badhA sthULa dRSTAMta che. Ama satra yathAyeAgyapaNe jema ghaTe
tema sevAdhama AdaravA, yathAzakti janatAnI sevA karavI, e paNa caramAvatta tu'
cihna che. - TvIna kahyA viNu dAnathI, dAtAnI vAdhe mAma; " jala dIe cAtaka
khIjavI re, megha huvo tiNe zyAma....caMdraprabha." zrI yazAvijayajI Ama atre
traNa mukhya lakSaNa kahyA,-duHkhIAnI dayA, guNI pratye adveSa, savanI
abhedyapaNe ucita sevA. A lakSaNa jenAmAM vatte" che, te carama AvattamAM varte
che, tene " kAle'lpamapi lAbhAya nAkAle karma bahyapi  /  vRau vRddhi:
jaLasyAviLayeTivuMthAyathA  /  /  :"--zrI yazAvijayakRta dvA. dvA "
dharmAGgakhyApanArthaM ca dAnasyApi mahAmatiH  /  bacoviyogena mayaMcavAnuM vyA
/  /  ''--zrI haribhadrasUriSkRta aSTaka,

Page #219 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Friend's perspective, the wise one's intention, motivation for effort. (153)
Know that the cycle of births and deaths is at its end. From these external
signs, it can be inferred that the cycle of births and deaths is about to end.
The rest is known only to the yogi, who has extraordinary knowledge. Therefore,
if one wants to enter the final cycle, to make the last turn of the cycle of
births and deaths, and to sow the seeds of liberation, then these qualities
should be cultivated in the soul: the heart should be filled with compassion for
the suffering, the mind should be purified by virtue, and one should become a
world-lover by serving all beings. This is the teaching of the great sage. And
from this, it is also important to note that we should not become lazy and
procrastinate, thinking that we will attain the path when the time is ripe, the
cycle of births and deaths is complete, and the time of our birth is over. It is
not appropriate to rely on the passing of time, it is not appropriate to sit
with folded hands and become inactive. The wise men have spoken of the ripening
of time, the completion of the cycle of births and deaths, etc., but we should
not interpret it in a way that is detrimental to our efforts. The wise man's
teachings will never motivate inactivity; they will only motivate effort.
Therefore, we should understand the intention of the wise. We do not know what
our future is like. But it is in our hands to make an effort to ripen that
future. That is, we can try to hasten the ripening of our future. Let us make an
effort to increase our worthiness and merit, so that the time will ripen on its
own, and we need not worry about it. For example, a seed has the potential to
ripen, but it will only ripen if it is planted in the ground. It will not ripen
on its own. Similarly, the soul, which is capable of liberation, will not become
liberated on its own unless we make an effort to bring about liberation.
Therefore, if one desires liberation, one should make a sincere effort to take
steps to ripen the time, to complete the cycle of births and deaths, and to
bring about the worthiness and merit in the soul. The primary step in this
effort is the compassion, etc., which is clearly explained here. One should take
refuge in this and achieve the goal of the soul. One should awaken the potential
through the strong support of pure instrumental causes, so that the cycle of
births and deaths comes to an end in the last cycle of existence, so that there
are only a few births left, and even in those, as few as possible. This is the
message here. In harmony with this, the great sage, the embodiment of knowledge,
Shrimad Rajchandraji, the supreme saint and devotee of the present age, has
uttered the following words, which are like the roar of a hero, motivating the
supreme effort:

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 mitrAdaSTi jJAnIne Azaya, puruSArtha preraNA (153) bhavacakrano chele AMTe che,
ema jANavuM. A bAhya cihno parathI bhavasAra bodha cakrane chello phere bAkI
che, evuM anumAna thaI zake che. bAkI vizeSa te atIMdriya evA yogIjJAnane gamya
che. mATe caramAvartAmAM AvavuM hoya, bhavane chele phere karavo hoya, ne
gabIjanI vAvaNI karavI hoya, te A lakSaNoguNa AtmAmAM pariNamAvavA joIe:
duHkhInI atyaMta dayAthI hRdayane kamaLa-A karavuM joIe, guNa-aSathI cittabhUmi
cekhI karavI joIe, ne sarva jIvanI yAcita sevA karI vizvavatsala banavuM joIe.
ema A uparathI mahAtmA zAstrakAre bodha Apyo. ane A uparathI eTaluM paNa khAsa
lakSamAM levA yogya che ke-kALasthiti pAkaze, bhavapariNati paripAka thaze,
bhavanI mudata pUrI thaze, tyAre ApaNe mArga pAmazuM, mATe ApaNe te tenI rAha
joyA karazuM,-evuM khoTuM AlaMbana pakaDI ALasu-pramAdI thavA lAgyA nathI.
pAdaprasArikA avalaMbavA yogya nathI, hAtha joDI besI rahI puruSArthahIna thavA
yogya nathI, jJAnI puruSoe kALalabdhiparipAka vagere kahyA che, tene UlaTo
anarthakArI artha karavA gya nathI. jJAnI puruSane upadeza kadI paNa
puruSArthahInatA prere ja nahiM; puruSArthanI jAgrati ja prere. mATe jJAnIne
Azaya samajavo joIe. ApaNI potAnI tathAbhavyatA kevI che, te ApaNe jANatA nathI.
paNa te bhavyatAne paripAka karavAne puruSArtha te ApaNA hAthamAM che. eTale ke
ApaNI bhavyatA-ogyatA - kema jaladI pakAvavI tene prayAsa ApaNe karI zakIe ema
chIe. puruSArtha preraNuM ApaNuM pAtratA-gyatA vadhArIe, eTale enI mudata enI
meLe pAkaze, ApaNe enI ciMtA karavAnI jarUra nathI. dAkhalA tarIke-agamAM
pAkavAnI yegyatA che, paNa te cUle caDAvIe to pAke, enI meLe koI kALe pAke nahi.
tema bhavya evA AtmAmAM paNa bhavyatA-vyagratA ANavAno prayAsa na karIe, te enI
meLe regyatA Ave nahiM. eTalA mATe je paramArthanI icchA hoya, te kALasthiti
jema pAke, bhavapariNati paripAka thAya, AtmAmAM yogyatA-pAtratA jema Ave tevA
upAya levAne satya puruSArtha karavo joIe, ane tevA upAyamAM prAthamikamAM
prAthamika je upAyadayA vagere ahIM spaSTa batAvyA che, teno Azraya karI
AtmArtha sAdhavo joIe; zuddha nimittakAraNanA prabaLa avalaMbanathI upAdAna
pragaTAvavuM joIe ke jethI karIne bhavapariNati chellA pudgalAvartAmAM AvI ubhI
rahe, bhavane chelle phere bAkI rahe, ne temAM paNa jema bane tema eAchA bhava
karavA paDe. Ama atre dhvani che. AnI sAthe saMvAdI evA parama puruSArtha
preraka vIragarjanArUpa satya vacane vartamAnayuganA parama saMta-bhAvagI zrImad
rAjacaMdrajI jevA jJAnAvatAra puruSe uccAryA che -

Page #220 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(154) “If you desire liberation, then strive for truth, do not cut the soul by
taking names like 'existence' and 'state of being'. Compassion, peace, equality,
forgiveness, truth, renunciation, detachment; These are always awake within the
seeker.” —Shri Atmasiddhi L2 And because it is so, therefore— Yogadashisamuccay
एवंविधस्य जीवस्य भद्रमूर्तेर्महात्मनः । शुभो निमित्तसंयोगो जायतेऽवञ्चकोदयात् ॥
३३ ॥  A good-natured, great-souled being like this; from the rise of the non-
obstructive, a good opportunity arises, 33 Thus—Such a good-natured, great-
souled being, from the rise of the non-obstructive, a good opportunity arises.
Commentary “Even if the bee is attracted to the sandalwood, the honeybee flies
to the jasmine; So, with inherent qualities, the best opportunity arises. Veer.”
—Shri Cho. S. -13 What kind of person is the one who possesses the qualities
mentioned above? They are those who are of good nature, good-natured, and have a
good appearance. Just by looking at them, one gets the natural impression that
they are good, kind, and noble beings. They are a good omen, their sight is
pleasing and lovable, and just by looking at them, a natural love arises for
them. They are dear to the gods, and they are worthy of being called 'great-
souled' because they have become a refuge for the noble-souled. Such a good-
natured, great-souled being has a good opportunity arise for them, they have the
qualities of compassion, etc. The best opportunity easily comes to the best, it
attracts them, like attracts like? According to this principle, a worthy being,
due to their virtuous qualities, is attracted to and finds a suitable
opportunity, and these good opportunities Opportunity Commentary:-Due to
diversity—Such a being, with the qualities mentioned above, who is a refuge,
good-natured, with a pleasing and lovable appearance, great-souled—because of
their noble qualities, what? What is it? -A good opportunity, an opportunity for
good fortune, etc. -because good fortune, etc. is the means for liberation, the
means for liberation, it arises, from where? For this, it is said -from the non-
obstructive heart. It is said that due to the excellence of this particular type
of meditation, this particular type of yoga, it is so.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (154) " jo icchA paramAra teA kareA satya puruSArtha, bhavasthiti Adi nAma laI,
chede nahi' AtmA. dayA, zAMti, samatA, kSamA, satya tyAga vairAgya; hAya mumukSu
ghaTa viSe, eha sadAya sujAgya." --zrI Atmasiddhi L2 ane kAraNa ke ema che, ethI
karIne-- yogadazisamuccaya evaMvidhasya jIvasya bhadramUrtermahAtmanaH  /  zubho
nimittasaMyogo jAyate'vaJcakodayAt  //  33  //  bhadrabhUtti mahAtma te, evA
jIvane joga; avaMcaka udaye upaje, zubhra nimittasa`yoga, 33 athaH--evA
prakAranA bhadrabhUtti mahAtmA jIvane, avaMcakanA udaya thakI, zubha nimitta
saMcAga upaje che. vivecana " cAhe cakAra te caMdane, madhukara mAlatI bhAgI re;
tima bhavi sahaja guNe heve, uttama nimitta sa'ceAgI re. vIr"--zrI ceA. sa0 -13
uparamAM je hamaNAM dayA vagere lakSaNa kahyA te lakSaNavatA cegI puruSa kevA
heAya ? te bhadrasUtti-bhadramUttivALA hoya, kalyANarUpa bhalI AkRtivALA hAya.
tene dekhatAM ja te bhadra, bhaleA, rUDA jIva che evI svAbhAvika chApa paDe. te
priyadarzIna zubha nimitta hAya, tenuM darzIna priya-vhAlu lAge evu hAya, tene
dekhatAM ja tenA pratye kudaratI prema sphure evo te priyadazI devAnAM priya'
hoya. ane te 'mahAtmA' kahevA ceAgya che, kAraNa ke sIya nA-uttama AtmavIne tene
yAga banyA che. AvA bhadramUrtti mahAtmA jIvane zubha nimittane sayeAga upaje
che, tene sadyAga vagerene joga mAjhe che. uttamane uttama nimitta saheje maLI
Ave che, tevu tevAne kheMce, Like attracts like? te nyAye cagya supAtra jIvane
tenA puNyaprAglRbhArathI khe'cAIne tathArUpa ceAgya nimitta sAMpaDe che, ane te
uttama nimitto sayeAga vRtti:-vaividhasyanIvaca--evA prakAranA jIvate, hamaNAM
ja kahelA lakSaNavALA yAgIne, mamrtta:bhadrabhUti, priyadarzIna, jevuM darzIna
priya-vhAlu lAge evAne, mAtmanaH-mahAtmAne-sadvIyanA mege karIne, zu' ? te ke-
zuma, prazarata, zuM? te ke-nimittasaMco:-nimitta saMcega, sadyoga AdinA sacega
-kAraNa ke sAga aAdinu ja niHzreyasAdhananuM -mekSasAdhananuM nimittapaNuM che,
jJAyate-upaje che, karyAMthI? te mATe kahyu -Ava jocAt-avaMcakanA hRdayathakI.
kahevAmAM AvatA samAdhivizeSanA-yogavizeSanA uttamane lIdhe, ema atha che.

Page #221 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Friend's View: 'The work is accomplished due to the cause, (155) It becomes the
means of the ocean of liberation. Just as the Chakera naturally loves the moon,
just as the bee naturally goes to the Malati, so too, the noble-worthy, eligible
being, by natural virtue, attains the excellent opportunity. “The addiction
arises like the ocean, in relation to the moon's light; The Kumud follows the
unattached, by pure nature....it will be”—Shri Yashovijayji “In the company of
the excellent, excellence increases, along with joy, O Anangi”—Shri Devchandraji
And why does this excellent opportunity arise? That too is explained here. This
opportunity is obtained by the arising of three obstacles. This obstacle is a
special type of yoga. Its form is now being told. This obstacle-like cause is
called Yaga, and the opportunity that is like it is called Yaga. Opportunity and
Material Cause 66 The work is accomplished due to the cause, there is no
argument in that; But to accomplish the work without a cause, that is the
madness of one's own opinion, O Sabhava”—Shri Anandghanji “The work is
accomplished with the cause, this is the eternal path....Lalana Having obtained
the position of Devchandra, one should maintain one's own
feelings....Lalana”—Shri Devchandraji Work does not happen without a cause, this
is the eternal rule, but those who talk about accomplishing work without a
cause, are only the madness of their own opinion. Yet, some people, due to their
misunderstanding, do not have the awareness of the proper division and
relationship of the material cause and opportunity, or due to their ingrained
misleading ideas, understand it upside down, and grasping the one-sided view,
consider the material cause and opportunity as if they were opponents, rivals of
each other, and by such meaningless, dry knowledge, they keep on denigrating the
highly beneficial opportunity, saying only 'material cause, material cause',
which, in the words of Shri Anandghanji, is 'the madness of one's own opinion'.
Because, to insist on the material cause alone or the opportunity alone, is only
a manifestation of delusion, a reversal. Those who grasp such a one-sided view,
do not know the fully interdependent, mutually supportive relationship of the
material cause and opportunity, and by creating a one-sided, false, untrue,
misleading statement, they destroy the eternal beliefs of the knowers. Because,
just as nothing is gained by grasping the opportunity alone, ignoring the
material cause, so too, nothing is gained by grasping the material cause alone,
ignoring the opportunity. .

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 mitrAdaSTi : 'kAraNa joge ho kAraja nIpaje (155) meAkSanA amegha sAdhanarUpa
thai paDe che. jema cakera kudaratI rIte ja caMdrane cAhe che, jema bhamarA
svabhAvathI ja mAlatIne bhAgI bane che, tema bhavya-yeAgya supAtra jIva paNu
sahaja guNe karIne uttama nimittanA sacega pAme che. " vyasana udaya je jaladhi
anuhare, zazine teja saMbadhe; aNusa'kha'dhe kumuda anuhare, zuddha svabhAva
prakhadhe....thAzu"--zrI yazovijayajI " uttama saMge re. uttamatA vadhe, sadhe
AnaMda anAjI "zrI devaca`drajI ane A uttama nimittane cega paNa zA kAraNathI
thAya che? te paNu ahI spaSTa karyuM'' che. traNa ava'caketA udayathI A nimitta
maLI Ave che. A avaMcaka eka prakArane ceAgavizeSa che. tenuM svarUpa have pachI
kahe che. A avacakarUpa kAraNane yAga ane te tevA nimittane yAga bane che.
nimitta ane upAdAna 66 kAraNa joge hA kAraja nIpaje, emAM koi na vAda; paNa
kAraNa viNa kAraja sAdhiye, e nija mata unamAda, sabhava0"zrI AnadaghanajI "
kAraNathe kAraja sadhe hA, eha anAdikI cAla....lalanA devacaMdra pada pAiye hA,
karata nija bhAva saMbhAla....lalanA."--zrI devaca'drajI kAraNa vinA kArya thAya
ja nahi, A sanAtana niyama che, paNa e kAraNa vinA kAryaM sAdhavAnI je vAta kare
che, te teA kevaLa peAtAnA mataneA unmAda ja che. chatAM keTalAka loke|
asamajasa bhAve upAdAna ane nimittanA yathAyeAgya vibhAga-saMbadhanI maryAdAnu
bhAna nahi heAvAthI, athavA bAMdhI lIdhelA bhrAmaka khyAlane lIdhe UMdhuM
vipasta samajatA heAvAthI, ekAMtika pakSa grahIne, upAdAna ne nimitta jANe eka
bIjAnA virAdhI pratispardhI hAya, ema arthahIna zuSkajJAnarUpa vAtAthI parama
upakArI nimittanA apalApa karatA rahIM, 'upAdAna upAdAna 'ema zabda mAtra kahetA
phare che, te zrI AnadaghanajInA zabdomAM nija mata unmAda' ja che. kAraNa ke
eklA upAdAnaneA ke ekalA nimittane ekAMtika pakSa-Agraha karavA te kevala
viparyAsarUpa-bhrAMtirUpa pragaTa mithyAtva ja che. je evA ekAMtika pakSa grahe
che, te upAdAna ne nimittane paraspara sApekSa pUrNa avidha sahukArarUpa sabadha
jANutA ja nathI, ane ekAMtika mithyA asat utsUtra prarUpaNA karI jJAnInA
sanAtana mAneA lApa kare chetInA uccheda kare che. kAraNa ke upAdAnane bhUkI
ekalA nimittane pakaDayAthI jema kAMi vaLatu nathI, tema nimittane cheDI ekalA
upAdAnathI paNa kAMI vaLatuM nathI. . d

Page #222 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(156) It is true that the Yogadashtisamuchya Shastra speaks of the Upadan
(material cause), but it does not do so to negate or undervalue the Nimitta
(efficient cause). It is said in relation to the Jiva's (soul) awakening of
Purushartha (effort), meaning it emphasizes the importance of maintaining the
awakening of self-effort with a strong reliance on the pure Nimitta. This is to
the extent that even the Shrutagyan (scriptural knowledge), Agyan (command), or
the reliance on the Jin Bhagwan (Jina) is said to be the last peak of the twelve
Gunasthanas (stages of spiritual progress), which indicates how beneficial and
praiseworthy the use of the pure Nimitta is. Therefore, the right approach is to
continue to manifest the purity of the Upadan through the reliance on the pure
Nimitta, and the Jiva should progress and achieve self-development. And this is
the eternal path of the Jin Bhagwan. In this regard, Shri Jinbhadragani
Kshamasramanji in Shri Vishesh Avashyak and Shri Devchandraji Mahamuni in the
praise of Shri Aranath-Malinath-Munisuvrat Jina, have elaborated and presented a
comprehensive decision, which is very appealing to the Mumukhu (aspirant). Here,
due to the fear of expansion, only a relevant indication is given: "Kaun Karan
Yog Karaj Siddhi Lahiri, Karan Char Anup Karyathi Teh Shehri...Praname Shri
Aranath" - Shri Devchandraji. The doer achieves the success of the work due to
the non-work of the cause, therefore, he takes the four unparalleled causes that
are relevant to the work. There are two main causes - Upadan and Nimitta. The
inherent nature of the object is the Upadan. Until that Upadan manifests as the
Upadan Karan (material cause), the object does not manifest in its true form as
the result of the action. And the Upadan Karan also does not manifest without
the Nimitta Karan (efficient cause). In other words, the Upadan manifests as the
Upadan Karan due to the reliance and benefit of the Nimitta Karan before the
doer, and therefore the action is successful. Moreover, the Nimitta does not
become the Nimitta Karan if the Upadan Karan does not occur, meaning the Nimitta
is not called the Nimitta Karan. When the Upadan Karan manifests in this way,
then it is truly called the Nimitta Karan, otherwise not. In this way, if the
desire for the work is fulfilled and the doer is inclined to do the work, he
makes an effort and continues to rely on the pure and strong Nimitta Karan
according to the rules, and continues to manifest the Upadan as the Upadan
Karan, then the work is successful. The work is accomplished only through the
cooperation and collaboration of the Nimitta and Upadan. "Nij Sattagat Dharma Te
Upadan Ganatri." The Upadan manifests as the Upadan due to the inherent nature
of the object, but the cause is dependent on the Nimitta, the doubt of being
strong or weak is the Upad (instruction), the recipient is dependent on the
rules...LD. Munisuvrat" - Shri Devchandraji. For example, the clay used to make
a pot is the Upadan, but if the tools like the potter's wheel etc. are not
available, it will not manifest as the Upadan Karan on its own, and a pot will
never be made from clay...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (156) yogadaSTisamucaya zAstramAM upAdAnanI vAta kahI che te vAta kharI, paNa
te kAMI nimittane niSedha karavA mATe ke enuM ochuM mUlyAMkana karavA mATe kahI
nathI, paNa jIvane puruSArtha jAgRti arthe sApekSapaNe kahI che, eTale ke zuddha
nimittanA prabaLa avalaMbanapUrvaka AtmapuruSArtha jAgrata rAkhavA mATe kahI
che. te eTale sudhI ke zrutajJAnanuM-AjJAnuM athavA jina bhagavAnanuM avalaMbana
bAramAM guNaThANAnA chellA samaya parvata kahyuM che, te paNa zuddha nimittanuM
sevana keTaluM prazasta ne upakArI che e sUcave che. mATe yukta pakSa e che ke
zuddha nimittane AzrayathI upAdAnanI zuddhi pragaTa karatA rahI jIve AgaLa
vadhavuM joIe, AtmavikAsa sAdhave joIe. ane e ja jina bhagavAnane sanAtana
rAjamArga che. A aMge zrI vizeSAvazyakamAM prajJAnidhi zrI jinabhadragaNI
kSamAzramaNajIe tathA zrI aranAtha-malinAtha-munisuvrata jina stavamAM parama
adhyAtmarasapariNata mahAtmA devacaMdrajI mahAmunie sUma mImAMsA karI sAMgopAMga
nirNaya batAvyo che, te mumukSune atyaMta mananIya che. atre vistArabhayathI
teno prAsaMgika nirdeza mAtra karyo che :"kauM kAraNa yoga kAraja siddhi laherI,
kAraNa cAra anupa kAryAthI teha zaherI...praNAme zrI aranAtha"-zrI devacaMdrajI
kartA kAraNanA ge kAryasiddhi pAme che, mATe kAryane arthe hoya te cAra anupama
kAraNe grahe che. temAM mukhya be kAraNa che-upAdAna ane nimitta. vastune nija
sattAgata dharma te upAdAna che. te upAdAna pite upAdAnakAraNapaNe na pragaTe
tyAM sudhI kAryasiddhirUpa vastusvarUpe pragaTatuM nathI, ane upAdAnakAraNa paNa
nimittakAraNa vinA pragaTatuM nathI. arthAta kartAnA prAge nimittakaraNanA
avalabana-upakArathI upAdAna upAdAnakAraNapaNe pariName che ane tethI ja
kAryasiddhi thAya che. vaLI upAdAnakAraNapaNuM na thatuM hoya te nimittanuM
nimittakAraNapaNuM paNa rahetuM nathI, arthAt nimitta nimittakAraNa kahevAtuM
nathI. jyAre tathArUpa upAdAnakAraNa pragaTatuM jatuM hoya, tyAre ja te
kharekharU nimittakAraNa kahevAya che, nahi te nahi. Ama karUM pate kAryaruci
thaI kArya karavA pravarte-puruSArtha kare ane zuddha puSTa nimitta kAraNane
vidhipUrvaka Azraya karate rahI, upAdAnane upAdAnakAraNapaNe pragaTAvate jAya to
kAryasiddhi thAya; nimitta ane upAdAnanA sahakAra-sahayogathI ja kArya nIpaje.
"nija sattAgata dharma te upAdAna gaNatarI." upAdAne upAdAna pariNati nija
vastunI re, paNa kAraNa nimitta AdhIna puSTa apuSTa duvidha te upadi re, grAhaka
vidhi AdhIna...elaDI. munisuvata" -zrI devacaMdrajI dAkhalA tarIke ---ghaDe
banAvavAmAM mATI che te upAdAna che, paNa daMDathaka vagere nimitta na maLe te
te enI meLe upAdAna kArarupaNe pariName nahiM, ane mATImAMthI ghaDe kadI

Page #223 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Friend's View: The Cause and the Instrument  (157)  While the soul itself is
the cause, it is not the cause in the same way as the instrument. All souls are
inherently equal in their potential for liberation, but this potential is
realized through the instrument. For the manifestation of this inherent
potential, for the cause to become the effect, the instrument is absolutely
necessary. Without the proper instrument, even after an infinite time,
liberation will never be attained, and the cause will not manifest. Similarly,
by neglecting the cause and only relying on the instrument, liberation cannot be
achieved. Both must work together for liberation to occur.  "The cause is within
you, the instrument is the pure devotion to the Jinas...worship the Jinas. The
cause is the Lord, the instrument is the devotion to the Jinas...the Jinas are
the source of liberation."  "The instrument is the Jinas, the nectar of
equality, The Lord is the source of liberation, the rules are the
instruments...the Jinas are the source of liberation." - Shri Devchandraji
Therefore, those who only focus on the cause, the inherent potential, and
neglect the instrument, will not attain liberation and will remain lost in
delusion. This is the unchanging principle that the wise have declared. The
commands of the Guru, the path of the Jinas, and the three jewels are the
instruments. Without these instruments, without the worship of the Lord, self-
realization cannot be attained. On this point, the supreme sage Shrimad
Rajchandraji has said:  "All souls are inherently equal, those who understand
this will be liberated; the commands of the Guru, the path of the Jinas, are the
instruments. Those who only focus on the cause and neglect the instrument, Will
not attain liberation and will remain lost in delusion." - Shri Atmasiddhi  In
other words, "The commands of the Guru, etc., are the instruments for self-
realization, and the knowledge of the soul, etc., are the cause. This is what
the scriptures say. Therefore, those who only focus on the cause and neglect the
instrument will not attain liberation and will remain lost in delusion. This is
because the scriptures do not mention the cause without the instrument, but even
if the instrument is present, without the cause, it will not work. Therefore,
the true meaning is to use the instrument to bring the cause to the forefront,
and not to neglect the instrument."  - Shrimad Rajchandra  • When it is said
"the three jewels arise", it means that their form is being explained.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 mitrAdaSTi : upAdAna ane nimitta (157) paNa mane nahiM tema jIvane nija
sattAgata dharmAM te upAdAna che. nija sattAe sarva jIva siddha samA che, paNa
te zaktithI che. te upAdAnanI vyakti mATe-pragaTapaNA mATe arthAt upAdAna
upAdAnakAraNapaNe pariName te mATe te nimitta kAraNanI avazya jarUra che. zuddha
evu puSTa nimittakAraNa vidhipUrvaka na seve te anaMtakALe paNa kadI siddhi
thAya nahiM, upAdAna pragaTe nahi. tema ja upAdAnanuM dukSya karI mAtra nimitta
senyAthI paNa kAryasiddhi thAya nahi. annenA sahakArathI ja siddhi nIpaje.
upAdAna Atama sahI re, puSTAlabana deva.....jinavara pUjo upAdAna kAraNapaNe re,
pragaTa kare prabhu seva....jina. zrI sa bhava." " nimitta hetu jinarAja, samatA
amRta khANI, prabhu avalaana siddhi, niyamA eha vakhANI...praNamA"--zrI
devacadrajI mATe tApa ke upAdAnanu nAma lai, je e nimitta cheDI dIe, tee siddhi
pAmatA nathI, ne bhrAMtimAM bhUlA bhame che. A acala siddhAMta jJAnI puruSAe
kahyo che. sadgurunI AjJA, jinadazA ane prastutamAM A ava'cakatraya e
nimittakAraNa che. te nimittakAraNa sevyA vinA-ArAdhyA vinA AtmajAgRti Ave nahi.
A aMge parama tattvaSTA zrImad rAjacaMdrajInA TakATlI vacanAmRta che keH-- "
sarva jIva che siddha sama, je samaje te thAya; sadguru AjJA jinadazA, nimitta
kAraNamAMya. upAdAnanuM nAma laI, je e tyaje nimitta; pAme nahi siddhatvane,
rahe brAMtimAM sthita."--zrI Atmasiddhi arthAt " sadguru AjJA Adi te
AtmasAdhananAM nimittakAraNa che, ane AtmAnAM jJAnadanAdi upAdAna kAraNa che;
ema zAstramAM kahyu' che; tethI upAdAnanu' nAma lai je phAi te nimittane tajaze
te siddhapaNAne nahIM pAme, ane bhrAMtimAM vartyA karaze, kemake sAcA nimittanA
niSedhAthe te upAdAnanI vyAkhyA zAstramAM kahI nathI, paNa upAdAna ajAgrata
rAkhavAthI tArU sAcA nimitta maLyA chatAM kAma nahIM thAya, mATe sAcA nimitta
maLye te nimittane avalaMbIne upAdAna sanmukha karavuM, ane puruSA rahita na
thavuM; evA zAstrakAre kahelI te vyAkhyAnA paramAtha che." --zrImad rAjacaMdra *
ava'caka udayathI' ema kahyu eTale enuM svarUpa pratipAdana karavA kahe che--

Page #224 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(158) The three types of unwavering (avachka) are called yoga, action, and
fruit. They are like the arrow's aim. 34  Meaning: By relying on the virtuous
(sadhu), the three unwavering (avachka) - yoga, action, and fruit - are heard.
This is like the arrow's aim.  Commentary: The pure virtuous (sadhu) attains
devotion... dear, yoga is unwavering... dear. Action is unwavering, dear. The
fruit is unwavering, dear, says Chandraprabhu.  The three types of unwavering
(avachka) - yoga, action, and fruit - are mentioned in the scriptures. These
unwavering (avachka) are a type of subtle samadhi, a special type of knowledge.
The type that arises due to the destruction of passions is a special type of
intention, a special type of result of the three mental states. What is
"avachka"? Aavachka is that which does not deceive, does not cheat, never
becomes empty, does not miss, does not go astray, is unwavering, infallible,
non-contradictory, like a magic arrow. Yoga is such that it never deceives,
never misses, never goes astray, it is unwavering. Action is such that it never
deceives, never goes in vain, never goes astray, it is unwavering. Fruit is such
that it never deceives, never becomes empty, never goes astray, it is
unwavering.  This supreme unwavering (avachka) is attained by relying on the
virtuous (sadhu), that is, those who are adorned with true virtuous qualities,
by relying on the true "muni", the wise person. This is how the relationship is
to be understood. That is, the true virtuous (sadhu) - the true guru - is the
unwavering (avachka) of yoga, meditation, and knowledge; it never deceives. It
is unwavering, because yoga, action, and fruit are heard in the scriptures -
"Chavashva: Jiyayaa; Staavadaha" - based on this statement. This is the subtle
samadhi, because there is a text on its authority. This is a special type of
intention due to the destruction of different passions. And this reliance on the
virtuous (sadhu) - relying on the virtuous (sadhu), the virtuous (sadhu) are the
munis; this is the supreme form, it is like the arrow's aim. The arrow's aim is
non-contradictory due to its main purpose, it is not separate from the aim. (The
arrow aims correctly, otherwise the aim cannot be achieved.) Thus, relying on
the virtuous (sadhu) is unwavering. Its speed is non-contradictory; thus, its
praise and other actions and its fruits are attained by relying on it, this is
how it is, from the substance.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (158) yogadaSTisamuracaya yogakriyAphalAkhyaM yacchrayate'vaJcakatrayam  /
sAdhunAzritya paramamiSulakSyakriyopamam  // 34 //  avaMcakatraya parama je,
lega kriyA phala nAma; sAdhu AzrI-te bANanI, lakSya kyiA sama Ama, 34 artha-
sAdhuone-sapuruSone AzrIne, vega kriyA ne phala nAmanuM parama avaMcakatraya
(tripuTI) saMbhaLAya che tene bANanI lakriyAnI upamA che. vivecana nirmala sAdhu
bhagati lahI...sakhI, yoga avaMcaka hoya... sakhI. kiriyAvaMcaka tima sahI
sakhI. phala avaMcaka joya re sakhI caMdraprabhu"-zrI AnaMdaghanajI gAvaMcaka,
kiyAvaMcaka ane phalAvaMcaka e traNa prakAranA avaMcakanI tripuTI zAstramAM
kahela che. A avaMcaka eka prakArane avyakta samAdhivizeSa-gavizeSa che, nAnA
prakAranA kSapazamane lIdhe upajate tevA prakArane AzayavizeSa-cittatraNa
avaMcaka pariNAmavizeSa che. "avaMcaka" eTale zuM? avaMcaka eTale vaMce nahi,
chetare nahi te je kadI khAlI na jAya, cUke nahi, ADoavaLo vAMko jAya nahi, e
amegha, acUka, avisaMvAdI, rAmabANa te avaMcaka. yoga evo ke kadI vaMce nahiM-
cUke nahiM-vAMke jAya nahi te cagAvacaka, kriyA evI ke kadI vaMce nahiM- phegaTa
jAya nahiM-vAMkI jAya nahi te kiyAvaMcaka. phala evuM ke kadI vace nahiM-khAlI
jAya nahi -vAMku jAya nahiM, te phlAvaMcaka. A parama-uttama evuM avaMcakatraya
sAdhuone eTale ke sAcA sAdhuguNathI zobhatA sapuruSane AzrIne che, sAcA "muni'
evA jJAnI puruSone avalaMbIne che, ema teno saMbaMdha samajavAnuM che. eTale ke
sAcA sAdhusvarUpa sapuruSane-saddagurune yoga, joga, tathArUpa oLakhANa te
gAvaMcaka che; te yuga kadI vace nahi. amegha hoya, avazya - vRttiH-nyAsTArtha
mA chUyateDakvatrathamU-kAraNa ke yoga, kriyA ne phala nAmanuM avaMcakavraya
AgamamAM saMbhaLAya che,-"cAvazva: jiyAyaa%; sTAvaDhaH ' e vacana uparathI. A
avyakta samAdhi ja che,-tenA adhikAramAM pATha che tethI. A citra (judA judA)
kSaya pazamathakI tathA prakArano AzayavizeSa che. ane A sAdhunAzriya-sAdhuone
AzrIne, sAdhuo eTale munio; vmA-parama evuM' ava svarUpathI te A pustraapikamu-
bAjunI lakSyakriyAnI upamAvALuM che. bANunI lakSyakriyA, tenI pradhAnatAe
karIne, tenAthI avisaMvAdinI ja hoya,nahiM te lakriyApaNAne alaga hoya teTalA
mATe. (bANa barAbara tAke e ja layakriyA, nahiM to lakSyakriyA bane nahiM.) ema
sAdhuone AzrIne vegavaMcaka che. tenA vegano avisaMvAdI hoya che; ema tenI
vaMdanAdi kriyA ane tenA phalate AzrIne, A ema ja, dravyathI che.

Page #225 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Friend's View: Yoga-avachka, Diya-avachka, Phala-avachka  (159) If someone is
not argumentative and then recognizes a man as a virtuous person, the actions of
respect, greetings, and conversation towards him are called Diya-avachka. These
actions never go in vain, they are definitely beneficial for Dharma. Similarly,
when a virtuous person recognizes a Sadguru as such, the actions of respect,
etc., performed towards him, never go in vain, they are unfailingly attained,
and this is known as Phala-avachka. These three A-avachkas are present in this
view, due to the substance.  “The action of respect towards the Sadguru, the
fruit that comes from it; the action, the fruit, and the difference between
them, these are the various A-avachkas...Veer” - Shri Eag Sakzaya 2-12  This
trinity of A-avachkas is similar to the analogy of an arrow's target. Just as an
arrow, aimed accurately at the target, will definitely hit it, not miss, not go
empty, not fail, and achieve its purpose; similarly, the actions performed with
pure intent, aimed at the target of self-realization, are like the arrow, and
the fruit is A-avachka, it definitely achieves its goal, it is unfailing, and it
achieves the desired result without any doubt. In this, aiming the arrow
accurately at the target, the connection of the arrow with the bow, the pursuit,
is Yoga-avachka. Similarly, the action of the arrow moving towards the target,
aimed accurately, is Diya-avachka. And the achievement of the target, the
result, is Phala-avachka. This analogy is full of meaning and mystery, and the
following points can be derived from it:  (1) If the arrow is not aimed
accurately at the target during the pursuit, its movement towards the target
will also be crooked, and it will miss the target; similarly, if the goal of
self-realization is not aimed at accurately, the Yoga-avachka will be flawed,
the action will also be flawed, and the fruit will also be flawed. (2) If the
arrow is connected to the bow accurately, aimed at the target, its movement
towards the target will be straight and swift, and it will hit the target, not
miss; similarly, if the goal of self-realization is aimed at accurately, the
Yoga-avachka performed will be accurate, the action will also be accurate, and
the fruit of achievement will also be accurate. Thus, the following is evident
from this: (1) If Yoga-avachka is accurate, the action and fruit will be
accurate. (2) If Yoga-avachka is accurate, the subsequent action and fruit will
not be flawed. (3) If Yoga-avachka is flawed, the action and fruit will also be
flawed. (4) If Yoga-avachka is flawed, the action and fruit will not be
accurate. All of this can be understood clearly from the following diagram:

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 mitrAdaSTi : yogAcaka, diyAvaMcaka, phalAvaMcaka (159) avisaMvAdI hoya ane
pachI puruSane tevA sapuruSavarUpe oLakhI, tenA pratye je vaMdana, namaskAra,
vaiyAvacca vagere kriyA karavAmAM Ave te diyAvaMcaka kahevAya; te kriyA kadI
vace nahiM-phogaTa jAya nahi, acUkapaNe avazya dharmalAbhadAyI thAya ja. ane Ama
sapuruSa sadgurune tathArUpe oLakhI, tenA pratye je vaMdanAdi kriyA karavAmAM
AvI, tenuM phala paNa kadI vaMce nahiM, amegha hoya, acUkapaNe prApta thAya, te
phelAvaMcaka jANavuM. A traNa avaMcaka ahIM A daSTimAM dravyathI hoya che.
"sadguru vege vaMdana kriyA, tehathI phala hoya jehe re; vega kriyA phala
bhedathI, vividha avaMcaka eha re...vIra"--zrI ega sakjhAya 2-12 A avaMcaka
tripuTIne bANunI lakSyakiyAnI upamA barAbara ghaTe che. jema lakSyane-nizAnane
barAbara tAkIne choDeluM bANa lakSyane avazya vidhe, cUke nahi, khAlI jAya
nahiM-aphaLa thAya nahiM, nija kAryanI siddhi kare; tema zuddha bANanI lakSyane
AtmasiddhirUpa lakSyane anulakSIne-tAkIne karavAmAM AvelA ga, kriyA yiAnI upamA
ne phaLa avaMcaka hoya, avazya potAnA sAdhyarUpa lakSyane sAdhe, amegha acUka
hoya, avisaMvAdIpaNe svakAryanI cokkasa siddhi kare. AmAM nizAnane barAbara
tAkIne bANane dhanuSya sAthe cega-joDANa thavuM, anusaMdhAna thavuM, tenI
barAbara yegAvaMcaka che. Ama barAbara tAkelA bANanI nizAna pratye gamana
karavAnI je kiyA, tenI barAbara kiyAvaMcaka che. ane nizAnane vidhavArUpa je
kAryasiddhi thavI, tenI barAbara phalAvaMcaka che. A daSTAMta ghaNuM artha
rahasya bhareluM che, ne tenA parathI nIcenA muddA tAravI zakAya che - (1)
bANane vega-anusaMdhAne barAbara nizAna tAkIne na hoya, te nizAna pratyenI
gamanakriyA paNa ADIavaLI-vAMkIcUkI hoya, ne nizAna cUkI javAya; tema
Atmasiddhino lakSya barAbara tAkyA vinA je yoga vaMcaka heya, te tenI sAdhaka
kriyA paNa vaMcaka hoya ane phala paNa vaMcaka hoya. (2) bANane vega-joDANa
barAbara nizAnane tAkIne karavAmAM Avela hoya, te ja nizAna pratyenI tenI
gamanakriyA sIdhI saDasaDATa hoya, ne nizAna vidhAya, cUke nahi tema
Atmasiddhine lakSya barAbara tAkIne je vega avaMcaka karavAmAM Ave, te pachI
tenI sAdhaka kriyA paNa avaMcaka hoya, ane siddhirUpa phaLa paNa avaMcaka ja
hoya Ama A uparathI bhaMgI phalita thAya che:-(1) vega avaMcaka hoya, te kriyA-
phala avaMcaka hoya. (2) vega avaMcaka hoya, te pachInA kiyA-phala vaMcaka na
hoya. (3) yoga vaMcaka hoya, te kriyA-phala paNa vaMcaka hoya. (4) ga vaMcaka
haya, te kriyA-phala avaMcaka na heya. A sarvane nIcenI AkRti parathI barAbara
khyAla AvI zakaze -

Page #226 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(16) Gadasti Samuchaya Figure - 6 Alakṣma 2 Vanchaka Anek Kriya Panchaka Yag.
Vechaka Yog - G Kya Kriya Kul Nishanalakṣma Fee Nishanalakṣya Baṇ Avanchaka
Avanchaka Avanchaka Ekaj 1 Chak Dhanuṣya Kriya Vachaka Vechaka Kul Avalaya Anek
From the above, it will be clear that if one peg is not correct, then all the
games are spoiled. And this peg depends on the Sadguru Purusha; that is, if the
true Sadhu Purusha, the Sadguru, is not correct, then the action and the fruit
are also spoiled. It is like this - (1) If a Sadguru Sapurusha is found, but he
is not recognized, then he becomes a burden, he fails. (2) Or if an Asadguru is
considered a Sadguru, then he also becomes a burden, it is like a wrong number
being dialed on the telephone.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (16) gadaSTisamuccaya AkRti- 6 alakSma 2 vaMcaka aneka kriyA paMcaka yAga.
vecaka yoga - ga kyiA kriyA kula nizAnalakSma phI nizAnalakSya bANa avaMcaka
avaMcaka avaMcaka ekaja 1 caka dhanuSya kriyA vacaka vecaka kula avalayA aneka A
uparathI spaSTa samajAze ke eka pega ja je barAbara na hoya te badhI bAjI bagaDI
jAya che. ane A cega saddaguru puruSane AzrIne che; eTale sAcA sAdhu puruSane,
saddagurune jaga barAbara na bane, te kiyA ne phalane ghANa paNa bagaDI jAya
che. te A rIte-(1) sadguru sapuruSa maLyA hoya, paNa te eALakhAya nahiM, te tene
vega agarUpa thaI paDe che, niSphaLa jAya che. (2) athavA asaddagurune sadguru
mAnI lIdhA hoya, te paNa roga agarUpa thAya che, TelIphenamAM beTo naMbara joDAI
gayA jevuM thAya

Page #227 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Friend's Perspective: An Analogy of the Target of an Arrow (161) It is like
the target of an arrow! (3) Or if you have found a Sadguru, but your father does
not have the same qualifications, then it is like not getting a peg. It is like
what happens when you sleep through your wedding!  And another thing to
understand is that the target of an arrow is one. If the arrow goes off-target,
crooked, up or down, it does not hit the target, it goes astray, it goes amiss,
or it hits multiple targets, like a widow with many husbands, but it does not
hit the one desired target. Similarly, in the pursuit of liberation, there is
only one target, one goal. And that is the attainment of the pure soul, or
liberation, which is the only goal. Therefore, the yoga, the action, that leads
to liberation is the only successful one, all others are unsuccessful. Or it
misses the fruit of liberation and leads to many fruits, like wandering in the
four states of existence. Thus, there is unity in the disease, action, and fruit
that are certain, and there is multiplicity in the disease, action, and fruit
that are uncertain.  One says, "The seeker performs various actions, but the
fruits are not seen, the fruits are not seen, the seeker performs various
actions, and he wanders in the four states of existence...like a sharp sword." -
Shri Anandghanji  Thus, the yoga that is in pursuit of the one goal, the action
that is performed in pursuit of that goal, and the one fruit of liberation that
is attained, these three are certain. But if there is no yoga in pursuit of the
one goal, if there are various actions with multiple goals, and therefore
various fruits, like wandering in the four states of existence, then these three
are uncertain. And this awareness of the goal comes from the association of a
Sadguru, a virtuous person. Therefore, recognizing the true Sadguru is the cause
of the cause, and is certain. Serving the virtuous Sadguru, devotion, etc., is
the action that is certain, and attaining liberation as a result of that is the
fruit that is certain.  "When a being recognizes a wise person, it is like an
endless chain of anger, pride, delusion, and attachment falling away, and it
becomes like a person who is being tested. As the being recognizes the wise
person, it begins to lose its attachment to opinions, stubbornness, etc., and
its mind turns back to its fatherland. It feels indifferent to worldly things,
or it feels disgusted. x x x The being..."  "Those who are foolish, great,
heroic, and have not seen the truth, their actions are impure, their actions are
unsuccessful. Those who are wise, great, heroic, and have seen the truth, their
actions are pure, their actions are successful." - Shri Suyagadaanga Sutra (For
liberation - see - Shrimad Rajchandra, Letters, 391. Notes on teachings 32)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 mitrAdaSTi : bANanI lakSyakriyAnI upamA (161) che ! (3) athavA sadguru maLyA
hoya, paNa pitAnAmAM tevI yogyatA na hoya, to pega na maLyA barAbara thAya che.
lagana veLA gaI UMghamAM tenA jevuM thAya che! ane bIjuM e samajavAnuM che ke
bANanuM nizAna-lakSya eka ja hoya che. te nizAnathI ADuMavaLuM-vAMkuMcUkuM,
upara nIce bANa jAya, te nizAna-vidhAtuM nathI, khAlI jAya che, aphaLa jAya che,
athavA ADA-avaLA alakSya vidhavArUpa aneka phaLa lakSya eka ja thAya che, paNa
eka ISTa lakSya pAmavArUpa phaLa maLatuM nathI. tema paramArthamAM paNa eka ja
nizAna che, eka ja lakSya che. ane te zuddha AtmAnI siddhi athavA mokSa e ja eka
lakSya che. eTale je yega, je kriyA te eka mokSa pratye laI jAya, te ja saphaLa
che, bAkI bIjI badhI aphaLa che. athavA te eka mokSarUpa phaLane cUkI jaI, cAre
gatimAM rakhaDavArUpa aneka phaLa* ApanArI che. Ama avaMcaka evA roga, kriyA ne
phalanI ekatA che, ane vaMcaka evA ga, kriyA ne phalanI anekatA che. eka kahe
sAdhiye vividha kiriyA karI, phala anekAMta lecana na dekhe; phala anekAMta
kiriyA karI bApaDA, raDavaDe cAra gatimAMhe lekhe...dhAra taravAranI" -zrI
AnaMdaghanajI Ama eka ja lakSyanA anusaMdhAna-jeDANarUpa je yoga bane, tenA ja
anusaMdhAnarUpa kriyA je karavAmAM Ave, ane tenA ja saMdhAnarUpa eka mekSaphaLa
je maLe, te e traNe avaMcaka che. paNa eka ja lakSyanA anusaMdhAnarUpa ga na
hoya, vividhalakSI anekAMta kiyA hoya, ane tethI karIne vividha anekAMta phaLa-
cAre gatimAM raDavaDavArUpa phaLa maLe, te e traNe vaMcaka che. ane A lakSyanuM
bhAna paNa sadguru sanduruSanA samAgama bhegathI thAya che, mATe sAcA sadUgurune
coga tathArUpa oLakhANa te kAraNanuM paNa kAraNa hovAthI gAvaMcaka che, te
satparuSa sadgurunA sevA, bhakti Adi karavA te kriyAvaMcaka che, ane paraMparAe
tenA phalarUpe mokSanI prApti thavI te phalAvaMcaka che. "jIvane jJAnI puruSanuM
eALakhANa thaye tathA prakAre anaMtAnubaMdhI krodha, mAna, mAyA, lAbha maLAM
paDavAne prakAra banavA che, ke jema banI anukrame te parikSINapaNAne pAme che.
puruSanuM eALakhANa jema jema jIvane thAya che, tema tema matAbhigraha,
durAgrahatAdi bhAva meLA paDavA lAge che, ane pitAnA deza jevA bhaNI citta vaLI
Ave che. vikathAdi bhAvamAM nIrasapaNuM lAge che ke jugupsA utpanna thAya che. x
x x jIvane * "je abuddhA mahAbhAgA vIrA asamattadaMsiNo  /  asuddhaM tersi
parakataM saphalaM hAi savvA  /  /  je ya buddhA mahAbhAgA vIrA sammattadaMsiNe
/  suddhaM tesiM parata taM aphalaM hAi savvasA"  /  /  zrI sUyagaDAMga sUtra
(paramArtha mATe-juo-zrImada rAjacaMdra, patrAMka, 391. upadezanoMdha 32)

Page #228 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(162) When the confluence of the right perception (Gidashtī) and the right
effort (Sandurush) happens, a feeling arises that all the efforts made so far
for the sake of welfare were futile, like arrows without a target. But now, with
the unprecedented union of the soul and the right effort, all my efforts are
destined to succeed.  - Shrimad Rajchandra, Patrank 433 (Par 2) “The knowledge
of the path is fatal to the ignorant, it is the destruction of the unskillful
and the decay of the unmindful; the study of the scriptures, listening,
contemplation, and investigation are the means to the goal. The seeker should
have the right intention and focus on the goal.” - Shri Anandghanji Thus, in the
use of the words "deceiver" (Vachka) and "non-deceiver" (Avachaka), the divine
author has explained a great truth. "Vachka" means a deceiver, a cheat, a
trickster; "Avachaka" means not a deceiver, not a cheat, not a trickster. Just
as a cheat deceives a person and gives him a false hope, similarly, this
"Vachka" (deceiver) soul deceives, cheats, and tricks the living being by
keeping him in delusion and confusion. Because, despite not being aware of the
true goal, the poor soul believes that he is doing good, that he is acting, and
that he will get the fruits of his actions. But he is being cheated! And despite
doing endless penance and performing endless actions, he keeps wandering in the
four realms of existence, crying and lamenting, because he has been misled. In
this delusion, the soul has left nothing undone in performing endless penance
and actions, he has not held back from any effort. But all his efforts have gone
in vain, they have become like "plaster on a wall of straw," useless, and the
result has been a big zero! Because, in the endless cycle of transmigration, the
soul must have taken initiation countless times, become a monk, an ascetic, a
devotee! He must have used as many vows and restraints as the Mount Meru! He
must have practiced countless austerities, like Yama, Niyama, Samyama,
renunciation, detachment, etc.! He must have gone into the forest, endured great
hardships, observed silence, and performed rigorous fasts! He must have
practiced Pranayama and other yogic techniques, and attained samadhi! He must
have learned about the rising of the soul, and shown miracles through mantras
and tantras, captivating the ignorant! He must have performed various types of
japa and tapasya! He must have become proficient in all the scriptures, and
become a scholar of the Agamas, a master of the scriptures, and a learned
scholar, arguing for his own views and refuting the views of others, becoming a
powerful debater and conquering the world! Oh! Even though he had no foundation,
he must have delivered sermons from high platforms, reaching the heavens, giving
lectures that were as vast as the universe, engaging in debates like the goddess
of speech, shaking the lecture halls, and captivating the audiences!

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (162) gidaSTisamuccaya sanduruSane yoga thaye te evI bhAvanA thAya ke atyAra
sudhI je mArA prayatna kalyANane arthe hatAM te sau niSphaLa hatAM-lakSa
vagaranA bANunI peThe hatA. paNa have puruSane apUrva yoga thaye che, te mArAM
sarva sAdhana saphaLa thavAne hetu che." ItyAdi. -zrImad rAjacaMdra, patrAMka
433 (para2) "paricaya pAtaka ghAtaka sAdhu zuM, akuzala apacaya ceta; graMtha
adhyAtama zravaNa manana karI, parizIlana naya heta..saMbhava"-zrI AnaMdaghanajI
sAdhyarasI sAdhakapaNe, abhisaMdhi rakhe nija lakSa che."--zrI devacaMdrajI Ama
vaMcaka-avaMcaka zabdanA prayogamAM bhagavAna zAstrakAre ghaNe paramArtha
samajAvyuM che. vaMcaka eTale chetaranAra, ThaganAra, chaLanAra; avaMcaka eTale
nahiM chetaranAra, nahiM ThaganAra, nahiM chaLanAra. Thaga jema mANasane
bhUlAvAmAM nAMkhI daI, vaMcaka ganuM thApa Ape che, tema A vaMcaka gAdi jIvane
bhUlAvAmAM-bhramaNamAM ThagapaNuM nAMkhI daI, Thage che, chetare che, chaLe che!
kAraNa ke mULa lakSyanuM bhAna na hovA chatAM, jIva bicAre baphamamAM ne
baphamamAM ema mAne che ke huM ga sAdhuM chuM, huM kriyA karuM chuM, mane phaLa
maLaze. paNa te bicAro ThagAya che! ne anaMta yaMga sAdhatAM chatAM, anaMta kiyA
karatAM chatAM, te Udhe ravADe caDI gayA hovAthI anaMta phaLa pAmate rahI, cAre
gatimAM raDavaDe che-rakhaDe che! AvI ne AvI bhramaNAmAM A jIve vaMcaka evA
anaMta yega-sAdhana karavAmAM kAMI bAkI rAkhI nathI, vaMcaka evI anaMta kriyA
karavAmAM kAMI maNa rAkhI nathI, anaMta parizrama UThAvavAmAM kAMI pAchI pAnI
karI nathI ! paNa te bApAnI A badhI mahenata pANImAM gaI che, "chAra para
liMpaNa" jevI nakAmI thaI che, ne paramAthe tenuM pariNAma meTuM mIMDuM AvyuM
che !! kAraNa ke anaMtakALanA paribhramaNamAM A jIve anaMtavAra dIkSA grahaNa
karI haze, sAdhu-saMnyAsI-bAvo banyA haze ! meruparvata jeTalA ghA-muhapatti
vAparyA haze ! yama, niyama, saMyama, tyAga vairAgya vagere athAga AdaryA haze;
vanavAsa moTuM mIMDu! laIne, mauna dhAraNa karI daDha pavAsana lagAvIne besI
gaye haze ! prANAyAma vagere haThaganA prayoga karI samAdhi caDhAvI gayo haze !
svarodaya vagare jANuM ane maMtra-taMtrAdinA camatkAra batAvI mugdhajanene
bheLavyA haze ! aneka prakAranA japa-tapa karyA haze. sava zAstrane pAraMgata
banI Agamavara, mRtadhara, zAstrajJamAM khape haze svamatanA maMDanamAM ne
paramatanA khaMDanamAM pAvaradho banI "digavijaya' karavA paNa nIkaLI paDayo
haze ! are ! pitAnuM kAMI paNa ThekANuM nahiM chatAM, UMcA vyAsapITha parathI
mekSa sudhInA upadezarUpa meTA moTA vyAkhyAne ApI, sAkSAta vAcaspatinA jevI
vatAbAjI karI, vyAkhyAnadharA dhrujAvI ne sabhAo gajAvI haze !

Page #229 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Friend's Perspective: The Fivefold Without the Shelter of Saint's Feet (163)
This poor soul must have done so much, endlessly! But nothing has come into his
hands yet! His hands are empty, empty! He was mixed up, and that's why he's
fallen away!  Because the one fundamental cause, the most important thing to do
first, he couldn't get his hands on it; he didn't get the true Sadguru, he
hasn't reached that point yet. There's still a flaw! So all those means, even
though they were true,  became bonds for him, they ended up in nothingness! Even
if you have a thousand or a million electric bulbs, but the main switch isn't
on, the lights won't turn on, it will remain dark. Similarly, even if you do
endless practices, but you don't have the Sadguru, the light of knowledge won't
shine, it will remain dark.  Regarding this, as if the entire world were
roaring, with these illuminating, penetrating words, Shrimad Rajchandraji has
revealed:  "You have done Yama, Niyama, and Samyama, and then you have taken
renunciation, dispassion, and unwavering devotion. You have taken to the forest,
kept your mouth silent, and sat firmly on the seat. You have made your mind and
intellect a treasure of self-knowledge, and you have practiced Hatha Yoga with
fear of the Creator. You have chanted, understood the essence of chanting,
practiced austerities, and endured them. You have become detached from the
world, and you have done all this. You have embraced all the scriptures and
their principles, you have analyzed, refuted, and understood the different
philosophies. You have done all these means, endlessly. But still, nothing has
come into your hands yet. Now, what is it that you are thinking in your mind? Is
there something left in those means? Without the Sadguru, you will not
understand the essence. What is the point of saying all this?  Compassion is
flowing towards you. That point remains with the Sadguru. It will manifest in
front of you in an instant, when the supreme love of the Sadguru's feet resides
within you. From your body, mind, and wealth, everything, the joy of the Gurudev
will reside in your own self. Then your work will be accomplished, and you will
drink the nectar of love."  - Shrimad Rajchandraji  Thus, without the shelter of
the Saint's feet, all practices and actions have become futile, they have become
deceitful, they have become cheats. One should take shelter in the true
Satpurush, the true Bhavasadhu, the one who is full of love. By focusing on that
true form, one becomes free from deceit, the actions become free from deceit,
and the fruits become free from deceit. That's why the scripture writer, in the
absence of the great soul, has emphasized the words "taking shelter in the
Sadhu," "taking shelter in the Saint." Because before the attainment of this
non-deceitful trinity, whatever yogas the soul has done, whatever actions the
soul has performed, whatever fruits the soul has received, all of them have
become deceitful, cheats, as shown above.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 mitrAdaSTi : saMtacaraNa Azraya vinA paMcaka (163) ATaluM badhuM e bicArAe
anaMtavAra karyuM haze! paNa tenA hAthamAM haju kAMI AvyuM nahi! tenA hAthe te
khAlI ne khAlI ! mikSa te hato eTaNe ja dUra paDayo che ! kAraNa ke eka
mULabhUta kAraNa je karavAnuM sauthI prathama agatyanuM hatuM, tadapi ka hAtha
tene tene vega na bane; sAcA saddagurune tene vega na maLyo, eTalI haju na
paryo" eka khAmI rahI gaI ! eTale enA e badhAM sAdhana svarUpe sAcA chatAM, tene
te baMdhanarUpa banI eLe gayA, zUnyamAM pariNamyA! hajAra ke lAkhe vijaLInI
battI gaThavI hoya, paNa eka "meIna svIca" (mukhya cAvI) cAlu na hoya, te battI
pragaTe nahiM, aMdhAruM ja rahe tema anaMta sAdhane kare, paNa sadgurune vega na
hoya, te jJAna-dI pragaTe nahiM, aMdhArUM ja rahe. A aMge--jANe sAkSAt jagadra
garjanA karatA hoya, e pragaTa bhAsa ApatA parama vedhaka vacane zrImad
rAjacaMdrajIe prakAzyA che "yama niyama saMyama Apa kiye, puni tyAga birAga
athAga li. vanavAsa liye mukha mauna riye, daDha Asana pA lagAya diye. mana-pana
nidhi svarbodha kiye, haTha joga prAga sutAra bhaye; japabheda japa tapa tyauhi
tape, urasehi udAsi lahI sabape. saba zAstranA ke naya dhAri hiye, matamaMDana
khaMDana bheda liye, vaha sAdhana bAra anaMta kiye, tadapi kachu hAtha haju na
pa. aba kayAM na bicArata he manase, kachu era rahA una sAdhanaseM; bina
saddaguru keya na bheda lahe, mukha Agala hai kaha bAta kahe ? karunA hama
pAvata he tumakI, vaha bAta rahI sugurugamakI; palameM pragaTe mukha AgalaseM,
jaba sadgurucarna suprema base; tanaseM, manasuM, dhanasuM, sabase, gurudevaki
Ana svaAtma base; taba kAraja siddha bane apane, rasa amRta pAhi premaghane."
-zrImad rAjacaMdrajI Ama saMtacaraNanA Azraya vinA samasta sAdhanakriyAdi
paramAthe niSphaLa gayA che, vaMcaka banyA che, ThaganArA banyA che. bhAvayogI
evA sAcA satapuruSane-bhAvasAdhune Azraya karavAmAM Ave, te ja sasvarUpane lakSa
thavAthI avaMcaka ga, saMtacaraNa avaMcaka kriyA ne avaMcaka phala thAya. eTalA
mATe ja atre mahAtmA Azraya vinA zAstrakAre "sAdhune AzrIne'-saMtane Azraya
karIne, e zabdo vaMcaka para khAsa bhAra mUkyo che. kAraNa ke A avAcaka
tripuTInI prApti thayA pUrvenA jIvane je je yoga thayA che, jIve che je kriyA
AcarI che, jIvane je je phaLa maLyA che, te badhAya upara batAvyA pramANe
vaMthaka-chetaranArA thayA che;

Page #230 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(164) Those who judge the collection of scriptures (Gadhisamuccaya) without the
true goal of the soul are like arrows without a target! Because the soul may
have encountered a virtuous person (Satpurusha) or a true guru (Sadguru), but by
not recognizing them in their true form, it becomes deprived and wasted.
Similarly, the soul may have performed countless actions (Sadhana) many times,
but without recognizing them as such and without knowing the true form of the
goal (Sadhya), it also becomes deprived and does not achieve the desired result
(Ishta Karya Sadhana), instead becoming an obstacle! The means (Sadhana)
themselves, due to a wrong understanding, or due to attachment (Mamata), or due
to evil pride (Dushta Abhimāna), have become a bondage! And thus, the fruit
(Phal) has also become deprived.  For countless ages, entangled, without
awareness of God, Did not serve the guru and saints, did not abandon pride.
Without the shelter of the feet of saints, performed countless actions, Did not
attain liberation from them, did not arise the wisdom of the soul. All means
became bondage, no remedy remained; Not understanding the true means, how can
bondage go away?”—Shrimad Rajchandraji  Such deprived actions and fruits are far
away, here in this first stage of friendship (Mitradaeshti), the aspiring yogi
(Mumukhu Yogi) attains the undeprived actions, fruits, and knowledge (Dravya),
and that too by taking shelter in the feet of the saints (Sant Charana). This
point needs to be kept in mind.  This undeprived triad (Avachakatraya) is also
caused by something, for which it is said –  “This is established in the
principle (Siddhanta) due to the means of true prostration (Satpranama) etc. And
its ultimate cause is the lessening of the stain of attachment (Bhavamala).”—35
Meaning – This undeprived triad (Avachakatraya) is caused by true prostration
(Satpranama) etc., it is established in the principle (Siddhanta) at that time.
And the ultimate cause of this true prostration (Satpranama) etc. is the
lessening of the stain of attachment (Bhavamala).  Commentary – This undeprived
triad (Avachakatraya) is caused by the means of true prostration (Satpranama)
etc., by the means of the virtuous (Sadhu) etc., by the means of prostration
(Vandana) etc., that is the meaning. Understand that it is established in the
principle (Siddhanta) at that time. It is established in the principle
(Siddhanta). The ultimate cause of this true prostration (Satpranama) etc. is
what? For that it is said – “And the lessening of the stain of attachment
(Bhavamala) in that way.” That means the lessening of the attachment to karma
(Karmasambandha). Just as the dust (Mala) is removed from gems (Ratna) etc., and
the activity of light (Prakash) etc. is revealed, so it is said.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (164) gadahisamuccaya mULa AtmalakSyathI cukAvanArA heI lakSya vinAnA bANa jevA
thayA che ! kAraNa ke jIvane kadAca satpuruSa saddaguruno samAgama vega thayo
haze, paNa tene te svarUpe nahiM eALakhavAthI, te vaMcaka thaye che, phegaTa
gaye che. tema ja anaMta sAdhana kriyA paNa jIve aneka vAra karI haze, paNa te
tathArUpa oLakhANa vinA ane sAdhyarUpa svarUpalakSyane jANyA vinA, eTale te paNa
vaMcaka thaI che, ISTa kAryasAdhaka thaI nathI, ulaTI bAdhaka thaI che! sAdhana
hatA te UMdhI samajaNane lIdhe, athavA mamatvane lIdhe, athavA duSTa abhimAnane
lIdhe baMdhana thaI paDyA che ! ane Ama phala paNa vaMcaka thayuM che. anaMta
kALathI AthaDyo, vinA bhAna bhagavAna sevyA nahiM guru saMtane, mUkyuM nahiM
abhimAna. saMta caraNa Azraya vinA, sAdhana karyA aneka pAra na tethI pAmiya,
Uge na aMza viveka. sau sAdhana baMdhana thayA, rahyo na koI upAya; sat sAdhana
samaje nahiM, tyAM baMdhana zuM jAya?"--zrImad rAjacaMdrajI AvA vaMcaka lega
kriyA ne phala dUra thaI, atre A prathama mitrAdeSTimAM vartatA mumukSu yogIne
avaMcaka yega-kiyA-phaLanI prApti (dravyathI) thAya che ane te paNa
saMtacaraNanA zaraNarUpa Azrayane laIne, e muddo khAsa lakSamAM rAkhavA gya che.
A avaMcakatraya paNa jenA nimitte hoya che, te kathavA mATe kahe che - etacca
satpraNAmAdinimittaM samaye sthitam  /  asya hetuzca paramastathA bhAvamalAlpatA
//  35  //  sa-NAmAdi nimitta A, sthita siddhAMta a5; ne ene hetu parama, tathA
bhAvamala a5, 35 artha -ane A avaMcakatripuTI sapraNAma Adina nimitta hoya che,
ema samayamAM eTale siddhAMtamAM sthita che ane A satpraNAmAdine paNa parama
hetu tathA prakAre bhAvamalanI alpatA e che. vRtti -istanna -ane A
avaMcakatripuTI, sabaLAnAvinimitta-sata praNAmAdi nimitta, sAdhuo praye
vandanAdina nimitta hoya che, ema artha che. samaje sthid-samayamAM sthita che.
siddhAntamAM pratiSita che. 4-Ano, sata praNAma AdinA, devazva paramaH-parama
hetu vaLI, kayo? te mATe kahyuM -tathA mAva tathA prakAre bhAvamalanI alpatA-e
che. eTale karmasaMbaMdhanI egyatAnI alpatA-e che. ratna vagerene mala dara
thaye, snA-prakAza vagerenI pravRttinI jema,-evuM gAcA kahe che.

Page #231 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Translation:  **Chitraad: The Cause of the Three Awanchaks is Devotion to the
Satpurush**  (15) The three Awanchaks mentioned above, how are they attained?
What is the cause of their attainment? This is explained here.  By paying
homage, bowing down, offering respect, service, and care to the Satpurush, the
true saintly person, the Awanchaks are attained.  The first Awanchak is attained
when one encounters the true Sadguru, the Satpurush, the true saint, and offers
them homage, bowing down, etc. Through this interaction, one becomes aware of
the devotional nature of that person, and thus the Chagawanchak arises.  Then,
having recognized their true nature, the homage, bowing down, respect, etc.,
offered to them becomes the Yiawanchak. And the fruit of such actions towards
the true saintly person is unwavering and certain, thus it is the Falawanchak.
Therefore, the root of all this is the pure devotion to the true Sadguru, the
Satpurush, who embodies the true path of conduct.  In this way, the attainment
of the three Awanchaks is achieved through the excellent cause of the Satpurush.
This is firmly established in the teachings of the enlightened ones, in the
Agamas. This principle is firmly established, as per the authority of the
scriptures. This principle is unshakeable, unwavering, and certain, it will
never change.  Can one attain this through the grace of the Satpurush, the
Sadguru? Yes, it is through their grace that the soul enters the path of
liberation, the path of salvation. This is the state in all three times, and the
path to attain the ultimate goal is the same in all three times.  Because, "Vina
Nayana ki Baat" - the things that are beyond the reach of the physical eye, but
are accessible to the divine eye of knowledge, these things cannot be attained
without the grace of the Sadguru. And those who serve at the feet of the
Sadguru, they attain it directly.  If one desires to quench their thirst, there
is a way to quench it, and that too cannot be attained without the grace of the
Guru. This is the eternal truth. And in this way, the supremely knowledgeable
person has spoken:  "Without the grace of the Guru, one cannot attain the things
beyond the reach of the physical eye. Serve at the feet of the Sadguru, and you
will attain it directly. If you desire to quench your thirst, there is a way to
quench it. Without the grace of the Guru, it cannot be attained. This is the
eternal truth." - Shrimad Rajchandraji  "If the Sadguru grants the ointment of
knowledge, one sees the ultimate treasure. The eye of the heart beholds the Lord
of the Universe, whose glory is like Mount Meru." - Shri Anandghanji  And when
does one receive the benefit of the company of such a true saintly person, the
true Sadguru, who embodies devotion? When does this excellent "G" become
possible? The reason for this is also explained here: When...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 citrAdaH arva cakanuM nimitta satapuruSanI bhakti (15) vivecana uparamAM je
traNa avaMcaka kahyA, tenI prApti paNa kayA nimitte kAraNathI thAya? te ahIM
batAvyuM che. satpuruSa, sAcA sAdhuguNasaMpanna sAcA sAdhupuruSa pratye vaMdana,
namana, vaiyA vacca, sevA-suzraSA vagere nimittathI te avaMcakanI prApti hoya
che. avaMcikanuM prathama te saddaguru sapuruSane, sAcA saMtane jega thatAM,
tenA pratye nimitta saMta vaMdanAdi karavAmAM Ave. ema karatAM karatAM
paricayathI te puruSanA bhakti svarUpanI oLakhANa thAya, eTale cagAvaMcaka
nIpaje. pachI tenI tathArUpa oLakhANa thaye, je tenA pratye vaMdana-namaskAra-
vaiyAvacca vagere kiyA karAya, te yiAvaMcakarUpa hoya. ane puruSa, sAcA
bhAvasAdhu pratyenI tevI vaMdanAdi kriyAnuM phaLa paNa amegha-acUka haya, eTale
phalAvaMcaka hoya. Ama A badhAnuM mULa sAcA bhAvAcAryarUpa sadguru sapuruSanI
nimaLa bhakti che. A prakAre ja uttama nimittanA sAgathI upara kahelA
avaMcakatrayanI prApti hoya che, ema AptapuruSapraNIta siddhAMtamAM-AgamamAM
daDhapaNe sthApavAmAM AvyuM che. evo siddhAMta nizcitapaNe pratiSThita che, evI
zAstramaryAdA-samaya che. e siddhAMta akhaMDa binA nayana nizcayarUpa heI, keI
kALe phare nahiM. sAkSAt satparuSa saddagurunA yoge pAve nahi? ja jIvane
kalyANamArgamAM-mokSamArgamAM praveza thAya, ema traNe kALamAM sthiti che, ema
traNe kALamAM paramArtha pAmavAne mAga eka ja che. kAraNa ke "vinA nayananI
vAta' eTale ke carmacakSune agamya ne jJAnarUpa divya cakSune gamya evI je vAta
che, te "vinA nayana'-sadgurunI deravaNa vinA prApta thAya nahiM; ane je
sagurunA caraNa seve, te sAkSAt prApta thAya. je tarasa chIpAvavAnI IcchA hoya,
to te chIpAvavAnI rIta paNa che, ane te paNa gurugama vinA kadI prApta thAya
nahiM,-ema anAdi sthiti che. ane tevA prakAre parama jJAnI puruSae bhAkhyuM che
- "binA nayana pAve nahiM, binA nayanakI bAta; seve sadguru ke carana, se pAve
sAkSAt, bujhI cahata je pyAsakI, hai bujhanI rIta; pAve nahiM gurugama vinA, ehI
anAdi sthita."- zrImad rAjacaMdrajI "pravacana aMjana jo sadguru kare, dekhe
parama nidhAna; hRdaya nayana nihALe jagadhaNI, mahimA meru samAna."--zrI
AnaMdaghanajI ane evA uttama sAcA sAdhu puruSanI-bhAvagIrUpa sAcA saddagurunI
saMgatine lAbha paNa kayAre maLe? tevo uttama "ga" kayAre bane? tenuM kAraNa
paNa ahIM kahyuM ke jyAre

Page #232 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(166) - When the collection of yogadristi (yogic vision) and bhavamala
(emotional impurities) becomes less, then it "g" (soul) escapes. - When
bhavamala is washed away and becomes one, then such an opportunity is found.
When such "punya pandur (merit) is revealed", then the association of a virtuous
person happens. "Now the master serves that presence, whose merit is revealed"
(Yashvijayaji). Just as the luster of a gem shines brighter as the dirt is
removed, similarly, as the inner dirt of bhavamala is removed from the soul, its
ability to attain dharma (righteousness) shines brighter and brighter, and the
inner light of the soul shines brighter and brighter. "The soul should
repeatedly think about the causes that are obstacles to well-being. It should
repeatedly think about and eliminate those causes, and without following that
path, well-being cannot be attained. Mal (dirt), viksep (distraction), and
ajnana (ignorance) are the three defects of the eternal soul. By obtaining the
words of a wise person and thinking about them appropriately, ignorance is
eliminated. Simplicity, forgiveness, the same as the father's fault, aparabh
(non-attachment), and alpaparigrah (minimal possessions) are the means to
eliminate mal. Extreme devotion to a wise person is the means to eliminate
viksep." - Shrimad Rajchandra Patranka 368 (449) Thus, as the soul becomes pure
by removing the dirt, its ability to attain the right path increases, and
attracted by that ability, it gets the opportunity of a virtuous person in the
form of a good cause. The meaning is that as the soul removes its impurities, it
increases its ability to attain the right path, and by serving and worshipping
the best causes like the sadguru (true teacher), it attains that path. - "Those
who are impure are wandering, when the pure cause plays on the soul, then the
doer takes the house... Shri Simandhar." - Shri Devchandraji To support the
natural object, he says in a way that emphasizes the difference: नास्मिन् घने
यतः सत्सु तत्प्रतीतिर्महोदया। किं सम्यग् रूपमादत्ते कदाचिन्मन्दलेोचनः ॥३६॥
Vritti - O ignorant people, this bhavamala, dense and strong, therefore,
because, towards the good people, tatpratiti (its perception). (When this
bhavamala is dense and strong, then there is no perception of the good people).
What kind of perception is it? For that, it is said - mahaday (great
compassion), abhyudaya (progress) etc. are the means of achieving it, so it is
mahaudaya (great progress). From the opposite object, the same meaning is said -
who can take it in the right form? - complete with characteristics, expressions,
etc. The meaning is that a person with weak vision, like a blind person, cannot
see it because of his weak senses.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (166) - yogadaSTisamucaya tevA prakAranI bhAvamalanI alapatA thAya, tyAre te
"ga" jIvane bAjhe, - bhAvamala jyAre aMdarano mela (AtmamalinatA) dhovAI jaIne
eka thAya, tyAre apatA tevuM nimitta maLI Ave. AvA "puNya paMDUra jyAre
prakaTe', tyAre sapuruSano samAgamaga thAya. "ehave sAhiba seve teha hajUra,
jehanA pragaTe re kIdhAM puNya paMDUra" (yazavijyajI). ratnane mala jema jema
dUra thAya, tema tema tenI kAMti-caLakATa jhaLahaLI UThe che; tema AtmAna
bhAvamala-aMdarane mela jema jema chevADe jAya che, tema tema tenI
dharmaprAptinI yogyatArUpa kAMti era ne era khIlatI jAya che, AtmaprakAza era ne
ora jhaLakatuM jAya che. "kalyANane viSe pratibaMdharUpa je je kAraNe che, te
jIve vAraMvAra vicAravA ghaTe che. te te kAraNone vAraMvAra vicArI maTADavAM
ghaTe che, ane e mArgane anusaryA vinA kalyANanI prApti ghaTatI nathI. maLa,
vikSepa ane ajJAna e anAdi javanA traNa doSa che. jJAnI puruSanAM vacananI
prApti thaye teno yathAyogya vicAra thavAthI ajJAnanI nivRtti hoya che. 4 4 4
saraLapaNuM, kSamA, pitAnA doSanuM jevuM, apArabha, alpaparigraha e Adi maLa
maTavAnAM sAdhana che. jJAnI puruSanI atyaMta bhakti e vikSepa maTavAnuM sAdhana
che." -zrImad rAjacaMdra patrAMka 368 (449) Ama mAMhene mala dhevAtAM, jema jema
AtmA nirmala bane, tema tema tenAmAM sanmArga pAmavAnI pAtratA AvatI jAya che,
ane te pAtratArUpa lehacuMbakathI AkarSAIne tene puruSanA jagarUpa uttama
nimitta sAMpaDe che. tAtparya ke-AtmamalinatA dUra karate rahI jIva je pitAnI
yegyatA-pAtratA vadhAre, ane sadguru Adi uttama nimittanuM sevana-upAsana karato
rahe, te mArganI prApti thAya. - "azuddha nimitte e saMsaratA, attA kattA para
zuddha nimitta rame jaba cidaghana, kartA letA gharano....zrI sImaMdhara."--zrI
devacaMdrajI prakRta vastunA samarthana arthe vyatirekapradhAnapaNe kahe che -
nAsmin ghane yataH satsu ttprtiitirmhodyaa| kiM samyag rUpamAdatte
kadAcinmandaleocanaH  // 36 //  vRtti-nArijana heya, A bhAvamala, ghare-ghana,
prabaLa hatAM, ataH kAraNa ke, samu-sAdhuo pratye, tawtItiH-tenI pratIti. ( A
bhAvabhala, ghana-prabala hoya tyAre sAdhuo pratye tenI pratIti na hAya). te
pratIti kevI viziSTa hoya? te mATe kahyuM-maracA-mahAdayavALI, abhyadaya AdinA
sAdhakapaNue karIne mahAudayavALI, prativastupamAthI Aja artha kahyo- saghakAmA-
zu samyagUrU5 grahaNa kare ?-lakSaNa, vyaMjana vagerenA saMpUrNapaNue karIne.
yAjika vana-kadI paNa maMda lenavALA-daSTivALe,-IdriyadaSane lIdhe, na ja rahe
ema artha che. '

Page #233 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
When there is a strong attachment, there is no true faith. (167) These were
true, as perceived by the wise. Would a person with weak eyes ever perceive the
true form? 36 Meaning: When there is a strong attachment, there is no true
perception of the person. Would a person with weak eyes ever perceive the true
form? Explanation: The above statement, which says that when there is a lack of
attachment, one attains the best opportunity, is further strengthened here by
negation (Negative Affirmation). When there is a strong attachment, there is no
true perception of the person, no faith or belief. As long as the soul is filled
with inner impurities, there will be no faith in the saint. As long as the soul
is burdened with guru-karma, there will be no recognition of the virtuous
person. Such perception and inner faith are truly life-enhancing, leading to
continuous progress. This is supported by an analogy: A person with weak eyes,
who sees things dimly due to a visual defect, cannot see the true form of
things. Similarly, a person whose emotional eyes are not open due to strong
attachment cannot truly recognize the form of the person, nor can they perceive
it. Thus, "true faith in a virtuous person will not arise until the intellect is
sharp, because a small twig cannot touch the branch of a tall tree." Now, in
support of the main point, the author says: अल्पव्याधिर्यथा लोके तद्विकारैर्न
बाध्यते । चेष्टते चेष्टसिद्धयर्थ वृत्त्यैवायं तथा हिते ॥ ३७ ॥ . Meaning: Just as
a person with a minor illness, whose illness is almost gone, is not affected by
its symptoms, such as itching, etc., in the world, so too, what? He acts,
engages in activities like royal service, etc., for the sake of achieving his
desires, for the sake of maintaining his family, etc. This is an example. This
is an explanation because it is said: "Pṛucitra - by virtue of the activity, by
virtue of the activity that describes the Dharma. And this - vrutti: śraddhā
suvivīdriṣā vijñarita dharma nāṁ: " - this is from the above verse. That is,
dhiti, śraddhā, suvivīdriṣā (intense desire to know, curiosity), and their
knowledge are the sources of Dharma (they are the birthplaces of Dharma, the
places where Dharma arises). Therefore, it is only by virtue of this purposeful
activity that this yogi, like a person with a minor illness, acts in the
interest of (engages in) giving, etc., due to the suppression of the inactive
vrutti. * "All together, quickly, with great intensity! - This is the path to
great happiness, the path to great glory, conquered by Śrī Yaśovijayajī."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 mitrAdaSTi gADha bhAvamala hotAM satIti na hoya, (167) A ghana hatAM sata
prati, pratIta mahadaya ne; samyagurUpa zuM grahe kadI, maMdalacane keya ? 36
artha-kAraNa ke A bhAvamala ghana-gADha hoya tyAre, puruSa pratye tenI
mahodayavaMtI evI pratIti hoya nahiM. zuM maMda locanavALe kadI paNa barAbara
rUpa grahaNa kare re ? vivecana uparamAM je kahyuM ke bhAvamalanI alpatA thaye
tevA uttama nimittanI prApti thAya che, te ja vAtane vyatirekathI eTale
niSedhAtmaka uktithI (Negative Affirmation) ahI daDha karI che-A bhAvamalanI
jyAre ghanatA haya, gADhapaNuM-prabalapaNuM hoya tyAre puruSa pratye tevI
mahodayavALI pratIti hoya nahiM, zraddhA-AsthA upaje nahiM. AtmAne aMdarano mela
jyAM sudhI gADha hoya, tyAMsudhI saMtanI pratye vizvAsa bese nahiM. jyAM sudhI
jIva gurukamI bhArekamI hoya tyAM sudhI satpuruSanI tevI pichAna, oLakhANa thAya
nahi. tevI pratIti-aMtara AsthA kharekhara ! jIvana mahA udaya karanArI che-
uttarottara caDhatI kaLA karanArI che. A vAtanuM tulya upamA dvArA samarthana
kare che ke jenI AMkhanuM teja ochuM che, maMda che, je daSTidoSathI jhAMkhuM
jhAMkhuM dekhe che, e puruSa zuM barAbara vastu svarUpa dekhI zake kharo ? na ja
dekhI zake. tema bhAvamala ghaNe hovAthI jenA bhAvacakSu ughaDyA nathI, te
puruSanA svarUpane barAbara na oLakhI zake, na pIchAnI zake; ne oLakhe nahi te
pratIti paNa kyAMthI kare? Ama "satpuruSa pratye satpaNAnI buddhi tIvra mata
hoya tyAMsudhI upaje nahi kAraNa ke ghaNA UMcA jhADanI zAkhAne pAMgaLo kadI
AMgaLIthI spazI zake nahi. * have anvayapradhAna paNe adhikRta vastunA
samarthana arthe ja kahe che - alpavyAdhiryathA loke tadvikArairna bAdhyate  /
ceSTate ceSTasiddhayartha vRttyaivAyaM tathA hite  //  37  //  . vRtti
-saMghavyAdhi-alpa vyAdhivALA, jene roga kSINaprAya-lagabhaga kSINa jevo thaI
gayo che e kaI kathA che-jema lokamAM, taw:tenA vikArothI, kaM-khajavALa
vagerethI, na vAdhyatevyAdhinA apapaNue karIne bAdhita thatuM nathI. tema ja zuM
? te ke-te ra-ane ceSTA kare che, rAjasevA AdimAM pravRtti kare che,
dunidrazartha-ISTa siddhine athe, kaTuMba vagerenA pAlana athe. A dRSTAMta che.
A ene apanaya che eTalA mATe kahyuM : " pRcaitra-vRttithI ja, dharmanirUpa
vRttivaDe karIne ja. ane A-vRtiH zraddhA suvividriSA vijJarita dharmanAM :"--e
vacana uparathI che. eTale dhati, zraddhA, suvividiSA (jANavAnI utkaTa icachI
jijJAsA), ene vijJapti e dhamanio che (dharmanI janmabhUmio che, dharmanA
uddabhavasthAne che). tethI A hetubhUta evI vRttivaDe karIne ja caM-A yegI, tevA
alpalAdhivALA puruSanI jema, sthira evA akAya vRttinA nirodhathI, te hitamAM,
dAna Adi hita viSayamAM ceSTA kare che, (pravarte che). * "sahu saravayaM drata
maNe tIvra sameta ja ! - ayAna pa AAva sumahaMtataH pA-zrI yazovijayajIkRta dvA
dvA

Page #234 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(168) Just as a man, affected by a minor ailment, is not hindered by his
ailment, so too, this (yogi) acts for his own benefit, driven by the desire for
the good. **Yoga-drishti-samuccaya** **Meaning:** Just as a man with a minor
ailment is not hindered by his ailment in the world, and acts for the sake of
achieving his desired goal, so too, this (yogi) acts for his own benefit, driven
by this (yogi) attitude. **Analysis:** The above statement, which spoke of the
diminishing of many emotions and the attainment of unwavering attainment, is now
reconciled here by means of an analogy, that is, by the method of positive
affirmation. In it, first, this example is presented: There is a man. He has
recovered from a serious illness. His anger is almost destroyed. He has almost
recovered. Only minor ailments like itching, etc., remain, but these minor
ailments do not bother him much, do not bother him much, and do not hinder his
royal work. And this man, who has a minor ailment and has almost recovered, acts
for the sake of achieving his desired work, such as royal service, trade, etc.,
for the sake of the sustenance of his family. In the same way, this yogi, who
has the attitude of a friend, acts for the sake of achieving his desired goal,
driven by the yogi attitude. This attitude is the birthplace of dharma and
adharma, the mother who gives birth to dharma. And there are four such
attitudes: (1) patience, (2) faith, (3) desire to know, (4) inquiry. This yogi,
who has the attitude of a friend, is capable of these four types of attitudes.
Therefore, he first has patience in the work of dharma, he has patience. He
takes firm patience until death in the shelter of the Lord's feet; he does not
become discouraged and impatient even if the fruit is not immediately obtained;
because he has firm faith that the fruit of this devotion to the Lord, etc., is
certainly attainable, therefore, it is appropriate to strive for its practice.
Being a man of such faith, he has a special desire to know the true nature of
the self, he has a desire to know. And motivated by such curiosity, he inquires
of the true teacher to know, and thus he attains special knowledge through
inquiry. Thus, this great seeker yogi is born with such auspicious attitudes,
which are like the mother of dharma. Since these auspicious attitudes are
possible here, this yogi, like a man with a minor ailment, firmly suppresses
these yogi attitudes, overcomes evil and inauspicious attitudes, and acts for
his own benefit, influenced by the auspicious attitudes, and acts for the
benefit of his soul, doing auspicious deeds that lead to the welfare of his
soul. He gives as much as he can, observes good conduct, etc., and the welfare
of all beings.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (168) sAjo rogavikArathI, bAdhita thAya na jema; iSTArtha pravartta-vRttithI,
hitamAM A paNa tema, 37 yogadRSTisamuccaya artha :--alpavyAdhivALA puruSa jema
leAkamAM tenA vikArAthI khAdhA pAmatA nathI, ane iSTa siddhine arthe pravRtti
kare che, tema A (yAgI ) vRttithI ja hitamAM pravRtti kare che. vivecana
uparamAM je ghaNA bhAvamalanI kSINatA thaye, avaMcaka prAptinI vAta kahI, tenu'
ahI anvayathI eTale ke vidhirUpa pratipAdanapaddhatithI ( Positive Affirmation )
samana karyuM; che. temAM prathama A dRSTAMta rajU kayu" che:-kAI eka manuSya
che. te meATI bimArImAMthI UThayo che. tene rAga lagabhaga naSTa thayeA che. te
lagabhaga sAjo thai gayA che. mAtra khUjalI vagere nAnAsanA kSudra-najIvA mAmUlI
vikAre khAkI che, paNa te rahyAsahyA tuccha vikArA tene jhAjhI mAdhA karatA
nathI, bahu herAna karatA nathI, tema ja tenA rAjanA kAmamAM ADakhIlI-aTakAyata
karatA nathI. ane AveA alpa vyAdhivALA, lagabhaga sAjo thai gayelA puruSa
peAtAnA kuTuMbanA bharaNupeASaNa khAtara rAjasevA, vepAra vagere ISTa kAryanI
siddhi arthe pravarte che. te ja prakAre A mitrA dRSTimAM vattatA yAgI
vRttithakI ja iSTa siddhi arthe pravRtta che. A vRtti dhamaceAni-dhamanA
janmasthAnarUpa che, dharmanI janmadAtrI jananIe che. ane te vRtti cAra cheH-(1)
dhRti, (2) zraddhA, (3) suvividiSA, (4) vijJapti. vRtti cArI AvI cAra prakAranI
vRttine A mitrA dRSTivALA yAgIne sa'bhava hAya che. eTale ene prathama teA
dharmakAryamAM dhRti hoya che, dhIraja hAya che. prabhunA " caraNu zaraNe ' te
'maraNa sudhInI cheka' dRDha dhIraja dhAraNa kare che; phaLanI tAtkAlika
aprAptithI paNa te nirAza thai adhIraja dharatA nathI; kAraNa ke tene dRDha
zraddhA che A prabhubhakti Adi dhama kRtyanuM phaLa avazyameva mAkSa che, mATe
enI sAdhanAne puruSAtha karyA karavA e ja ucita che. evI zraddhAvALA heAvAthI te
dhatuM vizeSa ne vizeSa satsvarUpa jANavAnI utkaMThA dharAve che, vividiSA rAkhe
che. ane tevI jijJAsAthI prerita thaIne te jANavA mATe sadgurune vijJapti-vinati
kare che, ane tethI karIne tene vijJapti-vizeSa jJAnanI prApti thAya che. Ama
dharmanI mAtA jevI uttarAttara zubha vRttie A mahAtmA mumukSu jogIjanane
uddabhave che, A zubha vRttiene ahI saMbhava haiAvAthI, alpa vyAdhivALA puruSanI
jema A cegI kAya vRttione dRDha nirodha kare che, duSTa azubha vRttine zake che,
ne ziSTa vRttionA prabhAve karI svarasathI ja hitAya mAM prazno che, AtmAnuM
zubha pravRtti kalyANa thAya evA zubha kArya kare che. te yathAzakti dAna ddIe
che, sadAcAra Adipa zIla pALe che, ane 'sava' jagatanuM kalyANu

Page #235 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Friend's View:** The last stage of **Yathapravruttikaran** is characterized by
**alpatva** (minimal **bhavamala**).  (169) "May all beings be free from
suffering! May all faults be destroyed! May all people be happy everywhere!"
This is the auspicious sentiment that arises. Because the **yogi**'s
**bhavamala** has become very thin, almost washed away, just like a person
recovering from illness, who has almost fully recovered, does not have any minor
complaints, which do not hinder their work, similarly, the **yogi** with minimal
**bhavamala** does not experience unbearable afflictions, which do not hinder
their **atma-hita** (self-beneficial) actions. Therefore, they inevitably cease
from harmful activities and engage in beneficial activities. Thus, through
**anvaya-vyatireka** (affirmation and negation) and **hakara-nakara** (positive
and negative) arguments, it is established that **alpatva** of **bhavamala**
leads to the attainment of the **avachka-tray** (three types of liberation).  To
further illustrate this, it is said:  "In the final stage of
**Yathapravruttikaran**, due to **alpatva** (minimal **bhavamala**), all these
things arise for those whose **granthibheda** (bondage) is near." (38)
**Meaning:** In the final stage of **Yathapravruttikaran**, due to **alpatva**
(minimal **bhavamala**), all these things arise for those whose **granthibheda**
(bondage) is near.  **Commentary:** "This **avachka** yoga, it manifests in the
final stage. For the **sadhu** (saint), it is like the state of **siddha**
(perfection), while the mind of others is still wandering." (Shri Gadh Sakzaya
2-14)  When do all these things mentioned above arise? They arise in the final
stage of **Yathapravruttikaran**. What is the reason for their arising? It is
due to the **alpatva** (minimal **bhavamala**). Who experiences this? It is
experienced by the **sant** (saint) whose **granthibheda** (bondage) is near,
close at hand. Thus, in the final stage of **Yathapravruttikaran**, when the
soul has almost completely shed its **mala** (impurities), the **jiva** (soul)
whose **granthibheda** (bondage) is near, experiences all these things mentioned
above.  **Summary:** In the final stage of **Yathapravruttikaran**,
characterized by **alpatva** (minimal **bhavamala**), the **jiva** (soul) whose
**granthibheda** (bondage) is near, experiences the attainment of the **avachka-
tray** (three types of liberation). This is due to the **alpatva** (minimal
**bhavamala**) which allows the **jiva** to cease from harmful activities and
engage in beneficial activities.  "All-knowing, the **pati** (master) of the
**naras** (humans), the **bhutakalas** (past) are known to him. He knows all
things everywhere." (Shri Brihat Shantistava)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 mitrAdaSTi : cheluM yathApravRttakaraNa-bhAvamala a9patA (169) thAo !* sarva
prANIgaNa parahita nirata thAo ! sarva doSa nAza pAme! sarvatra loke sukhI thAo
!" ItyAdi zubha bhAvanA te bhAve che. kAraNa ke A jogIjanane bhAvagarUpa
bhAvamala ghaNokharo kSINa thaI gayo che, lagabhaga dhovAI javA Avyo che, tethI
karIne mAMdagImAMthI UThelA, lagabhaga sAjA thaI gayelA puruSane jema rahI sahI
jhINI jhINI phariyAdo harakata karatI nathI, tenA pedA kAmanI ADe AvatI nathI,
tema A cheDA bhAvamalavALA jogIjanane radyAsahya vikAro jhAjhI bAdhA upajAvatA
nathI; ne AtmahitarUpa kAryamAM pravartatAM aTakAvatAM nathI, rekatA nathI.
eTale te avazya ahita pravRttimAMthI nivarte che, ane hita pravRttimAM pravarte
che. Ama anvaya-vyatirekavaDe, hakAra-nakArAtmaka dalIlathI, bhAvamalanI alpatA
thaye, avaMcakatrayanI prApti hoya che, e siddhAMtane atyaMta daDha karyo. A je
hamaNAM kahyuM te badhuM ya jyAre upaje che, te darzAvavA mATe kahe che-
yathApravRttikaraNe carame'lpamalatvataH Asannagranthibhedasya samastaM jAyate
hyadaH  // 38  /  carama yathApravRttimAM, alpamalatva prabhAva graMthibhedanI
nikaTane, upaje A sahu bhAva, 38 artha:- chellA yathApravRtti karaNamAM,
alpamalapaNAne lIdhe, jeno graMthibheda nikaTamAM che, evA puruSane A samasta
nizcaye upaje che. vivecana "eha avaMcaka yoga te, pragaTe caramAvajo re;
sAdhune siddhadazA samuM, bIjanuM citta prave revara"--zrI gaDha sakjhAya 2-14
uparamAM je A badhuM ya kahevAmAM AvyuM te kyAre upaje che ? chellA
yathApravRttikaraNamAM upaje che. kayA kAraNathI upaje che? bhAvamalanA
alpapaNArUpa kAraNathI. kene upaje che? graMthibheda nikaTa che. pAsamAM che,
evA saMta jegIjanane, Ama chellA yathApravRttikaraNamAM, AtmAne mela ghaNe ghaNe
devAI gaye hoya tyAre graMthibheda pAse AvelA jIvane, A uparamAM kaheluM badhuM
ya prApta thAya che. tene mAsikama A prakAre - vRtti-gathAivRtti -pUrve jenuM
svarUpa varNavavAmAM AvyuM che evA yathApravRttikaraNamAM, jame-carama, chellA
pacatavatI evA, kAmararavataH-alpamalapaNarUpa kAraNane lIdhe, mAnavaMthimegha-
jene graMthibheda nikaTa che evA saMtane, sanattay-samasta hamaNAM ja je kahyuM
ke, kAcate hya - A nizcaya upaje che. 4 "rivArasarvajJAtaH patinArA mavaMtu
bhUtakALarH | g: prathA nA sarvatra juvine mavaMtu che: " zrI bRhata zAMtistava

Page #236 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(170) **Gadasthi Samuchaya (1)** When the **bhavamala** (karmic matter)
gradually diminishes and **tathabhavyatva** (the state of being worthy of
liberation) matures, the soul, in its final **pudgalav** (state of existence),
receives the **gabij** (seed of liberation). (2) The soul, existing in the final
**pudgalav**, receives three **avachka** (unwavering) factors as auspicious
signs for receiving the **gabij**: **gavachka** (unwavering faith),
**kriyavachka** (unwavering action), and **falavachka** (unwavering result). (3)
These **avachka** are obtained through **pranama** (prostration) and other acts
of reverence towards a **sapurusha** (perfect being) and **sadguru** (true
teacher). (4) The purpose of these **pranama** and other acts is to diminish the
**bhavamala**. (5) This diminishing of **bhavamala** leads to the attainment of
the final **yathapravrittikaran** (right conduct). (6) Upon attaining the final
**yathapravrittikaran**, the soul approaches **granthibhed** (breaking of the
karmic bonds).  Thus, as the internal **mala** (impurities) and **bhavamala**
gradually diminish, **tathabhavyatva** matures, and the soul enters its final
**bhav** (existence). At this point, the internal impurities are further
purified, and the soul, having attained the final **yathapravrittikaran**,
reaches **granthibhed**. As the impurities are removed, the soul, recognizing
the true **santpurusha** (saintly person), performs **pranama** and other acts
of reverence. This leads to the attainment of the auspicious signs of
**gavachka**, **kriyavachka**, and **falavachka**. As the impurities are
removed, the soul's worthiness and eligibility increase, its faults are
eliminated, and its mental state becomes pure, preparing it for the reception
and cultivation of the **gabij**. The **gabij** is then received, and the soul's
vision opens up.  **Chhogiraj Anandghanji** experienced this in his own life:
"When the final **karan** (cause) is at its peak, and the maturity of
**bhavparinati** (liberation) is reached, the impurities are removed, and the
vision opens up, the attainment of **pravachan** (discourse) and **vak**
(speech) becomes possible."  **Figure 7: Gabij**  **Bhavamala** * **Gabijgyata**
**Tathabhavyatva** is at its peak These three **avachka** * **Pranama** etc.
Final **yathapravrittikaran** - **Granthibhed** ++ **Bhavamala** is minimal
**Apuurvakaran**  Or, this final **yathapravrittikaran** is "**apuurva**
(unprecedented), hence it is said...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (170) gadaSThisamuccaya (1) bhAvamalanI kSINatA thatAM thatAM,
tathAbhavyatvane-AtmAnI tevA tevA prakAranI gyatAne paripAka thaye, jIva chellA
pudgalAvAmAM Ave, tyAre gabIjanuM grahaNa thAya che. (2) carama chelA
pudgalAvattamAM vartatA jIvane, te gabIja prApta thavAnA zubha nimittarUpa traNa
avaMcakanI prApti thAya che,-gAvaMcaka, kriyAvaMcaka, phalAvaMcaka. (3) te
avaMcakavraya paNa sapuruSa sadguru pratye praNAma AdithI prApta thAya che. (4)
te prAmAdine hetu paNa bhAvamalanI kSINatA che. (5) te bhAvamalanI kSINatAthI
chelluM yathApravRttikaraNa prApta thAya che. (6) ane chelluM
yathApravRttikaraNa prApta thaye, jIva graMthibhedanI pAse Ave che. Ama jIvane
aMdarane mela-bhAvamala kSINa thatAM thatAM, tathAbhavyatA pAke che, eTale te
chellA bhava kerAmAM Ave che. tyAre vaLI teno aMdarano mela ora ne Ara vAta jAya
che, ane chelluM yathApravRttikaraNa pAmI te graMthibhedanI pAse pahoMce che;
ane Ama mala dUra thatAM, sAcA saMtapuruSane jega maLe te tene pratye praNAmAdi
kare che. ethI karIne ene gAvaMcaka, kriyAvaMcaka, ne phalAvaMcakarUpa zubha
nimittane vega bane che. Ama mahene mela devAtAM vAtAM tenI yegyatA-pAtratA
vadhatI jAya che, doSa dUra thAya che, ne tenI cittabhUmi cekakhI thatI jaI
gabIjanA grahaNa mATe-vAvetara mATe taiyAra thAya che, eTale te gabIja rahe che,
ne tenI bhalI evI " daSTi" khule che, ughaDe che. cogIrAja AnaMdaghanajInA
anubhavegAra che ke " caramAvata ho carama karaNa tathA re, bhavapariNati
paripAka, deSa TaLe vaLI daSTi khule bhalI re, prApati pravacana
vAka....saMbhava." AkRti-7 gabIja bhAvamalapatA *gabIjagyatA tayAbhavyatva che
paripAka A avaMcakatraya * satrAmAdi caramAva7- chelluM yathApravRttikaraNa
-graMthibheda ++bhAvamalaalpatA apUrvakaraNa athavA A carama (chelluM)
yathApavRtta "apUrva ja che, eTalA mATe kahe che -

Page #237 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Mitrādaṣṭi:** The last yathāpravṛttakaraṇa is indeed apūrva. (171)
Apūrvāsannabhāvena vyabhichāraviyogātaḥ | Tattvato’pūrvamevedamiti
yogavido viduḥ || 39 ||  Due to the proximity of the apūrva, and the absence of
vyabhicāra, this last yathāpravṛttakaraṇa is indeed apūrva in essence, as the
knowers of yoga understand. Commentary:  This last yathāpravṛttakaraṇa, which is
mentioned, is close to the apūrva, and therefore, it is apūrva, as the knowers
of yoga say. Because there is never any vyabhicāra in it, no deviation, that is,
after the last yathāpravṛttakaraṇa, it comes according to the rule of apūrva,
therefore, in essence, it is apūrva, that is, never attained before. To explain
the cause is the method of justice. This apūrva yathāpravṛttakaraṇa has never
been attained by this jīva before, from time immemorial. This apūrva ātmavilāsa
has never come before, this apūrva avasara has never been obtained, but it has
been obtained now in this daṣṭi, therefore, it is appropriate to call this last
yathāpravṛttakaraṇa apūrva. Here, the jana of guṇasthāna says: Prathamaṁ
yadguṇasthānaṁ sāmānyena upavarṇitam | Asyāṁ tu tadavasthāyāṁ
mukhyamanvaryogataḥ || 40 ||  The first guṇasthāna, which is described in
general, is the main one in this state, due to the yoga of the meaning. Vṛtti:
Prathama - first, āgha, first, guṇasthānaṁ - the guṇasthāna, the guṇasthāna
called mitrādaṣṭi, is described in general, from the word "nideridī
sāsāyārū". Lakṣya tu tavasthā - in this state, mukhya - the main one,
nirupacharita. Due to what reason? Because - gavarthātaḥ - due to the yoga of
the meaning, due to the yoga of the word that follows the meaning (in the true
meaning of the word). Due to the feeling of such a guṇa - due to the feeling of
being, the guṇasthāna is established, therefore (the name guṇasthāna is given).
| Jīta Mitrādaṣṭi II.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 mitrAdaSTiH chelluM yathApravRttakaraNa apUrva ja (171) apUrvAsannabhAvena
vyabhicAraviyogataH  /  tattvato'pUrvamevedamiti yogavido viduH  //  39  //
apUrvanA nikaTa bhAvathI, vaLI vinA vyabhicAra; eha apUrva ja tatvathI, jANe
gAtAra, 39 artha :-apUrvakaraNanA nikaTabhAvathI, tathA vyabhicAranA abhAvane
lIdhe, tattvathI A-chelluM yathApravRttakaraNa "apUrva" ja che, ema yogavettAo
jANe che. vivecana ane A je chelluM yathApravRttakaraNa kahyuM, te
apUrvakaraNanI nikaTamAM-pAsamAM vate che tethI karIne, te "apUrvaja che ema
yoganA jANakAra puruSa kahe che. kAraNa ke temAM kadI vyabhicAra thatuM nathI,
ADI-avaLo pheraphAra thato nathI, eTale ke te chellA yathApravRttakaraNa pachI
apUrvakaraNa niyamathI Ave ja che, eTalA mATe paramArthathI te apUrva ja eTale
ke pUrve kadI prApta nahi thayeluM evuM kahevA gya che. kAraNamAM kAryane
upacAra karavo e nyAyanI rIti che. AvuM "apUrva" yathApravRttakaraNa anAdi
kALathI A jIvane pUrve kadI paNa prApta thayuM nathI, A apUrva AtmavIlAsa pUrve
kadI AvyA nathI, A "apUrva avasara' kadI paNa sAMpaDyo nathI, paNa hamaNAM A
daSTimAM AvatAM sAMpaDyo che mATe A chelA yathApravRttakaraNane "apUrva" nAma
ApyuM te sArthaka che. ahIM ja guNasthAnanuM jana kahe che - prathamaM
yadguNasthAnaM sAmAnyenopavarNitam  /  asyAM tu tadavasthAyAM
mukhyamanvaryayogataH  //  40  //  sAmAnyathakI varNavyuM, je prathama
guNasthAna; antartha yogathI mukhya te, eha avasthA sthAna, 40 vRtti-
pUrvIsamAvera-apUrvakaraNanA nikaTabhAvarUpa hetuvaDe, tathA camiyAvita -
vyabhicAranA viyogarUpa kAraNane lIdhe, (vyabhicAra na thato hovAthI),
taragataH-tatvathI, paramArthathI, pUrvaA cheluM yathApravRtta apUrve ja che,
hRtti cAlavA viTu-ema yogavido jANe che, e bhAva che. vRttiH-prathama-prathama,
Agha, paheluM, caTIsthAnaM-je guNasthAna, mizrAdaSTi nAmanuM guNasthAna,
sAmAnyane paLataY-sAmAnyathI AgamamAM varNavavAmAM AvyuM che. "nidaridI sAsAyArU
-e vacana uparathI. lakSya tu tavasthA-te A avasthAmAM ja, mutye-mukhya,
nirupacarita evuM. kayA kAraNathI ? te ke-gavarthAtaH-anvathe yogathakI, arthane
anusaratA zabdanA yogathI, (zabdanA kharekharA arthamAM). evA guNanA bhAvathI-
hevApaNue karIne 'guNasthAnanI u5patti che eTalA mATe, (guNasthAna nAma ghaTe
che eTalA mATa). | jIta mitrAdaHi II.

Page #238 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(172) **Gadashtisamuchchay Meaning:** - The first Gunasthan that is described
from the general, in this state, it is "primary" according to the word "Anvath
Yeg". **Discussion:** This has suggested which Gunasthan is in the first Dristi
named Mitra. The first "Gunasthan" named "Mithyashti" in the Shastra, is the
main one here. So, in the state of this Mitra Dristi, the true first "Gunasthan"
falls in the true sense of the word - Nirupcharitapan. Because the place of
origin of the Gunas is called "Gunasthan". And where the Gunas of the primary
state are present, it is truly called the first "Gunasthan". The beginning of
the attainment of such Gunas starts in the first Dristi, the auspicious moment
of entering the Agmarg is this first Dristi, this is the auspicious beginning of
the eligibility for the Sanmarg, this is the first step of the liberation from
the cycle of birth and death, this is the first role of the great G-prasad, this
is the first attempt to climb the G-mountain. Thus, primarily, i.e.,
Nirupcharitapan, the first Gunasthan is present in this Dristi. Even before this
Dristi is attained, all Mithyadristi are counted in the first Gunasthan, but
they are Upcharitapan, secondary - not primarily. They have the name of
Gunasthan, but not truly. Because the manifestation of the Guna is not there,
the place of the Guna is not there, so according to the true meaning of the
word, it is not Gunasthan, it is just a name for the sake of saying it is
Gunasthan. Thus, there is a lot of difference in both types, it is the distance
between heaven and earth. Just as a person is called "King", and a real King who
has royal power, there is as much difference between the two, as there is
between the first Gunasthan without the previous Guna and the first Gunasthan
with the Mitra Dristi, which is full of Gunas. And here, in the Mitra Dristi,
even though Mithyatva has not yet been avoided and Samyaktva has not been
attained, yet what wonderful excellent Gunas are manifested here, it has been
discussed in detail above. Because we have seen that the self-absorption of this
world is very far away in Mitra. By meeting the Guru, the attainment of the age
of unwavering Guna-attainment is achieved. His mind becomes pure, it becomes wet
with the irrigation of Vairagya, and seeds are deposited in it. He manifests
pure devotion towards the Supreme Being, he performs the best worship of the
Guru, and he performs various worship of the Sat-Shastra. He becomes the abode
of auspicious Gunas like compassion, non-hatred, love for virtue, service to
people, etc. And having attained such a state of activity, he is standing close
to the breaking of the knot. Thus, with the emergence of many Gunas -
manifestation, this Yogi has got "the time of fame and splendor", he has got "an
unprecedented opportunity" for the attainment of excellent fame.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (172) gadaSTisamuccaya artha :-sAmAnyathI je prathama guNasthAna varNavavAmAM
AvyuM che, te A avasthAmAM te anvatha yegathI-zabdanA barAbara athe pramANe,
"mukhya" evuM hoya che. vivecana A mitrA nAmanI pahelI daSTimAM kayuM
guNasthAnaka haya, tenuM ahIM sUcana karyuM che. zAstramAM je "mithyASTi'
nAmanuM prathama "guNasthAna" kahyuM che, te ahIM mukhyapaNa ghaTe che. eTale A
mitrA daSTinI dazAmAM sAcesAcuM prathama "guNasthAna" te zakhanA kharekharA
arthamAM-nirupacaritapaNe ghaTe che. kAraNa ke guNonI utpattinuM prAptinuM
sthAnaka te "guNasthAnaka" kahevAya. ane temAM prAthamika avasthAnA guNonuM jyAM
kuraNa hoya te prathama guNasthAna" yathArtha paNe kahevAya. AvA tathArUpa
guNonI prAptinuM maMDANaprAraMbha prathama daSTimAM thAya che, egamArgamAM
pravezanuM zubha muhUrta A prathama daSTi che, sanmArga prAptinI yogyatAnuM A
maMgalAcaraNa che, mekSanI nIsaraNInuM A paheluM pagathiyuM che, mahAna ga-
prAsAdanI A prathama bhUmikA che, ga-parvata para caDhavAne A prathama prayAsa
che. Ama mukhyapaNe arthAt nirupacaritapaNe A dRSTimAM prathama guNasthAnaka
varte che. A daSTi prApta thayA pUrve paNa sarva mithyAdaSTi jenI gaNatrI
prathama guNasthAnakamAM karAya che, paNa te upacaritapaNe, gauNapaNe-mukhyapaNe
nahiM. eonuM e guNasthAnaka nAmanuM hoya che, kharekharUM nahiM. kAraNa ke temAM
guNanuM pragaTapaNuM nathI, guNanuM sthAnaka nathI, eTale zabdanA kharA artha
mujaba te guNasthAnaka nathI, kahevA pUratuM nAma mAtra guNasthAna che. Ama e
baMne prakAramAM pragaTa ghaNo phera che, AkAza-pAtAlanuM aMtara che. jema koI
mANasa "rAjA" kahevAtuM hoya, ne kaI kharekhara rAjasattA dharAvate rAjA hoya,
te bemAM jeTaluM taphAvata che, teTale AgalA guNa vagaranA prathama
guNasthAnamAM ne guNasaMpanna evA mitrAdaSTivALA prathama guNasthAnamAM che. ane
atre mitrAdaSTimAM je ke haju mithyAtva TaLyuM nathI ne samyaktva maLyuM nathI,
chatAM paNa kevA adbhuta uttama guNe atre pragaTe che, te uparamAM vistArathI
vivecavAmAM AvyuM che. kAraNa ke ApaNe joyuM ke A jagajananI AtmamalinatA
mitrAmAM ghaNuM ghaNuM dUra thaI hoya che. ene sazurune bhega maLatAM, avaMcaka
guNaprApti vayanI prApti thAya che. enI cittabhUmi cekakhI bane che,
vairAgyejalanA siMcanathI picI thAya che, ne temAM gabIjane nikSepa thAya che.
paramAtmA pratye tene zuddha bhakti pragaTe che, sagurunI te uttama upAsanA kare
che, ne satzAstranI vividha ArAdhanA kare che. dayA, adreSa, guNAnurAga,
janasevA vagere maMgala guNenuM te dhAma bane che. ane eTaluM
yathApravRttikaraNa pAmI, te grathibhedanI nikaTa AvIne ubho che. Ama aneka
guNanA AvirbhAvathI-pragaTapaNAthI A jogIjanane "suyaza vilAsanuM TANuM" maLyuM
che uttama yaza prAptine "apUrva avasara" sAMpaDyo che.

Page #239 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Friend-Vision: Essence  (173) If one deeply contemplates these qualities and
examines their own soul, they may find that these qualities are not present
within them. Even if they are present, those who consider themselves to be of
the sixth stage or of the stage of samiti are likely to be misled by their self-
examination, which is filled with errors and false beliefs. The path to
Samyagdristi is still very long, but has the journey even begun? Has the first
step been taken? Has the first stage even been reached? This is the essence of
the quality of Friend-Vision! One must contemplate this from the soul, and
strive to attain these qualities and enjoy the bliss of liberation as soon as
possible!  **Explanation:**  * **Friend-Vision:** A state of mind characterized
by seeing all beings as friends, free from hatred and with a non-violent
attitude. * **Samiti:** The fifth stage of spiritual development in Jainism,
characterized by a strong sense of self-control and detachment. * **Sixth
Stage:** The sixth and final stage of spiritual development in Jainism,
characterized by complete liberation from karma and the cycle of birth and
death. * **Samyagdristi:** Right vision, the ultimate goal of Jainism,
characterized by perfect knowledge, faith, and conduct. * **Bliss of
Liberation:** The state of complete freedom from suffering and the cycle of
rebirth.  **Source:**  * **Shree Yag॰ Sajjay 1-15:** A Jain scripture that
discusses the importance of Friend-Vision and other spiritual qualities.
**Summary:**  Friend-Vision is characterized by a non-violent attitude towards
all beings, a lack of hatred, and a gentle mind. It is the first step towards
liberation, as it helps to overcome the first stage of spiritual development,
which is characterized by hatred and violence.  **Further Explanation:**  *
**Yagi Purusha:** A person who is striving for liberation. * **Yagabij:** The
seeds of liberation, which are planted through spiritual practices. *
**Vaitraag:** Detachment from worldly attachments. * **Bhavacaru:** A person who
is devoted to the path of liberation. * **Satshastra:** The sacred scriptures of
Jainism. * **Chagkhajkatha:** The stories and teachings of the Jain scriptures.
* **Bhavamal:** The impurities of the soul, which are the cause of suffering. *
**Tathaabhavya:** A person who is destined for liberation. * **Avchakatraya:**
The three types of liberation: Yagavachaka, Kriyavachaka, and Falavachaka. *
**Yagavachaka:** Liberation through spiritual practices. * **Kriyavachaka:**
Liberation through right conduct. * **Falavachaka:** Liberation through the
fruits of spiritual practices.  **Conclusion:**  Friend-Vision is a crucial step
on the path to liberation. It helps to overcome the impurities of the soul and
cultivate the qualities necessary for spiritual progress. By cultivating Friend-
Vision, one can move closer to the ultimate goal of liberation.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 mitrAdaSTi : sAra (173) A guNNA upara pukhta vicAra karI, peAtAnA AtmAmAM tevA
tevA guNA pragaTayA che ke nahiM, tenuM jo AtmanirIkSaNa karavAmAM Ave, teA
peAtAnAmAM tevA guNa nahi. pragaTathA chatAM, potAnuM samitIpaNuM ke chaThThA
guNuThANApaNuM mAnI besanArA lokonA AtmanirIkSaNa keTalAka bhUlabharelA mithyA
brAMta khAlA dUra thavAnA saMbhava che. samyagdaSTinI majala tA hajI ghaNI lAMbI
che, paNa pravAsanI zarUAta paNa haju thaI che ke nahi, pAzerAmAM pahelI pUNI'
paNa ka'tAi che ke nahi, pahelA guNuThANAnuM paNa ThekANu che ke nahiM, te A
mitrA dRSTinA guNe! uparathI AtmAthI e vicAravAnuM che, ane te te guNanI prApti
karI suyaza vilAsanu TANu** jema jaldI maLe tema karavAnu che! sAdha    karaNa
apUrvanA nikaTathI, je paheluM guNuThANuM re; mukhyapaNe te hA hAye, suyaza
vilAsanuM TANuM re....vIra"--zrI yAga. sajjhAya 1-15 Jie  mitrAdRSTinA sAra-(
Summary ) samasta jagat pratye mitrabhAva, adveSabhAva, nivaeNra buddhi ahI'
pragaTe che, eTale Ane 'mitrA' nAma ghaTe che. atre dazana-khAdha tRNu
agnikaNanA prakAza jevA maMda hAya che, ceAganu prathama aga-yama prApta thAya
che, kheda nAmanA prathama mAzayadoSanA tyAga hAya che, ane adveSa nAmane
prathama guNa pragaTe che. ahI' sthiti karatA yAgI puruSa uttama yAgabIjonu
grahaNa kare che. mukhya cAgabIja A cheH (1) vItarAga prabhunI mana-vacana-
kAyAthI zuddha bhakti, (2) bhAvayegI evA bhAvAcArUpa sadguru AdinI upAsanA,
vaiyAvacca, (3) sa`sAra pratye sahaja evA aMtaraga vairAgya, (4) dravya
abhigrahanuM pAlana, (5) lekhanAdivaDe satzAstranI ArAdhanA, (6)
cAgakhIjakathAnA zravaNa pratye sthira AzayavALI mAnyatA, ane tenA zuddha
upAdeya bhAva. A uttama yeAgamIjonuM grahaNa, AtmAne ghaNeA bhAvamala dUra
thaye, prAye manuSyeAne hAya che. ane Ave| bhAvamalane kSaya chellA
pudgalAvattamAM tathAbhavyatAnA paripAkathI upaje che. A chellA pudgalAvattamAM
vatA jIvanA mukhya lakSaNa A che (1) du:khI pratye atyaMta dayA, (2) guNavAna
pratye adveSa, (3) sarvAM kAinI abhedabhAve yatheAcita sevA. AvA lakSaNavALA
bhadrabhUtti mahAtmA jIvane ava'cakatrayanA uyarUpa zubha-nimitta maLe che;
sadguru satpuruSanA yAgathI yAgAvacaka, kriyAvAcaka, ne phalAvacaka prApta thAya
che. Ane bANunI lakSyakriyAnI upamA kharAkhara ghaTe che. A avAcakanI prApti
pazu satpuruSa sadguru pratye praNAma AdithI thAya che. ane te praNAma AdinuM
kAraNa paNa bhAvamalanI alpatA che.-Ama bhAvamalanI apatAthI satpuruSa pratye
praNAmAdinI prApti, te praNAmAdithI

Page #240 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(174) Yoga-shti-samuchaya The attainment of avachakra, the attainment of
auspicious omens from avachakra, and from that, the attainment of chag-bija,
etc. - this is the causal chain here. * And all this arises in the last pudgala-
vatta, in the last yatha-pravritta-karana, which is a-purva - when there is a
scarcity of bhavamala, and the jiva has come close to granthi-bhed. This last
yatha-pravritta-karana, which is a-purva, is truly a-purva from the perspective
of the paramanu. In such a mitra-shti, according to the true meaning of the
word, the first gunasthana, which is the main one, exists. Table of Mitra-shti -
4 "Gunasthana" for closeness Druna-yaganga Like truna-agni-yama Dhasha-guna-
tyaga-prapti Akhed Advesha Yoga-kheja-grahana-prapti-kram-samaya | (1) Jin-
bhakti-bhavamala-alpata-chella (2) Sadguru-seva, ↓ Sant-ne-pranamadi ↓
Avahenchaka-prapti (3) Bhav-udveg (4) Dravya-abhi Graha-palan (5) Siddhant-na-
lekhan-adi, bija-katha-nu' manya Pashu, Bhav Mukhya Pu. 50 ma evu pehlu Chella
Yatha-pra0 ↓ 3. ma Shubh-nimitta-tri-thibhed ' Nikat Upadeya-chag-kheja-adi-hay-
tyare 品 Yoga-drishti-kalash-kavya - Sadakanta: Mitra-mahi truna-agni-she. Medha-
ta-madya-dise, aankhu-zankhu' darshan-thatu. Matra-chakkha-na-bhaase; tayae
shraddha-shruta-prati-dhari-chegi-a-bhakti-bhaave, Mukti-marge-gaman-karva-
tivra-ichchha-dharave. 15. Mitra-mahi-pratha-kari-ne-chag-sanmitra-maitree,
Nivairi-a-sakal-jiva-ni-sath-sadhe-sumaitree; vina-khede-man-dadh-dhare-dev-
gurva-kritye, Gunasthana Ne-adveshi-kadi-pan-kare-dvesha-na-kai-pratyee 16.
Gunasthana ( kharakharu Yatha-th Gunuthanu )

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (174) yogaSTisamuccaya ava'cakaprApti, avacakraprAptithI zubha nimittane
saryAga, ane tethI karIne cAgabIja vagerenI prApti-ema atra kAraNaparaparA che.
* ane A badhuya chellA pudgalAvattamAM, apUrva' evA chellA yathApravRtta
karaNamAM upaje che,-ke jyAre bhAvamalanI alpatA hAya che, ane jIva
graMthibhedanI najIkamAM AvyA hAya che. A chellu' yathApravRttakara apUrva
kacchunA lIdhe kharekhara ! paramAMthI apUrva ja che. AvI A mitrA STimAM  /
zabdanA kharekharA atha pramANe, mukhya evuM pahelu* guNasthAnaka varte che.
mitrAdaSTinuM kASTaka-4 nikaTapaNAne 'guNasthAna ' drunayAgAMga tRNuagni yama
jevuM ma DhASa guNa tyAga prApti akheda adveSa yogakhIjagrahaNa prAptikrama
samaya | (1) jina bhakti bhAvamalaalpatA chellA (2) sadgurusevA, | saMtane
praNAmAdi | avaheMcaka prApti (3) bhava udvega (4) dravya abhi grahapAlana (5)
siddhAMtanA lekhanAdi,bIja kathAnu` mAnya pazu, bhAva mukhya pu.50mAM evuM
paheluM chellA yathA pra0 | 3. mAM zubha nimitta tra thibheda ' nikaTa upAdeya
cAgakhIja Adi hAya tyAre Pin  yogadRSTi kaLaza kAvya --: sadAkAMtA : mitrAmAMhI
tRNa aganize| medha tA madya dIse, AMkhuM jhAMkhu' darazana thatuM. mAtra
cAkhkhA na bhAse; tAye zraddhA zruta prati dharI cegi A bhaktibhAve, muktimArge
gamana karavA tIvra icchA dharAve. 15. mitrAmAMhI prathama karIne ceAga sanmitra
maitrI, nivairI A sakala jIvanI sAtha sAdhe sumaitrI; vinA khede mana daDha
dhare devagurvA kRtye, guNasthAnaka ne adveSI kadI paNa kare dveSa nA kAI pratye
16. guNasthAnaka ( kharekharUM yathAtha guNuThANuM )

Page #241 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(175) **Kalasha Kavya of Mitradrishti and Yogadrishti**  One who is not affected
by raga (attachment) etc., does not kill any living being, thus not committing
suicide. One speaks the truth, does not utter falsehood, does not steal, and
practices celibacy. One does not have any attachment to possessions, and does
not indulge in greed. 17. One who is a friend of the yogi, sows the seeds of
liberation in the mind. These seeds grow and bear the fruit of liberation, just
as a banyan seed grows into a large tree. Such a person becomes a benefactor of
the future, just as a seed of a shiva tree bears fruit. 18. Here, the yogi has
devotion and love for the Lord. He worships the Lord, sings hymns and praises
his virtues. With a pure and selfless heart, he bows down to the Lord,
forgetting all other thoughts and focusing his mind on the Lord. 19. One who is
content with the self, has devotion for the guru, the true teacher, and the
saints, the avadhutas, and the munis. He has pure devotion for all of them in
his body, mind, and speech. He is always eager to serve them. 20. Through birth,
death, sorrow, old age, anger, and grief, This world seems unreal. One desires
to be free from this house of suffering. One is inspired by the fear of
suffering and desires liberation. 21. One gives charity, does not accept gifts,
and serves the saints. One dedicates his body, mind, and wealth to the welfare
of the world. One gives medicine and other help to the suffering, the poor, and
the helpless. One performs good deeds with a pure heart and enjoys the fruits of
his actions. 22. One reads and writes the scriptures with devotion. One listens
to the scriptures and understands their meaning. One reveals the meaning of the
scriptures to others. One spreads the message of the Lord in the world with a
pure heart. 23.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (175) mitrAdaSTi yogadaSTi kaLazakAvya rAgAdithI jIva na haNane AtmahisA kare
nA, sAcuM bole para nija kahI khoTuM te uccare nA; vastu cere nahiM para kadI,
brahmacarya care che, mUcchabhAve para parigraha nA prasakti dhare che. 17.
mitrAyogI citabhUmi mahIM caganA bIja vAve, vRddhi pAmI phala acUka je mekSarUpI
ja lAve, jevI rIte vaDa bIja vadhI vRkSa vizAla thAve, thAye bhAvI tyama
zivaprada bIje AvA svabhAve. 18. atre yogI prabhu prati para prIti bhakti
dharAve, pUje ace guNagaNa stave stotra saMgIta gAve; cokhA cite praNamana kare
zuddha niSkAma bhAve, saMjJA sarve bhUlI jaI prabhu dhyAna ekAgra thA. 19.
AtmArAma guNagaNagurU bhAva AcArya sAcA, ne sasAdhu avadhUta muni bhAvagI ja
jAcA te sau pratye tana mana vace zuddha bhakti lahe che, ne sevAmAM
vidhiyutapaNe tatpara the rahe che. 20. janma mRtyu duHkha tyama jarA rega ne
zoka dvArA, A saMsAra svarUpa sahaje khUba lAge akArA; ne te kAragRha thakI sadA
chUTavAne cahe che, uddejIne bhAvabhaya thakI mikSa IcchA vahe che. 21 dAnAdina
abhigraha dharI sAdhusevA kare che, ne lokArpe tana-mana-dhane zakti save dhare
che; regI duHkhI dIna pramukhane auSadhArdi daue che, sAcA bhAve sukRta karatAM
puNya lhAvo lie che. 22. satazAstrone lakhI lakhavIne bhakti bhArI kahe che,
pUje arthe zravaNa grahaNe artha tene rahe che; bhavya pAse pragaTa karate teha
sakjhAya dave, cite bhAve paramathutane vizvamAMhI prabhAve. 23,

Page #242 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(16) When the Yogin hears the story of this seed, He immediately accepts it with
faith and enthusiasm; and towards it, he develops pure devotion, Truly, this is
a great and auspicious act of merit. 24. When the subtle delusion of the cycle
of births and deaths is destroyed, When the last particle of matter comes to an
end; then, in the human realm, this seed is sown, Where else can one find such a
great opportunity to act? 25. Seeing the suffering, the compassionate one's
heart melts with compassion, He feels the pain of the father, and is filled with
mercy; seeing the appropriate qualities, he serves everyone, This is considered
to be the last and most glorious act in the cycle of births and deaths. 26.
Then, he receives auspicious omens. Good, So that the seeker may receive the
guidance of the true Guru; the fruits of his actions will not be lost, He will
attain the goal of liberation, like an arrow that is aimed at its target. 27.
When the internal impurities are destroyed by serving the saints, The fruits of
the yogic actions are not delayed, one attains such virtues, and the Lord
attracts him to the path of liberation, as if it comes to him naturally. 28.
Sowing the seed of liberation, it will bear the fruit of liberation in the
future; it brings one closer to right faith, and brings joy forever. 29. "Having
attained the art of the yogic seed, this Kirat Chandra, The Lord attains
perfection, Haribhadra, the great sage. 30. ॥ इति महषि श्रीहरिभद्राचार्यविरचिते
किरत्चन्द्रसूनुमनःसुखनंदनेन भगवानदासेन सुमनानंदनीबृहत्टीकानामकविवेचनेन सप्रपञ्चं
विवेचिते श्रीयोगदृष्टिसमुच्चयशास्त्रे प्रथमा मित्रादृष्टिः ॥

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 '(16) yogadaSTisamuccaya jyAre te te bIja taNI kathA e A sAMbhaLe che,
zraddhAvege tarata sadahI mAnya tene kare che; ne te pratye parama dharate
zuddha Adeya bhAva, sAce che te mahataudayI bhArI puNya prabhAva. 24. pAkI jyAre
bhavapariNati maMda mithyAtva thAve, chello jyAre pudagalataNe atra Avarta Ave;
tyAre prAye manujagatimAM gabIje grahe A, bIjA AvuM mahata karavA vyakti
kayAMthI lahe A? 25 duHkhI dekhI dila drava dayAbhAva dhAre dayALu, te pitAnuM
duHkha gaNuM anukaMpa pAme kRpALu; rIjhe joI guNa ucita te seva saunI kare che,
chellA pherA mahi bhavataNA bhavya A Thare che. 26. tyAre tene zubha nimittane
sAMpaDe che. sAre, jethI AzrI sadaguru lahe pega nivacanAre; tenA kriyA phala
paNa pachI paMcanArA na thAve, laya pratye acUka zaranuM jema saMdhAna pAve. 27.
aMtara mela kSINa bahu thaye saMta sevA karatA, yega kriyA phala parama e vacakA
nA havaMtA, pAme AvA suguNa bhagavAna vega atra svabhAve, AkarSatuM zivapada
svayaM pAsamAM jema Ave. 28. anuSku vAvI gabIjo ci, bhAvI mokSaphalapradA; lAve
samyaktvane pAse, mane naMdana sarvadA. 29. " yoga-bIja kalA pAmI, A gIrAja
caMdra zA, bhagavAn pUrNatA pAme, haribhadra mahAyazA. 30.  //  iti mahaSi
zrIharibhadrAcAryaviracite kiratcandrasUnumanaHsukhanaMdanena bhagavAnadAsena
sumanAnaMdanIbRhatTIkAnAmakavivecanena saprapaJcaM vivecite
zrIyogadRSTisamuccayazAstre prathamA mitrAdRSTiH  //

Page #243 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Tara Deshți  Now, Tara Deshți is being discussed. Thus, it is said:  "In
Tara, the vision is clear, and the rules are of that kind. There is no anxiety
in the beginning of good deeds, and there is an inquiry into the nature of
truth." (41)  **Commentary:**  "Vision in Tara Deshți...mind like cow dung
fire...mind..." - S. - 1  This second vision, called Tara, is somewhat clearer
than the first, Mitra Deshți. It is compared to the fire of cow dung.
**Explanation:**  "Tara ya - in Tara Deshți, what? It is that - the vision is
somewhat clear. Nichen tathavidha - and the rules are of that kind, like
cleanliness, etc.; rules like desire, etc., also exist. Cleanliness,
contentment, austerity, self-study, and devotion to God are the five rules.
'ShaunasampatY:vadhyaye ghaliana tti: - based on this saying. Therefore, here,
there is also understanding from the second yoga, but in Mitra, there is a lack
of this - due to the lack of destruction and cessation of that kind. Tatha bana
hitar - in the beginning of the good deeds of the other world, there is no
anxiety. In the beginning of the good deeds related to the other world - in the
activity, there is no anxiety, it is free from anxiety. Because of this, there
is its achievement. Tatha nijgnasa taravavara - inquiry into the nature of
truth. Inquiry into the nature of truth - the desire to know - is the
consequence of this. (Non-hatred comes first, so the inquiry comes after it, in
accordance with it.)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 tArAdeSTi have tArA daSTi kahevAmAM Ave che. tethI ane kahe che tArAyAM tu
manAk spaSTaM niyamazca tathAvidhaH  /  anudvego hitArambhe jijJAsA tattvagocarA
//  41  //  tArA mahiM darzana Ta kaMI, niyama tehavo khAsa; anukrega hita
kAryamAM tattvaviSaya jijJAsa, 41, artha tArA dRSTimAM darzana jarAka spaSTa
hoya che ane tevA prakArano niyama, hita pravRttimAM anuga, tathA tattvaviSaya
saMbaMdhI jijJAsA heya che. vivecana "dazana tArA daSTimAM....mana gomaya agni
samAna...mana"--. sa. -1 A bIjI tArA nAmanI dRSTimAM darzana-bodha pahelI mitrA
daSTi karatAM kaMIka vadhAre spaSTa-ceka hoya che. ene gomayanA eTale chANanA
agnikanI upamA ghaTe che. vRtti-tArAya tu-tArA dRSTimAM te, zuM? te ke-manA
5chaM-kaMika spaSTa evuM darzana hoya che. nicana tathavidhaH-ane tathA
prakArano niyama, zauca Adi; IrachA Adi rUpa ja niyama paNa hoya che. zauca,
saMtoSa. tapa, svAdhyAya ane IzvarapraNidhAna e pAMca niyama che.
'zaunasaMpataY:vAdhyAye ghaLiyAnA tti: _e vacana uparathI. tethI atre ditIya-
bIjA yogathakI pratipatti paNa hoya che, paNa mitrAmAM te Ano abhAva ja
che,-tathA prakAranA kSayopazamanA abhAvane lIdhe. tathA banA hitAra-pAralaukika
hita AraMbhamAM anuoNga. paraloka saMbaMdhI hita kAryanA AraMbhamAM-pravRttimAM
anuga, udvega rahitapaNuM. A akheda sahita hoya. ethI karIne ja tenI siddhi hoya
che. tathA nijJAsA taravAvarA-taragecara jijJAsA. tattvaviSaya saMbaMdhI
jijJAsA-jANavAnI icchA,-aSathakI ja tenI pratipattinuM AnuguNa che. (adveSa guNa
pahelAM Avyo che, eTale tenA anuguNapaNetene pachIne jijJAsA guNa Ave che.)

Page #244 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(178) The yogadristi samuccaya (collection of yogic vision) is somewhat
brighter, more stable, and clearer than the fire of cow dung and tinder.
Similarly, the knowledge of this vision is also somewhat more detailed and
precise than the previous one. However, it is almost like the vision of a
friend, only the quantity is different. Just as the fire of cow dung cannot show
the true form of the desired object, this vision cannot show the true nature of
the self, etc., which is the desired object of the bound element - the ultimate
reality. It only gives a faint idea, because the fire of cow dung does not last
long, it is extinguished in a short time. Similarly, the knowledge of this
vision does not last long enough to be properly practiced. The light of the fire
of cow dung is dim and faint, similarly, the light of knowledge of this vision
is also weak and feeble. The fire of cow dung is extinguished in a moment, it
does not remain stable. Similarly, here too, the knowledge with weak power does
not leave a firm memory imprint, so there is no skillful and expert memory at
the time of action in life. And thus, because the light of the fire of cow dung
is very weak, it is not possible to achieve any true object-like work through
it. Similarly, because of the weakness and inferiority of this vision, acts of
worship, etc., do not happen from the heart, they are only material acts of
worship, etc.  Similarly, this is the second yogadristi. Therefore, according to
the rule mentioned earlier, it has (1) the second limb of yoga, niyama, (2) the
renunciation of the other defects, anug, and (3) the attainment of the virtue
called jijñāsā.  1. The second limb of yoga: niyama "Shaucha, santosh, and tapas
are good...mind is absorbed in the meditation of Ishvara...mind is established
in the five niyamas...mind" - Dasha Shray - 2, -1 After the attainment of the
first limb of yoga called yama, the second limb, niyama, is attained here in
sequence. The yamas like ahimsa, etc., are to be observed as long as the jiva
lives, and the niyamas are for a limited time, for a certain fixed time.
'Niyama: parimitaaso vaavjiä chamo priyate |' (Ratnakaranda Shravakachar). For
example, swadhyaya, tapas, etc., are for a certain fixed time, they are not for
the entire life of the jiva, therefore they are called niyamas. There are five
main niyamas: (1) shaucha, (2) santosh, (3) tapas, (4) swadhyaya, (5) Ishvara
pranidhana. And due to their intensity, they are of four types according to
their level - ichchha niyama, pravritti niyama, sthira niyama, siddhi niyama.
1. Shaucha - means purity, cleanliness, holiness; it cleanses the mind,

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (178) yogadaSTisamuccaya chANane agni taNakhalAnA agni karatAM kaMIka vadhAre
prakAzavaMta, vadhAre sthitivALe, vadhAre spaSTa hoya che, tema A daSTino bodha
paNa prathama karatAM kaMIka vadhAre vizada-ceka hoya che. topaNa te lagabhaga
mitrA dRSTi jevo ja che, mAtra mAtrAne ja phera che. eTale jema chANAnA
agnikaNane prakAza iSTa padArthanuM barAbara darzana karAvI zakatuM nathI, tema
A daSTine baMdha tatvathI-paramArthathI iSTa evA AtmatattvAdinuM darzana karAvI
zakato nathI, jhAMkhe khyAla mAtra Ape che, kAraNa ke chANAne agni lAMbe vakhata
Takato nathI, cheDIvAramAM bUjhAI jAya che, tema A dRSTine bodha paNa tene
samyaka barAbara prayoga karI zakAya eTale vakhata sthiti karato nathI-
jhAjhIvAra TakatuM nathI. chANAnA agnino prakAza maMda-jhAMkho hoya che, tema A
dRSTine bodhaprakAza paNa alpa-maMda vIryavALo hoya che. chANano agni
jotajotAmAM olavAI jAya che, tenI daDha sthiti rahevA pAmatI nathI, tema atre
paNa alpa vIryasthitivALA bodhane daDha smRtisaMskAra rahetuM nathI, eTale
jIvanamAM AcaraNarUpa praga veLAe paTu-nipuNa evI smRti hotI nathI. ane Ama
chANAnA agnine prakAza sAva pAMgaLo hovAthI, tenA vaDe karIne kaMI kharUM
padArtha darzanarUpa kArya banavuM saMbhavatuM nathI, tema A dRSTimAM bedhanuM
vikalapaNuM-hInapaNuM hovAthI, atre bhAvathI vaMdanAdi kArya banatA nathI,
dravya vaMdanAdi hoya che. tema ja A bIjI yogadaSTi che, eTale AgaLa kahelA
niyama pramANe, temAM (1) yoganuM bIju aMga niyama, (2) tathA bIjA deSanA
tyAgarUpa anuga, (3) ane bIjA jijJAsA nAmanA guNanI prApti thAya che. 1. yoganuM
bIjuM aMga : niyama "zauca saMteSa ne tapa bhaluM....manasajhAya Izvara dhyAna
re...mana niyama paMca IMhAM saMpaje...mana"--ga dasajhAya-2,-1 yama nAmanuM
yoganuM prathama aMga prApta thayA pachI, krama pramANe, tenuM bIjuM aMga niyama
ahIM sAMpaDe che. ahiMsA vagere je yama che, te yAjajIva-jIve tyAM lagI dhAraNa
karavAnA hoya che, ane je niyama che te parimita-maryAdita kAla parvatanA, amuka
mukarara niyata vakhata mATenA hoya che. 'niyama: parimitAso vAvajhIa camo
priyate |' (ratnakaraMDa zrAvakAcAra). jemake-svAdhyAya, tapa vagere amuka
cokakasa avadhArita samaya mATe hoya che, cAvaja jIva hatA nathI, mATe te niyama
kahevAya che. te niyama mukhya evA pAMca cheH (1) zauca. (2) saMteSa, (3) tapa,
(4) svAdhyAya, (5) Izvara praNidhAna. ane tenA vaLI taratamatAnA kAraNe, kakSAde
karIne, icchA vagere cAra prakAra che-IcchAniyama, pravRttiniyama, sthiraniyama,
siddhiniyama. 1. zauca-eTale zucipaNuM, zuddhi, pavitrapaNuM; manano mela sApha
kare che,

Page #245 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Translation:  **Tārādṛṣṭi: Another Gang-Rule, Definition of Śauca**  (179)
To purify the inner self, to remove inner defilement, that is true Śauca. Some
people consider water to be Śauca, which is not correct. Therefore, it may be
that the body is cleansed of dirt, Śauca = inner purity, and even that is not
truly possible, because the body itself is a mine of impurity, a receptacle of
impurity. Even if it is bathed in water as vast as the ocean for thousands of
years, it will not become pure! Even fish, poor things, stay in water for
twenty-four hours! Similarly, no matter how many pilgrimages one takes, Śauca is
not achieved. This external Śauca is not presented here, but rather internal
Śauca is desired.  The spiritual Śauca in the form of purity of thought, which
is Śauca like water, etc., may amaze the foolish, but not the wise. Because -
Oh! Foolish beings bathe once, bathe again, bathe a third time, and so on, they
bathe again and again in pure water and anoint this body, which is the seat of
excrement, with sandalwood and fragrant substances; and now they consider
themselves pure and become attached to it; but in reality it is not so. That
body never becomes pure. Can a receptacle of excrement ever become pure? It
never does.”  Śrī Mansukh Bhai K. in his work, Śāntasudhāras Vivecan, does not
give much importance to this external Śauca, considering its limited nature. His
vision is primarily directed towards inner purity. He bathes in the water of
meditation, in the purity of the lotus, in the form of emotional bathing. He
bathes in the pure peace of Brahmacharya, which is the holy pilgrimage within
the Dharma, and becomes pure and spotless, renouncing faults and becoming cool.”
“ध्यानांभसा तु जीवस्य सदा यच्छुद्धिकारणम् । કરું í સાબિચ માઘસ્નાનં તદુ ”—Śrī
Haribhadrasuri's Aṣṭaka “Dharma Jaganātha ne Dharma Śuci Gāīe, Āpane Ātmā Teha
Bhāviye.” “Par Pariṇati Raj Ke, Nirmal Siddhi Varant.”—Śrī Devacandraji x"
शौचमाध्यात्मिकं त्यक्त्वा भावशुद्धयात्मकं शुभम् ।।"  Narāśira, who is a wise
person, explains this truth to the foolish – Umaśvātiji in his work,
Vācakavaryaśrī. *" स्नायं स्नायं पुनरपि पुनः स्नांति पुण्याभिरभ्दिः वारंवारं बत
मलतनु चंदनैश्चर्चयंते । मूढात्मानो वयमपमला प्रोतिमित्याश्रयंते । नेो शुद्धयंते
कथमवकरः शक्यते शोध्धुमेवम् ॥" –Śrī Vinayavijayaji Mahārāj's Śāntasudhāras + “
धम्मे हरए बंभे संतितित्थे, अणाइले अत्तपसन्नलेसे । - Poet or Poet, Murati Mūro
Pagāmi San Chhe? –Śrī Uttarādhyayana Sūtra " आत्मा नदी संयमते।यपूर्णा, सत्यावहा
शीततटा दयार्मिः। તત્રામિણે પાડુપુત્ર ? – Vāṇi Śudrathati Cātarātmā II” –Śrī
Mahābhārata,

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 tArAdaSTiH bIju gAMga-niyama, zaucanI vyAkhyA (179) aMta zuddhi karavI,
AtmamalinatA dUra karavI, te ja kharUM zauca che. keTalAka loke jalathI ja zauca
mAne che, te yukta nathI. tethI te kadAca zarIrane mela sApha zauca=aMtaHzuddhi
thAya, ane te paNa kharekharI rIte banavA yogya nathI, kAraNa ke zarIra pote ja
azucinI khANa che, azucine ukaraDo che. te hajAro varSa sudhI sAgara jeTalAM
jalathI paNa snAna karatAM zuddha na thAya ! ema mAchalAM paNa bicArA vIse
kalAka pANImAM paDyA rahe che ! tema game teTalA tIrtha snAna karyuM paNa zauca
thatuM nathI. A bAhya zauca ahIM prastuta nathI, paNa aMtaraMga zauca ja
vivakSita che. bhAvazuddhirUpa AdhyAtmika zaucane cheDI, je jala Adi zauca che,
te bhale mUDha janane vismaya pamADe, paNa budha janane nahiM. kAraNa ke- aho !
mUDha jIvo eka vAra nAhyA, bIjI vAra nAhyA, trIjI vAra nAhyA, ema pharI pharI
zuddha jaLavaDe nahAya che ane malanA sthAnarUpa A zarIrane caMdana-sukhaDathI
carca che; ane have ame pavitra chIe ema gaNI enA para prIti-moha dhare che;
paNa vAstavika rIte ema nathI. e zarIra kadI zuddha nathI thatuM. ukaraDo kadI
zuddha thAya kharo? na ja thAya." zrI manasukhabhAI kI. kRta zAMtasudhArasa
vivecana budha ane te AvA bAhya zaucane tenI kavacita gyatA karatAM jhAjhuM
mahatva ApatA nathI. teonI daSTi te mukhyapaNe aMtaraMga zuddhi bhaNI ja hoya
che. teo te dhyAnarUpa jalavaDe, kamalanI zuddhi karavArUpa bhAva snAna kare
che. dhamarUpa* drahanI aMdara brahmacaryarUpa nirmala zAMtitIrthamAM teo snAna
karI vimala vizuddha thAya che, doSane tyAga karI zItala thAya che."
"dhyAnAMbhasA tu jIvasya sadA yacchuddhikAraNam  /  karuM i sAbica mAghasnAnaM
tadu "--zrI haribhadrasUrikRta aSTaka "dhama jaganAthane dharma zuci gAIe, ApaNe
AtamA teha bhAvIe. " " para pariNati raja ke, nirmala siddhi varaMta."--zrI
devacaMdrajI x" zaucamAdhyAtmikaM tyaktvA bhAvazuddhayAtmakaM zubham  /  / "
narAzire cahuM mUDhavidaEApana di tatva -vAcakavaryazrI umAsvAtijI. *" snAyaM
snAyaM punarapi punaH snAMti puNyAbhirabhdiH vAraMvAraM bata malatanu
caMdanaizcarcayaMte  /  mUDhAtmAno vayamapamalA protimityAzrayaMte  /  neo
zuddhayaMte kathamavakaraH zakyate zodhdhumevam  // " -zrI vinayavijayajI
mahArAjakRta zAMtasudhArasa + " dhamme harae baMbhe saMtititthe, aNAile
attapasannalese  /  - kavi oro vimo viyuddho, muratimUro pagAmi saM che ? -zrI
uttarAdhyayana sUtra " AtmA nadI sNymte|ypuurnnaa, satyAvahA zItataTA dyaarmiH|
tatrAmiNe pADuputra ? - vANi zudrathati cAtarAtmA II" -zrI mahAbhArata,

Page #246 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(100) While the collection of *gadashti* may be somewhat useful for householders
and others, the insistence on external cleanliness is entirely *mithya*. The
true *shauch* is to cleanse the inner self of the *parparinaati* (external
influences) as much as possible and to reveal the pure nature of the soul, which
is *shuchi*, *nirmal*, *pavitra*, and *shuddha*. This is the true *shauch* that
is acceptable to all saints.  Or, *shauch* is *nirlobhata* (non-attachment).
This too is a form of inner purity, because *lebha* (attachment) is said to be
the root of all sins. As *labha* (gain) increases, so does *lebha*. This is
stated in the *Shri Uttaraadhyaayana Sutra*.  "Cha ta roho." Therefore, limit
*lebha* as much as possible. *Shauch* = *nirlobhata* is to bring *lebha* under
control. To desire the possessions of others, to be attached to *parparinaati*,
to be greedy for the things of others, these are the signs of *lebha*. As one
gives up the color of *parparinaati*, the *shauch* of *nirlobhata* is revealed.
As the desire for the possessions of others diminishes, so does the *shauch* of
the soul, its purity and holiness, and inner purity increases. Thus, both are
one and the same.  Or, *shauch* is *pramaanikta* (honesty). A honest person will
not touch the possessions of others, nor will they even think about them. They
can understand everyone, young and old. Therefore, to not even touch the
possessions of others is *shauch*. If one has mistakenly taken the possessions
of others, to return them and demonstrate honesty is *shauch* in the form of
honesty. As the contact with the possessions of others and *parparinaati*
diminishes, the quality of *shauch* increases. Thus, these three definitions are
one and the same.  "I am more attached to the *parbhaav* than myself, I am a
*bhakt* *pudgal* (devotee); The *kaarak* (doer), the *kaarak* (doer), the
*graahak* (receiver), I am attached to them, I am the *jad* (inert) *bhaabhoop*
(king of the world)...*Namiprabha* 0 - *Shri Devchandraji*  "The mine of urine
and feces, the abode of disease and old age; Considering the body as such,
abandon pride and make it meaningful." - *Shrimad Rajchandraji*  These are the
fruits of *shauch* (purity): (1) *Swaangajugupsa* - When one considers the form
of the father's body, one sees its impurity, therefore, one feels disgust and
aversion towards the mine of urine and feces, one feels repulsed, and this body
is impure. Therefore, there is no attachment, pride, or insistence on duty in
it. (2) *Anyairasangama* - Not being in contact with others.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (100) gadaSTisamuccaya Ama gRhasthAdine kAraNavizeSe kaMIka upayogitA chatAM
bAhya zaucano Agraha sarvathA mithyA che. AtmAne parapariNatirUpa aMdarane mela
jema bane tema sApha kare, ane AtmAne zuci-nirmala-pavitra zuddha svabhAvarUpa
svadharma pragaTa kare -e ja sAcuM bhAva zauca sarva saMtajanene saMmata che.
athavA zauca eTale nirlobhatA, nirlobhIpaNuM. A paNa aMtarazuddhirUpa che;
kAraNa ke lebha sarva pApanuM mULa kahevAya che. lAbha vadhe tema lebha vadhe
ema zrI uttarAdhyayana sUtramAM kahyuM che. "cA tA roho." mATe jema bane tema
lebhane maryAdita kara, zauca=nirlobhatA amuka cokkasa niyamamAM ANa te zauca
che. parapadArthane Iccha, para pariNatimAM lebhAguM, paravastunI lAlaca rAkhavI
te lebhanA lakSaNa che. parapariNatine raMga jema jema devA jAya, tema tema
nirlobhapaNArUpa zauca pragaTatuM jAya che. A paravastune lebha-lAlasA bhAva
jema jema ghaTe tema tema zauca eTale AtmAnuM zucipaNuM-pavitrapaNuM pragaTe,
aMta:zuddhi vadhatI jAya. Ama banne ekAvAcI che. athavA zauca eTale pramANiktA
(Honesty) che. je pramANika mANasa hoya, te pArakI vastu rahe nahiM, spaze paNa
nahiM. te AbAlavRddha sarva keI samajI zake che, mATe parapadArthane jema bane
tema hAtha paNa na lagADe te zauca = zauca che pArakI vastu bhUlathI paNa lIdhI
hoya te te pAchI ApI pramANikatA devI e pramANikapaNArUpa zauca che. jema jema
paravastune ne parapariNatine saMsarga raMga chUTato jAya, tema tema zauca guNa
phuTa thatuM jAya che. Ama A traNe vyAkhyAnI ekavAkyatA che. "huM karatA huM
karatA parabhAvane hoja, bhaktA pudgalarUpa; kAraka kAraka grAhaka ehane hajI,
rAcce jaDa bhavabhUpa...namiprabha0-zrI devacaMdrajI "khANa mUtra ne maLanI,
roga jarAnuM nivAsanuM dhAma; kAyA evI gaNIne, mAna tyajIne kara sArthaka Ama."
--zrImad rAjacaMdrajI A zaucanI bhAvanAthI ATalA phaLa Ave che:-(1) *
svAMgajugupsA-pitAnI kAyAnA rUpane vicAra karatAM tenuM azucipaNuM jaNAya che,
eTale te malamUtranI khANa prati jugupsA-dhRNuM upaje che, sUga Ave che, ane A
kAyA azuci che. mATe emAM leza mAtra mithyA meha-mAna-Agraha kartavya nathI. (2)
anya sAthe asaMgama-bIjA kAya* " jJovAnuM hA 7TcNA gharasaMsadA
suNaravazuddhitaubanAvyeniyanathAramanatyAna ja "pA. . 2, 40-41. "
zaucabhAvanayA svAGgajugupsA'nyairasaMgamaH  /  satvazuddhiH saumanasyekA-
yAkSajayayogyatA  // " -zrI yazovijayajIkRta dvA dvA

Page #247 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Translation:  **Tāradṛṣṭi Sateṣ, Tap, Svādhyāya**  (181) Vante - Dehadhāriyo
sāthe asangama etle tene samparka nu parivarjana thay chhe. Je kharakhar! Pote j
asucimay pitāni kāyāne jaguse chhe, te tevi j asucimay pāraki kāyāo sāthe
sansarga kem anubhave? (3) Sattvavṛddhi-prakāś-sukhātmaka susattani śuddhi thay
chhe, etle ke rajasū-tamas rahitapanu thay chhe. (4) Saumanasya-khedana
ananubhavthi mānasī prīti upaje chhe, cittprasannatā thay chhe. (5) Ekā-
ekāgrapanu, etle niyat viṣaya mā cittanu sthirapanu thay chhe. (6) Idriyayaj-
idriyanu jay thay chhe. (7) Ātmadarśan gratā-viṣayapāmukha nu etle je viṣayathi
vimukha thay hoy te nu svātma mā avasthān-sthiti thay chhe, ane vivekakhyātirūpa
ātmadarśan mā gyatā prāpt thay chhe, samarthapanu sāmpade chhe.  2. Santeṣ-prāpt
sthiti mā tuṣṭa rahevu, prasanna-rāji rahevu, sadā khushamījāj mā rahevu te
santeṣ chhe. Ā santoṣathi bhego pag padārtha ni maryādā bandhāy chhe, parigrah
parimānu nu niyaman karāy chhe, āranbh ni nivṛtti thay chhe. Bāki “Tṛṣṇā te ākāś
jevi anant chhe.” “Pratyek prāṇi dīṭh tṛṣṇārūpa ūde khāde chhe, temā ākhū viśva
ek aṇu jeṭlu chhe, te pachhi tena bhāge keṭlu āvśe?” * Ām tṛṣṇāne khāḍo kadī
pūrāto nathi. Cakravartī ni ṛiddhithi ke meru jevadā senā nā ḍungarathi pan je
tṛṣṇā chīpāti nathi, te pāmar manuşya ni pāmar sampattithi śī rīte chīpavāni
hati? Jem jem ā jīv tṛṣṇatarang mā taṇāte jāy chhe, tem tem te vadhāre ne
vadhāre ūndā tṛṣṇājala mā utartā jāy chhe! Satīśvara Śrīmad Rajacandrajīe sācu j
kahyu chhe ke “Hati dīnatai tyāre tāki patelāi ane, na maḷī patelāi tyāre tāki
chhe śethāine; sāpaḍī śethāi tyāre tāki mantriṭāi ane, Āvi mantriṭāi tyāre tāki
nṛpatāine, maḷī nṛpatāi tyāre tāki devatāine, Dīṭhi devatāi tyāre tāki
śankarāine ahe! Rājyacandra māne māna śankarāi maḷī, Vadhe tṛṣṇāi tey jāy na
marāine.”—Śrī Mokṣamālā Ā viṣayatṛṣṇā nu nivaran niyaman karana santeṣ chhe jem
jem par vastu ni mṛgatṛṣṇāne-zhānzavā nā jala ne moh ōchho thātā jāy chhe, tem
tem santeṣ guṇ ni * “Ti ṭu Bhāratamā maḷatiyā ”—Śrī Uttaraādhyāyan Sūtra,
“Mārāmḥ katiḷi caman viśvam apūTY | Ca vihan kriyāti vṛthā te viṣaceṣitā? –Śrī
Guṇabhadra Svāmījīkṛta Śrī Ātmānuśāsan, " Santāpānām: muḍhiām: I'-pāto o 2-42.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 tArAdaSTi sateSa, tapa, svAdhyAya (181) vaMte-dehadhArIo sAthe asaMgama eTale
tene saMparkanuM parivarjana thAya che. je kharekhara ! pote ja azucimaya pitAnI
kAyAne jaguse che, te tevI ja azucimaya pArakI kAyAo sAthe saMsarga kema
anubhave ? (3) sattvavRddhi-prakAza-sukhAtmaka susattanI zuddhi thAya che, eTale
ke rajasU-tamasa rahitapaNuM thAya che. (4) saumanasya-khedanA ananubhavathI
mAnasI prIti upaje che, cittaprasannatA thAya che. (5) ekA-ekAgrapaNuM, eTale
niyata viSayamAM cittanuM sthirapaNuM thAya che. (6) Idriyajaya-idriyano jaya
thAya che. (7) Atmadarzana gratA-viSayapAmukhanuM eTale je viSayathI vimukha
thayA hoya tenuM svAtmAmAM avasthAna-sthiti thAya che, ane vivekakhyAtirUpa
AtmadarzanamAM gyatA prApta thAya che, samarthapaNuM sAMpaDe che. 2. saMteSa-
prApta sthitimAM tuSTa rahevuM, prasanna-rAjI rahevuM, sadA khuzamIjAjamAM
rahevuM te saMteSa che. A saMtoSathI bhego paga padArthanI maryAdA baMdhAya che,
parigraha parimANanuM niyamana karAya che, AraMbhanI nivRtti thAya che. bAkI
"tRSNa te AkAza jevI anaMta che." "pratyeka prANI dITha tRSNArUpa UDe khADe che,
temAM AkhuM vizva eka aNu jeTaluM che, te pachI tenA bhAge keTaluM Avaze ?" *
Ama tRSNAne khADo kadI pUrAto nathI. cakravartInI RddhithI ke meru jevaDA senAnA
DuMgarathI paNa je tRSNA chIpatI nathI, te pAmara manuSyanI pAmara saMpattithI
zI rIte chIpavAnI hatI ? jema jema A jIva tRSNataraMgamAM taNAte jAya che, tema
tema te vadhAre ne vadhAre UMDA tRSNAjalamAM utarato jAya che ! satIzvara zrImad
rAjacaMdrajIe sAcuM ja kahyuM che ke "hatI dInatAI tyAre tAkI paTelAI ane, na
maLI paTelAI tyAre tAkI che zeThAIne; sAMpaDI zeThAI tyAre tAkI maMtritAI ane,
AvI maMtritAI tyAre tAkI nRpatAIne, maLI nRpatAI tyAre tAkI devatAI ane, dIThI
devatAI tyAre tAkI zaMkarAIne ahe ! rAjyacaMdra mAne mAna zaMkarAI maLI, vadhe
tRSNAI teya jAya na marAIne."--zrI mokSamALA A viSayatRSNanuM nivAraNa niyamana
karanAra saMteSa che jema jema para vastunI mRgatRSNAne-jhAMjhavAnA jaLane moha
ocho thato jAya che, tema tema saMteSa guNanI * "ti Tu bhAratamAM maLatiyA "--
zrI uttarAdhyayana sUtra, "mArAmaH katiLi camana vizvamapUTY | ca vihaM kriyAti
vRthA te viSaceSitA ? -zrI guNabhadrasvAmIjIkRta zrI AtmAnuzAsana, "
saMtApAnAma: muDhiAma: I'-pAtao o 2-42.

Page #248 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(182) **The Accumulation of Fourfold Vision**  The measure increases. As the
soul, freed from the objects of the five senses, becomes satiated with
attachment, it continues to detach itself from attachment, and thus experiences
the peace of self-satisfaction. Therefore, the seeker of liberation, the yogi,
who possesses this vision, desires to attain this satisfaction-bliss, which is
independent of the soul.  **3. Austerity**  Austerity is that which is practiced
for the destruction of karma or for the purpose of purification. Or, that
austerity which makes the soul shine in its own form, which makes it extremely
radiant, which makes it shine with its own inherent brilliance, is called
'austerity'. Just as fruits like mangoes ripen quickly due to heat, so too karma
ripens quickly and is destroyed by the heat of the fire of austerity. There are
many types of austerity, but the main division is this: there are six external
austerities, such as fasting, and six internal austerities, such as atonement
and self-study. External austerity is beneficial to internal austerity, it makes
it conducive, it is a helpful cause. Because when there is fasting, etc., many
external distractions are eliminated, the mind remains pure, it does not become
distracted, and there is an opportunity to engage in self-study, devotion, etc.
Even in fasting, etc., one should renounce the objects of attachment, one should
not indulge in sleep, eating, playing, etc., one should constantly focus on the
growth of internal austerity, and one should strive to dwell in the self as much
as possible. Only then can it truly be called 'fasting'. Otherwise, it is merely
a formality!  **X**  **D**  "My knowledge is like a red-hot iron, burning with
attachment; He who experiences that equanimity, that taste, is filled with
wisdom." - Shri Devchandraji  **D**  "Where the renunciation of the objects of
attachment is prescribed, That is fasting, say the wise." - Shri Mokshamarg
Prakash  **K**  "Where there is renunciation of the passions, meditation on
Brahman, and on the Jina, That is pure knowledge, that is the best." - Shri
Adhyatmasar  Thus, external austerity strengthens internal austerity, it removes
the obstacles to its practice, therefore it is essential, but not in a
mechanical way; rather, it should be done with understanding, with knowledge.
**66**  "The wise man, having controlled his senses, remains steadfast in his
knowledge. His knowledge is established in the objects of the senses." - Shri
Gita  **"C**  "That which is practiced for the destruction of karma is called
austerity."  "Austerity is born from the self." - Shri Amritchandracharya  *

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (182) ceAgadaSTisamuccaya mAtrA vadhatI jAya che. jema jema pAMca iMdriyanA
viSayamAMthI virAma pAmatA jaI, paratRSNAthI paritapta thayele AtmA paratRSNA
cheDatA jAya che, tema tema te AtmAthI paritRpta thai sateASajanya AtmazAMti
anubhavatA jAya che. eTale ja A dRSTivALA mumukSu jogIjana jema ane tema
iMdriyAnI viSayatRSNAmAMthI x pAche| haThI, AtmAdhIna evuM satASasukha meLavavA
icche che. 3. tapa--kamanA kSaya athe, nirjarA arthe je tapavAmAM Ave, te tapa
che. athavA je tapa-tejavaDe AtmAnu svarUpamAM pratapavuM-atyaMta pratApavaMta
hAvuM, nija svarUpateje jhaLahaLavu', te ' tapa' kahevAya che. jema Amraksa
vagere phaLa garamI vagerethI jaldI pAke che, tema kama paNa tapa-agninA tApathI
zIghra pAkIne nijare che. A tapanA aneka prakAra che, paNa temAM mukhya khAra
bheda che,-upavAsa, UNAdarI vagere cha bAhya tapa che, ane prAyazcitta,
svAdhyAya vagere cha abhyaMtara tapa che. bAhya tapa, abhyaMtara tapane upakArI
thAya che, anukULatA karI Ape che, sahAyakArI kAraNarUpa thAya che. kAraNa ke-
jyAre upavAsAdi hAya che, tyAre ghaNI bAhya paMcAta maTI jAya che, mana svaccha
rahe che, pramAda thatA nathI, ane svAdhyAya--bhakti AdimAM pravartAvAnI
anukULatA-anukULa taka maLe che. A upavAsa vageremAM paNa jema ane tema
viSayakaSAyane! tyAga karavA joie, uMghavuM-pAnA ramavA vagere pramAda na heAvA
joie, AbhyaMtara tapanI vRddhi bhaNI niraMtara lakSa rAkhaveA joie, ne jema bane
tema AtmAnI upa-pAse vAsa karavAne prayAsa karavA joie, te ja te kharekharo
'upavAsa' kahI zakAya. nahiM te lAMghaNu ja che! X dra muja jJAyakatA pararasI
re lAla0 para tRSNAe taptare; te samatA rasa anubhave re lAla. sumati sevana
vyAptare."--zrI devaca'drajI da 'kaSAyaviSayAhAratyAgo yatra vidhIyate  /
upavAsaH sa trijJo roSa chAna vidu: || ...zrI mokSamArga prakAza, k yatraH
rAdhaH kaSAyANAM brahmadhyAnaM jinasya ca  /  jJAtanya tatta: zuddhamatraziSTa
tu nam |"-zrI adhyAtmasAra, Ama bAhya tapa, Abhya'tara tapane puSTi Ape che,
tenA sAdhananI nirAkulatA karI Ape che, tethI te kabdha che ja,paraMtu
kriyAjaDapaNe nahi; paNa samajaNapUrva ka-jJAna 66 yA saMte pAcaM meDiniya
sayaMzaH  /  rUdriyALIndriyArtheyastasya prajJA pratiSThitA ||"--zrI gItA. "C
paraM karmakSayArtha' yattapyate tat tapaH smRtam  // " " svarUpe
prasavanAttava:|| "-- zrI amRtaca`drAcArya che. *

Page #249 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  The Increasing Radiance of the Ascetic  (183)  Knowledge should guide
actions, always mindful of one's limitations. Only then does it become
beneficial.  Otherwise,  excessive austerities, driven by ego or mere show, like
prolonged fasts, or ignorant practices like mass-feeding,  do not alleviate the
suffering of birth and death.  As the scriptures say, "An ignorant person, even
after years of austerities, cannot exhaust karma, while a wise person can do so
in a single breath."  Physical austerities alone are childish and ignorant.
Therefore, knowledge is essential for true benefit.  "One who endures hardship,
practices restraint, and mortifies the body, but lacks knowledge, will not
escape suffering." - *Savaso Gatha*  "The weak, the naked, and the fasting, but
those who are still attached to Maya, will continue to take countless births." -
*Sa. 2. Ga. St.*  The true austerity is internal.  *Swadhyaya* (self-study),
*Prayaschitta* (atonement), *Vyaavachch* (discernment), *Vyutsarg*
(renunciation), *Vinaya* (humility), and *Dhyana* (meditation) are the six types
of internal austerity.  These have many sub-categories.  Through these, the
inner self is purified, karma is shed, and one attains purity.  Just as fire
refines gold, removing impurities, so too, knowledge-based austerity refines the
soul, removing internal impurities.  Austerity leads to the destruction of
*kleshas* (afflictions) and other impurities, resulting in the attainment of
physical and sensory perfection.  "Austerity leads to the perfection of sleep,
energy, and purity." (*Pa. 2-43*)  As this knowledge-based austerity
intensifies, the soul radiates like the sun.  It becomes serene and cool like
the moon.  Thus, it attains the great *Mangal* (auspicious) state.  The ascetic
then becomes worthy of the salutations of the wise, a *Buddhi* (intellect).
With increasing radiance, they become a *Nigantha* (Jain) *Jnata* (knower)
*Siddhi-data* (bestower of liberation), a *Guru* (teacher).  Or, they become a
*Shukra* (Venus), radiating with the full power of the soul.  Then, the diseases
of the body, mind, and speech become weak like *Shani* (Saturn).  Finally, they
attain liberation, moving towards the ultimate state of *Swaroop Siddhi*
(perfection of form).  This is the unparalleled glory of austerity.  This is the
sentiment that Shrimad Rajchandraji has beautifully depicted in *Moksha Mala*,
in his unique style.  "An ignorant person, even after countless births, cannot
exhaust karma, while a wise person can do so in a single breath." - *Shri
Yashvijayji* - *Shri Adhyatma Saar*

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 tArAdaSTiH tapasvInuM vadhatuM jatuM teja (183) karavAmAM Ave, potAnI zaktinI
maryAdA-gajuM khyAlamAM rAkhIne ja jJAnapUrvaka karavAmAM Ave, te ja te
kalyANakArI thAya che. bAkI gajA uparavaTa thaIne yathAzakti tapa mamatanI
khAtara athavA dekhAdekhIthI mahinA mahinAnA upavAsa kheMca vAmAM Ave, athavA
manamAM mAyAne raMga rAkhI ajJAnapaNe mAsakhamaNa vagere tapazcaryA karavAmAM
Ave, te paNa janmamaraNa du:kha TaLatuM nathI. eTale ja zAstramAM kahyuM che ke-
ajJAnIjha kroDe varSa tapa karatAM paNa je karma kSINa karI zakatA nathI, te
jJAnI eka zvAse zvAsa mAtramAM kSINa kare che. kevala kAyakalezarUpa tapa te
bAla tapa che, ajJAna tapa che, mATe tapa jJAnapUrvaka hoya te ja kalyANa thAya
che. kaSTa kare saMyama dhare, gALo nija deha; jJAnadazA viNa jIvane, nahiM
duHkhane che."--savAso gAthAnuM stavana durbala nagna ne mAsa upavAsI, paNa je
mAyA raMga re; tepaNa garbha anaMtA leze, bole bIju aMga re"--sA. 2. gA. sta.
kharekharUM mukhya tapa te AtyaMtara tapa che. svAdhyAya, prAyazcitta,
vaiyAvacca, vyutsarga, vinaya, ne dhyAna e aMtaraMga tapanA cha prakAra che.
tenA vaLI aneka uttara bheda che. A tapathI aMtarAtmAnI zuddhi thatI jAya che,
karmamala gaLAto jAya che, nirjarate jAya che. jema agnimAM tapAvavAthI senAno
mela gaLAI jaI te cekhuM thatuM jAya che, tema jJAnapUrvaka tapathI AtmAno
aMdarane mela gaLAte jaI AtmA ceka bane che. tapathI kalezAdi azucinA kSayathI
kAya-indriyanI siddhi thAya che. "nidrasiddhiAzukriyAna tapAH " (pA. . 2-43).
ane jema jema A jJAnapUrvaka tapanuM aMtasteja vadhatuM jAya che, tema tema AtmA
ravi'nI jema pratApI tejathI jhaLahaLato jAya che. te sAdhIne te "sema' (caMdra
je saumya-zItala) bane che. eTale te mahAna "maMgala" paMkti pAme che.
tapasvInuM eTale pachI te "budha janonA praNAmanuM pAtra-"at " thAya che, ne
vadhatuM teja nigraMtha jJAtA siddhidAtA "guru" bane che, athavA te paripUrNa
Atma vIryathI virAjate "zuka" thAya che, ane tyAM triga-mana vacana kAyAnA roga
kevaLa maMda (zani) thAya che, ne pachI svarUpasiddhimAM vicarI te virAma pAme
che ! A A tapano apUrva mahimA che. A ja bhAva zrImad rAjacaMdrajIe mokSamALAmAM
pitAnI ananya lAkSaNika zailImAM pradarzita karyo che - x "ajJAnI tapasA
janmakoTibhiH karma yannayet  /  /  anta jJAnatApujatA naiva saMta -zrI
yazovijayajIkRta zrI adhyAtmasAra

Page #250 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(184) The collection of Gadasthi says, "Papdhyane becomes like the sun,
achieving that, remain steady and help; the great one attains the auspicious
line, then he bows to Budhan. The certain knower, the guru, the Siddha, the
giver, or the self-fulfilled Shuk, well-known; there, the Trig attains only the
weak, the form-Siddha wanders and rests." 4. Swaadhyaaya-Sakzaya, with Pranava,
the mantras; or reading, contemplation, and deep study of the scriptures, to
investigate is Sakzaya. To study the essence of the self, to contemplate is
Swaadhyaaya. I am the pure consciousness-essence soul, completely different from
the body and all other things, to remain in that self-awareness, to abandon the
self-consciousness in the body, to abandon the body-consciousness, and to have
self-consciousness in the soul, that is the best kind of Swaadhyaaya. Or, to
read and think about spiritual texts that strengthen that self-awareness; to
sing, praise, and chant in a state of detachment and devotion; to ask questions
to resolve doubts; to give Dharma-katha-vyakhyan, as if teaching the soul of the
father without ego, to cultivate the feeling of detachment - these are the types
of Swaadhyaaya. Through Swaadhyaaya, one sees the desired deity.
Swaadhyaayadidevatasam: " (Pai Tho 2-44). "Read, contemplate, and investigate
the scriptures, the spiritual knowledge, the path, the purpose." - Shri
Anandghanaji "By cultivating the self-awareness, the soul attains Kevalgyaan."
5. Ishwarpranidhaan - to focus the mind on the Supreme Soul, Parameshwar, to
contemplate is Ishwarpranidhaan. To connect the mind with its form, to merge the
mind, to become one with it, is called Ishwarpranidhaan. Ishwar is the one in
whom knowledge and other infinite powers have emerged, manifested, who has
become the master, the lord, the Ishwar of the infinite soul-essence. The pure
Siddha soul who has attained the supreme state of Paramatmapada, that is Ishwar.
"That Ishwar Dev, who has his own wonderful Ishwarta; The power of
disappearance, manifests and reveals all." "Whose infinite Dharma has
manifested, who is the ultimate perfection; Paramatma Jindev here, the ocean of
knowledge and other qualities...Swami! I request with a loving mind." - Shri
Devchandraji To do pranidhaan of such a Paramatma-Parameshwar who has attained
that state, to contemplate with a focused mind is Ishwarpranidhaan. Then, that
Ishwar may be known by many names like Prabhu, Jin, Ahanta, Shiv, Shankar,
Buddha, etc. Because, despite the difference in names, there is no difference in
meaning. It is enough that there is the Ishwar-ness with the true qualities.
That Ishwar-ness is worthy of worship, no matter what name it is called. For
example -

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (184) gadaSTisamuccaya "papadhyAne ravirUpa thAya, te sAdhIne sama rahI sahAya;
mahAna te maMgaLa paMkti pAme, Ave pachI te budhana praNAme. nircatha jJAtA guru
siddha dAtA, kAM to svayaM zuka prapUrNa khyAtA; triga tyAM kevaLa maMda pAme,
svarUpa siddha vicarI virAme." 4. svAdhyAya-sakjhAya, praNavapUrvaka maMtrone
ja; athavA sazAstranuM vAMcana, manana, nididhyAsana karavuM, parizIlana karavuM
te sajhAya. Atmatatvane abhyAsa karavo, ciMtana karavuM te svAdhyAya che. dehAdi
samasta para vastuthI huM sarvathA bhinna e zuddha caitanyamUtti AtmA chuM, evI
AtmabhAvane bhAvatA rahI, dehamAM Atmabuddhi choDI devI, dehAdhyAsa choDI deva,
ane AtmAmAM Atmabuddhi karavI, e uttama prakAranA svAdhyAya che. athavA tevI
AtmabhAvanAne puSTa kare, evA adhyAtma graMtha vAMcavA-vicAravA; vairAgya-
bhaktivAhI pade, bhajana, stavana gAvA, lalakAravA; zaMkAsamAdhAna arthe pRcchA
karavI; nirabhimAnapaNe jANe pitAnA AtmAne bodha detA hoya evI rIte dharmakathA-
vyAkhyAna karavuM, vairAgya bhAvanA bhAvavI,-e vagere svAdhyAyanA prakAra che.
svAdhyAyathI ISTa devatAnuM darzana thAya che. svAdhyAyAdidevatAsaM : " (pAi
thao 2-44). "graMtha adhyAtama zravaNa manana karI re, parizIlana naya
heta."-zrI AnaMdaghanajI "Atama bhAvanA bhAvatAM, jIva lahe kevalajJAna che." 5.
IzvarapraNidhAna-ekAgra citte paramAtmA paramezvaranuM dhyAna dharavuM, ciMtana
karavuM te IzvarapraNidhAna. tenA svarUpa sAthe cittanuM anusaMdhAna-jeDANa
karavuM, cittanuM lInapaNuM karavuM, tanmayapaNuM karavuM te IzvarapraNidhAna
kahevAya che. Izvara eTale jenAmAM jJAnAdi anaMta ezvarya Avirbhata thayuM che-
pragaTa thayuM che, je anaMta AtmAddhinA svAmI-prabhu-Izvara banyA che te. jeNe
parama evA paramAtmapadane prApta karyuM che, evA zuddha siddha AtmA te Ivara.
"se Izvara deva, jeNe IzvaratA ho nija adabhuta varI; tirobhAvanI zakti,
AvirbhAve he sakala pragaTa karI." "jehanA dharma anaMtA pragaTayA, je nija
pariNati variye; paramAtama jinadeva ahIM, jJAnAdika guNa dariye re...svAmI !
vinaviye manarage." -zrI devacaMdrajI evA paramAtmA-paramezvara padane prApta
thayela IzvaranuM praNidhAna karavuM, ekAgra citte dhyAna-ciMtana karavuM te
IzvarapraNidhAna che. pachI te Izvarane bhale prabhu, jina, ahaMta , ziva,
zaMkara, buddha vagere aneka nAme oLakhavAmAM AvatuM hoya. kAraNa ke nAmabheda
chatAM arthabheda nathI. tathArUpa yathArtha guNavALuM IzvarapaNuM hoya eTale
basa. te IzvarapaNuM ja pUjya che, pachI game te nAme mare. jemake -

Page #251 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
"Tārādadī īśvaramaṇidhāna, anug (185) “Śiva Śaṅkara Jagadīśvaru, Cidānanda
Bhagavān; Jin Arihā Tīrthakaru, Joti Svarūpa Asamāna. Śrī Supārśva, Alakha
Niranjana Vachalu, Sakala Jantu Viśarāma Abhayadāna Dātā Sadā, Pūraṇa
Ātamārāma... Śrī Supārśva Vidhi Viranchi Viśvabhāru, Hṛṣīkeśa Jaganātha; Aghahar
Aghamechana Dhāṇī, Mukti Parampada Sātha.. Śrī Supārśva Ema Aneka Abhidhā Dhare,
Anubhavgamya Vicāra; Je Jāṇe Tehane Kare, Ānandaghaṇa Avatāra... Śrī Supārśva ”
Śrī Āna Dghanajī E * īśvarane Śā Māte Āradhavā Joīye? Jevu Te īśvaranu Svarūpa
Chhe, Tevu Ā Ātmānu Svarūpa Chhe, Te Nu Bhāna Thavā Māte. Prabhu Pite Te Śuddha
Ātmasvarūpa Ne Pāmela Hoī, Ādarśarūpa Chhe. Te Ādarśa Dekhīne, Jīvane Potāna
Svarūpa Ne Lakṣa Āradhana Hetu Thaye E J Bhhakti-Upāsana Ne Mukhya Uddēśa-Hetu
Chhe. Jem Gheṭāna Toḷā Mā Ucharela Siṁhaśiśu Ne Potāna Svarūpa Nu Viśmarana Hoy
Chhe, Paṇ Je Te Siṁha Ne Dekhe Ke Tarat Te Ne Svarūpa Nu Bhāna Āve Chhe, Tem
Paramātmāna Svarūpa Chintana Thi Ātmā Ne Nij Svarūpa Nu Bhāna Thaye Chhe. Etle
Parmēśvarana Avalambanarūpa Setubandha Thi-Pūla Thi Ā Jīva Sahelāī Thi
Bhavasāgara Tari Jāye Chhe, Dustara Bhavasamudra Gopada Je Banī Jāye Chhe!
Prabhubhakti Ne Ā Adbhut Mahimā Chhe, Etle Māte E Nu Param Pūjyapana Chhe, Ema
Jāṇī Ā Dṛṣṭivāḷe Yogī Puruṣa Jem Bane Tem Bhhaktiparāyaṇa Thaye Chhe, Savadhāna-
Ekāgra Chitte Te Nu Nāmasmaran, Bhajan, Stavan, Chintana, Guṇasaṅkīrtana, Dhyāna
Vage Re Kare Chhe. Ā īśvarapraṇidhāna Thi Samādhi Nī Prāpti Thaye Chhe. Śrī
Supāsa Jin Vadiye, Sukha Sampatti Ne Hetu Śānta Sudhārasa Jalanidhi, Bhavasāgara
Mā Setu. Savadhāna Manasā Karī, Dhāre Jinapada Seva.”—Śrī Ānandaghaṇajī, Āvā Ā
Pāñch Niyama Ne Ahī Bīji Dṛṣṭi Mā Sambhava Hoy Chhe. Atre Prathama Dṛṣṭi Nu Anga
Je Yama Te Te Hoy J, Upraanta Ā Niyama Paṇ Hoy, Parantu Prathama Dṛṣṭi Mā *
Tapa, Svādhyāya Ne īśvarapraṇidhāna Thi Kaleśa Kārya Na Pratibandhārā Samādhi Nu
Anukūlapana Thaye Chhe. "Tapaḥsvādhyāyeśvarapraṇidhānāni Kriyāyogaḥ ।
Samādhimānārthaḥ Vajeśatanuvaḷārtha ”—Pā, , 2-1. “Samālisiddhiīśvpraḷiyānā ?-Pā,
, 2-45, "  This is a translation of the provided text, preserving Jain terms.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 tArAdadi IzvaramaNidhAna, anuga (185) "ziva zaMkara jagadIzvaru, cidAnaMda
bhagavAna; jina arihA tIrthakaru, joti svarUpa asamAna.zrI supArzva, alakha
niraMjana vachalu, sakala jaMtu vizarAma abhayadAna dAtA sadA, pUraNa
AtamarAma...zrI supArzva vidhi viraMci vizvabharu, hRSIkeza jaganAtha; aghahara
aghamecana dhaNI, mukti paramapada sAtha..zrI supArzva ema aneka abhidhA dhare,
anubhavagamya vicAra; je jANe tehane kare, AnaMdaghana avatAra...zrI supArzva "
zrI Ana daghanajI e * Izvarane zA mATe ArAdhavA joIe? jevuM te IzvaranuM svarUpa
che, tevuM A AtmAnuM svarUpa che, tenuM bhAna thavA mATe. prabhu pite te zuddha
AtmasvarUpane pAmelA hoI, AdarzarUpa che. te Adarza dekhIne, jIvane potAnA
svarUpane lakSa ArAdhana hetu thAya e ja bhakti-upAsanAne mukhya uddeza-hetu
che. jema gheTAnA ToLAmAM ucharelA siMhazizune potAnA svarUpanuM vismaraNa hoya
che, paNa je te siMhane dekhe ke tarata tene svarUpanuM bhAna Ave che, tema
paramAtmAnA svarUpa ciMtanathI AtmAne nija svarUpanuM bhAna thAya che. eTale
paramezvaranA avalaMbanarU5 setubaMdhathI-pUlathI A jIva sahelAIthI bhavasAgara
tarI jAya che, dustara bhavasamudra gopada je banI jAya che! prabhubhaktine A
adbhuta mahimA che, eTalA mATe enuM parama pUjyapaNuM che, ema jANI A dRSTivALe
yogI puruSa jema bane tema bhaktiparAyaNa thAya che, sAvadhAna-ekAgra citte
tenuM nAmasmaraNa, bhajana, stavana, ciMtana, guNasaMkIrtana, dhyAna vagere kare
che. A IzvarapraNidhAnathI samAdhinI prApti thAya che. zrI supAsa jina vadiye,
sukha saMpattine hetu zAMta sudhArasa jalanidhi, bhavasAgaramAM setu. sAvadhAna
manasA karI, dhAre jinapada seva."--zrI AnaMdaghanajI, AvA A pAMca niyamane ahIM
bIjI daSTimAM saMbhava hoya che. atre prathama daSTinuM aMga je yama te te hoya
ja, uparAMta A niyama paNa hoya, paraMtu prathama dRSTimAM * tapa, svAdhyAya ne
IzvarapraNidhAnathI kaleza kAryanA pratibaMdhArA samAdhinuM anukUlapaNuM thAya
che. "tapaHsvAdhyAyezvarapraNidhAnAni kriyAyogaH  /  samAdhimAnArtha:
vajezatanuvALArtha "--pA, , 2-1. "samAlisiddhiIzvapraLiyAnA ?-pA, , 2-45,

Page #252 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(186) There is no rule for the collection of Gadashti, because there is a lack
of such क्षपशम. That is, in the previous view, the previous view has merit, but
in the previous view, the previous view does not have merit. 2. "Anudveg nahi
kirya udveg re....Manmohan mere." - Gadashti 2 Similarly, here, the other mental
defect called Udveg is avoided, and Anudveg is present. That is, in the work of
self-interest, in the work of achieving the interest of others, there is no
anxiety, boredom, or dislike. Even while sitting, the name of the dislike-
absence that arises towards something is Udveg. (See page 85) That is, the man
with Udveg gets up from that yogakriya - he runs away, and perhaps he has to do
the action forcefully, like a royal order, he hurriedly finishes it, quickly
finishes it! On the contrary, this man with this view has Anukreg. There is no
anxiety-dislike towards Dharma Kriya, there is no hatred towards the means of
attainment, so he does not take a bribe in Dharma Karya, he does not do what he
has to do forcefully even though he does not want to, like a king's order, he
does not quickly finish Dharma Kriya! He does not join his hands to God, he does
not put two or three piles of rice, and he does not leave! But he has supreme
love for that yogakriya-dharma kriya. He knows that this Dharma Kriya that I
want to do is for my own self-welfare, I want to avoid the suffering of the
cycle of birth and death through this yogasadhan. Since this is the case, the
yogakriya priti, the muumukhu purush, does every Dharma Kriya with supreme joy,
with indomitable enthusiasm and peace. He does Prabhubhakti with devotion, with
supreme love. He serves the Sadguru-Sapurusha with supreme respect and humility.
He listens to the scriptures with attention. He does Samayik, Pratikraman, etc.
with proper purity. And this muumukhu yogi has this Anug with Akhed. Because
only when there is Akhed, then Anudveg comes, so the defect of Khed that is
removed in the first view, is also the same here. Thus, this yogi purush does
not feel regret or fatigue while doing Dharma Pravritti. 3. Tattvajijnasa, the
other quality called Jijnasa is revealed here. Jijnasa means the desire,
eagerness, and anticipation to know the truth. To develop a desire to know the
nature of the truth, to feel a longing, is true Jijnasa. The knowledge that is
without true Jijnasa is superficial.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (186) gadaSTisamuccaya niyama na hoya, kAraNa ke tevA kSapazamane abhAva che.
eTale ke pAchalI dRSTimAM AgalI daSTine guNa hoya ja, paNa AgalImAM pAchalIne
guNa na hoya. 2. anudvega nahiM kiriyA udavega re....manamohana mere."--ga da0
sajhAya-2 tema ja atre udvega nAmane bIje cittadoSa TaLe che, anudvega hoya che.
eTale AtmahitanA kAryamAM, paraka saMbaMdhI hitasAdhananA kAryamAM udvega,
kaMTALo, aNagamo upajatuM nathI. beThA beThA paNa kiyA pratye je aNagamo-abhAva
thavo tenuM nAma udvega che. (juo pR. 85) eTale udvegavALe puruSa te
yogakriyAthI ubhage che-dUra bhAge che, ane kadAca parANe karavI paDe che te
kriyA rAjaveThanI jema utAvaLe utAvaLe ATopI le che, jhaTapaTa patAvI de che !
ethI UlaTuM, A dRSTivALA purUSane anukrega hoya che. dharmakriyA pratye udvega-
aNagamo hete nathI, gasAdhana pratye dveSa hoto nathI, eTale te dharmakAryamAM
veTha kADhate nathI, rAjAnA hukamathI mana na hoya chatAM parANe karavuM paDatuM
hoya evuM te karato nathI, jhaTajhaTa utAvaLe utAvaLe dharmakriyA patAvI dete
nathI ! bhagavAnane be hAtha joDayA-na joDyA, cokhAnI be-traNa DhagalI mUkIna
mUkI, ne te bhAga nathI ! . paraMtu ene te yogakriyA-dharmakriyA pratye parama
prema hoya che. te jANe che ke A huM je dharmakRtya karavA IcchuM chuM, te hArA
potAnA ja AtmakalyANa mATe che, A yoga sAdhanathI hAre hAruM paribhramaNa du:kha
TALavuM che. Ama hovAthI yogakriyA prIti te AtmAthI mumukSu puruSa pratyeka
dharmakriyA parama ullAsa bhAvathI kare che, adamya utsAhathI ne zAMtithI kare
che. te prabhubhakti karate hoya te bhaktitanmayapaNe parama premathI kare che.
te sadguru-sapuruSanI sevAzuzraSA karato hoya, te parama AdarathI vinayapUrvaka
kare che. te sakzAstranuM zravaNa karate heya te dhyAna daIne kare che. te
sAmAyika, pratikramaNa Adi karate hoya te yathAvidhi zuddhabhAve kare che. ane
AvA A mumukSu jogIjanane A anuga paNa akheda sahita hoya che. kAraNa ke akheda
hoya te ja pachI anudvega Ave, eTale prathama dRSTimAM je kheda doSa dUra the,
te paNa ahIM tema ja che. Ama A yogI puruSa dharmapravRtti karatAM kheda pAmate
nathIthAkatA nathI. 3. tattvajijJAsA jijJAsA nAmane bIjo guNa ahIM pragaTe che.
jijJAsA eTale tatva jANavAnI IcchA, utkaMThA, iMtejArI. tattvanuM svarUpa
jANavAnI tamannA upajavI, tAlAvelI lAgavI te kharI jijJAsA che. sAcI jijJAsA
vinAnuM je jANavuM che-jJAna che, te uparachaluM hoya che,

Page #253 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Translation:  **Tārādṛṣṭi tattvajijñāsā, vegakathāprīti** (187) Does not
enter the heart. This vision reveals true tattvajijñāsā to the seeker. Just as
the chatak longs for the clouds, just as the thirsty man looks around for water,
so this seeker longs to know the truth, a longing arises, a thirst develops.
Like a traveler on a dusty road in the summer, parched and yearning for water,
crying out "water, water," so this thirsty soul yearns for tattvadarśana. This
intense thirst for truth arises in this inquisitive person, leading to many
natural questions. Such as:  "Who am I? Where did I come from? What is my true
form? What attachments do I have? Should I keep them or abandon them?" -  "Śrī
Mokṣamālā, the thirst for nectar, why drink poison? Congratulations, Jin
darśana, the best." - Śrī Ānandghanajī  When this true thirst for truth or
tattvadarśana arises, the way to quench it is also revealed. If that thirst does
not arise, why would one want to quench it? And how would one find the way to
quench it? The supremely capable tattvavettā, Śrīmad Rajacandraji, has said in
very poignant and moving words:  "One who wants to quench thirst, I am the way
to quench it; without the Guru's grace, this eternal state cannot be attained."
"The thirsty one should make the effort, the non-thirsty one should be made
thirsty. For those who cannot be made thirsty, remain indifferent." - Śrīmad
Rajacandra  This quality of jijñāsā arises only when the quality of adveṣa has
first manifested. Therefore, in accordance with the adveṣa quality that first
manifested in this vision, this jijñāsā arises. Jijñāsā is the subsequent result
of adveṣa. This jijñāsā has a desire to know the true nature of reality, but it
does not have the stubbornness of a father who is absolutely right. Thus, in
this vision:  "Darśana in your vision... captivating, like a fire that consumes
everything... purity of mind, contentment, and austerity are good... the mind is
attracted to devotion... the five rules are fulfilled in the mind... the mind
does not desire action... the mind has the quality of jijñāsā for truth... the
mind does not cling to its own stubbornness..." - Sajāya, 1-2  This vision also
mentions the other qualities that are present:

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 tArAdaSTi tattvajijJAsA, vegakathAprIti (187) hRdayamAM pravezatuM nathI. A
daSTivALA mumukSune te sAcI tatvajijJAsA pragaTe che. jema cAtaka meghanI
utkaMThA dharAve, jema tRSAtura puruSa pANI mATe cetarapha jhAMvAM nAMkhe, tema
A mumukSune tattva jANavAnI tarasa lAge che, utkaMThA jAge che, tAlAvelI upaje
che. marudeza jevI bhUmimAM, unhALAnA samayamAM cAlyA jate vaTemArga jevo
tarasyA thaIne pANIne Icche, "pANI pANI" kare, te tarasya A jIva tatvadarzana
pAmavA mATe thAya che. AvI tIvra tattvapipAsA A jijJAsu puruSane upaje che,
eTale ene aneka sahaja, prazna UThe che. jemake- huM koNa chuM? kayAMthI thaye?
zuM svarUpa che hArUM kharuM? kenA saMbaMdhI vaLagaNa che? rAkhuM ke e
pariharUM?"-zrI mokSamALA bajeTane pipAsA ha amRtapAnanI, kima bhAMje viSapAna ?
abhinaMdana jina darizana sarasiye." zrI AnaMdaghanajI ane AvI jyAre tatvanI ke
tattvadarzananI sAcI tarasa lAge che, tyAre te bUjhavavAnIchIpavavAnI rIta paNa
tene maLI Ave che. tevI tarasa na lAgI hoya, te te tarasa bujhavavAne Icche paNa
kema? ne te bUjhavavAnI rIta paNa kema maLe? parama samartha tattvavettA zrImad
rAjacaMdrajIe atyaMta mArmika bhAvavAhI zabdo kahyA che- bUjhI cahata pyAsa ko,
huM bUjhanakI rIta; pAve nahiM gurugama binA, ehI anAdi sthita." tRSAturane
pAyAnI mahenata karaje, atRSAturane tRSAtura thavAnI jijJAsA pedA karajo. jene
te pedA na thAya tevuM hoya, tene mATe udAsIna rahejo."--zrImad rAjacaMdra A
jijJAsA guNa paNa, prathama adveSa guNa pragaTayo hoya te ja upaje. eTale
prathama dRSTimAM je adveSa guNa pragaTayo hato, tenA anuguNapaNe-anukULapaNe A
jijJAsA pragaTe che. jijJAsA e adveSanuM uttara pariNAma che. A jijJAsAmAM sAcuM
tatvasvarUpa jANavAnI IcchA hoya che, paNa pitAne kakko kharo che e haThAgraha
hoto nathI. Ama A dRSTimAM- "darzana tArA daSTimAM....manamohana meregamaya agni
samAna re....mana zauca saMtoSa ne tapa bhaluM...mana sakjhAya Ivara dhyAna
re....mana niyama paMca IMhAM saMpaje...mana nahiM kiriyA uga re...mana jijJAsA
guNa tattvanI...mana paNa nahiM nija haTha Tega re....mana"--sajhAya,1-2 A
dRSTimAM je bIje guNasamUha hoya che te kahe che -

Page #254 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Gadasthi Samuchaya  **Verse 42:**  In this दृष्टि (drishti), there is an
unbroken, intense love for the वेगकथा (vegakatha) and respect for the pure योगी
(yogi) due to their adherence to the नियम (niyam).  **Explanation:**  This
दृष्टि (drishti) is characterized by two main qualities:  1. **Unbroken love for
वेगकथा (vegakatha):** The योगी (yogi) who embodies this दृष्टि (drishti) has an
unwavering, deep love for stories related to योग (yoga). This love is unbroken
because they are deeply connected to these stories, their heart resonates with
them, and their mind is drawn to them. They find a deep and lasting connection
to these narratives. What are these वेगकथा (vegakatha)? They are stories about
मोक्ष (moksha) or the ultimate reality, which is also known as योग (yoga).
Therefore, any story about the means to achieve मोक्ष (moksha) is a वेगकथा
(vegakatha).  2. **Respect for pure योगी (yogi):** This दृष्टि (drishti) also
involves respect for pure योगी (yogi) who follow the नियम (niyam). This respect
stems from their adherence to the principles of योग (yoga) and their dedication
to the path of liberation.  **Commentary:**  The commentator states that this
दृष्टि (drishti) is characterized by a deep love for वेगकथा (vegakatha) and
respect for pure योगी (yogi). This love and respect are essential qualities for
those who seek liberation.  **Note:** The commentary mentions two types of योग
(yoga): साधक योग (sadhak yoga) and सिद्ध योग (siddha yoga). साधक योग (sadhak
yoga) refers to the practices that lead to liberation, while सिद्ध योग (siddha
yoga) refers to the state of liberation itself. The commentary also mentions the
different stages of liberation, from the first दृष्टि (drishti) to the final
दृष्टि (drishti).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 gadaSTisamucaya bhavatyasyAM tathAcchinnA prItiyogakathAsvalam  /  zuddhayogeSu
niyamAdbahumAnazca yogiSu  //  42  //  gakathAmAM prIta ati, avicchinna A sthAna
zuddhayoga cagI prati, niyamathakI bahumAna kara artha -A dRSTimAM vegakathAo
pratye tevA prakAre avicchinna-akhaMDa evI atyaMta prIti hoya che ane zuddha
gavALA gIo pratye niyamathI bahumAna hoya che. vivecaka "eha daSTi heya
varatatAM....mana cogakathA bahu prema re....mana"---ceTa sajhAya, 2 uparamAM je
A daSTinA mukhya guNa kahyA, te uparAMta bIjA guNane paNa ahIM sadbhAva hoya
che. te A che -(1) gakathAo pratye akhaMDa-avicchinna evI atyaMta prIti. ane (2)
zuddha gavALA yegIo pratye bahumAna. te A pramANe - 1. vegakathA pratye atyaMta
prItiA daSTimAM vartanAra yegI puruSane yoga saMbaMdhI kathAo pratye akhaMDa evI
atyaMta prIti hoya che, avicchinna e parama prema hoya che, kAraNa ke tevI
kathAo pratye tene bhAvapratibaMdha thayo che, tene bhAva-aMtaraMga prema
baMdhAya che, tenuM citta AkarSAyuM checUMTayuM che. tene avihaDa daDha raMga
lAgyo che. eTale tevI kathA-vArtAmAM tene rasa paDe che. A cogakathA eTale zuM?
mokSanI sAthe athavA parama tatvanI sAthe je-jeDe tenuM nAma yoga che. eTale
mekSanA sAdhanarUpa je je che te yoga che. te yoga saMbaMdhI je kathA te
yaMgakathA. te yoganA mukhya karIne be prakAra che-sAdhaka pega ne siddha vega.
upazama, kSapazama ke kSAyika bhAvapaNe je nija AtmaguNanuM pragaTapaNuM thAya,
ane jenAthI keme karIne pUrNa avasthAnI prApti thAya, te badhAya
AtmasvabhAvarUpa dharmanA yoganA prakAra sAdhanabhUta evA sAdhaka yoga che.
pahelI gadRSTithI mAMDIne chellI gadaSTinI prApti sudhInI je sAdhanA che te
sAdhaka yuga che; athavA samakitathI mAMDIne zilezI avasthA paryata AtmabhAvane
anusaratI je gabhUmikAo che. kRttiH-maratyacAM-A dRSTimAM hoya che. tathA-tevA
prakAre, arijIna-avicchinna, (akhaMDa),bhAvapratibaMdhasArapaNAe karIne, rIti-
prIti, jAvathANu-gakathAo pratye, -atyaMtapaNe. tathA zuddhapu-zuddha yogavALA,
akadraka (1) pradhAna evA niyamaduniyathI, vAmAnazca eniy-ogIo pratye bahumAna.
( * A pATha azuddha ho saMbhave che. ka9papradhAna e pATha haze ? ema hoya te
kaha5-coktayoga-AcAravidhAna jene pradhAna che evA, ema artha bese.)

Page #255 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Tārādṛṣṭi:** Four types of Dharmakatha, pure yogi's reward for each. (189)
That is sādhaka yoga. The peak, the final limit of sādhaka yoga is siddha yoga.
In siddha yoga, all karma is destroyed, the complete, blissful, natural form is
revealed, the fullness of the inner qualities is achieved, and the yogi becomes
absorbed in the self and plays in the self-form.* Wherever there is any
statement related to such sādhaka yoga, or wherever the story of a man who
practices such yoga is being told, the seeker with this vision experiences
supreme joy and supreme love flows. Similarly, four types of attractive
Dharmakatha that attract towards the good, seem sweet like nectar to him.
Dharmakatha is there. He listens with interest to the vikṣepaṇa katha, which
creates distraction towards the bad. He likes very much the sanvega katha, which
shows the bitterness of the results of karma and creates a desire for
liberation. He likes the nivega katha, which shows the bitter results of sinful
karma and creates detachment from the world. In short, wherever the story of
self-welfare is being told, wherever the nectar of pure devotion is being
consumed, wherever the glory of the virtues of the true Guru is being sung, the
soul immerses itself in supreme love. Because he knows this self-beneficial yoga
katha to be extremely rare. He knows that in this world, the story of wealth,
the story of desire, is very common. He has heard the story of wealth and desire
countless times, he has been familiar with it countless times, he has
experienced it countless times. But he has never heard, never been familiar
with, never experienced the story of liberation, the story of speed, the
Dharmakatha, which is the means of liberation. Knowing this, why would he be
interested in such a poisonous story? And why would he not have supreme love for
the supreme, rare yoga katha, which is like supreme nectar? "Jin guna amṛtapāna
thi mana amṛta kriyā suprasāya re...bhavi. Amṛta kriyā anushṭhāna thi mana,
ātama amṛta thāya re...bhavi." - Shri Devchandraji "Girua re guna tum taṇā, Shri
Vardhamāna Jin rāya re, Suṇatā śravaṇe amī jhare, mahārī nirmala thāye kāyā re."
- Shri Yashovijayaji * * Upshama bhāva he miśra kṣayikapaṇe, je nij guna
prāgabhāva; Pūrṇāvasthāne nīpajāvte, sādhana dharma svabhāva...svāmī
svayamprabha ne jāuṁ bhāmaṇe. Samakita guna thi he śaleśī lage, ātama anagama
bhāva: Sanvara nirjarā he upādānaheta, sādhālambana dāva...svāmī Shri
Devchandraji * "Sudparicidāṇubhūda savvasa vi kāmabhogabandha kaha. Pracārakuve
mā navara ja guru vittaraṇa" - Shri Samyasāra

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 tArAdaSTi : cAra prakAranI dhamakathA, zuddha yogIe prati bahumAna (189) te
sAdhaka yoga che. te sAdhakaganI parAkASThA-chevaTanI hada te siddha yoga che.
te siddha yegamAM sakala karmane kSaya hoya che, pUrNAnaMdamaya sahajAnmasvarUpa
pragaTe che, AtamaguNanI saMpUrNatA nIpaje che, ne yogI AtmabhegI thaI
svasvarUpamAM ramaNa kare che.* AvA ekSasAdhaka yoga saMbaMdhI je kAMI kathana
hoya, athavA AvA yogane sAdhanArA puruSanI jyAM jyAM kathA-vArtA cAlatI hoya,
tyAM tyAM A daSTivALA mumukSune parama prIti ulase che, parama prema pravahe
che. temaja sanmAga pratye cAra prakAranI AkarSAnArI evI AkSepaNuM dharmakathA
tene amRta jevI mIThI lAge . dharmakathA che. asamAga pratye vikSepa upajAvanArI
vikSepaNa kathA te rucithI sAMbhaLe che. karmavipAkanuM virasa paNuM batAvI
saMvega-mekSAbhilASa janmAvanArI saMvejanI kathA tene khUba game che. pApakamane
kaDavo vipAka dekhADI nirveda-bhavavirAgya pedA karanArI nivejanI kathA tene
ruce che. TUMkamAM, jyAM kyAMya AtmakalyANanI kathA-vArtA cAlatI hoya, jyAM
kyAMya nirmala bhakti amRtarasanuM pAna thatuM hoya, jyAM kayAMya sadgurunA
guNagaNunuM gaurava gAna gavAtuM hoya, tyAM A AtmAthI puruSa parama premarasamAM
nimajajana kare che. kAraNa ke Atmahitakara yogakathAne te parama durlabha jANe
che. te jANe che ke-A jagatamAM sarvatra arthanI kathA, kAmanI kathA, atyaMta
sulabha che. eka bIjA pratye AcArya paNu-guru paNuM karatAM "jI kAmaga-arthanI
kathA anaMtavAra sAMbhaLI che, anaMtavAra paricita karI che, anaMtavAra
anubhavelI che. paNa mekSanA sAdhanarUpa sakathA, vegakathA, dharmakathA teNe
kadI sAMbhaLI nathI, paricita karI nathI, anubhavI nathI. Ama te jANate heI, evI
jhera jevI bhegakathAmAM tene rasa kema paDe ? ne parama amRta jevI parama
durlabha yogakathA pratye tene parama prema kema na kure? "jina guNa
amRtapAnathI mana0 amRta kriyA suparasAya re...bhavi. amRta kriyA anuSThAnathI
mana, Atama amRta thAya re...bhavi."--zrI devacaMdrajI "giruA re guNa tuma taNA,
zrI vardhamAna jina rAyA re, suNatAM zravaNe amI jhare, mahArI nirmaLa thAye
kAyA re."--zrI yazovijayajI * * upazama bhAva he mizra kSayikapaNe, je nija guNa
prAgabhAva; pUrNAvasthAne nIpajAvate, sAdhana dharma svabhAva...svAmI
svayaMprabhane jAuM bhAmaNe. samakita guNathI he zalezI lage, Atama anagama
bhAva: saMvara nirjarA he upAdAnahetA, sAdhyAlaMbana dAva...svAmI zrI
devacaMdrajI * " sudaparicidANubhUdA savvassa vi kAmabhogabaMdhakahA  /
pracArakuvaemA navara ja guru vittaraNa "--zrI samayasAra

Page #256 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(190) 2. If one has great respect for pure conduct and also for the stories of
the Yagas, then it is no surprise that they would have even greater respect and
reverence for the Yogis who embody the Yagas, who have attained pure conduct.
Those who are truly dedicated to the path of liberation, who are true ascetics,
will surely respect those who are devoted to the path of conduct. They will have
the utmost respect for those who have achieved complete mastery of conduct and
have become Siddha Yagas. Their soul will bow in devotion to anyone who is in a
higher state than them, who has a higher level of virtue. If they see someone
who is more virtuous in any group of ascetics, a stream of love will flow
through their heart.  Natural Expression of Devotion: Whether they are a seeker,
a soul on the path, a person with right vision, a true listener, a devotee, a
teacher, a guide, a practitioner of conduct, a liberated being, or a perfected
being, they will have the utmost reverence for all of them. From the depths of
their being, a natural expression will emerge:  "Namo Arihantaṇā!" - Salutations
to the Arihantas! "Namo Siddhaṇā!" - Salutations to the Siddhas! "Namo
Ayariyāṇā!" - Salutations to the Aaryas! "Namo Uvvajjaayaṇā!" - Salutations to
the Upadhyayas! "Namo Hoksasārupa!" - Salutations to the ascetics!  -
Salutations to the Acharyas! - Salutations to the Upadhyayas!  The Collection of
Yogic Vision: - Salutations to all the ascetics in the world!  "The ocean of
peace, the noble of ethics, The fire of knowledge, the treasure of meditation;
The pure intellect, the celibate, the mouth full of love, The benefactor of all,
the garden of Dharma; Free from attachment and aversion, supremely pure, The
mind filled with virtues, equal to the virtuous; The patience of Rayachandra,
the shield of Dharma against anger, O Muni! You are ahead of me, my salutations
to you." - Shrimad Rajchandraji  It is not just this respect, but also...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (190) 2. zuddha cAgIe pratye bahumAna ane yAgakathA pratye paNa jo AvA parama
prema hAya, te pachI te zuddha ceAgane sAkSAt dhAraNa karanArA mUrttimAn
yAgasvarUpa evA yeAgIe pratye tene bahumAna hAya, parama Adara heAya, emAM navAI
zu? meAkSasAdhaka ceAgamAganuM nirdoSapaNe ArAdhana karanArA je je sAdhako hAya,
sAcA sAdhujane hAya, tenA pratye A mumukSu puruSa cAkkasa bahumAna dharAve ja.
ceAganI saMpUrNa siddhi karI je siddhayAgI banyA che, teo pratye te atyaMta
AdarabhAva rAkhe ja. peAtAnAthI adhika dazAvALA, ucca guNusthitivALA kAi paNa
pratye tenA AtmA bhaktithI namI paDe. kAi paNa ceAgaSTimAM vattA guNIjana te
dekhe ke tarata tenA pratye tenA hRdayamAM parama premapravAha pravahe. sahaja
bhakti uddagAra : mumukSu jogIjana heAya ke mArgAnusArI AtmAthI hAya,
samyagdRSTi puruSa hAya ke sAcA bhAvazrAvaka hAya, bhAvasAdhu hAya ke
bhAvaupAdhyAya hAya, bhAvaAcAya hAya ke bhAvaceAgI hAya, kevalI bhagavAna heAya
ke siddha bhagavAna hoya,--te sa kAI pratye tene AtmA parama pUjyabhAva dharAve
che, ne tenA a MtarnA UMDANamAMthI sahaja udgAra nIkaLI paDe che ke: namo
arihaMtALa  /  - - arihaMtAne namaskAra hA ! namo siddhANaM  /  * siddhone
namaskAra hai ! namo AyariyANaM  /  namo uvajjhAyANaM  /  namo hok sasArRpa  /
'' - AcAryAMne namaskAra hA ! upAdhyAyAne namaskAra !! yogadRSTisamuccaya -
lAkamAM sarva sAdhuone namaskAra hA! zAMtike sAgara arU, nItike nAgara neka,
yAke Agara gyAna, dhyAnake nidhAna hA; zuddha buddhi brahmacArI, mukha khAni
pUrNa pyArI, sabanake hitakArI, dhamake udyAna hA; rAga-dveSase rahita, parama
punitanita, gunase' khacita citta, sajjana samAna heA; rAyacaMdra dhairya pALa,
dharma DhAla krAdhakAla, muni ! tuma Age mere, pranAma amAna hai|. "--zrImad
rAjaca'drajI * kevala A bahumAna ja hAya che ema nahiM, paNa--

Page #257 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Tāraṣṭi:** Service to the true ascetics according to one's capacity, the fruit
of the increase of the vow.  **Yathāśaktyupacāra ca yogavṛddhiphalapradaḥ |
Yogināṁ niyamādeva tadanugrahadhīyutaḥ || 43 ||**  Service according to one's
capacity, which gives the fruit of the increase of the vow. It is due to the
rule of the ascetics that they are endowed with the mind of grace. (43)
**(191)**  **Meaning:** And service according to one's capacity, which gives the
ascetics the fruit of the increase of the vow, and which is endowed with the
mind of grace towards them.  **Commentary:**  The noble ones do... the mind sees
its own cave... the mind"—This is the pure vow of the ascetics, the ascetics who
have advanced in the path of the vow, they are not only to be honored inwardly,
but that honor should be made meaningful, put into practice, made practical, and
there should be service from them according to their capacity, as much as they
can. Therefore, this powerful service, the seeker of liberation, performs
service to the true noble ones with humility, as much as he can; he gives them
pure food, drink, and medicine with due respect; he gives them the scriptures
and other things that are beneficial; he serves them with true devotion in times
of need, such as illness, etc.; he is always ready to make all arrangements so
that these great saints can worship without any obstacles.  Because he knows
that these true devotees are indifferent to their own bodies, they are free from
attachment, these renunciates have renounced all external influences and are
indifferent, these Nigrantha ascetics, who are immersed in their own bliss, are
only taking on the body for the sake of self-control, they do not have any other
desire.  **Vṛtti:** Yathāśaktyathāśakti, according to the appropriateness of
one's capacity, according to the appropriateness of one's capacity, what? It is
the service of the world, the procurement of food, etc., and this is the process
towards the aforementioned ascetics, there is a continuous relationship. It is a
special characteristic of this—yo vṛddhiphalapradaḥ—which gives the fruit of the
increase of the vow, due to its proper result; yogināṁ niyamādeva—only by the
rule of the ascetics. Otherwise, it would not have the intended purpose. (This
service to the pure ascetics, the ascetics give the increase of the vow only by
the rule of the vow, it would not have the intended purpose.)
Tadanugrahadhīyutaḥ—endowed with the mind of grace towards them. Endowed with
the mind of grace, of benefit, towards the one who provides the service. (The
one who performs the service thinks that I am doing good to my own soul, this is
the grace of the true guru.)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 tArASTi : sata yAgIonI yathAzakti sevA, yAgavRddhiphala yathAzaktyupacAraca
yogavRddhiphalapradaH  /  yoginAM niyamAdeva tadanugrahadhIyutaH  //  43  //
yogavRddhi phala ApatA, yathAzakti upacAra; yAgIone niyamathI, tasa anugraha
mati dhAra. 43 (191 ) artha :----ane yathAzakti upacAra,-ke je cegIene niyamathI
ja ceAgavRddhirUpa la ApanAra, ane tenI anugraha buddhithI yukta evA hAya che.
vivecana guNInA kare....mana dekhe nija guhANa re....mana"--AAsa0 zuddha
cegavALA yAgIjanA, ceAgamAga mAM AgaLa vadhelA yAgIpuruSo kahyA, te pratye a
MtaraMga bahumAna heAya eTalu ja nahi; paNa te bahumAnane sArthaka banAve,
AcaraNamAM mUkI vyavahArU (Practical) banAve, eve peAtAnAthI sa'tAnI yathA. anI
zake teTalA upacAra-sevAbhAva paNa temanA pratye hAya. eTale A zakti sevA
mumukSu puruSa te sAcA satpuruSo pratye peAtAnAthI banI zake teTalI sevA
vinayapUrvaka bajAve che; teone yathAvidhi parama AdarathI nirdoSa AhArapAna-
auSadha AdinuM dAna kare che; satzAstra vagere dhaupakaraNA te satpAtrone Ape
che; rega Adi Apatti AvI paDaye sAcI bhaktithI temanI sevA-zuzruSA, vaiyAvacca
kare che; te mahAtmA saMtajane nirAkulapaNe dharmArAdhana karI zake, evI badhI
jogavAi karI ApavA te sadA tatpara rahe che. kAraNa ke te jANe che ke-A sAcA
bhAvasAdhue te peAtAnA deha pratye paNa ni:spRha che-mamatArahita che, A
avadhUte te sarva parabhAvane phagAvI dai udAsIna thaIne beThA che, nijAnaMdamAM
nimagna rahelA A nigraMtha sanyAsIo sayamanA hetuthI ja deha dhAraNu karI rahyA
che,khIjA keAI paNa kAraNe khIjI koI paNa icchA A yAgIpuruSo rAkhatA
vRtti:-yathAzayithAzakti, zaktinA aucityathI,-zaktinA ucitapaNA pramANe, zu? te
ke 34rizrva-upacAra, trAsa-AhAra AdinA saMpAdanavarDa karIneyatheAkta yogIo
pratye ema prakrama che--cAlu saMbadha che. tenuM ja vizeSaNa Ape che-yo
vRdghitra:-yAgavRddhirUpa phala ApanArA,-tenA samyak pariNAmavaDe karIne;
cezinAM niyamATeva-yAgIone niyamathI ja. anyathA-anya prakAre tene vidhAtahetu
hAya nahiM. (A zuddha ceAgIe pratyenI sevA, ceAgIjanane ceAgavRddhi kula
niyamathI ja Ape che,-yeAgavidhAta hetu hAya nahiM. ) sanu pIyutaH-tenI anugraha
buddhithI yukta evA. upacAra sa'pAdakanA anugrahanI-upakAranI buddhithI yukta
evA. ( je upacAra-sevA kare che te ema mAne ke hu' A mhArA potAnA AtmA para
upakAra karI rahyo chuM, A sadguruprasAda che. )

Page #258 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(192) There is no collection of Gi-drishti; it is the duty of a seeker to serve
such completely detached great souls, it is the unparalleled benefit of life,
whatever we offer at their feet is less, because they are the ultimate
benefactor. Knowing this, he offers the flower petal of service that is possible
from the father - "I will fulfill the vow" - with devotion at their lotus feet.
"What should I offer at the Lord's feet? Everything is inferior from the soul;
it is given by the Lord, I am at the feet of the Lord. From this day onwards,
this body is at the Lord's feet. I am a servant, I am a servant, I am a servant
of the Lord." Shri Atmasiddhi and such virtuous devotees, this service-duty,
which is full of respect and humility, gives the seeker the fruit of the growth
of yoga qualities. In which, like a single seed sown in the best field, becomes
a giver of infinite fruits by tradition, so the service of such virtuous saints
gives infinite fruits, It becomes the cause of the soul's progressive growth in
Dharma - the real "gain of Dharma". The benefit of selfless service gives itself
the reward of growth, and therefore, I am doing a favor to my father's soul by
serving this soul-peaceful, virtuous person, I am doing a favor to my father's
soul, the servant should definitely feel this way. From this, the understanding
of self-grace should arise in me that I am saving my soul from the ocean of the
world. Thus, in this view, the yogi should respect the pure yogis, and serve
them as much as possible, and that too with the understanding of grace of the
father's soul. This treatment is given a special name - लाभान्तरफलश्चास्य
श्रद्धायुक्तो हितोदयः । क्षुद्रोपद्रवहानिश्च शिष्टसम्मतता तथा ॥ ४४ ॥ Other
benefits are also there, this is full of faith; There is no trouble, benefit
arises, it is also acceptable to the virtuous. 44, this attitude - devoid of
hypocrisy - and the giver of treatment, due to the merit of pure treatment,
which has other benefits, there is a feeling of consequence of that kind.
Therefore, - full of faith - this treatment is full of faith, there is a
continuous relationship. Hito: - in which there is the rise of benefit, as
before. Shudropadravaanich - and there is the loss of petty trouble. Therefore,
there is the destruction of diseases etc. Shishyanakshtaata tatha tatha prakaare
shisammata, the acceptance of the virtuous, therefore, this has very beautiful
respect.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (192) gidaSTisamuccaya nathI; te paNa tevA sarvathA niHspRha mahAjanenI banatI
sevA karavI, te mumukSu AtmAthIne dharma che, jIvanano apUrva lahAvo che, teonA
caraNe je kaMI paNa arpaNa karIe te ochuM che, kAraNa ke teone parama upakAra
che. ema jANato hoI, te pitAthI banatI sevArUpa phUlapAMkhaDI-"vaa purNa karuM
toyaM "-bhaktithI temanA caraNakamalamAM arpaNa kare che. "zuM prabhu caraNa
kane dharUM? AtmAthI sahu hIna; te te prabhue Apio, varatuM caraNAdhIna. A
dehAdi AjathI, varate prabhu AdhIna dAsa dAsa huM dAsa chuM, teha prabhuno
dIna." zrI Atmasiddhi ane AvA satpAtra bhAvagIo pratyene A upacAra-vinayAnvita
sevAdharma jegI janane cekakasa yogaguNanI vRddhirUpa phala Ape che. jemAM
uttama kSetramAM vAveluM eka paNa bIja paraMparAe anaMtagaNuM phala ApanArUM
thaI paDe che, tema AvA gavRddhi la satpAtra saMtajanonI sevA anaMtagaNuM phala
ApanArI thaI paDe che, AtmAne uttarottara dharmavRddhinuM-kharekharA
"dharmalAbha'nuM kAraNa thAya che. niSkAma sevAno lAbha ApI pote gavRddhirUpa
pratilAbha pAme che, ane eTalA mATe ja A AtmArAmI sapuruSanI sevA-bhaktivaDe huM
pitAne ja anugraha karUM chuM, mahArA pitAnA AtmA para ja upakAra karI rahyo
chuM, ema sevA karanAre cokkasa bhAvavuM joIe. AnAthI huM mahArA AtmAne ja
saMsArasamudrathI tArUM chuM, evI Atma anugraha buddhi ugavI joIe. Ama A
dRSTimAM vate yogI zuddha yegIo pratye bahumAna dharAvavA uparAMta, yathAzakti-
ucitapaNe temanI sevAbhakti kare, ane te paNa pitAnA AtmAnI anugraha buddhithI
ja. A upacArane ja vizeSaNa Ape che- lAbhAntaraphalazcAsya zraddhAyukto
hitodayaH  /  kSudropadravahAnizca ziSTasammatatA tathA  //  44  //  anya lAbha
phala tasa e, zraddhAyuta A ema; nirupadravatA hita udaya, ziSTa saMmatatA tema.
44, A vRtti -AmAnatabhrasTAca-ane upacArakartAne lAbhAnatera phalavALA -zuddha
upacAranA puNyathakI tacAprakAranA vipAkabhAvane lIdhe. eTalA mATe ja-
zraddhAyukato-zraddhAyukta e upacAra, ema cAluM saMbaMdha che. hitoH -jemAM
hitane udaya hoya che e, AgaLanI jema. zudropadravAnica-ane kSudra upadranI hAni
hoya che. ethI karIne ja vyAdhi Adine nAza hoya che. ziSyanakSatatA tathA tathA
prakAre zisammatatA, ziSTajananuM mAnyapaNuM, ethI karIne ja AnuM ati suMdara
bahumAna hoya che.

Page #259 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Vasadrusti: Other Benefits from Sant Seva  (193) The meaning and the
treatment, which gives other beneficial fruits and is full of faith, is
beneficial. And in it, there is the harm of Shudra Upadrav and the agreement -
acceptance of the Shishtajana.  **Discussion:** The treatment or service dharma
mentioned above is also special, what kind of special qualities it has, it is
said here, in this way, the service of a virtuous person with true feelings,
also gives other beneficial fruits. Because, through his service yoga-mahima,
there is the attainment of punya-daya, and from its result, there is the
attainment of other beneficial fruits like Surapati-Narpati wealth, etc. Just as
there is a support behind the jar, just as there is the attainment of a flower
before the fruit, similarly, along with the fruit of the increase of service,
there is the attainment of punya-paripaca, which is an incidental fruit like
Indra-Chakravattapad, etc. Because, "He is the best Kalpavriksha, the supreme
Chintamani Ratna, the chief among all religions, the self-grasp of Siddhi", what
fruits are not attained from him? Thus, like the Kalpavriksha, this service
dharma towards the Santjana, who gives desired benefits, is full of faith.
Because, what is the use of thought without pure faith? Therefore, this Mumukshu
serves the virtuous person with faith.  And this is full of faith, therefore,
this Mumukshu Yogi-jana's interest arises. That means, he is engaged in the work
of self-interest, self-welfare, and his art is increasing in it. Just as the
rising sun becomes more and more radiant, just as the moon in the Shukla Paksha
attains increasing art day by day, similarly, this soul, the man, attains more
and more powerful self-interest, interest follows interest from tradition.
"Shukla Beej Shashi Reh, Teha Puran Huve Lal" - Shri Devchandraji, therefore, he
suffers from Shukla Upadrav. That means, small, insignificant troubles like
Aadh, Vyadhi, Upadhi, etc., do not harass this being, do not trouble him. Where
the preparation for the destruction of the great trouble in the form of birth is
going on, then these small troubles are insignificant. "He is the best
Chintamani, the supreme Chintamani Ratna, the chief among all religions, the
self-grasp of Siddhi" - Shri Gabindu. "Yamah Sonamudhar, Nivrudhiniyan,
Kshadviteeya Ya Chamano Yathra -a Dwa..."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 vAsadRSTi : saMtasevAthI anya lAbha phaLa (193) artha ane e upacAra ene bIjA
lAbharUpa phaLa ApanAra ane zraddhAthI yukta e hiteAdayarUpa hoya che. ane temAM
zudra upadranI hAni tathA ziSTajanenuM saMmatapaNuM- mAnyapaNuM hoya che.
vivecana uparamAM je upacAra athavA sevAdharma kahyo te vaLI ke viziSTa hoya
che, kevA vizeSa guNavALo hoya che, te ahIM kahyuM che tevA prakAre satpuruSanI
sAcA bhAvathI sevA bhakti karanArane bIjA lAbhArUpa phaLa paNa maLe che. kAraNa
ke tenA sevA yogamahimA bhaktithI puNyadayanI prApti hoya che, ane tenA
vipAkathI surapati-nara pati saMpadA vagere anya lAbharU5 phaLa sAMpaDe che.
jema jAranI pAchaLa sAMThA te hoya ja, jema phaLa pahelAM phUlanI prApti hoya
ja, tema sasevAnA bhegavRddhirUpa phalanI sAthe sAthe iMdra-cakravattapada Adi
AnuSaMgika phaLarUpa puNyaparipAkanI prApti hoya che. kAraNa ke 'ga * che te
uttama kalpavRkSa che, parama ciMtAmaNiratna che, sarva dharmomAM pradhAna che,
siddhine svayaMgraha che" tenAthI zuM zuM phala prApta na thAya ? Ama
kalpavRkSanI jema vAMcchita lAbha ApanAra A saMtajana pratyene sevAdharma
zraddhAthI yukta hoya che. kAraNa ke zuddha zraddhA vinAno vicAra zA kAmane?
mATe A mumukSu te zraddhAthI satpuruSanI sevA kare che. ane A A zraddhAyukta
hoya che, tethI karIne A mumukSu jogIjanane hitane udaya thAya che. eTale te
AtmahitanA AtmakalyANanA kAryamAM pravarte che, ne temAM tenI caDhatI kaLA thatI
jAya che. jema udaya pAmate sUrya uttarottara vadhAre prakAzamAna thata jAya
che, jema zukala* pakSane caMdra dina-pratidina caDhatI kaLAne pAmate jAya che,
tema A AtmAthI puruSane uttarottara vadhAre ne vadhAre baLavAna AtmahitanI
prApti thatI jAya che, hita paraMparAthI hitane anubaMdha thayA kare che. zukala
bIja zazi reha, teha pUraNa huve lAla" zrIdevacaMdrajI ethI karIne ja ene zuka
upadravanI hAni thAya che. eTale Adhi, vyAdhi, upAdhi vagere nAnA nAnA tuccha
upadrava A jIvane herAna karatA nathI, kanaDatA nathI. moTA bhavarUpa upadravane
nAza thavAnI jyAM pUrva taiyArI cAlI rahI che, tyAM pachI A magatarA maka "TH
vaFpataH zreSTha azcintAmaLiH pas: | TH pradhAne dhananAM cAra: siddha caMdraH
|| "--zrI gabindu * "yamaH sonamUDhara, nivRddhiniyana FkSadvitIyA yA cAmaNo
yathar -aa dvA

Page #260 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(194) Yoga-drishti-samuccaya How can such trivial nama-la upadravas (trivial
disturbances) trouble him? Where even elephants are swept away in the turbulent
flow of a river, what is the weight of a trivial straw? And such a mumukṣu
(aspirant) has samatā (equality) towards the noble ones, and this is a very
beautiful honor. That is, he always considers the noble ones to be of the
highest standard, he considers their words - their commands - to be of the
highest honor, he places them on his head; and he receives honor through their
samatā.  Shiṣṭa (noble) refers to those who are supremely learned, well-
educated, panditas (scholars), who are masters of the scriptures, who are sādhus
(holy ones), and who are agreeable to such people. One who has received the pure
teachings of ātma-dharma (the dharma of the soul) properly, whose heart is
firmly imbued with the pure samskāras (impressions) of satya-dharma (true
dharma), who is skilled in the discernment of tattva-tattva (truth-truth), is
called a pandita, and therefore, such sat-janas (good people) are considered to
be samatā - acceptable, such satpuruṣas (good men) are called "shiṣṭa". Such
shiṣṭa-janas (noble people) consider such a yogi with this vision to be highly
honorable, and he becomes very honorable. Thus • * Bhaya nā tīva bhava kṛtya-
hāni na cocite | Tathā nā bhoga-to'pyuccaina cāpyanucita-kriyā || 45 || Meaning:
Such a yogi does not have excessive fear of bhava (existence), nor does he have
kṛtya-hāni (loss of action) in what is proper, nor does he have anucita-kriyā
(improper action) even unknowingly. Commentary Bhava-bhaya Such a yogi with this
vision does not have excessive fear of bhava (existence), he does not have much
fear of the world; because he does not engage in ashubha (inauspicious) actions,
therefore he remains free from fear. Only those who do bad or wrong deeds, who
engage in ashubha (inauspicious) conduct, who are wicked and sinful, have fear,
even a fool knows this. Moreover, such a man, free from attachment, engages in
shubha (auspicious) activities like prabhu-bhakti (devotion to the Lord), guru-
bhakti (devotion to the guru), etc., therefore he also attains special
fearlessness. Because he is absorbed in the devotion of the Lord with pure
feelings, and he takes refuge in the Lord's feet with the feeling that - O Lord!
O most merciful God! I am the recipient of infinite faults, yet by your grace I
have made this vast ocean of existence like a puddle. Although I have a great
enemy Vṛtti: - Marcha nā tīva bhava-dva - bhava-janya - samsāra-janya atyanta
bhaya hotā nāthi - , tathā-prakāre ashubha-mā aprāvṛtti-ne līdhe (ashubha
pravṛtti kare nahi, tethi samsāra-nā dar pan lage nahi). Tyāni-ne chete - and
sarvāṁ j ucita-mā mṛtya-hāni na hoy, dharṁ ādar-ne līdhe. Tathā-nā-mo-
te'vyuvaiva -  temaj anā-bhoga-thi panu, - ajāṇatāṁ pan atyanta-ne, ne
vāvyanucita-kriyā - savatra j anucita-kriyā pasu na hoy. (Ananutaṁ pan anucita-
kriyā kare nahi.)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (194) yogadRStisamuccaya jevA tuccha namAlA upadrave--kanaDagatA ene kema
khAdhA karI zake ? jyAM nadInA pramaLa pravAhapUramAM hAthInA hAthI taNAI jAya,
tyAM tuccha taNakhalAne bhAra ze ? ane AvA A mumukSu puruSane ziSTajanAnu'
samatapaNu' hAya che, ata eva Anu ati suMdara bahumAna heAya che. eTale ke te
ziSTajanane sadA parama pramANa mAne che, temanA vacanane-temanI AjJAne ati
bahumAnapUrvaka zirasAvadya gaNe che-mAthe caDhAve che; ane temanA sa'matapaNA
thakI bahumAna pAme che. ziSTa eTale parama 'skArI suzikSita pa'Ditajana,
sa`skArasvAmI, sAdhu janane saMmata evA puruSo. jeNe zuddha AtmadharmanI zikSA
samyapaNe prApta karI che, jenA hRdayamAM satya dharmanA zuddha saMskAra
dRDhapaNe lAgyA che, je tattvAtattvanA vivekamAM nipuNa hAi paMDita kahevAya
che, ane tethI karIne ja satajanAne samata che-mAnya che, evA satpuruSo ' ziSTa
' kahevAya che. evA ziSTajanane A dRSTivALA yAgI parama mAnanIya mAne che, ane
bahu mAnanIya bane che. tathA * * bhayaM nAtIva bhava kRtyahAnirna cocite  /
tathAnAbhogato'pyuccairna cApyanucitakriyA || 45|| bhavabhaya nA ati-citamAM,
kRtyahAni paNa nAgya; ajANatAM paNa hAya nA, kriyA anucita kAya. 45 artha :-- A
dRSTivALA puruSane bhavajanya atyaMta bhaya haiAya nahi, ucitamAM nRtyahAni
heAya nahi, tathA ajANatAM paNa anucita kriyA paNa sa.thA hAya nahi' vivecana
bhavabhaya AvA dRSTivALA ceAgIne bhavabhaya atyaMta hAtA nathI, sasAraneA jhAjho
Dara rahetA nathI; kAraNa ke azubha kAmAM tenI pravRtti heAtI nathI, eTale te
niya rahe che. je khAtu' ke kharAkha kAma karatA hAya, je azubha AcaraNa karatA
hAya, je duSTa pApI hAya, tene ja DaravApaNuM hAya, ema khAlaka suddhAM sa kAI
jANe che. vaLI A rahitapaNu AtmAthI puruSa te prabhubhakti-gurubhakti Adi zubha
pravRttimAM pravarte che, tethI karIne paNa tene savizeSa nirbhayatA prApta
thAya che. kAraNa ke te bhagavAnanI bhaktimAM zuddha bhAvathI lIna thAya che ne
prabhunuM caraNa-zaraNu grahI bhAve che ke-he bhagavAn ! he paramakRpALu deva !
huM te anaMta doSanu bhAjana chuM, chatAM paNa ApanA avala'banathI me' A apAra
bhavasAgarane gApada jevA karI dIdhA che. jo ke mehAda zatru vRtti:-marca nAtIya
mavadga--bhavajanya--sa'sArajanya atyaMta bhaya hotA nathI-, tathAprakAre
azubhamAM apravRttine lIdhe (azubha pravRtti kare nahi, tethI saMsAranA Dara
paNa lAge nahiM). tyAnine cetei-ane sarvAM ja ucitamAM mRtyahAni na hoya, dhamA~
Adarane lIdhe. tathAnAmeAte'vyuvaiH--temaja anAbhogathI paNu, -ajANatAM paNa
atyaMtaNe, ne vAvyanuSitakriyA-sava`tra ja anucita kriyA pazu na heAya. (
anaNutAM paNa anucita kriyA kare nahi'.)

Page #261 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
"Taraashti: Dhee'go Dhany Maathe Fiya Re', Uchit Katt Vy" (195)  "He is still
deceiving me, and I am still foolishly mingling in worldly affairs. But now I
have found a master like you, so I believe that my fear of rebirth has been
averted. O Vitarag Dev! I have drunk your essence-alchemy, and with devotion I
have enshrined you in my heart, so I feel that my worldly passions have
subsided. O Lord! By seeing you, my sorrows and misfortunes have vanished, and I
have attained happiness and prosperity. After I have taken a master like you 'on
my head', how can even my hair become crooked?"  :  "Sorrows! Burning flames
have been extinguished, happiness and prosperity have been bestowed; a master
like you is on my head, who can make me fall?" - Vimlajina! - Shri Manadghanaji
"He who has made the world, which is like an insurmountable ocean, as easy as a
pond, I have taken him as my Lord, I have mingled in worldly affairs... Lord.
But now I have found a master like you, my fear of rebirth has been averted...
Lord. But now there is no fear, the King of Jinas has come, I have drunk the
essence-alchemy... Lord. O Knower of Hearts! Lord, by enshrining you in my
heart, my worldly passions have subsided... Lord." - Shri Devchandraji  Thus,
this seeker of liberation is fearless and bold, due to his detachment from the
inauspicious and his engagement in the auspicious. And he does not suffer any
harm in performing the right action, he does not allow any flaw to occur in the
right Dharma-duty that is worthy of being done; because he performs the worship
of the feet of the Jinas with utmost devotion, he has great affection for the
company of the monks, he observes the power of restraint as appropriate, he
gives charity, he cultivates good conduct and morality, he practices
austerities, he cultivates good thoughts, and he does not allow any flaw or
deficiency to occur in them. He considers all beings as his friends, and he
strives to remain non-violent in thought, word, and deed as much as possible; he
speaks the truth, which is beneficial, moderate, and loving; he remains honest
and just, and he stays away from the desire to steal or covet the property of
others; he maintains a motherly-like view towards other women, and he becomes
content with his own wife, or he completely observes celibacy; he strives to
make his possessions and acquisitions appropriate, he sets limits on his
possessions. He takes refuge in the pure Dev, the pure Guru, and the pure
Dharma; he abandons all other nets. He abandons all dark tendencies and embraces
the sattvic tendencies. Compassion, peace, equality, forgiveness, truth,
renunciation, detachment - these sattvic tendencies are always alert in the mind
of this seeker of liberation.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 tArASTi : dhI ga dhaNI mAthe phiyA re', ucita katta vya (195) haju mane chaLI
rahyA che, ne huM parapariNatimAM amUtrapaNe bhaLI rahyo chuM, paNa have tamArA
jevA sAheba mane maLyeA che, eTale e mhArA bhavabhaya paNa TaLyo che, ema huM
mAnuM chuM. he vItarAga deva ! tamArU tattva-rasAyana meM pIdhuM che, bhaktithI
meM tamane mhArA cittamAM vasAvyA che, eTale mhArA bhavarUpa bhAvarAga maTI gayA
che, ema mane lAge che. he prabhu ! ApanuM darzIna thatAM mhArA duHkha-
daurbhAgya dUra thayA che, ane mane sukhasapatti maLI che. tamArA jevA dhI'go
dhaNI" me 'mAthe karyAM' che, te pachI mhArA vALa paNa kANu vAMkA karI zake ema
che ? : "duHkha ! dAhaga phre TaLyA re, sukha sapada zuM bheTa; dhIMga dhaNI
mAthe kayA re, kuNu gaje nara "kheTa .....vimalajina !"--zrI mAnadaghanajI "je
ati dustara jaladhi samA saMsAra jo, te geApada sama kIdhA prabhu avalabane 2
le" pi huM mehArdike liyeA, paraparaNita zuM bhaLiyA re....prabhu paNa have tuja
sama sAhiba maLiyeA, tiNe bhavabhaya savi TaLiyA re....prabhu "paNu navi bhaya
jinarAja pasAye, tattvarasAyana pAye re....prabhu. aMtarajAmI ! prabhu bhagate
nija citta vasAthe, bhAvareAga miTa jAye re....prabhu" zrI devaca`drajI Ama
azubhamAMthI nivRttithI ane zubhamAM pravRttithI A mumukSu puruSa nirbhIya-
nIDara hAya che. ane tene ucita kRtyamAM hAni hAtI nathI, karavA yAgya evA ucita
dharma karttavyamAM te kAMI khAmI AvavA detA nathI; kAraNa ke te jinacaraNanI
upAsanA atizaya bhaktipUrNAMka kare che, munijananI saMgati pratye atyaMta prIti
rAkhe che, yathAucita katta vya zakti saMyamanuM pAlana kare che, dAna de che,
zIla-sadAcAra seve che, tapa Acare che, zubha bhAvanA bhAve che, ane temAM kai
khAmI-UNapa AvavA detA nathI. te sarva jagajjatune peAtAnA mitra mAnatA heAi,
jema bane tema mana-vacana-kAyAthI ahiMsaka rahevAne prayatna kare che; hita
mita ne prIta evuM satya vacana khele che; pramANika ane nyAyapriya rahI
paradravya haravAnI ke cAravAnI icchAthI paNa dUra rahe che; parastrI pratye mA-
henanI dRSTi rAkhI svadArAsa'teASI thAya che, athavA sarvathA brahmacarya
dhAraNa kare che; jema bane tema AraMbha-parigrahanuM sakSeSapaNuM kare che,
parigrahanu parimANu--maryAdA TharAve che. te zuddha deva, zuddha guru ne zuddha
dharmanuM AlaMbana le che; khAkI bIjI badhI ja jAla cheADI dye che. te sarva
tAmasI vRttione tyajI i, sAttvikI vRttione bhaje che. dayA, zAMti, samatA,
kSamA, satya, tyAga, vairAgya,--ityAdi sAttvika vruttie A mumukSunA ghaTamAM
sadAya sujAgrata hAya che.

Page #262 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(196) Yoga-darshan-samuchaya: "Worship of the feet of the Jina, with extreme
devotion, companionship with the munis, delight in the extreme, restraint, yoga,
and its components. Compassion, peace, equality, forgiveness, truth,
renunciation, detachment; these are always awake in the heart of the seeker." -
Shrimad Rajchandraji Pure support, with love, abandoning other desires,
abandoning the tamasic tendencies, worship the sattvic qualities...peace. - Shri
Anandghanji And thus, this seeker, just as he does not fail to perform his
proper duties, he also does not perform improper actions. Knowing and
understanding, he does not even kill the smallest of living beings, how then
would he kill the larger dust-like beings? Even unknowingly, he does not wish to
harm any living being, knowing this, how would he even act improperly towards
anyone's feelings? He does not even wish to speak falsely in his dreams, knowing
this, how would he break his promises? For whom is the sin of earning wealth
unjustly and dishonestly, for whom is it a burden? He who thinks this, how would
he even desire to steal another's property? Seeing the faults of wealth loss,
loss of honor, and suffering, etc., that arise from adultery, etc., directly,
how would he even look at another woman with lustful eyes? He who desires to
escape from the trap of attachment and acquisition as soon as possible, why
would he lay down a long bed for himself? Thus, this seeker, who no longer has
any fear of the world, performs proper actions and does not perform improper
actions, because he is like a simple, obedient servant, who bends as he is told.
"He does not perform improper actions, his mind bends as it is told." - Shri Rog
Sazaay 2-3 Thus - In actions that are greater and greater, there is a desire for
knowledge. In equal actions, there is fear, but without hatred. ||46||
Explanation: - In actions, like meditation, etc., in greater and greater
actions, - in actions that are greater than the role of a father, - in actions
that are greater than the learned, like the actions of an acharya, etc., there
is a desire for knowledge, a desire to know how this is so. With a desire for
knowledge, that is, with an excess of desire. (Seeing the greater actions of
someone who is greater than a father, there is a strong desire to know how this
is so). In actions that are equal, like worship, etc., in the actions of one's
own father, who is flawed, due to negligence of duty, etc., there is fear in the
mind. There is great fear in the mind that I am harmful. Without hatred, - this
fear is without hatred, due to the strength of the present perspective. (Even
though both actions are equal, seeing the father's actions as flawed, there is
fear in the father's actions, and there is no hatred towards the one who is more
virtuous)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (196) yogadaSTisamucaya "upAsanA jina caraNanI, atizaya bhakti sahita munijana
saMgati rati ati, saMyama yoga ghaTita. dayA zAMti samatA kSamA, satya tyAga
vairAgya; hoya mumukSu ghaTa viSe, eha sadAya sujAgya."--zrImad rAjacaMdrajI
zuddha AlaMbana Adare, tyajI avara jajAla re, tAmasI vRtti savi pariharI, bhaje
sAttvikI zAla re...zAMti" -zrI AnaMdaghanajI ane Ama A mumukSu puruSa jema ucita
kartavya karavA cUkatA nathI, tema te anu cita kriyA paNa karate nathI. te jANI
bUjhIne sUmamAM sUkSma jIvane paNa haNu nathI, te meTA dhULa jIvane te kema ja
haNe? ajANatAM paNa koI jIvane anucita te dUbhavavA icchatuM nathI, te jANIne te
keInI lAgaNI paNa kema akartavya bhave ? te svapnamAM paNa khoTuM bolavA IcchatA
nathI, te jANuM bUjhIne pratijJAbhaMga kema kare? anyAyathI apramANikapaNe dhana
kamAIne pApane gAMsaDe konA mATe badhI ja che, e je vicAra kare che, tene
paradravyanI cerI karavAnI IcchA paNa kema thAya ? vyabhicAra AdithI upajatA
dhanahAni, mAnahAni, regApatti vagere doSa pratyakSa dekhatAM chatAM, te
parastrI pratye ADI AMkhe jue paNa kema ? AraMbha parigrahanI prapaMcanAlamAMthI
jema bane tema je jaldI chUTavA Icchato hoya, te ene lAMbe pathAro zuM kAma
pAthare ? Ama jene saMsArano jhAjho bhaya have rahyo nathI, e A mumukSu puruSa
ucita kRtya kare che, ne anucita karatA nathI, kAraNa ke te e saraLapariNamI
hoya che, ke te senAnI peThe jema vALIe tema vaLe che. "anucita teha na Acare
mana vALe vaLe jima hema re mana"--zrI roga sajhAya 2-3 ema-
kRtye'dhike'dhikagate jijJAsA lAlasAnvitA  /  tulye nije tu vikale saMtrAso
dveSavarjitaH  // 46 //  vRtti:- -kAmAM, dhyAna Adi kayamAM, adhi-
adhikamAM,-pitAnI bhUmikAnI apekSAe adhika evA kayamAM,-adhiante-adhigata eTale
AcArya Adi adhika-caDhIyAtAmAM (guNavaMtamAM) vartatA, evA kRtyama, vijJAna-AnI
jijJAsA, A Ama kema evI jANavAnI IcchA hoya che; DhADhaNAvittA-lAlasA sahita,
eTale ke abhilASAnA atirekathI yukta evI jijJAsA. (pitAnAthI caDhIyAtI
dazAvALAnI caDhIyAtI kriyA dekhI, A Ama kema haze te jANavAnI tIvra IcachA ).
tuje-vaMdanAdi tulya-sarakhA kRtyamAM, nine tu-pitAnA ja, vivAre-vikala,
kAryotsargIkaraNa vagerevaDe vika-khAmIvALA, saMtrA-saMtrAsa AtmAmAM hoya che.
huM hAnivirodhaka chuM ema AtmAmAM atyaMta trAsa chUTe che. pArvataH-TheSa
rahita,-adhika maye dveSa rahita e saMtrAsa-prastuta daSTinA sAmarthyane lIdhe.
(banenI eka sarakhI kriyA chatAM, pitAnI kiyA khAmIvALI dekhI, pitAnA kAmamAM
trAsa chuTe che, ane temAM adhika guNavaMta pratye dveSa hoto nathI)

Page #263 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Tāraṣṭi:** Intense curiosity towards one who is highly virtuous.  In the
actions of one who is more virtuous, a desire to know the reason for their
actions, and a lack of aversion towards one's own shortcomings. 46 (197)
**Meaning:**  There is a desire-filled curiosity towards the actions of one who
is more virtuous, and a lack of aversion towards one's own flawed actions.
**Commentary:**  Furthermore, in this ṣṭi, the aspirant, seeing the actions of
an ācāryādri who is more virtuous than themselves, and who has a higher state of
self-realization, thinks to themselves: "Ah! This great soul's actions are of
such a superior kind, what kind of curiosity is this, how does it happen?" This
gives rise to a state of intense desire and anxiety-filled curiosity to know the
reason; because the states of the soul are countless, and due to the speed of
the karmic actions, due to inferiority, due to being less, there are countless
differences in the states of the soul. Thus, due to the difference in the
destruction of karma, some souls are of a lower order than themselves, some are
of the same order, and some are of a higher order. Thus, there are differences
in the states of souls who are progressing, moving forward, and achieving self-
development. Therefore, their religious actions are also of that kind, with
varying degrees of speed, and are of a higher or lower level.  In this, the
aspirant, when they see great souls who have a higher state of self-realization
than themselves, when they see a bhavacārya, a bhavupaādhyāya, a bhavasādhu, a
bhavasrāvaka, or any other aspirant who is more virtuous than themselves, they
are filled with wonder. When they see their dharma-dhyāna, which is more pure
and blessed than their own, when they see their firm and unwavering faith, which
is more steadfast than their own, when they see their devotion to God, which is
more filled with joy and enthusiasm than their own, when they see their tapas,
svādhyāya, pratikramāṇa, vandanādi, which are more filled with self-exaltation
than their own, when they see their ahiṁsā, satya, etc., which are more
developed than their own, and when they see their samyagdarshan, jñāna, cāritra,
etc., which are more self-perfected than their own, then this aspirant, who has
this yogadṛṣṭi, is filled with wonder and thinks to themselves: "Ah! This great
soul's dharma-dhyāna! Ah! Their devotion! Ah! Their faith! Ah! Their tapas-
svādhyāya! Ah! Their ahiṁsā-satya! Ah! Their darshan, jñāna-cāritra! Ah! Their
state of brahmaniṣṭhā! Ah! Their unparalleled self-perfection! How did these
wonderful brahmaniṣṭhā great souls attain such a wonderful state of self-
realization?"

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 tArASTi : adhika guNI pratye tIvra jijJAsA adhikanA adhika kRtyamAM, salAlasA
jijJAsa tulya vikala nija kRtyamAM, dveSa rahita satrAsa. 46 (197 ) artha
:--guNathI adhikanA adhika kRtya pratye lAlasAyukta evI jijJAsA hAya, ane tulya
evA peAtAnA vikala-khAmIvALA kRtya pratye dveSa vinAnA saMtrAsa hAya. vivecana
vaLI A STimAM vattatA mumukSu peAtAnA karatAM adhika guNavaMta, caDhIyAtI
AtmadazA vALA evA AcAryAdrinI potAnA karatAM caDhIyAtI kriyA dekhI, ema bhAve
che ke-ahA ! A mahAjanenI A kriyA AvI uttama prakAranI, AvI ucca keTinI zI
jijJAsAH rIte hotI haze ? ema tenuM kAraNa jANavAnI tene tIvra
abhilASAvALIdazAbheda utkaMThAvALI jijJAsA upaje che; kAraNa ke ceAganA sthAna
asaMkhya che, ane mehakarmInI taratamatAnA kAraNe, nyUnAdhikatAnA kAraNe,
echAvattApaNAne lIdhe, jIvanI dazAnA asa`khya bheda paDe che. Ama kSayApazamanI
bhinnatAnA kAraNe, keTalAka jIvA peAtAnAthI hIna-utaratI paMktinA hAya, keTalAka
peAtAnI samAna paoNMktinA hAya, ne keTalAka peAtAnAthI caDhIyAtI paMktinA heya.
Ama sanmAge prayANa karatA, AgaLa vadhatA, AtmavikAsa sAdhatA jIveAnI dazAnA
bheda hAya che.eTale teenI dharmakriyA paNa tevA prakAranI taratamatAvALI hoya
che, UMcI-nIcI kakSAnI hAya che. temAM A dRSTimAM sthiti karatA yAgI jyAre
peAtAnAthI caDhIyAtI AtmadazAvALA mahAnubhAva mahAtmAone dekhe che, peAtAnAthI
guNamAM adhika evA bhAvAcAryane, bhAvaupAdhyAyane, bhAvasAdhune, bhAvazrAvakane
ke anya keAI mumukSune bhALe che, sAna'dAzcarya tyAre te vismayamAM paDI jAya
che. jyAre te tenuM peAtAnA karatAM vadhAre dhanya ! anya ! vizuddhivALu
dharmadhyAna jue che, jyAre peAtAnA karatAM vadhAre maLavALe! daDha dharaga
nIrakhe che, jyAre peAtAnA karatAM vadhAre bhakti ullAsavALI bhagava'tanI
bhAvabhakti bhALe che, jyAre peAtAnA karatAM vadhAre AtmavIceAllAsavALI tapa-
svAdhyAya-pratikramaNa-vaMdanAdi sakriyA nIhALe che, jyAre peAtAnA karatAM
adhika vikAsa pAmelA teenA ahiM'sA-satya Adi sAkSAt dekhe che, ane jyAre peAtAnA
karatAM adhika AtmapariNati pAmelA teonA samyagdarzana-jJAna-cAritra Adi guNa
pratyakSa kare che,-tyAre A yogadRSTivALA ceAgI sAna dAzcarya anubhavI vicAramAM
paDI jAya che ke-ahA! A mahAtmAonuM dharmadhyAna ! ahe| bhAvabhakti ! ahe|
dharga! ahe| tapa-svAdhyAya ! ahe| mahi'sA-satya ! ahA dazana jJAna-cAritra !
ahA emanI brAhnI sthiti ! ahA emanI apUrva AtmapariNati ! A adbhuta brahmaniSTha
mahAtmAe AvI adbhuta AtmadazA kema pAmyA haze ? AvI. AzcaryakAraka

Page #264 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(198) How could they have achieved such a state of Yoga-drishti-samurchay and
self-realization? How could they have performed such extraordinary acts of self-
empowerment, being so blessed? “Blessed, blessed are those men who, in their
country, hear the words of the Lord; who perform pure knowledge and action, and
experience it themselves.” – Shri Devchandraji Blessed are those monks who walk
with equanimity; who, through the play of the cycle of births and deaths, have
crossed over, by the name of restraint and action… Blessed are those who have
abandoned the mire of worldly attachments and sit on the lotus, separate from
it; who, like lions, are valiant in their own prowess, the support of the three
worlds… Blessed are those who are knowledgeable and wise, true in body, mind,
and speech; who speak the nectar of the essence of the elements, the true words
of the Jinas… Blessed.” – Sa. Trag. St., etc. In this way, the supreme
blessedness of those self-absorbed Mahatmas is perceived, and with a noble
affection for virtuous people, one contemplates how such a wondrous state of
self-awareness could have manifested in these great souls? A strong desire and
curiosity arises to know this. And this desire for liberation, this true
curiosity, arises in these aspiring yogis, not only that, but seeing their own
inferiority in the actions of praising the father, etc., like those Mahatmas,
they experience extreme torment in their minds, disgust towards their own soul,
and hatred towards their father, thinking: “Oh! I, or anyone else, cannot
perform such excellent religious actions! Truly! I am a recipient of endless
suffering, and not a single virtue is seen in me; because I do not have the pure
feelings, or the feeling of the Lord’s form, like these Mahatmas, nor humility,
nor meekness, nor devotion to the Guru’s commands, nor steadiness, nor firm
faith in the Lord, nor supreme devotion, nor the practice of good company, nor
the practice of service, nor the feeling of being only the soul, nor firm faith,
nor the feeling of “I am a mere mortal, what can I do?”, nor unwavering
attachment to the Lord, nor the heat of separation from the Lord, nor the sorrow
for the rare stories of the Lord, nor entry into the path of devotion, nor firm
awareness of devotional singing, nor understanding of one’s own religion, nor
dwelling in a good country, nor the abandonment of the bonds that are contrary
to service, nor the control of the body and senses, nor the sorrow of separation
from the Lord, nor knowledge of the scriptures and teachings, nor the attainment
of divine vision, nor the rules of Yama and Niyama, nor detachment, nor lack of
ego, nor the accumulation of one’s own religion, nor the abandonment of other
religions. Thus, in countless ways, I am without means. I do not have a single
virtue. What great thing can I show? In the entire world, I am the lowest of the
low, and the most fallen of the fallen.”

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (198) yogadaSTisamuracaya AtmasAdhanA emaNe kema sAdhI haze ? AvI apUrva
AtmasAmarthyavALI parama dhanya sakriyA teo zI rIte karI zakatA haze ? "dhanya
dhanya nara teha, prabhupada vaMdI ho je dezanA suNe; jJAna kriyA kare zuddha,
anubhava ge ho nija sAdhakapaNe."--zrI devacaMdrajI dhanya te munivara re, je
cAle samabhAve; bhavasAyara lIlAe utare, saMyama kiriyA nAve...dhanya bhagapaMka
tajI upara beThA, paMkaja pare je nyArA; siMha pare nija vikrama zUrA,
tribhuvana jana AdhArA....dhanya jJAnavaMta jJAnI zuM malatA, tana mana vacane
sAcA; dravya bhAva sUdhA je bhAkhe, sAcI jinanI vAcA...dhanya."-sA. traga. sta,
ityAdi prakAre te AtmArAmI mahAtmAonI parama dhanyatA te bhAve che, ane guNI
jana pratyenA prazasta rAgathI ciMtave che ke A mahAnubhAvonI AvI AzcaryakAraka
Atmasthiti kema pragaTI haze ? A jANavAnI tene tIvra IcchA-jijJAsA upaje che.
ane A mumukSu jogIjanane AvI sAcI jijJAsA upaje che, eTaluM ja nahi, paNa te
mahAtmAo jevI ja pitAnI vaMdanAdi kriyAmAM potAnI hInatA dekhI, tene potAnA
pratye manamAM atyaMta trAsa chUTe che, pitAnA AtmA pratye jugupsApitA pratye
dhRNa dhRNA upaje che ke-are ! huM te ke anya ke A mahAjane jevI uttama
dharmakriyA karI zakatuM nathI! kharekhara ! huM te deza anaMtanu bhAjana chuM',
ane mahArAmAM guNa te ekake dekhAto nathI; kAraNa ke hArAmAM A mahAtmAo je nathI
zuddha bhAva ke nathI prabhu svarUpabhAva, nathI laghutA ke nathI dInatA, nathI
guruAjJA ArAdhakatA ke nathI nizcalatA, nathI prabhune daDha vizvAsa ke nathI
paramAdara, nathI satsaMgane joga ke nathI sasevA joga, nathI kevaLa AtmApaNutA
ke nathI daDhaAzrayabhAva, nathI anuga, nathI "huM pAmara zuM karI zakuM?' evo
viveka ke nathI prabhu pratye acaLa Asakti, nathI prabhuvirahane tApa ke nathI
parama durlabha evI prabhukathAno paritApa, nathI bhaktimArgamAM praveza ke
nathI bhajananuM daDha bhAna, nathI nija dharmanI samajaNa ke nathI zubha deze
sthiti, nathI sevAne pratikULa baMdhanano tyAga nathI dehadamana-iMdriyadamana,
nathI prabhuviyoganI skUraNa ke nathI vacana-Agama jJAna, nathI divya nayananI
prApti ke nathI yama-niyamAdi, nathI udAsInatA ke nathI nirabhimAnapaNuM, nathI
svadharma saMcaya ke nathI paradharmanivRtti Ama anaMta prakArathI huM sAdhana
rahita chuM. mhArAmAM eka paNa sadguNa nathI. huM moTuM zuM batAvuM ? sakaLa
jagatamAM huM ja adhamAdhama ne adhikamAM adhika patita chuM.

Page #265 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Tārādṛṣṭi: Dekhe Nij Guṇ Hāṇ “O Lord! O Lord! What have you said? Dīnānāth
Dayāḷ! I am the vessel of infinite faults, merciful! Pure feelings are not in
me, nor am I all your form; There is no inferiority or humility, what can I say
about the supreme form. There is no obedience to the Gurudev, firmly in my
heart; Your faith is firm, and there is no supreme love. There is no yoga for
satsang, no service yoga; Only surrender is not there, nor is there refuge in
the follower. I am a pauper, what can I do? There is no such discrimination;
There is no refuge in your feet, no patience, until death. Your incomprehensible
greatness, there is no passionate feeling; Not a single part of love, does not
get the supreme effect. There is no firm form of attachment, no heat of
separation; The story of your love is unavailable, there is no sorrow for it.
There is no entry into the path of devotion, no firm awareness of worship; There
is no understanding of one's own dharma, no place in the auspicious land. Due to
the time, the poison of Kali, there is no limit to dharma There is no anxiety
either, see Lord my karma. Whatever is contrary to service, that is not
renunciation; The senses do not believe, they are attached to the external.
There is no joy in your separation, no vow, no restraint, There is no
indifference from the unfaithful, so in the house, etc. There is no freedom from
ego, no accumulation of one's own dharma; There is no renunciation in purity,
nothing of another dharma. Thus, in infinite ways, I am without means; Not even
one virtuous quality, what face should I show? Only the embodiment of
compassion, Dīnbandhu Dīnānāth! I am a sinner, a complete orphan, O Lord! Hand.
The lowest of the low, the most fallen, in the whole world I am Without that
certainty, what will the means do? Falling, falling at your lotus feet, again
and again I ask for the same; The form of the Sadguru Saint, make that
firmness.” - Śrīmad Rājacandrajī

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 tArAdaSTi : dekhe nija guNa hANa "he prabhu! he prabhu! zuM kahyuM? dInAnAtha
dayALa ! . huM te doSa anaMtanuM, bhAjana chuM karuNALa ! zuddha bhAva mujamAM
nathI, nathI sarva tuja rUpa; nathI laghutA ke dInatA, zuM kahuM parama svarUpa.
nathI AjJA gurudevanI, acaLa karI uramAMhi; Apa taNe vizvAsa daDha, ne
paramAdara nAMhi. joga nathI satsaMgane, nathI sasevA joga; kevaLa arpaNatA
nathI, nathI Azraya anuga. huM pAmara zuM karI zakuM? evo nathI viveka; caraNa
zaraNa dhIraja nathI, maraNa sudhInI che. aciMtya tuja mahAbhyane, nathI
prakulita bhAva; aMza na eka snehane, na maLe parama prabhAva acaLa rUpa Asakti
nahiM, nahiM virahane tApa; kathA alabhya tuja premanI, nahiM tene paritApa.
bhaktimArga praveza nahi, nahiM bhajana dRDha bhAna; samaja nahi nija dhamanI,
nahiM zubha deze sthAna. kALa deSa kaLithI thaye, nahiM maryAdA dharma teya
nahiM vyAkuLatA, juo prabhu muja karma. sevAne pratikULa je, te baMdhana nathI
tyAga; dedriya mAne nahiM, kare bAhya para rAga. tuja viyega phuratA nathI,
vacana nayana yama nahi, nahiM udAsIna abhaktathI tema gRhAdika mAMhi.
ahaMbhAvathI rahita nahiM, svadharma saMcaya nAMhi; nahiM nivRtti nimaLapaNe,
anya dharmanI kAMI. ema anaMta prakArathI, sAdhana rahita huM; nahiM eka saguNa
paNa, mukha batAvuM zuM? kevaLa karuNAmUrti che, dInabaMdhu dInAnAtha! pApI
parama anAtha chuM, he prabhujI! hAtha. adhamAdhama adhike patita, sakaLa
jagatamAM huM e nizcaya AvyA vinA, sAdhana karaze zuM? paDI paDI tuja pada
paMkaje, pharI pharI mAguM e ja; sadaguru saMta svarUpa tuja, e daDhatA karI
deja."- zrImada rAjacaMdrajI

Page #266 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Here is the English translation, preserving the Jain terms:  (200)
Yogadrishtisamuccaya "I have abandoned my own beautiful form and have become
engrossed in the pudgala (matter), which has brought the thirst for sense
objects; I shall bind the asrava (influx of karmic matter) and cultivate my own
inclination towards the vibhava (delusion)... I have forgotten, I shall give up
the defect of false belief..." - Thus the mumukshu (seeker of liberation) yogi,
seeing his own faults and realizing the inadequacy and shortcomings in his
father's religious practices, develops a sense of detachment towards his father.
Does this not indicate the weakness, laxity, negligence, and lack of virtues in
this life? But this distress arises, in which there is only absence of hatred
towards those virtuous people, and not at all any feeling of jealousy or envy.
Towards those praiseworthy persons, there is no arising of jealousy or malice,
but only a feeling of delight. Not only that, instead of being disappointed by
the lack of virtues in the father, he gets inspiration to progress further by
observing the excellent qualities of the great persons. Thus, "One should revere
more the virtuous... the mind sees its own deficiency..." (Sūkṣmāvattarī 2-3)
दुःखरूपो भवः सर्व उच्छेदोऽस्य कुतः कथम् । चित्रा सतां प्रवृत्तिश्च साशेषा
ज्ञायते कथम् ॥४७॥ The entire samsara (cycle of rebirth) is of the nature of
duhkha (suffering), from where and how can its uchchheda (destruction) happen?
And the wonderful, extraordinary activities of the sants (enlightened beings) -
how can they all be known? (47)  Further, this drishti-vala (one with this
perspective) yogi considers the entire samsara as full of duhkha, because birth,
old age, disease, death, etc. afflictions make this samsara full of adhi
(mental), vyadhi (physical), and upadhi (external) sufferings. Uchchheda - the
destruction of this samsara, kutah - from where, katha - how? By cultivating
qualities like ksanti (forbearance), etc. Chitra - the wonderful, extraordinary,
pravarti - activities, satam - of the sants, sa-ashesa - all of them, jnayate -
how can they be known? By abandoning others.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (200) yogadaSThisamuccaya "huM choDI nija rUpa ramyA para pudgale,. jhI UlaTa
ANI viSaya tRSaNa jale; Azrava baMdha vibhAva karUM ruci ApaNI bhUlya mithyA
vAsa doSa dauM para bhaNI....viharamAna"--zrI devacaMdrajI ItyAdi prakAre potAnA
doSa dekhI, pitAnI dharmakriyAnI vikalatA-khAmI jaI, A gadaSTivALA mumukSu yogI
puruSane pitA pratye beda upaje che, trAsa chUTe che ke A jIvanuM A te kevuM
hInavIyapaNuM? kevuM zithilAcArIpaNuM? kevuM pramAdIpaNuM? kevuM nirguNa
cakavartI paNuM? paNa A saMtrAsa upaje che, temAM te guNIjano pratye adveSa ja
hoya che, bIlakula draSa-matsara bhAva te hete ja nathI. evA guNanidhAna
prazasta puruSa pratye IrSyAadekhAI AvatI ja nathI, paNa kevaLa pramoda bhAva ja
ulase che. eTaluM ja nahiM paNa pitAnI guNahInatAthI nirAza thavAne badale, te
mahatuM puruSonA uttama guNa dekhI AgaLa vadhavAnI preraNA meLave che. Ama
"vinaya adhika guNIne kare...mana dekhe nija guNa hANa re....mana"--20 sakjhAya
2-3 duHkharUpo bhavaH sarva ucchedo'sya kutaH katham  /  citrA satAM pravRttizca
sAzeSA jJAyate katham  // 47 //  duHkharUpa bhava sarva A, kayAMthI kema uche?
citra pravRtti saMtanI, kayama jaNAya sahu bheda? 47, artha -sarva saMsAra
duHkharUpa che, Ane ucheda kyA kAraNathI kevI rIte thAya? ane saMtonI citra-
vividha AzcaryakArI pravRtti che, te badhIya kevI rIte jaNAya? vivecana trAsa
dhare bhavabhaya thakI.mana bhava mAne dukhakhANa re....mana" 0 sajhAya 2-4 vaLI
A daSTivALo yegI puruSa samasta saMsArane duHkharUpa mAne che; kAraNa ke janma,
jarA, maraNa, rega, zeka vagere duHkhathI bharele A saMsAra Adhi-vyAdhi-
upAdhirUpa vRtti-suto mA: sarva: -badheya saMsAra du:kharUpa che,-janma-jarA Adi
rUpapaNAne lIdhe. ucheDA -A saMsArane ucheda, kuMtaH-kayAMthI? kayA hetuthI ?
kSAMti AdithakI. vacce-kema ? kevA prakAre ? jitrA-citra, (vividha prakAranI,
athavA AzcaryakArI), sattAma-saMtanI, munionI pravRttitha-pravRtti, caitya karma
Adi prakArathI, sAzA jJAcate thay-te azeSa kema jaNAya? te badhIya kema
jANavAmAM Ave ? -tethI anyanA apahathI, (tethI bIjIno tyAgathI).

Page #267 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The picture of the character of the soul, which is tormented by the eight
afflictions, is as follows:  (21) It is directly seen that the soul is
constantly agitated by the three types of heat. It is realized that in this
world, which is full of destruction and sorrow, there is only fear, fear, and
fear. It sees that there is fear of attachment in wealth, fear of downfall in
family, fear of the king in wealth, fear of humiliation in honor, fear of
enemies in strength, fear of women in beauty, fear of debate in scriptures, fear
of wicked people in virtues, and fear of death in the body. Thus, everything
appears fearful to it, and it realizes that only detachment is fearless.  Thus,
the whole world is full of fear and sorrow. Whatever is considered to be a
source of happiness in the world is also only a semblance of happiness and is
actually sorrowful. Even the position of Indra and Chakravarti is sorrowful.
This is the firm conviction of the soul. Because:  “Every time there is fear of
death, fear of attachment, fear of livelihood, fear of protection if there is
fame, fear of avoiding infamy if there is infamy, fear of taking if there is
something to take, fear of being indebted if there is something to give, fear
of… if there is a woman, fear of acquiring if there is not, fear of the mischief
of children and grandchildren if there are, fear of acquiring if there are not,
fear of increasing if there is less wealth, fear of losing if there is more,
thus, there is experience for every achievement.” - Shrimad Rajchandra
Therefore, the aspirant soul thinks: O soul! You have suffered endless sorrow
while wandering in the four states of existence in this fearful world. You have
experienced intense suffering in the terrible hell state, the animal state, the
ghost state, and the human state. You have endured unbearable suffering for a
long time due to the lack of detachment. You have repeatedly experienced
physical and mental suffering. O soul! You have lived for a long time in the
wombs of many impure, repulsive, and filthy mothers. You have drunk more milk
than the water of the ocean. Your mother has shed more tears than the water of
the ocean at the time of your death. Your hair, nails, etc., have been cut more
than the height of Mount Meru. O soul! This:  “Fear of attachment in wealth,
fear of downfall in family, fear of the king in wealth, fear of humiliation in
honor, fear of enemies in strength, fear of women in beauty, fear of debate in
scriptures, fear of wicked people in virtues, and fear of death in the body.
Everything is filled with fear, detachment is the only refuge.” - Shri
Bhartrihari  (For this, see - Shrimad Rajchandra's Bhavanamoad). “Whatever is
called happiness in this world is all worldly. It is not happiness, but only a
semblance of happiness, but undoubtedly sorrow.” - Shri Amritchandracharya's
Shri Panchaadhyayee

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 tArASTi 'bhava mAne du:khakhANu'-satAnuM citra caritra (21) trividha tApathI
niraMtara khaLI rahyo che, ema te pratyakSa dekhe che; A layAkula saMsAra
saoNMsAramAM satra bhaya bhaya ne bhaya ja vyApI rahela che, ema tene jaNAya
che. te jue che te bhAgamAM x rAganA bhaya che, kulane paDavAne bhaya che,
lakSmImAM rAjAnA bhaya che, mAnamAM dvInatAneA bhaya che, khalamAM zatrune bhaya
che, rUpathI strIne bhaya che, zAstramAM vAdanA bhaya che, guNamAM khalane bhaya
che, ane kAyA para kALanA bhaya che. ema sarva vastu tene bhayavALI dekhAya che,
mAtra eka vairAgya ja abhaya che,' evuM tene pratIta thAya che. Ama AkhA sa`sAra
bhayAkula hAi kevala duHkharUpa ja che, saMsAramAM je je sukhasAdhana manAya che
te paNa badhAya paramAthI sukhAbhAsarUpa hAi duHkharUpa ja che, iMdra-cakravattI
AdinI padavI paNa duHkharUpa ja che, ema tenA AtmAmAM nizcaya thAya che. kAraNa
ke r " pratyeka vakhata mRtyunA bhayavALA, rAganA bhayavALA, AjIvikAnA
bhayavALA, yaza haze teA tenI rakSAnA bhayavALA, apayaza haze te tene TALavAnA
bhayavALA, leNuM haze te tene levAnA bhayavALA, deNuM haze te tenI hAyaveAyanA
bhayavALA, strI haze te tenI..........nA bhayavALA, nahi hoya tA tene prApta
karavAnA khyAlavALA, putra-putrAdika haze teA tenI kaDAkUTanA bhayavALA, nahiM.
Aya te tene meLavavAnA khyAlavALA, ochI Rddhi haze te vadhArenA khyAlavALA,
vadhAre haze te tene khAtha bharavAnA khyAlanA, ema ja pratyeka sAdhanA mATe
anubhava thaze. --zrImad rAjaca'dra "" eTale te mumukSu puruSa bhAve che ke-he
jIva! A bhayarUpa sa`sAramAM cAre gatimAM bhramaNa karatAM tu anaMta duHkha
pAmyA che. bhISaNa naraka gatimAM, tiya ca gatimAM, kudeva gatimAM, ne kumanuSya
gatimAM tuM tIvra du:khane prApta thayA che, dAruNa asahya du:kha
vairAgyabhAvanA te cirakALa sahyA che, zArIrika mAnasika duHkha te vAravAra
anubhavyA che. he jIva! azuci bIbhatsa ne malamalina evA aneka jananIonA
garbhAvAsamAM tuM cirakALa vasyA che. samudranA pANI karatAM paNa vadhAre mAtAnA
dhAvaNu tuM dhAvyA che. tArA maraNusamaye sAgarajala karatAM paNa vadhAre AMsuDA
tArI mAtAee sAryAM che. meruparyaMta karatAM paNa vadhAre tArA keza-nakha vagere
kapAyA che. huM jIva ! A X" bhoge rAgabhayaM kule vyutibhayaM vitte
nRpAlAdbhayaM; mAne dainyabhayaM bale ripubhayaM rUpe taruNyA bhayaM  /  zAstre
vAdabhayaM guNe khalabhayaM kAye kRtAntAdbhayaM, sarva vastu mayAnvita muvi
mULAM vaizyamevAmayam  / ' '--zrI bhartRharI (a` mATe juo-zrImad rAjacaMdrakRta
bhAvanAmeAdha ). "aihikaM yatsukhaM nAma sarva vaiSayikaM smRtam  /  na
tatsukhaM sukhAbhAsaM kintu duHkhamasaMzayam  // " -zrI amRtacaMdrAcArya kRta
zrI paMcAdhyAyI

Page #268 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(202) The one with yogic vision has traveled through all three worlds, through
all places, repeatedly. He has had all kinds of relationships with all beings,
many times. He has tasted and discarded all the objects in the universe, again
and again. He has consumed the essence of the world, repeatedly, with great
enthusiasm, yet he has not attained satisfaction! Suffering from thirst, he has
drunk the water of the three worlds, yet his thirst has not been quenched!
Therefore, O being! Now you attain peace! Attain peace! "The essence of the
world, like a lump of clay, does not diminish your burden, my friend." - Shri
Devchandraji  Thus, contemplating the sorrowful nature of the world, the color
of detachment arises in his heart. He contemplates, "For what reason, and how,
can this sorrowful world be destroyed? I am standing in fear of rebirth. What
should I do in this sorrowful, impermanent, and fleeting world? So that I do not
go to a state of misery." "I am standing in fear of rebirth, now take me across
the ocean of rebirth." (Yashvijayji)  Furthermore, seeing the various virtuous
activities of the liberated souls, the righteous men, and the saintly monks, he
becomes amazed. Their supreme, wonderful devotion, their supreme, wonderful
self-power, their supremely pure, spotless austerity, their supremely excellent
religious meditation, their supremely peaceful, solemn conduct, the picture of
the saints, their pure activities filled with supreme knowledge, and their
character, like a mountain of great restraint! Seeing the virtuous activities of
the holy men, like the adornment of green, etc., he becomes absorbed in wonder;
and he contemplates, "How can the entire picture and character of these self-
contented, Brahman-devotee, great souls be known? Because, when contemplating
the character of these righteous men, sometimes they appear compassionate,
sometimes they appear sharp, sometimes they appear indifferent! Thus,
contradictory qualities are seen in them! Because these great souls possess
compassion, which benefits all, they are sharp in severing karma, and they
exhibit indifference, which is like the feeling of a witness, without attachment
or aversion, to the results of acceptance and rejection! Furthermore, they are
yogis and they are also householders! They are speakers and they are also
silent! They are the lords of the three worlds and they are also naked ascetics!
Thus, various...  "Fearful hell, the animal realm, the celestial realm, and the
human realm. ... You experience great sorrow, O being, with the knowledge of the
Jinas. You have drunk all the water of the three worlds, you are suffering from
thirst. You should not contemplate the body." etc. (See) Shri Kundakundacharya's
Shri Bhava Prabhriti, *"In this impermanent, fleeting world, filled with sorrow.
I am not yours, I am not attached to you." - Shri Uttaradhyayanasutra

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (202) yogadaSTisamuccaya tribhuvana madhye te sarva sthAnamAM vAraMvAra
gamanAgamana karyuM che, sarva jI sAthe sarva prakAranA saMbaMdho te aneka vAra
karyA che. bhuvanedaramAM vattatA sarva pudgale te pharI pharI rasyA che ne
mUkyA che,-jaganI eMTha te vAraMvAra hoMze hoMze khAdhI che, to paNa tuM tRpti
pAmyo nathI ! tRSNAthI pIDita thaIne te traNe bhuvananuM pANI pIdhuM che, te
paNa hArI tRSNAne cheda thaye nathI ! mATe he jIva! have to tuM virAma pAma !
virAma pAma ! "jaDa cala jaganI eMThane, na ghaTe tujane bhega ho mitta."-zrI
devacaMdrajI Ama du:khamaya saMsArasvarUpa bhAvatAM tenA aMtaramAM vairAgyane
raMga lAge che, eTale te ciMtave che ke A du:khada saMsArane kayA kAraNathI,
kevI rIte ucheda thAya? huM A bhavabhayathI ubho chuM. A du:khapracura adhuva
azAzvata saMsAramAM huM evI zuM karaNI karUM? ke jethI karIne huM durgati prati
na jauM. * "bhavabhayathI huM ubho , have bhava pAra utAra he." (yazavijayajI)
vaLI te mumukSu satparuSanI, saMta munijanenI vividha prakAranI satupravRtti
joIne diMga thaI jAya che. teonI parama adbhuta bhakti, parama addabhuta
Atmazakti, parama vizuddha nimala tapazcaryA, parama utkRSTa dharmadhyAna,
parama prazAMta gaMbhIra vAdhArA, saMtanuM citra parama jJAnasaMpanna zuddha
kriyAkalApa, ane meru jevA mahAna saMyamabhAranuM caritra! lIlAthI dhAraNa,-e
vagere te sAdhupuruSanI satupravRtti nihALI te te - AzcaryamAM lIna thaI jAya
che; ane ciMtave che ke-A AtmArAmI brahmaniSTha mahAtmAonuM samasta citra
caritra kema jANI zakAya? kAraNa ke A sapuruSonuM caritra ciMtavavAmAM Ave te
kavacit karuNakamaLatA dekhAya che, kavacita tINatA dekhAya che, kavacit
udAsInatA dekhAya che! Ama paraspara virodhAbhAsI guNonuM emAM darzana thAya
che! kAraNa ke A mahAjane sarva jenuM hita karavAvALI karuNa dharAve che,
karmanuM vidAraNa karavAmAM tIkSNatA rAkhe che, ane grahaNa-tyAga pariNAma
vinAnI dRSTA-sAkSI bhAvarUpa udAsInatA dAkhave che ! vaLI eo yegI paNa che ne
bhegI paNa che! vaktA paNa che ne maunadhArI paNa che! tribhuvananA prabhu paNa
che ne nigraMtha paNa che ! Ama vividha x " bhIsaNa Naraya gaIe tiriya gaIe
kudeva maNuya giie| .. pattosi tivvaduHkhaM bhAvahi jiNabhAvaNA jIva  //
tihuyaNasalilaM sayalaM pIyaM tihAi pIDieNa tume  /  te vi ja tapAcho nA ciMted
mavamaLam II ityAdi (juo) zrI kuMdakuMdAcAryajIta zrI bhAvaprAbhRta, * " adhuve
asAsayaMmi saMsAraMmi duHkhapaurAe  /  viM nAma hunna naM #ma AhuM tujAruM na
joDyA "--zrI uttarAdhyayana sUtra

Page #269 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
"**Tāradṛṣṭi**: "Many scriptures, little intellect." (203) Their contradictory
picture activities appear! How can the great ones know the entire picture-
strange self-efforts of men, which are so amazingly surprising, by the miracle
of consciousness? Compassion, gentleness, sharpness, indifference, cool... cool,
all beings' welfare-causing compassion, sharp karma-cleaving; harmless,
resulting, indifferent, cool... cool. Power, person, three-world lordship, with
detachment, cool... cool. Yogi, together, speaker, silent, useless, cool...
cool. Etc. multi-broken, tri-broken, giving miraculous mind, cool... cool.
Amazing, picture-strange, taking the treasure of bliss, cool... cool." Shri
Anandghanaji, understanding bravery, patience, sharpness, saw the servant's mind
pleased; the qualities, by the praise of passion, were amazing, the qualities,
by the lack of passion, were alive." - Shri Devchandaji  Because "Our great
intellect, great expanse of scriptures. Shiṣṭa: "I accept that, in itself, it is
48." We do not have great intellect, and the expanse of scriptures is great;
therefore, here, the shiṣṭa is the proof, - this is the view, always believed.
The above discussion said, "All the picture activities of these holy people
cannot be known," the reason for that is shown here. Those with this view
believe that - we do not have such great intellect that we will never disagree -
never fall. And the intellect of the father, having lost to the free-willed
imagination, in the subject that is covered, will that disagreement come without
a dull mind? It does not remain. Thus, our intellect is very limited - limited
in subject, and the expanse of scriptures is very, very great. The Shruta Sagar,
beyond the scope, the name, the intellect, our intellect is not great, it is not
argumentative; because, from intellect, in the absence of knowledge, the vision
of disagreement arises, therefore. Also - great expanse of scriptures: the
expanse of scriptures is extremely great - large - because of the purpose of the
activity. Thus - the shiṣṭa - the holy person, the shiṣya puruṣa, who is
agreeable to them, is the proof - in this situation - in this occasion. Riti -
therefore, thus, with a clear mind - this is the view, always believed. What
they have done, it is appropriate to do it as much as possible from the
ordinary, that is the meaning.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 tArAdaSTi : zAstra ghaNA, mati thADalI" (203) virodhAbhAsI temanI citra
pravRtti jaNAya che! ema parama AzcaryakAraka evI puruSonI samasta citra-vicitra
AtmaceSTA, caitanya camatkAre mahArAthI kema jANI zakAya vAru? karuNA kemalatA
tIkSaNatA, udAsInatA sehe re....zItala sarva jaMtu hitakaraNa karuNA, karma
vidAraNa tIkSaNa re; hAnAdAna rahita pariNamI, udAsInatA vIkSaNa re...zItala0
zakti vyakti tribhuvana prabhutA, nirgathatA saMge re, yegI bhegI vaktA maunI,
anupayogI upage re....zItala ItyAdika bahabhaMga tribhaMgI, camatakAra citta
detI re acarijakArI citra vicitrA, AnaMdaghana pada letI re...zItala" zrI
AnaMdaghanajI tAharI zUratA dhIratA tIkSaNatA, dekhI sevaka taNe citta rAcyo;
rAga suprazastathI guNI AzcaryatA, guNI abhutapaNe jIva mA."--zrI devacaMdrajI
kAraNa ke nAsmAkaM mahatI prajJA sumahAn zAstravistaraH  /  zigr: pramAmi tatya
jAte savA 48 || nathI amArI mati mahA zAstravistAra mahAna; ziSTo ahIM pramANa
e, mAne nita A sthAna, 48 artha--amArAmAM moTI buddhi nathI, ane zAstravistAra
te ghaNo maTe che; tethI ahI'A te ziSTa ja pramANa che,-ema A daSTimAM sadA mAne
che. vivecana uparamAM je kahyuM ke "A sAdhujananI citra pravRtti badhIya na
jANI zakAya," tenuM ahI kAraNa batAvyuM che. A daSTivALe yegI bhAve che ke-
mahArAmAM te tevI moTI buddhi nathI ke kadI visaMvAda na pAme-TI na paDe. ane
pitAnI buddhiekayAM hArI svachaMda matikalpanAe kapelA viSayamAM te visaMvAda
AvyA vinA maMda mati? rahetuM nathI. Ama mahArI mati te ati pAmara che-
alpaviSayA che, ane zAstrano vistAra te ghaNo ghaNuM maTe che. zrutasAgarane
pAra vRtti-nAma matI prajJA-amArI prajJA-buddhi maTI nathI, saMvAdinI nathI;
kAraNa ke prajJAthI vihipatamAM visaMvAdanuM darzana thAya che, teTalA mATe.
tathA-sumahAna rAtraviratA:-zAstravistAra atyaMta mahAna-moTe che -te te
pravRttinA hetupaNue karIne. Ama-ziSTa-sAdhujanene saMmata evA ziSya puruSa,
pramANama-A vyatikaramAM-prasaMgamAM pramANabhUta che. riti-teTalA mATe Ama,
kAcAM macatte sA-A dRSTimAM sadA mAne che. je teoe AcaryuM che te ja yathAzakti
sAmAnyathI karavuM yukta che, ema artha che,

Page #270 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Gadasthi Samuchaya  Even the great and wise people get tired, so what can be
said about the lowly like me? How can the crow enter the palace of the king?
"The ocean of omniscience, with its infinite modes, meanings, causes,
viewpoints, and words - it is difficult for the unlearned to enter that city of
the omniscient doctrine, adorned with jewels. Then I, who am devoid of the
wealth of scriptural knowledge and intellect, and who wishes to enter there
without considering my incapacity, am like a poor beggar trying to collect the
scattered grains of a ruined heap! When we hear about the infinite ocean of
knowledge possessed by the great sages of the past, who had the knowledge of the
Twelve Angas even from a mere three-line verse, then I, the present-day person
called a 'bearer of the scriptures and traditions', who is not even a drop in
comparison, where is my place in that?"  The scriptures, in which the profound
sweet nectar flows, Where the mighty waves of the principles surge, The
beautiful confluence of the rivers of logic, Who can describe that ocean of
scriptural knowledge? Whose intellect's movement cannot be grasped even by the
wise, Where the intellect of the learned is completely confined, Seeing which,
the jewel-like qualities captivate the mind - Who can describe that beautiful
ocean of scriptural knowledge?  Thus, my limited intellect cannot fathom the
infinite ocean of scriptures, so it is appropriate here to accept the authority
of those saintly persons who are agreeable. What they have said must be true,
and what they have practiced should be followed to the best of one's ability.
Their words alone are worthy of contemplation and acceptance; therefore, it is
not appropriate for me to make any false or exaggerated claims. "The path taken
by the great is the right path" - following the path shown by the great ones is
my duty, and by doing so with this attitude, I will surely attain good
reputation.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 gadaSTisamucaya pAmatAM mahAmativALA mahAjana paNa thAkI jAya che, tyAM mahArA
jevA pAmaranuM zuM gajuM? mahArI cAMca temAM kema bUDI zake? "anaMta gama,
paryAya, artha, hetu, naya, ne zabdarUpa ! ratnathI dhanADhaya-samRddha evA
sarvajJa zAsana-puramAM pravezavuM abaDutone duSkara che. te pachI zruta-buddhiX
vibhavathI parihIna e huM ke je potAnI azakti vicAryA vinA temAM praveza karavA
IcchuM chuM, te te verAI gayelA dANAnA kaNa vINavA IcchatA raMka bhIkhArI jevo
chuM ! tripadImAtranA grahaNathI jene dvAdazAMgInuM jJAna thatuM hatuM, evA
pUrva puruSasiMhone anaMta sAgara jevo jJAnatizaya jyAre sAMbhaLIe chIe, tyAre
bindu jevA paNa nahi evA jJAnathI "Agamadhara-zrutadhara' kahevAtA
vartamAnakALanA puruSone paNa mane avakAza nathI, te mArA jevA maMdamatinuM te
temAM sthAna ja kayAM che? sUtro jemAM amala jala che athagabhIra mIThAM,
siddhAntanA prabaLa uchaLe jyAM taraMge garIThA; yuktirUpI sarasa saritA
saMgamasthAna catra, cArU e zrutajalanidhi varNavA koNa zakta ? dhImaMtanI paNa
matigati tAga jene na lAve, buddhi jemAM budha jana taNI kayAMya niruddha thA;
dekhIne jyAM guNa gaNamaNi citta thAye prasakta, cArU e zruta jalanidhi varNavA
koNa zakta ?"-(De. bhagavAnadAsa) Ama hArI apamati apAra zAstrasamudrane pAra
pAmI zake ema nathI, mATe atre te saMtajanone saMmata evA ziSTa puruSa ja hAre
pramANa karavA yogya che. teoe jema kahyuM che tema ja tathya hovA yogya che,
teoe je AcaryuM che te ja yathAzakti sAmAnya paNe hAre AcaravA gya che, hAre
mana te teonuM vacana ja mananIya ne mAnanIya che; mATe mhAre mahArUM jUThuM
DaphANa-doDhaDahApaNa karavA yogya nathI. "mIMgano cena jata: sa pracA:"--
mahAjana je mAge gayA te mArgane anusaravuM e ja mahArUM kartavya che, ane ema
bhAvathI karIza te suyazanI prApti mane avazya thaze.* x"
yadyapyanantagamaparyayArthahetunayazabdaratnAvyam  /  sarvajJazAsanapuraM
praveSTumabahuzrutairduHkham  //
zrutabuddhivibhavaparihINakastathApyahamazaktimavicintya  /  dramaka
ivAvayavocchakamanveSTuM tatpravezepsuH  //  pUrvapuruSasiMhAnAM
vijJAnAtizayasAgarAnantyam  /  RtvA mAMgatapuruSa zartha svayuddhathA mahuM
cAnita ." --zrI umAsvAtivAcakagaNIta prazamarati Re "taman zArdU mA te,
arthAdArthavyavasthitI ! jJAtvA phAstravidhAno varSa jItuSiAsi "-gItA-a, 16

Page #271 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Tashaṣṭi: Summary - Yoga-drṣṭi Kalaśa Kāvya (295) “Śāstra ghaṇā mati
thāḍalī....man॰ śiṣṭa kahe te pramāṇa re....man॰ Suyaśa lahe e bhāvathi....man॰
ma kare jūṭha kāṇu re....man”—chāga॰ sajjāya-2-5  Tārādrṣṭi Sārāṁśa This
Tārādrṣṭi— (1) Darśīn, like a weak ember of cow dung, with a weak state of
being. Hi. (2) The second limb of the fourfold path, niyama, is present. (3) The
abandonment of the second mental affliction, called udvega. (4) The second
virtue, called jijñāsā, manifests. In addition to these, this group of virtues
is also present: (1) Supreme love for the stories of the yagis. (2) Respect for
pure yagis, their care as much as possible. Therefore, there is a rise in
devotion, the destruction of petty disturbances, and conformity to the
righteous. (3) Escape from the fear of rebirth. (4) Proper conduct, improper
misconduct. (5) Curiosity towards those who are more virtuous. (6) Regret and
suffering due to one's own lack of virtue. (7) Dispassion for the world, a
desire to be free from it. (8) Wonder at the exemplary conduct of the righteous.
(9) A feeling of "what the righteous say is the standard," abandonment of self-
will. Tārādrṣṭi Table 5 Abandonment of the Fourfold Path Attainment of Virtue
Abandonment of Udvega Jijñāsā (Anudvega) Darśana Like a Cow Dung Ember Second
Limb of the Fourfold Path Other Group of Virtues { Love for the stories of the
yagis, respect for the yogis { Conformity, escape from the fear of rebirth,
Proper conduct, improper misconduct ...Curiosity towards the virtuous, regret
due to one's own lack of virtue. { Dispassion for the world, conformity to the
righteous. 品 Chāgaṣṭi Kalaśa Kāvya —: Madākāntā: In Tārā, the vision is more
open than in the first, the fourfold path, what kind of village fire does the
darśīn see; with true faith, he always walks the path of the scriptures, The
seeker, like a lion cub, walks with humility. 31.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 tAzaSTi : sArAMza-yogadRSTi kaLaza kAvya (295) " zAstra ghaNA mati
thADalI....mana. ziSTa kahe te pramANa re....mana0 suyaza lahe e
bhAvathI....mana. ma kare jUTha kANu re....mana"--cAga. sajjhAya-2-5 Pou
tArAdRSTi sArAMza A tArAdaSTimAM-- (1) darzIna, chANAnA agnikaNu jevuM maMda
vIya-sthitivALu. hAya. (2) ceAgatuM khIju aMga niyama hoya. (3) udvega nAmanA
bIjA cittadoSanA tyAga hAya. (4) jijJAsA nAmane khIjo guNu pragaTe. te uparAMta
A guNusamUha paNa hAya-(1) yAgakathAo pratye parama prema. (ra) zuddha yAgIe
pratye bahumAna, teeneA yathAzakti upacAra. tethI hiteAdaya, kSudra upadrahAni
ane ziSTasammatatA. (3) bhavabhaya palAyana. (4) ucita AcaraNa, anucita
anAcaraNa. (5) adhika guNavaMta pratye jijJAsA. (6) nija guNuhInatAthI kheda
trAsa. (7) bhavavairAgya-sa'sArathI chUTavAnI kAmanA. (8) sat puruSanI citra
pravRttithI AzcayaeN. (9) ziSTa kahe te pramANu' evI bhAvanA, svachaMda tyAga.
tArAdaSTinuM' koSTaka 5 DhASatyAga guNaprApti udvega tyAga jijJAsA ( anuddega )
darzana chANAnA agnikaNa jevu cAgAMga niyama khIjA' guNasamUha { yamakathAprIti,
yogIjana prati { saMmatatA, bhavabhaya palAyana, ucita AcaraNa, anucita
anAcaraNu ...guNavaMta prati jijJAsA, nija guNahAnithI kheda. { bhavavairAgya,
ziSTapramANatA. Pin  cAgaSTi kaLaza kAvya --: madAkAMtA :tArAmAMhI prathama
karatAM dRSTi khUlye vadhAre, ceAgI 'cuM darazana kaI gAmayAgni zu dhAre;
satzraddhAthI cuta zrutapathe te sadA sacare che, mumukSu te siMhazizu same
mekSamAge care che. 31.

Page #272 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Chogdasya Samuchaya 32. - 33. 33. 34. Gold, nectar, and water cleanse the
mind's dirt, Purity of conduct, pure taste, great speed, this pure one now, With
pure, selfless love, All growth, blossoming, and fitness, yoga finds,
Contentment, even this moment, not swayed by the waves of desire. Within the
soul, constantly dwell, contented, emotional color; Limit, that possession, by
rule, constantly brings, Desire's pit, difficult to fill, know, contentment
enjoys. Right knowledge, equipped, austerity, austerity, what power, this
glorious one, And in the soul, by austerity's power, this powerful ascetic; Good
scriptures, contemplation, this study, meditation, Body contemplation, there,
chant, chant, with soul-like feeling. Whose pure form is revealed, knowledge
incomplete, Yogindra, holding mind, holding, meditating, Such true, divine
qualities, mind's concentration is established, Singing, meditating,
worshipping, soul's awareness is attained. Yoga desires not, dislikes not,
takes, not pride, But in it, day by day, devotion, joy increases; Who am I? What
is my form? Knowing, essence, - With longing, thirst to quench, like the chatak,
Gold, nectar, like stories, are pleasing, Know them, rare, mind dwells in them;
Desire, etc., poison-like stories, mind does not stick, All have tasted, again
and again, have gathered, even a particle? True yogis, great ones, who have pure
devotion, Towards them, constantly, constantly, much devotion, respect
increases; Service, with humility, do, what power, with devotion, And the soul,
grace, in the mind, thus meditate. 35. 36. 37. 38.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 cogadaSyisamuccaya 32. - 33. 33. 34. sonA amala jalathI cittano mela che,
zaucAcAre zuci ruci ati vega A zuddha have sUgAte te azuci tanathI, zuddha
nirlabha bhAve, savavRddhi sumanapaNuM ne yogyatA yoga pAve saMtoSI A kSaNa paNa
taNAye na tRSNA-taraMge. AtmAmAMhI nita rata rahe tuSTa saMvega raMga; maryAdA
te parigraha taNuM niyame nitya ANe, tRSNa khADe kaThina pUravo jANuM saMtoSa
mANe. samyajJAne yuta tapa tape zakti zuM A yazasvI, ne AtmAmAM tapathI pratApe
A pratApI tapasvI; satuzAstronuM manana karate eha svAdhyAya dhyAve, dehAdhyAsa
tyaOM japa jape bhAvanA AtmabhAve. jenuM zuddha svarRpa pragaTayuM, jJAna
adhurya jenuM, yogIndro dhara mana dharI dhAratA dhyAna jenuM, evA sAcA Izavara
guNe cittasaMdhAna jAme, gAtAM dhyAtAM bhajana karatAM AtmanuM bhAna pAme. yoge
dhAre nahiM aNagame, veTha te nAja kADhe, kiMtu temAM dina dina prati bhakti
ullAsa vAdhe; huM chuM koNa? svarUpa muja zuM? jANavA tattva khaMkhe, -
utkaMThAthI tarasa bujhavA cAtake jema kaMkhe. sonI amRta sarakhI sakathAo game
che, jANa tene duralabha ati citta temAM rame che; kAmAdinI viSa sama kathAmAMhi
nA citta coMTe, saue cAkhI pharI phara pharI eThane kaNa boTe ? sAcA jogIjana
mahata je zuddha soga sAdhe, tene pratye nita nita bahu bhakti sanmAna vAdhe;
sevA tenI vinayathI kare zaktizuM bhaktibhAve, ne AtmAne anugraha karUM cittamAM
ema dhyAve. 35. 36. 37. 38.

Page #273 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(207) 39. Tashdristi: Yogadristi Kalash Kavya Therefore, he receives Suphal in
the form of Gavrudhi, Many others also get Anushangi Anupi; Kalyan's rise
increases, Han Upadrani, The Shist wears the Aana on his head, he is a Sajjani.
This Mumukhu is very afraid of Bhava, "Dhigo Dhni" on his head, the Lord makes
his hair crooked; He does not allow any deficiency in that act, He does not know
what is inappropriate, he does it uselessly. High Gasthitimay Dasha, Dharta
Gini, Look at the high action, he wants to know, he wants to see! He thinks
about the wealth of the saints, the hatred goes away, And seeing the father's
Vikal Karani, the association goes away. The whole world seems like a heavy
sorrow, For what purpose? From what Rauta will the Tas rise? How will these
various good deeds of the saints be known? This Mumukhu longs for this very
much. I do not have the intellect, the vastness of the scriptures, Therefore,
here, the Maticalpana-rupa Swachched Shist, the true Satjanamata is the proof in
every way, Believing this, the mind always remains in the Del, not in the Dafan.
41. 43. Anushk ... Increases Chag Kathapriti, with Sog Sadhana Sat Seva of the
saints, gets rid of the evil Kuvasna. Abandon those Bhavagos, adorn yourself
with Gasadhane; Worship that Bhagwan Gi, that Manahsukhnandane. 45. ... ॥ इति
महर्षि श्रीहरिभद्राचार्यविरचिते किरत्चन्द्रसूनुमनःसुखनंदनेन भगवानदासेन सुमनानंद.
नीबृहटीकानामविवेचनेन सप्रपञ्च विवेचिते श्रीयोगदृष्टिसमुच्चयशास्त्रे द्वितीया
ताराष्टिः॥

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (207) 39. tAzadaSTi : yogadaSTi kaLaza kAvya tethI tene suphaLa maLatuM
gavRddhi svarUpI, lAle bIjA paNa bahu maLe AnuSaMgI anUpI; kalyANane udaya
vadhate, hANa upadranI, mAnI ziSTa zira para dhare ANa te sajajanI. A mumukSu
bhava thaka bahu nA have te Dare che, "mAthe dhIgo dhaNI" prabhuna ke vALa vAMke
kare che; te te kRtye ucita mahi te AvavA de na khAmI, kiyAye anucita kare te
ajANe nakAmI. UMcI gasthitimaya dazA dhAratA ginI, UMcI kriyA nirakha talase
jANavA te jueAnI ! te saMtanuM dhana dhanapaNuM ciMtave, dveSa chUTe, ne pitAnI
vikala karaNI dekhau saMvAsa chUTe. bhArI dukhasvarRpa saghaLo eha saMsAra
bhAse, kayA hetuthI ? kaI ja rautathI tAsa uchera thAze? A saMtanI kyama vividha
A sat kriyAo jaNAze? evuM evuM bahu talasate A mumukSu vimAse. mahArAmAM to
nathau mati mahA, zAstra vistAra mATe, tethI atre matikalapanArUpa svaccheda
ziSTo sAcA satajanamatA sarvathA che pramANa, evuM mAnI mana mahiM sadA DeLane
nA DaphaNa 41. 43. anuSka . . vAdhe cAga kathAprIti, sAdhe soga sAdhanA sat sevA
saMtanI lAdhe bAdhe duSTa kuvAsanA. tyaja te bhavabhAgone, sajate gasAdhane;
bhaja te bhagavAna gI, te manaHsukhanaMdane. 45. ...  //  iti maharSi
zrIharibhadrAcAryaviracite kiratcandrasUnumanaHsukhanaMdanena bhagavAnadAsena
sumanAnaMda. nIbRhaTIkAnAmavivecanena saprapaJca vivecite
zrIyogadRSTisamuccayazAstre dvitIyA taaraassttiH||

Page #274 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Bala Dristi  Bala Dristi is also called Tara Dristi. Now, it is called "Ala",
so it is said here.  **"Sukhasanasamayuktam balaayaan darshanam dridham | Paraa
cha tattvasushrushaa na kshepo yogagocharah ||49||"**  **Meaning:** In Bala
Dristi, the vision is firm, combined with a comfortable posture. There is a
supreme desire to listen to the truth, and there is no distraction in the path
of yoga.  **Commentary:** The third Dristi is called Bala, like a burning log,
there is no distraction, it is combined with a posture, and there is a search
for listening to the truth.  **"Jinji! Dhan dhan tuj upadesh." - Gadh Sakzaye
Ru-1**  The third Dristi called Bala, according to the previous sequence, has
these characteristics: (1) Vision is like a burning log, (2) the third limb of
speed is posture, (3) the third intention fault called distraction is abandoned,
(4) the third virtue called listening is attained.  **"Kritti-Suhasanmaayu-
Sukhasanathi samaayukt, sthira sukhasanavaala, varaayaan-bala dristima,
-darshan, purve kahiyu hatu te (sat shraddhale che te darshan), dridh-dridh-
kasht agnikana ni upmawaalu che etla mate. Paa j tannaaraashran-ane param tattva
shushrusha-tattva, sambhalvani jijgnasa-param ichchha, utkantha, na kshe
jan:-gochar-gavishyak kshep hat nahi te anugajanya hoy che, etla mate."**
**Meaning:** In Bala Dristi, the vision is firm, combined with a comfortable
posture. It is like a burning log, as mentioned before. There is a supreme
desire to listen to the truth, and there is no distraction in the path of yoga.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 balA daSTi tArAdaSTi kahI. have " alA' kahevAmAM Ave che, tethI atre kahe che.
sukhAsanasamAyuktaM balAyAM darzanaM dRDham  /  parA ca tattvazuzrUSA na kSepo
yogagocaraH  // 49 //  sukha Asana saha darzana, daDha hoya balAmAMhi;
tattvazraSA parama ne kSepa yogamAM nAMhi 49 artha -balA dRSTimAM sukha Asana
saMyukta dRDha darzana, ane parama tattvazuzraSA-tattva sAMbhaLavAnI IcchA hoya
che. tathA yuga viSayamAM kSepa hoto nathI. vivecana trIjI daSTi balA kahIjI,
kASTha agni sama bodha, kSepa nahiM Asana sadhejI, zravaNa samIhA zodha re....
jinajI! dhana dhana tuja upadeza."--gaDha sakjhAya rU-1 trIjI balA nAmanI
dRSTimAM AgaLa kahelA anukrama pramANe A prakAre cabhaMgI hoya cheH-(1) dazana
kASTha agikaNa samAna, (2) veganuM trIju aMga Asana, (3) kSepa nAmanA trIjA
Azaya doSane tyAga, (4) zuzruSA nAmanA trIjA guNanI prApti hoya che. - kRtti-
suhAsanamAyu-sukhAsanathI samAyukta, sthira sukhAsanavALuM, varAyAM-balA
daSTimAM, -darzana, pUrve kahyuM hatuM te (sat zraddhALe che te darzana), daDha-
daDha-kASTha agnikaNanI upamAvALuM che eTalA mATe. pA ja tannArAzraNa-ane parama
tatva zuzruSAtatva, sAMbhaLavAnI jijJAsA-parama IcchA, utkaMThA, na kSe
jana:-gocara-gaviSayaka kSepa hata nathI te anugajanya hoya che, eTalA mATe.

Page #275 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Bahastthi: Like a Fire of Wood, the Third Limb is Asana  **(209) 1.
Darshan:** Like a fire of wood, the knowledge is strong. In this view, Darshan,
meaning steadfast faith, is a bond that is stronger than the previous two views,
more firm, and unique. It is likened to the light of a fire kindled from wood. A
fire of wood is brighter, more stable, and longer-lasting than a fire of grass
or dung. Similarly, this view, my friend, has a stronger, more stable, and more
powerful knowledge than the previous two views. Therefore, when it manifests in
action in life, it has a sharp and skillful memory, because its impressions last
longer. Consequently, even a slight effort is possible due to the mere liking
for the experiment of the soul, meaning the manifestation of meaning. Thus,
there is a firm and strong Darshan in this expectation. Therefore, according to
the characteristics of the word "Dristidarshan" mentioned earlier, here there is
a strong faith in the Purusha and the words of the Sapurusha, the scriptures.
And with such faith, the bond is also stronger. Therefore, the seeker with this
view is a devoted servant of the Sapurusha, the true Guru, and a steadfast
devotee of the true scriptures. Therefore, he engages in activities that are in
accordance with the true scriptures, refrains from unrighteous activities, and
draws closer and closer to the path of righteous action.  **2. The Third Limb of
Yoga is Asana:** Here, the third limb of Yoga, Asana, is attained. It is a
comfortable and stable posture, a firmness of posture. After attaining the first
two limbs, Yama and Niyama, in the previous two views, a firm Asana is naturally
attained here. Because, as the firmness of Yama and Niyama increases, as Yama
and Niyama become ingrained in the soul, the soul establishes a firm and
comfortable Asana on the path of liberation, it sits firmly, it becomes stable.
Here, apart from external postures like Padmasana, Paryakasana, etc., it is
important to understand the internal Asana. This soul has been sitting in the
posture of attachment to the external world since time immemorial, considering
the external world as its own and sitting on top of it! To rise from this
immemorial attachment to the external world and sit in the posture of the
father's true nature, to take a seat in it, is the comfortable posture for the
ultimate purpose. Along with this, the practice of external firm postures is
also helpful and supportive in removing the restlessness of the mind and body,
because when the soul sits still in one place, its mind becomes calm, and it
becomes conducive to Dharma-meditation. Asana.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bahASTiH kASThaagni sama be, trIjuM gAMga Asana (209) 1. darzana : kASThaagni
sama bodha balavALI te balA. A daSTimAM darzana eTale ke satazraddhAvALe baMdha
paNa AgalI be daSTi karatAM vadhAre baLavAna dRDha hoya che, kaMIka viziSTa
prakAranA hoya che, ane tene kASTha agnikaNunA prakAzanI upamA chAje che.
kAchano-lAkaDAne agni, tRNa ne chANAnA agni karatAM vadhAre prakAzavALa, vadhAre
sthitivALe ne vadhAre vayavALa hoya che, tema A daSTine bodha paNa mitro ne tArA
daSTi karatAM adhika daDhatAvALe, adhika sthitivALe ne adhika bala-sAmarthyavALA
hoya che. ethI karIne tene jIvanamAM AcaraNarUpa praga karatI veLAe 5Tu-nipuNa
jevI smRti rahe che, kAraNa ke tene saMskAra lAMbe vakhata Take che, ane tethI
karIne prajanabhUta prayoganI eTale ke artha praganI mAtra prItithI kaMIka
yatnane saMbhava hoya che. Ama apekSAe atre daDha-baLavAna darzana hoya che.
eTale AgaLa kahelA dRSTidarzana zabdanA lakSaNa pramANe, ahIM puruSanI ne
sapuruSanA vacanAmRtajInI -sazAstranI baLavattara zraddhA hoya che, ane evI
zraddhAthI saMyukta bedha paNa vadhAre baLavALo hoya che. eTale A daSTivALe
mumukSu sapuruSa sadgurune parama bhakta hoya che, satuzAstranI AjJAne daDha
ArAdhaka hoya che. ethI karIne te satzAstrane anukULa pravRtti kare che,
asatupravRttithI virAma pAme che, ane satpravRttipadane pAse ne pAse kheMcate
jAya che. 2. trIjuM yogAMga Asana atre yoganuM trIjuM aMga Asana prApta thAya
che; sukhAsana, sthira Asana hoya che, AsananI daDhatA hoya che; AgalI be
daSTimAM yama, niyama e be gAMganI prApti pachI svabhAvika kame ahIM daDha
AsananI prApti hoya che, kAraNa ke jema jema yama-niyamanI daDhatA thatI jAya
che, jema jema yama-niyama AtmAmAM pariNAma pAmatA jAya che, tema tema jIva
egamArgamAM daDha sukhAsana jamAvate jAya che, daDha beThaka karate jAya che,
sthira thato jAya che. ahIM padmAsana, paryakAsana Adi bAhya Asana uparAMta
mukhyapaNe atyaMtara AsananI vAta samajavAnI che. A jIva anAdi kALathI
paravastumAM adhyAsa-Asana karI beTho che, paravastune potAnI mAnI te upara
caDhI beTho che ! evI anAdinI paravastunI beThaka uThAvI laI, pitAnA
AtmasvarUpamAM Asana karavuM-beThaka levI te paramArthathI sukhAsana che. tenI
sAthe mananI ne zarIranI capaLatA dUra karavA mATe bAhya daDha AsananI sAdhanA
paNa sahakArIpaNe-AlaMbanapaNe upakArI thAya che, kAraNa ke jIva eka sthaLe
sthira thaI bese to tene mane yoga acapaLa thAya che, ne tene dharmadhyAnanI
anukULatA maLe che. Asana

Page #276 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(210) With the steadfastness of yogic vision, obstacles are conquered. *
Dualities are not affected, and the defects of the senses are abandoned with
dedication. This "Sukhasana" word is worth understanding. "Sthisuutvanatam" (Pa.
Tho2-46). Sukhasana is that which is stable, where one can sit comfortably and
at ease. A stable posture that does not cause anxiety is Sukhasana. An asana
that is unstable, where one cannot sit comfortably and at ease, is not called
Sukhasana. Just as a chair with a shaky base, broken or cracked, is not called
Sukhasana, but one with a stable base, a beautiful, unbroken cushion is called
Sukhasana; similarly, in the ultimate reality, in the language of spirituality,
the posture of a thing that is unstable, shaky, and painful to sit on is not
Sukhasana, but Dukhasana! True "Sukhasana" is a state of one's own natural self-
nature. Because it is extremely stable, not shaky, and brings supreme joy when
sitting, it is the ultimate Sukhasana in the ultimate reality. As the soul sits
in such a state of Sukhasana, waves of happiness and supreme bliss emanate from
it. Thus, as much as possible, to abandon the contemplation of the body and
become absorbed in the soul, is the achievement of the third limb of the asana,
called "asana". "Let go of the contemplation of the body, you are not the doer,
you are not the devotee, that is the dharma." - Shri Atmasiddhi "Atmabuddhi, he
Kayadike remained, Bahiratam Aghrup... Sugyani Kayadike he Sakhidhar became,
Antar Atmarupsu" - Shri Anandghanji 3. The "Kshepa" named citta-dosha, which was
mentioned in the third akshepa, is abandoned here, because after the removal of
the two doshas called kheda and udvega in the previous two dristi, this dosha
also disappears. First, kheda, which is the mind's lack of steadfastness towards
yogic practice, is removed. Then, the udvega dosha, which is the aversion or
dislike towards yogic practice, is removed. And then, naturally, the "Kshepa"
dosha also disappears. Kshepa means to throw away (from kshidhatu). To throw the
mind here and there, to run around, is called kshepa. While doing anything, the
mind gets distracted and wanders here and there. "Atosantarayavijayo
dwandvanabhihatistatha | Doshaparichayah kanidhanapur:sar: || " - Shri Yoga-
Krita Dva Dva "Tatanamighatah" - Shri Patanjali. Su 2-48

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (210) yogadaSTisamuccaya daDhatAthI aMtarAyano vijaya thAya che. * dvandrone
abhighAta thatuM nathI, ane daSTa deSane praNidhAnapUrvaka parityAga thAya che.
A "sukhAsana" zabda samajavA jevo che. " sthisutvanAtanam' (pA. tho2-46).
sukhAsana eTale jyAM sukhethI-ArAmathI-laherathI besI zakAya evuM sthira hoya te
Asana. udvega na pamADe evuM sthira Asana te sukhAsana. je Asana sukhAsana
DagamagatuM hoya, asthira hoya, jyAM sukhethI-ArAmathI besI zakAya evuM na hoya,
te sukhAsana na kahevAya. jema DagamagatA pAyAvALI ke bhAMgI tUTI ke khUce evI
khurazI sukhAsana na kahevAya, paNa sthira pAyAvALI, akhaMDa suMdara gAdIvALI
hoya te sukhAsana kahevAya; tema paramArthamAM, adhyAtma paribhASAmAM paNa, para
vastunuM je Asana te asthira, DagamagatuM, besatAM khUce evuM duHkhadAyaka che,
mATe te sukhAsana nahiM, paNa dukhAsana che ! sAcuM "sukhAsana' te eka nija
sahaja AtmasvarUpa pada che. kAraNa ke te ja atyaMta sthira, nahiM DagamagatuM,
ne besatAM sukhadAyaka parama AnaMda upajAvanArUM che, mATe te ja pAramArthika
sukhAsana che. jema jema tevA bhAva sukhAsanamAM jIva bese che, tema tema tene
sukhanI-paramAnaMdanI era laharIo chUTatI jAya che. Ama jema bane tema
dehAdhyAsa choDatA jaI, AtmArAmI banatA javuM, te Asana nAmanA trIjA vega aMganI
siddhi che. chUTe dehAdhyAsa te, tuM kartA nahiM karma; tuM bhaktA nahi tehane,
eja dharmane mama."_zrI Atmasiddhi Atamabuddha he kAyAdike rahyo, bahirAtama
agharUpa... sugyAnI kAyAdike he sAkhIdhara thaI rahyo, aMtara AtamarUpasu"-zrI
AnaMdaghanajI 3. akSepa trIje je "kSepa" nAmano cittadeSa kahyo hato, tene ahIM
tyAga hoya che, kAraNa ke AgalI be daSTimAM kheda ane udvega nAmanA be doSa dUra
thayA pachI A deSa paNa dUra thAya che. prathama kheda eTale yogakriyA pratye
mananuM adaDhapaNuM-thAkI javuM te dUra thAya che. eTale pachI te yogakriyA
pratyenA dveSarUpa--aNagamArUpa udvega deSa TaLe che, veDiyApaNuM dUra thAya
che. ane pachI svAbhAvika krame "kSepa" deSa paNa TaLe che. kSepa eTale phekAvuM
te (kSidhAtu parathI). cittanuM jyAM tyAM pheMkAvuM-doDavuM tenuM nAma kSepa.
kaI paNa kiyA karatAM karatAM vacce vacce tyAMthI ukhaDI ukhaDIne citta bIje
bIje sthaLe ADuMavaLuM x" ato'ntarAyavijayoM dvandvAnabhihatistathA  /
doSaparicAyaH kaNidhAnapura:sara: || "--zrI ya kRta dvA dvA to tAnamighAta: -
zrI pAtaMjala . su 2-48

Page #277 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Bahadashti:** "Akshep, mandu kihi na bane" (211) What is gone is gone. Just as
there is no fruit from sowing seeds that are repeatedly uprooted and replanted,
similarly, there is no pure fruit from actions performed with a mind that is
constantly distracted and running around. (See page 85). This state of a
wavering mind is called *kshep*. When this *kshep* fault is abandoned, it is
called *akshep*. This unwavering mind, free from distractions, is the essence of
the soul; a distracted mind is the delusion of the soul. Knowing this, the yogi,
with this vision, keeps his mind unwavering as much as possible, not allowing it
to become distracted. Whether he is performing *pratikraman* or *samayik*,
whether he is engaged in devotion to the Lord or paying homage to the true Guru,
his mind does not wander elsewhere, it does not become distracted and go towards
other things. He does not act like the merchant who went to the market while
performing *samayik* - There was a householder. He was sitting in *samayik*. In
the meantime, his mind wandered, and he started thinking about going to a
certain leather merchant, a *chamar*, and talking to him about this and that!
And he even started muttering to himself! His clever daughter-in-law heard this.
Someone came and asked if the merchant was at home. The daughter-in-law replied,
"He is not at home, he has gone to the market!" After the *samayik* was over,
the merchant asked his daughter-in-law, "I was at home, why did you say I was
not?" The wise daughter-in-law replied, "Father-in-law! Your body was at home
and you were sitting in *samayik*, but where did your mind go, to the market?"
Hearing this, the merchant realized his mistake and felt remorse for the
fickleness of his mind. This seeker, as much as possible, draws his mind back
from external influences, because the impressions of ignorance are being removed
from him, and he is acquiring the impressions of knowledge. Therefore, passions,
aversions, and attachments cannot greatly affect him, intense passions do not
disturb his mental state and create turmoil; the attraction of objects does not
make his mind waver; honor and dishonor, pleasure and pain, joy and sorrow,
etc., do not cause distractions in his mind; stories, love stories, or any kind
of gossip do not attract his mind. *"Avikshiptam manastattvam viksiptam
bhrantiratmanah | Dharayet tadaviksiptam viksiptam nasrayet tatah ||
Avidyabhyasasamskaarair avasam kshipyate manah | Tadeva jnanasamskaaraaih svatas
tattve'vatiṣṭhate || Apamaanadayastasyavikṣepo yasya cetasah | Naama na ca
hyavetanaḥ" - Shri Pujyapada Swami's Samadhi Shatak

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bahAdaSTi : akSapa, manaDuM kihi na bane" (211) gayA kare te kSepa. jema zAline
ukheDI ukheDIne bIje vAvavAthI tenuM phaLa hetuM nathI, tema ukhaDI ukhaDIne
anyatra doDatA-jhavAM nAMkhatA cittathI thatI kriyAnuM zuddha phaLa hotuM nathI.
(juo pR. 85). AvI cittanI DAmADoLa avasthA te kSepa che. A kSepa doSane ahIM
tyAga thatAM akSepa hoya che. A vikSepa vinAnuM evuM * avikSipta mana te ja
AtmAnuM tattva che, vikSipta mana te AtmAnI brAMti che. ema jANIne A daSTivALa
yogI puruSa jema bane tema manane avikSepa rAkhe che, vikSepa pAmavA detuM
nathI. te pratikramaNa karate hoya ke sAmAyika karate hoya, te prabhubhakti
karato hoya ke saddaguruvaMdana karate hoya, paNa tenuM mana bIje ADuMavaLuM
jatuM nathI, DAmADoLa thaI para vastumAM gamana karatuM nathI. sAmAyika karatAM
DhaMDhavADe gayelA zeThanI jevuM te nathI karate - eka gRhastha hatA. te
sAmAyikamAM beThelA. daramyAna vicAracakre caDI jaI, cAmaDAnA vepArI amuka
camArane tyAM javuM che ne enI sAthe Ama Ama vAta karavI che evI te manamAM
ghaDabhAMja karavA lAgyA ! ne tema baDabaDavA paNa mAMDyA ! te chokarAnI
vicakSaNa vahue sAMbhaLyuM. tevAmAM keI AvyuM ne pUchyuM ke zeTha gharamAM che
ke ? vahue pAdhare javAba Apyo-gharamAM nathI, DheDhavADe gayA che ! pachI
sAmAyika pUrI thaye, zeThe vahune pUchayuM-huM te gharamAM hatuM, chatAM tuM
beTuM kema belI ? DAhI vahue javAba ApesasarAjI! ApanuM zarIra gharamAM hatuM ne
sAmAyikamAM beThuM hatuM, paNa ApanuM mana zuM DheDavADe hetuM gayuM? te
sAMbhaLI zeThane potAnI bhUlanuM bhAna AvyuM ne pitAnA cittanI caMcalatA mATe
pazcAttApa thayo. A mumukSu puruSa jema bane tema parabhAvamAMthI manane pAchuM
vALe che, kAraNa ke tene avidyAbhyAsanA saMskAra dUra thaI rahyA che, ne
jJAnasaMskAra prApta thaI rahyA che. eTale rAga-dveSa-mehAdi bhAve tene jhAjho
phebha pamADI zakatA nathI, tIvra kaSAye tenI cittabhUmine khUMdI nAMkhI
khaLabhaLATa macAvatA nathI; viSayenuM AkarSaNa tenA manane DAmADeLa karatuM
nathI mAna-apamAna, sukha-du:kha, harSa-zeka vagere dvandro tenA cittane vikSepa
upajAvatA nathI, arthakathA, kAmakathA ke kaI paNa prakAranI vikathA tenA
cittane AkarSatI nathI. *" avikSiptaM manastattvaM vikSiptaM bhrAntirAtmanaH  /
dhArayettadavikSiptaM vikSiptaM nAzrayettataH  //  avidyAbhyAsasaMskArairavazaM
kSipyate manaH  /  tadeva jJAnasaMskAraiH svatastattve'vatiSThate  /  /
apamAnAdayastasya vikSepo yasya cetasaH  /  nAmanA aa cahya vetanaH " zrI
pUjyapAdasvAmIjIkRta samAdhizataka

Page #278 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Collection of Yogic Insights (212)  Because this great aspirant knows this
mind-matter trickery well. This monkey-like mind runs here and there, gets
distracted, whatever it does. Therefore, he understands that it should not be
left free. He understands that it is like this: "Because it thinks in the mind,
it thinks that - at night or during the day, in a populated place or in a
desolate place, it doesn't matter; this mind goes to the sky in a moment and to
the underworld in a moment! The ascetic who aspires for liberation studies
knowledge and meditation, there this enemy-like mind thinks something like this,
so that it throws him on the wrong path, puts him on the wrong track! Those who
are knowledgeable in great scriptures, who are called 'Agamdhars', even in their
hands, this mind does not get caught in any way - it cannot be brought under
control like a mad elephant! And somewhere if it is forcefully subdued, scorned
and treated like a dog, it becomes crooked like a snake, it turns upside down!
If we call this mind a thief, it doesn't seem to be stealing, and it's not a
moneylender either! It is in everyone and separate from everyone! It creates
wonder in the mind! And it resides in the mind! Whatever I say, it doesn't
listen to this world, and tomorrow! It remains in its own opinion! No matter who
explains it, whether it is a sage, a man, or a learned person, even my school-
great, vast explanations, it doesn't understand! I knew that this mind is
impotent, but it pushes all the men, puts them on the wrong track! In other
matters, it is 'masculine', but it cannot do anything to this mind! The mind is
so difficult to please, it is difficult to appease, therefore, I do not believe
the saying that 'he who has conquered the mind has conquered everything'. The
more I try to keep this mind, the more it runs away, further and further! It
doesn't get caught! It doesn't come to a place!  The mind does not get caught
anywhere. Where is it? The mind does not get caught anywhere; the more I try to
keep it, the more it runs away... Yes, where is it? It goes to the underworld in
the night and day, in a populated place and a desolate place.  The snake eats
and its mouth is full, this is the proverb's meaning... Yes, where is it? The
ascetic who aspires for liberation, studies knowledge and meditation; this mind
thinks something like this. It throws him on the wrong path... Yes, where is it?
Even in the hands of the Agamdhars, it does not get caught in any way;  Where it
is forcefully subdued, it becomes crooked like a snake... Yes, where is it?  If
I call it a thief, it doesn't seem to be stealing, and it's not a moneylender
either;  It is in everyone and separate from everyone, it creates wonder in the
mind... Yes, where is it?

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 yogadRSTisamuccaya (212) kAraNa ke A mahAnubhAva mumukSu A mana-maTanA
tarakaTane sArI peThe jANe che. kAi paNa kArya karatAM A manarUpa vAMdarU jyAM
tyAM doDayA kare che-phekAyA kare che, vikSepa pAme che. mATe tene chUTu-re na
mUkavu. joIe ema te samaje che. 'manaDuM mahI kAraNa ke te citave che ke-rAtre
ke divase, vasatimAM ke ujjaDa sthAnamAM na mAgeH game tyAre A mana ghaDIkamAM
AkAzamAM ne ghaDIkamAM pAtAlamAM jAya che! muktinA abhilASI evA tapasvIe jJAna-
dhyAnanA abhyAsa kare che, tyAM te A duzmana jevuM mana kaMIka evu* ci'tave che
ke jethI te avaLe pAse nAMkhI de cheudhe ravADe caDAvI dye che ! meATA meATA
zAstranA jANakAra je 'Agamadhara' kahevAya che. temanA hAthe paNa A manaDuM kAI
paNa prakAre aMkAtuM nathI-madonmatta hAthInI jema aMkuzamAM ANI zakAtuM nathI !
ane kayAMka jo tene haTha karIne haDakAvavAmAM Ave che-tiraskAra karIne kUtarAnI
jema haDadhUta karavAmAM Ave che, te te vyAlanI jema vAMku thaIne bese che,
ulaTu ADu phATe che! A manane jo Thaga kahIe te ThagatuM dekhAtuM nathI, ne
zAhukAra paNa te che nahi ! te badhAyamAM che te badhAyathI alagu' che! e Azcaya
manamAM upaje che! ne manamAM samAya che! huM je je kahuM chuM te te A duna kAne
dharatA nathI, ne kAle!' Apamate rahe che ! game te sura, nara ke pa'Ditajana
samajAve te paNa A mhArA zALA-mahA rezALA samajAvyeA samaje ema nathI! hu te
jANatA hatA ke A mana napu'sakilagI che, paNa A te badhAya * maradane Thele mAre
che-Dee caDAve che ! bIjI vAtamAM te 'puruSa' samatha che, paNa A manaDAne kAi
jera karI zakatuM nathI! mana Avu durArAdhya che, rIjhavavu'-za karavuM muzkela
che, mATe mana sAdhyuM teNe saghaLuM sAdhyuM' e vAta huM kheATI mAnatA nathI.
AvA manane huM jema jema jatana karIne rAkhavA jauM chuM, tema tema te aLaguM ne
aLaguM bhAgatuM jAya che ! kai rIte khARtu' nathI ! ThekANe AvatuM nathI !
manaDu* kiMmahI na khAjhe hai| ku'thu jina ! manaDu* kimahI na khAjhe; jima jima
jatana karIne rAkhu', tima tima aLagu` bhAje...hA kuthu rajanI vAsara vasati
ujaDa, gayaNa pAyAle jAya. sApa khAya ne mukhaDu' theAthu, eha ukhANA
nyAya....hA kuMthu mukti taNA abhilASI tapiyA, jJAna ne dhyAna abhyAse;
vayarIDuM kAMi ehavuM. ciMte, nAMkhe avaLe pAse....hA kuthu Agama Agamadharane
hAthe, nA've Oividhi AMku; kahAM karNe je haTha karI haTaku, teA byAla taNI pare
vAMkuM....hA kuMthu Thaga kahuM te ThagatuM na dekhuM, zAhukAra paNa nAMhi; sahu
mAMhe ne sahuthI aLagu', e acaraja manamAMhi...hA kuMthu

Page #279 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Bahadashti: Duraradhya Manamarkat, Tavshushrusha  (213) Whatever is done, the
ears do not heed, it remains in its own opinion; even if the gods, humans, and
learned people explain, it does not understand, oh great scholar. I have known
that this linga is neuter, it pushes away all men; another thing is that a man
is capable, no one can bind him... Oh Kunthu, the mind that has been controlled
has controlled everything, this is not a small matter... Oh Kunthu, those who
say this do not believe, this is a great statement... Oh Kunthu"- Shri
Anandghanji  Thinking this, he contemplates: "How can I bring this fickle,
difficult-to-control mind under control? Because just as water ripples when a
stone is thrown into it, so too does this  (difficult-to-control, wicked mind,
like water, ripples when it encounters an obstacle, how can this fickle mind be
controlled? "This fickle mind is restless and extremely powerful. How can it be
controlled? It is very difficult to control it like the wind." Therefore, now I
am defeated,  how to do it? If dispassion and study are not pursued with intense
effort, this mind will never be subdued, it is its nature to wander everywhere,
so I should tie this monkey-like mind somewhere! Or I should give it some work
to do, so that it can climb and descend at will! Thinking this, he ties this
mind with the chain of love to the pillar of the feet of the Supreme Lord, who
has conquered this mind! So that this naughty mind cannot wander around! Or he
sets it free to play in the Shruta-skandha, so that it can climb and descend in
it! Let it eat as much as it wants of the fruit of the soul! Let it pluck the
leaves of the vow! Let it swing on the branches of the right faith! Let it dance
and jump in the vast root of the intellect! The mind, difficult to control, has
been subdued, the intellect has been brought by the Agam, oh Lord Anandghan, you
have brought it, I know it is true. Kunthu"- Shri Anandghanji  4. Tattva-
Shushrusha: In this perspective, the third quality, named Shushrusha, is
revealed, because the second quality is the quality of inquiry. * "This mind is
restless, I want to control it firmly. I consider its control as difficult as
the wind. There is no doubt, oh great one, the mind is difficult to control, it
is fickle. But only through dispassion, it can be controlled." - Gita * "With
many fruits of the soul, laden with the burden of the soul, with leaves of vows
scattered, with many branches of right faith, on the high peak of the right
faith, in the vast root of the intellect, let the wise mind play in the Shruta-
skandha." - Shri Gunabhadra Swami's Shri Atmanushasan

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bahAdaSTi : durArAdhya manamaka, tavazuzruSA (213) je je karyuM te kAna na
dhAre, Apa mate rahe kAle; sura nara paMDita jana samajAve, samaje na mahAra
zALe.ho kuMthurA meM jANyuM e liMga napuMsaka, sakala maradane Thele; bIjI vAta
samaratha che nara, ehane keI na jele...ho kuMthu mana sAdhyuM teNe saghaLuM
sAdhyuM, eha vAta nahiM TI; ema kahe te navi mAnuM, e kahI vAta che meTI...ho
kuMthu"-zrI AnaMdaghanajI ema ciMtavI te vicAre che ke-AvA caMcala durArAdhya
manane mahAre zI rIte ThekANe ANavuM? kAraNa ke pANImAM pathare paDatAM pANI
jema DoLAI jAya che, tema A ( hArUM duSTa mana paNa jyAM tyAM gamanarUpa
vikSepane pathare paDatAM DoLAI manamarkaTane kema jAya che. "A caMcala mana te
mathana karanArUM ne atyaMta baLavAna che. ThekANe ANavuM? vAyunI jema tene
nigraha kara ghaNuM kaThina che.' mATe have hAre kema karavuM? vairAgya ne
abhyAsane ugra prayAsa nahiM karavAmAM Ave to A mana kadI vazamAM AvavAnuM
nathI, e te enA svabhAva pramANe cAre kora bhaTakyA karavAnuM che, mATe A
manarUpa vAMdarAne kayAMka bAMdhI rAkhuM te ThIka ! athavA enA jevuM kaMI kAma
seMpI dauM eTale e bicAruM bhale caDha-utara ryA kare! ema vicArI te, jeNe te
manano jaya karyo che, evA paramAtmA prabhunA caraNarUpa thAMbhalA sAthe A
manane premanI sAMkaLathI bAMdhI rAkhe che! eTale e bApaDuM ADuMavaLuM casI
zakatuM nathI ! athavA te ene zrutaskaMdhamAM ramavA mATe chUTuM mUkI ghe che,
eTale temAM te bhale ArohaNa-avarohaNa karyA ja kare ! bhale AtmArtharUpa phaLa
dharAI dharAIne khAvA hoya teTalA khAya ! bhale vacanarUpa pAMdaDAne cUMTI kADhe
! bhale nayarUpa zAkhAomAM laTakIne hIMcakA khAya! bhale vizAla matirUpa mUla
bhAgamAM nAcyA kare-kUdyA kare ! manaDuM durArAdhya te vaza ApyuM, AgamathI mati
ANuM AnaMdaghana prabhu hArUM ANo , te sAcuM karI jANuM. kuMthu"-zrI
AnaMdaghanajI 4. tattva-zuzruSA A daSTimAM zuzraSA nAmane trIjo guNa pragaTe
che, kAraNa ke bIje jijJAsA guNa * "raMparuM huM mana: pramAthi vaDhavA daDham |
tasyAhaM nigrahaM manye vAyoriva suduSkaram  //  asaMzayaM mhaabaahe| mano
durnigrahaM calam  /  acAna tu zautera vairAgye ja mRute " -gItA * "
anekAntAtmArthaprasatraphalabhArAtivinate, vacaHparNAkIrNe
vipulanayazAkhAzatayute  /  samuttuMge samyak pratatamatimUle pratidinaM,
zrutaskaMdhe dhImAn ramayatu manomarkaTamamum  /  / " -zrI guNabhadrasvAmIjIta
zrI AtmAnuzAsana

Page #280 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(214) Yoga-drishti-samuccaya After manifestation, naturally, the desire to
serve, that is, to listen, arises. And this desire to listen is also related to
the truth. What is the truth of things? Who am I? What is my form? What is all
this other stuff? What is its real form? What is my relationship with it? What
is this world? Why is its form so diverse and wonderful? What is dharma? What is
the ultimate form of dharma? How is it attained?  The desire to listen to the
stories of truth that reveal the answers to these and many other questions
related to the truth arises intensely in the seeker with this vision, and an
inner desire manifests. Listening through the ear-sense without this intense
inner desire is just a name, it is like listening with one ear and letting it
out the other! Thus, this being has listened to countless stories and tales, and
its ears have even burst from listening! Yet, it has not attained Brahma-jnana,
true knowledge of the truth! Because it has not listened with the inner mind,
with the inner ear-sense, with the feeling ear-sense, it has only listened
superficially. “The ears burst from listening to stories, yet Brahma-jnana does
not come.” - Shri Akhabhakt Brahma “O, those who are to be heard, those who are
to be loved, those who are not to be abandoned.” - Shri Veda-shruti “Sometimes,
a mistake is made in that the relationship between listening and acceptance, the
relationship with the truth, is not considered. ‘Shravana’ means to listen, and
to listen means to let sounds fall into the ears; and often, this is considered
to be enough. x x x To take the word into the ear and accept it with the mind,
that is the name ‘shravana’, that is the real and ancient meaning of the word
‘shravana’ according to the scriptures.” And this desire to listen, without the
influence of others or their teachings, Shri Anandashankar Bapubhai Dhruv, a
learned man, expects something from it, because listening is not a matter of
chance; therefore, listening is through another, through another’s mouth. That
is, primarily, it is to be done through the mouth of a special person, a Brahma-
nishtha sadguru, a sadguru; and if that is not possible, then it is to be done
through the mouth of a maha-atma, a great soul, who is always present, because
the consciousness of such great gurus, who are full of great knowledge, is
expressed in the form of ‘akshar’, the eternal form, and it is manifested in
their actions, remaining in the form of ‘akshar’. In the absence of a direct
self-knowing sadguru, it is beneficial to listen to the words of such indirect
self-realized sadgurus, it becomes a great help. In the absence of a sadguru, it
is more beneficial to listen to the words of such indirect sadgurus than to
listen to the words of ordinary people who are considered to be gurus. This is
the opinion of the learned. It is better to do this than to consider anyone as a
guru, even if they are devoid of guru-guna.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (214) yogadRSTisamuccaya pragaTavA pachI svAbhAvika krame zuzruSA eTale zravaNu
karavAnI-sAMbhaLavAnI icchA upaje che. ane A zravaNecchA paNa tattva sabadhI ja
hAya che. vastu tattva zuM che? huM kANu chuM ? mhArU svarUpa zuM che? A khIju
badhuMca zuM che? tenuM vAstavika svarUpa zuM che? tenI sAthe mhAre ze| sa
MbaMdha che? A jagat zuM che ? tenuM citra-vicitra svarUpa kema che ? dharma zuM
che? dharmAMnuM pAramArthika svarUpa zu che ? tenI prApti kema thAya ? ityAdi
tattva saMbadhI aneka praznonA khulAsA karatI tattvavArtA sAMbhaLavAnI A
dRSTivALA mumukSu puruSane tIvra utkaMThA upaje che, aMtaraMga icchA pragaTe
che. AvI aMtaraMga utkaTa icchA vinAnuM kaNendriyadvArA zravaNu, te nAma mAtra
zravaNa che, eka kAne sAMbhaLI khIje kAnethI kADhI nAMkhyA barAbara che! ema tA
A jIve anaMtavAra kathA-vArtA sAMbhaLI che ne sAMbhaLI sAMbhaLIne tenA kAna paNa
phUTI gayA che ! tepaNu haju tene brahmajJAna-sAcuM' tattvajJAna thayuM nathI !
kAraNa ke teNe aMtarAtmAthI,AMtara zravaNendriyathI bhAva zrotrendriyathI
zravaNa karyu nathI, mAtra dekhAva pUratu ja sAMbhaLyu' che. " kathA suNI suNI
phUTayA kAna, teya na AvyuM brahmajJAna. "--zrI akhAbhakta brahmA vA are
zrotavyo mamtavyo. niTribyAsito  / ' zrI vedazruti y, C " keTalIka vAra eka
bhUla tA e thAya che ke te * zravaNa ne atha grahaNa sAthenA tAttvika saMbaMdha
vastuta: dhyAnamAM levAtA ja nathI. 'zravaNa' eTale sAMbhaLavu' ane sAMbhaLavu
eTale kAnamAM zabdo paDavA devA; ane ATaluM thatAM zravaNa thayu' ema ghaNIvAra
kRtakRtyatA mAnI levAya che. x x x zabdane karNImAM laI tenI sAthe agrahaNa paNa
karI levuM tenuM nAma 'zravaNu ', ema zravaNu zabdane vAstavika ane prAcIna
zAstrasaMmata artha che. " ane A je zravaNecchA che khIjAnA melyA ke upadezyA
vinA vidvaya zrI Ana'daza kara bApubhAI dhruva temAM paranI apekSA rahe che,
kAraNa ke sAMbhaLavAnuM sabhave nahi; mATe zravaNu anya dvArA, anya mukhe hAya
che. eTale ke mukhyapaNe te zravaNa puruSavizeSarUpa brahmaniSTha sadguru
sadgurumukhe mukhe karavAnuM che; ane tenA joga na heAya te pUrNAMkAlIna
mahAtmAzravaNa enA sAsramukhe zraNa karavAnuM che, kAraNa ke mahAyAgabalasapanna
evA te te mahAguruonA caitanyasvarUpa AtmA ' akSara" svarUpe vyakta thai, temanI
kRtiomAM pragaTapaNe akSarasvarUpe rahyo che. pratyakSa AtmajJAnI sadgurunA
abhAve, AvA parekSa AtmArAmI sadguruonA vacananuM avalakhana ja zreyaskara thaI
paDe che, parama upakArI AdhArabhUta thaI paDe che. sadgurunA abhAve, anya
sAmAnya koTinA je te prAkRta janane guru sthApI-mAnI esI tenA mukhe zravaNu
karavA karatAM, AvA parokSa sadguruenA sathamukhe zravaNu karavuM, te anekagaNuM
vadhAre lAbhadAyI che, ema vidvAnAnu' mAnavuM che. tArUpa guruguNurahita game
tene guru kalpavA karatAM, Ama karavu te ja ceAgya che.

Page #281 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Bala-Dristi: Hearing from the mouth of the Sadguru and the Sat-Shastra (215)
“This Shastra is the elucidator of the existence of the Atma and others; there
is no reliance on a direct Sadguru, only on a worthy one. Or, what the Sadguru
has said, if it is ignored; then one should constantly contemplate it and
abandon any other opinion.” - Shri Atma-Siddhi  “Is it better to receive direct
instruction from an ordinary man, or indirect instruction through the scriptures
from an extraordinary man? This question has only one answer. Considering how
extraordinary men can perfectly convey their unique Atma in scriptures, it is
clear that the second option is superior.” - Prof. Anandshankar Dhruv.
Therefore, this Dristi-wala Mumukhu Yogi Purusha, experiencing an intense desire
for Tattva-Shravan, strives to gain access to Shri Sadguru and wishes to hear
the Tattva from their mouth. And, if access to them is not possible, he wishes
to hear from the Sat-Shastra. What does he wish to hear? He desires to find
resolution to the Tattva-questions churning in his fatherly heart. He wishes to
hear the form of peace, he is eager to hear what the Atma-Tattva is like. What
kind of opposition has this being faced before? He wishes to find resolution to
the doubt that his Meha-adi Deshas are not yet resolved. He wishes to imagine
Bhagwan present, standing before him, and despite all these reasons, he wishes
to ask Bhagwan directly why this being is still not liberated. He becomes one-
pointed in his desire to hear the answer. As in, “O Shanti Jin! One request from
me, listen, O King of the Three Worlds! What is the form of peace? How is it
known? How is the mind tested?....O Guru of the world, what is the Atma-Tattva?
Tell me this thought; without knowing the Atma-Tattva, one cannot attain pure,
concentrated mind... Muni-Suvat.” - Shri Anandghanaji  “What opposition did this
being face before? What did this red being do? The Meha is not ceasing, the
light of the Agam is seen as red.” - Shri Devchandraji  “Because of the reason,
the Tattva is with it, it is not a new acquisition... The light of Shri Jinraj
shines upon me, who is its cause... Ji.” - Shri Devchandraji  This is the
meaning.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 balAdaSTi : sadagurumukhe-satazAstra mukhe zravaNa (215) "AtmAdi astitvanA, eha
nirUpaka zAstra; pratyakSa saguru vega nahiM, tyAM AdhAra supAtra. athavA
sadgurue kahyA, je avagAhana kAja; te te nitya vicAravA, karI matAMtara tyAja."
--zrI Atmasiddhi "kevaLa sAdhAraNa varganA puruSa pAsethI pratyakSa upadeza le e
ThIka, ke asAdhAraNa puruSa pAsethI enA graMtha dvArA je parokSa upadeza maLe e
ThIka? A praznano eka ja uttara ghaTe che. asAdhAraNa puruSo potAnA anupama
AtmAne graMthamAM kevI sArI rIte saMkrAMta karI zake che, e vAta je dhyAnamAM
levAmAM Ave te sahaja samajAya ema che ke A bIjo bhAga ja uttama che."--pro.
AnaMdazaMkara dhruva. eTalA mATe A daSTivALo mumukSu yegI puruSa tattvazravaNanI
tIvra ukaMThA utpanna thatAM, zrI sadgurune vega meLavavA prayAsa karI temanA
zrImukhe tatva sAMbhaLavA Icche che. ane temane vega je banI zake ema na hoya te
satazAstra mukhe zravaNa karavA zuM sAMbhaLavAnI Icche che. te koI paNa prakAre
pitAnA hRdayamAM maMthAI rahelA tattvapraznonuM IcchA? samAdhAna pAmavA Icche
che. te kavacit zAMtinuM svarUpa sAMbhaLavA Icche che, te kavacit Atmatattva
kevuM haze te zravaNa karavA utkaMThita bane che. A jIve pUrve evI te zI
virAdhanA karI haze ? ke jethI tenA mehAdi deSa haju TaLatA nathI, evI zaMkAnuM
samAdhAna pAmavA te kavacit Icche che te kavacit bhagavAnane hAjarAhajUra kalpI,
sAkSAta khaDA karI, ATalA badhA kAraNa pAmyA chatAM. A jIva haju kema tarI jato
nathI, tenuM kAraNa Apa kaho, ema jANe sAkSAt bhagavAnane pUchI, te sAMbhaLavA
mATe ekatAna thaI rahe che. jemake"zAMti jina ! eka muja vinati, suNe tribhuvana
rAya re! zAMti svarUpa kima jANiye ? kayama aho ! mana parakhAya re?....zAMti
Atamatatva kayuM jANyuM jagata guru ! eha vicAra muja kahiye; Atamatattva jANyA
viNa nirmala, citta samAdhina lahiye...munisuvata."--zrI AnaMdaghanajI pUchuM
pUrva virAdhanA, zI kIdhI INa jIva lAla re; avirati meha Tale nahIM, dIThe Agama
dIva lAla re." kAraNa joge che sAthe tattvane, navi samaye upAdAna ra...
jirNodajI zrI jinarAja prakAza muja prate, tene koNa nidAna....ji ."--- zrI
devacaMdrajI A ja artha kahe che

Page #282 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(216) Yogadristi Samuccaya:  Nasyaam satyaamasat trushna prakrutyaiva
pravarttate. Tadabhavaccha sarvatra sthiteva sukhasanam. || 50 ||  Prakrutithi
ja trushna asat, pravartati nahi atra; taas abhave sthit vali, sukhasan ja
sarvatra, 50  Meaning: With this vision, false desire does not arise from nature
itself. And due to the absence of that false desire, sukhasan (state of blissful
ease) is present everywhere.  Commentary: This verse explains how the sukhasan
mentioned earlier is attained. When this vision is present, the mind does not
wander from one place to another. Therefore, false desire does not arise
naturally. And due to the absence of this false desire, sukhasan is present
everywhere. Thus, the absence of this false desire in this vision removes the
false desire of the seeker. The false desire to attain something like a mirage
or a pool of water in a desert does not arise in them. Until now, they have been
chasing after this object-oriented mirage-like desire, running and running, but
now they are tired and have found rest.  Because this entire living world is
mounted on the wheel of samsara (cycle of birth and death). It is constantly
revolving due to the infinite substance, field, time, birth, and feeling. It is
being driven like a bull by the great delusion that holds the entire world in
its grip. While revolving, it experiences intense pain due to desire. Therefore,
it jumps like a bull to quench its thirst.  _ *"This entire living world,
mounted on the wheel of samsara, is constantly revolving due to the infinite
substance, field, time, birth, and feeling. It is being driven like a bull by
the great delusion that holds the entire world in its grip. While revolving, it
experiences intense pain due to desire. Therefore, it jumps like a bull to
quench its thirst."_  – Acharya Chudamani Shri Amritchandrasuriji's Samayasar
Tika.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (216) yogadaSTisamuccaya nAsyAM satyAmasattRSNA prakRtyaiva prvrttte||
tadabhAvAcca sarvatra sthitameva sukhAsanam  //  50  //  prakRtithI ja tRSNA
asata, pravartatI nahi atra; tAsa abhAve sthita vaLI, sukhAsana ja sarvatra, 50
artha -A daSTi hatAM, asat tRSNA prakRtithI ja pravartatI nathI ane tenA
abhAvane lIdhe sarvatra-sarva sthaLe sukhAsana rahe ja che. vivecana pUrve je
sukhAsana kahyuM, te kevI rIte prApta thAya che, tenuM ahIM vivaraNa karyuM che.
jyAre A daSTi vartAtI hoya che, tyAre jyAM sthiti karI hoya tyAMthI bIje sthaLe
citta doDatuM nathI. eTale svabhAvathI ja asat tRSNa pravartatI nathI; ane tenA
asat tRSNa abhAvathI sarvatra ja sukhAsana hoya che. Ama A daSTimAM vartatA
abhAva mumukSu jogIjananI asat tRSNa dUra thAya che. mRgajaLa-jhAMjhavAnA pANI
jevI paravastunI prApti mATe jhAMvAM nAMkhavA jevI jUThI tRSNA tene have upajatI
nathI. atyAra sudhI te viSayarUpa mRgatRSNAnI pAchaLa khuvAra thavAmAM teNe bAkI
rAkhI hotI, tenI pAchaLa teNe daDAya eTaluM doDaDyA ja karyuM hatuM, "doDatA
doDatA deDiye, jetI mananI re doDI, paNa have te kAMIka thAkyo che, virAma pAmyo
che. kAraNa ke A sakala jIvaleka* saMsAracakrane cAkaDe caDela che. te anaMta
dravya, kSetra, kAla, bhava ne bhAvanA parAvartethI niraMtara bhamI rahyo che.
vizvanuM ekachatrI sAmrAjya dharAvatA mahAmoharUpa grahathI baLadIAnI peThe te
haMkArAI rahyo che. ema bhamatAM bhamatAM tene tRSNAnI tIvra pIDA upaje che.
eTale te tarasa chIpAvavA mATe baLadanI peThe uchaLI vRttiHnathI, aAM, A
adhikRta-prastuta dRSTi, satyAM-hete sate, asattaUTI-asata tRSNasthiti kAraNathI
atirikta gocara-viSaya saMbaMdhI, kacaiva-prakRtithI ja, svabhAvathI ja, te-
pravartAtI-viziSTa zuddhinA yogane lIdhe; tAmAvAva-ane tenA asata tRSNAnA
abhAvathakI, sarvatra-thAptithI savasthAne, sthitameva suvAsana-sukhAsana sthita
ja hoya che,-tevA prakAranA paribhramaNanA abhAvane lIdhe. _ *" iha sakalasyApi
jIvalokasya
saMsAracakrakroDAdhiropitasyAnAMtamanaMtadravyakSetrakAlabhavabhAvaparAvataH
samupakrAMtabhrAMterekachatrIkRtavizvatayA mahatA mohagraheNa goriva
vAhyamAnasya prasabhoja'bhitatRSNAtakatvena vyaktAMtarAdheruttamyottamya
mRgatRSNAyamAnaM viSayagrAmamuparuMdhAnasya parasparamAcAryatvamAcarato'naMtazaH
zrutapUrvAnaMtaza:
paricitapUrvAnaMtazo'nubhUtapUrvAcaikatvaviruddhatvenAtyaMtavisaMvAdinyapi
kAmabhogAnubaddhA kathA  / " -AcAyacUDAmaNi zrI amRtacaMdrasUrijIta samayasAra
TIkA,

Page #283 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Translation:  **Bala-dushti:** The water of a mirage, a delusion, all the
pleasures of the world, like a mirage, are a big deception! (217) It leaps into
the mirage-like world of objects, but its thirst is not quenched by the water of
the mirage, yet it continues to chase after it.  Just as a leper does not feel
any hesitation in eating food given by his father's hand, similarly, one who is
tired of the world, yet does not get tired of worldly objects and is not
indifferent to the fruits of karma. A donkey, even after being kicked by the
she-donkey, continues to follow her. Similarly, one who jumps into the flames of
fire for the sake of worldly desires, does not turn back, and considers his
father's addiction not as a flaw but as an ornament! Just as the deer's chest
bursts from running after the mirage, its desire does not decrease, but rather
increases! But it does not consider the mirage as real.  - Shri Jnaneśvari Gita:
Thus, this being is extremely troubled by this thirst. As it tries to satisfy
this thirst, it becomes stronger.  Just as fire flares up when fuel is added to
it, similarly, this thirst-fire flares up due to the fuel of worldly desires,
causing suffering and growth to the being. Just as the ocean cannot be filled by
any amount of water, similarly, this ocean of thirst cannot be filled by any
amount of worldly rivers. Even if this being gathers all the great happiness of
the gods and others for an infinite time, the thirst will not be quenched, how
can it be quenched by the insignificant pleasures of humans, which are like a
small pitcher? But it has passed! Now this seeker awakens, and he has developed
a strong attachment to detachment. Therefore, he does not run after the false
mirage of worldly desires, and he does not suffer in vain. The attachments that
were external before, which used to be satisfied by worldly desires, now become
internal and are satisfied by the self, experiencing contentment in the self,
and experiencing equanimity through the enjoyment of wisdom and good sense. Why
would he run after the mirage of worldly objects again to suffer? He will not
desire to eat that food again; he will not drink poison to live.  And thus, with
the absence of false thirst, this seeker experiences self-contentment.
Therefore, this seeker, wherever he may be, in whatever situation, in whatever
environment, in whatever company, he always experiences the stability of a
comfortable seat. Because the wise man adapts to the situation, is content with
the company he has received, and lives happily, comfortably, leisurely, and
peacefully, always remaining a king of his own mind. All the running around of
his mind stops, and...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 balAdaSTiH jhAMjhavAnAM jala, avarApUrvaka sava gamanAdi kalya (217) uchaLIne
te mRgajaLa jevA viSayagrAmamAM moTuM nAMkhe che! paNa te jhAMjhavAnA pANIthI
tenI tarasa chIpatI nathI, chatAM te tenI pAchaLa doDyA ja kare che. jevI rIte
koDhiyA mANasane pitAnA gaLelA hAtha vaDe anna khAvAmAM saMkeca thatuM nathI,
tevI rIte viSayane jene kaMTALo AvavA chatAM viSayono jene kaMTALo Avate nathI
ane karmaphaLa viSe niriccha thato nathI. gadheDe gadheDInI pAchaLa lAgatAM te
gadheDI lAte uchALIne tenuM nAka pheDI nAMkhe che, toya te te tenI pAchaLa
nakaTa thaIne cAlyo ja jAya che. te pramANe je viSa mATe baLatA agninI javALAmAM
kUdatAM paNa AgaLa pAchaLa jete nathI ane pitAnA vyasanane dUSaNa nahi paNa
bhUSaNa mAne che ! jema mRgajaLanI lAlasAthI daDatAM doDatAM mRganI chAtI tUTI
jAya, te paNa tenI utkaMThA ochI na thatAM svAmI vadhatI ja jAya che! paraMtu e
mRgajaLane te mithyA mAnatuM nathI " -zrI jJAnezvarI gItA Ama A tRSNAthI A jIva
atyaMta atyaMta vyAkula thaI rahyo hato. jema jema te tRSNAne tRpta karavA
prayAsa karatuM hatuM, tema tema te tRSNa baLavattara banatI jatI hatI. agnimAM
iMdhana nAMkhatAM te jema prajvalate jAya, tema viSayarUpa AhuviSayathItRSNa-
tithI A tRSNA agni ulaTo prajavalita thaI jIvane paritApa pamADayA vRddhi karate
hate. game teTalA pANInA pUrathI samudra pUrAya nahi, tema game teTalI viSaya
nadIonA pUrathI A tRSNasamudrane khADe pUrAte hote. sAgara jeTalA devakAdinA
mahAsukha A jIve anaMtavAra bhegavyA, chatAM je tRSNa samAI nahiM, te gAgara
jeTalA manuSyanA tuccha bhogethI zI rIte zamAvAnI hatI? paNa gaI te gaI! have te
A mumukSu jIva jAge che, ne tene vairAgyane dRDha raMga lAgyo che. eTale te tevA
asat tRSNarUpa mRgajaLa pAchaLa doDatuM nathI, ne nakAme duHkhI thatuM nathI.
tene AtmA pUrve je para-rasIo thaI, para tRSNAthI tRpta thatuM hatuM, te have
sva-rasIo banI svAtmAmAM saMtoSathI tRpta thAya che, buddhinA-sumatinA sevanathI
samatArasa anubhave che. te have te pharIthI duHkhI thavA mATe viSayarUpa
mRgajaLa pAchaLa doDe ja kema? te keluM anna pharI khaviA Icche ja nahiM; jIvavA
mATe viSapAna kare ja nahiM. ane Ama asatatRSNAne abhAva thatAM A mumukSu
jogIjanane AtmasaMteSane anubhava thAya che. eTale pachI A mumukSu puruSa game
te sthaLe, game te paristhitimAM, game te vAtAvaraNamAM, game te saMgamAM hoya,
to paNa tene sarvatra sukhaAsananI sthiratA varte che. kAraNa ke gIpuruSa te te
paristhitine anukULa thaI, prApta saMgemAM saMtuSTa banI, sukhe ja rahe che,
ArAmathI-laherathI-sukhacenathI mejamAM ja rahe che, sadA mastarAja banIne ja
rahe che. tenA mananI badhI doDAdoDa atra baMdha thaI jAya che, ane

Page #284 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(218) Chegashtasamuchchay Firmness in posture leads to stability of mind. The
mind, which was dwelling in the object of its desire, withdraws from it and
proceeds to take its seat in the soul. Thus, it remains in this absorption!
Avadhoot Sada CC Abadhu Sada Maganme Rehana, Kya Tera Kya Mera? Am‰0 Tera Hai Se
Teri Pase, Avar Sakhadi Anedra....Akhadhu” —Shri Anandghanji “ He who has the
origin of the body, is satisfied with the form-bliss, and has a state of non-
effort towards the object;”—Shrimati Rajchandra, Patrank, 297. (A. 360) ★ The
same is said— Atvarapurvakam Sarva Gamanam Krityameva Va. Pranidhanasamayuktam
Apaya Pariharatah. || 51 || Utavale 6 Twara Vinaanu Gaman Ne, Kritya J Teem
Samasth; Apayna Pariharathi, Sahun Pranidhan Prashasth, 51. Meaning:- All
movement is without haste-hurry, and all actions are also united with
dedication, through the avoidance of harm. Abhav Discussion The Sukhasan
mentioned above has been further clarified here. This great person with this
vision has such a calmness of mind - such stability remains that all his running
around ceases, everywhere he remains in Sukhasan, he sits down calmly with a
peaceful mind. The direct result of this is that wherever he goes or whatever
action he performs, he does not have even a trace of haste-hurry in that duty,
there is no running around. All his actions are united with the dedication of
the mind, and this vision does not allow any harm-defect in the sight etc. So
whether he goes to the temple or to the shelter, whether he goes for worldly
affairs or for the work of the Supreme, whether he goes for the sake of charity
or for any other work, even then he does not travel in a hurry, Vritti:-
Bhrashapuram— Atarapoornank, without haste-hurry, that is, without confusion,
Sarva—Sav”—generally, what is it? Ta or Man-Gaman, to go, towards Devakul etc.
Nrityameva Va —so also the action, the action of worship etc.,
Kalidhanasamayu—according to the dedication of the mind, (mindful), Gayatratah-
Apama Pariharathi,-by avoiding harm in the sight etc., (in such a way that there
is no harm-defect in the sight etc., by giving up the fault).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (218) cegaSTisamuccaya AsananI dRDhatA-cittanI sthiratA nIpaje che. mananI
beThaka je khAhya vastumAM hatI, temAMthI nivRtta thaI AtmAmAM Asana levA bhaNI
pravarte che. Ama A maganamAM ' rahe che ! avadhUta sadA CC abadhU sadA maganame
rahenA, kayA terA kayA merA ? ama%00 terA hai se terI pAse, avara sakhaDI
anerA....akhadhU" --zrI Ana'daghanajI " jene edhakhIjanI utpatti hAya che, tene
svarUpa-sukhathI karIne paritRptapaNu vatte ane viSaya pratye aprayatna dazA
vate che;"--zrImad rAjacaMdra, patrAMka, 297. (a. 360)  e ja kahe che--
atvarApUrvakaM sarva gamanaM kRtyameva vA  /
praNidhAnasamAyuktamapAyaparihArataH  //  51  //  utAvaLe 6 tvarA vinAnuM gamana
ne, kRtya ja tema samasta; apAyanA parihArathI, sahuM praNidhAna prazasta, 51.
artha :-sa gamana tvarA-utAvaLa vinAnuM ane sa* kRtya paNa apAyanA parihAra
thakI praNidhAna sayukta evu hAya che. abhAva vivecana uparamAM je sukhAsana
kahyu. tenuM atra vadhAre spaSTIkaraNa karyuM' che. A dRSTivALA mahAnubhAvane
cittanI eTalI badhI svasthatA vate che-eTalI badhI sthiratA rahe che ketenI
badhI doDAdoDa maTI jAya che, sarvatra tene sukhAsana ja rahe che, te game tyAM
nIrAMte heThA manathI bese che. AnuM sIdhu piraNAma e Ave che ke te game te
sthaLe jatA hoya athavA game te kriyA karatA heAya, tApaNu te te kattavyamAM
tene leza paNa utAvaLa-tvarA hAtI nathI, doDadhAma DhAtI nathI. tenI sarva kriyA
mananA praNidhAna sayukta hoya che, ane te dRSTi AdimAM apAya-khAmI AvavA dete
nathI. eTale te devamaMdire jatA hoya ke upAzraye jatA hAya, sa'sAra vyavahAranA
kAma mATe jatA hoya ke paramAnA kAma mATe jatA hAya, deci'tA arthe jatA hAya ke
anya kArya arthe jatA hoya, teA paNa te utAvaLe gamana karatA nathI,
vRtti:-bhraSApUrvam-- atarApUrNAMka, tA-utAvaLa vagaranuM, eTale anAkula, sarva-
sava"--sAmAnyathI, te zuM ? tA kemana-gamana, javuM te, devakula Adi pratye.
nRtyameva vA --tema ja kRtya paNa,vaMdanAdi kRtya paNu, kaLidhAnasamAyu--mananA
praNidhAnapuraHsara, ( matanI sAvadhAnatA yukta ), gAyatrAtaH-apAmanA
parihArathakI,-dRSTi AdimAM apAyanA parihAravaDe karIne, ( dRSTi AdimAM kAI paNa
hAni-khAmI na Ave evA prakAre doSanA tyAgathI ).

Page #285 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Devout Spiritual Practices with Reverence and Contemplation  (219) The girl does
not make a fuss; rather, she goes everywhere calmly and undisturbed, carefully
ensuring that no life-injury occurs, and walks with a steady, grave gait, and
properly observes all the rituals. For example,  Adorning the pure body with the
essence of the substance, we joyfully go to the temple; even while observing the
three-fold restraint, we become one-pointed. ... "Auspicious" Sri Anandghanji
"Swami, I go to the self-luminous one with joy, a thousand times" -Sri
Devachandraji  Alas! She will run away, that one will loot, and I will be left
behind. Some will perform the first worship, and I will be left behind lying on
the platform, the darshan opened and immediately closed, so let me run quickly.
Come, come! That one has to go somewhere urgently, so let me somehow complete
this worship of the Lord, let me quickly, quickly do a few lamps for this Lord
and hurriedly complete the worship ritual, placing these three piles of rice
"take it with you and put it there" and depart immediately! - In this way, the
girl expressing such hurried thoughts does not arise in this seeker.  She goes
everywhere calmly, peacefully, and undisturbed.  And due to her utmost
composure, this seeker performs every activity with contemplation, with a
vigilant mind, with one-pointedness. For example, when he performs the worship
of the deities and gurus, he carefully observes every detail of the place, time,
etc., and uses the words of the devotional texts and hymns with attentiveness,
not creating any disturbance or confusion for other devotees, but making the
appropriate devotional mood sweet-sounding for others as well, indicating
intense devotion and enthusiasm. And while performing this devotional act, his
feelings and goosebumps arise, his auspicious intentions increase - his
emotional state keeps elevating. He properly observes the rituals of
prostration, etc. Thus, he performs the worship of the desired deities and gurus
with complete absorption.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bahAdaSTi praNidhAnayukta vaMdanAdi adhyAtma kriyA (219) beTI dhamAla karate
nathI; paNa sarvatra zAMtithI anAkulapaNe jAya che, yatanApUrvaka jIvahiMsA na
thAya, ema dhIra-gaMbhIra gatie cAle che, ne sarva vidhi barAbara sAcave che.
jemake dravya bhAva zuci aMga dharIne, harakhe dehare jaIe re; daha tiga paNa
ahigama sAcavatAM, ekamanA dhuri thaIe re....suvidhi" zrI AnaMdaghanajI "svAmI
svayaMprabhane jAuM bhAmaNe, harakhe vAra hajAra" -zrI devacaMdrajI hAya! bhAgI
jaze, pele lUMTI jaze ne huM rahI jaIza. amuka pahelI pUjA karI leze ne huM meDe
paDI pAchaLa rahI jaIza, darzana khUlyA che ne tarata baMdha thaI jaze, mATe
cAla doDate jauM. cAla cAla! hAre phalANe ThekANe jaldI javAnuM che, mATe A
bhagavAnanI pUjA jema tema patAvI dau, A bhagavAnane jaladI jaladI be cAra
cAMdalA karI pUjAvidhi jhaTajhaTa ATopI lauM', A cokhAnI traNa DhagalI mUkI "le
tAre bhega ne mUka mAre keDe" ema karatekane ekadama ravAnA thaI jAuM ! -ItyAdi
prakAre vyakta thatI mudra vicAraNAvALI beTI utAvaLa A mumukSu puruSane upajatI
nathI. te te sarvatra heThA mane, nIrAMte, nirAkulapaNe gamana kare che. ane Ama
tenI atyaMta svasthatA hovAthI, A mumukSu jogIjana pratyeka kriyA cittane
praNidhAnapUrvaka kare che, sAvadhAna manathI kare che, ekAgrapaNe kare che.
dAkhalA tarIke te deva-guru AdinuM vana * karato hoya, te sthAna-kALa vagerenA
pratyeka kriyAmAM kama barAbara jALave che, je bhaktisUtra-stavana vagere bala
hoya tenA sAvadhAnapaNuM zabdanA arthamAM sAvadhAna upayoga rAkhe che, besUrA
rAgaDA tANI bIjA bhakti karanArAone saMmeha-vikSepa upajAvatA nathIpaNa yogya
rAgamAM bIjAone paNa karNapriya mIThuM lAge ema, zraddhA ne saMvega-atyaMta
bhaktirAga sUcave evI rIte, sUtra-stavanAdi lalakAre che. tathA te bhaktikRtya
karatAM tenA bhAva-romAMca udyase che, kharekharA rUMvADA ubhA thAya che, tene
zubhAzaya vardhamAna thatuM jAya che-tenA bhAva pariNAma caDhatA jAya che;
praNAma Adi vidhi te barAbara sAcave che. Ama te ISTa deva-guru vaMdana Adi
bhakti tanmayapaNe kare che. jemake*"sthaankaalkrmopetN zabdArthAnugataM tathA
/  anyAsamohajanakaM zraddhAsaMvegasUcakam  //  prollasadbhAvaromAJcaM
vardhamAnazubhAzayam  /  avanAmAdisaMzuddhamiSTaM devAdivaMdanam  /  /
pratikramaNamapyevaM sati doSe pramAdataH  /  tRtIvadhavatrA yajayavAta "--zrI
haribhakAcAryajIta zrI biMdu, 3-99

Page #286 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(220) The collection of Gani says, “Therefore, stand up and pair up, let us say
in front of the Jina, the time to serve the feet is pure, let us obtain the joy
of wealth – the service of the supreme virtues of Shri Anandghanji, absorption
in contemplation, contemplation with certainty; experience the purest taste,
reach the feet of Devchandra.” The servant is given a vision, the Lord is well-
disposed; whoever contemplates with absorption, for them the feet of Devchandra
will be attained… “Oh Jida! My mind is filled with your name.” – Shri
Devchandraji, the Lord’s feet are clung to, they remain fresh, no other limbs
are adorned. “The reader praises, I do not contemplate others, I sing the
virtues of that Lord.” – Shri Yashovijayji He who performs Pratikraman, does so
with complete devotion and single-minded focus. He becomes aware of his own form
through the knowledge of the pleasures, and he regrets any faults that may have
occurred in the form of conduct in the other’s influence. He seeks forgiveness
with a sincere heart, free from any feelings of attachment, “I renounce, I will
not repeat, I will be virtuous.” He purifies the soul, he makes it heavy and
light – he frees it from faults and even those faults that have not been
committed. This Pratikraman, like the third type of medicine, strengthens the
soul’s dharma. Because there are three types of medicine: (1) one removes the
disease, if there is none, it creates one, (2) the second removes the disease,
if there is none, it does not create any virtue or fault, (3) the third removes
the disease, if there is none, it transforms it chemically. Thus, this
Pratikraman, being like the third type of medicine, is beneficial. And in this
act of Pratikraman, he is also careful about the six essentials that are
included. He takes the vow of Samayik and establishes himself in equanimity.
When performing Pratyakhyan, he renounces the other’s influence. While studying,
he dwells in the state of the soul. When performing the twenty-four hymns, he
remembers the Lord’s innate form, and his mind contemplates the Lord’s virtues.
When performing Sadguru Vandana, he contemplates the Lord’s supreme, wonderful,
soul-liberating nature, and remembers the Lord’s supreme kindness. When
performing Karyotsarg, he experiences a pure state of the soul, as if he were
not dwelling in the body. When performing Alochana, he reveals his own faults
honestly and openly. When performing Kshamapana, he seeks forgiveness from all
beings with a sincere heart, and he develops a feeling of friendship with all
the creatures of the world. For example – “I seek forgiveness from all beings,
may all beings forgive me. I will not repeat, I will be virtuous.” – Shri
Pratikraman Sutra.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (220) gaNisamuccaya "te mATe ubhA kara joDI, jinavara AgaLa kahIe re samaya
caraNa sevA zuddha dejo, jima AnaMdaghana lahIe re-zrI AnaMdaghanajI parama guNa
sevana tanmayatA, nizcaya dhyAne dhyAvejI; zuddhAtama anubhava AsvAdI,
devacaMdra pada pAve che." dAsa vibhAva apAya, nAse prabhu supasAya; je
tanmayatAe dhyAya, sahI tehane re devacaMdra pada thAya re... jidA! terA nAmathI
mana bhIno."--zrI devacaMdrajI prabhu pada valagyA te rahyA tAjA, alaga aMga na
sAjA re; vAcaka yaza kahe avara na dhyAuM, e prabhunA guNa gAuM re."--zrI
yazovijayajI te pratikramaNa karate hoya, te pUrNa bhAvathI ekAgracitte kare
che. pramAdanA vize karI potAnA svarUpathI zruta thaI, parabhAvamAM gamanarUpa
je kAMI potAnA doSa thayA hoya, teno te pazcAttApa kare che, ane te doSa karIne
na thAya evI bhAvanApavaka sAcA aMtaHkaraNathI kSamA mAge che, 'rnivAmi rihAna
vALa vAIsarama" kare che, AtmAne nirje che, garyuM che ne sarAve che-doSathI
mukta kare che ane doSa je na thayo hoya te paNa A pratikamaNa trIjA auSadha
jevuM hovAthI tene AtmadharmanI puSTirUpa guNa ja kare che. kAraNa ke auSadha
traNa prakAranA che:-(1) eka roga hoya te dUra kare, na hoya te ubhe kare, (2)
bIju roga hoya te dUra kare, na hoya te guNa ke doSa na kare, (3) trIju roga
hoya te dUra kare, na hoya te rasAyanapaNe pariName. Ama A pratikamaNa trIjA
auSadha jevuM hovAthI tene lAbhakArI ja thAya che. ane A pratikramaNa kriyAmAM
paNa je cha Avazyaka samAI jAya che, temAM paNa te sAvadhAnapaNuM rAkhe che.
sAmAyikanI pratijJA laI te samabhAvamAM sthiti kare che, pratyAkhyAna karatI
veLAe parabhAvane paccakhe che-tyAge che; svAdhyAya karatAM te AtmabhAvamAM vate
che; caturvizati stava karatAM prabhune sahajAnmasvarUpa bhAva marI, temanA
guNamAM cittanuM anusaMdhAna kare che; sadaguruvaMdana karatAM temanuM parama
addabhuta AtmArAmIpaNuM ciMtavI, temanA parama upakAranuM anusmaraNa kare che;
kAryotsarga karatI veLAe jANe dehamAM vatata na hoya, evI dehAtIta zuddha
AtmadazA anubhave che; AlocanA karatAM te potAnA deSa niSkapaTapaNe nidabhapaNe
prakAze che; kSamApanA veLAe sarva jIvanI sAcA bhAvathI kSamA IcchI, te sakala
jagajajatu sAthe maitrI bhAve che. jemake - " khAmemi savva jIve, savve jIvA
khamaMtu me|| bittine zvamUhu, je makyuM na !"--zrI pratikramaNa sUtra,

Page #287 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Care of the Insightful Run (221) Thus, he performs every action with
utmost care, because he does not allow any harm or loss to the insight, etc., he
eliminates all defects and shortcomings, and he diligently cultivates the
virtues that are present in this insight. Therefore, he performs these virtuous
actions with utmost composure, without any kind of haste, with a focused mind,
and with pure vows, and experiences supreme blissful peace.  “He who possesses
this pure vow will be the embodiment of peace, he will attain the treasure of
bliss, he will receive great honor… Peace is the Jina.” He avoids the great
fear, he performs the sevenfold Jina-like service with a mindful heart, he
desires to serve the Jina-path. — Shri Anandghanji  It was mentioned above that
this seeker does not allow any harm or loss to the insight, etc. This is how:
until he reaches this stage, the seeker has performed a lot of yogic practices.
In these practices, he does not allow any kind of defect, shortcoming, or loss
to the precious gem of momentum that he has attained. He takes special care that
no harm comes to him. Just as one would protect a precious gem as if it were
their own life, so too does this yogi-father protect the invaluable gem of
insight, the gem of omniscience, as if it were his own life. He does not allow
any harm or loss to it. Just as one would take care that no blemish comes to a
precious gem, and would keep it in a strong cabinet or treasury, so too does
this seeker take special care that no blemish comes to the gem of omniscience,
and he keeps this gem of omniscience safe and secure in the strong cabinet of
his resolute mind. Therefore, he preserves the collection of virtues that he has
attained in the insight of the friend, as well as in his own insight.  Not only
does he preserve them, but he also takes great care of the gem of virtue that is
being attained in this insight.  Because: (1) He waters the seed that he has
attained in the insight of the friend, he makes it sprout. That is, he becomes
particularly firm in his devotion to the Lord, he is always eager to serve the
virtuous, he worships the scriptures more and more, he immerses himself in the
waves of detachment, he particularly cherishes the observance of giving, etc.,
and non-receiving, and he maintains a firm belief and a receptive attitude
towards this story of the wise. He strengthens the three-fold power of the non-
obstruction of the senses, the non-obstruction of the mind, and the non-
obstruction of the body. He refines the air of the emotional world, and he
ripens the virtues of the past and the present. Thus, he gradually eliminates
the element of false belief and comes closer and closer to right belief.
Moreover, he firmly observes the five great vows of non-violence, etc., he does
not feel regret in performing virtuous actions, and he does not harbor hatred.
(2) And…

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bahAdaSTiga rananuM jatana (221) Ama pratyeka kriyA te sAvadhAnapaNe kare che,
kAraNa ke daSTi AdimAM apAya-hAni AvavA detuM nathI, khAmI-UNapa sarva dUra karI
de che, tema ja A daSTimAM hovA gya guNanI te barAbara sAdhanA kare che, eTale
te te satakriyAo te kaI paNa jAtanI khetI utAvaLa vinA atyaMta svasthatAthI,
ekAgra citte, zuddha praNidhAnathI kare che, ane parama AnaMdamaya zAMtino
anubhava kare che. "zAMti svarUpa eha bhAvaze, je dharI zuddha praNidhAna re,
AnaMdaghana pada pAmaze, te leze bahumAna re...zAMti jina" sata mahAbhaya TALate
re, saptama jinavara devalalanA sAvadhAna manasA karI re, dhAre jinapada
seva.lalanA"--zrIAnaMdaghanajI uparamAM A daSTi Adine A mumukSu puruSa apAya-
hAni AvavA detuM nathI ema kahyuM, te A prakAre - atyAra sudhInI bhUmikAe
pahoMcatAM sudhImAM A gI puruSe jeTalI yegasAdhanA karI che, temAM te kaI jAtanI
kheDa-khAMpaNa-UNapa AvavA prApta veganuM ratna detuM nathI, ane tene koI
nukazAna na pahoMce enuM khAsa dhyAna rAkhe jema jatana che. jema keI
mahAmUlyavALuM ratna maLyuM hoya, to tene jIvanI jema jALavI rAkhe, tema A
jogIjana pitAne prApta thayela amUlya daSTirUpasabodharUpa ciMtAmaNiratnane
prANAdhikapaNe jALavI rAkhe che, tene hAni-nukazAna pahoMcavA detA nathI. jema,
mUlyavAna ratnane kAMI DAgha na lAge evI kALajI rAkhe che, ne tene majabUta
kabATa ke tejurImAM saMgharI rAkhe che tema A mumukSu puruSa bodhiratnane
bAdhArUpa DAgha na lAge tenI khAsa kALajI rAkhe che, ane badha-ratnane potAnA
daDha cittarUpa kabATamAM-tejurImAM sAcavIne saMgharI rAkhe che. eTale mitrA
dRSTimAM tema ja tArA daSTimAM prApta thayela ga-guNa samUha te sAcavI rAkhe
che, eTaluM ja nahiM paNa A daSTimAM prApta thaI rahelA guNaratnanuM paNa khUba
jatana kare che. kAraNa ke-(1) te mitrA dRSTimAM prApta thayela bIjene
jalasiMcana kare che, tene aMkarA ugADe che, eTale ke te prabhubhaktimAM vizeSa
daDha bane che, sazuru sevAmAM sadA tatpara rahe che, satazAstranI adhika
ArAdhanA kare che, vairAgyataraMgiNImAM vizeSa nimajajana karate jAya che;
dAnAdi abhigrahanuM pAlana vizeSapaNe Adare che, ane A gabIja kathA pratye
sthira mAnyapaNuM tathA upAdeya bhAva rAkhe che; cagAvaMcaka, yiAvaMcaka ne
phelAvaMcaka e avaMcaka tripuTIne baLavattara banAve che; bhAvamalanI era ne era
kSINatA karI, tathAbhavyatA-gyatAne vadhAre paripAka kare che ane Ama mithyAtva
aMzanI bAdabAkI karate jaI, samyakatvanI vadhAre ne vadhAre nikaTamAM AvatuM
jAya che. vaLI te ahiMsA vagere pAMca yamanuMvratanuM daDha pAlana kare che,
dharmakAryamAM kheda pAmate nathI, ke dveSa dharate nathI. (2) ane

Page #288 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(222) The collection of Gadasti (Jain term for a type of spiritual practice) in
your vision, observes the five vows (Jain principles of non-violence,
truthfulness, non-stealing, celibacy, and non-attachment) properly, abandons
anxiety, and ignites curiosity. Their devotion towards the Gatha (Jain
scriptures) increases, and their respect and service towards pure Yogis (Jain
ascetics) become more active. They act appropriately and avoid inappropriate
actions. They are curious about those with superior qualities and are troubled
by their father's lack of virtues. They are deeply detached from the world and
yearn to escape it. Considering the noble ones as their equals, they do not
diminish their father's wisdom. Thus, this Chegi (Jain term for a type of
spiritual practitioner) preserves the old capital (spiritual progress) and adds
new capital to it in this vision. Therefore, as this double vision strengthens
their bond, they become more cautious in their religious practices, as it was
said.  Asan said. This is what the Shushrusha (Jain term for service) says:
"Just as a young man, along with his beloved, desires to hear divine music, so
too, in this vision, is the Shushrusha towards the truth."  Commentary: "Just as
a young man, enjoying the company of a beautiful woman, desires to hear divine
music, so too, in this vision, is the Shushrusha towards the truth." - Gasaza
Ru-2  Here, an example is given to show how intense the desire to listen
(Shushrusha) should be - there is a young man, full of youthful vigor, who is
handsome. He is healthy, strong, and has all his senses intact. A beautiful,
graceful woman, with a great form, is by his side. He lacks nothing in terms of
wealth and prosperity. All the materials for enjoying the five senses are always
at his service. Thus, he is happy in every way.  Vritti: "With his beloved, with
his beautiful beloved, with his charming beloved, just as a young man, a mature
man, desires to hear divine music, the music of Kinnaras (celestial beings), so
too, in this vision, is the Shushrusha towards the truth."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (222) gadaSTisamuccaya tArA dRSTimAM dhAraNa karela zaucAdi pAMca niyama te
barAbara pALe che, udvegane tyAga kare che, ne jijJAsA vadhAre pradIpta kare
che. gakathA pratyenI tenI proti vadhatI jAya che, zuddha yegIo pratyenA
bahumAna-sevA Adi vadhAre sakriya banatA jAya che. te ucita Acare che ne anucita
AcaratuM nathI. adhika guNavata pratye te jijJAsA rAkhI, pitAnI guNahInatAthI
trAsa pAme che. te saMsArathI atyaMta virAgya dharI, tethI chUTavAnI tIvra IcchA
kare che. ziSTajanene pramANu gaNI te pitAnuM DahApaNa DahoLatA nathI. Ama A
cegI puruSa AgaLanI junI mUDI sAcavI rAkhe che, ne temAM paNa A daSTimAM navI
mUDI umere che. eTale A belA daSTimAM tene baMdha vadhAre baLavAna banavAthI, te
te dharmakriyAmAM tenuM mana vadhAre sAvadhAnapaNe vate che, ema je kahyuM hatuM
te barAbara che. Asana kahyuM. AnI ja zuzruSA kahe che - kAntakAntAsametasya
divyageyazrutau yathA  /  yUno bhavati zuzrUSA tathAsyAM tattvagocarA  // 52 //
ramaNa yukta yuvAnane, sAMbhaLavA sura gAna, jyama IcchA tyama hoya te,
taravaviSaya A sthAna para artha:-ramaNIya ramaNathI yukta evA taruNane jevI
divya saMgIta sAMbhaLavAnI icchAzuzruSA thAya, tevI A daSTimAM tatva saMbaMdhI
zuzruSA hoya. vivecana "taruNa sukhI strI parivajI, jima cAhe suragIta, tyama
sAMbhaLavA tatvane, e dRSTi suvinIta rejinajI!"--gasajhAya rU-2 ahIM zuzraSA
eTale sAMbhaLavAnI IcchA kevI utkaTa hevI joIe, te batAvavA mATe dRSTAMta ApyuM
che -keI eka taruNa-bhara yuvAnImAM AveluM suMdara yuvAna puruSa che. te zarIre
nIrogI, hRSTa-puSTa, ne saMpUrNa iMdriyasaMpanna che. mahAsvarUpavAna suMdara
lAvaNyamayI ramaNI tenI bAjumAM che. dhana-vaibhava AdinI tene koI kamInA nathI.
paMca viSayanA upabheganI samasta sAmagrI tenI sevAmAM sadA hAjara che. Ama
sarva prakAre sukhI e te vRtti:-%AtAttAta-kAMta kAMtAthI yukata, kamanIya-
suMdara priyatamAthI yukta evAne, vizrata athar-jema divya gItanA zravaNa praye,
jema kinara vagerenA gItanA zravaNa pratye ano-yuvAnane vayasthane. sAtti hoya
che, aSA-zuzraSA, zravaNuM karavAnI IcchA,-te saMgIta saMbaMdhI ja; tathAcAM
-tema A dRSTimAM vyavasthita honArane, taravA -tavagocara, taravaviSayI ja,
taravasaMbaMdhI ja zuzraSA-sAMbhaLavAnI IcchA hoya che.

Page #289 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Example of Shusha-Shravana-Ichchha (Desire to Hear)  (223) A young man,
enjoying himself in a beautiful garden like Nandana Van, immersed in the ocean
of happiness, experiences a wave of desire: "I want to hear divine music now.
How wonderful it would be to hear the sweet singing of a Kinnara, a celestial
being with a voice like a cuckoo! How wonderful it would be to be graced with
the melodious music of Gandharvas! How fortunate I would be to hear divine
music, resonating with the sounds of instruments like Veena and Veena, and
captivating with the dance of celestial beings!" He gets lost in this desire.
When a Kinnara, Gandharva, or any other celestial being arrives, and begins to
play divine music that stirs the strings of his heart, creating a whirlwind of
divine music, how eagerly does this young man want to listen? How intently does
he absorb the heart-stealing music, as if he were depicted in a painting? How
intently does he listen, as if he were a frozen statue?  Similarly, in this
state of Shusha-Shravana-Ichchha, a seeker yearns to hear with intense desire,
with a longing that never fades. Just as he desires to hear divine music with
such enthusiasm, he desires to hear the nectar of divine truth, even more
eagerly, through the ears, the organ of hearing. Just as the young man wants to
listen with a stillness like a painting, the seeker, thirsty for knowledge,
desires to hear the stories of truth with a deep sense of absorption. This
natural desire to hear flows from the innate yearning within.  For example:
"Oh, most merciful Sadguru Dev! I do not see the soul. I do not perceive its
form. I do not experience anything else. Therefore, the soul does not have a
form. Therefore, there is no soul. Therefore, the path to liberation is a
delusion. Please explain the true solution to this doubt that has taken root in
my heart.  Oh Lord! What is the nature of the soul? How have you known and
experienced it? I want to hear about the nature of the soul, because without
knowing the pure soul, my mind cannot attain liberation. Different teachers
describe its nature in different ways, and my mind is confused by what I hear.
You are the only one who can resolve this. Please have mercy!  Oh Supreme Lord!
How can I know the supreme Dharma? What is the nature of the self? What is the
nature of the other? I want to hear this from your holy mouth. Oh, glorious
Mahant! Please explain this to me.  Oh, Purushottama! What is Brahman? What is
Karma? What is Adhyatma? What is Adhibhuta?

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 balAdaSTi : zuSA-zravaNecchAnA dAkhalA (223) keI naMdanavana jevA ramya
upavanamAM vilasI rahyo che ane sukhasamudramAM nimajajana karI rahelA AvA
taruNane e IcchAtaraMga utpanna thAya ke-ApaNe te have divya saMgIta sAMbhaLavuM
che. koI kokilakaMThI kinnara pitAnuM madhura gAyana saMbhaLAve te kevuM sAruM ?
gAMdharvonA madhura AlApavALA saMgItane joga banI Ave to kevuM sArUM? vINa, veNa
vagere vAdyonA raNakArathI guMjatuM ane divyAMganAonA nRtya ThaNakArathI
rucatuM, evuM divya saMgIta sAMbhaLavAnuM saubhAgya je mane prApta thAya te
kevuM sArUM ? Ama te raMgamAM AvI jaIne Icche che. tyAM devAnuyege je kaI
kinnara ke gAMdharva Adi AvI caDe, ne hRdayanA tAra halamalAvI nAkhe evuM divya
saMgIta cheDe, divya saMgItanI ramajhaTa bolAve, te te taruNa puruSa te divya
saMgIta keTalA ullAsathI sAMbhaLavA iche? jANe citramAM AlekhAyele heya ema kevI
sthira tanmayatAthI te hRdayahArI gAnanuM karNapuTathI pAna kare ? jANe thIjI
gayeluM pUtaLuM hoya ema kevI ekatAnatAthI te zravaNa karavAnI hoMsa dharAve ?
tema A daSTimAM sthiti karate thegI puruSa tava zravaNa karavA mATe tevI tIvra
IcchAutkaMThA dharAve che, tAlAvelI rAkhe che. jevA ullAsathI te bhogI divya
saMgItanuM zravaNa Icche che, tevA balake tethI vadhAre ullAsathI A bhegI divya
tattva amRtanuM zravaNe chAnA zravaNedriyadvArA pAna karavA Icche che. te taruNa
puruSa jema citravat sthira dAkhalA thaIne sAMbhaLavA cAhe che, tema
zravaNapipAsu jogIjana sthira tanmayapaNe tattvavArtA sAMbhaLavAnI sahaja
IcchAulaTa dharAve che. ane te sahaja zravaNecchA svAbhAvika aMtarAdugAra dvArA
sarI paDe che. jemake he parama kRpALuM sadguru deva ! jIva te dRSTimAM Avato
nathI. tenuM koI rUpa jaNAtuM nathI. bIje paNa kaMI anubhava thato nathI. mATe
jIvanuM svarUpa ja nathI. mATe AtmA che nahiM. eTale mokSane upAya mithyA che. A
hArI aMtar zaMkAne Apa sadupAya samajAve. he bhagavAna ! AtmatattvanuM svarUpa
zuM che? Ape te kevuM jANyeanubhavyuM che ? te tattvasvarUpa sAMbhaLavA huM
IcchuM chuM, kAraNa ke nirmala Atmatattva jANyA vinA hArUM citta kaI rIte
samAdhi pAme ema nathI. A bhinna bhinna vAdIe tenuM svarUpa bhinna bhinna
prakAre kahe che, te sAMbhaLIne te mahArI mati muMjhAI gaI che. mATe samAdhAna
karavA Apa ja samartha che, kRpA kare! he parama prabhu ! Apane parama dharma
huM zI rIte jANuM? svasamaya zuM? ane parasamaya zuM? te ApanA zrImukhe zravaNa
karavA huM IcchuM chuM. he mahimAvaMta! mahaMta ! te samajAvavA kRpA kare! he
puruSottama! te brahma zuM che? te karma zuM che? te adhyAtma zuM che? te
adhibhUta zuM

Page #290 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(224) What is the Gadsimucchaya? What is the Adhidaiva? How is the Adhiyajna
present in this body? How can you recognize the Niyatatma Yogis during their
departure? “It is not visible, its form is not known; there is no other
experience, therefore it is not for the soul's form, not for the Atma, the
Mithya Meksha remedy; that inner doubt, the Sadupay explains.” - Shri Atmasiddhi
Munisuvrat Jinraj! My one request to the experts! What is the Atmatatva, the
world guru has known! Tell me this thought; without knowing the Atmatatva, pure,
the mind will not attain Samadhi... Munisuvrat “To the Dharma Param Arnath, what
do I know, Bhagvant Re; Swar explains the glory of the Mahant - Dharma” - Shri
Anandghanji etc. in this way, this truly Tatvapipasu - Tatvarasik man expresses
his Shravana Chha. And in the hearing of this supreme nectar-like Tatvavarta,
this Mumukhu Yogi gets so much joy, that even in the infinite part, he does not
get this much joy even by listening to divine music together! And this
(Shushrusha) is of this type, therefore it is said - Bodhambhasrotaschaisha
siratulya satam mata. Abhavesya shrutam vyartha masiravanikupavat. || 53 ||
Vritti: - Vadham: nnotaro - Bedharoop jal - srotani, Bodharoop pani na pravahni,
Vaisha - and this, Shushrusha, Utaravjaya - Sira Tulya, Saravani saman, -
Avandhya ne Akshaya eva tena bina yavanae karine sattam mata - Santane, Munio ne
mat chhe, Ishta chhe. Amaveda: - Aana, Shushrusha na abhave, shum? Te ke -
Shrutam ya "  Heard is in vain, Shramfalavala chhe. Koni jem? Te ke - Asirani v7
- Saravani vina ni Prithvi ma kavani jem. Te ma kavo bad te na kheda barabar j
chhe. Karan ke tenu phal nathi tetla mate. * “ Kim tad Brahma kimadhyatma kim
karma purushottama. Adhibhutam cha kim proktamaddhidevam kimuchyate. ||
Adhiyajnah katham ko'tra dehe'sminmadhusudan. Kanadare j arth shedati niyatminih
| » – Gita A. 8. Lek 1-2

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (224) gadasimuccaya che? te adhidaiva zuM che? A dehamAM rahela te adhiyajJa
karaNa kevI rIte che? niyatAtmA yogIothI tame prayANakAle kevI rIte jANI zakAya
che?* "nathI dRSTimAM Avate, nathI jaNAtuM rUpa; bIje paNa anubhava nahi, tethI
na jIva svarUpa mATe che nahiM AtamA, mithyA mekSa upAya; e aMtara zaMkA taNe,
samajAve sadupAya."--zrI Atmasiddhi munisuvrata jinarAja ! muja eka vinati
nisuNo! Atamatava kayuM jANyuM jagataguru ! eha vicAra muja kahiye; Atamatatva
jANyA viNa nirmala, citta samAdhi nA lahiye...munisuvrata "dharama parama
aranAthane, kima jANu bhagavaMta re; svAra samajAviye mahimAvaMta mahaMtare-
dharama"-zrI AnaMdaghanajI ItyAdi prakAre A sAce tattvapipAsu-tattvarasika
puruSa potAnI zravaNechA vyakta kare che. ane A parama amRta jevI tatvavArtAnA
zravaNamAM A mumukSu yogIne eTale AnaMda Ave che, tene anaMtame bhAga paNa te
bhavAbhinaMdI bhegIne divya saMgIta sAMbhaLavAmAM AvatuM nathI ! ane A (zuzraSA)
AvA prakAranI hoya che, eTalA mATe kahe che- bodhAmbhaHsrotasazcaiSA sirAtulyA
satAM matA  /  abhA'vesyAH zrutaM vyartha masirAvanikUpavat  //  53 //  badha
srota sa tulya A, e viNa zravaNa vRthA ja; saravANI viNa avanimAM, 5 kheda yathA
ja, pa3, vRtti:- vadhAmaHnnotaro-bedharUpa jala-srotanI, bodharUpa pANInA
pravAhanI, vaizA-ane A, zuzraSA, utarAvajyA-sirA tulya, saravANI
samAna,-avaMdhya ne akSaya evA tenA bIjanA ya5NAe karIne sattAM matA-saMtane,
munione mata che, ISTa che. amAveDA :-AnA, zuzraSAnA abhAve, zuM? te ke-zrutaM
ya" sAMbhaLeluM vyartha che, zramaphalavALuM che. konI jema ? te ke-
asirAniva7-saravANI vinAnI pRthvImAM kavAnI jema. temAM kavo bAda te na khedhA
barAbara ja che. kAraNa ke tenuM phaLa nathI teTalA mATe. * " kiM tad brahma
kimadhyAtma kiM karma puruSottama  /  adhibhUtaM ca kiM proktamadhidaivaM
kimucyate  /  /  adhiyajJaH kathaM ko'tra dehe'sminmadhusUdana  /  kAnadAre ja
artha zeDati niyAtminiH | >> -gItA a. 8. leka 1-2

Page #291 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Shushrusha: The Stream of Knowledge**  (25) **Meaning:** This Shushrusha, the
desire to listen, is like a stream of knowledge. Without it, listening is
futile, like digging a well in barren land without a stream.  **Commentary:**
"The stream of knowledge is like a well, without it, the land is barren.
Listening is like a king, who sleeps and hears nothing." - Ch. 20, Sanmay, Ru. 3
Here, the desire to listen, Shushrusha, is like a stream of knowledge. Just as a
well with a stream will always have water, so too will a strong desire to listen
bring forth a continuous flow of knowledge. But just as a well without a stream
will not have water, so too will a lack of Shushrusha, a lack of this desire,
prevent the flow of knowledge, leaving the well of knowledge empty.  Without
Shushrusha, all listening becomes dust, like hearing nothing at all. It enters
one ear and exits the other, never reaching the heart. It is like digging a well
in barren land, where no matter how deep you dig, no water will be found. The
effort is wasted, and only fatigue remains.  In such listening, the sound waves
strike the eardrum and are lost back into the air. This is illustrated in the
following diagram:  **Diagram 8**  **Diagram 9**  **Knowledge-filled well =
Knowledge-filled mind**  **Barren land = Lack of Shushrusha**  **Stream of
knowledge = Shushrusha**  The absence of Shushrusha is like the absence of a
stream of knowledge.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 balAdaSTiH zuzraSA-bedhapravAhanI saravANI (25) artha :-ane A zuzruSA bodha
jalanA pravAhanI saravANI samAna saMtoe mAnelI che. enA abhAve sAMbhaLeluM
vyartha -phegaTa che,-jema saravANI vinAnI bhUmimAM ku kheda vyartha che tema.
vivecana sarI e badhapravAhanIjI, e viNa zrata thala kUpa; zravaNa samIhA te
kisIjI, zayita suNe jima bhUpa....dhana."--ca0 sanmAya, rU-3 ahIM je AvI
zuzraSA-sAMbhaLavAnI IcchA hoya che, te bedharUpa jalapravAhanI saravANI samAna
che. jema kUvAmAM saravANI hoya, to te vATe pANI AvyA ja kare, tema AvI utkaTa
zravaNecchArUpa saravANa je hoya, te te vATe bedharUpa pANIne zuzraSA-bodha
pravAha ekadhAre akSayapaNe AvyA ja kare. paNa jema kUvAmAM saravANI pravAhanI
na hoya, te pANI Ave nahiM, tema je AvI zuzraSArUpa avadhya-akSaya saravANuM
saravANI na hoya, te bodharUpa pANIne pravAha Ave ja nahiM, ne jJAna rUpI kU
khAlI ja rahe Ama zuzruSA vinAnuM badhuM zravaNa karyuM te dhULa thAya che,
sAMbhaLyuM na sAMbhaLyA jevuM thAya che, eka karNachidrathI pesI seMsaruM
bIjethI nIkaLI jAya che, hRdayamAM pravezatuM nathI, phegaTa jAya che. jema keI
evI baraDa bhUmi-ke jemAM pANInI saravANI AvatI na hoya, te bhUmimAM game teTale
UMDe pha khelyA karIe (Tapping), te paNa pANI Ave ja nahiM, kR da na khodyA
barAbara ja thAya, zramamAtra ja phaLa maLe, mahenata mAthe paDe, tema sAcI
zuzruSA vinAnuM badhuMya zravaNa niSphaLa jAya che, bodharUpa phaLa ApatuM
nathI, eLe jAya che. tevA zravaNamAM te vAyunA taraMgathI (Air-waves) zabdo
karNapaTa para athaDAI pAchA vAyumAM-havAmAM maLI jAya che! Ane nIcenI AkRti
parathI barAbara khyAla AvazeAkRti-8 AkRti-9 =jJAna bharelo kUvA=jJAna khAlI
coma pecI bhUmika zubhraSAvALuM zravaNa baraDabhUmi= zuzruSA vinAnuM zravaNa I
zuzraSA-saravANIne abhAva to bedha-jalapravAhane abhAva bodha-jalapravAha 6
zazruSArUpa saravANI

Page #292 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(26) **Yoga-drushti-samuchaya**  Just as a king, while lying down at night,
hears stories, and in his sleep and wakefulness, he may also utter exclamations,
but his attention is not on them, and he does not remember what he heard! And in
the morning, he wakes up and asks, "Hey! What story was told last night?"
Similarly, one who listens without proper attention, is like one who is asleep!
For this reason, he may also exclaim, "Oh! Maharaj!" but he does not realize
what he has heard! He comes home and asks, "What did Maharaj speak about today?"
Thus, listening without proper attention is useless and futile, it does not
touch the heart, it is like pouring water from one ear to the other! True
listening happens when the mind is pleased, the body is excited, and the hair on
the body stands on end. Listening to a story of virtues without such a desire is
like singing in front of a deaf person! It is like reciting the Bhagavad Gita to
a buffalo! As the English proverb says, it is like "Casting pearls before
swine."  “When the mind is pleased, the body is excited, let me be pleased by
one tune; Without such a desire, the story of virtues is like singing in front
of a deaf person... Jinji! Hail to your teachings.”—Chag॰ Sajjay Ru-4  Here,
Vyatireka says—  श्रुताभावेऽपि भावेऽस्याः शुभभावप्रवृत्तितः । फलं कर्मक्षयाख्यं
स्यात्परबोधनिबन्धनम् ॥ ५४ ॥  Even in the absence of listening, if there is a
desire to listen, due to the activity of good feelings, the fruit called karma-
kshaya is obtained, which is the cause of supreme knowledge. 54  **Meaning:**
Even in the absence of listening, if there is a desire to listen, due to the
activity of good feelings, the fruit called karma-kshaya is obtained, which is
the cause of supreme knowledge.  **Analysis:**  The above praises the desire to
listen, which is further strengthened by Vyatireka, i.e., negative statement.
Even if there is a strong desire to listen to such truths, but there is no
actual listening,  **Vritti:**- Even in the absence of listening,
**Mavedacha:**- if there is a feeling of desire, (if this desire is present),
what? That is- **Zumamayapravrittittah:**- due to the activity of good feelings,
- that desire to listen is itself conducive to good, **Haru Mayarls Chan
Karmakshaya** named fruit is obtained, due to the validity of the statement (due
to the validity of the scriptures). And this **Vanopaniyandhanam:**- is the
cause of supreme knowledge, the main cause of liberation, due to the validity of
the statement.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (26) yogadRSTisamuccaya jema koi eka rAjA rAtre zayana karatI veLAe vArto
sAMbhaLatA hAya, udhamAM ne uMghamAM te hAMkArA paNa detA jAya, paNa tenuM lakSa
temAM Aya nahi, zu' sAMbhaLyu te tenA khyAlamAM rahe nahiM! ane savAre UThIne
khApu pUche alyA ! rAtre kaI vArtA karI hatI? tema prastuta zuzruSA vinAnuM
zravaNa karatA hAya te jANe uMghamAM hAya ema sAMbhaLe che! te mATethI ghAMTA
pADI jI ! mahArAja !' ema hAMkA paNa dIe che! paNa zu sAMbhaLyuM tenu tene bhAna
heAtuM nathI! te ghera AvIne pUche che ke Aja mahArAja vakhANumAM zI vAta karatA
hatA ! Ama sAcI zuzruSA vinAnuM zravaNu phogaTa-nakAmu che, hRdayane sparzatuM
nathI, eka kAnathI khIje kAne kADhI nAMkhyA jevu' thAya che! khar' zravaNa teA
tyAre thAya ke jyAre mana rIjhe--prasannatA pAme, tana ulluse-zarIramAM rAmAMca-
rUvADA UbhA thAya. evI zravaNecchA vinA je guNakathA sAMbhaLavAmAM Ave, te mherA
mANasa AgaLa sa'gIta karavA kharAkhara che ! bheMsa AgaLa bhAgavata che! aMgrejI
kahevata pramANe TUkara pAse meAtInA cAro nAMkhavA kharAkhara che! * Casting
pearls before swine.' " mana rIjhe tana ullasejI, rIjhe mujhe eka tAna; e icchA
viNa guNukathA jI, maherA AgaLa gAna re.... jinajI ! dhana dhana tuja upadeza."
--cAga. sajjhAya rU-4  ahI ja vyatireka kahe che-- zrutAbhAve'pi bhAve'syAH
zubhabhAvapravRttitaH  /  phalaM karmakSayAkhyaM syAtparabodhanibandhanam  //
54  //  zravaNa abhAve ya A sate, zubhabhAve A sthAna; phala kakSaya nAmanuM,
uttama khedha nidAna, 54 artha :--zravaNanA abhAve paNa A zuzrUSA-sAMbhaLavAnI
icchA hAtAM, zubha bhAvanI pravRttine lIdhe karmakSaya nAmanu phaLa hAya che,-ke
je parama edhanu nikha dhana-kAraNa thAya che. vivecana uparamAM je zuzrUSAnI
praza'sA karI, te vyatirekathI eTale ke nakArAtmaka uktithI vizeSa dRDha kare
che. dhArA ke tevI zuzruSA tattva sAMbhaLavAnI tIvra icchA che, paNa zravaNanA
vRtti:-jItAmAve'--izravaNunA abhAve paNa, maveDacAH- zuSAnA bhAva-sadbhAva
hatAM, (A suzruSA hoya teA), zuM? te ke-jhumamAMyapravRttittaH-zubha bhAvanI
pravRttine lIdhe,-te zuzruSA bhAvanA ja zubhapAthakI, haruM mAyArlsa cAn
kamakSaya nAmanuM phula hAya,vacananA prAmANyathI ( AgamavANInA pramANupaNAthI).
ane A vanopaniyandhanam-parama kheAlanu niSTha dhana, pradhAna meAvanuM kAraNu
hAya chaeN, vacanaprAmANyathI ja,

Page #293 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Aladasht: Even service without listening is successful and free from fault
(27)  If there is no connection, what then? It is explained here that even
though there is service, but no listening, even then, that service is an
activity in auspiciousness, therefore it produces a karma-destroying effect, and
that karma-destroying effect is the cause of the highest type of knowledge.
Thus, just having the true inner desire to serve and listen is a great thing, it
is praiseworthy, and traditionally it is also beneficial. Because due to such
auspiciousness, the proportion of karma is destroyed, and as a result, the cause
of the highest knowledge is obtained. Those who are true seekers of liberation,
due to their good fortune, are drawn to and obtain the cause of the highest
knowledge; they find the connection with the virtuous person and the virtuous
teacher, and they obtain the virtuous scriptures, etc. Just as a magnet attracts
iron, so it attracts them (Like attracts like). There is also such an
irresistible attraction in this service, that the meeting with the true speaker,
the virtuous person, happens from anywhere. If there is a desire to quench
thirst, then the way to quench it is also found.  Service destroys karma  Thus,
listening without service is unsuccessful, but service without listening is not
unsuccessful, but is successful with the fruit of karma-destruction. Just as
when one is truly hungry and eats, it is pleasing, palatable, satisfying, and
digestible; just as when one is very thirsty and drinks water, it is sweet and
like nectar, and quenches the thirst; similarly, when one has a true hunger to
listen to the truth, a true thirst to drink the nectar of truth, then that
listening is pleasing, palatable, and results in nectar for the soul; otherwise,
it is like a leaky pot, the water leaks out through another hole! It does not
stay in the heart! Therefore, the greatness of this quality of service is
immense.  "If you are thirsty, there is a way to find water." - Shrimad
Rajchandraji 5  In the connection, the quality of non-fault is mentioned -
"There is never any fault in the beginning of an auspicious connection. The
skill of the means and its subject matter should be beautiful." 55  Commentary:
- Gumayonalmaame - In the beginning of an auspicious connection, and in such
types of meditation, etc., there is never any fault in listening, etc., in this
authorized view. Uvachjaouraast Vi - Similarly, the skill of the means, the
skillfulness, etc., - such types of country, etc., seat, etc., related, Cha -
Shaolan, beautiful, Tadvishachan - its subject matter, the subject matter of the
auspicious connection, Maveth is there.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 alAdaSTi : zravaNa vinAnI zuzrUSA paNa saphaLa-avikSepa (27) joga na hoya teA
zuM? tenA ahIM khulAsA karyAM che ke zuzruSA chatAM zravaNu na ane, tepaNa te
zuzruSA thavI e zubhabhAvamAM pravRtti che, eTale tethI karIne kakSayarUpa kaLa
upaje che, ane te kakSaya uttama prakAranA edhanu nima...dhana-kAraNu heAya che.
Ama kevala zuzruSA-sAMbhaLavAnI sAcI aMtaraMga icchA thavI te paNa ghaNI meTI
vAta che, prazasta che, ane paraparAe te paNu lAbhadAyaka thAya che. kAraNa ke
tevA zubhabhAvathI AgamanA pramANapaNAne lIdhe ka`nA kSaya thAya che, ane tenA
pariNAme parama medhanA nimitta maLI Ave che. je sAcA tapipAsu mumukSu hAya che,
tene tenA bhAgyAyathI kheMcAine uttarAttara pradhAna medhanA kAraNeA prApta
thAya che; satpuruSa sadgurunA joga khanI Ave che, ne sat zruta vagerenI prApti
thAya che. leAcuMkhaka jema leAhune kheM'ce, tema tevu tevAne kheMce che (Like
attracts like). A zuzrUSAmAM paNa evuM koI ajaya AkarSaNa che, ke sAcA vaktA
satpuruSanA samAgama game tyAMthI thaI Ave che. jo tarasa jhAvavAnI icchA che,
te te bUjhAvavAnI rIta paNa maLI Ave che. zuzrUSAthI ka kSaya Ama zuzruSA
vinAnuM zravaNa niSphaLa che, paNa zravaNu vinAnI zuzrUSA niSphaLa nathI,
paraMtu karmakSayarUpa phaLathI saphaLa che. sAcI bhUkha lAgI hAya ne khAdhu
hoya te jema bhAve, ruce, mIThuM lAge ne pace; khUba tarasa lAgI hAya ne pANI
zuSAnA jema mIThuM* amRta jevuM lAge, ne tarasa chIpe; tema ja tattva
sAMbhaLavAnI mahimA sAcI bhUkha lAgI hAya, tattvasudhArasa-pAnanI sAcI tarasa
lAgI hAya, tA ja te zravaNu bhAve che, ruce che, ne jIvane amRtarUpe pariName
che; nahiM te| kANA mATalAnI jema bIjA ka-chidra vATe mahAra nIkaLI jAya che!
hRdayamAM Tharatu nathI ! mATe A zuzruSA guNunuM mAhAtmya ghaNu' che. << khUjhI
caData jo pyAsakI, hai khUjhana kI rIta." zrImad rAjacaMdrajI 5 ceAgamAM akSepa
guNa kahe che-- zubhayeogasamArambhe na kSepo'syAM kadAcana  /  upAyakauzalaM
cApi cAru tadviSayaM bhavet  //  55  //  zubha yoga samAraMbhamAM, kadI kSepa
ahiM nathya; ne te viSayoM upAyanuM, kauzala sudara hoya. 55
vRtti:-gumayonalamAme--zubha yAganA samAraMbhamAM, tathAprakAranA dhyAna AdimAM,
na kSeoDayAM vAcana-A adhikRta dRSTi sate kadI paNu kSepa hotA nathI.
uvAcajaurAsTa vi-temaja upAyanu kauzala kuzalapaNuM paNu,--tathAprakAranA deza
Adi, Asana Adi sabaMdhI, cA--zeAlana, suMdara, tadviSacaM--tenA viSaye, zubha
yeAgasamArabha viSayanuM, mavet hoya,

Page #294 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(228) Yoga-stisamuccaya A: - In this perspective, there is never any
interruption in the performance of auspicious yagas; and the means - skill in
this regard - is also beautiful. Discussion Here, the quality of non-
interruption is explained. In the previous perspective, the defect of agitation
was abandoned, so after that, the defect of interruption also goes away in due
course. Therefore, in this perspective, when a yogi performs meditation and
other auspicious yagas, there is never any interruption, no obstacle or
hindrance, the mind does not become agitated or disturbed. Therefore, when he
meditates, he does it with a concentrated mind and pure intention, he does not
become agitated by external stimuli; when he performs devotion to the Lord, he
does it with pure dedication and complete absorption, he does not become
agitated by distractions; when he performs Samayika and Swadhyay, he does it
with equanimity and utmost calmness, he does not become distracted by the
thoughts of heaven and hell; when he performs Pratikramana and other virtuous
actions, he does it with a true feeling of repentance for his own defects, but
he does not let his mind wander elsewhere; when he performs any other moksha-
achieving yoga, or any other pure tapasya or other Dharma-related actions, he
does it with self-awareness and complete absorption, but he does not become
distracted by the desire for worldly pleasures. Similarly, in the means related
to meditation and other auspicious yagas, this seeker of liberation possesses
skill and expertise, he exhibits the skill of an artist. He has a thorough
knowledge of how to perform these yagas in the best way. And thus, being skilled
in the means, he can perform these yagas beautifully. Because one who is skilled
in the art of weaponry is adept at playing with weapons; similarly, one who
truly knows the method of meditation and other practices is skilled in the
practice of meditation and other practices. Just as one who is well-trained in
exercise is skilled in wrestling and other activities; similarly, one who truly
knows the means of meditation and other practices is skilled in achieving
meditation and other practices. For example, if one wants to meditate, one
should know the appropriate place and other things, one should know the method
of asanas. If one knows this, then one can truly practice the means. A skilled
craftsman can truly perform his work, but an unskilled one cannot; similarly, a
skilled seeker can perform meditation and other practices skillfully, but an
unskilled one cannot. The Gita says, "Cho: Manu Kausham." "Now, from the words
of the Jina, knowing the path of the seeker...O Lord; With the taste of the
goal, we perform the method of the means...O Lord." Shri Devchandraji Section
Non-interruption in the yaga

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (228) yogaztisamuccaya a:--A dRSTine viSe, zubha yAganA samArabhamAM kadI paNa
kSepa hAtA nathI; ane tenA viSayanu upAya--kauzala paNa sudara hoya che.
vivecana ahIM akSepa guNanuM spaSTIkaraNa karyuM che. AgalI dRSTimAM udvega
doSanA tyAga karyAM, eTale te pachI anukrame kSepa doSa paNa jAya che. ethI
karIne A dRSTimAM vA yegI puruSa jyAre dhyAna vagere zubha yAganA samAraMbha
kare che, tyAre temAM kadI koI paNa vikSepa AvI paDatA nathI, keAI paNa ADakhIlI
ke a'tarAya naDatA nathI, ahI' tahI' mAMvAM nAMkhI citta DAmADoLa thatuM nathI,
saMkSubdha thatu' nathI. eTale te dhyAna karatA hAya, te ekAgra citta zuddha
bhAve kare che, parISaha-upasa`thI kSeAbha pAmatA nathI; prabhubhakti karatA
hAya te| zuddha praNidhAnathI tanmayabhAve kare che,- ahIMtahIM cittavikSepathI
DAmADoLa thatA nathI; sAmAyikasvAdhyAya karatA hAya teA samatAbhAve atyaMta
svasthatAthI kare che,-temAM AkAza pAtAlanA ghATa ghaDatA nathI; pratikramaNa
Adi satakriyA karatA hoya, te upayAgapUrNAMka nija doSadananA sAcA pazcAttApa
bhAvathI kare che,-paNa manane bIje bhamavA detA nathI; bIjo kAI paNa
meAkSasAdhaka yoga sAdhatA hAya, ke bIjuM keAI paNa zuddha tapazcaryAdika
dharmAMkRtya karatA hAya, teA AtmajAgRtipUrNAMka nila bhAve kare che, paNa A
lAka-paraleAkanI phulAkAMkSAthI vikSepa pAmate nathI. temaja te te dhyAna Adi
zubha cAga saMbaMdhI upAyamAM paNa A mumukSu puruSa kauzalakuzalatA dharAve che,
kalAkAranA jevI nipuNatA dAkhave che. te te ceAga kema uttama rIte sAdhI zakAya,
tenuM tene nipuNu jJAna haiAya che. ane Ama upAyapaTu hevAthI upAya kauzala te
te ceAgane te suMdara rIte sAdhI zake che. kAraNa ke je zasravyApAramAM niSNAta
hAya, te aTApaTAnA khela khelavAmAM paTu hoya; tema jene te dhyAna AdinI
vidhinuM kharAkhara jANapaNuM hoya, te te dhyAnAdinI sAdhanAmAM kuzala hoya che.
vyAyAmamAM je sArI peThe kasAyelA hAya, te jema kustI vagere prayAgeAmAM
hAzIyAra hAya che; tema te te dhyAnAdinA upAya je kharAkhara jANatA hAya, te
dhyAnAdi siddha karavAmAM nipuNa hAya che. dAkhalA tarIke-dhyAna karavuM heAya
te tene ceAgya deza Adi jANavA joie, AsanADhi vidhi jANavI joie. te jANela hAya,
te ja tenA upAyamAM kharAkhara pravartI zakAya. kuzala kArIgara peAtAnI kAmagIrI
kharAkhara khajAvI zake che, paNa aNaghaDa tema karI zakatA nathI; tema
upAyapaTu puruSa dhyAnAdi kuzalapaNe karI zake che, apaTu tema karI zakate
nathI. gItAmAM kahyu che ke' co: manu kauzAm| ' " have jinavacana prasaMgathI,
jANI sAdhaka nIti....nAtha re; sAdhyarasI sAdhakapaNe, karIe sAdhana
rIti....nAtha re.''zrI devaca`drajI Jie  AgamAM avikSepa

Page #295 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  **Baladeṣṭi: Unhindered by the Means, the Means are the Bondage!** (229)
And in this view, the Amūcchaya says:  **"परिष्कारगतः प्रायो विघातोऽपि न विद्यते
। अविघातश्च सावद्यपरिहारान्महोदयः ॥५६॥**  **"Priṣkāragataḥ prāyo vighāto'pi na
vidyate | Avighātaś ca sāvadya-parihārānmahodayaḥ ||56||"**  **Meaning:** In the
matter of the means, there is generally no hindrance, and due to the avoidance
of the faults, there is a great non-hindrance.  **Explanation:** Here, the
collection of qualities that are present in the other view is stated in a
general way (generalization): (1) Here, there is generally no hindrance related
to the means - no obstruction to desire, (2) and due to the avoidance of sinful
actions, there is a great non-hindrance - a non-obstruction that leads to
liberation and supreme bliss.  In this view, the aspiring yogi who is engaged in
this path does not generally experience any hindrance related to the means. The
means are those things that help in achieving Dharma-siddhi (spiritual
liberation).  By not being attached to the means, by not clinging to them, these
great souls do not become hindered by the means, they do not get stuck. Because
they know that the means are not the goal, they are just tools. Therefore, they
do not consider the means as everything, they do not get caught up in the means,
but they constantly focus on the goal of self-realization, which is to be
achieved through the means. They always have the goal in mind and use the means
accordingly. Therefore, the false attachment to the means, the struggle for the
means, the disputes about the means, all disappear automatically. They do not
become lost in the means, because they have learned from the teachings of the
Jinas that the means should be used with pure devotion to the goal.  **"Pancha
mahāvrat dhānya taṇu, karṣaṇa vadhyā re; sādhȳabhāva nija thāpī, sāghanatāe
sadhyā re...śrī nami."**  **"Sādhȳarasī sādhakapane, abhisandhi rakhe nija lakṣa
chhe." - Śrī Devacandraji Vṛtti-Ridārājāt**  **Meaning:** In relation to the
purification and the means, the meaning is that, generally, there is no
hindrance, no obstruction to desire. Here, in this view, there is both hindrance
and non-hindrance. What kind of hindrance and non-hindrance? It is said that due
to the avoidance of faults, due to the avoidance of the prohibited, due to the
abandonment, there is a great non-hindrance, a non-hindrance that leads to
liberation and supreme bliss.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 balAdaSTi : upakaraNamAM apratibaMdha, sAdhana te baMdhana ! (229) ane A
dRSTimAM ja amyuccaya kahe che - pariSkAragataH prAyo vighAto'pi na vidyate  /
avighAtazca sAvadyaparihArAnmahodayaH  // 56 //  upakaraNa viSayamAM vaLI, prAye
neya vighAta, pApataNA parihArathI, mahada avighAta. 56. artha -upakaraNa
viSayamAM vighAta paNa prAye atre hotuM nathI ane sAvadya parihArathI eTale ke
pApakarmanA parityAgathakI mahodayavALo avighAta hoya che. vivecana ahIM bIje je
guNasamUha hoya che, te atre samuccayarUpe ( Generalisation) kahyo cheH-(1) ahIM
upakaraNa saMbaMdhI prAye vighAta - IcchA pratibaMdha upajato nathI, (2) ane
pApakarmanA parihArathI mahedayavALA abhyadaya-niHzreyasahetu e avighAta-
apratibaMdha hoya che. te A prakAre A dRSTimAM vartatA mumukSu yogIne upakaraNa
bAbatamAM prAye koI paNa jAtane vighAta-IcchA pratibaMdha upajatuM nathI.
upakaraNa eTale dharmasiddhimAM upakAra kare evA upasAdhana. tevA upakaraNa
saMbaMdhI IcchAnA pratibaMdha karI-Agraha karI A mahAnubhAva upakaraNamAM vivAta
pAmate nathI, vina pAmI aTakI jato nathI. kAraNa ke upakaraNa apratibaMdha e te
sAdhana mAtra che, sAdhya nathI, ema te jANe che. eTale te sAdhanamAM ja
sarvasva mAnI besI raheto nathI, sAdhananA ja kuMDALAmAM ramyA karate nathI,
paNa te dvArA je AtmasiddhirUpa sAdhyanI siddhi karavAnI che, te bhaNI ja potAno
satata lakSa rAkhe che, sadAya sAdhyaruci rahI te sAdhana kare che. eTale
upakaraNa saMbaMdhI mithyA Agraha TaMTA, sAdhana dharmanA jhagaDA ene ApoApa
nivarsI jAya che. sAdhanamAMupakaraNamAM te mUccha pAmatA nathI, kAraNa ke
zuddha sAdhyarucipaNe sAdhana sevavAM e teNe jinavacana prasaMgathI jANyuM che,
paMca mahAvrata dhAnya taNu, karSaNa vadhyA re; sAdhyabhAva nija thApI,
sAghanatAe sadhyA re...zrI nami." "sAdhyarasI sAdhakapaNe, abhisaMdhi rakhe nija
lakSa che." -zrIdevacaMdrajI vRtti-ridArajAta -pariSkAra saMbaMdhI, upakaraNa
saMbaMdhI, ema artha che, kAco-prAye, ghaNuM karIne, bAhulathI, vighADava-vivAta
paNa, IcchA pratibaMdha paNa, na vicare-nathI hota, ahyAM-A dRSTi hete sate,
vighAra-ane avighAta hoya che. kevA prakAra hoya che? te mATe kahyuM ke-sAva
pariNAdAtta-sAvadhanA parihArathakI, pratiSiddhanA parihArathI-tyAgathI, jAya
-mahodayavALA, abhyadaya-niHzreyasane hetu e, ema artha che.

Page #296 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(230) Yoga-drushti-samuccaya Just as foolish, clinging souls, who, like the
tools of religion, which are only instruments for self-realization, miss their
goal, and get lost in the false attachment to those tools, in trivial
differences of opinion, in petty quarrels, in small enclosures, and consider
that to be their duty; such great souls with vast vision do not believe in
those. Because they understand well that - the wise men have said that whatever
external tools, whatever material-emotional instruments they have shown, they
have said it only for the benefit of the soul, not for its harm, but even in
that, if the soul holds a sense of possessiveness, creates an obstacle in the
form of desire, becomes unconscious, then those tools become the opposite of
tools! They become obstacles! The instrument becomes a burden! For example,
Unconsciousness as an obstacle Temples, upashrayas, etc., have been built for
many souls for the ease and convenience of devotion, study, etc., but even in
them, if there is competition, rivalry, a sense of "mine" and "yours", if a
possessive, clinging mentality is held even towards the impartial, selfless,
non-attached Lord, if petty quarrels like who climbed higher are made, and
hatred is increased, then the desired purpose is destroyed; the instrument
becomes a burden! And the upashraya is also, for a certain time, for the
temporary use of a wandering muni, like a bird, with the permission of the
householder. But even in that, if a possessive attachment to the territory is
made, like this one is given this place and that one is given that place, then
even that upashraya becomes an obstacle! The gachchha-gana, too, is originally
made for organization and coordination, but even that, if it becomes a place of
possessiveness, a dwelling place for pride, a battlefield for anger and
quarrels, or a display of narrow-mindedness like an enclosure, then even that
becomes a burden! It becomes an obstacle to the soul! The instrument becomes a
burden! “Many see the divisions of the gachchha, but they are not ashamed to
speak of the truth! They are tired of doing their own work, like filling the
north; the king of the Kali Yuga is a cruel one....” - Shri Anandghanaji The
scriptures are only meant for reading and understanding by the soul, and for
their beneficial use. Instead, if someone claims ownership of them, and hoards
them like a miser, and establishes their possessiveness in them, then it becomes
an obstacle. Or, if someone uses the scriptures for their own benefit, with
pride like "how learned I am", "how well I can lecture", "what a speaker I am",
then it becomes an obstacle for the soul. Or, if the scriptures are used for
criticism, for debate, or for pointless arguments, then that too...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (230) yogadRSTisamuccaya paNa mUDha AgrahI jIvA jema, dharmanA upakaraNa je
AtmasAdhana mAtra nimitta ja che, tenA lakSya cUkI jaI, te te sAdhananA mithyA
AgraheAmAM, tuccha matabhedomAM, nAnA nAnA jhaghaDAomAM, nAnA nAnA vADAomAM rAcI
rahI,-temAM ja itikarttavyatA mAne che; tema A mahAnubhAva vizAlaSTivALA
cegIpuruSa mAnatA nathI. kAraNa ke te sArI peThe samaje che ke-jJAnI puruSAe
bAhya-abhya tara je kAMI upakaraNa kahyA che, dravya-bhAva je kAMi sAdhana
batAvyA che, te kevaLa jIvane upakAra thavA mATe kahyA che, apakAra thavA mATe
nahi, paNa temAM paNu jo jIva mamatvabhAva rAkhe, icchArUpa pratikhaMdha kare,
mUrchA dharAve, teA te upakaraNeA ulaTA apakaraNArUpa thai paDe che ! adhikaraNA
thai paDe che! sAdhana te adhana bane che! jemake mUrchAthI apakaraNa maMdira,
upAzraya Adi ghaNA jIvAne bhakti-svAdhyAya AdinI sugamatA-anukULatA khAtara
karavAmAM AvyA che, paNa temAM paNa jo caDasAcaDasI, hAMsAMteAMsI karavAmAM Ave,
mArA-tArApaNuM karavAmAM Ave, nIrAgI niHsa`gI vItarAga prabhu aMge paNa
parigraharUpa mamatva buddhi dhAravAmAM Ave, keTe caDhavA jevA meTA jhaghaDA
karI rAgadveSanI vRddhi karavAmAM Ave, teA iSTa uddeza mAryAM jAya che; sAdhana
te badhana thai paDe che ! ane upAzraya paNa amuka vakhata mATe, gRhasthanI
anujJAthI, pakSInI jema apratidhapaNe vicaratA pharatArAma muninA kAmacalAu
vaparAza mATe che. paNa temAM paNa A phalANAne apAsarA ne A bIjAne apAso ema jo
mamatvarUpa kSetrapratibadha karavAmAM Ave, te te upAzraya paNa apAzrayarUpa
thaI paDe ! gaccha-gaNu Aphri paNa mULa te vyavasthA ( organisation) ane
sahakAra ( Co-ordination) khAtara karavAmAM Ave che, paNa te paNa jo mamatvanuM
sthAna thaI paDe, kadAgraheAnuM nivAsadhAma ane, kaleza-jhaghaDAnuM raNAMgaNu
anI jAya, ke vADArUpa sa'kucitatAnuM pradarzIna khane, te te paNa adhanarUpa
thaI paDe che! AtmAne vidhAtarUpa thaI paDe che ! sAdhana te badhana! " gacchanA
bheda bahu nayana nihALatAM, tattvanI vAta karatAM na lAje ! uttarabharaNAdi
nija kAma karatAM thakA; meha naDiA kalikAla rAje....dhAra."-zrI Ana'daghanajI
zAstra teA kevaLa AtmAthe paThana-pAna mATe ne sAnika upayAga mATe kahyA che.
tene badale koi peAtAneA mAlIkI hakka karI kajUsanI jema tenA saMgraha-sa caya
kare, ne temAM potAnuM mamatva sthApe te apakaraNurUpa thai paDe che. athavA huM
kevA paDita chuM, huM kevu' sarasa vyAkhyAna karI zakuM chuM, huM kevA vaktA
chuM, ema abhimAna dharI zAstrane mAnArthe upayAga karavAmAM Ave, te te jIvane
pratiSadharUpa thai paDe che. athavA zAstrane graharUpa khaMDana-maDanAthe ke
khATA vAdavivAda mATe upayAga karavAmAM Ave te te paNa

Page #297 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Baladashti: Serving the Means with the Soul  (231) The meaning of bondage is
this: Just as worldly possessions like wife, children, etc., are the world for
the foolish, so too, for the ignorant and spiritually unrefined, "scriptural
world" is their bondage!  Similarly, even the most excellent means like Yama,
Niyama, Samyama, Tyaga, Vairagya, etc., become bondage if they are performed
with attachment, or if they are performed forgetting the desired goal, or if the
means are considered the goal itself. Shri Ratnakarpachisi says:  "Vaishachar
Pavashyanaach, Dharmopadeisho Sansanay. Vaaday Vidyaadhyayanam Cha Me'bhoot,
Kiyad Bruve Hasya Karam Swamiish."  Knowing this, the seeker of liberation
(Mumukshu) uses these instruments as instruments. He serves these means as means
and does not create attachment or desire-restriction, thus not making them
bondage. Because he serves Yama, Niyama, Samyama, Tyaga, Vairagya, Bhakti, Japa,
Tapa, Vrata, Shastra, etc., all these extremely beneficial means, only as means,
with the soul. He constantly keeps the goal of pure self-realization in mind.
Just as the arrow of the archer aiming at Radha is focused on the target (the
idol of Radha), similarly, the seeker of liberation constantly focuses on the
ultimate goal of pure soul (Atma). Because of this, he does not experience any
obstacles in the means, and desire-restriction does not hinder him.  Similarly,
this seeker of liberation avoids all means, abandons all sinful actions, and
does not engage in prohibited conduct. Therefore, he diligently practices the
eighteen stages of non-violence (Ahimsa). This also ensures that he does not
face any obstacles in his spiritual practice, and he remains free from desire-
restriction. Nothing hinders him. He practices his spiritual path with purity
and without any distractions.  And this obstacle-free spiritual practice bears
the fruit of great joy. Therefore, this pure and obstacle-free spiritual
practice brings about the attainment of Amudaya-Punyadaya (liberation from the
cycle of birth and death) and the achievement of liberation (Moksha) for the
seeker. This great joy is his reward!  "Obstacles are not present here, in the
pursuit of Dharma; by avoiding misconduct, one attains great joy. Oh Jinendra!
Wealth." - Shri Ye Das Rupa  "Putradaraadisansaraha Punsam Samoodhachetasam.
Viguna Ratraha Sonahiitamanaam" - Bindu

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 balAdaSTi : AtmAthe ja sAdhana sevana (231) baMdhanane artha thAya che. mUDhaja
janono jema strI-putrAdi saMsAra che, tema sadgarahita-adhyAtmarahita vidvAnone
paNa "zAstra-saMsAra" che ! te ja prakAre yama, niyama, saMyama, tyAga, vairAgya
vagere atyaMtara sAdhane paNa je karaMjanAthe karavAmAM AvatA hoya, athavA ISTa
sAdhya lakSyane bhUlI jaI sAdhananI khAtara sAdhana karavAmAM AvatA hoya, athavA
sAdhanane sAdhya mAnI sevavAmAM AvatA hoya, te te paNa baMdhanarUpa bane che.
zrI ratnAkarapacIzImAM kahyuM che ke - "vaizAcara pavaSyanAca, dharmopadezo
sanasanAya . vAdAya vidyAdhyayanaM ca me'bhUt, kiyad bruve hAsyakaraM svamIza
// " Ama jANate heI A mumukSu puruSa te te upakaraNone upakaraNarUpe ArAdhe che.
te te sAdhanene sAdhanarUpe seve che ane temAM mamatvarUpa IcchA-pratibaMdha
karI tene baMdhana banAvate nathI; kAraNa ke te yama, niyama, saMyama, tyAga,
vairAgya, bhakti AtmAthe ja japa, tapa, vrata, zAstra Adi AtyaMtara upakArI
sAdhanane paNa kevaLa sAdhana sevana AtmAthe ja seve che, zuddha Atmasiddhine
satata nizcaya lakSya rAkhI ArAdhe che. jema rAdhAvedha sAdhanArA bANAvaLIne
lakSa rAdhAnI (pUtaLInI) kIkI para ja hoya che, tema A AtmAthI mumukSu puruSane
niraMtara lakSa zuddha AtmArUpa paramArtha para ja hoya che; Ama hovAthI ene
upakaraNa viSayamAM kaI paNa vighAta upajatuM nathI, IcchA pratibaMdharUpa vikta
naDatuM nathI. tema ja A mumukSu puruSa sAvadhane parihAra kare che, sarva
pApakarmane tyAga kare che, niSiddha AcaraNa karatuM nathI. eTale te aDhAra
pApasthAnaka prayatnapUrvaka vaje che. AthI karIne paNa tene yogasAdhanamAM
avighAta hoya che, IcchA pratibaMdha rahitapaNuM hoya che. koI paNa viddha
naDatuM nathI. te nirveinapaNe, nirAkulapaNe gasAdhanA karyA kare che. ane A
gasAdhanano avighAta mahedayarUpa phaLavALe che. eTale A nivina cagasAdhanathI
mumukSune mATe amyudaya-puNyadaya prApta thAya che, temaja niHzreyasU-mokSanI
siddhi sAMpaDe che. A mahadayavALe suyaza tene maLe che ! "vighana IhAM prAye
nahI jI, dharma hetumAM keya; anAcAra parihArathI cha, suyaza mahodaya hAya..re
jinajI! dhana"--zrI ye dasa rU-pa "putradArAdisaMsAraH puMsAM saMmUDhacetasAm  /
viguNa rAtraH sonAhitAmanAm - biMdu

Page #298 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(232) The Essence of Alaashti Here, the vision is firm like a blazing fire, and
the third limb of the yag, the asana, is attained. Due to the absence of false
desires, there is a state of blissful ease everywhere. There is a continuous
flow of uninterrupted movement, and due to the absence of obstacles, all actions
are performed with dedication. The third virtue, called Shushrusha, is attained
here. This young, happy man has a desire to hear divine music, as intense as the
desire for water in a parched land. This Shushrusha is like a stream of wisdom,
flowing like a river. Without it, listening is like digging a well in a barren
land - futile. Even if listening doesn't happen, the influence of this
Shushrusha brings about a good result through the body, which becomes the cause
of excellent wisdom. The Collection of Yag Here, the third mental flaw, called
Kshepa, is abandoned. Therefore, there is no accusation related to the fourfold
path, and there is skill and expertise in the remedy for the fourfold path.
Also, there are no obstacles in the matter of equipment, and due to the
abandonment of sin, there is a great, unobstructed state. The table of clear
vision - Yaganga Abandonment of Dhasha Abandonment of Kshepa Dosha Ignorance
regarding equipment Vision Firm like a blazing fire Asana Blissful ease due to
the absence of desires Continuous flow of uninterrupted movement Attainment of
virtue Shushrusha. Like a stream of wisdom. As intense as a young, happy man.
Skill in the remedy for the fourfold path Yagvrushti Kalash Kavya 1: Bhujangi:
In clear vision, like a blazing fire, in the clear land, the appropriate conduct
is believed; the essence of true Shushrusha is embraced, the yagi never
experiences accusation in the fourfold path. 46. Abandoning the study of the
body, which is without beginning, one joins the study of the self; the yagi
remains in a state of blissful ease, immersed in the twenty-four principles. 47.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (232) alASTinA sAra ahI darzIna dRDha-kAi agnikaNa jevuM hAya che, ane yAganuM
trIjuM aMga Asana prApta thAya che. asat tRSNAnA abhAvathI sarvatra sukhAsana ja
heAya che. atyarApUrvaka satra gamana hoya che, ane apAyaparihArathI sa kRtya
praNidhAnayukta heAya che. zuzrUSA nAmanA trIjo guNa ahIM prApta thAya che. A
yuvAna sukhI puruSanI divya gAna zravaNecchA jevI tIvra heAya che. A zuzruSA
medha jalapratrAhanI saravANI jevI che, e vinAnuM zravaNa saravANI vinAnI
bhUmimAM kUvA khAdavA jevuM-phAgata che. zravaNa na thAya tepaNu A zuzraSAnA
prabhAve zubha bhAvathI kAyarUpa phala thAya che,-je uttama bedhanuM kAraNa
thAya che. yAga simuccaya kSepa nAmanA trIjA cittadoSane ahI tyAga hAya che.
eTale ceAga saMbadhI akSepa hAya che, ane te cega upAyanuM kauzala-kuzalapaNu'
heAya che. temaja upakaraNa viSayamAM ghaNuM karI keAI vighna ahIM naDatuM
nathI, ane pApakanA parityAgathI maheAdayavaMta avighna hAya che. khalA dRSTinuM
koSTaka-- yAgAMga DhASatyAga kSepa doSa tyAga. upakaraNa viSaye avidya. darzana
dRDha-kApha agni sama Asana tRSNA abhAve satra sukhAsana. atarApUrNAMka sava'
gamana-nRtya. guNaprApti zubhraSA. medha pravAha saravANI samI. taruNu sukhI
jevI tI. cega upAya kauzala, yAgavRSTi kaLaza kAvya 1: bhUjaMgI :-- khalA
dRSTimAM kASTha agni samANuM, khalI dezane yukta beSatva mAnuM; parA zuzruSA
tattva kerI dharAve, na ceAge kadI yAgIne kSepa thAye. 46. anAdi taNA deha
adhyAsa cheADI, nijAdhyAsamAM te abhyAsa joDI; sukhAsanamAM sthiti yAgI kare
che, parAna4mAM magnatA te dhare che. 47.

Page #299 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Balaadristi: Kalash Kavya  **(233)** By nature, in this vision, there is no
craving, no falsehood, no where.  It resides in the state of happiness,
everywhere, therefore, it plays in the comfort of the soul with happiness. 48.
Wherever you go or whatever you do, be quick, without any obstacles, with a
steady mind;  holding the vow, always being self-contented, do not let any flaw
enter this vision. 49.  Happy, beautiful, youthful, like the sound of Gandharva
singing; here, the thirst for the truth is like that, like a thirsty person
desires water. 50.  Who am I? From where did I come? In what true form, oh! have
I remained? What are all these relationships that bind me?  The great thirst for
the truth. 51.  Here, compare it to the vein of water, this praise of the true
thirst for the truth; without the thirst for the truth, all that is heard is in
vain, like digging a well in barren land.  52.  Even though the knowledge is
heard, the true thirst for the truth, if it is weak in the mind due to the
feeling of attachment, it will diminish, but the purpose of the knowledge will
be achieved. 53.  The beginning of the attachment, the steady mind, sometimes
the attachment, sometimes the detachment; the best remedy for the poison, the
skill is shown here.  Sometimes, do not hold on to the means, do not make the
means your bondage; always run away from sin, like a river flows towards the
ocean.  **Traatak:**  The firm vision, the steady posture, resides; the thirst
for the ultimate truth, it yearns;  without interruption, the auspicious light
shines, the joy of the mind, the progress, it rejoices.  **This is the third
Balaadristi, from the Sri Yogadristi Samuccaya Shakha, explained in detail with
the commentary called "Sumanaanandani Brihattika", written by Bhagavanadas, the
son of Kiratchandra, the disciple of the great sage Haribhadracharya.**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 balAdaSTi: kaLaza kAvya (233) svabhAve karIne ja A daSTimAMhI, na tRSNA asatu
gIne hAya kyAMhI, sukhAsaMnamAM sthita sarvatra tethI, rame Atma ArAmamAM te
sukhethI. 48. game tyAM jatAM ke game te karatAM, tvarA nA nirAkula yegI
dharaMtA; praNidhAna dhArI sadA AtmarAmI, na gha AvavA daSTimAM kAMI khAmI. 49.
sukhI kAMta kAMtA yuta ke yuvAna, cahe sUNavA jema gaMdharva gAna; ahIM zuzruSA
tattvanI tema dhAre, pipAsu cahe pANIne je prakAre. 50. huM chuM keNu? kayAMthI
vaLI huM thayo chuM? kharA kayA svarUpe ahe! huM rahyo chuM? mane bAMdhatA A
saMbadhe badhA zA? mahA sUNavA tatva evA pipAsA. 51. ahIM bedha pANInI sirA
samANI, kharI zuzruSA tattvanI A vakhANI, vinA zuzruSA sAMbhaLyuM sau vRthA ja,
asirA bhUmAM kUpa khodyo yathA ja. para. kadI zrutane joga ne chatAM ye, khare
zuzraSA bhAva je cittamAM ruDA bhAvathI kama te kSINa thAye, paraM bodhane hetu
jethI ja pAya. 53. ruDA vega AraMbha-atra yegI, kadI kSepane bhega ne abhegI;
sugo taNuM zreSTha upAyamAMhi, sukauzalya te dAkhave che ja AMhI. kadI sAdhane
mUchanA nA dharAve, na te baMdhano sAdhanene banAve; sadA pApathI bhAgate te
phare che, mane nadI bhAdane vare che. : trATaka : daDha darzana Asana sthira
vase, ati tatva taNa zravaNe talase; avikSepapaNe zubha ga lase, mananaMdana
abhyadaye ulase,  //  iti maharSizrIharibhadrAcAryaviracite
kiratcaMdrasUnumanaHsukhanaMdanena bhagavAnadAsena
sumanAnaMdanIbRhatTIkAnAmakavivecanena saprapaJcaM vivecite
zrIyogadRSTisamuccayazAkhe tRtIyA balAdRSTiH  //

Page #300 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Deepra-drishti  Bala has spoken. Now Deepa speaks.  **"Praanayamavati Deepa
na Yogotthaanavatyalam. Tattvasravansamyukta Sukshmabodhavivarjita."** (57)
**"Praanayama in Deepra-drishti, not the upliftment of Yoga; it is accompanied
by the hearing of the truth, but devoid of subtle knowledge."** (57)
**Commentary:**  "From the perspective of Yoga, there is no upliftment in
Deepra-drishti. Praanayama is only in the sense of the light of knowledge...  Oh
Jinendra! Your words are sweet." - (G 60, Sakjaya K-1)  This is the fourth
chagad-drishti named Deepa. Therefore, the fourth limb of Yoga - Praanayama - is
present here, according to the previous sequence. The fourth intention of
upliftment is abandoned, and the fourth quality of hearing is manifested.
However, the vision is still devoid of subtle knowledge and is compared to the
light of a lamp. It is like this:  **"Vritti-Praanayamavati-Praanayamavati,
Praanayamawali Chaturthi Anga na Bhaavathi, Bhaav Rechak Aadi Bhaavathiki,
Teeka-Deeka, Chethi Drishti, Shaalaathaanavati-Chaag na Utthaanavali Nathi Hoti,
Tatha Prakaarna na Prashaantavaahita na Laabhathi, Sha-Atyant, Saraakravaran
Tarvasravana thi Samyukta - Shashrashana Kul Sravana thi Samyukta, Shushana
Falbhaavathi. Suavivarjita - Sukshma Bedha thi Vivarjita, Sukshma - Nipuna Bedha
thi Rahith Aavi."**  **"Praanayamavati - possessing Praanayama, the fourth limb,
in the sense of - the sense of Rechak, etc., Teeka-Deeka - the fourth vision,
Shaalaathaanavati - not possessing the upliftment of the Chaag, Tatha - thus, by
the benefit of the tranquil flow of the mind, Sha - extremely, Saraakravaran
Tarvasravana thi Samyukta - united with the hearing of the essence, Shashrashana
Kul Sravana thi Samyukta - united with the hearing of the whole, Shushana
Falbhaavathi - by the fruit of the essence. Suavivarjita - devoid of subtle
knowledge, Sukshma - Nipuna Bedha thi Rahith Aavi - devoid of skillful
knowledge."**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dIprAdeSTi balA kahI. have dIpA kahe che. prANAyAmavatI dIpA na
yogotthAnavatyalam  /  tattvazravaNasaMyuktA sUkSmabodhavivarjitA  //  57  //
prANAyAma dIprAmahI, na yoganuM utthAna; zravaNa tattvanuM hoya paNa, na sUkSma
bedhasthAna, 57, athaDa-dIprA daSTimAM prANAyAma hoya che, yoganuM utthAna
sarvathA hotuM nathI; ane te tattvazravaNathI sahita, paNa sUkSma bedhathI
rahita evI hoya che. vivecana "yogadaSTi thI kahIjI, dIprA tihAM na utthAna
prANAyAma te bhAvathIjI, dIpa prabhA sama jJAna..... mamehana jinajI ! mIThI
tArI vANu"--ga0 60 sakjhAya ka-1 A dIpA nAmanI cothI cagadaSTi che. eTale AgaLa
kahelA anukrame yoganuM cothuM aMga-prANAyAma ahI hoya che, utthAna nAmanA cethA
AzayadeSane parityAga thAya che, ane zravaNa nAmane cothe guNa pragaTe che,
paraMtu darzana te haju paNa sUma baMdha vinAnuM hoya che, ane tene dIpakanA
prakAzanI upamA ghaTe che. te A prakAre - vRtti-prANAyAmavatI-prANAyAmavaMtI,
prANAyAmavALI caturthI aMganA bhAvathI,-bhAva recaka Adi bhAvathakI, tIkA-dIkA,
cethI dRSTi, zALAthAnavatI-cAganA utthAnavALI nathI hotI,-tathA prakAranA
prazAMtavAhitAnA lAbhathI, zA-atyaMta, sarAkravaraM taravazravaNathI saMyukta
-zazraSAnA kula zravaNuthI saMyukta,-zuSAnA phalabhAvathI. sUAvivarjitA-sUkSma
bedhathI vivajita, sUkSma-nipuNa bedhathI rahita evI,

Page #301 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Deep-Vision: Knowledge Like a Lamp  **Deeper Vision:** This vision is
characterized by a gross, rather than subtle, understanding. Although it is more
stable and powerful than the previous three visions, it is still considered
gross compared to the stable, luminous vision. This is because the knowledge of
a lamp, while stronger and more stable than the fire of grass, wood, or fuel, is
still weaker and less luminous than the light of gems, stars, etc. Similarly,
this Deep-Vision is stronger and more stable than the knowledge of friends,
etc., but weaker and less stable than the stable vision.  Just as objects within
the circle of light emanating from a lamp are illuminated, but distant, subtle
objects outside the circle remain unseen, so too, in this vision, gross objects
are perceived, but subtle, distant, and hidden objects remain unseen. Like the
oil that fuels a lamp, this vision is limited by its own capacity. It shines as
long as the fuel lasts, but once the fuel is exhausted, it extinguishes. Just as
a lamp can be extinguished by a gust of wind or become unstable, this vision can
also be extinguished or become unstable due to external influences. In many
ways, the limitations of this vision are comparable to those of a lamp.  Here,
as per the previously mentioned characteristics of "vision," there is a constant
adherence to right faith, which gradually eliminates wrong actions and brings
one closer to right actions.  **Pranayama:** Here, the focus is on the spiritual
aspect of Pranayama. The external, physical aspect of Pranayama, which involves
controlling the breath, is not the primary focus here. This is because such
physical practices, being merely a form of bodily purification, can only lead to
mental restlessness and hinder the practice of true Pranayama.  There are three
types of external Pranayama: (1) Exhaling the breath, known as **Rechaka**
Pranayama. (2) Inhaling the breath, known as **Pooraka** Pranayama. (3) Holding
the breath still, like water in a vessel, known as **Kumbhaka** Pranayama.
**Note:** The text refers to a source for further information on Pranayama.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dImadaSTi : dIpakabhA sama jJAna" dravya-bhAva prANAyAma darzana-A dRSTimAM
darzana-baMdha sthUla prakArano hoya che, sUkSama-nipuNa hete nathI. jo ke AgalI
traNa daSTi karatAM vadhAre sthitivALe ne vadhAre sAmarthyavALa hoI, tene
dIpakane prakAzanI upamA ApavAmAM AvI che, te paNa sthira Adi dIpaprabhA daSTinI
apekSAe A bedhanuM haju zUlapaNuM che. kAraNa ke dIpakane prakAza sama jJAna
tRNa-gamaya-kASTanA agni karatAM anekagaNe baLavAn ne vadhAre sthitivALa hoya
che, paNa ratna-tArA vagerenI apekSAe ghaNe a5vIrya ne maMda che; tema A
dIprAdaSTine bodha-prakAza mitrA Adi karatAM vadhAre baLavAna ne vadhAre
sthitivALe hoya che, paNa sthira Adi karatAM maMda ne alpa sthitivALA hoya che.
dIpakanA sAnidhyamAM tenA prakAza-vartulamAM AvatA padArthonuM digadarzana thAya
che, paNa tenI bahAramAM dUravatI sUkSama vyavahita padArthonuM darzana thatuM
nathI, tema kSapazamarUpa telanA pramANamAM A daSTimAM padArthane skUla baMdha
thAya che, paNa dUra vartatA sUkSma aMtarita padArthanuM darzana thatuM nathI.
di tela hoya tyAM sudhI prakAze che, tela khUTI gaye olavAI jAya che, tema A
dRSTine bedha tathArUpa zopazama hoya tyAM sudhI prakAze che, pachI prakAza
nathI-olavAI jAya che. dIva vAyarAnA sapATAthI olavAya che, athavA asthira thAya
che, tema A dRSTine bodha paNa tathA prakAranA bAhA nimittarUpa vAyunA sapATAthI
olavAI javAne-paDI javAno bhaya rahe. che, athavA asthira-caMcala thavAno
saMbhava rahe che, ItyAdi aneka prakAre A daSTinA baMdhane dIpakanI upamA
barAbara ghaTe che. atre "daSTi"nA agAu kahelA lakSaNa pramANe
satazraddhAsaMgata badha hoya che, tethI karIne asat pravRttine vyAghAta thatuM
jAya che, ne saMtupravRttipada nikaTa AvatuM jAya che. - prANAyAma - bAhya bhAva
recaka IhAMjI, pUraka aMtara bhAva; kuMbhaka thiratA guNe karIjI, prANAyAma
svabhAva, mana"--zrI 0 60 sajajhAya ka-2 atre mukhyapaNe AdhyAtmika
bhAvaprANAyAmane nirdeza che. paNa prANAyAma nAmane zvAsanA dhanarUpa je bAhya e
haThagane prakAra che, te atre mukhyapaNe prastuta nathI, kAraNa ke te te
kAyakalezarUpa mAtra hAI cittacaMcalatAnuM kAraNa thavAne dravya prANAyAma
saMbhava che. A bAhya prANAyAmanA traNa prakAra che: (1) zvAsane bahAra kADha.
te recaka* prANAyAma che. (2) zvAsane aMdara pUra, te pUraka prANAyAma che. (3)
zvAsane kuMbhamAM jalanI jema nizcalapaNe thaMbhI rAkhave, te kuMbhaka prANAyAma
che. * " recakaH syAdvahirvRttirantirvRttizca pUrakaH  /  kuMbhakaH
staMbhavRttizca prANAyAmanidhetyayam  /  /  dhAraNAyogyatA tasmAt
prkaashaavrnnkssyH| anyairuktaH kaciccaitadyujyate yogytaanugm||" (AdhAra mATe
jue) yaza0 kRta dvA0 dvA

Page #302 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(23) The opinion of Patanjali and others in the Yoga Darshan is that, "Through
Pranayama, the veil of light is destroyed, and the mind becomes fit for
Dharana." That is, the veil of Klesha, which is the light of the mind, is
destroyed, and the mind, which is stabilized by Pranayama, is easily held in the
desired state. And what Patanjali and others have said is appropriate, as it is
seen in some special men, because Yogis have a lack of interest in small things.
Therefore, even in the Bhagavat Jinapravan, breathing and exhaling are
prohibited because they lead to distraction. Because, just as it is beneficial
to do activities that lead to Samadhi, so too is it not beneficial to exert too
much effort in the form of Pranayama. Otherwise, if we look at it from the
perspective of Bhava, then through the elimination of external Bhava, the
fulfillment of internal Bhava, and the stabilization of the definite meaning,
Bhava Pranayama is achieved. It is of this type: (1) Just as in the external
gross action of Pranayama, there is Bhava Pranayama in the action of exhaling,
so too in Bhava Pranayama, there is the action of exhaling, which is to
eliminate external Bhava and the influence of others. That is, the external
Bhava in the form of attachment to women, family, etc. is eliminated. (2) Just
as in external Pranayama, the action of inhaling is performed, so too in Bhava
Pranayama, the action of filling the internal Bhava within is performed. That
is, the internal Bhava in the form of Vivek, which arises from Shravana, is
filled. (3) Just as in Hatha Yoga Pranayama, after inhaling, the action of
Kumbhaka is performed, which is to hold the breath steady like water in a pot,
so too here in Bhava Pranayama, the action of Kumbhaka is performed, which is
the stability and location of the internal Bhava. That is, the stabilization of
the definite meaning is achieved. Thus, Bhava Pranayama is the nature of Atma
Bhava, and it is the limb of Yoga without any deviation. That is, external
Pranayama may or may not be a limb of Yoga, but this Bhava Pranayama is
definitely a limb of Yoga. Therefore, this spiritual Pranayama is the most
excellent and best Pranayama. _ " श्वासपश्वासयोर्गतिविच्छेदः प्राणायामः । स तु
बाह्याभ्यतरस्तंभवृत्तिर्देशकालसंख्याभिः परिदृष्टा दीर्घसूक्ष्मसंज्ञः ।
बाह्याभ्यंतरविषयापेक्षी चतुर्थः । ततः क्षीयते प्रकाशावरणम् । धारणासु च योग्यता
મનેર–પાતo o ૨, ૪- ૫૩. x" उस्सासं ण णिरंभह आभिग्गहीओवि किमु अचेठा। પણ મf fથે
મુમુકાયું જ નયા —શ્રી જિનભદ્રગણુ ક્ષમાશ્રમણજી, + “ના[હિમાવાના મનમવચ પૂરતા
ઝુમનાનિશ્ચિતાર્થચ પ્રાણાયામ માવતઃ ”—શ્રી યશોવિકૃત દ્વા દ્વા

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (23) yogadaSTisamucaya pataMjali Adine abhiprAya che ke-"prANAyAmathI prakAzanA
AvaraNane kSaya thAya che, ane dhAraNamAM mananI yogyatA thAya che." eTale ke
cittasavagata prakAzanuM je kalezarUpa AvaraNa che tene kSaya thAya che, ane
prANAyAmathI sthira karAyeluM citta sukhe karIne niyata dezamAM dhArI rakhAya
che. ane A je pataMjali Adie kahyuM che te kavacita puruSavizeSamAM gyatA
pramANe yukta che, kAraNa ke yegIonuM nAnArucipaNuM che, tethI.x paNa bhagavat
jinapravacanamAM te zvAsocchavAsane dha vyAkulatAne hetu thaI paDe che mATe
niSiddha ja che, kAraNa ke jema gasamAdhAna thAya ema ja pravRtti karavI
zreyaskara che ane prANadharUpa mathAmaNunuM bahu jhAjhuM prayajana paNa nathI.
bAkI bhAvathI joIe te bAhA bhAvenA recanathI, aMtabhAvanA pUraNathI, ne nizcita
arthanA kuMbhanathI paramArtharUpa bhAva prANAyAma + thAya che. te A prakAre:
(1) jema prANA yAmanI bAhya sthUla kriyAmAM zvAsane bahAra kADhavArUpa recaka
kriyA karavAmAM bhAva prANAyAma Ave che, tema A bhAva prANAyAmamAM bAhyabhAva-
parabhAvane bahAra kADhavA rUpa-reca devArUpa recaka kriyA karavAmAM Ave che.
eTale strI-kuTuMba AdinA mamatvarUpa bAhya bhAvane kADhI nAMkhavAmAM Ave che.
(2) jema bAhya prANAyAmamAM zvAsa aMdara bharavArUpa pUraka kriyA karavAmAM Ave
che, tema bhAva prANAyAmamAM aMtarAtmabhAva aMtaramAM bharavArUpa pUraka kriyA
karAya che. eTale ke zravaNathI upajelA vivekarUpa aMtarbhAva bharAya che. (3)
jema haThayogika prANAyAmamAM zvAsane aMdara bharyA pachI tene kuMbhamAM jalanI
jema sthira karavArUpa-thaMbhAvI rAkhavArUpa kuMbhaka kriyA karAya che, tema
atre bhAva prANAyAmamAM aMtarbhAvanI sthiratArUpa-sthanarUpa kuMbhaka kriyA
karavAmAM Ave che. eTale nizcita arthanuM kuMbhana-sthirIkaraNa thAya che. Ama
bhAva prANAyAma te AtmabhAvarUpa svabhAva che, ane e ja avyabhicArathI yeganuM
aMga che. arthAt bAhya prANAyAma eganuM aMga thAya ke na paNa thAya, paNa A
bhAva prANAyAma te cakkasa yoganuM aMga che ja. mATe A AdhyAtmika prANAyAma e ja
utkRSTa zreSTha prANAyAma che. _ " zvAsapazvAsayorgativicchedaH prANAyAmaH  /
sa tu bAhyAbhyatarastaMbhavRttirdezakAlasaMkhyAbhiH paridRSTA
dIrghasUkSmasaMjJaH  /  bAhyAbhyaMtaraviSayApekSI caturthaH  /  tataH kSIyate
prakAzAvaraNam  /  dhAraNAsu ca yogyatA manera-pAtao o 2, 4- 53. x" ussAsaM Na
NiraMbhaha AbhiggahIovi kimu acetthaa| paNa maf fthe mumukAyuM ja nayA --zrI
jinabhadragaNu kSamAzramaNajI, + "nA[himAvAnA manamavaca pUratA
jhumanAnizcitArthaca prANAyAma mAvataH "--zrI yazovikRta dvA dvA

Page #303 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Deepramadristi: Chag's Anutthan, Tantrvaan  66 : Abandon the inner Ahitram,
become the Atma, be steadfast; The Paramatma is the Atma, feel the Atma,
dedicate yourself to the Atma." - Shri Anandghanji Shuddha Dev, while singing
the Avlakhan Bhajan, he forgets the Parbhaav. "Inner Atar, attain Atmataa, be
present, the Parparinat is Nirrid," - Shri Devchandraji.  **Anusthan**  Chag's
Utthan - rising up, does not happen here, because there is a state of
Shantavaahita, that is, there is a flow of peaceful Rasa, such that the Chitt
does not rise from the Chag. Just as a calm river flows continuously and
peacefully, without any waves, similarly, here, the flow of the peaceful Rasa of
the Chagritha flows continuously, without any waves of Utthan. Because the
Kshep, a type of Dosha, was eliminated in the previous Dristi, therefore, there
is no disturbance in the Chitt in any way. Therefore, peaceful Rasa flows in the
Chitt, and the Chag does not rise from its place. The Chitt remains absorbed in
the initiated Chagkriya. Thus, Anusthan decreases. But if this Shantavaahita -
calmness, is not present, then Utthan occurs in the Chag, that is, the mind
rises from the Prabdh Chagkriya, it becomes uplifted, it is produced, the Chitt
does not remain absorbed - it does not become steady. However, even in such a
state of Unman, the Chagkriya, which is worthy of being abandoned, is not
abandoned. For example, someone has taken Diksha, and they are completely
incapable of following it, their mind has risen from it, in such a case, it is
better to abandon that Diksha and take the Shravak's Lig. However, due to fear
of Lenida, etc., they do not abandon the Muni Lig. This is an example of the
Utthan Dosha. Such Utthan Dosha is eliminated here.  **(237)**  Shantavaahita
Vishnu is now present, the Chag that has Utthan; Abandon the Chag, because of
that, the Dhyan that is not abandoned... Prabhu - Sa 20 Ga Stdha - 10  In the
previous Dristi, the Guna of Shrausha - the desire to listen, has manifested,
therefore, naturally, in sequence, the Shravan of the Tattva is present here. As
mentioned earlier, Shushrusha, without the desire to listen - without the inner
Jijnaasa, is in vain. It is important to keep this in mind. Shushrusha without
Shravan may be beneficial, but Shravan without Shushrusha is not beneficial.
Therefore, Shravan with the pursuit of Shushrusha - with Anusthan, is
beneficial. And this Shravan is not just the sound hitting the Karnendriya and
listening; but the acceptance of the sound through the Antahkarnendriya, from
the Antaratma, the acceptance of the Bhaav, that is called Shravan. Thus, this
Jiva, with deceit...  **Tattvashravan**  * If you do not fear, embrace the
Moolguna, embrace the Uttarguna. Mastul Totti, the earth, is like a Musant. -
Shri Upadeshmala.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dIpramAdaSTi : ceganuM anutthAna, tantrAvaNa 66 H ahitarAma taja aMtara,
AtamarUpa thaI thira bhAva; paramAtamanuM hai| Atama bhAvavuM, Atama arapaNu
dAva."--zrI AnaMdaghanajI zuddha deva avalakhana bhajatAM, paraharIe parabhAva.
"aMtara atara AtamatA lahI hAjI, parapariNati nirIDa, "--zrIdevaca'drajI * ??
anusthAna cAganu utthAna-UThI javuM te atra thatuM nathI, kAraNa ke tevA
prakAranI prazAMtavAhitA hAya che, eTale ke evA prakAranA prazAMta rasanA
pravAha pravahe che ke ceAgamAMthI citta URtu' nathI. jema zAMta saritAne
pravAha akhaMDa zAMtapaNe vahyA kare, temAM taraMga UThe nahi, tema atre
ceAgaritAnA zAMta rasane pravAha akhaMDapaNe vahyA kare che, temAM utthAnarUpa
taraMga UThatA nathI, kAraNa ke AgalI dRSTimAM kSepa nAmanA deSa TaLyo, eTale
koi paNa prakAre cittamAM vikSepa upajatA nathI, tethI cittamAM zAMtarasa
pravahe che, ane yAgane peAtAnA sthAnamAMthI UThavAnuM khanatuM nathI, ArabhelI
cegakriyAmAM ja citta cAMTayuM rahe che. Ama anusthAna ghaTe che. paNa AvI A
zAMtatrAhitA--TharelapaNuM na heAya, te yAgamAM utthAna thAya che, eTale ke
prArabdha cegakriyAmAMthI mana UThI jAya che, ucaka thAya che, uttpana thAya
che, citta cAMTatu nathI-TharatuM nathI. chatAM tevI unmana sthitimAM tyAgavA
yeAgya evI te cekriyA chaDAtI paNa nathI. jemake-keie dIkSA lIdhI hAya, ane te
pALavAne sarvathA asamartha hAi temAMthI tenuM mana UThI gayu' hAya, tevAne
tedIkSA cheADI zrAvakanu' li'ga dharavu vadhAre cAgya che, tathApi te lenidA Adi
bhayathI te munili`ga chAMDatA nathI. A utthAna doSanu udAharaNa che. AvA
utthAnadASa ahI TaLe che. * (237) zAMtavAhitA viSNu hAve re, je yAge utthAna re;
tyAga ceAga che tehathI re, aNuchaDAtuM dhyAna re....prabhu'--sA0 tra0 gA.
staDhA.-10 AgalI dRSTimAM zraSA-sAMbhaLavAnI icchAnA guNu pragaTayo che, eTale
tenA pachI svAbhAvika krame atra tattvanu' zravaNu ane che. AgaLamAM kahyuM
hatuM tema, zuzrUSA eTale sAMbhaLavAnI utkaMThA-atara`ga jijJAsA vinAnuM zravaNa
vRthA che, e khAsa lakSamAM rAkhavA yAgya che. kadApi zravaNa vinAnI zuzruSA
kalyANakArI thAya, paNa zuzruSA vinAnuM zravaNa kalyANakArI thatuM nathI. mATe
zubhraSAnA anuvedhavALu -anusa dhAnavALu zravaNuM ja upakArI thAya che. ane A
zravaNa eTale karNendriya para zabdAnu athaDAvu' ne sAMbhaLavu' ema nathI;
paraMtu aMtarAtmAthI a'taHkarNendriyadvArA zabdanu agrahaNu-bhAvagrahaNa
karavuM, tenuM nAma zravaNa che. ema te A jIve kapaTa tattvazravaNa * jai na
tarasi dhAreu mUlaguNabharaM uttaraguNabharaM ca  /  mastULa totti bhUmi musAnta
karatA ||"--zrI upadezamAlA,

Page #304 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(238) He has heard so many words about the collection of Gadasthi that his
eardrums have even become numb! Even then, he has not attained Brahmajnana!
Because he has not truly heard the essence, he has not heard with the inner
consciousness that understands the meaning and the feeling. Shri Akhabhakt has
said a profound word: "The ears have become numb from listening to the stories,
yet Brahmajnana has not come."  Bhavarechak Adi Guna says: "Dharma is greater
than life, there is no doubt about it. One abandons life for Dharma, but not
Dharma in the face of danger to life." (58) Meaning: This is the perspective,
Dharma is considered greater than life, without a doubt. One sacrifices life for
Dharma, but in the face of danger to life, one does not abandon Dharma.
Commentary: This perspective, Dharma is greater than life, even in the face of
danger to life, see! This is the essence of this perspective...mind... (2.20,
2.4.3)  A Yogi who lives with this perspective, undoubtedly feels that Dharma is
much greater than life. The greatness of Dharma shines brighter than life. In
the whole world, life is considered the most precious thing. The whole world is
working for the preservation of life, and everyone is ready to do anything to
protect it. But this Yogi feels that Dharma is more precious than even this most
precious life. That is why he does not hesitate to give up his life for Dharma,
and even when faced with danger to life, he does not abandon Dharma to save his
life. If he has to protect life or Dharma, his first choice is to protect
Dharma. He follows Dharma even at the cost of his life. For example:  "The
tradition of the Raghukul has always been, Life may go, but the word will not
go." - Shri Tulsidasji's Ramayana.  Meaning: Dharma is greater than life, even
greater than the senses and other animals. Guru-Dharma is the greatest, the most
important. This is the authoritative perspective, without a doubt. Why? Because
it says: "One abandons life for Dharma, but not Dharma in the face of danger to
life."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (238) gadaSTisamuccaya para athaDAvArUpa zabdazravaNa te eTaluM badhuM karyA
karyuM che ke tenA kAnanA paDadA paNa gUTI gayA che ! te paNa tene brahmajJAna
thayuM nathI ! kAraNa ke kharUM tattvazravaNa thayuM ja nathI, arthagrahaNa-
bhAvagrahaNarUpa aMtarAtmAthI zravaNa thayuM ja nathI. zrI akhAbhakta mArmika
vacana kahyuM che ke-kathA sUNI sUNI phUTayA kAna, teya na AvyuM brahmajJAna."
bhAvarecaka Adi guNa kahe che - prANebhyo'pi gurudharmaH satyAmasyAmasaMzayam  /
prANAMstyajati dharmArtha na dharma prANasaMkaTe  //  58  //  prANathIya moTo
gaNe, ni:saMzaya ahiM dharma; dharma artha prANa tyaje, prANasaMkaTa na dharma,
58, artha-A daSTi hatAM, prANa karatAM paNa dharmane niHsaMzaya guru-moTo mAne;
dharmane arthe prANa cheDe, paNa prANasaMkaTa AvI paDaye dharma na choDe.
vivecana dhama artha ahI prANane jI, De-paNa nahi dharma prANa athe saMkaTa paDe
che, juo ! e dRSTine marma..mana"--2 da0 sajhAya-4-3 A daSTimAM vartanAra yogIne
mana niHsaMzayapaNe prANa karatAM paNa dharma ghaNuM vadhAre meTo lAge che,
dharmanuM mAhAtma prANa karatAM paNa adhika bhAse che. AkhA jagatamAM hAlAmAM
vahAlI vastu prANu gaNAya che, te prANanI jALavaNI arthe prANuthIya samasta
jagat pravRtti karI rahyuM che, ne tenI rakSA mATe game te karavA dharma priya
te taiyAra rahe che. paNa A jogIjanane te AvA priyatama prANa karatAM paNa
dharma vadhAre priya bhAsyamAna thAya che. eTale ja te dharmanI khAtara prANa
paNa choDI devA paDe- chAvara karavA paDe, te te AMcake khAto nathI, ane
prANasaMkaTa AvI paDe, prANa javAne prasaMga AvI paDe, te paNa te prANa
bacAvavAnI khAtara dharmane cheDatuM nathI. prANanI ke dharmanI rakSA karavAnI
hoya, to tenI prathama pasaMdagI dharmarakSA para utare che, prANanA bhoge paNa
te dharmanuM paripAlana kare che. jemake - "raghukula rIti sadA calI AI, prAna
jAya aru bacana na jAI."--zrI tulasIdAsajIkRta rAmAyaNa. tRtti -Akhyoti-prANathI
paNa, Idriya Adi prANI karatAM paNa, guru-dharma guru, mahattara, vadhAre moTo
hoya, saranAmAma-A adhikRta daSTi-DIjhA hete sate, alaMkAyamU-asaMzayapaNe, A
kayAMthI ? te mATe kahyuM-kALAMtyAti dharmArtha--dharma athe praNe tyaje che
-taravarga pravRttivaDe karIne, (paNa) na dharma kAraMva-prANasaMkaTe dharma na
tyaje-tavautsaga pravRttivaDe karIne ja

Page #305 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Dīmādaṣṭi: "True battle is that of Dharma - Dharma for which one sacrifices
one's life. (239) He who is steadfast in this Dharma, he is truly dyed in the
color of Dharma - the color of madder. And this color of Dharma is the true
color, while all other colors are like the colors of a butterfly - a momentary
flash. "True battle is that of Dharma." The body may decay, rot, fall, and be
destroyed, but the color of Dharma never fades, rots, perishes, or is destroyed.
"What does Śrī Anantajina do... O friend, he is dyed in the color of madder. The
true color is that of Dharma... O master, other colors are like the colors of a
butterfly. The color of Dharma never fades... O master, the body perishes. The
gold does not vanish... O master, the form and design may go, but the copper
that is reddish... O friend, remains as it is, even if it is heated again... O
master, what is my love for you, O Lord?"- Śrī Yaśovijayajī  And the reason for
this true love for the color of Dharma-love for Dharma is that the supreme glory
of Dharma has taken root in their minds. For example: The wise one considers the
Cintāmaṇi (the wish-fulfilling gem) as dear as his own life, the poet speaks of
the Kalpavṛkṣa (the wish-fulfilling tree) out of love for the Pārāśamaṇi (the
philosopher's stone), the Sādhus (ascetics) speak of the ocean of nectar with
auspicious well-being; they follow the upliftment of the self with enthusiasm,
not out of duty or compulsion; says Rāyacandra the hero, "Knowing Dharma in this
way, they engage in the practice of Dharma with unwavering focus, without any
hesitation." - Śrīmad Rājacandrajī  Similarly, these aspirants (mumukṣus) know
that in this world, only the pure Dharma is always worthy of acceptance for the
sake of liberation - it should be embraced with reverence, because everything
else is the cause of suffering. In this world, everything is inherently
unpleasant, only Dharma is inherently pleasant. Therefore, O living being! where
else should the discerning ones place their faith, other than in Dharma? And
that Dharma is the one worshipped by the world, it is spotless, eternal, and
beneficial to others, and it is practiced by the virtuous and patient ones.
Therefore, faith should not be placed anywhere else other than in that Dharma.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dImAdaSTi : "sAce jaMga te dharmane -dharma athe prANa tyaje (239) A te
daDhadhamI hoya che, A daDha dharmara'ga-"cALa majIThane raMga -tene lAgele hoya
che. ane A dhamano raMga ja sAce raMga che, bAkI bIje badhe raMga pataMga samAna
che-cAra divasanI caTakI che. "sAce jaMga te dharmano'. deha bhale jIrNa thAya,
saDI jAya, paDI jAya, vidhvaMsa pAmI jAya, paNa dharmaraMga kadI jINuM thatuM
nathI, saData nathI, pote nathI, vidhvaMsa pAmate nathI. "zrI anaMtajina zuM
kare....sAhelaDIA, ceLa majIThane raMga reguNavelaDIA0 sAco raMga te
dharmane......sAheba bIje raMga pataMga reguNa0 dharma raMga jIraNa
nahiM....sAhebe deha charaNa thAya che...guNa0 sonuM te viNase nahiM....sAheba
ghATa ghaDAmaNa jAya reguNa0 trAMbuM je rasadhiyuM....sAheTa hoya te jAcuM hema
re....guNa0 pharI te trAMbuM navi huve...sAhebatima prabhu zuM muja prema
re...guNa"-zrI yazovijayajI ane A sAce dharmaraMga-dharmaprema lAgavAnuM kAraNa,
te dharmanuM parama mAhAsya tene mana vasyuM che te che. jemake cAtura cepathI
cAhI ciMtAmaNi citta gaNe, paMDite pramANe che pArasamaNi premathI kavi
kalyANakArI kalpataru kathe jene, sudhAne sAgara kathe sAdhu zubha kSemathI;
AtmanA uddhArane umaMgathI anusare che, nirmaLa thavAne kAje, na nIti nemathI;
vade rAyacaMda vIra, evuM dhamarUpa jANI, dharmavRtti dhyAna dhare, vilakho na
vemathI." -zrImad rAjacaMdrajI tema ja A mumukSu jogIjana jANe che ke-A
saMsArane viSe vizuddha dharma ja budhajanene mukti arthe sadA upAdeya che-
AdarathI grahaNa karavA egya che, kAraNa ke bIju badhuMya duHkhanuM kAraNa che.
A saMsAramAM badhuMya prakRtithI asuMdara che, dharmaja upAdeya svabhAvathI
asuMdara che. eTalA mATe atre dharma sivAya bIje kyAMya vivekIone AsthA dharavI
zuM yukta che? te he jIva! tuM kahe. ane te dharma te jagaduvaMgha che,
niSkalaMka che, sanAtana che, parArthane sAdhaka che, ane zIlavaMta dhIrajanee
te sevele che. mATe te dhama sivAya anyatra kyAMya AsthA karavI cuta nathI.'x x
" upAdeyazca saMsAre dharma eva sadA budhaiH  /  vizuddho muktaye sarva
yato'nyaduHkhakAraNam  //  prakRtyasuMdaraM hyevaM saMsAre sarvameva hi  /
ato'tra vada kiM yuktA kacidAsthA vivekinAm  /  /  muktvA dharma
jagadvaMdyamakalaGka sanAtanam  /  parArthasAdhakaM dhIraiH sevitaM zIlazAlibhiH
// " maharSi haribhadrAcAryajI praNIta zAstravArtAsamuccaya

Page #306 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(240) The greatness of this pure religion, which is supremely beneficial,
removes suffering and brings happiness, resides in the heart of the seeker.
Therefore, it is no surprise that this seeker would even sacrifice his life,
even be willing to die for this religion, and not turn back from the heat.
Because he considers this religion to be his very life, he considers himself
lost if this religion is lost, and he considers his life protected if this
religion is protected. He believes this with a pure heart. Therefore, by
accumulating and protecting this religion, which is like his life, he grows in
his devotion to it; and he sacrifices his life for it. In other words, he
dedicates his life to the noble activity of awakening the true self, of
achieving the realization of the self, which is the manifestation of the true
self; and if he faces a threat to his life, he continues to engage in this
activity of awakening the true self, continues to strive for self-realization,
and never abandons this religion. He is a steadfast follower of the religion.
Here, the author says:  "Only one friend follows even after death; everything
else perishes with the body." (59)  Meaning: Religion is the only true friend
that follows even after death. Everything else perishes with the body.
Commentary:  Religion is the only true friend because friendship is based on
companionship. A friend is one who does not abandon you in happiness or sorrow,
in prosperity or adversity, in good times or bad times, who remains in your
heart and does not abandon his love for you. If anyone deserves the name
"friend," it is religion. Because after death, only religion follows the one who
practices it, it goes after him, it remains with him forever.  Interpretation:
The author emphasizes that religion is the only true friend, unlike other
relationships that end with death. This is because religion provides a constant
source of guidance, support, and purpose, even in the face of death. The author
uses the term "friend" to highlight the intimate and enduring nature of the
relationship between a person and their religion.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (240) yogadRSTisamucca Ama parama kalyANakArI, du:khahAraka ne sukhakAraka, evA
nimala dharmanuM mAhAtmya tenA hRdayamAM vastu. heAvAthI, A mumukSu puruSa te
dharmAMnI khAtara peAtAnA prANane paNa bhAga ApI devA paDe, peAtAnA prANanI paNa
kuramAnI karavI paDe, tApaNu pAchuM vALIne jue nahi, emAM zuM navAi ? kAraNa ke
te dharmane ja pAtAnA bhAva-prANa jANe che, te dharma jo gayA te te peAtAne
suvele ja samaje che, te dhama jo rakSAyA tA peAtAnA prANa paNa rakSAye| ema te
kharA aMtaHkaraNathI mAne che. eTale AvA bhAvaprANurUpa dharmAMnA saMcaya karatA
rahI, sa`rakSaNa karatA rahI, te bhAva prANAyAmanI vRddhi karatA rahe che; ane
te dhane arthe prANa tyaje che. arthAt jema bane tema Atmatattvane utsaga thAya,
jema bane tema AtmatattvanA pragaTapaNArUpa kArya siddhi-tattvaniSpatti thAya
evI satpravRttimAM jIvana arpaNa kare che; ane tema karatAM kavacit prANasa'kaTa
AvI paDe, tApaNa te tattvautsaga pravRtti karatA ja rahI-Atmasiddhi sAdhatA ja
rahI kadI dharmAMne cheADatA nathI, evA te dRDhadharmAM hAya che. atra
pratimadhana kahe che-- eka eva suhRddha mRtamapyanuyAti yaH  /  zarIreNa samaM
nAzaM sarvamanyattu gacchati  //  59  //  eka ja suhRdU dharma je, suvA pAchaLe
jAya; anya sa tA dehanI, sAthe nAza ja thAya. 59, aH--dhama e eka ja suhRd-mitra
che, ke je marelAnI pAchaLa paNa jAya che. khAkI khIju` khadhuM te zarIranI
sAthe ja nAza pAmI jAya che. vivecana dharma ja eka sAcA-kharekhara mitra' che,
kAraNa ke je maitrI sahacegIpaNuM na eTale ke sahavAsacheDe te mitra kahevAya.
sukhamAM ke duHkhamAM, sa'pattimAM ke vipattimAM, sArI sthitimAM ke mAThI
sthitimAM je sAtha na cheDe, sadA peAtAnA hRdayarUpa rahI ' suhRd'bhAva na
tyaje, te kharekharA mitra athavA suhRd kahevAya che. evA mitra' zabdanA thAya
athamAM jo koI ne paNa 'mitra' nAma chAjatuM heAya te te dharmAMne ja che.
kAraNa mRtyu pAmyA pachI pazu eka dhama ja te dharma karanArane anusare che, enI
pAchaLa pAchaLa jAya che, sadA enA sa'gAthI rahe che. 6 vRtti v suddhameryuM--
eka ja suhu-mitra dhama' che, anya nathI, tenA lakSaNunA vegane lIdhe. tethI
kahyuM-mRtamadhyanuyAti ca:-je mRta-marelAnI pAchaLa paNa jAya che. zarIreLa
sama nAraoN- zarIranI sAthe nAza--ya, sarvamanyattu pati-bIjuM' 'ya-svajanahi tA
pAme che, dharma ja eka mitra

Page #307 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Dimadrushti:** "Love for Dharma is the true love, which remains wherever it
is. (241) All other so-called relatives are related to the body, and they perish
with the body. When the body perishes, the relationship also ends. Relatives
burn the dead body and return from the cremation ground, perform purification
rituals, mourn for a while, and then forget the name of the deceased! Not only
that, but sometimes they fight over the deceased's property, file lawsuits, and
make a big fuss over the deceased's name! They make a mockery of it! The learned
Shri Mansukh Bhai has vividly depicted this in his poignant words:  "O conscious
one! What do they do after you leave? You spent your entire life for them, but
they don't care whether you attain a good or bad destiny. They don't even think
about it. But after you leave, they scramble for your wealth; they grab it; they
create chaos in the distribution; some get less, some get more - this leads to
conflict. Some praise you, while others mock you. Thus, they behave selfishly
towards you after your death. Wives mourn for a long time, knowing that their
husband's happiness is gone, and they cling to his name. Men also remember your
name, calling you brother or son, and they remember you with long sighs; but
none of them think about your destiny. What destiny did you attain? What
happened to you? Are you happy or unhappy? O conscious one! They don't think
about any of this." (etc.) - Shri Mansukh Bhai Kiratchandra's Shant Sudharas,
Death Reformer, p. 46.  "You are dead, the world has drowned." - Saint Birji
Thus, everyone in the world engages in love and affection based on their own
self-interest, but all that love and affection is not true, it is illusory.
There is no value in this conditional love. True love and affection are
unconditional, free from self-interest and other attachments, and are purely
selfless and loving. "Everyone in the world engages in love and affection, but
it is not true love and affection; unconditional love and affection is true,
conditional love is like a lost treasure." - Shri Anandghanji  "The one who has
attained glory, whose brilliance has been extinguished by the fire of sorrow,
whose strength has been weakened by grief and hardship, whose body has been
weakened by sorrow, whose wealth has been taken away by relatives, whose family
has been destroyed, has been brought under their control." - Shri Vinay
Vijayji's Shant Sudharas.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dImAdaSTi : "dhamaprema e ja sAce prema che, je jyAMnI te tyAM rahI (ra41) bAkI
bIjA badhA kahevAtA svajana-saMbadhI te dehanA saMbaMdhI hoI, deha naSTa thatAM
tenI sAthe ja naSTa thAya che, dehaparyAya chUTI jatAM te te saMbaMdha paNa
chUTI jAya che. svajanAdi te mRtadehane bALI-jALI smazAnamAMthI pAchA vaLe che,
snAna-sUtaka karI, dA'De-pavADe karI, thoDo vakhata sAco-beTe svArthamaya kheda
karI, maranAranA nAmanI moTI pika mUkI pitAnA svArthane raDatA rahI, thaDA
vakhata pachI maranAranA nAmane paNa visarI jAya che ! are ! eTaluM ja nahi,
paNa keTalIka vAra te maranAranA nAme, maranAranI milakata mATe aneka prakAranA
jhaghaDA kare che, korTa-kajI A UbhA kare che, ne maranAra pAchaLa bhavADA karI
tenA nAmane jagabatrIzIe caDhAve che! phajetI kare che ! sAkSaravarya zrI sva.
manasukhabhAIe vedhaka zabdomAM A aMge AbehUba citAra khaDe karyo che ke cetana
! tArA javA pachI e zuM kare che? tuM je teone mATe Akho bhava dhULa ghAlI
ravyo, kho, tenuM te game te thAo; sArI gati thAo ke mAThI gati thAo, tene te
teone vicAra paNa nathI. paNa ulaTA tArA javA pachI tArAM dravyanI bhAMgapheDa
kare che; te heMcI le che; te vaheMcaNImAM tephAna kare che; keI ne ochuM maLe
che, keI ne vadhAre maLe che,-AthI virodha thAya che. koI tane jaza Ape che, ke
tArAthI ceDAM kADhe che. Ama pachavADe tArA prati vItaka thAya che, vIte che.
pitAnuM sukha gayuM jANI strIo lAMbA kALa sudhI raDApITa kare che, tArA nAmane
cheDe tANe che. puruSe paNa tArA saMbaMdharUpa nAma yAda karI, keI bhAI kahI,
keI beTA kahI, tane lAMbA sAde yAda kare che; paNa kaI ema nathI vicAratuM ke
tArI zI gati thaI? tuM kaI gatimAM paDyo? tAruM zuM thayuM? tuM sukhI che ke
duHkhI ? ene cetana! kaI vicAra karatuM nathI. " (ItyAdi )*-zrI manasukhabhAI
kiratacaMdrakRta zAMtasudhArasa vivecana, mRtyu sudhAraka bedha, pR. 46. Apa muA
pI che, DUba gaI dunIyA."-saMta bIrajI Ama potapotAnA svArthane AzrayIne
jagatamAM sarva kaI prIta-sagAI kare che, paNa te badhI prIta-sagAI sAcI nathI-
TI che, mAyAjAlarUpa che, e sopAdhika prItamAM kAMI mAla nathI-kAMI kiMmata
nathI. kharI prIta-sagAI to nirapAdhika che, svArtha Adi upAdhithI rahita che,
kevaLa paramArtha premamaya che. "prIta sagAI re jagamAM sahu kare che, prIta
sagAI na keya; prIta sagAI re nirupAdhika kahI re, pAdhika dhana khoya-rASabha."
zrI AnaMdaghanajI * " pratApApannaM galitamatha tejobhiruditairgataM
dhairyodyogaiH lathitamatha puSTena vpussaa| pravRttaM tadravyagrahaNaviSaye
bAMdhavajanairjane kInAzena prasabhamupanIte nijavazam  // " zrI
vinayavijayajIta zrI zAMtasudhArasa,

Page #308 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(242) The collection of yogic insights and such selfless, impartial, purely
altruistic love-engagement, that is the Dharma itself. "Love for Dharma is true
love." Because Dharma is the ultimate friend-well-wisher. Just as wherever this
being goes, it always remains imbued with love for Dharma, it performs true
friendship; it remains benevolent everywhere, and by its very nature, it truly
achieves welfare, and continues to perform the role of a true, well-wishing
friend. Therefore, this ultimate altruistic love for the ultimate welfare-friend
in the form of Dharma, never leaves its embrace, as is evident from the above.
Because all scriptures clearly state that - "There is suffering from sin and
happiness from Dharma, therefore do not commit sin, and accumulate Dharma."
Because no matter how much a human being deceives, no matter how much black
deeds he performs, no matter how much wealth he accumulates, no matter how much
"wealth" he gathers, no matter how many estates and salaries he builds, no
matter how much prosperity and wealth he acquires, even if he conquers the
entire world, trampling underfoot all his enemies, and even if he attains the
position of a universal emperor, when the time of death arrives, all that will
remain as it is, whatever is his will remain where it is, and under the command
of Yama, this body-dwelling will be emptied in an instant, without even a
moment's notice, leaving behind all possessions, and he will have to return
empty-handed, just as he came. It is said about the mighty conqueror Alexander
(Sikandar) that when he was on his deathbed, he ordered that when his body was
being carried, his hand should be kept open, and the world should be shown that
Sikandar came empty-handed and leaves empty-handed. "Attachment to possessions,
it brings birth after birth, whatever is yours, it remains there, no one comes
along with you...Jinaji! Miccha Dukkad Aaj." Shri Vinayavijayajikrit Shri
Punyaprakashstavana "He who wears a crown, he who wields a scepter, even he goes
with empty hands, leaving behind all the illusions of Maya." - Shri
Rupavijayaji, "Kuda Papaan Sur Ghasarvasrg Sanrithati: | Rj Chamat: Papam Tho
Dharmasannah" - Shastravartasamucchya "Papahuhkham Dharmatsukhamiti
Sarvajanasuprasiddhamidam. Tamahuiday Parantu Suddharthe Na Dharman -
Atmanushasan,

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ( 24ra) yogadaSTisamuccaya ane evI nirupAdhika, nisvArtha, kevaLa paramArtha
premamaya prIta-sagAI te dhamanI ja che. "dharmaprema e ja sAce prema che."
kAraNake dharma ja parama mitra-suhanI jema jyAM jayAM A jIva jAya che tyAM tyAM
sarvatra tene anu* dharma prema gAmI thaI, sAcuM mitrapaNuM adA kare che;
sarvatra hitasvI rahI Atmae ja sAce kalyANa sAdhI, sAce nircAja mitrabhAva
bajAvate rahe che. eTalA prema che" mATe AvA paramArtha premI dharmarUpa parama
kalyANamitrane saMsarga kadI paNa choDavA gya nathI, ema A uparathI sAra bedha
phalita thAya che. kAraNa ke sarva zAstro pikArIne kahe che ke -"pApathI duHkha
ne dharmathI sukha che, eTalA mATe pApa karavuM nahi, ne dharmane saMcaya kara.
jha' kAraNake manuSya game teTalA chaLaprapa karI, game teTalA kALA dheLA karI,
game teTaluM dhana saMcaya kare, game teTalI " de-lata" ekaThI kare, game teTalA
vADIvajIphA ne bAga-baMgalA baMdhAve, game teTalI traddhi-samRddhi meLave, are !
je jyAMnI te sakala zatrudalane padadalita karI vizvanuM ekachatrI sAmrAjya
sAdhI tyAM rahIjI' cakravatI padavI paNa prApta kare, te paNa jyAre mRtyuveLA
AvI pahoMce che, tyAre te badhuMya emane ema thayuM rahe che, je jyAMnuM che te
tyAMnuM tyAM ja paDayuM rahe che, ne yamarAjanI AjJAthI A kAyArUpa koTaDI eka
kSaNanI paNa neTIsa vinA tAbaDatoDa khAlI karI, e badheya parigraha parANe
mUkIne jevA AvyA tevA khAlI hAthe pAchA cAlyA javuM paDe che. mahAparAkramI
vijetA eNlekajhAMDara (sIkaMdara) aMge kahevAya che ke-te jyAre mRtyuzayyA para
hatuM, tyAre teNe evo Adeza karyo hate ke hArI ThAThaDI jyAre laI javAmAM Ave
tyAre mahArI muThThI khullI rAkhaje, ne jagatane batAvajo ke A sIkaMdara khAlI
hAthe AvyA hatA ne khAlI hAthe jAya che. " parigrahanI mamatA karIjI, bhavabhava
melI re Atha; je jyAMnI te tyAM rahIjI, keI na AvI sAtha re....jinAjI! micchA
dukkaDa Aja." zrI vinayavijayajIkRta zrI puNyaprakAzastavana "pahavIne je chatra
pare kare, merune kare daMDa re; te paNa gayA hAtha ghasatA, mUkI sarva akhaMDa
mAyAjAlaze."--zrI rUpavijayajI, * "kudae pApAna sura ghasarvazarg saMrithatiH |
rja camata: pApaM tho dharmasaMnaH "--zAstravArtAsamuccaya "pApAhuHkhaM
dharmAtsukhamiti sarvajanasuprasiddhamidam  /  tamAhUidAya paraM tu suddhArthI
na dharman -AtmAnuzAsana,

Page #309 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
With a pure heart and a desire to hear the truth, the true Dharma, the Dharma of
the self, comes along with the Dharma friend. (24)  Therefore, understanding
that "the hand is with the hand," the wise man, with his soul, worships Dharma
as much as he can. इत्थं सदाशयोपेतस्तत्त्वश्रवणतत्परः। प्राणेभ्यः परमं धर्म
बलादेव प्रपद्यते ॥६०॥ Thus, with a pure heart, he is eager to hear the truth. He
accepts Dharma, which is greater than life itself, by force. 60 Meaning - Thus,
with a pure heart, he is eager to hear the truth, and accepts Dharma, which is
greater than life itself, by force. Discussion As mentioned above, this
insightful yogi considers Dharma to be his ultimate friend and well-wisher. He
develops a deep friendship with Dharma, a strong Dharma bond. As the saying
goes, "Whoever you associate with, you become like them," he becomes a true
Dharma soul, a Dharma embodiment, through the influence of Dharma's company. The
influence of Dharma permeates him, reaching his very bones and marrow. Because -
"Excellent qualities, through love...we get the best place...qualities.
Excellent is his own glory...the best place in the world...qualities." Shri
Yashovijayji "Excellence increases with excellent company, infinite joy with
it." - Shri Devchandraji. And thus, his mind and intention become pure and
radiant, leading to good and auspicious results. His mental state becomes as
clear and bright as crystal, so that he becomes a suitable vessel (Receptacle)
with a pure heart to receive the pure water of truth. Good company removes vices
and brings about the truth of Dharma, just as the company of this Dharma friend
removes evil conduct and brings about the attainment of good conduct. The mind
becomes pure, clear, and detached, and when the mind becomes pure, it results in
the manifestation of virtues like devotion. - Explanation - Thus, with a pure
heart, he is eager to hear the truth, and accepts Dharma, which is greater than
life itself, by force, due to his nature. This is not a forced elevation, but a
natural inclination.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dImadaSTi sadAzayathI tattvazravaNa, vastudhama-Atmadharma (24) sAthe Ave che
mAtra ema dharmamitra ja, eTale " hAthe te sAthe' ema samajI AtmAthI vivekI
puruSa potAnA hAthe jeTaluM bane teTaluM dharmanuM ArAdhana kare che. itthaM
sdaashyopetstttvshrvnnttprH| prANebhyaH paramaM dharma balAdeva prapadyate  //
60 //  Ama sadAzaya yukta te, tava zravaNa taiyAra prANathI parama dharmane kare
baLe ja svIkAra 60 artha - Ama sad AzayathI yukta e te, tattvazravaNamAM tatpara
rahI, prANe karatAM parama evA dharmane baLathI ja aMgIkAra kare che, mAnya kare
che. vivecana Ama uparamAM kahyuM tema A daSTivALo yegI puruSa dharmane parama
mitra-suhadu jANe che, eTale tene dharmanI gADha mitrI jAme che, daDha
dhamaraMga lAge che, ane "jene je saMga, tene te raMga" e ukti pramANe te
dharmanI saMgatinA prabhAvathI te pite sAce dharmAtmA-dharmamUrti banI jAya che,
te dharmanA saMskAra tene asthimajajA paryata hADohADa vyApI jAya che. kAraNa
ke- " uttama guNa anurAgathI.....sAhe2 lahIe uttama ThAmare....guNa. uttama nija
mahimA vadhe....sAhedIpe uttama dhAma re....guNa." zrI yazovijayajI uttama saMge
re uttamatA vadhe, sadhe AnaMda anaMtajI."-zrI devacaMdrajI. ane tethI karIne
tene citta Azaya sphIta-ujajavala thAya che, sadu-zubha pariNAmavALe thAya che,
tenI cittabhUmikA sphaTikanA jevI svaccha ne cakakhI thAya che, ke jethI te
tatvarUpa nirmala jalane jhIlavA mATe yogya pAtra (Receptacle) sadAzaya : bane
che. sArA mitranI sobatathI avaguNadoSa dUra thAya che ne sadguNa tattvazravaNa
Ave che, tema A dharma sanmitranI saMgatithI azubha AcaraNarUpa deSa TaLe che ne
zubha AcaraNarUpa sadguNanI prApti thAya che, citta cekhuM nirmaLa ne nirvikAra
bane che, ane Ama citta cakhuM thAya tyAre ja temAM bhakti pramukha guNa
pariName che -Thare che. - vRtti -hyuM -ema, sArAta-sad AzayathI saMyukta hoI
taravazALatA tatvazravaNamAM tatpara, A tavazravaNa-pradhAna evo te kALekhyo
paramaM ya caDhAva gati-prANo karatAM parama evA dhamane balathI ja mAnya kare
che, tenA svabhAvapaNAne lIdhe. svata eva (AtAnI meLe ja) veganuM utthAna Ane
hetuM nathI.

Page #310 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(244) “The collection of Gadasti, meeting the cool Jin, makes the devotee’s mind
pure.” – Shri Yashovijayji. “Pure intention, the Lord, is firm and steadfast,
the one who remembers your name; he attains infinite, unobstructed bliss, the
supreme nectar-like abode.” – Shri Devchandraji.  And thus, when the slate of
the mind is clean, only then are the letters of the true teachings inscribed
upon it. Only then does the soul become a worthy recipient of the true
teachings. Therefore, the seeker, the yogi, becomes eager and enthusiastic in
the true teachings, becoming thirsty to hear the Dharma-truth. This entire world
goes around saying “Dharma, Dharma,” but it doesn’t know the essence of this
Dharma. So, what is this Dharma? What is the true essence of Dharma? The seeker
remains constantly eager to hear this story of truth from the mouth of the true
Guru.  Therefore, Shri Sadguru Bhagwan illuminates: “Raghuvo Dhamo” – “The
nature of a thing is its Dharma.” The nature of the self-substance is the self-
Dharma, meaning that the soul’s existence in its own nature is called Dharma.
Whatever way the soul comes into its own nature – its own essence – that is the
true form of Dharma. The state of suppression, gradual suppression, or the state
of decay, which ultimately leads to the manifestation of its own qualities, is
the means of self-Dharma, which is the nature of the soul. Therefore, it is also
Dharma in the form of a means. From the state of Samkiti Guna to the state of
Sheleshi, the feelings that follow the soul are dependent on the goal of self-
Dharma, and they reveal the cause of production, becoming the purpose of the
cleansing of the mind. Therefore, all of these are types of Dharma. And then,
when karma is absent in all realms, the complete manifestation of the soul’s
qualities in the form of complete bliss, the complete manifestation of the
innate nature, that is the unparalleled Dharma in the form of the liberated
nature. Thus, the means or the attainment of the goal of Dharma, which is the
substance of Dharma, is the true feeling-Dharma. The rest, like name-Dharma,
establishment-Dharma, substance-Dharma, field-Dharma, time-Dharma, etc., are
types of Dharma, which are good or bad depending on their purpose in relation to
feeling-Dharma. Without feeling, all of these are “illusion,” false, and futile.
The one who knows and understands this pure substance-Dharma – self-Dharma – or
the Dharma-form of the Lord who has manifested this pure Dharma, and worships
him, does not bind karma, and he manifests the Dharma in the form of the nature
of things.  “I go to the beloved Swami, with joy, a thousand times; the
substance-Dharma is fulfilled, the grace of the Lord, the creator, is bestowed.
Name-Dharma, establishment-Dharma, and substance, field, and time; they are good
only for the purpose of feeling-Dharma, without feeling, all are illusion…” –
Swami.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (244) gadaSTisamucaya zrI zItala jina bheTiye, karI bhakta cokakhuM citta ho."
--zrI yazovijayajI. "zuddhAzaya prabhu thira upage, je samare tuja nAmajI;
avyAbAdha anaMta pAme, parama amRta rasa dhAmay."--zrI devacaMdrajI. ane Ama
jyAre cittanI pATI cokakhI (Clean Slate) thAya che, tyAre ja temAM
tattvazravaNarUpa akSara lakhAya che, tyAre ja jIva tattvazravaNanuM yogya pAtra
bane che. eTale te mumukSu jogIjana tatvazravaNamAM tatpara-ughukta thAya che,
dharmatattva sAMbhaLavAne rasIo thAya che. A AkhuM jagat "dharma dharma" ema
kahetuM phare che, paNa A dharmane marma kaI jANatuM nathI, mATe A dharma eTale
zuM? dharmanuM vAstavika tattvasvarUpa zuM? ItyAdi tattvavArtA sadgurumukhe
zravaNa karavAmAM e sadA utkaMThita rahe che. eTale zrI sadguru bhagavAna
prakAze che ke -"raghuvo dhamo'-'vastune svabhAva te dharma." Atmavastune
svabhAva te Atmadharma, eTale ke AtmAnuM sva-svabhAvamAM vartavuM tenuM nAma
dharma. je je prakAre AtmA svabhAvamAM-AtmabhAvamAM Ave te vastudharma dharmanuM
vAstavika svarUpa che. upazama, kSayopazama ke kSAyika bhAvarUpe je nija guNanuM
pragaTapaNe chevaTe pUrNa avasthA nIpajAve che, te svabhAvarUpa AtmadharmanA
sAdhana che, mATe te paNa sAdhanarUpa dharma che. samakita guNathI mAMDIne
zelezI avasthA sudhI je AtmAne anugata-anusaratA bhAva che, te AtmadharmarUpa
sAdhyane avalaMbatA hoI, saMvaranirjarAnA hetu thaI paDI upAdAna kAraNane
pragaTa kare che, mATe te badhAya dharmanA prakAra che. ane pachI sarva pradeze
karmane abhAva thaI, pUrNAnaMdasvarUpa je AtmaguNanI saMpUrNatA thavI,
sahajAnmasvarUpanI pUrNa pragaTatA thavI, te anupama e siddha svabhAvarUpa
dharma che. Ama sAdhya evA vastu dharmanuM sAdhana ke siddhi te ja kharo
bhAvadharma che. bAkI nAmadharma, sthApanAdharma, dravyadharma, kSetradharma,
kAladharma, vagere je dharmanA prakAra che, te to je bhAvadharmanA heturUpa
thatA hoya te bhalA che-rUDA che, nahiM te bhAva vinA e badhAya "Ala" che,
mithyA che, vyartha che. AvA zuddha vastudharmane-Atmadharmane athavA te zuddha
dharma jene pragaTyo che evA dharmamUrti prabhune je jANI, sahIne ArAdhe che, te
pachI karma bAMdhate nathI, ne tene vastu svabhAvarUpa dharma pragaTe che. svAmI
svayaMprabhane huM jAuM bhAmaNe, harakhe vAra hajAra; vastudharma pUraNa jasu
nIpa, bhAva kRpA kiratAra svAmI. nAma dharma ho ThavaNa dharma tathA, dravya
kSetra tima kAla; bhAva dharmanA hA hetupaNe bhalA, bhAva vinA sahu Ala....
svAmI.

Page #311 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Deepradrushti: The refuge of Dharma, the seed sprouts. (245) Faith is the lamp,
the essence of the self, with a deep devotion, Devchandra, the Jain, serves the
feet of the Jina, The nature of things is revealed...Swami. - Shri Devchandraji.
"The world goes around saying 'Dharma, Dharma', But they don't know
Dharma...Jinesar! After taking refuge in the feet of the Jinesar, No one binds
karma...Jinesar! We will sing the praises of the Jinesar Dharma." - Shri
Anandghanji. The way the soul attains self-awareness, that is the way of
Dharma... A living being should not listen, contemplate, or worship Dharma based
on the imagination of a father or another man who has attained imagination. Only
from a man who is in the state of the self, can the soul or the Dharma of the
soul be heard, and only from such a man can it be worshipped." - Shrimad
Rajchandraji. - In this way, when the Sadguru explains Dharma, reveals the
essence of Dharma, Then this seeker, the listener, listens with deep devotion,
with eagerness. And he accepts that Dharma, which is beyond life itself, with
all his might, He is filled with a stream of love for that Dharma, without which
he cannot live. Because it is his nature, so he naturally, spontaneously, takes
refuge in the Dharma that is more precious than life, and feels, "Oh Dharma, I
have come to you for refuge, protect me." And he who protects Dharma, is
protected by Dharma. "Dharmo rakshati rakshitah." "Know that Dharma is the well-
wisher of all, the worthy of worship! The worthy of worship! It brings
influence; the lonely, the helpless, will become protected, Without it, no one
will be saved." - Shrimad Rajchandraji. That is called the virtue of listening -
क्षाराम्भस्त्यागतो यद्वन्मधुरोदकयोगतः । बीजं प्ररोहमाधत्ते तद्वत्तत्त्वश्रुतेनरः
॥६॥ Just as a seed sprouts from the sweet water, after giving up the salty
water, So too, a man sprouts from the hearing of the truth. 1 वृत्ति:
क्षा/मररंथारो चह्ना मधुरोri:- Just as a seed sprouts from the sweet water, after
giving up the salty water, Even though he is unaware of its sweetness, He
sprouts, Just as a man sprouts from the hearing of the truth, Because of the
power of the truth, its great influence.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dIprAdaSTi: dhamanuM zaraNAga bIja praha (245) zraddhA bhAsana ho tatva
ramaNapaNe, karatAM tanmaya bhAva devacaMdra he jinavara pada sevatAM, pragaTe
vastu svabhAva...svAmI."-zrI devacaMdrajI. "dharama dharama karato jaga sahu
phire, dharma na jANe che mama....jinesara ! dharma jinesara caraNa grahyA
pachI, keI na bAMdhe che karma..jinesara ! dharma jinesara gAuM raMgazuM."--zrI
AnaMdaghanajI. je je prakAre AtmA AtmabhAva pAme che te prakAra dharmanA
che...jIve dharma pitAnI kalpanAvaDe athavA kalpanAprApta anya puruSavaDe
zravaNa karavA jega, manana karavA jega, ke ArAdhavA joga nathI. mAtra
Atmasthiti che jenI evA puruSathI ja AtmA ke Atmadharma zravaNa karavA joga che,
yAvat ArAdhavA joga che."--zrImad rAjacaMdrajI. - ItyAdi prakAre jyAre sadaguru
dharmanI vyAkhyA kare che, dharmanuM tattvasvarUpe pragaTa kare che, tyAre A
mumukSu zrotA puruSa tanmayapaNe-tatparapaNe te zravaNa kare che. ane prANathI
paNa parama evA te dhamane balathI ja mAnya kare che, te dharma pratye ene e
premapravAha vachUTe che ke tenA svIkAra vinA tene cAlatuM nathI. kAraNa ke te
tene svabhAva che, eTale te anAyAse ja-sahaja svabhAve ja prANAdhika dharmanuM
zaraNa grahe che, ane bhAve che ke "zAdhi mAM -vAM gArna' he dhama ! tyAre
zaraNe Avyo chuM, tuM mAruM rakSaNa karo ane Ama je dharmanI rakSA kare che,
tene dharma rakSe che. "dharmo rakSati rakSitaH' " sarvane dhama suzaNuM jANI,
ArAdhya! ArAdhya ! prabhAva ANI; anAtha ekAMta sanAtha thAze, enA vinA keI na
bAMhyA hAze."_zrImad rAjacaMdrajI. te zravaNa guNa kahe che- kSArAmbhastyAgato
yadvanmadhurodakayogataH  /  bIjaM prarohamAdhatte tadvattattvazrutenaraH  // 6
//  khArA jalanA tyAgathI, madhura bhege jema; pAma bIja prarohane,
tatvazravaNathI tema 1 vRtti:kSA/mararaMthAro cahna madhurori:-khArA pANInA
tyAgathI, madhura--mIThA pANInA gathI jema - tenA mAdhuryanuM spaSTa saMcitithI
saMvedanAthI ajANapaNuM chatAM, vIgaM gharomAdharo-bIja praha dhAre che-pAme
che, (bIja UgI nIkaLe che) tatUra taravazruternaraH-tenI jema tattvazrutithI
nara (praha pAme che),-tatvazrutinA acinya sAmarthyathakI mahAprabhAvapaNAne
lIdhe.

Page #312 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(246) **Meaning of Yoga-Dristi-Samuchaya:** Just as a seed sprouts from the
abandonment of salty water and the force of sweet water, so too does a person
attain liberation through the hearing of the principles (Tattva-Shravana).
**Commentary:** Tattva-Shravana is like sweet water, here the seed is the soul.
Just as a seed that is in salty water will not sprout, but a seed that abandons
salty water and comes in contact with sweet water will sprout, even if it is not
aware of the sweetness, similarly, the soul will not sprout as long as it is in
the salty water of the worldly ocean. But when it abandons the salty water and
comes in contact with the sweet water of Tattva-Shravana, the seed of the soul
will sprout and attain liberation. Even if it is not aware of the sweetness of
the principles, it will still sprout.  Here, the word "Praha" means to sprout or
to ascend to higher levels. Through the inconceivable power of Tattva-Shravana,
a person ascends to higher levels of liberation. The word "Nar" (person) is used
here because it is primarily humans who are capable of hearing the principles,
as it is only in the human form that one can attain complete knowledge and
liberation. This is the inconceivable power of Tattva-Shravana.  **Diagram-10:**
Seed * **Punyam-Maj (Merit)** Samsara (Worldly Ocean): Salty Water Tattva-
Shravana: Sweet Water  "Follow the nectar of the words of the Jinas, respect the
principles; abandon the attachments to matter and emotions, and embrace the path
of the Devchandra." - Shri Devchandraji  "The nectar of the words of the
Vitaragas, the root of ultimate peace; the medicine for the disease of birth and
death, beneficial for the fearful."  "The tree of the principles, the root of
self-righteousness; it achieves the perfection of nature, that is the righteous
path." - Shrimad Rajchandraji

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (246) yogadaSTisamuccaya artha :-khArA pANInA tyAgathI ane mIThA pANInA vegathI
jema bIja prareha pAme che-UgI nIkaLe che, tema tattvazravaNathakI nara prahane
pAme che. vivecana tattvazravaNu madhudakeru, IhAM hoya bIja praha; khAra udaka
sama bhava tyajesTa, guru bhakti adroha....mana."- zrI. ke. da. sajhAya -4
tatvazravaNane mahimA ahIM batAvyuM che. A "tavazravaNu madhurodakejI -
tattvazravaNarUpa mIThA pANInA jegathI, ahIM bIjane praroha thAya che, aMkura
phUTe che. khAruM pANI hoya te bIja Uge nahi; paNa je khAruM pANI choDI, mIThA
pANIne joga bane te bIja UgI nIkaLe, bhale tenI mIThAzanuM spaSTa saMcetana vaDe
bhAna-jANapaNuM na hoya, te paNa aMkurA phUTI nIkaLe. te ja prakAre saMsAra
samudranA khArA pANIne jaMga jyAM sudhI hoya, tyAM sudhI bedhanuM bIja Uge nahi;
paNa te khAruM pANI choDI, tavazravaNarUpa madhura jalana joga je banI Ave te
bodharUpa bIja UgI nIkaLe-praroha pAme." bhale te tatvathatinA mAdhuryanuM
spaSTa saMcetana-saMvedana haju na hoya, te paNa tene aMkurA te jarUra Ave. atre
"praha' zabda bane arthamAM ghaTe che (leSa); praha eTale UgI nIkaLavuM te,
athavA uttarottara caDhatI padavI pAmavI te. tattvazravaNanA aciMtya
mahAprabhAvathI nara uttarottara praha-caDhatI kaLA para ArUDha thatuM jAya che,
te vArtA spaSTa che. ahIM "nara' zabdanuM grahaNa karyuM che, te mukhyapaNe
manuSya ja tattvazravaNanuM pAtra bane che, e sUcavavA mATe che, kAraNa ke
manuSya paryAyamAM ja pUrNa saddavivekane udaya thaI, yAvat mokSanI prApti thaI
zake che. AvuM tattvazravaNanuM acinya sAmarthya hoya che, A mATe prabhAva hoya
che. AkRti-10 badha-aMkura 0bIja * ** puNya-maja saMsAraHkhAruM pANI tava
zravaNa = mIThuM pANI. "jinavara vacana amRta anusariye, tatvaramaNa Adariye re;
dravya-bhAva Azrava paraharie, devacaMdrapada varIe re"-zrI devacaMdrajI.
"vacanAmRta vItarAganA, parama zAMtarasa mULa; auSadha je bhavaraganA, kAyarane
pratikULa." "teha tatvarUpa vRkSanuM, Atmadharma che mULa; svabhAvanI siddhi
kare, te ja dharma anukULa." -zrImad rAjacaMdrajI

Page #313 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Deepradrushti:** The seed of truth, watered by the nectar of knowledge,
sprouts.  **(247)** Just as the seed of friendship, etc., sprouted in the mind-
field, so too does it sprout here, meaning it grows through contemplation.
Therefore,  **Prabhubhakti:** Devotion to the Supreme Being, the Lord, increases
exponentially. This devotion, which is the ultimate remedy, is characterized by
a sprout-like feeling, devoid of the ten senses, including food, and free from
desire for fruit.  **Nishkam:** It is selfless. And the mind of the devotee, the
yogi, is extremely pure and spotless. Such unhindered devotion transforms the
mind into Vaikuntha, the heavenly abode, as the yogis experience. And with such
a pure mind, the yogis, filled with supreme love, say to the Lord: "Oh Lord! We
will welcome you into our mind-home, and seeing its beauty, you will remain
there forever!"  **Man Ghar:** The mind-home is adorned with the abode of the
Lord, and the Lord's presence will be seen forever. The Lord resides there; the
mind becomes Vaikuntha through unhindered devotion. The yogis speak of this
experience.  **Saheba Vasu:** "Saheba Vasu" (The Lord resides) - Shri
Yashovijayji.  Here, there is an outpouring of devotion towards the Sadguru, the
true guide who leads one onto the path of devotion. There is humility and
respect towards the Bhavacharya, the teacher of emotions, and others who are
filled with love. And with pure intentions, the devotee serves the ultimate
benefactor according to their ability and in accordance with the prescribed
rituals. They are dedicated to the Lord's worship with their body, mind, and
wealth.  **Satshastrabhakti:** Devotion to the true scriptures, the Sadagamas,
the ultimate benefactors and guides, increases exponentially. The scriptures are
revered and honored through reading, writing, worship, donation, contemplation,
meditation, and study.  **Jinbhakti:** Towards the ultimate seed, the Jinas,
there is a feeling of ultimate reverence. Similarly, the natural detachment from
the world, arising from the understanding of its true nature, becomes stronger.
There is a deep aversion towards the world, which is filled with suffering due
to birth, death, and other miseries.  **Ityadi:** All these seeds sprout and
grow through contemplation.  **This is the meaning.**  **Ksharam Bhastva
Tulya:** The entire world is considered like salty water.
**Madhurodakayogena:** The knowledge of truth is like sweet water.  **Vritti:**
The salty water of the world is compared to the knowledge of truth, which is
like sweet water.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dIprAdaSTi: tattvazravaNa madhu jalathI gabIja aMkura (247) Ama AgavI mitrA Adi
daSTiemAM je coga-bIjenuM cittabhUmimAM paNa thayuM hatuM, tene atre aMkurA
phuTe che, arthAt te paripaSaNathI vRddhi pAme che. eTale prabhubhakti-
paramAtmA ahaMta bhagavaMta pratyenI bhakti uttarottara gabIja adhika mAtrA
pAmatI jAya che. A bhakti prabhu pratye parama upAya aMkura bhAvavALI, ahArAdi
daza saMjJAthI rahita, ane phalakAmanA vinAnI- niSkAma evI hoya che. ane te
bhakti karanAra bhakta jogIjananuM citta atyaMta cepyuM hoya che, saMzuddha-
nirmala hoya che. AvI kuMThita bhaktithI mana e ja vaikuMTha-svarga thaI paDe
che, ema yogI janene anubhava kahe che, ane evA zuddhacitta yegIjano parama
premAvezamAM prabhune kahe che ke-he prabhu! ame tamane amArA mana-gharamAM
padharAvazuM eTale tenI zobhA dekhIne tame tyAM ja sthira thaI jaze ! mana
gharamAM dhariyA ghara zobhA, dekhata nitya raheze thira bhA; sAhebA vAsu; mana
vaikuMTha akuMThita bhakate, yogI bhAkhe anubhava yukate. sAhebA vAsu"zrI
yazovijayajI. - sadUgurubhakti-sanmArge caDhAvanAra zrImad saddaguru bhagavAna
pratye atre atyaMta bhakti ulase che; bhAvagI evA bhAvAcAryAdi pratye paramAdara
yukta vinaya-bahumAna hoya che. ane te parama upakArI pratye niSkAma evA zuddha
AzayathI bhaktajana vidhi pramANe yathAzakti vaiyAvacca-sevA kare che. tana-
mana-dhanathI tenI upAsanAmAM tatpara rahe che. satazAstrabhakti-parama upakArI
evA sanmArgadarzaka sadAgama pratye adhikAdhika bhakti sahuratI jAya che. sat
zrutana lekhana-pUjana-dAna-ciMtana-bhAvana-svAdhyAya Adi parama gauravabahumAna
yuktapaNe atra karAya che. jinabhakti Adi parama gabIja pratye atre parama
upAdeya bhAva pragaTe che. temaja bhava vairAgya-saMsAra pratye tenA
svarUpadarzanathI upajato sahaja vairAgya atra baLavattara bane che, janma-
maraNAdi du:khathI duHkhamaya evA saMsAra pratye atyaMta uga upaje che. ityAdi
gabIja atre paripaSaNa pAmI ga-aMkurapaNAne pAme che. Ane ja bhAvArtha kahe
kSArAmbhastulya iha ca bhavayogA'khilo mataH  /  madhurodakayogena samA
tatvazrutistathA  //  62  //  vRtti -ArA+maratunya ra ra mAyopoDa imattA ane
ahIM samasta saMsAraga khArA pANI barAbara mAnavAmAM Avyo
che,-atattvazravaNarUpa paNa (temaja che) madhurona samA tatvatietathA -tathA
madhura jalanA yoga samAna tattvazruti (tatvazravaNu) mAnela che, tenA aMgANuthI
tattvazrati paNa (temaja che).

Page #314 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(248) The collection of Gadashti is like salty water everywhere, know the Bhavas
here; Tavashruti is like sweet water, 62 meanings - and here the whole world is
considered like salty water, and Tattvashruti is considered like sweet water.
The commentary says that the salty water and sweet water mentioned above, what
is it? It has been explained here. The whole world is like salty water. The
worldly affairs, which are in the form of non-Tattvashravana, are also like
salty water. Just as no seed can sprout in salty water, similarly, no good or
bad seed can sprout in worldly affairs or non-Tattvashravana, but they are
burnt. As long as a human being has the desire to drink the salty water of this
worldly ocean, it is like hoping for a flower in the sky to get a seed. As long
as one does not give up drinking this salty water, and does not develop firm
detachment in the mind, and does not give up the desire for worldly life, it is
not possible for knowledge to arise. When detachment and dispassion arise in the
mind, then knowledge arises; when one stops in detachment and dispassion, then
one forgets one's own awareness. - Shrimad Rajchandraji's Shri Atmasiddhi And to
the discerning mind, this worldly ocean truly seems salty, and he experiences
its bitterness every moment, so he does not want to stay in this world even for
a moment. Because he has the feeling of detachment that "All the relationships
that arise in this worldly ocean become a place of disaster for humans." "
भवाब्धिप्रभवाः सर्वं संबंधा विपदास्पदम् । संभवन्ति मनुष्याणां तथान्ते सुष्ठु
नीरसाः ॥ वस्तुजातमिदं मूढ प्रतिक्षणविनश्वरम् । जानन्नपि न जानासि ग्रहः
कोऽयभनौषधः ॥ यद्वद्देशान्तरादेत्य वसन्ति विहगा नगे ! तथा जन्मान्तरान्मूढ
प्राणिनः कुलपादपे॥ प्रातस्तरुं परित्यज्य यथैते यान्ति पत्रिणः । स्वकर्मवशगाः
शश्वत्तथैते क्वापि देहिनः ॥ शरीरं शीर्यते नाशा गलत्यायुर्न पापधीः । मोह :
स्फुरति नात्मार्थः पश्य वृत्त' शरीरिणाम् ॥" Shri Shubhchandracharyaji's
Jnanarnava, the beautiful and heart-touching form of these feelings is described
in detail in Shri Shubhchandracharyaji's Shri Jnanarnava, Shrimad Rajchandraji's
Bhavanavobodh, and Shri Vinayvijayji Upadhyayaji's Shri Shantasudharas. Those
who are particularly curious should see it there. And based on that, it has been
said briefly..

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (248) gadaSTisamuccaya khArA pANI sama badhe, bhavo ahIM jANa; tavazruti te te
mITha, jalanA joga samAna, 62 artha--ane ahIM khArA pANI sarakho sakala saMsAra
yuga mAnya che, tathA tattvazrutine madhura jalanA yoga samAna mAnI che.
vivecana khAra udaka sama bhava tyajesTa'-zrI je. i. sa. uparamAM je khAruM
pANI-mIThuM pANI vagere kahyuM, te zuM? tenuM atra spaSTIkaraNa karyuM che.
samasta saMsAra yoga-sakala saMsAraprasaMga che, te khArA pANI barAbara che.
atattvazravaNarUpa saMsAraprasaMga paNa temaja khArA pANI jevo che. khArA pANInA
ge bIja saMsAra Uge nahiM, baLI jAya, tema saMsAraprasaMga athavA
atattvazravaNarUpa khArA khArU pANI pANInA vegathI puNyabIja vA bebIja Uge
nahiM, paNa baLI jAya. jyAM lagI A saMsAra samudranuM khAruM pANI pIvAnI hoMza
manuSya dharAve, tyAM lagI bedhabIja pAmavAnI AzA rAkhavI te AkAzakusumavata
che. jyAM lagI A khArUM pANI pIvAnuM choDI daI, cittamAM daDha vairAgyaraMga na
lAge, bhaveDhega na upaje, tyAM lagI jJAnane uddabhava the saMbhava nathI. tyAga
virAga na cittamAM, thAya ne tene jJAna; aTake tyAga virAgamAM, te bhUle nija
bhAna.-zrImad rAjacaMdrajI praNIta zrI Atmasiddhi ane vivekIne mana te A
saMsArasAgara kharekhara khAre ja lAge che, pratikSaNe tene tene te kaDa
anubhava thAya che, eTale te kSaNabhara paNa te saMsAramAM rahevAne icchate
nathI. kAraNa ke te vairAgyabhAvanA bhAve che ke A saMsAra samudramAM * upajatA
sarva saMbaMdhe manuSyone vipadAnA sthAna thaI paDe * " bhavAbdhiprabhavAH
sarvaM saMbaMdhA vipadAspadam  /  saMbhavanti manuSyANAM tathAnte suSThu nIrasAH
//  vastujAtamidaM mUDha pratikSaNavinazvaram  /  jAnannapi na jAnAsi grahaH
ko'yabhanauSadhaH  //  yadvaddezAntarAdetya vasanti vihagA nage ! tathA
janmAntarAnmUDha prANinaH kulpaadpe|| prAtastaruM parityajya yathaite yAnti
patriNaH  /  svakarmavazagAH zazvattathaite kvApi dehinaH  //  zarIraM zIryate
nAzA galatyAyurna pApadhIH  /  moha : sphurati nAtmArthaH pazya vRtta' zarIriNAm
// " zrI zubhacaMdrAcAryajIkRta jJAnArNava, A bhAvanAonuM parama suMdara
hRdayaMgama svarUpa zrI zubhacaMdrAcAryajIkRta zrI jJAnAvamAM, zrImad
rAjacaMdrajIta bhAvanAvabodhamAM, ane zrI vinayavijayajI upAdhyAyajIkRta zrI
zAMtasudhArasamAM atyaMta vistArathI varNavyuM che. vizeSa jijJAsue te te sthaLe
jovuM. ane tenA AdhAre saMkSepamAM kahyuM che..

Page #315 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Deepradrushti: The feeling of detachment - the world is full of suffering (29)
and ultimately proves to be extremely dull. This body is afflicted with disease,
youth is afflicted with old age, there is decay and destruction, and at the end
of life there is death. The three worlds have been destroyed by indulging in the
fleeting pleasures arising from sensory objects. This very thing is constantly
perishing, even knowing this, you do not know! Oh fool! It is a defeat or a
planet that has no cure! Those who were enemies of defeat before have become my
friends in this birth due to karma! And those who were friends of defeat in the
previous birth have become my enemies in this birth! Just as birds coming from
foreign lands dwell in trees, so too do animals dwell in the tree of the family
from birth after birth. Then, as the birds leave the tree and go in their own
directions when dawn breaks, so too do these animals, when the morning of the
completion of their lifespan arrives, go in different directions according to
their karma! Thus, all these birds gather. Yet, see the strange character of
animals! The body decays, but hope does not decay! Life is counted, but the mind
of sin does not melt! Compassion rains, but the soul does not strive! Truly!
Life is as fleeting as the waves of wind, wealth is connected with calamities,
all sensory objects are like the colors of clouds at sunset, the happiness of
the company of friends, women, relatives, etc. is like a dream-illusion.
Therefore, what is there in this world that can cause joy to the saint? There is
no one in these three worlds who has a body who does not have the noose of death
around their neck. When steps are taken that cannot be pushed back by Yama-
Kesari, even with great effort, life cannot be saved, then what is the fate of
the human-worm?” “Born, aged, died, this world is impermanent; Everyone
experiences karma, no one is a keeper. The refuge is of the Arihant, the refuge
is of the Siddha Bhagvant; The refuge is of the Dharma Shri Jain, the refuge is
of the virtuous Sadhu. Shri Vinayavijayakat Shri Punyaprakash Stavan
+“आयुर्वायुतरत्तरंगतरलं लग्नापदः संपदः, सर्वेऽपीन्द्रियगोचराश्च चटुलाः
सन्ध्याभ्ररागादिवत् । मित्रस्त्रीस्वजनादिसङ्गमसुखं स्वप्नेंद्रजालोपमम् , तत्किं
वस्तु भवे भवेदिह मुदामा लम्वनं यत् सताम् ।। Shantasudharas (see Shri Mansukh
Bhai Kiratchandra's commentary)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dIprAdaSTi : varAgya bhAvanA-duHkhamaya saMsAra svarUpa (29) che ane aMte
atyaMta nIrasa nIvaDe che. A zarIra rogathI AkrAMta thayeluM che, yauvana
jarAthI AkAMta che, azvaya ane vinAza che, ane jIvananA aMte maraNa che. iMdriya
viSayathI upajatA evA kSaNabhaMgura sukhamAM rati karIne tribhuvana naSTa thayuM
che. A vastumAtra pratikSaNe vinazvara che, te jANatAM chatAM tuM jANatuM nathI
! te he mUDha ! hAra ke graha che ke jenuM osaDa nathI ! je pUrve hArA zatruo
hatA te A janmamAM karmavaze mhArA baMdhuo banyA che ! ane pUrva janmamAM je
hAra baMdhuo hatA, te A janmamAM mhArA zatrupaNe upajyA che ! jema dezAMtarathI
AvIne pakSIo vRkSamAM vAsa kare che, tema prANIo janmAMtarathI AvIne kularUpa
vRkSamAM vase che. pachI prabhAta thatAM A paMkhIo jema jhADane cheDIne
potapotAnI dizAmAM cAlyA jAya che, tema A prANIo paNa AyupUrNatArUpa prAtaHkALa
thatAM potapotAnA karma pramANe judI judI gatimAM kayAMya cAlyA jAya che ! Ama A
badheya paMkhI meLe che. chatAM prANIonuM A vicitra caritra te juo ! zarIra
zIrNa (jIrNa) thAya che, paNa AzA zIrNa thatI nathI ! AyuSya gaNe che, paNa
pApabuddhi gaLatI nathI ! meha kure che, paNa AtmArtha spharate nathI !
kharekhara ! Ayu to vAyunA taraMga jevuM taralacaMcala che, saMpadAo ApadAo
sAthe joDAyelI che, sarva iMdriya viSaya saMdhyA samayanA vAdaLAnA raMga jevA
che, mitra-strI-svajanAdinA saMgamanuM sukha svapna-iMdrajAla samAna che. tethI
A saMsAramAM evI te kaI vastu che ke je saMtajanene AnaMdanuM kAraNa thAya ? A
tribhuvanamAM e kaI paNa zarIradhArI nathI ke jenA kaMThamAM kRtAntane pAza
nahiM AvI paDe. yama-kesarIne pAchA na ThelAya evA pagalAM jyAre paDe che, tyAre
mahAmahenata karatAM dethI paNa prANuM rakSI zakAto nathI, te pachI mAnava-
kIDAnuM zuM gajuM?" "janma jarA maraNa karI e, A saMsAra asAra te; kya karma
sahu anubhave e, keI na rAkhaNahAra te. zaraNa eka arihaMtanuM e, zaraNa siddha
bhagavaMta te; zaraNa dharma zrI jainane e, sAdhu zaraNa guNavaMta te. zrI
vinayavijayakata zrI puNyaprakAza stavana +"AyurvAyutarattaraMgataralaM
lagnApadaH saMpadaH, sarve'pIndriyagocarAzca caTulAH sandhyAbhrarAgAdivat  /
mitrastrIsvajanAdisaGgamasukhaM svapneMdrajAlopamam , tatkiM vastu bhave
bhavediha mudAmA lamvanaM yat satAm  /  /  zAMtasudhArasa (juo zrI manasukhabhAI
kIratacaMdrakRta vivecana )

Page #316 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(250) "The King of the six continents, who ascended and emerged, Became powerful
in the universe, and bore the burden of kingship; those clever, four-wheeled
charioteers, who were not, People know, mind believes, nine times they place
someone. With a jeweled crown on their head, they wear ear ornaments, Wearing
golden bracelets, they do not keep any weakness; in an instant, they fall, the
lords of the earth, consuming the earth of consciousness, People know, mind
believes, nine times they place someone." "Electric Lakshmi, the lordship, the
kite, the lifespan, it is the wave of water; The bow of Purandari, the endless
color, what do you enjoy there, the moment, the occasion? Neither my body, form,
radiance, nor the daughter, son, or brother, Neither my past, loved ones,
relatives, nor my lineage or caste; neither my wealth, home, youth, nor the
land, the delusion of ignorance, O, O, living beings! Think like this always,
the feeling of otherness." - Shrimad Rajchandraji. Again, those seekers, yogis,
feel that - There is nothing in this world worth even a little attachment to.
The wise have called this world endlessly sorrowful, endlessly painful,
disorganized, fluctuating, and impermanent. Endless heat, Endless burning,
endless suffering, seeing this, they have renounced this world, it is true. It
is not like turning back from that. There, suffering, suffering, the world is
suffering. Suffering is that ocean. Because the living being first, in the
mother's Womb - in the womb itself, it endures many torments. Then, born, it
suffers many kinds of great hardships, grows up, ah, now the suffering has
ended, now it is at peace, where it touches the apparent happiness, the
imaginary happiness, there, the death-like old age, the state of decay, devours
the body, that is, old age comes, the body begins to deteriorate, and time
comes, and snatches away the breath. This is the sorrowful world. From the
suffering of the womb to death, the living being is suffering." 4 Shri Mansukh
Bhai Kiratchandra's Shantasudharas Commentary + " गलत्येका चिंता भवति पुनरन्या
तदधिका, मनोवाक्काये हा विकृतिरतिरोषात्तरजसः । विपद्गर्तावर्ते झदिति पतयालोः
प्रतिपदं, न जंतोः संसारे भवति कथमप्यातिविरतिः ॥ साहित्वा
संतापानशुचिजननीकुक्षिकुहरे, ततो जन्म प्राप्य प्रचुरतरकष्टक्रमहतः ।
सुखाभासर्यावस्पृशति कथमप्यतिविरति, जरा तावत्कायं कवलयति मृत्योः सहचरी ।" -
Shantasudharas,

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (250) yogadaSTisamuccaya "cha khaMDanA adhirAja je caDe karIne nIpajyA,
brahmAMDamAM baLavAna thaIne bhUpa bhAre upajyA; e catura cakrI cAliyA hotA na
hotA hoIne, jana jANIe mana mAnIe nava kALa mUke keIne. maNimaya mugaTa mAthe
dharIne karNa kuMDala nAMkhatA, kAMcana kaDA karamAM dharI kazIe kacAza na
rAkhatA; paLamAM paDayA pRthvIpati e bhAna bhUtaLa khAIne, jana jANIe mana mAnIe
nava kALa mUke keIne." "vidyuta lakSmI prabhutA pataMga AyuSya te te jaLanA
taraMga; puraMdarI cApa anaMga raMga, zuM rAcie tyAM kSaNane prasaMga? nA mArAM
tana rUpa kAMti yuvatI nA putra ke bhrAta nA, nA mArAM bhUta snehIo svajana ke
nA gotra ke jJAti nA; nA mArAM dhana dhAma yauvana dharA e moha ajJAtvanA, re re
jIva ! vicAra emaja sadA anyatvadA bhAvanA." - zrImad rAjacaMdrajI. vaLI te
mumukSu jogIjana bhAve che ke- A saMsAra prati jIve lezamAtra moha karavA jevuM
nathI. jJAnIoe A saMsArane anaMta khedamaya, anaMta duHkhamaya, avyavasthita,
caLa-vicaLa ane anitya kahyo che. anaMta tApa anaMta zeka, anaMta duHkha joIne
eoe A saMsArane puMTha dIdhI che, khamaya te satya ja che. e bhaNI pAchuM vALI
jevA jevuM nathI. tyAM, du:kha, duHkha saMsAra ne du:kha ja che. duHkhane e
samudra che. kAraNa ke jIva prathama te mAtAnI kUkhamAM-garbhamAMja aneka
saMtApa sahana kare che. pachI janma pAmI aneka prakAranA mahAkaSTa pAmI meTa
thaI, hAza, have duHkhano aMta Avyo, have nirAMta thaI, ema jyAM dekhItAM sukha,
kAlpanika sukhane sparza kare che, tyAM ja mRtyunI benapaNI jarA avasthA kAyAne
keLiye karI jAya che, arthAt ghaDapaNa Ave che, deha jarjarita thavA mAMDe che,
ane kALa AvI eciMte prANa harI le che. A du:kharUpa A saMsAra che. gabharanA
du:khathI mAMDI maraNa payata jIva da:khIja che." 4 zrI manasukhabhAI
kiratacaMdrakRta zAMtasudhArasa vivecana + " galatyekA ciMtA bhavati punaranyA
tadadhikA, manovAkkAye hA vikRtiratiroSAttarajasaH  /  vipadgartAvarte jhaditi
patayAloH pratipadaM, na jaMtoH saMsAre bhavati kathamapyAtiviratiH  //  sAhitvA
saMtApAnazucijananIkukSikuhare, tato janma prApya pracuratarakaSTakramahataH  /
sukhAbhAsaryAvaspRzati kathamapyativirati, jarA tAvatkAyaM kavalayati mRtyoH
sahacarI  / " -zAMtasudhArasa,

Page #317 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Two-sightedness:  Salty water of untruth, sweet water of truth.  (251) In this
ocean of existence, where the four states of existence are constantly revolving
and the fire of suffering is burning, the creatures are wandering endlessly.
This machine-bearing being, abandoning one form and taking on another, is
constantly assuming new roles like actors on a stage, dancing the drama of this
world.  This world is filled with suffering through the five types of
transformations: matter, space, time, existence, and emotions. This being,
wandering since time immemorial, has experienced all relationships with all
beings in the three stationary realms. There is not a single realm, not a single
form, not a single country, not a single family, not a single suffering, not a
single happiness, not a single state of existence where this being has not
wandered and been fragmented.  “In this strange world, gods fall and dogs ascend
to heaven!  A learned Brahmin becomes a worm, and a worm or a dog becomes Indra!
A king becomes a worm, and a worm becomes Indra! Thus, by the force of karma,
beings are transformed!  Oh! In this uneven world, a mother dies and becomes a
daughter! A sister becomes a woman! That woman is reborn as a daughter! A father
is born as a son! That son dies and becomes a grandson!” Thus, this world is
truly impermanent, insecure, full of suffering, strange, and uneven.  Despise
this world! Despise it! -  Thus, this wise and detached man thinks.  So, what is
surprising that he finds the whole world distasteful? And therefore, rising
above it, becoming detached, he strives to abandon the salty waters of this
ocean of existence.  What is surprising about that?  Furthermore, what is
untruthful is also like salty water.  Since time immemorial, this being has
drunk the salty water of untruth, so the seed of truth has not been planted in
its heart.  Because the untruthful is tainted by false beliefs, as long as the
being continues to hear the untruthful, how can it develop the right
understanding?  This being has not left anything out in hearing the salty water,
but it has not… *"चतुर्गतिमहावत्त दुःखवाडवदीपिते । भ्रमन्ति भविनोऽजस्रं वराका
जन्मसागरे । रूपाण्येकानि गृह्णाति त्यजत्यन्यानि सन्ततम् । यथा रङ्गेऽत्र
शैलूषस्तथायं यन्त्रबाहकः ॥ सर्वैः सर्वेऽपि संम्बन्धा संप्राप्ता देहधारिभिः ।
अनादिकालसंभ्रान्तैस्त्रसस्थावरयोनिषु ॥ भूपः कृमिभवत्यत्र कृमिश्वामरनायकः । शरीरी
परिवर्तत कर्मणा वञ्चितो बलात् ॥ माता पुत्री स्वसा भार्या सैव संपद्यतेऽङ्गजा ।
पिता पुत्रः पुनः सोऽपि लभते पौत्रिकं पदं ॥” –from Shri Jnanarnava by
Shubhachandracharya.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 domAdaSTi : atazravaNa khArU jala- takRti madhura jala (251) cAra gatirUpa jyAM
meTA Avarte che ane duHkharUpa dAvAnala jyAM prajvalI rahyo che, evA A
bhavasAgaramAM prANIo bicArA niraMtara bhamI rahyA che. eka rUpa choDIne bIjA
grahaNa karate A yaMtravAhaka jIva, raMgabhUmi para nATakIAnI jema niraMtara
navanavA veSa dhAraNa karI, A bhavamaMDapamAM nATaka nAcI rahyo che. dravya,
kSetra, kAla, bhava ne bhAva ema pAMca prakAranA parAvartanavaDe A saMsAra
duHkhathI ThAMsI ThAMsIne bharela che. anAdi kALathI bhramaNa karatA A jIve
traNa-sthAvara yoniomAM sarvanI sAthe sarva saMbaMdhe prApta karyA che. ,
devalekamAM ke manuSya lekamAM, tiryaMcamAM ke narakamAM evI eka paNa yoni
nathI, evuM eka paNa rUpa nathI, evo eka paNa deza nathI, evuM eka paNa kula
nathI, evuM eka paNa duHkha nathI, evuM eka paNa sukha nathI, e eka paNa paryAya
nathI ke jyAM niraMtara gamanAgamana karI A jIva khaMDita na thaye heya' * "A
vicitra saMsAramAM deva AkaMda karate nIce paDe che ne zvAna svarge caDe che!
zrotriya brAhmaNa kRta bane che, vA kRmi ke zvapAka cAMDAla iMdra bane che !
rAjA kIDe thAya che ne kIDe iMdra bane che ! Ama karmathI balAtkAre prANInA
parAvartana thAya che ! are ! A viSama saMsAramAM mAtA hoya te mRtyu pAmIne
putrI bane che ! bahena hoya te strI thAya che! te strI vaLI putrI tarIke
avatare che ! pitA hoya te putrarUpe janme che! te putra vaLI marIne pautra paNa
bane che!" Ama A saMsAra kharekhara ! sAva asAra che. AvA anitya, azaraNa,
duHkhamaya, vicitra ne viSama saMsArane dhikkAra ! dhikkAra che ! - ItyAdi
prakAre A vivekI vairAgyavaMta puruSa bhAve che. eTale tene samasta saMsAra
saMbaMdha khAro lAge emAM zuM navAi? ane tethI ubhagIne, virakta thaI, te A
saMsArasamudranA khArA pANIne tyAga karavAne pravarte emAM zuM Azcarya ? vaLI je
atattvazravaNuM che te paNa khArA pANuM samAna che. anAdi kALathI A jIve
atattvazravaNarUpa khAruM pANI pIdhA karyuM che, tethI ja tenA aMtaramAM sAganuM
bIja ropAyuM nathI, kAraNa ke mithyAtvavAsanAthI vAsita evuM atatva
atattvazravaNa- jyAM sudhI jIva sAMbhaLyA kare, tyAM sudhI jIvane saMskAra Uge
ja kema? khArUM jala A jIve zravaNa karavAmAM to kAMI bAkI rAkhyuM nathI, paNa
te te teNe *"caturgatimahAvatta duHkhavADavadIpite  /  bhramanti bhavino'jasraM
varAkA janmasAgare  /  rUpANyekAni gRhNAti tyajatyanyAni santatam  /  yathA
raGge'tra zailUSastathAyaM yantrabAhakaH  //  sarvaiH sarve'pi saMmbandhA
saMprAptA dehadhAribhiH  /  anAdikAlasaMbhrAntaistrasasthAvarayoniSu  //  bhUpaH
kRmibhavatyatra kRmizvAmaranAyakaH  /  zarIrI parivartata karmaNA vaJcito balAt
//  mAtA putrI svasA bhAryA saiva saMpadyate'GgajA  /  pitA putraH punaH so'pi
labhate pautrikaM padaM  // " -thI zubhacaMdrAcAryajIkRta zrI jJAnArNava,

Page #318 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(252) It has been heard that the subject of the collection of Gadasti is related
to the bound, but it has never indicated "Sat", therefore its misfortune has
been so far. But now, upon attaining this vision, the living being abandons this
salty water of untruthful hearing. And along with the abandonment of this salty
water, the sweet water of Tavasruti-Tattvasravana also arises, hence the seed of
knowledge sprouts here. Here, Tattvakriti, meaning the Tattvashastra-Paramartha
Shastra, which is the proponent of the truth, is equal to Tattvasruti, like
sweet water. And in its other meaning, Tattvakriti (= Tattvasravana) sweet water
is also a part of Tattvasruti-Tattvashastra, equal to sweet water. Thus,
Tattvashastra and Tattvasravana, which happens through Tattvashastra, are both
like sweet water. And the Tattvasravana, which is said to be through
Tattvasruti, includes the acceptance of the Sadguru. Because the act of
listening happens when something sits, therefore the true speaker of the
intention of Tattvasruti-Paramartha Shastra is Shrimad Saru, only through his
Shrimuh can Tattvasravana be achieved primarily, or in the absence of Sadguru,
the hearing of meaning, through the Vachanamrit-Paramkrit, composed by indirect
Sadguru, Sapurusha, also happens. "Tattva Vichar Sudharas Dhara, Guru Gam Vin
Kim Pijere?" - Shri Anandghanji. "Atmaadi Astitva Na, Eh Nirupka Shastra;
Pratyaksh Sadguru Veg Nahi, Tyaan Adhar Supatra, Athava Sadguru Ae Kahya, Je
Avgahan Kaj; Te Te Nitya Vicharvaan, Kari Matantar Tyaj." Shrimad
Rajchandraprinit Shri Atmasiddhi. This (Tattvasruti) is called its virtue.
अतस्तु नियमादेव कल्याणमखिलं नृणाम् । गुरुभक्तिसुखोपेतं लोकद्वयहितावहम् ॥६३॥
Krutti-Sattaratu and therefore, that is, from Tattvasruti, what? So that - Nirma
Dev Chal-Niyamthi only Kalyan. Paropkar Aadi, Anirun Kunan - everything is for
Narene - humans. - Due to the intention of Tattvasruti and its type. It is
described as: "Marigunott-Guru Bhakti Na Su Ya Evu Kalyan, Te Ni Aajna Thi Te Na
Karan Nu - Karva Nu Tattva Thi Kalyan Panu Chhe, Te Tala Mate. That is why it is
said: Chihita Dam - both Lok Ma Hitavah - Dit Aanaaru - Anubandh Nu Guru Bhakti
Dvara Say Panu Chhe, Te Ne Lidhe.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (252 ) gadaSTisamuccaya kAmaga anubaddha-viSaya saMbaMdhI asakathA ja zravaNa
karI che, paNa teNe kadI "sat " sucyuM nathI, tethI ja tenuM atyArasudhI
akalyANa thayuM che. paNa have atre A daSTine pAmatAM jIva A atattvazravaNarUpa
khArA jalane tilAMjali Ape che. ane je A khArA pANIne tyAga thAya che, tenI
sAthe sAthe tavazruti-tattvazravaNarUpa mIThA pANune jega paNa bane che, eTale
ahIM bodha-bIja UgI nIkaLe che. atre tattvakRti eTale tatvanA pratipAdaka evA
tattvazAstra-paramArthazAstra te madhurAM-mIThA jalanA joga tattvazrati samAna
che ane tenA bIjA arthamAM laIe te tattvakRti (= tatvazravaNa) madhura jala te
paNa tatvazrutinA-tattvazAstranA aMgarUpa heI, madhura jalanA joga barAbara che.
Ama tattvazAstra tathA tatvazAstradvArA thatuM tatvazravaNa te banne mIThA pANI
jevA che. ane tattvazrutidvArA je tattvazravaNa kahyuM, temAM saddagurunuM
grahaNa aMtarbhAva pAme che. kAraNa ke sAMbhaLavAnI kriyA to kaI bese tyAre
thAya, eTale tattvazrutinA-paramArtha zAstranA AzayanA yathArtha vaktA te
zrImadda saru ja heI, tenA zrImukhe ja mukhya karIne tattvazravaNane joga banI
zake che, athavA saddaguru virahe arthagrahaNarUpa zravaNu parokSa saguru
sapuruSe praNIta karelA vacanAmRta-paramakRta dvArA paNa thAya che. tatva vicAra
sudhArasa dhArA, gurugama viNa kima pIje re ?"-zrI AnaMdaghanajI. "AtmAdi
astitvanA, eha nirUpaka zAstra; pratyakSa sadguru vega nahiM, tyAM AdhAra
supAtra, athavA saddagurue kahyAM, je avagAhana kAja; te te nitya vicAravAM,
karI matAMtara tyAja." zrImad rAjacaMdrapraNIta zrI Atmasiddhi. Ano
(tatvazrutine ) ja guNa kahe che atastu niyamAdeva kalyANamakhilaM nRNAm  /
gurubhaktisukhopetaM lokadvayahitAvaham  // 63 //  kRtti-sattaratu ane AthI
karIne ja, eTale ke tatvazruti thakI ja, zuM? to ke--niramA deva cALa-niyamathI
ja kalyANa. paropakAra Adi, aNiruM kUNAM-badhuMya narene-manuSyone hoya che.
-tatvazruti thakI tathA prakAranA AzayabhAvane lIdhe. tenuM ja vizeSaNa kare
che: "mariguNotta-gurubhaktinA sU yA evuM kalyANa, tenI AjJAthI tenA karaNanuM-
karavAnuM tattavathI kayANapaNuM che, teTalA mATe. eTalA mATe ja kahyuM : cihitA
dama-ubhaya lekamAM hitAvaha-Dita ANanArUM-anubaMdhanuM gurubhaktidvArA
sAyapaNuM che, tene lIdhe.

Page #319 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Dimadrusti:** From your hearing, all well-being (253) By rule, from this, all
well-being for humans Guru-devotion, happiness-filled, both lakes, beneficial
place. 63 Meaning: - And from that-truth-action, humans have all well-being by
rule, - which is filled with the happiness of Guru-devotion and is beneficial in
both lakes.  **Discussion** You in mind, in wealth, in all, Gurudev's grace,
self-soul in you; then your work becomes successful, nectar-juice drink, love-
wealth. - Shrimad Rajchandraji. And from that truth-effort-truth-hearing, by
rule, humans attain all well-being like altruism. Because from hearing the good
teachings of the holy scriptures, altruism, compassion, charity, virtue, etc.,
well-being-making impressions are planted in the soul; and from truth-hearing,
therefore, that kind of pure mind-intention manifests, mind-purification, all
well-being happens, and as a result, altruism, etc., well-being-giving
activities occur. Meaning - In the 4 matters of desire, even without teaching,
people are clever-sharp, but Dharma cannot happen without scripture-hearing, so
in that - in that well-being-making scripture, respect the words of the attained
holy person, that is beneficial, - is supremely well-being-making. The nectar of
words of the supremely compassionate soul Shrimad Rajchandraji is: "Oh! The
nectar of words of a man, gesture, and good company. Awakens the dormant
consciousness, keeps the falling tendencies stable, innocent by mere sight,
inspires the original nature, form-realization, un-negligent restraint, and the
cause of complete non-attachment, non-dual nature, finally reveals the original
nature, makes it stand in the infinite, unobstructed form, Three-time-living,
oh! 39 Peace: Peace: Peace" - Shrimad Rajchandra And that well-being is also
filled with the happiness of Guru-devotion, because from the command of Shri
Guru, there is well-being. Altruism, etc., well-being-making work, also done
with the command of Shrimad Guru Bhagwan, that is from the truth - from the
highest purpose - becomes truly well-being-making; done self-willed, it does not
become truly well-being-making. So, the Lord, the scripture-maker, x" उपदेशं
विनाप्यर्थकामौ प्रति पटुर्जनः । But not without knowledge, there, the two!" -
Shri Gibindu,

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dImAdaSTi: tava zravaNathI sakala kalyANa (253) niyamathI ja ethI karI, narene
sakala kalyANa gubhakti sukha yukta je, ubhaya leka hita sthAna. 63 artha :-ane
e-tattvakRti thakI ja manuSyane niyamathI ja sakala kalyANa hoya che,-ke je
gurubhaktinA sukhathI yukta ane bane lekamAM hitAvaha-hita karanAra evuM hoya
che. . vivecana tase manase dhanase sabase, gurudevakI Ana sva Atma base; taba
kAraja siddha bane apane, rasa amRta pAhi premaghano."--zrImad rAjacaMdrajI. ane
e tattvazrati-tatvazravaNa thakI ja niyamathI ja manuSyane paropakAra vagere
sakala kalyANanI prApti thAya che. kAraNa ke satzAstranA sadupadezazravaNathI ja
parepakAra, dayA, dAna, zIla AdinA kalyANakArI saMskAra bIja AtmAmAM ropAya che;
ane tattvazravaNathI tethI karIne ja tevA prakAranA nirmala citta-Azaya pragaTe
che, mana:zuddhi sakala kalyANa thAya che, ane tenA pariNAme paropakAra Adi
kalyANaprada pravRtti saMbhave che. artha-kAmanI 4 bAbatamAM to leke vinA
upadeze paNa 5Tu-heziyAra hoya che, paNa dharma te zAstra-zruti vinA thaI zakato
nathI, eTale temAM-te kalyANakara zAstramAM Apta satpuruSanA vacanamAM Adara
kare te hitakAraka che," parama kalyANakArI che. parama bhAvitAtmA zrImad
rAjacaMdrajInuM vacanAmRta che ke - "aho ! puruSanA vacanAmRta, mudrA ane
satsamAgama. suSupta cetanane jAgrata karanAra, paDatI vRttine sthira rAkhanAra,
darzana mAtrathI nirdoSa, apUrva svabhAvane preraka, svarUpapratIti, apramatta
saMyama, ane pUrNa vItarAga nivikalapa svabhAvanA kAraNabhUta, chelle agI
svabhAva pragaTa karI, anaMta avyAbAdha svarUpamAM sthiti karAvanAra, trikALa
jyavaMta vatte ! 39 zAMtiH zAMtiH zAMti" -zrImada rAjacaMdra ane te kalyANa paNa
gurubhaktinA sukhathI yukta evuM hoya che, kAraNa ke zrI sazurunI AjJAthI ja
kalyANa hoya che. paropakArAdi kalyANakArya paNa zrImad guru bhagavAnanI
AjJApUrvaka karavAmAM Ave te ja tattvathI-paramArthathI vAstavika kalyANarUpa
thAya che; svachaMda karavAmAM Ave te vAstavika kalyANarUpa thatuM nathI. ema
bhagavAna zAstrakArane x" upadezaM vinApyarthakAmau prati paTurjanaH  /  paratu
na vinA jJAti tatrAro dvitaH !"--zrI gibindu,

Page #320 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(254) The Gadashti Samuchaya opinion is that by abandoning the Guru's command,
one abandons the command of the Bhagwan, and by abandoning the Bhagwan's
command, one abandons both the Lekas.  "Charity, penance, and virtuous vows,
without the Nath's guidance, become obstacles to the cycle of birth and death...
Blessed are you! Blessed are you! Blessed are you, Jinraj!"  With such a heart,
Devchandra embraced the path of Shiva. - Shri Devchandraji. Such acts of
welfare, performed with the Guru's command, are bound by Anubandha.  This means
that they lead to a continuous progression of unique welfare, and the merit of
punya-anubandhi punya continuously rises.  Thus, this act of welfare becomes a
cause of benefit in both the Lekas, "Lekadrayahitavah" - it becomes a cause of
benefit in both the Lekas. "Magha, Aakhir T" - Shri Jinpravachan. This (Guru
Bhakti) is specifically said to be the ultimate fruit: "Guru Bhakti Prabhavena
Tirthakudarshanam Matam. Samapattyadibhedena Nirvanek Nibandhanam." || 64 ||
Through the influence of Guru Bhakti, the vision of the Tirthankara is
considered.  It is the cause of Moksha, through the difference of Samapatti,
etc.  64.  Meaning - Through the influence of Guru Bhakti, the vision of the
Tirthankara is considered, through the difference of Samapatti, etc., which is
the cause of Moksha. Explanation:  Through the influence of Guru Bhakti, through
the strength of Guru Mattika, through the karma-vipak that arises from it, what?
It is considered, it is desired, to see the Tirthankara, to see the Bhagwan.
How?  Through the difference of Samapatti, etc.  Samapatti is the touching
through meditation, through which it is done.  The word "adi" refers to the
binding, fruition, and the attainment of the Tabahav Apatti of the Namakarma.
(That is, it refers to the binding, arising, and attainment of the Tirthankara
Bhava of the Tirthankara Namakarma.)  Such a vision of the Tirthankara is unique
- it is the cause of Nirvanainivashvanabhu - Nirvan, it is an extraordinary,
unbreakable cause of Moksha. • "Guru Aanaae Chaae Jinavar Aana Na Hai Niyamen.
Sachchanda Vihaaraanam Haribhadde Na Jaao Bhanian." || Shri Yashovijayaji, Shri
Tilakshan Samuchaya.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (254) gadaSTisamuccaya abhiprAya che. kAraNake-guru AjJAne tyAga karyo eTale
bhagavAnanI AjJAne* tyAga karyo, ane bhagavAnanI AjJAne tyAga karyo eTale ubhaya
lekano tyAga karyo." dAna tapa zIla vrata, nAtha ANu vinA, thaI bAdhaka kare
bhava upAdhi... dhanya tuM ! dhanya tuM ! dhanya jinarAja tuM !" ANaraMge citta
dharI, devacaMdra pada zIvra varI je."--zrI devacaMdrajI. AvuM je guru
AjJApUrvaka kalyANa kArya hoya che, te anubaMdhavALuM hoya che. eTale ke tethI
uttarottara viziSTatA kalyANanI paraMparA prApta thayA ja kare che,
puNyAnubaMdhI puNyanI uttarottara caDhatI kaLA-abhyadaya thayA ja kare che. Ama
A kalyANakArya A leka-paralekamAM hitanuM kAraNa thAya che, "lekadrayahitAvaha"
--ubhaya lekamAM hitane kheMcI lAvanAruM bane che. "mAghA, Akhara ta"--zrI
jinapravacana. AnuM (gurubhaktinuM) ja vizeSathI parama phala kahe che-
gurubhaktiprabhAvena tIrthakudarzanaM matam  /  samApattyAdibhedena
nirvANaikanibandhanam  //  64  //  prabhAvathI gurubhaktinA, tIrthakara darzana
mAna; samApatti Adi bhedathI, mekSanuM eka nidAna. 64 artha -gurubhaktinA
prabhAvathI samApatti Adi bhede karIne tIrthakara darzana mAnyuM che,-ke je
mokSanuM eka nibaMdhana-kAraNa che. kRttiH-gurumattikamAna-gurubhaktinA
prabhAvathI, sAmarthyathI, tenAthI upajelA karmavipAkathI, zuM ? te ke
tIrthadana mara-tIrthakaranuM darzana, bhagavaMtanuM darzana mAnyuM che-ISTa
gaNyuM che. kevI rIte ? te ke sAmena-samAputti Adi bhedathI. samApatti eTale
dhyAnathI spazana, te vaDe karIne. Adi zabdathI te nAmakarmanA baMdha, vipAka
ane tabhAva ApattinI upapattinuM grahaNa che. (eTale ke tIrthaMkaranAmakamane
baMdha, udaya ane tIrthaMkarabhAvanI prAptinI yuktiyuktatAnuM-gyatAnuM grahaNa
che.) te tIrthakara darzana AvuM viziSTa che-nirvAgainivazvanabhU-nirvANanuM eka
nibaMdhana-kAraNa che, asAdhAraNa evuM avaMdhya (acUka) mekSa kAraNa che. * "
guru ANAe cAe jiNavara ANA na hAi NiyameNa  /  sacchaMdavihArANaM haribhaddeNa
jao bhaNiaM  /  /  eammi paricatte ANA khalu bhagavao pariccattA  /  tIe a
paricAe duNDa vi legANa cAotti  // " zrI yazovijyajIta zrI tilakSaNasamuccaya,

Page #321 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Deepradrushti: The Light of Guru Bhakti, the Path to Tirthankara Darshan, the
Essence of Samapatti  (55) Commentary: "Where there is supreme knowledge, there
is devotion to the Lord. To attain the Lord, one needs a Guru, a true Guru. To
recognize the Guru, one needs detachment, and to develop detachment, one needs
good fortune." - Shrimad Rajchandraji.  The above passage highlights the immense
power and efficacy of Guru Bhakti. It is believed by the virtuous that through
the influence of Guru Bhakti, one can attain the darshan of the Tirthankara. How
is this possible? It is achieved through the various aspects of Samapatti.
Samapatti refers to the experience of touching, through meditation, the essence
of the Lord, the pure Atma Swaroop. This experience leads to the attainment of
Tirthankara Darshan, or the binding of the Tirthankara Karma, which in turn
results in the attainment of the Tirthankara Bhaav. Thus, Tirthankara Darshan is
achieved. This darshan of the Tirthankara, the Dharma Tirtha Sansthapana, is a
unique and unparalleled cause for liberation, an unwavering and extraordinary
cause.  Therefore, Guru Bhakti holds immense glory. Through the devotion,
service, and worship of the Sadguru, one understands the essence of Shri
Jinendra Bhagavan, and attains the darshan of his form. This inevitably leads to
the fruit of liberation. This "darshan" is not possible without "drushti,"
without the eye, without the inner eye. "Without the eye, one cannot attain."
This refers to the fact that what is beyond the reach of the physical eye,
cannot be attained without the "eye," without the grace of the Sadguru, or
without the divine inner eye bestowed by the Sadguru. But those who serve at the
feet of the Sadguru, they experience this "beyond the eye" reality. The humble
and deserving disciple, through the eye of the Sadguru, attains the divine eye
and experiences the essence of the Jina. Thus, the darshan of the pure, inherent
bliss of the Lord, which is beyond the senses, is achieved through the divine
eye bestowed by the Sadguru. This is the ultimate grace of Shrimad Sadguru
Bhagavan. "Ask me about the original state, and I will reveal it to the yogi." -
Shrimad Rajchandraji.  The Essence of Samapatti: The Samapatti mentioned above
is fascinating and worthy of special understanding. Samapatti is the experience
of touching through meditation. It is the experience of touching, through
meditation, the essence of the object of meditation, the attainment of the true
essence of the object, the attainment of the essence of the object. Or, it is
the attainment of the essence of the object of meditation, the experience of the
self as equal to the object of meditation. To understand this, the example of a
crystal gem is used. A pure crystal gem, like a pure soul, can reflect the color
of a red or black flower placed near it.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dIprAdaSTiH gurubhaktiprabhA tIrthaMkaradazana-samA5ttisvarUpa (55) vivecana
"prabhu bhakti tyAM uttama jJAna, prabhu meLavavA guru bhagavAna guru oLakhavA
ghaTa vairAgya, teha upajavA pUvita bhAgya."--zrImad rAjacaMdrajI. uparamAM je
gurubhakti kahI tene mahAprabhAva-mAhAsya-sAmarthya atra batAvyuM che.
gurubhaktinA prabhAvathI zrI tIrthakaranuM darzana prApta thAya che, ema
sapuruSonuM mAnavuM che. te kevI rIte? tene mATe kahyuM ke samApatti vagere
bhedathI te darzana sAMpaDe che. samApatti eTale dhyAnathI sparzanA, prabhunA
svarUpanI arthAt zuddha AtmasvarUpanI dhyAnathI je pharasanA thavI, tethI karIne
tIrthakara "darzana' sAMpaDe che, athavA te tIrthakara nAmakarma baMdhAya che,
ane tene vipAka thaye tIrthakara bhAvanI prApti thAya che. Ama paNa tIrthakara
darzana prApta thAya che. ane AvuM je bhagavAna tIrthaMkaranuM--dharma
tIrthasaMsthApakanuM darzana che, te mokSanuM eka advitIya kAraNa che, amegha-
acUka evuM asAdhAraNa ananya kAraNa che. Ama gurubhaktine mahimA apUrva che.
saddagurunI bhaktithI-sevAthI-upAsanAthI zrI jinezvara bhagavaMtanuM svarUpa
samajAya che, temanuM svarUpadarzana thAya che, jethI amegha mokSaphaLa avazya
maLe che ane je "darzana' che te "daSTi ? binA nayana vinA-nayana vinA thatuM
nathI, "binA nayana pAve nahiM;" vinA nayananI pAve nahiM? je vAta che, arthAt
carmacakSune agocara evI je vAta che, te nayana' vinA arthAt sadgurunI deravaNa
vinA athavA sagurue apelA divya AMtarU cakSu vinA prApta thatI nathI. paNa je
sadgurunA caraNa seve che, te te te "binA nayanakI bAta" sAkSAt pAme che
vinayavaMta vineya-ziSya sadgurunA nayanathI divya nayana pAmI jinasvarUpane
sAkSAtkAra kare che. Ama atIndriya evA prabhunA zuddha sahajAnaMda svarUpanuM
darzana sadgurue ApelA divya nayana dvArA thAya che,-e zrImad sadguru
bhagavAnane parama upakAra che. mULa sthiti je pUcho mane, te seMpI dauM yogI
kane."-zrImad rAjacaMdrajI samApattinuM svarUpa - uparamAM je samApatti kahI
tenuM svarUpa rasaprada-badhaprada heI khAsa samajavA jevuM che samApatti eTale
dhyAna dvArA sparzanA. jenuM dhyAna karavAmAM Ave che tene svarUpanuM dhyAnathI
sparzana-anubhavana thavuM, tadrupatAnI samyapha Apatti-prApti thavI,
tadrupapaNuM pAmavuM te samApatti. athavA jenuM dhyAna karavAmAM Ave che tene
svarUpanI samatulya ApattiprApti thavI, tenI samAna tapa AtmAnubhava thavo te
samApatti. A samajavA mATe sphaTika ratnanuM dRSTAMta che. jAtavaMta evuM nimala
sphaTika ratna rAtA ke kALA phUlanI

Page #322 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(256) Yoga-drishti-samuccaya It is kept above. Its shadow falls on it, and it
attains the state of being like that, the state of being like that. Just as a
pure mind-jewel meditates, its shadow falls on it, and it attains the state of
being like that, the state of being like that, due to the influence of the
object being contemplated. Thus, just like a pure crystal gem, those with a
subtle mind (1) attain it through 'tārthya', i.e., with unwavering focus, and
(2) through 'tad-janapana', i.e., with complete absorption, like the application
of collyrium. 4 Samapatti There are three main essential conditions for this
samapatti to occur: (1) First, the mind must be pure, like a crystal gem, with a
subtle mind. This is the qualification for attaining samapatti. (2) Just like a
crystal placed near a flower, the mind must be steadily focused on the object
being contemplated. If this is not the case, how can samapatti occur? (3) And
then, just as the color of the flower falls on the crystal, there must be
complete absorption, the object of meditation must be firmly imprinted in the
mind. Only when this happens does samapatti occur. Also, these three conditions
(Essential conditions) that are essential for samapatti to occur, the previous
one is the cause of the next. Because first of all, the essence of the mind must
be extremely pure, like a crystal, i.e., the mind must become extremely sattvic.
If this does not happen, just as the shadow of a flower does not fall on a
stone, so too, the shadow of the object worthy of contemplation does not fall on
a polluted mind, samapatti does not occur. But when the mind becomes pure,
subtle, transparent, like a crystal, it does not run towards other thoughts. Due
to this, it becomes steady and attains focus; and when it attains this focus, it
then attains complete absorption. The meaning is that when the mind becomes
pure, it becomes steady, and when it becomes steady, it becomes absorbed. Thus,
the beginning of samapatti X "मणिरिवाभिजातस्य क्षीणवृत्तेरसंशयम् । તાન્ધ્યાત્ત
કારત્વાષ સમાઽત્ત: કથીર્ત્તિતા ૫ શ્રી યશા. કૃત દ્વા॰ દ્વા૦ ૨, ૧૦ * According to
the terminology of Patanjali's Yoga Shastra, there are three types of samapatti:
grahya, grahana, and grihita. Of these, grahya samapatti is the state of being
absorbed in nivichara samadhi, grahana samapatti is the state of being absorbed
in sananda samadhi, and grihita samapatti is the state of being absorbed in
sasmita samadhi. There are also four types of samapatti: (1) savit, (2) nirvit,
(3) savichara, (4) nivichara. This samapatti is called saprajnat samadhi
(savikalpa), and it is also called 'sakhij' samadhi. In this, the last nivichara
samapatti, when it is immersed, leads to spiritual grace, which gives rise to a
knowledge that is greater than shruti and anumana. This knowledge gives rise to
tattva-sanskara, which is the destroyer of the karmic residues, and its
cessation gives rise to samadhi called asamprajnat (nivikalpa). Through the
study of the virama suffix and the remnants of the sanskara of 'naiti neti',
this asamprajnat samadhi reveals the true nature of the self, the state of being
established in its own form. Thus, nivichara samapatti - spiritual grace →
knowledge → tattva-sanskara → asamprajnat samadhi → kaivalya, - this is the
order. (For more details, see Patanjali, and Yashvijayji's Dva. Kru. 20).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (256) yogadRSTisamuccaya uparamAM rAkhyuM hAya. te temAM tenI tevI jhAMI-chAyA
paDe che, tevI raMgachAyAthI tadrupApatti-tadrupapaNAnI prApti thAya che; tema
nirmala citta-ratna jevu dhyAna kare che, tenI tevI chAyA temAM paDe che, te te
bhAvavAmAM AvatI vastunA uparAgathI tene tadnApatti-tadrupapazu' prApta thAya
che. Ama jAtivata nila sphaTika ratnanI jema kSINavRttivALAne (1) tArthyathI ?
arthAt temAM sthitirUpa ekAgrapaNAthI ane (2) 'tada'janapaNAthI' arthAt tenuM
aMjana-raMga lAgavArUpa tanmayapaNAthI samApatti hoya che. 4 samApatti A
samApattix thavAmAM traNa mukhya Avazyaka zarata che-1) prathama te sphaTika
ratnanI jema citta kSINavRttivALu' nimala hevu joie. ema hAya te ja samApatti
thavAnI ceAgyatA prApta thAya. ( 2 ) eka lanI pAse mUkelA sphaTikanI jema,
bhAvavAmAM AvatA viSaya pratye cittanuM sthira ekAgrapaNu kema thAya? thavu joi
e. A na heAya te samApatti thAya ja kema ? ( 3 ) ane pachI phUlanI 2Mga-chAyA
sphaTikamAM paDe, tema tanmayapaNuM thavu joie, dhyAna viSayanA dRDha bhAvaraga
lAgI javA joIe. Ama thAya tyAre ja samApatti thAya. temaja A samApatti thavAmAM
Avazyaka evI je A traNa zarata ( Essential conditions) kahI, temAM AgalI hoya te
pAchalInuM kAraNa thAya che. kAraNa ke sauthI prathama te cittasattva sphaTika
jevu atyaMta nila-zuddha thavuM joIe, arthAMt citta atyata sAttvika pariNAmI
thai javuM joI e. Ama jo na thAya te pattharamAM jema phUlanI chAyA na paDe,
tema malina cittamAM paNa bhAvavA yeAgya vastunI chAyA na paDe, samApatti na
thAya. paNu jyAre citta nirmalakSINavRttivALuM, sphaTika jevu' pAradarzaka
svaccha (Crystal-clear) thai jAya, tyAre te anya vRtti pratye doDatu nahi.
hAvAthI sthira thai ekAgrapaNuM pAme; ane Ama jyAre te ekAgrapaNuM pAme tyAre ja
te tanmaya bhAvane pAme. tAtparya ke citta nimala thAya te sthira thAya ne
sthira thAya te tanmaya thAya. Ama samApattine upakrama X "maNirivAbhijAtasya
kSINavRtterasaMzayam  /  tAndhyAtta kAratvASa samA'tta: kathIrttitA 5 zrI yazA.
kRta dvA. dvA0 2, 10 * pAtaMjala yogazAstranI paribhASA pramANe grAhya, grahaNa
ane gRhIta ema traNa prakAranI samApatti che. temAM grAhya sabhApatti nivicAra
samAdhi paya te, grahaNa samApatti sAnaMda samAdhi pa`te, ane gRhItu samApatti
sAsmita samAdhi pate vizrAma pAme che. vaLI tenA cAra prakAra che. (1) savita',
(2) nirvita, (3) savicAra. (4) nivi`cAra. A samApattie sa'prajJAta samAdhi
(savikalpa) che, ane te ja 'sakhIja' samAdhi kahevAya che. temAM chellI nivicAra
samApattinuM nimajJapaNa' thaye adhyAtmaprasAda thAya che, tethI RtabharA prajJA
upaje che, ke je zruta-anumAna karatAM adhika hoya che. te RtaMbharA prajJAthI
saMskArAMtaranA khAdhaka evA tattvasaMskAra upaje che, ane tenA nirodhathI
asa'prajJAta (nivi'kalpa) nAme samAdhi upaje che. virAma pratyayanA abhyAsathI
ane naiti neti' evA saMskArazeSathI te asaMprajJAta samAdhithI caitraya pragaTe
che-AtmAnu kevala svarUpapratiSThatva thAya che. Ama nivicAra samApatti-
abhAmaprasAda- Rta'bhA prajJA- tattvasa skAra asaprajJAta samAdhi - kaivalya, -A
krama che. (vizeSa mATaeN jue pAtaMjala, tathA yazovijayajIkRta dvA. krUA. 20).

Page #323 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Deepradrushti: Taviki Paramatma Samapatti; Trividh Atma (257). In this,
Chittasthirata is the middle virtue, its importance is indicated by the profound
statement of Shrimad Rajchandraji: “I will tell you after understanding, when
the mind becomes stable.”  Now, whose Samapatti? Of which meditation object? It
is worth considering. If the object of meditation is inert and the meditator is
conscious, how can it be a result of oneness?  Therefore, there is no Tavik+
Samapatti of an inert object through meditation. The Tavik Samapatti is of the
soul, which is the object of emotion. And Paramatma is the pure soul, so the
Samapatti of Paramatma is the Samapatti of the Jivatma. I am Paramatma,
Paramatma is me, “To feel the Paramatma as the self” - this non-dual meditation
leads the Jivatma to the Samapatti of Paramatma, because the essence of the soul
and Paramatma is one, the essence of consciousness is the same, so their
harmonious Samapatti is worthy of non-dual unity. Therefore, “He who knows the
self (pure soul) through the qualities of his own essence, he knows the self,
and his delusion is destroyed,” said Maharshi Kundkundacharya. _ " जो जाणइ
अरहते, दव्वत्तगुणत्तपज्जयत्तेहिं । सो जाणइ अप्पाणं, मोहो खलु जाइ तस्स लय ।।"
-Shri Pravachansar  The remedy is the creation of many, knowing the one who is
pleased; pure essence, quality, and perception in meditation, Shiva gives the
Lord's grace. ... Shri Ar” Shri Yashovijayji. “Meditating on the revealed
essence, one becomes aware of one's own essence.” —Shri Devchandraji.  Thus, the
reason for the Samapatti of Paramatma is that the power of Paramatma, which is
the intimate element of the father, resides in the Jiva. Its individuality,
i.e., its manifestation, is in the form of meditation material with the
manifested Paramatma, and by obtaining the excellent means of meditation on the
manifested Paramatma, the Jiva's inherent power manifests as the manifested
Paramatma. +" संप्रज्ञातोऽवतरति ध्यानभेदेऽत्र तत्त्वतः । तरीत्र समापसर्नामेनो
माचतां विना !” –ા, હા. ૨૦-૧૫ *" परमात्मसमापत्तिर्जीवात्मनि हि युज्यते । मेन
तथाननान्तशतिः || -દ્વા, દ્વા. ૨૦

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dIprAdaSTi: tAvikI paramAtma samA5tti; trividha AtmA ( ra57 ) che. AmAM
cittasthiratA e madhyavatI guNa che, tenI keTalI badhI mahattvatA che e
sUcavatuM zrImad rAjacaMdrajInuM parama tatvagaMbhIra vacana che ke-- bIjI
samajaNa pachI kahIza, jyAre citta sthira thaIza." have samApatti kenI ? kayA
dhyAnaviSayanI? tene vicAra karavA yogya che. dhyAnaviSaya jo jaDa heya ne
dhyAtA cetana heya te ene ekatvapariNAmarUpa meLa kema bane? mATe jaDa vastune
dhyAnathI tAvika+ samApatti thAya nahiM. tAtvika tAvikI samApatti te AtmA je
bhAvanAviSaya hoya te ja thAya. ane paramAtmA paramAtma e zuddha AtmA ja che,
eTale paramAtmAnI* samApatti jIvAtmAmAM samApatti yukta che. huM chuM te
paramAtmA chuM, paramAtmA che te huM chuM, "paramAtamanuM he Atama bhAvavuM'
evuM abheda dhyAna dharavAthI jIvAtmAne paramAtmAnI samApti thAya che, kAraNa ke
dravyathI AtmAnI ne paramAtmAnI tArika ekatA che, eka cetana svarUpapaNAthI
samAnatA che, eTale tenI samarasIbhAvarUpa samApattiabheda ekatA thavA yogya
che. eTalA mATe ja "je ahaMtane (zuddha AtmAne) svadravyaguNa-paryayathI jANe
che, te ja sva AtmAne jANe che, ane tene moha nizcaya laya pAme che," ema
maharSi kuMdakuMdAcAryajIe kahyuM che. _ " jo jANai arahate,
davvattaguNattapajjayattehiM  /  so jANai appANaM, moho khalu jAi tassa laya  /
/ " -zrI pravacanasAra je upAya bahuvidhanI racanA, gamAyA te jANe ; zuddha
dravya guNa paryaya dhyAne, ziva diye prabhu saparANe re....zrI ara" zrI
yazovijayajI. "pragaTa tattvatA dhyAvatAM, nija tatvane dhyAtA thAya re. "--zrI
devacaMdrajI. Ama paramAtmAnI samApti thAya che tenuM kAraNa ema che ke jIvamAM
pitAnI aMtaraMga upAdAnabhUta tevI paramAtma zakti rahelI che. tenI vyakti
arthAt pragaTapaNuM vyakta-pragaTa paramAtmAnA tevA prakAre dhyAnarUpa
sAmagrIsagathI hoya che, pragaTa paramAtmAnuM dhyAnAlaMbanarUpa uttama nimitta
pAmI jIvanI te upAdAnazakti pragaTa paramAtmapaNe pariName che. +"
saMprajJAto'vatarati dhyAnabhede'tra tattvataH  /  taritra samApasarnAmeno
mAcatAM vinA !" -aa, hA. 20-15 *" paramAtmasamApattirjIvAtmani hi yujyate  /
mena tathANAnAntazatiH || -dvA, dvA. 20

Page #324 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(258) In the collection of yogic insights and the nature of the soul, the
omnipotence of the Supreme Soul is described in three types of souls, as is
well-known in the scriptures: * Bahiratma, Antaratma, and Paramatma. Of these,
(1) the one who has the awareness of self in the body, and therefore appears as
"I am a student, I am thin," etc., is known as the body or Bahiratma. (2) The
one who does not have the awareness of self in the body, but has it in the soul
itself, meaning the one who remains as a witness in the body and resides as the
indweller, is the indweller or Antaratma. (3) The one who is completely pure and
free from all impurities, and who is the embodiment of the transcendental
qualities of the jewels, is the Paramatma. Of these three types of souls, the
Bahiratma is not eligible for meditation and cannot become the meditator, the
Antaratma is eligible and can become the meditator, and the Paramatma is the
goal worthy of meditation. This is how meditation is used. Or in other words,
abandoning the Bahiratma, becoming the Antaratma, and with a steady mind, to
experience the Paramatma as the soul itself, is the practice of Samadhi. The
soul is our offering, "Atma Arpan Dav." Just as the reflection of a man's form
is reflected in a pure, unchanging mirror, so too is the form of the Supreme
Being, Paramatma, reflected in the pure, unchanging Antaratma, meaning that the
Paramatma form appears in it as a manifest experience. This is Samadhi.
"Kayadikhe ho Atma Buddhi Grahyo, Bahiratma Aghrup Sugyani; Kayadikhe he
Sakhidhar Thai Rahyo, Antar Atmarup Sugyani. Jnana Anandhe he Puran Pavne,
Varjit Sakal Upadhi Sugyani; Atindriya Gunaganmani Aag, Im Paramatma Sadh
Sugyani. Bahiram Taj Antar, Atmarup Thai Thir Bhav..Sugyani; Paramatma nu ho
Atma Bhavvu, Atma Arpan Dav-Sugyani. Sumati Charankaj Atma Arpan, Darpan Jim
Avikara..Sugyani" - Shri Anandghanji From all this, it is evident that the
Bahiratma has the potential for Paramatmahood, and therefore, with appropriate
effort, it is possible for its manifestation. That is, by abandoning the
Bahiratma, and with a pure and steady Antaratma, if one meditates on God-
Paramatma with single-pointed focus, then the meditator, the object of
meditation, and the goal become one, meaning that meditation x"बाह्यात्मा
चान्तरास्मा च परमात्मेति च त्रयः । कायाधिष्ठायकध्येयाः प्रसिद्धायोगवाङ्मये
॥"-500 "बहिरन्तः परश्चेति त्रिधात्मा सर्वदेहिषु । gવેચાત્તત્ર પર મપાયાહૂહિત્ય
–સમાધિશતક,

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (258) yogadaSTisamuccaya ane jIvAtmAmAM tevA prakAre paramAtmAnuM sarva-zakti
che, tenI upapatti mATe traNa prakAranA AtmA gavAmayamAM prasiddha cheH *
bahirAtmA, aMtarAtmA ane paramAtmA. temAM (1) kAyAmAM jene Atmabuddhi che ane
tethI huM skUla, huM kRza" trividha AtmA ItyAdi prakAre je pratIta thAya che, te
kAya athavA bahirAtmA che. (2) kAyAdikamAM jene Atmabuddhi nathI paNa AtmAmAM ja
Atmabuddhi che, eTale kAyAdikamAM je sAkSIrUpa rahI tene adhiSThAtA thaIne rahe
che, te adhiSThAyaka athavA aMtarAtmA che. (3) jJAnAnaMde je pUrNa pAvana ane
sarva upAdhithI rahita che, ane je atIndriya guNaratnanA Akara che, te paramAtmA
che. A traNa prakAranA AtmAmAM bahirAtmA dhyAnane adhikArI hoI dhyAtA thaI
zakatuM nathI, aMtarAtmA adhikArI heI dhyAtA hoya che, ane paramAtmA te
dhyAnamAM lAvavA yogya evA dhyeya che. Ama dhyAnano upayoga hoya che. athavA
bIjA zabdomAM kahIe te bahirAtmabhAva tyajI, aMtarAtmarUpa thaI, sthira bhAve
paramAtmAnuM je AtmArUpa bhAvavuM, te ja samApattine vidhi che, Atma apaNane
dAva che, "Atama arapaNa dAva." jema avikAra evA nirmala darpaNamAM puruSanA
svarUpanuM arpaNa thAya che, tema nirvikAra evA nimala aMtarAtmAmAM paramapuruSa
paramAtmAnA svarUpanuM arpaNa thAya che, arthAta te paramAtmasvarUpa temAM
pragaTa anubhavarUpe dekhAya che. A ja samApatti che. kAyAdike ho Atama buddha
grahyo, bahirAtama agharUpasugyAnI; kAyAdike he sAkhIdhara thaI rahyo, aMtara
AtamarUpa sugyAnI. jJAnAnaMde he pUraNa pAvane, varjita sakala upAdhi sugyAnI;
atIndriya guNagaNamaNi Aga, Ima paramAtama sAdha sugyAnI. bahirAma taja aMtara,
AtamarUpa thaI thira bhAva..sugyAnI; paramAtamanuM ho Atama bhAvavuM, Atama
arapaNa dAva-sugyAnI. sumati caraNakaja Atama arapaNa, darapaNa jima
avikAra..sugyAnI " -zrI AnaMdaghanajI A sarva parathI phalita thAya che ke
bahirAtmAmAM zaktithI paramAtmapaNuM che, tethI yathAyogya kArage tenI vyaktine-
Avibhavano saMbhava che. eTale ke bahirAtmabhAva tyajI daI, nirmala ne sthira
thayela aMtarAtmA jo paramezvara-paramAtmAnuM ekAgra dhyAna kare, te tenA
avalaMbane dhyAtA ne dhyeyane abheda thAya, arthAt dhyAna x"bAhyAtmA cAntarAsmA
ca paramAtmeti ca trayaH  /  kAyAdhiSThAyakadhyeyAH prasiddhAyogavAGmaye  //
"-500 "bahirantaH parazceti tridhAtmA sarvadehiSu  /  gvecAttatra para
mapAyAhUhitya -samAdhizataka,

Page #325 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Diimadrushti: "Bhangi Ilikaane Chatkaave" - Tirthankar Darshan  (259) The one
who performs becomes the ultimate self, the goal is achieved, and the complete
attainment of the desired is obtained. "God is the support...mind is the
meditator, the goal is inseparable...future. The goal is achieved now...mind,
the desired attainment is inseparable...future." - Shri Devchandraji "Your
meditation is the same, that knowledge and character are the same, therefore all
sins go away, the meditator is the goal form." - Shri Yashovijayji  Thus, due to
the similarity of the substance and its essence, the soul attains the ultimate
self, meaning it becomes like that, it becomes like that, it becomes absorbed in
that, because whatever one meditates on, one becomes that, is the rule. Here,
the example of the bee and the caterpillar is famous. The caterpillar meditates
on the bee, it becomes a bee. Shri Anandghanji has exclaimed with utmost
enthusiasm: "Whoever worships the Jina, becomes a Jina, the bhangi becomes like
the Ilika, the bhangi becomes like the world...the Jina's body is the source of
all."  Shrimad Rajchandraji explains this saying as the ultimate Dharma, saying:
"By becoming a Jina, meaning by abandoning the worldly feelings and embracing
the self-feeling, whoever worships the Jina, meaning the omniscient, the
liberated, is certainly a Jina, meaning he is united with the state of
liberation. He has given the example of the bee and the caterpillar, which is
directly understandable." "The servant's devotion is given, the Lord is easily
attained; whoever meditates with absorption, he truly becomes Devchandra...the
old one is yours, your mind is filled with your name." "The ultimate virtue is
the absorption in service, the mind is certainly focused on the meditation;
Experience the pure essence, attain the state of Devchandra." - Shri
Devchandraji  Thus, it is said that the attainment, etc., are obtained through
the influence of this Tirthankar Darshan - Paramatma Darshan - Guru Bhakti. In
other words, due to the ripeness of the virtues arising from the influence of
Guru Bhakti, the Paramatma Darshan is attained, or the Tirthankar name karma is
bound by Guru Bhakti, it arises, and the attainment of the Tirthankar state is
achieved. And the Tirthankar Darshan is also obtained in this way. This
Tirthankar Darshan - Paramatma Darshan is the only condition for Nirvana,
meaning the unique cause of liberation. It is never attained without it. Its
attainment is extremely rare, and...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dImAdaSTi: "bhRgI IlikAne caTakAve"-tIrthakaradazana (259) karanAra pote ja
dhyeya evA paramAtmasvarUpa thaI jAya, dhyeyanI samApatti thAya ane sAdhyanI
akhaMDa siddhi sAMpaDe. paramezvara avalaMbane re.....mana dhyAtA dhyeya abheda
re....bhavi. dhyeya samApatti have re....mana sAdhya siddhi aviccheda
re...bhavi."--zrI devacaMdrajI "tAruM dhyAna te samakitarUpa, tehI ja jJAna ne
cAritra te ja chejI, tethI jAye saghaLA ho pApa, dhyAtA dhyeya svarUpa hoye
pache."--zrI yazovijayajI Ama dravyanA-tattvanA sAdhamyathI aMtarAtmAne
paramAtmAnI samApatti thAya che, arthAta sabhyaprakAre tadrupatA5tti,
tadrupapaNuM, tanmayapaNuM thAya che, kAraNa ke je jene dhyAve te te thAya, e
niyama che. atre bhamarI ne iyaLanuM dRSTAMta prasiddha che. IyaLa bhamarInuM
dhyAna dhare che, te IyaLa bhamarI bane che. zrI AnaMdaghanajIe parama
bhAvollAsathI lalakAryuM che ke : "jina thaI jinane je ArAdhe, te sahI jinavara
hove re, bhaMgI ilikAne caTakAve, te bhaMgI jaga jeve re...hUdarizaNa jina aMga
bhaNIje." zrImad rAjacaMdrajI A vacanane uttama paramArtha samajAvatAM kahe che
ke -"jina thaI ne eTale sAMsArika bhAvane viSethI AtmabhAva tyAgIne, je kaI
jinane eTale kevalya jJAnIne, vItarAgane ArAdhe che, te nizcaye jinavara eTale
kaivalyapade yukta hoya che. tene bhamarI ane iyaLanuM pratyakSa samajAya evuM
daSTAMta ApyuM che." "dAsa vibhAva apAya, nAse prabhu supasAya; je tanmayatAe
dhyAya, tehane sahI devacaMdra pada thAya re...jirNodA tArA nAmathI mana bhIne."
"paramaguNa sevana tanmayatA, nizcaya dhyAne dhyAvejI; zuddhAtama anubhava
AsvAdI, devacaMdra pada pAve."--zrI devacaMdrajI. Ama samApatti Adi bhedathI A
tIrthakaradarzana-paramAtmadarzana gurubhaktinA prabhAvathI sAMpaDe che ema
kahyuM che. arthAt gurubhaktinA prabhAvathI upajelA puyaparipAkathI uparamAM
vivaryuM tema samApattithI paramAtmadarzana thAya che, athavA tIrthakara
nAmakarma gurubhaktithI baMdhAya che, tene udaya thAya che, ane
tIrthaMkarabhAvanI prApti thAya che. ane tIrthakara darzana Ama paNa
tIrthakaradarzana-paramAtmadarzana sAMpaDe che. A tIrthakaradarzana-para
mAtmadarzana ja nirvANanuM eka nibaMdhana arthAt mokSanuM advitIya kAraNa che.
te prApta thayA vinA kadI paNa nirvANa thatuM nathI. jenI prApti parama durlabha
che, evuM

Page #326 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(260) This supreme vision of the Supreme Soul is extremely rare. Upon attaining
this supreme vision, Shri Anandghanji, overwhelmed with joy, sang: “O friend,
look at the moon-like face of Chandraprabhu! It quenches the thirst of the
senses...friend. Devas and humans serve him...friend. The pain of past karma is
gone...friend. The sweet melody is not seen...friend. The great one is beyond
description...friend. I have not seen such a sight...friend. I will not take
oil...friend.” etc. (See p. 147). Without attaining this vision of the
Tirthankara, this soul has been wandering in this world since time immemorial,
and upon attaining it, this soul is liberated from the world. And this
attainment is not possible without pure devotion to the Sadhu, without devotion
to the holy Guru. “O Lord, the savior of the world, I pray to you, I beg you to
show yourself, Without your vision, I wander, for an endless and immeasurable
time.” - Shri Devchandraji “Whatever analogy we give for the holy religion
embraced by the Nigrantha Bhagwan, it is still inadequate. The soul has wandered
for an endless time, only because of the absence of his unique religion, what a
style it is!” - Shrimad Rajchandra, Letter No. 31. (2) What is this supremely
wonderful and supremely rare vision of the Tirthankara? It has many meanings.
For example: (1) Vision of the Prabhu's mudra - the image that establishes the
form of the state of being free from attachment, (2) General, gross vision of
the Tirthankara's qualities, (3) True vision of the Tirthankara, as a result of
seeing the truth, becoming a Tattvadrashta, (4) Direct vision - realization of
their various forms of the Supreme Soul, etc. This vision is beneficial in
countless ways, in every way, in every way. The first three types are also
beneficial because they are the cause of the fourth type. And this supremely
beneficial vision of the Tirthankara is understood only through the supremely
beneficial Shrimad Sadguru, therefore the greatest benefit is to Shrimad Sadguru
Bhagwan. “Without the teachings of the Sadguru, the form of the Jina cannot be
understood; without understanding, what is the benefit? At the time, the form of
the Jina.” - Shrimad Rajchandraji, author of Shri Atmasiddhi

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (260) gadaSTisamuccaya A paramAtmadarzana parama durlabha che. A
paramAtmadarzananI prAptithI parama bhAvAvezamAM AvI jaI zrI AnaMdaghanajIe
gAyuM che ke "caMdraprabhu mukha caMda re sakhI ! dekhaNa de ! upazama rasane
kaMda...sakhI. seve sura nara iMda.sakhI. gatakalimala duHkha heM..re sakhi.
suhama nigoda na dekhi sakhi. bAdara atihi vizeSa...re sakhI. paDhavI Au na
pekhiye...sakhi. tela vAu na leza re....sakhI." ItyAdi, (juo. pR. 147). A
tIrthakaradarzananI prApti vinA ja A jIva anAdi kALathI A saMsAramAM rakhaDaDyo
che, ane tenI prApti thaye ja A jIvane saMsArathI vistAra thAya che. ane tenI
prApti paNa nimala sAdhubhakti vinA-saMta sadgurunI bhakti vinA thatI nathI.
jagatAraka prabhu vinavuM, vinataDI avadhAra re, tuja darizaNa viNa huM bhame,
kALa anaMta apAra re."-zrI devacaMdrajI "nigraMtha bhagavAne praNatelA pavitra
dharma mATe je je upamA ApIe te te nyUna ja che. AtmA anaMta kALa rakhaDyo te
mAtra enA nirupama dharmanA abhAve 444 zI enI zailI !" -zrImad rAjacaMdra,
patrAMka 31. (ra) AvuM parama addabhuta ne parama durlabha tIrtha karadazana
eTale zuM ? tenA aneka artha ghaTe che. jemake-(1) prabhunI mudrAnuM-
vItarAgabhAvasUcaka tadAkAra rasthApanArUpa pratimAnuM darzana, (2) tIrtha
karanA guNasvarUpanuM sAmAnyapaNe sthUla darzana, (3) tattvanuM yathArtha
tIrthakara daza darzana karI tatvadraSTA tIrtha kare yathAvat prarUpela
tattvadarzana, (4) temanA nanA vividha paramAtma svarUpanuM sAkSAt darzana-
sAkSAtkAra, ItyAdi prakAre A darzanane artha pratyeka prakAra anaMtara ke
paraMpara rIte parama upakArI che. temAM prathamanA traNa prakAra paNa anukrame
cethA prakAranA kAraNarUpa thavAthI upakArI thAya che. ane AvuM A parama upakArI
tIrthaMkaradarzana paNa parama parama upakArI zrImad sadagurUthI ja samajAya
che, mATe moTAmAM moTo upakAra zrImad saddaguru bhagavAnane ja che. saddagurunA
upadeza vaNa, samajAya na jinarUpa; samajyA viNa upakAra ? samaye
jinasvarUpa."-zrImadurAjacaMdrajI praNIta zrI Atmasiddhi

Page #327 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(261) Deemadrushti: The characteristic of Soombhedh, the method of justice in
Tany Nirnay. Here, it is said to show the characteristic of Soombhedh that is
prohibited - Samyaghe tvadadibhenden loke yastattvanirnayah | Vedysamvedya
padatah sukshmabodhah sa uchyate ||65|| Samyag hetu aadithi je tattvanirnayaj
janmaany; Vidysamvedya padathi-te, sukshma bhedh kahevaay. 65. Meaning - Samyag
hetu, etc., by making a distinction, in the world, the tattvanirnay that happens
through the Vedysamvedya pad, is called sukshma bodh. Discussion “Soombodh te
pan ihaaji, samakit vin na hoy; Vedysamvedya pade kaheyo chhe, te na avelve
jey...manmehan.”–Shri . D. Sajay 5 It was said above that Soombodh is not yet in
this drushti, to clarify that, what is “sukshmabodh”? Its explanation is here.
By the form and fruit of the hetu, in the learned society, in the community of
pandits, the tattvanirnay that is done through the Vedysamvedya pad, that is,
the parmarth is dissected, the knowledge of parmarth is gained, that is called
“sukshma bodh”. The method of justice in Tattvanirnay To decide any tattva, it
is the work of true pandits - truly learned, because they are the ones who,
through the hetu, form, and fruit, examine the tattva properly, test it properly
through kash-ched-tap, etc., and are able to decide the tattva - parmarth. They
are above all attachment, and examine the tattva impartially through the method
of justice. Just as a skilled judge - justice-judge maintains the balance of
justice properly and impartially, so these justice-loving learned people also
compare the tattva impartially, because they are experts in the method of
justice. They do this in the following way - Vrittisajoo-sabhyapane, aviparit
vidhithi, ri -hetu aadi bhedathi; hetu, swaroop ne kalna bhedathi, dholakma,
that is, in the learned society, chatursanirnay - the tattvanirnay, parmarth
paricched. For what reason? Because - ghavath - Vedysamvedya pad thaki, the
characteristic of which is said to be the daavedya pad thaki, sukshmaposh: sa 32
te - te sakshmadh, nipun bhedh kahevaay chhe, that is the meaning.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (261) dImAdaSTi: sUma bedhanuM lakSaNa, tanya nirNayanI nyAyapaddhati ahIM
pratiSedha karelA sUma bedhanuM lakSaNa batAvavA mATe kahe che - samyaghe
tvAdibhedena loke yastattvanirNayaH  /  vedyasaMvedyapadataH sUkSmabodhaH sa
ucyate  // 65 //  samyaga hetu AdithI je tatvanirNajya janamAMya; vidyasaMvedya
padathI-te, sUkSma bedha kahevAya. 65. artha -samyapha hetu vagere bhede karIne,
lekamAM je vedhasavedya pada thakI tasvanirNaya thAya che, te sUkSma bodha
kahevAya che. vivecana "sUmabodha te paNa IhAMjI, samakita viNa na hoya;
vedyasaMvedya pade kahyo che, te na avelve jeya...manamehana."-zrI . da. sajhAya
5 uparamAM sUphamabodha haju A daSTimAM na hoya ema kahyuM hatuM, tene khulAso
karavA mATe "sUkSmabodha" eTale zuM? tenuM atra kathana che. hetu svarUpa ane
phalathI karIne vidvata samAjarUpa lekamAM, paMDita jananA samudAyamAM,
vedyasaMvedyapadathakI je sabhyaprakAre tattvanirNaya karavAmAM Ave, eTale ke
paramArthane pariccheda karAya, paramArthanuM parijJAna thAya, tene sUkSama
bodha" kahyo che. tatvanirNayanI nyAyapaddhati keIpaNu tatvane nirNaya karavo
hoya, te te kAma sAcA paMDita jananuM-kharekhara vidvAnuM che, kAraNa ke teo ja
hetuthI, varUpathI ane phaLathI tatvanI samyaka parIkSA karI, kaSa-cheda-tApa
Adi prakArathI samyaka kasoTI karI, tatvane-paramArthane nirNaya karavAne
samartha hoya che. teo sarva AgrahathI para heI, tattvanI madhyasthapaNe nyAya
paddhatithI cakAsaNI kare che. jema kuzala nyAyAdhIza-nyAyamUrti nyAyatulA
barAbara jALavIne pakSapAtarahitapaNe nyAya tole che, tema A nyAyapriya
vidvajane paNa niSpakSapAtapaNe tatvanI tulanA kare che, kAraNa ke teo
nyAyapaddhatimAM niSNAta hoya che. te A prakAre - vRttisAjU-sabhyapaNe,
aviparIta vidhithI, ri -hetu Adi bhedathI; hetu, svarUpa ne kalanA bhedathI,
DholakamAM, eTale ke vidyuta samAjamAM catarasanirNaya-je tatvanirNamA,
paramArtha paricacheda. kayA kAraNathI ? te ke- ghavata:-vedyasaMvedyapada
thakI, jenuM lakSaNa kahevAmAM Ave che evA dAvedya padathakI, sUkSmapoSaH sa 32
te-te sakSmadha, nipuNa bedha kahevAya che, ema artha che.

Page #328 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Fourfold Insight (Chaugdasht) (262)  Along with this, 1. In establishing
the truth, the judge first determines the **sadhya** (the thing to be proved),
establishes some aspects of the **sadhya** that are acceptable, and ensures that
they are not contradicted by direct perception, etc. They know that this
**sadhya** illuminates the purpose, so it should be pursued, otherwise it will
lead to a state like a mine without a target. (5) Thus, having determined the
**sadhya**, they consider its purpose. The **sadhya** is inseparable from the
**hetu** (reason), meaning the **sadhya** cannot exist without the **hetu** -
this is called the purpose. The relationship between the **sadhya** and the
**hetu** is inseparable, meaning they cannot exist without each other.
Therefore, through **upatti** (affirmative reasoning) and other forms of
**anupatti** (negative reasoning), the **sadhya** is established through the
application of the **hetu**. This **anupatti** means that it happens in this
way, not in any other way, and is a characteristic of the **hetu**. If there is
a lack of understanding, doubt, or contradiction, it is called **hetvabhas**
(fallacious reasoning). These discerning individuals diligently avoid
**hetvabhas**. ( ) Thus, having established the **sadhya** through the **hetu**,
they strengthen it with **drushtaant** (example). Where the relationship between
the **sadhana** (means) and the **sadhya** is specifically determined through
memory of the relationship, it is called **sadhannya drushtaant**; and where the
**sadhya** is negated, the **sadhana** is also considered impossible, it is
called **vaidhya drushtaant**. If the **sadhya** is established through internal
pervasiveness, it is a **khady** example, otherwise, in its absence, it is a
**vyatha**. (3) While strengthening with such **drushtaant**, these
knowledgeable judges do not allow **drushtaant desha** (flaws in the example)
arising from **asiddha** (unproven), **apratiti** (unrealized), **anyathapanna**
(otherwise established), **viruddha** (contradictory), and **anaikantika** (non-
categorical) **sadhamma** (reasoning). Similarly, they do not allow
**sadhyavikal** (flaws in the **sadhya**) etc. arising from **apalaksan**
(unclear) **hetu**. And they carefully avoid **drushtaant desha** arising from
**vaidhyamya** (lack of validity). Thus, these discerning individuals, skilled
in **anumana** (inference) and **pramana** (proof), establish the existence of
the truth through the correct **hetu** and strengthen it with flawless
**drushtaant**.  **Sadhya, Hetu, and Drushtaant**  2. The second thing in
establishing the truth is to consider the nature of the truth. That is, what is
the nature and characteristics of the truth? What are its general and specific
qualities? They consider this. Every thing is multi-faceted, and the **naya**
(perspective) is that which grasps one aspect or part of it. This **naya**,
which is rooted in the **shrutamag** (scriptural teachings) of the **eknishtha**
(single-minded) **naya**, leads to complete and certain knowledge through its
activity. *66 साध्या विनाभुवो हेतोर्वचो यत् प्रतिपादकम् । परार्थमनुमानं तत्
पक्षादिवचनात्मकम् ॥ અન્યથાનુવપન્નથું હેતોજેક્ષળમીપ્તિમ્ ।
તન્નત્તિયન્ટેનિવાસસ્તનામના ।।'' ઇત્યાદિ. (For details, see) Shri Siddhasena
Divakara's Shri Nyayavtar, + " साध्या विनाभुवो लिङ्गात् साध्यनिश्चायक स्मृतम् 1
અનુમાન તરૂવ્રત પ્રમાળયાત સમક્ષત્રત | ’—Nyayavtar.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 cogadaSTisamuccaya (262) sAthe ja, 1. tattvanA niya karavAmAM nyAyavettAe
prathama te (1) sAdhya nakkI kare che,* sAdhyanA svIkArarUpa amuka pakSa sthApe
che, ane te pratyakSa AdithI abAdhita evA heAya che. te hetune viSaya prakAze
che, mATe tenA prayAga karavA joIe, nahi teA lakSya vinAnA khANa jevI sthiti
thai paDe, ema tee jANe che. ( 5 ) Ama sAdhya nizcita karI teo tenA hetu vicAre
che. sAdhyane avinAbhAvI, eTale sAdhyane sAdhyA vinA na rahe--avazya te hetu
kahevAya che. sAdhya ane hetunA sabaMdha avinAbhAvI eTale ke eka khIjA vinA na
cAle evA che. tathAprakAre upapattithI ane anyathA prakAre anupapattithI, ema e
prakAre hetunA prayeAgavaDe karIne sAdhyanI siddhi thAya che. Ama anyathA
anupapannapaNuM eTale ke A ja prakAre ghaTe, khIjA prakAre na ghaTe, e hetunuM
lakSaNa che. tenI apratIti, saMdeha ke viparyAsa hAya, tA hetvAbhAsa kahevAya
che. te hetvAbhAsane A vicakSaNa puruSo prayatnathI vaje che. ( ) Ama hetuvaDe
sAdhyanI siddhi karI, teo tenI dRSTAMtathI puSTi kare che. jemAM sAdhana-
sAdhyanI vyApti vizeSe karIne saMbadhasmaraNathI vinizcita karavAmAM Ave te,
sAdhanya thI dAMta che; ane jyAM sAdhya nivRtta thatAM sAdhanane paNa asa'bhava
kahevAmAM Ave, te vaidha thI dRSTAMta che. aMtar vyAptithI ja sAdhyanI siddhi
hoya, te khAdya udAharaNa sAtha ka che, nahi teA tenA abhAve vyatha che, (3) AvA
dRSTAMtathI puSTi karatAM A nyAyavizAradA asiddha, apratIta, anyathApapanna,
viruddha, te anaikAMtika evA sAdhamma thI upajatA daSTAMta deSo AvavA detA
nathI, temaja apalakSaNa hetuthI upajatA sAdhyavikala vageredeSo paNa AvavA detA
nathI. ane vaidhamyathI upajatA dRSTAMtadeSo dUrathI parihare che. Ama A
vicakSaNa jane anumAnatra pramANathI niSNu evA samyak hetuvaDe sAdhyanI siddhi
karI, ne nirdoSa dRSTAMtathI tenI puSTi karI, tattvanuM astitva sthApe che.
sAdhyuM, hetu ane dAMta 2. tattvani yamAM bIjI vastu tattvanuM svarUpa
vicAravAnI che. eTale tattvanuM svarUpa-svalakSaNa zuM che? tenA sAmAnya-vizeSa
guNu zu che ? ene tee vicAra kare che. pratyeka vastu anekAMtasvarUpa che tenA
eka dezane-aMzane grahaNa kare te naya kahevAya che. * te ekaniSTha nayAnI
zrutamAgamAM pravRtti thakI saMpUNuM' aneA vinizcaya karAvanArU *66 sAdhyA
vinAbhuvo hetorvaco yat pratipAdakam  /  parArthamanumAnaM tat
pakSAdivacanAtmakam  //  anyathAnuvapannathuM hetojekSaLamIptim  /
tannattiyanTenivAsastanAmanA  /  / '' ityAdi. (vizeSa mATe juo) zrI siddhasena
divAkarakRta zrI nyAyAvatAra, + " sAdhyA vinAbhuvo liGgAt sAdhyanizcAyaka smRtam
1 anumAna tarUvrata pramALayAta samakSatrata | '--nyAyAvatAra.

Page #329 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Deepradrusti: How is the subtlety of knowledge? (263) It is called
Syadvadamrit. They resort to this as a support to understand the standard self-
opinion condition in the form of a current. Let the Shruta-knowledge take the
path of Nay, experience the taste. - Shri Devchandraji. 3. The third thing in
Tattvanirnay is to determine what it is. That is, having determined the form of
a certain principle, having made it certain, what is its fruit, what is its
result, and how is the fruit-like attainment of the present principle achieved,
how is the present principle produced-proven, they consider its failure. The
fruit of the standard omniscience is the direct removal of ignorance, the fruit
of Kevalgyan is happiness and indifference, and the fruit of the rest of the
knowledge is the production of grasping-renunciation intellect, that is, the
production of discriminating intellect in the form of grasping the truth and
renouncing the untruth. Darkness is ignorance, knowledge is light. - Shrimad
Rajchandraji. Thus, the scholar determines the principle correctly, as it is,
without contradiction, from the purpose, from the form, and from the fruit,
makes the ultimate truth certain, and the reason why he can do it is the
attainment of the Vedya-Sanvedya pad. Vedya means that which is known, where it
is perceived, known correctly, experienced, that is called Vedya-Sanvedya pad.
Its form will now be told by the author, the sage. This non-contradictory
Tattvanirnay which happens due to the Vedya-Sanvedya pad, is called "subtle
knowledge". Here, he specifically mentions the cause of activity:
भवाम्भोधिसमुत्तारात्कर्मवनविभेदतः  /  ज्ञेयव्याप्तेश्च कात्स्न्येन सूक्ष्मत्वं
नायमत्र तु  // 66 //  Vritti: - Mavaazmodhittumuttarah - from the liberation
from the ocean of existence, from crossing the ocean of the world, by doing so,
due to the purposefulness of the transcendental activity. Tatha
Varmashtraviratah - from the distinction of the karma-like weight, - from the
non-repetition, by doing so. Yajna Sharchan - and by the work of Yavyaapti -
completely, comprehensively, - by the attainment of the infinite Dharma-like
principle, by doing so, Sukshmavan - subtlety, subtlety, the expertise of
knowledge. Nayamatra tu - but (this) this subtle knowledge is not here. Here
means it is not in Deepradrusti and the lower perspectives. Due to the non-
establishment of the distinction of the nine Nayas, x नयानामेकनिष्ठानां
प्रवृत्तेः श्रुतवमनि  /  सपूनार्त्विधि थाकूबतमुचरे || - Nyayavtar, * " प्रमाणस्य
फलं साक्षादज्ञानविनिवर्त्तनम्  /  वरुध्ध गुनोपेक्से वाचकानाफ्राधीः " -
Nyayavtar,

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
dIprAdaSTi : bodhanuM sUkSmapaNuM zI rIte ? (263) syAdavAdamRta kahevAya che "
evA pramANabhUta svAvAda zratano teo vaturavarUpa samajavA mATe Azraya kare che.
zrutajJAne nayapatha lIje, anubhava AsvAdana kIje." -zrI devacaMdrajI. 3.
tattvanirNayamAM trIjI vastu phI zuM te nirdhAravAnuM che. eTale amuka tattvanuM
svarUpa nakkI karyuM, nizcita karyuM, tenuM phaLa zuM, pariNAma zuM, ane
prastuta tatvanI phaLarUpa prApti kevA prakAre thAya, prastuta tattva kema
niSpanna-siddha thAya, tenI phela vicAraNuM teo kare che. pramANabhUta evA
sarvajJAnanuM * phala sAkSAt ajJAnanuM dUra thavuM te che, kevalajJAnanuM phala
sukha ne upekSA che, ane bAkInA jJAnanuM phala grahaNa-tyAga buddhi upajavI te
che, eTale ke salUnA grahaNa ane asatnA tyAgarUpa vivekabuddhi upajavI te che.
aMdhakAra ajJAna sama, nAze jJAna prakAza." --zrImad rAjacaMdrajI. Ama vidvajane
hetuthI svarUpathI ane phalathI tattvane samyapha, yathAsthita, avisaMvAdI evo
nirNaya kare che, paramArthane suvinizcaya kare che, ane te karI zake che tenuM
kAraNa vedhasaMvedya padanI prApti che. vedya eTale jANavA gyA jyAM saMvedAya
che, samyapha prakAre jaNAya che, anubhavAya che, te vevasaMvedya pada kahevAya
che. AnuM svarUpa have pachI graMthakAra maharSi kaheze. A je avisaMvAdI
tavanirNaya vedhasaMvedya padathI thAya che, tene ja "sUkSma bodha" evuM nAma
ApavAmAM AvyuM che. ahIMja vizeSathI pravRttinuM nimitta kahe che
bhavAmbhodhisamuttArAtkarmavanavibhedataH / jJeyavyAptezca kAtsnyena sUkSmatvaM
nAyamatra tu // 66 // vRtti:-mavAjhmodhittamuttArA-bhavasamudramAMthI
samunnAraNathI, saMsArasAgaramAMthI pAra utAravA vaDe karIne, lokottara
pravRttinA hetapaNAne lIdhe. tathA varmavastravirataH-karma rUpa vajInA
vibhedathI,-apunaragrahaNathI vibhedavaDe karIne. yajJA zArcana-ane yavyAptinA
kAryathI-saMpUrNapaNathI-samagrapaNAthI,-anaMta dharmAtmaka tatvanI pratipatti
vaDe karIne, sUkSmavaM-sUkSmatva, sUkSmapaNuM, bedhanuM nipuNapaNuM. nAyamatra
tu-paNa (A) A sUkSma bedha atre nathI hote. atre eTale dIprA dRSTimAM ane tenI
nIcenI daSTiemAM nathI hota. navathI saMdhibhedanI asiddhine lIdhe, x
nayAnAmekaniSThAnAM pravRtteH zrutavamani / sapUNArthavidhi thAkUbatamucare
||-nyAyAvatAra, * " pramANasya phalaM sAkSAdajJAnavinivarttanam / varudhdha
guNopekSe vAcAkAnaphrAdhIH " -nyAyAvatAra,

Page #330 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The collection of Gadasti (Jain scriptures) is a guide to liberation from the
ocean of existence, through the differentiation of karma, and the all-
pervasiveness of the soul. However, this subtle nature is not perceived in this
limited vision.   **Meaning:** The subtle nature of the soul is revealed through
liberation from the ocean of existence, the differentiation of karmic matter,
and the all-pervasiveness of the soul. However, this subtle nature is not
perceived in this limited vision.  **Explanation:** The text explains the subtle
nature of the soul through three points:  1. **Liberation from the ocean of
existence:** The soul, when liberated from the cycle of birth and death,
experiences a subtle state of being. This liberation is achieved through
spiritual practices and detachment from worldly desires. 2. **Differentiation of
karmic matter:** The soul is bound by karmic matter, which creates suffering.
The subtle nature of the soul is revealed through the differentiation and
elimination of this karmic matter. 3. **All-pervasiveness of the soul:** The
soul is all-pervasive and infinite. This subtle nature is not perceived in this
limited vision, which is restricted by the senses and the mind.  The text
concludes by stating that the subtle nature of the soul is not perceived in this
limited vision. This is because the soul's true nature is beyond the reach of
the senses and the mind.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
gadaSTisamucaya bhavasAgara nistArathI, karma ja bhede ja; seya sakala vyApti
thakI, sUkSmatA -ahiM na e ja. 66 artha:-bhavasamudranA samunnAraNa thakI,
kamarUpa vajUnA vibheda thakI ane reya vyAptinA saMpUrNa paNa thakI sUkSmapaNuM
hoya che, paNa (A) A sUma baMdha atreA dRSTimAM hotuM nathI. vivecana uparamAM
je bodhanuM sUkamapaNuM kahyuM. te zA kAraNathI hoya che, te atra vivayuM cheH
(1) saMsArasAgaranA nistArane lIdhe, (2) tathA kamarUpa vAnA vibhedane lIdhe,
(3) tathA anaMta dharmAtmaka evuM je ya vastutatva tenA saMpUrNapaNAne lIdhe-
samagrapaNAne lIdhe, A sUkSmapaNuM kahyuM che. te A prakAre : bodhanuM
sUkSmapaNuM zI rIte? (1) jyAre A sUkSama bodha upaje che, tyAre jIva anaMta
apAra evo bhavasAgara tarI jAya che, tene bhavanistAra thAya che. saMsArasamudra
gempada je sukhethI lIlAmAM eLagI javAya evuM banI jAya che. Ama A sUkSma
bhavasAgara bhavanistAra kare che, kAraNa ke te lokettara pravRttine hetu thaI
paDe nistArathI che. athavA te jyAre jIvane bhavanistAra thavAnuM hoya che, jIva
jyAre bhavasamudranA kAMThA pAse AvI pahoMce che, tyAre lokottara pravRttino
hetubhUta e A sUkSmabodha prApta thAya che. ane Ama enA zIghra tArakapaNune
lIdhe enuM sUphamapaNuM ghaTe che. (2) tathA kamarUpa vajane vibheda thAya che,
tethI paNa A bedhanuM sUkSmapaNuM che. vaja (hIro) jema bheda-cUra muzkela che,
tema kamanI mahAmeharUpa graMthi durbhedya bhedI duSkara che, teno atra vibheda
thAya che. vibheda e ke jethI kamavajI apunagrahaNa hoya che, eTale ke evA
prakAre bheda thAya ke pharIne vibhedathI tenuM tevA prakAre grahaNa karavApaNuM
hoya nahiM. AvA karmavajInA vize dathI "tIvra saMkaleza-daDha kaSAyadaya thatuM
nathI, tethI karIne te sadA niHzreyasAvaha-nirvANa hetu thAya che. + ane Ama te
sUma bedhanuM kAraNa thaI paDe che. + "meroDani jAra vize na mUko meva tathA
tIvra vikAmAtta sayA nicalAvaDa -zrI gibiMdu

Page #331 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Deepradrishti:** The comprehensive and collective understanding of the
multifaceted nature of all things (265) (3) and the infinite-natured, undivided
essence of all things, leads to the profoundness of this knowledge. Because
*Syadvada* is the unshakeable, all-knowing, and all-encompassing rule of the
multifaceted nature of all things; and it teaches that all things are
multifaceted, because all things are inherently multifaceted. What is, is also
not; what is one, is also many; what is real, is also unreal; what is eternal,
is also non-eternal - this is the multifaceted nature, which reveals the
existence of a thing through the manifestation of two opposing forces. Thus, the
Jain doctrine, which is established by the principle of multifaceted nature, is
well-organized. This "multifaceted nature" is the lifeblood of the *Parmagam*.
It is the ultimate, generous, profound, and all-encompassing principle that
resolves the disputes of the blind men about the elephant, and eliminates the
contradictions of all viewpoints. Because it examines the complete form of all
things from different perspectives, keeping in mind different viewpoints, it
ends the petty quarrels that arise from conflicting opinions, and leaves no room
for any kind of vote-grabbing.  Captivated by the miraculous, all-solving nature
of this multifaceted principle, which is the lifeblood of truth, the ultimate
knowers of truth have declared with generous confidence: "There is no system of
truth without the multifaceted nature," and this is absolutely true.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
dIprAdaSTi : samasta vastunuM' anekAMta svarUpa (265) (3) temaja
anaMtadharmAtmaka evA akhaMDa vastu-tattvanuM atra samagrapaNe ( Comprehensive &
Collective ) grahaNa thAya che, tethI karIne paNa A bodhanuM sUphamapaNuM nIpaje
che. kAraNa ke * syAdavAda ja e samasta vastutattvanuM sAdhaka anekAMta evuM eka
akhalita arhat sarvasanuM zAsana che; ane te sarva anevastunA samagra kAMtAtmaka
che ema anuzAsana kare che, kAraNa ke sarva vastune anekAMta grahaNathI svabhAva
che. temAM je tat che. te ja atat che; je eka che te ja aneka che; je sat che,
te ja asat che je nitya che, te ja anitya che,-ema eka vastunA vastRtvanuM
sAdhanAra evuM je paraspara viruddha be zaktinuM prakAzana te anekAMta che. ema
tattvavyavasthitithI pite pitAne vyavasthApita karate, alaL jaina zAsana e
anekAMta vyavasthita che. A "anekAMta te paramAgamane* jIva-prANa che. ane
janmAMdha puruSonA hAthInA svarUpa viSenA jhaghaDAne zamAvanAro, tathA sakala
navilasitenA virodhane mathI nAkhanAre, e parama udAra gaMbhIra ne sarvagrAhI
che. kAraNa ke te bhinna bhinna naya-apekSA lakSamAM rAkhI, judA judA
daSTikoNathI samagra-saMpUrNa vastunuM svarUpa tapAse che, tethI paraspara
kalaha karatA nAnI takarArane aMta Ave che, ane koI paNa prakAranA matAgrahane
ubhavAnuM sthAna rahetuM nathI. tattvanA jIvanarUpa A anekAMtanA AvA parama
abhuta camatkArika sarvasamAdhAnakArI svarUpathI mugdha thaIne, parama tatvajJoe
udArazeSA ughoSaNA karI che ke- "anekAMta sivAya tatvavyavasthA nathI," te
atyaMta satya che. *" syAdvAdo hi samastavastutattvasAdhakamekamaskhalitaM
zAsanamarhatsarvajJasya / sa tu sarvamanekAMtAtmakamityanuzAsti sarvasyApi
vastuno'nekAMtasvabhAvatvAt / + + tatra yadeva tattadevAtat , yadevaka
tadevAnekaM, yadeva sattadevAsat , yadeva nityaM tadevA
nityamityekavastuvastutvaniSpAdakaM parasparaviruddhazaktidvaya- . kAnamawtaH 19
(ItyAdi, anekAMtanI parama vizada hRdayaMgama vivecanA mATe juo) -zrI
amRtacaMdrAcAryajI viracita samayasAra TakA pariziSTa. x "paramAgamasya jIvaM
niSiddhajAtyaMdhasiMdhuravidhAnam / sakalanayavilasitAnAM virodhamathanaM
namAmyanekAMtam // " -zrI amRtacaMdrAcAryajIpraNIta zrI puruSArthasiddhiupAya. "
evaM tattvavyavasthityA svaM vyavasthApayansvayam / alaGgadhyaM zAsanaM
jainamanekAMto vyavasthitaH // " -zrI amRtacaMdrAcAryajIkRta samayasAraTIkA-
pariziSTa, + "imA samakSaM pratipakSasAkSiNA mudAraghoSAmudaghoSaNAM bruve / na
vItarAgAtparamasti daivataM na cApyenakAntamRte nayasthitiH // "
kalikAlasarvajJa zrI hemacaMdrAcAryajIkRta anya vyaya, hA

Page #332 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(266) The Gidhistisamuchaya fully and completely (as a whole) comprehends the
infinite and indivisible nature of the fundamental reality (vastutattva). This
means that each substance (dravya) contains infinite attributes (dharmas), the
fundamental reality is anekanta (non-absolutistic), yet the substance is one,
indivisible, and non-dual. This is how the fundamental reality is understood
here. Therefore, this doctrine also has the quality of subtlety (saumyapana). As
the Syadvadi (proponent of the doctrine of conditional predication) says, "The
attributes (dharmas) of a thing are infinite in number; it is the abode of the
universal and the particular, which is the transformation (parinam) of the
substance (dravya)." - Swami Sujata. "Here, the doctrine of Syadvada is the sole
sovereign; whoever bears the seal of Syadvada, him the king accepts as his own."
- (Dr. Bhagavandas) Thus, due to the vastness of the ocean of existence
(bhavasamudra), the diversity of karmas, and the complete comprehension of the
fundamental reality, this doctrine is said to have the quality of subtlety
(saumyapana). However, this subtlety is not yet manifest in this perspective,
nor does it exist in the perspectives below it, because there is an absence of
the distinction of principles (tattvabhedabhava) in them. "Because in these
first four perspectives, the unperceivable and perceivable state
(avedyasamvedyapada) is extremely powerful; and the other, which is the
perceivable state, is like the activity of aquatic creatures in the shadow of a
bird." 67. The meaning is that in these first four perspectives, the
unperceivable and perceivable state (avedyasamvedyapada) is extremely powerful;
and the other, which is the perceivable state, is like the activity of aquatic
creatures in the shadow of a bird. As mentioned earlier, the subtle
understanding (saumya bodha) does not exist in these perspectives of Mitra,
etc., because here the unperceivable state (aghsamvedyapada) is powerful and
intense, and from this arises the activity, the perceivable state, whose
characteristic will be described later. This is because in these perspectives of
Mitra, etc., the intensity (tathaulbana) is such that the nature of the
unperceivable state predominates, and the other, the perceivable state, which is
like the activity of aquatic creatures in the shadow of a bird, is not relevant
in this perspective.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
(266) gidaSTisamucaya Ama anaMtadharmAtmaka akhaMDa vastutattvanuM saMpUrNa
paNe-samagrapaNe (as a whole) atra grahaNa thAya che. eTale ke pratyeka
vastumAM-dhamImAM anaMta dharma rahyA che, vastutatva anekAMta che, chatAM vastu
eka akhaMDa ne abheda che,-ema samagrapaNe-saMpUrNapaNe ahIM vastu tattva
samajAya che. tethI paNa A bodhanuM sUphamapaNuM hoya che. syAdvAdI vastu kahIe,
tasu dharma anaMta lahaje; sAmAnya vizeSanuM dhAma, te dravyAstika
pariNAma....svAmI sujAta."--zrI devacaMdrajI anaMta dharmAtmaka vastu atra,
syAdvAdanuM zAsana eka chatra; syAdvAda mudrA jana jeha lepe, sarvasva tenuM
nRpa leja kope."--(De. bhagavAnadAsa) Ama bhavasamudranA vistArane lIdhe,
karmavAnA vibhedane lIdhe, tathA ya vastutatvanA samagrapaNe grahaNane lIdhe, -A
bedhanuM sUmapaNuM kahyuM che, paraMtu AvA sUkSmapaNAvALe bedha haju A daSTimAM
pragaTatuM nathI, temaja tenI nIcenI dRSTiemAM paNa hotuM nathI, kAraNa ke temAM
tatvathI graMthibhedane abhAva hoya che. avedyasaMvedyapadaM yasmAdAsu
tatholbaNam / pakSicchAyAjalacarapravRttyAbhamataH param // 67 // 5da
aghasaMvedya te, tevuM prabala A sthAna; bIjuM pakSichAyA viSe, jalacara
pravRtti samAna. 67. artha-kAraNa ke A pahelI cAra dRSTiemAM avedyasaMvedya pada
tathA prakAre ulmaNaprabaLa hoca che; ane AnAthI bIju evuM je vevasaMvedya pada
che, te te ahI paMkhInA paDachAyAmAM jalacaranI pravRtti jevuM hoya che.
vivecana sUma bodha A mitrA vagere cAra dRSTiemAM nathI hota ema uparamAM
kahyuM, tenuM kAraNa e che ke atre aghasaMvedya pada ubaNa-prabala hoya che ane
AnAthI vRtti - vevaghATuM-- adyavedya padA-jenuM lakSaNa kahevAmAM AvanAra che
te, varNAvAyu-kAraNa ke AmAM-mitrA Adi cAra daSTiemAM, tathoravaLa-tevuM ubaNu,
te nivRtti di 5danA prakArathI prabala- uddhata, 'AichalakAvavAmaw-pakSInI
chAyAmAM jalacaranI pravRtti jevuM', pakSInA paDachAyAmAM te pakSInI budithI
jalacaranI pravRtti jevuM, : pUja-AnAthI para-bIjuM, eTale vaidyavedyapada, A
dRSTimAM tAvika nathI hotuM, ema artha che, kAraNa ke aMthibhedanI siddhi che
tethI karIna, A atAvika vedasarvapada paNa A mitrA Adi cAra daSTiemAM carama
yathApravRttikaraNathI ja hoya che,-ema AcAryo

Page #333 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Deepraashti Avegha Savaidya Pad Prabhal: Vedha Sangh Atatvik (267)**  The
second - the opposite, that which is Vedya-Sanvedya Pad, is not Tatvik here, but
is Mithya-Atatvik, like the activity of an aquatic creature towards the shadow
of a bird. Just as a bird flies in the sky, its shadow falls in the water, and
some aquatic creature, mistaking the shadow for the bird, tries to catch it -
runs after it, but since nothing comes into its hands, its effort goes in vain -
Mithya; similarly, this Vedya-Sanvedya Pad, even in the four Dristi, is like the
aquatic creature's futile activity after the shadow, like a shadow-like, frog-
like, futile activity, it is not the real, Tatvik (Real, Genuine) purpose, it is
Mithya shadow-like (shadow-like), it is only a semblance. Because the
Granthibhed has not yet happened here, so the attainment of Tatvik Vedya-
Sanvedya Pad does not happen, but Atatvik Vedya-Sanvedya Pad is here in these
four Dristi of Mitraadi, and that too is obtained only by the last
Yathapravrittakaran, as Acharya Bhagwan has said, because when the
Karmavivararoop Piliye Dwarapaal opens the Pool, that is, the entrance of the
Tattamndir, then only the true Tatvadarshan happens. "Bhav Anantma Darshan
Dithu, Prabhu Ehva Dekhaadeji; Vikat Granth Je Pal Piliye, Karmavivar
Ughaadechhe......... Sev Bhaviyaan Vimala Jisesar" - Shri Yashovijayji. This
form of Yathapravrittakaran etc. has been mentioned earlier in the description
of the first Dristi. When the Bhavmal of the Jiva becomes very weak, then this
last Yathapravrittakaran - Atmaparinamvishesh is obtained by the Jiva residing
in the last Pudgalavarta. Due to Yathapravritta, an unprecedented joy of
Atmaviya arises, "Apoovarakaran happens. Karanaadi and after that, Samyaktva
cannot be obtained without it - it cannot be avoided, it is "Anivrittikaran". In
it, until the Jiva reaches the Granthi, there is Yathapravrittakaran, before
Granthibhed, there is Apoovarakaran, and when Granthibhed is done and the Jiva
becomes inclined towards Samyaktva, there is Anivrittikaran. This ultimate
Yathapravrittakaran is obtained in the first four Dristi. But the attainment of
Samyaktva happens only from the fifth Dristi, until the first four Dristi, it is
only Mithyatva. (See page 46, 170) Thus, in the first four Dristi, Mithyatva is
the nature, so "Avedya-Sanvedya Pad" is of the Ulban-Utkat type, very strong, so
the Jiva's Mehdasha still exists due to Dasanamaha. And the Vedya-Sanvedya Pad
that is here is not the Tatvik-Vastavik purpose of the Sthal Badha, but it is a
semblance - a shadow-like Atatvik.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
dIprASTi avegha savaidya pada prabalaH vedha saMgha atAtvika (267) bIjuM-ulaTuM
evuM je vedyasaMvedya pada te atre tAtvika hotuM nathI, paraMtu pakSInI chAyA
pratye jalacaranI pravRtti jevuM mithyA-atAtvika hoya che. jema AkAzamAM paMkhI
uDatuM hoya, tene paDachAye pANImAM paDe, ane te paDachAyAne paMkhI jANa kaI
jalacara tene pakaDavAnI ceSTA kare-tenI pAchaLa doDe, paNa tenA hAthamAM kAMI
AvatuM nahi hevAthI te ceSTA jema niSphaLa-mithyA jAya; tema A ve. saM. pada
cAra daSTiemAM paNa vedasaMvedya pada te jalacaranI paDachAyA pAchaLa
paDachAyArUpa deDavArUpa khATI niSphaLa pravRti jevuM hoI, yathArtha, tAtvika (
Real, Genuine) hetuM nathI, mithyA paDachAyArUpa (shadow-like) hoya che, mAtra
tadAbhAsarUpa hoya che. kAraNa ke haju sudhI atra graMthibheda thaye nathI,
eTale tAtvika vedyasaMvedyapadanI prApti hotI nathI, paNa atAtvika evuM
vedyasaMvedyapada atre A mitrAdi pahelI cAra dRSTimAM hoya che, ane te paNa
chelA yathApravRttakaraNavaDe karIne ja sAMpaDe che, ema AcArya bhagavaMtenuM
kathana che, kAraNa ke karmavivararUpa piliye dvArapAla jyAre poLa arthAt
tattamaMdiranuM mukhadvAra ughADe tyAre ja kharekharUM tattvadarzana thAya che.
bhava anaMtamAM darzana dIThuM, prabhu ehavA dekhADejI; vikaTa graMtha je paLa
piLiye, karmavivara ughADeche......... seva bhaviyAM vimala jisesara."--zrI
yazovijayajI. A yathApravRttakaraNa AdinuM svarUpa AgaLa pahelI daSTinA
varNanamAM kahevAI cUkayuM che. jIvane bhAvamala jyAre ghaNA kSINa thAya che,
tyAre chellA pudgalAvartAmAM vattatA jIvane A chelluM yathApravRttakaraNa-
AtmapariNAmavizeSa sAMpaDe che. yathApravRtta tethI karIne apUrva Atmaviyano
ullAsa thaI "apUrvakaraNa thAya che. karaNAdi ane te pachI samyaktvanI prApti
karAvyA vinA rahe ja nahiM-nivate ja nahi, evuM "anivRttikaraNa" hoya che. temAM
java graMthi sudhI Ave tyAMsudhI yathApravRttakaraNa, graMthibheda karatAM
apUrvakaraNa, ane graMthibheda karI chava samyaphavAbhimukha thAya tyAre
anivRttakaraNa hoya che. AmAM A carama yathApravRttakaraNa pahelI cAra daSTiemAM
sAMpaDe che. paNa samyakatvanI prApti te pAMcamI daSTithI ja hoya che, tyAra
pahelAnI cAra dRSTi sudhI te mithyAtva ja hoya che. (juo pR. 46, 170 ) Ama
pahelI cAra daSTiomAM mithyAtvane sabhAva hovAthI " avedyasaMvedya pada?
ulabaNa-utkaTa prakAranuM hoya che, bahu baLavAna hoya che, jethI dazanAmahane
lIdhe jIvanI mehadazA haju hoya che. ane atre vedyasaMvedyapada je hoya che te
sthala bAdha tAttvika-vAstavika hetuM nathI, paNa tadAbhAsarUpa-paDachAyArUpa
atAtvika

Page #334 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(268). The Gyadashtisamuchya is such that the knowledge state of the soul is not
there. Therefore, in the first four dristi, whatever bondage of knowledge of the
soul is seen, it is only superficial and superficial, it is of a gross nature,
but it is not subtle, which is deep and mysterious. Those who consider
themselves knowledgeable from the above - by reading books or knowing something
from here and there, from superficial knowledge of the truth, or those who are
dry spiritualists who sit on the cream of the experience of the knowledgeable,
"ready-made goods", have a lot to learn, this is a lot to learn from the above.
Because the attainment of Samyaktva is a very high state attained in the fifth
dristi, as mentioned above, and before its attainment, one has to attain the
previous four dristi or the previous qualities, which has been described in
detail in each dristi. It is true that "without attaining the Gunasthan, the
eligibility for Samyaktva is also not attained. Yet, without such a self-
feeling, without such a knowledge state without compassion, to imagine the
father as a "knowledgeable" is just an "imagination", and it is equal to
deceiving one's own soul. Because "the fruit is of the state, not of the belief"
- this supreme truth-statement of Shrimad Rajchandraji is exactly applicable
here. Where there is decay of compassion or where there is peace of mind, that
is called the state of knowledge, otherwise it is called madness. "The whole
world is like a dream, or like a dream; that is called the state of knowledge,
otherwise it is called verbal knowledge" - Atmasiddhi by Shrimad Rajchandraji.
Why is this so? For that he says - अपायशक्तिमालिन्यं सूक्ष्मबोधविबंधकृत्  /
नैतद्वतोऽयं तत्तत्त्वे कदाचिदुपजायते  // 68 //  Apayashakti malitya kare,
sukshma bodh pratibandh eh-vantane tattvama, kadi na a upjat. 68. Meaning - The
impurity of Apayashakti is a hindrance to subtle knowledge, therefore, this
subtle knowledge never arises in those who have this impurity of Apayashakti. 1
Truth - Apayamarive Apayashakti's malitya, Narakad Apayashakti's malitya, what?
It is - sukshmavigandha-sukshma bodh ne vibandh-pratibandh karanaaru chhe,
because Apayahitu is its consumption-like kilesha seed, therefore. Nitadachan
this Apayashakti's malitya wala ne a-sukshma bandh nathi, tat-therefore, tarve-
tattva vishayma, rahunate-kadi upja, avany eva sthula bebijna bhavathi-hovapa
nathi.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
(268). gyadaSTisamucaya evuM hoya che, eTale jIvanI jJAnadazA hatI nathI. eTalA
mATe ja A pahelI cAra dRSTiemAM jIvane je kAMI tattvajJAnano baMdha thato
dekhAya che, te mAtra uparachale ne uparaTapakAne hoya che, sthUla prakAranuM
hoya che, paNa UDe ne tavarahasyagAmI e sUkSama heto nathI. A uparathI-pustaka
vAMcIne ke ahIMthI tahIthI kaMIka jANIne uparachalA tatvabodhathI potAnuM
jJAnIpaNuM mAnI besanArA paMDitamae ke jJAnIonA anubhavanI malAIrUpa "taiyAra
mAla" para besI gayelA zuSka adhyAtmIoe ghaNe dhaDa levA jevuM che, A uparathI
ghaNe bedha levA jevuM che. kAraNa ke samyaktvanI prApti te upara kahyuM levA
yogya dhaDe tema pAMcamI daSTimAM ghaNI UMcI dazA prApta thaye hoya che, ane
tenI prApti pUrve prathama cAra dRSTimAM ke apUrva guNagaNa prApta karavo paDe
che, te te pratyeka dRSTimAM vistArathI varNavyuM che. te yakta "guNasthAna
prApta karyA vinA samyaktvanI yogyatA paNa prApta thatI nathI. chatAM tathArUpa
AtmabhAvanI prApti vinA, mehabhAva rahita evI tathArUpa jJAnadazA vinA, pitAne
"jJAnI" mAnI besavAnI "kalpanA karavI te kalpanA" ja che, ane te potAnA AtmAne
vaMcavA chetaravA barAbara che. kAraNa ke " dazAnuM phaLa che, mAnyAnuM phaLa
nathI "-e parama tatvaSTA zrImad rAjacaMdrajInuM saMkelkIrNa vacanAmRta atra
barAbara lAgu paDe che. mehabhAva kSaya hoya jyAM athavA heya prazAMta, te
kahiye jJAnI dazA, bAkI kahiye brAMta. sakaLa jagata te eThavat , athavA svapna
samAna; te kahiye jJAnI dazA, bAkI vAcAjJAna" -zrImad rAjacaMdrajIpraNIta
Atmasiddhi. A ema kema che? te mATe kahe che - apAyazaktimAlinyaM
sUkSmabodhavibaMdhakRt / naitadvato'yaM tattattve kadAcidupajAyate // 68 //
apAyazakti mAlitya kare, sUkSma bodha pratibaMdha eha-vaMtane tatvamAM, kadI na
A upajata. 68. artha -apAya zaktinuM malinapaNuM sUphamadhane pratibaMdha
karanAruM che, tethI karIne A apAyazaktinA malinapaNAvALAne tatvaviSayamAM A
sUkSma bedha kadI upaja nathI. 1 jUti -apAyamarivye apAyazaktinuM mAlitya,
narakAdi apAyazaktinuM malinapaNuM, zuM ? te ke-sUkSmAvigaMdhA-sUma bedhane
vibaMdha-pratibaMdha karanAruM che, kAraNa ke apAyahetu enA sevanarU5 kilaSTa
bIjane bhAva-hovApaNuM che, tethI karIne. nitADacaMe apAyazaktinA
malinapaNAvALAne A-sUkSma baMdha nathI, tata-tethI karIne, tarave-tattva
viSayamAM, rAhunAte-kadI upaja, avaMya evA sthUla bebIjanA bhAvathI-hovApaNAthI.

Page #335 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Diimadrushti: Subtle Knowledge-Obstructing Apay-Shakti Malinya (269)  The
discussion above stated that in the four drushtis of Mitra, etc., the
adyasamvedya pad is strong, but the tatvik, vevasamvedya pad is not the goal,
and therefore subtle knowledge is not present here. The reason for this is
explained here with a clear exposition of the apay shakti. The malinya, which is
the shakti-rupa of the apay like hell, etc., is the one that obstructs and
hinders subtle knowledge. This is because the seed of the apay hetu, like hell,
etc., which is the cause of kilasht karma, is still present here, remaining in
its shakti-rupa. What is this apay? "The previous karma known as nirupkarma is
the apay, says the nirpay purusha. This apay-rupa, strange karma, generates papa
aashay." And as long as the seed of this apay-rupa, kilasht karma, which
generates papa aashay, remains in its shakti-rupa, it does not allow subtle
knowledge to arise. This is because it generates such a malinya in the chitta
that subtle knowledge cannot enter and become subtle bodha. Just as clear
letters cannot be written on a dirty cloth, similarly, as long as the cloth of
the chitta is malinya, subtle knowledge, like clear letters, cannot be written
on it. Just as water does not settle on a greasy surface, similarly, on the
chitta-bhumi, which is greasy with kilasht karma malinya, the nirmal jal, which
is subtle knowledge, does not settle or enter. As long as this apay-bija-rupa
kido is eating away at the inside, there is no hope of the birth of tatva-
samvadhi suddha. Until then, whatever is bound will remain only as a pile of
emptiness. This is because the apay-bija, which remains in its shakti-rupa,
becomes an obstacle to subtle knowledge. Not only that, but there is also the
possibility of it becoming a tree and bearing fruit, which is the result of such
a nimitta. As long as the seed of the disease is not gone, the disease is not
eradicated, the tree cannot say when the disease will erupt or strike.
Similarly, as long as the apay-bija is present, it cannot be known when it will
erupt and bloom, spoiling the health of the soul. Thus, this malinya of apay
shakti truly becomes apay (ap + aay), because it causes apay, the acquired
benefit slips away. "Apayma. Nipaya: The old picture of papa-aay is not a sign
of..." - Gabinda.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
dImAdaSTi : sUkSmabodharedhaka apAya-zaktimAlinya (ra69) vivecana uparamAM ema
je kahyuM ke A mitrA Adi cAra daSTimAM adyasaMvedya pada prabaLa hoya che, paNa
tAtvika evuM vevasaMvedya pada paNa hetuM nathI, ane tethI karIne sUkSma bodha
atra hoto nathI, te zA kAraNathI ema hoya che, teno ahIM spaSTa apAya zakti
khulAso karyo che. naraka vagere apAyanuM je zaktirUpa malinapaNuM che, te
mAlinya sUkSma bodhane vibaMdha-pratibaMdha karanAruM, dhanAruM--aTakAvanAruM
che. kAraNa ke naraka vagere Ape evA apAyahetuonuM-kilaSTa karmanA kAraNonuM
AsevanarUpa bIja haju ahIM sattAmAM che, zaktirUpe rahyuM che. A apAya eTale zuM
? * "nirupakrama nAmathI oLakhAtuM evuM pUrva karma ja apAya che, ema nirapAya
puruSe kahe che, A apAyarUpa vicitra karma pApa Azaya upajAve che." ane pApa
Azaya upajAvanAruM A apAyarUpa liSTa karmanuM bIja jyAM sudhI zaktirUpe paNa
hoya che, tyAMsudhI te sUkSama bodha upajavA detuM nathI, kAraNa ke te cittanuM
evuM malinapaNuM upajAve che ke temAM sUkSma bedhane aMtaHpraveza thaI
sUkSmabodha zakatuM nathI. melI pATI para jema cokhA akSara lakhI zakAtA nathI,
redhaka tema cittanI pATI jyAM sudhI malina hoya tyAM sudhI temAM sUphama
bedharUpa cekhA akSara lakhI zakAtA nathI, jema cIkAzavALI sapATI ( Greasy
surface) para pANI TharatuM nathI, tema kilaSTa karmamalathI cIkaNI cittabhUmi
para sUkSma bodharUpa nirmala jala TharatuM nathI-pravezatuM nathI. A
apAyabIjarUpa kIDo aMdarathI jyAM sudhI aMtarane kerI khAte hoya, tyAM sudhI
tattvasaMbadhI sU dha utpattinI AzA rAkhavI AkAzakusumavat phegaTa che, tyAM
sudhI je baMdha thAya te pile ja-pokaLa ja rahevAne. kAraNa ke te zaktirUpe
raheluM apAya-bIja paNa jyAM sudhI hoya, tyAM sudhI te sUphama bodhane ADA
aMtarAyarUpa thaI paDe che, eTaluM ja nahi, paNa tathArUpa nimitta pAmI temAMthI
vRkSa thaI tevA vyakta phala pariNAmanI paNa saMbhAvanA rahe che. bIjamAMthI
jyAM sudhI roganuM bIja na gayuM hoya, roga nimULa na thayo hoya, vRkSa
tyAMsudhI roga kayAre uMbarI nIkaLaze, kayAre uthale mAraze, te kahI zakatuM
nathI; tema apAyabIja paNa jyAM sudhI hoya, tyAM sudhI te kyAre ubarI AvI-kta
svarUpe phUlIphAlI AtmAnA svAthyane bagADI nAMkhaze, te kaLI zakAtuM nathI. Ama
A apAyazaktinuM malinapaNuM kharekhara ! apAyarUpa ja thaI paDe che, kAraNa ke
tenA thakI apAya (apa+Aya) thAya che, Avela lAbha hAthamAMthI cAlyo * "apAyamA.
nipAyA: purAtano pApArAya citra nipasaMjJaE >>- gabinda.

Page #336 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(270) The collection of yogic insights goes, that is, whatever benefit is
obtained without the subtle knowledge of the subtle knowledge, it goes away
without giving the desired result. And thus, the impurity, which is the seed-
form, the power-form of such a giving-killing, is not attained by the subtle
knowledge, that is, there is no knowledge of the secret of the subject matter,
there is no deep understanding of the truth of the subject matter. Even in these
four insights of friend etc., the knowledge related to the subject matter must
be present, because there is the presence of the seed of the knowledge of the
place, which is unbreakable, unyielding, and infallible, and because it is
unbreakable, it becomes the cause of the future auspicious fruit, that is, the
future subtle knowledge. Subtle knowledge is also not without this world,
without power. - It is said. This is so, therefore - अपायदर्शनं तस्माच्छ्रतदीपान
तात्त्विकम्  /  तदाभालंबनं त्वस्य तथा पापे प्रवृत्तितः  // 69 //  The vision of
giving is not true from the lamp of scripture; it is due to the activity of sin,
it is the appearance of that, 60 Meaning - Therefore, the vision of giving from
the lamp of the form of the deed is not the true purpose, but it has the support
of its aura - the appearance of that, because there is its activity in sin in
that way. Discussion - Thus, due to the impurity of the power of giving, the
knowledge of the place is present, but the subtle knowledge is not present,
therefore, by the lamp of the scripture, the vision of giving of those who have
this insight, that is, the tendency - giving-giving - vision of giving, the
vision of giving - the vision of sin, therefore, from the scripture-scripture-
form lamp, from the scripture, it is not true, it is not transcendental, there
is a relationship between this - this. The transcendental one - but it is due to
the delusion of having the support of its aura, the transcendental subject
matter. (That is, there is the vision of giving in the form of the appearance of
that, the appearance of the transcendental, not the vision of that). Why?
Because - तथा Tamત્તિ: in that way, there is activity in sin in that way, in
that way, in an unknown way, there is activity in sin, therefore. Explanation -
What - that is, in giving, in the sin-form,

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
(ra70) yogadaSTisamucaya jAya che, eTale ke je kAMI bedhana lAbha thAya, te
sUkSmajodharUpa ISTa pariNAma ApyA vinA cAlyA jAya che. ane Ama AvA apAyanuM-
kilaSTa kamaMdaSanuM bIjarUpa-zaktirUpa malinapaNuM jenAmAM hoya, tene
sUmabodhanI prApti hetI nathI, eTale ke tatvaviSayanuM aMtargata rahasyabhUta
jJAna hotuM nathI, tattvanI UMDI yathArtha sAMgopAMga samajaNa hotI sthalabadha
to nathI. te paNa A mitrAdi cAra daSTimAM tattvasaMbaMdhI skUla bedha te hAya ja
avazya hoya che, kAraNa ke avaMdhya-amegha-acUka evA sthala bodha bIjanuM atra
hovApaNuM che, ane te avaMdhya hoI, AgaLa upara bhAvI zubha phaLa pariNAmanuM
eTale ke bhAvI sUkSma bedhanuM kAraNa thaI paDe che. sUkama bodha te paNa IhAjI,
samakti viNa na hoya."--che. sajhAya. Ama che tethI karIne- apAyadarzanaM
tasmAcchratadIpAna tAttvikam / tadAbhAlaMbanaM tvasya tathA pApe pravRttitaH //
69 // zradIpathI tAvika nA apAya darzana tAsa; tevI pApa pravRttithI, te hoya
tadAbhAsa, 60 artha--tethI karIne kRtarUpa dIpakathI enuM apAya darzana tAvika
hetuM nathI, paNa ene tenI AbhAnuM-tadAbhAsanuM avalaMbana hoya che, kAraNa ke
tevA prakAre pApamAM enI pravRtti hoya che. vivecana Ama apAyazaktinA
malinapaNane lIdhe sthala bodha atre hoya che, paNa sUphamabedha nathI hoto,
tethI karIne AgamarUpa dIpakavaDe karIne A daSTivALAne apAyadarzana eTale vRtti
-apAyavanam -apAyadarzana, apAyanuM-deSanuM darzana, tamAZ-tethI karIne,
zratItta-zrutarUpa dIpathI, AgamathI, tAjiktAtvika nathI hotuM, pAramArthika
nathI hotuM, kazya-AnuM-ema saMbaMdha che. tAmArcane ta--paNa tenI AbhAnA
avalaMbanavALa te, paramArthabhAviSayI te bhrAMtithI hoya che. (eTale ke
tavAbhAsa, paramArthabhAsarUpa apAyadarzana hoya che, tavadarzana nahiM). zA
kAraNathI ? te ke-tathA Tamtti: tevA prakAre pApamAM 4 pravRttithI, tevA prakAre
vicitra anAga-ajANatA prakArathI pApamAM pravRtti hoya che teTalA mATe.
pAThAMtara-zA-arthAta apAyamAM, pAparUpa cheSamAM,

Page #337 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Deepradrusti:** The vision that arises from the karmic defilement, which is
the result of the school of thought that is based on the Agamas, is not truly
insightful or liberating. It is merely an illusion of the true nature of
reality, a distorted perception of the truth. The Agamas, like a lamp,
illuminate the lake of existence, revealing the true nature of all things. They
show the true nature of karmic defilement, which obscures the true nature of the
soul, and guide us to the path of liberation.  Just as the lamp of the Agamas
reveals the true nature of the soul, which is pure, wise, and filled with
consciousness, so too does it reveal the karmic defilement that obscures this
true nature. This defilement, which is the result of past actions, leads the
soul to wander through the cycle of birth and death. It is through the
accumulation of karmic defilement that the soul becomes bound to the cycle of
existence.  The ten virtues, such as non-violence, truthfulness, and non-
stealing, help to prevent the accumulation of new karmic defilement. Through
austerity, the old karmic defilement is gradually eradicated. When all karmic
defilement is destroyed, the soul is liberated and its true nature is revealed.
The karmic defilement is like darkness, while liberation is like light. The soul
is pure and full of consciousness, and it is only through liberation that it can
experience its true nature. The path to liberation is the path of understanding
the causes of karmic defilement and eliminating them.  The Agamas, like a lamp,
illuminate the true nature of reality and guide us to the path of liberation.
However, due to the karmic defilement that obscures our vision, we may not fully
understand the true nature of reality. Even when we see the karmic defilement,
we may not fully understand its true nature.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
dIprAdaSTi : Agama-dI, tattvAbhAsarUpa skUla baMdha (271) ke kilaSTa
karyadoSanuM je darzana thAya che, te tAtvika-pAramArthika hotuM nathI, paraMtu
tatvanAparamArthanA AbhAsarUpa, tatvAbhAsarUpa, paramArthAbhAsarUpa hoya che,
tadAbhAsarUpa hoya che. AgamarUpa dI mehadhakAra bharyA A lekamAM sarva
padArthanuM yathArtha darzana karAve che, ane AtmasvarUpane apAya-hAni
pahoMcADanAra evA liSTa karmarUpa apAyanuM samyaga savarUpa dekhADI te kamaSane
kema dUra kare tene sAce raste batAve che. jemake Agama-dIpaka -A AtmA
svarUpathI zuddha, buddha, caitanyaghana svayaMti ne sukhadhAma che. paNa
ajIvarUpa jaDa karmanA deSathI tenuM te zuddha svarUpa avarAyuM-DhaMkAI gayuM
che. tenA sahajAnmasvarUpane apAya-hAni pahoMcela che, ane A puNya-pAparUpa
karma apAyathI te narakAdi cAra gatirUpa saMsAramAM paribhramaNa kare che.
atrata-viSaya-kaSAya AdithI te karmane Azrava thAya che ne pachI baMdha thAya
che. dazavidha dharma Adi saMvarathI navAM karmo AvatA aTakI jAya che, ne
tapathI jUnA karmonI nirjarA thAya che.-kharI jAya che. ane Ama sarva karmone
kSaya thaye, AtmAnA zuddha svabhAvanA pragaTapaNArUpa mokSa thAya che. karma
bhAva ajJAna che, makSa bhAva nija vAsa; aMdhakAra ajJAna sama, nAze jJAna
prakAza. AtmA sat caitanyamaya, sarvAbhAsa rahita, jethI kevaLa pAmiye,
mikSapaMtha te rIta. je je kAraNa baMdhanA, teha baMdhane paMtha; te kAraNa
chedaka dazA, mokSapaMtha bhava aMta. makSa kahyo nija zuddhatA, te pAme te
paMtha; samajAvyo saMkSepamAM, sakaLa mArga nigraMtha. zuddha buddha
caitanyaghana, svayaMti sukhadhAma; bIjuM kahiye keTaluM, kara vicAra te pAma."
-zrImad rAjacaMdrapraNIta zrI Atmasiddhi ItyAdi prakAre sadAgamarUpa dIpaka
tattvanuM samyapha svarUpa prakAze che, karma-AtmAne saMbaMdha darzAvI te karma-
apAya dUra karavAne zuddha mArge spaSTapaNe dekhADe che. tathApi A jIvanI tevA
sUma baMdhanI UNapane lIdhe tene yathArtha tatvadarzana thatuM nathI. Agama35
dIpakanA prakAzathI je ke A jIvane kamarUpa apAya doSanuM sthUla svarUpa
bhAsyamAna thAya che, te paNa baMdhanI daSTimaMdatAne lIdhe tene tenuM tAtvika
svarUpa-paramArtha svarUpa haju samajAtuM nathI, barAbara lakSamAM AvatuM nathI.

Page #338 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(272) The term "Gadasti Samuchaya" refers to a gross, illusory perception of the
bondage of karma. It is like a shadow, superficial and fleeting. This gross
perception creates an illusion of bondage, but it does not leave a deep, lasting
impression on the mind. Therefore, it appears as if this gross perception binds
the soul to karma, rebirth, etc., but it is only an illusion. This is because
the soul, even with the knowledge gained through Shrauta Shravana, etc., still
engages in various minor sins due to ignorance. This indicates that the soul has
not yet truly realized the consequences of karma, such as hellish realms. If it
had, it would be terrified by the infinite suffering of those realms and would
avoid sin, becoming fearful of it. It would not engage in any sinful activities,
even unknowingly, and would stay far away from them.   Therefore, the other,
more subtle, perception of the bondage of karma is like placing one's foot on
hot iron.   **Verse 7:**  "Other than the perception of the bondage of karma,
which is not directly perceived, there is another perception, which is perceived
by the last four types of vision. This perception, due to the transgression of
karma, leads to sinful activities, which are like placing one's foot on hot
iron."  **Explanation:**  This verse refers to the subtle perception of the
bondage of karma, which is not directly perceived but is perceived by the last
four types of vision. This perception, due to the transgression of karma, leads
to sinful activities, which are like placing one's foot on hot iron. This is
because the soul, even though it has a subtle perception of the bondage of
karma, still engages in sinful activities due to ignorance. This is like placing
one's foot on hot iron, which is a painful experience that one would avoid if
one had a clear understanding of the consequences.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
(272) gadaSTisamuccaya eTale tene A sthUla baMdha tattvAbhAsarUpa,
paramArthAbhAsarUpa hoya che, uparachale ne paDachAyA je (Shadow-like) hoya che.
Ama A sthUla bedha tavana-paramArthane AbhAsa Ape evo hoya che, paNa tatvathI
cittamAM aMta:pravezarUpatattvAbhAsarUpa sajajaDa chApa lAgI jAya evo hato
nathI. ethI karIne upara uparathI te skUla bodha A jIvane AtmA-karma apAya Adino
baMdha hoya evuM dekhAya che, evo AbhAsa upaje che. kAraNa ke zratazravaNAdi
dvArA tevA sthUla prakAre jANa tevI vAta paNa te kare che; paraMtu tene te bodha
tatvathI nahi heI, bhrAMtirUpa hoya che, kharekharI aMta:pratItirUpa hoto nathI.
kAraNa ke A dRSTimAM vartato jIva haju ajANatAM paNa tevA prakAranA nAnAvidha
pApamAM pravRtti kare che, tethI karIne ema jaNAya che ke haju tene narakAdi
apAyanuM tatvathI darzana thayuM nathI; je thayuM hota te te bhISaNa narakAdi
gatinA anaMta duHkhathI bhaya pAmIne te te pApathI Darato rahI-pApabhIru rahI,
tathA prakAranI pApapravRtimAM ajANyuM paNa pravartata nahiM, tethI dUrathIja
bhAgata. ato'nyaduttarAsvasmAta pApe karmAgaso'pi hi / taptalohapadanyAsatulyA
vRttiH kvacidyadi // 7 // pada aghasaghathI, anya vedhasaMvedya te te chellI
cAra te, daSTimAMja saMvedya, AthI karma aparAdhathI, pApakarmamAM keya; tasa
lehupada nyAsa sama, vRtti kavacita ja hoya. 70 artha -A avevasaMvedya padathI
anya evuM je vedyasaMvedya pada che, te pAchalI cAra daSTiemAM hoya che. ane A
vevasaMvedya padane lIdhe, karmanA aparAdhathI paNa pApamAM je kavacit pravRtti
hoya, te te paNa tapelA leDhA para paga mUkavA jevI hoya che. vivecana e pada
graMthi vibhedathIjI, chellI pApa pravRti; tapta leha pada dhRti samIjI,
aMtasamaya nivRtti manamehana"--. sajajhA. 4-7 kRttiH-toDavat uttarA--AnAthI
eTale prakramathI prastuta adyasaMvedya padathI anya te vedya vidya padauttara
eTale sthira Adi pAchalI cAra dRSTiomAM hoya che. tamA-AnA thakI, A dyasaMvedya
pada thakI, -pApakarmamAM, hiMsA AdimAM, varmAnagari hi-kamane aparAdhathI paNa,
(kamanA doSe karIne paNa ), zuM ? te ke-topabhyAsatunyA kuttiH-leha56nyAsa tulya
vRtti, eTale tapelA loDhA para paga mUkavA jevI vRtti,-apAyamAM-apAya thAya
tyAre saMvegasAra-saMvegapradhAna e sI, vidya-kavacita hoya te hoya, paNa prAye
te hotI ja nathI.

Page #339 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Diimadrusti:  The **takhtaloha pad** (firm ground) is the **vyasavritti**
(activity) of the **bhav** (emotion) that is **apratibandh** (unrestricted)
(273).  The **adyasavedya pad** (directly perceivable state) mentioned above is
different from the **vedasavedya pad** (scripturally perceivable state), which
exists in the previous four **drushtis** (perspectives) - **sthira** (stable),
etc.  Due to the supreme influence of this **vedyasavedya pad**, the **jogi**
(ascetic) with this **drushti** does not engage in **taptahapad** (burning
state) activities, whether in **apaya** (hell) or **pap** (sin). Even if they
engage in **nyasavritti** (activity of placing) due to **desh** (demerit) of
**purvakarma** (past karma), this activity is like placing something on a hot
iron. Just as one immediately feels a shock when placing their foot on a hot
iron and does not stay there for long, immediately withdrawing it, similarly,
the **mahaatma** (great soul) with this **drushti**, the **samyagdrusti purush**
(person with right vision), is **pap-bhiru** (fearful of sin) and fears sin.
Even if, due to the transgression of **karma**, they unknowingly engage in
**himsa** (violence) or other **pap** (sin), they immediately feel a shock and
do not stay in sin for long, immediately turning back - **pratikram**
(repentance). They engage in this activity with **niraspana** (indifference) and
**antarang khed** (inner regret), not from **atmabhav** (ego), nor from **nirvas
parinam** (desire for results), but out of compulsion due to **purvakarma**
(past karma).  This **samyagdrusti jeev** (soul with right vision) is
**kayapati** (body-bound) and **kayapati** (body-bound), but their downfall is
only through the **kaya** (body). They do not fall into **pap** (sin) through
the **chitta** (mind) alone, and they do not engage in **papkriya** (sinful
activity) with **chitta** (mind). Their **chitta** (mind) is in **moksha**
(liberation), while their **sharira** (body) is in **sansar** (world). **Ri ma
tanu** (This is the body). Therefore, all their activities related to **dharma**
(righteousness), **artha** (wealth), etc., are **garup** (heavy). Their actions
are like those of **Shri Krishna** and others, **udasina** (detached).  When
**samyattva** (right conduct) arises in a **jeev** (soul), all their **sansari**
(worldly) activities happen **rasarahit** (without attachment). There is no
activity that causes **bhrant** (delusion) regarding **parmarth** (ultimate
goal). As long as there is no **bhrant** (delusion) regarding **parmarth**
(ultimate goal), **niraspana** (indifference) in other activities does not
hinder **samyaktva** (right conduct).  ...  The **samyagdrusti jeev** (soul with
right vision) appears to be engaged in the world, but they are bound by the
previous **nibandhan** (bondage). **"Yatin pad vodhisattv: pavita na
chittapatinastavdetadatrapi yuktimat // bhinnagranthestu yatpraayo moksha chitta
bhavetanu / taray taras ivenndra chono golo hi mavat: "** - Shri Yogabindu.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
dImAdaSTi : takhtaloha pada vyAsavRtti, bhAva apratibaMdha (273) uparamAM je
adyasaMvedya pada kahyuM, tenAthI itara-bIjuM evuM je vedasaMvedya pada che, te
sthira vagere pAchalI cAra daSTiemAM hoya che. ane A vedyasaMvedyapadanA parama
prabhAvathI A dRSTivALo jogIjana apAyamAM athavA pApamAM taptAhapada prAye
pravRtti karatA ja nathI; ane pUrva karmanA deSa karIne paNa je nyAsavRtti
kavacit kare, te tenI te pApa pravRtti, taptAhapadanyAsa jevI, eTale ke tapelA
leDhA para mUkavA jevI hoya che. jema tapelA leDhA para paga mUkatAM tarata ja
AMcako anubhavAya che, paNa tyAM jhAjho vakhata sthiti karate nathI, tarata ja
ApoApa pAcho kheMcI levAya che, tema A daSTivALe mahAtmA samyagU- dRSTi puruSa
eTale badhe pApabhIru hoya che, eTale badhe pApathI Darato rahe che, ke kavacit
karmanA aparAdhane lIdhe paNa je jANatAM-ajANatAM paNa tenI hiMsAdi pApamAM kaMI
pravRtti thaI jAya, to te tarata ekadama AMcaka anubhave che, pApamAM te jhAjho
vakhata Takato nathI, tyAMthI te takSaNa ja pAcho vaLI jAya che-pratikramI jAya
che. ane te pravRtti paNa te atyaMta nIrasapaNe-aMtaraMga khedapaNe kare che,
AtmabhAvathI te karate ja nathI; nirvasa pariNAmathI karato nathI, pUrva
karmathI prerAIne parANe na chUTake karavI paDe te kare che. A samyagra daSTi
jIva kAyapAtI ja + kAyapAtI, paNa hoya che, kAyAthI ja enuM patana thAya che,
eTale ke kAyA mAtrathI ja cittapAtI nahiM te kavacit pApamAM paDe-pApakriyA
kare, paNa te cittapAtI te heto ja nathI, cittathI tenuM kadI pApamAM patana
thatuM ja nathI. kAraNa ke te bhinnagraMthi samyagadaSTi puruSanuM citta
mokSamAM hoya che je zarIra saMsAramAM hoya che. ri ma tanu ." eTale tene sarva
ja ga-dharma arthAdi saMbaMdhI vyApAra garUpa ja hoya che. zrI kRSNAdikanI kriyA
udAsIna jevI hatI. je jIvane samyatva utpanna thAya, tene sarva prakAranI
saMsArI kiyA rasarahitapaNe thavI saMbhave che. ghaNuM karI evI koI paNa kiyA te
jIvanI hotI nathI ke jethI paramArthane viSe bhrAMti thAya; saMsArakriyAmAM ane
jyAM sudhI paramArthane viSe bhrAMti thAya nahIM tyAM sudhI nIrasapaNu bIjI
kriyAthI samyaktvane bAdha thAya nahIM. x x x samyagadaSTi jIva te saMsArane
bhajato dekhAya che, te pUrve nibaMdhana karelAM + "yatina pad vodhisattva:
pavitA na cittapAtinastAvadetadatrApi yuktimat // bhinnagranthestu yatprAyo
mokSe cittaM bhave tanuH / taraya tarasa ivendra cono goLo hi mAvataH " --zrI
yogabiMdu,

Page #340 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(274) The collection of *gaddhasti* is seen due to *prarabdha karma*. In
reality, it does not decrease in the world due to *bhaava*. It decreases due to
the fear of the arising of past *karma*. Therefore, to the extent that there is
no *bhaava* restriction, to that extent the *samyakdarshti* is present in that
being. It is true that infinite *krodha*, *maana*, *mayaa*, and *lebha* cannot
occur except for *samyakattva*. x x x The characteristic of the path of
*paramartha* is that the being becomes cowardly in all ways while engaging in
the *aparamartha*, whether in happiness or in sorrow. Cowardice in sorrow is
also possible for others. But cowardice in the attainment of worldly happiness,
the dislike of that happiness, the dullness, is that of a man who desires
*paramartha*. (See for details) - Shrimad Rajchandra. Letter No. 375. (459)
Thus, the entire worldly activity of a *samyakdarshti* man is without *bhaava*
restriction, it is with detached *bhaava*. The best example of this is Shri
Jinendra Bhagwan. Even when he was living as a householder, he was dwelling with
supreme *vairagya*. He was *bhegi* yet *gi*. He remained in the world like water
on a lotus leaf, detached. This later picture of his character has been
beautifully depicted in words full of *bhaava* by the great poet and scholar,
Acharya Yashvijayji Upadhyayji, "Even though the mind of the people is filled,
but *vairagya* for the three times; your mind is like the ocean, it does not get
any *taag*..." Shri Shreyans, please do *kripa*. Shri Yashvijayji "यदा
मरुन्नरेंद्रश्रीस्त्वया नाथोपभुज्यते  /  यत्र तत्र रतिर्नाम विरक्तत्वं तदापि ते
// " - Shri Hemchandracharya's Shri Vitragastava. And such a bright, living,
vibrant example has been provided in the present age by a supreme spiritual
*samyakdarshti* *vitraga* man like Shrimad Rajchandraji, from his father's
excellent spiritual character. It is evident to those who understand his
*vachanamrita* with a middle *bhaava*, which is interwoven with his spiritual
life. For example, night and day, there is only contemplation of the subject of
*paramartha*. Food is also the same, sleep is also the same, lying down is also
the same, dreams are also the same, fear is also the same, *bhega* is also the
same, *parigraha* is also the same, movement is also the same, sitting is also
the same.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
(274) gadaSTisamuccaya evAM prArabdha karmathI dekhAya che. vAstavyapaNe
bhAvathI te saMsAramAM tene pratibaMdha ghaTe nahiM. pUrva karmanA udayarUpa
bhayathI ghaTe che. eTale aMze bhAva pratibaMdha na hoya teTale aMze ja
samyaphadaSTipaNuM te jIvane hoya che. anaMtAnubaMdhI krodha, mAna, mAyA ane
lebha samyakatva sivAya gayAM saMbhave nahi, ema je kahevAya che te yathArtha
che. x x x paramArthamArganuM lakSaNa e che ke aparamArthane bhajatAM jIva badhA
prakAre kAyara thayA kare, sukhe athavA dukhe. duHkhamAM kAyarapaNuM kadApi bIjA
nuM paNa saMbhave che. paNa saMsArasukhanI prAptimAM paNa kAyarapaNuM, te
sukhanuM aNagamavApaNuM, nIrasa paNuM paramArtha mAgI puruSanuM hoya che." (
vizeSa mATe juo)-zrImad rAjacaMdra. patrAMka 375. (459) Ama samyagadaSTi
puruSanI samasta saMsAra ceSTA, bhAvapratibaMdha vinAnI hoya che, anAsakta
bhAvavALI hoya che. AnuM uttama daSTAMta zrI jinezvara bhagavAna che. teo
gRhasthAvAsamAM hatA tyAre paNa parama vairAgyathI vAsita hatA. bhegI chatAM gI
hatA. saMsAramAM anAsaktabhAve jalakamalavat nilepa rahyA hatA. AvuM temanuM
leTettara citra caritra AcAryonA AcArya jevA samartha kavivara yazovijayajI
upAdhyAyajIe suMdara bhAvavAhI zabdomAM AlekhyuM che kerAga bhare jana mana
rahe, paNa tihu kALa vairAga; citta tamArA re samudrane, kaI na pAme che tAga...
zrI zreyAMsa kRpA karo." zrIyazovijayajI "yadA marunnareMdrazrIstvayA
nAthopabhujyate / yatra tatra ratirnAma viraktatvaM tadApi te // " -zrI
hemacaMdrAcAryajI kRta zrI vItarAgastava ane evuM ja ujajavala jIvatuM jAgatuM
javalaMta daSTAMta vartamAnayugamAM zrImada rAjacaMdrajI jevA parama adhyAtmAgI
samyagadaSTi vItarAga puruSe pitAnA uttama adhyAtmacaritrathI pUruM pADyuM che.
te temanuM adhyAtma jIvana jemAM otaprota guMthAyeluM che evA temanA
vacanAmRtane madhyastha bhAvathI sAdyata avakanArane sahaje pratIta thAya che.
dAkhalA tarIke rAtri ane divasa eka paramArtha viSayanuM ja manana rahe che.
AhAra paNa e ja che, nidrA paNa e ja che, zayana paNa e ja che, svapna paNa e ja
che, bhaya paNa e ja che, bhega paNa e ja che, parigraha paNa e ja che, calana
paNa e ja che, Asana paNa e ja che.

Page #341 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Right Vision:** The state of being detached from the worldly activities of the
Samsara, being indifferent to them (275). What more can be said? Bones, flesh,
and their mixture are all of the same color. Even a ram knows this. "The state
of the mind remains conscious, so we perform all the actions of our dealings
with great disorder." We are indifferent to such confusion. We have supreme
detachment from worldly dealings, never allowing them to touch us. Just as our
mind is like an eye, and the eye cannot tolerate even a speck of dust, so too is
our mind, which is like an eye, and cannot tolerate anything else. XXX Despite
this state, we cling to attachments with great force. This is a difficult thing
to understand, because it is like trying to pick up sand near the eye; just as
this is painful, extremely painful, so too is the result of attachments to the
mind. The mind, being in a state of ease, experiences pain in the right way,
experiences it in a state of unbroken samadhi." etc. (For more, see) Shrimad
Rajchandra.  From the above, it can be understood that a being with Right Vision
will rarely commit sins, and if they do, perhaps due to the influence of past
karma - the arising of prarabdha - they will commit only a little, and even
then, they will not do so with a detached result, so they will not be bound.
Even a being with Right Vision, when they commit a sinful act, will feel a
shock, like putting a bare foot on hot coals, they will feel fear, and deep down
in their heart, they will feel immense regret from the true feeling of their
mind. Because, who, having tasted even a drop of the nectar of samkiti, would
like other tastes like bakasbuka?  "You know the taste of samkiti nectar, you
have served the sinful karma for many days; serve the karma that is destined,
the samkiti nectar is written in it. Know that you who have tasted even a drop
of your virtues, will not like other tastes. He who has tasted even a drop of
the nectar of love, will not like other tastes." - Shri Yashovijayji  Why is
this the case? He says - x "सम्मविट्ठी जीवो जइवि हु पावं समायरे किंचि  /  कपाणि
हौ वंघो ना निधë कुळg / Shri Pratikramanasutra - Vanditta Sutra

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
dImAdaSTiH samyagraSTinuM saMsArakriyAmAM nirasapaNuM -udAsInapaNuM (275) adhika
zuM kahevuM ? hADa, mAMsa ane tenI miMjAne eka ja e ja raMganuM raMgana che. eka
rema paNa ene ja jANe vicAra kare che. "cittanI dazA caitanyamaya rahyA kare
che, jethI vyavahAranA badhAM kArya ghaNuM karIne avyavasthAthI karIe chIe."
amane te evI jaMjALa viSe udAsInapaNuM vate che. amAre viSe vatate parama
vairAgya vyavahArane viSe kayAreya mane maLavA detA nathI. je ke amAruM citta
netra jevuM che. netrane viSe bIjA avayavanI peThe eka rajakaNa paNa sahana thaI
zake nahIM. bIjA avayavarUpa anya citta che, amane vate che evuM citta te
netrarUpa che. XXX AvI sthiti chatAM upAdhioga te baLavAnapaNe ArAdhiye chIe. e
vedavuM vikaTa ochuM lAgatuM nathI, kAraNa ke AMkhanI pAse jamInanI retI
upaDAvavAnuM kArya thavArUpa thAya che; te jema du:khe, atyaMta dukhe thavuM
vikaTa che, tema cittane upAdhi te pariNAmarUpa thavA barAbara che. sugamapaNue
sthita citta hevAthI vedanAne samyaphaprakAre vede che, akhaMDa samAdhipaNe vede
che." ItyAdi. (vizeSa mATe juo) zrImad rAjacaMdra. A uparathI samajI zakAze ke
samyagadaSTi jIva prAye pApa Acare ja nahi, ane kadAcane pUrva karmanI
preraNAthI-prArabdha udayathI te kiMcitmAtra paNa kavacit Acare, te te nirvasa
pariNAmathI to tema kare ja nahi, tethI karIne tene baMdhax samyagadaSTine paNa
a9pa hoya che. te pApakarma AcaratAM paNa tene tapAvelA leDhA para alapa baMdha
paga mUkavAnI jema ekadama AMcako lAge che, arerATI upaje che, ne hRdayanA
UMDANamAMthI cittanA sAcA bhAvathI atyaMta atyaMta kheda thAya che. kAraNa ke
jeNe samakita amRta rasane leza paNa svAda cAkhe, tene bAkasabukasa jevA bIjA
rasa kema game ? tuja samakita rasasvAdane jANa, pApa kubhakate he bahu dina
seviyuMjI; seve je karamane joge tehi, vAM che te samakita amRta dhure lakhyuM
che. jANe re jeNe tuja guNa leza, bIjA re rasa tehane mana navi gamejI. cAkhyo
che jeNe amI lava leza, bAkasabukasa tasa na ruce kimejI."--zrI yazovijayajI A
evA prakAranI kema hoya che? te mATe kahe che - x "sammaviTThI jIvo jaivi hu
pAvaM samAyare kiMci / kapANi ho vaMdho nA nidhae kuLag / zrI pratikramaNusUtra-
vaMdittA sUtra

Page #342 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(276) **Gadastisamuccaya** Vedya-samvedya-pada-tah samvegati-sayad iti /
Charameva bhavatyesha punartutyogatah // 71 // Sangati-saye kari, vadya-samvedya
prabhav; punah durgati agathi, chelli hoy aa sav, 71 Artha: - Vedya-samvedya
pada-thaki sangati-sayane lidhe, aa pap-pravutti chelli j hoy chhe, karanake
(tene) farine durgati ne veg hetun nathi. Vivechan: Uparna lekma em kahyu ke
vedya-samvedya pada-wala ne kadach pap-pravutti je thay, te te tapela lodha par
pag mukawa jevi hoy chhe, atle karmosh vash te karta tene antarang khed-
paschattap-rup teevr baltara thay chhe. Aavi vilakshan prakarni mandatam ras-
wali aa pravutti kem hoy chhe? Tene ahe khulaso hoy chhe. Pratham te vedya-
samvedya-padni prapti thai hovani lidhe j aavi pravutti hoy chhe. Aa vedya-
samvedya-pad (samyagdarshan) granthibhed thi prapt thay chhe, tenu swarup niche
kahvama aavshe. Atyant darun aavi karm-granthine shubh bhav-vade bhedi nakhi ne
kadachit koi ek j te darshan ne pame chhe.” Vritti: Vecha-pato-vidya-savidya-pad
thi, jenu lakshan kahvama aavshe te vedya-samvedya-pad ne lidhe,
samvefratirav7-samveg ati-sayathi, ati-say samveg ne lidhe, Ramaitra martyeshaaa
pap-pravutti chetli j hoy chhe. Sha karanathi? Te ke - punatya-yot - punah -
farine durgati na ayogathi, farine durgati ne veg thatu nathi tetla mate.
Shrenik adi na udaharan uparathi. Shanka - jenu sadarshan prati-pati-t (aavi ne
pachhu padi gayu chhe) thay chhe, eva anant sansari-o ne aneka-var durgati ne
veg hoy chhe, etla mate aa yat kinchit chhe. (Aama kahi sar nathi). Karanake
aamaara abhi-prayanu parijnaan nathi - aamaara abhi-pray barabar samajayo nathi.
Kshayik samyagrusti ne j nairyik vidya-samvedya-pad ne bhav hoy chhe, eva abhi-
prayathi e (samyagdarshan) vyavaharik chhe. Temaj aa j (nishchay vedya-samvedya-
pad) charu-sundar chhe, karanake e hota, praye durgati ma pan manas dukh ne
abhav hoy chhe, - j tandul ni jem (vajina chekha ni jem) aane bhav pak ne ag hoy
chhe tene lidhe, pan aana thi biju evu vyavaharik vedya-samvidh pad te ekati thi
j acha - asundar chhe. * Taddarshanam-avapnoti karm-granthin sudarunam /
Nirbidhy shubh-bhaavena kadachit-kashchideva hi // Sati cha-smin-nasau dhanayah
samyagdarshan-samyutah / Tattvashraddha-na-pu-tatma na ramate bhodhadhau // " -
Maharshi Haribhadracharyaji krut Shastra-vartasamuccaya,

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
(276) gadaSTisamuccaya vedyasaMvedyapadataH saMvegAtizayAditi / caramaiva
bhavatyeSA punartutyayogataH // 71 // saMgatizaye karI, vadyasaMvedya prabhAva;
puna: durgati agathI, chellI hoya A sAva, 71 artha :-vedyasaMvedya padathakI
saMgatizayane lIdhe, A pApapravRtti chelI ja hoya che, kAraNake (tene) pharIne
durgatine vega hetuM nathI. vivecana uparanA lekamAM ema kahyuM ke vedyasaMvedya
padavALAne kadAca pApapravRtti je thAya, te te tapelA loDhA para paga mUkavA
jevI hoya che, eTale karmoSa vaze te karatAM tene aMtaraMga kheda-pazcAttAparUpa
tIvra baLatarA thAya che. AvI vilakSaNa prakAranI maMdatama rasavALI A pravRtti
kema hoya che? tene ahIM khulAso hoya che. prathama te vedyasaMvedyapadanI
prApti thaI hovAne lIdhe ja AvI pravRtti hoya che. A vedyasaMvedyapada
(samyagadarzana) graMthibhedathI prApta thAya che, tenuM svarUpa nice kahevAmAM
Avaze. atyaMta dAruNa evI karmagraMthine zubha bhAvavaDe bhedI nAMkhIne kadAcit
koIka ja te darzanane pAme che." vRtti vecApato-vidyAsa vidya pada thI, jenuM
lakSaNa kahevAmAM Avaze te vedasaMvedya padane lIdhe, saMvefrtirAva7-saMvega
atizayathI, atizaya saMvegane lIdhe, rAmaitra maratyeSAA pApapravRtti cheTalI ja
hoya che. zA kAraNathI? te ke-punatyayota -punaH-pharIne durgatinA ayogathI,
pharIne durgatine vega thatuM nathI teTalA mATe. zreNika AdinA udAharaNa
uparathI. zaMkA-jenuM sadarzana pratipatita (AvIne pAchuM paDI gayuM che) thayuM
che, evA anaMta saMsArIone anekavAra durgatine vega hoya che, eTalA mATe A yata
kiMcita che. ( AmAM kAMI sAra nathI). kAraNake amArA abhiprAyanuM parijJAna
nathI-amAro abhiprAya barAbara samajAyo nathI. kSAyika samyagRSTine ja naiRyika
vidyasaMvedya padane bhAva hoya che, evA abhiprAyathI e (samyagadarzana)
vyAvahArika che. temaja A ja (nizcaya vedyasaMvedya pada) cArusuMdara che,
kAraNa ke e hotAM, prAye durgatimAM paNa mAnasa duHkhane abhAva hoya che,-ja
taMdulanI jema (vajInA cekhAnI jema) Ane bhAva pAkane aga hoya che tene lIdhe,
paNa AnAthI bIjuM evuM vyAvahArika vedhasaMvidha pada te ekatithI ja acA-
asuMdara che. * tadarzanamavApnoti karmagraMthiM sudAruNam / nirbhidya
zubhabhAvena kadAcitkazcideva hi // sati cAsminnasau dhanyaH
samyagdarzanasaMyutaH / tattvazraddhAnapUtAtmA na ramate bhodadhau // " -
maharSi haribhadrAcAryajI kRta zAstravArtAsamuccaya,

Page #343 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Dimādr̥ṣṭi: The Immense Glory of Samyagdṛṣṭi with Intense Zeal (277)  This
activity is due to the intense zeal, which is the result of the attainment of
the Vedhasamvedya-pada. Because when Samyagdṛṣṭi arises, the true nature of the
ocean of existence is revealed, the terrible, infinitely painful nature of the
world is directly perceived, and the infinite, blissful nature of the soul is
directly experienced. Therefore, such a being does not play in this painful,
fearful world, but just as one runs away from a place of fear or with clenched
fists, so too does this Samyagdṛṣṭi, the seeker of liberation, runs away from
this world with intense zeal. For a moment, the allure of the world does not
seem attractive to him. The supreme, zeal-filled words of Shrimad Rajchandraji
are: "O Lord! When the pain of the seventh, scorching hell is experienced, one
agrees. But the information of the world does not agree." - Shrimad
Rajchandraji. No. 58 (85)  Or, zeal means an intense desire for liberation, a
strong desire for liberation. The Samyagdṛṣṭi man has tasted the supreme bliss
of his own true nature, he tastes the wonderful, pure nectar, so naturally his
innate self-realization runs towards his innate, natural state with intense
zeal. That is, he has an intense desire to be free from all worldly attachments,
to be free from all karmic bondage, and to attain liberation, which is his true
nature, as soon as possible. Because he feels that birth, death, old age,
disease, sorrow, etc., are only causes of suffering for those who are tormented
by this terrible ocean of existence, and the only cause of happiness is
liberation, which is free from birth, etc., suffering, free from the power of
fear, and always free from suffering.  And because of this intense desire for
liberation, he also has a strong interest in the means of liberation, such as
devotion, affection, etc., which are the means of liberation. Because the cause
leads to the accomplishment of the work, this unshakeable, timeless principle,
unaffected by the three times, establishes devotion in his heart. Therefore, he
has intense zeal, full enthusiasm, and supreme self-excitement towards devotion,
affection, etc. towards the Lord. "Birth, death, and the winds of suffering are
only causes of suffering for men. The ocean of existence is terrible. But
liberation is the supreme happiness, free from birth, etc., suffering." -
Shastravarta Samuccaya.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
dImAdaSTi : savegAtizaya-samyagadarzanane apUva mahimA (277) bIjuM te
savegAtizaya-atizaya saMvegane lIdhe AvI pravRtti hoya che. ane A saMvegAtizaya
paNa vedhasaMvedyapadanI prAptinuM phaLa pariNAma che. kAraNa ke samyagadarzana
thatAM, bhavasAgaranuM sAcesAcuM svarUpa pratIta thAya che, saMsAranuM dAruNa
saMvega=atyaMta anaMta duHkhamaya svarUpa sAkSAt jaNAya che ane AtmAnuM anaMta
vega sukhamaya svarUpa pratyakSa pragaTa anubhavagocara thAya che. eTale te jIva
AvA du:khamaya bhayarUpa saMsAramAM ramatuM nathI, paNa jema bhayasthAnathI ke
mUThIo vALIne vege dUra bhAgI jAya, tema A samyagdaSTi mumukSu jIva paNa
saMvegathIatyaMta vegathI te saMsArathI bhaDakIne bhAge che. kSaNabhara tene
saMsAranI mohinI rucikara lAgatI nathI. zrImad rAjacaMdrajInuM parama
saMvegabhAvamaya vacanAmRta che ke he nAtha ! sAtamI tamatamaprabhA narkanI
vedanA maLI hoya te vakhate sammata karata. paNa jaganI mAhitI sammata thatI
nathI."-zrImad rAjacaMdrajI. naM. 58 (85) athavA saMvega eTale atyaMta
mekSAbhilASa, tIvra mumukSu paNuM. samyagadaSTi puruSe sahaja AtmasvarUpane
paramAnaMdamaya rasAsvAda karyo che, adbhuta samakita amRtarasa cAkhe che, eTale
svAbhAvika rIte ja tenI sahaja AtmapariNati atyaMta saMvegathIsaMvega=kSA-
atyaMta atyaMta vegathI sahajAnmasvarUpe sthitirUpa mekSa bhaNI doDe bhilASa
che. eTale ke jema bane tema tvarAthI samasta saMsArabaMdhanathI chUTI, sakala
karmanAlamAMthI mukta thaI, AtmasvabhAvarUpa mokSa pAmavAnI tene utkaTaatizaya
IcchA hoya che. kAraNa ke te bhAve che ke-janma, mRtyu, jarA, vyAdhi, roga, zoka
vagerethI upadrava pAmI rahele A bhayaMkara bhavasAgara puruSone kevaLa
kalezanuM ja kAraNa thAya che, ane sukhanuM kAraNa te mAtra mekSa ja che, ke je
mekSa janma vagere kalezathI rahita, bhayazaktithI vimukta ane sadA vyAbAdhAthI
vajita che "+ ane Ave tIvra mokSAbhilASarUpa saMga hovAthI, upalakSaNathI te
mokSanA sAdhanarUpakAraNarUpa ahaMdabhakti-vAtsalya vagere satUsAdhana pratye
paNa saMvega-parama rucibhAva dharAve che. kAraNa ke kAraNathI ja kAryanipatti-
kAryasiddhi thAya che, saMvega=parama e akhaMDa sanAtana siddhAMta
trikAlAbAdhita nizcala nizcaya te hadayamAM bhaktirAga avadhAre che. eTale te
bhagavAna aha tenI bhakti-vAtsalya Adi pratye saMvegathI-atyaMta vegathI, pUrNa
utsAhathI, parama AtmollAsathI, + "janmamRtyunAvyAnavAyu duH. klezAya kevala
puMsAmaho bhImo bhavodadhiH // sukhAya tu paraM mokSo janmAdiklezabarjitaH / /
aparAyA vinamo cAvavAnA sI -zAstravArtAsamuccaya,

Page #344 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(278) The collection of right faith (Samyak-darshan) is extremely joyful. And
just as a flood of water cannot be stopped, so too, this instrument (Samyak-
darshan) cannot be stopped from being extremely fast, energetic, and unstoppable
towards the right faith. "Just as the characteristic of the right faith is its
momentum, and that is understood by devotion and affection, or by being brought
about." - Panchadhyayi by Maharshi Amritchandracharya. Because of the work, now,
O Shri Jin Mukh Vanajinar! The strong reason for my success, I have known the
proof...Jinar!" - Shri Devchandraji. "Without the right faith, there is no
escape from suffering." - Shrimad Rajchandraji. Thus, due to the power of the
Veda-sanvedya-pad, there is attainment of momentum in the above three meanings.
Therefore, this Samyak-darshan, the liberated soul, runs away from the world
with extreme momentum, with extreme speed, runs towards liberation with extreme
momentum, and worships the instruments of liberation like Jin-bhakti with
extreme momentum, with supreme enthusiasm, with supreme devotion. And thus,
because of the attainment of the Veda-sanvedya-pad, and because of the excess of
momentum, the above-mentioned activities like the destruction of the body, which
may be there, are only the last, the final ones. Now, in the future, it is not
possible for such sinful activities to happen again. This sinful activity is
said to be the last because after that, this Samyak-darshan man will never again
be able to move towards the bad path. Here, the example of Shriman Shrenik Raja
is well-known. This great soul, the great being, attained the right faith, even
though he was subject to destruction and rebirth, but due to the influence of
past karma, he had his last sinful activity. He was able to understand the vows,
the knowledge of the vows, etc., he was a Samyak-darshan with no interruption,
and although he attained hell due to the influence of the karma of life that was
bound before the right faith, it is only the last. After that, he will become
the Tirthankara named Mahapadma in the next twenty. This is the extraordinary
glory of the Veda-sanvedya-pad, the Samyak-darshan, which is the self-awareness.
The supreme sage Shrimad Rajchandraji has sung: "There are no vows, no knowledge
of vows, no renunciation of anything; he will become the Tirthankara Mahapadma,
look at Shrenik's place. The Jinar says, 'Knowledge is his, let everyone hear
it.'"

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
(278) gadaSTisamuccaya atyaMta cittaprasannatAthI pravarte che. ane jema pANInuM
pUra rokayuM rakAtuM nathI, tema samyagadaSTine A sasAdhana pratyene atyaMta
vega-saMvega-adamya utsAha rekyo rokAto nathI. " yathA samyaktvabhAvasya saMvego
lakSaNaM guNaH / sa copalakSyate bhaktivAtsalyenA'thavAhatAm // maharSi
amRtacaMdrAcAryajIkRta paMcAdhyAyI. kAraNathI kAraja have, e zrI jina mukha
vANajinavara ! puSTa hetu muja siddhinA, jANa kIdha pramANa...jinavara !"--zrI
devacaMdrajI. jinase bhAva vinA kabU , nahiM chUTata duHkhadAva."--zrImad
rAjacaMdrajI. Ama vedasaMvedya padanA pratApe, uparokta traNe arthamAM saMveganI
prApti hoya che. eTale A samyagadaSTi mumukSu AtmAthI jIva atyaMta saMvegathI-
atyaMta atyaMta vegathI saMsArathI dUra bhAge che, atyaMta saMvegathI mokSa
pratye doDe che, atyaMta saMvegathI-paramollAsathI -parama bhaktirAgathI
jinabhakti Adi ekSasAdhanane ArAdhe che. ane Ama vedhasaMvedyapadanI prApti thaI
hovAthI, tathA saMvegAtizaya upa hovAthI, uparamAM kahI te takhtalohapadanyAsa
jevI pApapravRtti kadAca hoya te hoya; ane te paNa carama-eTale chellI ja,
chevaTanI ja hoya che, have pachI bhaviSyamAM koI kALe tenAthI tevI pApapravRtti
pharIthI thavI saMbhavatI nathI. A pApa pravRtti chellI ja kahI, tenuM kAraNa e
che ke tyAra pachI punaH kadI paNa durgatine-mAThI gatine te samyagRSTi puruSane
vega thavAnuM nathI. atre zrImAna zreNika rAjAnuM udAharaNa suprasiddha che. te
mahAnubhAva mahAtmAne kSAyika punaHdurgati samyakatva prApta thayuM hatuM,
chatAM pUrva karma prayogathI-prArabdhavaze karIne aga temanI chellI:
pApapravRtti hatI, vratapaccakhANa Adi te grahI zaktA hatA, avirati samyagadaSTi
hatA, ane jo ke samyagadarzana pUrve bAMdhelA AyukarmanA prabhAve temane
narakagatinI prApti thaI che, to paNa te chevaTanI ja che. te pachI te te AgAmI
vIzImAM mahApA nAmanA tIrthaMkara thavAnA che. A apUrva mahimA vedhasadha
padarUpa-svasaMvedanarUpa samyagadarzanane che. parama satkavivara zrImad
rAjacaMdrajIe gAyuM che ke - "vrata nahIM pacakhANa nahIM, nahIM tyAga vastu
keIne; mahApadma tIrthakara thaze, zreNika ThANuMga joI le. jinavara kahe che.
jJAna tene, sarva bhaLe sAMbhaLe.'

Page #345 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Deepradrusti:** This statement, that **Kshayika Samyagjnandristi** is the only
**Nishchay Veghavedya Pad** (279), is not meant to praise **Aviratipana**, but
rather to highlight the unparalleled glory of **Samyagdarshan**, the knowledge
of the self, the experience of the soul, even though there may be external
**Avirati**. Moreover, true **Samyagdarshan**, as seen with feeling, is an
unparalleled glory for the **Samyagdristi** person, who has attained **Viram-
Virati** from the external world through the inner self. Otherwise,
**Samyagdarshan** combined with external **Virati** is like mixing fragrance
into gold. But knowledge without **Samyagdarshan** is like not knowing at all;
it is like a large, empty vessel. Similarly, **Charitra-Virati-
Vratapacchakhana** without **Samyagdarshan** is also like a large, empty vessel,
useless for attaining **Moksha**, as stated in the **Shri Bhagavati Sutra**.
This is what **Shrimad Rajchandraji**, in his profound and secret words, says in
the same place, expressing this feeling: "He who has learned before, but does
not know the soul, is ignorant, as the scriptures testify. All that has been
said before, the soul must make pure. The Jina says, this is knowledge, let all
the noble ones listen. Knowledge is not found in scriptures, nor in the
cleverness of poets, nor in mantras and tantras, nor in language. Knowledge is
not found in other places, knowledge is an art in the knower. The Jina says,
this is knowledge, let all the noble ones listen. The soul and this body are not
separate, until this is understood, the meaning of liberation is not spoken. The
fifth limb of the teaching is pure, the Jina says, this is knowledge, let all
the noble ones listen. Even those who have learned about the scriptures, but do
not know their own form, let them take refuge in me with feeling. This is the
knowledge that is spoken of, which is found in the place of agreement, etc. The
Jina says, this is knowledge, let all the noble ones listen."   **Shrimad
Rajchandraji** says that **Samyagdarshan**, which is inseparable from the
experience of the soul, that is, which has the experience of the soul with
certainty, has this supreme effect. Therefore, once it is attained, it never
leads to **Durgati** again. Some may doubt this, saying that there are countless
beings in the world who have received **Samyagdarshan**, but have fallen back,
and who often experience **Durgati**. How is this possible?

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
dIprAdaSTiH kSAyika samyagnadaSTine ja nizcaya veghasavedyapada (279) A vacana
koI aviratipaNAnI prazaMsArUpa nathI, paraMtu bAhya-dravya avirati chatAM paNa
samyagadarzanane, AtmajJAnano, AtmAnubhUtine keTale badho acinya apUrva mahimA
che, te sUcavavA mATe ja che. vaLI bhAvathI joIe te tevA sAcA samyagadarzanane
samyagadaSTi puruSa aMtarAtmAthI parabhAvathI virAma-virati pAmyA ja apUrva
mahimA hoya che. bAkI samyagadarzana ne bAhya viratine sumeLa te te sonAmAM
sugaMdha bhaLyA barAbara che. paNa samyagadarzana vinAnuM je jJAna jANyuM te na
jANyA barAbara che; moTA mIDArUpa-zUnyarUpa che; temaja samyagadarzana vinAnuM
je cAritra-virati-vratapaccakhANa te paNa mokSaprApti arthe zUnyarUpa-moTA mIMDA
jevuM cheema zrI bhagavatI sUtramAM bhAkhyuM che. ene ja bhAva sUcavatA parama
rahasyapUrNa paramArthagaMbhIra zabdomAM e ja sthaLe kavirAja zrImad
rAjacaMdrajI vade che ke"je heya pUrva bhaNela nava paNa jIvane jANe nahi, te
sarva te ajJAna bhAkhyuM sAkSI che Agama ahIM; e pUrva sarva kahyA vize jIva
karavA nirmaLe, jinavara kahe che jJAna tene, sarva bhavya sAMbhaLe. nahi
graMthamAMhi jJAna bhAkhyuM, jJAna nahi kavi cAturI, nahIM maMtra taMtro jJAna
dAkhyAM, jJAna nahiM bhASA TharI; nahIM anya sthAne jJAna bhAkhyuM, jJAna
jJAnImAM kaLA, jinavara kahe che jJAna tene, sarva bhavya sAMbhaLe. A jIva ne A
deha e bheda je bhA nahI, pacakhANa kIdhAM tyAMsudhI mekSArtha te bhAkhyAM nahIM
e pAMcame aMge kahyo upadeza kevaLa nimaLe, jinavara kahe che jJAna tene, sarva
bhavya sAMbhaLo. zAstro vizeSa sahita paNa je jANiyuM nija rUpane, kAM teha
Azraya karaje bhAvathI sAcA mane, te jJAna tene bhAkhiyuM, je sammati Adi
sthaLe, jinAvara kahe che jJAna tene, sarva bhavya sAMbhaLe." zrImad
rAjacaMdrajI AtmAnubhUtithI avinAbhAvI eTale ke nizcayathI jemAM AtmAnubhava
hoya ja evA samyagadarzanane A parama prabhAva che. eTale te prApta thayA pachI
pharIne durgatine ga thatuM nathI. atra keIne zaMkA uddabhavavAne saMbhava che
ke-jenuM samyagadarzana ApIne cAlI gayuM che, pratipAtI thayuM che, paDI gayuM
che, evA anaMta saMsArIone anekavAra durgatine vega hoya che, tenuM kema?

Page #346 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(280) The resolution of the doubt regarding *Gidashtti Samuchaya* is that the
one who doubts does not understand the meaning of the opinion and intention,
because only the *Kshayik Samyagdashtti* has the definite *Vedhasanvedya Pad*,
and this statement is made with reference to it. Here, the discussion is not
about the practical *Vedhasanvedya Pad* that he believes in, or the practical
definite *Vedhasanvedya Pad* or *Samyagdarshan*. This practical *Samyagdarshan*
is not a beautiful *Sanvedya Pad*, because it does not end the cycle of birth
and death. The cycle of birth and death ends only after attaining the definite
*Vedhasanvedya Pad*. Therefore, this definite *Vedhasanvedya Pad* is the only
beautiful, noble, good, selfless, truly true, and auspicious one. It is the only
one that leads to the highest liberation. And once it is attained, one does not
have to go to hell again, but only occasionally, due to the force of karma, one
may have to go there once at the end (like the great soul, the great sage,
Shrenik Maharaj). Even then, in hell, such a *Kshayik Samyagdashtti* person does
not experience mental suffering. Just as unripe fruit does not ripen, so too,
his emotions do not ripen due to the heat of mental suffering. His emotions do
not burn, and he does not experience any pain. He remains balanced in his own
nature, experiencing all happiness and sorrow with equanimity. "Whether a person
is wise or ignorant, he cannot be without happiness and sorrow; the wise person
experiences it from the heart, the ignorant person experiences it from the
mind." - Shrimad Rajchandraji. Because he, the saint, who is an experiencer of
the soul, knows, experiences, and feels with the soul's emotion, that - "Abadhu!
Kya tera? Kya mera? Tera hai so teri pase, avar sab andera....Abadhu." I am the
one, the pure, the *darshan-jnanamaya*, the eternally formless soul. Nothing
else, not even an atom, is mine. I am the pure soul, the *Abaddhaprushta*, the
unique, the definite, the indivisible, and the uncombined. "I am experiencing
myself here as one who is completely dependent on the self, with a feeling of
self-love. I have no attachment, no desire. I am the pure *chighan*, the
treasure of light." "Ahamiko khlu suddo dasananaanamayo sadaruvi / navi asthi
majjha kinchhivi annam paramanuminrtpi / / jo passadi appaanam
abaddhaputthamannanyam niyadam / visamsangutta tan sudhanache viyali - Shri
Samyatsar.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
(280) gidaSTisamucaya enuM samAdhAna ema che ke evI zaMkA karanAra abhiprAya
Azaya samaja nathI, kAraNa ke kSAyika samyagadaSTine ja nizcayathI vedhasaMvedya
pada hoya che, tene apekSIne atra kathana che, teNe mAnelA vyAvahArika
vedyasaMvedya padanI-vyAvahAra nizcaya vedya- samyagadarzananI vAta ahIM che
nahiM. te vyAvahArika samyagadarzana suMdara saMvedya pada nathI, kAraNake tethI
bhavabhramaNano aMta Avato nathI. bhavabhramaNane aMta to nizcaya vedhasaMvedya
padanI prApti pachI ja Ave che. mATe A nizcaya vedhasaMvedya pada je che, te ja
suMdara che, rUDuM che, bhaluM che, nirvyAja sAcesAcuM kalyANakara che, te ja
zIvra mokSagati prApta karAvanAra che. ane e prApta thaye, prAye durgatimAM
javuM ja paDatuM nathI, paNa kavacit karmavaze karIne chevaTane mATe ekAdavAra
ja je javuM paDyuM (mahAnubhAva mahAtmA zreNika mahArAjanI jema), te paNa tyAM
narakamAM paNa tevA kSAyika samyagadaSTi puruSane mAnasika duHkhane abhAva hoya
che; vajana cekhA jema pAke nahi, tema mAnasika duHkhanA tApathI tenA bhAvano
pAka thato nathI, tenA bhAva tapatA nathI, tene unhI AMca paNa AvatI nathI, te
to nirAkulapaNe svasvabhAvamAM ja samavasthita rahI samatAbhAve sarva sukha-
duHkha vede che. "jJAnI ke ajJAnI jana, sukha duHkha rahita na keya; jJAnI vede
haiyethI, ajJAnI vede rAya"--zrImad rAjacaMdrajI kAraNa ke te AtmAnubhavI
nizcaya samyagadaSTi saMtajana jANe che, vede che, anubhave che, ne Atma bhAvanA
bhAve che ke - abadhU ! kyA terA ? kayA merA ? terA he so terI pAse, avara saba
anerA....abadhU" huM nizcaya eka, zuddha, darzanajJAnamaya, sadA arUpI e AtmA
chuM. bIjuM kaMI paNa, paramANu mAtra paNa, mhAruM nathI, huM abaddhapRSTa,
ananya, niyata, avizeSa, ne asaMyukta e zuddha AtmA chuM. " sarva taraphathI
svarasathI nirbhara bhAvavALA eka evA svane-AtmAne huM ahIM svayaM anubhavI
rahyo chuM. mahAre kaI meha che nahiM-che nahi. huM zuddha cighana tejenidhi
chuM." "ahamiko khalu suddho dasaNaNANamaio sadArUvI / Navi asthi majjha kiMcivi
aNNaM paramANuminrtapi / / jo passadi appANaM abaddhapuTThamaNaNNayaM NiyadaM /
visamasaMgutta taM suddhanace viyALI -zrI samayasAra

Page #347 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Deepradrushti:  The Vedya-Samvedya Pad - "This is the Yogi" (281) - Being
completely self-reliant, the law of sand, "I am not mine, I am not mine, I am
not mine, I am pure, I am the treasure of virtues" - Samyasaar Kalash. "Do not
give up the Parayaashti, it is one single, unbroken gold. Drink the Nirvikalpa
Rasa, it is pure, Nir-anjan, one" - Anandghanaji. And so on, through such
contemplation, this presented, supreme, virtuous soul, the determined,
Samyagdrushti Jiva, never experiences any kind of anxiety, always remains in a
state of detachment, constantly immersed in the bliss of the soul. But this
determined Vedya-Samvedya Pad, other than this, is ugly in itself, it is not
good, it is not beautiful. Because, as mentioned above, it does not stop the
wandering of Bhava-Bhraman, the cycle of Samsara continues. Yes, punya-bandh
happens, but Bhava-Vicched does not happen, therefore, one should constantly
keep in mind the supreme, beautiful, determined Vedya-Samvedya Pad, to achieve
it.  **Avedya-Samvedya Padam A-Padam Param-Arthatah / Padam Tu Vedya-Samvedya
Padam Eva Hi Yoginaam // 72 //**  It is A-Pad from the perspective of Param-
Arth, it is A-Ghasave; the determined Pad of the Yogis, it is the Vedya-Samvedya
Pad, 72.  **Meaning:** Avedya-Samvedya Pad is A-Pad from the perspective of
Param-Arth. The determined Pad of the Yogis is the Vedya-Samvedya Pad.
**Explanation:** The A-Samvedya Pad, which was mentioned above as ugly in
itself, not good, not beautiful, why is it so, it is explained here. The
A-Samvedya Pad, which is from the perspective of Param-Arth, is the Mithyaadi
Aashya-Sthan. That is why it is said that it is A-Pad from the perspective of
Param-Arth. From the perspective of the true nature of things, it is A-Pad due
to ignorance. The true good is the Vedya-Samvedya Pad, which is described as the
characteristic, through the unique Yoga (the true meaning of the word, according
to the Shakha, is the same "Pad"), the determined Pad of the Yogis.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
dIprAdaSTi : vedyasaMvedya 5da- "ie che je jogIjana" (281) sarvataH
svanirbharamAvuM, reta kAyaduM sthanidainma nAti nArita mama na meha,
zuddhavinamAnidhimi " -samayasArakaLaza "paryAyaSTi na dIjIe, eka ja kanaka
abhaMga re. nirvikalpa rasa pIjIe, zuddha niraMjana eka re. -AnaMdaghanajI.
ItyAdi prakAre AtmabhAvanA bhAvate A prastuta parama bhAvitAtmA nizcaya
samyagadaSTi jIva kyAreya paNa koI paNa prakAranI AkulatA pAmato nathI, sadAya
udAsIna bhAvathI svastha rahe che, niraMtara AtmAnA nijAnaMdamAM nimagna rahe
che. paNa AvA A nizcaya vedhasaMvedyapadathI anya evuM je vyAvahArika
vedasaMvedyapada che, te te ekAMte ja asuMdara che, bhaluM nathI, rUDuM nathI.
kAraNa ke upara kahyuM tema tenAthI bhavabhramaNanI rakhaDapaTTI baMdha thatI
nathI, saMsAra paribhramaNa cAlu ja rahe che. hA, puNyabaMdha thAya che, paNa
bhavaviccheda thatA nathI, mATe tenA avalaMbane paNa parama suMdara nizcaya
vedhasaMvedyapada pAmavAne niraMtara lakSa AtmAthIe rAkhavo joIe.
avedyasaMvedyapadamapadaM paramArthataH / padaM tu vedyasaMvedyapadameva hi
yoginAm // 72 // apada ja che paramArthathI, pada aghasave; pada te nizcaya
ginuM, pada ja vedasaMveda, 72 artha-avevasaMvedya pada e paramArthathI apada ja
che. nizcaya yogIonuM pada te vedyasaMvedya pada ja che. vivecana a saMvedya
pada je uparamAM ekAMte ja asuMdara kahyuM, sArUM rUDuM nathI ema kahyuM, te zA
kAraNathI ema che, tenuM ahIM spaSTIkaraNa karyuM che. a saMvedya pada je
paramArthathI vRttiH- ve pa -adyasaMvedya pada mithyAdi AzayasthAna. eTalA mATe
ja kahyuM kegharamArthatA-paramArthathI apada che.yathAvasthita vastu tavatAnA
apedanathI-ajANapaNuthI. kharuM su-5Na 50 che. vasaMvedapAva-vedyasaMgha pada
ja-jenuM lakSaNa kahevAmAM Ave che te, anUtha yegathI, (zakhanA yathArtha artha
pramANe e ja 'pada che,) dinizcaya, janA-gIeAnuM,

Page #348 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(282) Considering the collection of yogaduktis as "apada" is simply that, it
does not diminish its name as "pada". It is a mithyadristi-based ashayasthan,
which is why it is not a place to put the "pada" (foot) for someone with
samyagdristi. There is no place for it. As Shriman Anandghanji said, "There is a
state where the foot cannot find a place to stand." But the true "pada" for the
sick, the place to put the foot, is the vedyasamvedya pada. Because it is the
"pada" that is truly "par" according to the true meaning of the word "pada", and
it is only this that deserves the name "pada". The asamvedya pada or the
vyavaharik vedyasamvedya pada is not stable, it is unstable, it is prone to
fall, and it cannot end the cycle of birth and death. But if it becomes the
cause of the nischya vedyasamvedya pada through tradition, that is, through the
ability gained through its desire, the nischya vedyasamvedya yogijan pada that
the jiva attains through this ability, only then and only then does the jiva end
the cycle of birth and death and attain moksha. This nischya vedyasamvedya pada
is not unstable, it is stable, it is not prone to fall, and therefore it quickly
stops the cycle of birth and death and leads to liberation. Thus, the nischya
vedyasamvedya pada immediately brings about moksha, which is why the yogijan
always desires this nischya vedyasamvedya pada, considers it the ultimate goal
from the perspective of truth, and knowing all other padas as apada, considers
this nischya vedyasamvedya pada as the ultimate pada, and worships and adores
it. And in this way it is said: वेद्यं संवेद्यते यस्मिन्नपायादिनिबन्धनम्  /
तथाप्रवृत्तिबुद्धयापि स्व्याद्यागमविशुद्धया  // 73 //  Meaning: Vedya, vedaniya,
something that is to be experienced. It is something that is graspable through
unconditioned knowledge from the state of being and the general feeling of the
type. Samve - samvedaya is, the certainty is also known from the destruction of
the pacification, parim - in which, in which pada - ashayasthan, what is it
special? For that it is said avasanidhan - apaya adi's nibandhan - cause, the
cause of hell - heaven etc., chari - adi, tatha - in such a way that it is
penetrated by the general (connected with the general) agravrittivrishi -
apravrittibuddhi. That is, through the buddhi of its upadan - tyaga ashayamka,
through the buddhi of its upadan - tyaga (acceptance - rejection) ashay, now -
samvedaya is, (woman etc. vedya) samvisuddha - agam from the pure. That is, from
the shrat, the buddhi that makes the viparyayamal a rule. It is this that is the
main binding cause for the spectator to think, which is why the woman etc. was
accepted.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
(282) yogadakTisamucaya vicArIe te "apada" ja che, ene "pada" nAma ja ghaTatuM
nathI. vedhasaMvedya ja kAraNake te mithyAdaSTivALuM AzayasthAna che, eTale
samyagadaSTi evA "pada" gIjanene te pada (paga) mUkavAnuM ThekANuM ja nathI,
sthAna ja nathI. tyAM te zrImAna AnaMdaghanajInA vacana pramANe "caraNuM dharaNu
nahi ThAya evI sthiti che. paNa rogIonuM kharUM pada te,-paga mUkavAnuM sthAna
te, vedyasaMvedya pada ja che; kAraNake te ja "pada" zabdanA yathArtha artha
pramANe "para" kahevAne gya che, tene ja "pada" nAma ghaTe che. asaMvedya pada
athavA vyAvahArika vedyasaMvedya pada je che te sthira nathI, asthira che, tene
patanane bhaya che, ane te pite bhavabhramaNane aMta karI zakatuM nathI, paNa jo
te paraMparAe nizcaya vedhasaMvedya padanuM kAraNa thAya, eTale ke tenA Icche
che je dvArA prApta thayelI gyatAthI-pAtratAthI jIvane je nizcaya vedhasaMvedya
jogIjana pada prApta thAya, te ja ane tyAre ja jIvane bhavabhramaNane aMta Ave
che, ane mokSane pega thAya che. A nizcaya vedhasaMvedya pada asthira nathI,
sthira ja hoya che, tene patanane bhaya hotuM nathI, ane tethI zIdhra
bhavabhramaNa aTakI paDI mukti sAMpaDe che. Ama nizcaya vedhasaMvedya pada ja
mokSane avilaMbe yoga karAve che, eTale mokSanA athI yogIjane sadAya A nizcaya
vedhasavedya padane ja Icche che, paramArthathI tene ja parama ISTa gaNe che,
ane bAkI bIjA badhAM padane apada jANI, eka nizcaya vedhasaMvedya padane ja
pitAnuM pada mAne che, tene ja parama pUjya-ArAdhya-upAsya samajI ArAdhe
cheupAse che. ane tevA prakAre kahe che - vedyaM saMvedyate
yasminnapAyAdinibandhanam / tathApravRttibuddhayApi svyAdyAgamavizuddhayA // 73
// kRtti --vedya, vedanIya, veThavA gya vastu. vastusthitithI tathA prakAranA
bhAvagI sAmAnyathI avikalpaka jJAna vaDe grAhya evI vastu, ema artha che. saMve-
saMvedAya che, kSayapazamane anurU55Ne nizcaya ahithI paNa jaNAya che, parima-
jemAM, je padamAM-AzayasthAnamAM, te kevuM viziSTa ? te mATe kahyuM
avasAnidhana-apAya AdinuM nibaMdhana-kAraNa, naraka-svaga vagerenuM kAraNa,
cAri-Adi, tathA-tevA prakAre jethI sAmAnyathI anuviddha (sAmAnya sAthe
saMkaLAyeluM) agravRttivRSi -apravRttibuddhithI paNa. eTale ke tenA upAdAna-
tyAga AzayAmaka buddhithI, tenA upAdAna-tyAga (grahaNa -tyAga) AzayavALI
buddhivaDe karIne, have-saMvedAya che, (strIAdi vedya) sAmavizuddhA-AgamathI
vizuddha evI. eTale zratathI jene viparyayamala dara karAve che evI buddhithI.
prekSAvaMtane-vicAravAnuM chevAne paNuM A ja pradhAna baMdhakAraNa che, eTalA
mATe strIAdi grahaNa karyuM,

Page #349 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  **Dimadrusti: Definition of Vedya Pada, Nari Nida (283)**  **The definition
of Vedya Pada is given in Nari Nida (283) where the initial cause of Nida is
explained, and the woman, etc., are considered Vedya.**  **The definition is as
follows:**  **73. Meaning:**  Where the woman, etc., are Vedya - the object of
medicine, pure according to the scriptures, and the mind is free from
attachment, even then, it is perceived. (The connection to this verse is in the
following verse.)  **Analysis:** The woman, etc., are Vedya, the cause of Nida,
which is the cause of hell, heaven, etc., and is pure according to the
scriptures. Even with a mind free from attachment, it is perceived - it is
experienced correctly. This is called Vedya-Samvedya Pada, as explained in the
following verse.  **Explanation:** Vedya means that which is worthy of being
known, worthy of medicine, worthy of experience. It is the object of knowledge,
which is grasped without any conceptualization, through the knowledge of the
state of the object and the general nature of the object. The vision of the
object, where the woman, etc., are experienced, is called Vedya.  **Here, Vedya
refers to the object, such as the woman, etc., which is perceived, and which is
caused by hell, heaven, etc.**  **The woman, etc., are Vedya objects, and their
true nature, as it is, is experienced in a general way, according to the state
of the object. This is Vedya.**  **Where the woman, etc., are Vedya - the object
of experience, are perceived with a firm mind, according to their own decay and
cessation, and are experienced correctly, as they are, this is called Vedya-
Samvedya Pada, as explained in the following verse.**  **In other words, the
true nature of the woman, etc., which is the cause of hell, etc., is perceived
with a firm mind, which does not change in the three times. This perception,
vision, and experience is Vedya-Samvedya Pada.**  **This firm mind is purified
by the scriptures. Its impurities, such as the impurities of doubt and delusion,
are washed away by the pure water of the scriptures.**  **This firm mind is free
from attachment towards the woman, etc., and the nature of the object. This
freedom from attachment is purified by the scriptures. In other words, after
attaining the knowledge of Vedya-Samvedya Pada, this freedom from attachment
becomes firm in the mind, and the woman, etc., are considered to be objects of
renunciation, abandonment, and non-acceptance.**  **Due to this firm conviction,
the correct...**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
dImAdaSTi : vedya padanI vyAkhyA, nArI nidA (283) apAya Adi nidAna jyAM, strI
Adi vedya vedAya; Agamavizuddha tehavI, apravRtti mati chatAMya; 73. artha
-jemAM,-apAya AdinA kAraNarUpa strI Adi vedya-davA yogya vastu, AgamathI
vizuddha evI tevA prakAre apravRtti buddhithI paNa, saMverAya che, - (A lekane
uttara saMbaMdha nIcenA zlokamAM che. ) vivecana naraka-svarga vagere apAyanA
nibaMdhanarUpa-kAraNarUpa strI vagere vedya jyAM AgamathI vizuddha evI tevA
prakAranI apravRtti buddhithI paNa saMvedAya che-samyak prakAre vedAya
cheanubhavAya che, tenuM nAma vedyasaMvedya pada che, ema pachInA lekamAM
saMbaMdha che. ) te A prakAre vedya eTale vedanIya, davA yogya, anubhavavA
yogya. eTale ke vastusthitithI tathA prakAranA bhAvagI sAmAnyathI avikalpaka
jJAnavaDe grAhya-grahaNa thAya evuM vedavA vastusvarUpa. bhAgIne sAmAnyapaNe
vastusvarUpanuM je darzanajyAM strI Adi anubhavana-vedana thavA gya che, tenuM
nAma vedya che. atre vedya eTale strI vedha saMvedAya vagere padArtha -ke je
naraka-svarga vagerenA kAraNe thAya che. A strI Adi te ve. saM. padArthanuM,
tenA tenA tevA tevA yathAvasthita svarUpe, vastusthiti pramANe jema che tema,
bhAvagIne sAmAnyapaNe vedanA anubhavana thavuM, te vedya che. A strI Adi vedya-
anubhava cogya vastu jyAM potapotAnA kSayopazamane anurUpapaNe, nizcayabuddhithI
saMvedAya che, samyaka prakAre jema che tema vedAya che, anubhavAya che,
jANavAmAM Ave che, te (vedyasaMvedya pada kahevAya che, ema nIcenA lekamAM
saMbaMdha che.) eTale ke narakAdi apAyanA kAraNarUpa strI AdinuM jevuM vAstavika
sAcuM svarUpa che, tenuM tevA yathArtha svarUpamAM, trikALamAM na phare evI
nizcaya buddhithI saMvedana thavuM, bhAna thavuM, darzana thavuM, anubhavana
thavuM te vedhasaMvedya pada che. A nizcayabuddhi AgamathI-sazAstrathI vizuddha
thayelI evI hoya che, teno viparyaya mala-vimaryAsa mala AgamarUpa nirmala
jalathI dhovAI gaye hoya che. ane A nizcayabuddhimAM strI Adi padArtha pratye
tathA prakAranI apravRttibuddhi Agamavizuddha hoya che, eTale ke
vedyasaMvedyapada-samyagadarzana prApta thayA pachI, A apravRttibuddhi strI Adi
padArtha heya che, tyAgavA lAgyA che, cheDI devA gya che, anAdeya che-grahaNa
karavA yogya nathI, e dRDha nizcaya-traNe kALamAM kadI na phare e nirdhAra
aMtarAtmAmAM sthira thAya che. ane evA nizcayane lIdhe samyaga

Page #350 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(284) Even though a man with **Gadarisamuccaya** vision may not be able to
completely renounce it from the beginning, he will always have the inner
conviction of non-action towards the object of desire, such as women, and will
never act towards it with attachment. Because, "The man who desires worldly
pleasures with clear attachment has not heard the words of the **Jnanis**, or
has not seen a **Jnanis**, says the **Tirthankara**. You know that the passion
that arises upon seeing a woman after seeing a **Jnanis** is as if you have not
seen a **Jnanis**. After hearing the words of a **Jnanis**, the living body of a
woman will not remain without being affected by the **Jiva** for a moment.
Indeed, the earth will not remain without being affected by the **Vikara** of
wealth and other possessions. Except for the **Jnanis**, there is no other place
for the **Atma** to reside for a moment." (For more details, see) Shrimad
Rajchandra, Patrank 371. (454) Here, the main point about women is mentioned,
and the reason is that even the most thoughtful beings are hindered by women.
Even the **Durbhayy** **Kamachandala** **Pandits** are affected. "The worldly
traveler, bound by the great snare of women, falls into the great dark well
called **Bhava**." Therefore, by avoiding the main obstacle of women, there is a
chance that other obstacles will also be easily broken. * "All of this world is
the heroine, the renunciant is the hero; everything is renunciation, only sorrow
is the form. By conquering one object, all the world is conquered; by conquering
the king, the army and the kingdom are conquered." - Shrimad Rajchandraji's Shri
Moksha Mala. The greatest cause of **Apay** and **Atmahani** in this world, the
greatest obstacle to **Kalyana**, is women. That is why the **Jnanis** have not
spared any criticism of women. **Nari Ninda**, which is like nectar in speech
and poison in the heart, is a natural evil, and we do not know who created this
woman! * "The low-born, the worshiper of the **Jambavali**, beware of the
**Naalamara** **Astras** - Shri Adhyatmasar, "अङ्गनादिमहापाशैरतिगाढं नियंत्रिताः
/  पतत्यंधमहाकूपे भवाख्ये भविनोऽध्वगाः  // " - Shri Shubhachandracharyaji's Shri
Jnanarnava, *"धारयन्त्यमृतं वाचि हृदि हालाहलं विषम्  /  निसर्गकुटिला नार्यो न
विद्मः केन निर्मिताः॥ वनज्वलनलेखेव भोगिदंष्ट्रेव केवलम्  /  वनितेयं मनुष्याणां
संतापभयदायिनी।"

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
(284) gadarisamuccaya daSTi puruSane, pUrvakamathI kadAca tyAga na karI zakAya
te paNa, strI Adi apAyahetu pratye aMtarAtmAthI sadAya apravRttibuddhi ja hoya
te te padArtha pratye te kadI paNa AtmabhAve pravate nahi ja. kAraNa ke "saMsAra
spaSTa prItithI karavAnI icchA thatI hoya, te te puruSe jJAnInAM vacana
sAMbhaLyA nathI, athavA jJAnI puruSanA darzana paNa teNe kya nathI, ema
tIrthakara kahe che. jJAnI puruSane joyA pachI strIne joI je rAga utpana thato
hoya te jJAnI puruSane joyA nathI, ema tame jANe. jJAnI puruSanAM vacanane
sAMbhaLyA pachI strInuM sajIvana zarIra ajIvanapaNe bhAsyA vinA rahe nahIM.
kharekhara pRthvIne vikAra dhanAdi saMpatti bhAsyA vinA rahe nahIM. jJAnI puruSa
sivAya tene AtmA bIje kayAMya kSaNavAra sthAyI thavAne viSe che nahIM." (vizeSa
mATe juo) zrImad rAjacaMdra, patrAMka 371. (454) atre strInuM mukhyapaNuM
kahyuM, tenuM kAraNa e che ke bhalabhalA moTA vicArazIla jIvane paNa strI e
moTAmAM moTA pratibaMdhanuM kAraNa thaI paDe che. durbhaya kAmacAMDAla paMDitene
paNa paDe che. "strI vagere moTA phAMsAthI khUba jakaDAyelA saMsArI musAphare
"bhava' nAmanA moTA aMdhArA kUvAmAM paDe che." mATe mukhya e A strI-pratibaMdha
TaLatAM, bIjA pratibaMdha paNa saheje tUTavAno avakAza maLe che. * "A saghaLA
saMsAranI, ramaNI nAyakarUpa; e tyAgI tyAguM badhuM, kevaLa zoka svarUpa. eka
viSayane jItatAM, chatie sau saMsAra; nRpati jItatAM chatie, daLa pura ne
adhikAra." -zrImad rAjacaMdrajI praNIta zrI mokSamALA. jIvane A jagatamAM je
moTAmAM moTuM apAyanuM-AtmahAninuM koI kAraNa heya, kalyANanuM moTAmAM moTuM
pratibaMdhaka kaI paNa kAraNa hoya, te te strI ja che. eTalA mATe ja jJAnI
puruSoe A strInI niMdA karavAmAM kAMI bAkI rAkhI nathI. nArI niMdA jema ke-
vANImAM * je amRta ane hRdayamAM hAlAhala viSa dhAre che evI A nisarga-kuTila
strI keNe nirmANa karI che te ame jANatA nathI ! * "nica: jAmavALyA: vaMditAna
vaceta di nALAmarAstrArthodhodha man - zrI adhyAtmasAra,
"aGganAdimahApAzairatigADhaM niyaMtritAH / patatyaMdhamahAkUpe bhavAkhye
bhavino'dhvagAH // " -zrI zubhacaMdrAcAryajI praNIta zrI jJAnArNava,
*"dhArayantyamRtaM vAci hRdi hAlAhalaM viSam / nisargakuTilA nAryo na vidmaH
kena nirmitaaH|| vanajvalanalekheva bhogidaMSTreva kevalam / vaniteyaM
manuSyANAM sNtaapbhydaayinii|"

Page #351 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The knowledge of the fundamental nature of the object of discrimination, like
the light of a lamp, is like the fangs of a snake, causing only suffering and
fear to the human being. This woman, who dwells in the minds of even the saints,
drives away the virtues that are worthy of worship in the world - she exiles
them. It is better to embrace a furious, writhing serpent than to embrace a
woman who is like a path to hell, even out of curiosity. A woman who provokes
the senses of a man creates a fire in his heart that is not like the flame of a
fire that is touched. A woman is like twilight, fleeting in her desires, like a
low-lying river, she is fond of the low, and like the moon in its waning phase,
she is crooked. And so, just as the nature of a woman is perceived with utter
contempt, so too is the nature of all other things perceived in their true form
by the man of right perception. Therefore, he knows clearly the distinction
between what is to be rejected and what is to be accepted. This thing is worthy
of rejection, and this thing is worthy of acceptance, this clear discrimination,
determination, decisive intellect, and perception are firmly imprinted in his
soul. Therefore, even if he may not be able to act accordingly, that is, even if
he cannot renounce a woman, who is inherently to be rejected, or even if he
cannot accept renunciation, which is inherently to be accepted, even then, his
inner feeling, perception, realization, and unwavering conviction remain
unchanged. Perhaps due to the force of karma, he may be unable to do so, but
even then, he constantly feels a genuine remorse, thinking, "Alas! I cannot
renounce this thing that is to be rejected, I cannot accept this renunciation."
Thus, there is a distinction in the mind of the knower, while the ignorant do
not have such a distinction in their perception. Thus, there is a vast
difference between the vision, the tendencies, and the activities of the knower
and the ignorant. Because the knower of right perception has attained the
knowledge of discrimination. He knows the distinction between himself and other
things. He has the unwavering perception and experience of the fundamental
knowledge that "I am the pure soul, distinct from all other substances."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
dIprAdiSTa bhedavijJAna-mULa vastunuM bIjabhUta jJAna (285) vajagninI lekhAnI
jema ane sApanI dADhanI jema A vanitA manuSyane kevaLa saMtApa ane bhaya ApanArI
che. saMtenA paNa cittamAM vasati bAMdhatI evI A ni:zaMka strI jagatupUjya evA
guNasamUhane uddavAsita kare che-dezavaTo de che. krodha pAmelI kuMphADA mAratI
nAgaNane AliMgana karavuM sAruM, paNa narakapaddhatirUpa nArIne kautukathI paNa
AliMgavuM sAruM nahiM. iDhiyArthIne prakopa karanArI strI puruSonA hRdayamAM e
dAha upajAve che ke jevo sparzavAmAM AvelI agnizikhA upajAvatI nathI. strI
saMdhyAnI peThe kSaNarAgavaMtI che, nimna (nadI ) jema nIca-priyA che, tathA
bIjanA caMdramAnI peThe vaka-vAMkI hoya che. ItyAdi. ane Ama strInuM svarUpa
jema atyaMta heyabuddhithI saMvedAya che, tema "Adi" zabdathI anya sarva
vastusvarUpa paNa tenA yathArtha svarUpe atre samyagRSTi puruSane saMvedAya che.
tethI te sarva heya-upAdeya viveka barAbara jANe che. A vastu heya-upAdeya
tyAgavA yogya che, ane A vastu AdaravA gya-grahaNa karavA yogya viveka che, e
spaSTa viveka, nirdhAra, nizcaya buddhi, saMvedana tenA AtmAmAM daDha chApapaNe
aMkita thaI gayela hoya che. eTale bhale kadAca te te pramANe AcaraNa na paNa
karI zake, arthAt strI Adi heya che, tene te tyAga na karI zakato hoya, athavA
virati-pratyAkhyAna Adi Adeya che, tenuM te upAdAna-grahaNa na karI zakato hoya,
te paNa A vastu cekakasa choDI devA gya che, ane A vastu cokkasa AdaravA yogya
che, evI je tenI aMtaraMga lAgaNI, saMvedanA, pratIti, akhaMDa nizcayatA temAM
kaMI paNa phera paDato nathI. karmadeSa vaze tema karavAnI kadAca pitAnI
azaktinirbaLatA hoya te tene mATe paNa tene niraMtara kharekhara
AtmasaMvedanamaya kheda rahe che ke are ! huM A heya vastu tyAgI zakato nathI, A
virati Adi huM AdarI zakato nathI. Ama te jJAnInA aMtamAM bheda paDI jAya che,
ajJAnIne tevo saMvedanarUpa aMtarabheda hetuM nathI. Ama jJAnI ane ajJAnInI
dRSTimAM, vRttimAM, ane pravRttimAM AkAzapAtAlanuM aMtara hoya che. kAraNa ke
samyagdaSTi jJAnIne bhedavijJAna thayuM che. sva-para vastune bheda teNe jANe
che. sarva anya dravyathI bhinna evo huM zuddha AtmA chuM, evA bIjabhUta-
mULabhUta jJAnanuM aMtaHpratItimaya akhaMDa saMvedana-anubhavane tene vate che.
svaparanA bhedavijJAnarUpa udvAsayati niHzaGkA jagatpUjyaM guNavrajam / banatI
vasati citte satAmapi nitambinI / / varamAliGgitA kruddhA calallolA'tra sarpiNI
/ na punaH kautukenApi nArI narakapaddhatiH // hRdi datte tathA dAhaM na spRSTA
hutabhuzikhaH / vaniteyaM yathA puMsAmindriyArthaprakopinI / / sandhyeva
kSaNarAgADhathA nimnagevAdharapriyA / vakrA bAlendulekheva bhavanti niyataM
striyaH / / " zrI jJAnArNava

Page #352 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
This common (common) self-awareness is a collection of perceptions. That is, all
beings have a common perception of the knowable object that is graspable through
non-conceptual knowledge (through vision), and they perceive this knowable
object with certainty according to their own capacity. But the right perception-
faith-self-awareness-experience-understanding of the common perception that has
occurred is common to all. That is, whatever being there is, it has this right
perception-like knowable-perceivable state, and whatever has this right
perception-like knowable-perceivable state, it is the same being. The right
perception being is the same being. From the above, the ultimate meaning emerges
that even if there is the most subtle knowledge with self-awareness, which is
the root of the bondage seed, there is a knowable-perceivable state. But without
that seed-like knowledge, without self-awareness, even the most excellent
knowledge of any other root object is not a knowable-perceivable state. It is
for that seed-like knowledge that the knowledge of the essential element, which
is the root seed-like knowledge of the self-other distinction, was there, but
any other knowledge that was there, even the very subtle capacity like
"Tushmaash" has passed away; and the fourteen previous ones who knew something
less, the very great capacity scholars have also wandered, the reason for this
is that seed-like perception knowledge. They knew all the scriptures, but the
root seed-like knowable-perceivable state did not remain, they did not make this
clear self-awareness-like determination of this being and this body, so it
happened. Thus, in the absence of the knowable-perceivable state, where the root
seed-like knowledge is essential, even the most subtle knowledge quickly becomes
a great benefactor, and in its absence, even the most excellent knowledge does
not become such a benefactor. This knowable-perceivable state shows the
extraordinary glory of right perception. Shrimad Rajchandraji has revealed the
extraordinary miraculous mysterious solution in this regard - another question.
How is it that the knowledge of the fourteen previous ones who knew something
less, in the infinite number of births, and even those with the most subtle
knowledge, go to liberation in the fifteenth birth? - I will tell you the answer
that is in my heart, that subtle knowledge is different and that occasion is
also different. Subtle knowledge means, in general, knowledge of the root
object, even in a very concise way, it is the seed of liberation. That is why it
is said. And the knowledge of the fourteen previous ones, which is less in one
country, has become aware of everything except the knowledge of one root object;
but it did not become aware of the eternal object residing in the body-temple.
And after that, it did not happen, just like the arrow shot without aim is not
the reason for the hunter, this also happened. If the object that the knowledge
of the fourteen previous ones has pierced to obtain is not obtained, then the
knowledge of the fourteen previous ones has become ignorance. Here, the
knowledge of the fourteen previous ones, which is less in the country, should be
understood. By saying less in the country,

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
gadaSTisamuccaya A AtmasaMvedana sarva bhAvagIne sAmAnya ( Common) che. eTale ke
avikalpa jJAnavaDe (dazanavaDe) grAhya evI vidya vastunuM A sAmAnya darzana
sarva bhAvagIne hoya che, ane teone A vedya varatu potapotAnA kSapazama pramANe
nizcayabuddhithI saMvedAya che. paNa sAmAnya darzana je thayuM tenuM samyaga
darzana-zraddhAna-AtmasaMvedana- anubhavana-saMpratIti te te sarvane sAmAnya
che. arthAt je kaI bhAvagI che, tene A samyagadarzanarUpa vedyasaMvedya pada
hoya che ane jene A samyagadarzanarUpa vedhasaMvedya pada che, te ja bhAvagI
che. samyagRSTi puruSa e ja bhAvagI che. A uparathI parama paramArthabhUta
tAtparya e nikaLe che ke bAdhabIjabhUta-mULabhUta AtmasaMvedanavALuM,
AtmAnubhUtivALuM jaghanya jJAna paNa hoya, to tyAM vedyasaMvedya pada che. paNa
te bIjabhUta jJAna vinAnuM-AtmasaMvedana vinAnuM bIjuM badhuMya mULa vastunuM
game teTaluM utkRSTa jJAna hoya, te tyAM vedyasaMvedya pada nathI. eTalA
bIjabhUta jJAna mATe ja sva-para bhedavijJAnarUpa mULa bIjabhUta Avazyaka
tatvamaya jJAna jene hatuM, paNa bIju kAMI paNa jJAna jene hatuM, evA "tuSamASa"
jevA ati maMda kSapazamI paNa tarI gayA che; ane cauda pUrva kaMIka UNuM
jANanArA atimahA kSapazamI zAstrapAraMgata paNa rakhaDyA che, tenuM kAraNa A
bIjabhUta saMvedana jJAna hatuM e che. temaNe sarva zAstra jANyA, paNa mULa
bIjabhUta je A vedyasaMvedya pada te pharahyuM nahiM, A jIva ane A deha evo
spaSTa AtmasaMvedanarUpa nizcaya temaNe karyo nahiM, tethI tema thayuM. Ama mULa
bIjabhUta jJAna jyAM avazya che evA vedyasaMvedya padanA saddabhAve DuM jaghanya
jJAna paNa zIdhra mahAkalyANakArI thAya che, ane tene abhAve utkRSTa jJAna paNa
tevuM kalyANakArI thatuM nathI. A vedyasaMvedya padano-samyaga darzanane ati ati
adbhuta mahimA batAve che. A aMge ati addabhuta camatkArika rahasyamaya
samAdhAna zrImad rAjacaMdrajIe prakAzita karyuM che - bIju prazna. cauda
pUrvadhArI kaMI jJAne UNu evA anaMta nigodamAM lAbhe ane jaghanya jJAnavALA paNa
adhikamAM adhika paMdara bhave mokSe jAya e vAtanuM samAdhAna kema?-ene uttara
je mArA hRdayamAM che te ja jaNAvI dauM chuM ke e jaghanya jJAna bIju ane e
prasaMga paNa bIjo che. jaghanya jJAna eTale sAmAnyapaNe paNa mULa vastunuM
jJAna, atizaya saMkSepamAM chatAM mekSanA bIjarUpa che. eTalA mATe ema kahyuM.
ane eka deze UNuM evuM cauda pUrvadhArInuM jJAna te eka mULa vastunAM jJAna
sivAya bIjuM badhuM jANanAra thayuM; paNa dehadevaLamAM rahele zAzvata padArtha
jANanAra na thayuM. ane e na thayuM te pachI lakSa vagaranuM phekeluM tIra
lahayArthInuM kAraNa nathI tema A paNa thayuM. je vastu prApta karavA cauda
pUrvanuM jJAna jine bedhyuM che te vastu na maLI to pachI cauda pUrvanuM jJAna
ajJAnarUpa ja thayuM. ahIM deze UNuM cauda pUrvanuM jJAna samajavuM. deza UNuM
kahevAthI

Page #353 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Dīmādṛṣṭi: The truly real pada (287) is the pada-ātmasvarūpa (the intrinsic
nature of the pada). It may seem from our ordinary understanding that after
studying the Caturdasapūrva, one or two studies were left behind, and that is
why they wandered. But this is not the case. It is not reasonable to believe
that one who has studied so much knowledge fails in a small part of the study.
In other words, the language is not difficult, nor is the meaning difficult to
remember. The only deficiency is that the knowledge of the fundamental substance
was not obtained. From one perspective, it can also be considered that there is
no difference between carrying the scriptures (the written pages) and studying
them, as both involve only the carrying. The one who carried the pages has
carried the physical burden, and the one who studied has carried the mental
burden, but the understanding of the real meaning without it is considered
useless. The one who has an entire ocean of salt water at home cannot quench the
thirst of the thirsty, but the one who has a small pot of sweet water can quench
the thirst of the father and a few others. And from the perspective of
knowledge, this is what is important. Now, another perspective needs to be
considered, which is that in any way, the study of the scriptures will lead to
the desire to become worthy, and in due course, one will attain worthiness, and
will also impart worthiness to others. So, the intention here is not to prohibit
the study of the scriptures, but to prohibit the study of the scriptures that
leads one away from the fundamental substance.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
dImAdaSTi : savedya pada ja yathArtha pada-AtmasvabhAva 5da (287) ApaNI
sAdhAraNa matithI ema samajAya ke caudapUrvane cheDe bhaNI bhaNI AvI pahoMcatAM
ekAda adhyayana ke tevuM rahI gayuM ane tethI rakhaDyA, paraMtu ema to nahIM.
eTalA badhA jJAnane abhyAsI eka alpa bhAga mATe abhyAsamAM parAbhava pAme e
mAnavA jevuM nathI. arthAt kaI bhASA agharI, athavA artha aghare nathI ke
smaraNamAM rAkhavuM temane dullabha paDe. mAtra mULa vastunuM jJAna na maLyuM
eTalI ja UNAI, teNe cauda pUrvanuM bAkInuM jJAna niSphaLa karyuM. eka nayathI
evI vicAraNA paNa thaI zake che ke : zAstro (lakhelAMnAM pAnA) upADavAM ane
bhaNavAM emAM kaMI aMtara nathI, je tattva na maLyuM che. kAraNa beye be ja
upADyo. pAnAM upADyAM teNe kAyAe bojo upADyo, bhaNI gayA teNe mane be upADyo,
paraMtu vAstavika lakSArtha vinA tenuM nirupayogIpaNuM thAya ema samajaNa che.
jene ghera Akho lavaNa samudra che te tRSAturanI tRSA maTADavA samartha nathI;
paNa jene ghera eka mIThA pANInI vIraDI che, te pitAnI ane bIjA keTalAkanI tRSA
maTADavA samartha che. ane jJAna daSTie jotAM mahatvanuM te ja che. te paNa have
bIjA naya para daSTi karavI paDe che. ane te e ke kaI rIte paNa zAhyAbhyAsa haze
te kaMI pAtra thavAnI jijJAsA thaze, ane kALe karIne pAtratA paNa pAmaze, ane
pAtratA bIjAne paNa Apaze. eTale zAstrAbhyAsane niSedha ahIM karavAne hetuM
nathI. paNa mULa vastuthI dUra javAya evA zAstrAbhyAsane te niSedha karIe te
ekAMtavAdI nahIM kahevAIe." ityAdi.-(juo ) zrImad rAjacaMdra, patrAMka 125.
(139) tatpadaM sAdhvavasthAnAdbhinnagranthyAdilakSaNam / anvarthayogatastantre
vedyasaMvedyamucyate // 74 // te pada samyapha sthiti thakI, bhinna
graMthyAdirUpa; "vedyasaMvedya zAstramAM, kahyuM artha anurUpa. 74 artha-te
bhinnagraMthi vagere lakSaNavALuM pada, samyapha avasthAna-sthitine lIdhe,
zabdanA yathArtha artha pramANe, zAstramAM "vedyasaMvedya" kahevAya che.
vivecana uparamAM kahyA pramANe, jyAM strI Adi vedya yathAvasthitapaNe, jema che
tema, saMvedAya vRtti -tapurama-te pada padana thakI padarUpa thavAthI pada,
eTale AzayasthAna, sAgarakathAnAsAdhu avasthAnane lIdhe, paricchedathI samyapha
avasthAnane lIdhe, samyapha sthitithI. mitrAcAstrikSaLamubhinnagraMthi Adi
lakSaNavALuM, bhinnagraMthi-dezaviratirU5. zuMte ke-cazvarthAta -anvatha
yogathI, taMtaMtramAM, siddhAMtamAM, vecavecamucatte-vedhasaMvedya kahevAya
che.-AnA vaDe karIne veva saMdAya che, eTalA mATe. "

Page #354 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(288) The collection of right views is the experience of the soul, and this
state is known in the scriptures as the "Vedya-Sanvedya-Pad". Because it is
situated, positioned, and stable in the right way, it is rightly called the
"Vedya-Sanvedya-Pad", because "Pad" means the place where one can place one's
foot; and if it is stable, not shaky, then one can place one's foot there, one's
foot will not be placed there. One cannot place one's foot there. But here,
there is such stability from the feeling, so this "Pad" is called "Vedya-
Sanvedya-Pad", it is rightly called in the true meaning of the word, it is so in
reality. Because this Vedya-Sanvedya-Pad is primarily the self-awareness, the
experience of the soul. And this soul-Pad is the real Pad, all others are not
Pads, because what is the inherent nature of the soul, the inherent nature of
the soul, is stable in all three times, the nature of the soul is the inherent
birth-nature of the Pad - the pure nature of the soul, the realization of which,
the experience of which, the feeling of which, is also stable in all three
times, not changing, so it is called "Pad". Apart from this, all other so-called
Pads, which are beyond the nature of the soul, are not Pads, but are not-Pads,
because they are not of the nature of the soul, they are unstable, they are
impermanent. So, leaving aside these unstable material-feeling not-Pads, the man
of definite right view accepts this one, definite, stable, feeling (Pad)
obtained from the nature. "आदम्हि दव्वभावे अपदे मोत्तूण गिण्ह तह णियदं।
थिरमेगमिमं भावं उवलभंतं सहावेण  // " . –Shri Samayasar, verse 203 Because * in
this Lord Soul, among many material-feelings, those which are obtained from the
non-nature, experienced, having the state of impermanence, many, momentary, such
changing feelings, all of them are not-Pads because of their impermanence, they
are incapable of being the place of the one who stands. And that which is
obtained from the nature - the nature of the soul, the not-Pad, many, becoming-
experienced, having the state of permanence, one, eternal, that Pad is the only
unchanging feeling, - it is the only one, because of its own permanence, it is
capable of being the place of the one who stands. " इह खलु भगवत्यात्मनि बहूनां
द्रव्यभावानां मध्ये ये किल अतत्स्वभावेनोपलभ्यमानाः, अनियतत्वावस्थाः, अनेके,
क्षणिकाः, व्यभिचारिणो भावाः ते सर्वेऽपि स्वयमस्थायित्वेन स्थातुः स्थान
भवितुमशक्यत्वात अपदभूताः। यस्तु तत्स्वभावेनोपलभ्यमानः, नियतत्वावत्थः, एकः,
नित्यः, अव्यभिचारी भावः, स एक एव स्वयं स्थायित्वेन स्थातुः स्थानं भवितुं
शक्यत्वात् पदभूतः  /  ततः सर्वानेवास्थायिभावान् मुक्त्वा स्थायिभावभूतं,
परमार्थरसतया स्वदमानं ज्ञानमेकमेवेदं स्वाय  /  / " –Shri Amritchandracharya's
Samayasatika, verse 203

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
( ra88) gadaSyisamuccaya che, AtmAnubhavagocara thAya che, te pada
vedyasaMvedyapada nAmathI zAstramAM oLakhAya che. samyapha prakAre
avasthAnavALuM, sthitivALuM, sthiratAvALuM hovAthI tene vedyasaMvedya teja
'pada' nAma barAbara ghaTe che, kAraNa ke "pada" eTale pada-paga mUkavAnuM
yathArtha 'pada sthAna; ane te sthiratAvALuM hoya, DagamagatuM na hoya, te ja
tyAM pada (paga) mUkI zakAya nahiM te tyAM caraNa dharaNa nahiM ThAya."tyAM paga
mUkI zakAya ja nahi. paNa atre to bhAvathI tevI sthiratA hoya ja che, eTale A
padane "vedyasaMvedya pada" nAma ApyuM, te te zabdanA yathArtha arthamAM
barAbara ghaTe che, paramArthathI tema ja che. kAraNa ke A vedhasaMvedya pada
svasaMvedanarUpa-AtmAnubhava pradhAna che. ane A Atma pada ja vAstavika pada
che, bAkI bIjA badhA apada che, kAraNa ke je sahaja AtmasvarUpa che, sahaja
AtmasvabhAva che, te ja trikAlAbAdhitapaNe sthira hoya che, AtmasvabhAva eTale
te sahajAnmasvarUpa padanuM-zuddha AtmasvabhAvanuM je nizcayarUpa pada" bhAna
thavuM, anubhavana thavuM, saMvedana thavuM, te paNa traNe kALamAM phare nahiM
evuM sthira nizcala hoI "pada' nAmane gya che. te sivAyanAAtmasvabhAva padathI
atirikta evA bIjA badhAya kahevAtA pada te pada nathI, paNa apada che, kAraNa ke
te svabhAvarUpa na hovAthI, asthira che, aniyata che. eTale A asthirarUpa
dravya-bhAva apadone mUkI daI, nizcaya samyagadaSTi puruSa A eka, niyata,
sthira, e svabhAvathI prApta thate bhAva (pada) grahaNa kare che. "Adamhi
davvabhAve apade mottUNa giNha taha nniydN| thiramegamimaM bhAvaM uvalabhaMtaM
sahAveNa // " . -zrI samayasAra, gA. 203 kAraNa ke * A bhagavAna AtmAmAM bahu
dravya-bhAvonI madhye je atata svabhAvathI upalabdha thatA-anubhavAtA,
aniyatapaNAnI avasthAvALA, aneka, kSaNika, evA vyabhicArI bhAve che, te sarveya
pite asthAyIpaNAne lIdhe sthiti karanAranuM sthAna thavAne azakya hovAthI
apadarUpa che. ane je tat svabhAvathI-AtmasvabhAvathI upalabdha apada aneka,
thata-anubhavAte, niyatapaNAnI avasthAvALe, eka, nitya e pada eka ja avyabhicArI
bhAva che, -te eka ja, pote sthAyIpaNAne lIdhe sthiti * " iha khalu
bhagavatyAtmani bahUnAM dravyabhAvAnAM madhye ye kila
atatsvabhAvenopalabhyamAnAH, aniyatatvAvasthAH, aneke, kSaNikAH, vyabhicAriNo
bhAvAH te sarve'pi svayamasthAyitvena sthAtuH sthAna bhavitumazakyatvAta
apdbhuutaaH| yastu tatsvabhAvenopalabhyamAnaH, niyatatvAvatthaH, ekaH, nityaH,
avyabhicArI bhAvaH, sa eka eva svayaM sthAyitvena sthAtuH sthAnaM bhavituM
zakyatvAt padabhUtaH / tataH sarvAnevAsthAyibhAvAn muktvA sthAyibhAvabhUtaM,
paramArtharasatayA svadamAnaM jJAnamekamevedaM svAya / / " -zrI
amRtacaMdrAcAryajInI samayasATIkA, gA. 203

Page #355 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Diimadrushti: The Essence of the Self  Diimadrushti: Since the form of the
Self is capable of becoming the place of the glory-right perception (289), it is
a true form. Therefore, leaving all temporary states behind, the permanent
state, the essence of the Self, becomes the taste of the ultimate bliss. This
knowledge is a single taste, a single experience.   The meaning is that the
knower, the Self, is the permanent, the stable, the only place where stability
can exist. Therefore, it is the true essence of the Self. All other states,
except the Self, are temporary, unstable, and fleeting. Therefore, they are not
true forms.   This Self, the ultimate form, is directly experienced by the self-
knowing right perception. Since it is in the stable form, calling this
experienced form "the form" is completely true.   This pure, innate form of the
Self is praised by the self-knowing men of ultimate right perception. They
glorify this form. For example, "Without understanding this form, there is
endless suffering from sin. This form is worthy of praise, O Guru. The yogi
desires endless happiness, the pure Self, the essence of the Jina." - Shrimad
Rajchandraji.   "The lotus feet of the Jina are pure and stable. The lotus feet
of the impure are temporary. The pure Jina is seen by the pure. My mind is
filled with the lotus feet of the Jina. The bees collect the nectar of virtues.
The mountains are filled with the fragrance of the Jina. The moon, the sun, and
the serpent king are filled with the beauty of the Jina. There is no comparison
to the Jina. The Jina is the ultimate peace. The Jina is the ultimate purity." -
Giraj Anandghanji.   "The service of the Jina, Shri Chandraprabha, is like the
wind that blows through the trees. The experience of the Self is obtained
through the virtues of the Jina. This experience protects us from fear." -
Tatvarangi Muni Shri Devchandraji.   Thus, this self-knowing, self-experiencing
form is a true form, and it is indicated by the characteristics of karma-
cutting, detachment from the world, etc.   "This karma-bond, which is extremely
painful and as strong as a mountain, is difficult to break."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
dImAdaSTi : svarUpa padane mahimA-samyagRSTinI caraNa dhArA (289) karanAranuM
sthAna thavAne zakya hovAthI, padarUpa che. tethI karIne sarveya asthAyI bhAvene
mUkIne, sthAyI bhAvarUpa, paramArtha rasapaNe svAdamAM AvatuM, evuM A jJAna eka
ja svAdya-svAda levA gya che, -(saMvedya che). tAtparya ke sahaja svabhAvarUpa
jJAyaka evA eka AtmabhAva ja-Atmapada ja sthAyI che, sthira che, eTale tyAM ja
sthiti-sthiratA thaI zake, mATe te ja paramArthathI kharekharUM pada che. bAkI e
AtmabhAva sivAyanA bIjA badhAya bhAve pite ja asthAyI che, asthira che,
DagamagatA che, eTale tyAM sthiti-sthiratA thaI zakavI saMbhavatI nathI, mATe te
badhAya apada che. ane A AtmapadarUpa pAramArthika pada te svasaMvedanajJAnI
samyagadaSTine sAkSAt anubhavagocara hoya ja che, eTale te sthira padamAM tenI
sthiti hovAthI, enA e vedyasaMvedya padane "pada" kahyuM te sarvathA yathArtha
che. A zuddha sahajAnmasvarUpa padanI parama samyagadaSTi AtmajJAnI puruSoe
Thera Thera muktakaMThe stuti karI, te svarUpa padane khUba mahimA gAya che.
jemake je svarUpa samajyA vinA pApe duHkha anaMta, samajAvyuM te pada namuM, zrI
guru bhagavaMta. icche che je jogIjana, anaMta sukha svarUpa; mULa zuddha te
Atmapada, sagI jina svarUpa."-parama AtmadraSTA zrImad rAjacaMdrajI. caraNa
kamala kamalA vase re, nirmala thira pada dekha; samala athira pada pariharI re,
paMkaja pAmara dekha vimalajina dIThA leyaNa Aja. muja mana tuja pada paMkaje
re, lIne guNa makaraMda raMka gaNe maMdara dharA re, iMdra caMdra
nAgaeNdravimala0 abhiya bharI mUrati racI re, upamA na ghaTe keya zAMta
sudhArasa jhIlatI re, nIrakhata tRpati na hoya...vimala"--girAja AnaMdaghanajI.
"zrI caMdraprabha jina pada sevA, havAe je haLiyAjI; Atama anubhava guNathI
maLiyA, te bhAvabhayathI TaLiyAjI."--tattvaraMgI munivarya zrI devacaMdrajI. Ama
A svasaMvedanarUpa-AtmAnubhavarUpa vedhasadya pada samyaka sthitivALuM hoya che
ane graMthibheda, dezavirati Adi lakSaNothI te sUcita thAya che. "A karma-
graMthi je atyaMta kaleza upajAvanArI ane parvata jevI mahAbalavALI hoI bhedI
duSkara che,

Page #356 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(290) When the collection of yogic insights is separated from the sharp
emotions, this right insight produces immense, essential joy for the great soul
– just as the application of medicine removes the disease and produces joy.
(Gabi) A country-renunciation-right-insight, whose root is the emotion of
country-renunciation, the emotion of all-renunciation, etc., is also a
characteristic of this Veda-perceptible state, because after the true
understanding of the nature of things, the being naturally, by itself, gradually
renounces the emotion of country-renunciation – the emotion of others – and
leans towards the natural transformation – the wandering, etc., ceases. After
the vision of the pure, innate self-nature, or the Jina-nature, filled with the
essence of samadhi, after the awareness of the self-nature, forgotten since
beginningless time, the being inevitably renounces, diminishes, and reverses all
conceptual attachments and emotions, and progresses towards the practice of pure
self-existence. And thus, descending from the earth of the great night of
beginningless time, and remembering the pure, unbroken, unattached self-nature,
the being cherishes the pure, holy, sharp, and pure contemplation, which is the
essence of the truth, and embraces the Jina-mudra, the abode of equanimity, the
pure self-nature of right insight. Through the attainment of the Jina-vision,
etc., the pure, excellent lineage of the feet, the true understanding of the
self-nature through the similarity of things, produces a respectful interest,
and then that interest is followed by the effort – the self-power – that
progresses and harmonizes with the unbroken tradition of the “lineage of the
feet” – the self-conduct. In this, country-renunciation, all-renunciation, etc.,
are included in the emotion. The great truth-seer, Shriman Devchandraji,
exclaimed with utmost emotional fervor upon experiencing the direct Jina-vision:
“I have seen the facility, the renunciation, filled with the essence of samadhi…
O red, shining self-nature, forgotten since beginningless time… the mind has
renounced all conceptual attachments… the path of self-existence… I have seen…
the earth of the great night of beginningless time, descending from the
beginningless time… the pure, unbroken, unattached nature is remembered… the
contemplation of the essence of truth, which is cherished… the Jina-mudra, the
abode of equanimity, is embraced… I have seen… the roots, the limbs, the six-
fold entourage, the many virtues…”.  - Shri Kundakunda Acharya’s Shri
Ashtaprabhruta, etc.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
(290) yogadaSTisamucaya te jyAre tIkSaNa bhAva vajathI bhedAI jAya che, tyAre A
samyagadaSTi mahAtmAne atyaMta tAtvika AnaMda upaje che,-jema regIne auSadhavaDe
karIne rega dUra thatAM upaje che tema." (gabi ) A dezavirati-samyagadarzana
jenuM mUla che evI bhAva dezavirati, bhAva sarvavirati Adi paNa A vedasaMvedya
padanuM lakSaNa che, kAraNa ke vastusvarUpanuM yathArtha bhAna thayA pachI jIva
svayameva svAbhAvika rIte ja parapariNatithI-parabhAvathI bhAva dezavirati
osarate jAya che, ane svabhAva5riNati bhaNI DhaLatI jAya che-saMcara Adi jAya
che. samAdhirasa bharyA zuddha nija sahaja AtmasvarUpanuM athavA -
jinasvarUpanuM darzana thayA pachI, anAdikALathI visarAI gayelA Atma- svarUpanuM
bhAna AvyA pachI, jIva avazyameva sakala vibhAva upAdhithI bhAvathI pAchA haTha
che, osare che, pratikrame che ane zuddha AtmasattAnI sAdhanA pratye pravarte
che. ane Ama anAdinI mahAdinI vRmi (ghUmAve-jamaNe) utarI jatAM ne amala akhaMDa
alipta e AtmasvabhAva sAMbharI AvatAM, tattvaramaNarUpa zuci-pavitra-zula-zuddha
dhyAnane jIva Adare ja che, ane samatArasanA dhAmarUpa jinamudrAnesamyagdaSTinI
zuddha AtmasvarUpane vare che, prApta kare che. jinadarzana Adi zuddha uttama
caraNudhArA nimittanI prApti thakI, vastunA sAdhamyathI AtmasvarUpanI yathArtha
oLakhANa thatAM, te pratye bahumAnayukta ruci upaje che, eTale pachI te rucine
anuyAyI-anusaratuM vIrya-AtmasAmarthya pravarte che ane te "caraNudhArA"
AtmacAritranI akhaMDa paraMparA sAdhe che. AmAM dezavirati-sarvavirati Adine
bhAvathI samAveza thaI jAya che. mahAna tattvadaSTA zrImAn devacaMdrajIe sAkSAt
jinadarzanane anubhava thatAM parama bhAvAvezathI lalakAryuM che ke - "dITho
suvidhi niNaMda samAdhirase bharyo... he lAla bhAsya AtmasvarUpa anAdine
visaryo. , sakala vibhAva upAdhi thakI mana esa , ,, sattA sAdhana mArga bhaNI e
saMcaryo..,, ,, dITho. mahAdinI dhUmi anAdinI utare..... , amala akhaMDa alipta
svabhAva ja sAMbhare..,, , tattvaramaNa zuci dhyAna bhaNI je Adare., , te
samatArasa dhAma svAmI mudrA vare, , dIThe x jaha mUlAo khaMdho
sAhAparivArabahuguNo hoi| ta6 HisAmU giThThio mova4Hf/rasa -zrI
kuMdakuMdAcAryajI kRta zrI aSTaprAbhRta,

Page #357 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Dimādasti:** Ignorance-shaped, aghasava, bhavahbinandi (291) the Lord's mudra,
the yoga Lord, the Lord's sovereignty, write...ho lal. The substance, its samya,
its own wealth, it recognizes, recognizing, respect along with interest
increases..., interest, the follower, the age, the charanadhara, sadha...ho
lalditho”—Shri Devchandraji. Thus, when the awareness of the self-form arises,
the influence of others' activities decreases, and the activity of one's own
nature increases, therefore, women, etc., all the influence of others is
considered undesirable, they begin to renounce it, and only pure self-feeling is
desirable-acceptable, such a firm, unwavering conviction-like viveka arises in
the self-knowing soul. Therefore, truly, from the heart, this life's deshathaya
is avoided, para-virati, sarvavirati, etc., results are definitely produced. And
this "grahanuta" is the most secret, main key (Master-Key) of all, that when the
soul becomes the receiver, the reception of the other automatically disappears,
when you become united with it, the other's fortune automatically disappears.
When the self becomes the receiver, the reception of the other disappears, when
the principle becomes united, the other's fortune disappears. Dharma" Shri
Devchandraji. From the above, the meaning is that the kshayika samyagdasti is
the same as the conviction, vedhasanvedya pada, it is the true samkiti, the
ultimate samyagdarshan. Without the attainment of that "pada," only with
vyavahar samyagdarshan, those who believe in the real samkiti of the father are
playing in delusion, and they stop from making spiritual progress due to such
delusion. But those who are not satisfied with only vyavahar samyagdarshan, even
with the help of the vyavahar samyagdarshan, who constantly keep in mind the
achievable conviction samyagudarshan, who are eager for the tavik conviction
vedhasanvedya pada, who do not jump without its attainment, they definitely
continue to make spiritual progress. This is easily understood from the above.
Rati re vadhisvara: - Avedhasanvedya pada, the right, others say from it -
अवेद्यसंवेद्यपदं विपरीतमतो मतम्  /  भवाभिनन्दिविषयं समारोपसमाकुलम्  //  75  /  /
' Krutti - Complete disaster - Aghasavedya pada is opposite, then from this,
from this vevasandha pada, mat-mat is, is desired, is believed, it is of this
type - "Aved" means avedaniya - and what can be known, from the state of affairs
and from the general feeling of this type, even the knowledge-word is not easily
graspable, it is not graspable, such and such.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
dImAdaSTiH ajJAnarUpa aghasava bhavAbhinaMdIne (291) prabhu mudrAne yoga prabhu
prabhutA lakhe..ho lAla. dravya taNe sAdhamya sva saMpatti oLakhe che, oLakhatAM
bahumAna sahita ruci vadhe..., , ruci anuyAyI vaya caraNadhArA sadha... ho
lAladITho"--zrI devacaMdrajI. Ama AtmasvarUpanuM bhAna thatAM parabhAva pravRtti
ghaTe che, ne svabhAva pravRtti vadhe che, eTale strI Adi samasta parabhAva heya
che tyAgavA lAgyA che, ane eka zuddha AtmabhAva ja Adeya che-grahaNa karavA egya
che, evo nizcala nizcayarUpa viveka AtmagrAhaka AtmAmAM thAya che. tethI karIne
kharekharA bhAvathI A jIvanA dezathaye TaLe para- virati, sarvavirati Adi
pariNAma avazya upaje che. ane A grahaNutA" samastanI parama rahasyabhUta mukhya
cAvI (Master-Key) A che ke AtmAne grAhaka thAya eTale paranuM grahaNapaNuM enI
meLe chUTI jAya che, tane bhegI thAya eTale paranuM bhAgyapaNuM ApoApa TaLe che.
AtmagrAhaka thaye TaLe paragrahaNatA, tattvabhegI thaye TaLe parogyatA. dharma "
zrI devacaMdrajI. A uparathI tAtparya e che ke kSAyika samyagadaSTipaNuM e ja
nizcaya vedhasaMvedya pada che, e ja sAcuM samakita, pAramArthika samyagadarzana
che. e "padanI prApti vinA vyavahAra samyagadarzana mAtrathI pitAnuM vAstavika
samakitIpaNuM mAnI besanArA bhrAMtimAM rame che, ane tevI bhrAMtithI AgaLa
AdhyAtmika pragati karatAM aTake che. paNa je vyavahAra samyagadarzana mAtrathI
saMtoSa na mAnatAM, vyavahAra samyagadarzananA AlaMbana sAdhanathI paNa sAdhya
nizcaya samyagudarzanane niraMtara lakSa rAkhI-tAvika nizcaya vedhasaMvedya
padane jhaMkhatA rahI tenI prApti vinA jaMpatA nathI, te avazya AdhyAtmika
pragati karatA rahe che. e A uparathI saheje samajAya che. rati re vAdhizvaraH -
avedhasaMvedya pada adhikAra tenAthI anya kahe che - avedyasaMvedyapadaM
viparItamato matam / bhavAbhinandiviSayaM samAropasamAkulam // 75 / / ' kRtti -
sAva vipati-aghasavedya pada viparIta, to AnAthI, A vevasaMdha padathI, mata-
mata che, iSTa che, mAneluM che, te A prakAre -" ave eTale avedanIya-ne vedI
zakAya te, vastusthitithI tathA prakAranA bhAvagI sAmAnyathI paNa avikaTapaka
jJAnavarDa grAhya nahiM te-grahaNa na karI zakAya evuM tathAprakAranA

Page #358 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(292) The term "Aghasansvedya Pad" is the opposite of this, it is
"Bhavaabhinandi Vishachi" and is also "Samaropa Samukul". 75, Meaning - The
opposite of this is called "Asansvedya Pad". It is "Vishay Bhavaabhinandi"
(Bhavaabhinandi is the state of the Jiva), and it is "Samakupa Samukul".
Commentary - "This is the opposite, the Pad is Avedyasansvedya, Bhavaabhinandi
Jiva, it is Avedya Mani" - Shri J.D. Sajjay. 4-8. The characteristic of the
"Vedyasansvedya Pad" that was described earlier, the opposite of that is called
"Avedyasansvedya Pad". The reason for this is as follows: "Avedya" means
"Avedaniya" - not to be known, not to be experienced. According to the state of
affairs and the type of Bhavagis, it is not possible to grasp it through non-
conceptual knowledge. This is because there is no "Samaan Pariavedya" (similar
experience) that arises in this case. That is why it is called "Avedya". What
does this mean? Bhavagis generally have a certain type of general, similar
feeling, experience, and right understanding of the state of affairs. Therefore,
they have a similar result in the form of self-awareness, right understanding,
and experience. For example, "There is a soul different from the body etc." -
This type of knowledge of difference is generally experienced by all Bhavagis.
This experience is non-conceptual, non-dualistic, and without any choice. This
non-conceptual experience is the form of right understanding. Because "Darshan"
is said to be non-conceptual, and knowledge is due to the lack of similar
results. (Because such similar results do not occur). This "Avedya" is
"Sandaya", which means that it is "Upakshavassarvipasarup" (confused) due to the
destruction of the veil of ignorance, and it appears in the form of a mirage,
like a mirage of water. That is why it is said - "Mavaaminavishachan" -
"Bhavaabhinandi" which is "Vishachi" (poisonous), "Bhavaabhinandi" type of
"Vishay" (object). Its characteristics will be described. (Bhavaabhinandi means
one who praises, admires, and enjoys the world). "Samaropa Samukul" - extremely
engrossed. It is also contaminated by "Samaropa" which is directed towards the
"Gamanabhimukh" (towards the path) due to the "Mithyatva" (false belief) defect.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
(292) yogadakTisamucaya pada aghasaMvedya te, eha thakI viparIta; bhavAbhinaMdI
viSacI te, samAre paNa sahita. 75, artha -enAthI viparIta te asaMvedya pada
kahyuM che. tene viSaya bhavAbhinadI che, -(bhavAbhinaMdI jIvane te hoya che);
ane te samApathI samAkula evuM hoya che. vivecana "eha thakI viparIta chejI,
pada te avedyasaMvedya bhavabhinaMdI jIvane jI, hoya te vajI abhedya manI"--zrI
je. da. sajajhAya. 4-8 uparamAM je vedhasaMvedya padanuM lakSaNa karyuM, tenAthI
viparIta-ulaTA prakAranuM je che, te "adyasaMvedya pada' kahyuM che. tenuM
kAraNa A pramANe cheH avedya eTale avedanIya,-na vedAya, na anubhavAya evuM.
vastusthiti pramANe tathA prakAranA bhAvagI sAmAnyathI paNa avikalpaka jJAnavaDe
je grAhyagrahaNa karI zakAya evuM nathI, te avedya che. kAraNa ke tevA prakAranA
samAna pariavedya NAmanuM atra upajavuM thatuM nathI. eTalA mATe ja A "aveva"
kahyuM che. eTale zuM? bhAvagIone sAmAnyapaNe vastusthitinuM amuka prakAranuM
sAmAnya samAna bhAvavALuM saMvedana, anubhavana, samyagadarzana hoya che. jethI
teone samAna pariNAmarUpa svasaMvedana, samyagadarzana, anubhUti hoya che.
jemake-che dehAdithI bhinna AtamA re"--evA bhedajJAnarUpa samAna anubhavane
nizcaya sAmAnyapaNe sarva bhAvagIone hoyaja che. evo anubhava avikalparUpa-
nirvikalpa bedharUpa heya che, emAM kaI paNa vikalpa hotuM nathI, eTale
tavavinizcayarUpa A nivikalpa anubhava samyagadarzana svarUpa che. kAraNa ke
"dazana" avikalparUpa kahyuM che, ne jJAna samAna pariNAmanI anupattine lIdhe.
(tevuM samAna pariNAma ghaTatuM nathI tethI). AvuM je "a " te saMdAya che, eTale
ke ajJAnAvaraNanA kSapazamane anurUpapaNe upakSavasAravipasarU5 (goTALAvALI )
evI nizcayabuddhi vaDe karIne mRgatRSNa jalanI jema je padamAM jaNAya che, te
tathA prakAranuM adyasaMvedya che. eTalA mATe ja kahyuM - mavAminaviSacaM-
bhavAbhinaMdI jene viSama che evuM, bhavAbhinaMdIrUpa viSayavALuM. enuM lakSaNa
kahevAmAM Avaze. (bhavAbhinaMdI eTale bhava-saMsArane abhinaMdanAre,
vakhANanAre, saMsAramAM rAcanAre ). samAropaNamavum-samAropathI samAmula-atyaMta
Akula. mithyAtvanA deSathI apAya pratye gamanAbhimukha evA samAropathI tevA
prakAre paNa te malita che, ema artha che.

Page #359 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Diimadrusti: A Samare Paroop Aghasevdy Pad  (20)  is an alternative. But in
"Adya", there is no such kind of emotionally comprehensible, common sensation-
perception. That's why it is called "Adya".  Or, in another way, if we reduce
it, the Bhavagios generally have different levels of self-awareness, which
generally have some kind of common sensation, perception, and experience of
something, according to the situation. But in this "Avedya", there is no such
derivation of the result of common sensation of the level of Samyagdristi, it
does not come in any such low category - it is not attained, that's why it is
called "Adya".  Sandeya means something that is always there, is known, is
experienced, and here, because of the presence of Mithyatva, knowledge is only
ignorance. So, the veil of ignorance,  as much as it has moved, according to the
Kshayopapsham, the ignorance in the form of Uppava, Viparyas, and confusion, the
knowledge-wisdom that is ignorance here, which is Mithya sensation, is like a
mirage. Mirage (water in the desert)  is false, Mithya, so this Adya sensation
is also false, Mithya; because there is a Mithya illusion-delusion here,
believing the false water of the mirage to be true. Param* Tatvikshekhara
Shriman Amritchandracharya  Ignorance makes the deer run to drink the water of
the mirage with water-wisdom, ignorance makes people run in the darkness with
the illusion of a snake in the dust, and ignorance makes this (soul), even
though it is pure knowledge, become agitated like the sea where waves rise from
the wind, becoming the doer.  Where such a Mithya-like sensation of mirage
occurs due to ignorance, that is the Avedya Sandeya Pad, and in reality, it is
not even worthy of the name "Pad" as mentioned above. This Adya Sandeya Pad is
found in the Bhavaabhinandi Jeeva. Bhavaabhinandi means one who welcomes-
appreciates-praises the world, one who enjoys-is engrossed in the world, one who
finds the world sweet (Hails), this is the characteristic of the subject-
passion, the worm, the small insect, which will be explained later.  •
"Ajnanaatmrigatrushiko jaladhiya dhavanti patum mrgaah | Ajnanaat tamasi
dravanti bhujagaadhyaasena rajau janaah || Ajnanaaccha
vikalpachakrakaranadvaatotharangaabdhivat | Dhwajnanana ap vaan chamatsaah: Shri
Samaysar Kalash, 58

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dImAdaSTi : samAre parUpa aghasavedya pada (20) vikalparUpa che. paNa adya"mAM
te tevA prakAranuM bhAvagIgamya evuM kaI paNa sAmAnya saMvedana-darzana hotuM
nathI. tethI ja tene "adya" nAma ApyuM che. athavA bIjI rIte ghaTAvIe te
bhAvagIonI sAmAnyapaNe potapotAnI AtmadazA anusAra jUdI jUdI samAna kakSAo hoya
che, ke jemAM sAmAnyapaNe vastusthiti pramANe amuka vastunuM amuka prakAranuM
samAna saMvedana, darzana, anubhavana hoya che. paNa A "avedyamAM te evI koI
samyagadaSTinI kakSAnA samAna saMvedanA pariNAmanI upapatti thatI nathI, adya"
evI kaI jaghanya koTimAM paNa AvatuM nathI-prApta thatuM nathI, eTale ja ene
"adya' kahyuM che. saMvedya eTale evuM ane jyAM sadAya che, jaNAya che,
anubhavAya che te atre mithyAtvano sadbhAva hovAthI jJAna ajJAnarUpa ja hoya
che. eTale te ajJAnanuM AvaraNa jeTaluM khasyuM hoya, teTalA kSayopazama pramANe
upappavarUpa-viparyAsarUpaajJAnarUpa gaDabaDagoTALArUpa nizcayabuddhithI je
ajJAnarUpa jJAna-jANapaNuM atre mithyA saMvedana thAya che, te mRgatRSNA jevuM
khoTuM hoya che. mRgatRSNA (jhAMjhavAnuM jala) jema jUThI hoya che, mithyA hoya
che, tema A adyasaMvedana paNa jUThuM che, mithyA che; kAraNa ke mithyAbhAsarUpa
beTA jhAMjhavAnA pANIne sAcA mAnavArUpa mithyA bhrAMti-bhramaNa ahIM hoya che.
parama* tAtvikazekhara zrImAna amRtacaMdrAcAryajI ajJAnathI mRgatRSNAne-
jhAMjhavAnA jalane jalabuddhithI pIvAne mRgalAo doDe che, ajJAnathI aMdhakAramAM
rajune viSe sapanI bhrAMtithI leke bhAge che ane ajJAnathI vikalpacakana
karavAvaDe karIne A (AtmA), pote zuddha jJAnamaya chatAM, vAyuthI jemAM taraMga
UThe che evA samudranI peThe, kartA thaI Akula bane che. AvA ajJAnathI
jhAMjhavAnA jala jevuM mithyAbhAsarUpa saMvedana jyAM thAya che, te
avedhasaMvedya pada che, ane vAstavika rIte te te upara kahyuM tema "pada"
nAmane paNa yogya nathI. AvuM A adyasaMvedya pada bhavAbhinaMdI jIvane hoya che.
bhavAbhinaMdI eTale bhavane-saMsArane abhinaMdanAre, saMsArane prazaMsanAro-
vakhANanAro, saMsArathI rAcanAra, saMsAramAM rapa rahenAra, saMsAra jene mITho
lAge che (Hails) evo viSayakaSAyane kIDo, kSudra jaMtu AnuM lakSaNa have pachI
kaheze. * " ajJAnAnmRgatRSNiko jaladhiyA dhAvaMti pAtuM mRgAH  /  ajJAnAttamasi
dravaMti bhujagAdhyAsena rajau janAH  //  ajJAnAcca
vikalpacakrakaraNAdvAtottaraGgAbdhivata  /  dhvajJAnanA apa vAna camatsAha: zrI
samayasAra kalaza, 58

Page #360 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(294) Yoga-drishti-samuccaya Furthermore, this Avedya-Svedya pad is
characterized by samaropa, meaning there is an imposition, a superimposition,
one thing is placed on top of another, one's cap is placed on another's head,
one's own self is imposed on another, and another's is imposed on one's own
self. Therefore, in the Avedya-Svedya pad, instead of being in their own state,
the Bhava-abhinandi jiva considers another as their own, they attribute the soul
to the body and other things, they climb on top of another's seat, they take
over another's cushion! Although the soul itself is the very essence of
happiness, it imposes that happiness on the pudgala-vishaya! And the flower of
that samaropa's intensity is also enjoyed by them as intense suffering! Because
this samaropa is caused by Mithyatva-dosha, it leads to the jiva going towards
Apaya-gamanabhimukha - towards hell and other Apayas; therefore, it causes harm
to the soul's true nature, and the attainment of hell and other Apayas leads to
intense suffering. Samaropa Samakula This samaropa, this superimposition, is the
subject of Vyavahar-naya. Therefore, the jiva who is in the Avedya-Svedya pad is
predominantly Vyavahar-pradhaan. And the one whose vision remains in Vyavahar,
they do not attain the true nature of Paramatma, they remain entangled in the
endless complexities of Vyavahar, they keep spinning in circles, they do not
attain the one, undivided, true nature; because their hand remains focused on
Vyavahar, on superimposition, they do not receive anything in their hand; the
one who focuses on Paramatma, they receive the true nature of things, just like
the one in the Vedya-Svedya pad. "There is one thread, Its complexities are
endless, the true nature of the Lord is not in anyone's hand; By following the
pure naya, there is no doubt left, the true nature." - Shri Anandghanji. "The
path of Paramartha, which flows, is written in Vyavahar, This samaropa-filled
Avedya-Vedya pad arises from Mithyatva-dosha. It is wrong, it is false, it is a
false perception, and its subject is the Bhava-abhinandi jiva." * The
characteristics of Bhava-abhinandi are described as follows: क्षुद्रो
लोभरतिर्दीना मत्सरी भयवान् शठः । अज्ञो भवाभिनन्दी स्याम्निष्फलारम्भसं गतः ॥ ७६ ॥
Vritti! - Nnu-ru: Dhruva, Krupana, Matti: Labha-rati, those who are delighted in
gain, those who are greedy, Loali, Manchasheel (those who are begging in
nature), Phon: Deen, always in a state of misfortune, Mani: Masarvat, those who
are unhappy in the happiness of others.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (294) yogadaSTisamuccaya vaLI A Avedyasavedya pada samAreApathI samAkula hAya
eTale ke AmAM eka vastunuM khIjI para ArApaNu hAya che, upacAra hAya che, ekanI
TApalI khIjAne mAthe eDhADavAmAM Ave che, paravastumAM svanuM-peAtAnu ArepaNa
karAya che, svavastumAM paranu ApaNu karAya che. eTale avedyasa'vedya padamAM
sthiti karatA bhavAbhinaMdI jIva paravastune peAtAnI mAnI bese che, dehAdimAM
AtmAnA adhyAsa-Atmabuddhi kare che, bIjAnI beThaka upara pAte caDhI ese che,
pArakI gAdI Ate pacAvI pADe che! AtmA pAte ja sukhasvarUpa chatAM te sukhanA
Arepa pudgala-viSayamAM kare che! ane te samAropanI AkulatAnuM phUla paNa pAte
AkulatAmaya duHkhatrarUpe bhagave che!! kAraNa ke A samArepaNu mithyAtvadeSathI
apAyagamanAbhimukha-narakAdi apAya pratye janArA jIvane hAya che; tethI
AtmasvarUpanI hAnirUpa apAya thAya che, ane narakAdi apAyanI prAptithI
AkulatArUpa duHkha upaje che. samArApa samAkula A je samArApaNu upacAra che te
vyavahAra nayanA viSaya che. eTale avedyasa'vedya padmavALA jIva
vyavahArapradhAna dRSTivALA heAya che. ane vyavahAramAM ja jenI dRSTi rahyA kare
che, tene nizcayarUpa paramAnA lakSa thatA nathI, te te vyavahAranA vyavahAre
kAMI anaMta bhedarUpa kuMDALAmAM ja ramyA kare che, cakrAvAmAM ja bhamyA kare
che, na Ave paNa tene eka nizcayarUpa akhaMDa vastunI prApti thatI nathI; kAraNa
ke hAtha ' upacArarUpa-samAreAparUpa vyavahArane ja lakSa rAkhyA kare, tenA
hAthamAM kAMi vastu AvatI nathI; eka paramAneA ja lakSa rAkhI je pravarte, tene
ja vastugate vastu prApta thAya che,-jema vedyasa'vedya padava'tane thAya che
tema. te raje eka taMta re; tehanA bheda anaMta rai-dharma parama aranAthanA
kAMi na Ave hAtha re; zuddha naya thApanA sevatAM, rahe na duvidhA sAtha re-
dharama" zrI Ana'ghanajI. "paramAratha patha je vahe, vyavahAre lakha je rahe,
vyavahAre lakha dAhile, AvuM samAropavALu avedhasa vedha pada mithyAtvadeSathI
upajatu. hAI galata che, mithyA che, mithyAbhAsarUpa che, ane tenuM pAtra
bhavAbhina'TvI jIva che, * bhavAbhinaMdInuM lakSaNa kahe cheH-- kSudro
lobharatirdInA matsarI bhayavAn zaThaH  /  ajJo bhavAbhinandI
syAmniSphalArambhasaM gataH  //  76  //  vRtti!--nnurUH dhruva, kRpaNuM,
Amatti:-lAbharati, lAbhamAM rati-prItivALA, leALI, mAMcAzIla ( mAgaNu
svabhAvavALA ), phona:-dIna, sadAya akalyANudazI, maNI-masaravata, par
kalyANumAM du:sthita

Page #361 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Dīmadṛṣṭiḥ bhavābhinandanā lakṣaṇa (25) Luka lobhī dīna matsarī, śaṭha tathā
bhayavanta; bhavābhinandī a ne, ārambha abalāvanta. 76.  Meaning - The
Bhavābhinandī (one who delights in worldly existence) is stingy, miserly, mean,
envious, fearful, obstinate, and ignorant. He is associated with fruitless
endeavors.  Elucidation - The Bhavābhinandī, who revels in the worldly
existence, what are his main characteristics? They are described here: He is
śudra, i.e., miserly, vile, and trivial, because being excessively attached to
trivial worldly pleasures, his ideals and contemplations are also mean, miserly,
and petty. Being enamored by trivial, paltry, and momentary worldly gains, he
gets elated and starts dancing and jumping around like a madman, displaying the
vanity of his meanness! And fearing that he may lose those gains, he tries to
hoard them like a miser! But he is completely unaware of the infinite virtues of
the self. He is greedy for gains. He is always eager for profits, always wanting
more - be it five, twenty-five, hundred, thousand, lakh, crore, or billions. His
greed knows no bounds. And being such a greedy person, he becomes a beggar,
begging from others to satisfy his cravings for worldly objects, as he is
tormented by the hunger for them. He is mean, fearful, obstinate, deceptive,
ignorant, foolish, and without any security. He is the one who greatly values
the worldly existence, always associated with fruitless endeavors due to his
excessive attachment everywhere.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dImadaSTiH bhavAbhinadInA lakSaNa (25) luka lobhI dIna matsarI, zaTha temaja
bhayavaMta; bhavAbhinaMdI a ne, AraMbha aphaLavaMta. 76. artha -zudra, lebhI,
dIna, matsaravata, bhayavALe, zaTha, ajJAnI evo bhavAbhinaMdI niSphala
AraMbhathI saMyukta hoya che. vivecana saMsAramAM rAcanAre- rapae rahenAra
bhavAbhinaMdI jIva kevo hoya ? tenA mukhya lakSaNa ahIM sUcavyA che - te zudra
eTale ke kRpaNa, pAmara, tuccha hoya che, kAraNa ke tuccha-pAmara sAMsArika
viSayane te bahu mAnanAre heI, tenA Adarzo ne vicAraNAo paNa tuccha, pAmara,
kaMjUsa jevA anudAra ne chIcharA hoya che, eTale te pote paNa tevo pAmara,
kSudra-lobhI tuccha, kSudravRttivALa hoya che. tuccha, kSudra, kSaNika sAMsArika
lAbhathI te malakAI jAya che, harSAvezamAM AvI kAkIDAnI jema nAcavA kUdavA maMDI
jaI pitAnI pAmaratAnuM pradarzana (Vanity fair) kare che! ane rakhene te cAlya
jaze ema jANI tene kRpaNanI jema sAcavI rAkhavA mathe che! paNa AtmAnI anaMta
guNasaMpattinuM tene bhAna paNa nathI ! te lAbhArati-lobhI hoya che. te sadAya
lAbhamAM rati-prItivALo hoya che, eTale ke mane lAbha sadAya maLyA kare evo te
lebhI-lAlacu hoya che. pAMca maLe te pacIza, pacIza maLe te sa, se maLe to
hajAra, hajAra maLe to lAkha, lAkha maLe te koDa, kroDa maLe te abaja, -ema
uttarottara tene lebhanuM pramANa vadhatuM jAya che. "dInatAI hoya tyAre te
paTelAI Icche che, paTelAI maLe eTale te zeThAI Icche che, zeThAI maLe eTale
maMtritAI Icche che, maMtritAI maLe eTale nRpatAI (rAjApaNuM) Icache che,
nRpatAI maLe eTale devatAI Icche che, devatAI maLe eTale IMdratAI Icche che."
ema tenA lebhane bha nathI. jema lAbha vadhe tema lebha vadhatuM jAya che. ane
Avo lebhI-lAlacu hovAthI te yAcAzIla eTale ke yAcanA karavAnA svabhAvavALe,
mAgaNavRttivALe bhIkhArI hoya che, kAraNa ke sAMsArika viSayanI bhUkhathI pIDAte
heI, te bhUkha bhAMgavAne mATe-viSaya bumukSAne TALavAne mATe te "nipuNyaka
raMka' karamAM ghaTapAtra laIne du:khIe, (eTale ke bIjAnuM bhaluM dekhIne du:khI
thanAra), mayavAna-bhayavAna , nitya bhIta, sadI DaranAra, kA:- zaTha, mAyAvI,
kapaTI, mag:-ajJAnI, mUrkha, ajAminanI bhavAbhinaMdI, saMsAra bahumAnI,
saMsArane bahu mAnanAro, cAra-evA hoya te, niSkAmAtA-niSphala AraMbhathI
saMgata-saMyukta hoya. sarvatra atavAbhinivezane lIdhe.

Page #362 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(296) Yoga-drushti-samuccaya He wanders around begging! He runs after mirage to
quench his thirst for worldly desires! But he overlooks the infinite power of
the soul that resides within him! The living being is a beggar in the city of
existence, taking on the role of a beggar; He begs for worldly pleasures,
wandering day and night. - Manonadan (Dr. Bhagwandas) He is a miserable being.
He is always pessimistic, always seeing the negative side of things. He is like
a poor, wretched beggar, always seeing the bad, the negative, the pessimistic.
Alas! Will this worldly desire that resides in my body ever go away? Will anyone
take it away? Will anyone snatch it away? Even towards a man like Indra, he
always harbors suspicion. This poor fellow sees negativity and misfortune
everywhere; he is always fearful, anxious, and constantly trembling; and he acts
like a poor, helpless, wretched beggar, because he does not see the inherent
nature of his own self, which is liberation from suffering. Therefore, he is
envious of others' virtues Moreover, this living being, who is bound by the
cycle of birth and death, is envious and hateful. He harbors hatred towards
wealth. When he sees someone else's good fortune or someone else's virtues, he
feels disturbed, he feels a desire, he feels unhappy. Because he considers
worldly desires to be important, he is attached to them; and when he sees the
happiness of others, such as worldly pleasures that he does not possess, or when
he sees the noble and auspicious virtues of others, he feels envy in his mind,
thinking, "They got it, and I was left behind." He is envious of virtue and good
qualities. He is fearful. He is always anxious. Fear of this world and the next,
fear of pain, fear of helplessness, fear of insecurity, fear of death, etc.,
constantly torment him, frighten him. Alas! My possessions will be stolen! Alas!
I will suffer! Alas! Death will come upon me! In this way, he is always
trembling with fear; because he is not aware of his eternal self, which is the
ultimate refuge. He is deceitful He is deceitful, meaning he is cunning and
deceptive. He tries to deceive the world, to throw dust in the world's eyes. His
mind, speech, and body are not in harmony. There is a discrepancy between his
thoughts, his words, and his actions. Although he is wicked, he tries to appear
virtuous, he pretends! His efforts are hypocritical.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (296 ) yogadRSTisamuccaya bhIkha mAMgatA phare che ! viSayatRSNA chIpAvavA mATe
mRgatRSNA pAchaLa doDe che! paNu pAtAmAM ja rahelI AtmAnI anata Rddhine te
ulladhI jAya che ! bhavanagarImAM jIva bhikhArI, karamAM laI ghaTapAtra;
viSayaSubhukSu bhIkha mAMgatA, bhame divasa ne rAtra."--maneAnadana (DaoN.
bhagavAnadAsa ) dIna-satsava ta te dIna hAya che. te sadAya akalyANudazI,
haMmezAM bhUMDuM ja dekhanArA ( Pessimistic ) hoya che. te dIna, garIkhaDA,
rAMka jevo thai sadA akalyANu dekhe che, khUrU ja jue che, nirAzAvAdI ja hAya
che. hAya ! A mhArA A ThIbaDAmAM rahelu viSaya kadanta cAlyu jaze teA ? keAi
upADI jaze te ? kAi paDAvI leze te ? ema iMdra jevA puruSa pratye paNa sadA
AzakA rAkhatA ha|I te khApaDa-bicArA sarvatra akalyANa-amagala dekhatA phare
che; satra bhayadazI hAi, bhayAkula rahI, niraMtara phaphaDATamAM rahyA kare
che; ane hAthe karIne dIna, lAcAra bicArA, pApaDo, rAMka thaIne kare che! kAraNa
ke kalyANamUtti evA sahajAtmasvarUpane tene lakSa nathI. eTale te paranI guNu
vaLI A bhavAbhina'dI jIva matsaravata-adekhA heAya che. sapatti pratye dveSavALA
heAya che. pArakAnuM bhaluM dekhI ke pArakAne guNa dekhI tene manamAM khaLatarA
thAya che, mAga UThe che, parasukhe te duHkhI thAya che. kAraNa ke tene mana
tuccha sAMsArika viSayanuM mAhAtmya bhAsyuM che, te sAMsArika viSayathI rIjhe
che; ne peAtAne prApta na thayelA, paNa khIjAne prApta evA viSayAdi sukha dekhI,
athavA paranA prazasta zubha guNu dekhI, tene manamAM IrSyA upaje che ke A lai
gayA ne huM rahI gayA. Avo puNyadveSI ne guNadveSI te hAya che. te bhayavAn hAya
che. te sadA bhayAkula rahyA kare che. A leka paraleka sa'badhI bhaya, vedanA
bhaya, azaraNubhaya, aguptibhaya, mRtyubhaya, Adi bhaya tene nira Mtara satAvyA
kare che, DarAvyA kare che, hAya ! A mhAru lUTAi jaze te ! hAya ! mane vedanA
AvI paDaze te ! hAya ! mhAruM mRtyu AvI paDaze te ! ityAdi prakAre te sadAya
bhayathI phaphaDatA rahe che; kAraNa ke parama niya evA zAzvata AtmasvarUpanuM
tene bhAna nathI, bhayamAnU zaana te zarU eTale mAyAvI, kapaTI haeNAya che.
jagatane chetaravAne, jagatanI AMkhamAM dhULa nAMkhavAnA te prayAsa kare che.
tenI mana-vacana-kAyAnI ekatA hAtI nathI, manamAM kAMi, vacanamAM kAMI ane
varttanamAM kAMI-ema tenA traNe ceganI vaMcakatA hAya che. pote durguNI chatAM
sadaguNI dekhAvAne DALa kare che, "bha kare che! tenI ceSTA dAMbhika

Page #363 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Dīmādṛṣṭi: Bhavābhinandī Niṣphalārambhī  (297) He is, and he thinks "I am
reading and deceiving the world," but in reality, he himself is being deceived,
he is practicing self-deception, and he does not know this.  "For the sake of
covering up faults, I perform Jain rituals, I do not walk the path of faults,
the beloved one from beginningless time..." - Shri Devacandrajī  He is ignorant,
that is, he is foolish, devoid of the awareness of good and bad, confused, and
without discrimination.  And being endowed with such characteristics, he is an
unsuccessful initiator, meaning that all his undertakings are fruitless and
ineffective, because his entire activity is imbued with attachment to external
objects, due to which, due to the false attachment in the form of the belief in
the reality of substances, his entire activity, etc. does not become effective,
does not bear fruit, the undertakings become futile, go in vain. All his done
and made turns to dust, goes into water. "The blind weaves and the calf chews" -
it becomes like this for him. Thus, all his undertakings and beginnings become
fruitless, he only suffers from futile grief and false effort. His entire
activity without pure faith becomes like "smearing on ashes." "Know that the
activity done without pure faith is like smearing on ashes." - Shri
Ānandaghanajī  "As a faithless man, after doing some good deeds, laughs at the
end when he does not get the desired fruit, so the foolish living being, after
doing some meritorious deeds, in the end suffers the bitter fruit." - Shri
Banārāsīdāsajī  Thus, all his activity, all his undertakings become fruitless,
and not only that, but his spiritual activity is also equally fruitless from the
standpoint of the ultimate truth. Because this spiritual activity in the form of
religious activity arises from the cloud-like dispassion, it generates the
passion of attachment to the cycle of birth and death. And the merit that is
acquired from it is also ultimately bound to be fruitless, that is, that merit
is merit bound to sin. And thus, the living beings who are attached to the cycle
of birth and death, for them, the merit that exists is without bondage, and the
sin that exists is with bondage. Therefore, the series of merit does not
continue, and the series of sin continues.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dImAdaSTi : bhavAbhinadI niSphaLAraMbhI (297) hoya che, ne jagatane huM ke
vaMcuM chuM-chetaruM chuM, ema mAnI te manamAM malakAya che. paNa kharI rIte to
te pote ja chetarAya che, AtmavaMcanA ja kare che, te te mUkha jANatA nathI.
avaguNa DhAMkaNa kAja, karuM jinamata kriyA, chaDuM na avaguNacAla, anAdinI je
priyA...viharamAna bhagavAna"-zrI devacaMdrajI te ajJa eTale ajJAnI, mUrNa hoya
che, sArAsAranA bhAna vinAno, abUjha, ala vagarane hoya che. ane AvA lakSaNavALe
heI, te niSphaLa AraMbhI hoya che, eTale ke tenA sarva AraMbha niSphaLa-aphaLa
jAya che, kAraNa ke tenI samasta pravRtti atajvAbhinivezavALI hoya che, eTale
atavamAM tattvabuddhirUpa mithyA abhinivezane lIdhe niSphaLa tenI samasta kiyA
Adi kAryakArI thatI nathI, kAragata thatI nathI, AraMbhI phogaTa jAya che, eLe
jAya che. enuM badhuM karyuM-karAvyuM dhULa thAya che, pANImAM jAya che.
"AMdhaLe vaNe ne pADo cAve" enA jevuM thAya che. Ama tenA badhA AraMbha-maMDANa
niSphaLa jatA hoI, te te kevaLa niSphaLa kheda ne mithyA zrama ja hAre che.
zaddha zraddhAna vinAnI tenI sakala kriyA "chAra para lipaNuM' jevI thAya che.
"zuddha zraddhAna viNa jeha kiriyA karI, chAra para lipaNo te jANo."--zrI
AnaMdaghanajI Ageke TuMkata dhAya, pAche bacharA carAya, jaise dagahIna nara
jevI vaTatu hai; taise mUDha cetana sukRta karatUti karI, zevata hasata phala
bevata khaTatu hai."-zrI banArasIdAsajI. Ama tenI samasta pravRtti-samasta
AraMbha niSphaLa thAya che, eTaluM ja nahi paNa tenI gapravRtti paNa
paramArthathI tevI ja niSphaLa hoya che. kAraNa ke te dharmavyApArarUpa
egapravRtti mehagarbhavairAgyathI upajatI heI, apAyajananI mohabhavAbhinaMdinI
vAsanA utpanna kare che. ane tenAthI je puNyabaMdha thAya che te paNa cogakriyA
paNa pAchaLathI apAyavALo hoya che, eTale ke te puNya pApAnubaMdhI puNya -
aphaLa hoya che. ane Ama " avedhasaMvedya padamAM sthiti karatA bhavAbhinaMdI
jaMtuone puNya je hoya che, te niranubaMdha hoya che, ane pApa je ya che te
sAnubaMdha hoya che. eTale puNyanI paraMparA cAlu rahetI nathI, pApanI * "
pravRttirapi yogasya vairAgyAnmoigarbhataH  /  prasUte'gAyajananImuttarA
mohavAsanAm  //  avedyasaMvedyapade puNyaM niranubandhakam  /
bhavAbhinaMdijantUnAM pApaM syAtsA nuvandhakam  /  / " -zrI vijayajI kRta dvA
dvA

Page #364 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(298) The tradition of the Yogadristi Samuchaya continues because the power of
raga, dvesha, etc. is strong in the bhava-abhinandi. Thus, whatever dharma-karan
the bhava-abhinandi tries to do, it fails! - This bhava-abhinandi jiva, who is
very attached to the world, enjoys the world, is engrossed in the world, is like
a worm in the world. "Lebhi krupana dayamanaji, mayi machchar than; bhava-
abhinandi bhay bhariyoji, afal aaramh ayan....man." - D. Sakzaya 4-9 What is
true, so what? For this, it says - इत्यसत्परिणामानुविद्धो बोधो न सुंदरः ।
तत्संगादेव नियमाद्विपसंपृक्तकाम्नवत् ॥ ७७ ॥ Yukta asat parinamathi, badh ni
sundar em; tas sangathi j niyamathi, visaspashta ann jem. 77 Meaning - Such asat
parinamathi anuviddha (connected) bodha, from its association, by rule, is not
beautiful - like food mixed with poison. The characteristics of the bhava-
abhinandi, which were shown above, are clarified here. Whatever results the
bhava-abhinandi - the jiva who enjoys the world - has, are asat. Therefore,
whatever knowledge he has, is also connected to the asat parinam. Just as a dove
is trapped in a net, his bondage is also trapped in the asat parinam. Therefore,
due to the association of the asat parinam, his bondage is also asat by rule,
not beautiful, not good. Because, whatever association, that color is applied.
Thus, due to the asat parinam, his knowledge is completely spoiled. Here, food
mixed with poison, contaminated, mixed Vritti: - Re - Such bhava-abhinandi
parinam sat - due to this asat parinam, jarurinanuviddha - connected to the asat
parinam, trapped, connected, associated, vo-bodha - general, not sundar - not
beautiful. Why? Because - tarasav - due to its association, due to the
relationship of the asat parinam, niyamanu - by rule, like what? Because
vipdyattaranav - visaspashta ann jem, food mixed with poison. Such an example is
only an illustration.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (298) yogadaSTisamucaya paraMparA cAlu rahe che, kAraNa ke rAgadveSAdinuM A
bhavAbhinaMdIne prabalapaNuM hoya che. Ama bhavAbhinaMdI bicAre je kAMI
dharmakaraNa karavA jAya che, te paNa tene niSphaLa thaI paDe che!--A A
bhavAbhinadI jIva, saMsArane abhinaMdanA- bahu mAnanAre, saMsAramAM rAcanAra,
saMsAramAM rapa mazagUla-tanmaya rahenAra, saMsArane kIDe hoya che. "lebhI
kRpaNa dayAmaNajI, mAyI macchara ThANa; bhavAbhinaMdI bhaya bharyojI, aphala
AraMbha ayANa....mana."--. da. sakjhAya 4-9 je kharekhara ema che, tethI zuM? te
mATe kahe che- ityasatpariNAmAnuviddho bodho na suMdaraH  /  tatsaMgAdeva
niyamAdvipasaMpRktakAmnavat  //  77  //  yukta asata pariNAmathI, badha nI
suMdara ema; tAsa saMgathI ja niyamathI, viSaspaSTa anna jema. 77 artha -ema
asat pariNAmathI anuviddha-(saMkaLAyela) bodha, tenA saMgathakI ja, niyamathI
suMdara nathI,-viSamizrita-viSathI kharaDAyelA ananI jema. vivecana uparamAM je
bhavAbhinadInA lakSaNa batAvyA, te uparathI zuM phalita thAya che, te ahIM
spaSTa karyuM che. bhavAbhinaMdInA-saMsArathI rAcanArA jIvanA je je pariNAma
hoya che, te asat hoya che. eTale tene je kAMI skULa badha hoya che, te paNa
asat pariNAma asat pariNAmathI anuviddha-saMkaLAyela-joDAyelo hoya che. seyamAM
yukta bodha parevAyelA derAnI jema, tene baMdha paNa asat pariNAmamAM asat
parovAyeluM che, eTale asat pariNAmanA saMga thakI ja tene te bedha paNa
niyamathI asat hoya che, suMdara-sArA nathI hote, rUDe-bhale nathI hoto. kAraNa
ke je saMga tevo raMga lAge che. Ama asat pariNAmane lIdhe tenA bodhane badhe
ghANa bagaDI jAya che. atre viSathI kharaDAyelA, spardhAyelA, bheLa vRtti: -ri-
ema bhavAbhinaMdI pariNAma sate-AnA asata pariNAmapaNAne lIdhe,
jarUrinAnAnuvida-asata pariNAmathI anuviddha, parovAyele, joDAyele, saMkaLAyela,
voHbodha-sAmAnyathI, na saMrata:suMdara nathI. zA kAraNathI ? te ke-tarasava-
tenA saMgathakI ja, vivakSita asata pariNAmanA saMbaMdhathakI ja, niyamAnU-
niyamathI, kenI jema ? te kevipadyttaranava-viSasaMprata ananI jema, viSayathI
sparzayelA-kharaDAyelA annanI jema. ema nidarzana mAtradRSTAMta mAtra che,

Page #365 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Dotada: Asata Parinamamukta Bodha Asata  (299) The example of food mixed with
poison is appropriate. Even if the food is delicious, if it is contaminated with
poison, then the entire dish becomes poisonous and unpalatable, and one does not
want to consume it. Similarly, for the Bhavabhimandi (one who delights in
existence) jiva, even the scriptures and other knowledge, which are inherently
beautiful, become impure, tainted, and undesirable due to their false and wrong
self-transformations (asata parinamas). The entire knowledge becomes spoiled by
the poison of these wrong transformations.  Therefore, it is clear from this
that even if the Bhavabhimandi jiva is highly learned, possesses abundant
scriptural knowledge, is an expert in the scriptures, is eloquent, and has
mastery over the scriptures, yet due to their ignorant transformations being
false (asata), and being permeated by false tendencies (mithya vasanas), they
are truly ignorant, and all their knowledge becomes non-knowledge (abodha) for
them. Even if they have varying degrees of subsidence-cum-destruction
(ksayopasama) of karmas, since that is based on their tendency-filled bondage
(vāsanāmaya bandha), and their knowledge is also tainted, that knowledge is
essentially non-knowledge for them.  Further, it is also clear from this that as
long as the tendency for false transformations (asata parinamas) exists, even
the greatest scriptural knowledge becomes ignorance, and even the most extensive
scriptural learning becomes incomplete. The scriptures have stated that even the
scriptures studied by the inauspicious (abhavya) are unable to transform their
nature, just as drinking sweetened milk does not make the snake (visha-dhara)
non-venomous. This example of the inauspicious (abhavya) indicates that the
inauspicious never relinquishes their beginningless false tendencies, never
attains the knowledge of the distinction between self and non-self, and hence
never attains liberation. Similarly, other beings, even the auspicious (bhavya),
as long as they do not relinquish their beginningless false tendencies and do
not attain the knowledge of the distinction between self and non-self, continue
to wander in the cycle of rebirth, being ignorant. In other words, as long as
the Bhavabhimandi nature of the jiva is not eliminated, the cycle of rebirth
cannot be eliminated, because...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 doTAdaH asata pariNAmayukta bedha asata (299) vAyelA viSamizrita annanuM
daSTAMta ghaTe che. suMdara pakavAnna hoya, paNa te je viSathI dUSita hoya, tene
viSane saMga lAgyo hoya, te te AkhuM bhejana viSarUpa thavAthI asuMdara thaI
paDe che, bhakSaNa karavA gya rahetuM nathI. tema bhavAbhinaMdI jIvane paNa
svabhAvathI suMdara evA zAstra Adine je kaMI bodha hoya che, te paNa tenA asat-
mithyA AtmapariNAmathI dUSita hovAthI, vAsita hovAthI, aprazasta thaI jAya che,
asuMdara thaI jAya che; asat pariNAmarUpa viSathI badhI bAjI bagaDI jAya che. te
parama amRtarUpa Agamabedha paNa te asat pariNAmavaMta adhikArI jIvane
abhimAnAdi vikAra upajAvI viSarUpa pariName che. eTale A uparathI e spaSTa
phalita thAya che ke-bhavAbhinaMdI jIva bhale game teTale paMDita hoya, game
teTale dravya kRtajJAnI hoya, game te AgamavettA-Agamadhara zAstravizArada
kahevAtuM hoya, game te vAkapaTu hoI vAcaspati badha paNa kahevAtuM hoya, game
tevo zAstra dharAvato hoya, to paNa tenA abodha pariNAma asat hovAthI, mithyA
vAsanAthI vAsita hovAthI, te ajJAnI ja che, tene te sava bodha abodharUpa ja
che. kSayopazamanI taratamatA pramANe bhale tenAmAM taratama kSayopazama hoya,
te paNa tene AdhAra vAsanAmaya baMdha hovAthI, "vAsita bodha AdhAra hovAthI,
tene te bedha vAstavika rIte abodha ja che. kAraNa ke- vastu vicAre re! divya
nayana taNe re, viraha paDyo niradhAra; taratama ge re taratama vAsanA re,
vAsita bodha AdhAra. paMthaDo."--zrI AnaMdaghanajI vaLI A uparathI e paNa spaSTa
thAya che ke jyAM lagI asata pariNAmanI vAsanA hoya che, tyAM lagI game teTaluM
zAstrajJAna paNa ajJAnarUpa ja hoya che, game teTale dravya zrutabadha paNa
adharUpa ja hoya che. zAstramAM kahyuM che ke-"abhavya sArI bhavAbhinaMdInA
peThe zAstro abhyAsIne paNa prakRti cheDate nathI,-sAkaravALuM dUdha pIne jJAna-
kiyA paNa pannaga (viSadhara-sA5) nirviSa-jhera vagaranA nathI hotA tema."
niSphaLa (juo pR. 79 ). A abhavyanA daSTAMta uparathI e sUcita thAya che ke
abhavya to kadI paNa anAdi asat vAsanA cheData nathI, svaparano bheda jANavArUpa
bhedajJAna pAmI AtmajJAna kadI pAmato nathI, tethI tene kadI mekSa thato nathI.
tema anya jIva paNa-bhavya paNa jyAMlagI anAdi kuvAsanA-asat vAsanA choDatuM
nathI, jyAM lagI sva-parano bheda jANavArUpa bheda jJAna pAmI AtmajJAnane pAmate
nathI, tyAM lagI te paNa ajJAnI heI saMsAramAM rakhaDayA kare che. arthAt jyAM
lagI jIvanuM bhavAbhinaMdIpaNuM TaLe nahiM tyAM lagI bhavabhramaNa paNuM TaLe
nahiM; kAraNe ke

Page #366 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(300) Until the self-realization is absent in the object, until the evil,
wicked, and lustful desires towards the external and internal objects are not
removed, until the soul's karma and tendencies are not satisfied in the external
and internal objects, until then, all its knowledge is ignorance, and its
infinite material actions are also futile and useless. "Material action is a
means, a method, a request, which is read in the Jina Agamas; karma and
tendencies are satisfied in the objects, then it becomes true, O mind, from the
attachment." - Shri Devchandraji This is what the fruit says - "These people are
indeed here, those who are attached to the wrong view. They are blind to the
discrimination of good and bad, and they are distressed by the present." - 78
The meaning is that these people who are in the state of ignorance are attached
to the wrong view, and they are blind to the discrimination of good and bad.
They are only seeing the present, and they are distressed. The commentary is
that, because of the reason mentioned above, these people who are in the state
of ignorance are attached to the wrong view. They see the non-existent as
existent, and the existent as non-existent. They see the truth as untruth, and
the untruth as truth. They see the eternal as non-eternal, and the non-eternal
as eternal. They see dharma as adharma, and adharma as dharma. They see good as
bad, and bad as good. They see the undesirable as desirable, and the desirable
as undesirable. They see knowledge as ignorance, and ignorance as knowledge.
They see the soul as non-soul, and the non-soul as soul. And so on, in many
ways, the wrong view, the inverted understanding, is revealed, the manifested
feeling is seen. The meaning is that the wrong view is the belief that is
contrary to the reality. "These people who are in the state of ignorance,
because of this reason, here, in this world, are attached to the wrong view.
They are blind to the discrimination of good and bad, and they are distressed by
the present." - 78 Therefore, it is said that those who are attached to the
wrong view are distressed by the present.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (300) gadaSTisamuccaya jyAMlagI para vastumAM Atmabuddhi TaLatI nathI,
parabhAva-vibhAva pratyenI aMtaraMga ramaNatArUpa duSTa durvAsanA jyAM lagI dUra
thatI nathI, jIvanI pariNati ane vRtti jyAM lagI parabhAvavibhAvamAM rAcI rahI
che, tyAM lagI tenuM samasta jJAna paNa ajJAna che, ane tenI anaMta dravya kriyA
paNa niSphaLa-nakAmI che. dravya kriyA sAdhana vidhi yAcI, je jina Agama vAMcI;
pariNati vRtti vibhAve rAcI, tiNe navi thAye sAcI re manamehanA"- zrI
devacaMdrajI phala thakI A ja kahe che - etadvanto'ta eveha viparyAsaparA narAH
/  hitAhitavivekAndhA khidyante sAMpratekSiNaH  //  78  //  ehIjuM kAraNathI
ahIM, aghasavedyavaMta; viparyAsamAM tatparA, evA nare havata. vaLI te hita-
ahitanA vivekamAMhi aMdha; kheda prApta karatA rahe, vartamAna dekhaMta, 78
artha eTalA mATe ja ahIM A adyapadavALA manuSya viparyAsaparAyaNa hoya che,
eTale hita-ahitanA vivekamAM aMdha evA teo vartamAnane ja dekhanArA heI, kheda
pAme che. vivecana eTalA mATe ja, uparamAM je kahyuM te kAraNane lIdhe, A
aghasavedya padamAM je va che, evA manuSya A lekamAM viparyAsaparAyaNa hoya che,
eTale ke vastusthitithI - viparIta-ulaTI buddhi dharAve che. teo sane asat jANe
che, ane vipasa sat jANe che; tattvane atattva jANe che, atattvane tatva jANe
che; nityane anitya jANe che, anityane nitya jANe che, dhamane adharma jANe che,
adharmane dharma jANe che, hitane ahita jANe che, ahitane hita jANe che; heyane
Adeya jANe che, Adeyane heya jANe che, reyane jJAna jANe che, jJAnane ya jANe
che; AtmAne anAtmA jANe che, anAtmAne AtmA jANe che. ItyAdi aneka prakAre te
viparyAsaneUMdhI buddhino AviSkAra thAya che, pragaTa bhAva dekhAya che.
tAtparya ke vastu sthitithI viparIta-ulaTI mAnyatA tenuM nAma viparyAsa che.
vRtti -Natatte-A adApadavALA, atta ga-Aja kAraNathI, rU-ahIM, lekamAM, vipata
para -viparyAsapradhAna, nA nare, manuSyo, zuM ? te ke:-hitAvejAbhyA-hitAhita
vivekamAM aMdha, AthI rahita ema artha che. eTalA mATe ja kahyuM ke vizvane kaLi
-sAMpratekSIo kheda pAme che, vartamAnadazI hAI kheda pAme che.

Page #367 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Diimadrushti:  In a body of viparyasa, the soul's perception of itself is
the cause of samsara.  (301)  The obstacle to the soul's attainment of the true
nature of things is its innate viparyasa-bhava, a perception that, whether
consciously or unconsciously, misinterprets the nature of things.  This
viparyasa-bhava, which is not overcome by the teachings of vairagya and
upashama, leads to a distorted understanding of the world.  As long as this
viparyasa-bhava persists, even the contemplation of principles will be
distorted.  The ego and attachment that arise from the desire for worldly
possessions, family, and other things, and the passions of attachment and
aversion that arise from the attainment or non-attainment of these things, are
all manifestations of this viparyasa-bhava.  –Shrimad Rajchandra Patranka 418.
(506)  This viparyasa-bhava, this distorted perception, makes the soul blind to
the difference between what is beneficial and what is harmful.  It is unable to
discern between the two, and so it engages in harmful activities, even though
they bring suffering.  "Hitam hitva hite sthitva durdhir duhkhayase bhrisham.
Viparyaye tayorehi tvam sukhayishyase sudhih."  –Shri Gunabhadra Swami's Shri
Atmanushasana:  By abandoning the beneficial and dwelling in the harmful, the
foolish soul experiences great suffering.  But by reversing this, by abandoning
the harmful and dwelling in the beneficial, the wise soul will attain happiness.
The soul that cultivates the belief that happiness will not be found on the path
that leads to happiness, will be hindered from pursuing the true path.  It will
think, "I will not find happiness on this path, happiness will be found on
another path," and thus it will be prevented from pursuing the true path.  It
will encounter obstacles to the attainment of true happiness.  This kind of
perception is what the wise call mithyatva.  –Shri Manahsukhbhai K.
Shantasudharas Vivechan.  Therefore, such a soul is only concerned with the
present, only with the present moment.  It only sees the present and does not
consider the past or the future.  It believes, "This life is sweet, what have I
seen of the next life?" and only thinks about the present.  Thus, it forgets the
past and the future, becoming attached to this life.  It believes that all its
duties are to be performed in this life, and it becomes completely absorbed in
its activities.  In this way, it loses awareness of what is beneficial and
harmful, what is right and wrong, what is edible and inedible, what is drinkable
and undrinkable.  It forgets the true nature of the soul, which is pure
consciousness, distinct from the physical body.  It identifies itself with the
body, and becomes oblivious to its true nature.  It becomes completely absorbed
in the body and its needs.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dImAdaSTiH viparyAsa-dehamAM AtmabuddhithI ja saMsAra (301) paNa padArthanA
nirNayane pAmavA jIvane aMtarAyarUpa tenI anAdi viparyAsabhAvane pAmelI evI
buddhi che, ke je vyaktapaNe ke avyaktapaNe vipasapaNe padArtha svarUpane
niradhArI le che. jene vairAgya upazama saMbaMdhI upadeza baMdha thayo nathI,
tene buddhinuM viparyAsapaNuM varcA kare che, ane jyAM sudhI buddhinuM
viparyAsapaNuM hoya tyAMsudhI siddhAMtanuM vicAravuM paNa viparyAsapaNe thayuM
ja saMbhave che. gRha-kuTuMba parigrahAdi bhAvane viSe je ahaMtA mamatA che, ane
tenI prApti aprApti prasaMgamAM je rAgadveSa kaSAya che, te ja viparyAsabuddhi
che." -zrImad rAjacaMdra patrAMka 418. (506 ) ane AvI viparyAsabuddhi-ulaTI mati
hovAthI, te jIva hita ahita vivekamAM aMdha-AMdhaLA hoya che, hita-ahitanuM tene
bhAna hotuM nathI, eTale te hita choDI ahitamAM pravRtti karI hAthe karIne
duHkhI thAya che. "hitaM hitvA hite sthitvA durdhIrduHkhAyase bhRzam  /
viparyaye tayoredhi tvaM sukhAyiSyase sudhIH  // " -zrI guNabhadrasvAmIjIkRta
zrI AtmAnuzAsana arthAt hitane cheDA, ahitamAM sthiti karI tuM dubuddhi atyaMta
duHkhI thAya che. ane te bannenA viparyayane tuM pAma, eTale ke ahitane choDI
hitamAM sthiti kara, eTale subuddhi e tuM sukhI thaze. je vATe sukha maLe che te
vATe sukha nahi maLe, evI khetI mati jIvane thAya te te sAcI vATe prayatna
karate te aTake che. mane A vATe sukha nahi maLe, sukha te. bIjI vATe maLaze,
AthI te kharI vATe prayatna karato aTake che. ane satya sukhano aMtarAya pAme
che....A eTI matine jJAnIe mithyAtva kahe che." -zrI manaHsukhabhAI ki. kRta
zAMtasudhArasa vivecana. ethI karIne ja teo mAtra sAMpratekSI hoya che,
vartamAnadazI ja hoya che, mAtra vartamAnakALane ja dekhe che, AgaLa pAchaLane
vicAra karatA nathI. te te "A bhava mIThA parabhava keNa dIThA' ema mAnI mAtra
vartamAnane ja vicAre che. eTale vartAmAnadazI parAkane bhUlI jaI, visArI mUkI,
A bhavAbhinaMdI che A dehAzrita samasta kattavyamAMja ItikartavyatA mAnI,
sarvasva mAnI, tenI pravRttimAMja AMkha mIMcIne racyA-pacyA rahe che. ane tema
karatAM te hitAhita-aMdha ja kRtyAkRtyanuM, gamyAgamyanuM, khAdyAkhAdyanuM,
piyAyinuM bhAna bhUlI jAya che. tathA jaDa dehathI sarvathA judA zuddha
caitanyamUti AtmAnA abhAnapaNathI, deha-AtmAne ekava adhyAsa rAkhI te
bebhAnapaNe-mehamUrNitapaNe dehanI veTha karyA ja kare che.

Page #368 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(302) The collection of wrong views and the attachment to this perishable body,
for which these poor souls endure so much suffering and toil, this attachment to
the body becomes a bondage for them! Because the body with which they have such
a strong attachment, how can that body not also become a bond in return for the
suffering it endures? Is it ungrateful? Is it grateful? Therefore, due to the
self-consciousness in the body, they cannot detach themselves from the body; as
long as they are bound, birth and death do not cease; as long as birth and death
do not cease, suffering does not cease; and as long as this birth, death, and
suffering do not cease, the cycle of samsara does not cease. Thus, for the sake
of maintaining their relationship with this body, which they consider to be
their own, these unfortunate souls, like oxen burdened with toil, continue to
wander in the path of samsara, lamenting their fate! Shriman Pujyapaad Swami ji
has said: “In the body, the self-consciousness binds the soul to that body with
certainty; and in the true self, the self-consciousness separates the soul from
the body. Due to the self-consciousness in the body, the illusions of son, wife,
etc., are born in the body. And due to those illusions, the soul, with its self-
consciousness, considers the wealth of the father to be its own. Alas! This
unfortunate world has been destroyed! The root of the suffering of samsara is
the self-consciousness in the body. Therefore, by severing this self-
consciousness in the body, and not allowing the senses to be active in the
external world, one should enter within.” But the unfortunate souls have self-
consciousness in the body. And due to this perverse and inverted consciousness,
they become bound to the body and suffer the cycle of samsara. Thus, it is clear
that from this perversion arises ignorance, from ignorance arises the wrong
perception of the present, and from wrong perception arises the suffering of
samsara. जन्ममृत्युजराव्याधिरोगशोकायुपद्रुतम् । वीक्षमाणा अपि भवं
नोद्विजन्तेऽतिमोहतः ।। ७९ ।। Commentary: - Birth, the manifestation of which is
birth, death, the cessation of life, old age, the loss of youth, disease,
illness, etc., suffering, intense pain caused by fear, grief, etc., due to the
loss of loved ones, etc., and the word "aayupadruta" refers to the suffering
caused by the elements, etc. Even seeing all this, they do not worry because of
their extreme delusion. देहे स्वबुद्धिरात्मानं युनत्त्येतेन निश्चयात् ।
स्वात्मन्येवात्मधीस्तस्माद्वियोजयति देहिनम् ।। देहेष्वास्मधिया जाताः पुत्र
भार्यादिकल्पनाः । सम्पत्तिमात्मनस्ताभिर्मन्यते हा हतं जगत् ॥ मूलं संसारदुःखस्य
देह एव आत्मधीस्ततः । त्यत्क्वैर्ना प्रविशेदन्तर्बहिरव्यापृतेन्द्रियः ।। - Shri
Samadhishatak,

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (302) gadaSTisamuccaya ane je jaDa dehanA saMbaMdhanI khAtara A bicArA ATalI
badhI veTha UThAve che, ATalI badhI jahemata kare che, te dehane saMbaMdha te
ulaTe tene baMdharUpa nIvaDe che ! kAraNa ke je dehane teNe ATale badhe gADha
saMbaMdha rAkhe, te deha veThanI poTha paNa badalAmAM baMdharUpa saMbaMdha kema
na rAkhe ? zuM te kAMI akRtajJa che-zuM kRtapta che vAru ? eTale dehamAM
AtmabuddhithI tene dehane baMdhasaMbaMdha chUTa nathI; te baMdha che tyAMsudhI
janma-maraNa chUTatA nathI; janma maraNa chUTatA nathI tyAMsudhI duHkha chUTatuM
nathI ane A janma maraNa duHkha chUTatuM nathI, tyAM sudhI saMsAra paribhramaNa
chUTatuM nathI. Ama potAnA mAnelA saMbaMdhI evA dehano sabaMdha jALavavA khAtara
(!) pite pitAne bAMdhI pApane piTale mAthe caDhAvI, veThanI piTha UThAvI, A
veThIA baLada jevA bhavAbhinaMdI jIva saMsAramArgamAM niraMtara paribhramaNano
kheda pAmyA kare che! zrImAna pUjyapAda svAmIjIe prakAryuM che ke "dehamAM 4
Atmabuddhi AtmAne e deha sAthe nizcaye yoje che; ane sva AtmAmAM ja Atmabuddhi
te dehathI AtmAne vije che-vikhUTo paDe che. dehamAM AtmabuddhithI putra strI
vagere kalpanAo (Unrealities, Imaginations, Illusions) dehamAM Atma- upajI che.
ane te kalpanAo vaDe AtmAnI-pitAnI saMpatti mAnatuM buddhithI ja A abhAgIyuM
jagat arere ! haNAI gayuM che ! A saMsAra duHkhanuM saMsAra mUla dehamAM
Atmabuddhi e ja che, tethI A dehAtmabuddhi cheDIne, hAramAM indriyane pravRtta
nahiM karatAM, aMtaramAM praveza kare." paNa bhavAbhinaMdI jIvane te dehamAM
Atmabuddhi hoya che. ane AvI viparyAsarUpa ulaTI buddhithI te deha sAthe
baMdhAIne saMsAra paribhramaNa duHkha pAme che. Ama viparyAsathI aviveka,
avivekathI vartamAnane ja dekhanArI mithyA pravRtti, ane mithyA pravRttithI
saMsAra kheda upaje che, ema spaSTa thayuM.
janmamRtyujarAvyAdhirogazokAyupadrutam  /  vIkSamANA api bhavaM
nodvijante'timohataH  /  /  79  /  /  vRtti -nama-janma, prAdurbhAva-janmavuM
jenuM lakSaNa che tenuM mRtyu:-mRtyu, prANatyAgarUpa, karA-jA, ghaDapaNu,
vayahAnirUpa vRddhAvasthA, kathAdhi-vyAdhi ke vagere lakSaNavALe, roga-roga,
vizacikA vagere AtaMka-asaMta tIvra AvegavALI pIDA, zoka:-zAka ISTaviyAga
vagerethI upaja mane vikAra mAhi-Adi zabdathI graha AdinuM grahaNa che, eethI-
kUta-upadrava pAmI rahelA x " dehe svabuddhirAtmAnaM yunattyetena nizcayAt  /
svAtmanyevAtmadhIstasmAdviyojayati dehinam  /  /  deheSvAsmadhiyA jAtAH putra
bhAryAdikalpanAH  /  sampattimAtmanastAbhirmanyate hA hataM jagat  //  mUlaM
saMsAraduHkhasya deha eva AtmadhIstataH  /  tyatkvairnA
pravizedantarbahiravyApRtendriyaH  /  /  -zrI samAdhizataka,

Page #369 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Dimāiṣṭi: The Great Delusion of Bhava  **The great delusion of Bhava, birth,
death, and other sufferings, birth, death, disease, old age, pain, and sorrow;
even seeing Bhava, one does not feel distress, due to extreme attachment.**
**Commentary:**  The text states that beings caught in the cycle of Bhava
(existence) are deluded, with a distorted mind and intellect. They are unable to
discern between what is beneficial and harmful, and are solely focused on
worldly pleasures. This lack of discernment leads them to remain oblivious to
the suffering inherent in the world, even when they witness it directly. They
are so attached to worldly things that they do not feel any distress or desire
to escape from this cycle of suffering.  **The text further elaborates on the
nature of this suffering:**  * **Birth, old age, and death are the primary
causes of suffering.** These are the inevitable realities of existence, and they
are accompanied by a multitude of other pains, such as disease, sorrow, and
frustration. * **The root cause of this suffering is attachment.** Attachment to
worldly things, such as pleasure, possessions, and relationships, leads to
suffering because it creates a sense of dissatisfaction and insecurity. * **The
cycle of birth, death, and rebirth is a constant source of suffering.** It is a
never-ending cycle of pain and frustration, and it is only through liberation
from this cycle that true happiness can be attained.  **The text concludes by
emphasizing the importance of recognizing the delusion of Bhava and seeking
liberation from it.** This can be achieved through spiritual practices such as
meditation, self-reflection, and the pursuit of knowledge.  **The text also
quotes from the teachings of Shrimad Rajchandraji and Shri Gunabhadra Swami:**
* **Shrimad Rajchandraji:** "Birth, old age, and death are the main causes of
suffering. The reason for this is attachment, aversion, and ignorance." * **Shri
Gunabhadra Swami:** "Just as a worm trapped in a piece of wood burning on both
ends, so too is the soul trapped in the body, suffering from birth and death."
**The text concludes by emphasizing the importance of recognizing the delusion
of Bhava and seeking liberation from it.** This can be achieved through
spiritual practices such as meditation, self-reflection, and the pursuit of
knowledge.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dImAiSTi : bhavAbhina'dInA mahAmaha, janma-maraNAdi duHkha janma maraNa vyAdhi
jA, roga zAka du:khava'ta; bhava jotAMya udvega nA, ati mAhathI lahata, 79 artha
:-- janma, maraNu, jarA, vyAdhi, raMga, zeka vagerethI upadrava pAmatA saMsArane
dekhatAM chatAM, te ati mahane lIdhe udvega pAmatA nathI ! vivecana " janma jarA
ne mRtyu, mukhya duHkhanA hetu; kAraNa tenA e kahyA, rAga dveSa aNuhetu."--
zrImad rAjacadrajI (303) uparamAM bhavAbhinaDhI jIva viparIta mativALA, UdhI
buddhivALA hAi, hita-ahitanA vivakamAM adha hAya che, ane mAtra vamAnane ja
jonArA hAya che,-ema kahyuM. Ama avivekI vartamAnadazI hAvAthI ja, saMsAranuM
pragaTa duHkhada svarUpa mahAmahanu pratyakSa dekhatAM chatAM, te tethI udvega
pAmatA nathI, kaMTALatA nathI, vilasita ulaTA temAM ja gADha mADu pAme che!
puna: puna: janmavuM, punaH punaH maravu, punaH puna: jananInA jaTharamAM
garbhavAsa karavA, punaH puna: cAre gatimAM rakhaDavuM, evI atyaMta pragaTa
duHkhamaya avasthAe puna: puna: A saoNMsAramAM pratyakSa anubhavavI paDe che.
chatAM A sa'sArathI A jIva udvega pAmatA nathI, temAMthI urdu eTale atyaMta
vegathI bhAgI chUTavAne vicAra karatA nathI, eTaluM ja nahui paNa tene ulaTA
dRDha AsaktithI vaLagI rahe che, e kAMI jevu tevu Azcarya nathI. kharekhara A
badhuM mahuAmeAhunuM vilasita che. kAraNa ke-- azucimayamAtAnA udaramAM jANe
tapazcaryAM karatA hoya ema nava mAsa paryaMta udhe mAthe laTakatA rahI, A jIva
jyAre janma pAme che, te samaye je vedanA thAya che, te ati ati tIvra, ati ati
asahya, akalpya ne avazya heAya che. evI janma duHkha vedanA pratyeka janmamAM--
bhavamAM vedavI paDe che. kahyu che ke jenA banne cheDe agni saLagAvelA che evA
lAkaDAnI aMdaramAM rahelA kIDAnI jema, he jIva! tuM janma-mRtyuthI bheTAyelA
zarIramAM arere ! sIdAya che ! '* zrImad rAjaca'drajInuM parama saMvegaragI
vacanAmRta che ke-- * katha nA herAnagatI anubhavatA, vImAnA videkhatAM
chatAMya, marva-saMsArane, sovruitte-udvega pAmatA nathI,--AnA thakI udvega
pAmatA nathI ema prakrama che--cAlu saMbaMdha che, atimotoati mAharUpa hetune
lIdhe. 66 dIptobhayAmavAtAriyArUvaragakIdavat  /  namRtyulamAjike zarIre vata
mIla  // " -zrI guNabhadrasvAmIkRta AtmAnuzAsana " puttavi nanana punava maLa,
pusapi ananIgare kSayane "--zrI zakazacArya

Page #370 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(304) Yoga-drishti-samuccaya “There is no time, no moment, that I can remember
from within, where I have not been in this cycle of birth and death, and where I
have not lost my samadhi, and where I have not remembered this, and where I have
not been given great detachment.” “Moreover, whose mouth has never said, ‘I will
not take this,’ whom I will never take, why was I born in their house as a son,
as a daughter, as a servant, as a maidservant, as a small one? That is, I was
born in this form due to such hatred! And I did not want it! Tell me, when this
is remembered, does this subtle soul not feel disgust? That is, it does.”
—Shrimad Rajchandra, Patranka 115 (128) Moreover, when death comes, this soul
experiences the same unbearable, intense pain. And the body in which it has
lived its entire life, and the other attachments that are dependent on that
body, when it is left behind, when it is abandoned, the soul experiences extreme
internal-mental anguish. Every time it leaves a body, it has to experience this
unbearable internal pain due to the impermanence of that body. And it does not
want to take on that birth, but it is forced to. Therefore, its inner being is
cut off. But all the possessions it considered its own remain there, they do not
come with it. “Moreover, death occurs, without which I cannot live for even a
moment, and I leave behind so many things (wealth, etc.), and their separation
has lasted for an infinite time; still, living without them is not so
surprising. That is, when I had such feelings of attachment, they were imagined.
Did such feelings of attachment ever exist? This again and again gives
detachment.” -Shrimad Rajchandra, Patranka 115, Such a creature, improved by
these eight deaths, does not even take refuge in the gods, it 66 X 'उपघातस्य
घोरेण मृत्युव्याघ्रेण देहिनः । तेवा पि न नाचते शरल मुि मानत्राः ।।” Shri
Amritchandracharya-ji’s Shri Tattvarthasar 66 छात्राग्य मृत्युमूमानामन्तरे फ्युः
यियिम् ।।’–Shri Gunabhadra Swami’s Shri Atmanushasan

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ( 304) yogadRSTisamuccaya " aMtarmAMnathI macchu karatAM evA koi kALa jaNAtA
nathI vA sAMbharatA nathI ke je kALamAM, je samayamAM A jIve paribhramaNa na
kyu' hoya, ane e vaDe samAdhi na bhUlyA hAya, nira'tara e smaraNu rahyA kare
che, ane e mahAvairAgyane Ape che. " vaLI jenu' mukha koi kALe paNa nahi' e,
jene kAi kALe huM grahaNa nahI' ja karU'; tene ghera putrapaNe, skrIpaNe,
dAsapaNe, dAsIpaNuM, nAnA ja tuNe zA mATe janmyA ? arthAt evA dveSathI evA rUpe
janmavuM paDayu! ane tema kAnI teA icchA nahAtI ! kahe, e smaraNa thatAM A
lezita AtmA paratve jugupsA nahIM AvatI hoya ? arthAt Ave che." --zrImad
rAjacaMdra, patrAMka 115 (128) vaLI jyAre mRtyu Ave che tyAre paNa A jIvane tevI
ja asahya tItra vedanA thAya che. temaja je dehamAM AyuSya paryaM ta AkhA bhava
sthiti karI te dehanA ane te dehane Azrita evI anya vaLagaNAone sabadha vagara
neTise tAkhaDamaraNu du:kha teAkha cheDatI veLAe, A jIva atyaMta AMtarika-
mAnasika vyathA anubhave che. pratyeka deha cheDatI veLAe te te dehanA amatvathI
AvI asahya AMtar vedanA legavavI paDe che. ane te te bhavane parigraha te
che|DavA icchate nathI, chatAM tene parANe cheADavA paDe che. tethI tenuM aMtar
kapAI jAya che. paNa te teNe peAtAnI mAnelI badhI saMpatti tyAMnI tyAM ja paDI
rahe che, kAi sAthe AvatI nathI. " vaLI maraNa thAya che ke jenA vinA eka paLa
paNa huM jIvI nahI zakuM' evA keTalAka padArtho (zriyAdika ) te anaMtavAra
choDatAM tenA viyoga thayAM ana'ta kALa paNa thai gayA; tathApi tenA vinA
jIvAyuM e kai thADuM AzcaryakAraka nathI. arthAt je je veLA tevA prItibhAva
karyAM hatA te te veLA te kalpita hatA. evA prItibhAva kAM thayA ? e pharI pharI
vairAgya Ape che." -zrImad rAjaca'dna. patrAMka 115, AvA ghAra mRtyu-AghathIx
sudhAyelA prANIne devA paNa zaraNarUpa thatA nathI, te 66 X 'upaghAtasya ghoreNa
mRtyuvyAghreNa dehinaH  /  tevA pi na nAcate zaraLa mui mAnatrAH  /  / " zrI
amRtaca'drAcAryajI kRta zrI tattvArthasAra janmatAladrumAjjantuphalAni
pracyutAnyadhaH  /  66 chAtrAghya mRtyumUmAnamantare phyuH yiyim ||'-zrI
guNabhadrasvAmI kRta zrI AtmAnuzAsana

Page #371 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  The Suffering of the Soul  **Dimadrushti**, **jara**, **reg**, **shek**, and
other forms of suffering - what is the fate of a human being? Like a fruit that
falls from a palm tree, the soul, in the form of a **jantu**, falls from the
**taadvrush** (birth) and reaches the **bhoomibhag** (death). How long will it
remain in between? Just as a fruit that falls from a palm tree doesn't take long
to reach the ground, the soul doesn't take long to reach death from birth. "What
virtues can we sing of your worthless body? You built a palace but couldn't stay
in it. You chew on leaves and seeds, but your mouth is filled with dirt." - Sant
Kabirji  Thus, the cycle of birth and death continues. After birth comes death,
and after death comes birth - an endless chain of **anubandh**. Due to this, the
soul, trapped in the **arghattghati** (cycle of birth and death), wanders in the
**sansar** (world) like a drop of water in a well, experiencing endless
suffering.   Here, we will also discuss the other major sufferings that the soul
faces in each birth.   When **jara** (old age) arrives, the soul's condition
deteriorates. The five senses weaken, become **vikal** (disabled), and lose
their strength. The body becomes unable to stand, and one has to rely on a stick
for support. The waist bends, the body wrinkles, and **dukh** (pain) becomes a
constant companion. One becomes dependent on others, endures their insults, and
hears the bitter words, "He is neither dead nor alive." This old age is no less
painful.   Furthermore, in old age, the ears become deaf, as if unwilling to
hear the scorn of others. The eyes become blind, as if unable to bear the sight
of the father's helpless state. The body trembles in fear of the approaching
**chamaraj** (death). Even in this dilapidated, flickering abode of **jara**,
the soul remains **nishkap** (unaware).   Shrimad Rajchandraji, in his **Meksha
Mala**, beautifully describes this state: "The beard is wrinkled, the body is
bent, the black hair is covered with dust. The senses of smell, hearing, and
sight have faded. The teeth have fallen out or are about to fall out. "Your eyes
are unable to see your condition, as if you have gone blind. Your body trembles
in fear of the approaching end. What is your home in this world?" - Shri
Atmaanushasan.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dImAdaSTi jarA-rega-zeka Adi duHkha (305) pachI mAnavanuM zuM gajuM? janmarUpa
tADavRkSamAMthI nIce bhraSTa thayelA jaMturUpa phaLa mRtyu rUpa bhUmibhAge
pahoMcatAM pahelAM vaccamAM keTalIka vAra raheze ? tADanA jhADamAMthI chUTA
paDelA phaLane bhUmi para pahoMcatAM vAra lAgatI nathI, tema janmamAMthI jIvane
mRtyu pAmatAM vAra lAgatI nathI. "naguNI kAyA terA kayA guNa gAvuM? mahela racyo
timeM rahena na pAvuM; jA mukha cAvata pAnakI bIrI, tA mukha tere saMgata kIrI."
--saMta kabIrajI Ama janma mRtyu paraMparA-zRMkhalA cAlyA ja kare che. janma
pachI maraNa, ne maraNa pachI janma,-ema anaMta anubaMdha-paraMparA cAlyA ja
kare che. ane tethI A jIva araghaTTaghaTI nyAye, kUvAnA reMTa jevI A saMsAranI
rakhaDapaTTImAM, anaMta duHkhaparaMparA anubhavyA kare che. vaLI pratyeka
janmamAM paNa bIjA zA zA mukhya duHkha bhegavavA paDe che, tene paNa ahIM
nirdeza karyo che. te A pramANe jyAre jarA-ghaDapaNa Ave che tyAre paNa A jIvanA
hAlahavAla thavAmAM kAMI bAkI rahetI nathI. jyAre pAMca iMdriyanI zakti zithila-
DhIlI thaI jAya che, vikala-pAMgaLI banI jAya che, UThavAnI zakti aMgamAM rahetI
nathI, hAthamAM lAkaDIne ghaDapaNanuM Teke cAlavuM paDe che, keDa vAMkI vaLI
jAya che, zarIramAM karacalI paDe che, duHkha vaLIA-paLIo Ave che, ane jyAre
parAdhIna-paravaza thaIne rahevuM paDe che, bIjAnA meNA-ToNA sahana karavA paDe
che, ne A Doka "marate nathI ne mAM mUkate nathI" evA kaDavA vacana sAMbhaLavA
paDe che,-evI vRddhAvasthA paNa kAMI ochI duHkhadAyaka nathI. vaLI A
"vRddhAvasthAmAM bIjAonA tiraskAra veNa jANe sAMbhaLavAne IcchatA na hoya ema
kAna baherA thaI jAya che ! pitAnI duSya lAcAra dazA dekhavAne jANe asamartha
hoya ema AMkha aMdhapaNAne pAme che ! sAme AvelA camarAjanI bhItithI jANe kAyA
paNa khUba kaMpe che ! te paNa jarAthI khakhaDI gayela A pradIpta bhavanamAM
paNa aho ! A jIva niSkapa rahe che !' sat kavIzvara zrImad rAjacaMdrajIe
mekSamALAmAM svabhAktithI tAdazya varNana karyuM che ke - karacalI paDI dADhI
DAthA taNe DATa vaLyo, kALI kezapaTI viSe tatA chavAI gaI; suMghavuM sAMbhaLavuM
ne dekhavuM te mAMDI vaLyuM, vaLI daMta Avali te kharI ke khavAI gaI, + "gotrIva
rizvattA pattikArazrInAM prati cakSurvIkSitumakSamaM tava dazAM dUSyAmivAndhyaM
gatam  /  bhItyevAbhimukhAntakAdatitarAM kAyo'pyayaM kampate, nipatramAM tamAre
ghara? " -zrI AtmAnuzAsana

Page #372 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(306). "The collection of ailments, the bent back, the bones gone, the body's
color faded, the ability to rise gone, the walking stick taken away; Oh, King
Chandra! Even youth is lost, but the mind, even that, has lost its motherly
affection."  Similarly, when chronic diseases like leprosy, etc., or acute
ailments like cholera, etc., which cause intense pain, attack this body, when
they forcefully shake this body and surround it from all sides, then this
father's body becomes extremely unbearable, and sometimes the desire to leave it
arises, such unbearable pain is experienced here. When these ailments appear,
the desire to leave arises; "You consider this body yours, but it is not yours."
- Poet Shri Dalpatram.  And when separation from a beloved object or association
with an undesirable thing occurs, the inner sorrow in the form of grief gives
extreme anguish to the heart. One desires - "I did not get the desired object,
Oh, alas! I did not get this, this was attached to me, it went away leaving me
empty-handed," such inner anguish arises.  Or, if a beloved person like a
relative dies due to death, etc., then one grieves, saying, "Oh! He is gone, how
will I live without him?" Or, if an undesirable event like illness, loss of
wealth, or loss of honor occurs, then one also grieves, saying, "Oh! How will
this undesirable event go away? When will I be relieved from this difficulty?"
In this way, in this world, due to the separation from the beloved or the
association with the undesirable, the inner sorrow arising from grief, like a
worm, eats away the heart of the living being. This is the living word picture
of all these:  The unbearable pain that arises from a young, delicate person
being pierced by a needle all over his body, is eight times less than the pain
that a living being experiences when it resides in the womb. For almost nine
months, in the state of fainting, immersed in feces, urine, saliva, pus, etc.,
it is born with a mixture of pain, sorrow, and happiness. At the time of birth,
infinite times more pain and sorrow are produced than the pain of the womb.
After that, childhood is reached. In the state of nakedness, with feces, urine,
dust, and without understanding, it cries and wanders around, and childhood is
completed, and youth arrives. To earn wealth, one has to fall into minor sins,
from which the tendency towards worldly desires arises. Madness, laziness,
pride, contemptuous vision, association, separation, thus youth passes in a
whirlwind.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (306). gadaSTisamuccaya vaLI keDa vAMkI hADa gayA aMga raMga gaye, UThavAnI Aya
jatAM lAkaDI levAI gaI; aho rAjyacaMdra ! ema yuvAnI harAI paNa, manathI ne teya
rAMDa mamatA marAI gaI." temaja koDha vagere aneka jAtanA du:sAdhya asAdhya
vyAdhio (Chronic diseases) athavA visUcikA (Cholera) vagere aneka tIvra
AtyaMtika pIDA upajAvanArA-vedanAmaya rege (Acute Ailments) jyAre A zarIra para
AkramaNa kare che, jyAre A zarIra para jorathI hale lAvI tene cotaraphathI gherI
vaLe che, tyAre A pitAne hAla deha paNa atyaMta akAro thaI paDe che, ane te
choDavAnuM mana paNa kayAreka thaI Ave, evuM asahya du:kha atra vedAya che.
jyAre e regI jaNAze, mUkavAnuM mana thAze; tana tuM gaNe che tAruM re, te nathI
tAruM."--kavi zrI dalapatarAma, tathA ISTa vastune viyoga thatAM ke aniSTane
saMga thatAM, tene zoka karavArUpa AMtaruM duHkha atre hRdayane atyaMta saMtApa
Ape che. keI iccha-mane vAMcchita vastu na maLI, te arere ! A mane na maLI, A
lAga AvyuM hatuM te mArA zoka hAthamAMthI hAthatALI daIne cAlyA gaye, ema
aMtastApa thAya che. athavA svajanAdi koI ISTa-priya janane mRtyu Adi kAraNe
viyega thAya to tene zoca thayA kare che ke-are ! A te gaye, enA vinA huM kema
jIvIza ? athavA regApatti, dhanahAni, ke mAnahAni Adi keI aniSTa prasaMga AvI
paDe, tyAre paNa e jhUryA kare che ke-are ! A aniSTa prasaMga kema dUra thaze ?
A muzkelImAMthI kayAre Are Avaze ? ItyAdi aneka prakAre A saMsAramAM ISTanA
asaMgathI ke viyegathI, athavA aniSTanA saMyegathI ke aviyegathI ArtadhyAnarUpa
zekathI upajatuM AMtar duHkha jIvanA hRdayane kIDAnI jema korI khAya che. A
badhAnA sArasamuccayarUpa jIvaMta zabdacitra A che - eka taruNa sukumArane rome
reme lAlacoLa suyA ghecavAthI je asahA vedanA upaje che, te karatAM AThaguNa
vedanA garbha sthAnamAM jIva jyAre rahe che tyAre pAme che. lagabhaga nava
mahinA maLa, mUtra, lehI, paru AdimAM aherAvya mUcchagata sthitimAM vedanA
duHkha sukha jogavI bheLavIne janma pAme che. garbha sthAnanI vedanAthI
anaMtaguNa vidane ne duHkha janmasamaye utpanna thAya che. tyAra pachI
bALAvasthA pamAya che. maLa, mUtra, dhULa, ane nagnAvasthAmAM aNasamajathI
rajhaLI raDIne te bALAvasthA pUrNa thAya che, ane yuvAvasthA Ave che. dhana
upArjana karavA mATe nAnA prakAranA pApamAM paDavuM paDe che jyAMthI utpanna
thaye che tyAM eTale viSaya vikAramAM vRtti jAya che. unmAda, ALasa, abhimAna,
niMdya daSTi, saMga, viyega, ema ghaTamALamAM yuvAvaya cAlyuM jAya che.

Page #373 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Deepradrushti: Confusion between right and wrong, finding happiness in
suffering (307)  Old age arrives. The body weakens, saliva drips from the mouth;
wrinkles appear on the skin; the ability to smell, hear and see becomes weak,
hair turns white and starts falling out; the ability to walk diminishes, one has
to walk with a stick and stumble; or one has to lie on a bed for the rest of
their life; breathing, coughing, etc. afflictions cling to the body, and soon
death arrives and takes it all away. The soul departs from this body. The body
was, it is not. Even at the time of death, there is so much pain! In the
fourfold suffering, even in the best human body, there is so much pain! Yet, as
mentioned above, time does not come in a fixed order. It can come at any time
and take us away, therefore, wise men, without indulging in pleasures, worship
self-welfare.” —Shrimad Rajchandraji-pranit Moksha Mala, Chapter 18.  This
beautiful word-picture depicts the suffering of the world in a vivid and clear
manner. And thus, even though the suffering of birth, death, etc. is clearly
visible, why are these souls not disturbed by it? Why do they not flee from it
with great speed...? Why? Why would they want to stay in a burning house? Such
natural questions arise. The great author himself answers this: “Due to
excessive attachment”, due to the overwhelming power of attachment, these
greatly attached souls are not disturbed by the world, they do not feel
disgusted, therefore, they do not want to escape from it and end it! On the
contrary, they are confused by attachment and cling to it with strong
attachment! They find pleasure in it! They drink the salty water of the ocean of
the world with gusto, believing it to be sweet! And they make their name
“Bhavahbindi” (bound by the cycle of birth and death) meaningful!!  ## Example:
What does it say? It says:  “Kukrutyam krutyam abhati krutyam chaakrutyavat sada
| Duhkhe sukhadhiyakrushta kachchookandukadivat ||80||”  Meaning:  “Tsy-
kukrutyam, pranatipat-arambh adi kukrutyam, nrittyamamati-krutyam bhase chhe,
mohanne lidhe, ruty-and krutyam, ahinsa-anarambh adi krutyam, styavat sarva-
akrutyam jevu sada bhase chhe, mehthi j. Tuve-duhkhama, samarambh adima, suviya-
sukh buddhithi, da-aakarshaya, kani jem? To ke-kuchalya-kachchhu kahrushk ardini
jem, khasne khanunara vagere ni jem.  Pama, khas tena kandumaka, k-khajwal kare
te kathumak, khajwalnara, khanunara, tena jem, adi shabdathi krimi thi heran
thai rahel eva agnisevak-agni sevnaara kadhiya nu grahan chhe.”  (Translation:
“Tsy-wrongdoing, killing-beginning etc. wrongdoing, nrittyamamati-rightdoing
appears, due to delusion, ruty-and rightdoing, non-violence-non-beginning etc.
rightdoing, styavat sarva-wrongdoing like always appears, due to attachment.
Tuve-in suffering, in beginning etc., suviya-happiness intellect, da-attracted,
like whom? So that-kuchalya-tortoise kahrushk etc. like, those who dig and eat.
Pama, khas tena kandumaka, k-who scratches that kathumak, scratcher, digger,
like them, etc. word from worm being troubled by such fire-server-fire server
kadhiya's acceptance is.” )

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dIprAdaSTi : kRtyAkRtya vimUDhatA, duHkhamAM sukhabuddhi (307 ) tyAM
vRddhAvasthA Ave che. zarIra kape che, mukhe lALa jhare che; tvacA para
kareAcalI paDI jAya che; suMdhavu, sAMbhaLavuM ane dekhavuM e zaktie kevaLa
maMda thaI jAya che, keza dhavaLa thai kharavA mAMDe che; cAlavAnI Aya rahetI
nathI, hAthamAM lAkaDI laI lathaDIAM khAtAM cAlavuM paDe che; kAM teA jIvana
paryaMta khATale paDayA rahevu paDe che; zvAsa, khAMsI ItyAdika rAga AvIne
vaLage che, ane thADA kALamAM kALa AvIne kALIe karI jAya che. A dehamAMthI jIva
cAlI nIkaLe che. kAyA hatI na hatI thaI jAya che. maraNa samaye paNa keTalI
keTalI badhI vedanA che? catu`tinA du:khamAM je manuSya deha zreSTha temAM paNa
keTalAM badhAM du:kha rahyA che! tema chatAM upara jaNAvyA pramANe anukrame kALa
Ave che, ema paNa nathI. game te vakhate te AvIne laI jAya che, mATe ja
vicakSaNa puruSA pramAda vinA AtmakalyANane ArAdhe che." --zrImad
rAjaca'drajIpraNIta meAkSamALA pATha 18. A sarvAMgasu Mdara zabdacitramAM
saMsAraduHkhanuM tAdRzya Abehuba citra doryu` che. ane Ama pragaTapaNe janma-
maraNAdi duHkhanA upadrAthI herAna herAna evuM saMsAra svarUpa pratyakSa
dekhatAM chatAM, A jIvA tenAthI kema udvega nahi' pAmatA chatAM udvega hoya ?
temAMthI atyaMta vegathI kema nAzI chUTatA nahi... hAya ? A nahi ! baLatA
gharamAM rahevAne kema icchatA haze ? evA svAbhAvika prazna udbhave che. tenuM
samAdhAna mahAtmA graMthakAraja svaya' kahe che ke--ati me huthI', mehanA
atizaya prabaLapaNArUpa hetuthI, A mahA mehamUDha jIvA te saMsArathI udvega-
kaMTALA pAmatA nathI, sUga pAmatA nathI, tethI trAsI jai teneA aMta lAvavAne
icchatA nathI! ulaTA meAhathI muMjhAi jaine tene ja dRDha AsaktithI vaLagI rahe
che! temAM ja rAce che ! sa'sArasamudranuM khAruM pANI hoMzathI mIThuM mAnIne
pIe che! ne peAtAnA bhavAbhina'dI' nAmane sArthaka kare che!! 6  dAkhalA tarIke,
ene zu' heAya che? te kahe che-- kukRtyaM kRtyamAbhAti kRtyaM cAkRtyavatsadA  /
duHkhe sukhadhiyAkRSTA kacchUkaNDUkAdivat ||80|| vRtti:-tsya-kukRtya,
prANAtipAta-AraMbha Adi kukRtya, nRtyamAmAti--kRtya bhAse che,-- meAhane lIdhe,
Rtya --ane kRtya, ahiMsA-anArabha AdikRtya, styavat sarvA--akRtya jevuM sadA
bhAse che, mehathI ja. tuve--du:khamAM, samAraMbha AdimAM, suviyA--sukha
buddhithI, dA--AkarSAyelA, kAnI jema ? to ke--kUcAliyA--kachu kahraSaka ArdinI
jema, khasane khaNunArA vagerenI jema. pAmA, khasa tenA kaMDUmakA, ka-khajavALa
kare te kaThUmaka, khajavALanArA, khaNunArA, tenI jema, Adi zabdathI kRmithI
herAna thaI rahela evA agnisevaka-agni sevanArA kADhIAnuM grahaNu che. -

Page #374 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(308) The deluded beings always perceive sinful actions as virtuous, and
virtuous actions as sinful. They hold the view of happiness in misery, like
those who dig up thorns. For them, sinful actions always appear as virtuous, and
virtuous and non-virtuous actions appear the same. They are attracted to misery
with the false notion of happiness, just as a person who is pricked by thorns
finds happiness in digging them up, or a person with boils finds happiness in
applying fire, similarly, these deluded beings, blinded by delusion, engage in
harmful activities like violence, etc., which are sinful, and refrain from
virtuous activities like non-violence, etc., which are considered virtuous by
them. This is an extremely astonishing and perverse phenomenon!  The reason for
this astonishing and perverse phenomenon is that these beings do not have the
true understanding of the real nature of happiness. All beings desire happiness
and dislike misery, but they do not know the right path to happiness, and
mistakenly consider the path of misery as the path of happiness. Non-attachment
is the characteristic of happiness, and attachment is the characteristic of
misery. Activities like killing, falsehood, stealing, etc., which are
unrighteous, are the causes of attachment and hence, the causes of misery.
Because those who engage in violence, falsehood, stealing, and unethical
conduct, always remain agitated and extremely miserable. On the other hand,
those who do not engage in such harmful activities remain peaceful and extremely
happy.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (308) gadaSTisamuccaya kukRtya kRtya bhAse sadA, kRtya akRtya ja tema;
duHkhamAM sukhabuddhi dhare, khasa khaNanArA jema, 80 artha eone kukRtya sadA
kRtya bhAse che, temaja kRtya akRtya jevuM bhAse che; ane khasane khaNanArA
vagerenI jema teo duHkhamAM sukhabuddhithI AkarSAyelA hoya che. vivecana ati
mahamUDha evA bhavAbhinadI jIvonI viparyAsa mati-ulaTI buddhi kevA kevA prakAre
vyakta thAya che, te ahIM batAvyuM cheH -hiMsA, AraMbha vagere je duSTa kRtya
che, kukRtya che, akRtya che, te teone mana sadA kRtyarUpa, karavA gya
kRtyAkRtya lAge che ! ane ahiMsA, anAraMbha vagere je ziSTa kRtya che, sukRtya
vimUDhatA che, te teone akRtyarUpa, nahiM karavA yogya lAge che! Ama hovAthI teo
duHkhane sukha mAnI bese che, ane tevI mithyA sukhabuddhithI AkarSAIne teo te
duHkhamAM ja pravRtti kare che, rAce che, tanmaya thAya che ! jema khasavALe
manuSya khasane khaNavAthI sukha mAne che, ane tethI khaNavAnI pravRtti karyA
kare che tathA jene kIDA paDyA hoya evo keDhIye agninA sevanathI sukha mAnI
temAM pravRtti kare che; tema A viparIta mativALA bhavAbhinaMdI paNa duHkhamaya
saMsAramAM kRtyAkRtyanuM bhAna bhUlI jaI dukhadAyaka evA hiMsAdi kukRtyamAM
pravarte che, ane sukhadAyaka evA ahiMsAdi sukRtyathI nivatte che ! ! e ati
AzcaryakAraka viSama ghaTanA che ! ane A AzcaryakAraka viSama ghaTanAnuM kAraNa
paNa A che, ke A jIvane sukhanA sAcA vAstavika svarUpanuM bhAna nathI. sarva
jIvane sukha priya che ane duHkha apriya che, paNa teo sukhane sAco mArga jANatA
nathI, ne du:khanA mArgane duHkhamAM sukha sukhane mAga mAnI besI-kalpI besI
tene pakaDe che. anAkulatA e buddhi ! sukhanuM lakSaNa che, AkulatA e du:khanuM
lakSaNa che. prANAtipAta-hiMsA, asatya, cerI Adi anArya kAryo AkulatAnA
kAraNarUpa hoI duHkhanA kAraNa che. kAraNa ke je hiMsA kare che, asatya bole
che, cerI kare che, abrahmacaryarUpa durazIla seve che, paradravya grahaNa kare
che-hare che, te sthUla daSTie upalaka rIte jotAM paNa pite aparAdhI hoI,
niraMtara Akula rahyA kare che, ne tethI atyaMta du:khI thayA kare che-e sarva
keIne satata pratyakSa anubhava che. te hiMsA-cerI Adi karanArane aMtamAM kadI
paNa zAMti hatI nathI, hAya ! kadAca pakaDAI jaIza to!-ema sadAya phaphaDATa
rahyA kare che. tethI UlaTuM je prANAtipAta nathI karatA, asatya nathI bolato,
cArI nathI karate, du:zIla nathI seva, pAradravya nathI rAhata, te pite
niraparAdhI heI, niraMtara nirAkula rahyA kare che, ne tethI atyaMta sukhI varyA
kare che. ahiMsaka, satya vakatA,

Page #375 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Deeprayashti: The Trap of Attachment and Suffering (309)  A pure soul finds
peace and tranquility in the end. This is a direct experience for everyone. But
due to the delusion (viparayas), this being has a distorted mind and therefore
follows the wrong path. It desires happiness through Rs'isa (violence) and other
means! Therefore, seeking happiness, it becomes miserable! And abandoning the
path of happiness like ahi'sa (non-violence), it embraces the path of suffering
like hi'sa (violence) and struggles to find happiness, but being corrupted by
happiness, it experiences only suffering! This being needs to go north, but it
takes the southern path! This being desires the nectar of happiness, but it
drinks the poison of suffering!  Similarly, ar'bh (attachment) is the cause of
manifest agitation, and nirar'bh (non-attachment) is the cause of manifest
tranquility. The more ar'bh and upadhi (attachments), the more agitation and
suffering; the more nirar'bh and nirupadhi (non-attachments), the more
tranquility and happiness. This is a self-evident and undeniable truth. Yet, the
being with a deluded mind acts contrary to this, and behaves in the opposite
way. It believes that by engaging in ar'bh and samar'bh (attachment and
accumulation), it will find happiness. Therefore, it engages in acts of hi'sa
(violence), ar'bh (attachment), and papacharan (sinful conduct), accumulating
sin and earning its karma. For example, it believes that wealth brings
happiness, and therefore, it engages in various sinful businesses and ar'bh
(attachments) to acquire wealth, regardless of the means. Such as: agnikarm
(fire-related work), vanakarm (forest-related work), shaktam (labor), bhatakarm
(trading), dantavanijya (ivory trade), lakhvanijya (lac trade), rasavanijya
(perfume trade), keshvanijya (hair trade), vishavanijya (poison trade), etc.
Ar'bh (attachment) is the cause of suffering. It grabs from all sides, and as
ar'bh (attachment) increases, so does its friend, parigrah (grasping). This so-
called parigrah (grasping) also, as its name suggests, holds the being captive,
binding it. Then, this 'grah' (planet, evil spirit, or crocodile) like parigrah
(grasping) holds the being so tightly that even if it wants to escape, it
becomes difficult. It clings and clings, making it difficult to remove. Those
who engage in worldly business or those who hold worldly possessions like
kingdoms, experience this. These unfortunate souls, trapped in the web of
parigrah (grasping), cannot even sleep peacefully at night. Thus, the ar'bh
upadhi (attachment) that the being has created with its own hands becomes a
source of agitation and suffering for the being itself! What one does with one's
hands, one suffers from! The buffalo's horns become a burden to the buffalo
itself!  Parigrah (grasping) is the cause of suffering. Thus, being drawn by the
delusion of happiness in suffering, this being engages in sinful acts like hi'sa
(violence).  x "इ'गाली वण साडी भाडी फोडी सुवज्जए कम्मं । नाळिષ્મ ચૈત્ર કૃતજીલસ
વિજ્ઞવિસર્ચ ।।”—श्री प्रतिક્રમણ સૂત્ર

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dIprAyaSTi : du:khamaya Ara'bha-parigrahanI-khalA (309) suzIla puruSane aMtamAM
sadAya zAMti hoya che--nirAMta hoya che,-A savA~ koInA pratyakSa svAnubhava che.
paNa A jIve te viparyAsane lIdhe ulaTI buddhi dharI che, ne tethI te ulaTA mArgo
pakaDe che. te Rsi'sA Adi karIne sukha pAmavAnI icchA rAkhe che! tethI sukhane
mATe jhavA nAMkhatA te bicArA duHkhI thAya che! ane ahi'sAdi sukhane mAga
cheDIne hiM...sAdi du:khanA mArga pakaDI sukha pAmavAne phAMphAM mAre che, paNa
sukhathI bhraSTa thaI du:kha ja anubhave che! A jIvane javuM che uttara bhaNI,
ne pakaDe che dakSiNanA mAga ! A jIvane joIe che sukhaamRta, paNa pIe che
duHkhaviSa ! temaja Arbha e pragaTa AkulatAnuM kAraNa ane nirArabha pragaTa
nirAkulatAnuM kAraNa che. jeTallI Arabha upAdhi, teTalI AkulatA ne du:kha;
jeTalI nirAra'bha nirupAdhi, teTalI nirAkulatA ne sukha, e pratyakSasiddha evI
nivivAda vAta che. chatAM viparyAsa buddhivALA jIva ethI ja '' kalpI uMdhuM ja
pravatana kare che, ulaTuM ja AcaraNa kare che. te te ema samaje che ke AraMbha
samArabha karavAthI mane sukha sAMpaDaze. eTale te hi'sApradhAna kRtya-ArabhA
AdarI, pApAcaraNa AcarI, pApApArjana kare che, pApanI kamANI kare che. dAkhalA
tarIke-teNe dhanamAM sukha mAnyu che, eTale cena jaina prAreLa game te prakAre
te dhana meLavavA mATe te nAnA prakAranA mahApApI kAMdAnI dhaMdhA-AraMbha Adare
che. jemake-agnikarma, vanakarma, zakaTama, bhATaka karma, daMta vANijya, lAkha
vANijya, rasa vANijya, keza vANijya, viSa vANijya ityAdi.X Arbha e duHkha 4
eTale cAtaraphathI grahe che, ane jema jema AraMbha vadhe che, tema tema
Arabhane mitra parigraha paNa sAtheAsAtha vRddhi pAme che. A nAmacIna parigraha
' paNa peAtAnA nAma pramANe, jIvane 8 pari' pakaDI le che, jakaDI le che. pachI
teA A ' graha' (bhUta athavA duSTa grahu athavA magara ) jevA parigrahanI jIva
para jakaDa-pakaDa evI teA majabUta hAya che, ke temAMthI jIvane chUTavA dhAre
tA paNa chUTavu bhAre paDe che. te parigraha-khalA vaLagI te vaLagI, kADhavI
muzkela paDe che. mATA vyavasAyA ArabhanArA athavA mATI mATI rAjyAdi upAdhi
dhAraNu karanArA janane A rAjane jAtianubhava che. parigrahanI ja'jAlamAM selA
te bApaDAone rAte nIrAMte UMgha paNa AvatI nathI. Ama jIve hAthe karIne vhArelI
mArabha upAdhi jIvane potAne ja paztriharUpa AkulatA upajAvI duHkhanuM kAraNa
thaI paDe che ! hAthanA karyA haiye vAge che! bhesanA zIMgaDA bhesane ja bhArI
paDe che ! parigrahanI malA Ama du:khamAM sukhabuddhithI kheMcAine A jIve
duHkhadAyaka evA hiMsAdi kukRtyamAM x "i'gAlI vaNa sADI bhADI phoDI suvajjae
kammaM  /  nALiSma caitra kRtajIlasa vijJavisarca ||"--zrI pratikramaNa sUtra

Page #376 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(310) This concept is prevalent in the collection of Gadasthi and in the
beginning-acceptance, but it is not prevalent in the virtuous acts of non-
violence, etc., which are conducive to happiness, and in the non-beginning.
Therefore, two well-known examples have been presented here - (1) If someone has
scabies, they feel a sweet itch, so they scratch the scabies, but as a result,
they get inflammation, and the wound burns. (2) If a person has worms, they
believe that they will be removed by non-treatment - roasting, etc., but doing
so increases the disease. Why is it that a living being, tormented by countless
physical and mental sufferings, despite wanting to get rid of those sufferings
in many ways, cannot be freed from them? This question arises for many living
beings, but its true solution is only attained by a few rare living beings.
Until the root cause of suffering is truly known, no matter how much effort is
made to avoid it, suffering cannot be destroyed. And no matter how much
aversion, unpleasantness, and lack there is towards suffering, one has to
experience it. It is well known that all living beings are averse to suffering,
unpleasant, and favorable to happiness and pleasant. All living beings strive to
be free from suffering and to attain happiness. Despite the efforts of all
living beings, it is evident that they experience suffering. Sometimes, some
living beings seem to attain some portion of happiness, but due to the abundance
of suffering, it is seen. "Etc. - Shrimad Rajchandra, Letter No. 694 (755) Thus,
due to the inversion, there is no awareness of the true nature of happiness and
suffering, and therefore, the living being who is attached to the cycle of birth
and death has an inverted activity. There is wrong conduct. Explaining the same
meaning, it is said - Just as those who scratch, their minds are on removing the
scabies. So also, in the case of these beings, there is no examination of their
desires in the objects of enjoyment. || 81 || Explanation - There was a patient
who scratched scabies. Due to excessive scratching, his nails were worn out.
Then, due to living in sandy land, he could not find a piece of wood to scratch
with. He saw a Vaidya (physician) traveler who had taken grass and straw with
him, along with his begging bowl, etc. He asked him for a piece of grass, and he
gave it to him. So he was very satisfied and started to think - Oh! This is
truly blessed! Who has so many tools for scratching? Then he asked him - Friend,
where do you get all these? He said - In the Lat country, etc. What is its use?
He said - To remove the itch of scabies (by scratching). The traveler - If that
is the case, what is the use of this? I will remove your scabies in seven
nights. You take Triphala and...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (310) gadaSTisamuccaya tathA AraMbha-parigrahamAM pravarte che; paNa
sukhadAyaka evA ahiMsAdi sukRtyamAM tathA nirAraMbhamAM pravartatA nathI. te
mATe ahIM be prasiddha daSTAMta rajU karyA che - khasa khaNunAra (1) keIne
khasanuM darada hoya tene mIThI khUjalI Ave, eTale te jema khasane khaNyA kare
che, paNa pariNAme tene baLatarA ja UThe che, lAhya baLe che. (2) keDhIyAne kIDA
paDayA hoya te anisevanathI-zeka vagerethI dUra thaze ema mAne che, paNa tema
karatAM tene vyAdhi UlaTo vadhI paDe che. zArIrika, mAnasika anaMta prakAranA
duHkhAe AkuLavyAkula jIne te duHkhothI chUTavAne bahu bahu prakAre IcchA chatAM,
temAMthI te mukta thaI zakatA nathI tenuM zuM kAraNa? e prazna aneka jIvane
utpanna thayA kare paNa tenuM yathArtha samAdhAna keI virala jIvane ja prApta
thAya che jyAMsudhI duHkhanuM mULa kAraNa yathArthapaNe jANavAmAM na AvyuM hoya
tyAM sudhI te TALavAne mATe game tevo prayatna karavAmAM Ave to paNa duHkhane
kSaya thaI zake nahIM. ane game teTalI aruci, apriyatA ane abhAva te duHkha
pratye hoya chatAM tene anubhavyA ja karavuM paDe. atyaMta suprasiddha che ke
prANI mAtrane duHkha pratikULa, apriya ane sukha anukULa tathA priya che. te
duHkhathI rahita thavA mATe ane sukhanI prApti mATe prANI mAtranuM prayatna che.
prANI mAtranuM evuM prayatna chatAM teo duHkhane anubhava ja karatAM daSTigocara
thAya che. kavacit kaMIka sukhanA aMza keIka prANIne prApta thayA dekhAya che,
to paNa duHkhanI bAhulyatAthI karIne jovAmAM Ave che. " ItyAdi -zrImad
rAjacaMdra, patrAMka 694 (755) Ama viparyAsathI sukhaduHkhanA sAcA svarUpanuM
bhAna nahi hovAthI bhavAbhinaMdI jIvanI ulaTI pravRtti hoya che. asat AcaraNa
hoya che. A ja arthane spaSTa karatAM kahe che - yathA kaNDUyaneSveSAM dhIna
kacchUnivartane  /  bhogAGgeSu tathaiteSAM na tadicchAparikSaye  //  81  //
vRtti --kaI eka khasane khaNunAro daradI hate. khajavALanA atirekathI enA nakha
dhasAI gayA. pachI retALa bhUmimAM nivAsane lIdhe, tene khajavALa dUra karavA
mATe kema karIne taNakhaluM maLyuM nahi. tyAM bhikSApuTikA (jhoLI) vagere sAthe
jeNe tRNune pULo lIdho hato evA vaidya pathikanuM tene darzana thayuM. tenI pAse
teNe eka tRNa mAMgyuM ne eNe tene te dIdhuM. eTale te hayama parituSTa thaze ane
teSa pAmI ci tavavA lAge-aho ! A khare khara dhanya che ! ke jenI pAse ATalA
badhA khajavALavAne hUyana (sAdhano) chepachI teNe tene pUchyuM-vAru, A Ama
ATalA badhA kayAM maLe che ? teNe kahyuM-lATa deza AdimAM. hAre enuM zuM
prayojana che? teNe kahyuM-khasanI khajavALa dUra karavAnuM (kachUka chUvine
da). pathika-je ema che te AnuM zuM kAma che? huM hArI khasane ja sAta rAtamAM
dUra karI dauM. tuM triphalAne ga kara teNe

Page #377 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Dimadrusti:** Just as those who scratch an itch are focused on the means of
scratching, but not on eliminating the itch itself, (311) so too, the mind of
these bhavagamini beings is focused on the objects of desire, but not on the
elimination of desire for those objects.  **Meaning:** Just as the minds of
those who scratch an itch are focused on the act of scratching, but not on
eliminating the itch itself, so too, the minds of these bhavagamini beings are
focused on the objects of desire, but not on eliminating the desire for those
objects.  **Commentary:** The beautiful analogy presented here (see Vritti) is
worth pondering, and its underlying message is worthy of acceptance.  A person
suffering from an itch finds the scratching very pleasurable, and therefore
derives so much joy from scratching that even if their nails wear down from
scratching, the itch doesn't go away! They then seek out other means of
scratching, such as grass or other objects. Now, if a wise physician comes along
and tells them, "Brother, I will completely eliminate this itch for you. Let me
use Triphala," then the person will say, "This itch is better than no itch at
all. It feels good to me, so do whatever it takes to make me scratch." Although
this scratching provides temporary pleasure, it ultimately leads to
inflammation, the itch worsens, and the disease takes root deeper. But just like
a foolish animal, these ignorant beings don't understand this.  Similarly, the
bhavagamini beings are afflicted with the great disease of samsara, which is
like an itch. They experience the sweet itch of desire for worldly objects, and
they try to eliminate this itch by indulging in those objects, but no matter how
much they indulge, the itch doesn't go away. It only intensifies, like a fire
that is fed with fuel. The inflammation of suffering arises, and the disease of
samsara takes root deeper. Instead of finding satisfaction in worldly objects,
they only become more attached to them.  It has been said, "If the itch is gone,
what is the benefit of living without it?" Therefore, they cling to Triphala!
Just tell them where to find it!  They are so engrossed in their desires that
they don't even think about eliminating them. Their minds are focused on the
means of satisfying their desires, but not on the elimination of those desires.
Just as the mind of someone scratching an itch is focused on the means of
scratching, but not on eliminating the itch itself, so too, the minds of these
bhavagamini beings are focused on the objects of desire, but not on the
elimination of desire for those objects. Their ignorance and lack of maturity,
coupled with their attachment to worldly pleasures, keep them trapped in this
cycle.  Here, the word "chuch" refers to the act of grasping, which is a
characteristic of the cycle of birth and death.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dImAdaSTi : khasa khaNanArA jema viSaya sAdhanecachA (311) mati enI
khajavALamAM, khasa maTADavA nahi; tyama tasa mati bhegAMgamAM, na tadicchA
kSayamAMhi ! artha -A khasane khaNanArAonI buddhi jema khajavALamAM ja hoya che,
paNa khasanA maTADavAmAM hotI nathI, tema A bhavAbhinaMdI jInI mati paNa bheganA
aMgarUpa viSayamAM ja hoya che, paNa te bhegAMganI (viSayanI) IcchAnA nAzamAM
hotI nathI. vivecana atre je suMdara Abehuba dRSTAMta ApyuM che (juo vRtti) te
bahu manana karavA jevuM che, ne tene upanayayukta A sAra grahaNa karavA yogya
che - khasanA daradIne khajavALa-caLa ghaNI ja mIThI lAge che, ane tethI te
khaNavAmAM-bedI nAMkhavAmAM tene eTale badho AnaMda Ave che ke khajavALatAM
khajavALatAM tenA nakha ghasAI jAya, te paNa tenI khajavALa khUTatI nathI !
pachI te khajavALavA mATe dRSTAMta tRNa vigere bIjA sAdhana paNa zodhe che. have
tene je kaI vaidyarAja maLI upanaya Ave ane tene kahe ke bhAI ! hAra samULago
khasa ga ja huM kADhI nAMkhuM, mane triphaLAne prayoga karavA de, pachI tyAre
khajavALavAnI paNa paMcAta nahiM rahe, to e sAmuM kaheze-hAre te A hArI
khajavALa ja bhalI che, te ja mane mIThI lAge che, mATe barAbara khajavALAya te
tene upAya hoya te kare. jo ke A khajavALathI tAtkAlika kalpita mIThAza lAgatAM
chatAM pariNAme te baLatarA ja UThe che, khajavALa ulaTI vadhe ja che, ne rega
UMDA mULa nAkhe che, paNa pazu je mUrkha te gAmaDIo gamAra tema samajatA nathI.
te ja prakAre bhavAbhimaMdIrUpa regIne bhavarUpa khasane mahAroga lAgu paDyo
che. tethI A saMsAranA kIDAne viSayecchArUpa mIThI khujalIkhajavALa Ave che, ane
viSayasevanathI te khajavALa dUra karavA mathe che, paNa game teTalA viSayagathI
te maTatI nathI, agnimAM AhutinI jema ulaTI vadhatI jAya che, ne aMtastAparUpa
baLatarA UThe che. viSaya bhegathI saMsAra rega UMDA mULa nAMkhate jAya che.
viSayathI tRpti thavAne badale viSaya kahyuM-khasa maTI gaye, kavinedanA abhAve
(khajavALanA abhAve) jIvavAnuM phaLa zuM? tethI triphalAthI sayuM! A kayAM maLe
che e ja kaho ! ema ne gabharyA che. akSagamanikA (zabdArtha te-cAM za0qca thI
jUnivartine tateSa manag na ratiSThA rije-jema enI mati kaMthanAmAM (khajavALanA
sAdhanomAM) hoya che, paNa te khasanA nivatanamAM-maTADavAmAM hotI nathI; tema A
bhavAbhinaMdIonI mati bhegIMgamAM hoya che, paNa tenI IrachAnA parikSayamAM
bhegerachAnI nivRttimAM nathI hotI; tavanA anabhijJapaNathI ja (ajANupaNAthI )
vayanA paripAka thaye paNa. vAjIkaraNamAM Adara hovAthI. ahIM chUchanuM' prahaNu
bhegakriyAnA upalakSaNavALuM che.

Page #378 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(312) The thirst (trishna) of the accumulation of views (grahasthi) keeps
increasing. Just as fire is not diminished by fuel, in the same way, desire
(kama) is not diminished by poison (visa), but instead becomes more powerful and
grows. This is because due to the delusion that it has never been attained, even
though it has been obtained countless times, the desire of the deluded person
for sense pleasures (kamabhoga) does not subside.  Then, by the grace of the
divine (daivanugraha) or the rise of good fortune (sadabhaga), if some true
spiritual teacher (sadguru) suddenly meets him, he asks that teacher about the
means (sadhana) to cure that itching (khajvala) of desire for sense objects, and
he also desires that it should be achieved only through the means of sense
objects. Then the venerable Sadguru tells him - "O good one! What is this
itching itching doing? Come, I shall quickly destroy the root cause of this
itching, which is the cycle of birth and death (bhavoga). You consume this
triple fruit (tri-phala) of right faith (samyag-darshana), right knowledge
(samyag-jnana) and right conduct (samyag-charitra), then this itching will
automatically subside as its root cause is removed."  But that deluded being
speaks back - "O great one! Alas, this disease remains! I need the means to cure
this itching of my desire for sense objects, which gives me pleasure in
scratching it, so provide me a means that does not obstruct the objects of
enjoyment." Thus, being unaware of the true nature of things (vastu-tattva),
attached to the means of enjoyment (bhoga-sadhana), he does not wish to remove
the disease of transmigration (bhava-roga), considering the objects of senses as
desirable, remaining immersed and drowning in them. And thus, his desire for
enjoyment is not subsided, even until his old age when he has become decrepit
like a dried up old vine, still he tries "Vajikaran" practices, medicinal tonics
and potions to regain youthfulness, becoming a beast of burden for the objects
of desire! His hope does not decay, but he himself decays! His age passes, but
his desire for sense objects does not!  "My age itself turns back" - Sri
Bhartrihari. "The age does not turn back, the Vishvamitras" - Sri Ratnakara
Pachisi.  "Desire is not diminished by objects, like fire by fuel. Rather, its
power increases and grows more. Though obtained countless times, the desire of
the deluded for sense pleasures does not subside." - Sri Yashovijayji's
Adhyatma-sara. "Verily, by no means does the great thirst for objects in men,
born with the disease of birth, subside." - Sri Shubhachandra's Jnanaarnava.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (312) gadaSTisamuccaya tRSNA vadhatI jAya che. IdhanathI-baLataNathI agni jema
kSINa thato nathI, tema viSathI kAma kSINa thato nathI, ulaTo vizeSa baLavAna
banI vRddhi pAme che. kAraNa ke anaMta vAra prApta thayA chatAM jANe kadI prApta
na thayA hoya evA bhramane lIdhe kAmabhegene viSe mUDha jananI icchA upazamatI
nathI !' pachI tene daivAnuge-sadbhAgyanA udayathI kaI sadgururUpa savaidyane
Akasmika bheTe thaI jAya, te te viSayecchArUpa khajavALa-caLane sAdhanaupAya
(puNyarUpa) pUche che, ane te paNa viSayasAdhanathI ja thAya ema Icche che.
eTale zrI sadguru tene kahe che-he bhadra ! A khajavALa khajavALa zuM kare che?
cAla, huM tyAre A khajavALanA mULarUpa bhavoga ja alpa samayamAM maTADI dauM, A
samyam darzana-jJAna-cAritrarUpa triphalAnuM tuM sevana kara, eTale ApoApa te
khajavALa paNa enuM mULa kAraNa dUra thatAM maTI jaze. paNa te mehamUDha jIva
vaLatuM ema bole che-he mahAnubhAva! mahAre e roga che rahyo ! mahAre te A mArI
viSayecchAnI khajavALa-caLanuM sAdhana joIe che, te khaNavAmAMja -tene khedI
nAMkhavAmAMja mane te mIThAza lAge che, mATe tene bAdha viSaya sAdhana na Ave
evuM sAdhana hoya te kaho. Ama te vastutattvathI anabhijJaIcchA ajANa heI,
bhogasAdhanamAM Asakta rahI, bhavareganuM nivAraNa Icchate nathI, ane viSayane
ja ISTa mAnI temAM ja racyApacyA rahe che, temAMja nimagna thAya che, temAM ja
DUbI jAya che! ane Ama tenI bhogecchAnI nivRtti thatI nathI, te eTale sudhI ke
uMmara pAkI gaI hoya, pite gharaDakhakha bUDhA bela jevo thaI gayo hoya, chatAM
viSayAbhilASanA atirekathI puna: juvAnInuM jema prApta karavAne te "vAjIkaraNa"
prayoga,dhAtupuSTine vaidyaka prayoga kare che, rasAyana seve che, ne ghaDA jevI
tAkAta meLavavA Icchata te viSayane gadheDe bane che! AzA jIrNa thatI nathI, te
ja jIrNa thAya che ! vaya jAya che, paNa viSayAbhilASa ja nathI ! ! "mArA = nI
vayameva vaLa-zrI bhartuhari. nataM vayo no vizvAmitrA : '-zrI ratnAkara pacIzI
+ "viSayaiH kSIyate kAmo ne dhanairiva pAvakaH  /  pratyuta
prollasacchaktirbhUya evopavarddhate  //
aprAptavanamAnuzcairavApteSvapyanaMtazaH  /  kAmabhogeSu mUDhAnAM samIhA
nopazAmyati  /  / " zrI yazovijayajIta adhyAtmasAra, " na hi kenApyupAyena
janmajAtaGkasaMbhavA  /  viSayeSu mahAtRSNA pazya puMsAM prazAmyati"  //  zrI
zubhacaMdrAcAryajIta zrI jJAnArNava

Page #379 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Dīmādṛṣṭiḥ 55dhūlithī pitāna hāthe ātmāne phāṃse! (313) Atre bhegasādhane
icchāpariakṣaya nathī em kahyuṃ, te uparathī bhegakriyāne pariakṣaya pana nathī
thato em upalakṣaṇathī samajvānuṃ che, kāraṇa ke bhegakiyā pana bhegaicchā vinā
upajatī nathī, eṭale gaicchāne pariakṣaya-nāśa na hoya te bhegakiyāne pana
pariakṣaya nathī thato. Icchā-vāsanā ṭaḷe nahiṃ tyāṃ sudhī bhegapravṛtti pana
ṭaḷe nahiṃ. Jaba icchākā nāśa taba, miṭe anādi bhūl" "—Śrīmad rājacandrajī. Ane
kāraṇa em che tethī– Ātmānaṃ pāśayanti'te sadāsaccheṣṭayā bhṛśam | Pāpadhūlyā
jaḍāḥ kāryamavicāryaiva tattvataḥ ||82|| Kaceṣṭāthī jaḍa e sadā, nākhe chvane
pāśa; Pāpa dhūḷathī-tāvathī, vinā kārya vimāsa. 82, artha –Ā jaḍa che, tattvathī
kārya vicāryā vinā ja, atyaṃtapane asat ceṣṭāthī ātmāne pāpadhūlivade sadā pāśa
nāṃkhe che. Vivecana upramāṃ kahyuṃ tem sthiti hovāthī, ā bhavābhinaṃdī jīva
kṣaṇika viṣayarūpa kusukhamāṃ– khoṭā māni līdhelā kalpita sukhamāṃ āsakt hoi, te
viṣayani prāpti arthe hiṃsā kare che, asatya bole che, cerī kare che, kuśīla
seve che, parigṛha vadhāre pitānā hāthe che, āraṃbha ādi kare che, ane te te
pāpasthānakono sevanthī te phāṃso! Jñānāvaraṇādi pāpakarmma rūpa dhūli–raja
ātmāmāṃ nāṃkhī pitānā ātmāne malina kare che! Te pāpadhūlithī ātmāne pāśa nāṃkhe
che, pite pitāne bāṃdhe che, pite pitāne verī thaiī ātmaghātī bane che! Ane āma
je pitānā hāthe gaḷe phāṃse nāṃkhe che, ātmāmāṃ dhūḷ nāṃkhe che, te mūrkha,
jaḍa, maṃdabuddhi kahevā gyā che. Kāraṇa ke koī māṇasa potānā hāthe māthāmāṃ
dhūḷ nāṃkhate heya, te āpaṇe tene mūrkha divāne mānīe chīe, gāṃḍāni ispītālane
lāyak gade pāgal Vṛttiḥ– Gābhanaṃ-ātmāne, jīvane, pārāti–pāśa bāṃdhe che, jakaḍī
race che, gaṃṭhī le che, te ā adhikṛta–prastuta prāṇīo, sā sadā-sarvakāla
aṣṭayā-asat ceṣṭāthī, prāṇutipāta–āraṃbharūpa evī. Hetubhūta asat ceṣṭāvade
karīne, sūrāpu-atyaṃta. Kenāvade pāśa bāṃdhe che? te māṭe kahyuṃ ke–pāpūjā-
pāpadhūlivade, jñānāvaraṇa ādi lakṣaṇarūpa pāpadhūlivade, – jaḍe, maṃda, vivāva-
kārya vicāryā vinā ja, tarasatā-tāvathī, paramārthathī, kṣaṇika kasukhamāṃ
samāpaṇāthī teo ātmāne pāśa nāṃkhe che.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dImAdaSTiH 55dhUlithI pitAnA hAthe AtmAne phAMse ! (313) atre bhegasAdhanane
IcchAparikSaya nathI ema kahyuM, te uparathI bhegakriyAne parikSaya paNa nathI
thato ema upalakSaNathI samajavAnuM che, kAraNa ke bhegakiyA paNa bhegaIcchA
vinA upajatI nathI, eTale gaIcchAne parikSaya-nAza na hoya te bhegakiyAne paNa
parikSaya nathI thatuM. IcchA-vAsanA TaLe nahiM tyAM sudhI bhegapravRtti paNa
TaLe nahiM. jaba IcchAkA nAza taba, miTe anAdi bhUla" "--zrImad rAjacaMdrajI.
ane kAraNa ema che tethI- AtmAnaM pAzayantyete sadAsacceSTayA bhRzam  /
pApadhUlyA jaDAH kAryamavicAyaiva tattvataH  // 82 //  kaceSTAthI jaDa e sadA,
nAkhe chavane pAza; pApa dhULathI-tAvathI, vinA kArya vimAsa. 82, artha -A jaDa
che, tatvathI kArya vicAryA vinA ja, atyaMtapaNe asat ceSTAthI AtmAne
pApadhUlivaDe sadA pAza nAMkhe che. vivecana uparamAM kahyuM tema sthiti
hovAthI, A bhavAbhinaMdI jIva kSaNika viSayarUpa kusukhamAM- khoTA mAnI lIdhelA
kalpita sukhamAM Asakta hoI, te viSayanI prApti arthe hiMsA kare che, asatya
bole che, cerI kare che, kuzIla seve che, parigraha vadhAre pitAnA hAthe che,
AraMbha Adi kare che, ane te te pApasthAnakonA sevanathI te phAMso !
jJAnAvaraNAdi pApakarma rUpa dhUli-raja AtmAmAM nAMkhI pitAnA AtmAne malina kare
che ! te pApadhUlithI AtmAne pAza nAMkhe che, pite pitAne bAMdhe che, pite
pitAne verI thaI AtmaghAtI bane che! ane Ama je pitAnA hAthe gaLe phAMse nAMkhe
che, AtmAmAM dhULa nAMkhe che, te mUrkha, jaDa, maMdabuddhi kahevA gya che.
kAraNa ke koI mANasa potAnA hAthe mAthAmAM dhULa nAMkhate heya, te ApaNe tene
mUrkha divAne mAnIe chIe, gAMDAnI ispItAlane lAyaka gaDe pAgala vRttiH-
gAbhanaM-AtmAne, jIvane, pArAti-pAza bAMdhe che, jakaDI race che, gaMThI le che,
te A adhikRta-prastuta prANIo, sA sadA-sarvakAla aSTayA-asata ceSTAthI,
prANutipAta-AraMbharUpa evI. hetubhUta asat ceSTAvaDe karIne, sUrApu-atyaMta.
kenAvaDe pAza bAMdhe che ? te mATe kahyuM ke-pApUjA-pApadhUlivaDe, jJAnAvaraNa
Adi lakSaNarUpa pApadhUlivaDe, - jaDe, maMda, vivAva-kArya vicAryA vinA ja,
tarasatA-tAvathI, paramArthathI, kSaNika kasukhamAM samApaNAthI teo AtmAne pAza
nAMkhe che.

Page #380 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(314) We count the collection of yogic views and laugh at its foolishness. After
that, to throw the dust of sin into the soul, which is more precious than the
priceless Chintamani gem, and to make it impure, how much foolishness should it
be considered? Indeed! Those who are attached to worldly pleasures and throw
dust on the soul are fools, mad, insane, and worthy of a mental asylum. Because
they are intoxicated with worldly pleasures and have become insane! “In the womb
of the mother, the most sacred soul is born – the bearer of the soul. For
example – धर्मबीजं परं प्राप्य मानुष्यं कर्मभूमिषु । न सत्कर्मकृषावस्य
प्रयतन्तेऽल्पमेधसः ॥ ८३ ॥ Having obtained the supreme seed of Dharma in the
field of karma, human birth; Those of little intelligence do not strive in the
cultivation of good deeds. 83, Meaning – Having obtained the supreme seed of
Dharma in the field of karma, human birth, those of little intelligence do not
strive in the cultivation of good deeds. Discussion “From the accumulation of
great merit, the human body is obtained, oh! One of the cycles of birth and
death is avoided.” – Shrimad Rajchandraji’s Moksha Mala Cultivation of good
deeds, the seed of Dharma in the field of karma. The main cause of the
attainment of Dharma – the supreme seed of Dharma is human birth. Only when
there is a seed is there a possibility of a sprout, because only when there is
human birth is there a seed. Only when there is a seed can a sprout grow, and
only in human birth can full wisdom arise and enter the royal path of liberation
– liberation cannot be attained from any other body. Therefore, this human body
is the best of all. The wise say that many, many accumulations of merit are
gathered – therefore, when the merit shines, this human incarnation is obtained,
this human body is extremely rare. Such human birth is also obtained by the
accumulation of merit, but Tendency – Dharma is the seed of Dharma, the cause of
Dharma. But – supreme, main, – obtained, did it? What is it – human birth.
Where? Then it is – in the field of karma, like the earth. What? Then it is –
the cultivation of good deeds, the cultivation of good deeds like the seed of
Dharma, etc., but – these, this seed of Dharma, and those of little intelligence
do not strive.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (314) yogadaSTisamucaya gaNue chIe, ne tenI mUrkhatA para hasIe chIe. te pachI
A to amUlya cintAmaNi ratna karatAM paNa adhika evA AtmAmAM pApa dhUla nAMkhI
tene malina kare, te te keTalI badhI mUrkhatAnuM kAma gaNavuM joIe? kharekhara !
viSayAsaktithI pAyadhUli AtmAmAM nAMkhanArA mahamUDha bhavAbhinaMdI jI mUrkha,
divAnA, pAgala ja che, gAMDAnI ispitAlane lAyaka manuSya ja che. kAraNa ke teo
mahamadirAthI masta thaI unmatta banyA che ! "vavA momInamAM ja atimunImUi nAra
-bhartuhari. dAkhalA tarIke - dharmabIjaM paraM prApya mAnuSyaM karmabhUmiSu  /
na satkarmakRSAvasya prayatante'lpamedhasaH  //  83  //  karma bhUmimAM laha
parama, dharma bIja nara janma; tasa sata karma kRSi viSe, maMda kare na
prayatna. 83, artha -karmabhUmimAM parama dhama bIjarUpa manuSyapaNuM pAmIne,
enI satkarmarUpa kRSimAM (khetImAM) alpa mativALAo prayatna karatA nathI.
vivecana "bahu puNya kerA puMjathI zubha deha mAnavane maLe, te are!
bhavacakrano Tanahi eke TaLe."-zrImad rAjacaMdrajIpraNIta mokSamALA
karmabhUmimAM dharmabIjanI sat karma khetI. dharmanI prAptimAM bIjarUpa pradhAna
kAraNu-parama dharmabIja manuSyapaNuM che. bIja hoya te ja aMkura phUTavAno
saMbhava che, kAraNa ke manuSyapaNuM hoya te ja bIjA Anu. paMgika kAraNene jega
banI zake che, ane manuSyapaNAmAM ja pUrNa sadavivekane udaya thaI mokSanA
rAjamArgamAM praveza thaI zake che,-bIjA keI dehathI mokSanI prApti thaI zakatI
nathI. eTalA mATe A mAnava deha sarvathI uttama che. jJAnIo kahe che ke ghaNA
ghaNA puNyane puMja bhege thAya-mATe puNyazazi ekaTho thAya, tyAre A manakho
avatAra maLe che, A mAnavadeha parama durlabha che. AvuM manuSyapaNuM paNa puNya
jege maLyuM hoya, paNa vRtti -dharmI dharmabIja, dharma kAraNa. paraM-para,
pradhAna, -prApta karI, te karyuM? te kenAguca-manuSyapaNuM. kyAM ? to ke mumag-
bharata Adi karmabhUmimAM. zuM? te ke-saMvarmapI-sata karma kRSimAM, dhama
bIjAdhAna Adi rUpa satakarmanI khetImAM, baca-AnI, A dhamaM bIjanI, ne
pratasejala-a85mativALA prayatna karatA nathI.

Page #381 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  The Cultivation of Good Karma: A Seed of Dharma in the Land of Dharma  (315)
One who is born in an un-Aryan land, even their human birth is wasted. This is
because the attainment of Dharma is rare in such a land. Even if Dharma is
present, it is likely to be lost. Therefore, an Aryan land is equally essential
for the attainment of Dharma.   "Aryan" refers to those who have quickly
distanced themselves from all unworthy, discardable Dharmas. They are honorable
people who do not engage in un-Aryan actions like violence, deceit, lust, and
attachment. They practice the virtues of right food, right speech, and right
conduct. The land where such cultured Aryans reside is called an Aryan land.
There are six types of Aryans: those who are Aryan by land, by caste, by family,
by karma, by knowledge, and by language. Those born in the fifteen Karmabhumi
are considered Aryan by land, and so on.  The fifteen Karmabhumi are: the five
Bharat, the five Arvat, and the five Videh, excluding Devakuru and Uttar Kuru.
These are called Karmabhumi because they are the birthplace of the Tirthankaras,
the enlightened beings who are the knowers, doers, and teachers of the path of
liberation, the path of right faith, right knowledge, and right conduct. It is
here that those who are born attain liberation, not elsewhere. Therefore, these
Karmabhumi are the lands of liberation. They are called Karmabhumi because they
are the lands where the efforts for liberation, the efforts of karma, are
successful and lead to liberation.  However, even if one is fortunate enough to
be born with the precious seed of Dharma, the seed of a noble human birth, and
even if one is born in an Aryan land, such as the Bharat, Arvat, or Videh, what
is the use if one does not sow this seed, nurture it, and cultivate it with good
karma? Such a person is undoubtedly foolish, for they waste this precious human
birth, they do not strive for self-liberation, and they do not fulfill their
purpose.  Just as a seed that is not sown in suitable soil, nurtured, and cared
for will rot and perish, so too will the seed of Dharma. But if it is sown in
fertile ground, it will multiply into millions, billions, trillions, countless,
infinite seeds. For example, a small seed of a banyan tree, when sown, grows
into a large banyan tree. This banyan tree contains countless seeds, each of
which produces countless more seeds. Thus, the cycle continues infinitely.   * *
*  *  "Bapatrathah Sadho Ruttih Ba:" - Sri Shilaankaacharyakut Suyagdang Tika.
"Martaiyatvaar Sharshamoomachodchattr Revanuyuttaravu:" - Sri Tatvaarthasutra

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dImAdaSTi dharmabhUmimAM dharmabIjanI satakarma khetI (315) je anArya
kSetrabhUmimAM janmavuM thayuM hoya, te te manuSyapaNuM paNa aphaLa jAya che,
kAraNa ke evI anArya bhUmimAM dharma saMskAranuM durlabhapaNuM che, ulaTuM tyAM
te dharmasaMskAra hoya topaNa cAlyA javAno saMbhava che, mATe dharmanI prAptimAM
AryakSetranI paNa teTalI ja AvazyakatA che. " Arya' eTale sarva heya-tyAgavA
yogya dharmothI je jaldI dUrathI cAlyA gayelA che, te mAnanIya jana. hiMsA-cerI-
paradA rAgamana vagere anArya kArya je AcaratA nathI, ane khAdyAkhAdya,
paiyApeya, gamyAgamya vagere viveka je kare che, evA saMskArI Arya sajajana jyAM
vase che te AyakSetra che. Arya cha prakAranA che-kSetra Arya, jAti Arya, kula
Arya, karma Arya, zi95 Arya ane bhASA Aya. paMdara karmabhUmimAM janmelA te
kSetra Arya che, ityAdi. devakuru *, uttarakurune bAda karI, pAMca bharata,
pAMca aravata ne pAMca videha-e paMdara karmabhUmi kahevAya che, kAraNa ke
saMsAra durgane aMta karanArA samyagadarzana jJAna-cAritrarUpa mekSamArganA
jJAtA, kartA ne upadeza evA bhagavAna paramarSi tIrtha kare atre upaje che. atre
ja janmelA siddha thAya che, anyatra nahiM. eTalA mATe mekSArtha kamanI je
siddhibhUmio che, te karmabhUmi che. jyAM mokSa mATe puruSArtha karmavega
saphaLa thAya che-siddha thAya che, tene karmabhUmi nAma barAbara ghaTe che.
paNa AvuM pradhAna dharmabIjarUpa uttama manuSyapaNuM maLyuM hoya, ane
bharatakSetrAdi karmabhUmirUpa AryakSetra paNa sAMpaDayuM hoya, chatAM e dharma
bIjane vAvI, UgADI, temAMthI satkarmarUpa khetI na kare, tene kheDavAno prayatna
na kare, te zuM kAmanuM ? tevA manuSya te khacita alpamativALA kahevA gya che,
kAraNa ke te tevuM uttama manuSyapaNuM hArI jAya che, tene vega pAmI AtmArtha-
AtmakalyANa sAdhatA nathI, potAnuM kAma kADhI letA nathI. keI bIja hoya, tene
yogya bhUmimAM je vAvavAmAM na Ave, UgADavAmAM na Ave, ne tene nakAmuM paDayuM
rahevA devAmAM Ave, te te paDaghuM paDayuM saDI jAya ne nAza pAme. paNa je tene
sugya bhUmimAM vAvyuM hoya, te te eka bIjamAMthI bIjamAMthI lAkho, karoDa,
abajo, asaMkhya, anaMta bIja UgI nIkaLe. dAkhalA vRkSa tarIke-vaDanuM eka nAnuM
sarakhuM bIja vAvyuM hoya, temAMthI moTuM vaTavRkSa phAlIlI nIkaLe che. te
vaTavRkSamAM anaMta bIja hoya che, te pratyekamAMthI pAchA anaMta bIja nIpaje
che. ema anaMta paraMparA cAlyA ja kare che. tema * * bApAtrAtaH sAdho rUtti bA:
- zrI zIlAMkAcAryakuta sUyagaDAMga TIkA. "marataiyatavAra zarSamUmacoDacatra
revanyuttaravuM: " zrI tatvArthasUtra

Page #382 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(316) If you have been blessed with the human form, which is the seed of Dharma,
and have cultivated it with good conduct in the field of karma, you will be
bound to an infinite chain of auspiciousness. In this field of Dharma, which is
also a field of karma, there is a perpetual battle between the Pandavas, who
represent good conduct, and the Kauravas, who represent evil conduct. When you
overcome evil tendencies with the power of your soul, through the true effort of
karma yoga, and good conduct prevails, then the cultivation of the seed of
Dharma begins, and you will progressively attain a series of auspicious states.
Here, the word "karmabhoomi" is very significant. It suggests that just as we
have to cultivate crops like grains in the field of karma, sowing seeds and
nurturing them to grow, so too, you, who have attained the karmabhoomi, have
been born in this field of karma. Therefore, strive for the true effort of karma
yoga! Strive! Become virtuous! Become like a lotus! Sow this excellent seed of
human form, which is the seed of Dharma, and cultivate it with the practice of
good karma. Nurture it with the watering of the worship of the true Dharma, so
that it may grow, flourish, and bear infinite fruits. If you desire the ultimate
goal, then make the true effort, taking the name of the state of existence,
etc., and do not cut off the soul. O human! Keep in mind the goal of your own
nature, and cultivate the five great vows, which are like grains. Then, the
qualities of the transient vision, knowledge, and conduct, etc., will be
produced like grains, filling the house of your soul. Then, in your own realm of
the soul, there will be a perpetual abundance and prosperity of supreme bliss.
Thus, you will gather the happiness of the soul for an infinite period of time.
This karmabhoomi is giving a message to the humans of this karmabhoomi!
Cultivate the grains of the five great vows, keeping in mind the goal of your
own nature, and strive for the means. The transient vision, knowledge, and
conduct, etc., are the qualities that will be produced, filling the house of
your soul. The supreme vision has entered my realm, and supreme bliss and
prosperity have come to my land. Devchandra and Jinchandra have experienced
this, and the happiness of the soul will follow them for an infinite period of
time. O Shri Namin, the Lord of the Jains, the cloud of mercy! Shri
Devchandraji. + "In the field of Dharma, the field of Kuru, the warriors are
gathered, ready to fight. What are my Pandavas doing, Sanjay?" Shri Bhagavad
Gita, 1-1

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (316) yogadaSTisamuracaya dharmabIjarUpa manuSyapaNuM sAMpaDayuM hoya, tene
satakamoga vaDe karIne karmakSetrarU5 regya bhUmimAM vAgyuM hoya, te temAMthI
anaMta kalyANaparaMparAne anubaMdha thayA ja kare che. A dhamakSetrarUpa
kurakSetramAM-karmakSetramAM zubhavRttirUpa pAMDe ane azubha vRttirUpa kauranuM
sanAtana yuddha cAlyA kare che. temAM sakarmayogarUpa satya
puruSArthathIAtmaparAkramathI jyAre asad vRttione dabAvI daI savRttio vijayI
bane che, tyAre paramArthathI dharmabIjanI khetI zarU thAya che ema samajavuM,
ane pachI uttarottara kalyANanI zreNI prApta thayA kare che. te - atre
"karmabhUmi' ema je zabda bharatAdi kSetrane mATe che, te ghaNe arthasUcaka che,
ane te ema sUcave che ke-jema karmabhUmimAM dhAnya AdinI khetI karavI paDe che,
bIjane vAvI tenuM paripeSaNa karI tenI vRddhi karavI paDe che, karmabhUmi pAmI
tema te manuSya ! tame paNa A karmabhUmimAM janmyA che, te satkarma karmacagI
rU5 puruSArthamAM prayatna kare ! prayatna kare ! satkarmaga sAdhI sAcA thAo!
kamalegI bane ! A uttama dharmabIjarUpa manuSyapaNane vAvI sat karmarUpa khetI
kare, saddharma ArAdhanArUpa jalasiMcanavaDe tenuM paripaSaNa karI vRddhi
pamADe-jethI karIne te dharma bIja UgI nIkaLI, phAlIphUlI anaMtagaNuM phaLa
paripAka Apaze. jo icacha paramArtha te, kare satya puruSArtha bhavasthiti Adi
nAma laI, cheda nahi AtmAtha." zrImad rAjacaMdrajI praNIta zrI Atmasiddhi ahe
manuSya ! nija svarUpanuM sAdhyapaNuM lakSamAM rAkhI je tame paMca mahAvratarUpa
dhAnyanI khetI karaze, te kSAyika darzana-jJAna-cAritra vagere guNarUpadhAnya
niSpanna thaI AtmAnA gharane bharI deze, ane pachI tamArA AtmapradezamAM
paramAnaMda rUpa subhikSa-sukALa vartaze, eTale tame sAdi anaMtakAla Atmasukha
bhegavaze. Ama A karmabhUmi jANe A karmabhUminA manuSyane saMdeza ApI rahI che !
paMca mahAvrata dhAnya taNuM karSaNa vadhyA re, sAdhyabhAva nija thApI,
sAdhanatAe sadhyA re; kSAyika darisana jJAna, caraNa guNa upanyA re, Adika bahu
guNa sasya, Atama ghara nIpajyA re. prabhudarisaNa mahAmaha teNe paravezameM re,
paramAnaMda subhikSa thayA muja dezameM re; devacaMdra jinacaMdra taNe anubhava
kare re, sAdi anaMta kALa Atama sukha anusare re zrI nami jinavara seva
ghanAghana ume ?zrI devacaMdrajI. + "dharmakSetre kurukSetre samavetA
yuyutsatraH  /  mAmakAH pANDavAzcava kimakurvata saMjaya  // " zrI bhagavad
gItA, 1-1

Page #383 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  English Translation:  **With a discerning vision, embrace the field of karma
and become a karma-vegi!**  (317) Indeed!  Humanity is the expectant cause in
the attainment of Dharma and self-realization.  The manifestation of the
instrumental cause, such as the vision of the Lord, and the material cause,
which manifests as the result of the self, is the success of that expectant
cause, that is its account.  Otherwise, what is the point of this existence?
What if one dies?  There is no account for it.  Therefore, attaining the
instrumental cause in the form of the right Dharma, and manifesting the material
cause in the form of the soul, is the cultivation of this human birth, which is
the seed of Dharma.  “The human birth is the first accumulation, know that as
the expectant cause; the instrumental cause is dependent on the material cause,
that is the account, says Shri Arnatha.  The purpose of the instrumental cause
is the Jinaraja, the nectar of equality; the attainment is dependent on the
Lord, this is the rule...says Shri Arnatha.  “The purpose of birth is fulfilled,
that is the day of success; the world takes refuge in the feet of the Jina, I
bow down with joy.” - Shri Devchandraji.  “The human body is rare, as described
in ten examples, it is attained through great merit; hurry up and make it
meaningful, do not return to this world again.” - (Dr. Bhagwandas)  But the
fools, the crown jewels of fools, with their dull intellect, are lovers of
existence, and instead of making this human birth, which is the seed of Dharma,
meaningful, they waste that seed!  They lose their precious human life, which is
like a priceless Cintamani gem, in various kinds of vices, false pride,
pleasure, objects of desire, and passions!  They act like fools who throw away a
Cintamani gem to scare away a crow!  Therefore, they experience a “wasted
incarnation.”  “What increases with wealth and power?  Tell me, does it increase
with family or relatives?  This is the wrong path; the increase of the world
loses the human body, do not think about it, oh!  You have only one moment!” -
Shri Moksha Mala  1 Then what?  **बडि शामिषवत्तुच्छे कुसुखे दारुणोदये ।
सक्तास्त्यजन्ति सच्चेष्टां धिगहो दारुणं तमः ॥ ८४ ॥**  Commentary -
**शनिवव7-डिशामिष** like this, is an example; that is, like the flesh of a fish's
throat, **तु-तुच७**, insignificant, **सुमुकुसुख** in, the pleasure arising from
evil company, **राहथे दारुण उदयवाळा**, with a terrible rise, with a fierce
result, - this is the language of the scriptures.  **सा:-सक्त**, old, greedy,
what?  They abandon **सद-साचेश्ता**, the true desire, the means of Dharma.  This
karma is a fault, it...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dImAdaSTi karmabhUmi pAmI karmavegI thAo ! (317 ) kharekhara ! manuSyapaNuM e
dharmaprAptimAM-AtmasiddhimAM apekSA kAraNa che. prabhudarzana Adi nimitta
kAraNa pAmI, AtmapariNAmarUpa upAdAna kAraNa je pragaTe te ja te apekSA
kAraNanuM saphaLa paNuM che, te ja te lekhe che. nahiM te saMmUThThima jema jo
te zuM? ne mue toye zuM? tene kAMI hisAba nathI. mATe saddharmarUpa nimitta pAmI
AtmArUpa upAdAnane pragaTAve, e ja A dharma bIjarUpa manuSyapaNAnI khetI che.
"nara gati paDhama saMghayaNa te apekSA jANe; nimittAzrita upAdAna, tehane lekhe
ANepraName zrI aranAtha. nimitta hetu jinarAja, samatA amRta khANI; prabhu
avalaMbana siddhi, niyamA eha vakhANI...praName. "janma kRtArtha tehane re,
divasa saphala paNa tAsa; jagata zaraNa jina caraNane re, vaMde dhariya ullAsa.
"--zrI devacaMdrajI. "daza daSTAMte durlabha mAnavadeha A, prApta thAya che mahA
puNya saMga je; utAvaLe karavuM te sArthaka ehanuM, pharI pharI bAjhe nahi e
jaga je."-(DaoN. bhagavAnadAsa) paNa mUrkhaziromaNi evA maMdabuddhi
bhavAbhinaMdI che Ama dharmabIjarUpa manuSyapaNAnuM sArthakaya karavAne badale
te bIjane veDaphI nAMkhe che ! aneka prakAranA durAcAramAM, mithyAbhimAnamAM,
pramAdamAM, viSayamAM ne kaSAyamAM teo amUlya cintAmaNi ratna samAna manuSya
jIvana gumAvI de che! ne kAgaDAne uDADavA mATe ciMtAmaNi ratna phagAvI denAra
mUrkha jevuM kArya kare che ! tethI temane "eLe gayo avatAra' thAya che. "lakSmI
ane adhikAra vadhatAM zuM vadhyuM ? te te kaho, zuM kuTuMba ke parivArathI
vadhavApaNuM? e naya grahe; vadhavApaNuM saMsAranuM naradehane hArI ja, ene
vicAra nahiM ahoho ! eka paLa tamane ho !"-zrI mokSamALA 1 tyAre zuM ? baDi
zAmiSavattucche kusukhe dAruNodaye  /  saktAstyajanti sacceSTAM dhigaho dAruNaM
tamaH  //  84  //  vRtti - zanivava7-DizAmiSa jevA, e nidarzana-udAharaNa che;
eTale ke mAchalAnA gaLAnA mAMsa jevA, tu-tuca7, alpa, sumu-kusukhamAM, duSTa
bhegathI upajatA kusukhamAM, rAhathe dAruNa udayavALA, raudra vipAkavALA,- A
samaya (Agama) paribhASA che. sA:-sakta, vRddha, lupI, zuM ? te ke sthAnita
sada-sAceSTA tyaje che, dharmasAdhana saje che. A karmane doSa che, te

Page #384 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(318) The foolish ones, attached to the vile pleasures of the senses, abandon
the noble endeavors. Alas! Dreadful is their state here!   The meaning is: Those
who are attached to the vile, insignificant pleasures like the flesh of fish's
neck, and the dreadful karmic fruits, abandon the noble spiritual practices.
Alas! Dreadful is their state of ignorance!  The one who does not make the human
birth meaningful by practicing the religion, but instead wastes it; who does not
cultivate the seed of Dharma in the form of human birth, but instead lets it
rot; who does not engage in righteous earning, but instead loses the capital out
of greed - such a person engages in harmful activities instead of profit.  Just
as a fish gets trapped and suffers greatly after being lured by the flesh of its
own neck placed as bait, similarly the living being gets trapped and suffers
terribly after being lured by the vile sensual pleasures placed by the deceitful
'fisherman'.   Just as the fish, due to the greed of the tongue, rushes towards
the insignificant flesh and gets trapped, similarly the living being, due to the
subjugation of the senses, becomes intoxicated and gets trapped. Thereafter,
they experience dreadful sufferings of the hellish states.  Thus, due to the
greed of the senses, just as the fish suffers, similarly the elephant
intoxicated by pride gets bound, the moth burns itself in the flame, the bee
drowns in the lotus, and the deer gets trapped in the hunter's net. In this way,
the living being experiences dreadful karmic fruits due to the subjugation of
each sense organ to its respective sense object.  Then, what to say about the
one in whom all five senses are free - the one who delights in the cycle of
births and deaths? Surely, they must experience immense suffering.  "O bees,
moths, deer and others! Alas, they experience various pains due to the
intoxicating taste of sensual pleasures. Woe unto them for their bitter end!" -
As said by Shri Vinayavijayaji in 'Shantasudharasam', the meaning is: Alas!
Dreadful is their state of ignorance, which is the cause of their misery.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (318) gadarisarbhAzaya dANu udayI gala samA, tucha kusukhe sakta; tyaje
suceSTA-dhika ahe, dAruNa tamane atra! 84 artha -baDizAmiSa eTale mAchalAnA
gaLAnA mAMsa jevA tuccha, tathA dAruNa udaya-vipAkavALA kusukhamAM sakta thayelA
teo saceSTA tyaje che! aho ! dAruNa tamaneajJAna aMdhakArane dhikkAra ho !
vivecana te bhavAbhinaMdI je manuSya janmanuM sArthakya te karatA nathI, paNa
ulaTuM tene veDaphI nAMkhe che; manuSya avatArarUpa dharmabIjanI khetI karavI te
dUra rahI, paNa te bIjane ja saDAvI nAMkhe che ! kamANI karavI te dUra rahI,
ulaTI mUDI gumAvI galanI lAlace nukazAnI ja kare che ! naphAnA badale boTane
vyApAra kare che ! kAraNa bUrA hAla ke teo mAchalAnA gaLAnA mAMsa jevA tuccha
ane dAruNa-bhayaMkara vipAkavALA duSTa bhegajanya viSayasukhamAM sakta thAya
che. mAchalAne lalacAvavA mATe macchImAre mAchalAnA gaLAnuM mAMsa-gala AramAM
bharAvIne mUke che. mAchaluM te tuccha mAMsa khAvAnI lAlace, tenI pAchaLa doDI,
te AramAM sapaDAI jAya che, ane pachI tenA bhUMDA hAlahavAla thAya che, prANata
dAruNa duHkha te anubhave che. tema meharUpa mAchImAra jIvarUpa mAchalAne
lalacAvavA mATe duSTa viSayasukharUpa gala mUke che, te tuccha asat sukhanI AzAe
te tenI pAchaLa deDI temAM sapaDAI jAya che, Asakta thAya che. ane pachI tenA
bUrA hAlahavAla thAya che, narakAdinA dAruNa duHkha vipAka tene davA paDe che.
Ama rasaneMdriyanI lelupatAthI jema mAchaluM sapaDAIne duHkhI thAya che tema
pazendriyane vaza thavAthI madonmatta hAthI paNa baMdhana pAme che,
cakSuIndriyane vaza thavAthI patagIe dIpakamAM jhaMpalAvI baLI mare che, ghANe
driyane vaza thavAthI bhamaro kamaLamAM pUrAI jaI prANAMta duHkha pAme che,
zrotraMdriyane vaza thavAthI mRgalAM pAradhinI jAlamAM sapaDAI jAya che. Ama
ekeka dAdriya viSayanA paravazapaNAthI prANI dANu vipAka pAme che, to pachI
pAMca indriya jyAM mokaLI hoya, e bhavAbhinaMdI jIva te keTaluM duHkha pAme emAM
pUchavuM ja zuM ? "karijhaSamadhupA re zalabhamRgAdayo, viSayavinodarasena  /
haMta labhaMte re vividhA vedanA, bata pariNativirasena  //  jiLavA re
guRsimitAbavA " -zrI vinayavijayajIkRta zAMtasudhArasa, mATe kahyuM -dhikAdo vA
taH:-aho ! dAruNa tamane dhikkAra che ! A kAraNe asAna aMdhakArane dhikkAra che
! A kaSTarU5 ajJAna che, ema artha che. kAma tAta vira rAma tapAsa

Page #385 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Dimadrusti: 7 Horrible Consequences of Attachment to Objects  (319) The
mind, captivated by Kamadeva, becomes enslaved to the world, experiencing
sorrow. The foolish, greedy for pleasure, fall into the trap and regret later...
Renouncing the desire for objects, the conscious being finds the true path. Like
a bee attracted by the fragrance of a flower, it gets trapped in the bud. The
lotus bud, when combined with the bee, becomes a source of sorrow... The
beautiful form of the object, like a moth, attracts the mind and it falls into
the flame. Seeing this cause of sorrow, the eyes fear, O helper... The deer,
attached to the senses in the realm of objects, loses its head. Each attached
being experiences various kinds of sorrow... The five objects are powerful and
always tempting, what can we say? Hearing the word "Chidananda", we remain in
our true nature... "Objects."  - Shri Chidanandaji  Therefore, wise men have
compared the pleasure of objects to the foam of a snake or the fruit of a
poisonous plant. And it is true that they are called "Kusukh" (false pleasure)
or "Asat Sukh" (unreal pleasure). Or, what results in sorrow is not really
pleasure, but sorrow. The principle of renunciation or the subsequent sorrow is
not pleasure. - Shrimad Rajchandraji  It is appropriate to call this "tucch"
(trivial) and "darun" (horrible) here. Because it is trivial, without essence,
and like a single thing in the world. The "figo" (gross) hair-like particles of
matter, which countless beings have accumulated over time, are enjoyed by the
"bhava-abhinandi" (attached to existence) being! And such a being, running after
this "tam" (darkness) like the water of a mirage, becomes corrupted from the
right path, abandoning the activity of Dharma and duty! Therefore, the sage
Acharya expresses his regret - "Oh! This ignorance and darkness, be damned!
Because of this, the being forgets its fatherhood and engages in such perverse
activity, committing wrong deeds. The poor being is not to blame, but its
"mehniya" (attached to pleasure) karma is to blame. Because it is in the form of
darkness, it does not see the right direction, the right path does not appear,
so it gets confused and abandons the right path and goes astray.  "Ma mukamr:
Hઇ: valavali: | Ramaana banaavo sansare viyaap!" - Shri Shubhachandracharya's
"Jnanaarnava"

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dImAdaSTi : 7 viSayAsaktinA dAruNa vipAka (319) manamatha vaza mAtaMga
jagatameMparavazatA duHkha pAve re, rasanA lubdha hoya jhakha mUrakha, jALa paDe
pachatAve re.... viSaya vAsanA tyAge cetana, sAce mAraga lAge re. prANa suvAsa
kAja suna bhamarA, saMpuTamAMhe baMdhAve re te saroja saMpuTa saMyukta kuna,
karIke mukha jAve re....viSayaka rUpa manahara dekha pataMga, paData dIpamAM jAI
re; dekhe yAku duHkha kAranameM, nayana bhaye he sahAI re....viSayazretredriya
Asakta miragalA, chiname ziza kaTAve re, eka eka Asakta jIva ema, nAnAvidha
duHkha pAve re....viSaya paMca prabaLa vate nitya jAkuM, tAkahA kyuM kahIe re;
cidAnaMda e vacana suNIne, nija svabhAva rahIe re....viSaya." -zrI cidAnaMdajI
Ama hovAthI jJAnI puruSoe A viSaya sukhane nAganI pheNanIjha athavA
kipAkaphalanI upamA ApI che, ane tene kusukha-asat sukha kahyuM te yathArtha
che, athavA te jenA pariNAme du:kha che te vAstavika rIte sukha ja nathI, du:kha
ja che. e tyAgavA siddhAMta ke pazcAt duHkha te sukha nahi. - zrImad
rAjacaMdrajI Ane atre tuccha ne dAruNa kahyuM te yathAyogya che. kAraNa ke te
tuccha, sAra vinAnuM ne jagatanI eka jevuM che. je pudgale anaMta jIvoe
vAraMvAra bhegavyA che, tenA ucchiSTa-eThA evA pudgala paramANuonA bhegathI
viSayA"figo vALa sakta-bhavAbhinaMdI jIva AnaMda mAne che ! ne tevA jhAMjhavAnA
jala jevA tamaH" tuccha kusukha pAchaLa doDI sanmArgathI bhraSTa thAya che,
dharmakartavyarUpa sapravRtti cheDI de che ! e mATe zAstrakAra maharSi AcAryajI
kheda vyakta kare che-are ! A tamane, ajJAna aMdhakArane dhikkAra he! ke jene
laIne A jIva pitAnuM bhAna bhUlI jaIne Ama viparIta pravRtti kare che, khoTuM
AcaraNa kare che. AmAM e bicArAne doSa nathI, paNa tenA mehanIya karmane deSa
che. te ja aMdhakArarUpa hovAthI, tene sAcI dizA sUjhatI nathI, sAce mArga
bhAsato nathI, eTale muMjhAI jaI te samAga chaDI ubhAge jAya che. 4 "mA mukAmar:
Hi: vALavALiH | RAmAnA banAvo saMsAre viyApa !"-ii zubhacaMdrAcAryajIta zrI
jJAnArNava,

Page #386 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(320) "It is astonishing that the soul, unable to conquer the field of the
objects of the senses, claims to be able to conquer the whole earth!" - Shrimad
Rajchandraji  **Conclusion:** The **Avedyasamvedya** state is like blindness,
leading to downfall. It can be conquered by the **Satsang-Agam** yoga, only by
the great souls. 85.  **Meaning:** This **Avedyasamvedya** state is like
blindness, leading to downfall. It can be conquered by the **Satsang-Agam**
yoga, only by the great souls.  **Discussion:** The **Avedyasamvedya** state, as
explained above, is like blindness and leads to downfall.  This
**Avedyasamvedya** state can only be conquered by the great souls through the
**Satsang-Agam** yoga. Just as a blind person, due to his blindness, falls into
a deep pit while walking, similarly, due to the blindness of the
**Avedyasamvedya** state, the soul falls into the pit of hell and other lower
realms. But, if a true guide comes to the blind person, he will not fall into
the pit and will walk on the right path. Similarly, if the soul gets the
guidance of **Satsang** (good company) and **Agam** (sacred scriptures), it will
become aware of the right path and will not fall into the pit of lower realms.
**Interpretation:** The **Avedyasamvedya** state, with the above-mentioned
characteristics, is like blindness. Therefore, it is said to be **Durgaatipaat**
- leading to downfall. **Satsang-Agam** yoga means the association with good
company and sacred scriptures. This emphasizes the importance of **Purusha-
praadhaanya** (the supremacy of the soul). This **Avedyasamvedya** state is
conquerable, only by the great souls, because it is impossible to conquer
anything else. Therefore, **Agam** also says (in this way, it is appropriate to
say) that "I know" (**Jaanaami**) because of the failure of its own rules.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (320) gadaSTisamuccaya "iMdriyanA viSayarUpI kSetranI jamIna jItavAne AtmA
asamarthapaNuM batAve che, ane AkhI pRthvI jItavAmAM samarthapaNuM dhAre che, e
kevuM AzcaryarUpa che?"--zrImad rAjacaMdrajI upasaMhAra karatAM kahe che
avedyasaMvedyapadamAndhya durgatipAtakRt  /  satsaMgAgamayogena
jeyametanmahAtmabhiH  //  85  //  pada ave e AMdhyarUpa, karatuM durgati pAta;
satsaMgAgama yogathI, jeya mahAtmathI mAtra 85. artha -e adyasaMvedya pada
AMdhyarUpa- aMdhapaNArUpa heI, durgatimAM pAta karanAruMpADanAruM che e
satsaMga-Agamana yegathI mahAtmAothI jItI zakAya evuM che. vivecana Ama uparamAM
jenuM svarUpa vistArathI kahevAmAM AvyuM, te aghasavedya pada AMdhyarUpa eTale
ke aMdhapaNurUpa che, ane te durgatimAM pAta karanAruM-pADanAruM che. AvuM A
adyasaMvedya pada A ja bhUmikAmAM mahAtmA gIjanethI ja a. . saM. ne
satsaMgaAgamanA yoge karIne jItAya evuM che. te A prakAre jema satsaMga-Aga- keI
AMdhaLe aMdhapaNAne lIdhe mArge na dekhate hoI UMDA khADAmAM mathI jaya paDI
jAya, tema adyasaMvedyarUpa aMdhapaNane lIdhe A jIvane sanmArga na sUjhate hoI
te narakAdi dugatirU5 gartAmAM-khADAmAM paDI jAya che. paNa te AMdhaLAne je sAce
mArgadarzaka doranAre maLI Ave, te te khADAmAM na paDatAM sIdhe mArge cAlyA jAya
che, tema A jIvane paNa sAce raste doranAra satsaMga-sapuruSano ane Agamane-
satuzAstrane vega bAjhe, te tevA mArgadarzakanA prabhAve tene sanmArganuM bhAna
thAya, ane durgatinA khADAmAM na paDatAM te sanmArge cAlyo jAya. vRtti saMvepaH-
ukta lakSaNavALuM adyasaMvedya pada, bhArthe AMdhya bhAvarUpa, aMdhapaNArUpa
che. eTalA mATe ja kahyuMhutipAtazatta-durgatimAM pAta karavAnA zIlavALuM-
ravabhAvavALuM che. saraMjAmAna-satsaMga-AgamanA vegathI, viziSTa saMga-AgamanA
saMbaMdhathI ema artha che. ekarUpa bhAva puruSaprAdhAnya prakhyApana kare che
teyameTu-A adyasaMvedyapada chatAvA egya che, maThThAmami - mahAtmA puruSothI,-
A ja bhUmikAmAM; anyAdA jItavAnuM azakayapaNuM che tethI karIne. ethI karIne ja
Agama paNa anuvAdapara (Ama ja anukaLa kahenAra ) che, ema megAcAryuM kahe che.
" jAnAmi " a5nA niyamanI asiddhine lIdhe.

Page #387 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Glory of Satsang (31)  **Introduction:**  The text states that Satsang is
the sole source of knowledge, not Agam (scripture). This is because the guidance
of a virtuous person (Satpurusha) is paramount in the path of liberation. Only a
Satpurusha, a true guide, can show the path and lead the ignorant soul (Jiva)
towards the right path. This association with a Satpurusha is essential for the
Jiva to awaken to the teachings of the scriptures. Even the knowledge of Agam is
dependent on the guidance of the Guru. Therefore, the text emphasizes the unity
of the cause.  **The Importance of Satsang:**  Wise men have praised the glory
of Satsang throughout history. Satsang is the best means for the Jiva to cross
the ocean of life. The text quotes a saying: "Even a moment spent in the company
of a virtuous person is like a boat that helps one cross the ocean of life."
This is because Satsang helps the Jiva to overcome their negative tendencies and
cultivate their virtues. Satsang becomes the ultimate support, refuge, and
shelter for the Jiva. With the support of Satsang, the Jiva can easily cross the
ocean of life and attain liberation. The text emphasizes that no matter how much
we praise Satsang, it is never enough. Therefore, it is essential to surrender
oneself completely to Satsang.  **The Path to Liberation:**  The text advises
those who are determined to attain liberation to first acknowledge their
ignorance and then seek refuge in a wise person (Jnani). This is the only way to
attain the path of liberation. The text emphasizes that these teachings are the
ultimate support and protection for all seekers of liberation. By contemplating
these teachings, one can attain the ultimate goal. The text summarizes the
essence of the Jain teachings, including the twelve Angas, the six Darshanas,
and the knowledge of the Jnani.  **The Importance of Satsang in the Present
Age:**  Satsang is the ultimate means for achieving liberation. It is like
residing near the feet of a virtuous person. Satsang is rare in all times, but
especially in this age of adversity. Wise men have recognized the extreme rarity
of Satsang in this age. Those who try to define their own self-nature without
the guidance of a Satguru are merely indulging in their own desires. It is
essential to recognize that Satsang is the primary means for liberation, and all
other means are secondary. The text quotes the teachings of Shankaracharya and
Shubhachandracharya, emphasizing the importance of Satsang for liberation.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dImASTi: satsaMgane ananya mahimA (31) paricaya pAtakaghAtaka sAdhu zuM,
akuzala apacaya ceta; graMtha adhyAtama zravaNu manana karI, parizIlana naya
heta...saMbhava." "duSTajana saMgati pariharI, bhaje suguru saMtAna re."--zrI
AnaMdaghanajI. atre satsaMga-Agama nathI ema ekavacanarUpa praga karI ekabhAva
kahyo che, te sahetuka che, kAraNa ke mArganA darzanamAM sat puruSanuM ja
prAdhAnya-pradhAnapaNuM che. mArgadiSTA satparuSa sadguru ja mArga dekhADI zake,
te ja ajJAnAM jIvanuM "nayana" eTale ke sanmArge doravaNuM karI zake. ane te
puruSane samAgama joga bane te tenA anusaMdhAnamAM ja sahRtanA zravaNane jega
paNa banI Ave che. athavA temanI AjJA pramANe adhyAtmazAstra vAMcavA-vicAravAnI-
avagAhavAnI preraNA maLe che. Ama agama evuM AgamajJAna paNa gurUgamane AdhIna
che, mATe bane kAraNanI ekatA kahI. jJAnI puruSoe A satsaMgano mahimA Thera
Thera khUba gAya che. satsaMga e jIvane taravAnuM uttama sAdhana che. "kSaNa
paNa sajajananI saMgatijha thaI te te bhavasamudra taravAmAM naukA samAna thaI
paDe che," ema mahAjane kahe che. kAraNa ke satsaMgathI jIvanA svacchedAdi deSa
saheja dUra thAya che, ne AtmaguNanI vRddhi thAya che. Ama satsaMgano Azraya
jIvane parama AdhArarUpa, avaSTabharUpa, otharUpa thaI paDe che, ne tenA
avalaMbane saMsArasAgara khAbocIA je thaI jaI lIlAthI pAra utarAya che. jIvanA
parama bAMdhavarUpa A satsaMganI jeTalI prazaMsA karIe teTalI ochI che, mATe
temAM sarvAtmAthI AtmArpaNa karavuM yogya che ema satparuSe upadeze che. "mATe
jenI prApta karavAnI dRDha mati thaI che, teNe pote kaMi ja jANato nathI e daDha
nizcayavALo prathama vicAra kare. ane pachI "sa" nI prApti mATe jJAnIne zaraNe
javuM. te jarUrI mArganI prApti thAya. A je vacana lakhyA che, te sarve
mumukSune parama baMdhavarUpa che, parama rakSakarUpa che. ane ene samyapha
prakAre vicAryothI paramapadane Ape evAM che. emAM nigraMtha pravacananI samasta
dvAdazAMgI, SaTuM dazananuM sarvottama tatva ane jJAnInA bodhanuM bIja saMkSepe
kahyuM che. sarva paramArthanA sAdhanamAM parama sAdhana te satsaMga che.
puruSanA caraNa samIpano nivAsa che. badhA kALamAM tenuM dullabhapaNuM che, ane
AvA viSama kALamAM tenuM atyaMta dullabhapaNuM jJAnI puruSoe jANyuM che. je
puruSa sadgurunI upAsanA vinA nija kalpanAe AtmasvarUpane nirdhAra kare te mAtra
potAnA svachaMdanA udayane vede che, ema vicAravuM ghaTe che. avazya A jIve
prathama sarva sAdhanane gauNa gaNI, nirvANane mukhya hetu e satsaMga ja *
"kSAna irajJanayaMtire, mavati manAIvara nA />- zrI zaMkarAcArya "pAtayanti
bhavAvate ye tvAM te naiva bAMdhavAH  /  "vaMdhutAM te thinti hitamudirA
yoninaH"--zrI zubhacaMdrAcAryajI kRta zrI jJAnArNava,

Page #388 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(322) Yoga-drishti-samuccaya It is worthy of worship in all respects; because it
makes all means available, such is our self-realization. ”–(See) Shrimad
Rajchandra, Patranka 181-428-518 (211, Ha-Ne. 2-37, 609) E Such excellent
satsang can only be won by the fourfold power of the Agam, by these six-fold
great men, because it is only in this role that their victory can be achieved.
It is not possible elsewhere, because there is a lack of such worthiness.
Previously, there was not as much self-effort to win it, and then it did not
arise, it was won. It is. Even in the Agam, there is a statement that the
unachievable is the impossibility of the unattainable. Therefore, in this
vision, the great yogis are given the ability to win the avedhya-vedhya pad. And
that is why it is said that Such a virtuous person, that avedhya is hard, The
saintly assembly of the Agam, they won the victory... Manmohan.” -Shri Cha, 6.
S. 4–10 Comparison of Avedhya-vedhya and Vedhya-savadhya pad: Table 7. Avedhya-
savadhya pad Vedhya-savadhya pad In the first four, A. S. P is strong; Vedhya-
sanvedya is a non-essential knot, non-differentiation In the last four, Avedhya
San. is not there, Vedhya-savadhya pad is a essential knot, differentiation Name
In the ear vision Reason Definition Character May Sinful activity Symptom Result
Activity-cessation Form L Guru-sthana Avedhya is not savadhya, from the
ultimate, it is a non-essential bhava-abhinandi, currently, it is a false
vision, gross-false. Because the given power is polluting, the given vision is
non-essential, sinful activity is there Disagreement, lack of discrimination,
excessive attachment, uneven greed Worldly attachment, attachment to parts,
action-non-action revolution False effort-activity, true effort-cessation Non-
essential form of self-wealth, fall into evil First Vedhya is savadhya. From the
ultimate, it is a essential mumukhu, definite right vision, subtle-true. Because
the given power is not polluting, the given vision is essential, it is not
there. Sometimes, it is like the last one, the talohapada-nyasa Non-perversion,
right discrimination, non-attachment, freedom from greed Excessive attachment-
ultimate renunciation, non-attachment, Non-delusion True effort-activity, false
effort-cessation Right vision form of undivided, attainment of good fortune
Fourth –Desha-virati etc. [] Kriti and atha-sanvedya-pavashir: |] 5

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (322) yogadRSTisamuccaya sarvAMpaNapaNe upAsavA yAgya che; ke jethI sarva
sAdhana sulabha thAya che, evA amArA AtmasAkSAtkAra che. "-(jue) zrImad
rAjacaMdra, patrAMka 181-4ra8-518 (211, hA-neAM. 2-37, 609) I AvA uttama
satsaMga AgamanA ceAgathI A avedhasa vedha pada A ceAthI STivALA mahAtmA
puruSAthI ja jItI zakAya che, kAraNa A ja bhUmikAmAM teneA jaya karI zakAya ema
che. anyatra tema banI zakavuM sa bhavatu' nathI, kAraNa ke tathAprakAranI
cAgyatAnApAtratAne abhAva hoya che. pUrve te jItavA jeTalu' Atmakhala heAtu
nathI, ane pachI tene udaya hAtA nathI, te jItAI gayu. hAya che. AgamamAM paNa
AnuM samaMna che ke aceAgyane niyAganI asiddhi che.' mATe A dRSTimAM ja avedhasa
vedha patnane jItavAnI megyatA A mahAtmA jogIjanane sAMpaDe che. ane eTalA mATe
ja kahyuM ke evA avaguNavaMtanuMjI, pada e avedya kaThora, sAdhu saMga
AgamataNeAjI, te jItyA radhAra... manameAhana." -zrI cA, 6. sa. 4-10 avedhasa
vedha ane vedhasavedya padanI tulanA : koSTaka 7. avaidyasavaidya pa
vedyasavedya pada pahelI cAramAM a. sa. pa prakhala; vedyasaMvedya atAttvika
graMthi abheda chellI cAramAM avaidya saM. na heAma, vedyasa vaidya padma
tAttvika graMthibheda nAma karNa dRSTimAM kAraNa vyAkhyA pAtra meva pApa
pravRtti lakSaNa pariNAma pravRtti-nivRtti svarUpa la gurusthAna vaidya na
savedAma, paramAthI apadma bhavAbhinaMdI, sAMprataHzI mithyAdaSTi sthUla-asat.
kAraNa apAya zakti mAlinga, apAya darzana atAttvika pApa pravRtti hoya
viSarmAMsa, vivekAMdhatA, atimeha, viSama kutaka' graha saMsAra prati anudvega,
bhAgAsakti, kRtyAkRtyatkrAMti asat ceSTApravRtti, sat ceSTAnivRtti adhapaNArUpa
Atmakhadhana, durgatipAta prathama vaidya savedAya. paramArthathI padma mumukSu,
nizcaya samyagdaSTi sUkSma--sat. kAraNa apAya zakti mAlinsa na heAya, apAyadana
tAttvika hAya nahi. kavacit hAma teA chellI ne tAleAhapadanyAsa jevI
aviparyAMsa, sadviveka, ameha, graharahitapaNuM saMvegAtizaya-parama vairAgya,
anAsakti, abhrAMti sat ceSTApravRtti, asat ceSTAnivRtti samyagdarzanarUpa
akhaMdha, sugatiprApti catutha -dezavirati Adi [] kRti anethasaMvedyapavASir: |]
5

Page #389 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Composed by Maharshi Shri Haribhadracharya Shri Yogadashtisamuccaya Which is the
best of all commentaries, and the most excellent in its clarity. Shri
Haribhadrasuri (Part - 2) : Commentary by: Dr. Bhagwandas Mansukh Bhai Mehta :
Publisher: Shri Mahavir Jain Vidyalaya Shri Vasupujya Swami Mandir Marg, C.D.
Barfiwala Marg, Juhu Lane, Andheri (West), Mumbai-400 058. Price Rs. 250

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 maharSi zrI haribhadrAcAryajI praNIta zrI yogadaSTisamuccaya yo: zatpati
savivecana zreSTha:, coziMtAmaUiT: para: | zrI haribhadrasUri ( bhAga - 2) :
vivecana kartA: DaoN. bhagavAnadAsa manasukhabhAI mahetA : prakAzaka: zrI
mahAvIra jaina vidyAlaya zrI vAsupUjya svAmI maMdira mArga, sI.DI. baraphIvAlA
mArga, juhU lena, aMdherI (vesTa), muMbaI-400 058. mUlya rUpiyA 250

Page #390 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Publisher:** Hitesh Chimanlal Doshi, Mukesh Bhaichand Mehta, Hasmukh Ugarchand
Gatecha, Hon'ble Ministers **Shri Mahavir Jain Vidyalaya** Shri Vasupujya Swami
Mandir Marg, C.D. Barfiwala Marg, Juhu Lane, Andheri (West), Mumbai-400 058.
Email: headoffice@smiv.org **Availability:** (1) Shri Mahavir Jain Vidyalaya
Shri Vasupujya Swami Mandir Marg, C.D. Barfiwala Marg, Juhu Lane, Andheri
(West), Mumbai-400 058. Phone No. 022-26718641 Email: headoffice@smjv.org (2)
Shri Mahavir Jain Vidyalaya Hill Drive, Talaja Road, Bhavnagar-364 002. Phone
No. 0278-2563969, Email: bhavnagar@smjv.org **First Edition:** 1950 AD - 2006 VS
Veer Nirvan Samvat: 2475 **Second Edition:** 1978 AD - 2034 VS Veer Nirvan
Samvat: 2503 **Third Edition:** Part - 2 2018 AD - 2074 VS Veer Nirvan Samvat:
2543 **Price:** 250/Copy: POO **Printer:** Vinayak Printers, Vignapan Bhavan,
Tar Office Opposite, Bhadra, Ahmedabad-380 001. (Mob.) 9979206060

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prakAzaka : hiteza cImanalAla dozI mukeza bhAyacaMda mahetA hasamukha
ugaracaMda gaTecA mAnad maMtrIzrIo zrI mahAvIra jaina vidyAlaya zrI vAsupUjya
svAmI maMdira mArga, sI.DI. baraphIvAlA mArga, juhU lena, aMdherI (vesTa),
muMbaI-400 058. Email: headoffice@smiv.org prApti sthAno: (1) zrI mahAvIra jaina
vidyAlaya zrI vAsupUjyasvAmI maMdira mArga, sI.DI. baraphIvAlA mArga, juhU lena,
aMdherI (vesTa), muMbaI-400 058. phona naM. 022-26718641 Email:
headoffice@smjv.org (2) zrI mahAvIra jaina vidyAlaya hIla DrAIva, taLAjA roDa,
bhAvanagara-364 002. phona naM. 0278-2563969, Email: bhavnagar@smjv.org pahelI
AvRtti: I.saM. 1950- vi.saM. 2006 vIra nirvANa saMvata : 2475 dvitIya AvRtti:
I.saM. 1978 - vi.saM. 2034 vIra nirvANa saMvata : 2503 tRtIya AvRtti: bhAga - 2
I.sa. 2018 - vi.saM. 2074 vIra nirvANa saMvata : 2543 kiMmata : 250/nakala: paOO
mudraka: vinAyaka prinTarsa vijJApana bhavana, tAra oNphisa sAme, bhadra,
amadAvAda-380 001. (mo.) 9979206060

Page #391 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Vidhatirth Vidyalaya - Shri Mahavir Jain Vidyalaya, under the inspiration and
blessings of Pujya Param Pujya Vijay Vallabhasuriswarji Maharaj Saheb, was
established on the auspicious day of Monday, the 5th of the bright half of the
month of Falgun, Vikram Samvat 1970, 02/03/1914, 100 years ago. Pujya Gurudev
saw that proper educational facilities were not available in the small villages
and towns of Gujarat. Students who passed with high marks and had a strong
desire for higher education were coming to Mumbai for higher studies. Keeping
this in mind, Pujya Gurudev inspired the establishment of Shri Mahavir Jain
Vidyalaya with the aim of providing facilities for higher education for the
youth of our community.  Pujya Gurudev's mind was filled with the idea that
higher education should not only be for intellectual development, but also for
the all-round development of the seeker of knowledge. With this thought, Pujya
Gurudev included the study of religious values along with higher practical
education.  At the time of the establishment of the institution, three basic
points were considered. Night meals were prohibited, non-vegetarian food was
renounced, and religious studies were included along with Jain worship. With
these points in mind, Shri Mahavir Jain Vidyalaya was started in 1915 in a
rented house with fifteen students. Today, it has grown into a banyan tree, with
12 branches in major cities of Gujarat, Maharashtra and Rajasthan, with hostels
and girls' hostels with modern facilities for more than 1600 students.  To move
forward in the field of education, the Vidyalaya has established a new trust
called Shri Mahavir Jain Vidyalaya Education Foundation and started an MBA
college in Vadodara.  To ensure that the youth of our community do not remain
deprived of higher professional education due to financial reasons, an interest-
free loan assistance scheme is in operation. Under this scheme, the Vidyalaya
provides interest-free loans for higher education in India and abroad.
Encouragement to Jain literature and publication: (1) To encourage the
publication of books on Jainism, Shri Mahavir Jain Vidyalaya Jinagam Trust has
been established. This trust prepares Agam texts and the institution also
publishes other books. The late Seth Shri Motichandbhai Kapadia, who was a
supporter of the multi-faceted excellence of the institution, had the vision to
publish a wealth of critical and research-oriented literature in simple and easy
language. For this, the late Seth Shri Motichandbhai Kapadia started the work of
editing the series and so far 9 books have been published. Also, Jain Gurjar
Kaviyo, Part 1 to 10, and seven other books of the Shri Mohanlal Dalichand Desai
(Collector and Editor) series, and two books published by Munishri Nandighosh
Vijayji have been published. (2) To promote, propagate and encourage Jain
literature, 23 Jain literary festivals have been organized at different places
till date.  Branches of the Vidyalaya: | Establishment Year | Vidyalaya Branch
and Phone No. | Email ID ------- | -------- | -------- | -------- 1925 | Shri
Mahavir Jain Vidyalaya, started in 1915 with 15 students, At present under
redevelopment Gowallia Tank, in the institution's building, Bhavnagar state, on
31/10/1925, “Shri Vadi Lal Sarabhai Vidyarthigruh” | 1946 | Shri Bholabhai
Jasingbhai Vidyarthigruh, opposite Paldi Bus Stand, Paldi, | ahmedabad@smiv.org
Ahmedabad-380006. Telephone: (079) 26579953, 26584352. 1947 | Shri Mahavir Jain
Vidyalaya | Shri Bharat Jain Vidyalaya Agarakar Road, next to B.M.C. College,
Pune-411004. | pune@smjv.org Telephone: (020) 2551226. 1954 | Shri Laherchand
Uttamchand Vidyarthigruh, R.V. Desai Road, Pratapnagar, | vadodara smiv.org
Vadodara-390004. Telephone: (0265) 2432468. 1964 | Shri Laherchand Uttamchand
Vidyarthigan, near Panchayat Office, vidyanagar@smjv.org Vallabh
Vidyanagar-388120. Telephone: (02692) 230211. 1970 | Shri Manilal Durlabhji
Vidyarthigruh, Hill Drive, Talaja Road, bhavnagar@smjv.org Bhavnagar-364002.
Telephone: (0278) 2563969. 1972 | Acharya Shri Vijay Vallabhasuriswarji
Janmashtaabdi Vidyarthigruh andheri @smjv.org Juhu Lane, Vasupujya Swami Mandir
Marg, Andheri (West), Mumbai-400058. Telephone: (022) 26718641, 26 241457.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 vidhAtIrtha vidhAlaya - zrI mahAvIra jaina vidyAlaya paMjAba kesarI AcAryazrI
pa.pU. vijaya vallabhasUrIzvarajI ma.sA.nI preraNA ane AziSa saha AjathI 100
varSa pUrve vi.sa. 1970, phAgaNa sudI pAMcamane somavAra, tA. 02/03/1914nA zubha
divase "zrI mahAvIra jaina vidyAlaya"nI maMgala sthApanA karavAmAM AvI. pU.
gurudeve joyuM ke gujarAtanA nAnA gAmo ane zaheromAM yogya zaikSaNika suvidhAo
prApta na hatI. ucca abhyAsanI tIvra dhagazavALA ucca guNAMka sAthe pAsa thanArA
vidyArthIo muMbaI ucca abhyAsa mATe AvatA. e lakSamAM laIne ApaNA samAjanA
yuvAdhananA ucca abhyAsanI sagavaDatA ubhI karavAnA dhyeya sAthe pU. gurudeve
zrI mahAvIra jaina vidyAlayanI sthApanAnI preraNA ApI. pU. gurudevanA manamAM
ucca abhyAsa mAtra baudhika vikAsa mATe ja nahI paraMtu vidyApipAsunA sarvagrAhI
vikAsanuM kAraNa bane teja vicArothI pU. gurudeve ucca vyavAharika abhyAsa sAthe
dhArmika saMskAranA siMcananA abhyAsane saMlagna karyA. saMsthAnI sthApanA
samaye traNa mULabhUta muddAo vicAravAmAM AvyA hatA. rAtribhojana niSedha,
abhakSyano tyAga ane jinapUjA sAthe dhArmika abhyAsa vigere dhyAnamAM rAkhIne
paMdara vidyArthIo sAthe "zrI mahAvIra jaina vidyAlaya" 1915mAM bhADAnA
makAnamAM zarU karavAmAM AvyuM. je Aje vaTavRkSarUpI gujarAta-mahArASTra temaja
rAjasthAnanAM mukhya zaheromAM 12 zAkhAo, 1600 vidyArthIo vidyArthinIothI adhika
abhyAsa karI zake tevI adyattana suvidhAo sAthenA vidyArthIgRho | kanyA
chAtrAlayo kAryarata che. zikSaNa kSetre AgaLa vadhavA vidyAlaye zrI mahAvIra
jaina vidyAlaya ejyukezana phAunDezana nAmanuM navuM TrasTa racI vaDodarA mukAme
ema.bI.e. koleja zarU karela che. ApaNA samAjanA yuvAdhana ucca prophezanala
zikSaNathI Arthika kAraNosara vaMcita na rahe te mATe vagara vyAjanI lona sahAya
yojanA cAlu che. A yojanA heThaLa vidyAlaya dvArA bhArata ane paradezamAM ucca
abhyAsa mATe vagara vyAjanI lona ApavAmAM Ave che. jaina sAhitya ane prakAzanane
uttejana :(1) saMsthA dvArA jaina dharmanA pustakonA prakAzanane uttejana maLe
te mATe zrI mahAvIra jaina vidyAlaya jinAgama TrasTanI racanA karavAmAM AvI che
ane A TrasTa dvArA AgamanA graMtho taiyAra karavAmAM Ave che. temaja anya
pustakonuM prakAzana paNa saMsthA dvArA pragaTa karavAmAM Ave che. sAdI ane
saraLa bhASAmAM vivecanAtmaka ane saMzodhanAtmaka sAhityanI vipula sAmagrI
prakaTa karavAnI samayadarzI AcArya vijayavallabhasUrIzvarajI mahArAja ane
saMsthAnA anekamukha utkarSanA pUraskartA sva. zeThazrI motIcaMdabhAI kApaDiyAnI
bhAvanA hatI ane A mATe sva. zeThazrI motIcaMdabhAI kApaDiyAe graMthamALAnA
saMpAdana kAryanI zarUAta karI ane Ajadina sudhImAM 9 pustako tathA zrI
mohanalAla dalIcaMda desAI (saMgrAhaka ane saMpAdaka) graMthamALAnA jaina
gurjara kavio bhAga 1 thI 10 ane anya sAta pustako tathA munizrI naMdighoSa
vijayajI prakAzita be pustako prakAzita thayela che. (2) jaina sAhityano
prasAra, pracAra ane uttejana maLe te mATe Aja dina sudhImAM 23 jaina sAhitya
samArohanuM judA judA sthaLe Ayojana karavAmAM Avela che. vidhAlayanI zAkhAo :
ma | sthApanA varSa vidhAlaya zAkhA ane phona naM. I-meIla AI.DI 1925 15
vidyArthIo sAthe sane 1915mAM zarU thayelA zrI mahAvIra jaina At present under
vidyAlaya, govAliyA Tenka para saMsthAnA makAnamAM bhAvanagara rAjyanA
redevelopment dIvAna sara prabhAzaMkara paTanInA zubha haste tA. 31/10/1925 "zrI
vADIlAla sArAbhAI vidyArthIgRha" 1946 zrI bhoLAbhAI jesIMgabhAI vidhArthIgRha,
pAlaDI basa sTenDa sAme, pAlaDI,| ahmedabad@smiv.org amadAvAda-380006.
TeliphonaH (079) 26579953, 26584352. 1947 zrI mahAvIra jaina vidyAlaya | zrI
bhArata jena vidhAlaya pune@smjv.org Agarakara roDa, bI.ema.sI. kolejanI
bAjumAM, pUnA-411004. TeliphonaH (020) 2551226. 1954 zrI laheracaMda uttamacaMda
vidhArthIgRha, Ara.vI. desAI roDa, pratApanagara, | vadodara smiv.org
vaDodarA-390004. TeliphonaH (0265) 2432468. 1964 zrI laheracaMda uttamacaMda
vidhArthIgaNa, paMcAyata kAryAlaya najIka, vidyanagar@smjv.org vallabha
vidyAnagara-388120. TeliphonaH (02692) 230211. 1970 zrI maNIlAla durlabhajI
vidhArthIgRha, hIla DrAIva, taLAjA roDa, bhavnagar@smjv.org bhAvanagara-364002.
TeliphonaH (0278) 2563969. 1972 AcArya zrI vijayavallabhasUrIzvarajI
janmazatAbdI vidhArthIgRha andheri @smjv.org juhu lena, vAsupUjya svAmI maMdira
mArga, aMdherI (ve.), muMbaI-400058. TeliphonaH (022) 26718641, 26 2414pa7.

Page #392 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
| Order | Year of Establishment | School Branch and Phone No. | E-mail ID |
|---|---|---|---| | 1 | 1994 | Shrimati Shardaben Uttam Lal Mehta Kanya
Chhatralaya | ahmedabad@smjv.org | | | | Shri Niketan, Dasha Porwad Society,
Ayambil Bhavan, Paldi, Ahmedabad-380007. Telephone: (079) 26651627. | | | 9 |
2001 | Dr. Yavantraj Punamchandji and Shrimati Sampurn Jain Vidhyarthi Gruh |
udaipur@smjv.org | | | | Chitrakoot Nagar, Bhuwana, Pratapnagar Bypass,
Udaipur-313001, (Rajasthan). Telephone: (0294) 2440377. | | | | 2004 | Shri Vadi
Lal Sarabhai Vidhyarthi Gruh - Sandhurst Road Branch | sandhurst@smjv.org | | |
| C/o. Shri Kachchi Visha Oswal Jain Mahajan Wadi, 4th Floor, 99/101, Keshavji
Nayak Road, Chinch Bandar, Mumbai-400009. Telephone: (022) 23778124 | | | | 2005
| Shrimati Nalini Ben Pravinchandra Jamnadas Changani Kanya Chhatralaya |
vidyanagarko@smjv.org | | | | P.O. Box No. 25, Panchayat Karyalay Near, Vallabh
Vidyanagar-388120. Telephone: (02692) 232455 | | | | 2006 | Sau. Shobhaben
Rasiklal Dhariwal Kanya Chhatralaya | punekc@smjv.org | | | | Agarakar Road,
B.M.C. College Next to, Pune-411004. Telephone: (020) 2566 1895. | | | | 2009 |
Shri Mahavir Jain Vidyalaya Education Foundation | cksvim@gmail.com | | | | Shri
C.K. Shah Vijapurwala Institute of Management, Website: www.eksvim.edu.in R.V.
Desai Road, Pratapnagar, Vadodara-390004. Telephone: (0265) 2418328/29,
08000631517/1819 | | | | 2017 | Shrimati Chandrakaben Pravinbhai Mehta, Hiraba
Kanya Chhatralaya | vadodara@smjv.org | | | | R.V. Desai Road, Pratapnagar,
Vadodara-390004. Telephone: (0265) 2414299 | |  **Objectives and Implementation
and Journey Towards the 21st Century:**  The institution has been steadily
moving towards the 21st century, following the fundamental rules that were laid
down at the beginning. The following fundamental rules are in effect:  (1) In
every branch, a Shikharbandi Derasar has been built in Mumbai, Andheri,
Vadodara, Vallabh Vidyanagar, Udaipur, Bhavnagar, and Pune so that students can
perform regular Jinpuja. While in the Sandhurst Road branch, there is a home
Derasar. The construction of a new Vidhyarthi Gruh has begun in Ahmedabad and
Vadodara. A new Jinlay is under construction in both places.  (2) Religious
classes are conducted by religious teachers in every branch for the religious
curriculum. Regular religious examinations are conducted and students are
awarded prizes as encouragement.  (3) Facilities are provided to encourage
students to participate in religious tours, development camps, and intense
tapascharyas.  (4) Competitions, sports, and exercise equipment are available
for the personal and personality development of students, and seminars are
organized.  (5) "Inter-branch competitions" are organized by the students of the
branch. And prizes are awarded as encouragement.  (6) Libraries have been
established in the branches for "general knowledge" for students, along with
newspapers, magazines, reference books, and good books.  Shri Mahavir Jain
Vidyalaya, over 102 years, has provided the nectar of knowledge to an estimated
20,000 students, making them efficient and self-reliant, and has infused their
lives with service, religiosity, and culture.  The great festival of the
Vidyalaya, which enriches society, empowers it, and makes it cultured by
providing the younger generation with the nectar of knowledge and inspiration,
is still going on uninterruptedly.  Great people who are benevolent to society
and travelers on the path of virtue! May your generous financial contributions
continue to flow into this great festival! Your generosity will make you blessed
and enrich society. Don't miss out on this double benefit!  He who strives to
expand understanding through the spread of knowledge is a great benefactor of
the world. Shri Mahavir Jain Vidyalaya has humbly accepted the life vow to make
society prosperous, powerful, and happy through such an endeavor. Helping in the
fulfillment of this vow will be a virtuous act and will make one a participant
in the welfare of society.  Let us all stand together, day and night, in the
service of the Vidyalaya with our body, mind, and wealth, and with the blessings
of the Yuga Purusha, with the support of our glorious past, let us step on the
path of a beautiful present and realize the dream of a glorious future. That is
the prayer...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 krama | sthApanA varSa vidhAlaya zAkhA ane phona naM. I-meIla AI.DI. 1994
zrImatI zAradAbena uttamalAla mahetA kanyA chAtrAlaya ahmedabad@smjv.org zrI
niketana, dazA poravADa sosAyaTI, AyaMbila bhavana pAse, pAlaDI,
amadAvAda-380007. TeliphonaH (079) 26651627. 9 | 2001 Do. yAvantarAja
punamacaMdajI ane zrImatI saMpUNa jena vidhArthIgRha | udaipur@smjv.org
citrakUTa nagara, bhuvANA, pratApanagara bAyapAsa, udayapura-313001,
(rAjasthAna). TeliphonaH (0294) 2440377. 2004 zrI vADIlAla sArAbhAI
vidhArthIgRha - senDaharTa roDa zAkhA sandhurst @smjv.org C/o. zrI kacchI vizA
ozavALa jaina mahAjana vADI, 4thA mALe, 99/101, kezavajI nAyaka roDa, cIMca
baMdara, muMbaI-400009. TeliphonaH (022) 237781 24 2005 zrImatI nalinIbena
pravINacaMdra jamanAdAsa cAMgANI kanyA chAtrAlaya |vidyanagarko@smjv.org po.bo.
naM. 25, paMcAyata kAryAlaya najIka, vallabha vidyAnagara-388120. TeliphonaH
(02692) 232455 2006 sau. zobhAbena rasikalAla dhArIvAla kanyA chAtrAlaya
punekc@smjv.org Agarakara roDa, bI.ema.sI. kolejanI bAjumAM, pUnA-411004.
TeliphonaH (020) 2566 1895. 2009 zrI mahAvIra jaina vidyAlaya ejyukezana
phAunDezana cksvim@gmail.com zrI sI. ke. zAha vijApuravALA InsTITayuTa opha
menejamenTa, Website : www.eksvim.edu.in Ara.vI. desAI roDa, pratApanagara,
vaDodarA-390004. TeliphonaH (0265) 2418328/29, 08000631517/1819 2017 zrImatI
candrakAbena praviNabhAI mahetA, hIrAbA kanyA chAtrAlaya vadodara @smjv.org
Ara.vI. desAI roDa, pratApanagara, vaDodarA-390004. TeliphonaH (0265) 2414299
uddezo ane amalIkaraNa temaja ekavIsamI sadI tarapha prayANa : zarUAtamAM je
mULabhUta niyamo ghaDavAmAM AvyA hatA te anusAra Aja rIte Aje daza dAyakAthI
saMsthA makkamapaNe ekavIsamI sadI tarapha AgaLa vadhI rahI che. jemAM nIcenA
mULabhUta niyamo amalamAM che. (1) dareka zAkhAmAM vidyArthIo niyamita jinapUjA
karI zake te mATe muMbaI, aMdherI, vaDodarA, vallabha vidyAnagara, udepura,
bhAvanagara temaja pUnA mukAme zikharabaMdhI derAsarajI banAvela che. jyAre
senDaharTa roDa zAkhAmAM ghara derAsara che. amadAvAda tathA vaDodarA mukAme
vidyArthIgRhanuM navanirmANanI zarUAta thayela che. A baMne jagyAe nUtana
jinAlaya nirmANAdhIna che. (2) dhArmika abhyAsakrama mATe dareka zAkhAmAM
dhArmika zikSako dvArA dhArmika abhyAsanA vargo calAvavAmAM Ave che. niyamita
dhArmika parikSAo levAmAM Ave che ane protsAhanarUpe vidyArthIone InAmo ApavAmAM
Ave che. (3) vidyArthIone dhArmika pravAsa, DevalapamenTa zibIro, ugra
tapazcaryAone protsAhana mATe suvidhAo ApavAmAM Ave che. (4) vidyArthIonA
vyakitagata ane vyakitatvanA vikAsa mATe spardhAo, ramata-gamata temaja
vyAyAmanA sAdhano upalabdha hoya che ane semInAro goThavavavAmAM Ave che. (5)
zAkhAnA vidyArthIo dvArA "AMtara zAkhA hariphAI yojavAmAM Ave che. ane
protsAhana rUpe InAmo ApavAmAM Ave che. (6) vidyArthIone "janarala noleja mATe
zAkhAomAM nyujha peparsa, megejIna repharansa bukasa sArA pustako temaja
lAIbrerIo sthApavAmAM AvI che. zrI mahAvIra jaina vidyAlaya, 102 varSa
daramyAna, samAjanA aMdAje 20000 vidyArthIone vidyAnA amRtanuM pAna karAvI
kAryadakSa ane svAzrayI banAvyA ane temanA jIvanane sevAbhAvanA, dhArmikatA
temaja saMskAritAthI suvAsita banAvyA. ucharatI peDhIne vidyAnuM ane preraNAnuM
pAna karAvIne samAjane samRddha, zakitazALI ane saMskArI banAvanArI vidyAlayanI
A mahAparaba atyAre paNa aviratapaNe cAlI rahI che. samAjanA kalyANabaMdhu
mahAnubhAvo ane pUNyamArganA pravAsIo ! udAra Arthika sahakArarUpI ApanI
bhAvanAnAM nIra A mahAparabamAM niraMtara umeratA rahezo! ApanI udAratA Apane
dhanya banAvaze ane samAjane samRddha banAvaze. Avo bevaDo lAbha levAnuM rakhe
koI cukatA ! jJAna prasAra dvArA samajaNane vistAravAno je purUSArtha kare te
jagatano moTo upakArI. zrI mahAvIra jaina vidyAlaye AvA purUSArtha dvArA
samAjane samRddha, zakitazALI ane sukhI banAvavAnuM vinamra jIvana vrata
svIkAryuM che e vrata pAlanamAM sahAyaka thaze te kRtakRtya thavAnI sAthe samAja
kalyANanA sahabhAgI banaze. saune sathavAre ApaNe tana, mana ane dhanathI
vidyAlayanI sevAmAM aharniza ubhA rahIe ane yugapurUSanA AziSasaha, bhavya
bhUtakALanA sahAre suMdara vartamAnanI keDI para kadama milAvI utkRSTa
bhaviSyanuM svapna sidhdha karIe eja abhyarthanA...

Page #393 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Publisher's Statement  According to Jainism, the ultimate goal of a soul is
to attain liberation, which is the state of supreme bliss. To achieve this
state, aspirants must strive for spiritual growth through the path of yoga and
spiritual practices.  The practice of acquiring knowledge is achieved through
the study of rare scriptures and yoga. For this purpose, revered Acharyas have
graciously provided numerous scriptures for self-study. Among them,
*Yogadrushtisamucchya*, authored by Pujya Acharya Haribhadrasuri, stands out as
a beacon.  This book illuminates the path of the soul's gradual development for
the benefit of aspirants.  To help seekers understand the essence of this book,
the esteemed late Dr. Bhagvandas Manaksukhbhai Mehta had written a beautiful
commentary years ago. This commentary was published in book form in 1950 (first
edition) by Seth Shri Manaksukhbhai Tarachand Mehta in memory of the late Smt.
Lilavatiben.  The family of the commentator, the late Dr. Bhagvandas
Manaksukhbhai Mehta, is currently without any members. The family of the
publisher, the late Seth Shri Manaksukhbhai Tarachand Mehta, has given their
consent to republish the *Yogadrushtisamucchya* book, recognizing its religious
significance. This consent was given by their daughter Kokilaben V. Parekh and
Smt. Arunaben. We wholeheartedly appreciate their generosity.  This new edition
is a result of the generous support of Shri Jain Dharma Pedhi, Shri Shrimalipol
Jain Sangh, Bharuch, inspired by Pujya Kanakchandra Shah. We are deeply grateful
to the Sangh for this noble endeavor.  We express our gratitude to Pandit Shri
Pravinchandra Motajiji, the commentator of numerous scriptures from Shri
Gittartha Ganga, for granting permission to reprint the "Bhed Prabhed Vriksh"
table from his published book in this publication.  We are indebted to Shri
Nautambhai Ratilal Shah for the beautiful printing work and to Shri Shrenikbhai
Kirtibhai Shah for the equally beautiful proofreading.  Shri Mahavir Jain
Vidyalaya holds a unique position in the Jain community and educational
institutions. Through the publication of numerous books related to Jinaagamas
and Jain philosophy, Shri Mahavir Jain Vidyalaya is engaged in the dissemination
of knowledge as a means of spreading the influence of Jainism.  We are delighted
to publish the third edition of the *Yogadrushtisamucchya* book. We believe that
this book will be a source of well-being in the lives of our devout and studious
brothers and sisters, fostering the growth of spiritual aspirants, developing
inner nature, and leading everyone towards equality. With faith...  Place:
Mumbai. Date: 29/03/2018 Shri Mahavir Swami Janmakalyanak Din Yours sincerely,
Hitesh Chimanlal Doshi Mukesh Bhaichand Mehta Hasmukh Ugarchand Gadhecha
Honourable Ministers

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prakAzakIya nivedana jinazAsana anusAra jIvanuM mukhya lakSya
paramAnaMdasvarUpa mokSa pAmavAnuM che. A pada pAmavA mumukSuoe yoga ane
adhyAtmanI sAdhanAnA mArge vikAsa sAdhavAno che. jJAna saMpAdananI sAdhanA
virala graMthonA adhyayana ane yogathI ja thAya che. A mATe AcArya pravaroe
anugraha karI svAdhyAya mATe aneka graMtho ApyA che. pU. AcArya
haribhadrasUrIzvarajI racita yogadRSTisamuccaya e saumAM ziramora samAna che.
AtmAnA kramika vikAsanI keDI A graMtha dvArA mumukSuonA lAbhArthe cIMdhavAmAM
AvI che. sAdhakavarga A graMthanA marmane pAme e mATe varSo agAu mAnanIya sva.
DaoN. bhagavAnadAsa manaHsukhabhAI mahetAe suMdara vivecana karyuM hatuM. Ane
zeThazrI manaHsukhabhAI tArAcaMda mahetAe sva. zrImatI lIlAvatIbahenanA
smaraNArthe graMtha svarUpe varSa 1950mAM (prathama AvRtti) prakAzita karyuM.
vivecaka sva. DaoN. bhagavAnadAsa manaHsukhabhAI mahetAnA piravAramAM hAla koI
nathI. prakAzaka sva. zeThazrI manaHsukhabhAI tArAcaMda mahetAnA piravAramAM
temanA suputrI kokilAbahena vi. pArekha tathA zrImatI arUNAbahene zrI
yogadRSTisamuccaya graMthanI dhArmika dRSTie mahattA jANI, zrI mahAvIra jaina
vidyAlayane ene pharIthI prakAzita karavAnI udAra bhAvanA sAthe saMmati Apela
che. jenI amo bhUri bhUri anumodanA karIe chIe. A navasaMpAdana pU. kanakacaMdra
zAhanI preraNAthI zrI jaina dharma peDhI, zrI zrImALI poLa jaina saMgha,
bharUcanI udAra sahAyanuM zubha pariNAma che. A umadA kArya mATe zrI saMghanA
ame atyaMta AbhArI chIe. zrI gItArtha gaMgAnA aneka graMthonA vivecanakartA
paMDitavarya zrI praviNacaMdra motAjIno AbhAra mAnIe chIe ke emaNe emanA
prakAzita graMthamAMthI "bheda prabheda vRkSa" koSTaka A prakAzanamAM chApavAnI
anumati ApI che. punaHmudraNa kArya ati suMdara rIte karanAra zrI nautamabhAI
ratilAla zAhanA ane prupha rIDIMganuM vikaTa kArya paNa eTalI ja suMdara rIte
karavA mATe zrI zreNIkabhAI kIrtibhAI zAhanA RNi chIe. zrI mahAvIra jaina
vidyAlaya e jaina samAja ane zaikSaNika saMsthAomAM AgavuM sthAna dharAve che.
jinazAsananI prabhAvanAnA kArya rUpe jinAgamo temaja jaina tattvajJAnane lagatAM
aneka pustakonuM prakAzana dvArA zrI mahAvIra jaina vidyAlaya jJAna prasAranuM
kArya kare che. zrI yogadRSTisamuccaya graMthanI trIjI AvRtti prakAzana karatAM
amo harSanI lAgaNI anubhavIe chIe. dharmAnurAgI abhyAsu bhAI-bahenonA jIvanamAM
A graMtha kalyANanuM kAraNa bane, AdhyAtmika mumukSuono vikAsa thAya ane
AMtaraprakRtti vikasAvI sau samatA prApta kare evI zradhdhA saha... sthaLa :
muMbaI. tA. 29/03/2018 zrI mahAvIrasvAmI janmakalyANaka dina li. bhavadIya
hiteza cImanalAla dozI mukeza bhAyacaMda mahetA hasamukha ugaracaMda gaDhecA
mAnad maMtrIzrIo

Page #394 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
1 3 The Mangalacharan of the Critic, the Kalasha Kavya of Yogadristi Whose
origin is the Himala, the abode of Malini Jinavadan, Whose upward rise is on the
head of the Ganadhar-Har; the gods and men are served by the full, sweet water,
The protectors of the Bhagavata Shruta Ganga are we! The sweet nectar flows,
removing the delusion of the self, It establishes the path for all, doing good
to the world; like the best boat in the ocean of birth, I bow to the words of
the Jainendra, the mother of Shiva-Sukha. Anustup, infinite in the saints, one,
the lineage plays; Like the ocean of nectar, I bow to the mental solace. | The
high caste flies in the sky of consciousness, O Swan! O self-formed one; you are
the critics of the soul, | You play in the minds of the seekers. You are the
master of pure consciousness, You are the essence of the soul; you are the
enjoyer of the qualities of the soul, You are the yogi of the experiences of the
soul. Remembering the great guru, Srimad Haribhadra Suriendra Deva; to follow
his activities, I wish to criticize something in one place. This is the
Salfaastra critic, I will criticize Sumanananda's, and I will make the Kalasha
of Yogadristi, I will take the nectar of yoga, born of it. 6अ

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 1 3 vivecanakAranuM maMgalAcaraNa yogadRSTi kaLazakAvya mAlinI jinavadana
himAdri udbhava sthAna jenuM, gaNadhara-hara zIrSe Urdhva utthAna jenuM; surasa
salila pUrNA sevya suro narone, bhagavatA zrutagaMgA rakSako te amone !
prazamarasa jharaMtI AtmabrAMti haratI, jagata hita karatI pathya saune TharatI;
bhavajalataraNI je zreSTha naukA samANI, zivasukha jananI te vaMduM jainendra
vANI anuSTapu anaMtA saMtamAM eka, vilasatatI saMtatA; sudhAsiMdhu samI tene,
manogaMdana vaMdanA. | upajAti UMcA cidAkAza viSe uDatA, he haMsa ! hejAtma
svarUpavaMtA; AtmA vivecI parane vamo cho, | mumukSunA mAnasamAM ramo cho. svAmI
tame zuddha svacetanAnA, rAmI tame Atama bhAvanAnA; bhogI tame AtmataNA guNonA,
yogI tame Atma anubhavonA. hade smarI sadgururAja evA, zrImad haribhadrasUrIMdra
devA; savRtti tenI anuvartavAne, icchI vivecuM kaMI eka sthAne. salphAstra
vivecanakAriNI A, TIkA karuM sumananaMdanI A, ne yogadaSTi kaLazo karuM chuM,
yogAmRta saMbhUta te dharuM chuM. 6a

Page #395 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Page No. 323 325 329 333 334 339 341 345 348 348 Index Verse No. Subject 86 The
genders of the Avedya-Sanvedya-Pad that has been conquered The form of Kutarka
88-89 The remedy for conquering the Avedya-Sanvedya-Pad The futility of Kutarka
91-92 The form of Kutarka 93-94 Inappropriate alternatives prevailing in Kutarka
95-97 The activity of Kutarka based on the support of only an example 98
Inability to attain the transcendental meaning through dry logic Attaining the
transcendental meaning through Agama 100-101 The remedy for attaining the
transcendental meaning: Study of Agama, Anumana and Yoga 102-103 In the matter
of Sarvagna, the absence of different opinions from the ultimate truth and the
resort to the difference of Sarvagna from delusion 104 From the general, all
philosophers are worshippers of one Sarvagna 105 From the specific, the
indecision of Sarvagna for the hidden 106 The form of the worshipper of Sarvagna
from the general 107-108 All philosophers are worshippers of one Sarvagna due to
the distant difference 109 Despite the difference in names like Buddha-Kapiladi,
there is no difference in Sarvagna 110 The form of Deva-vishayak Chitra-bhakti
and Achitra-bhakti 111-112 The difference and form of the beings who perform
Chitra-bhakti and Achitra-bhakti 113-114 The reason for Chitra-bhakti in worldly
Devas 115 Different types of determination of people in Ishta-purta Karmas
116-117 The form of Ishta-karma and Purta-karma 118 Even though the same, the
difference in fruits due to the difference in determination in performance and
the predominance of determination towards the attainment of fruit 119 The reason
for the difference in determination in performance 120 Even though the same, the
difference in fruits due to Buddhi, Jnana and Asamoh in performance 121-122 The
form of Buddhi, Jnana and Asamoh and the example in the difference 123 The
characteristic of Sadanushthana 124 Attainment of worldly fruits from Dharma-
anushthana performed with Buddhi 125 Attainment of Moksha-phal from Dharma-
anushthana performed with Jnana 126 Attainment of quick Moksha-phal from Dharma-
anushthana performed with Asamoh 127 The form of beings who perform Dharma-
anushthana with Asamoh 128 One path of Shama-parayana for all philosophers who
go from Bhav to the past path 353 356 357 358 360 362 365 366 368 371 372 375
376 378 378 381 385 386 389 392 394

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pAnA naM. 323 325 329 333 334 339 341 345 348 u48 anukramaNikA zloka naM.
viSaya 86 avedyasaMvedyapada jitAyuM che tenA liMgo kutarkanuM svarUpa 88-89
avedyasaMvedyapadane jItavAno upAya kutarkanI asAratA 91-92 kutarkanuM svarUpa
93-94 kutarkamAM pravartatA anucita vikalpo 95-97 daSTAntamAtranA AlaMbanathI
kutarkanI pravRtti 98 zuSka tarkathI atIndriya arthanI aprApti AgamathI
atIndriya arthanI prApti 100-101 atIndriya arthanI prAptino upAya : Agama,
anumAna ane yogano abhyAsa 102-103 sarvajJanA viSayamAM paramArthathI sarvajJanA
bhinna abhiprAyano abhAva ane mohathI sarvajJanA bhedanuM AzrayaNa 104
sAmAnyathI sarva darzanakAro eka sarvajJanA upAsaka 105 vizeSathI chadmasthane
sarvajJano anirNaya 106 sAmAnyathI sarvajJanA upAsakanuM svarUpa 107-108 sarva
darzanakAro durAsanna bhedathI eka sarvajJanA upAsaka 109 buddha-kapilAdi
nAmabheda hovA chatAM sarvajJamAM bhedano abhAva 110 devaviSayaka citrabhakti
ane acitrabhaktinuM svarUpa 111-112 citrabhakti ane acitrabhakti karanArA jIvonA
bheda ane svarUpa 113-114 saMsArI devomAM citrabhakti thavAnuM kAraNa 115
ISTApUrta karmomAM lokonA judA-judA prakAranA adhyavasAya 116-117 ISTakarma ane
pUrtakarmanuM svarUpa 118 samAna paNa anuSThAnamAM adhyavasAyanA bhedathI
phaLabheda ane phaLaprApti pratye adhyavasAyanI pradhAnatA 119 anuSThAnamAM
adhyavasAyano bheda thavAnuM kAraNa 120 samAna paNa anuSThAnamAM buddhi, jJAna
ane asaMmohathI phaLabheda 121-122 buddhi, jJAna ane asaMmohanuM svarUpa ane
bhedamAM daSTAMta 123 sadanuSThAnanuM lakSaNa 124 buddhipUrvakanA karAyelA
dharmAnuSThAnathI saMsAraphaLanI prApti 125 jJAnapUrvakanA karAyelA
dharmAnuSThAnathI mokSaphaLanI prApti 126 asaMmohapUrvaka karAyelA
dharmAnuSThAnathI zIghra mokSaphaLanI prApti 127 asaMmohapUrvaka dharmAnuSThAna
karanArA jIvonuM svarUpa 128 bhavathI atIta mArgamAM janArA sarva darzanakArono
eka zamaparAyaNa mArga 353 3pa6 3pa7 358 360 362 365 366 368 371 372 375 376 378
378 381 385 386 389 392 394

Page #396 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Page No. 398 405 408 414 418 421 424 429 430 431 432 433 Verse No. Subject 129
to 131 The nature of Paratattva, the names of different Darshanas that describe
it and its characteristics 132-133 All Darshanakaras worship one omniscient -
reasons for accepting it 134-135 Kapil and Sugat are omniscient, yet the reason
for the difference in their teachings 136-137 Tirthankara's teachings differ due
to the difference in the audience and the country 138 Difference in teachings of
Kapil, Sugat, etc. due to the difference in Nayas 139 The fallacy of refuting
the teachings of other Darshanakaras without understanding their ultimate
meaning 140-142 The fallacy of refuting the statement of any Darshanakara
without understanding its meaning 143 The futility of debate on the subject of
extra-sensory objects 144 The impossibility of attaining extra-sensory knowledge
through inference 145 Bhartuhari's argument on the impossibility of attaining
extra-sensory knowledge through inference 146 Reasons for the impossibility of
attaining extra-sensory knowledge through Hetuवाद 147-188 Dry logic is to be
abandoned for the seeker of liberation and reasons for accepting it 149-152 In
matters of Dharma, wise people should abandon dry logic and engage in
appropriate activities 153 Conclusion of Dipra दृष्टि Verse 154 to 161
Description of Stira दृष्टि 154 The nature of Stira दृष्टि 155-157 The nature of
Bhav and Moksha as seen through the difference in Granthis 158 The discerning
Pratyahar of a Samyagdrusti Jiva 159-161 The nature of the superior Shruta-
predominant contemplation of Samyagdrusti Jivas Verse 162 to 169 Description of
Kanta दृष्टि 162-163 The nature of Kanta दृष्टि 164 Due to the knowledge of
Akshepak, Yogis with Kanta दृष्टि experience Bhogas but not for the purpose of
Bhav 165-166 The nature of the Asang activities of Yogis with Kanta दृष्टि even
during the time of Bhogas 167-168 Even with the practice of Dharma, Jivas with
Paramarth बुद्धि during Bhogas do not attain the path of Moksha 169 Constant
benefit from the Mimamsa of Yogis with Kanta दृष्टि Verse 100 to 100 The nature
of Prabhashti 17) The nature of Prabhashti 171 Tattva-pratipatti 437 442 453 461
487 495 513 526 531 538 546 555 568

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pAnA naM. 398 405 408 414 418 421 424 429 430 431 432 433 zloka naM. viSaya 129
thI 131 paratattvanuM svarUpa, ene kahenArA bhinna-bhinna darzanonAM nAmo ane
enA lakSaNa 132-133 sarva darzanakAronA upAsya eka sarvajJa - teno svIkAranA
kAraNo 134-135 kapila ane sugata sarvajJa hovA chatAM dezanAbhedanuM kAraNa
136-137 tIrthaMkaranI eka dezanAthI zrotAnA bhedathI bodhano bheda 138
nayabhedathI kapila-sugata Adi RSionI dezanAno bheda 139 anya darzanakAronA
dezanAbhedanA paramArthane jANyA vagara tenA nirAkaraNamAM doSaprAptinI yukti
140-142 koIpaNa darzanakAranA kathananA abhiprAyane jANya vagara tenA
nirAkaraNamAM doSaprAptinA kAraNo 143 atIndriya padArtha viSayamAM chamanA
vivAdamAM anarthakAritA 144 anumAnathI atIndriya arthanI aprApti 145 anumAnathI
atIndriya arthanI aprAptimAM bhartuharInI dalIla 146 hetuvAdathI atIndriya
arthanI aprAptinA kAraNo 147-188 mumukSu mATe zuSka tarka tyAjya ane enA
svIkAranA kAraNo 149-152 dharmanA viSayamAM zuSka tarkane choDIne buddhimAnoe
karavA yogya ucita pravRttio 153 dIprA dRSTino upasaMhAra zloka 154 thI 161
sudhI sthirA dRSTinuM nirUpaNa 154 sthirA daSTinuM svarUpa 155-157
granthibhedathI dekhAtuM bhavanuM ane mokSanuM svarUpa 158 samyagRSTi jIvano
vivekapUrvakano pratyAhAra 159-161 samyaguSTi jIvonuM uttama zrutapradhAna
AlocananuM svarUpa zloka 162 thI 169 sudhI kAntAdeSTinuM nirUpaNa 162-163
kAntAdRSTinuM svarUpa 164 AkSepaka jJAnanA kAraNe kAntAdRSTivALA yogIone bhogo
paNa bhavanA ahetu 165-166 bhogakALamAM paNa kAntAdRSTivALA yogIonI asaMga
pravRttinuM svarUpa 167-168 bhogamAM paramArtha buddhivALA jIvone dharmanI
pravRttithI paNa mokSamArganI aprApti 169 kAntAdRSTivALA yogIonI mImAMsAthI sadA
hitanI prApti zloka 100 thI 100 sudhI prabhASTinuM svarUpa 17) prabhASTinuM
svarUpa 171 tattvapratipatti 437 442 453 461 487 495 513 526 531 538 pa46 papapa
568

Page #397 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Verse No. 172 173-174 175 176 177 178 179 180 181-182 183-184 185-186 187 188
189 190-191 192-197 198-203 204-206 207-208 209 210 211 212 213 214 215-218
219-221 222 223–224 225 226-227 228  ## Topic The essential nature of happiness
and sorrow The impermanence of happiness from **puṇya** and the permanence of
happiness from meditation The path of **sat** activity in **asanga** practice
Names of different visionaries in **asanga** practice Conclusion Explanation of
**parārdhaṣṭi** from verse 108 to 186 The nature of **parārdhaṣṭi** The nature
of the **nirācāra** state of yogis residing in **parārdhaṣṭi** Differences in
conduct in begging, etc., of yogis with other visions and **parārdhaṣṭi**
Attainment of **kṣapaka** series and **kevala jñāna** through **asanga** state
The nature of the soul, knowledge of the soul, and the veil of karma through
illustration **Bhavakṣaya** through **yoga nirodha** after attainment of
**kevala jñāna** The nature of the liberated soul The nature of the great
disease of **bhavarūpa** Reasons for accepting the **bhava** disease that is not
cured The technique of accepting the liberated form for one who is free from the
**bhavarūpa** disease Reasons for the impossibility of liberation in
**kṣaṇikavāda** Reasons for the incompatibility of liberation in the absolute
eternal perspective Reasons for freedom from the disease The purpose of writing
the text The nature of the recipient of this text The nature of **kula yogi**
and **gotra yogi** The special characteristic of **kula yogi** The nature of
**pravṛtta cakra yogi** The recipient of this text is the **ādya avancaka yogi**
The nature of the five **yamas** of non-violence, etc. The nature of **icchā
yama**, **pravṛtti yama**, **sthira yama**, and **siddhi yama** The nature of
**yoga avancaka**, **kriyā avancaka**, and **phala avancaka yoga** The nature of
the benefit received by **kula** and other yogis from this text The difference
between the perspective of **tattva** and action without attachment The natural
activity of worthy beings in listening to the text Reasons for not giving this
text to unworthy beings The method of giving this text to worthy beings
according to the rules  ## Page No. 573 575 579 584 586 190 595 599 603 607 613
628 631 638 642 646 654 664 671 681 684 692 703 708 711 717 732 743 745 749 750
756

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zloka naM. 172 173-174 175 176 177 178 179 180 181-182 183-184 185-186 187 188
189 190-191 192-197 198-203 204-206 207-208 209 210 211 212 213 214 215-218
219-221 222 223-224 225 226-227 228 viSaya sukha-duHkhanuM tAttvika lakSaNa
puNyanA sukhanI anityatA ane dhyAnanA sukhanI nityatA asaMga anuSThAnamAM sat
pravRttipada asaMga anuSThAnonA judA-judA darzanakAronA nAmo upasaMhAra zloka
108 thI 186 sudhI parArdaSTinuM nirUpaNa parArdaSTinuM svarUpa parAdaSTimAM
rahelA yogIonA nirAcArapadanuM svarUpa anya daSTivALA ane parAkraSTivALA yogIonA
bhikSATanAdimAM AcArabheda asaMgabhAvathI kSapakazreNI ane kevaLajJAnanI prApti
dRSTAntathI jIvanuM, jIvanA jJAnanuM ane karmanA AvaraNanuM svarUpa
kevaLajJAnanI prApti pachI yoganirodha dvArA bhavakSaya muktAtmAnuM svarUpa
bhavarUpa mahAvyAdhinuM svarUpa nirupacarita bhava vyAdhinA svIkAranA kAraNo
bhava vyAdhithI muktane muktarUpe svIkAranI yukti kSaNikavAdamAM mokSanA
asaMbhavanA kAraNo ekAnta nityapakSamAM mokSanI asaMgatinA kAraNo vyAdhi
muktatAnA kAraNo grantha racanAnuM prayojana A granthanA adhikArInuM svarUpa
kulayogI ane gotrayogInuM svarUpa kulayogInuM vizeSa lakSaNa
pravRttacakrayogInuM svarUpa Adya avaMcakayogI A granthanA adhikArI ahiMsAdi
pAMca yamonuM svarUpa IcchAyama, pravRttiyama, sthirayama, siddhiyamanuM svarUpa
yogAvaMcaka, kriyAvaMcaka ane phalAvaMcakayoganuM svarUpa A granthathI kulAdi
yogIone thatA upakAranuM svarUpa tattvano pakSapAta ane bhAvazUnya kriyA e
vaccenuM aMtara yogya jIvonI granthazravaNamAM svAbhAvika pravRtti ayogya jIvane
prastuta grantha na ApavAnA kAraNo yogya jIvane vidhipUrvaka prastuta grantha
ApavAnI vidhi Wan Wan Wan  pAnA naM. 573 575 579 584 586 190 595 599 603 607 613
628 631 638 642 646 654 664 671 681 684 692 703 708 711 717 732 743 745 749 750
756

Page #398 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Yoga is the best Kalpataru, Yoga is the supreme Chintamani. Yoga is the main
Dharma, Yoga is the self-attained Siddhi.  Oh! This Atma is of infinite power,
illuminating the universe. By the power of Dhyana Shakti, it moves the three
worlds.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 yogaH kalpataruH zreSThaH, yogazcitAmaNiH paraH 1 yoga: pradhAna dharmAMLAM,
yoH siddhaH svayaMpra:|| zrI haribhadrasUrijIkRta yogabindu aho !
anantavIryA'yamAtmA vizvaprakAzakaH  /  trailokyaM cAlayatveva
dhyAnazaktiprabhAvataH 11 zrI zubhacaMdrAcAryajIkRta jJAnArNava - yoga kalpataru
zreSTha che, cintAmaNi para yoga; yoga pradhAna ja dharmamAM, siddhi svayaMvara
yoga aho ! anaMtavIrya A, AtmA vizva prakAzato; dhyAnazakti prabhAve je,
tralokyane caLAvato.

Page #399 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Diima:**  Aghaseva Kutarkathah Nivritti (323) Visham Kutarkagraha Nida
Adhikar,  Etla Mate Jayaling (Jayana Chihno) Kahe Che -  Jiyaamane Cha
Niyamadetasminstatvato Nrinaam. Nivartate Svato'tyantam Kutarkavishamgrahah.
||86||   This verse, according to the rule, from the truth, for humans,
completely, naturally, removes the grasp of the contradictory logic. 86.
Meaning - And when this Avedyasamvedyapada is conquered, by the rule, humans,
from the truth, completely, naturally, are freed from the grasp of contradictory
logic.   Commentary - It is easily overcome, this contradictory logic; like an
elephant, it is killed by the near one, it does the bad thinking... Manmohan -
Shri. A.D.S. 4-11  And this Adyasamvedyapada, which is the cause of Maha
Mithyatva, and is known by the words like Pashupana, etc., when it is conquered,
from the ultimate truth, the human, the contradictory logic, in the form of a
grasp, naturally, goes away. In Upmaha Mithyatva, the Avedyasamvedyapada is
described in great detail, from that, it is clear that whatever the cause of
Maha Mithyatva, it is that Avedyasamvedyapada. Due to its influence, the Jiva is
ignorant of the Atma, holds the Atma-buddhi in the Anatma, considers the self
and the other as one, considers the body as the Atma, forgets the knowledge of
the Atma, considers the Sat as Asat and the Asat as Sat. In this way, the cause
of deep Mithyatva - Asatva - is this Adyasamvedyapada. And due to this
confusion, it is called Pashupana, Gamarpana, Abujhpana, Moodhpana, etc.
Because, "The knowledge of the confused, like animals, is completely absorbed by
external objects, and the self-substance, i.e., the self-form, is abandoned, and
becomes empty. Thus, in the form of...  Vritti-Giyamane Ja Niyamatasmin - And
this Avedyasamvedyapada, by the rule, is conquered; that is, when this Maha
Mithyatva, in the form of a restriction, known by the words like Pashu, etc., is
conquered,  Svar - From the truth, from the ultimate truth, to the humans, to
the men,  Nivartate Svat: - It is naturally, from the self, without the
instruction of another, it is removed. It is overcome - due to the absence of
the cause, due to the absence of the cause.  Atyantam - Completely, due to the
knowledge-yoga, due to the knowledge of the Agama authority.  Jitapinaak -
Kutarkarupa Vishamgraha - The contradictory logic, in the form of a grasp, like
a planet (planet, sun, moon, etc., or ghost, or crocodile).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dImAHi aghasave kutarkathaha nivRtti (3ra3) viSama kutarkagraha nidA adhikAra
eTalA mATe jayaliMge (jayanA cihno) kahe che- jIyamAne ca
niyamAdetasmiMstattvato nRNAm  /  nivartate svato'tyantaM kutarkaviSamagrahaH
// 86 //  eha chaMtAtAM niyamathI, tatvathI narane sAva svayaM nivarse graha
sAme, viSama kutarka bhAva, 86. artha--ane A avevasavedyapadano jaya karAtAM
niyamathI manuSyane kutarka viSama graha tatvathI atyaMtapaNe ApoApa nivRtta
thAya che-TaLe che. vivecana te chate saheje TaLeja, viSama kutaka prakAra; dara
nikaTa hAthI haNejI, kare e baThara vicAra...manamohana"--zrI. e da. sa. 4-11
ane A adyasaMvedyapada ke je mahAmithyAtvanuM kAraNa che, ane pazupaNA Adi
zabdathI vAca-oLakhAvA yecuM che, te jyAre chatAtuM jAya che tyAre paramArthathI
puruSane viSama kutarkarUpa graha potAnI meLe ja cekasa nitI jAya che.
upamahAmithyAtva ramAM atyaMta vistArathI avedhasaMvedyapadanuM varNana karyuM,
te uparathI nibaMdhana spaSTa che ke mahAmithyAtvanuM kAraNa je kaI hoya, te te
avedya saMvedyapada ja che. tenA prabhAvathI ja jIva anAtmajJa hoya che,
anAtmAmAM Atmabuddhi dhare che, sva-parane ekatva adhyAsa kare che, dehane ja
AtmA mAnI AtmAnuM bhAna bhUlI jAya che, sane asat ane asat sat ciMtave che.
ItyAdi prakAre gADha mithyApaNAnuM-asatpaNAnuM kAraNa A adyasaMvedya pada che.
ane AvA abUjhapaNAne lIdhe ja ene pazupaNuM, gamArapaNuM, abUjhapaNuM,
mUDhapaNuM ityAdi nAma chAje che. kAraNa ke "pazu jevA abUjhanuM jJAna bAhya
padArthothI sarvathA pIvAI jAya che ne nija dravyakti arthAt svasvarUpanuM
pragaTapaNuM choDI dIdhAthI khAlI thatuM jAya che. Ama para rUpamAM ja vRtti-
gIyamane ja niyamatasmina-ane A asaMvedya pada niyamathI chatAtAM; eTale ke A
mahAmithyAtvanA nibaMdhanarUpa, pazutra Adi zabdathI vAya evuM adya pada chatAtI
veLAe, Rvara:-taravathI, paramArthathI, jhUnAM-narone, puruSone, niravartate
thatada-svata: nite che, AtmAthI ja potAnI meLe ja, paranA upadeza vinA niva'
che. TaLI jAya che-nimittanA abhAve naimittikanA abhAvane lIdhe. atyaMtaM-
atyaMtapaNe, samajJAnayogane lIdhe, Agama prAmANyanA jANapaNuM thakI.
jItapinAka-katakarU5 viSama graha -daSTa evA apAya hetupaNAthakI. ( apAya
hatapaNuM pragaTa dIThAmAM AvatuM hovAthI. ) graha jevo graha (graha sUrya
caMdrAdi, athavA bhUta-pizAca, athavA magara.)

Page #400 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(324) Yagadasisamuccaya The knowledge of an animal that has become tranquil is
clear from all sides. But the fact that it is what it is, that it is here in its
form, is the knowledge of the Syadvadi, which is filled with the nature of a
dense substance that rises above the extremely agitated, and it becomes unified,
it remains floating above like an owl. Such an incomprehensible, ignorant
animal-like false reasoning, like an unperceivable, perceivable state, as it is
conquered, so the false reasoning, subject to it, the false reasoning, the
heterogeneous fallacies that arise from it, disappear on their own, are removed;
because the rule of logic is that the absence of the cause of the false
reasoning, or the absence of the cause, leads to the absence of the effect. The
birthplace of fallacies is false reasoning. Therefore, as false reasoning is
removed, or with it, fallacies also disappear, because when the root cause is
eliminated, the subsequent cause becomes rootless and unsupported. Just as a
building collapses when the main supporting pillar breaks, so the building of
fallacies collapses completely when the foundation of false reasoning breaks.
The airy castles of fallacies disappear in a flash. Just as when a king is
conquered, the entire army is conquered, so when false reasoning is conquered,
its family-like army of fallacies is also conquered. And thus, these fallacies
are destroyed automatically, on their own; there is no need for anyone else's
instruction. Fallacy means corrupt reasoning, false, wrong reasoning, which is
inherently corrupt, wrong, false, and false, that is fallacy. The grasp of this
fallacy, the crooked obsession, the heterogeneous attachment, is rightly called
so. Because it truly dwells. It harasses and harasses the living being;
moreover, there is no place for this fallacy, no order, it jumps this way and
that, like a turban that can be worn in any way! To make the wrong right and the
right wrong is its work. And so on, the heterogeneity of fallacy is evident.
This heterogeneous 'grasp' of fallacy is compared to a planet in many ways: (1)
A planet is the sun, moon, Rahu, etc. Just as a malevolent planet, an evil
planet, afflicts a human being, causing suffering, it troubles him, so a corrupt
planet in the form of fallacy afflicts a human being, causing suffering, it
troubles him. Or, just as a corrupt planet like Rahu, like a sinful planet,
swallows the moon, causing it to become hot, so this corrupt, heterogeneous,
sinful planet swallows the soul, the moon, and makes it extremely + "
बाह्यार्थैः परिपीतमुज्झित निज प्रव्यक्तिरिक्ती भव द्वितं पररूप एव परितो ज्ञानं
पशोः सोदति । यत्तत्तत्तदिह स्वरूपत इति स्याद्वादिनस्तत्पुन - हूंत्ता
नषनवमात्रमरतઃ पૂર્ણ સમુન્દ્ર જ્ઞત્તિ ।। શ્રી અમૃતચંદ્રાચાર્યજી કૃત સમયસારક્લેશ,

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (324) yAgadazisamuccaya vizrAMta thayeluM pazunuM jJAna cAtaraphathI sIdAya
che. paNa je tat-te che, te tat ahI svarUpathI che, evuM syAdvAdInuM jJAna te
atyaMta-unmagna upara tarI AvatA ghana svabhAvabharathI pUrNa thai samunmana
pAme che, ullusI AvI-upara taratuM rahe che.'x AvuM abUjha-gamAra pazupA jevuM
mithyAtvakAraNa avedyasa'vedyapada jema jema jItAya che, tema tema te
mithyAtvane AdhIna-te mithyAtvathI ja udbhavatA evA viSama kutarka rUpa graho
peAtAnI meLe ja navatI jAya che, dUra thAya che; kAraNa mithyAtvajaya ke
nimittanA abhAva thAya eTale naimittikanA abhAva thAya ja evA niyama kutarka
graha- che. kutarkonuM. janmasthAna mithyAtva che. eTale jevu' mithyAtva dUra
thAya, nivRtti ke tenI sAtheAsAthe ja kutarka paNa cAlyA jAya che, kAraNa ke
mULa kAraNu nimUla thatAM uttara kAraNa nirmUla nirAdhAra thAya che. mukhya
AdhAra sthaMbha tUTI paDatAM jema makAna jamInadosta thAya che, tema mithyAtvane
AdhAra tUTI paDatAM kutarkanI imArata ekadama tUTI paDe che. kutarkanA havAI
killA (Castles in the air) jhapATAbaMdha UDI jAya che. jema rAjA jItAI jatAM
AkhI senA jItAI jAya che, tema mithyAtvane| jaya thatAM tenA parivArarUpa
kutaka-senA paNa jItAI jAya che. ane Ama A kutarka naSTa thAya che te ApeAApa
ja, peAtAnI meLe ja; emAM pachI bIjAnA upadezanI paNa jarUra rahetI nathI.
kutarka eTale kutsita tarka, asat--khATA tarka, je svarUpathI pAte ja duSTa che,
khATA che, asat che, mithyA che te kutarka. A kutarkanA graha eTale kuTila
AvezarUpa pakaDa, abhiniveza viSama' kahyo te yathAtha che. kAraNa ke te
kharekhara vasame che. jIvane herAna herAna karI mUke che; vaLI te kutarkanuM
kAi jAtanuM ThekANu* nathI, DhaMgadhaDA nathI, Ama paNa kUde ne tema paNa phde,
vANIAnI pAghaDI jema game tema pheravAya ! khATAnu sAcuM ne sAcAnu khATuM
karavu' e enuM kAma che. ityAdi prakAre kutarkanuM viSamapaNu' pragaTa che. AvA
kutarkane viSama 'graha' nI upamA aneka prakAre ghaTe che:--(1) graha eTale
sUrya, caMdra, rAhu Adi graha. temAM duSTa graha-aniSTa graha jema manuSyane
pIDAkArI vasameA thai paDe che, naDe che, tema kutarka rUpa duSTa graha
manuSyane herAna viSama graha'herAna karI nAMkhI vasame| pIDAkArI thaI paDe che,
kanaDe che. athavA jevA kutarka rAhu jevA pApagraha jema caMdrane grasI tene
uttApakArI thAya che, tema A kutaka'rUpI viSama pApagraha AtmArUpa caMdrane
grasI lai tene atyaMta + " bAhyArthaiH paripItamujjhita nija pravyaktiriktI
bhava dvitaM pararUpa eva parito jJAnaM pazoH sodati  /  yattattattadiha
svarUpata iti syAdvAdinastatpuna - hUMttA naSanavamAtramarataH pUrNa samundra
jJatti  /  /  zrI amRtacaMdrAcAryajI kRta samayasArakleza,

Page #401 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Dimari:**  The vicious, illogical, and deceptive mind is an enemy to the soul
(325) and causes great suffering. Thus, it is a heavy "Vasa" (obsession) (2).
Or, "Graha" (obsession) means a ghost, demon, or plant. Just as a ghost, demon,
or plant may cling to someone, not leaving them alone, holding them captive, and
causing them distress, so too, this vicious ghost, demon, or plant, when it
clings to a being, does not leave them alone, holding them captive, making it
difficult to remove, and causing them great suffering. For one whose mind is
filled with a vicious ghost (obsession, delusion), it becomes very difficult to
remove it, it becomes a great challenge to overcome this affliction! Thus,
illogical reasoning is a "Vicious Graha" (obsession) (3). Or, "Graha"
(obsession) means a crocodile. Just as a crocodile, when it grabs something,
makes it very difficult to escape its grasp, so too, one who is caught in the
clutches of a vicious Graha (obsession), like a crocodile, finds it very
difficult to escape its grip. In this way too, illogical reasoning is truly a
"Vicious Graha" (obsession). Thus, in any sense of the word "Graha" (obsession),
whether it be a wicked planet, a ghost, or a crocodile, the term "Graha"
(obsession) is aptly applied to illogical reasoning, and it is also a "Vicious
Graha" (obsession). It is a heavy, difficult, and challenging obstacle, which
makes one go astray and leads to misfortune.  Such a being, who holds one
captive, who keeps one in their grasp, the vicious, sinful Graha (obsession), or
ghost, or crocodile, upon attaining the state of non-violence, automatically
releases its hold. Just as the recitation of mantras for planetary peace brings
an end to the suffering caused by a sinful Graha (obsession), just as the
chanting of mantras by a sorcerer removes the possession of a ghost, just as a
strike to the vital spot releases the grip of a crocodile; so too, the state of
non-violence, the recitation of mantras, and the use of weapons, like planetary
peace, automatically release the hold of the vicious Graha (obsession) (in all
three senses, as far as possible) from the father.  Is this illogical reasoning
unique? To this, it is said:  "Bodharogaḥ śamāpāyaḥ śraddhābhaṅgo'bhimāna-kṛt |
Kutarkaścetaso vyaktaṁ bhāvaśatruḥ aneka-dhā || 87 ||"  **Commentary:**
"Ghoshon:" - Due to the attachment to passion, it causes harm to the established
state of being, and thus, it is a source of suffering. It is a generator of
false attachment, which leads to harm.  "Shraddham:" - It is a destroyer of
faith, due to the inability to understand the meaning of the scriptures. It is a
generator of pride and arrogance, due to the false belief in one's own
understanding.  Thus, "Jiyamaane'tra rājñīva camacara-paricchadaḥ | Nivartite
tataḥ śīrghā viṣamakaḥ" - "When the king is victorious, his army becomes more
powerful and his authority increases." - Shri Kshamaala.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dImAri: viSama kutarkagraha-cittane bhAvazatru (325) tApa pamADe che. Ama te
bhAre "vasa" graha che. (2) athavA "graha' eTale bhUtapizAca-jhoDa. jema keIne
vasamuM bhUta, pizAca ke choDa vaLagyuM hoya, te tene keDe na mUke, tene grahI
rAkhe, pakaDI-jakaDI rAkhe, ane tene herAna parezAna karI nAkhe, tema A
kutakarUpa bhUta, pizAca ke choDa jIvane je vaLagyuM hoya, to te tene keDe
mUkatuM nathI, tene grahI-pakaDI-jakaDI rAkhe che, kADhavuM muzkela thaI paDI
tene khUba kanaDe che. jenA manamAM kutakarUpa bhUta (Obsession, Delusion)
bharAI gayuM hoya, tene te kADhavuM bhArI vasamuM thaI paDe che, e balAne
kADhavI bhArI vikaTa thaI paDe che! Ama paNa kutarka viSama graha" che. (3)
athavA "graha' eTale magara. magara je kaIne grahe, pakaDe, to tenI pakaDamAMthI
chUTavuM bahu muzkela-vasamuM che, tema kutakarUpa grahanA-magaranA paMjAmAM je
sapaDAye, tenI dADhamAM je bhIDA, tene paNa tenA sakaMjAmAMthI chUTavuM bhArI
vasamuM thaI paDe che. A rIte paNa kutaka kharekhara ! viSama graha che.-Ama
duSTa graha, bhUta, ke magaraema grahanA keI paNa arthamAM kutakane "graha nAma
ApyuM te yathArtha che, ane te paNa "viSama graha che. vasama-zamA vikaTa, sama
kare-sIdhe pAMsa kara durghaTa e che. Avo jIvane grahI rAkhanAro, pakaDI-jakaDI
rAkhanAre kutarkarUpa pApagraha, athavA bhUta, athavA magaramaccha,
asaMvedyapadana4 jaya thatAM, ApoApa potAnI pakaDa mUkI che. jema grahazAMtinA
pAThathI pApagrahane upadrava virAma pAme che, jema bhuvAnA maMtrapAThathI bhUta
Aveza-jhoDa utarI jAya che, jema marmasthaLamAM prahAra AdithI magaranI pakaDa
chUTI jAya che; tema aghasavedyapadanA jayarUpa grahazAMtithI, maMtrapAThathI,
zastraprahArathI kutarUpa viSama graha (yathAsaMbhava traNe arthamAM) pitAne
graha-pakaDa ApoApa cheDI de che A kutaka ke viziSTa che? te mATe kahe che -
bodharogaH zamApAyaH zraddhAbhaGgo'bhimAnakRt  /  kutarkazcetaso vyaktaM
bhAvazatruranekadhA  // 87 //  vRtti:-ghoSona:-bApane rAgarUpa,-te
yathAvasthitanA upaghAta bhAvane lIdhe, ramAya -mane apAyarUpa-hAni
karanAra,-asadu abhinivezanA janakapaNa thakI.
zraddhAma:-zraddhAbhaMgarU5,-Agama arthanI apratipattine lIdhe, amimanachA-
abhimAna karanAra mithyAbhimAnanA janakapaNAthI. ema x "jIyamAne'tra rAjJIva
camacaraparicchadaH  /  nivartite tata: zIrgha viSamakaH "--ii yazo kRta dvA,
DhA, "nRpati jItatAM chatie daLa pura ne adhikAra."--zrI kSamALA.

Page #402 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(326) A collection of fallacies is a poison to the wise, a destroyer of faith;
It fills the mind with doubt, manifesting in many ways. 87. Meaning - It is a
disease to the intellect, a hindrance to calmness, a destroyer of faith, and a
source of pride for those who indulge in it. This fallacy is a foe to the mind
in many ways. Commentary: This harmful fallacy, which is called a "graha" (a
grasping, clinging), is evil and destructive. Its specific nature is described
here. This fallacy (1) is a disease to the intellect, (2) a hindrance to
calmness, (3) a destroyer of faith, and (4) a source of pride. Thus, it is a foe
to the mind in many ways, an enemy of the ultimate goal. The fallacy that is a
foe to the mind: 1. A disease to the intellect - This fallacy is a poison to the
intellect, to right knowledge, because it obstructs true understanding. Just as
a disease harms the body, weakens it, so too does this fallacy harm and weaken
true understanding. Just as a disease weakens the body, makes its limbs weak,
and makes the body thin, so too does this fallacy weaken the mind's ability to
think, making the intellect weak, sluggish, and thin. Thus, the intellect
becomes bound by this fallacy. Therefore, just as a sick person cannot digest
heavy food, so too a person afflicted with this fallacy, this disease, cannot
digest the supreme food of right knowledge. Instead, it causes indigestion! That
is why wise people say that it is not praiseworthy to give scriptural knowledge
to someone who is not worthy of it, who has not been freed from this harmful
grasping. Just as it is not appropriate to give a kingdom to a person who is a
thief, so too it is not appropriate to give scriptural knowledge to someone who
is not free from this harmful grasping. Just as water kept in a cracked pot
destroys both the water and the pot, so too does scriptural knowledge given to
someone who is not free from this harmful grasping destroy both the knowledge
and the person. To give advice to someone who is overwhelmed by this harmful
grasping is like applying musk to the body of a dog! The meaning of the
scriptures, which is hard to obtain, is corrupted by this harmful grasping.
Therefore, this fallacy is a destroyer of the mind, the inner being, in many
ways, due to reasons such as the rejection of the teachings of the wise.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (326) gadaSTisamuccaya badhaga zahANa ne, zraddhAbhaMga madakAra; kutarka
bhAvaripu cittane, pragaTa aneka prakAra. 87. artha -Sane rogarUpa, zamane
apAyarUpa, zraddhAne laMgarUpa, ane abhimAna karanAre e kutarka vyaktapaNe
cittane aneka prakAre bhAvazatru che. vivecana A viSama kutarka graha je kahyo,
te ke aniSTa ne duSTa che, tenuM vizeSa svarUpa ahIM kahyuM che. A kutaka (1)
bodha pratye roga je che, (2) zamane apAyarUpa-hAnirUpa che, (3) zraddhAne
bhaMga karanAra che, (4) ane abhimAnane upajAvanAre che. Ama te aneka prakAre
cittano bhAvazatru-paramArtharipu che. cittane bhAvazatru kutaka 1. bodhaga-A
kutarka graha bedha pratye-samyagra jJAna pratye raMgarUpa che, kAraNa ke
yathAvasthita bedhane-sAcI samajaNane te upaghAta kare che. roga jema zarIrane
hAni pahoMcADe che, nirbala kare che, tema kutaka paNa yathArtha bedhane
nukazAna pahoMcADI nabaLo banAve che. jema rogathI zarIranI zakti kSINa thAya
che, aMgopAMga DhIlA paDI jAya che, ne zarIra kRza thaI jAya che, tema
kutarkathI mananI ciMtanazakti kuMThita thavAthI bedhanI zakti kSINa thAya che,
badha zithila-kole-pi bane che, ne kRza thAya che-dUbaLe paDI jAya che. Ama
kutarkathI baMdha "mAM" paDe che. eTale mAMde mANasa jema bhArI rAka pacAvI
zakatA nathI-jIravI zakato nathI, tema kutarkagraharUpa roga jene lAgu paDyo che
evo kutakI jIva uttama kRtajJAnarUpa paramAnna pacAvI zakatA nathI-jIravI zakato
nathI, UlaTuM tenAthI te tene apacokugrahavaMta ajIrNa thAya che! eTalA mATe
jJAnI puruSe kahe che ke- jene bodha apAtra asadugraha nAza pAmyo nathI, evAne
zrutajJAna ApavuM vakhANavA lAyaka nathI,-jema kheDakhAMpaNavALAne meTI
rAjyalakSmI ApavI yogya nathI tema. kAcA ghaDAmAM rAkheluM pANI jema pitAne ane
ghaDAne nAza kare che, tema asadugrahavaMtane ApavAmAM AveluM kRta te banneno
nAza kare che. asagrahathI grasAcelane je vimUDha hitopadeza ApavA jAya che, te
mahAupakArI (!) kUtarInA zarIra para kasturIne lepa kare che ! kaSTathI prApta
thayela Agama artha je asagrahathI daSitane taH kutarka -AgamanirapekSa evo ema
artha che. te zuM ? te ke-jeta-cittane, aMtaHkaraNane, cavataMvyaktapaNe,
-mAvezatru:-bhAvazatru, paramArtharipu, anekavA-aneka prakAre,-AryanA apavAda
Adi kAraNavaDe karIne.

Page #403 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Translation:  **1.**  The *kutak* (obstruction) of *dimaddi* (pride) causes
two types of harm: *shamap* (peace) and *aady* (beginning). It is like planting
a seed that was obtained with hundreds of efforts in barren land, and then
feeling regret. Because, even though one listens to the scriptures from a
knowledgeable guru, they never follow their instructions. They consider
themselves to be wise like a sieve, which only holds the coarse grains. Just as
a sieve holds the coarse grains, this person holds onto the coarse *desh*
(faults) and takes pride in their discernment. Their cleverness is for
hypocrisy, their knowledge of scriptures is for sin, their talent is for
deception, and their patience is for arrogance. Alas! The qualities of an
*asadugrah* (one who holds onto the negative) are opposite to their true nature.
Therefore, an *asadugrah* patient cannot digest even the most nourishing milk.
**2.** The *kutak* of *shamap* (peace) is harmful because it gives rise to
*asat* (false) attachment and stubbornness. It creates false waves in the mind,
disturbing the peace of the mind and leading the soul astray. It is like a fire
that burns down a beautiful and cool garden, leaving it barren. Where the inner
self is burnt by this fire of *asadugrah*, how can the vine of *tattvanishchay*
(realization of truth) grow? One must then search for the flowers of peace and
the fruits of good advice elsewhere. A person whose mind is clouded by
*asadugrah* cuts the vine of truth with the sharp blade of *kutak*, waters the
tree of faults with their own essence, and throws away the delicious fruit of
peace.  **3.** The *kutak* of *shraddha bhang* (breaking of faith) breaks faith
because it leads to non-understanding and rejection of the meaning of the
scriptures. It breaks the faith in the scriptures and destroys faith. *Kutak* is
like a thorn that prevents faith from taking root in the heart. Just as water
cannot penetrate stony ground and a sprout cannot grow, so too, *sad* (good)
cannot enter a stony heart of *asadugrah*.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dImAdadiH kutakathI be rega-zamApAya Adi (327) Ape che, te seMkaDo yatnathI
meLaveluM bIja Ukhara bhUmimAM vAvatAM kheda pAme che! kAraNa ke asaragrahavAna
guru pAsethI zAstro sAMbhaLe che, paNa temanI AjJA kadI pALato nathI, ane te
asAragrAhI cAlaNInI jema potAnuM vivecakapaNuM mAne che!" jema cAlaNI asAra evA
kAMkarA pakaDI rAkhe che, tema A asagrahavAn kAMkarA jevA asAra deSa pakaDI
rAkhe che! ne ulaTuM tenuM abhimAna rAkhe che ke huM ke vivecaka chuM ! " Ama
tenI caturAI paNa daMbhane mATe hoya che. zAstrajJAna paNa pApane mATe hoya che,
pratibhAsaMpanapaNuM paNa pratAraNA mATe-chetarapIMDIne mATe hoya che,
dhIrapaNuM paNa garvane mATe heya che! aho ! asadugrahavaMtanA guNenI viparIta
sRSTi hoya che !' eTalA mATe ja asadugrahavaMta rogI bedharUpa dUdhapAka
pacAvavAne gya nathI. * 2, zamApAya-kutaka zamane eTale AtmazAMtine apAyarUpa-
hAnirUpa thAya che, khalela pahoMcADe che, kAraNa ke te asat abhiniveza-
kadAgraha janmAve che, khoTA khoTA mananA taraMge ke turaMge upajAve che, tethI
te cittanI zAMtine DoLI nAMkhe che, khaLabhaLAvI mUke che, ne jIvane vizvama
dizAmAM pADI nAMkhe che, hAvaro-hAvaro banAvI de che. "zamarUpa suMdara ne
zItala bAgane A kutarUpa AganI javAlA bALI nAkhe che, ne ujajaDa verAna karI
mUke che. AvA asagraharU54 agnithI jenuM aMtar baLI gayuM che, tyAM
tattvanizcayarUpa velI kyAMthI Uge? te pachI prazAMti-puSpa ane hitopadeza-le te
bIje ja zodhI levA ! A asadugrahathI jenI mati chavAI gaI che evo manuSya
kutakarUpa dAtaraDAvaDe tatvavallIne kApI nAMkhe che, rasathI daSavRkSane siMce
che, ne zamarUpa svAdiSTa phalane nIce pheMkI de che!" 3. zraddhAbhaMgakutaka
zraddhAne bhaMga kare che, kAraNa ke tethI Agama arthanI apratipatti-asvIkAra
thAya che, sazAstranI AsthAmAM bhaMgANa paDe che, AsthA TUTe che. kutarkarUpa
zalya hoya che, tyAM lagI hRdayamAM zraddhA cuMTatI nathI. jema pattharavALI
bhUmimAM pANI pravezatuM nathI ne aMkura phUTa nathI, tema asadugraharUpa
pattharamaya cittamAM sad* " asadgraho yasya gato na nAzaM, na dIyamAnaM
zrutamasya zasyam  /  na nAma vaikalyakalaMkitasya, prauDhA pradAtuM ghaTate
nRpazrIH  //  Ame ghaTe vAri dhRtaM yathA sadvinAzayet svaM ca ghaTaM ca sadyaH
/  a trattamottavaiva, kRtAtmAkumorvinAzaH " ityAdi, (vizeSa AdhAra mATe juo)
-zrI yaza0 kRta, zrI adhyAtmasAra, + "asadgrahAgnijvalitaM yadaMtaH, kva tatra
tattvavyavasAyavalliH  /  prazAMtiSuSpANi hitopadezaphalAni cAnyatra gaveSayantu
/  kutarkadAtreNa lunAti tattvavallI rasAtsiMcati doSavRkSam  /  picupa cAturNa
rAmAzramanachannamatirmanuSyaH "--zrI adhyAtmasAra,

Page #404 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(38) If the essence of true understanding does not enter, and the pure seed of
knowledge does not sprout, what is the fault of the teachings? Even if one
observes vows, practices austerities, and purifies the body through effort, if
no fruit is obtained, it is the fault of *asadugrah*, because they lack faith.
If laddoos are served on a plate, but someone presses down on the throat, how
can one eat? Similarly, "The plate is *svabuddhi*, the server is the *sadguru*,
and the intoxicating knowledge is served, but the *asadugrah* is the evil
throat-presser who does not allow it to be swallowed!" That is, it does not
allow faith to arise.  4. *Abhimanakar* - one who is arrogant, generates
*mithyabhiman* (false pride). They are independent of the scriptures. The one
who engages in *kutark* (sophistry) develops pride in their own reasoning
ability, thinking, "I am so intelligent, so wise, I can easily refute what the
scriptures say with my superior logic!" etc. They disregard the scriptures,
keeping them at bay. But all this is their false pride. Because, "One who
considers themselves a scholar by learning and hearing, but with *asadugrah*,
may kiss the mouth of the scriptures, but they do not understand their subtle
meaning."  Thus, this *visham kutark-grah* (perverted reasoning-grasp) is a
disease-causing, peace-disturbing, faith-breaking, and false-pride-generating
factor. It is also said elsewhere:  "शमारामानलबाला हिमानी ज्ञानपङ्कजे । શ્રદ્ધા
રાન્ચે સ્પોટ્ટાણઃ કુતરું: યુનારા ” - Shri Yashovijayji, Dv. Dv. 23  Meaning:
*Kutark* is like a fire to the garden of knowledge, like frost to the lotus of
knowledge, like a thorn to faith, like a wave of pride, and like a finger to the
wise.  And this is why this *kutark* mind - the inner being - is in many ways:
" असद्ग्रहनावमये हि चित्ते, न क्वापि सद्भावरसप्रवेशः ।
इहांकुरश्चित्तविशुद्धबोधः, सिद्धांतवाचां बत कोऽपराधः ॥ स्थालं स्वबुद्धिः
सुगुरोश्च दातुरुपस्थिता काचन मोदकाली । રાસ રોડ છે હીતા, તથાપિ મોવડુ ન વરાતિ સુદઃ
”—Shri Adhyatmasar. x  "अधीत्य किंचिच्च निशम्य किंचिदसद्ग्रहात्पंडितमानिनो ये।
મુર્ણ સુર્ય વિષમતુ પારો સીટાડ્યું તુ તેર્નાદે ”—Shri Adhyatmasar,

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (38) gadarisamuciya bhAva rasano praveza thato nathI, ne vizuddha bodharUpa
aMkure ugate nathI, emAM siddhAMta vANIne zo aparAdha vAru? vrata Acare, tapa
paNa tape, ane prayatnathI piMDazuddhi kare, te paNa nivone phaLa nathI maLatuM,
te asadugrahane ja aparAdha che, kAraNa ke teone zraddhA nathI." thALImAM lADavA
pIrasyA hoya, paNa koI gaLuM dabAve te kema khAI zakAya ? tema "svabuddhirUpa
thALI che, temAM saddagururUpa pIrasanAre kaI bodharUpa mAdaka pIrasyA che, paNa
asadugraharUpa ke e duSTa gaLacI dabAvanAra che ke te gaLe utaravA deto ja
nathI!" eTale ke zraddhA upajavA detuM ja nathI. * 4. abhimAnakAra-kutarka
abhimAna karanAra che, mithyAbhimAna upajAve che. te AgamathI nirapekSa e hoya
che. kutarka karanArane potAnI kutarkazaktinuM abhimAna upaje che ke huM ke baDo
hoziyAra chuM, ke DAhyo (doDha) chuM, AgamamAM kahelI vAtane paNa huM mahArA
tarkabaLathI kevI beTI pADuM chuM ! ItyAdi prakAre te peTe phAke rAkhI
AgamazAstranI paNa paravA karato nathI paNa A badhuM tenuM mithyA-khoTuM
abhimAna che. kAraNa kejha "kAMIka bhaNIne ne kAMIka sAMbhaLIne asadugrahathI je
paMDitamAnI-pitAne paMDita mAne che, te bhale vANInuM mukha cuMbe, paNa tenuM
lIlArahasya te avagAhata nathI." Ama A viSama kutarka-graha bodhane roga
upajAvanAra, AtmazAMtimAM khalela pahoMcADanAra, zraddhAne bhAMganAre, ane
mithyAbhimAnane janmAvanAre hoya che. anyatra paNa kahyuM che ke -
"zamArAmAnalabAlA himAnI jJAnapaGkaje  /  zraddhA rAnce spoTTANaH kutaruM:
yunArA " zrI yazovijayajItaku, dvA. dvA. 23 arthAtu-kutaka zamarUpa bagIcA
pratye agnivAlA che, jJAnarUpa kamaLane karamAvavAmAM hima jevo che, zraddhAne
zULarUpa che, garvanA ullAsarUpa che, ne sunaya pratye AgaLIArUpa che. ane Ama
che eTalA mATe ja A kutaka cittane-aMta:karaNane aneka prakAre * "
asadgrahanAvamaye hi citte, na kvApi sadbhAvarasapravezaH  /
ihAMkurazcittavizuddhabodhaH, siddhAMtavAcAM bata ko'parAdhaH  //  sthAlaM
svabuddhiH sugurozca dAturupasthitA kAcana modakAlI  /  rAsa roDa che hItA,
tathApi movaDu na varAti sudaH "--zrI adhyAtmasAra. x "adhItya kiMcicca nizamya
kiMcidasadgrahAtpaMDitamAnino ye| murNa surya viSamatu pAro sITADyuM tu ternAde
"--zrI adhyAtmasAra,

Page #405 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Deeprashti: Attachment to Kutaraka is inappropriate for the seeker of liberation
(329) It is an enemy of the soul, an enemy of the ultimate goal. Just as an
external enemy harms and destroys, this enemy of the soul does not hesitate to
cause harm to the being, because  Kutaraka causes disrespect to the highly
revered Satpurush, Sadagam, etc., due to its nature or its effects. It leads to
disrespect and criticism of the teachings, and thus causes great harm to the
being. Just as an enemy is always eager to destroy, so too, this enemy of the
soul in the form of Kutaraka always seeks to weaken and destroy the mental
faculties. Therefore, whoever engages in Kutaraka is doing the work of their own
enemy! They are their own enemy! * And because this is so, what then? For this,
it is said— कुतर्केऽभिनिवेशस्तन्न युको मुक्तिवादिनाम् । युक्तः पुनः श्रुते शीले
समाधौ च महात्मनाम् ॥ ८८ ॥  Kutarke abhiniveshastanna yuko muktivadinam. Yuktah
punah shrute sheele samaadhau cha mahatmanam. 88 A—Therefore, it is not
appropriate for the seekers of liberation (mumukhus) to be attached to Kutaraka;
but it is appropriate for the Mahatmas to be attached to Shruta, Sheela, and
Samadhi. Commentary Attachment to Kutaraka, which has the characteristics
mentioned above, is in no way appropriate for the seekers of liberation
(sannyasis, mumukhus), because it is inappropriate to combine intellect with
Kutaraka, and to forcefully combine Kutaraka with intellect. Vritti:
Kutaraka—Kutaraka, with the characteristics mentioned above,
abhinivesha—attachment, in that way, its grasping nature. What? So—na—not,
yuko—appropriate. To whom? So—muktivadinam—seekers of liberation, sannyasis.
Yuktah punah—but it is appropriate, shrute—in Shruta, in the teachings,
sheele—in Sheela, in conduct characterized by refraining from harming others,
sau cha—and in Samadhi, in the state of deep meditation, mahatmanam—for the
Mahatmas, the seekers of liberation, attachment is appropriate. '' * "
नियोजयत्येव मतिं न युक्तौ युक्ति मतौ यः प्रसभं नियुक्ते । अपनायैव न यः हाचोड़न
घटाओपळमाध्यानः ।''—Shri Adhyatmasar, " आग्रही बत निनीषति युक्ति, तत्र यत्र
मतिरस्य निविष्टा । पक्षपात तिक्क्ष्य तु युयिंंत्र तंत्र मतित्ति निवेशं !”—Shri
Haribhadracharya Ji " मनोवत्स युक्तिगवीं मध्यस्थस्यानुधावति । समावंति पुष्लेन
तुच्छात्रह्मन:व:।”—Shri Yoavijayakrit Adhyatmapanishada,

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dIprASTi : kutamAM abhiniveza sumukSune ayukta (329) bhAvazatru che, paramAtha
ripu che. bAhya zatru jema bhUMDu kare che, ahita kare che, tema A bhAvazatru
jIvanuM akalyANu karavAmAM kAMi khAkI rAkhatA nathI, kAraNa kutarka cittanA ke
enA kAraNe A paramapUjya evA satpuruSa-sadAgama Adine pragaDha bhAvazatru
anAdara thAya che, AzAtanA avinaya-apavAda vagere nIpaje che, ane tethI jIvatuM
bhArI akalyANa thAya che. zatru jema saOnAza karavAmAM sadA tatpara heAya che,
tema jIvanA A bhAvazatrurUpa kutarka sadAya cittazaktine hAsa karatA rahI,
sanAza karavA sadAya tatpara rahyA kare che, eTale je kutarka kare che, te pAte
peAtAnA duzmananuM kAma kare che! pAte peAtAnA vairI ane che!  ane kAraNa ke ema
che, tethI zuM ? te mATe kahe che-- kutarke'bhinivezastanna yuko muktivAdinAm  /
yuktaH punaH zrute zIle samAdhau ca mahAtmanAm  //  88  //  bhutake ma
abhiniveza nA, muktivAdIne cukta; paNa zruta zIla samAdhimAM, mahAtmAne e yukta.
88 a--tethI karIne muktivAdIene-mumukSuone kutakamAM abhiniveza karavA yukta
nathI; paNa zrutamAM, zIlamAM ane samAdhimAM abhinaveza karavA e mahAtmAone
yukta che. vivecana AvA je uparamAM kahyA te lakSaNavALA kutarkamAM abhiniveza
karavA te muktivAdIAne-saMnyAsIone-mumukSuone kAi paNa rIte yukta nathI, kAraNa
ke yuktimAM matine na joDavIx ane matimAM yuktine parANe joDavI e asaharUpa abhi
vRttiH-puta--ukta lakSaguvALA kutarkamAM, miniveza:-abhiniveza, tevA prakAre
tenA graharUpa. zu ? teA ke-navuH-yukta nathI. te ? te ke-mukttitrAlInAm-
muktivAdIone, saMnyAsIone. yutttaH punaH paNa yukta che, zrute zrutamAM, AgamAM,
zoDhe-zIlamAM, paradrohathI virati lakSajIvALA zIlamAM, sau ca-ane samAdhimAM,
khAnanA bhUta samAdhimAM, mahAtmanAm--mahAtmAone, muktivAdIene abhiniveza yukta
che. '' * " niyojayatyeva matiM na yuktau yukti matau yaH prasabhaM niyukte  /
apanAyeva na ya hAcoDana ghaTAopaLamAdhAnaH |''--zrI adhyAtmasAra, " AgrahI bata
ninISati yukti, tatra yatra matirasya niviSTA  /  pakSapAta tikSya tu yuyiMtra
taMtra matitti nivezaM !"--zrI haribhadrAcA jI " manovatsa yuktigavIM
madhyasthasyAnudhAvati  /  sAmAvaMti puSlena tucchAtrahmana:vi:|"--zrI
yoAvijayakRta adhyAtmapaniSada,

Page #406 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Collection of Yogic Insights  **Back**  The mark of attachment is like
putting a pot where there is no water... it is ridiculous! 'The mind of the
average person, like a calf, follows the cow of cunning, but the mind of a
foolishly attached person, like a monkey, pulls the cow of cunning by its tail!'
- It pulls cunning around! Such foolish attachment is not to be done by a
seeker, because the seeker only desires liberation, and has no other desire or
attachment except for the soul.  **(330)** The seeker is **rightly**
**Unrightly**  9  'The soul is one, not another' - attachment. Shrimad
Rajchandraji  And this attachment to sophistry is opposed to liberation and is
against the soul - it is intoxicating, because the seeker desires the means, and
sophistry, becoming a form of anger, destroys it or causes harm. The seeker
desires peace of the soul, the ultimate peace, and sophistry is harmful to that
peace, it is against liberation. The seeker considers faith to be the first step
in the path of liberation, and tries to be steadfast in it, and sophistry breaks
faith and makes it unsteady. The seeker, knowing that 'speech is the dharma,
silence is the tapas', is extremely humble and always tries to be obedient to
dharma; and sophistry, being self-willed, creates false pride in the being.
Thus, sophistry is the enemy of the being's emotions in many ways. Therefore,
there is never any kind of meeting between the seeker and sophistry, there is a
vast difference between them, a clear distinction like light and darkness, they
can never meet.  6  Therefore, how can a true seeker accept sophistry, which is
a hindrance to his desired goal? And if he does not accept it, he will not even
touch it from afar, then how can he hold on to it in the form of attachment?
Truly! A true seeker of liberation, knowing sophistry to be like Rahu to the
moon of the soul, will not desire to accept it; knowing sophistry to be like a
ghost or a demon, he will not desire to cling to it; knowing sophistry to be
like a crocodile, he will not desire to be caught by it, to fall into its
clutches. He will always run away from sophistry, he will never be attached to
it. And it is right for the seeker to do so, because the knowers of the path of
yoga, for the benefit of future seekers, have said this word of warning against
sophistry: 'Those who argue and counter-argue, they are not certain of the
truth.'  "वादांश्च प्रतिवादांश्च वदन्तो निश्चितांस्तथा । सवां नैव इति
तिरुवीयनुत्तौ ॥” Shri Haribhadracharya's Shri Yagabindu.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 yogadRSTisamuccaya pAchaLa nivezanu lakSaNa che, ane te pANI na hoya tyAM ghaDo
nAMkhavA jevu... hAsyAspada che ! ' madhyastha puruSanuM manarUpI vAcha uN
cuktirUpI gAyanI dADe che-yuktine anusare che, paNa tuccha AgrahInuM manarUpI
vAMdarU te yuktirUpI gAyane puchaDAthI kheMce che ! '--yuktinI kheMcatANa kare
che! Ave tuccha AgraharUpa abhiniveza mumukSu jIve karavA cegya nathI, kAraNa ke
mumukSu te mAtra meAkSane ja abhilASI hAya che, AtmA sivAya bIjI keAI icchA ke
manarega tene hAtA nathI. (330) sumukSune kRta ayukta 9 kAma eka AtmAnuM, bIjo
nahi' manarega. ' zrImad rAjaca'drajI ane A kutarkanA abhinivezatA meAkSane
pratipakSI ne AtmAnA virodhI che-- mAdhaka che, kAraNa ke mumukSu jIva sAdhane
icche che, ne kutarka tA kheAdhane rAgarUpa thai paDI tene hAsa athavA dhvaMsa
kare che. mumukSu zamane AtmazAMtine kuMta aMtimaLane jha'khe che, ne kutarka te
zamane apAyarUpa hAi hAni muktivirAdhI pahoMcADe che. mumukSu jIva zraddhAne
sanmACnuM prathama pagathIyu. mAnI temAM sthira thavAne prayatna kare che, ne
kutarka tA zraddhA bhaMga karAvI tene DagamagAvI mUke che. mumukSu teA 'ALApa
dhammo zALApa tavo' AjJAe dhama ne AjJAe tapa' ema jANI atyaMta namrapaNe sadA
AjJApradhAna rahevA mathe che; ne kutarka tA svacchaMdapradhAna heAI jIvane
mithyAbhimAna upajAve che. Ama kutarka aneka prakAre jIvanA bhAvazatru che.
eTale mumukSupaNAne ne kutarka ne kayAreya paNa kai paNa prakAranI ka'i paNa
maLatI pANu AvatI nathI, bannemAM AkAza-pAtAlanuM aMtara che, prakAza-adhakAra
jevA pragaTa bheda che, e annenA koi kALe meLa khAya ema nathI. 6 mATe sAceA
mumukSu DhAya te peAtAnA iSTa prayeAjanamAM viznakartA evA kutarkane kema
grahaNa kare vAru ? ane grahaNa na kare-dUrathI paNa na sparze, te pachI temAM
abhiniveza- AgraharUpa pakaDa te kema ja kare ? kharekhara! sAcA meAkSAbhilASI
hAya, te tA kutarUpa asagrahane AtmacaMdra pratye rAhurUpa jANatA hAi, kutaka
-grahaNane grahavA icche ja nahi'; kutarka grahane bhUta pizAcarUpa alAnA
vaLagADa jANatA heAi, te khalAne vaLagavA icche ja nahi; kutarka grahane
grAharUpa-magararUpa jANatA hei, tenAthI grahAvA--tenA saka'jAmAM AvavA icche ja
nahi. te te te kutarka khalAthI sadA dUra ja bhAge, kadI pazu temAM abhiniveza
kare ja nahi. ane ema ja karavu' mumukSune yukta che, kAraNa ke yeAgamAga nA
jJAtApuruSoe bhAvikALanA ceAgIjanAnA hita arthe mehAMdhakAra pratye A
lAlakhattIrUpa vacana kahyuM che ke--tevA tevA prakAre vAdA x ane prativAda
karatAM tattvane aMta pamAta x" vAdAMzca prativAdAMzca vadanto nizcitAMstathA  /
savAnuM naiva inti tiruvIyanUttau  // " zrI haribhadrAcAryajIkRta zrI yAgabiMdu,

Page #407 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Deeprapti: Attachment to Shruta, Sheel, and Samadhi  (331)  It is not like
the play of a blindfolded man on a grinding stone. The blindfolded man on the
grinding stone keeps spinning around, but how long does he spin? He is unaware
of it. Similarly, those who are blind due to their attachment to their own
opinions, argue in strange ways, yet they do not understand the truth that is
revealed.  “You think about the arguments, but you don't reach the end. Those
who speak about the truth, are rare in this world. ...They see the stones, but
they don't see the other things.” - Shri Anandghanji  Therefore, a seeker should
not be attached to anything at all. But if a seeker should be attached to
anything, it should be to the Shruta, the eternal scriptures. They should be
attached to Sheel, the conduct that is free from betrayal, and to Samadhi, the
state of meditation. Because Shruta, Sheel, and Samadhi are such auspicious
places that attachment to them, meaning deep immersion, firm conviction, and
steadfast adherence, is beneficial and highly commendable for the seeker who
desires liberation. Although attachment in the form of stubbornness, prejudice,
and opinionatedness is completely undesirable and should be abandoned, the
attachment to Shruta, etc., mentioned here is not of that kind. It is of the
nature of steadfastness and truthfulness, and is highly commendable. Here,
attachment means deep immersion.  Therefore, attachment to Shruta means to
worship the Shruta with firm devotion, to dive into the ocean of Shruta and
understand its meaning. Attachment to Sheel means to adhere to Sheel, pure
conduct, firmly, tightly, and steadfastly, to cling to it, and to serve it
without any break or interruption. Attachment to Samadhi means to enter Samadhi
firmly and remain unshaken, to attain such a state of stability that no fear,
doubt, or disturbance can affect it, and to achieve an unbroken state of self-
absorption.  Thus, in the commendable sense of firm devotion to Shruta, Sheel,
and Samadhi, attachment to them is highly desirable for the seeker. Because
Shruta, Sheel, and Samadhi are the best means to achieve the seeker's desired
goal of liberation, therefore, it is highly desirable for the seeker to be
firmly attached to them, to be devoted to them, and to immerse themselves in
them.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dIprApti : zruta-zIla-samAdhimAM abhiniveza yukta (331) nathI,--ghANInA khelanI
jema.' AMkhe pATA bAMdhelA ghANIne khela AkhA vakhata bhamyA kare, paNa keTaluM
cAlye! tenu' tene bhAna nathI hAtu; tema pAtapeAtAnA pakSanA akSinivezathI aMdha
thayelA vAdIe vicitra prakAre vAda vade che, chatAM kheAlAi rahelA tattvane te
teo pAmatA nathI ! " ta vicAre re vAdaparaparA re, pAra na phoMce keAya;
abhimata vastu vastugate kahe re, te viralA jaga joya. ....pathaDA nihALu` re
khIjA jitA. ''--zrI AnadaghanajI eTalA mATe mumukSu jIve kutamAM khIlakula
abhiniveza karavA ce|gya nathI. paNa A mahAtmA mumukSuone jo kayAMya paNa
abhiniveza karavA yAgya hAya, te te zrutamAMsadAgamamAM karavA ceAgya che,
paradrohathI virati lakSaNavALA zIlamAM- zIlAdimAM zuddha cAritramAM karavo
caiAgya che, ane dhyAnanA larUpa samAdhimAM karavA abhiniveza ceAgya che. kAraNa
ke zruta, zIla ne samAdhi ja evA zubha sthAnaka yukta che, ke jyAM abhiniveza
karavA eTale ke 'taHpraveza karavA, dRDha Agraha dharavA, dRDhatAthI vaLagI
rahevu', majabUta pakaDa karavI, e AtmArthI mumukSune hitAvaha hAi yukta che,
parama prazasta che. jo ke AgraharUpa-kadAgraharUpa, matAgraharUpa abhiniveza te
sarvathA aniSTa hAI sarvatra varjya ja-tyAgavA yAgya ja che; teA paNu atre je
zruta AdimAM abhiniveza kahyo, te kadAtraDunA amAM nathI, paNa
sadAgraharUpasatyAgraharUpa prazasta arthAMmAM che; atre abhiniveza eTale
atyaMta ataHpraveza ema a ghaTe che. Ama zratamAM abhiniveza karavo eTale
zrutane dRDha bhaktithI ArAdhavuM, zruta sAgaramAM UDo praveza karI tenA
arthanuM avagAhana karavuM. zIlamAM abhiniveza karaveA eTale zIlane-zuddha
cAritrane dRDhapaNe, custapaNe, makkamapaNe vaLagI rahevu, cITakI rahevuM,
zIlane akhaMDa abhaMgapaNe sevavuM. samAdhimAM abhiniveza karavA eTale
dRDhatAthI samAdhimAM pravezI akSeAbha rahevuM, dhArax parISaha ke upasa bhaye
karI, AvI zake nahiM te sthiratAne aMta jo,'--evI akhaMDa AtmasamAdhi prApta
karavI. " Ama prazasta amAM-zruta, zIla ne samAdhinI dRDha ArAdhanAnA samartha
arthamAM, zruta-zIla-samAdhi pratye abhiniveza karavA te mumukSune sarvathA
yAgya che; kAraNa ke te zruta-zIla-samAdhi mumukSu jogIjananA meAkSarUpa iSTa
prayeAjananI siddhinA uttama sAdhana che, mATe tenI dRDha laganIrUpa ArAdhanA
karavI, raDha lagADIne tenI pAchaLa maDI paDavu, temAM abhiniveza--atyaMta
tanmayatArUpa praveza karavo te mumukSune atyaMta cAgya che. x jIe zrImad
rAjacadrIkRta apUrva avasaravALuM atyaMta suprasiddha amara kAvya.

Page #408 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(332) The seed of this (karma) is the supreme, proven, infallible, and
beneficial for all beings, selfless service, which is perfectly pure. 89.
Meaning: The seed of this (karma) is the supreme, proven, infallible, and
beneficial for all beings, selfless service, which is perfectly pure. Therefore,
it is appropriate to be attached to it. "Worship the Lord, adorn yourself with
virtue, and engage in selfless service." - Shrimad Rajchandraji And the Shruta,
Shila, and Samadhi, which are worthy of attachment in the above, are also proven
and established for all beings. What is the ultimate reason for this? It is
revealed here - the ultimate seed of Shruta, etc., is selfless service, which is
the production of benefit for others. Thus, all beings, including Kulgi, etc.,
have agreed and established this. And this seed of selfless service gives the
infallible fruit of attaining Shruta, etc. This selfless service should not harm
anyone else, it should not cause any harm to others, it should be perfectly
pure. It is appropriate for the aspiring great souls to be attached to such pure
selfless service, because this selfless service is the cause of the cause of
Shruta, etc. Therefore, the advice of the virtuous is that the aspiring soul
should become a benefactor, become addicted to the work of selfless service.
Shri Vyasa has said in the Bhagavata: "He who desires the other shore, let him
not be a sinner!" Therefore, the aspiring soul, who desires liberation, should
dedicate all the power of his body, mind, wealth, and words to the benefit of
others. And the seed of this (karma), Shruta, etc., is the supreme, proven,
established, infallible, and certain fruit-bearing, for all beings, including
all beings, especially those in the Kali Yuga. What is it? It is said - selfless
service, the production of benefit for others. Therefore, because of this, which
is perfectly pure, without harming others, it is appropriate to be attached to
this selfless service.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (332) gadaSTisamuracaya bIjaM cAsya paraM siddhamavandhyaM sarvayoginAm  /
parArthakaraNaM yena parizuddhamato'tra ca  // 89  /  /  AnuM bIja sahu gine,
siddha avaMdhya pradhAna; paropakAra parizuddha je, ethI eha A sthAna, 89 artha
--ane A kRta AdinuM bIja, parama evuM sarva yogIone siddha avadhyaacUka phala
denAruM parizuddha parArthakaraNa (paropakAra ) che, eTalA mATe atre paNa
abhiniveza karavo yukta che. vivecana prabhu bhaje, nIti saje, paraTho
paropakAra."-zrImad rAjacaMdrajI ane A uparamAM je abhiniveza karavA gya-laganI
lagADavA yogya, evA zruta, zIla ne samAdhi kahyA, tenuM paNa sarva yegIone
siddha thayeluM-pratiSThita thayeluM parama kAraNa zuM che? te ahIM pragaTa
karyuM che -e zrutAdinuM paNa parama bIjarUpa pradhAna kAraNa parArthakaraNa
che, eTale ke para prayojananA paropakAramAM niSpAdanarUpa paropakAra che. ema
kulagI vagere sarva yegIoe abhiniveza saMmata kareluM che, pratiSThita kareluM
che. ane A paropakArarUpa bIja zrutAdinI prAptirUpa amegha-acUka phala ApanAruM
che. A paropakAra kAryamAM anya koIne upaghAta na thavo joIe, bIjA keIne bAdhA
na upajavI joIe, evuM te sarvathA parizuddha hovuM joIe. AvA parizuddha
paropakAramAM abhiniveza karavo, laganI lagADavI, te mumukSu mahAtmAone yukta
che, kAraNa ke A paropakAra zretAdi kAraNanuM paNa kAraNa che. eTalA mATe
mumukSue popakArI thavuM, parepakAra kAryanA vyasanI thavuM, ema satpuruSane
upadeza che. zrI vyAsajIe bhAgavatamAM kahyuM che ke -"re pAra puSkAya vAvAya
pApIranam !' eTale mekSAbhilASI mumukSu jIve pitAnA tana, mana, dhana ne
vacananI samasta zakti kRtti-vInaM rA-ane AnuM-zratAdinuM bIja, paraM sidga-
parama siddha, pradhAna pratiSThita, avarabdha-avaMdhya, niyata phaladAyI,
cakkasa phala ApanAruM, sarvanAma-sarvayogIone, kalayogI pramukha sarva yogIone.
te zuM ? te mATe kahyuM-pArtha -parArthakaraNa, paraprajananuM niSpAdana,
(paropakAra) zera-jethI, je kAraNathI, pazu-parizuddha, anyanA anupaghAtathI,
bIjAne upadhAta nahiM karavA thakI, to-AthI, A kAraNa thakI, satra 2-atre paNa,
A parArthakaraNamAM ( papakAramAM) paNa abhiniveza yukta che.

Page #409 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Domaashti: Anidhas Gat Vikalp, Teena Yaajak Kutark (333)  It is appropriate
to spend for the benefit of other beings. One should dedicate their body to
service, their mind to the welfare of others, their speech to good purposes,
their wealth to alleviate the suffering of the poor and distressed, and
contribute their efforts to the betterment of the world. Because the virtues of
the righteous are for the benefit of others. "Patray Saan Trimoortiyah." And
such acts of benevolence should be pure, meaning completely pure. This means
that one should ensure that no harm is caused to another being, and that the
benefit of one does not come at the expense of another. Any act that is
performed without causing any suffering to any being is pure benevolence. Also,
there should be no expectation of any reward in this life or the next for such
acts of benevolence. Acts of benevolence should be selfless, and only then are
they considered "pure."  ## 6  ## *  ## Tan, Man, Dhanthi Paapkar  ## ★ Kutarkni
Asarta J Bataavva Mate Kahe Chhe  Avidyasangataah Praayo Vikalpaah Sarve Ev Yat.
Tadyognatmachhesh Ta Minen Tat. ||10||  Avidyasangat Praay Te, Haay Vikalp
Tamaam; Tas Yaajak J Kutark Aa, Tethi Evu Shu Kaam? 90  A: - Ghanu Kari Ne Savey
Vikalpe Avidyasanyukt Haay Chhe, Ane Te Vikalpna Chojanaroop Aa Kutark Chhe.
Tethi Karine Aa Kutarkthi Shu?  ## Vivechan  "Jahaan Kalpana Jalpana, Tahaan
Maana Duhkha Chhaay; Mite Kalpana Jalpana, Tab Vastu Tin Paai." - Shreemad
Rajchandraji  Sarvath Vikalpe - Shavikalpe Te Avikalpa Praaye Karine
Avidyasangat Hoy.  ## Vritti:  Nivaasantaah - Aavidyasangat, Gyaanavaraniy
Aadithi Samprukt-Sayukt, Ye-Praaye, Mahulyaathi, Vistvaah Sarve Tra-Vikalpe
Sarvesha - Shavika, Ane Arthavikalp, Cha-Kaaran Ke, Tojnaanam - Ane Teene
Yaajanatmak, Te Vikalpna Yaajanatmak, Tatt - Aa - Gaamam - Payas Aadi Vikalp
Karavaavade Karine, 1 - Kutark - Kt - Lakshnawaala Chhe. Minen - Tethi Karine
Enaathi Shu? Eenu Shu Kaam Chhe? Kanhi Nahi', Em Ath Chhe.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 domASTi : anidhAsa gata vikalpa, tenA yAjaka kutarka (333) anya jIvonA
upakArane arthe khacavI eja ucita che. pAtAnA zarIrane te peAtAnAthI ane teTalI
para sevA kAryamAM aNu kare, peAtAnA manane te parahitaciMtAnA kAryamAM byAgRta
kare, peAtAnA vacanane te paratuM bhaluM thAya evA sat prayeAjanamAM prayukta
kare, peAtAnA dhanane te dIna-duHkhInA du:khadalanamAM viniyojita kare, ane
janakalyANanA utkarSa rUpa sevAkAmAM peAtAnA manA phALA Ape, kAraNa ke
satajaneAnI vibhUtio paropakArArtha hAya che. 'patrAya sAM trimUrtayaH  / ' ane
AvuM je parApakAra kRtya che te parizuddha ' arthAt sarvathA zuddha hovu' jeIe.
eTale AmAM khIjA jIvane upaghAta na thAya, ekanA bhAge khIjAne upakAra na thAya,
e khAsa jovuM joie. koI paNa jIvane kaMipaNu du:khakilAmaNA upajAvyA vinA je
karavAmAM Ave te ja parizuddha parApakAra che. temaja A pApakAra kRtyamAM A
lAka-paraleAka saMbaMdhI kai paNa phlU apekSA na ja hovI joie, paropakAra kRtya
sathA niSkAma ja hevu joie, ane tA ja te ' parizuddha' gaNAya. 6 * tana,mana,
dhanathI pApakAra  kutarkanI asAratA ja batAvavA mATe kahe che avidyAsaMgatAH
prAyo vikalpAH sarva eva yat  /  tadyoganAtmaceSa ta minena tat  // 10 //
avidyAsaMgata prAya te, hAya vikalpa tamAma; tasa yAjakaja kutarka A, tethI evuM
zuM kAma ? 90 a:--ghaNuM karIne saveya vikalpe avidyAsaMyukta hAya che, ane te
vikalpanA ceAjanarUpa A kutaka che. tethI karIne A kutarkathI zuM? vivecana "
jahAM kalapanA jalapanA, tahAM mAnA duHkha chAMya; miTe kalapanA jalapanA, taba
vastu tina pAi."--zrImad rAjacaMdrajI sarvatha vikalape-zavikalpe te avikalpA
prAye karIne avidyAsaMgata hoya vRtti:-nivAsaMtAH--mavidyAsaMgata, jJAnAvaraNIya
AdithI saMpRkta-sayukta, ye-prAye, mAhulyathI, vistvA: sarva tra-vikalpe
sarveSa,--zavikA, ane arthavikalpa, ca-kAraNa ke, tojJanAma -ane tene
yAjanAtmaka, te vikalpanA yAjanAtmaka, ttta:-A,- gAmama-pAyasa Adi vikalpa
karavAvaDe karIne, 1:- kutaka -kta-lakSaNavALA che. minena--tethI karIne enAthI
zuM? enuM zuM kAma che ? kaMi nahi', ema atha che.

Page #410 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(334) This is a collection of fallacies, meaning it is completely filled with
knowledge-obscuring things. Wherever there is an alternative, there is also
ignorance, and there is always an emergence of knowledge-obscuring alternatives.
And this fallacy is the one that creates, nourishes, and arranges these ignorant
alternatives. Is this dung or milk? Is this milk or dung? This kind of fallacy
is the producer of such contradictory alternatives. Ignorance-shaped sculptor-
links create the stone of imagination-shaped alternatives! And fallacy plans,
arranges, and connects this stone of imagination! So it is the original
sculptor! Its sculpture-creation is also imaginative, all in the air! Like
castles in the air! And the fallacy is the one who connects the stones of this
air castle! So then all the construction is falsely imagined and airy! And what
happens to the one who tries to build it? It breaks into pieces or something
else? The foolish being holds in his mind, the fallacy of alternatives, always
painful; meditate on Brahman, always very bright, far away from all the worldly
things.” Shri Devchandraji's Dravyaprakash Then what is the purpose of this
fallacy that arranges these ignorance-driven alternatives? What is its purpose?
Nothing. The root of the alternative is ignorance, and the one who nourishes it
is fallacy. Then, why would a wise person engage in such evil, harmful, useless,
and poisonous fallacies? This world is born from ignorance-born alternatives,
then why would a seeker of liberation, who desires the end of the world, take
refuge in alternatives? The most capable, experienced, and concise conclusion of
all philosophy, the great sage Shrimad Rajchandraji has declared: “This whole
world arises from the alternative of attachment; the inward, non-dual, does not
merge.” Also— “All this is mainly based on the fruit of perception. Like the
elephant will kill, the vow of the mahout, like the alternative of obtained and
not obtained.” * “The sculpture of the body is created by the science of
biology. Then what is the name of this fallacy, which is created by the
alternative of the body?”

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (334) gadaSTisamuccaya che, eTale ke jJAnAvaraNIya AdithI saMpUkta-saMyukta
hoya che. jyAM jyAM vikalpa che tyAM tyAM tenI sAthe avidyA avazya jAya ja che,
ne tyAM tyAM avazya jJAnAvaraNIya vikalpane Adine udaya hoya ja che. ane te
avidyAsaMgata vikalpone jaka kutarka pejaka-janAra-goThavanAro A kutarka che. A
chANa che te dUdha kema nahiM? A dUdha che te chANa kema nahi? ItyAdi prakAranA
asamaMjasa vikalpane utpAdaka kutarka ja che. avidyArUpa4 zilpI-kaDIo
vikalparUpa kalpanAnI zilA ghaDe che! ane kutarka te kalpanAnI zilAnI yojanA
kare che, goThave che, eka bIjA sAthe salADe che! eTale mULa zilpakAra ja !
tenuM zilpa-ghaDatara paNa ka5nArUpa, badhuMya havAmAM! havAI killA jevuM !
Castles in the air! ne te havAI kilAnI zilAne salADanAro pAche kutaka ! eTale
pachI badhuMya caNatara khoTAmAM khoTuM kalpita ne havAI ja hoya ne! ane te
bAMdhavA jAya tenA paNa bhAMgIne bhukkA ja thAya ke bIjuM kAMI? mUrakha jIva
dhare cittameM kahA, jalpa vikalpa sadA du:khadAyI; dhyAvahu brahma sadA ati
ujajavala, dUra to saba seja parAI." zrI devacaMdrajIkRta dravyaprakAza te pachI
AvA avidyAprerita vikalpane goThavanArA kutarkanuM zuM kAma che? zuM prayojana
che ? kaMI ja nahiM. vikalapanuM mULa avidyA che ne tene poSanAre kutaka che, te
pachI AvA duSTa aniSTa anarthakAraka ne haLAhaLa khoTA kutarkane karyo vibudha
bhaje vAru ? avidyAjanya vikalpathI ja A saMsAranI utpatti thAya che, te pachI
saMsArane aMta IcchanAre mumukSu vikalpane Azraya kema kare ? samasta
tattvajJAnanA uttama niSkarSarUpanicoDarUpa atyaMta samartha anubhavavacana
tAvikazekhara zrImad rAjacaMdrajIe uccAryA che ke upaje meha vikalpathI, samasta
A saMsAra; aMtarmukha alaktAM, vilaya thatAM nahiM vAra." temaja-- jAtiprAyazca
sarvo'yaM pratItiphalabAdhitaH  /  hastI vyApAdayatyuktau prAptAprAptavikalpavat
// 91 //  tattipAtikArazca-ane jAtiprAya, dUSaNubhAsapradhAna, saDayaM-A sarve
kutarka, katItijAdhiraH-pratIti-phalathI bAdhita che eTalA mATe. e ja kahe che
suratI thApatyuau - hAthI mArI nAMkhaze evuM vacana mahAvate kahyuM,-konI jema ?
te mATe kahyuM -gAtAkAta viThapavata-mAtaaprAptanA vikalpanI jema. *
""vikarAvadarAnA zilpa bAyogavidyAvinimitay I tonanAmayazcatra kutaH vikramanena
tan -dvA. dvA,

Page #411 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Diimadrusti:  Kutarak Dushanbhasapradhan  (335)  This is a perception-
failing, bound by jatipray, all speculation; Like, will the elephant kill?
There is an option of attainable-unattainable, meaning-and perception-bound,
this is all kutarak jatipray - dushanbhasapradhan.  "The elephant will kill" was
said, will the elephant kill the one who has attained-is near?  Or will it kill
the one who has not attained-is far away? - like this option, The discussion and
all this kutarak is all jatipray, dushanbhasapradhan.  Where it is, it is its
job to find the dushanbhas!  Not the dushan, but the dushan-like illusion,
anything that appears like dushan, it is the job of kutarak to find the hole!
"Like extracting butter from milk, even in an innocent, flawless thing, to find
the deceit, is the skill of kutarak! "Vayuakt Sadhane Proktadoṣāṇāmudbhāvanam |
Tūṣvi Nirva Tu Tūṣāma Naman!"  Shri Siddhasen Divakar's Nyayavtar, this kutarak
is bound by perception and fruit, that is, no matter what kutarak, it does not
produce perception, and it is not accepted, there is always doubt.  And
"Sanshayatma Virati" - the doubting being is destroyed.  Kutarak perception, as
well as its fruit, does not produce any benefit.  It is just a useless head-
bound waste.  Therefore, a humorous example has been presented here - the
elephant will kill, the mahout said, will the elephant kill the one who is near?
Or will it kill the one who is far away?  Like this option, like someone makes a
fool of themselves, it is to be understood here.  The elephant kills near and
far, like that fool thinks."  The essence of this example is as follows - A
naive logician (student) came from somewhere.  Someone who was riding a mad
elephant, who was completely uncontrolled, shouted, "Hey! Hey!  Get away
quickly!  (Otherwise) the elephant will kill you."  So, the one who was
proficient in logic - who had studied but not understood - said, "Hey!  Fool!
Why are you talking nonsense like this?  Because, does it kill the one who is
attainable?  Or the one who is unattainable?  In the first case, there is a
chance of death - due to the feeling of attainment.  So, where he says, there,
the elephant has stayed - caught him.  The mahout barely saved him. Jatiprayata
is present in all sensations that have a different meaning-grasping nature - due
to the option of form in the form of attainment, it has been discussed
elsewhere.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dImAdaSTi : kutarka dUSaNabhAsapradhAna (335) pratIti-phela bAdhita A,
jAtiprAya sahu jalpa; jyama hAthI haNaze? ka, prApta-aprApta vikalpa che, artha-
ane pratItiphalathI bAdhita e A sarva kutarka jAtiprAya che-dUSaNabhAsapradhAna
che. "hAthI mArI nAMkhaze" evuM kahyuM, hAthI pAmelAne-pAse rahelAne haNaze ? ke
nahi pAmelAne-dUra rahelAne haNaze ?-evA vikalpanI jema vivecana ane je A sarva
kutarka che te sarva jAtiprAya che, dUSaNabhAsapradhAna che. jyAM hoya tyAM
dUSaNabhAsa zodhI kADhavuM e enuM kAma che ! dUSaNa nahiM paNa dUSaNa je AbhAsa
ApatuM, dUSaNa jevuM dekhAtuM kaMI paNa chidra zodhI kADhavuM e kutarkanuM kAma
che ! "dUdhamAMthI pirA kADhavA jevuM chala nirdoSa niravadya vastumAM paNa
zedhI kADhavuM e khala kutarkanuM kuzalapaNuM che ! "vAyukta sAdhane
proktadoSANAmudabhAvanam  /  TUSavi nirava tu TUSAmA nAman !" zrI siddhasena
divAkarakRta nyAyAvatAra Avo A kutaka pratItithI ane phalathI bAdhita che, eTale
ke game tevA kutarkathI paNa pratIti upajatI nathI, ane te mAnyAmAM Avato nathI,
sarvadA saMzayAtmaktA ja rahe che. ne "saMzayAtma virati" saMzayI jIva vinAza
pAme che. kataka pratIti. temaja tethI kAMI phala projana siddha thatuM nathI.
khAlI nakAmI mAthAla bAdhita pheDa thAya che. e mATe atre ramUjI daSTAMta rajU
karyuM che ke-hAthI mArI nAMkhaze ema mahAvate kahyuM, hAthI pAse rahelAne haze
? ke dUra rahelAne haNe? evo vika9pa jema keI bakara-jaDa kare, tenI jema atre
samajavAnuM che. dUra nikaTa hAthI haNe che, jyama e baThara vicAra." A
daSTAMtane sAra A pramANe - koI naiyAyika chatra (vidyAthI) kayAMkathI AvyuM.
avaza-niraMkuza thaI gayelA gAMDA hAthI para caDhelA keIe bUma mArI "are! are !
jaladI dUra khasI ja! (nahiM te ) hAthI mArI nAMkhaze.' eTale tevA prakAre jene
nyAyazAstra pariNata hatuM-je bhaNyo paNa gaNyo nhoto evA teNe kahyuMre re!
baThara ! Ama yuktibAhya kema pralape che ? kAraNa ke, zuM A prANane haNe che ?
ke aprAptane ? Adya pakSamAM hArI ja vyApattina (maraNane) prasaMga
che,-prAptibhAvane lIdhe. ema jyAM te kahe che. tyAM to tene hAthIe rahyo-
pakaDyo. tene mAMDa mAMDa mahAvate mUkAvyA. jAtiprAyatA te sarvatra bhinna artha
grahaNa svabhAvavALA saMvedananA vedanamAM hoya che;-tatrata (temAM prApta
thatA) AkArarUpa vikalpananA evaM prAyapaNAne lIdhe, ema anyatra carcavAmAM
AvyuM che.

Page #412 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(336) A student of some kind of logic-jurisprudence came across a mad elephant
running wild. The mahout riding the elephant shouted, "Hey, hey! Get out of the
way! Get out of the way! Otherwise, the elephant will kill you!" So, the
student, who was learned but not wise, started to apply the methods of his
learned jurisprudence to the situation, saying, "Hey, you fool! What are you
saying, without any logic or reason? Because, does this elephant kill those who
come near it, or those who don't come near it? If you say it kills those who
come near it, then it will be you who gets killed!" While he was still
continuing his argument, the elephant reached him and caught him. Then, the
mahout barely saved him. In the same way, a being who is situated in such a kind
of perception, due to his cunning nature, is caught by the cunning elephant, and
is only saved by the wise mahout.   Another humorous example of this is: Is the
pot dependent on the ghee, or is the ghee dependent on the pot? To prove this,
the learned scholar turned the pot upside down, and the ghee poured out!  Thus,
wherever there is a perception that interprets things differently, there is
jatipraayata. That is, to interpret something with a different intention than
what was intended, to "twist the meaning," is jatipraayata, a kind of delusion.
And to make a choice based on that is also the same, and is therefore a kind of
jatipraay-delusion. "Naat tooshurrmasaah pakshaavihurt na chai:" The meaning is
that to understand something in a way that is opposite to what was intended, and
to make a choice based on that, is called jati or delusion. Like the English
proverb, "To mistake chalk for cheese." "I have no doubt, the fool thinks; the
lazy guru, the disciple, that is the kind of word...mind." - Shri K.D. Sajay.
4-12  Also, "Svaabhavoत्तरपर्यन्त एषोऽसावपि तत्त्वतः । नार्वाग्दृग्गोचरो
न्यायादन्यथान्येन कल्पितः ॥ ९२ ॥" Kritti: - 3maavottparayant gg: - This cunning
one is also ultimately dependent on his nature. Ultimately, "nature" is the
answer to the cunning. And here, "vatumaanvairaan vachche vastusvaabhavo wade
karine uttar kehwa yogya che, e vachan uparthi." Thus, fire burns, water wets.
That is its nature. This feeling, too, is, tattvatah - truly, from the ultimate
reality, - naarvaad - not a subject of perception, vaaya - according to logic,
not based on any other logic. What kind of logic?

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (336) gadaSTisamuccaya koI eka taiyAyika-nyAyazAstrane vidyArthI kyAMkathI AvI
caDhyo. tyAM rastAmAM niraMkuza gAMDA thayelA hAthI para caDhelA mahAvate bUma
mArI-are are ! jaladI dUra haThI jA ! dUra haTI jA ! nahiM te hAthI mArI
nAMkhaze. eTale bhaNe paNa gaNe nahi evo te vedIe doDhacatura doDhaDahApaNa
karI, pote bhaNelA nyAyazAstranI paddhatie nyAyane prayoga karavA lAgyuM ke-re
re mUrkha ! Ama tuM yuktibAhya-yukti vagaranuM zuM bake che? kAraNa ke A hAthI
zuM pAmelAne-pAse AvelAne haNe? ke nahiM pAmelAne haNe ? pAmelAne haNe ema kahe
te tane ja haze,-ema jyAM te haju potAnuM saMbhASaNa AgaLa calAve che, tyAM to
hAthI pAse AvI pahoMce, ne tene pakaDyo. pachI mahAvate tene mAMDamAMDa cheDA.
tema tevA prakAre vikalpa karanAre evo te te darzanamAM sthita jIva paNa kutaka-
hastIthI grahAyela hoya che, te sadgusa-mahAvatathI ja mUkAvAya che. AnA jevuM
bIjuM ramUjI daSTAMta-kRtAdhAre pAtra uThavA pAtrAdhAra vRtam ! ghInA AdhAre
pAtra che ? ke pAtranA AdhAre ghI che? e prayogasiddha karavA mATe vedI paMDite
pAtra UMdhuM vALyuM eTale ghI DhoLAI gayuM ! Ama sarvatra judo ja artha grahaNa
karavAnA svabhAvavALuM saMvedana jyAM jyAM hoya che, tyAM tyAM jAtiprAyatA hoya
che. eTale ke kahevAnA AzayathI-matalabathI judo ja avaLe ja Azaya grahaNa
karavo, "eDanuM coDa vetaravuM" te jAtiprAyatA che, dUSaNabhAsapradhAnatA che.
ane te saMbaMdhI vika9pa karavo te paNa tadrupa hovAthI tevA prakArano
jAtiprAya-dUSaNabhAsapradhAna hoya che. 'nAta TUSaurrmAsAH pakSAvihUrta na cai:
" tAtparya ke je vAta kahevA mAgatA hoya, tenAthI UlaTe ja-Udhe ja artha
pakaDavo ane tevo viklapa karavo te jAti athavA dUSaNabhAsa kahevAya che.
aMgrejI kahevata pramANe Chalk ne badale Cheese samajavI, tenI jema. "huM pAmyo
saMzaya nahIMcha, mUrakha kare e vicAra; ALasuA guru ziSyanejI, e te vacana
prakAra...mana."-zrI ke. da. sajhAya. 4-12 temaja vaLI- svabhAvottaraparyanta
eSo'sAvapi tattvataH  /  nArvAgdRggocaro nyAyAdanyathAnyena kalpitaH  //  92  //
kRttiH-3mAvottaparyanta gg:- A kutaka paya te svabhAva uttaravALA hoya che,
chevaTe "svabhAva" e ja takane uttara hoya che. ane atre "vatumAMvairAM vacce
vastusvabhAvo vaDe karIne uttara kahevA yogya che, e vacana uparathI. Ama agni
rahe che, pANI bhIMjave che. e eno svabhAva che. bAvaSi-A bhAva 5Nu, tattvataH-
tattvathI, paramArthathI, -nArvAda - arvAdagrecara nathI, chAsthano viSaya
nathI; vAyA-nyAyathakI, paraprasiddha evA nyAyathI. kevA prakArano hoIne !

Page #413 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Dipradrishti's response to Kutarka's final answer "Svabhava"  (337) Svabhava
(inherent nature) itself stands as the final answer; Kutarka is to be rejected,
such is the impression of this, and this Svabhava is also not accessible to the
Chadmastha (the deluded) through reasoning, because through the logic of Anyatha
(otherwise), it is conceived as different from different perspectives.
Explanation: This Kutarka (fallacious argument) that has been described has a
specific nature - in this Kutarka, the final answer is "Svabhava" (inherent
nature). When no other argument or logic works, then it is said that this is the
Svabhava of the thing. It is said "Vastusvarupatah pramanavat" - to give the
answer based on the inherent nature of the thing.  And this Svabhava is also not
accessible to the Chadmastha (the deluded) through Tattva (reality). What is the
Svabhava of a certain thing? To know that through Tattva is not the domain of
the Chadmastha or the one whose knowledge is veiled. Why? Because through the
logic of Anyatha (otherwise), it is conceived as different by different
proponents. How? That is, the same Svabhava is conceived differently by
different proponents.  For example, it can be said everywhere that the answer
should be given based on the Svabhava of the thing - in the same way, in
establishing its own Svabhava, it can be said. How? Through that by which it has
the nature of performing the intended activity, it performs that activity, not
by anything else. Because the acceptance of its intended activity is in all its
modes, therefore, from wherever the occasion of its intended activity arises,
the cause does not differ, therefore.  Thus, fire wets in the proximity of
water, due to the nature of such Svabhava. And water burns in the proximity of
fire, due to the nature of such Svabhava - due to the diversity of Svabhava.
There are also other Svabhavas besides these examples, the universality of
examples is easy. Therefore, this Kutarka is illogical, it is unreasonable, this
is the purport of what is said.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dIprAdaSTiH kutakane chevaTane javAba "svabhAva' (337) svabhAva AvI ubhuM rahe
chevaTane ja javAba; kutarka e heya e, evI ehanI chApa, e svabhAva paNa
taravathI, chadmasthAcara noya; kAraNa nyAyathI anyathA, anyathI kalpita hoya,
92, artha :-svabhAva ja jyAM chevaTano javAba che evo A kutarka che; ane A
svabhAva paNa tattvathI agadaSTivALAne-chadmasthane gocara heta nathI, kAraNa ke
nyAyathI e bIjAthI bIjA prakAre kapavAmAM Ave che. vivecana A je kutaka kahyo,
tenuM vizeSa svarUpa ahIM kahyuM che-A kutarka evo hoya che ke temAM chevaTano
javAba "svabhAva hoya che. jyAre bIjI kaI paNa dalIla ke yukti na cAle, tyAre
chelle ema kahevAya ke A te A vastune svabhAva che. kahyuM che
kevatustramANvattAM vALe" "vastusvabhAvathI uttara kahevo.' Ama agni bALe che-
dajhADe che, pANI bhIMjAve che, kAraNa ke evo ene svabhAva che. ane te svabhAva
paNa tatvathI-paramArthathI arvAdaSTine eTale ke chadmasthane gocara nathI.
amuka vastune svabhAva zuM che? te tatvathI jANavuM e chadmasthane eTale ke
jJAnA varaNavaMtano viSaya nathI. jene saMpUrNa chajJAnAvaraNa TaLyuM nathI, te
chaghasthanI te jANI zakavAne samartha nathI. zAthI? para darzanIone prasiddha
evA anyathA kalapanA nyAyathI. kevA prakAre ? te ke-anya vAdIthI te anyathA-bIjA
ja prakAre kalpavAmAM Ave che. koI amuka prakAre vastusvabhAvanI kalpanA kare,
te te mATe kahyuM-anyathA-anyathA, prakArAntarathI judA ja prakAre, anyana-
anyathI, bIjA vAdIthI, pitta-kalpita heI, kalpavAmAM Avela hAI. dAkhalA
tarIke-"varatavamAarattAM vAcaM vastu svabhAva parathI uttara kahevo, ema
sarvatra ja tathA prakAre tenI tenI siddhimAM kahI zakAya che. kevA prakAre
-jenA vaDe tene arthakriyA karavAno svabhAva che, tenA vaDe te arthIkriyA kare
che, nahiM ke kSaNi tAthI. kAraNa ke tene ( arthariyAna) sarva bhAvomAM ja
svIkAra che teTalA mATe. kAraNa ke game tyAMthI tenA artha kriyAbhAvanA
prasaMgathI tenA kAraNane avizeSa hoya che, taphAvata hotI nathI, tethI. Ama
agni, jalanI saMnidhimAM (nikaTa hojarImAM) bhIMjave che,-tathA prakAranA
svabhAvapaNAne lIdhe. tathA jala aninI saMnidhimAM dahe che,-tathA prakAranA
svabhAvapaNAne lIdhe ja-svabhAvanA vaiciyathIvicitrapaNAne lIdhe. temAM paNa
lekabAdhA zivAya vaLI bIje svabhAva hoya che, dRSTAMtamAtranuM sarvatra
sulabhapaNuM heya che. tethI ema kutarka asamaMjasakArI (ayukta) che. ema
adaMparya che, A kahevAnuM tAtparya che.

Page #414 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(338) The collection of fallacies, on the other hand, imagines it in a different
way, from a different type of argument. Thus, since the knowledge of the pseudo-
existent, whose revelation has not been avoided, is imaginary, the bizarre
imagination of the pseudo-existent does not match! And it becomes "mundemunde
matirminda" "different minds in different brains"! One will imagine the north,
while another will imagine the south! Diametrically Opposite! The pseudo-
existent does not have direct knowledge, so it has to rely on hypothetical
imagination everywhere, and from imagined knowledge, many imagined waves of
imagination arise; because, according to the maxim "to speak the truth from the
nature of things," it can be said to be achieved in this way everywhere. It is
in this way - by which it has the nature to perform the meaning, by which it
performs the meaning - not by momentariness. And any meaning action occurs from
the nature of that thing. This action is accepted in all feelings, and an
occasion for such meaning action can be created from anywhere, because there is
no difference in its cause. So who will say that fire, in the presence of water,
wets, because it has that kind of nature! And water, in the presence of fire,
burns - burns, because it has that kind of nature! Or, because of the
strangeness of that nature, a different kind of nature can also be imagined,
which does not produce a lake! Because there is an abundance of examples
everywhere that confirm such natures! It is easy to get such a suitable example
from anywhere! In this way, the one who argues fallaciously always takes refuge
in the nature of things for the sake of achieving the father's view - the
father's imagination, and this is the nature of things, in the end, he tries to
silence the common man by giving an answer and shutting his mouth with an
example! And he does not worry - no matter how, from anywhere, he finds a nature
that suits his imagination! Because the nature is strange, and it is easy to
find an example that fits it everywhere! It doesn't take much effort to get it!
For example, everyone knows that fire is inherently hot and burns, yet the one
who argues fallaciously will try to prove that, look! Fire has the nature to wet
in the presence of water, because water also wets! Similarly, water is
inherently cold and has the nature to wet, yet the one who argues fallaciously
will argue that water has the nature to burn in the presence of fire, because
flying water burns! That is a direct experience. Because it is its nature. In
this way, under the guise of the nature of things, the one who argues
fallaciously twists and turns to fit the father's mind! Thus, there is no
shortage of examples, and

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (338) gadaSTisamuccaya vaLI bIje vAdI prakAratarathI-judA ja prakArathI tenI
kalpanA kare che. Ama jenuM jJAnAvaraNa TaLyuM nathI evA chadmasthanuM jJAna
kalpanArUpa (Imaginary) hovAthI, chasthAnI citravicitra kalpanAne meLa khAte
nathI ! ne "muMDe muMDe matirminnA' "magaje magaje judI mati' jevuM thAya che!
eka kalpanA karaze uttaranI, to bIje karaze dakSiNanI ! Diametrically Opposite !
chadmasthane pratyakSa jJAna te che nahiM, eTale tene badhe AdhAra vikalparUpa
kalpanA upara rAkhavo paDe che, ane kalpita jJAnathI aneka kalpita
kalpanAtaraMge UThayA kare che; kAraNa ke "vastusvabhAvo uparathI uttara
kahevo,' e sUtra pramANe sarvatra ja tevA prakAre tenI siddhi kahI zakAya che.
te A prakAre-jenA vaDe karIne tene artha kriyA karavAne svabhAva che, tenA vaDe
te arthayiA kare che,-nahiM ke kSaNikatAthI. ane koI paNa artha kriyA tevA
prakAranA te vastunA svabhAvathI thAya che. A aWkriyAne sarva bhAvomAM ja
svIkAra karAya che, ane game tyAMthI tevI artha kriyAne prasaMga ubhuM karI
zakAya che, kAraNa ke tenA kAraNamAM kaI taphAvata nathI. Ama kaI kaheze ke
agni, pANInI nikaTa hAjarImAM, bhIjAve che, kAraNa ke tene tevA prakArane
svabhAva che! tathA pANI, agninI nikaTa hAjarImAM, bALe che-dajhADe che, kAraNa
ke tene tevA prakArane svabhAva che ! athavA te svabhAvanuM vicitrapaNuM
hevAthI, lekabAdhA na upaje evA bIjA prakAranA paNa tathAsvabhAvapaNAnI vicitra
kalpanA karI zakAya che! kAraNa ke tevA tevA svabhAvane puSTa kare evA daSTAMta
mAtranuM sarvatra sulabhapaNuM hoya che! game tyAMthI tevuM anukULa dRSTAMta
meLavavuM heluM che ! AvA prakAre kutarka karanAra pitAnA maMtavyanI-pitAnI
kalpanAnI siddhi mATe haMmezAM vastusvabhAvano Azraya le che, ane A
vastusvabhAva che ema chevaTane javAba ApI sAmA mANasane niruttara karavAne-
mukha baMdha karavAno prayAsa dRSTAMtano kare che ! ane cena na kare-game te
prakArathI kayAMyathI paNa tene toTo nathI potAnI kalapanAne anukULa evo
svabhAva maLI paNa Ave che ! kAraNa ke svabhAvanuM vicitrapaNuM hoya che, ane
tene baMdhabesatuM daSTAMta meLavavuM paNa badheya sulabha hoya che! te
meLavatAM jhAjhI takalIpha paDatI nathI ! dAkhalA tarIkeagni te mULa
uSNasvabhAvI heI dajhADanAra che ema sarva kaI jANe che, chatAM kutarka karanAra
ema sAbita karavA prayAsa karaze ke juo! agnine svabhAva pANInI hAjarImAM
bhIMjAvavAno che, kAraNa ke ulluM pANI bhIMjAve paNa che ! temaja pANIne mULa
svabhAva, zItala hoI bhIjAvavAne che, chatAM kutarka karanAra evI dalIla karaze
ke-pANIne svabhAva, agninI hAjarImAM dajhADavAne che, kAraNa ke uDuM pANI
dajhADe che ! e pratyakSa anubhava che. kAraNa ke te tene svabhAva che. A rIte
vastusvabhAvanA oThA heThaLa kutarka karanAra mArI macaDIne pitAne manaphAvate
artha baMdha besADe che ! Ama daSTAMtane toTo nathI ne

Page #415 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Deepradrushti: The 'Misunderstanding' of the Argument in the Form of 'Chhast
Panaru' (339)  There are no arguments on the side of 'Chhast Panaru'! Therefore,
such an argument is completely misunderstood, inappropriate, and unsuitable. It
is without any structure or foundation, and that is the truth. And for that very
reason, it is appropriate for the soul-liberated yogi to abandon it from afar.
★ This is what is being said, and it is being shown in detail—  **ears:**
क्लेदयत्यम्बुसन्निधौ दहतीति च । safoeनधौ तत्स्वाभाव्यादित्युदिते तयोः ॥ ९३ ॥
Fire moistens in the presence of water, and water burns in the presence of fire.
Both of these happen due to their own nature. This is what is said by some. 93.
**Meaning:** Therefore, fire moistens in the presence of water, and water burns
in the presence of fire. This happens because of the nature of both of them.
When someone says this—  **Analysis**  The above statement is explained in
detail: The nature of the presented object is not understood by the 'Arvaasht
Chhadmasth' (one who is veiled by ignorance). The 'Chhadmasth' cannot know the
true nature of the object. Therefore, fire moistens in the presence of water, or
water burns in the presence of fire. Because fire has such a nature, some argue.
What then? Its investigation is mentioned in the following verse. Fire's true
nature is hot, and therefore it burns. Everyone knows this, yet those who argue
will say: Fire's nature is to moisten, because fire moistens in the presence of
water. Hot water moistens, this is directly seen.  **Explanation:** Because the
presented nature is not understood by the 'Arvaangdayar-Dmath' (one who is
veiled by ignorance), therefore, fire moistens. To avoid the contradiction of
direct experience, it is said: In the presence of water. The explanation is: Or
water burns. Because this understanding is not correct, it is said: In the
presence of fire. Why is this so? It is said: Because of their own nature.
Because fire and water have such a nature, it is said by the 'Parvadi' (one who
argues). When someone argues—

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dIprAdaSTi : chAstha panArUpa kutarkanuM" asama'jasapaNuM' (339) kutarkanA AreA
nathI ! mATe Avo kruta sarvathA asamajasa, ayeAgya, anucita che, DhaMgadhaDA
vinAnA-ThAmaThekANA vinAnA che, ema tAtpa che. ane eTalA mATe ja AtmAthI mumukSu
jogIjane tenA sathA dUrathI parityAga karavo yAgya che.  A ja ane vizeSathI kahI
dekhADavA kahe che-- ears: kledayatyambusannidhau dahatIti ca  /  safoenadhau
tatsvAbhAvyAdityudite tayoH  //  93  //  ethaoN jala sannidhAnamAM, anala
bhIMjave vAhu ! sannidhAnamAM analanA, jala upajAve dAha; ema teDu banne taNA,
tathA svabhAve thAya; ema. koi vADhi thakI, jyAre kathana karAya; 93. artha
:--eTalA mATe pANInI hAjarImAM agni bhIjave che, ne agninI hAjarImAM pANI
dajhADe che, ema te bannenA tevA svabhAvapAne lIdhe thAya che, evu kAithI jyAre
kathavAmAM Ave tyAre-- vivecana uparamAM kahelI vAtane vizeSathI kahI dekhADe
che:-prastuta vastusvabhAva arvASTichadmasthane gAcara nathI, chadmastha te
svabhAvane yathA jANI zakateA nathI. eTalA mATe ja agni, pANInI sanidhimAM--
nikaTa hAjarImAM, bhIjave che; athavA pANI, agninI sa`nidhimAM--nikaTa hAjarImAM
dajhADe che; kAraNa ke agnine te pANInA tevo tevo svabhAva che,ema keAi vAdI
jyAre dalIla kare che. tyAre zuM? tenuM anusaMdhAna nIcenA leAkamAM kahyuM che.
agnine asala svabhAva uSNa che, ane tethI dajhAya che ema AkhAlavRddha sa koI
jANe che, chatAM kutarka karanArA kaheze ke-agninA svabhAva bhIMjavavAne che,
kAraNa ke agni pANInI hAjarImAM bhIjave che, uSNu jala bhIMjave che, e pratyakSa
dekhAya che. vRtti:--kAraNa ke adhikRta-prastuta svabhAva arvAMgadAyara-dmathanI
daSTine gAcara nathI, to ethI karIne, e kAraNathI, agni: phaiti--agni bhIMjave
che; pratyakSa virodhanA parihAra athe kahyuM. ke-lambulannau-jalanI sanidhimAM,
nikaTa hAjarImAM. vRti vAstu-athavA pANI dajhADe che. pratItikhAdhA nathI eTalA
mATe kahyuM ke-niyaMnidhI-agninI saMnidhimAM (agninI nikaTa hAjarImAM) A ema
kema che? te mATe kahyuM-satsvAmAvyAtto:-te khannenA te svAbhAvapaNAne lIdhe.
agninA te pANInA tevA svabhAva che tethI karIne, utte-paravAdIthI kahevAmAM
AvyeA, ema ema jyAre krAi paravAdI kahe che. tyAre--

Page #416 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(340) Yoga-Dristi-Samuchaya Water is inherently cool and therefore gets wet, yet
a sophist will try to prove that water's nature is to burn, because water burns
in the presence of fire, hot water burns, this is a direct experience. Thus, a
sophist can extract a meaning that pleases his father from the same thing, under
the guise of the nature of things! What? He says कोशपानादृते ज्ञानोपायो
नास्त्यत्र युक्तितः। विप्रकृष्टोऽप्ययस्कान्तः स्वार्थकद्दश्यते यतः ॥ ९४ ॥  There
is no way of knowing other than by memorizing, this is established by logic!
Because even though it is far away, the lodestone; Always performs its own work,
it is seen here, 94 Meaning- Here, there is no way of knowing other than by
memorizing, because even a far-off lodestone is seen to perform its own work
(the work of the father). Then someone will say that there is no other way of
knowing than by memorizing (memorizing the words, that is)! This can be
established in the context of nature by the logic of the dry. He who speaks of
nature will, in turn, argue as above, using the logic of the same nature. He
will then object to the far-fetched argument, that is, the remoteness, and this
too can be removed by the example of the lodestone: even a far-off lodestone
attracts iron, that is, it is seen to have the nature of performing the work of
the father, such as attracting iron. Kritti- There is no way of knowing other
than by memorizing, in the context of nature, because there is another example
that supports this meaning, established by logic, by the logic of dry reasoning,
therefore it is said - विलोडरदांन्तः- far-off lodestone, the one who performs
its own work, the one who has the nature of performing its own work, such as
attracting iron, is seen because it is seen. But the same far-off lodestone
attracts only iron, not copper, etc., it does not cut it. Therefore, just as
this, how is the nature of fire, etc., affected by the burning? It is
appropriate to think that it is not affected by anything.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (340) yogadaSTisamuccaya temaja jala mULa zItala svabhAvI che, ane tethI
bhIMjAvAya che, chatAM kutarka karanAra ema sAbita karavA prayatna karaze ke-
pANIne svabhAva dajhADavAne che, kAraNa ke pANI agninI hAjarImAM dajhADe che,
uSNa jala dajhADe che, e pratyakSa anubhava che. Ama vastusvabhAvanA eThA nIce
kutarka karanAra pitAne manaphAvato artha eka ja vAtamAMthI utArI zake che !
zuM? te kahe che kozapAnAdRte jJAnopAyo nAstyatra yuktitH|
viprakRSTo'pyayaskAntaH svArthakaddazyate yataH  //  94  //  kezapAna vinA bIja,
heya na jJAna upAya; evuM paNa yukti thakI, atre sthApita thAya! kAraNa dUra
rahyo chatAM, lehacuMba pASANa; svArtha kArya karata sadA, dekhAye A ThANa, 94
artha-atre yuktithI kozapAna sivAya jJAna upAya che nahi; kAraNa ke viprakRSTa (
dUra rahelo) lehacuMbaka paNa svArtha karanAre (pitAnuM kArya karanAre) dekhAya
che. vivecana tyAre koI vaLI ema kaheze ke kezapAna (zabdakeSa pI ja-gokhI ja
te) sivAya jJAnane bIjo upAya nathI ! ema atre svabhAvanA prasaMgamAM zuSka tanI
yuktithI sthApita thaI zakaze. je svabhAvanI ja vAta karyA karaze, te kaI vaLI e
ja svabhAvanI yukti AgaLa dharIne upara pramANe dalIla karaze. temAM vaLI kaI
viprakarSane (Far-letched argument) eTale dUrapaNAna-cheTApaNAne vAMdho leze, te
te paNa A lehacuMbaka dRSTAMtathI dUra karI zakAzeH-dUra rahele ayaskAMta-
lehacuMbaka patthara paNa svArtha sAdhe che, arthAt leDhAnuM AkarSaNa vagere
pitAnuM kArya karavAne svabhAva dharAvate dekhAya che. kRtti-jorApAnA te
kozapAna sivAya, jJAnopA nAsthatra-jJAnaupAya a-svabhAva vyatikaramAM
(prasaMgamAM ) che nahiM, putiH yuktithI, zuSka tarka yuktithI, koI bIjuM
daSTAMta paNa A arthanuM samarthaka evuM vidyamAna che ja, eTalA mATe kahyuM
-viloDaradAntaH-viprakRSTa-dUra rahelo evo ayaskAMta-lehAkarSaka pattharavizeSa,
svArtha-svArtha karanAro, lehAkarSaNa Adi svakArya karaNarUpa svabhAvavALo,
daphate catA -kAraNa ke dekhAya che. para te ja viprakRSTa ja-dUra rahele ja evo
saMnikRSTa lohane ja, nahiM ke tAmrAdine, AkarSe ja che, nahi ke kApe che. tethI
Ama AnI jema agni AdinuM tathAsvabhAva kapana konAthI bAdhita thAya ? keIthI
nahiM, ema bhAvavA yogya che.

Page #417 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Dimādr̥ṣṭi: Daṣṭāntapradhāna Kutarka-nā Cūṇṭhaṇ:  (341) Because it remains
far away, it attracts iron, not when it is near; it attracts only nearby iron,
not copper, etc.; it attracts iron, it does not cut it. Because that is the
nature of the magnet.  Therefore, in this way, how can the nature of fire, etc.,
be known? By nothing, it is thought. Any nature can be established by cleverness
and the strength of examples, therefore, there is no good in criticizing such
logic, there is no value. The seeker of liberation, who is seeking liberation,
should only give a respectful bow to this evil logic!  Concluding, it is said –
**Daṣṭāntamātraṁ sarvatra yadevaṁ sulabhaṁ kṣitau |  Etatpradhānastatkena
svanyātyāpodyate hyayam || 95 ||**  Meaning – Thus, examples are easily
available everywhere on earth. Therefore, how can this logic, which is based on
examples, be refuted by its own principles?  **Discussion** – As stated above,
examples are easily available everywhere on earth, especially for any object to
be proved, it is easy to find an example that is convincing to the intellect. It
is not difficult to find an example that is suitable and consistent with one's
own objective. Then, even if it does not convince the intellect, even if it
cannot be accepted as logic! No matter what, it is created to force, to pull, to
fit the mold of one's own belief! Therefore, where such an example is the main
thing, where one relies entirely on such an example, where one's airy edifice
stands on such a hollow pillar, how can such logic be refuted by its own
principles? Who can refute it? Nothing.  **Explanation:**  * **Daṣṭāntamātra:**
Only examples, convincing to the intellect, are easily available everywhere in
the world. * **Kṣitau:** On earth. * **Etatpradhāna:** This logic, which is
based on examples. * **Svanyātyāpodyate:** Can be refuted by its own principles.
The meaning is that this logic, which is based on examples, cannot be refuted by
its own principles because examples are easily available everywhere on earth.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dImAdaSTi : daSTAMtapradhAna kutakanA cuMthaNa : (341) kAraNa ke te dUra rahyo
rahyo ja loDhAne khece che, najIka hoya te nahi; saMnikRSTa-nikaTa leDhAne ja
kheMce che, tAMbA vagerene nahiM; loDhAne bece ja che, kApato nathI. kAraNa ke
lehacuMbakane te ja svabhAva che. tethI Ama AnI peThe agni vagerenA tathA
svabhAvanuM ka95na kenAthI badhI zakAya vAru? keIthI nahi, ema bhAvavA gya che.
game te svabhAva kuyuktithI ne daSTAMtabalathI sthApita karI zakAya ema che,
mATe evA kutarkanA cuMthaNuM karavAmAM kAMI sAra nathI, kaMi mAla nathI.
tavaMgaveSaka mumukSue te A duSTa kutakane nava gajanA namaskAra ja karavA gya
che. ! upasaMhAra karatAM kahe che - dRSTAntamAtraM sarvatra yadevaM sulabhaM
kSitau  /  etatpradhAnastatkena svanItyApodyate hyayam  //  95  /  /  ema
daSTAMtamAtra ahIM, sarvatra sulabha joya; tapradhAna A keNathI, nItithI bAdhita
hoya? 95 artha -Ama pRthvImAM sarvatra daSTAMtamAtra sulabha che. teTalA mATe e
daSTAMtapradhAna e A kutarka kenAthI potAnI nIti vaDe karIne bAdhita thaI zake
vAru? vivecana Ama uparamAM je kahyuM te pramANe A pRthvImAM savizeSapaNe sarva
kaI sthaLe sarvatra daSTAMtamAtra sulabha che, kaI paNa sAdhya vastu viSe, leka-
pratItithI bAdhita evuM, daSTAMta meLavavuM saheluM che. potAnA sAdhyane
anukULa-baMdhabestu evuM dRSTAMta daSTAMtapradhAna maLI AvavuM muzkela nathI.
pachI bhalene te lekane pratIta na thAya evuM, kutaka mAnyAmAM na AvI zake evuM
heya ! game tema mArI macaDIne, tANe kheMcIne, potAnI mAnyatAnI DAbalI baMdha
besADavA khAtara UbhuM kareluM hoya ! mATe AvuM dRSTAMta jyAM pradhAna che, AvA
dRSTAMta para ja jene badhe madAra che, AvA daSTAMtanA polA thAMbhalA para ja
jenI havAI imArata addhara ubhI che, evA A kutarkane ke pitAnI nItithI vArI zake
? koNa bAdhita karI zake vAru ? kaI nahiM. kRttiH-gitamAa-daSTAMtamAtra, sAdhya
vastumAM, leka-pratItithI bAdhita evuM, satra-sarvatra avizeSathI va5-kAraNa ke
ema, ukta nItithI, gurumaM-sulabha, kSitau-pRthvImAM che. AMtaraprayAnADaca-e
daSTAMtapradhAna A kuta, nAte-konAthI dUra karAya-bAdhita thAya? keInAthI nItinA
virodhane lIdhe, ema artha che.

Page #418 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Jain Terms Preserved:  (342) Yāgadṛṣṭisamuccaya Someone may say that this
fallacious argument (kutarka) is obstructed by the grandeur of imagination
(kalpanāgaurava) and so on. For example, imagining the nature of water to be
burning in the proximity of fire is a monstrous imagination (kalpanāgaurava), it
is a very heavy imagination, it does not go down the throat; therefore, it is an
obstruction. Someone may say this, the answer to that is that the grandeur of
imagination and the like is not capable of establishing the nature (svabhāva)
proved by reasoning, because it is not possible to imagine the nature otherwise
even with thousands of imaginations. Therefore, it should be understood that it
is not possible to imagine the alteration of nature even with the lightness of
imagination - a small imagination. The grandeur, although it may be, is its
defect; and if it is authoritative, it is faultless even through the grandeur
and the like. The meaning is that whether there is the grandeur of imagination
or the lightness of imagination, it does not obstruct the fallacious argument at
all; therefore, this example-based fallacious argument should certainly be
abandoned.  Kalpanāgauravādi is not an obstruction Here the example says:
द्विचन्द्रस्वप्नविज्ञान निदर्शन बलोत्थितः । निरालम्बनतां सर्वज्ञानानां साधयन्यथा
॥ ९६ ॥ The example of the knowledge of the two moons and the dream, arising from
strength, establishes the non-dependence of all knowledge in another way. 96
Meaning: Just as the fallacious argument arising from the example of the
knowledge of the two moons and the dream, while establishing the non-dependence
of all knowledge, is not obstructed by anything.  Explanation: Above, the
predominance of the fallacious argument through examples was said, and it was
said that such example-based fallacious arguments cannot be obstructed. To
clarify this, the example is presented here: The moon is one, yet it appears
double to the squinting eye; the dream is false, yet its knowledge occurs.
Similarly, the knowledge of the moon, as well as the knowledge of the dream, is
actually false, but

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (342 ) yAgadaSTisamuccaya kadAca kAi ema kaheze ke kalpanAgaurava AdithI A
kutarkane bAdhA phoMce che. jemake agnisaMnidhimAM pANInA dAha svabhAva kalpavA
temAM kalpanAgaurava ( Monstrous imagination) che, ghaNI bhArI kalpanA che, te
gaLe utare ema nathI; mATe te bAdhaka che. ema kAi kaheze te tenA uttara e che
ke yuktithI siddha svabhAvanA khAdhanamAM kalpanAgauravAdika samatha nathI,
kAraNa ke hajArA kalpanAothI paNa svabhAvanuM anyathA kalpavu zakaya nathI.
eTalA mATe ja kalpanAlAghavathI-nAnIsUnI kalpanAthI paNa svabhAvAMtara kalpavA
zakaya nathI, ema samajI levuM. gaurava chatAM aprAmANika hoya te tenuM
duhapaNuM che; ane prAmANika hoya te gauravAdi thakI paNa adoSapaNu che.
tAtparya ke kalpanAgaurava hAya ke kalpanAlAghava hAya, tethI kAMi kutarka ne
khAdhA phoMcatI nathI; mATe Ave A dRSTAMtapradhAnax kutarka saCthA parityAga
karavA ceAgya ja che ema nizcita thayuM. kalpanA gauravAdi bAdhaka nathI ahI ja
dRSTAMta kahe che-- dvicandrasvapnavijJAna nidarzana balotthitaH  /
nirAlambanatAM sarvajJAnAnAM sAdhayanyathA  //  96  //  dvicaMdra
svapnavijJAnanA, udAharaNa khala dAva; jyama sahu jJAnanI sAdhatA, nirAlatA
sAva. 96 aH--jema eca'dranA ane svapnavijJAnanA udAharaNa khalathI UThatA evA A
kutarka, sarva jJAneAnI nirAlaMbanatA sAdhatA satA, kAnAthI bAdhita thAya vAru ?
vivecana uparamAM kutarkanI dRSTAMta pradhAnatA kahI, ne AvA dRSTAMtaHpradhAna
kutarkane kANu khASita karI zake ema kahyuM. te spaSTa batAvavA mATe ahIM
dRSTAMta rajU karyuM cheH- caMdra eka che, chatAM trAMsI AMkhe e dekhAya che
svapna mithyA che-khATuM che, chatAM tenuM vijJAna-jANapaNuM thAya che. Ama e
caMdranuM jJAna, tema ja svapnavijJAna vAstavika rIte mithyA che, khATA nidarza
tanA vRttiH - dvicandrasvapna vijJAna nidarzana va le| tthitaH zre caMdranA ane
svapnavijJAnanA udAharaNanA alathI-sAmaththu thI UThele upajelA evA kutaka', ni
rundhanatAm-nirAlaMbanatA, AlaMbanazUnyatA, sarvajJAnAnAm-savAnAnI, mRgatRSNA
Adi gAyarasa jJAnAnI, -avizeSathI, sAmAnya karIne, sAdhacanyathA-sAdhatA sato
jema, "AvA kutaka kAnAthI khAdhI zakAya vAruM ? x"
dRSTAntamAtrasaulabhyAttadayaM kena bAdhyatAm  /  svamAvavASane nAnuM
vanAnauvAviSTham '' dvA dvA. 22-10

Page #419 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Dimaatrushti:**  Such a vicious argument! (343) It is baseless, without
support, and unfounded. With the strength of this example, someone might argue
that just as this knowledge is baseless and false, so too are all other
knowledge, like mirage, baseless and false. The water in a mirage is baseless,
not real, but appears as a false illusion, so all knowledge is baseless and
false. If someone argues in this way, using the example to discredit all
knowledge, claiming it is baseless, unsupported, and unfounded, how can it be
refuted? Nothing. This argument cannot be refuted, this is just an example;
therefore, what wise person would rely on such an argument that leads astray,
drives one mad, and leads one down the wrong path? * And it is said that it does
not lead to the truth: सर्व सर्वत्र चाप्नोति यदस्मादसमञ्जसम् । प्रतीतिबाधितं
लोके तदनेन न किंचन ॥ ९७ ॥ From this, everything is obtained everywhere, which is
illogical. In the world, that which is contradicted by perception, nothing is
obtained from it, 97. Meaning: Because this argument leads to everything
everywhere, which is illogical (unreasonable) and contradicted by perception in
the world, therefore, nothing is obtained from this argument, it has no purpose.
It is so. Analysis This And thus, this argument does not lead to any kind of
truth, because this argument leads to everything everywhere, anything can be
achieved anywhere. By discrediting a particular example, a particular point is
proven, and then this argument is applied everywhere! One stick is used to beat
everyone! This is an extreme generalization, illogical, unreasonable, and
inappropriate. Moreover, this argument is also contradicted by perception in the
world. Vicious argument Commentary: Sarve-sarva, the goal is to achieve
everything without exception, sarvatra 2-sarvatra, moreover, it is obtained in
everything everywhere, chachasmāt—if this argument, asamangahram-illogical,
(ayathāy),—due to extreme generalization. Pratitiāshit sra-in the world, that
which is contradicted by perception, such, from the mere strength of such an
example, tanen na chin-therefore, from this-this opportunity, nothing is
obtained, (it has no purpose).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dImAtRSTi : AvA duSTa kuta thI sayu ! ( 343) che, AlaMbana vinAnA, AdhAra
vinAnA, nimULa che. A dRSTAMtanA sAmarthyathI, A dRSTAMta AgaLa dharIne koI ema
kutarka kare ke jema A jJAna nirAla bana hAi mithyA-kheATA che, tema mRgatRSNAdi
geAcara khIjA badhA jJAna nirAlaMbana hAi mithyA-khATA che. jhAMjhavAnA jala
nirAlakhana che, vAstavika che nahi, paNa mithyA AbhAsarUpa dekhAya che, tema
sarva jJAnA nirAlaMbana hAi mithyA che. Ama kutarka karI dRSTAMtanA khale karIne
sarva jJAnenu nirAla'khanapaNuM, nirAdhArapaNuM, ni`LapaNuM kei sAkhita karavA
jAya, te tene keNu bAdhita karI zake vAru ? kAI nahiM. kutaka kai rIte khAdhita
karavo zakaya nathI, enuM A udAharaNlR mAtra rajU karyuM; mATe AvA uMdhA ravADe
caDAvI denAra, unmAge laI janAra, utpathe dorI janAra kutarkanA kayA vivekI
puruSa Azraya kare ?  ane ema tattvasiddhi nathI eTalA mATe kahe che sarva
sarvatra cApnoti yadasmAdasamaJjasam  /  pratItibAdhitaM loke tadanena na
kiMcana  //  97  //  ethI asamaMjasa badhuM, prApta thAya satra; pratIti bAdhita
lAkamAM, ethI kAMI na atra, 97 artha :--kAraNa ke A kutarka thakI sarva satra
prApta thAya che, ke je asamajasa ( ayathArtha ) ane leAkamAM pratItithI khASita
teTalA mATe A kutarkathI kAMI nathI, enu kAMi pratyeAjana nathI. evuM heAya che.
vivecana A ane Ama kutarka karavA thakI kei prakAre tattvasiddhi thatI nathI,
kAraNu kutarkathI tA sa satra prApta thAya che, game tyAM game te kAMi sAdhya
thai zake che. koi eka amuka dRSTAMtanA khalathI amuka vAta siddha karI,
kutarkathI te dRSTAMta sarvatra lAgu pADavAmAM Ave che! eka lAkaDIe badhAyane
hAMkavAmAM Ave che! A atiprasaMgarUpa hoi asamaMjasa che, ayathArtha che,
ayeAgya che. vaLI A kutarka tA lAkamAM paNa pratItithI bAdhita duSTa kRtathI
sata vRtti:--sarve-sa+, navazeSa sAdhyu ema prakrama che, sarvatra 2-satra vaLI,
sarvatra ja vastumAM prApteti-prApta thAya che, cacasmAt--jo A kutarka thakI,
asamaMgahram-asamaMjasa, ( ayathAya),-- atiprasaMgane lIdhe. pratItiASita sro-
lAkamAM pratItithI khASita thatu evu, tevA prakAranA dRSTAMtamAtra
sArava'tapaNAthI, taneena na cina-tethI AthI-A takathI kAMpta nathI, ( enuM
kaSkiM kAma nathI.)

Page #420 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(344) A collection of web-duṣṭi arises, meaning that it does not generate
perception or certainty in the people. An argument proven by logic is not
accepted by people. Because it contains nothing but examples, it has no other
merit. Thus, such a worthless, trivial argument is of no use, it has no value.
Therefore, such an argument, influenced by ambiguous public perception, is
bound! “Tată paryāsisa%ālā Atīndriyārthasiddhaārtha nivāroḍha kuṛi I dvā. ḍhā,
23-2. Therefore, the one who is inquisitive about the true essence, the soul who
is a seeker of truth, never even considers any kind of argument, that is the
meaning. Every seeker should keep this concise statement of the supreme soul-
experiencer, Śrīmad Rājacandraji, in their heart forever - “Leave the
philosophy, its attachment and its variations; He who asks for this will achieve
it, his birth is insignificant.” - Śrī Ātmasiddhi The essence of the criticism
of logic and this statement, as if echoing, reverberating, the great scholar
Mahārṣi Haribhadrasuriji has emphasized the abandonment of this illogical
planet, the logic, and has strongly prohibited all kinds of attachment and
aversion. Because, criticizing this illogical planet, he has clearly shown that
this logic, (1) is a color to knowledge, (2) is a hindrance to peace - self-
peace, (3) is a destroyer of faith, (4) generates false pride, and (5) thus, it
is a destroyer of the mind, an enemy of the ultimate goal, therefore, it is not
appropriate for the seeker to be attached to it. (6) It is associated with all
kinds of ignorance, and it is this logic that plans and arranges it, so what is
the use of it? (7) All this logic is a species, meaning it is full of pollution,
it is influenced by perception and results. Does an elephant kill the one who is
far away or the one who is near? Like the Vedic arguments. (8) Moreover, this
logic ultimately has an answer, “nature”. And this nature is not perceived from
the essence, because it is perceived differently from the other. For example,
fire wets, water burns, etc. (9) Thus, everywhere, examples are available that
are influenced by public perception, then who can consider such an example-based
logic? For example, the logic that arises from the strength of the example of
two moons and self-knowledge proves the independence of all knowledge! (10)
Thus, everything influenced by public perception is obtained everywhere from
such ambiguous logic. Anything can be proven by logic, anywhere, in a haphazard
way! Then what is the use of such evil, wicked logic?

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (344) vebaduSTisamuccaya thAya che, eTale ke lokamAM paNa te mATe pratIti
upajatI nathI, khAtrI thatI nathI. kutarkathI siddha karAtI vAta lokone paNa
mAnyAmAM AvatI nathI. kAraNa ke temAM mAtra daSTAMta sivAya bIjo kAMI sAra hoto
nathI Ama sarvathA AvA niHsAra tuccha kutarkathI kAMI nathI, emAM kAMI mAla
nathI. eTale AvA asamaMjasakArI lokapratItithI bAdhita kutarkathI sayuM! "tatA
paryAsisa%ALA atIndriyArthasidghArtha nIvAroDatha kuri I dvA. DhA, 23-2. mATe je
satyatattvano jijJAsu che evA tattvagaSaka AtmAthIe to kyAreya paNa, koI paNa
prakAranA kaMI paNa kutarkane bIlakula keDuM ApavA gya nathI ja, ema tAtparya
che. A aMge pratyeka mumukSue parama AtmAnubhavI zrImad rAjacaMdrajInA A
TakelkIrNa vacana hRdayamAM sadA kerI rAkhavA yogya che- choDI mata darzana
taNo, Agraha tema vika95; kahyo mAga A sAdhaze, janma tehanA alpa."--zrI
Atmasiddhi kutarka niMdAno sArAMza ane A vacanane jANe pratidhvani karatA heya-
paDagho pADatA hoya, ema bhagavAna zAstrakAra maharSi haribhadrasUrijIe A
kutakarUpa viSama grahanA tyAga para ATale badhe bhAra mUkyo che, sarva
prakAranA Agraha-abhinivezane atyaMta niSedha karyo che. kAraNa ke A kutarka
viSama grahanI khUba niMdA karatAM, teozrIe spaSTa darzAvyuM ke-A kutarka, (1)
bodha pratye raMgarUpa che, (2) zamane-AtmazAMtine apAyarUpa che, (3) zraddhAne
bhaMga karanAra che, (4) mithyA abhimAna upajAvanAra che, ane (5) Ama te cittano
aneka prakAre bhAvazatru-paramArtharipu che, mATe temAM abhiniveza karavo
mumukSune yogya nathI. (6) sarva vikala avidyAsaMgata che, ane tenI yojanA-
goThavaNI karanAra A kutarka che, mATe tethI zuM kAma che ? (7) A sarva kutarka
jAtiprAya eTale dUSaNabhAsapradhAna che, pratItithI ane phalathI bAdhita che.
dUra rahelAne hAthI haNe ? ke nikaTa rahelAne? tenA jevA vediyADAnI jema. (8)
vaLI A kutarkamAM chevaTane javAba svabhAva" che. ane A svabhAva te tattvathI
chadmasthAne gocara nathI, kAraNa ke anyathI te anya prakAre ka9pavAmAM Ave che.
jemake agni bhIMjave che, pANI bALe che, ItyAdi. (9) Ama sarvatra lekapratItithI
bAdhita evuM dRSTAMta sulabha che, te pachI AvA dRSTAMtapradhAna kutarkane kaNa
vArI zake ? jemake-be caMdra ne svamavijJAnanA udAharaNanA bala uparathI UThate
kutarka sarva jJAnanuM nirAlaMbanapaNuM sAdhe che! (10) Ama lekapratItithI
bAdhita evuM sarva kAMI paNa asamaMjasa kutarkathI sarvatra prApta thAya che.
kutarkathI game tevuM agaDaMbagaDe game tyAM sAbIta thaI zake che ! te pachI AvA
aniSTa duSTa kutarkanuM zuM prajana che?

Page #421 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Dimādr̥ṣṭi: A subject beyond the scope of sensory perception or dry logic
(345)  6 Therefore, it is appropriate for a noble-minded seeker of liberation to
abandon such fallacious arguments and attachments like straw. And whoever does
so, does not abandon the auspicious Lakshmi of virtue, like a virtuous, noble
woman. And such evil, harmful, and false fallacious arguments, which are
contrary to the right view, are automatically avoided when the true object of
knowledge is realized in this view. Thus ends the section on the condemnation of
fallacious arguments.  ##  A means to attain the knowledge of the transcendental
And here, it is said:  "For the sake of attaining the knowledge of the
transcendental, the efforts of those who act wisely are made. But dry logic is
not the means to attain it anywhere." (98)  The efforts of those who are wise
and discerning are made for the sake of attaining the knowledge of the
transcendental. Dharma, the soul, etc., are transcendental objects, meaning they
are beyond the reach of the senses and cannot be known through sensory
perception. There is no "go-char" (means of access) for them, meaning there is
no movement or interaction of the senses. What is the true nature of such
transcendental objects, like dharma and the soul, which are beyond sensory
perception? To know, understand, and realize them, discerning and wise men are
constantly striving.  ##  Commentary  The efforts of those who are wise and
discerning are made for the sake of attaining the knowledge of the
transcendental. Dharma, the soul, etc., are transcendental objects, meaning they
are beyond the reach of the senses and cannot be known through sensory
perception. There is no "go-char" (means of access) for them, meaning there is
no movement or interaction of the senses. What is the true nature of such
transcendental objects, like dharma and the soul, which are beyond sensory
perception? To know, understand, and realize them, discerning and wise men are
constantly striving.  ##  Interpretation  The meaning is that the efforts of
those who act wisely are made for the sake of attaining the knowledge of the
transcendental, like dharma, etc. Dry logic, which is based on reasoning and
argumentation, is not the means to attain this knowledge.  ##  Quote  "Knowing
this, the noble-minded person abandons false attachments like straw. He does not
abandon the auspicious Lakshmi of virtue, like a virtuous, noble woman." - Shri
Adhyatma Sara.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dImAdaSTi : atIndriya atha zuSka tarkanA aviSaya (345) 6 mATe AvA kutarka
grahane-kadAgrahane tRNanI jema tyAga karavA e ja udArabuddhi mumukSujanane
ucita che, ane ema je kare che, - tene pativratA kulIna strInI jema guNAnurakta
yazalakSmI+ kI cheADatI nathI. ' ane AvA nidya A duSTa, aniSTa, asat evA kutarka
viSama graha, atre A dRSTimAM avedhasa vedyapadane jaya thatAM ApeAApa TaLe che.
/  iti kutarkaviSamagra nindAdhikAraH  /  atIndriya atha siddhiupAya ane ahIM A
ema che, eTalA mATe kahe che-- atIndriyArthasiddhayarthaM yathAlocitakAriNAm  /
prayAsaH zuSkatarkasya na cAsau gocaraH kvacit  //  98  //  siddhaya
atIndriyAnI, prekSAvaMta prayAsa; ne te gAcara kayAMya nA, zuSka tarkane khAsa,
98 aH--joI vicArIne vanArA prekSAvaMta janAnA prayAsa atIndriya a nI siddhine
arthe hAya che; ane te atIndriya artha tA kavacit paNa zuSka tarkanA geAcara
(viSaya) hAtA nathI. vivecana je prekSAvata vicAravAna jIveA che, te vivekIAnA
prayAsa atIndriya anI siddhi arthe hoya che. dhama, AtmA Adi atIndriya atha che,
eTale ke iMdriyane ageAcara che, iMdriyajJAnavaDe jANI zakatA nathI. tyAM gA--
cara nathI, arthAt geA eTale iMdriya, tenA cara-saMcAra nathI, gati-prasara
nathI. AvA atIndriya, iMdriyajJAnathI para evA dha-AtmA Adi arthAnuM svarUpa
vAstavika rIte kevuM che ? te jANavA mATe, samajavA mATe te siddha karavA mATe
vicAravaMta vivekI puruSo satata prayatnazIla rahe che,
vRtti:-atIndriyArthasitUrtha-atIndriya atha'nI siddhine athe, dha AdinI siddhi
arthe ema artha che, cAocitaLAma-yathAlAcitakArIonA prekSAvAnA,
pracAra:-prayAsa, pravRtti-utkaSa* hoya che. jItattva-adhikRta zuSka takanA, na
cAau-ane nathI hotA te atIndriya atha, nora :-gocara, viSaya, kvannit-kavacit,
karyAMya paNa. + " idaM vidaMstattramudArabuddhirasaddrahaM yastRNavajjahAti  /
jJAti naina neva ceSir guLAnukSma citaM yajJa:zrI:  /  /  "--zrI adhyAtmasAra,

Page #422 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(346) The Yoga Dasimuccaya states that when one contemplates the nature of the
senses, one gains a deeper understanding of the transcendental nature of the
soul, dharma, and other principles. This is how:  “Indriya” means that which is
related to Indra. Indra is the soul, the master of the senses. Or, that which is
all-powerful in its own specific field, like Indra, is an indriya. Nothing else
operates in its field, and the indriya has no control over the field of another.
The soul’s power over the senses is limited to their respective fields. For
example, the eye can only see, the ear can only hear. The eye cannot hear, nor
can the ear see. Thus, the power of each indriya is limited to its own small
field, like a small king in his own small kingdom. That which is beyond the
power of all the senses, that which is the master of the senses, is known as the
“soul.”  Some may doubt this, saying, “There is no such thing as a soul, because
it is not visible, it cannot be seen, it has no form, and it cannot be
experienced in any other way. Therefore, there is no such thing as the soul. Or,
the body is the soul, or the senses and breath are the soul. To believe that the
soul is separate is a delusion, because there is no evidence for it. Moreover,
if there is a soul, why can’t we perceive it? If it exists, it should be
perceivable like a pot or a cloth. Therefore, there is no such thing as a soul,
and the path to liberation is also a delusion.”  “It is not visible, it has no
form, and it cannot be experienced in any other way. Therefore, there is no such
thing as the soul. Or, the body is the soul, or the senses and breath are the
soul. To believe that the soul is separate is a delusion, because there is no
evidence for it. Moreover, if there is a soul, why can’t we perceive it? If it
exists, it should be perceivable like a pot or a cloth. Therefore, there is no
such thing as a soul, and the path to liberation is also a delusion.”  Srimad
Rajchandraji’s Sri Atmasiddhi explains how such arguments from materialists and
skeptics are flawed. This can be easily understood from the nature of the senses
described above. Because even the sense of sight…

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (346) yogadasimuccaya mathe che. ane ema karatAM teone AtmA-dharma Adi
padArthanA atIndriyapaNAnI vizeSa pratIti thAya che. te A prakAre - Idriya"
eTale iMdra saMbaMdhinI. idra eTale AtmA jene svAmI che te idriya. athavA je
potapotAnA niyata kSetramAM ahamindranI jema sarvasattAdhIza thaIne vate che te
iMdriya. tenA kSetramAM bIjAnuM kaMI cAlatuM nathI ne bIjAnA kSetramAM iTriyene
IMdra tenuM kaMI cAlatuM nathI. pitapotAnI kSetramaryAdAnI bahAra kaI iMdriyanI
AtmA sattA cAlatI nathI. jemake-AMkha dekhavAnuM ja kAma karI zake che, kAna
sAMbhaLavAnuM ja kAma karI zake che. AMkhathI saMbhaLAtuM nathI, ke kAnathI
dekhAtuM nathI. Ama pratyeka iMdriyanI sattA nAnA ThAkaraDAnI peThe pitAnA
nAnakaDA svakSetra pUratI ja maryAdita che. AvI sarva idriyanI sattAthI je para
che, te indriyone paNa je iMdra-adhiSThAtA svAmI che, te "AtmA" nAmathI oLakhAtI
vastu che. atre kaI ema zaMkA kare ke-AtmA jevI kaI vastu ja nathI kAraNa ke te
dRSTimAM AvatuM nathI-najare caDatuM nathI, tenuM koI paNa rUpa jaNAtuM nathI,
temaja tene bIje kaI paNa anubhava thatuM nathI. mATe jIvanuM svarUpa che ja
nahiM. athavA nathI daSTimAM deha ja AtmA che, athavA iMdriya-prANa e AtmA che,
AtmA judo Avata' mAnava e mithyA che, kAraNa tenuM eMdhANa nathI. vaLI je te
AtmA hoya te te kema jaNAtuM nathI ? je te hoya te ghaTa-paTa vagerenI jema
jaNAvo joIe, mATe AtmA jevo koI padArtha nathI. ane te pachI mokSane upAya paNa
mithyA che-phegaTa che. nathI daSTimAM Avate, nathI jaNAtuM rUpa; bIje paNa
anubhava nahiM, tethI na chavasvarUpa. athavA deha ja AtamA, athavA iMdriya
prANa; mithyA jUdo mAna, nahiM jUhuM eMdhANa vaLI je AtmA hoya te, jaNAya te
nahiM kema? jaNAya je te hoya te, ghaTa paTa Adi jema. mATe che nahiM AtmA,
mithyA mokSa upAya; e aMtara zaMkAtaNe, samajAvo sadupAya." zrImad rAjacaMdrajI
praNIta zrI Atmasiddhi Ama kaI dehAtmavAdI ke jaDavAdI dalIla kare te keTalI
badhI pikaLa che, e upara kahelA iMdriyanA svarUpa parathI saheje samajI zakAya
che. kAraNa ke je draSTine paNa draSTA

Page #423 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The soul is **dipraatrusti**, **aatmaadhh**, **ateendriya**, and **aagamgochar**
(347). How can the eye see the form of the soul, which is beyond the reach of
the senses? The soul is the **akhaadhya anubhav** (unperceivable experience)
that remains beyond the reach of the senses. Each sense has knowledge only of
its own object, but the soul is aware of the objects of all five senses. The
body does not know the soul, nor do the senses or the breath. But it is by the
power of the soul itself that the body, senses, and breath perform their
respective functions. The soul is the **yatravahak** (driver) that drives all of
them. Thus, in all states, the soul is always distinct, always separate, always
manifest and luminous. This is its eternal mark, its identity. Due to
**dehaadhyaas** (identification with the body), the soul appears to be the same
as the body, but it is different from the body in its manifest characteristics,
just as the sword is different from its scabbard.  “The seer is different from
the sight, the knower is different from the form. The unperceivable experience
that remains is the form of the soul. Each sense has knowledge only of its own
object, but the soul is aware of the objects of all five senses. The body does
not know the soul, nor do the senses or the breath. It is by the power of the
soul itself that they perform their respective functions. In all states, the
soul is always distinct, always separate, always manifest and luminous. This is
its eternal mark, its identity. Due to identification with the body, the soul
appears to be the same as the body, but it is different from the body in its
manifest characteristics, just as the sword is different from its scabbard.”
(Ju) Thus, the **ateendriya** (beyond the senses) nature of the soul and other
such concepts is proven by **Shrimad Rajchandra** in his **Shri Aatmasiddhi
Shastra**. And this **ateendriya** object is not even the subject of dry logic.
Dry, dull, and **vit'daavaad** (skeptical) logic can never prove the
**ateendriya** truth. Therefore, what wise soul would serve such dry logic,
which is useless, does not lead to the desired result, and instead harms the
soul, causing **vyaameh** (confusion)? What wise and discerning soul would even
touch it from afar?

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dIprAtRSTi AtmAddhi atIndriya atha AgamageAcara (347) che, je rUpane jANanArA
che, tene dRSTi kema dekhI zakaze vAru ? sa indriyeAthI para evA akhAdhya
anubhava je bAkI rahe che, te ja jIvanuM svarUpa che. pratyeka iMdriyane tA
pAtapeAtAnA viSaya pUratuM ja jJAna hAya che, paNa AtmAne teA pAMce iMdriyanA
viSayanu bhAna heAya che. deha te AtmAne jANatA nathI, iMdriya ke prANa tene
jANatA nathI, paNa khudR AtmAnI sattA vaDe karIne ja te deha iMdriya ne prANa
pAtapeAtAnA niyata kAryoMmAM pravarte che. AtmA e badhA yatrane calAvanArA
yatravAhaka che. Ama sarva avasthAmAM je sadAya tyAre-jUdA ja jAya che, jUdA ja
tarI Ave che, je pragaTarUpa caitanyamaya che, te AtmA che; ane e ja enuM sadAya
eMdhANa che--ALakhavAnI nIzAnI che. bAkI dehAdhyAsane lIdhe AtmA deha samAna
bhAse che, paNa te khanne pragaTa lakSaNu uparathI bhinna che,- jema asi ne
myAna' bhinna che--jUdA che tema. * je draSTA che draSTinA ' " je dRSTA che
dRSTinA, je jANe che rUpa; akhAdhya anubhava je rahe, te che jIvasvarUpa. che
iMdriya pratyekane, nija nija viSayanuM jJAna; paca iMdrinA viSayanuM, paNa
AtmAne bhAna. deha na jANe tehane, jANe na iMdriya prANa; AtmAnI sattA vaDe,
teha pravartta jANu. sarva avasthAne viSe, tyAre sadA jaNAya; pragaTarUpa
caitanyamaya, e edhANa sadAya. bhAsyA dehAdhyAsathI, AtmA deha samAna; paNa te
banne bhinna che, pragaTa lakSaNe bhAna. bhAsyA dehAdhyAsathI, AtmA deha samAna;
paNa te khanne bhinna che, jema asi ne myAna. ,, (ju) zrImad rAjacaMdra kRta zrI
AtmasiddhizAstra, Ama AtmAdi arthanuM atIndriyapaNuM sAbita thAya che. ane te
atIndriya padArtha te kacit paNa prastuta zuSka tarkanA viSaya nathI hatA.
sukkA, nIrasa, vita'DAvAda jevA kArAdhAkeADa tarkathI kadI paNa atIndriya
arthanI siddhi thatI nathI. mATe evA aprayeAjanabhRta, iSTa siddhine nahi
sAdhanArA, ane ulaTA AtmAne hAnirUpakhAdhArUpa thai vyAmeha upajAtranArA zuSka
tane kaye vicAravaMta AtmAthI puruSa seve ? Adare ? kai vicAravAna vivekI jIva
te tene dUrathI paNa sparze ja nahi'.

Page #424 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(348) The object of the scriptures (agama) itself, and therefore its
comprehension. From the observation of eclipses of the moon and sun, etc., the
scriptural testimony is seen. 99  Explanation: However, the comprehension of the
transcendental (atindriya) object is through the scriptures (agama) itself.
Because the knowledge of such objects is obtained from the scriptures. For
example, the scriptures reveal that on certain days and at certain times, there
will be an eclipse of the moon or the sun, etc. And the same scriptural
statements are verified when the actual eclipses of the moon and sun (and other
celestial phenomena) are observed at the predicted times. Thus, the scriptural
statements are corroborated by direct perception, and there is no doubt about
it.  This gross example shows that the transcendental object is the subject
matter of the scriptures. However, one should understand that this example of
lunar and solar eclipses refers to worldly (laukika) objects. Nevertheless, it
is presented here as an analogy for the transcendental (alaukika) object, which
is the self (atma).  The transcendental object, if it is incomprehensible to the
senses, is still the subject matter of the scriptures (agama) - it is
comprehended through them. Why? Because, just as the statements of experts on
the subject of lunar and solar eclipses are authoritative, similarly, the
statements of the enlightened beings (yogishvara) who have directly realized the
nature of the self are authoritative on the transcendental subject of the self.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (348 ) gocarastvAgamasyaiva tatastadupalabdhitaH  /
candrasUryoparAgAdisaMvAdyAgamadarzanAt  //  99  //  paNa atIndriya artha te,
Agama gocara hoya; teha thakI te anI, upalabdhi ahi joya; caMdra-sUrya
grahaNAdita, maLatuM Ave je evA AgamadarzIne, hAya nahiM saMdeha, 99
yogaSTisamuccaya artha:--para'tu te atIndriya atha atIndriya arthAMnI upalabdhi
( jANapaNuM ) grahaNu vagerene saMvAdI-maLatA AvatA AgamanuM dana thAya che.
vivecana paNa gocara heAya te te Agamane ja che. kAraNu ke evA viSayanuM
jANapaNuM AgamathI thAya che. jemake Agama dvArA ema jANavAmAM Ave che ke amuka
divase, amuka vakhate atIndriya atha caMdragrahaNa thaze, sUryagrahaNa thaze,
ityAdi. ane te ja AgamavANI AgamageAcara pramANe tene maLatA AvatA ja samaye
caMdragraNa-sUrya grahaNa (Eclipse) Adi pratyakSa dekhAya che. Ama
AgamakathananeA pratyakSa sAthe savAda Ave che, meLa khAya che. eTale A sthUla
dRSTAMta uparathI atIndriya anI vAta e Agamane viSaya che, ema siddha thAya che.
jo ke A caMdragrahaNAdi laukika atha' che, ema bhAvavA ceAgya che; chatAM
atIndriya hAi dRSTAMtarUpe atre rajU karela che. ukta atIndriya artha jo koIne
atIndriya eTale ke iMdriyAne agamya Agamane ja geAcara hAya che,-tenA thakI te
thAya che teTalA mATe. kAraNa ke caMdra-sUryanA je je viSayamAM niSNAta heAya te
viSayamAM tenuM vacana ja pramANabhUta gaNAya, te sAmAnya niyama pramANe
atIndriya viSayamAM atIndriya jJAnI evA Asa puruSa pramANubhUta hAi, tenu ja
vacana pramANu che. ane Apta puruSanuM vacana tenuM nAma ja 'Agama' che. tenI
pratyakSa pratIti Ape evuM gaNunuM dRSTAMta atra Apyu che. paNa A tA laukika
padArtha che. paNa alaukika evA atIndriya AtmapadAnA saMbaMdhamAM paNa A Apta ja
pramANabhUta che. kAraNa ke te yAgIzvare AtmasvarUpanuM sAkSAt dana karI tenI
prApti karI vRtti:-novastu-paNa gAcaratA, macaitra-AJamane ja, atIndriya aMteA
Agamane ja gAcara hoya che. kAMthI ? te mATe kahyuM-tatajJakuvadhita:-tenA thakI
--Agama thakI te atIndriya arthAMnI upalabdhine lIdhe. e ja kahe che-
candrasUryAvALAhisaMvAthAmAMnAta-caMdra-sUryanA uparAga (grahaNa) Adine saMvAdI-
kharAkhara maLatA AvatA evA AgamanA daCna uparathI. A laukika atha che ema
bhAvavuM.

Page #425 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Divya Drishti:** A yogi who is **Ati-indriya** (possessing extra-sensory
perception) and **Sat-shraddha** (possessing true faith) knows (349) and has
experienced the true nature of the self, becoming the very embodiment of the
"**Prabhu**" (Lord). They have revealed this self-realization truthfully, just
as they have seen it. Therefore, such a **Atma-drishta** (self-realized)
individual, a **Nirdosh** (blameless) **Atma-anubhavi** (experiencer of the
self), a **Prapt** (attained) **Purush** (man), is the ultimate authority, a
true friend, and worthy of complete trust. Just as in worldly affairs, one
trusts a truthful and honest person without hesitation, so too in the realm of
**Parmarth** (ultimate truth), one should trust such a true and honest
**Sapurush** (perfect man) without hesitation, and "**Tahatti**" (accept their
words).   **Shreemad Rajchandraji** has said:  "Whose word should be considered
true to attain the ultimate? Believe the words of a blameless man who has
experienced it." - **Meksha Mala, Path 67**  And this is also true for those who
are free from **Desha** (faults) and **Avaran** (veils). Those whose **Rag-
Dvesha-Mahaadi** (attachment, aversion, and other vices) and **Jnana-Darshan**
(knowledge and perception) veils have been removed are truly worthy of being
considered "**Apt**" (worthy).  Because if there are veils on knowledge, then
due to incomplete knowledge, their words may be false, and one cannot trust
them. And if there are **Rag-Dvesha-Mahaadi** (attachment, aversion, and other
vices), then there is a chance of speaking falsehood, and again, one cannot
trust them. But if there is **Niravaran** (veil-less) knowledge and **Rag-
Dvesha-Rahit** (free from attachment and aversion) - **Nirdosh** (blameless)
nature, then their words are completely true and trustworthy. Therefore, whoever
is **Sarvajña** (omniscient) and **Vitrag** (free from attachment), they are
**Apt** (worthy), and their words are **Apt** (worthy), meaning they are the
ultimate authority and completely trustworthy. And such **Apt-Vachan** (worthy
words) are the **Agam** (scripture) or the trustworthy scripture.  In
conclusion, it is said:  **एतत्प्रधानः सच्छ्राद्धः शीलवान् योगतत्परः ।
जानात्यतीन्द्रियानर्था स्तथा चाह महामतिः ॥ १०॥**  **Vritti:** **Itat-pradhan** -
This **Agam-pradhan** (scripture-based), **Sad-shraddha** - **Sat-shraddha**
(possessing true faith), **Shraddhavant** (faithful), **Prajn** (wise),
**Shravan** - **Shilavan** (virtuous), **Par-droh** (betrayal) - **Virati-man**
(free from), **Yog-tatva** - **Tat-par** (devoted to yoga). Always engaged in
it, such a person knows **Ati-indriya** (extra-sensory) **Artha** (meaning),
like Dharma (righteousness), and **Tatha** - **Maha-matti** (thus, the great
sage) - **Patanjali** has said:  **"दोषावरणया निनिःशेषास्त्यतिशायनात् । जाथिथा
हेतूओ वक्रीआन्तर्मक्षचः ”** - **Shree Samantabhadracharya-krit Asammi-Mansa**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dImAdaSTi : atIndriya atha satazrAddha zIlavAna yogI jANe (349) che, ane
tathArUpa anubhava karI pote sahaja AtmasvarUpa evA sAkSAt "prabhu" banyA che.
ane jevuM AtmasvarUpa temaNe dIThuM tevuM yathArthapaNe temaNe kahI dekhADayuM
che. eTale AvA A AtmadraSTA nirdoSa AtmAnubhavI prApta puruSa A bAbatamAM
pramANabhUta che, prakRSTa Apta che, parama vizvAsa karavA yogya che.
lekavyavahAramAM paNa jema kaI sAcA pramANika manuSyano leke vagara vicAryuM
paNa vizvAsa rAkhe, tema paramArtha mAM paNa A sAcA pramANika sapuruSa vagara
vicAryuM paNa vizvAsa rAkhavA yaMgya che, "tahatti" karavA che. parama tattvadA
zrImad rAjacaMdrajIe bhAkhyuM che ke "te prApta karavA vacana konuM satya kevaLa
mAnavuM ? nirdoSa naranuM kathana mAne te jeNe anubhavyuM."--mekSamALA pATha 67
ane Ata paNa te ja ke jenA deSa* ne AvaraNa kanyA hoya. jenA rAga-dveSamahAdi
doSa ane jJAna-darzana AvaraNa TaLyA che, te ja puruSa "Apta" havA yogya che.
kAraNa ke jJAnane AvaraNa hoya te apUrNa jJAnane lIdhe tenuM vacana Ata
kaNa?asatya paNa hoya, ne tenA para vizvAsa mUkI zakAya nahi. ane rAga dveSa-
mahAdi hoya che tethI paNa asatya vadavAno prasaMga Ave, eTale paNa vizvAsa
rAkhI zakAya nahiM. paNa nirAvaraNa jJAna hoya ane rAgadveSarahitapaNuM-
nirdoSapaNuM hoya, te ja tenuM vacana saMpUrNa satya hoI vizvAsapAtra hoya-ApyuM
hoya. eTale je kaMI sarvajJa vItarAga hoya te ja Apta che, ne tenuM vacana ja
Apta che, arthAt parama pramANabhUta hoI parama vizvAsapAtra che. ane AvuM je
Aptavacana te ja Agama athavA vizvAsapAtra evuM zAstra che. upasaMhAra karatAM
kahe che - etatpradhAnaH sacchrAddhaH zIlavAn yogatatparaH  /
jAnAtyatIndriyAnarthA stathA cAha mahAmatiH  //  10 //  vRtti -itatpadhAna -A
AgamapradhAna, sadnArdo:-sata zrAddha, sazraddhAvaMta prAjJa, zaravAna-zIlavAna,
paradrohathI viratimAna, yogatatva:-gatatpara. sadA temAM abhiyukta-tatpara, evA
prakArano hoI, nAnAcatathinarthona-atIndriya arthone, dharmAdine jANe che, tathA
jAdu mahAmatti -ane tevA prakAre mahAmatie-pataMjalie kahyuM che - *
"doSAvaraNayA niniHzeSAstyatizAyanAt  /  jAthithA hetuo vakriAntarmakSacaH "
-zrI samaMtabhadrAcAryajIkRta AsamImAMsA,

Page #426 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(350) The collection of Gadasti, primarily based on scriptures, describes a
person who is devoted to truth, righteous, and disciplined. Meaning: This
person, who is devoted to scriptures, righteous, and disciplined, knows the
subtle meanings beyond the senses. And in this way, the great sage (Patanjali)
has said - Analysis: This means that the person who considers scriptures as the
primary source of knowledge, is righteous, disciplined, and devoted to yoga,
knows the subtle meanings beyond the senses. And in this way, the great sage
Patanjali has also said. In the previous section, the scriptures were
established as the authoritative source of knowledge about the subtle meanings
beyond the senses, through the example of perception. Such a person who
considers scriptures as the primary source of knowledge, is called a righteous
person. Because he is devoted to the truth, has unwavering faith and firm belief
in the scriptures, and always strives to follow the teachings of righteous
people. Thus, a seeker who desires self-liberation should first become devoted
to the scriptures, because "righteousness comes from the scriptures and
austerity comes from the scriptures" - this is the teaching of the scriptures.
Without the guidance of a righteous person, the actions of a being, such as
charity, austerity, and discipline, become obstacles and lead to further
rebirth. Therefore, the sage has placed the quality of devotion to the
scriptures as the most important. Only a person who is devoted to the scriptures
can become righteous. "The devotee who is absorbed in the Lord, has attained the
state of Devchandra." "He should color his mind with devotion and quickly attain
the state of Devchandra." - Shri Devchandraji. Such a righteous person then
strives to follow the scriptures to the best of his ability. And the main
teaching of the scriptures is to practice "discipline." "Discipline" means to
remain in one's own nature; by engaging in sexual misconduct, one violates
discipline. Therefore, the main teaching of the scriptures is to practice
"discipline" by remaining in one's own nature and not engaging in sexual
misconduct. And for the practice of such discipline, the five vows of non-
violence, truthfulness, etc. are paramount.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (350) gadaSTisamuccaya zrutapradhAna satazrAddha ne gapara zIlavAna; artha
atIndriya jANata-kahe mahAmatimAna:- 100 artha -A AgamapradhAna, satuzrAddha
(satazraddhAvaMta), zIlavAna e gatatpara puruSa, atIndriya arthone jANe che. ane
tevA prakAre mahAmatie (pataMjalie) kahyuM che - vivecana A AgamapradhAna eTale
ke Agama jene mana pradhAna-mukhya che, e satazrAddha zIlavAna ne yogatatpara
thaI atIndriya ane jANe che. ane tevA prakAre mahAmati pataMjalie paNa kahyuM
che. uparamAM atIndriya viSayamAM pramANabhUta atIdriya artho evuM je Agama
arthAt Aptavacana kahyuM, te jene mana pradhAna che, mukhya keNu jANe che,
sarvopari che, evo puruSa sazrAddha athavA satuzraddhAvaMta kahevAya che. e
sahyAddha zIlavAnuM thAya che eTale ke paradrohathI virAma pAme che, ane
yogasAdhanAmAM tatpara rahI dharma-AtmA Adi atIndriya ane jANe che. AgalA
lekamAM atIndriya viSayanI bAbatamAM grahaNanA daSTAMta uparathI AgamanuM- Apta
vacananuM pramANabhUtapaNuM batAvyuM. AvuM Agamavacana jene mana pradhAna che,
te AjJA pradhAna puruSa sat zrAddha kahevAya che. kAraNa ke te sat vacana pratye
AjJApradhAna sat zraddhA-daDha vizvAsa-sthira AsthA dharAve che, ane sarvatra
satazrAddha puruSanA vacanane AgaLa karI pravartAvAnI utkaTa icchA dharAve che.
Ama AtmakalyANane IcchanAra mumukSue sauthI prathama "AjJApradhAna thavuM joIe,
kAraNa ke "AjJAthI dharma ane AjJAthI tapa _ema zAstravacana che. sapuruSanI
AjJA vinAnI A jIvanI dAna-tapa-zIla Adi kriyA paNa jIvane bAdhaka thaI ulaTI
bhavaupAdhi kare che, mATe atre zAstrakAra maharSie AjJApradhAnapaNA guNane
sauthI prathama mUkyo che. A AjJApradhAna hoya te ja "sat zrAddha '-sat
zraddhALu thaI zake che. prabhu ANu bhakate lIna, tiNe devacaMdra pada kIna."
ANe raMge citta dharaje, devacaMdra pada zIdhra varIje."--zrI devacaMdrajI. A je
sahyAddha hoya che te pachI yathAzakti AgamanI AjJA pramANe cAlavA tatpara bane
che. ane AgamanI mukhya AjJA te "zIla" sevavAnI che. "zIla" eTale AtmasvabhAva;
parabhAva-vibhAva pratye gamana karavAthI-vyabhicAra karavAthI zIlasevana te
zIlane bhaMga thAya che, mATe parabhAva-vibhAva pratye vyabhicArathI zIla bhaMga
na karatAM, AtmasvabhAvamAM rahI "zIla" pALavuM evI mukhya zAstra AjJA che. ane
tevA zIlana pAlana mATe ahiMsA-satya Adi paMca zIla parama

Page #427 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Diimadrushti: The Threefold Remedy of Your Masina's Arrival  (351)  The
arrival of your Masina is a threefold remedy, therefore, following its
instructions is a scriptural command. By following this command, the devout
seeker, with all their might, becomes dedicated to the observance of ahimsa,
satya, and other virtues. They strive to remain in their true nature, abandoning
all external influences and distractions. Thus, they become virtuous.  And so,
the devout and virtuous seeker, who is also restrained, becomes eligible for the
path of liberation and becomes dedicated to it. They strive to achieve the union
of their true nature with the divine. As they become dedicated to this path,
they attain divine knowledge through the grace of the liberated ones, and gain
knowledge of the transcendental realms.  What is it? It is this:  "Through
scripture, through inference, and through the practice of yoga, one attains the
highest truth by cultivating wisdom in these three ways." (101)
**Explanation:**  Muni Patanjali says that the highest truth is attained by
cultivating wisdom in three ways: (1) through scripture, (2) through inference,
and (3) through the practice of yoga. By applying wisdom to scripture, by
aligning oneself with the words of the enlightened ones, one attains the highest
truth. Inference is the knowledge of the cause from the effect, and by applying
wisdom to this, one attains the highest truth. Similarly, the practice of yoga,
which is the practice of prescribed rituals, also leads to the attainment of the
highest truth when wisdom is applied to it. Thus, in these three ways, through
scripture, inference, and the practice of yoga, one attains the highest truth by
applying wisdom to them in this order.  **Commentary:**  "Through scripture" -
through scripture that is characterized by the words of the enlightened ones.
"Through inference" - through inference that is the knowledge of the cause from
the effect. "Through the practice of yoga" - through the practice of yoga that
is the practice of prescribed rituals. "In these three ways" - because
otherwise, the practice would be ineffective. "The highest truth" - the highest
truth is attained by the elimination of karmic impurities, which leads to the
realization of the true nature of reality.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dImAdaSTi : tava mAsinA AgamAdi trividha upAya (351 ) upakArI che, mATe tenuM
pAlana karavuM evI zAsraAjJA che. A AjJAne anusarIne satzrAddha mumukSu puruSa
yathAzakti ahiMsA-satyAdi zIlanA pAlanamAM tatpara bane che, ane jema bane tema
parabhAva-vibhAvanA tyAga karI AtmasvabhAvamAM rahevA prayatnazIla ane che. Ama
te zIlavAna' hAya che. ane Ama je sazrAddha zIlavAna--saMcamI heAya che, te
pachI cegane adhikArI banI ceAgatatpara hoya che, AtmasvabhAva sAthe yujanarUpa
yogane sAdhavA pravarte che. ane tema yeAgatatpara thatAM tene divya
ceAgIjJAnanI prAptithI atIndriya arthAMnuM jJAna thAya che, sAkSAtkAra thAya
che. zuM? te ke-- AgamenAnumAnena yogAbhyAsarasena ca  /  tridhA
prakalpayanprajJAM labhate tatramuttamam  //  101  //  AgamathI anumAnathI,
cAgAbhyAsa rase ya; prajJA trividhe yAjatAM, uttama tattva lahe ya. 101
a:--bhagamathI, anumAnathI ane ceAgAbhyAsanA rasathI,-ema traNa prakAre prajJAne
prakalpatAM-prayeAjatAM uttama tattvane pAme che, vivecana muni pata'jali kahe
che ke- uttama tattvanI prApti traNa prakAre prajJAne prayeAjatAM thAya cheH (1)
AgamathI, (2) anumAnathI, ane (3) yeAgAbhyAsanA rasathI.' prajJAnebuddhine
AgamamAM yAjavAthI, Apta puruSanA vacanamAM joDavAthI uttama uttama tattva
tattvanI prApti thAya che. anumAna eTale liMga uparathI liMgInu prApti traNa
jJAna, temAM paNa prajJAne prayAjatAM uttama tattvanI prApti thAya che. ane
prakAre ceAgAbhyAsa eTale vihita anuSThAnanA abhyAsarasamAM paNa prajJAne
pratyeAjita karatAM uttama tattvanI prApti thAya che. Ama traNa prakAre
AgamathI, anumAnathI ane yeAgAbhyAsarasathI,-e ukta anukrame ja prajJAne
prayAjatAM vRtti:--bALamena-AgamathI, AptavacanarUpa lakSaNuvALA mAgamathI,
anumAnena-manumAnathI, liMga uparathI liMgInA jJAnarUpa anumAnathI, ceLAsalena
7-ane yAgAbhyAsanA rasathI, vihita anuSThAnarUpa yeAgAbhyAsanA rasathI, tridhA
yantrajJA traNa prakAre prajJAme prakalpatA, ukta me ja, kANu ke anyathA te
pravRttinI asiddhi che, tethI karIne. te| zuM ? te ke-mate tatramuttamam-uttama
tattva pAme che,-pApasamAhanI nivRttine lIdhe zrutAdi bhede karIne.

Page #428 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(352) Yoga-drishti samuccaya attains the supreme principle, that is, by the
cessation of sin and doubt, the supreme principle is attained by distinguishing
between the created and the uncreated. In another way, the attainment of the
principle does not happen by activity. 1. Here, the first means of attaining the
principle is Agama, because Agama is the word of the self-realized person who
has seen the principle directly. By going to the nectar of the words of such a
supremely wise and principle-knowing person, that is, by worshipping the words
of a virtuous person with understanding and understanding, the attainment of the
supreme principle is sure to happen. 2. The second means of attaining the
principle is Anumana, that is, the reasoning that is full of logic. In this
reasoning, by doing the experiment of knowledge, that is, by reasoning with
agreement, the principle is examined in detail, it is examined in detail, and by
passing the test of reasoning, the principle becomes extremely firm, and the
principle is determined by the appropriate resolution of the reasoning of
agreement. But this reasoning must be full of logic. Just as the justice of
justice is impartial, non-aggressive, and neutral, so the examiner of agreement
must impartially, non-aggressively, and neutrally examine the principle, and
accept the logical side with an open mind, as the author of this Yoga-drishti
samuccaya scripture, Maharshi Hari Bhadrasuriji, has shown and done; or as
Shrimad Rajchandraji has demonstrated in the Maha Darshan Prabhavak Granth
called Meksha Mala. “Pakshapato na ke vire: piraripu. Guvatam avanam ya ta tha:
paripradda” Shri Haribhadracharyaji. Also, this reasoning should not be contrary
to Agama, but should be non-contrary, it should be in accordance with Agama.
Because Agama is the word of the directly principle-knowing person, its place is
much higher than reasoning. Therefore, there is no obstacle in establishing the
principle of Agama with good reasoning, but there is definitely an obstacle in
uplifting it. And that is why Agama is placed first here. 3. And the third means
of attaining the principle is the interest of the four practices. By studying
the yoga practice prescribed in the true scriptures with interest, the supreme
principle is attained. The yoga practice, that is, the practice of Dharma, which
is shown in the scriptures, by taking interest in studying it again and again,
the soul's maturity becomes pure, and the knowledge becomes pure, so the miracle
of the principle shines in it. Here, the word 'rasa' indicates the feeling of
being one-minded and absorbed in yoga practice. The place of this practice here
is...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (352) yogadaSTi samuccaya uttama tatvane pAme che, eTale ke pApa-saMmehanI
nivRtti thakI kRtAdinA bhede karIne uttama tattvanI prApti thAya che. bIjI rIte
pravRtti karatAM tattvanI prApti thatI nathI. 1. atre tasvaprAptine sauthI
prathama upAya Agama che, kAraNa ke Agama e tattvanuM sAkSAt darzana jeNe karyuM
che evA AtmAnubhavI puruSanuM vacana che. tevA parama prajJAvata tatvaSTAnA
vacanAmRtamAM buddhine javAthI arthAt sapuruSanA vacananI buddhipUrvaka-
samajaNapUrvaka ArAdhanAthI uttama tatvanI prApti jarUra thAya. 2.
tattvaprAptine bIjo upAya anumAna arthAt sanyAyasaMpanna yuktivAda che. A
yuktivAdamAM prajJAna prayoga karavAthI arthAt sanmatiyukta tarka karavAthI
tatvanI vizeSa parIkSA thAya che, vizeSa cakAsaNI thAya che, ane yuktinI
kasoTImAMthI pAra utaratAM tatvanI atyaMta daDhatA thAya che, sanmatitarkanuM
yathAyogya samAdhAna thatAM tatvavinizcaya thAya che. paNa A yuktivAda
sanyAyasaMpanna hovo joIe. jema nyAyamUtti niSpakSapAtapaNe-nirAgrahapaNe-
madhyasthatAthI satya nyAya tela, tema sanmati parIkSake niSpakSapAtapaNe,
nirAgrahapaNe, madhyasthatAthI tattvane tela karI, sanyAyasaMpana yuktiyukta
pakSane ja mukta kaMThe svIkAra karavo joIe,-jema A yogadaSTisamuccaya zAstranA
kartA maharSi hari bhadrasUrijIe kahI dekhADyuM che ne karI dekhADayuM che tema;
athavA mekSamALA nAmaka mahAdarzanaprabhAvaka graMthamAM zrImad rAjacaMdrajIe
pradarzita karyuM che tema. "pakSapAto na ke vIre : pirAripu. guvatamavanaM yA
tA thAH paripraddaH "zrI haribhadrAcAryajI. temaja A yuktivAda AgamathI viruddha
na hovo joIe, paNa aviruddha hovo joIe, Agamane anukULa have joIe. kAraNa Agama
e sAkSAt tatvaSTA puruSanuM vacana heI, tenuM sthAna yukti karatAM ghaNuM uMcuM
che. eTale Agamakta tattvanuM suyuktithI pratiSThAna karavAmAM bAdha nathI, paNa
utthApana karavAmAM jarUra bAdha che. ane eTalA mATe ja atre AgamanuM sthAna
prathama mUkyuM che. 3. tathA tattvaprAptino trIjo upAya cogAbhyAsa rasa che.
satazAstramAM je yogaanuSThAna vihita che, tenA rasapUrvaka abhyAsathI uttama
tatvanI prApti thAya che. zAstramAM je yogasAdhana arthAt dharmavyApAra vidhAna
batAvyA che, tenA punaH punaH AsevanarUpa abhyAsamAM rasa laI mati jeDavAthI
AtmAnI pariNati vizuddha thAya che, ane prajJA nirmala bane che, tethI tattvanA
camatkAra temAM bhAsyamAna thAya che. atre "rasa' zabdathI yogAbhyAsamAM
ekarasatArUpa-tanmayatArUpa bhAva sUcavyuM che. A gAbhyAsanuM sthAna atre

Page #429 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**The Divine Perspective**  There is no difference in the Truth, yet there is
love for the devotees!  (353) The third is placed, the reason for this is that
this practice should be according to the instructions of the scriptures, and it
should be in accordance with the scriptures, and it should be done with the help
of the scriptures, not according to one's own will.  Thus, in the attainment of
Truth, these three remedies have the aforementioned precedence. The first place
is of the scriptures, then of inference, and then of practice, because the
latter is only beautiful if the former is in place. Therefore, the seeker should
accept the scriptures with firm faith, examine them with skill, understand them
properly with intelligence, and then practice them with enthusiasm, then he will
surely attain the highest Truth, that is the meaning. First faith, then
intelligence, and then enthusiastic activity, when these three are present in
this order, then the attainment of the work of Truth is achieved.  **The
Omniscient Truth**  This means that there are many omniscient beings, but they
are not different in their views from the Truth. The difference is in the
delusion of those who are not liberated, and therefore they take refuge in that
difference. (102)  **Commentary**  * From the Truth, from the ultimate reality,
there are no different opinions. There are many omniscient beings, but they are
not different in their views. The difference is in the delusion of those who are
not liberated, and therefore they take refuge in that difference.  * This
description of the Divine Perspective is very long, with many heart-touching
scholarly discussions. For the sake of clarity and ease of reading, I have used
the main chapters and their sub-chapters in this daily practice.  - Bhagvandas

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dImAdaSTi sattAmAM bheda nathI, chatAM atibhakatone meha! (353) trIjuM mUkayuM
che, tenuM kAraNa A gAbhyAsa zAAjJA pramANe temAM batAvela vidhi anusAra ho
joIe; temaja Agamane anukULa yuktithI yukta e ho joIe, svachaMda pramANe na
hovuM joIe. Ama tattvaprAptimAM A traNa upAyanuM ukta anukrame pUrvApara
pradhAnapaNuM che. prathama sthAna AgamanuM, pachI anumAnanuM, ane pachI
gAbhyAsarasanuM che, kAraNa ke AgaLa AgaLanuM sthAna hoya to ja pAchaluM zobhe
che. mATe mumukSu Agamavacanane daDha zraddhAthI mAnya karI, yuktithI tenI
cakAsaNI karI buddhipUrvaka barAbara samajIne, tadanusAra je rasapUrvaka
yogAbhyAsa kare to tene avazya uttama tatvanI prApti thAya, ema tAtparya che.
pahelAM zraddhA, pachI buddhi, ane pachI rasapUrvaka pravRtti, A anukrame traNe
maLe, te tattvakAryanI siddhi sAMpaDe.  /  iti atIMdriyArthasiddhayupAyAdhikAraH
/  UR sarvajJa tattva abheda sarvajJavAdI abheda adhikAra * A ja artha kahe che
na tattvato bhinnamatAH sarvajJA bahavo yataH  /  mohastadadhimuktInAM
taddedAzrayaNaM tataH  // 102 //  sarva bahu taravathI, nathI bhinna matavAsa;
bheda mAnave moha che, atibhaktone tAsa, 102 artha -kAraNa ke ghaNuM sarva
tatvathI bhinna matavALA nathI, tethI karIne tenA bhedane Azraya kare te tenA
atibhaktona-dAsane meha che. vRtti - 4 tatvataH- taravathI, paramArthathI,
mittamatA -bhinna matavALA, bhinna abhiprAyavALA, kaI vAvo -kAraNa ke bahu
sarvajJo, noratAdhimuttarInAM-meha che tenA atibhaktono. savatiya zrAddhane,
tALa-tenA bhedane AzraNa karo te, sarvanA bhedanuM aMgIkaraNa, tatta:tethI
karIne. * A dIprAdaSTinuM varNana aneka hRdayaMgama zAstrIya carcAvALuM ghaNuM
lAMbu hoI, viSayanI vizadatA ane vAMcakanI sugamatA athe atre A mukhya adhikAro
ane tenA aMtarAdhikAronA vibhAganI rojanA meM prayojI che. -bhagavAnadAsa,

Page #430 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(354) Yogadristi Samuccaya Vivcehan “Nahi Sarva Jajaji, Tehana Vali Das.” —. 6.
Sajja. 4-14. Above, the priority of the Agama or scripture and its faith is
emphasized. After that, which scripture should one have faith in? Because there
are differences in everything, it is natural to ask this question. The answer is
given here that one should look at the scripture from the perspective of the
Tattva, not from the perspective of Dharmavad. There is no difference in the
scripture because there is no difference in its Shasta. But the school-minded
people become proud of their differences, and this is because of the differences
in the country, according to their Nay. Thus, the creators of these Dharma-
Shastras, who are all-knowing and many all-knowing, are not different in opinion
when considered from the perspective of Tattva - the ultimate truth. There is no
difference of opinion among them, nor is there any difference of opinion among
their devotees. Therefore, there is no room for any kind of difference of
opinion among all those who worship them, who are all-knowing devotees, and who
are faithful and righteous. However, some of those who are extremely devoted to
the all-knowing, who imagine differences among them, who believe in differences
and separation, are only ignorant, because they are blinded by their excessive
devotion and faith, and in their religious zeal, they forget their wisdom and
imagine things that are not true. But in reality, all the infinite all-knowing
ones are one and the same. Therefore, to imagine differences among them is only
a delusion, only a delusion. Therefore, since there is no difference in the all-
knowing ones who are worthy of worship, there is no difference among the all-
knowing devotees who worship them. It is human nature, a human weakness, to
consider the father's worthy and revered person, the all-knowing one, as
superior. Therefore, the father wants to prove that the all-knowing one he
believes in is superior to all others, and he is easily tempted to imagine
differences, and blinded by his attachment to his favorite deity, he insists on
imagining differences. From this attachment, excessive enthusiasm and excessive
devotion lead to blind religious zeal among the overly enthusiastic devotees;
and thus, small quarrels arise in the name of religion. Thus, this evil
tradition of division becomes the root. “Abhinandan Jin Darishan Tarsie,
Darishanu Durlabh Dev; Mat Mat Bhede Re Je Jai Poochie, Sau Thape Ahmev.” – Shri
Anandghanji. Tarata Brame Na Shakhamera Motashimuvati Nana Takatha Tarah | Shri
Yashovijayajikrit Dva Dva. 23-14.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (354) yogadaSTisamuccaya vivecana "nahiM sarva jajaAjI, tehanA vaLI dAsa."--.
6. sajajhA. 4-14. uparamAM AgamanI athavA zAstranI pradhAnatA ane tenI zraddhA
para khAsa bhAra mUke, te pachI kyA zAstranI zraddhA karavI ? kAraNa ke zAnuM
paNa bhinnapaNuM che, ema svAbhAvika prazna uThavAne saMbhava che. tene atre
uttara Apyo che ke tatvathI dharmavAdanI apekSAe joIe te zAstrane bheda paNa
nathI, kAraNa ke tenA zAstAmAM bheda nathI. paNa skUlabuddhi janene tenA
bhedanuM abhimAna thAya che, te te te te nayanI apekSAe dezanAbhedane lIdhe ja
che. Ama te te dharma-zAstranA praNetA je sarvajJa bheda aneka sarvajJa che, te
tatvathI-paramArthathI vicAratAM kAMI bhinna matavALA, kalapanA ati bhinna
abhiprAyavALA nathI, temAM koI paNa jAtane matabheda kivA bhakatane meha
abhiprAyabheda nathI. eTalA mATe te te sarvane bhajanArA je sarvajJa bhakto che,
zraddhALu zrAddhajane che, te sarvamAM kaI paNa prakAranA matabhedane avakAza
rahetuM nathI. chatAM paNa te te sarvajJanA keI atibhakti-atizraddhALuo je te
sarvamAM bhedanI kalpanA kare, bhinnatA-jUdAI mAne, te te kevala te atibhakatone
meha ja-ajJAna ja che, ema kahevuM paDaze. kAraNa ke teo bhaktinA atirekamAM ne
zraddhAnI adhatAmAM dharmajhanUnanA AvezathI viveka bhUlI jaI tevA prakAre
mithyA kalpanA kare che. paNa vAstavika rIte joIe te anaMta sarvajJo paNa eka
abhinna svarUpa che. mATe temAM bhinnatA* kalpavI te mAtra mahine vilAsa che,
kevala brAMti ja che. mATe je ArAdhya-upAsya evA sarvajJamAM bheda nathI, te
pachI ArAdhaka evA sarvajJabhaktomAM paNa kaI bheda have ghaTato nathI. pitAnA
ArAdhya-pUjya puruSane sarvajJa ne satkRSTa mAnavAne mAnavasvabhAva che,
mAnavasulabha nabaLAI che. eTale pite mAnelA sarvajJanuM sthAna bIjA badhAthI
caDhIyAtuM che ema sAbita karavA icchate te tenuM bhinnapaNuM kalpavAne saheje
lalacAya che, ane potAnA ISTa deva pratyenA dRSTirAgathI aMdha thaI tathA
prakAre bhinna kalpanAno Agraha kare che. A daSTirAgamAMthI zraddhA-bhaktinA
atirekane lIdhe vadhAre paDatA utsAhI atibhaktone AMdhaLuM dhArmika jhanUna
pragaTe che; ane tethI dharmane nAme nAnA prakAranA jhaghaDA utpanna thAya che.
Ama A bhedaka95nA aniSTaparaMparAnuM mUla thaI paDe che. abhinaMdana jina
darizaNa tarasie, darizaNu durlabha deva; mata mata bhede re je jaI pUchiye, sau
thApe ahameva." -zrI AnaMdaghanajI. tarata brame na zAkhAmerA mottaSimuvatInAM
tAkathai taraH | zrI yazovijyajIkRta dvA dvA. ra3-14

Page #431 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Diimadrushti: The Ultimate Omniscient, Though Different in Person, is One and
the Same  (355) How? It is said -  "Whoever is called omniscient, is indeed
ultimate. He is one and the same everywhere, despite differences in person."
(103)  **Meaning:** Whoever is called "omniscient" and is truly ultimate, is one
and the same everywhere, despite differences in person.  **Commentary:**  It was
stated above that there is no difference among omniscients. How is this so? This
is clarified here - "Whoever is called omniscient" and is truly ultimate, is one
and the same everywhere, despite differences in person. Even though the true
ultimate omniscient may be called by different names like Ahanta, Jin, Buddha,
Shiva, Sarvagna Abheda Shankar, etc., due to differences in person, in essence,
they are one and the same. Even though they may be different in person, like
Rishabha Jin, etc., they are one and the same in essence, as they share the
common characteristic of ultimate omniscience. There is no room for difference
in this.  "The liberated, the Buddha, and even Ahanta, when endowed with divine
power, are all one and the same." - Shri Haribhadrasuriji's Shri Yogabindu.
"Shiva, Shankar, Jagadishwaru, Chidananda Bhagavan...Lalana, Jin Ariha
Tirthankaru, all three are the same." - Shri Anandghanaji.  No matter what the
name or the person, if the true ultimate reality is the same, then the infinite
omniscients are also one form. Thus, the infinite Kevaljnas are also...
**Kritti:**  * **Sarvagna Name:** - Whoever is called omniscient, like Ahanta,
etc., is ultimate. * **Di-Paramarthik:** - He is truly ultimate. * **Sarvatra:**
- He is one and the same everywhere. * **Vyakti Bhed Chata:** - Despite
differences in person. * **Tattva Thi:** - In essence. * **Rishabha Adhirup
Vyakti Bhed Chata:** - Despite differences in person, like Rishabha, etc.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dImAdaSTi : pAramArthika sarvajJa vyakitabheda chatAM eka ja (355) kevI rIte ?
te mATe kahe che - sarvajJo nAma yaH kazcitpAramArthika eva hi  /  sa eka eva
sarvatra vyaktibhede'pi tatvataH  //  103  //  sarvajJa nAme jeha ke,
pAramArthika ja atra; vyakti bhede paNa tattvathI, te eka ja sarvatra. 103 artha
"sarvajJa" nAmane je kaI pAramArthika ja eve che, te vyaktibheda chatAM,
tatvathI sarvatra eka ja che. vivecana uparamAM kahyuM ke sarvajJomAM bheda
nathI, te kevI rIte ? tenuM ahIM spaSTIkaraNa karyuM che -"sarvajJa" nAmathI
oLakhAte je koI paNa pAramArthika ja, sAcesAce, nirupacarita sarvajJa hoya, te
vyaktibheda chatAM tatvathI sarvatra eka ja che. vyakitabheda chatAM te sAcA
pAramArthika sarvajJane bhale pachI ahaMta, jina, buddha, ziva, sarvajJa abheda
zaMkara vagere game te nAma ApavAmAM AvyuM hoya, chatAM tatvathI sarvajJapaNAe
karIne te sarvatra eka ja che. te RSabha jina Adi vyaktibhedanI apekSAe bhale
bhinna bhinna hoya, to paNa pAramArthika sarvajJapaNArUpa eka sAmAnya lakSaNathI
joIe te te tatvathI jAtinI apekSAe sarva sthaLe eka ja che, temAM bhedane
avakAza cheja nahiM. " mukto buddho'hanvApi yadaizvaryeNa samanvitaH  /  /
tIraH sa va cArasaMnnAmevoDatra devam I" -zrI haribhadrasUrijIta zrI yogabindu,
"ziva zaMkara jagadIzvarU, cidAnaMda bhagavAna...lalanA, jina arihA tIrthakarU,
tisarUpa asamAna.lalanA. zrI supAtajina vaMdIe." -zrI AnaMdaghanajI. nAma game
te hoya ke vyakti game te hoya, paNa sAcuM paramArtha sat sarvApaNuM hoya, to
anaMta sarvajJa paNa eka svarUpa che. Ama anaMta kevalajJAnInA paNa kRtti-
sarvajJo nAma : - sarvajJa nAme je koI ahaMta Adi paramArthiw ga di-pAramArthika
ja che, niru5caritaja che, sa g gva sarvatra-te sarvatra ekaja che -sapaNe
thakI, nimeTeDa 1 vara-vyakitabheda chatAM -tatvathI, RSabhAdarUpa vyaktibheda
chatAM

Page #432 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(356) The collection of Gadasti is not different from Kevaljnana, because the
Kevaljnani is omniscient and knows everything. In his countless regional self-
fields, there is an infinite place for Paryaya, and his complete and perfect
knowledge power is fully manifested, so he knows everything specifically, all
the Prameyapramanas are his Kevaljnana. “The field is countless regions,
infinite Paryaya are inserted; the knowing power is complete, therefore he knows
everything specifically... Your name is Jiganda, my mind is filled with it. All
Prameyapramanas, as Kevaljnana is attained, it is the same as Kevaljnana, as the
Muni knows... Jiganda.” –Shri Devchandraji. Therefore, the acceptance of him,
which is general; All of them are dependent on him, that is the ultimate path of
logic, 14. Meaning – Therefore, the acceptance of the main omniscient, which is
general, all of them are dependent on him, that is the ultimate path of logic.
Discussion – Thus, even though there are individual differences, the omniscient
is one, therefore, all those who accept this omniscient generally, are all
dependent on him, that is the ultimate path of logic. Because, just as the human
characteristics are in whomsoever, the main omniscient is accepted as “human”
generally, that is the method of logic of the non-dualistic approach; similarly,
the characteristics of the omniscient are in whomsoever, he is accepted as
“omniscient” generally, that is the method of logic. And thus, all the different
thinkers and philosophers who accept the omniscient generally, have faith in
him, all of them are dependent on the main, transcendental, that is –
acceptance, therefore, his, of the omniscient, generally, of those, how many, of
other countries, also, all of them, that main omniscient, are dependent, that is
the ultimate path of logic, – without it, his acceptance is not proven.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (356) gadaSTisamucaya kevalajJAnasvarUpamAM bheda nathI, kAraNake kevalajJAnI
sarvajJa sarva kAMI jANe che. tenA asaMkhya pradezAtmaka AtmakSetramAM anaMta
paryAyanuM sthAna che, ane tenI azeSa-saMpUrNa jJAyaka zakti pUrNa kakSAe
pragaTI che, tethI te sarva kAMI vizeSa jANe che, sarva prameyapramANa tenuM
kevalajJAna hoya che. "kSetra asaMkhya pradeza, anaMta paryAya niveza; jANuga
zakti azeSa, tehathI jANere kAMI sakala vizeSa re.... jigaMdA terA nAmathI mana
bhIne. sarva prameya pramANa, jasa kevalanANu pahANa tiNe kevalanANI abhihANa,
jasa dhyAve re kAMI munivara jhANa re....jimuMdA." -zrI devacaMdrajI.
pratipattistatastasya sAmAnyenaiva yAvatAM  /  te sarve'pi tamApannA iti
nyAyagatiH parA  //  104  //  tethI pratipatti tehanI, jehanI sAmAnya ja; te
sarva Azrita tehane, parA nyAyagati e ja, 14. artha -tethI karIne te mukhya
sarvajJanI jeTalAone sAmAnyathI ja pratipati (mAnyatA ) che, te sarveya tene
Azrita che, ema parA nyAyagati che. vivecana Ama vyaktibheda chatAM sarvajJa eka
ja che, tethI karIne A sarvajJane sAmAnyathI ja jeTalA svIkAra karatA hoya, te
sarve te sarvane ja Apanna che, Azrita che, evI cAyanI parA gati che. kAraNa ke
jema manuSya lakSaNa jenA jenAmAM hoya, mukhya sarvajJane tene tene sAmAnyathI
ja "manuSya" tarIke svIkAra kare e nyAyanI bhakta abheda paddhati che; tema
sarvajJanuM lakSaNa jenA jenAmAM hoya, tene tene sAmA nyathI "sarvajJa" tarIke
svIkAra karavo e nyAyanI rIti che. ane Ama jeTalA jeTalA bhinna bhinna
matavAdIo-dArzanike sAmAnyapaNathI ja te sarvajJane svIkAra karatA hoya, mAnyatA
dharAvatA hoya, te sarveya mukhyaja-pAramArthika ja evA te - vRtta - pratipattiH
tataH- tethI karIne pratipatti, taraMtha-tenI, sarvajInI, sAmAncanaiva
sAmAnyathI ja, jIlAnI, jeTalA taMtrAntarInI (anya anya dezanI enI) paNa, te
sarvekavi-te saya. tamanna-te mukhya sarvagnane ja Apanna-Azrita che, hRtti
cAyatti: - evI parA nAyagati che,-te zivAya tenI pratiSattinI asiddhi che mATe.

Page #433 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Diimadrushti: The Unity of the Ordinary and the Omniscient  (357) It is
logically proven that one recognizes and believes in only one Omniscient.
Therefore, even those who follow different philosophies, all recognize the same
Omniscient, the same unified form. Thus, there cannot be any difference among
the devotees who worship the Omniscient.  **Verse 105:**  "The special, however,
is not known by all those who are not omniscient. No one attains Him, because He
is not fully known by all."  **Explanation:**  The above discussion established
the unity of the ordinary and the Omniscient. Now, someone might argue that
there is a difference in the special. The answer to this is that the special
difference in the Omniscient cannot be fully known by all those who are not
omniscient. Because they themselves are not omniscient, they cannot fully
perceive the Omniscient. How can they know the special, the difference, in the
Omniscient? Even if they have a general understanding, they cannot progress in
their knowledge of the special. Thus, it is impossible for all those who are not
omniscient to fully understand the special form of the Omniscient. Because the
complete can understand the complete, but how can the incomplete understand the
complete?  Therefore, any difference imagined about the Omniscient based on such
understanding is meaningless. For example, the Keshava people call Him eternal
and omnipresent, while others call Him temporal and not omnipresent. The
Buddhists call Him momentary, and so on. All these differences are meaningless
because:  1. The special knowledge, the complete knowledge of all aspects,
cannot be attained by those who are not omniscient. 2. Due to the differences in
their philosophies, there is often conflict.  **Commentary:**  "The special,
however, is not known by all those who are not omniscient. No one attains Him,
because He is not fully known by all."  This means that even if someone has a
general understanding of the Omniscient, they cannot fully comprehend the
special aspects of the Omniscient. This is because they are not omniscient
themselves. Therefore, no one who is not omniscient can truly attain the
Omniscient.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dImAdaSTi : sAmAnyathI savajJane mAnanArA abheda (357) eka sarvajJane ja mAnya
kare che, mAne che, ema nyAyathI sAbita thAya che. mATe sarvajJane mAnanArA judA
judA darzanavAdIo paNa sarva kaI eka svarUpa ja che, abheda svarUpa ja che. Ama
sarvajJane bhajanArA bhaktomAM paNa bheda hovo saMbhavato ja nathI. vizeSastu
punastasya kAtsnye nAsarvadarzibhiH  /  sarvairna jJAyate tena tamApanno na
kazcana  //  105  //  asarvadarzI sarvane, vizeSa paNa tene ya; pUrNa jaNAya na-
te thakI, tene prApta na keya, 105 artha-ane te sarvajJa vizeSa-bheda te
saMpUrNapaNe sarva asarvadazI"ene jANavAmAM AvatA nathI, tethI karIne te sarvane
prApta thayele evo kaI (asarvadazI) che nahi. vivecana uparamAM sAmAnyathI
sarvajJanuM ekapaNuM kahyuM. have koI kaheze ke vizeSathI temAM bheda haze. tene
uttara atre kahe che te sarvajJa vizeSa-bheda to asarvadazI evA sarva pramAtRone
jANavAmAM saMpUrNapaNe AvI zakato nathI. kAraNa ke te pote asarvadarzI
asarvadarzI asarvajJa hovAthI, tenuM sarva darzana teone thatuM nathI, vizeSa
saMpUrNa eTale te sarvajJanA vizeSanuM-bhedanuM jJAna teone kema thaI zake? ane
kema jANe? sAmAnya evuM darzana thatuM hoya te paNa vizeSa evA tenA jJAnamAM
teonI gati hotI nathI. Ama sarvajJanuM svarUpa ciMtavanArA sarva asarvadazIne
tenA saMpUrNa vizeSa svarUpanuM bhAna thavuM saMbhavatuM nathI. kAraNa ke
saMpUrNane saMpUrNa ne khyAla AvI zake, paNa apUrNane saMpUrNane khyAla kema AvI
zake? eTale te te darzana pramANe A sarvajJa saMbaMdhI je bheda kalpanA
karavAmAM Ave che, te paNa nirarthaka che. jemakezava loko tene anAdizuddha ne
sarvagata kahe che, jene sAdi ne asarvagata kahe che, bauddho pratikSaNa
bhaMgura kahe che, ItyAdi je bheTa kapAya che te nakAme che. kAraNa ke-(1) tenA
vizeSanuM parijJAna eTale ke sarvathA sarva prakAre jJAna chadmasthane thaI
zakatuM nathI. (2) yuktionA jAtivAdane lIdhe prAye virodha hoya che, vRttiH--
viroSatu-vizeSa to, bheda te puna-vaLI, tasya-te sarvAna, caina-kAryathI,
saMpUrNapaNe arvazimiDa-asadaza pramAtRothI sarve-sarvathI, na jJAnathI
jANavAmAM Avate - tenA Adarzanane lIdhe darzana sate paNa tenA jJAnanI agatine
lIdhe, darzana hoya to paNa tenA jJAna pratye gati hotI nathI tethI karIne,
tena-te kAraNathI, taM-te sarvane, Aghanna-pratipana, prApta thayele, na 7koI
asarvadaza nathI.

Page #434 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(358) Gadashtisamuchya means that contradictory arguments based on conjecture
refute each other. Sankhya refutes Shaiva and Bauddha, and Bauddha refutes
Sankhya and Shaiva. This cycle of refutation continues, and the question remains
unresolved, leaving the donkey in the well! (3) And there is no difference
between the feeling and the fruit. That is, there is no difference in the fruit
from the ultimate truth. (4) Because whatever the specific form of the
omniscient may be, the fruit of the worship of the omniscient, which is in the
form of qualities, is the same, and it is the ultimate fruit in the form of
liberation. Therefore, since the fruitfulness is only due to the respect for the
omniscient God, whoever worships him with true feeling will receive that fruit.
So what is the point of the false debate about the specific form of the
omniscient? What is the point of this useless fight? Thus, since the omniscient
is manifested and attained through the specific, no one is truly omniscient.
Then, who can see or know that there is a difference in the omniscient?
Therefore, accepting the unity that is proven, and leaving the talk of the
specific, is the most appropriate and beneficial for all beings, and it is what
the liberated yogis should do from the ultimate truth, from the soul. Therefore,
even from the general point of view, he who accepts him as the omniscient,
without any hypocrisy, is equal to him in that respect, for the wise. (106)
Meaning: Therefore, even from the general point of view, whoever truly accepts
this omniscient, is equal to him in that respect, for the wise. Commentary:
Therefore, even from the general point of view, whoever accepts this omniscient,
whoever accepts him, is equal to him in that respect, for the wise. x
"Anadishuddha iti adiryasch bhedo'sya kalpyate. Tattattantranusaarena manye
so'pi nirarthaka. Visheshasyaparignaanadyaktinam jativadatah. Prayo virodha
jamela% mavatah"—Shri Haribhadrasuri-chrit Shri Yogabindu.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (358) gadaSTisamucaya eTale anumAnarUpa yuktionA paraspara viruddhapaNAthI eka
bIjAnuM khaMDana kare che. sAMkhya ne zaiva bauddhanuM khaMDana kare che, te
bauddha sAMkhya ne zivanuM pratikhaMDana kare che. Ama khaMDanamaMDana paraMparA
cAlyA kare che, ne A praznane niveDo kaI rIte AvatuM nathI, ane ghANIne bela
jyAMne tyAM paDyo rahe che ! (3) ane bhAvathI phalano abheda che. eTale ke
paramArthathI phaLamAM bheda paDatuM nathI.4 kAraNa ke sarvajJanuM vizeSa
svarUpa game te ho, paNa te guNaprakarUpa sarvajJanI ArAdhanAnuM sAdhya phaLa te
eka ja che, ane te kalekSayarUpa mekSaphala che. eTale te sarvajJa bhagavAna
pratyenA bahumAnanuM ja phaladAyakapaNuM hevAthI je kaI paNa te sarvajJanI sAcA
bhAvathI bhakti karaze tene ja te phaLa maLaze, mATe te sarvajJanA vizeSa
svarUpa saMbaMdhI mithyA vAdavivAda zo? nakAme jhagaDo zo? Ama vizeSathI te
sarvajJane pratipanna thayele-pAmela e koI paNa asarvadazI che nahi, te pachI
sarvajJamAM bheda che ema keNa dekhI-jANI zake vAru ? mATe tenI ekatA je siddha
che te mAnya karI, vizeSanI vAta hAlI jatI karavI, e ja sarva asarva dazI
chaghasthAne sAMprata ne zreyaskara che, ane paramArthathI AtmAthI mumukSu
jogIjanane temaja karavuM ucita che. tasmAtsAmAnyato'pyenamabhyupaiti ya eva hi
/  /  niji tulya evAsau tenAMzenaiva dhImatAm  //  106  //  (tethI) sAmAnyathI
paNa ehane, mAne adaMbha je; te aMze ja dhImaMtane, tulya ja hoye teha, 106
artha:-teTalA mATe sAmAnyathI paNa A sarvajJane je nircAjapa-sAcesAcI rIte mAnya
kare che, te teTalA aMze karIne ja matima tene mana tulya ja-sarakhe ja che.
vivecana teTalA mATe sAmAnyathI paNa A sarvajJane je kaMI paNa mAne che, svIkAre
che, te te tti:-tawArasAmAcaroDabena-tethI karIne sAmAnyathI paNa A sattane,
amyupaiti ca zva di-je koI asavaMdazI mAnya kare che, nircAna-nivyAja paNe
(sAcesAcI rIte), aucitya yugathI teNe kahelanA pAlanamAM tatpara thaIne, turaka
vAtau-te layaja che. tenAMzana-te sarva pratipatti lakSaNa aMzathI, dhInatAma-
dhIme tene, anupaData buddhivaMtane, ema artha che. x "anAdizuddha ityA diryazca
bhedo'sya kalpyate  /  tattattantrAnusAreNa manye seo'pi nirarthakaH  /  /
vizeSasyAparijJAnAdyaktInAM jAtivAdataH  /  prAyo virodha jAmelA% mAvataH "--zrI
haribhadrasUrichakRta zrI yogabindu,

Page #435 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Deemadrushti: All devotees who serve the omniscient are one and the same.**
(359) To the extent of their belief, all devotees are the same as the
omniscient. That is, they are truly, sincerely, and wholeheartedly dedicated to
following the omniscient's commands. They are equal to the wise and learned in
their understanding and acceptance of the omniscient's teachings, regardless of
their religion, sect, or philosophy. To believe in the omniscient means to be
sincerely and wholeheartedly dedicated to following their commands. This is
clearly stated because simply saying that you believe in the omniscient but not
following their commands is like mocking or making fun of their teachings. It is
like saying, "I am your servant, but I will not do what you say!" Therefore, the
best way to worship the omniscient is to always be dedicated to following their
commands regarding ahimsa, satya, and other principles.  In this regard, Shri
Haribhadrasuriji has said in the Ashtak:  "Good service is good, it does not
cause any harm; Being present and obedient, the Lord is easily pleased. Good
service to the Jina, with a pure mind." - Shri Devchandraji  The meaning is that
anyone who accepts the omniscient principle and is sincerely and wholeheartedly
dedicated to following their commands is equal to the omniscient to the extent
of their belief. Whether they are Jain or non-Jain, Buddhist or Brahmin, Shaiva
or Vaishnava, Sankhya or Nyaya, Vedanta or Siddhanta, Islamic or Christian,
regardless of their religion or sect, if they believe in the omniscient, they
are one and the same. Thus, the common belief in the omniscient is a unique
meeting point for all religions in the world. Therefore, there is no difference
between devotees who serve the omniscient, who is one and the same.  This same
meaning is expressed in the following verses:  "Those who worship the omniscient
are truly equal. They are fruitful in their actions, according to their ability
and rules."  "By relying on the omniscient's teachings, with a pure mind, All
yogis are equal, without any self-interest." (23-17)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dImAdaSTi : rAjasevakavata savabhakto abheda (359) mAnyatA pUratA aMzathI
dhImone mana sarakhA ja che. eTale ke nircAjapaNe, nidabhANe, niSkapaTapaNe,
sAcesAcI rIte te sarvajJanI AjJAnA pAlanamAM yathocitapaNe tatpara thaI, tene je
kaI mAnya kare che, te sarvajJa mAnyatArUpa sAmAnya aMze karIne buddhimAna
prAjJajanone mana tulya ja che, samAna ja che,-pachI te bhale game te matane,
saMpradAyane ke darzanane anuyAyI hoya. ane sarvajJane mAnavuM, eTale niSkapaTa,
nirdabhapaNe tenI bhAkhelI AjJAnuM pAlana karavAmAM tatpara rahevuM, ema artha
spaSTa karyo che. kAraNa ke mukhethI mAnyapaNe kahIe, paNa AjJA ArAdhana na
karIe, te te mAnyapaNAnI mazkarI vA viDabanA karavA barAbara che ! e te "cAkara
terA, kahyA nahiM karuM !"--enA jevo ghATa thaye ! mATe ahiMsA, satya AdinA
pAlana saMbaMdhI enI AjJAnuM pAlanamAM sadA ughukta rahevuM, eja e sarvajJa
bhaganAnanI ArAdhanAno zreSTha upAya che. ane tevA prakAre zrI haribhadrasUrijIe
aSTakamAM kahyuM che + "sArI vidhi sevA sAratAM, ANa na kAMI bhAMje; hukama
hAjara khIjamati karatAM. saheje nAtha nivAje. sevA sAra re jinanI mana sace"--
zrI devacaMdrajI. tAtparya ke-je koIpaNa sarvajJa tatvane, svIkArI, nidabhapaNe-
niSkapaTapaNe, sAcA bhAvathI tenI AjJAnA ArAdhanamAM tatpara hoya che, te sarva
teTalI mAnyatA pUratA samAna aMzathIjha tulya ja che, samAna ja che. cAhe te
jaina hoya ke ajaina sarva bhaktone hoya, bauddha hoya ke brAhmaNa hoya, zaiva
hoya ke vaiSNava hoya, sAMkhya abheda hoya ke naiyAyika hoya, vedAMtI hoya ke
siddhAMtI hoya, IslAmI hoya ke isAI hoya, game te mata saMpradAyane anusakhta
hoya, paNa je te sarvazane (omniscient) mAnato hoya to te ekarUpa-abhedarUpa ja
che. Ama sarvane sAmAnya evI sarvajJa mAnyatA jagatanA samasta saMpradAyanuM eka
anupama milanasthAna che, mATe eka abhedasvarUpa sarvajJane mAnanArA sevaka
bhaktajanamAM koI paNa bheda ghaTato nathI, ema siddha thayuM. A ja artha
nidarzanagarbhapaNe kahe che - + "vastha rAnAdhanovAyaH sAccAsa va . yathAzakti
vidhAnena niyamAtsa phalapradaH  /  / " x"sarvajJapratipattyaMzamAzrityAmalyA
dhiyA  /  nirvyAjaM tulyatA bhAvyA sarvataMtreSu yoginAm || 23-17

Page #436 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(360) Yoga-Dristi-Samuccaya  Just as many people are dependent on one king, even
though they are different in terms of nearness and distance, they are all his
servants. 107  Meaning - Just as there are many dependents of a king, but
despite the difference in nearness and distance, they are all his servants;  The
above discussion has been supported by a well-known example, which shows the
oneness of all omniscient devotees. Just as there is a king, and there are many
men who serve him, some of these dependents are close to the king, some are far
away, some are ministers, some are advisors, some are soldiers, some are clerks,
some are attendants, etc. There is a difference in rank according to the
appointment of these men. But all these men who are dependents of the king are
servants of the same king. There is no difference in their servitude. Some may
have a higher position, some may have a lower position, but all of them are
counted among the servants - the servants. They are all called government
servants as one class.  The Dristika people say - All those who believe in the
omniscient principle are to be known as omniscient, even though they are
different in their conduct. 108  Re-explanation - Just as there are many
dependents of a king, even though they are different in terms of nearness and
distance, they are all his servants. In the same way, all those who believe in
the omniscient principle, even though they are different in their conduct, are
to be known as omniscient.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (360) yogadaSTisamuccaya yathaivaikasya nRpaterbahavo'pi samAzritAH  /
durAsannAdibhede'pi taddhRtyAH sarva eva te  //  107  //  jema eka rAjA taNA,
Azrita hoya ghaNAya; dUra-nikaTa bhedeya te, tasa sevaka saghaLAya. 107 artha
-jema kei eka rAjAnA ghaNAya Azrite hoya, paNa dUra-nikaTa Adine bheda chatAM,
teo sarveya tenA bhU-sevako che; vivecana uparamAM suyuktithI je
sarvajJabhaktonuM abhedapaNuM ghaTAvyuM, tenuM ahIM lekaprasiddha daSTAMtavaDe
samarthana karyuM che-jema keI eka amuka rAjA hoya, ane tenA Azrita evA sevA
karanArA aneka puruSa hoya te AzritamAM koI rAjAnI nikaTano sevaka hoya, ke
dUrane hoya, ke pradhAna hoya, te kaI maMtrI hoya ke saradAra hoya te kaI sIpAI
hoya; keI kArakuna hoya, te kaI paTAvALA hoya. ItyAdi prakAre te te puruSanI
nimaNuka pramANe darajajAne bheda hoya che. paNa rAjAnA Azrita evA te badhAya
puruSa te eka ja rAjAnA bhRtyo te che ja, sevako to che ja. teonA mRtyapaNAmAM-
sevakapaNAmAM kAMI bheda paDatuM nathI. koIne hoddo UMco te keIne nIce, paNa te
badhAyanI gaNatrI bhRtyavargamAM ja-dAsavargamAM ja thAya che. te sarva eka
varga tarIke rAjasevaka (Government Servant) kahevAya che. daSTa'tika jana kahe
che- sarvajJatatvAbhedena tathA sarvajJavAdinaH  /  sarve tattattvagA jJeyA
bhinnAcArasthitA api  //  108  //  ricarthavaijaltha vRttei-jema koI eka
vivakSita rAjAnA, vADapi mizritA-ghaNAya samAzrita pura, tUrAnnAhame reDari-
dUra-Asana Adi bheda hatAM chatAM, tevA prakAre niga bheda (nImaNuMkane bheda)
karavAmAM AvyuM paNa, taddatyA -te vivakSita rAjAnA sevaka, sarva va te-te
samAzrita sarve heya che vRtta sarvajJatasvImena-mathakta nItithI hetubhUta evA
sarvagnatatvanA abhedathI, tathA-tevA prakAre, rAjAnA samAzrita bahu puruSanI
jema, sarvajJAvinaH sarve-sarve sarvasavAdIo, jina Adi matabheda avalaMbIo,
tattatva:-te sarva tattvagAmI, zeyAH-jANavA, minnAvArithatA pi-bhinna AcAramAM
sthita chatAM, tevA prakAranA adhikArabhedathI.

Page #437 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  **Diimadrusti: All are One in the All-Knowing**  (361) All are All-Knowing
due to the oneness of the All-Knowing principle; Though their practices differ,
they all know the All-Knowing principle. 108 Meaning - Due to the oneness of the
All-Knowing principle, all All-Knowing ones, though they reside in different
practices, are known to be followers of the All-Knowing principle.
**Discussion**  As per the above mentioned principle, i.e. according to the
above mentioned example, just like many men residing under the patronage of a
king, all All-Knowing ones are those who go towards - move towards - the All-
Knowing principle; because the All-Knowing principle is one, as mentioned above.
Thus, all are All-Knowing. Then, even if those All-Knowing ones are situated in
different practices due to different types of rights, they are known to be
followers of the All-Knowing principle. The meaning is - just as there are many
men under the patronage of a king, who have different rights, big and small,
according to their own merit, who hold high and low positions, but they are all
considered to be the king's subjects, there is no difference in their servitude;
similarly, all those who take refuge in the Lord, who respect and worship all,
whether Jain or non-Jain, all All-Knowing ones are those who move towards that
one All-Knowing principle, they are the subjects, servants, and devotees of the
All-Knowing. Then, even if those who accept the All-Knowing principle are Jain
or Buddhist, Shaiva or Vaishnava, Parsi or Christian, and even if they conduct
themselves in different practices due to different rights according to their own
merit, whether they are of high status or low status, whether they are of
superior or inferior category, whatever they may be, they are all worshippers,
devotees, and servants of the one and only worshipable All-Knowing, there is no
difference in their servitude, they are all servants of the All-Knowing Lord.
Are these true servants and devotees of the All-Knowing also called 'kan'? This
has been clarified above, and here it has been further strengthened by the
example of the king's servants. Even in common social interactions, a servant
should always be ready to obey the king's orders, this is the way of a servant
and devotee, then how much more should a true servant be ready to obey the
orders of the All-Knowing Lord, it can be easily understood. And a true servant
and devotee who serves and worships should not expect any reward for their
service, and that is the true devotion, not that which expects something in
return, that is not devotion, but like a paid job!

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dImAdaSTi : save sarvajJavAdIne abheda (361) sarvajJatatva abhedathI, sarvAvAdI
badhAya; sarvajJatattvaga jANavA, bhinnAcAra chatAMya. 108 artha-tema sarvajJa
tatvanA abhedathI, sarvajJavAdIo sarve, bhinna AcAramAM sthita chatAM, te
sarvajJa taravagAmI jANavA. vivecana uparamAM kahI te nIti pramANe, eTale ke
ukta daSTAMta anusAra eka rAjAnA Azraye rahelA ghaNuM puruSonI jema, sarveya
sarvagravAdIo te sarvajJatatva pratye janArA-gamana karanArA che; kAraNake
sarvajJa tattvo uparamAM kahyA pramANe abheda che. tema sarva sarvajJa. pachI
bhale te sarvajJavAdIe tevA tevA prakAranA adhikArabhede bhinna vAdI abheda
bhinna AcAramAM sthita hoya. tAtparya ke-jema eka rAjAnA Azrita evA ghaNA puruSa
heya, teo potapotAnI yogyatA anusAra nAnA moTA bhinna bhinna adhikAra dharAvatA
hoya, UMcA nIcA hoddA saMbhALatA hoya, paNa te eka ja rAjAnA Azrita rAjasevaka
gaNAya che, teonA dAsabhAvamAM bheda paDato nathI; tema bhagavAn sarvadevano
Azraya karanArA, sarvane mAnanArA-bhajanArA jaina ke jainetara badhAya
sarvajJavAdIe te eka sarvajJatatva pratye gamana karanArA heI, sarvajJanA Azrita
sevaka bhakta che. pachI te sarvajJa tatvane svIkAra karanAre bhale jaina hoya
ke bauddha hoya, zaiva hoya ke vaiSNava haya, pArasI hoya ke khrIstI hoya, ane
bhale te potapotAnI yogyatA pramANe adhikArabhedathI bhinna bhinna AcAramAM
vartate hoya, uMcI dazAvALo hoya ke nIcI dazAvALa hoya, uttama keTina hoya ke
adhama keTina hoya, game tema hoya, paNa te sarveya eka ja ArAdhya sarvajJane
bhajanArA ArAdhaka-bhakto che, sarvajJasevake ja che enA dAsabhAvamAM koI jAtane
bheda nathI, te badhAya sarvajJa bhagavAna-dAsa che. A sarvajJanA sAcA sevaka
bhakta paNa kaNa kahevAya? te upara spaSTa karyuM che, te ahIM nRpasevakanA
daSTAMtathI vizeSa daDha karyuM che. sAmAnya lekavyavahAramAM paNa rAjasevaka
hoya teNe rAjAnI AjJA UThAvavAmAM sadA tatpara rahevuM joIe, evI sevaka bhakta
rIti che, te pachI A te kettara deva sarvajJa mahArAjanI AjJAnA AjJA pAlaka
pAlanamAM sAcA sevakane keTalA tatpara rahevuM joIe, te saheje samajI zakAya ema
che. ane tenI sevAbhakti karatAM sAcA sevaka bhaktajane sevAphaLanI AzA paNa na
rAkhavI joIe, ne te ja te sAcI bhakti kahI zakAya nahi te tenI je AzA rAkhavAmAM
Ave te te bhakti nahiM, paNa bhADutI kAma jevuM thayuM !

Page #438 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(362) Gādaṣṭisamuccaya "Sevā sāra re jināni mana sāce, paṇa mata māgo bhāī!
Mahināta ne phala māgī letāṃ, dāsabhāva savi jāī....sevā. Bhakti nahi te te
bhāḍāyata, je sevā phala jāśe; dāsa tike je ghana bhari nirakhi, kekīnī pare
nāce...sevā."–Śrī Devacandrajī. And these true devotee-servants of the
Omniscient Lord, being of the same nature, are all co-religionists. Therefore,
they should have the utmost affection towards one another, they should have the
highest love, the feeling of universal brotherhood should be firmly developed,
as is easily deduced from the above. And being so, where is the scope for any
kind of superiority, jealousy or intolerance towards one another? Concluding, it
is said– na bheda eva tattvena sarvajñānāṃ mahātmanām | tathā nāmādibhede'pi
bhāvyam etan mahātmabhiḥ || 109 || Mahātmās have no difference in essence; Even
in the differences of names etc., this is to be contemplated by the wise. 109,
Meaning-There is no difference in essence among the great souls, and in the same
way, even though there are differences in names etc., this is to be contemplated
upon by the great souls. Vivecana "Rāma kahe Rahemāna kahe keu, kāna kahe
Mahādevarī." Śrī Ānandaghanajī. "Īśvara allā tere nāma, sabako sanmati de
Bhagavān!" The elaboration given above regarding the Omniscient, the concluding
sage, the great soul, the author of the scriptures, Maharshi, says that in
essence-in the ultimate truth, there is no difference among the great souls,
i.e., the true devotees. Although there may be differences in the desired and
the undesired, day and night, etc., but in essence, in the ultimate truth, among
all the great souls, the great knowers, the meaning is that the feeling is the
same for all. And in the same way, even though there are differences in the
names, the desired and the undesired, these great souls should contemplate upon
this-through the essence of scriptural wisdom, intellect, and unwavering
conviction.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (362) gadaSTisamuccaya "sevA sAra re jinanI mana sAce, paNa mata mAgo bhAI !
mahinatane phaLa mAgI letAM, dAsabhAva savi jAI....sevA. bhakti nahiM te te
bhADAyata, je sevA phaLa jAze; dAsa tike je ghana bhari nirakhI, kekInI pare
nAce...sevA."-zrI devacaMdrajI. ane A sarvajJa devanA AvA je sAcA sevaka
bhaktajane haya, teo samAnadhamI hovAthI, sarveya sAdharmika che. eTale tene eka
bIjA pratye parama vAtsalya hovuM joIe, parama prema kuro joIe, vizvabaMdhutvanI
(Universal Brotherhood) bhAvanA daDhapaNe vikasavI joIe, ema A uparathI saheje
phalita thAya che. ane Ama che te pachI ekabIjA pratye kaI paNa prakAranA
zreSane, matsarane ke asahiSNutAne uddabhavavAnuM sthAna paNa kayAM rahe che?
upasaMhAra karatAM kahe che- na bheda eva tattvena sarvajJAnAM mahAtmanAm  /
tathA nAmAdibhede'pi bhAvyametanmahAtmabhiH  //  109  //  mahAtmA sarva taNe,
tatvathI bheda ja natha; nAmAdi bhedeya A, bhAvya sujJane hoya. 109, artha-
mahAtmA sarvane tattvathI bheda ja nathI,-tevA prakAre nAma vagerene bheda
chatAM paNa, A mahAtmAoe bhAvavuM yogya che. vivecana "rAma kahe rahemAna kahe
keu, kAna kahe mahAdevarI." zrI AnaMdaghanajI. "Izvara allA tere nAma, sabako
sanmati de bhagavAna !" uparamAM je sarvajJa saMbaMdhI vivaraNa karyuM, tene
upasaMhAra karatAM mahAnubhAva mahAtmA zAstrakAra maharSi kahe che ke tattvathI-
paramArthathI joIe te mahAtmA sarvamAM eTale ke kharekharA bhAva sarvajJomAM
bheda ja nathI. bhale tevA tevA prakAre iSTa-aniSTa | dina me -bheda ja nathI,
tarave-tatvathI, paramArthathI, sarvajJAna mAtmanAmasarvara mahAtmAone, bhAva
sarvane ema artha che, tathA-tevA prakAre, nAmAMDiji-ISTaaniSTa nAma Adine bheda
chatAM, mAmetanmatimamiH - A mahAtmAoe bhAvavuM yogya che -zrata-medhA-
asaMmehasAra prajJAvaDe karIne.

Page #439 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Deepradrushti: Despite differences in names and other attributes, all are
ultimately non-dual in essence. (363) Even though there may be differences in
names and other attributes, in essence, there is no difference whatsoever. Thus,
it is appropriate for the great souls to contemplate with wisdom, understanding,
and unwavering faith, considering the essence as the primary focus. Because,
when contemplating from the perspective of ultimate reality, it is clear to the
wise that there is no possibility of any kind of difference in the true essence
of all beings. The definition of "He who knows all is omniscient" proves this
logically. Even though there may be differences in names, the omniscient one is
given different names based on different beliefs, sects, etc., and his form is
described differently, his glory is sung differently, and his character is
narrated differently, but there is no difference in his all-encompassing
essence. Some call him Jin, some Shiva, some Buddha, some Ahanta, some Vishnu,
some Brahma, some Ishwar, some Khuda, some Ram, some Rehman, some Paramatma,
some Almighty God, etc., whatever the name of their beloved deity, they all
worship the same one, but there is no difference in meaning due to the
difference in names. Just as the Ganga River is called Suranadhi, Bhagirathi,
Vipathga, Mandakini, etc., but the Ganga River is one and the same, there is no
change in it, similarly, even though different names are given to the one
essence of all, there is no change in its essential unity. Omniscience is one
and indivisible from the ultimate perspective, and it is appropriate for the
wise to contemplate with wisdom, understanding, and unwavering faith, and to
contemplate again and again. And the various names given to this one essence of
omniscience are also indicative of its various qualities, and are meaningful in
describing its unparalleled and inconceivable glory from different perspectives.
For example, "Ahan" means worthy of worship, worthy of worship, worthy of
worship by the world. By destroying the enemy of karma, he is "Jin-Vitrag". By
his divine nature, he is "Mahadeva". By his unwavering nature and his ability to
bring happiness, that is, by his nature as the savior of the three worlds, he is
"Shankar". By his knowledge of Brahma, by his knowledge of the self, he is
"Brahma". By removing suffering, he is Hari. He is worshipped by the wise, so he
is "Buddha". By establishing the rules of the path of Shiva, he is "Vidhata".
Thus, he is the manifest supreme being. Even though he has many names, he is not
many in his own nature, because the one essence of infinite qualities is well-
known. Therefore, the various names based on different qualities are not
mutually contradictory, but are indicative of the same meaning and essence,
complementing and supporting each other, and confirming the one essence.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dIprAdaSTi : nAmAdi bheda chatAM tattvathI sarvaza abheda (363) nAma vagerene
bheda hoya, te paNa tatvathI te temAM kaMI paNa bhedane abhAva che. Ama mahAtmA
janee kRtathI, medhAthI ne asaMhathI sAra-pradhAna evI prajJAvaDe bhAvavA egya
che. kAraNake paramArtha daSTithI vicAratAM, sAcA kharekharA bhAva-sarvamAM
keIpaNa jAtane bheda saMbhava nathI, ema budhajanene spaSTa jaNAya che. "sarva
jANe te sarvajJa" ema tenI vyAkhyA parathI A yuktisiddhapaNe pratIta thAya che.
bhale pachI nAmabheda bhale he e sarvajJane mata-saMpradAya AdinA bhede karIne
potapotAnA ISTa evA bhinna bhinna nAma ApavAmAM AvatA hoya, bhinna bhinnapaNe
tenuM svarUpa varNavavAmAM AvatuM hoya, bhinna bhinnapaNe tene mahimA gavAte
heya, bhinna bhinna paNe tenuM caritra saMkIrtana karAtuM hoya, paNa tenA
sarvarUpaNarUpa lakSaNamAM bheda paDatuM nathI. keI tene jina kahe ke ziva kahe,
keI buddha kahe ke ahaMta kahe, kaI viSNu kahe ke brahmA kahe, keI Izvara kahe
ke khudA kahe, koI rAma kahe ke rahemAna kahe, kaI paramAtmA kahe ke
sarvazaktimAna "geDa" (God Almighty) kahe, ItyAdi game te ISTa devanA nAme tene
sarva ke bhajatA hoya, paNa temAM nAmabhedathI arthabheda nathI. jema
gaMgAnadIne keI suranadI kahe, kaI bhAgIrathI kahe, keI vipathagA kahe, keI
maMdAkinI kahe, paNa gaMgA nadI te eka ja che, temAM phera paDato nathI, tema
ekasvarUpa sarvanA apekSAbhede bhale judA judA nAma ApavAmAM Ave, paNa tenA
tAvika svarUpanI ekatAmAM phera paData. nathI. sarvajJatA te paramArthathI eka
ne abhinna ja che, evuM budhajanee medhAthI, mRtathI ne asaMmehathI pAvana evI
prajJAvaDe bhAvana karavA yogya che, punaH punaH ciMtana karavA gya che. ane AvA
A eka svarUpa sarvajJane je vividha nAma ApavAmAM AvyA che, te paNa tenA vividha
guNanA vAcaka che, ane judI judI apekSAe tenA apUrva aciMtya mahimAne varNavatA
heI sArthaka che. jemake-te " ahaM" eTale guNani5na pUjAhe-pUjAne yogya,
jagatupUjya, vizvavaMdya che. karmazatrune nAza nAmanI karavAthI te "jina-
vItarAga che. adhidevapaNAthI te "mahAdeva che. aviruddhatA sukhAvahapaNAthI
eTale ke traNe bhuvananA zaMkarapaNAthI te "zaMkara che. brahmajJapaNAthI-
AtmajJapaNAthI te "brahmA" che. duHkha haravAthI te hari che. vibudhothI tene
buddhidha arcAya che, mATe te "buddhI che. zivamArganI vidhinuM vidhAna
karavAthI te "vidhAtA che. AvA hevAthI te vyaktapaNe pragaTa puruSottama che.
ItyAdi aneka nAma dharAvatAM chatAM te svalakSaNathI aneka nathI, kAraNake
anaMta guNAtmaka eka Atmadravya prasiddha che. eTale vividha guNa apekSAe
vividha nAma paraspara viruddha nathI, paNa eka ja arthanA-svarUpanA dyotaka
hoI, ekabIjAnA pUraka poSaka che, ane eka ja tattvasvarUpanI puSTi kare che.

Page #440 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(364) Gadashtisamudrachay "Shiv Shankar Jagadishwaru, Chidanand Bhagwan...Lalana
Jin Ariha Tirthankaru, Jyotisarup Asaman. Lalana Shri Supas." Ityadi. "Em Anek
Abhidhaz Dhare Re, Anubhavgamya Vichar...Lalana Je Jane Te Ne Kare Re, Anandghan
Avtar Re Lalana. Shri Supas" Shri Anandghanji, Aam Sarvagna Paramatma Na Anek
Abhidhan Chhe, Ane Te Ne Vichar Anubhavgamya Chhe. Je Te Ne Parmarththi Jane
Chhe, Te Nu Yatharth Swarup Elkha Chhe, Te Ne Te "Anandghan Avtar Kare Chhe,
Tadrup Sarvagnapadni Prapti Karave Chhe. Ane Aa Ek It Parmarth Hetu Ni Siddhi Ne
Arthhe, Aa Sarvagna Bhagwan Ne Gme Te Name Bhajwaman Aave, Te Ma Virodh She? Je
Parmarth Ek Chhe, Te Shabdabhed No Zhagde Chhe? Shabdabhed Zhagdo Kiji, Je
Paramarth Ek; Kaho Ganga Kahe Surnadiji, Vastu Fare Nahi Ek. Manmehan" 0
Sakzaye. 4-21, Ane Aava Aa Sarvagna Ne Bhajnara Bhakta Jogiji Ne Te Prabhuthi
Dur* Hoy Ke Nikat Hoy, Pan Te Sarvey Te Sarvagna Na Sevak-Upasak J Chhe. Pachi
Bhal Te Upasako Pot x" Arhannniti Jagatpujyo Jinaha Karmaarishaatanat |
Mahadevo'dhidevatvaachchhankaro'pi Sukhavahat | | Vishnuanen
Sarvarthavistrutatvat Kathanchan | Brahma Brahmajnaroopatvadhari
Duhkhaapanodanat | | Ityadyanekaanamaapi Naneko'sti Svalakshanat |
Yato'nantagunatmaikadravyam Syat Siddhasadhanat ||" Shri Amritchandracharyaji ()
Pranit Panchaadhyayee. "Buddhastvameva Vibudharchitbuddhibodhat | Tvam
Shankaro'si Bhuvanatrayashankaratvat | Dhatasi Dhir Shivamargavidhevidhanat |
Vyaktam Tvam Eva Bhagavanpurushottamo'si ||" –Shri Bhaktamar Stotra. "Nirmachah
Shashvat Shuddha Nirvivaano Niramayah Niraaro Niratan Siddha Sukshma Nirangjanah
| Mahadevo Mahaviro Mahamhohavinashakaha | Mahabhavo Mahadarasha
Mahamuktipradayakaha ||" Shri Bhadrabahu Swami Jinladhusahashtranama, *
"Duraasannaadibhedopi Tadbhutyatvam Nihanti Na | Eko Namaadibhedena
Bhinnaachareshvapi Prabhuh | |" Shri Yashovijayji Krit Dvadva. Raru-18,

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (364) gadaSTisamudracaya "ziva zaMkara jagadIzvarU, cidAnaMda
bhagavAna...lalanA jina arihA tIrthakarU, jyotisarUpa asamAna.lalanA zrI
supAsa."ItyAdi. "ema aneka abhidhAjha dhare re, anubhavagamya vicAra...lalanA je
jANe tene kare re, AnaMdaghana avatAra re lalanA. zrI supAsa" zrI AnaMdaghanajI,
Ama sarvajJa paramAtmAnA aneka abhidhAna che, ane tene vicAra anubhavagamya che.
je tene paramArthathI jANe che, tenuM yathArtha svarUpa eLakhe che, tene te
"AnaMdaghana avatAra kare che, tadrupa sarvajJapadanI prApti karAve che. ane A
eka ITa paramArtha hetunI siddhine arthe, A sarvajJa bhagavAnane game te nAme
bhajavAmAM Ave, temAM virodha ze? je paramArtha eka che, te zabdabhedano
jhaghaDe che ? zabdabheda jhaghaDo kijI , je paramAratha eka; kaho gaMgA kahe
suranadIjI, vastu phare nahiM eka. manamehana" 0 sakjhAya. 4-21, ane AvA A
sarvajJane bhajanArA bhakta jogIjane te prabhuthI dUra* hoya ke nikaTa hoya,
paNa te sarveya te sarvajJanA sevaka-upAsaka ja che. pachI bhale te upAsako pota
x" arhanniti jagatpUjyo jinaH karmArizAtanAt  /  mahAdevodhidevatvAcchaGkaro'pi
sukhAvahAt  /  /  viSNuAnena sarvArthavistRtatvAt kathaMcana  /  brahma
brahmajJarUpatvAddharirduHkhApanodanAt  /  /  ityAdyanekanAmApi nAneko'sti
svalakSaNAt  /  yato'nantaguNAtmaikadravyaM syAt siddhasAdhanAt  // " zrI
amRtacaMdrAcAryajI () praNIta paMcAdhyAyI. "buddhastvameva
vibudhArcitabuddhibodhAt  /  tvaM zaGkaro'si bhuvanatrayazaGkaratvAt  /  dhAtAsi
dhIra zivamArgavidhevidhAnAt  /  vyaktaM tvameva bhagavanpuruSottamo'si  // "
-zrI bhaktAmara stotra. "nirmacaH zAzvata zuddha nirvivAno nirAmayaHA niHAro
nirAtaM siddha sUkSma niraMjJanaH | mahAdevo mahAvIro mahAmohavinAzakaH  /
mahAbhAvo mahAdarzaH mahAmuktipradAyakaH  // " zrI bhadrabAhu svAmI
jinaladhusahastranAma, * "dUrAsannAdibhedo'pi tadbhUtyatvaM nihanti na  /  eko
nAmAdibhedena bhinnAcAreSvapi prabhuH  /  / " zrI yazovijayajIkRta dvAdvA.
rarR-18,

Page #441 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Deeprakrut: Two types of devotion - Chitra and Achitra (365)  Those who follow
different rituals due to their own differences in rights, who cherish small
types of practices, who worship the Lord in different ways according to their
own high and low self-awareness, but the worshipped-adorable Lord is one, then
his worshippers-adorers are also one.  Chitra Achitra Devabhakti Vibhag
Shastragal (as stated in the scriptures) says another justification:
चित्राचित्रविभागेन यच्च देवेषु वर्णिता । भक्तिः सद्योगशास्त्रेषु ततोऽप्येवमिदं
स्थितम् ॥ ११० ॥ Chitra Achitra Vibhagena, Bhakti Deva ni je; Sag Shastra varnvi,
tethi pan sthit ehu, 110, Ah - And devotion towards the Gods, which is described
in the Sag Shastras by the division of Chitra and Achitra, from that also this
(what is said) is established.  Discussion To support what was said above that
the cognition is one, another scriptural justification is stated here: - It is
described in the Sadvegshastra, which contemplates the spiritual subject, that
there is a clear division of devotion to the Gods like Akapal, Mukta etc.: (1)
Chitra means different, different types, (2) Achitra means non-different or
different types. From the confirmation of this Sadshastra, the unity of the
present cognition and its devotee is established.  "Nahi Sarvagna Jujuaji,
Tehana Vali Das; Bhakti Deva ni pan Kthiji, Chitra Achitra Prakash....Man॰ ”
—Cha. Sajjay 4-14 ⭑  This same thing is said more clearly:  Vritti:
Trichitravin-Chitra-Achitra Vibhagathi - Whose characteristic is said, Yajna and
which, it is forbidden towards the country, Lokapann-Mukta etc. Gods, it is
described, Ktti: Bhakti, Soloshastravu-Saddeveshnashtras, in all spiritual
contemplation scriptures, Tevi - because of that also, Manu Sthitam - this
present is established.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dIprAkRtti: bhaktinA be prakAra-citra ane acitra (365) peAtAnA adhikArabhedathI
bhinna bhinna AcAra pALatA hAya, nAnA prakAranA anuSThAna AdaratA hoya, peAtAnI
uMcI nIcI AtmadazA anusAra vividha rIte te prabhune bhajatA hAya, paNa te
upAsya-ArAdhya prabhu jo eka ja che te tenA upAsakA--ArAdhake paNa eka rUpa ja
che. Pin  citra acitra devabhaktivibhAga zAsragala ja (zAstramAM kahela) khIjI
upapattiyukti kahe cheH-- citrAcitravibhAgena yacca deveSu varNitA  /  bhaktiH
sadyogazAstreSu tato'pyevamidaM sthitam  //  110  //  citra acitra vibhAgathI,
bhakti devanI je; sAga zAstra varNavI, tethI paNa sthita ehu, 110, aH--ane devA
pratyenI bhakti, citra ane acitra e e vibhAgathI sAgazAstromAM vavavAmAM AvI
che, te uparathI paNa A (je kahyu' te) ema ja sthita che. vivecana uparamAM je
kahyuM ke saMjJanu ekapaNuM che, tenuM samarthana karavA mATe zAstrAkta bIjI
yukti ahIM' kahI cheH--adhyAtma viSayanuM ciMtana karanArA sadvegazAstrAmAM
varNavavAmAM Avyu che ke-aAkapAla, mukta vagere devAnI bhaktinA e spaSTa vibhAga
paDe che: (1) citra eTale bhinna, jUdA jUdA prakAranI, ( 2 ) acitra eTale
abhinna athavA jUdA jUdA prakAranI hiM te. A satzAstranI puSTi uparathI paNa,
prastuta sajJa ne tenA bhakatAnI ekatA che, te ema ja sthita che, ema ja
sasiddha thAya che. "C nahiM sarvajJA jujuAjI, tehanA vaLI dAsa; bhakti devanI
paNa kThIjI, citra acitra prakAza....mana. " --cA. sajjhAya 4-14  A ja ane
spaSTa karatAM kahe cheH-- vRtti: tricitraviina-citra-acitra vibhAgathI.--jenuM
lakSaNu kahevAmAM Avaze, yajJaane je, tenevu varjita-deza pratye, leAkapAnna-
mukta Adi devA pratye vastu vavAmAM AvI che, ktti:bhakti, soLazAstrevu-
saddheznastromAM, sarva adhyAtmaciMtA zAstromAM, te'vi-te kAraNa thakI paNa,
manuM sthitam-A prastuta ema sthita che.

Page #442 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Gadashtisamuccaya  **Verse 111:**  *For those who are bound to the cycle of
birth and death, devotion is directed towards the gods of this world. For those
who transcend the cycle of birth and death, devotion is directed towards the
ultimate truth.*  **Explanation:**  This verse explains the difference in
devotion based on the seeker's path.   * **Devotion to worldly gods:** This type
of devotion is practiced by those who are still bound to the cycle of birth and
death. They seek liberation through the path of worldly gods, aiming to attain a
heavenly realm. * **Devotion to the ultimate truth:** This type of devotion is
practiced by those who have transcended the cycle of birth and death. They seek
liberation through the path of self-realization, aiming to attain the ultimate
truth.  **Commentary:**  The verse highlights the distinction between the
devotion of those who are still bound to the cycle of birth and death and those
who have transcended it.   * **Worldly gods:** These are the gods of this world,
such as the Lokapalas (guardians of the directions). Their devotees are those
who are still bound to the cycle of birth and death and seek liberation through
their path. * **Ultimate truth:** This refers to the ultimate reality, the true
nature of existence. Its devotees are those who have transcended the cycle of
birth and death and seek liberation through the path of self-realization.  The
verse emphasizes that the type of devotion one practices depends on their stage
of spiritual development. Those who are still bound to the cycle of birth and
death will naturally be drawn to worldly gods, while those who have transcended
it will be drawn to the ultimate truth.  **Quote from the Bhagavad Gita:**  *
"Those whose knowledge is destroyed by desires, worship other deities, seeking
fulfillment through them. They are bound by their own rules and regulations."
(Bhagavad Gita, 7.20)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 gadaSTisamuccaya saMsAriSu hi deveSu bhaktistatkAyagAminAm  /  tadatIte
punastattve tadatItArthayAyinAm  //  111  //  saMsArI deve prati, bhakti nizcaye
joya; te saMsArI devanA, kAyagAminI heya. saMsArAtIta tavamAM, bhakti paraMtu
seya; saMsArAtIta arthamAM, gamanakArInI hoya. 111 artha-kAraNake saMsArI de
pratye, te kAyamAM janArAonI bhakti hoya che; paNa te saMsArathI atIta-para evA
tatva pratye, saMsArAtIta artha pratye janArAonI bhakti hoya che. vivecana kenI
kenI bhakti kevA kevA deva pratye hoya che, tene spaSTa vibhAga atre karyo che?
(1) lekapAla vagere je saMsArI de che, tenA pratyenI bhakti te saMsArI devanI
kAyamAM janArAone hoya che, te te saMsArI devanI gatimAM je gamana sukAnA bhakta
karanArA che-javAvALA che, tevAo te saMsArI denA bhakta-sevaka mumukSu hoya che,
teo ja tene bhaje che.* (2) paraMtu te saMsArathI atIta para tattva pratyenI
bhakti te saMsArAtIta artha pratye janArAone hoya che. saMsArathI atIta-para evA
rogamArge je gamana karanArA che, evA yogIjananI bhakti te saMsArathI atIta,
saMsArane pAra pAmelA, evA para tattvamAM ja hoya che. Ama saMsArI denA bhakta,
saMsAragAmI saMsArI jIva hoya che; ane mukta sarvajJa devanA bhakta muktigAmI
mumukSu jogIjane hoya che. kAraNake "yAdazI mAvanA tAdazI tiddhi jevI bhAvanA
tevI siddhi, athavA caNA mati tathA jattiH jevI mati - kRtti-saMpAripu hi tepu-
kAraNake saMsArI devAmAM, lokapAla Adi devo praye, mattibhakti sevA,
tathAninAma-te kAyagAmIonI, eTale ke te saMsArI devanI kAyamAM janArAonI, (Aya
che), taratIte puna:-paNuM tethI atIta, saMsArathI atIta-para, tarere tatvamAM,
tatva pratye, tIrAInAjinAM-tenAthI atIta arthagAmIonI, tenAthI atIta -para artha
pratye janArAonI. eTale ke saMsArAtIta mAge janArA yogIonI bhakti hoya che.
"vanAM garbhanA mane jJAnavAtmA kapUre | vAsudevaH sarvamiti sa mahAtmA
sudurlabhaH  //  kAmaistaistairhatajJAnAH prapadyante'nyadevatAH  /  saM saM
niyamana thAya tyA niyatAH 4thA | p--gItA.

Page #443 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Diimadrushti Sansari Devni Bhakti Chitra-Sukta ni Bhakti Achitra  (367) The
motion of the soul is determined by what it worships. If it worships the
worldly, it becomes worldly. If it worships the liberated, it becomes liberated.
The soul can become whatever it desires to become. Just as an eel, focusing on a
bee, becomes a bee, similarly, if one worships the Jina in the form of the Jina,
they become a true Jina. If one worships a scavenger, they become a scavenger.
... "Shaddarshan" Shri Anandghanji.  This is further explained by the following:
"Chitra Chadyeshhu Tadragatadanyadveshasangata. Achitra Charame Twesha
Shamasaraakhileva Hi." || 112 ||  The devotion that is based on attachment and
aversion is called "Chitra" (different). The devotion that is free from
attachment and aversion is called "Achitra" (undifferentiated).
**Explanation:**  The two types of devotion mentioned above are explained here.
The devotion towards worldly gods like Lokapala, etc., is "Chitra" (different)
because it is based on attachment and aversion. This type of devotion is
characterized by attachment to one's own chosen deity and aversion towards other
deities. For example, a devotee of Hanuman, Shiva, Vishnu, Surya, Varuna, or any
other deity, due to their attachment to their chosen deity, may develop aversion
towards other deities. This type of devotion is based on different deities and
is characterized by attachment and aversion. It lacks tolerance and often
involves the belief that one's own deity is the true one and all others are
false.  **Interpretation:**  "Chitra" - This type of devotion is based on
attachment and aversion towards worldly deities. It is characterized by
attachment to one's own chosen deity and aversion towards other deities.
"Achitra" - This type of devotion is undifferentiated and is characterized by
the absence of attachment and aversion. It is directed towards the ultimate
reality, which is beyond the worldly realm.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dImAdaSTi saMsArI devanI bhakita citra-suktanI bhakti acitra (367) tevI gati je
jene bhaje te te thAya. saMsArane bhaje te saMsArI thAya, mukatane bhaje te
mukta thAya. A pariNAmI AtmA jevA jevA bhAve pariNamavA Icache, tevA tevA bhAve
te pariNamI zake che. Iyala bhamarInuM dhyAna dharatAM, pote bhamarI bane che.
jinasvarUpa thaI jina ArAdhe, te sahI jinavara hove re; bhaMgI IlikAne caTakAve,
te bhaMgI jaga jeve re....Sadarzana" zrI AnaMdaghanajI. A bene vizeSa kahe che
citrA cAdyeSu tadrAgatadanyadveSasaGgatA  /  /  acitrA carame tveSA
zamasArAkhilaiva hi  //  112  //  tasa rAga para dveSathI, bhakti AghamAM citra;
zamasArA e caramamAM hoya samasta acitra. 112 artha ane temAM pahelA te saMsArI
deva pratyenI bhakti, tenA pratyenA rAgathI ne tenAthI anya pratyenA dveSathI
saMgata hoI, citra (bhinna) hoya che. ane chellA-te saMsArAtIta tatva pratyenI
je bhakti te badhIya zamasAra (zamapradhAna) heI, acitra ( abhina) hoya che.
vivecana uparamAM je be prakAranA devanA bhaktanA be vibhAga pADavA, tenI
bhaktimAM paNa tevA be bheda paDe che, te ahI batAvyuM che -temAM prathama je
lokapAla vigere sAMsArika de che, teo pratyenI bhakti citra eTale nAnA prakAranI
hoya che; ane saMsArI devanI mehagarbhapaNane lIdhe te potAnA ISTa deva pratye
rAgavALI ne aniSTa bhakti citra deva pratye dveSavALI hoya che. jemake ke
hanumAnane, ke zaMkarane, ke viSNune, ke sUryane, ke varuNane, ke anyane bhakta
hoya, te tevA prakAranA mehabhAvane lIdhe pitAnA ISTa deva pratye rAga rAkhI,
itara pratye dveSa rAkhe che. Ama te bhakti judA judA devane apekSIne judA judA
prakAranI ne rAga-dveSavALI hoya che. emAM sahiSNutAne prAyaH abhAva hoya che,
ane huM mAnuM chuM te ja deva sAcA ne bAkI bIjA badhA kheTA, evI mAnyatA
mukhyapaNe hoya che. vRtti -jitrA -ane citra, nAnA prakAranI, thepu-AaomAM,
sAMsArika deve pratye, rAgata vasatA-pitAnA abhISTa devatAnA rAgathI ane
anabhISTanA dveSathI saMyukta evI heya che,-mehagarbha paNAne lIdhe. jitrA-
acitra, ekAkAra, eka prakAranI, rame su-paNa caramamAM eTale ke tadatIta-
saMsArAtIta tatvamAM, ghaNA-A bhakti; ane te, rAmapArA-zamasAra-mapradhAna,
mahisaiva di akhila ja hoya che -tevA prakAranA saMmehanA abhAvane lIdhe.

Page #444 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(368) Yoga-drishti-samuccaya And the other, which is said to be the liberated
principle, free from the world, the devotion towards it is achitra, that is, it
is uniform, it is of one kind; because the oneness-non-duality of that principle
has been proved above. The devotion of the liberated principle and this one-form
principle is samsara-shama-predominant. Devotion is achitra, in it there is no
raga towards one and dvesha towards the other; but there is samabhava, which is
free from raga-dvesha, and the flow of akhada shanta rasa flows, so the
emergence of evil emotions like dvesha-intolerance is impossible, because there
is a lack of samahana here. Thus, the devotion of many such worldly gods is
vichitra and the devotion of one such liberated principle is achitra. Gods are
many in the world, their devotion is vichitra; One raga, one dvesha, one
liberation is achitra...mind '—Ya. 6. Say. 4-15 ★ Here the purpose is said
संसारिणां हि देवानां यस्माच्चित्राण्यनेकधा । स्थित्यैश्वर्यप्रभावाद्यैः स्थानानि
प्रतिशासनम् ॥ ११३ ॥ The place of the worldly gods, vichitra, many kinds; from
the state of aisvarya, the basis of pratisasana. 113 A:—Because the place of the
worldly gods is made by the state-aisvarya-influence, etc., in each shasana,
there are many kinds of vichitra (different). Discussion It was said that the
worldly gods are vichitra-of various kinds and their devotion is also vichitra,
the reason for this is as follows:-The worldly gods who are in this three-fold
universe, which is the upper, middle and lower world, are said to be vichitra in
many ways in each shasana, that is, the worldly gods are said to be of small
kinds-of various kinds. Because their state, ashva, vichitra place influence,
natural form, etc., there are various differences in their vimanas, etc. For
example, (1) in Hindu religion, Brahma, Vishnu, Vritti:-Because the worldly
gods-lokapala, etc., are chashma-vichitra, because they are vichitra-of many
forms, nepa-of many kinds,-by what? which? For that it is said, sthira-aisvarya-
mava-dhai:sthiti, aisvarya, influence, etc., by doing so, the word adde is the
acceptance of the natural form, etc., sthanaani-place, vimanas, etc., vritti-
shasana-pratisasana, in each shasana,-from the non-duality of the universe,

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (368) yogadRSTisamuccaya ane bIjuM je saMsArAtIta-sa'sArathI para evuM mukta
tattva kahyuM, tenA pratyenI je bhakti te te acitra eTale ke ekAkAra ja heAya
che, eka ja prakAranI hAya che; kAraNa ke te paratattvanuM ekapaNuM-abhedapaNuM
uparamAM siddha karAi cUkayu che. mukta tattvanI ane A ekasvarUpa paratattvanI
bhakti zamasAra-zamapradhAna hoya che. bhakti acitra temAM eka pratye rAga ne
khIjA pratye dveSa, ema heAtuM nathI; paNu satra rAgadveSarahita evA samabhAva
hAya che, ane akhaDa zAMtarasane pravAha vahe che, eTale dveSa-asahiSNutA Adi
duSTa bhAvAnA udbhavanA asaMbhava che, kAraNa ke samAhane atra abhAva hAya che.
Ama aneka evA sa'sArI deveAnI bhakti vicitra ane eka evA saMsArAtIta para
tattvanI bhakti acitra hAya che. deva sa'sArI aneka che jI, tehanI bhakti
vicitra; eka rAga para dveSathIjI, eka muktinI acitra...mana '--yA. 6. sAya.
4-15  atre ja hetu kahe che saMsAriNAM hi devAnAM yasmAccitrANyanekadhA  /
sthityaizvaryaprabhAvAdyaiH sthAnAni pratizAsanam  //  113  //  sthAna sasAri
devanA, citra aneka prakAra; sthiti aizvaryAkrikathI, pratizAsane AdhAra. 113
a:--kAraNu ke saMsArI devAnA sthAne sthiti--aizvaya -prabhAva vagere vaDe
karIne, pratyeka zAsanamAM, aneka prakAre citra ( jUdA jUdA ) hoya che. vivecana
sasArI devA citra-jAtajAtanA ane tenI bhakti paNa citra hoya che ema kahyuM,
tenuM kAraNa A pramANe:-Urdhva, madhya ne adheAleAkarUpa A trividha brahmAMDamAM
je saMsArI devA che, teonA sthAne pratyeka zAsanamAM aneka prakAre citra eTale
sa'sArI devAnA nAnA prakAranA-jAta jAtanA kahyA che. kAraNa ke teonI sthiti,
azva, citra sthAna prabhAva, sahaja rUpa vagerethI teenA vimAna Adi sthAneAmAM
jAta jAtanA taphAvata-bheda heAya che. jemake (1) hiMdu dharmAMmAM brahmA,
viSNu, vRtti:-saMsALiAM phri revAnAM kAraNu ke sa MsArI devAnA-leAkapAla AdinA
cazmAjjitrAni kAraNa ke citra-aneka AkAravALA, nepA-aneka prakAre,-kAnA vaDe ?
kayA ? te mATe kahyuMsthiraaizvarya mAvA dhai:sthiti, aizvama, prabhAva Adi vaDe
karIne, addei zabdathI sahaja rUpa Adinu grahaNa che, sthAnAni-sthAna, vimAna
Adi, vRtizAsana-pratizAsane, pratyeka zAsanamAM,-brahmANDanA vaiviSyanA
anubhedathI,

Page #445 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Divine Vision: The Picture of the Deities' Abode as a Means of Attainment
(36) Mahesh, Indra, Surya, Chandra, Pavana, Agni, Varuna, etc. are considered
deities. They differ in their natural form, position, opulence, influence, and
other aspects, as described in the scriptures. (2) Jainism recognizes four types
of worldly deities: Bhuvanapati, Vyantara, Jyotishi, and Vaimanika. They are
further described in detail with various distinctions. Some have a lower
position, while others have a higher one. Some possess greater opulence, while
others have less. Some have a weak influence, while others are intensely
radiant. Some have an attractive natural form, while others are unattractive.
Thus, there are many types of deities based on different aspects of form, taste,
smell, and color. (3) Buddhism, Christianity, and other religions also describe
worldly deities according to their own beliefs. Thus, the abodes of worldly
deities, such as Vimanas, are also depicted in various ways depending on each
doctrine.  Because it is so:  "Therefore, the means of attainment for them are,
by rule, indeed pictures. There is never one path for different cities." (114)
Meaning: Therefore, the means of attainment for their abodes are, by rule,
different types of pictures, because there is never one path for different
cities.  Discussion: Thus, the abodes of worldly deities are different and
distinct. Therefore, the means of attainment for those deities' abodes are also,
by rule, pictures of different types. To illustrate this, a well-known example
is given here: there is never one path to go to different cities. Mumbai,
Kolkata, Madras, Delhi, etc., are cities located in different directions. If one
wants to go to them, the paths will also be in different directions, not one.
Otherwise, the difference between those cities would be diminished.  Commentary:
"Therefore" - because of that reason, "means of attainment" - the means of
attainment for them, the means of attainment for the abodes of worldly deities.
"By rule, indeed pictures" - by rule, they are indeed pictures. This same point
is explained through a well-known example: "different cities" - different
cities, "one path" - there is never one path of that type, because of the
difference between them.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dImA daSTi: te citra devasthAnene sAdhana upAya citra (36) maheza, iMdra,
sUrya, caMdra, pavana, agni, varuNa vagere deva gaNAya che. teonA svAbhAvika
svarUpa, sthiti, ezvarya, prabhAva, sAma vageremAM te te yakta varNana pramANe
bheda hoya che. (2) jaina dharmamAM cAra prakAranA saMsArI devanikAya kahyA che:
bhuvanapati, vyaMtara, jyotiSI ne vaimAnika. teonA vaLI aneka pratibheda
viratArathI varNavyA che. temAM koinI sthiti ochI hoya che, koInI vadhAre hoya
che. keInuM aizvarya adhika hoya che, keInuM nyUna hoya che. koIne prabhAva
maMda hoya che, keIne ugratejasvI hoya che. keInuM sahaja rUpa AkarSaka hoya
che, keInuM anAkarSaka hoya che. Ama rUpa, rasa, gaMdha, varNanA vibhinna bhede
karIne taratamatAnA aneka prakAra hoya che. (3) bauddha dharmamAM, khristI
dharmamAM, ane bIjA dharmomAM paNa pitApitAnI mAnyatA anusAra saMsArI devenuM
varNana karyuM che. Ama pratyeka zAsananI apekSAe saMsArI denA sthAne-vimAna Adi
paNa citra prakAranA hoya che. kAraNa ke ema che - tasmAttatsAdhanopAyo
niyamAccitra eva hi  /  na bhinnanagarANAM syAdekaM vartma kadAcana  //  114  //
(tethI) sAdhana upAya tehane, niyamathI citra ja hoya; kadI bhinna nagara taNe,
mAraga eka ja naya. 114 artha -tethI karIne te denA sthAnanI sAdhanAne upAya,
niyamathI ja, citrajudA judA prakArane heya che, kAraNake bhinna nagana mAga
kadI paNa eka heya nahiM. vivecana ane Ama te te saMsArI denA sthAne bhinna
bhinna che, judA judA che, eTalA mATe te te devasthAnanI sAdhanAne je upAya che,
te paNa niyamathI citra hoya che, bhinna-jUdA judA prakAranuM hoya che. A mATe
atre lekamAM jANItuM daSTAMta ApyuM che ke jUdA jUdA nagare pratye javAne mArga
kadI paNa eka heya nahiM. muMbaI, kalakattA, madrAsa, dilhI vagere judI judI
dizAmAM AvelA zahere bhaNuM javuM hoya, te tene raste paNa judI judI dizAmAM
jate heya, eka na hoya. nahi te te te nagaranuM bhinnapaNuM ghaTe vRtti -tasmA-
te kAraNa thakI, tarasAdhanApA :-tenA sAdhanane upAya, te saMsArI devanA
sthAnanA sAdhanane upAya. niyAcitra Izva hi-niyamathI citra ja hoya che. A ja
vastu leprasiddha udAharaNa dvArA kahe che-7 minnanaLarLa cATu-bhinna nagarone
na hoya, pa. varSa vAvanaeka mArga kadI paNa,-tevA prakAre tenA bhedanI
anupasine lIdhe.

Page #446 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(370) Yoga Darshanamuchchaya is not like this. Just as the paths to different
cities are different, so too are the means to different worldly temples
different. Therefore, it is proven that the devotion to the image deity is of
the image type. Figure 11 Delhi 1 North Mumbai West | Kolkata East Kas The
Catalogue of Image-Based Devotion: 8. Image Devotion Non-Image Devotion La
Characteristics Image-Basedness Reason Lokapala etc. worldly deities Liberated
Supreme Being worldly deities Desire-driven, enjoying existence, worldly,
seeking wealth, enjoying existence, worldly Retired seeker Due to affection,
attachment to the Ishta Deva, | Due to unwavering faith, calmness, aversion to
the undesirable Equanimity ) Means to the image location of the worldly deity
Sadashiva, Parabrahma, Siddha, etc. means image Despite the difference in names,
the non-dual nature of Nirvana - The non-dual nature of 2) Image due to the
intention of the image, difference in image World Ks Meks [ Re Vivimarshta
Pivagar]. == =

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (370) yogadarisamuccaya nahi. Ama sAdI samajathI bhinna nagaranA mArga paNa
bhinna che, tema bhinna saMsArI devasthAnanA sAdhane pAya paNa bhinna che. eTale
citra devanI bhakti citra prakAranI che ema sAbita thayuM. AkRti 11 dilhI 1
uttara muMbaI pazcima | kalakattA pUrva kAsa citrAcina bhaktinuM keTakaH 8.
citra bhakita acitra bhakti lA lakSaNa citrAcitratA kAraNa lokapAlAdi saMsArI
deva mukta paramAtmA saMsArI deva kAmagAmI, bhavAbhinaMdI, saMsArAtIta
arthagAmI, bhavabhAgasaMsArasiddha virata mumukSu mehagarbhapaNAne lIdhe
iSTadevamAM rAga, | asaMmehabhAvane lIdhe zamasArapaNuManiSTamAM dveSa samabhAva
) saMsAri devanA citrasthAnanA sAdhana sadAziva, paraMbrahma, siddhamA Adi upAya
citra nAmabheda chatAM nirvANutatvanuM-para panuM abhedapaNa 2) citra AzayathI
citrakalabheda saMsAra kSa mekSa [ ri vivimarzatApivagara]. == =

Page #447 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Deepraranshti: The Nature of Ishta - The Feeling of Self-Sacrifice in Yajna
And - The Ishtapurta Karmas and the Distinction in Intention and Fruit.
**"Ishtapurta karmani loke chitraabhisandhitah | Nana phalani sarvani
drishtavyaani vichakshanaih || 115 ||"**  "The karmas that are Ishtapurta are,
in the world, due to different intentions (chitraabhisandhi) - due to different
opinions, they have different kinds of fruits. The discerning ones should see
this." (115)  **(371)**  **Explanation:**  Above, we spoke of the diversity in
the place of the deity and the diversity in the means of worship. To further
clarify this, another point is presented here: The Ishtapurta karmas, which are
performed in the world, are also diverse in nature due to the different
intentions (abhiprayabhede) and different opinions (abhisandhi-abhipray) of
different beings. There are different intentions, and therefore, the fruits of
these karmas are also different. The discerning ones - the wise and learned -
should understand this.  The nature of Ishtapurta karmas will be explained
below. The different intentions (abhiprayabhede) with which these karmas are
performed lead to different fruits. This is clear to the wise. "As the intention
(intention), so the fruit, as the feeling, so the accomplishment."  **The nature
of Ishtapurta is explained:**  **"Rtvigbhirmantrasanskarairbrahmananan
samkshatah | Antarvedyaam hi yaddattamishtam tadabhidhiyate || 116 ||"**
**Explanation:**  "Ishtapurta" - which will be explained below - is that which
is given in the yajna, in the presence of Brahmanas, by the Rtvigs, using
mantras and rituals. It is that which is given inside the vedi (altar), clearly
and definitely. This is called "Ishta" due to the specific nature of the yajna.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dIprAraMSTi : iSTanu svarUpa-yajJanI AtmApaNu bhAvanA tathA-- iSTApU karyAM ane
Azayabhede phlabheda. iSTApUrtAni karmANi loke citrAbhisaMdhitaH  /  nAnAphalAni
sarvANi dRSTavyAni vicakSaNaiH  //  115  //  lAke citra azisaMdhithI, karmAM
kApU; vicakSaNe sahu dekhavA, nAnA lUthI yukta, 115 ( 371 ) aH--je iSTApU karyAM
che, te sarveya lekamAM citra (jUdA jUdA) abhisaMdhine lIdhe--abhiprAyane lIdhe,
nAnA prakAranA phulavALA che, ema vicakSaNAe dekhavA ceAgya che. vivecana
uparamAM te te devAnA sthAnanu' citrapaNuM ane tenA sAdhane pAyanuM paNa
citrapaNuM kahyuM, tenu' vaLI prakArAMtarathI samana karavA mATe ahI khIjI yukti
rajU karI cheH--iTApUta vagere karmo je leAkamAM karavAmAM Ave che, temAM paNa
judA judA prANIone abhiprAyabhede jUdA jUdA abhisaMdhi-mabhiprAya hAya che,
AzayavizeSa hoya che. sabheda ane tethI te sarvanA kula paNa jUdA jUdA heAya
che, ema vicakSaNa puruSAe-DAhyA vidvajanAe jANavu ceAgya che. jenuM svarUpa
nIce kahevAmAM Avaze evA iSTApUta' vagere karyAM karavAmAM jevA jevA
abhiprAyabheda hoya che, tevA tevA tene phalabheda paNa prApta thAya che, e vAta
budhajanAne sAva spaSTa bhAse che. jevI matalakha-irAdo ( Intention ) tevu'
phula, jevI bhAvanA tevI siddhi '. * ITApUnuM svarUpa kahe che--
RtvigbhirmatrasaMskArairbrAhmaNAnAM samakSataH  /  antarvedyAM hi yaddattamiSTaM
tadabhidhIyate  //  116  //  vRtti:--chApUrvAnirmANa-prApU karyAM,-jenuM lakSaNa
kahevAmAM Avaze, te ApUta" kramAM, holAkamAM, prANigaNamAM, khriAmiNaMti:-citra
abhisaMdhithI--abhiprAyarUpa kAraNathI. zuM ? te kenAnAAtinAnA prakAranA
phalavALA, citra lavALA che ema, sarvALi-sarve', dRSTaeAni-dekhavA ceAgya
che,hetubhedane lIdhe. kAnAthI ? te mATe kahyu*-vipaLa: vicakSaNAthI,
vidvAnAthI. vRtti:-RRSimi:mattumAM adhikRta evA RtigeAthI, maMtrataMtrajaiH--
karaNabhUta evA maMtrasaMskArA vaDe karIne, kAcabAnAM samata: brAhmaNAnI
samakSamAM, tenAthI anyane, antarvedyAM-vedInI aMdara, hiM--spaSTapaNe, nizcaye,
ca++-je hiraNya (suvarNa' ) Adi devAmAM Ave che, pharsTa tamilIyate te 'iSTa'
kahevAya che, vizeSa lakSaNanA yAgane lIdhe.

Page #448 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
( 2) Gadastisamuccaya Mantrasanskar performed in the presence of Brahmanas; What
is given in the Veda, that is called Ishta, 116 meaning - by the Rtvigs, through
mantrasanskar, in the presence of Brahmanas, inside the Vedi, what is given,
that is called 'Ishta'. Discussion | What is 'Ishta' in the fulfillment of
desires? Its form is stated here - in the Yajna, the authorized-officiating
Brahmana is called 'Rtvig'. By such Rtvigs, in the presence of other Brahmanas,
inside the Vedi, through mantrasanskars, the donation of gold etc. given
according to the ritual, is called 'Ishta'. Because the meaning of the word
'Ishta' is fully fulfilled in it. With the intention of 'I want to give such and
such donation', the donation given in the Yajna according to the ritual, is
called 'Ishta'. In this, a serious pledge of Ishta donation is taken in the
presence of the Mahajan, therefore this is 'Ishta'. Here, following the ritual
prevalent in the external Yajna, it has been said. The word Yajna is derived
from the root 'Yaj'. Its original meaning is 'Yaj' means to worship-to worship,
from that Yajna means to worship-to worship the Ishta Dev, and in that worship,
there is a feeling of offering Yajna - a feeling of offering Homa, so offering
Homa, offering is another meaning of Brahmayajna. That is, to perform Danadi
Sadanushtan with the mind of self-offering is Yajna. Giving Homa with the mind
of fatherhood-possession, self-sacrifice, selflessly-selflessly, whatever is
given, whatever is Ishta-intended Danadi, that is Yajna and that is Ishta; not
that offering to other animals etc. is Yajna, that is the distortion and irony
of that Yajna. The main point here is to offer oneself and one's father's
property as a sacrifice. The noble feeling behind Yajna is the renunciation of
possession-self-sacrifice, true renunciation of selfishness. Even today, if we
make a comparative analogy, the assembly of the noble people (Brahmanas), the
donor householder (Rtvigs), from the Vyasapeeth (Vedi), with a solemn pledge-
ritual announcement (through mantrasanskar), the father's Ishta donation is
announced (announcement), that whole ritual also somewhat resembles the said
Yajna ritual, it seems like a small version of it! Let it be! This is the story
of the external Yajna. Otherwise, the true transcendental Yajna is internal,

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ( 2) gadaSTisamuccaya brAhmaNa samakSa vige karI maMtra saMskAra; vedamAMhi
devAya je, iSTa teha avadhAra, 116 artha -katvio dvArA, maMtra saMskAra vaDe
karIne, brAhmaNanI samakSamAM, veDhInI aMdara, je ApI devAmAM Ave, te "ISTa'
kahevAya che. vivecana | IcchApUrtimAM "ISTa " eTale zuM? tenuM svarUpa ahIM
kahyuM che-yajJamAM je adhikRta -adhikArI brAhmaNe hoya, te "Rtviga" kahevAya
che. evA Rtvio dvArA, bIjA brAhmaNonI hAjarImAM, vedInI aMdara maMtrasaMskAro
vaDe vidhipUrvaka je suvarNa vagerenuM dAna ApavAmAM Ave, te "ISTa' kahevAya
che. kAraNa ke temAM "ISTa' zabdano artha barAbara ghaTe che. "huM amuka dAna
devA IcchuM chuM" evA ISTa saMkalpapUrvaka yajJamAM dAna devAne vidhi hovAthI,
tene ISTa" nAma ApavAmAM AvyuM che. AmAM mahAjananI samakSa ISTa dAnanI gaMbhIra
pratijJA levAmAM Ave che, mATe A "ISTa" che. atre bAhya yajJamAM je vidhi
pracalita che tene anusarIne kahyuM che. yajJa zabda "yaja' dhAtu parathI
nIkaLyo che. ene mULa artha "yaja" eTale yajavuM-pUjavuM, e uparathI yajJa eTale
ISTa devanuM yajana, pUjana karavuM te che; ane te pUjanamAM arpaNa yajJanI
bhAvanAH karavAnI-homI devAnI bhAvanA hoya che, eTale hemI devuM, arpaNa karavuM
brahmayajJa e bIjo artha paNa thAya che. arthAt svArpaNa buddhithI dAnAdi
sadanuSThAna karavuM te yajJa. pitApaNAnI-mamatvanI buddhi homI daI, AtmArpaNa
bhAvathI kevaLa niHsvArtha paNe-niSkAmapaNe je kaMI Atmabhoga (Self-sacrifice)
ApavAmAM Ave, je kAMI ISTa saMkalpita dAnAdi devAmAM Ave, te yajJa ne te ja
iSTa;nahiM ke anya pazu Adine bhega ApavAmAM Ave te yajJa, te te yajJanI vikRti
ne viDaMbanA che. potAne ne pitAnI vastune bhega-balidAna ApavAnI vAta ja atra
mukhya che. mamatva visarjanarUpa-AtmArpaNa bhAvarUpa sAce svArtha tyAga eja
yajJanI pAchaLanI prazasta bhAvanA che. vartAmAnamAM paNa apekSAe kaMIka
upamArUpa tulanA karIe te ziSTa jananI (brAhmaNe) sabhA samakSa, dAtA sagRhastha
(Rtvio ), vyAsapITha (vedI) parathI, gaMbhIra pratijJAvidhirUpa jAherAtathI
(maMtrasaMskArethI) je pitAnA ISTa dAnane saMkalpa jAhera kare che
(announcement), te samasta vidhi paNa eka prakAre ukta yajJavidhine kaMika aMze
maLato Ave che, te jANe tenI nhAnakaDI AvRtti sama lAge che ! astu! A te bAhA
yajJanI vAta thaI. bAkI khare pAramArthika yajJa te AMtarika che,

Page #449 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Mani Shay - Spiritual Feelings (373) This is the spiritual yajna, the Brahman
yajna, and it is the most excellent, and all good men agree to it. Mahatma
Jnaneshwar Maharaj says: O Path! In such a way that one washes away all one's
sins, by churning in the heart-shaped churn, and pressing it with the wheel-
shaped weight, and shaking it with the peace-shaped rope, and churning it with
the Guru-word-shaped mantra. In this way, by churning all the tendencies, there
is immediate accomplishment of the task. That accomplishment is that, there,
immediately, the fire of knowledge is ignited. That is, first, the smoke
produced by the Moharoop of the Adhisiddhi, is covered, and the spark of the
fire is produced. After that, with the help of the mind-shaped fuel, which is
naturally prepared by the Yama-Niyam, that fire is ignited. With its help, a
large flame is produced. After that, the desire-shaped fuel is burned by
applying various types of love-shaped ghee. After that, the soul-shaped
initiate, offers the oblation of the senses-actions in the ignited fire of
knowledge. Finally, with the help of the "Suva" named yajna vessel of the
Pranakarma, after offering the full oblation in the fire, the benefit of the
Abhhuth bath is obtained, and after offering the oblation of the senses etc. in
the fire of restraint, the remaining soul-bliss is accepted as the offering.
First, by the fullness of the renunciation-shaped fuel, the sense-shaped fire is
ignited, and the subject-shaped material is offered in it, then the desire-
shaped foundation is purified, and the fundamental mudra is tied on it, and the
body-shaped mandap is erected on it. In that place, the sense-shaped gold is
offered in the fire-pit of the sense-restraint-shaped fire, and the havan is
performed with the yoga mantra. After that, the mind and breath are prepared as
the offering material, and the pure fire of knowledge is satisfied without
smoke. In this way, by offering that literature to knowledge, then that
knowledge is absorbed in Brahman, that is, "ब्रह्माग्नि ब्रह्म हविब्रह्माग्नौ
ब्रह्मणा हुतम् । ब्रह्मैव तेन गन्तव्यं ब्रह्मकर्मसमाधिना ॥ सर्वाणींद्रियकर्माणि
प्राणकर्माणि चापरे । आत्मसंयमयोगाग्नौ जुह्यति ज्ञानदीपिते ॥ श्रेयस्कर मचाबला
ज्ञानयज्ञ परंतर सर्व वि पार्थ ज्ञाने परिनवयो ”—गीता. That is, (1) The Brahman
which is offered, is the Brahman-shaped offering (offering material), in the
Brahman fire, it is offered by Brahman; and by the Brahman-karma-samadhi, one
has to go to Brahman, one has to attain Brahman. (2) Others, on the other hand,
offer all the sense-actions and breath-actions in the self-restraint-shaped
fire, which is illuminated by knowledge. (3) O Parth! The knowledge-yajna is
more beneficial than the material yajna. O Parth! All actions are ultimately
resolved in knowledge.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 maNi zAya-AdhyAtmika bhAvayA (373) adhyAtma yajJa che, brahmaXya che, ane te ja
prazasta hoI sarva sapuruSone saMmata che. mahAtmA jJAnezvara mahArAja kahe che
ke- he pAtha ! evI rIte ke potAnA sarva denuM kSAlana karI nAkhe che, keI
hRdayarUpI araNImAM vicArarUpa maMthana karIne, ane tene paiyarUpa bhArathI
dAbIne, tathA zAMtirUpa dorIthI hacamacAvIne guruvAkyarUpa maMtravaDe maMthana
kare che. evI rIte sarva vRttionuM zakya karIne maMthana karavAthI tyAM tatkALa
kAryasiddhi thAya che. te kAryasiddhi e ke, tyAM tarata jJAnarUpI agni
prajavalita thAya che. arthAt prathama addhisiddhinA moharUpa utpanna thayelA
dhUmADAne lepa thatAM agninI sUma cinagArI utpanna thAya che. e pachI yama-
niyamanA ge sahaja taiyAra thayelA manarUpa kayalAnI sahAyatAthI te agnine
saLagAvavAmAM Ave che. enI sahAyathI moTI javALA utpanna thAya che. tyArapachI
vAsanArUpa samidhene aneka prakAranA meharUpa dhRtanuM lepana karIne temane bALI
nAMkhavAmAM Ave che. tyArapachI jIvarUpa dIkSita, pradIpta karelA jJAnarUpa
agnimAM iMdriya-karmonI Ahuti ApI de che. aMte prANukarmanA "suvA' nAmaka
yajJapAtranI sahAyathI agnimAM pUrNa Ahuti karyA pachI ejyabedharUpa avabhUtha
snAnane lAbha prApta thAya che, ane saMyamAgnimAM iMdriya Adika homadravyonuM
havana karI dIdhA pachI bAkI rahelA Atmasukhane pureDAza tarIke svIkAra
karavAmAM Ave che. ? prathama vairAgyarUpa IdhananI pUrNatAthI indriyarUpa
agnine prajavalita karIne temAM viSayarUpa dravyanI Ahuti ApavAmAM Ave che,
tyAra pachI vAsanarUpa bhUmikAne zuddha karIne tenI upara mULabaMdha mudrAne
eTale bAMdhavAmAM Ave che, ane tenI upara zarIrarUpa maMDapa ubhe karAya che. te
sthAne iMdriyanigraharUpa agninA kuMDamAM iMdriyarUpa hemadravyo apIne
yogamaMtravaDe havana karAya che. e pachI mana ane prANanA nigraharUpa
homadravyonI taiyArIthI dhUmADA vinA ja nirdoSa jJAnAgnine saMtuSTa karavAmAM
Ave che. evI rIte e sAhityane jJAnamAM arpaNa karIne, pachI te jJAna pite
brahmamAM laya pAme che, arthAt x"brahmArpaNaM brahma havibrahmAgnau brahmaNA
hutam  /  brahmaiva tena gantavyaM brahmakarmasamAdhinA  //
sarvANIMdriyakarmANi prANakarmANi cApare  /  AtmasaMyamayogAgnau juhyati
jJAnadIpite  //  zreyAra macAvalA jJAnayajJa paraMtara sarva vi pArtha jJAne
pariNAvyo "--gItA. athata-(1) je brahmane arpaNa karavAmAM Ave che, te
brahmarUpa havi (homa dravya ), brahma animAM, bradhathI homavAmAM Ave che; ane
brahma kama samAdhithI tene brahma pratye ja javAnuM che, brahmane ja pAmavAnuM
che. (2) bIjAone vaLI sarva idriya ane prANukarmone jJAnathI pradIpta thayelA
AtmasaMyamarUpa ga-agnimAM homI de che. (3) he paraMtapa ! dravyamaya yajJa
karatAM jJAnayajJa zreyasakara che. he pArtha ! saghaLuMya sarva karma jJAnamAM
parisamApta thAya che.

Page #450 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(374) When the collection of the senses is destroyed, only the soul and Brahman
remain. This is considered to be the Adhyajna, the Brahman. - Jnaneshwari Gita.
| The 12th chapter of the Uttaraadhyayanasutra also briefly expresses the same
sentiment as Shri Jnaneshwarji. A Brahmin asks Harikeshibal Muni, who was a
Chandala by birth - "O Muni! What is your Agni (fire)? What is your spiritual
abode - Agni sthana? What is your Suva (tongs)? What are your Bhavayajna fuels
(dung-wood)? Who are your Samidhas? With what do you perform the Agnihotra?" The
Muni replies - "Tap is my Agni (fire), the Jiva is my abode, the Yugas are my
Suva (tongs), the body is my fuel (dung-wood), Karma is my Samidha, restraint
and Yoga are my peace, and I perform the Agnihotra with the Rishi connection."
Maharshi Haribhadracharya also says in the "Agnikarika" Ashtak - "One should
perform the Agnikarika with the fire of Dharma Dhyana, which is based on Karma
Indhana and in which the offering of goodwill is made." "कर्मेन्धनं समाश्रित्य
दृढा सद्भावना हुतिः। धर्मध्याग्निना कार्या दीक्षितेनाग्निकारिका ॥" Thus, the
true and excellent Yajna is the Bhavayajna, the Adhyatma Yajna, the Brahmayajna.
The other external Yajnas - Ishta - are for those who are Sakama, they are not
part of Moksha. For the Akam Mumukushu, the Agnikarika mentioned above is the
right one, and he should always keep this "Dhooni" burning. Also -
वापीकूपतडागानि देवतायतनानि च । अन्नप्रदानमेतत्तु पूर्त तत्त्वविदो विदुः ॥ ११७ ॥
Kriti - Savishattarani - wells, ponds, lakes are well-known, Devatanani - and
the abode of the gods, residence etc. And there is also the giving of food
(worldly). And what is this kind of thing? For this it is said - Purva Tarvavido
Vidu - the true meaning is known by the Tatvavido. "के ते जोइ किं व ते जोइठाणं १
का ते सुआ किं व ते कारिसंगं ? एहा य ते कयरा संति भिक्खू ! कयरेण होमेण हुणासि
जोइं ?" The Muni replies "तवो जोई जीवो जोइठाणं, जोगा सुआ सरीरं कारिसंग ।। कम्मे
एहा संजमजोग संती, होमं हुणामि इसिणं पसत्थं ॥" x “ईष्टापूर्त न मोक्षाङ्गं
सकामस्योपवर्णितम् ।। कामथ पुनर्योwा शैव चाग्यानिIि II”—Shri Haribhadrasuri-krit
Ashtak

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (374) gadarisamuccaya ema thatAM te kevala, ekaluM brA ane brahma ja avaziSTa
rahe che. ene ja adhiyajJa eTale brahma mAnavAmAM Ave che."--jJAnezvarI gItA. |
zrI uttarAdhyayanasUtranA 12 mA adhyayanamAM paNa saMkSepathI A ja zrI jJAne.
zvarajIne maLate bhAva batAve che. brAhmaNe janmathI caMDAla evA harikezibala
munine pUche che # - he muni ! tamArI ti (agni) zuM che? tamAruM AdhyAtmika
jyotisthAna-agnisthAna zuM che? tamArI suvA (kaDachI) kaI che ? tamArA
bhAvayajJa iMdhana (chANAM-lAkaDAM) kayA che? tamArA samidhe kayA che? kyA
hamathI tame tine homo che? muni javAba Ape che-"tapa mArI ti (agni) che, jIva
mahArUM tisthAna che, yugo mahArI suvA (kaDachI) che, zarIra mahArUM dhana
(chANAM-lAkaDAM) che. karma mahArA samidha che, saMjama joga zAMti che, RSi
saMbaMdhI e prazasta homa huM hasuM chuM." maharSi haribhadrAcAryajI paNa
agnikArikA" aSTakamAM vade che ke-"karmaIbdhanane Azraya karIne jemAM
sadbhAvanAnI Ahuti ApavAmAM Ave che, evI daDha agnikArikA dharmadhyAnarUpa
agnivaDe dIkSite karavI." "karmendhanaM samAzritya dRDhA sadbhAvanA hutiH|
dharmadhyAgninA kAryA dIkSitenAgnikArikA  // " Ama sAco prazasta yajJa te
bhAvayajJa ja che, adhyAtma yajJa ja che, brahmayajJa ja che. bAkI je bAhya
yajJa-ISTa che, te te sakAmane hoya che, te mokSanA aMgarUpa nathI. akAma
mumukSune te uparamAM kahelI agnikArikA ja nyAcya che, ene te evI ja "dhUNI"
sadAya dhakhAvavI ghaTe che. tathA-- vApIkUpataDAgAni devatAyatanAni ca  /
annapradAnametattu pUrta tattvavido viduH  //  117  //  kRtti -sAvISattarAni-
vAva, kUvA, taLAvo lokaprasiddhaja che, tevatAnAni -ane devAyatane, vasatikA
Adi. tathA zALAnaM annadAna (laukikaja) che. ane AvA prakAranuM te zuM ? te mATe
kahyuM ke-pUrva taravavido vidu-pUrUM ' paribhASAthI tattvavide jANe che. "ke te
joi kiM va te joiThANaM 1 kA te suA kiM va te kArisaMgaM ? ehA ya te kayarA
saMti bhikkhU ! kayareNa homeNa huNAsi joiM ?" muni uttara Ape che"tvo joI jIvo
joiThANaM, jogA suA sarIraM kArisaMga  /  /  kamme ehA saMjamajoga saMtI, homaM
huNAmi isiNaM pasatthaM  // " x "ISTApUrta na mokSAGgaM sakAmasyopavarNitam  /
/  kAmatha punaryowA zaiva cAgyAniIi II"--zrI haribhadrasUrikRta aSTaka

Page #451 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Deemadrushti:  Even in similar observances, the intention makes the
difference.  (375) Wells, ponds, and tanks, and temples, and feeding the hungry;
All these are considered "Puta" by the wise, like a fever's cure.
**Commentary**  Building wells, digging ponds, constructing tanks, building
temples, and feeding the hungry, all these are considered "Puta" (acts of merit)
according to the definition of the wise. (1) Building wells, etc., for water, is
a beneficial act for the welfare of the public. Whoever comes to quench their
thirst and finds relief, blesses the one who built the water reservoir in their
heart, thus how can it not be a meritorious act? Although there may be some
faults like violence, etc., involved, still, life cannot survive without water,
so providing it where it is lacking is a beneficial "Puta" act for the people.
(2) Similarly, feeding the hungry, building shelters for the needy, performing
virtuous acts, etc., are all forms of service to the people. And since one
cannot live without food, providing food to the poor, the suffering, and the
destitute is a meritorious "Puta" act. During times of famine, excessive rain,
drought, etc., providing relief centers to the best of one's ability and
alleviating the shortage of food is also a form of "Puta" act. (3) Similarly, by
implication, giving medicine, building hospitals wherever needed for the best
care of the sick, opening pharmacies and clinics, opening orphanages and homes
for the disabled, are also forms of "Puta" acts. Thus, wherever there is a lack
of resources for the welfare of the people in this world, fulfilling that need
is a "Puta" act. (4) Similarly, wherever there is a lack of resources for the
spiritual welfare of the people, fulfilling that need is also a "Puta" act. For
example, building temples, building dharmasalas (rest houses), building schools
for spiritual studies, building hospitals, building shelters, etc.
**Highlighting the intention** (primarily) it is said:  "The intention is
different, even in similar observances. The ultimate goal is the same, whether
it is water or agriculture." (118)  **Explanation:**  "Abhisandhi" - through the
intention, the characteristic of the intention. What? It is different in the
end. The fruits of the worldly deeds are different, even though the offerings
like "Deeksha" etc. are similar, the ultimate goal, the main purpose, the reason
- all these are the same, the intention itself, here, in the ultimate
achievement. Just like? It is said that - water in agriculture, the act of
farming. This is a well-established example.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dImAdaSTi : sama anuSThAnamAM paNa Azayabhede kulabheda (375) vAva taLAva kUvA
ane, devasthAna annadAna; eha sarvane pUrNa te, jANe tAva sujANa, 117 _artha -
vAva, kUvA, taLAva ane devAyatane-devamaMdire, tathA annapradAna-Ane tatvavido
"pUtta' kahe che. vivecana vAve karAvavI, kUvA khodAvavA, taLAva baMdhAvavA,
devamaMdira caNAvavA, annadAna ApavuM, e badhA pUrtakarma che, ema ttanI
paribhASA uparathI tattvavettAo jANe che. (1) vAva vagere jalAya karAvavA, e
sArvajanika lokakalyANanA keI apekSAe upayogI sukRtya che. kaI paNa tarasyA tyAM
AvIne potAnI tarasa bujhAve ne potAnI AMtaraDI TharatAM jalAzaya karAvanArane
aMtaranA AzIrvAda Ape, tethI kaI rIte kaMI puNyabaMdha saMbhave che. jo ke temAM
hiMsA Adi doSa paNa che, tathApi jala vinA jIvana TakatuM nathI, eTale tenI jyAM
oTa hoya tyAM te pUrI pADavI, te lokopayogI " pUrta karma " che. (2) temaja
bhUkhyAne annadAna devuM, te mATe jyAM jarUra hoya tyAM dAnazAlAo karAvavI,
sadAvrate khelavA, ItyAdi sukRta paNa janasevAnA prakAre che. ane vinA jIvI
zakAtuM nathI, tethI dIna-duHkhI-daridrIne piTane khADe pUravA mATe
annapradAnano prabaMdha karavo te puNya evuM "pUtta karma che. duSkALa,
ativRSTi, anAvRSTi, vagere bhayaMkara prasaMgomAM janatAnI rAhata mATe
yathAzakti rAhatakendro khelI annanI truTinI pUtti" karavI te paNa pUrNa karmane
prakAra che. (3) te ja prakAre upalakSaNathI auSadhadAna devuM, rogIonI sArAmAM
sArI mAvajata mATe jyAM jyAM jarUra hoya tyAM ispitAle baMdhAvavI,
auSadhAlayedavAkhAnAM kholavAM, anAthAlaye-apaMgAla kholavAM, te paNa pUrNa
karmanA prakAra che. Ama janatAnA Ihalaukika kalyANa mATenA sAdhanonI jyAM UNapa
hoya, tyAM tenI pUtti karavI te "pUtta' karma che. (4) temaja lekanA pAralaukika
kalyANa mATenA sAdhananI paNa jyAM jyAM UNapa hoya, tyAM tyAM tenI vRtti karavI,
te pUrA pADavA, te paNa pUrNa karma. jemake-devamaMdiro karAvavA, dharmazALAo
karAvavI, svAdhyAyagRho-pauSadhAlA-upAzraye karAvavA vagere. Antarahetune
adhikRta karI (mukhya karIne) kahe che - abhisaMdhaH phalaM bhinnamanuSTAne
same'pi hi  /  paramotaH sa eveha vArIva kRSikarmaNi  // 118 //  vRtti
-amisaMthe -tathA prakAranA AzayarUpa lakSaNavALA abhisaMdhi thakI-abhiprAya
thakI. zuM ? te kendaDha miniM-kula bhinna che. saMsArI devane sthAnAdirUpa
phaLa bhinna che, jANIne tameDapi diiSTa Adi anudAna sama ( sarakhuM ) chatAM,
ghAma -parama, pradhAna, rAta:-A kAraNatha, sa gva-te ja, abhisaMdhi ja, zrada-
ahIM, kulasiddhi mAM, kenI jema ? te mATe kahyuM ke-vAtava kRSivamaLa-
kavikarmamAM-khetImAM jalanI jema. ema karUDhithI parama dRSTAMta che.

Page #452 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(376) The community of the Gadashti, though performing the same rituals, have
different intentions, and therefore their fruits are different. Just as water is
the most important factor in agriculture, so too is intention the most important
factor in achieving the desired fruit. 118, Therefore, even though the rituals
are the same, the fruits are different due to the intention. Therefore,
intention is the most important factor in achieving the desired fruit, just as
water is in agriculture.  The form of fulfillment of desires that was discussed
above, even though the rituals are the same, the fruits are different according
to the intention.  For example, five people may perform the same rituals of
yajna, dana, etc., or may perform the same actions like digging wells, etc., but
the fruits they receive will be different according to their intentions. This is
because the fruits are different according to the intention, therefore intention
is the most important factor in achieving the desired fruit. Here, a well-known
example is given: just as water is the most important factor in agriculture, so
too is intention in this case. Even if the land is good, the seeds are good, and
the land is well-cultivated, but there is no water, then all this is in vain. If
there is water, then all this is successful. In the same way, in the same
rituals of yajna, dana, etc., intention is the most important factor.  Due to
the difference in intention, it is said: रागादिभिरयं चेह भिद्यतेऽनेकधा नृणाम् ।
नानाफलोपभोक्तृणां तथा बुद्धयादिभेदतः ॥ ११९ ।।  चित्र लगी लेकने, रागादिથી આ એમ;
बहु प्रकारे भिन्न अहिं, बुद्धयादि भेरे तेम 119,  Meaning: This intention is
divided into many ways by raga, etc., and by the difference in intelligence,
etc., of those who enjoy different fruits.   Kutte - Kimi - This intention is
also divided into many ways by raga, etc., in this world, by the difference in
the minds of humans, by the difference in their softness, medium, and firmness.
Which specific humans? It is said: those who enjoy different fruits, and by the
difference in intelligence, etc., of those who enjoy different fruits.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (376) gadaSTisamudAya phala bhinna abhisaMdhithI, sama anuSThAna chatAMya; ethI
te ja parama ahIM, jala jema kRSimAMya. 118, atha:-anuSThAna samAna chatAM,
abhisaMdhine (Azayane lIdhe phaLa bhinna hoya che. tethI karIne te abhisaMdhi ja
ahIM phalasiddhimAM parama (kAraNu) che,-jema kRSikarmamAM jala che tema.
vivecana uparamAM je IcchApUrtinuM svarUpa kahyuM, te anuSThAna samAna-
ekasarakhuM hovA chatAM, abhisaMdhi pramANe Azaya anusAra tenuM phala bhinna
hoya che, juduM juduM hoya che. dAkhalA tarIke koI pAMca manuSya ekasarakhI
yajJa-dAnAdi kriyA kare, abhisaMdhi athavA vAva-kUvA vagere karAve, paNa te
pratyekane je je AzayapramANe phelabheda vizeSa hoya che, je je aMtara pariNAma
hoya che, te te phalAmAM paNa bheda paDe che. Ama abhisaMdhi-AzayavizeSa pramANe
phalada hoya che, eTalA mATe A abhisaMdhi ja ahIM phalasiddhi bAbatamAM parama
che, pradhAna che, mukhya che. atre lekarUDhithI prasiddha daSTAMta ApyuM che
ke-jema kRSikarmamAM, khetIvAmAM pANI ja mukhya kAraNa che, tema prastutamAM
paNa samajavuM. yogya jamIna hoya, sArA bIja vAvyA hoya, sArI peThe kheDavAmAM
Avela hoya, paNa pANI ja na hoya, te e badhA phogaTa che, pANIno joga hoya to ja
e badhA saphaLa che. te ja prakAre yajJa-dAnAdi samAna anuSThAnamAM-kriyAmAM
paNa sarvatra abhisaMdhinuM-AzayanuM pradhAnapaNuM che. abhisaMdhinA-AzayanA
bhedanA kAraNe kahe che- rAgAdibhirayaM ceha bhidyate'nekadhA nRNAm  /
nAnAphalopabhoktRNAM tathA buddhayAdibhedataH  //  119  /  /  citra lagI lekane,
rAgAdithI A ema; bahu prakAre bhinna ahiM, buddhayAdi bhere tema 119, artha ane
rAga Adi vaDe karIne A abhisaMdhi (Azaya) nAnA prakAranA phalanA upabhoktA
narene tathA prakAre buddhi AdinA bhedathI bhinna hoya che. kUtte - kimi -rAgAdi
dethI, arthe ra-A abhisaMdhi vaLI, du-A lokamAM, miDane nAma-manuSyone-aneka
prakAre bheda pAme che, tenA mRdu, madhya, adhimAtra bhede karIne. kevA viziSTa
manune ? te mATe kahyuM-nAnATomori-nAnA prakAranA phalanA upaletA evA manuSyone,
tathA yuddhakArbhivataH-tevA prakAre buddhi AdinA bhedathI ( kahevAmAM AvanArA )
abhisaMdhi bheda pAme che.

Page #453 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(377) **Dimdarshti: Distinction of Intention from Attachment and Intellect**
**Discussion** And even within this intention, there is a distinction. What is
the reason for this? It is explained here that this distinction arises according
to attachment and its derivatives. Just as there are different results of
attachment, aversion, and delusion, so too there are different intentions and
aspirations. For example, some people have a mild level of attachment, aversion,
and delusion, while others have a moderate level, and still others have a very
intense level. Thus, even in performing the same action, there are distinctions
in intention based on the intensity of attachment and its derivatives. And
according to intention, there is also a distinction in the fruits of action. The
fruit received is in accordance with the intention. For example, there are three
householders who each donate the same amount of money to charity, or build a
temple or hospital. But one of them is motivated by a desire for fame, he craves
recognition, and thinks, "People will praise me, my name will be inscribed on a
plaque, and a statue of me will be erected." The second is also motivated by a
desire for fame, but he is also inspired by a sense of service. The third is
motivated solely by altruism and love for others. Thus, in the same action, the
three have different levels of attachment and its derivatives, therefore their
intentions are different, and therefore the fruits of their actions are also
different. The first receives fame, but the fruit does not go beyond that. The
second receives fame along with some special merit. The third accumulates a vast
store of merit, and just as the roots of a tree are hidden beneath the ground,
so too he receives the fruits of fame and recognition, but he, being a great
soul and pure servant, does not care about them. Similarly, there is a
distinction in intention based on the distinction of intellect and its
derivatives. The type of understanding one has determines one's intention. The
nature of this distinction of intellect and its derivatives is explained below.
**Figure 12** **Sun-Mind** -Mind-{ Non ' Teen Or Asammoh [। इति
इष्टापूर्तान्तर्गत आशयभेदे फलभेदान्तराधिकारः ।]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (377) dImadaSTi: zagAdithI ane buddhi AdithI Azayabheda vivecana ane A AzayamAM
paNa bheda paDe che, tenuM kAraNa zuM? tene ahIM khulAso karyo che ke-rAgAdi
pramANe te bheda paDe che. jevA jevA rAga, dveSa, moha Adi pariNAma hoya che, te
tevo AzayavizeSa-abhisaMdhi nIpaje che. eTale koInA rAgAdithI rAgAdi pariNAma
maMda-mALA hoya, keInA madhyama prakAranA hoya, Azayabheda koInA vadhAre paDatI
mAtrAvALA-adhimAtra tIvra hoya. Ama eka sarakhI kriyA karavAmAM paNa rAgAdinI
taratamatA pramANe AzayanA bheda paDe che, ane Azaya pramANe phaLamAM paNa bheda
paDe che, jevo Azaya tevuM phaLa maLe che. dAkhalA tarIke--keI traNa gRhastha
che, ne te dareka ekasarakhI rakamanuM dhamAMdA dAna kare che, athavA
dharmasthAnaka ke hospITala baMdhAve che; paNa temAMne eka kIrtine lAlasu che,
nAmane bhUkhe che, ne loke hArI vAhavAha karaze, hArA nAmanI takhtI caDaze,
mhAruM pUtaLuM besADaze, ema samajIne dAnAdi kare che. bIjuM kaMIka kIrtilebhI
che, paNa sAthe sAthe sevAbhAvanAthI prerAIne tema kare che. trIje ekAMta
paropakAra arthe kevaLa paramArtha premathI prerita thaIne te ja kArya kare che.
Ama eka ja kAryamAM traNenA rAgAdi pariNAma judA che, tethI Azaya judA che, ane
tethI phaLa paNa judA che. pahelAne kItti te maLe che, paNa phaLa tethI AgaLa
vadhatuM nathI; bIjAne kItti sAthe kaMI vizeSa puNya phaLa paNa maLe che;
trIjAne parama puNyarAzino saMcaya thAya che, ane jAranI pAchaLa sAMThA te hoya
ja, tema AnuSagika kIrti Adi paNa maLe che, paNa tenI tevA mahAnubhAva zuddha
sevAbhAvIne paravA paNa hotI nathI. temaja buddhi vagerenA bhedathI AzayamAM
bheda paDe che. je je je bodha hoya che, te te tene Azaya hoya che te buddhi Adi
bhedanuM svarUpa nIce kahyuM che. AkRti 12 ravi-mana -mAnane -{ nona ' tIna ke
asaMmoha [ /  iti iSTApUrtAntargata Azayabhede phalabhedAntarAdhikAraH  / ]

Page #454 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(378) Buddhi, Jnana and Asamaah are the three types of Bodha, as stated in the
scriptures. Due to the difference in these three, all the actions of all beings
are differentiated. 120.  Meaning: Buddhi, Jnana and Asamaah are the three types
of Bodha. Due to the difference in these three, all the actions of all beings
are differentiated.  Discussion: The scriptures state that there are three types
of Bodha: (1) Buddhi-rupa Bodha, (2) Jnana-rupa Bodha, (3) Asamaah-rupa Bodha.
The characteristics of these three will be discussed later. Due to the
difference in these three types of Bodha, all beings with bodies have a
difference in their actions, including their desires. The type of Bodha one has,
the type of understanding one has, and the type of actions one performs are all
interconnected. This is because the difference in the purpose leads to a
difference in the result. This is a well-known principle. The cause is
different, so the effect is also different. This is a well-known principle.
Thus, in the same action, there is a difference in the intensity of the Bodha,
and a difference in the intensity of the action.  Therefore:  ★  Yogadristi
Samuchaya Buddhi is based on the senses and their objects, Jnana is based on the
scriptures, and Asamaah is characterized by the right practice. 121.
Commentary: Buddhi: Buddhi, whose characteristics will be discussed, Jnana:
Jnana is also the same, Asamaah: Asamaah is also the same, Trividho Bodha: The
scriptures state that there are three types of Bodha, Tadbhedat: Due to the
difference in these three types of Bodha, Sarva Karmani: All actions,
Mithunanta: Are differentiated, Sarva Dehinam: Of all beings with bodies. This
is because the difference in the purpose leads to a difference in the result.
Commentary: Indriyartha Ashraya Buddhi: Buddhi is based on the senses and their
objects. Just as when a person sees a pilgrimage site, they develop the desire
to go there, Jnanaswagama Purvam: Jnana is based on the scriptures. Just as one
learns the rules of pilgrimage from the scriptures, Sadanushthanavat Chait: And
the right practice. This is the Jnana, Asamaho Abhidhiyate: Asamaah is
characterized by the right practice.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ( 378 ) buddhi, jJAna ane asamAha kama adhikAra, A ja kahe che--
buddhirjJAnamasaMmohastrividho bodha iSyate  /  tadbhedAtsarvakarmANi bhidyante
sarvadehinAm  //  120  //  buddhi jJAna asamAhu e, edha trividha kathAya; sarva
daihinA ka sahu, tasa zeDhe bhedAya. 120. artha:--buddhi, jJAna ne asameAha, ema
traNa prakAranA medha kahyo che; ane tenA bhedathakI sarva prANIonA sarva karma
bheda pAme che. vivecana zAstramAM bedha traNa prakAranA kahyo che:- (1)
buddhirUpa medha, (2 ) jJAnarUpa medha, (3) asa'mAharUpa medha. A traNenuM
lakSaNa have pachI kahevAmAM Avaze. A buddhi AdirUpa medhanA bhedane lIdhe sava
dehadhArI prANIonA iSTa Adi sarva karmomAM paNa bheda paDe che. jevA jevA jene
edha, jevI jevI jenI samajaNu, tevA tevA tenA karmamAM bheda hAya che; kAraNa ke
hetubheda hoya te phalabheda paNa hAya, e nyAyanI rIti che. kAraNa jUduM, paNa
judu' hAya ja, e nyAya prasiddha che. Ama eka ja kamAM, medhanI taratamatA
pramANe, kramanI taratamatAnA bheda paDe che. kA temAM--  yogadRSTisamuccaya
indriyArthAzrayA buddhirjJAnaM tvAgamapUrvakam  /  sadanuSThAna
vaccaitadasaMmoho'bhidhIyate  //  121  //  buddhi iMdriyArthAzrayI, AgamapUrvaka
jJAna; sadanuSThAnavat jJAnanuM, asa'mehu abhidhAna, 121 vRtti:--vRddhi:-buddhi,
jenuM lakSaNa kahevAmAM Avaze, jJAnam-jJAna paNa ema ja, saMmo:asaMmeAha paNa
ema, trividho koSaH-traNa prakArane edha, vyate-zAstromAM kahyo che, tadneAt te
buddhi AdinA bheda uparathI, sarva'Li-iSTa Adi sava" karyAM, mithunta-bheda pAme
che, sarvatRdinAmsava` dehadhArIonA, prANIonA,-tenA hetubheda thakI bheda hoya
che eTalA mATe. vRtti:--reMdriyAzrayA vuddhi:-iMdriya arthanA Azraya kare te
buddhi che,-tI yAtrALunu da"na thatAM jema tyAM javAnI buddhi thAya tema;
jJAnasvAmapUrvam ane jJAna AgamapUrNAMka hoya che,-- tIrthayAtrAnI vidhinA
vijJAnanI jema; sanuSThAnava cait- ane sadanuSThAnavALu. A jJAna, zuM? te
kesamoomilIyate-asaMmeha kahevAya che, edharAja che.

Page #455 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Deepradrushti: The Gem-like Example of Intellect, Knowledge, and Asamoh Karma
**(379)** **Meaning:**  "Intellect" is that which relies on sense objects.
"Knowledge" is that which is derived from scriptures (or tradition). And
"Asamoh" is that knowledge which is accompanied by righteous conduct.
**Analysis:**  **(1)** The intellect relies on sense objects. The object
perceived by the senses becomes the subject of the intellect. The understanding
that arises from the senses is the intellect-based knowledge. For example,
seeing a pilgrim inspires the intellect to think about pilgrimage. This is
intellect-based understanding. There is no understanding of the nature of the
pilgrimage itself, only the thought, "How good it would be to go on pilgrimage,
seeing others going there."  **(2)** Knowledge is derived from scriptures. The
understanding that arises from scriptures or the deceased is knowledge-based
understanding. For example, the knowledge of the rituals of pilgrimage comes
from scriptures. What is a pilgrimage? What is the nature of a pilgrimage? How
to perform a pilgrimage? These rituals are known from scriptures. The pilgrimage
is a means to cross the ocean of existence. There are different types of
pilgrimages: material, geographical, temporal, and emotional. What kind of
humility, discernment, devotion, respect, and honor should be shown towards
them? All these rituals are explained in detail by the scriptures.  **(3)** And
this knowledge, accompanied by righteous conduct, is called Asamoh or "Bodharaj"
(King of Understanding). The knowledge acquired through scriptures is
understood. Acting accordingly with that knowledge is the Asamoh, the gem in the
bondage, the Bodharaj, the king of understanding. Thus, intellect is the
understanding through the senses, knowledge is the understanding through
scriptures, and Asamoh is the understanding accompanied by righteous conduct.
And therefore, there is a difference in their fruits. Intellect is based on
sense objects, knowledge is based on scriptures, Asamoh is based on good deeds.
These three indicate the difference in their fruits. - Shri Ye Da. Sa. 4-16.
**Thus, their characteristics are systematically explained, and the text
provides a suitable example:**  **"Rattnopalambhatajnanatatprayadi yathakramam
|** **Ihodarhanam sadhu jneyam buddhyadisiddhaye || 122 ||"**  **Explanation:**
**Snepastam:** The knowledge of the gem from the general is the intellect that
relies on sense objects.  **Tadjnana:** The knowledge of the gem from scriptures
is the knowledge of the gem.  **TabEyaadidhi:** The attainment of the gem, etc.,
is Asamoh, due to its understanding-based nature.  **Yathamam:** Thus, in this
order, in the subject of intellect,  **Udarhanam:** The example is good
(correct), due to its ability to achieve the desired meaning.  **Sadhu:**
Therefore, it is said, "Shaikam yuddhwalisiddhaye" - to understand the meaning
of intellect, knowledge, and Asamoh.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dIprAdaSTi : buddhi jJAna ane asaha karma-ratna daSTAMta (379) artha-Idriya
arthane Azraya kare te "buddhi' che, AgamapUrvaka (kRtapUrvaka) hoya te "jJAna"
che, ane sadanuSThAnavALuM A jJAna te "asaMmoha" kahevAya che. vivecana temAM
(1) je buddhi che te iMdriya arthane Azraya karanArI che. iMdriyadvArA jaNane
padArtha te buddhine viSaya che iMdriya thakI je jANapaNuM thAya che, te
buddhirUpa bAdha che. jemake-keI tIrthayAtrALune dekhIne tIrthagamananI buddhi
upaje, te buddhijanya bodha che. AmAM tIthanA svarUpanI gatAgama nathI, mAtra
anyane tIrthe jate dekhI, tyAM tIrthe jaIe te kevuM sAruM? evI pitAne buddhi
upaje che. (2) jJAna je che te AgamapUrvaka che. zAstra athavA mRtadvArA je
bedha upaje che, je jANapaNuM thAya che, je samajaNa Ave che, te jJAnarU5 bodha
che. jemake-tIrthayAtrAnI vidhinuM vijJAna Agama dvArA thAya che. tIrtha eTale
zuM ? tIrtha svarUpa zuM ? tIrthayAtrA kema karavI? e vagere vidhi bAbata
zAstrathakI jaNAya che. bhavasAgarathI tAre te tIrtha. tenA vaLI dravyatIrtha,
kSetratIrtha, kALatIrtha ne bhAvatIrtha evA bheda che. te pratye kevA vinaya,
viveka, bhakti, Adara, bahumAna Adi dAkhavavA joIe, e badhI vidhi zAstra
vistArathI batAve che. (3) ane sadanuSThAnavALuM A je jJAna te asameha athavA
"bedharAja' kahevAya che. Agama dvArA je jANyuMsamajAyuM te jJAna thayuM.
tadanusAra te jJAnasahitapaNe tathArUpa sat pravRtti-AcaraNa karavuM te,
baMdhamAM ziromaNi, bodharAja, e asaMmeharUpa baMdha che. Ama buddhimAM
IdriyadvArA raka jANapaNuM che, jJAnamAM zAstrathakI jANapaNuM che, ane
asaMmehamAM jJAna sahita saAcaraNapaNuM che. ane tethI karIne tenA phalamAM paNa
bhedapaNuM che. iDhiyArthagata buddhi chejI, jJAna te Agama heta; asaMmoha zubha
kRti guNejI, tiNe phalabheda saMketa mana."--zrI ye da. sa. 4-16. ema eonuM
lakSaNa vyavasthita sate, lekasiddha udAharaNa kahe che--
ratnopalambhatajjJAnatatprAyAdi yathAkramam  /  ihodAharaNaM sAdhu jJeyaM
buddhayAdisiddhaye  //  122  //  vRtti:- snepasTama-ratnanuM sAmAnyathI jANapaNa
te Idriya arthanA AzramavALI buddhi che, taDajJAna- AgamapUrvaka te ratnanuM te
jJAna ratnajJAna che. tabaEyAddhi-tenI prApti Adi te asaMmeha che-enA
bodhagarbhapaNAne lIdhe, yathAmaH-Ama yathAkrame, ukta anukrame, ahIM, buddhi
viSayamAM, -udAharaNa, sAdhu-sAdhu che, (samyapha che ),-ISTa arthane
sAdhakapaNAne lIdhe. eTalA mATe ja kahyuM-zaikaM yuddhavAlisiddhaye-buddhi,
jJAna, ne asaMmehanI siddhi arthe jANavuM.

Page #456 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(380) Yogadi Samuccaya The perception of a gem, and then its knowledge;
attainment, etc., are also like this place; this is the order, know the example
here; for the sake of the attainment of intellect, etc., the virtuous example is
the measure, 122 Meaning: - To know (know) the gem, to know it, and to attain
it, etc. - in this order, here, for the sake of the attainment of intellect,
etc., know the virtuous (samyak-sadhak) example, discussion The perception of
the gem, that is, to know from the ordinary that this is a gem, is the intellect
that relies on the sense objects. Its knowledge, that is, to know the gem from
the scriptures, is knowledge. And the attainment, etc., of that gem, the example
of that gem, is asamaha due to the medhagarbha. Thus, in this order, here is a
virtuous-samyak example with respect to intellect, etc.; because it is the
desired-desired, etc., it is truly a sadhak, therefore, the true form of
intellect, knowledge, asamahu is presented here as an example of this worldly
gem: (1) Just as there is a gem, seeing it, knowing from the ordinary, from the
object of the eye, 'this is a gem', that knowledge is the intellect. (2) And
through the scriptures that describe the characteristics of the gem, based on
it, the special knowledge of the characteristics of that gem, that is the
knowledge-like medha. (3) And knowing the definite form of that gem, recognizing
it as it is, the attainment, etc., of that gem, is the asamaha-like medha. In
asamaha, the knowledge of that form is inherent, because if there is no
knowledge of that form, how can asamaha arise? Without recognizing, without
understanding the form, how can one accept? Therefore, when one recognizes
properly, when there is direct attainment, etc., where is asamaha? There is only
asamaha. * It states the characteristic of sadanushtana - Aadarah karane
pritiravighnah sampadagamah | Jijgnasa tajgnas seva cha sadanushtanalakshanam ||
123 || Vriti: - Only: - Aadar, yatnatishay (excess mind), in karana - action,
priti: - priti, abhidhwangarup priti (love, deep affection), vinn: - avidma, -
in its karana, in doing that ista, etc., due to the ability of avidhra-adrusht,
sampvaam-sampad aagam, attainment of wealth, - therefore, due to the punya-
siddhi of auspicious feeling, nijgnadha-jijgnasa, desire to know, the desire of
ista, etc., taleva 2 - and tanni - service of the knowledgeable person, ista
proper service, 6 - from the word, there is acceptance of grace,
sanushtanalakshalam - this is the characteristic of sanushtana. Because it is
anubandhasarpana (it is anubandhapradhana, by tradition, it has auspicious
anubhadh in succession).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (380) yogadisamuccaya ratna taNA upalabha ne, tehu taNu' vaLI jJAna ; prApti
Adi paNa ehanA, jema hoya A sthAna; ehu krama anusArathI, udAharaNa ahI jANa;
buddhi AdinI siddhine, kAje sAdhu pramANa, 122 artha:--ratnanI jANa ( khakhara )
thavI, tenu' jJAna thavuM, ane tenI prApti vagere thavI,-ema anukrame ahIM
buddhi vagerenI siddhi arthe sAdhu ( samyak-sAdhaka ) udAharaNa jANavu',
vivecana ratnanA upala'bha eTale ke AMkhathI dekhIne A ratna che evI sAmAnyathI
khabara paDavI, te iMdriya arthAMnA Azraya karatI buddhi che. tenuM jJAna eTale
ke AgamapUrvaka te ratnanu jANapaNuM thavuM te jJAna che. ane te ratnanI prApti
Adi te ratnanu dRSTAMta medhagarbha paNAne lIdhe asamAha che. Ama anukrame ahI
buddhi Adi paratve sAdhu-samyak udAharaNa che; kAraNa ke te abhipreta-iSTa anu.
kharAkhara sAdhaka che, eTalA mATe ja buddhi, jJAna, asa'mAhunuM kharAkhara
sacATa svarUpa samajavA mATe atre A laukika ratnanu dRSTAMta raju karyu che: (1)
jema kAi eka ratna hAya, tene dekhI sAmAnyathI cakSuiMdriyanA viSayathI * A
ratna che' evu' je jANupaNa", te buddhirUpa Adha che. (2) ane ratnanA lakSaNa
darzAvanArA pratipAdaka zAstra dvArA, tenA AdhAre, te ratna sa`kha'dhI
lakSaNanuM vizeSa jANapaNuM, te jJAnarUpa medha che. (3) ane te ratnanuM nizcita
svarUpa jANI, tene tathAsvarUpe eLakhI, te ratnanI prApti vagere thavI, te
asameAharUpa bedha che. asa'mehamAM tathArUpa jJAna  /  aMtarbhUta hAya ja che,
kAraNapaNe tathArUpa yathArtha jJAna na heAya te| asa mAha kema upaje ? eLakhyA
vinA, svarUpa samajyA vinA grahaNa kema kare ? eTale samyapaNe eLakhI, sAkSAt
prApti Adi jyAM hAya, tyAM samAha kayAMthI hAya ? asaMmAhu ja hAya.
sadanuSThAnanuM lakSaNa kahe che-- AdaraH karaNe prItiravighnaH saMpadAgamaH  /
jijJAsA tajjJasevA ca sadanuSThAnalakSaNam  //  123  //  vRtiH--mAtra:-Adara,
yatnatizaya ( atizaya mana ), ratne-STa Adi karaNamAM-kriyAmAM, prIti:-prIti,
abhidhvaMgarUpa prIti ( prema, gADha sneha), vinna:-avidma,-tenA karaNamAM ja,
te ISTa Adi karavAmAM avighra-adRSTanA sAmarthyane lIdhe, saMpavAma-saMpad
Agama, saMpattinI prApti,--tethI karIne ja zubhabhAvarUpa puNyasiddhine lIdhe,
nijJADhA-jijJAsA, jANavAnI IcchA, ISTa Adi viSayanI ja jijJAsA, tAlevA 2-ane
tananI--tenA jANakAra jJAtA puruSanI sevA, iSTa ucita sevA, 6-- zabda uparathI
anugrahanuM grahaNa che, sanuSThAnakSaLam-- A sanuSThAnanuM lakSaNu che. kAraNa
ke enu anubaMdhasArapaNa che ( anubaMdhapradhAnapaNuM che, paraMparAe ene
uttarAttara zubha anubhadha thayA kare che).

Page #457 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Dikad: A Sign of Right Conduct  **(381)** Respect, affection, non-attachment,
and attainment of wealth; Inquiry, service to the knowledgeable, and right
action are its signs.   **Meaning:** Respect, affection, non-attachment,
attainment of wealth, inquiry, service to the knowledgeable, and their grace -
these are the signs of right conduct (action).  **Commentary:** The right
conduct mentioned above, its signs are shown here: (1) Respect in action, (2)
Affection, (3) Non-attachment, (4) Attainment of wealth, (5) Inquiry, (6)
Service to the knowledgeable, (7) Their grace.  **Signs of Right Conduct:**  1.
**Respect in Action:** Respect in performing actions like worship, etc., means
utmost effort. Performing actions like worship, etc., with great respect, utmost
reverence, and extreme effort is a sign of right conduct. Performing actions
with care, not being careless, and with awareness of their use, indicates right
conduct. For example, in devotional acts: "With reverence, bow down to the feet
of the Jineshwar, perform auspicious actions. With great reverence, fold your
limbs, and ask for forgiveness... With reverence, purify your body and mind, and
go with joy. Even if you have to walk for miles, become dust at the feet of the
One." - Shri Anandghanji  2. **Affection:** Affection, inner love, and deep
attachment towards the action-conduct is a sign of right conduct. Any action
where there is no inner affection, love, or enthusiasm, appears dull, lifeless,
and selfish. When there is love and enthusiasm for it in the heart, the same
action becomes very beautiful, joyful, and exciting. The soul becomes absorbed
and one-pointed in it. For example, in performing devotion to the Lord,
affection is the first requirement. When a stream of love flows towards the
Lord, and unique affection arises, only then is the joy and delight of devotion
to the Lord experienced. Only then does the soul become absorbed and experience
oneness in devotion to the Lord. "Ajit, what is the use of affection, if it
doesn't please me, then what is the use of others? The jasmine flower attracts
me, why should I sit under the banyan tree?" - Ajit

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dIkAda : sata anuSThAnanuM lakSaNa (381) Adara prIti avidha ne, saMpada prApti
tema; jijJAsA tajajJa sevanA, sata kRti lakSaNa ema. 123 artha:-kriyAne viSe
Adara, prIti, avikha, saMpattinI prApti, jijJAsA ane tajunI-tenA jJAtA puruSanI
sevanA-A sat anuSThAnanuM ( kriyAnuM) lakSaNa che. vivecana uparamAM je
sadanuSThAna kahyuM, tenuM lakSaNa ahIM batAvyuM cheH (1) kriyAmAM Adara, (2)
prIti, (3) avikha, (4) saMpatti prApti, (5) jijJAsA, (6 ) tajajJasevA, (7) tene
anugraha. sanuSThAnanuM lakSaNa 1. kriyA Adara -IsTa Adi karavAmAM Adara eTale
ke yatnAtizaya heya; je ISTa vagere kriyA karavAmAM Ave te bahumAnapUrvaka,
atyaMta AdarathI, atizaya yatnathI karavAmAM Ave, te sadanuSThAnanuM lakSaNa
che. kriyAmAM veTha nahi kADhatAM khUba jALavIne, upayogajAgRtipUrvaka kriyA
karavI, te sadanuSThAna sUcave che. dAkhalA tarIke bhakti kAryamAM- suvidhi
jinezvara pAya namIne, zubha karaNI ema kIje re; ati ghaNo ulaTa aMga dharIne,
praha UThI pUchaje re...suvidhi dravya bhAva zuci aMga dharIne, harakhe dehare
jaIe re; daha tiga paNa ahigama sAcavatAM, IkamanA dhuri thaIe re.suvidhi" zrI
AnaMdaghanajI 2. prIti-te kriyA-anuSThAna pratye prIti, aMtaraMga prema,
abhiLaMga-raneharUpa prIti hovI te sadanuSThAnanuM lakSaNa che. kaI paNa
kriyAmAM aMtaranI prIti-prema-umaLake jyAM lagI na hoya, tyAM lagI te kriyA
nIrasa, phIkkI, ne lukhI lAge che, veTha kADhavArUpa thaI paDe che. jyAre tenA
pratye aMtarane prema-ullAsa pragaTe che, tyAre te ja kriyA atyaMta sarasa,
AhalAdaka ne romAMcaka nivaDe che, tyAre AtmA temAM tanmaya thaI ekarasa bane
che. dAkhalA tarIke-prabhubhakti karavAmAM Ave, temAM prItinI prathama
AvazyakatA che. prabhu pratye para prema pravAha pragaTe, ananya prIti jAge,
tyAre ja prabhu bhaktinI ora majAha-lIjajata anubhavAya che, tyAre ja jIva
prabhubhaktimAM tanmaya thaI ekarasapaNuM-ektAnapaNuM anubhave che. "ajita
niNaMda zuM prItaDI, mane na game to bIjAne saMga ke; mAlatI phUle mohiye, kima
bese he bAvaLa taru bhaMga ke...ajita

Page #458 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(382) The collection of verses, Kekil Kal, is a beautiful composition. It
describes the love between a creeper and a tree, a lotus and the sun, and a moon
and a night-blooming jasmine. It also describes the love between Gauri and
Girish, and the love between a devotee and the Lord. The author, Shri Nayavijay
Vibudh, praises the Lord and his devotees.  Shri Yashovijayji Swami, the self-
illuminated, is praised by the author. He is said to be the embodiment of dharma
and compassion.  3. The absence of obstacles in the performance of an action is
a sign of a virtuous act. This absence of obstacles arises from the strength of
good karma accumulated in the past. The performance of a virtuous act is a
result of past good deeds. For example, devotion to the Lord removes all
obstacles.  Serving Shri Nami Jin removes all obstacles. The eight great siddhis
and the nine treasures come to those who serve him.  4. The acquisition of
wealth is also a sign of a virtuous act. Wealth is also obtained through good
karma generated by good intentions. No action is without its fruit, just as no
seed is without its fruit. Therefore, it is not surprising that the performance
of an action results in the acquisition of material and spiritual wealth.
Material wealth includes wealth, prosperity, etc., and spiritual wealth includes
knowledge, wisdom, discrimination, detachment, and enlightenment. The
acquisition of such wealth is a sign of a virtuous act. For example, the poet
Yashovijayji says about devotion to the Lord:  "The rays of the moon shine
brightly, the sun shines like a lamp. Those who are devoted to the Lord with
humility are very powerful. Shri Nami. The garland of auspiciousness is wide and
beautiful, many children are adorned with love. Shri Nayavijay Vibudh, the
servant of the Lord, says that happiness and love are found in him. Shri Nami."
5. Curiosity, a strong desire to know about an action, anxiety, eagerness, a
desire to understand the true nature of devotion, etc., are signs of a virtuous
act.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (382) gadaSThisamuccaya kekila kala kRjita kare, pAmI maMjarI ho paMjarI
sahakAra ke; UMchA taruvara navi game, giruA zuM hoye guNane pyAra ke... ajita
kamalinI dinakara kara grahe, vaLI kumudinI ho dhare caMda zuM prIta ke; gaurI
girIza giridhara vinA, navi cAhe ho kamalA nija citta ke....ajita tima prabhu
zuM muja mana ramyuM, bIjA zuM che navi Ave dAya ke zrI nayavijaya vibudha taNa,
vAcaka jaya ho nita nita guNa gAya ke..ajita." zrI yazovijayajI svAmI
svayaMprabhane jAu bhAmaNe, harakhe vAra hAra; vastu dharma pUraNa jasu nIpa,
bhAva kRpA kiratAra.-svAmI"--zrI devacaMdrajI 3. avinna-kriyAmAM avizna-
nirvighapaNuM e sadanuSThAnanuM lakSaNa che. A nirvighapaNuM adaSTa evA
pUrvopArjita zubha karmanA sAmarthyathI upaje che. niviMdane sadanuSThAna thAya
te pUrva puSyane pasAya che. jemake-prabhubhaktithI sarva vijJa dUra nAse che.
zrI nami jinanI sevA karatAM, aliya vighana savi dUra nAse che; aSTa mahAsiddhi
navanidhi lIlA, Ave bahu mahamUra pAse che. "--zrI yazovijayajI 4. saMpadAgama-
saMpadunuM AvavuM, saMpattinI prApti thavI e paNa sadanuSThAnanuM lakSaNa che.
saMpatti paNa zubhabhAvathI upAjelA puNyakarmathI AvI maLe che. koI kiyA phala
vinAnI hotI nathI, tema sakriyA paNa saphala vinAnI hotI nathI. eTale sakriyAnA
phala pariNAme dravya-bhAva saMpattinI prApti thAya emAM kAMI navAI nathI.
dravyasaMpatti eTale artha-vaibhava vagere laukika saMpatti, ane bhAvasaMpatti
eTale vidyA-viya-vivekavairAgya-vijJAna vagere saguNonI AdhyAtmika saMpatti. AvI
saMpattinI prApti dekhAya, te A sadanuSThAnanuM phala che ema samajavuM. dAkhalA
tarIkeprabhubhakti aMge kavivara yazovijayajI kahe che - "caMdra kiraNa uvala
yaza ulase, sUraja tulya pratApI dIpe jI; je prabhubhakti kare nita vinaya, te
ariyaNa bahu pratApI jhape che. zrI nami. maMgala mAlA lacchI vizAlA, bAlA
bahule prema raMge jI; zrI nayavijaya vibudha payasevaka, kahe lahIe sukha prema
aMge che. zrI nami. " 5. jijJAsA-te te kriyA saMbaMdhI jANavAnI tIvra icchA,
utkaMThA, utsukatA thavI, bhakti Adi sadanuSThAnanuM yathArtha svarUpa
samajavAnI tAlAvelI lAgavI, tamannA upajavI, te sadanuSThAnanuM lakSaNa che.

Page #459 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Five Types of Anushthana (Ritual)  **(383) 6. Service to the
Knowledgeable:** Service to a knowledgeable person, one who has true knowledge,
is also a sign of good ritual. A true seeker, one who thirsts for truth and
desires to quench that thirst, seeks out such a knowledgeable person. They
sincerely and humbly approach them, seeking to satisfy their own curiosity. This
is service to the knowledgeable, offering reverence at their feet, sitting close
to them (Upanishada). Through this, they receive the knowledge that is the
essence of Upanishada. Therefore, serving a knowledgeable person is a sign of
good ritual.  "Serve the feet of the wise, abandoning your own self-interest.
You will attain the ultimate goal, and your own path will be clear." - Shrimad
Rajchandraji  **(7. Grace of the Knowledgeable):** The grace and favor of a
knowledgeable person is also a sign of good ritual. By serving them, they become
pleased and bestow their grace. Although knowledgeable people do not desire such
service, it benefits the seeker. Therefore, offering such service is in their
best interest. Thus, the grace of the knowledgeable person satisfies the
seeker's curiosity, and their benevolent gaze brings about the fulfillment of
all the soul's desires. This is a sign of good ritual.  "Respect and devotion
are abundant, obstacles are overcome, and prosperity is gained. The seeker's
service to the wise is a sign of good deeds and a mark of excellence." - Man -
A. 6. S. 4-17  The reason this is called "Sadanushthana" (good ritual) is
because it is based on good consequences. It is driven by good consequences,
leading to a continuous chain of good consequences and an increasing amount of
good karma.  Here, to understand the nature of Sadanushthana, it is important to
understand the types of Anushthana. Because the same Anushthana can be different
depending on the intention, just as the same food can have different effects on
a sick person and a healthy person. For a sick person, certain foods can worsen
their condition, while for a healthy person, the same foods can strengthen them.
Similarly, Anushthana can be categorized into five types: (1) Poison, (2) Gar,
(3) Ananushthana, (4) Taddhatu, (5) Amrit. These distinctions arise from the
expectations and rules surrounding rituals like the worship of the Guru.  **(1)
Poison Anushthana:** This is the type of Anushthana performed with the
expectation of gaining worldly things like wealth and fame. It is called poison
because it kills the true self and leads to the pursuit of lesser things,
neglecting the true purpose of Anushthana.  **(2) Gar Anushthana:** This is the
type of Anushthana performed with the desire for heavenly pleasures. It is
called Gar because, as mentioned earlier, it leads to the pursuit of lesser
things.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dImASTi: pAMca prakAranuM anuSThAna (383) 6. tajajJa sevA-tajajJa eTale tenA
jJAtA puruSanI-jANakAranI sevA te paNa sadanuSThAnanuM lakSaNa che. je sAco
jijJAsu-tattvapipAsu hoya che, jene tatva jANavAnI tarasa lAgI che, ne te tarasa
bujhAvavAne je Icche che, te tenA jANakAra jJAtA puruSane zodhe che, ne
nikhAlasapaNe nirmAnIpaNe tenI pAsethI potAnI jijJAsA saMtoSavA icche che, eTale
te tajanI sevA-upAsanA kare che, temanA caraNakamala pratye "upaniSada" (samIpa-
pAse besavuM te) kare che, jethI tene " upaniSada -rahAyabhUta jJAna prApta
thAya che, mATe jJAnI sapuruSanI sevA-paryuM pAsanA karavI te sadanuSThAnanuM
sUcaka lakSaNa che. seve saMguru caraNane, tyAgI daI nija pakSa pAme te
paramArthane, nija padane le lakSa"-zrImad rAjacaMdrajI 7. tajajJa anugraha-tenA
jJAtA puruSano anugraha-kRpAprasAda paNa sadanuSThAnanuM lakSaNa che. tajajJanI
sevA karatAM, te prasanna thAya che, ane tethI tene anugraha upaje che. jo ke
jJAnI puruSa tevI sevAnA bIlakula abhilASI hotA ja nathI, paNa jijJAsune tethI
AtmalAbha thAya che, tethI tevI yAcita sevA karavI e tenA pitAnA ja hitanI vAta
che. eTale jJAnInI sevAthI jijJAsA saMtoSAvArUpa anugraha hoya che, ane Ama
jJAnInI kRpAdRSTinI vRSTithI jIvanA sarva arthanI siddhi thAya che. Ama
sadanuSThAnanuM lakSaNa che. Adara kiriyA rati ghaNI jI, vighana TaLe mile
lacchI; jijJAsA budha sevanA che, zubha kRti cihna pratyeSThI.mana -e. 6. sa.
4-17 Ane "sadanuSThAna" kahevAnuM kAraNa e ke tenuM anubaMdhasArapaNuM che,
anubaMdhapradhAnapaNuM che. tethI uttarottara zubha anubaMdhaparaMparA thayA
kare che, ane uttarottara puNyAnubaMdha puNyanI mAtrA vadhatI jAya che. atre
sadanuSThAnanuM svarUpa samajavA mATe anuSThAnanA prakAra samajavA yogya che,
kAraNa ke eka ja anuSThAnamAM kattanA bhedathI bheda paDe che,-jema rogI ane
nIrogI bhaktAnA bhedathI bhojanAdi bAbatamAM bheda paDe che tema; rogIne amuka
bhojana pAMca prakAranuM vagere rogavRddhino hetu thAya che, ane nIrogIne te ja
bhojanAdi anuSThAna bapacayanuM-puSTinuM kAraNa thAya che tema. Ama A anuSThAna
sAmAnyathI pAMca prakAranuM kahyuM che -(1) viSa, (2) gara, (3) ananuSThAna, (4)
taddhatu, (5) amRta.-guru AdinA pUjAnuSThAnamAM apekSAdi vidhAnathI Ama bheda
paDe che. temAM (1) A lekamAM labdhi-kIrti AdinI apekSAthI je karavAmAM Ave che
te viSa anuSThAna che. kAraNa ke A saccittane mArI nAkhe che ane mahatuM evA
anuSThAnanuM alepa spRhaNathI laghutra saMpAdana kare che. tethI A kharekhara
viSa che. 2) divya bhoganA abhiche lAthI je karavAmAM Ave che te "gara'
anuSThAna che. kAraNa uparamAM kahI te ja nItithI

Page #460 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(384) The collection of wrong views (gadashti samuchaya) destroys in time,
annihilates, earns evil in future lives, and thus slowly kills like poison,
therefore this is truly a "poison" practice. (3) The practice of the ignorant
(anabhogavant) which is equal to inaction due to unawareness is non-practice, it
is the same as not doing it. Because their mind is extremely deluded, therefore
it is said so. (4) What is done with attachment (rag) towards good practice is
"ta" practice, because it is motivated by the feeling of good practice, as it
has the momentum of auspicious feelings. (5) The feeling-filled practice which
is known to be the right path (jinekt) and is extremely passionate is called
"amrit" practice by the monks. "Vinoti niti chaturmavatanam: punah
samvelarmassattam amritam muniyava che -Shri Gibindu "Jinagun amritpaan thi
re...man amrit kriya ne pasay. Re bhavi amrit kriya anushtan thi re...man atam
amrit thay re bhavi." -Shri Devchandraji Thus, out of these five types of
practices, the first three are unrefined, untrue, and despicable; the fourth is
somewhat refined and true; and the last, amrit practice, is supremely refined,
supremely true, therefore it is the main practice, it is the ultimate goal for
the seeker of liberation, and it is the one that is desired here. In it-
Buddhipurvani karmani sarvani eveha dehinam. Samsarafaladanyeva vipakavirastvat:
|| 124 || Vritti: Shuddhipurvali vali sajjaive-samanyathi sarvey buddhipurvak
karma, ahe lekham, hinadhehdharieaona, pranio na. Shu? Te ke-sanjnana cheva-
sansarfaldayak j che, karan ke teo nu shastrapurvakpanu nathi, etle ke shastra
ne pratham agal kari te karvama aavta nathi). And they also say-varavisar -teo
nu niyogathi j-niyamathi j vipakaviraspanu che tethi karine, vipakma-parinama
teona virapanu che etla mate. x "Visham labdhyady apekshatah idam
sanchittamaranat. Mahato'lparthnajnayam laghutvaapadana tatha ||
Divyabhogaabhilashena garamaharmani shina: Huti nidhaive vastran tani varana"
-Shri Gibindu * "Anabhogavata chatadan anushtanamuchyate. Sampramugdha
mano'syeti tatha chaitadyathoditam || Etad raga didam hetu: shreshtho yogavido
viduh. Sadanushtanabhavassya shubhabhavasiyogatah." -Shri Gibindu

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (384) gadaSTisamuccaya A kAlAMtare nipAtana kare che, haNI nAMkhe che,
bhavAntaramAM anartha saMpAdana kare che, ane Ama garanI jema dhIre dhIre mAre
che, tethI A kharekhara "gara" anuSThAnaka che. (3) anAbhogavaMtanuM-
bekhabaranuM je saMmUcchanaja tulya pravRttithI anuSThAna * che, te ananuSThAna
che, karyuM na karyA barAbara che. kAraNa ke AnuM mana atyaMta mugdha che, eTalA
mATe A AvuM kahyuM che. (4) sadanuSThAna pratyenA rAgathI-bahumAnathI je
karavAmAM Ave che, te sadanuSThAna bhAvane zreya hetu hovAthI "tA" anuSThAna
che, kAraNa ke AmAM zubha bhAvAMzane vega che. (5) A jinekta che ema jANa
karavAmAM AvatuM evuM bhAvasAra je atyaMta saMvegagarbha anuSThAna che, tene
munipaMga "amRta" anuSThAna kahe che. "vinotiniti cAturmAvatanamaH punaH
saMveLArmasAttamamRtaM muniyvA che -zrI gibiMdu "jinaguNa amRtapAnathI re...mana
amRta kriyAne pasAya. re bhavi amRta kriyA anuSThAnathI re...mana Atama amRta
thAya re bhavi."--zrI devacaMdrajI Ama A pAMca prakAranA anuSThAnamAMthI
prathamanA traNa te aprazasta che,-asat che, heya che, cothuM kaMIka aMze
prazasta-sat che; ane chelluM amRta anuSThAna te parama prazasta che, parama sat
che, eTale te ja mukhyapaNe sadanuSThAna che, e ja mumukSune parama Adeya che,
ane e ja atra vivakSita che. temAM- buddhipUrvANi karmANi sarvANyeveha dehinAm
/  saMsAraphaladAnyeva vipAkavirasatvataH  //  124  //  vRttiH-zuddhipUrvALi
vaLi sajjaiva-sAmAnyathI sarveya buddhipUrvaka karmo, ahI lekama,
hinAdehadhArIeAnA, prANIonA. zuM ? te ke-saMjJAnAceva-saMsaraphaladAyaka ja che,
kAraNa ke teonuM zAstrapUrvakapaNuM nathI, eTale ke zAstrane prathama AgaLa karI
te karavAmAM AvatA nathI). ane tema ja kahe che-vAravisAra -teonuM niyogathI ja-
niyamathI ja vipAkavirasapaNuM che tethI karIne, vipAkamA-pariNAme teone
virapaNuM che teTalA mATe. x "viSaM labdhyAdyapekSAtaH idaM saJcittamAraNAt  /
mahato'lpArthanAjJayaM laghutvApAdanAttathA  //  divyabhogAbhilASeNa
grmaahrmniissinnH| hUitinIdhaiva vastrAntAnivAranAT "--zI gabiMdu *
"anAbhogavatazcatadananuSThAnamucyate  /  saMpramugdhaM mano'syeti
tatazcaitadyathoditam  //  etadrAgA didaM hetuH zreSTho yogavido viduH  /
sadanuSThAnabhAvasya zubhabhAvaziyogataH  /  / " -ii gabiMdu

Page #461 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Dimdarshti: Intellect, Karma, Its Fruits, and the Cycle of Existence
**(385)** All actions performed by embodied beings with intellect are the result
of karma and its fruits, leading to the cycle of existence.   **Meaning:** All
actions performed by beings with intellect, due to the nature of karma and its
fruits, inevitably lead to the cycle of existence.  **Commentary:** This verse
highlights that all actions performed by embodied beings with intellect, due to
the nature of karma and its fruits, inevitably lead to the cycle of existence.
Here, we see that all beings perform actions with intellect, meaning they are
driven by sensory experiences. They act based on what they perceive through
their eyes, ears, nose, tongue, and skin. For example, when something is seen or
perceived through the eyes, it triggers a memory and a desire to either accept
or reject it. This desire then leads to action. The message from the eye reaches
the brain, the brain transmits it to the intellect, and the intellect commands
the legs to "go and get it" and the hands to "take it." This entire process
happens in the blink of an eye. Moreover, a memory of this desired object
remains, influencing future actions of acceptance or rejection. Similarly, other
senses like ears, etc., generate knowledge through the intellect, leading to the
perception of something as desirable or undesirable. This then leads to mental
contemplation, acceptance or rejection, and ultimately, the creation of a memory
that influences future actions. Thus, sensory experiences drive the actions of
all beings. Eating, drinking, seeing, hearing, smelling, tasting, touching,
taking, and leaving are all activities that beings perform without any specific
training. This is not surprising.  These actions, driven by intellect and
sensory experiences, are subject to the nature of karma and its fruits. The
consequences of these actions are inevitable. What initially seems pleasant,
eventually becomes unpleasant and tasteless. What initially appears sweet and
attractive, later becomes bitter and repulsive. What initially appears
beautiful, attractive, fragrant, and pleasant, eventually becomes unattractive
and unpleasant due to the nature of its inherent qualities.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dImadaSTi: buddhi karma vipAkavirala saMsAra (385) buddhipUrvaka karma sahu,
dehadhArInA AMhi; vipAka virasa paNa thakI, saMsAraphaladAyi. 124. artha -ahIM
prANIonA je buddhipUrvaka kame che te sarveya, vipAka virasapaNane lIdhe,
saMsAraphala ja denAra che. vivecana A lekamAM dehadhArI prANIonA sAmAnyathI
sarveya buddhipUrvaka karmo vipAkaviratapaNAe karIne saMsAraphala ja ApanArA
hoya che. atra sAmAnyathI joIe te prANIo sarveya karmo buddhipUrvaka eTale ke
iMdriyajanya baMdha dvArA kare che; AMkhathI, kAnathI, nAthI, jIbhathI ke
tvacAthI je kAMI jANavAmAM Ave che, tenAthI prerAIne teo samasta pravRtti kare
che. dAkhalA tarIke- idriyapravRtti AMkhathI kaI padArtha dekhavAmAM AvyuM,
jANavAmAM AvyuM, te padArtha ane smRti- ISTa lAgatAM te grahaNa karavAnuM mana
thAya che, aniSTa lAgatAM tyajavAnuM saMskAra mana thAya che ane pachI tevA
prakAre pravRtti thAya che. AMkhane saMdeza magajane pahoMcyA, magaje buddhine
pahoMcADyo, ane buddhie pagane hukama karyo ke "A levA tuM jA, tathA hAthane
Adeza dIdhuM ke "A tuM le. A badhI sUkSama prakriyA AMkhanA palakArAmAM banI
jAya che. vaLI te IcchAniSTa padArtha saMbaMdhI mRtisaMskAra-dhAraNuM paNa rahI
jAya che. jethI AgAmI kALe tenI grahaNa-tyAgarUpa pravRttine nirNaya thAya che.
te ja prakAre kAna vagere bIjI indriyo dvArA upajatA buddhirUpa bodhathI te te
prakAranuM ISTa-aniSTapaNuM jaNAya che, ane pachI manathI tenuM manana thatAM
tenA grahaNa-tyAga karAya che, tathA bhAvikALe paNa tenA rahI gayelA
smRtisaMskAranI vAsanAthI tathA prakAre pravRtti thAya che. Ama iMdriyajanya
bodhathI prANIonA sAmAnyapaNe sarva karmanI ghaTamALa cAlyA kare che. khAvuM,
pIvuM, dekhavuM, sAMbhaLavuM, suMghavuM, cAkhavuM, sparzavuM, levuM, mUkavuM e
vagere viSayabhega pravRtti, vagara zikhacaeN paNe, prANIo karyA kare che. emAM
kAMI navI navAI nathI. ane A viSayasega pravRttirUpa je buddhijanya karmo che,
tenuM vipAka virasa5NuM che, vipAke-pariNAme te avazya virasa nIvaDe che. je
viSaye prathama sarasa lAge che, te ja pariNAme virasa-rasahIna-bhUkha lAge che.
je viSaye prAraMbhamAM mIThA ne viSayanuM vipAka AkarSaka bhAse che, te ja
prAMte tene meha utarI jatAM kaDavAM ne virapaNuM anAkarSaka jaNAya che. je
pudgalenA rUpa-rasa-gaMdha-sparza prathama sarasa ne manejJa hatA, te ja
pudgalanA svabhAva pramANe vipariNAma pAmatAM

Page #462 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(386) Yogadristi samucchch When we become averse, it appears to us as ignorant-
non-existent. Because it is difficult to swallow the truth. Where it
continuously happens is pudgal, and its nature is to decay-perish. Such pudgal-
like objects, when enjoyed, initially seem sweet, but ultimately lead to bad
karma, hence its result is aversion. 'The fruits of pakkal-indravrana appear
beautiful, but after eating, they quickly become deadly, similarly, these
objects seem nice to enjoy, but ultimately lead to aversion. The wise have
called this enjoyment like the part of a snake-like the venom of a snake, it
quickly takes life, and by enjoying it, even the gods have to wander in samsara.
Thus, this buddhi-purvak karma of enjoying objects is the result of aversion. .
' "Hrishikarth-samutpanne pratikshan-vinashvare | Sukhe krutva rati mooth
vinashtam bhuvanatrayam | Bhoga bhujang-bhoga-bha: sadya pran-apaharinah |
Sevyamana prajayante sansare tridashairapi ||" Shri Shubhachandracharya chhakrit
Shri Gnanav. And such aversion, done with buddhi-purvak, only gives samsara,
because it is not done with shap-purvak, it is not done by putting shashtra-
masavachan ahead, it is not done by following shashtra-agna, hence its fruit-
result is only samsara, which is like wandering in a dream. “Sayal sansari
indriyarami, muni gunu aatmarami re.”—Shri Aan Dhaghaji. * Gyanapurvani tanyeva
mukti-angam kul-yoginam | Shruta-shakti-samaveshad anubandha-phalatvatah || 125
|| Mukti ag kulchagine, gyanapurya te karyan; shruta-shakti samaveshathi
anubandhe shiv sha. 125, Ah—Such karma done with gyanapurvak is the limb of
liberation for kul-yogis; because it has the inclusion of shruta-shakti, hence
it is anubandha-phal. Vritti:—Gyanapurvali-gyanapurvak, thokt gyan-
nibandhanvala, as mentioned above, having gyan as the cause). Tanyeva—those very
karma. What? That is-mutva-the limb of liberation, yoginam-kul-yogis, whose
characteristics will be mentioned. The acceptance of kul-yogi is to show that it
is not possible for others. For what reason? That is-shruta-shakti-samaveshar-
for the purpose of the inclusion of shruta-shakti. This (shruta-shakti) is like
amrit shakti. In its absence, the main kul-yogipana is not present. Therefore,
it is said " - anuy-hatva:-because of anubandha-phal-because of the existence of
tatvik anubandha in the attainment of the limb of liberation. (Because it
becomes the limb of liberation, that is the form of tatvik anubandha).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (386) yogadRSTi samucacca virasa thaI jatAM amaneAjJa-akArA lAge che. kAraNa ke
pUrAva' ne gaLavuM. jyAM niraMtara thayA kare che te pudgala che, ane saDavAne-
vidhvaMsa pAmavAnA tenA svabhAva che. AvA pudgalarUpa viSayeA bhAgavatAM tA
prArabhe mIThAM lAge che, paNa pariNAme mAThA krutikAraNa thAya che, eTale tenu
vipAka virasapaNuM che. 'pAkakala-iMdravAraNAnA phaLa dekhAve suMdara jaNAya
che, paNa khASA pachI zIghra prANahArI thAya che, tema A viSaye bhAgavatAM
sarasa lAge che, paNa pariNAme varasa thai paDe che. jJAnIee A bhAgAne
bhujaMganA bhAga jevA-sApanI kRNA jevA kahyA che, te zIghra prANa hare che, ne
te bhAgavatAM devane paNa sa`sAramAM rakhaDavuM paDe che. Ama A viSayasevanarUpa
buddhipUrvaka karmAnu' vipAkavirasapaNuM che. . ' " hRSIkArthasamutpanne
pratikSaNavinazvare  /  sukhe kRtvA rati mUDha vinaSTaM bhuvanatrayam 1 bhogA
bhujaGgabhogAbhAH sadyaH prANApahAriNaH  /  sevyamAnA prajAyante saMsAre
tridazairapi  /  /  " zrI zubhacadrAcArya chakRta zrI jJAnAva. ane AvA A
vipAkavirasa buddhipUrvaka karyuM sasAraa ja Ape che, kAraNa ke teM karyAM
zApUrvaka nathI, zAsrane-mAsavacanane AgaLa karI te karavAmAM AvatA nathI,
zAstrAjJAne anusarI karAtA nathI, eTale tenuM phUla-pariNAma ekAMta
bhavabhramaNurUpa sa'sAra ja che. " sayala saMsArI IMdriyarAmI, muni guNu
AtamarAmI re."--zrI Ana daghanajI. * jJAnapUrvANi tAnyeva muktyaGgaM kulayoginAm
/  zrutazaktisamAvezAdanubandhaphalatvataH  /  /  125  /  /  mukti aga
kulacAgine, jJAnapUryAM te karyAM; zrutazakti samAvezathI anubaMdhe ziva za.
125, aH--jJAnapUrvaka evA te ja kame* kulayeAgIone muktinA agarUpa heAya che;
kANu ke emAM zrutazaktinA samAvezane lIdhe anukha dhalapaNuM hAya che.
vRtti:--jJAnapUrvALi-jJAnapU`ka, theAkta jJAna-nibaMdhanavALA, upara kahyA
pramANe jJAnarUpa kAraNavALA ). tAnyeva--te ja karyAM. zu ? te ke-muttva
-muktinu aMga hoya che, yoginAmkulayeAgIone, jenu lakSaNa kahevAmAM Avaze.
kulayeAgInuM grahaNu, anyane asbhava jaNAvavA mATe che. zA kAraNathI ? te ke-
zrutAntisamAvezAr-zruta zaktinA samAvezarUpa hetuthI. A ( zrutazakti ) amRta
zakti jevI che. enA abhAve mukhya evuM kulayeAgIpaNuM hAtuM nathI. eTalA mATe ja
kahyuM" - anuya--hatvata:-anukha dhaphalapaNA thakI,-mukti aMganI siddhimAM
tAttvika anubaMdhanA eva'bhUtapaNAne lIdhe. ( muktinA aMgarUpa thAya te ja
tAttvika anubaMdhanuM svarUpa che eTalA mATe ).

Page #463 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Knowledge-based Action, a Limb of Liberation, a Strength like Nectar  (387)
Deliberate action, performed with knowledge, is a limb of liberation, and it is
only found in the Kula Yogis, because they possess the Shruta Shakti, which
leads to the cessation of karmic bondage.  Knowledge-based action refers to
actions performed in accordance with the Agamas. Actions performed in obedience
to the scriptures are limbs of liberation, and they become the cause of
liberation. Because following the commands of the Aptas, the authoritative
figures, is the primary purpose of liberation, and it is the royal road to
liberation. Therefore, those who accept the scriptures as authoritative, written
by the Aptas, and consider them as the highest authority, and perform virtuous
actions, are on the path to liberation.  “You are the one who guides me to pure
devotion, I am the one who strives.” “I have taken refuge in your feet, O
Devchandra, with a pure heart.” – Shri Devchandraji  Thus, these knowledge-based
actions, which are limbs of liberation and where following the commands of the
Aptas is paramount, are only found in the Kula Yogis, and not in others. The
characteristics of the Kula Yogis will be discussed later. These knowledge-based
actions are called "possible nectar" for the Kula Yogis, because they possess
Shruta Shakti in the lower state, and they perform actions without doubt in the
higher state. Therefore, these knowledge-based actions are considered impossible
for anyone other than the Kula Yogis. And the reason why they are possible for
the Kula Yogis is that they possess the Shruta Shakti, and therefore they have
the cessation of karmic bondage. This Shruta Shakti is like nectar. Without it,
the primary characteristic of being a Kula Yogi would not exist. Just as nectar
revives the dead or the unconscious, making them alive and immortal, similarly,
this Shruta Shakti, like nectar, revives the dead or unconscious soul, making it
alive, bestowing upon it a life of supreme purpose, and rescuing it from the
terrifying death of the moment, granting it immortality. This Shruta Shakti,
like a life-giving elixir, is the supreme nectar, and its inclusion, its proper
internalization, and its firm embrace, leads to the attainment of the primary
characteristic of being a Kula Yogi.  “Follow the words of the Jinas, they are
nectar, respect the true path, abandon the attachment to matter and emotions,
take refuge in the feet of Devchandra… the Lord who knows the inner self.” –
Shri Devchandraji  “The words of the Vitaraga, the ultimate peaceful essence,
the root medicine for the disease of the world, the antidote for the coward.” –
Shrimad Rajchandraji

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dImAdaSTi jJAnakama mukti aMga, zrata amRta zakti (387) vivecana je
jJAnapUrvaka karme che, te mukita aMgarUpa che, ane te kulayogIone ja hoya che,
kAraNa ke zrutazaktinA samAvezathI teone anubaMdhaphalapaNuM hoya che.
jJAnapUrvaka karma eTale AgamapUrvaka je karmo karavAmAM Ave che. zAstra AjJAne
AgaLa karI-anusarI je karmo karavAmAM Ave che, te muktinA aMgarUpa che, mekSanA
kAraNarUpa thaI paDe che. kAraNa ke Apta arthAt pramANabhUta puruSanI AjJAne
anusaravuM te mekSane pradhAna hetu che, mAkSane dhorI rasterAjamArga che. eTale
tathArUpa Asa puruSathI praNIta zAstra-AjJAnuM pramANa mAnI, zirasAvaMgha gaNI,
mAthe caDhAvI, je kaI satakarma kare che, te mokSamArga sAdhe che. " tuma ANA he
ArAdhana zuddha ke, sAdhuM huM sAdhakapaNe." "ANuM raMge citta dharI, devacaMdra
pada zIgha varI je."-zrI devacaMdrajI Ama jemAM Apta AjJAnuM anusaraNa mukhya
che evA A mukti aMgarUpa jJAnapUrvaka karmo kulagIone ja hoya che,-bIjAne nahiM.
A kulagInuM lakSaNa AgaLa upara kahevAmAM Avaze. A kulagIone ja A jJAnapUrvaka
karmone saMbhava amRta satI kahyo, tenuM kAraNa e che ke tethI heDalI avasthAmAM
buddhipUrvaka karmo zrutazakti hoya che, ne upalI avasthAmAM asaMmeharUpa karmo
hoya che. eTale kula yogI sivAya anyane A jJAnapUrvaka karmone asaMbhava kahyo.
ane kulayogIone Ano saMbhava kahyo, tenuM kAraNa paNa teone zrutazaktine
samAveza hoya che, ane tethI karIne anubaMdhaphalapaNuM hoya che, te che. A
zrutazakti amRtazakti jevI che. e na hoya te mukhya evuM kulagIpaNuM hotuM
nathI. amRta jema marelAne ke mUrzitane jIvADe che, sajIvana kare che, amara
kare che, tema amRta samI A zrutazakti paNa mahAmahathI mRtaprAya athavA
mUcchita banelA jIvane jIvADe che, sajIvana kare che, paramArthamaya bhAva-
jIvana bakSe che, ane kSaNa kSaNa bhayaMkara bhAva-maraNamAMthI ugArI amRtatva
Ape che. A saMjIvanI jevI parama amRtasvarUpa zrutazaktino samAvezathI arthAt
samyaka aMtaHpravezathI, daDha bhAvaraMgathI mukhya evuM kulagIpaNuM prApta
thAya che. "jinavara vacana amRta anusariye, tattvaramaNa Adariye re, dravya
bhAva Azrava parahariye, devacaMdra pada variye re....prabhu aMtarajAmI." zrI
devacaMdrajI vacanAmRta vItarAganA, parama zAMtarasa mULa auSadha je
bhavaraganA, kAyarane pratikULa."-zrImad rAjacaMdrajI

Page #464 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(388) By the great influence of the Shruta Shakti, which is like nectar, the
collection of Gadashti and such other things leads to the attainment of
Anubandha Phala, that is, one gets progressively more and more auspicious
fruits. One auspicious fruit becomes the cause of another more auspicious fruit,
and so on, the accumulation of auspicious fruits continues uninterruptedly and
without break, until the ultimate fruit is attained. Thus, due to the influence
of Shruta Shakti, the Kulgis get the Anubandha, therefore, these actions done
with knowledge become the means of liberation for them.  Thus, the practice of
Kulgis is fruitful with Anubandha, because it is Anubandha-Shuddha. To
understand this properly, it is necessary to understand the form of three types
of practice. Practice is said to be of three types: (1) Vishaya-Shuddha, (2)
Trividha Anushthana Swarupa-Shuddha, (3) Anubandha-Shuddha. These three
practices are progressively more important and their fruits are also more
important. (1) The practice done by Bhrigu-Pat and others, believing blindly and
naively that they will attain liberation, is Vishaya-Shuddha Anushthana. And it
is said to be auspicious because of the slightest possibility of attaining
liberation, but it is not pure in form due to extreme carelessness (sinfulness).
(2) Swarupa-Shuddha Anushthana is that which is done systematically without
Gadashti, that is, the practice of Ahimsa, Satya, etc., Yamas, etc., done in a
worldly way, according to the established customs, is Swarupa-Shuddha
Anushthana. But it is not according to the scriptures, it is not according to
the scriptures, because there is a lack of Samyak Jnana, Shraddha, etc. This
practice is pure in form, but not pure in method. (3) The Anubandha-Shuddha
Anushthana is the same, but it is done with the awareness of the truth, it is
endowed with Samyak Tattva-Parijnana, it has a proper understanding of the
truth, and it is done with a calm and decisive attitude, and it is completely
free from any kind of anxiety. This Anubandha-Shuddha Anushthana is pure in form
and also in method.  "Triteeyam apyadaha kintu tattvasanvedanaanugam |
Prasantavritti sarvatra dadhapauturnatam" - Shri Gabindu  The fruits of these
three are as follows: (1) Vishaya-Shuddha Anushthana does not remove the Dosha,
that is, the Dosha that hinders the attainment of Moksha is not removed. Because
the darkness of ignorance is very strong, therefore, such suicidal thoughts
arise. (2) Swarupa-Shuddha Anushthana removes the Dosha, but it does not remove
the Anubandha. The powder of a burnt frog, which has been destroyed, does not
produce a frog from it, but here, like that, the Anubandha of the Dosha is not
destroyed, so that another future...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (388) gadaSTisamuccaya ane AvI A amRta samANI zrutazaktinA mahAprabhAvathI
anubaMdha phla prApta thAya che, eTale ke uttarottara adhikAdhika zubha
phalaparaMparA sAMpaDe che; eka zubha phala bIjA vadhAre zubha phalanuM kAraNa
thAya che, ema ne ema zubha phalanI saMkalanA atUTapaNe- akhaMDapaNe cAlyA kare
che, yAvat parama bhakSaphaLa prApta thAya che. Ama zrutazaktinA prabhAve
kulogIone tAtvika anubaMdha thayA kare che, tethI ja A jJAnapUrvaka karmo teone
muktiaMgarUpa thaI paDe che. Ama kulagIonuM anuSThAna anubaMdha phalavALuM hoya
che, kAraNa ke te anubaMdhazuddha hoya che. A barAbara samajavA mATe traNa
prakAranA anuSThAnanuM svarUpa samajavA yogya che. anuSThAna traNa prakAranuM
kahyuM cheH (1) viSayazuddha, (2) trividha anuSThAna svarUpazuddha, (3)
anubaMdha zuddha. A traNa anuSThAnanuM uttarottara ane tenuM phala pradhAnapaNuM
che. (1) temAM muktine arthe-mane mukti maLaze ema mugdhapaNe-bhoLA bhAve mAnIne
je bhRgupata Adi paNa karavAmAM Ave che, te viSayazuddha anuSThAna che. ane te
muktinA leza upAdeyabhAvathI zubha kahyuM che, paNa atyaMta sAvadyarUpa5Nane
(pAparUpa paNAne) lIdhe te svarUpathI zuddha nathI. (2) svarUpa. zuddha
anuSThAna te kadaSTithI vyavasthita evA yAdi ja che, arthAt tAtvika svarUpa
samajyA vinA je ahiMsA-satya vagere yama Adi laukika rIte-zUla lekarUDhi pramANe
karavAmAM Ave che, te svarUpazuddha anuSThAna che. paNa te yathAzAstra nathI,
zAstra anusAra nathI, kAraNa ke samyak jJAna-zraddhAna Adine abhAva che. A
anuSThAna svarUpathI te zuddha che, paNa vidhithI zuddha nathI. (3) je anubaMdha
zuddha anuSThAna che te A yAdi ja che, paNa te tatvasaMvedanathI anugata hoya
che, samyak tatvaparijJAnathI yukta hoya che, tattvanI barAbara samajaNavALuM
hoya che, tathA prazAMta-niSkaSAya vRttivaDe karIne te sarvatra atyaMtapaNe
utsukatA rahita hoya che. A anubaMdhazuddha anuSThAna svarUpathI ane vidhithI
paNa zuddha hoya che. "tRtIyamapyadaH kintu tattvasaMvedanAnugam  /  prazAMtavRA
sarvatra daDhapauTurnatam " -zrI gabiMdu A traNenuM phaLa anukrame A pramANe
cheH- (1) viSayazuddha anuSThAnathI daSavirAma thato nathI, arthAt mokSalAbhane
bAdhaka e deSa dUra thatuM nathI. kAraNa ke tamasanuMajJAna aMdhakAranuM
bAhulya-prabalapaNuM che, tethI ja AvI AtmaghAtarUpa kumati sUjhe che. (2)
svarUpazuddha anuSThAnathI doSa dUra te thAya che, paNa ekAMta anubaMdhathI dUra
thato nathI. bhasma karAyelA deDakAnA cUrNane je nAza karavAmAM AvyuM hoya te
temAMthI deDakAnI utpatti na thAya, paNa atre to tenI jema doSano sAnubaMdha
nAza thatuM nathI ke jethI bIjA bhAvi

Page #465 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Deepraatrusti: Various Rituals and Their Fruits (389)  Faults do not arise.
Faults are removed, but the tradition of their removal does not continue. When
one fault is removed, others arise. It becomes like the situation of "blind year
and calves graze"! Because it does not happen according to the rules of Guru-
Laghav-Chinta, etc.; that is, there is no awareness of the proportion of the
greatness and smallness of virtue and fault. Therefore, today it is considered
external and unimportant, because it is internally impure, polluted, and like
the effort of a beautiful fort for a wicked king. It provides protection from
external attacks, but internally the king himself oppresses the people by
looting them! How can the people there prosper? Similarly, in this form-pure
ritual, despite the absence of external faults, due to the ignorance fault of
the ignorant man, like a wicked king, internally, there is no increase in
virtue. (3) From the third, there is a removal of faults, faults are removed,
and it is connected by rules, that is, the tradition of removing faults
continues, one after another, the pursuit of removing faults continues. This
removal of faults has been compared to the initial foundation of a house. If the
foundation of the house is strong, then floors can be built upon it, one after
another. Similarly, in this ritual, the pursuit of removing faults continues.
Such a ritual is endowed with Guru-Laghav-Chinta, it is truly aware of the
proportion of virtue and fault, and it gives a generous fruit with such a
connection. Therefore, here all activity is always noble. Such a ritual, pure in
its pursuit, is beneficial to the Kula Yogis, and they attain a connected fruit.
*  **Verse 126:**  "Those arising from non-delusion, from one-pointed purity.
They give the fruit of Nirvana, quickly, to those who have gone beyond the
world."  **Commentary:**  "Asammoh-samutthani" - those arising from non-
delusion, those who are free from delusion, those who are free from the causes
of delusion. "Tva ekant-parishuddhi-tah" - from one-pointed purity, from the
cause of one-pointed purity, from the cause of purification. "Nirvaan-phal-
danani" - those who give the fruit of Nirvana, those who give the fruit of
liberation. "Aashu" - quickly, speedily. "Bhavatit-arth-yayinam" - to those who
have gone beyond the world, to those who have gone beyond the cycle of birth and
death, to those who have attained liberation.  *  "From the third, there is a
removal of faults, connected by rules. It is compared by some to the initial
foundation of a house, like a foundation. This is a good thing, endowed with
Guru-Laghav-Chinta. Therefore, all activity is always noble." - (See Yaga-Bindu
for reference)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dIprAtRSTi : vividha anuSThAna ane tenu phaLa (389) doSa na upaje. doSa dUra tA
thAya che, paNa dUra thavAnI paraMparA cAlu rahetI nathI. eka doSa dUra thAya
tyAM khIjA ubhA ja che. AMdhaLA varSe ne pADA cAve' enA jevI paristhiti thAya
che ! kAraNa ke temAM gurulAghava-ci'tAdi niyamathI heAtA nathI; arthAt guNa--
doSanA gurulaghubhAvanA pramANanuM bhAna atra hetu nathI. eTale Ajane ene bAhya
--mapradhAna mAne che, kAraNa ke te aMdarakhAnethI meluM che, malina che, ane
duSTa rAjAnA purane suMdara killAnA yatna jevu te che. kidyAthI bahAranA
AkramaNa sAme rakSaNa maLe che, paNa aMdarakhAnethI rAjA ja peAte prajAne lUTIne
pIDe che ! tyAMnI prajAnI AbAdI kema thAya tema A svarUpazuddha anuSThAnamAM
bAhya doSane abhAva chatAM, adarakhAnethI A kurAjA jevA tattvajJAnarahita
puruSanA ajJAna doSane lIdhe guNavRddhi thatI nathI. (3) trIjAthI doSaviMgamax
thAya che, doSa dUra thAya che, ane niyamathI te sAnubaMdha hoya che, arthAt
doSa dUra thavAnI para`parA cAlyA kare che, eka pachI eka doSa dUra thavAnuM
anusa MdhAna cAlu rahe che. A doSavigamane gharanI Adya bhUmikAnA AraMbha sAthe
sarakhAvavAmAM AvyA che. gharane pAye majabUta hAya, tA tenA upara mALanA mALa
uparAupara caNI zakAya che, tema A anuSThAnamAM uttarAttara doSa dUra thavAneA
anuSadha thayA ja kare che. Avu A anuSThAna gurulAghava ci'tAthI yukta hAi,
guNadoSanA pramANanA kharAkhara bhAnavALuM hAI, tevu anubaMdhavALu udAra phala
Ape che. ethI karIne atre sarvaya pravRtti sadaiva mahAdayavALI hAya che. Avu. A
anuSaMdhazuddha anuSThAna kulayeAgIone hAvAthI teone sAnuadha phya prApti hAya
che. * asaMmohasamutthAni tvekAntaparizuddhitaH  /  nirvANa phaladAnyAzu
bhavAtItArthayAyinAm  //  126  //  ekAMte parizuddhithI, asa mAharUpa ka;
bhavAtIta a gAmine, zIghra dIe zivaza 126. vRtti:-asaMmochtamutthAni-asa mAhathI
uddabhavelA, mathAkta asamAharUpa nikha dhana-kAraNavALA, te ja karyuM tu--teA,
vaLI, hrAnsahita ekAMta parizuddhirUpa kAraNathI,paripAka vaze karIne; zuM ? te
ke-nirvALajjAnyANu-zIghra nirvANu phUla denArA che. kAne ? te mATe kahyuM-
mavAsItArthayAyinAm-sa sArAtIta atha pratye gamana karanArAone, eTale sammak-
parata vavekIne--para tattva jANanArAone ema a che. * " tRtIyAddoSavigamaH
sAnubaMdho niyogataH  /  gRhAdyabhUmikA pAtatulyaH kaizcidudAhRtaH  //  etada
kaladaM gurulAghavacitayA  /  ataH pravRttiH sarvaiva sadaiva hi mahodayA "  //
--(AdhAra mATe jue) yAgabiMdu

Page #466 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(390) Gadastisamuccaya A: And those karmas arising from asamaah, due to their
solitary purity, are those who quickly lead to nirvana for those who are moving
towards the transmigration of beings (paratattvavedi). Discussion Karmas arising
from asamaah, due to their solitary purity, are those who quickly lead to
nirvana for those who are moving towards the transmigration of beings
(paratattvavedi). As mentioned above, the knowledge that is accompanied by
sadanushtan is called asamaah. Karmas performed with such asamaah, that is,
knowledge accompanied by sadanushtan, quickly yield the fruit of nirvana; there
is no delay or obstruction in them, because asamaah has solitary purity here. It
is completely pure due to its ripeness, and it is quickly fruitful, just as when
gold is heated with fire, the impurities in the form of dirt are removed, and
finally, when it is ripened, pure gold emerges. Similarly, here too, as the soul
is repeatedly heated by knowledge, the impurities in the form of karma are
removed, and finally, when purity is ripened, the pure soul, like gold, is
produced. And thus, when the soul attains solitary purity, then how long does it
take to reach moksha? When the soul becomes capable of pure use, then moksha is
in the palm of its hand, because "he who is capable of pure use, his coverings,
obstructions, and delusions are removed, and he himself becomes manifest as the
soul, self-existent, and attains the other shore of all that is knowable, that
is, he attains kevalgyan." It is like this: "He who, by means of use
characterized by the characteristic of the result of consciousness, becomes as
pure as possible and acts accordingly, his unique power of purity becomes
increasingly revealed step by step. Therefore, his ancient, extremely dense
mahagranthi, udhbhgranthi, is dissolved, and he becomes extremely unchangeable,
conscious. Then all his knowledge-coverings, faith-coverings, and obstructions
are completely removed. And thus, when the unhindered, unhindered power of the
soul is aroused, it becomes manifest as the soul itself and attains the other
shore of all that is knowable, that is, it attains kevalgyan." Thus, through the
solitary purity of use, moksha is attained. * "Uvogvisuddho jo
vigadavaranantarayamohavo | Muro sayamevaava jnati par geyamulo ||" Shri
Kundacharya's Pravachansar, (6 "Yo hi naam chaitanyaparinamalakshnenoupayogen
yathashakti vishuddho bhootva vartate sa khalu pratipada mudbiddyamanavishishta
vishuddhishakti rudranthitasansar badhdridh tar mohapranthitayaatyantanirvikar
chaitanyo nirast - samastajnan darshanavaranantarayo ni:
praghativijrimbhitaatmashakti cha swayameva bhooto jneyatvam apannaana
mantmavaapnoti." Shri Amritchandracharyaji's Pravachansarvrutti. *

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (390) gadaSTisamuccaya a:-- ane asa'mAhathI upajatA evA te ja karmI, ekAMta
parizuddhine lIdhe, sasArAtIta-para atha pratye gamana karanArAone
(paratattvavedIene) zIghra nirvANu phela denArA hAya che. vivecana asamAhathI
upajelA evA karmI, ekAMta parizuddhine lIdhe, bhavAtIta-sa'sArAtIta a gAmIone
zIghra nirvANu la ApanArA evA hAya che. uparamAM kahyA pramANe sadanuSThAna
sahita je jJAna te asa mAha kahevAya che. evA asaMmAhathI eTale ke
saanuSThAnayukta jJAnathI je karmo karavAmAM Ave che, te zIghra nirvANuphala Ape
che; emAM kALakSepa ke vilakha thatA nathI, kAraNa asaMmeAha ka ke atre ekAMta
pazuiddhi hAya che, paripAkavaze karIne sarvathA zuddhi zIghra mAsadAyI hoya che
jema suvaNune agnithI tapAvatAM tapAvatAM melarUpa azuddhi dUra thatI jAya che
ne chevaTe paripAka thatAM zuddha suvaNuM uttIrNa thAya che. tema atre paNa
yAgAnalathI tapAvatAM tapAvatAM AtmAnI kamalarUpa azuddhi dUra thatI jAya che,
ane chevaTe zuddhine paripAka thatAM zuddha AtmArUpa suvaNu ja niSpanna thAya
che. ane Ama jyAre AtmAnI ekAMta parizuddhi thai, eTale pachI meAkSalane AvatAM
vAra zI ? AtmA zuddhopayeAgavata thayA eTale mekSa hatheLImAM ja che, kAraNa ke
'jex zuddopayeAgavaMta che tenA AvaraNa-aMtarAya ne meharaja dUra thai jatAM, te
svayameva pragaTa AtmArUpa-svayaMbhU thai, jJeyamAtranA pArane pAme che, arthAt
kevalajJAna pAme che. ' te A prakAre:- je caitanyapariNAmarUpa lakSaNavALA
upayeAgavaDe karIne yathAzakti vizuddha thaIne varte che, tenI viziSTa vizuddhi
zakti pade pade ubheda pAmatI jAya che--khUlatI jAya che. eTale tenI anAdinI
madhAyelI ati deDha mAhagraMthi udbhagrathita thAya che--ukelAI jAya che, ane te
atyaMta nirvikAra caitanyarUpa thAya che. eTale pachI tenA samasta jJAnAvaraNu,
danAvaraNa ne aMtarAya sarvathA dUra thAya che. ane Ama nipratiSa-apratihata
Atmazakti ulrasita thatAM, svayameva pragaTa AtmArUpa thai jJeyamAtranA atane
pAme che, ' kevalajJAna pAme che. Ama uyeAganI ekAMta parizuddhi thakI yAvat
mekSa prApta thAya che. * " uvaogavisuddho jo vigadAvaraNaMtarAyamoharao  /
mUro sayamevAvA jJAti para geyamULa  /  / " zrI kuMda dAcArya kRta
pravacanasAra, (6 'yo hi nAma caitanyapariNAmalakSaNenopayogena yathAzakti
vizuddho bhUtvA vartate sa khalu pratipada mudbhidyamAnaviziSTa
vizuddhizaktirudranthitAsaMsAra baddhadRDha tara mohapranthitayAtyantanirvikAra
caitanyo nirasta - samastajJAna darzanAvaraNAntarAyo niH
praghativijRmbhitAtmazaktizca svayameva bhUto jJeyatvamApannAnA mantamavApnoti
/  " zrI amRtacaMdrAcAryajIkRta pravacanasAravRtti. *

Page #467 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Deepradrushti: The fruit of Asamaah Karma is swift liberation (391)  Such
swift liberation-yielding Asamaah Karmas, who possess them? For that, it is said
here: "Those who are beyond the cycle of birth and death," meaning those who are
moving towards the transcendent, those who know the true principles, those who
are true knowers of the principles, they are the ones who possess Asamaah Karma.
Those who understand the true principles, they are the ones who move towards the
true principles.  Thus, in sequence, the fruit of Buddhi Kriya is the cycle of
birth and death, the fruit of Jnana Kriya is liberation in the form of limbs,
liberation in succession, and the fruit of Asamaah Kriya is swift, uninterrupted
liberation, liberation in the immediate future.  "Buddhi Kriya leads to the
cycle of birth and death, Jnana Kriya is the limb of liberation; Asamaah Kriya
leads to swift liberation." (Mano 20)  ## Summary of the Three Types of Medha
There is a difference in the length of time due to the difference in intention
and opinion. And the difference in intention arises from the intensity of
attachment, aversion, etc., as well as from the difference in the cause of the
three types of Medha: Buddhi, Jnana, and Asamaah. There are three types of
Medha: Buddhi, Jnana, and Asamaah. Due to the difference in these Medhas, there
is a difference in the types of all the Karmas of the Jiva. (1) The Medha that
arises from the object of the senses is called 'Buddhi'. (2) The Medha that
arises from the scriptures is called 'Jnana'. (3) And the knowledge that is
accompanied by righteous conduct is called 'Asamaah' Medha; that Medha is the
most excellent, it is called 'Dharaj'. For example, when a traveler sees a
pilgrimage site, the desire to go there is Buddhi; the knowledge of the rituals
of pilgrimage is Jnana; and performing the pilgrimage according to the knowledge
of the rituals is Asamaah. The general knowledge of a gem, "This is a gem," is
an example of Buddhi; knowing the form of this gem based on the scriptures is an
example of Jnana; and knowing the form of the gem with that knowledge, acquiring
the gem, etc., is an example of Asamaah, the righteous means. Respect,
affection, absence of obstacles, acquisition of wealth, curiosity, and service
to the body, these are the characteristics of righteous conduct.  - Shri Cho. 6.
S. 4-18  In that, (1) the Karmas of all beings in general, those that are done
with Buddhi, those that are caused by the senses, are called Vipaak Viruddh,
their fruit, their result, is the cycle of birth and death. (2) The Karmas of
all Kula Yogis are done with Jnana, meaning they follow the scriptures, and the
power of the scriptures is like nectar, therefore, they get a higher and higher
tradition. Therefore, the Karmas of Kula Yogis who follow the scriptures are in
the form of limbs of liberation, they become the cause of liberation in
succession. (3) And those who are beyond the cycle of birth and death...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dIprAdaSTi : asameha kama nu' phala zIghra meAkSa (391) AvA zIdhra meAkSaphala
ApanArA asamAha karyAM kAne heya che? te mATe atra kahyuM ke-'bhavAtIta
agAmIone,' eTale sa'sArathI atIta-para evA a` pratye gamana karanArAone, samyak
para tattvane jANanArA para tattvavedIene A asamAha karmI hoya che ema tAtpaya
che. jene A para tattvanI gama-samajaNa paDe che, tee ja A para tattva pratye
gamana karanArA hAya che. Ama anukrame buddhikriyAnu phUla sa'sAra che,
jJAnakriyAnu kUla muktinA aMgarUpa cheparaparAe mukti che, ane asamAha kriyAnu
la zIghra avila'khapaNe mAkSa che, anaMtara mukti che. " buddhikriyA bhavala
dIejI, jJAnakriyA zivaaMga; asaMmeAha kikriyA dvIejI, zIghra mugatila ca'ga.
mana0 trividha medhanA sAra sa MkSepa AzayanA--abhiprAyanA bhede karIne lamAM
bheda paDe che. ane AzayanA bheda rAgAdinI taratamatAthI, temaja buddhi-jJAna-
asa meharUpa medhanA kAraNabhedathI paDe che. meSa traNa prakAraneA heAya che-
buddhirUpa, jJAnarUpa ane asamAharUpa. A medhanA bhedathI sa jIvAnA sarvakarmAnA
prakAramAM bheda paDe che. (1) iMdriyanA AlaMbane upajatA edha te buddhi'
kahevAya che (2) zrutanA-zAstranA AdhAre upajatA medha te 'jJAna' kahevAya che.
(3) ane sadanuSThAnayukta jJAna te 'asamAha' rUpa beSa kahevAya che; te beSa ja
sarvAMtkRSTa hAi 'dharAja' kahevAya che. jemakeyAtrALune dekhI tIthe javAnI
buddhi thAya, te buddhi che; tIrthayAtrAnI vidhinuM vijJAna, te jJAna che; ane
tI yAtrAnI vidhinA vijJAna pramANe tIrthaMgamana- tItha krasaNa te asamAhu che.
'A ratna che' evuM ratnanu sAmAnya jANapaNuM te buddhinuM udAharaNa che; Agama
AdhAre A ratnanuM A svarUpa che ema jANavuM te jJAnanuM udAharaNa che; ane te
jJAnagarbhitapaNe jJAnathI te ratnanuM svarUpa eLakhI te ratnanI prApti Adi
thavI te asamAhanu' samyak sAdhaka udAharaNa che. kriyAmAM Adara, prIti,
avighna, sa'pattiprApti, jijJAsA, ane tanasevA tana anugraha,--e sadanuSThAnanA
lakSaNu che. . -zrI ceA. 6. sa. 4-18 temAM (1) prANIonA sAmAnyapaNe sarvedha
buddhipUrvadka karmAM- iMdriyajanya khAdhavALA karyAM te vipAkavirasa hAi tenu'
phala pariNAma sa`sAra che. (2) kulayeAgIenA sarva karmAM jJAnapUrvaka eTale ke
zruta-zAsrane anusaranArA haiAya che, ane zAstranuM sAmarthya amRta jevu che,
tethI uttarAttara uttama paraMparA sAMpaDe che. mATe zAstrAnugAmI evA
kulayeAgInA kama' muktinA aMgarUpa che, paraMparAe muktinA kAraNarUpa thai paDe
che. (3) ane sa'sArAtIta

Page #468 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(392) Gidashtisamuccaya The actions of those who are seekers of the ultimate
truth, who are beyond the world, are amehijannya. That is, they are pure,
unmixed, and their fruit is immediate liberation, instant liberation. Various
types of Keshtka: 9 San Asammoh Lakshan Indriya Ashrayi Agampurvak Sarannushtan
Yukt Gnan. Kriya Adar, Preeti, Avil, Sampatti Prapti, Jigyasa, Tajai Seva, Teena
Anugrah Ratna Ni Prapti Aadi Udaaharan Ratna Nu Samany Janapanum Agamthi Ratna
Nu Gnan Patra Kul Yogio Savo Bhavatit Athagami. * Samanythi Sarv Pranee.
Vipakvirsapane Ekant Parishuddhi, Virishta Parinam Amrit Sami Shrutshaktithi
Sanubandh Falpanum Mukti Ang-Parampraaye Kul Sansar Shigh Mukit-Anantar Moksh [
Ruti Guddhjnanarjamovarmantradhi: ] Parantasvagami ne ek j shamparayanu marg aao
nu j (bhavatit arthagami nu) lakshan kahe che - Praakriteshu ih bhaaveshu yesham
cheto nirutsakam. Bhava bhogaviraktaaste bhavatitaarthayaayinah. || 127 ||
Vritti: - Provi6 maapu - Aheen praakrutbhavo pratye, buddhi ma jenu paryaavasan
che eva shabdadhi bhaav ma, (aa shabdadhi bhavo chevate budhi ma samaay che,
addhijanm bhavo che te ma), cheshan reto nikaranw - jeae nu chitt nirutsak che,
- nissangatana samavesh ne lidhe, mamo vivaare bhavabhegthi virakt eva te,
sansar na bhegthi virakt eva swaroopwala (evambhoot) te jeev mukt jeava,
manitaarthatharin - "Bhavatit arthagami" kahevaay che, - bhav ma chitt na
asansparsh ne lidhe. (Sansar ma te nu chitt sparshatu nathi - lepatu nathi,
tethi karine).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (392) gidaSTisamuccaya saMsArathI para evA para tatva pratye gamana karanArA
paramArthavettAonA je karmo che te amehijanya hoya che. eTale ekAMte-
nirbheLapaNe parizuddhivALA heI, teonuM phala zIdhraavilaMbe mukti che, anaMtara
mukti che. vividha bedhanuM keSTaka : 9 sAna asaMmoha lakSaNa Idriya AzrayI
AgamapUrvaka saranuSThAna yukta jJAna. kriyA Adara, prIti, aviLa, saMpatti
prApti, jijJAsA, tajai sevA, tenA anugraha ratnanI prApti Adi udAharaNa ratnanuM
sAmAnya jANapaNuM AgamathI ratnanuM jJAna pAtra kula yogIo savo bhavAtIta
athagAmI. * sAmAnyathI sarva prANI. vipAkavirasapaNe ekAMta parizuddhi, viriSTa
pariNAma amRtasamI zrutazakitathI sAnubaMdha phalapaNuM mukti aMga-paraMparAe
kula saMsAra zIgha mukita-anaMtara mokSa [ rUti guddhijJAnArjamovarmAntarAdhi: ]
paraMtasvagAmIne eka ja zamaparAyaNu mArga eonuM ja (bhavAtIta arthagAmInuM )
lakSaNa kahe che- prAkRteSviha bhAveSu yeSAM ceto nirutsukam  /
bhavabhogaviraktAste bhavAtItArthayAyinaH  //  127  //  vRttiH-provi6 mApu-ahIM
prAkRtabhAvo pratye, buddhimAM jenuM paryAvasAna che evA zabdAdi bhAvamAM, (A
zabdAdi bhAvo chevaTe budimAM samAya che, addhijanma bhAvo che temAM ), ceSAM
reto nikaraNaw-jeenuM citta nirutsuka che,-ni:saMgatAnA samAvezane lIdhe, mAmo
vivArebhavabhegathI virakta evA teo, saMsAranA bhegathI virakta e svarUpavALA
(evaMbhUta) te jIva mukta jevA, mAnItArthatharina - " bhavAtItaarthagAmI "
kahevAya che,-bhavamAM cittanA asaMsparzane lIdhe. (saMsAramAM tenuM citta
sparzatuM nathI-lepAtuM nathI, tethI karIne).

Page #469 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Example:** “Bhavatiit Arthagami” Bhav Bhagavirukt (393) Prakrit Bhavo Ma Ahi,
Nirutsuka Sa Chitt; Bhavatiit Arthagami Te, Bhav Bhag Ma Virukt. 127 Arth:–Ahi
Prakrit Bhave Pratye Jeenu Chitt Nirutsuka (Utsukta Rahith) Hoy Chhe, Te Vibhag
Thi Virukt Theyela, Bhavatiit Arthagami Chhe. Vivechan Upar Ma Bhavatiit
Arthagami Eva Mahamunmukhu Kahya, Te Kon Ne Keva Hoy? Teenu Lakshyan Ahi Spashta
Kahyu Chhe. Ahi Shabdaadi Vishayrup Prakrit Bha Ma Jeo Nu Chitt Utsukta Rahith
Hoy Chhe, Te Sansarik Bhag Thi Virukt Jane Bhavatiit Arthagami Chhe. Prakrit
Bhave Etle Buddhi Ma Jeenu Paryavasan Chhe Eva Shabdaadi Bhave. Prakrit Etle
Prakruti Ne Vikar, Pudgal Ne Vikar. Shabdaadi Vishe Prakrit Bhav Chhe Arthath
Jad Prakruti Na Vikarrup Chhe, Pudgal Na Vikarrup Chhe; Ane Te Buddhi Ma
Paryamumukhu Bhav Bhag Vasan Paame Chhe, Chevate Buddhi Ma Samay Chhe, Arthath
Buddhigamya Bhav Chhe. Virukt Aava Aa Shabdaadi Vishayrup Prakrit Bhavo Ma Jeenu
Chitt Ana Sakta Pana Ne Lidhe Utsukta Vina Nu Hoy Chhe, Te Bhav Bhag Thi Virukt
Theyela Jane “Bhavatiit Arthagami” Kehvaay Chhe. Shabdaadi Vishayo Ma Teo Rachta
Nathi, Aasakt Thta Nathi, Vishayo Ma Thi Teenu Chitt Uthi Gayu Chhe, Sansarik
Bhag Teo Ne Ditha Gamta Nathi, Etle Bhav Bhag Thi Virukt-Saacho Antarang Vairagy
Paamela Aa Jeeve Khara Khara “Bhavatiit Arthagami” Chhe. Karan Ke Te Mahanubhav
Mahatmao Nu Chitt Bhav Ma-Sansar Ma Sparthatu Nathi, Leptu Nathi, Askrushta Rahe
Chhe, Jal-Kamalvat Alipta Rahe Chhe. Vividh Swapna-Indrajala Jevi Pudgal Rachna
Teo Ne Karmi-Akari Lage Chhe, Ane Jagat Ni Ethrup Te Pudgal Vishay Nu Sevan
Karvu Te Teva Param Vairagyvant Saacha Sangarangi Mahatmao Ne Aankh Pase Reti
Upadava Jevu Atyant, Asahya Lage Chhe. Dakhala Tarike Parmatattvajnya Shrimud
Rajchandraji E Pita Na Swanubhavdugar Kadhya Chhe Ke Joke Amaru Chitt Netra Jevu
Chhe; Netra Ne Vishe Beeja Avayav Ni Peth E Ek Rajan Panu Sahana Thai Sake Nahi.
Beeja Avayavrup Anya Chitt Chhe. Amane Varte Chhe Evu Je Chitt Te Netrarup Chhe.
Te Ne Vishe Vani Nu Uthvu, Samajavu, Aa Karvu Athva Aa Na Karvu, Evi Vicharana
Karvi Te Mand Ma Mand Bane Chhe x x Karan Ke Aankh Ni Pase Jamini Reti Upadava
Nu Karya Thavarup Thay Chhe.” –Shrimud Rajchandra, Patrak 313 (385)  **English
Translation:**  **Example:** “Bhavatiit Arthagami” detached from the cycle of
births and deaths (393) Here, the mind is indifferent to worldly objects; Those
who are detached from the cycle of births and deaths are Bhavatiit Arthagami.
127 Meaning:–Those whose minds are indifferent (without desire) to worldly
objects are detached from the cycle of births and deaths, they are Bhavatiit
Arthagami. In the above discussion, the Mahamunmukhu who are Bhavatiit Arthagami
were mentioned, who are they and what are their characteristics? Their
characteristics are clearly stated here. Those whose minds are indifferent to
worldly objects like words, etc., are detached from worldly attachments, they
are Bhavatiit Arthagami. Prakrit Bhave means worldly objects like words, etc.,
which are the result of the mind. Prakrit means the modification of nature, the
modification of Pudgal. Worldly objects are Prakrit Bhav, meaning they are the
modification of inert nature, the modification of Pudgal; and they are absorbed
in the mind of the Paryamumukhu, they ultimately reside in the mind, meaning
they are objects of the mind. Those whose minds are indifferent to these worldly
objects like words, etc., due to their detachment, are called “Bhavatiit
Arthagami”. They do not enjoy worldly objects, they are not attached to them,
their minds have risen above them, they do not find worldly attachments
appealing, therefore, they are detached from the cycle of births and deaths –
they are truly detached from the inner world. Because the minds of these great
souls are not attracted to the world, they are not attached to it, they remain
unattached, like a lotus in water. They find the various creations of Pudgal,
like dreams and illusions, to be painful and unbearable, and they find the
consumption of worldly objects, which are the essence of Pudgal, to be like
picking up sand in front of their eyes, extremely unbearable. For example, the
great sage Shrimud Rajchandraji has described his father's experience: “Although
our mind is like an eye; the eye cannot tolerate even a speck of dust, like
other organs. The other mind is like another organ. The mind that we use is like
an eye. It is difficult for it to speak, explain, do this or not do that, to
think about it x x because it is like picking up sand in front of the eye.”
–Shrimud Rajchandra, Patrak 313 (385)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dAhari: " bhavAtIta athagAmI" bhavabhAgavirakta (393) prAkRta bhAvomAM ahIM,
nirutsuka sa citta; bhavAtIta arthagAmi te, bhavabhegamAM virakta. 127
artha:-ahIM prAkRta bhAve pratye jeenuM citta nirutsuka (utsukatA rahita) hoya
che, te vibhAgathI virakta thayelAo, bhavAtIta arthagAmI che. vivecana uparamAM
bhavAtIta arthagAmI evA mahAmumukSu kahyA, te koNa ne kevA hoya ? tenuM lakSaNa
ahIM spaSTa kahyuM che. ahIM zabdAdi viSayarUpa prAkRta bhAmAM jeonuM citta
utsuktA rahita hoya che, te sAMsArika bhegathI virakta jane bhavAtItaarthagAmI
che. prAkRta bhAve eTale buddhimAM jenuM paryAvasAna che evA zabdAdi bhAve.
prAkRta eTale prakRtine vikAra, pudgalane vikAra. zabdAdi viSaye prAkRta bhAva
che arthAt jaDa prakRtinA vikArarUpa che, pudgalanA vikArarUpa che; ane te
buddhimAM paryamumukSu bhavabhoga vasAna pAme che, chevaTe buddhimAM samAya che,
arthAt buddhigamya bhAva che. virakta AvA A zabdAdi viSarUpa prAkRta bhAvomAM
jeenuM citta anA saktapaNAne lIdhe utsukatA vinAnuM hoya che, te bhavabhegathI
virakta thayelA jane "bhavAtIta arthagAmI' kahevAya che. zabdAdi viSayomAM teo
rAcatA nathI, Asakta thatA nathI, viSayomAMthI tenuM citta UThI gayuM che,
sAMsArika bhega teone dIThA gamatA nathI, eTale bhavabhogathI virakta-sAco
aMtaraMga vairAgya pAmelA A jIve kharekharA "bhavAtIta arthagAmI" che. kAraNa ke
te mahAnubhAva mahAtmAonuM citta bhavamAM-saMsAramAM spardhAtuM nathI, lepatuM
nathI, askRSTa rahe che, jaLa-kamaLavat alipta rahe che. vividha svapna-
iMdrajAla jevI pudgalaracanA teone kAramI-akArI lAge che, ane jagatanI eTharUpa
te pudgala viSayanuM sevana karavuM te tevA parama vairAgyavaMta sAcA saMgaraMgI
mahAtmAone AMkha pAse retI upaDAvavA jevuM atyaMta, asahyA lAge che. dAkhalA
tarIke paramatattvajJa zrImad rAjacaMdrajIe pitAnA svAnubhavadugAra kADhayA che
ke joke amArUM citta netra jevuM che; netrane viSe bIjA avayavanI peThe eka
rajaNa paNu sahana thaI zake nahIM. bIjA avayavarUpa anya citta che. amane varte
che evuM je citta te netrarUpa che. tene viSe vANInuM uThavuM, samajAvavuM, A
karavuM athavA A na karavuM, evI vicAraNA karavI te mAMDamAMDa bane che x x
kAraNake AMkhanI pAse jamInanI retI upaDAvavAnuM kArya thavArUpa thAya che."
-zrImad rAjacaMdra, patraka 313 (385)

Page #470 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(394) How can these supremely excellent, detached, passionate, truly perfected-
souls, who are imbued with the essence of true feelings, find delight in objects
like words, etc., which are the fruits of intellect? In these natural feelings,
they find delight in the common natural people, the ones who are attached to the
pleasures of the body and the world, the six types of attachments. But the truly
detached, inward-looking, liberated souls never feel anxiety or attachment. Such
detached souls, the true "renouncers," are the ones who move towards the meaning
and essence beyond the world, who know and attain that essence. Because even
while living in the world, the minds of these great souls are not touched in the
least by worldly feelings and desires. Therefore, they are like the liberated
ones, they have attained Nirvana even while having a body, they are Jivanmuktas.
“Where there is the destruction of attachment, or where there is peace, That is
called the state of the knower, everything else is just a distraction. The whole
world is like a dream, or like a dream, That is called the state of the knower,
everything else is just talk.” –Shrimad Rajchandra's Shri Atmasiddhi There is
only one path for them, the path of peace. Even though there are differences in
their states, it is like the path on the shore of the ocean. 128. Meaning—And
their path is also the path of peace, even though there are differences in their
states, it is like the path on the shore of the ocean. Discussion—And the path
of those who are beyond the world, who are the knowers of the ultimate truth, is
also one, even though there are differences in their states, it is like the path
on the shore of the ocean. The clear characteristic of which was mentioned
above, such truly detached, renounced, passionate souls, Action—% Tu Madji—and
the path is also one, the path with the characteristic of purity of mind is also
one, Teshan—for them, that is, for those who are beyond the world,
Ramprayan—Shamprayan, Shamanic, Avmeddji—even though there are differences in
their states, in terms of the differences in the Gunasthanas, (even though there
are differences in their states), Dhau Tibhavatu—like the path on the shore of
the ocean, this is an example. And here, the ocean is different from the shore
due to the differences in proximity, etc. (The path on the shore of the ocean is
the path on the shore. Some are far away, some are near, even though there are
differences, they are all "part of the shore.")

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (394) yogadaSTisamucaya AvA parama utkRSTa vairAgyavaMta saMvegaraMgI sAcA
pariNata-bhAvitAtmAo buddhiphaLarUpa zabdAdi viSayamAM-prAkRta bhAvomAM kema
rAce ? A prAkRta bhAvamAM te sAmAnya prAkRta jane ja rAce, pudgalAnaMdI
bhavAbhinaMdI cha ja Asakta thAya; paNa sAcA aMtaraMga vairAgyavAna mumukSu che
kadI paNa utkaMThA dharAve nahi, Asakta thAya nahiM. AvA vairAgyavAsita AtmA,
sAcA "vairAgIo" ja saMsArathI para evA artha--tatva pratye gamana karanArA che,
para tattvane jANanArA ne pAmanArA hoya che. kAraNake saMsAramAM rahyA chatAM,
te mahAnubhAva mahAtmAonuM citta saMsArI bhAvone-vAsanAne lezamAtra sparzatuM
nathI. tethI teo mukta jevA che, deha chatAM nirvANa pAmelA che, jIvanmukta che.
" mohabhAva kSaya hoya jyAM, athavA hoya prazAMta te kahiye jJAnI dazA, bAkI
bIjI brAMta. sakala jagat te eThavat, athavA svapna samAna, te kahiye jJAnidazA,
bAkI vAcAjJAna." -zrImad rAjacaMdrapraNIta zrI Atmasiddhi eka eva tu mArgo'pi
teSAM zamaparAyaNaH  /  avasthAbhedabhede'pi jaladhau tIramArgavat  //  128  //
eka ja hoya tehane, prazamaparAyaNa mArga avasthAbheda chatAM yathA, sAgaramAM
tIramArga, 128. artha--ane teone zamaparAyaNa mAga paNa, avasthAbhedane bheda
chatAM, eka ja che, samudramAM tIramAganI kAMThAnA mArganI jema. vivecana ane
evA te bhavAtItaarthagAmIone eTale ke paramatattvavedIono mArga paNa,
avasthAbhedane bheda chatAM, eka ja che, sAgaramAM tIramAganI-kAMThAnA mArganI
peThe. uparamAM jenuM spaSTa lakSaNa kahyuM, evA sAcA bhavavirakta
vairAgyavAsita saMvegI kRtti-% va tu mADaji-ane mArga paNa eka ja,
cittavizuddhirUpa lakSaNavALA mArga paNa eka ja che, teSAMteone, eTale ke,
bhavAtIta arthagAmIone, rAmaparAyaNaH-zamaparAyaNa, zamanika, avameDiji-
avasthAbhedane bheda chatAM, guNasthAnakanA bhedanI apekSAe, (temanI dazAne
bheda chatAM), dhau tIbhAvatu-samudranI bAbatamAM tIramAganI jema, e daSTAMta
che. ane ahIM te samadrathI dara-nikaTapaNu AdinA bhethI avasthAbhera hoya che.
( samudranA kAMThAnA mArga te tIramArga che. temAM kAI dUra hoya, keI nikaTa
hoya, ema bheda chatAM te badhAya "tIrabhAga ja che.)

Page #471 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Dimādasti:** The path of liberation for the seeker is one, the path of peace
(Shantimarg).  **(35)** The seeker's soul is called "bhavatiit arthagami"
(transcendent of worldly desires) or "paratatvavedi" (knower of the ultimate
reality). The path is one, and the characteristic of that path is purity of mind
(chittavishuddhi).   The path is to purify the mind and the soul in any way. It
is one, there is no difference in it. Shrimad Rajchandraji's Kokirna Vachanamrit
says:  "Moksha is said to be one's own purity, the path that leads to it;
explained in brief, all paths are Nigranth." - Shri Atmasiddhi  The path of
liberation is one, the path of peace (Shantimarg), and this path is based on
"sham" (tranquility):  (1) "Sham" means the ultimate evolution of the soul, free
from attachment and aversion, equanimity. "The soul that is free from attachment
and aversion is called "sam" (equanimity)." In this path, attaining "sham"
(tranquility) is the only devotion, the ultimate state, the final goal.  (2) Or
"sham" means "samya" (similarity); to attain the inherent qualities of the soul
as they are, to become similar to the inherent qualities of the soul is "samya."
What is "samya" is "dharma" (righteousness), and "the nature of a thing
according to its characteristics is "dharma." This "dharma" is "charitra"
(conduct), and "charitra" means "to move in the form of "hare varitra" (to move
in the form of the soul), to dwell in the form of the soul, that is "charitra."
Thus, "charitra," "dharma," "samya," "sam," and "sham" are synonymous. The point
is that to be eager to attain the state of the inherent nature of the soul, that
is the path of "sham" (tranquility).  (3) Or "sham" means "shanti" (peace). The
peace of anger, pride, attachment, greed, attachment, aversion, and affection is
"sham." To be free from external influences and to come to the state of the soul
is called "shanti" (peace), and that is the path of "sham" (tranquility) or the
path of peace (Shantimarg).  The very heart-touching form of this path of peace
(Shantimarg) has been briefly presented by the great sage Yogishwar Shriman
Anandghanji in his praise of Shri Shantinathji. In it, Shri Anandghanji, as if
seeing the Lord in person, talks to him and asks:  "Shantijin! One request from
me, listen, O King of the Three Worlds, what is the form of peace? Tell me, how
is the mind tested? ... Peace."  "There is no sorrow in the Hindu religions, no
sorrow! The soul that is free from attachment and aversion is its own equal." -
Shri Kundakundacharya's Shri Pravachansar.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dImAdaSTi : mumukSune eka ja zamaparAyaNa zAMtimAga (35) mumukSano mumukSu
AtmAo bhavAtIta arthagAmI athavA paratatvavedI kahevAya che. mArga eka ja ane
teone cittavizuddhirUpa lakSaNavALo mArga paNa eka ja che, keIpaNa prakAre
cittavizuddhi karI, AtmAne zuddha kare, e ja mArga che. ane te eka ja che, temAM
kaI paNa bheda nathI. zrImad rAjacaMdrajInuM kokIrNa vacanAmRta che ke - mokSa
kahyo nija zuddhatA, te pAme te paMtha; samajAvya saMkSepamAM, sakaLa mAga
nigraMtha."-zrI Atmasiddhi mekSane eka ja zamaparAyaNu mArga-zAMtimArga ane A
mAga zamaparAyaNa che-zamaniSTha cheH (1) zama eTale niSkaSAya AtmapariNati,
rAgadveSa rahitapaNuM, samabhAva. "meha-kSebharahita je AtmAne pariNAma te
samajha kahevAya che." A mArgamAM zamanI prApti karavI, zamaparAyaNa thavuM, e
ja eka niSThA che-chevaTanI nitAMta sthiti che, e ja aMtima sAdhya che. (2)
athavA zama eTale sAmya; yathAvasthita AtmaguNane pAmavuM-jema che tema
AtmaguNanI samAna thavuM te sAmya che. je sAmya che te dharma che, ane
"vattharaNAvo cho e lakSaNa pramANe vastuno svabhAva te dhama che. A dharma che
te cAritra che, ane cAritra eTale " hare vAritra' e lakSaNa pramANe svarUpamAM
caravuM, AtmasvarUpamAM vattavuM, te cAritra che. Ama cAritra dharma, sAmya,
sama, zama e zabdo samAnArthavAcaka che. tAtparya ke sAmyamAM arthAta sahaja
AtmasvarUpamAM sthiti prApta karavA tatpara thavuM e ja zamaniSTha mArga che.
(3) athavA zama eTale zAMti. krodha, mAna, mAyA, lebha, rAga, dveSa, meha AdinI
zAMti thavI te zama che. parabhAvathI virAma pAmI AtmabhAvamAM AvavuM tenuM nAma
zAMti che, ane te ja zamaniSTha mArga athavA zAMti mArga che. A zAMtimArganuM
zAMtimArga atyaMta hRdayaMgama svarUpa mahAjJAnI yogIzvara zrImAna
AnaMdaghanajIe zrI zAMtinAthajInA stavanamAM saMkSepamAM pradarzita karyuM che.
temAM zrI AnaMdaghanajI bhagavAnane sAkSAt hAjarAhajUra dekhatA hoya ema temanI
sAthe goSThivArtAlApa karatAM pUche che - zAMtijina ! eka muja vinati, suNe
tribhuvana rAya re, zAMti svarUpa kima jANIe? kahe kima mana parakhAya re
?..zAMti." x " nahiraM hindu dharmo no ko so sori viho ! mohakkhohavihINo
pariNAmo appaNo hu smo||" -zrI kuMdakuMdAcAryapraNIta zrI pravacanasAra

Page #472 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Vagptisamuccaya  Then the Lord answers him, "O Joyful One, who has the space
for such a question, blessed is your soul! Listen with patience in your mind. I
tell you as I have appeared in the form of peace:  "Blessed are you, O soul, who
has the space for this question; Listen with patience in your mind, I speak as
peace appears...peace."  1. The impure and the pure, the emotions that Lord
Jinavara - the supreme Vitaraga Deva - has spoken of, know them as they are,
with hospitality or utmost truth, accept them with faith and firm self-
realization, this is the first service of the path of peace, the first step-
footprint of the path of peace.  2. And those who hold the ultimate meaning of
the Agamas, those who are Samyaktava, that is, self-knowing, those who perform
the virtuous actions of Samvara, those who follow the eternal path of liberation
of the knowers, those who are always unwavering, completely simple and pure, and
those who are the foundation of pure soul experience, the service of such a true
Guru is the ultimate support of the service of the path of peace. Similarly, to
respect other pure supports, to abandon all other entanglements, and to perform
beautiful sattvic actions by abandoning all tamasic tendencies, is the path to
attain the form of peace.  "The emotions, impure and pure, that Jinavara Deva
has spoken of; know them as they are, this is the first service of the path of
peace...peace. The Agamas, the Guru, the Samyaktava, the virtuous actions of
Samvara, the essence; the community, unwavering always, the foundation of pure
experience...peace. Respect pure supports, abandon other entanglements; Abandon
all tamasic tendencies, perform sattvic actions...peace."  3. Similarly, to
connect with the auspicious means - the Samyagdarshan, etc., the means of
liberation - which do not have any contradiction in the fruits, which
unfailingly give the desired mixed fruits, in which the words are connected with
the meaning, that is, the words truly serve the ultimate meaning, and in which
the entire Nayavada pervades, that is, all the Naya operate in a non-
contradictory, non-conflicting manner, as a means of achieving the ultimate
meaning, this is the best remedy for the path of supreme peace, the path of
Shiva-form, the path of liberation.  "The fruits, in which there is no
contradiction, the words are connected with the meaning; The entire Nayavada
pervades, this is the connection with the auspicious means...peace."  4. To
perform the rituals and prohibitions that do not oppose the essence of the self,
to respect the method of accepting the soul as described in the Mahajanas, this
is the all-encompassing teaching of the path of peace as described in the
Agamas.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 vAgapTisamuccaya tyAre bhagavAna tene javAba Ape che ke jene AvA praznano
avakAza che evA he AnaMdaghana ! hArA AtmAne dhanya che ! tuM manamAM dhIraja
dharIne sAMbhaLa! huM tane zAMtisvarUpa jema pratibhAsyuM che tema kahuM chuM:
"dhanya tuM Atama jehane, e prazna avakAza re; dhIraja mana dharI sAMbhaLo,
kahuM zAMti pratibhAsa re...zAMti." 1. avizuddha ne suvizuddha je je bhAvo
bhagavAna jinavare-parama vItarAgadeve kahyA che, te temaja atithya athavuM
atyaMta sAcA jANIne sahe, zraddha, daDha AtmapratItithI mAnya kare, te
zAMtipadanI prathama sevA che, zAMtimArganuM prathama pada-pagathiyuM che. 2,
ane AgamanA paramArtha rahasyane dhAraNa karanArA, samyakatvavata arthAt
AtmajJAnI, sArabhUta evI saMvara kiyA karanArA, jJAnIonA sanAtana mokSamArganA
saMpradAyane anusaranArA, sadAya avaMcaka, sarvathA Aju-sarala, ane zuddha
AtmAnubhavanA AdhArarUpa, evA sadagurunuM je sevana te zAMtipadanI sevAnuM
parama avalaMbana che. temaja anya paNa zuddha AlaMbana AdaravA ne bIjI badhI ja
jAla choDI devI, tathA sarva tAmasI vRttio pariharI suMdara sAtvikI vRttio
bhajavI e zAMti svarUpane pAmavAne mArga che. "bhAva avizuddha suvizuddha je,
kahyA jinavara deva re; te tema avita sahe, prathama e zAMtipada seva re..zAMti
Agamadhara guru samakitI, kiriyA saMvara sAra re; saMpradAyI avaMcaka sadA, zuci
anubhava AdhAra re....zAMti zuddha AlaMbana Adare, tajI avara jaMjAla re; tAmasI
vRtti savi pariharI, bhaje sAtvikI zAla re...zAMti." 3. temaja jemAM phalane
visaMvAda che nahi, acUkapaNe je ISTa mikSaphala Ape ja che, jemAM zabda che te
barAbara artha sAthe saMbaMdha-sumeLa dharAve che, arthAt zabdanaye kharekhara
paramArtha arthamAM te te sat sAdhana sevAya che-praye jAya che, ane jemAM
sakala nayavAda vyApI rahe che, arthAt sarva naya jemAM aviredhI-avisaMvAdIpaNe
eka paramArtha sAdhakapaNe pravarte che, evA zivasAdhananI-samyagadarzanAdi
mokSasAdhananI saMdhi karavI, evA samyaka makSasAdhana joDavA-prajavA, te
zivasvarUpa-mokSasvarUpa parama zAMtimArgane zreSTha upAya che. phala visaMvAda
jehamAM nahi, zabda te artha saMbaMdhI re, sakala nayavAda vyApI rahyo, te
zivasAdhana saMdhi re....zAMti. " 4. AtmapadArthane virodha na Ave e vidhi-
pratiSedha karI, mahAjane rahele e AtmAno grahaNavidhi Adaravo,-e AgamamAM
kahelo zAMtimArgane badha-upadeza che.

Page #473 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Domaani: The path to liberation is one and the same.  (37) 5. Abandon the
company of wicked people, associate with the children of good teachers, and
cultivate the state of mind of yoga and samadhi, which is the purpose of
liberation, this is the path to peace. “Refrain from actions that are
prohibited, and let your actions be free from obstacles; accept the things that
are permitted, and let your actions be free from attachment... Peace is found by
abandoning the company of wicked people, and associating with the children of
good teachers. Cultivate the state of mind of yoga and samadhi, which is the
path to liberation... Peace.” 6. Consider honor and dishonor to be the same,
consider praise and blame to be equal, consider gold and stone to be the same,
consider all living beings to be equal, consider grass and jewels to be the
same, consider liberation and the world to be the same, this is the peace that
is like a boat to cross the ocean of existence. “Consider honor and dishonor to
be the same in your mind, consider gold and stone to be the same, consider
praise and blame to be the same, know this... Peace is found by considering all
living beings to be equal, considering grass and jewels to be the same in your
mind. Consider liberation and the world to be the same, this is the boat to
cross the ocean of existence... Peace.” 7. Similarly, the state of our soul,
which is pure consciousness, is the true family, better than all other
companions, therefore, to enter into this pure state of soul and remain in it,
is the best way to attain peace. “The state of our soul, which is pure
consciousness... is the true family, better than all other companions... Peace.”
And so on, the nature of this path of peace, the path of peace, is described in
the scriptures. “The cessation of passions like anger, etc., the weakening of
the passions that have arisen, the state of the soul that can be withdrawn, or
the cessation of the tendencies of the beginningless time, this is peace.” -
Shrimad Rajchandra, Patraank 122 (15) All those who seek liberation desire to
attain this one path of peace, therefore, the path is one and the same for all.
Just as all the paths on the seashore are “paths to the sea”, therefore, they
are one and the same, so too, the paths of all those who seek liberation are
“paths to the shore of existence”, the path to liberation, the path to peace,
therefore, it is one and the same. Then, even though there may be differences in
the stages of development, some may be closer to this one path and some may be
farther away. Just as some paths to the sea are closer to the shore and some are
farther away, but they are all “paths to the sea”.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 domANi: mekSane zAMtimAga eka ja (37) 5. duSTa jananI saMgati cheDI daI,
sugurunA saMtAnanI saMgata karavI, ane muktinA heturUpa yoga-samAdhimaya
cittabhAvane bhajavuM, e zAMtine sanmArga che. "vidhi pratiSedha karI AtamA,
padAratha avirodha re; grahaNa vidhi mahAjane parigraho, I Agame bedha re...
zAMti duSTa jana saMgati pariharI, bhaje suguru saMtAna re, yoga samAdhi citta
bhAva je, bhaje mugatinidAna re...zAMti. " 6. mAna-apamAnane samAna jANe,
vaMdaka-nidakane sama gaNe, kanaka-pASANane sarakhA mAne, sarva jagatajaMtune
sama gaNe, tRNamaNine tulya jANe, mukti-saMsArane sama gaNe,A bhavasAgara taravA
mATe naukA samAna zAMtimA che. "mAna-apamAna citta sama gaNe, sama gaNe kanaka
pASANa re, vaMdaka nidaka sama gaNe, I hoya te jANa re...zAMti sarva jagajaMtune
sama gaNe, sama gaNe tRNa maNi bhAva re; mukti saMsAra bahu sama gaNe, mune
bhavajalanidhi nAva re...zAMti." 7, temaja ApaNe AtmabhAva je zuddha cetanAdhAra
che, te ja nija parikara (parivAra ) bIjA badhA sAthasaga karatAM sAra che, mATe
te zuddha AtmabhAvamAM AvI temAM samAI javuM, e ja zAMtisvarUpa pAmavAne zreSTha
upAya che. ApaNe Atama bhAva je, zuddha cetanAdhAra re; - avara savi sAthe
sagathI, e nija parikara sAra re...zAMti." ItyAdi prakAre A zamaparAyaNa
mArganuM-zAMti mArganuM svarUpa zAstramAM varNavyuM che. "krodhAdika kaSAyonuM
samAI javuM, udaya AvelA kakSAmAM maMdatA thavI, vALI levAya tevI AtmadazA thavI
athavA anAdi kALanI vRttio samAI javI te zama." - zrImad rAjacaMdra, patrAMka
122 (15) sarva mumukSuo te ja eka zAMtimArgane pAmavAne Irache che, eTale te
savane mArga eka ja che. jema sAgarakAMThAnA sarve mArga "tIramArga' che, mATe
te eka ja svarUpa che, tema A sarva mumukSuonA mArga paNa "bhava-
tIramAga'-mokSamArga mokSane zAMti- che, mATe te eka ja che. pachI bhale
avasthAbhedanA bhedane lIdhe keI te mArga eka ja mArganI nikaTa hoya ne kaI dUra
hoya. jema sAgaramAM kaI tIramArga kAMThAnI nikaTa hoya, ne kaI dUra hoya, paNa
te "tIramAga' ja che;

Page #474 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(398) The collection of Gada-shti (Jain scriptures) states that all those who
seek liberation (Mumukshu) are very close to the shore of the ocean of existence
(Bhav-paar) and the peak (Meksh), and some are far away. But the path for all of
them is the same, the "Meksh-marg" (path to liberation). Thus, although there
may be differences in distance and proximity based on the Gunasthan (spiritual
stages), they are all united in the Meksh-marg. In other words, they are all
devotees, worshippers, and seekers of the undivided, eternal, and blissful ocean
of liberation (Moksh-marg).  There are not two paths to liberation. All those
who have attained the supreme peace of liberation in the past have attained it
through the same path. They are attaining it in the present, and they will
attain it in the future. There is no difference of opinion in this path, no
simplicity, no madness, no division, no acceptance or rejection. It is a simple
path, a path of Samadhi (meditation), and a stable path. It is the natural state
of peace. This path is always present. Without attaining this path, no one has
attained liberation in the past, is attaining it in the present, or will attain
it in the future.  Shri Jin (Mahavira) has said in the Sahasragam (a Jain
scripture) that actions and teachings are the same path. And if those actions
and teachings are accepted in the true sense of this path, then they are
successful. And if those actions and teachings are accepted without
understanding this path, then they are all unsuccessful.  Shri Mahavira will
cross the same path that Shri Krishna crossed. Shri Krishna will cross the same
path that Shri Mahavira crossed. When this path is attained, whether sitting
anywhere, at any time, in any series, or in any yoga, one will experience the
sacred, eternal, and infinite, transcendental bliss of the true path. This path
is possible everywhere.”  - Shrimad Rajchandra, Patrank 32 (54)  From the desire
for the location of the ultimate truth, it is said:  "The ultimate truth beyond
the cycle of birth and death is called Nirvana. It is one and the same, even
though there are different words for it." (129)  Commentary: What is the
ultimate truth beyond the cycle of birth and death? It is the supreme,
principal, and pure Nirvana. Nirvana is its name. It is definitely one and the
same, by rule, even though there are different words for it, because of the
difference in the way it is described.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (398) gadaSTisamracaya tema kaI mumukSu vasamudranA tIranI-bhavapAranI-mekSanI
atyaMta nikaTa hoya, ne kaI dUra hoya, paNa te sarvano mArga te eka ja
"mekSamAga' che. Ama guNasthAnakanI apekSAe dazAvizeSa pramANe bhale teomAM
dUra-nikaTapaNane bheda hoya, te paNa mekSamArgano te abheda ja che. arthAta te
sarva eka akhaMDa abheda parama amRtarasasAgarasvarUpa mokSamArganA bhakto-
ArAdhaka-upAsako che, sAdharmika baMdhuo che. mokSanA mArga be nathI. je je
puruSo mekSarUpa parama zAMtine bhUtakALe pAmyA, te te saghaLA eka ja mArgathI
pAmyA che. vartamAna kALe paNa tethI ja pAme che; bhaviSyakALe paNa tethI ja
pAmaze. te mArgamAM matabheda nathI, asaraLatA nathI, unmattatA nathI,
bhedabheda nathI, mAnyAmAnya nathI. te saraLa mArga che, te samAdhi mArga che,
tathA te sthira mArga che. ane svAbhAvika zAMtisvarUpa che. sarva kALe te
mArganuM hovApaNuM che. e mArganA mane pAmyA vinA ke bhUtakALe mokSa pAmyA
nathI, vartamAnakALe pAmatA nathI, ane bhaviSyakALa pAmaze nahI. zrI jine
sahastragame kriyAo ane sahasaMgame upadeza e eka ja mArga ApavA mATe kahyAM
che. ane te mAgane arthe te kriyAo ane upadeza grahaNa thAya to saphaLa che, ane
e mAgane bhUlI jaI te kriyAo ane te upadeza grahaNa thAya te te sau niSphaLa
che. zrI mahAvIra je vATethI taryA te vATethI zrI kRSNa taraze. je vATethI zrI
kRSNa taraze te vATethI zrI mahAvIra taryA che. e vATa game tyAM beThAM, game te
kALe, game te zreNImAM, game te yogamAM jyAre pAmaze, tyAre te pavitra, zAzvata,
satpadanA anaMta atIndriya sukhane anubhava thaze. te vATa sarva sthaLe
saMbhavita che." ItyAdi. -zrImad rAjacaMdra, patrAMka 32 (54) para tattvanA
sthAnanI icchAthI kahe che- saMsArAtItatatvaM tu paraM nirvANasaMjJitam  /
taddhayekameva niyamAcchabdabhede'pi tattvataH  //  129  //  bhavAtIta para tava
te, nirvANa kahevAya; tatvathI eka ja teha che, zabda bheda chatAMya. 129 vRtti
-saMtAyAtItatattva tu-ane saMsArAtIta tatva te, zuM ? te ke5ra, pradhAna,
nircALaNaNitamananirvANa nAmanuM che, nirvANa saMjJA enI upajI che eTalA mATe.
ta neva-te nizcaye eka ja sAmAnyathI che, niyama-niyamathI, niyame karIne,
rAmeDaji-zabdabheda (jenuM lakSaNa kahevAmAM Ave che.) chatAM, tavatatattvathI,
paramArthathI.

Page #475 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Dristi Parantattva Tirthi and its other names  (39) Meaning - And the
principle that is beyond the world, it is known by the name "Nirvana". And even
though there are different words, it is one and the same in essence.
**Explanation:** The principle that was mentioned above as being beyond the
world, what is it? It is explained here - that principle is known by the name
"Nirvana". And it is one and the same in essence. It is said below that even
though there are different words, it is one and the same in essence - in
ultimate reality, the principle of Nirvana is one and the same. No matter what
name it is known by, there is no difference in the ultimate principle of
Nirvana. It is beyond any principle and it is beyond everything, that is why it
is called "Parantattva". When the oil of karma is exhausted, the lamp of the
world is extinguished - it attains Nirvana, that is why this principle is called
Nirvana.  Sadashiva, Parabrahma, Siddhatma, Tathata, etc. are the words by which
it is known; it is one and the same in essence (according to the true meaning of
the words).  **Commentary:**  Sadashiva means eternally auspicious, never
inauspicious - due to its eternal auspiciousness, it is beyond all
inauspiciousness. It is the ultimate, the supreme, Brahma - Brahma in the sense
of being the cause and the effect, and being the support of all auspiciousness.
Siddhatma means the perfected soul, the accomplished soul, the liberated soul.
Tathata means eternal, because it is eternally present, it is called "Tathata".
It is said:  "Because of its inherent nature and its cause, it is eternal.
Because it is eternally present, it is called "Tathata". It is free from the
three kinds of suffering, it is the ultimate reality, and it is the source of
all happiness."  Therefore, it is called "Nirvana" by these words, it is known
by these words, it is one and the same in essence, according to the true meaning
of the words, according to the above mentioned principle, by these words.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 daSTi paraMtatva tirthI ne tenA anyUtha nAma (39) artha -ane saMsArAtIta tava
te "nirvANa' saMjJAthI oLakhAtuM evuM para tattva che ane te te zabdabheda
chatAM tatvathI niyame karIne eka ja che. vivecana uparamAM je saMsArAtIta-
saMsArathI para evuM para tattva kahyuM, te zuM ? tenuM ahIM spaSTIkaraNa karyuM
che-te para tatva nirvANu" evI saMjJAthI oLakhAya che. ane te te sAmAnyathI
niyame karIne eka ja che. nIce kahevAmAM Ave che e zabdabheda chatAM tatvathI-
paramArthathI te nirvANa tatva eka ja che. game te nAme oLakhavAmAM Ave, paNa
parama evA te nirvANa tatvamAM kaI bheda che ja nahiM. te tatvathI para kaI che
nahiM ne sarvathI para te che, teTalA mATe te "paraM tattva che. karmarUpa tela
khUTI javAthI saMsArarUpa dI tyAM bUjhAI jAya che-nirvANa pAme che, teTalA mATe
te tatvane nirvANu nAma ghaTe che. sadAzivaH paraM brahma siddhAtmA tathAteti ca
/  zabdaistaducyate'nvarthAdekamevaivamAdibhiH  // 130  //  sadAziva para brahma
ne, siddhAtma tathAtA ya; Adi zabda avarthathI, eka ja teha kathAya, 130 artha-
sadAziva, parabrahma, siddhAtmA, tathAtA, ItyAdi zabdothI te oLakhAya che; te
anvarthathI (zabdanA barAbara athe pramANe) eka ja che. vRttiH-sArava -sadAziva,
eTale sarvakALa ziva, kadI 5Na aziva nahiM te,-trikAla pariddhi thakI sarva
azivanA abhAvane lIdhe -parama, pradhAna, trahma-brahma tathA prakAre buhA ane
bUkavaDe karIne sadbhAvanuM avalaMbanapaNuM hovAthI, siddhAramA-siddha AtmA,
kRtakRtya AtmA, niSThitA ema artha che, tathati ja-ane tathAtA, AkAla eTale
sarvakAla tathAbhAvathI, sadAkAla tevA prakArane bhAva hovAne lIdhe, "tathAtA'
kahevAya che. kahyuM che ke " upAdAnanimittAbhyAmadhi kAritvatA dhruvA  /
sarvakAlaM tathAbhAvAttathAtetyabhidhIyate  //  visaMyogAtmikA ceyaM
triduHkhaparivarjitA  /  bhUtakoTiH parAtyantaM bhUtArthaphaladeti ca  //
athAta-upAdAna ne nimittathI tenA adhikAritvatA dhruva che, ane sarvakAla
tathAbhAvane lIdhe te "tathAtA" ema kahevAya che ane A adhikAritvatA tathAtA
visaMgasvarUpa ne traNa prakAranA duHkhathI parivarjita-sarvathA rahita evI che;
te parA bhUtakeTi che, ane atyaMta bhUtAtha phUla denArI che. ItyAdi
za.-zabdathI, tatta-te nirvANa, utte-kahevAya che, oLakhAya che, avata-
antarthathI, arthane anusaratA, zabdanA yathArtha artha pramANe, ukta nItithI,
meva-te eka ja hoI, vANimiHe Adi zrabdothI.

Page #476 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(400) Dhogatissuraay Commentary: “The word difference is a quarrel, which is the
ultimate truth; say Ganga, say Suranadji, the thing does not change.
Manmehan”—Shri. E. S. 4-21 That ultimate “Nirvana” named element, which is known
by different names, there is no difference in meaning when seen from the
ultimate truth. Some of those different names are shown here: (1) Sadashiv, (2)
Parabrahma, (3) Siddhatma (4) Thathata. The oneness of that name from the
ultimate truth is as follows: Sadashiv-Who calls it “Sadashiv”. This ‘Sadashiv’
means always Shiva, always Shiva, never Ashiv. In all three times, by doing
complete purity, due to the absence of all Ashiv-unfortunate, this name
“Sadashiv” is rightly given. Because being pure Sahajanmaswaroop, this “Nirvana”
is always Shivaswaroop-Kalyanaswaroop-Mangalswaroop, the abode of all welfare-
auspiciousness, Shankar Swaroop, that is, Sham-Atmasukhakar Swaroop. “Shivsankar
Jagdishwar Roo Re, Chidanand Bhagwan....Lalana” Shri Anandghanji Parabrahma-
Again it is known by the name “Parabrahma”. Para means supreme, principal. And
thus, due to the dependence of the good nature on the greatness-bigness, it is
“Brahma”. Brihattv means that which is greater-greater than any other thing in
the world. Or Brihattv means the Brahma where the extreme growth-extreme
strength of the Atma-guna resides. Due to such Brihattv-Brihattv, where the
dependence of the good nature of the Atmaswaroop is, that is, where the
existence of the pure Sahajanmaswaroop is, which is the Sahajanmaswaroop, is
‘Para Brahma’. The word Brahma is derived from Vruddhi-Dho (to grow, to grow),
it is believed. And in that way, seeing the growth of the world, the development
of the world, the name of that inner element is “Brahma”. x x But considering
another etymology of the word Brahma-which is as ancient as the previous one-the
non-specific form can also be revealed. From ancient times-from the time of the
Vedas-the word Grita is used in the sense of vast, hot, uninterrupted, and that
word is closer to the word Graha, so Brahma means uninterrupted object-element,
that meaning also comes out. ” -Prof. Anandshankar Bapubhai Dhruv

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (400) dhogaTisasurAya vivecana " zabda bheda jhaghaDo kiche, je paramAratha
eka; kaho gaMgA kahe suranadIjI, vastu phire nahi eka.manamehana"--zrI. i. sa.
4-21 te parama "nivaNa" nAmanA tatvane je jude jude nAme oLakhavAmAM Ave che,
tene paramArtha jotAM kAMI arthabheda nathI. te bhinna bhinna nAmomAMthI
keTalAka atra batAvyA che : (1) sadAziva, (2) parabrahma, (3) siddhAtmA (4)
tathAtA. paramArthathI te nAmanuM ekapaNuM A prakAre- sadAziva-kaI tene
"sadAziva" kahe che. A 'sadAziva' eTale sadAya ziva, sarvakALa ziva, kadI paNa
aziva nahiM te. traNe kALane viSe sarvathA parizuddhi vaDe karIne sarva azivana-
akalyANanA abhAvane lIdhe Ane "sadAziva' nAma barAbara ghaTe che. kAraNa ke
zuddha sahajAnmasvarUpa hovAthI, A "nirvANu' sadA zivasvarUpa-
kalyANusvarUpamaMgalasvarUpa che, sarva kalyANanuM-maMgalanuM dhAma che, zaMkara
svarUpa arthAt zama-Atmasukhakara svarUpa che. "zivazaMkara jagadIzvarU re,
cidAnaMda bhagavAna....lalanA " zrI AnaMdaghanajI parabrahma-vaLI e "parabrahma"
nAmathI oLakhAya che. paraM eTale parama, pradhAna. ane tathA prakAre bRhattva-
bRhakatvathI sadbhAva avalaMbanapaNane lIdhe te "brahma' che. bRhattva eTale
jagatamAM anya koI paNa vastu karatAM jenuM bRhatapaNu-mahatapaNuM che te brA.
athavA bRhakatva eTale AtmaguNanuM atyaMta vRddhigatapaNuM-atyaMta puSTapaNuM
jyAM vase che te brahma. AvA bRhattva-bRhaka7 vaDe karIne jyAM AtmasvarUpanA
sadbhAvanuM avalaMbana che, arthAt jyAM zuddha sahajAnmasvarUpanuM
vidyamAnapaNuM vate che, je sahajAnmasvarUpa che, te 'para brahma' che. brahama
zabda vRdu-Dho (vadhavuM, to grow) e uparathI thayo che, ema manAya che. ane e
rIte jotAM vizvanI vRddhina, vizvanA vikAsane jethI khulAso thaI zake che,
rahasya samajAya che, e Antara tattvanuM nAma "brA" che. x x paNa brahma zabdanI
eka bIjI vyutpatti-je pUrvanA jeTalI ja prAcIna che-te vicAratAM nivizeSa
svarUpa paNa phalita thaI zake che. ati prAcIna samayathI-pha saMhitAnA
samayathI-gRta zabda vizALa, hoTuM, anavacchinna e arthamAM vaparAya che, ane e
zabda graha zabdane sahetara che, tethI trahma eTale anAvacchinna vastutattva
ema artha paNa nIkaLe che. " -pro. AnaMdazaMkara bApubhAI dhruva

Page #477 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Diimadrushti: A Name for the Principle of Nirvana (401)  **Siddhatma** - It
is also called Siddhatma. One whose soul is perfected, who has attained pure
self-realization is Siddhatma. One whose soul is accomplished, who has no
remaining karmic residue is Siddhatma. One who is definitive, meaning one whose
all-pervading essence has reached its final limit, that is, one whose all
purposes have been fulfilled, is Siddhatma. Thus, one who has realized,
manifested, the pure self-form, such a self-born, self-formed, pure
consciousness entity is Siddhatma.  “"He whose soul is enlightened, and who is
the ultimate, and who is not other than that, to that Siddhatma, who is the
source of infinite, imperishable knowledge, I bow."” —Shri Pujyapaad Swami Ji's
Samadhi Shatak,  “"In all realms, this is the absence of deficiency, the form of
complete bliss; this is the fullness of the qualities of the soul, the unique
nature of the perfected one... I go to the Lord himself, who is the source of
all beauty. This is the unshakeable, unperturbed, non-dualistic nature, the
image of the Supreme Soul; This is the soul-enjoyer, playing in his own state,
the perfected one, the form of bliss... Swami"” —Shri Devchandraji.
Furthermore, some know it by the name **Tathaata**. Because of its all-time,
all-pervading nature, it is called Tathaata; because of its eternal, all-
pervasive nature, it is 'Tathaata'. One whose pure, self-born, self-form is
eternally present as it is, is Tathaata. Therefore, it is said that:  Its
authority is firm, unwavering, due to its cause and instrument. Both cause and
instrument are in its hands, subject to it. The cause is the soul, and the
instrument that manifests it is the pure soul itself. Therefore, its form's
authority, lordship, divinity, and sovereignty are firm, unwavering, and never
changing. The cause of the pure, self-born, self-form is also it, and the
instrument is also it.  This Tathaata is **Vischaagatmika**, and is free from
the three types of suffering. Where there is separation from other states, that
is, where all states have been separated, analyzed, where even an atom does not
touch, where only the pure soul exists, such Tathaata is Vischaagatmika - the
form of separation. And therefore, it is free from physical, mental, and verbal
suffering, or from the three types of suffering in the form of disease,
affliction, and obstacles.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dImAdaSTi : eka nirvANu tattvanA avayA nAma (401) siddhAtmA--tene siddhAtmA
nAma paNa ApavAmAM AvyuM che. jenA AtmA siddha che, jeNe zuddha Atmasiddhi
prApta karI che te siddhAtmA. jeneA AtmA kRtakRtya che, jene kAMI kabya avazeSa
rahyuM nathI te siddhAtmA. je niztiA che arthAt jenA sarvAM anI niSThA chevaTanI
hada prApta thai che, eTale ke jenA sa atha-prayeAjana siddha thayA che, te
siddhAtmA. Ama jeNe zuddha Atma svarUpa siddha karyu che, niSpanna karyu" che,
evA sahajAtmasvarUpa svAmI zuddha caitanyamUrtti te siddhAtmA che. "6 'yenAtmA
budhyatAtmaiva paratvenaiva cAparam  /  akSayAnantabodhAya tasmai siddhAtmane
namaH  // " --zrI pUjyapAdasvAmIjIkRta samAdhizataka, " sakaLa pradeze hA kama
abhAvatA, pUrNAnaMda svarUpa; AtamaguNanI hA je saMpUrNatA, siddha svabhAva
anUpa ...svAmI svayaM prabhane jAuM bhAmaNe. acaLa akhAdhita hA je niHsaMgatA,
paramAtama citrupa; AtamabheAgI hA ramatA nija pade, siddha ramaNu e rUpa
...svAmI --zrI devaca'drujI. tathAtA vaLI kAI tene tathAtA' nAmathI eLakhe che.
AkAla eTale ke sarvakAla tathAbhAva vaDe karIne te tathAtA kahevAya che;
sadAkALa tathAprakAranA bhAva hAvAne lIdhe te 'tathAtA ' che. jenuM zuddha
sahajAtmasvarUpa jema che tema zAzvata varte che, te tathAtA che. te mATe kahyu`
che ke upAdAna ne nimittathI tenI adhikAritvatA dhruva che-nizcala che. upAdAna
ane nimitta banne tenA hAthamAM che, tene AdhIna che. upAdAna AtmA che ane tene
pragaTa karanAra nimitta pazu zuddha AtmA ja che. eTale tenu svarUpanuM
adhikArIpaNuM, svAmIpaNuM, IzvarapaNuM;, sattAdhIzapaNuM dhruva che, acala che,
kadI na phare evuM che. zuddha sahajAtmasvarUpanuM upAdAna paNa te ja che, ne
nimitta paNa te ja che. A tathAtA * visa'cegAtmikA che, ane traNa prakAranA
du:khathI parivarjita che. sa anya bhAvane jyAM visayeAga che, arthAt samasta
para bhAvane jyAM viyAga thayA che, vizleSa thayeA che, paramANu mAtra paNa kanA
jyAM sparzI rahyo nathI, kevala zuddha AtmA ja jyAM varte che, evI A tathAtA
visa cAgAtmikA che-visayAgasvarUpa che. ane eTalA mATeja zArIrika, mAnasika ne
vAcika duHkhathI, athavA Adhi-vyAdhi-upAdhirUpa trividha

Page #478 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(42) The one who is liberated from the heat of yoga-darśana, or from the three
types of suffering - ādhātmika, ādhidaivika, and ādhi-bhautika - is completely
devoid of them. By abandoning all attachments, the Lord attained his own state,
and collected the pure spiritual bliss. Let us sing the purity of Dharma to
Dharma Jagannatha.” - Śrī Devacandraji. Furthermore, this is called para-
bhūtakṣeti, and it is extremely fruitful in terms of its bhūtartha. The highest
class of kṣeti, which is the ultimate form of kṣeti for beings and bhūtas, is
called para-bhūtakṣeti, meaning the one who is the form of the Supreme Self, the
pure, innate form, the soul of the excellent kṣeti, is called: “O one who has
attained the fullness of knowledge and bliss, free from all upādhis, with the
fire of the extraordinary qualities and jewels, you are the Supreme Self. O wise
one! With a pure mind, offer your self at the feet of the Lord.” - Śrī
Anandghanaji. And that bhūtartha-phala - the ultimate fruit - gives the true,
real fruit, the imperishable, ultimate, true fruit. The service and devotion to
the Supreme Lord, who is the pure, innate form, is called tathatā, and it
definitely gives the fruit of nirvāṇa. The form of tathatā has been described
elsewhere, and that verse has also been quoted by Śrī Haribhadrasuriji in his
commentary. Its meaning has been considered here somewhat. - The word "etc."
indicates that nirvāṇa is named after the meaning that follows the word, i.e.,
the meaning that follows the word. That nirvāṇa element, which is known by the
word "etc.", is one and the same, only the name is different, not the meaning.
Because the pure, innate nirvāṇa element is the same as the nirvāṇa that we have
seen, it is always Śiva, because it is the Supreme Self, it is Brahman, because
it is the pure self, it is the Siddha-ātma because of the accomplishment of
Siddhi, it is tathatā because of its innate, eternal state. "Etc." and other
names that follow it also reveal its non-dual form, it is manifested. The one
who understands this ultimate truth, attains the incarnation of Anandghana. “It
takes on many names, the one who knows the experience-based, thought-based
contemplation, he is the one who attains the incarnation of Anandghana...
contemplation.” - Śrī Anandghanaji. What is it like? He says -

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (42) yogadarisarAya tApathI, athavA AdhyAtmika, Adhidaivika ne Adhibhautika e
trividha dukhathI te parivijita che, sarvathA rahita che. saga parihArathI svAmI
nija pada lahyuM, zuddha Atmika AnaMdapada saMgrahyuM dhama jaganAthane dharma
zuci gAIe." - zrI devacaMdrajI. vaLI A tathAtA parA bhUtakeTi che, ane
atyaMtapaNe bhUtArtha phala denArI che. prANIenI-bhUtanI parama keTirUpa--
uccatama vargarUpa je che te parA bhUtakeTi che, arthAta je paramAtmasvarUpa
che, zuddha sahajAnmasvarUpa che, utkRSTa keTinA AtmA che, te tathAtA che,
"jJAnAnaMde he pUraNa pAvane, varajita sakala upAdhi, atIndriya guNagaNamaNi
Aga, Ima paramAtama sAdha. sugyAnI ! sumati caraNakaja Atama arapaNa."-zrI
AnaMdaghanajI ane te bhUtArtha phala-paramArtha phala ApanAra che, arthAt
kharekharUM satya phala, mekSarUpa paramArtha sata phala Ape che. tathAtAnI
arthAt zuddha sahajAnmasvarUpa parama prabhujInIparamAtmAnI sevA-bhakti
tathAtArUpa nirvANa phala avazya ApanArI che. Ama tathAtAnuM svarUpa anyatra
kahyuM che, te zloka zrI haribhadrasUrijIe paNa vRttimAM TAMkela che, tene
bhAvArtha atra kaMIka vicAryuM che. - ItyAdi zabdothI te nirvANane anyathathI
eTale ke zabdane barAbara anusaratA artha pramANe te te nAma Apela che. e Adi
zabdothI oLakhAtuM te nirvANa tatva eka ja che, nAmabheda mAtra che, arthabheda
nathI. kAraNa ke zuddha sahajAtmanirvANutatva svarUpa evuM te nirvANa, ApaNe
joyuM tema, sadA zivasvarUpa hevAthI eka ja sadAziva che, parama AtmasvarUpa
hovAthI parabrahma che, zuddha Atma siddhinA niSpannapaNathI siddhAtmA che,
sahajAtmasvarUpapaNe zAzvata sthitithI tathAtA che. ItyAdi ane anusaratA anya
anya nAmathI paNa tenuM abheda svarUpa ja pragaTa thAya che, vyakta thAya che
tene paramArtha je samaje, te AnaMdaghana avatArane pAme che. ema aneka abhidhA
dhare re, anubhavagamya vicAra-lalanA je jANe tehane kare re, AnaMdaghana
avatAra...lalanA"-zrI AnaMdaghanajI, te kevuM che? te kahe che -

Page #479 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Dima:**  Nirabadh, Niramay, Nishkriya, Parantav (407).  **Translation:**
**Dima:**  Free from obstacles, free from disease, inactive, ultimate (407).
**Explanation:**  * **Nirabadh:**  Free from obstacles, meaning free from any
hindrances or impediments. * **Niramay:**  Free from disease, meaning free from
any physical or mental ailments. * **Nishkriya:**  Inactive, meaning free from
any actions or activities. * **Parantav:**  Ultimate, meaning the highest state
of existence, the final goal.   This phrase describes the state of liberation in
Jainism, where the soul is free from all attachments, karmas, and suffering. It
is a state of pure consciousness, devoid of any limitations or imperfections.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dImA : nirAbAdha nirAmaya niSkriya paraMtava (407).
tallakSaNAvisaMvAdAnnirAbAdhamanAmayam  /  niSkriyaM ca paraM tattvaM yato
janmAdyayogataH  // 131  //  lakSaNa avisaMvAdathI, nirAbAdha nIroga; ne
niSThaya para tava te, janmAdine ayoga. 131 atha-te nirvANunA lakSaNanA
avisaMvAdane lIdhe, te parama tatva nirAbAla, nirAmaya ane niSkriya evuM che,
kAraNa ke janma Adine ayoga che. vivecana atyAbAdha agAdha, Atamasukha saMgraho
ho lAla."-zrI devacaMdrajI, uparamAM je nirvANa tatva kahyuM, ane tenA vAcaka je
vividha nAma kahA, tenA lakSaNamAM avisaMvAda che, saMvAda-maLatApaNuM che,
temAM visaMvAda-basurApaNuM nathI, tethI karIne te ekasvarUpa che. kAraNa
ke-"nirvANa eTale zuM ? (1) nirvANu svarUpa nirvANa eTale bUjhAI javuM, zAMta
thaI javuM, nivRtti pAmavI te. jema tela hoya tyAM sudhI dIva baLe che, tela
khUTI jAya eTale te tarata bUjhAI jAya che-nirvANa pAme che tema jyAM sudhI
karmarUpa tela hoya tyAMsudhI saMsArano dI baLyA kare che, paNa jevuM karmarUpa
tela khUTyuM ke tarata te saMsAra-dIpaka bUjhAI jAya che, holavAI jAya che,
nirvANa pAme che. Ama jyAM saMsAra-dIpaka bUjhAI jAya chenirvANa pAme che, te
pada nirvANapada che. (2) athavA nirvANa eTale zAMti, zAMta thaI javuM te. jyAM
sarva saMsArabhAva zAMta thaI jAya che, sarva parabhAva-vibhAva virAma pAme che,
te nirvANa che. AtmA jyAM sva svabhAvamAM vizrAMta thAya che, nistaraMga
samudranI jema parama zAMta thaI sva sahajAnmasvarUpamAM samAI jAya che, te
parama zAMtisvarUpa evuM pada te nirvANa che. (3) athavA jyAM sarva vRttiono
saMkSaya thayo che, arthAt sarva saMsAravRttio jyAM nivRtta thaI che, nivRtti
pAmI gaI che, ane kevala zuddha AtmasvabhAvamAM ja vartanArUpa vRtti jyAM varte
che, arthAt zuddha AtmapadarUpa svayaMbhUramaNa samudramAM niraMtara ramaNatA
che,-te nivRttipada athavA nirvANa che. ane uparamAM je sadAziva vagere zabdano
para mAthe darzAvavAmAM Avyo, te tatvathI vicAratAM, je nirvANane artha che,
teja te te zabdane jUttiH - takSAvisaMvAlA -tenA-nirvANunA lakSaNanA
avisaMvAdane lIdhe. e ja kahe che-nirAdhaMtirAbAdha, " niraM jAvAskaH
-AbAdhAomAMthI nirgata-mhAra nIkaLI gayela. (leza paNa bASA jyAM evuM),
banAnaye-anAmaya, jyAM dravya-bhAva rAga avidyamAna che evuM, nice 2-ane niSkaya
che, nibaMdhananA-kAraNanA abhAve kartavyanA abhAvathakI nikriya che. ghara
taracaM-evaMbhUta te 5raM tatva. catto-je kAraNa thakI, sanmAdyogata:-janma,
jarA, maraNanA aga thakI.

Page #480 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(404) Yoga-drishti-samuchaya Meaning, therefore, there is no discord in the
characteristics of Nirvana and the characteristics of Sadashiva, etc., there is
unity without discord. That is, Nirvana, Sadashiva, etc. are of the same form,
are one, it is extremely well-known. And thus, what is this Nirvana-tattva? It
is the supreme principle, which is free from obstacles, free from disease, and
inactive. It is of this nature-(1) Nirabadha-it has emerged from all obstacles;
it is free from even the slightest obstacle, it is of the form of non-
obstruction. And because this non-obstructed form is its state, there is a
unique, ultimate, innate, independent, unparalleled, non-obstructed, self-bliss
that is constantly experienced. (2) Niramaya-there is an absence of any kind of
material-emotional disease. There is an absence of the body, meaning that there
is no possibility of any material defilement related to the body. And the soul
is extremely pure, meaning that there is absolutely no absence of emotions like
attachment, aversion, and pride. Thus, this state is free from material and
emotional defilement, it is healthy, and here the supreme emotional health of
the soul, the state of its own form, the supreme health prevails. (3) It is
inactive. There is an absence of binding-cause, meaning there is an absence of
effect. Here, all actions have been completely destroyed, so there is no
motivating cause in the form of action, meaning there is no duty left. If there
is a cause, there is an effect, if there is no cause, there is no effect, this
is the eternal general rule. Thus, it is inactive. Unique, ultimate, innate,
nectar, independent, O Jinendra! Free from action, free from suffering, free
from other purposes, O Jinendra! “Pure result, the hero becomes the doer, drinks
the nectar of ultimate inactivity.” - Shri Devchandraji The combination of body,
etc., is ultimately abandoned; the Siddha remains in the eternal state,
gathering his own infinite bliss.” - Shrimad Rajchandraji's Atmasiddhi. This
supreme principle is free from obstacles, free from disease, and inactive,
because there is an absence of birth, old age, and death, there is an absence of
everything. Therefore, there is an ultimate absence of all suffering, because
“birth, old age, and death” are the “main causes of suffering”. And “its causes
are said to be two, “attachment, aversion, and their causes”. But here, this
main cause of suffering, birth, etc., is not present, and because of that, there
is also an absence of attachment and aversion. Therefore, in this supreme state
of Nirvana, any kind of obstacle, defilement, and the cycle of action-samsara
are completely impossible. The essence (tatparya) says—

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (404) yogadaSTisamucaya artha che, mATe nirvANane lakSaNamAM ane sadAziva AdinA
lakSaNamAM visaMvAda nathI, avisaMvAdarUpa ekatA che. arthAt nirvANa, sadAziva
Adi ekasvarUpa che, eka ja che, ema atyaMta prasiddha thayuM. ane Ama eka evuM A
nirvANutattva kevuM che? te ke nirAbAdha, nirAmaya ane niSkriya evuM te parama
tattva che. te A prakAre-(1) nirAbAdha-sarva AbAdhAomAMthI te bahAra nIkaLI
gayeluM che; AbAdhA arthAta lezamAtra bAdhAthI paNa te rahita che, avyAbAdha
svarUpa che. ane AvuM avyAbAdha svarUpa te pada hevAthI, tyAM ekAMtika,
AtyaMtika, sahaja, svAdhIna evuM anupama avyAbAdha Atmasukha niraMtara
anubhavAya che. (2) nirAmaya-Amaya eTale keIpaNa jAtanA dravya-bhAvarogane tyAM
abhAva che. dehane abhAva che, eTale zarIra saMbaMdhI kaI paNa dravya regane
tyAM saMbhava ja nathI. ane AtmAnI atyaMta parizuddhi varte che, eTale rAga-
dveSa-maha Adi bhAva rogane paNa bIlakula abhAva che. Ama dravyathI ne bhAvathI
A pada nirAmaya, nIrogI che, ane atre AtmAnuM parama bhAva Arogya,
svarUpasthitirUpa parama svAthya varte che. (3) niSkriya che. nibaMdhanane-
kAraNano abhAva che, eTale kAryane abhAva che. atre sarva kamane niHzeSa nAza
thaI gayuM hovAthI kamarUpa preraka kAraNa nathI, eTale kAMI kartavya paNa
rahyuM nathI. kAraNa hoya te kArya hAya, kAraNa na hoya te kArya paNa na hoya, e
sanAtana sAmAnya niyama che. Ama te niSkriya che. ekAMtika AtyaMtika sahaja
amRta svAdhIna ho jinajI! nirupacarita niddha% sukha, anya ahetuka pIna he
jinajI! "zuddha pariNAmatA, vIrya kartA thaI, parama akriyatA amRta pIdhe."--zrI
devacaMdrajI dehAdika saMyogane, AtyaMtika viga; siddha mekSa zAzvata pade, nija
anaMta sukha bhega."-zrImad rAjacaMdrajIkRta Atmasiddhi. AvuM nirAbAdha,
nirAmaya, ne niSkriya evuM te parama tatva che, kAraNa ke janma jarA-maraNane
tyAM aAga che, sarvathA abhAva che. eTale sarva duHkhano tyAM AtyaMtika abhAva
che, kAraNa ke "janma-jarA ne mRtyu" e ja "mukhya duHkhanA hetu" che. ane
"kAraNa tenA be kahyA, "rAga dveSa aNuhetu. paNa atre te mukhya du:khahetu A
janmAdi nathI, ane tenA kAraNe rAgadveSane paNa sarvathA abhAva che. eTale ja A
nirvANarUpa parama padamAM kaI paNa prakAranI bAdhAno, regane ane saMsaraNarUpa
kriyAnesaMsArane sarvathA asaMbhava ja che. eNpa (tAtparya) kahe che--

Page #481 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Damoda Drishti: There is no dispute for the knower of the non-dual supreme
reality  (405) For one who knows this state of nirvana without delusion, truly.
For the discerning, there is no dispute in devotion to that. 132  Meaning - This
state of nirvana has been known truly without delusion. For the discerning
(intelligent) ones, there is no dispute regarding devotion to it.  Explanation -
The supreme, undisturbed, flawless and inactive state of nirvana described
earlier has been known truly, without any delusion, through right discernment.
For the wise thinkers, there is no dispute regarding devotion to it, because
there is no distinction in the knowledge of the reality. There is no dispute,
because that would contradict the very nature of the discerning ones - those who
constantly focus on the ultimate truth. Even if there are differences in the
modes of worship and devotion towards that non-dual reality, the wise do not at
all care about it, because the goal is one, even if the paths may be diverse.
Just as one can reach Nagpur through different routes like Mumbai, Delhi, Madras
etc., similarly, although the followers of different philosophical traditions
may worship the nirvana principle in different ways, if their ultimate goal is
the same, there is no scope for any dispute regarding devotion to it. Therefore,
the knowers of the principle do not get entangled in the meaningless disputes
about the various spiritual practices. Because the true knowers of the nirvana
principle, who have its complete understanding, never dispute with each other;
in fact, they consider all those who worship that supreme nirvana principle as
their own spiritual brethren. But the ignorant ones, who lack the awareness of
the nirvana principle, though completely distant from it, dispute about it -
what? That is, for the discerning ones, there is no dispute regarding devotion
to that nirvana principle, because of the absence of distinction in the
knowledge of the reality, not because it would contradict their discernment.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dAmodaSTi : abheda paraMtatvavedIne vivAda na ghaTe (405) jJAte
nirvANatattve'sminnasaMmohena tattvataH  /  prekSAvatAM na tadbhaktau vivAda
upapadyate  //  132  //  asaMmohathI tAvathI, jANe tava A ukta; tasa bhaktimAM
vivAda nA, buddhivaMtane yukta, 132 artha- A nirvANa tatva asaMmohe karIne
tatvathI jANavAmAM AvyuM, prekSAvaMtene (buddhivane-vicAravAne) tenI bhakti
bAbatamAM vivAda ghaTatuM nathI. vivecana AvuM je nirAbAdha, nirAmaya ane
niSkriya evuM parama nivRtava uparamAM varNavyuM, tenuM svarUpa asaMmeha
bodhavaDe tavathI-paramArthathI jANavAmAM AvyuM, samyaka paricacheda karavAmAM
AvyuM, vicAravAna jIvone tenI bhaktinA taddaSTine viSayamAM vivAda ghaTatuM
nathI, kAraNa ke tatvajJAnamAM bhedane abhAva che. vivAda na ghaTe nahi te ja
vivAda karavAmAM Ave te prekSAvaMtapaNAne-vicAravaMtapaNAne virodha Ave. je
sujJa vicAraka ja che, te te niraMtara tatva bhaNI ja daSTi rAkhe che. tatva je
abheda hoya te pachI tenI bhakti-ArAdhanA vidhimAM game teTale bheda hoya, te
paNa tenI teo bIlakula paravA karatA nathI. sAdhya je eka che, te tenA sAdhaka
sAdhana game te hoya, tenA pratye teo durlakSya kare che, arthAt ISTa sAdhyarUpa
madhyabiMdu pratye ja derI jatA vividha sAdhanamArgo pratye teo kaTAkSadaSTie
jotA nathI. dAkhalA tarIke-nAgapura javuM hoya, te judI judI dizAmAM AvelA
muMbaI, dihI, madrAsa vagere zaherathI bhinna bhinna mAge tyAM pahoMcI zakAya,
paNa ISTa madhyabiMdu eka ja che tema bhinna bhinna darzana saMpradAyavALAo
nirvANa tatvane mAnya karI bhale tene bhinna bhinna prakAre ArAdhatA hoya, paNa
teonuM ISTa lakSya sthAna jo eka ja che, te pachI tenI bhakti bAbatamAM kaI
vivAdane avakAza raheto nathI. eTale tatvagrAhI daSTivALA sujJajano te te
sAdhanadharmanA mithyA jhaghaDAmAM paDatA nathI. kAraNa ke sAcA tattvajJAnIo ke
jeone nirvANa tattvanuM pUrepUruM bhAna che, teo te kadI paraspara jhaghaDe ja
nahiM; eTaluM ja nahi, paNa pitAnA parama ArAdhya evA te ISTa nirvANa padane je
anya koI bhaktithI ArAdhatA hoya, te sarvane potAnA sAdharmika ja mAne,
svadharmabaMdhu ja gaNe. paNa nirvANutattvanuM jene bhAna nathI, evA ajJAnIo
pote tethI atyaMta dUra chatAM, te - jUri-zte-paricchinna thaye,
nirdhAtaraveDamina -A evaMbhUta nirvANa tatva, saMtonaasaMmoharUpa bedhathI,
taravataH-paramArthathI. zuM ? te ke-kSAvatAM-prekSAvaMtene-buddhima tene, na
tatanathI tenI bhaktimAM, nivaNa taravanI sevA bAbatamAM, zuM ? te ke vivAra
356-vivAda ghaTatotatvajJAnamAM bhedanA abhAvane lIdhe,-nahiM te
prekSAvaMtapaNune virodha Ave, eTalA mATe.

Page #482 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Gidashtisamuchya  It is a great wonder that people argue about the worship of
the principle of Nirvana! The fault lies in the emptiness of the knowledge of
the principle. The great and capable philosopher, Shrimad Rajchandraji, has
spoken the ultimate truth in a very pleasing way in his great and influential
book, Shri Meksha Mala:  "There have been many differences of opinion in the
reign of Mahavira Bhagwan. One of the main reasons for this is that the devotees
have focused on the knowledge of the principle. They have only been interested
in actions, and the result is evident. The current population of the earth is
about one and a half billion. Of these, only twenty lakh are Jains, including
all the Gachchhas. These people are Shramanopasakas. Of these, I think that only
two thousand men will know the nine principles. Even fewer will be able to
understand them with contemplation and thought. When such a degenerate state has
arisen in relation to the knowledge of the principle, then differences of
opinion have increased. There is a worldly saying, "A wise man has one opinion."
Similarly, there is rarely any difference in the opinions of many philosophers.
Therefore, the knowledge of the principle is paramount." - Shri Meksha Mala.
From the above, it is clear that a wise person who knows the principle of
Nirvana properly will not argue, and one who argues is not wise. What is the
point of many?  । इति परंतत्त्वाभेदमार्गान्तराधिकारः । सर्वज्ञपूर्वकं
चैतन्नियमादेव यस्थितम् । आसनोऽयमृजुर्मागस्त दस्तत्कथं भवेत् ॥ १३३ ॥  This is
established by rule, with the knowledge of all. This straight path is close, how
can there be a difference? 133  Meaning - And because this principle of Nirvana
is established by rule, with the knowledge of all. And this path, which is close
to Nirvana, is straight and simple, how can there be a difference?  Commentary -
And this principle of Nirvana, which is established by rule, with the knowledge
of all, is close to Nirvana. This path, which is straight and simple, with the
knowledge of all, how can there be a difference? There is no difference.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 gidaSTisamucaya nirvANu tatvanI ArAdhanA bAbata paraspara jhaghaDe che, e
mahAAzcarya che! emAM tatvajJAnanI zUnyatAne ja doSa che. mahAsamartha
tattvajJAnI zrImad rAjacaMdrajIe mahAdazana-prabhAvaka zrI mekSamALA graMthamAM
atyaMta mananIya evuM parama satya ja bhAkhyuM che ke mahAvIra bhagavaMtanA
zAsanamAM bahu matamatAMtara paDI gayA che, tenuM mukhya A eka kAraNa paNa che
ke tattvajJAna bhaNIthI upAsaka varganuM lakSa gayuM. mAtra kriyAbhAva para
rAcatA rahyA, jenuM pariNAma daSTigocara che. vartamAna zepamAM AvelI pRthvInI
vasati lagabhaga deDha abajanI gaNAI che, temAM sarva gacchanI maLIne jaina
prajA mAtra vIza lAkha che. e prajA te zramaNopAsaka che. emAMthI huM dhAruM
chuM ke navatatvane paDanarUpe be hajAra puruSe paNa mAMDa jANatA haze; manana
ane vicArapUrvaka te AMgaLIne Terave gaNuM zakIe teTalA puruSe paNa nahIM haze.
jyAre AvI patita sthiti tattvajJAna saMbaMdhI thaI gaI che, tyAre ja
matamatAMtara vadhI paDyAM che. eka laukika kathana che ke "sa zANe eka mata,"
tema aneka tattvavicAraka puruSonA matamAM bhinnatA bahudhA AvatI nathI, mATe
tattAvadha parama Avazyaka che."-zrI mekSamALA. uparamAM je vivaryuM, te
uparathI ATaluM tAtparya phalita thAya che ke te nirvANutatvane samyaphapaNe
jANanArA vivekI vivAda kare nahi, ane vivAda kare te vivekI nahiM. suSa kiM
bahunA?  /  iti paraMtattvAbhedamArgAntarAdhikAraH  /  sarvajJapUrvakaM
caitanniyamAdeva yasthitam  /  Asano'yamRjurmAgasta dastatkathaM bhavet  //  133
//  sarvApUrvaka A vaLI, niyamathI ja che sthita; nikaTa A Rju mArga , teno
bheda zI rIta? 133 artha - ane kAraNa ke A nirvANa tatva sarva pUrvaka niyamathI
ja sthita che. ane nirvANane samIpa e A sarvajJarUpa mArga kAju-sarala che, te
pachI tene bheda kema hoya? vRtti - sarvajJapUrva caitaMduM-ane sarvattapUrvaka
A-nirvANa nAmanuM adhikRta tatva, niramA atta sthitamU-kAraNa ke niyamathI ja
sthita che,sarvane nirvANanI anupattine lIdhe AsoDAnirvANune Asana-samIpane, A
sarvata lakSaNavALo, gurmA-Rju-avakra mArga-paMtha, tame:-sarvajJa bheda,
matabhedarUpa lakSaNavALe, tata tethI, mata-kema hoya? na ja hoya.

Page #483 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  **Deemadrushti: Sarvagyaavak Nirvana-Sarvagya Abhed** (407)  **Discussion:**
"Different opinions are seen, this is the view of difference; in the root of one
principle, the interpretation is considered to be a distraction" - Shrimad
Rajchandraji. And this presented Nirvana is completely in accordance with the
rule, this is the situation, because Sarvagya never experiences Nirvana, meaning
that Nirvana is not attained without becoming Sarvagya, this is the rule.
Therefore, Sarvagya is the inevitable future state before Nirvana, and Nirvana
is attained only after becoming Sarvagya. This rule of Nirvana does not change
in the three times, this is the firm, established principle. Thus, this Sarvagya
is the path closest to Nirvana, and this path is straight, simple, and not
crooked, therefore it is uniform. How can there be a difference in opinion about
Sarvagya in such a uniform Sarvagya path? There is no, there is no. And since
there is no difference in Sarvagya, how can there be a difference in its
devotees? There is no, there is no. This is further proved and established from
the above.  **Meaning:** It is established by the rule that Nirvana is attained
only after becoming Sarvagya. Therefore, whatever is closest to Nirvana is
Sarvagya, and whatever path is closest to the goal is the state of Sarvagya.
This path is straight, simple, and not crooked, and in a straight, simple path,
there is only one difference; because how can there be a straight path to a
particular place? There is only one straight path (straight-line), there are
many crooked and winding paths, this is directly evident; similarly, this
Sarvagya path leading directly to Moksha is one. To follow this simple Sarvagya
path closest to Nirvana is the closest path to Nirvana, and there is no
difference in it. Then how can there be a difference in the true devotees who
follow it? "The wise have become in the past, they are in the present; they will
be in the future, there is no difference in the path." Shrimad Rajchandraji's
Shri Atmasiddhi.  **Unity of Sarvagya and Sarvagya Devotees - Summary:** The
arguments presented here regarding the unity of Sarvagya and Sarvagya devotees
are summarized as follows: (1) Although there is a difference in individuals in
the transcendental Sarvagya, from the general perspective, it is everywhere...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dImAdaSTi : savajJayvaka nirvANa-sarvajJa abheda (407) vivecana "bhinna bhinna
mata dekhoye, bheda daSTine eha; eka tattvanA mULamAM, vyAkhyA mAne teDa"--
zrImad rAjacaMdrajI. ane A prastuta nirvANa tava niyamathI ja sarva pUrvaka
hoya, ema sthiti che, kAraNa ke arvajJane kadI nirvANa ghaTe ja nahiM, arthAt
sarvajJa thayA vinA nirvANa pAme ja nahiM evo niyama che. eTale sarvajJapaNuM e
nirvANa pUrvenI avinAsarvajJapUrvaka bhAvI Avazyaka sthiti che, sarvajJa thayA
pachI ja nirvANa pAme, e nirvANa niyamamAM traNe kALamAM pheraphAra thAya ema
nathI, e nizcala nizcaya siddhAMta sthita che. Ama A sarvajJapaNuM nirvANane
atyaMta nikaTanI sthitirUpa mArga che, ane te mArga kAju che, sarala-sIdhe che,
vaka-vAMkAcUke nathI, eTale te ekarUpa ja che. AvA abhedarUpa sarvajJa mArgamAM
matabhedarUpa sarvajJabheda kema hoya vA? na ja hoya, na ja hoya. ane
sarvajJamAM bheda je nathI ja, te pachI tenA ArAdhaka bhaktomAM kema bheda hoI
zake? na ja hoya, na ja heya, e A uparathI vizeSa karIne pUravAra thayuM,
saMsiddha thayuM. tAtparya ke sarvajJa thayA pachI ja nirvANapadanI prApti
thAya, ema niyamathI siddha che. eTale nirvANune nikaTamAM nikaTa je kaI hoya te
te sarvajJa che, ane mekSano nikaTamAM nikaTa je kaI mAga hoya te te
sarvajJadazA che, A mArga kAjute sarvajJa sarala che, sIdhe che, vAMkecUke
nathI, ane je sIdhe sarala mAga hoya bhAmAM bheda te eka ja hoya; kAraNa ke koI
amuka sthaLe javAne sIdhe-sIdhI kema? lIMTIe jata (Straight-line) mArga eka ja
hoya, vAMkAcUkA-ADA avaLA mArga aneka hoya, e pratyakSasiddha che; tema mokSa
pratye sIdho laI jato A sarvajJatArUpa mArga eka ja che. AvA nirvANane nikaTamAM
nikaTanA sarala sarvajJamArgane bhajavuM, te nirvANane nikaTatama mAge che, ane
temAM koI paNa bheda nathI. to pachI tene bhajanArA sAcA ArAdhaka bhakta janamAM
kema bheda hoI zake vAru ? "AgaLa jJAnI thaI gayA, vartamAnamAM hoya; thAze kALa
bhaviSyamAM, mAgabheda nahi koya." zrImad rAjacaMdrajIkRta zrI Atmasiddhi.
sarvajJa ane sarvajJabhaktonI ekatA-sArAMza. sarvajJa ane sarvajJabhaktonI ekatA
bAbata atre je yuktio-dalIlo batAvI, tene sAra A pramANe-(1) pAramArthika
sarvajJa vyaktibheda chatAM sAmAnyathI sarvatra

Page #484 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(408) Yoga-drishti-samuccaya The truth is one; and it is not fully understood by
the ignorant. Therefore, from the general point of view, it is equal to the
omniscient, as far as possible, according to their understanding, which is the
same as the omniscient, i.e., the devotees of the omniscient are one. - Just as
the many servants of a king are considered to be in one category of his
servants. (2) Devotion to God is of two types: pictorial and non-pictorial.
Among them, devotion to the worldly God is pictorial, and devotion to the non-
worldly, liberated God is non-pictorial. Therefore, the desire of the seeker of
liberation, who desires to go to the liberated truth, is one. (3) The seekers of
liberation are one, and they are like the path of the conch in the ocean, one
despite the difference in stages. (4) Nirvana, the name of the ultimate truth,
is one despite the difference in names. Sadashiva, Parabrahma, Siddhatma, and
Tathata, etc., are all known by different names, but the Nirvana truth is one in
form. Such Nirvana truth is one, without any defects, without any diseases,
without any activity, and without birth, death, etc. Why should the seekers of
liberation who know and believe in this Nirvana truth argue? (5) This Nirvana
truth is omniscient. Omniscience is the only direct and near path to attain it,
without which it cannot be attained. Thus, the one Nirvana truth has one path,
which is the truth, then why is there a difference in omniscience? And if there
is no difference in it, then why is there a difference in the seekers of
liberation, who are the true devotees of the omniscient? । इति
सर्वज्ञतत्त्वाभेदप्रतिष्ठापको महा धिकारः ।  Different countries are not
different, the right of non-difference Why are there differences in countries?
The seeker asks: चित्रा तु देशनैतेषां स्याद्विनेयानुगुण्यतः । यस्मादेते
महात्मानो भवव्याधिभिषग्वराः ॥ १३४ ॥ Explanation: - Citra tu - again Citra, small
types, of countries, 'the soul is eternal', and 'it is not eternal', etc., such
- these - Kapil, Sugata, etc., are the goldsmiths, yat - hay, vineyaanu - nyat:
such types of vineyas - the disciples, according to their suitability - due to
their suitability. Due to the passage of time, the disciple who is afraid,
relying on the paryay, makes the upasarjan - secondary, such a substance-
dominant eternal country; and relying on the bhaga-astha, making the substance
secondary, such a paryay-dominant non-eternal country. And they are not ignorant
of the thing that has anvay-vyatireka, because they have the attribute of
omniscience (not the attribute of truth). In this way, the countries are
different, and in this way, they are different due to the difference in
qualities, and they are only invisible - they are only invisible. Therefore,
nothing is included in it, matmaan: - because these Mahatmas, are. What? Then -
mavyadhimishvar: - they are the best doctors of bhavyadhi. They are the main
doctors of the disease of the world.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (408) yogadRSTisamuccaya tattvathI eka che; ane tene vizeSa sa MpUrNapaNe asadI
ne gamya nathI. eTale sAmAnyathI te sarvajJane nirde bhapaNe yathAzakti tenA
AjJApAlanapUrNAMka je kei mAnatA hoya te sa tulya ja che, arthAt sarvajJabhakto
eka ja che.--jema eka rAjAnA aneka sevake tenA eka bhRtyavaga mAM ja gaNAya che.
tema. (2) devAnI bhakti citra-citra be prakAranI che. temAM sa'sArI deva
pratyenI bhakti citra, ane saMsArAtIta a-para tattva-mukta devanI bhakti acitra
che. eTale te eka mukta tattva pratye gamana IcchanArA mumukSu jogIjanAne mAga
eka ja che. ( 3 ) te mumukSuone mA eka ja-maparAyaNa evA che, ane te sAgaramAM
kAMDAnA mArganI peThe avasthAbhedane bheda chatAM eka ja che. (4) nirvANu nAmanu
para' tattva nAmabhe chatAM ekaja che. sadAziva, parabrahma, siddhAtmA, tathAtA
Adi yathArtha nAmeAthI oLakhAtuM te nirvANu tattva svarUpathI eka ja che. AvuM
nirvANu tattva nirAkhAdha, nirAmaya, niSkriya ne janmamaraNAdi rahita evu'
ekasvarUpa che. A nirvANutattvane jANanArA ne mAnanArA mumukSu cegIe vivAda kema
kare ? (5) A nirvANutattvane sa.jJapUrNAMka che. sajJatva ja ene pAmavAne Rju
ane nikaTa evA eka ja mArga che, tenA vinA tenI prApti nathI thatI. Ama
ekasvarUpa nirvANune satvarUpa mArga paNa eka ja che, tA pachI sajJamAM bheda
kema heAya ? ane temAM bheda na heAya te te sarvajJanA sAcA bhakta evA mumukSu
jogIjaneAmAM paNa bheda kema hAya ?  /  iti sarvajJatattvAbhedapratiSThApako
mahA dhikAraH  /  Jie  bhinna sarvadezanA abheda adhikAra dezanAbheda kema che ?
ema AzakIne kahe che-- citrA tu dezanaiteSAM syAdvineyAnuguNyataH  /  yasmAdete
mahAtmAno bhavavyAdhibhiSagvarAH  //  134  //  vRtti:--citrA tu-vaLI citra, nAnA
prakAranI, pherAnA-dezanA, ' AtmA nitya che,' ane anitya che,' ityAdipe tevAM-
eenI,-kapila, sugata Adi sonI, yAt- hAya, vineyAnu- nyata: tathAprakAranA vineSe
nA-ziSyAnA AnuguNyathI--khanukULapaNAne lIdhe. kAlAntara apAyathI bhIru evA
ziSyane AzrIne paryAyane upasarjana-gauNa karatI evI dravyapradhAna nitya
dezanA; ane bhAgaAsthAva'tane AzrIne dravyane upasarjana karatI evI
paryAyapradhAna anitya dezanA. ane te anvaya-vyatirekavALI vastunA jANunArA na
hoya ema nathI, kAraNa ke te te sarvajJapaNAnI anupatti hAya, ( sattapaNuM Te
nahi"). evA prakAre deDhanA tA tathAprakAre guNudanathI adRSTa ja che-nirdeSa ja
che. te mATe kazuMncamAvete mAtmAna:-kAraNu ke A mahAtmAo, sa`ze. zu ? tA ke-
mavyAdhimiSavara :-bhavavyAdhinA bhiSavarA che. saMsAravyAdhinA vaidyomAM
pradhAna che.

Page #485 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The teachings of the great ones are based on the principle of **dravya-pradhan**
(substance-oriented) and **paryaya-pradhan** (mode-oriented) **deshna**
(discourse) for the benefit of the disciples.   (409) The **deshna** of these
great ones is tailored to the individual disciple.   Because these great souls
are the physicians of the disease of **bhavvyaadhi** (the cycle of birth and
death), they use different methods of **deshna** to suit the disciple.   The
**vivechana** (analysis) of the **gayos** (scriptures) is the same for all, but
the style of explanation varies. The understanding of **syadvad** (the theory of
maybe) is also true. - Shrimad Rajchandraji  The question arises: If all are
one, why are their **deshna** so diverse? Why are there different styles?  The
answer is that the **deshna** of Kapil, Buddha, and others, as well as the
**gayos**, are tailored to the individual disciple. This is because these great
souls are the physicians of the disease of **bhavvyaadhi**, the disease of the
world.  Kapil, Sugat-Buddha, and other **darshanvadis** (philosophers) are
considered omniscient, but their **deshna** (teachings) differ. What is the
reason for this?  The great sage, the **shasakar** (ruler), has provided a
logical explanation. It is this: The style of explanation is tailored to the
specific disciple, to suit their nature, to benefit their soul, and to guide
them appropriately.  Therefore, all of them have done so according to the nature
of the disciple, in a way that benefits them and their soul. They have explained
things in different ways. Their goal is to guide the disciple to the right path,
to help them understand, and to bring them peace.  For example, if a disciple is
an **anitya-vadi** (believer in impermanence) and says, "This body and
everything in the world is impermanent, fleeting, and so is the soul. Then what
is the purpose of this religion? Why should we practice it?" If such a disciple
is afraid of impermanence and is **dravya-pradhan** (substance-oriented), then
the great ones would use a **paryaya-pradhan** (mode-oriented) **deshna** to
guide them. They would say, "Oh, **bhavy** (seeker)! Everything is eternal in
its substance, and so is the soul."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dImAdaSTi zikhya hitArtha dravyapradhAna-5ryAyapradhAna dezanA (409) citra
dezanA ehanI, ziSya AnuguNa kAja; kAraNa eha mahAtmA te, bhavavyAdhi vaidyarAja,
134 artha-paraMtu enI citra-jUdA judA prakAranI dezanA te ziSyanA
AnuguNyathIanukULapaNAthI heya; kAraNa ke A mahAtmAe bhavavyAdhinA bhiSavare
che. vivecana je gAyo te saghaLe eka, sakala dazane eja viveka, samajAvyAnI
zailI karI, syAdvAda samajaNa paNa kharI."--zrImad rAjacaMdrajI tyAre have
prazna UThe che ke je uparamAM pratipAdana karyuM tema sarvano abheda che, te
pachI eonI dezanA citra-vicitra kema che? judA judA prakAranI kema che? tene
ahIM javAba Ape che ke A kapila, buddha Adi sarvanI dezanA tathAje gAyo te
prakAranA ziSyonA AnuguNyathakI-anukULapaNAthakI citra eTale ke judA judA
saghaLe eka prakAranI hovI saMbhave che; kAraNa ke A mahAtmAo bhavavyAdhinA
bhiSavare che, saMsAra roganA vaidyarAje che. kapila, sugata-buddha Adine te te
darzanavAdIo sarvajJa mAne che, paNa teonI dezanAmAM-upadezapaddhatimAM bheda
paDe che, tenuM zuM kAraNa? tenuM yuktisaMgata samAdhAna atra mahAnubhAva
zAsakAra maharSie ApyuM che. ane te e che ke-je jevo samajAvyAnI ziSyarUpa
pAtravizeSa hoya, te te tene anukULa paDe-mAphaka Ave, zailI karI tenA AtmAne
guNa kare, e bodha kara, upadeza kare yogya jANI, te te sarvae tema karyuM che.
eTale ke tathAvidha ziSyavizeSanA AnuguNyathI, tene jema guNa upaje tema, tenA
AtmAnuM je rIte kalyANa thAya te rIte, teoe tene vividha prakAre "samajAvyAnI
zailI karI che. pAtravizeSane lakSamAM laI kaI paNa prakAre ziSyane ThekANe ANa-
svasthAne lAva-samajAve,' e ja teone ekAMta hita hetu heI, tenI dezanA zailI
jUdI paDe che. dAkhalA tarIke kaI anityavAdI ziSya ema kahe ke-A dehAdi anitya
che, jagamAM vastumAtra kSaNika che, kSaNabhaMgura che, tema A AtmA paNa anitya
che, te pachI A dharmamekSa Adi konA mATe? ne zA mATe karavA? ema anityapaNAthI
bhIru dravyapradhAna hoya, Darate hoya, tevA ziSyane baMdha karavAno hoya-
samajAvavAne dezanA hoya, tyAre teoe paryAyane gauNa karI, dravyapradhAna dezanA
dIdhI ke-ahe, bhavya ! pratyeka vastu dravyathI nitya che, tema A AtmA paNa

Page #486 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(10) The soul, from the perspective of yoga, is eternal in its essence (dravya)
but changes in its modifications (paryaya). Just like the ocean doesn't change,
only the waves do, similarly, the soul remains the same, only its states change.
The remembrance of the three states of childhood, youth, and old age, all
experienced by the same soul, clearly indicates the soul's eternal nature. Just
as a person discards old clothes and wears new ones, the soul sheds its worn-out
body and takes on a new one. The body changes, but the soul remains unchanged.
Therefore, knowing that the soul is imperishable, immortal, and indestructible,
you should be free from fear.  X “The soul is eternal in its essence (dravya),
but changes in its modifications (paryaya); The knowledge of the three states of
childhood, youth, and old age, is experienced by the same soul. Or, if someone
claims that knowledge is momentary, Then the one who claims so is not momentary,
as their experience proves otherwise. When does anything ever truly perish? If
consciousness perishes, then where does it merge? Investigate.” —Srimad
Rajchandra's Sri Atmasiddhi.  Furthermore, if any disciple has faith and
attachment towards the body, then, in order to make them understand, one should
emphasize the impermanence of the body by saying: – “Look! It is not appropriate
to have faith in these impermanent bodies. This entire world is momentary. It is
constantly perishing. Beloved relationships filled with jealousy and sorrow are
impermanent. This is the place of evil conduct. Youth is impermanent. Wealth,
born from intense suffering, is impermanent. And life, which is the cause of the
destruction of all beings, is also impermanent. Repeated birth, repeated death,
and repeated reliance on higher and lower states, all of this is present here,
so there is no happiness here. Thus, everything in this world is inherently
impermanent in its modifications (paryaya).  x " Just as one discards old
clothes and wears new ones, so too does one discard old bodies and take on new
ones. Just as one does not consider oneself lost when one's clothes are lost, so
too does one not consider oneself lost when one's body is lost." —Sri Pujyapada
Swami's Sri Samadhishatak. "Impermanent is the beloved union, filled with
jealousy and sorrow. Impermanent is youth, and the place of evil conduct.
Impermanent is wealth, born from intense suffering. Impermanent is life, the
cause of the destruction of all beings. Repeated birth, repeated death, and
repeated reliance on higher and lower states, all of this is present here, so
there is no happiness here. Thus, everything in this world is inherently
impermanent in its modifications (paryaya). Therefore, what is the point of
attachment for the wise? Abandoning the world, which is worthy of worship, and
the eternal stain, Serving others, the wise, the virtuous, have done their
duty." —Sri Haribhadracharya's Sri Shastravartasamuccaya, Stamak 1.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (10) yogadRSTijIvAya dravyathI nitya che, paryAyathI palaTAya che. ' kai
samudra palaTAtA nathI, mAtra meAjA` palaTAya che, tenI peThe.' mAla, vRddhane
yuvAna e traNe avasthAnuM smaraNa"jJAna eka ja AtmAne thAya che, e pragaTa
sUcave che ke AtmA nitya che. jema jUnA vastro badalIne manuSya navAM pahere
che, tema jINu thayelA dehane choDI AtmA navA dehane grahe che, khALIyu'
badalAya che, AtmA badalAtA nathI, mATe AtmA ajara, amara ne avinAzI che ema
jANI tuM bhaya ma pAma. X " AtmA dravye nitya che, paryAye palaTAya; khAlAdi
vaya traNyanuM, jJAna ekane thAya. athavA jJAna kSaNikanuM, je jANI vadanAra;
vadanArA te kSaNika nahi, kara anubhava niradhAra. kayAre kAi vastunA, kevaLa
hAya na nAza; cetana pAme nAza tA, kemAM bhaLe? tapAsa.' --zrImad
rAjacaMdrapraNIta zrI Atmasiddhi. vaLI bhAga pratye AsthAvata-Asakti dharAvatA
kAI ziSya hAya, tene medha karavAnA prasage, teee dravyane gauNa karI,
paryAyapradhAna evI anityadezanA dIdhI ke * - ahA ! A anitya bhAgeAmAM tyAre
AsthA karavI ceAgya nathI. A badhu ya jagata kSaNabha`gura che. pratikSaNe
vinazvara che. IrSyA ne zAkathI bharelA evA priyasayAga anitya che. kutsita
AcaraNanuM sthAnaka evu. yauvana anitya che. tIvra kaleza-samUhathI upajelI evI
saMpadAe anitya che. ane sabhAvanA nidhanarUpa-kAraNurUpa evu' jIvana paNa
anitya che. punaH punaH janma, punaH punaH mRtyu, ane punaH punaH ucca-nIca Adi
sthAnane Azraya karavA paDe che, eTale atre sukha che nahiM. Ama mA sa`sAramAM
badhuya prakRtithI paryAyapradhAna dezanA x " vAsAMsi jIrNAni yathA vihAya
navAni gRhNAti naro'parANi  /  tathA rAtALi vidAya gIocAni saMcAti navani
veddI'zrI bhagavadgItA " naSTe vastre yathAtmAnaM na naSTaM manyate tathA  /
naTe pheheDapthAmAnuM na naSTa hanyate puSaH ||"--zrI pUjyapAdasvAmIjIkRta zrI
samAdhizataka * " anityaH priyasaMyoga idderSyAzokasaMkulaH  /  anityaM yauvanaM
cApi kutsitAcaraNAspadam  //  anityA: saMpadastIvraklezavarga samudbhavAH  /
anityaM jIvitaM ceha sarva bhAvanibandhanam  //  punarjanma punarmRtyuhIMnA
disthAnasaMzrayaH  /  punaH punazca yadataH sukhamatra na vidyate  //
prakRtyasundaraM hyevaM saMsAre sarvameva yat  /  ato'tra vada kiM yuktA
kvacidAsthA vivekinAm  //  muktvA dharmaM jagadvaMdyama kalaGkaM sanAtanam  /
parArthasAdhakaM dhIraiH sevitaM zIlazAlibhiH || --zrI haribhadrAcArya chakRta
zrI zAstravArtAsamuccaya, stamaka 1.

Page #487 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
"Romadi: A thing that is Syadvadi in the form of Anvaya-Vyatireka is ugly.
Therefore, tell me, where else should the wise have faith except in one eternal
pure religion that is the only one in the world?" Thus, it seems that the
difference in the country of all of them is due to the purpose of the benefit of
the disciple, according to the difference in the character.  Moreover, it is not
that all of them are not aware of the thing that has Anvaya-Vyatireka, it is
certain that they are aware, otherwise their omnipotence will not decrease.
Because,  If they do not know the Anvaya-Vyatireka form, which is the
combination of Anvaya-form substance and Vyatireka-form Paryaya, how can they be
omniscient? Vyatireka-form and other pervasiveness, from that Anvaya-Vyatireka,
that is, substance-Paryaya, that thing,  Both of them together are the thing
that has a tendency to meet, that is a wise and consistent thing, even a person
with common sense can understand, then how can all of them not know? Because,
"There is no Paryaya without substance and there is no substance without
Paryaya," this other pervasiveness is famous. This other pervasiveness of
substance-Paryaya does not decrease even if it is considered as a separate
difference or non-difference. Because, if substance-Paryaya is considered as a
separate difference, then there will be attainment of Atiprasanga; if it is
considered as a separate non-difference, then there will be oneness of both of
them, then what is the need to consider substance-Paryaya as different? And
thus, if it is considered as a separate difference or non-difference, then
"Syadvada" will come, even the meaning of the word will not decrease; because,
wherever there is understanding, it is known by the name of Anvaya, and wherever
there is a separate and distinct truth, it is called Vyatireka. Thus, even the
meaning of the word will not decrease in a separate aspect. Moreover, in "other
pervasiveness," the words "other" indicate difference, and "pervasiveness"
indicates non-difference. Therefore, if both of them are considered as separate
differences, then the possibility of other pervasiveness arises, meaning that
the thing is different due to other pervasiveness of Anvaya-Vyatireka, that is,
the thing has a tendency to be different due to other pervasiveness of
substance-Paryaya, the thing is full of substance-Paryaya, this is proved
without contradiction by justice. * "Anvayo Vyatirekascha
Trayavyaparyayasamjnitau | Anyonyavyaptito bhedabhedavrttyeva vastu tau ||
Nanyoanvavaptirekantabhede'bhede cha yujyate | Atiprasangadaiakyasca
sabdarthannupapattitah || Anyoanvamiti yabhedam vyaptischaha viparyayam |
Bhedabhede dvayos tasmadanyonyavyaptisambhavaḥ || Evam nyayaviruddhe'smin
vigethodbhavanam nrinaam | Vyasanam va jadatvam va prakashayati kevalam ||" etc.
(for details see) Shri Haribhadrasuri's treatise Vartasamuh, Stabak. 7 "Natthi
vina parinam atho atham vineha parinamoh | Vvgunapajjayatho atho athittanivvatto
||" –Shri Kundakundacharyaji's Pravachansar, that is – there is no meaning
without transformation, and there is no transformation without meaning. The
meaning of substance-guna-Paryaya is proved by existence.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 romAdi : anvaya-vyatirekarUpa syAvAdI vastu asuMdara che. eTalA mATe, kahe, eka
jagadvaMdya sanAtana zuddha dharma zivAya ane kyAMya vivekIoe AsthA karavI yukta
che?" Ama pAtrabhede te te ziSyanA upakAra hetuo te sarvanI dezanAno bheda paDyo
hoya ema saMbhave che. vaLI te sarva kAMI anvaya-vyatirekavALI vastune jANanArA
na hoya ema nathI, jANanArA hoya ja e nizcaya che, nahi te temanuM sarvApaNuM
ghaTe nahi. kAraNa ke anvayarUpa dravya ane vyatirekarUpa paryAya, e banethI
yukta evuM anvaya- vastusvarUpa teo na jANatA hoya, te teonuM sarvajJapaNuM zI
rIte ? vyatirekarUpa ane anya vyAptithI te anvaya-vyatireka arthAt dravya-
paryAya e vastu bane maLIne bheTAleka vRttivALI ja vastu che, e yukti-susaMgata
vAta te sAmAnya buddhivALA budhajana paNa samajI zake che, te pachI A sarva na
jANatA hoya, ema kema bane? kAraNa ke " dravya vinAno paryAya nathI ane paryAya
vinAnuM dravya nathI,' ema anya vyApti prasiddha che. A dravya-paryAyanI a nya
vyApti paNa tene ekAMta bheda ke abheda mAnavAmAM AvatAM ghaTatI nathI. kAraNa
ke dravya-paryAyane ekAMta bheda mAnavAmAM Ave, te atiprasaMganI prApti thaze;
ekAMta abheda mAnavAmAM Ave, te te bannenuM akyaekapaNuM thaze, te pachI dravya-
pathAya judA mAnavAnI zI jarUra paDI? ane Ama ekAMta bheda ke abheda mAnavAmAM
"syAdavAda Avaze, te zabdArtha paNa ghaTaze nahiM; kAraNa ke sarvatra
anuvasamajaNa paNa cAlyo Ave te anvaye nAme oLakhAya che, ane ekatra vattI judI
kharI' tarI Ave te vyatireka kahevAya che. Ama zabdArtha paNa ekAMta pakSamAM
ghaTaze nahi. vaLI "a nya vyApti' emAM " anyAnya' e zabdo bheda sUcave che, ane
"vyApti' e abheda batAve che. mATe e banneno bhedabheda mAnavAmAM Ave te ja anya
vyAptino saMbhava thAya tAtparya ke anvaya-vyatirekanI* anya vyAptithI vastu
bhedAdarUpa ja che, arthAt dravya-paryAyanI anya vyatithI bhedabheda vRttivALI
vastu che, vastu dravya-paryAyamaya che, ema nyAyathI aviruddhapaNe siddha che.
* " anvayo vyatirekazca TravyaparyAyasaMjJitau  /  anyonyavyAptito
bhedAbhedavRttyeva vastu tau  //  nAnyo'nyavyAptirekAMtabhede'bhede ca yujyate
/  atiprasaMgAdaikyAzca zabdArthAnupapattitaH  //  anyo'nyamiti yabhedaM
vyAptizcAha viparyayam  /  bhedAbhede dvayostasmAdanyonyavyAptisaMbhavaH  /  /
evaM nyAyaviruddhe'smin vigedhodbhAvanaM nRNAm  /  vyasanaM vA jaDatvaM vA
prakAzayati kevalam  /  / " ityAdi (vizeSa mATe juo) zrI haribhadrasUrikRta
zAstra vArtAsamu , stabaka. 7 "Natthi viNA pariNAma attho atthaM viNeha pariNAmo
/  vvaguNapajjayattho attho atthittnnivvtto||" -zrI kuMdakuMdAcAryajIprIta
pravacanasAra, arthAta-pariNAma vinAne artha nathI, ane artha vinAne pariNAma
nathI. dravya-gaNu-paryAyasthita artha astitvathI siddha thAya che.

Page #488 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(12) How can it be that the true nature of things, which is understandable by
good intellect and established by logic, is beyond the knowledge of all those
who are knowledgeable? It cannot be. They must surely know the true nature of
things, but for the benefit of their disciples, they have spoken in different
ways, giving prominence to different aspects. Therefore, they are blameless,
innocent. Because, in the hearts of these great souls, there must be a sense of
subordination of the relative to the eternal, and of the material to the non-
eternal. Any statement can only be made with the prominence of some aspect of
the Nay and the subordination of other aspects, because only one aspect can be
present in a statement at a time, and in knowledge, all aspects are present
simultaneously. However, in a statement, one can only speak of each aspect in
turn, giving prominence to one and subordinating the others. Therefore, it is
understood that the statement of these great souls is not absolute. “Kunthunath
Prabhu Deshnar, Sadhak Sadhan Siddhi; Goun Mukhyata Vachan Ma Re, Gnan Te Sakal
Samruddhrire. Kunthu Jinesaru! Vastu Anant Swabhav Chhe Re, Anant Kathk Tasu
Name; Grahak Avsar Bedhthi Re, Kaheve Arpit Kame Re. Kunthu”—Shri Devchandraji.
And it is not surprising that such supremely benevolent Mahatmas and Mahapursha
would do this, because their main objective was to cure this being of the great
disease of Samsara in any way possible. Therefore, these omniscient beings, like
the great physicians of the world, have recognized the nature of the being
suffering from the disease of birth and death, and have given them the medicine
of Deshna, which is suitable and beneficial to them. Even in practice, a skilled
physician, recognizing the nature of the patient and diagnosing the disease,
treats them properly and gives them appropriate and balanced medicines. For
example, the medicine that is beneficial for a person with a Pitta constitution
is not beneficial for a person with a Kapha constitution, and the medicine that
is beneficial for a Kapha constitution is not beneficial for a Pitta
constitution; the medicine that is beneficial for a Vata constitution is harmful
for a Kapha constitution, etc. Keeping these aspects in mind, they experiment
with medicines. Similarly, these great physicians of the world, the Mahatmas,
have also experimented with different types of Deshna medicines, taking into
account the nature of the being, it is understood. What does this show? It says
– *" विज्ञानमात्रमप्येवं बाह्यसंगनिवृत्तये । विनेयान् कांश्चिदाश्रित्य यद्वा
तद्देशनाईतः ॥ न चैतदपि न न्याय्यं यतो बुद्धो महामुनिः । सुवैद्यवद्विना कार्य
द्रव्यासत्यं न भाषते ॥" “Any other way to get rid of this external association,
all this is just a war of desires!” –Shastravarta Samucchay

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (12) yogadaSTisamuccaya AvuM saddabuddhigamya nyAyaprasiddha vastusvarUpa jJAnI
evA sarvanI jANa bahAra hAya, ema kema bane? na ja bane. tevuM yathArtha
vastusvarUpa teo avazya jANatA ja hevA joIe, paraMtu ziSyanA hitahitue teoe tevA
tevA prakAre gau-pradhAna bhAvathI judI judI dezanA karI che, mATe te aduSTa ja
che, nirdoSa ja che, kAraNa ke nitya dezanA karatAM paryAyane gauNubhAva, ane
anitya dezanA karatAM dravyane gauNubhAva, te mahAnubhAvonA hRdayamAM hovo ja
joIe. kaI paNa dezanA amuka naya-apekSAnA pradhAnapaNathI ne anya apekSAnA
gauNapaNathI ja thaI zake kAraNa ke vacanamAM eka vakhate eka apekSA ja AvI
zake, ane jJAnamAM te sarva apekSA ekI sAthe bhAsyamAna thAya, chatAM vacanathI
te anukrame eka eka apekSA ja gauNa-mukhyabhAve kahI zakAya. eTale te
mahAnubhAvanuM kathana ekAMtika nathI, ema Azaya samajAya che. "kuMthunAtha
prabhu dezanAre, sAdhaka sAdhana siddhi; gauNa mukhyatA vacanamAM re, jJAna te
sakala samRddhire. kuMthu jinesarU! vastu anaMta svabhAva che re, anaMta kathaka
tasu nAme; grAhaka avasara bedhathI re, kaheve arpita kAme re. kuMthu"--zrI
devacaMdrajI. ane tevA parama upakArI mahAtmA mahApuruSe Ama kare emAM Azcarya
nathI, kAraNa ke koI paNa prakAre A jIvane saMsArarUpa mahAroga maTe e ja temane
mukhya uddeza hatuM. eTale bhavyAdhinA bhiSagavare-vaidyarAje jevA A sarvajJAe
bhavavyAdhinA te te jIvanI prakRti eLakhI, tene mAphaka Ave anukULa paDe, guNa
bhiSagavare kare, evI dezanA auSadhi teone ApI. vyavahAramAM paNa kuzaLa
vaidyarAja hoya te rogInI prakRti eLakhI, roganuM nidAna pArakhI, barAbara
cikitsA karI, tene yogya anupAnayukta auSadhAdi Ape che. temAM pitta
prakRtivALAne je auSadha mAphaka Ave, te kaphavALAne na Ave, kaphavALAne sade,
te pitta prakRtine na phAve; vAta prakRtine guNa kare, te kaphaprakRtine avaguNa
kare; ItyAdi apekSA lakSamAM rAkhI te auSadha prayoga kare che. tema A
bhavaraganA vaidyarAja mahAtmA sarvAe paNa tevA tevA prakAre jIvanI prakRti
pramANe viveka karIne tevI bhinna bhinna dezanAauSadhine 1 prayoga karyo che,
ema samajAya che. A uparathI zuM? te kahe che- *" vijJAnamAtramapyevaM
bAhyasaMganivRttaye  /  vineyAn kAMzcidAzritya yadvA taddezanAItaH  //  na
caitadapi na nyAyyaM yato buddho mahAmuniH  /  suvaidyavadvinA kArya
dravyAsatyaM na bhASate  // " "anya vamiratye metarAthanivRttaze vi sarvameveti
yuddhanovAM kAmanA !" -zAstravArtAsamuccaya

Page #489 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Habad: The glorious physician, the remover of all diseases, has bound the seed-
deposit and other things. (413). "For whom, in what way, the seed-deposit and
other things are possible, for him, in that way, they have said here." - 135
Commentary: "The physician of the world, Jineshwaru, the medicine of the soul,
your devotion; Devchandra, the glorious Arihant, is the support of this person."
- Shri Devchandraji. And as said above, this great soul is the remover of all
diseases of the world - the king of the physicians of the world's afflictions.
Therefore, for the being who, in what way, the seed-deposit and other things are
possible, in that way, they have, like a skilled gardener of the seed-deposit
and other things, done the work of instruction for him. It is in this way: -
Just as for plants, according to the rules of all scriptures, some plants need a
certain type of fertilizer to grow. Some other plants need a different type of
fertilizer. Thus, different types of fertilizer have to be applied to different
plants. Keeping this point in mind, the skilled gardener applies fertilizer to
the land so that the seed-deposit is formed, the seeds are sown, and they
sprout. Similarly, this skilled physician also applies fertilizer in the form of
instruction to the mind-land of the disciple, who is a special type of vessel,
so that the right faith - the seed - is deposited, and it grows. Just as the
gardener, even after the seed-deposit is formed, even after the seeds are sown,
waters them so that the sprouts grow, so this skilled king of physicians also
waters that disciple with the water of good instruction so that the faith-seed
sprouts and grows. Then, just as the gardener, to protect the tender plants,
makes a fence around them, binds them, and waters them, so this expert physician
protects the growing virtue - the disciple - who, in what way, due to the
characteristics of the eternal law, the seed-deposit and other things, which are
possible due to the non-attachment to the objects of the senses, are possible,
by doing the enjoyment and other things, by becoming attached, in that way, by
the virtue of the northern direction, has done, for him, in that way, they have
said, they have sung, for that reason.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 hAbAdaH bhavyAdhi bhiSavarene bIjAdhAnAdira baMdha (413). yasya yena prakAreNa
bIjAdhAnAdisaMbhavaH  /  sAnubandho bhavatyete tathA tasya jagustataH  //  135
//  sAnubaMdha bIja Adine, saMbhava jene jema tene eoe ahIM, bAdha karyo che
tema, 135 artha -jene je prakAre sAnubaMdha bIjAdhAna Adine saMbhava thAya, tenA
pratye tevA prakAre teoe teTalA mATe kahyuM che. vivecana "bhavaraganA vaidya
jinezvarU, bhAvauSadha tuja bhakti; devacaMdrane zrI arihaMtane, che AdhAra e
vyakti."-zrI devacaMdrajI ane Ama uparamAM kahyuM tema A mahAtmA sarva
bhavavyAdhinA bhiSavare che-saMsArareganA vaidyarAje che, eTalA mATe ja je
prANIne je prakAre sAnubaMdha bIjAdhAna Adine saMbhava thAya, tevA prakAre teoe,
kuzala bIjAdhAnAdi mAlInI peThe, tenA pratye upadezakArya karyuM. te A prakAre
:-vanaspatithAya te badhA zAstranA niyama pramANe kaI choDane UgavA mATe amuka
jAtanuM khAtara joIe che. koI bIjA cheDane mATe bIjI jAtanuM khAtara khape che.
Ama jUdA jUdA choDane mATe judI judI jAtanuM khAtara nAMkhavuM paDe che. A muddo
lakSamAM rAkhIne kuzala mAlI bhUmimAM bIjAdhAna thAya, bIja ropAya, UgI nIkaLe,
evuM khAtara nAMkhe che. tema A kuzala bhiSavara paNa gya pAtravizeSarUpa
ziSyanI cittabhUmimAM samyagU bedha-bIjanuM AdhAna thAya, paNa thAya, tevuM
bhaveDhega upaje evuM upadeza rUpa khAtara nAMkhe che. mALI jema bIjAdhAna thayA
pachI paNa, bIja ropAyA pachI paNa, temAMthI aMkuraphaNago phUTe tema
jalasiMcana kare che tema A nipuNa vaidyarAje paNa te te ziSyane te bedhabIja
UgI nIkaLI temAMthI aMkura phUTe evuM sadupadezajala siMce che. pachI mALI jema
te kumaLA choDane rakSavA mATe tenI AsapAsa vRtti-vADa kare che, jyAre bAMdhe
che, ane tene pANI pAyA kare che, tema A niSNAta vaidyavare ziSyanA UgatA
dharUpa kRti - zya-je prANane, jena kALa-nityadezanA Adi lakSaNavALA je prakAre,
cIkAthInArisaMmavA bIjAdhAna Adine saMbhavatAprakAre bhoga Adi bhAve karIne,
sAnu po mavati-sAnubaMdha thAya tevA prakAre uttara guNaddhi vaDe karIne, te-A
sarvAe tathA tevA prakAre, toya tene, tenA pratye, gajdakahyuM che, gAyuM che,
tad-teTalA mATe.

Page #490 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(414) To protect the sapling, the Guru creates a fence of vows and conduct,
provides it with a suitable foundation, and helps it grow. Then, with great care
and affection, the Guru nurtures the sapling, just as a gardener cultivates a
sapling into a fruit-bearing tree; similarly, this physician of the soul makes
the disciple a tree of liberation. Just as a skilled gardener, through the act
of sowing seeds, takes care of the sapling until it becomes a fruit-laden,
humble tree, so this great physician of the soul, with compassion, showers the
disciple with the nectar of teachings, ensuring that the seeds of right conduct
sprout, grow progressively, and ultimately bear the fruit of liberation. For,
the sole purpose of these supremely wise, supremely compassionate, and supremely
merciful physicians of the soul is to bring about the disciple's welfare. Just
as the sole purpose of a physician is to cure the patient as quickly as
possible, so these physicians of the soul, regardless of the severity of the
disease, administer the medicine, with the sole purpose of the disciple's well-
being. Similarly, these physicians of the disease of rebirth, without
hesitation, administer the medicine of teachings that can cure the disease of
rebirth, eliminate the delusion of the self, and bring about liberation. Their
sole purpose is to quickly cure the disease of rebirth, eliminate the delusion
of the self, and thereby the delusion of rebirth. If they believe that the
disciple will benefit from the teachings of the eternal, they emphasize those
teachings; if they believe that the disciple will benefit from the teachings of
the non-eternal, they emphasize those teachings. They use their wisdom to
administer appropriate teachings as needed. Thus, it is understood that the
difference in teachings arises from their selfless purpose. "The delusion of the
self is like a disease, and the wise Guru is the physician; the Guru's command
is like medicine, and contemplation is the cure." - This is how the second
chapter of the *Atmasiddhi Pariharantar* resolves the doubt. "Even though there
is only one teaching, it appears different due to the difference in the
listeners. This is due to the inconceivable power of merit, which arises from
the karma of the listener." - This means that the eternal, non-eternal, and
other types of teachings appear differently due to the karma of the listener.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (414) gadarisarusthaya choDane rakSavA mATe vrata-vRttirUpa vADano prabaMdha
karI ApI, tene tevA prakAranuM sAdhajala pAyA karI parivRddhi pamADe che. ane
pachI khUba kALajIthI-mAvajatathI cheDane ucherIne jema mAlI te cheDa
phalaphUlathI zebhatuM vRkSa thAya tevuM kare che; tema A bhiSaguvAre paNa
ziSyane bedharUpa choDa mokSavRkSarUpa bane ema kare che. Ama jema kuzala mAlI
bIjAdhAnathI vRkSa mAMDIne phalabhArathI namra vRkSa thavA paryata cheDanI
kALajIbharI saMbhALa le che, tema A mahAnipuNa vaidyarAje ziSyane sAnubaMdha
bIjAdhAnAdi thAya, arthAt samyagu bAdhabIja UgI nIkaLI, uttarottara guNavRddhi
pAmI, yAvat mekSaphaLa prApta thAya, tema upadezAmRta jaladhArA vahAvI niSkAraNa
karuNAthI kALajIbharI saMbhALa le che. kAraNa ke AvA parama vivekI, parama
kRpALu, parama kRpAnidhAna A bhAva-vaidyarAjone ekAMta hetu game tema karIne
ziSyanuM kalyANa karavAnuM che. jema savaidyano hetu rogIne jema bane tema
jaladI rogamukta karavAne-sAjo karavAno ja hoya che, ekAMta ziSya pachI game te
esaDathI sAro thato hoya, te te osaDa te ni:saMkecakalyANa hetu paNa ajamAve
che. tema A bhavaroganA bhiSavaro paNa je upadeza auSadhithI A jIvane bhavaroga
maTe, tenI AtmabrAMti TaLe, te auSadhino ni:zaMka prayoga karatAM acakAtA nathI,
kAraNa ke teono ekAMta hetu jema bane tema jaladI jIvane bhavarUpa bhAvoga
maTADavAno che. javanI AtmabrAMti ne tethI thatI bhavabhrAMti dUra karavAno che;
eTale nityapradhAna dezanAthI ziSyane guNa thAya ema che evuM lAgyuM, te teoe
nityadezanA upara bhAra mUkyo; ane anityapradhAna dezanAthI lAbha thAya ema che
evuM dekhyuM te anityadezanA para bhAra mUkyo. jyAM jema ghaTe tema viveka
vAparI teoe yathAyogya upadeza dIdho. Ama paramArtha hetue karIne sarvonI
dezanAmAM bheda paDyo haze, ema Azaya samajAya che. AtmabrAMti sama roga nahiM,
sadguru vaidya sujANa; guru AjJA sama padhya nahiM, auSadha vicAra dhyAna "--zrI
Atmasiddhi parihArAntara-bIjA prakArane zaMkAno parihAra (samAdhAna) kahe che-
ekApi dezanaiteSAM yadvA zrotRvibhedataH  /  acintya puNyasAmarthyAttathA
citrAvabhAsate  //  136  //  kRtti-pAri rerAnA-dezanA eka chatAM tenA
mukhamAMthI vinimana-nIkaLavAne AzrIne eka chatAM, teNa-A sarvajJAnI, yaddA-
athavA to, zokUvamerata-zrotAonA vibhedathI, tathA bhavyatAnA bheda karIne,
nipuNatA -acinta puNyanA sAmarthyathakI, eTale ke para bedhanA AzrayathakI
upajelA karmanA vipAkane lIdhe, ema artha che, tathA-tevA nitya Adi prakAra,
trivimAre-citra avabhAse che.

Page #491 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The picture of a country shines forth from the unfathomable, unchangeable,
meritorious power of the omniscient! (415) Although there is only one such
country, it appears differently to different listeners; Because of the
unfathomable, meritorious power, the picture shines forth in this way, 136
Meaning: - Or, although there is only one country of the omniscient (of all), it
appears differently to different listeners, because of the unfathomable,
meritorious power. Discussion: Or, why is there a difference in the speech of
the omniscient? To resolve this contradiction, another logical explanation is
given here - although there is only one country of the omniscient, it appears
differently to different listeners, because of the influence of the
unfathomable, meritorious power. In other words, although there is only one
picture, it appears as the country of the omniscient, depending on the
listener's understanding of the omniscient's speech. There is only one, but
because of the difference in the nature of the listener, the picture appears
differently! Thus, the speech spoken by the omniscient is of the same kind, but
there is a difference in the nature of the listeners, there is a difference in
their merit and worthiness, so there is a difference in the listeners,
therefore, the omniscient speech appears differently to them because of the
unfathomable, meritorious power of the omniscient! Therefore, according to the
merit of the father, each listener understands the omniscient speech as being
beneficial to the father, and accepts it in a way that is beneficial to himself.
Therefore, each listener understands that the Lord is speaking to him! It is
said that the omniscient Tirthankara, residing in the Samavasarana, gives the
country. Then, all beings, including animals, birds, and humans, understand it
in their own language, and they understand its meaning! This is the wonderful,
all-encompassing power of the word. And thus, even one speech appears in many
forms - in the form of a picture, and this is the influence of the unfathomable,
meritorious power of the omniscient Lord. Because, with the power of the
supreme, noble, compassionate feeling of "I will rule all beings", they have
accumulated a great store of merit due to their teachings. This miraculous,
extraordinary, great power emanates from them because of the ripeness of that
merit! Just as the rain from the clouds is one, but when it falls on the earth,
it flows in different ways according to the shape of the earth, so this all-
pervading, torrential, rain of teachings is of one kind, but it appears
differently to different listeners, because of their different capacities. "
तेषामेव स्वस्वभाषापरिणाममनोहरम् । बलवे वरं ते ઘwવવો 1 ”–श्री हेमचन्द्राचार्यजीत
वीतरागस्तव,

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dIodaSTi acitya puNya sAmarthyathI eka dezanA citra bhAse ! (415) eka chatAM
tasa dezanA, zrotRbhedathI tema; acinya puNya sAmarthyayathI, citra bhAsatI ema,
136 artha:-athavA te eonI (sarvanI) dezanA eka chatAM, zrotAonA vibhede karIne,
acitya puNya sAmarthyane lIdhe, tathA prakAre citra-jUdI jUdI avabhAse che.
vivecana athavA te sarvajJonI vANImAM bheda kema paDe che? e virodhane parihAra
karavA mATe bIje yuktisaMgata khulAse ahIM karyo che -eonI dezanA eka chatAM,
zrotAonA vibhede karIne, acitya puNya sAmarthyanA prabhAvane lIdhe, tevA
sarvajJa dezanA prakAre citra bhAse che! arthAt e sarvajJonA mukhavinigamane
apekSIne eka chatAM citra eTale ke eenA mukhamAMthI nIkaLI te apekSAe te teonI
dezanA bhAse ! eka che, chatAM tathAbhavyatvanA bhedathI zrotAonA bhedane lIdhe
te citra bhAse che ! Ama te sarvajJonA mukhamAMthI karelI vANI te eka ja
prakAranI che, paraMtu zrotAomAM tathAbhavyatvane bheda hoya che, judI judI
bhavyatA-cogyatA hoya che, eTale zretAono bheda paDe che, tethI karIne te
sarvajJavANI eonA acitya puNya prabhAvathI te te zretAne citra-judI judI
pratibhAse che! eTale pitApitAnI bhavyatA pramANe pratyeka zrotA sarvajJavANIne
pitapatAne upakArI evI anukULa apekSAmAM samajI jAya che, potapotAne kalyANakArI
anukULa arthamAM grahaNa karI le che, eTale pratyeka sAMbhaLanAra jANe emaja
samaje ke bhagavAna A jANe mane ja uddezIne kahI rahyA che ! emax kahevAya che
ke samavasaraNamAM birAjI bhagavAna tIrthakara sarvajJadeva dezanA Ape che.
tyAre pazu-pakSI, manuSyAdi sarva koI potapotAnI bhASAmAM tene bhAva samajI jAya
che, tene artha grahaNa karI le che! A adbhuta sarvanA vacanAtizaya hoya che, te
e ja paramArtha sUcave che. ane Ama eka vANI paNa anekarUpe-citrarUpe bhAsyamAna
thAya che, te bhagavAna sarvajJanA acitya puNya sAmarthyane ja prabhAva che.
kAraNa ke "savi jIva karUM zAsanarasI' evI parama udAtta parepakAra bhAvanAnA
balathI, popadezanA kAraNe karI, teoe mahApuNyasaMbhAra saMcita karyo hato. te
puNyanA paripAkavaze karIne A camatkArakArI atizayavaMta mahAprabhAva teono
varte che ! jema meghavRSTi te eka ja hoya che, paNa bhUmi para paDatAM, te te
bhUminA AkAra pramANe judA judA vaheLA vahe che, tema A sarvazoe vaSavela
bedhadhArAmaya upadezavRSTi eka ja prakAranI che, chatAM bhinna bhinna zrotA
pAtranI x " teSAmeva svasvabhASApariNAmamanoharam  /  baLevA varaM te ghawvavo 1
"-zrI hemacaMdrAcAryajIta vItarAgastava,

Page #492 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(416) When these different streams of meaning fall into the Chittabhumi of the
listener, they take on different forms! This indicates their unparalleled
excellence in speech! “There are thirty-five virtues of speech, and they are in
the form of non-contradiction, they are the cause of the destruction of the
suffering of existence and the cause of Shiva-Sukha, they are in the form of
pure Dharma.” - Shri Devchandraji And he also says that it is not that there are
no virtues, he says - यथाभव्यं च सर्वेषामुपकारोऽपि तत्कृतः ।
जायतेऽवन्ध्यताप्येवमस्याः सर्वत्र सुस्थिता ॥ १३७ ॥ From this, benefit arises for
all, as per their worthiness, This is the nature of this, it is established
everywhere. 137 Meaning: - And as per their worthiness (according to their
worthiness), benefit arises for all from this, thus this success of this country
is also established everywhere. Discussion “The nectar of speech of the
Vitaraga, the ultimate peaceful essence; Medicine for the suffering of
existence, unfavorable to the coward.” - Shrimad Rajchandraji And thus, the
omniscient speech appears differently to different listeners, even though it is
one, and what is even more amazing is that it benefits all according to their
worthiness. Thus, the omniscient speech produces its success - its infallibility
- which is established everywhere. Shri Sarvagna's speech is one, yet it appears
in many forms, and not only that, but the pure nectar of speech that is heard,
benefits all the listeners who hear it. Action - and as per their worthiness, to
the worthy, to all, to all, benefit also, even, then from this, from the
country, arises, arises, is present, is revealed. Success also, infallibility
also, thus, this, of this country, established everywhere. *
“क$ष्टपुष्यामबातिहार्यान्वितः वगेषण शोमांसयमन्चे नियतः | » –Pagbild

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (416) gadarisasu thayA cittabhUmimAM paDatAM te bhinna bhinna artha pravAha
dhAraNa kare che! A temane apUrva vacanAtizaya sUcave che ! "vANI guNa pAMtrIza
anepama, avisaMvAda sarUpe re, bhava duHkhavAraNa zivasukha kAraNa, sUdhe dharma
prarUpe re."--zrI devacaMdrajI ane ema paNa guNa nathI ema nathI, te kahe che-
yathAbhavyaM ca sarveSAmupakAro'pi tatkRtaH  /  jAyate'vandhyatApyevamasyAH
sarvatra susthitA  //  137  //  ethI upaje sarvane, yathAbhavya upakAra
avasthatA sthita ehanI, sarvatra eha prakAra. 137 artha:-ane yathAbhavya (bhavya
pramANe) savene tenAthI karAyele upakAra upaje che; Ama A dezanAnI A avadhyatA
(saphaLatA) paNa sarvatra susthita evI che. vivecana "vacanAmRta vItarAganA,
parama zAMta rasamULa; auSadha je bhavaraganA, kAyarane pratikULa."--zrImad
rAjacaMdrajI ane Ama sarvajJadezane eka chatAM bhinna bhinna zrotAne bhinna
bhinna bhAse che, te paNa vizeSa AzcaryakArI te e che ke tenAthI te sarvane
yathAbhavyatva pramANe upakAra paNa thAya che. Ama sarvajJa vANInI sarvatra
susthita evI avadhyatA-aniSphaLatA upaje che. zrI sarvajJavANI ekarUpa chatAM
citrarUpe bhAse che, eTaluM ja nahiM paNa, te pAvana amRtavANuM je sAMbhaLe che,
te sarva sAMbhaLanAra zrotAne tenA thakI u5kAra paNa thAya che, kRtti -Ama ra-
ane yathAbhavya, bhavyane sada, sarve-sarvene, samaDaji-upakAra paNa, gaNa 5Na,
tAtA tenAthI karAyelA, dezanAthI nipana-nIpaje, gAjate-upaje che, prAdavi che,
pragaTe che. javADaji-avaMdhyatA paNa, aniSphaLatA paNa, parva-ema, ukta nItithI
acA-AnI, A dehanAnI, sarvatra suriyA-sarvatra susthita evI. *
"ka$STapuSyAmabAtihAryAnvitaH vagezana zomAnsayamance niyataH | >> -pagabilDa

Page #493 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Hamaddhi: Ravana's Avadhya Desh's (417) And that favor, the listener's as much
as much magnificence-worthiness is, it happens according to the omniscient. As
much as much as whose whose worthiness-eligibility is, that Avadhya Desh's that
that to him him favor happens, virtue arises, self-benefit happens is. As much
as much as whose whose absorbing power, who who who about destruction-
pacification-special, that that all that he absorbs. As if some Amrit Sarover is
filled, from it as much as vessel is, that much vessel-proportion reception
happens, so this omniscient Vachanamrit Sagar from, that-like vessel-proportion
reception happens. That Amrit Sindhu from, from whom as much as is possible, as
much as possible Amrit-drinking properly all some listeners do, and from that
him that type self-virtue happens, that check. Bhav upadhi gad avoid, Prabhuji
is Vaidya Amegh re; Ratnatrayi Aushadh done, you saved Bhavjan Ogh re. Dev
Vishal Jirnodni, you Dhyan Tatvasamadhi re.”—Shri Devchandraji Because the
patient truly Vaidya gets, and Amegh Amrit Aushadhi to the world has become,
that that him rag away why not happens? So this self-delusion from arisen this
Bhav-shaped Maha-rag who to is applied, such this magnificent listeners to Shri
Sarvagya-shaped supreme Aushadh to the virtue-worthy to the world brought, and
they have projected supreme Aushadhi-shaped Videsh to the destruction Amritvani
ear to fell, then after them that rag why not be removed? Why not be stubborn?
Patient to the disease is stubborn or not, him virtue happens or not, that that
his fault away-shaped sign from is recognized. As speech, bile and phlegm's
disharmony from arisen Tridosh from someone is suffering, him Aushadh is given,
that that his Tridosh away is seen, that understand that this Aushadh from him
virtue happened; so this Bhav-patient rag, hatred and love-shaped Tridosh
confluence from is suffering, him this rag-hatred-love-shaped Tridev which
supreme peaceful juice-rooted omniscient Vachanamrit from away happened, yes
that happened, that know that this Aushadh to this virtue is. And this
omniscient Vachanamrit listening from that that listener's rag-hatred-love-
shaped Tridosh certainly away happens, away is stubborn, garland falls, that is
certain. So it is said that, Sarvadesh's listened love-veil away happening
something being to Sarvavirat Parinam-bhav arises, something is Deshviratibhav
to attains. Something to Samyagdarshan is received, and something just
auspicious-bhav in position does. Mahi being Lehko Kanchan, do Paras heavy is -
Samati Suratru Van Sechanmen, Var Pushkar Jaldhari he.” Shri Devchandraji

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 hamAddhi: rAvaNanI avadhya dezanA (417) ane te upakAra, sAMbhaLanAranuM jevuM
jevuM bhavyatva-ogyapaNuM hoya te sarvajJanI pramANe thAya che. jevI jevI jenI
jenI yogyatA-pAtratA che, te avaMdhya dezanA te tene tene upakAra thAya che,
guNa upaje che, AtmalAbha thAya che. jevI jevI jenI jenI jhalavAnI zakti, je je
jene kSayopazamavizeSa, te te badhuM te jhIle che. jema keI amRtasarovara
bharyuM hoya, temAMthI jevaDuM pAtra hoya, tevaDuM pAtrapramANa grahaNa thAya
che tema A sarvajJa vacanAmRta sAgaramAMthI tathAvidha pAtrapramANa grahaNa
thAya che. te amRtasiMdhumAMthI jenAthI jeTaluM bane teTaluM yathAzakti
amRtapAna yatheca7paNe sarva kaI zrotA kare che, ane tethI tene tathA prakArane
AtmaguNa thAya che, te cekasa. bhava upAdhi gada TALavA, prabhujI che vaidya
amegha re; ratnatrayI auSadha karI, tame tAryA bhavijana ogha re. deva vizAla
jirNodanI, tame dhyA tatvasamAdhi re."--zrI devacaMdrajI kAraNa ke rogIne sAce
vaidya maLe che, ane amegha amRta auSadhine jaga banya che, te tene rega dUra
kema na thAya? tema AtmabrAMtithI upajele A bhavarUpa mahArAga jene lAgu paDyo
che, evA A bhavya zrotAjanene zrI sarvajJarUpa parama auSadhane guNaka sadyane
jaga lAvyo che, ne teoe projelI parama auSadhirUpa videSane nAza amRtavANI kAne
paDI che, to pachI teone te rega kema na maTe? kema na haThe? rogIne roga haThe
che ke nahiM, tene guNa thAya che ke nahi, te tenA doSa dUra thavArUpa cithI
parakhAya che. jema vAta, pitta ne kaphanI viSamatAthI upajelA tridoSathI koI
pIDAte hoya, tene auSadha ApavAmAM AvatAM je teno trideSa dUra thate dekhAya te
samajavuM ke A auSadhathI tene guNa thaye; tema A bhavarogI rAga, dveSa ne
meharUpa tridoSa sannipAtathI pIDAI rahyo che, tene A rAga-dveSa-meharUpa
trideva je parama zAMta rasamULa sarvajJa vacanAmRta thI dUra thaye, vA e che
thaye, te jANavuM ke A auSadhane A guNa che. ane A sarvajJa vacanAmRta
zravaNathI te te zrotAnA rAga-dveSa-meharUpa tridoSa avazya dUra thAya che, dUra
haTe che, mALA paDe che, e nizcita che. ema kahevAya che ke, sarvadezanA
sAMbhaLI mehapaTala dUra thatAM kaMIka jIvane sarvavirati pariNAma-bhAva upaje
che, kaMIka che dezaviratibhAvane pAme che. kaMIka ne samyagadarzana sAMpaDe
che, ane kaMIka ja zubhabhAvamAM sthiti kare che. mAhI jIva lehako kaMcana,
karave pArasa bhArI ho - samati surataru vana secanameM, vara puSkara jaladhArI
he." zrI devacaMdrajI

Page #494 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(18) The omniscient speech, filled with infinite and infinite shades of meaning,
and explained with infinite and infinite principles, is beneficial to the entire
universe, the entire world, it is a garland of compassion, it is the savior of
the ocean of existence, and it is the guide of the path of liberation. To
compare such omniscient speech to the speech of the Jineshwar is a waste of
time, and to compare it to the speech of the Jineshwar is a sign of arrogance,
for he who knows this, knows that his own intellect is being measured. Such a
supremely virtuous and omniscient speech is not understood by the young souls,
only he who knows it, knows it. And in this way, Shrimad Rajchandraji, in his
immortal poetry, praises the unique nature of the speech of the Jineshwar with
utmost reverence - "Filled with infinite and infinite shades of meaning, it is
explained with infinite and infinite principles; it is beneficial to the entire
universe, the entire world, it is a garland of compassion, it is the savior of
the ocean of existence, it is the guide of the path of liberation; to compare it
to the speech of the Jineshwar is a waste of time, for by comparing it, one's
own intellect is measured; Oh Rajchandra! The young souls do not understand
this, only he who knows the speech of the Jineshwar, knows it." Shrimad
Rajchandra's Moksha Mala. Thus, the omniscient speech always bestows upon its
listeners the appropriate virtues, therefore it is omnipresent, infallible, and
unfailing, that is, it is always successful in all ways and everywhere, this is
a certain state. The omniscient speech is like a panacea, it never fails. The
alternative explanation (another type of solution) says - यद्वा तत्तन्नयापेक्षा
तत्कालादिनियोगतः । ऋषिभ्यो देशना चित्रा तन्मूलैषापि तत्त्वतः ॥१३८॥  tatkaladin
niyogathi, te te nayasapeksha chitra deshana rishithaki tanmel a pan vakha, 138
Meaning - Or, it is the picture of the speech of the sages, which is based on
that particular principle, and which is influenced by that time and other
factors, this is also true, it is the speech of the omniscient, the root of all
knowledge. Commentary - Or, it is, tat-tan-na-apeksha - based on that particular
principle, with the emphasis on the substance, the body, etc., tat-kal-adin-
niyogathi - due to the influence of that time and other factors, due to the
force of the passions, etc., - from the sages, from Kapil, etc., it is the
picture of the speech, the picture of the speech. And this too, is not pure,
therefore it is said that this too, is the speech of the omniscient, tat-tvath -
from the truth, from the ultimate reality, - according to its teachings, and due
to its nature.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (18) gadaricaya kAraNa ke anaMta anaMta bhAvabhedathI bharelI, tathA anaMta
anaMta jayanikSepe vyAkhyAna karelI, evI sarvasavANI sakala jaganI hitakAriNI
che, mehanI hAriNI che, bhavasAgaranI tAriNI che, ane mekSanI cAriNuM che. evI
sarvasavANIne jinezvarataNuM upamA ApavAnI tamA rAkhavI te phegaTa che, ane
upamA ApavAnI zaNa, jANI ke dhRSTatA kare te tenA uparathI tenI potAnI matinuM
mApa nIkaLI teNe jANI che" jAya che! AvI parama guNakAriNI sarvajJavANIne bAla
jIvo khyAla nathI pAmatA, te guNakhANI vANI te jeNe jANI teNe ja jANI che. ane
tevA prakAre zrI "jinezvaranI vANI'nI ananya bhAvathI parama prazaMsA karatA
amara kAvyamAM zrImad rAjacaMdrajIe lalakAryuM che - "anaMta anaMta
bhAvabhedathI bharelI bhalI, anaMta anaMta naya nikSepe vyAkhyAnI che; sakaLa
jagatahitakAriNI hAriNI meha, tAriNI bhavAbdhi mekSa cAriNI pramANa che; upamA
ApyAnI jene, tamA rAkhavI te vyartha, ApavAthI nija mati, mapAI meM mAnI che;
aho rAjyacaMdra! bAla, khyAla nathI pAmatA e, jinezvara taNI vANI jANI teNe
jANuM che." zrImad rAjacaMdrapraNIta mokSamALA. Ama sarvajJavANI zrotAone
yathAyogya upakArarUpa guNa avazya kare che, eTalA mATe enuM sarvatra
avadhyapaNuM che, aniSphaLapaNuM che, ameghapaNuM che, arthAt sarvadA sarvathA
sarvatra saphaLapaNuM che, e nizcita sthiti che. sarvajJavANuM rAmabANa jevI
amegha che, kadI paNa khAlI jatI nathI. prakArAntara (bIje samAdhAna prakAra)
kahe che - yadvA tattannayApekSA tatkAlAdiniyogataH  /  RSibhyo dezanA citrA
tanmUlaiSApi tattvataH  // 138 //  tatakAlAdi niyogathI, te te nayasApekSa citra
dezanA RSithakI tanmela A paNa vakha, 138 artha--athavA te te te nayanI
apekSAvALI citra dezanA te kAla Adi nivegathI traSio thakI pravartI che, A paNa
tattvathI te taskUla-sarvajJamUla vANI che. vRtti -ca-athavA te, tattanApekSA-te
te nayanI apekSAvALI, dravyAstikAya Adine adhikRta karIAzrIne, tawAiinayota -te
kAla AdinA niyogathI, duSabha AdinA vegathI, -RSio thakI, kapila Adi thakI ja,
terazanA citrA-dezanA citra che. ane A paNa, nirmala nathI, eTalA mATe
kahyuMtanyUTakArate sarvazadezanAla A paNa, tattvata tattvathI,
paramArthathI,-tenA pravacananA anusAra thakI tathA prakAre pravRttine lIdhe.

Page #495 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Dah: Kadi Sapeksha Ruvideshanaanu Mul Savarnaa (419) Vivechana “Rachana Jin
Upadeshaki, Parmattam Tin Kaal; Inmen Sab Mat Rahat Hai, Karte Nij
Sambhaal”–Shreemad Rajchandraji. Aheen Vali Prastut Vaatne Beeja Prakaare
Khulaaso Karyo Chhe. Te Kaalnaa Aadina Nirogthi Te Te Nayni Apekshawali Aa
Chitra Deshnaa Kapil Aadi Rishiyo Thaki J Pravati Chhe, Ane Aa Rishi Deshanaanu
Mul Pan Tatvthi Sarvdeshana J Chhe, Kaalaadi Sapeksha Kaaran Ke Sarvagna
Pravachanaa Anusaare J Teni Tatha Prakaare Pravruti Chhe. Aam Chitra Rishi
Deshana Te Te Deshnaa Chitra-Judi Judi Bhaase Chhe, Tenun Prakaarantare Aa
Yuktiyukta Kaaran Pan Sambhave Chhe Ke-Tevi Judi Judi Deshnaa Swayam Trashiyo
Thaki J Chali Aavi Chhe, Arthat Kapil Aadi Rishiyoe J Tevi Bhinna Bhinna Deshnaa
Pravruti Kari Chhe. Ane Tem Karvamaan Teo Desh-Kaal Aadi Joi Vichaari Ne
Pravarya Chhe. Sarvatra Dravya, Kshetra, Kaal, Bhav Aadi Jeine Pravartvu E
Vichakshanaanu Kartavya Chhe E Niyam Chhe. Atle E Mahanubhavoae Dusham Kaal-
Karal Kalikaal Vagere Paristhiti Lakshmaan - Laine, Ane Jeevo naa Sarv-Sanveg Ne
Vignaanvishesh Khyalmaan Rakhi Ne Anushasan Karyu Chhe, Vyastiak Aadi Nayni
Apekshaae Jaatjaatni Deshnaa Kari Chhe. Shree Siddhasen Diwakar Suurishvare
Kahyu Chhe Ke – " Desh Kaalanvayaacharavayahprakritimaatmanam. Viveg
Vignaanvishesh Javanushasanam ” –aatrishat Dvaatrishika. Desh Kaalaadi Jota J
Nitaydeshana Upkaari Lagi, Te Teoae Dravyastiak Naynaa Pradhanpane Upadesh
Karyo, Je Anity Deshnaa Upayogi Lagi, Te Paryayastiak Nayni Mukhyataathi Upadesh
Karyo, Athava Anya Koi Apeksha Karyakari Lagi, Te Tene Pradhanpad Aapi Upadesh
Karyo. Aam Te Te Nayne–Apekshavisheshne Aashri Ne Teoae Sarvatra Tevi Tevi
Upadesh Padhdhati Angikar Kari Chhe Kaaran Ke Game Tem Kari Jeevni Aatmbranti
Dur Kari, Tene Nij Aatmsvarupne Laksh Karavi “Thekane Aanuu” E J Ek Emno Mukhya
Uddesh Hatun. Atle E J Ek Vivek Teoae Sarvatra Nij Nij Darshanmaan Gay Chhe, Ane
Te Samajavva Mate Ni Judi Judi Shaili-Kathannriti Akhtyar Kari Chhe. Je Gaye Te
Sagale Ek, Sakal Darshanne Ej Vivek Samajavyaani Shaili Kari, Swaaduvaad Samajan
Pan Khari.” –Param Tatvadashta Shreemad Rajchandraji,

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dAhaHi kAdi sApekSa RvidezanAnuM mUla savAranA (419) vivecana "racanA jina
upadezakI, paramAttama tina kAla; InameM saba mata rahata hai, karate nija
saMbhAla"-zrImad rAjacaMdrajI. ahIM vaLI prastuta vAtane bIjA prakAre khulAso
karyo che. te kALanA AdinA nirogathI te te nayanI apekSAvALI A citra dezanA
kapila Adi RSio thakI ja pravatI che, ane A RSidezanAnuM mUla paNa tatvathI
sarvadezanA ja che, kAlAdi sApekSa kAraNa ke sarvajJapravacananA anusAre ja tenI
tathA prakAre pravRtti che. Ama citra RSidezanA te te dezanA citra-judI judI
bhAse che, tenuM prakArAMtare A yuktiyukta kAraNa paNa saMbhave che ke-tevI judI
judI dezanA svayaM traSio thakI ja cAlI AvI che, arthAt kapila Adi RSioe ja tevI
bhinna bhinna dezanA pravRtti karI che. ane tema karavAmAM teo deza-kAla Adi joI
vicArIne pravaryA che. sarvatra dravya, kSetra, kAla, bhAva Adi jeIne
pravartavuM e vicakSaNanuM kartavya che e niyama che. eTale e mahAnubhAvoe
duHSama kALa-karAla kalikAla vagere paristhiti lakSamAM - laIne, ane jIvonA
sarva-saMvega ne vijJAnavizeSa khyAlamAM rAkhIne anuzAsana karyuM che, vyAstika
Adi nayanI apekSAe jAtajAtanI dezanA karI che. zrI siddhasena divAkara sUrIzvare
kahyuM che ke - " dezakAlAnvayAcAravayaHprakRtimAtmanAm  /  vivegavijJAnavizeSa
javAnuzAsanam " -Atrizata dvAtri zikA. dezakALAdi jotAM jo nityadezanA upakArI
lAgI, te teoe dravyAstika nayanA pradhAnapaNe upadeza karyo, je anitya dezanA
upayogI lAgI, te paryAyAstika nayanI mukhyatAthI upadeza karyo, athavA anya koI
apekSA kAryakArI lAgI, te tene pradhAnapada ApI upadeza karyo. Ama te te nayane-
apekSAvizeSane AzrIne teoe sarvatra tevI tevI upadeza paddhati aMgIkAra karI che
kAraNa ke game tema karI jIvanI AtmabrAMti dUra karI, tene nija AtmasvarUpane
lakSa karAvI "ThekANe ANu" e ja eka emano mukhya uddeza hatuM. eTale e ja eka
viveka teoe sarvatra nija nija darzanamAM gAya che, ane te samajAvavA mATenI
judI judI zailI-kathanarIti akhatyAra karI che. je gAye te saghaLe eka, sakaLa
darzane eja viveka samajAvyAnI zailI karI, svAduvAda samajaNa paNa kharI."
-parama tatvadaSTA zrImada rAjacaMdrajI,

Page #496 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(420) The terms "Yogadristi Samuray" and "Nay" both convey the same ultimate
meaning. "Nay" is derived from the root "ni," which means "to lead towards" or
"to direct." It can be defined as "the way that leads to a particular aspect of
the truth," or "the way that expands from a smaller perspective to encompass a
larger one." It can also be defined as "a specific determination that grasps an
aspect of the true nature of things without rejecting other aspects."  Anything
that rejects other aspects is not "Nay" but rather "Durnay" (incorrect Nay) or
"Nayabhas" (an illusion of Nay). "Nay" can also be understood as "Nyaya"
(justice). Through the just method of "Nay," one can impartially examine the
infinite aspects of the truth in a sequential manner. The term "Nay" is also
used in the context of "Upadesh" (teaching), as in the phrase "Upadesh che te
Nany che" (teaching is Nay). This is because teaching can be based on specific
perspectives. Therefore, teaching is also "Nay," as it guides the soul towards
the right path based on specific perspectives. It is a "style of explanation,"
and therefore, even the teachings of the "Trishi Desh" (three worlds) are
considered to be "Nay-related."  The value of such relative teachings ultimately
stems from the "Tattva" (truth) or "Paramarth" (ultimate reality), which is the
knowledge of the "Sarvagna" (omniscient). The omniscient knowledge examines
every aspect of reality without being biased by any particular "Nay." There is
no teaching or meaning in the omniscient knowledge that is devoid of "Nay."
However, the "Nay" is explained based on the understanding of the listener. Any
error in the teachings of the omniscient is due to the specific perspective of
the listener, and the value of all teachings ultimately originates from the
omniscient knowledge. Just as many rivers originate from a mountain, so too do
various teachings originate from the omniscient knowledge. The words of the
great soul, Shrimad Rajchandraji, are a testament to this, as he offers his
heartfelt devotion to the omniscient knowledge: "Oh, the noble, peaceful, and
righteous path! Oh, the omniscient God, the source of the most excellent,
peaceful, and righteous path!"   + "नानास्वभावेभ्यो व्यावृत्त्यैकस्मिन्स्वभावे
वस्तु नयति प्राप्नोतीति नयः।" "प्रकृतवस्त्वंशग्राही तदितरांशाप्रतिक्षेपी
अध्यवसायविशेषो नयः ।" –Shri Yashvijayji-krit Narhasya. + "जो न्तwówwwजुवाते
चुस्तता दुर्नयाः” –Shri Haribhadrasuri-krit Panchashat. x "नथि नएहि विहुणं
सुत्तं अत्थो अ जिणमए किंचि । । गायज्ઞ ૩ લોયા ના નવવિલા કૂવા ” Shri
Jinabhadragani Kshamasraman-krit Visheshavashyak Sutra.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (420) yogadaSTisamurAya ane "naya' zabdane paramArtha paNa e ja sUcave che,
kAraNa ke "nI" dhAtu uparathI naya eTale vastusvarUpa aMza pratye derI jAya ,
athavA "nAnA svabhAvamAMthI vyAvRtta karI eka svabhAvamAM vastune dorI jAya-
pahoMcADe te naya;" athavA "prakRta vastunA aMzanuM grahaNa karate paNa tenA
Itara-bIjA aMzane pratikSepa- vidha nahiM karate adhyavasAyavizeSa te naya. " je
Itara aMzane apalApa kare-pratikSepa kare, te te naya nahiM, paNa durnaya+
athavA nayAbhAsa bane che athavA naya eTale nyAya. nayarUpa nyAyapaddhatithI
niSpakSapAtapaNe anaMtadharmAtmaka vastusvarUpanA aMzonuM anukrame
parIkSaNatelana thaI zake che. ane "upadeza che te nanya che,' 'vaso so nAma',
arthAt nayajanya upadezamAM naya padane upacAra thAya che. kAraNa ke upadeza
paNa amuka apekSAvizeSanA pradhAnapaNathI thaI zake che. eTale upadeza che te
paNa naya che, apekSAvizeSathI jIvane sanmArge doravaNIrUpa che, "samajAvavAnI
zailI' rUpa che, mATe te te traSidezanAne paNa nayasApekSa kahI te yathArtha
che. AvI sApekSa RSidezanAnuM mUla paNa tatvathI-paramArthathI sarvajJadezanA ja
che, kAraNa ke parama pramANabhUta sarvajJavANI ja pratyeka vastune-keI naya na
dubhAya ema-anaMta naya apekSAe parIkSe che. sarva vANImAM nayavihIna evuM koI
sUtra raSidezanAnuM ke artha nathI,x paNa zretAne AzrIne niyavizArada naya kahe-
prakAze. bhUla sarvajJadezanA eTale paramArthathI te te naya apekSAe
zrotAvizeSane AzrIne karavAmAM AvelI sarva RSidezanAonuM mUla udbhavasthAna
sarvajJavANI ja che, ema svayaMsiddha thAya che. jema aneka nadIonuM mUla
prabhavasthAna parvata che, tema vividha dezanA-saritAonuM mUla janmasthAna
sarvajJavacana che. parama bhAvitAtmA zrImad rAjacaMdrajInuM A sarvajJavANIne
parama bhaktibhAvAMjali arpatuM TakotkIrNa vacanAmRta che ke ahe! te satkRSTa
zAMtarasamaya sanmArga ! aho ! te sarvotkRSTa zAMtarasapradhAna mArganA mULa
sarvajJa deva! + "nAnAsvabhAvebhyo vyAvRttyaikasminsvabhAve vastu nayati
prApnotIti nyH|" "prakRtavastvaMzagrAhI taditarAMzApratikSepI adhyavasAyavizeSo
nayaH  / " -zrI yazavijyajIkRta narahasya. + "je ntawowwwjuvAte custatA
durnayAH" -zrI haribhadrasurita paMcAzata. x "nathi naehi vihuNaM suttaM attho a
jiNamae kiMci  /   /  gAyajJa 3 loyA nA navavilA kUvA " zrI jinabhadragaNi
kSamAzramaNakRta vizeSAvazyaka sUtra

Page #497 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Dimdarshti: Rejection is Highly Harmful  (421) Oh! You, the most merciful
Sadguru Dev, who has made the most excellent peaceful rasa well-understood! May
you always be victorious in this world! Jayavant Vatt! - Shrimad Rajchandraji
Thus, according to the all-knowing discourse, those Rishi Deshanas are like the
daughters of one loving mother, diverse yet rooted in the same shelter.
Therefore, they are also inseparable from the ultimate goal.  “The disciple
learns from the Jina Deshana, the people say the maturity is different, the Muni
says the path is different, but from the ultimate goal they are inseparable...”
- Shri. S. 4-20.  Figure 13 (1) All Deshana Picture (2) All Dev are One (3)
Rishi Deshana Picture (According to time, place, etc.)  The picture appears
differently to different listeners. All Deshanas are one. Paraya-predominant,
Dravya-predominant, Anideshana, Nisandeshana (for the benefit of the disciple).
Even those who are outside the Deshana, the all-knowing ones, reject the
prohibition, the right, the nature, the Rishi, and the people say:  "Without
knowing their intention, it is not right for the virtuous to reject them.
Rejection of them is highly harmful." - 139  1. Di - Taminaath - their
intention, everyone's intention, Agnatvi - without knowing, R - not, Tad -
because of that, Arvadashan Sattan - Avagudashti (sixth) saints, the virtuous.
What? That - Gu - Tat - Gati - their rejection is appropriate, or special!
Therefore it is said - Manarth - Maha Anarthkaranasil, of the nature to cause
great harm, P - Par, Pradhan x"  "We are certain about the methods of dependence
on others, some of the wisdom that shines forth." - Shri Siddhasen
Divakarachkrit Dva Dva.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dImadaSTiH pratikSepa mahAanarthakara (421) aho ! te sarvotkRSTa zAMtarasa
supratIta karAvya evA parama kRpALu saddaguru deva! tame A vizvamAM sarvakALa
jayavaMta vatte ! jayavaMta vaoN !"--zrImad rAjacaMdrajI Ama sarvajJa pravacana
anusAre ja pravartelI te te RSidezanAo eka ja vatsala mAtAnI saMpIlI putrIo jevI
che, vividha chatAM mUla te eka ja AzrayavALI che. eTale paramArthathI te paNa
abhinna che. "ziSya bhaNI jina dezanA, kahe jana pariNati bhinna kahe muninI
naya dezanA, paramArthathI abhina....mana"-zrI . sa. 4-20. AkRti 13 (1) sarva
dezanA citra (2) sarvadevanA eka (3) RSidezanA citra (dezakAlAdi pramANe)
zrotAbhede citra bhAse sarva dezanA eka paryAyapradhAna dravyapradhAna anidezanA
nisaMdezanA (ziSyakalyANa*). tti videzanADamepijhADA sarvajJa pratikSepa niSedha
adhikAra prakRta RSiothakI jana kahe che- tadabhiprAyamajJAtvA na tato'gdRizAM
satAm  /  yujyate tatpratikSepo mahAnarthakaraH paraH  //  139  //  1 di-
taminAtha-teone abhiprAya, sarvane abhiprAya, ajJAtvi-jANyA vinA, ra-nathI, tad
-te kAraNathI, arvAdazAM sattAM-avagudaSTi (chaThastha) saMtane, pramAtRone.
zuM? te ke-gu tatta gatize teone pratikSepa yukta, ke viziSTa ! te mATe kahyuM-
mAnartha-mahA anarthakaraNazIla, mahA anartha karavAnA svabhAvavALo, pa-para,
pradhAna x" sunizcitaM naH parataMtrayuktiSu, sphurati yAH kAzcana sUktasaMpadaH
/  tavaiva te pUrvakALavocittA, jAstranA binavAvavigH " zrI siddhasena
divAkarachakRta dvA dvA.

Page #498 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(422) Chey Shishurudh Tas abhipray ladha vina, chhadmasthane lagar; pratikshep
tasayukt na, par mahanakar. 139 Meaning: Therefore, without knowing the opinion
of the wise, it is not appropriate to oppose the false saint who is the cause of
great suffering. Commentary “Sab shastranake nay dhari hiye, mat mandan khandan
bhed liye; Vahu sadhan khar anat karya, tadapi kachhu haju na paan’–Shreemad
Rajchandraji. As mentioned above, due to these reasons, it is not appropriate
for the false saints who are ignorant to oppose the wise without knowing their
opinion. What kind of opposition is this? It is the one that causes great
suffering. Regarding the resolution of the differences in the various schools of
thought, as mentioned above, what is the intention of the omniscient? Without
understanding this, it is not appropriate for the ignorant, i.e., the false
saints who are seekers of truth, to oppose them. Because the knowledge of the
false saints is covered and very limited. The false saints without omniscience
are truly blind! They conduct their affairs with the help of scriptural
knowledge, which is like a blind man's stick. Just as a blind man feels around
to identify an object, this scriptural knowledge is like a blind man's touch.
How can the false saints see and know the truth with this? Therefore, it is not
surprising that the false saints cannot illuminate the meaning of the subject of
omniscience, but it is truly amazing that they know anything at all! “Sarvagya
vishay sansthanchhadmastho prakashyatyarthan. Nashcharyamevavatyapurna tu
kishishi veshi.” Shree Siddhasen Divakachchh Murti Dvadvad. 8-11 Furthermore,
the schools of thought with their different views are also fundamentally rooted
in the omniscient, they arise from it, and therefore they are also part of the
omniscient. Thus, the six main schools of philosophy are also integral to the
teachings of the omniscient, and opposing them is truly opposing the omniscient.
Shree Anandghanji's immortal words are: ★ "Antarakevaljhanam chhadmastha
khalvachchhush. Hastasparshasam shakhyajnanam tadvyavaharkrit.” –Shree
Yashovijayjit Adhyatmapanishadd.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (422) ceya zisuradha tasa abhiprAya ladhA vinA, chadmasthane lagAra; pratikSepa
tasayukta nA, para mahAnakAra. 139 artha :--tethI karIne teneA-sujJanA abhiprAya
jANyA zivAya, arvASTi chadmastha satAne tenA pratikSepa (vireAdha) yukta nathI,
ke je parama mahAanatha karanAra che. vivecana "saba zAstranake naya dhAri hiye,
mata maMDana khaMDana bheda liye; vahu sAdhana khAra anata karyA, tadapi kachu
haju na pA~'-zrImad rAjacaMdrajI. uparamAM kahevAmAM AvyA te te kAraNeAne lIdhe
te sajJAnA abhiprAya jANyA vinA arvASTivALA chadmastha saMtajanAe tenA
pratikSepa karavA-virodha karavA yukta nathI. te pratikSepa kevA che? tA ke
parama-meATAmAM mATeA anatha karanAra evA che. sarvajJapratikSepa sava dezanAnA
bhedanA samAdhAna aMge je je uparamAM kahevAmAM AvyuM;, mahAanatha kara sarva
lakSamAM laIne vicArIe te-te sarvajJanA Azaya ze che? tenA samajaNu vinA arvASTi
pramAtRoe arthAt tattvagaveSaka chadmastha sajjanAe tenA pratikSepa karavA-
virodha karavA ghaTatA nathI. kAraNa ke chadmasthanuM jJAna AvaraNavALuM DhAi
ghaNuM ja maryAdita che, atyaMta parimita che. kevalajJAna vinAnA x chadmasthA
kharekhara! acakSu-cakSu vinAnA che, eTale AMdhaLAnI lAkaDI jevA parAkSa
zAstrajJAna vaDe tene vyavahAra cAle che. AMdhaLA jema hAtha lagADIne vastu
pArakhe, tema A zAstrajJAna cakSua`dhanA hastasparzI samuM che. tenA vaDe
chadmasthA yathAvat kema dekhI-jANI zake? mATe sarvaijJanA viSayamAM saMsthita
arthAne chadmasthA prakAzI zakatA nathI, emAM Azcaya nathI, paNu te kaMi paNa
jANe che te ja ati adbhuta-Ama che ! "sarvajJa viSaya saMsthAMzchadmastho
prakAzayatyarthAn  /  nAzcaryamevavatyapUrNa tu kiSiSi vezi  // " zrI siddhasena
divAkccha mRta dvA dvA. 8-11 vaLI upalakSaNathI te te dazanabhedavALI dezanAe
paNa sanamUlaka che, mUla temAMthI udbhavelI che, eTale te paNa sava savANInA
agarUpa che. Ama mukhya evA SaDUdarzana paNa sarvaijJapravacananA aMgabhUta hoi,
teneA pratikSepa karavA te paNa sazavANInA cheda karavA kharAkhara che. zrI
AnaddaghanajInI amRta vANI che ke--  " aMtarA kevalajhAnaM chadmasthA
khalvacakSuSaH  /  hastasparzasamaM zAkhajJAnaM tadvyavahArakRt  //  " --zrI
yazovijayajIta adhyAtmapaniSad

Page #499 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Hari Padh Darisan Jin Ang Bhanje (23) “Shatun Darisan Jin Ang Bhanijey, Nyas
Shadanga Je Saadhe Rey; Nami Jinavarana Charan Upasak, Shat Darisan Aaraadhe
Rey...Shat... Darisan. Jin Surapad Paay Vakhashu, Sankhya Jog Dey Bhede Rey;
Aatam Sattaa Vivaran Kartaan, Lahe Duhkha Ang Akhede Rey....0 Bhed Abhed Saugat
Mimaansak, Jinavar Kar Dey Bhaari Rey; Lokalok Avalamban Bhajie, Gurugamaathi
Avadhaari Rey...50 Lakayatik Kukh Jinavarni, Ansh Vichaar E Kijey Rey; Tattva
Vichaar Sudharas Dhara, Gurugama Vin Kim Pijey Rey? " Jain Jineshwar Var Uttam
Ang, Antaranga Bahiranga Rey; Akshar Nyas Dhuri Aaraadhak, Aaraadhe Dhari Sange
Rey...10 Jinavar Ma Sagalaan Darisan Chhe, Darshan Jinavar Bhajanare; Sagar Ma
Sagali Tatini Sahi, Tatini Sagar Bhajanare. ” Therefore, while considering those
ten, “Chat” padaanti apekshavisheshne “Dhari” - first nyas kari, Sarvagna's
aaraadhak santjane, they have not opposed or rejected it. Not only that, but by
placing the syat pada, they have also placed the sthata pada in front of it, and
have considered the Shat Darisan Jinadarshan, which is like a Kalpavriksha, to
be worthy of worship. And the knowledge of this Jin Ang Darshan is not for
refutation or argumentation, but for understanding the tattva. It is for knowing
the principles and strengthening one's own principles. It is for testing the
strength of one's own side. And even by doing so, it is for achieving one's own
self-interest. Moreover, by holding the essence of all scriptures in one's
heart, even if one has known the differences of refutation and argumentation for
an infinite time, it has not brought them any benefit! Even after doing this for
an infinite time, nothing has come into their hands! Their hands are still
empty! Therefore, it is not appropriate for a santjane to engage in any kind of
opposition or refutation. And among them, opposing the Sarvagna or the
Sarvagna's words is extremely evil, it is harmful, it is the greatest harm.
Because it becomes a major obstacle in the path of the soul's attainment of the
right path, it leads to ultimate misfortune. Every seeker should constantly keep
this in mind that a sant's + “Shey: Siddhanta” Shwavaniyopatasya
Pakshmaamaagutya tu sattamaana chaar - Shri Siddhasen Diwakarchkrit Dva, Dva
8-19 » “Vaaraashaatnaavyatra Rame Taravata Anyonyamanuviddha hi te maana - Shri
Yashe, Krut Dva, Ka, 21-9

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 hari paddha darisaNa jina aMga bhaNaje (23) "SaTuM darisaNa jina aMga bhaNIje,
nyAsa SaDaMga je sAdhe re; nami jinavaranA caraNa upAsaka, Sa darisaNu ArAdhe
re...Sa... darisaNu. jina surapAda5 pAya vakhAzuM, sAMkhya joga deya bhede re;
Atama sattA vivaraNa karatAM, lahe duHkha aMga akhede re....0 bheda abheda
saugata mImAMsaka, jinavara kara deya bhArI re; lokAloka avalaMbana bhajIe,
gurugamathI avadhArI re...50 lakAyatika kukha jinavaranI, aMza vicAra e kIje re;
tatva vicAra sudhArasa dhArA, gurugama viNa kima pIje re ? " jaina jinezvara
vara uttama aMga, aMtaraMga bahiraMge re; akSara nyAsa dhuri ArAdhaka, ArAdhe
dharI saMge re...10 jinavaramAM saghaLAM darisaNa che, darzana jinavara
bhajanAre; sAgaramAM saghaLI taTinI sahI, taTinI sAgara bhajanAre. " mATe te te
dazane vicAratAM "cAta " padAMti apekSAvizeSane "dhari'-prathama nyAsa karI,
sarvajJanA ArAdhaka saMtajanee tene paNa pratikSepa-virodha karavA gya nathI,
eTaluM ja nahiM paNa, syAt padanA nyAsapUrvaka-sthAt pada AgaLa joDIne
kalpavRkSa samA SaTa darizana jinadazananA aMgabhUta SaDradarzana paNa ArAdhavA
yogya che. ane A jina aMga darzananuM jJAna paNa kAMI khaMDanamaMDanamAM utaravA
mATe nathI, paNa tattvano bhaNI je' vinizcaya karavA mATe che, 5ra siddhAMta
jANIne sva siddhAMtanA balane* nizcaya jANavA mATe che, svapakSanuM bala
cakAsavA mATe che, ane ema karIne paNa kevala AtmArtha sAdhavA mATe che. vaLI
sarva zAstranA naya hRdayamAM dhAraNa karI, A jIve anaMtavAra mata
khaMDanamaMDananA bheda jANyA, te paNa tenuM kalyANa thayuM nathI ! e sAdhane
anaMtavAra karyA chatAM, haju kAMi tava hAthamAM AvyuM nathI ! hAtha haju khAlI
ne khAlI che ! mATe AtmAthI saMtajanee koI paNa prakAre pratikSepamAM-
khaMDanamaMDanamAM utaravuM yogya nathI. ane temAM paNa sarvajJano ke sarvajJa
vANIne pratikSepa karavo te te atyaMta duSTa che, mA anarthakara che, moTAmAM
moTo anartha karanAra che. kAraNa ke parama pUjya ArAdhya savajJanI AzAtanA
jIvane sanmArga prAptimAM mahA aMtarAyarUpa thaI paDI, parama akalyANane hetu
thAya chepratyeka mumukSuo A niraMtara lakSamAM * zakhavA yogya che ke eka
saMtanI + "zeya: siddhAMta' zvavaniyopaTa6SyanA pakSamAmAgutya tu sattAmanA
cAra-zrI siddhasena divAkarachakRta dvA, dvA 8-19 >> "vArAzAtanAvyatra rAme
taravatA anyonyamanuviddhA hi te mAnA - zrI yaze, kRta dva, kA, 21-9

Page #500 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(424) The aspiration (āśātanā) of all saints is the aspiration (āśātanā) of
Yogadharmacarya, and the worship (pūjanā) of all saints is the worship (pūjanā)
of one saint. Here, the illustration (nidarśana) says: निशानाथप्रतिक्षेपो
यथान्धानामसंगतः । तद्भेदपरिकल्पश्च तथैवार्वाग्दृशामयम् ॥१४०॥ Just as the
rejection (pratikṣepa) of the moon by the blind and the conceptualization
(parikalpanā) of its divisions are irrelevant (asaṃgata) to them, similarly, the
rejection (pratikṣepa) of the omniscient (sarvajña) and the conceptualization
(parikalpanā) of its divisions are irrelevant (asaṃgata) to the deluded
(chadmastha). Explanation: Just as the visually impaired people reject the moon
and conceptualize its divisions, which is irrelevant and inappropriate,
similarly, the rejection of the omniscient (sarvajña) and the conceptualization
of its divisions by the deluded (chadmastha) are also irrelevant and
inappropriate. The moon, which dispels the darkness, shines in the sky and
illuminates the entire world, but the visually impaired cannot see it. Although
the moon is manifest, the blind person says, "There is no moon," and objects to
it, which is completely absurd, inappropriate, and against the principles.
Because they themselves cannot see, how can they say that this is not so?
Similarly, the omniscient (sarvajña), who illuminates the entire universe with
the light of knowledge, is manifest, but the visually impaired (dṛṣṭivikala)
cannot see it. Although the omniscient (sarvajña) is manifest, the deluded
(chadmastha) who has limited vision says, "There is no omniscient," and objects
to it, which is completely inappropriate and against the principles, because how
can they have the audacity to say that this is not so when they themselves
cannot see? Explanation of terms: Tṛtti-niśānāthaprati: Rejection of the moon.
Cāyanāma: Like the blind. Alakāraḥ: Irrelevant, inappropriate. Nītitaḥ:
According to the principles. Rājājña: And its two conceptualizations, such as
the crookedness and the waning of the moon. Tathaiwa: Similarly. Bādaśā: To the
deluded (chadmastha), those with limited vision. Bārthyā: All rejection
(pratikṣepa) and conceptualization (parikalpanā) of the omniscient (sarvajña)
are irrelevant and inappropriate.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (424). yogadaricayurAya AzAtanAmAM sarva saMtanI AzAtanA che, ne eka saMtanI
pUjAmAM sarva saMtanI pUjanA che. ahIM ja nidarzana (daSTAMta) kahe che-
nizAnAthapratikSepo yathAndhAnAmasaMgataH  /  tadbhedaparikalpazca
tathaivArvAgdRzAmayam  // 140 //  caMdra taNe pratikSepa ne, bheda kalpanA jema,
hoya asaMgata aMdhanA, chadmasthanA A tema, 140 artha :- jema caMdrane
pratikSepa ane tenA bhedane parikalpa (kalpanA) AMdhaLAone asaMgata-ayukta che,
temaja avane-chadrasthAne A sarvajJapratikSepa ane tenA bhedane parikalpa
asaMgata-asaMyukta che. vivecana jema cakSuvikala evA AMdhaLAone caMdrane
pratikSepa kare, niSedha kara, te nItithI asaMgata che-ayukta che, ane caMdranA
bhedanI parikalpanA karavI te paNa ayukta che; temaja chadmasthAne sarvajJane
pratikSepa karavo ke tenA bhedanI parikalpanA sarvajJapratikSepa karavI asaMgata
che--ayukta che. aMdhakArane dUra karanArA nizAnAtha-caMdra ayukta adhanuM dUra
AkAzamAM rahyo sate cAMdanI relAvI samasta jagatamAM prakAza daSTAMta relAve
che; chatAM cakSuvikala AMdhaLA tene dekhI zaktA nathI. caMdra pragaTa che,
chatAM te A aMdhajane "caMdra cheja nahiM" ema kahI vAMdho uThAve, tene
pratikSepa kare, te te bIlakula behUduM che, aNaghaTatuM che, nItithI asaMgata
che. kAraNa ke teo pote ja dekhatA nathI, te A nathI ema kema kahI zake tema
hAMdhakArane haranArA sarvajJa-caMdra jJAna-tranA vistArI samasta vizva vastune
prakAzita kare che, chatAM dRSTivikala chavA tene dekhI zakatA nathI; sarvajJa
pragaTa che, chatAM je A avadaSTi chadmastha, "sarvajJa ja nathI" ema kahI
prativAda kare-pratikSepa kare, te te sarvathA ayukta che, sanyAyathI asaMgata
che, kAraNa ke pote ja je dekhatA nathI, te A nathI ema kahevAnI dhRSTatA kema
karI zake vAru? tRtti-nizAnAthapratiH -caMdrane pratikSepa, cAyanAma-jema
aMdhere, cakSuvine, alaMkAraHasaMgata che. nItithI asaMgata che. rAjAjha-ane
tenA be parikalpa, caMdranA be parikalpavakrapaNuM, cerapaNuM vagere, tathaiva-
temaja, bAdazA-avagu daSTivALAone, eTale ke chAsthAne, barthaA, sarva
pratikSepa, ane tenA bhedane parika5 asaMgata-aphakta che.

Page #501 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Prāṇi:** Sun Bhedakalpana Ayukt-Janmānḍha Manushya ne Hathi (425)  Again, if
someone imagines that these blind people are of different types, some with a
bent moon, some with a slanted moon, some with a square moon, etc., that too is
inappropriate and against ethics. Because, one who has never seen the moon, any
imagination about its form is just imagination, not truth. Similarly, if someone
imagines that the omniscient is like this or like that, etc., that too is
inappropriate and absurd. Because, one who has never seen the omniscient, any
imagination about its form is just a false imagination, not truth. And, if those
who have never seen the moon themselves, imagine different types of moons and
fight about them, how absurd is that? Similarly, if those who have never seen
the omniscient themselves, imagine different types of omniscients and engage in
false arguments and debates about them, opposing each other, engaging in mutual
criticism and refutation, that too is extremely inappropriate, as is evident
from the above. Here, the example of a blind man and an elephant is very apt. It
is like this—  **Bhed Hepana** **Ayukt** **Janmānḍha Manushya ne Hathi**  Once,
an elephant came to a certain place. Six blind men went to see it. These blind
men touched the elephant and examined it. One man touched the elephant's trunk,
so he thought the elephant was like a rope. Another man touched the tusk, so he
thought it was like a fan. The third man touched the ear, so he thought it was
like a pot. The fourth man touched the leg, so he thought the elephant was like
a pillar. The fifth man touched the belly, so he thought it was like a mortar.
The sixth man touched the tail, so he thought it was like a broom. From this,
they formed their own opinions and then told each other. Then, each one became
firm in his own opinion, insisting that he alone was right and all the others
were wrong, and they started arguing with each other, engaging in false
discussions, and the dispute escalated!  Then, a sighted man came there and
stopped them, saying, "Oh, good men! Why are you arguing in vain? You are all
wrong, and you are all right! Because, you are wrong in your insistence that the
elephant is like this or like that, and you are right in that the elephant is
like this in terms of some of its parts. Look! The trunk of the elephant is
shaped like a rope, the tusk is shaped like a fan, the ear is like a pot, the
leg is like a pillar, the belly appears like a mortar, and the tail is like a...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prANi: sana bhedakalpanA ayukta-janmAMdha manuSyA ne hAthI (425) vaLI A
aMdhajaneAmAM kAi caMdra vAMke che, kAi trAMsA che, keAi ceArasa che, ema kahI
tenA bhedanI parikalpanA kare, te te paNa ayukta che, nItithI viruddha che.
kAraNa ke je caMdrane dITho ja nathI, tenA svarUpa sabaMdhI game te kalpanA
karavI te kalpanA ja che, satya nathI. tema chadmastha janA, sarvajJa AvA che ke
tevA che vagere tenA bheda sabadhI parikalpanA kare, te te paNa ayukta che,
behUdu che; kAraNa ke je sarvajJane peAte dIThA ja nathI, tenA samI game te
kalpanAnA gheADA deDAvavA te mithyA kalpanArUpa ja che, satya nathI. ane je
caMdra peAtAne dekhAtA nathI, te caMdranA vividha bheda kalpI, AMdhaLAe te
sabadhI jhaghaDA kare, tA te teA keTaluM badhuM behUdu kahevAya ? tema je sajJa
pAte dIThA nathI, te saCjJanA jUdA jUdA bheda kalpI, chadmasthA te bheda
saMkhazrI mithyA vAdavivAda kare, sAmasAmA pratikSepa kare, paraspara khaDana-
maMDanamAM utarI paDe, te tA atyaMta ayukta che ja, e A uparathI phalita thAya
che. atre janmAMdha manuSyA hAthInuM dRSTAMta ghaNuM adhakhetu che. te A
prakAre-- bheda hepanA ayukta janmAMdha manuSyA ne hAthI kAi eka sthaLe eka
hAthI Avyo. ene jovA mATe cha janmAMdha puruSA gayA. te AMdhaLAoe hAthIne hAtha
lagADIne tapAsI joyA. ekanA hAthamAM hAthInI sUMDha AvI eTale tene hAthI
sAMkhelA jevA lAgyA. khIjAnA hAthamAM datUzaLa AvyuM eTale tene te bhUMgaLA jevA
lAgyA. trIjAnA hAthamAM kAna AvyA, eTale tene te sUpaDA jevA lAgyA. ceAthAnA
hAthamAM paga Avyo, eTale tene hAthI thAMbhalA jevA jaNAyA. pAMcamAnA hAthamAM
udara AvyuM, eTale tene te maSaka jevA jAyA. chaThThAnA hAthamAM pUMchaDuM
AvyuM, eTale tene te sAvaraNI jevA jaNAyeA. A uparathI teoe peAtAtAnA abhiprAya
bAMdhyA ane pachI eka bIjAne jaNAvyo. pachI dareka pAtapeAtAnA abhiprAyamAM
makkama hAI, pAte ja sAcA che ne bAkInA bIjA badhA khATA che, ema Agraha karI
paraspara jhaghaDA karavA lAgyA, mithyA carcAmAM utarI paDayA, ne takarAra vadhI
paDI ! tyAM kAI eka dekhatA dRSTivALA manuSya AvI caDhyo, ane te tene nivArIne
khelyA ke--are ! bhalA mANasA ! A tame phogaTa jhaghaDA zA mATe kare che ? tame
badhAya khATA che ne tame badhAya sAcA che ! kAraNa ke hAthI AvA ja che evA
tamArA AgrahathI tame khATA che, ane amuka a`ganI apekSAe hAthI AvA che e rIte
tame sAcA che. juo ! hAthInI sUMDhane AkAra sAMbelA jevA che, datUzaLanA AkAra
bhUMgaLA jevA che, kAna sUpaDA jevA che, paga thAMbhalA jevA che, peTa maSaka
jevuM jaNAya che, ane pUcha u'

Page #502 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(426) It looks like a broom. Touching each limb, you feel like an elephant, it
is exactly as expected of that limb, but from above, you don't get the whole
elephant! The whole body together makes the elephant. Therefore, to understand
its complete form, one must consider it in time. You must abandon the insistence
of "J'ekantavad". Understand this, now you must stop the argument! Stop it!
Thus, the wise-looking, seeing man explained, so the debaters cooled down, and
abandoning the false discussion, they understood and became calm. This example
reveals that the "J" ekantvadi who says "this is J" is insistent, but the sarva
samanyavakari anekantavadi is always and everywhere non-insistent. There is a
miraculous saying of Shrimad Rajchandraji, which in a few but great words,
completely refutes all ekantvadis: "Ekantvad is the sign of incomplete
knowledge, debaters! I show you for your sake. Just as novice poets use the word
"J" to suppress flaws in poetry, so you too say "J" meaning certainty, with
novice knowledge. Mahaveer never said so; that is his unique miracle." -Shrimad
Rajchandra, Patrank 6 (20) Also- "न युज्यते प्रतिक्षेपः सामान्यस्यापि तत्सताम् ।
आर्यापवादस्तु पुनजिंहाछेदाधिको मतः ॥ १४१ ॥" "Pratikshep is not appropriate even
for the common people, let alone the saints; the Aryan slander is considered
more than cutting the tongue." 141 Meaning- Even for common people, pratikshep
is not appropriate. Therefore, slander against the Aryan saints is considered
more than cutting the tongue. -Not appropriate, pratikshep is in the form of
refutation. The meaning is that even common people, common men, should not curse
the saints, the munis, even if they are angry, because it is a sin against all.
What? So- it is considered more than cutting the tongue (jihava cheda)- with the
intention of such an act. "WHच वीघं, नિષિદ્ધનાચંતિપુવિધાનમ્ | सकलनयविलसितानाम् ,
विरोधमथनं नमाम्यनेकांतम् ॥" -Shri Amritchandracharyaji's Purusharthsiddhi Upay.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (426) sAvaraNI jevuM dekhAya che. eka eka aMgane sparzavAthI tamane hAthI te
tevo lAgyo, te te te aMganI apekSAe barAbara che, paNa te uparathI kAMI AkhA
hAthIne khyAla che * Ave che! samagra aMga maLIne ja hAthI bane che. mATe tenuM
sAMgopAMga svarUpa barAbara samajavuM hoya te tene samayapaNe ja vicAra karavo
joIe. tamAre AgraharUpa "ja'kAraekAMtavAda cheDI devo joIe. ema samajI have
tamAre jhaghaDo baMdha kare ! baMdha kare ! ema te DAhyA dekhatA dazya puruSe
samajAvyA, eTale te vAdIo TADhA paDyA, ne mithyA carcA choDI daI samajIne zAMta
thayA.* A dRSTAMta uparathI eTaluM phalita thAya che ke A Ama "ja" che ema
vadanArA ekAMtavAdI AgrahI hoya, paNa sarva samanvayakArI anekAMtavAdI te
sarvathA sarvatra nirAgrahI ja hoya. theDA paNa mahAgraMthamabhIra zabdamAM
samasta ekAMtavAdInuM parama samartha nirasana karatuM zrImad rAjacaMdrajInuM
camatkArika subhASita che ke "ekAMtavAda e ja jJAnanI apUrNatAnI nizAnI che
vAdIo ! mane tamAre mATe darzAve che. kAraNa zikhAu kavio kAvyamAM jema tema
khAmI dAbavA "ja' zabdano upayoga kare che, tema tame paNa "ja' eTale nizcayatA
zikhAu jJAnavaDe kahe che. mahAre mahAvIra ema koI kALe kahe nahi; e ja enI
sakavinI peThe camatkRti che." -zrImad rAjacaMdra, patrAMka 6 (20) temaja- na
yujyate pratikSepaH sAmAnyasyApi tatsatAm  /  AryApavAdastu punajiMhAchedAdhiko
mataH  //  141  //  pratikSepa sAmAnyane paNa saMtane na yukta; adhika
jidvAdazI, Arya apavAda ukta. 141 artha-sAmAnya janane paNa pratikSepa yukta
nathI. tethI karIne Arya sathAne apavAda te saMtane mana jihA cheda karatAM
adhika che. tti: -nathI yukta, karizeSa-nirAkaraNarUpa pratikSepa.
sAmAnyarASimAI sAmAnya puruSa Atrio 5Na ta-vethI karIne savAra-saMva, munione,
zApavAnu punaH-gAyane caravA te vaLI, sarvane paribhava te ema artha che. zuM ?
to ke-bihAcheDAoi maraH-jihavAkeda karatAM (jIbha kapAI javA karatAM) adhika
mata che,-tathAvidha prayapAyanA bhAve karIne. * "WHca vIghaM,
niSiddhanAcaMtipuvidhAnam | sakalanayavilasitAnAm , virodhamathanaM
namAmyanekAMtam  // " -zrI amRtacaMdrAcAryajIkRta puruSArthasiddhiupaya.

Page #503 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The committee of the language of the Jiva, which is an exception to the two-
fold, (47) Criticism is not appropriate for even an ordinary man; therefore, to
oppose the omniscient Aryas is more than just having one's tongue cut off in the
minds of the saints. If there is an ordinary man, it is not appropriate for him
to refute, oppose, or contradict him. Because there is something in our mind and
something in his mind. "There is something in our mind, there is something in
the mind of the ordinary." We cannot know his intention or opinion, and to
refute him without knowing him, to refute him, is not appropriate. Even if he
does, it is completely absurd. Even more than refuting him, the other person
does not give up his opinion, but often clings to it with double the force!
Moreover, such refutation increases opposition, the other person's mind is hurt,
animosity is created, a knot of attachment and hatred is formed, + joy, anger,
and meditation arise, and the father also remains restless. Thus, many evils
arise, therefore, the saints and sages do not oppose. After that, it is
extremely inappropriate to oppose the extraordinary, extraordinary, magnificent,
supremely powerful, omniscient Aryas, let alone criticize them. What is there to
ask? Therefore, the saints consider opposing such revered Aryas to be more than
having their tongues cut off. That is, even a single word of exception spoken to
the supreme, omniscient Aryas causes them more pain than having their tongues
cut off. And why would they be cut off? And why would they want to speak such
words that would cut off the father's roof? The meaning is that the saints would
never even begin to utter a word of exception to the omniscient Aryas, their
tongues would not even rise to utter such a word; because the supreme, virtuous
Aryas, by their criticism, cause great evil - tradition arises, the Jiva becomes
eternally worldly. Also, + "The one who opposes the wise, remains bound by the
fetters of ignorance" - Shri Siddhasen Divakarachkrit Ha, Dva. 8-10

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 domahaSiH A apavAda jivAdathI adhika bhASA samiti (47) vivecana keI sAmAnya
puruSane paNa pratikSepa-virodha kara yukta nathI; teTalA mATe Arya evA
sarvajJane virodha kare che te saMtajanene mana jIbha kapAI javA karatAM paNa
adhika che. koI sAmAnya-sAdhAraNa manuSya hoya, tene paNa nirAkaraNarUpa
pratikSepa kara, prativAda kara, virodha kare, te sajanane ghaTatuM nathI.
kAraNa ke ApaNA manamAM kAMI hAya ane enA manamAM kAMI heya. "apane mana kachu
era he, unake sAmAnyane mana kachu era' ApaNe ene Azaya-abhiprAya jANI zakatA
nathI, pratikSepa paNa eTale te jANyA vinA tenA khaMDanamAM utarI paDavuM, tene
teDI pADavAne yukta nathI vikalpa suddhAM kare, te sAva behUdu che. te
pratikSepa karatAM paNa, sAmo mANasa kAMI potAno abhiprAya choDI detuM nathI,
UlaTo ghaNIvAra tene bevaDA jorathI vaLagI rahe che ! vaLI tevA pratikSepathI
virodhanI vRddhi thAya che, sAmA mANasanuM mana dubhAya che, vaimanasya baMdhAya
che, rAgadveSanI gAMTha paDe che, + AnaM-raudradhyAna thAya che, pitAne paNa
azAMti rahe che. Ama aneka anartha nIpaje che, mATe saMta-munio te virodha kare
ja nahiM. te pachI asAmAnya, asAdhAraNa vibhUtirUpa, mahAatizayavaMta eja Akhya
sarvajJAne apavAda kare-avarNavAda balavA te te atyaMta atyaMta ayukta ja heya,
emAM pUchavuM zuM? eTalA mATe evA paraya pUjya Arca sane apavAda A apavAda kara
parivarUpa virodha kara, tene saMta munijane te jihuvA chAvAdathI karatAM adhika
mAne che. eTale ke parama ahaM sarvara mATe eka rAdhika paNa apavAda vacana
bolatAM, temane jIbha kapAI javA karatAM vadhAre duHkha thAya che. ane jIbha
kapAI jatAM belAya ja kema? ane pitAnI chatya kapAya tevuM bolavA Icche paNa
keNu? tAtparya ke saMtajane kadI paNa Arya sarvajJAnuM apavAda vacana uccAravAne
prAraMbha paNa kare nahiM, tevuM vacana uccAratAM temanI jIbha upaDe ja nahiM;
kAraNa ke parama satapuruSa evA Arya sarvajJanA avarNavAdathI mahA anartha -
paraMparA nipaje che, jIva anaMta saMsArI thAya che. temaja +LAkhyAnopo vAre
prativAnistatha rahyA ntiri pAzA havAlAnarAmartha "--zrI siddhasena
divAkarachakRta hA, dvA. 8-10

Page #504 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(428) Yogasarasaya Saints rarely speak words that are tainted with malice or
negativity. Their words are always certain, full of essence, and beneficial to
all beings. 142  Meaning: Saints never speak words that are tainted with malice
or negativity. Instead, they always speak words that are certain, full of
essence, and beneficial to all beings.  Commentary: Saints never speak words
that are tainted with malice or negativity, like the words of the wicked. They
always speak words that are certain, full of essence, and beneficial to others.
It is only the unwise who speak words that are tainted with malice or
negativity. They speak without regard for the situation, and their words are
often meaningless and harmful. They speak without any regard for the
consequences, and their words can cause pain and suffering to others. But true
saints and sages never speak in such a way. They always speak with wisdom and
discernment, and their words are always beneficial to others.  Therefore, the
words of saints are always certain, unambiguous, and meaningful. They are never
uncertain, meaningless, or harmful. They are always full of essence, and they
are always intended to benefit others. Saints always speak words that are
certain, full of essence, and beneficial to others.  The virtuous ones, with
their pure intentions, speak words that are free from any taint. Their words are
like a beacon of light, guiding others towards the right path. They are always
ready to help others, and their words are always full of compassion and
kindness.  Thus, saints always speak words that are certain, full of essence,
and beneficial to others. They are always mindful of the consequences of their
words, and they always strive to speak in a way that will benefit others.  This
is the end of the chapter on the rejection of all-knowingness. S In the
Shatashloka, it is said that saints never speak words that are tainted with
malice or negativity. They always speak words that are certain, full of essence,
and beneficial to all beings.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (428) yogasarAzaya kudRSTayAdivano santo bhASante prAyasaH kvacit  /  nizcitaM
sAravaccaiva kiMtu sattvArthakRt sadA  //  142  //  kuSTiAdivALuM veNa te,
bhAkhe kadI na saMta; nizcita parahitakara sadA, sAravaMta ja vadaMta. 142 artha
-kudaSTi AdivALuM kasya vacana saMte kavacit bolatA nathI, paraMtu sadAya
nizcita, sAravALuM ane sattvArtha karanArUM-prANIonuM hita karanArUM evuM vacana
bole che. vivecana saMtajane kudaSTi AdinI peThe kadI kudaSTivALuM-kutsita-nigha
vacana bolatA nathI, ane bele che te nizcita, sAravALuM ane paranuM hita
karanArUM evuM ja vacana sadA le che. kudaSTivaMta avivekI ja hoya te kutsita-
niMgha bhASaNa kare che, phAve tema ThekANA vinAnuM bele che, yataddhA
DhaMgadhaDA vinAne asaMbaddha pralApa kare che. sAra vagaranuM namAluM bake che,
ane bIjA ane duHkha thAya, anartha thAya, ahita saMta kevuM thAya evuM sAvadya
vacana uccAre che. paNa je sAcA saMta-munijane bole ? jogIjane che, teo tema
kadI karatA nathI, tevuM sAvadya vacana kadI uccAratA nathI. teo bele che te
vivekapUrvaka bhASAsamiti sAcavIne, bhASAne viveka AcAra barAbara jALavIne ja
sadA bole che. eTale ja teonuM vacana sadA nizcita-asaMdigdha-susaMbaddha hoya
che,-saMdehavALuM, ThekANu vinAnuM, asaMbaddha pralApa jevuM hatuM nathI;
sArapUrNa hoya che, niHsAra niSpAjana ke nirmAlya hetuM nathI; ane satvArtha
karanArUM hoya che, anya chAnuM hita karavAnA svabhAvavALuM ja hoya che,-bIjA
jIvane duHkha thAya, anartha thAya, ahita thAya, evuM sAvadya kadI paNa hetuM
nathI. Ama saMta janene sadA nizcita, sArabhUta, ne parepakArI evuM niravadya-
nirdoSa vacana uccAravAnI Teva paDI hoya che. sAdhujI samiti bIjI Adare, vacana
nirdoSa parakAza re; gupti utsargane samiti te, mArga apavAda suvilAsa re." -zrI
devacaMdrajIkRta aSTapravacanamAtAnI sajajhAya  /  iti
srvjnyprtikssepnissedhaadhikaarH| S kRtizadaSTayarivA-kudaSTi AdivALuM, kussa
ItyAdi, no santo na saMte, munie, mAnti vaLavA-bhAkhe kavacita, tyAre kevuM
bhAkhe? te mATe kahyuM - nizcita-nizcita, asaMdigdha, sAvara-ane sAravALuM ja,
na apArthaka- nahiM evuM, riMtu sArthaza-paraMtu sattvArthakara,
parArthakaraNazIla evuM, sadA bhAkhe che.

Page #505 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Two. The Transcendental Inference (Atīndriyānumāna)  (429) While concluding the
topic of the omniscient and other transcendental objects of inference, it is
said:  The certainty of transcendental objects is not possible without yogic
knowledge. The certainty of transcendental objects is not possible without yogic
knowledge. Therefore, here too, in the matter of the omniscient, there is no
dispute with the blind-like ones.  Explanation: The transcendental and certain
knowledge of the omniscient and other such transcendental objects is not
possible without the knowledge obtained through yogic experience. Therefore,
even here, in the matter of the omniscient, there is no dispute with the blind-
like ones (the ignorant).  The transcendental objects like the omniscient are
beyond the reach of the senses and the mind, and can be known only to the yogis.
In the matter of the accurate determination of such transcendental entities, the
ignorant who are unable to perceive the essence have no authority, just as the
blind are incapable of determining the true nature of an elephant. Therefore,
their futile disputes in this regard are of no consequence, as it is a sign of
foolishness to imagine and argue about the nature of something that one does not
know or perceive. Just as the imaginations of the blind about the shape of the
moon are laughable, their attempts to determine the true nature of the
transcendental are equally absurd. Instead of any benefit, such meaningless
disputes only lead to the destruction of one's own true understanding.
Therefore, the certain knowledge of the transcendental objects like the
omniscient can only be obtained through yogic experience, and not through the
baseless arguments of the ignorant.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 do. girAnagaya atIdviyama anumAnaaviSaya (429) sarvajJAdi atIMdriya artha
anumAna agocaratva adhikAra upasaMharatAM kahe che- nizcayo'tIndriyArthasya
yogijJAnAdRte na ca  /  gogA #pAnAM vivAna ja ni che rU . nizcaya atIndriyArtha,
na gijJAna zivAya; ethIya aMdha samAjanA vivAdathI nahiM kAMya. 143 artha--ane
atIndriya ane nizcaya gijJAna zivAya thato nathI; ethI karIne paNa atre
sarvajJanI bAbatamAM aMdha jevAonA vivAdathI kAMI nathI. vivecana ane sarvajJa
Adi atIndriya arthane nizcaya gijJAna sivAya thatuM nathI, kAraNake tenA thakI
ja tenI siddhi thAya che, eTalA mATe atre sarvajJa adhikAramAM aMdha jevA
chadmasthAnA vivAdathI zuM? sarvajJa Adi viSaya atIndriya che, iMdriya ane
manane agocara che, ane mAtra yegIone ja jJAnagaNya thaI zake evA che. e
saMbaMdhI yathArtha nizcayanI bAbatamAM chandrasthAne adhikAra nathI, kAraNa ke
vizeSathI tattvane nahi dekhanArA evA aMdha samA te chagha aMdha jane jevA che.
mATe e emanA adhikAra bahAranA chaghasthAnA viSayamAM-tatvanizcaya bAbatamAM
teone vivAda nakAmo che, teonI vivAthI zuM? carcAnI aca akiMcitkAra che. kAraNa
ke je vastu ApaNe dekhatA nathI jANatA nathI, tenA svarUpa bAbatamAM svacchede
kalpanA karI, micyA jhaghaDo karo, niHsAra vAyuddha karavuM, vAda-prativAda karI
zRMka vAvavuM, khaMDanamaMDanamAM paDI vaimanasya vadhAravuM, te mUrkhatAnI
nizAnI che. caMdranA AkAra viSe aMdhajanenI kalpanA jevuM hAsyAspada che, pelA
AMdhaLAo jema hAthInA svarUpa bAbata kheTa TaTo karatA hatA, tenA jevuM phegaTa
che. tevA mithyA vivAdathI lAbha thavAne badale UlaTI hAni thAya che, kAraNa ke
tethI potAnA sat cittane nAza thavArUpa aniSTa phala nIpaje che. arthAt ri-
niloDarAica sarva Adi atIndriya arthane nizcaya, zillAnAda na ja -registAna
sivAya nathI hota-kAraNa ke tenA thakI ja tenI siddhi thAya che. moDakiA kAraNa
thakI batra-ane, sarvajJa adhikAramAM, rAjAnAM-aMdha jevAonA vizeSathI tenA
tattvane nahi dekhanArAbAnA, vivAna na zivana-vivAthI kaMi nathI
-saccittanAdarUpa zivALA vivAdathI kAMI nathI.

Page #506 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(430) When the pure intention of the mind is destroyed, an impure intention
arises, the faults of attachment, aversion, etc. increase, and mental unrest and
confusion arise. What benefit do the saints derive from the dispute that
destroys such a conscious being? Nothing, nothing at all.  न चानुमानविषय
एषोऽर्थस्तत्त्वतो मतः । न चातो निश्चयः सम्यगन्यत्राप्याह धीधनः ।। १४४ ।।  This
omniscient object is not the subject of inference, as per the truth. Nor is
there a correct determination of it from that (inference), as the wise
Bhartṛhari has said.  The explanation is that the omniscient and transcendental
object is not known through inference or logic. Even through other means, a
correct determination of it is not possible. As the wise Bhartṛhari has stated -
The specific object endowed with the characteristics of omniscience, etc. is not
the object of mental activity (vṛtti) and inference. It is established in
reality (tattva-tah). And from that (tattva), there is no correct determination
(niścayaḥ) even elsewhere, as the wise Bhartṛhari has said.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (430) gakhrisazcaya saddabhAvavALo citta Azaya naSTa thaI duSTa Azaya janme
che, rAgadveSAdi deSanI vRddhi thAya che, cittane azAMti ne saMbha upaje che.
AvA sacittano nAza karanArA vivAdanuM saMtajanone zuM prajana che? kaMI ja
nahiM, kaMI ja nahi. na cAnumAnaviSaya eSo'rthastattvato mataH  /  na cAto
nizcayaH samyaganyatrApyAha dhIdhanaH  /  /  144  /  /  yukti viSaya A tatvathI,
nahi-ethI anyatra; samyak nizcaya thAya nA, kathya buddhidhana atra-144 atha-ane
A sarvajJarUpa artha tatvathI anumAnane viSaya nathI mAnavAmAM Avyo. ane A
anumAnathakI anyatra paNa samyakSaNe nizcaya thatuM nathI. buddhidhana bhaharie
kahyuM che - vivecana uparamAM ema kahyuM ke sarvajJAdi atIndriya artha gijJAna
vinA jaNAtuM nathI, eTale A viSaye aMdha samA chadmasthAnA vivAdathI kaMI
prayojana siddha nathI thatuM. tyAre kaI ema kahe ke Apa evuM kema kahe che ?
anumAnathI-yuktithI paNa atIMdriya te kema na jANI zakAya? tene ahIM javAba Ape
che ke-A artha yuktine sarvajJarUpa atIndriya artha tattvathI anumAna-yuktino
viSaya nathI. aviSaya game tevA mahAmatimAna tAkikanI yuktinI tyAM gati nathI;
game teTalA yuktivAdathI sAkSAt sarvajJa tava gamya thaI zakatuM nathI. kAraNa
ke te tattva atIndriya eTale mana ne iMdriyathI para che-agamya che, ane
takavAda buddhine viSaya hoI buddhigamya che. eTale te atIndriya viSayamAM atinI
gati kuti thatAM yuktivAda bhoTho paDe che. vaLI A atIndriya viSayanI vAta javA
daIe, te paNa anya sAmAnya arthane paNa anumAna thakI samyapaNe nizcaya thato
nathI; yuktivAdathI sAmAnyasAdhAraNa bAbatane paNa barAbara nirNaya prApta thatI
nathI, te pachI atIndriya arthanuM te pUchavuM ja zuM? AnA samarthanamAM ahIM
mahAmati bhatRharinuM vacana TAMkayuM che. * zuM kahyuM che? te kahe che - vRtti
- jJAnamAnaviSayo ane anumAnano viSaya nathI, yuktigAcara nathI, ghoDaW--A
sarvajJavizeSa lakSaNavALa artha, taravaro mataH-tatvathI mAnavAmAM Avela,
paramArthathI daSTa, jAto-ane A anumAnathakI nathI hote, nizcaya: sabhya-nizcaya
samyaphapaNe, anyatrAti-anyatra paNa, sAmAnya arthamAM paNa A dhodhanate
buddhidhana bhatRharie kahyuM che -

Page #507 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Dimadrushti:** "Opportunity considers debate, tradition."  **(431)**
**yatnena anumito'pyarthaḥ kuśalaig numaatribhiḥ | abhiyuktatarai ranyai
ranyathaivopapadhyate || 145 ||  Even though an अर्थ (meaning) is inferred
through effort by skillful अनुमातृ (inferers), it is proven otherwise by others
who are more skillful. 145  **Meaning:** Even when a meaning is inferred with
effort by skilled inferers, it can be proven differently by others who are even
more skillful.  **Commentary:** What has the wise Bhartṛhari said? He says,
"Even the meaning inferred with effort by skillful inferers can be proven
differently by others who are more skillful."  Skilled logicians, proficient in
the methods of Anvaya-Vyatireka, etc., examine the truth according to Anvaya-
Vyatireka, etc. Anvaya means a positive statement that something is so;
Vyatireka means a negative statement that something is not so. (1) Some skillful
logicians, through effort and reasoning, establish a certain meaning and say,
"Look! This meaning arises in this way for this reason. This is its affirmation.
This meaning does not arise in any other way." This is its negation. (2) Then,
other more powerful logicians, relying on the same Anvaya-Vyatireka, etc., prove
the same meaning differently and say, "Look! This meaning does not arise in the
way you have said. This is its negation. And it arises in the way we say. This
is its affirmation." Thus, one logician establishes a meaning, and another
refutes it! The same meaning is proven differently by skillful logicians with
their sharp intellect!  **Vṛtti:** -  The meaning inferred through effort
according to Anvaya, etc., is also proven differently by skillful inferers who
know Anvaya, etc., by others who are more skillful and know Anvaya, etc. It is
proven differently through methods like Athathasiddhi, etc.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dImAdaSTi: "taka vicAre vAda paraMparA re' (431) yatnenAnumito'pyarthaH
kuzalaignumAtRbhiH  /  abhiyuktatarairanyairanyathaivopapAdyate  //  145  //
yatnathI paru anumAtRthI, artha anumita thAya; teya yuktatara anyathI, anyathA
samarthAya, 145 artha -kuzala anumAnakArothI yatnathI anumAnavAmAM Avela artha
paNa, vadhAre yuktiyukta evA bIjAethI bIjI ja rIte sAbIta karAya che. vivecana
te buddhidhanavALA zrI bhatRharie zuM kahyuM che? te kahe che-"kuzaLa anumAnakAe
yatnathI anumAnele artha paNa vadhAre sabaLa yuktivALA bIjAethI bIjI ja rIte
upapAdana karAya che'-sAbIta karAya che. anvaya-vyatireka vagere
nyAyapaddhatimAM pAraMgata evA nipuNa yuktivAdIo anvayavyatireka Adi anusAra
tatvaparIkSA kare che. temAM anvaya eTale A Ama hoya te A Ama hoya evI
vidhAnarUpa hakArAtmaka ukti; ane vyatireka eTale yuktithI maMDanaH A Ama na
hoya te A Ama na hoya, evI niSedharUpa nakArAtmaka yuktithI khaMDana ukti. (1) A
anvaya-vyatireka pramANe keI kuzala yuktivAdIo prayatnapUrvaka anumAnathI-
yuktithI amuka artha sthApita kare, ane kahe ke juo ! A artha A hetuthI A rIte
ja ghaTe che, Ama enI tapapatti che A artha AthI anya rIte ghaTato nathI-Ama enI
anyathAnupatti che. (2) te tyAM tenAthI caDhiyAtA evA bIjA prakhara tArkiko-
yuktivAdIo, vaLI e ja anvaya-vyatireka Adine Azraya karI, te ja arthane anyathA
prakAre upapAdita kare che, sAbIta karI batAve che, ane kahe che ke juo! tame
kaho che te prakAre A artha ghaTatuM nathI-enI ata papatti che ane A ame kahIe
chIe te bIjA prakAre ja e ghaTamAna thAya cheenI anyathopatti che. Ama eka ja
arthane amuka vAdI sthApe che, te bIje utthApe che! eka ja arthane samartha
tArkika patatAnA matibalathI judA judA prakAre pUravAra karI Ape che! vRtti:-
nenAnumitoDaNa-anvaya Adi anusAra atnathI anumAnavAmAM Avela artha paNa,
kurAsaiAnamAmi - anvaya AdinA jANanArA kuzala anumAnakArothI-yuktivAdIothI,
mithunattamaira:anvaya AdinA jJAtA ja evA abhiyuktatara-vadhAre yuktivALA
bIjAothI, arthavopAcate anyathA ja upapAdana karAya che. atathAsiddhi Adi
prakAre bIjI rIte ja pUravAra karAya che.

Page #508 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(432) The Yogadarsitayurayam argues that this dialectic undermines the
intellect! Just as the body is exercised, made to do physical exercises,
intricate movements are played, tricks and tactics are played in the wrestling
arena, the dialectic similarly exercises the intellect in this gymnasium of
logic, makes it do the exercises of reasoning, plays the intricate games of
arguments, and engages in the tricks and tactics of fallacies and sophistry!
"The victorious party is the one with greater erudition!" Just as the stronger
wrestler overpowers and defeats the weaker wrestler in the arena, similarly the
more acute intellect of the dialectician defeats and vanquishes the less
intelligent opponent in this gymnasium of logic! Further, just as the stronger
wrestler even defeats the previously victorious wrestler according to the
principle of "the stronger overcomes the strong," similarly the dialectician who
is victorious is in turn defeated by an even more sophisticated dialectician!
Thus, just as the tradition of wrestling continues and the battle of wrestlers
never ends, similarly the tradition of dialectic continues and the battle of
intellects never concludes! But despite this endless dialectic, one is not able
to conclusively establish any definite proposition about the nature of reality!
On the contrary, according to the principle of "the tree gets uprooted in the
fight between the bulls," in this melee of dialectics, the tree of reality gets
completely uprooted and the true nature of things remains inaccessible. As the
profound nectar-like words of Mahatma Anandaghanaji state: "Reasoning
contemplates, the tradition of dialectic, but none can reach the end; what is
asserted about the nature of things, that is rarely seen in the world. I shall
behold the other Jina path."  The Abhyarachaya states: "The objects that are
beyond the senses are known through the dialectic. Thus, the certainty about 246
such transcendental objects is established in a short time through the
dialectic." - In a short time, through the dialectic (hetu-vada, logical
reasoning), the 246 transcendental objects were known, and the certainty about
them was established by the wise. The objects that are beyond the senses were
known through the dialectic, the logical reasoning, in a short time, and the
certainty about them was thus attained.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (432) yogadariTAyurAya Ama A tarkavAda te buddhine akhADe che! akhADAmAM jema
zarIrane vyAyAma thAya che, kasarata karAya che, aTApaTA khelAya che, dAvapeca
ramAya che, tarkavAda buddhine tema A yuktivAdarUpa vyAyAmazALAmAM buddhine
vyAyAma thAya che, akhADe yuktinI kasarata karAya che, takanA aTapaTA khelAya
che, chala-jAtinA dAvapeca ramAya che! "sAkSara vijetA pakSanA mavatti !"
akhADAmAM jema vadhAre baLavAna malla alpa baLavALA pratimallane mahAta kare
che, zikasta Ape che, tema A yuktivAdanI kasaratazALAmAM vadhAre prakhara
buddhimAna vAdI alpa buddhivALA prativAdIne parAjita kare che, hAra Ape che!
vaLI zerane mAthe savAzera' e nyAye te vijetA malane paNa jema vadhAre baLavAna
mala jIte che, tema vijayathI malakAtA ne phelAtA te vAdIne paNa bIje adhika
tarkapaTa prativAdI harAve che! Ama jema kustInI paraMparA cAlyA kare che,
mallayuddhane cheDo Avato nathI, tema tarkavAdanI paraMparA cAlyA kare che ne
buddhiyuddhane Are Avate nathI! paNa Ama anaMta tarkavAda karatAM paNa kaI
abhimata vastu vastugate kahI zakavA samartha thatuM nathI ! ulaTuM "paDe pADA
laDe temAM jhADane khe nIkaLI jAya," e nyAye A tAmikenI sAThamArImAM tattvavRkSa
bApaDuM kayAMya chuMdAI jAya che! tattva vastu kayAMya hAtha lAgatI nathI.
mahAtmA AnaMdaghanajInuM mArmika vacanAmRta che ke :"taka vicAre re vAda
paraMparA re, pAra na pahoMce koya; abhimata vastu vastugate kahe che, te viralA
jaga jeya. paMthaDo nihALuM re bIjA jina taNe re."--zrI AnaMdaghanajI.
abhyaracaya kahe che- jJAyeranhetuvAdena padAryA yadyatIndriyAH  /  jAnaitAvatA
ghA chatA nizcaya | 246 padArtho atIndriya ja, hetuvAdathI jaNAta ATalA kALe
prANathI, nizcaya tihAM karAta, 146 artha - hetuvAdathI atIndriya padArtho
jaNAtA hata, te ATalA kALe prAjJothI te viSayamAM nizcaya karavAmAM Avyo hota. -
kRtti-jJAna hetuvAna-hetuvAdathI-anumAnavAthI jANavAmAM AvatA hatA, parALa
vaparajiyA je sarva Adi atIndriya padArtho, anaitAvatA-gATa kALe karIne, -mAthI,
tArkikAthI, to cAtta-karAyA hatA, tey-te viSayamAM, nizcaya-nizcaya avagama.

Page #509 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Deeprashti: The dry logic-grasp is to be abandoned by the seeker. (433)
Discussion: "The mind should be fixed on the purpose of the debate, the theory
is very difficult; whether the theory is easy or not, there is a strong debate.
Greetings to the one who thirsts for the vision of the Jina." - Shri
Anandghanji. If knowledge of extra-sensory objects could be obtained through
logic, then the wise men of the past would have made a definite conclusion about
it. If extra-sensory objects, which are inaccessible to the senses, could be
known by means of logic, then these great intelligent wise men - great logicians
- who have been engaged in the pursuit of such definite logic for a long time,
would have made a definite conclusion about those extra-sensory objects. But
that does not seem to have happened, no solution has been found yet. Because
these debaters - counter-debaters are still carrying on the same debate with
great vigor! They still seem to be as stubborn as new students! Their arguments
are still the same! These great powerful debaters have tried their best for so
long, but it seems that these great men's efforts have gone in vain! Because as
said in the Gabindu, "Even though they are engaged in definite arguments and
counter-arguments, they have not yet reached the end of the truth, like the bull
in the well!" न चैतदेवं यत्तस्मात्शुष्कतर्कग्रहो महान् ।
मिथ्याभिमानहेतुत्वात्त्याज्य एव मुमुक्षुभिः ॥ १४७ ॥ And this is not so, because
of that, the dry logic-grasp is great; It is to be abandoned by the seeker,
because it is the cause of false pride, 147 Meaning: - And because this is not
so, therefore the great dry logic-grasp is to be abandoned by the seekers,
because it is the cause of false pride. Kritti - Jaithavan and this is not so,
because of that - because of that, dry logic-grasp, pride - arrogance, excessive
pride, false pride - false pride, because of that, it is to be abandoned,
seekers - seekers, those who desire liberation.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dIprASTi : mumukSune zuSka taka graha tyAjya ja (433) vivecana "hetu vivAde ho
citta dharI joIe, ati durgama nayavAda; AgamavAde ho gurugama ke nahIM, e sabale
vikhavAda. abhinaMdana jina darizaNa tarasiye."--zrI AnaMdaghanajI. je
yuktivAdathI atIndriya padArthonuM jJAna prApta thaI zakatuM hota, te ATalA kALe
prANa janee te saMbaMdhI nizcaya karI nAMkhyo hato. je yukti vaDe karIne
indriyane agamya evA atIndriya padArtho jANavAmAM AvatA hota, te ghaNuM
hetuvAdathI lAMbA kALathI A mahAbuddhizALI prAjJajane-mahAtAkiko je tevI
tanizcaya yukti laDAvatA AvyA che, teone ATalA badhA kALe te atIndriya na thAya
padArthane nizcaya thaI javo joIto hato. paNa tevuM to thayuM dekhAtuM nathI,
haju tene kAMI niveDo Avyo jaNAto nathI. kAraNa ke A vAdI-prativAdIo haju tevA
ne evA jorazorathI te ja vAdavivAda calAvI rahyA che ! haju paNa te bAbatamAM
navA nizALIAnI jema tevA ne tevA kerAdhAkaDa rahelA jaNAya che ! teonI vAda-
kaMDU haju tevI ne tevI che ! ATalA badhA mahAsamartha vAdI mahArathIoe ATale
badho kALa prakhara yuktibala ajamAvyuM, paNa te mahAnubhAvone A mahA prayAsa
pANImAM gayo hoya ema jaNAya che! kAraNa ke gabiMdumAM kahyA pramANe "nizcita
evA vAda ne prativAde karatAM chatAM teo gatimAM ghANInA belanI peThe, haju
tattvanA aMtane pAmyA nathI !" na caitadevaM yattasmAtzuSkatarkagraho mahAn  /
mithyAbhimAnahetutvAttyAjya eva mumukSubhiH  //  147  //  ne A ema na te thakI,
zuSka kuha mahAna; tyAjya ja hoya mumukSane, mithyA mAna nidAna, 147 artha :-ane
kAraNa ke A ema nathI, teTalA mATe mahAna e zuSka tarka graha mithyAbhimAnanA
hetupaNAne lIdhe, mumukSuone tyAjya ja che- choDI ja de yogya che. kRtti -
jaitavaM ane A ema nathI, du-je kAraNathI, tamAra-te kAraNathI,
zudagAtozuSkatarka graha, mAna-maDAna, atiraudra, madhyAmi mAnatulhA-
mithyAbhimAnahetuSaNarUpa kAraNathI, cAva zva-tyAjaya ja che, mumukSumi -mumukSa
ee, mUkAvA IcchanArAoe.

Page #510 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(434) Yogadarisasura Discussion  And this is not so, that is, even after a very
long time, the knowledge of the subtle principle through reasoning has not been
possible even through practice, therefore, this dry logic, which is the cause of
wrong belief, should be abandoned by the seeker who truly desires liberation
from the terrible, fearsome planet of the cycle of birth and death, the planet
of dry logic. Because, this dry logic is truly dry! It has no taste or moisture,
only a dry, heartless, and argumentative battle of tactics. Just as no oil can
be extracted from a stick, no matter how much you grind it, similarly, no
essence of truth can be extracted from dry logic, no matter how much you analyze
and dissect it. And the seeker desires only that truth. Why would he be
attracted to such dry, tasteless logic? Moreover, this planet of dry logic is
truly a planet! As mentioned earlier, a planet is a ghost, or an evil planet, or
a crocodile. (1) Just as someone possessed by a ghost, who has been entangled by
it, experiences tremors and finds it difficult to escape from the ghost,
similarly, someone possessed by this dry logic, who has been consumed by it,
suffers greatly and finds it difficult to escape from its clutches. (2) Or,
someone afflicted by an evil planet of sin suffers intense pain, similarly,
someone afflicted by this evil planet of logic suffers intense torment inflicted
by their own mind, and they cannot easily escape its influence. (3) Or, someone
caught by a crocodile finds it extremely difficult to escape its jaws;
similarly, someone caught by the planet of dry logic finds it extremely
difficult to escape its clutches. Thus, in all three ways, the seeker of truth
suffers due to the planet of dry logic. Why would a seeker of truth, who desires
liberation, embrace such an evil, harmful planet of dry logic?  Furthermore,
this planet of dry logic is great, extremely powerful, and terrifying. Its
consequences are terrible for both the seeker and others. Because, due to the
joy and anger of reasoning, the debater and the opponent both suffer. As the
great scholar, Shri Siddhasen Divakarji, has described in his characteristic
style, whoever wins in any way, becomes arrogant, transgresses boundaries,
boasts, and disturbs everyone! And whoever is defeated by another, becomes
angry, attacks the opponent with harsh words and insults, and in doing so,
destroys himself.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (434) yogadarisasurAya vivecana ane A ema te che nahi arthAt ghaNA ghaNA kALe
paNa hetuvAdathI atIndriya tatvane nizcaya haju prAsajanathI paNa thaI zakyo
nathI, tethI karIne mithyAbhimAnanA heturUpa A zuSka tarkane mahA raudra-
bhayaMkara graha, bhavabaMdhanathI zuSka tarka graha kharekhara chUTavA
IcchanArA mumukSujane e choDI ja devo joIe, kAraNa mumukSue ke A zuSka tarkavAda
kharekhara! "zuSka ja' che. emAM kAMI rasa-AdratA tyAjya nathI. sukkI, hRdaya
sparza vinAnI yuktionI vAjAlamaya laDAI ja emAM che. veLune game teTaluM palatAM
paNa jema temAMthI telarUpa sAra nIkaLe nahi, tema game teTaluM pIlatAM paNa-
piSTapeSaNa karatAM paNa zuSka tarkavAdamAMthI tatvarUpa sAra nIkaLe nahiM. ane
mumukSu te tatvane ja khapI che. te AvA nisAra nIrasa zuSka tane kema grahe
vAru? vaLI A zuSka tarka graha kharekhara! graha jevo ja che. pUrve kahyuM hatuM
tema graha eTale bhUtapizAca, athavA aniSTa graha, athavA magaramaccha. (1)
bhUtapizAcarUpa grahathI je grasta hAya, jene jhADa vaLagyuM hoya, tenA bhuDA
hAlahavAla thAya che ne tene te grahamAMthI chUTavuM muzkela thaI paDe che tema
A zuSka tarkavAdarUpa grahathIbhUtathI je AviSTa thayo hoya, e bhUta jene
bharAyuM hoya, tenI bhAre bUrI dazA thAya che, ne tenA grahamAMthI-pakaDamAMthI
chUTavuM bhArI thaI paDe che. (2) athavA aniSTa pApa graha jene naDato hoya,
tene bhArI vasamI pIDA sahavI paDe che, tema A takavAdarUpa aniSTa grahathI je
pIDAtA hoya, tene pitAne hAthe horelI bhArI kanaDagata bhegavavI paDe che, ane
tenI asaramAMthI te sahelAIthI chUTI zakatuM nathI. (3) athavA je magarathI
prasA hoya, tene tenA jaDabAmAMthI chaTakavuM bhArI kaThina thaI paDe che; tema
zuSka takarUpa magaranA grahathI je grahAye haya, tene tenI cuMgAlamAMthI
chUTavuM ati duSkara thaI paDe che. Ama traNe arthamAM pite rahelA zuSka
takarUpa grahathI zuSkata grAhI pitAnI meLe ja du:khI thAya che. AvA aniSTa
duSTa zuSka tarka grahane AtmArthagrAhI mumukSu kema gahe? temaja A zuSka taka
graha mahAna che, ati reDha che, mahA bhayaMkara che. enuM pariNAma pitAne mATe
te parane mATe mahA raudra che-dAruNa che. kAraNa ke AnaM-raudra dhyAnathI vAdI-
prativAdI banene hAni thAya che. mahA tAki kaziromaNi zrI siddhasena divAkarajIe
pitAnI lAkSaNika zailImAM varNavyuM che tema-je koI prakAre potAno vijaya thAya
che te te eTale badhe pariteSa pAme che ke maryAdAne bhaMga karI e potAnI baDAI
hAMkI traNe lokone khala banAve che! ane pote je koI prakAre bIjAthI chavAI jAya
che te kapAMdha thaI jaI, prativAdI pratye ghAMTA pADI-barADA pADI, AkramaNa
karate sate potAnuM

Page #511 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Dimadrusti** makes the seeker free from all attachments. (45) It removes all
kinds of disputes. It cannot tolerate any kind of debate or discussion, and it
sighs deeply with anger due to insult! Even in pleasant things, it experiences
**arati-jwar** – it does not like pleasant things, and its words towards friends
are as harsh as stones! And it arises from **ahankara** (ego), this all-
pervading principle is the principle of all systems, it seems to be mounted on
it and truly examines itself! That is, it directly experiences the suffering
caused by ego!” Thus, dry logic leads to a terrible outcome. Moreover, dry logic
leads to **mithyabhiman** (false pride). A dry logician considers his father to
be very intelligent! He is very proud of his father's intelligence and reasoning
ability. He keeps boasting about how he cleverly tricked and defeated someone!
Thus, dry logic, which leads to a terrible outcome, leads to **mithyabhiman**,
and therefore, it is completely to be abandoned by seekers of liberation.
Because the true seekers have only one goal, to get rid of the bondage of birth
and death at any cost. They have only one purpose, they are not interested in
honor, worship, achievement, respect, etc., and as seen above, dry logic does
not lead to any kind of self-interest, on the contrary, it causes great harm due
to ego. Where is the solitude of a true seeker of liberation, and where is the
solitude of a dry logician? “The good is on one side, and the debaters or the
bull-like debaters are thinking on the other side! The sage has never said that
debate is a good remedy.” Thus, there is a vast distance between debate and
liberation, so why should a seeker of liberation engage in debate? Why should he
embrace dry logic?  *"If he wins, he becomes arrogant, breaking the bounds of
courtesy. He makes even the three worlds into wicked people by his boasting
about his own virtues. Or if he loses, he becomes angry and quarrelsome. He
attacks with a roar, making fun of the opponent. He cannot tolerate debaters, he
sighs deeply with anger due to insult. Even in pleasant things, he experiences
**arati-jwar**, and even towards friends, his words are like stones." This is
the principle of all systems, that suffering arises from ego. And he, mounted on
it, truly examines himself."* *Shri Siddhasena Divakarcharita, 8, 15-18*  *"The
good is on one side, and the bull-like debaters are thinking on the other side.
The sage has never said that debate is a good remedy."* *Shri Siddhasena
Divakarcharita, 8-7*

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dImAdaSTi mumukSane sarvatra graha ayukta (45) vilakhApaNuM dUra kare che. te
vAda kathA khamI zakatuM nathI, ane mAnabhaMgathI uSNa evA lAMbA nisAsA nAkhe
che! ramya vastumAM paNa tene arati-javara lAgu paDe che- ramya vastu paNa tene
gamatI nathI, ane sahade pratye paNa tenA vacana vaja jevA kaThora nIkaLe che !
ane kha ahaMkAramAMthI upaje che, e A sarvataMtra siddhAMta sarva taMtrane
siddhAMta che, tenA para jANe ArUDha thaIne te kharekhara ! tasvaparIkSA kare
che ! arthAt ahaMkArajanya duHkhane sAkSAt anubhava kare che!" ItyAdi prakAre
zuSka takavAda raudra pariNAmanuM kAraNa thAya che. vaLI zuSka tarkavAda
mithyAbhimAnane hetu thAya che. zuSka tarkavAdI pitAne baDo hoziyAra mAne che!
tene pitAnI buddhinuM-tarkazaktinuM ghaNuM abhimAna hoya che. meM kevI phakkaDa
yukti laDAvI phalANAne chakaDa mArI teDI pADa-harAvyo, e phAke rAkhI te akkaDa
rahe che! Ama mahAraudra pariNAmavALa zuSka tarkagraha mithyAbhimAnane hetu
hevAthI, AtmahiteSI mumukSuone sarvathA tyAjya ja che. kAraNa ke sAcA mumukSuone
mukhya ne eka ja hetu game tema karIne bhavabaMdhanathI chUTavAne che. teone
kevaLa eka AtmArthanuM ja kAma che, mAna-pUjA-labdhi-satkAra Adi bIje mana-roga
teone hete nathI, ane uparamAM joyuM tema zuSka tarkathI koIpaNa prakArane
AtmArtha siddha thatuM nathI, UlaTo mAnAthane lIdhe atyaMta hAni pAme che. kayAM
sAcA mumukSu jogIjananuM ekAMta AtmAthI paNuM? ane kayAM zuSka tarkavAdInuM
matAthI paNuM-mAnAthIpaNuM? "zreya te eka bAjue rahyA che, te vAdiSo athavA
vAdIrUpa baLadIA bIjI bAjue vicArI rahyA che ! munie vAdavivAdane kayAMya paNa
mekSa-upAya kahyo nathI." Ama vAdane ane mokSane lAkha gAunuM aMtara che, mATe
mAtra mokSane athI e mumukSu jogIjana vAdavivAdamAM kema paDe? zuSka takagrahane
kema gahe? *"yadi vijayate kathaMcittato'pi paritoSabhagnamaryAdaH  /
svaguNavikatthanadUSikatrInapi lokAn khalIkurute  //  uta jIyate kathaMcit
pariSatparivAdinaM sa kopaandhH| galagarjenAkrAman vailakSyavinodanaM kurute  //
vAdakAM na kSamate dIrgha niHzvasiti mAnabhaGgoSNam  /  ramye'pyaratijvaritaH
suhRtvapi vniikrnnvaakyH|| duHkhamahaMkAraprabhavamityayaM srvtNtrsiddhaaNtH|
atha ca tamevArUDhastattvaerIkSA kila karoti  // " zrI siddhasena divAkarachakta
dvA, dvA, 8, 15-18 x"anyata eva zreyAMsyanyata eva vicaranti vaadivRssaaH|
vAkUsaMraMbhaH kvacidapi na jagAda muniH shivopaayH|| zrI siddhasena
divAkarachakRta dvA-dvA, 8-7

Page #512 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(436) Also— Grahaḥ sarvatra tattvena mumukṣūṇāmasangatāḥ | aat dharmā api
prāyastyaktavyaḥ kima nena tat || 148 || Mumukṣuōne tattvathī, grahu ayukt
satra; dharmāye prāye muktīmā, tyājay-ethī shu' atra? 148 A:—Satra graha
tattvathī mumukṣuōne asangat-ayukt chhe. Muktine viṣe dharmā pan prāye tyajavānā
hāy chhe, to pachhī ā grahathī shu? Vivecan Yogadṛṣṭisamuccaya Chheḍī mat
darśana ṭaṇō, āgraha tem vikalpa; Kahyo māg ā sādhaśe, janma tehana alpa.
’”—Śrīmad Rajacandrajī praṇīta Ātmasiddhi Mumukṣuē tattvathī kyāṇy pan graha
rākhavo yukt nathi. Kāran ke muktīmā dharmō pan prāye chheḍī deva pade chhe. Te
pachhī ā grahathī shu? Mōkṣābhilāṣī ātmāthī jīve śuṣka tak graha chheḍī deva
cōgya chhe, etlu j nahi, panu kyāṇy panu kāī pan vastu ne graha pan tyajī deva
jōīē. Māte sa॰ matdana nō āgraha tem vikalpa chheḍī i, tem j anya sarva prakār
ne kyāṇy pan graha graha pan visarjan karī mumukṣuē thōkt mōkṣamāg j āradhavā
yukt nathi cōgya chhe, kāran ke mumukṣu nā ekānta hetu kōī pan prakār ne mōkṣanī
prāpti karavī te j chhe. Ane māksa mā te śuddha ātmāsva bhāvarūpa kṣāyik dharmā
sivāy badhu y chheḍye j chūṭkō chhe. Are! Kṣamādik kṣāāpaśamik dharmā pan
mōkṣamā chheḍī deva pade chhe, tyā ā tuchchha aniṣṭ graheō nī te śī vāta karavī?
Sa grahathī mukt thayā vinā mā sanmukha pan na thavāy, to mukt te kem j thavāy?
Te pachhī ā ‘rākhanā paḍīkā' jēvā duṣṭ grahanē mumukṣu śā hetuē gāṇṭhe bāṇḍhe?
Ne ē graha jēvā grahanē grahīne hāthe karīne shu kāma niṣkāraṇe du:kha thī
gṛhīta thāy? ,, ‹ Dharma kṣamārdik pan mitejī, pragate dharma sannyās; te jhagḍā
aṇā ṭaṇājī, munine kavṇu abhyās. ....manmāhan jinjī! Mīṭhī tāharī vāṇu. Chā. Da.
Sā. 4-22 । Iti sarvajñādi atīndriyārthānumanāgocaratvādhikāraḥ | 5 Vṛtti:-Tra
્:graha, sarvatra-sarvāntra, sa` vastu mā tarven-tattvathī, paramātha thī,
mumukṣuḷāmasamvatḥ-mumukṣuōne asangat chhe—ayukt chhe. Kyā kāraṇu thī! Tā ke–muō
dharmō vikācatvaya:-muktine viṣe dharmā paśu prāye tyajavā pade chhe, prāma:nū
grahaṇu kṣāyik dhamēnā vyavacchhed (apavāda) athe chhe, minen sa ્—to pachhī ā
grahathī shu? Kaī nahi, em athe chhe.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (436 ) temaja-- grahaH sarvatra tattvena mumukSUNAmasaMgataH  /  aat dharmA api
prAyastyaktavyAH kimanena tat  //  148 //  mumukSuone tattvathI, grahu ayukta
satra; dharmAya prAye muktimAM, tyAjaya-ethI zu' atra ? 148 a:--satra graha
tattvathI mumukSuone asagata-ayukta che. muktine viSe dharmAM paNa prAye
tyajavAnA hAya che, teA pachI A grahathI zu ? vivecana yogadRSTisamuccaya cheDI
mata darzana taNeA, Agraha tema vikalpa; kahyo mAga A sAdhaze, janma tehanA
alpa. '"--zrImad rAjaca*drajI praNIta Atmasiddhi mumukSue tattvathI kayAMya paNa
graha rAkhaveA yukta nathI. kAraNa ke muktimAM dharmo paNa prAye cheADI devA
paDe che. te pachI A grahathI zuM? meAkSAbhilASI AtmAthI jIve zuSka taka graha
cheDI devA ceAgya che, eTalu ja nahiM, paNu kayAMya paNu kAi paNa vastune graha
paNa tyajI devA joie. mATe sa. matadananeA Agraha tema vikalpa cheADI i, tema ja
anya sarva prakArane kayAMya paNa graha graha paNa visarjana karI mumukSue
theAkta meAkSamAga ja ArAdhavA yukta nathI ceAgya che, kAraNa ke mumukSunA
ekAMta hetu koi paNa prakAre meAkSanI prApti karavI te ja che. ane mAkSamAM te
zuddha AtmasvabhAvarUpa kSAyika dharmAM sivAya badhuya cheDaye ja chUTako che.
are ! kSamAdika kSAApazamika dharmAM paNa meAkSamAM cheDI devA paDe che, tyAM A
tuccha aniSTa graheAnI te zI vAta karavI ? sa grahathI mukta thayA vinA mA
sanmukha paNa na thavAya, teA mukta te kema ja thavAya ? te pachI A 'rAkhanA
paDIkA' jevA duSTa grahAne mumukSu zA hetue gAMThe bAMdhe ? ne e graha jevA
grahAne grahIne hAthe karIne zuM kAma niSkAraNe du:khathI gRhIta thAya ? ,, <
dharma kSamArdika paNa miTejI, pragaTe dharma saMnyAsa; te jhaghaDA aJA taNAjI,
munine kavaNu abhyAsa. ....manamAhana jinajI ! mIThI tAharI vANu. cA. da. sA.
4-22  /  iti sarvajJAdi atIMdriyArthAnumAnAgocaratvAdhikAraH  /  5 vRtti:-tra
:graha, sarvatra-sarvAMtra, sa` vastumAM taravena-tattvathI, paramAtha thI,
mumukSLAmasaMvataHmumukSuone asagaMta che--ayukta che. kayA kAraNuthI ! tA ke-
muau dharmo vikAcattvayA:-muktine viSe dharmAM pazu prAye tyajavA paDe che,
prAma:nuM grahaNu kSAyika dhamenA vyavaccheda (apavAda) athe che, minena sa --to
pachI A grahathI zuM? kaMi nahi, ema atha che.

Page #513 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Domadashti Mahajan** (the great ones) should be followed on the path, with
care and compassion. (437) The path of the **Mahtapurusha** (great souls) is the
right path because it is so. Therefore, in this matter, the wise should follow
the path of the great ones, without transgressing it, and act according to
righteousness. 149 Meaning: Therefore, in this matter, the wise should follow
the path of the great ones, without transgressing it, and act according to
righteousness. The wise **Mumukshu** (seeker of liberation) should abandon all
other distractions, discard all other **Mahajan** (great ones) and their
teachings, and follow the path of the **Mahtapurusha** (great souls) with
complete surrender. The path of the **Mahajan** (great ones) is the path of
**Atmavisuddhi** (self-purification). Therefore, it is the duty of the
**Mumukshu** (seeker of liberation) to follow in their footsteps. While walking
on this path, one should avoid transgressing, violating, or breaking the
**Dharmamarg** (path of righteousness) established by the **Mahtapurusha**
(great souls). Therefore, in this matter, the wise should follow the path of the
great ones, without transgressing it, and act according to righteousness.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 domAdaSTi mahAjanane mArga-parapIDAvana, pare5kAra (437) mahatpuruSa mArga
adhikAra kAraNa ke ema che tethI- tadatra mahatAM vartma samAzritya vicakSaNaiH
/  vartitavyaM yathAnyAyaM tadatikramavarjitaiH  //  149  //  prAze atra
mahaMtane, mArga Azraune sAra; tasa atikrama viNa vartavuM, nyAya taNe anusAra
149 artha -tethI karIne atre mahatva puruSonA mArgane samyapha Azraya karI,
vicakSaNoe tene atikrama vajIne, yathAnyAya vartavuM gya che. vivecana mikSa
kahyo nija zuddhatA, te pAme te paMtha; samajAvya saMkSepamAM, sakaLa mArga
nigraMtha." - zrImad rAjacaMdrapraNIta zrI Atmasiddhi tethI atre A bAbatamAM
mahApuruSonA mArgane samyapha Azraya karI, nirIkSaNa karI mumukSujanee te
dharmane atikrama na thAya e rIte, yathAnyAye vartavuM egya che. te pachI
mumukSu AtmAthI jIve zuM karavuM yogya che te ahIM spaSTa karyuM che. vicakSaNa
mumukSue to bIjI badhI mAthApheDa choDI daIne, bIjI badhI mahAjananA bhaMgajAla
phagAvI daIne, mata-darzana Agrahane samasta prapaMca visarjana mArgane karI,
sarva grahanI cuMgAlamAMthI mukta thaI, mahat puruSonA mArganuM anusaravuM
samyapha avalaMbana karavuM yogya che. "mAnano cena jata: 4 prathAH " mahAjana
je mArge gayA te mArga che. ane mahAjanene mAge te kevaLa AtmavizuddhirUpa
mekSamArga che. eTale mahAjanenA nidiSTa mAge temanA pagale cAlavuM e ja
mumukSunuM kartavya che ane te mArge cAlatAM, mahatapuruSoe praNIta karelA
nirdoSa dharmamAgane jema atikama na thAya, aticAra na thAya, ullaMghana na
thAya, bhaMga na thAya, tema upagapUrvaka sanIti pramANe cAlavuM egya che. Ama
mahAjananA mArge niraticArapaNe yathAnyAya pravaktavuM-gamana karavuM e ja
mumukSu jogIjananuM kartavya che. nRtti-satra-tethI atra vyatikaramAM, A
prasaMgamAM, maMtAM varma-mahata puruSonA mArgane, samAzrityasamAzraya karI
aMgIkAra karI, viraH -vicakSaNoe, paMDitoe, tatacaM cAnyA-thathAnyA-nyAya
pramANe vartavuM pega che. tarikSamannataiiH -te mahata dharmanA atikramathI-
aticArathI rahita evAoe.

Page #514 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(438) It is said— Even subtle harm to others should be avoided with effort. And
in their welfare, one should always strive. 150 Meaning: Even subtle harm to
others should be avoided with effort; and in their welfare, one should always
strive. Samadashtimuji Commentary ‘Poshahar: puchhyaay, papaacha papiwanam’ -
Nyasaji. This is the great man’s request, as he has said here. In this world,
even subtle harm to others should be avoided, and in their welfare, one should
always strive. :: In this world, one should strive with effort to avoid even
subtle harm to other beings, even subtle transgression. This is the duty of a
seeker of liberation. A seeker of liberation avoids even subtle harm to other
beings, let alone greater harm! One should remain constantly aware, through
mind, speech, or body, that one does not cause any harm or transgression to any
being. Anushadhe aatma phlay, jinavarni tyah nahi aajnaay; Sa jeevanu ichche
sukh, mahavirni shiksha mukhya. Sadane a upadesh, a ekant nahi vishesh; Sarva
prakaare jinne khesh, ya ya nirmal aviash. A bhavatarak sundar rah, riche tariye
kari utsaah; Dha sakalanu a shubh mul, a vishnu dham sada pratikool.
Tattvaroopathi a elakhe, te jan pahonche shashvat sukhe; Shantinath bhagwan
prasiddha, rajachandra karunaaye siddha” Shreemad Rajachandrapraneet Maakshamala
Vritti: Pavida - par pida, par khaadha, ru - ahee, loakmaan, sukshmaapi -
sukshma panu, moti ta door rahe! Shu'! Ta ke varganiaya - java chona chhe,
parityaajava yogya chhe, prayatnar: prayatnaathi, sukshma maabegaathi,
tadutateni jemj, prayatnaathij, tendup repi - tena upkaarmaan pashu, chatitany -
man karava yogya chhe, anushtan dvaaraaye (acharanuvade karine), sanvaiv fri -
sadaiv j.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (438) eja kahe che-- parapIDeha sUkSmApi varjanIyA prayatnataH  /
tadvattadupakAre'pi yatitavyaM sadaiva hi  //  150  //  parapIDA ahiM sUkSma
paNa, vavI ja saprayatna; temaja tasa upakAramAM, karavA sadaiva yatna. 150
artha :--ahIM' sUkSma paNa parapIDA prayatnathI najavI; temaja tenA upakAramAM
paNu sadaiva ja yatna karavA. samadaSTimujIya vivecana 'poSahAra: puchyAya,
pApAca papIvanam 'nyAsajI. te mahat puruSAe Acarela mAga karyo che? te ahI kahyo
che. A lAkamAM sUkSma paNa parapIDA vajavI, temaja para upakAramAM paNa
niraMtara yatna karavA. HH A jagamAM peAtAnAthI bIjA jIvane sUkSma pIDA paNa na
thAya, sUkSma khAdhA paNu na upaje, ema prayatnathI-yatnAthI vartavuM, e mumukSu
AtmAthInu karttavya che. mumukSu khIjA jIvAne sUkSma pIDA paNa vajra, tA pachI
mATI pIDAnI vAta te kayAMya dUra rahI ! manathI, vacanathI ke kAyathI koipaNa
prakAre kAipaNa jIvane pAtAnAthI kaipaNa pIDA-mAdhA na upaje, evI satata jAgRti
AtmAthI jIva rAkhe. anuSadhe AtmA phlAya, jinavaranI tyAM nahi AjJAya; sa jIvanu
Icche sukha, mahAvIranI zikSA mukhya. sadane e upadeza, e ekAMte nahi vizeSa;
sarva prakAre jinane kheSa, yA yA nirmaLa aviASa. e bhavatAraka suMdara rAha,
rice tariye karI utsAha; dha sakaLanu e zubha mULa, e viSNu dhama sadA
pratikULa. tattvarUpathI e eLakhe, te jana paheAMce zAzvata sukhe; zAMtinAtha
bhagavAna prasiddha, rAjaca'dra karuNAe siddha" zrImad rAjacadrapraNIta
mAkSamALA vRtti:--pavIdA--para pIDA, para khAdhA, rU-ahI, leAkamAM, sUkSmApi-
sUkSma paNu, moTI tA dUra rahe ! zu'! tA ke varganIyA-javA ceAJa che,
parityajavA yogya che, prayatnara: prayatnathI, sUkSma mAbegathI, tadUtatenI
jemaja, prayatnathIja, teMDupa repi-tenA upakAramAM pazu, catitanya-mana karavA
yogya che, anuSThAna dvArAe ( AcaraNuvaDe karIne), saMvaiva phri-sadeva ja.

Page #515 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  The Proper Worship of Gurudev-Dvijayati  (439) A seeker of liberation should
always strive to benefit others.  A seeker should always actively engage in
actions that benefit other beings in this world and the next, using their body,
mind, and wealth to the best of their ability.  Thus, a seeker is compassionate
and devoted to the welfare of others.  **And**  "Guru, Devatas, Vipras, and
Tapasvi Yatis who are rich in austerities, are all great souls who should be
worshipped with a sincere heart." (151)  **Meaning:** Gurus, Devatas, Vipras,
and Tapasvi Yatis who are rich in austerities - all these great souls are worthy
of worship with a sincere heart.  **Discussion:** Gurus, Devatas, Vipras, and
Tapasvi Yatis who are rich in austerities - all these great souls are worthy of
worship with a sincere heart.  Gurus include mothers, fathers, art teachers,
their relatives - brothers, sisters, etc., as well as elders who teach Dharma,
Devatas, and other teachings, those who are knowledgeable and elderly.  These
noble people are the category of Gurus who are worthy of worship.  Their worship
should be done in the following ways:  (1)  Bow to them three times a day, and
when the opportunity arises, bow to them with utmost devotion in your heart. (2)
When they arrive, greet them with respect, i.e., stand up and go to meet them,
offer them a seat, and when they sit down, offer them water, etc.  Behave with
humility in their presence.  Do not speak loudly in their presence.  Do not
listen to gossip about them. (3)  Offer them the best clothes, etc., to the best
of your ability, and always serve them. (4)  Refrain from any actions that are
harmful to them, and engage in actions that are beneficial to them.  Do this
with propriety, i.e., do not cause them any pain.  **Meaning:**  These qualities
- mothers, fathers, Devatas, Vipras, and Yatis who are rich in austerities - are
all worthy of worship.  They are great souls who should be worshipped with a
sincere heart.  This means that they should be worshipped with a devoted heart,
with a heart that is obedient to their teachings.  "The abandonment of what is
harmful to them, and the engagement in what is beneficial to them, is what is
called propriety, and it is said that Dharma should not cause pain."  (See
reference) Shri Yogabindu, Shwe 110-115.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dImAri gurudeva-dvijayatinuM yathAyogya pUjana (439) ane bIjA nA upakAramAM
paNa mumukSu jIva sadaiva yatna kare. anya jIvanuM A lekamAM ne paralokamAM je
rIte hita thAya evA prakAre tana-mana dhanathI pitAthI banatuM badhuMya mumukSu
jIva sadAya sakriya AcaraNa dvArA karI cUke. Ama mumukSu jogIjana paramadayALu
ne paropakArane vyasanI-baMdhANI heya. tathA guravo devatA viprA yatayazca
tapodhanAH  /  pUjanIyA mahAtmAnaH suprayatnena cetasA  //  151  //  guru devatA
vine, tapAdhana yatirAja; pUjaya suprayatna cittathI, mahAtmAo sahu A ja, 151
artha- guruo, devatAo, vipro ane tapodhana yatio-e sarva mahAtmAo suprayatnavALA
cittathI pUjanIya che-pUjavA yogya che. vivecana temaja-guruo, devatA, kije ane
tapodhana yatio,-e sarva mahAtmAo suprayatnata citte yathAyogyapaNe pUjanIya
che, pUjavA yogya cheH- guruo eTale mAtA, pitA, kalAcArya, eenA jJAtio-bhAI
bahena vagere, tathA dharmane guru-devAdi upadeza karanArA vRddho-jJAnavRddha
ane vRddha jane. A ziSTa janene pUjana iSTa evo guruvarga che. tenuM pUjana A A
prakAre thAya :-(1) traNa saMdhyA samaye tene namanakriyA karavI, ane te
avasaraga na hoya te cittamAM tene atyaMtapaNe ApIne namanakriyA karavI. (2) te
Ave tyAre abhyatthAnAdi karavuM, arthAt UThIne sAmA javuM, Asana devuM, te bese
eTale parya pAsanA karavI, ItyAdi vinaya AcaraNa karavuM tenI samIpamAM
apragalTapaNe-anuddhatapaNe besavuM; asthAne tenuM nAma na levuM; kavacit paNa
tene avarNavAda na sAMbhaLa. (3) sArAmAM sArA vastrAdinuM tene yathAzakti
nivedana-samarpaNa karavuM, ane tenA hAthe sadA paraka kriyAonuM karAvavuM. (4)
tene aniSTa evA vyavahArane tyAga kare, ane ISTa evA vyavahAramAM pravartana
karavuM, ane A dhamadine pIDAjha na upaje ema aucityathI-ucitapaNe karavuM,
arthAt - kRtti-guNo-e, mAtA-pitA pramukha, vaitA-devatA, sAmAnyathI ja vi-vi,
tije, catA-ane yatio, pravati, tapovanI tapAdhana, ta5rUpa dhanavALA, varIyA-
pUjanIya che, pUjavA yoga che, mAramAra-mahAtmAo, e savepa, yathAhapaNe
thAyegyapaNe kevI rIte te ke-yuina netanAsuprayatnavaMta citathI, AjJApradhAna
cittathI, ema artha che. x" tyAgazca tadaniSTAnAM tadiSTeSu pavartanam  /
aucityena vida kSeyaM prAhurdharmAdyapIDayA" (AdhAra mATe juo) zrI yogabiMdu,
zve 110-115.

Page #516 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Yogadrishti Samuccaya  (1) One should remain devoted to the pursuit of spiritual
endeavors (purushartha-aradhana-parayaṇa) instead of engaging in what is
undesirable (anishta) and indulging in what is desirable (ishta), and instead of
pursuing the objects of dharma and other human goals (dharmadi purushartha).
(2) One should refrain from using the seat and other belongings of the guru.
Instead, one should donate the guru's wealth to sacred places (tirthas), i.e.,
use it for sacred purposes, not for one's own consumption, lest it become a
cause of one's own demise.  (3) One should perform the rituals of worship, such
as offering incense and flowers, for the consecrated image (pratibimba) of the
guru. One should also perform the supreme and most excellent rite of the 'upward
departure' (urdhvadeha-kriya), i.e., the funeral rites.  (4) One should worship
the deities with purity and faith, using flowers, clay, garments, and other
auspicious materials, in an appropriate manner, thus honoring the guru and the
deities.  (5) The learned and twice-born (dvija), i.e., the Brahmins, who are
endowed with knowledge and sacraments, and who know Brahman, are worthy of
worship and honor.  (6) Similarly, the ascetic (yati), who is rich in
austerities (tapodhana), is also worthy of constant, reverential worship, for he
is ever engaged in the protection of life and the restraint of the senses.  In
this way, one should worship the guru, the deities, the learned, and the ascetic
rich in austerities, as is appropriate, and with a supremely diligent mind
devoted to the observance of their instructions.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (440 ) yogadRSTisaMmuccaya tene aniSTathI nivattatAM ane iSTamAM pravarttatAM
ne dharmAdi puruSArtha ne khAdhA upajatI hoya, te tema na karatAM puruSArtha-
ArAdhanaparAyaNa rahevuM. (5) tenA AsanAdinA abhoga karavA, arthAt gurunA
AsanAdi vAparavA nahi. ane tenA dravyanu tIrthAMmAM niyeAjana karavuM, arthAt
tIkSetramAM vAparI nAMkhavuM, nahi te te peAte grahaNa kare te tenA maraNAdimAM
anumatine prasaMga Ave. (6) temaja tenA pratibimbanI* sthApanAnA dhUpa-puSpAdi
pUjArUpa sa'skAra karavo. ane tenI parama-utkRSTa evI UrdhvadekriyA karavI,
mRtakArya karavuM. puSpAthI, alithI, vastrothI, ane zeAlana teMtrothI zauca-
zraddhA samanvita evu' devonuM pUjana karavuM, ityAdi prakAre yathAyeAgyapaNe
guru-devanI pUjA karavI. vipro eTale dvijo--brAhmaNeA. vidyA vaDe je prakRSTa
che, arthAt je vidyAnA prakane pAmelA che te vipra. be vAra jene janma thayA
che, arthAt eka te sthUla dehajanmanI apekSAe ane khIjo saMskAranI apekSAe ema
be janma jenA thayA che te dvija. brahmane AtmasvarUpane je jANe che, te
brAhmaNa. AvA vidyAvata, sa'skArasvAmI, brahmavettA vidvajanArUpa dvijo
yathAyeAgyapaNe pUjavA ceAgya che, sanmAnavA ceAgya che, temaja tapeAdhana evA
yatie paNa pUjanIya che. yati eTale sacamI puruSa, sAdhujana. jeNe manane te
iMdriyAnA sayama karyA che te yati athavA 'ti'. je jIvarakSAmAM ne
iMdriyanigrahamAM yatnavaMta che te yati. tapa jenu' dhana che te tapeAdhana.
anazanAdi khAdya tapa, ane prAyazcitta svAdhyAyAdi AbhyaMtara tapa niraMtara
tapatA rahI taparUpa dhananI jeNe vRddhi karI che, evA tapAdhana yatie niratara
paramAdarathI pUjavA yAgya che. Ama gurue, devatAo, viSe, ane tapeAdhana yatie
----A sa+ mahAtmAe jema ucita hAya tema yathAyeAgyapaNe pUjavA cAgya che. ane te
pUjanA paNa suprayatnavaMta cittathI hAvI joie. arthAt tenA AjJApAlanamAM
tatpara evA AjJApradhAna cittathI karavI joie.  pApavatsvapi cAtyantaM
svakarmanihateSvalam  /  anukampaiva saveSu nyAyyA dharmo'yamuttamaH  //  152
//  svakarmathI ja haNAyalA, pApI prati atyaMta; nyAya anukaMpA ja-A, uttama
dharma mahuta, 152 vRtti:-pApavizvAsthataM-ane atyaMta pApavA pratye paNa,
lubdhaka-jJikArI Aphri pratye paNa, carmanitaeNvvasam-atyatapaNe svakamA~thI
haNAyelA evA, anueva sattveSu-sattvA pratye anuka`pA ja, nyAyA nyAyya che.--
nahiM ke matsara, dharmAMDayamuttama:A dha' uttama che,-kAraNamAM kAnA upayAthI.
zrI cAdui * " tadAsanAdyabhogazva tIrthe tadvittayojanam  /
tadvivanyAsasaMskAra Urdhvadeha kriyA parA  //  "

Page #517 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Mahi: Mahat Purusha ne Maag, Upsanhar** (44) **Artha** - And even towards
those who are extremely sinful, who are extremely afflicted by their own karma,
compassion is the only justice - this is the highest Dharma. **Vivechan**
"Shantinath Bhagwan Prasad, Rajchandra Karunae Siddha" - Shrimad Rajchandraji
And even towards those who are extremely sinful, who are extremely afflicted by
their own karma, compassion is the only justice - this is the highest Dharma.
For a Mumukshu, compassion for all beings is a given, what is there to ask? But
Even towards Mahapaapi beings like hunters, fishermen, etc., compassion is the
only justice - it is just. It is not appropriate to have a disdainful attitude
towards them, because These poor, ignorant beings have fallen into great sins
due to their ignorance, they have become fallen, and they are extremely
afflicted by their own evil karma. What is the point of killing the already
dead? "To strike the fallen"? These poor sinners are the very place of
compassion, of mercy. Thinking about the terrible fate that these six beings
will suffer due to their evil karma, the Mumukshu will feel compassion for them.
And motivated by this, he will try to prevent them from doing so, as much as he
can. This is the highest Dharma. "Tulsi Daya Na Chhandie, Jab Lag Ghat Mein
Pran." - Tulsidasji "Parahit Ae J Nit Hit Samjhu, Ane. Par Dukha Ae Pota Nu
Dukha Samjhu." "Prabhu Bhaje, Niti So, Partho Par Pakar." - Shrimad Rajchandraji
Thus, (1) Compassion for others, (2) Addiction to helping others, (3) Worship of
Gurudev, (4) Compassion even for sinners - this is the highest Dharma. This is
the path of the Mahat Purusha. This highest Dharma has been practiced by the
Mahajanas, it has been shown, following it is the only righteous conduct. | Ri
Madhumaadapi: 1 - DR =

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 mAhiH mahata puruSane mAga, upasaMhAra (44) artha -ane svakarmathI atyaMta
haNAyelA evA atyaMta pApavaMta cha pratye paNa anukaMpA ja nyAcya che,- A dhama
uttama che. vivecana "zAMtinAtha bhagavAna prasiddha, rAjacaMdra karuNAe
siddha"zrImad rAjacaMdrajI ane pitAnA ja karmothI atyaMta haNAyelA evA mahApApI
jIvo pratye paNa anukaMpA ja nyApya che-A dhama uttama che. mumukSu jIvane sarva
jIva pratye dayA-anukaMpA heya emAM te pUchavuM ja zuM? paNa zikArI, mAchImAra
vagere jevA mahApApI jIvo pratye paNa te mahApApI pratye anukaMpA ja rAkhe ane e
ja nyA che-nyAyayukta che. tenA paNa dayA pratye ghaNA rAkhavI ke tiraskAranI
dRSTithI jevuM e yogya nathI, kAraNa ke e bicArA pAmara jI ajJAnanA vize karIne
mahA kukarmomAM paDI gayA che, patita thayA che, ane potAnA duSTa karmothI ja
atyaMta haNAI gayelA che. evA marelAne mAravuM zuM? "paDatA upara pATu" zI? e
bicArA pApI che te atyaMta dayAnuM, anukaMpAnuM ja sthAna che. A kukarmothI A
cha bApaDA kevI durgati pAmaze ? e vicAratAM mumukSune tenA pratye anukaMpA ja
chUTe. ane tethI prerita thaI pitAnAthI bane te temAMthI tene nivAravA prayatna
paNa kare. A ja dhama uttama che. tulasI dayA na chAMDIe, jaba laga ghaTameM
prAna." tulasIdAsajI parahita e ja nita hita samajavuM, ane. paradu:kha e
potAnuM duHkha samajavuM." "prabhu bhaje, nIti so, paraTho para pakAra."--zrImad
rAjacaMdrajI Ama ( 1 ) parapIDAvajana, (2) paropakAra vyasana, (3)
gurudevAdipUjana, ( 4 ) pApInI paNa anukaMpA-A dharma uttama che. A mahat
puruSane mArga che. A uttama dharma mahAjanee Acaryo che, je darzAvyuM che, tene
ja anusaravuM e ja yathAtyAya vattana che. | ri madhumADapis: 1 - DR =

Page #518 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Gadasya Samuchaya (42) - Concluding, it is said -  कृतमत्र प्रसंगेन प्रकृतं
प्रस्तुमोऽधुना । तत्पुनः पञ्चमी तावद्योगदृष्टिमहोदया ॥ १५३ ॥   Sarna atra
prasangathi, have kahane prastut; te te panchmi ghani, dasti mahodaya yukta, 153
**Meaning:** Here, the occasion has been fulfilled. Now we present the main
topic; and that main topic is the fifth, the great, the Yoga-drsti.
**Commentary:** All that has been said above was said due to the occasion.
Therefore, this is enough! There is no need to say more. The wise will
understand it in their own way. Therefore, the true seeker, the discerning one,
will understand everything from this. A little has been said, but you will know
a lot.” So now we present the main topic - the ongoing discussion. And that
topic is the fifth, the "Sthira" named Yoga-drsti. And how special is it? It is
great. Therefore, O seeker, O yogi! Abandoning all attachments, crossing the
limits of the four drstis, now listen with one-pointed mind to the story of Yoga
related to this "Suyash" nectar-pouring, fifth "Sthira" drsti!  Abhinivesh
sagale tyajiji, char lahi jhene dasti te leshe have panchmiji, suyash amrut ghan
vrusti Manmohan jinji! Mithi tahari vanu - "Shri ye, da, saza 4-23  **Kritti-
sh-** Sufficient, enough, **tra-** here in the context, **kan-** due to the
occasion, **ka prastuno dhapuna-** now we say the main topic (ongoing
discussion), **tapunah-** again, that main topic is, **vanneri tavaladashti-**
the fifth, the "Sthira" named. How special is it? Therefore, it is said -
**motha-** great, **mahodaya wali-** great, the ultimate liberation, that is the
meaning.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 gadaSyisamuccaya (4jara) - upasaMhAra karatAM kahe che - kRtamatra prasaMgena
prakRtaM prastumo'dhunA  /  tatpunaH paJcamI tAvadyogadRSTimahodayA  //  153  //
sarNa atra prasaMgathI, have kahA~e prastuta; te te paMcamI ganI, daSTi mahodaya
yukta, 153 artha:- atre prasaMgathI basa thayuM. have ame prakRta vAta prastuta
karIe chIe; ane te prakRti te pAMcamI mahodayavatI yogadaSTi che. vivecana
uparamAM A je badhuM ya kahyuM te prasaMgavazAt kahyuM che. te mATe ATaluM basa
che! vadhAre kahevAnI jarUra nathI. zANA te sAnamAM samajI jAya. eTale sAcA
mumukSu vicakSaNa jane ATalAmAMthI badhuM samajI jaze, thoDuM kahyuM jhAjhuM
karI jANazo." eTale have ame prakRta-cAlu vAtane prastAva rajU karIe chIe. ane
te prastuta vAta te pAMcamI "sthirA nAmanI yogadaSTi che. ane te kevI viziSTa
che? te ke mahadayavALI che. mATe ahe mumukSu jogIjano ! sarva abhiniveza choDI
daIne cAra daSTinI maryAdA vaTAvI jaIne, tame have A "suyaza' amRta ghanavRSTi
karanArI pAMcamI "sthirA" daSTi saMbaMdhI yoga kathA bhAvathI ekacitta zravaNa
kare! abhiniveza saghaLe tyajIjI, cAra lahI jeNe daSTi te leze have pAMcamIjI,
suyaza amRta ghana vRSTi manamohana jinajI! mIThI tAharI vANu-"zrI ye, da, sajhA
4-23 kRtti-za-paryApta thayuM, basa thayuM, tra-atra vyatikaramAM, kana-
prasaMgathI, kAM prastunoDapunA-have ame prakRta (cAlu vAta) kahIe chIe,
tapunaH-puna: te prakRta te, vannarI tAvaLadaSTi-pAMcamI yuga tharA nAmanI che.
te kevI viziSTa che ? te mATe kahyuM-mothA-mahodayavALI che, nirvANa35 parama
kalavAnI che, ema artha che,

Page #519 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  **Fourth Insight:**  **Fourth Insight Table:** 10  | Name | In Fourth
Insight |  Neath |  Vision | |---|---|---|---| | **Deep-Light** |  **Deep-
Light** |  **Deep-Light** |  **Deep-Light** | | **Asanga** |  **Asanga** |
**Asanga** |  **Asanga** | | **Bodhi** |  **Bodhi** |  **Bodhi** |  **Bodhi** |
| **Ganga** |  **Ganga** |  **Ganga** |  **Ganga** | | **Dasa-Tyaga** |  **Dasa-
Tyaga** |  **Dasa-Tyaga** |  **Dasa-Tyaga** | | **Guna-Praapti** |  **Guna-
Praapti** |  **Guna-Praapti** |  **Guna-Praapti** | | **Visishta** |
**Visishta** |  **Visishta** |  **Visishta** | | **Guna-Sthan** |  **Guna-
Sthan** |  **Guna-Sthan** |  **Guna-Sthan** |  **Description:**  **Bodhi** is
not gross or subtle.  **Ganga:**  **Bhaava** (feeling) **Praanayama** (breath
control) - **Rechaka** (exhalation) - **Pooraka** (inhalation) - **Kumbhaka**
(retention) - **Parabhaava** (external feeling) is **rayed** away, **Aatma-
Bhaava** (inner feeling) is **purified** and **stabilized**.  **Dasa-Tyaga:**
**Uththaana** (arising) **Dasa-Tyaga** (abandonment of the ten) - Due to
**Prashanta-Vaahita** (peaceful flow), there is no **Ulyaan-Dasa** (arising of
the ten) in the **Yuga** (era).  **Guna-Praapti:**  **Tattva-Shravana** (hearing
of the truth) - **Dharma-Sharan-Beejoha-Asabhakti** (non-attachment to the seed
of refuge in Dharma) - **Teerthankara-Shana-Nirvana** (Nirvana of the
Teerthankara).  **Visishta:**  **Asanvedya** (imperceptible) **Pada** (state)
**Jay** (victory) - **Vishama** (uneven) **Kataka-Praha** (cutting of the knot)
**Nivritti** (cessation).  **Guna-Sthan:**  **First Guna-Sthan** - The
**excellence** of the first **Guna-Sthan** - The **last** **limit** is
**achieved** here.  **Summary:**  The essence of the **Fourth Insight** is like
a **lamp** that illuminates, as its name suggests. The fourth limb of **Yoga**,
**Praanayama**, is achieved. The fourth **Chitta-Dasa** (state of mind),
**Uththaana**, is destroyed, and the fourth **Guna** (quality), **Tattva-
Shravana**, is attained. However, subtle **Neath** (subterfuge) is still
present.  The **Praanayama** here is based on **Bhaava** (feeling). It involves
**Rechaka** (exhalation) to **ray** away external feelings, **Pooraka**
(inhalation) to **fill** with internal feelings, and **Kumbhaka** (retention) to
**stabilize** them with the quality of **stability**. This is **Bhaava**
(feeling) **Praanayama**.  A **Yogi** with this insight considers **Dharma**
(righteousness) as the **supreme** **guide**, even more than **life**. They will
sacrifice their life for **Dharma**, but they will not sacrifice **Dharma** for
their life. This is their **firm** **resolve**.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 tamAdaSTi: romASTine sAra dImAdaSTinuM koSTaka : 10 nAma cathI daSTimAM nedha
rzana dIpaprabhA samabodha asaMgha padane lIdhe bodha sthUla-sUkSma nahi. gAMga
bhAva prANAyAma recaka -pUraka kuMbhaka parabhAvane reya, AtmabhAvanI pUti ne
sthiratA. daSatyAga utthAna deSatAga prazAMtavAhitAne lIdhe yugamAM ulyAnadeSa
na hoya. guNaprApti | tattvazravaNuM | dharmazaraNabIjoha-asabhakti
tIrthakarazananirvANa. viziSTatA | asaMvedya pada jaya | viSama katakapraha
nivRtti. guNasthAna paheluM guNasthAna pahelA "guNasthAna" no prakarSa-chellAmAM
chelI hada ahIM prApta thAya. dImA dRSTine sAra cAthI dIpA daSTimAM tenA nAma
pramANe dIpaka samAna boSa prakAza hoya che, ane yoganuM cothuM aMga prANAyAma
prApta thAya che. temaja atre utthAna nAmanA cothA cittadeSane nAza tathA
tavazravaNa nAmanA cethA guNanI prApti hoya che chatAM atre haju sUkSma bedha
hete nathI. atre A prANAyAma je hoya che, te bhAvathI hoya che. eTale bAhya
bhAvane reca devArUpa recaka prANAyAma, aMtarannAvane pUravArUpa pUraka
prANAyAma, ane tene sthiratA guNathI sthira karavArUpa kuMbhaka prANAyAma,-ema
svabhAvarUpa bhAva prANAyAma hoya che. A dRSTivALa yogI puruSa prANa karatAM
paNa dharmane niHsaMzaya guru-mATe gaNe che, eTale te dharmanI khAtara prANa
cheDe, paNa prANasaMkaTa AvI paDaye paNa prANanI khAtara dharma cheDate nathI, e
te daDhavamAM hoya che.

Page #520 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(44) From Vagdaripura, this ever-benevolent seeker, eager for Tattvasravana,
embraces Dharma, which is more precious than life itself, with utmost devotion.
Just as a seed sprouts from sweet water, leaving behind salty water, so too,
Tattvakriti sprouts in a man, leading him to liberation. Here, the entire
worldly existence is like salty water, and Tattvasruti is like the sweet water
that nourishes it. Thus, through Tattvakriti, a human being attains all well-
being, which is filled with the joy of Guru Bhakti and beneficial in both
worlds. This Guru Bhakti inspires the vision of Tirthankaras, which is a cause
of Nirvana, free from the distinctions of Samaptti, etc. “Tattvasravana is like
sweet water, here the seed of liberation sprouts; Leaving behind the salty water
of worldly existence, Guru Bhakti is unwavering.” - Manmohan. However, the
reason for mentioning the negation of subtle bonds here is that without
Samyakta, they cannot be broken. Both are experienced through the Vedya-Sanvedya
state, and they do not occur in the Avedya-Sanvedya state. Vedya refers to the
object of knowledge, the binding cause, and the Vedya-Sanvedya state is where it
always exists. Therefore, the Tattvanirnaya that occurs in the Viddh Samaj, due
to the distinctions of Samyakta, etc., is called Sukshma Bandha. This Sukshma
Bandha does not yet exist in this state, because in the first four states, the
Avedya-Sanvedya state is dominant, and the Vedya-Sanvedya state is like the
shadow of a bird, a reflection of the activity of aquatic creatures, unreal and
illusory. And the Avedya-Sanvedya state is the ultimate truth, the state of
Yogis is the Vedya-Sanvedya state. Because where there is pure and
uncontaminated activity of the intellect, free from the influence of the
knowledge of women, etc., through the proper perception and various types of
knowledge, that state is worthy of the name "state" due to its proper state.
This Vedya-Sanvedya state is characterized by detachment from the world, etc.
This Nitya Vedya-Sanvedya state belongs only to the permanent Samyak Darshan.
And due to its great influence, even if some activity occurs in sin due to the
transgression of karma, it is like stepping on a hot ember, meaning that just as
one immediately retracts one's foot from a hot ember, so too, this Samyak
Darshan immediately feels the shock of sin, it does not have a long-lasting
state, and this sinful activity is the last one. Because the firm Samyak Darshan
does not lead a man to further degradation, like a king. “That state, through
the separation of knots, the last sinful activity, Like stepping on a hot ember,
there is an end to liberation.” - Manmohan. In contrast to that is the Avedya-
Sanvedya state. And just as a diamond is impenetrable, so too, that state
belongs to the Bhava-Abhinandi Jiva. This Bhava-Abhinandi is petty, greedy,
humble, envious, fearful, rotten,

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (44) vAgadaripurAtha Ama sadAzayavALe te mumukSu tavazravaNamAM tatpara banI
prANa karatAM paNa parama evA dharmane balAtkAre ja bhaje che. jema khAruM pANI
choDI mIThA pANInA gathI bIja UgI nIkaLe che, tema tatvakRtithI narane gabIja
UgI nIkaLe che-prareha pAme che, ahIM sarva saMsAraga che te khArA pANI barAbara
che, ane tattvazruti te madhura jalanA joga samAna che. jethI karIne A
tasvakRtithI manuSyane sarva kalyANa sAMpaDe che, ke je gurubhaktinA sukhathI
yukta ane banne lekamAM hitAvaha evuM hoya che. A gurubhaktinA prabhAvathI
tIrthaMkaradarzana karyuM che, ke je samApatti Adi bhedathI nirvANanuM eka
kAraNa che. "tattvazravaNa madhudakeru, IhAM heya bIja praha; khAra udaka sama
bhava tyajI, guru bhakti adroha.manamohana" chatAM atre sUkSma baMdhano niSedha
kahyo tenuM kAraNa e che ke samakti vinA te bedha hote nathI. te beya
vedyasaMvedya pada thakI hoya che, te avedyasaMvedya padamAM jevAmAM AvatuM
nathI. vedya eTale baMdha-mekSaheturUpa vedanIya vastu, te vedhasavedya 5da jyAM
sadAya che te vevasaMvedya pada che, tethI karIne samyapha hetu Adi bhedathI
viddhasamAjamAM je tatvanirNaya thAya che te sUphamabedha kahevAya che. te
sUkSamadha haju A daSTimAM hotuM nathI, kAraNa ke ahIM pahelI cAra daSTimAM
avedyasaMvedya pada prabaLa hoya che ne vedyasaMvedya pada paMkhInI chAyAmAM
jalacaranI pravRtti jevuM paDachAyArUpa-tadAbhAsarUpa atAtvika hoya che. ane
avedyasaMvedya pada je che te te paramArthathI apada ja che, yogIonuM pada te
vedhasaMvedya pada ja che. kAraNa ke strI Adi vedhanuM jyAM samyapha saMvedana
tathA prakAranI AgamathI vizuddha evI nirmala apravRtti buddhithI thAya che,
evuM te pada samyapha sthitivALuM hoI te "pada" nAmane barAbara yegya che. AvuM
A vedhasaMvedya pada bhinnathi, dezavirati Adi lakSaNavALuM che. A naiRRyika
vedhasaMvedya 5da kSAyika samyagadaSTine ja hoya che. ane tenA mahAprabhAvane
lIdhe, karmanA aparAdhavaze karIne paNa je kavacit pApamAM pravRtti thaI jAya te
te tapelehapadanyAsa jevI hoya, arthAt tapelA leDhA para paga mUktAM jema tarata
pAcho kheMcAI jAya che, tema A samyagadaSTine paNa pApa karatAM tarata AMcako
lAge che, temAM jhAjhI sthiti nathI, ane A pApa pravRtti paNa chellI ja hoya
che. kAraNa ke nizcaya samyagdaSTi puruSane zreNika mahArAjanI jema punaH
durgatine yoga heta nathI. te pada graMthi vibhedathI, chellI pA5 pravRtti,
tapta lehapada dhRti samIjI, tihAM hoya aMta nivRtti.....manamohana" - tenAthI
viparIta te avedhasaMvedya pada che. ane vA jevuM abhedya te pada bhavAbhinaMdI
jIvane hoya che. A bhavAbhinaMdI kSudra, lobhI, dIna, matsaravata, bhAyAkala,
saDa,

Page #521 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Essence of Homedasti Homaasti (445) Ignorance and a futile beginning are
always companions. Such a person, devoid of knowledge and understanding, is
pierced and overwhelmed by the consequences of wrong actions, resulting in a
mixed state that is not beautiful. Therefore, such a person, with a mind clouded
by ignorance, is prone to reversals and blind to the distinction between good
and bad in the present moment. Despite witnessing the manifest suffering of the
world, they remain attached to it due to excessive delusion and do not
experience distress or weariness. They remain entangled in worldly attachments,
and their inert nature binds their soul with the dust of sin. Even though they
have received the seed of the supreme Dharma, the form of human existence, in
the field of karma, these people of limited intellect do not strive to cultivate
this seed through virtuous actions. Instead, they become engrossed in trivial
and harmful pleasures, abandoning righteous conduct and virtuous behavior. Alas!
Such people deserve condemnation! This state of ignorance is a path to
degradation and downfall, and it can only be overcome through the guidance of
great souls, the scriptures, and the company of the righteous. It is impossible
to achieve this through any other means.  “The life of such a person, devoid of
knowledge, is like a hard rock, Only through the company of the righteous, the
scriptures, and the guidance of great souls can they be softened... captivating
the mind.”  Even when this state of ignorance persists, the human mind is
naturally protected from harmful and illogical arguments. These arguments are
like a snare, a source of suffering, a destroyer of faith, and a generator of
pride. Thus, such arguments are a clear enemy of the mind, causing harm in
various ways. Therefore, those seeking liberation should not be attached to such
harmful and illogical arguments, but rather focus on virtuous actions, good
conduct, meditation, and compassion. All alternatives are associated with
ignorance, and these arguments are their plan. What is the purpose of them?
Moreover, all such arguments are based on speculation, illusory perceptions, and
influenced by personal opinions. Just as one might wonder whether a running
elephant will strike the one who is far away or the one who is near, so too are
these arguments. Many other types of errors arise from such arguments.
Therefore, what is the purpose of such harmful and illogical arguments?  Wise
beings strive to achieve the knowledge of the subtle realities, and these subtle
realities are never accessible through mere intellectual reasoning but only
through the scriptures. Therefore, those who are devoted to the scriptures,
righteous conduct, and meditation, and who are engaged in the practice of yoga,
are aware of these subtle realities. In the same way, the great sage Patanjali
has said, “Through the scriptures, inference, and direct experience, a person
attains the highest truth.”  There are many who hold different opinions about
the truth, but those who consider them to be different are mistaken.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 homadaSTi homASTino sAra (445) ajJAnI ane niSphala AraMbhathI saMgata evo hoya
che. evA avaguNaaghasavedya vaMtane bodha asata pariNAmathI anuviddha-parovAyela
hoI viSamizrita pada ane jema suMdara nathI hato. eTale A aghasa vedya padavALA
manuSya viparyAsaparAyaNa ne vartamAnadazI hAI hitAhitanA vivekamAM aMdha hoya
che, eTale saMsAranuM pragaTa duHkhamaya svarUpa dekhatAM chatAM teo atimohane
lIdhe tethI udvega-kaMTALe pAmatA nathI, ane bhegamAM Asakta rahI A jaDa jane
pApadhUlithI AtmAne pAza nAMkhe che-bAMdhe che. karmabhUmine viSe
manuSyapaNArUpa parama dharma bIja pAmIne paNa A alpamati jano A bIjanI
satkarmarUpa khetImAM prayatna karatA nathI, paNa gala jevA tuccha ne dAruNa
udayavALA kusukhamAM sakta thaI saceSTA-satUAcaraNa choDI de che! aho ! AvA A
dAruNa tamane dhikkAra che! AvuM A adyasaMvedya pada adhapaNurUpa heI durgatimAM
pAta karanAruM--pADanAruM che, ane te satsaMga-Agama gavaDe dhuraMdhara
mahAtmAothI ja A ja bhUmikAmAM jItavA gya che,-anya samaye jatAvuM azakaya che.
"evA avaguNavaMtanuM jI, pada je aveva kaThora sAdhusaMga Agama taNAjI, te ja
dhuraMdhara....manamohana" ane A avedhasaMvedya pada chatAyuM hoya che tyAre
manuSyanA viSama kutarkagraha ApoApa niyamathI TaLe che. A kutarka bedhane
garUpa che, zamane apAyarUpa, che zraddhAne bhaMga karanAra ane abhimAna
upajAvanAra che. Ama kutarka pragaTapaNe viSama kutarkagraha cittane aneka
prakAre bhAvazatru che. eTalA mATe mumukSuone AvA nivRtti duSTa kutarka mAM
abhiniveza-Agraha kara yukta nathI, paNa kRtamAM, zIlamAM, samAdhimAM ane
paropakAramAM te kara yukta che. temaja - sarveya vikalpa avidyAsaMgata che. ane
teonI yojanArUpa A kutarka che, te ethI zuM prayojana che? vaLI A sarva kutarka
jAtiprAya che-zSaNAbhAsapradhAna che, ane pratItithI-phalathI bAdhita che. hAthI
mAravA doDate hoya tyAre A hAthI dUra rahelAne haNaze ke nikaTa rahelAne haNaze?
evA mUkha vikalpa jevo A kutarka che. ItyAdi aneka prakAranA deSa A kutarkathI
upaje che tethI AvA duSTa aniSTa kutarkanuM zuM kAma che? ane vicAravaMta jIvone
prayAsa to atIndriya arthanI siddhi arthe hoya che, ane te atIndriya artha kadI
zuSka takane gocara hete nathI, paNa Agamane ja gocara hoya che eTale A
AgamapradhAna, salTAddha, zIlavAna e yogatatpara puruSa atIndriya arthone jANe
che, ane tevA prakAre mahAmati pataMjalie paNa kahyuM che-"AgamathI, anumAnathI
ane gAbhyAsarasathI ema prajJAne traNa prakAre prayojatAM puruSa uttama tattvane
pAme che." ane tatvathI ghaNA sarva bhinna matavALA nathI, tethI tene bheda mAne
te tenA

Page #522 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(446) The collection of Gadasti is great for the extremely devoted. Because the
name Sarvagna, which is truly transcendental, is one and the same in essence,
despite individual differences. Therefore, those who have the belief and
understanding of Sarvagna in general, are all considered to have attained him,
and this is an undeniable truth. And since he is not fully known by all
Asavadasis, those who, in general, are devoted to Sarvagna with a selfless and
sincere heart, are considered to be close to him in that measure, like many
servants of a king. There is another point here - devotion to God is of two
types - Chitra and Achitra. The devotion of those who are worldly is of the
Chitra type, because their nature is of the Chitra type, and their devotion is
filled with attachment, leading to affection for their favorite deity and hatred
for the disliked deity. But the devotion of those who are liberated from the
world, is Achitra, and due to the absence of doubt, it is only Shamasara -
Shampradhan. “Not all are his servants, Devotion to God is also said to be
Chitra and Achitra, illuminating the mind.” Similarly, even in the same
practice, the fruit is different according to the intention, and that intention
is paramount here, like water in agriculture. This intention is also of many
types, depending on the intensity of ragadi and the difference in buddhi, jnana,
etc., because there are three types: (1) buddhi, (2) jnana, (3) asanmeha. All
actions are different because of these. The buddhi that relies on action is
buddhi, the one that is based on scripture is jnana, and the one that is
accompanied by good practice is asanmeha. Respect, affection, non-violence,
acquisition of wealth, curiosity, service to knowledgeable people, and grace
towards them are the characteristics of good practice. All actions of beings are
generally done with buddhi, and due to the effect of karma, they are the cause
of worldly results. The actions of a Kulagi are done with jnana, and due to the
inclusion of the power of Shruti, which is like nectar, they are the cause of
liberation, and the actions that arise from asanmeha, due to their pure nature,
quickly give the fruit of liberation. This asanmeha karma is only for those who
are beyond the world, who are not bound by karma, and who are seeking
liberation. “Buddhi action gives worldly results, jnana action is the limb of
Shiva; Asanmeha action gives the fruit of liberation quickly.” Here, in the
natural emotions - the creation of karmic pudgala, the mind that is not eager is
called bha...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (446) gadaSTisamuccaya atibhaktone maha che. kAraNa ke sarvajJa nAmano je kaI
pAramArthika ja che, te vyaktibheda chatAM tatvathI sarvatra eka ja che. tethI
tenI sAmAnyathI ja jeTalAonI sarvajJa tava pratipatti-mAnyatA che, te sarveya
tene pAmelA che evI para nyAyagati abheda che. ane tene vizeSa te saMpUrNapaNe
sarva asavadazIethI jaNAte nathI, tethI sAmAnyathI paNa e sarvajJane je nirvyAja
paNe-niSkapaTapaNe tenA AjJApAlanamAM tatpara thaI mAnatA hoya, te teTalA
aMzathI ja dhIme tene mana tulya ja che,-eka rAjAnA ghaNu sevakanI jema. atre
bIjI yukti paNa che.-devanI bhakti be prakAranI che-citra ane acitra. temAM je
saMsArI de che tenI bhakti vicitra prakAranI che, kAraNa ke teonuM svarUpa
vicitra prakAranuM che, ane te bhaktimAM mohagarbhapaNane lIdhe pitAnA ISTa deva
pratye rAga ane aniSTa deva pratye dveSa hoya che. paNa saMsAratIta evA para
mukta tatvanI je bhakti che, te acitra che, ane te saMmehanA abhAvane lIdhe
zamasArA ja-zamapradhAna ja hoya che. "nahiM sarva jajuA, tehanA vaLI dAsa;
bhakti devanI paNa kahIjI, citra acitra prakAza.manamohana" temaja-samAna
anuSThAnamAM paNa abhisaMdhi-Azaya pramANe bhinna phaLa hoya che, ane te ja
Azaya ahIM kRSikarmamAM pANInI peThe parama che-pradhAna che. A Azaya paNa
rAgAdinI taratamatA pramANe tathA buddhi Adi bedhanA bheda pramANe buddhi-jJAna-
aneka prakAranA bheda vALa hoya che, kAraNa ke be traNa prakArane heAya che:
asaMmoha (1) buddhi, (2) jJAna, (3) asaMmeha. te badhathakI sarva karmomAM bheda
paDe che. temAM ikriyAthane Azraya kare te buddhi che, AgamapUrvaka hoya te
jJAna che, ane sadanuSThAna yukta je jJAna te asaha che. kriyAmAM Adara, prIti,
avizva, saMpattiprApti, jijJAsA, tajajJa budhajananI sevA, ane temane anugrahae
A sadanuSThAnanuM lakSaNa che. prANIonA sarva karmo sAmAnyathI buddhipUrvaka
hoya che, ane vipAkavirasapaNane lIdhe te saMsAraphala ApanArA che. kulagInA je
karma che te jJAnapUrvaka hoya che, ane te amRta samI zrutazaktinA samAvezathI
anubaMdhaphalapaNuMthakI muktine aMgarUpa hoya che, ane asaMmehathI upajatA
karmo ekAMta parizuddhithakI zIdhra mekSaphaLa ApanArA hoya che A asaMmeha karma
bhavAtIta athagAmI mumukSuone ja hoya che. "buddhi kriyA bhavaphala dIejI,
jJAnakriyA ziva aMga; asaMmeha kiriyA dIejI, zIvra mugatiphala
caMga....manamehana" ahIM prAkRta bhAvomAM-kAramI pudgala racanAmAM jenuM citta
nirutsuka che, te bhava

Page #523 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Deepraani: Essence of Vaadrusti (447)  The liberated soul is a future
inhabitant of the liberated state. Their path is one, the path of renunciation,
and despite differences in stages, it is one, like the arrows on the shore of
the ocean. Because the principle beyond the worldly existence is called
'Nirvana', it is one in essence, despite differences in words. Sadashiva,
Parabrahma, Siddhatma, and other such words refer to the same one. Because it is
free from the conflict of attributes, it is free from suffering, free from
disease, and inactive. This principle is beyond the reach of birth and death.
Therefore, when the seeker, through their lack of understanding, fails to
recognize this principle of Nirvana, their devotion is filled with conflict. And
this principle of Nirvana is inherently established. How can there be
differences in the knowledge of this all-knowing, pure Nirvana, which is the
closest goal? And if there is no knowledge, then how can their devotees be
liberated?  **The seeker's one path** **The principle of Nirvana is one** **How
can there be differences?**  **"The structure of the karmic matter is there,
where the mind is not absorbed; the path is one, that of Shiva, the world is
full of differences...mind"**  Then, one might wonder, how can there be
differences in the knowledge of the liberated souls? The solution is that the
knowledge is of different types, depending on the disciple's capacity and
suitability. Because these liberated souls, who have overcome the cycle of birth
and death, teach in a way that is suitable for the individual, based on their
karmic tendencies and other factors. Or, another reason is that, although the
knowledge is one, it appears different due to the differences in the listeners,
because of their varying levels of merit and ability. And this also benefits
everyone, according to their individual capacity and understanding. Or, it is
because of the influence of time and space, that the knowledge appears
different, depending on the perspective of the sage who is teaching. And the
essence of this sage's knowledge is ultimately the same, all-knowing. Therefore,
it is not appropriate to oppose or contradict the knowledge of the liberated
souls without understanding their perspective. Because such opposition is
ultimately harmful. Therefore, it is not appropriate to engage in debates and
arguments about this all-knowing subject, like a shadow in the form of a debate.
Therefore, the seeker who is eager for liberation should completely abandon the
dry, intellectual pursuit of knowledge, which is born out of false pride. The
seeker should not be attached to the pursuit of knowledge, because it is
ultimately irrelevant. Because even the principles of Dharma have to be
abandoned in the pursuit of liberation, then what is the point of this trivial,
dry, intellectual pursuit?  **Explanation of the differences in knowledge**
**Intellectual pursuit** **Abandonment**  **"Even Dharma, forgiveness, etc., are
abandoned, the Dharma of renunciation is revealed; then what is the use of
arguments for the ignorant, what is the use of study for the sage?...mind"**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dIprANi : vAdRSTinA sAra (447 ) bhAgavirakta jane bhavAtIta agAmI che. tenA
mArga eka ja zamaparAyaNa eve che, ane avasthAbhedane bheda chatAM te sAgara
paranA tIramAnI jema eka ja che, kAraNa ke saMsArAtIta para tattva ' nirvANu '
nAmanuM che, te zabdabheda chatAM tattvathI niyamathI eka ja che. sadAziva,
parabrahma, siddhAtmA, tathAtA Adi zabdothI anyathI oLakhAtuM te eka ja che.
kAraNake tenA lakSaNunA avisaMvAdathI nirAmAdha, nirAmaya ane niSkriya evuM A
para tattva janmAdinA aceAgyathI hAya che. eTale asamAhathI tattvathI A
nirvANutattva jANavAmAM ALye, prekSAvAne tenI bhaktinI khAkhatamAM vivAda
ghaTatA ja nathI. ane A nirvANu tattva niyamathI ja sajJapUrvaka sthita che. A
sarvajJarUpaRju mA nirvANune nikaTamAM nikaTa mAga che, te te sajJanA bheda kema
hAya ? ane te na heAya tA tenA bhaktone bhedya sumukSunA eka ja zamamA nirvANu
tattva eka ja kema hAya? HH pudgala racanA kAramIjI, tihAM jasa citta na lIna;
eka mArga te ziva taNeAjI, bheda lahe jaga dIna....mana" tyAre sheje za kA thaze
ke te pachI te sajJAnI dezanAne bheda kema che ? tenuM samAdhAna ema che ke
ziSyanA AnuguNyathI-guNu thAya evA anukULapaNAthI te citra-nAnA prakAranI che.
kAraNa ke bhavarAganA A bhiSavarAe jene je prakAre khIjAdhAna AdinA sabhava
thAya tene tevA prakAre upadeza dvIdhA che. athavA te khIjuM kAraNa ema che ke
eenI dezanA eka chatAM zrotAonA vibhedathI teonA acinya puNyasAmarthyane lIdhe
citra bhAse che, ane tenAthI te sarvanA yathAbhavya-caiAnyatA pramANe upakAra
paNa thAya che. athavA te te te deza-kAlAgninA niyeAgathI te te nayaapekSAvALI
citra dezanA RSio thakI ja pravattI che, ane A RSidezanAnu mUla paNa tattvathI
sarvajJa ja che. eTalA mATe sajJane abhiprAya jANyA vinA tenA pratikSepa-virAdha
karavA yukta nathI, kAraNa ke te pratikSepa parama mahA anarthaMkara che. eTale
A sarvajJa viSayamAM adha jevA chadmasthAe vAdavivAda karavA yukta nathI, mATe
mithyAbhimAna hetupaNAne lIdhe zuSka taka graha mumukSue sarvathA cheADI devA
ceAgya ja che. mumukSune tA tattvathI saCtra graha ayukta che. kAraNa ke
muktimAM prAye dharmAM paNa cheDI devA paDe che, te pachI A tuccha zuSka kutarka
grahathI zuM? dezanA bhinnatAnA khulAsA kutarka graha tyAjya " dharma kSamAdika
paNa maTejI, pragaTe dhama sanyAsa; tA jhaghaDA aJA taNeAjI, munine kavaNu
abhyAsa ?....mana"

Page #524 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(448) Therefore, the Gadsi community should properly follow the path of the
great men, and the discerning should act righteously without transgression. This
is the path of the great men, in brief: (1) Here, even subtle suffering should
be avoided with effort, (2) Always strive for the welfare of others, (3) Worship
the great ones - the Guru, the Deities, the learned Brahmins, and the ascetic
Yatis - with a sincere mind, as appropriate, (4) Even towards those great
sinners who are extremely afflicted by the karma of their fathers, have utmost
compassion - not envy. This is the highest Dharma.  And so on, having attained
these virtues, one who abandons all wrong views and attains the four visions,
will now attain the fifth vision, like a shower of nectar. “Abandoning all wrong
views, having attained the four visions; one will now attain the fifth, a shower
of nectar of fame. ...O charming Jinendra! Sweet is your speech.” Thus says
Sakzaya. Yoga-darshan Kalash Kavya : Shalini: In the lamp, what is the light
that illuminates? It is the illumination of the mind that shines; through
Pranayama, it fills the self, and through love, it attains the knowledge of the
truth. 57 Through outward breath, it expels outward, through inward breath, it
draws inward; the Yogi considers it stable through Kumbhaka, thus is Pranayama
through love. 58 Pranayama is complete in this state, Dharma is considered
greater than even life, one abandons life for the sake of Dharma, one does not
abandon Dharma for the sake of life. 59 True love is the only Dharma, it goes
beyond death; everything else burns, it merges into ashes with the body. 60 With
such a deep understanding of Dharma, one becomes eager for the knowledge of the
truth; one says that Dharma is greater than even life, one embraces it with
devotion. 61 Just as one leaves salty water and drinks sweet water, just as a
sprout emerges from a seed, in the same way, through the influence of the
knowledge of the truth, the seed of Yoga sprouts. 62 Just as salty water is like
the world, the knowledge of the truth is like sweet water, all good things are
obtained from it, the happiness of devotion to the Guru is obtained. 63 Through
the influence of devotion to the holy Guru, one attains the darshan of the
Tirtha Swami; through meditation, one attains the state of liberation, one aims
for Nirvana. 64

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (448) gadasimudAya tethI mahatu puruSanA mArgane samyakapaNe AzrI vicakSaNee
tenA atikrama rahitapaNe yathAnyAya vartavA yogya che. te mahatu puruSone mArga
sAmAnyathI saMkSepamAM A che :(1) ahIM sUkSma paNa parapIDA prayatnathI vajevI,
(2) paropakAramAM sadaiva yatna kare, (3) gurue, devatA, vipro, ane tapodhana
yatie-e mahAtmAone suprayatna cittathI yathAyogyapaNe pUjavA, (4) pitAnA
karmothI ja atyaMta haNAyelA evA mahApApI prANIo pratye paNa atyaMta anukaMpA
rAkhavI, -nahIM ke matsara. A dharma uttama che. ItyAdi guNagaNa prApta karI, je
sarva kutarka-abhiniveza tyajI cAra dRSTi pAme che, te have amRta ghanavRSTi
samI pAMcamI thirA dRSTi pAmaze. "abhiniveza saghaLo tyajIjI, cAra lahI jeNe
daSTi; te leze have pAMcamIjI, suyaza amRta ghana vRSTi. ...manamohana jinAjI!
mIThI tAharI vANu." che. da. sakjhAya yogadaSTi kaLaza kAvya H zAlinIH dIpAmAMhI
dIpa zA bodha dIpe, dIpati te citta utthAna jhIpe; prANAyAme Atmane te bhare
che, ne prItethI tattvazruti kare che. 57 bAhirabhAve recake bahAra kADhe,
aMtarabhAva pUrake gADha vAdhe; tene yogI kuMbhake sthira dhAre, bhAve prANAyAma
te Ama tyAre. 58 prANAyAme pUrNa te eha sthAne, prANathIye dharma meTo ja mAne,
prANene te dharma arthe tyaje che, nA prANathe dharmane te tyaje che. 59 suhad
sAce eka dharma thAye, mUAnI ye pAchaLe jeha jAye; bAkI bIjuM te badhu baLe che,
kAyA sAthe khAkhamAMhI bhaLe che. 60 AvI rUDI dharmanI bhAvanAthI, tattvazruti
tatpara thAya AthI; prANathIye dharma mATe kahe che, zaNu" tenuM bhaktibhAve
grahe che. 61 khAruM pANI choDI mIThA jalethI, Ave bIje akarA je raoNtethI tevI
rIte tatvazruti prabhAve, aMkurA te yoganA bIja pAve. dara khArA pANI tulya
saMsAra pANI, tavazruti miSTa vAri samANI, kalyANa sau e thakI sAMpaDe che,
gurubhakti saukhya lhAvo maLe che. 63 zrI sadguru bhakti kerA prabhAve, tIrtha
svAmI darzana prApta thAve; dhyAne spazI" te samApatti bhAve,-nirvANe je eka
hetu dharAve. 64

Page #525 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Chapter: The Nature of the Soul**  (49) The sub-species is not here, the
capable one is here, it is not the Veda-sensitive state, it is not the Veda-
sensitive state, it is the non-Veda-sensitive state that is seen. 65 The one who
abides in the non-Veda-sensitive state, the wise one quickly crosses it; and
that is the karma-like differentiation, the whole Veda is from the essence. 66
This non-Veda-sensitive state, by its influence, never causes sinful activity;
and if there is sinful activity, it is the activity of the state of destruction.
67 The one who abides in the non-Veda-sensitive state, is very happy with the
feeling of detachment; therefore, the last sinful activity, there is no activity
of the hellish state. 68 In the absence of this non-Veda-sensitive state, the
Veda-sensitive state is present; there is no subtle difference in the essence,
but there is a difference in the state. 69 It is not the essence, it is the
"state" that is non-Veda-sensitive, it is the state of the soul, it is the Veda-
sensitive state, the "state" is the true one, and the form of the knot, etc., is
examined. 70 The non-Veda-sensitive state is the opposite of that, the vessel of
the soul is from that; it is not the result of the non-existent, just as
poisonous food is not good. 71 Therefore, the non-Veda-sensitive one who is
opposite, is blind in the discrimination of good and bad; who has seen this
sweet poison? The mind is deluded by such thoughts. 72 The world is seen to be
suffering from birth, etc., it is not seen to be happy! The evil deed is a deed,
the non-deed is a deed, it appears - it is the evil deed that binds itself. 73
The seed of Dharma is sown in the field of karma, the foolish one does not
cultivate good karma; the seed sprouts and grows, the inert one abandons the
effort, it is all true. 74 This non-Veda-sensitive blindness is bad, it is the
one that puts one in hell; one conquers it with the speed of good creation, with
the good company of the right scriptures. 75 And this is conquered by the rule,
by the soul itself, by the essence; the wrong argument is abandoned, the one who
is attached to it is harmed. 76 This is all, the wise one, the one who has
faith, the one who is proud; the wrong argument is directly in many ways, it is
always heavy on the mind. 77 Therefore, the wrong argument is not appropriate,
meditation, conduct, and effort are appropriate; charity is also pure - the one
who walks on it, the other is also accomplished. 78 The seeker of liberation is
devoted to the scriptures, he is eager in yoga, he is virtuous; he knows the
object that is beyond the senses, he attains the highest essence by the power of
wisdom. 79

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dImANiH kaLasa kSatra (49) upajAti te na hoye ahiM sakSama che, te vedasaMvedya
pade sudha te vedhasaMvedya na atra hoya, avevasaMvedya ja ugra joya. 65 je
vevasaMvedya pade Thare che, bhavAMbudhi zIdhra ja te tare che; ne vA te
karmarUpI vibhede, sattatvathI reya samagra veda. 66 A vedyasaMvedya pada
prabhAve, pApe pravRtti kadIye na thA; ne kadoSe yadi te pravRtti, te
tasalehapadanyAsa vRtti. 67 je vedyasaMvedya pade vase che, saMvegarage ati te
hase che; tethI ja chellI tasa pApavRtti, nA durgatinI pharane pravRtti. 68 A
vevasaMvedya taNA abhAve, adyasaMvedya taNA ja bhAve; na atra tatve kadI sUkSma
bedha, paraMtu heye kaMI skUla baMdha 69 nA tatvathI te "pada" che avedya, che
gInuM pada eka vedya samyapha sthitithI "paTa" te ja sAcuM, ne graMthibhedAdi
svarUpa jAcuM. 70 avedya te che viparIta tethI, bhavAbhinaMdI tasa pAtra ethI;
asat pariNAmI na be cAru, kyuM viSasaMpUkta na anna sArUM. 71 ethI viparyAsI
avedyavaMtA, hitAhite heya viveka aMdhA; A leka mIThA para koNa dIThA? evuM
vicAre jana moha mUThA. 72 saMsAra janmAdithI duHkhI dekhe, udvejatA teya na
meha lekhe ! kukRtya te kRtya akRtya kRtya, bhAse-sva pAza karI te kukRtya. 73
le karmabhome nara dharmabIja, sat karma khetI mUDha nA kare ja; dANa phUDA
kusukhe ja rAcI, ceSTA tyaje te jaDa sarva sAcI. 74 avedya A aMdhapaNuM
naThAruM, che durgatimAMhi ja pADanArUM; te te jIte A ja sudaSTi vege, satasaMga
sat AgamanA suge. 75 ne A jIMtAtAM niyame nakI ja, svata: narene ati tatvathI
ja; kutarka grAhe vasamo TaLe che, je jIvane te graha zo naDe che. 76 A rega
badhe, zahANakArI, zraddhApahArI abhimAnakArI; kutarka pratyakSa aneka rIte, che
cittane bhAvaripu ja nitye. 77 tethI kutake graha nA ja yukta, samAdhi ne zIla
zrate suyukta; paropakAre paNa suvizuddha,-je cagIne bIja avadhya siddha. 78
mumukSu te zrAddha zrutapradhAna, vai yegamAM tatpara zIlavAna; padArtha
atIndriya atra jANe, prajJAbale uttama tattva pAme 79

Page #526 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(450) Idravansha (Vanshastha) The omniscient is not different from the essence,
the devotee believes in the difference due to delusion; what the omniscient
truly is, is one and the same even in individual differences. It is the same as
the common essence, the diamond is the same for all; A king's servant, many,
even with different appointments, all die. 81 The omniscient is true essence,
without difference, the omniscient believer does not have difference here; the
object of worship is one, even among the worshippers, there is no difference in
conduct. 82 The omniscient is great for all, truly! Therefore, there is no
difference from the essence in the end; the difference in names etc. may be
there, the right-minded great soul should have this feeling. 83 The devotion of
Shalini, Chitra, Chitra, which is described in the scriptures, therefore, this
thing is confirmed, the unity of all is established. Those who are worldly, who
go to the divine body, they have devotion to the worldly divine; those who go to
the transcendental meaning, they have devotion to that essence. 85 The devotion
of the worldly divine is a picture, with its passion and other hatred, and the
transcendental is without a picture, devotion is pure for all worldly beings.
The place of the worldly divine is a picture, the state etc. are all strange in
every way; therefore, the means are a picture, the paths are different, the
destination is not a picture. There is a difference in the intention, therefore,
there is a difference in the fruits, the intention and the purpose are the main
here, just as water is in agriculture. The enjoyers take the essence here, their
intentions are different; according to the intensity of passion etc., and
according to the difference in understanding etc., understanding, knowledge and
non-duality, the scriptures have spoken of three types of difference; according
to this difference, all beings, they experience the difference in the essence.
Idri understanding is the one that relies on, it is according to knowledge and
scriptures; and the knowledge that is combined with right action, it has been
given the name "unwavering". Great respect and love for the giver, the
acquisition of wealth without obstacles is good; inquiry and service to the
expert, know it by the signs of the knowledgeable! 92 The actions of all
intelligent beings, they all lead to worldly fruits; according to the scriptures
and where, the consequences are the inheritance here. 93:

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (450) idravaMzA (vaMzastha) sarvajJa jhAjhA nathI bhinna tatvathI, tabheda mAne
atibhakta mohathI; sarvajJa je kaI kharekhara ja che, te vyakti bhede paNa eka
sarva che. tene ja sAmAnyatha jeha mAnatA, dhImaMtane te sahunI samAnatA; eka
rAjAzrita sevake bahu, niyukti bhede paNa mRtyu te sahu. 81 sarvajJa satuM
tattva taNuM abhedathI, sarvajJavAdI mahiM bheda te nathI; upAsya jo eka upAsako
mahIM, AcAra bhede paNa bhinnatA nahiM. 82 sarvetha sarvajJa mahAtmane khare !
tethI nathI tattvathI bheda Akhare; nAmAdinuM bhinnapaNuM bhale havuM, samyapha
mahAtmA jana eha bhAvavuM. 83 zAlinI citrAcitra bhakti je deva kerI, sazAstromAM
keganA varNavelI, tethIye A vastu te puSTi pAve, sarvanI ektA siddha thA. je
saMsArI devakAye janArA, te saMsArI devamAM bhakti dhAra je saMsArAtIta arthe
janArA, te te tehI tattvamAM bhaktikArA. 85 te saMsArI devanI bhakita citra,
tenA rAge anya dveSe sahita, ne saMsArAtIta tave acitra, bhakti sarve zaMsArA
pavitra. te saMsArI devanA sthAna citra, sthiti Adi sau prakAre vicitra; tethI
tene sAdhane pAya citra, raste judA pura nA acitra. kA eke Azayane vibheda,
tethI te tat phaloneya bheda, hoye hetu Azayo mukhya AMhI, jevI rIte pANI te
khetImAMhi. bhoktA nAnA tata le eha ThAme, te lokonA Azayo bheda pAme; rAgAdinA
tAratamya pramANe, ne buddhayAdi bodhabheda pramANe, buddhi jJAna ne
asaMhadvArA, bhAkhyA zAse bedhanA triprakAra; tenA bhede sarva prANIgaNanA, ka
sa pAmatA bheda nAnA. idri buddhi te AzranArI, hoye ane jJAna zAstrAnusArI; ne
sat kriyA yukta je jJAna Ama, tene ApyuM che "asaMmeha' nAma. diyA pratye Adara
prIti bhArI, nirvidhdha zrI saMpadAlabdhi sArI; jijJAsA ne tajajJa sevA sujANe !
sakiyAnAM lakSaNe eha jANe. 92 buddhipUrva prANInA kama sarva, te te saMsArI
phale the ja sarva; zAstrAnusArIpaNuM ne jyAMhi, vipAke te virasA hoya AMhi. 93
:

Page #527 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Hi; Kalasa Kavya (451) And the karmas that you see with knowledge! They are the
cause of the entire cycle of births and deaths; just as nectar-like knowledge-
power influences, so does the true self, connected with it, obtain it. 94 If it
is done without doubt, then it gives the blessed state of liberation quickly; if
it is directed towards the true essence, transcending the world, then it is the
master of attainment through pure oneness. 5 Whose mind is not attached to
worldly things, who is detached from worldly enjoyments; such a liberated soul,
who is self-absorbed, is directed towards the true essence, transcending the
world. 96 Such saints have only one path, "Kshaitimo" is the only true path;
there are many different states of being, just as there is no need for an arrow
in the ocean. 97 That essence, transcending the world, is called liberation, it
is the essence of all; it is one with the true essence, even though there are
different words like Siddhatma, etc. 98 This liberation essence, through the
true essence, is attained with certainty, and in its devotion, the wise person
does not have any doubt, see! 99 And liberation is preceded by omniscience,
liberation is preceded by omniscience, all this omniscience is the path to
liberation, so how can there be any difference? 100 The picture of the country
of all, spoken for the benefit of the disciple, just as the seed of the banyan
tree sprouts, so does it sit in the womb of birth. 101 The picture appears
differently according to the listener, the power of merit is like that! It
benefits all the noble ones, and in this way, it remains eternal. 102 And the
picture of the country of the sage is seen in relation to time, etc.; and its
value is known by the omniscient, like a drop in the ocean of omniscient words.
103 Without knowing the intention behind it, rejecting it is not appropriate; to
call this a bad word is more like a lie. 104 Omniscience, etc., is beyond all
this, without knowledge, it is decided, and therefore, here, people like the
blind, have nothing to do with debate. 105 Dry, barren, and harsh, the planets,
the sun, the great heat, the false ego, the seeker of liberation should abandon
this. 106 The planets are everywhere in the true essence, they do not diminish
for the seeker of liberation; even in liberation, they are there, so what is the
point of them here? 107

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 hi ; kaLasa kAvya (451) ne karmo je jJAnapUrva juone! te mukavyaMgA kulagI
jone; sudhA jevI zrutazakti prabhAve, sAnubaMdhI satapha te ja pAve. 94 karyo
hoya je asaMmehajanya, te te Ape zIdhra nirvANa dhanya; je saMsArAtIta tat
tattvagAmI, te ekAMte zuddhithI siddhi svAmI. 5 jenuM citta prAkRtArthe na
sakta, je saMsArI bhoga pratye virakta; evA jIvanmukta je AtmarAmI, te
saMsArAtIta tat tatvagAmI. 96 evA te saMte taNe mArga eka, "kSatimo "
saMmaniSTho ja cheka; heye jhAjhA tad dazA bheda teye, abdhimAM kyuM tIrane mAga
heye. 97 te saMsArAtIta tattva para te, che nirvANuM nAma saMgAdhare te; te te
nizce tatvathI eka hoye, siddhAtmAdi zabdabhedo chatAMye. 98 A nirvANa tatvane
tatvathI ja, samyapha jAye e asaMmehathI ja tenI bhaktimAM vivekI janene, vivAde
te nA ghaTe re! juone ! 99 ne nirvANa hoya sarvajJapUrva, mukto pUrve hoya
sarvajJa sarva A sarvajJa bAju nirvANamAga, tethI tene kema re! hAya bheda? 100
sarvanI dezanA citra jeha, kalyANArthe ziSyanA ukta teha, jene Uge bedhabIjAdi
jema, tene beThuM janmavaidhe ja tema. 101 zrotAbhede dezanA eka teya, citrA
bhAse! puNya sAmarthya je e! sau bhavyane tethI upakAra hoye, ne A rIte tad
avadhyatva rahe. 102 vA RSinI dezanA citra hoya, te te kAlAdi apekSA ja joye; ne
tenuM mUla sarvajJa jANe, sarvajJavAk siMdhu bindu pramANo. 103 vinA jANe Azaya
tAsa AMhitene pratyAkSepa te yukta nAMhi; Ane durvAda bhAkhe kadI ke, te te
jivAdathI che adhika. 104 sarvajJAdi A atIdiya heye, vinA gIjJAna niNata ne,
ethI atre aMdha jevA janA, vivAdenuM kAma kAMI ja che nA. 105 anuSya zuSka taka
taNe tethI, graha raudra mahA ati, mithyAbhimAnane hetu, tyaje mumukSu sanmati.
106 tatvathI graha sarvatra, mumukSune ghaTe nahiM; dharmeya muktimAM tyA, te A
grahathI zuM ahiM? 107

Page #528 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(52) The Gadashti Samuchi Vaitaliya here, the Self is the only eternal one, and
Dharma is the only eternal one; worship that eternal Dharma, and you will attain
the eternal path. Abandon the 108 opinions and philosophies, and follow the path
of the true saints and sages; become devoted to truth, and cultivate a
compassionate mind. 109 Avoid harming others, and always be grateful; worship
the Guru and other revered ones, and be compassionate towards the wicked. 110
The desire for worldly things is poison, and the nectar of equanimity is the
antidote; the abode of mental joy will be attained, and the devotee of the Lord
will attain immortality. 111  This commentary on the Kiratchandra Sunu Manah
Sukhanandana, composed by the great sage Haribhadracharya, is called
"Sumanonandani Brihattika" by Bhagavandas ("Manah Nandana").

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (52) gadaSTisamuci vaitAlIya ahiM Atma ja eka zAzvate, tasa che dharma ja eka
zAzvate; bhajI dharma ja te sanAtane, jana yegI pada le sanAtane. 108 mata
darzana Agraha tyajI, patha sat saMta mahaMtane bhajI; sata bhaktiparAyaNa
thavuM, anukaMpAmaya citta dhAravuM. 109 parapIDana sUma varjavuM, upakAre nita
citta apavuM; pUjavA guru Adi sAdarA, thavuM pApI pratiye dayAparA. 110 viSa
AgrahanuM ja vAmaze, samakitAmRta teha pAmaze; mananaMdana dhAma jAmaze,
bhagavAnadAsa amRtatva pAmaze. 111  //  iti maharSizrIharibhadgAcAryaviracite
kiratcaMdrasUnumanaHsukhanaMdanena bhagavAnadAsena
*sumanonaMdanIbRhatTIkAnAmakavivecanena saprapaJca vivecite
zrIyogadRSTisamuccayazAne caturthI diipaadRssttiH|| ja A maskata vivecananuM A
'sumane naMdanI" bahata TIkAnAma rAkhyuM che bhagavAnadAsa ("mane naMdana')

Page #529 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Steady Vision  This is the fifth type of vision, called "Steady Vision". It
is described as follows:  **Verse 154:** "In steady vision, the sight is always
present and accompanied by withdrawal. The action is unwavering, pure, and
imbued with subtle knowledge."  **Meaning:** In steady vision, the sight is
always present and accompanied by withdrawal. The action is unwavering, pure,
and imbued with subtle knowledge.  **Commentary:** In steady vision, the sight
is like a jewel, unwavering and subtle. It is accompanied by withdrawal.
**Explanation:** The fifth type of vision, called "Steady Vision", is
characterized by unwavering sight, which is always present and not subject to
change. In contrast, in the other types of vision, the sight is not always
present and can be subject to change. This unwavering sight is accompanied by
withdrawal, which is the ability to control the senses and prevent them from
being distracted by external objects. This withdrawal is essential for achieving
steady vision, as it allows the mind to focus on the object of sight without
being disturbed by external stimuli.  The action that results from steady vision
is also unwavering, pure, and imbued with subtle knowledge. This means that the
action is not motivated by selfish desires or attachments, but by a deep
understanding of the nature of reality. The action is also pure, meaning that it
is free from any negative consequences. Finally, the action is imbued with
subtle knowledge, meaning that it is guided by a deep understanding of the
subtle workings of the universe.  In summary, steady vision is a state of mind
that is characterized by unwavering sight, withdrawal, pure action, and subtle
knowledge. It is a state of enlightenment that allows the individual to see the
world clearly and act in a way that is beneficial to all beings.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 sthirA daSTi ema saprapaMca thI daSTi kahI, pAMcamI kahI dekhADavA mATe kahe
che- sthirAyAM darzanaM nityaM pratyAhAravadeva ca  /  kRtyamabhrAntamanaghaM
sUkSmabodhasamanvitam  //  154  /  /  darzana nitya sthiramahIM, pratyAhArathI
yukta; kRtya abrAMta adoSa ne sukSma bedha saMyukta, 154. artha -sthira dRSTimAM
darzana nitya ane pratyAhAravALuM ja hoya che; tathA kRtya abrAMta, anagha
(nirdoSa), ne sUkSamadha saMyukta evuM hoya che. vivecana daSTi thirAmAMhi
darzana niye, ratnaprabhA sama jANe re; bhrAMti nahi vaLI bedha te sUkSama,
pratyAhAra vakhANe re. te guNa vIra taNe na visAruM." zrI e. 6sakjhAya. 6-1.
sthirA nAmanI pAMcamI gadaSTimAM-niraticAra evImAM darzana nitya-apratipAtI hoya
che, ane sAticAramAM anitya paNa hoya che ane te darzana pratyAhArathI yukta
evuM kRtti - cirA-sthirA dRSTimAM, nai-darzana, bedhalakSaNavALuM, nityaM-nitya,
apratipAtI,-niraticAra evI daSTimAM; ane sAticAramAM te-jene nayanapaTalane
(AMkhanA paDadAne) upadrava prakSINa che tene tenA ulkApAdinA anavabodha
jevuM,-anitya paNa hoya che,-tevA prakAranA atiyAranA bhAvane lIdhe.
ratnaprabhAmAM paNa li Adine upadrava hoya che. pratyAhAhA -ane pratyAhAravALuM
ja. haviSayAsaMkone vittahAna ja rendriyALAM tyAdA svaviSayanA asaMprayoge
svacittasvarUpane anukArI evo dakiyeno pratyAhAra, tenAthI yukta evuM A darzana
che. tyA-kaya, vaMdanAdi kriA, abrAnta-abrAMta-kamane adhikta karIneAzrIne,
eTalA mATe ja janapaM-anA, niSpApa-nirdoSa,-anaticArapaNane lIdhe. ene ja
vizeSaNa aApe che. sahAropasamavibhU-sUkSmadha saMyukta,graMthibheda thakI
ghasavedyapadanI u5pattine lIdhe.

Page #530 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(454) There is a collection of six views. Here, in terms of the sequence of
actions like veneration, etc., it is free from blemishes, free from faults and
free from transgression; and that is why it is with great wisdom. Because,
through the breaking of the knot, here the attainment of the Vedic knowledge is
possible. Thus, according to the sequence mentioned earlier, here in the fifth
view, (1) the vision is like the brilliance of a jewel, (2) the fifth limb of
yoga, pratyahara, is attained, (3) the fifth mental fault named branti is
destroyed, (4) the five qualities named bodha manifest.  The eternal vision: the
steady view, like the brilliance of a jewel, is of two types - (1) free from
transgression, (2) with transgression. The vision that occurs in the view free
from transgression is eternal and unchanging, it remains as it is; and the
vision that occurs in the view with transgression is impermanent, it undergoes
change, it does not remain as it is.  This vision, this knowledge, is likened to
the brilliance of a jewel, because the brilliance of a jewel is greater than the
brilliance of a lamp, just as this knowledge is much greater than the fourth
view, the view of the lamp. The brilliance of a lamp depends on external causes
like oil, etc., "The lamp shines as long as there is oil, so it is considered
unstable, but the brilliance of a jewel does not depend on such external causes,
it is self-dependent, so it is steady, it never perishes. Similarly, this
knowledge is self-dependent, it does not depend on any cause, it is not
dependent on others, it is direct, and thus this knowledge, being self-
dependent, direct, and an experience of the self, is steady, it never perishes.
In it - (1) the knowledge in the steady view free from transgression is like the
pure brilliance of a jewel, due to its purity, it is eternal, always steady,
uniform, unchanging, it remains as it is. And (2) the knowledge in the steady
view with transgression is like the brilliance of a jewel covered with dust, due
to the transgression-like dustiness, it is impermanent, unstable, it does not
remain uniform, it undergoes change according to the influx of karma. Just as
dust, etc., fall on a jewel, and due to that dust, etc., its brilliance becomes
unstable, fluctuating, the dustiness increases, but it does not perish from its
root, so it remains steady, similarly, this knowledge, due to the transgression-
like dust, becomes unstable, fluctuating, impermanent, it undergoes change
according to the influx of karma, but it does not perish from its root, so it
remains steady.  Just as someone's eye has been injured and it is healing, they
do not feel the effect of the injury, etc., their eye does not appear very red
anymore, they do not feel pain either,

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (454) gadaSTisamuccaya hoya che. tathA atre vaMdanAdi kriyA kramanI apekSAe
abrAMta, nirdoSa-niraticAra hoya che; ane eTale ja te sumabedha sahita evI hoya
che. kAraNa ke graMthibhedathI ahIM vedasaMvedyapadanI prApti heya che. Ama
AgaLa kahelA krama pramANe ahIM pAMcamI daSTimAM(1) darzana ratnaprabhA samAna
hoya che, (2) yoganuM pAMcamuM aMga pratyAhAra sAMpaDe che, (3) brAMti nAmane
pAMcame cittadoSa naSTa thAya che, (4) bodha nAmane pAMca guNa pragaTe che.
nitya darzanaH ratnaprabhA sama sthira daSTi be prakAre che-(1) niraticAra, (2)
sAticAra. niraticAra daSTimAM je darzana thAya che te nitya-apratipAtI hoya che,
jema che tema avasthita rahe che; ane sAticAramAM je darzana thAya che, te
anitya paNa hoya che,-jUnAdhika thayA kare che, jema che tema avasthita rahetuM
nathI. A dRSTinA darzana-bedhane ratnaprabhAnI upamA chAje che, kAraNa ke
ratnanI prabhA dIpaprabhA karatAM adhika hoya tema A dRSTine bodha cothI dIprA
daSTi karatAM ghaNuM vadhAre hoya che. dIpakanI prabhA tela vagere bAhya
kAraNene avalaMbI hoya che, "ratnaprabhA jyAM lagI tela hoya tyAM sudhI dIpaka
prakAze che, eTale te asthira hoya sama jANe re che, paNa ratnanI prabhA tevA
bAhya kAraNone avalaMbatI nathI, te te svAvalaMbI che, eTale te sthira rahe che-
kadI nAza pAmatI nathI. tema A dRSTine bodha AtmAvalaMbI che, para kAraNane
apekSata nathI-parAvalaMbI nathI, aparokSa che, ane Ama A bodha AtmAlaMbI
pratyakSa AtmAnubhavarUpa hovAthI sthira rahe che, kadI nAza pAmatuM nathI.
temAM-(1) niraticAra sthira daSTine bodha nirmala ratnaprabhA jevo hoI,
nimalapaNAe karIne nitya-sadA sthira ekarUpa hoya che, apratipAtI hoya che, je
che te avasthita rahe che. ane (2) sAticAra sthira daSTine baMdha samala
ratnaprabhA jevo hoI, aticArarUpa samalapaNAne lIdhe anitya-asthira hoya che,
sadA ekarUpa raheto nathI, malApagama pramANe cUnAdhika thayA kare che. ratna
upara jema dhUla vagere upadrava saMbhave che, ane te dhUla vagerene lIdhe tenI
prabhA paNa asthira AMdolanavALI hoya che-cUnAdhika jhAMkhI vadhAre thAya che,
paNa mUlathI naSTa thatI nathI eTale sthira rahe che tema A daSTine baMdha
aticArarUpa malane lIdhe asthira AMdolanavALa-anitya hoya che, kSayapazama
pramANe nyUnAdhika thayA kare che, paNa mUlathI naSTa thata nathI, eTale sthira
rahe che. jema koInI AMkha UThI heya ne te maTavA AvI hoya, tene tenA uopa AdinI
asara mAlUma paDatI nathI, tenI AMkha have khUba lAlaghUma dekhAtI nathI, tene
pIDA paNa

Page #531 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  **The Radiant Jewel Lamp** (455)  Even though the eye disease has been
cured, the eye still flickers due to the lingering effects of the past
transgression.  The eye occasionally appears dim. Similarly, the eye disease of
a person with *saatichaar* (transgression) has been cured, so they are unaware
of the effects of their past actions, such as *ulkepa* (negative karma). They do
not see the eye disease, nor do they experience the pain associated with it.
However, due to the lingering effects of the transgression, their vision still
fluctuates and weakens. Thus, in the *sthira* (stable) vision, there is
instability and impermanence in the form of a decrease in the clarity of vision.
Despite this, the *sthira* vision remains true to its name, stable and
unwavering. Once attained, it never fades away. This established principle
remains constant.  As mentioned earlier, the last four types of vision,
including *sthira*, are unwavering.    While the *sthira* vision is unwavering,
how the vision attained in *niratichaar* (non-transgression) is eternal and
unwavering, and how the vision attained in *saatichaar* (transgression) is
impermanent and wavering, will be explained in detail later.  The vision that
arises in this *sthira* vision is like the vision that emerges after the eye
disease is cured. Just as the true vision of an object becomes clear when the
eye disease is cured and the film over the eye is removed, similarly, in this
*sthira* vision, the vision of the soul and body, which was obscured by the
*aanadi* (beginningless) *mehsantaan* (delusion) and the *buddhi* (intellect)
based eye disease, is revealed when the veil of delusion is removed.  The
liberated soul immediately experiences the true nature of objects.    Therefore,
the *samyag darshi* (perfectly enlightened) person, who is the direct witness,
experiences the knowledge of the true nature of self and objects. They
understand that they are a pure, knowledge-filled, and eternally formless soul.
Nothing else, not even an atom, belongs to them. (See page 68)  **6.
Experience**  The analogy of the *ratnadeepak* (jewel lamp) to this vision is
truly apt.    (1) Just as the *ratnadeepak* spreads a peaceful light and dispels
darkness, similarly, the *samyag darshan* (perfect vision), like a jewel lamp,
illuminates the mind palace with supreme peace, dispelling the darkness of
ignorance.  (2) Just as there is no smoke or flickering in the *ratnadeepak*,
similarly, when the *samyag darshan* jewel shines brightly, there is no trace of
*kashya* (passions) like smoke, and the *charitra* (conduct) does not flicker.
(3) Just as the *ratnadeepak* does not lower its light, similarly, the *samyag
darshan* jewel does not lower its light, meaning its recipient does not descend
into degradation.  (4) The *ratnadeepak* may be hidden by the sun's rays, but
the brilliance of the *samyag darshan* jewel is not obscured by the sun's light.
(5) The *ratnadeepak* is a lamp, but the *samyag darshan* jewel is not a lamp.
It is the *ratnadeepak* itself, the radiant jewel lamp.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 vicAvaSTi : ratnadIpaka ati dIpatA ho lAla" (455) thatI nathI, chatAM haju
kaIka vikAranI asarathI te AMkha maTamaTAvyA kare che, ne vacce vacce AMkha'
jhAMkhu' dekhe che; tema sAticAra daSTivALAnA dRSTiroga maTavA Avyo che, eTale
tene tenA ulkepa AdinI asara mAlUma paDatI nathI, dRSTirAga paNu dekhAtA nathI,
ane tajanya pIDA paNa thatI nathI, chatAM haju kaMi aticArarUpa vikArane lIdhe
dazanamAM kSayApazama thayA kare che, vadhaghaTa thayA kare che. Ama sAticAra
sthirA dRSTimAM dananI nyUnAdhikatArUpa asthiratA, anityatA nIpaje che.-chatAM A
' sthirA' dRSTi tA enA nAma pramANe sthira ja rahe che, apratipAtI ja hAya che,
AvyA pachI kadI paDatI nathI, e pUrmAMkta niyama te kAyama rahe che. kAraNa ke
prArabhamAM kahevAmAM AvyuM hatuM ke sthirA Adi chellI cAra dRSTi apratipAtI
che. Ama A sthirA dRSTi apratipAtI che, chatAM temAM-niraticAramAM prApta thatuM
darzana kaI rIte nitya-apratipAtI che ane sAticAramAM prApta thatuM darzana kaI
rIte anitya-pratipAtI paNa che, ene Azaya uparamAM viravAmAM Avyu che te
uparathI spaSTa thai jaze. A STimAM thatuM dana, netraroga dUra thatAM upajatA
darzIna jevuM che. jema AMkhanA rAga maTI jatAM-AMkhanu paDaLa khasI jatAM,
tatkALa padArthanuM yathArtha darzana thAya che; tema atre A dRSTimAM anAdi
mehasaMtAnathI upajele deha-AtmAnI aiya dRSTirAga naSTa buddhirUpa dRSTirAga
dUra thatAM ne darzanamahanA paDadA haThI jatAM, tattkSaNa ja pratibuddha
thayelA jIvane padArthanuM samyak dana thAya che. eTale A sAkSAt dRSTA evA
samyagdaSTi puruSane svapara padArthanA vivekarUpa bhedajJAna pragaTe che, ane
te samaje che ke huM eka zuddha dana-jJAnamaya ane sadA arUpI evA AtmA chuM.
anya kaMI paNu paramANuM mAtra paNa mhAruM' nathI.' (jue pR. 68 ) " 6 anubhava A
darzana-khAdhane ratnadIpakanI upamA kharAkhara a'dha ese che. kAraNa ke (1)
ratnapradIpathI jema zAMta prakAza patharAya che ne adhakAra vikharAya che, tema
atre samyagdarzanarUpa ratnapradIpa manamaMdiramAM pragaTatAM parama zAMtimaya
anubhava prakAza prakAze che, mADu aMdhakAra vilaya pAme che, miTe te mAha
adhAr. (2) ratnapradIpamAM jema dhUmADAnI rekhA hAtI nathI ne citrAmaNu caLatuM
nathI, tema samyagdarzana ratna jyAre -teje avaLahaLe che, tyAre kaSAyarUpa
dhUmADAnI rekhA paNa dekhAtI nathI, - dhUma thAya na rekha' ane cAritrarUpa
citrAmaNu caLatuM nathI. citrAmaNa navi caLe DhA lAla. ' (3) ratnadIpa khIjA
dIvAnI peThe pAtra nIce karatuM nathI, pAtra kare nahi heTha,' tema A
samyagadarzana ratna tenA pAtrane adha:-nIce karatu nathI, arthAt tenu pAtra
adheAgatine pAmatuM nathI. (4) ratnadIpa tA kadAca sUryanA tejamAM chUpAI jAya,
paNa samyagadarza na ratnanu teja tA sUryatejathI chUpAtuM nathI. ( 5 )
ratnadIpanuM 6 caraNa 6 4 ratnadIpaka ati dIpatA ho lAla' d

Page #532 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(56) The collection of *gadashti* remains stable, but the brilliance of this
*samyagdarshan* jewel, which is "the brilliance of all brilliance," increases
with the strength of experience and practice. (6) Just as a jewel lamp is not
extinguished by the wind and does not become fickle or unstable, so this jewel
lamp of *samyagdarshan* is not affected by the wind of attachment and does not
become fickle or unstable. "The stability that cannot be shaken by household
troubles or external dangers, that is the end." (See footnote p. 68). (7) Just
as a jewel lamp always appears beautiful and does not become weak or thin, so
this jewel lamp of *samyagdarshan* always appears beautiful and, "With strong
qualities, it never becomes weak or thin," it does not become thin, but rather
becomes increasingly strong with the continuous strengthening of *atmadharma*.
(8) Just as oil does not need to be poured into a jewel lamp and the "direction"
or path does not burn, so in this jewel lamp of *samyagdarshan*, *pudgala* oil
does not need to be poured, meaning there is no dependence on external
influences, and the pure state of the self does not burn, "Because the pure
state does not burn," meaning it remains in the pure state of the self. The poet
*Yashavijayaji* has beautifully sung all these miraculous qualities derived from
the metaphor of the jewel lamp in his immortal poem - "O friend, the *Jineshwar*
is like a jewel lamp; yes, in the temple of my mind, the *ariyal* shines
brightly." (See p. 69) Similarly, just as the light of a jewel, this vision of
*bodhi* is also (1) unopposed, (2) ever-increasing, (3) without a cause, (4) not
a cause for others, (5) a cause for satisfaction, (6) the birthplace of
knowledge, etc., (7) and supremely auspicious. (For clarification, see pp.
69-70). And so on, in many ways, this stable vision of *darshan* - *bodhi* is
similar to the light of a jewel, their similarities cannot be diminished. The
more we contemplate this metaphor, the more miraculous it appears, and it evokes
a sense of awe and reverence for the words of the *jnani*. Here, a brief
overview has been given. Contemplate it further with your own mind. "The fifth
limb of yoga - *pratyahara* - does not involve the senses with the objects of
the senses, it is here in *pratyahara*." - *Sakzaya*, 6-4. After the fourth limb
of yoga, *pranayama*, is attained through vision, the fifth limb, called
*pratyahara*, naturally arises. *Pratyahara* (prati + ahar) means to withdraw
the senses from their objects. "When the senses are not attached to objects,

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (56) gadaSTisamucaya teja te sthira-jema che tema avasthita rahe che, paNa
"sarva tejanuM teja" evuM A samyagdarzanaratnanuM teja to anubhava prayoganI
baLavattaratAthI pahelAM karatAM pAchaLathI vadhatuM jAya che. (6) ratnadIpaka
jema pavanathI olavAtuM nathI ane caMcalatA-asthiratA pAmate nathI, tema A
samyagadarzanarUpa ratnadIpa maharUpa vAyune gamya nathI ke tethI
caMcalatAasthiratA pAmatA nathI. "ghara parISaha ke upasarga bhaye karI, AvI
zake nahi te sthiratAne aMta je." (juo phUTaneTa pR. 68). (7) ratnadIpaka sadA
ramya-suMdara dekhAya che ane kSINa-kRza thato nathI, tema A samyagadarzanarUpa
ratnadIpa sadA ramaNIya-suMdara dekhAya che, tathA puSTa guNe navi kRza rahe he
lAla'-puSTa guNe karIne kadI paNa kuza-kSINa thato nathI, dUbaLo paDato nathI,
paNa AtmadharmanI uttarottara puSTithI niraMtara puSTa ja thayA kare che. (8)
ratnadIpakamAM jema tela nAMkhavuM paDatuM nathI tathA "dizA" arthAt vATa baLatI
nathI, tema A samyagdarzanarUpa ratnadIvAmAM pudgalarUpa tela nAMkhavuM paDatuM
nathI, arthAt parabhAvanuM AlaMbana hotuM nathI, tathA zuddha AtmadazA baLatI
nathI, "jeha na zuddha dazA dahe che lAla," arthAt zuddha AtmabhAvamAM sthiti
rahe che. ratnadIpakanA rUpaka parathI phalita thata A sarva camatkArika bhAva
kavivara yazovijayajIe potAnA A amara kAvyamAM adbhuta rIte saMgIta karyo che -
sAhelAM te kuMtha jinezvara deva! ratnadIpaka ati dIpata he lAla; sA, muja
manamadiramAMhI, Ave jo ariala jhIpate ho lAla." I. (juo pR. 69) temaja-ratnanA
prakAzanI jema A daSTine bodha paNa (1) apratipAtI, (2) pravaddhamAna, (3)
nirapAya, (4) anyane aparitApahetu, (5) paritoSahetu, (6) parijJAna AdinuM
janmasthAna, (7) parama maMgalarUpa hoya che. (spaSTIkaraNa mATe juo pR. 69-70).
ItyAdi aneka prakAre ratnaprabhA sAthe A sthirA dRSTinA darzananuM-bodhanuM
samAnadharmapaNuM che, sarakhApaNuM ghaTAvI zakAya che. A upamAne jema jema
vizeSa vicArIe tema tema temAMthI era ne era camatkRti bhAse che, ne jJAnInI
vANInI parama addabhutatAnI pratIti karAvI bahumAna upajAve che. atre
saMkSepamAM tenuM digdarzana karyuM che. svamatithI vizeSa vicAravuM. yoganuM
pAMcamuM aMga-pratyAhAra viSaya vikAre na iMdriya joDe, te IhAM pratyAhAre
re."--. sakjhAya, 6-4. yoganuM cothuM aMga prANAyAma cethI daSTimAM prApta thayA
pachI, svAbhAvika krame pratyAhAra nAmanuM pAMcamuM gAMga atra sAMpaDe che.
pratyAhAra (prati + AhAra) eTale idrinuM viSayomAMthI pratyAhata thavuM-pAchuM
kheMcAvuM te. "viSayane asaMgrega thatAM

Page #533 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Steady Gaze:**  The restraint of the senses (pratyahara) is not the absence of
the senses, but rather the non-attachment to the objects of the senses.   (457)
Pratyahara is the imitation of the true nature of the mind (chitta).  This means
that when the senses, such as the eyes, are not engaged with their respective
objects, such as forms, they cease to be drawn towards them.  The senses
withdraw from their objects, remaining in their own state, and this imitation of
the true nature of the mind (chitta) provides the material for the restraint of
the mind (chittanirodha).  This is called the restraint of the senses
(pratyahara).  What kind of restraint is this?  It is a fruit-bearing restraint
that subdues the senses.  Through the practice of pratyahara, the senses become
so disciplined and obedient that they do not wander even when exposed to
external objects.  In the fourth stage of the steady gaze, through pranayama,
external emotions are expelled, internal emotions are cultivated, and their
retention and stabilization are achieved.  Thus, the seeker who progresses on
the path of yoga, their tendencies no longer play in external emotions, but
rather culminate in internal emotions.  Therefore, with the attainment of this
fifth stage, the seeker's senses no longer engage with their respective objects,
and they withdraw from them, becoming restrained.  They become absorbed in
internal activities, serving the mind's essence, and imitating the true nature
of the mind.  The senses, which previously roamed freely like wild horses, now
become disciplined, withdraw, and are bound to their own mental abode.  They
abandon their outward tendencies, which were like mouths seeking objects, and
become wise and introspective.  The eyes, which once saw external forms, now see
the inner essence through feeling.  The ears, which once heard external sounds,
now hear the inner sound.  The nose, which once enjoyed external fragrances, now
finds satisfaction in the fragrance of feeling.  The tongue, which once relished
external tastes, now delights in the taste of inner consciousness.  The body,
which once found pleasure in external touch, now experiences joy in the touch of
the essence of consciousness.  Thus, the external tendencies of the senses
cease, and the internal tendencies, which are in the form of feeling, prevail.
Because the five senses, like unruly horses, are now controlled by the awakened
soul.  * "The restraint of the senses is the knowledge that arises from the non-
attachment to objects.  It is the state of being free from the desire for
objects." * "When the senses are not engaged with their respective objects, they
imitate the true nature of the mind.  From this, the senses become restrained."
- Shri Patanjali Yoga Sutras, 2-54-55.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 sthirAdaSTiH pratyAhAra-viSayavikAre na idriya De" (457 ) svacittasvarUpane
anukArI te pratyAhAra che." arthAt cakSu Adi iMdriyane grAhya evA rUpa Adi
viSayane asaMprayoga thatAM, eTale ke viSaya sAthe joDANa nahiM thatAM tenuM
grahaNAbhimukhapaNuM choDI dIdhAthI svarUpamAtra avasthAna thAya. iMdriye pitAnA
viSayamAMthI pAchI phare, eTale jema che tema chAnImAnI besI jAya, ane ema thAya
eTale aMta:svarUpanuM anukaraNa thAya, arthAt cittanirodha karavA mATenI sAmagrI
sAMpaDe. AnuM nAma cakSu Adi indriyane pratyAhAra che. A pratyAhAra kevo che? te
ke indriyonA vazIkaraNarUpa eka phalavALe che. pratyAhArane abhyAsa thatAM,
iMdriye evI AyaraAdhIna-tAbedAra thaI jAya che, ke bAhya viSaya pratye laI
javAmAM AvatAM paNa te jatI nathI. * cethI dRSTimAM prANAyAma vaDe karIne bAhya
bhAvane reca dIdhe, aMtarbhAva pUraNa karyuM, ane tenuM kuMbhana-sthirIkaraNa
karyuM; Ama yogamArge AgaLa vadhatA mumukSu jegIjananI vRtti bAhA bhAvamAM
ramatI nathI, ane antar bhAvamAM pariName che. eTale have A pAMcamI daSTi prApta
thatAM, A gAbhyAsI mumukSu jananI iMdriye pitapatAnA viSayo pratye pravartatI
nathI, ane tenA tenA viSayamAMthI vyAvRtta thaI pAchI kheMcAI Ave chepratyAhata
thAya che, ane aMta:vyApAramAM vyApRta-pravRtta thaI cittanidhimAM khapa lAge
che, ane cittasvarUpanuM anukaraNa kare che. je idri pUve harAyA TheranI jema
chUTI pharatI hatI ne raghavAI thaIne svaccheda vicaratI hatI, te have niyamamAM
AvI jaI, pAchI kheMcAIne, potAnA citta-gharanA khIle baMdhAya che. viSayagrahaNa
mATe jyAM tyAM mukha nAMkhavArUpa bahi"viSaya vikAre mukha vRtti choDI daI, te
have DAhIDamarI banI aMtar abhimukha thAya che. na ikiya joDe eTale jenI AMkhe
bAhya rUpane dekhatI hatI te yogI have bhAvathI aMtaH svarUpane dekhe che. jenA
kAna bAhya zabdo suNatA hatA te have aMtaHnAda sAMbhaLe che. jenuM nAka bAhya
sugaMdhathI bhAtuM hatuM, te have bhAva-saurabhathI saMtoSAya che. jenI rasanA
bAhya rasathI rIjhatI hatI, te have aMta:caitanyarasanA pAnathI prasanna thAya
che. jene sparza bAhya sparzathI sukha mAnato hatuM, te have caitanya svarUpanI
sparzanAthI AnaMda anubhave che. Ama iMdriyanI bAhya vRtti virAma pAmI bhAvarUpa
AtyaMtara vRtti vase che, kAraNa ke pAMce itirUpa tophAnI gheDAnI lagAma have
jAgrata AtmAnA * "viSayAsakayorannAhAnutti vidyA pratyAhAraH pIvALAmetAratADha
." zrI yazA kRta dvADhA, 24-2, "svaviSayAsaMprayoge cittasvarUpAnukAra
ivendriyANAM prtyaahaarH| tataH pamA varasendriyALA " -zrI pAtaMjala ya, se.
2-54-55.

Page #534 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(458) Yoga-drishti-samurachya has come into the hands of a Chitta-sarathi, and
thus, the unparalleled Chaitanya-rasa is experienced and savored with emotion,
then the senses become subdued, they become as submissive as a poor cow, so that
they no longer have any interest in external objects, and even when they are
forcibly taken towards them, they do not go! Thus, it arranges this Chitta-ghar!
Therefore, after savoring this Chaitanya-amrita-rasa, it does not desire the
collection of Pudgala-bhega in the form of Bakas-bukas! - Thus, in this drishti,
the darshan of the Samyag-drishti-purusha is necessarily accompanied by
Pratyahara, because if Pratyahara is not truly an internal object-dispassion,
then Samyag-drishti-panam will also not be present, therefore, the Samyag-
drishti-purusha has extreme non-attachment towards objects, and only supreme
dispassion prevails. I will explain the other understanding of Bhrānti-desh-
tyāga later, when the Chitta becomes stable. - Shrimad Rajchandraji. After the
Chitta-dosha named the fourth Uththāna is destroyed in the drishti, the fifth
dosha named Bhrānti naturally disappears here. Because (1) there is such
peaceful tranquility here, the Chitta flows in such an unbroken, continuous,
calm stream, there is such a settled state of the Chitta that it does not rise
from the Maekshasadhak-yugmarg-kriya. And how can the Chitta, which does not
rise from its own place, become Bhrānti? How can it wander aimlessly? Therefore,
the Chitta is Abhrānti here, it is stable. (2) Or, leaving the present activity,
the Chitta's wandering, roaming, and fluctuating tendencies are Bhrānti. But
here, due to calmness, Chitta-sthitirata prevails, therefore, such Bhrānti does
not exist, only Abhrānti exists. (3) Or, to wander like the image in a shell, to
have a Viparyas in the form of considering the Tatva as Atatva, is Bhrānti. But
here, due to the true determination of the Tatva, such Viparyas-rupa Bhrānti
does not exist, only Abhrānti prevails. (4) To not remember whether one has done
a certain action or not, due to delusion, therefore, even from such auspicious
actions, there is such a void in the Arthavidhi, the desired result, the
Paramartha-karma, does not happen (see page 86). This is also Bhrānti. But here,
in this drishti, due to the use of Samyam, the awakened Samyag-drishti-purusha
does not experience such Bhrānti. Thus, due to calmness, due to being free from
Viparyas, and due to being useful, the Chitta is Abhrānti in every way here - it
is stable. Therefore, the actions of the Samyag-drishti-purusha, such as
Vandanadi, are also Abhrānti, that is, he performs those actions without
Bhrānti, while properly maintaining the Yakt-kram; he performs them with
complete emotion, with supreme peace, with focused attention, and with a stable,
absorbed use. For example,

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (458) yogadaSTisamuracaya eka citta-sArathinA hAthamAM AvI che, ane Ama
bhAvathI anupama caitanyarasane anubhava AsvAda thAya che, eTale pachI iMdriya
evI te vaza thaI jAya che, evI te garIbaDI gAya jevI AdhIna thaI jAya che, ke
tene pachI bAhya viSayomAM rasa paDato nathI, ne te pratye parANe laI javAmAM
AvatAM paNa te jatI nathI ! evuM te tene A citta-ghara goThI jAya che! eTale A
caitanya amRtarasano AsvAda cheDIne bhegI te bAkasabukasa rUpa pudgalabhegane
icchate nathI !-Ama A daSTimAM sthiti karatA samyagRSTi gIpuruSanuM darzana
avasya pratyAhAravALuM ja hoya che, kAraNa ke pratyAhAra-kharekhara aMtaraMga
viSayavairAgya na hoya te samyagadaSTipaNuM paNa ghaTe nahi, mATe samyagadaSTi
puruSane viSaye pratye atyaMta anAsakti ja hoya, parama vairAgya ja varte
bhrAMti deSa tyAga bIjI samajaNa pachI kahIza, jyAre citta sthira thaIza."--
zrImad rAjacaMdrajI. ceAthe utthAna nAmane cittadoSa jethI daSTimAM nAza pAmyA
pachI, svAbhAvika krame brAMti nAmane pAMcame deSa atre TaLe che. kAraNa ke (1)
atre evI prazAMtavAhitA hoya che, cittane evo akhaMDa ekadhAre zAMta pravAha
pravahe che, cittanuM evuM TharelapaNuM hoya che ke mekSasAdhaka yugamArga-
kriyAmAMthI citta UThatuM nathI. ane je citta svasthAnamAMthI UThe ja nahiM, te
tenI brAMti paNa kema thAya? te ADuMavaLuM kema bhame? eTale atre citta abrAMta
hoya che sthira hoya che. (2) athavA prastuta gakriyAne choDI cittanuM cArekera
bhramaNa-brAmaka vRtti te brAMti. paNa atre to zAMtapaNAne lIdhe cittasthiratA
vare che, eTale tevI brAMti hotI nathI, abhrAMti ja hoya che. (3) athavA
chIpamAM rUpAnI jema bhramaNuM thavI, tattvane atatva mAnavArUpa viparyAsa thavo
te bhrAMti. paNa atre te tatvanA yathArtha nizcayane lIdhe tevI viparyAsarUpa
brAMti hotI nathI, abrAMti ja varte che (4) amuka kriyA karI ke na karI, e
bhramathI na sAMbhare, eTale evI zubha kiyAthakI paNa arthavidhI evuM akAja
thAya, ISTaphalarUpa paramArtha kArya na thAya (juo pR. 86) A paNa bhrAMti che.
paNa atre A dRSTimAM te samyam upayogavaMtapaNane lIdhe jAgrativALA samyagadaSTi
puruSane tevI bhrAMti paNa upajatI nathI. Ama zAMtapaNAne lIdhe,
viparyAsarahitapaNAne lIdhe, ane upayogavaMtapaNAne lIdhe atre citta sarva
prakAre abrAMta hoya che-sthira hoya che. eTale samyagadaSTi puruSa je vaMdanAdi
kriyA kare che te paNa abrAMta hoya che, arthAt yakta kramane barAbara sAcavIne
te te kriyA brAMtirahitapaNe kare che; pUrNa bhAvapUrvaka parama zAMtithI,
tAvika lakSathI, ne tanmaya sthira upayogathI kare che. jema ke

Page #535 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Steadfastness: Abandonment of Delusion, Attainment of Subtle Insight
**Steadfastness:** Abandonment of delusion, attainment of subtle insight.
**Pure intention, steadfast devotion to the Lord, those who chant your name,
they attain the uninterrupted, infinite, supreme nectar-like abode.** - Shri
Devchandraji.  Those who perform such acts of veneration, they truly preserve
the place, time, and order, they use the words of the sutras according to their
meaning, they do not cause confusion or distraction in others, and they chant
the sutras in a proper tone that conveys faith and enthusiasm. And as they
perform these acts of veneration, their feelings and emotions are pure, their
intention is steadfast, their good intentions increase, and the purity of their
prostrations and other acts of veneration is truly preserved through devotion to
the Lord. Thus, their acts of veneration are free from any fault due to their
non-attachment, non-direction, and non-blameworthiness. (See page 219-220)
Furthermore, these acts of veneration, repentance, etc., are accompanied by
subtle insight. A person with right vision performs any action with a proper
understanding of its essence; because they have a right understanding of the
essence, they perform all actions with a calm mind, without any attachment,
without any haste. Thus, the practice of steadfastness is pure in its
attachment.  For example, a person with right vision performs devotion to the
Lord with an understanding of the essence of devotion. They know that this Lord
has attained the pure self-nature, therefore, they are worthy of my highest
reverence. The nature of this Supreme Being is the nature of my own soul.
Therefore, to attain the fullness of my pure self-essence, to achieve pure self-
realization, this ideal form of the Lord, who is the object of my aspiration, is
my ultimate goal, and I must strive to attain his supreme grace.  **(459)**
**"Having attained the pure nature, the Jina is therefore worthy of worship; the
Jina's nature is the same as the essence of self-awareness."** - Shrimad
Rajchandraji's Shri Atmasiddhi  **"My pure essence is fulfilled, you are the
true goal, O Lord; Devchandraji, the sages, and all the devotees of the truth
have experienced this."** - Shri Devchandraji  **Subtle Insight**  Here, the
fifth quality of insight is revealed, because in the fourth vision, the quality
of understanding the truth was revealed, and therefore, in this fifth vision,
the quality of insight naturally manifests as a consequence. And this insight is
also subtle here. Because here, due to the breaking of the knot, there is
attainment of the object of knowledge, and it is in this object of knowledge
that subtle insight arises. This has been explained in detail in the previous
section on the right of the object of knowledge in the fourth vision, but let us
briefly reiterate it with feeling. Its characteristic was described as follows:
**Understanding the essence of the goal and the different aspects of the goal
with wisdom.**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 sthirASTi : bhrAMti doSatyAga, sUkSma beSa guNuprApti zuddhAzaya thira prabhu
upayege, je samare tuma nAmajI; avyAbAdha anatuM pAme, parama amRtarasa dhAmajI.
zItala. "--zrI devaca'drajI. te vaMdanAdi kare che teA sthAna, kALa ne krama
kharAkhara sAcave che, sUtra zabdanA artha mAM upayAga rAkhe che, bIjAne sa`mAha
na upaje-vikSepa na thAya tathA zraddhA-saMvega sUcave evA yukta svare
sUtroccAra kare che; ane te vaMdanAdi karatAM tenA bhAva-zamAMca zuddAzaya thira
ullase che, zubhAzaya vadha`mAna thAya che, ne praNAmAdinI saMzuddhi kharAkhara
prabhu upacAge' jaLavAya che. Ama tenI vaMdanAdi kriyA niraticArapaNAne lIdhe
anaH- nirdeSi--niSpApa hoya che. (jue pR. 219-220) temaja A
vaMdanapratikramaNAdi kriyA sUkSma dhathI saMyukta evI heAya che. samyagdaSTi
puruSa je kAI kriyA kare che, te tenI tAttvika samajaNapUrvaka samyapaNe kare
che; kAraNa ke tene tattvanuM samyak savedana hAya che, eTale tene anusarIne sa*
kriyA prazAMta vRttithI, saMtra atyaMta audbhukayarahitapaNe, tvarA rahitapaNe
kare che. Ama sabhyaSTinuM anuSThAna anubaMdhazuddha hAya che. dAkhalA tarIke-
samyagdaSTi prabhubhakti kare che te tAttvika bhaktinuM svarUpa samajIne kare
che. te ema jANe che ke A prabhu zuddha AtmasvarUpane pAmyA che, mATe mhArA
parama pUjya che. je A paramAtmAnuM svarUpa che te mhArA AtmAnuM svarUpa che.
eTale mhArI zuddha AtmasattAnI pUrNatA pAmavA mATe, zuddha Atmasiddhi karavA
mATe, A praticchaMdasthAnIya-zuddha AdarzarUpa prabhu parama hetu hAi, mhAre
tenuM parama prakhaLa avaaMkhana levA ceAgya che. k (459) "pAmyA zuddha
svabhAvane, che jina tethI pUjya; samo jina svabhAva tA, AtmabhAnanA gujya."--
zrImad rAjacadrajIpraNIta zrI Atmasiddhi "mArI zuddha sattA taNI pUtA, te taNeA
hetu prabhu tuMhI sAcA; devacaMdre stabyA munigaNe anubhavyo, tattvabhakta
bhavika sakala rAcA."-zrI devaca'drajI sUkSma bedha guNanI mAsi atre eya nAmane
pAMcame guNu pragaTe che, kAraNa ke ceAthI dRSTimAM tattvazravaNanA guNu
pragaTayo, eTale tenA laripAkarUpe A pAMcamI STimAM beSa guNu svAbhAvika krame
pragaTavA joie. ane te beSa paNa atre sUkSmatAvALA heAya che. kAraNa ke atre
graMthibhedane lIdhe vedhasavedyapadanI prApti heAya che ane A vevasavelapadamAM
ja sUkSmabAdha ghaTe che, ema AgaLa ceAthI dRSTinA vaidyasavedyapadaadhikAramAM
vistArathI kahevAI cUkayu' che, tepaNu saMkSepamAM bhAvanAthe tenI punarAvRtti
karI jaie, teA tenu lakSaNa A pramANe kahyuM. hatuM:--samyak hetu svarUpa ne
phulanA bhede karIne vidvat

Page #536 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(460) The subtle knowledge is that which, through the Vedya-Sanvedya-pad in the
society, determines the truth, and the ultimate purpose is achieved. And the
skill of this knowledge in crossing the ocean of existence is its subtlety, or
its sharpness in differentiating the weight of karma is its subtlety, or its
comprehensive and skillful acceptance of the infinite Dharma-atma-samagra vastu-
tattva is its subtlety. Thus, in many ways, the subtlety of this knowledge is
revealed. (See 65-66, Vivechan p. 261-266) Here, the Vedya-Sanvedya-pad is
attained. That is, where the Vedya-Sanvedaniya object is perceived according to
the state of the object, that is the Vedya-Sanvedya-pad. That is, the object
like woman, etc., which is the cause of the giving, etc., is perceived here
through the arrival, in its true form, as pure and pure, and in this way, by the
non-active intellect. That is, the experience of woman, etc., is always the
object of existence, therefore it is to be abandoned, it is to be abandoned,
such a decisive intellect arises in the soul. (See - Lai. 7075, Vivechan p.
272-291) And the pure knower-natured soul, with the characteristics of
knowledge, vision, and character, is the only one that is to be accepted, the
rest is to be abandoned, such an unbroken conviction is revealed in the soul.
The experience that the pure soul has is the enjoyment of its own time, and
where the shadow of the influence of the pudgala karma-pradesh falls, that is
the dwelling of the other time, thus the object is revealed here. Pure
experience is always the enjoyment of one's own time, and the shadow that falls
on the other side is the dwelling of the other time - "Dharma is the supreme
lord." - Shri Anandghanji. Just as a sword from a sheath, the soul is different
from the body, etc., it is always useful and imperishable, knowing this from the
teachings of the Sadguru, the correct perception arises here, the feeling of the
soul's true form is felt. Without understanding this innate soul-form, that is,
without knowing and perceiving it, the soul had suffered endlessly before, this
soul-form "pad" is explained by Shri Sadguru Bhagwan, now this soul is
experienced, it is directly known by self-awareness, and that is the Vedya-
Sanvedya-pad. "From the teachings of the Sadguru, such an unprecedented
awareness; the own pad in the own, ignorance is removed." - Shrimad Rajchandraji
Shri Atmasiddhi and this experience of the soul-form or the Vedya-Sanvedya-pad
is the "pad" in the true sense of the word, because where one can stand firmly,

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (460) yogadaSTisamucaya samAjamAM je vedyasaMvedyapada thakI tatvano nirNaya
thAya, paramArtha pariccheda karAya, te sUkSma bodha' kahevAya che. ane
bhavasamudramAMthI pAra utAravAmAM A bedhanuM kuzalapaNuM che e ja enuM
sUkamapaNuM che athavA karma vajAna vibheda karavAmAM enuM tIkSaNapaNuM che e ja
enuM sUphamapaNuM che; athavA anaMta dharmAtmaka samagra vastutattvanuM
vyApakapaNe nipuNa mAnyapaNuM e ja enuM sUkSmapaNuM che. Ama aneka prakAre A
bedhanuM sUkamapaNuM ghaTe che. (juo . 65-66, vivecana pR. 261-266) atre
vedhasaMvedyapadanI prApti hoya che. arthAta jyAM vedya-saMvedanIya vastu vastu
sthiti pramANe saMvedAya che te vedhasaMvedyapada che. eTale strI Adi padArtha
je apAya AdinA kAraNarUpa che, te tenA yathArtha svarUpamAM atre AgamathI
vizuddha zuddhAtama evI tathA prakAre apravRtti buddhithI saMvedAya che. arthAt
strI Adi anubhava sadA padArtha bhavahetu che, mATe heya ja che, tyAjya ja che,
evI nizcayabuddhi pratIti-samajaNa-chApa AtmAne viSe upaje che. (juo-lai. 7075,
vivecana pR. ra72-291) tathA jJAna-darzana-cAritrarUpa lakSaNavALe eka zuddha
jJAyakasvabhAvI AtmA ja mAtra Adeya che-grahaNa karavA gya che, bAkI bIjuM
badhuM ya heya che-tyajavA yogya che, e akhaMDa nizcaya AtmAmAM pragaTe che.
zuddha AtmAne je anubhava che te svasamayane vilAsa che, ane jyAM pudgala
karmapradezamAM sthitirUpa parabhAvanI chAMyaDI paDe che, te parasamaya nivAsa
che, ema vatugate vastu atre prakAze che. zuddhAtama anubhava sadA, te svasamaya
vilAsa re paravaDI chAMhaDI je paDe, te parasamaya nivAsa re-- dharama parama
aranAthane."--zrI AnaMdaghanajI. myAnathI taravAranI jema, dehAdithI AtmA bhinna
che, sadA upayogavaMta ane avinAzI che, ema sadguru upadezathI jANIne atre tenI
samyapha pratIti upaje che, AtmasvarUpanuM saMvedana thAya che. AvuM je sahaja
AtmasvarUpapada samajyA vinA arthAt jANIne pratItyA vinA pUrve anaMta duHkha
pAmyo hato, te AtmasvarUpa "pada' zrI saddaguru bhagavAne samajAvyAthI have A
jIvane anubhavagocara thAya che, svasaMvedanathI pratyakSa jaNAya che, ane te ja
vedhasaMvedyapada che. saddagurunA upadezathI, AvyuM apUrva bhAna; nija pada
nijamAMhi la, dUra thayuM ajJAna."- zrImad rAjacaMdrajIpata zrI Atmasiddhi ane A
je AtmasvarUpa anubhava pada athavA vedhasaMvedya pada che te ja ' zabdanA
kharekharA artha pramANe "pada" che, kAraNa ke jyAM sthirapaNe pada mAMDI zakAya

Page #537 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Steady Vision:** All actions in the cycle of birth and death appear like the
play of a child in a dust-house.  (461) Only that which has a stable and correct
state of being can be called a "pad." And this experience of the true nature of
the self, being the nature of the "pad" that is perceived by the "pad-vedya"
(the one who knows the "pad"), is of a correct state of being, therefore it is
rightly called a "pad." (See Commentary pp. 288-291).  This stable experience of
the true nature of the self, which is the "pad" perceived by the "pad-vedya," is
attained through the breaking of the "granthi" (knots of ignorance) by this
steady vision. Therefore, there is the attainment of subtle knowledge. And from
such a person with subtle knowledge and correct vision, such spontaneous
utterances emerge: "By the power of this pure and correct vision, I have avoided
the animalistic state and attained the divine state, revealing the divine and
inherent nature of the self. I will never forget the immeasurable grace of the
Lord Veer, who has made this possible. I remember him day and night.  "I will
not forget the virtues of the Veer, I remember him day and night; he who has
avoided the animalistic state and attained the divine state, I am eternally
grateful to him." - Shri. D. Sakzay. P-2.  "The knowledge that was being
accumulated for an infinite period of time, was transformed in a single moment,
which led to the cessation of the cycle of birth and death. I bow to this
auspicious and pure vision." - Shrimad Rajchandraji.  "Like the play of a child
in a dust-house, all actions in the cycle of birth and death appear to the wise.
Through the breaking of the knot of ignorance, all actions in the cycle of birth
and death appear like the play of a child in a dust-house to the wise." - 155
**Commentary:** "Like the play of a child in a dust-house, all actions in the
cycle of birth and death appear here. The attainment of the "trathi" (threefold
knowledge) enters into the "savi" (self), and the eight great attainments are
attained." - Shri. J. D. Sakzay. P-3  **Vritti (Commentary):** "Like the play of
a child in a dust-house - due to the ugliness and instability of nature, all
actions in the cycle of birth and death appear like the play of a child in a
dust-house to the wise - due to the breaking of the knot of ignorance, all
actions in the cycle of birth and death appear like the play of a child in a
dust-house to the wise."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 sthirAdaSTi : bAladhUligRhakIDA samI sarva bhavaceSTA (461) evuM sthira samyak
sthitivALuM je hoya tene ja "pada' nAma ghaTI zake. ane A AtmasvarUpa anubhava
pada-vedhasaMvedya pada svabhAvabhUta hoI tevuM samyapha sthitivALuM che, eTale
tene ja "pada" nAma barAbara ghaTe che. (juo vivecana pR. 288 thI 291). AvuM
sthira AtmasvabhAva anubhavarUpa vevasaMvedya pada graMthibhedathI A sthira
daSTimAM prApta thAya che, tethI karIne atre sUkSama bodhanI saMprApti hoya che.
ane evA sUkamabedhasaMpanna samyagadaSTi puruSanA AvA sahaja udgAra nIkaLI paDe
che ke-Ama nirmala samyagadarzananA pratApe karIne jeNe hAruM pazurUpapaNuM
TALIne devarUpapaNuM karyuM, divya sahaja AtmasvarUpa pragaTa karyuM te
bhagavAna vIrane amApa upakAra huM kadI visaruM nahi, rAta divasa saMbhAruM
chuM. e guNa vIra taNo na visAruM, saMbhAruM dina rAta re; pazu TALI sararUpa
kare je, samakitane avadAta re."-zrI . da. sajhAya. pa-2. anaMtakALathI je jJAna
bhavahetuM thatuM hatuM, te jJAnane eka samaya mAtramAM jAtyaMtara karI, jeNe
bhavanivRttirUpa karyuM, te kalyANamUti sabhya darzanane namaskAra." zrImad
rAjacaMdrajI. bAladhUlIgRhakrIDAtulyAsyAM bhAti dhImatAm  /
tamograMthivibhedena bhavaceSTAkhilaiva hi  //  155  //  bAla dhUligraha ramata
zI, bhavaceSTA ja samarata; tamecaMthibhede dIse, buddhimaMtane atra. 155 artha
--A daSTimAM tamograMthinA vibhedane lIdhe buddhimatone akhila ja bhavaceSTA
bAlakanI dhUligrahakIDA tulya bhAse che. vivecana bAladhUli gRha krIDA sarakhI,
bhava ceSTA IhAM bhAse re; traddhi siddhi savi ghaTamAM pese, aSTa mahAsiddhi
pAse re......te guNa vIra." -zrI je. da. sakjhAya. 5-3 vRttisAdhUrI vRkrIetucA-
bAlakanI dhUligrahakrIDA sarakhI-prakRtiasuMdarapaNAthI ne asthirapaNathI,
a-AmAM, A sthirA dRSTimAM, mAri-bhAse che, dhImatAM-dhImaMta-buddhimaMta
puruSone, tamobapivinatamograMthinA vibhedarUpa hetuthI, mavajhAvikaiva hi-
akhila ja bhavaceSTA nizcaye-cakravatI Adi ceSTArUpa paNa prakRtiasuMdarapaNuthI
ne asthirapaNuthI.

Page #538 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(462) **Chaugadashtisasuy**  In this vision, the fourfold fetters are
differentiated, so it appears to them like the dust-house play of a child in the
entire world, because by nature, both are equal in ugliness and instability. The
child plays the game of making a house of dust. Those houses are naturally ugly
and unstable, falling apart with a touch or a blow. Similarly, all worldly
efforts, this worldly effort, are also naturally ugly, uncomfortable, and
unstable, fleeting like a moment. Thus, both are equal. Indeed, even the wealth
of a Chakravarti, considered the most excellent in the world, is ugly and
temporary when viewed from the perspective of truth, like mixed food. Those who,
with immense power, became rulers of six continents and, meeting in the
universe, gave rise to "heavy kings," were not clever Chakravartis, but came
empty-handed and left empty-handed. So many Chakravartis have come and gone in
this world that when a new Chakravarti arises, they have to erase a name from
the Rishabhkut mountain with a Kikini gem to make space for their own name!
Thus, countless rulers have come and gone on this earth, and this earth has not
gone with anyone nor will it go. This is the state of even the highest position
in this world, so what to speak of other lower levels? (See pp. 24-250).
**Baladhuli Ghar** **Kriya Sami**  Just as a child's house is completely
temporary and disappears in a moment, so too does this worldly play end in a
moment, it was never there to begin with. Everywhere in this world, there is
only fleetingness and discomfort. It is like the child's house, which pleases
the child, but just as a grown-up would not like or would be ashamed to play
such a game, similarly, this worldly effort, this dust-house play, does not
please the wise, the knowledgeable, the right-visioned person, and to play in
it, to enjoy it, would be a cause of shame! It would seem shameful. And this
entire worldly effort appears to them like a child's dust-house play because
they have differentiated the fourfold fetters. Through this differentiation of
the fourfold fetters, they have attained right vision, the vision of the path,
and therefore they experience the truly sorrowful nature of the world. Thus, the
nature of the differentiation of the fetters and the right vision attained as
its fruit is briefly understood in this context:  **Granthibhed**  The right-
visioned person, who has attained this fifth stable vision, has differentiated
the fourfold fetters, which are...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (462) ceAgadaSTisasuya A dRSTimAM vattatA ceAgIne tamAgraMthinA vibheda thayA
haiAya che, eTale tene samasta sa'sAraceSTA bAlakanI dhUligraha krIDA jevI bhAse
che, kAraNa ke prakRtithI asuMdarapaNAthI ne asthirapaNAthI te bannenuM
samAnapaNuM che. khAlaka dhULanA kUmA ( ghara ) banAvavAnI ramata rame che. te
kUmA prakRtithI-svabhAvathI asuMdara ane hAtha lagADatAM ke Thesa mAratAM paDI
jAya evA asthira heAya che. tema sarva bhavaceSTA A sa saMsAraceSTA paNa
prakRtithI asuMdara-aramaNIya ane asthira che, kSaNamAtramAM zINuM vizI thaI
jAya evI kSaNabha'gura che. Ama e bannenuM tulyapaNuM che. are ! cakravattI
AdinI Rddhi ke je saoNMsAramAM sarvotkRSTa gaNAya che, te paNa tattvathI jotAM
viSamizrita anna jevI asu Mdara ane asthAyI che. je pracaMDa pratApe karIne cha
khaMDanA adhirAja banyA hatA, ne brahmAMDamAM maLavAn thaIne ' bhArI bhUpa'
upajyA hatA, e catura cakrI cAliyA hAtA na hotA hoine,' hAtha kha'kherIne AvyA
hatA tevA khAlI hAthe cAlI nIkaLyA che. A jagamAM eTalA badhA cakravattI thai
gayA che, ke jyAre koi navA cakravattI' thAya che, tyAre kikiNIratnathI
RRSabhakUTa parvata para peAtAnuM nAma utkI karatI veLAe tene eka nAma bhUMsI
nAMkhavuM paDe che, tyAre te tenA nAma mATe jagyA thAya che! Ama A pRthvInA
anaMta svAmI thai gayA che, ne A pRthvI keAI sAthe gai nathI ke javAnI nathI.
Ama A jagatnI sarvocca padavInI paNuM A dazA che, teA pachI enAthI utaratI evI
anya kakSAe nI zI vAta karavI ? (jue pR. 24-250 ). bAladhUli ghara kriyA samI
Ama bAlakanA kubA jema sAva takalAdI nee kSaNavAramAM hatA na hatA thaI jAya
che, tema A sa` saMsArane khela paNa kSaNavAramAM khatama thaI jAya che, hateA
na hatA thaI jAya che. A sahasAramAM jyAM jue tyAM saCtra kSaNabhaMguratA ne
aramyatA ja bharI che. te teA khAlakanA sUbAnI jema khAlajIvAne ja ruce
che,-game che, paNa tevI khAlakanI ramata ramavI jema meATA mANasane na rucena
game, athavA zaramAvA jevI lAge, tema A bhavaceSTArUpa dhUligRhakrIDA paNu
paMDita janane-jJAnI samyagdaSTi puruSane rucatI nathI, ane bhUlecUke temAM
ramavuM-AnaMda mAnavA te lajjAnuM kAraNa lAge che! zaramAvA jevuM lAge che. ane
A sakala bhavaceSTA tene khAladhUligRhakrIDA jevI lAge che, tenu kAraNa tene
tameAgraMthinA vibheda thayA che, te che. A tamAgraMthinA vizvedathI tene
vedhasa vedhapadarUpa samyagdarzana pragaTayuM che, tethI tene saMsAranuM yathA`
duHkhada svarUpa savedAya che, mATe A graMthibheda tathA tenA phalarUpe prApta
thatA samyagdarzananuM svarUpa sa MkSepamAM jANavuM atra prasa`gathI prApta
thAya cheH-- graMthibheda A pAMcamI sthirA dRSTine pAmelA sabhyaSTi puruSane
tamethine eTale

Page #539 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Sthiraiti:**  **Gathibhed Dashamehupsham-Samyagdarshan**  (463) The ignorance-
like darkness-form **granthi** has been broken, the ignorance-filled
**moha**-darkness has been torn apart. This ignorance is truly **tamas**-like
darkness, because just as an object cannot be seen in darkness, so too an object
cannot be seen in the darkness of ignorance. This ignorance, which is like
darkness, quickly disappears when the light of knowledge arises - it flees
completely. Just as long-lasting darkness disappears immediately when a lamp is
lit, so too the **moha**-darkness, which is without beginning, is immediately
destroyed when the lamp of knowledge is lit. Therefore, all things are seen in
their true form, as they are. Thus, this **yogi** has **samyagdarshan**,
**samyagdristi** knowledge.  “**Kamabhav** is ignorance, **moksha**-feeling is
one's own abode; Ignorance is like darkness, knowledge-light destroys it.
**Rag** and **dvesha** are ignorance, the main **karma**-knot, Liberation
happens from it, that is the path to **moksha**.” - Shri Atmasiddhi  This
**tamograntshi** is the result of **rag** and **dvesha**, which are dense and
thick, born from the **karma** of life; and it is extremely difficult, like a
rough, dense, fixed, and hidden knot in bamboo. That is why it is called
**granthi** - knot. This hard, complex, mountain-like, powerful **tamograntshi**
is broken here by the extraordinary **atmapurushaarth** with extraordinary,
sharp **bhaava**-power. Therefore, **samyaktva** is attained, and
**samyagdarshan** is attained through **anivrittikaran**, which cannot be
avoided - it cannot be stopped, so that the true form of things is seen. (For
more details, see pp. 39 and 46-47).  **Samyagdarshan** is different from the
**haadi**, it is the **atma**, it is always useful, it is imperishable... Listen
to the original path of the **Jina**! Know it through the teachings of the
**sadguru**, the knowledge is called **khaas**... The knowledge that is known,
it is pure **pratiti**... The **bhagavat** said that **darshan** is that, its
other name is **samyag**...  - Shrimad Rajchandraji. Thus, **samyagdarshan**
arises as a result of the **granthibhed**. This **samyaktva** or
**samyagdarshan** is a quality of the **atma**, and it is **nirvikalpa**. This
subtle quality is **kevalgyan**-accessible and is the subject of
**paramaavashi** and **man:paryaya** knowledge, not the subject of **matijnan**,
**tajnan**, or **deshaavdhi**. Therefore, whether this quality has manifested or
not...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 sthirAiTi: gathibheda dazamehaupazama-samyagadarzana (463) ajJAna aMdhakArarUpa
graMthine vibheda thayo hoya che, ajJAnamaya mohAMdhakArane paDade cIrAI gayo
che. A ajJAna kharekhara ! tamasarUpa-aMdhakArarUpa ja hoya che, kAraNa ke
aMdhakAramAM jema padArthanuM darzana thaI zakatuM nathI, tema ajJAna
aMdhakAramAM padArthanuM darzana thaI zakatuM nathI. A adhikAra samuM ajJAna
jJAnarUpa prakAza thatAM zIdhra nAzI jAya che-ekadama palAyana karI jAya che.
lAMbA vakhatanuM aMdhAruM paNa dI paTAvatAM tarata ja dUra thAya che, tema
anAdine mehAMdhakAra paNa jJAna-pradIpa pragaTatAM tatkSaNa ja nAza pAme che.
eTale samasta vastusvarUpa jema che tema yathAsthita svarUpe A gIne dekhAya che.
Ama A yegI samyagadarzanI, samyagadaSTi jJAnI hoya che. "kamabhAva ajJAna che,
mokSabhAva nija vAsa; aMdhakAra ajJAna sama, nAze jJAna prakAsa. rAga dveSa
ajJAna e, mukhya karmanI graMtha, thAya nivRtti jehathI, te ja mokSane paMtha."
--zrI Atmasiddhi A tamograMthi jIvana karma janita ghana-gADha rAgadveSa
pariNAma che; ane te vAMsanI karkaza, ghana, rUDha ne gUDha gAMTha jevo atyaMta
dudha che. eTalA mATe ja ene "graMthi'-gAMTha kahela che. te kaThaNa aTapaTI
(Complex) parvata jevI mahAbalavAna tamagraMthi atre apUrva AtmapuruSArthanI
phuraNAthI apUrvakaraNarUpa tIkSaNa bhAvavAvaDe bhedAI jAya che. eTale pachI
samyakatvanI prApti karAvyA vinA rahe nahi-nivarse nahi evA anivRttikaraNavaDe
karIne samyagadarzananI prApti thAya che, jethI vastunuM yathArthasamyapha
svarUpa dekhAya che. ( vizeSa mATe juo-pR. 39 ane 46-47). samyagadarzana che
hAdithI bhinna AtamA re, upayogI sadA avinAza... mULa mAraga sAMbhaLe jinano re!
ema jANe sadguru upadezathI re, kahyuM jJAna tenuM nAma khAsa...maLa0 je jJAna
karIne jANiyuM re, tenI varte che zuddha pratIta...mULa0 kahyuM bhagavate
darzana tehane re, jenuM bIjuM nAma samakita...mULa" -zrImad rAjacaMdrajI. Ama
ukta graMthibhedanA phala-pariNAmarUpe samyagadarzana upaje che. A samyakatva
athavA samyagadarzana AtmAno guNa che, ane te nirvikalpa che. A sUkSama guNa
kevalajJAnagocara che tathA paramAvaSi ane mana:paryaya jJAnano viSaya che,
matijJAnano ke tajJAnane ke dezAvadhine viSya nathI. eTale A guNa pragaTahyo che
ke nahi te tevA

Page #540 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(464) The collection of the eight types of knowledge (Gadashti Samuchaya) is
known only by the true knower. This quality, from the beginning of time, has
become a false taste due to the rise of the delusion of perception
(Darshanamoha) - like milk poured into a bitter gourd, by the grace of God, the
attainment of time, etc. (Kalaadi Labdhi) is achieved, and when it is near the
end of the ocean of existence (Bhavasamudra), due to the result of the feeling
of grandeur (Bhavya Bhavana) - due to the suitability of the living being (Jiva)
- the living being attains right conduct (Samyaktv). These five attainments are
the cause of this attainment of right conduct: (1) Kshapashamik Labdhi - the
attainment of the destruction of the karmas (Kshapashmani). (2) Vishuddhi Labdhi
- the purity of the soul that arises from the destruction of the karmas. (3)
Deshana Labdhi - the teachings of the true guru, etc. (4) Prayogiki Labdhi - the
state of the five attainments (Kame) decreases and becomes only a fraction of an
atom (Antar Kata Koti Maatra). (5) Karan Darshanamoha Labdhi - the special power
of the soul (Atmasamarthya Vishesh) that gives the power to destroy the state of
the karmas and the taste of the karmas. Karan Labdhi is of three types: Adha
Karan, Apurva Karan, Anivritti Karan. The nature of this Karan has been
explained before. After this Karan Labdhi, at the final moment (Antamuhurt), the
destruction of the delusion of perception (Darshanamoha) inevitably leads to
right perception (Samyagdarshan), i.e., the false state of perception becomes
the right state. But as long as the rise of the infinite binding passions
(Anantanu bandhi Kashaya) exists, this right perception does not benefit.
Because these evil infinite binding passions (Kashaya) in the form of intense
anger, pride, deceit, and greed are the ones that destroy and obstruct right
conduct (Samyaktv), they bring the delusion of perception (Darshanamoha), the
root cause of infinite existence (Anant Sansar), into existence, therefore, it
is given the true name "Anantanu bandhi". Thus, this great, terrible, infinite
binding passion (Anantanu bandhi Kashaya), which binds to infinite existence
(Anant Sansar), is eliminated only when the delusion of perception
(Darshanamoha) is eliminated, therefore, one should understand the practical
nature of the infinite binding passion (Anantanu bandhi) and make every effort
to avoid it from the soul. The living being who is attached to the world
(Sansar) for the sake of the world, and who worships false gurus, gods, and
religions for the sake of the higher purpose (Parmarth), due to delusion,
suffers a lot from the infinite binding passions (Anantanu bandhi) of anger,
pride, deceit, and greed, because other worldly actions do not bind to infinite
existence (Anant Anubandh) very much. Only the living being who knows the higher
purpose (Parmarth) and is eager to worship the true knower (Parmarth Gyanee),
the god, and the religion, is truly free from them. It is very true to say that
he is free from them. It is possible that he may be influenced by the false
guru, etc., due to his attachment to the false guru, god, and religion, due to
his bad company, due to his carelessness, and due to his neglect. Also, his
worldly desires (Sansar Vasna) will not be cut off by his bad company. * "खयुवसम
विसोही देसणा पाउग्ग करणलद्धिए । चत्तारिवि सामण्णा करणं पुण होदि सम्मत्ते॥" Shri
Nemichandra Siddhanta Chakravattakrit Shri Gammasar,

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (464) gadaSTisamuccaya viziSTa jJAnI ja jANe che. A guNa anAdithI darzanamohanA
udayathI mithyA svAdarUpa thaI paDyo che -kaDavI tuMbaDImAM nAMkhelA dUdhanI
jema daivayoge kAlAdi labdhi saMprApta thaye bhavasamudrane cheDe najIkamAM hoya
tyAre bhavyabhAvanA vipAkathI-jIvanI yathAyogyatAthI jIva samyakatva pAme che. A
samyaktvanI prAptimAM A pAMca labdhi kAraNabhUta cheH (1) kSApazamika labdhi-
kanA kSapazamanI prApti. (2) vizuddhi labdhikarmonA kSapazamathI AtmAnI je
vizuddhatA upaje te. (3) dezanA labdhi-saddaguru AdinA upadezane ga. (4)
prAyogikI labdhi-ke jethI karIne pAMca labdhiH kamenI sthiti ghaTIne
aMtarakaTAkoTimAtra rahI jAya. (5) karaNa darzanamoha labdhi-AtmasAmarthyavizeSa
ke jethI karIne karmonI sthitinuM ne rasanuM upazama khaMDana karavAnI zakti
upaje che. karaNa labdhi traNa prakAranI che-adha: karaNa, apUrvakaraNa,
anivRttikaraNa. A karaNanuM svarUpa pUrve kahevAI cUkyuM che. A karaNalabdhi
pachI aMtamuhUrtamAM darzana mehanA upazamathI avazya samyagadarzana upaje che,
arthAt darzananI mithyA avasthA samyak avasthArUpa thAya che. paNa jyAM sudhI
anaMtAnubaMdhI kaSAyano udaya hoya tyAM sudhI A samyagadarzanane lAbha thatuM
nathI. kAraNa ke tIvra krodha-mAna-mAyA-lobharUpa A duSTa anaMtAnubaMdhI
kaSAyacekaDI ja samyakRtvane ghAta karanAra che, avarodhanAra che te anaMta
saMsAranA mULa kAraNarUpa mithyAtvane-darzanamohane udayamAM ANe che, eTalA mATe
ene " anaMtAnubaMdhI" evI yathArtha saMjJA ApavAmAM AvI che. Ama anaMta
saMsArano anubaMdha karanAra A mahA raudra ne dAruNa pariNAmI anaMtAnubaMdhI
kaSAya TaLe ja darzanamoha TaLe che, eTalA mATe anaMtAnubaMdhInuM A vyavahArU
svarUpa samajI AtmAthIe tene TALavAne pratyeka prayatna kare joIe je saMsAra
arthe anubaMdha kare che, te karatAM paramArthane nAme, bhrAMtigata pariNAme
asaddaguru, deva, dhamane bhaje che te jIvane ghaNuM karI anaMtAnubaMdhI kodha,
mAna, mAyA, lAbha thAya che, kAraNa ke bIjI saMsAranI kriyAo ghaNuM karI anaMta
anubaMdha karavAvALI nathI. mAtra aparamArthane paramArtha jANI Agrahe jIva
bhajyA kare, te paramArtha jJAnI evA puruSa pratye, deva pratye, dharma pratye
nirAdara che ema kahevAmAM ghaNuM karI yathArtha che. te sadagara, deva, dharma
pratye asataguruvAdikanA AgrahathI, mAThA bedhathI, AsAtanAe. upekSAe pravate
evo saMbhava che. temaja te mAThA saMgathI tenI saMsAravAsanA pariracheda nahI
thatI * "khayuvasama visohI desaNA pAugga karaNaladdhie  /  cattArivi sAmaNNA
karaNaM puNa hodi smmtte||" zrI nemicaMdra siddhAMtacakravattakRta zrI
gammasAra,

Page #541 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Sthiradrishti:** The commencement of Samyaktvamas, the Dasanamaha Upshama.
(465) Even though they exist, they remain indifferent to the ultimate goal,
believing in fragmentation. This is the very form of infinite anger, pride,
deceit, and greed.” – Shrimad Rajchandra, Patranka 375, 523. (459, 613)
Furthermore, from the nature of these five attainments, it becomes clear that
the key (Master-key) to attaining Samyaktvamas lies in the middle path, the path
of Deshana Ladhi. Because only through the destruction of desires can the soul
attain purity, and only then can it become eligible to receive the teachings of
the true Guru. Subsequently, it attains Samyaktvamas in a sequential manner.
Therefore, the soul must first attain purity. And how is this achieved? Through
sincere effort and the attainment of virtues like Prashamadi.  When the passions
are pacified, there is no desire other than liberation. When there is regret for
the world and compassion in the end, then this soul attains purity, and it is
truly called a “Jignasu” (seeker). The true Guru who binds with such a pure and
eligible Jignasu soul, that soul attains Samkiti (spiritual awakening) and
progresses in the search within. Then, through the practice of Samyak Praiti
(correct understanding) of the Guru's teachings, it attains Samkiti, and as a
result, it experiences the ultimate goal, the pure self-realization, which is
Paramartha Samkiti. Thus, it gradually progresses through the stages of
Samyaktvamas, which are interconnected and progressively increasing.  The
pacification of passions, only one desire; Regret for the world, compassion
within, that is called a Jignasu. That Jignasu soul, binds with the true Guru.
It attains Samkiti, progresses in the search within. Abandoning the attachment
to views and opinions, it focuses on the true Guru. It attains pure Samkiti,
where there is no division or faction. It experiences its own nature, realizing
the ultimate goal. Its tendencies flow in its own essence, attaining Paramartha
Samkiti. As Samkiti increases, it avoids false appearances; The virtue of
Charitra (conduct) arises, and the state of Vitaraga (freedom from attachment)
resides.”  Shri Atmasiddhi  In Atmasiddhi, three types of Samkiti are taught:
(1) The first Samkiti is said to be the understanding of the words of the true
person, the eagerness for the teachings, and the devotion to the true person
with complete surrender. (2) The second type of Samkiti is the clear experience
of the ultimate goal. (3) The third type of Samkiti is the experience of the
ultimate goal without any doubt. The first Samkiti is the cause of the second
Samkiti. The second Samkiti is the cause of the third Samkiti. All three
Samkitis are accepted by the Vitaraga (liberated) person. All three Samkitis are
to be cultivated, respected, and devoted to.” – Shrimad Rajchandra, Patranka 689
(751)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 sthirAdaSTi : samyakatvamAsino upakrama, dazanAmaha upazama (465) hatAM chatAM
te pariccheda mAnI paramArtha pratye upekSaka rahe che. e ja anaMta krodha,
mAna, mAyA, lobhane AkAra che."-zrImad rAjacaMdra, patrAMka 375, 523. (459, 613)
vaLI A ukta pAMca labdhinA svarUpa parathI e spaSTa samajAya che ke AmAM
madhyavatinI dezanA ladhi samyakatva prAptinI rahasya cAvI (Master-key) che.
kAraNa ke kamanA kSapazamathI jIvanI vizuddhatA thAya ane tene sadgurunA
upadezanI prAptina joga bane, to pachI tene anukrame samyaphatvanI prApti thAya.
eTale prathama te jIvanI vizuddhatA thavI joIe. ane te kema thAya? satya
puruSArthathI prazamAdi guNanI prAptithI. jyAre kaSAyanuM upazAMtapaNuM thAya,
mAtra mokSa sivAya bIjI abhilASA hoya nahi. saMsAra pratye kheda hoya ane
aMtamAM dayA va, tyAre A jIva vizuddhine pAme, ane te ja kharekhara mikSamAgane
"jijJAsu" kahevAya. AvA vizuddhi prApta supAtra jijJAsu jIvane je saddaguruno
baMdha thAya te te samakita pAme ane aMtaranI zodhamAM vatte; eTale pachI
sadeva-guru-dharmanI samyapha pratItirUpa vyavahAra samakita, ane tenA phalarUpe
zuddha AtmAnubhavarUpa paramArtha samakita-ema sAnubaMdhapaNe uttarottara
vadhatI jatI samyakatvanI kakSAone te spazate jAya. kaSAyanI upazAMtatA, mAtra
ekSa abhilASa; bhave kheda aMtara dayA, te kahiye jijJAsa. te jijJAsu jIvane,
thAya sadguru bedha te pAme samakitane, vatte aMtar zodha. mata darzana Agraha
tyajI, vatte sadguru lakSa lahe zuddha samakti che, jemAM bheda na pakSa. va
nija svabhAvane, anubhava lakSa pratIta; vRtti vahe nija bhAvamAM, paramArthe
samakita. vardhamAna samakita thaI, TALe mithyA bhAsa; udaya thAya cAritrano,
vItarAga paddha vAsa." zrI Atmasiddhi AtmasiddhimAM traNa prakAranAM samakita
upadezyAM che -(1) Apta puruSanAM vacananI pratItirUpa, AjJAnI apUrva rucirUpa,
svachaMdanidhapaNe Apta puruSanI bhaktirUpa e prathama samakita kahyuM che. (2)
paramArthanI spaSTa anubhavAze pratIti te samakitane bIjo prakAra kahyo che. (3)
nivikalpa paramArtha anubhava te samakitane trIjo prakAra kahyo che. paheluM
samakita bIjA samaktinuM kAraNa che. bIjuM samakita trIjA samakitanuM kAraNa
che. traNe samakti vItarAga puruSe mAnya karyA che. traNe samakita upAsavA gya
che, satkAra karavA gya che, bhakti karavA gya che." zrImad rAjacaMdra, patrAMka
689 (751)

Page #542 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(46) From all this, it is evident that by abandoning self-destruction and taking
refuge at the feet of the Shri Sadguru, the soul of the seeker is freed from the
infinite bondage of the evil karmas (kṣayās) and the poison of attachment (dāna-
meha) is pacified. Just as the rays of the sun destroy darkness and the
directions become radiant and pure, so too, purity arises in all the regions of
the soul, leading to mental joy and clarity, which destroys the three types of
bondage. Or, just as someone who has drunk wine or datura becomes unconscious,
but after a while, the intoxication subsides and they become conscious and
healthy, so too, the soul becomes unconscious due to the rise of the attachment
to perception (darśana-meha), there is confusion, the mind is unsteady, there is
unconsciousness and delusion. But when this attachment to perception is pacified
and the unconsciousness is destroyed, the soul becomes healthy. “When the
attachment to perception is transcended and knowledge arises, The knowledge of
the pure consciousness, distinct from the body… (previous occasion)”—Shrimad
Rajchandraji. What is the characteristic of right perception (samyag-darśana)?
Faith (śraddhā) and other qualities are the external characteristics of right
perception. These faith and other qualities are not the essence of right
perception, but are synonyms of knowledge. Moreover, self-realization (ātma-
anubhūti) is also knowledge, because it is a synonym of knowledge. Therefore,
faith and other qualities are not the characteristics of right perception. In
other words, knowledge is not right perception, and what is said to be the
external characteristic can be called the external characteristic. Because, just
as health is difficult to perceive, but can be known through the gross
characteristic of enthusiasm in mind, speech, and body, so too, right perception
is difficult to perceive, but can be known through the external characteristics
of selfless faith, self-realization, etc. Since it is not possible to describe a
non-conceptual (nirvikalpa) object, it is described through knowledge, because
knowledge is the only quality that is conceptual and concrete, like a lamp,
which is the object of itself and others, reveals itself and others, and
determines and makes certain itself and others. All other qualities are non-
conceptual and do not reveal themselves or others. Therefore, right perception
is also a subtle quality that is non-conceptual, formless, and beyond the reach
of words. Therefore, it cannot be described or heard through any means.
Therefore, in the practice of the soul, knowledge is the only thing that is
evident, and it is self-evident. x “There, the mention is like the destruction
of darkness by the rays of the sun. The directions become radiant, all become
pure. The mention of right perception is the same as the pacification of ego-
attachment. Purity in all regions, which destroys the three types of bondage.”
(For reference, see) Shri Amritchandracharya (3) composed Shri Panchaadhyayee. *
“Faith and other qualities are the external characteristics of right perception.
Therefore, they are synonyms of knowledge.”–Shri Panchaadhyayee.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (46) gadadisapura A sarva parathI phalita thAya che ke svacchedano tyAga karI
zrI saddagurunA caraNanuM samukhAsana karatAM AtmAthI mumukSu jIvane
anaMtAnubaMdhI duSTa kaSAya-cekaDI naSTa thaye danamehane upazama thAya che ane
tyAre-jema sUryakiraNothI aMdhakArane nAza thaye dizAo prasannatA pAme che ane
cotarapha nirmala thaI jAya che, tema sarva AtmapradezamAM zuddhapaNuM hoya che,
cittaprasannatA-nirmalatA upaje che, ke jethI traNa prakArane baMdha thara thAya
che. athavA jema keIe madirA ke dhatUre pIdhe hoya tene mUcha Ave che, paNa
thoDA vakhata pachI tene nazo utarI jatAM te mUccharahita nIrogI thaI jAya che,
tema darzana mehanA udayathI jIvane mUcha upaje che, vaicitya heya che-cittanuM
ThekANuM hatuM nathI, bebhAnapaNuM hoya che, tathA bhrama hoya che, paNa te
darzanamoha zAMta thaye mUchane nAza thatAM jIva nIrogI bane che. "darzana meha
vyatIta thaI upa bodha je, deha bhinna kevaLa caitanyanuM jJAna je....(apUrva
avasara.)"--zrImad rAjacaMdrajI. te samyagdarzananuM lakSaNa zuM? zraddhAnAdi*
guNa samyagadaSTinuM bAhya lakSaNa che. te zraddhAnAdi ja samyaktvarUpa nathI,
paNa jJAnanA paryAya che. vaLI AtmAnubhUti AtmAnubhava paNa jJAna che, kAraNa ke
te jJAnano paryAya che. mATe te zraddhAna nAnAdi paNa samyakatvanuM lakSaNa
nathI. arthAta jJAna che te samyakatva nathI ane bAhya lakSaNa je che ema kahe
che te bAhya lakSaNa kahI zakAya. kAraNa ke jema nIrogatA durlakSya che, paNa
mana-vacana-kAyAnA utsAhAdika guNarUpa sthUla lakSaNethI jANI zakAya che, tema
samyaggadarzana durlakSya che, paNa tasvArthI zraddhAna, AtmAnubhUti Adi bAhya
lakSaNathI lakSita thAya che, jANI zakAya che. nirvikalpa vastu kahI zakAya ema
nahiM hovAthI tene ullekha jJAna dvArA karAya che, kAraNa ke jJAna ja eka e guNa
che ke je savikalpa-sAkAra hoI dIpakanI jema sva-parano grAhaka che, svaparane
Avedaka che, sva-parane nizcAyaka-nizcaya karAvanAra che. bIjA badhA guNa
nirvikalpa hAI sva-para avedaka che. eTale samyakatva paNa nirvikalpa-nirAkAra
heI vastutaH vacanane agocara e sUkSama guNa che. tethI vidhi-kame kaIthI kahI
ke sAMbhaLI zakAya tema nathI, mATe AtmAnI sAdhanAdi vidhimAM jJAna ja eka
prasiddha che, ane te svAnu x "tatrollekhastamonAze tamo'reriva rshmibhiH| dizaH
prasattimAseduH sarvato vimlaashyaa:|| haGmohopazame samyagdRSTerullekha eva saH
/  zuddhatvaM sarvadezeSu tridhA bandhApahAri yat  // " (AdhAra mATe juo) zrI
amRtacaMdrAcAryajI (3) kRta zrI paMcAdhyAyI. * "zraddhAnAdi guNA bAhya lakSma
samyaghagAtmanaH  /  tati laiMti jJAnAtha paMcA: "-zrI paMcAdhyAyI,

Page #543 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Stable Existence: The Scope of Self-Realization, Faith, and Conduct** (467)
Self-realization is the ultimate goal, the ultimate refuge. Knowledge is the
means to achieve other virtues.  "The formless, the one who collects, the one
who differentiates, is the embodied one; The knowledge of the two, the
consciousness, the action of grasping the object..." - Vasupujya  The self-
realization, the experience of the self, is the knowledge of the self. This
self-realization has an inseparable relationship with right faith, an
inseparable relationship that cannot exist without the other. In other words, if
there is right faith, there is self-realization; if there is self-realization,
there is right faith; if there is no right faith, there is no self-realization;
if there is no self-realization, there is no right faith.  Therefore, due to the
mutual pervasiveness of both, it can be said that right faith is self-
realization, that self-realization which is pure and self-existent. In other
words, it should be understood that where the experience of the pure self
exists, there is right faith. Thus, pure self-realization is the inseparable
primary characteristic of right faith.  Furthermore, let us examine how virtues
like right faith, etc., are characteristics of right vision: "The faith in the
true meaning is indicative" - The Tattvartha Sutra states that faith in the true
meaning is a characteristic of right vision. This faith in the true meaning, the
object of faith, is of four types: (1) Faith - the inclination towards the true
meaning. (2) Faith - the affinity, the feeling of oneness, the feeling of self.
(3) Perception and acceptance of the true meaning, love. (4) Conduct - action in
accordance with it. This is a progressive sequence. The first three are in the
form of knowledge, they are synonymous with knowledge; and conduct is the action
of the mind, speech, and body in virtuous deeds. Whether these four are
collectively or individually present, they may or may not be characteristics of
right vision, they may be present with right faith or with wrong faith, or this
faith may or may not be present with right vision. Therefore, this faith, etc.,
is not itself a characteristic of right vision, but if it is accompanied by
self-realization, then it is a virtue, a characteristic of right vision; without
self-realization, it is a semblance of virtue, i.e., it is not a virtue. Thus,
if all of these, including faith, etc., are accompanied by self-realization,
then it is right faith, but if it is accompanied by a semblance of faith, etc.,
like wrong faith, etc., then it is not right faith. In other words, if there is
faith, etc., but not pure self-realization, then there is no right faith; if
there is faith, etc., and pure self-realization, then there is right faith.
There are two types of this faith, etc. - right and wrong. (1) If it is
accompanied by self-realization, then it is right faith, etc., and it is the
only true faith worthy of being called faith. (2) If it is accompanied by self-
realization...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 sthiraSTi : AtmAnubhUti zraddhA ane sabhyanI vyApti (467) bhUtinA eka hetu hoI
te ja parama pada che-parama AzrayasthAna che. jJAna ja anya guNAnA lakSya
karAvanAra che. nirAqAra aleka saMgrAhaka, bheda grAhaka sAkAre re; dana jJAna
dubheda cetanA, vastugrahaNa vyApAre re....vAsupUjya "--zrI AnadaghanajI ane je
AtmAnubhUti-AtmAnubhava che te AtmAnA jJAnivazeSa che. A mAtmAnu bhUtinA
samyaktvanI sAthe anvaya-vyatirethI avinAbhAvI saMbadha che, eka khIjA vinA na
cAle evA saMbadha che. arthAt samyaktva hoya te| AtmAnubhUti AtmAnubhUti hoya,
AtmAnubhUti hAya  /  samyaktva hoya; samyaktva na heAya te ane samyaka
AtmAnubhUti na hoya, AtmAnubhUti na DhAya te samyaktva na hoya. tvanI vyAsi Ama
bannenI paraspara vyAptinA sadbhAvathI kahI zakAya che ke samyaktva te
svAnubhUti che,te svAnubhUti je zuddha nayAtmaka kema te. arthAta zuddha AtmAnA
anubhava jyAM varte che tyAM samma che ema samajavuM. Ama zuddha AtmAnubhUti e
samyaktvanuM avisaMvAdI mukhya lakSaNa che. 66 vaLI samyakzraddhAna Adi guNa
paNu samyagdarzananA lakSaNa kevI rIte che te tapAsIe:--' sattvArthazraddhAnuM
sUcavIna'-tattvArthaM zraddhAna te samyagdarzona che evuM lakSaNu zrI tattvArtha
sUtramAM kahyuM che. A yathAsnAya tattvArthaM gocara zraddhAtanA AtmAnubhUti
cAra prakAra che--(1) zraddA-tattvA abhimukhI mruddhi te. (2) sahita zraddhA
ruci-sAtmya, AtmabhAva, (3) pratIti tathA ' tadghatti ' prema samyaktvalakSaNa
svIkAra te, (4) caraNu-tene anukUla AcaraNa-kriyA. Ama uttarezattara anukrama
che. AmAM prathama traNa te jJAnasvarUpa che, jJAnatA ja paryAya che; ane
AcaraNu mana-vacana-kAyAne zubha karmamAM vyApAra che. A cAre samasta ke vyasta-
chUTA chUTA samyagda nanA lakSaNu hAya ke na paNa hAya, te samyaktva sAthe paNa
hAya ne mithyAtva sAthe paNa hAya, athavA A zraddhA isAthe samyagdarzana heAya
ke na paNa heAya, eTale A zraddhAdi pote kAMI samyagdarzananA lakSaNa nathI,
paNa jo te svAnubhUti sahita hoya tA ja guNu che-samyagdarzananA lakSaNa che,
svAnubhUti vinA guNAbhAsa che arthAt guNA ja nathI. Ama zraddhAdi sarve
svAnubhUti sahita hoya te| samyaktva che, paNa zraddhAbhAsa Adi mithyA
zraddhAdinI jema samyaktva nathI. tAtpa ke zraddhA Adi hAya paNa zuddha
AtmAnubhUti na hoya, teA samyaktva nathI; zraddhA Adi hAya ane zuddha AtmAnu
bhUti hoya teA samyaktva che. A zraddhAdinA be prakAra che--samyak ane mithyA. (
1 )mAtmAnubhUti sahita hAya te samyak zraddhAdi che, ane te ja vAstavika zraddhA
kahevA yAgya che. (2) AtmAnu

Page #544 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(468) The collection of yogic views that are devoid of reality is called mithya
shraddha, etc. In other words, it is not shraddha, etc. The reason for
differentiating between shraddha, atma, etc. is that the scope of shraddha and
self-experience is the same. Because shraddha in an unperceived meaning, i.e.,
shraddha in a meaning that has not been experienced, is like a mirage, like the
horns of a donkey. In other words, it is not possible to have firm shraddha in
an object that has not been experienced. Moreover, shraddha that is based solely
on scriptures, without self-experience, is also not shraddha in the true sense,
even though it follows the truth. Because there is no perception, there is no
self-experience. The implication is that where there is true, firm shraddha,
there is self-experience, and where there is self-experience, there is true,
firm shraddha. Thus, there is a scope of both, an inseparable relationship. That
is why the term "shraddha" has become a conventional term for the characteristic
of samyaktv. Even in that, only shraddha that includes self-experience is true
shraddha. This is the meaning to understand. And this is the secret of the great
saying, "Taryashraddhanam vachanam - shraddha in the truth is samyagdarshan."
Because self-experience is the essence of shraddha. Shraddha without self-
experience is not true shraddha.  Thus, without pure self-experience, there is
no samyagdarshan, and without self-experience, there is no true shraddha.
Therefore, (1) self-experience is the main characteristic of samyagdarshan, or
(2) samyak shraddha arising from self-experience is the characteristic of
samyagdarshan. This is evident. Here, self-experience means pure self-experience
arising from pure knowledge, free from delusion. That is why Shri Samyasarji has
clearly stated, "The knowledge and experience of the living being, non-living
being, merit, demerit, inflow, restraint, cessation, bondage, and liberation, as
they are, is samyaktv."  "The living being, non-living being, merit, demerit,
inflow, and bondage; restraint, cessation, liberation, and truth are called the
nine substances. The living being and non-living being do not include those
substances; they are special considerations of things, different explanations
given by the great sages." - Shrimad Rajchandraji. "Because the world binds with
bondage, because it causes liberation, inflow and restraint are the names,
respectively, that are heard at the feet of the Lord... Padma Prabhu." - Shri
Anandghanji. In this, (1) the living being is the object to be attained, to be
grasped, (2-3-4) the inflow... * "Vavodmulyo mulyo siva tu yuddha no!
Mutvamasiva svahu saddi hava jivo - Shri Samyasar, + "Mulyamika nivaliwa
puchapavu jo Vikshetali vandho jovo satta |" - Shri Samyasar,

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (468) yogadaSTisamuccaya bhUti rahita hoya te mithyA zraddhAdi che, arthAta te
zraddhAdi nathI- zraddhA-AtmA- Ama bheda pADavAnuM kAraNa e che ke zraddhA ane
svAnubhavanI sama nubhUti vyApti vyApti che, kAraNa ke anupalabdha arthamAM
eTale ke jene anubhava nathI thaye evA anubhUta arthamAM zraddhA hovI te
kharaviSANa jevI-gadheDAnA ziMgaDA jevI che, arthAta nahiM anubhavelA
padArthamAM nizcayathI zraddhA saMbhavatI nathI. vaLI AtmAnubhUti vinA je
zraddhA kRtamAtrathI-zAstramAtrathI che, te paNa tattvArthane anusaratI chatAM
arthathI zraddhA nathI, kAraNa ke anupalabdhi che-AtmAnubhava nathI tAtparya ke
tyAM kharekharI nizcayAmaka zraddhA che tyAM AtmAnabhava che ane jyAM
AtmAnubhava che tyAM ja kharekharI nizcayAtmaka zraddhA che. Ama bannenI vyApti
che-avinAbhAvI saMbaMdha che. eTalA mATe ja zraddhAne samyakatvanuM lakSaNa
kahevAnI yaugikI rUDhi paDI che. temAM paNa svAtmAnubhUti sahita hoya te ja
vAstavika zraddhA che, ema Azaya samaja. ane A ja "tAryazraddhAnaM vacanaM
-"tatvArthanuM zraddhAna e samyagradarzana che" e mahAsUvanuM rahasya che.
kAraNa ke AtmAnubhUti-AtmAnubhava e ja zraddhAnanuM aMtastatva che, AtmAnubhUti
vinAnI zraddhA e kharI zraddhA ja nathI. Ama zuddha AtmAnubhUti vinA
samyagadarzana hoya nahi, ane AtmAnubhUti vinA sAcI zraddhA hoya nahi, eTale (1)
AtmAnubhUti e ja samyagradarzananuM mukhya lakSaNa che, (2) athavA
AtmAnubhUtijanya samyaka zraddhA ja samyagadarzananuM lakSaNa che, ema phalita
thAya che. atre AtmAnubhUti eTale zuddhanayathI * -bhUtAIthI upajatI zuddha
AtmAnubhUti samajavI. eTalA mATe ja zrI samayasArajImAM spaSTa karyuM che-ke-
"bhUtArthathI+ jANelA anubhavelA jIva, ajIva, puNya, pApa, Azrava, saMvara,
nirjarA, baMdha ne mokSa e samyakatva che.' "jIva ajIva padArtho, puNya, pApa,
Asava tathA baMdha; saMvara nijerA, mokSa, tattva kahyAM, nava padArtha
saMbaMdha. jIva, ajIva viSe te na tatvane samAveza thAya; vastu vicAra vizeSa,
bhinna prabedhyA mahAna munirAya."- zrImad rAjacaMdrajI. "kAraNa jage he bAMdhe
baMdhane, kAraNa mugati mUkAya; Azrava-saMvara nAma anukrame, he pAdeya
suNAya....padmaprabhu, "-zrI AnaMdaghanajI. AmAM (1) jIva tatva upAdeya che-
grahaNa karavA gya che, (2-3-4) achava * "vavoDamUlyo mUlyo sivo Tu yuddhano !
mUtvamasivo svahu sAddI havA jIvo -zrI samayasAra, + "mUlyamikA nIvALIvA
puchApAvuM jo vikSetaLivaMdho jovo satta | >>-zrI samayasAra,

Page #545 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Knowledge of Differentiation through Steadfast Vision and Nine Tattvas**
(469) And the karmic actions of merit and demerit, which are parts of it, are to
be abandoned, they are worthy of renunciation. (P-6) The non-living being, which
is worthy of renunciation, is the cause of the inflow of passions, and it is the
cause of bondage, which is the grasping and acceptance of the nine tattvas,
through the knowledge of differentiation, therefore, both are worthy of
renunciation. (7-8-9) Restraint and knowledge of differentiation, which are the
means of purification, are the cause of the destruction and weakening of the
non-living being, which is worthy of renunciation, and the ultimate destruction
and weakening of the non-living being, which is worthy of renunciation, is
liberation for the soul, therefore, these three tattvas are to be adopted. This
adoption of knowledge of differentiation makes a person with right vision. (See
- Shri Amritchandracharya's Tattvarthasar). Thus, from the true meaning, from
the ultimate meaning, from the body and all other things, the inherent light
shines forth, which, "like the golden thread in a garland of many colors, does
not abandon its oneness, even though it is made up of nine tattvas!" To
experience the knowledge of differentiation of this pure soul, which is the
distinct light, to experience it, to manifest the knowledge of the self, is
right vision, rightness, or samyaktva. (See p. 40) "The glory of righteousness
does not rise, nor does it set, its measure is not known anywhere, nor does it
go into the cycle of deposits. What else can be said about this all-pervading
abode, when the experience is attained, duality does not appear." - Shri
Amritchandracharya's Shri Samayasar Kalash Nay Nikshepe Re Jeh Na Jaaniye, Navi
Jihan Prasare Praman Shudd Swaroope Te Brahma Dakhave, Keval Anubhav Bhan...Veer
Jineshwar Parmeshwar Jaye. Alak Agochar Anupam Arthane, Kenun Kahi Jaane Re
Bhed? Sahaja Vishuddha Re Anubhav Vayan Je, Shastra Te Sagalo Re Khed Veer. -
Shri Anandghanji There are also other external signs of right vision, which are
the manifestation of this experience of the soul; and they are five:
tranquility, enthusiasm, detachment, compassion, and faith. (See - p. 41-42).
These qualities of tranquility, etc., are also signs of right vision from an
external perspective; if they are present along with the experience of the soul,
tranquility, etc., or rightness, then they are qualities, otherwise they are
external signs, the appearance of qualities. In other words, tranquility, etc.,
are not signs of right vision if there is no experience of the soul. Its concise
form is as follows: (1) Tranquility is the mind's relaxation in the passions,
that is, the calming of the passions. Or, it is the absence of the desire to
punish those who have committed offenses, it is the calming of anger and the
practice of forgiveness. (2) Enthusiasm - (a) Extreme enthusiasm in the dharma
of the soul and in the fruits of dharma, (b) affection for the righteous, (c)
love for the supreme beings, is enthusiasm. For example - (a) The soul itself is
the only dharma, or the experience of the pure soul is the only dharma, and its
fruit

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 sthirAdaSTi navatatva vivekathI bhedajJAna (469) ane tenA aMgabhUta puNya-pApa
heya che-tyAga karavA yogya che. (pa-6) heya evA ajIva tatvane upAdAnahetu Asava
che, ane tene AdAnarUpa-grahaNarUpa baMdha navatatva vivekathI che, eTale e bane
ya heya-tyajavA yogya che. (7-8-9) saMvara ane bhedajJAna nirjarA e heya evA
ajIva tattvanA hAnanA-kSINapaNAnA hetu che, ane te heyanA prahANarUpa-AtyaMtika
kSINatArUpa jIvane mokSa che, eTale A traNeya tatva upAdeya che.A he pAdeya
viveka samyagadaSTi puruSa kare che (juo - zrI amRtacaMdrAcAryajIkRta
tatvArthasAra). Ama bhUtArthathI-paramArthathI dehAdi samasta para vastuthI
bhinna evI pratyaga jyoti prakAze che ke je "aneka varNamALAmAM suvarNa sUtranI
jema navatatvagata chatAM ekatva choDatI nathI !" A bhinna jyotirUpa zuddha
AtmAnuM bhedajJAna upajavuM, anubhUti thavI, AtmakhyAti pragaTavI te
samyagadarzana che, samyaktva athavA samati che. (juo pR. 40) "udayati na
nayazrIrastameti pramANaM, kvacidapi ca na vidmo yAti nikSepacakra  /
kimaparamabhidhmo dhAmni sarvakaSe'sminnanubhavamupayAte bhAti na dvaitameva  //
" -zrI amRtacaMdrAcAryajIta zrI samayasArakalaza naya nikSepe re jeha na jANiye,
navi jihAM prasare pramANa zuddha svarUpe te brahma dAkhave, kevaLa anubhava
bhANa...vIra jinezvara paramezvara jaye. alakha agocara anupama arthane, keNuM
kahI jANe re bheda? sahaja vizuddha re anubhava vayaNa je, zAstra te saghaLo re
kheda vIra."--zrI AnaMdaghanajI AvA AtmAnubhavarUpa samyagdarzananA bIjA bAhya
liMga-pragaTa cihno paNa che; ane te prazama, saMvega, nirveda, anukaMpA ne
Astikya e pAMca che (juo-pR. 41-42). A prazamAdi guNa paNa bahir daSTithI
samyagadarzananA lakSaNa che; AtmAprazamAdi nubhUti athavA samyaktva sAthe je te
hoya to te guNa che, nahiM te bAhya lakSaNa guNabhAsa che. arthAt AtmAnubhUti na
hoya te prazamAdi samyaga | darzananA lakSaNa nathI. tenuM saMkSepa svarUpa A
prakAre : (1) prazamaviSaya kaSAyamAM zithila mana te, arthAt viSayakaSAyanuM
upazAMtapaNuM te prazama che. athavA kRtAparAdhI jIvo pratye tene bAdhA
upajAvavAnI buddhi na thavI, krodhanuM upazamana karI kSamA dharavI te prazama
che. (2) saMvega-(ka) AtmadharmamAM ane dhamaphalamAM parama utsAha, (1)
sAdhamikamAM anurAga, (4) parameSThIo pratye prIti, te saMvega che. jemake-()
samyaktvamAtra AtmA e ja dharma che, athavA zuddha AtmAno anubhava te ja dharma
che, ane tenuM phaLa

Page #546 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(40) There is a single path (Akshapada) which is characterized by Gadarisrushna
(intense desire), Atiinndriya (beyond the senses), Akshaya (imperishable), and
Kshayika (perishable).  One who has such intense desire for Atmadharma (true
nature of the soul) and Moksha (liberation) which is the fruit of Atmadharma, is
said to have Sanveg (intense desire). (2) Sanveg is also having intense love for
those who practice and worship Atmadharma. However, having affection for those
who are merely nominal practitioners without true qualities is not Sanveg but
Moha (attachment). Because here, Anurga (affection) does not mean desire, but
love for qualities, or it means detachment from Adharma (unrighteousness) or
Adharmakala (unrighteous time). (2) Or, having intense love and devotion for the
Supreme Being (Parameshti Bhagwan) who has attained Atmadharma and its fruits,
or who has achieved the highest state of its practice, is Sanveg. In other
words, Sanveg is to worship and adore Arihant, Siddha, Acharya, Upadhyaya, and
Sadhu with intense desire and joy. Thus, Sanveg is the absence of any desire
other than the practice of Atmadharma and Moksha, which is the fruit of
Atmadharma. Only this single desire is Sanveg in the form of Vidhi
(prescriptive), and the abandonment of all desires is Sanveg in the form of
Nishedha (prohibitive) or Niveda (renunciation). This is the division made by
the great sage Shri Panchadhyayikaar. This Sanveg is the same as Dharma, because
anything that is motivated by desire or wish other than Moksha is not Dharma.
And mere action is not Dharma, even Mithyadristi (false perception) performs
actions, but its actions are always contrary to the righteous feelings of raga
(attachment) etc., and are therefore unrighteous. Because Mithyadristi is always
attached, Samyakdristi (right perception) is always detached, and always has
Sanveg. (See page 277). "Sanveg: Paramosaho dhau dharmafale chitaha |
Sadharmeshu anurago va pritirva paramesthishu || Dharma samyaktramatma
shuddhasyanubhavo'thava | Tar# Suramachchakshamaarchcha kshaavi 2 cha7 ." – Shri
Panchadhyayi. (3) Nirveda (renunciation) means abandoning all desires and wishes
related to the world, detachment, being tired and bored of the world, feeling
regret for the world. (4) Anukampa (compassion) means having a feeling of grace
and kindness towards all beings, or friendship, or motherly love, or the absence
of hatred. Compassion is the equality that exists towards all beings, and in
terms of meaning, it is self-compassion - like the removal of a thorn. This
self-compassion is the main one. * "Saala: Sarvamia cha niro hakaraatha | Sa
sanvego'thava dharmaha saabhilaasho na dharmavan ||" (For reference, see) -
Panchadhyayi.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (40) gadarisaruSNaya atIndriya akSaya ne kSAyika evuM ekSapada che. AvA A
Atmadharma ane AtmadharmanA phalarUpa mokSa pratye saMvega (saM + vega)-atyaMta
vega dhare, adamya parama utsAha dharAvavo, parama ucharaMga dharAve te saMvega
che. (2) AvA Atmadharmane sAdhanArA-ArAdhanArA je sAdhamike che, tenA pratye
kevaLa guNanA anurAgathI parama prema dharAvavo te saMvega che. paNa tevA guNa
na hoya evA nAmamAtra sAdhamika pratye anurAga have te saMvega nathI, paNa moha
che. kAraNa ke atre anurAga eTale abhilASa e artha nathI, paNa guNaprema artha
che, athavA adharmathI ke adharmakalathI nivRtti thavI te anurAga che. (2)
athavA AvA Atmadharmane ne tene phaLalAbhane jeNe siddha karyo che, athavA tenI
sAdhanAnI ucca dazA jeNe sAdhI che, evA parA parameSThI bhagavaMte pratye parama
prIti hovI, parama bhakti hovI te saMvega che. arthAt saMvegathI-atyaMta
vegathI, parama ulAsathI arihaMta, siddha, AcArya, upAdhyAya ne sAdhunI
ArAdhanA-upAsanA karavI te saMvega che.-Ama Atmadharma ne AtmadharmanA kalarUpa
mokSapadanI sAdhanA sivAya bIjI kaI jyAM abhilASA nathI, te saMvega che. mAtra
ekSa abhilASa" te vidhirUpa saMvega che, ane sarva abhilASane tyAga te
niSedharUpa saMvega athavA niveda* che, ema parama tattvadaSTA zrI
paMcAdhyAyIkAra vibhAga pADe che. A saMga te ja dharma che, kAraNa ke mekSa
sivAya bIjA abhilASayuktaIcchAyukta hoya te dharmavAnuM nathI. ane kriyA mAtra
che te dharma nathI, mithyAdaSTi paNa kiyA kare che, paNa tenI kriyA nitya
rAgAdinA sadUbhAvathI ulaTI adharmarUpa ja che, kAraNa ke mithyAdaSTi sadA rAgI
ja hoya che, samyagadaSTi sadA vairAgI ja hoya che, sadA saMvegI ja hoya che.
(juo pR. 277). "saMvega : paramosAho dhau dharmaphale citaH  /
sadharmeSvanurAgo vA prItirvA parameSThiSu  //  dharmaH samyaktramAtrAtmA
zuddhasyAnubhavo'thavA  /  tara# suramacakSamArca kSAvi 2 ca7 ." - zrI
paMcAdhyAyI. (3) nirveda-eTale saMsAra saMbaMdhI sarva abhilASane-IcchAne tyAga,
vairAgya, saMsArathI thAkI javuM-kaMTALavuM te, saMsArathI kheda pAmavo te. (4)
anukaMpA-eTale sarva prANa pratye anugraha buddhi-upakAra buddhi, athavA
maiitrIbhAva, athavA mAdhyaracya, athavA vairatyAgathI niHzalyapaNuM. sarva
prANI pratye je samatA che te para anukaMpA che, ane arthathI te svAnukaMpA che
-zalyavarjanathI zalyanI jema. A svAnukaMpA ja pradhAna che. * "sALa: sarvAmiA
ca niro hakArAthA | sa saMvego'thavA dharmaH sAbhilASo na dharmavAn  // "
(ItyAdi AdhAra mATe juo)-paMcAdhyAyI,

Page #547 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Stable Vision, Tranquility, etc. are the Characteristics of Right Faith**
(47)  Knowing that attachment, etc., impure thoughts are bound by good conduct,
but not by bad conduct, and that abandoning attachment, etc., and binding the
soul is compassion – the mercy of the father's soul. (5)  Aitiky – the inherent
nature of the principle, in its existence, in Dharma, in the purpose of Dharma,
and in the fruit of Dharma – the soul, etc., is the Dharma that is determined as
it is. This Aitiky, which is accompanied by self-realization, is Right Faith,
otherwise it is false Aitiky.  “The soul is eternal, it is the doer, its own
karma, It is the enjoyer, it is mixed, the mixture is the remedy.” – Shri
Atmasiddhi  The calming of the mind, the weakening of the passions that have
arisen, the state of the soul that can be withdrawn, or the calming of the
tendencies of the beginningless time is called **Shram**.  The desire for
nothing other than liberation, no aspiration, is called **Sanveg**.  Since it is
understood that one has been wandering in delusion, now it is enough! Oh soul!
Now be patient, that is **Nirved**.  Immersion in the words of the selfless men
whose ultimate goal is great fortune is called **Shraddha-Astha**.  Through all
these, the soul develops a self-like intellect, that is **Anukampa**.  These
characteristics are worthy of contemplation, worthy of remembrance, worthy of
desire, worthy of experience.”  - Shrimad Rajchandra Patrak 122. (135)  These
qualities of tranquility, etc., are the external characteristics of Right Vision
if they are accompanied by self-realization, otherwise they are not the
characteristics of Right Vision.  Thus, pure self-realization is always
paramount, pure self-realization, tranquility, etc., are the main things in the
world.  However, these qualities of tranquility, etc., are the cause of the
necessary attainment of Right Vision, because as the qualities of tranquility,
etc., increase in the soul, so does its ability to attain Right Vision.  When
the passions of the objects are calmed, there is no other desire except
liberation, there is intense detachment from the world, and there is compassion
for all beings and for the father's soul, then such a purified soul becomes
eligible for the teachings of the true Guru, and those teachings become the
cause of contemplation, and thus the six states of existence from the existence
of the soul to the state of liberation are understood – Aitiky arises, and self-
realization – self-knowledge manifests, Right Vision is attained, and thus the
passions are destroyed and the state of liberation is attained.  This complete
and perfect order of attaining the path has been clearly explained by the great
master of the principles, Shrimad Rajchandraji, in Shri Atmasiddhi, in this
extremely beautiful and meaningful saying.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 sthirAdaSTi prazamAdi samyapha lakSaNa (47) rAgAdi azuddha bhAnA sadUbhAve
baMdha thAya che, tenA asadubhAve baMdha nathI thato, ema jANe rAgAdi tyajI AtmA
ne baMdhAya ema karavuM te svAnukaMpA-pitAnA AtmAnI dayA che. (5) Atikya-
svata:siddha evA tatvanA sarbhAvamAM-hovApaNAmAM, dharmamAM, dharmanA hetumAM
ane dharmanA phaLamAM,-AtmA Adine je dharma che te yathAvat vinizcaya kare te
Astikya che. A Astikaya je AtmAnubhUti sahita hoya te ja samyaphavA che, nahiM
te mithyA Astikya che. "AtmA che te nitya che, che kattA nija karma che bhoktA
vaLI mikSa che, mikSa upAya sudhama."--zrI Atmasiddhi kaidhAdika kAnuM samAI
javuM, udaya AvelA kaSAmAM maMdatA thavI, vALI levAya evI AtmadazA thavI, athavA
anAdi kALanI vRttio samAI javI te zama. mukta thavA sivAya bIjI kaI paNa
prakAranI IcchA nahIM, abhilASA nahi te saMvega. jyArathI ema samajAyuM ke
bhrAMtimAM ja paribhramaNa karyuM tyArathI have ghaNu thaI ! are jIva! have
thebha, e nirveda. mahAgya jenuM parama che evA niHspRhI puruSonAM vacanamAM ja
tallInatA te zraddhA-AsthA. e saghaLAM vaDe jIvamAM svAtmatulya buddhi te
anukaMpA. A lakSaNo avazya manana karavAM megya che, smaravA yogya che, IcchavA
egya che, anubhavavAM yogya che." -zrImad rAjacaMdra patraka 122. (135) AvA A
prazamAdi guNa paNa je AtmAnubhUti-AtmAnubhava sahita hoya to samyagadarzananA
bAhya lakSaNa che, AtmAnubhUti sahita na hoya te samyagdarzananA lakSaNa nathI.
Ama sarvatra zuddha AtmAnubhUtinuM ja prAdhAnya che, zuddha AtmAnuprazAmAdi guNa
bhavanuMja mukhyapaNuM che. tathApi A prazamAdi guNa samyagadarzananI Avazyaka
prAptimAM kAraNarUpa che, kAraNa ke jIvamAM jema jema prAmAdi guNanI vRddhi
thAya che, tema tema tenAmAM samyagadarzana pAmavAnI yogyatApAtratA vadhatI jAya
che. jyAre viSayakaSAyanuM upazAMtapaNuM thAya, mAtra mekSa sivAya bIjo abhilASa
na hoya, saMsAra pratye tIvra vairAgya varta, tathA sarva prANIo pratye ne
pitAnA AtmA pratye anukaMpA bhAva hoya, tyAre tevI vizuddha dazA pAmele jIva
sadgurunA upadezane pAtra bane che, ane te upadeza bedhathI savicAraNanI kuraNa
thAya che, eTale AtmAnA astitvathI mAMDIne mokSapada sudhInA cha astipada
samajAya che-Astikya upaje che, ane AtmAnubhUti-AtmajJAna pragaTI samyagadarzana
sAMpaDe che, ane tethI meha kSaya thaI nirvANapada pAme che. mArga prAptine A
sakala avikala krama mahAsamartha tattvavettA zrImad rAjacaMdrajIe zrI
AtmasiddhimAM A atyaMta mananIya subhASitamAM spaSTa prakAzya che -

Page #548 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(472) Yoga-drishti samuchaya is the calmness of kshaya, only moksha abhilasha;
in bhava, kheda, pranidaya, there, atmaarth nivaas. Dasha is not like that,
until then, jeev will not get jag; mokshamarg will not be attained, antar reg
will not be removed. Where such dasha comes, sadguru bodh suhay; there, all
suvicharana, there, sukhday will be revealed. Where suvicharana is revealed,
there, nijgyaan is revealed, In that jnaan, moha is destroyed, pad nirvana is
attained.” - Shri Atmasiddhiji. Thus, prashma-tyaga-vairagya-adi atmajnaan is
successful, and it is also the best purpose of attaining atmajnaan. Because,
tyaga-vairagya is not in the chitta-antarang of one, asthi-maja-paryat is not
spread throughout the body, atmajnaan will not happen to him; and in tyaga-
viragya, the jeev who gets stuck - does not move forward towards the desired
goal of atmajnaan, he forgets the awareness of his father, that is, the original
purpose of attaining atmajnaan, or tyaga-vairagya-adi, which is very essential,
he misses that original purpose. Vairagya-adi is successful, which is along with
atmajnaan, as well as the diagnosis of attaining atmajnaan. Tyaga-viraga is not
in the chitta, jnaan does not happen to him Tyaga-viraga gets stuck, he forgets
his own awareness.” - Shri Atmasiddhi. Where this supreme benevolent pramada-adi
guna is revealed, where samyak shraddha of paramarth-tatvarth is elevated, and
where revealed atmajnaan - shuddha atmaanubhav happens, such supreme blessed,
supreme venerable, supreme rare kalyaanmurti samyagdarshan is attained by the
yogi who is situated in this fifth stable drishti, from the separation of
tamogranthi. And thus, the one whose darshan-meh is destroyed, and who has
attained the light of clear atmajnaan, such mahabuddhiman viveki samyagdristi
dristi yogi, experiences the terrible, painful, unstable form of this sansaar,
it is directly experienced, that is why, this supreme blessed samyagdristi
purush, all sansaar cheshta appears like a child's play, there is no wonder in
it. Because - the one who attains darshan of himself, his mind does not go to
another bhaam, there is a little chance of becoming Krishna, he does not like
the company of sansaar. Laughing, playing, Hari is revealed, my life is
successful, I write it to you; muktanand's naath vihaari, oodha jeevandevi
amari.” - Shri Muktanandji.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (472) yogadaSTisamuccaya kaSAyanI upazAMtatA, mAtra mokSa abhilASa; bhave kheda
prANI dayA, tyAM AtmArtha nivAsa. dazA na evI jyAM lagI, jIva lahe nahi jega;
mokSamArga pAme nahiM, maTe na aMtara rega. jyAM Ave evI dazA, sadguru bodha
suhAya; te badhe suvicAraNA, tyAM pragaTe sukhadAya. jyAM pragaTe suvicAraNA,
tyAM pragaTe nijajJAna, je jJAne kSaya moha thaI, pAme pada nirvANa."--zrI
AtmasiddhijI. Ama prazama-tyAga-vairAgyAdi AtmajJAna hoya te saphaLa che, ane
AtmajJAnanI prAptinA uttama hetu paNa che. kAraNa ke tyAga-vairAgya jenA
cittamAM-aMtaraMgamAM nathI, asthimajAparyata hADohADa vyApyA nathI, tene
AtmajJAna thAya nahiM; ane tyAgavirAgyamAM ja je jIva aTakI paDe-AtmajJAnanA
ISTa lakSya bhaNI AgaLa vadhe nahi, te te pitAnuM bhAna bhUlI jAya, arthAta je
AtmajJAna pAmavAnA mULa hetu athe tyAgavairAgyAdi atyaMta Avazyaka che, te mULa
hetu ja te cUkI jAya che. vairAgyAdi saphaLa che, je saha Atama jJAna, temaja
AtamajJAnanI, prApti taNuM nidAna. tyAga virAga na cittamAM, thAya na tene jJAna
aTake tyAga virAgamAM, te bhUle nija bhAna."-zrI Atmasiddhi. A parama upakArI
pramAdi guNa jyAM pragaTayA che, paramArthathI-tatvArthanuM samyaka zraddhAna
jyAM uparyuM che, ane jyAM pragaTa AtmajJAna-zuddha AtmAnubhava thAya che, evuM
A parama dhanya, parama vaMdya, parama durlabha evuM kalyANamUrti samyagadarzana
A pAMcamI sthira daSTimAM sthiti karatA yegIne tamograMthinA vibhedathI sAMpaDe
che. ane Ama jene darzana meha naSTa thayuM che, ne spaSTa AtmajJAna prakAza
sAMpaDyo che, evA A mahAbuddhimAna vivekI samyagdaSTi daSTA yegIne A saMsAranuM
mahAbhayaMkara duHkhada asthira svarUpa saMvedAya che, sAkSAt anubhavAya che,
eTale ja A parama dhanya samyagadaSTi puruSane samasta saMsAraceSTA
bAladhUligrakrIDA jevI bhAse emAM kAMI Azcarya nathI. kAraNa ke- enuM svane je
darzana pAme che, tenuM mana na caDhe bIje bhAme re thAya kRSNane leza prasaMga
che, tene na game saMsArane saMga re. hasatAM ramatAM pragaTa hari dekhuM re,
mAruM jIvyuM saphaLa tava lekhuM re; muktAnaMdane nAtha vihArI re, odhA
jIvanadevI amArI re." zrI muktAnaMdajI.

Page #549 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Rithradashti: "Mirage water is a delusion. Blessed is he who lives..."
(473) Thus, the saints have sung the great glory of self-knowledge -
Samyagdarshan. Shrimaan Yashvijayji says that the fruit of self-knowledge is
meditation, and self-knowledge is the liberator, therefore, the great soul
should always strive for this self-knowledge, because knowing the soul, there is
nothing left to know, and not knowing the soul, then other knowledge is
useless." The supreme self-knower, Shrimad Rajchandraji, also says -  "When you
know your own form, then you know everything; if you don't know your own form,
then knowing everything is useless." - Shrimad Rajchandra  "Maya, mirage,
Gandharvanagar, dream-like. He sees the external objects truly, through the
wisdom of scriptures." (156)  Mirage water, Gandharvanagar, and dreams are all
similar; He sees the external objects truly, with the wisdom of scriptures.
(156)  Meaning: - This type of person, with this vision, sees external objects
truly, through the wisdom of scriptures, as Maya water, Gandharvanagar, and
dreams.  Commentary: "He who has time as his servant, mirage water as his
delusion... blessed is he who lives! He who has hope as his slave, lust and
anger as his prisoners... blessed is he who lives!"  This type of yogi has
attained the wisdom of scriptures, therefore, he sees the external objects like
body, house, etc., as mirage water, Gandharvanagar, and dreams, from the
perspective of ultimate truth.  This Samyagdarshi believes that this entire
world is like a mirage, like mirage water - illusory like the water in a mirage
(see page 216). In the middle of summer, the forest, the mirage, Gandharvanagar,
Harishchandrapur, etc., dreams - rooms, appear to be real, the cinema - its
shapes, the external - body, house, etc., the husband - he sees, from the
perspective of the soul, from the perspective of ultimate truth, the illusory -
objects, why? Because - the wisdom of scriptures - through the wisdom of
scriptures, by having the right knowledge of scriptures.  "Knowing this soul,
there is nothing left to know. Not knowing this, other knowledge is useless."
Shri Adhyatmasar, Atmanishchayadhyayakar

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ritharAdaSTi: "mRgatRSNA jala vailoka. chavyuM dhanya tehanuM (473) Ama
saMtajanoe AtmajJAnane-samyagadarzanano khUba mahimA gAyo che. zrImAnuM
yazovijayajI kahe che ke-AtmajJAnanuM phala dhyAna che, ane AtmajJAna mukti
ApanArUM che, mATe mahAtmA AtmAthI e AtmajJAnane arthe nitya yatna karavA yogya
che, kAraNa ke AtmAne* jANya, pachI jANavAnuM bAkI rahetuM nathI ane A AtmA na
jANya, te pachI bIjuM jJAna phegaTa che." parama AtmajJAnI zrImad rAjacaMdrajI
ane paDe pADe che - jaba jA nija rUpake, taba jA saba leka; nahiM jAne nija
rUpake, saba jA se pheka."--zrImad rAjacaMdra
mAyAmarIcigandharvanagarasvapnasaMnibhAn  /  bAhyAn pazyati tattvena bhAvAn
zrutavivekataH  //  156  //  mRgajala gaMdharvanagara ne, temaja svapna samAna;
bAhya bhAva tatvathI jue, mRtavivekathI sujANa, 156 artha :-A daSTivALo gI
zrataviveka thakI bAhya bhAvone tatvathI mAyAjala, gaMdharvanagara ne svapna
jevA dekhe che. vivecana "jene kALa te kiMkara thaI rahyo, mRgatRSNA jala
celeka..jIvyuM dhanya tehanuM! dAsI AzA pizAcI thaI rahI, kAma krodha te kedI
leka-jIvyuM dhanya tehanuM !" A daSTivALA yogIne zrataviveka pariNata hoya che,
ethI te deha-gRhAdi bAhya bhAvene paramArthathI mRgatRSNA jevA, gadharvanagara
jevA, svapna jevA dekhe che. A samyagadaSTi puruSa bhAve che ke A sarva
jagajajAla mRgatRSNA jevI che, mRgajala jevI-jhAMjhavAnA pANI jevI mithyA che
(juo pR. 216). bhara unDALAmAM jaMgalane kRttimArIja-mRgatRSNakA, parvanA
gandharvanagara, harizcaMdrapura Adi, svapna - rUma, pratIta ja che, sanimAra-
tenA AkAravALA, vAghAna-bAhya, deha-gRha Adi, pati-dekhe che, tana-tatvathI,
paramArthathI, mAvAna-bhAvone, padArthone, zA kAraNathI? te ke-kRtiH -zruta
viveka thakI, samyaka evA zrutajJAne karIne. x"jhAte hyAtmani no bhUyo
jJAtavyamavaziSyate  /  ajJAte punaretasmin jJAnamanyannirarthakam  /  / " zrI
adhyAtmasAra, AtmanizcayAdhikAra

Page #550 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(74) A thirsty deer, misled by mirage, sees water in the distance and runs
towards it with all its might! But since that mirage is not real water, just an
illusion, it keeps receding as the deer approaches! The poor deer keeps running
in vain, chasing its false hope! Similarly, a traveler crossing a desert at noon
sees a mirage of water in the distance. Thirsty, he runs towards it, but the
water remains just as far away! Because that water is false, a mere illusion, a
visual deception created by the sun's rays. So, he is left disappointed! In the
same way, these feelings of attachment to the body, house, etc., are like
mirages. They are not ours, yet they appear to be ours due to our lack of
understanding, our illusion, our false perception! So, a foolish being, like a
deer, considers them his own and runs after them, driven by a desperate desire
to possess them! But how can something that is not truly ours ever be obtained?
As this being runs after them, they keep receding, mocking him! It's as if they
are cruelly making fun of him, playing a trick on him!   Because in this endless
cycle of existence, this being has taken on countless bodies. Which body does
this being consider its own? The body that this being mistakenly considers its
own, it abandons, like a thief, leaving it behind! And this being, like a sheep,
keeps rubbing its hands in vain! If this body, which is constantly changing, is
not truly ours, then how can we be attached to possessions like houses, etc.,
which are dependent on that body? If this soul, like milk and water, resides in
this body for a short time, and even this body is not truly ours, then how can
other things, which are completely different from it, be ours? Therefore, these
external feelings, like the body, are illusory, like mirages, as a person with
right understanding clearly sees.  Great souls, who wander in the form of
bodies, always focus on the eternal, immortal, infinite soul that resides within
the body. Even though this soul may have taken on many bodies, which body does
it consider its own?  Sri Mansukh Bhai Kirchand's "Srimad Rajchandra's Life
Story." Or, these feelings of attachment to the body, house, etc., are like
castles in the air, created in the sky.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (74) gadaSTisakhA viSe tarasyA thayelA mRgane dUra dUra pANIne AbhAsa thAya
che, ne te mRgatRNu pANI pIvAnI AzAe pUrapATa deDayo jAya che ! paNa te mRgajala
te jala aileka' vastuta: nahiM hovAthI, khAlI AbhAsamAtra hevAthI, hAthatAlI
daIne AvuM ne AvuM bhAgatuM jAya che! ne te mRga bicAro tenI khoTI ne khoTI
AzAmAM doDAdoDIne nAhakane lathapatha thAya che ! athavA madhyAhe raNabhUmimAM
pasAra thatA musApharane dUra dUra kSitijamAM pANIno AbhAsa ( Mirage) thAya che,
eTale tarasyo thayele te te meLavavAnI AzAe doDe che, paNa te pANI te hatuM
teTaluM ja dUra rahe che! kAraNa ke te jala khoTuM che, mithyAkalpanArUpa che,
sUryakiraNethI upajate mithyAbhAsarUpa dazyavibhrama (Illusion of vision) che,
eTale te bicArAne nirAza thavuM paDe che! tema A deha-gRhAdi bhAva mRgajaLa jevA
che. te pitAnA nathI, chatAM avivekarUpa dehAdhyAsathI-mithyAbhAsathI-asat
kalpanAthI potAnA bhAse che! eTale mRga-pazu jevo mUDha jIva tene pitAnA gaNI,
te meLavavAnI durAzAthI, tenI pAchaLa "jetI mananI re doDa" jeTaluM deDAya
teTaluM doDe che! paNa je vastu vastutaH pitAnI che ja nahiM, te kema hAthamAM
Ave? jema jema A jIva tenI pAchaLa doDe che. tema tema te hAthatALI daIne dUra
ne dUra bhAgatI jAya che! ne A jIvanI jANe krUra mazkarIrUpa viDaMbanA kare che,
ThekaDI kare che! kAraNa ke A anAdi saMsAramAM A jIve anaMta dehaparyAya dhAraNa
karyo, temAM karyo deha A jIvane gaNa? je dehaparyAyane A jIva mithyA
dehAdhyAsathI potAne mAnavA jAya che, te deha te khalajananI mAphaka teno tyAga
karIne-dago daIne cAlyo jAya che! ne A jIva meMDhAnI jema ame me' (hArUM
mahAsuM) karate hAtha ghasato rahe che! A hAlAmAM hAle deha paNa jyAM jIvane
thatuM nathI, te pachI te dehane Azraye rahelIdeha hoIne rahelI evI gharabAra
vagere parigraharUpa vaLagaNa te tenI kayAMthI thAya? je dehamAM dUdha ne pANInI
jema eka kSetrAvagAhapaNe A AtmA rahyo che, te deha paNa je A AtmAne nathI
thatuM, te pachI pragaTapaNe atyaMta atyaMta bhinna evA anya padArtha te A
AtmAnA kyAMthI bane? mATe A dehAdi bAhya bhAva tatvathI mithyAbhAsarUpa che,
mRgatRSNA jevA ja che, ema A samyagadaSTi puruSa pratyakSa dekhe che. mahAtmA
puruSo-dehadhArIrUpe vicaratA mahAtmA puruSone lakSa sadaiva dehane viSe
adhiSThita ajara amara anaMta evo je dehI-AtmA te prati hoya che. e dehIe deha
to aneka dharyo hoya, tyAM kayA dehane pitAne gaNe?" zrI manasukhabhAI
kiracaMdakRta zrImad rAjacaMdranI jIvanarekhA. athavA te A deha-gRha Adi bhAva
gagananagara jevA che, AkAzamAM racAyelA ja che.

Page #551 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
"This is a dream, this world" - Shravak.  (475) Like cities! Illusionists create
a city in the sky, but that illusory city disappears in an instant! The sky city
vanishes into thin air! Or, it is impossible to create a city in the sky, a
world without support! Building castles in the air is impossible, like the
illusory imaginations of a charlatan! Similarly, these external objects like the
body, house, etc., are momentary and illusory, they exist and cease to exist in
an instant. These bodies, etc., are truly external to the soul, they are
external influences, the soul has nothing to do with them in the ultimate sense.
In the words of Shri Devchandraji, "Matter does not mix with matter, the feeling
is different and unattainable." The inert is inert and the conscious is
conscious, this is the unchanging state in all three times. Therefore, any
imagination of a relationship with the body, etc., is like the illusory
imagination of creating a city in the sky. As Shri Pujyapad Swami ji has said,
"From the delusion of the self in the body, the imaginations of son, wife, etc.,
have arisen, and by this, the world, believing in the wealth of the soul, has
been destroyed!" "The electric Lakshmi, the lordly kite, the life is like the
waves of water; the Purandari bow, the eternal color, what is the use of ruling
there for a moment?" - Shrimad Rajchandraji.  Or, these external objects like
the body, house, etc., are like dreams. Just as the things seen in a dream do
not appear in the waking state, they appear illusory, similarly, these body,
etc., imaginations seen in the state of ignorance, the dream state, do not
appear real in the state of knowledge, the state of self-awareness, they appear
illusory. Or, whatever it is, the world is like a beautiful dream. If a
beautiful dream comes and all kinds of excellent things are gathered in it,
still, it does not take long for it to dissolve in an instant; and alas! Those
things are gone and our things are gone! - This illusory regret remains in the
mind! Similarly, if this body, house, etc., has a beautiful combination and the
power of a chakravarti, etc., is attained and there is an abundance of excellent
enjoyments, even then, all of it disappears in an instant like a dream, and
alas! These things are gone, this worry remains in the mind! "The beggar's
regret" is an apt illustration that Shrimad Rajchandraji has described in Moksha
Mala, it applies here perfectly. A beggar has a dream of excellent royal
splendor, and then he experiences excitement in that dream, and then alas! A
storm comes - thunder and lightning roar, and his dream remains incomplete, only
regret remains for him! Thus, this world is truly like a dream, therefore, the
simple, piercing words of the whip-wielding Bhaja Bhagata have sung the truth
with a mixed heart, that animals! Take refuge in the Kirtar, this is...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zizadaSi"A to svapanuM che saMsAra' -zratavika (475) zahera jevA che!
iMdrajAlIyA AkAzamAM nagararacanAne peTe bhAsa ubhuM karAve che, paNa te
mithyAbhAsarUpa nagara te kSaNavAramAM kyAMya "chu" thaI jAya che! gagananagara
kayAMnuM kayAMya alepa thaI jAya che! athavA te AkAzamAM addhara je saMsAra
nirAdhArapaNe evuM nagara racavuM azakya che! havAmAM killA bAMdhavA (Castles in
air ) asaMbhavita che, zekhacallInA vicAra jevA mithyA kalpanAnA ghoDA che !
tenI jema A deha-gRha Adi bAhya padArtho kSaNabhaMgura ne mithyAbhAsarU5 che,
kSaNavAramAM hatA na hatA thaI jAya che. A dehAdi kharekhara ! AtmAthI bAhya
che, parabhAva che, tenI sAthe paramArthathI A AtmAne kAMI levAdevA nathI. zrI
devacaMdrajInA zabdomAM "dravya dravya mile nahiM, bhAva te anya avyApta che
mitta." jaDa te jaDa ne cetana te cetana ema traNe kALamAM akhaMDa sthiti che.
eTale dehAdi sAthe kaMI paNa saMbaMdhanI kalpanA te AkAzamAM nagararacanA jevI
mithyA kalpanAmAtra che. zrI pUjyapAda svAmIjIe kahyuM che tema "dehamAM
AtmabuddhithI putra, strI Adi ka95nAo upajI che ane tenA vaDe AtmAnI saMpatti
mAnatuM jagat are haNAI gayuM che !" "vidyuta lakSmI prabhutA pataMga, AyuSya te
te jaLanA taraMga; puraMdarI cApa anaMga raMga, zuM rAciye tyAM kSaNane
prasaMga?-zrImad rAjacaMdrajI. athavA A deha-gRha Adi Atma-bAhya padArtho svapna
samAna che. svapnamAM dIThelI vastu jema jAgrata avasthAmAM dekhAtI nathI,
mithyA jaNAya che, tema ajJAnarUpa svapna dazAmAM dekhAtI A dehAdi kalpanA
AtmajAgratirUpa jJAnadazAmAM A te svapanuM vAstavika dekhAtI nathI, miyANAsarUpa
jaNAya che. athavA game tevuM che saMsAra" suMdara svapna AvyuM hoya ane temAM
game tevA uttama bhega bhegavyA hoya, chatAM tene kSaNavAramAM vilaya thatAM
vAra lAgatI nathI; ane hAya! te bhega cAlyA gayA ne amArA bhega maryA!-e mithyA
kheda manamAM bAkI rahe che! tema A deha-gRhAdine suMdara yoga thayo hoya ane
cakravartI AdinI Rddhi prApta thaI uttama bhogonI vipulatA sAMpaDI hoya, te paNa
te sarva kSaNavAramAM svapnAnI jema jotajotAmAM daSTanaSTa thaI jAya che, ne
hAya ! A hAra bhega cAlyA gayA, e vasavase manamAM rahI jAya che! "bhIkhArIne
kheda" e mananIya daSTAMta zrImad rAjacaMdrajIe mokSamALAmAM tAdRzya rIte
varNavyuM che, te atre barAbara lAgu paDe che. kaI eka bhIkhArIne svapnamAM
uttama rAjavaibhava sAMpaDayo che, ne pachI te svapnamAM ne svabamAM romAMca
anubhave che, tyAM aphasosa! vaccamAM vizna Ave che-gAjavIjane gaDagaDATa thAya
che, ne tenuM svapna adhUruM rahe che, tene kheda mAtra avazeSa rahe che! Ama A
saMsAra kharekhara ! svapnA je che, mATe ja sAdA vedhaka zabdomAM cAbakhA
mAranArA bhejA bhagate bheLA bhAve sAcuM ja gAyuM che ke prANIo ! bhajI lene
kiratAra, A te

Page #552 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(476) "The aggregate of the six senses is a dream, the world is a dream," - and
so on.  This is how the world appears to the Jñānī, the man of perfect
knowledge, who constantly contemplates the right view (Samyakdṛṣṭi).  To him,
this entire world appears like a dream, like a mirage, like a city in the sky,
like a reflection, like dust and ashes, like a speck of soot.  This is because
the state of ignorance, which is like a dream, has passed away, and he has
attained the state of awakening, which is like knowledge.  "When I wake up, I
don't see the world, in sleep, it appears strange and unreal; the play of
consciousness is like that, it hangs on to the Brahman." - Shri Narasimha Mehta.
The whole world is like a reflection, or like a dream; That is what the Jñānī
knows, the rest is just talk. - Shri Ātmasiddhi. This world is tormented by the
three fires (tapas).  It runs after the water of the mirage, wanting to quench
its thirst, it is miserable.  Due to ignorance, it has forgotten its true
nature, and has been caught in a terrible cycle of birth and death.  It
experiences immense sorrow, diseases like fever, fear of death, and the pain of
separation, it is helpless.  Only a perfect man (Sapuruṣa) can be its refuge.
Without the words of a perfect man, no one can overcome these fires and thirst,
this is certain.  Therefore, again and again, we meditate on the feet of that
man. - Shrimad Rajchandra, Letter 184. Thus, this world evokes a very intense
inner detachment in the yogi who has the right view (Samyakdṛṣṭi).  Such a Jñānī
is imbued with this deep feeling, because he has developed Śrutaviveka, the
right understanding of the scriptures.  He has attained the true knowledge of
the scriptures (see Śrutaviveka, pp. 19-20).  In other words, the man who has
the right view (Samyakdṛṣṭi) develops Śrutaviveka from the scriptures he has
heard from the perfect man, the true guru.  He has attained the true knowledge
of the scriptures, he has realized the true nature of things, he has understood
the difference between the self and the non-self, he has experienced the clear
distinction between the soul and the non-soul, he has developed the knowledge of
the pure soul, he has attained the knowledge of the pure soul. For example, "I
am the pure, conscious, imperishable, eternal soul, distinct from this body and
other things.  This perishable body and other things are not me.  Only the pure
self is mine, nothing else is mine.  I am not this body and other things, and
this body and other things are not mine." - this is the firm conviction of his
soul. "His own nature shines forth, pure consciousness, imperishable, eternal,
and beyond the body." - Ātmasiddhi.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (476) gadaSTisamuccaya svapanuM che saMsAra."--ItyAdi prakAre niraMtara bhAvatA
A samyaggadaSTi jJAnI puruSane A samasta saMsAra svapna jeva, mRgajaLa jevo,
gagananagara je, upalakSaNathI eTha je, dhULa-rAkha je, kAjaLanI keTalI jevo
bhAse che. kAraNa ke svapnarUpa ajJAna dazA vyatIta thaI, tene jJAnarUpa jAgrata
dazA prApta thaI che. "jAgIne jouM te jagata dIse nahiM, UMghamAM aTapaTA ga
bhAse; citta caitanya vilAsa tadrupa che, brA laTakAM kare brahma pAse." zrI
narasiMha mahetA. sakaLa jagata te eThavat, athavA svapna samAna; te kahIye
jJAnidazA, bAkI vAcA jJAna."--zrI Atmasiddhi, A leka trividha tApathI
AkuLavyAkuLa che. jhAMjhavAnA pANIne levA doDI tRSNa chIpAvavA Icche che, e dIna
che. ajJAnane lIdhe svarUpanuM vismaraNa thaI javAthI bhayaMkara paribhramaNa
tene prApta thayuM che. samaye samaye atuLa kheda, javarAdi roga, maraNAdika
bhaya, viyegAdika duHkhane anubhave che, evI azaraNatAvALA A jagatane eka
sapuruSa ja zaraNu chesapuruSanI vANI vinA keI e tApa ane tRSA cheDI zake nahIM
ema nizcaya che. mATe pharI pharI te puruSanA caraNanuM ame dhyAna karIe chIe."
--zrImad rAjacaMdra, patrAMka 184. Ama A saMsAra pratye A samyagadaSTi yogI
puruSane atyaMta tIvra aMtaraMga vairAgya vatte che. AvA gADha saMvegaraMgathI
jJAnI puruSa raMgAyelA hoya che, tenuM kAraNa emane zrataviveka upajyA che te
che, samyapaNe zrutajJAna pariNata thayuM che te che (juo zrataviveka pR. 19-20)
arthAt A samyagadaSTi dRSTA puruSane satparuSa saddaguru samIpe zravaNa karelA
"zruta' jJAnathI viveka upaje che, zrutajJAna samyapaNe pariNamyAthI sada sanuM
bhAna thayuM che, vastu svarUpa jevuM che tevuM samajavAmAM AvyuM che, sva-
paranuM bhedajJAna pragaTayuM che, AtmAanAtmAne pragaTa bheda anubhavavAmAM Avyo
che, kevala zuddha AtmAnI anubhUtirUpa vivekakhyAti upajI che, zuddha AtmajJAna
thayuM che. jema ke-huM A dehAdi paravatuthI bhinna e zuddha caitanya svarUpa
avinAzI ajara amara AtmA chuM. A nAzavaMta dehAdi parabhAva te huM nathI. eka
zuddha sahAtmasvarUpa ja hArUM che, bIjuM kaMI paNa hAruM nathI. huM A dehAdi
bhAvane nathI, ne A dehAdi bhAva mahArA nathI,-evo vivekarUpa nizcaya tenA
AtmAmAM daDha thayo che. "bhAsyuM nija svarUpa te, zuddha cetanArUpa ajara amara
avinAzI ne, dehAtIta svarUpa"--I Atmasiddhi.

Page #553 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Steadfast Vision:** 'Why should one taste the effects of others?' Doubtless,
right vision. (477) Always take refuge in the path of the Nigantha, as the
revered Guru has said. I am not the body or any form, and the body, woman, son,
etc., are not great. I am the soul, pure consciousness, imperishable. By having
this self-awareness, attachment and aversion are destroyed.” –Shrimad
Rajchandraji.  Therefore, this garland is a pure self-awareness, worthy of
acceptance. All other feelings are transient, worthy of abandonment. Therefore,
I will only worship my self-awareness and abandon all other worldly attachments.
This is the right path. Our self-awareness, which is the foundation of
consciousness, is the true family, better than all other relationships. “That
true family is the best.” Therefore, O conscious one! Be calm and free from all
worldly attachments! Be free! O treasure of joy! This is the ultimate remedy for
attaining ultimate peace. Take refuge in it! Take refuge in it! “Our self-
awareness, which is pure consciousness, is better than all other relationships.
That true family is the best…peace-giving.” –Shri Anandghanji.  Thus, a wise
person with right vision, decides to take refuge in his own nature and abandon
worldly attachments. The example of the garment brought from the washerman's
house, which has been changed, is appropriate here. Just as a man, due to
delusion, takes a garment from the washerman's house and, believing it to be his
own, lies down wearing it. Since he is ignorant, he is approached by another
who, seeing him, grabs him and forcibly tries to strip him naked, saying, “Hey!
Get up quickly! Give me this garment that has been changed!” Hearing this
repeatedly, he examines it carefully with all his senses and realizes that it is
indeed someone else's. Then, becoming wise, he immediately discards the garment.
Similarly, the knower, due to delusion, accepts worldly attachments as his own
and, believing them to be his own, lies down in them, engrossed in worldly
pursuits. Since he is ignorant, the Guru, seeing him, tries to awaken him and
instructs him, saying, “Awaken! Realize that the soul is one.” Hearing this
repeatedly, he examines it carefully with all his senses and realizes that it is
indeed worldly attachments. Then, becoming wise, he immediately abandons all
worldly attachments. Because, x “When a man knows that he is attached to worldly
things, then he abandons all worldly attachments and becomes wise.” (For
reference, see Shri Samyatsar and Shri Amritchandracharya's commentary).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 sthirAdaSTi : Rha parabhAvane kema cAkhe?' niHzaMka samyagadaSTi (477) zrI
sadgurue kahyAM che evA nigraMtha mArgane sadAya Azraya raho. huM dehAdi svarUpa
nathI, ane deha, strI, putrAdi keIpaNa mahArAM nathI. zuddha citanya svarUpa
avinAzI e huM AtmA chauM. ema AtmabhAvanA karatAM rAgadveSane kSaya thAya."
-zrImad rAjacaMdrajI. mATe mahAre A hAra eka zuddha AtmabhAva ja Adeya che-
grahaNa karavA yogya che, bAkI A bIjA badhA bhAva heya che, tyajavA yogya che
mATe huM mahArA AtmabhAvane ja bhaju ne samasta parabhAvaprapaMcane tyaje e ja
yaMgya che. ApaNo AtmabhAva je eka cetanAdhAra che, te nija parikara-
parivArarUpa bhAva ja A bIjA badhA sAtha soga karatAM sAra che. "e nija parikara
sAra re." mATe he cetana ! tuM zAMta thaI A sarva parabhAvathI virAma pAma!
virAma pAma! he AnaMdaghana ! e ja A parama zAMtimArga pAmavAne parama upAya
che. ene Azraya kara ! Azraya kara ! "ApaNe Atama bhAva je, zuddha cetanAdhAra
re; avara savi sAtha sogathI, e nija parikara sAra re....zAMtijina"- zrI
AnaMdaghanajI. Ama jJAnI samyagRSTi puruSa svabhAvane Azraya karavAne ne
parabhAvane tyAga karavAne vivekajanya nizcaya kare che, temAM dhAbInA gherathI
ANelA badalAI gayela vastranuM A daSTAMta barAbara ghaTe che -jema keI eka
puruSa bhrAMtithI dhobInA gherathI vastra laI neha parabhAvane AvI, pitAnuM mAnI
paherIne sUI gaye. te pote ajJAnI hoI, bIjAe kema cAkhe?' tene cheDe pakaDI tene
baLathI nagna karavA mAMDyo ane kahyuM ke "alyA ! jaladI UTha ! A mahArUM
badalAI gayeluM vastra ApI de !" ema vAraMvAra vacana sAMbhaLIne teNe badhA
cihnothI sArI peThe parIkSA karI, cakkasa A to pArakuM che ema jANyuM, eTale
jJAnI thaI teNe te vastra ekadama mUkI dIdhuM. tema jJAtA paNa saMbhrAMtithI
pArakA bhAve grahaNa karIne AtmIya pratipattithI-pitAnA mAnI besI paramAM
adhyAsa karIne sUte hatuM. te svayaM ajJAnI hoI, guru parabhAvaviveka karI tene
"eka karavA mAMDe che ne upadeze che ke-are ! pratibodha pAma! jAga ! A AtmA
nizcayathI eka che." ema vAraMvAra zratazrata saMbaMdhI vacana sAMbhaLI te sarva
cihnothI sArI peThe parIkSA karI, nizcita A parabhAva che ema jANe che, eTale
jJAnI thaI te sarva* bhAvene zIgha mUkI de che. kAraNa ke x "jaha NAma kovi
puriso paradavvamiNati jANiduM cayadi  /  taha savve parabhAve pAUNa vimuMcade
NANI  // " (AdhAra mATe juo ) zrI samayasAra ane zrI amRtacaMdrAcAryajInI TIkA.

Page #554 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(478) The ocean-like Jiva does not have any attachment or aversion towards the
aggregates (pudgalas), nor does it have any relationship with them. It is not
the Lord, nor is it any other Ishvara. It is never associated with any other
substance. Alas! The pure nature of Shri Sumati Jina is such that it does not
accept or reject anything, nor does it have any reverence for others. The one
whose pure self-experience is established, how can it taste the flavors of other
substances? Alas! The pure nature of Shri Sumati is manifested with wonder. The
taste for that tattva (reality) arises in it. Having become the color of that
tattva, it is free from defects and attains that tattva by abandoning the
faults. Alas! Shri Sumati.  Due to the maturity of scriptural knowledge, the
presence of tattva-viveka (discrimination of reality), the manifestation of the
knowledge of self and other, the understanding of the nature of the self, and
the attainment of pure self-knowledge, it is very natural for the Samyagdrishti
(right-visioned) ascetic that the external objects like the body, house, etc.
appear to him like a mirage, because the state of the Jnani Samyagdrishti person
is characterized by intense detachment and the highest enthusiasm.  Indeed, the
state of the Atmarama (delighted in the self) Samyagdrishti Mahatma is extremely
wonderful. For example, the Samyagdrishti one who cuts off the four roots of
Mithyatva (false belief) that give rise to the bondage of karma is to be known
as the Nishanka (fearless) Atma. The one who does not have any desire for the
fruits of karma or any other dharmas is to be known as the Nishkanksha
(desireless) Atma. The one who does not have any aversion towards any dharmas is
to be known as the Nishanka Samyag Nirvichikitsa (free from doubt) Atma. The one
who has an undistorted vision in all the bhavas (states of being) is to be known
as the Amudhadrishti (non-deluded vision) Samyagdrishti.  The one who either
protects or nourishes the dharmas of all other substances, or who nourishes all
the dharmas and powers of the self, is to be known as the Upagrahana-kaari
(protector) or Upabrihanakari (nourisher) Samyagdrishti. The one who establishes
the Atma of the father who is going on the wrong path on the right path is to be
known as the Sthitikaran-yukta (stabilizer) Atma Samyagdrishti. The one who,
with non-dual understanding, has affection towards the three sadhus, i.e.,
Samyagdarshana (right faith), Samyagjnana (right knowledge), and Samyakcharitra
(right conduct), is to be known as the Vatsalabhavayukta (affectionate)
Samyagdrishti.  The one who, having ascended the chariot of knowledge, drives on
the path of the Jina's teachings is to be known as the Chetayita (awakener)
Atma, the propagator of the Jina's knowledge, the Samyagdrishti.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (478) emadariyAmaya "jIva navi puSyalI nava pUgala kadA, puggalAdhAra navi tAsa
raMgI; parata Iza nahiM apara ezvaryatA, vastudhame kadA na para saMgI... aho !
zrI sumati jina zuddhatA tAharI, saMgrahe nahiM Ape nahiM para bhaNI, navi kare
Adare para na rAkhe; zuddha svAvAda nija bhAva bhegI jike, teha parabhAvane kema
cAkhe?...aha zrI sumati tArI zuddhatA bhAsa AzcaryathI, upaje ruci tiNe tatva
Ihe; tatvaraMgI thaye doSathI ubha, deSa tyAge DhaLe tatva lahe...aho ! zrI
sumati." zrI devarAMdrajI. Ama zratajJAna pariNata thavAthI, tattvaviveka upa
hovAthI, sva-paranuM bhedajJAna pragaTayuM hovAthI, AtmasvarUpapada samajAyuM
hovAthI, ne zuddha AtmajJAna sAMpaDyuM hovAthIA samyagadaSTi yegI puruSane deha-
gRhAdi bAhya bhAve-parapadArtho mRgatRSNAdi jevA bhAse e atyaMta svAbhAvika che,
kAraNa ke jJAnI samyagadaSTi puruSanI AtmadazA utkaTa vairAgyamaya ne parama
saMvegaraMgathI raMgAyelI hoya che. kharekhara ! AtmArAmI samyagadaSTi mahAtmAnI
dazA parama addabhuta hoya che. jemake karmabaMdhanI zaMkA upajAvanArA
mithyAtvAdi cAra pAdane chede che, te niHzaMka AtmA samyagadaSTi jANavo. je
karmaphalemAM tathA sarva dharmomAM kAMkSA karatuM nathI, te niSkAMkSa AtmA
samyagadaSTi jANa. je sarveya dharmomAM jugupsA karatA nathI, te niHzaMka
samyaga nirvicikitsa AtmA samyagadaSTi jANu. je sarva bhAvamAM asaMmUDha daSTi
ke hoya? heI saddaSTivAnuM che, te amUDhadaSTi samyagdaSTi jANo.
siddhabhaktiyukta e je sarva paravastunA dharmonuM upagrahana-gopana kare che,
athavA sarva AtmadharmonuM-AtmazaktionuM upabRhaNa kare che-vRddhi kare che, te
upagrahanakArI-upabRhanakArI samyagadRSTi jANo. unmArge jatA pitAnA AtmAne je
mArge sthApe che te sthitikaraNayukta AtmA samyagadaSTi jANo. mokSamArgane viSe
traNa sAdhuonuM arthAta samyagadarzana-jJAna-cAritranuM je potAnAthI
abhedabuddhithI vAtsalya kare che, te vatsalabhAvayukta e mArga vatsala
samyagadaSTi jANe. vidyArathamAM ArUDha thayela je mane rathapathAmAM bhame che,
te cetayitA-AtmA jinAjJAnanI prabhAvanA karanAra samyagdaSTi jANavo." *"jo
cattArivi pAe chidadi te kammabaMdhamohakare  /  so LisaMzo jevA samaridrI
muLathavyo ? -(juo) zrI samayasAra, gA. 229-236. ane zrI amRtacaMdrAcAryajInI
TIkA * " vimo maLo mamaH jo revAnI so vikharLAvI samAvido muLacaLyo ! -zrI
samayasAra,

Page #555 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**The state of pure knowledge is the ultimate treasure, revealing happiness
beyond.**  (479)  "Unaffected, only pure light, unimpeded and free from disease.
That which is here, that is the ultimate truth, the rest is merely a wave."
(157)  **Meaning:** The pure knowledge that is unaffected, unimpeded, and free
from disease, that which exists here, is the ultimate truth; the rest is merely
a wave.  **Commentary:** "Pure knowledge is the only light, the rest is mere
illusion." - Shri K.D. Saxena, 6-4  Here, the pure knowledge that is unaffected,
unimpeded, and free from disease is the ultimate truth. It is free from
obstruction and disease due to its formless nature. That is why it is the
ultimate truth. Everything else is merely a wave.  In this world, the ultimate,
supreme, and most excellent truth is the pure knowledge that shines within. This
truth is unaffected, shining within. It is unimpeded, free from any kind of
obstruction or suffering, because it is formless and intangible, so no
obstruction can touch it. It is also free from disease, free from illness, and
perfectly healthy, because it is formless and intangible. Thus, being unimpeded
and free from disease, it is the ultimate source of happiness and bliss. Just as
a healthy person, free from any obstruction or disease, appears radiant and full
of joy, so too, this pure knowledge, free from any obstruction or disease,
shines forth in its natural, complete, unimpeded, healthy, and blissful form.
This unimpeded, healthy, and natural state of pure knowledge is the ultimate
truth. Everything else is merely a wave, a temporary phenomenon, while this pure
knowledge remains as the ultimate, unaffected experience.  **Reflection:**  The
pure knowledge is unaffected, unimpeded, and free from disease due to its
formless nature. It is the ultimate truth, and everything else is merely a wave.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 sthiHi 52 jati-5rama nidhAna pragaTa sukha AgaLa (479) abAhyaM kevalaM
jyotirnirAbAdhamanAmayam  /  yadatra tatparaM tattvaM zeSaH punarupaplavaH  //
157  //  abAhya kevala jati je, nirAmaya nirAbAdha; parama tava tehI ja ahIM,
zeSa upaplava bAdha, 157 artha :-abAhya evI kevala, nirAbAdha, nirAmaya ti je
atre che te parama tatva che; bAkI zeSa te upaptava che. vivecana "kevala jati
te tanya prakAze, zeSa upAya asAre .--zrI ke. da. sakjhA. 6-4 atre abAhya evI je
nirAbAdha ne nirAmaya kevala jJAnajAti che, te ja parama tattva che. te ja
amUrtApaNAne lIdhe nirAbAdha ane anAmaya che. eTalA mATe ja parama tattva che. e
sivAyanuM bAkI bIjuM badhuMya upappavarUpa che. A jagatmAM je kaI parama,
sarvotkRSTa, paramattama tatva hoya che te aMtaramAM jhaLahaLI rahelI kevaLa eka
jJAna jyoti ja che. e tatva abAhya che, aMtaramAM jhaLahaLI rahyuM che. te
nirAbAdha che, kaI paNa prakAranI bAdhAthI-pIDAthI rahita abAhya kevala che,
kAraNa ke te amUrta-arUpI che, eTale tene keI bAdhA spazI jyoti para zakatI
nathI. vaLI te nirAmaya-Aya-roga rahita, aregI che, bhAvatava ArogyasaMpanna
che. kAraNa ke te arUpI-amUrta che. Ama nirAbAdha ne nirAmaya hovAthI te parama
sukhamaya, parama AnaMdamaya che. koI paNa bAdhA -pIDA vinAne ane roga vinAne
svastha manuSya jema pitAne sahaja (Normal & Natural) kudaratI saMpUrNa
Arogyamaya svarUpamAM dIpI nIkaLI pUNuM khuzamIjAjamAM-AnaMdollAsamAM dekhAya
che, tema kaI paNa prakAranI bAdhAthI ne rogathI rahita, evI A kevala jJAnati
pitAnA sahaja saMpUrNa avyAbAdha Arogyamaya-svAdhyamaya svarUpamAM prakAzI
nIkaLI parama nirbhaya sukhamaya-parama AnaMdamaya dIse che. A avyAbAdha
Arogyamaya evA sahajAnmasvarUpe sthita kevala eka jJAnajyoti ja parama tattva
che. neti neti' ema bIjuM badhuMya bAdhya bAdha karatAM, te chevaTa-parama
abAdhya anubhavarUpa rahe che, vRtti -zA-abAla, Anara, varuM-kevala, eka, ratiH
-ti, jJAna, anArdha-anAbAdha -amUrtatAthI pIDArahita, anAmathuM-anAya,
arogI,-eTalA mATe ja, patra-je atra-leDamAM, tAre tavaMte paraM ta va che, sadA
tathAbhAvane lIdhe, zepa punaH-zeSa-bAkIne puna:, uparA -upaptava
che,tapAsavarUpe jarathI.

Page #556 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(480) The collection of Gadashti is supreme because there is nothing greater
than it, it is the most excellent, it is the best, that is why it is supreme.
And there is only one, pure, non-dual knowledge, which is nothing but a miracle
of consciousness. “The infinite, unbreakable, and boundless supreme light is
always shining within and without, it is dependent on the surge of
consciousness, like a lump of salt, it always remains one and the same. X The
lump of salt tastes the same wherever it is tasted, but it always tastes like
salt, similarly this knowledge-treasure of consciousness is always experienced
as one consciousness. Pure, enlightened, conscious treasure, self-illuminating,
blissful abode; how much more can be said, think and attain it.” – Shrimad
Rajchandraji's Shri Atmasiddhiji. And this supreme, transcendental element is
external, it is within, it is situated in the soul, it resides in the father, it
is not external to the soul. It is the essence of the soul, and it is its own.
It is not necessary to search for it. It is within the soul, it is to be
recognized from the soul and revealed. But just as musk is in the navel of the
deer, but the ignorant deer is not aware of it, so it runs elsewhere to find it!
Similarly, the ignorant soul, which is within its own soul, which is the soul
itself, is not aware of it, so it wanders outside in search of it! But it does
not turn inward and look within the father! Thus, the supreme treasure, which is
right in front of us, is overlooked by this ignorant world! And it gets lost in
its search! It becomes like “the child who goes to find himself”! It is like a
blind person who closes his eyes when he comes to an open treasure! They went
out to find the treasure, but when they come to the treasure, they say, “Let's
see how the blind walk!” So they close their eyes and walk! In doing so, they
overlook the treasure – they miss it! And they run ahead to find it! But they do
not see the open treasure right in front of them! Similarly, the supreme
treasure of infinite knowledge, vision, character, effort, joy, etc., the
greatest and most precious of all, x अखण्डितमनाकुलं बलदनन्तमन्तर्बहि-महः
परममस्तु नः सह जमुद्विलासं सदा । चिदुच्छलननिर्भर सकलकालमालम्बते,
यदेकरससमुल्लसल्लवणखिल्यलीलायितं ॥" – Shri Amritchandracharyaji's
Samyatsarakalash,

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (480) gadaSTisamuccaya teTalA mATe te parama che; athavA enAthI para-moTuM koI
nathI, e ja sarvotkRSTa che, e ja sarvottama che, teTalA mATe te parama che. ane
tyAM kevala mAtra, eka, zuddha, advaita evI te jJAti ja che, eka caitanya
camatkAra sivAya bIjuM kAMI nathI. "akhaMDa anAkula ne anaMta evI te parama
jyoti aMdaramAM ne bahAramAM sadA sahaja vilasI rahI che, caitanyanA uchALAthI
te nirbhara heI, mIThAnA gAMgaDAnI peThe sadAkAla ekarasane AlaMbe che. X
mIThAne gAMgaDo game tyAMthI cAkhe paNa sadA eka lavaNarasarUpa ja lAge che,
tema A caitanyaghana jJAnati sadA eka caitanyarasarUpa ja anubhavAya che. zuddha
buddha caitanyaghana, svayaMjyoti sukhadhAma; bIjuM kahiye keTaluM kara vicAra
te pAma."-zrImad rAjacaMdrajI praNIta zrI AtmasiddhijI. ane AvuM A parama
tirmaya tatva abAhya che, aMtaramAM ja vate che, AtmAmAM ja sthita che, pitAmAM
ja rahe che, AtmAthI bAhya-nhAra nathI. e AtmAnuM aMtastatva che, ane te ja
potAnuM che. te kaMI hAra khoLavA javAnI parama nidhAna jarUra nathI. te te
AtmAmAM ja raheluM heI, AtmAmAMthI ja oLakhIne pragaTa mukha kheLI kADhavAnuM
che. paraMtu kasturI jema mRganI nAbhimAM ja che, paNa AgaLa' ajJAna mRgane
tenuM bhAna nahiM hovAthI te DhuMDhavA mATe bIje deDe che! tema ajJAnI jIvane A
parama tatva je potAnA AtmAnI aMdaramAM ja raheluM che, je AtmA pote ja che,
tenuM bhAna nahiM hevAthI, te tenI zodhamAM bahAra bhamyA kare che! paNa
aMtarmukha thaI pitAnI aMdara avelekate nathI ! Ama parama nidhAna je pragaTa
mukha AgaLa rahyo che, tene A ajJAnI jagat ullaMdhI jAya che ! ne tenI zodhamAM
hAra nIkaLI paDe che! keDe chokaruM ne zodhavA cAlI" enA jevo ghATa thAya che!
khulle khajAno Ave che, tyAM AMkha mIMcIne cAlatA, chatI AMkhe AMdhaLA banelA
mUkhe janenA jevI A vAta bane che! teo nikaLyA'tA te khajAne zodhavA, paNa jyAM
khajAne Ave che, tyAM "AMdhaLA zI rIte cAlatA haze te joIe te kharA !" ema tukko
UThatAM teo AMkho mIMcIne cAlavAne akhataro kare che ! ema karatAM teo khajAno
ullaMghI jAya che-TapI jAya che ! ane te zedhavA mATe AgaLa doDyA jAya che !
paNa pragaTa moDhA AgaLa ughADo paDele khajAne dekhatA nathI ! tema anaMta
jJAna-darzanacAritra-vIrya-AnaMda Adi guNaratnono parama nidhAna, sauthI moTAmAM
moTo ne kiMmatImAM x akhaNDitamanAkulaM baladanantamantarbahi-mahaH paramamastu
naH saha jamudvilAsaM sadA  /  ciducchalananirbhara sakalakAlamAlambate,
yadekarasasamullasallavaNakhilyalIlAyitaM  // " -zrI amRtacaMdrAcAryajIta
samayasArakalaza,

Page #557 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Steadfast Vision: Karma and its Causes are External to the Soul  (481) This
soul, a precious treasure, is revealed before us, completely unveiled. Yet, this
ignorant world, like the blind, transgresses it! The reason for this is that
they have not received the light of this supreme knowledge. Therefore, enveloped
in the darkness of ignorance, they cannot see this ultimate treasure and act
like the blind leading the blind!  The world transgresses before the revealed
ultimate treasure... O Jinesar! They see without light! The world, blind leading
the blind... O Jinesar! Dharma.  - Shri Anandghanji. But those with steadfast
vision, those with right vision, have seen this inner revelation, which is
beyond the external. They have received the light of the Lord of the World, and
therefore they have seen this "revealed ultimate treasure." When such a person
with right vision remembers their previous state of ignorance, they laugh at
themselves! They think, "We forgot ourselves!" What greater darkness is there
than forgetting oneself? Remembering this again and again makes us laugh! But
now we will not forget again! The supremely compassionate Shrimad Rajchandraji
has said in a very poignant verse:  "You forgot yourself, what darkness is this?
Remembering, remembering, now we laugh, we will not forget again." - Shrimad
Rajchandraji.  This knowledge of the Self is beyond the external, everything
else is external, meaning karma, karma's causes, etc., are external to the soul.
They do not enter the soul. Because, "Even though a thing with infinite power is
revealed, it does not enter another thing. Because everything is determined by
its own nature, why is it confused and suffering? There is only one thing here,
not another thing. Therefore, that thing is that thing. What is the certainty of
one thing about another? What does it do even though it is external? Whatever a
thing does to another thing, it is only a change in itself. This is only a
practical view, there is nothing else in certainty."  - Shri
Amritchandracharya's Samyatsar Kalash.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 sthirAdaSTi: karma Adi AtmAthI bAhya (481) kiMmatI khajAne, evo A AtmA mukha
AgaLa pragaTa ughADe paDyo che-sAva khulle paDayo che, chatAM A ajJAnI jagat
aMdhanI jema tene ullaMghI jAya che! te Ama kare che tenuM kAraNa tene A parama
jJAnajyotine prakAza sAMpaDyo nathI te che, eTale ajJAnarUpa aMdhakAra vyApI
rahyo hoI, te bicArUM A parama nidhAna dekhatuM nathI, ane "aMdhe aMdha palAya"
AMdhaLAnI pAchaLa AMdhaLA deDatA hoya evI ceSTA kare che ! parama nidhAna
pragaTa mukha AgaLa, jagata ullaMghI he jAya....jinesara! joti vinA jue!
jagadIzanI, aMdhe aMdha palAya...jinesara ! dharma." -zrI AnaMdaghanajI. paNa A
gadaSTivALA samyagdaSTi puruSane te abAhya evI AMtaru tinuM pragaTa darzana
thayuM che, jagadIzanI tine prakAza sAMpaDyo che, eTale teNe te A parama nidhAna
pragaTa mukha AgaLa" dIThe che. evA samyagdaSTi puruSane te pitAnI pUrva ajJAna
avasthAnuM smaraNa thatAM potAnA pratye hasavuM Ave che ! te vicAre che ke A5
A5kuM bhUla gayA !" pote potAne bhUlI gaye enAthI te bIjuM moTuM adhera karyuM?
e pharI pharI yAda karatAM karatAM amane hasavuM Ave che ! paNa have te ame
pharIthI nahi bhUlIe ! parama bhAvagI zrImad rAjacaMdrajIe atyaMta mArmika
vacane kahyA che ke - Apa ApakuM bhUla gayA, Inase kayA adhera? sumara sumara
aba hasata he, nahi bhUlege phera."--zrImad rAjacaMdrajI. A kevala jJAnati ja
abAhya che, bAkI bIjuM badhuMya bAhya che, arthAt karma, karma Adi AtmAthI bAhya
che, teno AtmAmAM aMtaHpraveza nathI. kAraNa ke 4 "pragaTapaNe anaMta zaktivALI
vastu paNa bhale hAra ALoTyA kare, paNa vartu x"bahilaThati yadyapi
sphuTadanaMtazaktiH svayam, tathApyaparavastuno vizati nAnyavastvantaram  /
svabhAvaniyataM yataH sakalameva vastviSyate, svabhAvacalanAkulaH kimiha mohita:
klizyate  /  vastu caikamiha nAnyavastuno, yena tena khalu vastu vastu tat  /
nizcayo'yamaparo'parasya kaH, kiM karoti hi bahi Thannapi  /  /  yattu vastu
kurute'nyavastunaH, kiMcanApi pariNAminaH svayaM  /  vyAvahArikadRzaiva
tanmataM, nAnyadasti kimapIha nizcayAt  // " -zrI amRtacaMdrAcAryajIta
samayasAra kalaza.

Page #558 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(482) The aggregate of karma, etc., cannot enter into another thing, because the
gross soul is said to be external to the object, it is said to be limited by its
own nature, by its own fixed determination. Then, after attaining greatness,
what is it that is agitated to change its nature? Because here nothing is
another thing, therefore the thing is that thing itself, this is the
determination. Even though it is defeated, what does another do to another? And
whatever another does to another, which is self-produced, is considered to be so
from the point of view of practice, but in reality, it is nothing else here.
Thus, karma, etc., are external to the soul, then what is the relationship
between the soul and the karma of knowledge-obscuration, etc., the body, etc.,
and the feelings of attachment and aversion, etc.? For understanding this, it is
necessary to think briefly. Here, the example of the sculptor-craftsman is
appropriate - just as a craftsman, etc., performs karma, which is the result of
the substance of the necklace, etc., with the help of the instrument, which is
the result of the substance of the hammer, etc., he takes hold of the
instrument, which is the result of the substance of the hammer, etc., and enjoys
the pleasure, etc., which is the result of the substance of the necklace, etc.,
as the fruit of the karma of the cause and effect. But due to the multiplicity
of the substance of the practice, there is otherness-separation from it, so it
does not become one with it. Therefore, only due to the feeling of cause and
effect, there is the practice of the doer-karma and the enjoyer-enjoyment.
Similarly, the soul also performs karma, which is the result of the substance of
merit and demerit, etc., with the help of the mind, speech, and body, which are
the result of the substance of the pudgala. It takes hold of the mind, speech,
and body, which are the result of the substance of the pudgala, and enjoys the
pleasure and pain, etc., which are the result of the substance of the pudgala,
as the fruit of the karma of merit and demerit, etc. But due to the multiplicity
of the substance, there is otherness-separation from it, so it does not become
one with it. Therefore, only due to the feeling of cause and effect, there is
the practice of the doer-karma and the enjoyer-enjoyment. And just as that same
craftsman, desiring to work, performs karma, which is the result of the self,
according to the effort, and enjoys the fruit of karma, which is the result of
the self, with the characteristics of suffering, according to the effort, and
due to the multiplicity of the substance, there is otherness-separation from it,
so it becomes one with it. Therefore, due to the feeling of result-resultant,
there is the determination of the doer-karma and the enjoyer-enjoyment in it.
Similarly, the soul also performs karma, which is the result of the self,
according to the effort, *"जह सिप्पिओ उ कम्मं कुम्वइ ण य सो उ तम्मओ होइ । तह
जीवोवि य कम्मं कुव्वदि ण य तम्मओ होइ ।" (See for reference) - Shri Samayasar Ga.
349-355 and the extremely wonderful commentary of Shri Amritchandracharya.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (482) gadaSTisamuccaya karma Adi taranI-bIjI vastunI aMdara pravezI zakatI
nathI, kAraNa ke sakala ja AtmAthI bAhya vastu svabhAvaniyata kahI che, potAnA
svabhAvathI niyata-nizcayathI maryAdita kahI che, te pachI maha pAmI te svabhAva
pheravavA mATe Akula thaI zAne kaveza pAmavAmAM Ave che? kAraNa ke ahI kaI vastu
anya vastunI nathI, tethI vastu te vastu ja che, A nizcaya che hAra leTatAM
chatAM anya anyanuM zuM kare che? ane svayaM pariNamI evI anya vastunuM anya
vastu kaMI paNa kare che, te te vyavahAra dRSTithI mAnyuM che, nizcayathI te
ahIM bIjuM kaMI paNa nathI.' Ama karma Adi AtmAthI bAhya che, to pachI AtmAne
ane jJAnAvaraNIyAdi kamane, zarIrAdine tathA rAgadveSAdi bhAvakane paraspara zo
saMbaMdha che? te prasaMgathI atra samajavA mATe saMkSepa vicAra kartavya che.
atre zilpInuM*-kArIgaranuM daSTAMta ghaTe che - jema keI nI vagere kArIgara
kuMDalAdi padravya pariNAmarUpa karma kare che, hatheDI vagere paradravya
pariNAmarUpa karaNa vaDe kare che, haDI vagere paradravya pariNAmarUpa karaNe
grahe che, ane kuMDalAdi nimitta nimi. karmanA phaLarUpe paradravya pariNAmarUpa
prAmAdi bhogave che, paNa aneka ttika vyavahAra dravyapaNAne lIdhe tenAthI
anyapaNuM-jUhApaNuM hoI tanmaya thato nathI. tethI nimitta-nimittika bhAva
mAtrathI ja temAM koM-karmavano ne bhekartAbhegyatvane vyavahAra che. tema AtmA
paNa puNya-pApAdi pudgala pariNAmarUpa karma kare che, pudgala dravya
pariNAmarUpa mana-vacana-kAya karo vaDe kare che, pudgala dravya pariNAmarUpa
mana-vacana-kAya karaNe grahe che, ane puNya pApAdi karmaphalarUpa pudgala
dravya pariNAmAtmaka sukha duHkhAdi bhegave che, paNa aneka dravyapaNAe karIne
tenAthI anyapaNuM-bhinnapaNuM hoI tanmaya thatuM nathI. tethI nimitta naimittika
bhAva mAtrathI ja temAM karNa-karmavana ne bhokatR-bhegyatvane vyavahAra che.
ane jema te ja kArIgara kAma karavAne icchate sata, ceSTAne anurUpa
AtmapariNAmarUpa karma kare che, ane ceSTAne anurUpa duHkhalakSaNavALuM
AtmapariNAmarUpa karmaphaLa bhegave che, ane eka dravyapaNue karIne tenAthI
ananyapaNuMpariNAma-pari abhinnapaNuM hoI tanmaya thAya che, tethI pariNAma-
pariNAmI bhAvathI bhumI nizcaya temAM ja tuM-kamavana ne bhakatR-bhegyatvane
nizcaya che. tema AtmA paNa karavA Iccho te, ceSTArUpa AtmapariNAmarUpa karma
kare che, *"jaha sippio u kammaM kumvai Na ya so u tammao hoi  /  taha jIvovi ya
kammaM kuvvadi Na ya tammao hoi  / " (AdhAra mATe juo)-zrI samayasAra gA.
349-355 ane zrI amRtacaMdrAcAryajInI parama addabhuta TIkA,

Page #559 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The siddhāṣṭi (perfect being) is like a stone and a wall, the pure form of the
soul. (483) It accumulates karma-phala (fruits of karma) in the form of ātmā-
pariṇāma (transformation of the soul) which is characterized by duḥkha-lakṣaṇa
(characteristics of suffering). And because of its unique nature, it becomes
absorbed in it. Therefore, due to the relationship of cause and effect, it is
certain that it performs karma and experiences its fruits. Thus, the soul has a
causal-consequential relationship with karma through its actions, and a cause-
and-effect relationship with the bhavakarma (karmic actions) due to impure
perception. But according to the pure perception of the right view, the soul is
free from all karmic stains and impurities, and is pure in nature, "the eternal
God himself."  Just as a stone placed on a wall is not part of the wall, but is
external to it and distinct from it, so the stone is not part of the wall, it is
simply a stone; similarly, the soul, which is the knower, is also a substance
like pudgala (matter) in practical terms, but it is external to the knower,
distinct from the stone and the wall, so it is not part of the external
substance, the knower is like the wall, it is simply the knower, this is
certain. Just as the white quality of the stone is its nature to adorn the wall,
so the knowledge quality of the soul is its nature to know the object. Just as
the stone, in practical terms, is related to the external substance that is the
wall, it does not become part of the wall, that is, it does not become the wall,
but remains a stone in its own right; similarly, the soul also knows the
external substance in practical terms, but it does not become part of the
external substance, that is, it does not become the external substance, but
remains the knower in its own right. Because that is its nature. (For reference,
see Samyāsāra, verses 356-365 and Śrī Amṛtacandracāryaji's extraordinary
commentary "Ātmakhyāti").  "Just as a stone is not part of another stone, so too
is the soul not part of anything else." –Śrī Samyāsāra  "Just as a stone is
placed on a wall, it is not part of the wall, but is external to it and distinct
from it, so the stone is not part of the wall, it is simply a stone; similarly,
the body, speech, soul, and mind are not part of karma, but are external to it
and distinct from it, so they are not part of karma, they are simply themselves;
similarly, the soul is not part of the body, speech, mind, or karma, but is
external to them and distinct from them, so the soul is not part of them, it is
simply itself." –Śrī Yaśovijayaji's Sāḍa Trīṁśa, verses, and the knowledge
quality of the soul is its nature, so it illuminates the world, but it does not
become the world, just as the moon does not become the sky (see page 75).
Knowledge always knows the object, but the object never becomes the knower.
Thus, the relationship of the knower is such that the soul, which is of the
nature of knowledge, remains in its own form and knows the object, which is the
world. Thus, the soul is not the body, speech, mind, karma, attachment,
aversion, pudgala, or any other substance. The soul is distinct from all of
these. All of these are external to it.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 sidaSTi khaDI ane bhIMta, AtmAnuM zuddha svarUpa (483) ceSTArUpa
duHkhalakSaNavALuM AtmapariNAmarUpa karmaphaLa bhegave che, ane eka dravyapaNAe
karIne tenAthI ananyapaNuM-abhinapaNuM hoI tanmaya thAya che. tethI pariNAma-
pariNAmI bhAvathI temAM ja karyuM-karmavana ne bhokatR-bhegyatvano nizcaya che.
Ama dravya karma sAthe jIvane vyavahArathI nimitta-naimittika saMbaMdha che, ane
azuddha nizcayathI bhAvakama sAthe pariNAma-pariNAmI saMbaMdha che. paNa zuddha
nizcaya nayathI te AtmA sarva karmakalaMka-paMkathI rahita e zuddha svabhAvI
"deva svayaM zAzvata" che. vaLI jema bhIMta para hAra lagADelI khaDI bhItarUpa
nathI, bhIMtathI bAhya che, bhIMtathI jUdI che, eTale khaDI bhItanI nathI, khaDI
te khaDI ja che; tema jJAyaka evA AtmAnuM vyavahArathI pudgalAdi dravya ya che,
paNa te jJAyaka yathI bAhya che, khaDI ane zeyathI judo che, eTale te jJAyaka ya
evA paradravyane nathI, jJAyaka bhIMtanuM dRSTAMta te jJAyaka ja che, ema
nizcaya che. jema zveta guNavALI khaDIne svabhAva bhIMtane veta karavAno che,
tema jJAnaguNuvALA AtmAne svabhAva reyane jANavAno che. khaDI jema vyavahArathI
bhItarUpa paradravyane zrata kare che, tethI te kAMI bhItanI thaI jatI nathI,
arthAt bhItarUpa banI jatI nathI, paNa nizcayathI khaDInI khaDI ja rahe che;
tema AtmA paNa vyavahArathI ya evA padravyane jANe che, tethI te kAMI
paradravyano thaI jato nathI, arthAt paradravyarUpa banI jato nathI, paNa
nizcayathI jJAyakano jJAyaka ja rahe che. kAraNake e ja ene svabhAva che.
(AdhAra mATe juo samayasAra gA. 356-365 ane zrI amRtacaMdrAcAryajInI alaukika
"AtmakhyAti' TIkA) "jaha seDiyA du Na parassa seDiyA seDiyA ya sA hoi  /  tad
nAno Tu na paNa nAno gALo so Tu -zrI samayasAra "bhAva sagajA kama udayAgatA,
karama navi jIva navi mUla te navi chatA; khaDIyathI bhItimAM jema hoe tatA,
bhIti navi khaDIya navi teha bhramasaMgatA; deha navi vacana navi jIva navi
citta che, karma navi rAga navi cheSa na vicitta che, puli bhAva pudgalapaNe
pariName, dravya navi juo juo eka have kime." -zrI yazovijyajIkRta sADA tra0 gA,
sta, ane jJAyakapaNuM AtmAno svabhAva hoI te vizvane prakAze che, tethI te kAMI
vizvarUpa thaI jato nathI,-vizvaprakAzaka "caMdra bhramirUpa thato nathI" tema
(juo pR. 75 ). jJAna Neyane sadA jANe che, paNa zeya kadI tenuM thatuM nathI.
Ama yajJAyaka saMbaMdhanI vyavasthA che jJAna svabhAvI AtmA svarUpasthita rahI
vizvarUpa Neyane jANe che.Ama jIva deha nathI, vacana nathI, mana nathI, karma
nathI, rAga nathI, dveSa nathI, pudgala nathI, ke anya dravyarUpa nathI. jIva A
sarvathI juda che-bhinna che. A sarva te bAhya bhAve che,

Page #560 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(484) The collection of perceptions (gadashtisamuchchay) is an attribute of the
soul that is only known by omniscience (kevalgyanati); because, with certainty
(nishchay), with pure knowledge (shuddhnay), this soul is unattached
(abadhprushta), unique (anany), constant (niyat), without any particular
characteristics (avishesha), and uncombined (asanyukt). (See Gatha, Footnote p.
72) The relationship of the sheath (myan) to the sword is like the relationship
of the body to the soul, which has seen the body in its true form
(yathathathya). The relationship of the body to the soul, which has seen the
soul in its true form, is like the relationship of the sheath to the sword. The
great soul (mahat purush) is the same for both life and death, for he has
experienced the unattached, clear soul (abadhspasht atma). -Param Atmadashta
Shrimmad Rajchandraji. (1) The soul is attached (badhspasht) due to the
expectation of the endless bondage (anadi bandh paryay), but the soul is
unattached (abadhskrushta) like a lotus in water, due to the expectation of the
soul's nature (atmasvabhav) which is untouchable by matter (pudgal) alone. (2)
The soul is unique (anany) because, although it takes on other forms (anyarup)
due to the assumption of other states (naranarkadi anyany paryay), it is always
the same pure, undivided soul (atmasvabhav). This is like the nature of clay
(mruttika), which remains undivided in all its forms (ghat adi sav paryay). (3)
The soul is constant (niyat) because, although it is impermanent (aniyat) due to
the states of growth and decay (vridhi-hani paryay), it is always the same, like
the nature of the ocean (samudrasvabhav). (4) Gold appears in many forms
(paryayarup) - heavy, yellow, sticky - but if we do not look at it with the
perception of forms (paryaydasht) and look at it with the perception of
substance (dravya dasht), then only one unbroken gold (kanak) is seen.
Similarly, the soul appears in many forms (paryayvishesharup) - knowledge
(gyan), vision (darshan), etc. - but if we look at it with the perception of the
soul's nature (atmasvabhav) without any particular characteristics (avishesha)
and drink the nectar of non-dualistic taste (nirvikalp ras), then only one pure,
unstained soul (shuddh nirangan ek atma) is seen. (5) Just as water has a
combined heat (sanyuktpan) due to the expectation of the state of heat (ushnatva
paryay) obtained from fire (agnisange), but it does not have such a combined
heat due to the expectation of the cold nature of water (jalna sheet svabhav)
alone; similarly, the soul has a combined state of attachment (mehsanyuktpan)
due to the expectation of the state of attachment (mahaparyay) obtained from
karma (karmasange), but it does not have such a combined state due to the
expectation of the soul's own nature of the seed of bondage (svayam badhbeej
svabhav) alone. In other words, the soul is uncombined (asanyukt). Thus, by
discarding the perception of forms (paryaydasht) and looking at it with the pure
perception of substance (shuddh dravya dasht), the soul is unattached
(abadhprushta), unique (anany), constant (niyat), without any particular
characteristics (avishesha), and uncombined (asanyukt). (For reference, see
Shree Amritchandracharyaji's Samyasaarika Ga. 14-15) Heavy, yellow, sticky, gold
in many waves; do not look at it with the perception of forms, only one unbroken
gold remains... The supreme lord of religion (dharam), the vision (darshan),
knowledge (gyan), and feet (charan) of the supreme lord (arnaath), are many in
their formless nature (alakh svarup); drink the nectar of non-dualistic taste
(nirvikalp ras), only one pure, unstained (shuddh nirangan ek) remains...
Religion (dharam) - Shree Anandghanji Such pure (shuddh), unstained (nirangan),
one (ek), non-dual (advait) omniscient light (kevalgyanjyot) is the only
attribute (abaahya) that is the ultimate essence (antstattva) of the soul. All
other attributes (bhavo) are external (baahya) to the soul.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (484) gadaSTisamuccaya eka kevalajJAnati ja AtmAno abAhya bhAva che; kAraNa ke
nizcayathI-zuddhanayathI A AtmA abaddhapRSTa, ananya, niyata, avizeSa ne
asaMyukta che. (juo gAthA, phuTaneTa pR. 72) deha pratye jevo vacano saMbaMdha
che te AtmA pratye jeNe dehane saMbaMdha yathAtathya dITho che, myAna pratye
taravArane jevo saMbaMdha che te deha pratye jeNe AtmAne saMbaMdha dITho che,
abaddhaspaSTa AtmA jeNe anubhavyo che, te mahata puruSane jIvana ane maraNa
banne samAna che." -parama AtmadaSTA zrImad rAjacaMdrajI. (1) anAdi baMdha
paryAyanI apekSAe AtmA baddhaspaSTa che, chatAM ekAMte pudgalathI aspRzya evA
AtmasvabhAvane apekSIne AtmA jalamAM kamalanI jema abaddhaskRSTa che. (2)
naranarakAdi anyAnya paryAya dhAraNa karyAthI anyarUpa chatAM sarvatra AtmAnuM
zuddha akhaMDa evA AtmasvabhAvanI apekSAe, ghaTa Adi sava paryAyamAM svarUpa
vattatA akhaMDita mRttikA svabhAvanI jema, AtmA ananya che. (3) samudranI jema
AtmAnA vRddhi-hAni paryAyathI aniyata chatAM, samudrasvabhAva jevA nitya
vyavasthita AtmasvabhAvanI apekSAe AtmA niyata che. (4) bhArI, pILuM, cIkaNuM
ema sonuM aneka paryAyarUpa dIse che, paNa paryAyadaSTi na daIe ne
dravyadaSTithI joIe to eka abhaMga senuM ja dekhAya che. tema paryAya dRSTithI
AtmA jJAna- darzanAdi aneka paryAyavizeSarUpa dIse che, paNa avizeSa evA
AtmasvabhAvane apekSIne joIe ne nivikalpa rasanuM pAna karIe te zuddha niraMjana
eka AtmA ja bhAsyamAna thAya che. (5) jema agnisaMge prApta uSNatva paryAyanI
apekSAe jalamAM uSNapaNAnuM saMyuktapaNuM che chatAM, ekAMte jalanA zIta
svabhAvanI apekSAe tevuM saMyuktapaNuM nathI; tema karmasaMge prApta
mAhaparyAyanI apekSAe AtmAnuM mehasaMyuktapaNuM che, chatAM ekAMte AtmAnA svayaM
bAdhabIja svabhAvanI apekSAe tevuM saMyuktapaNuM nathI, arthAt AtmA asaMyukta
che. Ama paryAyadaSTi cheDI daI, zuddha dravya dRSTithI jotAM AtmA abaddhapRSTa,
ananya, niyata, avizeSa ne asaMyukta che. (AdhAra mATe juo zrI
amRtacaMdrAcAryajIkRta samayasArIkA gA. 14-15) bhArI pILo cIkaNe, kanaka aneka
taraMga re; paryAyaSTi na dIjIe, eka ja kanaka abhaMga re..dharama parama
aranAthana darazana jJAna caraNathakI, alakha svarUpa aneka re; nirvikalpa rasa
pIjIe, zuddha niraMjana eka re.... dharama" -zrI AnaMdaghanajI AvI zuddha,
niraMjana, eka, advaita evI kevala jJAnajyoti ja abAhya che, AtmAnuM parama evuM
aMtastattva che. e sivAyanA zeSa bhAvo te bAhya che, AtmAthI

Page #561 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Steadfast Vision:** “g tension” — all the rest is *upaplap* (485) It is on the
*upaplap* and it is *upaplap* in nature. *Upaplap* means chaos, disaster, all
the rest is calamity, misfortune, fear, anxiety, agitation, inauspiciousness,
planetary influence, etc. Whatever is experienced or influenced by anything
other than pure knowledge, that is truly *upaplap* in nature. Just as a city is
thrown into chaos by the invasion of an enemy, chaos spreads, agitation
pervades, destruction occurs, wealth is looted, and there is no end to the
calamity; similarly, by the invasion of external objects, *upaplap* arises in
this conscious being's conscious city, producing a contraction in the form of
self-awareness, ignorance spreads like chaos, the treasure of the soul's
knowledge, vision, and other virtues is looted, and there is no end to the
calamity of endless transmigration. The proverb "The outsider enters and causes
destruction" is true here! "The outsider enters and causes destruction, I
believe this proverb is not false." — Shri Shantasudharas. This influence of
karma, etc., is external, truly! It is "external" because it acts like an enemy,
it is the enemy of the soul's emotions. The soul has nothing to do with it in
terms of its true nature. But due to the influence of the endless past, it
becomes attached to it by identifying with it. It goes so far as to become
intoxicated with the results of external objects, it is stained by the color of
external objects, it is dyed by the color of external objects, and it becomes a
consumer and protector of the external, becoming attached to external objects!
It is from this color of external results that this being experiences endless
suffering. Therefore, this invasion of the external cycle, which is in the form
of external influence, is truly *upaplap* in nature, it is a disaster, it is a
calamity, it is misfortune, it is a hindrance, it is inauspicious, it is a
planetary influence, it is chaos. External results, intoxication, external
color, stained, external consumer, protector, attached to external objects... "I
pray to the Lord who protects the world." — Shri Devchandraji. "There is only
one breath, the sign of pure knowledge." — Shri Arsha Vachan. But the one who
has received the light of pure knowledge, the being with right vision, feels
that the eternal soul with the characteristics of knowledge and vision is the
only reality, the rest is external, it is external to the self, it has nothing
to do with the self, there is no connection. Understanding this, he abandons
external results and embraces self-results, becoming absorbed in the glory of
the pure essence of the self, the true nature, he cuts off the taste of external
objects, which are like poison, and becomes strong and healthy by partaking of
the taste of his own true nature.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 sthirAdaSTi : "g je tANa "---bAkI badho upaSNava (485) para che, ne te
upappavarUpa che. upaplava eTale aMdhAdhuMdhI, Aphata, bAkI badhe Apatti,
durbhAgya, vijJa, bhaya, kSobha-khaLabhaLATa, ariSTa, graha ItyAdi. upaplava
kevala jJAnati sivAyanA je je bhAve che-parabhAve che, te te kharekhara!
upappavarUpa ja che. jema keI paracakanA AkramaNathI nagaramAM upaplava macI
rahe, aMdhAdhuMdhI phelAI jAya, khaLabhaLATa vyApI jAya, nAzabhAga thaI rahe,
saMpatti lUMTAI jAya, ne vipattino pAra rahe nahiM; tema paravastunA AkramaNathI
A caitanyamaya puruSanA caitanyapuramAM upaplava mace che,
AtmapradezaparispaMdarUpa saMkSebha upaje che, ajJAnanI aMdhAdhuMdhI vyApe che,
AtmAnA jJAna-darzanAdi guNaratnono khajAna lUMTAya che, ane anaMta
bhavaparibhramaNarUpa Apattine pAra raheto nathI. "pArake peTho vinAza kare" te
kahevata atra sAcI paDe che ! "paraH praviSTaH kurute vinAzam, lokoktireSA na
mRSeti manye  /  nirvirA jumiyA vikra jiM, jJAnAno ne samAri vaSTa "--zrI
zAMtasudhArasa. A karmAdi parabhAva te bAhya bhAvo che, kharekhara ! para che
arthAt zatrunuM kAma karatA hovAthI "para" che, AtmAnA bhAvazatru che.
paramArthathI AtmAne enI sAthe kAMI levAdevA nathI. paNa anAdi adhyAsanI
kuvAsanAthI temAM ahevamamatva karIne te baMdhAya che. te eTale sudhI ke
parapariNatinA rAgIpaNe, te pararasanA raMgathI rakta thAya che, pararasaraMge
raMgAI jAya che, ane parane grAhaka tathA rakSaka banI parabhegamAM Asakta bane
che! A parapariNatinA raMgathI ja A jIva anaMta du:kha pAme che. eTale A
parabhAvarUpa paracakranuM AkramaNa kharekhara ! upappavarUpa che, Aphata che,
Apatti che, durbhAgyarUpa che, vizvarUpa-bAdhArUpa che, ariSTa-aniSTarUpa che,
graharUpa che, aMdhAdhuMdhIrUpa che. para pariNati rAgIpaNuM, para rasa raMge
rakta re, para grAhaka rakSakapaNe, parabhege Asakta re...jagatAraka prabhu
vinavuM" zrI devacaMdrajI. "ego me sAsao appA nnaanndNsnnlkkhnno| senA ne jAti
mavA sarve saMkoravaLa ." zrI ArSa vacana. paNa jene kevala jJAnatine prakAza
sAMpaDyo che, e samyaggadaSTi jIva te ema bhAve che ke-jJAnadarzana lakSaNavALo
eka zAzvata AtmA ja mahAre che, bAkInA saMjogalakSaNa bhAve te bAhya che-
AtmabAhya che, mahArA AtmAne tenI tAro sAthe kaMI levAdevA nathI-kaMI nisbata
nathI. ema samajI te parapariNati ApA' tyaje che, ne AtmapariNatine bhaje che
paramAtmasvarUpa zuddha svajAti tatvanA bahumAnamAM tallIna banI, virasa evA
vijAti parabhAva rasane cheDI de che, ne sarasa evA svasvarUpa rasanA pAnathI
pIna-puSTa thAya che, dhIgodhaDa bane che!

Page #562 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(486). Ganiramuchchay, pure self-kind essence, immersed in great respect;
abandoning the taste of other kinds, drinking the taste of one's own
form...world-protector”—Shri Devchandraji. And such a person who has attained
the vision of the supreme self-essence, the ultimate knowledge-tirmy, who has
attained self-realization, such a Samyagdarshi man does not have even a trace of
doubt. “Knowledge there is no doubt.” Just as the sun's rays spread, darkness
does not remain, so too, after the vision of the Supreme Self, even a trace of
doubt does not remain, there is complete unshakeable fearlessness, and
“suffering is avoided at the door of the body.” Because where there is doubt,
there is sorrow, and where there is knowledge, there is no doubt. “Where there
is doubt, there is sorrow, knowledge there is no doubt.” —Shrimad Rajchandraji.
Having seen the vision, the Jina, there is no doubt; just as the sun's rays
spread, darkness is prevented...pure”—Shri Anandghanji. Such a fearless, innate,
self-form vision, having attained supreme fearlessness, such are the supreme
blessed utterances of the great, experienced, Samyagdarshi: “The true path has
been found, doubts have been dispelled; those waters have gone, the self-body
has been distinguished.” Nineteen hundred and forty-nine, pure samyakti has
shone; heard and experienced, the state is increasing, the self-form has been
realized. Blessed is this day! The unprecedented peace has awakened.” —Shrimad
Rajchandraji. “Suffering has been avoided at the door of the body, happiness has
met; what treasure is there for the one who has made the mind the treasure? Pure
Jina, having seen, take it today, the desired task in our teachings. Having
filled the form, having created it, no comparison is less; the peaceful, good,
absorbing it, there is no satisfaction in seeing it...pure.” —Shri Anandghanji.
Thus, the wise, the patient, those devoted to restraint. Those who strive to
abandon the obstacles to Dharma, truly. || 159 || 158 Commentary: - Thus,
according to the above principle, - these wise, patient, unwavering, those who
are devoted to restraint, with the above characteristics, and - in that way,
those who strive to abandon the obstacles to Dharma, truly, - from the root, -
thus, by following the above principle, by practicing discrimination, due to the
purification, from the root - from the Supreme. Because they are superior, based
on the scriptures, as they are described.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (486). gaNirAmuccaya zuddha svajAti tattvane, bahumAne tallIna re; te vijAti
rasatA tajI, svasvarUpa rasa pIna re...jagatAraka"--zrI devacaMdrajI. ane AvA
kevalajJAna-tirmaya parama AtmatatvanuM jene darzana sAMpaDayuM che,
AtmasAkSAtkAra thayuM che, evA samyagadaSTi puruSane pachI koI paNa prakArano
saMzayane aMza paNa rahetuM nathI. "jJAna tihAM zaMkA nahiM thApa.' jema sUryane
kiraNasamUha prasaratAM aMdhakAra raheto nathI, tema paramAtmadarzana thaye leza
paNa saMzaya rahetuM nathI, sarvathA parama nizaktA-nirbhayatA varte che, ane
"dukha dehaga dare TaLe che. kAraNa ke jyAM zaMkA che tyAM ja saMtApa che, ane
jyAM jJAna che tyAM zaMkA nathI. "jyAM zaMkA tyAM gaNa saMtApa, jJAna tihAM
zaMkA nahi thApa."--zrImad rAjacaMdrajI. darazana dIThe jinataNe re, saMzaya na
rahe vedha; dinakara karabhara prasaratAM re, aMdhakAra pratiSedha...vimala."--
zrI AnaMdaghanajI. evuM niHzaMka sahajAnmasvarUpanuM darzana thatAM parama
nirbhayapaNAne prApta thayelA mahAtmA anubhavajJAnI samyagdaSTionA AvA parama
dhanya uddagAra nIkaLI paDe che - "mAraga sAcA mila gayA, chUTa gaye saMdeha;
hatA se te jala gayA, bhinna kiyA nija deha." ogaNIsaseM ne suDatAlIsuM, samakti
zuddha prakANyuM re; zruta anubhava vadhatI dazA, nija svarUpa avabhAsyuM re.
dhanya re divasa A aho ! jAgI je re zAMti apUrva re."--zrImad rAjacaMdrajI.
"duHkha dehaga dvare TaLyA re, sukha saMparazuM bheTa; dhI*ga dhaNI mAthe kiye
re, kuNu gaMje nara eTa ? vimala jina dIThA leyaNa Aja, mahArA sikhkhayAM
vaMcchita kAja. abhiya bharI mUrati racI re, upamA na ghaTe keya; zAMtasudhArasa
jhIlatI re, nirakhata tRpati na hoya....vimala0"--zrI AnaMdaghanajI. evaM
vivekino dhIrAH pratyAhAraparAyaNAH  /  dharmabAdhAparityAgayatnavantazca
tattvataH  //  159  // 158 kRttiH-vajU-ema, ukta nIti pramANe, vini -A vivekI,
ghI-dhIra, acapala, pratyAhArapUjA-ukta lakSaNavALA pratyAhArapradhAna, tathA-te
prakAre, dharmAdhAparityAnacattavana-ane dhamabhAdhAnA parisamAgamAM kanavaMta,
taravara - taravathI, ema ukta nItithI vivekavarDa karIne pariddhine lIdhe
tarasathI-paramA* thI. kAraNa ke teo bhinayaMthipaNuthakI uttama zrutapradhAna
hoI ema Alece che.

Page #563 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Standing Firm:**  The wise, with their discerning knowledge and experience,
are like swans who do not get entangled in the mire.  (487)  Thus, the wise and
patient, being devoted to Pratyahara, strive to abandon the bondage of Dharma.
(158)  **Commentary:**  As stated above, according to the principles of ethics,
the wise and steadfast, who are free from wavering, are eager to engage in
Pratyahara, as described. Due to the purity arising from their discernment, they
strive to abandon the bondage of Dharma, motivated by the ultimate truth.   This
is how it happens:  The discerning knowledge mentioned above clearly reveals the
distinction between the self and the non-self. It shows that the body, house,
and other attachments are external, impermanent, insecure, and impure. They
belong to others, not to the self.   On the other hand, the pure knowledge-light
is the only thing that is not external, eternal, secure, and pure. It is the
self, the father, not belonging to others. It is the ultimate truth, while
everything else is like a mirage, a disaster, and a blinding darkness.
Therefore, only this pure knowledge-light is worthy of acceptance, while
everything else is worthy of rejection. Just as a child mistakenly brings home a
garment belonging to someone else, the honest and discerning, righteous person
understands that all external attachments and objects should be abandoned. They
realize, "I am bound by attachment to these things, so I must abandon this
attachment."   Because the self-consciousness in the body connects the soul to
the body, the self-consciousness in the soul separates the soul from the body.
This self-consciousness in the body is the root of worldly suffering. Therefore,
I should abandon the self-consciousness in the body, which is the focus on the
body, and cultivate self-consciousness in the soul. (See page 302).  Thus,
through the discernment of the self and the non-self, the knowledge of
distinction arises, leading to pure self-knowledge. This grants them the
experience of the pure soul. Therefore, "The past, the present, and the future,
breaking through the bonds with force, the wise one, if anyone, indeed,
contemplates within, dispelling delusion instantly. The glory of the unity of
the self and the experience of the self is clearly manifest, this is certain.
The eternal one, free from the stain of karma, is himself eternal."  From the
Samyasaar Kalash, by Shri Amritchandracharya.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 sthiSTi : vivekakhyAti-anubhava haMsU zuM pekha re' (487) ema vivekI dhIra A,
pratyAhAra karaMta; tavathI dharmabhAvanA, tyAre prayatnavaMta 158 artha -ema
vivekI evA e dhIrajane tevA prakAre pratyAhAraparAyaNa hoya che, ane tatvathI
dhamabAdhAnA parityAgamAM yatanavaMta hoya che. vivecana uparamAM kahI te nIti
pramANe vivekI evA A dhIra-acapala jane ukta lakSaNavALA pratyAhAramAM tatpara
hoya che, ane te vivekathI upajelI parizuddhine lIdhe teo tatvathIparamArthathI
dharmanI bAdhAnA parityAgamAM yatnavaMta hoya che. te A prakAre - vivekakhyAti
uparamAM sva-para bhAvane spaSTa viveka batAvyuM ke deha-gRhAdi bhAva bAhya che;
mRgajalAdi jevA anitya, azaraNa ne azuci che; para che pArakA che, potAnA nathI.
ane nirAbAdha nirAmaya evI kevala eka jJAnajyoti ja abAhya che; zAzvata,
zaraNarUpa ne zuci bhAva che; AtmIya-pitAne che, pArake nathI; ane e ja parama
tattva che, bAkI bIjuM badhuMya upappavarUpa-AphatarUpa-aMdhAdhuMdhIrUpa che.
mATe eka A kevalajJAnajyoti ja Adeya che, grahaNa karavA yogya che, bAkI bIjuM
badhuMya heya che-tyAga karavA yogya che. bhUlathI bebIne gherathI pArakuM
vastra AvI gayuM hoya te tenA mULa dhaNIne pAchuM ApI devuM joIe, e nyAye
pramANika vivekI samyagadaSTi puruSa ema jANe che ke A sarva parabhAvane-
paravastune mahAre tyAga karI devo joIe, temAM neharUpa "AsaktithI huM baMdhA
chuM, mATe mahAre te Asakti choDI devI joIe. kAraNa ke dehamAM svabuddhi AtmAne
e deha sAthe nizcaya joDe che, svAtmAmAM Atmabuddhi e dehathI AtmAne vije che-
vikhUTo pADe che. dehamAM Atmabuddhi e ja saMsAra duHkhanuM mULa che, mATe huM
dehAdimAM AtmabuddhirUpa dehAdhyAsa choDI daI AtmAmAM ja Atmabuddhi karUM. (juo
pR. 302). Ama sva-parabhAvane viveka upaje hevAthI, bhedajJAna pragaTayuM
hovAthI, zuddha AtmajJAna thayuM hovAthI, tene nirmala AtmAnubhava sAMpaDe che.
eTale-"bhUtaka vartamAna x "bhUtaM bhAntamabhUtameva rabhasA nirbhidya baMdhaM
sudhI yadyantaH kila ko'pyaho kalayati vyAhatya mohaM haThAt  /
yAtmAtmAnubhavaikAmyamahimA vyakto'yamAste dhruvaM, nityaM karmakalaGkapavikalo
devaH svayaM zAzvataH  // " zrI amRtacaMdrAcAryajIkRta samayasAra kalaza,

Page #564 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Collection of Yogic Insights  This wise and discerning soul, having
completely separated himself from future attachments, has overcome the
attachment of the senses through intense effort and finally beholds the true
nature of the soul. This soul, whose glory is understood only through self-
realization, is eternally 'established' and is the self-existent, eternal God,
free from all impurities and blemishes. Just as a swan separates milk from
water, this self-realized, right-sighted soul distinguishes between the soul and
non-soul, separating the self from the non-self. He experiences that the soul,
in its essence of pure consciousness, is distinct from the body, just as a
garment is distinct from the body, or a sword from its scabbard. He perceives
the soul as eternally distinct and separate, and as the manifest, luminous form
of consciousness. He understands that the picture gallery is distinct, the bed
within it is distinct, the mattress on the bed is distinct, and the sheet on the
mattress is also distinct. He understands that his relationship with these
external objects is distinct, and that his self-awareness is distinct from them.
Understanding this, the right-sighted, discerning soul, abandoning the state of
unconsciousness and embracing consciousness, opens his eyes and sees his own
true nature.   "His own qualities are inscribed within him, not the qualities of
others. He separates milk from water, through the experience of the swan. Bow
down to the lotus feet of Parshvanath."  (488)  4 66 *  —Shri Ananddhanaji,  The
picture gallery is distinct, the furniture is distinct, the mattress is
distinct, the sheet is also distinct. My existence here is false. In the past, I
was in a state of sleep, like a dream. The present moment is not a dream, it is
a reality. The breath and the dream are like the sleep from which I have
awakened. I see my own form clearly, like a mirror reflecting my true self.
Abandoning the fear of consciousness, abandoning the state of unconsciousness,
Opening my eyes, I see my own true form.  —Kaviwar Banarasidasji.  C  And what
is the form that he sees? I am the soul, in the soul, by the soul. I am the
experience of the soul. I am not a neuter, not a man, not a woman, not one, not
two, not many. In the absence of this, I was asleep, and in its presence, I have
awakened. I am the transcendental, indescribable, self-perceived soul. (See page
280-81) Thus, when the right-sighted soul realizes his true nature, the sleep of
ignorance, which has lasted since time immemorial, is dispelled, and the soul,
the abode of right knowledge, awakens and rises.  k. "7  "By the soul, I
experience myself, in the soul, by the soul. I am that, not this, not that, not
one, not two, not many. In the absence of this, I was asleep, and in its
presence, I have awakened. I am the transcendental, indescribable, self-
perceived soul."  —Shri Pujyapadaswami, Shri Samadhishatak.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 yogadRSTisamuccaya ne bhAvI adhane ekadama nibhedIne A subuddhivaMta mehane
haThathI anubhava haMsa haThAvI aMtamAM nihALe che, teA eka AtmAnubhavathI ja
jene mahimA zuM pekha re 'gamya che evA A pragaTa AtmA dhruvapaNe ' sthita '
che, ane te nitya ka kalaMka paMkathI rahita evA svayaM zAzvata deva che'. Ama
huMsa jema kSIra-nIrane viveka kare che, dUdha ne pANI jUdA kare che, tema A
AtmAnubhavI samyag dRSTi puruSa AtmA-anAtmAnA viveka kare che, svaparane judA
pADe che. dehathI jema vasra jugnu' che, myAnathI jema talavAra jUdI che, tema
jaDathI cetanasvarUpa AtmA pragaTa lakSaNe judA che, ema te anubhave che; sa
avasthAmAM je sadAya nyArA-judA ne judA jaNAya che ane je pragaTa caitanyamaya
svarUpa che, evA AtmA te sAkSAt saMvede che. citrazALA nyArI-judI che, temAM
palaMga nyArA-judA che, temAM seja-pathArI nyArI che tenI cAdara paNa nyArI che,
AvA paravastu sAthenA mhArA sabadha che, emAM mhArI sthApanA karavI--Atmabuddhi
karavI jUDI che,-ema samajI samyagdaSTi bhedajJAnI puruSa acetanatAbhAva
tyAgIne, tyAgI cetana manI, dRSTi kheAlIne dekhe che, te peAtAnuM-AtmAnuM
svarUpa dekhe che. " nija guNu sakhanijamAM lakhe, na ca paraguNanI rekha re;
khIra nIra vivare kare, anubhava hu'sa zu' pekha re....praNamu' padapakaja
pArzvanA ' (488) 4 66 * --zrI AnadadhanajI, citrasArI nyArI, parajaka nyArA,
seja nyArI, cAdara bhI nyArI, ihAM jUThI merI thapanA; atIta avasthA saina,
nidrA vahI keu paina, vidyamAna palaka na, cAme' akha chapanA; zvAsa au supana
dAu, nidrAkI alaMga khue, sUjhe sakha aMga lakhI, Atama darapanA; tyAgI bhayA
cetana, acetanatAbhAva tyAgI, bhAle dRSTi khAlike, saMbhAle rUpa apanA.
--kavivara banArasIdAsajI. C ane te dekhe che te svarUpa kevu che? AtmAthI ja,
AtmAmAM, AtmAne huM je anubhavuM chuM te huM chuM, soph '. te nathI napusaka,
nathI nara, nathI nArI, nathI eka, nathI ke, nathI khabahu, neti neti. jenA
abhAve huM suSupta-sUtA hatA, ane jenA sadbhAve huM jAgrata thayA--UThayo, te
atIndriya anirdezya evA svasa vedya huM chuM. ( ju pR. 280-81) Ama samyagdaSTi
puruSane nija svarUpanuM bhAna pragaTatAM anAdinI pramAda nidrA TaLI che, ane
samyag jJAnasudhArasadhAma evA AtmA jAgyA che ne eTalI UThe che ke k. "7
yenAtmanA'nubhUye'hamAtmanaivAtmanAtmani  /  so'haM na tanna sA nAsau naiko na
dvau na vA bahuH  //  dabhAve toshaM yadbhave vyutthitaH punaH  /
atIndriyamanirdezyaM tatsvasaMvedyamasmyahaM  //  " zrI pUjyapAdasvAmIjI kRta
zrI samAdhizataka,

Page #565 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Sthira drishti: The supreme fearlessness of the knowledgeable one who is free
from all fears  (489) "O Lord Neminath, the sun of the world, I have been
deluded by the beginningless ignorance. Abandoning the false and negligent
delusion, I have attained the nectar-like true knowledge. The natural
manifestation of the discrimination between the self and the non-self has firmly
established the means of spiritual practice within me. Becoming the supporter of
the knowable, the essential nature of the knower has become steady, and my own
nature's essence has become stable." - Tattvaranjini Mahamuni Shri Devachandrajī
"Dhairyata-nirbhayata. How much it burns on the head, who can extinguish it? O
spotless one!" - Shri Anandghanji  These supreme-visioned great souls are thus
discriminative, steady, unwavering, and supremely fearless, because the cause of
fear and restlessness is the ignorance of one's own nature, but those who have
realized the nature of the self firmly know that nothing of mine is going
anywhere, what is mine is with me, and all else is foreign. "Whose is this, and
what is mine? That which is Yours is with You, all else is foreign. So, what
fear do I have? What worry? What delusion?"  "In all respects, I am distinct
from all, I am the supreme, inconceivable bliss-nature, the absolute pure
experiential form alone. Where is distraction? What delusion? What fear? What
sorrow? What other state? I am pure, supreme, most tranquil consciousness,
devoid of any differentiation. I abide in my own essential nature. I become one
with it. Peace, peace, peace."  It is such right-visioned ones who are capable
of this supreme courage, that when the thunderbolt falls and they are trembling
with fear, they unhesitatingly cut off that path, knowing themselves to be the
indestructible knowledge-embodied, free from the seven fears. And thus, those
who have the supreme unwavering certainty of their own self-nature free from any
doubt are the truly fearless.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 sthi rAdaSTi : sasa bhayarahita jJAnInuM parama ni:zaMkapaNu (489) "jagata
divAkara zrI namIzvara svAma je, tuja mukha dIThe nAThI bhUla anAdinI re le. jA
samyaga jJAna sudhArasa dhAma , chAMDI durbhaya mithyA nida pramAdanI re le.
sahaje pragaTa nija parabhAva viveka je, aMtara Atama Thaharyo sAdhana sAdhave
re le. sAdhyAlaMbI thaI jJAyakatA cheka je, nijapariNati thira nija dharmarasa
Thare re le." tattvaraMgI mahAmuni zrI devacaMdrajI dhIratA-nirbhayatA. dhaga
dhaNuM mAthe kiye re, kuNa gaMje nara eTa? vimala0"--zrI AnaMdaghanajI. A
samyagadaSTi mahAtmAo AvA vivekI hoya che, eTalA mATe ja dhIra hoya che,
acapala-acaMcala hoya che, parama nirbhaya hoya che, kAraNa ke bhaya-
caMcalatAnuM kAraNa AtmasvarUpanuM ajJAna che, paNa jene pitAnA svarUpanuM bhAna
pragaTyuM che, evA samyagRSTi puruSo te daDha nizcayapaNe jANe che ke mahAruM
kAMI cAlyuM javAnuM nathI, hAruM che te te hArI pAse ja che, bAkI bIju badhuMya
aneruM che. "avadhU kayA terA? kayA merA ? terA he se terI pAse, avara sabahI
anerA. mATe hAre bhaya che? ciMtA zI? vikalpa che? "sarvathI sarva prakAre huM
bhinna chuM, eka kevala zuddha caitanyasvarUpa paramotkRSTa, aciMtya
sukhasvarUpa mAtra ekAMta zuddha anubhavarUpa huM chauM. tyAM vikSepa che?
vikala5 ze ? bhaya che? kheda che? bIjI avasthA zI? zuddha zuddha, prakRSTa
zuddha parama zAMta caitanya huM mAtra nirvikalpa chuM. nija svarUpamaya upaga
karuM chuM. tanmaya thAuM chuM. zAMtiH zAMtiH zAMtiH " chuM. AvA samyagadaSTie
ja A parama sAhasa karavAne samartha thAya che ke jyAre vaja paDatuM hoya ne
bhayathI kaMpAyamAna thatuM leya tene mArga cheDatuM hoya, tyAre nisarga -
nirbhayatAthI sarva ja zaMkA cheDI daI, teo svayaM pitAne na haNI sapta
bhayarahita zakAya evA avadhya jJAnadeharUpa jANatA hoI bedhathI cuta thatA
jJAnInuM parama nathI," (juo pR. 68, phuTanoTa ). ane Ama jene jJAnadevamaya
nija niHzaMkapaNuM sahajAnmasvarUpane parama akhaMDa nizcaya upa che evA dhIra *
samyagadaSTine sAta bhayamAMthI koI paNa prakArano kaMI paNa bhaya raheto nathI.
e te parama niHzaMka hoya che, kAraNa ke (1-2) sarvathI* judA evA A * A sAta
bhayanuM vistarathI parama mane jJa varNana zrI amRtacaMdrAcAryajI(?)kRta
paMcAdhyAcImAM ApyuM che. tyAM jijJAsue jevuM. tenuM sArabhUta saMkSepa paNa
saMpUrNa varNana zrI amRtacaMdrAcAie parama suMdara rIte ane AdhArarUpa lIdhelA
parama abhuta camatkArika samayasArekalazamAM lalakAyuM che. jemake - "To:
zAzvata paNa pa sarakacaro viviIRmanashcillokN svayameva kevalamayaM
yallokayatyekakaH  /  loko yanna tavAparastava parastasyAsti tadbhIH kuto, niHrA
satataM sAM sa saghaM jJAnaM savA vinaMti | ityAdi

Page #566 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(490) The collection of yogic insights is a lake, eternal and devoid of all, the
isolated soul. The one who experiences this lake of pure consciousness alone,
and contemplates that this upper lake or paradise is not defeated, where does he
have fear of this world or the next? Thus, the knower, constantly unshakeable,
experiences this innate knowledge always. (3) By the power of the knowable-
knower, arising distinctly, an unshakeable knowledge arises, which is itself the
knower, this is the only knowledge, there is no other knowledge that has fallen,
so where does the knower have fear of knowledge? (4) What is 'sat' (being) is
certainly not destroyed, this manifest state is the state of being, and
knowledge is itself sat, then what is its salvation from others? Therefore,
there is nothing like its salvation, then where does the knower have fear of
salvation? (5) 'Self-form' is the truth! The ultimate secret of the object,
because no one else can enter the self-form, and innate knowledge, which is
uncreated and unartificial, is the self-form. Then there is no secrecy of it. So
where does the knower have fear of secrecy? (6) The destruction of the life
force is called death, and the life force of this soul is certainly knowledge.
It itself, by its eternity, never perishes, therefore, there is no death of it,
then where does the knower have fear of death? (7) One such knowledge is eternal
and unshakeable, and it is truly self-evident. It is always here, there is no
rise of the other, the second, here. Therefore, there is nothing accidental
here. Where does the knower have fear of the accidental? The knower, constantly
unshakeable, experiences this innate knowledge always. Thus, the knower of right
vision, who has escaped the seven fears of this world, etc., is always supremely
fearless, supremely unshakeable. Fear itself runs away from them, as if they are
afraid of fear! Pratyahara. "It is the result of karma, O friend, that you are
bound by the karmic particles! The inert world is attached to you, but you do
not have any enjoyment, O friend!" - Shri Devchandraji, The man of right vision
is such a wise and patient person, therefore, he is eager in pratyahara, that
is, he does not connect his senses with the objects of desire, he withdraws his
senses from the objects of desire, he withdraws his soul from the influence of
the world, and imitates the self-conscious form, he plays in the maturity of the
self-realization, having vomited the traditionalism. He addresses his own soul
and says - O soul! O friend! What you are doing is the result of karma,
*"Saviddhi nava nirnavada hari nidamatha teni hattam vaghamuji na tahan tu
basera ||"—Shri Samyatsar,

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (490) yogadaSTisamuccaya vivikta AtmAno te sarvathI rahita e A eka zAzvata leka
che. evA A kevala caiitanya lekane ekAkI svayameva je anubhave che, ane A
aparaleka ke paraloka hAre nathI ema je ciMtave che, tene te IhalokabhIti ke
paralobhIti kayAMthI hoya? Ama satata ni:zaMka evo jJAnI te svayaM sahaja jJAna
sadA anubhave che. (3) nibhedapaNe udita-udaya pAmelA evA vedya-vedakanA balathI
eka acala evuM jJAna sadA anAkula janathI je svayaM vedAya che, te A eka ja
vedanA che, bIjI AvI paDelI vedanA hoyaja nahiM, tethI jJAnIne te vedanAbhIti
kyAMthI hoya? (4) je "sat ' che te nizcaya nAza pAmatuM nathI, evI pragaTa vastu
sthiti che ane jJAna svayameva sat che, te pachI enuM bIjAothI zuM trANa karAyuM
che? eTalA mATe enuM atrANa evuM kaMI nathI, te pachI te atrANu bhIti jJAnIne
kyAMthI hoya? (5) "sva rUpa" e ja kharekhara ! vastunI parama gupti che, kAraNa
ke svarUpamAM koI paNa bIje pravezavA zaktA nathI, ane akRta-akRtrima evuM
sahaja jJAna ja svarUpa che. eTale pachI enI agupti kaI hoya nahiM. tethI agupti
bhIti jJAnIne kyAMthI hoya ? (6) prANunA ucchedane maraNa kahe che, ane A AtmAnA
prANa to nizcayathI jJAna che. te svayameva zAzvatatAe karIne kadI paNa
ucchadAtuM nathI, ethI karIne tenuM maraNa kaMI hoya nahiM, te pachI jJAnIne
mRtyubhIti kyAMthI hoya? (7) eka evuM jJAna anAdianaMta ne acala che, ane e
kharekhara ! svata:siddha che. game tyAM A sadaiva ja che, atre bIjAne-dvitIyane
udaya nathI. tethI Akasmika evuM kAMI atre hoya nahiM. te Akasmika bhIti jJAnIne
kyAMthI hoya ? satata nizaka e jJAnI te svayaM sahaja jJAna sadA anubhave che.
Ama IhalokAdi sAta bhaya jene TaLyA che, evo samyagadaSTi jJAnI te sadA parama
nirbhaya, parama niHzaMka ja hoya che. bhayane ja bhaya lAgI temanAthI dUra
bhAgI jAya che ! pratyAhAra. "papariNAmikatA che, je tuja pudgala bhega he mitta
! jaDa cala jaganI eDane, na ghaTe tujane bhoga ho mitta!" -zrI devacaMdrajI,
samyagadaSTi puruSa AvA vivekI ne dhIra hoya che, teTalA mATe ja teo
pratyAhAramAM tatpara bane che, arthAt viSayavikAramAM iMdriya joDatA nathI,
viSayavikAramAMthI iMdriyene pratyAhata kare che-pAchI kheMcI le che,
parabhAvamAMthI AtmAne pAcho sakaLa jagatuM " vALI svacittasvarUpane anukArI
kare che, paraMparikRtine vamI Atmate eThava" pariNatimAM rame che. teo potAnA
AtmAne saMbodhIne kahe che ke-he Atmana ! he mitra! je tuM pudgalaga kare che,
te parapariNatipaNuM che, * "saviddI navA nirNavadA hari nidamathA tenI hattama
vAghamujI nA tahAM Tu baserA || "--zrI samayasAra,

Page #567 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Steady Gaze:**  "O awakened one, renounce the desires for objects of
withdrawal (pratyahara)!"  (491) There is a feeling of "other-becoming" (par-
parinaati-bhaav).  O friend, this inert and moving world, this "eth" (eth), does
not bring you enjoyment.  All living beings have experienced this "eth"
countless times and have left it behind.  It is like their discarded offerings,
like "eth."  Who would eat such a manifest impurity, such a particle of "eth"?
And who would corrupt the supreme purity of the Self (aatma-swaroop) of the
Father?  Furthermore, O awakened one, this enjoyment of matter (pudgal-bhog) is
impermanent, fleeting.  The material objects of enjoyment that seemed pleasant
and dear, become unpleasant and repulsive in an instant, because the changes in
form, taste, smell, and color bring about corresponding changes and
modifications in matter.  The enjoyment obtained from worldly possessions or
heavenly possessions is like poison.  Therefore, why would one taste such
impermanent, poisonous matter, when one can savor the eternal, delightful, and
blissful Self (chaitanya-rasamaya nijaatma-swaroop)?  "The true color is that of
the Jineshwar, the world is devoid of color, all others are; the wealth of the
king of the gods and the king of men, that is like poisonous matter... The true
one, the Jina, enjoys the taste of his own qualities, the objects are deformed
by their changes; without the right understanding, the Jina has tasted the pure
form... The true one..."  Shri Devchandraji.  The objects of the five senses are
extremely painful.  What seems pleasant at the beginning, like the "initial
taste of a mango," becomes extremely painful in the end, like the bitter fruit
of karma.  This enjoyment is truly like the foam of a snake, suicidal.  There is
as much difference between an object and the poison of desire (vishayavasana) as
there is between a mountain and a mustard seed.  "Renounce each sense, O
awakened one!"  You have seen the terrible consequences of the direct fear
experienced by elephants and others due to their being overpowered (see page
318-319).  Then how much more suffering will there be due to the power of the
five senses?  Therefore, O Self of pure consciousness and bliss
(sachchidanandaatman), renounce the desires for objects and remain in your own
nature.  Furthermore, O awakened one, in this endless cycle of existence (anaadi
sansaar), you have enjoyed countless pleasures of gods and others, yet you are
not satisfied.  Like a hungry person who has never seen a day, you desire the
fleeting pleasures of this human life.  How will you ever be satisfied?  The
ocean cannot be filled with a bucket of water.  How can the ocean be satisfied
with a flood of water?  How can fire be satisfied with a drop of water?
Similarly, a creature is not satisfied even after enjoying endless pleasures for
a very long time.  Therefore, renounce these terrible pleasures of the senses
that cause thirst and suffering.  Thus, this enjoyment of matter is completely
impure, impermanent, painful, and causes thirst and suffering.  And your own
nature, O awakened one, is supremely pure, eternal, supremely blissful, and
brings about the supreme peace of self-satisfaction.  Therefore, now renounce
your attachment to the enjoyment of matter, which is "other-becoming," and savor
the enjoyment of your own nature.  >> For further reference, see the Jnanarnava,
Adhyatmasaar, and other such treasures of scriptures.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 sthirAdaSTi: pratyAhAra-viSayavAsanA tyAge cetana !' (491) para pariNatibhAva
che. A jaDa ne cala jagatanI eThane he mitra ! tane bhoga ghaTate nathI. A
muddagala sarva jIvoe anaMta vAra bhogavIne mUkI dIdhelA che, te teonA ucchiSTa
bhajana jevA che, eTha jevA che. AvI pragaTa azucirUpa eTha kaNa khAya? ne
pitAnA parama zuci AtmasvarUpane ke bhraSTa kare? vaLI he cetana ! A
pudgalabhoga anitya che, kSaNavivaMsI che. je paugalika viSayabhoga sarasa ne
priya lAgatA hatA, te kSaNavAramAM virasa ane apriya thaI paDe che, kAraNa ke
rUpa-rasa-gaMdha-varNanA vipariNAmathI pugalamAM tevA tevA vikAra-pheraphAra
thayA ja kare che. rAjasaMpadAthI ke svarga saMpadAthI prApta thatA bhega paNa
durgathI kadanna jevA che, mATe nitya sarasa evA caitanyarasamaya
nijAtmasvarUpane AsvAda cheDIne tevA anitya virasa pudgala kadanane keNa cAkhe?
"ka sAcA raMga jinezvara, saMsAra viraMga sahu anya re; surapati narapati
saMpadA, te te duragaMdhi kadana re....kare sAcA AstAga jina guNarasa ramI,
viSaya vikAra virUpa re; viNa samakita mata abhiSe, jiNe cAkhyo zuddha svarUpa
re...kare sAcA " zrI devacaMdrajI. pAMca iMdriyanA viSayabhAga pariNAme atyaMta
duHkhadAyI che. je "ApAtamAguM-AraMbha mAtra sukhadAyaka lAge che, te
viSayabhoga vipAke kipAka phala jevA dAruNa pariNAmI che. A bhoga kharekhara !
sApanI pheNa jevA AtmaghAtI che. viSayamAM ne viSayavAsanA kAlakUTa viSamAM meru
ne sarasava jeTaluM aMtara che." ekeka iMdriyane tyAge cetana !" paravazapaNathI
hAthI Adine prApta thatA A pratyakSa bhayaMkara pariNAma tuM je ! (juo pR.
318-319 ) te pachI pAMca iMdriyanA prabaLapaNathI te keTaluM badhuM duHkha
thAya? mATe he saccidAnaMda Atmana ! tuM viSayavAsanA cheDIne nijasvabhAvamAM
sthiti kara ! vaLI he cetana ! A anAdi saMsAramAM te aneka vAra deva kAdinA
anaMta sukha bhegavyA, chatAM tane tRpti upaja nathI, ane haju bhUkhALavAnI jema
jANe kaI divasa dIThA na hoya ema tuM A manuSyalakanA turacha kAmabhoganI vAMchA
kare che! te tethI tane zI rIte tRpti upajaze ? sAgarajalathI je tRSA nathI
chIpI, te gAgarajalathI kema chIpaze ? pANInA pUrathI samudra kaI rIte tRpti
pAme, iMdhanethI agni tRpti pAme, paNa ati cirakALa bhegavela anaMta kAmagathI
paNa prANI tRpti pAmate nathI, mATe AvA tRSNa-tApa upajAvanArA dAruNa
viSayasukhathI saryuM.x-Ama A pudgalabhaga sarvathA azuci, anitya, duHkhamaya
ane tRSNAtApa upajAvanAra che. ane hAruM svarUpa te he cetana ! parama zuci,
nitya, parama sukhamaya, ne AtmatRptijanya parama zAMti upajAvanAruM che, mATe
have tuM parapariNatirasarUpa pudgala bheganI Asakti cheDI de, ne
svasvarUparasanA bhegane AsvAda le ! >> vizeSa AdhAra mATe juo jJAnArNava,
adhyAtmasAra Adi graMtharatna.

Page #568 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(492) The Samyagdrishti (right-seeing) Yogis, who have renounced all
attachments, are delighted by the essence of the experience of their own self.
If they easily get rid of the flow of the influx of passions, then the
discipline of equanimity (Samvar) is manifested in them.  (1) How can the sweet
notes of the cuckoo bird delight those Yogis whose minds are absorbed in the
unstruck sound (Anahata Nada)? How can the dance of the enchantress (Anubhuti
Nati) please them? How can they be captivated by the soft sound of the bangles
of the beloved, when they are engrossed in the eternal and pure-natured sound?
(2) How can the perishable and blood-stained form please those Yogis who behold
the imperishable and naturally pure form?  (3) Those who delight in the
fragrance of virtue, how can they be pleased by the fragrant substances like
musk and sandalwood? Because the other fragrances do not last long and are
quickly dispersed by the wind, but the fragrance of virtue lasts for a long time
and cannot be taken away by the wind of delusion.  (4) How can those whose minds
are constantly immersed in the tranquil rasa (sentiment) of the ninth stage
(Navama Shanta Rasa) be pleased by the initially pleasurable but ultimately
painful rasa? Those who taste the sweet rasa, their tongues become moist, but
those detached persons, on contemplating its dreadful consequences, shed tears
from their eyes.  (5) How can those Samyagdrishti (right-seeing) persons be
attached to external touch, who are resting, embracing the wife of steadfastness
(Dhritipattni) in the pure and well-conceived lake where the flowers of virtues
are spread?  Thus, these objects of the world do not delight this detached and
discerning Samyagdrishti person. Alas! These great souls, having drunk the
nectar of supreme bliss, have become so lazy that they are even devoid of desire
for the happiness of the next world!  These wise, steadfast, and detached
Samyagdrishti great beings are diligent in the abandonment of obstacles to
dharma. They constantly strive to act in such a way that no obstacle arises in
their spiritual development, i.e., they make efforts to conduct themselves in
accordance with the nature of the self as much as possible, and they are free
from other dispositions.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (492) gadaSTisamuccaya tyAgIne sahu parapariNatirasa rIjha je, jAgI che nija
Atama anubhava ISTatA re le. saheje chUTI Azrava bhAvanI cAla jo, jAlima e
pragaTI che saMvara ziSTatA re le." -zrI devacaMdrajI ityAdi prakAre
viSayamAMthI indriyone pAchI kheMcanArA A samyagadRSTi jogIjanane bhega pratye
atyaMta anAsakti ja hoya che, parama vairAgya ja vate che; kAraNa ke...(1) jenuM
mana mUMge anAhata nAda sAMbhaLI rahyuM che, evA A jogIjanane AvA jogIne kekila
kala svara kema AnaMda Ape ? anubhUti naTIe lalakArelA bhega kema game? priya
saMgItamAM je rata thayA che, te kAminInA komala karakaMkaNanA avAjathI kema
ghUrNAyamAna thAya ? (2) avinAzI ne nisaga-nimala evA svarUpane je dekhe che, te
yogIpuruSane nAzavaMta ne zukra-zaNitathI upajeluM rUpa kema game? (3) zIla
saurabhathI je prasanna thAya che, tene kastUrI-caMdanAdi sugaMdhI dravyothI
kema AnaMda upaje? kAraNa ke bIjI sugadhI te jhAjhIvAra TakatI nathI, vAyuthI
zIgha UDI jAya che, paNa zIlasaurabha te lAMbe vakhata upayogamAM Ave che ane
tene vibhAvarUpa vAyare harI zakatA nathI. (4) jenuM mana satata avikArI evA
navamAM zAMta rasamAM magna thayuM che, te gIjana AraMbhe sukharUpa paNa
pariNAme vasamA evA rasethI kema rIjhe? je madhura rasane cAkhatAM rasalupInI
rasanAmAMthI rasa paDe che-jIbhamAM pANI chUTe che, te rasane bhayaMkara vipAka
ciMtavatAM A viraktajanenI AMkhamAMthI pANI paDe che-AMsu Ave che. (5) jyAM
guNapux bIchAvelA che evI nirmala suvikalparUpa taLAImAM je dhRti-patnIne
AliMgIne sUtA che, te samyagadRSTijano bAhya sparzamAM kema rata thAya? Ama A
lekanA viSaye A viraktacitta samyagdaSTi janene AnaMdadAyI thatA nathI. are ! A
mahAnubhAve paramAnaMdarasanuM pAna karIne dhIMgAdhaDabA banI eTalA badhA ALasu
banI gayA che, ke teo paraleka sukhamAM paNa ni:spRha hoya che ! dharmayatanA
AvA vivekI dhIra ne viSayavirakta samyagdaSTi mahAjane dharmabAdhAnA
parityAgamAM yatnavaMta hoya che. AtmadharmamAM jema bAdhA na upaje tema
pravartAvA teo satata yatnazIla rahe che, arthAta jema bane tema AtmapariNatimAM
vartAvA prayAsa kare che; parabhAvamAMthI x "iha ye guNapuSpapUrite,
dhRtipatnImupaguhya sherte| vimale suvikalpatalpake, ka bahiH sparzaratA
bhavaMtu te  /  /  tadime viSayAH kilaihikA, na mude ke'pi viraktacetasAm  /
paralokasukhe'pi niHspRhAH paramAnaMdarasAlasA amI  // " (ItyAdi AdhArarUpa
hadayaMgama varNana mATe juo) adhyAtmasAra vairAgya adhikAra.

Page #569 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Sthiradarshti: The True Form of Mam-Dharma**  (493) It strives to bring the
soul back to its natural state of Dharma, and does not allow any obstacles or
harm to come to it. The supreme Dharma-moorti, Shrimad Rajchandraji, has
described the experience of the soul similar to that of the father:  "Except for
the evolution of the soul, the mind is disturbed by other subjects. ... The
desire remains only in the state of being in the unchanging form of the soul.
... It is indifferent to all other results except the result of the soul."
–Shrimad Rajchandra, Patrank 492.  Dharma means the nature of the object.
"Dharma is the nature of the object." The nature of the soul is Atma-Dharma.
Knowledge, vision, and conduct, or simply a pure knowing feeling, is the nature
of the soul, so to live in it is Dharma. This is the true Dharma. Or as said in
Shri Pravachansar:  "Conduct is Dharma, Dharma is samya, and samya is the result
of the soul without attachment and disturbance." Here, "conduct in its form is
conduct, meaning activity in its own time. It is Dharma because of its nature.
Meaning, it is the pure illumination of consciousness. And it is samya because
of its inherent nature. And samya is the result of the soul, which is completely
free from all attachment and disturbance arising from the rise of delusion in
vision and attachment in conduct." Thus, conduct, Dharma, and samya are all
synonymous.  Thus, the knowledge of the soul, the vision of the soul, and the
conduct of the soul – these three jewels, the pure Atma-Dharma, are constantly
used by the Samyagdarshi jiva, just as no obstacles reach them. The meaning is
that it strives to make the soul stay in its pure use as much as possible. This
is the true form of Dharma. The rest of the types of practical Dharma are good,
virtuous, only if they are conducive to the above-mentioned decisive feeling-
Dharma. Without feeling, they are all useless. (See pp. 244-245) The whole world
goes around saying "Dharma Dharma", but it does not know the essence of Dharma.
Only a few know it. The essence of Dharma is what was said above – to live in
one's own nature. When the body-consciousness is abandoned, the soul-
consciousness from the body _x "स्वरूपे चरणं चारित्रं स्वसमयप्रवृत्तिरित्यर्थः ।
तदेव वस्तुस्वभावत्वाद्धर्मः । शुद्धचैतन्यप्रकाशनमित्यर्थः । तदेव च
यथावस्थितात्मगुणत्वात्साम्यम् । साम्यं तु
दर्शनचारित्रमोहनीयोदयापादितसमस्तमोहक्षोभाभावादत्यन्तनिर्विकारो जीवस्य परिणाम.।"
–Shri Amritchandracharyaji's Commentary on Pravachansar

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 sthirAdaSTi: dha mama-dharmanuM vAstavika svarUpa (493) AtmAne pratyAhata karI-
pAchA kheMcI laI, te svabhAvarUpa dharmamAM sthiti karavAno prayatna kare che,
ne temAM bAdhA-hAni AvavA detA nathI. parama dharmamUtti zrImad rAjacaMdrajIe
pitAne tAdRzya AtmAnubhava Alekhyo che ke - eka AtmapariNati zivAyanA bIjA je
viSayo tene viSe citta avyavasthitapaNe varte che. x x x acalita AtmarUpe
rahevAnI sthitimAM ja cittecchA rahe che. * * * eka AtmapariNAma zivAya sarva
bIjAM pariNAmane viSe udAsInapaNuM varte che." -zrImad rAjacaMdra, patrAMka 492.
dharma eTale vastuno svabhAva bhulAvo dhamo ' vastune svabhAva te dharma.
Atmavastune svabhAva te Atmadharma. jJAna-darzanacAritra athavA TaMketkIrNa eka
zuddha jJAyaka bhAva e AtmAne svabhAva che, mATe temAM vartavuM te ja dharma
eTale? vAstavika kharekharo dharma che. athavA zrI pravacanasAramAM kahyuM che
tema "cAritra e ja dharma che, je dharma che te sAmya che, ane je sAmya che te
meha-kSebha vinAno AtmAno pariNAma che.' AmAM "svarUpamAM caraNa te cAritra che,
arthAta svasamayapravRtti te cAritra che. te ja vastusvabhAvapaNAthI dharma che.
arthAt zuddha caitanya prakAzana te dharma che. ane te ja yathAvasthita
AtmaguNapaNathI sAmya che. ane sAmya to darzanamohanIya ne cAritramehanIyanA
udayathI upajatA samasta mehakSobhanA abhAvathI atyaMta nirvikAra e javano
pariNAma che. Ama cAritra, dharma ne sAmya e traNe ekArNavAcaka che. Ama AtmAnuM
jJAna, AtmAnuM darzana ne AtmAnuM cAritra-e ratnatrayIrUpa zuddha AtmadharmamAM
jema bAdhA na pahoMce, tema vartavAna samyagadaSTi jIva satata upayoga rAkhe
che. tAtparya ke jema bane tema AtmA zuddha upayogamAM sthiti kare tema karavA
mathe che. dharmanuM vAstavika svarUpa e ja che. bAkI vyavahAradharmanA prakAro
paNa je uparokta nizcayarUpa bhAvadharmanA sAdhaka thatA hoya te ja bhalA che,
rUDA che,-bhAva vinA te e badhAya phegaTa che. (juo pR. 244-245) sakala jagat
"dharama dharama" karatuM phare che, paNa te dharmane marma jANatuM nathI. te te
kaI viralA ja jANe che. dharmane marma te upara kahyo te-AtmasvabhAvamAM
vartavuM te che. je dehAdhyAsa chUTe, dehamAMthI Atmabuddhi _x "svarUpe caraNaM
cAritraM svasamayapravRttirityarthaH  /  tadeva vastusvabhAvatvAddharmaH  /
zuddhacaitanyaprakAzanamityarthaH  /  tadeva ca yathAvasthitAtmaguNatvAtsAmyam
/  sAmyaM tu
darzanacAritramohanIyodayApAditasamastamohakSobhAbhAvAdatyantanirvikAro jIvasya
prinnaam.|" -zrI amRtacaMdrAcAryajIkRta pravacanasAra TIkA

Page #570 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(494) When the collection of wrong views (samyagdasti) goes away and self-
knowledge (atmabuddhi) arises in the soul, then you are neither the doer of
karma nor the enjoyer of its fruits. This is the essence of Dharma. “When the
attachment to the body (dehadhyas) is gone, you are not the doer of karma; You
are not the enjoyer of its fruits, this is the essence of Dharma.” - Shri
Atmasiddhi Thus, to live in one's own nature (svabhaav) is Dharma, and to live
in the state of division (vibhaav) is Adharma. That which is divided (vibhaav)
is conditional (nimittik) - it arises from a cause (nimitt), and that cause is
related to the object (vishayasangaadik). This impure cause (ashuddha nimitt)
causes the soul to wander in the cycle of birth and death (samsara) - to be
entangled, and to become the doer of actions (karma). But when this pure,
conscious, and luminous soul (chaitanyagana atma) dwells in the pure cause
(shuddha nimitt), then it becomes aware of its own nature (nij bhaav). “The
Dharma that you have, which is based on the results (parinaamik), is not our
Dharma. Our Dharma is to dwell in the light of faith (shraddha bhaasan raman
viyege), and to be free from the attachment to the divided state (valagya
vibhaav adharma). ...O Lord! I beg you, color my mind. That which is divided
(vibhaav) is conditional (nimittik), the state of continuity (santati bhaav) is
beginningless (anaadi); the cause (parnimitt) is related to the object
(vishayasangaadik), O Lord! - due to the impure cause (ashuddha nimitt), the
soul wanders in the cycle of birth and death (samsara), becoming the doer and
enjoyer of actions (karma). When it dwells in the pure cause (shuddha nimitt), O
Lord! - then it becomes the doer and enjoyer of its own nature (karta bhokta
gharno)....” - Shri Devchandraji Thus, knowing this ultimate essence of Dharma
and Adharma, the person with right view (samyagdasti) abandons the causes of
Adharma, which are in the form of division (vibhaav), and takes refuge in the
causes of Dharma, which are in the form of one's own nature (svabhaav). In other
words, he takes refuge in the means of growth (vridhi) of right knowledge
(samyag jnana), right faith (samyag darshan), and right conduct (samyag
charitra). He abandons the causes that hinder the realization of his own nature
(atmasvaroop) and takes refuge in the causes that help him realize it. And among
these, he takes refuge in the Supreme Lord (parmatma prabhu), who is the pure,
natural, and manifest essence of Dharma (shuddha svabhaavaroop vastu dham
pragat), with firm faith and devotion (dridh aashrayabhakti), considering him as
the ultimate support and foundation (param avlambhanbhoot aadharbhoot). And
while worshipping him, he constantly chants (ajpa jap jape) the mantra, “O Lord!
O Lord of our innate nature (sahaja anmasvaroop swami)! The pure Dharma that
manifests in you, let that pure Dharma manifest in us too....O Lord! By
worshipping the pure Lord (shuddha dev), we abandon the external (parhava), and
by experiencing the joy of dwelling in our own Dharma (atmadharm raman), our own
nature (atma bhaav) manifests....O Lord!” - Shri Devchandraji.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (494) gadaSTisamuccaya jAya ne AtmAmAM ja Atmabuddhi thAya, te tuM karma kartA
ane bhaktA paNa nathIe ja dharmane marma che. " chUTe dehAdhyAsa te, tuM kartA
nahiM kama; tuM bhaktA nahi tehane, e ja dharmane mama."--zrI Atmasiddhi Ama
AtmAnuM svasvabhAvamAM vartavuM te dharma che, ane vibhAvamAM vartavuM te
adharma che. je vibhAva che te nimittika che-nimittathI utpanna thAya che, ane
te nimitta viSayasaMgAdika che. A azuddha nimittathI AtmA saMsAramAM saMsare
che-rajhaLe che, ane parabhAvane kartA thAya che. paNa jyAre A zuddha buddha
caitanyaghana AtmA zuddha nimittamAM rame che, tyAre te nija bhAvane kanna thAya
che. "pariNAmika je dharma tamAre, tevo ama dharma zraddhA bhAsana ramaNa
viyege, vaLagya vibhAva adharma ... re svAmI ! vinaviye mana raMge. jeha vibhAva
teha nimittika, saMtati bhAva anAdi; paranimitta viSayasaMgAdika, hAya sAdigbare
svAmI ! - azuddha nimitte e saMsaratA, attA kattA parane; zuddha nimitta rame
jaba cighana, kartA bhoktA gharano....re."--zrI devacaMdrajI AvuM dharma-
adharmanuM parama sArabhUta paramArtha svarUpa jANa samyagadaSTi puruSa
vibhAvarUpa adharmanA nimittone tyAga kare che, ane svabhAvarUpa dharmane
sAdhaka kAraNone sat sAdhanene Azraya kare che. arthAt samyagra jJAna-darzana-
cAritranI pragaTe teha vRddhinA upAyonuM avalaMbana le che, AtmasvarUpanA
bAdhaka kAraNone amAro re !' tyaje che ne sAdhaka kAraNane bhaje che, ane temAM
paNa jene e zuddha svabhAvarUpa vastu dhama pragaTa che, evA paramAtmA prabhunI
dRDha Azrayabhakti parama avalaMbanabhUta-AdhArabhUta gaNIne te paramapreme
bhaje che. ane te prabhune bhajatAM te, "he prabhu! he sahajAnmasvarUpa svAmI !
Apane je zuddha dharma pragaTe che, te zuddha dharma ane pragaTa !" ema
niraMtara ajapA jApa jape che. te prabhune avalaMbatAM parabhAva parihare che,
ane AtmadharmamAM ramaNatA anubhavatAM tene AtmabhAva pragaTe che. zrI
sImaMdhara jinavara svAmI, vinataDI avadhAra; zuddha dharma je pragaTayo tuma,
pragaTo teha amAre re....svAmI ! zuddha deva avalaMbana bhajatAM, parahariye
parabhAva; AtamadhamaramaNa anubhavatAM, pragaTe AtamabhAva re....svAmI."--zrI
devacaMdrajI.

Page #571 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Stable Insight:** Sinful companions, such as taking, violence, etc., are the
source of sin.  **(495)** And such activity of Samyak Darshan is from the truth,
from the ultimate goal, because it has definitely been freed from the knots.
Therefore, due to the purity of discrimination, it is considered to be the best
Shruta-predominant.  **5** Not indeed Lakshmi, the companion of Alakshmi, is for
the joy of the wise, just as the companion of sin in the world is not for the
enjoyment of beings. (159)  **Meaning:** Indeed, Lakshmi, the companion of
Alakshmi, does not happen for the joy of the wise; similarly, in the world, the
companion of sin does not happen for the enjoyment of beings.  **Analysis:**
Lakshmi, whose companion is Alakshmi, is not joyful for the wise; similarly, the
companion of sin is not joyful for beings who are full of enjoyment.  In common
social practice, it is also believed that Lakshmi, whose companion is Alakshmi,
i.e., Lakshmi with whom Alakshmi is associated as a companion, Lakshmi as a
result of which Alakshmi is obtained, such Lakshmi is not the cause of joy for a
wise person. Because the companion of sin is Lakshmi, which gives Alakshmi in
return, which earns money that is wasted and gives poverty, and finally burns
and goes away, how can a wise person be happy with such Lakshmi? Similarly, sin
is the companion-friend of all kinds of enjoyment. There is such a close
friendship between enjoyment and sin, such a deep attachment, that wherever
there is enjoyment, there is always sin present as a companion-friend. That is,
enjoyment cannot happen without sin, both of them have an inseparable
relationship that cannot exist without each other. Such beings who have sin as a
friend or who are friends of sin, who are full of enjoyment, are not joyful, and
sin is from the past, that is the feeling. And from sin...  **Translation:** Not
- not at all, Amitavi Lakshmi - Lakshmi, the companion of Alakshmi, or Lakshmi
whose companion is Alakshmi, in this way, from both parts, Yathanandaya Dhimatam
- in the same way as the joy of the wise, in the same way, Pavarghana - the
companion of sin, or those whose companion is sin, Hoje - in the world - from
its inseparable nature, Fehina Movistar - the enjoyment of beings, does not
happen for joy, enjoyment cannot happen without the past being born, and sin is
from the past, that is the feeling.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 sthirASTi : pApasakhA leNa-hiMsAdi pApamaya bhega (495) ane samyagdaSTinI AvI
pravRtti tattvathI-paramAtha thI hAya che, kAraNa ke tene nizcayapaNe
graMthibheda thayA che. eTale vivekanI parizuddhine lIdhe te uttama
zrutapradhAna hAi ema vicAre che. 5 na hyalakSmIsakhI lakSmIryathAnandAya
dhImatAm  /  tathA pApasakhA loke dehinAM bhogavistaraH  //  159  //
alakSmIsakhI lakSmI na de, dhImatane AnaMda; pApasakhA tyama prANine, ahI'
bhAganA vR, 159 artha :--kharekhara alakSmInI sakhI evI lakSmI buddhimatAne
AnaMda mATe thAya ja nahi; tema leAkamAM pApanA sakhA evA bhAgavistara prANIone
AnaMda mATe thatA nathI. vivecana alakSmI jenI sakhI che, evI lakSmI
buddhimatAne AnaMdadAyaka thatI nathI; tema pApa jenA sakhA che evA bhAgavistara
prANIone AnaMdadAyI thatA nathI. sAmAnya leAkavyavahAramAM paNa manAya che ke
alakSmI jenI henapaNI che arthAt je lakSmInI sAthe alakSmI sahacarIrUpe joDAyelI
che, je lakSmInA piraNAme alakSmI prApta thAya che, tevI lakSmI DAhyA mANasAne
AnaMdanuM kAraNa thatI nathI. sApasakhA kAraNa ke je lakSmI anukha'dhe alakSmI
Ape, je karelI kamANI bhAga dhULadhANI thaI ninapaNuM Ape, ne aMtamAM dAha daIne
cAlI jAya, tevI lakSmIthI budhajana kema rAce ? tema samasta prakArane je
bhAgavistAra che tenA sakhA-mitra pApa che. bhAganI ane pApanI evI gADha maitrI
che, evI dileAjAna DhAstI che ke, jyAM jyAM bhAgapravRtti che, tyAM tyAM tene
sahacara leiAjAna dAsta pApa avazya hAjara hAya ja che. arthAt bhAgapravRtti
pApa vinA thaI zakatI nathI, evA e bannene eka bIjA vinA na cAle evA-cena na
paDe evA avinAbhAvI sabaMdha che. Ave pAparUpa mitravALA athavA pApanA mitra-
geAThI bhAgavistara prANIone AnaMdadAyI thatA nathI, ane bhUtapaghAtathI pApa
che, ema bhAvanA che. ane pApathI tA vRttiH--nahi--nahiM ja, amItavI
kSmI.-alakSmInI sakhI evI lakSmI, athavA alakSmI jenI sakhI che evI lakSmI,
tathAprakAre ubhayanA paribhAgathI, yathAnanyAya dhImatAm--jevA prakAre
dhImatAnA AnAthe,--tathA tevA prakAre, pAvaraghA-pApanA sakhA, athavA pApa jeneA
sakhA che evA, hoje-lAkamAM -tenA avinAbhAvathI, phehinAM movistara:-prANIonA
bhAgavistara, AnaMdAthe thatA nathI, bhUtAne upannAta karyAM vinA bhAga
saMbhavatA nathI, ane bhUtapadhAtathI pApa che ema bhAvanA che,

Page #572 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(496) The collection of harmful views is suffering. How can happiness arise from
such sinful actions that lead to further suffering? Shrimad Rajchandraji's
profound and enlightening words are: "Do not be entangled in worldly
possessions, let compassion remain in you. Renunciation is the principle, and
suffering that follows is not happiness." - Shri Mekshamala  All types of
enjoyment are sinful. Because, in their origin, their attainment, and their
consumption, there is nothing but sin, sin, and sin: (1) The origin of all types
of worldly enjoyment cannot occur without causing harm and violence. To produce
sinful enjoyment, one must engage in the act of acquiring and possessing,
because no material for the five senses can be obtained without acquiring and
possessing.  Whether it is the object of the sense of touch, the object of the
sense of taste, the object of the sense of smell, the object of the sense of
sight, the object of the sense of hearing, or any other object, no enjoyable
thing can be produced without harming and killing animals. For this, the example
of food is sufficient. To satisfy this two-inch tongue, how much violence is
committed in the world? To satisfy the sense of taste, how many mute and
innocent creatures are killed? For the sake of the momentary taste of meat-
eaters, this so-called civilized world is slaughtering millions of animals every
day! The production of alcohol, etc., also involves such terrible violence, yet
these people, laughing and consuming it, become intoxicated and revel in their
madness, considering themselves cultured (civilized) and not ashamed! Similarly,
for silk, etc., soft fabrics, how much cruel violence is inflicted on the
silkworm, everyone who knows its process knows this. For wool, leather, etc.,
for feathered and furry animals, for the "fat hat" (monkey crown!) gentleman,
etc., millions of animals are sacrificed in a deadly manner, and then these
shameless human-animals cover their distorted, deformed, and disfigured bodies
with these garments, and then they look in the mirror and admire how beautiful
they look! But these fools do not know that: "What does the face see in the
mirror, compassion and righteousness are not in the heart." - Shri Kabirji
Furthermore, to avoid becoming the object of suffering themselves, they consume
cod liver oil, chicken essence, etc., which are made by sacrificing millions of
innocent animals, and these people consume these violence-tainted medicines with
a smile! As if they are going to attain immortality, they close their eyes and
gulp down bottles and bottles of these medicines into their stomach, and even
though they may try all sorts of remedies, in the end, they die! These are all
examples, but any...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (496) gadaSTisamuccaya du:kha ja che, te pachI jenAthI pAchaLa duHkha che evA
pApasakhA bhegathI sukha kema thAya ? zrImad rAjacaMdrajInuM saMkIrNa amRta
vacana che ke - paravastumAM nahiM muMjhavo, enI dayA mujane rahI; e tyAgavA
siddhAMta ke pazcAtuM duHkha te sukha nahiM-zrI mekSamALA sarva prakArane
bhogavistara pApamaya ja che. kAraNa ke tenI utpattimAM, tenI prAptimAM, ane
tenA upabhogamAM sarvatra pApa, pApa ne pApa ja che : (1) sarva prakAranA
viSayabhoganI utpatti nA upaghAta-hiMsA vinA thaI zakatI nathI. hiMsAdi pApa-
kAmabhoganI utpatti mATe AraMbha-parigraha sevavA paDe che, kAraNa ke maya bhega
paMca viSayanI kaI paNa sAmagrI AraMbha-parigraha vinA upajatI nathI. spaze
driyano viSaya che ke rasaneMdriyane viSaya , dhrANedriyane viSaya lyo ke
cakSurindriyane viSaya , zrotraMdriyane viSaya lyo ke anya koI viSaya , paNa kaI
paNa bhogya vastu prANIonA upamaI-upaghAta vinA upajatI nathI. A mATe
khAnapAnano eka dAkhalo ja basa che. A be iMcanI jIbhaDIne rAjI rAkhavA khAtara
jagamAM keTalI badhI hiMsA thAya che? rasane driyanA rasane saMteSavA mATe
keTalA badhA muMgA nirdoSa jene ghAta karAya che? mAMsAhArIonA kSaNika svAdanI
khAtara roja lAkhe-karaDe prANIonI katala A sudhareluM kahevAtuM jagat karI
rahyuM che! madirA AdinI banAvaTamAM paNa tevI ja bhayaMkara hiMsA thAya che,
chatAM tenuM hase hase pAna karI unmatta leka mehamadirAmAM masta banI potAne
saMskArI (civilised) mAnatAM zaramAtA nathI ! te ja prakAre rezamI vagere
mulAyama va mATe, kozeTAnA kIDAnI keTalI kAramI hiMsA karavAmAM Ave che, te te
tenI vidhi jANanArA sahu kaI jANe che. Una-cAmaDA vagerenI vastuo mATe,
pIMchAMvALI-rUMchAvALI TepIo mATe, pheTa haeNTa (markaTa-mukuTa !) sAheba TepI
vagere mATe, hajAra-balka lAkhe prANIonA ghAtakIpaNe balidAna levAya che, tyAre
aMga paridhAna karI A bezarama mAnava-pazu pitAnI vikRta virUpatA-beDeLapaNuM
DhAMke che, ane tema karI pote kevuM rUDuM rUpALuM dIse che ema arisAmAM moTuM
joI malakAya che ! paNa te bApaDAne khabara nathI ke - mukhaDA kayA dekhe
darapanameM, dayA dharama nahiM dilameM.mukhaDA"zrI kabIrajI. vaLI pote regana
bhoga na bane teTalA khAtara lAkho nirdoSa prANIono bhoga laI banAvavAmAM AvatI
kaoNDalivara, cIkana Isensa vagere hiMsAdUSita davAone A leka hasathI upabhoga
kare che! ne AthI jANe amarapaNuM pAmI javAnA hoya, ema AMkho mIMcIne bATalAnA
bATalA peTanI gaTaramAM gaTagaTAvatAM chatAM mAnavamo game teTalA upAya kaye"
paNa chevaTe maraNazaraNa thAya che!--A badhA skUla daSTAMta che, paNa koI paNa

Page #573 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  **Steadfastness:**  **Dharma-born possessions are also a source of harm**
(497)  There is no smallest item of enjoyment whose origin is free from
violence. Thus, violence pervades all possessions; and violence is the greatest
sin, so sin is always intertwined with all possessions.  (2) Moreover, to obtain
these possessions—the means of enjoyment—humans often have to acquire wealth
through sin, they have to engage in *arambha-parigraha* (acquisition of
possessions), and thus commit even greater sins. There are hardly any
occupations for earning money that are free from sin and truly virtuous. Among
them, occupations like fire-related work, forest-related work, etc., are
particularly sinful, extremely harmful, and are to be avoided by the soul—they
are to be abandoned from afar. Thus, there is great sin in acquiring wealth,
which is the means of enjoyment. (3) Similarly, there is great sin in the
consumption of possessions, because when enjoying these possessions, the desires
for objects of form, taste, etc., increase the passions of attachment, aversion,
pride, etc., in the soul. This leads to the destruction of the soul's virtues,
resulting in self-inflicted violence, and the soul experiences a terrible death
of emotions every moment. This is an obvious sin. Instead of attaining
happiness, it leads to its destruction, "A little bit, a little bit, moment by
moment, terrible death of emotions, oh, how can one remain content?"—Shri Moksha
Mala.  Thus, there is sin in the origin of possessions, sin in acquiring them,
and sin in their consumption. Therefore, it is truly said that possessions are
intertwined with sin, and that is why, for the soul seeking liberation, all
activities related to possessions are to be avoided, and *arambha-parigraha*,
which is the means of enjoyment, is also to be abandoned. Knowing this, the
truly steadfast, right-sighted person constantly strives to stay away from all
activities related to the enjoyment of objects, and minimizes *arambha-
parigraha* as much as possible.  ★  To dispel the notion that possessions are
good because of Dharma, it is said:  **"Even from Dharma, possessions are mostly
for harm to embodied beings. Even sandalwood, when born, burns in the fire."**
(160)  **Explanation:**  **"Even from Dharma..."**—Even possessions arising from
Dharma, mostly, due to their abundance, cause harm to embodied beings, in the
same way as pleasure. The word "mostly" implies that it is not referring to
possessions arising from pure Dharma (those who acquire wealth purely through
Dharma—those who attract it), but to those that are not virtuous, due to their
nature of being a means of pleasure, extremely harmful, due to their impurity,
and due to the involvement of desires in the pursuit of virtue, etc., which
leads to the corruption of the mind. "Even sandalwood..."—Just as sandalwood,
which is cool in nature, when born, burns in the fire, so too, due to its
inherent nature, possessions are mostly like this. (Even though) it is not wood,
but fire—due to the fire being refined from the truth, it burns the sandalwood.
This is a clear example.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 sthirAiSTi : dharma janya bhAgA paNa anatha hetu (497 ) nhAnAmAM nhAnI
bhogasAmagrI evI nathI ke jenI utpattimAM hi'sAna haiAya. Ama bhAgasAmagrImAM
sarvAMtra hi`sA vyApta che; ane hiMsA e moTAmAM meATu' pApa che, eTale samasta
bhAgAtpatti sAthe pApa sadA sa'kaLAyeluM heAya che. (2) vaLI A pApa-sakhAvALI
bhAgasAmagrInI--viSayasAdhananI prApti karavA mATe manuSyAne prAye pApApAnathI
dhanaprApti karavI paDe che, Ara'bhaparigraha sevavA paDe che, ane tethI paNa
mahApApa thAya che. paisAnI kamANI mATe bhAgye ja koi evA dhaMdhA haze ke je
sathA pApamukta te anavadya hoya. temAM paNa agnikarma-vanakama vagere padara
karmAdAnI dhaMdhA te vizeSa vizeSa pApanA kAraNu heAi atyaMta nidya che, ane
AtmAthI ne sathA varjya che--dUrathI tyajavA yAgya che. Ama bhAgasAdhana evA
dhananA upArjanamAM paNa mahApApa che. (3) temaja bhAganA upabhAgamAM paNa
mahApApa che, kAraNa ke te te bhAgasAmagrI bheAgavatI veLAe rUpa-rasAdi
viSayeAnA abhilASathI jIvanA rAga-dveSa-mAha Adi vikAranI vRddhi thAya che.
tethI nija AtmAnA guNanA ghAta thavAthI AtmaghAtarUpa bhAvahiMsA thAya che,
AtmAnuM kSaNe kSaNe bhayaMkara bhAvamaraNa thAya che. A pragaTa pApa che. sukha
prApta karatAM sukha TaLe che, leza e lo laheA; 66 kSaNa kSaNa bhayaMkara
bhAvamaraNe, kAM aheA rAcI raheA ?"--zrI meAkSamALA. Ama bhAganI utpattimAM pApa
che, bhAganI prAptimAM pApa che ane bhAganA upabhAgamAM paNa pApa che. eTale
bhAgane sakhA pApa che ema kahyu te sathA yathAtha che, ane eTalA mATe ja
AtmAthI mumukSune samasta bhAgapravRtti varjya che, temaja bhogasAdhanarUpa
AraMbha-parigraha paNa tyAjya che, ema jANI sa`vegara'gI samyagdaSTi puruSA
samasta viSayabhega pravRttithI satata dUra rahevA prayatnazIla rahe che, ane
jema bane tema Arbhaparigrahune saMkSepa kare che.  dhama bhoga sudara che evI
paNa AzakA dUra karavA mATe kahe che-- dharmAdapi bhavan bhogaH prAyo'narthAya
dehinAm  /  candanAdapi saMbhUto dahatyeva hutAzanaH  //  160  //
vRtti:-dharmAvi mana moLa:-- dhamathakI paNa upajatA bhAga-devalAkAmAM,
kAcoprAye, bAhulmathI, banAya pheniAm-prANIone ana` artha thAya che,
tathAprakAre pramAdavidhAnathI. prAyaHnuM grahaNa zuddha dharmAkSepI (zuddha
dhane AkanArA--kheMcI lAvanArA ) bheganA nirAsa athe' che,-tenA pramAchavatvanA
yAgane lIdhe, atyaMta anavadya tItha karAdi lazuddhine lIdhe, tathA puNyazuddhi
AdimAM mAgamAbhiniveza thakI dhama sAra cittanI upapattine lIdhe, sAmAnyathI
dAMta kacuM"--nApi saMmUta-tathAprakAre zaitya prakRtivALA zItala cA~danathakI
pazu upajele, zu ? te ke vyeva dhrutAzana:-hatAzana--agni he ja che, dajhADe ja
che,-tathAsvabhAvapaNAne lIdhe prAya: A Ama ja che, (tathApi) kASTha nathI paNa
hatA,-satya matrathI abhisaMskRta agnithakI dADhanI asiddhine lIdhe. A sakatra
lesiE che.

Page #574 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(Translation with Jain terms preserved)  (498) Even from dharma, the fruit is
mostly inauspicious; even from sandalwood, the fire here burns. 160
Yogadrishtisamuchaya Alas - the fruit that arises even from dharma is mostly
inauspicious for living beings. The fire that arises even from sandalwood burns.
Vivechana "Even from the cool sandalwood, the fire burns the forest; similarly,
the fruit arising from dharma also appears inauspicious to the mind... That
quality, Shri Cha Sajja 1-5."  In the above, the fruit alone is called a
companion of sin, and therefore its renunciation is emphasized for the seeker of
liberation. But what about the fruit obtained from dharma, i.e., merit acquired
through virtuous deeds? The answer given here is that even the fruit arising
from dharma, i.e., the acquisition of merit through auspicious activities, often
becomes disproportionate and unfavorable for living beings in the realms of gods
and humans, because it tends to generate carelessness. Here, the term "mostly"
is used to indicate an exception, referring to the pure fruit that does not lead
to carelessness, such as that obtained by the Tirthankaras and others, which is
entirely pure, and in which there is an abundance of spiritual wisdom and
devotion to dharma.  The well-known example given here is that even sandalwood,
which has a cool nature, produces fire that burns. Similarly, in this world, it
is observed that the fire produced from sandalwood consecrated with true mantras
does not burn, but the ordinary fire does burn.  In the first celestial realm,
how does carelessness occur? It arises from the fruition of the merit acquired
through virtuous deeds. There, in the divine vimanas (celestial abodes), the
devas (celestial beings) are spontaneously born from lotus-like emergence
platforms. That place is delightful, providing pleasure to the senses, ever-
festive, filled with the sport of song and music, resounding with the words
"Victory! Live!" There, the mighty, all-beautiful devas, devoid of the seven
bodily constituents and radiant with the luster of the body, attain the supreme
divine form through incomprehensible merit-yoga.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (498 ) dha thakI paNa bhoga te, anarthaMkara prAye ja; caMdanathI paNa upajatA,
agni ahI bALe ja, 160 yogadRSTisamuccaya aH--dharma thakI paNa upajele bhAga
prANIone prAye anatha arthe thAya che. caMdanathakI paNa upajelA agni dajhADe ja
che. vivecana " zItala caMdanathI paNa upanA, agni dahe jima vanane re;
dharmAMjanita paNa bhAga IhAM tima, lAge aniSTa te manane re....te guNu zrI cA
sajjhA 1-5 ,, . uparamAM bhAgamAtrane pApasakhA kahyo ne tethI gabha tapaNe
mumukSune tenA niSedha ryAM, paNa dharmothI-puNyathI prApta thatA bhAganuM zuM ?
e praznanuM atra samAdhAna karyuM che kedharmAMthI eTale zubhaka rUpa dha
kRtyathI upArjana karela puNyanA udayathI dharmajanya bhAga paNa devale ka-
manuSyalAka AdimAM je bhAgavistaranI prApti thAya che, te paNa anahetu paNa
ghaNu karIne prANIone anarUpa thai paDe che, kAraNa ke te tevA prakAre pramAda
upajAve che. ahIM ghaNuM karIne ' ema kahyuM te zuddha dhamane AkSepanArA-khecI
ANanArA bhAgane apavAda sUcavavA mATe che, kAraNa ke tevA bhAga pramAdajIvI
nathI, ane temAM atyaMta nirdoSa evA tIrthaMkarAdilanI zuddhi hAya che, temaja
AgamAbhiniveza vaDe karIne dharmAMsAra-dhamA~pradhAna cittanuM hAvApaNuM che.
atre leAkaprasiddha dRSTAMta ApyuM ke, caMdana zItala prakRtivALuM che; chtAM
tethI pragaTelA agni jarUra khALe ja che-dajhADe ja che. kadApi keAi sAcA
maMtrathI saskArela caMdananA agni nathI paNa khALatA, A leAkamAM pratIta che.
5-A devalAkanAM sukha temAM prathama devalAkamAM kevI rIte pramAdAcaraNa thAya
che te jIva zubha dharmAMkaraNInA puNyAdayathI upaje che. tyAM ati bhavya
tapAsIe!-- devaleAkamAM vimAnane viSe kuda jevA kemala upapAda zilA-gabhamAM
devA svaya utpanna thAya che. te sthAna sa` iMdriyAne sukha ApanArU evuM ramya
che, nitya utsavathI virAjamAna che, gIta-vAjiMtranI lIlAthI bharacaka che, '
jaya' ' jIva' zabdathI gAjatuM che. tyAM divya AkRti-rUpa susaMsthAnavALA, sAta
dhAtuthI rahita, ane dehakAMtijalanA pUrAthI dvigatarAne prasAdita karatA evA
vajrakAyane mahAbalavAn sarvAMgasuMdara devA acintya puNyayeAgathI uttama divya
zarIra dhAraNa kare che. jANe sukhA + " tatrAtibhavyatAdhAre vimAne kundakomale
/  upapAdizilAgameM saMbhavanti svayaM surAH  /  /  " ( ityAdi parama sundara
vaNuMnanA AdhAra mATe jume )--zrI zubhacaMdrAcAryajI kRta zrI jJAnAva, pra0 35.

Page #575 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Steadfast Vision: The Joyful Life of Gods and Others**  (49). As if emerging
from the depths of the ocean of death, these gods instantly become youthful.
Just as someone wakes up from a pleasant sleep, shaking off their drowsiness,
these gods rise from their birth-bed, open their eyes, and behold the supremely
delightful heavenly realm and its abundant treasures. They are filled with
wonder and contemplate: "Oh! In the past, I practiced severe austerities in a
distant land, and through compassion, I granted refuge to living beings. With a
pure mind, I worshipped the fourfold path of vision, knowledge, conduct, and
liberation, and I revered the omniscient Lord of the universe. I burned down the
forest of worldly desires, vanquished the enemy of lust, cut down the trees of
passions, and controlled the enemy of attachment. All this has had its effect,
for today I have been rescued from misery and established in the divine heavenly
kingdom."  "Every moment, new colors, songs of victory forever, red songs, a
body without seven metals, beautiful and delightful, red. A body extremely
delicate, wise and learned, red. Free from worldly anxieties and fears, peaceful
like the night, red. The fruits of virtue bring happiness, the mind always
rejoices, red. The land of the heavenly realm forever, happiness and virtues are
embraced, red. The king of the gods, the conscious one, the cause is virtue,
red. The cause, the completed austerities, the blessings of feet and charity,
red. The desire of the devotee of Shiva, what he doesn't like, red. This is the
destruction of happiness, count the sorrows, red."  –Sri Devchandraji's
translation of Sri Jnanarnava. And then, with the happiness born of virtuous
deeds, they enjoy the heavenly wealth they have obtained. There is such an
abundance of pleasures of the five senses that they become completely immersed
in them, engrossed in enjoyment, so much so that they are oblivious to anything
else. Day and night, they spend their lives in pleasure! They don't even know
where their time goes! Alas! Their long lifespan, as vast as countless oceans,
also slips away like water, unnoticed! Only when six months of their lifespan
remain do they feel the withering of their garland of flowers, their eyes begin
to blink, their vision dims, and they realize: "Oh! My end is near. Alas! I have
wasted my life in worldly pleasures and enjoyment: "This beautiful heavenly
realm! These divinely beautiful celestial maidens! These supremely loving
friends..."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 sthirAdaSTi : sukhamama deva-rAdinuM pramAdajIvana (49). mRtanA mahAsAgaranI
madhyethI bahAra nikaLyA hoya ema te devo tarata ja kSaNamAM navayauvanavALA
thAya che. jema keI sukhanidrAmAMthI ALasa maraDIne UThe, tema A deve
upapAdazayAmAMthI UThI AMkha ughADIne jue che te parama ramaNIya svargabhUmi ne
tenI vipula bhegasAmagrI najare paDe che. eTale te Azcaryacakti thaI ciMtave
che-aho ! meM pUrve anya janane dura evuM tapa AcaryuM hatuM, ane kavitAthI
prANIone abhayadAna dIdhuM hatuM, manaHzuddhithI darzana-jJAnAdi catuSTaya
ArAdhyuM hatuM, ane jagannA nAtha sarvajJa paramezvarane ArAdhyA hatA; viSaya
araNyane meM bALI nAMkhyuM hatuM, kAma vairIne haNyA hatA, kaSAya taruone chedI
nAMkhyA hatA, ne rAgazatrune niyaMtrita karyo hato. A badhe tene prabhAva che ke
jenAthI Aje durgatimAMthI uddharIne mane devavaMdita svarga rAjyamAM sthApavAmAM
Avye che.' "nita nita nava nava raMga, gIta jaya jaya sadA ho lAla gIta sAta
dhAtu viNa deha, rUpa sukhakara mudA ho lAla0 rU50 ati sukamAla zarIra, catura
paMDitavaru he lAla0 catura0 deSa kaleza bhayahIna, zAMta jima nizakaru he lAla0
zAMta puNya ude lahe sukha, sadA mana Umahe ho lAla0 sadA devalokanI bhUmi sadA,
sukha guNa gahe ho lAla0 sadA surapati cetana tAma, kAma e puNyanA ho lAla0 kAma
pUravakRta tapa zIla, caraNa vara dAnanA he lAla caraNa0 piNa zivasAdhaka mAga,
eNa game nahIM te lAla0 eNa0 eha vinAzI sukha, duHkha giNaje sahI he lAla0
duHkha0 " -zrI devacaMdrajIta zrI jJAnArNava anuvAda, ane pachI Ama
zubhakaraNIjanya puNyadayathI sAMpaDelI svargasaMpattino upabhegI de kare che.
tyAM paMcaviSayanA sukhe paga sAdhananI eTalI badhI vipulatA hoya che, ane devo
bhegasAgaramAM eTalA badhA nimagna thaI jAya che-mazagula banI pramAdamAM jAya
che, ke te ADe teone bIjuM kAMI sUjhatuM nathI. rAtadivasa jIvanavyaya! kayAM
jAya che tenI paNa temane khabara paDatI nathI ! are ! aneka sAgaropama jeTaluM
temanuM dIrgha AyuSya paNa ema ne ema pANInA relAnI mAphaka kayAM cAlyuM jAya
che tenuM paNa temane bhAna rahetuM nathI! AyuSyanA mAtra chellA cha mAsa bAkI
rahe che tyAre emanI phUlanI mALA karamAvA lAge che, netronuM animeSapaNuM TALe
che-cakSu maTamaTe che, tyAre temanI AMkha ughaDe che ke-are ! mahAre aMtakALa
have najIkamAM che. are re ! mahAruM AyuSya meM viSayatallIna banI pramAdamAM
gumAvyuM: "A suramya svargabhUmi! A sarvAMgasuMdara devAMganAo ! A parama
praNayI mitra

Page #576 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(100) Chagadashtisulsaya "Oh Gods! This devotee servant! This Nandana garden!
These Kalpa trees! This complete material of the five senses! Oh dear! I must
leave all this behind now. When will I see this again?"  Thus, filled with inner
sorrow, he is immersed in the ocean of worry, and like the last six months, he
spends his days in anxiety and restlessness. Thus, in the heavenly realms, life
is often spent in pleasure, indulging in the enjoyment of the fruits of Dharma,
and due to this corruption of form, the soul becomes devoid of its true purpose.
Let us leave aside the talk of these heavenly realms, and consider the state of
human beings, who are directly visible. Even there, the same thing is evident.
If we examine the inner life of a king who has attained the highest state of
wealth and prosperity through intense merit, we find that he is so engrossed in
worldly pleasures and royal concerns that he appears to be completely lost in
enjoyment and fallen. He has no time for Dharma! He has no leisure! Not only
that, but this great soul, who is lying on a bed of flowers, the burden of the
kingdom, is hardly aware that there is something called Dharma in the world! He
forgets the source of his good fortune, the very Dharma that has bestowed upon
him this wealth and prosperity, and this ungrateful creature, this miserable
being, indulges in pleasure and loses himself in it! Unhappy lies the head, that
wears the crown.  The life of a king, etc., is a life of pleasure, or rather, it
is a state of misery.  Consider a wealthy man, who is blessed with great wealth
and possessions. He too is in the same state, because the comforts of his home,
his garden, and his carriage, the servants who are always at his beck and call,
the milk that is readily available when he asks for water, all these things lead
him to a life filled with pleasure. Because he is entangled in the mire of his
own wealth, his possessions, and his comforts, he is completely lost in them. He
is so engrossed in enjoying the fleeting pleasures of this life, which are like
the moonlight that lasts only for four days, that he has become completely
oblivious to everything else. He is so eager to grab every pleasure that life
has to offer, that he has become completely intoxicated by it. He is so lost in
his wealth that he is unaware of the existence of Dharma in the world! He is so
intoxicated by his wealth that he has become completely blind to everything
else. He has applied the ointment of "Chittasthata" to his chest, and he is so
arrogant that he thinks he is looking at the stars in the sky!  The wealthy are
in the same state!

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (100) cagadaSTisasulzaya devA! A svAmIbhakta sevake ! A naMdanavana ! A
kalpavRkSeA ! A paMca viSayanI sa pUrNa sAmagrI ! are re ! A badhuMya cheDIne
mhAre have cAlyA javuM paDaze. AnA mane punaH kayAre darzana thaze ? ' ityAdi
aMtastApapUrvaka citavatA te ciMtAsAgaramAM nimagna thaIne chellA cha mAsa
yugeAnI jema aksAsamAM ne asesamAM keme karIne vItAve che. Ama devalAkamAM
prAyaH dhamathI prApta thayela bhAga bhAgavatAM pramAdamAM jIvana vyatIta thAya
che, ane svarUpabhraSTatAthI te AtmAne ananA hetu thai paDe che. " . A svarga
lAkanI vAta javA daie, ane pratyakSa dRzyamAna evA manuSyAdinI sthitinA vicAra
karIe, teA paNu temaja pratIta thAya che. prakhaLa puNyAdathI uttama
rAjyalakSmIne pAmela evA rAjAttui AMtar jIvana jo tapAsIe, te te
bhAgavilAsAkrimAMke rAjyaciMtAdimAM eTalA badhA vyagra thaI gayelA dekhAya che,
eTalA badhA pramAdamAM patita-- paDI gayelA ' jaNAya che, ke tene - dharma kA` '
mATe ' phurasada ' maLatI nathI ! navarAza jaDatI nathI ! eTaluM ja nahi paNa
rAjyabhArarUpa puSpazayyAmAM nahi...--paNu kaTakazayyAmAM peADhI gayelA te
mahAnubhAvAne 'dharma' jevI kAi vastu jagamAM che ke nahi tenI paNa bhAgye ja
khakhara paDe che! je dhamA~nA ja prasAdathI A puNyavaibhava sAMpaDayo che, te
upakArI mULa dharmanuM ja vismaraNa karI A bApaDA du:khIA jIveA kRtaghdhapaNu'
Acare che ! ne pramAdamAM avatAra eLe gumAve che! Unhappy lies the head, that
wears the crown. , rAjAdinuM pramAda jIvana athavA te khUrI dazA che. mahAazvaya
saMpanna evA kAi zrImaMta dhanADhya hAya, te tenI paNa e ja kAraNa ke lADI, vADI
ne gADInuM sukha jene ghera hAya che, mAga, maMgalA ne agI sadA jenI tahenAtamAM
hAya che, pANI mAgatAM dUdha jenI pAse hAjara thAya che, evA zrImata dhanADhya
janeAnI jIvanacaryAM nIrakhIe te te paNa evI ja pramAdAcaraNathI bharelI heAya
che. kAraNa ke Rdi gAva, sagArava ne zAtAgAravanA gArAmAM guMcIne garakAva thaI
gayelA hAi, teo kAM te ezaArAmamAM ne vaibhavavilAsamAM eTalA badhA paDI gayA
hAya che, cAra divasanI cAMdanI jevA jIvananI ' e ghaDI mAja ' mANuvAmAM eTalA
badhA apramAdI banI gayA haiAya che, hAya ! rahI jaze ema jANI jIvananA lhAve
lUMTavAnI tAlAvelImAM eTalA badhA laTTu khanI gayA haiAya che, ke dhama jevI kAi
cIja jagamAM astitva dharAve che ke kema, tenuM paNa temane bhAna rahetuM nathI
! mAM te te dhananA madamAM eTalA badhA chakI gayA hAya che, dAlatanI dA-lata
emanI chAtImAM eTalA badhA jorathI lAgI heAya che, 'cittastaAtA' nAmanuM
vilepana chAtI para lagAvI te jANe AkAzanA tArA nihALatA hAya ema eTalA badhA
akkaDa ne zrImatAnA paNa e ja hAla !

Page #577 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Steady-sighted, exceptional Tirthankaras and other virtuous people (101) walk
around like fools, or they consider the entire world as insignificant as grass
in front of their father! Oh! Even though they are fools themselves, they laugh
at and insult true pandits, capable and learned people! And either these poor
rich people are so entangled in the web of attachment they have woven
themselves, so engrossed in the hustle and bustle of sinful businesses like
mills and factories, so consumed by the pursuit of wealth accumulated through
the sweat of others, so lost in the intricacies of how to tie up and store this
wealth, so busy in the frenzy of accumulating piles of money to leave behind,
that these poor fools, who are engaged in worldly pursuits, do not even take a
moment of peace! They do not sleep peacefully at night, consumed by worry! And
these honeybees of wealth and honey, who accumulate wealth and honey, deprive
themselves of enjoying it! The honeycombs of wealth that they build are as if
they are meant to be left behind for others, they become altruistic! They become
beggars, taking from others! But they forget the Dharma from which this wealth
has been, is being, and will be obtained! Truly! It is difficult to find a more
pitiable creature in the world than a rich man. It is possible for a camel to
pass through the eye of a needle, but it is not possible for a rich man to enter
the kingdom of heaven, this is the meaning of the words of the great Mahatma
Jesus Christ in the Bible, which are applicable here - 'It is easier for a camel
to pass through the eye of a needle than for a rich man to enter the kingdom of
heaven.' If you have worldly happiness, if you have pride, if you have self-
importance, what is the use of it? If you have the strength of youth, if you
have comfort and ease, if you have wealth, what is the use of it? It is just a
life of pleasure and indulgence! If you have maturity and enlightenment, if you
have servants like Daksh, if you have the happiness of the spiritual realm, as
Raychand says, without embracing the true Dharma, know that happiness is just a
fleeting pleasure, like a nut that is quickly consumed.”**  – Shrimad
Rajchandraji says that in heaven or in the human realm, wherever wealth is
obtained through the accumulation of merit due to Dharma, life is often spent in
pleasure and indulgence, and the true nature of the soul is forgotten. As a
result, the wealth accumulated through Dharma becomes useless for the soul, it
becomes harmful, it becomes a source of deprivation and drying up of the soul;
therefore, this wealth obtained through Dharma is often harmful, it is painful
from the perspective of the soul.  Here, the word "often" is used to indicate
that this is not always the case, but it is a common occurrence for those who
are attracted to and embrace pure Dharma.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 sthirAdaSTiH apavAdarUpa tIrthaMkarAdi sapuruSe (101) phakakaDa banIne cAle
che, ke teo samasta jagatune pitAnI pAse tRNavat tuccha gaNe che ! are ! pote
mUrkhaziromaNi chatAM sAcA paMDita samartha vidvajAjanone paNa hase cheapamAne
che ! ane kAM te A bicArA zrImaMtajano pote pAtharelI parigrahanI jAlamAM eTalA
badhA guMthAI gayA hoya che, mila-kArakhAnA vagere pApo pAdAnarUpa karmAdAnI
dhaMdhAonI dhAMdhalamAM ne parajaNamAM eTalA badhA parovAI gayA hoya che, pArake
paraseve saMcaya karela dhanarAzi kaI gAMThe bAMdhavo ne kyAM roko tenA
prapaMcanI vimAsaNamAM eTalA badhA otaprota thaI gayA hoya che, zerasaTTAnI
uthalapAthalanI gaDamathalamAM ahIMnA ahIM ja pAchaLa mUkI javA mATenA dhananA
DhagalA zIdhra bhegA karavAnI vetaraNamAM eTalA badhA vyagra banI gayA hoya
che,-ke A bApaDA gaddhAvaitaruM karanAra zrImatI zAMtithI bhejana paNa letA
nathI ! ciMtAmagna thaI rAte nirAMte UMghatA paNa nathI ! ane AvI A dhana-
madhanI madhamAkhIo je dhana-madhane pote saMcaya kare che, tene AsvAda levAthI
pote ja vaMcita rahe che! je dhananA madhapuDA pite bAMdhe che, te jANe pArakA
mATe mUkI javAne" ja hoyanI ema paragaju-paropakArI bane che ! veThIA piThIka
banI pArakI veTha kare che ! paNa pramAda cheDI, je dharmathI A ezvaryanI prApti
thaI che, thAya che, ne thavAnI che, tene saMbhAratA paNa nathI ! kharekhara !
zrImaMta dhanavAna jevuM bIjuM keI vadhAre dayApAtra prANI duniyAmAM jaDavuM
muzkela che. soyanA nAkAmAMthI UMTa nIkaLI jAya e banavAjoga che, paNa
zrImaMtane prabhunA dhAmamAM praveza thavo saMbhava nathI, evA AzayanuM mahAtmA
isu khrIstanuM vacana bAIbalamAM che, te atre barAbara lAgu paDe che - 'It is
easier for a camel to pass through the eye of a needle than for a rich man to
enter the kingdom of heaven.' sAhyabI sukhada hoya, mAna taNe mada hoya, khamA
khamA khuda hoya, te te kazA kAmanuM ? juvAnInuM jora hoya, ezane aMkera hoya,
delatano dora hoya, e te sukha nAmanuM vanitA vilAsa haya, prauDhatA prakAza
hoya, dakSa jevA dAsa hoya, hoya sukha dhAmanuM, vade rAyacaMda ema, saddharmane
dhAryA vinA, jANI leje sukha, e to bee ja badAmanuM." - zrImad rAjacaMdrajI Ama
svargamAM ke manuSyamAM jyAM dharmapasAthe puNyodayathI bhAgasaMpatti sAMpaDe
che, tyAM jIvana prAye viziSTa dharmasAdhana vinA pramAdamAM vyatIta thAya che,
ne AtmasvarUpa bhUlAI jAya che. eTale pariNAme ramA dharmajanita bhegasaMpatti
paNa paramArthathI AtmAne anarthakAraka thaI paDe che, ahitarUpa bane che,
AtmArthathI sUkAvI denAra-vaMcita karanAra nIvaDe che; mATe A dharma janita
bhega paNa prAye aniSTa che, paramArthathI duHkharUpa ja che. atre prAye-ghaNuM
karIne ema kahyuM che te zuddha dharmane AkSepanArA-AkarSanArA

Page #578 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(502) The term "Samyagdristi-samuccaya" is an exception to the accumulation of
merit based on virtuous actions, because it involves "pramada" (delusion), which
is not corrupted by the awareness of one's true self. The exceptional case of
Tirthankara and other highly enlightened beings with Samyagdristi is different.
These virtuous individuals attain the Tirthankara status and other meritorious
fruits due to their inconceivable accumulation of merit. Even while living as
householders, they consume the accumulated wealth obtained through virtuous
actions, but they remain completely detached, thus not getting bound. Just as
dry mud does not stick to a dry wall, these detached individuals do not get
bound by karma, but rather experience "nirjara" (shedding of karma) and become
free from "bhogakarma" (karma related to enjoyment). Despite being amidst the
"bhog-panka" (mire of enjoyment), they remain completely detached like a lotus
in water. This is their extraordinary and remarkable characteristic! For
ordinary people, enjoyment leads to karmic bondage, but for these extraordinary
and exceptional Tirthankara and other enlightened beings with Samyagdristi, it
leads to "nirjara." Therefore, the rules applicable to ordinary people do not
apply to these extraordinary and exceptional individuals. They are exceptions to
the rule. The English proverb "Exception proves the rule" applies here. Just as
everyone can walk on a highway, but only a few can walk on a narrow path,
similarly, these Tirthankara and other enlightened beings, who are completely
detached from worldly desires, remain focused on Dharma even while enjoying
worldly pleasures. Their minds are always centered on Dharma, and they are
deeply immersed in the awareness of their true self. (See pages 274-275). "Even
though the mind of ordinary people is filled with desires, they remain detached
throughout the three periods of time. Their minds are like the ocean, which
cannot be captured by any hook... May Shri Shreyans bless you!" - Shri
Yashovijayji.  From the above, it is clear that the consumption or non-
consumption of worldly objects is not the main characteristic of detachment, but
rather the state of detachment itself. If someone does not consume worldly
objects but lacks detachment and harbors desires for enjoyment within their
heart, then that is not detachment. On the other hand, if someone consumes
worldly objects but is detached, knowledgeable, and free from karmic bondage,
and does not harbor desires for enjoyment within their heart, then that is true
detachment. Among these, the combination of non-consumption of worldly objects
and detachment is the best. However, there are exceptional cases of highly
enlightened beings with Samyagdristi who, despite being detached, may still
consume worldly objects due to their past karma. This is also a manifestation of
their "nirjara." x" अत एव महापुण्यविपाकोपहितश्रियाम् । नर्माता वैषं नोर्तानां
विदुते ” - Shri Adhyatmasar

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (502) gadaSTisamuccaya evA puNyAnubaMdhI puNya phalanA bhegane apavAda sUcavavA
mATe che, kAraNa ke temAM pramAdane aAga hoya che, AtmasvarUpanA bhAnathI
bhraSTapaNuM hotuM nathI. apavAdarUpa tIrthakara Adi uttama samyagadaSTi jJAnI
puruSavizeSanI vAta nyArI che. satpuruSo teone aciMtya puNyasaMbhArathI
tIrthaMkara padavI Adi puNyaphala prApta thAya che, ane gRhasthAvAsamAM paNa teo
puNyAnubaMdhI puNyathI prApta thayela bhegasAmagrIne upabhoga le che, te paNa
teone te upaga atyaMta anAsakta bhAve hovAthI teo baMdhAtA nathI. jema sukkI
bhIMta para mATIne gaLo caeNTa nathI. tema ni:sneha-anAsakta evA teone
karmabaMdha thatuM nathI, paNa nirjarA ja thAya che, ne bhogakarmathI te chUTe
che. kAraNa ke bhoga-paMkanI madhye rahyA chatAM teo jalamAM kamalanI jema
sarvathA alipta ja rahe che, e emanuM AzcaryakAraka citra caritra che! bIjA
prAkRta sAmAnya janone je bhoga baMdhanuM kAraNa thAya che, te A asAmAnya-
asAdhAraNa atizayavaMta tIrthaMkarAdi samyagadaSTi jJAnI puruSavizeSane
nirjarAnuM kAraNa thAya che ! eTale sAmAnya prAkRta keTinA janone niyama AvA
asAmAnya puruSottamone lAgu paDato nathI. teo temAM apavAdarUpa che. "Exception
proves the rule"--apavAda niyamane siddha kare che, e aMgrejI kahevata atra
ghaTe che. rAjamArgo -dhorImAge te sahu kaI cAlI zake che, paNa sAMkaDI keDI-
ekapadI para cAlavuM te kaI viralAonuM ja kAma che. mATe Ajanma parama vairAgI
evA tIrthaMkarAdi samyagadaSTi jJAnI puruSo bhoga bhogavatAM chatAM, temanuM
citta te dharmasAra ja hoya che--dharma pradhAna ja hoya che, AtmadharmanI
bhAvanAthI ja bhAvita ne vAsita hoya che. 4 (juo pR. 274-ra75). "rAga bhare jana
mana rahe, paNa tihu kALa vairAga; citta tamArA re samudrane kaI na pAme ho
tAga...zrI zreyAMsa kRpA kare!" zrI yazovijayajI A uparathI e phalita thAya che
ke viSayanuM sevana-asevana e vairAgyanuM mukhya lakSaNa nathI, paNa anAsakta
bhAva e ja mukhya lakSaNa che; kAraNa ke viSayanuM sevana na kare, paNa anAsakta
bhAva na hoya ne aMtaramAM bhogAdinI kAmanAajJAnIne vAsanA heya te vairAgya
nathI; ane viSayanuM sevana kare, paNa anAbaMdha: jJAnI saktabhAva heya ne
aMtarumAM bhogAdinI kAmanA-vAsanA na hoya to abaMdha vairAgya che. temAM paNa
viSayanA asevana sAthe anAsakta bhAva hoya te te sarvottama che, tathApi keI
apavAdarUpa viziSTa samyagadaSTi samartha jJAnI puruSane anAsaktabhAva chatAM
pUrva prArabdhadayathI viSayasevana hoya, te paNa tenA x" ata eva
mahApuNyavipAkopahitazriyAm  /  narmAtA vaiSaM noratAnAM vidute " zrI
adhyAtmasAra

Page #579 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Stithi:** The ignorant are bound by everything, the wise by nothing. (503)
This does not affect detachment. Therefore, "There is no rule for the production
of bondage from objects. The ignorant are bound by them, the wise are never
bound - they are free; because the wise, even while enjoying, do not enjoy -
even while accumulating, do not accumulate! And "the ignorant, even while not
enjoying, enjoy" - even while not experiencing, experience! This is a surprising
but true event. * Because just as someone does business on behalf of a merchant
who is not present - makes transactions, but he does not become the owner of any
profit or loss, he has nothing to do with his profit or loss, he is only a
servant to the letter; and the merchant himself sits and does nothing, yet he is
the owner of the profit and loss, the owner of the profit and loss; similarly, a
wise man with right vision, even while enjoying the objects received from the
fruition of past karma, due to the absence of emotions like attachment, etc., is
not the owner of the fruits of enjoying the objects - he is not the enjoyer; and
the one with wrong vision, even while not enjoying the objects, due to the
presence of emotions like attachment, etc., is the owner of the fruits of
enjoying the objects - he is the enjoyer. Thus, a wise man with right vision
enjoys but is not bound, and his karma is naturally free! And the ignorant are
bound by enjoying! Because "while consuming the objects, due to the arising of
seven types of pleasant and unpleasant pain, the soul naturally experiences the
feeling of knowledge and detachment, which is pleasant or unpleasant. But when
it experiences, the power of wrong vision, due to the good feeling of emotions
like attachment, etc., becomes the cause of bondage, and even though it is
naturally free, it remains undigested and becomes bound; but the right vision,
due to the absence of emotions like attachment, etc., does not become the cause
of bondage, and it becomes naturally free by being completely digested. * Thus,
even while enjoying, one is not bound by karma! It is the power of knowledge or
the power of detachment: (1) Just as a physician does not die by eating poison,
similarly, a wise man enjoys the karmic matter, but is not bound. A poison
doctor, even while eating poison, which is the cause of death for others, due to
the power of his knowledge, he is not affected by it. * "विषयाणां ततो बंधजनने
नियमोऽस्ति न । अज्ञानिनां ततो बंधो ज्ञानिनां तु न कर्हि चित् ॥ सेवतेऽसेवमानोऽपि
सेवमानो न सेवते । कोऽपि पारजनो न स्याच्छ्रयन् परजनानपि ॥" –Shri Yashovijayji's
Shri Adhyatmasar, "सेवंतोवि ण सेवइ असेवमाणोवि सेवगो कोई। વાળા #વિ જ ય પાચળોત્તિ
દો.”–Shri Kundkundacharyaji's Shri Samyasar. * To understand this topic in
detail, refer to the verses 194-198 of Shri Samyasar and the beautiful
Atmakhyati commentary of Shri Amritchandracharyaji on them, as well as the
Virama Adhikar of Shri Adhyatmasar. + "तत् ज्ञानव सामर्थ्य विराळथ ज वा वाजी
यत्कोऽपि कर्मभिः कर्म भुञ्जानोऽपि न बध्यते ॥" –Shri Amritchandracharyaji's Shri
Samyasar Kalash.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 sthiSTiH ajJAnIne badha, jJAnI abaja (503) vairAgyane bAdha Avato nathI. eTale
"viSayanA baMdha utpAdanamAM niyama che nahi. ajJAnIone tenAthI baMdha che,
jJAnIone kadI baMdha nathI-nirjarA ja che; kAraNa ke jJAnI sevatAM chatAM sevatA
nathI -bhegavatAM chatAM bhegavatA nathI ! ane "ajJAnI nahiM sevatAM chatAM seve
che"--nahiM bhogavatAM chatAM bhogave che! A AzcaryakAraka paNa satya ghaTanA
che. * kAraNa ke jema koI vANetara zeThanI vatI vyApAra kare-levaDadevaDa kare,
paNa te kAMI lAbhahAnine svAmI thatuM nathI, tenA naphA-ToTAmAM tene kAMI
levAdevA nathI, te te mAtra cIThThIne cAkara che; ane zeTha pote besI rahe che,
ne kAMI karato nathI, chatAM te naphA-ToTAne mAlIka che, lAbha-hAnino svAmI che;
tema samyagadaSTi jJAnI puruSa pUrva karmodayathI sAMpaDelA viSaye sevatAM
chatAM, rAgAdi bhAvonA abhAve viSayasevanaphalanA svAmitvanA abhAvathI asevaka
ja-nahiM sevanAro che; ane mithyAdaSTi te viSaya nahiM sevatAM chatAM rAgAdi
bhAvanA sabhAve viSayasevanaphalanA svAmitvane lIdhe sevaka-sevanAra che. Ama
samyagadaSTi jJAnI puruSa bhega bhagave che chatAM baMdhAtA nathI ne karma
nijare ja che! ne ajJAnI bhogavatAM baMdhAya che! kAraNa ke "padravya
upabhogavatAM satAM tenA nimitte sAta-asAta vedanAnA udayathI jIvane sukharUpa
vA du:kharUpa jJAna-vairAgyanuM bhAva niyamathI udayamAM Ave che. paNa te jyAre
vedAya che tyAre sAmarthya mithyAdaSTine rAgAdi bhAvanA sadUbhAvathI
baMdhanimitta thaIne nirja rAto chatAM ajIrNa hoI baMdha ja thAya che; paNa
samyagadaSTine rAgAdi bhAvanA abhAvathI baMdhanimitta thayA vinA kevaLa
nirjarAte sate jIrNa thaIne nirjarA ja thAya che.* Ama kaI kama bhegavatAM
chatAM karmothI baMdhAtuM nathI ! te jJAnanuM ja sAmarthya che ke virAganuM ja
sAmarthya che: (1) jema viSa khAtAM vaidya puruSa maraNa nathI pAmate, tema
pudgala kamane udaya jJAnI bhagave che paNa baMdhAtuM nathI. koI viSavaidya,
bIjAone maraNanuM kAraNa evuM viSa khAtAM chatAM, amegha vidyAnA sAmarthya vaDe
tenI * "viSayANAM tato baMdhajanane niyamo'sti na  /  ajJAninAM tato baMdho
jJAninAM tu na karhi cit  //  sevate'sevamAno'pi sevamAno na sevate  /  ko'pi
pArajano na syAcchrayan parajanAnapi  // " -zrI yazovijayajI kRta zrI
adhyAtmasAra, "sevaMtovi Na sevai asevamANovi sevago koii| vALA #vi ja ya
pAcaLotti do."-zrI kuMdakuMdacAryajI kRta zrI samayasAra. * A viSaya vistArathI
samajavA mATe atre AdhArarUpa lIdhela, zrI samayasAranI gA. 194-198 tatha te
paranI zrI amRtacaMdrAcAryajInI paramasuMdara AtmakhyAti TIkA avagAhI,-temaja
zrI adhyAmasArano virAma adhikAra avaloka. + "tat jJAnava sAmarthya virALatha ja
vA vAjI yatko'pi karmabhiH karma bhuJjAno'pi na badhyate  // " -zrI
amRtacaMdrAcAryajI kRta zrI samayasAra kalaza.

Page #580 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(504) The power of right faith (Samyag Darshan) is not destroyed by death; just
as ignorant people, due to their attachment to passions (ragadi bhavas), are
bound by their past karma, which ripens and is consumed, yet the wise, through
their invincible knowledge (Jnana Samarthya), are not bound by the passions,
even though they experience them, because of the power of their right faith. -
This is the power of knowledge. (2) Just as a man who drinks honey does not
become intoxicated due to his lack of desire, similarly, the wise are not bound
by the consumption of matter (dravya) due to their lack of desire. If a man,
despite having a strong desire for liquor, does not become intoxicated due to
the power of his strong aversion, similarly, the wise, due to their strong
aversion to all objects (dravya), are not bound by the consumption of objects,
even though they experience them, due to the power of their strong aversion. -
This is the power of detachment (Vairagya).  Thus, the story of the wise men
with right faith (Samyag Darshan), like the Tirthankaras, is different. Even
though they are driven by past karma and remain in the world due to the ripening
of their past actions (Prarabdha Uday), they are still beyond the world
(Asansari), and even though they experience the world, they are not bound by it.
They have the ultimate detachment (Nitt Vairagya) towards the world. Because
their body is a plaything in the world, it dies, but their mind is in liberation
(Moksha). As Shriman Haribhadrasuriji has said, “Moksha is in the mind, not in
the body.”  The activities of the wise who are in the world are like the dances
of puppets in a puppet show, they are not binding. And this "Yoga Maya" is for
the purpose of grace (Kanugraha). Other philosophers also say this, and there is
no fault in it. “The activities of the wise are like the dances of puppets in a
puppet show. The wise are not bound by the world.” - Shri Adhyatma Saar.  And we
don't need to go far to find an example of such an exceptional, supremely
powerful, wise soul with right faith (Samyag Darshan). We can find a shining
example of this in the life of Shrimad Rajchandraji, the supreme seer of truth,
who lived in the present age. This supremely wise man with right faith (Samyag
Darshan) had to remain in the world due to the ripening of his past actions
(Prarabdha Uday), even though he did not want to, but every moment he was
completely detached from the world. “Just as a man who drinks honey does not
become intoxicated due to his lack of desire, similarly, the wise are not bound
by the consumption of matter (dravya) due to their lack of desire.” - Shri
Samayasar. “Just as a man who drinks honey does not become intoxicated due to
his lack of desire, similarly, the wise are not bound by the consumption of
matter (dravya) due to their lack of desire.” - Shri Vandittasutra.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (504) gadaSTisamuccaya zaktinI niruddhatAthI marate nathI; tema ajJAnIone
rAgAdi bhAvenA sadUbhAvathI baMdhakAraNa e pUrva karmane udaya upabhegavatAM
chatAM, amogha jJAnasAmarthyavaDe karIne rAgAdi bhAne abhAva sate tenI zaktinI
niruddhatAthI jJAnI baMdhAto nathI.-Ama jJAnanuM sAmarthya che. (2) jema madha
pIte puruSa aratibhAve karIne madavALo thato nathI, tema dravyanA upabhegamAM
arata e jJAnI baMdhAtuM nathI. koI puruSa madya prati tIvra aratibhAva
pravartate heI madya pItAM chatAM tIvra aratinA sAmarthyathI madavALe thatuM
nathI, tema rAgAdi bhAvanA abhAve sarva dravyoga prati tIvra virAgabhAva
pravartate hoI, viSaye upabhegavatAM chatAM, jJAnI tIvra virAgabhAvanA
sAmarthyathakI, baMdhAto nathI.-A vairAgyanuM sAmarthya che." Ama tIrthaMkarAdi
samyagadaSTi samartha jJAnI puruSanI vAta nyArI che. teo pUrva karmathI prerAIne
prArabdhodayathI saMsAramAM rahyA hoya to paNa te saMsArathI para-asaMsArI che,
ne bhega bhegavatAM chatAM nathI bhegavatA,-e parama adbhuta mokSe nitta
vairAgya temane hoya che! kAraNa ke temanuM zarIra-kheLIyuM saMsAramAM che, mare
tana: > paNa citta to mokSamAM ja che. zrImAna haribhadrasUrijIe kahyuM che tema
mokSe vitta ma tanu " "lekamAM vartatA jJAnI gInI pravRttio kAjhayaMtranI
pUtaLIonA nRtya jevI hoI temane bAdhArthe thatI nathI, ane kAnugrahanA
hetupaNAthI A "yogamAyA" che, ema anya darzanIo paNa kahe che, ane emAM paNa
dUSaNa nathI." "dAruyaMtrasthapAMcAlInRtyatulyAH pravRttayaH  /  yonino naiva
vadhArca jJAnino DhortinaH " -zrI adhyAtmasAra. ane AvA apavAdarUpa parama
samartha jJAnI samyagadRSTi AtmAnuM dRSTAMta zodhavAne ApaNe vadhAre dUra javAnI
jarUra nathI. haju hamaNAM ja vartamAna yugamAM thaI gayelA parama tatvadraSTA
zrImad rAjacaMdrajInA parama adhyAtmamaya jIvanavRttamAMthI AnuM jvalaMta
udAharaNa maLI Ave che. e parama samyagdaSTi jJAnI puruSane pUrva
prArabdhadayathI anicchatAM chatAM saMsAraprasaMgamAM rahevuM paDyuM hatuM,
chatAM pratikSaNe temane tene atyaMta * "jaha visamuvabhujjato vejjo puriso Na
maraNamuvayAdi  /  poggalakammarasudayaM taha bhuMjadi Neva bajjhae NANI  //
jaha majz2a pibamANo aradibhAveNa majjadi Na puriso  /  vumone karo : vi ja
varlsari tadeva | "--zrI samayasAra, "kA virNa sukAye, paMtamUvinAyA ! vikalA
phauiti mahaiiM, to te dhruva nirivarsa "--zrI vaMdittAsUtra,

Page #581 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Steadfast Vision:** Even the portion arising from Dharma is harmful, like
sandalwood in fire. (505) There was immense regret, and even the great sages
were experiencing a rare state of supreme indifference, an extraordinary state
of detachment, and intense self-awareness. They were experiencing unbroken self-
absorption - this is clearly evident to an impartial observer from their soul-
filled words. But such exceptional (Exceptional -Extraordinary) great souls with
a pure vision like a lotus in mud are rare, extremely rare. It is not possible
for others to fathom or imitate the ocean of their minds, which are free from
attachment to the three periods of time. If they try to do so, they will only be
consumed by their own nature. In this regard, the words of Shrimad Rajchandraji
are very meaningful: “It is difficult to desire to be free from the objects of
desire like sense objects, and even if one tries to do so, it is difficult to
prevent the emergence of attachment to those objects. This is because without
knowledge, it is not possible to completely eliminate the objects of desire.
Simply experiencing the arising of the object of desire leads to its
destruction; but if there is no knowledge, then the desire for the object will
not cease without producing a strong result, and instead of being defeated, the
object of desire will increase. A man who has knowledge does not engage in the
objects of desire, nor does he desire to be free from them by experiencing them.
And if he does engage in them, it is appropriate for knowledge to be covered. It
is only because of the arising of karma that he cannot escape, and therefore the
knowledgeable man engages in enjoyment. Even then, it is accompanied by regret
before and after, and the weakest of results. An ordinary seeker of liberation,
when he engages in the objects of desire, is likely to be bound by them, because
the knowledgeable man has barely won over that situation. A man who only has the
state of thought does not have the strength to overcome the object of desire in
that way.” – Shrimad Rajchandra, Letter No. 499 (591). Thus, in general, it is a
rule that even enjoyment arising from Dharma becomes harmful, but it is an
exception that it does not happen to the special knowledgeable men with right
vision. Here, the example of sandalwood is appropriate. Sandalwood is naturally
cool. Yet, sandalwood fire burns the forest, because it is its nature.
Similarly, Dharma also burns, but even though it is naturally cool and peaceful,
enjoyment arising from Dharma also produces burning. In rare exceptions,
sandalwood is not burned by the fire of a mantra-enchanted man, because he has
been purified by the mantra. Similarly, some exceptional great men like
Tirthankaras and others with right vision are not harmed by enjoyment arising
from Dharma. Because such souls, who are masters of their own selves, have
eliminated the poison of desire with a detached attitude. Therefore, the poison
of enjoyment does not affect them! Other ignorant people...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 sthirAdaSTi : dharmajanya bhAga paNa aniSTa,-caMdanaagnivata (505) atyaMta
kheda vatto hato, ane mahAmunivarone paNa durlabha evI parama udAsIna adbhuta
vairAgyamaya bhAvanigraMthadazA ne utkaTa Atmasthiti temane vartatI hatI,
akhaMDa AtmasamAdhi anubhavAtI hatI,-e emanA AtmAnubhavamaya vacanAmRta parathI
niSpakSapAta avalakanArane pade pade supratIta thAya che. paNa AvA apavAdarUpa
(Exceptional -Extraordinary) jalakamalavat nilepa mahAnubhAva samyagadaSTi
mahAtmAo virala ja hoya che, ati ati alpa hoya che. trikALa vairAgyavaMta temanA
cittasamudrano tAga levAnuM ke anukaraNa karavAnuM bIjAnuM gajuM nathI; tema
karavA jatAM bIjA prAkRta ane te kharA ja khAya! A aMge zrImad rAjacaMdrajInuM
ja mananIya vacanAmRta che ke - "viSayAdi icchita padArtha bheLavI tethI nivRtta
thavAnI IcchA rAkhavI ane te kame pravartAvAthI AgaLa para te viSayamUrchA
utpanna thavI na saMbhave ema thavuM kaThaNa che, kemake jJAnadazA vinA
viSayanuM nimULapaNuM thavuM saMbhavatuM nathI. mAtra udaya viSaya bhogavyAthI
nAza thAya; paNa je jJAnadazA na hoya te viSaya ArAdhatAM utsuka pariNAma thayA
vinA na rahe ane tethI parAjita thavAne badale viSaya vardhamAna thAya. jene
jJAnadazA che tevA puruSa viSayAkAMkSAthI athavA viSayano anubhava karI tethI
virakta thavAnI IcchAthI temAM pravartatA nathI, ane ema je pravartAvA jAya to
jJAnane paNa AvaraNa AvavA yogya che. mAtra prArabdha saMbaMdhI udaya hoya eTale
chUTI na zakAya tethI ja jJAnI puruSanI bhogapravRtti che. te paNa pUrvapazcAt
pazcAttApavALI ane maMdamAM maMda pariNAma saMyukta hoya che. sAmAnya mumukSu
jIva vairAgyanA udbhavane atheja viSaya ArAdhavA jatAM te ghaNuM karI baMdhAvA
saMbhava che, kemake jJAnI puruSa te prasaMgane mAMDa mAMDa jItI zakyA che, te
jenI mAtra vicAradazA che evA puruSane bhAra nathI ke te viSayane evA prakAre
jItI zake."-zrImad rAjacaMdra, patrAMka 499 (591). Ama sAmAnyapaNe dharmajanita
bhoga paNa anartharUpa thaI paDe che e niyama che, chatAM samyagadaSTi jJAnI
puruSavizeSane tema nathI paNa thato e apavAda che. atre caMdananuM dRSTAMta
ghaTe che. caMdana je ke svabhAvathI zItala ja che. chatAM caMdanane caMdanano
agni agni vanane bALe ja che, kAraNa ke te tene svabhAva che. tema dharma paNa
bALe paNa svabhAve zItala-zAMtiprada chatAM, dharmajanita bhega paNa atadAha |
upajAve ja che. kavacit apavAde caMdanane agni maMtrathI saMskAravAmAM AvatAM
maMtrasiddha vidyAdhara puruSane nathI paNa dajhADe. tema keI apavAdarUpa
tIrthaMkarAdi samyagadaSTi jevA uttama puruSavizeSane dharmAnita bhoga anartha
hetu nathI paNa thato. kAraNa ke tevA bhAvitAtmA te Atma-vidhAdhara puruSoe
anAsakta bhAvathI vAsanAnuM viSa kADhI nAMkhyuM hoya che. eTale temane bhoganuM
jhera caDatuM nathI ! bIjA ajJAnI janone

Page #582 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(506) Yoga-drishti-samuccaya That which is the cause of the inflow of asrava-
karma, is the same that is the cause of the outflow of parisrava-karma! "Not by
abandoning, but by abandoning, one abandons." - Shri Acharanga Sutra "It is not
by abandoning, but by abandoning, that one abandons. There is no doubt in this;
it is only a mistake of the drishti, a mistake of the past." - Shrimad
Rajchandraji From the above, it follows that for a person with samyak-drishti,
even the portion of dharma generated by the mind appears undesirable, and even
the accumulation obtained from punya-adaya appears unreal, because he
understands well that this enjoyment of objects is the cause of the dharma-
generated portion that corrupts the soul in the form of delusion. Therefore, he
does not desire to be attached to it. Understanding this, he does not even
desire these objects of enjoyment, and therefore he runs away from them. But if,
due to past karma, he cannot avoid them completely, then he remains constantly
vigilant and enjoys them with detachment, without identifying with them, and
thus he exhausts that karma, but does not become attached to it! He behaves as
if he were merely a witness, observing the play of the pudgala-dhatu, with only
drishti-bhava, as a witness. And— "Viraati from the desire for enjoyment, for
the sake of removing the burden of the skandhas. The attachment to other
skandhas is due to the conditioning of those samskaras." (161) Explanation: -
From the enjoyment of objects, viraati - its - the desire for its portion, -
immediately, what? It is for the sake of skandha-bharapanutthaye - removing the
burden of the skandhas, skandha-antar-samaraapa - attachment to other skandhas
occurs, which is actually wrong, for what reason? Because - tat-samskara-
vidhanant - due to the conditioning of those samskaras, thus, due to the
conditioning of those samskaras, which are undesirable, the desire for them is
not abandoned. Thus, the fifth drishti is explained. In this drishti, other
yoga-acharyas have also described the qualities of alaulya - non-greed, etc.
They have said that - "Alaulya, health, harshness, good smell, little urine and
feces, radiance, grace, sweetness of voice, are the first signs of yoga-
pravritti. "Being free from attachment to objects, with friendliness, etc.,
being endowed with strength, patience, and courage, being unmoved by dualities,
being free from desires, being beloved by people, and so on, are the highest
qualities. "The absence of faults, supreme satisfaction, the yoga of beauty,
equality, and the destruction of the skandhas, are the signs of a yogi." And so
on. Meaning: - (1) Alaulya - non-greed, (2) Arogya - health, (3) Anishthurapana
- harshness,

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (506) yeAgadaSTisamuccaya je Azravanu -kama AgamananuM kAraNa thAya che, te ja
tene parizravanu-kama niga mananuM kAraNa thAya che! ni bAlavA ke sivA, parasavA
se bAlavA ||'--zrI AcArAMga sUtra "heAta AsavA pirasavA, nahi. inameM saMdeha;
mAtra dRSTi kI bhUla hai, bhUla gaye gata eha."--zrImad rAjaca`drajI A uparathI
phalitA e che ke samyagdRSTi puruSane dharma janita bhAga paNa manane aniSTa
lAge che, puNyAdayathI sAMpaDela bhega paNa akAre lAge che, kAraNa ke te sArI
peThe samaje che keA viSayabhoga AtmAne pramAdanA-svarUpabhraSTa karavAnA
dharmajanya bhAga kAraNa che, mATe enI aDAse paNa utaravA cAgya nathI. ema
samajI paNa aniSTa te viSayabhoga icchatA ja nathI ane tethI bhAgatA ja phare
che. paNa pU prArauAdayathI kavacit tema na khanI zake, teA satata cetatA rahI
anAsaktabhAve-anAtmabhAve bhogavI te kamane kheravI nAMkhe che, paNu madhAtA
nathI ! te avinAzI jANe pudgalAlanA tamAsA joI rahyo hAya ema kevaLa dRSTAbhAve-
sAkSIbhAve varte che. tathA-- bhogAcadicchA viratiH skaMdhabhArApanuttaye  /
skaMdhAntarasamAropastatsaMskAravidhAnataH  //  161 //  vRtti:-mota bhogathakI,
tioAvittiH--tenI--bhAganI icchAnI virati,-tAtkAlikI, zuM? te ke SamArApanuttaye-
kaMdhabhAra dUra karavA mATe, skaMdhAntalamAroH-skadhAntara samArApa varte che,
khIjI khAMdha para lAdavA kharAkhara che, zA kAraNathI ? teA ke-taraNaMga
vidhAnantaH-tenA saMskAravidhAnathI, tathAprakAre karyuM aMdhathI aniSTa evA
bhAgasaMskAranA vidhAnathakI, tattvathI tenI icchAnI anivRttine lIdhe, ema
pAMcamI dRSTi kahI. A daSTi sate, khIjA yeAgAcAryee paNa alaukS--alAlupatA Adi
guNA kalA che. kahyuM che ke-- " alaulyamArogyama niSThuratvam, gandhaH zubho
mUtrapurISamalpam  /  kAntiH prasAdaH svarasaumyatA ca, yogapravRtteH prathamaM
hi cihnam  //  maitryAdiyuktaM viSayeSvacetaH, prabhAvavaddhairyasamanvitaM ca
/  dvandvairadhRSyatvamabhISTayabhaH, janapriyatvaM ca tathA paraM syAt  //
doSavyapAyaH paramA ca tRpti - raucityayogaH samatA ca gurvI  /  vaivinAzoDatha
zrRtamA thI--rniqyogastha tu vijJamatat  //  " ityAdi. arthAt--( 1 ) alaulga-
alelupapaNu, ( 2 ) AreAJa. ( 3 ) aniSThurapaNuM-kaThArapaNuM,

Page #583 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Stable Vision:**  Desire does not cease through indulgence. (507) Indulgence
itself creates karma. Removing the darkness, the burden is shifted, 161.
Meaning: - Indulgence is like shifting the burden from one shoulder to another,
due to the creation of karma. The intellect will say that desire will cease
through indulgence, that boredom and detachment will arise from indulgence. This
is also wrong. Because ceasing desire through indulgence is like shifting the
burden from one shoulder to another, because the karma continues. Just as a
burden-bearer gets tired of lifting the burden on one shoulder, and so shifts it
to the other shoulder, but does not put it down; similarly, a seeker of pleasure
gets tired of one object, and so ceases his desire for it and takes hold of
another object, but does not give up the fundamental desire for objects.
Therefore, desire cannot cease through indulgence. Because the karma of
indulgence has not been shed - the desire has not been abandoned, therefore,
there is only a shift from one object to another. Thus, the cessation of desire
that comes from indulgence is only a form of non-cessation of desire, because
the attachment to desire continues! * Knowing this, a person with right vision
stays away from the desire for pleasure; he abandons the desire for objects, he
abandons the desire for objects, and perhaps due to the force of past karma, he
enjoys the fruits of his good karma, but he does so without attachment, without
the feeling of "I" and "mine", like a lotus flower in water, remaining
unstained. Therefore, he does not get bound by it, and he is freed from the
fruits of his karma. This is the first sign of the four good qualities of a
person with right vision: (4) good smell, (5) little urine and feces, (6) a mind
filled with friendliness, (7) a mind that is not affected by poison, (8) a
powerful mind, (9) and a mind filled with joy. (10) Indifference to worldly
affairs - not being disturbed by good and bad, gain and loss, etc. (11) And
popularity - this is the second sign. (12) The removal of faults, (13) and
complete satisfaction, (14) the right way of life, (15) and great equanimity,
(16) the destruction of hatred, etc., (17) and a mind filled with truth - these
are the signs of the developed force. Here too, this natural group of qualities
should be connected from here (from this vision). x "सिद्धथा विषयसौख्यस्य
वैराग्यं वर्णयति ये । मतं न युज्यते तेषां यावदर्थप्रसिद्धितः।
अप्रासत्वभ्रमादुच्चैरवाप्तेष्वप्यनंतशः। कामभोगेषु मूढानां समीहा नोपशाम्यति ॥
विषयैः क्षीयते कामो नेधनैरिव पावकः । प्रत्युत प्रोल्लसच्छक्तिर्भूय एवोपवर्धते ॥"
Adhyatma Sara,

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 sthirAdaSTi : bhegathI IrachAnivRtti na thAya (507) bhegathakI icchA-virati te,
tasa saMskAra kare5;. aMdhabhAra utAravA, sakaMdhAtara Aropa, 161. artha
:-bhegathakI tenI IcchAvirati te khAMdha para bhAra dUra karavA mATe bIjI
khAMdha para lAdavA barAbara che,-tene saMskAra vidhAnane lIdhe. vivecana tyAre
kaI kaheze ke-viSayabhegathI tenI icachAnI nivRtti thaze, bhega bhegavyAthI enA
pratye kaMTALo-vairAgya Avaze, te te mAnavuM paNa khoTuM che. kAraNa ke bhegathI
tenI IcchAvirati thavI, te to eka khAMdhethI bhAra utArI bIjI khAMdhe bhogathI
bhAra ApavA barAbara che, kAraNa ke tenA saMskAra te cAlu ja che. IcchAnivRtti
jema kaI bhAravAhaka eka khAMdhe bhAra upADatAM thAkI jAya, eTale na thAya bIjI
khAMdhe bhAra Ape che, paNa bhAra mUkI dete nathI; tema bhagavAMcchaka eka
viSayathI thAke-kaMTALe eTale tenI IcchAthI virAma pAmI bIjo viSaya pakaDe che,
paNa mULabhUta viSayavAsanAne mUkI dete nathI, mATe bhegathI tenI IcchAvirati
thavI zakya nathI. kAraNa ke bhegasaMskAra chUTayo nathI-vAsanA TaLI nathI,
eTale viSayamAMthI viSayAMtara thayA ja kare che. Ama bhoga thakI je IcchAvirati
thavI te te tatvathI IcchA anivRttirUpa ja che, kAraNa ke vAsanAne anubaMdha
cAlu ja che !* Ama jANI A samyagadaSTi puruSa bhogecchAthI dUra rahe che;
viSayavAMcachA tyaje che, viSayavAsanAno tyAga kare che ane kadAcit
pUrvakarmavege puNyAnubaMdhI puNyanA prabhAve - prApta bhAgasaMpattine upabhoga
kare che, te paNa anAsaktabhAve-anAtmapudgala jAla bhAve jalakamalavat nilepa
rahIne ja kare che, eTale te temAM baMdhAte tamAsI re" nathI ane karma bhogavIne
chUTI jAya che. A samyagadaSTi puruSanI (4) zubha gaMdha, (5) alpa mUtra-purISa
-A gaprattinuM prathama cihna che. (6) maitrI AthiI yukta citta, (7) viSamAM
aceta evuM citta, (8) prabhAvavaMta citta, (9) ane haiyathI yukta evuM citta.
(10) dhaMdhothI adhRSyatva - ISTa aniSTa, lAbha-alAbha Adi ThaMdhothI nahi
gabharAvApaNuM. (11) ane janapriyapaNuM-A bIjuM cihna che. (12) doSane apAya-
dUra thavuM te, (13) ane parama tRpti, (14) aucitya yoga, ( 15 ) ane bhArI
samatA, ( 16 ) vairAdine nAza, ( 17 ) ane RtaMbharA buddhi,-A niSpanna veganuM
cihna che. ahIM paNa A akRtrima guNasamUha ahIMthI ja (A daSTithI ja) AraMbhIne
joDavo. x "siddhathA viSayasaukhyasya vairAgyaM varNayati ye  /  mataM na
yujyate teSAM yaavdrthprsiddhitH| apraastvbhrmaaduccairvaaptessvpynNtshH|
kAmabhogeSu mUDhAnAM samIhA nopazAmyati  //  viSayaiH kSIyate kAmo nedhanairiva
pAvakaH  /  pratyuta prollasacchaktirbhUya evopavardhate  // " adhyAtmasAra,

Page #584 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(508) The collection of the five senses is a wondrous phenomenon. Because it
does not get entangled with the pudgala, being the pure form of the self, the
knower of the senses. And all this is the form-taste-smell-touch-sound pudgala,
knowing that it is "Avadhu! Nat Nagar's game," it only sees it as a witness, and
enjoys it for free! Because the one who is the devotee of the glory of the
treasure of bliss, why would he have any hope for the object? Partially, this is
imperishable, the pudgala net is all-pervading; the devotee of the glory of the
treasure of bliss, why would he have any hope for the object? That quality", Da,
Saza.1-6 We see the world, the world's play, sitting for free. "Shrimad
Rajchandraji. UR The qualities obtained through yogasadhana, these five senses,
and other qualities like Alelupya, etc., which other yogacharyas have also
mentioned, also decrease, in this way - (1) Alelupta-Samyagdristi, the man has
no desire for the object, or it is very weak, the four activities have gone
away, so he does not have any desire for the object. The first sign of
Samyagdristi, the jiva does not get attached to the object, nor does he become
greedy for it. He enjoys the enjoyment obtained from the previous prarabdhaudaya
without attachment, without any desire. (2) Arogya-The effect of yogasadhana,
Samyagdristi has health. The mind-speech-body are purified, and due to the lack
of desire for the object, the disease is destroyed and does not occur. Health is
obtained. (3) Anipparpana-The mind-result of Samyagdristi becomes very gentle,
it becomes wet with compassion and mercy. So there is no kind of selfishness in
it, but there is only gentleness like a flower, softness and compassion. As
Devchandraji has sung, "This is the behavior of the result of compassion." (4)
Shubhagandha-The yogi man, due to the effect of yogasiddhi, his body also
becomes fragrant, and the radiance and happiness also increase. (5) Ap Mutra-
Purisha-Yagasadhana, there is a process in the body due to which the body's
waste dries up and the stool and urine also become less, the small and large
intestines become small. Etc. are the first signs of the four activities, the
first sign of the four activities. All these signs appear at the beginning of
yogasadhana. "Unstable disease-free selfless not, 95 be two policies; the smell
is good, radiance happiness, good voice first activity... Dhan Dhan Shasan Shri
Jinavratanu!" Shri A. S. -1

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (508) gadaSTisamuccaya Azcarya ghaTanA che. kAraNa ke te zuddha AtmasvarUpane
daSTA-jJAtA heI, pudgalanI bAjumAM sapaDAtuM nathI, ane A badhuM rUpa-rasa-
gaMdha-parza -zabdamaya pudgalane tamAse che, "avadhU! naTa nAgaranI bAjI" che
ema jANI, mAtra dRSTArUpe-sAkSIbhAve te tamAso joyA kare che, ane maphatamAM
AnaMda mANe che ! kAraNa ke je cidAnaMdaghananA suyazane vilAsI che, te para
vastunI AzA kema rAkhe? aMze hoya Iha avinAzI, pudgala jAla tamAsI re;
cidAnaMdaghana suyaza vilAsI, te kima parane AzI re? te guNa", da, sajhA.1-6
jagatane, jagatnI lIlAne beThA beThA maphatamAM joIe chIe. "zrImad rAjacaMdrajI.
UR yogasAdhanAthI prApta guNagaNa A pAMcamI daSTimAM vaLI alaulyAdi bIjA guNo je
anya yogAcAryoe paNa kahyA che, te paNa ghaTe che, te A prakAre -(1) alelupatA-
samyagadaSTi puruSane viSaya vAsanA naSTa hoya che, athavA ati maMda hoya che,
meLI paDI cogapravRttinA gayelI hoya che, eTale tene viSayalelupatA saMbhavatI
nathI. samyagaprathama cihana dRSTi jIva viSaya mATe jhAMvAM nAkhatuM nathI ke
te mATe talapApaDa thata ja nathI. pUrva prArabdhodayathI prApta bhoga paNa te
anAsaktapaNe amUcchitapaNe bhogave che. (2) Arogya-gasAdhananA prabhAvathI
samyagadaSTine Arogya varte che. mana-vacana-kAyAnA ganI zuddhithI tathA viSaya
alelupatAthI roga hoya te nAbuda thAya che ne na thatuM nathI. Arogya sAMpaDe
che. (3) anipparapaNu-samyagadaSTinA manapariNAma atyaMta komaLa thaI jAya che,
dayA-anukaMpAthI A bhInA bane che. eTale tenAmAM kaI paNa prakAranuM
niSpharapaNuM hotuM nathI, paNa kusuma samuM kamaLapaNuM, mRdupaNuM ne
dayAdrapaNuM ja hoya che. devacaMdrajIe gAyuM che tema "bhAva dayA pariNAmane
eha ja che vyavahAra." (4) zubhagadha-yegI puruSane yogasiddhinA prabhAvathI
zarIrane parimala paNa sugaMdhI-suvAsita banI jAya che, kAMti prasannatA Adi
paNa vadhe che. (5) apa mUtra-purISa-yegasAdhanAthI zarIramAM koI evI prakriyA
thAya che ke jethI zarIranA mala sukAI jaI malamUtra paNa thaDA thAya che,
laghunIti-vaDInIti alpa bane che. ItyAdi gapravRttinA prathama cihna che,
prathama vAnakIrUpa che. A badhAM lakSaNe yogasAdhanAnA prAraMbhamAM jaNAya che.
"acapala roga rahita niSphara nahi, a95 hoya doya nIti; gaMdha te sAro re kAMti
prasannatA, susvara prathama pravRtti... dhana dhana zAsana zrI jinavarataNu!"
zrI e. sa. -1

Page #585 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  **Sthirashti: Qualities attained through Yoga Sadhana** (509) (6) **Maitri
Adi Yukta Chitta** - The mind is filled with feelings of Maitri (friendliness)
and other virtues due to the Yoga Sadhana practiced in the previous life. (7)
**Vishayee Pratye Achet** - The mind is indifferent to objects. (8)
**Prabhavavantapan** - Due to the influence of Yoga, the Yogi exhibits a unique
aura that makes others feel awestruck. This aura creates a spontaneous
impression of the Yogi being a powerful and influential person. (9) **Dhairya
Vantpan** - The Yogi possesses extraordinary and divine patience due to complete
self-reliance and perfect vision. (10) **Adhrushta** - The Yogi is unaffected by
dualities like pleasure-pain, attachment-aversion, gain-loss, honor-dishonor,
love-hate, birth-death, etc. In other words, the Yogi is not disturbed, moved,
agitated, afraid, or panicked by these dualities. These dualities cannot
influence the Yogi. (11) **Janpriyatva** - Such a Yogi is popular among people.
Their presence brings joy to people, and they are loved naturally. They are
considered **Priyadarshan** (pleasing to behold). These are some of the signs of
a Yogi.  **Shweera Prabhavi, Aagle Chagthi, Mitra Adi Yukta Chitta;** **Labh
Ishta Na Rai Dwandva Ashta, Janpriyata Hai Nitya.... Dhan Dhan** - Shri Chag S.
6-2.  (12) **Dosha Vyapya** - The vices like attachment, aversion, and delusion
are eliminated or significantly reduced. As the firmness of **Samyag Darshan**
(right vision) increases, the power of these three vices (attachment, aversion,
and delusion) weakens. (13) **Param Tripti Nishpann** - The Yogi experiences
ultimate satisfaction from the bliss arising from the realization of the Self
through Yoga. The Yogi is so fulfilled and content with the taste of pure
consciousness that they are no longer attracted to worldly pleasures. (14)
**Ouchitya Yog** - The Yogi acts with perfect propriety and appropriateness in
all situations. They perform actions that are suitable for the occasion. (15)
**Bhari Samata** - The Yogi possesses an unparalleled equanimity. (16) **Vaidya
Nash** - The Yogi naturally eliminates hatred, opposition, and distress. The
Yogi thinks, "Why should I be bound by hatred and opposition?" The presence of a
non-violent Yogi eliminates hatred and other negative emotions. The Yogi's
powerful aura is such that even violent animals become calm in their presence.
(17) **Ritambhara Buddhi** - The Yogi's intellect is filled with truth. They
only accept truth and are never clouded by delusion.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 sthirASTi : yogasAdhanAthI prApta guNagaNuM (509) (6) maitrI Adi yukta citta--
AgalI dRSTiemAM karelI ceAgasAdhanAthI citta maitrI Adi bhAvathI bhAvita hoya
che. (7) viSaye| . pratye aceta--viSaye pratye citta aceta hAya che. (8)
prabhAvava'tapaNu--yoga prabhAvathI cagI puruSane khIju` cihna kAi Ara prabhAva
jhaLake che. jethI sAmeA mANasa ajAI jAya che, ne tenA para camatkAranI
svAbhAvika chApa paDe che. ceAgI puruSane jotAM ja A kAI prabhAvika puruSa che
evI svayaMbhU sahaja asara upaje che. (9) dhairya vaMtapaNu - parama
AtmanirbhayatAthI yAgI samyagdaSTi puruSanuM dhairya asAdhAraNa-alaukika hAya
che. (10) * adhRSTatra--sukha-duHkha, rAga-dveSa, lAbha-hAni, mAna-apamAna, hu
zeka, janma-mRtyu Adi dvandvothI yAgInuM adRSyapaNuM hAya che. arthAt te te
ndrothI samyagdRSTi puruSa kSeAbha pAmatA nathI, calAyamAna thatA nathI, gAMjyA
jatA nathI, DaratA nathI, gabharAtA nathI. te te dvandvone| bhAra nathI ke yegI
puruSaneA vALa vAMkA karI zake. (11) janapriyatva--AvA samyagdaSTi puruSa
leAkapriya heAya che. emanu da"na thatAM leAkeAne AnaMda upaje che, ane kudaratI
prema sphure che, evA te priyadarzana heAya che.--A badhA ceganA bIjA cihana
che. zvIra prabhAvI r Agale cegathI, mitrAdika yuta citta; lAbha iSTanA rai
dvaMdva aSTatA, janapriyatA hAya nitya....dhana dhana0" -zrI cAga sa. 6-2. (12)
doSa vyapAya--rAga, dveSa-mAThu Adi doSa dUra thAya che, athavA atyaMta maDha
thAya che, meLA paDe che. jema jema samyagdaCnanI dRDhatA thAya che, tema tema
rAgadveSa-maiAha e trideSanu jora evuM thatu jAya che. (13) parama tRptiniSpanna
ceAganA AtmASIna evA AtmAnubhavathI upajatA sukhathI samyagdaSTine parama tRpti
upaje che. zuddha caitanyarasanA AsvAdathI te eTalA badhA AtmatRpta thaI gayela
heAya che, eTalA badhA dharAI gayela hAya che, ke tene pachI cihna mAkasabukasa
jevA bIjA rasa gamatA nathI. (14) aucitya yAga----samyagdaSTi sarvAMtra
aucityathI-ucitapaNe, ghaTitapaNe pravarte che. jyAM jyAM je je ceAgya che tyAM
tyAM te te Acare che. (15) bhArI samatA--samyagdRSTine satra koI apUrva' samatA
varte che. (16) vaidi nAza--samyagdaSTine vaira-virodha, kaleza AdinA nAza
sahajamAM thai jAya che, kAraNa ke vaira vidhAdi karIne kai gAMThe bAMdhavA che?
ema sabhyadRSTi vicAre che. temaja ahiMsaka sabhyaSTinA sannidhAnamAM vairAdinA
nAza thAya che, evA temanA ugra mahAprabhAva varte che. cegI puruSAnI hAjarImAM
hiMsaka prANIo paNa peAtAnA jAtivaira bhUlI zAMta thaI jAya che. (17) RtaMbharA
buddhi- 'RRtuM vimaItti RRrtamA'arthAt Rta eTale satyane ja je dhAraNa kare che,
kadI paNu viparyayathI AcchAdita thatI nathI te Rta bharA

Page #586 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(510) Yogadristi Samuchaya reveals the right vision (Samyagdristi) of the
intellect. This Ritambhara intellect is also called Pratij Jnana. It is superior
to Shruta Jnana and Anuman, because Shruta and Anuman are general in nature,
while Ritambhara is specific. This Ritambhara intellect arises from the bliss of
the soul (Adhyatma Prasada) and manifests from extreme purity of the soul. All
these are the characteristics of accomplished yoga, and they manifest from the
fifth vision onwards. “Destruction of faults, supreme satisfaction is attained,
equality is the appropriate combination; destruction of hatred, Ritambhara
intellect, this is the accomplished... wealth, wealth, the essence of yoga,
which is described in the scriptures, as per the Yogachar, from the fifth vision
onwards, this is the essence... wealth, wealth.” Shri Sazha 6-3-4 The essence of
the fifth stable vision is that in this stable vision: (1) the vision is like a
jewel, eternal and unchanging, (2) the fifth restraint called Pratyahar is
attained, (3) the fifth mental defilement called Branti is eradicated, and (4)
the five virtues called Suphmad are obtained. The wise person with this vision
has overcome the darkness of ignorance (Tamogranthi), and therefore sees the
entire world in its true form. All worldly activities appear to this wise person
like the dust of a child, unsubstantial and unstable. Due to the discrimination
gained from the perfectly matured Shruta Jnana, all external emotions appear
like a mirage, a Gandharvanagar, and a dream. The only knowledge-light that is
external and internal, without any obstacles and without any defects, is the
ultimate truth here. Everything else is a delusion. This Samyagdristi, who has
developed this discrimination, is steadfast, virtuous, and devoted to Pratyahar,
meaning they withdraw their senses from objects and do not get attached to
worldly desires. They are careful to not violate Dharma and are devoted to the
truth. - Just as Lakshmi, the companion of misfortune, does not bring joy to the
wise, similarly, the beings who are attached to pleasure and enjoyment do not
find joy in sin, because the relationship between sin and pleasure is
inseparable, meaning where there is pleasure, there is sin. Enjoyment is not
possible without the destruction of other beings. x" अध्यात्म
निर्विचारत्ववैशारखे प्रसीदति । ऋतंभरा ततः प्रज्ञा श्रतानुमितितोऽधिका॥" - Shri
Yashoyat Dvadvadva

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (510) yogadaSTisamucaya buddhi samyagdaSTine pragaTe che. A RtaMbharA buddhine
prAtija jJAna paNa kahe che. te zrutajJAna ne anumAna karatAM adhika che, kAraNa
ke zrata ne anumAnane viSaya sAmAnya che, RtaMbharAne viSaya vizeSa che. A
RtaMbharA buddhi adhyAtmaprasAdathI-adhyAtmanI prasannatAthI upaje cheatyaMta
AtmazuddhithI pragaTe che.-A badhA niSpanna-siddha yoganA lakSaNa che. ane te
pAMcamI daSTithI mAMDIne pragaTatA pAme che. "nAza deSano re tRpti parama lahe,
samatA ucita saMyoga; nAza vairane re buddhi RtaMbharA, e niSpannaha ga....dhana
dhana ciTha yoganA re je paragraMthamAM, yogAcAraja dITha; pAMcamI daSTithakI
savi jeDIe, ehavA teha garITha...dhana dhana." zrI sajhA 6-3-4 pAMcamI sthira
daSTine sAra A sthirA daSTimAM-(1) darzana ratnaprabhA samAna, nitya-apratipAtI
evuM hoya che, (2) pratyAhAra nAmanuM pAMcamuM gAMga prApta thAya che, (3)
brAMti nAmano pAMcamo cittadeSa TaLe che, ane (4) sUphamadha nAmane pAMca guNa
sAMpaDe che. A dRSTivALA sabhyazanI jJAnI puruSane ajJAnadhakArarUpa
tamograMthine vibheda thayo hoya che, eTale tene samasta saMsArasvarUpa tenA
kharA svarUpamAM dekhAya che. A sarva bhavaceSTA te buddhimaMtane mana bAlakanI
dhUlihakIDA jevI asAra ane asthira bhAse che, samyak pariNata zrutajJAnathI
prApta thayelA vivekane lIdhe te sarva bAhya bhAvane mRgajala jevA,
gaMdharvanagara jevA, ane svapna jevA dekhe che, abAhya-AMtar evI kevala
nirAbAdha ne nirAmaya je jJAnajyoti che te ja atre parama tatva che, bAkI bIje
badhe upaplava che,-ema jene viveka upaje che evA A samyagadaSTi dhIra satapara
tathA prakAre pratyAhAraparAyaNa hoya che, arthAt viSayomAMthI indriyone pAchI
kheMcI le che viSayavikAromAM idrine joDatA nathI; ane dharmane bAdhA na upaje
ema tatvathI yatnavaMta rahe che. - alakSmInI sakhI evI lakSamI jema
buddhimatene AnaMdadAyI thatI nathI, tema pApane sakhA e bhegavistara prANIone
AnaMdadAyI thatuM nathI, kAraNa ke pApane ane bhegane saMbaMdha eka bIjA vinA na
cAle e avinAbhAvI che, arthAta bhega che tyAM pApa hoya che ja prANIonA upaghAta
sivAya bhoga saMbhavita x" adhyAtma nirvicAratvavaizArakhe prasIdati  /
RtaMbharA tataH prajJA shrtaanumitito'dhikaa||" - zrI yazaoyta dvA dvA0

Page #587 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Steadfast Vision: The Essence of Steadfast Vision, Kalash Kavya (511)
Knowing that there is only sin in attachment, the righteous, the Samyakdrishti,
desires to be free from the objects of sense. Moreover, the pleasures arising
from Dharma often become a source of attachment, because they corrupt the true
nature of the self and lead to pride. Just as fire kindled by cool sandalwood
can burn, so too, the pleasures derived from Dharma can cause suffering for the
discerning soul. Similarly, to desire pleasure from pleasure is like shifting a
burden from one shoulder to another. It does not alleviate the burden, but only
perpetuates the habit of carrying it. To believe that pleasure can be attained
by giving up pleasure is delusion, because it only leads to new habits of desire
and the thirst for objects does not cease. Understanding this, the Samyakdrishti
strives to stay away from pleasure, that is, to practice Pratyahara, the
withdrawal of the senses from objects.  Furthermore, the other signs of non-
attachment, such as Alolupata, which are attained through the practice of Yoga,
manifest from the fifth stage of vision onwards. (See page 506)  ## Table of
Steadfast Vision (11)  | Seer | Ratna Prabhasamanitya | Yatraanga | Pratyahara |
Doshatyaag | Bhrantiyaag | Gunuprapti | Sukshmasha | Alolupatadi |
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---| | **Steadfast Vision** |  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  ## Chaupai  The light of the jewel shines brightly, the senses are
conquered by Pratyahara; all actions are performed without delusion, the yogi
enjoys subtle happiness. 112  The 112 knots are broken by the brilliance, the
mind is steadfast in the knowable and unknowable; the night of ignorance passes,
the dawn of knowledge breaks. 113  Just as milk and water are recognized, so
too, the self and non-self are differentiated; the yogi, with a pure mind,
enjoys the true nature of the self. 114  The world is like a play of dust and
dirt, the activities of life seem to be real; like a mirage and dreams, the
external world appears to be real to the ignorant. 115  ## Gunasthan  4-5

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 sthirASTi: sthirASTinA sAra, kaLaza kAvya (511) nathI, mATe bhegathI pApa ja
che, ema jANI dharmiSTha evA samyagdaSTi puruSa viSayabhAgathI virAma pAmavA ja
icche che. vaLI dhamathI paNa upajatA bheAga prAye anathakArI thaI paDe che,
kAraNa ke te tevA prakAre AtmasvarUpathI bhraSTatArUpa pramAda upajAve che. jema
zItala ca'danathI upajele agni paNa dajhADe che, tema dhajanita bhAga paNa tApa
pamADatA hAi sabhyadRSTi puruSane aniSTa lAge che. tema ja-bhAgathI bhAga-
icchAvirati mAnavI, te te eka khAMdhethI bhAra utArI khIjI khAMdhe lAdavA
kharAkhara che. tethI kAMI bhAra uttaratA nathI, paNa bhAraneA saMskAra cAlu ja
rahe che. tema bhogathI bhoganI IcchA virAma pAmaze . ema mAnavuM te brAMti che,
kAraNa ke tethI teA UlaTA bhAgecchAnA navA navA saMskAra cAlu rahe che, ane
viSayatRSNAne lIdhe bhogecchAnI nivRtti thatI nathI.-ema samajI samyagdaSTi
puruSa jema bane tema bhogane dUrathI vavA prayatnazIla rahe che, arthAt
viSayeAmAMthI iMdriyAne pAchI khe`cI levArUpa pratyAhAra kare che. vaLI
ceAgasAdhanAthI prApta thatA bIjA alelupatAdi cihna paNa je anya ceAgAcAryae
kahyA che, te paNa A pAMcamI dRSTithI mAMDIne pragaTe che. ( jue pR. 506)
sthirAdaSTinuM' koSTaka 11 darzIna ratnaprabhAsamanitya yAtrAMga pratyAhAra
doSatyAga bhrAMtiyAga guNuprApti sUkSmASa aleAlupatAdi --; kaLaza kAvya -- cApAI
dana ratnaprabhA sama nita, pratyAhAre iMdriya jIta; kRtya kare sahu bhrAMti
rahita, yAgI sUkSma sukhAdha sahita. 112 graMthibheda taNe suprabhAva,
vedyasa'vedya pade sthira bhAva; vItI mAha adhArI rAta, bhedajJAnanuM thayuM
prabhAta. 113 kSIra-nIra jyama jANI ledya, svapara vastunA karI vibheda; yeAgI
huMsa zuddha mAnasa rame, parapariNati AtmAnI vaye 114 khAla dhUligRhakrIDA
samI, bhavaceSTA lAge vasamI; mRgajala ne svapnAdi samAna, dekhe bhAvA bAhya
sujANu. 115 guNasthAna 4-5

Page #588 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(512) Yoga-drishti-samuchaya The only true, external, Kevala is one, without
obstacles, without defects; that is the ultimate principle here, all else is
just a wave. 116 Thus the wise, patient, great one, always practices pratyahara,
withdrawing the senses from objects, not clinging to enjoyment. 117 Where the
senses have been withdrawn from objects, where they have been forcefully removed
from the objects they love, they are united with their own form. 118 Enjoyment
is the friend of sin, enjoyment is the disease for yoga; enjoyment is the
enjoyment of the serpent, who desires enjoyment forever? 119 Even from dharma,
enjoyment is obtained, but it is not liked; like cool sandalwood, it burns the
forest of fire. 120 From enjoyment, the cessation of desire, never happens, it
only increases; taking the burden off one shoulder, it is loaded onto the other!
121 Thus the yogi thinks, without desire, self-contented, a treasure of virtue;
he abandons the poison of objects, and worships the nectar of his own form. 122
The eight great siddhis, the nine treasures, are near to yoga; all powers become
his servants, and come to him of their own accord. 123 He sees the nine
drishtis, the true Samyak-drishti! Where there is infinite power of the soul,
there is only the attainment of siddhi. 124 Sitting in the house of his own
form, the yogi is a witness here; he sees the play of the dust of karma, and
experiences the waves of lila freely. 125 He removes the bondage of dharma, he
strives for dharma through the principle; he remains steadfast in his own
dharma, and attains the state of the delight of the Lord. 126 ॥ इति
महर्षिश्रीहरिभद्राचार्यविरचिते किरत्चंद्रसूनुमनःसुखनंदनेन भगवानदासेन
सुमनोनंदनीबृहत्टीकानामकविवेचनेन सप्रपञ्च विवेचिते श्रीयोगदृष्टिसमुच्चयशाने
पञ्चमी स्थिरादृष्टिः॥

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (512) yogadaSTisamucaya abAhya kevala ti eka, nirAbAdha nirAmaya cheka; teja
parama ahiM tatva pramANa, bAkI badhA upaplava jANuM. 116 ema vivekI dhIra
mahaMta, pratyAhAra sadAya karaMta, viSayomAMthI iMdriya hare, Asakti bhoge nA
dhare. 117 jeha harAyA che jemAM viSayamAM dharatI bahu prema haThathI haThAvI
iMdriya teha, svarUpamAM joDe guNageha 118 pApa taNe mitra ja che bhoga, yoga
pratye roga ja che bhoga; bhoga bhujaMga taNe che bhoga, iche kayamayegI te
bhoga? 119 dharmathI paNa sAMpaDate bhoga, tene paNa game nahi ga; upa zItala
caMdana thakI, te agniya vana bALe nakI. 120 bhogathI icchA taNe virAma, kadI na
thAye-vadhe ja kAma; eka khAMdhethI utArI bhAra, bIje lAda te avadhAra! 121 ema
ciMte yegI niSkAma, AtmArAmI te guNadhAma; viSayaviSane dUrathI tyaje,
AtmasvarUpa amRtane bhaje. 122 aSTa mahAsiddhi nava nidhi, yogane heye saMnidhi;
vibhUti sau dAsI thaI phare, AvI svayaM yegIne vare. 123 te sAmI nava daSTi
kare, gI samyagadaSTi khare! anaMta jyAM AtmAnI Rddhi, tyAM kuNa mAtraja labdhi
siddhiH 124 besI svarUpanA gharamAMhi, yegI sAkSI bhAve AMhi; pudgalajAla tamAse
juve, lIlA lahera maphata anubhave. 125 dharmataNI bAdhA parihara, tatvathI
dharma yatna ja kare; AtmadharmamAM sthiratA dhare, bhagavAn mananaMdana pada
vare. 126  //  iti maharSizrIharibhadrAcAryaviracite
kiratcaMdrasUnumanaHsukhanaMdanena bhagavAnadAsena
sumanonaMdanIbRhatTIkAnAmakavivecanena saprapaJca vivecite
zrIyogadRSTisamuccayazAne paJcamI sthiraadRssttiH||

Page #589 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Kanta Dristi  **And in this way, the sixth Dristi is explained. The Jain
scriptures say, "What is the nature of the Jantāvatā?" Therefore, there is no
other ultimate goal here, only the investigation of the good.** (162)  **In the
sixth Kanta Dristi, everything that was just said is present. There is no other
goal than the love of the other, and the perception of the other as worthy. This
is the only investigation, and it is always beneficial.** (162)  **Meaning:** In
the Kanta Dristi, the eternal vision and other things become the cause of love
for the other, and there is a perception of the other as worthy. Therefore,
there is no other goal here, and there is only the eternal investigation of the
good.  **Commentary:** Now, I will speak of the sixth Dristi, which is called
Kanta. There, your light shines. The investigation of the truth is firm, and
there is no other perception.  **Glory to the teachings of the Jina!** - Shri
A.D. Sajay - 5  **Explanation:** In the Kanta Dristi, the eternal vision and
other things that were just said do not become the cause of love for the other
or hatred. There is a perception of the other as worthy. "The binding of the
mind to the country" is the characteristic of this perception. It has been said
that "the perception is from the beginning" (Pa. Ru. 1). Because of this
perception, in this Dristi, there is no other goal. There is no other joy. This
is because of the perception of the other. The eternal, all-time, investigative
mind is present. Therefore, it is said that it is beneficial - because of the
fruit of right knowledge.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 kAMtA daSTi ane tathA prakAre chaThThI daSTi kahI dekhADavA mATe kahe
chejAntAvAtAM zI dhAra I ato'tra nAnyamunnityaM mImAMsA'sti hitodayA  //  162
//  kAMtA daSTi chaThThImAM, je kahyuM hamaNAM ja teha badhuMye hoya che, anya
prItine kAja, heya para ahiM dhAraNA, ethI anyamuda naya; mImAMsA vaLI sarvada,
hiteyayuta hoya, 16ra artha-kAMtA daSTimAM A nitya darzanAdi anyane prIti kAraNa
thAya che, tathA parA dhAraNa hoya che; ethI atre anyamud hotI nathI ne nitya
hiteAdayI mImAMsA hoya che. vivecana chaThThI diThThI re have kAMtA kahuM, tihAM
tArA prakAza; tatvamImAMsA re daDha hoya dhAraNA, nahiM anya kRta vAsa... dhana
dhana zAsana zrI jinavarataNu!'"--zrI. e. da. sajhAya -5 vRtti:-hanAthAma-kAnA
dRSTimAM, taTu-A, anaMtara-hamaNuM ja kaheluM nityadarzanAdi bIra-bIjAonI prIti
artha thAya che nahi ke dveSa arthe. tathA bAraNA pA-parA-pradhAna dhANA hoya
che. "cittane dezabaMdha' e dhAraNAnuM lakSaNa che. kahyuM che
ke-"sezavapattitha dhANA" (pA. rU. 1). bato-A dhAraNAthakI, zatra-A dRSTimAM,
nAthakuTu-anyamud nathI hatI, anyatra harSa nathI hota,-tyAre te te pratibhAsanA
aAgane lIdhe. tatha-nitya-nitya, sarva kALa, mInasADatti-savicArAtmikA mImAMsA
hoya che, eTale ja kahyuM-tiyA-hiteAdayavALI,-samyagrajJAnanA phaLapaNue karIne.

Page #590 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(514) This sixth perspective, called "Kantha," is characterized by (1) the
constant presence of the qualities mentioned earlier, such as "Nitya Darshan,"
which inspire love in others, not hatred. (2) It involves a deep-rooted
conviction, a firm anchoring of the mind. (3) This conviction eliminates any
other desires or attachments, as it renders them irrelevant. (4) It fosters a
constant and insightful contemplation of the truth, fueled by the fruits of
right knowledge and a compassionate heart.  The name "Kantha" is apt for this
perspective. It signifies a devoted wife who is completely dedicated to her
husband. Just as a devoted wife, despite performing other household duties,
always keeps her husband in her thoughts, similarly, a person with this
perspective, even while engaged in worldly affairs, keeps their mind focused on
the teachings of Dharma. Alternatively, "Kantha" can also be interpreted as
"beloved" or "charming." A person embodying this perspective appears captivating
and endearing, just like someone who is universally loved. This also justifies
the name "Kantha" for this perspective. Another reason for this name is that
this perspective is highly cherished by yogis.  Therefore, this sixth
perspective, "Kantha," encompasses all the qualities of the fifth perspective,
such as "Nitya Darshan," but with greater purity and intensity. "Nitya Darshan,"
subtle understanding, withdrawal of senses, and abandonment of delusion are all
present here, but with even greater strength.  The vision attained here, like
the steady gaze of a star, is constant and unwavering, but even more pure and
powerful. It is likened to a star because, just as a star shines brightly and
steadily like a precious gem, but with even greater intensity, this perspective
illuminates the mind with a similar brilliance. Just as a star shines eternally
in the sky, remaining steadfast, similarly, the light of right knowledge
illuminates the mind of a person with this perspective, remaining constant and
unwavering. This vision, like the star's light, continuously illuminates the
inner sky of consciousness. Moreover, just as a star shines independently in the
sky, this perspective's understanding also illuminates the mind without any
external support. This independence is achieved through the reliance on the
Supreme Being, the ultimate knower, who is the source of all knowledge. This
reliance on the Supreme Being transforms the challenging ocean of existence into
a safe haven, allowing the soul to experience its inherent purity and joy.
Therefore, the understanding of a person with this perspective is extremely
subtle. It is like a...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (514) gadaSTisamuccaya A chaThThI kAMtA daSTimAM (1) A je hamaNAM ja kahyuM te
nitya darzanAdi badhuMya hoya che, ane te bIjAone prIti upajAve che-nahi ke
dveSa. (2) parama dhAraNuM hoya che. dhAraNA eTale cittane dezabaMdha. (3) ane A
dhAraNAne lIdhe atre anyamudda hetI nathI, arthAt anyatra harSa hoto nathI,
kAraNake tyAre te te pratibhAsane ayoga hoya che. (4) tathA nitya-savakALa
savicArAtmaka mImAMsA-tattvavicAraNA hoya che, ke je samyaga jJAnanA phaLa5Nue
karIne hidayavaMtI hoya che. A dRSTine "kAMtA" nAma ApyuM che, te yathArtha che.
kAraNa ke A daSTimAM kAMtA eTale pativratA strI je paramArthabhAva hoya che.
jema pativratA A gharanA bIjAM badhAM kAma karatAM paNa patinuM ja ciMtana kare
che, tema A daSTivALe samyagadRSTi puruSa bhale bIjuM saMsAra saMbaMdhI kAma
karate hoya, paNa tenuM citta sadAya zrutadharmamAM ja lIna rahe che. athavA
kAMtA eTale priyA-hAlI lAge che. A draSTimAM rithati karato puruSa kAMta-
kamanIya-parama ramya bhAse che, eTale anya ivene bahu priya-hAlo lAge evo
janapriya hoya che, eTale A daSTine paNa kAMtA" nAma ghaTe che. athavA A daSTi
yogIjanene bahu priya che, eTale paNa te yaMtA che. Ama kharekhara "kAMtA" evI A
chaThThI draSTimAM pAMcamI daSTino je nitya darzanAdi guNagaNa kahyo, te te hoya
ja che, paNa te vizeSa nirmaLapaNe. eTale nityadarzana, sUkSma bodha,
pratyAhAra, bhrAMtityAga Adi atre avazya anuvarte che ja, ane tenI era
baLavattaratA varte che. atre je darzana thAya che te sthira daSTinI peThe
nitya-apratipAtI hoya che, paNa vadhAre nirmala ane baLavAna hoya che. tene
tArAnI upamA ghaTe che, kAraNa ke tArAne prakAza ratnanI jema sthira hoya che,
paNa tenA karatAM vadhAre baLavAna tejasvI hoya tihAM tArAla che. tArAne prakAza
AkAzamAM nitya camake che, sadA sthira hoya che, tema prakAza" A dRSTivALA
samyagRSTi puruSane samyagadarzanamaya bodha-prakAza cidA kAzamAM nitya
jhaLahaLe che, sadA sthira prakRtithI sthita ja varte che. atre darzana arthAt
AtmAnubhavajanya sazraddhAvaMta beya eTale badho spaSTa hoya che ke te tArAnI
peThe cidAkAzane niraMtara udyotamaya karI mUke che. vaLI tArA jema AkAzamAM
nirAlaMbana chatAM nitya prakAzI rahe che, tema A daSTine bodha paNa nirAlaMbana
chatAM sadA cidAkAzane prakAzamAna kare che. ane jJAnInuM A nirAlaMbanapaNuM
paNa prathama te parama jJAnI evA prabhunuMparamAtmAnuM avalaMbana levAthI
pragaTe che, kAraNa ke A dustara bhavasamudra paNa te zuddha sahajAnmasvarUpa
prabhunA prabala avalaMbanathI gopada samAna banI jAya che, ane te prabhunA ja
avalaMbanabalathI AtmA niravalabanapaNuM pAmI nija guNarUpa zuddha
naMdanavanamAM rame che. eTale ja AvA A samyagdazanI puruSano bAdha atyaMta
sUkSama hoya che. dravyAnu

Page #591 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Kanta Drishti:    **Verse 515**  A person with Samyak Drishti (right vision)
knows the subtle intricacies of Yoga and its profound secrets through the true
nature of the soul. Their understanding of scriptures and experiences keeps
growing, leading them to realize their pure, innate self. The subtle "Khaad"
(deficiency) of self-awareness, which is the ultimate discernment, becomes
stronger and more stable. They have a firm conviction that they are the pure,
conscious soul, distinct from the body. This conviction is so strong that they
firmly believe that the soul is the only reality, encompassing all its inherent
qualities, and everything else is merely material. In this eternal play of
ignorance, it is only the "Pudgala" (matter) that dances, not anything else. The
soul is pure, conscious, and made of the essence of "Chaitanya" (consciousness),
distinct from the "Pudgala" and its modifications like attachment, aversion,
etc.  This firm conviction in the soul leads them to completely abandon
everything that is devoid of "Chaitanya" (consciousness). They fully realize the
soul as pure consciousness and transcend the world, experiencing the infinite,
true self within themselves.  This subtle understanding eliminates the fatigue
caused by "Mithyatva" (false belief) and brings them ultimate peace. The primary
delusion is mistaking the non-self for the self, which is "Mithyatva" or
ignorance. Recognizing the self as the self is "Samyaktv" or knowledge, which
brings peace, rest, cessation, and tranquility. Mistaking the non-self for the
self is the greatest attachment for the soul, which leads to endless suffering
in the form of mental and existential delusion. A person with Samyak Drishti
(right vision) is completely free from this great disease of mistaking the non-
self for the self. They find peace in their true nature, become established in
their true self, and experience ultimate peace.  Since they have overcome the
fundamental delusion of mistaking the non-self for the self, and have found
ultimate peace in recognizing the self as the self, these wise individuals with
Samyak Drishti (right vision) withdraw the soul from the non-self. They do not
engage in the consequences of external actions, nor do they allow the soul to be
entangled in the non-self, becoming lost in it. Instead, they engage in the true
nature of the soul.  * "The soul is the only reality, encompassing all its
inherent qualities, and everything else is merely material. In this eternal play
of ignorance, it is only the "Pudgala" (matter) that dances, not anything else.
The soul is pure, conscious, and made of the essence of "Chaitanya"
(consciousness), distinct from the "Pudgala" and its modifications like
attachment, aversion, etc." - Shri Amritchandracharya, Shri Samayasar Kalash.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 kAMtA dRSTi : tArA sama prakAza-sumabAdhAdi, dhAraNA (515) sUkSma bAdha yoga ne
tenA mamdarUpa rahasyane samyagdaSTi puruSa tattvathI sabhyapaNe jANe che. tenI
zruta-anubhavanI dezA pratisamaya vadhatI jAya che ne tene zuddha
sahajAtmasvarUpane avabhAsa thAya che. sva-para bhAvane parama viveka karavArUpa
sUkSma khAdha atre adhika baLavattara heAya che, atyaMta sthira hAya che. huM
dehAddhithI bhinna evA zuddha caitanyasvarUpI AtmA chuM, evu* pragaTa bheda
jJAna atra atyaMta dRDha bhAvanAvALuM hAya che. eTale te samyagdaSTi puruSa
bhAve che ke-caitanya* zaktimAM jenA saCsva sAra vyApta che evA A AtmA ATaleA ja
che, enAthI atirikta (judA) A sarveya bhAvA paulika che. A anAdi avivekarUpa
mahAnATyamAM varNAmiAn pudgala ja nAce che-anya nahi; ane A jIva tA rAgAdi
puddagala-vikArathI viruddha evI zuddha caitanya dhAtumaya mUttirUpa che.'-evI
dRDha AtmabhAvanAne lIdhe caitanyathI rikta-khAlI evuM badhuMya ekadama cheADI
i, atyaMta sphuTa evA citazaktimAtra AtmAne avagAhIne tee vizvanI upara taratA
rahI, A anaMta evA sAkSAt paramAtmasvarUpa AtmAne AtmAmAM anubhave che.' AvA
sUkSma medha hovAthI samyagdRSTine kayAranIce mithyAtvajanya zrAMti TaLI che ane
parama zAMti maLI che, kAraNa ke anAtma evI para vastumAM Atmabuddhi e ja mukhya
bhrAMti che, e ja mithyAtva athavA avidyA che, AtmAmAM ja Atmabuddhi e ja
samyaktva athavA vidyA che, e ja vizrAMti che, e ja ArAma che, e ja virAma che,
e ja virati che, ane e ja zAMti che. para vastumAM AtmabrAMti e ja jIvanA
meATAmAM meATo rAga che, ane te AtmabrAMtithI ja cittabhrAMti ane
bhavabhrAMtirUpa anaMta duHkha upaje che. samyagdaSTi jJAnI puruSane te| A
AtmabrAMtirUpa mahAroga sarvathA dUra thayA che, eTale tee svasvarUpamAM
vizrAMta thai, svarUpaikaniSTha banI parama AtmazAMti anubhave che. Ama
parabhAvamAM AtmabuddhirUpa mUlagata bhrAMti TaLI heAvAthI, ane AtmAmAM ja
AtmabuddhirUpa svarUpavizrAMtimaya parama zAMti maLI heAvAthI, A jJAnI
samyagdRSTi satpuruSa parabhAvamAMthI AtmAne pAchA khecI le che-pratyAhata kare
che. eTale te pratyAhAra parapariNatimAM ramatA nathI, paravastumAM AtmAne
muMjhavavA detA nathI-- mehamUcchita thavA detA nathI, paNa nija AtmapariNatimAM
ja rame che. * "cicchaktivyApta sarvasvasArA jIva iyAnayam  /  ato'tiriktAH
sarve'pi bhAvAH paugalikA amI  //  asminnanAdIni mahatyavivekanATaye,
varNAdimAnnaTati pudgala eva nAnyaH  /  rAgAdipudgalavikAra viruddha zuddha -
caitanyadhAtumayamUrttirayaM tu jIvaH  //  sakalamapi vihAyAhnAya
cicchaktiriktam, sphuTataramavagAhya svaM ca cicchaktipAtram  /  imamupari
tarantaM cAru vizvasya sAkSAt, kalayatu paramAtmAtmAnamAtmanyanantam  // " zrI
amRtacaMdrAcArya chakRta --zrI samayasAra kalaza.

Page #592 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(516) Those with right faith (Samyak Darshan) constantly move away from worldly
objects, and like a tortoise, they withdraw their senses from objects.
Therefore, their flow of karmic afflictions (Asrava) easily ceases, and a state
of intense austerity (Samvara) is revealed. As a result, their soul itself
becomes the embodiment of austerity (Samvara), becoming hidden in its pure form.
Thus, the benefits of the fivefold vision (Panchama Drishti), including eternal
vision (Nitya Darshan) and withdrawal (Pratyahara), are particularly strong and
pure in this sixth vision (Shasta Drishti). Seeing such supremely generous and
virtuous individuals with right faith (Samyak Darshan), others naturally feel
love for them. Their popularity stems from the inherent charm of their
character, which is a manifestation of their great austerity (Samvara). What is
the reason for this immense influence of these great souls? It is because seeing
them evokes natural love and respect in others.  The sixth limb of yoga, called
"Dharana," is "to serve the Jina (liberated soul), to hold the goal (Moksha) in
mind." - Shri Devchandraji. In this vision, the sixth limb of yoga, called
"Dharana," is attained, because it naturally follows the attainment of the fifth
limb, called "Pratyahara" (withdrawal). Dharana means to confine the mind to a
specific limited area or field, to keep it focused and free from distractions.
This is the definition of Dharana. The mind, like a monkey, is extremely fickle
and restless, constantly wandering in all directions. To stabilize it in the tip
of the nose (Nasagra) or to keep it engaged in the continuous ascent and descent
of the Shruta Skandha (scriptural knowledge), to bind it with the chain of love
to the nail of devotion to the Lord, or to keep it engaged in the practice of
pure self-reflection, is Dharana. (See page 212-213) The function of Pratyahara
is to withdraw the soul from external influences, and the function of Dharana is
to hold it in its own essence. Thus, to divert the mind from objects and engage
it only in its own essence, to keep it focused on the true nature of the soul
(Atma Swaroop Dharma), is the pure Dharana that a person with right faith
(Samyak Darshan) practices, which ultimately leads to complete absorption
(Samadhi) filled with bliss (Tattvananda). Such a person with right faith
(Samyak Darshan) and excellent self-absorption (Atma Dharana) transcends all
external influences (Paraparinaati), refutes all dualities (Bhedavada), and
establishes himself in the vast, undivided, and knowledge-filled nature of the
soul (Atma Swaroop). After that, where is there any scope for further action
(Karma) or karmic bondage (Paudgalik Karma)?  Such a wonderful soul, filled with
the essence of the soul (Atma Swaroop Dharma) - (For more details, see) - Shri
Samayasar Kalash.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (516) gadaSTisamuccaya teo paugalika viSayabhegathI niraMtara dUra dUra bhAge
che, ane kAcabAnI jema viSayamAMthI idrine pratyAhAra kare che-pAchI kheMcI le
che. eTale emanI AzravabhAvanI cAla sahejeanAyAse chUTI jAya che, ane ugra
saMvara dazA pragaTe che. jethI teone AtmA pote ja sAkSAt saMvararUpa thAya che,
savarUpagupta bane che. Ama nityadarzana-pratyAhAra Adi pAMcamI daSTinA
guNagaNuno AtmalAbha atra chaThThI draSTimAM vizeSa prabaLapaNe-nirmaLapaNe
anuvara che ja. AvA parama udAra guNasaMpanna samyagadaSTi sanduruSane dekhIne
anya jIne paNa temanA pratye svAbhAvika prema kure evI temanI janapriyatA hoya
che. A mahaMtonA svarUpAcaraNarUpa cAritrane kaI e muMgo mahAprabhAva svayaM
kure che, ke temane jotAM ja bIjA ne temanA pratye kudaratI prema-bahumAna upaje
che. yoganuM chachuM aMga-dhAraNA "jinarAjanI sevA karavI, dhyeya dhyAna dhAraNA
dharavI."--zrI devacaMdrajI A dRSTimAM dhAraNA nAmanuM chaThThuM coga aMga
prApta thAya che, kAraNa ke pratyAhAra nAmanuM pAMcamuM aMga sAMpaDyA pachI
svAbhAvika krame dhAraNa thAya che. dhAraNuM eTale cittane dezabaMdha, cittane
amuka maryAdita dezamAM-kSetramAM bAMdhI rAkhavuM-dhArI vibhAva nivRtti rAkhavuM
te dhAraNA, ema tenI vyAkhyA che. manamarkaTa cAre kora bhramaNa svabhAva
pravRtti karavAno ati caMcala svabhAva dharAve che, tene nAsAgra AdimAM sthira
karavuM, athavA zrutaskaMdhanA niraMtara ArohaNa-avarohaNamAM rokI rAkhavuM,
prabhubhaktirUpa khIlAmAM premanI sAMkaLathI bAMdhI rAkhavuM, athavA zuddha
AtmaciMtananA vyApAramAM dhArI rAkhavuM te dhAraNA che. (juo pR. 212-213) AtmAne
parabhAvamAMthI pratyAhuta karepAcho kheMca te pratyAhAranuM kAma che, ne tene
AtmabhAvamAM dhArI rAkha te dhAraNanuM kAma che. Ama cittane viSayomAMthI
vyAvRtta karI AtmabhAvamAM ja pravRtta karavuM, AtmasvarUpa dharmamAM ja dhArI
rAkhavuM evI zuddha dhAraNA samyagadaSTi yegI puruSa dhare che, ke je aMte
tattAnaMdamaya pUrNa samAdhimAM layane pAme che. AvI uttama AtmadhAraNavALA
samyagRSTi jJAnI puruSa para pariNati* cheDI daI, bhedavAdonuM khaMDana karI,
udita akhaMDa evA pracaMDa jJAnamaya svabhAvamAM sthiti kare che, te pachI tene
bIjI kartA-karma pravRttine avakAza kayAMthI hoya che athavA paugalika karma
baMdha kayAMthI hoya?" AvI adabhata AtmasvabhAva dhamamaya *
"parapariNatimujjhat khaMDayajhedavAdA-nidamuditamakhaNDaM
jnyaanmunycnnddmuccaiH| nanu kathamavakAzaH kartRkarmapravRtteriha bhavati
kathaM vA paudgalaH krmvndhH||" (ItyAdi vizeSa mATe juo)-zrI samayasArakalaza.

Page #593 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Kanta Dushtti: Anyamud - "What I don't like, I don't like in others"  (517)
The Dharana-possessing, discerning, right-sighted man is extremely alert and
awake in his own activities, and deaf, blind, and mute in the activities of
others! "Aramkavruttivattina:, Pavruttee Vishayoo: Shri Yashovijayajikrit
Adhyatmapanishada."  Anyamud destroys the fault. "Dharma Jinesar Gau Rangshun,
Bhang Ma Padshe Ho Preet...Jinesar!" "Baje Man Mandir Aanun Nahi, Ae Am Kulvat
Reet...Ji." Shri Anandghanji.  And here, there is a firm, unwavering Dharana in
one's own true nature, which is why the steadfast Yogi, who is established in
this vision, does not have Anyamud. Joy does not arise elsewhere, because joy
arises nowhere else except in the soul. For, where else would the abode of
supreme bliss, the Sachchidananda-form of Bhagwan Anandghan, be found? The one
who has tasted the nectar of supreme bliss of the soul, how can he be interested
in trivial worldly pleasures like "bakas bukas"? Why would he like anything else
besides the soul and the Dharma of the soul? Such a soul-absorbed, right-
sighted, wise man finds joy only in his own immersion in the soul. He cannot
bear even a moment of separation from that bliss. And even if, unwillingly, he
is momentarily distracted from the uninterrupted experience of the ocean of
nectar-bliss by external, karmic circumstances, he experiences profound regret
for it. - Such is the noble nature of the wise man who is self-realized.
"Manmehan Tum Sanamuk Nirkat, Aankh Na Trupati Amchi; Mahatimir Ravi Harsh
Chandra Chhavi, Murat Ae Upshamchi.... Hun Te Vari Prabhu! Tum Mukhni." - Shri
Devchandraji. Because the wise, right-sighted man is a supreme devotee of the
supreme soul-essence, he has an unparalleled love for it, a flow of supreme love
flows through him, so much so that his mind does not even momentarily find
pleasure in anything else. He is bound by such an unprecedented love for the
pure, innate, self-existent Lord, that he does not like anything else. Just as a
bee that has found a Malati flower will not sit on a Babul branch, and a swan
that has tasted the pure, cool, fragrant Ganga water will not play in the
impure, foul, and painful water of a Dudhi Khachiya, so too, the one who is
intensely yearning for the Lord, chanting "Peeu Peeu" (drink, drink), will not
be attracted to anything else.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 kAMtA duSTi : anyamuda-"mane na game te bIjAne saMga' (517) dhAraNavALA
bhedajJAnI samyagadaSTi puruSa AtmapravRttimAM ati jAgarUka-jAgatA hoya che, ane
parapravRttimAM baherA, AMdhaLA ne mUMgA hoya che ! "aramakavRttAvattinA :,
pavRttI viSayUH zrI yazovijyajIkRta adhyAtmapaniSada. anyamud doSane nAza.
"dharma jinesara gAuM raMgazuM, bhaMga ma paDaze ho prIta...jinesara ! bIje mana
maMdira ANuM nahiM, e ama kulavaTa rIta...ji." zrI AnaMdaghanajI. ane atre AvI
svasvarUpamAM daDha avadhAraNarUpa dhAraNa hoya che, eTalA mATe ja A daSTimAM
sthiti karatA daDha yegIne anyamud hotI nathI, anya sthaLe harSa upajate nathI,
eka AtmA sivAya bIje kyAMya AnaMda thato nathI, kAraNa bIje mana- ke parama
AnaMdanA nidhAna saccidAnaMdarUpI bhagavAna AnaMdaghana maMdira ANuM AtmAnA
parama amRta sukhane rasAsvAda jeNe cAkhe heya, tene nahiM tenAthI anya evA
"bAkasa bukasa" jevA tuccha viSayasukhamAM kema rasa AtmA ane Atmadharma zivAya
tene bIjuM kaMI paNa kema game? AvA AtmArAmI samyagadaSTi jJAnI puruSane kevaLa
AtmanimagnatAmAM ja AnaMda upaje che. eka kSaNa paNa e sukhane viraha te khamI
zakatA nathI. ane anicchatAM chatAM kadApi karmajanya bAhya upAdhi prasaMgathI
te amRtasukhasiMdhunA akhaMDa anubhavanamAM vipna Ave, te tethI tene AtmA
atyaMta saMvedanavALe prazasta kheda anubhave che. -evI utkRSTa AtmAkAratA jJAnI
puruSanI varte che. "manamehana tuma sanamukha nirakhata, AMkha na tRpatI amacI;
mahatimira ravi harSa caMdra chavi, mUrata e UpazamacI.... huM te vAri prabhu !
tuma mukhanI."--zrI devacaMdrajI. kAraNa ke jJAnI samyagadaSTi puruSa parama
AtmatatvanA evA parama bhakta hoya che, tenA pratye emane evI ananya prIti
pragaTI hoya che, evo parama premapravAha pravahata hoya che, ke e zivAya bIje
kayAMya emanuM citta caMcamAtra paNa rati mane na game che pAmatuM nathI. zuddha
sahajAnmasvarUpa prabhu pratye temane evI apUrva bIjAne saMga prItaDI baMdhANI
che, ke tene bIjAne saMga gamatuM nathI. mAlatI phUle je mahyo hoya te bhamaro
bAvaLanI DALa para kema bese ? pavitra pravAhI ne zItala sugaMdhI gaMgAjalamAM
je haMsa jhIlyo hoya, te azuci baMdhiyAra ne duHkhada dudhI khAciyAnA pANImAM
kema rame ? atyaMta utkaMThAthI je "pIu pIu" japI

Page #594 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(518) **Gadashtisamuchchay**  Just as a Chatak bird, waiting for the water of
the clouds, does not look at any other water, similarly, a wise man's mind does
not find any attraction in anything other than the Supreme Soul.  Why would a
Chatak bird look at any other water when it is waiting for the water of the
clouds? Why would a mango tree, with its cool shade and sweet fruits, be
attracted to a tall, barren palm tree? Why would a lotus flower be attracted to
anything other than the sun? Why would a moonflower be attracted to anything
other than the moon? Why would Gauri (Parvati) desire anyone other than Girish
(Shiva), or Lakshmi desire anyone other than Girish (Krishna)? Similarly, why
would a wise man's mind find any attraction in anything other than the Supreme
Soul? (See page 381-382)  This unwavering love for the Supreme Soul makes the
wise man so absorbed and focused that he does not even perceive any other
object. The mind of a wise man with Samyagdrishti is so engrossed in its own
nature that it is not even aware of what is happening elsewhere. This
extraordinary, unique feeling is evident in the spontaneous words of Shrimad
Rajchandraji, which are a living example for the discerning and wise. For
example:  "Night and day, my mind is only focused on the Supreme Soul. My food
is the Supreme Soul, my sleep is the Supreme Soul, my bed is the Supreme Soul,
my dreams are the Supreme Soul, my fear is the Supreme Soul, my gathering is the
Supreme Soul, my possessions are the Supreme Soul, my movement is the Supreme
Soul, my posture is the Supreme Soul. What more can I say? My bones, flesh, and
their essence are all the same color. Every hair on my body knows only the
Supreme Soul. Therefore, I do not like anything, I do not taste anything, I do
not hear anything, I do not smell anything, I do not touch anything, I do not
speak, I do not remain silent, I do not sit, I do not stand, I do not sleep, I
do not wake up, I do not eat, I do not feel hungry, I do not like being alone, I
do not like being with others, I do not like being happy, I do not like being
sad. It is like this." (See Shrimad Rajchandra, Patrank 120, 133)  This is just
a glimpse into the state of a wise man with Samyagdrishti, who has attained this
unique feeling. In this sixth stage of perception, the sixth mental defect
called Anyamud is destroyed. Anyamud is the tendency to find pleasure in things
other than the Supreme Soul, or to be attracted to other things while neglecting
the Supreme Soul. It is like a shower of embers on the path of the Supreme Soul.
(See page 86)  In this sixth stage of perception, the sixth virtue called
Mimamsa is manifested. After the manifestation of the virtue called Sukshmad in
the fifth stage of perception, the virtue of Mimamsa naturally arises.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ( 518) gadaSTisamuccaya jaladharanA jalanI pratIkSA karatuM hoya, te cAtaka
bIjA jala sAmuM paNa kema jue? zItala chAyAprada ne phalabhArathI namra evA
AmranI paMjarI maMjarI pAmI je madhura TahUkA karatI hoya, te kenilane phalakUla
rahita uchA ne uMcA tADa jevA jhADa kema game? kamalinI dinakaranA kara vinA
bIjAne kara kema rahe? kumudinI caMdra zivAya bIjAnI prIti kema kare ? gaurI
girIza vinA ne lakSamI giridhara vinA potAnA cittamAM anyane kema cAhe? tema
jJAnI puruSanuM citta paNa eka paramAtma tatva zivAya anyatra prIti kema dhare?
(juo pR. 381-382) Ama A parama AtmatatvanA ananya premane lIdhe jJAnI puruSane
temAM eTaluM badhuM tanmayapaNuM-ekAgrapaNuM thaI jAya che, ke tethI tenI
dRSTimAM anya viSayane pratibhAsa paNa thatuM nathI ! samyagRSTi sapuruSanuM
citta svarUpa-svadezamAM eTaluM badhuM rokAyeluM rahe che ke te ADe bIje kayAMya
zuM banI rahyuM che, tenuM paNa te parama saMta avadhUtane bhAna rahetuM nathI !
-AvA parama adbhuta ananyamud bhAvanuM jIvatuM jAgatuM javalaMta udAharaNa
zrImad rAjacaMdrajInA svAnubhavajanya sahaja vacanegAramAM sthaLe sthaLe sujJa
vivekIne pratyakSa thAya che. jemake - rAtrI ane divasa eka paramArtha viSayanuM
ja manana rahe che, AhAra paNa e ja che, nidrA paNa e ja che, zayana paNa e ja
che, svapna paNa e ja che, bhaya paNa e ja che, bhega paNa e ja che, parigraha
paNa e ja che, calana paNa e ja che, Asana paNa e ja che. adhika zuM kahevuM ?
hADa mAMsa ane tenI miMjAne eka ja e ja raMganuM raMgana che. eka roma paNa ene
ja jANe vicAra kare che, ane tene lIdhe nathI kaMI jevuM gamatuM, nathI kaMI
cAkhavuM gamatuM, nathI kaMI sAMbhaLavuM gamatuM, nathI kaMI cAkhavuM gamatuM,
ke nathI kaMI sparzavuM gamatuM, nathI bolavuM gamatuM ke nathI mauna rahevuM
gamatuM, nathI besavuM gamatuM ke nathI uThavuM gamatuM, nathI suvuM gamatuM ke
nathI jAgavuM gamatuM, nathI khAvuM gamatuM ke nathI bhUkhyuM gamatuM, nathI
asaMga gamata ke nathI saMga gamate, nathI lamI gamatI ke nathI alamI gamatI;
ema che. ityAdi" (juo) zrImad rAjacaMdra. patrAMka 120. (133) kharekhara jJAnI
samyagadaSTi puruSane ananyamubhAva AvI parAkASThAne prApta thayele varte che,
tenuM A diggadarzana mAtra che. Ama A chaThThI daSTimAM anyamud nAmano chaThTho
cittadoSa naSTa thAya che. Atmatattva karatAM anya sthaLe AnaMda-maMda pAma te
anyamud athavA Ama mAMDelI gakriyA avagaNIne bIje ThAme harSa dharo, te
paramArtharU5 ISTa kAryamAM aMgArAnA varasAda je che. (juo, pR. 86) mImAMsA
tathA A chaThThI draSTimAM mImAMsA nAmane chaThTho guNa pragaTe che. pAMcamI
daSTimAM sUkSmadha nAmane guNa pragaTyA pachI svAbhAvika krame mImAMsA guNa
upaja joIe.

Page #595 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Kanta Drishti: Hiteodayavati Mimamsa  (519) Because one who generates subtle
understanding, then contemplates the two-fold nature of existence, engages in
deep introspection, constantly ponders and meditates, and continuously engages
in philosophical contemplation. Just as when someone eats a delicious meal, they
chew it thoroughly, leading to proper production of digestive juices in the
stomach, resulting in excellent digestion, and then those juices, becoming one
with the essence, nourish all the limbs, making them strong and robust;
similarly, when the right kind of food for the soul is chewed thoroughly,
meaning contemplated repeatedly, it leads to the production of excellent
emotions, and the pure self-realization, the excellent digestion, takes place.
Then, this realized essence spreads throughout the body and mind, nourishing it
with the strength of pure soul-qualities, making it strong and robust. This
analogy explains the ultimate purpose of contemplation.  Therefore, the wise,
the one with the right vision, contemplates the subtle aspects of substance,
qualities, modes, their destruction, viewpoints, proofs, true nature, the three-
fold nature of creation, destruction, and permanence, the seven-fold
categorization, the soul, karma, and momentum, etc. They contemplate deeply,
understanding that the soul exists in relation to its own substance, space,
time, and state, and does not exist in relation to other substances, space,
time, and state. Through this deep contemplation, they delve into the ultimate
mystery of the union of substance, the ultimate essence of the soul, the essence
of the Lord, meaning the inherent nature of the pure soul, and they make it
their own nature.  “Qualities and modes are infinite, and so is the inherent
nature. Viewpoints, destruction, and classifications are like the flow of a
river...O Kunthu! The self exists in its own nature, and does not exist in the
nature of others. Existence is non-existence, and the self exists in both
natures...Kunthu.” - Shri Devchandraji.  This kind of subtle contemplation and
philosophical inquiry is beneficial, leading to the attainment of all kinds of
self-welfare. Uday means the rising phase. Just as the sun rises and gradually
increases its brilliance, reaching its full glory at noon, similarly, here too,
the sun of self-interest rises, gradually reaching a higher state of self-
awareness, and ultimately attaining the full glory of the self at noon. Or, just
as the moon gradually reaches its full phase at the full moon, similarly, here
too, the moon of self-interest gradually reaches its full phase, attaining the
fullness of the pure, inherent, natural state. Just as the lotus bud gradually
unfolds, reaching its full bloom, similarly, here too, the lotus of self-
interest, with its thousand petals, gradually unfolds, reaching its full bloom.
The nine treasures and the eight great attainments, etc., follow the wise person
like a shadow, but the liberated, detached wise person does not even look back
at them.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 kAMtA dRSTi: hiteAdayavatI mImAMsA (519) kAraNa ke jene sUkSmadha upaje che, te
pachI te bedhanuM mImAMsana kare che, talasparzI savicAraNuM kare che, ahoniza
UhApoha kare che, nitya manana-nididhyAsana kare che, niraMtara tatvaciMtana
kare che. jema keI kherAka khAya te barAbara rasapUrvaka cAve te hojarImAM
pAcaka rasanI barAbara utpatti thAya, ne tenI pAcanakriyA uttama thAya, ane
pachI te rasa lehamAM ekarasa thaI sarva aMgane mAMsala kare, puSTa-bharAvadAra
banAve; tema samyaga bedharUpa AhAra paNa rasapUrvaka barAbara cAvavAmAM Ave,
arthAt punaH punaH manana karavAmAM Ave te uttama bhAvarUpa rasanI niSpatti
thAya, ne zuddha AtmapariNatirUpa uttama pAcanakriyA thAya, ane pachI te
pariNata rasa AtmAnA aMgeaMgamAM-pradezepradezamAM vyApta thaI tene zuddha
AtmadharmanI puSTithI mAMsala kare, puSTa-bharAvadAra banAve. A daSTAMtathI
mImAMsAno paramArtha samajAya che. eTale jJAnI samyagadaSTi puruSa dravya, guNa,
paryAya, tene bhaMga, naya, pramANa, sat svarUpa, utpAda-vyaya-dhrauvyarUpa
tripadI, saptabhaMgI, AtmA, karma, vega Adi dravyAnugAMtagaMta sUkSama viSayonI
talaspezinI avagAhanA kare che; svadravya-kSetra-kAla-bhAvathI AtmAnuM astipaNuM
che, paradravya-kSetra-kAla-bhAvathI AtmAnuM nAstipaNuM che, evuM UMDuM gaMbhIra
tattvaciMtana kare che. A dravyAnuyoganA parama rahasyabhUta-kaLazarUpa parama
AtmatatvanuM-bhagavAna samayasAranuM arthAt zuddha AtmAnA sahaja svarUpanuM
parizIlana karI, tene AtmasvabhAvabhUta karI mUke che. "guNa paryAya anaMtatA
re, vaLI ya svabhAva agAuM re; naya gama bhaMga nikSepanA re, he pAdeya pravAha
re...kuMthu jinesa! nija bhAve sIya astitA re, 5ra nAstitva svabhAva; astipaNe
te nAstitA re, sIya te ubhaya svabhAve re...kuMthu.--zrI devacaMdrajI. ane AvI
sUkSma mImAMsAtatvavicAraNuM hiteAdayavALI hoya che, AthI hitedayasarva
prakAranA AtmakalyANanI saMprApti thAya che. udaya eTale caDhatI kaLA. jema
sUryane udaya thaI te uttarottara vadhatI tejasvitAne pAmI madhyAhune pUrNapaNe
pratApe che, tema atre paNa AtmahitarUpa sUryane udaya thaI, uttarottara caDhatI
AtmadazAne pAmI, pUrNa AtmasvarUpa madhyAhnane pAme che. athavA jema bIjane
caMdra uttarottara caDhatI kaLAne pAmI, pUrNimAe pUrNa svarUpane pAme che, tema
atre paNa AtmahitarUpa caMdra uttarottara caDhatI kaLAne pAmI, pUrNa zuddha
sahajAnmasvarUpanI prAptimAM paryApti pAme che. sahastradalakamalakalikA jema
uttarottara vikAsane pAmI, pUrNapaNe khIlI UThe che, tema atra hitodayarUpa
sahastradala kamala sAnubaMdha vikAsane pAmI pUrNa svarUpe khIlI nIkaLe che.
nave nidhAna ane aSTa mahAsiddhi Adi kikara thaIne jJAnI puruSane anusare che,
paNa avadhUta nirapekSa jJAnI te tenI sAmuM paNa pAchuM

Page #596 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(200) Yagdristi Samuchchay He who does not look at hair, nor does he touch it!
Such a supremely wonderful, virtuous, detached, wise man is hailed! “There is
nothing greater than the Self. There is no influence, nor will there be any
influence, in this creation, which is not attained by the complete Self; yet,
the Self does not say anything about that influence, that is how it is. And if
it appears that the Self says something about that influence, then know that it
is due to the extreme ignorance of the Self.” “As long as there are the stations
of Samyaktva, and as long as there is a Samyak Parinaami soul, there is no
activity of the soul in any one state for the three periods of time.” —Shrimad
Rajchandra, Patrank 337, 369. (411, 450) 品 This same meaning is clearly stated—
Asyaam tu dharma mahatmyaat samaachaar vishuddhithah | Priyo bhavati bhootaanaam
dharmekaagram anaastatha || 163 || In this, due to the greatness of Dharma,
there is purity of conduct; Therefore, he is dear to beings, and he is one-
pointed in Dharma. 163 A—And in this same view, due to the greatness of Dharma,
there is purity of Samyak conduct, therefore, he is dear to beings, and he is
one-pointed in Dharma. Discussion In this view, due to the greatness of Dharma,
there is purity of Samyak conduct; and therefore, the Samyakdrishti Yagi man,
who is in this state, becomes dear to beings, and he is one-pointed in Dharma.
The greatness of Dharma. “Jin se hi hai aatma, any hai so ka; Kram kate saajit
khachan, tattvajnanike ma.” —Shrimad Rajchandraji ,, Vritti: Asyaam tu—in this
same view—niyegથી, niyamથી, dharma mahatmyat—due to the greatness of Dharma,
samaachaar vishuddhithah—due to the purity of Samyak conduct, what? So
that—triyo mati mulaanaam bhootaane—he is dear to beings, dharmanamam
anaastatha—and he is one-pointed in Dharma.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (520) yAgadaSTisamuccaya vALIne jotA nathI, tenI tamA paNu karatA nathI ! evA
parama adbhuta guNavairAgya jJAnI puruSane hAya che ! "te AtmasvarUpathI mahat
evu' kaI nathI. evA A sRSTine viSe koi prabhAvajoga utpanna thayA nathI, che
nahI', ane thavAnA nathI ke je prabhAvoga pUrNa AtmasvarUpane paNa prApta na
hoya; tathApi te prabhAva jogane viSe vattavAmAM AtmasvarUpane kaMI kavyu nathI,
ema te che, ane jo tene te prabhAvabegane viSe kaMi kavya bhAse che te te puruSa
AtmasvarUpanAM atyaMta ajJAnane viSe varte che, ema jANIe chIye. ' " bAkI
jeTalAM samyaktvanAM sthAnaka che, ane jyAMsudhI samyak pariNAmI AtmA che
tyAMsudhI te eke jogane viSe jIvane pravRtti trikALe sabhavatI nathI." --zrImad
rAjacaMdra, patrAMka 337, 369. (411, 450) Pin  A ja artha spaSTa karatAM kahe
che-- asyAM tu dharmamAhAtmyAtsamAcAra vizuddhitaH  /  priyo bhavati bhUtAnAM
dharmekAgramanAstathA  //  163  //  AmAM dha mAhAtmyathI, hAya vizuddhAcAra;
tethI hAya priya prANine, dhama ekamana dhAra. 163 a--ane A ja dRSTimAM
dharmAMnA mAhAtmyathakI samyak AcAranI vizuddhine lIdhe, cegI prANIone hAya
priya che, tathA dharmAMmAM ekAgra manavALA hoya che. vivecana A kAMtA dRSTimAM
ja niyame karIne dharmAMnA mAhAtmyarUpa kANu thakI samyak AcAravizuddhi hoya
che; ane tethI karIne ja atre sthiti karatA samyadRSTi yAgI puruSa prANIone
ApeApa priya thaI paDe che, tathA te dharmamAM ekAgra citta dharAve che.
dharmanA ma| dharmanA apUrva mahimA. "jina se|hI he AtamA, anya hAI seA ka;
krama kaTe sAjita khacana, tattvajJAnIke ma. " --zrImad rAjacaMdrajI ,,
vRtti:AsyAM tu--A ja kAMtA dRSTimAM-niyegathI, niyamathI, dharmamAhAtmyat-dhama
mAhAtmyarUpa kAraNa thakI, samAcAravidvitaH-samyak AcAravizuddhirUpa hetune
lIdhe, zuM ? to ke-triyo mati mUlAnAmbhUtAne-prANIone priya hoya che,
dhama~nAmamanAstathA-tathA dharmAMmAM ekAgra manavALA heya che,

Page #597 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Kanta Dristi: Dharma is the nature of the self, karma is the opposite.  (521)
The glory of Dharma is unparalleled. It is essential to understand the true
nature of Dharma. Here, "Dharma" refers to the eternal, everlasting Atmadharma
(Dharma of the soul). Jain Dharma is its synonym, because the pure soul, having
attained its inherent pure form, is called "Jin," meaning the liberated Lord;
and that Jin, the pure soul, is Dharma itself, which is Jain Dharma. Everything
else is karma. Karma is what cuts and binds the soul, and Jinavachan (the
teachings of the Jinas) is what cuts it. This is the essence of the knowledge of
the wise. This Atmadharma is inherent in the soul, eternal, everlasting, and
unaffected by time. To remain in this state of the soul, to hold onto the soul,
is called "Dharma"; and that is the true Dharma. Because knowledge, perception,
and conduct are the inherent qualities of the soul, or the pure, single, all-
pervading, knowing consciousness that is the nature of the soul, to live in it,
to remain in it, to hold onto the soul, is Dharma of the soul. "The nature of
the object is Dharma. The nature of the soul is Atmadharma." Thus, to live in
the pure state of knowledge and perception of the soul is Dharma. But the world
is unaware of this true nature of Dharma. Everyone in the world goes around
saying "Dharma, Dharma," but they don't know the essence of Dharma. They don't
know that after taking refuge in the feet of the Jineshwar, one will not create
any karma. This is what the great soul Anandghanji sang in the Mahagita.  People
go around searching for Dharma in other people's homes, but they don't see that
Dharma is in their own father's home! They behave like the musk deer! The musk
deer has musk in its navel, but it doesn't know where the fragrance comes from.
So, it wanders around searching for it! Similarly, this Dharma resides within
one's own soul, it hasn't gone anywhere else, yet people, in their ignorance,
search for it outside, hoping to find it, and they become frustrated and
disappointed. They ignore the supreme treasure that is right in front of their
own eyes, and they go out searching for it, only to be defeated! (See page 480).
"You go around searching for Dharma, but you don't find it in your own home.
Just like the musk deer doesn't know about the musk, it doesn't know the essence
of the fragrance."  "Shri Simandhar Saheb listens." - Shri Yashovijayji, S. Ga,
St.  Thus, this Dharma resides within one's own soul, or the soul itself...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 kAMtA daSTi: dharmane samavibhAva te kama, svabhAva te dharma (521) dharmano
mahimA keI apUrva che. A dharmanuM vAstavika svarUpa samajavA yogya che. atre
"dharma eTale sanAtana-zAzvata evo Atmadharma samaja. jinadharma e enuM paryAya
nAma che, kAraNa ke zuddha sahajAnmasvarUpane prApta thayelA zuddha AtmA tenuM
nAma ja "jina" arthAta vItarAga prabhu che; ane evA te jinane arthAt zuddha
AtmAne dharma te ja jinadharma che, ane tenAthI anya te karma che. te karmane je
kATe-kApe te jinavacana che. Ama tattvajJAnIono marma che. A Atmadharma AtmAne
svabhAvabhUta heI sanAtana che, zAzvata che, trikAlAbAdhita che. AvA
AtmabhAvamAM sthiti karavI, AtmAne dhArI rAkhavA tenuM nAma "dharma' che; ane te
ja vAstavika e vastu-dharma che. kAraNa ke jJAnadarzanacAritrAdi AtmAnA
svabhAvabhUta guNa che, athavA te jemAM aMtarbhAva pAme che e zuddha eka TaMke
kIrNa jJAyaka bhAva e ja AtmAne svabhAva che, temAM vartavuM, temAM sthiti
karavI, AtmAne dhArI rAkhavo te Atmavastune dharma che. "raghurAvo mo' vastuno
svabhAva te dharma. Atmavastune svabhAva te Atmadhama. Ama nirmala jJAna
darzanamaya AtmabhAvamAM vartavuM te ja dharma che. paNa dharmanA A vAstavika
svarUpanuM jagatane bhAna nathI. dharama dharama karato sahu jaga phire" AkhuM
jagat "dharma " "dharma" karatuM phare che, paNa tene dharmanA marmanI khabara
nathI. nahi te A dharma jinezvaranuM caraNa grahyA pachI kaI karma bAMdhe ja
nahi,-ema mahAgItArtha mahAtmA AnaMdaghanajI gAI gayA che. leke pArake ghera
dharma zodhatA phare che, paNa pitAnA ghera ja dharma che te jotAM nathI ! A te
teo kastUrIA mRga jevuM AcaraNa kare che ! kasturI mRganI nAbhimAM ja kastUrIne
vAsa che, chatAM te mRgane tene parimala kyAMthI Ave che kasturI mRganuM tenuM
bhAna nathI. eTale te bicAre tenI zodhamAM bahAra cotarapha dRSTAMta bhamyA kare
che! tema A dharma te potAnA AtmAnI aMdara ja rahyo che, kAMI gAma gayo nathI,
chatAM ahIMthI maLaze ke nahIthI maLaze evI khoTI AzAe ajJAna leka tene TUMDhavA
mATe cArekera jhAMvA nAMkhI nakAmA herAna thAya che, ne niSphaLa kheda dhare
che. potAnA mukhanI AgaLa ja je parama nidhAna pragaTa khulle paDyo che, tene
ulaMghI jaIne, teo tenI zodhamAM hAra nIkaLI paDe che!! (juo pR. 480). para
ghare jatAM re dharma tume phare, nija ghara na lahe re dhama; jema navi jANe re
mRga kastUrIo, mRgamada parimala marma. zrI sImaMdhara sAheba sAMbhaLe." -zrI
yazovijyajI kRta sa. gA, sta, Ama A dharma te potAnA AtmAmAM ja rahyo che,
athavA AtmA pote ja

Page #598 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(222) The essence of Yoga-Dristi is Dharma, a simple truth that many fail to
understand. Just as purity is the inherent nature of a crystal, and thus its
Dharma, similarly, the absence of passions (Kashaya) - purity - is the inherent
nature of the soul, and thus its Dharma. In other words, pure soul, free from
attachments, is Dharma. Purity of the soul is Dharma. The opposite of this is
Adharma. However, even though a crystal is inherently pure, if a red flower is
placed near it, a red hue is reflected in it. Similarly, if a black flower is
placed near it, a black hue is reflected. Thus, due to external influences, the
purity of the crystal is covered by a layer of impurities. Similarly, due to
external influences in the form of Karma, the purity of the soul is obscured by
the arising of passions like attachment, aversion, pride, etc. When these
influences are removed, the crystal shines in its inherent pure form. Similarly,
when passions are removed, the soul shines in its inherent pure form. The soul's
inherent nature is pure and unblemished by the three periods of time (past,
present, future). It is self-existent. When the covering is removed, it simply
manifests. Thus, to the extent that the covering is removed, the influences of
passions are overcome, and freedom from attachments is achieved, to that extent
the attainment of Dharma of the soul is achieved. This freedom from attachments,
starting from the state of Right Faith (Samyak-Dristi), gradually manifests
until the attainment of liberation (Moksha).  Just as purity is the nature of
the crystal, so is the nature of the soul. The Jinas have illuminated this
Dharma, the powerful absence of passions... Shri Simandhar. Just as a flower
reflects the color of its surroundings, so does the soul reflect the influence
of good and bad deeds. Passions lead to... Shri Simandhar. We cannot call it
Dharma if it is influenced by passions. This was first explained by the Jinas,
that Karma creates influences. Shri Simandhar. To the extent that one is free
from attachments, one knows Dharma. From the state of Right Faith, one can
say... Shri Simandhar.  As the influence of external factors fades and the
influence of the soul shines, this pure Dharma of the soul unfolds and expands,
until in liberation, the soul becomes the embodiment of pure Dharma. The
complete liberation of the soul attains liberation, which is the culmination of
Karma. The essence is that the attainment of the pure soul is its inherent
nature, and that is Dharma. As the influence of Karma fades, Dharma-Samadhi
manifests, because the influence of passions is Karma, and the state of Samadhi,
which is the manifestation of the soul's nature, is Dharma. This is the clear
definition of Dharma. The essence of Dharma...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (522) yogadaSTisamuccaya dharma che, eTalI sIdhI sAdI vAta leka samajatA nathI.
jema nirmalatA e sphaTika ratnane svabhAva hoI tene dharma che, tema
kaSAyaabhAvarUpa nimalatA e ja sphaTika daSTAMtaH AtmAne zuddha svabhAva hoI
AtmAne dharma che. arthAt zuddha AtmA nirupadhipaNuM e ja dharma che, Atmazuddhi
e ja dharma che, tethI viparIta te te dharma adharma che. paNa sphaTika ratnane
svabhAva nirmala chatAM, pAse rAtuM phUla hoya te temAM rAtI jhAMI-chAyA paDe
che, kALuM phUla hoya te kALI jhAMI paDe che. Ama bAhya upAdhine lIdhe
sphaTikanI nirmaLatAmAM uparAgarUpa AvaraNa Ave che, tema kamarUpa bAhya
upAdhine lIdhe rAga-dveSa-mahAdi vibhAva pariNAmenI utpattithI AtmAnI nimaLatA
avarAya che. te upAdhi dUra thAya eTale sphaTika jema svayameva zuddha sahaja
svarUpe prakAze che, tema rAgAdi vibhAva upAdhi dUra thaye AtmA svayaM zuddha
sahaja svarUpe prakAze che. AtmAne nimala zuddha svabhAva te trikAlAbAdhita ne
svayaMsthita che ja, AvaraNa dUra thayuM ke te basa pragaTa ja che. Ama jeTale
jeTale aMze AvaraNa dUra thAya, vibhAva upAdhi TaLe, nirupAdhipaNuM Ave, eTale
teTale aMze AtmadhamanI siddhi che, ane tevuM nirupAlikapaNuM samyagdaSTi
guNasthAnathI mAMDIne mokSa prApti payata uttarottara pragaTatuM jAya che. jima
nirmalatA re ratna sphaTika taNI, temaja jIva svabhAva; te jina vIre re dharma
prakAzIo, prabaLa kaSAya abhAva...zrI sImaMdhara. jema te rAte re phUle rAtaDuM,
spAma phUlathI re zyAma; pApa puNyathI re tema jagajIvane, rAga dveSa
pariNAma.....zrI sImaMdhara. dharma na kahIe re nizca tehane, jeha vibhAva vaDa
vyAdhi, pahele aMge re eNI pere bhAkhiyuM, karame hoye upAdhi.zrI sImaMdhara. je
je aMze re nirupAdhikapaNuM, te te jANe re dharma, samyagradaSTi re
guNaThANAthakI, jAva kahe zivazarma....zrI sIma dhara." -yazovijayajI. jema jema
para5riNati sajAtI jAya che ane AtmapariNati bhajAtI jAya che, tema tema A
zuddha Atmadharma unmIlana pAmate jAya che-vikasato jAya che, yAvata mokSamAM
zuddha dharmamUrti svarUpa AtmA siddha thAya che, saMpUrNa AtmavibhAva te karma
siddhirUpa mokSane pAme che. tAtparya ke zuddha AtmAnI siddhi e ja svabhAva te
dharma dharma che. jema jema kama-upAdhi TaLe che, tema tema dharma-samAdhi
pragaTe che, kAraNa ke vibhAvapariNatirUpa upAdhi te karma che ane
svabhAvapariNatirUpa samAdhi te dharma che. Ama dharmanI spaSTa vyAkhyA che.
dharmanA dravya

Page #599 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Kanta Dristi: The Unparalleled Glory of Dharma, Purity of Right Conduct
(523) Dharma, along with other factors, contributes to the birth and attainment
of this inherent Dharma, this Atma Dharma, to the extent that it is a cause.
Without the attainment of this inherent Dharma, there is failure. As the great
sage Shri Devchandraji has said, "Without Bhava, everything is futile."  This
Atma Nirmata (self-purification) form of inherent Dharma has become extremely
manifest in this Dristi (perspective), because those who possess this Dristi,
the Samyag Dristi Gipurusha (perfect visioned soul), are deeply rooted in their
own being, they abandon external influences and embrace their true nature. They
are such great souls, embodiments of Dharma.  "Dhammo Mangalamukkitum, Ahimsa
Sanjamo Tavo. Seva Vi THsaati, Nar Gha Cha Malo" - Shri Dasha Vaikalik Sutra.
The glory of this inherent Dharma is unparalleled. The glory of Chintamani,
Kamakumbha, Kalpavriksha, etc., is insignificant compared to it. When this
Dharma manifests in its true form within the soul, all attainments, all
accomplishments, all divine powers become its humble servants, standing before
it. Yet, this self-absorbed, liberated, glorious soul does not even care about
them! It does not even bother to look at them! Truly, even gods bow down to such
great souls whose minds are always immersed in Dharma. Because Ahimsa, Samyama,
and Tapa are the aspects of Dharma, and these great souls have attained their
highest perfection. They do not allow any violence to their true nature through
external influences, and they remain constantly in their own being, therefore
they are extremely non-violent. They keep their soul restrained in its true
form, they do not allow it to wander outside, therefore they are completely
restrained. Thus, through non-violence, which is not going outside, and through
restraint, which is staying in one's own nature, the powerful Atma Virya
(spiritual strength) accumulates, and therefore these Gipurusha (perfect
visioned souls) shine with the supreme brilliance of their true nature, they are
the epitome of Tapas (austerity). What wonder is there that even gods bow down
to such non-violent, restrained, and austere true saints?  * "Dharma: Shri Vasha
Mantra Esha Paramo Dharmacha: Kalpadrumo, Dharma: Kama Gavipsita Pradamani
Dharma: Param Daivatam. Dharma: Saukhya Parampara Amrit Nadi Sambhuti
Satparvato. Gha Ratavadghata Shivu Chhuawatai" - Shri Padmanadipanchavinshatika.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 kAMtA daSTi : dharmane apUrva mahimA, samyapha AcAravizuddhi (523) dharma Adi
bIjA prakAro paNa A ukta bhAvadharmanI-AtmadharmanI utpattimAM-siddhimAM jeTale
aMze kAraNabhUta thAya teTale teTale aMze ja tenI saphaLatA che, nahiM te
vastunA svabhAva dharmanI siddhi vinA niSphaLatA che. mahAmunIzvara zrI
devacaMdrajIe kahyuM che tema bhAva vinA sahu Ala'. A A AtmanirmalatArUpa
svabhAva-dharma A dRSTimAM sthiti karatA megIne atyaMta Avirbhata thayo hoya
che, atyaMta pragaTayo hoya che, kAraNa ke A dRSTivALA samyagra daSTi gIpuruSa
atyaMta AtmasthitimAM sthita hoya che, parapariNatine tyajI AtmasvarUpane bhaje
che, evA te dharmamUrti mahAtmA hoya che. "dhammo maMgalamukkiTuM, ahiMsA
saMjamo tvo|| sevA vi << THsati, nara gha ca maLo " -zrI dazavaikAlika sUtra, A
ukta AtmasvabhAvarUpa dharmano mahimA keI apUrva che. ciMtAmaNi, kAmakuMbha,
kalpavRkSa * Adine mahimA tenI pAse tuccha che. A dharma jyAre kharekharA
svarUpamAM AtmAmAM pragaTe che, tyAre sarva labdhi-siddhi, sarva vibhUti tenI
pAse dharmane apUrva dAsI thaIne kara joDI UbhI rahe che, chatAM A Atmanimagna
avadhUta mahimA mahAtmA tenI paravAha paNa karatA nathI ! tenI sAme jovAnI paNa
takalIpha letA nathI ! kharekhara ! dharmamAM jenuM mana sadA lIna hoya che, evA
mahAtmA gIne deve paNa namaskAra kare che. kAraNa ke ahiMsA, saMyama ane tapa e
dharmanA prakAra che ane tenI A mahAtmAe atyaMta siddhi karI hoya che.
parabhAva-vibhAva pariNatithI te AtmasvarUpanI ghAtarUpa hiMsA thavA detA nathI,
ane svasvarUpamAM niraMtara sthiti kare che, tethI te atyaMta ahiMsaka hoya che.
AtmAne te svasvarUpamAM ja saMyamI rAkhe che-dAbI rAkhe che, bahAra paravastumAM
javA detA nathI, tethI te pUrA saMyamI hoya che. Ama parabhAvamAM nahiM javArUpa
ahiMsanathI, ane svabhAvamAM sthitirUpa saMyamanathI samartha AtmavIryane
saMcaya thAya che, ane tethI A gI puruSa svasvarUpanA parama tejathI pratApe
che, parama tapodhana hoya che. AvA ahiMsaka, saMyamI ane tapasvI sAcA saMta
puruSane deve paNa namaskAra kare emAM zI navAI ? * 'dharmaH zrI vazamaMtra eSa
paramo dharmazcaH kalpadrumo, dharmaH kAmagavIpsitapradamaNidharmaH paraM
daivatam  /  dharmaH saukhyaparaMparAmRtanadIsaMbhUtisatparvato. gha
rAtavAdghatAM ziva chuawtai: >> zrI padmanadipaMcaviMzatika.

Page #600 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(24) The glory of the attainment of pure Dharma, which is a combination of
Yogadristi and Samyak Achar Vishuddhi, results in Samyak Achar Vishuddhi,
meaning the complete purification of Jnanaachar, Darshanachar, Charitraachar,
Tapaachar, and Viryaachar. Therefore, (1) "With Jnanaacharan, this Yogi Purusha
observes the time of Swadhyaya, practices various types of Vinaya, respectfully
performs the Udhyana Vidhi with utmost care, honors with great respect,
completely eliminates Deshapatti, and remains extremely cautious in the purity
of Artha-Vyanjana and both." (2) With Darshanacharan, they are immersed in
Prashamrasana, filled with firm Sanvega, possess supreme Vairagya, are devoted
to Anukampa, and are Astikya. They are always prepared to suppress doubts,
desires, doubts, and foolishness as they arise, by constantly tying the
Badhparikar-Bheth. They repeatedly enhance their enthusiasm by nurturing
Upvrunhan, Sthitikaran, Vatsalya, and Prabhavna. (3) With Charitraacharan, they
are dedicated to the five great vows, which are completely renunciatory in
nature, including violence, falsehood, theft, adultery, and attachment. They are
extremely diligent in the secrecy of Samyam, which is characterized by
Yognigraha. They are extremely diligent in the Samitis of jealousy, speech,
greed, acquisition and disposal, and renunciation. (4) With Tapaacharan, they
are enthusiastic every moment in Anashan, Amdarya, Vrittiparisankhyan,
Rasparityag, and secluded bed and seat. They control their inner mind through
Prayashchitta, Vinaya, Vaiyavrutya, Vyutsarga, Swadhyaya, and Dhyanparikar. (5)
For the sake of Viryaacharan, they are fully engaged in Karmakanda with all
their might." Thus, they perfectly observe the Panchaachar without any
transgression. This is their Niratichar Bhava Anushthan, active conduct. "These
practices are for the ultimate welfare of Samyagdristi Jivas who are on the
path. Therefore, they must practice them, they must strive diligently to
practice them. Through study, pure conduct will be achieved. Oh! What
incomparable conduct!" (To understand the heart-felt, clear form of this
Panchaachar in detail, see) - Shri Mansukh Bhai Kirchandt Danadharmapanchaachar,
the good action that follows knowledge - the name of that is "Anushthan",
meaning this Samyagdristi Purusha, who has attained self-knowledge, constantly
strives with utmost effort to perform the self-conduct that is appropriate to
that self-knowledge - to maintain good character. This true Sadhu Purusha has
excellent feelings of Vandanadi Anushthan. + "Jnana-wala Swadhyaya-astamaro-
yant, many Vinachan Pashchatt" - (For the beautiful description of this
foundation, see) Shri Amritchandracharya's Panchaastikaya Tika Ga. 172.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (24) yogadaSTisamuciya samyak AcAravizuddhiane AvA zuddha dharmanI siddhinA
mahimAthI samyapha AcAravizuddhi hoya che, arthAta jJAnAcAra, darzanAcAra,
cAritrAcAra, tapAcAra ane vIryAcAranI cokta vizuddhi thAya che. eTale (1)
"jJAnacaraNathe A yegI puruSa svAdhyAya kAla avaleke che, aneka prakAre vinaya
prapaMce che, duddhara upadhAna vidhipUrvaka Adare che, sArI peThe bahumAna
vistAre che, nitava deSApatti atyaMta nivAre che, artha--vyaMjana ane tadubhaya
zuddhimAM nitAMta sAvadhAna rahe che. (2) darzanacaraNathe prazamarasanimagna,
daDha saMvegaraMgI, parama vairAgyasaMpanna, anukaMpAparAyaNa ane AstikyavaMta
evA teo zaMkA, kAMkSA, vicikitsA ane mUDhadaSTitAne UThatAM veMta ja dAbI devA
mATe nitya baddhaparikara-bheTha bAMdhIne taiyAra rahe che ane upavRMhaNa,
sthitikaraNa, vAtsalya, tathA prabhAvanAne bhAvatAM vAraMvAra utsAhanI
abhivRddhi kare che. (3) cAritracaraNathe hiMsA, asatya, steya, abrA ane
parigrahathI samasta viratirUpa paMca mahAvratamAM teo taniSThavRttivALA hoya
che samyam yeganigraharUpa lakSaNavALI guptimAM atyaMta ughogI hoya che, IrSA,
bhASA, eSaNa, AdAnanikSepa ane utsargarUpa samitiomAM atyaMta prayatnazIla rahe
che. (4) tapa AcaraNathe teo anazana, amadarya, vRttiparisaMkhyAna,
rasaparityAga ane vivikta zayyAsanamAM pratikSaNe utsAha dharAve che;
prAyazcitta, vinaya, vaiyAvRtya, vyutsarga, svAdhyAya ane dhyAnaparikarathI teo
potAnA aMtaHkaraNane aMkuzamAM lAve che. (5) vIryacaraNArthe teo karmakAMDamAM
sarvazaktithI vyApRta thAya che." Ama kaMI paNa aticAra doSa na lAge ema teo
paMcAcAranuM Adarza paripAlana kare che. AvuM teonuM niraticAra bhAva anuSThAna,
sakriyAcaraNa hoya che. "mArgAbhimukha thayelA samyagadaSTi jIvone e AcaraNo
parama kalyANanA heturUpa che. mATe teoe te avazya AcaravAM ghaTe che, AcaravAno
khaMtathI prayAsa karavo ghaTe che. abhyAsa karI vizuddha AcaraNa thaze. ahe!
kevA anupama AcAra!" (A paMcAcAranuM hRdayaMgama spaSTa svarUpa vistArathI
samajavA mATe juo) -zrI manasukhabhAI kIracaMdata dAnadharmapaMcAcAra, jJAnane
anusaratI-anukULa je sat kriyA tenuM nAma " anuSThAna" che, eTale A samyagadaSTi
puruSane je AtmajJAna uparyuM che, te AtmajJAnane anurUpa-chAje evI
AtmAnucaraNarUpa bhAvakiyA karavAne-saccAritra pALavAne A yegI puruSa satata
prayatnapUrvaka parama puruSArtha kare che. A sAcA sAdhupuruSane vaMdanAdi
anuSThAna uttama bhAvavALA hoya che. + "jJAnavALA svAdhyAyAsTamaroyanto, ghaNA
vinacaM pazcAtto) -(ityAdi AdhArarUpa paramasuMdara varNana mATe juo) zrI
amRtacaMdrAcAryajIta paMcAstikAya TIkA gA. 172.

Page #601 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**The Khata Dristi:** Ideal conduct, mind focused on Dharma  (525) This is why
the conduct and character of the Paramatma Yogi with this Dristi is free from
all blemishes, following pure usage, endowed with special diligence, focused on
proper use, and with a serious and generous intention. (See page 72, and page
25, Shrimad Rajchandraji's "A Unique Poem for a Unique Occasion.")  He is free
from: Ismita (ego), Bhasha-samita (attachment to language), Eshana-samita
(attachment to desires), Adan-bhandamaatra-nikshepan-samita (attachment to
accumulation), Parikaapanika-samita (attachment to external objects), Manas-
samita (attachment to mind), Vachan-samita (attachment to speech), Kaya-samita
(attachment to body), Man-guptha (secrecy of mind), Vachan-guptha (secrecy of
speech), Kaya-guptha (secrecy of body), Guptha (secrecy), Gukhendriya (secrecy
of senses), Guptha Brahmachari (secret celibacy), Akodha (angerlessness), Amana
(pridelessness), Amaya (attachmentlessness), Abha (fearlessness), Shanta (calm),
Prasanta (tranquil), Upshanta (serene), Parinivruta (detached), Anashrava (free
from karmic inflow), Agradha (free from attachment), Chinnashrota (broken karmic
stream), Nipalepa (free from defilement), Kashyapaatra (like a vessel of pure
water), Shankha (like a conch, pure and clear), Jeeva (like a soul, free and
unhindered), Gaganatal (like the sky, without support), Vayu (like the wind,
without obstruction), Sharadjal (like autumn water, pure and clear),
Pushkarpatra (like a lotus leaf, free from blemishes), Koorm (like a tortoise,
with hidden senses), Vihag (like a bird, free from bondage), Gaenda-na-shingada
(like a rhinoceros horn, single-minded), Bharand-pakshi (like a crane,
diligent), Kunjar (like an elephant, strong and powerful), Vrushabha (like a
bull, steady and stable), Simha (like a lion, fearless and powerful), Mandar
(like Mount Meru, unshakable), Sagar (like the ocean, deep and vast), Chandra
(like the moon, gentle and luminous), Surya (like the sun, radiant and bright),
Jaatya-suvarna (like pure gold, pure and unblemished), Vasundhara (like the
earth, all-embracing and tolerant), Suhuta-hutaashan (like a well-lit fire,
burning with brilliance).  He is not bound by any restrictions.  And due to this
perfect purity of conduct, this pure-footed Nigrantha Shraman naturally becomes
dear to the people. He doesn't need to speak or make any artificial effort to
gain this spontaneous affection. It is the pure character of the Nigrantha
Mahatma, naturally attained, that attracts people like a beacon! Hundreds of
words cannot convey the wisdom that a silent Muni embodies. Thousands of
teachings and millions of interpretations cannot match the silent power of a
true sage. The pure, natural, and unblemished character of a true sage speaks
volumes! And thus, a natural flow of love arises towards him.  **Mind focused on
Dharma:**  And such a pure-conduct, Dharma-embodied, avatar of ultimate truth,
the Samyagudristi Yogi, his mind is always focused on Dharma, what is there to
ask? Dharma is...  (See Shri Sutra Kritanga, Kin. Shru. Run. Sutra 70 for this
beautiful description of the heart of Nigrantha Charya)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 katA daSTi: Adarza niyathacaryA, dhamamAM ekAgra mana (525) eTale ja A
daSTivALA parama bhAvitAtmA yogIpuruSanuM samasta AcaraNa-cAritra niraticAra,
zuddha upayogane anusaranAruM, viziSTa apramAdathI yukta, viniyogapradhAna ane
gaMbhIra udAra AzayavALuM hoya che. (juo pR. 72, tathA pR. 25, zrImad
rAjacaMdrajInuM "apUrva avasara vALuM apUrva kAvya.) te aNagAra bhagavate
isamita, bhASAsamita, eSaNAsamita, AdAnabhaMDamAtra nikSepaNa samita,
pArikApanikA samita, manasamita, vacana samita, kAyasamita, mana, vacanagupta,
kayagupta, gupta, gukheMdriya, gupta brahmacArI, akodha, amAna, amAya, abha,
zAMta, prazAMta, upazAMta, parinivRta, anAzrava, agratha, chinnazrota, nipalepa,
kazyapAtra jevA muktajala, zaMkha jevA niraMjana, jIva jevA apratihatagati,
gaganatala jevA nirAlaMbana, vAyu jevA apratibaMdha, zAradajala jevA
zuddhahRdaya, puSkarapatra jevA nirupalepa, kUrma jevA guptadriya, vihaga jevA
vipramukta, geMDAnA zIMgaDA jevA eka jAta, bhAraMDapakSI jevA apramatta, kuMjara
jevA zauDIra, vRSabha jevA sthira, siMha jevA dugharSa, maMdara jevA aprakaMpa,
sAgara jevA gaMbhIra, caMdra jevA saumyulezyAvaMta, sUrya jevA dIptateja, jAtya
suvarNa jevA jAtarUpa, vasuMdharA jevA sarvasparza viSaha, suhuta hutAzana jevA
tejathI jvalaMta hoya che. te bhagavatene kayAMya paNa pratibaMdha hete nathI.
ane AvI samyapha AcAravizuddhine lIdhe A zuddhopagamaya nigraMtha zramaNa ApoApa
janatAne priya thaI paDe che. A svayaMbhU (spontaneous) prIti saMpAdana karavA
mATe tene kAMI bolavuM paDatuM nathI, ke bIje kaI kRtrima prayAsa kare paDato
nathI. mAtra A nigraMtha mahAtmAnuM sahaja svabhAve siddha evuM zuddha
AtmAnucaraNarUpa pavitra cAritra ja jANe lokone pokArIne bedha ApI AkarSe che!
seMkaDo vAcAnI vANI je bodhI nathI zakatI, te eka jJAnI muninuM mauna bedhe che
pustaka-paMDitanA vAgajAlarUpa hajAre upadeza ke vAcaspationA lAkhe vyAkhyAne je
bAdha nathI ApI zakatA, tenAthI anaMtagaNa samartha bodha eka sAcA sapuruSanuM
zuddha sahajAtmasvarUpamaya nirmala AtmacAritra mUka vANIthI Ape che! ane tethI
tenA pratye kene naisargika prema pravAha pravahe che. dharmamAM ekAgra manaane
AvA zuddha AcArasaMpanna, dharmamUrti, paramArthanA avatAra samA A samyagudaSTi
yogIpuruSanuM citta sadAya dharmamAM ekAgra ja hoya, emAM pUchavuM ja zuM ?
dharma te re gadA gAmaNa jApA marato rUriyAmiyA mAtAniyA I (juo nigraMthacaryAnA
A parama suMdara hadaya gama varNana mATe zrI sUtrakRtAMga, kiM. zru rUM. sUtra
70)

Page #602 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(26) The collection of perceptions is the very essence of their life, it becomes
their life itself, such is the unwavering faith in Dharma that permeates them
from their bones to their marrow. Here is a shining example of such a Dharma-
embodied Yogi: “He whose bones are Dharma, whose marrow is Dharma, whose blood
is Dharma, whose flesh is Dharma, whose skin is Dharma, whose senses are Dharma.
He whose movement is Dharma, whose sitting is Dharma, whose standing is Dharma,
whose sleep is Dharma, whose awakening is Dharma, whose food is Dharma, whose
enjoyment is Dharma, whose contemplation is Dharma, whose choice is Dharma,
whose resolve is Dharma, whose everything is Dharma, such a man is rare to find.
And he is the Supreme Soul in a human body. Do we not desire such a state?” -
Shrimad Rajchandra, Patrank 117. (130) Thus, this Yogi is supremely steadfast in
his adherence to Dharma, the fruit of his long-standing austerities. For, as we
saw in the previous perspective in the process of spiritual development, he
first cultivated his inner practice through the feelings of Maitri, Karuna,
Mudita, and Upeksha, thereby purifying his mind; then he diligently studied Yama
and Niyama; he conquered Asana, abandoning the focus on the body and
establishing himself in the feeling of the Self; he avoided Pranaviksep,
maintaining the stability of the feeling of the Self through Pranayama; he
practiced Pratyahara, withdrawing the senses from their objects, and balancing
and straightening the body; he conquered the tendencies of attachment and
aversion, pleasure and pain, and deeply immersed himself in the practice of
Samprajnat Samadhi; and he confined his mind to the region of the navel chakra,
the tip of the nose, etc., by avoiding distractions, that is, by abandoning all
other objects and establishing the mind in its steadiness. How could such a
Yogi, established in this steadiness, well-ordered and perfectly balanced, not
be dear to the world? And how could he not be devoted to Dharma? He himself
says: “The mind is always in Dharma, the body is engaged in other activities.
Therefore, due to the knowledge of the right action, there are no causes for
worldly existence.” (Shruti Dharma, 164) (See reference) Shri Dva. Dva. 24-9.
“The mind is bound to the region, its steadiness is there. He is dear to all
beings, and he is devoted to Dharma.”

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (pa26) daSTisamuccaya enA prANarUpa ja hoya che, jIvanarUpa ja thaI paDe che,
evo asthi-majajA paryata avihaDapAko dharmaraMga temane lAgyo hoya che. AvA
dharmamUrti yogIndranuM javalaMta udAharaNa A rahyuM "dhama ja jenAM asthi ane
dharma ja jenI miMjA che, dharma ja jenuM lehI che, dharma ja jenuM AmiSa che,
dharma ja jenI tvacA che, dharma ja jenI iMdriya che. dharma ja jenuM calana
che, dharma ja jenuM besavuM che, dharma ja jenuM ubhuM rahevuM che, dharma ja
jenuM zayana che, dharma ja jenI jAgRti che, dharma ja jene AhAra che, dharma ja
jeno vihAra che, dharma ja jene nihAra (?) che, dharma ja jene vikalpa che,
dharma ja jene saMkalpa che, dharma ja jenuM sarvasva che, evA puruSanI prApti
durlabha che. ane te manuSya dehe paramAtmA che. e dazAne zuM ApaNe nathI
icchatA ?" -zrImad rAjacaMdra, patrAMka 117. (130) Ama A yogI puruSa dharma-
dhAraNAmAM A parama daDha dhIra hoya che, te tenI atyAra sudhInI dIrgha
gasAdhanAnuM phaLa che. kAraNa ke ApaNe pUrve AgalI dRSTiemAM prApta thatA
AdhyAtmika vikAsakramamAM joyuM tema, teNe prathama to maitrI dIrgha coga. Adi
bhAvanAo vaDe cittaparikamathI-cittasudhAraNAthI potAnA aMta:sAdhanAnuM phaLa
karaNane vAsita karyuM; pachI yama-niyamane sArI peThe abhyAsa karyo; Asanane
jaya karyo-dehAdhyAsa choDI AtmabhAvamAM Asana jamAvyuM; prANuvikSepane
pariharyo-AtmabhAvanI sthiratArUpa bhAva prANAyAma sAthe; iMdriyagrAmane
viSayomAMthI pAchI kheMcI levArUpa pratyAhAra karI kAyAne trAju karI-sIdhI karI;
rAga-dveSa, sukha-du:kha Adi DhaMDhone jaya karyo, saMprajJAta samAdhinA
abhyAsamAM atyaMta praveza karyo; ane nAbhicakra-nAsAgra Adi dezamAM cittane
baMdha karyo,-viSayAntara parihArathI arthAt bIje badhe viSaya cheDI daI cittanA
sthirIkaraNarUpa dhAraNa karI.-Ave dhAraNAmAM susthita-samyaphapaNe vyavasthita
mahAyogI zrImad puruSa jagajanane priya kema na hoya ? tathA dharmamAM
ekAgramanA kema na hoya ?ja e ja kahe che- zrutadharme mano nityaM
kAyastvasyAnyaceSTite  /  atastvAkSepakajJAnAnna bhogA bhavahetavaH  // 164 //
| kRtti -zrata -zratadharmamAM, AgamamAM, mana niyaM-mana nitya hoya che,-tenI
bhAvanAnI u5pattine lIdhe. -kAya ja, maca-A adhikRta duTivaMtanI, anyUrti -anya
cekhitamAM, sAmAnya evA bIjA kAryamAM, ataz-A ja kAraNathI, AkSepa jJAnAnna
hetubhUta evA samyagu AkSepaka jJAnalakI, moLar:bhege, IdriSArtha saMbaMdhe,
matavaH-saMsArahetuo, nathI hotA. x"dezabandho hi cittasya dhAraNA tatra
susthitH| priyo bhavati bhUtAnAM dharphakAgramanAstathA  // " - AdhAra mATe juo)
zrI dvA. dvA. 24-9.

Page #603 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Kanta Dristi: In Brief - "Is the woman's mind on her beloved?"  (527) The
mind is always in the Shruta Dharma, the body in other activities; Therefore,
due to the Akshepak Jnana, they do not become Bhavahetu. 164 Meaning - Her mind
is always in the Shruta Dharma, her body in other activities; therefore, due to
the Akshepak Jnana, she does not become Bhavahetu.  | **Analysis** - The mind of
the Bhagi with this presented Dristi is in the Shruta Dharma, in the Agama, due
to the firm belief in the Shruta Dharma, and her body is in other ordinary
activities. This is the reason why, due to the Akshepak Jnana, the Bhagi does
not become Bhavahetu - the cause of Samsara.  In this Dristi, the Samyak Dristi
Yogi Purusha develops such a firm belief in Atma Dharma that his mind remains
constantly immersed in the Shruta Dharma - the Agama - which he has heard from
the Shrimad Satpurusha Sadguru Bhagwan. Even though his body may be engaged in
other ordinary activities related to worldly Akshepak Jnana, his mind is still
focused on the Shruta Dharma. He has such an extraordinary attraction - Akshepan
- to this Dharma that it draws his mind to itself, no matter what he is doing.
Just as a magnet attracts iron, so too does this innate Akshepak Jnana, which
attracts and holds the mind towards the Shruta Dharma. This innate knowledge is
called Akshepak Jnana. And the Gyanee Purusha who possesses this innate
knowledge is called "Jnana Akshepakvant."  Here, a well-known example arises.
The mind of a woman, that is, a Pativrata woman, is always focused on her
beloved, even while performing other household tasks. Similarly, the mind of a
Jnana Akshepakvant Gyanee Purusha is constantly immersed in the Shruta Dharma,
even while performing other worldly activities or enjoying pleasures. The mind
of this Maha Mumukhu is in the state of "Meksha" and "Kheliyu Samsara."  Shrimad
Rajchandraji has beautifully explained this in his Prakash: "The woman's mind is
on her beloved, while she performs other tasks; similarly, the mind of the Jnana
Akshepakvant is firmly rooted in the Shruta Dharma... Dhan." - Shri Yo, Da,
Sakzaya 6-6  Upon subtle analysis of this verse, the profound Tatvavetaa Shrimad
Rajchandraji has given a very insightful analysis: "Just as the mind of a
Pativrata (the word "Mahila" means woman) woman is focused on her beloved
husband, even while performing all other household tasks, so too is the mind of
a Samyak Dristi Jeeva focused on the Shruta Dharma, even while performing all
worldly activities and tasks, because he has heard the teachings of the Gyanee."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 kAMtA daSTi: sAmAkSepakavata-"mana mahilAnuM vahAlA upare? (527) zratadharma
mana tasa sadA, anya kArya tana ga; etha AkSepaka jJAna, bhavahetu nahi bhega.
164 artha -enuM mana nitye kRtadharmamAM hoya che, kAya ja anya kAryamAM hoya
che; AthI karIne ja AkSepaka jJAnane lIdhe ene bhege bhavahetu thatA nathI. |
vivecana A prastuta dRSTivALA bhegInuM mana mRtadharmanI daDha bhAvanAne lIdhe
zrutadharmamAMAgamamAM hoya che, ane enI kAyA ja sAmAnya evA anya kAryamAM hoya
che. A ja kAraNathI AkSepaka jJAnane lIdhe bhego ene bhavahetu-saMsArakAraNa
thatA nathI. A daSTimAM sthiti karatA samyagadaSTi yogI puruSane AtmadharmanI
evI daDha bhAvanA upaja hoya che, ke tenuM mana zrImad satparuSa saddaguru
bhagavAna pAsethI zravaNa karelA te zratadharmamAM-AgamamAM niraMtara lIna rahe
che. bhale tenuM zarIra saMsAra AkSepaka jJAna saMbaMdhI bIjA sAmAnya kAryamAM
pravRtta hoya, paNa tenuM citta to te AjJArUpa-kRtadharmamAM ja cUMTeluM hoya
che. A dharmanuM tene koI evuM ajaba AkarSaNa-AkSepaNa hoya che, ke game te
kArya karatAM paNa tenA cittane potAnA bhaNa AkSepa-AkarSaNa kare che.
lehacuMbaka jema leDhAne kheMcI rAkhe che, tema zratadharma pratye AvuM sahaja
svabhAve AkSepanArUM AkarSanAruM-kheMcI rAkhanArUM jJAna AkSepaka jJAna kahevAya
che. ane tevuM sahaja svabhAvasiddha jJAna dharAvanArA A jJAnI puruSa
jJAnAkSepakavaMta" kahevAya che. atre A lekaprasiddha daSTAMta ghaTe che.
mahilAnuM arthAt pativratA strInuM mana ghara saMbaMdhI bIjA badhAM kAma karatAM
paNa potAnA priyatamamAM ja lagna thayeluM hoya che. tema jJAnAkSepakavaMta
jJAnI puruSanuM citta paNa saMsAra saMbaMdhI anya kArya karatAM chatAM, ke bhoga
bhogavatAM chatAM paNa niraMtara zratadharmamAM ja lIna hoya che, Asakta hoya
che. A mahAmumukSunuM mana mekSamAM ane kheLIu saMsAramAM--evI sthiti hoya che.
zrImad rAjacaMdrajIe prakAze addabhuta paramArtha. "mana mahilAnuM vahAlA upare,
bIjA kAma karaMta re; tima zrata dharme mana daDha dhare, jJAnAkSepakavaMta
re....dhana."--zrI. yo, da, sakjhAya 6-6 A vacana upara sUkSma mImAMsana karatAM
prakhara tattvavettA zrImad rAjacaMdrajIe parama mananIya vivecana karyuM che
ke-"ghara saMbaMdhI bIjA samasta kArya karatAM thakAM paNa jema pativratA
(mahilA zabdane artha) strInuM mana pitAnA priya evA bhartArane viSe lIna che,
tema samyagadaSTi evA jIvanuM citta saMsAramAM rahI samasta kArya prasaMge
vartavuM paDatAM chatAM, jJAnI saMbaMdhI zravaNa karyo che e je upadeza dharma
tene viSe vInapaNe

Page #604 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(28) The collection of yogic perspectives is presented. In the entire world, the
love between men and women is considered primary. Among them, the love of a
woman for a man is considered even more primary. And among that, the love of a
devoted wife for her husband is considered primary even within the primary. Why
is this love considered primary within the primary? The one who has strongly
presented the principle, the proponent of the principle, says that we consider
this love primary within the primary because even while doing all other
household (and other) tasks, the mind of that devoted woman remains absorbed in
her husband, with love, remembrance, attention, and desire. But the proponent of
the principle says that the cause of this love is worldly, and here we are
talking about making it non-worldly, therefore this love is absorbed, loving,
remembering, attentive, and desiring. Where it is appropriate, where this love
attains non-worldly results, we say that. This love, the same way that a seeker
who is devoted to their husband, should act towards the teachings, etc., of the
knowledgeable one, which are in the form of listening; and the way that the
being acts towards them, then we know that the being is situated in the
perspective of "kanta," which is related to the same kind of love. There are two
such words that are complete in this sense. Those words are the primary of
devotion. x x x By acting in the state of the primary of devotion, the defects
of the being, such as attachment, etc., easily dissolve, this is the primary
intention of the knowledgeable person. Even a small amount of selfless devotion
that arises in a being, even that is suitable for removing defects. Such
knowledge or the state of the primary of knowledge is attained towards the non-
suitable meaning, towards the defects of attachment, etc., or towards the change
related to the object. This happens a lot. Even in this time, it is considered
appropriate to worship the state of the primary of devotion for a long time,
even for a lifetime, this is the decision that the knowledgeable ones have made.
(We think so, and it is so.) – Shrimad Rajchandra, Letter 320 (394) Furthermore,
"Even if the mind holds firm, the one who has attained knowledge," on this word,
they, Shrimad Rajchandraji, shed light, doing a further, extremely profound, and
insightful analysis: The one who has attained knowledge without distraction, the
one who is a seeker of self-welfare, the one who has heard from the mouth of the
knowledgeable one, the one who holds firm in their mind the self-welfare-like
dharma, this is the word for the above states. In order to establish this
principle in the results of the being, the author knows that a suitable example
is needed, so in the world, in the world, the love that a woman has for a man,
which is free from the feelings of attachment, etc., is the primary love...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (28) yogadaSTisamuccaya varte che. samasta saMsArane viSe strI puruSanA nehane
pradhAna gaNavAmAM AvyuM che. temAM paNa puruSa pratyeno strIne prema e kaI
prakAre paNa tethI vizeSa pradhAna gaNavAmAM AvyuM che. ane emAM paNa pativratA
evI strIne pati pratyeno sneha te pradhAnane viSe paNa pradhAna e gaNavAmAM
AvyuM che. te sneha e pradhAna-pradhAna zA mATe gaNavAmAM AvyuM che? tyAre jeNe
siddhAMta baLavAnapaNe darzAvavA te daSTAMtane grahaNa karyuM che, e
siddhAMtakAra kahe che ke te snehane eTalA mATe ame pradhAnane viSe paNa
pradhAna gaNIe chIe, ke bIjAM badhAM ghara saMbaMdhI (ane bIjA paNa) kAma
karatAM chatAM, te pativratA evI mahilAnuM citta patine viSe ja lIna paNe,
premapaNe, smaraNapaNe, dhyAnapaNe, icchApaNe vare che, eTalA mATe. paNa
siddhAMtakAra kahe che ke e snehanuM kAraNa te saMsArapratyayI che, ane atra to
te asaMsArapratyayI karavAne arthe kahevuM che mATe te sneha lInapaNe,
premapaNe, smaraNapaNe, dhyAnapaNe. IcchApaNe, jyAM karavA yogya che, jyAM te
sneha asaMsAra pariNAmane pAme che te kahIe chIe. te sneha te pativRttArUpa evA
mumukSue jJAnI saMbaMdhI zravaNarUpa je upadezAdi dharma tenI pratye te ja
prakAre karavA gya che; ane te pratye te prakAre je jIva varte che, tyAre
"kAMtA" evA nAmanI samakita saMbaMdhI je dRSTi tene viSe te jIva sthita che, ema
jANIe chIe. evA arthane viSe pUrita evAM e be pada che. te pada te
bhaktipradhAna che. x x x bhaktipradhAna dazAe vartavAthI jIvanA svacchedAdi
deSa sugamapaNe vilaya thAya che, evo pradhAna Azaya jJAnI puruSane che. te
bhaktine viSe niSkAma evI alpa paNa bhakti je jIvane utpanna thaI hoya che te te
paNa deSathI nivRtta karavAne yogya evI hoya che. a95 evuM jJAna athavA
jJAnapradhAna dazA te asugama evA artha pratye, svacchedAdi doSa pratye, athavA
padArtha saMbaMdhI brAMti pratye prApta kare che. ghaNuM karIne ema hoya che.
temAM paNa A kALane viSe te ghaNuM kALa sudhI jIvanaparyata paNa jIve
bhaktipradhAna dazA ArAdhavA yogya che, evo nizcaya jJAnIoe karyo jaNAya che.
(amane ema lAge che, ane ema ja che)."- zrImad rAjacaMdra, patrAMka 320 (394)
vaLI "tema chatame mana daDha dhare, jJAnAkSepakavaMta re' e pada para punaH
parama paramArthamaya talasparzI vivecana karatAM teozrI-zrImad rAjacaMdrajI
prakAze che ke - vikSepa rahita evuM jenuM vicArajJAna thayuM che, e
jJAnAkSepakavaMta AtmakalyANanI IcchAvALo puruSa hoya, te jJAnI mukhethI zravaNa
thayo che evo je AtmakalyANarUpa dharma tene viSe nizcaLa pariNAme manane
dhAraNa kare, e sAmAnya bhAva uparanAM padono che. atyaMta samartha e siddhAMta
pratipAdana karatAM jIvanA pariNAmamAM te siddhAMta sthita thavAne arthe
samartha evuM dRSTAMta ghaTe che, ema jANI graMthakartA te sthaLe jagatmAM,
saMsAramAM prAye mukhya e je puruSa pratyene kalezAdi bhAva rahita evo kAmya
prema strIne, te ja prema

Page #605 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Kanta Drishti: The Knower Does Not Become "Bhaga"  (Page 19)  It is said
that one should be fully immersed in the Dharma heard from a Satpurush. The
Dharma heard from a Satpurush, in which one has love for all other objects, is
said to be abandoned by becoming indifferent, with one-pointedness, one-
mindedness, one-rhythm, one-remembrance, one-series, one-use, and one-result.
The desirable love that remains in the mind is eliminated, and the teachings of
making it into Shruta Dharma are given. One should love the Shruta, which is
infinitely superior to desirable love. However, an example cannot be limited, so
love is said to be limited to the extent of the example, but the principle is
not limited. - Shrimad Rajchandra, Patraank 321 (395)  Another well-known
example is also relevant here. Just as a cow goes to graze in the forest,
roaming in all four directions, but its mind remains on its beloved calf,
similarly, four or five friends go to fetch water, carrying the water pot on
their heads, walking briskly, talking, clapping, and laughing loudly, but their
eyes are on their "Gaguria" - their water pot. In the same way, the mind of a
knowledgeable knower, free from the distractions of external influences, is
always absorbed in Shruta Dharma, even while performing other worldly tasks.
"Jin Charne Chitt Lav, Vaise Jin Charne Chitt Lav, Chara Charnake Karane Re, Gau
Anmen Jay; Chara Chere Fire Chihun Dish, Vanki Nazar Madhuria Mah.....Vaise
Jin...Chara Panch Sahelimi Mili, Hilmil Pani Jay; Taali Dvie Khadkhad Hase,
Vanki Nazar Gazuria Mahyu....Vaise" - Shri Anandghanji.  "Nishdin Sutant Jagtan,
Huida Thi Na Rehe Dur Re; Jab Upgar Sabhariye, Tav Upje Anandpur Re." - Shri
Yashovijayji.  And due to the influence of this natural, inherent, and
perceptive knowledge, this knower, a man of Samyagdrishti, does not become
"Bhaga" - does not become a cause of Samsara! The worldly "Bhaga" that is the
cause of Samsara for other ordinary, natural people, even that "Bhaga" does not
become a cause of Samsara for this knower with this vision. This is an extremely
surprising but ultimately true event. The explanation is this: ordinary worldly
ignorant beings are attracted to the objects of the senses, and this knower is
constantly attracted to Shruta Dharma. The ignorant being is always attached to
the objects of the senses, indulging in sensual desires and longing for them.
And the knower, as seen above, is always absorbed in Shruta Dharma.  8 "Bhoga
Nahi Bhavet"

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 kAMtA dRSTi : jJAnIne ' bhAga nahi" bhavaheta', dhAra taravAranI' (para9)
satpuruSathI zravaNa thaye| hAya je dhama tene viSe parimita karavA kahe che. te
satpuruSadvArA zravaNu prApta thayA che je dhamA~ temAM savA~ bIjA je padArtha
pratye prema rahyo che, tethI udAsIna thai eka lakSapaNuM, eka dhyAnapaNe, eka
layapaNe, eka smaraNapaNe, eka zreNIpaNuM, eka upayAgapaNe, eka pariNAmapaNe sa
vRttimAM rahele je kAmya prema te maTADI, zrutadhama rUpa karavAnA upadeza karyo
che; e kAmya premathI anaMtaguNaviziSTa evA zruta pratye prema karavA ghaTe che,
tathApi dRSTAMta parisImA karI zakayu nathI, jethI dRSTAMtanI risImA jyAM thai
tyAMsudhIne prema kahyo che, siddhAMta tyAM parisImApaNAne pamADayo nathI."--
zrImad rAjaca'dra, patrAMka 321 (395) atre bIjA leAkaprasiddha dRSTAMta paNa
ghaTe che. jemake gAya vanamAM cAreA caravA jAya che, cAre dizAmAM phare che,
paNa tenuM mana teA peAtAnA parama priya vatsa-vAcharaDAmAM ja heAya che. cAra
pAMca sAhelIe haLImaLIne pANI bharavA jAya che, te pANInu kheDu mAthA para
mUkIne jhapATAkha dha ruvAkhabhera cAle che, vAtA karatI jAya che, tAlI krIe che
ne khaDakhaDATa hase paNa che, paNa tenI najara te ' gaguriAmAMya '-tenI
gAgaramAM ja heAya che. tema parabhAvanA vikSepathI rahita evA jJAnAkSepakavaMta
jJAnInuM mana paNa saMsAra saMbadhI anya kArya karatAM thakAM paNa sadAya
zrutadharmAMnA ja dhyAnamAM lIna heAya che. "jina carane citta lAva, vaise jina
carane citta lAva, cArA caranake kAraNe re, gau anameM jAya; cArA care phire
cihuM dizi, vAMkI najara madhuriA mAM.....vaise jina. cAra pAMca sAhelima milI,
hilamila pAnI jAya; tAlI dvIe khaDakhaDa hase, vAMkI najara gajhuriA
mAMhyu....vaise '--zrI AnaMdaghanajI. nizadina sutAM jAgatAM, huiDAthI na rahe
dUra re; jaba upagAra sabhArIe, tava upaje AnaMdapUra re. ''--zrI yazeAvijayajI.
ane AvA sahaja svabhAvabhUta AkSepaka jJAnanA prabhAvane lIdhe ja A jJAnI
samyagdaSTi puruSane bhAgA paNa bhavahetu thatA nathI--sa'sArakAraNu banatA
nathI ! je sAMsArika bhAge khIjA sAmAnya prAkRta janane sa'sArahetu hAya che, te
bhAge paNa A dRSTivALA jJAnI puruSane saMsArakAraNa thatA nathI, e atyaMta
Azcaya kAraka paNa parama satya ghaTanA che. Ane khulAsA ema che ke-sAmAnya
sa*sArI ajJAnI jIvAne viSayAnu AkSepaNuAkarSaNu hAya che, ane A jJAnI puruSane
te niraMtara zrutadharmanuM ja AkSepaNu-AkaNu heAya che. ajJAnI jIva sadAya
viSayAtta hAi, viSayAkAra vRttine bhajatA rahI viSayane ja Icche che ne te
pratye dADe che. ane jJAnI puruSa te uparamAM joyuM tema sadAya zruta 8 bheAga
nahi bhavaheta'

Page #606 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(530) The yogic perspective, the right understanding of Dharma, desires only
Dharma, not the objects of desire. It distances itself from them, yet when
forced to encounter them due to past karma, it experiences them with detachment
and indifference, consuming them without attachment. When the ignorant being
experiences them with extreme attachment, it becomes bound again. Thus, the
difference between the wise and the ignorant, in their attitude and perspective,
is like the difference between heaven and earth. Therefore, the ignorant,
constantly desiring objects, becomes bound even though it does not experience
them. And the wise, not desiring objects, even though it experiences them, does
not become bound! This is a truly astonishing phenomenon. (See pp. 502-504).
Because just as puppets dance due to the strings, so too, the activities of the
wise, who do not desire, are driven by the strings of past karma. Therefore,
even if they engage in worldly activities like enjoyment, according to the
arising of past karma, their minds, like a lotus in water, remain detached and
absorbed in their true nature. The wise, residing in the world, appear as if
they are manifesting the illusion of enjoyment! And there is no fault in this,
even for the purpose of compassion. Thus, the wise yogi, even though they may
occasionally, as an exception, reside in the world, in homes, etc., and even
though they may experience worldly enjoyment, they do not become bound. And the
ignorant, even though they do not experience enjoyment, become bound! This
extraordinary fact reveals the profound impact of right knowledge.  The reason
why the wise do not become bound even though they experience enjoyment is
because they lack attachment and affection. Just as a person who is covered in
oil, due to affection, will collect dust while exercising in a dusty gymnasium,
but a person who is not covered in oil, due to the absence of oil-like
stickiness, will not collect dust; similarly, the ignorant, due to the
stickiness of affection, attachment, and passion, collect karmic particles like
dust. But the wise, who are devoid of affection, passion, and attachment, like a
"strong" person, cannot be bound by karmic particles due to the absence of oil-
like stickiness of affection and attachment. Thus, the wise, who are capable,
are different. They possess the extraordinary ability to remain detached, like a
lotus in water. The foolish ignorant cannot imitate them, and if they try, they
will only suffer! "The sharpness of the sword, the feet of the fourteenth
Tirthankara; the juggler dances on the edge, but do not let him stay on the edge
of the sword." - Shri Anandghanji.  This great feat of remaining completely
detached while residing in the world can only be achieved by rare, exceptional,
extraordinary wise beings. Walking on such a double-edged sword is a task that
is "only for those who are wise in all things, not for the weak!" (See) Shri
Samayasar - Ga. 242-246.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (530) yogadaSTisamuracaya dharmane ja-AjJApradhAna svabhAva dharmane ja Icche
che, e viSayane nahi IcchatAM tethI dUra bhAge che, chatAM pUrva
prArabdhadayathI bhegavavA paDe te alelu55Ne-anAsakta bhAve bhogavI nirjarI
nAMkhe che. jyAre ajJAnI jIva te atyaMta upapaNe-Asakta bhAve jogavI punaH
baMdhAya che. Ama jJAnI-ajJAnInI vRttimAM ne daSTibindumAM AkAza-pAtAlanuM
aMtara che. eTale ja bhegane niraMtara Icchate e ajJAnI bhaga nahiM bhagavatAM
chatAM baMdhAya che! ane bhegane anicchate e jJAnI AvI paDela bhega bhegavatAM
chatAM baMdhAtuM nathI ! e AzcaryakAraka ghaTanA satya bane che. (juo pR.
502-504). kAraNa ke yaMtranI pUtaLIo jema dorIsaMcArathI nAce che, tema niriccha
evA jJAnI puruSanI badhI pravRtti pUrva prArabdhanA sUtrasaMcArathI ja cAle che.
eTale te kavacita pUrva prArabdhodaya pramANe sAMsArika bhegAdi pravRtti paNa
kare, te paNa vicare pUrva jalakamalavata nilepa evA te jJAnInuM citta te
mekSamAM ja lIna prayoga' rahe che. saMsAramAM rahelA jJAnI puruSa jANe
bhegamAyA prakaTa karatA hoya, ema jaNAya che ! ane kAnugrahanA hetupaNAthI AmAM
paNa dUSaNa nathI. Ama lekavatI jJAnI yegI puruSa kvacit apavAdavizeSe
saMsAramAM-gRhavAsAdimAM rahyA chatAM, sAMsArika bhegAdi bhogavatAM chatAM paNa
baMdhAtA nathI, ane ajJAnI nahi jogavatAM chatAM paNa baMdhAya che! e vilakSaNa
vAta AkSepaka jJAnane mahAprabhAva sUcave che. bhega bhegavatAM chatAM paNa
jJAnI baMdhAtA nathI, tenuM kAraNa temanAmAM Asaktinasnehane abhAva e che. jema
reNubahulaka vyAyAmazALAmAM keI snehAbhyakta-tela cepaDele manuSya vyAyAma kare
te tene raja cUMTe che; paNa snehAbhyakta na hoya-tela copaDela na hoya, tene
neharUpa-telarUpa cIkAzanA abhAve reNu cuMTatI nathI; tema ajJAnIne neharUpa,
AsaktirUpa, rAgarUpa cIkAzane lIdhe karma paramANurUpa raja cAMTe che, paNa
niHsnehavItarAga-anAsakta evA "kerA dhAkaDa" jJAnI samyagadaSTi puruSane
saneharUpa-AsaktirUpa cIkAzanA abhAve kamaraja vaLagI zaktI nathI. Ama samartha
evA jJAnInI vAta nyArI che, te jalamAM kamalanI jema alipta ja rahI zakavAnuM
adbhuta sAmarthya dharAve che, mUrkha ajJAnImAM tenuM anukaraNa karavAnuM gajuM
nathI, ne tema karavA jAya to khattA ja khAya! dhAra taravAranI sohalI, dehalI
caudamA jinataNI caraNa cevA; dhAra para nAcatA dekha bAjIgara, sevanA dhAra
para rahe na devA."-zrI AnaMdaghanajI. saMsAramAM rahIne paNa sarvathA nilepa
rahevAnuM AvuM mahAparAkrama te kaIka viralA apavAdarUpa asAdhAraNa jJAnI ja
karI zake; AvI bedhArI talavAra para cAlavAnuM kAma X "rva sanmAdi va
vastuvidejoyu, jo kavaLone siMgharU ! " (juo) zrI samayasAra-gA0 242-246,

Page #607 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Khata Drishti: The Gnostic's Mirage-Like Perception of the Supreme Abode
(31) This is something that only a capable Yogi can achieve. Even while
remaining amidst external influences, maintaining an unbroken state of self-
absorption, like the unwavering blade of a sword, is not an easy task.   But,
"It is as difficult as picking up sand from near the eye" - this is what the
great Yogi, Shrimad Rajchandraji, who was deeply immersed in the ultimate
spiritual essence, truly said. His Vachanamrut is filled with the wonders of
this insightful knowledge, which is evident at every step. Even though external
influences were present, the self-absorption of this great Gnostic was unbroken,
his pure self-awareness was unparalleled, and his detachment even amidst worldly
attachments was remarkable. This is evident to the impartial, discerning, and
wise person in his Vachanamrut, which is filled with his own experiences. The
saying from Patanjali's Yoga Sutra, "Patro di vigyan," also testifies to this
state of insightful knowledge.  This same meaning is conveyed through the
following analogy:  "Mayaambhastavatah pashyannaanudvignastato druttam |
Tanmadhyena prayaty eva yatha vyaghatavarjitah ||165||"  Seeing the mirage as it
is, without any anxiety; He goes through it swiftly, without any hindrance, just
like that. (165)  Meaning: The person who sees the mirage as it truly is, does
not get anxious about it. He goes through it swiftly, without any hindrance.
Explanation: The one who sees the mirage as it truly is, does not get anxious or
scared. Therefore, he goes through it swiftly. And while doing so, he does not
face any obstacles, because the mirage, being just water, is incapable of
causing any harm. Knowing the mirage for what it is, he understands that it is
not real water. The mirage, in its true essence, does not exist, it is just an
illusion. The one who knows this, does not get anxious or disturbed.   He sees
the mirage as it truly is, without any anxiety. He goes through it swiftly,
without any hindrance, just like that.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 katA daSTi : jJAnInuM bhega-mRgajala seMsarU paramapada gamane ( 31) te
samartha yegI puruSe ja karI zake. bAhya upAdhi madhye rahyA chatAM dhAra
taravAranI' akhaMDa AtmasamAdhi jALavavI e kAMI jevuM tevuM vikaTa kArya nathI,
paNa "AMkha pAse retI upaDAvavA jevuM mahAvikaTa che'--ema parama
adhyAtmarasanimagna samartha mahAyogI zrImad rAjacaMdrajIe AtmAnubhavathI
yathArtha ja kahyuM che,-jemanA vacanAmRtamAM A AkSepaka jJAnanA camatkAra pade
pade dagocara thAya che. bAhya upAdhi maLe paNa e mahAtmA parama jJAnI puruSanI
AtmasamAdhi kevI akhaMDa hatI, zuddhopAgamaya AtmajAgRti kevI apUrva hatI,
saMsArasaMgamAM paNa asaMgatA kevI adbhuta hatI te temanA AtmAnubhavamaya
vacanAmRtamAM sthaLe sthaLe niSpakSapAtI vicakSaNa vivekI janane svayaM
pratyakSa thAya che. "pAtro di vijJAna e pAtaMjala yogabhAganuM vacana paNa AvI
jJAnAkSepakavaMta jJAnadazAnI sAkSI pUre che. A ja artha daSTAMtane AzrIne kahe
che- mAyAmbhastatvataH pazyannanudvignastato drutam  /  tanmadhyena prayAtyeva
yathA vyAghAtavarjitaH  // 165 //  mRgajala tAvathI dekhate, te te viNa udvega;
te madare vyAghAta viNa, jAya ja jema savega, 165 artha -mAyAjalane taravathI
dekhate puruSa tenAthI anuddhipaNe tenI madhyethI jema vyAghAta pAmyA vinA zIgha
cAlyo ja jAya che - vivecana mAyAjalane-mRgajalane je tatvathI-mAyAjalapaNe
dekhe che, te tenAthI udvega pAmate nathI-gabharAtuM nathI. eTale te te tenI
madhyethI jhapATAbaMdha cAlyo ja jAya che; ane tema karatAM tene vyAghAta-bAdha
upajato nathI, kAraNa ke mAyAmAyA pANI re jala tatvathI vyAghAta-bAdha
upajAvavAne asamartha che. mRgajala-jhAMjhavAnuM jANI tehane pANI e vAstavika
rIte mithyA che-beTuM che. evA mAyAjalanuM tattvathI kaI svarUpaastitva che ja
nahi, te mithyAbhAsarUpa hoI cheTuM ja che, ema je jANe che, te tethI udvega-
kSobha pAmato nathI, rakhene huM AmAM - vRtti -nayAma -mAyAjalane taravara:
riyana tatvathI mAyAjathapaNe dekhate, anuhUinattaro-te mAyAjalathI nadina heI,
tama-za dhra, tanmathe-te bhAyAjala madhyethI, pratyeva-cAlyA ja jAya che.
yathA-jema, e udAharaNanA upanyAsa athe che, thAkAtavarSita-bhAdhAta pAmyA vinA,
-mAyAjalanA tatvathI vyAdhAtanA asamarthapaNune lIdhe.

Page #608 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(532) The one who has attained the yogic vision is not afraid of being submerged
in the ocean of Maya. Therefore, he fearlessly walks through the net of Maya,
without being caught in its clutches. He boldly transgresses it, and in doing
so, he encounters no obstacles or hindrances, no difficulties or impediments.
"Knowing it to be the water of Maya, he crosses it unperturbed; knowing the
truth, he remains unaffected, not being swayed by the waves of desire." Shri J.
6. Sajay - 8 "Seeing the objects of enjoyment as they truly are, like the water
of Maya, even while enjoying them, he, being unattached, reaches the ultimate
goal." 166. Meaning - The one who sees the objects of enjoyment as illusory,
like the water of Maya, even while enjoying them, being unattached, reaches the
ultimate goal. Commentary - In the same way, the one who sees the objects of
enjoyment as illusory, like the water of Maya, without identifying with them,
even while enjoying them, being unattached, reaches the ultimate goal. This is
because he is free from attachment and aversion, and is not controlled by his
desires. Enjoyment refers to the objects of desire, which are illusory, like the
water of Maya. The water of Maya is merely an illusion, it has no real
existence. Therefore, the one who identifies with the water of Maya is deluded.
He is deluded in his desire to attain it, and he is deluded in his belief that
it can quench his thirst. Because it is illusory, he can cross it without being
submerged. In the same way, the objects of enjoyment are illusory, they are
empty. They are nothing compared to the true nature of the self. Therefore, the
one who sees them as they truly are, is not attached to them. Vritti - The one
who sees the objects of enjoyment as they truly are, without identifying with
them, sees them as illusory, like the water of Maya. Even while enjoying them,
he is unattached, and reaches the ultimate goal. This is because he is free from
attachment and aversion, and is not controlled by his desires.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (532) yogadaSTisamuccaya bUDI jaIza ema Darate nathI. eTale te te te mAyAjala
madhyethI sasaro jhapATAbaMdha bedhaDakapaNe cAlyo jatAM AMcake khAte nathI,
nirbhIkapaNe tene ullaMghIne cAlyA ja jAya che. ane tema karatAM tene keI paNa
vyAghAta-bAdhArUpa aMtarAya upajato nathI, kaMI paNa Alaavala AvatI nathI. mAyA
pANI re jANI tehane, laMghI jAya aDola; sAcuM jANuM re te bIte rahe, na cale
DAmADola dhana dhana." zrI je. 6. sajhAya -8 bhogAn svarUpataH pazyaMstathA
mAyodakopamAn  /  bhujAno'pi hyasaGgaH san prayAtyeva paraM padam  // 166 /  /
tyama bhego mRgajala samA, tatvathI je dekhe ja; bhogavatAMya asaMga te, para
padane pAme ja. 166 artha -tema bhegane svarUpathI mAyAjala sarakhA dekhate
puruSa, bhogavatAM chatAM, asaMga heI, parama pada pratye jAya ja che. vivecana
te ja prakAre bhegene samArepa sivAya tenA svarUpe karIne je mRgajala jevA asAra
dekhe che, te karmathI AkarSAIne parANe AvI paDelA bhogone bhegavatAM paNa
asaMga heI, paramapada pratye jAya ja che-kAraNa ke anabhigvagaMthI-anAsaktithI
paravaza bhAva che mATe. bhoga arthAt iDhiyArtha saMbaMdhone koI paNa prakAranA
samApa zivAya tenA vastusvarUpe joIe te mAyAjala sarakhA-mRgajala jevA mithyA
che. mRgajala mAtra mithyAbhAsarUpa che, vastutaH svarUpathI tenuM kaMI astitva
nathI, eTale viSaya mRgajala temAM jalabuddhine samAropa kare mithyA che, khUTe
che, tenA pratye prAptinI AzAe doDavuM te paNa mithyA che, tenAthI kaMikALe tRSA
chIpavAnI nathI, ane te mithyA hovAthI ja tene ullaMghIne cAlyA jatAM-tenI
madhyethI seMsarA pasAra thatAM DUbAtuM paNa nathI. tema viSayabhega mRgajala
jevA che, niHsAra che. AtmasvarUpanI apekSAe te kaI cIja che
nahiM,-paramArthathI AtmasvarUpane tenI sAthe vRtti -mobAna-bhogena, kriyAthe
saMbaMdhane, svAta. parana-samAropa zivAya svarUpathI jote, tavA-tema,
mAyopamAna-mAyAjala jevA asAra, munnAnoDaji-kamakSipta -karmathI AkarSAIne AvI
paDelA bhoge bhegavatAM paNa vAsa: saja-asaMga haI, vAghera para pam parama pada
pratye jAya ja che-anabhiLaMgatAthI (anAsaktithI) paravaza bhAvane lIdhe.

Page #609 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Vision of the Knower: Detachment and Trikala Viragya  (533) The knower
has nothing to do with anything. Therefore, to consider the self in the
worthless, illusory objects of enjoyment is wrong. To run after them with the
desire for their attainment is also wrong, because what is not one's own can
never be obtained, and one can never be satisfied by it. And since it is
completely worthless and illusory, the knower, without identifying with it,
remains detached, and even when passing through it, does not get immersed in it.
Therefore, the knower, who understands the illusory nature of these objects,
like a mirage, does not get immersed in them. Even if the karmic fruits of
enjoyment come upon him, he passes through them effortlessly and without
attachment.  Here, although enjoyment is called "illusory," it does not mean
that it has no existence. The word "illusory" here means that although it
exists, it is ultimately worthless. Just as there is no water in a mirage, and
running after it yields nothing, similarly, there is no self in the objects of
enjoyment, and running after them does not benefit the self. Or, "illusory"
means not non-existent, but false. Because, in relation to the self, the objects
of enjoyment are false, i.e., they are not the self. The self has nothing to do
with these objects, yet the ignorant self, identifying with them, gets entangled
and bound by the desires and aversions arising from them. But the liberated
knower, who is free from desires, does not identify with them, and does not get
entangled or bound by them.  The implication here is that the knower, who
understands the illusory and worthless nature of these objects, like a mirage,
even when experiencing the fruits of past karma, remains detached and attains
the ultimate state. The true knower never gets entangled in the mire of
enjoyment, like a lotus in water, remaining untouched and completely
indifferent. This is called "anasakti yoga" in the Gita.  "Abandoning the mire
of enjoyment, he sits above, like a lotus in water; like a lion, he is fearless
in his own mind, the support of all the three worlds. Blessed is the sage who
walks with equanimity." - Sa, Tr, Ga, St.  The reason why the knower can
maintain this detached and non-attached attitude is that he knows with certainty
and constantly remembers that these objects are not the self.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 katA daSTi : jJAnIne anAsakatayoga-trikALa vairAgya (533) kAMI levAdevA nathI.
eTale evA niHsAra micchA viSayabhogamAM Atmabuddhine samApa kara mithyA che-
khoTe che, tenA pratye tenI prAptinI tRSNAe-durAzAe doDavuM te paNa mithyA che,
kAraNa ke je vastu pitAnI nathI te kadI hAthamAM AvavAnI nathI ane tenAthI kaI
kALe tRSNA chIpAvAnI nathI. ane Ama te sarvathA niHsAra-mithyA hovAthI ja temAM
Atmabuddhi karyA vinA, asaMga rahIne, tenI madhyethI tene ulaMghIne seMsarA
cAlyA jatAM paNa DUbAtuM nathI, eTale viSayenuM AvuM mRgajala jevuM mithyAbhAsa
svarUpa je tattvathI jANe che, te asaMga-anAsakta jJAnI puruSa temAM DUbate
nathI paNa avazya bhogya karma kavacita AvI paDe te paNa tenI madhyethI seMsare
bedhaDakapaNe aviSama bhAve pasAra thaI jAya che. atre bhogane "mithyA' kahyA
che, tene artha keI svarUpastitva na hovuM e kare che tema nathI. paNa atre
"mithyA' zabdano artha svarUpAstitva hovA chatAM para mArthathI niHsAra evo
spaSTa karyo che. jema mRgajalamAM kaMI jalarUpa jJAnIne anA- sAra nathI, ane
tenI pAchaLa doDavAthI kAMI vaLatuM nathI, tema anAtma sakta roga svarUpa
bhogemAM kaMI AtmatatvarUpa sAra nathI, ane te pratye anu dhAvanathI-doDavAthI
AtmAnuM kAMI vaLatuM nathI. athavA "micyA" eTale nahiM hevApaNArUpa asatpaNuM
nahi, paNa khoTApaNArUpa asapaNuM. kAraNa ke AtmatatvanI apekSAe paravaturUpa
bhoga asat arthAt beTA che, viparyAsarUpa che. Atmatatvane vastutaH te
paravastunI sAthe levAdevA che nahiM, chatAM tenI asat-beTI paravastumAM
Atmabuddhi karIne rAgadveSajanya IcchAniSTa bhAvathI mahamUDha AtmA niSkAraNa
muMjhAya che ne baMdhAya che. paNa amehasvarUpa evA vItarAga jJAnI puruSa te
temAM Atmabuddhi nahi karatAM, ISTAniSTa bhAvanAne tyAga karI muMjhAtA nathI ne
baMdhAtA nathI. A uparathI tAtparya e che ke-je bhogane svarUpathI mAyAjala jevA
nisAra ne khoTA jANe che, te jJAnI puruSa kavacit pUrva karmanA-prArabdhanA
megathI AkSipta-kheMcAIne AvI paDelA bhogo bhogavatAM chatAM paNa asaMga hoI,
paramapadane pAme ja che. sAcA jJAnI puruSa bhogapaMkanI madhye paNa kadI
kharaDAtA nathI-lepAtA nathI, jalamAM kamalanI jema alipta ja rahe che,
mohamalathI aspRzya evA parama udAsIna ja rahe che. AnuM nAma ja gItAmAM kahele
anAsakta coga che. "bhoga paMka tyajI upara beThA, paMkaja pare je nyArA; siMha
pare nija vikama zUrA, tribhuvana jana AdhArA. dhanya te munivarA re je cAle
samabhAve."--sA, tra, ga, sta. AtmajJAnI puruSa AvI rIte anAsakti-asaMga bhAva
rAkhI zake che, tenuM kAraNa ema che ke-te sAcA aMtarAtmAthI nizcaya jANe che
ane niraMtara bhAve che ke-A

Page #610 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(534) Even an atom in the universe is not mine. I am a pure, knowledge-filled,
conscious, formless soul. I have nothing to do with this entire universe. In the
past, I was bound by karma due to my attachment to this universe. Now, this
karma is coming to collect its due. Let it take its due and quickly free me from
debt! After all, "I am not the universe, and the universe is not me. It is not
mine, and I am not its." I am I, and it is it. What is mine is mine, and what is
its is its. O conscious one! What is mine is with me, everything else is
different. So why do you keep saying "mine, mine" in this universe? Why do you
keep saying "mine, mine"? Break the attachment of "mine" and "mine." Be certain
that "mine" is mine.  Due to this supreme detached attitude and the great
influence of the unbroken soul-consciousness, even though the enlightened person
is surrounded by the universe, they are not attached to enjoyment. They remain
unattached even in the midst of enjoyment, like a black beetle on a black cloth,
they experience the karma of enjoyment without being stained. They are freed
from the three times (past, present, and future) but are not bound. This is a
supreme wonder. This is the supreme secret of the enjoyment of the karma of
enjoyment by the enlightened Tirthankara. Even though the Tirthankara, who is
detached from the world for countless births, is sometimes forced by past karma
to live in a household, they are a firm, knowledge-filled, supreme soul-knower,
and even though they experience the karma of enjoyment, they are not bound.
Instead, they experience the karma of enjoyment and are freed from it, they
destroy it. This is a well-known fact. (See, p. 273-274)  In the same way, some
exceptional, powerful enlightened beings, due to the force of past karma, are
sometimes forced to live in the world, even though they are truly unwilling from
the depths of their hearts. These supreme, powerful yogis, with their supreme
self-awareness, remain unattached even in the midst of the world, and they make
a supreme effort to transcend it effortlessly. Like the "charan seva" of the
fourteenth Jin, who walks on the sharp edge of a sword, they maintain their
supreme self-absorption even though they are surrounded by worldly attachments.
They demonstrate the amazing feat of walking on the sharp edge of the pure soul-
consciousness, showing the supreme, amazing power of the self that they have
cultivated, and they inspire joy and wonder. But these exceptional beings are
rare, because it is difficult, though not impossible, to maintain self-
absorption in the state of renunciation.  x“अहमेदं एदमहं अहमेदरसेव होमि मम एदम्
। अण्णं जं परदव्वं सञ्चित्ताचित्तमिस्सं वा ॥ एयत्तु असंभूदं आदवियप्पं करेदि
संमूढो । भूदत्थं जाणंतो ण करेदि दु तं असंमूढो । Shri Samayasar Ga. 20-22, (For
the amazing meaning of this, see the commentary of Shri Amritchandracharya)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (534) gadaSTisamuccaya paravatumAM paramANu mAtra paNa hAruM nathI. huM te eka
zuddha darzana-jJAnamaya caitanyasvarUpI arUpI AtmA chuM. A samasta paravastunI
sAthe mahAre kaMI paNa levAdevA nathI. pUrve mehathI A paravastumAM Atmabuddhi
bAMdhIne huM je pudgala karmabaMdhathI baMdhAyo chuM, te A kamapudgale potAnuM
jUnuM leNuM vasula karavA AvyA che, te bhale potAnuM leNuM laI laI mane jhaTa
RNamukta kare ! bAkI "hute paravastu nathI ne paravastu te huM nathI. te mahArI
nathI ke huM hene nathI." huM te huM chuM, te te te che. hArUM te mhArUM che,
tenuM te tenuM che. he cetana ! hArUM che te hArI pAse che, bAkI bIjuM badhuM ya
aneruM che, mATe A paravastumAM tuM huMkAra huMkAra zuM kare che? mAruM mAruM
zuM kare che? AtmAne huMkAra karI e huMkAra tuM toDI nAMkha. 'mAruM 'ne mAruM
ema nizcaya kara. AvI parama udAsIna vRttivALI akhaMDa AtmabhAvanAnA
mahAprabhAvane lIdhe ja jJAnI puruSa paravastunA bhAga maLe rahyA chatAM paNa
bhogathI lipta thatA nathI, paraMtu kAjaLanI keTaDImAM paNa asaMga rahI, DAgha
lAgavA dIdhA vinA bhogakarmane bhogavI jJAnIne trikAla nirjarI nAMkhe che, paNa
baMdhAtA nathI ! e parama Azcarya che. parama vairAgya jJAnI tIrthakara
bhagavAnanA bhogAvalI karmanA bhogavaTAnuM A ja parama rahasya che. Ajanma
parama vairAgI evA tIrthakara devane pUrva prArabdhadayathI anicchatAM chatAM
kaMIka vakhata gRhavAsamAM sthiti karavAno prasaMga paNa paDe che, paNa
zratadharma mAM daDha jJAnAkSepakavaMta parama AtmajJAnI evA te parama puruSa
bhogakarmane bhegavatAM chatAM paNa baMdhAtA nathI,-ulaTA te bhogAvalI kama
bhogavIne nirjarI nAMkhe che, kheravI nAMkhe che. A vAta zAzvaprasiddha che.
(jue, pR. 273-274) e ja prakAre keI apavAdarUpa samartha jJAnI vizeSane pUrva
prArabdhanA yogathI. kharekharA aMta:karaNathI anicchatAM chatAM, saMsAravAsamAM
rahevAne prasaMga parANe AvI paDe, te te parama samartha yegI atyaMta
AtmajAgRtipUrvaka te saMsAraprasaMgamAM AvA jJAnI paNa asaMga rahI, temAMthI
nileSapaNe uttIrNa thavAne parama puruSArtha apavAdarUpa kare che; ane dhAra
taravAranI sehalI-dehalI caudamAM jina taNuM caraNasevA"nI jema, saMsAra upAdhi
maLe sthita chatAM parama AtmasamAdhi jALavI, zuddha AtmAnucaraNamaya cAritranI
bedhArI talavAra para cAlavAnuM addabhuta bAjIgarapaNuM dAkhavI, pite sAdhelA
parama addabhuta AtmasAmarthyogane para batAve che ane sAnaMdAzcarya upajAve
che. paNa AvA apavAdarUpa gIo te kaIka viralA ja hoya che, kAraNa ke tyAga
avasthAmAM AtmasamAdhi jALavavI duSkara chatAM sukara x"ahamedaM edamahaM
ahamedaraseva homi mama edam  /  aNNaM jaM paradavvaM saJcittAcittamissaM vA  //
eyattu asaMbhUdaM AdaviyappaM karedi saMmUDho  /  bhUdatthaM jANaMto Na karedi
du taM asaMmUDho  /  zrI samayasAra gA. 20-22, (AnA addabhuta paramArtha mATe
juo zrIamRtacaMdrAcAryajInI TIkA)

Page #611 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Kant Drishti: Such Knowledgeable Ones Are Exceptional - Others Cannot
Follow.  (535) It is commendable, but to maintain such self-absorption in the
householder stage is extremely difficult, indeed, it is a daunting task. It is
easy to avoid stains in a clean room, but to remain spotless even while living
in a charcoal room requires a unique level of effort and skill. However, it must
be reiterated that such exceptional, supreme yogis are rare. A shining example
of this can be found in the life story of the supremely accomplished Shrimad
Rajchandraji. Despite being forced into worldly responsibilities by past karmic
influences, he maintained an unwavering state of self-absorption. This is
evident to any impartial and discerning observer who delves into his
Vachanamrut. Similar examples are well-known in other philosophies, such as
Janak Videhi and Shri Krishna.  But this act of walking on a double-edged sword,
this supreme feat, can only be accomplished by those who are masters of their
craft, those who possess extraordinary abilities. Ordinary people, those of
average caliber, or those who are just beginning their spiritual journey, should
not dare to blindly imitate such individuals. For they are destined to fall, as
they lack the capacity and capability. Therefore, when ordinary people attempt
to remain detached while living in the world, they are often destined to fail.
Not only that, but they are also likely to face great harm. Nowadays, many
people can be seen who, driven by their own whims and fancies, read spiritual
scriptures and speak of detachment without actually experiencing it, and they
deceive others. But if these individuals were to reflect honestly, shedding
their pretense and deception, they would realize the folly of their ways. For
only those who have attained the sixth stage of vision, those who are mature and
knowledgeable, are capable of performing such actions. How can someone who is
still in their early stages, lacking the necessary qualifications, achieve what
a learned scholar with a doctorate can? Just as a child cannot walk in the shoes
of a grown man, so too, ordinary humans cannot imitate the conduct of great
sages. And to attempt to do so without the necessary qualifications will only
lead to harm. As Shri Narsinh Mehta said:  "Those who merely sing our songs will
only eat a lot of leftovers; Those who understand and sing will reach the
heavenly abode of Vaikuntha."  Therefore, only a rare few can traverse the
narrow path, the one-step path, while the royal roads...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 kAMta daSTi : AvA jJAnI apavAdarUpa,-bIjAnuM gajuM nathI. (535) sohalI che,
paNa gRhasthAvasthAmAM tathArUpa AtmasamAdhi jALavavI te te duSkara duSkara ne
dahalI che. cekhA oraDAmAM DAgha na lAge e dekhItuM che, paNa kAjaLanI koTaDImAM
rahIne paNa jarA paNa DAgha na lAgavA de, e kAMI jevA tevA puruSArtha
kauzalyanuM kAma nathI. paNa punaH kahevAnuM ke AvA apavAdarUpa parama yogIo te
kaIka viralA ja hoya che. AnuM javalaMta udAharaNa vartamAnamAM parama
gasiddhisaMpanna zrImad rAjacaMdrajInA jIvanacaritramAMthI maLI Ave che.
anichatAM chatAM pUrva prArabdhadayathI parANe saMsAraupAdhi maLe rahIne paNa,
temaNe kevI akhaMDa AtmasamAdhidazA jALavI che, te temanA vacanAmRtamAM DokiyuM
karatAM kaI paNa niSpakSapAta vivekI vicArakane saheje supratIta thAya che. anya
darzAnIomAM paNa janaka videhI-zrI kRSNa AdinA dRSTAMta suprasiddha che. paNa
AvuM bedhArI talavAra para cAlavA jevuM parama durghaTa kArya te koI viziSTa
sAmarthyanA svAmI evA siddhahasta gArUDha puruSo ja karI zake. bAkI bIjA sAmAnya
prAkRta jane, ke sAmAnya koTinA yegIjane ke gaprAraMbhaka Arohaka bIjAnuM gaju'
sAdhake, tenuM je AMdhaLuM anukaraNa karavA javAnI dhRSTatA kare, to nathI tenuM
te adhaHpatana thavAnuM ja nirmANa thayeluM che, kAraNa ke tema karavAnuM tenuM
gajuM nathI, sAmarthya nathI. eTale saMsAraprasaMgamAM rahI kevaLa asaMga
rahevAno akhataro sAmAnya prAkRta jano ajamAvavA jAya to te prAye niSphaLa
thavAne ja sajAyele che, eTaluM ja nahiM paNa tene ulaTo mahAanarthakAraka thaI
paDavAne pratyeka saMbhava che. hAlamAM svacchaMda matikalpanAe adhyAtmazAstra
vAMcI tathArUpa dazA vinA anAsakta ganI dAMbhika vAto karanArA ane khoTo phAMke
rAkhanArA ghaNA jane daSTigocara thAya che, paNa te mahAnubhAvo kSaNavAra je
pitAno daMbha ane phAMke chaDI daI svastha aMtarAtmAthI vicAre te teone A
uparathI ghaNe dhaDo levAnuM prApta thAya ema che. kAraNa ke chaThThI dRSTi
jeTalI UMcI paripakava gadazAne pAmelA jJAnAkSepakavaMta gIvizeSa ja je kArya
karavAne samartha che, te kAcI dazAvALA yogyatAvihIna jana kema karI zake? jene
haju ekaDo paNa AvaDatuM nathI e bAla, snAtaka padavIne pAmelA vidyApAraMgata
paMDitane kema pahoMcI zake ? moTA mANasanA jeDAmAM jema nhAnAne paga na mUkAya,
tema mahAjJAnI mahApuruSanA AcaraNanuM anukaraNa sAmAnya manuSyo na ja karI
zake, ane megyatA vinA karavA jAya te ulaTuM ahitakAraka ja thaI paDe. zrI
narasiMha mahetAne kahevuM paDayuM che ke - amArUM gAyuM gAze, te jhAjhAM
khAsaDAM khAze; je samajIne gAze, te helAM vaikuMTha jaze." mATe sAMkaDI keDI-
ekapadImAMthI te kaI virala manuSya ja jaI zake che ne rAjamArgo

Page #612 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(536) Knowing that the path of Gadashti Samuchaya is accessible to all, let the
arduous task of walking on the one-footed path, which is like a leg but remains
unattached, be left to the special knowledgeable ones. Let others focus their
attention on walking the path of Vidya Tyaga, which is the royal path. This is
the essence here. (See, Adhyatma Saar).  Therefore, without experiencing the
true self-state like the father, by reading the spiritual words of the
knowledgeable man, and imagining oneself to be in such a state, those ignorant
people who pretend to be selfless while enjoying worldly pleasures, are actually
deceiving themselves and making a mockery of yoga and spirituality. Because
external causes of selfishness do not allow them to remain selfless, and not
only that, but they also cause their downfall. Therefore, if one truly wants to
be selfless, then it is absolutely essential to renounce such external causes.
Those who remain unattached and maintain their selfless nature even in worldly
situations are extremely rare, exceptional. Knowing this, the seeker should
renounce worldly attachments as much as possible. This detachment can only be
achieved by some rare, supreme Siddha Purushas. Others, who are not qualified,
but dare to attempt to achieve it, will only suffer. The external causes that
arise will corrupt them completely, and they will get lost in the maze of Maya
and become "attached" instead of "detached." That is why knowledgeable men have
forbidden all external attachments, knowing that the object of desire is a place
of downfall. Their constant teaching is that even a single atom should not be
attached to any object. And that is why they have placed a "red light" as a
warning to those who are trying to practice selfless yoga. For example:  O
Knowledgeable one! It is never right to do any karma. However, if you say, "I
enjoy it, but I never possess anything," then alas! You are unfortunate. That
is, you enjoy what you do not possess, meaning you are a wicked enjoyer. And if
one says, "I am not bound by enjoyment, because I am not bound by the enjoyment
of external objects," then  x "Knowledgeable one, never do any karma. However,
if it is said, "I enjoy it, but I never possess anything," then alas! You are
unfortunate. That is, you enjoy what you do not possess, meaning you are a
wicked enjoyer. And if one says, "I am not bound by enjoyment, because I am not
bound by the enjoyment of external objects," then  –Shri Amrit Chandracharya
Ji's Shri Samaya Saar Kalash,

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (536) gadaSTisamuccaya te sahu koI jaI zake che, ema jANI, lega maLe paNa
nilepa rahevArUpa ekapadI para cAlavAnuM durghaTa kArya kaI viziSTa jJAnI
vizeSane mATe rahevA daI, Itara janee to vidhyatyAgarUpa rAjamArge ja cAlavAmAM
potAnuM dhyAna kendrita karavA egya che, e ja atra tAtparya che. (juo,
adhyAtmasAra ). eTale jJAnI puruSanA adhyAtma vacane vAMcI pitAnI tathArUpa
AtmadazA thayA vinA, potAnI tevI dazA kalpI laI, je zuSka jJAnIo saMsAramAM
rahIne bhega bhogavatAM chatAM niSkAmapaNuM bhajavAno khoTo DoLa-daMbha kare
che, te ajJAnIo daMbhI ajJAnIne kharekhara ! AtmavaMcanA ja kare che, ane yoga-
adhyAtmanI hAMsI-viDaM. karaNa pheja ! banA ja mAtra kare che! kAraNa ke
sakAmapaNAnA bAhya nimitto tene ( niSkAma rahevA detA nathI, eTaluM ja nahi paNa
tenuM ghara adhaHpatana kare che. mATe kharekhara je niSkAmapaNuM bhajavuM ja
hoya to tevA bAhya nimitta prasaMgane paNa tyAga karavo atyaMta Avazyaka che.
saMsAraprasaMgamAM paNa asaMga rahI niSkAmavRtti akhaMDapaNe jALavanArA parama
puruSa te atyaMta atyaMta viralA ja che, apavAdarUpa ja che, ema jANI mumukSue
sAMsArika bega prasaMgane jema bane tema parityAga karatAM ja rahevuM e
utsargamArga che. A anAsakta ga to koIka viralA parama gasiddha puruSe ja sAdhI
zake che. bAkI tathArUpa yogyatA vinAnA je te sAdhavAnI dhRSTatA vA sAhasa
karavA jAya che, te te bicArA khattA ja khAya che, tyAha upajAvanArA bAhya
nimitte tene sasvarUpathI bhraSTa kare che-pADI nAMkhe che, ane mAyAnI
bhUlabhUlAmaNImAM bhUlA paDI te megIne badale "bhegI' bane che ! eTalA mATe ja
jJAnI puruSoe viSayalega sAdhanane patanasthAna jANI bAhya saMgano paNa sarvathA
niSedha karyo che, te sahetuka che. paramANu mAtra paNa paravastune leza paNa
saMga karavA gya nathI, e emane niraMtara upadeza che. ane eTalA mATe ja
anAsakta niSkAma yoga sAdhavA pravartAvAnI ceSTA karanArane cetavaNIrUpa
"lAlabattI' teoe AgaLa dharI che. jemake he jJAnI! kadI paNa kaMI karmaX karavuM
ucita nathI. tathApi je tuM ema kahe ke huM te bhogavuM chuM, paNa paradravya
kadI hArUM nathI," te are! tuM durbhakta ja che, arthAt je hArUM nathI te tuM
bhagave che, eTale tuM duSTa bhegavanAra che ane je te kahe ke "upabhogathI
baMdha nathI, kAraNa ke paradravyanA upabhogathI baMdha nathI ema x "jJAnin
karma na jAtu kartumucitaM kiMcittathApyucyate, bhuMkSve haMta na jAtu me yadi
paraM durbhukta evAsi bhoH| baMdhaH syAdupabhogato yadi na tatkiM kAmacAro'sti
te, jJAnaM sanvasa baMdhameSyaparathA svasyAparAdhAdhudhruvam  // " -zrI
amRtacaMdrAcAryajIta zrI samayasArakalaza,

Page #613 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Kant Darsti: "Mind is the field of virtues and vices," the powerful Dharma
Shakti  (537) The scriptures say, "Is this not a losing activity, a work of
desire? And is it not bound? Therefore, O Knower! Become the form of knowledge,
otherwise, you will surely be bound by the sins of your father. Similarly, those
who are engrossed in the actions of the world, clinging to the path of karma,
who do not know knowledge, are immersed, drowned in the ocean of the world. Even
those who desire the path of knowledge, but are sluggish in their efforts, are
also immersed, drowned in the ocean of the world. He swims above the world, who
constantly becomes the form of knowledge, who never performs karma, and never
succumbs to delusion."  Furthermore, it is said here that even though the Knower
may experience some part of the world, he remains detached and unattached. This
is said to indicate his extraordinary power of detachment. It is not said to
imply that the Knower is always detached, but rather that even a Knower, who may
be subject to the effects of past karma, remains detached. This is said to show
his extraordinary, unwavering strength of detachment.  Because the Knower, the
man of right vision, knows the object as an object, he does not identify with
it. He believes with firm self-realization that he is not the father of it. And
he does not even have the slightest attachment to it, even in his dreams. Just
as a dry ball does not stick to a wall, so too, the truly detached Knower does
not become bound by objects, he remains completely unattached. Even if he has to
experience the world due to past karma, he does not get caught in it due to his
complete detachment. He maintains this extraordinary awareness. This is truly
the power of his knowledge, or the power of his detachment. Similarly,  Objects
are not of the nature of virtues or vices, nor are they the mind's virtues or
vices. Therefore, "There is no rule for objects in the production of bondage;
the ignorant become bound by vices, the Knower never does. That which, when
served, becomes impure, may also purify it, so says the scripture." (See
Adhyatma Saar) But it is the desire and aversion that arises from the object
that is the cause of bondage. Therefore, the mind is the field of virtues and
vices, the place of their origin.  "Mind is the cause of bondage and liberation
for humans," and the detached Knower behaves with such supreme detachment that
he does not have even the slightest desire or aversion for objects. He is
completely free from them.  + "Knowledge is not for those who are attached to
the world, Even those who desire the path of knowledge, but are sluggish in
their efforts, are immersed. He swims above the world, who constantly becomes
the form of knowledge, who never performs karma, and never succumbs to
delusion." - Shri Samaya Saar Kalash

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 kAMta daSTi : "mana guNa avaguNa kheta', balIyasI dhamazakti (537) zAstramAM
kahyuM che,' te zuM A hArI gapravRtti kAmacAra che-IcchA pravRtti che? ane ema
che te zuM baMdha nathI ? mATe he jJAnI ! tuM jJAnarUpa thaIne vasa, nahiM te
cokkasa hArA pitAnA aparAdhathI tuM baMdhane pAmIza. temaja-karmanayanA
avalaMbanamAM parAyaNakriyAmAM racyApacyA rahenArA evA kriyAjaDa je jJAnane
nathI jANatA te magna che, saMsArasamudramAM DUbI gayelA che. jJAnanayane
icchanArAo paNa je svacchedathI maMda udhyamavALA che te paNa magna che,
saMsArasAgaramAM DUbelA ja che. vizva upara te te tare che, ke je satata svayaM
jJAna thaI-jJAnarUpe pariNamI karma kadI paNa karatA nathI, ane kadI paNa
pramAdane vaza thatA nathI. ' vaLI atre jJAnAkSepakavaMta kavacit bhAga
bhogavatAM chatAM paNa asaMga hoI nirlepa rahI zake che ema kahyuM, te tenI
abhuta gasiddhinuM sAmarthya sUcavavA mATe kahyuM che, te bhega bhegave ja ema
kahevA mATe kahyuM nathI, paNa kavacita jJAnI bhegI koI yogIvizeSane pUrva
prArabdhodayathI tevI saMbhAvanAnI apekSA lakSamAM chatAM abhegI ! rAkhI, tenuM
asAdhAraNa atizayavaMta daDhayegIpaNuM darzAvavA mATe kahyuM che. kAraNa ke
jJAnI samyagadaSTi puruSa viSayane para padArtha jANe che, temAM AtmabhAva
karatA nathI, te pitAnA nathI ja ema daDha AtmapratItithI mAne che. ane temAM
svapnAMtare paNa paramANu mAtra paNa Asakti rAkhatA nathI. eTale sukko goLo jema
bhIMtane lAgatuM nathI, tema kharekharA anAsakta jJAnI puruSa viSayothI baMdhAtA
nathI, kevaLa alipta ja rahe che. pUrva prArabdhodayathI kadAcane bhoga
bhogavavuM paDe, te paNa temAM sarvathA asaMgapaNAne lIdhe jJAnI lapAtA nathI,
evI apUrva upagajAgRti rAkhe che. A kharekhara ! teonA jJAnanuM ja sAmarthya
athavA vairAgyanuM ja sAmarthya che. temaja- viSayo je che te pite tenA
svarUpathI guNarUpa paNa nathI ke deSarUpa mana guNa paNa nathI. eTale "viSayone
baMdha utpAdanamAM niyama nathI; ajJAnIne avaguNa kheta tethI baMdha thAya che,
jJAnIne kadI thato nathI. je sevatAM kadI jenI azuddhi thAya che, tenAthI ja
tenI kadAcit zuddhi thAya che, ema zAstravacana che." (juo adhyAtmasAra) paNa te
viSayanA nimitte je ISTa-aniSTha buddhi upaje che, te ja baMdhanuM kAraNa che.
tethI mana ja guNa-avaguNanuM kSetra che, utpattisthAna che. mana ga manuSyALAM
jAuM vaMdhamokSayo " ane vItarAga jJAnI puruSane te e parama vairAgya varte che
ke tene viSayomAM lezamAtra paNa IcchAniSNa buddhi hotI ja nathI, nimULa ja +
"manA zarmanAvaTa-vanapA jJAnaM nAnaMti re, magnAH jJAnanayaiSiNo'pi
yadatisvacchaMdamaMdodyamAH  /  vizvasyopari te taraMti satataM jJAnaM bhavaMta:
svayaM, je kutti ja gAtu na va yAMti kamAya -zrI samayasAra kalaza ,

Page #614 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(538) The collection of yogic vision is present, meaning that even though they
experience objects due to past karma, they remain completely indifferent and are
not affected by the merits and demerits of those object experiences. They are
supremely capable. "The mind is bound to the world by afflictions, the mind free
from afflictions is the end of rebirth." - Shri Yashovijayji. "Such knowledge
removes obstacles, there is no experience of rebirth; neither merits nor
demerits, nor the form of objects, the mind is not affected by merits and
demerits." - Shri Yo. Sakzayi - 7 Thus, the one who drowns in the ocean of
enjoyment, the capable yogi swiftly swims across! The one who dies from the
enjoyment of others, even such enjoyment does not become a cause of rebirth for
them, does not lead to rebirth! Because "in this Kanti vision, due to the
absence of attachment, the power of enjoyment is pure, it does not destroy the
powerful Dharma Shakti that continuously flows with its own essence - just as a
wire cannot extinguish a blazing fire, but instead helps it, similarly here, the
karma that cannot be escaped without experiencing it is destroyed, so the
powerful Dharma Shakti only helps the power of enjoyment, but does not oppose it
due to weakness. What can a crocodile do to an elephant? What can a weak child
do to a great wrestler? Even in a stable vision, the power of knowledge is so
great that enjoyment cannot do anything to it, yet there is still some
possibility of pleasure. But in this Kanti vision, it has been achieved by the
knowledge-possessing householder, and the knowledge has become so powerful that
even enjoyments, even emotions, cannot produce even a trace of pleasure! That
is, enjoyment is obtained, but such a special knower does not become intoxicated
by his own form, he remains stable in his form, unintoxicated, that is his
powerful capability. Such an unintoxicated householder yogi is also a devotee.
And thus, the knowledge-possessing, detached, unattached, wise man, free from
attachment, continues to move forward towards the supreme state, without any
hindrance. "That vision crosses the ocean of rebirth, the Muni gains fame." -
Sakzayi. "The essence of enjoyment, however, is not the ocean of rebirth. The
strong attachment to the water of illusion, by that, who goes here by this
path?" - 167 Commentary - Just as a peacock does not have the bondage of the
ocean of rebirth, the essence of enjoyment, that is, the one for whom enjoyment
is the ultimate goal, does not have the bondage of the ocean of rebirth, does
not cross the ocean of rebirth - due to inactivity in his means, due to such
intelligence, and the same is said - Maya-odesha - the one who is firmly
attached to the illusionary water - due to such a type of withdrawal, the one
who is firmly attached to the mirage water, by that: patha - because here he
goes by this path - the way, where there is the intelligence of water in
illusion. x "Dharma Shakti does not kill the stronger Bhog Shakti. Just as a
fire does not extinguish a fire, a monkey does not kill a lion." - Yashovakrut
Dva. Dva. 24-15

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (538) yogadaSTisamuccaya thayelI hoya che, eTale pUrva karmavazAt kavacita
viSaya bhogavatAM chatAM paNa te parama udAsIna rahI, te viSayabhoganA
guNadoSathI lepAtA nathI, evA te parama samartha hoya che. "kaleze vAsita mana
saMsAra, kaleza rahita mana te bhavapAra."--zrI yazovijayajI. "evA jJAne re
vighana nivAraNe, bhoga nahiM bhavaheta; navi guNa deSa na viSaya svarUpathI,
mana guNa avaguNa kheta..dhana." -zrI yo.sakjhAya -7 Ama je bhegAsAgaramAM bhogI
DUbI mare che, tene samartha yogI zIvra tarI jAya che ! je bhogathI bIjAnA bhoga
mare che, te bhoga paNa AvA uttama bhegIne gabAdhaka thatA nathI, bhavahetu
thatA nathI ! kAraNa ke "A kAMtA daSTimAM kamakSipaNAthI bhogazakti nirmala hoya
che, te niraMtara svarasathI pravartatI evI balIyasI dharmazaktine haNatI nathI
-dIpane je vAyare bUjhAvI nAMkhe che, te prajavalita evA dAvAnalane bUjhAvI zako
nathI, paNa ulaTe tene sahAyatA kare che, tema atre bhogavyA vinA chUTake ja
nathI evA karmane kSaya thatuM hovAthI baLavAna dharmazaktine bhogazakti
sahAyatA ja kare che, paNa nibaLapaNAne lIdhe tene virodha karatI nathI. hAthIne
magataruM zuM karI zake ? mahAmallane nirbala bAlaka zuM karI zake? je ke sthira
daSTimAM paNa jJAnanI tAkAta eTalI badhI hoya che ke tene bhoge kAMI karI zake
ema nathI, to paNa tyAre haju kaMIka aMze paNa pramAdanI saMbhAvanA che. paraMtu
A kAMtA daSTimAM te dhAraNa jJAnI gRhastha vaDe karIne jJAnanuM evuM parama
baLavAnapaNuM thayuM hoya che, ke te bhogo paNu bhAvasAdhu paNa leza paNa
pramAda upajAvI zaktA nathI ! arthAt bhoga maLe paNa tevo viziSTa jJAnI
svasvarUpathI pramatta-bhraSTa thato nathI, svarUpasthita apramatta ja rahe che,
e te baLavAna sAmarthya saMpanna hoya che. Avo apramatta gRhastha yogI paNa
bhAvasAdhu ja che. ane Ama havAthI atrasthita asaMga jJAnI gIpuruSa nirvine
nibaMdha paNe parama pada pratye akhaMDa prayANa karate AgaLa vadhe ja che. "te
e daSTi re bhavasAgara tare, lahe muni suyaza saMga."--. sajhAya. bhogatattvasya
tu punarna bhavodadhiladhanam  /  mAyodakadRDhAvezastena yAtIha kaH pathA  //
167 //  vRtti-moravaca subhagatatvane te, bhegaparamArthane to, arthAta bhega
jene mana paramArtha che evAne, punaH-punaH, 7 morakuna-bhodadhinuM baMdhana
nathI, bhavasAgara ullaMghA nathI,-tevA prakAranI buddhithakI tenA upAyamAM
apravRttine lIdhe, ane e ja kahe che-mAyodaveza:-mAyAjalamAM jene daDha Ave che
evo -tevA prakAranA vipasane lIdhe, jene mRgajalamAM daDha abhiniveza che e,
tena cAvI : pathA- keNu ahIM te paMthe-mArge jaya, ke jyAM mAyAmAM jalabuddhi
che. x "dharmazakti na hantyasyAM bhogazaktirbalIyasIm  /  /  tti rIpavNo
vAyurghaTAM vAnarama "--yazavakRta dvA. dvA. 24-15

Page #615 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
English Translation (preserving Jain terms):  The one who has the vision of
kartā (doer) does not cross the ocean of bhavābdhi (worldly existence), [he is]
the mṛgajala (mirage) of viṣaya (sense objects). (539) The one who has the
vision of bhagavattva (divinity) does not cross the ocean of bhavābdhi (worldly
existence); The one who has a firm attachment to mṛgajala (mirage), how can he
go on that path? 167 Meaning - The one for whom that tattva (reality) is mana
(mind), does not transgress the ocean of bhava (worldly existence). The one who
has a firm attachment to mṛgajala (mirage), how can he go on that path - where
there is the jala-buddhi (water-perception) in māyā (illusion)? Vivecana
(Explanation) "The one who truly knows, remains in fear, does not move
restlessly...Dhana dhana (Wealth, wealth) to that one, his fear never subsides"
- Śrī J. D. Sakhāya. But the puruṣa (person) of bhagavattva (divinity), who
considers that tattva (reality) as paramārtha-rūpa (the ultimate reality), does
not transgress the ocean of bhava (worldly existence). Because due to such type
of viparyāsa (delusion), the one who has a firm attachment to māyā-jala
(illusory water), how can he go on that path - where there is the jala-buddhi
(water-perception) in māyā (illusion)? The one for whom mana (mind) is the
tattva-rūpa (reality-form), appears as paramārtha-rūpa (the ultimate reality),
the true one, that bhogattva (sensual) puruṣa (person) can never cross the ocean
of bhava (worldly existence). Because due to such mithyā-bhāsa-rūpa (illusory)
buddhi (intellect), he does not engage in the means of its transgression. And
the reason for that is also the bhogattva (sensual), that the one who has a firm
attachment-deep aversion in the māyā-jala (illusory water), how can he go on
that path to cross the bhavābdhi (ocean of worldly existence)? Due to viparyāsa
(delusion), even though he knows the truth, how can he be inspired to transgress
it? So, perhaps fearing that "I will drown", remaining restless, not making the
effort to cross that māyā-jala (illusory water), he remains stuck there!
Similarly, the one who, due to viparyāsa (delusion) - contrary intellect,
considers the viṣaya-bhoga (enjoyment of sense objects) similar to māyā-jala
(illusory water) as true, does not make the effort to cross it decisively, and
remains stuck there! The one who, due to viparyāsa (delusion) - contrary
intellect, considers the viṣaya-bhoga (enjoyment of sense objects) similar to
māyā-jala (illusory water) as true, does not make the effort to cross it
decisively, knowing it as devoid of essence and untrue, he does not fearlessly
pass through it, but gets immersed, entangled, and remains consumed in it. Here,
the simile of mṛgajala (mirage) given for the viṣaya (sense objects) is
extremely apt. Because in the summer, at the distant horizon where the earth and
sky appear to meet, the appearance of water is called mṛgaviṣaya mṛgajala (the
mirage of the deer). That water does not exist in reality, but it appears as an
illusion (viparyāsa) due to the defect of vision. Believing that mṛgajala
(mirage) to be true, the thirsty deer runs towards it with the hope of drinking
it.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 katA daSTi bhagatatva bhavAbdhi na tare, viSaya mRgajaa (539) bhagatatvane
bhavAbdhinuM, laMghana te na ja thAya; mRgajala daDhAveza che, te mArge kuNa
jAya? 167 artha-paNa jene mana bhega e tatva che, evAne te bhavasamudranuM
ullaMghana thatuM nathI. jene mRgajalamAM daDha Aveza che, e keNa ahIM te mAge
-ke jyAM mAyAmAM jalabuddhi che tyAM-jAya? vivecana "sAcuM jANuM re te bIte
rahe, na cale DAmADela...dhana dhana gataravane re e bhaya navi TaLe" -zrI je.
da. sakjhAya. paNa bhegane je tatvarUpa-paramArtharUpa mAne che, evA bhagatatva
puruSane te bhavasAgaranuM ullaMghana thatuM nathI. kAraNa ke tevA prakAranA
viparyAsane lIdhe, mAyAjalamAM jene daDha abhiniveza che evo koNa ahIM-jyAM
mAyAmAM jalabuddhi che evA te mArge jAya? bhega jene mana tatvarUpa che,
paramArtharUpa lAge che, sAcA bhAse che, e bhogatatva puruSa kadI bhavasamudra
oLaMgI zakatuM nathI. kAraNa ke tevI mithyAbhAsarUpa buddhine lIdhe te tenA
ullaMghananA upAyamAM pravartatuM nathI. ane tenuM kAraNa paNa bhegatatva ema
che ke jene mAyAjalamAM dRDha Aveza-gADha abhiniveza hoya, bhavAbdhinatare te te
mAge kevI rIte jAya? vipasane lIdhe tene sAcuM jANata hoya te tene ullaghI
javAnI hAma kema bhIDe? eTale rakhene huM DUbI jaIza ema Darate rahI, DAmADoLa
banI, te mAyAjalane oLaMgI javAno puruSArtha karatuM nathI, ane tyAM ja paDyo
rahe che! tema viparyAsathI-viparIta matithI je mAyAjala samA viSayabhogane sAcA
mAne che, te temAMthI nibaMdhapaNe pAra utaravAne puruSArtha karate nathI, ane
tyAM ja paDyo rahe che! tema viparyAsathI-viparIta matithI je mAyAjala samA
viSayabhogane sAcA mAne che, te temAMthI nibaMdhapaNe pAra utaravAne puruSArtha
karatuM nathI, tene niHsAra asatya jANI tenI seMsara nirbhayapaNe pasAra thaI
jato nathI, paNa temAM ja nimagna banI DUbI jAya che, guMcI jAya che, pacyo rahe
che. atre viSayane je mRgajalanI-jhAMjhavAnA pANInI upamA ApavAmAM AvI che, te
atyaMta yukta che. kAraNa ke grISmamAM dUra dUra kSitijamAM-jyAM pRthvI ne AkAza
maLatA dekhAya che tyAM daSTimaryAdAnA cheDe jalane AbhAsa thAya che, tene
mRgaviSaya mRgajala jala kahe che. te jala kaI vastutaH che ja nahiM, paNa
daSTivibhramathI viparyAsa (Illusion of vision) tene AbhAsa mAtra thAya che. evA
te mRgajalane sAcuM ja mAnIne tRSAtura mRga te pIvAnI AzAe te

Page #616 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(540) It runs towards the collection of yogic vision, but it knows that it is
false water, giving a hand-clap and running away like this! Nothing comes into
the hand, and the thirst of the poor deer, instead of being quenched by the
futile labor of running, increases instead! Just as it is impossible for the
inert object and the conscious soul to be related, yet due to the delusion of
the wrong vision (Illusion and Delusion), it appears to be related due to the
inclusion of the self-consciousness in the inert object. That same object is a
mirage. Believing that such illusory water is real, the foolish living being,
the deer, tormented by the thirst for objects, runs towards it with full speed,
it throws a lot of dust for that illusory water, but that illusory water, which
is very illusory, seems to be mocking the life, as if it is saluting from afar,
it keeps running away! And due to this futile pursuit of objects, due to the
sorrow arising from the cycle of births and deaths, the thirst of the living
being, which is like a path, instead of being quenched, increases instead, and
therefore one has to bear the great suffering of the cycle of births and deaths.
- This wrong vision is the root of all suffering. It binds the living being in
the wrong way, creates self-consciousness in the non-self, and makes the mind
believe in the external object. This wrong vision, which is beginningless and in
the form of ignorance, creates self-consciousness in the body and other things,
which are the means of enjoyment, and the living being forgets its true nature
and thinks, "I am the body and other things." Then the soul, corrupted from its
true form, remains active through the senses, falls into the object, and having
obtained that object, it does not know the truth of itself, it forgets itself!
As Shrimad Rajchandraji said in his characteristic style, "You have forgotten
yourself, in what darkness are you?" Such a ridiculous story is created! "I am
not my own form, I am attracted to the pleasant object, I have turned upside
down, with the water of the thirst for objects." - After the origin of the
thought of Shri Devchandraji, great men like Vaddhamana Swami thought again and
again that this living being has been born and died countless times in the four
states of existence since time immemorial, yet its state of birth and death,
etc., does not diminish, how can it be diminished now? And what kind of mistake
does this living being continue to make, which has resulted in this much? In
this way, thinking again and again with utmost concentration, the mistake that
the Lord saw as a result of the relationship, has been said in the Jinaagama
again and again; that by knowing that mistake, the living being becomes a seeker
of liberation, free from that mistake. The mistake of the living being seems to
be infinite, but the fundamental mistake of all mistakes, which the living being
should first consider, is...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (540) yogadaSTisamucaya pratye doDe che, paNa te mithyA jala te jANe hAthatAdvI
daIne AvuM ne AvuM bhAgatuM ja jAya che! kAMI hAthamAM AvatuM nathI, ane
deDavAnA niSphaLa zramathI bicArA mRganI tRSNA chIpavAne badale ulaTI vadhatI
jAya che ! tema jaDa evA viSayapadArtha ane cetana evA AtmAne saMbaMdha thavo
asaMbhavita che, tathApi viparyAsarUpa daSTivibhramathI (Illusion and Delusion)
te jaDapadArthamAM AtmabuddhinA samAropathI te saMbaMdha bhAse che. te ja viSaya
mRgajala che. evA te jhAMjhavAnA pANIne sAcuM mAnIne, viSayataSNAthI Akula
banele mahamUDha jIvarU5 mRga tenuM pAna karavAnI durAzAthI pUra vege te pratye
deDe che, te jhAMjhavAnA pANIne mATe khUba jhAMvAM nAMkhe che, paNa mahAmAyAvI
evuM te mAyAjala te lAMbethI laTaka salAma karI jANe jIvanI viDaMbanA karatuM
hoya, ema dUra ne dUra bhAgatuM ja jAya che! ane A niSphaLa viSayAnuvAvanathI
bhavabhramaNujanya khedane lIdhe, patha samA viSayapipAsu jIvanI tRSNA zamavAne
badale ulaTI abhivRddhi pAme che, ane tethI mahA bhavabhramaNa duHkha sahavuM
paDe che. - A viparyAsa ja sarva duHkhanuM mULa che. te ja jIvane uMdhA pATA
baMdhAve che, anAtmAmAM Atmabuddhi upajAve che, para vastumAM buddhino vizvama
karAve che. A anAdi avidyArUpa viparyAsathI bhogasAdhanarUpa dehAdimAM
Atmabuddhi upaje che, Apa ApakuM dehAdithI AtmAne abhinna mAnI huM dehAdirUpa
chuM evI miyAmati bhUla gayA !" udbhave che. eTale pachI svasvarUpathI bhraSTa
thayela AtmA iMdriyadvArathI pravartate rahI viSayamAM paDI jAya che, ane te
viSayane pAmIne pote pitAne tattvathI jANatuM nathI, pote potAne bhUlI jAya che!
zrImad rAjacaMdrajIe lAkSaNika zailImAM bhAkhyA pramANe "Apa ApakuM bhUla gayA,
Inase kayA aMdhera?" enA jevI mahAhAsyAspada vArtA bane che ! "huM DI nija rUpa,
ramya para pudgale, jhI UlaTa ANI, viSaya tRSNAjale.-zrI devacaMdrajI vicAranI
utpatti thayA pachI vaddhamAna svAmI jevA mahAtmA puruSe pharI pharI vicAryuM ke
A jIvanuM anAdikALathI cAre gati viSe anaMtathI anaMtavAra janmavuM maravuM
thayAM chatAM, haju te janma-maraNAdi sthiti kSINa thatI nathI, te have kevA
prakAre kSINa karavAM? ane evI kaI bhUla A jIvanI rahyA karI che ke, je bhUlanuM
ATalAM sudhI pariNamavuM thayuM che? A prakAre pharI pharI atyaMta ekAgrapaNe
sabaMdhanAM vaddhamAna pariNAme vicAratAM vicAratAM je bhUla bhagavAne dIThI che
te jinAgamamAM ThAma ThAma kahI che; ke je bhUla jANIne tethI rahita mumukSu
jIva thAya jIvanI bhUla jotAM te anaMta vizeSa lAge che, paNa sarva bhUlanI
bIjabhUta bhUla je jIve prathamamAM prathama vicAravI ghaTe che,

Page #617 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The wise vision sees the object as a beggar, skilled in begging. (54) The one
who thinks of a fault, thinks of all faults, and the one who removes a fault,
removes all faults. What living being would ever think of a small fault and want
to get rid of it, but it is a duty, and the desire to get rid of many such
faults easily becomes the cause of getting rid of the root fault. ”Shrimad
Rajchandra, Patrank 413. (500) The root cause of all these faults is the
ignorance of the self-nature or the opposite of self-knowledge in the other,
'You have forgotten your own!' This is the biggest central fault. From this root
fault, a tradition of other faults arises, the subject falls so much that its
tendency becomes a beggar of objects. It becomes so absorbed in the objects of
the five senses that it becomes a skilled beggar, forgetting its original form
of the father, and considering the object as its all, it remains engrossed in
its friction day and night! And due to the thirst for objects, it becomes hot
and constantly experiences suffering, yet it does not leave the objects, nor
does it leave the objects! And like a bee of lust, it keeps buzzing behind it!
This object-loving living being, in the Shri Upamiti Bhavprapanch Katha, the
great Siddharsi has described in an unparalleled style, like a skilled beggar,
who strives for everything, and takes a begging bowl in his hand and wanders day
and night for the sake of begging for objects! As if “This living being wanders
endlessly in this world city, in high and low houses, in the form of birth
marks, under the influence of the hope and fear of objects. “The body is weak
due to hunger, he begs from house to house, he takes a begging bowl in his hand,
he wanders day and night, he is condemned. The great fire of all-pervading
anger, there the conscious self is attached; Oh mother! Please save me!' He
cries out in such a humble voice. Fever, madness combined, suffering from pain
and suffering; He is the abode of all diseases, he is especially disturbed by
the pain of suffering. He will get alms, he will get that house, etc., he thinks
this; The mind becomes full of alternatives, it goes filled with anger. The
place of compassion for the saints, the place of laughter for the believers, the
abode of worms for the children, the special example for the sinners.” -Shri U.
B. Pr. Katha, Pr. 1 (Day. Bhagwandasakrut Sapghamgha Translation) “This living
being, who wanders endlessly in the world, these words, etc., objects, and these
friends, wealth, gold, etc., and these worms, stories, etc., other worldly
things

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 kAMta daSTi viSayane bhikhArI nipuNya ka (54) ke je bhUlane vicAra karyAthI
sarve bhUlane vicAra thAya che, ane je bhUlanA maTavAthI seve bhUla maTe che.
kaI jIva kadApi nAnA prakAranI bhUlano vicAra karI te bhUlathI chUTavA I che,
paNa te kartAvya che, ane tevI aneka bhUlathI chUTavAnI IcchA mULa bhUlathI
chUTavAnuM saheje kAraNa thAya che. "zrImad rAjacaMdra, patrAMka 413. (500) A
sarva bhUlanI bIjabhUta bhUla te AtmasvarUpanuM ajJAna athavA paravatumAM
AtmabuddhirUpa viparyAya che, "Apa ApakuM bhUlI gayA !' e ja moTAmAM moTI
kendrastha bhUla che. te mUlagata bhUlathI bIjI bhUlanI paraMparA nIpaje che, te
viSayano eTalI hada sudhI AtmAnuM patana thAya che ke tenI vRtti viSayAkAra
bhikhArI banI jAya che. paMca iMdriyanA viSayomAM te eTale badhe tanmaya thaI
nipuNyaka raMka jAya che ke te pitAnuM mULa svarUpa sAva bhUlI jaI, viSayamAM ja
| sarvasva mAnI tenI gaSaNamAM ahoniza maMDyo rahe che ! ane viSayatRSNAthI A ne
tapta banI niraMtara duHkha anubhave che, chatAM te viSayone kI viSayono keDo
mUkate nathI ! ne viSTAnA bhramaranI peThe tenI pAchaLa pAchaLa bhamyA kare che
! A te viSayakhubhukSu jIva zrI upamiti bhavaprapaMca kathAmAM mahAtmA
siddharSie anupama zailIthI tAdazya varNavelA te nipuNyaka raMkanA jevuM samasta
ceSTita kare che, ne karamAM ghaTapAtra laI rAtadivasa viSayakadannanI
bhikSArthe bhame che ! jemake " A jIva A saMsAranagaramAM aparApara janma
lakSaNarUpa UcA-nIcA gRhamAM viSaya-kadananA AzApAzane vaza thaI avirAmapaNe
bhamyA kare che. "kSudhAthI jasa durbala deha, gRhe gRhe bhikSAthe teha
karamAMhi grahone ghaTapAtra, nindAte bhamate dinarAtra. sarvAgI mahAghAta
utApa, tihAM anugata cetana Apa; ya mADI! re karajo trANu!' pokAre evI dIna
vANa. javara kucha unmAda saMyukta, zUlapIDita ne pAmI yukta; sarva rogane teha
nivAsa, vedanAvege vihala khAsa. pAmIza bhikSA te te geha, ItyAdika ciMtavata
eha; vikalpAkula manamAM thAya, raudradhyAna bharate jAya. saMtane karuNanuM
sthAna, mAnIeAne hAsya nidAna bAlane kIDana AvAsa, udAharaNa pApIne khAsa." -zrI
u. bha. pra. kathA, pra. 1 (De. bhagavAnadAsakRta sapaghamagha anuvAda)
"saMsArane viSe ahoniza paryaTana karatA A jIvanA je A zabdAdi viSaya ane je A
baMdhuvarga-dhana-suvarNAdi, ane je kIDa-vikathA Adi anya paNa saMsAra

Page #618 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(542) It is appropriate to know the nature of *kaḍan* because the collection of
*gaḍaṣṭi* is the cause, and it is due to the *gṛddhi* motive, the cause of
*rāga* and other emotions, and the cause of the accumulation of *karma* in the
form of great indigestion, and the cause of the *kaḍan*. (U.B.P. Katha) Such a
*kaḍan* is the type of *bhikṣā* that this being desires to eat, and it is also
the type of *chakravartī* that he desires. And this *chakravartī* also appears
to be like a lowly *raṅka* to the *sat-sādhu*s, so what is the point of asking
about the remaining states?  And even though this being is filled with *kaḍan*
like wealth, objects, and spouses, his desires are not extinguished, but rather
his thirst grows even stronger. Because just as a traveler who is overcome by
thirst in the intense heat of summer, whose body is burning with fever, and who
has fainted, does not experience any decrease in his thirst even when he drinks
from a vast reservoir in a dream, so too does this being experience this with
objects and so on. It is like this: This being, who has been revolving in the
endless cycle of existence, has previously obtained countless words and so on in
the realm of the gods, has obtained countless precious jewels, has enjoyed with
beautiful women who would break the world of husbands, and has enjoyed the
pleasures of the three worlds. Yet, this being is like someone with an empty
stomach who has been starved for a long time, and he does not know anything
about the stories of the devotees of the remaining days! He is simply consumed
by his desires! Therefore, he does not experience satisfaction, but his hunger
only increases!  –Śrī U.B.P. Katha (D, Bhagavān Dās M, Mehta's translation) This
being experiences all these misfortunes because he runs after this *kaḍan* like
a mirage, and he does not cross the ocean of existence. Because he has a strong
attachment and false belief in the illusion of *māyā*, he does not have the
desire to cross it, and he remains stuck in the mud of objects like a pig!  *sa
tatra bhavo-dvigṇo yathā tiṣṭhaty-asaṁśayam | mokṣa-mārge 'pi hi tathā bhoga-
jambāla-mohitaḥ ||168||*  *Vṛtti:* *sa* - he, who has a strong attachment to the
water of *māyā*, *ta* - there, in the path, in the way, *mohita* - he is
deluded, *bhavo-dvigṇo* - he is troubled by existence, *caṇā* - like a chickpea,
this is an example, *tiṣṭhaty-asaṁśayam* - he remains without doubt. *jala-
buddhinaḥ samācātho* - like someone who is deluded by water, *mokṣa-mārge 'pi
hi* - even in the path of liberation, which has endless qualities, *tathā* - so,
*asaṁśaya-rithi-tiṣṭhaty* - he remains without doubt. *mohita* - he is deluded
by *bhoga-jambāla* - the entanglement of enjoyment, and so on.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (542) gadaSTisamuccaya kAraNa heya, te gRddhihetupaNAthI rAgAdi bhAvonA
kAraNapaNAne laIne viSaya kadannanA ane karma saMcayarUpa mahA ajIrNanA
nimittapaNane laIne kadanta jANavA manoratha yegya che." (u. bha. pra. kathA)
evI te kadannarUpa bhikSA bhakSaNa karavA Icchato A jIva nAnA prakAranA viSaya
saMbaMdhI mAro kare che,thAvat te cakravartIpaNAne mane ratha paNa kare che. ane
A cakravattI paNa bhagavAna satasAdhuone kSudra raMka jevo pratibhAse che, te
pachI zeSa avasthAonuM te pUchavuM ja zuM?" ane AvA kadanta jevA A dhana-viSaya-
kalatrAdithI pUrAI rahyA chatAM A jIvane abhilASAne viccheda thatuM nathI,
eTaluM ja nahiM paNa tenI tRSA vizeSa gADhapaNe abhivRddhi pAme che. kAraNa ke
jema gADha grISmamAM davadAhathI tApa pAmela zarIravALA, pipAsAthI-tarasathI
abhibhUta cetanAvALA, mUcchathI DhaLI paDelA evA keI pathikane tyAM ja
svapnadarzanamAM, prabala kallebamAlAthI Akula evA ghaNuM ghaNuM mahA
jalAzayasamUhe pItAM paNa jarAya tRSAnI nyUnatA upajAvatA nathI, tema A jIvane
paNa A viSayAdi vatta che. te A prakAre:-anAdi saMsAramAM parAvartana karI
rahelA A jIve pUrve devane viSe anaMtIvAra nirupacarita evA zabdAdi bhego prApta
karelA che, anaMta amUlya ratnarAzio meLavelA che, patinA vizvamene khaMDita
kare evA vilAsinIvRdo sAthe vilAsa karelA che, tribhuvanAtizAyinI nAnA prakAranI
kIDAethI kIDana kareluM che. tathApi jANe mahAbubhakSAthI-bhUkhathI kRza
udaravALo hoya ema A jIva zeSa dinanA bhakta vRttAMtane kAMI paNa jANa nathI !!
kevala tenA abhilASathI zoSAya che !!! -tethI tRpti na tene thAya, paNa bubhakSA
vadhatI jAya !" ' -zrI u. bha. pra. kathA (DI, bhagavAnadAsa ma, mahetAkRta
anuvAda) AvI kadannarUpa A viSaya mRgatRSNAnI pAchaLa doDavAthI A jIvane A badhI
anartha paraMparA sAMpaDe che, ane tene bhavasAgaranuM ullaMghana thatuM nathI,
kAraNa ke mAyAjAlarUpa te mAyAjalamAM tene gADha abhiniveza-mithyA Agraha che,
eTale te tene ullaMghI javAnI hAma bhIDate nathI, ane jyAM che tyAMne tyAM eTale
ke viSaya-kAdavamAM DukkaranI jema paDayo rahe che !! sa tatra bhavodvigno yathA
tiSThatyasaMzayam  /  mokSamArge'pi hi tathA bhogajambAlamohitaH  // 168 //
vRttiH-sa-te, mAyAmAM jene jalane daDha Aveza che te, tA-tyAM ja, pathamAM,
mArgamAM moniHbhadvigna hoI, caNA-jema, e udAharaNanA upanyAsa athe che,
tiraMgAya-niHsaMya sthiti ja kare che.-jalabuddhinA samAcatho, mokSamADapi hi-
nAnAdi lakSavALA mokSamArgamAM paNa, tathA-tema asaMzaya rithati kare che.
monarannATohita -bhegajaMbAlathI-bheganibaMdhana detAdi prapaMcathI mehita evo
te ema artha che.

Page #619 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Kanta Dristi: State in Bhava, Self-Consciousness in the External Body  (543)
Just as one who is bewildered, remains steadfast in the path, so too, one who is
deluded by the allure of enjoyment, remains steadfast in the path of liberation.
**Meaning:** Just as one who is bewildered, remains steadfast in the path, so
too, one who is deluded by the allure of enjoyment, remains steadfast in the
path of liberation.  **Commentary:** The Bhagavata Purusha, who has a strong
attachment to the water in the illusionary world, just as he remains steadfast
in the path due to the influence of the water-consciousness, so too, he remains
steadfast in the path of liberation, which is characterized by knowledge and
other qualities, due to the delusion caused by the body and other intricacies,
which are the cause of enjoyment.  The meaning of this is that the Bhagavata
Purusha, who has an attachment to the water-consciousness in the illusionary
world, due to the preconceived notion that this water is real and true, remains
steadfast in the path, suffering from anxiety and sorrow due to the world.
However, he does not progress towards liberation, knowing that there is no good
in this. He does not make an effort to cross the ocean of the world, but remains
steadfast in the enjoyment, dwelling in the enjoyment.  Similarly, he remains
steadfast in the path of liberation, which is characterized by knowledge and
other qualities, due to the delusion caused by the body and other intricacies,
which are the cause of enjoyment. This means that he remains stuck where he is,
he does not progress. The implication is that just as he remains steadfast in
the path of Bhava, he also remains steadfast in the path of liberation, not
progressing further. In other words, he remains submerged in the ocean of Bhava
and does not progress towards liberation.  In this way, the soul, forgetting its
original, inherent, pure form from time immemorial, is self-conscious in the
external object due to ignorance, which is the form of Avidya or Mithyatva.  Due
to the long-standing habit of identifying with the body and other external
objects, his self-consciousness has become so externalized that it has taken
deep roots. This has given rise to the perverse notion that "the body and other
external objects are me." Due to the long association with the inert, he has
become like the inert!  Thus, the soul, which is grasped by the self-
consciousness in the body and other external objects, is called the external
soul. This external soul, which is far from self-knowledge, forgets its own
form, becomes deluded by the senses, and considers its body to be the soul. In
the human body...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 kAMtA daSTi : bhavamAM sthiti, bahiratmA-dehamAM Atmabuddhi (543) tyAM ja
ni:zaMka sthiti kare, bhadvigna te jema; gajabAle mohiye, mokSapathe paNa tema.
168 artha -te jema tyAM jamArgamAM, bhadvigna hoI, ni:saMzaya sthiti kare che,
tema mekSamArgamAM paNa bhegabAlathI mahita e te sthiti kare che. vivecana
mAyAjalamAM jene jalane daDha abhiniveza che, e te bhegatatva puruSa jema
jalabuddhinA AvezathI, bhadvigna rahI, tyAM ja mArgamAM asaMzaya sthiti kare
che, tema jJAnAdi lakSaNavALA mokSamArgamAM paNa bhoganA kAraNarUpa dehAdi
prapaMcathI mAhita evo te ni:saMzaya "sthiti' kare che. Ano Azaya ema samajAya
che ke-mAyAjalamAM jene jalabuddhine abhiniveza che, evo bhagatava puruSa, A
jala sAcuM che-kharekharUM che, evA bAMdhI lIdhelA pUrvagraharUpa -
mithyAbhAvane lIdhe, saMsArathI udvega-dukha pAmate rahI, tyAM ja mArgamAM
bhavamAM sthiti: sthiti kare che, paNa AmAM kAMI sAra nathI ema jANI te saMsAra
mekSamAge sAgarane oLaMgI javA AgaLa vadhatuM nathI, puruSArtha karatuM nathI,
paNa "sthiti" eTale te bhegamAM ja sthiti kare che, bhogamAM ro-pacce rahe che.
temaja bhegakAraNarUpa dehAdi prapaMcathI mehamUDha banIne, te jJAnAdi
lakSaNavALA mekSamAgamAM paNa "sthiti" kare che, eTale ke jyAM che tyAMne tyAM
aTakI rahe che-thebhI rahe che, paDyo rahe che, paNa AgaLa vadhatuM nathI.
tAtparya ke jema te bhavamArgamAM nivAsarUpa sthiti kare che, tema mekSamArgamAM
paNa AgaLa pragati na karavArUpa sthiti' kare che. arthAt te bhavasamudramAM
nimagna rahe che, ane mokSamArge AgaLa vadhatA nathI. te A prakAre - A AtmA
anAdithI potAnA mULa sahaja zuddha svarUpane bhUlI gayA che. A svarUpaajJAnarUpa
avidyA athavA mithyAtvathI te parapadArthamAM Atmabuddhi karI rahyo che. anAdi
kALanA adhyAsathI dehAdi paravastumAM tenI Atmabuddhi eTalI bahirAtmAH badhI
sajajaDa thaI gaI che. eTalA badhA UMDA mULa ghAlI gaI che ke dehamAM "dehAdi te
ja hu" evI viparyAsa buddhi-viparIta mati tene upajI che. Atmabuddhi jaDanA
dIrghakAlanA sahavAsathI te jANe jaDa jevo thaI gayo che ! Ama kAyAdikamAM
AtmabuddhithI grahAyelo jIva bahirAtmA kahevAya che. AtmajJAnathI parAkSukha e A
bahirAtmA potAnA svarUpanuM bhAna bhUlI, IdriyadvArAthI kurAyamAna thaI, potAnA
dehane AtmApaNe mAnI bese che. manuSya dehamAM

Page #620 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(544) A person who is ignorant of the true nature of the soul considers the soul
residing in a human body as a human, the soul residing in a non-human body as a
non-human, the soul residing in a celestial body as a celestial being, and the
soul residing in a hellish body as a hellish being. But they do not understand
that the soul is not the body, it is not the physical form. The soul is the
eternal, unchanging, self-aware, infinite knowledge and power. They mistakenly
identify the soul with the body, mistaking the inanimate body for the soul. This
mistaken identification of the soul with the body leads to a false sense of
self, and this false sense of self leads to delusion about relationships like
wife, children, etc. This delusion gives rise to a strong karmic imprint called
Avidya, which leads to the belief that the body is the soul. This identification
of the soul with the body is the root cause of all worldly suffering.  "The body
is inert, the body is inert, the karma that binds the body, know the true nature
of the soul. The soul is not the body, the soul is not the body, I have
understood this truth, the fourfold unity. Namo Prabhu." - Shri Devchandraji.
Because of this mistaken identification of the soul with the body, the soul
engages in activities related to the body and its senses. It strives to acquire
wealth and other material possessions, which are considered tools for fulfilling
desires. It develops attachment to things that are favorable and aversion to
things that are unfavorable. It becomes angry towards those who stand in the way
of its desires. It becomes proud and arrogant when it obtains even the smallest
of pleasures, like a peacock dancing with pride. It becomes greedy for more and
more, resorting to deceit and trickery to gain its desires, deceiving itself and
others. In this way, the soul becomes entangled in the cycle of desires and
passions, creating a web of karma and suffering, and becoming trapped in the
cycle of birth and death. This cycle of suffering is driven by the mistaken
identification of the soul with the body, which leads to desires and passions.
"The soul, turning away from the knowledge of its own true nature, identifies
itself with the body through the senses. It mistakenly believes that the soul
residing in a human body is a human, the soul residing in a non-human body is a
non-human, the soul residing in a celestial body is a celestial being, and the
soul residing in a hellish body is a hellish being. But it does not understand
that the soul is not the body, it is not the physical form. The soul is the
eternal, unchanging, self-aware, infinite knowledge and power. Seeing the
inanimate body as similar to its own, the ignorant soul mistakenly identifies it
as the soul. This mistaken identification of the soul with the body leads to
delusion about relationships like wife, children, etc. This delusion gives rise
to a strong karmic imprint called Avidya, which leads to the belief that the
body is the soul. This identification of the soul with the body is the root
cause of all worldly suffering. Therefore, one should abandon this mistaken
identification and realize the true nature of the soul, which is beyond the body
and the senses." - Shri Pujyapada Swami.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (544) gadaSTisamucaya rahelA AtmAne te manuSya mAne che, tiryaMca dehamAM
rahelA AtmAne tiryaMca mAne che, deva dehamAM rahelA AtmAne deva mAne che, ane
nAraka dehamAM rahelA AtmAne te nAraka mAne che, paNa tatvathI huM pote tevo
nathI, te te dehaparyAyarUpa nathI, huM te anaMtAnaMta jJAnazaktine svAmI
saMvedya e acala sthitivALe zAzvata AtmA chuM, ema te mUDha jANatA nathI. Ama
potAnA dehamAM AtmAne adhyAsa karatA e A bahirAtmA paranA AtmAne jyAM vAsa che
evA svadeha sadeza acetana paradehane A pArake deha mAnI bese che. ane Ama
dehamAM svaparanA mithyA adhyavasAyanemAnyatAne lIdhe, jene AtmAnuM bhAna nathI
evA anAtmaNa janane strI-putrAdi saMbaMdhI vibhrama varte che, ane temAMthI
avidyA nAmane daDha saMskAra janme che, ke jethI leka puna: deha e ja AtmA evuM
abhimAna dhare che. A dehamAM Atmabuddhi e ja saMsAra duHkhanuM mULa che." jaDa
cala jaDa cala karma je dehane hejI, jANyuM Atama tatva; bahirAtama bahirAtamatA
meM grahI hojI, caturage ekatva. namiprabha0"-zrI devacaMdrajI. dehamAM A
Atmabuddhine lIdhe ja jIva tenA lAlana-pAlanAthe viSayamAM pravRtti kare che,
ane te viSayaprAptinA sAdhanarUpa dhanAdinA upArjanamAM pravRtta thAya che, tenI
prAptimAM anukULa thAya te pratye rAga kare che, pratikULa pratye dveSa dhare
che. temAM koI vacce ADuM Ave tenA pratye krodha kare che. tuccha kadana jevA
kaMIka viSayanI prApti thatAM te anaMtagaNuM abhimAna dharI kAkIDAnI jema nAce
che. ane vizeSa vizeSano lobha dharate rahI tenA lAbha mATe aneka prakAranA
chaLaprapaMca-mAyAkapaTa karI potAne ane parane chetare che. ItyAdi prakAre jIva
viSayane arthe kaSAya kare che, ane tethI hAthe karIne A bhavaprapaMca ubhuM
karIne, saMsAra paribhramaNadu:kha pAmI, te bhadvigna bane che. Ama dehamAM
AtmabuddhirUpa mULathI upajatA viSaya-kaSAyathI A jIvanuM saMsAracakra cAlyA
kare che. x"bhiraatmendriydvaaraigtmjnyaanpraangmukhH| sphuritazcAtmano
dehamAtmatvenAdhyavasyati  /  /  naradehasthamAtmAnamavidvAnmanyate naram  /
tiryaJcaM tiryagaGgasthaM surAGgasthaM suraM tathA  //  nArakaM nArakAGgasthaM
na svayaM tttvtstthaa| anaMtAnaMtadhIzaktiH svsNbedyo'clsthitiH|| svadehasadRzaM
dRSTvA paradehamacetanam  /  parAtmAdhiSThitaM mUDhaH paratvenAdhyavasyati  //
svaparAdhyavasAyena deheSvaviditAtmanAm  /  varttate vibhramaH pusAM
putrabhAryAdigocaraH  /  /  avidyAsaMjJitastasmAtsaMskAro jAyate dRDhaH  /  yena
loko'Ggameva svaM punarapyabhimanyate  /  /  mUlaM saMsAraduHkhasya deha eva
AtmadhIstataH  /  tyasvainAM prvishedntrbhirvyaapRtendriyH||" -zrI
pUjyapAdasvAmIjIta zrI samAdhizataka

Page #621 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Kanta's vision, the state of non-progression on the path of liberation due to
the enjoyment of objects. (545) Filled with attachment, the enemy (of the soul)
has troubled me, in the manner of a lake, much at night; under the influence of
anger, pure virtues do not play, I am intoxicated with objects in this world...
"O Lord, my master, be merciful to your servant." - Shri Devchandraji. It is
remembered that this wandering, only by self-destruction, does not bring
indifference to the soul? Did it not know that being angry with others, being
proud, being attached, being greedy, or doing otherwise is bad? Of course, it
should have known, but it did not know, and this again gives dispassion to
wander again. - Shrimad Rajchandra, Patranka 115 (128) And then, in this
trivial, object-like pleasure, this deluded soul is so colored, so engrossed in
all the senses, that it remains immersed in its attainment, and considers it
beautiful, it does not know anything else. Because it has not even dreamed of
the taste of delicious food. So, just as a pig likes to lie in mud, so it likes
to be engrossed in objects. Just as the fly of excrement liked the smell of
excrement, so this fly of objects likes the smell of objects! "It considers it
beautiful, a rogue, it does not know anything else, a fool, it has not even
attained the taste of delicious food." U. B. Pr. 1 (Translation by Dr.
Bhagvandas M. Mehta) Thus, this soul, colored by the attachment of the fruits of
actions, colored by the senses, becoming the receiver and protector of external
objects, becoming attached to the part of external objects, wanders in the world
for an infinite time. And thus, missing the welfare of the father, this greatly
deluded soul, like a beggar, takes up the burden of others, and needlessly
suffers! The nectar of the words of the great souls of the liberated souls is:
"The color of the senses of the fruits of actions, the feeling of receiving from
others... O Lord! Receiving from others, enjoying from others, is this nature?
... O Lord!" - Shri Devchandraji. The action in which the soul is colored, there
is its state, this is the opinion of the Jinas, it is true. The thirty great
Mahamahaniya's Stanak Tirthankaras have said, it is true. - Shrimad Rajchandra,
Patranka 148 (Hathnedh, 2-19)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 kAMtA daSTi bhogatatvanI kSamArga apragati-sthiti (545) rAga bharyo mAha vairI
naDyo, lekanI rItamAM ghaNuMya rAte; krodha vaza dhamadhamya, zuddha guNa nava
rame, bha bhavamAMhi huM viSaya mAte..... tAra ho tAra prabhu ! muja sevaka
bhaNI."--zrI devacaMdrajI vaLI smaraNa thAya che ke e paribhramaNa kevaLa
svacchedathI karatAM jIvane udAsInatA kema na AvI? bIjA cha para kodha karatAM,
mAna karatAM, mAyA karatAM, lobha karatAM ke anyathA karatAM te mAThuM che ema
yathAyogya kAM na jANyuM? arthAta ema jANavuM joItuM hatuM, chatAM na jANyuM e
vaLI pharI paribhramaNa karavAne vairAgya Ape che." I. -zrImad rAjacaMdra,
patrAMka 115 (128) ane pachI te te tuccha kadanna jevA viSayasukhamAM A
mehamUDha jIvane eTale badho raMga lAgI jAya che, eTale badhe tanmaya rasa jAme
che, ke tenI prAptimAM ! nimagna rahe che, ane tene ja suMdara mAne che, bIjuM
kAMI te bApaDa jANatA nathI. kAraNa ke susvAdu bhojanano svAda tene svapna paNa
lAdhyo nathI. eTale Dukkarane jema kAdavamAM paDayA rahevuM game che, tema tene
viSaya -kadanamAM racyA-pacyA rahevuM game che. te viSTAnA bhramarane jema
viSTAnI sugaMdhI ja sArI lAgatI hatI, tema A viSayanA bhramarane viSayanI gaMdha
ja sArI lAge che ! tene suMdara mAne rAMka, bIjuM na jANe te varAka, susvAdu
bhojanano svAda, ravane paNa ene na prApta." u. bha. pra. 1 (Do. bhagavAnadAsa
ma. mahetAkRta anuvAda) Ama para pariNatinA rAgIpaNuM, para rasaraMge rakta
thayela A jIva, para vastuno grAhaka ane rakSaka banI, paravastunA bhAgamAM
Asakta thaIne anaMta kALa paryata saMsAramAM rakhaDe che. ane Ama pitAnuM
Amahita cUkI, A mahAmehamUDha jIva veThIA piThIAnI peThe pArakI veTha uThAvI,
hAthe karIne nAhakano herAna herAna thAya che ! bhAvitAtmA mahAtmAonA vacanAmRta
che ke papariNati rasa raMgatA, paragrAhakatA bhAva....nAtha re! para karatA
para bhogatA, o thaye eha svabhAva ?....nAtha re !" zrI devacaMdrajI. je kriyAne
viSe jIvane raMga lAge che. tene tyAM ja sthiti hoya che, e je jinano abhiprAya
te satya che. trIza mahAmahanIyanAM sthAnaka zrI tIrthakare kahyAM che te sAcA
che."-zrImad rAjacaMdra, patrAMka 148 (hAthanedha, 2-19)

Page #622 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(546) Yagdadisamuccaya And thus, in the essence-less ocean of Maya, those who
have a strong attachment, a strong attachment, such a Bhagatattva Purusha does
not have the vision of his pure Atmaswaroop, so how can he enter Mokshamarg?
Those who have gone astray in the labyrinth of the body, those who are confused
by the Maya-prapaंच in the body, those who are trapped in the intricate,
illusory web of the subject, which is the ocean of Maya, those who are colored
by the Kshaya-rang due to the Rag-dvesh they do, and therefore those who have
fallen into the endless cycle of Bhava-prapaंच, - such a Maha-meh-mudha Jeeva
finds it difficult to attain Moksha. His state is in Mithyatva, so he does not
move forward, he does not progress; because until the Kshaya is subsided, until
there is no inner detachment from the subject, until there is no desire other
than Moksha, until then, the eligibility to enter Mokshamarg is not attained,
the true Mithyatva · Gunasthanak is not attained, and the first Mitra-darshti is
not opened, then how can the above Bhagatattva Purusha enter Mokshamarg? And how
can he move forward in it? How can he progress by attaining the Gunasthanas one
after the other? Mokshamarg Aprogression State Thus, the Bhagatattva Purusha,
who has the knowledge of the Tatva in his Bhaga, remains in the world, that is,
he suffers endless suffering for an endless period of time. And he also remains
in Mokshamarg. That is, he does not progress by developing his qualities, he
remains where he is, like a worm! And thus, his suffering of rotation continues,
and he does not get the remedy to remove it. So he suffers in both ways. U2 5
Mimamsabhavatonityam na moho'syaam yato bhavet | Atastavasamaveshaatsadaiv hi
hitodayah || 169 || Nitya Mimamsa Bhava, Maahu Ehma Nhoy; Ethi Tatvasamavesathi,
Sada Hidaay Hoy. 169 A:- Nitya Mimamsa Bhava, due to this vision, Maahu is not
there, so due to Tatvasamavesha, there is always Hito-day. Vritti:-
Mimamsamavaton- Mimamsa Bhava, Sadvichar Bhava, Nisyan- Nitya. Savakal, Na
Moddoda Yato Mavat, because Maadu is not there in this vision, Atah- therefore,
Sarvasamavesha- Tatvasamavesharoop Karan Thaki, Savaiv Hi Hito-ty:- in this
vision, there is definitely always Hitaay.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (546) yAgadadisamuccaya ane Ama bhAgarUpa niHsAra mAyAjalamAM ja jene dRDha
ra'ga lAgyA che, dRDha abhiniveza upajyo che, evA bhAgatattva puruSane potAnA
zuddha AtmasvarUpanuM darzana hetu nathI, eTale mAkSamAga mAM tene praveza paNa
kayAMthI hoya ? dehArdinI bhUlabhUlAmaNIbharI jakhAlamAM je sAi gayA che,
dehArdi mAyAprapa`camAM AtmabuddhinA vyAmAhathI je mujhAI gayA che, mAyAjalarUpa
viSayanI aTapaTI mAyAvI jAlamAM je aTavAi paDayo che, tenA nimitte rAgadveSa
karatA je kaSAyaraMgathI raMgAI rahyo che, ane tethI je bhavaprapa`canA anaMta
cakrAvAmAM paDI gayA che,- evA A mahAmehamUDha jIvane meAkSamA pAmavA paNa
muzkela thai paDe che. tenI mithyAtvamAM ja sthiti hAya che, tethI te AgaLa
vadhatA nathI, pragati karatA nathI; kAraNa ke jyAMlagI kaSAyanI upazAMtatA na
thai hAya, viSayAdi pratye aMtaraMga vairAgya na vattA hAya, mAkSa zivAya trIjI
kaI abhilASA na heAya, tyAMlagI meAkSamAga mAM praveza karavA yeAgya ceAgyatA
paNa prApta thatI nathI, sAcuM mithyAtva * guNasthAnaka' paNa prApta thatuM
nathI, ne prathama mitrAdaSTi paNa khUlatI nathI, teA pachI ukta bhegatattva
puruSanA meAkSamAga mAM praveza kayAMthI hAya? ne temAM te AgaLa kayAMthI vadhe?
uttarottara guNasthAnanI prAptithI pragati kema kare ? mekSamA apragatisthiti
Ama jene bhAgamAM tattvamuddhi che evA bhAgatattva puruSa sasAramAM 'sthiti'
kare che, arthAt ana ta kALasthiti paryaMta anaMta paribhramaNa du:khane pAme
che. ane meAkSamAga mAM paNa te ' sthiti 'ja kare che. arthAt guNavakAsa pAmI
AgaLa pragati karatA nathI, gaLIyA aLadanI jema jyAMne tyAM paDyo rahe che! ane
Ama tenuM paribhramaNa du:kha cAlu rahe che, ne tenA nivAraNanA upAya tene
maLatA nathI. eTale banne rIte te duHkhI thAya che. U2 5 mImAMsAbhAvato nityaM
na moho'syAM yato bhavet  /  atastavasamAvezAtsadaiva hi hitodayaH  //  169  //
nitya mImAMsA bhAvathI, mAhu ehamAM nhoya; ethI tattvasamAvezathI, sadA hidaya
hoya. 169 a:--nitya mImAMsA bhAvane lIdhe A dRSTimAM mAha hAtA nathI, ethI
karIne tattvasamAvezane lIdhe sadaiva hiteAdaya ja hAya che.
vRtti:-mImAMsAmAvato-mImAMsA bhAvathI, sadvicAra bhAvathI, nisyaM-nitya.
savakALa, na moddoDA yato mavet kAraNa ke A dRSTimAM mADu hotA nathI, ataH-ethI
karIne saravasamAveza--tavasamAvezarUpa kAraNa thakI, savaiva hi hitotya:-A
dRSTimAM cokkasa sadaiva hitAya ja hoya che.

Page #623 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Kant's Perspective: A Detailed Examination, Dasanami Examination  (547) This
perspective does not have attachment towards the essence of the eternal
examination. Therefore, due to the cause that is inclusive of the essence, the
certainty is always beneficial.  The essence examination, in this perspective,
is the position of the right-visioned knowledgeable person, who is a capable
essence-thinker and essence-examiner. Therefore, due to the continuous essence-
examination in the form of contemplation, there is no possibility of any
attachment here. Because, whoever understands the essence, does not become
attached. And, in the right-vision, the destruction of the cause of attachment
has already happened, and as one progresses on the path of yoga, the attachment
to character also gradually diminishes, therefore, there is a complete absence
of attachment.  The right-visioned person contemplates the essence in many ways.
For example,  The knowledgeable persons who have attained the pure self-form,
have described the following six stages as the most excellent dwelling places of
right-vision: (1) The first stage - The self exists. Just as there are objects
like pots and vessels, so too does the self exist. The examination of the second
stage - Just as there is evidence of the existence of pots and vessels due to
certain qualities, so too is there evidence of the existence of the self, which
is the consciousness-being that is self-illuminating, and the quality of which
is directly experienced. (2) The second stage - The self is eternal. Objects
like pots and vessels are temporary. The self is eternal. Pots and vessels are
objects that are associated with something else. The self is an object by
nature, because there is no experience of any cause for its origin.
Consciousness-being cannot be manifested from any associated substance,
therefore, it is uncreated. Being uncaused, it is imperishable, because whatever
is not created from any association, cannot be destroyed by any association. (3)
The third stage - The self is the doer. All objects are capable of action and
result. All objects are seen as having some result or action. The self is also
capable of action, therefore, it is the doer. This doership has been examined by
the three revered Jinas. By ultimate reality, it is the doer by nature's
transformation of its own form. By unrefined (without special association that
is fit to be experienced) practice, the self is the doer of the substance-karma.
By refined practice, it is the doer of houses, cities, etc. (4) The fourth stage
- The self is the experiencer. Whatever action there is, it is all fruitful, not
futile. Whatever is done, the experience of its fruit is directly experienced.
The fruit of poison is experienced by eating poison; the fruit of sugar is
experienced by eating sugar; the fruit of touching fire is experienced by
touching fire; the fruit of touching ice is experienced by touching ice. Just as
the fruit of touching ice does not remain unexperienced, so too, whatever result
the self experiences, whether it is pleasant or unpleasant, its fruit is also
experienced.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 kAMta daSTiH tharSada mImAMsA, dazanAmImAMsA (547) vivecana vaLI nitya
mImAMsAnA bhAvathI A daSTimAM meha hoto nathI. ethI karIne tatvanA samAvezarUpa
kAraNa thakI nizcaya ene sadAya hiteAdaya ja hoya che. tattva mImAMsA A daSTimAM
sthiti karata samyagadaSTi jJAnI puruSa samartha tatvaciMtaka-tatvamImAMsaka
hoya che. eTale niraMtara savicArarUpa mImAMsAnA-sUma tattvapaSaNanA hevApaNAne
lIdhe atre keIpaNa mohane saMbhava hoto nathI. kAraNake je tattva samaje che, te
meha pAmata nathI. ane samyagdaSTine darzanamaha te kArano kSaya thaI cUka che,
tathA yogamArgamAM AgaLa vadhatAM ene cAritramehanI paNa uttarottara kSINatA
thatI jAya che, eTale sarvathA mehano abhAva hoya che. samyagadaSTi puruSa aneka
prakAre tatvane sUma vicAra kare che. jema ke zuddha AtmasvarUpane pAmyA che evA
jJAnI puruSoe nIce kahyAM che te cha padane samyaggadarzananAM nivAsanAM
sarvotkRSTa sthAnaka kahyAM che -(1) paheluM pada AtmA che. jema ghaTapaTa Adi
padArtho che tema AtmA paNa che. papada mImAMsA amuka guNa hovAne lIdhe jema
ghaTapaTa Adi hovAnuM pramANa che, tema svaparaprakAzaka evI caitanya-sattAne
pratyakSa guNa jene viSe che evo AtmA hovAnuM pramANa che. (2) bIjuM pada-AtmA
nitya che. ghaTapaTa Adi padArtho amuka kALavarti che. AtmA trikALavatti che.
ghaTapaTAdi saMge karI padArtha che. AtmA svabhAve karIne padArtha che, kemake
tenI utpatti mATe keIpaNa sago anubhava cogya thatA nathI. koI paNa saMyegI
dravyathI cetana-sattA pragaTa thavA yogya nathI, mATe anutpanna che. asaragI
hovAthI avinAzI che, kemake jenI kaI saMgathI utpatti na hoya, teno koIne viSe
laya paNa hAya nahi. (3) trIju' pada-AtmA kartA che. sarva padArtha artha kriyA
saMpanna che. kaMI ne kaMI pariNAma kiyA sahita ja sarva padArtha jovAmAM Ave
che. AtmA paNa kriyA saMpanna che, mATe kartA che. te kartApaNuM trividha zrI
jine vivecyuM che, paramArthathI svabhAvapariNatie nija svarUpane kartA che.
anupacarita (anubhavamAM AvavA cogya vizeSa saMbaMdha sahita ) vyavahArathI te
AtmA dravyakarmano kartA che. upacArathI ghara, nagara Adine kartA che. (4)
cothuM pada AtmA bhoktA che. je je kaMI kriyA che te te sarva saphaLa che,
nirarthaka nathI. je kaMI paNa karavAmAM Ave tenuM phaLa bhogavavAmAM Ave e
pratyakSa anubhava che. viSa khAdhAthI viSanuM phaLa; sAkara khAvAthI sAkaranuM
phaLa agnisparzathI agnisparzanuM phaLa; hImane sparza karavAthI hImasparzanuM
jema phaLa thayA vinA rahetuM nathI, tema kaSAyAdi ke akaSAyAdi je kaMI pariNAme
AtmA pravarte tenuM phaLa paNa

Page #624 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(548) Yoga-drishti-samuccaya It is possible and it happens. The soul is the doer
of the action, therefore it is the enjoyer. (5) The fifth step is the Ma-ksha-
pad. - The one who has negated the doership of karma through reverse action, the
one who has negated the enjoyership through doership, that is also the avoidance
of karma. Because, even though there is intense suffering, etc., directly, but
due to its non-study, due to its ignorance, due to its suppression, its mildness
is seen, it appears to be capable of being destroyed; it can be destroyed. That
blindness is capable of being destroyed, therefore the pure nature of the soul,
which is devoid of it, is the form of Ma-ksha-pad. (6) The sixth step is the
remedy for Ma-ksha. - If the karma-bandha were to happen only occasionally, then
its liberation would never happen. But the means like knowledge, vision,
samadhi, detachment, devotion, etc., which are opposite in nature to karma, are
directly evident. By the power of these means, the karma-bandha becomes loose,
it is suppressed, it is destroyed. Therefore, that knowledge, vision, samayam,
etc., are the remedies for the Ma-ksha-pad. ’’ (For details, see) Shrimad
Rajchandra, Patranka 409 (493) Author: Nij Karyam; 66 The soul is eternal, it is
the enjoyer, and there is liberation, liberation is the remedy. Six standpoints
in brief, six visions also this; Understood by the Supreme, said By the knower
this. - Shri Atmasiddhi. “ Muni Suvrat Jinraj! My one request to the wise; The
soul principle, the world-teacher! This thought I say; Without knowing the soul
principle, the mind-samadhi is not attained. - Shri Anandghanaji. Furthermore,
this soul principle, regarding the six visions, the wise man explains in detail
as follows: (1) Some consider the soul principle to be undivided, but this soul
is seen to be doing actions, then who will enjoy the fruits of those actions?
(2) Some say that the inert and the conscious are both one soul, the stationary
and the mobile are the same. But in that, there is no occurrence of the
arrangement of happiness and sorrow, and the defect called Sankara arises, this
is seen by the mind when examined. (3) Some who are absorbed in self-vision say
that the soul principle is eternal, but in that, there is the defect of
destruction of the done karma, and the defect of arrival of the undone karma,
these are not seen by the foolish. Mimamsa “ Which blind one considers the soul
principle, seeing it doing actions; The fruits of the actions, who will enjoy?
Thus the mind asks. - Muni Suvrat.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (548 ) yogadRSTisamuccaya thavA ceAgya ja che, ane te thAya che. te kriyAne
AtmA kartA hovAthI bheAktA che. ( 5 ) pAMcamu' pada--makSapada che.-je anuparita
vyavahArathI kama'nuM kartApaNuM nirUpaNa karyuM", kartApaNuM hAvAthI
bhAktApaNuM nirUpaNa karyuM", te kama'nu' TaLavApaNuM paNa che, kemake pratyakSa
kaSAyAdinuM tIvrapaNuM heAya, paNa tenA anabhyAsathI, tenA aparicayathI, tene
upazama karavAthI tenuM maMdapaNuM dekhAya che, te kSINa thavA ceAgya dekhAya
che; kSINa thaI zake che. te te aMdhabhAva kSINa thaI zakavA ceAgya hAvAthI
tethI rahita evA je zuddha AtmasvabhAva te rUpa mekSapada che. ( 6 ) chaThTha
pada-te mekSanA upAya che.--jo kadI karyaMbaMdha mAtra thayA kare ema ja hAya
te| tenI nivRti keAI kALe sabhave nahI; paNa kama''dhathI viparIta svabhAvavALAM
evA jJAna, darzana, samAdhi, vairAgya, bhakatyAdi sAdhana pratyakSa che. je
sAdhananA baLe ka`baMdha zithila thAya che, upazama pAme che, kSINa thAya che.
mATe te jJAna, darzana sayamAdi meAkSa padanA upAya che. '' (vizeSa mATe juo)
zrImad rAjacaMdra, patrAMka 409 (493) kartA nija karyAM; 66 AtmA che te nitya
che, che che bhAktA vaLI meAkSa che, mekSa upAya sudha SaT sthAnaka saMkSepamAM,
SaT dazana paNa eha; samajAvA paramAne, kahyAM jJAnie ehu, ". -zrI Atmasiddhi. "
munisuvrata jinarAja ! muja eka vinati nisuNeA; Atama tattva karyu. jANyu'
jagataguru ! ehu vicAra muja kahiyeA; Atama tattva jANyA viNu nimA~la,
cittasamAdhi navi lahiMyA mu."--zrI AnaMdaghanajI. vaLI A Atmatattva saMbadhI
SaDkananI te tattvajJa puruSa A pramANe vizeSa paryAyeAcanA kare che: (1) kAI
Atmatattvane akhaMdha mAne che, paNa A AtmA kriyA karatA dekhAya che, te te
kriyAnuM phaLa kANu bhAgavaze ? ( 2 ) jaDa-cetana Sadana A banne eka ja AtmArUpa
che, sthAvara-jaMgama anne sarakhA che ema keAI kahe che. paNa temAM sukha-
duHkha vyavasthA nathI ghaTatI, ane saMkara nAmanuM dUSaNa Ave che, ema cittamAM
vicArI parIkSA karatAM jaNAya che. ( 3 ) AtmadarzInamAM lIna evA kAi kahe che ke
Atmatattva nitya ja che,' paNa temAM teA karelA karmanA vinAzarUpa kRtavinAza
doSa, ane nahi karelA karmInA AgamanarUpa akRtAgama doSa Ave che, te matihInane
dekhAtA nathI. mImAMsA " kai aMdha Atama tatta mAne, kariyA karatA dIse;
kriyAtaNu' phUla kahe| kuNu bhAgave? Ima pUchyuM citta rIse. munisuvrata.

Page #625 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  The Examination of the Path and its Resultant Vision  **Katha Darsti
Padanmimamsa, Atmatattvamimamsa**  (549) The inert and the conscious, this self
is one, like the stationary and the mobile; sorrow, happiness, and mixed
suffering arise, the mind contemplates and discerns. The Muni says, the self-
principle is eternal, by seeing the self; the destruction of the done, the
arrival of the undone, the defilement, is not seen by the foolish. Muni - Shri
Anandghanji  (4) Some say, "This soul is momentary, know it." But believing so,
the bondage, the arrangement of happiness and sorrow, will not diminish,
bringing this thought to mind is necessary. (5) Some say, "There is no separate
self-existence apart from the four elements." But the blind cannot see the cart,
what fault is there in the cart? - Thus, the mind, fallen into the predicament
of the confusion of the opinions of many disputants, does not attain
tranquility, and without truly understanding the self-principle, it does not
arise, how should the seeker of liberation act? "The worldly-minded say, the
soul is momentary, know it, bondage, happiness, sorrow will not diminish, bring
this thought to mind. Muni, the self-principle is separate from the four
elements, there is no separate existence; the blind cannot see the cart, what
fault is there in the cart? Muni, thus, the confusion of the opinions of many
disputants, fallen into the predicament, does not attain tranquility; for that,
I ask, without you, no one can tell the truth, Muni" - Shri Anandghanji.  Then,
the inner self (or the Supreme Self) answers him, "Oh self! Abandon all
partiality, and with the mind fixed on the one self-principle, free from
attachment, aversion, and delusion, begin! Whoever contemplates this self, does
not return to this, and knows that everything else is illusory, brings this
principle to mind, therefore, the side that brings about the discrimination of
body and soul is worthy of acceptance, and that is called the knower of the
truth." Therefore, the inner self again speaks to him, "Oh self-form, Anandghan
Prabhu! "Muni Suvrat! He who grants grace, "Let us attain the state of
Anandghan."  "The world-teacher, in turn, speaks, abandon all partiality; free
from attachment, aversion, and delusion, what is the self, fix your mind on it -
Muni Suvrat, whoever contemplates the self, does not return to this, knows that
everything else is illusory, brings this principle to mind. Muni, he who has
discrimination, accepts that side, he is called the knower of the truth: Muni
Suvrat, he who grants grace, let us attain the state of Anandghan. Muni" - Shri
Anandghanji.  Thus, the examination of the path and the resultant vision arising
from it, etc.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 katA daSTi padanamImAMsA, AtmatatvamImAMsA (549) jaDa cetana A Atama eka ja,
sthAvara jaMgama sarikhe; duHkha sukha saMkara dUSanuM Ave, citta vicArI je
parikhe. muni eka kahe nitya ja Atama tatva, Atama darizaNa lIne; kRtavinAza
akRtAgama dUSaNa, navi dekhe matihINe. muni--zrI AnaMdaghanajI (4) koI kahe che
ke "A AtmA kSaNika che ema jANe. paNa tema mAnatAM baMdhamekSa ke sukha-duHkhanI
vyavasthA nahiM ghaTe, e vicAra manamAM lAvavA egya che. (5) kaI vaLI ema kahe
che ke "cAra bhUta zivAyanI aLagI-judI evI AtmasattA ghaTatI nathI." paNa
AMdhaLe gADuM najare na bhALe temAM gADAMne ze doSa?--ema aneka vAdIonA
matavibhramarUpa saMkaTamAM paDI gayeluM citta samAdhi pAmatuM nathI, ane
yathArthapaNe Atmatatva samajyA vinA te samAdhi upaje ema nathI, te mumukSue
kema karavuM? "saugata matirAgI kahe vAdI, kSaNika e Atama jANo, baMdha mekSa
sukha dukha navi ghaTe, eha vicAra mana ANe. muni bhUta catuSka varjita
Atamatatta, sattA alagI na ghaTe; aMdha zakaTa je najara na dekhe, te zuM kIje
zakaTe? muni ema aneka vAdi matavibhrama, saMkaTa paDi na lahe; cittasamAdhi-te
mATe pUchuM, tuma viNa tatta keI na kahe muniva"--zrI AnaMdaghanajI. tyAre tene
aMtarAtmA (athavA paramAtmA) jANe javAba Ape che ke-aho Atmana ! tuM sarva
pakSapAta cheDI daI, rAga-dveSa-moha pakSathI varjita evA eka AtmatattvamAM
raDha lagADIne maMDI paDa! je koI A AtmAnuM dhyAna kare che te pharI AmAM AvatuM
nathI, ane bIjuM badhuMya vAjAla che ema jANe che, A tatva cittamAM lAve che,
mATe jenA vaDe karIne deha-AtmAne viveka upaje te ja pakSa grahaNa kare yogya
che, ane te ja tattvajJAnI kahevAya. eTale ene aMtarAtmA punaH belI UThe che ke
he AtmasvarUpa AnaMdaghana prabhu! "munisuvrata ! je kRpA kare che, "AnaMdaghana
pada lahIe." "vaLatuM jagaguru INi pere bhAkhe, pakSapAta saba ThaMDI; rAga-
dveSa-meha pakha varjita, Atama zuM raDha maMDI-munisuvrata Atama dhyAna dhare
je kou, so phira INameM nA've, vAjAla bIjuM sahu jANe, eha tatva citta lAve.
muni jiNe viveka dhariye pakha gRhiye, tattajJAnI te kahiye: munisuvrata je kRpA
kare che, AnaMdaghana pada lahiye. muni" -zrI AnaMdaghanajI. ItyAdi prakAre
padanI ane te parathI phalita thatA paDradarzananI mImAMsA karanAra

Page #626 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(550) This great knower of the truth, having abandoned all other five senses,
becomes absorbed in pure self-meditation, and contemplates that I am the pure,
conscious, self-existent soul, distinct from the body and the like. "Having
fallen from this great form, I fell into the objects through the senses. I
obtained those objects, and I" did not know me before by the truth! That which
does not grasp the ungraspable, and does not release the grasped, which knows
everything in every way, that self-conscious one, I am. Seeing me, who am the
self-knowledge-self-existent, in truth, passions and the like are extinguished
here, therefore there is no great enemy, nor any great dear friend. Not seeing
me, this world is not my enemy, nor my friend." Thus, the knower, having
abandoned the external self and established himself in the internal self, feels
that the Supreme Self is I, and I am the Supreme. Therefore, I am the one to be
worshipped by me, not anyone else, is the state. Having been freed from the
objects, I have surrendered to the self-existent, full of supreme bliss, who is
established in me by himself. " etc. In this way, he destroys the delusion of
perception through the contemplation of the self. And therefore, he develops the
supreme subtle knowledge where the self-experienced knowledge of the pure
consciousness, distinct from the body, prevails. Then, he has such a meditation
on that pure form that it tends to completely extinguish the conduct. For
example - Conduct is a great defeat | He is indifferent to all emotions, and he
considers the body only for the purpose of restraint, he does not conceive
anything else for any other reason, and he does not have even a little bit of
attachment to the body. He makes the yoga of mind, speech, and body as concise
as possible, and he makes the secrecy of the three concise yogas stable in the
self, and he mainly lives in the state of the body like a mountain. His self-
stability is so firm that he cannot be affected by fear of home, society, or
adversity. *"Having fallen from this great form, I fell into the objects through
the senses. I obtained those objects, and I" did not know me before by the
truth! That which does not grasp the ungraspable, and does not release the
grasped, which knows everything in every way, that self-conscious one, I am.
Seeing me, who am the self-knowledge-self-existent, in truth, passions and the
like are extinguished here, therefore there is no great enemy, nor any great
dear friend. Not seeing me, this world is not my enemy, nor my friend." Thus,
the knower, having abandoned the external self and established himself in the
internal self, feels that the Supreme Self is I, and I am the Supreme.
Therefore, I am the one to be worshipped by me, not anyone else, is the state.
Having been freed from the objects, I have surrendered to the self-existent,
full of supreme bliss, who is established in me by himself. " etc. –Shri
Pujyapada Swami Ji's Shri Samadhi Shatak,

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (550) yogadaSTisamuracaya A mahAtattvajJAnI puruSa bIjI badhI paMcAta cheDI
daI, zuddha AtmadhyAnamAM lIna thAya che, ane dhyAve che ke huM dehAdithI bhinna
e zuddha caitanyasvarUpa AtmA Atmatattava chuM. "A mahArA svarUpathI4 cuta thaI
huM idriyadvArothI viSayamAM patitamImAMsA paDI gayo hato. te viSayane pAmIne
huM" ema mane meM pUrve tatvathI oLakhe nahiM ! je agrAhyane graDatuM nathI ne
grahelane mUkatuM nathI, je sarvathA sarva jANe che, evuM svasaMvedya te tahuM
chuM. tattvathI bodhAtmA-bedhasvarUpa evA mane samyaphapaNe pekhatAM, rAgAdi
atre ja kSINa thAya che tethI kaI mahA zatru nathI, ke kaI mahAro priya mitra
nathI. mane nahiM dekhate e A leka nathI mahAro zatru ke nathI mAre mitra." Ama
bahirAtmAne tyajI aMtarAtmAmAM vyavasthita thayela jJAnI puruSa bhAve che ke-je
paramAtmA che te huM chuM, ne je huM chuM te parama chuM. tethI huMja mahArAthI
upAsya chuM, anya koI nahi ema sthiti che. viSayamAMthI mane prazruta karAvI,
svArathI ja hArAmAM sthita evA paramAnaMdamaya bedhAtmAne huM prapanna thayela
chuM, prApta thayela chuM.' ityAdi prakAre AtmabhAvanAnA paribhAvathI te
darzanamohane kSaya kare che. ane tethI karIne dehathI bhinna evA kevala zuddha
caitanyanuM AtmAnubhavamaya jJAna jyAM varte che, e parama sUkSmabodha tene
upaje che. eTale pachI tene te zuddha svarUpanuM evuM dhyAna pravarte che ke te
cAritrahane prakSINa-atyaMta kSINa karavA bhaNI pravarte che. jemake-- cAritra
maha parAjaya | sarva bhAvathI te audAsInya vRtti-udAsIna bhAva kare che, ane
tene deha mAtra saMyamanA hetue ja hoya che, bIjA keI kAraNe tene bIjuM kAMI
kalpatuM nathI, ane dehamAM paNa tene kiMcit mUccha hotI nathI. mana, vacana,
kAyAnA sarvatra dA yogane te jema bane tema saMkSipta kare che, ane te traNe
saMkSipta yoganI sInya: gupti AtmAmAM sthiratA kare che, te paNa mukhyapaNe te
dehanI sthiti parvatasamiti cAvajajIva varte che. te AtmasthiratA eTalI badhI
daDha hoya che ke ghera parISaha ke upasarganA bhayathI paNa tene aMta AvI
zakato nathI. *"matta cyutvendriyadvAraiH patito viSayeSvaham  /
tAnprapadyAhamiti mAM purA veda na tattvataH  /  /  yadagrAhyaM na gRhNAti
gRhItaM nApi muJcati  /  jAnAti sarvathA sarva tatsvasaMvedyamaramyaham  //
kSIyante'traiva rAgAdyAstattvato mAM prpshytH| bodhAtmAnaM tataH kazcinna me
zatrurna ca priyH|| mAmapazyannayaM loko na me zatrurna ca priyH| mAM
prapazyannayaM loko na me zatrana ca piyH|| yaH parAtmA sa evAhaM yo'haM sa
prmsttH| ahameva mayopAsyA nAnyaH kazciditi sthitiH|| pracyAvya viSayebhyo'haM
mA mayaiva mayi sthitam  /  bodhAtmAnaM prapanno'smi paramAnandanirvRtam  // "
-zrI pUjyapAdasvAmIjI kRta zrI samAdhizataka,

Page #627 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Kanta's vision, character, and attachment are defeated, always leading to
welfare. (551) And he performs the activities of the three-fold body (mind,
speech, and body) only for the purpose of restraint, and that too with constant
attention to his own self-nature and in accordance with the command of the
Vitaraga Dev. Even that brief activity is constantly diminishing in its state of
being, and finally merges into its own nature. (See p. 25, the supreme self-seer
Shrimad Rajchandraji has sung this in the form of an experience of the soul, "An
unprecedented opportunity, an unprecedented unique poem - which has been
embodied in this form"). He remains indifferent to all emotions, only the body
is for the purpose of restraint; he does not do anything else for any other
reason, even in the body, he does not even have a slight desire. When will such
an unprecedented opportunity come? " - Shrimad Rajchandraji, in the matter of
the five senses, he is free from attachment and aversion, he does not have any
evil thoughts; his mind is not disturbed by the five types of pleasures; he
wanders freely without any restriction from matter, field, time, and emotion,
being subject to the arising of karma, which is the result of past actions. He
behaves with self-compassion towards anger! He has humility towards pride! He
has a witness-like vision, a vision of non-attachment towards Maya! And towards
greed, he does not consider himself equal to the gain, he does not care for
those who cause much trouble. Even when a Chakravarti comes and pays homage, he
does not feel pride in him, even when the body leaves, he does not feel any
attachment in his love. Even when powerful gains and achievements are revealed,
he does not even touch greed. He treats enemies and friends equally, his nature
remains the same in honor and dishonor, he does not consider himself inferior or
superior in life or death, and he treats the world and the beyond with pure
equanimity. Equanimity everywhere: he wanders alone in the cremation ground, and
also wanders in the mountains or where there are lions, tigers, and monkeys; yet
his seat remains firm and no kind of emotion arises in his mind, but he knows as
if he has met his best friend. Even when he performs severe austerities, his
mind does not become heated, and he does not feel happy with pleasant things.
Whether it is a speck of dust or the wealth of a celestial being, he believes
that all are of the nature of a single particle. Thus, he also defeats the
attachment to character, so due to the absence of attachment in all respects,
due to the cause of the inclusion of the elements - due to the extreme
perfection of austerity, he always has welfare.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 kAMtA daSTi cAritra mehaparAjaya, sadAya hiteAdaya (551) ane te saMkSipta mana-
vacana-kAyAnA yuganI pravRtti karavI paDe che te mAtra saMyamanA hetuthI ja kare
che, ane te paNa nija AtmasvarUpane niraMtara lakSa rAkhIne ane bhagavAnuM
vItarAga devanI AjJAne AdhInapaNe rahIne. te saMkSipta pravRtti paNa kSaNa kSaNa
ghaTatI jAtI sthitimAM hoya che, ane chevaTe nija svarUpamAM lIna thAya che.
(juo pR. 25, parama AtmadaSTA zrImad rAjacaMdrajIe AtmAnubhavasiddhapaNe saMgIta
kareluM "apUrva avasara vALuM apUrva ananya kAvya.--jene bhAva atra avatAryo
che). sarva bhAvathI audAsInya vRtti karI, mAtra deha te saMyama hetu hoya jo;
anya kAraNe anya kazuM kape nahiM, dehe paNa kiMcit mUcha nava jaya jo. apUrva
avasara evo kyAre Avaze ? " I -zrImad rAjacaMdrajI paMca indriyanA viSayamAM
tene rAgadveSa virahitapaNuM hoya che, ITa-aniSTa buddhi hatI nathI; pAMca
prakAranA pramAdathI enA manane kSebha upajatuM nathI; dravyathI, kSetrathI,
kALathI ne bhAvathI kyAMya pratibaMdha karyA vinA te nirlobhapaNe pUrva
prArabdha viSayakaSAyajaya: karmanA udayane AdhIna thaIne vicare che. krodha
pratye te tene svaapramAda- bhAvapaNuM varte che ! mAna pratye dInapaNAnuM mAna
hoya che! mAyA pratye apratibaMdha te sAkSIbhAvanI daSTAbhAvanI mAyA kare che !
ane lebha pratye te lAbha samAna thatuM nathI kaI bahu upasarga karanAro hoya te
tenA pratye te kepatuM nathI. cakravatI AvIne vaMdana kare te paNa tenAmAM mAna
gesuM jaDatuM nathI, deha chUTI jAya te paNa tenA premamAM paNa mAyA upajatI
nathI. prabaLa labdhi-siddhi pragaTe te paNa tene lebhane aMza paNa spazata
nathI. zatru-mitra pratye tene samadarzipaNuM varte che, mAna-apamAnamAM paNa
teno te ja svabhAva varte che, jIvitamAM ke maraNamAM te nyUnAvikapaNuM-
ochAvattApaNuM mAnato nathI, ane saMsAra ho ke mekSa che te pratye tene zuddha
samabhAva varte che. sarvatra samabhAva: te ekAkIpaNe smazAnane viSe vicare che,
vaLI parvatamAM ke jyAM vAghajinakapIvat siMhane saMyoga hoya che tyAM paNa
vicare che; chatAM tenuM Asana caryA aDola rahe che ne manamAM keIpaNa prakArano
bha upajato nathI, paNa jANe parama mitrane vega pAmyA hoya ema te jANe che.
ghora tapazcaryA karatAM paNa tenA manane tApa thatuM nathI, ane sarasa anathI
tenA manane prasannabhAva upajato nathI. rajakaNa ho ke vaimAnika devanI Rddhi
che, te sarveya eka pudgala svabhAvarUpa che ema te mAne che. Ama te
cAritramohane paNa parAjaya kare che, eTale sarvathA mohanA abhAvathI
tatvasamAvezarUpa kAraNane lIdhe-atyaMta tavapariNatine lIdhe tene sadAya
hiteAdaya ja

Page #628 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(552) There is a collection of right views. The *Mimamsa-deepika*, which dispels
the darkness of delusion, through its four principles of illumination, always
brings about well-being and constantly fosters the growth of self-welfare and
Dharma. The nature of the self, which is the essence of Dharma, becomes
increasingly revealed and manifest. Thus, the state of the self progressively
ascends to higher levels, and it becomes established on a series of increasingly
excellent qualities of the self. Just as the moon, in its waxing phase, reaches
its fullness, so too, this great soul, the *yogi* with right view, attains its
full form as the beneficial moon progressively waxes. “Fear is dispelled by the
state of being a devotee, False knowledge is like a swarm of bees; This view
crosses the ocean of existence, The sage gains fame. Hail, hail, the rule of the
Jina!” – Shri K.D. Sajjay. – E Right view: Chapter 12, like a star, gives 12
kinds of charity. Giving up other mental defilements. Holding fast to the
Dharma. Gaining the qualities of *Mimamsa*. – Essence of Right View – In the
sixth right view, the constant perception, withdrawal, non-attachment, subtle
understanding, etc., mentioned in the previous view, are present, and they
inspire love in others. In addition, here the sixth *anga* called *dharana* is
attained. Due to this supreme *dharana*, there are no mental defilements called
*anyamud*, meaning the mind does not find pleasure in anything other than
Dharma. And there is a constant *Mimamsa*, a contemplation that brings about
well-being. In this view, due to the greatness of Dharma, there is perfect
purity of conduct. And therefore, this *yogi* with this view becomes dear to all
beings, and he is single-minded in Dharma. His mind is always absorbed in
fulfilling his duty, and his body is engaged in other activities – just as the
mind of a virtuous woman is absorbed in her household duties, even while she is
engaged in other tasks. + “*Mimamsa-deepika* dispels the darkness of delusion.
Know the principles in their essence!” – Shri Dva Dva. 24-15

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (552) gadaSTisamuccaya hoya che. mohAMdhakAra haranArI mImAMsAdIpikAnA4
tatvaprakAzavaDe sadAya hiteAdaya karIne tene sadAya AtmakalyANanI-dharmanI
vRddhi thayA ja kare che. tene vastusvabhAvarUpa Atmadharma adhikAdhika aMze
unmIlana pAmata jAya che, pragaTato jAya che. Ama tenI AtmadazA uttarottara
caDhatI kaLAne pAmatI jAya che, te uttarottara uttama AtmaguNanI zreNI para
ArUDha thatuM jAya che. jema bIjane caMdramAM uttarottara caDhatI kaLAne pAmI
prAMte pUrNatAne pAme che, tema A samyagadaSTi mahAtmA yegIne hitarUpa caMdra
uttarottara caDhatI kaLAne pAmI pUrNa svarU55Nane pAme che. "bhagatatvane re e
bhaya navi TaLe, jUThA jANe re bhega; te e daSTi re bhavasAyara tare, lahe muni
suyaza saMga. dhana dhana zAsana zrI jinavarataNuM !" zrI ke. da, sajajhAya. -
Eaa kAMtA daSTi: kepTaka 12 dAna-tArA samAna | anyamud cittadoSa tyAga | gAMga-
dhAraNuM | mImAMsA-guNaprApti - kAMtA dRSTino sAra - chaThThI kAMtA daSTimAM,
AgalI dRSTimAM je nityadarzana, pratyAhAra, abrAMti, sUphamabodha vagere kahyuM,
te te hoya ja che, ane te bIjAone prIti upajAve evuM hoya che. te uparAMta atre
dhAraNu nAmanuM chaThuM mAMga prApta thAya che. e parama dhAraNAne lIdhe atre
anyamud nAmane cittadoSa hete nathI, arthAt citta dharma zivAya keI anya sthaLe
AnaMda pAmatuM nathI. ane hidaya karanArI evI nitya mImAMsA-sadavicAraNA atra
hoya che. A daSTimAM dharmanA mAhAbhyane lIdhe samyapha AcAravizuddhi hoya che.
ane tethI karI A daSTivALo yegI puruSa prANIone priya thaI paDe che, ane te
dharmamAM ekAgra manavALo hoya che. enuM mana sadAya kRtadharmamAM lIna rahe
che, ane kAyA ja bIjA kAmamAM hoya che, - jema pativratA strInuM citta gharanAM
bIjA badhAM kAma karatAM paNa + " mImAMsAdIpikA cAsyAM mohadhvAntavinAzinI  /  /
tatvone tenA cAnna jANamA !" -zrI dvA dvA. 24-15

Page #629 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Kanta Darsti: Essence, Gadarsti Kalash Kavya  (553) The one who is
completely absorbed in the husband of their father, does not become entangled in
the cycle of birth and death due to the knowledge of the accuser.   Just as a
man, seeing the illusion of Maya in its true form, fearlessly walks through it
without being affected, similarly, the one who sees the illusion of Maya in its
true form, even though they are entangled in it, remains detached and moves
towards the ultimate goal. But the one who sees the illusion of Maya as their
true self, does not escape the ocean of birth and death. Because their
intellect, due to its nature, remains inactive in its solution.   The one who is
firmly attached to the illusion of Maya due to their wrong perception, where
will they go in this Maya, where there is the intellect of water? Therefore,
they remain suffering from the pain of birth and death, just as they remain in
the same place, they remain in the path of liberation, but they do not progress.
This vision is always free from the allure of delusion due to the constant
contemplation of the true nature of things, therefore, the wise man, who is free
from delusion, always experiences progress, meaning, the continuous progress of
the state of the self, leading to the ultimate welfare of the self.  ## Yog
Darsti Kalash Kavya  Kanta, like Hari, always has the vision of Kanta, the
vision of Kanta, which shines brightly with the light of your vision; the subtle
light of the consciousness illuminates the sky, strengthened by the power of the
contemplation of the true nature of things. 127  Just as the sword is different
from the sheath, the soul is different from the body and other things, it is
imperishable and useful, it is always seen as such; the yogi, with the firm
resolve of the supreme self, adopts the form of the self, and never gets
attached to the influence of others. 128  The yogi, by acting in accordance with
the nature of the self, achieves purity of conduct; the one who is absorbed in
the supreme self, who is the embodiment of Dharma, is very dear to the people
due to the glory of Dharma. 129

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 kAMta daSTi : sAra, gadaSTi kaLaza kAvya (553) pitAnA patimAM ja lIna rahe che,
tema. ethI karIne AkSepaka jJAnane lIdhe ene bhegA bhavahetu-saMsArakAraNa thatA
nathI. mAyAjalane tattvathI-tenA svarUpathI dekhanAre puruSa jema bedhaDakapaNe
zIdhra tenI madhyethI, tyAghAta pAmyA vinA, cAlyo jAya ja che; tema mAyAjalanI
upamA jene ghaTe che, evA bhegene tenA svarUpathI dekhanAre samyagadaSTi dechA
puruSa, te bhegavatAM chatAM asaMgaanAsakta heI, paramapada pratye jAya ja che.
paNa bhega jene mana tavarUpa-sAcesAcA bhAse che, evA bhagatatva puruSane te
bhavasamudranuM ullaMghana thatuM nathI. kAraNa ke tenI tathA prakAranI
buddhithI tenA upAyamAM tenI apravRtti hoya che. mAyAjalamAM jene tevA vipasane
lIdhe daDha abhiniveza-Agraha che, evo ke ahIM mAyAmAM-jyAM jalabuddhi che te
mAge jAya? eTale te te bhadvigna-bhavathI duHkha pAmate rahI, jema tyAM ja-
mArgamAM ja niHsaMzaya sthiti kare che, tema bhogajaMbAlathI mohita evo te
mokSamArgamAM paNa sthiti' kare che, jyAM che tyAMne tyAM ja paDayo rahe che,
paNa AgaLa pragati karato nathI. sadA saddavicArarUpa mImAMsA bhAvathI A
dRSTimAM kadI moha heta nathI, ethI karIne amehasvarUpa' evA "bedhamUtti' jJAnI
puruSane sadaiva hiteAdaya ja hoya che, arthAt uttarottara AtmadazAnI
pragatirUpa hitanoAtmakalyANane samudaya thayA ja kare che. yogadaSTi kaLaza
kAvya harigIta kAMtA samI nita kAMta kAMtA daSTi gijana taNI, tArA samI
darzanaprabhAthI camakatI nitye ghaNuM; sUphamadha prakAza kAMti cidAkAza
jhagAvatI, puSTa tatvavicAraNAmaya mImAMsA balathI ati. 127 myAnathI asi jema
AtmA bhinna dehAdi thakI, avinAzI ne upayogavata dekhate nitye naka; yegI parA
dhIra dhAraNA AtmasvarUpa dhAra, parabhAva tema vibhAvamAM kadI moda te na
dharAvate. 128 Atma svabhAve vartanArUpa dharmamAM vartana thakI, AcAranI zuddhi
parA A pAmate yegI nakI; dharmamAM ekAgramana A dharmamUrtAi mahAtmane, A
dharmanA mahimA thakI hoye ati priyatA jane. 129

Page #630 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Gadashtisamuccaya  **The sixth aspect of the Yogadrishtisamuccaya:**  **In
the Shrauta Dharma, the mind should always be focused, the body should be
engaged in other activities, just as a woman's mind is always absorbed in her
husband, just as a cow goes into the forest, grazes, wanders in all directions,
but its gaze is always fixed on its calf.** (130)  **The Shrauta Dharma, whose
mind is always focused in this way, is not bound by the knowledge of the knower!
Even in the midst of the illusory Maya, it remains eternally free from the self,
like a lotus flower that does not get stained by the water.** (131)  **Just as a
person sees a mirage as a mirage, the senses move freely without any attachment;
similarly, when one sees the illusory world as it is, one remains detached and
moves towards the ultimate goal.** (132)  **One who considers the illusory world
as real, cannot cross the ocean of existence, he is bound by the illusory world
and does not move on the right path; he remains there, tormented by the illusory
world, and even the path to liberation becomes a source of attachment for him.**
(133)  **I am pure knowledge, everything else is evil, this firm truth is
strengthened by the constant consumption of the nectar of knowledge; does the
yogi, who is always absorbed in contemplation, ever fall into attachment or
external influence? He always finds joy in the nature of Bhagavandas.** (134)
**Thus, in the Kiratchandrasonumanahsukhanandana, composed by the great sage
Shri Haribhadracharya, the sixth aspect of the Yogadrishtisamuccaya is explained
in detail in the Sumanonandani Brihattika, by Bhagavandas.**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 gadaSTisamuccaya zrata dharmamAM nita citta dhAre, kAya kArya bIjA mahIM, mana
jema mahilAnuM sadAye lIna hAlAmAM ahIM, jyama gAya vanamAM jAya, cAra care,
cAra dizA phare, paNa daSTi te tenI sadA nija vatsa vhAlA para dhare. 130 zrata
dharma jenuM citta Ama ja nitya AkSepe ahIM, te jJAnAkSepakavatane bhego ya bha
vahe tu nahiM ! mohamayI mAyAmahIM paNa amehasvarUpI sadA, duSkarakarA te
kamalavat jalamAM na lepAye kadA. 131 mRgajala ahIM mRgajalapaNe je tatvathI
jana pekhate, te seMsara bedhaDaka te bAdhA vinA cAlyo jate; tyama bhaMga
mAyAjala samA je svarUpathI ahIM dekhate, bhega'tAMya asaMga rahI te pada parama
pratye jate. 132 bhega tatva ja mAnate te bhavasamudra tare nahi, mAyAjale Aveza
daDha te te pathe vicare nahi; te tyAM ja bhavaudvigna tyama mAyAjale sthiti
dhAro. tyama mokSamArga paNa kare sthiti bhegamala mehita thatA. 133 huM eka
zuddha ja jJAnamaya, bAkI badhuMya aniSTa che, e puSTa tattva sudhAtaNa
rasapAnathI nita puSTa che; te yogI mananaMdana dhare kayama moha ke
parabhAvamAM? hita udaya te pAme sadA bhagavAnadAsa svabhAvamAM. 134  //  iti
maharSi zrIharibhadrAcAryaviracite kiratcaMdrasUnumanaHsukhanaMdanena
bhagavAnadAsena sumanonaMdanIbRhatTIkAnAmakavivecanena saprapaJca vivecite
zrIyogadRSTisamuccayazAkhe SaSThI kAntA dRSTiH  //

Page #631 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Prabha Drishti  The sixth Drishti has been explained. Now the seventh is
being told -  **Dhyanpriya Prabha prayo nasyaam rugat ev hi. Tarvatipatti yuta
sastravruttipavi* || 270 ||**  Prabha Drishti is generally Dhyanpriya,
therefore, there is no fault of "Ga" in this. This Drishti is Tatvapratipatti
yukt, meaning it is accompanied by the true experience of the soul, and it
brings about the Satpravritti pad.  **Commentary:**  Prabha is like the sun's
rays, Dhyanpriya is the seventh yogaanga, the absence of the seventh "Sa"
defect, and the seventh Tatvamatipatti guna are present in this seventh Prabha
Drishti. This Drishti is generally Dhyanpriya, and especially it is accompanied
by Shama and therefore brings about the Satavrittipad - Satpravrittipad.
**Conclusion:**  It has been stated that this Drishti is "Satyaavrittipadavaha",
meaning it brings about the Satpravrittipad.  **Alternative Reading:**  It is
especially accompanied by Shama. Here, Vritti appears to be incomplete or
broken.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prabhA daSTi chaThThI dRSTi pratipAdana karavAmAM AvI. have sAtamI kahevAmAM
Ave che - dhyAnapriyA prabhA prAyo nAsyAM rugata eva hi  /  taravatipattiyutA
sastravRttipAvI* || 270 || dhyAna priyA pAye prabhA, ethI atra na ga; tarava
pratipatti ahIM, satyavRtti pada yoga, 170 artha -prabhA dRSTi prAye dhyAnapriyA
hoya che, ethI karIne ja AmAM "ga" nAmane doSa hotuM nathI. A daSTi
tattvapratipatti yukta arthAt yathArtha AtmAnubhavayukta heya che, ane
satpravRtti padane ANanArI hoya che. vivecana arka prabhA sama bedha prabhAmAM,
dhyAna priyA e diDI, tatvataNuM pratipatti vaLI IhAM, rega nahiM sukha
puThThI... re bhavikA ! vIra vacana citta dharIe"-zrI je. da. sakjhA. 7-1 A
sAtamI prabhA daSTimAM pUrvokta niyamAnusAra sUrya prabhA samAna bedha, sAtamuM
yogAMga dhyAna, sAtamA "sa" deSano abhAva ne sAtamA tattavamatipatti guNane
bhAva hoya che. AvI A daSTi prAye dhyAnapriyA hoya che, tathA vizeSa karIne
zamasaMyukta ane tethI satAvRttipadAvahA-satupravRttipada ANanArI hoya che.
kRtti -ema A dRSTi "satyavRttipadAvahA' che ema piMDAryuM che, arthAt
satapravRttipadane lAvanAra che. + pAThAMtara:-viroLa romAnvitA athata vizeSa
karIne zama saMyukta evI heya che. atre vRtti paNa apUrNa athavA khaMDita jaNAya
che.

Page #632 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(556) It is fitting to compare this seventh insight to the radiance of the sun,
as the sun's light is many times stronger than that of a star. Similarly, the
seventh insight, Prabha Drishti, is many times more powerful and profound than
the sixth insight, Kanta Drishti. Calling it "Prabha" is also accurate, as
Prabha means the pervading, all-encompassing light. Just as the sun's radiance
is intensely bright, this insight's all-pervading light is intensely bright,
powerful, and capable of penetrating. As sunlight illuminates all objects and
the entire world, this insight's all-pervading light reveals the true nature of
all objects.  The seventh limb of yoga, Dhyana (meditation), is characterized by
this pervading, all-encompassing light. Therefore, these two, Dhyana and this
insight, are constantly intertwined. Knowledge and meditation are
interconnected; the stronger the knowledge, the stronger the meditation. This
insight is thus conducive to meditation, a beloved companion to meditation,
where meditation is deeply cherished by the yogi. Therefore, the yogi, the wise
man, who is established in this state, meditates on the undivided self, which is
most dear to him. And because this self-meditation is sharp, self-aware, and
rooted in the self, there is rarely any room for distractions to arise; it is
thus free from distractions.  After attaining the sixth limb, Dharana
(concentration), the seventh limb, Dhyana (meditation), arises naturally.
Dharana means focusing the mind on a specific object or area, and through
repeated impressions, the mind is drawn towards its essence and becomes
concentrated there. Dharana, which involves holding the mind towards the nature
of the self, gives rise to Dhyana, which is the concentration of the mind on the
self. "Yogaś citta-vṛtti-nirodhaḥ" (Yoga Sutras 1.2). Dharana involves the
mind's focus on the essence of the object, while Dhyana involves the direct
realization of the pure self. "Tatra pratyakṣa eva jñānataṁ sthānam" (Yoga
Sutras 3.2). The unification of the mind's focus in the realm of Dharana,
meaning the continuous flow of a single, undivided result in the realm of
Dharana, is Dhyana. (See Dva. Dva.) "Steady determination is Dhyana, and
unsteady mind is Bhavana, Anuprekṣā, or Chinta, these three. In one sense, the
final state of the mind is Dhyana. In the context of multiple meanings, even a
long-lasting state, if it is unbroken and undivided, is a continuous stream of
Dhyana." (See Adhyatma Sara).  There are four main types of Dhyana: (1) Atma,
(2) Raudra, (3) Dharma, (4) Shukla. Of these, Atma and Raudra are undesirable,
as they are the causes of the dualistic world and are unrefined and harmful.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (556) yogadaSTisasurAya A daSTine sUrya prabhAnI upamA ApI, te yacita che.
kAraNa ke tArA karatAM sUryane prakAza anekagaNa baLavAnuM hoya che, tema
chaThThI kAMtA dRSTi karatAM sAtamI prabhA daSTinuM darzana-bedhaprakAza
anekaguNaviziSTa baLavAna, parama avagADha hoya che. Ane . "prabhA' nAma ApyuM
te paNa yathArtha che. prabhA arthAt prakRNa badhaprakAza jene che te prabhA.
jema sUryanI prabhA ati ugra tejasvI che, tema A daSTinI bedha-prabhA ati ugra
tejasvI, baLavAna kSapazamasaMpanna hoya che. sUryaprakAzathI jema sarva
padArthanuM barAbara darzana thAya che, samasta vizva prakAzita thAya che, tema
A daSTinA bedhaprakAzathI sarva padArthasArthanuM yathArtha darzana thAya che.
yoganuM sAtamuM aMgaH dhyAna ane A dRSTine A prakRNa bedha-prakAza hoya che,
tethI ja A be niraMtara dhyAnane hetu thaI paDe che, kAraNa ke jJAnapramANu
dhyAna thAya che; jevuM jJAna baLavAn tevuM dhyAna paNa baLavAna hoya che. Ama A
daSTi dhyAnapriyA hoya che, dhyAnanI hAlI priyatamA jevI hoya che, jyAM dhyAna
yogIne atyaMta priya hoya che evI hoya che. eTale ahIM sthiti karato yegI jJAnI
puruSa potAne parama priya evuM akhaMDa AtmadhyAna dhyAve che. ane A AtmadhyAna
tIkSaNa AtmA pagavALuM-AtmajAgrativALuM hovAthI, temAM prAye-ghaNuM karIne koI
paNa vikalpa UThavAne avakAza hete nathI, evuM te nirvikalpa hoya che. dhAraNu
nAmanuM chaThuM gAMga sAMpaDayA pachI svAbhAvika kame sAtamuM dhyAna nAmanuM
gAMga prApta thAya che. kAraNa ke dhAraNa eTale amuka viSayamAM-pradezamAM
cittabaMdha thAya, eTale tenA punaH puna: saMskArathI tenA aMtastatva pratye
citta dorAya che, ane temAM ja ekAgra thAya che. AtmAne AtmasvabhAva abhimukha
dhArI rAkhavArUpa dhAraNAthI AtmAmAM ekAgratArUpa dhyAna pragaTe che.
"yogazcittavRttinirodha:" (pA2-1). dhAraNamAM svarUpAbhimukha pravRttimAM
cittanuM avadhAraNuM hoya che, ane dhyAnamAM zuddha AtmatatvanuM sAkSAt
anusaMdhAna hoya che. "tatra pratyakaivajJAnatA thAnam' (pA. 3-2). cittanA
dhAraNA-dezamAM pratyayanI ekatAnatA thavI arthAt dhAraNA pradezamAM eka sarakhA
akhaMDa pariNAmanI dhArA rahevI te dhyAna che. (juo dvA. dvA.) "je sthira
adhyavasAya te dhyAna che, ane asthira citta te bhAvanA, anuprekSA, vA ciMtA ema
traNa prakAre che. eka arthamAM mananI aMtamuhUrta sthiti te dhyAna che. aneka
arthasaMkramamAM lAMbI paNa sthiti haya, te acchinna-akhaMDa evI dhyAnasaMtati
che. " (juo adhyAtmasAra ). dhyAnanA mukhya cAra bheda che-(1) Atta, (2) raudra,
(3) dharma, (4) zukala. temAM Attarodra e be dudhdhana saMsAranA kAraNa heI
aprazasta ane aniSTa che,

Page #633 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Prāśa Dṛṣṭi: Meditation, the Steady-Minded Meditator with Four Virtues
(557)  And the soul, for the seeker of liberation, is completely contemptible -
worthy of being abandoned. The rest, however, are the cause of Dharma and Śukla
Mokṣa, highly praiseworthy and desirable, and for the soul, the seeker of
liberation, they are completely worthy of being embraced, to be honored with the
utmost respect. Or, one can understand the four types of meditation as being in
the form of the body, in the form of the senses, in the form of the form, and
beyond form. To understand these types of meditation in detail, the inquisitive
should observe the Śrī Jñānāva, Adhyātmasāra, Yāgaśāstra, Mākṣamālā, and other
such scriptures. The ultimate goal of all these types of meditation is to be
established in the meditation of the pure soul. Therefore, Ātma-dhyāna
(meditation on the soul) is the main meditation. Here, to truly understand the
nature of meditation, it is necessary to understand the nature of the meditator,
the object of meditation, etc. -  **The Nature of the Meditator**  The
meditator, the person who performs this meditation, should be worthy, and for
that, they should be endowed with the four excellent virtues of knowledge,
faith, conduct, and detachment. They should be imbued with these four virtues,
with a firm and unwavering mind. Because, through the virtue of knowledge, there
is steadiness; through the virtue of faith, the mind becomes stable and
unperturbed; through the virtue of conduct, the past karma is destroyed; and
through the virtue of detachment, the desires and fears associated with
attachment are eradicated. That is, due to detachment, the mind does not become
attached to anything, and it does not have any desires or aspirations related to
this world or the next, and it does not become disturbed by any kind of fear.
Thus, the mind of one who is imbued with these four virtues becomes stable. And,
the one who has a stable mind is the one who is worthy of meditation; others,
with unstable minds, are not worthy. For the attainment of meditation, stability
of mind is the first and foremost requirement. The supreme seer of the soul,
Śrīmad Rājacandraji, has said in his profound statement of truth, "I will tell
you when I understand, when my mind becomes stable." Similarly, the Gītā also
says, "For the uncontrolled mind, yoga is difficult to attain, I believe. But
for the one who has control over the mind and senses, yoga is attainable through
effort." - All this truly happens in the soul imbued with the above virtues. Śrī
Nemicandracārya has said in the Br̥had Dravyasaṅgraha, "If you want to know
about the different types of meditation, then..."  " निश्चलत्त्रमसंमोहो निर्जरा
पूर्वकर्मणाम् । सङ्गाशंसा भयोच्छेदः फलान्यासां यथाक्रमम् ॥ स्थिरचित्तः
किलैताभिर्याति ध्यानस्य योग्यताम् । योग्यतैव हि नान्यस्य तथा चोक्त ं परैरपि । ”
—Śrī Yaśavijayajīkṛta Adhyātmasāra  *  k  ܕ  असंयतात्मने। योगो दुःप्राप्य इति मे
मतिः । વયાભના તુ ચતતા રાજ્જોડવાનુમુયત: || ”—Gītā A. 6.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prazA dRSTi: dhyAna, cAra bhAvanAthI sthicittasthitaprajJa dhyAtA (557 ) ane
AtmAthI mumukSune savathA heya che--tyajavA yAgya che. bAkInA e dhama ane zukla
meAkSanA kAraNa hAi prazasta ane iSTa che, ane AtmAthI mumukSune sarvathA Adeya
che, parama AdarathI AdaravA cAgya che. athavA padastha, piMDastha, rUpastha ane
rUpAtIta ema dhyAnanA cAra prakAra pazu samajavA yeAgya che. A sa dhyAnaprakAra
vistArathI samajavA mATe jijJAsue zrI jJAnAva, adhyAtmasAra, yAgazAstra,
mAkSamALA Adi graMtharatne avaleAkavA. A sarva prakAranA dhyAnaneA aMtima uddeza
zuddha AtmAnA dhyAna para ArUDha thavAnA che. eTale AtmadhyAna e ja mukhya
dhyAna che. atre dhyAnanuM svarUpa kharAkhara samajavA mATe dhyAtA-dhyeya AdinuM
svarUpa samajavA ceAgya che-- dhyAtA svarUpa A dhyAna dharanAra dhyAtA caiAgI
puruSa paNa te mATenI yathAyAgya caiAgyatAvALA hAvA joie, ane te mATe jJAna,
darzIna, cAritra ane vairAgya e cAra uttama bhAvanAothI+bhAvitAtmA DhAvA joIe-
dRDha bhAvara'gI hAve cAra bhAvanAthI joie. kAraNa ke jJAnabhAvanAthI
nizcalapaNuM thAya che, danabhAvanAthI sthira citta asaMmeAha haiAya che,
cAritrabhAvanAthI pUrva karmInI nirjarA thAya che ane vairAgya bhAvanAthI
sa`ganA AzasAnA ne bhayanA uccheda thAya che; arthAt vairAgyane lIdhe citta
kayAMya paNa sa`ga-Asakti karatuM nathI, ane A leAka-paraleAkAdi saMbadhI kaI
paNa Aza'sA-icchA karatuM nathI, ane kAI paNa prakAranA bhayakAraNathI kSeAbha
pAmatuM nathI. Ama je cAra bhAvanAthI bhAvita heAya che, tenuM citta sthira
thAya che. ane Ave je sthiracitta hoya che, te ja dhyAnanI ceAgyatA pAme che,
bIjAne-asthiracittane tenI yAgyatA heAtI nathI. dhyAnanI siddhi mATe
cittasthiratA e sauthI prathama Avazyaka che. parama AtmadRSTA zrImad
rAjacaMdrajInuM parama ga'bhIra tattvavacana che ke aujI samajaNa pachI kahIza,
jyAre citte sthira thaIza.' temaja gItAmAM paNa kahyuM che ke '*asa yatAtmAne
yoga pAmavA durlabha che ema mhArI mati che, paNu jene AtmA-mana vaza che te
yatnavatane yoga upAyavaDe karIne pAmaveA zakaya che. '-A badhuya uparakta
bhAvanAthI bhAvitAtmAmAM kharAkhara ghaTe che. zrI nemicaMdrAcAya jIe bRhad
drabyasaMgrahamAM bhAkhyuM che ke- jo tame vicitra prakAranA dhyAnanI
prasiddhine arthe " nizcalattramasaMmoho nirjarA pUrvakarmaNAm  /  saGgAzaMsA
bhayocchedaH phalAnyAsAM yathAkramam  //  sthiracittaH kilaitAbhiryAti dhyAnasya
yogyatAm  /  yogyataiva hi nAnyasya tathA cokta N parairapi  /  " --zrI
yazAvijayajIkRta adhyAtmasAra * k d asNytaatmne| yogo duHprApya iti me matiH  /
vayAbhanA tu catatA rAjjoDavAnumuyata: || "--gItA a. 6.

Page #634 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(558) "If you want your mind to be steady, then you should be indifferent to
both pleasant and unpleasant objects, you should not be attached to them, you
should not hate them." "Ma mujjaha ma rajjaha ma dussaha ini?atthesu.
Thiramicchaha jai chittan vicittjjaanapassiddhie." -Sri Nemichandra
Siddhantachkravattakrut Brihad Dravyasangraha, Thus, the one who is free from
passions due to the victory of the mind and senses, is calm and restrained. That
is, he is calm due to the cessation of passions, and he is restrained due to the
control of the senses. The characteristics of calmness and restraint of the
sthitaprajna mentioned in the Gita are fully present in this calm and restrained
yogi. "Arjuna, when one abandons all desires arising from the mind, and is
content with the Self alone, then he is called sthitaprajna. His mind is not
disturbed by sorrow, nor does he crave for happiness. He is free from
attachment, fear, and anger. Such a muni is called sthitaprajna. This calm and
restrained man is truly content with the Self. And this yogi who has the seventh
vision is certainly a meditator of the highest order, because he has become
extremely steady-minded and sthitaprajna through the highest yogic practices so
far. (1) Through the knowledge of subtle elements and their analysis, this one
who has the subtle vision has developed a superior understanding of knowledge
and vision. (2) Through the observance of the five yamas of ahimsa, etc., the
practice of the niyamas of purity, contentment, etc., the firmness of the
sukhasana that calms the mind, the practice of pranayama that involves the
expulsion of external thoughts and the filling and emptying of the inner self,
the withdrawal of the senses from objects, and the firm holding of the mind in
meditation on dharma, thus, through the continuous practice of yoga, through
repeated contemplation, his character has become of the highest order. (3) And
this samyagdarshi, the wise man who has such a superior understanding of
knowledge, vision, and character, is imbued with the highest detachment,
therefore, he is completely indifferent, he does not attach himself to anything,
he does not have any desires related to this world or the next, he has no thirst
for life, and he is not disturbed by the thought of death. "प्रजहाति यदा
कामान्सर्वान्पार्थ मनोगतान् । आत्मन्येवात्मना तुष्टः स्थितप्रज्ञस्तदोच्यते ।।
दुःखेऽपि च प्रसन्नतां गच्छत्यत्मा विपश्यतः । सुखेऽपि च न विक्षिप्तिः
स्थितप्रज्ञस्तदोच्यते ।। वीतरागः वीतभयः वीतशोकः समाहितः । ब्रह्मनिर्वाणमृच्छति
ब्रह्मभूतोऽधिवासितः ।।" -Gita, "सुविदिदपदत्यसुत्तो संजमतवसंजुदो विगतरागो। समणो
समसुदुक्खो भणिदो सुद्धोवओगोत्ति ॥" -Sri Kundakundacharya's Sri Pravachansara

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (558) gadaSTisamuccaya cittane sthira IcchatA ho, te ISTa aniSTa arthomAM maha
ma pAme, rAga ma kare, dveSa ma karo.' " mA mujjaha mA rajjaha mA dussaha
iNi?atthesu  /  thiramicchaha jai cittaM vicittajjhANappasiddhie  // " -zrI
nemicaMdra siddhAMtacakravattakRta bRhad dravyasaMgraha, Ama mananA ane
indriyanA jayathI je nirvikAra buddhivALo che, te dhyAtA zAMta ane dAMta evo
hoya che, arthAt kaSAyanI upazAMtatAthI te zAMta hoya che, ane iMdriyAdinA
damanathI te dAMta hoya che. gItAmAM kahelA sthitaprajJanA zAMta, dAMtaH lakSaNa
A zAMta-dAMta yogImAM saMpUrNa paNe ghaTe che- "he arjuna ! sthitaprajJa jyAre
sarva manogata kAmane-icchAone choDI de che, tyAre AtmAthI AtmAmAM ja tuSTa e te
sthitaprajJa kahevAya che. du:khamAM tenA manane udvega upajatuM nathI ane
sukhamAM te spRhA karatA nathI. vItarAga, vItabhaya, vItakodha heya e te muni
sthitaprajJa kahevAya che. AtmArAmapaNAe sthita e zAMta-dAMta puruSa kharekhara
! AvA lakSaNavALo hoya che. ane A sAtamI dRSTivALA yogI puruSa to AvA uttama
koTinA dhyAtA hoya ja che, kAraNa ke atyAra sudhInI uttama yogasAdhanAthI te
atyaMta sthiracitta ane sthitaprajJa thaI cUkyA che. (1) sUkSma tatvabodha ane
tenI mImAMsAthI-sUkSama A daSTivALo saduvicAraNAthI tene jJAna-darzananI uttama
bhAvanA thaI hoya che. (2) uttama yAtA ahiMsAdi pAMca yamanA pAlanathI, zauca sa
teSAdi niyamanA sevanathI citta samAdhAnakArI sukhAsananI daDhatAthI, bAhya
bhAvanA virecana ane aMtar AtmabhAvanA pUraNa-kuMbhanarUpa prANAyAmathI,
iMdriyone viSayamAMthI pAchI kheMcI levArUpa pratyAhArathI ane cittane
dharmadhyAnamAM dhArI rAkhavArUpa daDha dhAraNathI,Ama yogagAnA niraMtara
abhyAsathI-punaH puna: bhAvanathI tenI cAritrabhAvanA uttama prakAranI thaI hoya
che. (3) ane jJAna-darzana-cAritranI AvI uttama bhAvanAvALA A samyagadaSTi jJAnI
puruSa parama vairAgyabhAvanAthI raMgAyelA hoya che, tethI parama udAsIna evA te
vItarAga puruSa kayAMya paNa saMga-Asakti karatA nathI, A leka-paraleka
saMbaMdhI keipaNa icchA dharatA nathI, jIvavAnI temane tRSNa nathI ne
maraNuyogathI te kSobha pAmatA x" prajahAti yadA kAmAnsarvAnpArtha manogatAn  /
AtmanyevAtmanA tuSTaH sthitaprajJastadocyate  /  /  duHvedanuddiAnamanA supu
vitara: vItarAmacakrodhaH sthitIniyate "--gItA, "suvididapadatyasutto
saMjamatavasaMjudo vigtraago| samaNo samasudukkho bhaNido suddhovaogotti  // "
-zrI kuMdakuMdAcAryajIkRta zrI pravacanasAra

Page #635 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Prabha Drushti: Vastu Svaroopa Dhyan, Arihant Dhyan, Siddha Dhyan  (559)
Such a being is free from all fear, a true Avadhoot, a fearless one. Yogishwar
Rajchandraji's concise Vachanamrut says:  "There is no thirst for life, no fear
of death; the great soul desires, the ultimate yoga of victory." - Shreemad
Rajchandraji.  Thus, a Yogi, whose very bones and marrow are imbued with the
noble sentiments of knowledge, vision, character, and detachment, and whose soul
is deeply immersed in self-reflection, is free from the defects that cause
mental distractions. Therefore, such a Yogi experiences extreme mental
stability. This stable-minded, steady-willed, self-contented, peaceful, and
detached Yogi, being endowed with all the elements of meditation, is not
attracted to anything, neither desirable nor undesirable, nor does he harbor
attachment or aversion. Therefore, this ultimate Nigranth, the detached Muni, is
the ultimate destination for the ultimate, pure self-meditation.  ##  Dhyeya
Swaroop (The Object of Meditation)  Dhyeya means the subject or object of
meditation. The ultimate goal of contemplating any object is to attain self-
meditation. Whatever is contemplated, if it leads the soul to a state of pure,
undistracted awareness and single-pointed focus, then it is a Dhyeya. The main
Dhyeyas are: (1) Conscious or unconscious, animate or inanimate objects, (2)
Pancha Parameshthi, (3) The Soul.  1. **Vastu** (Objects) are divided into two
categories: conscious and unconscious. They possess the essence of existence,
characterized by creation, sustenance, and dissolution. Each substance, endowed
with its own unique qualities, exists in its own inherent state. Every object,
existing due to its own substance, space, time, and qualities, is non-existent
due to other substances, space, time, and qualities. In other words, an object
does not simultaneously possess its own form and the form of another, nor does
it transgress the boundaries of its own time and enter another's. What is inert,
remains inert in its effects, and what is conscious, remains conscious in its
effects. Nothing changes its nature. What is inert, remains inert in all three
times, and what is conscious, remains conscious in all three times. This is
evident from experience, so why doubt it? And so on, contemplating the nature of
any object leads the soul towards contemplating the pure nature of its own self,
and ultimately ascends to the meditation of the pure soul.  "Inertness leads to
inert effects, consciousness to conscious effects; Nothing changes its nature,
abandoning its own essence. What is inert, remains inert in all three times, and
what is conscious, remains conscious as well; This is evident from experience,
so why doubt it?" - Shreemad Rajchandraji.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prabhA dRSTi : vastasvarUdhyAna, arihaMtadhyAna, siddhAkhyAna (559) nathI, evA
te sarva bhayathI muktaparama nirbhaya avadhUta hoya che. yogIzvara
rAjacaMdrajInuM TakelkIrNa vacanAmRta che ke : nahiM tRSNa jIvyA taNI, maraNa
pega nahiM kSobha; mahApAtra te mAganA, parama yoga jitabha."-zrImad
rAjacaMdrajI. ane Ama jJAna, darzana, cAritra, vairAgyanI utkRSTa bhAvanAothI
asthimajajA paryata hADohADa raMgAyelA, ne AtmabhAvanAthI, atyaMtapaNe
bhAvitAtmA evA yogIne, cittavikSepa upajAvanArA doSa nivRtta thaI gayA hovAthI,
cittanI atyaMta sthiratA varte che. eTale A AvA sthiracitta, sthitaprajJa,
AtmArAmI zAMta-dAMta, vItarAga yogIzvara samagra dhyAnasAmagrIthI saMpana heI,
kayAMya paNa ISTa-aniSTa arthamAM moha pAmatA nathI, rAga dharatA nathI, dveSa
karatA nathI ane eTale ja A parama nigraMtha vItarAga munIzvara parama nizcaya
dhyAnane mATe-zuddha AtmadhyAnane mATe parama gya hoya che. dhyeya svarUpa
dhyeya eTale dhyAna karavAne viSaya-AlaMbana. kaI paNa dhyeya citavavAne aMtima
(Ultimate) hetu AtmadhyAna para ArUDha thavAno che. je kaMI ciMtavatAM AtmA
nirIha vRttine pAmI ekAgrapaNAne pAme te dhyeya che. temAM mukhya dhyeya A che -
(1) cetana ke acetana evI mUdamUrta vastu, (2) paMca parameSTi, (3) AtmA. 1.
vastu cetana-acetana ema be bhAgamAM vibhakta che. te utpatti-sthiti-layarUpa
sat svarUpa saMpanna che. nija nija guNaparyAyathI yukta evuM pratyeka dravya
potapotAnI svarUpasattAmAM avasthita che. sva dravya-kSetra-kAla-bhAvathI
astirUpa evI pratyeka vastu, para dravya-kSetra-kAla-bhAvathI nAstirUpa che.
arthAt koI vastu svarUpa cheDI pararUpane bhajatI nathI, svasamayanI maryAdA
ullaMghI parasamayamAM jatI nathI. jaDa che te jaDa bhAve ja pariName che, ane
cetana che te cetana bhAve ja pariName che. emAM kaI pitAne svabhAva choDI
palaTatuM nathI. jaDa te traNe kALamAM jaDa che, ane cetana te traNe kALamAM
cetana che. A pragaTa anubhavarUpa che, emAM saMzaya kema hoya? ItyAdi prakAre
koI paNa dhyeya vastunA svarUpaciMtana parathI AtmA zuddha svavastunA
svarUpaciMtana pratye DhaLe che, ane zuddha AtmAnA dhyAna para caDhe che. "jaDa
bhAve jaDa pariName, cetana cetana bhAva; kaI kaI palaTe nahiM, chaDI Apa
svabhAva. jaDa te jaDa traNa kALamAM, cetana cetana tema; pragaTa anubhavarUpa
che, saMzaya emAM kema ?"-zrImad rAjacaMdrajI.

Page #636 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(560) The collection of yogic views, part 2, or the five supreme beings, are to
be chanted with the mantras that describe them (meditation with a fixed object).
This is also the best subject for meditation, the best goal. "Namo Arihantaṇam,
Namo Siddhaṇam, Namo Ayariyāṇam, Namo Uvzahayāṇam, Namo Loe Sabvasahūṇam." (1)
The one whose four karmas are destroyed, and therefore has infinite vision,
infinite knowledge, infinite power, and infinite bliss, that auspicious, pure
soul is "Worthy of meditation." The one who has attained samadhi, the supreme
soul, the Arihant, who, despite having a body, moves in a state of transcending
the body, that pure soul, who is naturally in his own form, is the Arihant-Jin,
the Bhagavan-Omniscient Supreme Being. The essential pure form of this liberated
embodied Supreme Being is the ultimate goal for the seeker, worthy of
meditation; because through meditation on this naturally existing pure soul, the
soul becomes established in meditation on the pure soul's own form. Therefore,
meditation on this "Supreme Being" is the ultimate goal for the seeker, as it is
a support for him. Through the support of the Jina, the soul becomes self-
reliant and meditates on its own form. "In the meditation of Nemi Prabhu, there
is oneness, unity in one's own essence; In the meditation of Shukal, one attains
perfection, one attains liberation in the end." - Shri Devchandraji. "The one
whose state is without a body, whose tendencies are always active in the self-
awareness; The one who has attained the state of liberation from the six karmas,
I bow to that greatness, the most excellent in the world." Shri Arihant Stotra
(written by Dr. Bhagvandas M. Mehta) (2) The one whose eight karmas and body are
destroyed, the one who is the knower and seer of the Kalak, that Siddha soul,
who is situated in the Kashikhar, is to be meditated upon." The destruction of
all karmic impurities The one who has attained the pure soul, the Siddha, who is
without a body, the meditation on that pure soul, the Siddha, is revealed, the
one who has attained his own natural form, the one who has attained Kaivalya,
the state of being one with the form, through the manifestation of the pure
consciousness of the self-essence - that pure soul, the Siddha Bhagavan, is the
ultimate goal - x" णट्ठचदुघाइकम्मो दसणसुहणाणवीरियमईओ । सुहदेहत्यो अप्पा सुद्धो
अरिहो विचिंतिज्जो ॥" - Shri Nemichandra Siddhantachkravarti's Shri Brihad
Dravyasangraha, +“ ले ज़ोयास्टोरेन्स गाळो वा कुरीलाया पा सिद्द क्ष सोसिद्दो.” -
Shri Brihad Dravyasangraha,

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (560) yogadaSTisamuccaya 2, athavA paMca parameSThine parameSTivAcaka
nAmamaMtrothI japa kare (padastha dhyAna ) te paNa dhyAnane uttama viSaya che,
uttama dhyeya che. "namo arihaMtANaM, namo siddhANa, namo AyariyANaM, namo
uvajhAyANaM, namo loe sabvasAhUNaM  / " (1) jenA cAra ghAtikarma naSTa thayA
che, ane tethI karIne ja anaMta darzana, anaMta jJAna, anaMta vIrya, anaMta
AnaMdamaya che, e je zubhahastha* zuddha AtmA te " ahaMtu dhyAna karavA yogya
che." dhyAnanA phalarUpa parama AtmaarihaMtanuM samAdhine pAmI je deha chatAM
dehAtIta kAryotsarga dazAe vicare che, dhyAna evA sahajAnmasvarUpe sthita zuddha
AtmA te ja ahaMta-jina bhagavA-sarvajJa paramAtmA che. A jIvanamukta dehadhArI
paramAtmAnuM tAtvika zuddha svarU5 AtmAthI mumukSune parama dhyeya che, dhyAna
karavA yogya che; kAraNa ke A sahajAnmasvarUpa zuddha AtmAnA dhyAnathI AtmA
zuddha AtmasvarUpanA dhyAna para ArUDha thAya che. eTale A "parameSThi'nuM
dhyAna mumukSune hastAvalaMbanarUpa hovAthI parama ISTa che. jinavaranA
AlaMbanathI AtmA AtmAvalaMbanI thaI nija svarUpane dhyAtA thAya che. nemi prabhu
dhyAne re ekatvatA, nija tatve ektAne; zukala dhyAne re sAdhI susiddhatA, lahiye
mukita nidAne."-zrI devacaMdrajI. daha teya jehanI dazA adeha vartAtI, vRtti
AtmabhAvamAM sadA svayaM pravartatI; ginAtha je dharI rahyA chavanavimuktine,
vizvanI viziSTa zreSTha vaMduM e vibhUtine." zrI arihaMtastotra (DaoN.
bhagavAnadAsa ma. mahetA viracita) (2) jenA aSTama karma ane deha naSTa thayA
che, kAlekanA je jJAyaka ne daSTA che, evA puruSAkAra siddha AtmA kazikhara
sthita che te dhyAvavA." sarva karma kalaMkane kSaya jyathI jeNe zuddha AtmA
siddha karyo che, deha rahita evA zuddha AtmA siddhanuM dhyAna pragaTa karyo
che, sahajAnmasvarUpane prApta evA je zuddha AtmA thayA che, kevala caitanyamaya
Atmatatva avasthAnA pragaTapaNAthI je svarUpapratikatvarUpa kaivalyane pAmyA
che,-evA zuddha AtmArUpa siddha bhagavAna te parama dhyeya che-- x"
NaTThacadughAikammo dasaNasuhaNANavIriyamaIo  /  suhadehatyo appA suddho ariho
viciMtijjo  // " - zrI nemicaMdra siddhAMtacakavarIkRta zrI bRhad
dravyasaMgraha, +" le jhoyAsToransa gALo vA kurilAyA pA siddha kSa sosiddo."
-zrI bRhad dravyasaMgraha,

Page #637 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Prabha Drishti: Contemplation of the Siddhas, Contemplation of the Acharyas,
etc. (561)  This is worthy of the highest contemplation. Because it is the pure
Atma-Vastu-Dharma manifested by the Bhagwan, the complete purity of all Atma-
Gunas has been attained, they have become the doer and enjoyer of their own
nature, they are experiencing the joy and result of that, the purity of all
Atma-Pradeshas has arisen in them, the Chaitanya-maya Tattva-pan has been
manifested and attained by them, they are both the perceiver and the perceived,
the pervader and the pervaded, all are Chaitanya-maya - this Chaitanya-maya
Tattva-Avastha-Siddha-Dasha has been manifested. "Dharma Pragu-Bhavata, Sakal
Guna Shuddhata, Katruta Bhegyata, Raman Parinamata; Shuddha Swapradeshata,
Tattva Chaitanya, Vyapy Vyaphak Tatha Grahya Grahakagata... Dharma Jagnathno
Dharma Shuchi Gaiye, Aapne Atama Teho Bhavie!" - Shri Devchandraji. "Prabhupad
Valagya Te Rahya Taja, Alag Ang Na Saaja Re; Vachhak Yash Kahe Avar Na Dhyau, E
Prabhu Na Gun Gau Re" - Shri Yashovijayji. "Khata Karai Khatam Kamtana Samasat,
Pamaya Gati Ja Apunarbhav Je Prashast; Jene Surya Chaugati Rath Chak Chaare, Te
Siddha Ne Charan Ho Sharanu Amaare!" - Shri Siddha Stotra (Dr. Bhagwandas
Mansukh Bhai Mehta Virchit)  Through contemplation of such manifested, innate,
self-existent Siddha Prabhu, the Atma contemplates its own nature, because the
Atma-Jati of the Paramatma and the Atma is one. The pure Dharma of the Dharma-
Moorti, Dharma-Nath, Paramatma, is the same as the Atma's inherent nature,
Dharma, in the three Man-Mandirs. Thus, the nature of that which is one, never
changes or shifts. In the liberated Paramatma, the Paramatma Tattva, which is
supremely blissful, remains manifest due to the absence of all attachments. In
the Samsari Atma, it remains latent, in the form of Shakti, due to the occasion
of the Parbhavas, which are like Upadhis. In other words, in the Samsari Jiva,
the Paramatma-pan is in the form of Shakti, and in the Siddha, it is in the form
of Vyakti. Therefore, for the sake of that Shakti-rupa Paramatma-pan, one should
immerse oneself in the devotion of the actual Paramatma Tattva, who has attained
the manifestation of his Vyakti. Through such Tanmaya Dhyana, Samapti occurs,
meaning that Samarsi-Bhav arises, unification happens, where the Atma merges
into the Paramatma without distinction. Thus, through contemplation of the pure
Paramatma, the pure Atma is manifested. Therefore, the contemplation of this
Siddha Parameshthi is always worthy of contemplation for the Mumukhu in the Man-
Mandir - it is the supreme Ishta.  "Mam Shaktya Gunagrama Vyaktva Cha
Parameshthinah. Etavanavayor Bhedah Shaktivyaktisvabhavathah. So'yam Samarsi
Bhavastadeekaranam Smritam. Aprithaktvena Yatraatma Liyate Paramatmani." - Shri
Shubhachandracharyaji-Krit Shri Gnanav.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prabhA daSTi : siddhanuM dhyAna, AcAryAdinuM dhyAna (561) parama dhyAna dharavA
yogya che. kAraNa ke te bhagavAnane zuddha Atmavastu-dharma pragaTayo che, sarva
AtmaguNunI saMpUrNa zuddhatA prApta thaI che, nija svarUpanA kartA-bhoktA thaI
te temAM ramaNatA-pariNAmatA anubhavI rahyA che, sarva AtmapradezanI zuddhatA
temane upajI che, caitanyamaya tattvapaNuM temane pragaTa prApta thayuM che,
temane grAhya paNa cetana che ne grAhaka paNa cetana che, vyApya paNa cetana che
ne vyApaka paNa cetana che,-evI caitanyamaya tatva avasthA-siddha dazA pragaTI
che. "dharma prAgubhAvatA, sakala guNa zuddhatA, katRtA bhegyatA, ramaNa
pariNAmatA; zuddha svapradezatA, tattva caitanyatA, vyApya vyApaka tathA grAhya
grAhakagatA... dharma jaganAthano dharma zuci gAIe, ApaNe AtamA teho bhAvIe!"--
zrI devacaMdrajI. "prabhupada vaLagyA te rahyA tAjA, alaga aMga na sAjA re;
vAcaka yaza kahe avara na dhyAuM, e prabhunA guNa gAuM re."--zrI yazovijayajI.
"khAtAM karI khatama kamataNA samasta, pAmyA gati ja apunarbhava je prazasta;
jeNe sUryA caugati ratha caka cAre, te siddhane caraNa ho zarANuM amAre! -zrI
siddhastotra (Do. bhagavAnadAsa manasukhabhAI mahetA viracita) AvA pragaTa
sahajAnmasvarUpa siddha prabhunA dhyAnathI AtmA nija svarUpane dhyAtA thAya che,
kAraNa ke te paramAtmAnI ne AtmAnI Atmatva jAti eka che. je te dharmamUtti
dhamanAtha paramAtmAne zuddha dharma che, tevo ja A AtmAne tiNe manamaMdire mULa
svabhAva dharma che. Ama je vastunI jAti ekatA che, te kadI dharma prabhu
palaTatI nathI-pharatI nathI. mukta paramAtmAmAM sarva saMganA parihArathI
dhyAe" te parama AnaMdamaya paramAtma tatva vyaktapaNe rahyuM che, ane saMsArI
AtmAmAM upAdhirUpa parabhAvanA prasaMgane lIdhe te AvRtta hovAthI avyaktapaNe-
zaktirUpe* rahyuM che, arthAt saMsArI jIvamAM zaktithI paramAtmapaNuM che, ane
siddhamAM vyaktithI paramAtmapaNuM che. eTale te zaktirUpa paramAtmapaNAnI
vyakti mATe, jene tenI vyakti-pragaTatA prApta thaI che evA sAkSAt paramAtma
tattvanI bhaktimAM raMga lagADI, tenuM tanmaya dhyAna karavuM joIe. tevA tanmaya
dhyAnathI samApti thAya che, eTale ke samarasIbhAva upaje che, ekIkaraNa thAya
che, ke jyAM AtmA apRthaphapaNe-abhinnapaNe paramAtmAmAM laya pAme che. Ama
zuddha paramAtmAnA dhyAnathI zuddha AtmA pragaTe che, tethI A siddha
parameSThinuM dhyAna manamaMdiramAM mumukSune sadA dhyAvavA yogya che-parama
ISTa che. +" mama zaktyA guNagrAmo vyaktyA ca parameSThinaH  /
etAvAnAvayorbhedaH zaktivyaktisvabhAvataH  /  /  so'yaM
samarasIbhAvastadekIkaraNaM smRtam  /  apRthaktvena yatrAtmA lIyate paramAtmani
/  / " -zrI zubhacaMdrAcAryajIkRta zrI jJAnAva.

Page #638 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(562) Yoga-darshan-samuchchay: “Three things arise from my soul, all my wealth
is born from me; three things are contemplated by the Lord of Dharma in the
temple of the mind, the Supreme Devchandra attains his own Siddhi and
happiness.” “When the essence of truth is contemplated, one becomes aware of
one’s own essence; the essence of meditation is concentration, that is the
fulfillment of the essence.” “The purity of the pure Jinraj, which is
contemplated in the temple of the mind; contemplation is the essence of the
earth with its attributes, contemplation is oneness without attributes.” Blessed
are you! Blessed are you! Blessed is the Jinraj! – Shri Devchandraji. (3-4-5)
And – “The excellent thoughts that are the essence of darshan and knowledge, the
soul that is in both self and others, in the conduct of character and the
conduct of penance, such is the goal of the Acharya Muni – It is worthy of
contemplation. He who is endowed with the three jewels and is immersed in the
eternal teachings of Dharma, the Acharya, the Upadhyaya, the soul who is the
bull among the ascetics, salutations to him! (He is also a goal) The eternal
pure character that is the essence of darshan and knowledge, the path to
liberation, He who practices it is the ascetic Muni, salutations to him!” This
too is worthy of contemplation. – This Acharya, Upadhyaya, and ascetic are the
pure souls who are constantly engaged in the practice of their innate nature,
the innate pure nature of the soul, and who are established in a high state of
virtue. Therefore, such great souls who are the embodiment of the pure soul are
the supreme object of devotion, as their contemplation of the form of the soul
inspires the soul to become established in self-contemplation. – Thus, the five
supreme beings, etc., are all objects of devotion, the purpose of which is to
become established in the contemplation of the soul, for “When the ascetic
contemplates anything and becomes one with it, and becomes devoid of desire,
then he has definite contemplation, that is, contemplation of the pure soul.
Just as a ladder, etc., is needed to climb a palace, so too, the supreme beings,
etc., are of great benefit in climbing to the definite contemplation of self-
contemplation. 3. Or, the soul is the main object of contemplation. The ultimate
goal and fruit of all the other objects mentioned above is also this self-
contemplation. Because, through the contemplation of the pure soul, the
embodiment of the Arihant Siddha, etc., the mind becomes pure, stable, and
concentrated. *"दसणणाणपहाणे वीरेयचारित्ततवायारे । अप्पं परं च जुजइ सो आयरिओ मुणी
झेओ। जो रयणत्तयजुत्तो णिच्चं धम्मोवएसणे णिरदो । सो उवज्झाओ अप्पा जदिवरवसहो णमो
तस्स ॥ दसणणाणसमग्गं मग्गं मोक्खस्स जो हु चरितं । साधयदि णिच्चसुद्धं साहू स मुणी
णमो तस्स ।। जं किंचिवि चितंतो णिरीहवित्त। हवे जदा साहू । लध्धूणय एयत्तं तदाहु तं
तस्स णिच्छयं झाणं ॥" -Shri Badu Dravyasangrah

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (562) yogadaSTisamuccaya "tiNe muja AtamA tuja thakI nIpaje, mahArI saMpadA
sakaLa muja saMpaje; tiNe manamaMdire dharma prabhu dhyAIe, parama devacaMdra
nija siddhi sukha pAIe." "pragaTa tattvatA dhyAvatAM, nija tattvane dhyAtA thAya
re; tattvaramaNa ekAgratA, teha pUraNa tatva samAya re." "INI pare vimala
jinarAjanI vimalatA, dhyAna manamaMdire jeha dhyAve; dhyAna pRthaphatva
savikalpatA raMgathI, dhyAna ekatva avikalpa Ave. dhanya tuM! dhanya tuM! dhanya
jinarAja tuM!"-zrI devacaMdrajI. (3-4-5) temaja-"darzana-jJAnapradhAna evA
uttama vicAra, cAritrAcAra ane tapAcAramAM je AtmAne ane parane je che, evA te
AcArya muni dhyeya che-- dhyAna karavA yogya che. je ratnatrayayukta che ne
nitya dharmopadezamAM nirata che, AcAryAdi yativaravRSabha evA upAdhyAya AtmA
che, tene namaskAra he! (te paNa dhyeya dhyeya che) dazana-jJAnasamagra evuM
mokSanA mArgarUpa nitya zuddha cAritra je sAdhe che te sAdhu evA muni che, tene
namaskAra he !' A paNa dhyAna karavA yogya che.-A AcArya, upAdhyAya ne sAdhu e
zuddha AtmAnA sahajAnmasvarUpanI sAdhanAmAM-sahaja zuddha svabhAvabhUta
AtmasvarUpanI ArAdhanAmAM niraMtara pravRtta thayelA ane ucca guNasthAne sthiti
karatA, evA AtmArAmI mahAtmAo che. eTale evA e zuddha AtmArUpa parameSionuM
svarUpadhyAna AtmArthIne AtmadhyAnArUDha thavAmAM apUrva preraNAdAyI hovAthI
parama ISTa che.-Ama paMcaparameSTi Adi A sava dhyeya-AlaMbanane hetu
AtmasvarUpanA dhyAnapara ArUDha thavAne-caDhavAno che, kAraNa ke "je kaMI
ciMtavatAM sAdhu jyAre ekatva pAmI nirIha vRttivALo thaI jAya che, tyAre tene
nizcaya dhyAna hoya che, arthAt zuddha AtmasvarUpanuM dhyAna hoya che. prAsAda
para caDhavA mATe jema nIsaraNI vagere AlaMbananI jarUra paDe che, tema
AtmadhyAnarUpa nizcaya dhyAna para caDhavA mATe parameSThi Adi dhyeyanuM
AlaMbana parama upakArI thAya che. 3. athavA AtmA e ja mukhya dhyeya che-
dhyAnane viSaya che. uparokta anya sarva dhyeyanuM aMtima lakSya ane phaLa paNa
A AtmadhyAna ja che. kAraNa ke e arihaMta siddha Adi zuddha AtmArUpa dhyeyanA
ciMtanathI cittanI zuddhi ane sthiratA-ekAgratA *"dasaNaNANapahANe
vIreyacArittatavAyAre  /  appaM paraM ca jujai so Ayario muNI jheo| jo
rayaNattayajutto NiccaM dhammovaesaNe Nirado  /  so uvajjhAo appA jadivaravasaho
Namo tassa  //  dasaNaNANasamaggaM maggaM mokkhassa jo hu caritaM  /  sAdhayadi
NiccasuddhaM sAhU sa muNI Namo tassa  /  /  jaM kiMcivi citaMto nniriihvitt|
have jadA sAhU  /  ladhdhUNaya eyattaM tadAhu taM tassa NicchayaM jhANaM  // "
-zrI badu dravyasaMgraha

Page #639 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Prabha Drushti: Shukal Atmadhyan, Prabhu's Pidastghyan (563)  It happens that
for a pure man, who is free from attachment, Shukal Atmadhyan, which is a firm
conviction, is the most suitable for meditation. Therefore, the one who
meditates on the Supreme Being, who is full of virtues, with complete devotion,
experiences the pure soul and attains the state of the Supreme Being.
**Parmaguni Tanmayata Sevan, Nishchay Dhyane Dhyaveji; Shuddhatma Anubhav
Asvadi, Devchandra Pad Paveji. Shri Chandraprabh'-Shri Devchandraji,**  And
these great souls, who have this vision, are most suitable for the beginning of
this pure Atmadhyan, because through the excellent worship of Dharma Dhyan,
these self-knowing, selfless, and dedicated souls have become calm, peaceful,
and unwavering in this vision. They have become absorbed in the feeling of the
self, and have become established in the state of self-realization. They have
accumulated an extraordinary store of self-knowledge and non-self-knowledge,
which is essential for climbing the ladder of Shukal Dhyan, which is the most
suitable form of meditation for the pure soul.  Therefore, this soul, who is
meditating, feels inspired by this extraordinary self-knowledge and says,
"Although I am like the sun, who develops the lotus of infinite virtues, alas! I
was deprived by my enemies in this great forest! Bound by the countless chains
of attachment, etc., which arose from self-delusion, I wandered in this terrible
cycle of birth and death for an infinite time! Today my fever of attachment has
subsided, today my sleep of ignorance has gone, therefore, with the sword of
meditation, I will kill my enemies of karma."  Furthermore, he feels, "I am the
one, without whom I was sleeping, and with whose grace I have awakened. I am the
one who is beyond the senses, indescribable, and self-evident. I am the Supreme
Being, and the Supreme Being is me. Therefore, I am the one who is worthy of
worship by me, and no one else." This is the state of being. This feeling of
self-awareness does not involve any attachment or aversion. Because he thinks,
"What is inert is visible, and what is conscious is invisible. So, where should
I have attachment, and where should I have aversion?" Therefore, I...
*"Anantgunarajivabandhurapyatra Vanchitah. Aho Bhavamaha Kakshe Pragham
Karmavairibhih. ||  Svibhiramasamudbhute Raagadyatulabandhanai.  Baddho
Vidambitah Kalamanantan Janmadurgame. ||  Adya Ragajjaro Jirnomo Hanidradya
Nirgata.  Tatah Karmaripuham Hanmi Dhyananistrishdharyaya. || " —Shri
Shubhachandraji's Shri Jnanavali, +‘-Shvetamibhu Dhathmaden Chetannu Tathah.
Vami Va Tushyami Madhyasthoddham Manyatah. || ′′—Shri Samadhishatak,

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prabhA dRSTi : zukala AtmadhyAna, prabhunu pi'DasthaghyAna (563) thAya che,--
jethI satra nirIha evA cegI puruSa zukala AtmadhyAnarUpa nizcaya dhyAnane mATe
parama ceAgya thAya che. eTale te parama guNavaMta paramAtmAnuM tanmaya dhyAna
je nizcaya dhyAnamAM dhyAve che, te zuddhAtmAnA anubhava AsvAdI te
paramAtmapadane pAme che. paramaguNI tanmayatA sevana, nizcaya dhyAne dhyAvejI;
zuddhAtama anubhava AsvAdI, devacaMdra pada pAvejI. zrI caMdraprabha'-zrI
devaca'drujI, "" ane A dRSTivALA mahAyegI tA yukta evA A zuddha AtmadhyAnanA
prAraMbha mATe parama ceAgya thaI gayA hAya che, kAraNa ke atyAra sudhInI dharma
dhyAnanI utkRSTa ArAdhanAthI A AtmajJAnI sabhyaSTi yAgI puruSa eve zAMta, dAMta
A dRSTimAM ne apramatta thaI gayA haiAya che, AtmabhAvathI evA bhAvitAtmA
zukaladhyAnanI ane sthitaprajJa AtmArAmI thai gayA heAya che, ke teNe zuddha
AtmAnA caiAgyatA dhyAnarUpa zukaladhyAnanI zreNIe caDhavA mATe Avazyaka upayegI
evA apUrva AtmavIya nA-AtmasAmarthya nA adbhuta saMcaya karI lIdhA hAya che,
eTale A AtmadhyAnI puruSa apUrva AtmavIyanI sphuraNAthI bhAve che ke* anaMta
guNu-kamalane vikAsa karanAra evA huM sUrya samAna chatAM ahA ! A
mahAlavAraNyamAM pUrve ka-vairiothI vaMcita karAyA ! AtmabrAMtithI upajelA
rAgAdi atula adhanAthI badhAyeleA huM anatakALa A duCma bhava-vanamAM vikhita
thayo! have Aja mhArA rAga-jvara naSTa thayeA che, Aja mhArI mAhanidrA cAlI gaI
che, tethI dhyAnarUpa khagadhArAthI huM kama zatrune haNI nAMkhu vaLI te bhAve
che ke-- jenA abhAve huM sUtA hatA, ane jenA sadbhAve huM UThayo chuM, te
atIndriya anirdezya svasa`vedya huM chuM. je paramAtmA che te ja huM chuM, je
huM chuM te parama che, tethI huM ja mhArAthI upAsya chu, anya kAI nahi', ema
sthiti che.' namA muja Ama je AtmabhAvanA bhAve che, te kayAMya rAga-dveSa
karatA nathI. name muja re 'kAraNake te ciMtave che ke- A acetana x che te dRzya
che, ne cetana che, te adRzya che. teA huM kayAM rASa karu ? kayAM teSa karuM ?
ethI huM < *"anantaguNarAjIvabandhurapyatra vaJcitaH  /  aho bhavamahA kakSe
prAgahaM karmavairibhiH  //  svavibhramasamudbhUtai rAgAdyatulabandhanaiH  /
baddho viDambitaH kAlamanantaM janmadurgame  //  adya rAgajjaro jIrNo
mohanidrAdya nirgatA  /  tataH karmaripuM hanmi dhyAnanistrizadhArayA  /  /  "
--zrI zubhaca dgAcA chakRta zrI jJAnAva, +'-zvetaminuM dathamadaE cetanuM tataH
/  vAmi va tuSyAmi madhyasthoDaDhuM mAnyataH  /  /  ''--zrI samAdhizataka,

Page #640 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(564) Gadarisamuccaya "I become the middle." And everywhere, the soul, being
devoid of attachment, becomes absorbed in the pure self-meditation, and its
supreme blissful emotions emerge: Oh! Oh! I say to myself, I bow to myself, I
bow to myself; the infinite fruit, the gift of the giver, which has become your
gift. ... Shantijin! One request from me." - Shri Anandghanji, this soul, in
which there is a goal, is called Pindastha Dhyana in the scriptures. The
meditation of the soul residing in the physical body, the meditation of the
soul-god residing in the body-temple, is Pindastha Dhyana. Where the mantra-
sentences like Namaskara, which are indicative of the Supreme Being, are
chanted, that is Padastah Dhyana. Where the omniscient Supreme Being, who is the
subject of meditation, is the form-like meditation, that is Roopastha Dhyana.
And - Where the Nirangan, Nirakar Siddha Paramatma, who is beyond the body and
form, is the subject of meditation, that is called Rupaatita Dhyana. *"देहादेवलि
जो वसइ, देउ अणाइ अणतु । केवलणाणफुरंततणु, सो परमप्पु णिभंतु ॥"* - Shri
Yogindevdev-written Paramatmaprakash Ga. 33 In this, especially the meditation
of the omniscient Bhagwan, who is the form-body-dwelling, is the ultimate
benefit to the soul. Because seeing the unparalleled form of the Supreme Being,
who is beyond the body, even though he has a body, the mind of the devotee
becomes steady, leaving behind the Pindastha nature of the agile Lord.
Therefore, that devotee sings in meditation and emotion: Oh Lord! If this form-
like form had not been seen in the world, would our mind have been happy and
joyful over it? Without being attracted, how would we desire the pure nature?
Without being attracted, how would we desire the manifest form of the Lord?
Without being attracted, how would we bring it to the state of meditation?
Without being attracted, how would we taste the nectar? Therefore, we believe
that Oh Lord! No devotee can attain liberation without your devotion. Oh
Omniscient Supreme Being! By the gathering of our good virtues, you have become
the form-body-wearer and have spoken the words of the nectar-like Dharma. Thus,
Oh Lord! This form-body is the cause of many virtues, and by serving it, it
becomes a shield against great fear, therefore, Oh Lord! We are determined to do
this Pindastha Dhyana, becoming one. "Seeing the unique form, the good mind,
having abandoned the agile nature, my mind becomes steady; if the form-like form
had not been seen in the world, then what would the mind say, it would be
hurting." *"पदस्थं मन्त्रवाक्यस्थं पिण्डस्थं स्वाचितनम । रूपस्थं सर्वचिद्रूपं
रूपातीतं निरञ्जनम् ॥"*

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (564) gadarisamuccaya madhyastha thauM chuM." ane sarvatra vItarAga evo te
AtmAmAM ja rata thaI zukala evA AtmadhyAnane pAme che, ne tenA parama dhanya
uddagAra nIkaLI paDe che ke ahe ! aho ! huM mujane kahuM, name muja name muja
re; amita phala dAna dAtAranI, jehane bheTa thaI tuja re. ... zAMtijina ! eka
muja vinati."--zrI AnaMdaghanajI, A AtmA jemAM dhyeya che, tene
zAstraparibhASAmAM piMDastha dhyAna kahe che. dehapiMDamAM sthiti karatA
AtmAnuM, deha-devaLamAM birAjamAna AtmadevanuM jyAM dhyAna dharAya che te
piMDastha dhyAna che. parameSThivAcaka namaskArAdi maMtra vAkayane japa ya bhede
cAra jyAM dhyeya che, te padastha dhyAna che. jyAM sadehe vatA, sAkAra-rUpI
dhyAna bheda evA sarvajJa paramAtmA dhyAnane viSaya che, te rUpastha dhyAna che.
ane - jyAM dehAtIta-rUpAtIta evA niraMjana nirAkAra siddha paramAtmA dhyAnane
viSaya che, te rUpAtIta dhyAna kahevAya che.* "dehAdevali jo vasai, deu aNAi
aNatu  /  kevalaNANaphuraMtataNu, so paramappu NibhaMtu  // " - zrI
yogIndradevaviracita paramAtmaprakAza gA. 33 emAM paNa khAsa karIne jIvatamUtti
evA rUpI-dehapiMDastha sarvajJa bhagavAnanuM dhyAna jIvane parama upakArI thAya
che. kAraNa ke A deha chatAM dehAtIta dazAvALA parama AtmasamAdhimaya prabhunuM
anupama rUpa dekhIne bhakta jananuM mana capaLa prabhunuM piMDastha svabhAva
choDIne TharI jAya che-sthira thAya che. eTale e bhakta jana dhyAna bhAvAvezamAM
gAya che ke-he bhagavAna ! jo A hArUM rUpI svarUpa jagamAM na dekhAyuM hota, te
amAruM mana tenA upara hasata-harSa pAmata? hIMcyA vinA zuddha svabhAvane kema
Icchata? IDyA vinA hArA pragaTa bhAvane kema prIcchata - eLakhata ? prIyA vinA
dhyAna dazAmAM te kema lAvata? lAvyA vinA rasasvAda te kema pAmatI mATe ame te
mAnIe chIe ke he prabhu! hArI bhakti vinA koI bhaktane mukti hotI nathI. he
sarvajJa paramAtmA ! amArA sat puNyanA bhegathI tame rUpI dehadhArI thayA ne
amRta samANu dharmanI vANI kahI gayA. Ama he bhagavAna! A hAre deha-piDa ghaNu
guNanuM kAraNa che, ane te sevavAmAM AvatAM mahAbhayanuM vAraNa thaI paDe che,
mATe he prabhu! ame to hAruM piMDastha dhyAna ekamanA thaIne karavAno nizcaya
karIe chIe. "rUpa anUpa nihALI sumati jina tAharu, chAMDI capala svabhAva Tha"
mana mAruM; rUpI sarUpa na hota jo jaga tuja dIsatuM, te kuNa upara mana kahe
ama hIMsatuM. *"padasthaM mantravAkyasthaM piNDasthaM svAcitanama  /  rUpasthaM
sarvacidrUpaM rUpAtItaM niraJjanam  // "

Page #641 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Assembly Vision:** The importance of self-knowledge, the destruction of the
land of passions.  Without violence, how can one desire pure nature? Without
desire, how can your essence manifest? Without contemplation, how can you bring
it into your state? Without experiencing its taste, how can you attain it?
Without devotion, there is no liberation. Now, who is the devotee? Without form,
there is no one. Now, who is the person? Through the yoga of true virtue, you
have become form. We are equal to the divine, we have spoken of the Dharma.
Therefore, your body, due to many virtues, is now the object of devotion, the
great fearsome one. Peace-Victory-Wisdom-Disciple, tell the future generations!
Meditate on the Lord's body, become one. - Shri Rupavijayji.  "The meditation
that is the same as the form, that is knowledge and conduct; by that, all sins
go away, the meditator becomes the form of the object now." - Shri Yashovijayji.
This all-knowing Supreme Being, in whom the state of perfect peace, the
immersion in the bliss of liberation, and the non-attached state are embodied,
is also as beneficial for meditation as the Jinapratimā, which is the
establishment of his form. The Jin and the Jinapratimā are both the same in
terms of cause, as the scriptures say. Therefore, this established form of the
Jinapratimā is like the Jin, and the oneness with it increases the manifestation
of the qualities of the self's nature. And seeing this wonderful form of the
embodied Lord, it is amazing that the noble people, the wise, desire the
formless state! "The established Jin is the same in terms of cause, that is the
word of the scriptures."  "The Jinapratimā is like the Jin, the sutras say." The
oneness with the Jin, which is the same in essence, is the manifestation of the
qualities of the self's nature. - Shri Devchandraji.  "Seeing this wonderful
form, the wise desire the formless state; you have lost yourself, know this, O
Dev! Remembering and worshipping it, the reader does good." - Shri Yashovijayji.
Similarly, the forms of the primordial gods, etc., also help the soul to attain
its true form and elevate it to self-meditation. This self-meditation is the
main means, because it fulfills the main purpose of the journey, it unites with
the pure nature of liberation, and it leads to the yoga of seeking the pure
self-essence. The meditator, the one who meditates, becomes the object of
meditation, the Supreme Being. "By practicing karma yoga, the yogi who is
absorbed in knowledge yoga, ascends to meditation yoga and attains liberation
yoga." * "कर्मयोगं समभ्यस्य ज्ञानयोगसमाहितः । ध्यानयोगं समारुह्य मुक्तियोगं
प्रपद्यते ।।"  Shri Adhyatmasar.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 sabhA daSTi : AtmayAnanI mukhyatA, rega dezane nAza hiMsyA viNa kima zuddha
svabhAvane IcchatA ? IcchA viNa tuja bhAva, pragaTa kima prIchatA ? prIchayA
viNa kima dhyAna, dazAmAMhi lAvatA? lAvyA viNa rasasvAda, kaha kima pAvatA?
bhakti vinA navi mukti, have kaI bhaktane, rUpI vinA te te na, have kaI vyaktine
ama satapuNyane yoge, tame rUpI thayA, amiya samANI vANa, dharamanI kahI gayA.
te mATe tuja piMDa, ghaNA guNa kAraNo, sevya dhyAye have, mahAbhayAraNo
zAMtivijaya budha ziSya, kahe bhavikA janA ! prabhunuM piMDastha dhyAna karo
thaI ekamanA." -zrI rUpavijayajI. "hAruM dhyAna te samakita rU5, teha ja jJAna
ne cAritra teha che; tehathI jAye saghaLA he pApa, dhyAtA dhyeya svarUpa have
pacha."-zrI yazovijayajI. A sarvajJa paramAtmAne parama zAMta,
prazamarasanimagna vItarAga bhAva jemAM mUrtimaMta thAya che, evI tenI taDAkAra
sthApanArUpa jinapratimA paNa dhyAna mATe teTalI ja upakArI thAya che. jina ane
jinapratimA banne nimitta jinapaDiyA samAna che, evI Agama vANI che. eTale A
sthApanArUpa jinapratimA jina sArikhI" sAthe paNa je abhedatA vadhI, te A AtmAnA
svasvabhAva guNanI vyakta-pragaTa gyatA sAdhI ema jANavuM. ane AvA A rUpI
bhagavaMtanuM adbhuta rUpa dekhIne Azcarya che ke bhavyajana-gya evA gIjana
arUpIpada vare che! "nimitta samAna thApanA jinajI, e AgamanI vANI re."
jinapaDimA jina sArikhI, kahI sUtra majhAra." ThavaNuM samavasaraNa jina seMtI,
je abhedatA vALI re, e AtamanA svasvabhAva guNa, vyakta yogyatA sAdhI re."-zrI
devacaMdrajI. "dekhI abhuta tAharuM rUpa, acarija bhavikA arUpI pada varejI;
hArI gata tuM jANe he deva! samaraNa bhajana te vAcaka yaza kareche."--zrI
yazovijayajI. temaja rUpAtIta Adi dhAna prakAre paNa AtmAne svarUpAvalaMbanamAM
parama upakArI thaI AtmadhyAne caDhAve che. A AtmadhyAna ja mukhya evuM
bhegasAdhana che, kAraNa ke tenAthI ja vegane mukhya uddeza siddha thAya che,
zuddha svabhAvarUpa mokSa sAthe yujana thAya che, zuddha AtmatatvanA
anusaMdhAnarUpa yeAga nIpaje che. A dhyAna karanAra dhyAtA pote dhyeyarUpa-
paramAtmArUpa banI jAya che. "karmayogane samyaka abhyAsa karI, jJAnayegathI
samAhita evo yegI, dhyAna para caDhI, muktiyogane pAme che."* x"karmayogaM
samabhyasya jJAnayogasamAhitaH  /  dhyAnayogaM samAruhya muktiyogaM prapadyate
/  / " zrI adhyAtmasAra,

Page #642 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(566) There are many types of meditation in the Yoga perspective, but the best
one is the meditation that focuses on the soul. This soul meditation is mostly
not achieved without self-knowledge, and this self-knowledge is not attained
without the true understanding of the soul. This true understanding is mostly
achieved gradually by many beings, and the main path to it is the refuge,
company, and respect for the knowledgeable person who is the embodiment of the
soul. (See) Shrimad Rajchandra, Letter 342. Disease and faults are destroyed
"The meditator, the object of meditation, and samadhi are inseparable, leading
to liberation." - Shri Devchandraji. The seventh mental fault, "G", is destroyed
here. Disease means the three faults of attachment, aversion, and delusion,
which are the major forms of attachment and disease. Here, their absence is
achieved. Or, any action performed without true understanding is a disease,
because it destroys pure action. This means that the three faults cause
suffering or damage to pure action, which is disease. (See Sanipat, p. 86) And
the fruit of such diseased impure action is barren. (1) Due to ignorance of the
true nature of the soul, the being is confused and deluded - this is delusion.
And due to this, the being develops attachment and aversion towards external
objects because of the mistaken identification of the self with the body.
Therefore, it moves towards external objects, engages in worldly activities.
Thus, attachment and aversion are the greatest diseases for the being. Just as a
person suffering from a severe illness loses consciousness, becomes delirious,
and speaks nonsense, mistaking the self for the other and the other for the
self, in short, behaves in a confused and contradictory manner, acting contrary
to its original nature, and thus becomes a "sick person" by losing its true
nature, similarly, when the three faults of attachment, aversion, and delusion
affect a being, it loses awareness of its true nature, mistakes the external for
the self and the self for the external, and speaks and acts in a confused and
delirious manner, behaving contrary to its original nature. Thus, due to the
three faults, the being falls away from its true nature, and its self-
realization is disrupted, leading it to move towards external objects, engage in
worldly activities, and find pleasure in them. This is the main disease for the
being. (2) Or, any action performed without true understanding is also a
disease, because it destroys pure action, that is, it causes suffering to pure
action or disrupts it. Just as the actions of a sick person are diseased, so too
are the actions of a person afflicted by these faults. The point is that any
action that causes suffering to pure self-realization is a disease.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (566 ) yogadaSTisamuccaya dhyAnanA ghaNu ghaNA prakAra che, e sarvamAM zreSTha
evuM te AtmA jemAM mukhyapaNe varte che te dhyAna kahevAya che; ane e ja
AtmadhyAnanI prApti ghaNuM karIne AtmajJAnanI prApti vinA thatI nathI, evuM je
AtmajJAna te yathArtha bedhanI prApti sivAya utpanna thatuM nathI. e yathArtha
bodhanI prApti ghaNuM karIne krame karIne ghaNuM jIvone thAya che, ane tene
mukhya mArga te bedhasvarUpa evA jJAnI puruSano Azraya ke saMga ane tene viSe
bahumAna, prema e che." (juo) zrImad rAjacaMdra, patrAMka 342. roga doSane nAza
<< dhyAtA dhyeya samAdhi abhede, parapariNati ude. "--zrI devacaMdrajI. ga"
nAmane sAtame cittadoSa atre naSTa thAya che. roga eTale rAga-dveSa-meha e
tridoSarUpa mahArAga-bhAvaroga tene atra abhAva thAya che. athavA sAcI yathArtha
samajaNa vinAnI kriyA karavAmAM Ave te zuddha kriyAne ucheda thAya, eTale
tridoSa zuddha kriyAne je pIDArUpa athavA laMgarUpa thAya, te roga che. (juo
sanipAta pR. 86) ane AvI mAMdalI azuddha kriyAnuM phaLa vAMjhiyuM che. (1)
AtmasvarUpanA ajJAnathI jIva parabhAvamAM muMjhAya che, mUrzita thAya che,-A ja
maha che. ane tene lIdhe paravastumAM AtmabuddhinA kAraNe A jIva rAgadvaSa kare
che. eTale e parabhAva pratye gamana kare che, parapariNatine bhaje che. Ama
maharAga-dveSa e ja jIvane moTAmAM moTo roga che. jema trideSa sannipAtane regI
potAnuM bhAna bhUlI jAya che, bebhAnapaNe phAve tema bake che, potAnuM te
pArakuM ne pArakuM te potAnuM evuM yadvAladvA asamaMjasa bele che, TUMkAmAM jANe
badalAI gayuM hoya ema potAnA mULa asala svabhAvathI viparIta paNe-vibhAvapaNe
varte che, ane pitAnA sat svarUpathI nipAtane pAmI potAnA " sannipAtI" nAmane
yathArtha kare che tema rAga-dveSa-meharUpa tridoSa sanipAta je jIvane lAgu
paDayo hoya che, te jIva potAnA AtmasvarUpanuM bhAna bhUlI jAya che, pArakuM te
pitAnuM ne pitAnuM te pArakuM evuM bebhAnapaNe phAve tema pralape chelave che,
potAnA mULa asala sahaja svabhAvathI viparIta paNe-vibhAvapaNe vatta che. Ama
tridoSa sannipAtathI jIvana nija svarUpathI nipAta-adha:pAta thAya che, eTale
tenA AtmapariNamanamAM bhaMga paDI, te parabhAva pratye-vibhAva pratye gamana,
pariNamana ne ramaNa kare che. A ja jIvane mukhya mahAroga che. (2) athavA
yathArtha sAcI samajaNa vinAnI je kiyA karavAmAM Ave te paNa roga che, kAraNa ke
tethI zuddha kriyAne ucacheda thAya che, eTale ke zuddha kriyAne pIDA upaje che
athavA tene bhaMga thAya che. mAMdA mANasanI gamanAdi kriyA jema mAMdalI hoya
che, tema A roga doSavaMtanI koI paNa kriyA mAMdalIregiSTa hoya che. tAtparya ke
zuddha kriyA eTale zuddha AtmapariNatine je pIDA upaje,

Page #643 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Essence of the Soul's Perfection - A Journey of Bliss  (567) The
corruption of pure character, which is the form of the soul, is the disease.
This is the essence of the discourse. Thus, the disease in the form of the
soul's degeneration or the movement towards externalization is destroyed here. -
This means that there is no movement towards externalization and the soul
remains immersed in its own perfection. - In this "Prabha" vision, the state of
being constantly immersed in pure self-perfection, avoiding the influence of
external factors, is achieved. It embraces the pure, innate, self-divine,
avoiding external influences and revealing the self-essence by immersing in the
self-religion. This is the description of the experience of this high state of
self-being:  "The mind becomes restless about other subjects besides self-
perfection." "Here, the self-essence is realized." etc. (See) Shrimad
Rajchandra.  "The perfection of the soul is a wonder, as if it is known, as if
it is revealed." - Shrimad Rajchandraji.  After the manifestation of the quality
called "Sookshma Tatvavicharana" (subtle analysis of the essence) in the sixth
vision, the quality called "Tatvamatipatti" (perfection of the soul) emerges as
a natural consequence in the seventh vision. Tatvamatipatti is the experience of
the self-essence as it is, in its true form. "The pure self is always
experienced." Thus, here, the soul experiences direct perception - realization.
Therefore, other scriptures that describe its aspects become irrelevant and
useless, because scriptures only provide guidance on the path, and the main
purpose of the scripture is to point towards the essence of the self, which is
now experienced directly in realization. So, what is the use of it now? It has
no purpose now.  "Who can describe the indescribable, unparalleled essence? The
innate, pure experience is the only word, all scriptures are a source of
sorrow... Veer Jineshwar Parmeshwar Jaye. As the mind and speech are
indescribable, so is the form beyond the senses; the experience of the mirror of
the individual power, the form of the hero is spoken." - Shri Anandghanji.  What
is beyond the mind and speech, where speech and mind are silent, where there is
no scope for alternatives - chanting, such a transcendental self-essence is
directly perceived through the grace of the friend. What is not known through
the deposit of knowledge, and where there is no spread of evidence, no movement,
that pure form of Brahman is revealed only by the experience-light. (See p. 30)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 kalA daSTika tatvamatipatti-masArayAna sukha anubhava (567) zuddha
svarUpamaNutArUpa cAritrane je bhaMga thAya te ja roga che. A banane vyAkhyAna
tAtparyAthe eka ja che. Ama zuddha AtmapariNatinA laMgarUpa athavA para
pariNatimAM gamanarUpa rogane atra nAza thAya che.-eTale parapariNatimAM gamana
thatuM nathI ane AtmapariNatimAM ja ramaNa thAya che.-A "prabhA" daSTimAM sthiti
karate mahAgI parabhAvane pariharI niraMtara zuddha AtmapariNatine ja bhajyA
kare che, zuddha sahajAnmasvarUpI zuddha Atmadevane avalaMbatAM parabhAvane
parihare che, ane AtmadharmamAM ramaNa anubhavatAM AtmabhAvane pragaTAve che.
AvI ucca AtmadazAnA svAnubhavanuM tAdazya Alekhana A rahyuM - eka AtmapariNati
sivAyanA bIjA je viSaye tene viSe citta avyavasthitapaNe varte che. " "atre
AtmAkAratA vate che." ItyAdi. (juo) zrImad rAjacaMdra. tattvamatipatti e Azcarya
jANe te jANa, jANe jyAre pragaTe bhANa."- zrImad rAjacaMdrajI. chaThThI dRSTimAM
mImAMsA'-sUkSama tatvavicAraNA nAmane guNa pragaTayA pachI tenA svAbhAvika
pariNAmarUpe sAtamI dRSTimAM tattvamatipatti nAmanA guNane avirbhAva thAya che.
tattvamatipatti eTale yathAsthita-jema che tema Atmatattvane anubhava.
"zuddhAtama anubhava sadA". Ama atre AtmAne pratyakSa anubhava-sAkSAtkAra thAya
che. eTale jemAM tenuM pakSa varNana che, evA anya zAstro akiMcikara thaI paDe
che, nakAmA-aNakhapanA thaI paDe che, kAraNa ke zAstra ne mAtra mArganuM
dizAdarzana karAve che, ane je Atma-vastutatvane lakSa karAvavA mATe zAstranuM
mukhya prayojana che, te vastutatva te atre sAkSAt anubhUtimAManubhavamAM AvyuM
che, eTale have tenuM zuM kAma che ? tenuM have kaMI prajana rahyuM nathI.
"agama agocara anupama arthane, keNuM kahI jANe re bheda ? sahaja vizuddha re
anubhava vayaNa je, zAstra te saghaLe re kheda...vIra jinezvara paramezvara
jaye. jeha agocara mAnasa vacanane, teha atIndriya rU5; anubhava miro re vyakti
zakti zuM, bhAkhyuM tAsa svarUpa vIra."--zrI AnaMdaghanajI. je mana-vacanane
agocara che, jyAM vANI ane manane mauna bhajavuM paDe che, jyAM vikalpa-japane
avakAza nathI, evuM atIndriya AtmasvarUpa anubhava mitranA prasAdathI atre
sAkSAt jaNAya che. je naya-nikSepathI jaNAtuM nathI, ane jyAM pramANane prasara
nathI, gati nathI, te zuddha svarUpI brahmane kevaLa anubhava-bhAnu ja dekhADe
che. (juo pR. 30 )

Page #644 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(568) Yoga-Dristi-Samuchaya Dhyaan Mukhamasyaam Tu Jitamanmatha Sadhanam |
Viveka Bal Nirjaatam Shama Saar Sadaiv Hi || 171 || Dhyaan-janya Sukh Eha Maan,
Manmatha Ne Otnaar, Viveka Bal Thi Upjatam, Sadaiv Je Shama Saar, 171
Meaning:–And in this Dristi, there is a Dhyaan-janya Sukh that conquers the
means of Manmatha (desire), which is born from Viveka Bal and is always Shama
Saar (essence of peace). Commentary “Kaya Ni Visari Maya, Swaroope Shamaya Eva,
Nigranth No Panth Bhavanant Ne Upay Che.” —Shreemad Rajchandraji. In this
presented seventh Dristi, there is only Dhyaan-janya Sukh. And what kind of
special Sukh is it? It is such that it conquers the means of Manmatha – desire,
meaning it conquers the objects of the senses like sound, etc. Moreover, it is
born from Viveka Bal – the strength of knowledge, and is always Shama Saar –
predominantly peaceful, because the fruit of Viveka is peace. In this Dristi,
the true Sukh of Dhyaan is experienced; the pure soul’s Dhyaan brings forth
true, unadulterated bliss, which is felt here. Immersed in the ocean of nectar-
like Nirvikalpa Dhyaan, the Giraj, who experiences the cool waves of bliss of
the Dhyaan of his inherent nature, knows the indescribable Sukh of that
experience himself. This Dhyaan-janya Sukh is the opposite of the Sukh born from
objects. Because here, it is about conquering the objects of the senses like
sound, etc., which are the means of desire. - "Indriya Sukha Bhajanesh Hu
Pradhanah Divoukasah | Tesham Api Na Khalu Swaabhavikam Sukham Asti, Pratyut
Tesham Swaabhavikam Du.khameva Avlokyate | Yataste Panchendriyaatmak Shareer
Pishaach Pideya Parav Prapaat Sthaaniyan Manojn Vishayan Abhipatanti | xxx
Taddukh Vega Masahmaana Anubhavanti Cha Vishayan Jalathka Fuv Taavavaavt Kshay
Thaani | ' I (See for details) –Shree Amritchandraacharyaji-krit
Pravachansaratika Ga. 71-77.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (568) yogadaSTisamuccaya dhyAna mukhamasyAM tu jitamanmathasAdhanam  /
vivekabalanirjAtaM zamasAraM sadaiva hi  //  171  //  dhyAnajanya sukha ehamAM,
manmathane oNtanAra, vivekabalathI upajatuM, sadaiva je zamasAra, 171 artha:-ane
A dRSTimAM kAmanA sAdhanane jItanArUM evuM dhyAnajanya sukha hoya che, ke je
vivekabalathI upajeluM haI sadeva zamasAra ja hoya che. vivecana "kAyAnI visArI
mAyA, svarUpe zamAyA evA, nigraMthano paMtha bhavanaMtane upAya che. "--zrImad
rAjacaMdrajI. A prastuta sAtamI daSTimAM ja dhyAnajanya sukha hoya che. ane te
kevuM viziSTa hoya che? te ke manmathanA-kAmanA sAdhanene jItanAruM, arthAt
zabdAdi viSayano jaya karanArUM evuM hoya che. vaLI te vivekabalathI-
jJAnasAmarthyathI utpanna heI, sadAya zamasAra-zamapradhAna ja hoya che, kAraNa
ke vivekanuM phaLa zama che. A daSTimAM ja dhyAnanuM kharekhara sukha anubhavAya
che; zuddha AtmAnA dhyAnathI ke nivyaja sAcesAco AnaMda upaje che, te atra
saMvedAya che. nirvikalpa dhyAnarUpa parama amRtarasasAgaramAM nimagna thayela
girAja je sahajAnmasvarUpanA dhyAna sukha AnaMdanI zItala laharIo anubhave che,
tenuM avAcya sukha te te anubhava pote ja jANe che. A dhyAnajanya sukha
viSayajanya sukhathI ulaTA prakAranuM che. kAraNa ke atre te kAmanA sAdhanarUpa
zabdAdi viSayone* jUtti-dAnavuM sumisyAM su-AmAM adhikRta daSTimAM ja mAnajanya
sukha hoya che kevuM viziSTa che ke sitamathaSanaM-mamathanA-kAmanA sAdhanane
jItanArUM, zabdAdi viSayane badasta karanAruM kaNAnI denA. Ane ja vizeSaNa Ape
che-viveivanitavivekanA balathI upajeluM, jJAna sAmarthyathI upana, eTalA mATe
ja, mAruM sadaiva -sadaiva ja zamasAra-zamapradhAna -vivekanA zamaphalapaNAne
lIdhe. - "indriyasukhabhAjaneSu hi pradhAnAH divaukasaH  /  teSAmapi na khalu
svAbhAvikaM sukhamasti, pratyuta teSAM svAbhAvikaM du.khamevAvalokyate  /
yataste paJcendriyAtmakazarIrapizAcapIDayA parava
prapAtasthAnIyAnmanojJaviSayAnabhipatanti | xxx tadaduHkhavegamasahamAnA
anubhavanti ca viSayAn jalathakA phuva tAvavAvata kSaya thAni | ' i (vizeSa mATe
juo) -zrI amRtacaMdrAcAryajIkRta pravacanasAraTIkA gA. 71-77.

Page #645 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The pleasure of the senses, even if it is caused by merit, is ultimately
suffering. True happiness lies in the contemplation born of wisdom. (59) Victory
is achieved, and the state of "Jinatva" is attained by conquering the senses.
What is considered a source of happiness in the realm of words and other
objects, when viewed from the perspective of ultimate truth, is actually a
source of suffering, or merely an illusion of happiness. Because of the ripening
of merit, deities attain exquisite sensual pleasures, but they do not experience
natural happiness; instead, they experience natural suffering. This is because
they are enslaved by the pain of their five-sense body, which is like a ghost,
and they are drawn to and jump at objects that are pleasing to their minds, like
a bird falling into a pit. They appear to be happy because of the accumulation
of merit that makes them present at their will, but they are deeply attached to
objects and experience the suffering of craving for them, like water in impure
blood. Just as a thirsty person who desires to drink bad water suffers by
consuming blood, so too do these meritorious beings, who crave and accumulate
objects, suffer by experiencing destruction and the annihilation of their souls.
Thus, even the merit that arises from good deeds is a source of suffering, which
is merely an illusion of happiness. If the happiness of deities, who are highly
meritorious, is ultimately suffering, then what can be said of other forms of
happiness?  Furthermore, the sensual pleasure that arises from merit is not only
an illusion of happiness but also a source of suffering in many ways. It is
dependent, accompanied by bondage, fragmented, a cause of bondage, and uneven.
Therefore, the pleasure that is obtained through the senses is actually
suffering. Because it arises from external causes, which are separate from the
soul, this sensual pleasure is dependent. It is accompanied by bondage because
of the intense craving for objects, such as sounds, tastes, and so on. It is
fragmented because it does not remain constant and unbroken, but is interrupted
by the arising of pleasure and pain. It is a cause of bondage because the army
of passions, such as attachment, follows it, and the heavy burden of karma
accompanies it. It is uneven because it is constantly subject to increase and
decrease. Thus, merit, like sin, is proven to be a source of suffering.  "Bound
by attachment, accompanied by bondage, fragmented, a cause of bondage, and
uneven. That which is obtained through the senses is indeed suffering." - Shri
Kundakunda Acharya's Shri Pravachana Sara. And "Those who do not believe that
there is no difference between merit and sin are like beings covered by a thick
veil, wandering in the vast house of the world." - Shri Amrit Chandra Acharya's
Pravachana Sara Commentary, verse 76.  For just as a chain made of iron or a
chain made of leather are both chains and therefore a form of bondage, so too
are the bonds of merit and the bonds of sin both bonds.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prabhA daSTi Idriyasukha te dukha ja, vivekabalajanya dhyAnasukha (59) jaya
hoya che, jitendriyapaNArUpa "jinatva hoya che. zabdAdi viSaye je lekamAM
sukhasAdhana manAya che te te paramArtha dRSTithI jotAM duHkhasAdhana ja che,
athavA kalpita sukhAbhAsa ja che. kAraNa ke puNyaparipAkane lIdhe devatAone
utkRSTa iMdriyasukhanI prApti hoya che, "teone paNa svAbhAvika sukha nathI,
ulaTuM svAbhAvika duHkha ja dekhAya che. kAraNa ke teo pacendriyAtmaka zarIra-
pizAcanI pIDAthI paravaza thaI bhRguprapAta samA managamatA viSaye pratye jhavAM
nAMkhI jhaMpalAve che." puNya balathI IcchA mujaba hAjara thatA bhegothI teo
sukhIA jevA pratibhAse che, paraMtu "duSTa rudhiramAM jaLanI peThe ' teo
viSayomAM atyaMta Asakta hAI viSayatRSNAduHkha anubhave che. kharAba lehI pIvA
IcchatI hItarasI jaLa jema rudhira pAna karatAM pote ja pralaya pAmI kaleza
bhogave che, tema viSayatRSNAvaMta A puNyazALIe paNa viSayone icchatA ane
bhegavatA rahI pralaya-AtmanAza pAmI kaleza anubhave che. Ama zubhapayogajanya
puNyo paNa sukhAbhAsarUpa duHkhanAM ja sAdhana che. jyAM mahA puNyazALI devAdinA
sukha paNa paramArthathI duHkharUpa ja che, tyAM bIjA sukhanuM to pUchavuM ja
zuM ? vaLI puNyajanya iMdriyasukha sukhAbhAsarUpa che eTaluM ja nahi, paNa bahu
prakAre dukhasvarUpa paNa che. kAraNa ke te parAdhIna che, bAdhA sahita che,
vicchinna-khaMDita che. baMdhakAraNa che, viSama che. eTalA mATe iMdriyethI je
sukha prApta thAya che, te duHkha ja che. AtmAthI atirikta-jUdA evA para
nimittathI upajatuM hovAthI, te iMdriyasukha parAdhIna* che. zruSA-tRSAdi tRSNA
prakArathI atyaMta AkulatAne lIdhe te *bAdhA sahita che. eka sarakho akhaMDa
zAtAdanIyane udaya rahete na heI, zAtA-azAtA vedanIyanA udayathI te khaMDakhaMDa
thAya che, eTale te vicchinna-khaMDita che, upabhegamArgamAM rAgAdi dezasenA te
pAchaLa pAchaLa lAgelI ja che, ane tenA anusAre ghana kamarapaTala paNa sAthe
sAthe hoya ja che, tenA vaDe karIne te baMdhakAraNa che. ane sadA vRddhi-hAni
pAmavAthI viSamapaNAe karIne te viSama che. Ama puNya paNa pApanI jema
duHkhasAdhana siddha thayuM. "saparaM bAdhAsahidaM vicchiNNaM baMdhakAraNaM
visamaM  /  jaM iMdiehiM laddhaM taM sokhaM duHkkhameva tdhaa||" -zrI
kuMdakuMdAcAryajIkRta zrI pravacanasAra. ane "Ama puNya-pApamAM taphAvata nathI
ema je nathI mAnate te mahAcchAdita jIva apAra ghara saMsAramAM bhame che." *
kAraNa ke senAnI beDI hoya ke leDhAnI beDI hoya, paNa baMne baMdhanarUpa beDI ja
che; tema puNyabaMdha hoya ke pApabaMdha hoya, paNa bane 4 juo-zrI
amRtacaMdrAcAryajIkRta pravacanasAra TIkA, gA. 76.

Page #646 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(570) The yogic perspective, which is the correct understanding of reality, is
the only true bondage, meaning there is no real difference between merit and
demerit. In other words, the happiness that is the result of merit is also just
suffering, arising from karma. This happiness, born of merit, is suffering due
to its consequence, its heat, its karmic imprint, and its opposition to the true
nature of the soul. Just as the consequence of fattening a sheep destined for
slaughter is extremely dreadful, and just as the water that quenches thirst
ultimately leads to a terrible state, so too is the consequence of the enjoyment
of worldly pleasures born of merit extremely dreadful. Where the senses are
constantly burning with the heat of desire, fueled by the sun of worldly
objects, what happiness can there be? Just as shifting a burden from one
shoulder to another does not eliminate the pain, so too does indulging the
senses not eliminate the suffering that is inherent in the soul. Happiness,
suffering, and delusion are all opposed to the true nature of the soul, yet they
are all forms of suffering.  A wise yogi, who has realized the true nature of
worldly pleasures born of merit, understands their inherent suffering and is
completely detached from them. Why would such a person indulge in these trivial
pleasures? Why would they not conquer the objects of the senses, such as sound,
touch, etc., which are the tools of Cupid (the god of love)? Why would they not
completely abandon the accumulation of karma, which is like the dust of the
world, as the Jinas (the enlightened ones) have done? Having tasted the nectar
of the joy of meditation, which is the victory over the senses, why would they
taste the foul-smelling objects of the senses, which are like a mere mouthful of
tasteless food? Because worldly pleasures are dependent on external factors,
while the joy of meditation is independent. Worldly pleasures are accompanied by
bondage, while the joy of meditation is free from bondage. Worldly pleasures are
fragmented and broken, while the joy of meditation is continuous and unbroken.
Worldly pleasures are the cause of bondage, while the joy of meditation is the
cause of liberation. Worldly pleasures are uneven, while the joy of meditation
is even. Having attained this supreme joy of meditation, why would anyone even
look at trivial worldly pleasures?  This joy of meditation arises from the
strength of discrimination and the power of knowledge. The discrimination that
arises from understanding the difference between the self and the non-self, and
the knowledge of the self that is gained through this discrimination, are the
source of this meditation. Just as the intensity of discrimination is like the
sharpness of a sword, so too is the intensity of meditation. And just as the
intensity of meditation gives rise to the joy of meditation, so too does it give
rise to the intensity of the joy of the self. "If there is no attachment to the
objects of the senses, then the world is like a dream." - Shri Pravachansar.
"There is no bondage, no liberation, no difference in the fruits of actions,
except for the difference in dependence." - Shri Adhyatmasar,
Atmanishchayadhyay, Sloka 60-74.  "Due to its consequence, its heat, its karmic
imprint, and its opposition to the true nature of the soul, happiness born of
merit is ultimately suffering." - Shri Adhyatmasar.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (570) yogadaSTisamuracaya bhavabaMdhanarUpa beDI ja che, eTale puNya-pApamAM
koI phatabheda nathI, arthAta puNyaphalarUpa sukha paNa karmodayarUpa he duHkha
ja che, pariNAmathI* tApathI, saMskArathI, ane guNavRttinA virodhathI puNyajanya
sukha te du:kha ja che." jene vadha karAvAne che evA gheTAnI dehapuSTinuM
pariNAma jema ati dAruNa hoya che, lehItarasI jaLa jema aMte dAruNa dazAne pAme
che, tema puNyajanya viSayabhegane vipAka paNa ati dAruNa hoya che. sUryane
lIdhe jyAM viSayatRSNatApathI indriyanuM saMtaptapaNuM rahe che, tyAM sukha
zenuM hoya? eka khAMdhethI bIjI khAMdhe bhAra ApavAnI peThe indriyano AlAda
chatAM tatvathI duHkhane saMskAra dUra thato nathI. sukha, duHkha ane moha e
traNeya guNavRttio viruddha che, chatAM e traNeya duHkharUpa ja che. ItyAdi
prakAre puSyajanya viSayasukhanuM je pragaTa duHkharUpapaNuM jANe che, evA
parama vairAgyavAnuM jJAnI yegI puruSa A tuccha viSayasukhamAM kema rAce ?
manmathanA sAdhanarUpa | zabdAdi viSayane jaya kema na kare ? "jaDe cala jaganI
eTha" "jina"no jevA pudgala bhegane dUrathI kema phagAvI na de? parama amRta
jevA viSayajaya dhyAnasukhane rasAsvAda jeNe cAkhyo hoya, te tuccha bAkasabukasa
jevA durgadhi viSaya-kadane kema cAkhe? kAraNa ke viSayasukha parAdhIna che,
tyAre dhyAnasukha svAdhIna che. viSayasukha bAdhA sahita che, tyAre dhyAnamukha
bAdhA rahita che. viSayasukha vicchinna-khaMDita che, tyAre dhyAnasukha
avicchinna-akhaMDita che. viSayasukha baMdhakAraNa che, tyAre dhyAnasukha
makSikAraNa che. viSayasukha viSama che, tyAre dhyAnasukha sama che. AvuM
paramAttama dhyAnasukha jene prApta thayuM hoya, te pachI tuccha viSaya bhaNI
najara 5Na kema nAMkhe? AvuM dhyAnasukha vaLI vivekane baLathI-jJAnanA
sAmarthyathI utpanna thayeluM hoya che. svapara vastunA bhedavijJAnathI je
viveka upaje che, AtmajJAna sAMpaDe che, tenA sAmarthyathI A dhyAna prApta thAya
che. A vivekajanya jJAnanI kSapazamanI jevI viveka balajanya tIvratA hoya che,
tevI ja dhyAnanI tIvratA nIpaje che; ane jevI dhyAna sukha dhyAnanI tIvratA
nIpaje che, tevI AtmasukhanI tIvratA upaje che. * " ja di mAhi no chuM natri
viSetti puouTyA ! hiM ghoDamAM saMsAra mohaMchavLo ! " zrI pravacanasAra. na
hAyara vaMdhaNa tapanIyama aa pArataMtryAvizeSeNa phalabhedo'sti kazcana ||" -(
ityAdi juo ) zrI adhyAtmasAra, AtmanizcayAdhikAra, zlo. 60-74 * " pariNAmAcca
tApAcca saMskArAcca budhairmatam  /  guNavRttivirodhAtha duvaM pukhyamavai kulam
" -zrI adhyAtmasAra,

Page #647 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Prabha Drishti: The Unity of Diverse Meanings of Shama - "Samajya Te Samaya"
(571) Just as a swan distinguishes between milk and water, separating the milk
from the water and then consuming the milk, similarly, the Muni-like, supreme
swan, the Yogi-raj, distinguishes between the Atma and Anatma, and recognizing
the Anatma-like, all external influences as worthy of rejection, abandons them.
He then recognizes the pure Atma-swaroop, filled with knowledge and vision, as
the ultimate object of attainment and connects his mental activity to his Atma-
swabhav. When the mental activity, in the form of contemplation, becomes still
in this Atma-swaroop, that is primarily "G", and in Jain terminology, it is
known as "Dhyan". This Shukal Dhyan-like, fiery flame burns away even the hard
karma. Shukal Dhyan, a fiery flame, burns away the hard karma... leading to
one's own happiness; the remaining nature is destroyed, becoming ashes, a
powerful play... - Shri Devchandraji.  Thus, this Dhyan-sukh arises from Vivek-
bal, the power of knowledge, and therefore it is always Shama-sar, Shama-
predominant. Because "Samajya Te Samaya". The fruit of knowledge, that is,
Vivek, is Virati-Shama. "Jnanastha Shreshtha Vitti" - this is the great sutra of
the Jina-pravachan.  "Knowing the Atma-swaroop as it is, is called
understanding. Therefore, when the use of other alternatives ceases, it is
called Shama. In reality, there is only one. Understanding as it is, leads to
Shama in the form of use, and the Atma becomes Atma-swabhav-maya. This is the
meaning of the first sentence, "Samaji Ne Shamai Raheya". The attachment to
other objects, which was considered to be the Atma, has ceased. This is the
meaning of the second sentence, "Samaji Ne Samai Gaya". Whatever one
understands, one abandons the "mine" and "yours", the ego and possessiveness,
because one does not see any separate self-nature; and one's own nature is
inconceivable, unobstructed, and purely one's own. Therefore, one merges into
it." (See) - Shrimad Rajchandra, Patrant 6. (651)  Thus, the mind of a Jnani
Purush, who has attained Shama in his swaroop, is characterized by a peaceful
flow. Just as the flow of a tranquil river, devoid of waves, continues
uninterrupted, similarly, the flow of the Yogi's tranquil mind-river, this
uninterrupted, peaceful flow, continues calmly, without any waves of
alternatives arising. Because the distractions have been removed, there is a
uniform flow, resulting in a state of equanimity. This peaceful flow arises from
the impressions created by Nirodha. (For a detailed explanation, see page. Ye.
Ru -10, and Dwa. Dwa. 24.)  "Tranquil flow, the world - Patanjali Yoga 2-10"

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prabhA daSTi : "samajyA te samAyA" zamanA vividha arthanI ektA (571) kAraNake
haMsa jema kSIra-nIrane viveka kare che, dUdha ne pANI judA pADe che, ane pachI
pANIne cheDI dUdha grahe che, tema munirUpa paramahaMsa yogirAja AtmAanAtmAne
viveka kare che, ane anAtmArUpa samasta parabhAvane heya-tyajavA yogya jANI tene
tyAga kare che, tathA jJAnadarzanamaya zuddha AtmasvarUpane parama Adeya grahaNa
karavA gya jANI AtmasvabhAvamAM cittavRttine joDe che. A AtmasvarUpanA ekAgra
ciMtanamAM anusaMdhAnarUpa cittavRttine nirodha tha, te ja mukhyapaNe "ga" che,
ane tene ja jaina paribhASAmAM dhyAna" nAmathI oLakhavAmAM Ave che. ane e zukala
dhyAnarUpa heLInI javALA kaThera karma paNa bALI nAMkhe che. zukala dhyAna
herIkI javAlA, jAle karma kaThora re....nija sukhake sayA; zeSa prakRti dala
kSIraNa nijerA, bhasma khela ati jora re.....nija "-zrI devacaMdrajI. Ama A
dhyAnasukha vivekabalathI-jJAna sAmarthyathI utpanna hoya che, eTalA mATe ja te
sadAya zamasAra-zamapradhAna hoya che. kAraNa ke "samajyA te samAyA." jJAnanuM
arthAt vivekanuM phala virati-zama che. "jJAnastha zreSTha vitti:'- e
jinapravacananuM mahAsUtra che. "jema che tema AtmasvarUpa jANyuM tenuM nAma
samajavuM che. tethI upayoga anya vikalpa rahita thayo tenuM nAma zamAvuM che.
vastutAe bane eka ja che. jema che tema samajAvAthI upaga svarUpamAM zamA, ane
AtmA svabhAvamaya thaI rahyo e prathama vAkya "samajIne zamAI rahyA" tene artha
che. anya padArthanA saMyogamAM je adhyAsa hite, ane te adhyAsamAM AtmApaNuM
mAnyuM hatuM, te adhyAsarUpa AtmApaNuM zamAI gayuM. e bIjuM vAkya samajIne samAI
gayA" tene artha che. je je samajyA teNe teNe mArUM tArUM e Adi ahaM mamatva
zamAvI dIdhuM kemake koI paNa nija svabhAva te dITho nahi; ane nija svabhAva te
aciMtya avyAbAdhasvarUpa, kevaLa nyAro che. eTale temAM ja samAveza pAmI gayA."
(juo)-zrImad rAjacaMdra, patrAMta pa6. (651) Ama svarUpamAM je samAyA che, evA
jJAnI puruSanA cittanI prazAMtavAhitA heya che. jema taraMga rahita zAMta
saritAne pravAha akhaMDa ekadhAre vahyA kare, tema atre yogInI zAMta citta-
saritAne pravAha e akhaMDa ekadhAro prazAMtavAhitA zAMtapaNe pravahyA kare che,
ke temAM kaI paNa vikalpataraMga UThata nathI, vikSepa dUra karyo hovAthI sadeza
eka sarakhA pravAhavALI pariNamitA hoya che. A prazAMtavAhitA nirodhajanya
saMskArathI upaje che* ( AnI vizeSa samajUtI mATe juo pAta. ye. rU -10, tathA
dvA. dvA. 24. ) "taraNa karAvAhitA saMsAra - pAtaMjala yuga 2-10

Page #648 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(572) The meaning of "Gadashtti Samuchaya Sham" is: (1) Cessation of passions,
(2) Restraint, (3) Absence of attachment, (4) Equanimity, (5) Samya
(similarity), (6) Dharma (righteousness), (7) Character, (8) Inner peace and
tranquility.  Thus, the word "Sham" has one meaning, which is as follows: (1)
Due to the various aspects of "Sham" in Vivek (discernment), one understands the
true nature of things, the distinction between self and others is recognized,
the unity of meaning is understood, and then one knows that everything other
than the soul is foreign. Therefore, due to the object, the passions that are
without cause do not arise, "rage, hatred, and purposelessness" do not arise,
and anger, pride, deceit, and greed are pacified, peace is attained, and
calmness is achieved. Thus, through Vivek, the passions are pacified. (2)
Through Vivek, one knows the distinction between self and others, and then one
is freed from the influence of others - one attains restraint. The mind's
attachment to the object, which was like a clinging vine, ceases, it is
restrained. Thus, the aphorism "The fruit of knowledge is restraint" becomes
true. (3) When one knows the distinction between self and others, one is not
confused by external things, one does not become attached, one does not get
entangled. Therefore, attachment to external things is relinquished, attachment
is released, and the bond of affection is broken. Thus, one attains the state of
"Sham" in the form of absence of attachment. (4) When one attains the state of
absence of attachment, one becomes free from attachment and aversion everywhere,
and thus one becomes equanimous everywhere. One does not think of anything as
desirable or undesirable, one becomes impartial, one considers "the worshiper
and the critic as equal," etc. In this way, one attains equanimity. (5) When one
attains equanimity, one attains Samya (similarity). To attain the same nature as
the soul, to attain the same essence, is called Samya. Therefore, one attains
Samya in the form of the state of the soul. (6) And when one attains Samya, one
attains Dharma. Because Dharma is the nature of things. "Dharma is the nature of
the soul." To attain the nature of the soul is called Dharma. Therefore, when
one attains Samya in the form of the soul, one attains the Dharma of the soul.
(7) When one attains the Dharma of the soul, one becomes virtuous. Because "to
follow the nature of the soul is character." As the nature of the soul is known,
as it is revealed, so too is the character, that is, the enjoyment of one's own
nature, thus attained. (8) And our soul, which is one consciousness, is the best
in relation to all others, as it is our own family, our own relatives. When this
soul, which is our own family, is directly realized here, then supreme inner
peace arises, and the soul rests in its own nature, it attains tranquility in
its own nature, it merges into its own nature. This is what is meant by "Sham."
"Towards the enemy and the friend, one should have the same attitude, in honor
and dishonor, one should have the same nature, in life and death, one should not
have any attachment, in the world and in liberation, one should have pure
equanimity. When will such an opportunity come again?" - Shrimad Rajchandraji.
Thus, when one knows the distinction between self and others - when one attains
Vivek, then the passions are pacified, restraint is attained, attachment is
gone, absence of attachment arises, equanimity arises, the nature of the soul is
attained, and the attainment of the Dharma of the soul is achieved.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (572) gadaSTisamuccaya zama eTale (1) kaSAyanuM zamana, (2) virati, (3)
vItarAgabhAva, (4) samabhAva, (5) sAmyabhAva, (6) dharma, (7) cAritra, (8)
AtmazAMti-vizrAMti. Ama zama zabdane lakSyArthI eka che. te A prakAre -(1)
vivekane zamanA vividha lIdhe vastusvarUpanI yathArtha samajaNa Ave, sva-parano
bheda parakhAya, arthanI ekatA te pachI AtmA zivAyanI samasta vastu pArakI che
ema jANe, eTale te viSayarUpa paravastune nimitte niSkAraNa kaSAyanI utpatti na
thAya, "rAga dveSa aNahetu' na upaje, ane krodha-mAna-mAyA-lebhanuM zamana
thAya, zAMtapaNuM thAya, maMdapaNuM thAya. Ama vivekathI kaSAyazamana thAya che.
(2) vivekathI sva-parane bheda jANe, eTale pachI parabhAvathI virAma pAme-virati
pAme. je viSayane mATe jhAMvAM nAMkhavArUpa mananI dehAdeDa thatI hatI, te badhI
aTakI jAya, viramI jAya. Ama jJAnanuM phala virati" e sUtra caritArtha bane che,
(3) sva-para bheda jANe, eTale para vastumAM muMjhAya nahi, moha pAme nahi,
gothuM khAya nahiM. eTale parabhAva pratye rAga chUTI jAya, Asakti chUTe,
nehAnubaMdha truTe, Ama vItarAga bhAvarUpa zama pAme. (4) Ama vItarAga bhAva
pAme, sarvatra rAga-dveSa virahita bane, eTale sarvatra samabhAvI thAya, kayAMya
paNa ISTa-aniSTa buddhi ciMtave nahi, samadazI bane, "vaMdaka nidaka sama gaNe"
ItyAdi prakAre samabhAvane pAme (5) Ama samabhAvane pAme eTale sAmyabhAvane
pAme. jevuM AtmasvarUpa che, tenuM samAnapaNu-saMdezapaNu pAmavuM tenuM nAma
sAmya che, eTale svarUpasthitirUpa sAmyane pAme. (6) ane A sAmya pAme eTale
dharma pAme. kAraNa ke dharma eTale vastuno svabhAva. vaghurAvo dhamo'
AtmasvabhAvane pAmo tenuM nAma dharma mATe svarUpa sAmya thayuM eTale Atmadharma
pAmyo. (7) Atmadharma pAmyo eTale cAritra yukta thayA. kAraNa ke "svarUpe vArvi-
Atma svarUpanuM anucaraNa te cAritra. jevuM AtmAnuM svarUpa khyAta che,
prasiddha che, tevuM yathAkhyAta cAritra arthAt sva svarUpamAM ramaNapaNuM Ama
prApta thAya. (8) ane ApaNe AtmabhAva je eka ja caitanya AdhArarUpa che, te ja
nija parikara-nija parivAra bIjA sarva sAthe saMyoga karatAM sAra che. te ja
nija parikararUpa AtmabhAvanI sAkSAta atra prApti thaI, eTale parama AtmazAMti
upajI, ane AtmA svarUpamAM vizrAMta thaye, svarUpavizrAMti pAmya, svarUpamAM
samAI gaye. Ama samajo eTale zamA. "zatru mitra pratye vatte samadarzitA, mAna
amAne vatte te ja svabhAva je, jIvita ke maraNe nahiM jUnAdhitA, bhava mokSe
paNa varte zuddha samabhAva jo. apUrva avasara evo kayAre Avaze?"-zrImad
rAjacaMdrajI. Ama sva-parane bheda jANya-viveka thaye, eTale kaSAya upazAMti
thaI, virati thaI, Asakti gaI, vItarAgatA AvI, samatA upajI, svarUpa sAmya
thayuM, AtmadharmanI siddhi

Page #649 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Prabha Dari: “All that is dependent is the characteristic of suffering”, “Having
performed Pratikraman, he became free (573), the well-known conduct manifested,
the soul reached the path of ultimate peace, calmed down in its own form, rested
in its own form, understood its own form and merged into it. These are all the
“types of calming down”. Or, in summary, they are all one. Such an unprecedented
calming down is attained here. That is why this meditation is called “Shamsar-
Shampradhan”. Also - “All that is dependent is suffering, all that is self-
dependent is happiness. This is the characteristic of happiness and suffering in
summary.” (172) Meaning - All that is dependent is suffering, and all that is
self-dependent is happiness. This is the characteristic of happiness and
suffering in summary. “All that is dependent is the characteristic of suffering,
we obtain happiness that is self-dependent; This is the manifestation of the
inherent qualities of the soul, without it, what happiness can we call?” - Shri
K. Sajay. 7-2 Whatever is dependent - subservient, is all suffering; and
whatever is self-dependent - self-dependent, is all happiness; because it has
the characteristic of happiness and suffering. This is the characteristic of
happiness and suffering in summary, as the Muni has said. Even in common
parlance, it is said that “Hope in others is always disappointment”. There is no
suffering like dependence - subservience, and no happiness like self-reliance -
independence. If someone has fallen into despair due to hope in others, he alone
knows the suffering of all that is dependent. The suffering of a dependent -
subservient nation or people is evident, everyone knows this in the present
times. Just as in practice, so also in the ultimate reality, dependence -
subservience is suffering, and self-reliance - independence is happiness. In the
ultimate reality, dependence means being subservient to something other than the
soul - something different, independence means being subservient to one's own
soul - self-reliance. Where there is an expectation of an object, that object-
based happiness is Kritti - TRvaan Duv - All that is dependent is suffering,
this is the characteristic of that, in all beings, all that is self-dependent is
happiness - this is the purpose, Pataturan - this is what the Muni has said,
Samen - in summary, Ksham - characteristic, form, Suvaduy - happiness -
suffering.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prabhA dari: "saghaLuM paravaza te duHkhalakSaNa", "pratikramaNa karyo chUTake
(573) thaI, yathAkhyAta cAritra pragaTayuM, AtmA parama zAMtimArgane pAye,
svarUpe zamAyA svarUpamAM vizrAMta thayo, svarUpa samajIne temAM ja samAI gayo.
A evA badhA "zamanA prakAra che. athavA te saravALe pariNAme eka ja che. AvA
apUrva zamanI atra prApti hoya che. eTale ja A dhyAnasukhane zamasAra-
zamapradhAne kahyuM che. temaja- sarva paravazaM duHkhaM sarvamAtmavazaM sukham
/  etaduktaM samAsena lakSaNaM sukhaduHkhayoH  // 172 //  paravaza saghaLuM
duHkha che, nijavaza saghaLuM sukha; lakSaNa e sukha duHkhanuM kahyuM saMkSepa
mukhya. 172 artha-paravaza hoya te badhuMya duHkha che, ane Atmavaza hoya te
badhuMya sukha che, A saMkSepamAM sukhaduHkhanuM lakSaNa kahyuM che. vivecana
saghaLuM paravaza te duHkhalakSaNa, nijavaza te sukha lahIe; e daSTa AtamaguNa
pragaTe, te viNa sukha kuNa kahIe ?"-zrI ke. sajhAya. 7-2 je kAMI paravaza che-
parAdhIna che, te badhuMya duHkha che; ane je svavaza che-Atmavaza che. te
badhuMya sukha che; kAraNake temAM sukha-du:khanA lakSaNane vega che A
saMkSepamAM sukhaduHkhanuM lakSaNa-svarUpa munie kahyuM che. sAmAnya
lekavyavahAramAM paNa kahevAya che ke "pArakI Aza te sadA nirAza" parAdhInatA-
parataMtratA jevuM kaMI duHkha nathI ne svAdhInatA-svataMtratA jevuM kaMI sukha
nathI. keI pArakI Aze ezIyALa thaIne paDyo hoya, tenuM duHkha te saghaLuM
paravaza pote ja jANe che. parAdhIna-parataMtra rASTra ke prajAne kevuM du:kha
bhogavavuM te dakhalakSaNa paDe che, te hAlanA jamAnAmAM sarva kaI jANe che. Ama
jema vyavahAramAM, tema paramArtha mAM paNa parAdhInatA-parataMtratA e duHkha te
svAdhInatA-svataMtratA e sukha che. paramArthathI parAdhInatA eTale AtmAthI
atirikta-judI evI vastune AdhInapaNuM-parataMtrapaNuM, svAdhInatA eTale nija
AtmasvarUpane AdhInapaNuM-svataMtrapaNuM. jemAM para vasturUpa viSayanI apekSA
rahe che, te viSayajanya sukha te kRtti - TRvAM duHva-paravaza te sarva duHkha
che tenA lakSaNanA yoga thakI, sarvamAnamAM yuvaAtmavaza te sarva sukha che-e ja
hetuthakI, pataturaM-A kahyuM che munie, sAmena-samAsathI, saMkSepathI kSam-
lakSaNa, svarUpa, suvaduyo -sukha-duHkhanuM.

Page #650 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(574) Yogasthiti-Sushrutchay  We have already considered in detail that there is
no happiness, but only sorrow, or perhaps only the appearance of happiness. The
only true happiness is the absolute happiness of the self, which is the
contemplation of a pure self-substance, because it is relatively powerless, but
absolutely powerful. This is the definition of the Supreme Self.  “What is the
use of hope? It is only knowledge that can improve things… Hope wanders from
door to door, like a dog, hoping for something… Hope The servant of hope goes
wherever it goes, and that person becomes a servant of the world… Hope.” —Shri
Anandghanji  Or, the definition that anxiety is a sign of sorrow, and calmness
is a sign of happiness, also fits with the previous definition and confirms it;
because where there is more than one, where there is duality, there is anxiety;
and where there is one pure, unmixed substance, where there is non-duality,
there is calmness. Therefore, where there is dependence on the connection with
the other, there is anxiety; and where there is anxiety, there is sorrow – this
is the direct experience of everyone. And where there is independence, free from
the connection with the other, there is calmness; and where there is calmness,
there is happiness. This is also the direct experience of everyone. Thus, these
two definitions are in harmony.  Anxiety is Sorrow 4  The self has received
endless suffering of worldly wandering due to the other, which is separate from
the self. Just as a prisoner bound by chains is taken wherever he is to be
taken, so too, the self, bound by the chains of the other, is dragged wherever
it pleases, and is made to suffer endless sorrow of birth, old age, and death.
Thus, the proverb “The other destroys” – “विटः ते विनाशं” – is true. The self
has transgressed, trespassed, by violating its own time, that is, the limits of
the form of the self-substance, and entering into the time of the other – the
realm of the other’s matter – the other’s limits. From time immemorial, the self
has interfered in the realm of the other’s matter, become attached to the other,
and formed a bond of affection (!) with it. Therefore, the other’s matter, in
return, has clung to the self like a hideous ghost, and has given the self a
pledge to keep it within its own realm in return for the crime of invasion! Or,
in return for the bond of affection, it has bound it with thick darkness and
kept it in the prison of the world! Thus, dependence has led to this great
suffering!  But when the self atones for the transgression of invading the
other’s realm, and returns to its own…

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (574) yogaSTisasuzrcaya sukha nathI, paNu du:kha ja che, athavA kevala
sukhAbhAsa ja che, ema ApaNe pUrva vistArathI vicArI gayA. jemAM eka zuddha
AtmavastunuM ja avalakhana che, evuM nirapekSa Atmasukha e ja vAstavika sukha
che kAraNake sAveAM asamartha, nivezva samartha' sApekSa te asamartha che,
nirapekSa te samatha che, Ama paramAtha paribhASA che. " AzA eranakI kayA kIje ?
gyAna sudhArasa pIje....AzA bhaTake dvAra dvAra vaiAnake, kukara AzA dhArI...
...AzA AzA dAsIke je jAye, te jana jagake dAsA....AzA. "--zrI AnaMdaeNghanajI,
athavA AkulatA e du:khanuM lakSaNa che, ane nirAkulatA e sukhanuM lakSaNa che, e
vyAkhyA paNa upAkta vyAkhyA sAthe baMdhabesatI che, ne tene puSTa kare che;
kAraNa ke jyAM eka karatAM vadhAre maLe-bhaLe, jyAM dvaita che tyAM AkulatA che;
ane jyAM eka zuddha nirbheLa vastu hAya che, jyAM advaita che tyAM nirAkulatA
che. eTale paravastunA sayeAga saMbadhathI jyAM parAdhInatA che tyAM AkulatA
che; ane jyAM AkulatA che, tyAM duHkha che,-e sa kAInA pratyakSa anubhava che,
tathA paravastunA saMyoga saMbaMdhathI rahita evI jyAM svAdhInatA che tyAM
nirAkulatA che; ane jyAM nirAkulatA che tyAM sukha che. A paNa sarvAMnA sAkSAt
anubhava che. Ama A bane vyAkhyAnA sumeLa che. AkulatA te duHkha 4 AtmAthI
atirikta-jUdI evI je anya vastu-ka, tenA vaDe karIne ja A AtmAne anaMta saMsAra
paribhramaNa duHkha prApta thayuM che. eDIthI jakaDAyelA parAdhIna kedIne jyAM
lai javA hoya tyAM parANe lai javAya che, tema kakha dharUpa pArakA peDhI eDIthI
baMdhAyelA parAdhIna jIvane ka game tyAM ghasaDI jAya che, ane vinAza
kare'janma-jarA-maraNAdi anaMta duHkhAthI du:khI kare che. Ama 'pArakA peTho
vinAza kare '-'16: viTaH te vinAzaM' -e leAkeAkti sAcI Thare che. AtmAe
svasamayane arthAt AtmavastunI svarUpamaryAdAne ullaMghI, parasamayamAM- pArakA
pudgala kSetramAM-pArakI hadamAM praveza karyAM, atikramaNa (Transgression,
Trespass ) karyAM. anAdithI AtmAe parapudgala pradezamAM mAthuM
mAryuM.-hastakSepa karyAM, paravastumAM Asakti karI, tenI sAthe snehasaMbadha
(!) khAMdhyA. eTale te pudgala khalAe badalAmAM karUpa bhUta te AtmAne
vaLagADyuM, ane AtmAne peAtAnA kSetramAM AkramaNanA gunhAnA badalAmAM potAnA
viSaya-kSetramAM pUrI rAkhavArUpa daDa dIdhA ! athavA teA snehasaMbaMdhanA
badalAmAM tene gADha aMdhane bAMdhI sa*sArarUpa heDamAM pUrI rAkhyuM ! Ama
parAdhInatAthI ja adhI mhAkANu thai che! paNa jyAre AtmA parakSetramAM
AkramaNurUpa atikramanuM prAyazcita kare che, ne peAtAnA

Page #651 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Prabha Drishti:** The virtuous eye sees both happiness and sorrow as
transient, while the happiness of meditation is self-controlled.  (575) It
performs **pratikraman** (retraction) as a return to the field, and rejects
going back to the other field. It remains balanced in its form and performs
**samayik** (self-restraint) as its true nature. It performs true self-worship
by touching its own form. It attains the supreme blessedness of self-praise,
saying, "I bow to myself, I bow to myself!" It attains the path of the
**Nigantha** (Jain ascetic), who has forgotten the body and is absorbed in its
form, meaning it attains a state beyond the body while still having a body, and
constantly practices **kayotsarga** (non-attachment to the body). Then this soul
experiences the supreme happiness that is self-controlled. And this **yogi**
(practitioner) who has attained this state of **karyotsarga** (action-restraint)
abandons all objects of attachment, which are the source of sorrow, and takes
refuge in the pure self-meditation, which is the source of happiness. Therefore,
it constantly immerses itself in the waves of supreme bliss.  **SR** Even the
happiness that is desired for the sake of virtue is transient. Therefore,
according to the nature of its characteristics, it is only sorrow. (173)
Meaning: Even the happiness that is desired for the sake of virtue is transient,
and therefore, according to the nature of its characteristics, it is only
sorrow. (And the happiness that arises from meditation is the only true
happiness.)  **Commentary:** According to the above-mentioned principle, the
happiness that is desired for the sake of virtue is also transient, because
virtue is external. Therefore, it is also only sorrow, according to the nature
of its characteristics. Therefore, the happiness that arises from meditation is
the only true happiness, because it is self-controlled and arises only from the
detachment from karma.  The above-mentioned general principle states that
whatever is transient is sorrow, and whatever is self-controlled is happiness.
According to this principle, the happiness that is desired for the sake of
virtue is transient, because virtue is external. Therefore, it is only sorrow,
according to the nature of its characteristics. Therefore, the happiness that
arises from meditation is the only true happiness, because it is self-controlled
and arises only from the detachment from karma.  **Vritti:** Even the happiness
that is desired for the sake of virtue is transient, because virtue is external.
Therefore, it is only sorrow, according to the nature of its characteristics.
Therefore, the happiness that arises from meditation is the only true happiness,
because it is self-controlled and arises only from the detachment from karma.
**- Shri Adhyatma Saar**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prabhA daSTi : puNyAkSI sukha te dukha, dhyAnasukha AtmAdhIna (575) kSetramAM
pAchA javArUpa pratikramaNa kare che, punaH parakSetramAM nahiM javAnuM
pratyAkhyAna kare che, svarUpamAM samavasthita rahI zuddha sAmAyikarUpa
AtmasvabhAvane pratikamaNu" bhaje che; svasvarUpanA sparzanarUpa sAcuM
AtmavaMdana kare che; "name karyo chUTake muja ! namo muja !" ema AtmastutinI
parama dhanya yogyatAne prApta thAya che, ane "kAyAnI visArI mAyA, svarUpe
zamAyA evA nigraMthanA paMthane pAme che, arthAt deha chatAM dehAtIta dazAne
pAmI niraMtara kAyetsarga bhAvane sAdhe che;-tyAre A AtmA svAdhIna-AtmAdhIna evA
parama sukhane anubhave che. ane AvI A kAryotsarga dazAne pAmele A daSTimAM
sthita yegI te paravazapaNAthI dukhasvarUpa evA sarva viSayane tyAga kare che,
ane svavazapaNAthI sukhasvarUpa evA zukala AtmadhyAnane Azraya kare che, tethI
te paramAnaMda laharIomAM niraMtara nimajajana kare che. SR puNyApekSamapi
hyevaM sukhaM paravazaM sthitam  /  /  tatazca duHkhamevaitattallakSaNaniyogataH
//  173  //  puNya apekSaka sukha paNa paravaza sthita che Ama; tasa lakSaNa
niyagathI, duHkha ja eha tamAma. 173. arthA-ema puNyanI apekSAvALuM sukha paNa
paravaza sthita che, ane tethI karIne A tenA lakSaNanA niyegathI duHkha ja che.
(ane dhyAnajanya sukha ja tAvika sukha che.) vivecana ema upara kahI te nIti
pramANe puNyanI apekSAvALuM sukha paNa paravaza rahyuM che, kAraNake puNyanuM
parapaNuM che, eTale te paNa tenA lakSaNanA niyogathI duHkha ja che. tethI Ama
dhyAnajanya sukha e ja tArika sukha che, kAraNa ke tenuM aparAdhInapaNuM che ane
karma- viyega mAtrathI upajavApaNuM che. uparamAM je sAmAnya niyamathI kahyuM ke
jeTaluM paravaza che teTaluM badhuMya duHkha che, ane svavaza che teTaluM
badhuMya sukha che, te niyamanI nIti pramANe je sukhamAM puNyanI apekSA vRttaH-
guthApi -puNyAkSI paNa, puNyanI apekSAvALuM paNa, ghara-ema, ukta nItithI, murNa
vAM thiram-sukha paravaza sthita che, puNyanA parapaNane lIdhe tatadu:khevaitata
tarthakSaniyota -ane tethI karIne A tenA lakSaNa niyAmane lIdhe dukha ja che.
tethI mAmadazAnazuM tAtti purva-dhyAnajanya e ja tArika sukha che-
aparAdhInapaNane lIdhe, karmaviga mAtra janyapaNAne lIdhe [ dhyAna rAri suvanae
pAThAMtara che.] -zrI adhyAtmasAra

Page #652 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(576) The collection of yogic perspectives remains, meaning that whatever
happiness is attained from the rise of merit, it is also happiness and suffering
dependent on merit. Because that merit is also an external object, meaning that
it is dependent on something else, that happiness which is dependent on it is
that suffering itself. The characteristic of that suffering is obtained here.
The reason for calling merit an external object is that merit is auspicious
action, and auspicious action is an external object, separate from the soul.
Thus, from the rise of merit, which is in the form of an external object,
whatever happiness is obtained by the gods, human kings, etc., is suffering from
the ultimate perspective, or it is merely an appearance of happiness. The
abundant wealth of Indra, Chakravarti, etc., and the so-called happiness
obtained from the five senses related to it, is suffering itself. Here, the
example presented in the story of the skilled pauper in the
*Upamitibhavprapancha Katha* comes to mind, which clearly depicts the reality.
In it, even those who have attained wealth from the rise of merit are called
"skilled paupers," meaning those who are devoid of the wealth of dharma, and are
said to be poor and miserable from the ultimate perspective. That entire
wonderful allegorical description, like the great Siddhas, should be
contemplated again and again by the liberated soul upon the soul of the father.
If one can consider bondage as happiness, then one can consider merit as
happiness, but even a fool would not believe that. Because merit is the fetter
of the army, and sin is the fetter of iron, but both are fetters. Whether a
parrot is kept in a cage of the army or of iron, both are cages in the form of
bondage. Therefore, whatever is dependent on karma, the bondage of the world
continues. The thirst for objects remains.  The thirst for objects remains, how
can it be called happiness? This has been discussed in detail above.  The
essence of the above is that true, ultimate happiness arises only from
meditation, because there is no dependence on anything else in self-meditation,
or there is only dependence on the pure soul, the Supreme Soul, which is
manifest. Therefore, the happiness of meditation is only dependent on the soul,
and it arises only from the absence of karma. Being dependent on the soul, it is
not subject to karma. Thus, in self-meditation, which is independent, the soul
is the meditator, the object of meditation is the soul, and meditation is the
soul. The trinity of meditator, meditation, and object of meditation becomes one
here, the ultimate pure end is achieved. The inherent nature is the goal, the
inherent nature is the means, and the inherent nature is the achievement. The
non-dual unity is achieved here. Therefore, there is no agitation of any kind,
no alternative form, ultimate non-dual peace is achieved, ultimate well-being
arises, that is ultimate happiness, that is ultimate bliss. How can those who
are attached to the trivial happiness of objects know about such supreme
happiness of meditation? How can a villager understand the happiness of a city
dweller? How can that happiness of meditation be described without experience?
"The happiness of the city dweller, the commoner does not know, the happiness of
the beloved, the maiden does not know; without experience, the happiness of
meditation, neither man nor woman can understand." - *Shri Saksha* 7-3

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (576) yogadaSTisamuccaya rahe che, arthAt puNyodayathakI je je sukhaprApti
thAya che, te paNa puNyApekSI sukha duHkha ja che. kAraNa ke te puNya paNa
paravastu che, eTale tene parAdhIna te duHkha evuM sukha te te duHkha ja che, e
duHkhanuM lakSaNa atra prApta thAya che. puNyane paravastu kahevAnuM kAraNa e
ke-puNya e zubha karma che ane zubha karma e AtmAthI atirikta-judI evI paravastu
che. Ama paravaturUpa puNyanA udayathI deveMdra-manujedra AdinA je je sukha
sAMpaDe che, te paramArthathI duHkha ja che, athavA sukhAbhAsa ja che. iMdra-
cakravattI AdinI aDhaLaka Rddhi ane tethI prApta thatA paMca viSaya saMbaMdhI
kahevAtA sukha te duHkha ja che. atre zrI upamitibhavaprapaMca kathAmAM kahela
nipuNyaka raMkanuM tAdazya citAra khaDo karatuM prastuta daSTAMta yAda Ave che.
temAM puNyodayathI cakravattInI addhi pAmelAne paNa paramArthathI "nipuNyaka'
arthAta dharmadhanathI rahita e nidhanIo mahAdaridrI ne duHkhI kahyo che. te
samasta addabhuta rUpaka varNana (Allegory) mahAtmA siddharSinI jema pitAnA AtmA
upara ghaTAvI AtmAthI mumukSu jIve punaH punaH manana karavA yogya che. je kadI
baMdhanane sukha mAnI zakAya te puNyane sukha mAnI zakAya, paNa tema te mUkha
gamAra paNa mAne nahi. kAraNa ke puNya e senAnI beDI ne pApa e loDhAnI beDI,
paNa banne baMdhana to che ja che. popaTane senAnA pAMjarAmAM pUryo hoya ke
leDhAnA, paNa te baMne baMdhanarUpa pAMjarA che ja. eTale je payapradhathI
saMsArabaMdhana cAlu rahe che. viSaya tRNA udI rahe che. che. viSaya tRSNA
udIrNa rahe che, tene sukha kema kahI zakAya? A vagere uparamAM vistArathI
vivecAI cUkayuM che. A uparathI sArarUpa tAtparya eka ja che ke-tAtvika-
pAramArthika sukha kevaLa dhyAnathI ja upaje che, kAraNa ke AtmadhyAnamAM
parAvalaMbananI apekSA nathI, athavA pragaTa zuddha AtmArUpa paramAtmAnA ja
avalaMbananI apekSA che, eTaledhyAnasukha te kevala AtmAdhIna che, ane te
karmaviyogamAtrathI upaje che, AtmAdhIna eTale temAM karmanuM paravazapaNuM
nathI. Ama svAdhIna evA AtmadhyAnamAM AtmA dhyAtA che, dhyeya AtmA che, ne
dhyAna AtmA che. dhyAtAdhyAna-dhyeyanI tripuTInI atra ekatA thAya che, parama
zuddha aMta thAya che. sahajAtmasvarUpa e ja sAdhya, sahajAnmasvarUpa e ja
sAdhana, ne sahajAnmasvarUpa e ja siddhiema abheda ekatA atra thAya che. eTale
keI paNa prakAranI kaI paNa vikalparUpa AkulatA thatI nathI, parama nirvikalpa
zAMti thAya che, parama svasthatA upaje che, te ja parama sukha che, te ja
parama AnaMda che. evA paramottama dhyAna sukhanI tuccha viSayasukhamAM rAcanArA
pAmara janene zI khabara paDe ? nagaramAM rahenArA nAgara jananA sukhanI gamAra
gAmaDIAne zI gama paDe ? tema anubhava vinA te dhyAnasukha kema kahI zakAya ?
"nAgara sukha pAmara navi jANe, vallabha sukha kumArI re; anubhava viNa tyama
dhyAnataNuM sukha, kaNa lahe nara nArI re."--zrI . sakjhA. 7-3

Page #653 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Mamat: Nim Badhe Sada Abhyaan: Hem Sada Kalyana** (577) “This *dhyaan* when it
reaches its ultimate perfection, then the position of Indra is like a blade of
grass to it. Self-illuminating, blissful, and free from delusion, this dhyaan is
the destroyer of births. The doubt that was created by the intellect regarding
the difference between the soul and the Supreme Soul, this dhyaan, in the form
of a bridge, quickly removes it, and makes the two non-dual. That is, when the
non-duality of the soul and the Supreme Soul is realized, the soul merges into
the Supreme Soul. “Dhyaan Sudharas Paan Maganta, Bhajan Swagun Upga Re....Nij
Sukhake Savaiya; Reez Ekatvata Tanmen Vaaje, Vaajintr Sanmukh Ga Re....Nij”—Shri
Devchandraji.  **Dhyaanam Cha Nirmale Boghe Sadaiv Hi Mahatmanam ||
Ksheenaprayamal Ham Hem Sada Kalyanam Ev Hi || 174 ||** Nirmal Bodh Sathe Sada,
Mahatmao Ne Dhyaan; Ksheenapray Mal Hoy Te, Hem Sada J Kalyana. 174,
Meaning:–And Nirmal Bedh Sathe, Mahatmao Ne Sadaiv J Dhyaan Hoy Chhe.
Ksheenapray Malvaalu Se Nu Sadaay Kalyana J Hoy Chhe.  **Vivechan** “Eh Dashtin
Ma Nirmal, Dhyaan Te Heye Sachun; Dushan Rahit Nirantar Ti, Ratna Te Dipe
Jaachun.”—Shri J. Sakza. 7-4 Spasht Kshapakshama Thi Upjel Nirmal Bandh Hataa,
Mahatmao Ne-Munio Ne Sadaiv J Dhyaan Hoy Chhe. Atre Prativastuupma Aapi Chhe Ke-
Ksheenapray Malvaalu Se Nu Sadaay Kalyana J Hey Chhe. Karan Ke Teni Tatha Prakar
Ni Avastha Ni Upapatti Chhe.  Jetlu Aatmajnaan Thaay Tetli Aatmasamadhi
Pragate.”—Shrimud Rajchandra. Tti:—Thanam 2 Nirmane Ghose-Ane Spasht Kshayopshma
Thi Upjel Nirmal Edh Sathe Aan, Shunu? Te -22 Di Maatmana Sadaiv J Mahatmao Ne,
Munio Ne Hey Chhe. Aa J Prativastuupma Thi Kahe Chhe-Shikhamadh Ma-Ksheenuzhay
Malvaalu Hem-Se Nu, Ra Vanyaanmev Sida Kalyana J Hoy Chhe Tatha Prakar Ni
Avastha Ni Upapatti Ne Lidhe. x" Yatra Gachchati Para Paripark, Pakashasanapad
Trankalpam. Swaprakashsukhaboodham Yayam Taddhathanamev Bhavanashi Bhajdhvam ||
Aatmano Hi Parmaatmani Yo'bhootendabudhikrit Ev Vivaad: Nibandhnu Nu Kathaaniy
Trimekanarvatneti | ">Shri Adhyatmasar, A 17.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 mamata: nima badhe sadA AbhayAna: hema sadA kalyANa (577) "A dhyAna* jyAre
parama paripAkane pAme che tyAre tenI pAse IMdrapada tRNa sarakhuM che.
svaprakAzamaya-sukhamaya-bedhamaya evuM A dhyAna ja bhavane nAza karanAruM che.
AtmAne paramAtmAmAM je bhedabuddhikRta vivAda hatuM, ene A dhyAnarUpa saMdhikAra
jhaTa dUra karI, e bene abheda karI Ape che. arthAta AtmA-paramAtmAnI abhedatA
thatAM AtmAne paramAtmAmAM laya thAya che. " dhyAna sudhArasa pAna maganatA,
bhajana svaguNa upaga re....nija sukhake savaiyA; rIjha ekatvatA tAnameM vAje,
vAjiMtra sanmukha ga re....nija "--zrIdevacaMdrajI. dhyAnaM ca nirmale boghe
sadaiva hi mahAtmanAm  //  kSINaprAyamalaM hema sadA kalyANameva hi  //  174  //
nirmala bodha sate sadA, mahAtmAone dhyAna; kSINaprAya mala hoya te, hema sadA
ja kalyANa. 174, artha:-ane nirmala bedha sate, mahAtmAone sadaiva ja dhyAna
hoya che. kSINaprAya malavALuM senuM sadAya kalyANa ja hoya che. vivecana "eha
daSTimAM nirmala , dhyAna te heye sAcuM; dUSaNa rahita niraMtara ti, ratna te
dIpe jAcuM."--zrI je. sakjhA. 7-4 spaSTa kSApakSamAMthI upajela nimala baMdha
hatAM, mahAtmAone-munione sadaiva ja dhyAna hoya che. atre prativastuupamA ApI
che ke-kSINaprAya malavALuM senuM sadAya kalyANa ja heya che. kAraNa ke tenI
tathA prakAranI avasthAnI upapatti che. jeTaluM AtmajJAna thAya teTalI
AtmasamAdhi pragaTe."--zrImad rAjacaMdra. ttiH--thAnaM 2 nirmaNe ghoSe-ane
spaSTa kSayopazamathI upajelo nimala edha sate Ana, zuM? te -rara di mAtmanA
sadaiva ja mahAtmAone, munione heya che. A ja prativastupamAthI kahe che-
zIkhAmaDha ma-kSINujhAya malavALuM hema-senuM, ra vanyANameva sidA kalyANa ja
hoya che tathA prakAranI avasthAnI u5pattine lIdhe. x" yatra gacchati para
paripArka, pAkazAsanapadaM tRNakalpam  /  svaprakAzasukhabodhamayaM
taddhathAnameba bhavanAzi bhajadhvam  //  Atmano hi paramAtmani
yo'bhUteMdabuddhikRta eva vivAdaH  /  nibaMdhinuM kathAnIya TrAimekanarvataneti
| ">zrI adhyAtmasAra , a 17.

Page #654 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(578) In the seventh Prabha Drishti of the Yogadrishti Suri, the knowledge is
completely pure, the power of Kshapaksha has increased so much that the Mahatmas
with this Drishti constantly meditate on the Muniśvaras. These Atmaram Jnanis,
through Atmadhyan, are constantly immersed in Atmadhyan, such an amazing natural
Atmaprapti Dhyanadsha is theirs because knowledge becomes meditation. And here,
for the Yogi, the knowledge-obscuring karma has been destroyed, the
Satushraddhasangat Bedha has become clear and excellent, the knowledge has
become so intense that such Yogishvaras naturally have constant, unbroken
Atmadhyan. These Atmadhyani Purushas, "free from the desire for the objects of
the world, and from the attachment to the soul, they remain established in
Darshan-Jnana. And being free from all attachments, they meditate on the soul,
not on karma or non-karma, and they contemplate the unity of the conscious,
self-experiencing soul. Thus, the Jnanis, who are full of Darshan-Jnana and
Ananyamaya, meditate on the soul and quickly attain the soul that is free from
karma." In this achievement of Atmadhyan, the reliance on the Supreme Soul, who
has attained the direct realization of the pure soul, is extremely beneficial.
By the worship of the pure Atmaswaroop Paramatma, the pure soul is revealed,
therefore, the Yogi Purushas constantly meditate on the Paramatma in the temple
of their mind, because by the meditation on such a strong, supporting,
Paramatma, the self-reliance becomes the reliance on the soul, and thus, by
becoming one with the qualities of the "Devchandra" Paramatma, the soul reaches
its full potential, attains the Paramatmapada. "By the meditation on the strong,
supporting Paramatma, the self-reliance becomes the reliance on the soul; by
becoming one with the qualities of Devchandra, the soul reaches its full
potential." My Lord, meditate on Him, meditate on Him, Attain Siddhi, drink the
nectar of experience." - Shri Devchandraji. Here, a well-known example is given:
that which is almost completely purified, is known as "Kalyan" of gold, and it
is always... "The desire for the objects of the world is destroyed, and the soul
meditates on itself. He who is free from all attachments, meditates on the soul,
not on karma or non-karma, and he contemplates the unity of the conscious, self-
experiencing soul. The Jnanis, who are full of Darshan-Jnana and Ananyamaya,
meditate on the soul and quickly attain the soul that is free from karma." -
Shri Samayasar Ga. 187-189.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (578) yogadarisasurIya A sAtamI prabhA daSTimAM bodha eTale badhe nimala thaI
gayuM hoya che, spaSTa kSapazamanuM bala eTaluM badhuM vadhI gayuM hoya che, ke
A daSTivALA mahAtmA gI munIzvarone sadAya-niraMtara dhyAna vatte che. A AtmArAma
jJAnI AtmadhyAnathI puruSe niraMtara AtmadhyAnamAM nimagna rahe che, evI adbhuta
sahaja AtmaprApti dhyAnadazA temanI va chekAraNa ke jJAnapramANa dhyAna thAya
che. ane atre yegIne jJAnAvaraNIya kamane kSayopazama eTale badhA vadhI gayo
hoya che, satuzraddhAsaMgata bedha eTale badho spaSTa ne utkRSTa thaI gayo hoya
che, jJAnadazA eTalI badhI AkarI-tIvra thaI gaI hoya che, ke evA yogIzvarene
sahaja svabhAve niraMtara akhaMDa AtmadhyAna varte che. A AtmadhyAnIjha puruSa
"puNya-pApa yoga viSayamAM AtmAne AtmAthI rudhI, tathA paravastu pratyenI
icchAthI virata thaI, darzana-jJAnamAM sthita thAya che. ane sarva saMgathI
mukta evA te AtmAne AtmAthI dhyAve che, karmane ke nekamane dhyAvatA nathI, ane
cetayitA-AtmAnubhavI evA te ekatane ciMtave che. Ama dazana-jJAnamaya ne
ananyamaya evA jJAnI puruSa AtmAne dhyAvatAM karmavipramukta evA AtmAne ja
zIdhra prApta kare che." A AtmadhyAnanI siddhimAM jeNe zuddha AtmAnI sAkSAt
siddhi prApti karI che, evA paramAtmAnuM avalaMbana parama upakArI thAya che.
zuddha AtmasvarUpa paramAtmAnI bhajanAthI pitAne zuddha AtmA pragaTe che, eTalA
mATe yegI puruSo pitAnA manamaMdiramAM paramAtmAnuM niraMtara dhyAna dhare che,
kAraNa ke evA puSTa nimitta AlaMbanarUpa paramAtmAnA dhyAnathI laya sthAne
svAlaMbanaAtmAlaMbana thAya che, ane Ama "devacaMdra' paramAtmAnA guNanI sAthe
ekatAnatA thatAM, AtmA pUrNa sthAne pahoMce che, paramAtmapadane pAme che.
"puSTa nimittAlaMbana dhyAne, svAlaMbana laya kAne; devacaMdra guNane eka tAne,
pahoMce pUraNa thAne." mArA svAmI he tere dhyAna dharije, dhyAna dharije ho,
siddhi varIe, anubhava amRta pIje."--zrI devacaMdrajI. atre lokaprasiddha
daSTAMta ApyuM che ke-jemAMthI mela lagabhaga gALI nakhAyo hoya, zuddha karAye
heya, evuM hema-sanuM "kalyANa" tarIke oLakhAya che, ane te sadAya x " ajALama:5
iMdhira puupAvagoNuM ! daMsaNaNANajhi Thido ijchAvirao ya aNNasi  /  /  jo
savvasaMgamukko jhAyadi appANamappaNo appA  /  Navi kammaM NokammaM cedA citedi
eyattaM  //  appANaM jhAyaMto daMsaNaNANamao annnnnnmo| 26 jiLa aogrLameva
rAmavika che - zrI samayasAra gA. 187-189,

Page #655 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Assembly Vision: Asangaanushthan Sati Samavrittipad  (579) The form of
"Kalyan" remains. Similarly, here too, due to the almost complete depletion of
karma, the "Kalyan" has become like gold - it is swift and pure. The excellent
"Kshapashram" which is bound by this, is itself the ultimate "Kalyan" because it
becomes the goal of the ultimate "Kalyan" - the excellent, true knowledge. Just
as a gem, free from impurities, continuously radiating light, truly shines and
sparkles, so too, this pure, unblemished, true gem sparkles within, shining
brightly. This ultimate luminous, radiant, "Dham" form is always the ultimate
"Kalyan" because the attainment of the ultimate "Kalyan" - the "Maekshapad" - is
very close here. Moreover, just as pure "Kalyan" gold never deteriorates, never
changes, but remains as it is, in the form of "Kalyan", so too, pure "Kalyan" -
the pure "Bodh" - never deteriorates, never changes, but remains as it is, in
the form of pure "Kalyan". Therefore, it is truly said that this pure "Baadh" is
constantly present here.  **Satpravrittipad** is here, "Asangaanushthan" is the
name. The journey on the great path, which leads to the "Nirvana" pad. (175)
**Meaning:** Here, in the "Tattvamarg", "Asangaanushthan" is the name given to
the "Satpravrittipad" which is the journey on the great path, leading to the
"Apuanaravarta" pad - the eternal pad.  **Analysis:** Here, in the "Tattvamarg",
"Asangaanushthan" is the name given to the "Samavrittipad" which is attained.
Because, in this way, there is "Swaraspravritti". This "Asangaanushthan" named
"Satpravrittipad" is the journey on the great path, and it leads to the
"Anaagami" pad, meaning it leads to the "Apuanaravarta" pad - the eternal pad.
What is the "Satyaavrittipad" mentioned above, in relation to "Asangaanushthan"?
Its form is described here. Here, in the "Tattvavritti-Sanbavritti" chapter of
the "Ved", and here, meaning in the "Tattvamarg", "Satpravritti" is what? It is
"Asangaanushthan" - the name given to it, which is "AshaanWara" -
"Asangaanushthan" - "Sanrit" - "Sanjna" - "Waala". Because, in this way, there
is "Varaspravritti". "Mgruthya" 26 - this "Asangaanushthan" is the journey on
the great path. "Mana[[naavan" - "Anaagami" padavah, (it leads to the
"Apuanaravarta" pad), it is the "Nitya" pad - the "Praaptak" - the "Pamaadnak".

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 sabhA draSTi: asagAnuSThAna sati sAmavRttipada (579) kalyANa" svarUpa ja rahe
che. tema atre paNa karmamala lagabhaga kSINa kalyANa suvarNa thayuM hovAthI-
kSIprAya hevAthI, nimala evA utkRSTa kSapazamathI je baMdha thAya che, te parama
kalyANarUpa ja hoya che, kAraNake te parama kalyANusvarUpa utkRSTa sAcA jJAnano
hetu thaI paDe che. jema dUSaNa vinAnuM, niraMtara jyotivALuM ratna kharekharUM
dIpe che-jhagArA mAre che, tema A nirmala bedharUpa sAcuM ratna aMtaramAM
jhagArA mAre che, atyaMta jhaLakI UThe che. A parama prakAzamaya-prakAza.
dhAmarUpa bAya sadAya parama kalyANusvarUpa ja che, kAraNake parama kalyANamaya
svasvabhAvarUpa mekSapadanI prApti atre nikaTamAM nikaTa vatta che. vaLI jema
zuddha "kalyANa" suvarNa kadI bagaDe nahiM, vipariNAma pAme nahiM, paNa jema che
tema kalyANusvarUpa ja rahe tema zuddha kalyANamaya nirmala bodha kadI viNase
nahi, vipariNAma pAme nahiM, paNa jema che tema zuddha kalyANusvarUpe ja rahe.
eTale A nirmala bAdha sate atre niraMtara dhyAna vatte che, e yathArtha kahyuM
che. satpravRttipadaM cehAsaGgAnuSThAnasaMjJitam  /  mahApathaprayANaM
yadanAgAmipadAvaham  //  175  //  ne saspravRttipada ahI, che asaMga anuSThAna;
mahApathataNuM prayANa je, Ape pada nirvANa, 175 artha :-ane ahI-tatvamAgamAM,
"asaMgAnuSThAna" e saMjJAo oLakhAtuM evuM sapravRttipada vate che, ke je
mahApatha-prayANurUpa hoI, apunarAvarta pada-nitya pada pamADanArUM che.
vivecana ane ahIM tatvamArgane viSe, "asaMgaanuSThAna" e saMjJAo oLakhAtuM evuM
samavRtti pada prApta varte che. kAraNa ke tathA prakAre svarasapravRtti hoya
che. te asaMgAnuSThAna nAmanuM sapravRttipada mahApathanA prayANarUpa che, ane
anAgAmipadAvaha che, arthAta apunarAvarta pada pamADanAruM-nitya pada
pamADanAruM che. asaMga-anuSThAna uparamAM je satyavRttipada kahyuM te zuM ?
tenuM atra svarUpa kahyuM che. ahIM tattva vRtti-saMbavRttiparva veda-ane ahI
eTale ke tatvamAga mAM satapravRtti 56, zuM? te ke aSAnaWArasahitay
-asaMgAnuSThAna saMrita saMjJAvALuM vate che; tathA prakAre varasapravRttine
lIdhe. magruthayA 26-je asaMgAnuSThAna mahApatha prayANa che. manA[[nAvaNa-
anAgAmi padAvaha che, (apunarAvartA 58 pamADanAra che ), nityapada prApaka-
pamADanAra che.

Page #656 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Gidhistisamuccaya  In the path, i.e., the yogic path that aims to attain the
pure essence of the self, the term 'asanganushthan' is used for the state of
non-attachment. The name 'asanganushthan' itself indicates its nature and is
appropriately used. It is also known as 'sanjnachakra' and 'ruti sanjjna.'  What
is this 'asang anushthan'? To understand it properly, we need to know the nature
of four types of anushthan (spiritual practice): (1) Preeti anushthan, (2)
Bhakti anushthan, (3) Vachan anushthan, and (4) Asang anushthan.  Preeti
anushthan is the practice where there is the highest reverence and intense love,
and all other activities are abandoned to focus on it. Bhakti anushthan is a
more purified form of Preeti anushthan, where the sense of reverence towards the
object of worship is more prominent. The examples of a wife and a mother help
understand the difference between Preeti and Bhakti anushthan. A wife is
extremely dear and beloved, while a mother is the embodiment of compassion. The
offerings made to a wife are out of love, while those made to a mother are out
of devotion.  Vachan anushthan is the appropriate and virtuous conduct of a
sadhupurusha (spiritual aspirant) in all situations, in accordance with the
scriptural teachings. It is the ideal behavior and practice as per the
scriptural instructions.  Asang anushthan is the spiritual practice that is free
from any attachment or association with external objects. It is the pure and
selfless service of the Jinkalpit (as prescribed by the Jinas) without any
expectation or attachment to the results.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 gidaSTisamuccaya mArgamAM arthAt zuddha AtmatatvanI siddhi sAdhanArA
yogamArgamAM, sapravRttipadane asaMgAnuSThAna' saMjJA ApavAmAM AvI che. A
asaMgAnuSThAna" saMjJA-nAma uparathI enuM svarUpa saMjJAta thAya che,
samyaphaprakAre jaNAya che, eTale ene "asaMganuSThAna saMjJA barAbara ghaTe che.
"saMjJAcakta ane rUti saMjJA." A asaMga anuSThAna eTale zuM? te barAbara
samajavA mATe A cAra prakAranA anuSThAnanuM svarUpa jANavuM joIeH (1) prIti
anuSThAna, (2) bhakti anuSThAna, (3) vacana anuSThAna, (4) asaMga anuSThAna. je
anuSThAnamAM parama Adara-prayatnAtizaya hoya che, parama prIti upaje che, ane
zeSatyAgathI eTale ke bIjAM badhAM kAma eka kera mUkI daI je karAya che, te
prIti anuSThAna che. * e prIti anuSThAnanI tulya chatAM, pUjyapaNAnI buddhithI
prIti-bhakti je vizuddhatara vyApAravALuM hoya che, te bhakti anuSThAna che.
eTale anuSThAna bIjI badhI rIte prIti anuSThAna barAbara chatAM, A bhakti
anuSThAnamAM pUjyabhAvano aMza vizeSa hoya che, tethI te vadhAre
vizuddhagavyApAravALuM hoya che. A prIti-bhakti e bane anuSThAnanuM svarUpa
samajavA mATe patnInuM ane mAtAnuM udAharaNa che. patnI che te atyaMta vallabha-
priya che, temaja jananI hitarUpa che, patnIne je bhajana-vastrAdi ApavAmAM Ave
che te prItithI apAya che, ane mAtAne je ApavAmAM Ave che te bhaktithI apAya
che. ATale e baMne vacce phera che. zA arthanA anusaMdhAnapUrvaka sAdhupuruSanI
je sarvatra ucita pravRtti, te vacanAnuSThAna che. arthAt cAritravaMta satpaSanI
zAstravacanane anusaratI, "jyAM jyAM je je yogya che evI sarvatra ucita gavALI
pravRtti, zAstramAM kahyA vacana-asaMga pramANe yathAsUtra Adarza ( Ideal)
AcaraNa, te vacanAnuSThAna che. anuSThAna dA. ta. aDhAra hajAra zIlaaMgane
dharanArA te sAcA sAdhu athavA muni che, tevuM zAstravacana anusAranuM yakta
Adarza AcaraNa hoya te vacanAnuSThAna. vyavahArakAle zAstravacanathI je
nirapekSa hoya che-zAstravacananI jyAM apekSA rahI nathI, ane atidaDha
saMskArane lIdhe caMdanagaMdha nyAye je AtmArUpa thaI gayuM hoya che, evuM je
jinakalpI AdinuM kriyAsevana-sarva para bhAvanA saMgasparzarahita zuddha x "
yatrAdaro'sti paramaH prItizca hitodayA bhavati kartuH  /  zeSatyAgena karoti
yacca tatpItyanuSThAnam  //  gauravavizeSayogAdbuddhimato yadvizuddhatarayogam
/  kriyayetaratulyamapi jJeyaM tadbhaktayanuSThAnam  //  atyantavallabhA khalu
patnI tadvaddhitA ca jananIti  /  sunyamari OMcamanojJapta thAtotimati " "--
Dizaka, 10, 3-5

Page #657 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Prabha Drishti: Meeti Aadi 4 Anushthan, Anal Ban Chag (51)  **Atmaanucharan
is Asangaanushthan.** It is said that: "What is performed as if it is one's own
nature due to excessive practice by the virtuous, that Asangaanushthan is due to
the impressions of the word." The first rotation of the wheel is due to the
movement of the hand, and the subsequent rotation is due to the absence of the
hand. This is an example that explains the difference between Vachanaanushthan
and Asangaanushthan.  **Meaning:** Just as a wheel rotates when moved by hand,
the initial rotations are due to the hand's movement. Later, even when the hand
is removed, the wheel continues to rotate due to the previous impressions. Here,
the initial rotations are truly Vachanaanushthan, and the subsequent rotations
are truly Asangaanushthan.  Therefore, Vachanaanushthan related to begging,
etc., is due to the action of the word, while Asangaanushthan is due to the
impressions created by the word, even in the absence of the word, not due to the
action of the word. However, due to the strong impressions of practice arising
from it, it happens automatically.  Thus, Asangaanushthan is the practice that
becomes ingrained in one's nature due to the deep impressions arising from
excessive practice, without relying on the word in the course of action. It is
like the fragrance of sandalwood permeating the entire forest, this practice
becomes so much a part of the soul of the virtuous, that it pervades their
entire being and fills them with the fragrance of virtue.  The soul has become
so deeply ingrained with this practice, and the scriptures have left such deep
impressions on it, that it spontaneously acts on its own, even without relying
on the word. This natural, inherent practice of the great soul is
Asangaanushthan.  **Analamban Chag**  It is called Analamban Chag because the
form of Analamban Yag is as follows: Here, the reliance is also this - the
supreme, both with form and without form, and the subtle, formless one is
Analamban Chag.  "आलंबणं पि एयं रूवमरूवी य इत्थ परमुत्ति । तग्गुणपरिणइरूत्रो,
सुहुमोऽणालंबगो नाम || " —Shri Haribhadrasuri's Yagavishka, Ga. 19  "6
यत्त्वभ्यासातिशयात्सात्मभूतमिव चेष्ट्यते सद्भिः । तदसङ्गानुष्ठानं भवति
त्वेतत्तदावेधात् ॥ चक्रभ्रमणं दण्डात्तदभावे चैव यत्परं भवति ।
वचनासङ्गानुष्ठानयोस्तु तज्ज्ञापकं ज्ञेयम् ।। " Maharshi Haribhadracharya's
Shodashak 10-7, 8.  This Asangaanushthan is the very sign of Analamban
Sangatyag. One should know the form of Alamban Chag. It is the supreme, both
with form and without form, and the subtle, formless one is Analamban Chag.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prabhA dRSTi : mIti Adi 4 anuSThAna, anAla bana cega (51) AtmAnucaraNa te
asaMgAnuSThAna che. kahyuM che ke-abhyAsAtizayane lIdhe satAthI je sAhmIbhUta
jevuM AcarAya che, evuM asaMgAnuSThAna te vacananA saMskAra thakI hAya che.
paheluM cakrabhramaNa da...DavyApArathI hAya che ane tenA abhAve pachInuM hAya
che,-A vacanAnuSThAna ane asaMgAnuSThAnanA vizeSa jaNAvanArU dRSTAMta che.'
arthAt hAthe| halAvatAM cakra bhrame che, temAM pahelA AMTA hAthe| halAvavAthI
phare che, ane pachI hAtheA mUkI daie te paNa pUrva sa'skArathI cakra pharyAM
kare che. AmAM pahelA AMTA kharAkhara vacanAnuSThAna che ane pachInA AMTA
kharAkhara asa'gAnuSThAna che. eTale bhikSATanAdi viSayI vacanAnuSThAna
vacanavyApArathakI hoya che, ane asaMgAnuSThAna vacana abhAve paNa kevala
tajjanita saMskArathakI hAya che, vacanavyApAra nahi. chatAM tenAthI upajelA
dRDha abhyAsa saskArathI Ape|Apa (Automatic) thayA kare che. Ama asaMgAnuSThAna
eTale vyavahAra kAle vacananuM Alakhana lIdhA vinA, atizaya abhyAsane lIdhe
upajelA gADha saskAra thakI, caMdanagadhanyAye sAtmIbhUta thayeluM-AtmAnA
svabhAvabhUta thai gayeluM anuSThAna-jema ca'nagaMdha AkhA vanane suvAsita rI
mUke che, tema A anuSThAna A cAritravata mahAyeAgIne eTaluM badhuM AtmArUpa thai
gayuM hAya che, ke te tenA sakala AtmapradezamAM vyApta thai jai tene
zIlasaurabhathI suvAsita karI mUke che. te anuSThAnanA tenA AtmAne eTaleA badhA
dRDha abhyAsa thai gaye hAya che, ne zAstravacananA tene eTaleA badhA gADha
saskAra lAgI gayeA hAya che, ke vacanAlaMbana vinA paNa enI meLe svarasathI tenI
tathApravRtti thayA ja kare che. AvuM te mahAtmAnuM sahaja svabhAvarUpa asa'ga
AcaraNu te asaMga anuSThAna che. anAlaana cAga anAlaMbana coga kahevAya che,
kAraNa ke anAlaMbana yAganuM svarUpa samajavA mATe prakAreH-- ahIM Alakhana paNa
A che-- paramAtmAnA guNunI pariNatirUpa evA A A je asaMgAnuSThAna che, te ja
anAlaMbana e saMgatyAganuM ja lakSaNa che. AlaMbana ceAganuM svarUpa jANavuM
joIe. te A rUpI ane arUpI evA parama; ane te arUpI je sUkSma che, te anAlakhana
ceAga che.' "AlaMbaNaM pi eyaM rUvamarUvI ya ittha paramutti  /
tagguNapariNairUtro, suhumo'NAlaMbago nAma || " --zrI haribhadrasUriSkRta
yAgavi'zikA, gA. 19 "6 yattvabhyAsAtizayAtsAtmabhUtamiva ceSTyate sadbhiH  /
tadasaGgAnuSThAnaM bhavati tvetattadAvedhAt  //  cakrabhramaNaM daNDAttadabhAve
caiva yatparaM bhavati  /  vacanAsaGgAnuSThAnayostu tajjJApakaM jJeyam  /  /  "
maharSi haribhadrAcArya jIpraNIta SoDazaka 10-7, 8.

Page #658 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(582) Here, **yoga-dristi-samuccaya** is of two types: (1) **Rupi** which means
**samavasaranasthit** **jina-rupa** (the form of the Jina in the state of
**samavasarana**) and its **alambana** (object of focus) which has
characteristics like its image, etc. (2) **Arupi** **param** which means
**siddha** **paramatma** (the liberated soul). In this, the **alambana** is the
**arupi** **paramatma-rupa** (the form of the liberated soul) and the **yoga**
is called **tad-guna-parinati-rupa** **analambana** (the yoga of the
transformation of those qualities like **kevaljnana** etc. of the liberated
soul) which is known through the transformation of those qualities. Due to its
**atindriya** (beyond the senses) nature, it is **sukshma** (subtle); or this
**yoga** is with a **sukshma** **alambana** (subtle object of focus), therefore
it is called **ishad-u-kichit** **alambana-rupa** (slightly having an object of
focus) and is called **analambana** **yoga**.  This **analambana** **yoga** is
the **paratattva-darshanecchha-rupa** (desire to see the ultimate reality) which
is attained in **samartha** **yoga**. "In the scriptures, the remedy is shown,
but what is beyond the subject of the scriptures, is attained through special
effort and strength, this **samartha** **paratattva** is called the supreme
**yoga**." - This definition of **darshanecchha** was given in the beginning of
this text (verse 5). This **samartha** **yoga** is attained in the second
**apuurvakarana** (stage of purification) of the **kshapka** **shreni** (series
of purifications) and in it, there is **sanyasa** (renunciation) of **kshama**
(forgiveness) and other **kshapashmika** (purifying) **dharmas** (virtues). This
**samartha** **yoga** which is in the form of **dharma-sanyasa** (renunciation
of virtues) leads to the **nihsanga** (unattached) **paratattva-darshanecchha**
(desire to see the ultimate reality) which is **akhand** (unbroken). Know this
as **analambana** **yoga**. In other words, it is the desire to see the ultimate
reality with **asanga** (unattached) power, which does not attach itself to
anything else, does not choose anything, and is completely **akhand**
(unbroken). This **analambana** **yoga** exists until the **paratattva**
(ultimate reality) is seen. But when the **paramatma** (liberated soul) is seen,
**kevaljnana** (omniscience) arises and **analambana** **yoga** is no longer
**analambana** (without an object of focus) but becomes **salambana** (with an
object of focus). The example of an arrow is used to understand this:  The
**kshapka** (purification) is like the bow, arrow, and quiver. The **kshapka**
**shreni** (series of purifications) is like the bow. The **paramatma**
(liberated soul) is the target. The **analambana** **yoga** is like the arrow
which is aimed at the target without missing. As long as the arrow is not
released, **analambana** **yoga** is active. But when it is released, the target
is hit only by its fall. Quickly, the **paramatma** (liberated soul) is seen.
Therefore, the fall of the arrow is like the **salambana** (with an object of
focus) **kevaljnana** (omniscience) light. * "The kingdom is not a denial: the
grace is the **shey** (supreme) **tin-padhyana** (threefold meditation) is the
**havair-at-tattva-swar** (the essence of the true nature of the liberated
soul)." - **Shodashaka** 14-1. "**Samartha** **yoga** is the desire to see the
**tattva** (ultimate reality) with **asanga** (unattached) power. This is called
**analambana** **yoga** until that vision is attained. Because it is established
there and is truly active there. This **analambana** (without an object of
focus) is called the best of all. Know that the vision of the **tattva**
(ultimate reality) is like the arrow hitting the target. **Pat** (fall) is the
**tattva** (ultimate reality) and **jnana** (knowledge) is the **chashvara-na-
choti** (the peak of the liberated soul)." - **Shodashaka** 11-8, 9, 10.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (582) yogadaSTisamuccaya ahIM (1) rUpI eTale samavasaraNasthita jinarUpa; ane
tenI pratimAdi lakSaNavALuM AlaMbana. (2) arUpI parama eTale siddha paramAtmA.
temAM-te arUpI paramAtmarUpa AlaMbananA je kevalajJAnAdi guNo, tenI
samApattirUpI pariNatithI je jaNAya che, te taddaguNapariNatirUpa anAlaMbana
nAmano yoga che. atIndriya viSayapaNAne lIdhe te sUkSma che; athavA te sUkSma
AlaMbanavALe A yoga che, tethI A ISadU-kicita AlaMbanarUpa hoI anAlaMbana yuga
kahevAya che. * ane A je anAlaMbana yoga che, te sAmarthya yogamAM prApta thatI
paratatvadarzanecchArUpa che. "zAstramAM jene upAya batAvavAmAM Avyo che, paNa
jene viSaya zAstrathI para che, evo vizeSathI zaktiudrekathI prApta thato A
sAmarthya paratattva nAmane uttama yoga che."--ema A graMthaprAraMbhamAM (le. 5)
darzanechA vyAkhyA karavAmAM AvI hatI. A sAmarthya yoga kSapakazreNIgata dvitIya
apUrvakaraNamAM prApta hoya che, ane temAM kSamA Adi kSApazamika dharmone
saMnyAsa-tyAga hoya che. AvA svarUpavALA A dharmasaMnyAsarUpa sAmarthyoga thakI
je niHsaMga evI paratattvadarzane chA* akhaMDapaNe pravarte che, tadurUpa A
anAlaMbana yoga jANo. arthAt eka paramAtmA sivAya bIje kayAMya saMga na kare-
cUMTe nahiM evI asaMga zaktithI, akhaMDa pravRttithI pUrNa evI je
paramAtmadarzananI IcchA te anAlaMbana yoga che. ane te paratavanuM darzana
jyAMlagI nathI thayuM, tyAM lagI ja A hoya che; paNa paramAtma svarUpanuM
darzana thaye kevalajJAna upajatAM, anAlaMbana yuga heto nathI, paNuM sAlaMbana
hoya che A samajavA mATe bANunuM daSTAMta che : kSapakarUpa dhanurdhAra-bANAvaLI
che. kSapakazreNIrUpa dhanuSya che. paramAtmA e lakSya-tAkavAnuM nizAna che.
tenA vedhamAM khAlI na jAya, acUka je bANa tAke che, tenA sthAne A anAlaMbana
yoga che. jyAM lagI te bANa choDavAmAM AvyuM nathI, tyAM lagI ja anAlaMbana yoga
vyApAra che. paNa te choDavAmAM AvyuM, acUka evA tenA patanamAtrathI ja
lakSyavedha hoya che. zIdhra paramAtmadarzana thAya che. eTale bANapAta bANunA
paDavA jevo sAlaMbana kevalajJAna prakAza ja hoya che, * " rAjyane nirATana : je
krUipA zeyaH ttinapadhyAna havAiratattaravasvara : "--SoDazaka 14-1. " sAmarthya
yogato yA tatra didRkSetyasaGgazacyADhayA  /  sA'nAlambanayogaH
proktastadadarzanaM yAvat  //  tatrA pratiSThito'yaM yataH pravRttazca
tattvatastatra  /  sarvottamAnujaH khalu tenAnAlambano gItaH  //
draagsmaattdrshnmissugtjnyaatmaatrte| jJeyam  /  pata varTa tatta jJAnaM
cazvaranAM cotiH | >>-SoDazaka 11-8, 9, 10,

Page #659 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Prabha Drishti: The Essence of Asanga Anushthan  (583)  Not an Alanban Yaga
Vyapar. Because the perfection of the flower is there. (Special inquisitive
should observe the commentary of Shri Yashovijayji on Chaugvamshika and
Shodashak Shastra.)  The essence of all this is: (1) Asanga Anushthan means,
without the association of the scriptures, it is performed by the firm sanskar
arising from it. It is the natural flow of the Nigranth Vitrag Muni, the Asanga
conduct that has become the nature of the soul, this Nigranth Mahamuni's self-
character is so ideal, that it does not have any kind of external influence.
Sang is of two types: external and internal. Food and objects are external Sang,
while attachment, aversion, pride, etc. are internal Sang. Where there is a
complete absence of both these types of Sang, it is called Asanga Anushthan.
Where there is complete perfection of the Nigranth nature of matter and spirit,
and especially the ideal spirit, it is Asanga Anushthan. (2) This Asanga
Anushthan is the same as Alanban Chaug. To attain oneness with the qualities of
the formless Supreme Soul, to attain the state of harmony, is Alanban Yaga.
Without any attachment to anything else, just focusing the mind on the Supreme
Soul, becoming absorbed in the contemplation of the oneness of the qualities of
the Supreme Soul and the soul, is Alanban Yaga, which is Asanga Anushthan. (3)
And this Alanban Chaug is the intense desire for the vision of the Supreme Soul,
which manifests in Samathyaag. This desire for the vision of the Supreme Soul is
so intense that there is no attachment to any other influence, the mind does not
wander anywhere else, only the thirst for the vision of the Supreme Soul
remains. Thus, without any association, attachment, dependence, or obstruction,
the Asanga Nigranth conduct that takes place, the Alanban Yaga that manifests in
the form of meditation on the Supreme Soul, the intense desire for the vision of
the Supreme Soul that prevails, all this is Asanga Anushthan.  The essence of
Asanga  It is necessary to understand the mystery of the word 'Anushthan'. To
perform an action that is in accordance with knowledge, that is conducive, and
that is not contradictory, is called Anushthan. So, just as it was firmly
decided that the soul is different from the body and other external objects, to
put this decisive knowledge into practice, to renounce the feelings of
attachment, etc. towards the body and other external objects, and to strive for
the attainment of the pure soul, is Anushthan. The experience of the soul, which
is different from the body and other external objects, the self-knowledge that
is attained, to perform the conduct of the pure soul nature, free from the
association of the body and other external objects, in accordance with it, is
Anushthan. Such an action, which is so beneficial, is also known as Anushthan.
By performing the practice of Amrit Anushthan, which leads the soul to the state
of Amrit,

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prabhA dRSTi : paratattvadata necchA, asa'Ja anuSThAna'nuM tAtpa (583) nahiM ke
anAlaMbana yAga vyApAra. kAraNa ke phulanu siddhapaNuM che. ( vizeSa jijJAsue
ceAgaviMzikA para zrI yazeAvijayajInI TIkA tathA SoDazaka zAsra avaleAkavAM. ) A
sarvAM uparathI tAtparya A che ke-(1) asaMga anuSThAna eTale zAsravacananA
saMga-avala khana vinA,tajanya dRDha saMskArathI Ape|Apa svarasathI pravatuM
evu, nigraMtha vItarAga muninuM AtmasvabhAvarUpa thai gayeluM asaMga AcaraNa A
nigraMtha mahAmuninuM AtmacAritra eTaluM badhuM Adarza paNe asaMga hAya che, ke
temAM koI paNa prakAranA parabhAvanA kaMI paNa sa`ga nathI hAtA. sa`ga e
prakAranA che-khAdya ane abhya tara. dhana dhAnyAdi parigraha te bAhya sa`ga
che, rAga-dveSa-mAhAdi aMtaraMga bhAvA te abhyatara saMga che. A baMne prakAranA
saMganA jyAM sarvathA abhAva varte che, te asaMga anuSThAna kahevAya che.
dravya-bhAva nigra MthapaNAnI ane temAMya mukhya karIne Adaza bhAva
nigraMthapaNAnI jyAM sapUrNa sasiddhi varte che, te asaMga anuSThAna che. (2) A
asaMga anuSThAna e ja anAla ana ceAga che. arUpI paramAtmAnA guNu sAthe
samApatti thavI, samarasabhAva pariNati thavI te anAlaMbana yAga che. khIje
kayAMya paNa sa`ga-Asakti karyA vinA kevaLa eka paramAtmAmAM ja citta joDI,
paramAtmAnA ane AtmAnA guNanI ekatvatAnA ciMtanathI tanmayatA thavI, te asaMga
anuSThAnarUpa anAlakhana yAga che. (3) ane A anAla bana cega te sAmathyAgamAM
pragaTatI utkaTa paratattvadarzanecchA che. A paratattvadarzananI IcchA eTalI
badhI utkaTa-tIvra hoya che, ke tyAM pachI khIje kAMya parabhAvamAM
saoNMgaAsakti hotI nathI, khIje kayAMya citta cAMTatuM nathI, kevaLa
paratattvanA darzananI ja jhakhanA vate che. Ama anyatra kayAMya saMga vinA--
Asakti vinA, Alakhana vinA, pratikhaMdha vinA, je asaga nigraMtha AcaraNa thAya,
eka paramAtmAnA dhyAnanarUpa je anAlaMbanayeAga pragaTe, paramAtmadarzananI je
utkaTa icchA pravartta, te sarva asaMga anuSThAna che. asaganuM' tAtka ' A
anuSThAna' zabdanuM athaOrahasya samajavA yAgya che. jJAnane anusaratI, anukULa,
aviruddha kriyA karavI, tenuM nAma anuSThAna che. eTale je prakAre dRDha
nizcayapUrvaka jJAna thayuM ke dehAdi paravastuthI AtmA bhinna che, te nizcaya
jJAnane 6 rahasya ' anuSThAna 'tuM vanamAM -AcaraNamAM mUkavuM arthAt dehArdi
paravastu pratyenA rAgAdi bhAvanA tyAga karI, zuddha AtmAnI siddhi karavA
pravarttavuM, te anuSThAna che. dehAdithI pragaTa bhinna evuM je .
AtmAnubhavarUpa AtmajJAna thayuM, tene anurUpa-chAje ema dehArdi parabhAvanA
sa'sarga'thI rahitapaNe zuddha AtmasvabhAvanuM AcaraNa karavu, te anuSThAna che.
eTalI tenI sAdhaka evI kriyA te paNa anuSThAna nAmathI oLakhAya che. AvA AtmAne
amRtarUpe pariNamatA amRta anuSThAnanI sAdhanA karatAM karatAM

Page #660 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(584) The yogi who has attained Samyak Darshan, free from all external
influences and attachments, attains the state of supreme, nectar-like self-
contemplation. "With love and devotion, practice...mind, speech, and action,
free from attachment...the devotee, immersed in the divine, experiences...the
mind, naturally filled with devotion to the Lord...future." - Shri Devchandraji.
This supreme, nectar-like, detached practice is the journey on the great path,
the direct path to the great liberation, the final destination. This detached
practice is the direct attainment of liberation. And that is why this detached
practice is called "Anagami Pada Avaha" here, meaning the non-returning state,
the eternal state, the state of eternal liberation, which it brings about.
Through this detached practice, one attains the eternal, ever-stable state of
liberation. Because this detached practice, as mentioned above, is the state of
non-dependence, the state of complete immersion in the divine, and through the
contemplation of the divine form, the soul inevitably becomes the divine, just
as a caterpillar becomes a butterfly through contemplation of the butterfly.
"The mind, filled with devotion to the Jina, is filled with love, penetrating
essence, and virtue. Future." "The devotee will attain the Jina's state, mind,
like the essence of nectar. Future." - Shri Devchandraji. "He who becomes the
Jina and worships the Jina, he is truly a Jina. He who is attracted to the
beauty of the world, is like a fly attracted to dung." - Shri Anandghanji. This
is called "Prashantavahitasanjham Visbhagaparikshayah. Shivavartma Dhruvadhveti
Yogibhirgiyate Hyadah." 176. Visbhagaparikshay and, the name Shantavahitam, The
Shivapath, the Dhruvamarg, this song is sung by the yogis, thus, 106, meaning -
This detached practice, known as Prashantavahitasanjna, is Visbhagaparikshay,
Shivavarma, Dhruvamarg, and is sung by the yogis. Discussion "Visbhagapkshay
Shantavahit, Dhruvamarg Shiv Naam; The yogi performs detached action here, the
result is pure fame." - A. Sakza, - P. Krutti -
Kaftavaataavanshaprashantavahitasantavala, - Sankhyanu. Vimaan Pariksha: -
Vibhagaparikshay, Buddhist. Shivavarma - Shivavarma, Shivmarg - Shonu -
Dhruvadhya - Dhruvamarg - Mahavatinu, Krutti - Thus, Jimirjay? Yes - Detached
practice is sung by the yogis.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (584) gadaSTisajhumra samyagadaSTi yogI puruSa, samasta parabhAva-vibhAvanA
saMga-sparza vinAnA parama asaMga anuSThAnane pAmI, parama amRtamaya
AtmadhyAnadazAne pAme che. prIti bhakti anuSThAnathI re....mana, vacana asaMgI
seva re....bhAvika kartA tanmayatA lahere...mana prabhu bhakti svayameva
re....bhavi. "-zrI devacaMdrajI. AvuM parama amRtamaya asaMga anuSThAna
mahApathanA prayANarUpa che, mahAmekSamArga pratyenA sAkSAt gamanarUpa-chellI
majalarUpa che. A asaMga anuSThAnathI ja sAkSAta ekSamAganI prApti hoya che. ane
eTalA mATe ja A asaMga anuSThAnane ahIM "anAgAmipadAvaha' kahyuM che, arthAt
apunarAvartta pada ke jyAMthI puna: pAchuM pharavAnuM nathI, evuM nityapada,
zAzvata mokSapada te prApta karAvanAra che. A asaMga anuSThAna thakI ja nitya-
sadA sthira evA mokSapadanI prApti hoya che. kAraNake A asaMgAnuSThAna te
uparamAM kahyuM tema paramAtmAnA tanmaya dhyAnarUpa anAlaMbana yuga che, ane
paramAtmAnA svarUpadhyAna AlaMbane AtmA avazya paramAtmA thAya che,-IyaLa jema
bhamarInA dhyAnathI bhamarI bane che tema. "jina bhaktirata cittane re, mana,
vedhaka rasa guNa prema che. bhavi. sevaka jinapada pAmaze re, mana, rasadhita
aya jema re. bhavi."- zrI devacaMdrajI. "jina thaI jina je ArAdhe, te sahI
jinavara hove re bhaMgI IlikAne caTakAve, te bhUMgI jaga jeve re."--zrI
AnaMdaghanajI. AnA nAme kahe che prazAntavAhitAsaMjhaM visabhAgaparikSayaH  /
zivavartma dhuvAdhveti yogibhirgIyate hyadaH  //  176  //  visabhAgaparikSaya
ane, zAMtavAhitaM nAma, dhruvamArga zivapaMtha A gIta yogIthI Ama, 106, artha
-prazAMtavAhitA saMjJAvALuM A asaMga anuSThAna visabhAgaparikSaya, zivavarmA,
dhruvamAga ema yogIothI gavAya che. vivecana "visabhAgakSaya zAMtavAhitA,
dhruvamAraga ziva nAma; kare asaMga kriyA IhAM yegI, vimala suyaza pariNAma
che."--e. sakjhA, -pa. kRtti-kaphatavAtAvaMzaprazAMtavAhitA
saMtAvALuM,-sAMkhyAnu. vimAna parikSAH-vibhAgaparikSaya, bauddhonuM. zivavarma-
zivavarmA, zivamArga-zonuM-dhuvAdhyA-dhruvamArga-mahAvatinuM, kRti-ema,
jimirjAya? hA-asaMga anuSThAna yogIothI gavAya che.

Page #661 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The assembly, on the name of Asanga Anushthan, is peaceful and infinite,
blissful. (585) This Asanga Anushthan, which has been mentioned, has been sung
by the Yegis with different names. Some call it Prasanta Vahitha, some call it
Vibhag Pariksha, some call it Shiv Varma, and some call it Dhruv Mag. (1) The
Sankhya Dasni-Gadasni call this Asanga Anushthan by the name Prasanta Vahitha.
Where Prasanta-extremely peaceful Vahitha-carrying feeling is, that is, where
the unbroken peaceful Sudharas flows continuously, that is Prasanta Vahitha
Asanga Anushthan. Where the unbroken Atma sthiti rup Param Prasanta Chaitanya
Rasa Amrit Sagar, various names are immersed, unbroken, continuous Atma bhav
pravah flows, that is Prasanta Vahitha. (2) The Bauddha Dasni call it "Visabhag
Pariksha". Where there is a test of division, that is Visabhag Pariksha. This is
understood as follows: where there is a complete destruction of the Anadi
Kuvasnamay Visha, that is Visabhag Pariksha. When this Kuvasnamay Visha is
completely destroyed, the Param Amrit Swarup Atma naturally manifests, that is
Visabhag Pariksha. (3) It is called Shiv Varma-Shiv Marg. Shiv means the supreme
principle, the ultimate good or liberation; the path to attain it, the path
leading to it, that is Shiv Varma, Shiv Marg, Moksha Marg. Or Shiv means peace,
the path to attain supreme Atma Shanti, that is Shiv Vak. (4) The Mahavratik
calls it Yuva Adhvaprav Marg. Dhruv means that which never moves, never changes,
in all three times. Just as the Dhruv star never moves, never changes, it
remains Dhruv, so that which never moves, never changes, remains Dhruv, that is
Dhruv Pad. The path to go to that Dhruv Pad is Dhruv Marg. Thus, the Asanga Atma
Charitra, which is the supreme Vitrag Bhav, which is known as Asanga Anushthan,
has been sung by other Darshanis with different names, and its greatness has
been expanded. And thus, even the Paramanu Matra is free from the touch of the
desire of Parbhav-Vibhav, this supreme Asanga Vitrag Pad-Jin Pad, Shiv Pad,
Buddha Pad, Vishnu Pad; and the path to attain it is also the same Asanga
Anushthan. The supreme secret of all the paths, "This is what the Yogi knows",
the supreme wonderful immortal poem, which is the Gishwar * Kanta Vahitha:
Sansthanikolasan Pradurabhavatiroma thi Tadgulyanagochham | "—Dha. Tha, 24, 25.
That is, Prasanta Vahitha means the result of the continuous flow of Sadpravah,
without interruption. That Vritti means the Vrittimay Chitta, free from the
influence of Nirodhajan and Vyatyajan. "Tatha Vatavadita Samvat - (A. 20-10).
What is this Nirodha? It is the Nirodhajan and Vyatyajan, the emergence and
disappearance of the Sanskar, in order.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 sabhA dariH asaMgAnuSThAnanA nAma-52 zAMti anaMta sudhAmaya je (585) A je
asaMga anuSThAna kahyuM, tene yegIoe bhinna bhinna nAme gAyuM che kaI tene
prazAMtavAhitA kahe che, kaI vibhAgaparikSaya kahe che, kaI zivavarmA kahe che,
kaI dhruvamAga kahe che. (1) sAMkhyadazanI-gadazanIo A asaMga anuSThAnane
prazAMtavAhitA nAme oLakhe che. jyAM prazAMta-atyaMta zAMtavAhitA-vahana bhAva
che, arthAt jyAM akhaMDa zAMta sudhArasane prazAMta ekadhAre pravAha vahyA kare
che, te prazAMtavAhitA asaMgAnuSThAnanA che. jyAM akhaMDa AtmasthitirUpa parama
prazAMta caitanya rasAmRtasAgaramAM vividha nAma nimajjanamaya akhaMDa ekadhAre
AtmabhAva pravAha vahyA kare che, te prazAMtavAhitA Xche. (2) bauddha dazanI
tene "visabhAgaparikSaya" kahe che. jyAM vibhAgane parikSaya che te
visabhAgaparikSaya. Ane paramArtha ema samajAya che ke-anAdi kuvAsanAmaya viSane
jyAM parikSaya-sarvathA kSaya hoya che te visabhAgaparikSaya che. A kuvAsanAmaya
viSano sarvanAza thatAM, parama amRtasvarUpa AtmA jyAM svasvabhAve pragaTa thAya
che, te visabhAgaparikSaya che. (3) tene zivavarmA-zivamArga kahe che. ziva
eTale parama tatvarUpa mekSa athavA kalyANa-niHzreya; tene pAmavAne mArga, tenA
pratye jate mArga te zivavarmA, zivamArga, mokSamArga. athavA ziva eTale zAMti,
parama AtmazAMti pAmavAne mArga te zivavakma. (4) mahAvratike tene yuvAdhvaprava
mArga nAma Ape che. dhruva eTale traNe kALamAM je kadI cale nahiM, phare nahi
evuM acala 58. jema dhruvane tAre kadI phare nahiM, cale nahiM, dhruva ja rahe,
tema je kadI phare nahiM, cale nahiM, dhruva ja rahe te dhruva pada. te
dhruvapada pratye javAne mAge te dhruva mArga, Ama je parama vItarAga bhAvarUpa
asaMga AtmacAritrane jene asaMgAnuSThAna nAme oLakhe che, tene ja anya darzanIoe
paNa judA judA nAme gAI tene mahAmahimA vistAryo che. ane Ama paramANumAtra paNa
parabhAva-vibhAvanI vAsanAnA sparza lezathI rahita evuM A parama asaMga
vitarAgapada-jinapada, zivapada, buddhapada, viSNupada che; ane te pAmavAne
mArga paNa te ja asaMga anuSThAnarUpa che. sakala bhegamArganA parama
rahasyarUpa "ie che je jogIjana" vALuM parama addabhuta amara kAvya ke je
gIzvara * kAMtavAhitA H saMsthAnikolasAna prAdurbhAvatiromAthI tadgulyAnagocam |
"--dhA. ThA, 24, 25. arthAta-prazAMtavAhitA eTale vikSepanA parihatapaNuthI
sadapravAha pariNAmitA, eka sarakhI pravAha35 parimitA. te vRtti eTale vRttimaya
cittanA nirAdhajanya saMskArathI hoya che. " tatha vAtavAditA saMvata -(aa.
20-10). A nirodha te zuM ? te ke nirodhajana ane vyatyAnajanya saMskAranA
anukrame prAdurbhAva-tirabhAva te nirodha che,

Page #662 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(586) Gadasti Samuchaya is the final work of Shrimad Rajchandraji. In this final
chapter, all the above-mentioned names are beautifully woven together in a
simple and clear style, with a profound meaning.  “Sukhdham anant susant chahi,
Dinrat rehe tad dhyan mahi; par shanti anant sudhamay je, Pranamum pad te, var
te, jay te.” – Shrimad Rajchandraji.  The saints and yogis desire this supreme
abode, which is infinite, eternal, and unchanging. They constantly desire it,
and therefore they remain in its contemplation day and night. This abode, where
supreme peace flows, is filled with nectar. Salutations to this abode! This
abode is a “var” (blessing), meaning it is chosen and desired by the yogis. This
abode is the ultimate (Choicest) and victorious! Here, the word “sudhamay je”
(filled with nectar) indicates its auspiciousness, and the word “anant”
(infinite) indicates its unchanging nature. The word “sudhamay” suggests the
examination of the different parts, and the phrase “par shanti anant” (supreme
peace infinite) demonstrates the state of tranquility. Thus, in a single stanza,
all the yogic scriptures are perfectly aligned with the ultimate definition of
yoga, revealing the profound secret of the ultimate truth with unparalleled
simplicity! Indeed, Shrimad’s final words are the final words of all yogic
scriptures. एतत्प्रसाधयत्याशु यद्योग्यस्यां व्यवस्थितः । एतत्पदावहैयैव
तत्तत्रैतद्विदां मता ॥ १७७ ॥ Eh prasadhe shigh ahim sthit gijan shi; tethi eh-
padavaha, aa j tattane it. 177 Meaning – Because the established saint yogi in
this vision quickly achieves this unattached practice. Therefore, this vision,
which bestows this abode, is the most desired by those who know this abode.
Commentary – This vision quickly achieves this unattached practice because the
established saint yogi is in this vision. Therefore, this vision, which bestows
this abode, is the most desired by those who know this abode.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (586) gadaSTisamuccaya zrImad rAjacaMdrajInI aMtima kRti che, tenI A aMtima
gAthAmAM uparokta sarva nAmene paramArthabhAve suMdara sarala ne spaSTa zailImAM
uttama rIte guMthela dazya thAya che - sukhadhAma anaMta susaMta cahI, dinarAta
rahe tada dhyAna mahIM; para zAMti anaMta sudhAmaya je, praNamuM pada te, vara
te, jaya te."-zrImad rAjacaMdrajI. sukhanA dhAmarUpa anaMta-zAzvata-dhruva evA A
parama padane saMtajane-jogIjane cAhe che, niraMtara Icche che, eTale ja
rAtadivasa tenA ja dhyAnamAM rahe che. sudhAmaya amRtamaya evI parama zAMti jyAM
pravahe che evA A padane namaskAra " parazAMti ho! e pada "vara' che arthAt
yegIoe vareluM-pasaMda kareluM anaMta ( Choicest ) parama pada che. evuM te pada
jayavaMta vaheM ! atre sudhAmaya je" "sukhadhAma" zabdathI tenuM zivapaNuM ane
"anaMta" zabdathI dhruvapaNuM batAvyuM che. "sudhAmaya' zabdathI
visabhAgaparikSayanuM sUcana che, ane para zAMti anaMta" padathI prazAMtavAhitA
pradarzita karI che. Ama eka ja kaMDikAmAM sarva dazanenA yogazAstrone parama
saMmata evI yagaparibhASAne parama rahasyarUpa anupama paramArtha kevI apUrva
saralatAthI prakAze che! kharekhara ! zrImadane A chellAmAM chelle zabda e sarva
yogazAstrano paNa chellAmAM chelle (last word) zabda ja che. etatprasAdhayatyAzu
yadyogyasyAM vyavasthitaH  /  etatpadAvahaiyaiva tattatraitadvidAM matA  //  177
//  eha prasAdhe zIgha ahiM sthita gijana zi; tethI eha-5dAvahA, A ja tattane
ITa. 177 artha -kAraNa ke A dRSTimAM vyavasthita saMta yogI A asaMga anuSThAnane
zIvra prasAdhe che. tethI karIne e pada pamADanArI A ja daSTi tyAM A pada
jANanArAone ISTa che. vivecana A asaMga anuSThAnane A dRSTimAM vyavasthita gI
zIghra prasAdhe che. eTale A vRttiH-par-A, asaMga anuSThAna, prayatyAsu-zIdhra
prasAdhe che, vat rojI-kAraNake megI, -AmAM, A daSTimAM, yavasthitaH-vyavasthita
sata, gagva-e padAvatA A ja che. e 5 pamADanArI A ja dRSTi che, tA-tethI karIne,
tatra-temAM, inivAM-e padane jANanArAone, katA-mata che, iSTa che.

Page #663 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Prabha Drishti, the attainment of Asanga Anushthana, is the ultimate goal,
the supreme blessing, victory! (587) This Drishti, which leads to the Asanga
Pad, is considered the ultimate goal by the wise, the enlightened ones, who know
this path.   This Asanga Anushthana, which is mentioned here, is attained in the
seventh Prabha Drishti, leading to swift liberation. Here, the Yogi, with a
pure, detached state of mind, attains this Asanga Pad, where the endless cycle
of karma is transcended. Through the process of purification and detachment, the
soul, in its pure, eternal form, manifests as the inherent state of liberation.
Here, the soul continuously immerses itself in the ocean of pure, blissful
consciousness, where the flow of peace and tranquility is uninterrupted. It is
here that the Yogi experiences the ultimate truth, the unity of knowledge,
vision, and conduct, leading to liberation, the path to Shiva. The Yogi attains
the direct path to the ultimate goal, the eternal state of liberation.  "By
conquering the ego, the Yogi attains a state of pure detachment, where the mind
is free from all attachments." - Shrimad Rajchandraji. The state of such a
detached Yogi is truly extraordinary. The soul is indifferent to everything,
dwelling only in the state of detachment. The Yogi does not identify with
anything other than the pure, radiant soul. This extraordinary state of
detachment and indifference is a prime example of the teachings of Shrimad
Rajchandraji.  "The mind remains in a state of pure consciousness." The Yogi is
free from all desires, attachments, and worldly pursuits. They have no interest
in material possessions, no desire to achieve anything, and are unaware of the
world's affairs. They do not differentiate between friends and enemies, and are
barely aware of their own physical body.  And so on. See Shrimad Rajchandra,
Patranka 217 (25). This Asanga Anushthana is attained in the seventh Drishti,
making it the ultimate path to liberation, the most cherished goal of the Yogis.
This is because it leads to the eternal state, the ultimate goal, the Asanga
Anushthana, the state of pure activity. Those who know this state in its true
form, are blessed with eternal happiness, victory, and the glory of the soul,
the state of liberation.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prabhA daSTi asaMganuSThAnasiddhi-praNamuM pada te, vara te, jaya he. (587)
asaMgapadAvahA-asaMga padane pamADanArI A ja dRSTi, te gamArgane viSe e padanA
jJAtA gI puruSone mata che, ISTa che, abhimata che. A je asaMga anuSThAna
kahevAmAM AvyuM, te asaMga anuSThAnane A sAtamI prabhA dRSTimAM sthiti karate
thegI zIdhra prasAdhe che. atre yegI parama vItarAga bhAvarUpa A asaMga padane
pAme che, ke jyAM anAdi kuvAsanAmaya viSane asaMgAnuSThAna. parikSaya-
visabhAgaparikSaya thatAM, parama amRtasvarUpa AtmA zuddha siddhi
sahajAnmasvarUpe pragaTa thAya che, ane jyAM parama zAMta sudhArasano prazAMta
akhaMDa pravAha vahyA kare che-prazAMtavAhitA varte che, eTale akhaMDa
AtmasthitirUpa parama prazAMta caiitanya rasAmRtasAgaramAM AtmA niraMtara
nimajjana kare che. atre ja te parama bhegI jJAna-darzana-cAritranI abheda
ekatArUpa paramArtha mokSamAgane-zivamArgane sAkSAt pAme che, mokSarUpa
dhruvapada pratye laI janArA pratyakSa dhruvamAgane prApta kare che. "ema
parAjaya karIne cAritramehane, AvuM tyAM jyAM karaNa apUrva bhAva je." -zrImad
rAjacaMdrajI AvA asaMga-vItarAga vegInI AtmadazA parama addabhuta hoya che.
temane AtmA eTale badhe udAsIna-vItarAga vate che, ke te sarvatra asaMga bhAvane
ja bhaje che, eka javalaMta AtmA sivAya anyatra kyAMya saMga karatuM nathI. AvI
parama addabhuta asaMgaudAharaNu udAsIna vItarAga dazAnuM zrImad rAjacaMdrajInuM
zreSTha udAharaNa A rahyuM - cittanI dazA caitanyamaya rahyA kare che." eka
purANa puruSa ane purANa puruSanI prema saMpatti vinA amane kaMI gamatuM nathI,
amane kaI padArthamAM ruci mAtra rahI nathI; kaMI prApta karavAnI icchA thatI
nathI; vyavahAra kema cAle che enuM bhAna nathI; jagata zuM sthitimAM che tenI
smRti rahetI nathI. keI zatru-mitramAM bhedabhAva rahyo nathI; koNa zatru che
ane koNa mitra che enI khabara rakhAtI nathI; ame dehadhArI chaIe ke kema te
saMbhArIe tyAre mAMDa jANIe chaIe." ityAdi. juo -zrImad rAjacaMdra, patrAMka 217
(25). A asaMga anuSThAna atre sAtamI daSTimAM prApta thAya che, eTalA mATe A
sAtamI daSTi ja paramapadane-mokSapadane ANanArI, pamADanArI heI, legIone parama
ISTa che, abhimata che. kAraNa ke e padane-zAzvata padane athavA praNamuM pada
te. asaMgAnuSThAnarUpa sapravRttipadane jeo svarUpathI jANe che, te zAzvata vara
te, jaya te AtmasvarUpa padano-mokSapadane mahimA jenA hRdaye vasyuM che, evA

Page #664 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(588). For the expert yogis who have mastered the collection of insights, this
vision that grants them direct realization of that state is supremely beloved,
extremely dear, what wonder in that? Therefore, the yogi constantly yearns for
this vision, constantly holds a devotional desire, and praises the wise one who
is endowed with such unattached knowledge: “Even though he has a body, his state
is beyond the body; at the feet of that knower, O countless salutations.” —Shri
Atmasiddhi : Essence of the Prabha Dristi: The seventh Prabha Dristi is beloved
of meditation. Therefore, in this, the seventh citta-dosha named “roga” is not
present, and this vision is endowed with the seventh guna named tattva-
pratipatti, and especially is united with shama, and is the one that grants the
sat-pravritti-pada, the path of right action. In this vision, there is
meditation-born happiness, which conquers the objects of desire such as words,
etc., and is born from viveka-bala, the power of knowledge, and is always united
with shama, because the fruit of viveka is shama. Similarly, all that is
dependent is suffering, and all that is self-dependent is happiness. In brief,
the Muni has described the characteristics of happiness and suffering. Even
happiness that expects punya is dependent, because punya is external, and
therefore, this happiness that expects punya is suffering due to the attainment
of its characteristics. Only meditation-born happiness is the true happiness,
because it is independent, and is born only from karma-viyoga. Here, because the
bond is pure, the great Munis always have meditation, because that which is
almost free from defilement is always auspicious. The sat-pravritti-pada, known
by the name asanga-anushtana, is attained here. It is the path of the great
path, and is the one that grants the eternal state. This asanga-anushtana is
sung by the yogis by many names: prashanta-vahitta, vibhaga-parikshaya, shiva-
varma, dhruva-bhaga; the yogi who is situated here quickly attains this.
Therefore, this vision that grants this state is beloved of the yogi. Key Points
of Prabha Dristi: 13 Darshan | Yoga | Dristi-tyaga | Guna-graapti and other
specialities, Guna-sthana Meditation is always like the sun’s radiance Sat-
pravritti, roga, dosha | Tattva-pratipatti, pada-avahana, tyaga Sat-pravritti-
pada - shama-sar = Asanga-anushtana asi - Pure bond, unparalleled happiness

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (588). darisamuccaya tajajJa yogIone, te padanI sAkSAt prApti karAvanArI A
daSTi ja parama priya, atyaMta vahAlI heya, emAM Azcarya zuM? eTale yegIe
niraMtara A dRSTinI ja jhaMkhanA karyA kare che, niraMtara bhAvanAmaya IcchA
rAkhe che, ane tevI asaMga jJAnadazAsaMpanna jJAnIne stave che ke deha chatAM
jenI dazA, vate dehAtIta; te jJAninA caraNamAM, he vaMdana agaNita."--zrI
Atmasiddhi : prabhA daSTino sAra : sAtamI prabhA daSTi dhyAnapriyA che. ethI
karIne ja AmAM "roga" nAmane sAtame cittadoSa heta nathI, ane A daSTi
tatvamatipatti nAmanA sAtamA guNathI yukta, tathA vizeSa karIne zamasaMyukta evI
heI, satupravRttipadAvahA-satapravRtti pada pamADanArI che. A daSTimAM
dhyAnajanya sukha hoya che, ke je zabdAdi viSayarUpa kAmasAdhanane jItanAruM
hoya che, tathA vivekabalathI-jJAnasAmarthyathI upajeluM evuM hoI sadaiva
zamasAra ja hoya che, kAraNa ke vivekanuM phala zama che. temaja sarva paravaza
te duHkha che, ne sarva Atmaviza te sukha che. A saMkSepamAM sukha duHkhanuM
lakSaNa munie kahyuM che. ema puNyanI apekSA rAkhavAvALuM sukha paNa paravaza
sthita che, kAraNa ke puNyanuM parapaNuM che, ane tethI karIne A puNyanI
apekSAvALuM sukha tenA lakSaNanI prAptithI duHkha ja che. mAtra dhyAnajanya
sukha te ja tAtvika sukha che, kAraNa ke tenuM aparAdhInapaNuM che, ane
karmaviyegamAtrathI upajavApaNuM che. atre nirmala baMdha hoI, mahAtmA munione
dhyAna sadeva hoya che, kAraNa ke jene mala lagabhaga kSINa che evuM suvarNa
sadA kalyANa ja hoya che. asaMgAnuSThAna saMjJAthI oLakhAtuM sapravRttipada atra
prApta hoya che. te mahApathanA prayANurUpa heI nitya pada pamADanAruM che. A
asaMgAnuSThAna prazAMtavAhitA, vibhAgaparikSaya, zivavarmA, dhruvabhAga-ema
aneka nAme yegIothI gavAya che; Ane atra sthita yegI zIdhra sAdhe che. tethI A
pada pamADanArI A daSTi ja yogavidene ISTa che. prabhASTinuM keSTaka : 13
darzana | yogaga ! daSatyAga | guNagrApti anya viziSTatA, guNasthAna dhyAne
sadAya sUrya'prabhAsama satmavRtti roga doSa | tattapratipatti padAvahapaNuM,
tyAga satapravRttipada -zramasAra = asaMgAnuSThAna sy -nimala badhA anupama
sukha

Page #665 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Prabha Drishti: Essence, Prabha Drishti's Kalash Kavya (589) Kalash Kavya
Malini Dinakar, what light does this Prabha named Drishti illuminate, a
torrential downpour of the nectar of peace, pure perception, the essence of the
truth, free from disease, making all pure forever. 135 The subject of happiness,
the means of conquering all, born from the knowledge of the difference between
self and others, the essence of peace, the happiness of meditation, what kind of
yogic strength is experienced here? 136 Everything is under the control of the
mind, knowing the pain, everything is under the control of the self, happiness
according to that, the sign of happiness and sorrow, in short, happiness is
dependent on flowers, sorrow is here. 137 Pure, the soul's sharp meditation
everywhere, day and night, this is the place for the great wise, the impurities
are melted, the auspiciousness of gold is examined, the wise say, "Here is the
true auspiciousness of meditation." 138 Where the poison of the world, the
poison of the senses, is exhausted, where the activity of the non-returning path
prevails, where the stream of peace, the nectar of peace, flows, the yogi is
always pleased with the path of Shiva, the path of the eternal. 139 Where there
is no change, no association, where time does not touch the self, where time
does not exist, where there is no activity of the mind, the state is in its own
time, the activity of the true non-attached. 140 The path of true activity,
where there is non-attachment, the great path, the yogi's journey, the
separation of the world, the peace of the mind, the path of Shiva, the eternal
part, is sung. 141 The whole place is non-attached, this non-attached practice,
the yogi practices here, this place, day and night, the mind's joy of the self,
the servant of the Lord, quickly attains the path. 142  || Thus, in the
Kiratchandra Sunu Manah Sukhanandana, composed by the great sage
Haribhadracharya, the great sage Bhagavan Das, with the commentary of
Sumanonandani Brihattika, with the explanation of the Makavivechana, in the
seventh chapter of the Sri Yogadrishti Samuccaya Shastra, Kamadrishti ||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prabhA dRSTi: sAra, prabhA daSTinA kaLaza kAvya (589) kaLaza kAvya mAlinI
dinakara zuM prakAzI A prabhA nAma daSTi, zama amRta ghananI atra uddAma vRSTi,
niramala pratipatti tattvakerI prava, rugarahita kiyA sau sarvadA zuddha vaoN.
135 viSaya sukhataNuM sau sAdhane jItanAruM, balathI svapara bhedajJAnanA
janmanAruM; prazamarasatha sAra dhyAnanuM saukhya evuM, ahiM anubhava cAkhe
yogI-auSamya kevuM? 136 paravaza saghaLaye lekamAM duHkha jANe, nijavaza
saghaLuMye sukha te te pramANe, lakhaNa sukhaduHkhanuM e saMkSepamAMhi, paravaza
sukha puSpApekSau te duHkha AMhi. 137 niramala ati badhe AtmanuM zula dhyAna,
nizadina ja mahAtmA jJAnIne eha sthAna; mala galita thaye te hema kalyANa jAcuM,
tyama amala kahe "hyAM dhyAna kalyANa sAcuM. 138 viSama viSaya Adi viSa-jyAM
kSINa varte, apunaragatidAyI satupravRtti pravarte, parama pravahatI jyAM zAMti
sudhA saritA, dhruva ziva pathadAtrI yogIne nitya prItA. 139 parapariNati ke
saMga jyAM no'ya kAMI, para samayana jemAM hAya svane na chAMI; samaya paNa na
jemAM hAya vibhAva vRtti, sthiti ja svasamaye te sat asaMgI pravRtti. 140 sata
pravRttipadaM te' hyAM asaMgAnuSThAna, mahata patha prati te yoginuM che prayANa
parikhaya visabhAga zAMtasaMvAhitAya, zivapada dhruvabhAga githI te gavAya. 141
sakala sthala asaMgI A asaMgAnuSThAna, sthita ahiM jhaTa yogI sAdhato eha
sthAna; nizadina mananI Atma AnaMda jAme, para pada bhagavAne dAsa te zIdhra
pAme 142  //  iti maharSizrIharibhadrAcAryaviracite
kiratcaMdrasUnumanaHsukhanaMdanena bhagavAnadAsena sumanonaMdanIbRhatTIkAnA
makavivecanena saprapaJca vivecite zrIyogadRSTisamuccayazAne saptamI kamAdaSTiH
||

Page #666 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Seventh Insight, Para Darsti  The seventh insight is called Para Darsti,
and now the eighth is described. It says:  **"Samadhi-nishtha tu para tad-
asanga-vivarjita | Satmikrita-pravritti cha tad-uttirna-ashayiti cha || 178
||"**  **Translation:** The eighth insight, Para Darsti, is established in
samadhi and free from its attachments. It is characterized by self-realized
activity and an aspiration that transcends it.  **Commentary:**  The eighth
insight is called Para Darsti, and its name "Para" is truly fitting, as there is
nothing beyond it. It is the ultimate, the most excellent.  The eighth insight,
Para Darsti, is established in samadhi. Samadhi is a special state of compassion
or the fruit of meditation.  It is free from the attachments of samadhi. It is
characterized by self-realized activity, like the fragrance of sandalwood. It
has an aspiration that transcends activity, like the absence of a desire in a
liberated mind.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 parA daSTi sAtamI daSTi kahI, have te pachInI kahevAmAM Ave che. te kahe che -
samAdhiniSThA tu parA tadAsaGgavivarjitA  /  sAtmIkRtapravRttizca
taduttIrNAzayeti ca  // 178 //  samAdhiniSThA daSTi para, tasa AsaMga vihIna;
AtmArUpa pravRtti jyAM, Azaya tethI uttIrNa. 178. athara-AThamI para daSTi
samAdhiniSTha ane tenA AsaMgadoSathI vivarjita evI hoya che tathA sAtmIbhUta
pravRttivALI ane tenAthI uttIrNa AzayavALI hoya che. vivecana AThamI dRSTi sAra
samAdhi, nAma parA tasa jANuMjI; Apa svabhAve pravRtti pUraNa, zazi sama bodha
vakhANuMcha" -e. sajhA. 8-1 A parASTi samAdhiniSTha ane te samAdhinA AsaMga
doSathI sarvathA rahita evI hoya che. vaLI te caMdanagaMdha nyAye sAtmIbhUta
pravRttivALI ane te pravRttithI uttIrNa AzayavALI hoya che, kAraNake vAsaka
cittane abhAva hoya che. A AThamI daSTi "para" nAmanI che, ane tenuM A "para"
nAma sarvathA yathArtha che, kAraNa ke enAthI para keI nathI, ane e sarvathI
para che, parama che, satkRSTa che, jika-rApinir gm -AThamI parAdaSTi to
samAdhiniSTha hoya che. samAdhi te dayAnavizeSa che, athavA dhyAnanuM phala che
ema bIjAne kahe che. kahyuM che ke- terAparistha dhAra ' (T. -1), "tatra
pratyenAnatA dhyAna' (-2), "tadevArzamAtranirmAtaM sva camitra samAdhi:' (. 2-3
). talAvivarjitA-tenA-samAdhinA AsaMgathI vivajita, samItaravRtti-sAtmIkRta
pravRttivALI, sAtmIbhUta pravRttivALI A,caMdana dhanyAye. taduttIrAyA-tenAthI
pravRttithI uttIrNa AzayavALIvAsaka cittanA abhAve.

Page #667 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Eighth Insight: The Moon-Like Samadhi  "Par" Insight: This insight is
called "Par" because it is the highest and the ultimate. Here, the spiritual
development culminates, reaching its final peak. The ultimate principle is
directly active here, meaning the soul directly becomes the Supreme Soul.
Moreover, the one who attains this "Par" insight transcends the world, hence it
is also called "Para." This eighth insight, as described above, has two
characteristics like the moon, the eighth limb of yoga, Samadhi, the eighth
restraint, the abandonment of the eight types of attachment, and the attainment
of the eighth virtue.  In this insight, the two characteristics are like the
moon because this eighth insight has more restraint than the seventh insight,
which is like the sun, the all-illuminating Sun-like insight. The sun's light is
bright but gives heat, while the moon's light is intense but cool and calming,
providing ultimate bliss. Both illuminate the world equally, but the moon's
light is considered superior to the sun's. Thus, this insight, like the full
moon, is fully illuminated by the full moon of knowledge, and its restraint is
fully absorbed in the Supreme Soul. This moon of knowledge illuminates the
entire world but does not become the world itself. (See pages 757-487)  This
"Par" insight is aptly compared to the moon because, like the moon, it remains
stable in its form, illuminating the world with knowledge but not encompassing
it. It is inherently complete in its activity, with no room for external
influence. It is a pure, unadulterated, non-dual state.  Since this insight
reaches the peak of restraint, it attains the eighth limb of yoga, Samadhi. This
insight is rooted in Samadhi, always remaining in the form of the right path.
Others call this state "Samadhi-nishedh" (rooted in Samadhi) because it is a
special kind of meditation or the fruit of meditation. Holding the mind in
restraint, the unity of conviction, that is meditation, and that meditation,
being only the form of the object, is considered formless, that is Samadhi. In
other words, where only the object is seen and the form of meditation remains
absent, and where the triad of meditator, meditation, and object merges into
one, only the inherent self-nature shines in its natural form, that is called
Samadhi. Here, this supreme self-Samadhi continuously prevails, so the yogi who
dwells in this insight remains in an unbroken state, as the Supreme Self,
because all external influence has completely vanished.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 para daSTiH samAdhiniSTha para daSTi, zazi sama be vakhANuM , (591) UMcAmAM
UMcI ne chevaTamAM chevaTanI e che eTalA mATe ene "para" kahI che. atre ja
AdhyAtmika vikAsarUpa ganI parAkASThA-chelAmAM chellI hada prApta thAya che,
parama tatvanI sAkSAt pravRtti atra hoya che, arthAt atre AtmA sAkSAt paramAtmA
bane che. vaLI A "para" daSTine pAmele gIzvara saMsArathI para thAya che, eTale
paNa ene "parA" nAma ghaTe che. AvI A yathAthabhidhAnA AThamI para dRSTimAM
pUrvokta krama pramANe caMdraprabhA samAna bedha, yeganuM AThamuM aMga samAdhi,
AThamA AsaMga deSane tyAga ane AThamA pravRtti guNanI saMprApti hoya che. A
daSTimAM prApta thatuM be caMdranI prajA sarakhe hoya che, kAraNa ke sAtamI
dRSTi ke jene badha-prakAza sUryaprabhA samAna hoya che, tenA karatAM A AThamI
daSTine baMdha adhikatara hoya che. sUryane prakAza tejasvI che, paraMtu tApa
pamADe che, zazi sama bodha ugra lAge che, ane caMdrane prakAza te kevala saumya
ne zAMta hoI vakhANuMjI zItalatA upajAve che, parama AlAda Ape che ane bannenuM
vizvaprakAzakapaNuM te samAna che, eTale caMdranA prakAzanuM sthAna sUrya
karatAM adhika mAnyuM che. Ama pUrNa caMdranI jema jyAM pUrNa jJAnacaMdrane
prakAza soLe kaLAe khIlI UThe che, evI A dRSTine baMdha paramAtkRSTa hoya che,
ane te badha-caMdranI jJAna snA samasta vizvane prakAzita kare che, paNa te
vizvarUpa thato nathI. (juo pR. 757-487) Ama A parASTine caMdranI upamA
sAMgopAMga saMpUrNapaNe ghaTe che, kAraNa ke caMdranI jema svarUpamAM
samavasthita rahI atre bodhanI vizvaprakAzakatA hoya che, paNa vizvavyApakatA
nathI hotI; Apa svabhAvamAM ja paripUrNa pravRtti hoya che, parabhAvane leza
paNa praveza hetuM nathI, kevaLa nirbheLa zuddha advaita avasthA ja hoya che,
ane Ama bedhanI parAkASThA prApta hovAthI atre yoganuM AThamuM aMga samAdhi
prApta thAya che. A daSTi samAdhiniSTa hoya che-sadA saddhayAnarUpa ja hoya che.
A samAdhi e dhyAnavizeSa che, athavA dhyAnanuM phaLa che ema bIjAo
samAdhiniSThatA kahe che. cittane dezabaMdha te dhAraNa, temAM pratyayanI
ekatAnatA te dhyAna, ane te ja dhyAna artha mAtra nirmAsarUpa heI jANe
svarUpazUnya hoya che te samAdhi che. arthAt jyAM theya vastumAtra ja dekhAya
che ne dhyAnanuM svarUpa rahetuM nathI, ane Ama jyAM dhyAtA, dhyAna ne dhyeyanI
tripuTInI ekatA thAya che,kevaLa eka sahaja evuM AtmasvarUpa ja sahaja svarUpe
bhAse che, tenuM nAma samAdhi che. atre niraMtarapaNe AvI parama AtmasamAdhi ja
varte che, eTale A daSTimAM sthiti karatA yogIzvaranI sahAtmasvarUpe akhaMDa
sthiti hoya che, kAraNa ke parabhAvanuM je drata hatuM te sarvathA TaLI gayuM,

Page #668 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(592) **Gadarisaaruchchaya** means to exist in the state of spontaneous,
effortless playfulness, solely in the form of the Self, with the purest, non-
dualistic feeling. Thus, this vision attains the ultimate state of steadfastness
in samadhi, which is why it is called "samadhinishtha" here. "When one enjoys
one's own pure, effortless nature, and there is no protection in the field of
the Self; a single, helpless, selfless, steadfastness, the power of enthusiasm
is present in all manifestations." - Shri Devchandraji. This supreme,
**sadhyana**-like **atmasamadhi** is **nivikalpa** (without any mental
modifications), because, as mentioned above, everything is pure and
**nivikalpa** like the moon. Therefore, it is a **nivikalpa** state where no
kind of mental modification can arise at all. Thus, there is **nivikalpa**,
undivided **atmasamadhi** here, meaning the meditator, meditation, and the
object of meditation, all three distinctions disappear. The triad of knower,
knowledge, and the known also merges. Knowledge, vision, and conduct, these
three qualities also merge into one, non-dualistic, Self-nature. Here, all
dualistic feelings cease to exist, and a pure Self-nature remains established.
It conducts itself as a pure, knowledge-vision-filled Self-nature, with fixed
conduct and character, and blossoms in its own nature. "In **nivikalpa**
samadhi, the three qualities are non-dual." "The meditator, the object of
meditation, and samadhi are non-dual, they merge into each other without
separation; the meditator's effort and feeling are eliminated, the object of
meditation is realized." - Shri Devchandraji. "When those three merge into non-
duality, then that Self-nature...the original path. The one who attains that
path, attains their own true nature...the origin." - Shrimad Rajchandraji. This
supreme **gidd** (spiritual intoxication) attains this **nivikalpa** state
through such undivided Self-meditation. "I am different from everything in every
way, I am a single, pure, conscious form, supremely excellent, inconceivable,
blissful form, I am only a solitary, pure experience. Is there any disturbance?
Any mental modification? Any fear? Any regret? Any other state? Pure, pure,
excellent, pure, supremely peaceful consciousness, I am only **nivikalpa**. I
use my own nature. I become absorbed. Peace! Peace! Peace!" Shrimad Rajchandra,
Letter 760 (833) Thus, those **gishvars** (liberated souls) who have transcended
the web of mental modifications, have a peaceful mind, have abandoned partiality
towards any path, and have become absorbed in their eternal nature, they are the
ones who truly drink the nectar. In other words, those who meditate on this
pure, **shukla** (bright) Self-meditation, they are the ones who attain the
supreme...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (592) gadarisaruccaya eTale ene parama zuddha advaita bhAve kevaLa eka
AtmasvarUpamAM ja sthitirUpa sahaja niHprayAsa ramaNatA varte che. Ama A daSTi
samAdhimAM niSThAne-aMtima AtyaMtika sthitine pAme che, eTale ja ene atre
"samAdhiniSTha kahI che. zuddha ni:prayAsa nija bhAva bhogI yadA, Atma kSetre
nahi ane rakSaNa tadA; eka asahAya niHsaMga nidraDhatA, zakti utsaganI hoya sahu
vyaktatA."-zrI devacaMdrajI. A parama saddhayAnarUpa AtmasamAdhi nivikalpa ja
hoya che, kAraNa ke atre upara kahyA pramANe badha paNa caMdra jevo nirmala
tathA nirvikalpa hoya che. eTale emAM kyAreya paNa koI paNa prakArane keI paNa
vikalpa UThavAno sarvathA asaMbhava ja nirvikalpa dazA che. Ama atre nirvikapa
akhaMDa AtmasamAdhi hoya che, eTale dhyAtA dhyAna ne dhyeya e traNane bheda paNa
maTI jAya che, jJAtA, reya ne jJAnanI tripuTI paNa laya pAme che, jJAna-darzana-
cAritra e triguNa paNa eka abheda AtmasvarUpe pariName che. atra samasta
dvaitabhAva asta pAmI jAya che, ne eka zuddha AtmA svabhAvasamavasthita rahe
che, zuddha jJAna-darzanamaya AtmasvabhAvamAM niyata caritavaMtacaraNavaMta
varte che, svasvabhAvamAM vikase che. "nirvikalpa susamAdhimeM hai, triguNa
bhaye he abheda." "dhyAtA dhyeya samAdhi abhede, para pariNati vicchede re;
dhyAtA sAdhaka bhAva ucchede, dhyeya siddhatA vede re....prabhu aMtarajAmI !
-zrI devacaMdrajI. te traNe abheda pariNAmathI re, jyAre te te AtmArUpa...mULa
mAraga. teha mAraga jinane pAmiye re, kivA pAmyA te nijasvarUpa...mULa."-zrImad
rAjacaMdrajI. A parama gIdra AvI nirvikalpa dazA AvA akhaMDa AtmadhyAnathI pAme
che - "sarvathI sarva prakAre huM bhinna chauM, eka kevala zuddha citanya
svarUpa, parameskRSTa, aciMtya sukhasvarUpa, mAtra ekAMta zuddha anubhavarUpa
huM chauM. tyAM vikSepa che? vikalpa ? bhaya che? kheda che? bIjI avasthA zI?
zuddha zuddha, prakRSTa zuddha parama zAMta caitanya huM mAtra nirvikalpa chaG.
nija svarUpamaya upayoga karUM chaG. tanmaya thAuM chauM. zAMtiH zAMtiH zAMtiH"
zrImad rAjacaMdra, patraka 760. (833) Ama vikalpajAlathI cuta thaI zAMta
cittavALA je gIzvare nayapakSapAta cheDI, nitya svarUpagupta thaIne nivase che,
teo ja sAkSAt amRta pIe che. arthAt jeo nirvikalpa evuM zuddha-zukala AtmadhyAna
dhyAve che, teo ja parama

Page #669 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
On the breath leaving, the soul drinks the nectar of its own form. (493) The
soul experiences the direct nectar-like taste of the innate samadhi bliss, which
is the supreme nectar in the form of the eight stages of liberation of the self-
hidden soul. In the same way, the crest-jewel of the ascetics, Shri
Amritchandraji, has expressed this supreme self-awareness in the overflowing joy
of the Shri Samayasar Kalash: “Those who, having abandoned the bias of the path,
dwell eternally in the self-hidden form, their minds freed from the net of
alternatives, they alone drink the nectar directly.” In this eighth vision,
where such supreme self-samadhi manifests, the eighth mental defect called fire
is completely abandoned. Attachment to a particular action due to the color that
is applied to that place, that is, attachment to that action itself, is the
defect of attachment. The action that is being performed, the feeling that “this
is beautiful,” “this is ugly,” “this is good,” whatever color is applied,
whatever feeling of attachment arises, to remain stuck in that, to be entangled
in that, is attachment. Because, if the soul remains attached to a single place,
it remains stuck there, it does not progress, it does not advance, it does not
touch the next stage of virtue, and therefore does not attain the success, the
liberation, which is the ultimate goal. (See page 86). “Like the fragrance of
sandalwood, forgiveness is not appreciated here; attachment is forbidden here,
action is attributed to its own virtue.” — Sajja 8-2 Or, attachment arising in
the context of matter and its influence is attachment. This vision-possessing,
dispassionate, great yogi has no attachment, even in the slightest, to the atoms
of matter and its influence, not even in dreams, not even for a moment, does he
develop a sense of self towards them; because, except for the pure soul, even an
atom is not different, he has this unbroken self-awareness. Why would such a
supremely self-aware soul have attachment to influence? Indeed, attachment
elsewhere is far away, but as mentioned above, even in the action of yoga-
samadhi, he does not have attachment! And therefore, this yogi-lord, attaining
higher and higher stages of samadhi, progresses, attaining higher and higher
stages of virtue; he does not remain stuck in a single place, but constantly
increases his infinite restraint, and climbing the ladder of stages of virtue,
he attains the exalted state of self-samadhi. “Gradually, restraint touches the
soul, the acquired perishable feeling; the series of restraints destroys the
whole, it worships the state of liberation.” — Shri Yashovijayji

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 para havA nikala za, savarUpagusa' amRtapAna (pa93) svarUpaguptanuM
jIvanmuktadazArUpa parama amRta samA sahaja samAdhi sukhano sAkSAt amRtapAna
anubhava kare che. e pramANe tAvikaziromaNi zrI amRtacaMdrA cAryajIe zrI
samayasAra kalazamAM parama AtmabhAvanA ullAsamAM lalakAyuM cheH "ya eva muktvA
nayapakSapAta, svarUpaguptA nivasanti nityam  /  vikalpajAlacyutazAstacittAsta
eva sAkSAdamRtaM pibanti  // " AvI parama AtmasamAdhi jyAM pragaTe che, evI A
AThamI daSTimAM Aga nAmanA AThamA cittadoSane sarvathA tyAga hoya che. amuka eka
ja gakriyAnA sthAnamAM raMga lAgavAthI, te sthAnamAM ja-te ja kriyAmAM Asakti
thaI javI AsaMga te AsaMgadoSa che. je kriyA karatuM hoya, temAM "Idameva
suMdara' A ja deSayAga suMdara che-rUDuM che-bhaluM che, e je raMga lAgavo,
Asakta bhAva the, temAM ja guMdarIyA thaIne ceTayA rahevuM, te AsaMga arthAt
Asakti che. kAraNa ke ema eka ja sthAne jIva je Asakta thaIne eMTI rahe-maMDayo
rahe, te pachI tyAM ja guNasthAne sthiti rahe, AgaLa na vadhe, pragati
(Progress, Advancement) na thAya, AgaLanuM guNasthAna ne sparzIya, ane tethI
paramArtharUpa saphaLa-mokSaphala na maLe. (juo pR. 86). caMdana gaMdha samAna
kSamA IhAM, vAsakane na gavejI; AsaMge varajita vaLI ehamAM, kiriyA nija guNa
lekheche. "--. sajhA0.8-2 athavA para dravya tathA parabhAvanA prasaMgamAM
Asakti upajavI te AsaMga che. A daSTivaMta vItarAga mahAyogInI paradravya-
parabhAvanA paramANu pratye paNa lezamAtra Asakti hetI nathI, svapnAMtare paNa
samaya mAtra paNa te pratye AtmabhAva upajato nathI; kAraNa ke eka zuddha AtmA
sivAya paramANu mAtra paNa hArUM nathI, evI akhaMDa AtmabhAvanA te bhAve che.
AvA parama bhAvitAtmAne parabhAva pratye Asakti kema hoya ? are ! anyatra AsaMga
te dUra rahyo, paNa uparamAM kahyuM tema yoga-samAdhi kriyAmAM paNa tene AsaMga
hete nathI! ane tethI karIne ja uttarottara samAdhi prakarvane pAmate A
yogIzvara ucca ucca guNasthAnanI prApti karate AgaLa vadhe che; eka ja sthAne
paDayo raheto nathI, paNa samaye samaye anaMta saMyama vardhamAna karate rahI te
jhapATAbaMdha guNasthAna zreNIe caDhate caDhate utkRSTa AtmasamAdhi dazAne pAme
che. "anukrame saMyama spazatejI, pAmya kSAyika bhAva; saMyama zreNI kulaDeja,
pUje pada niSpAva."--zrI yazovijayajI

Page #670 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(494) After the Gadashti Sanjeeer T and the seventh Prathipatti-Tatvanubhav-रूप
(form) Guna (quality) manifest, naturally, in this eighth Dristi (perspective),
the eighth Pravritti Guna (quality of activity) manifests, so that the activity
is in accordance with the truth. That is, * Just as the form of the pure Atma-
Tattva (soul-essence) is experienced, in the same way, the state of activity,
conduct, and character, which is inherent in oneself, prevails. The activity is
fulfilled by the soul's own nature. In other words, the nature of the soul is
knowledge-vision, and in that nature, there is a fixed character, to act fully
in the nature of the soul, to fulfill the activity of one's own nature, this
excellent quality of activity manifests here. Thus, this natural activity
becomes one with the soul, the activity guided by the soul becomes soul-like. It
becomes the soul itself. The soul itself becomes the embodiment of character,
the region of character, by the name of the soul, is filled with pure character
qualities. Just as sandalwood, which does not need to be perfumed by anyone,
spreads its fragrance everywhere in the forest, so this form-based, soul-
activity quality naturally spreads throughout the entire region of the soul,
filling it with the complete fragrance of good conduct. As this quality of
activity develops, the desire for worldly things diminishes, and the amount of
detachment increases, ultimately revealing the well-known supreme detached
character. That is, just as the pure form of the soul is known, or as the pure,
unblemished form of character is known, as the wise have spoken, it manifests
here. As such a perception is the ray of the soul, distinct from all,
unattached; the original path that stable nature which produces, the character
by name, that unattached original”—Shrimad Rajchandraji. Moreover, this Dristi
(perspective) is elevated from activity, due to the absence of the Vasak
(desire) mind. That is, now the mind-intention is elevated from activity, it has
crossed over. The mind has nothing left to do, so its entire activity, the
activity of cessation, ends, all running around stops, and it merges into the
soul. Previously, all the activity of the soul, which is free from desires, was
done through the mind, as long as there was even a trace of desire, the mind,
filled with desire, was running all the affairs of the soul. But now, when that
desire-like affliction is eradicated, when the seed of desire is completely
burned, the soul itself acts in its own form, there is no interference from the
mind (agent) in between. Thus, like a deposed minister, the mind filled with
desire is expelled here! Therefore, “Schittvrittinidhah” the complete attainment
of the yoga of cessation of mental activity is achieved here. All regions
manifest with all qualities, activity is infinite, O free from desires; with the
service of the supreme quality, the servant, the lack of respect is
removed”—Shri Devchandraji.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (pa94) gadaSTisaMjIra T ane sAtamAM pratipatti-tatvAnubhavarUpa guNa pragaTayA
pachI, svAbhAvika krame A AThamI daSTimAM AThame pravRtti guNa pragaTe che,
jethI yathAtattva pravRtti hoya che. eTale ke * jevA prakAre zuddha
AtmatattvanuM svarUpa anubhavamAM AvyuM, tevA prakAre A5 svabhAve
pravartanarUpa, AcaraNarUpa cAritrarUpa sthiti pravarte che, AtmAnucaraNe
pravRtti pUraNa" hoya che. arthAt AtmAne svabhAva jJAna-darzanarUpa che, te
svabhAvamAM niyata carita hovuM, AtmasvabhAvamAM pUrNapaNe pravartavuM, "Apa
svabhAve pravRtti pUraNa" thavI, evo utkRSTa pravRtti guNa atre pragaTe che. Ama
A svabhAva pravRtti sAtmIrUpa-AtmabhUta thaI jAya che, AtmAnucaraNarUpa pravRtti
AtmAmaya banI jAya che. AtmAkAra thaI jAya che. AtmA svayaM cAritramUrti bane
che, AtmAnA nAma cAritra pradeza pradeze zuddha cAritra guNa vyApta thAya che.
jene vAsakanI-suvAsita te aNaliMga" karanAranI apekSA nathI, e caMdanane gaMdha
vanamAM sarvatra prasarI jaI tene suvAsita kare che, tema A svarUpAcaraNamaya
AtmapravRtti guNa sahaja svabhAve sarva AtmapradezamAM vyApI jaI saMpUrNa
zIlasugaMdhathI tene suvAsita karI mUke che. jema jema A pravRtti guNa vikasatuM
jAya che, tema tema mehanIya kamarane kSaya thatuM jAya che, ne vItarAgatAnI
mAtrA vadhatI jAya che, chevaTe yathAkhyAta parama vItarAga cAritra pragaTe che.
eTale ke jevuM AtmAnuM zuddha svarUpa khyAta che-prasiddha che, athavA te jevuM
cAritranuM zuddha niSkaSAya svarUpa AkhyAta che-jJAnIoe bhAkhyuM che, tevuM atra
pragaTa thAya che. jema AvI pratIti jIvanI re, jA sarvethI bhinna asaMga; mULa
mAraga te sthira svabhAva je upaje re, nAmacAritra te aNaliMga mULa"--zrImad
rAjacaMdrajI. vaLI A dRSTi pravRttithI uttIrNa AzayavALI hoya che-vAsaka cittanA
abhAvane lIdhe. eTale ke have citta-Azaya pravRttithI uttIrNa-pAra utarI gayela
hoya che. cittane kaMI pravRtti karavApaNuM rahyuM nathI, eTale tenI samasta
pravRtti nivRtta pravRtti anaMta thAya che, badhI doDAdoDa baMdha thAya che ne
te AtmAmAM laya pAme che. apahArI he' atyAra pahelAM vAsanAnaMta AtmAnI badhI
pravRtti cittadvArA thatI hatI, jyAM sudhI lezarUpa vAsanA hatI tyAM sudhI
vAsanAvAsita citta jIvane badhA kArabhAra calAvatuM hatuM. paraMtu have te
kalezarUpa vAsanA nimULa thatAM, vAsanAnuM bIja sarvathA baLI jatAM, AtmA pite
ja AtmasvarUpamAM pravRtti kare che, vacce maphatIA mAraphatIA (agent) cittanI
Dakhala rahetI nathI. Ama padabhraSTa maMtrInI jema vAsanAvAsita citta atra
nirvAsita thAya che ! eTale "zcittavRttinidhaH " cittavRttinirodharUpa yoganI
saMpUrNa siddhi atra saMprApta thAya che. sarva pradeza pragaTa samaguNathI,
pravRtti anaMta apahArI he; parama guNa sevanathe sevaka, aprazastatA vArI ho."
--zrI devacaMdrajI.

Page #671 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**On the Eighth Insight:**  "Activity is fulfilled by its own nature, (55) The
mind, attached to the world, is full of afflictions, while the mind free from
afflictions is the end of rebirth." - Shri Yashovijayji.  "Where there is
attachment and aversion, there is always affliction for the mind. Where there is
indifference, there is the destruction of all suffering. "Just as the shadow
disappears in the vast expanse, so too does the mind's nature disappear in its
own form." - Shrimad Rajchandraji.  **The State of Nirāchāra:**  "Nirāchāra is
here, free from all transgressions. The effort is like the movement of one who
has reached the summit and has no need to climb further." (179)  **Commentary:**
In this insight, the yogi is in the state of Nirāchāra, free from all
transgressions. He has no desire to perform any actions, and therefore lacks the
need for Pratikramaṇa and other rituals. He is also free from all
transgressions, as he has no reason to commit any. His effort is like the
movement of one who has reached the summit and has no need to climb further,
because he has no karmas left to conquer through actions. He has transcended all
actions and attained the state of Nirāchāra.  "The yogi in this state of
Nirāchāra, is not to be called a transgressor. His movement is like that of one
who has reached the summit of a mountain." - D. Sazā. 8-1.  When the yogi
attains this eighth insight, he no longer needs to perform any actions. He is
liberated from all actions. Until now, the yogi in the state of Nirāchāra has
been free from actions, but in this insight, he is completely free from all
restrictions. His effort is like the movement of one who has reached the summit
and has no need to climb further. He is free from all karmas that can be
conquered through actions, and has attained the state of Nirāchāra.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 para daSTi : "ApasvabhAve pravRtti pUraNa, (55) leze vAsita mana saMsAra,
kaleza rahita mana te bhavapAra."--zrI yazovijayajI. "jihAM rAga ane vaLI dveSa,
tihAM sarvadA mAne kaleza udAsInatAne jyAM vAsa, sakala duHkhane che tyAM nAza.
"Ave bahu sama dezamAM, chAyA jAya samAI; AvyuM tema svabhAvamAM, mana svarUpa
paNa jAI." zrImad rAjacaMdrajI. nirAcArapado hyasyAmaticAracAravivarjitaH  /
ArUDhArohaNAbhAvagativattvasya ceSTitam  // 179 //  nirAcAra egI ahI, niraticAra
ja hoya; tasa ceSTita-ArUDhanuM, ArehaNa jyama nogya. 179 atha -A dRSTimAM yogI
nirAcAra padavALa, aticArathI vivajita-rahita e hoya che. ArUDhanA ArohaNa
abhAvanI gati jema enuM ceSTita hoya che. vivecana A dRSTimAM yogI nirAcAra
paddhavALA hoya che. kaI paNa AcAra karavAnuM prajana tene hotuM nathI. tethI
tene pratikramaNa Adi AcArano abhAva hoya che. vaLI te aticArathI vivarjita-
sarvathA rahita hoya che, kAraNa ke kaI paNa aticAra lAgavAnuM kAraNa tene hotuM
nathI. ArUDhane ArahaNanA abhAvanI jema A gInuM ceSTita hoya che, kAraNa ke
AcAra vaDe jItavA yogya evA kamano tene abhAva thayo che. eTale keI AcAranuM
pALavApaNuM tene bAkI rahyuM nathI. Ama te sarva AcArathI para evA nirAcAra
padane prApta thayo hoya che. "niraticAra pada ehamAM yegI, kahiye nahiM
aticArIjI; Are ArUDha girine, tyama ehanI gati nyArIjI" . da. sajhA. 8-1. jyAre
yogI A AThamI para daSTine prApta thAya che, tyAre tene keI AcAra pALavApaNuM
rahetuM nathI, te AcArathI para evo kapAtIta thAya che. atyAra sudhI kRtti-
nivArano di-nirAcAra padavALe ja, cAM-AmAM, mA daSTimAM yogI hoya che
-pratikramaNAdinA abhAvathI, attivAvikasita -atiyAra vivajita-rahita-tenA
nibaMdhananA abhAvane lIdhe ja hRAo[nAmAvatti 7 ratha reTira-AraDhanA ArohaNa
abhAvanI gati jema AnuM-gInuM ceSThita hoya che. AcArathI jaya-jaya karavA gya
evA kamanA abhAvathI nirAcAra padavALo hoya che, ema artha che.

Page #672 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(56) The practices and principles that were essential for the practice of yoga,
which were necessary and non-material, now become useless when complete yogic
attainment is achieved. This is because the yogi is liberated from the need for
them. The practices like Pratikramana, which were helpful for the initial
practitioner to climb the ladder of spiritual progress, become useless for the
yogi who has attained the state of Samadhi. The practices like Pratikramana,
which are like nectar in the initial stage, become poisonous if clung to in the
state of yogic attainment. This is because they disrupt the state of unbroken
self-realization. The purpose of practices like Pratikramana is to attain the
state of self-realization. Once this purpose is achieved, these practices become
useless.  There may be a doubt: "What about pure self-contemplation? Because it
is through Pratikramana that the soul becomes free from guilt. Not practicing
Pratikramana is like not removing guilt, making it poisonous. And practicing
Pratikramana is like removing guilt, making it nectar."  The resolution: Why is
Pratikramana poisonous? There are three types of non-Pratikramana: (1) The non-
Pratikramana of the ignorant is poisonous. This is because it lacks pure self-
realization and is itself a form of guilt. (2) The non-Pratikramana that is not
aimed at the third stage of pure self-realization is also poisonous. This is
because it does not serve the purpose of the soul and works against the purpose
of the mind, thus becoming poison for the soul. (3) The non-Pratikramana of the
enlightened, which is aimed at the third stage of pure self-realization, is
itself nectar. It directly leads the soul to nectar.  Therefore, for the
enlightened who have attained pure self-realization, practices like Pratikramana
are poisonous, and non-Pratikramana is nectar. (Compare: Poisonous and nectarous
practices).  •"Paddicamanam paddisaranam pariharao dharana niyattee ya | jinda
garha sohi atthaviho hoi visakumbho || appaddicamanam appaddisaranam appariharo
adharana ceva | aniyattee va aninda garha sohi amayakumbho ||" (See) Samayasara
Ga. 301-307 and the extremely wonderful commentary of Amritchandracharya.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (56) gadaSTibhramuccaya yogasAdhanA mATe je je AcAra Avazyaka hatA, avazya
karavA yogya nirAcAra pada hatA, te have atre saMpUrNa yogasiddhi sAMpaDatAM
nirupayogI banI jAya ehamAM yogI' che, niSpojana thAya che. pUrve prAraMbhika
sAdhakane je pratikramAdi sAdhana gabhUmikA para caDhavA mATe upakArI hatA, te
have gArUDha evI samAdhidazA pAmyA pachI yogasiddha puruSane akiMcitkara-nakAmA
thaI paDe che. gAraMbha dazAmAM je pratikramaNAdi Avazyaka AcAra amRtakuMbharUpa
hoya che, te ja sAdhanane je niSpanna-siddha yogadazAmAM paNa vaLagI rahevAmAM
Ave che te viSakuMbharUpa thaI paDe che; kAraNa ke akhaMDa AtmasamAdhirUpa
AtmasthitimAM te te kriyA ulaTo vikSepa pADe che pratikramaNAdi kriyA karavAno
hetu anukrame AtmasamAdhidazA pAmavAne che, te hetu siddha thaI gayA pachI te te
sAdhananuM koI prayojana rahetuM nathI. atre zaMkA thavI saMbhave che ke-"A
zuddha Atma upAsanathI zuM ? kAraNa ke pratikramAdithI ja AtmA niraparAdha thAya
che. apratikramaNAdi sAparAdhane-aparAdhIne aparAdha dUra nahi karanAra hovAthI
viSakuMbharUpa che, ane pratikramaNAdi pratikamaNudi aparAdha dUra karavApaNAthI
amRtakuMbha che. tenuM samAdhAna-pratikramaNAdi viSakuMbha kema?
apratikramaNadinA traNa prakAra che -(1) ajJAnI jananuM je aprati kramazudi che
te te sAkSAt viSakuMbha ja che. kAraNa ke temAM te zuddha Atmasiddhine abhAva ja
che, eTale e svayaM aparAdharUpa ja che, (1) (4) bIju je dravya pratikramaNAdi
zuddha AtmasiddhirUpa trIjI bhUmikAnA lakSya vinAnuM hoya, te paNa viSakuMbha ja
thaI paDe che, kAraNa ke te AtmArtharUpa svakArya sAdhatuM nathI, ane mAnArtha
Adipa viparIta kArya sAdhe che, eTale AtmAne viSarUpe ja jherarUpe ja pariName
che. (5) paNa te dravya pratikramaNAdi je zuddha AtmasiddhirUpa tRtIya bhUmikAnA
lakSyavALuM hoya, Atmasiddhine lakSya rAkhIne karavAmAM AvatuM hoya, te
vyavahArathI te amRtakuMbharUpa hoya che, arthAta AtmAne amRtarUpe pariNamavAnuM
kAraNa thAya che. (3) trIju jJAnIjananuM je tRtIya bhUmikArUpa-zuddha
AtmasiddhirUpa apratikramaNAdi che, te te sAkSAt svayaM amRtakuMbha che, arthAt
AtmAne sAkSAta amRtarUpe pariName che. eTale zuddha AtmasiddhisaMpanna AvA
gArUDha jJAnInI apekSAe teone dravya pratikramaNAdi viSakuMbha che, ane
apratikramaNAdi amRtakuMbha che *(sarakhA-viSa, amRta Adi anuSThAna svarUpa). *"
paDikamaNaM paDisaraNaM parihAro dhAraNA NiyattI ya  /  jiMdA garahA sohI
aTThaviho hoi visakuMbho  //  apaDikamaNa appaDisaraNaM apparihAro adhAraNA ceva
/  aNiyattI va aNiMdA garahA sohI amayakuMbho  // " (juo ) samayasAra gA.
301-307 ane amRtacaMdrAcAryajInI parama addabhuta TIkA,

Page #673 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
On the other hand, in this state of complete detachment, the situation of the
Siddha Yogi, the Knower, is different. (597) And for this very reason, because
this Siddha Yogi, the Knower, has attained the third stage, which is like the
Amrit Kalash (pot of nectar) and is non-retrogressive, they do not have any
practices like material repentance, etc., which are useful for seekers. It is
non-retrogressive because the ultimate goal of all actions is the pure self-
realization, which is like the Amrit Kalash, and this realization of the pure
self has already been attained here. Therefore, there is nothing left to be
achieved. Because, “Repentance is that which turns the soul back from the many
extensive and specific good and bad actions that have been done in the past.”
Or, “Repentance is the return to the original place of one who has gone to
another place due to being overpowered by delusion from his own place.” In other
words, repentance is the return to the original pure state of the self from the
state of corruption. This kind of return to the pure innate self-nature, which
is the ultimate goal of repentance, has already been attained here. Therefore,
they have manifested a state of complete innocence and purity, where even the
slightest transgression is impossible. Then, where is the scope for repentance,
which is the atonement for transgression? Thus, they attain the state of non-
retrogression, which is the ultimate state of pure self-nature and the state of
being like the Amrit Kalash. The same applies to the matter of non-rejection,
etc.  Here, this example is given: To climb a mountain, one has to perform the
action of climbing, but once one has reached the top of the mountain, there is
no need to climb anymore. Similarly, to climb the mountain of Yoga, one has to
perform the action of climbing, which is the gradual crossing of the stages of
Yoga, but once one has reached the peak of the mountain of Yoga, there is no
need to perform any action of climbing, which is the practice of Yoga.  The
means of support and practice that are essential and unavoidable for the seeker,
who is still in the process of seeking, are not needed at all for the Knower,
who has attained the state of realization. Because, what is the need for
climbing for one who has already climbed? What is the need for attaining for one
who has already attained? What is the need for eating for one who has already
been fed? Thus, the situation of the Knower of Yoga, who has attained the
ultimate state of self-absorption and ultimate knowledge, is different. Why
should the law apply to the ordinary people? Why should they be subject to the
speculations of the ordinary people? And why should the ordinary people be able
to imitate such Knowers? What is the use of offering food to one who is not
hungry?  + “If you ask about the happiness of being united with the beloved,
then your mind is not pure.” - Samayasar Ga. 383. "Repentance is the return to
the original place of one who has gone to another place due to being overpowered
by delusion from his own place."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 para dara nirAzAra pada ehamAM gI?-gArUDhanI vAta nyArI (597) ane eTalA mATe ja
A daSTimAM sthiti karatA siddha yogI jJAnI puruSa A amRtakuMbha samI
apratikamaNadirUpa trIjI bhUmikAne prApta hevAthI, temane sAdhakopayogI evI
dravya pratikamaNAdi AcArakiyA hotI nathI; apratikramaNadi kAraNa ke samasta
kriyAkalApane eka ISTa uddeza zuddha Atmasiddhi e ja amRtakuMbha che, ane te
zuddha AtmAnI siddhi te atre prApta thaI cUkI che. eTale have tenuM kaMI prajana
rahyuM nathI. kAraNa ke * "kama je pUrvakRta zubhAzubha aneka vistAra
vizeSavALuM che, tenAthI je AtmAne nivartAve-pAcho vALe te pratikamaNa che."
athavA te "svasthAnamAMthI je pramAdane vaza thaI parasthAne gayo hoya, tenuM
punaH pAchuM tyAM ja mULa sthAne kamaNu-gamana te pratikramaNa kahevAya che.'
arthAt zuddha AtmasvarUpa padamAMthI je bhraSTatA thaI hatI, tyAM "mULa zuddha
te Atmapada 'mAM pAchuM AvI javuM tenuM nAma pratikramaNa che; AvuM zuddha
sahaja AtmasvarUpamAM punarAgamanarUpa bhAvapratikamaNuparamArtha pratikramaNa
atre niSpanna gIne prApta thaI cUkayuM che. eTale emane evI parama niraparAdha-
nirdoSa AtmadazA pragaTI che, ke tyAM leza paNa aparAdhane punaH saMbhava nathI.
te pachI aparAdhanA prAyazcittarUpa pratikramaNane avakAza kyAMthI hoya? Ama
temane zuddha AtmasvabhAvamAM sthitimaya parama amRtasvarUpa apratikamaNa dazA
ghaTe che. te ja prakAre apratyAkhyAnAdi bAbata samajI levuM. atre A dRSTAMta
ghaTe che-parvata para caDhavA mATe ArehaNakriyA-caDhavAnI kriyA karavI paDe
che, paNa parvatanI Toce caDhI gayA pachI kAMI caDhavAnI kriyA karavI paDatI
nathI. tema yogagiri para caDhavA mATe uttarottara yogabhUmikA vaTAvavArUpa
gArUDhanI ArehazukriyA karavI paDe che, paNa gagirinA zRMga para ArUDha vAta
nyArI thayA pachI kaMI paNa yogasAdhanarUpa ArohaNakriyA karavI paDatI nathI.
sAdhaka dazAmAM vattatA gAhakane je avalaMbana-sAdhana anivArya paNe Avazyaka
che, avazya jarUranA che, te niSpanna gadazAne pAmelA gArUDha jJAnI puruSane
kaMI paNa kAmanA nathI. kAraNa ke caDhelAne caDhavAnuM zuM? pAmelAne pAmavAnuM
zuM? dharAyelAne jamavAnuM zuM? Ama parama addabhuta AtmasamAdhimaya parama
jJAnadazA pAmelA jJAnayogInI vAta e che, nyArI che. tyAM prAkRta janane kAyado
kema lAgu paDe? sAmAnya jananA anumAnanA kATale jokhavAnuM kema pAlave? ane
sAmAnya prAkRta jana tevA jJAnIjananuM anukaraNa karavAnI dhRSTatA kare te paNa
kema kAma Ave? bhUkhyAne bhejana + " vaM puchavayaM suhAgumaLAvityaviSe to citta
avayaM tu go to vimaLA"--samayasAra gA. 383. "svasthAnAtyatparasthAna pramAdasya
vazAd gataH  /  tatraiva kramaNaM bhUyaH pratikramaNamucyate "

Page #674 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(598) There is a need to perform the act of Yagdristi-Susukhya, but for those
who are fulfilled, there is no need for anything. Those who are completely
satisfied by the taste of the nectar of supreme knowledge, they no longer need
any support or means, because the one who has abandoned the support and means
and has overcome the transmigration, such a self-existent, blissful Lord, is
awakened in the eternal vision, knowledge, and detachment. In other words, they
are established in the pure self-nature, in the state of eternal wakefulness, in
the state of being fully awakened. Thus, since the goal has been achieved, there
is no need for any means. Since the work is done, there is nothing left to do.
“The one who abandons the support and means, overcomes the transmigration; The
blissful Lord is awakened in the eternal vision, knowledge, and detachment.”
—Shri Anandji. State This supremely knowledgeable person has completed the
ultimate work, the work is complete; because since the conscious self has turned
away from the division, has become detached, has attained time, and has taken
hold of its own nature, since then, whatever was to be taken, it has taken it,
and whatever was to be abandoned, it has abandoned it. Therefore, there is
nothing left to take or leave, so what new work is left for him? Because this
supremely detached, four-bodied Lord, who has abandoned the company, the body,
the words, the mind, and the intellect, has purified the soul. “When the
conscious self turned away from the division, attained time, and took hold of
its own nature, then whatever was to be taken, it took it, whatever was to be
abandoned, it abandoned it. There is nothing left to take or leave, so what new
work is left for him? The one who has abandoned the company, the body, the
words, the mind, and the intellect, has purified the self.” —Shri Manarsidedas-
written Hindi Samaysar. Such a supremely wonderful, detached state of knowledge,
the one who has experienced it in his own life, such a supreme yogi, Shrimad
Rajchandraji, in this proverb, praises this state of knowledge with great
enthusiasm, saying: “There is nothing left to take, there is nothing left to
abandon; so what new work is left for him?” “By becoming aware of the self-
nature, the work is complete. Therefore, there is no field left for taking
anything. The self-nature will never desire to abandon anything; and where there
is only the self-nature, there is nothing else left.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ( 598) yAgadRSTisasukSaya karavAnI jarUra paDe che, paNa dharAyelAne-tRpta
thayelAne kAMi jarUra rahetI * AnaMdaghana nathI. tema parama jJAnAmRtanA
pAnathI je AkaMTha paritRpta thayA che, tene prabhu jAge re' have keAI AlaMbana-
sAdhananI apekSA rahetI nathI, kAraNa ke AlaMbanasAdhanane tyAgI jeNe
parapariNatine bhagADI che, evA sahajAtmasvarUpI AnaMdaghana prabhu akSaya evA
darzana-jJAna-vairAgyamAM jAgyA che, arthAt zuddha AtmasvarUpamAM akhaMDa
sthitirUpa sadAti jAgrata evI ujAgara dazAmAM khirAjamAna thayA che. Ama sAdhya
siddha thayu' hAvAthI sAdhananI kai apekSA rahetI nathI, kRtakRtya thayA DAvAthI
ene have kaMi karavAnuM rahyuM nathI. " AlaMbana sAdhana je tyAge,
parapariNatine bhAge re; akSaya darzana jJAna vairAgye, AnaMdadhana prabhu jAge
re. ''--zrI AnanajI. dazA A parama jJAnI puruSa parama kRtakRtya, pUrNakAma thai
cUkayA che; kAraNa ke jyArathI cetana pAte vibhAvathI ulaTA thai-vimukha thai,
samaya pAmI peAtAne svabhAva grahaNa karI lIdhA che, tyArathI ja je je levA
yAgya hatuM te te sa teNe kRtakRtya jJAna- laI lIdhu che, ane je je tyAga yAgya
hatuM, te te sava cheDI dIdhuM che. eTale tene have kaMi levAnuM rahyuM nathI ke
mUkavAnuM khIjuM kAMi rahyuM nathI, tA have tene bAkI navIna kArya zuM rahyuM
che? kAraNa ke saMganA tyAgI, aMganA tyAgI, vacana-taraMganA tyAgI, mananA
tyAgI, buddhinA tyAgI evA A parama vItarAga ceAgIzvare AtmAne zuddha karI dIdheA
che. " jamahiM te cetana vibhAvase uTi Apu, samA pAI apane subhAva gaDhI lInA
hai, tamahi' te jo jo lena joga seA se| sakha lInA, jo jo tyAga joga seA se|
sakha chAMDI dIneA hai. levekI na rahI ThAra tyAgiyekA nAMhi aura, bAkI kahA
umaryAM ju, kAraja navIneA hai; saMga tyAgI, aMga tyAgI, vacanataratra tyAgI,
mana tyAgI, buddhi tyAgI, ApA zuddha kInA hai. --zrI manArasIdAsakRta hiMdI
samayasAra, AvI parama adbhuta vItarAga jJAnadazAne jeNe peAtAnA jIvanamAM
sAkSAt anubhava karyAM che, evA parama yogI zrImad rAjacaMdrajI A subhASitamAM
vadhu vela jJAnadazAnI mukta kaMThe praza'sA karatAM parameAllAsathI kahe che
ke:-~~ "" levekI na rahI Thora, tyAgIvekI nAhi aura; AkI kahA ukha^ ju. kAraja
navIna hai." " svarUpanuM bhAna thavAthI pUrNa kAmapaNu' prApta thayu. eTale
have bIju kAI kSetra kaI paNa levAne mATe rahyuM nathI. svarUpanA te koI kALe
tyAga karavAne mUkha paNa icche nahi; ane jyAM kevala svarUpasthita che, tyAM te
pachI bIjuM kaI rahyuM

Page #675 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
But vision:  Kritakritya Jnana-dasha,  Lene-ki nahin rahi thaar? •  Le-veki
nahin rahi kaar’ (599) No, that means renunciation also did not remain. Now when
‘taking and giving’ has ceased, what is left to do something new...?  That is,
as it should be, after that, where is the net of taking and giving?  Therefore,
it is said that here, ‘fullness’ has been achieved. Shrimad Rajchandra, A. 275.
(328) What a wonderful, blessed state!  What kind of conduct, in the form of
taking and giving, is left for such a Kritakritya, Purna-kaam Jnani Purusha?
Because the ignorant being performs taking and giving in the external world, the
self-knower performs taking and giving in the internal world, but the Nishthita-
atma does not have taking and giving in the external or internal world.  Thus,
having attained the state of Niraachar Ati-chaari-ji, there is no possibility of
any transgression due to the absence of its cause.  Because transgression is
seen in conduct, but here, there is no conduct, so where is the transgression?
The example of the conduct of such great souls who have attained this high state
of Niraachar-pada is found in the spiritual life of Shri Chidanandji Maharaj.
Shrimad Rajchandraji has said about this: “After becoming a Jain Muni, due to
his own supreme, non-dual state, he will no longer be able to follow the Yamas
and Niyamas in a sequential manner, through the elements, field, time, and
emotions, as he felt (Chidanandji).  The attainment of the object for which the
sequential observance of Yamas and Niyamas is necessary, after the attainment of
that object, it is equal to both, to continue or not to continue in that series.
This is the belief of the Tattva-jnani.”  etc. – Shrimad Rajchandra, Patranka 9
(2) (22) To remove the doubt of how can there be conduct like begging, etc., it
is said: Ratnaadi Shikshaadrigbhyo’nya yatha drikoo taniyojane. Tathaachaar
kriyaapyasya saivaanya phalabhedatah || 180 || Vritti: - Naishkshaado -
Compared to the teaching of Ratnaadi, Anya - other, friend, Chatha - like, Da -
vision, Tatriyogene - in the application of Ratnaadi - they were taught, Tatha -
so, Bhaasha Triyaayaa Yaagini Aachaar-kriya Pashu, Saive - that same, begging,
etc. characteristic, Anya - other, different, is completely different.  For what
reason?  Ta ke Matt: - Labhedhathi - the previous, worldly order was destroyed,
and now it is Bhava-pagrahi Kama-kshaya Kula. B X Tyagaadane Bahirmudhah karoti
adhyatmamaatmavit. Naandaryaddipanyaanu na chaano Nishthitaatmanah ||”
Samadhishataka,

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paNa daSTi : kRtakRtya jJAnadazA, lenekI na rahI ThAra? * levekI na rahI kAra'
(599) nathI, eTale tyAgavApaNuM paNa rahyuM nahI. have jyAre levu. devu' e ane
nivRtta thai gayuM tyAre bIju kAi navIna kA karavAne mATe zuM gayuM...? arthAt
jema thavuM joIe tema thayuM, tyAM pachI bIjI levAdevAnI ja jALa kayAMthI heAya?
eTale kahe che ke ahI' pUrNakAmatA thaI. " zrImad rAjacaMdra, a'. 275. (328)
kevI adbhuta dhanya dazA ! AvA kRtakRtya, pUrNakAma jJAnI puruSane grahaNu-
tyAgarUpa kayA AcAra AcaravAnA khAkI rahyo hAya ? kAraNa ke mUDha jIva mhAramAM
grahaNu-tyAga x kare che, AtmavettA adhyAtmamAM aMtamAM grahaNa-tyAga kare che,
paNu * kahIye nahi' niSThitAtmAne mhAra ke aMdara grahaNu-tyAga hAtA nathI.' Ama
nirAcAra aticArIjI'padane pAmyA hAvAthI atre tenA kAraNanA abhAve kAi paNa
aticArane saMbhava rahetA nathI. kAraNa ke AcAramAM aticAra lAge, paNa atre tA
AcAra ja nathI, te aticAra kayAMthI lAge ? AvI nirAcArapaDhavALI UcI AtmadazAne
pAmelA mahAtmAeAnu va`mAna udAharaNa zrI cidAnaMdajI mahArAjanA adhyAtma
jIvanamAMthI maLI Ave che. A aMge zrImad rAjacaMdrajIe kahyuM che keH-- " jaina
muni thayA pachI peAtAnI parama nivikalpa dazA thaI javAthI kramapUrvaka dravya
--kSetra-kAla-bhAvathI yama-niyama tee have pALI zakaze nahIM, tema temane (
cidAnaMdajIne ) lAgyuM. je padArthanI prApti mATe yamaniyamanuM kramapUrvaka
pAlana karavu che, te vastunI prApti thaI teA pachI te zreNIe pravattavu ane na
pravarttavuM banne sama che. Ama tattvajJAnIonI mAnyatA che. " ityAdi.-- zrImad
rAjacaMdra, patrAMka 9 (2) (22) Pin  Ane bhikSATanAdi AcAra kema heAya ? evI
AzakA dUra karavA kahe che. ratnAdi zikSAdRgbhyo'nyA yathA dRkU taniyojane  /
tathAcAra kriyApyasya saivAnyA phalabhedataH  //  180  //  vRtti:--nAiizakSAdo--
ratAdinI zikSAdRSTie karatAM, anyA-manya, mitra ja, cathA-jema, da-daSTi,
tatriyoganene-te ratnAdinA niyAjhanamAM,--zikSita hatAM, tathA-tema, bhASA
triyAyaA yAgInI AcArakriyA pazu, saiva- te ja, bhikSATanAdi lakSaNuvALI, anyA-
anya, bhinna, jUdI ja hAya che. kayA kAraNathI ? tA ke matta:-labheda thakI-
pUrva sAMparAyika krama kSaya La hatuM, ane hamaNAM te| bhavApagrAhI kama'kSaya
kuLa che. ba X tyAgAdAne bahirmUDhaH karotyadhyAtmamAtmavit  /
nAndaryaddipAyAnuM na cAno niSThitAtmanaH ||" samAdhizataka,

Page #676 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(00') From the perspective of Ratnadishiksha, the perspective of application is
different; The action of Tyam Achar Kriya is also different due to its fruit,
180 "" Yogadashtisasuya A—Just as the perspective of application is different
from the teaching of Ratnaadini, so too is the action of this Achar Kriya
different due to its fruit. Discussion "Just as the perspective of application
of Ratna is different from the teaching, so too is this." —Shri Cha, Sajja, 9–1
From the perspective of the teaching of Ratnaadi, the perspective of application
is different when one is being taught; just as the perspective of application is
different when one is being taught, so too is the action of this Chaogi's
Bhikshaatnaadi Achar Kriya different. Why? Because of the difference, the fruit
of the previous Saampaayik Karma Kshaya was there, now the fruit of Bhaapgraahi
Karma Kshaya is there. The perspective of the one who is taught is different,
The perspective of the one who is taught is different from the perspective of
the one who is learning when they first learn about Ratnapariksha; because the
perspective of the one who has learned and passed is different from the
perspective of the one who is learning. Because the one who is learning does not
have any knowledge about the subject. What is Ratna? What is its form? What are
its types? What are the merits and demerits of Ratna Niyojan? What is its value?
etc. All this is unknown to him. Therefore, he has a curious mind about it.
Therefore, he is eager to learn about the examination of Ratna. Thus, as he
studies, he becomes an expert in the subject. And then he applies the knowledge
he has gained in the examination of Ratna, he performs experiments like selling,
etc. In the first stage, there was only theoretical knowledge, now he has
practical application. Therefore, the perspective of this stage of application
is different from the perspective of the learner. Similarly, here too, the
action of this Chaogi's Bhikshaatnaadi Achar Kriya is also different. Earlier,
the same Bhikshaatnaadi Kriya was there, and now the same Bhikshaatnaadi Kriya
is there, yet there is a great difference in perspective. Or, the one who is
learning does not even know the alphabet, the numbers, etc. He does not even
know how to count. But he becomes a student and learns to count, gradually
gaining theoretical knowledge, he becomes a graduate, he bathes in the river of
knowledge! And then he applies the knowledge he has learned in life, he applies
it in the world. His perspective as a learner is different from the perspective
of the one who has learned.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (00') ratnAdizikSA dRSTithI, niyojana dRSTi bhinna; tyama AcAra kriyA ya tasa,
te phala bheru bhinna, 180 "" yogadaSTisasuya a--ratnAdinI zikSASTi karatAM jema
tenA niyeAjana saMbadhI dRSTi bhinna hAya che, tema AnI te ja AcArakriyA paNa
phaladane lIdhe bhinna hAya che. vivecana zikSAthI jyama ratana niyeAjana, dRSTi
bhinna tyama eheAjI. "--zrI cA, sajjhA, 9-1 ratnAdikanI zikSArdaSTie karatAM,
jema zikSita thatAM tenA niyeAjana viSayamAM dRSTi anya ja hAya che, bhinna ja
hAya che; tema A ceAgInI te ja bhikSATanAdi AcArakriyA paNa anya ja-bhinna ja
hAya che. zA kAraNathI? tA ke labhedathI, pUrva sAMpAyika karma kSaya phaLa
hatu, have bhApagrAhI kama kSaya phaLa che. dRSTi hoya che, te evA te zikSitanI
prathama zikSA letI veLAe ratnaparIkSA viSaye zikhAunI je karatAM zIkhIne pAra
utarI gayA pachI te ratnanuM niyeAjana kare che dRSTi jUdI ja hoya che; kAraNa
ke prathama tA zikhAune te viSaya saMbadhI zikSAthI jyama kai jJAna hai|tuM
nathI. ratna kevuM che ? tenuM svarUpa zuM ? tenA prakAra zuM ? ratana
niyeAjana' tenA guNa-doSa zuM? tenuM mUlya zu? ItyAdi khAkhata tene sAva ajJAta
hAya che. eTale tene te saMbadhI kutUhala buddhi heAya che. ethI te
jijJAsApUrvaka te te ratnanI parIkSA saMbaMdhI jJAna meLavavA pravarte che. Ama
abhyAsa karatAM karatAM te taviSayaka jJAnamAM niSNAta thAya che. ane pachI
ratnaparIkSAmAM suzikSita evA te upalabdha jJAnanA vyavahAramAM viniyoga kare
che, ca-vikrayAdi prayAga kare che. prathama avasthAmAM mAtra zikhAu jJAna (
Theoretical knowledge ) hatuM, tyAre have tA teneA anubhavasiddha prayAga (
Practical application ) hoya che. eTale vhelAMnI zikhAu dRSTi karatAM A viniyega
dazAnI dRSTi bhinna ja-jUdA ja prakAranI hAya che. tema atre paNa cegInI te ja
bhikSATana Adi AcArakriyA paNa bhinna ja-era prakAranI ja DAya che. pahelAM paNa
e ja bhikSATanAdi kriyA hatI, ane hamaNAM paNa e ja bhikSATanAdi kriyA che,
chatAM ane dRSTimAM mahad atara che. athavA tA ekaDIAne prathama te
mAtRkAkSaranuM-khArAkhaDInuM jJAna paNa nathI hetu, ekaDA paNa nathI AvaDatA.
paNa te khatIleA vidyArthI banIne ekaDo ghuMTatAM ghuMTatAM, krame rIte zikhAu
jJAna prApta karatA karatA, vidyApAraMgata snAtaka thAya che, jJAna-gaMgAmAM
nAhIne mhAra paDe che! ane pachI jIvanavyavahAramAM zikhelA jJAnane vyavahAra
upayAga kare che-cathAyAgya viniyAga kare che. tenI nizALIA tarIkenI zikhAu
avasthAnI

Page #677 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Par Drusti: A Different Perspective  (601)  The perspective of a **sadhu**
(saint) who has attained **yoga** (spiritual union) is different from the
perspective of a **yagi** (aspirant) who is still in the initial stages of
practice. This difference is similar to the difference between the perspective
of a student learning music and the perspective of a master musician.  Just as a
novice musician first learns the basics of music, such as the different notes
and scales, and gradually becomes proficient in the art of music, so too does a
**yagi** develop their understanding of **aachar** (conduct) through practice.
As they progress, their perspective changes, and they become adept at **aachar**
in a way that is natural and effortless. They can then effortlessly perform any
**rag** (musical mode) with complete absorption, captivating the audience.
Similarly, the perspective of a **yagi** in the initial stages of practice is
different from the perspective of a **sadhu** who has attained **jnana**
(knowledge) through **yoga**. Just as a novice's understanding of a gem, a
letter of the alphabet, or music is different from that of an expert, so too is
the perspective of a **yagi** on **aachar** different from that of a **sadhu**.
This difference arises because the **yagi** is still subject to **kashya**
(passions), while the **sadhu** has overcome them. The **yagi**'s actions are
motivated by a desire to reduce **kashya**, while the **sadhu**'s actions are
motivated by **jnana**. The **yagi**'s body is a tool for **samaya** (self-
control), while the **sadhu**'s body is a vessel of **jnana**.  The **sadhu**'s
perspective is characterized by a deep understanding of the subtle nature of
**kashya**. Even the slightest trace of **kashya** is a cause for concern, as it
can lead to **kaladosha** (temporal defilement).  **Shri Haribhadrasuriji** in
his **Pachashka Shastra** states that a **sadhu** may experience a slight
**sanjwalan kashya** (momentary passion) due to **kaladosha**, but they are not
truly subject to **kashya**. If they are, then they are not a true **sadhu**.
**Sanjwalan kashya** arises from **atichar** (excess), while **anantanubandhi
kashya** (deep-rooted passions) lead to **vratabhang** (violation of vows) and
require **prayashchitta** (penance).  **"Chariman vi tah neyam sanjwalan kashya
sangamam cheva. Maithaanam payen asai pi hu kaladoshen. Savveviya aiyara
sanjwalanaanam tu udayo honti. Moochekh pul hoar vasaru layalu."** - **Shri
Pachashka**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 parA dRSTi : zikSA dRSTithI niyeAjana dRSTi bhinna, niSkaSAya 'sAdhu ' (601)
dRSTimAM ane jIvana-vyavahAra zALAnI zikSita anubhavasiddha dRSTimAM ghaNA ja
pharaka hAya che. tema atre paNa AcAranI khAkhatamAM prAraMbhaka sAdhaka yAgInI
dRSTi karatAM, yeAgArUDha siddha cegInI dRSTi bhinna--jUdA prakAranI hAya che.
athavA te| sa`gIta zAsrathI anabhijJa aNu jema pahelAM te AlApa letAM zIkhe che,
svaranA prakAra vagere sabadhI jJAna meLave che. Ama zIkhatAM zIkhatAM anukrame
te saMgIta kalAmAM pravINa khane che, ane temAM eneA hAtha evA esI * dRSTi
bhinna jAya che ke grAma-mUnAdi prakAra tene sahaja siddha thAya che, game tyama
ehAjI' tyAre game te rAga cheDI tanmayatA sAdhI te ustAda jana-manaraMjana karI
zake che. Ama prathamanI azikSita AlApalA karatAM tenI havenI suzikSita
AlApakalA sAva jUdI ja tarI Ave che. tema atre paNa AcAra paratve prathamanI
abhyAsadazAmAM sAdhaka ceAgInI je dRSTi hAya che, tenA karatAM gItA niSpanna
jJAnadazAmAM dRSTi bhinna vhAya che. Ama ratna, ke mAtRkAkSara, ke sa gIta Adi
che teA tenA te, paNu tenA pratyenI zikhAunI dRSTimAM ne zikSitanI dRSTimAM
pragaTa bheda heAya che; tema zikSATanAdi AcArakriyA che tA tenI te, paNa tenA
pratyenI sAdhaka yAgInI dRSTi karatAM atre siddha niSpanna cegInI dRSTi bhinna
ja-jUdA ja prakAranI-era ja hAya che. kAraNa ke pUrva sa MpAyika-kaSAya saMbadhI
kakSaya e AcAra kriyAnuM phala hatuM, have bhavApagrAhI kama kSaya e la che.
pUrve nigraMtha muninI samasta pravRtti kaSAya sabaMdhI kama kSaya karavA mATe
hatI, jema bane tema sUkSmamAM sUkSma kaSAyanA paNa kSaya karavA arthe hatI, te
saMyamInA deha paNa mAtra sayamane mATe hatA, ane te deha dvArA sayamayAtrAnA
nirvAha arthe ja zikSATanAdi kriyA Avazyaka hatI, tathA e badhuOya kaSAya-bhAva
dUra karavA mATe ja-pUrNa vItarAgatA ANavA mATe ja hatuM. kAraNa ke sAcA * sAdhu
'ne kavacam heya te ati ati sUkSma evA sajvalana kyAya ja hAya, ethI adhika
kaSAya x hAya ja nahi, chatAM bheda d 6 x zrImAn haribhadrasUrijI zrI pacAzaka
sAstramAM spaSTapaNe kahe che ke- sAdhu ' ne kAladoSathI hAya to kavacit
sajvalana kaSAyane uddama hoya, bAkI teA kaSAya hAya ja nahiM, ane jo hAya te te
sAdhu ja nathI. kAraNa ke salema aticArA saMjvalananA umathI hAya che, paNa
anaMtAnubaMdhI Adi khAra Sa yanA yathI tA sacADo vratabhaMga thato hovAthI
mUlava prAyazcitta lAge che " carimANa vi taha NeyaM saMjalaNakasAyasaMgamaM
ceva  /  mAIThANaM pAyeM asaI pi hu kAladoMseNa  //  savveviya aiyArA
saMjalaNANaM tu udayao hoMti  /  mUchekha puLa hor vAsarUM lAyALuM ||"--zrI
pacAzaka,

Page #678 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(602) The great sage, with his keen insight, cannot even compare the subtle
karmic particles to a speck of dust in the eye. Therefore, he strives with all
his being to eliminate even the minutest karmic particle from all the realms of
the soul, and attains the state of complete detachment (Vitaraga). But now, even
the slightest trace of karmic attachment has completely vanished, Vitaraga has
been attained, the fatal (Ghatik) has been destroyed, so the only purpose here
is the destruction of the karmic bondage (Bhogagrahi karma). The body that this
supreme yogi is currently inhabiting is only for the purpose of destroying the
karmic residue (Prarabdha karma) that he is destined to experience in this final
body, which is characterized by name, lineage, and lifespan. Therefore, the acts
of begging, etc., that he performs for the sustenance of this body, are also
done for the destruction of the karmic bondage. Thus, in the past, the
destruction of the karmic bondage (Sampraayik karmakshaya) was the result of the
actions of begging, etc., and here, the destruction of the karmic bondage
(Bhogagrahi karmakshaya) is the result. Thus, the difference in the cause
reveals the difference in the effect.  The implication here is that the
Vitaraga, the supreme sage, who has completely destroyed all karmic attachments,
continues to exist in this final body until the end of its lifespan, and by
doing so, he pays off the remaining karmic debt and sheds the body, even though
he is already liberated. Thus, the wise man, who is liberated from the body,
continues to exist in the body, but experiences the state of complete liberation
(Jivanmukta) - a state beyond the body. He lives in the world, but is free from
the body. Such a liberated soul, who is endowed with the state of liberation
(Videha), walks the earth, showering the world with the rain of supreme truth
(Paramarth), enlightening the noble souls, and performing the greatest service
to humanity. Such a pure soul, like a wish-fulfilling tree (Kalpavruksha), is
worshipped by the blessed souls. For example:  "Ajitvirya Jin, wandering...
mind, a lotus in the sky, beyond the body... future... mobile, a tree of
virtue... mind, serves, blessed, blessed is he... future - Shri Devchandraji."
"Even though he has a body, his state is beyond the body; to the feet of such a
wise man, countless salutations." - Shrimad Rajchandraji's Shri Atmasiddhi.  "By
the application of this principle, the great soul becomes fulfilled, just as the
gem merchant becomes fulfilled by the application of his principle. Similarly,
the great sage becomes fulfilled by the application of the principle of
renunciation." - Annishe - By the application of this principle, by the
application of the principle of the gem, the great soul here in the world, just
as the gem merchant becomes fulfilled, just as the gem merchant becomes
fulfilled; similarly, this, the great sage, by the application of the principle
of renunciation, the great sage, becomes fulfilled.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (602) thAgadaSTisamuccaya te mahAmuni AMkhanA kaNAnI jema te kaSAyakaNikAne
paNa sAMkhI zakatA nathI, eTale sarva AtmapradezamAMthI paramANu mAtra
kaSAyakaNane paNa kADhI nAMkhavA mATe te sarvAtmAthI pravarte che, ane
niSkaSAyatArUpa vItarAga bhAvane sAdhe che. paNa have atre te te ati ati alpa
kaSAyabhAva paNa sarvathA dUra thaI gayuM che, vItarAgatA prApta thaI cUkI che,
ghAtikane kSaya thaI cUkyo che, eTale aghAtI evA bhopagrAhI karmane kSaya eka ja
atra hetu che. atre A parama yogI je deha dhAraNa karI rahyA che, te nAma-gotra-
AyurvedanIya e cAra, A carama dehamAM bhogavavA gya prArabdha karmanA kSaya
arthe ja dhAraNa karI rahyA che. eTale te dehanA nirvAhAthe je bhikSATanAdi
kriyA kare che, te paNa te bhayagrAhI karmanA kSaya athe ja kare che. Ama pUrve
sAMparAyika karmakSaya e bhikSATanAdi kriyAnuM phala hatuM, ane atre bhapagrAhI
karmakSaya e phala che. Ama kulabhedathI daSTibheda pragaTa thAya che. A
uparathI tAtparya e che ke-jene sarva kaSAyane kSaya thayo che evA vItarAga
parama bhegI jyAM lagI A chellA dehanI Ayusthiti che tyAM lagI pUrva
prArabdhadayathI vicare che, ane ema karIne potAnA zeSa kamane trANAnubaMdha
cUkavI ApI deha chatAM jenI nirjarI nAMkhe che. Ama pUrva prayogathI vicaratA
jJAnI puruSa, deha dazA, varte chatAM dehAtIta evI parama adbhuta kAyotsarga
dazA-jIvanmukta dehAtIta" dazAne anubhava karatA satA, sadehe mukta varte che.
AvA videhadazA saMpanna kevali bhagavAna paramArtha meghanI vRSTi karI
bhavyajanone bodha karatA bhUtala para vicare che, ne parama
janakalyANalakepakAra kare che ane AvA jagama kalpavRkSa samA zuddha AtmasvarUpa
jinarAjane dhanya AtmAo seve che. jema ke - "ajitavIrya jina vicaratA re... mana
puSkara adha videha re....bhavi. jaMgama surataru sAri re..mana seve dhanya
dhanya teha re...bhavi-zrI devacaMdrajI. "deha chatAM jenI dazA, vatte dehAtIta;
te jJAnInA caraNamAM, he vaMdana agaNita."-zrImad rAjacaMdrajIpraNIta zrI
Atmasiddhi. tanniyogAnmahAtmeha kRtakRtyo yathA bhavet  /  tathAyaM
dharmasaMnyAsaviniyogAnmahAmuniH  // 181 //  -Annize-tenA niyagathI, ratnanA
niyagathI, mAtma-mahAtmA ahIM lekamAM, tyo cA mA-jema kRtakRtya hoya che, kaI
ratvavaNipha kRtakRtya hoya che; tathAthaM-tema A, adhikRta vegI,
dharmasaMnyAviniyoniA-dharmasaMnyAsanA viniyogathakI, mAmuni -mahAmuni,
kRtakRtya hoya che.

Page #679 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**On Sight:** The Muni-Ravani, by the application of Dharma-Sannyasa, is
accomplished. (603) Just as the great soul becomes accomplished by the
application of gems, so too does this great Muni become accomplished by the
application of Dharma-Sannyasa. 181 Meaning - Just as the great soul becomes
accomplished by the application of gems, so too does this great Muni become
accomplished by the application of Dharma-Sannyasa. Discussion - "By that
application, the Muni obtains the supreme knowledge." - Sakza. 8, 2, Just as the
great soul-gem merchant becomes accomplished by the application of gems, so too
does this Muni, with pure sight, become accomplished by the application of
Dharma-Sannyasa. The gem merchant, who knows how to examine gems, is considered
accomplished when he conducts business with gems with pure sight. Because, no
matter how much knowledge one has about examining gems, it is not considered
meaningful or accomplished until the gem merchant has put it into practice in
business-exchange. But the knowledge of examining gems is essential for the
purpose of buying and selling gems, and only when this knowledge is applied in
business and used to gain desired benefits, is it considered accomplished, only
then is it considered done. Similarly, this Muni, with pure sight, becomes
accomplished by the application of Dharma-Sannyasa, that is, by the specific
practice of pure sight, by the business of Dharma, because no matter how much
knowledge one has about Dharma-Sannyasa, no matter how much training one has
received in Dharma-Sannyasa, it is not considered meaningful for the sake of the
ultimate goal until it is put into practice in a decisive and pure way. But the
training in knowledge, vision, and character, which was essential for the
attainment of the rightness of Dharma-Sannyasa, is now being put into practice
in a practical way, and the ultimate benefit of the self is being derived from
it. Therefore, here, in this sight, the application of Dharma-Sannyasa
(Practice) is accomplished. That is, here, the great Muni, who is like a gem
merchant, becomes accomplished by the application of Dharma-Sannyasa, which is
like the gem trade, and obtains the desired benefit of the self. Here, he
crosses over, here his work of self-realization is done.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 para daSTi: dharmasaMnyAsaviniyogathI muni-rAvaNi; kRtakRtya (603) tasa
viniyege te ahIM, kRtakRtya jyama thAya; dharma saMnyAsa vigathI, tema
mahAmunirAya. 181 artha -te ratnanA viniyogathI ahIM jema te mahAtmA kRtakRtya
thAya che, tema A mahAmuni dharmasaMnyAsanA viniyegathI kRtakRtya thAya che.
vivecana "tAsa niyoge karaNa apUrva, lahe muni kevala gejI."--. sakjhA. 8, 2, te
rananA viniyogathI jema ahIM lekamAM kaI mahAtmA-ratnAvaNika kRtakRtya thAya
che, tema A daSTivALo yegI mahAmuni dharmasaMnyAsanA viniyegathakI kRtakRtya
thAya che. ratnaparIkSA karI jANanAre ratnAvaNi cekasI, jhaverI zuddha dRSTithI
jyAre ratnane yatheccha vyApAra kare, tyAre ja te kRtakRtya thayo kahevAya che.
kAraNa ke ratna parIkSA saMbaMdhI game teTaluM jANapaNuM hoya, paNa jyAM sudhI
vyavahAramAM-vyApAravinimayamAM ratnAvaNiphanuM tene prayoga na karavAmAM AvyuM
hoya, tyAM sudhI tenuM sArthakapaNuM- dRSTAMta kRtArthapaNuM thayuM kema
kahevAya ? paNa ratnanA kayavikrayamAM, levaDadevaDamAM upayogI thAya tenI
khAtara ja je ratnaparIkSAnuM jJAna anivAryapaNe Avazyaka hatuM, te jJAnane
vyApAramAM jyAre viniyega (Practical application) karavAmAM Ave, ne tene
yatheccha lAbha uThAvavAmAM Ave, tyAre ja tenuM kRtakRtyapaNuM gaNAya, tyAre ja
tenuM kAma thayuM kahevAya. te ja prakAre A dRSTivALe yegI mahAmuni ahIM
dharmasaMnyAsanA viniyogathI, arthAt zuddha dRSTithI tAvika AcaraNarUpa viziSTa
prayogathI-dharmavyApArarUpa prajanathI kRtakRtya thAya che, kAraNa ke
dharmasaMnyAsa saMbaMdhI game teTaluM jANapaNuM hoya, dharmasaMnyAsa game teTalI
tAlIma lIdhI hoya, paNa jyAM sudhI haju tene nizcayazuddha viniyoga vyavahAramAM
tAtvikapaNe upaga na karavAmAM AvyuM hoya, tyAM sudhI paramArthathI tenuM
sArthakapaNuM thayuM kema kahevAya ? paNa prastuta dharmasaMnyAsanI yegyatA
prApta thAya te khAtara ja je atyArasudhInI jJAna-darzana-cAritranI akhaMDa
ArAdhanArUpa tAlIma atyaMta Avazyaka hatI, tene have ahIM tArika
dharmasaMnyAsapaNe vyavahArU prayoga karavAmAM Ave che, ane tajajanya parama
AtmalAbha UThAvavAmAM Ave che. eTale ahIM A dRSTimAM ja dharmasaMnyAsanA
viniyogathI (Practice) kRtakRtyapaNuM hoya che. arthAt atre ja zuddha
ratnatrayIne vyApAra karanAre mahAmunirUpa ratnAvaNika dharmasaMnyAsa yogarUpa
ratnavANijya vaDe, yatheccha AtmalAbharUpa na meLavI kRtakRtya thaI jAya che,
ahIM ja tene beDo pAra thaI jAya che, ahIM ja tenuM AtmasiddhinuM kAma thaI

Page #680 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(604) The collection of yogic insights culminates here, where one truly becomes
a "Dharmasanyasi" (one who has renounced worldly attachments) and a "Yogi-
Sanyasi" (a yogi who has renounced worldly attachments), attaining ultimate
self-welfare. Because this insight, compared to the previous Dharmasanyasa yoga,
was, in essence, non-essential. It required the renunciation of the activity-
oriented Dharma. Therefore, although non-essential, it was rightly called
"Dharmasanyasa" and was also essential and beneficial for attaining the
qualification of essential Dharmasanyasa. Therefore, it was also fittingly
called Dharmasanyasa in a remedial sense. But here, it is essential
Dharmasanyasa yoga. Dharma means the path of non-violence, and here, it is
renounced. Therefore, this Dharmasanyasa yoga is truly and ultimately real.
Thus— द्वितीयापूर्वकरणे मुख्योऽयमुपजायते । केवलश्रीस्ततश्चास्य निासपत्ना सदोदया
॥ १८२ ॥ In the second pre-action, this one arises as the main. (Therefore, it is
called Niravarana-Nidyaya, Kevalashri, and Sadodaya). 182. Meaning - In the
second pre-action, this Dharmasanyasa arises as the main, and therefore, this
being has Nissapanna-Niravarana (free from obstacles) and Sadodaya (always
arising) Kevalashri. Discussion - In the second pre-action, which is a series,
this Dharmasanyasa yoga arises - it begins with the restrained and controlled,
starting from the remedial stage. And through the application of this
Dharmasanyasa, this being attains Kevalashri, which is Niravarana (free from
obstacles) and Sadodaya (always arising) due to the absence of opposition. The
Dharmasanyasa yoga mentioned here, when is it truly essential Dharmasanyasa?
This is clarified here. Essential Dharmasanyasa is attained at the time of the
second pre-action in the series. Although the remedial Dharmasanyasa, which is
non-essential, begins from the restrained and controlled Gunasthanas, it is
Dharmasanyasa, and it is extremely beneficial for becoming qualified to attain
essential Dharmasanyasa. This non-essential Dharmasanyasa - in the second pre-
action - in the series of pre-actions, this Dharmasanyasa, which is the main,
arises - it begins with the restrained and controlled, starting from the
remedial stage. And through the application of Dharmasanyasa, this being attains
Nissapanna-Niravarana (free from obstacles) and Sadodaya (always arising) due to
the absence of opposition.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (604) yogadaSTisamuccaya jAya che, ahIM ja te sAce "dharmasaMnyAsa' yogI-
saMnyAsI' banI parama AtmakalyANane pAme che. kAraNa ke A daSTi pUrvene atyAra
sudhI je dharmasaMnyAsayoga hatuM, te tAttvika hete, atAvika hatuM. temAM
pravRtti-lakSaNa dharmane saMnyAsa-tyAga jarUra hato. eTale ja atAtvika chatAM
"dharmasaMnyAsa' nAmane yogya hatuM temaja te tAtvika dharmasaMnyAsanI yogyatA
pAmavA mATe paNa Avazyaka ne upakArI hatA, eTale paNa tene upacaritapaNe te
dharmasaMnyAsa nAma ghaTatuM hatuM. paNa ahIM te tAtvika dharmasaMnyAsacoga hoya
che. dharma eTale kSApathamika bhAva, tene ahIM saMnyAsa-tyAga hoya che, mATe te
dharmasaMnyAsayoga atre yathArtha paNe paramArthathI hoya che. tathA--
dvitIyApUrvakaraNe mukhyo'yamupajAyate  /  kevalazrIstatazcAsya niAsapatnA
sadodayA  //  182  //  bIjA karaNa apUrvamAM, mukhya eha upajata; (tethI tene
nirAvaraNa nidayA, kevalalakSmI varata. 182. artha -bIjA apUrvakaraNamAM mukhya
e A dharmasaMnyAsa upaje che, ane tethI karIne A gIne niHsapannA-nirAvaraNa evI
sodiyA kevalalI hoya che. vivecana zreNIvattI evA bIja apUrvakaraNamAM mukhya e
A dharmasaMnyAsayoga upaje che,-upacarita te pramatta saMyatathI AraMbhIne hoya
che. ane te dharmasaMnyAsanA viniyoga thakI A gIne nirAvaraNa evI kevalazrI
upaje che ke je pratipAtanA abhAve karIne sadedayA hoya che. A dharmasaMnyAsa
lega je kahyo, te mukhya arthAt tAtvika koTine dharma saMnyAsa kyAre hoya che ?
tenuM ahIM spaSTIkaraNa che. mukhya-tAtvika dharma saMnyAsa zreNImAM AvatA bIjA
apUrvakaraNa samaye prApta hoya che,-jo ke upacaritatAtvika atAttvika e dharma
saMnyAsa pramattasaMyata guNasthAnathI mAMDIne hoya dharmasaMnyAsa che, ane te
anukrame tAtvika dharmasaMnyAsa pAmavAnI yogyatA mATe adhikArI thavA mATe parama
upakArI thAya che. A atAvika dharmakRtti - dUtIyApUrvajaLe-dvitIya
apUrvakaraNamAM, zreNIvattI evA apUrvakaraNamAM, mughoDatha-mukhya evo A
dharmasaMnyAsa; EvjJAnta-upaje che, -upacarita te pramatta saMyatathI AraMbhIne
upaje che. devazItata-ane kevalazrI tethI karIne-dharma saMnyAsa viniyoga thakI,
aca-A piMgIne, ni sannA-niHsa patnI, pratipakSa rahita (nirAvaraNa), soyA-
sadAya, -pratipAtanA abhAve karIne.

Page #681 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
On the topic of **Tattvika Dharma-sanyasa**, **Kevalashri** says:
“**Shrimadbhagwan Jin** (605) In **Sanchasa**, the **Dharmas** that are
characterized by activity are **Sanyasa-tyaga**, and in **Tattvika Dharma-
sanyasa**, the **Dharmas** that are in the form of **Kshaya-upshama** are
**Sanyasa-tyaga**. Therefore, the term **Dharma-sanyasa** is true.  Here, it is
said that this **Tattvika Dharma-sanyasa** is revealed in the second
**Apuurvakaran**, which is meaningful because the first **Apuurvakaran**, which
is the cause of **Granthibhed**, cannot have this presented **Dharma-sanyasa**.
Therefore, it is mentioned in the second **Apuurvakaran** as an exception. Thus,
there are two **Apuurvakaranas**: (1) The first, which is the cause of
**Granthibhed**, and (2) The second, which is during the **Kshapak-shreni**.
What is this **Apuurvakaran**? “**Apuurva**” means the **Shubh-prashasta Atma-
parinam** that has never been attained before in the endless cycle of births and
deaths. The fruit of the first **Apuurvakaran** is **Granthibhed**, and the
fruit of **Granthibhed** is **Samyagdarshan**. And then, when this second
**Apuurvakaran** - **Apuurva Atma-parinam** is attained after the **Karma-
sthiti** has been transcended, like the countless oceans, this **Tattvika
Dharma-sanyasa** is revealed to the **Samarthya-yogi** who ascends the
**Kshapak-shreni**. (For the reason behind calling this **Apuurvakaran**, see
pages 43-44).  Having attained this **Apuurva Atma-samarthya** in the form of
**Apuurvakaran**, and having revealed the **Param Atma-vilas**, the **Yogi-
purusha** who ascends the **Kshapak-shreni** has the **Samarthya-yoga** of this
**Tattvika Dharma-sanyasa**, because he progresses by **Kshapan** of the
**Kshaya-upshama** **Dharmas**, completely consuming the **Karma-prakriti**,
consuming it with **Kevala**, destroying it, eliminating it, and rapidly
ascending the **Gunasthanaka** series. And thus, destroying the **Karma-
shatru**, renouncing the **Kshaya-upshamika Dharmas**, this supremely powerful
**Veer Sanyasi** surpasses the 8th, 9th, 10th, and 12th **Gunasthanas**, and
reaches the 13th **Gunasthan** of **Sagi Kevali**, revealing his **Nij Kevalgyan
Nidhan**. (See Figure 3, page 50).  And thus, through the application of
**Dharma-sanyasa**, this **Samarthagi** attains **Kevala-lakshmi** -
**Kevalashri**, meaning the birth of **Kevalgyan-darshan**, which is not
obstructed by any **Prathibhandhak**, **Virethak**, or **Pratipaksharoop
Avaran**. This **Niravaran Kevalashri** is **Shrimadbhagwan Sadideya**, meaning
it is always **Udayavanti** because it is always **Abhav Bhagwan** for its
**Pratipat**. Therefore, this unparalleled **Kevalashri** is always present in
this **Shrimadbhagwan Jinrajrajeshwar Atma-samrajya Lakshmi**. Its **Apuurva**
description has been sung by **Kaviraj Devchandraj** in a characteristic style:

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 para daSTi tAtvika dharmasa-kevalazrI: "zrImada' jina bhagavAna (605)
saMcAsamAM pravRttilakSaNa dharmone saMnyAsa-tyAga hoya che, ane tAtvika
dharmasaMnyAsamAM kSayopazamabhAvarUpa dharmone saMnyAsa-tyAga hoya che, eTale
dharmasaMnyAsa saMjJA yathArtha che, ahIM "bIjA" apUrvakaraNamAM A tAtvika
dharmasaMnyAsa pragaTe che ema kahyuM te sahetuka che, kAraNa ke paheluM
apUrvakaraNa je graMthibhedanuM kAraNa che, temAM A prastuta dharmasaMnyAsa hoI
zake nahi. eTalA mATe bIjAmAM ema kahI tene apavAda sUcavyo. Ama A apUrvakaraNa
be che:-(1) graMthibhedanA kAraNarUpa te paheluM; (2) kSapakazreNI veLAnuM te
bIju. A "apUrvakaraNa eTale zuM? "apUrva " eTale anAdikALanA bhavabhramaNamAM je
kadI paNa pUrva prApta thayo nathI, e zubha-prazasta AtmapariNAma. temAM pahelA
apUrvakaraNanuM phaLa graMthibheda che ane te graMthibhedanuM phaLa
samyagadarzana che. ane pachI karmasthitimAMthI saMkhyAta sAgaropama vyatIta
thaye A bIjuM apUrva karaNa-apUrva AtmapariNAma prApta thAya che, tyAre A tAvika
dharmasaMnyAsa yoga kSepaka zreNImAM caDhatA sAmarthyayogIne heya che. (Ane
"apUrvakaraNa" kahevAnA kAraNa mATe juo pR. 43-44). A apUrvakaraNarUpa apUrva
AtmasAmarthya pAmIne, parama AtmavIlAsa skurAvIne je yogIpuruSa kSakazreNa para
ArUDha thAya che, tene A tAvika dharmasaMnyAsa nAmane sAmarthya yoga hoya che,
kAraNa ke te kSayapazamarUpa dharmonuM kSapakazcaNa kSapaNa karate karato AgaLa
vadhe che, karma prakRtine sarvathA khapAvate kevalathI khapAvate, khatama
karate karate, uDAvate uDAvate, guNasthAnakanI zreNI para vege caDhato jAya che.
ane Ama karmazatruno kSaya karato karato, kSApazamika dharmone saMnyAsa karate
karate, A parama samartha vIra saMnyAsI" 8-9-10-12 guNasthAnane vaTAvI jaI,
teramAM sagI kevali guNasthAne pahoMcI "nija kevalajJAna nidhAna" pragaTAve che.
(juo AkRti 3-pR. 50) ane Ama dharmasaMnyAsanA viniyogathI A sAmarthagIne
kevalalakSmInI-kevalazrInI prApti hoya che, arthAt kevalajJAna-darzananI utpatti
hoya che, ke jemAM koIpaNa pratibaMdhaka viredhaka pratipakSarUpa AvaraNa hotuM
nathI. AvI A nirAvaraNa kevalazrI zrImad sadIdayA hoya che, arthAt keipaNa kALe
tenA pratipAtane abhAva bhagavAna hovAthI sadA udayavaMtI ja hoya che. eTale AvI
anupama kevalazrI saMpanna A "zrImadda bhagavAn jinarAjarAjezvara AtmasAmrAjya
lakSamIthI sadA virAje che. tenuM apUrva varNana lAkSaNika zailImAM kavirAja
devacaMdrajIe gAyuM che:

Page #682 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(66) Yoga-drishti-samuccaya: “O Maha-bhadra Jin-raj! Raj-raj is seated today on
your throne; your ksayaika veerya is infinite, you are the master of dharma, the
great lord… I am a sacrifice to the feet of Shri Jinavar. The doer, the devotee,
the feeling, the cause, the reason, all are the Swami, the lord; Jnana-ananda is
the minister, the light of dharma for all things. I am a sacrifice to Samyag-
darshan, the friend, the stable, the unwavering, the non-contradictory; The
uninterrupted samadhi, the hair, the undying, the self-bliss… ” – Shri
Devchandraji, because in this Atma-samrajya, the lord, Shrimad Bhagavan, all the
characteristics of the emperor, Raj-rajeshwar, are seen. For example, in him,
the infinite ksayaika veerya is manifested, and therefore, due to the unbroken
nature of dharma, which is the nature of the self, Shri Jin-raj has become the
“Vada Saheb”, the greatest lord. He is the Raj-rajeshwar of the self-feeling,
the doer, the devotee, the cause, the reason, therefore, he is the Swami, the
lord, who is manifested in the self-form. He has Jnana-ananda as his minister,
who illuminates all things with the light of dharma; and he has Samyag-darshan
as his friend, who establishes the stable, unwavering, non-contradictory, who
takes care of everything being right. He has the uninterrupted samadhi, the
self-bliss, the undying, the inexhaustible treasure. He has countless Atma-
pradesh, his countries, which are filled with qualities in their own way. He has
the unbroken fortress of charitra, the invincible fort, which has been built to
conquer the enemy, the other-feeling, with the power of the self. He has the
army of dharma, like kshama, etc. He has the mighty power of parinati-prabhutva,
the lordship of self-parinati. This lord has taken on all the elements in a
manifested form, in an infinite way. He has destroyed all the enemies, the
material-feeling, and has come as the “Saheb”, the lord, and he is filled with
the knowledge and qualities, which are the enjoyment and use of the natural
nature. The countries, countless pradesh, filled with qualities in their own
way; the unbroken fortress of charitra, the power of the self, the victory that
has been achieved… I am a sacrifice, the army of dharma, kshama, etc., the
mighty power of parinati, your power, the mighty one; the lord has taken on all
the elements, in an infinite way. I am a sacrifice, the material-feeling, the
enemy, the destruction of all, the lord has come; the enjoyment and use of the
natural nature, filled with knowledge and qualities… ” – Shri Devchandraji. The
overview, the policy, says, for the purpose of determining the authorized thing…

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (66) yogadaSTisamuccaya "mahAbhadra jinarAja ! rAjarAja virAje che Aja
tamAraDojI; kSAyika vIrya anaMta, dharma age tuM sAhiba vaDe.... huM balihArI re
zrI jinavara taNI re. kartA bhaktA bhAva, kAraka kAraNa che te svAmI chatejI;
jJAnAnaMda pradhAna, sarva vastune ho dhama prakAzajI.huM balihArI
samyagadarzana mitta, sthira niddha re avisaMvAditAjI; avyAbAdha samASi, keza
anadhara re nija AnaMdatAjI."--zrI devacaMdrajI, kAraNa ke A AtmasAmrAjyanA
svAmI zrImadda bhagavAnamAM rAjarAjezvaranA samrATana saMpUrNa lakSaNa jovAmAM
Ave che. jemake-temanAmAM anaMta evuM kSAyika vIya pragaTayuM che, ane tethI
AtmasvabhAvarUpa dharmanA abhaMgANAe karIne zrI jinarAja e "vaDA sAheba" moTAmAM
moTA sAheba thayA che. te AtmabhAvanA rAjarAjezvara katta-bhaktA, kAraka kAraNa
che, eTale te chatA-pragaTa evA svasvarUpanA - svAmI thayA che. temane
jJAnAnaMda nAmano pradhAna che ke je sarva vastune dhama prakAze che; ane
samyagadarzana nAmane mitra che ke je sthira evI avisaMvAditAne nirdhAra kare
che, badhuM barAbara che enI takedArI rAkhe che. temane avyAbAdha samAdhirUpa
nijAnaMdamaya avinazvara keza che, akhUTa khajAne che. asaMkhya AtmapradezarUpa
tenA deza che ke je potapotAnI rIte guNasaMpattithI bharyA che emane cAritrarUpa
abhaMga durga che, ajeya killA che, ke je AtmazaktithI paraparabhAvarUpa zatrune
jaya karavA saMcaryA che. kSamAdi dharmarUpa temanuM sainya che. pariNati
prabhutvarUpa-AtmapariNatinA svAmitvarUpa temanuM AkarUM bala che AvA A prabhue
sakala tatvane pragaTabhAva sAdianatI rIte dhAraNa karyo che. dravya-bhAva sarva
zatrune nAza karIne AvA A "sAhiba" avataryA che, ane te sahaja svabhAva vilAsanA
bhogI, upayogI evA jJAnaguNe bharyo che. deza asaMkhya pradeza, nija nija rIte
re guNasaMpatti bharyAjI; cAritra dugara abhaMga, Atamazakta ho para jaya
saMcayajI....huM balihArI, dharma kSamAdika sainya, pariNati prabhutA he tuja
bala AkarejI; tattva sakala prAbhAva, sAdi anaMtI je rIte prabhu dharyo che.
balihArI, dravyabhAva ari leza, sakala nivArI re sAhiba avataryojI; sahaja
svabhAva vilAsa, bhogI upayogI re jJAnaguNe bhajI."--zrI devacaMdrajI
siMhAvalokana nItithI adhikRta vastunA nirdhAraNArthe kahe che -

Page #683 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**On the Vision: Shri Jinrajrajeshwar: Self-Moon, Knowledge-Moonbeam**  (607)
Situated like the cool-rayed moon, the being by nature, pure in essence.
Knowledge like moonbeam, its covering like clouds. 183  **Meaning:** The being,
like the moon, is situated by nature, pure in essence; and knowledge is like
moonbeam, its covering is like clouds.  **Commentary:** The soul, like the moon,
is situated by its inherent nature, pure in essence, there is nothing to be
established. And the knowledge that exists is like moonbeam, like moonlight.
This is merely a simile for the liberated soul. And the covering, meaning the
covering of knowledge, is like clouds.  Every thing is situated in its own form
by its pure nature, there is nothing new to be established. Similarly, the soul
is also situated by its pure nature, there is nothing new to be established.
Here, the simile of the self-moon and the moon is perfectly apt. Just as the
moon is situated in the sky by nature, naturally, so too the soul is situated in
the space of consciousness by its own nature, naturally. Just as the moon,
situated in its own place in the sky, spreads moonbeam, so too the soul,
situated in its own form, spreads knowledge-moonbeam. But just as the moonbeam
illuminates the earth and other things, but the moon does not become earth-like,
so too the soul, illuminating the world with knowledge-moonbeam, does not become
world-like. Thus, the moon, spreading its own illuminating moonbeam, remains
situated in its own place, so too the soul, spreading its own illuminating
knowledge-moonbeam, remains situated in its own nature. This is the certainty,
the situation is by pure nature. And that nature never becomes otherwise,
because becoming another substance is not its nature, but another nature (see p.
483, and p. 75). The soul has the nature of being self-illuminating, knowing,
therefore it is situated in the world, not established, not to be established,
like the cool-rayed moon, the being, the soul, by its inherent nature.
**Meaning:** The essence of the being is pure in essence, like the moon. And the
knowledge is like moonbeam, like moonlight. This is merely a simile for the
liberated soul. And the covering, meaning the covering of knowledge, is like
clouds.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 para daSTi : zrI jinarAjarAjezvara : Atma-caMdra, jJAna-caMdrikA (607) sthitaH
zItAMzuvajjIvaH prakRtyA bhAvazuddhayA  /  caMdrikAvacca vijJAnaM
tadAvaraNamabhravat  //  183 //  bhAvazuddha prakRti thakI, sthita caMdra zuM
chava eha; jJAna caMdrikA sama ane, tadAvaraNa che meha. 183 artha :-jIva,
caMdranI jema, bhAvazuddha evI prakRtithI sthita che; ane vijJAna caMdrikA jevuM
che, tenuM AvaraNa azva-vAdaLA jevuM che. vivecana AtmA caMdranI peThe pitAnI-
AtmIya bhAvazuddha evI prakRtithI sthita che, kAMI sthApita karavAnuM nathIane
je vijJAna che te snA jevuM-cAMdanI jevuM che. A kevalAdinuM upamA mAtra che.
ane tadAvaraNa arthAt jJAnAvaraNa te aA jevuM vAdaLA jevuM che. pratyeka vastu
bhAvazuddha prakRtithI-zuddha svabhAvathI nija nija svarUpamAM sthita che ja,
kAMI navI sthApavAnI nathI. tema Atma-vastu paNa bhAvazuddha evI prakRtithI-sva
bhAva sthita ja che, kAMI navI sthApita karavAnI nathI. atre caMdranI Atma-
caMdra upamA sAgapAMga sughaTapaNe ghaTe che. caMdra jema AkAzamAM
prakRtithIjJAna-caMdrikA kudaratI-svabhAvathI sthita che, tema AtmA paNa nija
prakRtithI-kudaratI sahaja svabhAvathI cidAkAzamAM sthiti karI rahyo che.
AkAzamAM svasthAne sthita rahyo chate caMdra jema caMdrikA prasAre che, tema
sthira evA svasvarUpa padamAM sthita AtmA jJAnarUpa tsanA-caMdrikA vistAre che.
paNa cAMdanIthI bhUmi Adine prakAzita karatAM chatAM caMdra kAMI bhUmirUpa banI
jato nathI, tema AtmA paNa jJAnajyotsanAthI vizvane prakAzatAM chatAM, kAMI
vizvarUpa banI jato nathI. Ama sva-para prakAzaka caMdrikA relAvate caMdra
svasthAne sthita rahyo che, tema sva-para avabhAsaka jJAna-caMdrikA vistArate
AtmA paNa nija svabhAvapadamAM samavasthita ja rahyo che. A pramANe nizcayavArtA
che, tavazuddha prakRtithI-svabhAvathI sthiti che. ane je svabhAva che te kadI
anyathA thatuM nathI, kAraNa ke anya dravyarUpa thavuM te te svabhAva nahiM,
paNa parabhAva ja che (juo pR. 483, tathA . pR. 75) AtmAne sva-paraprakAzaka evo
jJAyaka svabhAva che, eTale te vizvane kRtti-thitaH-sthita che, nahiM ke
sthApanIya, sthApavAne nathI, zIrvAzuva7-zItAMzu-caMdranI jema, lIva-jIva, AtmA,
kanyA-AtmIya-pitAnI prakRtithI. mAvA -bhAvaza evI, tatvazaha evI ema artha che.
temaja-ddhiAvadara-ane caMdrikA jevuM, jyanA-cAMdanI jevuM, vijJAnavijJAna
kevalAdina A upamAmAtra che, tavA -tAvaraNa, jJAnAvaraNa. jhava-abhra jevuM,
medhaTapala jevuM che ema artha che.

Page #684 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(608) Even though one knows about the *Gadasti*, it doesn't make them become the
universe. In this regard, it is worth contemplating again and again the profound
and mysterious *Vachanamrut* of the supreme *Tattva-darshta*, Shrimad
Rajchandraji. The moon illuminates the earth, and due to the brilliance of its
rays, the entire earth becomes illuminated, but the moon never becomes the
earth. Similarly, this soul, which illuminates the entire universe, never
becomes the universe, it always remains in its pure *chaitanya* form. Believing
in the oneness of the soul in the universe is delusion.” – Shrimad Rajchandra.
760 (433), “What is this new knowledge you have received, O Lal? Knowledge does
not go away, it remains. The known and the unknown, the knowable, O Lal, are
known just as they are.” – Shri Devchandraji. And thus, even though it is
situated in its pure nature, the moon is covered by clouds, obscured, and its
true form is not visible. Similarly, the soul, situated in its pure nature, is
covered by *jnana-avaranas* and other karmic clouds, obscuring it, and its true
form is not visible. However, no matter how dense the clouds are, just as the
moon's shadow never disappears, and its light never fails to pierce through the
clouds, “The moon does not hide, the clouds cast a shadow”; similarly, the soul-
moon, which is pure *kevaljnana*, no matter how dense the karmic veil that
covers it, its brilliance never diminishes, its *jnana-jyotsna* always peeks
through, revealing its *chaitanya* form. That is why the scriptures say that a
part of *kevaljnana*, as vast as an infinite number of *aksharas*, always
remains revealed. Otherwise, the being who is bewildered would attain the state
of being non-living. Therefore, even though *kevaljnana-avaranas* prevent
*jnana* from attaining full illumination, a faint light, a partial illumination,
always remains visible. And the cause of this faint light is also the present
*kevaljnana-avaranas*. Thus, due to the same cause, *kevaljnana-avaranas*, full
illumination in the form of *kevaljnana* does not arise, and a faint light, a
partial illumination, arises. *Suvi mevamudra ti ma valan??* – Shri Nandi Sutra,
42 Even in this faint light, there is a sense of immediacy, a sense of
abundance, a picture… “*Sabjivaanapi ya nan akkharass anantatamo bhago
niccughhadiyo chitthai,* *So vish karu varijna te vivo nivattala pavza* – Shri
Nandi Sutra, 42 * “*Ayam cha svabhavah kevaljnanaavaranavritasya jivasya
ghanapatalachchhannasya,* *Vevi maya%ara rutuyuth tatra dettu
varjnanaavaranameva*” – Shri Jnanabindu,

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (608) gadaSTisaMmuzmAM jANe che, paNa tethI te kAMI vizvarUpa banI jato nathI.
A aMge parama tatvadaSTA zrImad rAjacaMdrajInuM A parama rahasyamaya vacanAmRta
punaH punaH manana karavA yogya che caMdra bhUmine prakAze che, tenA kiraNanI
kAMtinA prabhAvathI samasta bhUmi ta thaI jAya che, paNa caMdra kaMI bhUmirUpa
koI kALe tema thatuM nathI. ema samasta vizvane prakAzaka e A AtmA te kayAre
paNa vizvarUpa thatuM nathI, sadA sarvadA caitanyasvarUpa ja rahe che. vizvamAM
jIva abhedatA mAne che e ja brAMti che."- zrImad rAjacaMdra. 760 (433), "ya
jJAna zuM navi mile re lAla, jJAna na jAye taththa re; prApta aprApta prameyane
re lAla, jANe je jima jaththa re."--zrI devacaMdrajI. ane Ama zuddha svabhAvathI
svasthAne sthita chatAM caMdrane jema meghapaTala-vAdaLAM Avare che, DhAMkI che,
ne tethI tenuM yathArtha darzana nathI thatuM; tema zuddha svabhAvasthita AtmAne
jJAnAvaraNAdi karmarUpa meghapaTala AvRta kare che-DhAMkI de che, jJAnavaraNa-
ane tethI tenuM yathAsthita darzana thatuM nathI. tathApi meghapaTala game megha
teTaluM gADha hoya chatAM, jema caMdranI kaMI ne kaMI chAyA dekhAyA vinA rahetI
nathI, tenI kaMI ne kaMI caMdrikA vAdaLane vIdhIne bahAra nikaLyA vinA rahetI
nathI, "caMdra chupe nahiM bAdala chAyo'; tema kevalajJAnasvarUpa Atma-caMdra
game teTalA gADha karmapaTalanA AvaraNathI AvRta hoya, to paNa tenI koI ne kAMI
jhAMkhI thayA vinA rahetI nathI, tenI kaMI ne kaMI jJAna-jyotsanA DokIuM karI
caitanya svarUpane khyAla ApyA vinA rahetI nathI. eTalA mATe ja akSaranA
anaMtamAM bhAga jeTalo kevalajJAnano bhAga nitya ughADe ja rahe che ema
zAstramAM + kahyuM che. nahi te te paNa je avAI jAya te jIva ajIvapaNane pAmI
jAya. eTale kevalajJAnAvaraNane lIdhe je ke jJAnane pUrNa prakAza prApta thatuM
nathI, tepaNa aMzaprakAzarUpa maMda prakAza te sadAya avazya dazyamAna hoya ja
che. ane te maMda prakAzanuM kAraNa paNa prastuta kevalajJAnAvaraNa ja che. Ama
kevalajJAnAvaraNarUpa eka ja kAraNane lIdhe pUrNa prakAzarUpa kevalajJAna
upajatuM nathI, ane maMda prakAzarUpa chAvasthika jJAna upaje che * suvi
mevamudra ti mAM vALAM?? :-zrI naMdIsatra, 42 A maMda prakAzamAM paNa je
taratamatA dekhAya che, nAdhikatA dekhAya che, citrax "sabajIvANapi ya NaM
akkharassa anantatamo bhAgo NiccugghADio ciTThai, so viza karU varijJA te vIvo
nIvattaLa pavajhA -zrI naMdIsutra, 42 * " ayaM ca svabhAvaH
kevalajJAnAvaraNAvRtasya jIvasya ghanapaTalacchannasya, vevi maya%ArA rUtyutha
tatra detu varajJAnAvaraNameva " -zrI jJAnabiMdu,

Page #685 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**On the Sight:** The cloud of the veil of omniscience, the fading of the dim
light. (609) The strange distinctions appear, the reason for which is the other
karma like the veil of knowledge. Just as the sun's light, which is not covered
by clouds, appears dim through the holes in the cloth or the wall, so too, the
knowledge of the soul, which is covered by the veil of omniscience, appears dim
due to the other karmas like the veil of knowledge, which are present in the
interval. There is a difference in the degree of dimness. And therefore, due to
the infinite distinctions in the fading of the karmas like the veil of
knowledge, infinite distinctions in knowledge like the veil of knowledge are
born. + Whatever may be the case, the light of the soul-moon is always uncovered
to some extent. That is why it is said that knowledge is an extraordinary
quality of the soul that illuminates itself and others. "Tatra jnanam
tavadatmanah svaparaavabhaasakah asaadhaarano gunah." -Sri Yashovijayaji's
Jnanabindu  Nature's creation says - Ghatikarma is like a cloud, the wind blows;
When it goes away, the glorious one becomes the omniscient. 184 Meaning - Ghatik
karma is like a cloud, which is blown away by the wind of yoga, then the
glorious one becomes the omniscient. Analysis - Ghatik karma, like the veil of
knowledge, is like a cloud. It is blown away by the wind of dharma-sannyasa,
which was just mentioned. Action - Ghatik karma, the veil of knowledge, etc.,
and the veil of knowledge, the veil of perception, the veil of attachment, and
the veil of obstruction. These are like clouds. Ghatik karma, which is mentioned
here, is blown away by the wind of yoga. When it goes away, the glorious one
becomes the omniscient. +"Sa cha
apantaraalaabhasthitamatijnaanaadyaavaranakshayopaashamabhedasaampaaditam
naanaatvam bhajate | GhanapatalaachchhannareveH mandaprakaash iva
antaraalasthakutakutaayaadyaavaranavivarapravesaat ||" -etc. (see) - Sri
Jnanabindu.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 para daSTi: kevalajJAnAvaraNa megha, maMda prakAza-kSayopazama (609) vicitra
bheda dekhAya che, tenuM kAraNa matijJAnAvaraNAdi itara karma che. vastranA
vivaramAMthI ke bhItanA vivaramAMthI (chidramAMthI) dekhAtA abrAcchAdita sUryanA
kSapazama: maMda prakAzamAM paNa taratamatA hoya che, tema aMtarAlamAM rahelA
mati anaMta bheda Adi Itara jJAnAvaraNa kamane lIdhe kevalajJAnAvaraNachAdita
AtmAnA jJAnarUpa maMda prakAzamAM paNa taratamatA hoya che-nyUnAdhikatA,
ochAvattApaNuM hoya che. ane tethI karIne mati Adi te te jJAnAvaraNa karmono
kSayopazamanA anaMta bhedathI mati Adi jJAnanA anaMta bheda janme che. + game
tema ho, paNa AtmacaMdranI caMdrikAne kaMI ne kaMI prakAza avazya anAvRta hoya
che-aNuDhAMkyo ja rahe che. eTalA mATe ja kahyuM che ke-jJAna e AtmAne
svaparAvabhAsaka asAdhAraNa guNa che. " tatra jJAnaM tAvadAtmanaH
svaparAvabhAsakaH asAdhAraNoH gunnH|" -zrI yazovijayajIkRta jJAnabiMdu
prakRtinuM jana kahe che - ghAtikarmAbhrakalpa taduktayogAnilAhateH  /
yadApaiti tadA zrImAn jAyate jJAnakevalI  // 184  //  ghAtikarma vAdaLa samuM,
vAtAM ga suvAya; dUra thAya tyAre zrImAna, jJAnakevalI thAya. 184 artha -ghAtika
vAdaLA jevuM che, te ukta yogarUpa vAyunA AghAtathI (sapATAthI) jyAre dUra thAya
che, tyAre te zrImAnuM jJAnakevalI arthAt sarvajJa thAya che. vivecana
jJAnAvaraNIyAdi je ghAtikarma te abhra jevuM-vAdaLA jevuM varte che. te
ghAtikarmauparamAM hamaNAM ja kahevAmAM AvelA dharmasaMnyAsa garUpa pavananA
sapATAthI,-jyAre kRtti -pati-dhAtikarma, jJAnAvaraNIya Adi, tathA jJAnAvaraNIya,
darzanAvaraNIya, mehanIya ane aMtarAya. A agavaDatAma-anna, vAdaLA jevuM varte
che. tatte ghAtakarma, swyomniH -ukta-hamaNAM ja kathA te yoga-vAyunA AghAtathI-
sapATAthI (ema artha che ). cAti-jyAre dUra thAya che-zreNInI parisamApti veLAye
tAtyAre, zrImAna zrImAna, zrImad te mukhya evA vikrama nathI, parAkramayogathI,
nA jJAnadevI-jJAnakevalI thAya che, sarvajJa thAya che, ema artha che. +"sa ca
apAntarAlAbasthitamatijJAnAdyAvaraNakSayopazamabhedasaMpAditaM nAnAtvaM bhajate
/  ghanapaTalAcchannaraveH maMdaprakAza iva
antarAlasthakuTakuTayAdyAvaraNavivarapravezAt  // " -ityAdi (juo)-zrI
jJAnabindu,

Page #686 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  The Collection of Gadashti  When the series of [karma] comes to an end, it
disperses, and then through the supreme effort, one attains the knowledge of the
Shriman, becoming a Kevali-Sarvagna.  The four "Ghatikarma" are: Jnanavarniya,
Darshanavarniya, Mehniya, and Antaraya. They speak of the inherent qualities of
the soul, hence "Ghati" - destroyers. Jnanavarniya karma covers the soul's
inherent quality of knowledge, destroying it. Darshanavarniya karma covers the
soul's inherent quality of perception, destroying it. Mehniya karma destroys the
soul's supreme decisive quality of Samyaktava, and the quality of character that
is stable in the nature of knowledge and perception. Antaraya karma destroys the
soul's infinite quality of vigor. Thus, because they destroy the inherent
qualities of the soul, these four karmas are given the true name "Ghatikarma."
**Diagram: 14** /Knowledge-Drika Soul Dharma-Sanchal Chag-Vayu Ghatikarma-
Meghpatala "Tatra Dhatini Chatvari Karmany Anvarthasangnaya." Patatva-guna-na hi
nivaiti vasthati: - Shri Panchaadhyayee.  Among these four Ghatikarma, Mehniya
karma is the most powerful. It is called the king because while other karmas
like Jnanavarniya only cover the soul's respective qualities, Mehniya karma
transforms the soul's respective Mehniya qualities into the opposite taste.
Darshan Mehniya, the king of the soul, transforms the quality of Samyaktava,
which is the form of correct faith, into the opposite form of Mithya faith.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 gadaSTisamuccaya zreNInI parisamApti veLAye vikherAI jAya che, tyAre mukhya evA
parAkramayoge karIne te zrImAnuM jJAna kevalI-sarvajJa thAya che. jJAnAvaraNIya,
darzanAvaraNIya, mehanIya ane aMtarAya e cAra "ghAtikarma" kahevAya che. te
AtmAnA mULa svabhAvabhUta guNanI vAta kare che, mATe "ghAti"--ghAta karanArA
che. jJAnAvaraNIya karma AtmAnA jJAnasvabhAvaguNane AvRta ghAtikarma-anna karI
tenI ghAta kare che. darzanAvaraNIya karma AtmAnA darzana guNane AvarI tenI
ghAta kare che. mehanIya karma AtmAnA parama nizcayasvarUpa samyakatva guNane
tathA jJAnadarzana svabhAvamAM sthitirUpa cAritra guNane haNe che, ghAta kare
che. aMtarAya kama AtmAnA anaMta vIrya guNane haNe che, ghAta kare che. Ama
AtmAnA svabhAvabhUta mULa guNanI ghAta karatA hovAthI A cAreya karmone
"ghAtikarma evI yathArtha saMjJA ApavAmAM AvI che. AkRti: 14 /jJAna-drikA AtmA
dharmasaMcAla caga-vAyu ghAtikarma-meghapaTala " tatra dhAtIni catvAri
karmANyanvarthasaMjJayA  /  /  pAtatvAr guNAnA hi nIvaaiti vAsthatiH II -zrI
paMcAdhyAyI. A cAra ghAtikarmamAM paNa mehanIya karma sarvathI vadhAre baLavAna
che. te karmane rAjA kahevAya che, kAraNa ke jJAnAvaraNIyAdi bIjAM karmo jyAre
AtmAnA te te guNone AvaraNa mAtra kare che, tyAre A mehanIya karma te AtmAnA te
te mehanIyaH guNane viparIta svAdavALe banAvI de che. darzana mehanIya AtmAnA
kamena rAjA samyagU nizcaya-zraddhAnarUpa samyakatva guNane viparIta-mithyA
zraddhAnarUpa

Page #687 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Paradrushti: The King of Mahiy Karma, Ghati-Aghati Nature (611)  It
[Paradrushti] turns one towards Mithyatva. And it transforms the virtuous nature
of the Mahiy soul, which is the state of its inherent qualities, into a state of
division. Thus, it commits the most wicked and vile act of transforming the
supreme, nectar-like qualities of the soul into a state of distorted, poisonous
existence. While other karmas merely act as coverings or obstacles, this great
[!] Mahiy karma, using its own cunning, turns things upside down! That is why it
is the most terrifying and dreadful enemy of the soul. Its power depends on the
strength of the Nayak [the soul], and when the Nayak's strength weakens, the
power of other karmas also diminishes. Thus, being the supporter and nourisher
of other karmas, the Mahiy, deserving of the name "King of Karma," is truly so.
There are infinite types of karma, of which eight are the main ones. Among them,
the Mahiy is the most important, as I have taught. The divisions of Mahiy are:
1) Darshan and 2) Charitra. It destroys 1) Aedh and 2) Vitragata. This is the
sure remedy.  "The eight fundamental natures of karma are divided into four
Ghati and four Aghati. The four Ghati are called so because they destroy the
qualities of the soul, meaning they (1) cover those qualities, or (2) weaken
them, or (3) distort them. The nature of these Ghati is to destroy the soul's
qualities. The ones that cover the qualities of knowledge and Darshan are called
(1) Jnanavarniy and (2) Danavarniy respectively. The Antaray nature does not
cover the qualities, but it obstructs their parts, sub-parts, etc., and hinders
their functioning. In this case, the soul understands and perceives things, so
there is no covering; but even while understanding, it creates obstacles and
hindrances in the parts, etc., so it is not a covering, but an Antaray nature.
Thus, there are three Ghati natures of the soul. The fourth Ghati nature is
Mahiy. This nature does not cover, but it deceives and entices the soul, making
it deviate. Despite having knowledge and Darshan, it does not create obstacles,
but it still distorts the soul, making it run on the wrong path, causing it to
move. Therefore, it is called Mahiy. Thus, these four are called Ghati natures.
The other four natures are connected to the soul's domain, perform its work, and
are destroyed accordingly. However, they are not destructive in the sense of
covering, obstructing, or distorting the soul's qualities. Therefore, they are
called Aghati." - Shrimad Rajchandra, Patrank 793 (Updesh Noand, 39)  The
remaining four karmas, other than these four Ghati karmas, are called Aghati.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 parA dRSTi: mAhanIya-karmAnA rAjA, ghAti-aghAti prakRti (611) mithyAtvamAM
pheravI nAMkhe che. ane cAritra mAhanIya AtmAnA svabhAvasthitirUpa guNune
vibhAva sthitipaNAmAM palaTAvI nAMkhe che. Ama AtmAnA parama amRtamaya guNane
viSamaya vikRta sthitipaNAmAM palaTAvI nAMkhavAnuM mahAduSTa adhama kRtya (
Villain's action) meAhanIya karma kare che. bIjAM kama tA mAtra AvaraNa ke
aMtarAya karIne aTake che, tyAre A mahAnubhAva (!) mAhanIyakama te pAtAnuM
doDhaDahApaNu vAparI ulaTA magADo karI mUke che! eTale ja e AtmAnA bhaya'karamAM
bhayaMkara ne meTAmAM mATeA duzmana ( Ring-leader) che. te nAyakanA jora para ja
khIjAM karyAMnuM baLa nabhe che, tenuM jora kSINa thatAM anya karmAnuM khaLa
paNu kSINu thAya che. Ama anya karmAMnA AzrayadAtA-- * annadAtA ' AvAthI
nekanAmadAra mehanIyane karmAnA 'rAjA ' kahyo te yathArtha che. 6 karma anaMta
prakAranA, temAM mukhya ATha; temAM mukhye mehanIya, haNAya te kahuM pATha.
krama meAhinIya bheda e, 1 darzana 2 cAritra nAma; haNe 1 edha 2 vItarAgatA,
acUka upAya Ama. ''--zrI Atmasiddhi "kanI mULa prakRti ATha, temAM cAra ghAtinI
ane cAra adhAtinI kahevAya che. cAra dhAtinIne dharma AtmAnA guNunI ghAta
karavAne arthAt (1) te guNane AvaraNu karavAne, athavA (2) te guNunuM khaLavI
rAdhavAnA, athavA (3) tene vikaLa karavAne che. ane te mATe dhAtinI evI saMjJA
te prakRtine ApI che. AtmAnA guNu jJAna, darzana tene AvaraNa kare tene anukrame
(1) jJAnAvaraNIya ane (2) danAvaraNIya evuM nAma ApyuM. aMtarAya prakRti e
guNune AvaratI nathI, paNa tenA bhAga upabhAga Adine, tenAM vIya-khaLane rAke
che. A ThekANe AtmA bheAgAdine samaje che, jANe dekhe che eTale AvaraNu nathI;
paNu samajatAM chatAM bhAgAdimAM vighna-atarAya kare che, mATe tene AvaraNa
nahi. paNa aMtarAya prakRti kahI, Ama traNa AtmaghAtinI prakRti thai, ceAthI
ghAtinI prakRti mehanIya che. A prakRti AvaratI nathI, paNa AtmAne sUcchita
karI, meAhita karI nikaLa kare che; jJAna, darzana chatAM, aMtarAya nahi. chatAM
paNa AtmAne vakhate vikaLa kare che, UMdhA pATA dhAve che, muve che, mATe ene
mAhanIya kahI. Ama A cAre saghAtinI prakRti kahI. bIjI cAra prakRti je ke AtmAnA
pradeza sAthe joDAyelI che tathA tenuM kAma karyAM kare che ane uca anusAra
vedAya che, tathApi te AtmAnA guNunI AvaraNa karavArUpe ke aMtarAya karavArUpe
ke tene vikaLa karavArUpe ghAtaka nathI. mATe tene adhAtinI kahI che. "--zrImad
rAjacadra, patrAMka 793. (upadeza neAMdha, 39) A cAra ghAti kama zivAyanA zeSa-
khAkInA je cAra krama che, te aghAti'

Page #688 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(12) The collective of karma is called "Gadasti". Ayu, Nama, Gotra and Vedaniya
are "Aghati" karma, because they do not destroy the inherent knowledge-
perception qualities of the soul. However, Aghati karma does assist in the
destruction of Ghati karma, but it does not itself destroy the inherent
knowledge-perception qualities of the soul. Nevertheless, it does exhibit its
own unique power. For example, due to Ayu karma, the soul resides in a
particular body for a limited time, meaning Ayu karma binds the soul to the
prison of the four-fold world, and thus harms the soul's perception qualities.
Nama karma deceives the soul's inherent qualities of being invaluable and
subtle, causing the soul to manifest in various locations, forms, and bodies.
Therefore, Nama karma gives the soul various names, like a painting drawn by a
painter, making the soul multi-faceted and multi-formed! Gotra karma harms the
soul's inherent qualities of being heavy and light, causing a pure, homogeneous
soul to experience the disparity of high and low Gotras. Vedaniya karma destroys
the soul's inherent quality of uninterrupted happiness, causing the soul to
experience both happiness and sorrow, like a thorny path covered with honey.
Thus, these four Aghati karma, although not fundamentally destructive of the
soul's qualities, do have their own unique effects and play their respective
roles. - Thus, among these eight types of karma, the destructive karma like
knowledge-obscuring karma is like a cloud. When it is shattered by the wind of
Dharma-sannyasa yoga, it dissolves, and through the power of supreme effort, one
becomes a Shriman Dharma-sannyasa Jnana-kevali, that is, an omniscient Supreme
Soul. Just as clouds are scattered by the wind, so too is the cloud of
destructive karma shattered by the force of Dharma-sannyasa. This powerful
Dharma-sannyasa, as mentioned earlier, begins with the eighth "Apuurvakaran"
state, where the process of destruction begins. Here, the powerful yogi, with
his unique self-effort and self-indulgence, mounts the chariot of destruction
and, while destroying karma, consuming it, and eliminating it, he progresses
forward, manifesting his heroism in the seat of the soul, like a great warrior.
He continuously increases his restraint, which is the state of the soul, and,
while throwing away the shackles of karma, he leaps forward to the higher and
higher states of being, increasing the growth of the destructive force. Finally,
at the end of the twelfth state, he destroys all Vedaniya karma and attains the
supreme state of being, the supreme state of being free from attachment, the
supreme state of being free from attachment. * "Tat: Seshajan Cha Vaari Vivaana!
Gunaana Baatmi Varaavo Vyaatmiraatti Ni" - Shri Panchaadhyaayi,

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (12) gadaSTisamuccaya karma kahevAya che. Ayu, nAma, gotra ne vedanIya e
"aghAti" karma che, kAraNa ke te AtmAnA mULa svabhAvabhUta jJAna-darzana guNanI
ghAta karatA nathI. hA, aghAti karma te ghAti karmone sahAyaka avazya thAya che,
paNa svayaM AtmAne te mULa jJAna-darzana svabhAvaguNane haNatA nathI. tathApi te
te kama pitapitAnI viziSTa zakti jarUra dAkhave che. jemake-Ayu karmathI jIva
amuka maryAdita samaya sudhI te te gatine viSe te te dehamAM sthiti kare che,
arthAt Ayukarma jIvane catugaMtimaya saMsAramaya baMdikhAnAmAM jakaDI rAkhe che,
ane tethI AtmAnA avagAhana guNane hAni pahoMce che. nAmakarma AtmAnA amUltatva-
sUphamatva guNane dhokhe pahoMcADe che, jethI karIne AtmAnA gati-jAti-zarIra Adi
sthala-mUrta paya pragaTe che eTale nAmakarma citArAe citrelA citrAmaNa jevA
citravicitra nAma pAmI AtmA bahurUpIvizvarUpI bane che ! gotrakama AtmAnA
agurulaghu guNane hAni kare che, jethI karIne eka zuddha samasvarUpa AtmA ucca-
nIca gotrarUpa viSamatAne pAme che. vedanIya karma AtmAnA avyAbAdha sukhaguNane
haNe che, jethI karIne madhuthI kharaDAyela khaDUgadhArA jevA zAtA-azAtA
vedanIyanA udayathI sukhaduHkha bhegavavA paDe che. Ama A cAra aghAtix karma
paNa mULa AtmaguNaghAtI nahi chatAM potapotAnI viziSTa asara jarUra nIpajAve
che, pitApitAne bhAva jarUra bhajave che. - Ama A ATha prakAranA karmamAMthI je
jJAnAvaraNIyAdi ghAtakarma che, te vAdaLa jevuM che. te jyAre dharmasaMnyAsa
yogarUpa pavananA sapATAthI zIvizIrNa thAya che, vikharAI jAya che, tyAre mukhya
evA parAkrama yege karIne te zrImAna dharmasaMnyAsa jJAnakevalI arthAt sarvajJa
paramAtmA thAya che. vAdaLAM jema vAyunA vAyuH kSapakazreNuM holenAthI vikharAI
jAya che, tema dharmasaMnyAsarUpa pavananA AghAtathI sapATAthI ghAtakarmarUpa
meghapaTala vikharAI jAya che. A hamaNAM ja kahyo te tAvika dharmasaMnyAsa
nAmane sAmarthya vega AThamA "apUrvakaraNa" guNasthAnathI zarU thAya che, ke
jyAM kSapakazreNIne prAraMbha thAya che. atre A samartha yegI apUrva
AtmaparAkrama-apUrva AtmavIllAsa dAkhavate kSapakazreNI para ArUDha thAya che,
ane karmone kSaya karato karato, khapAvate khapAvate, khatama karato karato,
"mahA vIra nI piThe AtmasthAne vIrapaNuM prakaTa kareta sata, AgaLa vadhe che.
samaye samaye AtmasthitimAM saMyamanarUpa anaMtA saMyama vardhamAna karate
karate, ne kamaMdane uDAvate uDAvate, te mahAgI uttarottara guNasthAna bhUmikAo
kUdAvate jAya che, ane kSAyika bhAvanI vRddhi karato jAya che. yAvat bAramAM
guNasthAnanA aMte mehanIya karmane sarvasaMkSaya karI, te parama cegI parama
amehasvarUpa evA parama vItarAga bhAvane pAme che. * "tataH zeSAjaM cA vAri
vivAnA ! gunAnAM bAtamIvarAvo vyAtmirAttini " -zrI paMcAdhyAyI,

Page #689 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
From the perspective of Dharma, the four karmas are destroyed and the self-moon
shines brightly. “Even at that time, the hero knows, your victory is certain;
With the strength of meditation, you will reach your own true place.” — Shri
Anandghanji. (613)  And as the knowledge-obscuring karma is destroyed, the
remaining three karmas, namely the knowledge-obscuring karma, the perception-
obscuring karma, and the obstruction karma, are also destroyed. Thus, with the
victory of the hero, the self is victorious, the victory drum beats, and the
self, as the conqueror of the enemies of karma, becomes known in the world as a
‘Jina’, an ‘Arihant’, a ‘Veer’.  Perfect Knowledge “A little virtue, a little
happiness, a little knowledge, a little detachment, a little Lord; Purity,
unity, sharpness, with these feelings, the enemy of karma is defeated and the
victory drum beats.” — Shri Devchandraji. “I seek refuge at the feet of the
hero, I seek heroism; I will dispel the darkness of false attachment and fear, I
will sound the victory drum.” — Shri Anandghanji.  And thus, when the four
karmas, like clouds, covering the self-moon, are destroyed, the self, in its
pure, natural state, shines brightly as the light of the self. Just as the moon
shines in its full glory when the clouds are removed, so too, when the karmic
clouds are removed, the self-moon, the king of the people, shines in its full
glory as perfect knowledge, and shines brightly in its pure, natural state.
“Where the four karmas are destroyed, there is the destruction of the seeds of
rebirth; The knower of all, the seer of all, is pure, the Lord has accomplished
his task, infinite light, an unprecedented opportunity.” — Shrimad Rajchandraji.
Therefore, it is said: क्षीणदोषोऽथ सर्वज्ञः सर्व लब्धिफलान्वितः । परं परार्थ
संपाद्य ततो योगान्तमश्रुते ॥ १८५ ॥ Vritti: - क्षीणदोषः - क्षीणु दोष, whose,
सर्वज्ञः - omniscient, without any obscurations of knowledge, with the cessation
of all desires. Then, having done, सर्व लब्धि फलान्वितः - endowed with all the
fruits of attainment, - संवाद्य - having accomplished the highest good, शाभव्या
सम्यक्त्वादि चोलांतमस्तुत - then he attains the end of yoga, the end of the
cycle of births and deaths.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 parA dRSTi ke dhama suthI ghAti-prabhra vilaya ne aAtma-caMdrane prakAza " vIra
paNuM te Atama TANe, jANyu' tumacI vAge re; dhyAne nANe zakti pramANe, dhruva
nija pada pahiMcANe re. "--zrI AnaMdaghanajI. (613) ane jevuM mAhanIya krama
kSaya pAme che ke tatkSaNa ja tenA avaze--Athe rahelA jJAnAvaraNAdi bAkInA traNa
ghAti kama kSaya pAme che, arthAt kevalajJAnAvaraNa, kevaladanAvaraNu, ne
aMtarAya krama'nI tripuTInA sarvanAza thAya che. Ama mAhirapune jaya thatAM
AtmAne jayapaTaha vAgI rahe che, chata-nagArU vAge che, ane AtmA kama ripune
jaya karanArA * jina ' tarIke, ' arihaMta ' tarIke, ' vIra ' tarIke jagatmAM
prasiddha thAya che. kevalajJAna " saheja guNa AgareA, svAmI sukha sAgA, jJAna
vayarAgarA prabhu savAye;; zuddhatA ekatA tIkSNatA bhAvathI, mAha ripu jItI
jayapaDatu vAyeA. ''--zrI devaca`drajI. vIrajIne caraNe lAguM, vIrapaNuM te
mAguM re; 66 mithyA meha timira bhaya bhAguM, jIta nagArUM vANuM re."--zrI
AnaMdaghanajI. ane Ama Atma-caMdrane AvaraNa karI rahela vAdaLA jevA cAra
ghAtikama ra thAya che, ke tatkSaNa zuddha prakRtisthita jhaLahaLa jyeAtisvarUpa
AtmA svaravarUpe pragaTa thAya che. jema vAdaLAnuM AvaraNa dUra thatAM caMdra
svayaM pUrNasvarUpe prakAze che, tema ghAti karUpa meghapaTala TaLatAM
parajyeAtisvarUpa Atma-caMdra, janarAja-caMdra svayaM pU kevalajJAna svarUpe
prakAze che, zuddha sahajAtmasvarUpe jhaLahaLe che. " cAra krama ghanaghAti te
vyaccheda jyAM, bhavanA bIja taNeA Atya'tika nAza jo; sarva bhAva jJAtA deSTA
sahu zuddhatA, kRtakRtya prabhu vIya anaMta prakAza jo, apUrva avasara. zrImad
rAjaca'drajI. ,, eTalA mATe ja kahe che-- kSINadoSo'tha sarvajJaH sarva
labdhiphalAnvitaH  /  paraM parArtha saMpAdya tato yogAntamazrute  //  185  //
vRtti:-kSILayoSaH--kSINu doSa jenA sarvajJo - sarvajJa, nirAvaraNa jJAnanA bhAve
sa` autsukayanI nivRttithI. paM pArtha lakSaNuvALA parAtha--paropakAra karI, to
tane pAme che. thayA che te, -sakala rAgAdinA parikSayathI. ca-tyAre ja, karIne,
sarvavidhAnvitaH-sava* labdhi phalathI yukta, - saMvAdya--parama parAthI
saMpAdana karI,zAbhavya samyaktvAdi coLAntamastute -pachI ceganA aMtane pAme
che, ceAmanA

Page #690 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(14) The one who has completely eradicated all the karmic impurities, is
omniscient, and has attained all the fruits of liberation, after accomplishing
the ultimate purpose, attains the end of yoga (liberation). 185. Meaning - After
eradicating all the karmic impurities, the omniscient one, who is endowed with
all the fruits of liberation, attains the end of yoga after accomplishing the
ultimate purpose. **Commentary** Thus, the one who has eradicated all the karmic
impurities, is omniscient by virtue of the knowledge of non-attachment, and is
endowed with all the fruits of liberation due to the cessation of all the karmic
activities. Such an omniscient one, who is endowed with all the fruits of
liberation, bestows the ultimate benefits of right faith, right knowledge, and
right conduct, etc., upon the worthy beings, according to their capacity, and
performs the ultimate act of compassion. And then, he attains the end of yoga.
The one whose all karmic impurities, including attachment, etc., are eradicated,
becomes a Vitaraga-Jina, and the one who becomes Vitaraga, is immediately
omniscient. This is the rule. All the karmic impurities are contained in the
three main karmic impurities: attachment, aversion, and delusion. The one who
has transcended these three karmic impurities, is free from all karmic
impurities and is the ultimate Vitaraga, because these three karmic impurities
cause the 'Sannipat' (downfall) of the soul, i.e., the soul falls from its pure
and true nature. But when these karmic impurities are destroyed, there is no
downfall from the true nature of the soul, but the soul remains in its natural
and true state. The soul remains in its natural and true state. This is the
state of the ultimate Vitaraga, and this is the truly divine 'Mahadeva-pan'
(state of the great Lord). Therefore, it is said, "The one who has no
attachment, which is the cause of karmic impurities, forever, and who has no
aversion towards the fuel of calmness, like the fire towards the fuel, and who
has no delusion, which covers the knowledge and causes impure conduct, is called
the 'Mahadeva', whose glory is known throughout the three worlds."
"Yasyasankleshajanano rago nasty eva sarvada. Na cha dvesho'pi sattveshu
shameindhanadavanalah. Na cha moho'pi sajgnanachchhadano'shuddhavrittakrit.
Trilokkhyatamhimamahadevaha sa uchyate." - Shri Haribhadracharya's Ashtak The
eighteen karmic impurities are absent in the Vitaraga Jina, or in other words,
the one who has transcended the eighteen karmic impurities, is the ultimate
Vitaraga, who is free from all karmic impurities. Others, who are attached to
the karmic impurities, and who are endowed with attachment, etc., are...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (14) cogadadisamuccaya kSINa doSa sarvajJa taba, sarva labdhi phalavaMta, 5rama
parArthe karI pachI, lahe yegane aMta 185, artha-pachI kSINa delavALA, sarvajJa,
sarva labdhi phalathI yukta evA te parama parArthanuM saMpAdana karI yoganA
aMtane pAme che. vivecana Ama je kSINadoSa thayA che evA te tyAre ja nirAvaraNa
jJAnanA bhAve karIne sarvajJa hoya che; ane sarva suyanI nivRtti thakI sarva
labdhiphalathI yukta evA hoya che. AvA sarvalabdhisaMpanna sarvajJa, bhavya
janenI yogyatA pramANe temane samyaktyAdi paramArthalAbha ApI, parama paropakAra
kare che, ane pachI yoganA aMtane pAme che. jenA rAgAdi sarva doSa kSINa thAya
che te vItarAga-jina thAya che, ane je vItarAga thAya che te tatkSaNa ja
sarvajJa heya che. A niyama che. sarva de traNa mukhya doSamAM samAya chejhAga
dveSa ane maha. A tridoSa" jenAmAMthI gayA che, tridoSa" te sarva doSathI mukta
evA parama vItarAga hoya che, kAraNa ke A vijetA mahAdeva "tridoSathI ja jIvane
"sannipAta' lAgu paDe che, arthAta AtmAnA zuddha sat svarUpathI nipAta-
adhaHpatana hoya che. paNa jyAre A deSa naSTa thAya che tyAre sat svarUpathI
nipAtarUpa sannipAta hotuM nathI, paNa AtmAnA sahaja sata svarUpamAM saMsthiti
ja hoya che. AtmA sahajAbhasvarUpe sthita thAya che. A ja parama vItarAga dazA
che, ane A ja parama divya evuM kharekharUM "mahAdevapaNuM" che. eTalA ja mATe
kahyuM che ke jene saMkaleza upajAvanAre rAga sadAyane mATe che ja nahi, ane
zamarUpI iMdhana pratye dAvAnala je prANa pratye dveSa paNa che ja nahiM, ane
sajJAnane AcchAdana karanAra tathA azuddha cAritra karanAre meha paNa che ja
nahiM,-te trikaprasiddha mahimAvALo "mahAdeva' kahevAya che." " yasya
saMklezajanano rAgo nAstyeva sarvadA  /  na ca dveSo'pi sattveSu
zamendhanadavAnalaH  //  na ca moho'pi sajjJAnacchAdano'zuddhavRttakRt  /
trilokakhyAtamahimA mahAdevaH sa ucyate  // " -zrI haribhadrAcAryajIta aSTaka
aSTAdaza doSa rahita zrImadda vitarAga jinadeva athavA prakArAMtare, jenAmAMthI
aDhAra deSa gayA che, te parama nirdoSamUrti vItarAga hoya che. bIjAo je doSane
ati Adara Ape che, je rAgAdi deSathI yuktamAM paNa

Page #691 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
English Translation (preserving Jain terms):  The "Mahadeva"-18 faultless Jina-
deva, the conqueror of special vision, bestows the state of worshipfulness.
(15) This Bhagavan Vitaraga has uprooted and destroyed from the very roots, that
which was bestowed with worshipfulness, as if saying, "O Mallījina! Why should
we disregard that which is so beautiful? We should honor those whom you greatly
respect, for you have uprooted them from the roots." - Shri Anandghanji.  The
knowledge-form of the eternal self, over which the layers of ignorance had
accumulated for infinite time, was brought out and manifested by this Bhagavan
Vitaraga.  He made the beginningless state of ignorance associated with the self
feel ashamed, and behold, it departed in the turiya state! And it departed
without even casting a glance back! It did not even make a feeble attempt to
stay! Thus, this Bhagavan eliminated the defect of ignorance.  From the four
states of sleep, dream, wakefulness, and superwakefulness, He attained the state
of superwakefulness. That is, He attained the unbroken, ever-vigilant state of
being absorbed in the natural self-form.  He made the states of sleep and dream
depart, but did not indulge them, for He was the Lord of His own self-form.
"The eternal knowledge-form is yours, which you have grasped; the state of
ignorance felt ashamed and departed without a trace. O Manijina! Sleep, dream,
wakefulness, superwakefulness - the turiya state came, the states of sleep and
dream felt ashamed and departed, the Lord did not accept them..."  This Mahatma
recognized the prostitute named Mithyamati, who had been associated with this
jiva from beginningless time, as sinful, unchaste, and adulterous, and expelled
her from the abode of the self. And He established a deep relationship of
samyaktva (right faith) with her, along with her family. Thus, the Bhagavan
diminished the great delusion of wrong belief.  "He established a relationship
of samyaktva, deeply bonded with the family; Recognizing Mithyatva as sinful, He
expelled her from the home, O Mallījina!"  The defects like laughter, aversion,
attachment, sorrow, disgust, fear - like worthless lumps of clay - were all
scattered away! Those base passions were completely eliminated when the Bhagavan
ascended the elephant-like ksapakasreni (the series of spiritual stages).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 para daSTi vizeSavijetA "mahAdeva'-18 doSa rahita jinadeva (15) pUjyapaNuM Ape
che, te dene A bhagavAna jine-vItarAge te mUlathI nivAryA hoya che, jaDamULathI
ukheDI nAMkhyA hoya che, jemake"sevaka kima avagaNIe he mallijina ! e aba zobhA
sArI; avara jehane Adara ati dIe, te teM mUla nivArI. "--zrI AnaMdaghanajI.
anAdi evuM AtmAnuM jJAnasvarUpa ke jenA para anaMta kALanA ajJAna AvaraNanA
anaMta thara bAjhI gayA hatA, tene A bhagavAna vItarAge vhAra kheMcI kADhI
prakaTa karyuM. anAdinI sAthe saMlagna thayelI ajJAnadazAne rIsAvI te juo te
turIya avasthA kharA ! ane te rIsAIne cAlI jatAM tenI kANuM paNa na mAMDI ! tene
AvI' mATe aphasesa vIka paNa na karyo ! Ama A bhagavAne ajJAna deSane nivRtta
karyo. nidrA, svapna, jAgrata ane ujajAgrata e cAra dazAmAMthI cethI ujAgara
avasthA bhagavAne prApta karI. arthAt sahaja AtmasvarUpamAM akhaMDa jAgrata
Atmapayogamaya satata atyaMta jAgratine pAmyA; ane nidrA svapna e be dazA rIsANI
jANI te cAlavA mAMDI, te paNa A svasvarUpanA svAmIe tene manAvI nahi ! te
cirakAlanI priyAnuM manAmaNuM karyuM nahi ! Ama atyaMta jAgrata-ujAgara evI
parama jJAnadazAne pAmelA bhagavAne nidrA dezanI AtyaMtika nivRtti karI. jJAna
ravarUpa anAdi tamArUM, te lIdhuM tame tANa; jue ajJAna dazA rIsAvI, jAtAM kANa
na ANI. he maNijina ! nidrA supana jAgara ujAgaratA, turIya avasthA AvI nidrA
supana deya dazA rIsANI, jANI na nAtha mAnavI... he maNijina !" mithyAmati
nAmanI je kulaTA A jIva sAthe anAdithI joDAyelI hatI, saMlagna hatI, tene
aparAdha-duSTa doSavALI duHzIla vyabhicAriNI jANIne A mahAtmAe AtmagRhamAMthI
bahAra kADhI mUkI, ane saparivAra samakita sAthe sagAI samakita sAthe kIdhI,
gADha sagapaNa saMbaMdha bAMdhyuM. Ama samyagadarzanane pAmelA sagAI kIdhI"
bhagavate mahAmithyAtva deSane-darzanamohane kSINa karyo. "samakita sAthe sagAI
kIdhI, saparivAra zuM gADhI; mithyAti aparAdhaNa jANI, gharathI bAhira kADhI
malijina !" hAsya, arati, rati, zoka, dugacchA, bhaya,-e tuccha kRSipaMkti jevA,
DhIlA mATInA DhephAM jevA deSa te bicArA kyAMya kacarAI gayA ! e pAmara
magatarAM jevA nekaSAya deze te bhagavAna jyAre kSapakazreNIrUpa gajarAja para
caDhyA

Page #692 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Yoga-drishti Samuchaya  Then, - assume the gait of a dog! But just like "dogs
bark behind an elephant", they kept barking foolishly! And the Lord's ride
continued, ignoring them! Meaning, these insignificant, lowly faults became
insignificant in the presence of this supreme, self-controlled being, completely
unable to have any effect on him! (616) Om, "Fear, lowly, Karasali" Far away
Laughter, excess, desire, greed, fear, lowly, Karasali; Climbing the series of
elephants, assuming the gait of a dog...Ha Majin!  The passions of anger,
hatred, and restlessness, which were the wounds of the charitra-meh, as soon as
this Lord's state of freedom from passions manifested, immediately fled, running
away! Moreover, the Lord abandoned all the karma-kasya karma, which was like the
Vedic scriptures, the result of desires and passions. Thus, destroying the
charitra-meh, becoming free from all causes, this supremely merciful Lord, who
is an ocean of compassion, manifested the infinite fourfold state", meaning he
attained infinite knowledge, infinite vision, infinite bliss, and infinite
liberation. 6 Chadda' "The state of anger, hatred, and restlessness, are like
dust on the feet; As the state of freedom from passions manifests, they rise and
flee, running away...Ha Majin! The Vedic desires and their results, all the
karmic actions, he abandoned; An ocean of compassion, free from all causes, he
attained the infinite fourfold state...Ha Majin!"  Such a supreme, passionless
Lord, became the giver of the state of fearless refuge, removing all obstacles
related to giving. This Lord, who is filled with the essence of supreme benefit,
became the remover of obstacles related to benefit, for the entire world. By
becoming the master of supreme benefit, destroying all obstacles and all
hindrances, this Lord became the king of the fourfold state; and by removing
obstacles related to fortune and enjoyment, he became the enjoyer of complete
fortune. "He removes all obstacles related to giving for all beings, the giver
of the state of fearless refuge; He removes all obstacles related to benefit for
the entire world, the essence of supreme benefit...Ha Majin! He destroys all
obstacles among the learned, attaining the complete state; He removes all
obstacles related to fortune and enjoyment, the enjoyer of complete fortune...Ha
Majin!"  Thus, (1) ignorance, (2) sleep, (3) false belief, (4) laughter, (5)
excess, (6) desire, (7) greed, (8) greed, (9) fear, (10) anger, (11) hatred,
(12)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 yogadRSTisamuccaya tyAre,--zvAnanI gati dhAraNa karI ! paNa 'hAthInI pAchaLa
kUtarAM bhase ' tenI jema te khApaDA bhasatA ja rahyA ! ane bhagavAnI svArI te
tenI upekSA karI AgaLa cAlI ! arthAt A tuccha pAmara deSo A parama sama cAgivara
pAse kicitkara thaI paDayA, temanA para peAtAnI kaMi paNa asara nIpajAvavA
sarvathA asamartha nIvaDayA ! (616) OM bhaya pAmara karasAlI ' dUra hAsya arati
rati zeka dugacchA, bhaya pAmara karasAlI; nekaSAya gaja zreNI caDhatAM, zvAna
taNI gati jhAlI....hA ma@ijina !" rAga, dveSa ane avirati pariNAma ke je
cAritramehanA jakharajasta yAddhA hatA, te teA jevI A bhagavAnanI vItarAga
pariNati pariNamI ke tatkSaNu khAghA khanau uThIne nAThA ! vaLI vedAdacarUpa je
kAmavikAra pariNAma-kAsya karma te sarvanA caNu mAhanA paNa A bhagavAne tyAga
karyAM. Ama cAritramehane sanAza karI, niSkAraNu karuNArasanA sAgara evA A
parama kRpALu deve anaMta catuSTa pada pragaTa karyuM", arthAt anaMta jJAna,
anaMta darzana, anaMta AnaMda ne anaMta vInI prApti karI. 6 cAddA' " rAga dveSa
viratinI pazthiti, caraNu mAhanA cAddhA; vItarAga pariNati pariNamatAM, UThI
nAThA khAdhA...hA ma@ijina ! vedeya kAmA piraNAmA, kAmya karama sahu tyAgI;
niSkAraNu karuNArasa sAgara, anaMta catuSTha pada pAgI....hA ma,ijina ! " AvA A
parama vItarAga prabhu dAna sa'badhI viAne-a'tarAyane nivArIsajanane
abhayadAnapadanA dAtA thayA. lAbha sauMbadhI vizrvane nivArI parama lAbharasathI
masta evA A prabhu jagane vinna karanArA lAbhavijJanA nivAraka thayA. parama
lAbha pati vIce karIne vIca vighnane-vIryA'tarAyane haNIne A prabhu pU rasa
mAtA' paDhavInA ceAgI banyA; ane bhAga-upaleAga e ane vighna nivArIne pUrNa
bhAganA subheAgI thayA. "dAna vidhana vArI sahu janane, abhayadAna pada dAtA;
lAbha vidhana jaga vizvana nivArI, parama lAbha rasa mAtA hai....mahvijina !
nIya vidhana paDita vIce haNI, pUraNa padavI yAgI; bhAgeApabhAga dAya vidhana
nivArI, pUraNa bhAga subheAgI heA....mijina !" Ama ( 1) ajJAna, (2) nidrA, (3)
mithyAtva, ( 4 ) hAsya, ( 5 ) ati, (6) rati, (7) zAka, (8) dugacchA, (9) bhaya,
(10) rAga, (11) dveSa, (12)

Page #693 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Behold! The Jina, the omniscient, is free from the eighteen defilements: (617)
Avirati, (13) Vedodaya (Kama), (14) Danaantaraya, (15) Muni-jana-vrinda-labha-
antaraya, (16) Vayantaraya, (17) Bhegantaray, (18) Upgaaya "Bhegantaray". This
Jina, the liberated soul, is free from these eighteen defilements. His unique
qualities are sung by the assembly of monks, and they are pleasing to the pure
mind. This supreme, pure, and virtuous being, the Srimad Vitrag Dev, is examined
in this way. The qualities of this Jina, who brings peace to the mind, are sung
by the monks, and they too attain the state of Anandghanapada through the
merciful gaze of the compassionate one. In other words, they too attain the
state of inherent self-nature, which is filled with supreme bliss, like the
Jineshwar.  These eighteen defilements are rejected by the body, sung by the
assembly of monks; the Avirati-rupa-desha is described, the pure mind is
pleased. ... Mallijin! This is how the mind is pacified, the qualities of the
Jina are sung. Through the merciful gaze of the compassionate one, the state of
Anandghanapada is attained. - Sri Anandghanaji.  Thus, there is a complete
destruction of the covering of defilements of this Bhagwan, a complete
annihilation. Just as external and internal impurities are destroyed for their
own reasons, so too are the external and internal impurities of Bhagwan
destroyed by the reasons of Samyagdarshan, etc. Just as the external and
internal impurities of metals and stones are destroyed for their own reasons, so
too are the external and internal impurities of Bhagwan destroyed by the reasons
of Samyagdarshan, etc. Kshaya: Sarvagna means that the defilements that are
objects of compassion and obstacles, as well as the coverings of knowledge and
perception, are completely destroyed. And thus, with the destruction of these
obstructive defilements, he who is free from defilements necessarily becomes
omniscient. In other words, he attains the state of Kevalgyan, which is free
from all coverings, and thus he sees all beings directly, and knows all the
states of all substances. (See page 356, and page 349 footnote.)  This matter of
omniscience is as follows: Subtle, hidden, and distant objects are directly
perceived by someone, because they are inferable, like fire, etc. In other
words, subtle means naturally separated, hidden means separated by time, and
distant means separated by space. Such objects are directly perceived by someone
because they are inferable, or provable. And what is provable is directly
perceived by some special person, or what is inferable is directly perceived by
someone. For example, fire, etc. Moreover, omniscience... *"
सूक्ष्मान्तरितदूरार्थाः प्रत्यक्षाः कस्यचिद्यथा । मेवतोडाविपिति सर्वशस्थितिः Sri
Asmimansa,

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 para daSTi ! ahAra dUSaNavajita jinadeva-savajJa (617) avirati, (13) vedodaya
(kAma), (14) dAnAMtarAya (15) munijana vRMde lAbhapaMtarAya, (16) vayatarAya,
(17) bhegAMtarAya, (18) upagAyA " bhegAMtarAya,-e aDhAra dUSaNathI rahita A
jina-vItarAga paramAtmA hoya che, ke jenA ananya guNonuM saMkIttana
munijanavRMda gAya che, ane je nirdUSaNa evA prabhu manane ruce evA game evA
che. ane A AvA parama nirdoSa guNamUtti zrImad vItarAga devanI A prakAre
svarUpaparIkSA karI, A manavizrAmI jinavaranA guNa je gAya che, te paNa A
dInabaMdhunI mahera najarathI-kRpA daSTithI AnaMdaghanapadane pAme che, arthAt
te paNa jinezvara tulya paramAnaMdamaya sahaja AtmasvarUpa padane pAme che. eha
aDhAra dUSaNa varajita tana, munijana vaMde gAyA; aviratirUpaka deSa nirUpaNa,
nirdUSaNa mana bhAyA he....mallijina ! Ividha parakhI mana vizarAmI, jinavara
guNa je gAve re; dinabaMdhunI mahera najarathI, AnaMdaghanapada pAve re he." -
zrI AnaMdaghanajI. Ama A bhagavAnanA deSa-AvaraNanI niHzeSa hAni-AtyaMtika
kSINatA hoya che - svahetuothI jema bAhya-abhyatara mala kSaya thAya che tema.
dhAtupASANane bAhyAbhaMtara mala jema potAnA hetue karIne kSaya pAme che, tema
samyagadarzanAdi deSa-AvaraNa svahetuo vaDe karIne bhagavAnanA bAhyAbhyatara
malane kSaya thayo hoya che, kSayaH sarvajJa eTale mehanIya ne aMtarAyarUpa
doSa, tathA jJAnAvaraNadarzanAvaraNarUpa AvaraNane AtyaMtika kSaya hoya che. ane
Ama pratibaMdhaka evA doSa-AvaraNane kSaya thatAM, kSINudeSa evA te avazya
sarvajJa thAya che, arthAt nirAvaraNa evA kevalajJAnane pAme che, jethI
lekAlekanA sarva bhAvane te sAkSAt dekhe che, sarva dravyanA sarva paryAya jANe
che. (juo pR. 356, tathA pR. 349 phuTanaTa.) A sarvasiddhi viSayamAM A pramANe
che:-*sUkSma, aMtarita ne dUra padArtho koIne pratyakSa hoya che,-anumeyapaNuM
che mATe, agni AdinI jema. arthAt sUma eTale svabhAvathI viprakRNa (vikhUTA
paDelA), aMtarita eTale kALathI viprakRSTa ne dUra eTale dezathI viprakRSTa evA
padArtho keIne paNa pratyakSa hoya che, kAraNa ke te anumeya-anumAnagamya che,
athavA prameya che. ane je prameya che te kaI puruSavizeSane pratyakSa hoya che,
athavA je anumAnagamya che te keIne pratyakSa hoya che. jemake-agni Adi. vaLI
sarvajJa *" sUkSmAntaritadUrArthAH pratyakSAH kasyacidyathA  /  mevatoDAvipiti
sarvazasthitiH zrI AsamImAMsA,

Page #694 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(18) The second standard technique regarding the attainment of *gadarissusthay
siddhi* is this: that which is characterized by *taratambhav* has a limit of
excellence. For example, importance is a quality characterized by *taratambhav*.
Its ultimate limit is attained in the sky, meaning that the sky is the greatest.
Similarly, the quality of knowledge is characterized by *taratambhav*.
Therefore, its attainment of excellence in some particular person is definitely
possible. And the one in whom this knowledge attains excellence is the
omniscient. This is the occasion! (See - *Shri Haribhadrasuri*’s *Sarvajnasiddhi
Prakarana*, *Jnana Bindu*, *Apt Mimamsa* etc.).  Such a *kshinadosha* (one with
minimal faults) - *param nirdosha* (perfectly faultless), virtuous *Shrimad
Sarvajnya Bhagavan* is united with all the fruits in the form of attainment. The
attainment of *kevaljnana*, the attainment of *kevaldarshan*, infinite
attainment of giving, infinite attainment of gain, infinite attainment of
sharing, infinite attainment of taking, infinite attainment of all the powers -
all these attainments reside in the body of this *kevali* Bhagavan. The eight
great *mahasiddhis* like *animmafal* and *bhegi* *mahima* etc. revolve around
him like his attendants. This Bhagavan is the abode of all the glories described
in the *yogashastras* like *Patanjali* and in *Jinagama*. Due to his
omniscience, which pervades all the states of all the objects, this omniscient
*Shripati* is completely free from *ausush* (desire), he has no desire for
anything anywhere, therefore he is the enjoyer of the fruits of all the
attainments.  There is nothing greater than his own self. No influence has been
produced, is present, or will be produced in this creation, which is not
attained by his complete self. *Shrimad Rajchandra*, *Ank* 337 (411).  Because
this *vitrag* (desireless) Lord, who is the Lord of the knower and the known,
knows through his own knowledge, this Lord sees his own ordinary object by
seeing his own form, this Lord, who is immersed in his own nature-like
character, enjoys infinite *chaturshka* (fourfold) pleasures in his own
enjoyment, this Lord, who is the enjoyer of his own nature-like fortune, enjoys
infinite pleasures in his own form. This great giver, this Lord, always gives,
and this God, who is the receiver and the pervader of his own power, is himself
the recipient of that gift.  He knows through his own knowledge, the Lord of the
knower and the known; he sees his own ordinary object by seeing his own form.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (18) gadarisasusthaya siddhi bAbata bIja pramANabhUta yukti A che ke-je vastu
taratamabhAvayukta hoya che, tene prakarSa-chevaTanI hada hoya che. jemake
mahattva, e taratamabhAvavALo guNa che. tene prakaaMtima maryAdA AkAzamAM prApta
thAya che, arthAt AkAza sauthI mahAna che, tema jJAna guNa taratamabhAvathI
yukta hoya che. eTale tenI kavacit--kaI puruSavizeSamAM prakarSa prApti avazya
saMbhave che. ane jenAmAM te jJAnane prakarSa prApta hoya che, te ja sarvajJa
che. Iyala prasaMgena ! (juo-zrI haribhadrasUrikRta sarvajJAsiddhi prakaraNa,
jJAnabindu, AptamImAMsA Adi). AvA kSINadoSa-parama nirdoSa, guNavatAra zrImad
sarvajJa bhagavAn sarva labdirUpa phalathI saMyukta hoya che. kevalajJAna
labdhi, kevaladarzana labdhi, anaMta dAnalabdhi, anaMta lAbha labdhi, anaMta
bhAga labdhi, anaMta upaga labdhi, anaMta vIrya sarva labdhi labdhi Adi sarva
labdhi A kevalI bhagavaMtanA ghaTamAM vase che. aNimAphala bhegIjI mahimA Adi
aSTa mahAsiddhi emanI kikarI thaIne phare che. pAtaMjala Adi yogazAstromAM tathA
jinAgamAM varNavela sarva vibhUtionuM A bhagavAna eka dhAma hoya che. sarva
padArthanA sarva paryAyamAM vyApaka evA sarvajJapaNane lIdhe A jJAnavaDe karIne
sarvavyApaka zrIpati "viSNu bhagavAnane ausuSanI sarvathA nivRtti hoya che,
kyAMya paNa kaMI paNa utsukapaNuM hotuM nathI, eTale te sarva labdhionA phalanA
bhogI hoya che. te AtmasvarUpathI mahatuM evuM kaMI nathI. e A sRSTine viSe kaI
prabhAvajoga utpanna thayo nathI, che nahI ane thavAnuM nathI ke je prabhAvajoga
pUrNa AtmasvarUpane paNa prApta na hoya." zrImad rAjacaMdra, aMka 337. (411).
kAraNa ke nija jJAne karI jJAyaka padanA Iza evA A vItarAga prabhu senA jJAtA
hoya che, nija svarUpanuM darzana karI A prabhu nija sAmAnya evuM dazya dekhe
che, AtmasvabhAvarUpa cAritramAM ramatArAma evA A prabhu nija ramyamAM "anaMta
catuSka ramaNa kare che, bhagya evA nija svarUpanA anaMta bhegane A bhoktA pada
pAgI" svAmI bhogave che. mahAna dAtA evA A prabhu nitya dAna dIe che, ane nija
zaktinA grAhaka-vyApakamaya evA A deva pote ja te dAnanA pAtra che. nija jJAne
karI seyane, jJAtA jJAyaka pada Iza re; dekhe nija dazana karI, nija dazya
sAmAnya jagIza re,

Page #695 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Pas Darsti: "Sav Udhi Fal Bhegi" Dhruvpadrami  (19) Nij Rame Raman Kare,
Prabhu Charitre Ramta Ram Re; Bhogya Anantne Bheg, Bhege Tine Bhokta Swami Re.
Dey Dan Nit Dijate, Ati Data Prabhu Swayamev Re, Patra Tame Nij Shakti Na,
Grahak Vyapakmay Dev Re. Shri Shreyans "Shridevchandraji.  Since Danaantaraaya
has been destroyed, this Bhagwan gives the gift of pure, natural Atmaswaroop to
the soul. Since Labhaantaraaya has been destroyed, he continuously receives the
natural Atmaswaroop, which is beyond worry. Since Bhegaantaraaya has been
destroyed, he gathers pure Atmaswaroop, pure good qualities, and wealth. Since
Veeryantaraaya has been destroyed, he continuously consumes pure good qualities.
Since Upbhogantaraaya has been destroyed, he is effortless in his Atmaswaroop
Raman. He effortlessly and naturally manifests infinite Atmashakti.  "Akshay Dan
Achintan, Labh Ane Bhog...Ho Jinji! Veery Shakti Aprayasata, Shudh Swagun
Upbhog....Ha" - Shridevchandraji.  Thus, since he is fulfilled in his
Atmaswaroop through infinite giving and receiving, this supreme Prabhu Dhruv
remains in his natural, innate Atmaswaroop. Therefore, this "Dhruvpadrami"
Prabhu has no desires, he is desireless. Why would he desire anything else,
Swami, when his "Dhruvpadrami" home is filled with abundant, complete wealth?
Why would this "Dhruvpadrami" desireless Gunaraya desire anything else, when his
Atma-griha is filled with abundant, complete good qualities? Why would this
"Kevali" Bhagwan use anything other than the pure Atmapad, which is the only
"Dhruv"?  Dhruvpadrami Cheswami Mahara, Nikaami Gunaraya Sugyani! Nikaami He
Pami Tu Dhani, Dhruv Aarami Thay - Shri Anandghanji.  While deeply contemplating
this subject of attainment, the supreme truth-seer Shrimati Rajchandraji
revealed the supreme, wonderful ultimate truth:  When the four powerful karmas
are destroyed, the nature of the Antarayas is also destroyed. Therefore,
Danaantaraaya, Labhaantaraaya, Veetaraaya, Bhegaantaraaya, and Upbhogantaraaya,
these five types of Antarayas are destroyed, and infinite giving and receiving,
infinite benefit,

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pasa daSTi : "sava udhi phala bhegI" dhruva5darAma (19) nija rame ramaNa kare,
prabhu cAritre ramatA rAma re; bhogya anaMtane bhega, bhege tiNe bhoktA svAma
re. deya dAna nita dIjate, ati dAtA prabhu svayameva re, pAtra tame nija
zaktinA, grAhaka vyApakamaya deva re. zrI zreyAMsa " zrIdevacaMdrajI.
dAnAMtarAyane kSaya thayo hovAthI A bhagavAna zuddha sahaja AtmasvarUpanuM dAna
AtmAne kare che, lAbhAMtarAyane kSaya thayo hovAthI aNaciMtavyo evo sahaja
AtmasvarUpa lAbha niraMtara pAme che, bhegAMtarAyanA kSayane lIdhe zuddha
AtmasvarUpa zuddha svaguNa saMpattine ayane bhegA kare che, vIryaMtarAyanA
kSayane lIdhe zuddha svaguNane upabhega" niraMtara upabhoga le che,
upabhogatarAyanA kSayane lIdhe svarUparamaNane viSe aprayAsavaMta hoya che-
prayAsa vinA sahajapaNe anaMta Atmazakti saphurAyamAna kare che. "akSaya dAna
aciMtana, lAbha ane bhoga...ho jinajI! vIrya zakti aprayAsatA, zuddha svaguNa
upabhega....ha."--zrI devacaMdrajI. ane Ama anaMta dAnAdi labdhithI svarUpane
viSe paryApta hovAthI, A parama prabhu dhruva evA sahajAnmasvarUpa padamAM ja
ramaNa karanArA hoya che. eTale ja A "dhruvapada rAmI' prabhune koI kAmanA nathI
hotI, te niHkAmI ja hoya che. jene "dhruvapadarAmI ghera vipula paripUrNa
saMpatti bharI hoya, te anya vastunI IcchA kema he svAmI kare? tema jenuM Atma-
gRha vipula paripUrNa guNasaMpattithI saMbhUta che, mAharA" te dhruvapadarAmI
niSkAmI guNarAya bIjI kaMI kAmanA kema dhare? kevala eka "dhruva' evA zuddha
Atmapada zivAya anyatra A "kevalI" bhagavAna upayoga kema dIe? dhruvapadarAmI
chesvAmI mAharA, ni:kAmI guNarAya sugyAnI ! nikAmI he pAmI tuM dhaNI, dhruva
ArAmI thAya."--zrI AnaMdaghanajI. A labdhi viSaya aMge talasparzI mImAMsA
karatAM parama tatvadraSTA zrImada rAjacaMdrajIe parama adbhuta paramArtha
prakAzya che ke - cAra ghanaghAtI karmane kSaya thatAM aMtarAya kamanI prakRtine
paNa kSaya thAya che. ane tethI dAnAMtarAya, lAbhAMtarAya, vItarAya,
bhegAMtarAya ane upabhogavaMtarAya e pAMca prakArane aMtarAya kSaya thaI anaMta
dAnalabdhi, anaMta lAbha labdhi,

Page #696 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(20) The collection of yogic insights, the attainment of infinite dana (giving),
etc., and the attainment of infinite bhega (enjoyment) and upga (absorption) are
all considered to be "labdhi" (attainments). These are the ultimate, because
they are the result of the destruction of the karmic obstacles. The supreme
being, having destroyed all karmic obstacles, is fully capable of bestowing
infinite dana, etc., and the ultimate good. However, these attainments, in the
form of pudgala (matter), are not the result of the supreme being's activity.
Primarily, the attainment of these labhdis is the nature of the soul itself.
Because they are attained through kshayika (destruction) and not udayika
(manifestation), they are the very nature of the soul. The infinite capacity
that was present in the soul from the beginning, in the form of power, is now
manifested, and the soul can bestow it in its own form. Similarly, it can
manifest in a pure and clear way, which is called infinite dana labdhi. Also, in
the attainment of infinite soul-capacity, there is no cause for even the
slightest separation, hence it is called infinite laabha labdhi. Furthermore,
the attainment of infinite soul-capacity is experienced entirely in the form of
supreme bliss, and there is no cause for even the slightest separation in it,
hence it is called infinite bhoga upga labdhi.  Similarly, even though the
attainment of infinite soul-capacity is complete, the soul's power does not
become tired from experiencing it, nor can it be exhausted, carried, or affected
by any kind of time or space. There is nothing that can even slightly affect it.
It is the complete capacity to remain in its own nature, with full power in all
three times, which is called infinite veerya labdhi. From the perspective of
kshayika (destruction), these labhdis are the use of the supreme being, as
mentioned above. These five labhdis are differentiated for the sake of
understanding, but they can all be included in infinite veerya labdhi. The soul,
having attained complete veerya, has the capacity to use these five labhdis in
the form of pudgala (matter). However, this is not possible for the supreme
being, who is already perfect and has a completely detached nature. The activity
of the supreme being, in the form of giving teachings, etc., is due to the
arising of yogic preconditions, and not due to any distortion of the soul's
nature.  –Shrimad Rajchandra, Patrak 840 (3) (915) and onwards.  Such a supreme
being, who is omniscient, detached, and possesses all attainments, acts
according to the dictates of prarabdha (past karma) and performs ultimate
benevolence. This karma-free, perfect being, who is like a particle of pure
consciousness, walks the earth according to the manifestation of the remaining
four aghati (uncontrollable) karmas, namely bhogagrahi karma. Through the power
of his compassion, he bestows ultimate benevolence upon other souls, guiding
them towards the path of liberation and perfection. This compassionate being,
who is an ocean of compassion, showers the world with the rain of ultimate good,
bringing peace and tranquility to the suffering beings of the world.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (ra0) yogadaSTisamucaya dAnAdi anaMta vIrya labdhi, ane anaMta bhega upaga
labdhi saMprApta thAya labdhine adda che. jethI te aMtarAya karma kSaya thayuM
che evA parama puruSa anaMta dAnAdi bhuta paramArtha ApavAne saMpUrNa samartha
che. tathApi pudgala dravyarUpe e dAnAdi labdhinI parama puruSa pravRtti karatA
nathI. mukhyapaNe te te labdhinI saMprApti paNa AtmAnI svarUpabhUta che, kemake
kSAyakabhAve te saMprApti che, udayikabhAve nathI, tethI AtmasvabhAva
svarUpabhUta che, ane je anaMta sAmarthya AtmAmAM anAdithI zaktirUpe hatuM te
vyakta thaI AtmA nija svarUpamAM te ApI zake che, tadurUpa zuddha svaccha bhAve
eka svabhAve pariNumAvI zake che, te anaMta dAnalabdhi kahevA yogya che. temaja
anaMta AtmasAmarthyanI saMprAptimAM kiMcit mAtra viyoganuM kAraNa rahyuM nathI
tethI anaMta lAbha labdhi kahevA yogya che. vaLI anaMta AtmasAmarthyanI
saMprApti sapUrNapaNe paramAnaMda svarUpe anubhavAya che, temAM paNa kiMcit
mAtra paNa temAM viyoganuM kAraNa rahyuM nathI, tethI anaMta bhoga upaga labdhi
kahevA yogya che. temaja anaMta AtmasAmarthyanI saMprApti saMpUrNapaNe thayAM
chatAM te sAmarthyanA anubhavathI Atmazakti thAke ke tenuM sAmarthya jhIlI na
zake, vahana na karI zake, athavA te sAmane keIpaNa prakAranA dezakALanI asara
thaI kiMcitmAtra paNa cUnAdhikapaNe karAve evuM kazuM rahyuM ja nahIM, te
svabhAvamAM rahevAnuM saMpUrNa sAmarthya trikALa saMpUrNa baLa sahita rahevAnuM
che te anaMta vIrya labdhi kahevA gya che. kSAyaka bhAvanI daSTithI jotAM upara
kahyA pramANe te labdhina parama puruSane upayoga che. vaLI e pAMca labdhi
hetuvizeSathI samajAvA arthe judI pADI che, nahIM te anaMtavIrya labdhimAM paNa
te pAMce samAveza thaI zake che. AtmA saMpUrNa vIryane saMprApta thavAthI e
pAMce labdhino upayoga pudgala dravyarUpe kare che tevuM sAmarthya temAM vate
che, tathApi kRtakRtya evA parama puruSamAM saMpUrNa vItarAga svabhAva hovAthI
te upayogane tethI saMbhava nathI. ane upadezAdinA dAnarUpe je te kRtakRtya
parama puruSanI pravRtti che te yogAzrita pUrvabaMdhanA udayamAnapaNathI che,
AtmAnA svabhAvanA kiMcit paNa vikRta bhAvathI nathI." -zrImad rAjacaMdra,
patraka 840 (3) (915) ane pachI AvA sarva labdhisaMpanna A sarvajJa vItarAga
deva prArabdhadaya pramANe parama paropakAra karatA satA vicare che. pitAnA zeSa
je cAra aghAti karma-bhapagrAhI karma che, tenAthI prApta udaya pramANe bhUtala
para vihAra karatA A niSkAraNa kaNa kRtakRtya prabhu, sadezanA dAnavaDe anya
AtmAo pratye parama paropakAra rasasAgara' karI, teone kRtakRtya thavAno mahA
mokSamArga badhe che. "niSkAraNa karuNa rasa sAgara' evA A paramakRpALu deva
paramArtha meghanI vRSTi karI saMsAratApathI saMtapta jagajajaMtuone parama
AtmazAMtirUpa zItalatA Ape che.

Page #697 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**On the sight:** Danadi Labdhi is the ultimate purpose: the ultimate
benefactor. (21) This being, without understanding its true form, suffers
endless cycles of rebirth. This Supreme Guru, understanding the true form,
bestows ultimate welfare upon the world, gathering and protecting the virtuous.
This pure Dharma, embodied in this Lord, the friend of the world, flows towards
ultimate peace, the path of peace, in which virtuous souls, immersing
themselves, experience ultimate peace of the soul. Thus, this Dharma-form,
Dharma-avatar, the Vitaraga Paramatma, establishes, reforms, and bestows upon
the virtuous, according to their nature, and according to the merit of their
parents, the attainment of Samyaktvad, etc., virtues, and gives them Dharma-
benefit as appropriate. This Kevali Bhaskar, enlightening and developing the
virtuous, wanders in the world. "Keval Jnana, infinite light, blossoming the
lotus of the future generation... Lord, the inner knower. The essence of pure
bliss, dwelling in the pure form... Lord, resting in the Dharma of the self,
selfless in its transformation... Lord." - Shri Devchandraji. And thus, until
the end of life, he guides the wicked and the unrighteous away from the wicked
path, and leads the righteous and the virtuous towards the desired ultimate
purpose, performing the ultimate grace of benefiting all beings in the world,
and then this world-loving Paramatma attains the end of yoga, attains the state
of Shaileshi. "The great Muni, with his faults extinguished, omniscient, gathers
all the fruits of attainment; he does good to others, and thus attains the speed
of fire." - Shri Dasakza, 8-3 "There, from that yoga, the supreme yoga, the
Lord, quickly, having destroyed the disease of rebirth, attains ultimate
Nirvana." 186. Meaning - There, quickly, that Lord, from that supreme yoga,
destroys the disease of rebirth and attains ultimate Nirvana. "Tatra - there,
that is, in the end of yoga, in the Shaileshi state, Drava - quickly,
immediately, in the time of uttering only five letters, Bhavan - the Lord, from
that yoga, from that non-action, from that supreme yoga, from that yoga-leader,
from that Shaileshi yoga, that is the meaning. What? That is, having destroyed
the disease of rebirth, in all ways, he attains Nirvana - ultimate Nirvana,
attains the state of Nirvana, that is the meaning."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 para daSTiH dAnAdi labdhine paramArtha : parama paraMpakAra (21) je svarUpa
samajyA vinA A jIva anaMta paribhramaNa duHkha pAme che, te "svarUpa pada'
samajAvI, A parama jagadguru parama lokakalyANu-kasaMgraha-lakAnugraha kare che.
"bhavaduHkhavAraNa ziva sukhakAraNa" evo zuddha dharma prarUpI A bhagavAna
vizvabaMdhu parama zAMti sanmArga pravahate kare che, ke jemAM nimajajana karI
bhavya AtmAo parama AtmazAMtine anubhave che. Ama A dharmamUrti-dharmAvatAra
vItarAga paramAtmA saddharmanI saMsthApanA karI, samuddhAra karI, bhavyajanenI
yathAbhavyatA pramANe-pitApitAnI yogyatA anusAre temane samyakatvAdi guNanI
prApti karAvI, yathAyegyapaNe dharmalAbha Ape che. A kevalI bhAskara bhavyajana-
kamane prabodhI vikasita karatA satA jagamAM vihare che. "kevala jJAna anaMta
prakAzI, bhavijana kamala vikAsI re....prabhu aMtarajAmI. cidAnaMda ghana tattva
vilAsI, zuddha svarUpa nivAsI re....prabhu Atama dharma taNe ArAmI, papariNati
niSkAmI re...prabhutra "- zrI devacaMdrajI. ane Ama AyuSya sthiti paryata duSTa
asAdhujanene duSTa mArga cheDAvI, ane ziSTa sAdhujanene ISTa paramArtha mAge
caDhAvI, sarva jagajaMtunuM hita karavArUpa parama kAnugraha AcarI, pachI A
vizvavatsala paramAtmA yeganA aMtane pAme che, gaparyatane arthAt zailezI
avasthAne pAme che. kSINadoSa sarvajJa mahAmuni, sarva labdhi phala bhegIjI;
para upakAra karIne ziva te, pAme vega aAgI."-zrI . dasakjhA, 8-3 tatra drAgeba
bhagavAnayogAdyogasattamAt  /  bhavavyAdhikSayaM kRtvA nirvANaM labhate param
//  186 //  aga garama thakI, zIgha ja tyAM bhagavAna kSaya karI bhavyAdhine
pAme para nirvANa, 186. artha -tyAM zIdhra ja te bhagavAna, gasattama evA agathI
bhavyAdhine kSaya karIne parama nirvANune pAme che. tti-tatra-sAM, eTale ke
yogAntamAM, zailezI avasthAmAM, dravi-zIdhra ja, jhapATA baMdha ja, harava paMca
akSara uccAraNamAtra kALamAM, mAvAna-bhagavAna te kayoTu-ayoga thakI, avyApAra
thakI. jorAvaranA7-yogAsattama thakI, yogapradhAna thakI, zaile zrI yoga thakI
ema artha che. zuM? to ke mavaDyAdhikSa vA-bhavavyAdhino kSaya karI,-sarva
prakAre, nirvA 4te pat-parama nirvANune pAme che, bhAva nirvANane pAme che, ema
artha che.

Page #698 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(622) Chaugdashtasamuchchay Vivechan Then there - in the Shaileshi state, in the
form of Chaug, quickly, he, the Bhagwan, attains the supreme 'Ayag' Yoga, which
is the main in the Yag, that is, the Shaileshi Chaug, destroys all kinds of
Bhavyadhis and attains the supreme state of Bhava Nirvana. In the Shaileshi
state, he attains this supreme Chaug called 'Ayag', which is the best in the
Bhagwan's Samyog; that is, the actions of Samaneyag, Savchanayag, and
Neskayachaug cease, and he attains the supreme 'Ayagi' Dashagunasthan, which is
devoid of all Yogavyapars. Where the mind, speech, body, and karma are all gone,
where all the Pudgal relationships are severed; such an Ayagi Gunasthan exists
there, full of great fortune, happiness, and completeness... an unprecedented
opportunity...” - Shrimad Rajchandraji, Here, by removing the subtle,
destructive, and restless activity of the mind, speech, and body, this
Chaugishwar Bhagwan makes the Chetan pure, clean, and free from Aleshi and
Leshya. And in the Shaileshi state, which is like Meru, that is, the state of
Shaileshikarana, which is the state of self-stability, which is free from all
actions and motionless, he, having attained the supreme Sav, becomes completely
inactive, and destroys the subtle four remaining Karmas, the Chaugsattam. Thus,
when there is a strong inspiration of the supreme Atmiya, the Chaug-kriya does
not enter, so there is such a firmness and immobility of Yag in this
Shaileshikarana that it cannot overcome the immovable, stable, self-power like
Shaileshi-Meru - it cannot move it. (See pp. 45-46). And this Ayagi
Dashagunasthan remains for the time of the utterance of the five Hasvakshar;
that is, it remains for the time it takes to utter the five short letters A, I,
U, R, and L. So, having attained this 'Ayag' Yagsattam, this Prabhu quickly -
immediately - destroys the Bhavyadhis and attains supreme Nirvana. Due to which
the state of Bhava, the root cause of Karma, was there - the state of repeatedly
taking birth in a body - all of Bhava is completely destroyed. So, due to the
absence of the cause, there is no effect, according to the principle, the Bhava-
Samsara is completely destroyed. Just as the seed of Bhava, the root cause of
Raga, is destroyed, Raga is destroyed, similarly, the root cause of Bhavaraga,
the subtle Karma, is destroyed, Bhavaraga is destroyed. So, then there is no
rebirth, no more taking birth. Just as after the fire has been extinguished,

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (622) ceAgadaSTisamuccaya vivecana pachI tyAM-ceAgapatarUpa zailezI avasthAmAM
zIghra ja te bhagavAn sa yAgamAM pradhAna evA 'ayeAga 'yogathI arthAt zailezI
ceAgathI, sarva prakAre bhavyAdhine kSaya karI, parama evA bhAva nirvANane pAme
che. zailezI avasthAmAM A kevI bhagavAn sadyeAgamAM uttama evA 'ayAga ' nAmanA
parama ceAgane pAme che; arthAt sa maneyAga, sa vacanayAga, nesa kAyaceAganI
kriyA virAma pAme che, evI samasta yeAgavyApAra rahita parama 'ayeAgI'
dazAneguNasthAnane pAme che. mana vacana kAyA ne kamanI vaNA, chUTe jahAM sakaLa
pudgala saMbadha jo; evuM ayAgI guNasthAnaka tyAM vattatuM, mahAbhAgya
sukhadAyaka pUrNa akhadha jo.... apUrva avasara "--zrImad rAjaca'drajI, atre
utkRSTa evA kSAyika vInA khaLathI mana-vacana-kAyAnA yAganI capaLatA rAdhIne, A
ceAgIzvara bhagavAn cetanane zuci-zuddha ane alezI-lezyA rahita kare che. ane
zailezI arthAt meruparyaMta jevI niSpaka'pa-nizcala AtmasthiratAzailezIkaraNa:
rUpa zailezI avasthAmAM sthiti karI, pam savane pAmelA A aAga parama 'zIleza'
prabhu parama akriya thaI, sUkSma evA cAra zeSa karmanA ceAgasattama kSaya kare
che. Ama jyAre utkRSTa AtmIyanI sphuraNA heAya che, tyAre ceAga-kriyAnA praveza
heAtA nathI, eTale A zailezIkaraNamAM yAganI evI dhruvatA-nizcalatA heAya che ke
te zaileza-meru jevI acala aDAla Atmazaktine khesavI zakatI nathI--calAyamAna
karI zakatI nathI. (jue pR. 45-46). ane A ayeAgI dazAguNusthAnaka paMca
hasvAkSara uccAraNumAtra kALa rahe che; arthAt a, i, u, RR lU-e pAMca laghu
akSara uccAratAM jeTale samaya lAge teTaleA vakhata ja rahe che. eTale A * ayAga
'yAgasattama pAmIne zIghra ja-tarata ja A prabhu bhavavyAdhinA kSaya karI parama
nirvANane pAme che. jene laIne bhavanI sthiti mUla kAraNabhUta sa kamanA atra
hatI--puna: punaH dehadhAraNarUpa sthiti hatI, te bhavanA sarvathA sakSaya thAya
che. eTale kAraNanA abhAve kA na hAya e nyAye, bhavanA-sa`sArane AtyaMtika
uccheda thAya che. jema 'bhavanA bIja rAganuM mULa kAraNa nirmULa thatAM rAga
nirmULa thAya che, tema bhavarAganuM taNA Atya'tika karmarUpa kAraNa nirmULa
thatAM bhavarAga nirmULa thAya che. eTale pachI nAza je puna: janma dhAraNa
karavApaNuM rahetuM nathI. jema khIja maLI gayA pachI

Page #699 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
But, due to the absence of the shell-like chariot, liberation from the cycle of
birth and death is attained. (23) Just as a sprout does not emerge from a
completely burnt seed, similarly, after the karma-seed is burnt, the sprout of
birth does not emerge. “दग्धे बीजे यथाऽत्यन्तं प्रादुर्भवति नाङ्कुरः । कर्मबीजे
तथा दग्धे न रोहति भवाङ्कुरः ॥" –Shri Amritchandracharya's Shri Tattvarthasar.
And just as after the disease is destroyed, complete health is attained where
even a speck of dust is not present; similarly, after the disease of birth is
destroyed, the soul attains complete health, a state of liberation from all
diseases, where even an atom of karma-disease is not present. Just as after the
disease is destroyed, a human being attains their original, natural, inherent
health, similarly, after the disease of birth is destroyed, the soul attains its
original, natural, inherent health, its innate state, meaning the pure soul, the
Lord, manifests in its natural, inherent state. And just as a healthy human
being experiences natural, inherent joy after the disease is destroyed,
similarly, after the disease of birth is destroyed, the soul, which is healthy
in terms of birth, experiences natural, pure, inherent bliss. "Paramanand Vilasi
anubhave re, Devchandra pad vyakti... Pujana te kije re barma Jinatani re."
-Shri Devchandraji. And thus, when the disease of birth is destroyed, the Lord
attains the ultimate state of liberation. Just as a lamp is extinguished when
its oil runs out, similarly, the Lord attains liberation when the karma-oil runs
out. Because liberation from the cycle of birth and death is attained due to the
absence of karma-oil, the Lord is said to have attained liberation. Or, just as
fire, which has no fuel, is extinguished when its fuel is burnt to ashes,
similarly, the fire of the world, which has no fuel, is extinguished when all
the karma-fuel is burnt to ashes. Therefore, it is truly said that the Lord has
attained liberation. "कृत्स्नकर्मभयादूर्ध्व निर्वाणमधिगच्छति । यथा दग्धेन्धनो
वह्निनिरुपादानसंततिः ॥" –Shri Amritchandracharya's Shri Tattvarthasar. "He who
has gone to the water, has become different from his own body." Shrimad
Rajchandraji. "The destruction of all enemies, the destruction of all diseases,
the fulfillment of all desires; all wealth, speed, and happiness are obtained
from it; infinite virtues are without any blemish." -Shri . 6, Saja, 8-3

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paNa dari: zelezIka2tha-ayoga gasattathI nirvANa (23) aMkura phUTa nathI, tema
karmarUpa bhava-bIja baLI gayA pachI, bhavarUpa aMkura phUTato nathI. "dagdhe
bIje yathA'tyantaM prAdurbhavati nAGkuraH  /  karmabIje tathA dagdhe na rohati
bhavAGkuraH  // " -zrI amRtacaMdrAcAryajIta zrI tatvArthasAra. ane rogane nAza
thayA pachI jyAM reganuM rajakaNa paNa nathI, evI taMdurastI- saMpUrNa Arogya
avasthA prApta thAya che; tema bhavavyAdhine nAza thayA pachI jyAM kama roganuM
eka paramANuM paNa nathI, evI AtmAnI saMpUrNa bhAva Arogya sarva vyAdhi laya
avasthA pragaTe che. jema rogane nAza thayA pachI manuSya potAnI asala mULa
sahaja svasthatAne pAme che, tema bhavarUpa bhAvagane nAza thatAM AtmA pitAnI
asala mULa sahaja "svasthatAne-sahajAnmasvarUpa sthitine bhaje che, arthAt
sahaja-yathA jAta AtmasvarUpamAM "susthita' evo bhagavAna zuddha AtmA pragaTe
che. ane jema regane nAza thayA pachI nIrogI manuSya Arogyane sahaja tAtvika
AnaMda anubhave che, tema bhavarogano kSaya thayA pachI bhAva ArogyasaMpanna
AtmA bhAva-Arogyane sahaja zuddha tArivaka paramAnaMda anubhave che. paramAnaMda
vilAsI anubhave re, devacaMdrapada vyakti... pUjanA te kIje re bAramA jinataNI
re." -zrI devacaMdrajI. ane Ama bhavavyAdhino kSaya thAya che, eTale bhagavAna
parama evA bhAva nirvANune pAme che. dIpakanuM tela khUTI jatAM jema dIpaka
nirvANane pAme che-bUjhAI jAya che, tema kamarUpa tela khUTI jatAM bhagavAna
paNa nirvANa pAme che. kAraNa ke bhAva nirvANa karma-telanA abhAve temane
saMsAra-dI nirvANa pAme tevAthI- holavAI gayuM hovAthI, bhagavAna paNa "nirvANa
pAmyA kahevAya che. athavA jenuM idhana-baLataNa baLIne khAkha thaI gayuM che,
evo upAdAnasaMtati vinAne agni jema nirvANune pAme che-bUjhAI jAya che, tema
sarva karma idhana baLIne khAkha thaI jatAM upAdAna-saMtati vinAno saMsAra agni
nirvANane pAme che, holavAI jAya che. eTale bhagavAna "nivaNa pAmyA ema
yathArtha kahevAya che. "kRtsnakarmabhayAdUrdhva nirvANamadhigacchati  /  yathA
dagdhendhano vahninirupAdAnasaMtatiH  // " -zrI amRtacaMdrAcAryajIkRta zrI
taravAthasAra hAtA so te jala gayA, bhinna kiyA nija deha." zrImad rAjacaMdrajI
"sarva zatru kSaya sarva vyAdhilaya, pUraNa sarva samItAjI; sarva aratha vege
sukha tehathI, anaMta guNa nirIhA.-zrI . 6, sajhA, 8-3 ET

Page #700 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(624) Yoga Trisamuccaya The Essence of Para Drishti Parardashti is rooted in
Samadhi. It is free from the defilement of attachment to Samadhi, and by the
logic of sandalwood fragrance, it is characterized by inherent activity, meaning
it is inherently active in its nature. It is characterized by a state of
detachment, transcending all conduct. And due to the absence of cause, it is not
subject to any transgression; meaning it is not bound by any conduct and
therefore has no potential for transgression. Just as the one who has ascended
has no need for further ascent, similarly, this yogarudha purusha, due to the
absence of karmas that need to be conquered through conduct, has a state of
detachment.  Then why does he engage in practices like begging, etc.? The
resolution of this doubt is this: Just as the perspective of the one who is
being taught is different from the perspective of the one who is teaching
regarding the regulation of gems, etc., similarly, the perspective of this yogi
is also different regarding the same conduct. Because previously, his
destruction of the subtle (including kshaya) was taking place, and now the
destruction of the gross, which is the cause of rebirth, is complete. Just as
the great soul, the Ratnavarna, becomes fulfilled through the regulation and
practice of gems, similarly, this great sage becomes fulfilled through the
regulation and practice of Dharma Sannyasa. This primary Dharma Sannyasa arises
in the second incomplete stage, and through it, there is the state of
Kevalashri, which is free from any obstruction and is eternally present due to
its never being subject to decline.  Just like the moon, the jiva is naturally
pure in its essence and does not need to be established. And the knowledge that
exists is like moonlight. The veil of that knowledge is like a cloud. This
cloud-like veil, when it is dispelled by the force of the Dharma Sannyasa yoga,
which is like the wind, at the time of the completion of the series of
destructions, then he becomes a knower of knowledge through the power of the
primary yoga. Meaning, through the destruction of all defilements like
attachment, etc., he becomes a knower of all, having destroyed all defilements,
and he becomes a partaker of all attainments. Such a great sage, the omniscient
Bhagavan, performs acts of benevolence and then attains the end of yoga. There,
in the state of Shaileshi, in the brief span of time it takes to pronounce five
short syllables, he, through the yoga of A-yoga, destroys the disease of rebirth
and attains the ultimate state of liberation.  “Having destroyed all
defilements, The great sage, a partaker of all attainments, Through benevolence,
he attains the bliss of Shiva, being a yogi; All enemies destroyed, all diseases
extinguished, he is completely fulfilled; Through the yoga of all, he attains
bliss, and his infinite virtues are manifest.” —Shri Cha. Sajjaya.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (624) yoga thrisamuccaya parA dRSTinA sAra parArdaSTi samAdhiniSTha che. te
samAdhinA AsaMga deSathI rahita evI hAya che, ane caMdanagaMdha nyAye te
sAhmIbhUta pravRttivALI heAya che, arthAtu AtmasvabhAve pU pravRttivALI hoya
che. AmAM cegI sarva AcArathI para evA nirAcAra padmavALe hAya che. ane kAraNu
abhAve tene aticAra hAtA nathI; arthAt tene keAI AcAra pALavApaNuM rahyuM nathI
ane tethI tene kAi aticAra doSanI sabhAvanA paNa nathI. ArUDhane ArehaNunA jema
abhAva hAya che, caDhelAne jema caDhavAnuM hotu nathI, tema A yeAgArUDha
puruSane AcAra vaDe jItavA ceAgya karmAMnA abhAve nirAcAra pada heAya che. tA
pachI tene bhikSATana Adi AcAra kema DhAya che? te zaMkAnuM nivAraNa e che ke--
ratna AdinI zikSArdaSTie karatAM jema tenA niyeAjana viSayamAM zikSitanI dRSTi
jUdI hAya che, tema A yegInI te ja AcArakriyA paNa bhede karIne jUdI hAya che;
kAraNa ke pUrve tenuM sAMparAyika ( kaSAya sadhI ) ka kSaya la hatu, ne have teA
bhavApagrAhI kakSaya phUla che. te ratnanA niyeAgathI-vyApArathI ahIM lekamAM te
mahAtmA ratnavarNam jema kRtakRtya thAya che, tema dha*saMnyAsa viniyAgathI-
vyApArathI A mahAmuni kRtakRtya thAya che. A mukhya dharmasaMnyAsa bIjA
apUrNAMkaNumAM upaje che, ane tenA thakI nirAvaraNa evI kevalazrI hAya che, ke
jenA kadI pratipAta na thatA haiAvAthI sadAyAsadA udayavaMta hAya che. cadranI
jema jIva pe!tAnI bhAvazuddha prakRtithI-svabhAvathI * sthita ja' che, kAMI
sthApavAnA nathI. ane je vijJAna che te caMdrikA jevu che. te jJAnanuM AvaraNa
te medhapaTala jevuM-vAdaLA jevuM che. A vAdaLA jevuM ghAtikama che, te A
dharmasaMnyAsa yeAgarUpa vAyunA sapATAthI jyAre kSapakazreNInI parisamApti
veLAye dUra thAya che, tyAre te zrImAn mukhya evA parAkramayeAgathI jJAnakevalI
thAya che. eTale ke sakala rAgAdi doSanA parikSaya thakI kSINudoSa evA te
tatkSaNa ja nirAvaraNu jJAne karIne sarvajJa hoya che, ane sa* labdhilanA bhAgI
hoya che. AvA te zrImad sajJa bhagavAn mahAmuni parA --paropakAra karIne pachI
yeganA aMtane pAme che. tyAM yAgAntamAM zailezI avasthAmAM zIghra ja pAMca hasva
akSara uccAraNa mAtra kALamAM te bhagavAn yAgAttama evA ayega thakI
bhavavyAdhine kSaya karI parama bhAva nirvANane pAme che. " kSINu doSa sarvajJa
mahAmuni, savalabdhi phala bhAgIjI, para upagAra karI zivasukha te, pAme cega
ayAgIjI; sarvAM zatru kSaya sarva vyAdhi laya, pUN sava samIhAjI, sava' aratha
yeAge sukha tehuthI, anaMta guNu nirIhAjI. "--zrI cA. sajjhAya.

Page #701 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(25) Pas Hari! Essence: The culmination of Ashtanga Yoga, the manifestation of
the cycle of existence. Focus: 14 Darshan | GANG | Dashatyag | Gunaprapti
Gunasthan Chandraprabha Sama Pravritti | 8-9-1 -12-13-14 Dharmasanyasayog
Asangatyaag! “By nature Complete Keval- | Samadhi | Darshan Jnana Kshapak Shreni
Pravritti Puran | Kevaljnana-Nirvana The culmination of Ashtanga Yoga is the
manifestation of the cycle of existence. Thus, with the cessation of the eight
mental afflictions, and with the activation of the eighth Pravritti Guna, which
is by nature complete activity, and with the attainment of the eighth Samadhi
Gang, the eighth Darshan blossoms in full bloom. Consequently, with the
completion of the cycle of disease, the cycle of existence is also completed,
meaning the cycle of existence comes to an end. This cycle is truly an
invincible weapon that destroys the cycle of existence. By means of this, the
supreme yogi, having conquered the ocean of existence, attains the true name
"Arihant" and, by achieving the perfection of his own nature, makes the name
"Siddha" meaningful. The eight Gangs are the pillars of this cycle, closely
connected to the axis of yoga, which is the nature of the self, and revolve
around it. Or, the yogi is the complete man. His eight limbs are the eight
Gangs. Among them, Yama and Niyama are the two feet, Asana and Pranayama are the
two hands, Pratyahara is the abdomen, Dharana is the chest, Dhyana is the neck,
and Samadhi is the head. When these eight limbs of the yogi become complete and
free from any defects, it is the complete and defectless Ashtanga Yoga - just as
it is in a man with complete and defectless limbs. Any defect or incompleteness
in any limb leads to a defect or incompleteness in the yogi - just as it is in a
man with defective limbs. Just as every limb of the human body has its own
appropriate place and function, so too does every Gang in this body have its own
appropriate place and function. Just as all the limbs and parts of the body work
together in coordination to perform all the actions related to the body, so too
do all the limbs of the yogi work together in coordination (organic unit) to
perform all the actions related to the yogi.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (25) paza hari ! sAra : aSTAMga yoganI pUrNAhuti, pakaghaTanA para daSTi keka :
14 dazana | gAMga | daSatyAga ] guNaprApti guNasthAna caMdraprabhA sama pravRtti
| 8-9-1 -12-13-14 dharmasaMnyAsayoga AsaMgatyAga ! " Apa svabhAve saMpUrNa
kevala- | samAdhi | darzana jJAna kSapakazreNI pravRtti pUraNa | kevalajJAna-
nirvANa aSTAMga yoganI pUrNAhuti rUpakaghaTanA Ama aSTa cittadoSanI nivRtti
thatAM, tathA Apa svabhAve pUrNa pravRttirUpa AThamA pravRttiguNanI pravRtti
thatAM, tathA AThamA samAdhi gAMganI siddhi sAMpaDatAM, atre AThamI gadaSTi
pUrNa kaLAe khIlI nIkaLe che, ane tethI karIne rogacakanI pUrNatA thatAM
bhavacakanI paNa pUrNatA thAya che, arthAt bhavacakrane aMta Ave che. A gacaka
kharekhara ! bhavacakrane ucacheda karanAruM amogha zA che tenA vaDe karIne A
parama yoginAtha bhavaarine haNI " arihaMta" evA yathArtha nAmane pAme che, ane
svarUpanI siddhi karI * siddhi" nAmane sArthaka kare che. aSTa gAMga e A
gacakranA ArA che, te AtmasvabhAvayuM janarUpa yoganI dharI sAthe gADha
saMbaddha heI tenI AsapAsa phare che. athavA garUpa puruSa che. tenA aSTa
gAMgarUpa ATha aMga che. temAM yama-niyamarUpa be caraNa che, Asana-prANAyAma be
hAtha che, pratyAhAra udara che, dhAraNA vakSasthala (chAtI) ' che, dhyAna
grIvA-Doka che, samAdhi uttamAMga-mastaka che. A AThe aMganuM yoga-puruSa
saMpUrNapaNuM-avikalapaNuM thAya te ja yoga puruSanI avikala saMpUrNatA aSTAMga
ga che -jema avikala saMpUrNa aMgopAMgavALA puruSanI hoya che tema. eka paNa
aMganI vikalatAthI-apUrNatAthI-ga puruSanI vikalatA-apUrNatA che,-jema hIna
aMgavALA kheDakhAMpaNavALA puruSanI hoya che tema. jema puruSa zarIranA pratyeka
aMganuM yathAyogya samucita sthAna ne upayogIpaNuM hoya che, tema A gazarIramAM
paNa pratyeka gAMganuM yathAyogya samucita sthAna ne upayogIpaNuM che. jema
zarIranA sarva aMga-pratyaMga eka bIjA sAthe sahakArathI-sahayogathI ekapaNe
vattI (Co-ordination) eka zarIra saMbaMdhI sarva kriyA sAdhe che, tema yuga
puruSanA A sarva aMga ekabIjA sAthe sahakArathI-sahagathI ekapaNe vattI (organic
unit ) eka

Page #702 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(26) Yogadashti-Susura, the Yuga Purusha, performs all the processes that are
conducive to the attainment of liberation.  And so on, in many ways, this simile
has been explained in detail by this commentator.  It is necessary to
contemplate this with one's own understanding. Or, the Garud is a lotus with
eight petals.  The eight Gani-rupa are its eight petals.  And the place where
these petals meet is the Atma-svabhava-rupa, the Jan-rupa, the Yog-Karnika. In
this Atma-svabhava-rupa Karnika, the Bhagavan, the Atma-Parabrahma, resides.  As
the Garud's eight-petaled Yogadashti-rupa petals develop, so too does the Yog-
Kamal lotus develop.  With the opening of each Yogadashti-rupa petal, one by
one, each Chitta-dosha is eliminated, each Guna develops, and each Gyan is
revealed.  Thus, with the complete development of the Yogadashti, the Garud's
eight-petaled lotus attains complete development.  A complete understanding of
all this can be obtained in brief from the comprehensive main diagram placed by
this commentator himself at the beginning of this book on the title page.
Yogadashti Kalash Kavya Vasantatilaka, with the heart fixed in Samadhi, is the
perfect creation, the pure Chandramani, the peace, the nectar, the good
creation, the art of the soul, the Chandra blooms here, the knowledge-filled,
the three worlds are absorbed. 143 All the thoughts and influences are contained
within, the Atma-svabhava is pure and always contained; the mind becomes merged
in the Atma forever, such Samadhi manifests, bringing happiness to all. 144 With
constant restraint, at every moment, the infinite, the Amla Atma-bhava grows;
such a unique, pure, eternal knowledge, free from association, is always
present. 145 Where the mind, filled with desires, becomes merged, the Atma
becomes absorbed in its own form; in all regions, like the fragrance of
sandalwood, the Atma's activity becomes its natural, inherent form. 146 Such a
pure, white stream of feet, always flows naturally, free from all impurities;
beyond conduct, the difficult task is this, what is there to climb for one who
has already climbed? 147 Those who have climbed the highest peak of the Yuga,
and those who have grown in the unique series of Gunas; they are all beyond the
limitations of time, beyond the realm of thought, like the Jin-kalpa in their
power. 148 The vision of the novice in the Nadi-Shikshan is like that of a
novice, different from the vision of the self; the conduct, the action, is also
the same, the Yogi's other fruits are different in the world. 149 The jewels are
free, the jewel forest is fulfilled, the three jewels are free, the Muni, in
accordance with the truth, the renunciation, the Dharma, the application, here
the Yogi, becomes fulfilled, the ultimate truth, the good qualities are
gathered. 150 Renunciation Dharma, doing it for all, the perishable feelings,
filling the hearts of all; the Muni says, the renunciation Dharma is the path,
the unique series of Gunas flows. 151

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (26) yogadaSisasurAya yugapuruSanI sAdhaka evI sarva prakriyA kare che. ItyAdi
aneka prakAre A upamAnuM ghaTamAnapaNuM atra yathAmati A vivecanakAre vivecyuM
che. te vizeSa svamatithI ciMtavavuM. athavA garUpa aSTa kamaladalavALuM kamala
che. ATha gaNirUpa tenI ATha pAMkhaDIkamaladala che. ane te pAMkhaDInuM
milanasthAna AtmasvabhAvathuM janarUpa yoga-karNikA che. te AtmasvabhAvarUpa
kaNikAmAM bhagavAna AtmA-parabrahma birAje che. garUpa aSTadala yogadaSTirUpa
dala jema jema vikAsane pAme che, tema tema yaMga-kamala kamala vikAsane pAmatuM
jAya che. ekeka yogadaSTirUpa pAMkhaDI khulatAM anukrame ekeka cittadoSa nivRtta
thatuM jAya che, ekeka guNa vikAsa pAmate jAya che, ane ekeka gAMga pragaTatuM
jAya che. Ama saMpUrNa gadaSTi vikasatAM garUpa aSTadala kamala saMpUrNa
vikAsane pAme che. A sarvano saMpaNa khyAla saMkSepamAM A vivecanakAre svayaM
khAsa jelI A graMthanA prAraMbhamAM mukhapRSTha para mUkelI sarvagrAhI mukhya
AkRti parathI Avaze. yogadaSTi kaLaza kAvya vasaMtatilakA haiye
samAdhimahiniSTha para sudaSTi, saddha caMdramaNI zAMti sudhA suvRSTi, seLe
kaLAthI ahiM Atama caMdra khIle, snA sujJAnamayamAM traya leka jhIle. 143 sarve
vibhAva parabhAva samAI jAya, AtmA svabhAvamahiM zuddha sadA samAya; thAye
vilIna mana AtmamahiM sadAya, evI samAdhi pragaTe para saukhyadAya. 144 sata
saMyame ja samaye samaye anaMtA, vRddhi lahe amala Atama bhAvavaMtA; evuM apUrva
ahiM zukala sadA sudhyAna, AsaMga varjita akhaMDa praviddhamAna. 145 jyAM
vAsanAmaya mana: varate vilIna, AtmA thayo nija svarUpa viSe ja lIna; sarva
pradezamahiM caMdana gaMdha nyAye, AtmapravRtti sahajAnmasvarUpa thAya. 146 AvI
asita samI caraNekadhArA, vatte sadA sahaja niraticAracArA; AcArathI para
suduSkarakAra te che, ArohavAnuM zuM ja ArUDhane rahe che? 147 je yuganA parama
bhRga pare caDhayA che, ne je apUrva guNazreNI pare vadhyA che; te sarva ka5thI
atIta ja nirvikalpa, sAmarthyayegI jinakalpa tule ana5. 148 nAdi zikSaNanI daSTi
zikhAu jevI, tethI jUdI tasa nijana daSTi evI; AcAranI tyama kriyA paNa te ja
AMhi, yegInoM anya phalabhedatha lekamAMhi. 149 ratno nirdho yama ratnAvaNika
kRtArtha, nirjI ratnatrayI tema muni yathArtha saMnyAsa dharma viniyogathI atra
vegI, thAye kRtArtha paramArtha sutattva bhegI. 150 saMnyAsa dharma saghaLAya
taNe karIne, kSAyika bhAva sahu aMtaramAM bharIne; saMnyAsa dhama para vega muni
kahe che, zreNI apUrvakaraNe guNanI vahe che. 151

Page #703 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Kalash Kavya of the Eightfold Vision  (627)  A unique series of virtues,
comparable to the direct path to liberation, ascends and shines; the twenty-four
Tirthankaras, the supreme Kevalis, bless those who are eternally arising and
free from attachments. 152 Just as the moon is situated in the sky by nature, so
too is the Atma-chandra (inner moon) situated in its pure nature; to attain
Keval Jnana (omniscience) is like the moon's light, while the veil of ignorance
is like a cloud. 153 When the dense cloud of karmic actions dissipates quickly,
propelled by the wind of renunciation and Dharma, then the glorious supreme
Keval Jnana is attained, and one is truly called a Jnana Kevali. 154 All faults
are completely eradicated, omniscience is attained, and all beings are
liberated; the compassionate Muni, having achieved the highest purpose, bestows
grace upon all. 155 The Lord, whose natural form is like the king of mountains,
quickly attains the state of liberation, known as "Bega"; having destroyed the
disease of birth and death, he attains Nirvana and resides eternally in the
abode of bliss. 156  || Thus, in the Sri Yoga Drishti Samuccaya Shastra, the
eighth vision, as explained in detail by the great commentary "Sumana Anandani
Brihattika" by Bhagavan Das, the son of Kirat Chandra, composed by the great
sage Haribhadracharya. ||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 para daSTi para daSTinA kaLaza kAvya (627) sAkSAta mokSapada nIsaraNa samANI,
evI apUrva guNazreNI caDhata nANI; cogIzvara parama kevalazrI vare che, je nitya
udayI nirAvaraNa Thare che. 15ra AkAzamAM prakRtithI sthita jema caMdra, zuddha
svabhAva sthita che tyama AtmacaMdra; sacaMdrikA sama ja kevala jJAna levuM, te
jJAna AvaraNa meghasamUha jevuM. 153 te ghAti karma ghana zuM vikhare jhapATe,
saMnyAsa dharmarUpa vAyu taNA sapATe tyAre zrImAna parama kevalajJAna pAme, ne
jJAnakevalI kahAya yathArtha nAme. 154 sarveya doSa kSINu sAva ja vattanArA,
sarvajJa labdhiphala sarve ja bhaga'nArA; sAdhI parArtha para teha para kRpALu,
gAMta zrImada munIMdra lahe dayALu. 155 zailezamAMhi sahajAnmasvarUpa svAmI,
pAmI ja zIgha para bega aga nAmI; vyAdhi bhava kSaya karI niravANa pAme,
susthita teha bhagavAn nita saukhya dhAme. 156  //  iti
maharSizrIharibhadrAcAryaviracite kiratcaMdrasUnumanaHsukhanaMdanena
bhagavAnadAsena sumanAnaMdanIbRhatTIkAkhyavivecanena saprapaJcaM vivecite
zrIyogadRSTisamuccayazAstre aSTamI parA dRSTiH  //

Page #704 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Essence of Liberation*  What is there (in Nirvana)? It says:  "The
liberated man in the world is like this, so is this. He is not non-existent, nor
is he free from affliction, nor is he unafflicted." (187)  **Meaning:** The
liberated man in the world is like this, so is this (the liberated man in
Nirvana). He is not non-existent, and he is not free from affliction, meaning he
is free from affliction. And he is not unafflicted.  **Commentary:** The
liberated man in the world is like this liberated man who has attained Nirvana.
(1) He is not non-existent, but he is like a extinguished lamp, which is a
metaphor for the state of being. (2) He is not free from affliction, meaning he
is free from affliction, because he is free from the test of existence. (3) He
is not unafflicted, nor is he afflicted, because he has overcome affliction
through the state of being.  Someone who has been suffering for a long time from
a very difficult affliction. He is tormented by various ailments and cries out,
"Save me!" He has a high fever in his body. The example of the imbalance of
Vata, Pitta, and Kapha has caused him to suffer from a severe illness.
Therefore, he...  **Note:** *Chashimu* - free from affliction, afflicted,
*Puman* - man. *Chadaroyadash* - like, *Tadash* - so is this, *Nit* - Nirvana.
*Namavo* - non-existent, like a extinguished lamp. *No Mu* - not free from
affliction, meaning he is free from affliction. *Mathapit* - unafflicted.  *This
consideration of the true nature is actually a distortion of the true vision. It
has been placed here separately for the sake of the subject.*

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 mukta tattva mImAMsA* tyAM (nirvANamAM) A ke hoya che ? te kahe che
vyAdhimuktaH pumAn loke yAdRzastAdRzo hyayam  /  nAbhAvo na ca no mukto vyAdhinA
vyAdhito na ca  // 187 //  vyAdhimukta puruSa ahIM, je-te A ja; na abhAva na
vyAdhithI nA, mukta-avyAdhita nAja. 187 artha -lekamAM vyAdhimukta puruSa jevo
hoya che, te ja A hoya che. te abhAvarUpa nathI ane vyAdhithI mukta nathI ema
nathI, ane te avyAdhita paNa nathI. vivecana A lekamAM vyAdhimukta puruSa je
hoya che, te A nirvANa pAmelo mukta puruSa hoya che. (1) te abhAvarUpa nathI,
paNa bUjhAI gayela dIpakalikAnI upamA jene ghaTe che e te sadbhAvarUpa hoya che.
(2) vaLI te vyAdhithI mukta nathI thaye ema nathI, paNa bhavyatvanA parikSayathI
mukta ja hoya che. (3) temaja te avyAdhita paNa nathI, vyAdhivALo heta ema paNa
nathI, kAraNa ke pUrve tathA prakAre vyAdhine sadbhAva tene hate. keI cirakALane
mahAgI che. ghaNuM ghaNuM lAMbA vakhatathI ati duHsAdhya vyAdhithI pIDAya che.
vividha raMgavikArothI dukhAkula thaI te "trAhi mAm ' pokArI rahyo che. tenA
zarIramAM ugra javara-tAva bharAyele che. vAta-pitta-kapha regInuM dRSTAMta e
doSanI viSamatAthI tene videSa sannipAta upajyA che. tethI te kRtti:-cASimua
-mAdhithI mukta, vyAdhi jene parikSINuM che te, pumAna-puruSa. cAdaroyAdaza,
jevo hoya che, tAdaza hAthama-tevo A nita-nirvANaprApta hoya che. nAmAvo-abhAva
nathI, bUjhAI gayela dIpakalikAnI upamA jene ghaTe che e. ra ra no mueo vinA-ane
vyAdhithI mukta nathI thayA, ema nathI arthAta mukta ja che-bhavyatvanA
parikSayane lIdhe. mathApito 1 - ane avyAdhita paNa nathI, vyAdhivALo heta ema
paNa nathI- pUrve tathAkAra tabhAvane lIdhe. * A siddhasvarUpavicAra vAstavika
rIte parA dRSTinI vikArUpa ja che. te viSayanI vizatArthe atra alaga
adhikArarUpe mUkyo che.

Page #705 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Liberation of the Soul: The Disease of Samsara  (629)  He who has forgotten
his own nature, wanders aimlessly, driven by madness.  His entire body is
consumed by unbearable torment.  A sharp, piercing pain pierces his heart.  He
is tormented by various kinds of ailments, overwhelmed by suffering.  If such a
soul, afflicted by this great disease, receives the guidance of a supreme
physician, and is given the best medicine, administered according to the
prescribed method, then the disease will be eradicated.  The fever will subside,
the three poisons (tri-dosha) and the deadly disease (sannipat) will vanish.  He
will regain his true self-awareness, his torment will cease, the pain in his
heart will disappear.  He will then be completely free from disease, restored to
perfect health, strong and vigorous, and experience the fullness of well-being.
And this healthy, "swastha" man, freed from disease, experiences an
indescribable joy, a taste of bliss.  In the same way, this soul has been
afflicted by the great disease of samsara since time immemorial.  He has been
tormented by this difficult-to-cure ailment for countless eons.  He cries out in
pain, "Oh, please grant me liberation!"  A raging fever of attachment (raga) has
consumed his knowledge-body, and the three poisons of greed, hatred, and
delusion (tri-dosha) have afflicted him.  He has lost his true self-awareness
and wanders in a state of delusion, engaging in senseless activities.  His
entire body is consumed by unbearable torment, a burning sensation arising from
his craving for worldly pleasures.  A sharp, piercing pain of hatred (dvesha)
pierces his heart.  When such a soul, afflicted by this intense disease,
encounters the supreme physician, the Shrimad Sadguru, he receives the three-
fold medicine of right faith, right knowledge, and right conduct (samyak
darshan, samyak jnana, samyak charitra) through the Guru's teachings.  By
diligently practicing these three jewels (ratna-trayi) as prescribed by the
Guru, he gradually eradicates his disease.  The fever of attachment subsides,
the pain of hatred disappears, the deadly disease of delusion (sannipat) is
vanquished, he regains his self-awareness, and the torment arising from his
craving for worldly pleasures is extinguished.  He then sees his true self,
attains knowledge, and follows his true nature.  He knows the pure soul, the
self, and dwells in the state of pure knowledge.  He becomes "swastha" and
experiences the state of liberation (kevalya).  Then, until the end of his
physical life, he gradually eliminates the remaining four karmas, which are like
the remnants of a burnt-out wick, according to his prarabdha karma.  He
completely exhausts these karmas.  Thus, completely free from karma, he is
liberated from the cycle of samsara.  And this soul, freed from the disease of
samsara, possessing perfect spiritual health, dwelling in his true self, this
supreme "swastha" man, experiences an indescribable joy, a state of perfect
bliss.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 mukta tatva mImAMsA: jIvana bhavarUpa bhAvarega (629) potAnuM bhAna bhUlI jaI
jema tema bAkI rahyo che, unmatta ceSTA karI rahyo che. AkhA zarIre tIvra asahya
dAvedane tene thaI rahI che. hRdayamAM tIkSNa zUla bheMkAI rahyuM che. ema aneka
prakAranI rogapIDAthI AkulavyAkula e te herAna herAna thaI rahyo che. AvA mahA
rogAtta duHkhI jIvane uttama sarveidyanA upadezathI uttama auSadhano joga maLI
Ave ne tene yathAnidiSTa padhdhapUrvaka prayoga karavAmAM Ave, to te rogIne roga
nimULa thAya; tene jvara-tAva utarI jAya, trideSa-sannipAta cAlyo jAya, te
barAbara pitAnA bhAnamAM Ave, tenI dAvedanA dUra thAya, hRdayazUlya nIkaLI jAya,
ne pachI saMpUrNa rogamukta thaI, taddana sAjetAjo-duSTapuSTa banI te saMpUrNa
ArogyanesvAne anubhave. ane Avo A ArogyasaMpanna "svastha" puruSa rogamukta
thayAne kaI adbhuta AnaMdarasa AsvAde. A prakAre lekamAM pragaTa dekhAya che. te
ja prakAre A jIvane anAdi kALathI A bhavarUpa mahAroga lAgu paDyo che. A mahA
kaSTasAdhya vyAdhithI te ghaNA ghaNA dIrgha samayathI herAna herAna thaI rahyo
che. te roganA vikArothI duHkhI duHkhI thaI te "ya mADI re ! karaje trANa"
jIvane bhavarUpa ema pokArI rahyo che. tenA jJAnamaya dehamAM rAgarUpa ugra
jvara caDhI bhAvaga Avyo che, meharUpa trideSa sanipAta tene thayo che, eTale te
"nija bhAna bhUlI jaI unmatta pralApa ceSTA karI rahyo che. AkhA zarIre tene
viSayatRSNajanya asahya tatra dAvedanA vyApI rahI che-baLatarA thaI rahI che;
hRdayamAM dveSarUpa zalya bheMkAI rahyuM che. AvA ugra virogathI Akula jIvane
zrImad sadgururUpa uttama savaidyane "joga' bAjhatAM, temanA sadupadezathI
samyam darzana-jJAnacAritrarUpa auSadhatrayInI prApti thAya che. ane guru
AjJArUpa pathya anupAna sAthe te ratnatrayIrUpa auSadhatripuTInuM samyak sevana
karatAM anukrame tenA virogano nimULa nAza thAya che. tene raga-javara utarI
jAya che, dveSazalya nIkaLI jAya che, mAha sannipAtanuM patana thAya che,
AtmabhAna pAchuM Ave che, viSayatRSNAthI upajatI dAvedanA-baLatarA zamI jAya
che. ane te nija sahaja AtmasvarUpanuM darzana karI, jJAna pAmI, AtmavarUpanuM
anusaraNa kare che, kevala zuddha AtmAne jANa, zraddhI, kevala jJAnamaya AtmAmAM
sthiti karI, "svastha" thaI, kevalya dazAne anubhave che. ane pachI te carama
dehanA AyuSyanI sthiti paryata baLelI sIdarI jevA AkRtimAtra rahelA zeSa cAra
karmone prArabdhadaya pramANe bhegavI nijArI nAMkhe che, ane prAMte te karmone
paNa sarvathA parikSaNa kare che. Ama sarvathA karma mukta thayela te
bhavaregathI mukta bane che. ane AvA A bhavavyAdhithI mukta thayelA, parama
bhAvArogyasaMpana, sahajAtmasvarUpa susthita, evA A parama "svastha" parama
puruSa parama AnaMdamaya evI bhAva-Arogya dazAne koI avarNanIya AnaMdarasa
bhegave che.

Page #706 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(630) The collection of Gadasti is like a lake where a man free from disease is
healthy, well, and joyful. Similarly, this pure, conscious being (soul) free
from the disease of existence is supremely healthy, supremely "well", and
supremely joyful. (1) This liberated being who has attained Nirvana is not
devoid of anything. In other words, it is not a state of nothingness, as some
(Buddhists, etc.) believe. It is not the absence of the self, but the essence of
the self. That is, there is only the pure, distinct, and immaculate essence of
the self, which is known as "Siddha". Just as a man freed from disease does not
cease to exist when he is freed from disease, so too, the conscious being-soul
freed from the disease of existence does not cease to exist when he is freed
from the disease of existence. The absence of disease does not mean the absence
of the man, but only reveals his pure, healthy state. Similarly, the absence of
the disease of existence does not mean the absence of the soul, but only reveals
its pure, healthy, and disease-free state. The soul's worldly state is removed,
and the Siddha-liberated state emerges. The pure, inherent nature of the soul,
where there is ultimate detachment from the body and other attachments, is
revealed. (See the verses of Atmasiddhi, p. 404). Furthermore, (2) this being-
soul is not free from disease, but is free from the test of existence. Some
(Samkhya, etc.) believe that this soul is always free, unbound, and never bound.
But this belief is very free and full of errors. Because if we believe that,
then bondage, pleasure-pain, etc., will not cease, and many faults like
destruction-non-creation, etc., will arise. And the goal of that philosophy,
which is liberation, will also fail! Because one who is bound has the
possibility of being liberated, but one who is never bound, where is the
possibility of liberation? If there is no bondage, then where is liberation?
Because liberation is the process of being freed from bondage. This liberation,
which is the process of being freed from bondage, is achieved here by being free
from the test of existence. Therefore, one who attains liberation is not free
from the disease of existence, but is free from it. Just as a "healthy" person
is not free from disease, but is still free from that disease, and therefore is
called healthy and disease-free, so too, the liberated soul is not free from the
disease of existence, but is still free from it, and therefore is called
"liberated" and free from the disease of existence. (3) And it is not that he
was "disease-free" - without disease, because previously he had the essence of
disease, which was manifested in various ways. It is not even said that the man
free from disease had disease before, because it contradicts the direct
perception. Because it is like saying "There is no tongue in the great ocean".

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (630) gadaSTisamuccaya Ama jema lekamAM vyAdhimukta puruSa je nIrogI, jevo
svastha, je AnaMdamaya hoya che, te A bhavavyAdhithI mukta A zuddha
caitanyasvarUpa puruSa (AtmA) parama nIrogI, parama "svastha ', parama
AnaMdamaya hoya che. (1) A nirvANa prApta mukta mukta abhAva puruSa kAMI
abhAvarUpa nathI, arthAt keTalAka (bauddha Adi) mAne che tema rUpa nathI
nairAmya avasthArUpa nathI, Atma vastunA abhAvarUpa nathI, paraMtu vastu
sadbhAvarUpa che. eTale ke kevala, zuddha, vivikta, nirmala AtmatattvanuM ja
tyAM hovApaNuM che, ke je zuddha Atmatattva "siddha" nAmathI oLakhAya che.
rogathI mukta thayela puruSa rogathI mukta thatAM kAMI puruSa maTI jato nathI,
tema bhavarogathI mukta thayele caitanya maya puruSa-AtmA bhavarogamukta thatAM
kAMI puruSa-AtmA maTI jato nathI. roganA abhAve kAMI puruSano abhAva thato
nathI, paNa kevala tenI zuddha nIrogI avasthA ja pragaTe che. tema bhavaroganA
abhAve kAMI AtmAne abhAva thatuM nathI, paNa tenI kevala zuddha nIrogI nirAmaya
tattvakAya avasthA pragaTe che, AtmAnI saMsArI avasthA dUra thaI siddha-mukta
avasthA AvirbhAva pAme che; dehAdika saMgane jayAM AtyaMtika viga che, evI
zuddha nija svabhAvarUpa mekSadazA prakaTa thAya che. (juo AtmasiddhinI gAthA,
pR. 404). vaLI (2) A puruSa-AtmA vyAdhithI mukta nathI thayo ema paNa nathI,
paNa bhavyatvanA parikSayathI mukta hoya ja che. keI (sAMkhyAdi ) ema mAne che
ke A AtmA te sadAya mukta ja che, abaMdha ja che-baMdhAyele ja nathI. paNa A
mAnyatA bahu mukta nathI thaye bhUlabharelI che; kAraNa ke tema je mAnIe te
baMdha-kSa, sukha-duHkha ema paNa nathI Adi vyavasthA ghaTaze nahiM, kRtanAza-
akRtAgama Adi aneka doSa Avaze, ane je mokSane mATe ja te te darzananuM
prayojana che te prajana paNa niSphaLa thaze ! kAraNa ke baMdhAyela hoya tene
mukata thavApaNuM hoya, paNa je baMdhAyelo ja na hoya te mukta thavAnuM kyAM
rahyuM ? jo baMdhana ja na hoya te mukti kayAMthI hoya ? kAraNake baMdhana-
mecana, baMdhanathI chUTavuM tenuM nAma ja mekSa che. A baMdhanamocanarUpa mekSa
atre bhavyatvanA parikSayathI hoya che. eTalA mATe je mekSa pAme che, mukta
thAya che, te bhavavyAdhithI mukata nathI thaye ema nathI, paraMtu mukta thaye
ja che, jema "nIrogI " manuSya rogathI mukta nathI ema nathI, paNa chatAM evA
rogathI mukta thaye ja che, ane eTale ja te nIrogI-rogamukta kahevAya che, tema
mukta AtmA bhavarogathI mukta nathI thaye ema nathI, paNa chatAM-pragaTa
astitvarUpa bhavarogathI mukta thayo ja che, eTale ja te "mukta"--bhavarogamukta
kahevAya che. (3) ane te "avyAdhita"--vyAdhi vagarano hato ema paNa nathI,
kAraNa ke pUrve tene tathA prakAre pragaTa avyAdhita vyAdhine sadbhAva hato ja.
vyAdhimukta puruSane mATe kaI ema kahe paNa nathI ke pUrve tene vyAdhi ja , te
temAM dRSTa-ISTa bAdhA. pratyakSa virodha Ave che. kAraNa ke te te "mahArA
meDhAmAM jIbha nathI ' ema

Page #707 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Liberation of the Soul: Regamukt is Bhavamukt  (631) To say that a Regamukt
is like a cured person is a contradiction. Because if someone was afflicted, how
could they be free from affliction? Therefore, to say so is completely absurd.
Because it is a real fact that he was suffering from the disease of existence.
And only when he is freed from it, is he called free from the disease of
existence.  Thus, in every way, the liberated soul is like a person who is free
from disease: (1) Just as a person who is free from disease is healthy and
joyful, so too is this liberated soul perfectly healthy and joyful, immersed in
Regamukt. (2) Just as when a disease is cured, there is no lack of the diseased
person, similarly, when the disease of existence is cured, there is no lack of
the pure conscious soul. (3) Just as a person who is free from disease is not
free from disease, but is free, so too is this liberated soul who has attained
Nirvana not free from the disease of existence, but is free. (4) And just as a
person who is free from disease was previously afflicted, without disease, but
was afflicted; so too is this liberated soul who has attained Nirvana previously
afflicted, without the disease of existence, but was afflicted by the disease of
existence. If there was no disease, then how could it be destroyed? And how
could there be liberation?  "If there is no dog, then how can it be tied?" Thus,
this illustration clearly reveals the truth, like a bright lamp, which even a
child can understand. How can any human being with a simple understanding not
understand it? Yet, it is surprising that some philosophers, who consider
themselves wise, have created many false ideas about liberation! For example,
"Liberation is a state of nothingness." "This soul is eternally liberated."
"This soul has never been afflicted by the disease of existence." And so on. All
such alternative views are based on wrong desires and cannot stand for even a
moment when examined with reason. Those who are curious about this should study
the great scriptures like the Shatdarshanasamuccaya, Shastravartasamuccaya,
Batris Batrisi, Tattvarthasara, etc. Due to the fear of being too lengthy, only
a brief guidance has been given here.   The same meaning is clearly stated in
the following verse:  **भव एव महान्याधिर्जन्ममृत्युक्किारवान् ।**
**विचित्रमोहजननस्तीव्ररागाविवेदनः ॥१८८॥**  **Vritti:** Existence itself is the
great disease, the great affliction. Why? Because it is characterized by birth
and death, which are forms of change. It is the source of various delusions, and
it is filled with intense passions and suffering.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 mukta tattava mImAMsA: regamukata je bhavamukta (631) belanAranI jema vadate
vyAghAta che. kAraNa ke je vyAdhi ja hote, te vyAdhimukta thaye zI rIte? mATe
ema kahevuM te sAva behUduM che. kAraNa ke te bhavarogathI duHkhI thaI rahyo
hato te pratyakSa pragaTa hakIkata (Real fact) che. ane temAMthI chUTayo-mukta
thayo, tyAre ja te bhavyAdhi rahita-mukta kahevAya che. Ama sarvathA,
vyAdhimukta puruSa jevo lekamAM hoya che, te ja-tAdaza ja A nirvANa prApta mukta
puruSa (AtmA) hoya cheH (1) vyAdhimukta puruSa jevo svastha AnaMdI hoya che, te
A mukta AtmA parama svastha-parama AnaMdaregamukta je nimagna hoya che. (2) jema
roga dUra thatAM kAMI rogI puruSane bhavamukta abhAva thaI jatuM nathI, tema
bhavavyAdhi dUra thatAM kAMI zuddha caitanya mUrti AtmAno abhAva heta nathI. 3)
te vyAdhimukta puruSa jema vyAdhithI mukta nathI hote ema nahi, paNa mukta ja
hoya che, tema A nirvANaprApta mukta AtmA bhavyAdhithI mukta nathI ema nahiM,
paNa mukta ja hoya che. (4) ane te vyAdhimukta puruSa jema pUrve avyAdhita hete,
vyAdhi vagarane hote, paNa vyAdhivALe hate ja; tema A nirvANa prApta mukta AtmA
paNa pUrve avyAdhita hete, bhava vyAdhi vagarano hote, paNa bhava vyAdhivALe
hatuM ja. nahiM te, vyAdhi ja na hota, te tene nAza paNa kema heta ? tethI
muktapaNuM kema hota? mUruM nAsti kutto lA? Ama A dRSTAMta uparathI
supratItapaNe phalita thatI cakakhI dIvA jevI spaSTa hakIkata bAlaka paNa samajI
zake ema che, te sAdI samajavALa keI paNa manuSya kema na samaje? tathApi
mahAmati gaNatA keTalAka darzanavAdIoe A mokSa saMbaMdhI aneka prakAre asatu
kaha5nAo ubhI karI che te Azcaya che ! jemake- mokSa Ama abhAva5 che. " " A AtmA
nitya mukta ja che," "A AtmAne bhavyAdhi lAgela ja nathI," ItyAdi. AvA badhA
vikalpa daSTa-ISTa bAdhita hoI, viveka vicArathI kSaNabhara paNa TakI zakatA
nathI. A saMbaMdhI vizeSa prakAzanA jijJAsue zrI Sadarzanasamuccaya,
zAstravArtAsamuccaya, batrIza batrIzI, tavArthasAra Adi mahAgraMtharatno
avagAhavA bhalAmaNa che. atra vistAra bhayathI digdarzanarUpa nidezamAtra karyo
che. A ja arthane spaSTa karatAM kahe che bhava eva
mahAnyAdhirjanmamRtyukkiAravAn  /  vicitramohajananastIvrarAgAvivedanaH  // 188
//  vRtti -maya pa-bhava ja, saMsAra ja, mahAvyAdhi-mahAvyAdhi che, ke viziSTa ?
ke-sanmamRtyuviravAna-jama, mRtyurUpa vikAravALe, AnuM jarA Adi upalakSaNa che.
vinitrokanano vicitra moha upajAvanAro,-bhiThThAvanA udaya bhAvathI, toDyA vinA-
tIva rAgAdi vedanAvALe,-trI AdinA abhiLyuM gabhAvathI (Asakti bhAvathI).

Page #708 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(632) The collection of yogic insights states that the world is a great disease,
birth, death, and change; intense passions and pains, a strange affection. 188
Meaning: - This world is a great disease. It is full of change in the form of
birth and death, it produces strange affection and is full of intense passions
and pains. Discussion: This world is a great disease. What kind of disease is
it? It is full of change in the form of birth and death, it is full of change
like dust and so on; it produces strange affection due to the arising of false
belief; and it is full of intense passions and pains due to the attachment to
women and so on. What is the disease mentioned above? The author, the great
sage, has clarified it here. From the ultimate point of view, the greatest
disease in this world is this world itself, that is, the cycle of birth and
death. This world is comparable to a great disease; because in terms of its
sign, form, cause, distortion, treatment, result, and so on, there are many
similarities between the two. It is like this - Just as a disease attacks the
human body and surrounds it from all sides, so too does the disease of the world
attack the soul's knowledge-body and surrounds it from all sides. Just as a
disease spreads from atom to atom in the body and produces its effect, so too
does the disease of the world spread throughout the soul's regions and produces
its effect. Just as a disease weakens the body's strength, destroys its
vitality, and absorbs its blood, flesh, and other elements, so too does the
disease of the world weaken the soul's infinite power, destroys its light and
vitality, and absorbs its knowledge, vision, and other elements of its nature.
Just as a disease causes a disturbance of the elements, so too does the disease
of the world cause a disturbance of the passions, hatred, and other vices. Just
as a disease confines a person to bed, makes him dependent and weak, so too does
the disease of the world confines the soul to the body, makes it dependent on
matter and weak. Just as a disease changes the entire appearance of a person so
much that it becomes difficult to recognize him, so too does the disease of the
world changes the soul's true appearance so much that it becomes difficult to
recognize it. Just as a disease is a state of ill health, unnatural, unnatural,
and distorted for the human body, so too is the disease of the world a state of
ill health, unnatural, unnatural, and distorted for the soul. Just as a disease
is an unhealthy state of the human body, so too is the disease of the world an
unhealthy state of the soul. Just as a disease is a punishment for the human
body's unnatural, unnatural behavior, for its unrighteousness, so too is the
disease of the world a punishment for the soul's unnatural, unnatural behavior,
for its unrighteousness. Just as a disease is a punishment for the body's

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (632) yogadaSTisamuccaya saMsAra ja mahA vyAdhi che, janma mRtyu vikAra; tIvra
rAgAdi vedanA, citra meha karanAra, 188 artha:-bhava ja mahAvyAdhi che. te
janma-maraNarUpa vikAravALo che, vicitra meha upajAvanAra ane tIvra rAgAdi
vedanAvALe che. vivecana A bhava-saMsAra e ja mahAvyAdhi che. te kevo che?
janma-maraNarUpa vikAravALe che, upalakSaNathI jarA Adi vikAravALo che;
mithyAtvanA udayabhAvathI vicitra prakArane meha upajAvanAro che; tathA strI
AdinA Asakti bhAvathI tIvra rAgAdi vedanAvALe che. uparamAM je vyAdhinI vAta
kahI te vyAdhi kayo? tenI ahIM graMthakAra maharSie ja spaSTatA karI che.
paramArthathI joIe te A jagatamAM moTAmAM moTo je kaI vyAdhi hoya, te te A bhava
eTale saMsAra ja che. A saMsArane mahAreganI upamA barAbara ghaTe che; kAraNa ke
cihnathI, svarUpathI, kAraNathI, vikRtithI, cikitsAthI, pariNAma AdithI bannenuM
aneka prakAre sAmya che. te A prakAre - roga jema manuSyanA zarIra para AkramaNa
karI tene taraphathI gherI le che, tema bhavarega AtmAnA jJAnamaya zarIra para
AkramaNa karI ene copAsathI gherI le che. roga jema zarIranA paramANue
paramANumAM vyApta thaI pitAnI asara nIpabhavareganuM jAve che, tema bhavaraga
AtmAnA pradeza pradezamAM vyApI jaI potAnI AkramaNa asara nIpajAve che. roga
jema zarIranI zaktine kSINa karI nAMkhe che, nara-teja uDADI de che, rakta-mAMsa
Adi dhAtuone zoSI le che, tema bhavaroga paNa AtmAnI anaMta zaktine kSINa karI
nAMkhe che, AtmAnuM nUra-teja uDADI de che, jJAna-darzanAdi AtmasvabhAvarUpa
dhAtuone zoSI le che. roga jema doSaprakopa kare che, tema bhavaroga rAgadveSAdi
deSano prakepa kare che. roga jema manuSyane pathArIvaza karI parAdhIna ne
pAMgaLa karI mUke che, tema bhavaroga AtmAne zarIra-zasyAmAM suvaDAvI para
pudgala vastune AdhIna pAMgaLo karI mUke che. roga jema mANasanI AkhI sakala evI
pheravI nAMkhe che ke tenuM oLakhANa paDavuM muzkela thaI paDe che, tema
bhavaroga AtmAnI asala sIkala evI palaTAvI nAMkhe che ke tenuM oLakhANa thavuM
kaThina hoya che. rega e jema manuSyanI anAregyarUpa aprAkRtika-akudaratI-vikRta
avasthA che, tema bhavaraga e AtmAnI anArogyarUpa akudaratI aprAkRtika-vikRta
avasthA che. roga jema manuSyanA zarIranI asvastha sthiti che, tema bhavaroga e
bhavarega AtmAnI asvastha sthiti che. roga jema manuSyanA prakRtiviruddha
aprAkRtika vartAnanI-adharmanI sajA che-daMDa che, tema bhavaroga e AtmAnA
saheja avasthA prakRti viruddha vartAnanI-adharmanI sajA che, daMDa che, roga
jema zarIranI

Page #709 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Beginning **The Essence of the Sūktas**: The state of being bound by
karma, a state that is unnatural and distorted, and its signs.  **(633)** Just
as the imbalance of the bodily elements manifests as disease, so too does the
imbalance of the soul's inherent elements manifest as the disease of karma. Just
as disease has specific causes, so too does the disease of karma. Just as the
accumulation of impurities, the aggravation of karmic poisons, the imbalance of
bodily elements, conduct contrary to nature, fear, and anxiety, etc., lead to
the manifestation of disease, so too does the accumulation of karmic impurities,
the aggravation of karmic poisons like attachment, aversion, and delusion, the
imbalance of the soul's inherent elements, conduct contrary to the soul's
inherent nature - adharma, the fear of the consequences of one's actions, and
the anxiety of not being on the right path, etc., lead to the manifestation of
the great disease of karma.  **(1)** Just as disease leads to a weakening of the
digestive fire, causing a loss of appetite and a dislike for food, so too does
the disease of karma lead to a weakening of the soul's inherent energy, causing
a loss of appetite for the path of liberation and a dislike for the supreme
reality. Just as disease leads to vomiting, a sign of the body's rejection of
the disease, so too does the disease of karma lead to a rejection of the path of
liberation and a forgetting of one's true nature. Just as disease leads to
constipation or indigestion, so too does the disease of karma lead to the
accumulation of karmic impurities or the indigestion of worldly desires.
**(2)** Just as disease causes pain in the heart and shortness of breath, so too
does the disease of karma cause pain to the soul and shortness of breath in the
pursuit of the right path.  **(3)** Just as disease leads to an increase in
vital energy, causing rapid breathing, coughing, and phlegm, so too does the
disease of karma lead to an obstruction of the soul's inherent knowledge and
vision, causing rapid breathing of birth and death, coughing of karmic poisons,
and phlegm of worldly desires.  **(4)** Just as disease leads to the decay and
depletion of the body, so too does the disease of karma lead to the decay and
depletion of the soul's knowledge body.  **(5)** Just as disease disrupts the
flow of pure blood in the body, causing the body to become pale, weak, and
lifeless, so too does the disease of karma disrupt the flow of pure
consciousness, causing the soul's knowledge body to become pale, weak, and
lifeless.  **(6)** Just as disease dries up the bodily elements like blood and
flesh, leaving only bones, so too does the disease of karma dry up the soul's
inherent elements like knowledge and vision, leaving only a faint trace of
consciousness.  **(7)** Just as disease can affect the brain, causing confusion,
loss of memory, and incoherent speech, so too does the disease of karma affect
the soul, causing confusion, loss of memory, and incoherent speech.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Adi suktatatvamImAMsAH bhavaga aprAkRtika vikRta avasthA, cihno (633) dhAtuonI
viSamatAne AvirbhAva che, tema bhavaraga e AtmAnI svabhAva-dhAtunI viSamatAne
AviSkAra-prakaTa prakAra che. rogane jema niyata cokkasa kAraNukalApa hoya che,
tema bhavarogane niyata cokkasa kAraNakalApa hoya che. malasaMcaya, deSa
prakopa, dhAtuvaiSamya, prakRtiviruddha AcaraNa, bhaya, udvega Adi sva-gya
kAraNathI jema reganI utpatti hoya che, tema bhAvamalasaMcayathI, rAgAdi
doSaprakopathI, svabhAvadhAtuvaiSamyathI, AtmAnI sahaja svabhAvasiddha prakRti
viruddha AcaraNathI-adharmathI, AtmapariNAmanI caMcalatArUpa bhayathI, sanmArga
pratye kaMTALArUpa udvegathI,-ityAdi svayegya vividha kArathI mahAbhavaraga
upaje che. (1) rogathI jema agnimAMdya thAya che, anna pratye aruci upaje che,
khAvAnuM bhAvatuM nathI, tema bhavarogathI AtmatejanI maMdatArUpa agnimAMdya
upaje che, sanmAgarUpa paramAna prati aruci-abhAve Ave che. regathI jema meLa
Ave che, rogacihano vamana thAya che, tema bhavaragathI savacana pratye
aNagamArUpa meLa agnimAMdya Ave che, ne svarUpavismaraNarUpa vamana thAya che.
regathI jema malA varSobha thAya che, athavA ajIrNa-visUcikA upaje che, tema
bhavarogathI kamasaMcayarUpa bhAvamalane avarNabha thAya che, athavA
viSayavikArarUpa ajIrNa-vicikA upaje che. (2) rogathI jema hRdayamAM zUla
bheMkAya che, tathA hAMpha caDhe che, tema bhavaragathI TheSarUpa zULa AtmAne
bheMkAya che, tathA sanmArga pratye bedarUpa hAMpha caDhe che. (3) regathI jema
prANu vadha thAya che, zvAsevAsa jorathI cAle che, khAMsI Ave che, kapha paDe
che, tema bhavaregathI jJAnadazanarUpa bhAvaprANane avarodha thAya che, janma-
maraNarUpa zvAsocchavAsa jorathI cAle che, kaSAyarUpa khAMsI Ave che, te
viSayarUpa kapha paDe che. (4) regathI jema zarIrane kSaya-kSINatA-ghasAro lAgu
paDe che, tema bhavaregathI jJAnamaya Atmadehane kSaya-kSINatA-ghasAro lAgu paDe
che. (5) rogathI jema zuddha raktAbhisaraNa (circulation) barAbara thatuM nathI,
zarIra pAMDu-phIkakuM-nisteja (anaemic) thaI jAya che, tema bhavarogathI zuddha
caitanyapravAharUpa raktanuM abhisaraNa (circulation ) barAbara thatuM nathI,
AtmAne jJAnadeha pAMDu-phIkko-nisteja banI jAya che. (6) regathI jema zarIranA
rudhira-mAMsAdi dhAtu sukAI jAya che ne zarIra asthimAtrAvazeSa rahe che, tema
bhavarogathI AtmAnA jJAnadarzanAdi svabhAvarUpa dhAtu zeSAya che ne atyaMta
maMda caitanyacihnarUpa Atmadeha avazeSa rahe che. (7) rogathI jema magajanuM
ThekANuM rahetuM nathI. magajanuM kedra (centre) khasI jAya che, mANasa pite
pitAnuM bhAna bhUlI jAya che, "cakrama' thaIne yadvAtA phAve tema bake che, ne
tridoSa sannipAtane pAme che; tema bhavarogathI AtmAnuM

Page #710 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(34) The collection of impurities (gaderisamuccaya) does not reside in the form
of the three poisons (tridosha), the center of the form is shifted due to the
corruption of the form, the soul forgets its inherent nature (nijaswaroop) of
the father, the insane one becomes a "chakra" and speaks nonsense about the
other things as if they were the father, and due to the growth of the three
poisons (mehraag-dvesharoopi trideesha), it attains the state of annihilation
(nipataroop) from the state of existence (saswaroop). (8) Just as the body
itches and burns due to the heat, similarly, due to the disease of existence
(bhavarog), the body itches and burns due to the desire for enjoyment
(bhogechchaaroop). (9) Just as the body gets fever and thirst due to the heat,
similarly, due to the disease of existence (bhavarog), the soul gets fever and
thirst due to the desire for objects (vishayatrushna). (10) Just as various
ailments arise due to the heat, similarly, birth, death, etc. arise due to the
disease of existence (bhavarog). To be born again and again, to die again and
again, to lie in the womb of the mother again and again, to experience old age,
heat, pain, anxiety, misfortune, poverty, etc. again and again - these are all
the ailments of the disease of existence (bhavarog). (11) Just as strange types
of affection arise due to the heat, similarly, strange types of affection arise
due to the disease of existence (bhavarog). Just as the disease of jaundice
(kamala) causes the yellowness of the eyes, similarly, the disease of existence
(bhavarog) causes the delusion of perception (darshanmoh) due to the strange
affection of the wrong belief (mithyatva). Just as the patient with fever
forgets his own identity, similarly, the soul in the disease of existence
(bhavarog) does not have the awareness of its own true nature. Just as the
patient in unconsciousness considers the father's things as his own and his own
things as others, similarly, the soul in the disease of existence (bhavarog)
considers the other things as the father's and its own things as others. (12)
Just as the patient is not in his original healthy state but in a diseased and
distorted state, similarly, the soul in the disease of existence (bhavarog) is
not in its original natural state but in a distorted state due to the disease of
existence (bhavarog). (13) Just as the behavior of the patient suffering from
fever is erratic, similarly, the behavior of the soul suffering from the disease
of existence (bhavarog) is also erratic and contrary to its nature. (14) Just as
the patient becomes irritable due to the heat, similarly, the soul in the
disease of existence (bhavarog) also becomes irritable and gets angry. (15) Just
as the body experiences intense pain due to the disease, similarly, the soul
experiences intense pain due to the attachment to women, etc. - thus, from
certain specific signs...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (34) gadarisamuccaya tridoSa svarUpa padamAM sthitirUpa kaI ThekANuM rahetuM
nathI, svarUpabhraSTatAthI unmAdAdi svarUpa kedra khasI jAya che, AtmA pote
pitAnA sahaja nija svarUpanuM bhAna bhUlI jAya che, unmatta "cakrama' banIne
paravastune pitAnI kahevArUpa yadvADhA pralApa-akabakATa kare che, ane meha-
rAga-dveSarUpI trideSanI vRddhithI sasvarUpathI nipAtarUpa sannipAtane pAme che.
(8) regathI jema khasa thAya che ne khUjalI-mIThI caLa upaDe che, ane tethI
pariNAme lAhya baLe che, tema bhavarogathI viSayavikArarUpa khasa thAya che ne
bhogecchArUpa khajavALa-mIThI caLa-"kaM' Ave che, ne tethI pariNAme
bhavabhegarUpa lAhya baLyA kare che. (9) regathI jema zarIramAM ugra-Akare tAva
bharAya che ane bhArI tarasa lAge che, tema bhavagAthI rAgarUpa ugra javara
bharAya che ane viSayatRSNArUpa bhArI tRSA upaje che. (10) vaLI regathI jema
vividha vikAro ubharI Ave che, tema bhavaregathI janma-maraNAdi vikAre upaje
che. pharI pharIne janmavuM, pharI pharIne maravuM, pharI pharIne mAtAnA
udaramAM zayana karavuM, pharI pharI ghaDa5Na, rega, zeka, ciMtA, daubhAMgya,
dAridra Adi duHkha anubhavavuM,-e badhA bhavaraganA vikAra che. (11) regathI
jema vicitra prakArano meha upaje che, tema bhavarogathI vicitra prakArane meha
upaje che. rogathI jema kamaLArUpa pittavikArane lIdhe ghaLI vastu paNa pILI
dekhAvArUpa daSTidoSa thAya che, tema bhavaregathI mithyAtva udayane vicitra
meha lIdhe asatamAM sabuddhi ne samAM asaMtabuddhirUpa daSTideSaAdi darzanamoha
upaje che. regathI jema raMgAkula daradI pote potAnuM bhAna - bhUlI jAya che,
tema bhavaregA jaMtune AtmAnA svasvarUpanuM bhAna rahetuM nathI. bebhAnapaNamAM
jema daradI pitAnI vastune pArakI ne pArakI vastune potAnI kahevArUpa brAMtine
seve che, tema AtmasvarUpanA abhAnapaNamAM bhavaragI paravastune pitAnI ne
svavastune pArakI gaNavArUpa mithyA bhrAMtine seve che. (12) rogI jema potAnI
mULa Arogyamaya asala svabhAvasthitimAM hoto nathI, paNa rogakRta vikRta
avasthAmAM hoya che, tema bhavarogI pitAnI mULa asala sahaja svabhAvasthitimAM
varnAte nathI, paNa bhavagakRta vibhAvarUpa vikRta dazAmAM vatto hoya che. (13)
rogathI muMjhAI gayelA-mehamUDha regInuM AcaraNa jema viSama hoya che, tema
bhavarogathI mehita thayelA-muMjhAI gayelA mehamUDha jIvanuM AcaraNa paNa
mahAmehamaya viSama hoya che, svabhAvathI viparIta hoya che. (14) regathI jema
svabhAva cIDhIye thaI javAthI daradI vAtavAtamAM cIDhAI jAya che, tema
bhavarogathI cIDhIye thaI gayela A bhavarogI paNa vAtavAtamAM krodhAdi
kaSAyAkula thaI AvezamAM AvI jAya che ! "kama jora ne gussA hota" kare che !
(15) rogathI jema zarIre tIvra vedanA-pIDA upaje che, tema bhavaregathI AtmAne
strI Adi pratyenA AsaktibhAvane lIdhe rAgadveSAdi tIvra vedanA upaDe che.-Ama
amuka amuka cokkasa cihno parathI

Page #711 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Muktatattvamimaansa: Comparison of Bhava Chihnos, Sadhya-Asadhya Nirnay
(635) Just as a diagnosis can be made based on examining the symptoms of a
disease, the diagnosis of Bhava Rog can be made based on the subtle, specific
signs.  And just as the curability, difficulty to cure, or incurability of a
disease can be determined based on the condition of the patient and the type of
disease, the curability, difficulty to cure, or incurability of Bhava Rog can be
determined based on the state of the being, the type of Bhava, and the specific
circumstances. Is this being's Bhava Rog curable, difficult to cure, or
incurable? This can be determined through a Prognosis. For example:  (1) If a
patient experiences a very positive effect from a medicine immediately, it
indicates that the disease is curable. Similarly, if a being experiences a very
positive effect, in the form of a change in their Bhava, immediately after the
application of the appropriate medicine, such as Samyag Darshan, it is certain
that the being is close to liberation and their Bhava Rog is curable.  (2) If a
patient experiences some effect from a medicine after a long time, it indicates
that the disease is difficult to cure. Similarly, if a being experiences a
positive effect, in the form of a change in their Bhava, after a long time of
applying the medicine of the Ratna Trayi, it indicates that the being is far
from liberation and their Bhava Rog is difficult to cure.  (3) If a patient does
not experience any effect from any medicine, even after a very long time, and
the medicine has no effect, it is like pouring water on a stone, and the disease
worsens, it indicates that the disease is incurable. Similarly, if a being does
not experience any positive effect, in the form of a change in their Bhava, even
after a long time of applying the best medicines, such as Darshan, and does not
experience any improvement, and instead experiences negative effects like pride,
it indicates that the being is far from liberation and their Bhava Rog is
incurable.  Just as the future outcome of a disease can be predicted based on
the symptoms and specific circumstances of the patient, the future outcome of
Bhava Rog can be predicted based on the signs and specific circumstances of the
being.  Furthermore, just as there are differences among patients, some are
intelligent, some are not, some are children, some are old, etc., there are also
differences among beings with Bhava Rog. Some are intelligent, some are not,
some are children, some are old, etc. Because, as mentioned above, the one who
understands the painful nature of the disease, the intelligent and wise patient,
will try to cure the disease as quickly as possible.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 muktatattvamImAMsAH bhavaga cihnonI tulanA, sAdhyAsAdhya nirNaya (635) jema
roganuM nidAna-parIkSA (Diagnosis) thaI zake che, tema nAnA prakAranA
pratiniyatacakkasa cihno parathI bhavareganuM nidAna thaI zake che. ane rogInI
tathA prakAranI avasthA uparathI jema reganI susAdhyatAno ke duHsAdhyatAno ke
asAdhyatAne nirNaya karI zakAya che, tema jIvanI tathA prakAranI bhavyatA-
abhavyatArUpa, yogyatA-ayogyatArUpa dazAvizeSa uparathI A jIvane bhavaroga
susAdhya sAdhyA sAdhya che? ke du:sAdhya che? ke asAdhya che? tene prAkRnirNaya
(Prognosis) nirNaya thaI zake che. jemake-(1) rogI upara ajamAvavAmAM Avela
auSadhinI tAtkAlika ghaNI suMdara asara thAya te jema rogIne roga susAdhya che
ema jaNAya che, tema samyagadarzanAdi yathAyogya auSadhinA prayogathI je jIvanA
para tAtkAlika prazasta AtmapariNAmarUpa-bhAvarUpa ghaNI suMdara asara thAya
che, te jIva nikaTabhavya che ane tene bhavaroga susAdhya che, ema nizcita thAya
che. (2) rogI para prayojela auSadhinI lAMbA vakhate kaMIka asara thAya te jema
A roga du:sAdhya che ema khAtrI thAya che, tema ratnatrayIrUpa saauSadhanA
prayogathI je jIvanA para cirakALe zubha bhAvarUpa kaMIka suMdara asara thAya,
te te jIva dUrabhavya che, ne tene bhavaraga dasAdhya (Difficult to cure) che
ema samajAya che. (3) regI para game teTalA uttama auSadhono prayoga karavAmAM
Ave chatAM ati ati cirakALe paNa jenA para kaMI paNa asara upajatI nathI, davAnI
kaMI paNa "TIkI' lAgatI nathI, "patthara para pANI DhaLyA jevuM thAya che, ne
roga ulaTa vadhato jAya che, te rogIno roga jema asAdhya keTimAM (Incurable) Ave
che; tema je jIva para game teTalA uttama darzanAdi saduauSadhanI mAtrA
ajamAvavAmAM Ave, paNa ghaNA lAMbA vakhate paNa kaMI paNa sabhAvanI utpattirUpa
suMdara asara nIpajatI nathI, kaMI paNa guNa upajato nathI, "ghaDe kare ne kere
dhAkaDa" rahe che, ne ulaTI abhimAnAdi vipariNAmarUpa asara thaI rega ulaTa
vRddhi pAme che, te jIva abhavya-asAdhya keTine (Incurable) che, ane tene
bhavarega asAdhya che ema pratIta thAya che. Ama regInA cihna uparathI-
dazAvizeSa uparathI jema reganA bhAvi pariNAmanuM anumAna (Prognosis) agAuthI
baMdhAya che, tema bhAvagInA ciha uparathI-dazAvizeSa uparathI tenA bhavaraganA
pariNAmanuM anumAna agAuthI karI zakAya che. vaLI regI-regImAM paNa pharaka hoya
che ke samaju, keI aNasamaju hoya che, kaI bAla, keI vRddha, ItyAdi prakAra hoya
che. tema bhavarogImAM paNa taphAvata hoya che, kaI samaju, koI aNasamaju, kaI
bAla, kaI vRddha, ItyAdi prakAra regInI hoya che. kAraNa ke upara kahyA pramANe
roganA duHkhamaya svarUpane je jANe che, vividhatA te vivekI sujJa rogI jema
bane tema jaladI roga nimLa thAya ema

Page #712 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(636) Yagadi Samuchaya  A wise, discerning person who is afflicted with raga
(passion) seeks refuge in a skilled physician, and without discarding his own
wisdom, he follows the physician's instructions and takes the prescribed
medicine, thereby becoming free from raga. Similarly, a wise, discerning,
learned soul who has attained right understanding seeks refuge in a
knowledgeable physician in the form of a Sadguru, and discarding his own mental
speculations and whims, he takes the medicine of the Ratnatraya according to the
instructions of the Sadguru, and thus becomes free from the raga of rebirth. But
a foolish, undiscerning person who is attached to wrong practices, like a camel
owner who is attracted by sweet-talking, incompetent quacks, falls prey to their
deceitful treatment and suffers further, remaining bound by raga. Similarly, a
childish, ignorant soul who is attached to worldly pleasures, seeks refuge in a
false guru who speaks sweet words that appear appealing at first but are
actually poisonous in their consequences, and through the incompetent remedies
of this inept physician, he falls deeper into the abyss of rebirth and remains
bound by raga. And so on, there are different types of people afflicted by raga,
and even among them, there are differences in the prognosis of the severity and
curability of raga.  Just as raga can be controlled and cured through
appropriate treatment, so too can the raga of rebirth be controlled and cured
through appropriate treatment. In the treatment of raga, just as there is a need
for a skilled, expert physician who truly understands the root cause, the
reason, the form, the signs, the consequences, and the treatment of raga, so too
in the treatment of the raga of rebirth, there is an indispensable need for a
knowledgeable, wise Sadguru who truly understands the root cause, the reason,
the form, the signs, the consequences, and the preventive treatment of the raga
of rebirth. Just as there is a need for excellent medicine in the prevention of
disease, so too there is a need for the medicine of right faith, right
knowledge, and right conduct in the prevention of the raga of rebirth. Just as
taking the right medicine with the right diet is beneficial and leads to
healing, while taking it without the right diet is harmful, so too taking the
medicine of the Ratnatraya with the right diet of following the guru's
instructions is beneficial and leads to liberation, while taking it without the
right diet is harmful and leads to spiritual downfall. The supreme seer, Shrimad
Rajchandraji, has said:  "Raga is like self-delusion, the Sadguru is the
knowledgeable physician; Following the guru's instructions is like the right
diet, the medicine is contemplation and meditation." - Shri Atmasiddhi  And
thus, just as a person afflicted with raga becomes healthy through appropriate
treatment, so too...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (636) yAgAdisamuccaya kharA aMtaHkaraNathI icche che. eTale te DAhyo samaju
rAgI jema kuzaLa savaidyanuM zaraNu le che, ane peAtAnuM DahApaNa DaheALyA vinA
vaidyanI sUcanA mujaba auSadhaprayAga kare che, ane tethI karIne rAgamukta thAya
che. tema samyak samajaNavALA DAhyo samaju pa`Dita' jIva sadgururUpa sujANa
savaidyanuM zaraNu le che, ane peAtAnI matikalpanApa svacchaMdanuM DoDhaDahApaNa
cheDI dai zrImad sadgurunI AjJAnusAra ratnatrayI auSadhanuM pratisevana kare
che, ane tethI te bhavarAgathI mukta thAya che. paNa kupathyasevanamAM Asakta
evA aNasamaju rAgI jema mIThu' mIThu. anukULa vadanArA UMTavaidyane (Quack)
pakaDe che, ane teNe khatAvela UMTavaidu' sevIne ulaTA hAthe karIne herAna thAya
che ne rAgamukta thatA nathI; tema viSaya-kadannamAM Asakta evA bAla aNusamaju
jIva viSayAnukULa-- prathama dRSTie mIThA lAgatA paNa pariNAme hAlAhala jhera
jevA vacana vadanArA mithyAdaSTi asadgururUpa UMTavaidyanA Azraya kare che, ane
te anADI vaidyanA anADI upAyathI hAthe karIne bhavakUpamAM UMDA utare che ne
bhavarAgathI mukta thatA nathI. ityAdi prakAre rAgI rAgInA prakAra hAya che, ane
te uparathI paNu rAganI sAdhyatA--asAdhyatAnA prAthanamAM (Prognosis) paNa
pharaka paDe che. temaja-Aga jema yathAyeAgya cikitsAthI (Right treatment)
kAbUmAM Ave che ne maTe che, tema bhavarAga paNu yathAyeAgya cikitsAthI kAbUmAM
Ave che ne maTI jAya che. rAgacikitsAmAM prathama jema rAganA mULa nidAnane,
kAraNane, svarUpane, rAgacikitsA cihnane, pariNAmane ane cikitsAne kharAkhara
jANanArA kuzaLa niSNAta (Expert, Specialist) savaidyanI jarUra che; tema
bhavarAganI cikitsAmAM paNa bhavareAganA mULa nidAnane, kAraNane, svarUpane,
cihnane, pariNAmane ane nivAraNarUpa cikitsAne yathArtha paNe kharAkhara
jANanArA kuzaLa jJAnI saddagururUpa 'sujANa' sa  vaidyanI anivArya jarUra paDe
che. vaLI roganA nivAraNamAM jema uttama auSadhanI jarUra paDe che, tema
bhavarAganA nivAraNamAM samyagdazaCna-jJAna-cAritrarUpa sad auSadhatrayInI
jarUra paDe che. pathya anupAna sAthe esaDanu kharAbara sevana karavAmAM Ave te
ja te phAyade kare che, guNakArI thAya che, nahi. te ulaTu anathakAraka thaI
paDe che; tema guruAjJArUpa pathya anupAna sAthe jo parama amRtasvarUpa
ratnatrayI auSadhinuM samyak sevana karavAmAM Ave, te ja te guNakArI-AtmApakArI
thAya che, nahi te| AtmA-hAnirUpa ana vipariNAma nIpajAve che. parama AtmadraSTA
zrImad rAjacadrajInu' subhASita che keH-- AtmabrAMti sama rAga nahi', sadguru
vaidya sujANu; guru AjJA sama pathya nahi, auSadha vicAra dhyAna."--zrI Atmasidi
ane Ama yathAyAgyapaNe auSadhaprayAgathI rAga nimU La thatAM rAgI jema nIrogI
ane

Page #713 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Essence of the Poison: The Variety, Treatment, and Why it is Called
"Maha" (Great)  (637)  **Health**  When the poison is eradicated through the
proper use of the three jewels (right faith, right knowledge, and right conduct)
as medicine, the being becomes free from the poison, healthy, free from disease,
and nourished by the pure essence of consciousness. It experiences the ultimate
state of health, immersed in the bliss of its true nature. In many ways, the
poison can be compared to passion, so it is fitting to call it by that name.
This is a brief overview, as much as possible. You should understand it more
deeply through your own reflection.  **6**  Furthermore, calling this poison
"Maha" (Great) is also justified. Because whatever is the best in its own
category or class is called "Maha. For example, Maha-kavi (great poet), Maha-
raja (great king), Maha-vir (great hero), Maha-muni (great sage). The poison's
greatness is evident in many ways. For example:  (1) The passions that arise in
a human body last for a limited time, or at most, for the duration of this life.
But this poison has been affecting this being since time immemorial, and it
continues to torment it even now. Thus, due to its extreme duration, this poison
is "Maha."  (2) Although the passions that manifest in the human body cause
intense suffering, the suffering caused by the poison in the hellish realms (see
Gatha, page 202, footnote) is so intense that no other suffering can compare to
it. The physical and mental suffering caused by passion is nothing compared to
the infinite physical and mental suffering caused by the poison in the form of
disease, affliction, and obstacles. In the four realms of existence, one endures
endless suffering from birth and death. Thus, due to its intensity, the poison
is also "Maha."  (3) It is not very difficult to cure or alleviate ordinary
passions, but curing or alleviating this poison is extremely difficult.
Therefore, due to its difficulty or even impossibility to cure, this poison is
"Maha."  (4) Intense passion may lead to death once, but this intense poison
leads to endless cycles of birth and death. Thus, due to its consequences, this
poison is also "Maha."  **Why is it called "Maha" (Great)?**  In these and other
ways, this world of suffering is truly a great poison. To overcome it, the wise
must become determined, exert themselves, and make every effort with all their
being. How much effort does a sick person make to cure a common illness in this
fleeting life? What lengths do they go to? How many doctors and healers do they
consult?

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 suktatattvamImAMsA : bhavaregInI vividhatA, cikitsA, 'mahA' rega kema ? (637 )
svAsthya che, sAjotAjo-hRSTapuSTa thAya che, ane AnaMdanimagna svastha avasthA
mANe che; tema yathAyeAgyapaNe samyak ratnatrayIrUpa auSadhaprayogathI bhavarega
nimULa AreAgya thatAM jIva nIrAgI-bhAvaAreAgya sapanna bane che, sAjotAjo-
nirAmaya tathA zuddha caitanyarasanA pAnathI hRSTapuSTa thAya che, ane
paramAnaMda nimagna sahujAtmasvarUpa sthitimAM parama svastha avasthA anubhave
cheityAdi aneka prakAre bhavatuM rAga sAthe sAmya-sarakhAmaNuM ghaTAvI zakAya
che, tethI tene rAganI upamA barAbara chAje che. e atra saMkSepamAM yathAmati
digdarzanamAtra darzAvyuM che. vizeSa svamatithI samajI levuM. 6 vaLI A
bhavarAgane mahA' kahyo te paNa sahetuka che, kAraNa ke peAtapeAtAnA vaga mAM-
jAtimAM je zreSTha-mATe hoya te 'mahA' kahevAya che. dA. ta. mahAkavi, mahArAjA,
mahAvIra, mahAmuni; ane bhavarAganuM mahattpaNu-meTApaNuM aneka prakAre che.
jemake-(1) mANusanA zarIramAM upajatA rAga amuka maryAdita samaya sudhIne athavA
vadhAremAM vadhAre cAvajIva-A jIMdagI pata Take evA hAya che; paNa A bhavarAga
tA anAdi kALathI A jIvane lAgu paDelA ane bhavAlava cAlI Avele hAi, haju paNa A
jIvanA keDA mUkatA nathI ! Ama ati ati dvIdha sthitine ( Duration) laI A
bhavarAga 'mahAn' che. (2) manuSyanA zarIramAM dazya thatA rAga jo ke tIvra
vedanA upajAve che, te paNa bhavareAgathI narakADhimAM ( jue gAthA pR. 202
phUTaneTa) upajatI vedanA eTalI badhI tIvra hAya che ke tenI pAse game tevA
AkarA rAga kai visAtamAM nathI. rAgathI je zArIrika-mAnasika du:kha bhAgavavuM
paDe che. tenA karatAM anAMtagaNuM zArIrika-mAnasika duHkha Adhi, vyAdhi,
upAdhirUpe bhavarAgathI veThavuM paDe che. cAra gatimAM janmamaraNAdithI anaMta
anaMta du:kha vedanA-yAtanA khamavI paDe che Ama tIvratAne laI (Acuteness &
Intensity ) paNa bhavarAganI mahattA che. (3) mAhyarAgane sAdhavA-maTADavA e
kAMi eTalI badhI muzkela vAta nathI, paNa A bhavarUpa bhavarega sAdhavA-maTADavA
e mahA mahAduSkara vArtA che. eTale kRsAdhyatAthI athavA asAdhyatAthI paNa A
bhavarega 'mahAna' che- mATe che. (4) khAdya rAga ati tIvra hAya tA kavacit eka
ja vAranA maraNamAM pariName che, paraMtu A ati tIvra bhAga tA sadAya
anaMtavAranA janmamaraNamAM pariName che. Ama pariNAmaSTithI paNa A bhavarAga
ati mATeA che. ( 'mahA' rAga kema ko ityAdi prakAre A lava-sasAra kharekhara
mahArega ja che. ene mITAvavAne vivekI addhaparikara thaI jarUra kammara kase
ja, sarvAtmAthI sarva prayAsa karI chUTe ja. kSaNika jIRRgInA eka sAmAnya rogane
maTADavAne lAke keTalI badhI jahemata sumukSunuM karttavya UThAve che? kevA
AkAzapAtAla eka kare che? keTalA vaidya-DAktara

Page #714 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(38) What collection of yogic perspectives does one gather? How much is spent on
medicines and other things? After that, why doesn't the soul, being a seeker of
liberation, make as much effort to overcome this eternal, great disease? Why
doesn't one make unprecedented self-effort? Why doesn't one expend all the power
of one's father's body, mind, wealth, and word? Why doesn't one drink the
supreme nectar of the three jewels with utmost love? Why doesn't one follow the
prescribed regimen of the true Guru with utmost enthusiasm?
मुख्योऽयमात्मनोऽनादिचित्रकर्मनिदानजः । तथानुभवसिद्धत्वात्सर्वप्राणभृतामिति ॥१८९॥
This is the main disease that arises for the soul, born from the cause of
eternal, variegated karma. It is experienced and proven by all living beings.
189 Meaning - This bhavyadhi is the main disease for the soul, it is truly
incurable. And it is born from the cause of strange karma, which is different
from the distinction of substance and quality, because it is experienced and
proven by all beings in the same way. Discussion - This bhavyadhi, which is for
the soul, is the main one, it is truly incurable. And it is born from the power
of strange karma, which is different from the distinction of substance and
quality, because it is experienced and proven by all beings, including the
tiryanch, through the direct experience of birth, death, and other changes. The
bhavyadhi mentioned above is not imaginary, it is not fictional, it is not
merely a statement of treatment, but it is real, it is the main one, It is truly
transcendental. It is not a wave of bhavyadhi, a poetic imagination, it is not
imagined, but it is the real state of affairs, the true reality, the main
transcendence (Actual Fact, Reality). Because what is truly transcendental,
truly incurable, is called "main". And the treatment also It can only be the
main, transcendental, true thing, not otherwise. If there were no such thing as
bhavarupa, then it could not be treated as a disease. But bhavarupa Vritti: -mu:
-main, incurable, -this, bhavyadhi named - the soul, the soul, what kind? So -
anariritrivaarbaninad - eternal, such a strange karma-like cause, born from,
different from the distinction of substance and quality, such karma-born, that
is the meaning. Due to what cause? That is - tathaanu bhavasiddhatvaan - such
experience-provenness, due to the experience of birth, etc. Sarvakagmitamiti -
all beings, - tiyyay pramukh, too.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (38) yogadaSTisamucaya bhegA kare che? auSadhAdi aMge keTale badho kharca kare
che ? te pachI AvA A anAdinA mahArogane mITAvavAne mATe AtmAthI mumukSu kema
bane teTalI jahemata na UThAve ? kema apUrva Atma-puruSArtha na kare? pitAnA
tana-mana-dhana-vacananI samasta zakti kema na khacI nAMkhe? ratnatrayI
auSadhinuM parama amRtapAna parama premathI kema na kare ? saddaguru AjJArUpa
pathyanuM parama utsAhathI kema pAlana na kare ?
mukhyo'yamAtmano'nAdicitrakarmanidAnajaH  /
tathAnubhavasiddhatvAtsarvaprANabhRtAmiti  // 189 //  mukhya A jIvane upaje,
anAdi citra kaja; tema anubhavasiddha che, sarva prANIone ja 189 artha -A
bhavyAdhi AtmAne mukhya-nirupacarita evo vyAdhi che; ane te anAdi evA vicitra
karmanA nidAnathI-kAraNathI upajela che; kAraNa ke sarva prANIone tenuM tevA
prakAre anubhavasiddhapaNuM che. vivecana jIvane A je bhavyAdhi che te mukhya
che, nirupacarita e kharekhara che. ane te anAdi evA dravya-bhAva bhedathI
bhinna vicitra karmanA balathI utpanna thayeluM che; kAraNake janma-maraNAdi
vikArenA pratyakSa anubhava vaDe karIne, te tiryaMca vagere sarva prANIone paNa
anubhavasiddha che. uparamAM je bhavavyAdhine ulekha karavAmAM AvyuM te
bhavyAdhi kAMI kalapanArUpa nathI, kAlpanika nathI, kathanamAtra upacArarUpa
nathI, paraMtu kharekhara che, mukhya che, nirupacarita e pAramArthika che. te
kAMI ubhekSArUpa kavikalpanAno bhavavyAdhi taraMga nathI, kalpita nathI, paNa
kharekharI vastusthitirUpa satya hakIkata mukhya paramArtha (Actual Fact,
Reality) che. kAraNake je pAramArthikasatu vastusvarUpe satu nirupacarita hoya
te "mukhya" kahevAya che. ane upacAra paNa je mukhya-pAramArthikasatu vastu hoya
te ja thaI zake che, nahi te nahi, je bhavarUpa vastu ja na hota, te tene
vyAdhirUpe upacAra paNa na thaI zakata. paNa bhava vRttiH-muc:-mukhya,
nirupacarita, -A, bhavyAdhi nAmano-AtmAne jIvane, kevA prakArano? to-
anAriritravArbaninAda-anAdi evA citra kamarUpa kAraNuthI janmele,dravya-bhAva
bhedathI bhinna evA kamaranA balathI utpanna ema artha che. kayA kAraNathI ? te
ke-tathanubhavasiddhatvAna-tathA prakAre anubhavasiddhapaNAne lIdhe, janmAdinA
anubhavathI. sarvakAgmitAmiti-sarvaprANIone paNa,-tiyaya pramukhane paNa.

Page #715 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Makttavami-Mansa: Love-Disease, the Primary Goal, Eternal  (639) It is indeed
the true state of affairs, the nature of things, and therefore it can be treated
as a disease. The disease may be a metaphor, a concept, a treatment, but "birth"
is not a metaphor, a concept, or a treatment. Birth is the true reality
(Absolute reality), an untreatable event, the primary goal, the essential state
of affairs. It is the primary "chati" (manifest) thing, and this metaphorical
event-treatment narrative is to understand it truly. And this treatment-like
behavior also occurs in the best interests of the primary goal, the essential
thing. For example, there is the existence of a real disease, and it can be
treated metaphorically, there is the existence of a real lion, and the "lion-
man" - the cat is treated as a metaphor for the lion, the man-lion is treated,
but if it did not exist, then what treatment could it be? For example, the
existence of a "vadhyasut" (a mythical creature), or a "akashpushp" (a flower
that grows in the sky), or a "shashshanga" (a mythical creature) does not exist,
so it is not possible to treat them.  This birth is born from a strange karma-
like cause, which is eternal. According to the eternal law, every action must
have a cause, so there must be a cause for the action of birth. Just as a
disease arises from a specific cause, so too does this birth arise from a
strange karma-like cause, different from the material and mental distinctions.
And this karma-like cause is eternal. Therefore, this karma is eternally
connected to this soul, bound by the relationship of association. This pairing
of nature and soul is eternal, just as the association of gold and stone, or the
association of army and soil is eternal.  "Just as gold is naturally associated
with the earth, so too is the soul eternally associated with karma. The soul is
called a worldly being as long as it is associated with karma." - Shri
Anandghanji.  "The association of the inert and the conscious is eternal,
infinite, and without a doer. This is what the Jina Bhagvant says." - Shrimad
Rajchandraji.  If we do not accept this eternal association of karma and soul,
then there is a contradiction. If we accept karma as the first, then who did the
karma without the soul? And who did it attach to? If we accept the pure soul as
the first, then what is the purpose of karma attaching to the pure soul? And if
we accept that it attaches, then why wouldn't it attach to the pure, liberated
soul? Again, which came first, the chicken or the egg? Which came first, the
tree or the seed?   "Treatment is also often done in the world, primarily for
the sake of the main thing. All this is just a fabrication." - Shri Gibindu,
Shle, 15.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 maktatavamImAMsA : lava vyAdhi mukhya paramArthasata, anAdi (639) te kharekharI
vastusthitirUpa-sabhAvarUpa che ja, eTale ja tene vyAdhirUpe upacAra paNa karI
zakAya che. vyAdhi e rUpaka-kalpanA-upacAra bhale he, paNa "bhava e kAMI rUpaka-
kalpanA-upacAra nathI. bhava e te satya hakIkata (Absolute reality) nirupacarita
ghaTanA che, mukhya evI pAramArthika vastusthiti che. e mukhya "chatI" pragaTa
vastu che, tene yathArthapaNe samajavA mATe A vyAdhirUpa rUpaka ghaTanA-
upacArakathana che. ane A upacArarUpa vyavahAra paNa paramArtharUpa mukhya
vastunA sadbhAve ja ghaTe che, zobhe che. jemake-vAstavika vyAdhinuM astitva
che, te tene upamArUpe upacArarU54 vyavahAra karI zakAya che, vAstavika siMhanuM
astitva che, te "siMha-mANavakane'-bIlADIne siMhanI upamAne upacAra karAya che,
puruSa-siMhane vyavahAra karAya che, paNa tenuM astitva ja na hota te te kaI
upacAra vyavahAra banI zata nahiM. dAkhalA tarike-vadhyAsutanuM, ke
AkAzapuSpanuM, ke zazazaMganuM astitva ja nathI, eTale tene upacAra paNa
saMbhavatA nathI. A bhavaga anAdi evA vicitra karmarUpa kAraNathI utpanna
thayela che. koI paNa kAryanuM kaMI ne kaMI kAraNa hovuM ja joIe, e sanAtana
niyama pramANe bhavarUpa kAryanuM kaMI ne kaMI kAraNa tevuM ja joIe. eTale roga
jema cokkasa kAraNakalApathI upaje che, tema A bhavaga paNa dravya-bhAva
bhedathI bhinna evA vicitra karmarUpa kAraNathI utpanna thayela che. ane A
karmarUpa nidAna-kAraNa anAdi che. eTale A karma A AtmA sAthe anAdinuM
joDAyeluMsaMlagna che, saMga saMbaMdhathI baMdhAyeluM che. prakRtinI ane
puruSanI A joDI anAdi che,kanakapASANamAM senAne ne mATIne saMga jema anAdi che
tema. "kanake palavat payaDi puruSa taNI, jeDI anAdi svabhAva; anya sagI jihAM
lagI AtamA, saMsArI kahevAya."-zrI AnaMdaghanajI jaDa cetana saMga A, khANa
anAdi anaMta; keI na kartA tehane, bhAkhe jina bhagavaMta."--zrImad
rAjacaMdrajI. karma-AtmAne A saMga saMbaMdha je anAdi na mAnIe te Ama virodha
Ave che - karmane paheluM mAnIe te AtmA vinA karma karyA keNe? ane te lAgyA
kene? je kevala zuddha AtmAne pahele mAnIe te zuddha AtmAne karma lAgavAnuM
prayajana zuM? ane lAge che ema mAnIe, te zuddha evA siddha AtmAne paNa kema
nahiM lAge? vaLI maraghI pahelI ke IMDuM paheluM ? vRkSa paheluM ke bIja paheluM
? tene x"upacAro'pi ca prAyo loke ynmukhypuurvkH| daSTastatoDavaH sarvamithameva
racathita " zrI gibiMdu, zle, 15

Page #716 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(640) Just as the yogic perspective on the origin of the universe cannot be
definitively stated and is considered to be beginningless, similarly, the
relationship between karma and the soul is also established as beginningless.
“Which came first, the soul or karma? – Both are beginningless. If the soul came
first, then there would need to be a reason for it to become entangled with the
pure substance. If you say karma came first, then who performed karma without
the soul? By this logic, both are beginningless.” - Shrimad Rajchandra’s Shri
Moksha Mala. This beginningless karma is unique – it is of many types, and it is
divided into material and mental aspects. Material karma is in the form of
pudgala particles, and mental karma is in the form of the soul’s results.
Attachment, aversion, and delusion are the impure results of the soul, and these
are mental karma. The eight karmas, such as knowledge obscuration, are material
karma. The general understanding of these eight karmas is as follows: Knowledge
obscuration is the covering of the soul’s infinite power related to knowledge.
Perception obscuration is the covering of the soul’s infinite power of
perception. Vedaniya karma is the two types of vedaniya karma, pleasant and
unpleasant, caused by the body, which obstruct the soul’s power of uninterrupted
happiness. Mehniya karma is the obstruction of the soul’s power of self-conduct.
Ayu karma is the obstruction of the soul’s power of indestructible existence.
Nama karma is the obstruction of the soul’s power of formless divine qualities.
Gotra karma is the obstruction of the soul’s power of unwavering awareness.
Antaray karma is the obstruction of the soul’s infinite power of giving,
receiving, effort, gathering, and consumption.” – Shri Moksha Mala, page 102.
These eight fundamental types of karma have further numerous subdivisions. And
there are four types of bondage of karma: nature bondage, state bondage, taste
bondage, and region bondage. State bondage and taste bondage are caused by
passions, and nature bondage and region bondage are caused by the actions of the
mind, speech, and body. The bondage, arising, manifestation, power, karma-
severance, destructive, and non-destructive aspects of these karmas, and many
other subtle aspects, are worthy of understanding by the seeker of truth through
the great scriptures like Karma Granth, Panchaadhyayee, Gomsar, etc. Padma
Prabhu Jin! You and I, what is the difference, O Lord? Karma’s results are the
reason, some say, wise Padma, a particle from a region, the root has many
subdivisions; destructive, non-destructive, bondage, arising, manifestation,
power, karma-severance… Padma” – Shri Anandghanji. x" योग्यतामन्तरेणास्य
संयोगोऽपि न युज्यते। That is the truth, my friend, like the waves of the ocean.”
– Shri Yogakhindhu Play, 10.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (640) yogadaSTi murA nirNaya jema kahI zakAtuM nathI ne bane anAdi ja mAnavAnuM
prApta thAya che, tema atre paNa karma-AtmAno saMbaMdha anAdi ja saMsiddha thAya
che. "jIva pahelo ke kama?-bane anAdi che. jIva pahele hoya te e vimaLa vastune
maLa vaLagavAnuM kaMI nimitta joIe. karma pahelA kaho te jIva vinA karma karyA
keNe? e nyAyathI bane anAdi che." -zrImad rAjacaMdrapraNIta zrI mokSamALA. A
anAdi karma vicitra che-aneka prakAranuM che, ane te dravya-bhAva bhedamAM
vibhakta thayeluM che. dravya karma te pudgala paramANurUpa, ane bhAvakama te
AtmapariNAmarUpa che. rAga-dveSa-moha e azuddha AtmapariNAma te bhAvakama che,
ane jJAnAvaraNIyAdi ATha karma te dravya karma che. te ATha karmanI sAmAnya
samaja A prakAre - jJAnAvaraNaya eTale AtmAnI jJAna saMbaMdhInI je anaMta zakti
che tene AcchAdana thaI javuM te. darzanAvaraNaya eTale AtmAnI je anaMta
darzanazakti che tene AcchAdana thaI javuM te. vedanIya eTale deha nimitta sAtA
asAtA be prakAranAM vedanIya karma, ethI avyAbAdha sukharUpa AtmAnI zakti rokAI
rahevI te. mehanIyakarma eTale AtmacAritrarUpa zakti rekAI rahevI te. Ayukarma
eTale akSaya sthiti guNa rokAI rahe che. nAmakarma eTale amUrtirU5 divya zakti
rokAI rahevI te. gotrakama eTale aTala avagAhanArUpa Atmika zakti rokAI rahevI
te. aMtarAya kama" eTale anaMta dAna, lAbha, vIrya, bhega ane upabhega zakti
rokAI rahevI te." -zrI mokSamALA, pA. 102 A ATha mULa prakRtinA vaLI uttara
aneka bheda che. ane tenA baMdhanA cAra prakAra cheH prakRtibaMdha,
sthitibaMdha, rasabaMdha, pradezabaMdha. temAM sthitibaMdha-rasabaMdha kaSAyathI
thAya che, ane prakRtibaMdha-pradezabaMdha mana-vacana-kAyAnA yegathI thAya che.
te te karmonA baMdha, udaya, udIraNa, sattA, karmaviccheda, ghAti, aghAti vagere
aneka sUma prakAre karmagraMtha, paMcAdhyAyI, gomasAra Adi mahAgraMtharatnathI
tattvarasike samajavA yogya che. padmaprabha jina ! tujha mujha AMta, kima
bhAMje bhagavaMta ? karma vipAke che kAraNa joIne, koI kahe matimaMta padma
pacaDi kiI aNubhAga pradezathI, mULa uttara bahu bheda; ghAti aghAti baMdha
udaya udIraNa, sartA karmaviccheda...padma"-zrI AnaMdaghanajI. x"
yogyatAmantareNAsya saMyogo'pi na yujyte| tA ja tattvamitrevaM
taraMgoDathanAvimAna "--zrI yogakhindu ple, 10

Page #717 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Muktatvamimansa: The Interplay of Dravyakarma and Bhavakarma  (641) There is
a mutual cause-and-effect relationship between Bhavakarma and Dravyakarma. The
generation of Dravyakarma, such as Jnanavaraniya, arises due to Bhavakarma, like
Raga, etc. Conversely, the generation of Bhavakarma, like Raga, etc., arises due
to Dravyakarma. Thus, a vicious circle of Dravyakarma and Bhavakarma continues,
perpetuating the cycle of karma. This vicious circle can be broken by stopping
Bhavakarma, like Raga, etc., which is like applying brakes to a motor. This is
within the control of the soul. Once this vicious cycle is broken, the cycle of
karma stops, and consequently, the cycle of birth and death also stops. This
intricate relationship is elaborated in various scriptures like Shri Samyatsar,
Pravachansar, etc., which should be deeply contemplated by the seeker.
**Diagram: 15**  **Bhavakarma** **Karma Chakra** **Bhav Chakra** **Dravyakarma**
If someone asks for proof of this Bhavavyaadhi, which is the main cause of
suffering and is generated by the endless cycle of karma, the simple and
accurate answer is that it is experienced by all beings. This is a strong and
direct proof based on experience. All beings, including Tiryanchas, experience
this Bhavavyaadhi in various ways. They suffer the great pain of birth, aging,
death, disease, sorrow, and fear. This Bhavavyaadhi, which causes birth and
death, is not a mere imagination but a reality experienced by all. It is a
proven fact, and there is no need for further proof.  **x "Jivaparinamahedu
Kammattam Puggalā Pariṇamanti.** **Punarjanmanimittam Tadeva Ni Viparigama** **-
Shri Kundakundacharya in Shri Samyatsar.**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 muktatavamImAMsA: dravya-bhAva kamanI sakalanA (641) A bhAvakarma-dravyakamane
paraspara kArya-kAraNa saMbaMdha che rAgAdi bhAvakanA nimittathI jJAnAvaraNIyAdi
dravya karmanI utpatti thAya che, ane dravya karmanA nimittathI punaH rAgAdi
bhAvakanI utpatti thAya che. Ama eka bIjAnI sAMkaLa dravya-bhAva cakrabhramaNa
nyAye cAlyA kare che, ane duSTa anaMtacaka (Vicious circle) karmanI sthApita
thAya che. paNa rAgAdi bhAvakama je aTakAvI devAmAM AvesakalanA je aTakAvavuM
moTaranI breIkanI jema AtmAnA potAnA hAthanI vAta che te te duSTa cakra ApoApa
truTI paDe che, ne karmacakragati aTakI paDatAM bhavacakragati aTakI paDe che. A
saMbaMdhI ghaNe sUkSama vivekavicAra zrI samayasAra4, pravacanasAra Adi
graMtharAjomAM pradarzita karavAmAM Avyo che,-je mumukSue atyaMta manana karavA
yaMgya che. AkRti: 15 bhAvakama karmacaka : bhavacake dravyakama Ama anAdi evA
vicitra karmathI utpanna thayela A bhavaraga mukhya-nirupacarita kahyo, tenuM
pramANa zuM? ema koI pUche to tene sIdhe, saraLa ne sacoTa javAba e che ke-te
sarva prANIone anubhavasiddha che. eTale ke anubhavarUpa prabaLa pratyakSa
pramANa atra che. kAraNake tiryaMcAdi sarva prANIone A bhavyAdhi tathA prakAre
potAnA anubhavamAM AvI rahyo che, teo janma-jarA-maraNa-roga-zoka-bhaya AdirUpe
A bhavyAdhinuM mahAduHkha-vasamI pIDA pratyakSa veThI rahyA che. A janmamaraNAdi
ApanAre bhavavyAdhi e kalpanA nathI, paNa sarvane sAkSAta anubhavasiddha
"hakIkata che, vastusthitirUpa siddha vArtA che, te pachI AthI vadhAre bIjuM
pramANa tavA dUra javAnI jarUra nathI. x " jIvapariNAmahedu kammattaM puggalA
pariNamaMti  /  punarjanmanimitta tadeva nI viparigama - zrI kuMdakuMdAcAryajIta
zrI samayasAra.

Page #718 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(642) Gadasthi Samuchaya Comparison of Bhava (Karmic Bondage) and Vyadhi
(Disease) - Verse 15  Jiva-Rogi (Living Being as Patient): Abhavya = Incurable
Patient, Bhava = Primary Disease, Durabhavya = Difficult-to-Cure Patient, Janma-
Marana-Vikar = Birth-Death Afflictions Asanabhavya = Easily Curable Patient,
Meha = Consequence, Sadguru = Good Physician, Ragadi = Suffering Ratnatraya =
Medicine, Karma-Dravya-Bhava = Causes of Karmic Disease, Bhavamukta = Liberated
from Karmic Bondage  एतन्मुक्तश्च मुक्तोऽपि मुख्य एवोपपद्यते ।
जन्मादिदोषविगमात्तददोषत्वसंगतेः ॥ १९०॥  Etanmuktashcha muktopi mukhya
evoppadyate | Janmadidoshavigatattadadoshatvasangateh || 190 ||  The one who is
liberated from this Bhava (Karmic Bondage) disease is also considered the
principal one, because with the disappearance of the defects like birth and
others, its freedom from defects becomes appropriate. 190  The meaning is that
the one who is liberated from the Bhava (Karmic Bondage) disease is also
considered the principal one, because with the disappearance of the defects like
birth and others, its freedom from defects becomes appropriate.  The analysis is
that the Mukta (liberated) who is freed from the Bhavya (Karmic Bondage) disease
is also considered the principal one, because the cause of activity, i.e., the
defects like birth and others have been eliminated, and therefore, its freedom
from defects becomes appropriate.  The Bhava (Karmic Bondage) disease, which has
been established as the principal and non-figurative, the Mukta (liberated) who
is freed from this Bhava disease is also the principal, non-figurative, and the
ultimate truth.  Because the rule is that the effect is also principal where the
cause, i.e., the occasion for activity, is principal. And here, the elimination
of the principal defects like birth and others is the cause, so the effect,
i.e., liberation, is also principal.  And thus, due to the elimination of the
defects like birth and others, its freedom from defects becomes appropriate.
Because when a diseased person becomes free from the disease, he is called
healthy.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (642) gadaSTisamucaya bhava ane vyAdhinI tulanA-keSTaka 15 jIva-rogI abhavya=
asAdhya rogI bhava = vyAdhi-mukhya dUrabhavya = du:sAdhya rogI janma maraNa
vikAra Asanabhavya = susAdhya rogI meha = pariNAma sadguru = suvaidya rAgAdi =
vedanA ratnatrayI = auSadha kama-dravya-bhAva=bhavaroga hetu | bhavamukta-mukta
= vyAdhi mukta etanmuktazca mukto'pi mukhya evopapadyate  /
janmAdidoSavigamAttadadoSatvasaMgateH  //  190 //  ethI mukta paNa muktanuM,
ghaTatuM mukhya paNuM ja; (kAraNa) janmAdi doSa TaLe ghaTe, adaSatva tenuMja.
190 artha--ane A bhavyAdhithI mukta thayele mukta paNa mukhya ja e ghaTe che
kAraNake janmAdi deSanA dUra thavAthI, tenA adeSapaNAnI saMgati hoya che.
vivecana uparamAM "suSya" e je bhavyAdhi kahyo, tenAthI mukta thayele mukta-
siddha paNa mukhya ja ghaTe che, kAraNa ke pravRtti nimittane bhAva che. eTale
ke janmAdi deSanA dUra thavArUpa kAraNa thakI tenA adeSapaNAnI saMgati che-
ghaTamAnapaNuM che. bhavavyAdhi je mukhya-nirupacarita sAbIta karavAmAM AvyuM,
te bhavavyAdhimAMthI mukta thayele mukta-siddha paNa mukhya ja, nirupacarita ja,
pAramArthika sat ja hova ghaTe che. kAraNa pravRttinimitta-tevA prakAre
pravRttinuM nimitta-kAraNa je mukhya mukta paNa hoya te kArya paNa mukhya heya,
A niyama che. ane ahIM janmAdi mukhya ja doSa dUra thavArUpa kAraNe mukhya che,
eTale mukta thavArUpa kArya paNa mukhya che. ane Ama janmAdi doSanA dUra
thavAthI ene adeSapaNAnuM saMgatapaNuM hoya che. kAraNa ke rogayukta saroga
puruSa rogamukta thatAM aroga kahevAya che, kRtti-patabhua--ane A bhavyAdhithI
mukta evo, muttoDaji-mukta paNa, siddha, mulya poSa -mukhya ja upapanna che,
ghaTe che,-pravRti nimittanA bhAvane lIdhe. ane tevA prakAre kahe che-
samAvilopavitAnA janmAdi doSanA vimamarUpa-haLavArUpa kAraNuthakI, toSaainte -te
doSavaMtanA adoSapaNAnI prAptine lIdhe.

Page #719 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Muktatvamimansa: Mukta (liberated) is the primary, adosha (without faults) due
to the absence of desha (faults).   Just as a man afflicted with birth, death,
etc., faults, is called "adosha" when he is freed from those faults, similarly,
the absence of faults, which is the cause of the disappearance of faults, is the
primary reason for being "mukta".   The meaning is that when a disease is
destroyed, the man is not destroyed, but the disease-free man has only good
qualities. Similarly, when the disease of birth and death is destroyed, the man-
soul is not destroyed, but the liberated soul has only good qualities.   Just as
a person who is afflicted with faults becomes faultless when those faults are
absent, similarly, this soul, which is afflicted with birth, death, etc.,
faults, becomes a liberated soul when those faults are absent. But the absence
of faults does not mean that the faultless person is absent, just as the absence
of birth, death, etc., faults does not mean that the faultless soul is absent.
Just as faultlessness is the state of a person being free from faults, but the
person is not absent, similarly, liberation, which is faultlessness, is the
state of the soul being free from birth, death, etc., faults, but the soul is
not absent.   Just as a healthy man remains after the disease is gone,
similarly, a pure soul remains after the disease of birth and death is gone.
Figure 16 Disease absent Disease of birth and death absent Sick man Man
afflicted with the disease of birth and death Worldly soul Man = Soul liberated
Explaining the same meaning, it is said:  "Even though there is a suppression of
the nature of the soul, due to the connection with its own nature, it is the
same soul that is present. Because of the absence of that, there is a connection
with faultlessness." (191)  Meaning: Even though there is a suppression of the
nature of the soul, due to the connection with its own nature, it is the same
soul that is present. Because of the absence of that, there is a connection with
faultlessness.   "Just as a man does not consider himself destroyed when his
body is destroyed, similarly, the soul is not destroyed." - Shri Samadhishatak.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 muktatavamImAMsA : mukta paNa mukhya ja, deSa abhAve adoSa tema janma maraNAdi
doSathI yukta sadeSa puruSa te janmAdi deSathI mukta thatAM "adoSa" kahevAya
che. Ama doSanA apagamarUpa-cAlyA javArUpa kAraNathI doSavaMtanuM adeSapaNuM
ghaTe che, mATe "sukta" e mukhya ja e ghaTe che. tAtparya ke-roga naSTa thatAM
kAMI puruSa naSTa thaI jato nathI, paNa rogamukta puruSane sadbhAva ja hoya che,
tema bhavaraga naSTa thatAM kAMI puruSa-AtmA naSTa thaI jatuM nathI, paNa
bhavarogamukta puruSane-mukta AtmAne sadbhAva ja hoya che. je daSavaMta hoya te
tenA doSano abhAva thatAM adoSa hoya che, tema janmAdi deSavaMta A AtmA te
deSane abhAva thatAM adeSa e siddhamukta AtmA hoya che. paNa doSa abhAve kAMI
adeSa puruSane abhAva hoto nathI, tema janmAdi doSa abhAve kAMI adoSa AtmAne
abhAva hotuM nathI. jema adeSapaNuM e puruSanI deza-abhAvAtmaka avasthA che,
paNa puruSa abhAvarUpa nathI; tema adeSa evuM muktapaNuM e AtmAnI janmAdi deSa
abhAvAtmaka avasthA che, paNa Atma-abhAvAtmaka nathI. dukAmAM roga abhAve nirogI
puruSa ja bAkI rahe che, tema bhavaroga abhAvex nirogI zuddha AtmA ja bAkI rahe
che. AkRti 16 roga abhAve bhavarAga abhAve rogI puruSa bhivaragI saMsArI AtmA
puruSa |=| AtmA mukta A ja arthane spaSTa karatAM kahe che - tatsvabhAvopamarde
'pi tattatsvAbhAvyayogataH  /  tasyaiva hi tathAbhAvAcadadoSatvasaMgatiH  // 191
//  te AtmanA svabhAvane che upamarda chatAMya, tenA te ja svabhAvanA yoga taNe
supasAya; te ja Atmana upaje, nicce ja tathAbhAva, tethI ghaTe che tenuM aSatva
ahiM sAva, 191 gttiH -tatvamAMDaji-te AtmAnA svabhAvane upamadda chatAM. janmAdi
bhAvanA vikame karInedara thavApaNAe karIne, tattarAmAyora -tenA tatasvAbhAvyanA
vegathI; eTale tenuM tasvAbhAvya, tenI sAthe nathI. te A prakAre-tene evA
prakArane ja svabhAva che jethI te ja "tathA hoya che. ane 2 tathaiva hi-tenA
ja, tamArA-tathAbhAvathI, janmAdinA sAgathI, janmAdi atIta paNe bhAvathI, zuM ?
te ke-toSavarNAtiH -tenA aSatvanI saMgati hoya che. doravavaMtanI ja
aSatvaprApti hoya che, ema artha che x"naSTa vasne yathAtmAnaM na naSTaM manyate
tathA  /  na deDavyAtmAnaM mate yudhaH " -zrI samAdhizataka.

Page #720 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(644) Yoga-darsti-samuchaya meaning - Although the soul's nature is obscured,
due to the force of its inherent nature, it is connected to its own true nature,
and because of this, it is connected to its non-destruction. Commentary -
Although the soul's nature is obscured, due to the removal of the feeling of
birth, etc., it is connected to its inherent nature; and therefore, it has
"tatha-bhava" in the past, meaning it is connected to its non-destruction. In
other words, the deluded one is less likely to attain non-destruction. From time
immemorial, the soul's nature has been obscured - it has been covered with dirt.
Due to the attack of the mind, its nature has been obscured, suppressed,
surrounded, covered, but not fundamentally destroyed. The nature of the
knowledge-nature of the true form is obscured by the separation from the dharma-
like nature of the feet - the nature of the feet - or it is attached to the
adharma-like mind, but the nature of the object, which is its own nature, is
never fundamentally absent. It only happens that it is obscured - covered - by
the consciousness that follows the mind. In other words, the soul followed the
mind-like mountain, so it was obscured by karma. The nature-like "self-dharma"
was abandoned, and it followed the mind-like "other dharma." Therefore, due to
the attachment of the past in the form of karma, the other dharma made it truly
"fearful" by causing it to wander in the world and suffer! "Other dharmas" are
created by the mind, which is also accidental, meaning it is produced by a
cause, and is therefore eternal from the beginning, and the cause-like "other
effect" is subject-object-related, and is therefore finite. Thus, the mind-like
adharma arises from the cause of the other effect, which is the object, etc.,
and therefore the soul, corrupted by the pure nature-like dharma, wanders in the
world and becomes the doer of the other effect. Thus, the soul's nature is
obscured - covered with dirt - by the other effect - the mind. (See page 494).
"The nature of the object, its own nature, is never fundamentally absent; it is
only obscured by the consciousness that follows the mind." - Shri Devchandraji.
"The consciousness that is in its own awareness, the doer, does not act in its
own awareness, the doer, the effect." - Shri Atmasiddhi. Just as the attack of
the outer wheel causes chaos in the city, confusion spreads, self and other are
not distinguished, and the kingdom of fear spreads everywhere due to anarchy, so
the attack of the outer wheel in the form of the mind causes

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (644) yogadaSTisamucaya artha - te AtmAnA svabhAvane upamada chatAM, tenA
tasvAbhAvyanA-tevA svabhAvapaNAnA vegathI, tenA ja tathAbhAvane lIdhe, tenA
adeSapaNAnI saMgati hoya che. vivecana te AtmAne svabhAva upama chatAM, janmAdi
bhAvanA dUra thavAthI tene tasvAbhAvya sAthe yoga hoya che; ane tethI karIne
tene janmAdi atItapaNe "tathAbhAva" hoya che, eTale tenA adeSapaNunI saMgati
hoya che. arthAt delavaMtane adeSapaNAnI prApti ghaTe che. anAdi kALathI A
AtmAnA svabhAvane upamanda thayo che-kaccaraghANa nIkaLI gayo che. vibhAvanA
AkramaNathI te svabhAva kacarAI gayo che, dabAI gayo che, gherAI gayuM che,
AvRta thayo che, paNa mULa nAza nathI pAme. nija svarUpanA jJAnasvabhAva
upamanda dazana-caraNarUpa svabhAva dharmanA viyege che ke tene vibhAvarUpa
adharma vaLagyo che, to paNa vastune je svajAti svabhAva che, tene kadI samULago
abhAva thato nathI. mAtra thAya che eTaluM ja ke-para vibhAvane anugata-
anusaratA evA cetanathI te kameM karIne avarAya che-DhaMkAI jAya che. arthAt
AtmA paravaturUpa vibhAvane anusaryo, tethI te karmathI avarAyo che.
svabhAvarUpa "svadharma cheDI, te vibhAvarUpa "para dharma ne anusaryo. tethI
karmarUpa bhUtanA vaLagADathI te paradharma tene saMsAra paribhramaNa duHkhavaDe
karIne kharekhara ! "bhayAvaha" thaI paDayo che! "vadharmo macAvaDA A para e je
vibhAva che, te paNa naimittika arthAta nimittathI utpanna thanAro hoI
saMtatithI anAdi che, ane tenA nimittarUpa je parabhAva che-te viSayasaMgAdika
che, te saMge karIne sAdi che. Ama viSayAdirUpa parabhAvanA nimittathI rAgAdi
vibhAvarUpa adhama upaje che, ane tethI zuddha svabhAvarUpa dharmathI bhraSTa
thaI AtmA saMsAramAM rakhaDe che ne parabhAvane kartA thAya che. Ama parabhAva-
vibhAvathI AtmAnA svabhAvane upamada thAya che-kacarAvApaNuM thAya che,
abhibhUtapaNuM-dabAI javApaNuM thAya che. (juo pR. 494). "vastu svabhAva svajAti
tehane, mUla abhAva na thAya; para vibhAva anugata cetanathI, kameM te avarAya."
--zrI devacaMdrajI. cetana je nija bhAnamAM, kartA Apa svabhAva varte nahiM nija
bhAnamAM, kartA kamaM prabhAva."--zrI Atmasiddhi. jema paracakranA AkramaNathI
puramAM upamada-upaplava macI rahe che, aMdhAdhuMdhI (chaos) phelAI jAya che,
sva-parane bheda parakhAtuM nathI, ne arAjakatAthI sarvatra bhayanuM sAmrAjya
vyApI jAya che, tema vibhAvarUpa paracakranA AkramaNathI

Page #721 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Muktatma-Navami-Mansa: Ravbhavu-Upam, “Tatha-Bhava-thi Adesh-panu (645)  Vibhav
Parach- Chaitanya-Puram-ma Upamda Thaye Chhe, Up-plav Mache Chhe, Andha-dhundhi
Vyape Chhe, Kathi Up-plav Swa-Par-no Bhed Parakha-te Nathi, Swa-Par-ni Sel-bhel-
Gotalo Thayi Jaye Chhe,   Ane Chaitanya Raj-na “Pad-bhrashta-pana-thi Arajakta-
ne Lidhe Sarvatra Bhay-nu Samrajya Jami Jaye Chhe! Aam Vibhav-rup Adharm-na
Sevan-thi, Swasthana-thi Chut Thayelo Thekana Vina-ne, Swarup-pad-thi Bhrashta
Ae Aa Atma Chatur-gati-may Sansar-ma Rakhade Chhe, Ne Janma-marana-adi Anant
Duhkha Bhogave Chhe.  Aava Aa Swarup-pad-bhrashta Chighan Atma-ne Puna Jyaare
Janma-adi Bhavana-na Vigame Kari-ne Tasva-bhavya Saathe Arthath Te-na Pita-ne
Swasvabhav Pan Saathe “G” Thaye Chhe, Tyare Te-ne   Tatha-bhava Hoye Chhe. Etale
Ke Te-ne Je Mul Svabhav Chhe, Tatha Prakar-no Tasva-bhavya Bhav Te-ne Upje Chhe.
Aam Atma Jyaare Pratikramna Kari-Piche-hath Kari Saathe Yog Mul Asal Sahaja
Tatha-bhav-rup Swarup-sthi-ti-ne Bhaje Chhe, Vibhav-rup   Par “Dhar” Chhodi Dai
Nij Svabhav-rup Ghar-ma Aave Chhe, Tyare Te-ne Janma-marana-adi-rup Sansar Viram
Pame Chhe, Ane Svabhav-sthi-ti-rup Moksha Pragate Chhe, Ne Nij Ghar Mangal-mal’
Thaye Chhe. “Atam-ghar Atam Rame Re, Nij Ghar Mangal-mal Re.” (Dev-chandraji).
Ane Aam Tatha-bhava Arthath Je Mul Svabhav Chhe Te Bhav Thava-thi J Te-nu
Ashapnu Ghate Chhe, Te Janma-adi Desh-vant Mati Adesh Bane Chhe. Karan Ke
Svabhav Upamand   Karna-ra Vibhav-rup Dosha-thi Te Desh-vant Ho; Te Vibhav Desh
Talva-thi Te-ne Tatha-bhava-thi Svabhav Upam Thate Atakyo, Etale Te Adosh Thayo,
Jevo Hato Adesh-panu Te Rahyo. Svabhav Pad-thi-Pita-na Thekana-thi Bhrashta
Thayo-Kho Ae Te-no   Dosha Hatun, Svabhav-ma Aavyo Etale Te Desh Tale, Ane
Svabhav-pad-ma Sthi-ti Thava-thi-“Thekane Aavya-thi Te Adesh Thayo -Rogi-no Rang
Talta Jyam Te Aroghi Hoye Chhe Tem. Tatparya Ke-Adesh Hatan, Te Tatha-bhav-yukt
Hoye Chhe, Arthath Swasvabhav-pana-na Yog-thi Je Asal Sahaja Svabhave-Sahaja-
anma-swarupe Hatu Te Hoye Chhe. Aam Khara-khara-Mukhya Aeva Janma-marana-adi
Apna-ra Svabhav-pamard-rup Vibhav-desh Mukhya Hate, Ae Jyam Khari Vat Chhe, Tem
Vibhave-desh Tali Svabhav-ma Aavya-thi Te “Adash” Thaye. Ae Pan Tevi J Khara-
khari Mukhya Vat Chhe. Mate Adosh” Aevo Aa Svabhav Mukta Atma Mukhya Chhe,
Khara-kharo Chhe, Nirup-charit Chhe, Parmarth-satu Chhe, Em Aa Upar-thi Sabit
Thayu.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 muktatanavamImAMsA: ravabhAvaupama, "tathAbhAvathI adeSapaNuM (645) vibhAva
paraca- caitanya-puramAM upamada thAya che, upaplava mace che, aMdhAdhuMdhI
vyApe che, kathI upaplava sva-parano bheda parakhAte nathI, sva-paranI
seLabheLa-goTALo thaI jAya che, ane cetana rAjanA "padabhraSTapaNAthI arAjaktAne
lIdhe sarvatra bhayanuM sAmrAjya jAmI jAya che! Ama vibhAvarUpa adharmanA
sevanathI, svasthAnathI cuta thayelo ThekANAM vinAne, svarUpapadathI bhraSTa e A
AtmA caturgatimaya saMsAramAM rakhaDe che, ne janmamaraNAdi anaMta duHkha
bhogave che. AvA A svarUpa-padabhraSTa cighana AtmAne punA jyAre janmAdi bhAvanA
vigame karIne tasvAbhAvya sAthe arthAta tenA pitAne svasvabhAva paNa sAthe "ga"
thAya che, tyAre tene tathAbhAva hoya che. eTale ke tene je mULa svabhAva che,
tathA prakArano tasvAbhAvya bhAva tene upaje che. Ama AtmA jyAre pratikramaNa
karI-pIchehaTha karI sAthe yoga mULa asala sahaja tathAbhAvarUpa svarUpasthitine
bhaje che, vibhAvarUpa para dhara" choDI daI nija svabhAvarUpa gharamAM Ave che,
tyAre tene janmamaraNAdirUpa saMsAra virAma pAme che, ane svabhAvasthitirUpa
mokSa pragaTe che, ne nija ghara maMgalamALa' thAya che. "Atamaghara Atama rame
re, nija ghara maMgalamAla re." (devacaMdrajI). ane Ama tathAbhAva arthAt je
mULa svabhAva che te bhAva thavAthI ja tenuM aSapaNuM ghaTe che, te janmAdi
dezavaMta maTI adeSa bane che. kAraNa ke svabhAva upamanda karanArA vibhAvarUpa
doSathI te deSavaMta ho; te vibhAva deSa TaLavAthI tene tathAbhAvathI svabhAva
upama thato aTakyo, eTale te adoSa thayo, jevo hato adeSapaNuM te rahyo.
svabhAva padathI-pitAnA ThekANAthI bhraSTa thayo-kho e teno doSa hatuM,
svabhAvamAM Avyo eTale te deSa TaLe, ane svabhAvapadamAM sthiti
thavAthI-"ThekANe AvyAthI te adeSa thayo -rogIno raMga TaLatAM jema te arogI
hoya che tema. tAtparya ke-adeSa hatAM, te tathAbhAvayukta hoya che, arthAta
svasvabhAvapaNAnA yogathI je asala sahaja svabhAve-sahajAnmasvarUpe hatuM te
hoya che. Ama kharekharA-mukhya evA janmamaraNAdi ApanArA svabhAva5mardarUpa
vibhAvadeSa mukhya hate, e jema kharI vAta che, tema vibhAvedeSa TaLI
svabhAvamAM AvyAthI te " adaSa" thaye. e paNa tevI ja kharekharI mukhya vAta
che. mATe adoSa" evo A svabhAva mukta AtmA mukhya che, kharekharo che,
nirupacarita che, paramArthasatu che, ema A uparathI sAbita thayuM.

Page #722 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(646) **Fault** From fault Man Faultless In the absence of fault Man Figure 17 =
From self-depreciation - Soul with the fault of division of the soul Self-
depreciation - division fault in the absence Nature Situated Soul And this is
how it is appropriate to say - 5 स्वभावोऽस्य स्वभावो यन्निजा सत्चैव तत्त्वतः ।
भावावधिरयं युक्तो नान्यथातिप्रसङ्गतः ॥ १९२॥ Fault Nature is that nature, truly
its own existence; This is appropriate for the limit of feeling, not otherwise,
due to excessive implication. 192 Yoga-Sutra-Samuccaya Meaning: - The nature of
this soul is that nature, because truly its own existence is nature. This nature
is appropriate for the limit of feeling (the limit of feeling); otherwise not,
due to excessive implication. Discussion The nature of this soul is its own
nature, and from the ultimate - from the truth, what is its own existence is
nature. This nature is appropriate for the limit of feeling, that is, the limit
of the feeling is appropriate - otherwise it is not appropriate, because the
fault of excessive implication arises. Above, it was said that the soul is free
from fault because of its nature, what is that nature? Its clear limit is shown
here. The nature of this soul is its own nature. That is, the way it exists from
the ultimate - from the truth, that is nature. In the way Vritti: - Self-
awareness - the nature of this soul, its own nature - nature, because, what is
said? That is - its own existence from the truth, from the ultimate, the limit
of feeling is appropriate; otherwise - otherwise it is not appropriate, for what
reason? That is, due to excessive implication.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (646) doSa doSathI puruSa nirdoSa doSa abhAve puruSa AkRti 17 =
svabhAipamardathI - AtmA vibhAva doSayukta AtmA mALopamarda-vibhAva doSa abhAve
svabhAva sthita AtmA ane A Ama agIkAra ceAgya che te kahe che-- 5 svabhAvo'sya
svabhAvo yannijA satcaiva tattvataH  /  bhAvAvadhirayaM yukto
nAnyathAtiprasaGgataH  //  192 //  doSa svabhAva tasa svabhAva che, tattvathI
nija sattA ja; bhAvAvadhi A-anyathA, atiprasaMgathI nA ja. 192 yogaztisamuccaya
artha :--A AtmAnA sva bhAva te svabhAva che, kAraNa ke tattvathI nija sattA ja
svabhAva che. A svabhAva bhAvAvadhi (bhAvanI avadhi pata) yukta che; anyathA
nahi, atiprasagane lIdhe. vivecana A AtmAne svabhAva te sva bhAva che, ane
paramArthathI-tattvathI je nija sattA ja te svabhAva che. A je svabhAva che te
bhAvAvadhi ja yukta che, eTale ke bhAvanI avadhimaryAdA pa"ta ja yukta
che,-nahiM teA yukta nathI, kAraNa ke atiprasaMga doSa Ave che. uparamAM AtmAnuM
svabhAvamAM AvyAthI adeSapaNuM hoya ema kahyuM, te svabhAva eTale zuM? tenI
spaSTa maryAdA atra khatAvI che. A AtmAnA sva bhAva' te svabhAva che. arthAt
paramAthI--tattvathI je prakAre nija sattA che, te svabhAva che. je prakAre
vRtti:-svamAyoDakSya-A AtmAnA svabhAva, svAvaH-svabhAva che, cat--kAraNa ke, zuM
kahyuM ? te ke-nigalanai tarataH-nija sattA ja tattvathI, paramAthathI,
mAtrAvaSicaM cusro-A hamaNAM ja kahyo te svabhAva bhAva avadhivALA yukta che;
nAnyathA-anyathA yukta nathI, zA kAraNathI ? te ke atiprasannata:atiprasaMgane
lIdhe.

Page #723 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Essence of the Devotee:  This discourse on the nature of the devotee, the
essence of the self, and its limitations, is a profound exploration of Jain
philosophy. It emphasizes the inherent nature of the soul, its pure and
unadulterated essence, and the limitations imposed by its interactions with the
world.  The soul's true nature is its inherent essence, its pure and
unadulterated self. This essence is the soul's true abode, its inherent being.
This inherent nature is the soul's "svabhaav" (nature). (See footnote on page
75).  This "svabhaav" is limited by the soul's "bhaav" (emotions). The extent of
the soul's "bhaav" determines the extent of its "svabhaav." It is not otherwise.
To exist and function in pure consciousness is the soul's "svabhaav-maryada"
(natural limitation). This "svabhaav" is its "maryada dharma" (limitation-based
dharma). Therefore, to exist in pure consciousness is to be within one's
"svabhaav." To exist in any other "bhaav" is not to be within one's "svabhaav."
Because the soul's "svabhaav" is limited to pure consciousness, to exist in any
other "bhaav" is to be outside of its "svabhaav." To say otherwise would be a
fallacy, because the pure essence of the soul is its "svabhaav," and any other
form is not its "svabhaav" but a "vibhaav" (external influence).  In essence, to
exist within the limitations of one's "svabhaav," to function according to one's
true essence, to remain in one's true nature, is the essence of the soul. To
exist outside of these limitations, to function outside of one's true essence,
is not "svabhaav" but "vibhaav."  To exist within one's "svabhaav" is to be free
from all faults, to be liberated. To exist in one's true essence, to be free
from all external influences, is to be pure and perfect, to be in a state of
infinite virtues. This is the state of "devachandra" (the perfect being), the
state of the "jinaraaj" (the victorious king).  "Devachandra" is the embodiment
of this pure and perfect state, the state of infinite virtues. He is the one who
has attained this state of liberation, the state of pure consciousness, the
state of "svabhaav."  The text then goes on to discuss the concept of
"anantarakshanamutiratmamud" (the absence of the soul in the past and future
moments). This concept is explained in detail, emphasizing the eternal nature of
the soul and its existence beyond the limitations of time.  The text concludes
by highlighting the importance of understanding the true nature of the soul and
its limitations. It emphasizes the need to strive for liberation, to attain the
state of "svabhaav," and to become like "devachandra," the embodiment of pure
consciousness and infinite virtues.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bhakatatattvamImAMsA svabhAva-maryAdA dhama', nija sattA nija bhAvathI re'
AtmAnI svarUpa sattA che, je prakAre AtmAnuM zuddha sahaja AtmasvarUpa che, te
prakAre svanuM bhavana-hovuM te svabhAva che. nija svarUpe tevuM te "svabhAva
che. (juo ka pR. 75 phUTaneTa ). ane A svabhAva paNa bhAvAvadhi ja yukta che,
eTale ke jeTalI sva bhAvanI avadhi-maryAdA che, teTalI avadhi-maryAdA paryata ja
svabhAva ghaTe che, -nahiM ke anya prakAre. zuddha cetanabhAvamAM hovuM-vartavuM
e AtmAnI svabhAva-maryAdA che, svabhAva- e ja ene "maryAdA dharma" -marajAda
che. eTale zuddha cetana maryAdA dharma? bhAvamAM vatte te ja "svabhAvamAM Avyo
kahevAya, nahiM te nahi. kAraNa ke svabhAva maryAdAmAM arthAt zuddha
cetanabhAvamAM na vattatAM, parabhAva-vibhAvamAM varte, te te svabhAvamAM vanya
na kahevAya, ne vatye je kahIe to atiprasaMga doSa Ave; kAraNa ke zuddha
dravyanuM je svarasabhavana te ja svabhAva che, ane je te anya dravyarUpa thAya
to te ene svabhAva nathI, paNa vibhAva ja che. tAtparya ke-jema che tema, jeTalI
che teTalI svabhAvanI avadhimAM-maryAdAmAM hovuMnija sattA nija vartavuM,
tattvathI nija sattAe sthiti karavI, te ja svabhAva che. te svabhAva bhAvathI
re" maryAdAmAM na levuM-na vartavuM te svabhAva nathI, paNa vibhAva che,
parabhAva che. ane A je svabhAvamAM hovuM-vattavuM te ja adoSa evuM muktapaNuM
che; "nija bhAvathI nija sattA" e ja anaMta guNanuM sthAna evuM zuddha
siddhapaNuM che. ane tene je pAmyA che te ja parama nirdoSa mukta, siddha evA
"devacaMdra" jinarAjajI che. "nija sattA nija bhAvathI re, guNa anaMtanuM
kANuM...jinavara pUje devacaMdra jinarAja re, zuddha siddha sukhakhANa..jina-
"-zrI devacaMdrajI A ja kahe che- anantarakSaNAmUtirAtmamUda thaze tuA.
tayAvirodhAnnityo'sau syAdasanvA sadaiva hi  // 193 //  AgalI pAchalI kSaNe,
AtmA taNe abhAva; je mAne che tehane, ahiM lekamAM sAva; te ja mAnyatA sAthamAM,
virodhabhAva vinA ja hoya nitya te AtamA athavA asat sadAja. 193 - vRtti-
banattAkSamUri-anaMtarakSaNe abhUti-abhAva, pUrva-pazcAta kSaNe abhUtiabhAva,
ema artha che, kAmamUte ratha su-jene ahIM AtmabhUta che, je vartamAnanI athavA
vAdInI AtmabhUta che, tene deSa che che -te sAthe. te anaMtara kSaNa abhUti
sAthe, virodhA-avireSarUpe kAraNa thakI, vartamAnabhAve karIne zuM ? te ke-
nityogasau-nitya e te vartamAna hoya 'tadUta nA tadrAvAva, "sadA tabhAva thakI
tata hoya " eTalA mATe. pakSAntara kahe che-ghasavA laiva 6i-athavA sadaiva asat
hoya-te anaMtara kSaNeamati sAthe avirodhathI tenA prastapaNAne lIdhe.

Page #724 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(648) Yoga Disamuccaya Meaning: - In the immediate moment, the one who is
considered to be the self (by the Vaamanavadi) is not real, and with that, he is
eternally present, or he is always unreal. Discussion Anantar, meaning the
previous and subsequent moments, is non-existence, non-being. The one who,
according to the Vaamanavadi's opinion, is considered to be the self, meaning
the one who believes that the soul is not real in the previous and subsequent
moments, but only real in the present moment, has many faults. He has no
connection with the previous and subsequent moments of non-existence, therefore
his present moment (1) should be eternal, and (2) or it should always be unreal,
non-existent - this is the argument here. Both these arguments are flawed, and
therefore the theory of momentariness is established. It is like this: - . (1)
The momentarist believes that - the soul and other things are momentary, they
are non-existent, unreal in the previous and subsequent moments, and only real,
existent in the present moment. If we apply this to the momentarist's own soul,
it becomes clear: - Due to the lack of connection with his belief that there is
non-existence in the previous and subsequent moments, he himself exists in the
present moment. Because he says that he is not real in the previous and
subsequent moments, he accepts his existence, his present moment, in the moment
between them. Thus, the one who is real in the present moment should be eternal,
because it is a rule that whatever is real, is always real due to its reality.
Meaning, whatever is real, should always be real. So, the one who is real in the
present moment should always be real in the present moment. Meaning, he should
be eternal. And thus, by establishing the eternal argument, momentariness is
destroyed. (2) Moreover, the one who knows and says that there is non-existence
in the previous and subsequent moments, if he himself is not real in the
previous and subsequent moments, then how can he know and speak? So, he himself
should be real in the previous and subsequent moments, in the present moment in
which he is real. Thus, it is experienced that the one who knows that something
is momentary is not momentary himself. (See page 81, the verses of Atmasiddhi).
So, the soul is not momentary, but eternal. - Therefore, the arguer should
either accept the eternal argument, or he should abandon the argument that he is
real in the present moment. And if he does that, he will always be unreal, non-
existent! Because according to them, he is unreal in the previous and subsequent
moments, and if he is not real in the present moment, then he will always be
unreal, non-existent. Is the arguer not momentary?

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (648) yoga disamuccaya artha :--anaMtara kSaNe abhUti ahI jene (vamAnane vA
vAdIne ) AtmabhUta che, tene tenI sAthe avirAdhathI te vattamAna nitya hAya, vA
sadaiva asat ja hAya. vivecana anaMtara arthAt AgalI-pAchaDhI kSaNe abhAva-nahi.
aAvApaNuM, e je vamAnavAdInA abhiprAye AtmabhUta che, arthAt AtmAne je AgalI-
pAchalI kSaNe abhAvarUpanahi heAvArUpa mAne che, mAtra vamAna kSaNe ja
bhAvarUpa-hAvArUpa mAne che, tene aneka doSa Ave che. te AgalI-pAchalI kSaNe
abhAva sAthe tenA vatta mAnabhAvanA avirAdha che, tethI te va`mAna (1) kAM te
nitya hovA joi e, ane (2) kAM te sadAya asat ja avidyamAna ja hAvA joi e,-Ama A
e pakSa atre saMbhave che. A banne pakSa dUSita che, ane tethI kSaNikavAdanA
mata khaDita thAya che. te A prakAre H-- . (1) kSaNikavAdI ema mAne che ke-
AtmAdi vastu kSaNusvarUpa che, AgalI-pAchalI kSaNe avidyamAna-abhAvarUpa che,
mAtra vattamAna kSaNe ja vidyamAna-bhAvarUpa che. A mata jenA AtmabhUta che,
tenA peAtAnA AtmA upara ja A ghaTAvIe te Ama vizadha Ave che :-AgalI-pAchalI
kSaNe abhAva che evI tenI mAnyatAnI sAthe avirAdhane lIdhe, vantamAna bhAve tA
te peAte che. kAraNake AgalI-pAzrlI kSaNe ja nahi. hAvApaNuM te kahe che, eTale
te enI vaccenI va''mAna kSaNe te tenuM vidyamAnapaNu-vattamAnapaNuM te svIkAre
che. Ama je vamAnabhAve vamAna che, te nitya hAvA joIe, kAraNake sadA tadbhAva
thakI tata te bhAvavaMta hAya ema niyama che. arthAt je je bhAvavALA hAya te
tadbhAvathI sadA te bhAvavALA hAvA joie. eTale vattamAna bhAvavALA te sadA
vamAnabhAvavata heAvA joie. arthAt te nitya hAvA joie. ane Ama nitya pakSanI
siddhi thatAM, kSaNikavAda UDI jAya che. (2) vaLI AgalI-pAchalI kSaNe abhAva che
ema je jANe che ne kahe che, te peAte o AgalI-pAchalI kSaNe vidyamAna na hoya,
teA tema kema jANI-kahI zake vAru ? eTale te pAte je vamAna kSaNe vidyamAna che,
te AgalI-pAchalI kSaNe paNa vidyamAna hAvA ja joIe. Ama je vastu kSaNika che ema
jANI de che, te vadanArA pAte kSaNika nathI, ema anubhavathI nizcaya jaNAya che.
(jue pR. 81, AtmasiddhinI gAthA ). tA ke AtmA kSaNika nahi, paNa nitya
che.-eTale vAdIe kAM tA nitya pakSane svIkAra karavA joie, ane kAM tA peAtAnA
vattamAna kSaNe paNa vidyamAnapaNAnA pakSa cheDI devA joIe. ane ema jo kare te
te sadAya asat ja-avidyamAna ja thaI paDe ! kAraNake teonA mate AgalI pAchalI
kSaNe te abhAvarUpa che, ane Ama vattamAna kSaNe paNa jo na hAya, teA te sadAya
abhAvarUpa ja hAvAthI sadAya asata ja hAya, avidyamAna ja hoya. vadanArA te
kSaNika nahiM ?

Page #725 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Refutation of Momentarism by Its Own Logic:  **(649)** Even in the
present moment, it does not remain as it is, and the momentarists who claim
this, their father's existence would not remain! So, from where would their
argument arise? Those who believe in the absence of the soul in the previous and
subsequent moments, their momentarism cannot stand even for a moment.  To
counter the objection, it is said:  "It is not the same, just as it is not
otherwise. It is contradictory by its own logic, because of its origin and so
on." (194)  **Meaning:** "It is not the same" - this is contradictory to "it is
otherwise", just as it is contradictory by its own logic, because of its origin
and so on.  **Analysis:** "It is the same" - this indicates the state of being.
"It is not" - this indicates the state of non-being. Therefore, "it is not the
same" is contradictory to "it is otherwise". It is contradictory by its own
logic, because the momentarists say, "It is otherwise - it is not otherwise - it
becomes", and they say, "How can it be otherwise, if it is otherwise? How can it
be?" And this logic is the same in "it is not the same". It is contradictory in
this way - if it is the same, how can it "be not"? How can it not be? And if it
"is" - it is not, how can it "be"? This is contradictory. Because of the absence
of origin and so on, it is contradictory in this way.  **Explanation:** "It is
the same" - this is the indication of the state of being, and "it is not" - this
is the indication of the state of non-being. "It is otherwise" - this is the
indication of the state of being otherwise. It is contradictory, it is refuted,
by its own logic, because it says, "How can it be otherwise? If it is otherwise,
then how can it be?" And this "it is not the same" - here also, it is the same.
It is contradictory in this way - if it is the same, how can it "be not"? How
can it not be, because of the absence of being? It is contradictory in this way.
The commentary says: "Because of its origin and so on, because of the absence of
origin and so on, it is contradictory in this way."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 mutatatvamImAMsA: kSaNikavAdanuM enA ja nyAye khaMDana (649) vartamAna kSaNe
paNa te sata nahi rahe ane te vadanArA kSaNikavAdInuM pitAnuM astitva nahi rahe!
eTale tene vAda ja kyAMthI ubho raheze? ema AgalI-pAchalI kSaNe AtmAno abhAva
mAnanAre kSaNikavAda kSaNabhara paNa TakI zakatA nathI. parekti mAtranA
parihArArthe kahe che - sa eva na bhavatyetadanyathAbhavatItivat  /  virudaM
tanmayAdeva tadutpattyAditastathA  // 194 //  te ja che na e anyathA, te che enI
jema; viruddha tasa nyAye jata, utpanyAdi tema, 194 artha "te ja nathI hota' -A
"anyathA hoya che"-enI jema viruddha che-tenA nyAyathI ja tautpatti Adine lIdhe
tathA prakAre viruddha che. vivecana "g gNa te ja e bhAva sUcave che, "1 mati
-nathI hote e abhAva sUcave che. eTale "te ja nathI hota" e be anyathA mavati.
te anyathA hoya che enI peThe, viruddha che, virodha pAme che. tenA pitAnA
nayathI ja-nyAyathI ja ne ja bhAva Ama che. kAraNa ke te kSaNikavAdI "te ja
anyathA bhavati-anyathA abhAva-A thAya che,' ema kahe Ama kahe che -"te anyathA
kema hoya che je viruddha anyathA hoya, te te kema hoya ?" ane A nyAya te ja
bhAva mavati -nathI hote, emAM paNa samAna ja che. te A prakAre - je te ja che,
te te "ra mavati' kema? nathI hoto kema ? ane je " jamava7 deg che-che nahiM, te
te "bhAva" kema? ema A viruddha che. abhAvatpatti Adine lIdhe A tathA prakAre-
tevA prakAre viruddha che. kRtti- zva-te ja ema bhAva parAmarza che, ane mavati-
nathI hotA,-ema abhAva abhidhAna che, chata-A zuM? te anyathA mavaroniva-anyathA
bhavati-anyathA hoya che enI jema, ema nidAna che, vihR-viruddha, vyAhata
che,tanayA deva-tenA naya thakI ja, tenA nyAyathI ja, kAraNa ke te 'te ja
anyathA thAya che' ema kahyuM Ama kahe che-"kema anyathA thAya? je anyathA
thAya, to te kema ?" ane A "te ja nathI hoto'--emAM atre paNa samAna ja che. te
A prakAre je te ja che, te te kema ja mavati na hoya ? abhavatapaNAthI-na
hovApaNAthI te kema ? evA prakAre viruddha che. abhyaracaya kahe che-
ttatsatyAdita tenI utpatti Adi thakI, abhatpatti Adi thakI, tathA-tevA prakAre
viruddha che,

Page #726 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(650) Momentary [Kshanika Vadi] { Feeling Figure: 18 X Absence | Refutation {
Feeling × Absence Yoga-drishti-samuchchaya This conveys the meaning of the
feeling— "Sato'sattve tadutpadastato nasho'pi tasya yat. Nastasya punarbhava
sada nashe na tat sthitih." || 195 || X Absence ? " Feeling ? Here, the
momentary [Kshanika Vadi] uses the same tactic to support his own opinion, with
which the sage, the master of Nyaya Shastra, refutes the momentary opinion with
great skill, like a skilled lawyer, and returns the argument of the proponent to
the proponent's mouth. Then, by the same justice, he has no choice but to remain
silent. In this way, the refutation of the momentary [Kshanika Vadi] is that the
feeling that exists in one moment, in the next moment, transforms into something
else—'it becomes something else,' he says. Then the momentary [Kshanika Vadi]
argues in this way to refute it—'How can it become something else? If it becomes
something else, how can it become something else? That is, how can that feeling
become something else? And how can the feeling that is something else become
something else? Therefore, 'it becomes something else'—that feeling becomes
something else, it does not happen.' Now, by the same justice, believing that
what exists in the previous and next moment does not exist in the present
moment, 'the same is not'—what the momentary [Kshanika Vadi] says, that also
does not happen. Because 'the same' shows the feeling of being, and 'not being'
shows the absence of not being. Thus, in one place, feeling and absence are
mutually opposed. Because the same feeling is, how can it 'not be'—how can it
not be? And if it is 'not being'—'not being', then how can it be feeling? That
is, if 'feeling' is, how can it 'not be'? And if 'not being' is, how can it be
'feeling'? Thus, this is contradictory. Therefore, the momentary side of 'it is
not the same' does not happen. Moreover, the momentary [Kshanika Vadi] accepts
that the feeling exists only in the present moment, but he says that in the
previous and next moment, it 'does not be'—it does not exist—it is absence.
There are also many contradictions in this; because if it does not exist in the
previous moment, it exists in the present moment, that is, the feeling arises
from absence, this is a fault. Similarly, if it does not exist in the next
moment, then there is destruction of being, that is, the manifestation of the
feeling is a fault. And so on, many such contradictions arise. (See Shloka. 嗡
Asat is produced, it exists in the present moment, it becomes absence, this is
also a fault. (See P. 81 of the Fruitnet.) Vritti: -Sato—being, feeling,
asattva—being considered as non-being (from the word 'the same is not'). What?
Then kesavutsah—its production, that is, the production of asattva, will
happen—due to kadachitkapana (due to the possibility of being). Then—therefore,
due to that production, nashopi tattva—that asattva will also be destroyed.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (650) kSaNikavAdI { bhAva AkRti : 18 X abhAva | khaMDana { bhAva x abhAva
yogadRSTisamuccaya AnA bhAvana artha ja kahe che-- sato'sattve tadutpAdastato
nAzo'pi tasya yat  /  naSTasya punarbhAvaH sadA nAze na tatsthitiH  //  195 //
X abhAva ? " bhAva ? ahI" kSaNikavAdI je yuktithI peAtAnA matanuM samarthana
kare che, te ja yuktithI te kSaNika matanuM khaMDana zAstrakAra maharSi e kuzaLa
nyAyazAstrInI jema ajaba kuzaLatAthI karI khatAvI, vAdInI dalIla vAdInA mukhamAM
pAchI ApI che, tyAre enA ja nyAye tene niruttara-mauna rahevA zivAya chUTako
nathI. te A prakAre pU enuM kha'Dena kSaNe je bhAva che, te ja uttara kSaNe
paryAAMtara pAmI anyathA hAya che-- * anyathA bhavati,' ema kAI kahe che. tyAre
kSaNivAdI A pramANe dalIla karI tenu* kha'Dana kare che- te anyathA kema hAya?
jo anyathA hAya, te te kema hAya ? arthAt te bhAva khIjA prakAre kema Aya ? ane
khIjA prakAre hoya te| bhAva kema hAya ? mATe anyathA bhavati--te bhAva anyathA
hAya che te ghaTatuM nathI.' have e ja nyAye, AgalI-pAchalI kSaNe che te ja
vamAna kSaNe nathI ema mAnI, 'jJa va na mata -te ja che nahi, ema je kSaNikavAdI
kahe che, te paNa ghaTatuM nathI. kAraNa ke te ja' e bhAva-heAvApaNuM batAve
che, ane 'che nahi e abhAva-nahi. heAvApaNuM batAve che. Ama eka sthaLe bhAva-
abhAva paraspara viruddha che. kAraNa ke te ja bhAva che, te te kema 'na bhavati
'-kema nathI hAtA ? ane jo te abhavat che-che nahi', teA te bhAva kema ? arthAt
jo ' bhAva' che te 'na bhavati' kema ? ne jo 'na bhavati ' che te 'bhAva kema '?
Ama A viruddha che. mATe 'te ja nathI hote' e kSaNika pakSa ghaTatA nathI. vaLI
vamAna kSaNe ja bhAva 'nA kSaNikavAdI svIkAra kare che, paNa AgalI-pAchalI kSaNe
te 'na bhavati'-te nathI hAtA-abhAva che ema te kahe che. temAM paNa aneka
virodha Ave che; kAraNa ke pUrva kSa na hAya, te vakhta mAna kSaNe hAya, te
arthAt abhAvamAMthI bhAvanI utpatti thaI, A doSa che. tema ja uttara kSaNe na
hoya, teA sata vinAza thayA, arthAt bhAvamAMthI pragaTa doSa che. ityAdi aneka
vidha atra Ave che. (jue zrleA. Weng  asat utpAda thayA, vattamAna kSaNe hAya te
abhAva thaye, A paNu phrUTaneTa pR. 81.) vRtti:-sato--satanuM, bhAvanu, asattva-
asattva mAnavAmAM Avye ( 'jJa zrva nA matta ' ' te ja nathI hotA' e vacanathI. )
zuM? teA kesavutsAH-tenA utpAda, eTale asattvane utpAda thaze,-kAdAcitkapaNAthI
(kadAcit heAvApaNAne lIdhe). to-tethI karIne, te utpAdane lIdhe, nAzopi tattva-
te asattvane nAza paNu thaze.

Page #727 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Muktatattvamimamsa: Defects in the Theory of Annihilation (Kshanikavada)
(651) If the nature of Sat (being) is considered to be Asat (non-being), then
Asat will be produced, and therefore it will also be destroyed. Consequently,
the destroyed Asat will be reborn, or else it will be constantly destroyed, and
there will be no state of existence for it.  **Explanation:**  The statement "It
is not" implies that Sat is considered to be Asat, meaning the absence of being.
Due to the occasional existence of Asat, it will be produced, and due to this
production, it will also be destroyed, because "Whatever is produced is
impermanent." Therefore, the destroyed Asat will be reborn in the same form,
because there is no other possibility for the destruction of Asat. In other
words, there is no other way for it to be destroyed.  Now, if someone argues
that destruction is only a state of being before and after the destruction-
causing factor, then this is a misconception. The constant destruction that is
assumed will not have any state of existence, and it will be destroyed even at
the desired moment.  Based on the statement "It is not," the nature of Sat is
considered to be Asat, meaning the absence of being. This will lead to the
production of Asat, the emergence of absence. Therefore, something that does not
exist in the first place cannot be produced, being cannot arise from non-being,
and the world cannot be created from nothing! It is like saying that Asat will
spontaneously appear in the sky like a sky flower, a hare's horn, or a barren
woman's child, which does not exist! This production of Asat is directly
contradicted and is flawed in many ways.  (1) Even if we assume that Asat is
produced, it will be destroyed along with its production. Because whatever is
produced is also destroyed, this is a rule. Therefore, Asat will be destroyed,
and it will vanish. Consequently, the destroyed Asat will be reborn in the same
form, because the destruction of Asat is "Vahoottimattanatya," meaning whatever
is produced is impermanent. Therefore, the destroyed Asat will be reborn in the
same form, because there is no other possibility for the destruction of Asat. In
other words, there is no other way for it to be destroyed. Now, if someone
argues that destruction is only a state of being before and after the
destruction-causing factor, then this is a misconception. The constant
destruction that is assumed will not have any state of existence, and it will be
destroyed even at the desired moment.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 muktatattvamImAMsA: kSaNikavAdamAM asata utpAda Adi deSa (651) satanuM
5satapaNuM sate-utpatti tasa hoya; tethI teha asavano, ahiM nAza paNa joya; ne
tethI karI naSTane, upaje punarbhAva; athavA nAza sadA kalle, sthiti na tenI
sAva, 15 artha -satanuM asatva-asatupaNuM mAnavAmAM AvyuM te asattvane-
asatapaNane utpAda thaze, tethI karIne te asatvane nAza paNa thaze; teTalA mATe
naSTa asatvane punarbhava thaze, ane sadA nAza mALe tenI sthiti ja nahi heya.
vivecana sa parva mavati:-"te ja nathI hote" e vacana uparathI satanuM-bhAvanuM
asatva-abhAva mAnavAmAM AvyuM, kavacit hovApaNane lIdhe asatvane utpAda thaze,
ane te utpAdane lIdhe te asattane nAza paNa thaze kAraNa ke "je utpattivALuM
asat utpAda heya te anitya heya" evo niyama che. ane tethI karIne naSTa evA Adi
doSa asatvane te ja rUpe punarbhava thaze, kAraNa ke asattvanA vinAzanI anyathA
anupapatti che, arthAt bIjI koI rIte ghaTamALapaNuM nathI. have nAza te
nAzAtmaka bhAvane lIdhe pUrvapazcAtu-AgaLapAchaLa avasthita ja che, ema keI kahe
to e AzaMkIne kahe che-sadA nAza je mAnavAmAM Ave te tenI sthiti ja nahiM hoya,
vivakSita kSaNe paNa te nAza pAme. te ja nathI hota" e vacananA AdhAre ja
satanuM asapaNuM mAnavAmAM Ave, bhAvanuM abhAvapaNuM mAnavAmAM Ave, te asatanI
utpatti thaze, abhAvano uddabhava thaze. eTale je vastunuM mULa astitva ja che
nahi, te navI AvIne kato sadA sat : utpanna thaze, abhAvamAMthI bhAva upajaze,
zUnyamAMthI jagat pedA thaze! kAMte sadA asat Ama AkAzapuSpa, zazazuga, athavA
vaMdhyAsuta ke jenuM astitva ja che nahiM, te ApameLe AkAzamAMthI ubhA thaze !
Ama A asat utpAda pratyakSabAdhita che, aneka prakAre doSayukta che. (1) tathApi
dhAra ke asata utpAda thaze, te te asatane nAza paNa sAthe AvIne ubhuM raheze.
kAraNa ke jenI utpatti hoya tene nAza paNa hoya ja evo niyama che. tethI
asatvane vinAza thaze, te asatva paNa UDI jaze. eTale naSTa evA asavane te ja
rUpe punarbhava thaze, kAraNa ke asatvane vinAza "vahuttimattanatya' je
utpattivALuM hoya te anitya heya, eTalA mATe. caMduje kAraNathI, jethI karIne.
ema tana-tethI karIne, naB%-naSTane, asattva, punarmAva:-te ja rUpe punarbhava
thaze,-te asavanA vinAzanI anyathA anupattine lIdhe (te asattvano vinAza bIjI
koI rIte nahiM ghaTe mATe). have "nAza te nAzAtmaka bhAvane lIdhe pUrva-pazcAta
avasthita ja che" e AzaMkAne kahe che-sA -sadA nAza mAnavAmAM Avya, zuM? te ke-
tatithatiH-tenI sthiti nahiM hoya, vivakSita kSaNe paNa te nAza pAme che.

Page #728 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(52) How else will the collection of yogas not diminish? Thus, being will
remain, truth will remain, the object will always be proven to be of the nature
of being, therefore, the untruth of being that you have believed is
inappropriate - it is false. (2) Therefore, the debater caught in the trap,
confused, holding onto the side of the destruction of being, says that due to
the destructive feeling, we also believe that destruction is in the previous and
subsequent moments. Then, the answer is given: there will not be a state of
always believing in destruction. You say that even in the desired moment, it
will not exist, therefore, the being that you believe in will always become non-
being. Thus, by believing in the non-being of being, (1) non-being will be
produced - the feeling of absence will arise, (2) therefore, non-being will be
destroyed, meaning the feeling of absence will be absent, (3) therefore, the
feeling will be reborn in the same form. Meaning, the feeling will be the
feeling, the object will always be proven to be of the nature of feeling. Or -
by believing in the destruction of being, the object will always be proven to be
of the nature of absence, therefore, it will never exist. Figure: 19 | 10 0 0.
Feeling Feeling Feeling [ Absence Production Absence Destruction ] Momentary
Debater { Absence Absence Absence Absence [ Always No ] X Bring x x x स
क्षणस्थितिधर्मा चेद् द्वितीयादिक्षणे स्थितौ । युज्यते ह्येतदप्यस्य तथा
चोक्तानतिक्रमः ॥१९६॥ क्षणस्थिति धर्म युत वळी, जो माने ते नाश; ते द्वितीय आदी
क्षणे, हेतां स्थिति ज तास: क्षणस्थिति धर्मकपणું, ए ज युक्त एनूय; आणि तेम ते जे
क्हयू, ते यथार्थ बधूय, १९६० Meaning: - He who says that destruction is of the
nature of momentary existence, if he believes that destruction is in the second
and subsequent moments, then the nature of momentary existence of this presented
feeling is appropriate, and thus, there is no violation of what has been said.
Criticism: He who says that destruction is the feeling that is of the nature of
momentary existence, if he believes that destruction is in the second and
subsequent moments, then the nature of momentary existence of this presented
feeling is also appropriate, and thus, there is no violation of what has been
said above. Commentary: - He who says that destruction is the feeling that is of
the nature of momentary existence, this doubt is said - in the second and
subsequent moments, is there existence? Then - this is also appropriate, the
nature of momentary existence is also appropriate, of this, of the presented
feeling, and in this way, thus, there is no violation of what has been said.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (52) yogadarisamucaya bIjI kaI rIte ghaTaze nahiM. Ama satva ja raheze,
satapaNuM ja raheze, vastu sadA satasvarUpa ja sAbita thaze, mATe tame mAneluM
satanuM asatva ayukta che-mithyA che. (2) eTale sakaMjAmAM Avela vAdI muMjhAIne
satavinAza pakSane pakaDIne kahe che kenAzAtmaka bhAvane lIdhe AgalI-pAchalI
kSaNe nAza te che ja ema ame paNa mAnIe chIe. tyAre teno javAba Ape che ke-sadA
nAza mAnavAmAM AvyuM tenI sthiti ja nahi hoya. tame kaho cho te vivakSita kSaNe
paNa tenuM astitva ja nahiM rahe, eTale tame mAneluM sata sadA asat ja thaI
paDaze. Ama satanuM asattva mAnavAthI (1) asata utpAda- abhAva bhAva thaze, (2)
eTale asatva vinAza thaze arthAta abhAva bhAvane abhAva thaze, (3) eTale ke
bhAvane te ja rUpe punarbhava thaze. arthAta bhAva bhAva thaze, vastu sadA
bhAvarUpa ja siddha thaze. athavA-satavinAza mAnavAthI vastu sadAya abhAvarUpa
siddha thatAM, kyAreya paNa tenI sthiti nahi hoya. AkRti H 19 | i0 0 0. bhAva
bhAva bhAva [ abhAva utpAdaabhAva nAza ] kSaNikavAdI { abhAva abhAva abhAva
abhAva [ sadA nA] X lAva x x x sa kSaNasthitidharmA ced dvitIyAdikSaNe sthitau
/  yujyate hyetadapyasya tathA coktAnatikramaH  // 196 //  kSaNasthiti dharma
yuta vaLI, jo mAne te nAza; te dvitIya Adi kSaNe, hetAM sthiti ja tAsa:
kSaNasthiti dharmakapaNuM, e ja yukta enuMya; ane tema te je kahyuM, te
yathArtha badhuMya, 1960 artha :-te nAza kSaNasthiti dharmavALe che ema je kahe,
te dvitIya Adi kSaNe sthiti sate, A adhikRta bhAvanuM A kSaNasthitidharmakapaNuM
yukta che, ane ema sate uktane anatikrama heya che, arthAta je kahyuM tenuM
ullaMghana thatuM nathI. vivecana te nAza je kSaNasthiti dharmavALe bhAva ja
che, ema je kahe, te dvitIya Adi kSaNe sthiti sate A prastuta bhAvanuM
kSaNasthitidharmakapaNuM paNa yukta che, ane ema sate uparamAM kahelI vAtanuM
ullaMghana thatuM nathI. vRtti:-sa: te nAja, kSatiSa jeta-je
kSaNasthitidharmavALe bhAva ja che, A AzaMkAne kahe che-hUitIyAkSike citau-
dvitIya Adi kSaNe sthiti sata, zuM? to ke-purAte hetari-A paNa yukta che,
kSamusthitidharmakapaNuM paNa yukta che, baca-AnuM, adhikRta bhAvanuM, tathA
2-ane tevA prakAre, ema sate, sAratima -uktane anatikrama che.

Page #729 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Doctrine of Existence: Either Eternal Existence or Eternal Non-Existence
**(53)** In the previous chapter, it was stated that if a thing is considered to
be eternally destroyed, then it cannot even exist for a moment. Therefore, the
momentarists argue that destruction is a characteristic of momentary existence.
In response, the scholars state: (1) Even in the subsequent moments, the
characteristic of momentary existence, which you claim, will cease to exist.
Therefore, in the subsequent moments, this characteristic of momentary existence
will arise again. Thus, the eternal non-existence will continue for an infinite
number of moments. After that, what moment will be devoid of the characteristic
of momentary existence? Show that. In other words, an eternal state of existence
in all three times will be attained. Thus, when the uninterrupted existence of a
thing is established, where will the momentariness remain? (2) Or, if you say
that destruction, which has the characteristic of momentary existence, will
exist for a moment, then in the subsequent moments, that destruction with the
characteristic of momentary existence will be attained. Therefore, tell me, what
moment will be devoid of the destruction that you believe has the characteristic
of momentary existence? There will not be a single moment when destruction does
not exist, meaning that destruction will always be attained, and the thing will
not exist even for a moment. Thus, either eternal existence will be attained, or
eternal non-existence will be attained. Therefore, in any case, your momentarism
will not stand even for a moment. And thus, what was said above is all correct,
and it is confirmed here.  How? It is said:  **क्षणस्थितौ तदैवास्य
नास्थितियुक्त्यसंगतेः । न पश्चादपि सेत्येवं सतेोऽसत्त्वं व्यवस्थितम् ॥ १९७॥**
**kshaṇasthitau tadaiva asya nāstiti yuktyasangateḥ | na paścādapi seti evam
satō'sattvaṁ vyavasthitam || 197 ||**  **Meaning:** When there is momentary
existence, then there is no non-existence of the intended object, due to the
inconsistency of the logic. And even later, there is no non-existence. Thus, the
non-existence of existence is established.  **Explanation:** When there is
momentary existence, then there is no non-existence of the intended object at
that moment, due to the inconsistency of the logic. And even later, there is no
non-existence. Thus, the non-existence of existence is established.
**Commentary:** When there is momentary existence, then there is no non-
existence of the intended object at that moment, due to the inconsistency of the
logic. And even later, there is no non-existence. Thus, the non-existence of
existence is established.  The sutra states that the non-existence of existence
is established. And therefore, the production, etc., of existence is also non-
existent.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 sutatatvamImAMsA : kAM to sadA sthiti, kahe sadA asthiti | (53). uparanA
lekamAM kahyuM ke-sadA nAza mAnavAmAM AvyuM vastunI kSaNabhara paNa sthiti ja
nahi rahe, eTale kSaNikavAdI kahe che ke-te nAza kSaNasthiti dharmavALo che.
tene javAba ApatAM zAstrakAra kahe che-(1) bIjI vagere kSaNe paNa A kAM te sadA
tame je kSaNasthitidharmapaNuM kaho cho te ghaTe che, eTale bIjI vagere sthiti
kA te kSaNe paNa A kSaNasthitivALe dharma AvIne ubho raheze. ema anaMta sadA
asthiti kSaNa paryata cAlyA ja karaze, te pachI kSaNasthiti dharma vinAnI khAlI
kaI kSaNa haze? e batAve. arthAta anavakAza evI trikALa sthiti ja prApta thaze.
Ama vastunI akhaMDa sthiti siddha thatAM kSaNikapaNuM kyAM raheze? (2) athavA
ema je kaho ke nAza kSaNasthitidharmavALe-kSaNabhara rahenAra che, te pachI bIjI
vagere kSaNe paNa te kSaNasthitivALo nAza prApta thaze. eTale tame mAnelA
kSasthiti dharmavALA nAza vinAnI khAlI-avakAzarUpa evI kaI kSaNa haze? te kahe.
evI eka paNa kSaNa nahi hoya ke jyAre nAza nahiM vartate hoya, athAt sadAya nAza
ja prApta thaze, ane vastunI kSaNabhara paNa sthiti ja nahiM rahe. Ama kAM te
sadA sthiti-sapaNuM ja prApta thaze, ane kAM te sadA asthiti-asatpaNuM ja prApta
thaze, eTale kaI paNa rIte tamAre kSaNikavAda kSaNa paNa Takaze nahiM. ane Ama
uparamAM je kahyuM hatuM te badhuMya barAbara ja che, ema atre puSTi maLe che.
kevA prakAre? te kahe che - kSaNasthitau tadaivAsya nAsthitiyuktyasaMgateH  /
na pazcAdapi setyevaM sateo'sattvaM vyavasthitam  //  197 //  kSaNasthiti
tyAreja ehanI, asthiti nahi yukta; na pachI paNa asthiti te, ema vyavasthita
ukta, atha -kSaNasthiti sate, tyAre ja A vivakSita bhAvanI asthiti
nathI,-yuktinI asaMgatine lIdhe, ane pachI paNa te asthiti nathI -evA prakAre
sanuM asatva vyavasthita che. vivecana kSaNasthiti sate tyAre ja-vivakSita kSaNe
A vivakSita bhAvanI ja asthiti nahi jUttiH-kSaLasthitaukSaNasthiti sata,
tadaivatyAre ja, vivakSita kSaNe, ca-gAnI, vivakSita bhAvanI ja, nAsthiti
-asthiti nathI. zA kAraNathI? te ke-yuvacaraMjate-yuktinI asaMgatine lIdhe, sAre
ja asthitinA virodha thakI, evA prakAre yukti che ja pApa-pachI paNa-ditIya
kSaNe paNa nahi, te asthiti nathI, yukti asaMgati thakI ja. 'sAre avasthitimAM
tenI asthitinA virodha thakI." -evA prakAre mukita che. sUtreuM evA prakAre,
karoDarva-satanuM asatya vyavasthita che. ane tethI karIne satanA asavamAM tenA
utpAda ItyAdi anuva ja che.

Page #730 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(654) Yogadi Samuchaya Dai; because if it is not, then there is a contradiction
to the state of being, so the logic is inconsistent. Even then, in the second
moment, it is not the state of being. Hai, because of the intended initial
inconsistency of the logic. 'Then there is a contradiction to its state of being
in the state of being' - because the logic is inconsistent in this way that it
is not the state of being in the moment. In this way, existence and non-
existence are arranged. And therefore, in summary, the conclusion is:
'Existence, non-existence, being, its production, etc. are all that follows.' In
the previous section, it was said that there are those who have the dharma of
the moment of destruction, etc., and this is clarified here. (1) When there is a
moment of feeling, then - at a certain intended moment, there will not be a
state of being of that intended feeling, i.e., there will only be a state of
being. Because if it is not, then the logic becomes inconsistent. When there is
a state of being, there is a contradiction to the state of non-being, i.e., the
logic is that when there is a state of being, there is no state of non-being,
and that does not happen. So, if something has the dharma of the moment, then
there must be a state of being of the intended feeling at the intended moment.
(2) And even then, in the next moment, there is no state of being of it, because
if it is not, then the logic becomes inconsistent; 'Then there is a
contradiction to the state of being in the state of non-being' - this is the
logic, and it becomes inconsistent; i.e., when there is a state of non-being,
there is no state of being, this is the logic, and it does not happen here - so,
even in the next moment, there is no state of being of the present feeling, but
only a state of being. It should be understood in this way for the past and
future moments. The state of being means that the three-time state of being of
the present feeling is established - thus, it is proven that all that was said
about existence, non-existence, being, non-existence, production, etc. is indeed
true. So, the non-existence of the momentary form of existence, which the
momentarists believe in, is established; i.e., the non-being, the falseness, the
delusion is proven. Thus, the momentarist view is false. । इति एकान्त अनित्यपक्ष
निराकरणम् । It says, taking the eternal view as the basis - भवभावा
निवृत्तावप्ययुक्ता मुक्तकल्पना । एकान्तैकस्वभावस्य न ह्यवस्थाद्वयं क्वचित् ॥ १९८
॥ If there is no more becoming and non-becoming, then the idea of liberation is
not appropriate... because, for that which is eternally one in nature, there is
never a duality of states. 198 Commentary:- Even in the non-cessation of
becoming and non-becoming, even in eternal existence, what? Then - the idea of
liberation of the soul is inappropriate. Why is it inappropriate? Because - it
is eternally one in nature - because of the contradiction of the eternal one
nature - because it is not, it goes away - the state of being - the worldly and
the liberated, the mind - never, because of the contradiction of the eternal one
nature.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (654) yogadisamuccaya DAya; kAraNake nahi te tyAre ja asthitine virodha Ave,
ema yuktinI asa`gati hAya. pachI paNa dvitIya kSaNe paNa te asthiti nahi. hAya,
yuktinI vivakSita Adi asa'gatine lIdhe ja. ' tyAre avasthitimAM tenI asthitinA
virAdha che'-- kSaNe na asthiti e prakAre yuktinI asaMgati hAya che mATe. evA
prakAre sattu asattva vyavasthita che. ane tethI karIne toDasarave tanuAva:
'sattu asattva sate tenA utpAda ityAdi anuvartta ja che. AgalA eAkamAM nAza
kSaNasthitidhama vALA che, ityAdi kahyuM, tenuM atra spaSTIkaraNu karyuM" che. (
1) bhAvanI kSaNasthiti veLAye tyAre ja-amuka cAkkasa vivakSita kSaNe te
vivakSita bhAvanI asthiti nahi hoya, arthAt sthiti ja hoya. kAraNa ke nahi te
yuktinI asagati thAya. jyAre sthiti che tyAre asthitine virodha che, arthAt
jyAre sthiti hoya tyAre asthiti hoya nahi~ e pramANe yukti che, te ghaTe nahi.
eTale vastu jo kSaNasthiti dharma vALI hoya teA vivakSita kSaNe vivakSita
bhAvanI sthiti heAvI ja joie. (2) ane pachI paNa khIjI kSaNe paNa tenI asthiti
nathI, kAraNa ke nahiM te yuktinI asati thAya; 'tyAre avasthitimAM asthitinA
viredha Ave che' e prakAre yuti che, tenI asa'gati thAya; arthAt jyAre avasthiti
hoya tyAre asthiti hoya nahi, e prakAre yukti che, te ahIM ghaTe nahi' eTale
bIjI kSaNe paNa prastuta bhAvanI asthiti nathI, paNa sthiti ja che. ema
aparApara kSaNa mATe samajavuM. sthiti eTale prastuta bhAvanI trikALa sthiti
siddha thaI -Ama sattuM asattva sate asattva utpAda vagere je kahyuM hatuM, te
khadhuMya kharAkhara ja che, ema sAbita thayu' eTale kSaNikavAdIe mAnelA kSaNika
evA sat svarUpanu asattva sthApita thayuM; arthAt asatapaNuM-asatyapaNuM
mithyApaNuM pUravAra thayuM. Ama sathA kSaNikavAda asat che.  /  iti ekAnta
anityapakSa nirAkaraNam  /  nitya pakSane adhikRta karI kahe che-- bhavabhAvA
nivRttAvapyayuktA muktakalpanA  /  ekAntaikasvabhAvasya na hyavasthAdvayaM
kvacit  //  198  //  bhavabhAvaneAya jo vaLI hAya nahiM abhAva; mukta bhAvanI
kalpanA, tA ghaTe nahi...ja sAva; kAraNa ke ekAntathI jenA eka svabhAva; tenA
kadIya hAya nA, hraya avasthA bhAva, 198 vRtti:-mavamAvAnivRttavavi-bhavabhAvanI
anivRttimAM paNu, ekAnta nitmatAmAM paNu, zuM? tA ke--yuhA muddaRvanA-AtmAnI
muktikalpanA ayukta che. kema ayukta che? te ka-jAtteja svamAvaya-ekAnta eka
svabhAvanuM,-apracyuta anutpanna sthira eka svabhAvatAnuM sa~di-kAraNa ke nathI,
jAya dUrya-avasthAta,--sa MsArI ane mukta5, cit--kavacit ,-ekAMta
ekasvabhAvapaNAnA virAdhane lIdhe.

Page #731 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Satatvamimansa: Kshanikavada Asat, Ekanta Nitya Ma Moksha Nahi Ghatte
**Meaning:** Even in the absence of worldly desires, the concept of liberation
is inappropriate because a single, unchanging nature cannot have two states.
**Critique:**  Even in the absence of worldly desires, meaning even if one
believes in the unchanging nature of the soul, the concept of liberation is
inappropriate. Why is it inappropriate? Because a single, unchanging nature
cannot have two states; meaning, the unchanging, uncreated, single, eternal
nature, which has a single, uniform nature, cannot have two states, namely,
worldly and liberated, because it would contradict its single, unchanging
nature. As mentioned earlier, liberation does not occur in the transient, non-
eternal aspect of the single nature, and similarly, liberation does not occur in
the eternal aspect of the single nature. Because worldly desires exist,
according to the view of the eternal nature, they will never cease to exist,
meaning worldly desires will always remain, and the soul will never be
liberated. Thus, the concept of liberation does not arise in the single, eternal
nature because the single, unchanging nature cannot have two states.  According
to the view of the single, eternal nature, the unchanging, uncreated, stable,
single, unchanging nature is eternal. Meaning, that which is not subject to
decay or destruction is unchanging, that which is not created is uncreated, that
which is always stable is eternally stable, and that which has a single, unique
nature is the single, unchanging nature, which is the definition of eternal
existence. This is their definition of the word "eternal."  "Shaktrutananurthic
Sa" - according to their belief, the nature of the soul is eternal, always
stable, and unchanging. It remains in the same state as it always has been,
meaning there is no other change, result, or state transition. Thus, it always
remains in the same state, and another state is not possible. It would
contradict its single, unchanging nature. Therefore, whatever worldly desires
exist will always remain worldly desires. It is impossible for another state of
liberation to arise from them. Thus, liberation will never occur in the single,
eternal nature, and "liberation" will only be a concept! And the path of yoga
for liberation will also be "a mere concept"! Meaning, the path of yoga will not
be possible in the single, eternal nature. (See page 80)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 sAtatvamImAMsA : kSaNikavAda asata, ekAMta nityamAM mokSa nahiM ghaTe artha
-bhavabhAvanI anivRttimAM paNa muktakalpanA ayukta che, kAraNa ke ekAMta eka
svabhAvanI kavacita be avasthA hAya nahiM. vivecana bhavabhAvanI -
saMsArabhAvanI anivRttimAM paNa, arthAt ekAnta nityatA mAnavAmAM AvatAM paNa,
AtmAnI muktakalpanA ayukta che. kema ayukta che ? te ke ekAMta eka svabhAvanuM
avasthAdvaya kadI heya nahiM; arthAt apracuta, anutpanna, ekAMta nityamAM sthira
e jene ekarUpa svabhAva hoya, tene saMsArI ne mukta evI mokSa nahiM ghaTe be
avasthA kadI hoya nahi, kAraNa ke tema te tenA ekAMta eka svabhAva5Nune virodha
Ave. uparamAM kahyA pramANe ekAMta abhAvarUpaanitya pakSamAM jema mekSa ghaTatuM
nathI, tema ekAMta bhAvarUpa nitya pakSamAM paNa mekSa ghaTate nathI. kAraNa ke
bhavabhAva-saMsArabhAva hoya, te nitya pakSanA abhiprAye tenI kadI nivRtti thaze
nahiM, eTale sadAya bhavabhAva ja-saMsArabhAva ja rahyA karaze, ane AtmAnI kadI
paNa mukti thaze nahi. Ama ekAMta nitya pakSamAM muktakalpanA ghaTatI nathI,
kAraNa ke ekAMte eka svabhAvarUpa je hoya, tene kadI paNa be avasthA hoya nahi.
ekAMta nitya pakSanA abhiprAya pramANe apracuta, anutpanna, sthira, eka
svabhAvarUpa hoya te nitya che. eTale ke je svarUpathI pracuta-bhraSTa nahiM
hovAthI apracuta che, utpanna nahiM thatuM hovAthI je anutpanna che, sadA
sthiratAvALuM hovAthI je vidhAtmaka sthira che, ane advitIya evA
ekasvabhAvavALuM hovAthI je ekarUpa nitya vyAkhyA che,-te nitya evuM sat che,
ema teonI "nitya zabdanI vyAkhyA che. " zakatrutAnunarthika sa' -A teonI mAnyatA
pramANe bhAva-varatu nitya heI, sadA sthira ekasvabhAvarUpa hoya che, te ja
pramANe jema che tema sadA avasthita rahe che, eTale temAM koI bIjo pheraphAra
ke pariNAma ke avasthAtara ghaTatuM nathI; ane Ama tenI sadA jema che tema eka
ja avasthA rahe che, bIjI avasthA saMbhavatI nathI. nahi te tenA ekAMta
ekasvabhAvapaNAne virodha Ave. eTale je saMsArabhAva haze te sadAya saMsAra
bhAva ja raheze. temAMthI kadI paNa muktapaNArUpa bIjA bhAvano avasthAne
saMbhava nahi ja thAya. Ama ekAMta nitya pakSamAM kadI paNa muktapaNuM ghaTaze
nahiM, ane "muktapaNuM" e kalpanA mAtra thaI paDaze ! ane A mukti mATe yogamArga
paNa "kalpane mAtra bhadraka" thaI paDaze ! arthAt ekAMta nitya pakSamAM kadI
paNa gamArgane saMbhava ja nahiM rahe. (juo . pR. 80)

Page #732 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(656) Yogadṛṣṭisamuccaya - And in the absence of that (state), the statement
that the worldly and the liberated (are different) becomes meaningless. The
destruction of its own nature by means of reasoning is considered as the true
(nature) of this (self).  Meaning - And in the absence of those (two) states,
the statement that the worldly and the liberated (are different) becomes
meaningless. Therefore, the true (nature) of this (self) is to be considered as
the destruction of its own nature by means of reasoning.  Vivecana and as stated
above, in the absence of those (two) states, the statement that the worldly and
the liberated (are different) would become merely a meaningless verbal
expression, because the meaning is the essence. Therefore, in this manner, the
self should be considered as the true (nature) by the reasoning of the nature-
destruction (svabhāvopamarda) - that is the desirable (iṣṭa) view. This nature-
destruction has the characteristic of destroying the other by means of the
other, i.e., it has the characteristic of destroying the other-than-that by
means of that.  As proved and demonstrated above, in the absolute non-changing
eternal singular nature, the two states can never occur. Thus, in the non-
changing (aparināmī), the absence of those (two) states, the self being worldly
and liberated will not occur. So, the conception of these two different states -
the worldly with the nature of the sub-human etc., and the liberated due to the
cessation of the cycle of rebirth - this conception becomes meaningless, devoid
of meaning, merely a verbal expression, a mere statement, a mere conception, not
the true essence-nature. This is inappropriate, contradicted by the observed and
the desired, because the worldly and the liberated are definitely the two
different states, observed and desired, so the absolute non-changing singular
nature does not fit.  From this, the implication is that the occurrence of the
two states of the worldly and the liberated is itself what is to be considered
as the true (nature) of the self by the reasoning of the nature-destruction
(svabhāvopamarda).  The destruction of one nature by another nature - that is
the nature-activity (svabhāvavṛtti); and in its absence, the absence of those
(two) states, the worldly with the nature of the sub-human etc., and the
liberated due to the cessation of the cycle of rebirth - this is merely a
meaningless verbal expression due to the lack of meaning. Therefore, in this
manner, by the reasoning of the nature-destruction (svabhāvopamarda) - having
the characteristic of destroying the other by means of the other, the self
should be considered as the true (nature) by the reasoning (nyāya), the
desirable (iṣṭa) view.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (656) yogadaSTisamucaya _ tadabhAve ca saMsArI muktazceti nirarthakam  /
tatsvabhAvopamardo'sya nItyA tAttvika iSyatAm  /  /  199 //  ane be avasthA
taNe, hotAM ema abhAva; saMsArI ne mukta e, kathana nirarthaka sAva; tethI eka
svabhAvathI, bIjA taNe abhAva, nyAyathI tAttvika mAna, e ja iSTa che bhAva. 100
artha-ane te avasthADhayanA abhAve saMsArI ane mukta ema kahevuM nirarthaka thaI
paDaze. tethI A AtmAno svabhAvapamada nyAyathI tAtvika mAnya kare. vivecana ane
uparamAM kahyuM tema te avasthAnA abhAve saMsArI ane mukta, ema A nirarthaka ja
zabdamAtra ja thaI paDaze, kAraNa ke arthane aga che. tethI karIne tathA prakAre
A AtmAne svabhAva5marda nItithI-nyAyathI tAriva-pAramArthika mAne e ja iSTa che.
A svabhApamarda tadantarathI tadantaranA dura karavArUpa lakSaNavALe che,
arthAta tenAthI anya vaDe karIne tadanyane hara karavArUpa lakSaNavALe che.
uparamAM sAbita karI batAvavAmAM AvyuM ke apariNAmI evA ekAMta nitya pakSamAM
sthira ekasvabhAvarUpa vastunI kadI paNa be avasthA heI zake nahiM. Ama
apariNamImAM avasthAkayanA abhAve AtmAnI saMsArI ne mukta evI be avasthA ghaTaze
nahiM. eTale tiryaMcAdi bhAvavALe saMsArI, ane bhavaprapaMcanA uparamane lIdhe
mukA, -ema A be bhinna avasthAnI kalpanA karavI te nirarthaka ja-arthavihIna ja
thaI paDaze, zabdamAtra ja thaI paDaze, kathanamAtra ja-kahevA pUratI ja raheze,
te kalpanA te kalpanA ja raheze, artharUpa-tattvarUpa nahiM rahe. A ayukta che,
daSTa-ISTathI bAdhita che; kAraNa ke saMsArI ane mukta e be judI judI avasthA
tattvathI avazya che, daSTa ane ISTa che, eTale apariNAmI e nitya ekAMtapakSa
kaI rIte ghaTatuM nathI. A uparathI phalitArtha e che ke-saMsArI ne mukta e be
avasthAnuM ghaTanAnapaNuM te ja hoya ke je AtmAne svabhAvopamaEUR tAvika-
pAramArthika mAnavAmAM Ave. eka svabhAve karIne bIje svabhAva dUra karAya-
haThAvAya, te ja svabhAvavRtti-tamAre ra-ane tenA abhAve, avasthayanA abhAve,
saMsAra-saMsArI, tica Adi bhAvavALe, maccha-ane mukta,-bhavaprapaMca parama
thakI, pati-A, nirarthanirarthakazabdamAtra ja che. arthanA aAgane lIdhe. tA-
tethI, tathA prakAre, mAvopamarha:-svabhAva upama, tadantarathI tadantaranA
apanayanarUpa lakSaNavALe tenAthI anyathI tadanyanA dUra karavArUpa lakSaNavALa
e, annaAno, AtmAne, nA-nItithI, nyAyathI zuM! take- tAviLatAM tArika IchA
pAramArthika mAne.

Page #733 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Muktatattvamimamsa: Tatvik Svabhavopamad - Parinamaantar (657)  The
characteristic of Tatvik Paam is that it undergoes a change of state. From a
state of feeling, it changes to a state of Svabhavopamad, from a result, it
changes to a Parinamaantar. This is what Svabhavopamad is. The result is that
the Samsari Bhaav becomes Svabhavopamad and undergoes Parinamaantar, Bhavaantar.
Only then does the Mukta Bhaav decrease, not otherwise. Because if Svabhavopamad
does not occur - if one nature does not displace another nature and take its
place, and the Samsari Bhaav remains as it is, without Bhavaantar-Parinamaantar,
then how can Mukta Bhaav occur? Therefore, according to this logic, this Atma,
with its Svabhavopamad-Parinama Bhaav, is considered Tatvik - Paramarthik.
Because only in this Paami Atma, with the harmony of the different states, is
Yaga-Maag possible. (See. Hyo. Tanet p. 81.)  ## Clearances  Dikṣādyātmabhūtam
tatmukhyamasyanivarttate | Pradhānādinate haṁ tu tadabhāvann tannatiḥ || 200 ||
Dikṣā, Mala, etc. are inherent in the Atma, therefore, this Atma is the primary
one. It is Dikṣā, etc. that are eliminated. Dikṣā, etc. are the causes of the
results of Pradhānādi, and in their absence, the Muktātma does not have those
results of Pradhānādi.  ## Explanation:  Dikṣā, Avidyā, Mala, Bhavadhikār, etc.
are inherent in the Atma, they are naturally existing things. Therefore, this
Dikṣā, etc. is the primary, unrefined Atma that is eliminated. What is it like?
It is the cause of the results of Pradhānādi. And in the absence of Dikṣā, etc.,
the Muktātma does not have those results of Pradhānādi. It is like this:  Dikṣā
means the desire to see, the desire to see the creation of the world. Avidyā
means ignorance of one's own true nature. Mala means the internal impurities of
Rāga-Dveṣa-Mādi, Bhavamala. Bhavadhikār means the right to Samsara, the
dominance of Samsara Bhaav, the power of Samsara Bhaav. This Dikṣā, etc.  ##
Interpretation:  Dikṣā, Avidyā, Mala, Bhavadhikār, etc., are inherent in the
Atma, they are naturally existing things. Therefore, this Atma is the primary,
unrefined one that is eliminated. What is it like? It is the cause of the
results of Pradhānādi. And in the absence of Dikṣā, etc., the Muktātma does not
have those results of Pradhānādi.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 muktatattvamImAMsA : tAttvika svabhAveApamada -pariNAmAMtara (657) tAttvika
pamanuM lakSaNa che. arthAt eka avasthAmAMthI avasthAMtara thAya, bhAvamAMthI
svabhAveApamada bhAvAMtara thAya, pariNAmamAMthI pariNAmAMtara thAya te ja
svabhAveApama che. pariNAma eTale sa'sArI bhAvanA svabhAveApama thai
piraNAmAMtara thAya, bhAvAMtara thAya, teA ja mukta bhAva ghaTe-nahiM te nahi.
kAraNa ke svabhAveApama na thAya--eka svabhAva bIjA svabhAvane haThAvI tenI
jagyA na le ne sa'sArI bhAva ema ne ema rahe, bhAvAMtara-pariNAmAMtara na thAya,
teA mukta bhAva thAya ja kema ? mATe Ama nyAyathI A AtmAne svabhAveApamada
-pariNAma bhAva tAttvika ja-pAramArthika ja mAnave iSTa che. kAraNa ke pAimI
AtmAmAM ja avasthAbhedanI saMgatithI yAgamAga ne saMbhava hAya che. (jue. hyeA.
TaneTa pR. 81.) CLEARANCES dikSAdyAtmabhUtaM tatmukhyamasya nivarttate  /
pradhAnAdinate haiM tustadabhAvAnna tannatiH  //  200 //  dikSA mala Adi A,
tethI mukhya ja sAva; nivatte ahiM AtmanA, AtmabhUta A bhAva; pradhAnAdi
pariNAmanu, dikSAdi nidAna; tasa abhAve tehavuM, hAya nahi. pariNAma. 200 artha
:--drikSAdi AtmabhUta che, tethI A AtmAnuM mukhya evu. te krikSAdi nivatta che.
te dikSAdi pradhAnAdi pariNatinA hetu che; ane tenA abhAvathI muktAtmAne te
pradhAnAdinI pariNati nathI hAtI. vivecana dikSA, avidyA, mala, bhavAdhikAra Adi
AtmabhUta che, sahaja vastusat che. tethI karIne mukhya-anupacarita ja evu A
didakSAdi AtmAne nivatte che. te kevuM che ? tA ke pradhAna AdinI pariNatinA
hetu kAraNa che. ane te dikSAdinA abhAvathI te pradhAnAdinI pariNati mukta
AtmAne hAtI nathI. te A prakAre : didakSA eTale dekhavAnI IcchA, jagat racanA
dekhavAnI icchA. avidyA eTale AtmasvarUpanuM ajJAna. mala eTale rAga-dveSa-mAdi
aMtaraga mala, bhAvamala. bhavAdhikAra eTale sa`sAranA adhikAra, saMsAra
bhAvanuM prAbalya, sauMsAra bhAvanI sattA. A dikSAdi vRtti:--vidakSAli-dikSA,
avidyA, mala, bhavAdhikAra Adi, AtmamUta-AtmabhUta, saheja vastusat, tat-tethI,
mukhyam-mukhya, anuparita ja, ca-A AtmAnuM, niti-nivatta che. te kevuM ? te
kepradhAna nite tu:-pradhAna AdinI pariNatinA hetu-kAraNa evuM, tama vAta-3
didakSAdinA abhAvathI, na tannati:-tenI nati-pariNati nathI, pradhAna AdinI
pariNati nathI,-mukta AtmAne.

Page #734 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(658) Gadarisamuccaya It is the essence of the soul, the inherent nature of the
soul, it is realistic, not imaginary. Thus, being connected with the soul, this
initiation, etc. is the main, it is not scattered. This initiation, etc. is the
liberation of the soul, it is the purpose of the merit of the main, etc., and
when this initiation, etc. is withdrawn, the liberated soul does not have the
maturity of the main, etc. Without attaining the state of non-duality, the being
who desires the creation of this world is bound. To attain such a state, that
being must have affection for the cause of that creation, and abandon the
egoistic delusion of the father. It is appropriate to abandon the desire for the
enjoyment of that creation in all ways. And for that to happen, there is no
medicine like the refuge of the perfect man. This determination, seeing the
miserable beings burning with the three fires, without knowing, brings supreme
compassion. Oh Lord! You grant grace, give him devotion in your path, this
feeling comes out.” - Shrimad Rajchandraji. In the above, the nature of the soul
is established as being essential, and therefore it undergoes changes in state
and feeling. How does this change in state and feeling occur? It is explained
here. How does the worldly state and the liberated state - these two states
result from initiation, etc.? It is explained here, showing the main, etc.
Initiation, etc., which is the inherent nature of the soul, as long as it is not
withdrawn, it becomes the cause of the maturity of the inert nature - the main,
etc. And when this initiation, etc. is withdrawn, the liberated soul does not
have the maturity of nature - the main, etc. The meaning is that as long as
there is the feeling of initiation, etc., there is the result of nature, and as
long as there is that, there is the world. And when there is an absence of the
feeling of initiation, etc., there is an absence of the result of nature, there
is an absence of the world, and there is the attainment of the liberated state.
Thus, the withdrawal of initiation, etc. is the result of the soul, and the non-
result of the soul, all this becomes meaningless and futile. * “The faith of the
name-giver is also | The garment of the soul, the faith increases the love.” -
Shri Samadhishatak, Initiation, etc. is the cause of the result of the village,
etc. - Shri Bindu, page 489.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (658) gadarisamuccaya AtmabhUta che, AtmAnA aMgabhUta-AtmabhAvarUpa che, sahaja
vastusat che ( Realistic ), kAlpanika ( Imaginary) nathI. Ama AtmA sAthe
joDAyela hovAthI A dikSAdi mukhya che-nipacarita che. te dikSAdi A AtmAne nivaoN
che, te pradhAnAdinI paNitine hetu hoya che, ane te te dikSAdinI nivRtti thatAM,
muktAtmAne pradhAnAdi pariNati hetI nathI.* abheda dazA AvyA vinA je prANI A
jagatanI racanA jevA Icche che te baMdhAya che. evI dazA AvavA mATe te prANIe te
racanAnAM kAraNa pratye prIti karavI, ane pitAnI ahaMrUpa brAMtine parityAga
karavo. sarva prakAre karIne e racanAnA upabheganI icchA tyAgavI yogya che. ane
ema thavA mATe sapuruSanA zaraNu jevuM eke auSadha nathI. A nizcaya vArtA
bicArAM mehadha prANIo nahI jANIne traNe tApathI baLatA joI parama karuNA Ave
che. te nAtha! tuM anugraha karI ene tArI gatimAM bhakti A5, e uddagAra nikaLe
che." -zrImad rAjacaMdrajI. uparamAM svabhAvapamadaM tAttvika che, ane tethI
avasthAtara-bhAvAMtara thAya che, ema sthApita karyuM. te avasthAtara-
bhAvAMtararUpa pariNAmIpaNuM kevA prakAre hoya che? tenuM ahIM spaSTIkaraNa karI
batAvyuM che. saMsArI avasthA ane mukta avasthA-e didakSAdithI be avasthAnuM
pariNamana kevI rIte thAya che? te ahIM vivarI pradhAnAdinuM batAvyuM che.
didakSA vagere je AtmAno aMgabhUta bhAva che, te jyAM sudhI pariNamana nivatta
to nathI-TaLato nathI, tyAM sudhI te jaDa prakRti-pradhAnAdinI pariNatinuM
nimitta-kAraNa thAya che. ane te dikSAdi jyAre nivatte cheTaLe che, tyAre te
mukta AtmAne prakRtinI-pradhAnAdinI pariNati hotI nathI. tAtparya ke jyAM lagI
didakSAdibhAva che, tyAM lagI prakRti pariNAma che, ane tyAM lagI saMsAra che.
ane jyAre dikSAdi bhAvane abhAva thAya che, tyAre prakRti pariNAmanA abhAve
saMsArane abhAva hoya che, ane muktabhAvanI prApti hoya che. Ama didakSAdinI
nivRtti Adi AtmAnuM pariNAmIpaNuM sate ghaTe che,AtmAnuM apariNAmIpaNuM sate A
badhuM nirarthaka niSphala thaI paDe che. * * "nAmadazInAM vizvAsaH meva vA |
AtmajovA madadInAM vastra vizvAsa vadha ghA ratiH "--zrI samAdhizataka,
dikSAvinighracAhi pUrvakUtiM yathA gAmanoDamriNAma sarvametArtham - zrI bindu,
ble. 489

Page #735 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Muktatatvamimansa: Dikshaadithi Prakrutiparinati > Sansara, Tadbhaave Meksha**
(659) Dikshaadi... » Prakruti parinam sansara. Dikshaadi abhav - Prakrutiparinam
abhav > Sansara abhav (Moksha)  **Translation:**  **Liberation Inquiry: From
Initiation to Nature's Transformation > Samsara, In Its Absence, Liberation**
(659) Initiation, etc... » The result of nature is samsara. The absence of
initiation, etc. - the absence of the result of nature > the absence of samsara
(liberation)  **Verse 201:**  "Otherwise, this would be eternal, and this is
called 'bhaava'. If bhaava is eternal, how is liberation possible?"
**Meaning:**  If the transformation of the primordial principles (praadhanaadi)
is eternal, and this transformation is called 'bhaava', and if bhaava is
eternal, how can liberation be possible?  **Commentary:**  If we do not accept
that the transformation of the primordial principles is caused by initiation,
etc., then this transformation would be eternal. This transformation is called
'bhaava' and is known as 'samsara' because it involves the existence of the
primordial principles, their nature, and their attributes like mahat. Since the
transformation of the primordial principles is eternal, bhaava would also be
eternal, and liberation would be impossible.  In the previous verse, it was
stated that the transformation of the primordial principles is caused by
initiation, devotional feelings, etc., and that in their absence, this
transformation does not occur. However, if we do not accept this, then the
transformation of the primordial principles would be eternal. This is because
anything that has a cause is contingent, meaning it may or may not occur. But
anything that is without a cause is either always present or always absent. This
is a rule. Therefore, if initiation, etc., are not the cause, then the
transformation of the primordial principles would occur naturally and eternally.
It would never stop or cease, and liberation would never be possible.
Therefore, it is appropriate to accept that if we do not accept the view that
the transformation of the primordial principles is caused by initiation, etc.,
then this transformation would be eternal. This transformation is called
'bhaava' and is known as 'samsara'. Since this transformation is eternal, it
would involve the existence of the primordial principles, their nature, and
their attributes like mahat. Therefore, if bhaava is eternal, liberation would
be impossible.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 muktatatvamImAMsA: dikSAdithI prakRtipariNati> saMsAra, tadabhAve mekSa (659)
dikSAdi... >> prakRti pariNAma saMsAra. dikSAdi abhAva-- prakRtipariNAma abhAva>
saMsAra abhAva (mokSa) anyathA syAdiyaM nityameSA ca bhava ucyate  /  evaM ca
bhavanityatve kathaM muktasya saMbhavaH  // 201 //  nahi te hoya A nitya ne,
kahAya A "bhavIema; bhavanuM nityapaNuM sate, mukta saMbhava ja kema? 101 artha
:-nahi te A pradhAnAdinI pariNati nitya hoya, ane A pradhAnAdi pariNati "bhava"
kahevAya che, ane ema bhavanityatva sate muktino saMbhava kema hoya? vivecana
ane ema je dikSAdina nimitte A pradhAnAdinI pariNati na mAnavAmAM Ave, te A
pradhAnAdinI pariNati nitya-sadaiva ja hoya. ane A pradhAnAdi pariNati "bhava'
kahevAya che, "saMsAra" nAme oLakhAya che, kAraNa ke e pradhAnanI-prakRtinI
pariNati sata, tAdAtmaka mahat Adine bhAva hoya che. eTale pradhAnAdinI pariNati
nitya hotAM, ema bhavanuM nityapaNuM thaze, eTale muktane saMbhava kevI rIte
hoya? na ja hoya, ema artha che. uparanA lekamAM dikSA-bhAvamala Adina nimitte A
pradhAnAdinI pariNati hoya che, ane tenA abhAve tenI pariNati hotI nathI ema
kahevAmAM AvyuM. tema je na mAnavAmAM Ave, te A pradhAnAdinI pariNati nitya-
sadeva ja thayA kare; kAraNa ke je sakAraNa hoya che te kAdAcika heya-kavacita
kAraNa maLyuM ja hoya, paNa niSkAraNa hoya te kAM te sadAya ja hoya ane kAM te
sadAya na hoya, A niyama che. eTale dikSAdi nimitta kAraNa je na hoya,
pradhAnAdi pariNati enI meLe svabhAvathI ja thayA karatI hoya, te te pachI te
enI meLe sadAya thayA ja karaze, kadI paNa aTakaze nahiM, kadI paNa virAma
pAmaze nahiM, ne mokSa kadI thaze nahi. tti ane Ama A aMgIkAra karavA yogya
che,-anyathA-anyathA, nahiM to, ema abhyapagama svIkAra na karavAmAM AvatAM,
cArji-A badhAnAdi nati-pariNati hoya, nitya-nitya, sadaiva. tethI zuM? te ke-gSA
-ane A pradhAnAdi nati-pariNuti, mana uthale-bhava kahevAya che, saMsAra nAme
oLakhAya che,-enI pariNati sate tadAtmaka mahata AdinA bhAvane lIdhe, jIvuM -ane
ema, ukta nItithI, avanitya-bhavanitya sate, thaM mulya haMmara:-muktane
saMbhava kevI rIte hoya? na ja hoya ema artha che.

Page #736 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Thagadashtisamuccaya  Because the consequence of Pradhan etc. is what is
called Bhav or Samsara. The consequence of Pradhan-Prakruti is that it has the
nature of Mahat etc. From Pradhan, Mahat arises, meaning Buddhi. From Mahat,
Ahamkara arises, the consequence of Prakruti. And from Ahamkara, Shodashak Gana
arises, meaning the five Buddhi Indriya, five Karmendriya, five Tanmatra and
Man, making a total of sixteen. Thus, according to the consequence of Pradhan-
Prakruti, there is a consequence of Bhav-Samsara. So, if the consequence of
Pradhan is eternal, then the consequence of Bhav-Samsara will also be eternal.
And thus, due to the eternality of Bhav-Samsara, liberation will be impossible.
This is illogical. Therefore, the consequence of Pradhan etc. does not occur due
to Nishkaran-Ninimit, but it occurs due to the cause of Didaksha-Bhavamal etc.
The implication is that Samsara and its cause are eliminated due to Diksha etc.
Thus, the principle is established. Diksha etc. - Pradhan etc. consequence -
Samsara. Similarly, Pradhan (Prakruti) -> Mahat (Buddhi) -> Ahamkara > Shodashak
Gana, (five Buddhi Indriya; five Karmendriya, five Tanmatra, Man.)  ##   **Verse
202**  If there is no state (Avastha) in reality, then how can there be a
perception of it? This perception of state is false, so what is the point of it?
There is no proof (Man) for this false state.  **Explanation:**  The verse
states that if there is no state (Avastha) in reality (Tattvato), then how can
there be a perception (Pratyay) of it? This perception of state is false
(Brant), so what is the point of it? There is no proof (Man) for this false
state.  **Commentary:**  The verse is a critique of the concept of state
(Avastha) as a real entity. The author argues that if there is no state in
reality, then any perception of it must be false. The author further argues that
there is no proof for this false perception.  **Reference:**  The verse is from
the **Sri Haribhadrasuri Darshanasamuccaya**, a Jain text that discusses the
nature of reality.  **Note:**  The verse uses the term "Avastha" which is a Jain
term for a state of being. The verse also uses the term "Tattvato" which means
"in reality". The verse also uses the term "Pratyay" which means "perception".
The verse also uses the term "Brant" which means "false". The verse also uses
the term "Man" which means "proof".  **Translation:**  "If there is no state in
reality, then how can there be a perception of it? This perception of state is
false, so what is the point of it? There is no proof for this false state."
**Note:**  The translation is based on the understanding of the verse and the
commentary. The translation is not a literal translation of the verse.
**Note:**  The verse is a part of a larger discussion about the nature of
reality. The verse is not meant to be a standalone statement.  **Note:**  The
verse is a part of a Jain text. The verse is not meant to be a statement of
universal truth.  **Note:**  The verse is a part of a religious text. The verse
is not meant to be a scientific statement.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 thAgadaSTisamuccaya kAraNa ke A pradhAnAdinI je pariNati che. te ja bhava
athavA saMsAra kahevAya che. pradhAnanI-prakRtinI pariNati hatAM, te
prakRtiAtmakaH mahatu Adine bhAva hoya che. pradhAnamAMthI mahatu arthAt buddhi
upaje che, mahamAMthI ahaMkAra prakRtipariNati upaje che, ane ahaMkAramAMthI
choDazaka gaNu upaje che, arthAt pAMca e ja saMsAra buddhi Indriya, pAMca
karmendriya, pAMca tanmAtrA ane mana, ema saLa upaje che. Ama pradhAna-prakRtinI
pariNati pramANe bhavanI-saMsAranI pariNati hoya che. eTale pradhAnanI pariNati
je nitya hoya, to bhavanI-saMsAranI pariNati paNa nitya thaze. ane Ama bhavanuM-
saMsAranuM nityapaNuM hetAM, muktane asaMbhava ja thaze. A ayukta che. eTale
niSkAraNa-ninimitta evI pradhAnAdinI pariNati ghaTatI nathI, paNa didakSA-
bhAvamala Adina nimitta-kAraNe ja tenI pariNati ghaTe che. tAtparya ke-dikSAdinA
kAraNe saMsAra ne te kAraNa TaLe mekSa hoya che. ema siddhAMta sthApita thaye.
dikSAdi -- pradhAnAdi pariNati -- saMsAra. temaja-pradhAna (prakRti) -> mahat
(buddhi) --> ahaMkAra > SoDazaka gaNa, (pAMca buddhi iMdriya; pAMca karmendriya,
pAMca tanmAtrA, mana.) nA mana.) avasthA tattvato no cennanu tatpratyayaH katham
/  bhrAnto'yaM kimaneneti mAnamatra na vidyate  //  202  //  avasthA jo tatvatha
nathI, pratyaya tene kema ? brAMta eha, ethI ja zuM? pramANa ahiM na ema, 202
artha :-tatvathI avasthA nathI ema je kahe, te teno pratyaya kema hoya? A
avasthA pratyaya brAMta che, te AthI zuM? atra brAMta avasthAmAM mAna-pramANa
vidyamAna che nahiM. ttiH-avasthA tatvato-avasthA tattathI-paramArthathI. no re-
je na hoya, pUrvApara bhAvathI. te AzaMkIne kahe che na tabatyi :-vAru, tene
pratyaya--avasthAne praya, vyaM-kevI rIte hoya ?nibaMdhananA abhAve. A bhale he
! tethI zuM ? prAntoDaya-A brAMta che, A avasthA pratyaya jati che. te jimana-
AthI zuM ? dRtti-ema A AzaMkAne kahe che-mAnamatra-mAna-pramANu atra bhrAMta
avasthAmAM, na vidya-vidyamAna nathI. x "eteSAM yA samAvasthA sA prakRtiH
kilocyate  /  pradhAnAvyaktazabdAbhyAM vAcyA nityasvarUpikA  //  tataH saMjAyate
buddhimahAniti yakocyate  /  ahaMkArastato'pi syAtattasmAt SoDazako gnnH||" -zrI
haribhadrasurita darzanasamuccaya 36-37

Page #737 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Muktatatvamimansa: Bhavanityatva Sathe Mukta Asambhav: Aavantara Siddhi
**Discussion**  If you say that the state of liberation is not from the essence
of the state, then how will that state arise as a perception (pratiti) due to
the lack of a condition? Therefore, the proponent says, "This may be true, but
this state perception is false." What then? The response is that there is no
evidence present regarding this false state.  Above, it was proven through pure
logic how the two states of the soul, the worldly and the liberated, can arise.
And the argument for the eternal state was refuted.  Therefore, the proponent of
the eternal state says, "You may have proven those two states and shown the
state, but that state is not from the essence." The scholar responds with
logical arguments, "Well, if that state is not from the essence, then how will
that state arise as a perception (pratiti) due to the lack of a cause? How will
this perception of the worldly state and this liberated state arise?"
Therefore, the proponent, cornered, says, "This may be true, but this state
perception is false." What then? The response is, "You say that this state
perception is false, but what is the evidence for that? There is no evidence
here."  **Verse 203**  **Yogijnanam tu manam chet tadavasthantran tu tat; tatah
kim bhrantmetatsyadanyatha siddhasadhyata.**  **Meaning:** If you say that yogic
knowledge is the evidence, then that yogic knowledge is a change of state. What
then? If this yogic knowledge is false, then its non-false nature is the
established conclusion, meaning the existence of a difference in states is
proven.  **Explanation:**  If you say that yogic knowledge is the evidence here,
then that yogic knowledge is a change of state. What then? The proponent says,
"This yogic knowledge is false." The response is, "If it is not false, then its
non-false nature is the established conclusion, meaning the existence of a
difference in states is proven."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 muktatatvamImAMsA: bhavanityatva sate mukta asaMbhava: avAMtara siddhi vivecana
je pUrvApara bhAvathI avasthA tatvathI-paramArthathI nathI ema kaho, te vAru,
nibaMdhananA abhAve te avasthAne pratyaya (pratIti) kevI rIte upajaze? eTale
vAdI kahe che-A bhale ho, A avasthA pratyaya brAMta che. ethI zuM? tene javAba
Ape che ke atre brAMta avasthA bAbatamAM kaI pramANa vidyamAna nathI. uparamAM
pariNamI AtmAmAM saMsArI ne mukta e be avasthA kevI rIte ghaTI zake che, te
nirmala yuktithI siddha karI batAvyuM, ane ekAMta nitya pakSanuM khaMDana
karyuM. eTale nitya pakSavAdI kahe che ke-tame bhale te be avasthA siddha karI
avasthA bA. batAvI, paNa te avasthA tatvathI-paramArthathI nathI. tene nyAyamUti
dalIlo zAstrakAra uttara Ape che ke-vAru, te avasthA je paramArthathI nathI, te
kAraNa abhAve te avasthAne pratyaya (pratIti) kema upajaze ? A saMsArI avasthA
ne A siddha avasthA, evI pratIti zI rIte thaze? eTale saMkaDAmaNamAM AvIne vAdI
kahe che-A bhale ho, paNa A avasthA pratyaya te bhrAMta che. AthI zuM? tene
punaH javAba Ape che ke-A avasthA pratyaya brAMta che ema tame kahe che te tenuM
pramANa zuM? atre pramANa kaI che nahiM. . yogijJAnaM tu mAnaM
cettadavasthAntaraM tu tat  /  tataH kiM bhrAntametatsyAdanyathA siddhasAdhyatA
// 203 /  /  gijJAna je mAna te avasthAntara te tAsa; to zuM ? bhrAMta A
anyathA, siddhasANatA khAsa. 203 artha :-ane gijJAna mAna che-pramANa che ema je
kaho, te te vijJAna te yegInuM avasthAMtara thayuM. tethI zuM? te ke-A gijJAna
brAMta hoya, nahiM te enuM abhAMtapaNuM sate siddhasAdhyatA thAya, arthAta
avasthAbhedanI upapatti thAya. gIjJAna ja atra pramANa che, ema je kaho, te te
yogIjJAna gInuM ava kRtti-vaoNjillAne su-gijJAna ja, kArna reta-atra je pramANa
che, A AzaMkAne kahe che, tavA tu-tenuM avasthAtara ja, yegI avasthAntara ja,
ta-te, ginAna che. tataH viM-tethI zuM ? ema A AvIne kahe che-jAtanecAta-A
mijJAna bhrAMta heya. anyathA-anyathA, nahiM te enuM abhrAMtapaNe sate, zuM? to
ke-siddhArthatA-siddhasAdhyatA thAya,-avayabhedanI upapattine lIdhe..

Page #738 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(662) The collection of perceptions is stable. So what? It is said that this
yogic knowledge is false; if not, its non-false nature is true, due to the
existence of a difference in states, it becomes provable. The question was asked
above, what is the proof, so the proponent says that yogic knowledge is the
proof. The scholar replies that the yogic knowledge that you call proof is
itself a transformation of the yogi. So the proponent says - So what? It is a
transformation of the yogi, so what has happened? What are you trying to say
from above? The scholar replies that this yogic knowledge is either false or
non-false. How can you consider it as proof if it is false? And if it is non-
false, then it becomes provable. That is, the existence of a difference in
states that is non-false has been established, so you have accepted and proved
what we wanted to prove! You were trying to escape, but you have fallen into the
same trap! So now that you have accepted our opinion, we have nothing to say,
because yogic knowledge is itself a transformation of the yogi. It was yogic
knowledge before, and then it became, so it is a different state from the
previous state. And this is non-false - you say it is proof, so you also accept
that this transformation is non-false, proof. Thus, it is proved! Is there too
much speculation? - Thus, the argument of the eternal one-sidedness has also
been refuted here with proper reasoning. Therefore, the object is neither only
non-existent nor only existent, but is both existent and non-existent, thus the
theory of anekanta is established here. The meaning is that the soul is eternal
in terms of substance, and impermanent in terms of modification. From the
perspective of dravyarthika nay, the soul is eternal, from the perspective of
paryayaarthika nay, it is impermanent - it changes with modification. The
knowledge of the three states of childhood, youth, and old age occurs to the
same person. The soul is eternal in terms of substance, it changes with
modification; the knowledge of the three ages of childhood, youth, and old age
occurs to the same person. - Shri Atmasiddhi. | This is the eternal principle of
anekanta! The nature of the object The momentarists say that "the object is non-
existent in the previous and subsequent moments, and it is existent in the
present moment." (1) This statement of theirs is inconsistent with logic,
because according to their opinion, the one that is existent in the present
moment is the one that is always existent, so it should be a one-sided,
impermanent, present-moment existent. Because "the rule is that the side that is
always existent is always existent." Thus, according to their belief, the object
will be eternally present-moment existent, that is, eternally existent, by
default. And that present-moment existence

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (662) gadaSTisamuccaya sthAtara ja che. tethI zuM? te ke-A yogIjJAna bhrAMta
hoya; nahiM te enuM abrAMtapaNuM sate, avasthAbhedanI upapattine lIdhe,
siddhasAdhyatA thAya. uparamAM pramANa zuM ema pUchayuM, eTale vAdI kahe che ke-
gIjJAna che te pramANa che. tene zAstrakAra uttara Ape che ke-je tame
yegIjJAnane pramANu kahetA he te te gIjJAna pote ja gInuM avasthAMtara ja che.
eTale vAdI kahe che-tethI zuM? te yogInuM avasthAMtara che, to tethI zuM thaI
gayuM ? te uparathI tame zuM kahevA mAgo cho ? tene siddhAMtakAra javAba Ape che
ke-A gIjJAna kAM te brAMta hoya ne kAM to abrAMta hAya. je bhrAMta kaho te tene
tame pramANabhUta lekhyuM zI rIte ? ane je abrAMta kahe te siddhasAdhyatA thaI.
arthAt abrAMta evA avasthAbhedanI u5patti thaI, eTale ame je sAdhavA mAgatA
hatA, te ja tame svIkArIne sAdhI ApyuM ! jayAMthI tame chaTakavA mAgatA hatA,
tyAM ja AvIne tame sapaDAI gayA ! eTale have tame amArA matane svIkAra karyo
hevAthI, amAre kAMI kahevApaNuM rahetuM nathI, kAraNa ke yogIjJAna e ja pite te
yogInuM avasthAMtara che. pUrve te yegIjJAna hetuM, pachI thayuM, eTale e AgalI
avasthAmAMthI thayelI judI avasthA che. ane A te abrAMta che-pramANabhUta che
ema tame kaho cho, eTale te avasthAtara paNa abrAMta che, pramANabhUta che, ema
tame paNa svIkAra kare che. iti siddha naH samIhitama! kiM bahu jalpitana ?--Ama
ekAMta nityapakSanuM paNa atra suyuktiyukta sanyAyathI khaMDana karavAmAM AvyuM.
eTale vastu kevala abhAvarUpa paNa nathI, temaja kevala bhAvarUpa paNa nathI,
paNa bhAvAbhAvarUpa che, ema anekAMta siddhAMta atra supratiSThita thayo.
tAtparya ke-AtmA dravyathI nitya che, ane paryAyathI anitya che. dravyArthika
nayanI apekSAe AtmA nitya che, paryAyArthika nayanI apekSAe anitya che-
paryAyathI palaTAya che. bAla, yuvAna ne vRddha e traNe avasthAnuM jJAna eka ja
puruSane thAya che. AtmA dravye nitya che, paryAye palaTAya; bAlAdi vaya
traNyanuM, jJAna ekane thAya."--zrI Atmasiddhi. | ti prAntanityaniyA RLam !
vastusvabhAva-sAra kSaNikavAdI kahe che ke-"AgalI pAchalI kSaNe vastune abhAva
che, vartamAna kSaNe ja tene bhAva-hevApaNuM che." (1) A tenuM kathana yuktithI
asaMgata che, kAraNa ke tenA abhiprAye te vartamAna bhAvavALI te che, eTale te
sadA tadUbhAvavALIekAMta anitya vartamAna bhAvavALI hovI joIe. kAraNa ke "sadA
tadUbhAvathI taduvatI hoya pakSa ayukta evo niyama che. Ama tenI mAnyatA sAthe
avidhithI te vastu sadA vartamAna bhAvavALI arthAt nitya siddha thaze. ane te
vartamAna bhAvane

Page #739 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Suttatattvamimamsa: Vastusvabhavasara: Ekanta Anitya Adi Paksha Ayukt (663)
If one does not accept the principle of **Suttatattvamimamsa**, which states
that the nature of reality is **Vastusvabhavasara** (the essence of things),
then it will be proven that it is always false. Thus, either the object will be
proven to be eternally existent in its own form, or it will be proven to be
eternally non-existent. Therefore, **Kshanikavada** (the theory of
momentariness) cannot stand for even a moment.  (2) Now, if the **Kshanikavadi**
argues that "what exists in the previous moment does not exist in the present
moment," it is contradictory, like saying "it is otherwise." Because if the
object becomes something else, then how can it be "it"? And if it is "it," then
how can it become "otherwise" - something else? They argue this way. The same
logic applies to their statement: "How can it be 'it' if it does not exist?" And
if it does not exist, then how can it be "it"? This leads to a contradiction.
(3) Similarly, there are flaws like the origin of non-existence, etc. Because if
one believes in the existence of both existence and non-existence, then non-
existence will be produced, i.e., the origin of non-existence will occur. And
according to the rule that whatever is produced must also be destroyed, this
non-existence will also be destroyed. Therefore, the destroyed object will be
reborn in its own form. In other words, the object will be proven to be
eternally existent. And if the object is considered eternally perishable, then
it will not exist even in the desired moment, i.e., it will be proven to be
eternally non-existent.  (4) Now, if you say that it is perishable and has the
characteristic of existing in a moment, then even in other moments, it will
exist, and this moment-existence will remain. Therefore, what was said will also
happen. Because when it exists in a moment, it does not cease to exist, and even
after that, it does not cease to exist. In other words, it always exists. Thus,
everything that was said about the non-existence of existence, etc., is true. In
other words, **Ekanta Anitya Paksha** (the theory of absolute impermanence) -
**Kshanikavada** - cannot stand in any way. In other words, the object is not
eternally non-existent.  Similarly, **Ekanta Nitya Paksha** (the theory of
absolute permanence) cannot stand in any way either. Because (1) the **Nitya
Vadi** (the proponent of eternalism) says that what is unchangeable, unproduced,
stable, and uniform is true, i.e., the object is eternally uniform. Therefore,
the world is real, and its cessation will never occur, i.e., the world will
always remain, and the state of liberation will never be produced. Because there
is only one nature, and that state always exists. Therefore, to say that there
are states of worldly existence and liberation is merely a matter of words.
Therefore, it is desirable to consider the transformation from one nature to
another as a matter of essence. In other words, only if one nature displaces
another and takes its place can the states of worldly existence and liberation
occur, otherwise not.  (2) **Diksha** (initiation), **Bhavamala** (the stream of
karma), etc., are the essential and primary things of the soul, and they are
inherent in the soul. And they are the cause of the transformation of **Diksha**
and other primary things. Without them, the transformation of primary things
would not occur. In other words, as long as the cause of **Diksha**, etc.,
remains, the transformation of nature, etc., continues to occur. And when that
cause is obtained, the transformation of primary things does not occur. If one
does not accept the cause of **Diksha**, etc., then this transformation of
primary things, which is without a cause, will always continue to occur. This
transformation of primary things...  **Ekanta Nitya Paksha Ayukt**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 sutatattvamImAMsA : vastusvabhAvasAra : ekAMta anityAdi pakSa ayukta (663)
svIkAra nahi kare, te te sadAya asat ja siddha thaze. Ama kAM tA vastu ekAMta
nityasadA bhAvarUpa sAbita thaze ane kAM te ekAMta anitya-sadA abhAvarUpa sAbita
thaze. eTale kSaNikavAda kSaNabhara TakI zakaze nahi. (2) have jo kSaNuivAdI ema
kahe ke--je AgalI kSaNe che te ja che nahi.'  /  'te anyathA hoya che' enI jema
viruddha che. kAraNake te vastu anyathA-khIjI ja thaI jatI hAya te 'te' kema ?
ane te hoya tA 'anyathA'-bIjI ja kema thAya ? evI dalIla teo kare che. te ja
nyAya temanA kathana para lAgu pADIe te te ja che te te kema che nahi ?' ane te
che nahi. te 'te' kema ? ema vadatA vyAghAta thAya che. (3) temaja abhAva
utpatti Adi doSa Ave che, kAraNa ke sattu asattva mAne, te asattvane utpAda
thaze, arthAt abhAvanI utpatti thaze. ane jenI utpatti hAya teneA nAza paNa
heAya ja, e niyamathI A abhAvanA nAza paNa thaze, eTale naSTa vastune te ne te
rUpe punaHrbhAva thaze. arthAt vastu sadA bhAvarUpa sAkhita thaze. ane jo vastu
sadA nAzavaMta mAnA teA vivakSita kSaNe paNa tenI sthiti nahi hAya, arthAt te
sadA abhAvarUpa sAkhita thaze. (4) have jo ema kaho ke te nAza
kSaNasthitidharmAMvALA che, teA khIjI vagere kSaNe paNa sthiti hotAM A
kSaNusthitidha pazu... AvIne Ubhu` raheze. eTale je kahyu hatu. temaja thaze.
kAraNa ke jyAre tenI kSaNasthiti che tyAre ja tenI asthiti ghaTatI nathI, ane
pachI paNa te asthiti ghaTatI nathI. arthAt sadA tenI sthiti ja ghaTe che. Ama
sanuM asattva vagere je kahyuM hatuM te badhuM ya kharAkhara che. arthAt kAI
paNa prakAre ekAMta anitya pakSa-kSaNikavAda ghaTatA nathI. tAtpa ke-vastu
ekAMta abhAvarUpa nathI. temaja ekAMta nitya pakSa paNa kAI rIte ghaTatA nathI.
kAraNa ke (1) apracyuta, anutpanna, sthira, ekarUpa te sat che ema nityavAdI
kahe che, arthAt vastu sadA ekabhAvarUpa che. eTale saMsAra bhAva che, te tenI
kadI paNa nivRtti nahi thAya, arthAt sadAya sa'sArabhAva ja raheze, kadI paNa
mukta bhAvanI upapatti thaze nahi; kAraNa ke eka svabhAvanI e avasthA kadI hAya
che. eTale sa'sArI ane mukta ema e avasthA kahevI te zabdamAtra thaI paDaze,
mATe eka svabhAvathI khIjA svabhAvanA upama tAttvika mAnavA ISTa che. arthAta
eka svabhAva khIjA svabhAvane khaseDI tenuM sthAna le teA ja sasArI ne mukta ema
e avasthA ghaTI zake, nahi teA nahi. (2) dikSA-bhAvamala vagere AtmAnI AtmabhUta
mukhya vastusat che, te AtmAne nivatta che. ane te dikSAdi pradhAnAdinI
pariNatinuM kAraNa che, tenA abhAve pradhAnAdinI pariNati hAtI nathI. arthAt
dikSAdi kAraNa jyAMlagI TaLatuM nathI tyAMlagI pradhAnAdinI-prakRti AdinI
pariNati thayA kare che, ane te kAraNa maLye pradhAnAdinI pariNati thatI nathI.
nahi' te| dikSAdi kAraNa na mAne te niSkAraNu evI A pradhAnAdi pariNati sadA
thayA karaze. A pradhAnAdinI pariNati ekAMta nitya pakSa ayukta

Page #740 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(664) The Gādhaṣṭisamuccaya is called the cycle of existence (bhava-saṃsāra).
And since the eternality of existence is denied, how can liberation (mokṣa) be
possible for the liberated one? Therefore, one must accept initiation (dīkṣā)
and other causes. With initiation and the like, there is the cycle of existence,
and in their absence, there is liberation. Thus, two states will be established.
(3) And he also says that this state is not from the essence (tattva), how will
its cognition arise? What is the proof of this cognition being tranquil? Yogic
knowledge (yogijñāna) is the proof, and that itself has become a different
state. If he calls this knowledge erroneous (bhrānta), how did he first call it
proof? And if he calls it non-erroneous (abhrānta), then you have accepted the
opposite state. Thus, the absolute eternal aspect (bhāvarūpa vastu) is not
established in any way.  The purport is that the substance (vastu) is of the
nature of being and non-being, i.e., it is eternally transforming. If we accept
this, then the entire system of saṃsāra and mokṣa is properly established,
because the impurity (bhāvamala) and so on arise from the inherent nature
(svabhāva), yet due to the connection with the root nature, they undergo
transformation. This is the absence of hatred (adveṣapañā). And this inherent
nature is the nature of the substance, i.e., it is its own essential being
(sattā). The abiding in the inherent nature is liberation (mokṣa), that is the
absence of hatred; and the abiding in the modified state is the cycle of
existence (saṃsāra), that is the presence of hatred.  As a corollary, we are now
discussing the nature (prakṛti), and that nature is the perfected form
(siddhasvarūpa), as described through examples like the boastful ox freed from
disease, etc. Therein:  व्याधितस्तदभावो वा तदन्यो वा यथैव हि । व्याधिमुक्तो न
सन्नीत्या कदाचिदुपपद्यते ॥ २०४  The meaning is: The one afflicted by the
disease, or its absence, or something else - just as the one freed from the
disease is never established through proper reasoning.  The explanation is: The
one afflicted by the disease, or its absence, or something else - such as a son,
etc. - none of these three can ever be established as "freed from the disease"
through proper reasoning.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (664) gadaSTisamuccaya che, te bhava-saMsAra kahevAya che. ane Ama bhavanuM
nityapaNuM hetAM, muktane saMbhava kema thaze ? mATe dikSAdi kAraNa mAnavuM
paDaze. dikSAdi hotAM saMsAra hoya che, ane tenA abhAve mokSa hoya che. Ama be
avasthA ghaDaze. (3) ane ema ja kahe ke-A avasthA tattvathI nathI, te tenI
pratIti kema upajaze ? A pratIti zAMta che ema kahe che tenuM pramANa zuM ?
yogIjJAna pramANa che, te te A yogIjJAna ja avasthAMtara thayuM. A gIjJAnane
bhrAMta kahe te tene pahelAM pramANa kema kahyuM? ane abrAMta kahe, te
avasthAMtara pakSane tame svIkAra karyo. Ama kaI rIte ekAMta nitya pakSa
(bhAvarUpa vastu ) ghaTatuM nathI. tAtparya ke vastu bhAva-abhAvarUpa che,
arthAta pariNamI nitya che. ema mAnIe te ja saMsAra-mokSa e sarva vyavasthA
barAbara ghaTe che; kAraNa ke bhAvamala AdithI svabhAvano upama thAya che,
chatAM tenA mULa svabhAvanA yogathI tene jevo bhAva hatA te bhAva-tathAbhAva
thAya che. eja adeSapaNuM che. ane A je svabhAva che te ja vastune svabhAva che,
arthAta tavathI nija sattA ja che. svabhAvasthiti e ja mokSa che, e ja
adeSapaNuM che; ane vibhAvasthiti e ja saMsAra che, e ja sadevapaNuM che.
AnuSaMgika kahyuM, have prakRti prastavIe chIe, ane te prakRti siddhasvarUpa
che, cASimukta gumAna Dhora ItyAdinA upanyAsathI. temAM vyAdhitastadabhAvo vA
tadanyo vA yathaiva hi  /  vyAdhimukto na sannItyA kadAcidupapadyate  //  204
raMgI rogI abhAva vA, tethI anya ja jema; rega mukta sannayAthI, ghaTe na kadIya
ema. 204 artha -jene vyAdhi upaje che te vyAdhita, athavA tene abhAva je che te,
athavA tenAthI anya je che te, jema sannItithI " vyAdhimukta" kadI paNa ghaTatuM
nathI. vivecana vyAdhita eTale jene vyAdhi upa che te, athavA tenA abhAvarUpa je
che te, athavA tenAthI anya-tene putrAdi je che te, e traNemAMthI eka paNa
sanyAyathI kadI paNa vyAdhimukta " ghaTatuM nathI. ema daSTAMta che. 1 kRti-
pitta-vyAdhita, jene vyAdhi upaje che te ja, tamAro vA-athavA tene abhAva je che
te, to vA-athavA tenAthI anya, vyAdhitathI atra-tene putrAdi, carthava hi
vyAdhimuvato ra-jema vyAdhimukta nathI, e traNemAMthI eka paNa jema
"vyAdhimukta' nathI, nIcA-sanItithI, sanyAyathI, nikupAte-kadI paNa ghaTate, ema
daSTAMta che.

Page #741 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Sutratattva Mimamsa:    **The diseased is not free from disease, just as the
samsari is not free from samsara (665).**  **A diseased person cannot be called
"free from disease" even if he has been cured; because how can one who is
diseased be called free from disease? That would be a contradiction in terms.
(1)**  **Or, even if the diseased person has a complete absence of the disease,
how can he be considered free from disease? Because if the disease itself is not
present, how can he be free from it? (2)**  **Or, his son, brother, etc., who
are different from the diseased person, cannot be called free from disease.
Because how can the diseased person be different and the one who is free from
disease be the same?**  **Similarly, how can a passionate person be called free
from passion? Or, if there is an absence of passion in the passionate person,
how can he be free from passion? Or, how can a different person be free from
passion, while the passionate person remains passionate?**  **Therefore,
according to the rules of logic, a passionate person, or the absence of passion
in a passionate person, or someone other than a passionate person, can never be
called "free from passion." Because all three of these cases are directly
contradicted, they are against what is seen and desired. Therefore, it follows
from this that whoever calls a passionate person free from passion, or whoever
calls the absence of passion in a passionate person free from passion, or
whoever calls someone else free from passion instead of the passionate person,
is clearly deluded, mistaken, and has a distorted mind.**  **卐**  **The
Dārśanika commentator says:**  **"The samsari, or the absence of the samsari, or
someone other than the samsari, is said to be liberated. Yet, he is not
liberated from the main activity, say those who know the liberated." (205)**
**Explanation:**  **The diseased is not free from disease, just as the samsari,
or the mere absence of that person, or someone else entirely, is not liberated
from the main activity - the ultimate goal - even though he is said to be
liberated. This is what those who know the liberated say.**  **Commentary:**
**Samsari - the person, or the absence of that person, or someone else entirely,
is said to be liberated. Yet, he is not liberated from the main activity, say
those who know the liberated.**  **The three - the person, the absence of the
person, and someone else entirely - are not liberated from the main activity
because of their attachment to the non-virtuous. This is what those who know the
liberated say.**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 suktatattva mImAMsA : vyAdhita Adi vyAdhimukta nathI, tema sa*sArI mAdi mukta
nathI (665) vyAdhivALA manuSya sanyAyathI (1) jene vyAdhi upajyA che evA
vyAdhita arthAt joIe teA kadIpaNa 'vyAdhimukta' kahI zakAya nahi; kAraNa ke
vyAdhyuikta hoya te vyAdhimukta kema kahevAya ? te teA vadatAvyAghAta che. ( 2 )
athavA jyAM vyASitane vyAdhivatanA ja saceADA abhAva hoya, tyAM paNa
vyAdhimuktapaNuM kema ghaTe ? kAraNa ke jyAM vyAdhivata ja pAte nathI, tyAM
vyAdhithI mukta thAya keNu ? ( 3 ) athavA vyASitathI anya evA tenA putra-bhAI
Adi paNa vyAdhimukta kahI zakatA nathI. kAraNa ke vyAdhiyukta jUdo ne
vyAdhimukta thanArA jAdA-ema kema bane? Ama rAgI hoya te rAgamukta kema kahevAya
? athavA rAgIne ja jyAM abhAva che, tyAM rogamukta thaze keNu ? athavA rAgI
khInne ne rAgamukta-sAo thAya khIjo, e paNa kema ghaTe ? mATe sannItinI rItie
jotAM rAgI ke rAgInA abhAva ke rAgIthI anya kadI paNu. 8 rAgamukta " kahevA
ghaTe nahi. kAraNa ke A traNeya pakSa pratyakSabAdhita che, dRSTa-ISTa viruddha
che. eTale A uparathI e phalita thAya che ke-rAgIne je rAgamukta kahe, athavA
rAgInA abhAvane je rogamukta kahe, athavA rAgIne badale bIjAne je rogamukta kahe
te tenuM pragaTa bhrAMtapaNuM ja che, mithyAtva ja che, mativiparyAsa ja che.
Wan  dArjItika ceAjana kahe che-- saMsArI tadabhAvo vA tadanyo vA tathava hi  /
mukto'pi hanta no mukte mukhyavRtyeti tadvidaH  //  205  //  sasArI tasa abhAva
vA, tethI anya ja tema; mukta paNa mukta mukhya nA, vaDe yAgavid ema. 205 aH--
temaja saMsArI, athavA tenA abhAva, athavA tenAthI anya, te mukta karyo. chatAM
mukhya vRttithI mukta nathI, ema te muktanA jANakArA kahe che. vivecana vyAdhita
Adi vyAdhimukta nathI tema ja saMsArI puruSa, athavA te puruSane abhAva mAtra
ja, athavA tenAthI ekAMte anya, te mukta chatAM mukhya vRttithI-paramAtha thI
mukta nathI, ema te muktanA jJAtA puruSA kathe che. vRtti:--saMsArI-puruSa,
tamAvo vA-athavA tenA abhAva, puruSa abhAva mAtra ja, tattvo vA-athavA tenAthI
anya, ekAMtalakSaNa evA tenAthI anya, tathaiva phi--tema ja, jema dRSTAMtamAM
che tema zuM ? tA - mujto'va hanta no muddo mulyavRttathA-mukta kahe| tAM ahA !
mukhyavRttithI mukta nathI, traNeyanA--tenA pravRttinimittanA aSrAvane lIdhe.
AMta dU:-ema taviddo tenA jANukArA, muktanA jJAtAe ema kahe che.

Page #742 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(666) The illustrative example given above regarding the collection of obstacles
is explained here in detail. Just as a patient, or the absence of the disease in
the patient, or someone other than the patient, none of these three can be
called free from the disease; similarly, a worldly man, or the mere absence of
the worldly man, or someone else entirely separate from him - none of these
three can be called free from the main obstacle, from the ultimate truth,
because in all these cases, there is an absence of the cause of activity. (1) A
worldly man, meaning a soul who is subject to the cycle of birth and death,
cannot be called free from the ultimate truth; because if he were truly free
from the ultimate truth, why would he be worldly? And if he is worldly, how can
he be free from the world? Although, from the perspective of pure conviction, it
can be said that "all beings are liberated," this is only a verbal statement and
cannot be considered as true liberation from the main obstacle, from the
ultimate truth. And whatever is said in this regard is nothing but delusion,
falsehood, and mental aberration. The point is that a worldly man cannot be
called free from the main obstacle. (2) Or, even where there is only the absence
of the worldly man, there is no liberation. Because where there is only the
absence of the soul, how can there be liberation? (3) Or, even if someone else
entirely separate from the worldly man exists, he cannot be liberated; because
just as it is impossible for a patient to become healthy by someone else,
similarly, it is impossible for a worldly soul to be liberated from the worldly
disease by someone else.  Thus, due to the absence of the cause of activity, the
cause of liberation, none of these three aspects can be considered free from the
main obstacle. In other words, just as a patient cannot be called free from the
disease, similarly, a worldly man cannot be called liberated. Just as there is
no question of liberation for a patient who has the disease itself, similarly,
there is no possibility of liberation for a worldly soul who has the disease
itself. Or, just as it is impossible for a patient to become healthy by someone
else, similarly, it is impossible for a worldly soul to be liberated from the
worldly disease by someone else, because it would be like saying, "Take the red
one and fill it with Haridas," which is absurd! This is a definitive,
established, theoretical truth, like two plus two equals four, which cannot be
changed at any time. This is a clear, true fact that any human being, young or
old, can understand. Yet, whoever insists that a patient, or the absence of the
disease in the patient, or someone other than the patient, is free from the
disease, is clearly delusional, a direct falsehood; similarly, whoever says that
a worldly man, or the absence of the worldly man, or someone other than the
worldly man, is liberated, is also clearly delusional, a direct falsehood.  From
the above, it is established that (1) some philosophers (Samkhya, etc.)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (666) thAgaTisamuccaya uparamAM je daSTAMta kahyuM tenI dAbdatika ghaTanA ahI
kahI che -jema regI, ke rogIne abhAva, ke regIthI anya,-e traNamAMthI kaI paNa
rogamukta kahe ghaTatuM nathI; tema saMsArI puruSa, ke saMsArI puruSane abhAva
mAtra ja, ke tenAthI saMsArI Adi ekAMta anya-e traNemAMthI koI paNa
mukhyavRttithI-paramArthathI mukta mukta nathI ghaTatuM nathI, kAraNa ke tathA
prakAre tenA pravRttinimittane tene abhAva che. (1) saMsArI arthAta bhavana jene
lAgu paDe che, evo saMsAra paribhramaNa karI rahela puruSa-AtmA je che, te
paramArthathI mukta kahevo ghaTate tathI; kAraNa ke te paramArthathI kharekhare
mukta hoya te te saMsArI kema che? ane je te saMsArI che, te saMsArathI mukta e
te mukta kema hoya ? jo ke zuddha nizcaya nayanI apekSAe sarva jIva che siddha
sama"--ema upacAra thana karI zakAya, te paNa tathArUpa tAtvika mukta dazA vinA
pAramArthika-mukhya evuM muktapaNuM kahI zakAya nahiM. ane je kaMI kahe te te
kevala brAMti ja che, mithyAtva ja che, mativiparyAya ja che. tAtparya ke-
saMsArI te mukhyavRttithI mukta kahevAya nahiM. (2) athavA jyAM saMsArI puruSane
ja abhAva hoya, tyAM paNa muktapaNuM ghaTatuM nathI. kAraNa ke jyAM puruSane-
AtmAne ja saDo abhAva che, tyAM mukta thaze keNu? (3) athavA te saMsArI
puruSathI anya-ekAMte judo ja hoya, te paNa mukta thava ghaTato nathI; kAraNa ke
rogI bIja ne sAjo thAya bIje e jema banavAjoga nathI, tema bhavaragI bIja ne
bhavarogathI mukta thanAre bIje e paNa banavAjoga nathI. Ama mokSanA
pravRttinimittanA-kAraNanA abhAve traNemAMthI koI paNa pakSamAM mukhya vRttithI
muktapaNuM ghaTatuM nathI, eTale ke rogI jema regamukta kahI zakAtuM nathI, tema
bhavaragI evo saMsArI paNa mukta kahI zakAtuM nathI. regIne pitAne ja jyAM
sacoDo abhAva hoya tyAM pachI rogamukta thavAno prazna ja raheto nathI, tema
bhavaragI evA puruSaneAtmAne ja jyAM abhAva che, tyAM tene mukta hovAno saMbhava
raheto nathI. athavA rogI bIja ne rogamukta sAjo thAya bIje e jema ghaTatuM
nathI, tema bhavarogI AtmA bIje ne bhavarogathI mukta thAya bIje te paNa
ghaTatuM nathI, kAraNa ke te te kare keI ne bhagave koI, "le lAla ne bhare
haradAsa" enA jevuM thayuM ! Ama be ne be cAra jevI, keI kALe na phare evI A
parama nizcayarUpa siddhAMtika vArtA che. AbAlavRddha sAdI samajavALe kaMI paNa
manuSya samaje evI A pragaTa satya hakIkata che. chatAM rogIne athavA rogInA
abhAvane, athavA rogIthI anyane je kaI rogamukta hovAno beTo Agraha dhare, te te
sAva behUduM hoI jema pragaTa brAMti ja che, pratyakSa mithyAtva ja che, tema
bhavaragI evA saMsArI puruSane, ke te puruSanA abhAvane, ke te puruSathI anyane
je koI mukta kahe, te te paNa sAva behUdu heI pragaTa brAMti ja che, sAkSAt
mithyAtva ja che. A uparathI e ivanita thAya che ke (1) keI matavAdI ( sAMkhya-
gAdi)

Page #743 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Liberation and Its Implications: Misconceptions and the Principle of Anekanta
**(667)** It is a misconception to believe that a worldly being (soul) is always
liberated. If a worldly being (soul) is truly liberated, why is it bound by the
cycle of births and deaths? How can something that is liberated be bound by the
world? And if the belief is that it is liberated, then what is the purpose of
all the yogic paths that aim to liberate it from the world? Therefore, this
belief is erroneous, a misconception.   **(2)** It is also a misconception to
say that the absence of a being (soul) is liberation. This is an extreme and
inappropriate view. Because to call something that is absent as "being" is
absurd. How can something that does not exist be liberated?   **(3)** It is also
inappropriate to say that liberation is something separate from the being
(soul). According to the momentarists, what existed in the previous moment does
not exist in the subsequent moment. Therefore, without any connection between
the past and the present, the worldly soul is one thing, and the liberated soul
is another. This is clearly contradictory.  Thus, according to the doctrine of
one-sidedness (ekanta), the nature of things does not manifest, the system of
bondage and liberation does not manifest, and the system of worldly and
liberated beings does not manifest. Only through the principle of many-sidedness
(anekanta) does the nature of things manifest, the complete and unchanging
system of bondage and liberation manifests, and the system of worldly and
liberated beings manifests in its entirety.   This is a profound philosophical
discussion that requires further exploration. To understand it, one should study
the scriptures like the **Vashanasamuccaya**, **Shastravartasamuccaya**,
**Dharmasangrahanu**, **Shrimadb Rajchandra**, **Sammatitarka**, and other
influential philosophical texts.  The teachings of the Jinas regarding the
nature of bondage and liberation are more complete and accurate than the
teachings of other philosophies. This complete and accurate teaching is the one
that is logically proven. - **Shrimadb Rajchandraji**  So, what is the nature of
liberation? He says:  **"Just as a person with a waning illness is considered
free from illness in the world, so too is a person free from the disease of the
cycle of births and deaths, due to the waning of that disease."** (206)
**Explanation:** Just as a person with a waning illness is considered free from
illness in the world, because of the absence of the illness, so too is a person
free from the disease of the cycle of births and deaths, because of the waning
of that disease. This is not a claim that the illness is completely gone, but
rather that it is waning and will eventually disappear.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 muktatatvamImAMsA : brAMta mAnyatAo, anekAMtanI pramANatA (667) saMsArI
puruSane-AtmAne sadA mukta ja mAne che, te mithyA che kAraNake saMsArI puruSa-
AtmA je mukta ja che, te tene pragaTa bhavabhramaNarUpa saMsAra kema che? brAMta
ane je saMsAra che te te mukta kema che? vaLI je te mukta ja che mAnyatAo te
tene saMsArathI mukta karavA mATenA A badhA yogamArganuM prayojana che? mATe A
mAnyatA bhUlabharelI che, mithyA che. (2) kaI matavAdI puruSanA-AtmAnA abhAvane
mukta kahe che, te paNa mithyA che, atiprasaMgarUpa hAI ayukta che. kAraNa ke
jene abhAva che, tene "bhAva"--hovApaNuM kahevuM behUduM che. je che ja nahiM,
te mukta kema thaze? (3) ke puruSathI-AtmAthI ekAMte anyane-jUdAne mukta kahe
che, te paNa ayukta che; kAraNake kSaNavAdInA abhiprAye je pUrva kSaNe hatuM te
uttarakSaNe che ja nahi. eTale pUrvApara anvaya saMbaMdha vinA bhavaragI e
saMsArI AtmA te bIje, ane mukta thaye te AtmA paNa bIjo. A te pragaTa
visaMvAdarUpa che. Ama ekAMtavAdI anya dezanIonI mAnyatA pramANe vastusvabhAva
ghaTato nathI, baMdha-makSa vyavasthA ghaTatI nathI, saMsArI-mukta Adi vyavasthA
ghaTatI nathI. kevaLa anekAMta siddhAMtathI ja vastusvabhAva ghaTe che, avikala
evI sakala anekAMtanI baMdha-mokSa vyavasthA ghaTe che, saMsArI-mukta Adi
vyavasthA sAMgopAMga pramANutA saMpUrNapaNe ghaTe che. ItyAdi atyaMta gaMbhIra
dArzanika vicAraNA atra samAya che,-je samajavA mATe zrI vazaMnasamucaya,
zAstravArtAsamuccaya, dharmasaMgrahaNuM, zrImad rAjacaMdra, sanmatitarka Adi
dazanaprabhAvaka Akara graMtho jijJAsue avagAhavA. sarva darzananI zikSA karatAM
jinanI kahelI baMdha mekSanA svarUpanI zikSA jeTalI avikaLa pratibhAse che,
teTalI bIjAM darzananI pratibhAsatI nathI-ane je avikaLa zikSA te ja
pramANasiddha che."--zrImad rAjacaMdrajI. tyAre mukta vyavasthA kevA prakAre
che? te kahe che- kSINavyAdhiryathA loke vyAdhimukta iti sthitaH  /
bhavarogyeva tu tathA muktastantreSu tatkSayAt  // 206 //  vRtti kSINavyAdhi
-kSINa vyAdhivALA puruSa, yathA To-jema lekamAM avinAnathI (ekI avAje),
vyAdhimuvatta zuti-vyAdhimukta che ema tenA tenA abhAvathI vyAdhimukta che ema,
sthita:che. sthApanIya nathIsthApavAno nathI. mavazava-bhavarogI ja, mukhya evA
tabhAvathI,-te roganA bhAvathI, tathA tevA prakAre, mu-mukta, vyAdhimukta,
taMtrapu- taMtramAM-zAstromAM sthita che, takSayAt-tenA kSaya thakI, te
bhavaroganA kSayane lIdhe, ema artha che.

Page #744 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(668) Just as a person with a weakened disease is considered "disease-free" in a
lake, similarly, a Bhavagī is considered "free" from Bhavagana through its
decay, as stated in the scriptures.  **Analysis:** The person with a weakened
disease, who is considered "disease-free" in the lake, is not established or
proven. Similarly, the Bhavagī, due to the decay of Bhavagana, is considered
"free" in the scriptures.  Here, the judge, the scholar, has given the final
verdict on the entire discussion, which is unanimously agreed upon by all the
lakes and all the scriptures. The person who has a weakened disease, due to the
decay of Bhavagana, is considered "disease-free" in the lake due to the absence
of the disease. This is a simple and established principle, which does not need
to be proven. Similarly, the Bhavagī, who is affected by Bhavagana, is
considered "disease-free" due to the decay of Bhavagana, as stated in the
scriptures. This is an established principle, which does not need to be proven.
Therefore, there is no need for any further evidence to establish this simple
and understandable situation, which is unanimously agreed upon by all the lakes
and all the scriptures. What more can be said about this?  To understand the
nature of the liberated soul, who has attained Nirvana, the example of a
disease-free person is presented here in detail. The disease-free person who is
in the lake is not a non-existent entity, nor is he free from disease, nor was
he previously diseased. In other words, the disease-free person does not
experience any lack, just as the liberated soul does not experience any lack.
Just as the disease-free person is not free from disease, similarly, the
liberated soul is not free from Bhavagana, but is indeed free. Just as the
disease-free person was not previously diseased, but was indeed diseased,

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (668) gadaSTisamuccaya kSINavyAdhi jyama lekamAM, vyAdhimukta che sthita;
bhAvagI ja tyama tasa kSaye, zAtre mukta susthita 206 artha-jema lekamAM kSINa
vyAdhivALo te "vyAdhimukta" ema sthita che, tema bhAvagI ja te bhavaganA kSaya
thakI "mukta" ema taMtromAM-zAstromAM sthita che. vivecana jene vyAdhi kSINa
thaye che e kSINavyAdhi puruSa jema lekamAM avizAnathI ekI avAje "vyAdhimukta
che ema sthita che, sthApanIya nathI-sthApavAne nathI; tema mukhya evA
tabhAvathI bhavagI ja te bhavaraganA kSaya thakI "mukta" ema taMtramAMzAstromAM
sthita che. atre uparokta samasta rasaprada carcAne chevaTane cUkAdo-nirNaya
(Judiement) nyAyamUrti zAstrakAre Apyo che, ke je sarva lekane ane sarva
zAstrane ekamate saMmata che. jene "ha" te vyAdhi-roga kSINa thayo che e
kSINabhavaregakSayathI vyAdhi puruSa, te te vyAdhinA abhAvathI lekamAM
"vyAdhimukta" mukta kahevAya che, Ama avimAnathI-sarvAnumate lekamAM sthita che,
sAdI samajathI sthApita siddhAMta che, kAMI na sthApavAnuM nathI. tema mukhya
bhAvathI jene bhavaroga lAgu paDelo che, evo bhAvagI ja te bhareganA kSaya thakI
"vyAdhimukta" mukta hoya che, ema taMtramAM-zAmAM sthita che, akhaMDa nizcaya
siddhAMta sthApita che, te kaI no sthApavAne raheto nathI. eTale Ama je sarva
lekane ane sarva zAstrane saMmata che, evI AbAlavRddha sarva samajI zake evI
sAdI samajavALI vastusthitine sthApita karavA mATe anya kaI pramANanI jarUra
nathI. e saMbaMdhI vadhAre zuM kahevuM ? muktatatvamImAMsAne sAra A nirvANa
prApta mukta AtmA ke che, tenuM svarUpa samajavA mATe atre vyAdhimukta-rogamukta
puruSanuM dRSTAMta sAMgopAMgapaNe ghaTAvyuM che -vyAdhimukta puruSa je ahIM
lekamAM hoya che, te A bhavyAdhimukta AtmA hoya che te abhAvarUpa nathI,
vyAdhithI mukta nathI ema paNa nathI, ane pUrve vyAdhivALo heta ema paNa nathI.
arthAta vyAdhimukta thatAM puruSane kAMI abhAva thaI jato nathI, tema
bhavavyAdhimukta thatAM AtmAno kAMI abhAva thaI jatuM nathI. vyAdhimukta puruSa
jema vyAdhithI mukta nathI ema paNa nathI, tema A bhavavyAdhimukta AtmA
bhavavyAdhithI mukta nathI ema nathI, paNa mukta ja che. vyAdhimukta puruSa jema
pUrve vyAdhiyukta hete ema nathI, paNa vyAdhiyukta hatA ja,

Page #745 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Muktatnavami Maansa: Freed from the Disease of Existence, Essence, Kalash
Kavya  Thus, this soul, freed from the disease of existence, was not previously
afflicted by the disease of existence, but was afflicted by it, and now it is
free from it.  Here, the world itself is the great disease. Birth, death, etc.,
are its afflictions. It produces a strange kind of affection, and raga, etc.,
cause intense pain. This disease of existence is the main one, and this disease
has been generated in the soul by strange karma (dravya-bhav) that is without
beginning. And it is experienced by all beings, from the lowest to the highest,
as is evident from experience. Thus, this disease of existence is the main one,
so being freed from it is also the main thing, because the faults of birth,
death, etc., are light, and their absence is the essence of their nature. It is
like this - even though it is an analogy to its nature, it is the essence of the
soul's nature, that is, the original nature is the essence, so its absence of
faults is the essence. Due to the absence of the essence, its nature was like a
broken pot, and it was a fault. When it regained its original nature, it
attained the essence. Thus, just as someone who was afflicted with a disease
becomes free from the disease, so too, this soul, which was afflicted with the
disease of existence, has become free from the disease of existence. Thus, being
free is the main thing - truly, the ultimate goal, the ultimate truth, is the
essence of nature.  And this essence is the essence of the soul, that is, it is
the essence of the essence. That is, the essence of the soul is the essence of
its nature, its inherent state, its innate nature, which is the essence of
liberation, the essence of being free. And this essence is the essence of the
essence, which is limited to the essence of the object, and not otherwise,
because excessive extension leads to faults. If we consider that essence to be
either completely impermanent or completely permanent, then the essence of
liberation is not possible, as has been explained in detail above.  Someone who
has a disease is called diseased, or the absence of that diseased person, or
someone other than that diseased person, none of these three definitions can be
used to describe someone who is free from the disease. Similarly, a worldly
person, or the absence of that person, or a soul other than that person, cannot
be called free from the main point of view, from the point of view of truth,
from the point of view of the ultimate goal. This is what those who know the
nature of liberation say. Therefore, the system of liberation is like this -
just as someone who has been cured of a disease is called a "disease-free"
person, and is considered to be in a state of liberation, so too, those who were
truly afflicted by the disease of existence are free from it due to the
destruction of the disease of existence, as is stated in the scriptures.
**Gadashti Kalash Kavya**  **Chamar Chhand (Naarachavat)**  The person who is
free from the disease is in a state of liberation, the one who is free from
birth has attained liberation; there is no absence of that person, nor is there
anyone who is not free, nor is there anyone who is not afflicted by the disease,
nor is there anyone who is not afflicted by the disease. 157

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 muktatanavamImAMsA : bhavaregakSayathI mukta, sAra, kaLaza kAvya tema A
bhavyAdhimukta AtmA pUrve bhavyAdhiyukta hote ema nahiM, paNa bhavyAdhiyukta
hatA ja, te have tenAthI mukta thayo che. atre saMsAra e ja mahAvyAdhi che.
janma-mRtyu Adi tenA vikAra che. te vicitra prakArano meha upajAve che, ane
rAgAdi tIvra vedanA pamADe che. A bhavyAdhi mukhya che, ane AtmAne A vyAdhi
anAdi evA vicitra karmathI (dravya-bhAva) upajela che. ane te tevA prakAre
tiryaMcAdi sarva prANIone anubhavasiddha che. Ama A bhavavyAdhi mukhya che, mATe
ethI mukta thayele mukta paNa mukhya ja ghaTe che, kAraNa ke janma maraNAdi doSa
haLavAthI tenA adoSapaNAnI saMgati-ghaTamAnapaNuM thAya che. te A prakAre -tenA
svabhAvane upama chatAM te AtmAnA te svabhAvapaNAnA yuga thakI tene ja
tathAbhAva hoya che, arthAt je mULa svabhAva che, te ja bhAva thAya che, tethI
tenuM adoSapaNuM ghaTe che. vibhAvathI tenA svabhAvane upama-kaccaraghANa thaye
te deSa hatuM, tene punaH mULa svabhAvane vega thatAM aSapaNuM prApta thayuM.
Ama je doSayukta hatA te deSamukta thAya, tenI jema A bhavadoSayukta AtmA
bhavadoSathI mukta thayA. Ama mukta mukhya che-kharekhara pAramArthika
paramArtha sat e svabhAva bhAva che. ane A je svabhAva che te AtmAne sva bhAva-
patAne bhAva che, arthAta tatvathI nija sattA ja che. arthAta AtmAnI svarUpa
sattA ja-svabhAva sthiti-sahajAnmasvarUpa e ja mokSabhAva-mukta bhAva che, ane A
svabhAva che te bhAva avadhi ja yukta te-vastusvarUpa maryAdA paryata ja yukta
che, bIjI rIte nahiM, kAraNa ke atiprasaMga deSa Ave. je te bhAva ekAMta anitya
mAnIe ke ekAMta nitya mAnIe to mokSabhAvane saMbhava thatuM nathI, e uparamAM
suyuktipUrvaka kahevAI cUkyuM che. jene vyAdhi upa che e vyAdhita, athavA te
vyAdhivaMtano abhAva, athavA te vyAdhivaMtathI anyae traNemAMthI keI paNa
sanyAyathI vyAdhimukta kahe ghaTatuM nathI. tema saMsArI, athavA tene abhAva,
athavA tenAthI anya evo AtmA mukta kahe te paNa mukhyavRttithI-tattvathI-
paramArthathI mukta nathI, ema muktanuM svarUpa jANanArA puruSo kahe che, mATe
mukta vyavasthA A prakAre ja ghaTe che -jema jene vyAdhi kSINa thayo che e
kSINavyAdhi puruSa ja " vyAdhimukta" che ema lekamAM sthita che, tema ja
kharekharo bhavaragI hatA, te ja te bhavaraganA kSaya thakI mukta che, ema
zAstromAM sthita che. gadaSTi kaLaza kAvya cAmara chaMda (nArAcavata)
vyAdhimukta je puruSa lekamAMhya che, janmamukta tehavo ja mukti prApta eha che;
nA abhAva tehane, na mukta ema nA ahi, vyAdhithI na vyAdhita vaLIya ema che
nahiM. 157

Page #746 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The disease of the soul, this is the cause of birth, birth and death are just
transformations, the pain of attachment, aversion and delusion is immense; the
main cause of this is the karma generated from the beginningless time, which
binds the soul to the cycle of births, the Siddhas experience this in all
beings. 158 This disease is the main cause of bondage, when it is removed, the
bondage is removed, the defects of birth etc. are removed, and non-attachment is
attained; the defects of the soul, which were present in the previous births,
are removed and non-attachment is attained. 159 Even though the nature of the
soul is suppressed by the influence of the karmic matter, it is still the nature
of the soul, because of the influence of the karmic matter; the nature of the
soul is as it is, and thus the non-attachment of the soul, which was present in
the previous births, is removed. 160 The nature of the soul is its own nature,
know this through the knowledge of the soul, and believe in your own true
nature; the limit of the nature of the soul is this nature, otherwise, there is
only the influence of the karmic matter. 161 The patient, his lack of health, is
not the same as the other, the disease-free person never loses his health due to
the influence of the karmic matter; similarly, the soul, which is born with the
disease of birth, its lack of health, is not the same as the other, the
liberated soul never loses its liberation. 162 The disease of the soul is
removed in the person who has attained liberation, just as the disease-free
person remains in the world; similarly, the soul, which has removed the disease
of birth, is liberated from the cycle of births, as stated in the scriptures.
163 The lack of disease does not mean the lack of the soul, the disease-free
person is healthy because he is free from disease, the lack of birth does not
mean the lack of the soul, the soul is healthy because it is free from the
disease of birth. 164 The soul is liberated from the cycle of births by the
influence of the nature of the soul, which is free from the influence of the
karmic matter; by removing the influence of the karmic matter, the soul attains
its true nature, and the seed of birth is burnt by the power of the soul. 165
The soul is liberated from its own nature, which is known, the pure, natural,
and inherent nature of the soul is the Siddha, the soul is the Siddha; the
Brahman, which is the pure consciousness, is the supreme state of the blessed
soul. 166  This is the end of the chapter on the liberation of the soul, from
the book "Kiritchandra Sumanonandsudan", written by the great sage
Grihadracharya, and explained in detail by Bhagavan Das in his commentary
"Sumanonandani Brihattika".

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 gadaSTisamucAca vyAdhi A bhavAkhya, janma mRtyu to vikAra che, citra maha rAga
Adi vedanA apAra che; mukhya A anAdi karma janya Atmane bhave, siddha eha sarva
prANIne tathA anubhave. 158 eha vyAdhimukta teya mukta mukhya A ghaTe, janma Adi
deSavigame adeSatA ghaTe; pUrva janma Adi SavaMta Atma je hatuM, te doSa te TaLe
adeSabhAva pAmate. 159 tasvabhAva te bhale dabAyale vibhAvathI, teya tehanA ja
tatasvabhAva ga bhAvathI; bhAva je hato yathA thaye ja tehane tathA,Ama pUrva
devavaMtanI ghaTe adeSatA. 160 eha AtmAne svabhAva te sva bhAva jANu, teha
tattvathI ja nija sattvabhAva mAnave; bhAvanI maryAda eTale ja A svabhAva che,
anyathA ati prasaMgane ja atra bhAva che. 161 rogI, tehane abhAva, tehathI bIje
naka, rogamukta te kadI ghaTe na sannIti thakI; tema janmarogI, taddaabhAva,
anya te ahiM, mukta teya mukta mukhyate kadI ghaTe nahiM. 16ra vyAdhi kSINa je
puruSane ahiM thaI gaye, vyAdhimukta jema lekamAMhi sthita te rahyo; tema
janmavyAdhi kSINa jeha AtmAna thaye, teha janmargoi tethI mukta zAstramAM kahyo.
163 reganA abhAvathI na rene abhAva che, roga mukta te naoNregane ja svastha
bhAva che, janmanA abhAvathI na AtmAno abhAva che, Atma te naoNregoM svastha
AtmAne svabhAva che. 164 viyogathI vibhAvanA svabhAvanA sugathI, theye ja mukta
Atma eha mukta janmogathI; svAbhAvadharma yune adharma kama TALiyuM, pratApathI
svarUpanA ja janmabIja bALiyuM. 165 Atma svasvabhAva rithI mukta je prasiddha
che, zuddha tata sahajasvarUpa siddha tethauM siddha che; brahma je paraM zrImad
sva zuddha cetanApati, ziva te sadA subhAgyavAnanI parA gati. 166 ||iti
maharSigrIharibhadrAcAryaviracite kiratcaMdrasnumanaHsukhanaMdanena
bhagavAnadAsena sumanonaMdanIbRhatTIkAnAmakavivecanena saprapaJca vivecite
zrIyogadRSTisamuccayazAne mukttttvmiimaaNsaadhikaarH||

Page #747 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Conclusion:** The thought of the yogi, the form of the Supreme, is worthy of
being contemplated.  **Nature says:** All conclusions are stated here—*From many
yoga scriptures, this has been extracted in brief. This yoga, due to the
difference in vision, is supreme for the remembrance of the Self.* (207)
**Meaning:** This yoga, due to the difference in vision, has been extracted in
brief from many yoga scriptures; and it is supreme for the remembrance of the
Self.  **Commentary:** Patanjali and other yoga scriptures have been extracted
in brief, like extracting butter from milk. What is the purpose? It is for the
remembrance of the Self, which is supreme.  Here, the author of this scripture,
the great sage, embodies simplicity and straightforwardness. He honestly
acknowledges the source of his work. He says that this scripture has been
extracted in brief from many yoga scriptures, like extracting butter from milk.
He has extracted the essence of many yoga scriptures, like extracting butter
from milk. Just as the churning of the ocean yielded nectar, so too has the
churning of the ocean of yoga scriptures yielded this great scripture.
**Interpretation:** *From many yoga scriptures*—from Patanjali and others, *in
brief*—in summary, *extracted*—separated from them, like *butter from milk*, by
what? By *difference in vision*—by the aforementioned characteristics of vision,
*this yoga*—the yoga that is being discussed, *is supreme for the remembrance of
the Self*—for the purpose of remembering the Self, *it is the most important*.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 upasaMhAraH kulayogI AdisvarUpayogyAyogya vicAra ema prakRta kahI, sarva
upasaMhAra kahe che-- aneka yogazAstrebhyaH saMkSepeNa samuddhRtaH  /
dRSTibhedena yogo'yamAtmAnusmRtaye paraH  // 207 //  yAgazAstrothI uddharyAM,
ehu saMkSepamAM ja; dRSTibhedathI yAga para, AtmAnusmRti kAja. 207 artha
:-STibhede karIne A yAga aneka ceAgazAstromAMthI saMkSepathI samuSkRta karavAmAM
AvyA che; ane te AtmAnusmRti arthe parama-pradhAna evA che. vivecana pAta'jala
Adi aneka yAgazAstromAMthI dRSTileke karIne A yAga sakSepathI-samAsathI
samuSkRta karavAmAM AvyA che, kSIramAMthI navanItanI jema pRthak karavAmAM AvyA
che. zuM arthe ? te ke-AtmAnusmRti arthe, parama pradhAna evA. atre saralatAnI--
RjutAnI mUrtti samA A zAstrakAra maharSi peAtAnA A graMthanu mUla zuM che? tenA
RjutAthI pramANikapaNe RNasvIkAra kare che. teezrI kahe che keA graMtha pAtajala
Adi aneka yegazA<<AmAMthI saMkSepathI samuddhRta dUdhamAMthI karavAmAM AvyA che,
dUdhamAMthI mAkhaNanI jema pRthak jUdA karavAmAM mAkhaNa jema AvyA che. ' aneka
cegazAonuM dohana karIne navanIta jevA parama sArabhUta A gagraMtha A mahAn
yeAgAcArya pRthak karyAM che. sAgaranu mathana karI jema viSudhAe amRta leAvyu
hatuM, tema yegazAsra-samudranu mathana karIne vRtti:-aneyo zA(myaH - aneka
yogazAstro mAMthI, pataMjala AdimAMthI sNkssepennsaMkSepathI, samAsathI,
samudataH--samudrata karAyA che, tema thI pRthakU karAyA che, kSIramAMthI,
navanItanI jema, kAnA vaDe karIne? ke kANu tA ? dRSTimerena--ukta lakSaNavALA
STibhedathI, cooca--A yAga adhikRta ja yAga. zu athe ?-te  /  AtmAnubhRtaye-
mAtmAnusmRti artha', var:-para, pradhAna evA mega,

Page #748 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(672) This great and wise scholar, the Bhagavan, has planted this **Chaugdashtri
Samuchchay** (Fourteen-fold Viewpoint Collection), a supreme nectar of yoga.
Just as the gods alone know the effort that went into churning the ocean, so
too, only this supreme Acharya knows the effort that went into churning this
yoga scripture. And just as only he knows the taste of the nectar obtained
through that great and difficult effort, so too, only this supreme yoga teacher,
the creator of this immortal work, knows the taste of this nectar obtained
through that great and difficult effort. This is described in detail in the yoga
scriptures. Here, it is stated in a concise summary. It is not an easy task to
extract a gem of concise statement from a vast and extensive body of literature.
From one perspective, it is easy to expand a concise statement, but it is not
easy to condense an extensive one. Because condensing an extensive statement
requires great skill, and this Acharya has demonstrated this skill fully, as is
evident. Moreover, conciseness is not incomplete or unfinished, but complete in
brevity. Just as a portrait of a man can be life-size or as small as a locket,
yet even the small locket-sized portrait represents the complete figure of the
man, so too, a concise statement of an extensive scripture presents the complete
subject matter of the scripture in brevity.  The synonym for conciseness,
"**Samas**" (Synthesis), also confirms the same meaning. To synthesize or
include a lot of meaning in a few words is **Samas** or conciseness. Just as the
sky has the power to encompass and contain infinite objects, so too, **Samas**,
in the sense of a concise statement of scripture, has the extraordinary power to
encompass and contain infinite meanings. Thus, this scripture, though concise in
words, is full of great meaning, and its intention is very profound. And the
depth of that intention becomes increasingly apparent as we delve deeper into
it. Just as the ocean appears shallow from the surface, but its depth is only
revealed when we dive into it, so too, this scripture appears simple on the
surface, but its profound intention is only revealed when we delve deeper into
it. This scripture possesses this extraordinary power of encompassing and
synthesizing; because a simple statement, when touched by the hand of a capable
and virtuous person, becomes a powerful and profound statement. A word, when
touched by the **Parashmani** (touchstone) of a saintly soul, becomes
"**Suvarna**" (golden), filled with infinite meaning. Every "**pad**" (word) of
a knower is capable of becoming a supreme "**pad**" (position). That is why, "In
every word of a virtuous person, there lies infinite knowledge," - this saying
of Shrimad Rajchandraji is truly applicable here.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (672) yogadaSTisamuccaya A mahAvibudha zAstrakAra bhagavAne A
cogadaSTisamuccayarUpa parama yogAmRta vAvyuM che. ane sAgaranuM maMthana
karavAmAM keTalI mahenata paDI haze te jema devo ja jANe, tema A
yegazAstramaMthanamAM keTale parizrama paDyo haze, te A parama AcAryadeva ja
jANe. ane te mahAvikaTa prayAse prApta amRtane rasAsvAda kevo haze te jema te
amAro ja jANe, tema ati vikaTa prayAse upalabdha A gAmRtane rasAsvAda A amara
kRti sarjanArA A parama amRtasvarUpa yogAcArya ja jANe. te te yogazAstromAM
vistArathI varNana che. atre tenA sArabhUta saMkSepamAM kathana che. atyaMta
vistRta mahAna graMtharAzimAMthI sArabhUta kathanarUpa ratna khoLI kADhavuM e
kAMI jevuM tevuM vikaTa kArya nathI. eka apekSAe joIe te saMkSepano vistAra
karavo saheluM che, paNa vistArane saMkSepa kare hele nathI. kAraNa ke vistArane
saMkSepa karavAmAM ghaNI bhAre kuzaLatAnI jarUra paDe che, ane te A AcAryavaye
pUrepUrI dAkhavI che, ema pragaTa dekhAya che. vaLI saMkSepa eTale kAMI apUrNa-
adhUruM nahi, paNa TUMkAmAM chatAM saMpUrNa. jema kaI puruSanI pratikRti-chabI
(Portrait) te puruSa pramANa (Life-size) maTI paNa hoya, ne aMgulinI mudrikAmAM
samAya evaDI nAnI (Locket-size) paNa hoya, chatAM te nAnI mudrApratikRti paNa
puruSanI te saMpUrNa AkRti rajU kare che, tema vistRta zAstrakathananuM
"saMkSepa' kathana paNa TUMkAmAM taviSayaka saMpUrNa zAstravaktavya rajU kare
che. saMkSepane paryAya zabda " samAsa" paNa e ja arthanI puSTi kare che. thaDA
zabdomAM ghaNuM arthane samAsa karavo-samAvavo te samAsa athavA saMkSepa che.
jema AkAzamAM - anaMta padArthane avagAhana karavAnI-samAvavAnI zakti che, tema
samAsane puruSa kathita zAstrasamAsamAM anaMta artha avagAhavAnI-samAvavAnI
paramArtha addabhuta zakti che. Ama A zAstra apazabdarUpa chatAM mahAartha
saMbhArathI saMbhUta che, atyaMta Azaya gaMbhIra che. ane te AzayanI
gaMbhIratAnI pichAna paNa jema jema temAM UMDA utarIe-avagAhana karIe tema tema
thatI jAya che. jema sapATI jotAM samudra upara uparathI te sAva sAde UMDe nahi
hoya ema jaNAya che, paNa tenA UMDANanI khabara te temAM avagAhana karIe-
nimajajana karI UMDA utarIe tyAre ja paDe che; tema upara uparathI jotAM A
graMtha sAva sAdo jaNAya, paNa tenI AzagaMbhIratAnI khabara te temAM avagAhana
karIe-UMDA utarIe tyAre ja paDe. AvI adbhuta AzayavALI avagAhana zakti-
samAsazakti A zAstranI che; kAraNa ke samartha sapuruSanI hathoTI lAgatAM eka
sAmAnya vacana paNa samartha abharyuM mahAvacana banI jAya che. AtmAnabhavI
saMtarUpa pArasamaNine sparza thatAM varNamaya zabda suvarNa' banI anaMta
arthalabdhithI bharapUra hoya che. jJAnInuM ekeka "pada' parama "pada"
pamADavAne paripUrNa samartha hoya che. eTalA mATe ja "sapuruSanA eka eka
vacanamAM anaMta Agama rahyA che, - e zrImad rAjacaMdrajInuM subhASita
vacanAmRta atra yathArtha

Page #749 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Conclusion: This scripture, in essence, is like the "Sur" (Sun), a concise
summary. (673) Just as a child, when asked "How big is the ocean?", spreads out
both hands and says "This big", so too, we can only be amazed by this "ocean-
like" scripture and say "It's so big!" We can only do so much, like a child's
play. For this "ocean-like" scripture, a profound work of Acharya Chudamani, we
can only imitate, with a slight change, the exclamation someone made for Shriman
Anandghanji Giraj's work:  "The intention is Shri Haribhadra, extremely profound
and generous; the child, spreading out his arms, says the ocean is vast."  "Even
a child, spreading out his arms, says the ocean is vast."  "बालोऽपि किं न
निजबाहुयुगं वितत्य, विस्‍तर्ग‍त रथयात वधवुaो .   Shri Bhaktamar Stotra, or
"Sutra", is like a concise statement. It contains a lot of meaning in a few
words. This scripture is also like a Sutra. A Sutra, like a thread, can be kept
in a pouch, but when unraveled, it can reach from village to village. Similarly,
this Sutra-like scripture is concise, but when its essence is unraveled, it can
fill volumes of great scriptures. It is full of generous intentions. Just as a
thread is wound around a central point (Nucleus), this Sutra-like scripture is
also wound around a central point of self-nature. A kite can be flown high with
a thread in hand, but if the thread is released, the kite falls immediately.
Similarly, this Sutra-like Yoga scripture, with its form as a thread in hand,
can be raised high to the highest realms of Yoga Siddhi, but if the thread of
form is released, it immediately falls into the abyss of ignorance. Just as
various pearls are strung together on a single thread in a pearl necklace,
various pearls of wisdom are strung together on a single thread of self-
realization in this Yoga scripture. Just as various flowers are woven together
with a single thread in a garland, various flowers of wisdom are woven together
with a single thread of wisdom in this scripture. Just as a mountain of flowers
cannot be worn on the neck, but a garland made of various selected flowers
strung together on a single thread can be worn comfortably on the neck, so too,
a mountain of scriptures cannot be easily absorbed, but various pearls of wisdom
selected and strung together on a single thread of wisdom can be easily
absorbed.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 upasaMhAra : saMkSepa-samAsane paramArtha, "sura" samuM A zAstra (673) bhAse
che. ane bALaka jema "samudra kevaDo ?' ema pUchavAmAM AvatAM be hAtha pahoLA
karIne kahe ke "AvaDe meTe," tema ApaNe paNa AvA "sAgaravaragaMbhIrA' graMthane
mATe Azcaryacakita thaI AvaDo moTo !" eTaluM ja kahI bAlaceSTA mAtra karI zakIe
ema che ! A "sAgaravaragaMbhIra" AcAryacUDAmaNinI A paramArthagaMbhIra kRti mATe
ApaNe je zrImAn AnaMdaghanajI girAjanI kRti mATe koIe kADhelA uddagAranuM
kiMcita pheraphAra sAthe anukaraNa karIe te- " Azaya zrI haribhadra, ati
gaMbhIra udAra; bALaka bAMhya prasArIne, kahe udadhi vistAra." "bAlo'pi kiM na
nijabAhuyugaM vitatya, vistargata rathayAta vadhavuao . zrI bhaktAmarastotra,
athavA "sUtra" jema saMkSepa kathanarUpa. thoDA zabdamAM ghaNuM
arthasaMgraharUpa hoya che, tema A zAstra paNa tevuM ja haI sUtra samAna che.
sUtrane-dorAno daDe gajavAmAM mUkI zakAya evo nA hoya che, paNa tene ukelI je
vistAra karIe, to sUtra" samuM gAunA gAu sudhI pahoMce che, tema A sUtrAtmaka
zAstra paNa saMkSepa A zAstra heI sva95 zabda pramANa che, paNa tene paramArtha
ukelI tene vistAra karIe te mahArNavALA graMthanA graMtho bharAya eTale udAra
Azaya emAM bhareluM che. vaLI sUtra-dare jema madhyabindurUpa pherakaNAnI
(Nucleus) AsapAsa viMTaLAyela hoya che, tema A sUtrarUpa zAstra paNa
AtmasvabhAva-guMjanamaya garUpa madhyabindunI AsapAsa viMTaLAyela che. sUtrane
dora hAthamAM hoya te pataMga game teTaluM UMce cagAvI zakAya che, nahiM te dera
choDI detAM pataMga tarata paDI jAya che. tema A sUtrAtmaka yogazAstrane
svarUpAnusaMdhAnarUpa gane dora hAthamAM-lakSyamAM hoya, te yogasiddhirUpa
pataMga game teTalI UMce Urdhva-kAvuM gabhUmikAo paryata caDhAvI zakAya che,
nahiM te te svarUpAnusaMdhAnane dora cheDI detAM tarata gabhraSTatArUpa
adhaHpatana thAya che. muktAmALAmAM jema vividha muktAphaLa eka sUtramAM
parovela hoya che, tema muktAmALArUpa AyegazAstramAM vividha sUktarUpa
muktAphaLa eka AtmasiddhirUpa sUtramAM parela che. jema puSpahAramAM vividha
puSpa eka sUtrathI guMthelA hoya che, tema A gazArarUpa puSpahAramAM vividha
subhASita puSpa gadaSTirUpa eka sUtrathI guMthelA che. jema puSparAzi kaMThe
dhAraNa karI zakAto nathI, paNa vividha cuMTelA puSpo eka sUtramAM guthI hAra
banAvyo hoya te sukhethI kaMThe dhAraNa thaI zake che, tema mahAgraMtharAzi
kaMThe dhAraNa karavo sahelo nathI, paNa vividha sUkta-pu cUMTI eka ga-sUtramAM
kaLAmaya rIte

Page #750 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(674) This garland of yoga scriptures, woven together as a collection of yoga
insights, can be easily worn around the “neck”. This concise statement makes
this yoga scripture comparable to a sutra in many ways. Furthermore, this
concise statement also exemplifies the relationship between the ocean and a
drop, and the tree and a seed. Just as the ocean contains a drop and the drop
contains the ocean, and the tree contains a seed and the seed contains the tree,
the same applies here. It is like this - the composition of the ocean is the
same as the composition of a drop. The elements that are present in the ocean
are also present in each drop in the same proportion. The elements that are
found when analyzing the entire ocean are the same elements found when analyzing
a single drop in the same proportion. The entire ocean has a certain taste, and
each drop has the same taste. Tasting a single drop is like tasting the entire
ocean. That is why it is said that the ocean contains a drop and the drop
contains the ocean. Similarly, the composition of the entire yoga scripture,
which is like an ocean, is the same as the composition of this concise, rich,
drop-like yoga scripture. The spiritual elements that are present in the ocean
of discourse are also present in this drop-like yoga scripture in the same
proportion. The elements that are found when analyzing the entire ocean of
scriptures are the same elements found when analyzing this drop-like yoga
scripture in the same proportion. The entire yoga scripture ocean, which is an
undivided, non-dual, supreme, nectar-like, ocean of consciousness, has a
supreme, nectar-like taste, and this drop-like yoga scripture also has the same
taste. Whoever tastes this yoga drop has tasted the entire ocean of scriptures.
Thus, the entire “ocean of discourse” has been condensed into this supreme,
nectar-like, “drop” of scriptures - it has been condensed, making its taste
accessible to all. The wise saying of Shri Rajchandraji is: “Just as the ocean
of discourse is condensed into a drop, So too is the attainment of the fourteen
previous births.” - Shrimad Rajchandraji. The composition of a tree is the same
as the composition of a seed in miniature form. The limbs and branches of the
tree, which are manifest, are represented in the seed in an unmanifest form. The
tree produces the seed, and the seed produces the tree - this is the eternal
cycle. The essence of the entire tree is contained in a single seed. That is why
it is said that the tree contains a seed and the seed contains the tree.
Similarly, the entire scripture is like a vast tree, and this concise, essence-
filled yoga scripture is like a seed. The composition of the yoga scripture tree
is the same as the composition of this concise yoga scripture. The limbs and
branches of the yoga scripture tree…

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (674) yogadaSTisamuccaya guMthele A yogazAstrarUpa hAra sukhethI "kaMThe"
dhAraNa thaI zake ema che. Ama saMkSepa kathanane lIdhe A yegazAstrane aneka
prakAre sUtranI upamA ghaTe che. vaLI atre saMkSepa kathanamAM siMdhu-biMdunuM
ane vRkSa-bIjanuM daSTAMta paNa ghaTe che. sidhumAM biMdu che ne biMdumAM siMdhu
che, vRkSamAM bIja che ne bIjamAM vRkSa che, tema atre paNa ghaTe che. te A
prakAre -siMdhunI je racanA (Composition) che siMdhu-biMdanuM te biMdunI racanA
che. siMdhumAM je je bhautika ta (Elements) che, daSTAMta te te te ja pramANamAM
tenA pratyeka biMdumAM che. AkhA samudranuM pRthakkaraNa karatAM je ta nIkaLe
che, te ja to te ja pramANamAM eka bindunuM pRthakkaraNa karatAM nIkaLe che.
AkhA samudrane je svAda che, te tenA pratyeka binne svAda che. eka bindu cAkhyuM
eTale Akhe samudra cAkhe, eTalA ja mATe kahyuM ke-sidhumAM bindu che ne biMdumAM
siMdhu che. tema samasta yegazAsarUpa siMdhunI je racanA che, te A temAMthI
saMkSepe samuddhata bindurUpa yogazAstranI racanA che. te te pravacana-siMdhumAM
je je AdhyAtmika to che, te te te ja pramANamAM tenA bindurUpa A yogazAstramAM
che. AkhA gazAa-samudranuM pRthakkaraNa karatAM je ta nIkaLe che, te ja to te ja
pramANamAM A bindurUpa yogazAsanuM pRthakkaraNa karatAM nIkaLe che. eka akhaMDa
abheda parama amRtarasa sAgarasvarUpa samasta yogazAstra-sidhune je
paramAmRtamaya rasAsvAda che, te ja A tenI vAnakIrUpa yogazAstra-bindune
rasAsvAda che. A yoga-bindu jeNe cAkhyuM, teNe samarata bhega-sidhu cAkhyo. Ama
Akha " pravacanasamudra" A parama amRtamaya gazAsrarUpa eka "bindumAM" ulaTI
AvyA che-ulUsI Avyo che ke jene rasAsvAda sarvasulabha thaI paDyo che. girAja
rAjacaMdrajInuM kelkIrNa subhASita che ke - ja pravacana samadra bindamAM, ulaTI
Ave ema: cauda pUrvanI labdhinuM, udAharaNa paNa tema." -zrImad rAjacaMdrajI.
vRkSanI je racanA che, te saMkSeparUpamAM (miniature form) bIjanI racanA che.
vRkSanA aMga-pratyaMga, zAkhA-prazAkhA je pramANe vyakta rUpamAM che te ja
pramANe avyakta rUpe tenA aMga-pratyaMganuM pratinidhitva bIjamAM che.
vRkSamAMthI bIjanI vRkSa-bIjanuM utpatti ane bIjamAMthI vRkSanI utpatti hoya
che, A sanAtana krama che. daSTAMta AkhA vRkSanuM satva (Essence) eka bIjamAM
AvIne rahyuM che. eTalA mATe ja kahyuM ke vRkSamAM bIja che ne bIjamAM vRkSa
che. tema samasta gazAstra eka vizALa vRkSasvarUpa che, ane tenA saMkSepa
sArasaMharUpa A yegazAstra bIjasvarUpa che. te yogazAstra vRkSanI je
saMkalanArUpa racanA che, te saMkSepa rUpamAM A yogazAstranI racanA che; te
yogazAstravRkSanA je aMga pratyaMga, zAkhA-prazAkhA

Page #751 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Conclusion: The Importance of the Author as Illustrated by the Simile of the
Seed and the Tree**  (675) Just as the vast expanse of the Yoga Shastra is
presented in a condensed form in this seed-like Yoga Shastra (In Concentrated &
condensed form), so too, just as this Yoga Shastra-seed is born from the vast
Yoga Shastra tree, so too, by contemplating and expanding this Yoga Shastra-
seed, the entire Yoga Shastra tree can be born. Thus, the entire essence of the
Yoga Shastra tree is contained within this single Yoga Shastra-seed. Such is the
amazing power of this seed! All that is needed is a skilled, true seeker, a
seeker of truth, a researcher! So be it!  Furthermore, it is easy to give a
gross form to the subtle, but it is not easy to give a subtle form to the gross;
or it is easy to make a small picture big, but it is not easy to make a big one
small, just as it is easy to expand a summary, but it is not easy to summarize
an expansion. Therefore, to extract this condensed nectar from the many
difficult Yoga Shastra-like summaries, making it accessible to all, is not a
small, easy task, but a great, difficult task, a work of great art. And in this
creation of such a condensed summary, this Acharya is unparalleled, supremely
skilled. His mastery in saying much in few words, his amazing, artistic wonder,
is evident in every work of his. To write little and know much - this saying
seems to be the essence of his unique style.  "This summary is enriched by the
Yoga Shastras of Patanjali and others" - by saying this, the great author has
revealed his humility, his lack of ego, his gratitude, his honesty, his
steadfastness, his simplicity, his magnanimity, his generosity, his non-
attachment, his moderation in writing, and his tolerance towards all
philosophies. He has given us a glimpse of his father's supreme generosity, his
ethical and spiritual greatness. This discerning reader can understand this for
himself. But what is particularly noteworthy is that while others are hesitant
or even afraid to mention the names of those from other countries, this
supremely generous, magnanimous Acharya has boldly mentioned other philosophical
schools with gratitude. And it is no surprise that such a true knower of the
right path would do so, because in the right path, there is unity of all
philosophies, the right path is agreeable to all philosophies and is the
ultimate goal. Although there may be many paths in the world, the path to
liberation - the right path - is one, because the pure nature of the self, which
is liberation, is the only goal that is to be achieved. Therefore, such a seeker
of liberation...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 upasaMhAra: siMdhu-biMdu, vRkSa-bIjanA daSTAMta graMthakAranI mahattA (675) je
pramANe vistRta rUpamAM che, te atra bIjarUpa yogazAstramAM saMkSipta svarUpe
(In Concentrated & condensed form) che. akhila yogazAstra vRkSamAMthI saMkSepa
karatAM jema A yogazAstra-bIjanI utpatti che, tema A yegazAsa-bIjane vicAra-
vistAra karatAM temAMthI samasta gazAstra vRkSanI utpatti saMbhave che. Ama AkhA
yogazAstra vRkSanuM saMpUrNa tatvamaya satva A eka yegazAstra-bIjamAM ekatra AvI
vasyuM che. evuM AnuM AzayazaktirUpa adbhuta sAmarthya che ! mAtra tenI vyakti
karanAra-janAra kuzaLa sAco jijJAsu tattvagaveSaka saMzodhaka joIe ! astu! vaLI
eka apekSAe sUphamane sthULa rUpa ApavuM saheluM che, paNa sthaLane sUkSma rUpa
ApavuM jema saheluM nathI; athavA nAnA citrane meTuM banAvavuM saheluM che, paNa
moTAne nAnuM banAvavuM jema heluM nathI, tema saMkSepane vistAra karavo te
saheluM che, paNa vistArane vistArano saMkSepa kare saheluM nathI. eTale aneka
yegazAstrIrUpa saMkSepa duSkara kAmadhenune dehane, temAMthI A saMkSeparUpa
navanIta kheMcI kADhI sarvasulabha karI ApavuM,e kaMI jevuM tevuM-nAnuM sUnuM
kArya nathI, mahAdurghaTa kArya che,-uttama kaLAnuM kAma che. ane tevI saMkSepa
saMkalanArUpa uttama kaLAkRti karavAmAM A AcAryazrI ekkA che, parama kuzaLa che.
thoDA zabdomAM ghaNuM kahI nAMkhavAnI emanI siddhahasta adUbhuta kaLAmaya
camatkRti emanI pratyeka kRtimAM daSTigocara thAya che. thoDuM lakhyuM jhAjhuM
karI jANo -e lekti emanI A anokhI viziSTa zailImAM caritArtha thatI jaNAya che.
pAtaMjala Adi aneka yogazAstromAMthI A saMkSepathI samuddhata che"--e uparathI
mahAtmA graMthakAre potAnI laghutAne, nirabhimAnitAne, kRtajJatAne,
pramANikatAne, nibhatAne, saraLatA, mahAnubhAvatA, udAratAne, nirAgrahatAne,
graMthamaranI madhyasthatAne ne sarva darzana pratye samabhAvarUpa sahiSNutAno
paricaya mahattA ApaNane Apyo che, ane ema karI pitAnI ati ucca koTinI parama
udAratA naitika ne AdhyAtmika mahattAnI jhAMkhI karAvI che. e sujJa vAMcaka
svayaM samajI zake ema che. temAM paNa khAsa dhyAna kheMcanArI bInA e che ke-
bIjAo jyAre anya dezanIonA nAmathI paNa sUgAya che vA acakAya che, vA bhaDake
che, tyAre A parama udAra mahAnubhAva AcAryavare bedhaDaka anya darzanIya zAone
paNa nAmollekha kRtajJatApUrvaka karyo che. ane AvA parama bhegamArganA
yathArtha jJAtA Ama kare emAM kAMI Azcarya nathI; kAraNa ke gamArgamAM sarva
dazanenI ektA che, lega mArga sarva dazanene saMmata ne parama ISTa che. bhale
saMsAranA mArga aneka hoya paNa mokSane mArga-gamArga te eka ja che, kAraNa ke
zuddha AtmasvabhAvarUpa mokSa sAthe yojana-ga kare te ja eka tene uddiSTa lakSya
che. eTale AvA mekSasAdhaka

Page #752 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(676) In the path of Yoga, in the path of liberation, where is there room for
trivial insistence on differences in opinions and views? Where is there room for
the distinction of a father's doctrine or a stranger's doctrine for the aspiring
yogi? There, the truth, the principle that is free from the influence of what is
seen and desired, should be accepted with an open heart and an open throat;
whatever way the soul attains its true nature, that is the measure there. (See
pp. 397-398, and the verses of Atmasiddhi on p. 436) "आत्मीयः परकीयो वा का
सिद्धांत: विपश्चिताम् । દરેણાવાયત્તો ચરતુ ચુસ્તબ્ધ પરિબડ્ડઃ ” – Bindu, Play. 24.
Therefore, it is extremely wise for this supreme yogacharya, who has no
attachment or insistence on opinions and views, to follow this policy; because
they are supremely skilled (Expert) in harmonizing all views (Unity), and they
have shown extraordinary skill in bringing together and harmonizing the views of
other yogas with their own yoga! Which is worthy of the highest gratitude of all
views, without insistence on any particular view! So be it! Thus, just as the
brevity of the narrative is a special feature of this book, so is the special
subject of this book another special feature. And that subject is the narrative
of the path of yoga from the point of view of different perspectives - that is,
This book is divided into sections according to the development of the
yogadristi. As explained clearly in each perspective above, this yogadristi
narrative is a "spiritual instrument" that indicates the spiritual development
of the soul. As this yogadristi unfolds - opens up, the soul ascends to higher
and higher levels, and finally, when it is fully unfolded - developed, it
attains the state of supreme yogarudha. As the great and powerful Bhavagi
Shrimad Rajchandraji has explained - just as the temperature of the body can be
measured from a thermometer (Thermometer), a heat-measuring instrument
(parashi), so the state of the soul's development can be measured from this
"yogadristi" - a spiritual instrument for measuring the state of the soul. Just
as there is the method of fourteen gunasthana for understanding the spiritual
development of the soul, so there is also this unique method of eight
yogadristi. So, what is the purpose of this yogadristi book being woven together
in brief? What is its...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (676) yogadaSTisamuccaya yegamArgamAM-mokSamArgamAM matadazanabhedanA tuccha
Agrahane avakAza kyAMthI hoya ? pitAno siddhAMta ke pArake siddhAMta e bheda
mumukSu yogIone kyAMthI hoya ? tyAM te daSTa-ISTathI abAdhita e je satya
tatvapratipAdaka siddhAMta hoya, tenuM ja mukta kaMThe ne khullA hRdaye grahaNa
hoya; je kaMI paNa rIte "AtmA Atmatva pAme" e ja rIti tyAM pramANa heya. (juo
pR. 397-398, tathA AtmasiddhinI gAthA pR. 436) "AtmIyaH parakIyo vA kA
siddhAMta: vipazcitAm  /  dareNAvAyatto caratu custabdha paribaDDaH " - biMdu,
ple. pa24. eTalA mATe matadazanane jene leza mAtra Agraha-abhiniveza che ja nahi
evA A parama yogAcAye e ja nItirItinuM anusaraNa karyuM hoya, te atyaMta
yuktiyukta che; kAraNa ke sarva dazanene samanvaya (Unity) sAdhavAmAM teozrI
parama kuzaLa (Expert) heI, anya darzanekta yugane svadarzakata yegamAM sAMge
pAMga avatAra karavAnuM ne paraspara sumeLa sAdhavAnuM bhagIratha kArya temaNe
ajaba kuzaLatAthI karI batAvyuM che! ke je mata-darzananA Agraha vinA sarva
dazanIonA parama dhanyavAdane pAtra che ! tathAstu ! Ama saMkSepakathana jema A
graMthanI viziSTatA che, tema A graMthane khAsa viSaya paNa enI bIjI viziSTatA
che. ane te viSaya daSTibhedathI veganuM kathana-e che, arthAt yogadaSTinA
vikAsa pramANe atre gana vibhAga karavAmAM AvyuM che. daSTibhedathI uparamAM
pratyeka dRSTimAM spaSTapaNe varNavavAmAM AvyuM tema A yogadaSTi gathana AtmAno
AdhyAtmika vikAsa sUcavanArI "AdhyAtmika yaMtrapaddhati (Spiritual Instrument)
che. jema jema A gadaSTi unmIlana pAmatI jAya che-ughaDatI jAya che, tema tema
AtmA ucca ucca gabhUmikA para ArUDha thato jAya che, ane chevaTe pUrNa unmIlana-
vikAsa thatAM parama yegArUDha sthitine pAme che. mahAsamartha bhAvagI zrImad
rAjacaMdrajIe prakANyuM che tema-tharmomITara (Thermometer), uSNatAmApaka yaMtra
(pArAzIzI) uparathI jema zarIranI uSNatAnuM mApa thaI zake che, tema A
"yogadaSTi' rU5 AtmadazAmApaka AdhyAtimaka yaMtra uparathI AtmAnI vikAsarUpa
AtmadazAnuM mApa nIkaLI zake che. AtmAne AdhyAtmika guNavikAsa samajavA mATe
jema cauda guNasthAnaka paddhati che, tema A aSTa yogadaSTirUpa viziSTa paddhati
paNa che. Ave A yogadaSTi graMtha saMkSepathI zuM arthe guMthavAmAM Ave che ?
tenuM zuM

Page #753 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Conclusion: From the perspective of the Jain term "Daṇibheda" (differentiation
of the soul), the statement, "For the sake of 'Ātmānusmṛti' (remembrance of the
soul)" (677) has been explained. It means "for the sake of 'Ātmānusmṛti', i.e.,
for the sake of remembering the soul's father, for the sake of remembering the
father, by the soul. Just as someone might write a memorandum for the sake of
remembering a subject, so too, this Ācārya says that I have briefly compiled
this list of yogic principles (Memorandum) for the sake of remembering my
father, for the benefit of my own soul. Just as one quickly glances at a brief
list and immediately understands what has been done and what remains to be done,
so too, one quickly glances at this brief list of yogic principles and
immediately understands what spiritual qualities have been attained and what
remain to be attained in relation to the father's soul. And just as one then
focuses on what remains to be done from the list, so too, here one focuses on
the attainable spiritual qualities that remain to be attained, and accordingly,
they are achieved through self-effort. Thus, by the soul -  This list is
extremely beneficial in this way. Therefore, the intention of this Supreme Soul
in telling the Ācārya is this: "I am a soul who is a traveler on the path of
liberation, I am a seeker of liberation. I am a seeker who desires to progress
on the path of liberation, a seeker who desires to be liberated." And this yogic
perspective is a milestone in the spiritual progress of a soul, a measure of the
soul's state from which the soul's purpose can be understood. Therefore, it is
constantly present in the soul of my father, the great soul, whether or not this
yogic perspective is present. This is why I have compiled this yogic text for
the sake of "Antarmukha Avalokan" (introspection), for the sake of constant
awareness, for the sake of remembrance. This yogic perspective should be
constantly before the eyes, so that one can clearly understand how much the
yogic perspective of my father's soul has developed, so that the attained state
is "secured," strengthened, and protected, and the unattained is "obtained" and
brought into being. This is why I have constantly remembered the soul. This is
the only purpose of this text. Otherwise, we have no intention of composing this
text for the sake of fame, for the sake of worship, for the sake of glory, or
for any other benefit related to this world or the next. We have abandoned all
those trivial purposes, knowing them to be the poison of "Halahala." Our only
purpose is the attainment of the Supreme Nectar-like purpose of self-
realization. We have no other purpose, such as fame, etc. "The purpose is one,
the soul's, not another." Or, "For the sake of 'Ātmānusmṛti' means for the sake
of remembering the soul, this is the compilation of this yogic perspective. This
yogic perspective constantly reminds one of the soul, because...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 upasaMhAra: daNibhedathI vegakathana, "AtmAnusmRti arthe (677) prayojana che?
te atra spaSTa karyuM che ke "AtmAnusmRti athe'; arthAta AtmAnI pitAnI
anusmRtine arthe, pitAnI yAdIne mATe, AtmAthe. jema keI AtmAnu. pitAne vismRti
na thAya ne smRti rahe te mATe, kaI viSayanI dukAmAM smRti arthe yAdI TapakAvI
le, tema A AcAryajI kahe che kepitAne vismRti nA thAya ne anusmRti rahe te
khAtara meM A yogaviSayanI yAdI (Memorandum) hArA potAnA AtmAnA
upakArArtheAtmAthe saMkSepamAM seMdhI che. saMkSepamAM nedhelI yAdI para jema
jhaDapathI najara pheravI javAya che, ane temAMthI kaI vastu thaI gaI ne kaI
rahI gaI tene turata ja khyAla Ave che, tema A yogadaSTinI saMkSipta yAdI pratye
jhaDapathI daSTi pheravI javAya che, ne temAMthI pitAnA AtmA paratve kaI
guNasthiti prApta thaI gaI ne kaI rahI gaI, tene jhaTa khyAla AvI jAya che. ane
pachI yAdImAMthI rahI gayelI vastu pratye jema lakSya keMdrita thAya che, tema
atre paNa prApta thavI rahI gayelI sAdhya guNasthiti pratye lakSya kendrita
thAya che, ne anukrame AtmaparAkramathI tenI siddhi thAya che. Ama AtmAthe- A
gAthe A yAdI atyaMta upakArI che. tethI ja A parama AtmAthI AcAryavayane
kahevAno Azaya e che ke-huM gamArgane pravAsI AtmAthI chuM, mumukSu chuM.
mokSasAdhaka yogamArge AgaLa vadhavA Icchate huM IcchAyogI sAdhaka-basAdhu"
chuM. ane A yogadaSTi kAma eka AtmAnI AdhyAtmika pragatinA sImAcihnarUpa
(Milestone) che, e AtmArthanuM uparathI AtmadazAnuM mApa nIkaLI zake che. eTale
te te gadaSTinA yakta lakSaNa mahArA pitAne AtmAmAM che ke nahi ? tenuM
"aMtarmukha avalokana" (Introspection) karatAM satata bhAna rahe, anusmaraNa
rahe, tenI khAtara kevaLa AtmAthe ja meM A gaSTi graMthanI guMthaNI karI che. je
A yogadaSTi niraMtara daSTi sanmukha hoya, te mahArA pitAnA AtmAnI gadaSTi
keTalI vikAsa pAmI che, tene spaSTa khyAla AvI zake,-jethI karIne prApta
sthitinuM jema "kSema thAya, sudaDhapaNuM- surakSitapaNuM thAya, ane aprAptane
jema "ga" thAya, tema pravartAvA mATe mane AtmAnusmRti rahe. Ama kevaLa
AtmakalyANa ja A graMtha racavAmAM hetu che. bAkI khyAti mATe, ke pUjAsatkAra
mATe, ke yaza mATe, ke A leka-paraloka saMbaMdhI anya koI lAbha mATe, A graMtha
racavAnuM amAre kaI prajana che ja nahiM. e badhA tuccha hetuo te hAlAhala
"viSa" jANI ame cheDyA che. amAre te kevaLa AtmasiddhirUpa parama amRtamaya
AtmArthanuM ja kAma che, bAkI bIjo khyAti Adi kAmanArUpa "manarega amane che
nahiM. "kAma eka AtmArthanuM, bIje nahiM manarega". athavA " AtmAnusmRti
artheeTale AtmAnA anusmaraNa athe, A yogadaSTinuM grathana che. A gadaSTi
niraMtara AtmAnuM anusmaraNa karAve che, kAraNa ke

Page #754 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(678) The collection of yogadristi, combined with the nature of the self, is
called "yoga," and this yogadristi is the study of such yoga, which is born of
the nature of the self. Therefore, this yogadristi constantly focuses on the
true nature of the self, the perspective of the body is abandoned, and the
vision remains constantly on the soul, so that only the goal of the soul, which
is the attainment of the self, is achieved. There is no desire for worship,
etc., nor is there any internal path to the root of worldly suffering. It is
only said that the ultimate goal is to attain the self, and what the seeker
attains is the root of the matter." - Shrimad Rajchandraji. Thus, the purpose of
this text is to attain the self in all respects. This yogadristi, which is a
distinction of perspectives, is the ultimate, the primary, and the best,
because, as discussed above, it is extremely beneficial in the welfare of the
soul and in the yoga of the unattainable, and because it constantly keeps the
self-nature alive through constant awareness, what other yoga can be superior to
this yogadristi? The second explanation (second explanation) says -
कुलादियोगभेदेन चतुर्धा योगिनो यतः । अतः परोपकारोऽपि लेशतो न विरुध्यते ॥२०८॥
Kulaadi yogabhede, yogi chara prakar Athi virodh na paamte, kaa'iy par upakaar.
208 Meaning - Because yogis are of four types, due to the distinction of
kulaadi, therefore, this text does not contradict any benefit to them.
Discussion Due to the distinction of kulaadi, yogis are also of four types,
generally. Therefore, in comparison to kulaadi, this yogadristi text does not
contradict any benefit to them, because they have a bias towards yoga. - Above,
"for the sake of self-remembrance" - the main purpose of this yogadristi shastra
is to attain the self, which is self-benefit; here, the secondary purpose is to
benefit others. Explanation: - Kuriyojame - due to kulaadi distinction -
lineage, kula, cycle of activity, distinction based on the characteristics of
the manifested form, vat - four types, yoni no yat - because yogis are
generally. What is the result? - Rod - ipopkaar pan - in comparison to kulaadi,
raato na viru - it is not contradictory - it does not contradict even a little
bit, because they have a bias towards yoga, that is the feeling.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (678) gadaSTisamuccaya AtmasvabhAva sAthe yujana tenuM nAma "yoga" che, ane A
yogadaSTi tevA svabhAvayuMjana yeganA abhyAsarUpa che. eTale A cagadaSTithI
niraMtara AtmasvarUpane lakSa rahe che, dehAdhyAsa daSTi chUTI satata AtmA bhaNI
daSTi rahe che, jethI kevaLa AtmasiddhirUpa eka AtmArthanuM ja prayajana siddha
thAya che. no'ya pUjAdinI jo kAmanA re, neya hAluM aMtara bhavaduHkhamULa
mAraga. mAtra kahevuM paramAratha hetuthI re, kaI pAme mumukSu e vAta
mULa."-zrImad rAjacaMdrajI. Ama sarvathA AtmArtha ja A graMthanuM prayojana heI,
AtmAnusmRti arthe A daSTibhedarUpa ga parama che, pradhAna che, zreSTha che;
kAraNa ke uparamAM vivecIne kahyuM tema, prAsa veganA kSemamAM ane aprAptanA
yogamAM parama upakArI hovAthI, tema ja niraMtara AtmasvabhAvanI anusmRtirUpa
satata jAgRta upayoga rakhAvato hovAthI, A yogadaSTithI para e bIjo kaye vega
hoI zake vAru? prayaMjanAntara (bIju prajana) kahe che - kulAdiyogabhedena
caturdhA yogino yataH  /  ataH paropakAro'pi lezato na virudhyate  // 208 //
kala Adi yogabhedathI, yegI cAra prakAra ethI virodha na pAmate, kAMiya para
upakAra. 208 artha -kAraNa ke kulaga Adi bhede karIne vegIo cAra prakAranA che,
ethI karIne A gagraMtha thakI kaMIka emane papakAra paNa virodha nathI pAmate.
vivecana kula Adi gabhedane lIdhe gIo paNa sAmAnyathI cAra prakAranA che. ethI
karIne tathAvidha kulagI AdinI apekSAe eone paNa A yogadaSTi graMtha thakI
lezathI-kaMIka upakAra thave virodha pAmatuM nathI, kAraNa ke teone vega pratye
pakSapAta hoya che.-uparamAM "AtmAnusmRti arthe'-AtmArtharUpa svaupakAra
arthenuM A yogadaSTizAstranuM mukhya prayajana kahyuM; atre para upakAra
arthenuM gauNu prajana kahyuM che. kRtti:-kuriyojamena-kulAdi gabhedathI,-gotra,
kula, pravRttacakra, niSpanna garUpa lakSaNavALA gabhedathI, vatta-cAra
prakAranA, yonino yata:-kAraNa ke yegIo sAmAnyathI che. ethI zuM ? to ke- roDa-
ipopakAra paNa,-tathAvidha kulagI AdinI apekSAe, rAto na viru-lesathI viruddha
nathI hoto- jarAka AnA thakI paNa virodha nathI pAmate, kAraNa ke teone vega
pratye pakSapAta che mATe, ema bhAva che.

Page #755 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Conclusion: The Sorrowful Ātrī is somewhat Benefited  (679) Just as this text
has been beneficial for the sake of self-remembrance – for the sake of
remembering the soul of the father, so too, it is possible that this text can be
somewhat beneficial for other souls who are similarly inclined. Because their
soul-nature is the same, it is possible that they too, through this, will
experience self-remembrance – self-awareness. Since the nature of all souls is
the same, it is possible that other souls who are similarly inclined, who are
fit for the benefit of the same Dharma, will also experience self-awareness
through this, if they absorb this influence. Just as a lion cub, who has lived
for a long time in a flock of sheep, experiences awareness of its form upon
seeing a lion, (see page 113) so too, a soul who has been in contact with –
familiar with – the external world for an immeasurable time, may also experience
remembrance of its own nature through seeing its own form.  And for absorbing
this influence (Reception), some similar qualification is required. Just as a
radio receiver must be at a certain specific frequency – wavelength – “G” (Wave-
length) in order to absorb the radio broadcast (Radio Broadcasting) waves
(Waves), only then can it absorb them, otherwise not; similarly, for absorbing
the influence – waves – vibrations (Vibrations) of this G-discourse, the soul
must also be at a certain specific, similar frequency – wavelength. Only then
can it absorb them, otherwise not. Or, just as a vessel cannot hold more than
its capacity, similarly, this spiritual knowledge cannot remain without a
suitable vessel. As Shrimad Rajchandraji has said in Moksha Mala, “A thing
cannot remain without a vessel, spiritual knowledge remains in a vessel.” This
“G” (suitable) being cannot digest this “Jaga” (world) form of great substance.
Just as a lioness’s milk is only for a lion cub – “A lioness’s milk is only for
a lion cub,” – it will burst in the presence of another; similarly, this “Jaga”
form of supreme substance can only be digested by a suitable being, it cannot be
digested by others – those who are not suitable, not only that, but it will
cause indigestion – dyspepsia – and abdominal pain due to false pride.  And
there are four types of such beings, because there are four types of Yoga:
G-Yoga, Kula-Yoga, Pravritta-Yoga, and Nishpanna-Yoga. Therefore, there are also
four types of beings: Gogi, Kulagi, Pravritta-chogi, and Nishpanna-chogi (whose
characteristics will be described later). It is possible that they too,
according to their Yoga, will be benefited by this text. And the reason for this
benefit is that they have an inner feeling of partiality towards Yoga, they have
a natural love – innate love – for the subject of Yoga.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 upasaMhAra : kuyogI Atri kaika upakAra (679) jema A graMtha AtmAnusmRti arthe
-pitAnA AtmAnI anumRti arthe upakArI che, tema bIjA paNa tathArUpa gratAvALA
AtmAone A graMtha kaMIka upakArI thaI zakavAne saMbhava paNa che, kAraNa ke
teonuM Atmatva samAna che, eTale teone kulagI paNa AnA thakI AtmAnusmaraNa
thavAne-AtmabhAna AvavAne saMbhava che. Adine kaMIka sarva AtmAone svabhAvarUpa
dharma samAna hovAthI samAnadharmIupakAra sAdhamika evA anya AtmAone paNa, jo
teo A saMskAra jhIle te, AnA thakI AtmajAgratirUpa AtmalAbha thavo saMbhave che,
kAraNa ke gheTAnA ToLAmAM cirakALa sudhI rahelA siMhazizune jema siMhane dekhIne
svarUpapadanuM bhAna thAya che, (juo pR. 113) tema paravastunA anAdi
saMsargamAM-paricayamAM rahelA AtmAne paNa AnA thakI AtmasvarUpanA darzanathI
nija svarUpanuM anusmaraNa thAya evI saMbhAvanA che. ane te saMskAra jhIlavA
(Reception) mATe paNa kaMIka tathArUpa yogyatA joIe che. jema reDiye pravacananA
(Radio Broadcasting) vAyutaraMga-AMdolana (Waves) jhIlavA mATe reDio yaMtra
amuka cekakasa kakSA para-rekhAMza " ga" vinA (Wave-length) para hovuM joIe, te
ja te jhIlI zakAya che, joga nahiM nahi te nahi; tema A ga-pravacananA saMskAra-
taraMga-AMdolana | (Vibrations) jhIlavA mATe AtmA paNa amuka cokkasa gyatArUpa
kakSA para-garekhAMza para rithati karate he joIe, te ja te jhIlI zakAya che,
nahi te nahiM. athavA pAtra vinA vadhu rahI zakatI nathI, tema tathArUpa pAtra
vinA A Atmika jJAnarUpa vastu rahI zakatI nathI. zrImad rAjacaMdrajIe
mokSamALAmAM kahyuM che tema-"pAtra vinA vastu na rahe, pAtre Atmika jJAna."
"ga" (yogya) jIva vinA A "jagarUpa mahat vastu jIravI zakAya ema nathI. jema
siMhaNanuM dUdha siMhasutane ja jare che-"siMhaNa keruM dUdha te te siMhasutane
jare,"--bIjAnI te hAjarI ja phATI jAya; tema A "jaga'rUpa paramAna paNa
tathArUpa yogyatAvALA jegIjanene ja karI zake ema che, bIjAne-ajogIone te te
jare ema nathI, eTaluM ja nahi, paNa mithyAbhimAnarUpa ajIrNa--apaco ne
udarapIDA upajAve ema che. ane te jogIjananA cAra prakAra che, kAraNa ke ge ga,
kulaga, pravRttacoga, ne niSpannayoga-ema yoganA cAra prakAra che. eTale gogI ,
kulagI, pravRttacagI, ne niSpannagI ema bhegIonA paNa sAmAnyathI cAra prakAranA
cAra prakAra che (jenuM lakSaNa have pachI kaheze). eone paNa yathAyogI saMbhava
A gagraMthathI upakAra thavo saMbhave che. ane te upakAra thavAnuM kAraNa paNa
teone yega pratyene aMtaraMga bhAvathI pakSapAta hoya che, e che teone kudaratI
rIte ja yoga viSaya pratye prazasta rAga-naisargika prema hoya che,

Page #756 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(680) Gadastisamurchya This is because their mental inclination is naturally
biased towards yoga, their self-reflection is completely inclined towards yoga.
Thus, this Gadasti text, while primarily for self-knowledge, is also secondarily
for the benefit of others. In other words, the primary purpose of this text is
to benefit both self and others. This is a prime example of how the actions of a
great soul, while primarily for self-benefit, also become beneficial for all,
for public use. Compare: " न कवित्वाभिमानेन न कीर्तिप्रसरेच्छया। । कृतिः किन्तु
मदीयेयं स्वबोधायैव केवलम् ॥" –Shri Shubhachandracharya's Shri Jnanarnava. And
from this, it is also important to note that true selfless saints who benefit
themselves are the ones who are truly capable of benefiting others. Those who
achieve self-interest, which is the form of self-interest, are the ones who can
achieve the ultimate goal of benefiting others. Because those who do not benefit
themselves cannot benefit others; those who do not achieve self-knowledge cannot
achieve the benefit of others. Because "If it is in the well, it will come to
the air." "If you don't achieve anything for yourself, what will you cook for
others?" But those who dare to benefit others without achieving self-interest,
who boast about it, lose both and become corrupt. Those who go to teach others
without teaching their own soul cannot benefit either their father or others;
because without the strength of character, which is the form of self-
purification, the intended effect does not occur, the hearts of others are not
touched, and it becomes like "water on a stone"! That is why the first and
foremost endeavor of the knowers of the right path, the virtuous, the good men,
is to teach their own soul, because they feel deeply that: "O soul! You teach
me, first you learn, because the country of the wise is the most distant and
inaccessible." This profound saying of Shrimad Rajchandraji should be engraved
in the hearts of all seekers: "You teach, first you learn, The country of the
wise is the most distant and inaccessible." – Shrimad Rajchandraji. Thus, the
lecture activity of such virtuous, virtuous men, while primarily for self-study,
is also like this writing activity, silent.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (680) gadaSTisamuracaya e che. kAraNa ke teonuM mAnasika valaNa (Inclination)
svabhAvathI ja yoga pratye pakSapAtathI (Bias) DhaLe che, teonuM AtmapariNamana
yoga pratye pari-mana karatuMsarvathA namI paDatuM hoya che. Ama A gadaSTi
graMtha jema mukhyapaNe AtmAthe-AtmapakArArthe che, tema gauNapaNe parArthe-
paropakArArthe paNa che tAtparya ke sva-5ra upakAra e A graMthanuM ISTa
prayojana che. mahApuruSe sva upakAra athe je kRti race che, te AnuSagikapaNe
sarva upakArArthe-sArvajanika upayoganI paNa thaI paDe che, tenuM A uttama
udAharaNa che sarakhAvo " na kavitvAbhimAnena na kiirtiprsrecchyaa|  /  kRtiH
kintu madIyeyaM svabodhAyaiva kevalam  // " -zrI zubhacaMdrAcAryajIkRta zrI
jJAnArNava ane A uparathI e paNa khAsa lakSyamAM rAkhavA yogya che ke-AvA sAcA
paropakAraparAyaNa saMta mahAtmAo je sva upakAra kare che te ja kharekhara para
upakAra karavAne samartha hoya che je AtmArtharUpa svArtha sAdhe che te ja sva-
para upakAra paramArtharUpa parArtha sAdhI zake che. kAraNa ke je sva upakAra
nathI karatA, te para upakAra paNa nathI karI zakata; je AtmAthe nathI sAdhate,
te parArtha paNa nathI sAdhI zakatA. kAraNa ke "kuvAmAM hoya to havADAmAM Ave."
"potAnuM nahiM sAdhyuM kAMI, ukALaze paranuM zuM bhAI ?" paNa AtmArtha sAdhyA
vinA je parArtha karavAnI dhRSTatA kare che, vA zekhI kare che, te te banne
gumAve che, ane bhraSTa tatabhraSTa thAya che. je pitAnA AtmAne upadeza dIdhA
vinA parane upadeza devA jAya che, te pitAnuM ke paranuM hita karI zakto nathI;
kAraNa ke svAcaraNarUpa cAritranA baLa vinA tenI dhArelI asara nIpajatI nathI,
anyanA hRdayane sparza thato nathI, ne patthara para pANI" DhaLyA jevuM thAya
che ! eTalA mATe ja sanmArganA jJAtA sadupadekhA sapuruSonuM sauthI prathama ne
mukhya prayajana svAtmAne upadeza devAnuM hoya che, kAraNa ke te bhAvitAtmAo
sArI peThe bhAve che ke-" he jIva! tuM upadeza ma de, prathama tuM ja upadeza
le, kAraNa ke te jJAnIne deza sarvathI nyAro ne agama che." zrImad
rAjacaMdrajInuM A mArmika vacanAmRta sarva mumukSuoe aMtaramAM katarI rAkhavA
gya che ke - mata de tuM upadezakuM, prathama lehi upadeza sabase nyArA agama
che, je jJAnIkA deza."- zrImad rAjacaMdrajI. Ama AvA sadupadeSTA sAdhucarita
puruSonI vyAkhyAnapravRtti paNa jema mukhyapaNe mATethI-uccasvare svAdhyAyarUpa
hoya che, tema AvI graMthalekhanapravRtti paNa mUka-mUMgA

Page #757 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Sunrise Garland:** Self-benefit, like the living, awakened awareness, this is
the silent self-study of the 'Sadhu' (holy person).  (681)  It is self-study, it
is contemplation; not like the eloquent speakers who spread the knowledge of the
Vedas, entertaining the masses; because they know well that where the self-
witness is the Dharma (righteousness), what is the use of the masses?
Entertainment of the masses is not even a single nut in the value of Dharma.
“Where the self-witness is the Dharma, what is the use of the masses?
Entertainment of the masses is not even a single nut in the value of Dharma.” —
Shri Chidanandaji.  Therefore, this self-study, immersed in self-study, from the
true soul, yearning for liberation, the true seeker of liberation, the seeker of
liberation, the spiritualized, the soul of the future, this self-study of the
great sage, even today, touches the hearts of other living, awakened, spiritual
seekers, yogis, and bestows upon them immeasurable benefits like the awareness
of the living, awakened. This yogic awareness, this yogic teaching of the
living, awakened yogi, awakens the yogis, and in the end, reveals the inner,
self-awareness, the yogic lamp! And it will continue to illuminate the path for
as long as the world exists, such is the supreme divinity in it! So be it!  **In
this, here—**  Those who are engaged in the cycle of the universe, they alone
are the rightful recipients. Not all yogis are like that, due to their lack of
realization, etc. 209  **Explanation:**  Those who are engaged in the cycle of
the universe and are not all yogis, because those who are engaged in the cycle
of the universe are yogis, they alone are the rightful recipients of this, they
have such a lack of realization, etc.  **Commentary:**  In this, those who are
engaged in the cycle of the universe and are yogis engaged in the cycle of the
universe, they alone are the rightful recipients of this yogic scripture.
**Meaning:** Those who are engaged in the cycle of the universe and are yogis
engaged in the cycle of the universe, they alone are the rightful recipients of
this yogic scripture, not all yogis, because of their lack of realization, etc.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 uSasa hAra : sva-para upakAra, jIvatI jAgatI yAta jevA A negI A te 'sAdhu'nA
mUMgA svAdhyAya che (681) svAdhyAyarUpa-sajajhAyarUpa ja hAya che; nahi ke
vAjrAla vistAranArA vAcaspationI jema janamanaraMjanakAriNI; kAraNa ke teo sArI
peThe jANe che ke-jyAM AtmasAkSIe dharma che, tyAM jananuM zuM kAma che?
janamanaraMjana dharmanuM mUlya eka phUTI badAma paNa nathI. " Atama sAkhe dhama
jyAM, tyAM jananuM zuM kAma ? janamanaraMjana dharmanuM, mUla na eka badAma. '"
--zrI cidAna'dajI. eTalA mATe ja AvA svAdhyAyanimagna, sAcA AtmAthI, vivara 'ne
jhaMkhanArA kharekharA mumukSu, meAkSasAdhake sAcA sAdhaka-sAdhu,
adhyAtmarasapaNita, bhAvitAtmA A zAsrakartA mahAyegInI A svAdhyAya udghASA
adyApi anya jIvatI jAgatI adhyAtmarasapipAsu mumukSu jogIjaneAnA hRdayane spazI
temanA para jyAta jevA apAra upakAra kare che. jIvatI jAgatI jyAta jevA A
jogIrAjanI A jogI cetanavatA jogavANI jogIjanAne jAgrata karI, temanA aMtamAM
nimA~la AtmajyAtirUpa yoga-pradIpa pragaTAve che ! ane yAvacca dradivAkaro
pragaTAvatI raheze evuM emAM parama daivata che ! astu ! E ]] temAM atre--
kulapravRttacakrA ye ta evAsyAdhikAriNaH  /  yogino na tu sarve'pi
tathA'siddhyAdibhAvataH  //  209  //  layogI pravRttacakra je, adhikArIe te ja;
tathA asiddhayAdi bhAvathI, na yAgIo sarve ja. 209 aH--je kulayeAgI ane nahi ke
saveya cegIe, kAraNa ke pravRttacakra yAgI che, tee ja AnA adhikArIe che,teone
tevA prakAre asiddhi AdinA bhAva che. vivecana temAM je kulayeAgI ane
pravRttacakrayAgI che, te ja A yAgazAstranA pAtra vRtti:-putravRttavA ce-je
kulayeAgI ane pravRttacakra yogI che, te vAsyAdhini:-e ja A yogazAstranA
adhikArIe che, ahu che, cohino--yAgIo, maiM tu sarve-nahi ke sarveya sAmAnyathI.
zA kAraNathI ? teA ke--tathA--tathAprakAre, siddhavimAvata:-RRsiddhi Adi bhAvane
lIdhe,-gAtra ceAgIone asiddhibhAvane lIdhe, ane Adi zabdathI niSpanna (siddhu)
cegIone siddhibhAvane lIdhe.

Page #758 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(682) The Ganadhipati-samudracarya (Omniscient Ones) are the eligible yogis, and
not others; because the ordinary yogis lack the required qualifications, and
therefore they are not eligible for this. And the liberated and perfected
Caritas have already attained that kind of yogic perfection, so they no longer
need such scriptural study, and hence they too are not eligible here.  Every
entity is befitting according to its own eligibility and qualification. Even in
ordinary worldly affairs, higher or lower positions are granted according to
one's eligibility. Similarly, in the spiritual realm of scriptural practice, the
eligibility determines the fitness for spiritual practices. "The establishment
of spiritual practices is not possible without the qualified recipient." This is
the well-known aphorism of Acarya Haribhadrasuri in the Astaka text.   Just as
specific qualities are required for the eligibility of royal authority,
similarly, the appropriate qualifications are indispensable for this yogic
authority as well. Just as there is a need for progressively increasing
eligibility for ordinary academic studies, likewise, there is a need for the
appropriate eligibility in the form of gradually ascending spiritual competence
for this extraordinary yogic study.   Just as certain qualities like humility,
discrimination, understanding, and intellectual development are required even
for learning ordinary worldly scriptures, similarly, there is a special need for
the appropriate state of qualities for learning this extraordinary spiritual
scripture. And such qualifications are surely present in the accomplished yogis
engaged in the tradition, and therefore, they alone are the eligible ones for
this spiritual science, they alone are the fit and worthy recipients for
imbibing the profound spiritual teachings.  The rest who are not yogis, they do
not have the eligibility for this scriptural knowledge, because they lack the
appropriate qualitative state. They are devoid of the perfection of yoga, and
therefore, they are unfit. Just as the unqualified are ineligible for the royal
position, similarly, these unfit non-yogis are ineligible for the yogic
authority.   Just as the ignorant fool is not befitting to enter the assembly of
the wise, similarly, this ignorant non-yogi is not befitting to enter the
assembly of the yogis. Just as the one who has not yet mastered the basics is
ineligible to sit in the advanced classes, similarly, the one who has not yet
even grasped the elementary qualifications is ineligible to participate in this
elevated realm of yogic scriptures. Thus, those who lack even the primary
qualifications are unfit and ineligible here.  And even the liberated and
perfected ones, they too are not the eligible ones for this yogic scripture.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (682) gadaSTisamuracaya adhikArI yogIo che,-bIjA nahi; kAraNa ke gogIne tathA
prakAranI yogyatAnI asiddhi hoya che, tethI teo AnA anadhikArI che; ane
niSpanna-siddha cagIne te tathA prakAranI yogasiddhi thaI cUkI che, eTale teone
have AvA gagraMthanuM prajana rahyuM nahiM heI teo paNa atra anadhikArI che.
pratyeka vastu potapotAnI yogyatAnusAra-adhikArAnusAra zobhe che. sAmAnya
lekavyavahAramAM paNa adhikArI pramANe ucca-nIca padavIrUpa adhikAra apAya che.
tema paramArtharUpa zAstravyavahAramAM paNa adhikArI pramANe dharmasAdhanane
"pAtra vinA adhikAra ghaTe che. "dhivirArA dharmasAdhanasaMsthitiH' -e vastu na
rahe." zrI aSTakamAM zrI haribhadrasUrijInuM suprasiddha subhASita che.
rAjyAdhikAra mATe jema yathAgya guNanI jarUra paDe che, tema A yoga-rAjyAdhikAra
mATe paNa tathArUpa yathAyogyatAnI jarUra anivArya che. sAmAnya vidyAbhyAsa mATe
jema uttarottara krame vadhatI yogyatArUpa adhikAranI AvazyakatA che, tema
asAmAnya evA A yogavidyAbhyAsa mATe paNa uttarottara krame caDhatI
yugabhUmikArUpa yogya adhikAranI AvazyakatA che. sAdhAraNa laukika zAstra
zIkhavA mATe paNa jema yathAyogya vinaya, viveka, samajaNa, buddhi vikAsa Adi
guNagaNarUpa yogyatAnI jarUra hoya che, tema asAdhAraNa alaukika evuM A
adhyAtmazAstra zIkhavA mATe paNa yathAyogya guNasthitirUpa gyatAnI vizeSa jarUra
che. ane tevA prakAranI cegyatA kulagI pravRttacaka yegIomAM avazya hoya che,
eTalA mATe teo ja A megazAstranA adhikArI che, teo ja A paramArthazAstranA
satusaMskAra jhIlavAne sugya supAtra che. (juo. pR. 252, AtmasiddhinI gAthA ).
bAkI je geaogI che, teone A gazAstrane adhikAra ghaTatuM nathI, kAraNa ke teomAM
tathArUpa yathAyogya guNabhAva te nathI, "ga" egya yoganI siddhine abhAva hoya
che, eTale teone vegane aga che. jema agyane rAjyapadavI anadhikArI ghaTatI
nathI, tema A ayogya gotragIne vega-rAjya padavI ghaTatI getrayegI nathI. abudha
evA mUkhane jema viThanamaMDaLImAM praveza zebhate nathI, tema A abudha yogIne
gamaMDaLImAM praveza zobhate nathI. ekaDo haju nathI AvaData te ekaDIAne jema
sAtamI copaDImAM besavAno adhikAra ghaTatA nathI, tema gamArgane prAthamika
yogyatArUpa ekaDo paNa haju jeNe ghuMTyo nathI te ayogIne A ucca
yogazAstravargamAM sthAna levAno adhikAra ghaTatuM nathI. Ama prAthamika
yogyatAthI paNa rahita evA gotragIo apAtra heI atra anadhikArI che. ane je
niSpanna gIo-siddha gIo che, te paNa A yogazAstranA adhikArI

Page #759 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Conclusion: The Kulgi and the Pravrittachka are not the authorities of this
scripture (683). But the reason is different. When the GotrYogi is not the
authority here due to the non-attainment of Yoga, then the accomplished Yogi is
the authority of Siddhi due to the attainment of Yoga. The purpose of this
scripture is for that Siddhi, and the non-authority and that Siddhi have already
been achieved by these accomplished-Siddha Yogis. After that, what is the
purpose of this for them? What is the purpose of this scripture in the form of
words (Theory) for the Siddha Yogi who has shown the Siddhi in practice, who has
achieved the Yoga of the essence of nature and manifested the pure soul, who has
shown the "Samyasaar" in practice? This scripture in the form of a guide is
useful for the traveler on the path of Yoga, but what need does the one who has
completed the journey on the path of Yoga have for this scripture in the form of
a guide? One needs a support to climb the temple, but just as one doesn't need
it after climbing to the top of the temple, one needs this scripture in the form
of a support to climb the temple of Yoga, but after climbing to the top of the
temple of Yoga, where is the need for it? Just as one needs the support of a
stick to climb a mountain, but just as one doesn't need it after climbing to the
top of the mountain; similarly, one needs the support of this scripture in the
form of a vision to climb the mountain of Yoga, but after crossing all the
stages and reaching the peak of the mountain of Yoga, what is the need for it?
Because what is there for the one who has climbed to climb? What is there for
the one who has attained to attain? What is there for the Siddha to achieve?
Therefore, the accomplished-Siddha Yogi is also the authority of this scripture
in this expectation.  Thus, the GotrYogi is the authority of this scripture
because he is the beginner, and the accomplished Yogi is not the authority
because he is the supreme Yogi. Only the middle two types of Yogis - the Kulgi
and the Pravrittachka - are the authorities of this scripture. The meaning of
Kulgi is - the Pravrittachka who is in the obstructive state due to being far
from the stage of Yoga is the beginner here; the accomplished Yogi is not
suitable here because he is in the state of Siddhi, which is the culmination of
the stage of Yoga; and the Kulgi and the Pravrittachka Yogi who are in the state
of the stage of Yoga, which is suitable for them, are suitable here. And that is
why -  "Adidhitthi has said in brief, the scripture of Yoga is a guide; the
Kulgi and the Pravrittachka, it is for their benefit." - Shri Ch. Da. Sakza. 8-4
He tells their special characteristic -

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 upasaMhAra: kulagI ne pravRttacakagI adhikArI (683) nathI. paNa tenuM kAraNa
bIjuM ja che. gotrayAgIe jyAre yoganI asiddhine lIdhe atra anadhikArI che, tyAre
niSpanna yogIe yoganI siddhine lIdhe siddhagI paNa adhikArI che. A gazAstranuM
prayojana te gasiddhi mATe che, anadhikArI ane te gasiddhi to A niSpanna-siddha
yogIone hAMsala thaI cUkI che. te pachI tene have AnuM prayojana zuM hoya? jeNe
gasiddhi sAkSAta pragaTa prayogasiddha (Practice) karI batAvI che, jeNe
svabhAva-guMjana yoga siddha karI zuddha AtmA pragaTa karyo che, jeNe
"samayasAra " pragasiddha karI batAvyo che, evA siddhayogIne pachI AvA zabdarUpa
zAstranuM (Theory ) zuM prajana hoya? yogamArganA pravAsIne A yogazAstrarUpa
mArgadarzaka bhemIo upayogI thAya, paNa jeNe yogamArgane pravAsa pUro karyo che,
tene have A yogazAstrarUpa bhamIAnI (Guide) zI jarUra ? prAsAda para caDhavA
mATe AlaMbananI jarUra paDe, paNa prAsAdazikhare caDhaLyA pachI jema tenI jarUra
na paDe, tema gaprAsAda para caDhavA mATe hastAvalaMbanarUpa A yegazAstranI
sahAya levI paDe, paNa yoga-prAsAdanA zikhare caDhI gayA pachI tenI jarUra kayAM
rahI ? parvata para caDhavA mATe jema lAkaDInA TekAnI jarUra paDe, paNa
parvatanI Toce caDhI gayA pachI jema tenI kaMI jarUra na rahe; tema yega-giri
para caDhavA mATe A gadaSTirUpa dRSTinA TekAnI jarUra paDe, paNa badhI
gabhUmikAo vaTAvI jaI yogagirinA zrege pahoMcyA pachI tenI jarUra zenI hoya ?
kAraNa ke caDhelAne caDhavAnuM zuM? pAmelAne pAmavAnuM zuM? siddhane sAdhavAnuM
zuM? mATe niSpanna-siddha yogI paNa A apekSAe A yogazAstra-sAdhananA adhikArI
che. Ama gotrayAgI agI hovAthI A satazAstrane adhikArI che, ane niSpanna yogI
parama yogI hovAthI AnA anadhikArI che. mAtra madhyama be prakAranA gI kalagI ne
pravRttacaka yogI-A gazAstranA adhikArI che. kulagI ne tAtparya ke-gya
gabhUmikAthI dUra evA bAdhaka bhAvamAM vattatA pravRttacaka je' hovAthI gAtra
yogI atra agya che; parama yogya evI yugabhUmikAnI parAkASThArUpa siddha
bhAvamAM vartAtA hevAthI niSpanna thegI paNa atra ayogya che; ane yathAyogya evI
yogabhUmikArUpa sAdhaka bhAvamAM vattatA kulagI ane pravRttacaka yegI atra
suyogya che yathAyogya che. ane eTalA mATe ja- aDadiThThI e kahI saMkSepe,
yegazAstra saMketejI; kulagI ne pravRttacaka je, teha taNe hita hetejI." -zrI
ca. da, sakjhA. 8-4 eonuM vizeSa lakSaNa kahe che -

Page #760 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Jain Terms Preserved:  The Yogadrishtisamuccaya states that those who are born
in the lineage of the yogis and are also followers of their dharma are called
'kulagyi'. They are not merely those who possess the gotra (lineage), but others
as well.  The explanation is: "Those who are born in the lineage of the yogis
and have from birth itself embraced their dharma, as well as others who are by
nature inclined towards the yogic dharma, are called 'kulagyi' - not merely
those who possess the gotra, nor those who are generally capable of spiritual
attainment."  In other words, the 'kulagyi' are the 'born yogis' - those who are
yogis by birth, just as a human child is a human by birth, or a lion cub is a
lion by birth. These 'kulagyi' may be those who have attained perfection in yoga
through their spiritual practices in previous births. They are naturally endowed
with yogic abilities, just as some are naturally gifted as poets. Their past
spiritual impressions easily manifest, and they can quickly reconnect with the
unfinished threads of their yogic practices from previous lives, without much
effort. They are the ones who have rested at the midway point, like a traveler
on a long journey.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (684) yogadaSTisamuccaya ye yoginAM kule jAtAstaddharmAnugatAzca ye  /
kulayogina ucyante gotravanto'pi nApare  // 210 //  jamyA je gile, taru gharma
anugatA ya; kulagio kahAya te, na gotravaMta bIjAya, 210. artha -jeo gIonA
kulamAM janmyA che, ane jeo te yogIonA dharmane anugata che, teo "kulagIe"
kahevAya che,-nahiM ke bIjAo gotrarvate paNa. vivecana "gikule jAyA tasa dham,
anugata te kulagIjI.". sakjhA. 8-4 jeo yogIonA kulamAM janmyA che ane janmathI
ja teonA dharmane upagata chepAmelA che, tathA prakRtithI yogidharmane anugata-
anusaranArA evA je bIjAo paNa che, teo "kulagI' kahevAya che, ema dravyathI ane
bhAvathI jaNAya che, -nahi ke gotravate paNa, nahi ke sAmAnyathI bhUmibhavya evA
bIjA paNa je yegIonA kulamAM janmyA che ane yogIonA dharmane je upagata che-
pAmelA che, te kulagI che. arthAta-je janmathI ja yogI che, Ajanma yogI (Born
Yogis) che te kulagI che, manuSya kulamAM janmele jema janmathI ja manuSyagIH
bAla hoya che, siMha kulamAM janmele jema janmathI ja siMhazizu Ajanma hoya che,
tema egikulamAM janmele janmathI ja bajegI" hoya che. gI pUrva janmamAM
gasAdhanA karatAM karatAM, Ayu pUrNa thatAM jenuM cavana thayuM che, tevA
pUrvArAdhaka "gabhraSTa" puruSe AvA kulagI (Born Yogis) heI zake che. jema
jaisargika kavitvazaktivALA manuSyo Ajanma kavi (Born Poets) hoya che, tema AvA
naisargika egazaktivALA mahAtmA kulagI Ajanma yogI hoya che. AvA yegIone
pUrvArAdhita yaMgasaMskAranI jAgrati svayaM saheje kurita thAya che, jAtismRti
Adi jJAnanI prApti paNa hoya che, ane pUrve adhUrA cheDela yoganI kaDInuM
anusaMdhAna zIdhra vinA prayAse hoya che. jema lAMbI musApharIe nIkaLela
musAphara vaccamAM vizrAmasthAne visAmo khAya che, rAtavAsa kare jUtti - rojina
je vAtA-jeo yegIonA kulamAM jagyA che,-janmathI ja- tanAtAane teonA dharmane
anugata- gilamane anugata, ce-je e prakRtithI anya 5Nu, kurojina racantahyogIo
kahevAya che ema samajAma che,-dravyathI ane bhAvathI. jotravattoDaji-gAtravaMte
paNa, sAmAnyathI bhUmibhaLe paNa, nAre-nahiM ke bI ja. nahiM ke bIjAo kalagI
kahevAya che.

Page #761 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Conclusion:** Kulgi-Aajanyogi, an example, is like a traveler on the path to
liberation who, after a period of rest, resumes their journey with renewed
vigor. Similarly, a seeker on the path of liberation, after taking a break at a
resting place, resumes their journey with renewed enthusiasm. Just as an
employee, after completing their work, resumes their unfinished tasks the next
day, so too does a yogi, after completing their lifespan, resumes their
unfinished spiritual work in the next life. Thus, the journey of a yogi towards
liberation is continuous.  Just as a carpenter, after completing their work,
resumes their unfinished tasks the next day, so too does a yogi, after
completing their lifespan, resumes their unfinished spiritual work in the next
life. Thus, the journey of a yogi towards liberation is continuous.  "In the
four states of existence, the journey towards liberation is never broken; just
as the carpenter's work is never wasted, so too is the happiness of the
liberated soul." - Ch. Saza. 2  What others achieve through years of study,
Aajanyogis achieve effortlessly, naturally. This is a testament to their
extraordinary spiritual power accumulated in past lives. This is evident in the
spontaneous enlightenment of the great yogi, Shrimad Rajchandraji, as he himself
said:  "From a young age, I was drawn to the knowledge of the truth; How can I
explain this? What effort did I make to attain this knowledge? It came to me
effortlessly, without any fear of rebirth." - Shrimad Rajchandraji.  The lives
of many great saints who exhibited extraordinary yogic abilities from birth also
confirm this. For example, Sant Jnaneshwar, who wrote the extraordinary
Jnaneshwari at the young age of twenty, and Vajiswami, who, while playing with
dice, remembered his previous life as a muni.  Shri Hemchandracharya, who
displayed extraordinary intellectual brilliance at the age of five, and Dharma-
Dhurandhar Shri Yashovijayji, Sant Kabirji, Raman Maharshi, and others, all bear
witness to this. Even the Tirthankaras themselves were born with the three
knowledges of Mati, Shruta, and Avadhi. This is also confirmed by the verse: "A
yogi is born into a family of wise men. This is a rare birth in the world." -
Gita.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 upasaMhAra : kulagI-AjanmayogI, udAharaNa che, paNa thAka utarI gayA pachI
tAjamA thaI tarata ja AgaLa akhaMDa prayANa cAlu rAkhe che; tema mokSapurInA
pravAse nIkaLela cogamArgane akhaMDa pravAsI mumukSu AyupUrNatArUpa
vizrAmasthAne vizrAMti le che, bhavAMtaragamanarUpa rAtrIvAsa kare che, ane
zrama utarI gayA pachI pAcho punarjanmarUpa na avatAra pAmI, tAmAje thaIne,
apUrva utsAhathI bhegamArganI musApharI AgaLa calAve che ane Ama AyegamArganA
musApharanuM muktipurI pratyenuM prayANa akhaMDita rahe che. jema vakhata pUre
thaI jatAM kArakuna Agale divase adhUruM mUkeluM kacerInuM kAma, bIje divase
jyAMthI adhUruM hatuM tyAMthI AgaLa calAve che, tema Ayune samaya pUro thaI
jatAM yegI AgalA janmamAM adhUruM chaDeluM AtmArthanuM kAma, bIjA janmamAM
adhUruM hatuM tyAMthI AgaLa dhapAve che. Ama yegI puruSanuM yogasAdhanarUpa
AtmAthe kArya aTUTapaNe pUrNatA paryata vinA prayAse-sahaja svabhAve cAlyA kare
che. daSTi thirAdika cAramAM, mugati prayANa na bhAMje re; racaNIzayana jima
zrama hare, suranara sukha tima chAje re."--che. sajhA. 2 bIjAone-anya prAkRta
janane je saMskAra ghaNuM ghaNuM abhyAse kaMIka ja-apa mAtra ja thAya che, te
AvA XAjanma yegIone vinA parizrame sahaja svabhAve upaje che ! ane te
pUrvajanmanuM asAdhAraNa bhegArAdhakapaNuM ja darzAve che,-jenuM vartamAnamAM
pragaTa jvalaMta udAharaNa parama yogI zrImad rAjacaMdrajInA A svasaMvedanarUpa
AtmAnubhavagamya sahaja ugAra uparathI svayaM sUcita thAya che - "laghuvayathI
adbhuta thaye, tattvajJAnane bedha; e ja sUcave ema ke, gati Agati kAM zodha ?
je saMskAra thavo ghaTe, ati abhyAse kAya? vinA parizrama te thayo, bhavazaMkA
zI tyAMya ?"-zrImad rAjacaMdrajI. bhUtakALamAM paNa janmathI ja atyaMta
asAdhAraNa yogasAmarthya dAkhavanArA aneka mahApuruSonAM caritro paNa A ja
vAtanI puSTi kare che. jemake-vIza varSanI nAnI uMmaramAM jJAnezvarI jevo
asAmAnya graMtha lakhanAra saMta jJAnezvara, ghaDIAmAM bIjA udAharaNe ramatAM
paNa jene pUrvArAdhita munibhAva sAMbharI AvyuM hatuM, te mahAyogI vajIsvAmI.
pAMca varSanI laghuvayamAM asAdhAraNa buddhicApalya darzAvanAra kalikAlasarvajJa
zrI hemacaMdrAcAryajI, ane dharmadhuraMdhara zrI yazovijayajI, saMta kabIrajI,
ramaNa maharSi AdinAM caritro paNa enI sAkSI pUre che. khuda tIrthakara
bhagavaMto paNa janmathI ja mati-zruta-avadhi e traNa jJAnanA dhAraka hatA e
hakIkata paNa x" athavA yoginAmeva kule bhavati dhImatAm  /  etaddhi
durlabhataraM loke janma yadIdRzam  //  tatra saM yuddhiyo zramane pauvaizmi
cAle ja to mayaH vaMtiau gurunaMdana " -gItA

Page #762 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(686) The collection of *gadashti* indicates that one is a *kulgi* from birth.
Hundreds of examples of *kulgis* can be given, which are the result of the
practice of yoga in previous births. Such *kulyogis* naturally have speed
inherent in them. As soon as they wake up from sleep, shaking off laziness, they
remember the events of the previous night, and then they quickly and swiftly
pass through the stages of *pravrittachakradi* yoga and attain the state of
*gadashana* - the state of *siddha*.  The *kulgi* nature, which is described as
birth in this *yogikul*, is in relation to spiritual *sanskar*, i.e., it is
*sanskar* itself in the form of birth. Just as a man has an external birthplace,
similarly, a *gipurusha* has this spiritual birth in a subtle form. In practical
terms, just as the external, well-developed body is born, similarly, in terms of
ultimate reality, the *yogasanskar* is the birth of the soul, which is endowed
with *sanskar*. Just as the gross body of a man is created from the
*bijaadhana*, similarly, the subtle *sanskar* body of the soul is created from
the *g-bijaadhana*. Just as there are external parents who are the *bijaadhana*
of the external body, similarly, there are *yogis* who are the parents in the
form of *bijaadhana* of this spiritual subtle body. Just as qualities and
characteristics are inherited from parents in the physical body, similarly,
*gunasanskar* is inherited from the spiritual *sanskaraswami* *gis* in this
subtle body. Just as "like father, like son, and like grandfather, like
grandson", similarly, these *gi-balas* are like *gipitas*. But external birth
has the purpose of rebirth, while this spiritual *sanskarajanama* has the
purpose of non-rebirth. Practical birth has the purpose of death, while this
ultimate birth has the purpose of immortality. Or, that external gross body
birth is not really birth in terms of ultimate reality, but in terms of feeling,
it is the death of the soul, it is the death of feeling; the true ultimate birth
of the soul is to be born endowed with *sanskar*. This ultimate, blessed,
ultimate *sanskarajanama* has been attained by these *kulyogis*, and from birth,
they have attained the religion of *yogis*.  And others who are naturally
inclined towards the religion of *yogis* are also *kulgis*. That is, those who
follow the religion of *yogis* are also called " *kulgis* ".  What is this " *gi
dharma* "? One who has a connection with yoga is a *yogi*, and the connection of
the soul with liberation, which is its nature, is called yoga. So, one who has a
connection with the soul's nature, i.e., one who has attained the pursuit of the
soul's nature, is a *yogi*, and the religion that such a *yogi* has is
*gidharma*. What is it? Thus, to pursue the soul's nature, to practice and
cultivate the soul's nature, to attain self-realization, is the religion of
*yogis*. Moreover, the word " *dharma* " also indicates the same feeling,
because the nature of a thing is its *dharma*.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (686) gadaSTisamuccaya AjanmagIpaNuM ja sUcave che. Ama kulagIenA seMkaDo
dAkhalA ApI zakAya ema che, je pUrvajanmanA yogAbhyAsanuM ja pariNAma che. AvA
kulayogIone vega sahaja svabhAve siddha hoya che. uMghamAMthI ALasa maraDIne
UThatAM ja gata rAtrInA banAvanI peThe temane yega yAda AvI jAya che, ane pachI
pravRttacakrAdi yogAbhUmikAo jhapATAbaMdha atyaMta vege vaTAvI jaI teo niSpanna
gadazAne-siddhadazAne pAme che. A yogIkulamAM janmarUpa je kulagIpaNuM kahyuM te
adhyAtma saMskAranI apekSAe che, arthAt te saMskAra jamarUpa che. jema puruSane
bAhya janma sthala svarUpe che, tema gIpuruSane A AdhyAtmika janma sUkSma
svarUpe che. vyavahArathI AdhyAtmika jema bAhya vadisaMpanna dehane janma che,
tema paramArthathI yogasaMskAra janma saMskArasaMpanna AtmAne janma che.
bIjAdhAnathI jema sthUla puruSa dehanuM sarjana thAya che, tema ga-bIjAdhAnathI
puruSanA-AtmAnA sUkSma saMskAra-zarIranuM sarjana thAya che. bAhya sthala
dehanuM bIjAdhAna karanArA jema bAhya mAtA-pitA hoya che, tema A AdhyAtmika
sUkSma dehanuM samyagadarzanAdi bIjAdhAna karanArA yogIorUpa mAtA-pitA che. jema
skUla dehamAM mAtA-pitAne guNa lakSaNa vAraso utare che, tema AdhyAtmika
saMskArasvAmI gIone guNasaMskAra-vArase te sUphamadehamAM utare che jema "bApa
tevA beTA ne vaDa tevA TeTA" hoya che, tema gIpitA jevA A gI-bAla hoya che.
paraMtu bAhya janma punarjanmane hetu hoya che, paNa A AdhyAtmika saMskArajanma
te apunarjanmano hetu hoya che. vyAvahArika janma mRtatvanomaraNane hetu hoya
che, paNa A pAramArthika janma amRtatvane-amarapaNAne hetu hoya che. athavA te
bAhya sthUla deha janma e paramArthathI janma ja nathI, paNa bhAvathI te AtmAnuM
mRtyu ja che, bhAvamaraNa ja che; AtmAno kharekhara pAramArthika janma te
saMskArasaMpannapaNe janmavuM te ja che. A A parama dhanya pAramArthika
saMskArajanma A kulayogIone sAMpaDyo hoya che, ane janmathI ja teo yegIonA
dharmane pAmelA hoya che. ane bIjAo paNa je prakRtithI yegIdharmane anugata
hoya, te paNa kulagI che. arthAta jeo yogIonA dharmane anusaranArA-anuyAyI" che
te paNa "kulagI " kahevAya che. A " gI dharma' eTale zuM ? yogane jene yoga
(saMbaMdha) thayo te che yogI, ane AtmasvabhAvarUpa mokSa sAthe jana-joDANa
tenuM nAma yoga. eTale AtmasvabhAva sAthe jenuM jana che, arthAta jene
AtmasvarUpanuM anusaMdhAna thayuM che gIdharma? te yogI che, ane evA te yogIne
je dharma che te gIdhama che. eTale zuM ? Ama AtmasvarUpanuM anusaMdhAna
karavuM, AtmasvabhAvanI sAdhanA-ArA dhanA karavI, Atmasiddhi karavI, e ja
yogIono dharma che. vaLI dharma" zabda paNa e ja bhAvane sUcaka che, kAraNa ke
vastune svabhAva te dharma,

Page #763 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Conclusion:** What is the spiritual government, the yogi dharma? (687) "Rahu
Rao Gho" meaning the dharma of the self-substance is the self-dharma-substance
dharma. To describe the nature of the soul is dharma, to be in its form is
dharma, to hold the soul in its form is dharma. This soul's natural form is the
same as dharma. So, whoever acts in the nature of the soul, stays in its form,
holds the soul in its form, practices the yoga that is the form of the soul's
nature, is truly the embodiment of dharma "Gi" and that is also dharma. Thus,
yogi dharma is the substance dharma-self dharma that follows the form of the
self. To abandon the external transformation and follow the internal
transformation is the Gi dharma. The meaning is that whoever has achieved the
form that is united with the nature of the soul is "Gi". And the form that is
united with the nature of the soul is their true dharma. Whoever is constantly
striving to follow this self-nature Gi dharma is the Kulagi. Whoever is devoted
to the soul, meaning whoever follows the soul everywhere, whose entire feeling-
dharma activity is devoted to the soul, is the Kula yogi. This self-devoted
feeling is from the Samkrit guna to the Shaileshi state, so that the Sanvar-
Nirjara happens and the causal factor manifests, because here the object of
attainment is grasped. (See page 493, 21-522). "From the Samkrit guna to the
Shaileshi, the self-devoted feeling; Sanvar Nirjara is the causal factor, the
object of attainment is grasped." - Shri Devchandraji. And thus, because of this
constant self-devoted feeling, the Samyakdristi yogi purusha, as much as
possible, does not oppose the self-substance, does not cause opposition, so he
performs all the actions and prohibitions, so that the self-substance is not
opposed, he performs all the "dharma" duties, and whatever opposes the self-
substance, he does not perform those adharma duties. In short, he "worships the
living being, the knowledge-vision-character nature dharma, he avoids the
adharma that is the form of attachment-aversion etc.; he embraces the internal
transformation and abandons the external transformation. And thus, by performing
the actions and prohibitions that do not oppose the self-substance, he "accepts"
the self-substance that is accepted by the great ones. (See Kavya page 397) That
is why the Kulagi, the seeker of liberation, who follows this Gi dharma-the path
of liberation, cuts off the karma-feeling that is the form of ignorance, and
constantly strives to embrace the liberation feeling that is the form of his own
nature-natural state; he destroys the darkness of ignorance with the light of
knowledge, knowing the bondage that is the cause of bondage, he serves the path
of liberation that is the form of that cause; he worships the path that leads to
the cessation of attachment-aversion and ignorance, which are the main knots of
karma; and he follows the method of the path of liberation so that he may attain
the "pure soul" that is full of consciousness and devoid of all appearances.
(See Atmasiddhi's Gatha page 271, 463) This is what was said about the Gi
dharma-the path of liberation-the eternal substance dharma-the eternal

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 upasaMhAra : AyAtmika saMrakArajama, yogidharma eTale zuM ? (687 ) raghurAvo
gho " arthAt Atmavastune dharma te Atmadharma-vastudharma. AtmAnuM svabhAvamAM
varNavuM te dharma, svarUpamAM sthiti hevI te dharma, AtmAne svarUpamAM dhArI
rAkhe te dharma. A AtmAne svabhAvayuM janarUpa ga te ja dharma. eTale je
AtmasvabhAvamAM varte che, svarUpamAM sthiti kare che, AtmAne svarUpamAM dhArI
rAkhe che, AtmAnA svabhAvayuMjArUpa yogane sAdhe che, te sAkSAt dharmamUrti "gI"
che ane tene dharma paNa te ja che Ama yogI dharma eTale AtmasvarUpanA
anusaMdhAnarUpa vastudharma-Atmadharma. pa2pariNatine parityAga karI,
AtmapariNatine anusaravuM te ja gidharma. tAtparya ke-AtmasvabhAva sAthe
yujanarUpa ga jeNe sAdhyuM che, je svarUpasthita che te gI" che. ane
AtmasvabhAva sAthe yujanarUpa ga te ja teone vAstavika dharma che. AvA
AtmasvabhAvarUpa gidharmane anusaravA je nitya prayatnazIla rahe che, te kulagI
che. AtmAne anugata eTale ke sarvatra AtmAne AgaLa karI tene anusaratI jenI
samasta bhAvadharma pravRtti che, te kulayogI che. A Atma-anugata bhAva samakita
guNathI mAMDIne zailezI avasthA paryata hoya che, ke jethI saMvara-nirjarA thaI
upAdAna kAraNa pragaTe che, kAraNa ke atre sAdhya AlaMbanane dAva hAtha lAge
che. (juo pR. 493, pa21-522 ). samakita guNathI he zelezI lage, Atama anugata
bhAva; "-- saMvara nirjarA ho upAdAna hetutA, sAdhyAlaMbana dAva."--zrI
devacaMdrajI. ane Ama sadA Atma-anugata bhAva hovAthI ja A samyagadaSTi
yogIpuruSa jema bane tema Atma-padArthane virodha na Ave, virAdhanA na thAya,
ema sarva vidhiniSedha Acare che, eTale jethI Atmavastune virodha na Ave te
sarva "dharma" kartavya kare che, ane jethI Atmavastune virodha Ave te sarva
adhama kartavya nathI karate. TuMkAmAM te "ArAdhaka jIva jJAna-darzana-cAritra
svabhAvarUpa dhamane Adare che, te rAgadveSAdi vibhAvarUpa adharmane parihare
che; AtmapariNatine bhaje che ne parapariNatine tyaje che. ane Ama
AtmapadArthathI avirodha e vidhi-niSedha AcarI, te "mahAjane " parigrahela
AtmapadArthane grahaNa "vidhi" kare che. (juo kAvya pR. 397) eTale ja A
gidharmane-mekSamArgane anuyAyI mumukSu kulagI, ajJAnarUpa karmabhAvane cheDI
daI, nija vAsarUpa-svabhAvasthitirUpa mokSabhAvane bhajavA nitya prayatnazIla
bane che; aMdhakAra samA ajJAnane jJAnaprakAza vaDe nAza kare che, je je
baMdhanA kAraNe che te baMdhane paMtha jANI, te kAraNenI eka evI dazArUpa
mokSamArgane seve che; rAga dveSa ne ajJAna e karmanI mukhya graMthi-gAMTha che
tenI jenA vaDe nivRtti thAya, evA ekSapaMthane ArAdhe che; ane sat caitanyamaya
ne sarvAbhAsathI rahita e "kevaLa AtmA jethI pAmIe, e mekSapaMthanI rItine
anusare che. (jue AtmasiddhinI gAthA pR. 271, 463) A je kahyo te mekSamArgarUpa
gIdharmamAM-sanAtana vastudharmamAM-zAzvata

Page #764 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(688) Where is there any scope for differences of opinion - differences in
philosophical views - in the religion of the Self, in the collection of yogic
perspectives? Where is there any difference in caste or attire? Therefore, this
pure nature of the Self, the caste and attire, where there is only one goal,
that of liberation, in the religion of the Self, there is no Jain, Vaishnav,
Brahman, Vedantin, Buddhist, etc., differences in all religions. Sadhu, Shraman,
Sanyasi, Jagi, Fakir, etc., external differences in physical forms have no
place. What was said above, the emotional form of the religion of the Self - the
path to liberation - whoever follows, worships, and meditates on it, attains
liberation. "There is no difference in caste and attire, the path is said to be
one; Whoever follows it attains liberation, there is no difference in it." -
Shri Atmasiddhi. Whoever worships this true religion of the Self, is in this
religion of the Self. Whoever abandons attachment and choice in any opinion or
philosophy, and with devotion follows this eternal religion of the Self, which
is the goal of one's own nature, abandoning traditional practices, and continues
to practice the self-transformation of yogic religion - all true practitioners,
all true followers, all worshippers, all seekers of liberation, all souls, all
Jivas, all right-view Sadhus, without any difference in opinion or sect, are the
true "followers" of this universal religion of the Self. And by implication -
those who are completely averse to this yogic path, who have true inner love,
noble attachment, true inner curiosity, and a heartfelt desire to follow it -
all these lovers of the right path, all those who follow the path, all those who
are curious, are also materially the followers of this yogic religion. Thus,
this eternal yogic religion, which is the nature of things, is perfectly suited
to be a universal religion; because by nature, all yogic practitioners are of
one caste, and they have only one religion, because the religion that achieves
the goal of one's nature is suitable for these great yogis. (See Poetry p.
58-59) "That is the root of the tree of that principle, the religion of the
Self; To achieve the goal of one's nature, that is the religion that is
suitable." - Shrimad Rajchandraji. x " लिङ्गं देहाश्रितं दृष्टं देह एवात्मनो भवः
। न मुच्यन्ते भवात्तस्मादेते लिङ्गकृताग्रहाः ॥ जातिदेहाश्रिता दृष्टा देह
एवात्मनो भवः । न मुच्यन्ते भवात्तस्मादेते जातिकृताग्रहाः ॥" - Shri Pujyapada
Swami Ji's Samadhishatak. "ण उ होदि मोक्खमग्गो लिंगं जं देहणिम्ममा अरिहा । &િાં
મુદ્દg હંસળવત્તા સેતિ – Shri Samayasar,

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (688) yogadaSTisamucaya AtmadharmamAM kaI paNa prakAranA matabhedane-
dazanAgrahabhedane avakAza kyAMthI hoya? jAti-veSano bheda kyAMthI hoya? eTale A
zuddha AtmasvabhAvanI jAti veSane siddhirUpa eka ja prayajana jyAM che te
gidharmamAM jaina, vaiSNava, bheda nahi" brAhANa, vedAMtI, bauddha Adi
kuladharmanA bheda maTI jAya che. sAdhu, zramaNa, saMnyAsI, jegI, phakIra Adi
bAhya dravyaliMgabhedane4 sthAna ja nathI. uparamAM je kahyo te bhAvaliMgarUpa
jegidharma-mokSamArga je sAdhe che, ArAdhe che, upAse che, te ja muktine pAme
che. " jAti veSane bheda nahi, kahyo mArga ja hoya; sAdhe te mukti lahe, emAM
bheda na keya."--zrI Atmasiddhi. je koI A yathAta gIdhane ArAdhe che, te A
gIdharmamAM che. je kaMI mata-darzanane Agraha temaja vikalpa choDI daI, nija
svabhAvanI siddhirUpa A sanAtana Atmadhamane bhAvathI sAdhe che, paraMparikRtine
tyajatA rahI yogidharmanA AtmapariNatine bhajatA rahe che,-te sarva sAcA
sAdhake, sarva sAcA anuyAyI ArAdhake, sarva upAsako, sarva mumukSuo, sarva
AtmAthIe, sarva gIo, sarva samyagadaSTi sAdhujane, mata-saMpradAyanA bheda vinA
A vizvadharmarUpa (Universal Religion) gidharmanA kharekharA "anuyAyI' evA
kulayogIo che. ane upalakSaNathI-AvA yogamArganI prApti to dUra rahI, paraMtu
tenA pratye je kaIne sarvathA adveSa hoya, kharekhare aMtaraMga prema hoya,
prazasta rAga hoya, sAcI aMtaraMga jijJAsA hoya, tene anusaravAnI hArdika icchA
hoya,-te sarva sanmArga premIo, sarva mArganusArIe, sarva jijJAsuo paNa
dravyathI A yogIdharmanA adhi. kArI kulayogIo che. Ama A vastusvabhAvarUpa
sanAtana yogadharma sArvajanika e vizvadharma ' banavAne parama yogya che;
kAraNa ke svarUpathI sarva yogArAdhaka yogIonI jAti eka che, ane teone dharma
paNa eka ja che, kAraNa ke svabhAvanI siddhi kare te ja garUpa dharma A
mahAnubhAva yogIone anukULa hoya che. (juo kAvya pR. 58-59 ) "teha tatvarUpa
vRkSanuM, Atmadharma che mULa; svabhAvanI siddhi kare, te ja dharma
anukuLa"-zrImad rAjacaMdrajI. x " liGgaM dehAzritaM dRSTaM deha evAtmano bhavaH
/  na mucyante bhavAttasmAdete liGgakRtAgrahAH  //  jAtidehAzritA dRSTA deha
evAtmano bhavaH  /  na mucyante bhavAttasmAdete jAtikRtAgrahAH  // " -zrI
pUjyapAdasvAmIjIta samAdhizataka. "Na u hodi mokkhamaggo liMgaM jaM dehaNimmamA
arihA  /  &iaaN muddag haMsaLavattA seti - zrI samayasAra,

Page #765 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Conclusion: The Secret of the Word 'Kuli' for True Followers of Jainism  (689)
Those who truly follow this most generous and all-encompassing Jainism,
regardless of their sect, are all followers of the same Dharma - Sadhamika. The
meaning is that whoever truly follows this path of Yoga, whether they are a
Jain, a Vaishnavite, a Buddhist, a Brahmin, a Sankhya, or a Vedanti, they are
all Sadhamika brothers, Atmabandhus. All those who follow this Jain Dharma with
any material or emotional attachment are Kulgi. Here, the material that causes
the emotion is the main one, not the material that does not cause the emotion.
That is, the material that follows the Jain Dharma as a means of Yoga, which
leads to the emergence of emotion, is also Kulgi by implication; and the one
that follows with emotion is clearly so. It is only necessary to keep in mind
that the material means of Yoga Dharma is good and successful only if it is the
cause of emotional means of Yoga Dharma, otherwise it is bad - Mithya. The
material should be such that it is the cause of a particular emotion, and it is
successful only if it does so, otherwise it is unsuccessful. Those who are
interested in knowing more about this should read Shri Haribhadrasuriji's Shri
Panchashakashashtra.  "Material Dharma is to suppress the ego, to avoid objects,
etc.; The power of the soul is the nature of good Dharma, the means and the
purpose are generous." - Shri Devchandraji. Such great souls are truly Kulgi.
Just as a Kulvadhu (daughter of a noble family) behaves in a way that befits her
family - she practices Kulina (noble) behavior, just as a Kulputra (son of a
noble family) behaves in a way that does not bring shame to his family - he
practices Kulina (noble) behavior, so too does a Kulgi behave in a way that
befits his father's lineage, and does not bring shame or blemish to his lineage.
For example, just as a Kulvadhu follows the family Dharma by not going to other
people's homes, staying in her own home, staying within the proper limits of
Dharma, and maintaining her chastity, so too does a Kulgi follow the Dharma of
his lineage by not going to other people's homes, staying in his own home,
staying within the proper limits of Dharma, and maintaining his chastity. Just
as a Kulputra avoids all un-Aryan actions such as violence, falsehood, theft,
adultery, and taking what is not given, and follows the principles of
righteousness and honesty, so too does this Aryan Kulgi avoid violence, which is
the destruction of the soul, falsehood, which is the father's word, theft, which
is the taking of what is not given, and going to other people's homes, which is
adultery.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 upasaMhAra : gidharmanA sAcA anuyAyI, 'kulI ' zabdanuM rahasya (689) eTale AvA
parama udAra sarvagrAhI A gilamane je sAcA bhAvathI anusaratA hoya, te sarve
game te saMpradAyanA hoya, te paNa eka ja dharmanA anuyAyI-sAdhamike che.
tAtparya ke A yogamArgane kharekhara anusaranAro jena hoya ke sAdharmika
vaiSNava hoya, bauddha hoya ke brAhmaNa hoya, sAMkhya hoya ke vedAMtI hoya,
AtmabaMdhuo game te hoya, te sarva sAdharmika baMdhuo che, AtmabaMdhuo che. AvA
A gidharmane je kaI dravyathI ke bhAvathI anusaratA hoya te sarva kulagI che.
atre bhAvanuM kAraNa thAya te ja pradhAna evuM dravya vivakSita che -nahiM ke
bhAvanuM kAraNa na thAya evuM apradhAna dravya. eTale ke jethI pariNAme
gabhAvane udbhava thAya tema dravyathI je dravya yogasAdhanarUpa gidharmane
anusare che, te paNa upalakSaNathI kulagI che; ane bhAvathI je anusare che te te
pragaTa tema che ja. mAtra eTaluM ja lakSamAM rAkhavA yogya che ke-dravya yuga
sAdhanadharma paNa bhAva vegasAdhana dharmanAM kAraNabhUta thAya te ja te bhalA
che, saphaLa che, nahiM te Ala che-mithyA che. dravyastava evuM viziSTa hovuM
joIe ke te cokkasa bhAvastavanuM kAraNa thAya, ane ema thAya te ja te saphaLa
che, nahiM te aphaLa che. A saMbaMdhI vizeSa jANavA IcchatA tattvarasika jane
zrI haribhadrasUrijIta zrI paMcAzakazAstra avalekavuM. dravyadharma te yuga
samAravA, viSayAdika parihAra; Atamazakti che svabhAva sudharmane, sAdhana hetu
udAra." -zrI devacaMdrajI. AvA A mahAnubhAva "kula yogIe" kharekhara ! kulagIo
ja hoya che. kulavadhU jema potAnA kulane chAje evuM varnAna kare che-
kulInapaNuM Acare che, kulaputra jema potAnA kulane lAMchana na lAge evuM
kulInatA cogya "logI" AcaraNa kare che tema kulagI paNa pitAnA legikulane chAje
zabdanuM rahasya evuM, ne deSa-kalaMkarUpa jhAMkhapa na lAge evuM, yathAyogya
kulIna AcaraNa kare che. jemake-para ghare na javuM, sva gharamAM ja rahevuM,
ucita maryAdA dharmamAM rahevuM, zIla sAcavavuM, ItyAdi kuladharmane jema
kulavadhU pALe che, tema parabhAva-vibhAvarUpa para ghara pratye gamana na
karavuM, AtmAnA nija gharamAM ja rahevuM, vastusvabhAvanI maryAdA na ulaMghAya
ema ucita "maryAdAdharmamAM marajAdamAM" rahevuM, svarUpAcaraNarUpa zIla
sAcavavuM,-ityAdi bhegIkulanA dhamane kulagI barAbara pALe che. temaja kulaputra
jema hiMsA, asatya, cerI, vyabhicAra, padravyagrahaNa Adi sarva anArya kAryane
dUrathI vaje che, ane sanyAyanItine-pramANikatAne anusare che, tema A Arya
kulagI paNa AtmasvarUpanI ghAtarUpa hiMsAne, paravastune pitAnI kahevArUpa
asatyane, pAradravyanI cerI karavArUpa adattAdAnane, paravastu pratye gamana
karavArUpa

Page #766 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(690) He abandons from afar the unrighteous acts such as *gadashti* (sexual
misconduct), *vyabhichar* (adultery), and *mamtav* (attachment) leading to the
acquisition of another's property, and by severing the *parbhaav-vibhaav*
(external influence and its effect), he lifts his ownership from above,
establishes himself in his own possessions, and continuously strives to follow
the *sanyayniti* (ethics of renunciation) - the true authenticity. Just as a
*kulputra* (son of a noble family) enhances the reputation of his ancestors,
illuminates his family, and becomes well-established in society, similarly, a
*kulgi* (Jain monk) also enhances the reputation of his *bikul* (lineage),
illuminates his family, and attains a place in the *yogi* (spiritual) community,
becoming well-established in his form, "saving forty-one generations."
Therefore, the name "Kulgi" aptly suits him, just like *kulvadhu* (daughter-in-
law) and *kulputra* (son of a noble family).  However, those who are born into
the lineage of the *Jinadi* (Jain) supreme beings, but do not follow their
religion with devotion, or those who follow it only in name, even if their
father calls them "Jain" etc., are merely nominal Jains, *gotragi* (belonging to
a lineage), but not *kulgi* (true Jain). Similarly, those who are born into the
lineage of Buddha, but do not follow his religion with devotion, even if their
father calls them "Buddhist," are also merely nominal Buddhists, not *kul-yogi*
(true Buddhist). Likewise, it should be understood for others who are called
Brahmins, Vaishnavas, etc., but do not possess the characteristics of true
Brahmins or Vaishnavas. Those who do not possess the Jain qualities of
conquering the enemies like *raag-dvesh* (attachment and aversion), or the
wisdom of true *buddhi* (understanding), or the purity of *vaishnava* (devotee
of Vishnu), or the true knowledge of *brahma* (ultimate reality) of a Brahmin,
even if they are born as Jains, Buddhists, Vaishnavas, Brahmins, or anything
else, are not true Jains, Buddhists, Vaishnavas, or Brahmins in their heart and
soul. They cannot be called *kulgi* (true Jain) either. The point is that those
who do not follow the true path of *yog* (spiritual practice) - the path of
*maekshamaag* (non-violence) - are not *kulgi* (true Jain) in any community or
any school of thought.  Often, a human soul belongs to some religion or school
of thought, and therefore believes that it should act according to that religion
or school of thought. But this is not called *mumuksta* (desire for liberation).
*Mumuksta* is to strive for liberation alone, free from all kinds of worldly
attachments. And intense *mumuksta* is to constantly strive on the path of
liberation with unwavering love. - Shrimad Rajchandra, Patrak 216 (254) Or it
can be called *yog* (spiritual practice) that is merely for physical
development, like the exercises practiced by the Vaishnavas. - Shri Narsinh
Mehta

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (690) gadaSTisamuccaya vyabhicArane, ane mamatvathI paradravyanA grahaNarUpa
parigrahane-ityAdi anArya kAryane dUrathI tyaje che ane paravasturUpa parabhAva-
vibhAvane cheDI daI, te uparathI potAnI mAlIkI uThAvI laI, sva vastumAM ja
sthiti karI sanyAyanItine-kharekharI pramANiktAne anusaravA niraMtara
prayatnazIla rahe che. ane kulaputra jema bApadAdAnI AbarU vadhArI-kulane ujALI
samAjamAM supratiSThita hoya che, tema kulagI paNa potAnA bikulanI pratiSThA
vadhArI, kulane ajavALI, "ekotera peDhIne tArI" yogI samAjamAM sthAna pAmI
svarUpamAM supratiSThita hoya che. eTalA mATe kulavadhu ane kulaputranI jema
kulagIne A "kulagI' nAma barAbara ghaTe che. bAkI jinAdi parama bhegIonA kulamAM
bAhya dehajanmanI apekSAe jamyA chatAM, je tenA dharmane bhAvathI anusaratA na
hoya, athavA te nAmamAtra anusaratA hoya, chatAM pitAne tenA anugAmI-anuyAyI
"jaina" Adi kahevaDAvatA hoya, te nAmamAtra te nAmamAtra jaina Adi che, gotragI
che, paNa kulagI nathI. te anuyAyIo ja prakAre buddhanA kula-saMpradAyamAM
janmyA hoya ane tenA dharmane bhAvathI anusaratA na hoya, chatAM pitAne tenA
anuyAyI "bauddha' tarIke oLakhAvatA hoya, to te paNa nAmamAtra bauddha che,
kulayogI nathI. temaja sAcA brAhmaNa-vaiSNavajana* AdimAM hovA gya lakSaNa
jenAmAM nathI, chatAM pitAne brAhmaNa-vaiSNava vagere kahevaDAvanArA anyane mATe
paNa samajavuM. rAga-dveSAdi zatruno jaya karavArUpa jainapaNuM jenAmAM nathI,
athavA yathArtha vastubedharUpa budhapaNuM jenAmAM nathI, athavA
AtmapavitratArUpa zaucamaya vaiSNavapaNuM jenAmAM nathI, athavA sAcA
brahmajJAnarUpa brAhmaNapaNuM jenAmAM nathI,-te bhale janmathI jaina ho ke
bauddha he, vaiSNava ho ke brAhmaNa he, ke anya kaI paNa he; paNa te bhAvathI-
paramArthathI jaina paNa nathI ne bauddha paNa nathI, vaiSNava paNa nathI ne
brAhmaNa paNa nathI; temaja te kulagI paNa kahI zakAya ema nathI. tAtparya ke-
sAcA pAramArthika yogamArgane-mekSamAgane nahiM anusaranArA evA sava
saMpradAyavAdIo, sarva matadarzanAgrahI kAMI kulagI nathI. ghaNuM karIne
manuSyAtmA keI ne koI dharma matamAM hoya che, ane tethI te dharma mata pramANe
pravartavAnuM te kare che, ema mAne che. paNa enuM nAma mumukSatA nathI.
mumukSatA e che ke sarva prakAranI mahAzaktithI muMjhAI eka mokSane viSe ja
yatna kare; ane tIvra mumukSatA e che ke ananya preme mokSanA mArgamAM kSaNe
kSaNe pravartAvuM." -zrImad rAjacaMdra, patraka 216 (254) athavA te mAtra
zArIrika vikAsa mATenA vyAyAmAdi prayogane je yogane nAme 4 vaiSNava jana to
tene kahiye." IsAdi- zrI narasiMha mahetA

Page #767 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Conclusion:** Mere nominal followers, those who are only physically related
are not Kulagi. (691) Those who mock, or under the pretext of Homa-adi process,
those who create a sense of speed, or in the name of speed, create many Dhiting,
those who mock the great "G" of the great "G" word, or those who pretend to have
attained the state of Beti Samadhi and deceive the innocent people, those who
eat and drink in the name of Yoga, or those who increase complexity and wear the
garb of a Yogi, those who are consumed by the desire for worldly pleasures - all
these are not Kulagi. They are the mockers of Yoga, the ones who make the Yogi-
kula a laughing stock, and the ones who disgrace the most sacred thing like "G"!
Apart from the Kulagi mentioned above, the others who are Bhumi-bhavya-gotra-
yogi are not Kulagi. Bhumi-bhavya means those who are called glorious due to the
qualities of the earth. For example, the descendants of the Aryakshetra - this
Bharat-bhumi are Bhumi-bhavya. They are Gotra-yogi, but not Kulagi, because mere
glory of the earth does not bring about the welfare of any living being. But
when a living being attains true glory, when such qualities are manifested, then
only welfare happens. The glory of the earth is necessary for the welfare of the
soul, it is necessary for the provision of suitable material, but it is only
when the material cause is manifested, which is dependent on the cause of
opportunity, that it is used, not otherwise. For example, there is complete
suitability for attaining Gidharm in this glorious Bharat-bhumi. Because in this
divine land, many great souls have taken birth and sanctified this earth.
Therefore, it is easy to obtain the means of Gidharm here. But it is only when
those means are used to the fullest extent, and the soul's true glory,
magnificence, and worthiness are manifested, that it is done. Otherwise, mere
Bhumi-bhavya-ta will not yield anything. In this glorious Bharat-bhumi, mere
location will not make one a Yogi. Therefore, those who are Bhumi-bhavya-yogi
are not called Kulagi. To become Kulagi, one must manifest the qualities that
are suitable for Moksha. (See page 316-317) To understand the difference between
Gotra-yogi and Kulagi, it is necessary to understand the difference between the
words "Gotra" and "Kula". The word "Kula" refers to a close lineage, while
"Gotra" refers to a distant lineage. Similarly, Kulagi has a close lineage
relationship with Yogi-kula, and Gotra-yogi has a distant relationship. From the
above, we can infer that those who are close to Moksha, those who are near,
those who are imminent and glorious, are "Kulagi"; and those who are far away
from Moksha, those who are distant and glorious, are "Gotra-yogi". To further
clarify this, it is said:

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 upasaMhAra : nAma mAtra anuyAyIo, gAtrAgI te kuhagI nathI (691) ThaThADatA
hoya, athavA hogAdi prakriyAne bahAne je lekone vega saMbaMdhI vyAha upajAvatA
hoya, athavA vegane nAme aneka dhatIMga ubhA karI je mahAt "ga"nI mahAna "ga"
zabdanI viDaMbanA karatA hoya, athavA beTI samAdhi viDaMbanA caDhAvI javAne DoLa
karI mugdha lokone vaMcatA rahI je yogane nAme carI khAtA hoya, athavA jaTAjUTa
vadhArI jogI Adi veSa dhAraNa karI je jegImAM khapatA hoya -e Adi paNa kaMI
kulagI nathI. te te yoganI ThekaDI uDAvanArA yugaviDabake che, yegIkulane
hAMsIpAtra banAvanArA che, ane "ga" jevI parama pavitra vastune abhaDAvanArA che
! uparamAM je kulagI kahyA, te sivAyanA bIjA je bhUmibha-gotrayAgIo che, te kAMI
kulagI nathI. bhUmibhavyo eTale bhUminA guNane lIdhe je bhavya kahevAya che te.
jemake-AryakSetranA-A bharatabhUminA saMtAno bhUmibhaLe che. te gotrayegI te
gotragI che, paNa kulagI nathI, kAraNa ke bhUminI bhavyatAmAtrathI kulagI nathI
kAMI jIvanuM kalyANa thaI jatuM nathI. paNa tathArUpa anukULa nimitta pAmI,
jIvamAM jyAre kharekharI bhavyatA Ave-tathArUpa guNagyatA pragaTe, tyAre ja
kalyANa thAya che. bhUminI bhavyatA AtmAnuM kalyANa thavAmAM anukULa sAmagrInI
upanatimAM jogavAImAM apekSAkAraNa jarUra che, paNa nimitta kAraNane AdhIna evuM
upAdAnakAraNa pragaTAvavAmAM je tene upayoga karAya, te ja te lekhe thAya che,
nahi te alekhe che. dAkhalA tarIke-Aya evI A bhavya bharatabhUmimAM gidharma
pAmavAnI pUrepUrI anukuLatA che. kAraNa ke A divya bhUmimAM aneka mahAna givoe
janma laI A avanine pAvana karI che. eTale atre gasAdhana sAmagrI pAmavI sulabha
che. paNa te sAdhanasAmagrIne je yatheSTa lAbha UThAvavAmAM Ave, ne AtmAnuM
tathArUpa gyapaNuMbhavyapaNuM-supAtrapaNuM pragaTa karavAmAM Ave, te ja te lekhe
che. bAkI khAlI bhUmibhavyatAthI kAMI vaLe nahi, mahAgIonI bhUmi evI bhavya
bharata bhUmimAM jagyA mAtrathI kAMI yegI thaI javAya nahiM. eTale
bhUmibhavyarUpa gegIo che, te kAMI kulagI kahevAya nahiM. kulagI thavA mATe te
tevA mumukSatA yogya guNa pragaTAvavA joIe. (juo pR. 316-317) A getragI ne
kulagIne taphAvata skUlarUpe samajavA mATe gotra ane kula zabdane taphAvata
samajavAnI jarUra che "kula" zabda nikaTane vaMzasaMbadha sUcave che, ne "gotra"
darane vaMzasaMbaMdha sUcave che. tema kulagI yogIkula sAthe nikaTane
vaMzasaMbaMdha dharAve che, ane tragI dUra dUrane sagapaNa saMbaMdha dharAve
che. A uparathI ApaNe ema anumAna karI zakIe ke-jene mokSa nikaTamAM che,
samIpamAM che, te Asannabhavya mumukSu AtmAo "kulagI" che; ane jene mekSa haju
ghaNe ghaNe dUra che, te dUrabhavya bhavAbhinaMdI jI gAtrogI" che. enA vizeSa
lakSaNane adhikRta karI kahe che-

Page #768 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(692) These are all-merciful, dear to the Guru, Gods and twice-born,
compassionate, humble, wise and self-controlled. ||211|| Meaning: And they (the
Kulakas) are all-merciful, dear to the Guru, Gods and twice-born, compassionate,
humble, wise and self-controlled. Commentary: "These are dear to the Guru, Gods
and twice-born, compassionate and useful." - Saz. 8 And these Kulakas, due to
the absence of all kinds of attachments, are all-merciful; due to the influence
of Dharma, they are dear to the Guru, Gods and twice-born; due to the absence of
Kilesha-paap, they are compassionate by nature; due to their skillful attachment
to the sublime, they are humble; due to the breaking of the knots, they are
wise; and due to their virtuous nature, they are self-controlled. These Kula
Yogis, who are born in the Kula Yoga and who follow the Gidh Dharma, are all-
merciful everywhere. They have no hatred in the world because they are
completely free from all kinds of attachments, including Mithya Aagraha, which
is the cause of hatred. Hatred is caused by attachment. When someone is attached
to a particular belief, they immediately develop hatred towards anything that
contradicts that belief. This is because they have a sense of "mine" about their
belief. They think, "This is my belief, it is the right one." This sense of
ownership leads them to become angry towards those who disagree with them. The
person who is attached to their belief thinks, "My belief is true," and the
person who is attached to their belief thinks, "My belief is true." Therefore,
the person who is attached to their belief is dragged along by their belief and
even when they are presented with a different perspective, they cling to their
own belief. The person who is attached to their belief is drawn to their belief,
and their mind automatically enters into the belief. The monkey of the mind of
the person who is attached to their belief pulls the cow of the belief by its
tail! And the person who is not attached to their belief... All-merciful, and
they are all-merciful due to the absence of all kinds of attachments. And - Vav-
Kriya: - Dear to the Guru, Gods and twice-born - due to the influence of Dharma.
And - Vav - Compassionate - by nature, due to the absence of Kilesha-paap. And -
Humble - due to their skillful attachment to the sublime. And - Wise - due to
the breaking of the knots. And - Self-controlled - due to their virtuous nature.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (692) yugadaSTisamuccaya sarvatrAdveSiNazcaite gurudevadvijapriyAH dayAlavo
vinItAzca bodhavanto yatendriyAH  // 211 //  sarvatra aSI guru-deva-dvija
prItivaMta; dayALu tema vinIta A, yadriya dhavaMta 211. artha --ane eo (kulagIe)
sarvatra adveSI, guru deva ne dvija jene priya che evA, tathA dayALu. vinIta,
bedhavaMta ane yateMdriya hoya che. vivecana aSI guru deva dvija priya,
dayAvaMta upayogIjI." - sajhA. 8 ane A kulagIo tathA prakAranA grahanA abhAvane
lIdhe sarvatra ahevI hoya che, dhamaprabhAvane lIdhe, guru deva ne dvija jene
priya che evA hoya che kilaSTa pApanA abhAvane lIdhe prakRtithI dayALu hoya che;
kuzalAnubaMdhI bhavyatAthI vinIta hoya che; graMthibhedathI bedhavaMta hoya che,
ane cAritrabhAvathI yatendriya-jiteMdriya hoya che. sarvatra adveSI A kulayogIo
ke je yogIkulamAM janmyA che ane gidharmane je anusaranAra, che, teo sarvatra-
sarva sthaLe aSI hoya che, teone jagatamAM kyAMya paNa dveSa hete nathI; kAraNa
ke teone dveSanA kAraNarUpa kaI paNa prakAranA grahane-mithyA Agrahano sarvathA
abhAva hoya che, eTale dveSano paNa abhAva hoya che. dveSanuM kAraNa graha hoya
che, pite grahelA-pakaDelA matathI je kaI viruddha paDe te grahagrasta
matAgrahIne tarata ja TheSa upaje che; kAraNa ke matAthIne pitAnA matane
"mamata" hoya che, A mahAro mata che evA mamatvane lIdhe tethI viruddha janArA
pratye te gusse thAya che ! matAgrahI "mAre te sAcuM' ema mAne che, ane sagrAhI
'sAcuM te mAruM ema mAne che. tethI matAgrahI pitAnI mAnyatA pramANe ghasaDAte
heI yuktine paNa jyAM potAnI mati abhiniviSTa che, tyAM kheMcI jAya che, ane
sadAgrahIne te jyAM yukti che tyAM mati svayaM praveza kare che. AgrahInuM
manarUpI vAMdarUM yuktirUpI gAyane pUMchaDethI "kheMce che ! ane nirAgrahI
jUtti-sarvatraSire ane emAM sarvatra aSI hoya che, tathA prakAranA grahanA
abhAvane lIdhe. tathA- vakrikriyA:-gura, deva ane dvija jene priya che
evA,-dhama prabhAvane lIdhe. tathA-vAva-dayALa prakRtithI, kilaSTa pApanA
abhAvathI, vinItAzca-ane vinIta,-kuzalAnubaMdhI bhavyatAthI, tathA
vadhavarodhavaMta-graMthibhedathI, tendriyAyataMdriya, cAritrabhAvathI hoya che.

Page #769 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Conclusion: The characteristics of a Kulagi, the absence of attachment
everywhere, the absence of attachment to any particular view.  (693) The calf,
which is the mind of the Kulagi, follows the cow, which is the strategy, it goes
behind it! (See footnote, page 328-329).  Such attachment is only found in an
isolationist, because they cling to a particular view, and like a "Vohra's
rope," they hold onto it stubbornly! That is, it is from the mind. For example,
someone who is attached to a particular practical view, is attached to a
particular decisive view. Someone who is attached to a particular knowledge from
the soul, is attached to a particular action. Someone who is attached to a
particular eternal aspect of isolation, is attached to a particular non-eternal
aspect of isolation. Thus, from the mind, the isolationist has attachment to
their own views. But from the soul, the non-isolationist has no attachment to
anything, because they know the nature of the view well, that every view is good
in relation to its father, but is wrong in relation to others. Therefore, it is
wrong, it is false, to be attached to any particular view. Knowing this, they
never cling to any one view, and accept the appropriate limits of practical and
decisive views, and achieve reconciliation. Therefore, when they hear something
decisive, they do not abandon their means, but keeping the decision in mind,
they use the same means.  "Having heard the decisive word, do not abandon the
means; Keeping the decision in mind, use the means." - Shri Atmasiddhi.
Moreover, in matters of philosophy, they are not attached to any particular view
or philosophy; because they are self-realized, they know that those philosophies
are true in relation to their own view, and in relation to some other view, they
are true. By applying the "self" principle, they reconcile their attachment to
philosophies. They know that those philosophies are part of the Jina philosophy,
and they are not lacking. Therefore, they are not attached to anything in this
regard. (See page 58-59, page 423).  Thus, because of the narrowness of the
isolationist's vision, and the vastness of the non-isolationist's vision, from
the soul, the Kulagi has a complete absence of attachment to the mind. They are
a seeker of truth everywhere, they search for the good everywhere; they do not
have the work of the mind, they have the work of the "truth." And thus, they
have a complete absence of attachment, so they never develop hatred towards any
philosopher. In their mind, they are all fellow spiritual brothers and sisters
of the same father. They feel that all souls have the same natural dharma, so
because of this equality, all these souls are our spiritual brothers and
sisters. With this supreme generous feeling, they have friendship towards all
beings.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 upasaMhAra: kalogInAM lakSaNa, sarvatra apI, dazanAgraha abhAva (693)
madhyasthanuM manarUpI vAchaDu yuktirUpI gAyane anusare che-pAchaLa pAchaLa jAya
che ! (juo phUTanoTa leka pR. 328-3ra9). Avo matAgraha ekAMtavAdIne ja hoya che,
kAraNa ke te koI eka amuka nayane ja pakaDI bese che, ane "vahorAvALA nADA" nI
jema tene ja haTha pakaDI rAkhe che! eTale ke te matAthI hoya che. dAkhalA
tarIke kaI vyavahAra nayano ja AgrahI matAtha ne hoya che, te keI nizcaya nayane
ja AgrahI hoya che. koI jJAnane AtmAthI ja AgrahI hoya che, te kaI kriyAne ja
AgrahI hoya che. keI ekAMta nitya pakSane ja AgrahI hoya che, te koI ekAMta
anitya pakSane ja AgrahI hoya che. Ama matAthI ekAMtavAdIne potapotAnA matane
abhiniveza-Agraha hoya che. paNa AtmAthI anekAMtavAdIne te kaI paNa Agraha hete
nathI, kAraNa ke te nayanA svarUpane sArI peThe jANe che ke pratyeka naya
pitapatAnI apekSAe pitAnI naya. maryAdAmAM sAro che, paNa para apekSAe kheTe
che, mATe kaI paNa nayane ekAMta Agraha kare te khoTo che, mithyA che, ema
jANate hoI te kadI paNa koI eka nayano Agraha karato ja nathI, ane
vyavahAranaya-nizcaya nayanI yathAyogya maryAdA svIkArI banene samanvaya (
Reconciliation) sAdhe che. eTale nizcayavANuM sAMbhaLI te kAMI sAdhana cheDI
dete nathI, paNa nizcayane lakSamAM rAkhI te te ja sAdhana kare che. "nizcaya
vANI sAMbhaLI, sAdhana tajavAM naya; nizcaya rAkhI lakSamAM, sAdhana karavAM
soya." -zrI Atmasiddhi. vaLI darzana viSayamAM paNa tene kaI paNa mata-darzanane
Agraha hete nathI; kAraNa ke svAvAdadazI hoI te, te te darzana potapotAnA nayanI
apekSAe, kathaMcita kaI apekSAe sAcA che, ema "svAta' padano nyAsa karIne te
darzanAgraha samAdhAna kare che. te te darzanene te jinadarzananA aMgabhUta jANe
abhAva che. eTale tasaMbaMdhI paNa tene keI Agraha saMbhava nathI. (juo pR.
58-59, pR. 423) Ama sAMkaDI ekAMta daSTine abhAva hovAthI ane vizAla
anekAMtadaSTine sadbhAva hovAthI A AtmAthI kulagIne matAgrahane sarvathA abhAva
hoya che. te te jyAM tyAMthI "sane ja grAhaka heI, sarvatra sada zane ja khoLe
che; ene matanuM kAma nathI, "sat 'nuM ja kAma che. ane Ama tene sarvathA
grahane abhAva hoya che, eTale keI paNa darzanavAdI pratye tene kadI paNa dveSa
upajato nathI. tene mana te te sarva pitAnA sAdharmika AtmabaMdhuo che. te te
eTale sudhI bhAve che ke-sarva AtmAene svabhAva dharma eka ja che, eTale
samAnadhamI hovAthI A sarva AtmAo hArA sAdharmika bhAIo che. evI parama udAra
bhAvanAthI tene sarva bhUtamAtra pratye maitrI

Page #770 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(694) There is a collection of yogic vision, there is affection towards them, it
treats all beings as its own self. Where can such a person with a friendly
attitude everywhere be found? “Mitti ke samuhu, veram ma = laru”—Shri
Jinpravacan “Satmavat sarvabhutheshu” Shri Bhagavad Gita Sarvatmaman samadasti
gho a vachan ne hadey lakhe.”– Shrimad Rajchandraji 2. The love of the Guru-
Deva-Dvija is the second virtue of this Kula Yogi. This soul, the seeker of
liberation, is very dear to the Guru, Deva and Dvija - he feels very
affectionate towards them, and it is the effect of the Dharma he has attained.
With a calm and steady mind, if we think, every creature loves the welfare of
its father, everyone wants their own good, so whatever is helpful in the cause
of that good, is also dear to them. And the Guru-Deva-Dvija become helpful to
them in their self-interest, so they become dear to them. For example - A man
suffering from a long illness, lying in the throes of death, if some good doctor
cures him, then that life-giving, benevolent doctor becomes very dear to him. So
it is also with this Kula Yogi, in the matter of the supreme benefactor, Shrimad
Sadguru Bhagwan! Because - (1) The soul itself, which has been benefiting since
time immemorial! The patient was suffering from the great disease of self-
delusion, and was lying in the throes of death, “moment by moment, terrifying,
primordial, dreadful, fear-filled, death-like”, this Sadguru cured him with the
medicine of self-understanding, made him healthy, and planted the seed of
enlightenment, the seed of knowledge, and gave him birth. After that, how can
this supreme benefactor, Shrimad Bhagwan, not be infinitely dear to this soul,
the seeker of liberation? “Without understanding the form, the suffering
experienced is infinite, I bow to that path, Shri Sadguru Bhagwan” Shri
Atmasiddhi. Or (2) If some poor beggar is suffering from great poverty, if
someone relieves him of his poverty and makes him rich, then that poverty-
removing man becomes very dear to him. After that, - the infinite self-wealth,
the fear of one's own form, this soul does not have the awareness of it, so it
leaves its father's house and wanders around begging.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (694) yogadaSTisamuccaya hoya che, temanA pratye vAtsalyabhAva hoya che, sarva
bhUta pratye te Atmavat varte che. AvA sarvatra mitrI bhAvavALAne kyAMya kyAMthI
hoya? "mitti ke samUhu, veraM mA~ = LarU"--zrI jinapravacana "sAtmavata
sarvabhUteSu " zrI bhagavaddagItA sarvAtmamAM samadaSTi gho A vacanane hadaye
lakhe."- zrImada rAjacaMdrajI 2. gurudeva-dvijanuM priyapaNuM A kulayogIne bIje
guNa guru-deva-brijanuM priyapaNuM e che. A AtmAthI mumukSune guru, deva ane
dvija ati priya hoya che-khUba vahAlA lAge che, ane te tene prApta thayelA
dharmano prabhAva che. zAMta svastha citte je vicAra karIe te dareka prANIne
pitAnuM hita priya hoya che, potAnuM bhaluM thAya ema sahu koI Icche che, eTale
te hitanA kAraNarUpa bhaluM karanAra sahAyaka je kaI hoya che, te paNa tene
priya thaI paDe che. ane guru-deva-dvija tene AtmahitamAM sahAyabhUta thaI
paDatA hoI tene priya thAya che. dAkhalA tarIke- mANasa dIrgha rogathI pIDAte
heI mRtyuzadhyAmAM paDyo hoya, tene keI suvaidya sAje kare, te te jIvitadAna
ApanAra upakArI vaidya tene keTale badhe hAle lAge? tema A kulagIne paNa parama
upakArI zrImad sadguru bhagavAnanI aho ! ahA ! bAbatamAM paNa che. kAraNa ke-(1)
potAne jIva je anAdikALathI upakAra ! rogI AtmabhrAMtirUpa mahArogathI pIDAte
hatA, ane "kSaNa kSaNa bhayaMkara Adi daSTAMta bhAvamaraNa rUpa mRtyuzadhyAmAM
paDyo hato, tene A sadguru sudhe svarUpa-samajaNarUpa auSadhi vaDe sAjo karyo,
AtmaArogyasaMpanna karyo, ane samyagadarzanarUpa-bodhibIjarUpa apUrva
saMskArabIja ropI ne janma Apyo, te pachI AvA A parama upakArI zrImad bhagavAna
te AtmAthI mumukSune tenAthI anaMta anaMtagaNuM vhAlA kema na lAge? je svarUpa
samajyA vinA, pAmyA duHkha anaMta, samajAvyuM te pada namuM, zrI sadaguru
bhagavaMta"zrI Atmasiddhi. athavA (2) kaI raMka bhikhArI bhArI
dAridrayaduHkhathI duHkhIo hoya, tenuM dAridrayaduHkha TALI koI tene mahAsukha
saMpattimAna banAvI de, te te dAridrayahara puruSa tene keTalo badho ISTa thaI
paDe? te pachI,-anaMta AtmasaMpatti bhaya nija svarUpanuM A jIvane bhAna nahiM
hovAthI te pitAnuM ghara choDIne paraghera bhIkha mAgate pharate

Page #771 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Conclusion:**  "Oh! Oh!  Great Grace to the Sadguru!"  The patient, etc., was
a wicked example.  He was clinging to the false and deceitful attachment to the
pudgala, and like a thief and a robber, he was filling his sinful belly by
stealing from others.  This virtuous Sadguru made him aware of his own true
nature, and showed him the way to his own infinite, self-possessed home.  He
taught him to stay in his own home, and stopped him from begging for alms in the
homes of others.  He stopped him from licking the dirt of the material world,
and from stealing from others, and stopped him from filling his sinful belly.
Thus, he made the abundant self-wealth residing in his own home, his devoted
servant, and made him full of supreme happiness and wealth.  Why would such a
true seeker and yogi not be dearly loved by the infinitely gracious Srimad
Sadguru Bhagwan?  Or (3) if someone is lost in a terrible forest, and is
wandering around, unable to find food, and someone shows him a simple, straight,
and direct path, how much would that person love that guide?  Then, because he
was unaware of the direction of the right path in this terrible forest of
existence, this being was wandering around in all four directions, suffering
from endless wandering.  He who showed him the straight, simple, and innocent
path of his own true nature, and who saved him from the endless suffering of
wandering in the forest of existence, why would this being, who is grateful for
the immeasurable grace of the Srimad Sadguru Dev, not have a stream of love
flowing towards him?  Or (4) if someone is drowning in a vast ocean where waves
are crashing, and someone saves him, pulls him out, and brings him to the shore,
how much would he love that savior?  Then, this being was being tossed around by
the waves of birth and death in this terrible ocean of existence, and was
swallowing the bitter water of suffering, and the Sadguru Dev, who is like a
great savior, saved him from drowning by taking his hand, and brought him to the
shore of Shiva-pura.  Why would this grateful being not have an extraordinary
love for the Srimad Sadguru, who is the unique benefactor, the ocean of
compassion, and the supremely merciful one? "Oh! Oh! Sri Sadguru, the ocean of
compassion, boundless; Oh! Oh! Great grace that you have bestowed upon this
lowly one." - Sri Atmasiddhi "It seems to me that you have saved Arjin from the
ocean of existence; You have taken him to the shore of Shiva-pura, holding him
by the hand." - Sri Yashovijayji. Or (5) if someone is caught in a fierce fire,
and someone saves him with a shower of cool water, how much love would he feel
for that savior?  Then, this being was caught in the terrible fire of existence,
and the Sri Sadguru saved him by showering him with the cool rain of the nectar
of the highest truth.  Why would this seeker not have an extraordinary love for
the Sri Sadguru?

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 upasaMhAra: zrI sadagurune "ahA! ahe! upakAra'. rogI Adi duSTAMta hatuM, para
pudgalanI eThI jUThI eTha khAte hatuM, ane veThIA piThIAnI peThe pArakI veTha
karate rahI pApI peTa bharatA hatA, tene A satparuSa sadgurue nija svarUpanuM
apUrva bhAna karAvI anaMta AtmasaMpattibharyA svagRhane lakSa karAvyuM, nija
gharamAM ja rahevAno upadeza karI paragRhe bhIkha mAMgate baMdha karyo, "cala
jaDa jaganI eTha" nahi cATavAne ane pArakI veTha nahi karavAne baMdha karI pApI
peTa bharate aTakAvyuM ane Ama nija gharamAM ja rahelI aDhaLaka AtmalakSamIne
bhaktA svAmI banAvI daI parama sukhasaMpattimaya karI mUkyo. te anaMta upakArI
zrImad saddaguru bhagavAna AvA sAcA mumukSu yogIne parama priya kema na lAge?
athavA (3) koI bhayaMkara aTavImAM mAga nahiM maLavAthI cAre kora gothAM khAtAM
bhUlA paDela manuSyane keI sarala, sIdhe ne niSphaTaka mArga batAvI Ape, te te
mArgadarzaka puruSa tene keTale badhe priya thaI paDe? te pachI A bhayaMkara
bhavATavImAM sanmArganI dizAnuM bhAna nahiM hovAthI A jIva cAre gatimAM cArekora
gothAM khAte AthaData hatuM, anaMta paribhramaNa duHkha pAmatuM hatuM, tene nija
svarUpa-garUpa sIdhe sarala nirdoSa sanmArga batAvI jeNe punaH anaMta
paribhramaNa duHkha TALI bhavATavImAMthI ugAryo, te sanmAgadezaka zrImad sadguru
devane amApa upakAra ciMtavatA A samyagRSTi bhegIne teozrI pratye parama
premapravAha kema na pravahe? athavA (4) bhayaMkara mAM jyAM UchaLI rahyAM che,
evA mahAsamudramAM DUbI rahelA manuSyane je kaI tAru bacAvI laI, bAvaDuM jhAlI
kAMThe ANe, te te tAranAra pratye tene keTale badhe prema kure? te pachI-A
bhISaNa bhavasAgaramAM janma maraNa taraMgathI taNAte A jIva mAharUpa gaLakAM
khAI anaMta duHkhathI duHkhI thaI rahyo hato, tene mahAtA jevA je sadgurudeve
hastAvalaMbana ApIne DUbate bacAvI zivapurane Are Aryo, te ananya upakArI apAra
karuNasiMdhu paramakRpALu zrImad sadguru pratye A kRtajJa jegIjanane apUrva
premane umaLake kema na Ave vAru ? " aho! aho ! zrIsaddaguru, karuNasiMdhu
apAra; A pAmara para prabhu karyo, aho ! aho! upakAra."-zrI Atmasiddhi "zrI
arajina bhavajalane tAru, lAge muja mana vAru re; bAMhya grahI je bhavajala
tAre, ANe zivapura Are re."- zrI yazovijayajI. athavA-(5) koI jIva ugra
dAvAnalamAM sapaDAI gayo hoya, tene zItala jalavRSTithI je kaI bacAvI le, te te
bacAvanAra pratye tene keTalo badhe premabhAva upaje ? te pachI-A bhayaMkara
bhavadAvAnalamAM A jIva sapaDAI gayo hate tene paramArtha amRtanI zItala
meghadhArA varSovI jeNe bacAvI lIdhe, te zrI saddaguru pratye A mumukSu
AtmAthIne apUrva premabhAva kema na upaje ?

Page #772 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  The Collection of Gadasti “Oh Lord, the world is a poison, the living beings
are tormented by it; Oh Lord, consider them as the treasure of nectar.” – Shri
Devchandraji. “The fire of the world’s suffering, the wind that removes the dust
of delusion; I bow down to the one who is free from the attachments of Maya.” –
Shri Haribhadracharya.  Or (6) If a human being has been poisoned by the bite of
a great venomous snake and has fallen unconscious, what kind of Garuda mantra
will remove the poison and bring him back to life? How much love will he have
for that poison-remover? Then, this living being was poisoned by the poison of
Mithyatva (false belief) from the bite of the great venomous snake of Mahamaha.
Therefore, this living being forgot his true nature and became unconscious. The
great Guru, who is like the supreme mantra, removed the poison of Mithyatva with
the help of the mantra of Samyakdarshan (right vision), which illuminates the
true nature of the soul, and brought him back to the awareness of his true self.
He showered the nectar of Samyaktv (right conduct) and gave him rebirth in the
form of liberation. How can the love of this seeker not expand towards the
supreme nectar-like Shrimad Sadguru Bhagwan, like a drop of water in oil?  “Oh
Lord, Mithyatva is the poison of delusion; Oh Lord, the mantra of liberation is
playing in my mind.” – Shri Devchandraji.  Thus, because of the unparalleled
favor, the seeker feels immense love towards Shrimad Sadguru Bhagwan. Not only
that, but Shrimad Sadguru is such that any true devotee, who is attracted to his
supreme qualities, cannot help but feel a natural love for him. Because, when we
think about the nature of Shrimad Sadguru, his nature is the same as the nature
of the Guru, or “Sadguru” is his nature. In other words, the Guru is his nature
in all “Sat” (true) things. Because, the Guru is heavier and more glorious than
the entire world. If we put the entire world on one side and the Sadguru on the
other, the side of the Sadguru will weigh down. Therefore, Shri Sadguru is the
Jagadguru (world teacher). Or, the Sat-Sant (true saint) is his nature. In other
words, just as the nature of the soul is, his nature is Sat, true, pure,
existing in the present, in the form of ten qualities. It is the nature of the
Sant, the nature of the Sadhu. Or, “Sant” means the one who is peaceful, who has
given up all his running around for the objects of enjoyment and has found peace
in his own nature and attained supreme peace of the soul. He is the peaceful
“Sant”.  “Falling, falling at your lotus feet, I ask for the same again and
again; You are the form of the Sadguru Sant, make this firm in my mind.” –
Shrimad Rajchandraji.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 gadaSTisamuccaya " bhava dava he prabhu! bhava dava tApita jIva; tehane he
prabhu! tehane amRta ghana samaja."--zrI devacaMdrajI.
"saMsAradAvAnaladAhanIraM, saMmohadhUlIharaNe samIram  /  mAyAvasAvALA sI,
namAmi thI risAradhIm I"-zrI haribhadrAcAryajI. athavA (6) mahAphaNidharanA
DaMsathI jhera caDhavAthI ke manuSya mUti -bebhAna thaIne paDyo hoya, tene kaI
gAruDika jAMgulimaMtrathI jhera utArI punajIvana bakSe, te tene te viSahara
pratye keTalI badhI prIti upaje? te pachI mahAmaha viSadharanA DaMsathI A jIvane
mithyAtva-jhera caDhayuM hatuM, tethI A jIva nija svarUpanuM bhAna bhUlI
mehamUcchita-bebhAna banyA hatA. tene sahajAnmasvarUpa prakAzanArA apUrva
samyagadarzana maMtraprayAgathI parama mAMtrika samA je zrImad gurudeve
mithyAtva-viSa utArI nAMkhI, nija sahaja AtmasvarUpanA bhAnamAM ApTe, ane
samyakatva amRta chAMTI nikule janmarUpa punarjanma Ape, te viSahara parama
amRtamaya zrImad saddaguru bhagavAna pratye A mumukSu jogIjanane, telamAM
jalabindunI jema apUrva prIti kema na vistare ? mithyA he prabhu ! mithyA viSanI
khIra, haravA he prabhu! haravA jAMguli mana ramI che."--zrI devacaMdrajI. Ama
ananya upakArI hovAthI zrImad sadguru bhagavAna pratye mumukSu bhegIne parama
prema udghase che, eTaluM ja nahiM paNa zrImad sadguru ja svarUpathI evA che ke
temanA paramottama guNagaNa pratye kaI paNa guNAnurAgI sAcA sajajanane upakArI
sada- kudaratI prema skuryA vinA na ja rahe. kAraNa ke zrImad saddagurunuM
svarUpa gurunuM svarUpa vicArIe te "svarUpa' e ja emanuM svarUpa che athavA
"sadaguru" e ja emanuM svarUpa che, arthAt sarva "sat " vastumAM guru e ja
emanuM svarUpa che, kAraNa ke AkhA jagat karatAM guru, bhArI, gauravavaMta evA
zrI sadguru ja che. eka bAju AkhuM jagat mUkIe ne bIjI bAju sadguru mUkIe, te
sadgurunuM ja palluM namI paDaze. eTale jagadguru zrI sadguru ja che. athavA
sat-saMta e ja emanuM svarUpa che, arthAt je prakAre jevuM AtmavastunuM svarUpa
che, te prakAre tevuM sat , sAcuM, chatuM, vartamAnamAM pragaTa dazArUpe
vidyamAna, evuM temanuM svarUpa che, saMtasvarUpa che, sAdhusvarUpa che; athavA
"saMta" eTale zAMta -parabhAva vibhAva pratyenI jenI badhI doDAdoDa maTI jaI, je
svabhAvamAM vizrAMta thaI parama AtmazAMtine pAmyA che, evA zAMta te "saMta".
paDI paDI tuja pada paMkaje, pharI pharI mAguM e ja; sadguru saMta svarUpa tuM
ja, e daDhatA karI de ja, " zrImad rAjacaMdrajI

Page #773 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Conclusion:** The form of the benevolent Guru, the form of God  (697) Such a
saintly Guru is self-knowing, impartial, wandering due to the force of past
karma, radiating unparalleled speech, and possessing supreme scriptural
knowledge. They have the supreme, wondrous state of "Jnani-dasha" where
attachment has been destroyed or is tranquil, and the entire world appears like
a dream or a mirage. And such a Jnani, even though in a body, appears as if they
are not in a body, existing in the supreme, wondrous state of "Dehatit-Videh-
dasha" (beyond the body). (See Atmasiddhi Gatha, p. 129, 394). How can a seeker
not have unique love for such a supreme treasure of virtues, an ocean of
compassion without any impurities, supremely benevolent, supremely merciful,
Shrimad Sadgurudev?  "The compassionate, merciful, the support of the devotees,
the Lord; Red, O Red! Serving the Devchandra, the Jina, is the cause of supreme
blissful nectar. Red, O Red!" Shri Devchandraji. Just as a seeker has affection
for a directly present Guru in a body, they also have the same unique affection
for an indirect God who is beyond the body, because that The form of the inner
God becomes the form of the supremely benevolent God for the soul to attain its
own nature. The one whose "form" has manifested is God, the one who is
"established" in the pure form of the soul is the pure, conscious form of God,
the one who has known the soul as the soul and nothing else, that imperishable,
infinite form of knowledge is the God, the liberated soul. Because they have
shown the path of liberation, they are the law-giver. Because they have shown
the path of supreme peace, the path of liberation, the path of Shiva, and have
done the "Shankarpana" of the three worlds, they are Shiva-Shankar. Because they
are established in their form, yet know the entire universe through knowledge,
they are Vishnu. Because they have attained the supreme state of liberation,
they are Sugata. And because they have conquered attachment, aversion, etc., and
manifested the pure, natural form of the soul, they are the supremely detached,
the true Jinadev. (See p. 363-364 and 400-401). Such a pure, natural, innate
form of Jinaprabhu is God in practice, and in certainty, that soul is the same
God. The worship of Jinadev is, in certainty, the worship of one's own soul,
because the state of the Jina and one's own state are one, there is no
difference, no difference in form. (See Kavya, p. 112-113).  Without true
devotion to this Jinadev, suffering will never cease; therefore, to escape from
the fire of suffering in this life, devotion to this supreme Lord is like a
supreme nectar It becomes cool and blissful, like a dense treasure; therefore,
how can a seeker not have a supreme love, a unique love, for this supremely
benevolent Lord? Moreover, this supreme Lord is in the place of the established
form of the soul, which is the goal.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 upasaMhAraH upakArI sadagurunuM svarUpa, devanuM svarUpa (697) AvA saMtasvarUpa
sadaguru, AtmajJAnI, samadazI, prArabdhadayathI vicaranArA, apUrva vANI
prakAzanArA, ane paramazrutajJAnasaMpana hoya che. mehabhAva jyAM kSaya thaI
gayo che athavA prazAMta va che, ane AkhuM jagat jyAM eTha jevuM athavA svapna
jevuM bhAse che, evI parama addabhuta "jJAnI dazA" temanI hoya che. ane AvA
jJAnI puruSa deha chatAM jANe dehamAM na vartatA hoya, evI parama AzcaryakAraka
dehAtIta-videha dazAmAM (voza ) vartatA hoya che!! (juo AtmasiddhinI gAthA, pR.
129, 394). AvA parama guNanidhAna, niSkAraNa karuNarasasAgara, parama upakArI,
parama kRpALu zrImad saddagurudeva pratye mumukSu AtmAne ananya prema kema na
vachUTe? dIna dayALa kRpALuo, nAtha bhavika AdhAra; lAla re; devacaMdra jina
sevanA, paramAmRta sukhakAra. lAla re." zrI devacaMdrajI. Ama jema sadehe
vartamAna pratyakSa sadguru pratye mumukSune prIti hoya che, tema videha evA
parokSa deva pratye paNa tene tevI ja ananya prIti hoya che, kAraNa ke te para
mAtma devanuM svarUpa AtmAne nija svarUpAvalaMbana mATe parama upakArI devanuM
svarUpa thaI paDe che. divya evuM jenuM "svarUpa" pragaTayuM che te deva che,
divya evA zuddha AtmasvarUpamAM je "susthita che te zuddha caitanyamUrti
bhagavAna deva che, jeNe AtmAne AtmA ja jANe ne bIjuM parapaNe ja jANya, evA
akSaya anaMta bodhasvarUpa te deva siddha AtmA che. mukti sanmArgane vidhi
batAvyuM hevAthI te vidhi vidhAtA che. parama AtmazAMtine zivamArga-mokSamArga
darzAvI tribhu vananuM zaMkarapANuM karyuM hovAthI te ziva-zaMkara che.
svarUpasthita chatAM jJAnathI samasta vizvane jANatA hovAthI te viSNu che.
mokSarUpa parama sugatine pAmyA hovAthI te sugata che. ane rAgadveSAdine jaya
karI kevaLa zuddha sahaja svarUpI AtmA pragaTa karyo hovAthI te parama vItarAga
evA yathArthanAmAM jinadeva che. (juo pR. 363-364 tathA 400401) AvA zuddha
sahajAnmasvarUpa jinaprabhu te vyavahArathI deva che, nizcayathI te AtmA e ja
deva che. je jinadevanI pUjA che, te nizcayathI nija AtmAnI ja pUjanA che,
kAraNa ke jinapada ne nija padanI ektA che, emAM kAMI bhedabhAva nathI,
svarUpabheda nathI. (juo kAvya, pR. 112-113). A jinavara deva pratye sAcA
bhaktibhAva vinA kadI paNa duHkhadAva chUTa nathI; teTalA mATe A bhava
duHkhadAvAnalathI chUTavA mATe A parama prabhunI bhakti parama amRta ghana samI
hoI, zItala AnaMdadAyinI thaI paDe che; eTale A parama para premapravAha upakArI
prabhu pratye mumukSune parama prema-ananya prema kema na ullaze? mahe prabhuse
vaLI A parama deva sAdhya evA AtmasvarUpanA pratiSThada sthAne che,

Page #774 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(698) Yogadrishtisamuccaya | (model) is the ideal form. Just as the artist-
sculptor creates an artistic work by keeping the pure and beautiful ideal in
view, in the same way the sadhaka, the devotee, the seeker of liberation, keeps
the pure ideal of the perfected divine form constantly in view and realizes the
nature of the self-form. (See p. 113) "The lion born in the family" just as it
realizes its own form on seeing itself, in the same way this sublime soul
realizes its own power through devotion to the Lord. Thus, being extremely
beneficial in the attainment of self-realization, and being an ocean of
incomparable qualities, the seeker of liberation naturally has the highest love
for this most desirable divine Lord.  The reason for placing the word "Guru"
first is to indicate the supreme influence of the present true Guru. Because the
attainment of the path of supreme truth is always through the revered true Guru.
Therefore, the word "Guru" is even more beneficial than the indirect Jinas of
the past. That is why it is placed first. And the form of the Jina is also not
understood without the teachings of the true Guru, and without understanding it,
how can the beneficence of the Jina be known? In this way too, the revered true
Guru is the one who makes us aware of the supreme beneficence of the Jina, so
his position is placed first because he is the most beneficial. This is also the
reason why the most sacred Navkar Mantra places the title "Arihant" before the
title "Siddha", to show the greatness of the present living embodiment of the
Supreme Lord, the true Guru. (See p. 130, the Gatha of Atmavishti).  Further,
this "Kulgin" is also extremely dear as a "Dvija". What is this "Dvija"? It is
worthy of spiritual contemplation. Dvija means one who has taken birth twice, or
one who has taken a second birth. This second birth means the birth of spiritual
refinement. The first birth is the birth of the physical body, but the true
birth of a human being is when he receives the initiation of the right path,
when the inner tonsure is performed - that is when he takes the second birth,
the birth of right perception (samyagdarshana). The mere name of Dvija by birth
is not related to this spiritual Dvija, because even one who has the external
name of Dvija may not have this spiritual Dvija, and one who does not have the
external name of Dvija may still have attained this spiritual Dvija, even if he
is of low caste like a Chandala! So the physical birth as a Dvija is not related
to this spiritual Dvija, therefore, from this perspective, anyone of any caste
who has attained the birth of right perception can be called a "Dvija".

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (698) yogadaSTisamuccaya | (model) Adarza svarUpa che. jema zuddha suMdara
Adarzane dRSTisanmukha rAkhI kalAkAra zilpI kalAkRtinI ghaTanA kare che tema A
siddha devarUpa zuddha Adarzane satata dRSTisanmukha rAkhI sAdhaka e bhakta
mumukSu AtmasvarUpanI ghaTanA kare che. (juo pR. 113) "ajakulagata kesarI' jema
siMhane dekhIne nijarUpa lahe che, tema A prabhubhaktithI A bhavya AtmA
Atmazaktine saMbhALI le che. Ama svarUpasiddhimAM parama upakArI hovAthI, temaja
anupama guNagaNanA ratnAkara hovAthI, pitAnA parama ISTa evA A parameSTi deva
pratye mumukSune parama prIti hoya ja che. atre "guru" pada prathama mUkavAnuM
kAraNa pratyakSa sadagurune parama prabhAva sUcavavA mATe che. kAraNa ke
sarvakALane viSe paramArthamAganI prApti zrImadda saddaguru thakI ja hoya che.
eTale bhUtakALamAM thaI gayelA parokSa evA jinadeva karatAM guru" pada paNa
pratyakSa sadgurune upakAra adhika che, mATe temanuM sthAna prathama prathama
kema? mUkayuM che. temaja te jinanuM svarUpa paNa zrI sadgurunA upadeza vinA
samajAtuM nathI, ane te samajyA vinA jinanA upakArane paNa khyAla kema Ave ? e
rIte paNa parama upakArI jinanA upakAranuM bhAna karAvanAra paNa zrImad sadguru
bhagavAna che, eTale paNa te parama parama upakArI hovAthI temanuM pada prathama
mUkyuM che. A pratyakSa dehadhArI sajIvana mUtti paramAtmA parama sadgurune
mahimA darzAvavA mATe ja parama pavitra zrI navakAra maMtramAM paNa "arihaMta
pada siddha karatAM prathama maLyuM che, tenuM paNa e ja rahasya che. (juo pR.
130, AtmasiddhinI gAthA). vaLI A kulagIne "dvija' paNa atyaMta priya hoya che. A
"dvija eTale zuM ? tene paramArtha vicAravA yogya che. dvija be vAra jene janma
thayo che te dvija, athavA bIjo janma jene thayuM che te dvija, te bIje janma
eTale "dvijane paramArtha saMskAra ApaNurUpa janma. pahele janma te je deha
janma paramArtha thaye te. paNa manuSyane kharekhara janma te-tene jyAre
sanmArganI dIkSA maLe che, AMtara muMDana thAya che,-tyAre thAya che. arthAt
samyagadarzanarUpa saMskAra-bIja AtmAmAM ropAyAthI jene samyagadaSTirUpe bIje
janma-nave avatAra thayo che, te "dvija" che. janmathI prApta thatA nAmamAtra
dvijapaNane A pAramArthika dvija paNa sAthe levAdevA nathI. kAraNa ke janmathI
bAhya dvija nAma hovA chatAM A pAramArthika dvija paNuM na paNa hoya; ane
janmathI bAhya dvija nAma na hovA chatAM, A pAramArthika dvija paDyuM hoya paNa
kharU: jame dvija caMDAla jevA lakSaNavALo paNa hoya! eTale dravya
dvijajanmapaNe sAthe A bhAva dvija paNAne saMbaMdha nathI, mATe ukta apekSAe
game te jAtimAM janmele A "dvija' hei zake che. arthAta samyagadarzanarUpa
saMskArajanma pAmavAne adhikAra koI paNa jAtine che,

Page #775 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Conclusion:** "Dwij" (twice-born) and "Paramarth" (ultimate goal), compassion
(69) In this, there is no distinction of caste or attire. Whoever is a worthy
person with appropriate qualities, regardless of caste, is eligible to receive
this "Sanskar" (spiritual refinement). And such a person who has received this
"Sanskar" can be called a "Dwij" or a "Brahman". Because "Tra naanaatiti
traaksha: _Brahmane shuddha atmaswaroopa ne jaane te Brahman." Thus, a "Dwij" or
a "Brahman" is a person with right faith, knowledge, and spiritual refinement, a
"Kulgi" (one who has attained spiritual knowledge), a "Jogi" (a yogi). Such a
"Kulgi" with right faith is equal in Dharma (righteousness), therefore, this
"Mumukshu" (aspirant) "Kulgi" naturally has love and affection for him.
Therefore, he shows various kinds of compassionate affection towards them, helps
them in their pursuit of the "Paramarth" path, makes things convenient for them,
and does whatever he can with his body, mind, and wealth. In this way, he
demonstrates his love and affection.  Thus, this "Mumukshu" "Kulgi" has
affection for the "Shreemad Sadguru Bhagwan" (the supreme spiritual teacher) who
is the direct benefactor, for the "Paramatma Dev" (the supreme soul) who is the
ideal local benefactor, and for the "Samyagdasht" "Dwij" or "Sanskar Swami" (the
master of spiritual refinement) who is equal in Dharma.  3. Compassionate - This
"Kulgi" is also compassionate. Compassion is a natural quality for him. When he
sees someone who is poor, suffering, or in need, he feels compassion and
empathy. The pain and suffering that the afflicted person experiences, the same
pain and suffering resonates in his soul, his heart melts, and his inner being
trembles. Thus, he suffers from the suffering of others. Therefore, he develops
a desire to alleviate the suffering of others, which is called "Karuna"
(compassion). And he actively strives to remove the suffering of others with all
his body, mind, and wealth. Such a supremely compassionate person who is
consumed by the suffering of others desires only the happiness of all beings and
does only "Sarva Jantu Hitakarani Karuna" (compassion for the welfare of all
beings). What is there to be surprised about? Therefore, how can he knowingly
inflict pain on other beings, even the smallest? Why would he even harm any
living being with his body? And why would he even disturb the spiritual outcome
of any living being with his thoughts? (See pages 149, 438, 441) These
"Mumukshu" yogis are compassionate, merciful, and full of compassion. The reason
for this is the absence of "Filasht Karma" (karmic actions that bind). "Filasht"
means difficult, harsh, heavy, and fruit-bearing karmic actions. Therefore,
their mental state is free from the harsh and binding results of "Filasht
Karma", it is soft and pure like a lotus, moistened with compassion; and their
spiritual outcome is extremely soft, melting and dissolving quickly from the
heat of the suffering of others.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 upasaMhAra : " dvija ne paramArtha, dayALupaNuM (69) emAM jAti-veSano bheda
naDatuM nathI. game te jAtine yathAyogya guNagyatAvALe je yogya adhikArI puruSa
te saMskAra jhIlavAne pAtra hoya, te A saMskArajanma pAmI zake che. ane Avo
saMskArajanma pAmela "dvija " " brAhmaNa" paNa kahI zakAya che. kAraNa ke "tra
nAnAtIti trAkSaT: _brahmane zuddha AtmasvarUpane jANe te brAhmaNa. Ama dvija
athavA brAhmaNa eTale samyagadaSTi, jJAnasaMskArasaMpanna puruSa, kulagI,
jogIjana. AvA samyagadaSTi kulagI puruSa samAnadhamI hevAthI, sAdhamika hevAthI,
A mumukSu kulogIne tenA pratye kudaratI prema-vAtsalya kure ja che. tethI temanA
pratye aneka prakAre te sAdharmika vAtsalya kare che, temane paramArtha mArganI
sAdhanAmAM jema bane tema sahAyatA thAya--anukULatA thAya, tevA tevA prakAre
potAnA tana-manadhanathI yathAzakti prabaMdha kare che, ane ema karI potAnuM
vAtsalya-premabhAva dAkhave che. Ama sAkSAt parama upakArI hovAthI zrImad
saddaguru bhagavAna pratye, tathA pakSapaNe parama upakArI Adarza sthAnIya
hovAthI paramAtma deva pratye, tathA samAnadhamI hevAthI samyagadaSTi dvija
athavA saMskArasvAmI brAhmaNe pratye, A mumukSu kulogIne avazya prIti hoya che.
3. dayALupaNuM dayALuM--A kulagI puruSe vaLI dayALu hoya che. dayA e emane
AtmasvabhAvabhUta guNa thaI paDyo hoya che. keI dIna-duHkhI-daridvI dekhI temane
dayA vachUTe che, anukaMpA upaje che. te duHkhathI duHkhIne je kaMpa-trAsa thAya
che, te tene anusarate kaMpa-trAsa temanA AtmAmAM vedAya che, temanuM hRdaya
dravIbhUta thAya che, temanuM aMtar kakaLI UThe che. Ama te paraduHkhe duHkhIA
thAya che. eTale paraduHkhanuM chedana karavAnI IcchArUpa karuNa temane upaje
che. ane tana-mana-dhananI samasta zaktithI te paradu:kha dUra karavA
sakriyapaNe tatpara bane che. AvA paraduHkhe dAjhatA parama dayALu puruSe sarva
jIvanuM sukha ja Icache ane "sarva jaMtu hitakaraNI karuNA' ja kare, emAM
Azcarya zuM? eTale teo sUphamamAM sUkSama paNa anya jIvone jANI bUjhIne duHkha
te kyAMthI ja Ape? dravyathI paNa kaI paNa jIvanI hiMsA kare ja kema? temaja
bhAvathI kaI paNa jIvanA AtmapariNAmane dUbhave ja kema? (juo pR0 149, 438, 441)
A mumukSu yogIo AvA dayALu, kRpALu, karuNAvALuM hoya che, tenuM kAraNa philaSTa
kamano abhAva e che. kliSTa eTale kaThina, AkarA, bhArI, phalezarUpa karmone
abhAva che, e che. tethI temanI cittabhUmi kaThora-philaSTa pariNAmathI rahita
evI kamaLa-pocI hoya che, dayAthI Adra-bhInI hoya che; ane temanA AtmapariNAma
ati kemaLa hoya che, paraduHkhanA tApathI zIdhra ogaLI jAya (melting)-dravI jAya
evA hoya che.

Page #776 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(700) Chag Shtisamuchchay 6 4. Humility This Jogi is humble. These Jogi men are
humble with humility, they are never arrogant, haughty, or mad. The attainment
of Chagidhani is the effect of humility, because without humility, there is no
humility, meaning there is no humility of the soul towards the virtues of the
soul, knowledge. Humility is the only way to attain self-knowledge (Spiritual
education). Therefore, Jogi men are humble by nature, knowing the great effect
of humility. Therefore, they maintain appropriate humility towards those who are
superior to them in qualities; they perform appropriate services such as rising
up and going to meet them, offering seats, worship, respect, and honor. They
perform appropriate humility, respect, and reverence towards the Satpurush, the
nectar of the Satpurush's words, and the means. And they do not even dream of
disrespecting any of them in the slightest. Because they know that disrespect to
one Satpurush, one Satvachan, or one Satsadhan is disrespect to all Satpurush,
all Satvachan, and all Satsadhan. (See Shloka Footnote p. 423) And worship of
one is worship of all, because all Sat is one undivided, inseparable, supreme
nectar ocean form. Therefore, worship of one is worship of all, and insult of
one is insult of all. Knowing this, these Bhava-Bhiru Jogi men stay away from
disrespecting any Sat. And wherever they see qualities superior to their own,
the souls of these true quality-loving Mumukhsus become joyful, and they
naturally bow down to that quality with humility. They have an excess of
"Gunupramaad". (See verse, p. 197-198) But seeing qualities, they never become
envious, or arrogant and haughty. Because they understand well that the reason
why my soul, which is devoid of its own awareness, has been wandering for an
infinite time, is that I did not serve the true saintly Guru. I did not give up
that desire and arrogance. Because of this evil, wicked, great enemy-like
arrogance, I have been suffering for so long; if I still hold on to false pride
and do not serve the feet of the saintly, I will still have to endure the same
worldly suffering. I have never heard of anyone's welfare being achieved through
arrogance, but only through service with humility has anyone's welfare been
achieved, is being achieved, and will be achieved. Indeed, the scriptures say
that even if one has attained perfect knowledge through the teachings of a
Sadguru, and the Guru himself is still in a state of delusion (with the veil of
knowledge), even then, the Kevali Bhagavan still shows humility to that
supremely benevolent Guru. Such are the teachings of humility that Shri
Vitragdeva has spoken, the main purpose of which is "Subhag" - auspiciousness.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (700) cAga STisamuccaya 6 4. vinItapaNuM vinIta--vaLI A jogIjana vinIta hAya
che. A jogI puruSo vinayathI namra hAya che, kadI paNa abhimAnathI unnata-akkaDa
vA unmatta heAtA nathI. cAgidhanI prApti thavI te vinayane ja prabhAva che,
kAraNa ke vinaya vinA vinaya' arthAt Atma'guNa pramAda vidyA pratye AtmAnuM
vinayana-doravaNI hAtI nathI; vinayathI ja vinayanIatizaya rahe' AtmavidyAnI (
Spiritual education) prApti hoya che. eTale ceAgI puruSA vinayanA Ave|
mahAprabhAva jANatA haiAvAthI svabhAvathI ja'vinIta' hAya che. tethI peAtAnAthI
adhika guNavatAnA teo yathAyAgya vinaya sAcave che; abhyutthAna-UThIne sAmA
javu', AsanadAna, pUjana, bahumAna, satkAra Adi ucita upacAra Acare che.
satpuruSanA, satpuruSanA vacanAmRtanA, ane sAdhananA yathAyeAgya vinaya-humAna-
gauravAdi te kare che; ane temAMthI koInI paNa svapnAMtare pazu lezamAtra
AzAtanA, avajJA karatA ja nathI. kAraNa ke te jANe che ke-eka satpuruSanI ke eka
satvacananI ke eka satsAdhananI AzAtanA te sa` satpuruSanI, sarva satvacananI,
ane sarva sAdhananI AzAtanA che. (jue zrlAka phUTaneTa pR. 423) ane ekanI
pUjAmAM te sarvanI pUjA che, kAraNa te sarva sat eka akhaMDa abheda parama amRta
rasasAgarasvarUpa che. eTale ekanI vaMdanA te sarvanI vadanA che, ane ekanI
niMdanA te sanI nizvanA che. Ama jANatA hAi te bhavabhIru megI puruSA koI paNa
satnI AzAtanA dUrathI ja vaje che. ane jyAM kayAMya peAtAnAthI adhika guNa dekhe
che, tyAM A sAcA guNAnurAgI mumukSuonA AtmA praphulla bane che, ane te guNa
pratye sahaja svabhAve vinayathI namI paDe che. AvA tene 'guNuprameAda atizaya
rahe' che. (jue padya, pR. 197-198 ) paNa guNu dekhIne te kadI matsara dharatA
nathI, athavA abhimAnathI akkaDa rahetA nathI. kAraNa ke te sArI peThe samaje
che ke-A mhArA AtmA je nija bhAna vinA ana ta kALathI AthaDayo, tenuM kAraNa
sAcA saMta gurune me' sevyA nhAtA * evA mAga ane abhimAnane mUkayu nhotue che. A
duSTa aniSTa mahAzatrurUpa vinaya taNA ' abhimAnathI teA huM ATale kALa ATaleA
badhA du:khI thayA; te have paNa mithyAbhimAna rAkhI jo huM vinayapUrNAMka
saMtacaraNu nahiM sevuM. tA haju paNa mhAre te ne te ja bhavaduHkha sahevAnA
vArA Avaze. abhimAnathI kadI keAInuM kalyANu thayu' sAMbhaLyuM nathI, paNa
vinayamAMnA sevanathI ja saM kAI kalyANa thayu che, thAya che, te thaze. are!
zAstramAM te eTale sudhI kahyu` che ke je sadgurunA upadezathI peAtAne kevaLa
jJAna thayu che, te guru peAte haju chadmastha (jJAnAvaraNu yukta) rahyA hAya,
tA paNa te kevaLIbhagavAn paNa te parama upakArI gurune! vinaya kare che. evA A
vinayanA mAga zrI vItarAgadeve bhAkhyA che, e mAnA mULa hetu kAi ' subhAga
'-saubhA

Page #777 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Conclusion:** The virtuous, non-deceitful, self-controlled, and wise are
understood only by the liberated soul. Therefore, I too, abandoning pride, will
follow the path of ultimate humility. Understanding this, the seeker of
liberation, the yogi, practices humility as appropriate.  The one who attained
omniscience through the teachings of the true Guru, even though the Guru
remained hidden, practiced humility towards the Lord. Such a path of humility
was described by Shri Vitrag: "The essence of this path is understood by the
fortunate." - Shri Atmasiddhi. This humility is the effect of virtuous karma,
the fruit of virtuous karma. The karma that leads to further and further
virtuous karma is called virtuous karma. Therefore, this humility is attained as
the fruit of great virtuous karma, which keeps the chain of virtuous karma
going.  5. Non-deceitfulness: The yogi is wise, possessing true knowledge and
understanding. This true knowledge arises from the breaking of the knots of
ignorance. Therefore, these yogis have right vision and are steadfast in their
faith. They have attained true knowledge of the nature of things, and therefore
they see the distinction between self and non-self clearly. The knowledge that
"I am the self-illuminating soul, distinct from the body and other things," this
unshakeable knowledge of the truth is firmly established in their souls. "I am
one, pure, full of knowledge and vision, eternally formless, and nothing else,
not even an atom, is mine." (See verse page 68). Due to this unshakeable self-
awareness, they are never confused, deluded, attached, or entangled in the non-
self. Even while dwelling in the midst of it, they remain detached and
indifferent, like a lotus in water. The one who tastes the nectar of this right
knowledge does not find other tastes appealing; they seem like tasteless, bland,
and unappealing.  6. Self-control: The yogi is self-controlled, having conquered
the senses. This is achieved through virtuous conduct. The one who truly knows
the nature of the self is no longer controlled by the senses, but strives to
control the senses. They do not become slaves to the senses, but make the senses
their slaves. They do not allow the senses to dominate them, but they dominate
the senses. They bind the unruly horses of the senses with the reins of self-
control, sit in the chariot of their true nature, and command the charioteer of
the mind to drive them forward. They withdraw the five senses from objects, turn
them towards their true nature, and employ them in the attainment of self-
realization. The insignificant body...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 upasaMhAra : vinIta bedhavaMta yatendriya kulagI (701) vyavAna puruSa ja samaje
che. mATe huM paNa abhimAna cheDI te ja parama vinaya mArganuM anusaraNa karuM.
ema samajI A mumukSu yogI puruSa yathAyogya vinayAcaraNa kare che. je sadguru
upadezathI, pAmyo kevaLajJAna, guru rahyA chadmastha paNa, vinaya kare
bhagavAna. evo mArga vinaya taNe, bhAkhyo zrI vItarAga; mULa hetu e mArgane,
samaje ke subhAga."-zrI Atmasiddhi. A vinIta paNuM e kuzalAnubaMdhI puNyane ja
prabhAva che, puNyAnubaMdhI puNyanuM ja phaLa che. je puNyathI pAcho viziSTa
viziSTa puNyane anubaMdha thayA kare che, te puNyAnubaMdhI puNya kahevAya che.
eTale jethI puNyanI zRMkhalA-sAMkaLa cAlu rahe che, evA mahApuNyanA ja phaLa
paripAkarUpe A vinItapaNuM prApta thAya che. 5. bedhavaMtapaNuM bodhavaMta-vaLI
A jogIjane bodhavaMta hoya che, yathArtha bodhavALA-samajaNavALA hoya che. A
yathArtha bodha graMthibhedane lIdhe hoya che. tethI karIne A yogIo samyagadaSTi
hoI temane bedha satazraddhAsaMgata hoya che. temane vastutatvane yathArtha -
tattvavinizcaya thaI cUkyo hoya che, tethI teo sva-paravastuno bheda
hastAmalavata dekhe che. huM dehAdithI bhinna e svaparaprakAzaka AtmA chuM, e
akhaMDa tattvabedha temanA AtmAmAM sadedita rahe che. huM eka, zuddha, darzana
jJAnamaya, sadA arUpI e AtmA chuM, bIjuM kaMI paNa paramANumAtra paNa hAruM
nathI." (juo gAthA pR. 68 ) evI akhaMDa AtmabhAvanAne lIdhe te paravatumAM kadI
muMjhAtA nathI, mahAtA nathI, lepAtA nathI, kharaDAtA nathI, ane te madhye rahyA
chatAM paNa teo tethI jalakamalavat alipta ane udAsIna ja rahe che. A samyaga
bodhane amRtarasa jeNe cAkhe che, tene pachI bIjA rasa gamatA nathI,
bAkasabukasa-chAsabAkaLA lAge che. 6. tendriyapaNuM teMdriyaane te yateMdriya-
jitendriya hoya che. teNe indriyone saMyama karyo hoya che,-A cAritra bhAvathI
bane che. je tattvasvarUpane yathArthapaNe jANe che, te pachI idrine AdhIna
thatuM nathI, paNa idrine pitAne AdhIna karavA mathe che te iMdriyane gulAma
banatuM nathI, paNa iMdriyone potAnI gulAma banAve che. te iMdriyone potAnA para
svAra thavA detA nathI, paNa pite tenA para svAra thAya che. iMdrirUpa tephAnI
ghoDAne saMyamarUpa lagAmathI bAMdhI, te svarUpa-rathamAM besI, manarUpa
sArathine AjJA karI te calA varAve che. te pAMce indriyone viSayomAMthI vyAvRtta
karI-pAchI vALI svarUpAbhimukha kare che, ane temane svarUpasAdhananI prAptimAM
temanA "jogA" kAme lagADI de che, nisAra deha

Page #778 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(702). It also extracts the essence of the ultimate goal from the collection of
Gadasti, uses it to its advantage, and gets its work done, and like a skilled
speaker, it "extracts the essence"! For example, it makes the taste organ
successful with the taste of the virtues of a good man, purifies the hearing
organ with the listening of good conduct. In this way, by engaging the five
senses with external use, it turns them towards internal use, which benefits the
soul. "Remain internally focused." "The one who is pleased with the Lord's face,
that is the eye's measure... Jinavar! The one who names the Jin's feet, that is
the head's chief... Jinavar! The one who holds the Ariha's foot, that is the
hand's peace... Jinavar! The one who plays in the contemplation of the Jin's
virtues, that is the mind's happiness... Shri Trashabhanan." "It is good that I
have sung the Lord's virtues, I have taken the fruit of taste, Devchandra says
to my mind, all of me is straight like a chariot." Shri Devchandraji. Thus, here
are the six characteristics of this Kulgi - (1) Absence of attachment and
aversion everywhere - due to the absence of attachment and aversion. From this,
its neutrality and friendliness towards the entire world is indicated. (2) Love
for God, Guru, and Twice-born - due to the influence of Dharma. Demonstration -
From this, the difference in virtues is shown. (3) Compassion - due to the
absence of agreement with the karmas of defilement. From this, his compassion
for the suffering is said. (4) Humble austerity - due to the virtue that is
connected to virtue. From this, his humility and lack of pride are said. (5)
Wisdom - due to the understanding of the knots. From this, his right vision,
understanding of truth, right perception, and knowledge are shown. (6) Control
of the senses - due to the attitude of conduct. From this, his self-control is
shown. From these six characteristics, this aspiring Kulgi is implicitly shown
to have right perception, knowledge, and conduct, and the attainment of the
complete path to liberation, which is the goal of nature and desire, is shown.
These (first) characteristics are so clear, unambiguous, and practical that from
them, one can clearly examine who is a Kulgi and what kind of Kulgi they are.
These same characteristics are so vast and all-encompassing that they are truly
in accordance with the main six philosophies. (See page 558 of the Gita). The
one who possesses these characteristics is the true Kulgi, the true Vaishnav,
the true Brahmin, the true Buddhist, the true Sankhya, the true Jain, the true
Vedantin, the true soul, and the true Siddha Yogi, Shrimad Rajchandraji, who
immortalized the true Kulgi in his last work. (See "The one who desires is the
Kulgi" page 13). And the one who possesses these characteristics is the one who
is entitled to this Yoga Shastra. Thus, the form of the Kulgi has been discussed
here in some detail, as much as possible, and it should be contemplated further
with one's own mind.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (702). gadaSTisamuccaya mAMthI paNa sArabhUta paramArtha sAdhana sAdhI levAmAM
tene sadupayoga karI potAnuM kAma kADhI le che, ane pAka vANIAnI peThe tene
"kasa' kADhe che! dAkhalA tarIke-rasaneMdriyane te sapuruSanA guNasaMkIrtananA
rasAsvAdathI saphaLa kare che, zravaNendriyane satpaSacarita zravaNathI pAvana
kare che. ItyAdi prakAre bahirmukha upagathI pAMca iMdriyane vyAvRtta karI, te
AtmAne upakArI thAya ema aMtarmukha upayoga bhaNI vALI de che. "rahe aMtarmukha
ga. " je prasanna prabhu mukha grahe, tehI ja nayana pramANu....jinavara! je
jina caraNe nAmiye, mastaka te ja pradhAna...jinavara ! arihA padakaja araciye,
te sulahi je haththa... jinavara ! jina guNa ciMtanameM rame, tehi ja mana
sukamaththa..zrI trASabhAnana." bhaluM thayuM meM prabhu guNa gAyA, rasanA phaLa
lIdhe re, devacaMdra kahe mahArA manane, sakaLa mane ratha sIdhe re."zrI
devacaMdrajI. Ama ahIM A kulagInA cha lakSaNa kA -(1) sarvatra adveSa-grahanA
abhAvane lIdhe. A uparathI tenuM madhyasthapaNuM ane samasta jagata pratye
maitrIbhAva sUcavyo. (2) deva-guru-dvijanuM priyapaNuM-dhama prabhAvane lIdhe.
padarzana- A uparathI guNa prabheda batAvyuM. (3) dayALutA-kilaSTa karmanA
saMmata paDa abhAvathI. A uparathI tenI dukhI pratye anukaMpA kahI. (4)
vinIlakSaNa tapaNuM-puNyAnubaMdhI puNyane lIdhe. A uparathI tenuM
vinayanamrapaNuM ane nirabhimAnapaNuM kahyuM. (5) bodhavaMtapaNuM-graMthibhedane
lIdhe. A uparathI enuM samyagdaSTipaNuM, satya samajaNapaNuM, samyagadarzana-
jJAnasaMpannapaNuM batAvyuM. (6) yate'driyapaNuM-cAritrabhAvane lIdhe. A
uparathI enuM saMyamIpaNuM darzAvyuM. A chae lakSaNa uparathI garbhitapaNe A
mumukSu kulagIne samyagadarzana-jJAna-cAritrane sadbhAva batAvI svabhAva-cAga
sAdhaka saMpUrNa mokSamArganI prApti batAvI. A ( paha lakSaNa eTalA badhA
spaSTa, avisaMvAdI ane vyavahArU che ke te uparathI kulagI keNa hoya? ne kevo
hoya ? tenI spaSTa parIkSA thaI zake che. A ja lakSaNa evA vizALa ne sarvagrAhI
che ke te mukhya Sa darzanane saMmata thAya evA te ja sAce che. (juo pR. 558
gItAnA zle). A lakSaNa jenAmAM hoya te ja jogIjana' kulagI che, te ja sAco
vaiSNavajana che, te ja sAco brAhmaNa che, te ja sAce bauddha che, te ja sAce
sAMkhya che, te ja sAce jaina che, te ja sAce vedAMtI che, te ja sAce mumukSu
che, te ja sAco AtmAthI che, ane te ja parama siddha yogIzvara zrImad
rAjacaMdrajIe pitAnI chellI kRtimAM amara karele sAco jogIjana" che. (juo "Icche
che je jogIjana" pR. 13) ane AvA lakSaNavALo je jogIjana hoya, te ja atra A
yogazAstrane adhikArI che. Ama kulagInuM svarUpa atra kaMIka vistArathI
yathAmati vivecyuM, te svamatithI vizeSa ciMtavavuM.

Page #779 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(703) **Conclusion: The Six Characteristics of the Kulagi, the Complete Form of
the Pravṛttachakra**  The Pravṛttachakra, first of all, is dependent on the two
Yamas; the remaining two are intensely desired, and they are endowed with the
qualities of service, etc. (212)  The Artha and the Pravṛttachakra yogi are of
two types: those who depend on the two Yamas, and those who are intensely
desirous of the remaining two Yamas, and are endowed with the qualities of
service, etc.  - Commentary: The eight qualities of service, etc., are complete;
the Pravṛttachakra is said to be that; the one who gains the brilliance is the
one who desires the two Arthas; the one who gains the initial non-attachment is
the one who gains the Pravṛttachakra. - G.D., Sakṣā. 8-5  The Pravṛttachakra is
further distinguished as follows: (1) They are dependent on the two Yamas, i.e.,
they are perfectly dependent on the two Yamas of Icchayam and Pravṛttiyam. And
(2) they are intensely desirous of the remaining two Yamas - Sthira-yam and
Siddhi-yam. This is due to the virtuous activity. Therefore (3) they are endowed
with the eight qualities of service, etc.: service, listening, grasping,
holding, knowledge, this, that, and the firm establishment in the truth - they
are endowed with these eight qualities.  What is "Pravṛttachakra"? The one whose
chakra has become active is the Pravṛttachakra. And here, the G-chakra is
presented. That is, the one whose entire yoga-chakra has become active, has
started to move, is the Pravṛttachakra. Just as when one part of a wheel is
moved by a stick, the entire wheel starts to move on its own (what is "Auto"?
matically), similarly, when one part of this G-chakra is touched, moved, the
entire G-chakra automatically becomes active, starts to move. This is a very
simple but supremely miraculous truth. To move a wheel, one does not have to
touch the entire wheel, but by moving one part (handle) with the hand, the
entire wheel becomes mobile. Similarly, to move this G-chakra, one does not have
to touch the entire chakra, but by moving one of its   **Vṛtti:** Pravṛvatu
punaḥ - The Pravṛttachakra is further distinguished as follows: What is meant is
that they are dependent on the two Yamas of Icchayam and Pravṛttiyam. Śeṣārthin
- desirous of the remaining, i.e., they are desirous of the two Yamas of Sthira-
yam and Siddhi-yam. Atyanta - intensely, due to virtuous activity. Therefore, it
is said - Śuśruṣāvigunānvitā - endowed with the qualities of service, etc.; they
are endowed with the eight qualities of service, listening, grasping, holding,
knowledge, this, that, and the firm establishment in the truth.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (703) upasaMhAraH kulagInA SaDu lakSaNa, pravRttacakanuM savarUpa
pravRttacakrAstu punaryamadvayasamAzrayAH  /  zeSadvayArthino'tyantaM
shushruussaadigunnaanvitaaH||212|| pravRttacaka te prathama, yamaya AzrayavaMta;
bAkI be ati IcchatA, zuzruSAdi guNavaMta, 212 artha ane pravRttacakra yogI te be
prakAranA yamane samAzraya karanArA, tathA bAkInA be prakAranA yamanA arthI,
temaja zuzraSA Adi guNathI yukta, evA hoya che. - vivecana zuzruSAdika aDa guNa
saMpUraNa, pravRttacaka te kahiyejI; camakayalAbhI para duga artha, Adya
avaMcaka lahiye."--ga da, sakjhA. 8-5 pravRttacaka te punaH kevA viziSTa hoya
che te kahe che-(1) teo yamadrayane samAzraya karanArA, eTale ke IcchAyAma ane
pravRttiyama e be yamane samyapha Azraya karanAra hoya che. tathA-(2) bAkInA be
yamanA arthI-sthirayama ane siddhiyamanA athI atyaMtapaNe hoya che. Ama
sadupAyapravRttine lIdhe hoya che. eTalA mATe ja(3) teo zuzruSAdi ATha guNathI
yukta hoya che, zuzruSA, zravaNa, grahaNa, dhAraNa, vijJAna, hA, apaha ane
tattvAbhiniveza--e ATha guNathI yukta hoya che. pravRttacaka" eTale zuM? jenuM
cake pravRtta thayuM che te pravRttacaka. ane atre ga-caka ja prastuta che.
eTale jenuM AkhuM yogacaka pravRtta thayuM che cAlavA mAMDayuM che, te
pravRttacakra gI che. jema cakranA keI eka dezane daMDathI preravAmAM
pravRttacakra AvatAM-calAvavAmAM AvatAM, AkhuM caka enI meLe (AutoeTale zuM ?
matically ) cAlavA mAMDe che tema A gacakanA keI eka dezane sparzavAmAM AvatAM-
preravAmAM AvatAM, AkhuM gacaka ApoApa pravRtta thAya che cAlavA mAMDe che. A
sAva sAdI paNa parama AzcaryakAraka satya ghaTanA che. cakrane calAvavA mATe
kAMI AkhA cakrane hAtha lagADa paDatuM nathI, paNa koI eka deze hAthe (Handle)
halAvavAthI AkhuM cakra gatimAna thAya che, tema A gacakrane calAvavA mATe kAMI
AkhA cakrane hAtha lagADavo paDato nathI, paNa tenA keI eka vRtti:pravRvatu
punaH-pravRttacakra te puna: kevA viziSTa hoya che? te ke yamadUyAtrAicchAya,
ane pravRttiyamanA AzramavALA ema artha che, zeSArthina -zeSayanA athI, eTale ke
sthirayama ane siddhiyama e benA arthI, ema kahyuM. atyanta-atyaMtapaNe,
sadupAya pravRttivaDe karIne-eTalA mATe. eTalA mATe ja kahyuM-
zuzraSAviguNAnvitA-suzruSA Adi guNayukta; zuzraSA, zravaNa, grahaNa, dhAraNa,
vijJAna, IhA, apaha ane tattvAbhiniveza--e ATha guNathI yukta evA,

Page #780 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Yoga Dasya Samuchaya  The act of turning the hand, which is the form of self-
effort, sets the entire cycle in motion. Just as one cycle of a clock starts,
all the other cycles closely connected to it also begin to move, and the entire
clockwork starts functioning; similarly, when one cycle of the Gachka starts,
all the other cycles intimately connected to it automatically start moving, and
thus the entire Gachka mechanism starts functioning. And just as the started
clockwork moves in a certain direction, so too does this started active cycle
mechanism progress towards the attainable state of Siddha. For example:  "When
non-violence is touched by the soul, when one acts in non-violence, other
virtues like truthfulness, etc., are also touched and activated, because they
are the inherent protectors of non-violence. When they are followed, non-
violence is also followed, and when they are violated, non-violence is also
violated. (1) This is because non-violence means not allowing the self-nature to
be harmed or destroyed by passions, hatred, pride, etc. And claiming another's
property as one's own is falsehood, which is also a destruction of the self-
nature, so a true non-violent person will never lie. Stealing another's property
is theft, which is also violence against the self-nature, so a non-violent
person will never steal. Engaging in adultery with another's spouse, embracing
them, is also a violation of the self-nature, so a non-violent person will never
do it. Acquiring another's property is also a form of delusion and attachment,
which is a destruction of the self-nature, so a truly non-violent person will
not acquire possessions. Thus, whoever is non-violent will certainly follow
truthfulness, etc., and whoever follows truthfulness, etc., is truly non-
violent. Whoever is non-violent will not indulge in falsehood, etc., and whoever
indulges in falsehood, etc., is not non-violent. Thus, there is a mutual
inseparable relationship between non-violence, truthfulness, etc., meaning that
those who violate truthfulness, etc., are also violating non-violence, so a non-
violent person will avoid them. (2) Similarly, whoever embraces the Yoga of
"truth" will never say that another's property is theirs, will never call
falsehood truth and truth falsehood, but will always call truth truth and
falsehood falsehood. Therefore, since committing violence, which is the
destruction of the self-nature through passions, etc., is falsehood, a truthful
person will never commit it. And whoever commits it is not truthful. They will
not commit the act of stealing another's property, because doing so is a
violation of truth. They will not engage in adultery with another's spouse,
abandoning their own self-nature, because it is equivalent to abandoning the
true self. They will not acquire another's property with a sense of self-
ownership, because to claim another's property as one's own is a blatant
falsehood. The same understanding applies to non-stealing, etc. (See Kavya, pp.
106, 107)"

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 yogadaSyisamuccaya pradeze AtmapuruSArtharUpa hAtha pheravavAthI AkhuM cakra
gatimAna thAya che. athavA jema ghaDiyALanuM eka cakra cAle, eTale enI sAthe
gADha saMkaLAyelA bIjA badhAM cakra paNa cAlavA mAMDe che, ane AkhuM
ghaTikAyaMtra cAlu thAya che; tema gacakanuM eka cakra cAlavA mAMDatAM, enI
sAthe ghaniSTha rIte saMkaLAyelA bIjA badhAM cakra ApoApa cAlavA mAMDe che, ane
Ama AkhuM gacakra yaMtra cAlu thAya che. ane cAlu thayeluM ghaTikAyaMtra jema
amuka dizA bhaNI ja gati kare che, tema A cAlu thayeluM pravRttacakra yaMtra
paNa sAdhya evI siddhadazAnI dizA bhaNI ja pragati kare che. dAkhalA tarIke-:
"ahiMsA vega AtmAthI sparzavAmAM AvatAM, ahiMsAmAM pravRtti karatAM, tenI sAthe
satyAdi bIjA vega paNa sparzAI jAya che, cAlu thaI jAya che, kAraNa ke te
satyAdi paNa ahiMsAnA aMgabhUta saMrakSaka heI, tenuM pAlana thatAM ahiMsAnuM
paNa ahiMsAdinI pAlana thAya che, ane bhaMga thatAM ahiMsAno paNa bhaMga thAya
che. (1) saMkalanA kAraNa ke ahiMsA eTale rAga-dveSa-mahAdi vibhAvathI
AtmasvarUpanuM hiMsana na thavA devuM, ghAta na thavA devI, te che. ane para
vastune potAnI kahevI te asatya che, te paNa Atma svarUpanI ghAta hovAthI sAco
ahiMsaka kadI vade ja nahiM. para vastunuM apaharaNa karavuM te corI che, te
paNa svarUpanI hiMsA hovAthI ahiMsaka kadI kare ja nahiM. paravastu pratye
vyabhicaraNa karI teno AzleSa kara, bheTavuM te paNa svarUpanuM hiMsana heI
ahiMsaka kadI kare ja nahiM para vastunuM parigrahaNa paNa mUrchA-mamatvarUpa
heI AtmasvarUpanI ghAta che, mATe kharekharo ahiMsaka te parigraha grahe ja
nahiM. Ama je ahiMsaka hoya te satyAdi avazya pALe ja, ane satyAdi pALe te ja
sAce ahiMsaka hoya. je ahiMsaka hoya te asatyAdi seve ja nahiM, ane je asatyAdi
seve te ahiMsaka hoya ja nahiM. Ama ahiMsA-satyAdinI paraspara avinAbhAva
saMbaMdharUpa vyAti che, eTale asatyAdi svarUpane bhaMga karanAra hovAthI
ahiMsAno bhaMga karanArA hoya che, mATe ahiMsaka megI tene vaje ja che. (2) tema
"satya" yogane je grahe che, te kadI para vastune pitAnI che ema kahe ja nahi,
sane asat ane asatane sat kadI kahe ja nahi, paNa sadAya sane sat ne asatane
asata ja kahe. eTale rAgAdithI svarUpanI ghAta karavArUpa hiMsA karavI te asat
hevAthI, satavAdI te kadI Acare ja nahiM. ne Acare te te savAdI nathI. para
vastunA apaharaNarUpa adattAdAna te kare nahiM, kAraNa ke tema karavuM te satnA
bhaMgarUpa che. svarUpa choDIne paravastu pratye vyabhicAra-saMzleSa te kare
nahi, kAraNa ke te sat vastune tyAga karavA barAbara che. pArakI vastu pratye
AtmabuddhirUpa mUcha karIne te parigraha grahe ja nahiM, kAraNa ke tema pArakI
vastu pacAvI pADavAnuM karavuM te haDahaDatuM asatya che. te ja pramANe asteya
Adi mATe samajI levuM. (juo kAvya, pR. 106, 107)

Page #781 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Conclusion:** Here, the entire cycle of six karmas, which are the obstacles to
liberation, is destroyed by the practice of non-violence and other virtues.
(705) In this way, by practicing with true devotion, even a single virtue, when
touched by purity, becomes fully activated, and the entire cycle of karmas
automatically starts functioning. This is the great benefit of this active
cycle. When this group of virtues touches even a single part of the soul, the
entire soul becomes pure! When this group of virtues, like a "magic wand,"
touches the soul, it brings about a miraculous transformation in the soul! When
this offering of yogic devotion is poured out, its magical life-giving effect
spreads throughout the soul, from every part to every part!  Thus, the yogic
cycle of the yogi who practices this cycle of virtues becomes fully activated.
The cycle that previously functioned as an obstacle, without the awareness of
the true nature of the soul, and was moving in the opposite direction, "anti-
clockwise," and was destructive, now, with the awareness of the true nature of
the soul, becomes a facilitator, and the cycle reverses, moving in the opposite
direction, "clockwise."  It functions favorably, "clockwise." The six karmic
factors, namely, the agent (karta), the action (karma), the instrument (karan),
the object (apaadan), the recipient (sampradan), and the location (adhikaran),
which previously functioned as obstacles to the soul, now begin to function as
facilitators of the soul. Previously, the agent was affected by the external,
the action was external, the instrument was used for external purposes, the
recipient was external, the object was external, and the location was also
external; now, instead, the agent is affected by the self, the action is of the
nature of the self, the instrument is used for the purpose of the self, the
recipient is of the nature of the self, the object is external, and the location
is in the self. Here, the soul itself is the agent, the attainment of the self
is the action, the instrument used in the process of attainment is the
instrument, the gift of the self's wealth is the recipient, in which the giver,
the recipient, and the gift are all one; the discrimination between the self and
the non-self is the object, and the basis of all the categories is the location.
Thus, it eliminates the obstacles of the karmic factors, which are without
beginning, and embraces the virtues that facilitate liberation. Therefore, what
previously was done by the external agent, through the external action, with the
external instrument, for the external purpose, through the external means, and
in the external, is now done by the self, through the self's nature, with the
self's nature as the instrument, for the self's nature, through the self, and in
the self. In other words, the soul, for the soul, by the soul, for the soul's
purpose, through the soul, in the soul, practices. The soul, for the soul, by
the soul, for the soul's purpose, through the soul, in the soul, practices. In
this way, it practices the virtues of the soul through the six karmic factors
that facilitate liberation.  "Mallaanath," meditate on the feet of Jagannath,
attain the supreme state of pure primordial consciousness, practice the virtues
of the six karmic factors, and only then will you attain the pure form, free
from all limitations.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 upasaMhAra : ahiMsAdinI sakalanA : SakAraka cakane 53 (705) A prakAre
ApayogathI sAcA bhAvathI eka paNa vega zuddhapaNe sparzItAM, anya yoga tenI
sAthe saMkalita hovAthI AkhuM cogacaka ApoApa cAlu thaI jAya che. AvI A pravRtta
gacakranI bhArI khUbI che. A garUpa pArasamaNino kaI eka deze sparza thatAM,
Akho AtmA gamaya banI jAya che ! A garUpa 'jAduI lAkaDI" (magic wand) AtmA para
pharatAM, AtmAmAM keI ajaba pheraphAra thaI jAya che! A yoga-paramAmRtanI aMjali
chAMTavAmAM AvatAM tenI jAdUI saMjIvanI asara AtmAnI nasenasamAM-pradeze
pradezamAM prasarI jAya che ! Ama A pavanacakasAdhaka yogInuM yoga-sAdhaka caka
ekadama cAlu thaI jAya che. je cakra pUrve AtmasvarUpanA bhAna vinA bAdhaka
thaIne pravartatuM hatuM, viparIta paNe- ulaTuM udhuM (anti-clockwise) cAlatuM
hatuM, "vAmamAgI'-ADe mAge SakAraka cAlanAruM thatuM hatuM, te have
AtmasvarUpanuM bhAna Avye sAdhaka thaIne cakano palaTo pravarte che, aviparIta
paNe sulaTuM sIdhuM (clockwise) cAlavA mAMDe che. "dakSiNamAgI"--anukULa thaIne
pravarte che. karNA, karma, karaNa, apAdAna, saMpradAna ane adhikaraNa e SaTu
kAraka caka je pUrve Atma-bAdhakapaNe cAlatuM hatuM, te have Atma-sAdhakapaNe
cAlavA mAMDe che. pUrve je kartA parabhAvane thato hatuM, karma parabhAva-
vibhAvarUpa karatuM hatuM, karaNa paravastunuM prayojato hato, grahaNarUpa
saMpradAna paranuM karatuM hatuM, tyAgarUpa apAdAna svanuM karate hatA, ane
adhikaraNa paNa paravatumAM karato hato; tene badale have te kartA svabhAvane
thAya che, karma svabhAvarUpa kare che, kAraNa AtmasvabhAvanuM prayoje che,
grahaNarUpa saMpradAna AtmabhAvanuM kare che, tyAgarUpa apAdAna parabhAvanuM
kare che, ane adhikaraNa AtmavastumAM kare che. atre Atma dravya e ja kartA che,
nija AtmAnI siddhi-siddhatA e kArya-karma che, upAdAna-pariNAmamAM prayukta te
karaNapaNuM che, AtmasaMpattinuM dAna te saMpradAnapaNuM che, ke jemAM dAtA
pAtra ne deya e traNe bhAvanI abhedatA thAya che; sva-paranuM vivecana-viveka
karavo te apAdAna che, ane sakala paryAyano AdhAra te adhikaraNa che. Ama anAdi
evA bAdhaka kAraka bhAva nivAravA te sAdhakatAne avalaMbI te samArI le che
sudhArI le che. eTale pUrve je parano kartA, para karma, para karaNa vaDe, 5ra
arthe, para thakI, paramAM rahIne karate hatuM, te have sva AtmAne kartA,
svabhAva karmane, svabhAva karaNa vaDe, svabhAva athe, sva thakI, svamAM rahIne
kare che. arthAt AtmA, AtmAne, AtmAthI, AtmA artha, AtmA thakI, AtmAmAM sAdhe
che. rAtmA gAtmAne zAtmanA AtmAne zAtmanaH AtmA sadhati. A pramANe te sAdhaka
evA kAraka SaTaka vaDe AtmaguNanI sAdhanA kare che. mallinAtha" jaganAtha
caraNayuga dhyAIe re, zuddhAtama prAgabhAva paramapada pAIe re sAdhaka kAraka
SaTaka kare guNa sAdhanA re, tehI ja zuddha svarUpa thAya nirAbAdanA re.

Page #782 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(706) The self-substance is the doer of the collection of actions, its own
nature is the cause, the material cause is the result, the applied cause is its
efficiency; the self is the giver, its giving is the giving nature, the giver,
the receiver, and the given, the three are inseparable. The self-other
discrimination is the cause, it is from the non-material cause, the whole cycle
is based on the relationship of the place; the obstructive cause is the feeling,
it is to be removed from the beginningless, the supportive cause is the
dependence, it is to be maintained...that  Great Muni Shri Devchandraji Figure
20 D 13Re છne Parbhaav 72a. Baav Adhikarana) Ke * Prabhaav - Parbha “Vabhaavana
Baadhak Chak Saadhak Chak Aadhak Chak four types Saadhak Chak Gee Re Keshtka 16
Naam Gotra Gee Kul Yogi Pravrittchakrayogi Nishpan) Siddha Gee Vyakhyaan Yogi
born in the clan, whose non-violence, etc. is the ground of being, etc. or the
Yogi is active in the abode, named follower | started walking. Who is
accomplished in yoga-perfection. Lakshan As per the yoga, devoid of qualities,
named Irchhayam-Pravrittim Sarvatra Ali obtained, Sthiraayam- Guru-Dev-Dij
Priya, Siddhiyam Athi, compassionate, humble, non-deceitful, Yate Diy|.
Shrashtadi Gunayukt, Avachaka Trayayukt who have attained yoga-perfection
Samarth Yogi This is the way of this text Ayogya * Y Ayogya Kaaranu
Yogyatarahithapanu Par Yathaayogya Panu | Yathaayogapanu Siddhi Bhaav Praaptpanu

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (706) gidasimucaya kartA Atama dravya, kAraja nija siddhatA re, upAdAna
pariNAma, prayukta te karaNutA re; Atama saMpadAna, teha saMpradAnatA re, dAtA
pAtra ne deya, tribhAva abhedatA re. sva-para vivecana karaNa, teha apAdAnathI
re, sakala paryAya AdhAra saMbaMdha AsthAnathI re; bAdhaka kAraka bhAva, anAdi
nivAravA re, sAdhakatA avalaMbI, teha samAravA re...teha mahAmuni zrI
devacaMdrajI AkRti 20 Dii 13Re chane parabhAva 72aa. bAva adhikaraNa ) ke *
prabhAva - parabhA "vabhAvanA bAdhaka caka sAdhaka cakra Adhaka caka cAra
prakAranA sAdhaka caka gI ra keSTaka 16 nAma gotra gI kula yogI pravRttacakra
yogI niSpana) siddha gI vyAkhyAM yegI kulamAM janmelA, jenuM ahiMsAdi
bhUmibhavya Adi athavA yogIdhAmane gaka pravRtta che, nAmadhArI anusaranAra |
cAlavA mAMDayuM che. jene yoganiSpanna-siddha che. lakSaNa yathAyogya
guNavihIna, nAmadhArI irachAyama-pravRttima sarvatra alI pAmelA, sthirayama-
guru-deva-dija priya, siddhiyama athI, dayALu, vinIta, bedhavata, yate diya|.
zraSAdi guNayukta, avaMcaka trayayukta yogasiddhine pAmelA samartha yogI A
graMthanA Ama ayogya * ya ayogya kAraNuM yogyatArahitapaNuM para yathAyogya
paNuM | yathAyogapaNuM siddhibhAva prAptapaNuM

Page #783 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Upasahar: Progress towards the Achievable Direction of the Active Cycle
Thus, the seeker, turning away from the direction of the "khaadhak" (worldly
desires), starts walking towards the direction of the "shat-kaarak" (six-factor)
cycle. Just as a started clock moves in a certain direction, so too does this
started, activated "chaag-chakra" (cycle of effort) progress towards the
direction of the achievable "siddha" (liberated) state. Moreover, just as a
once-started clock gains more and more velocity, so too does this "chaag-
chakra", once activated by emotion, progressively gains more and more momentum,
reaching higher and higher "chaag-bhoomika" (stages of effort), resulting in
progressively higher outcomes and progressively increasing "aatma-pragyaa"
(self-awareness).  And due to the swiftness of the purification of these five
"yams" (vows) - ahimsa (non-violence), satya (truthfulness), asteya (non-
stealing), brahmacharya (continence), and aparigraha (non-attachment) - their
four "kakshat" (stages) or "bhoomika" (levels) are described: "ichchhaayam"
(desire stage), "pravrittiyam" (activity stage), "sthiyam" (stability stage),
and "siddhiyam" (achievement stage). These divisions are made according to the
progressively increasing degree of purification of ahimsa, etc. There are four
"keti" (categories) based on the degree of purification of ahimsa. Just as the
body's temperature changes according to the degree of heat, so too does the
soul's state of ahimsa, etc., change according to the degree of self-
purification. Of these four "keti" of ahimsa, etc., the seeker in the active
cycle has already attained the first "keti" - "ichchhaayam" - and is on the
verge of attaining the "pravrittiyam" "keti". They are extremely eager to attain
the remaining "keti". And for this, their "sat-purushaarth" (righteous effort)
is always active, their active cycle is constantly in motion. The reason for
this is their "sadupay" (righteous means) activity, their "sat-saadhan"
(righteous tools) and "sat-purushaarth" (righteous effort) oriented nature.
Therefore, they are intensely active in "sadupay" (righteous means) with undying
enthusiasm and full vigor, they have set their minds to it (see page 154).  ##
Progress towards the Achievable Direction  (707)  And because they are
constantly active in "sadupay" (righteous means), they are endowed with the
eight "buddhi-gun" (intellectual virtues) - "shushrusha" (eagerness), "shravan"
(listening), "manana" (reflection), "nidhidhyasana" (contemplation), "dhyana"
(meditation), "samadhi" (absorption), "anubhava" (experience), and "jnana"
(knowledge). They are as follows:  (1) **Shushrusha:** Intense desire for
"tattva-shravan" (hearing the truth). Just as a young, happy, and beautiful man
desires to hear music, so too does this seeker have an even greater desire to
hear the eight "tattva-gun" (virtues of truth). This "shushrusha" is the stream
of "adhipravah" (inner flow), without it, listening becomes like a "sthala-
grupa" (dry land) or like a sleeping king listening to a story.  (2)
**Shravan:** Only when there is an intense desire to listen - true "shushrusha"
- can there be true "shravan" (listening). This "shravan" is not just the sound
hitting the ears, but listening with awareness, with the soul, with the
intention of understanding the meaning. Otherwise, it becomes like pouring water
from one ear to the other.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 upasa'hAra : pravRtta cakra sAdhakanI sAdhya dizA bhaNI pragati Ama khAdhaka
dizAmAMthI pharIne SaT kAraka cakra sAdhaka dizAmAM cAlavA lAge che, eTale pachI
cAlu thayela ghaTikAyaMtra jema amuka dizA bhaNI ja gati kare che, tema A cAlu
thayelu-pravRtta thayelu. cegacakra-yaMtra paNa sAdhya evI siddha dazAnI dizA
bhaNI ja pragati karyAM kare che. vaLI eka vakhate calAvavAmAM Avelu. yaMtra-
cakra uttarAttara vadhAre gativegane (Velocity) pakaDatu jAya che, tema A cAga-
cakra eka vakhata bhAvathI pravRtta karavAmAM AvatAM pachI uttarAttara vadhAre
pragatirUpa gatine pAmatu' jAya che, uttarAttara vadhu ne vadhu vega pAmI
caDhatI caDhatI cega-bhUmikAone sparzatuM jAya che, eTale uttarAttara caDhatA
pariNAma thatA jAya che, uttarAttara AtmApayeAga jAgRti vadhatI jAya che. ane A
a'isAdi pAMca yamanI zuddhinI taratamatAnA kAraNe tenI cAra kakSA-cAra bhUmikAe
kahevAmAM AvI che--icchAyama, pravRttiyama, sthiyama ane siddhiyama. ahiMsAdinI
uttarAttara adhikAdhika zuddhinI mAtrA (Degree) pramANe A vibhAga pADavAmAM AvyA
che. eka ne eka ahiMsAnI zuddhi aMza pramANe Ama cAra keTi heAya che. jema
uSNutA aMza (Degree) pramANe zarIranI uSNu dazAmAM phera paDe che, tema
AtmazuddhatAnA aza pramANe AtmAnI ahiMsAdi yAgadazAmAM phera paDe che. ahi'sADhi
yamanI A cAra keTimAMthI A pravRttacakra ceAgIne prathamanI e icchAyamane
pravRttiyama tA prApta thaI cUkI heAya che, ane bAkInI e kATi prApta karavAnA-
sparzavAnA te atyaMta athI hAya che, tIvra abhilASI heAya che. ane te mATene
temane sat puruSAtha sadAya cAlu ja hAya che, emanu' pravRtta cakra' nira'tara
pravRtta ja hoya che. Ama thavAnu kAraNa teonI sadupAya pravRtti che, satsAdhana
pratyenI satpuruSArtha zIlatA che. eTale te sat upAyamAM tIvra savegathI,
atyaMta adamya utsAhathI, pUrNa ucharaMgathI pravRtta ja hAya che, raDha
lagADIne maMDI paDayA ja heAya che, (jue pR. 154). sAdhya dizA bhaNI pragati
(707) ane Ama te sadupAyamAM satata pravRtta hoya che, tethI ja tee zuzraSA Adi
ATha buddhiguNathI saMpanna heAya che. te A prakAreH (1) zuzrRSA-tattvazravaNunI
a'tara'ga tIvra icchA. jema keAI taruNu, sukhI ane ramaNIthI parivarelA puruSa
kinnara gIta zuzrUSAdi sAMbhaLavAne icche, tenA karatAM anekagaNI utkaTa icchA-
talasATa tattva AThe guNa sAMbhaLavA mATe A mumukSune hAya. AvI zuzruSA ja
edhapravAhanI saravANI che, AvI zuzruSA na hAya teA sAMbhaLyuM te sthala grUpa
samAna thai paDe che, athavA uMghatA rAjA kathA sAMbhaLatA hAya tenA jevu thaI
paDe che. ( 2 ) zravaNa--AvI sAcI zuzruSA-sAMbhaLavAnI tIvra icchA hAya, teA ja
pachI sAcuM zravaNa thAya che. A zravaNa eTale kamAM mAtra zabda athaDAvA te
nathI, paNa AtmAdvArA artha anusa dhAnapUrvaka sAvadhAnatA vALuM zravaNu te
sAcuM zravaNu che. bAkI teA eka kAnethI khIje kAne kADhI nAMkhyA jevu thAya

Page #784 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(78) Yoga-drishti-susuriya is! The story heard and heard, the ears burst, even
then Brahma-jnana did not come. '(3) Grahana - After hearing, grahana happens.
The one who listened with utmost care and eagerness, his ath grahana happens.
(4) Dharana - After grahana, its dharana-avdharana happens. The sanskar of it
remains in the mind, remains avidyut. That is dharana. (5) Vijnana - After
dharana, special vijnana happens, special khesh happens. Due to the firm sanskar
obtained gradually, the khesh becomes firm and the khalata goes away. (6) Iha -
After vijnana-khaad, iha-chintan, shanka-samadhan, tark etc. happen. (7) Apoha -
After iha, apoha happens. The shanka-sandeh is resolved, the khaadak ansh is
resolved and removed. (8) Tattvabhinivesh - After apoha, after all shanka-
samadhan is done, after the satark is resolved, tattvanirnay happens, that
means, abhinivesh-dridh nishchay-rupa pravesh happens in the tattva, tattva
nirधार happens. Such a pravrutti-chakra, which is endowed with these eight
gunas, is the yagi purusha. Tatha -  Aadyavanchakaye. Gaptya
tadanyadwayalabhinah. Easantarino yogaprayogasyet tadvidah. || 213 || By the
aady avanchak yoga, the other avanchaks are obtained; Those who are eligible for
this yoga-prayoga, the yagi says they are. 113. Meaning: - By obtaining the
first avanchak yag, they are those who have obtained the benefit of the other
two avanchaks. They are the ones who are eligible for this yag-prayoga, so the
yogavid says. Vivechan Tatha, the aady avanchak yoga, which is the hetu-bhoot,
by obtaining it, they have obtained the benefit of the other two avanchaks,
kriya-avanchak and kula-avanchak. Due to its avadhya-amogh-achuk bhavya, they
are of such a form. They are the ones who are eligible for this yag-prayoga, so
the yogavid says. Above, the lakshan of the pravrutti-chakra yagi were told -
(1) those who have obtained the benefit of the first yama-dveya, (2) those who
have obtained the benefit of the khaki yama. Here, its third lakshan is told: -
aady avaachk yag Vritti - - gavaav dholaacha - - hetu-bhoot, such aady avanchak
yoga, by obtaining it, tattva-chaminah - - those who have obtained the benefit
of the other two, kriya-avanchak - kula-avanchak, those who have obtained the
benefit of it, due to its avashya bhavya, they are of such a form, who? They are
- - dhinah - - adhikario, who? Then, yogaprayogaya - - adhikrit, such
yogaprayoga - - vritti - - so, tandrah - - those who know it, yogavidah say - -
so, the rest is.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (78) yogadRSTisasurajIya che ! kathA suNI suNI phUTavA kAna, teya na AvyuM
brahmajJAna. '(3) grahaNu--zravaNu thayA pachI grahaNa thAya che. je
sAvadhAnapaNe utkaTa talasATathI zravaNu karyuM, tenuM atha grahaNa thAya che.
(4) dhAraNu--grahaNa pachI tenuM dhAraNa-avadhAraNa thAya che. tenA sa`skAranuM'
cittamAM TakI rahevu avidyuta rahevu. te dhAraNa che. (5) vijJAna--dhAraNa pachI
vijJAnavizeSa jJAna thAya che, vizeSa kheSa thAya che. uttarAttara dRDha
saMskArathI prApta beSa khaLavAn khanatA jAya che. ( 6 ) IhA--vijJAna--khAdha
pachI IhA-ciMtana, zaMkA samAdhAna, tarka vagere thAya che. (7) apeAha--iDhA
pachI apeAha thAya che. zaMkA-sa MdehanuM nirAkaraNa thAya che, khAdhaka aMzanuM
nirAkaraNa-dUra karavApaNuM thAya che. (8) tattvAbhinivezaapeAha thayA pachI,
sarva zaMkA-samAdhAna thaI gayA pachI, satarkanuM nirAkaraNa thayA pachI
tattvaninirNaya thAya che, eTale tattvamAM abhiniveza-dRDha nizcayarUpa praveza
thAya che, tattva niradhAra thAya che. AvA A ATha guNathI yukta A pravRttacakra
yAgI puruSA heAya che. tathA---- Jie  aadyaavnyckye| gAptyA tadanyadvayalAbhinaH
/  easantriNo yogaprayogasyeti tadvidaH  //  213 //  Adya avacaka yogathI, anya
avacaka prAsa; yogya A yoga prayAganA, kahe yAgIe Asa. 113. artha :--pahelA
avaMcaka yAganI prAptithI tenAthI anya be avaMcakanA lAbha pAmelA evA tee hAya
che. ee A yAgaprayAganA adhikArIe che, ema cevide vade che. vivecana tathA
hetubhUta evI Adha avacaka ceAganI prAptithI tee tenAthI anya evA e avaMcakanA
kriyA avaheMcaka ne kula avaMcakanA cAMgane lAbha pAmelA hAya che. tenI avadhya-
ameAgha-acUka bhavyatAthI teo evA svarUpavALA heAya che. ee A yAgaprayAganA
adhikArIe che, ema te ceAganA jANanArAo kahe che. uparamAM pravRttacakra yAgInA
e lakSaNa kahyA-(1) prathama yamadveyanA lAbha pAmelA, (2) khAkInA yamayanA
athI. ahIM tenuM trIjuM' lakSaNa kahyu` che:-Adya avAcaka yAganI vRtti----gAvAva
dhoLAcA--hetubhUta evI Adya avaMcaka ceganI prApti thakI, tattvacaminaH--tenAthI
anya manA lAbhI kriyAavaMcaka-kulAva cakra e enA lAbha dharAvanArA tenI avaSya
bhavyatAthI eka bhUta, evA svarUpavALA temA, zu? te ke --dhiniH-- adhikArIo,
kAnA? to ke coprayogaya--adhikRta evA meNaprayAganA --vRtti-ema, taMdra:--tenA
jANakAro, yogavidA kahe che,--ema zeSa che.

Page #785 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Conclusion: The authorities of this great experiment (79) i.e. due to the
attainment of the *Chagawanchak*, they have attained the other two *Awanchak*
yogas - *Kiya Awanchak* and *Phal Awanchak*, because there is such an
unfathomable, infallible, and magnificent brilliance of the *Yogawanchak*, and
there is such a type of qualification that the attainment of these other two
*Awanchak* is certain. (The form of *Chagawanchak*, *Kiya Awanchak*, and *Phal
Awanchak* will be mentioned below. Also see pages 158 to 164). And due to the
attainment of this *Pravrittachka* by the *Adya Awanchak*, the remaining two
*Kiya-Phal Awanchak* yogas have benefited. Therefore, it is complete with these
three *Awanchak* yogas. And thus, those who have benefited from these three
*Awanchak*, who have attained *Ichchhayam* and *Pravrittiyam*, and who are
determined to engage in the activity of the right path, desiring to attain
*Thiyam* and *Siddiyam*, - these *Pravrittachka* are the authorities of this
*Yogaprayag*. So say the knowledgeable men, the experts of *Kegan*.  This yoga
is truly a great experiment, a great and grand experiment beyond the reach of
ordinary people. Because if it succeeds, it will cross the ocean - the welfare
of the soul will be achieved, and if it fails, the ship of the *Chaga-Maha-Jiva*
will sink! Like the experiment of science, a great thing, if used improperly,
leads to acceleration and misfortune, causing great harm. The experiment of
science, when conducted by a scientist who knows its method, yields miraculous
results; but when conducted by an ignorant person who is unaware of the method,
it yields harmful results, and perhaps even the person himself may be blown up!
Similarly, this experiment of *Yogavijnan*, when conducted by a knowledgeable
yogi who knows the method, yields the most miraculous results; but when
conducted by an ignorant person who is unaware of the method, it yields harmful
results, and even self-destruction! In the present time, the secret of the
powerful atom bomb (Atom-Bomb) has fallen into the hands of ignorant scientists,
i.e. scientists who are ignorant of the ultimate truth, and the world has
suffered a lot of harm, as is evident. Similarly, if this powerful secret falls
into the hands of the wrong people, it is easy to understand how much harm it
can cause. Just as the science of materialism, "like showing a monkey a mirror",
leads to adverse results and causes great harm to the world, so too, the science
of spirituality, when given to an unqualified soul, "like giving a monkey wine",
leads to adverse results and causes great harm! One and the same thing can yield
poison or nectar depending on its use! Similarly, the right use of *Yogaprayag*
yields nectar, and its misuse yields poison! Therefore, this *Yogaprayag*, a
grand experiment,

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 upasaMhAra: A mahAga prayAganA adhikArIe (79) arthAt cagAvaMcakanI prAptine
lIdhe teone bIjA be avaMcaka yoganI-kiyA avaMcaka ne phala avaMcakanI prApti
thayelI hoya che, kAraNa ke te yogAvaMcakanI evI avadhyaamegha-acUka bhavyatA
hoya che, tathA prakAranI yogyatA hoya che ke A bIjA be avaMcakanI prApti hoya
ja. (A cagAvaMcaka, kiyAvaMcaka ane phalAvaMcakanuM svarUpa nIce kahevAmAM
Avaze. temaja juo pR. 158 thI 164). ane A pravRttacaka gIne te Adya avaMcaka
ganI prAptine lIdhe, bAkInA be kiyA-phela avaMcaka yugane lAbha prApta thaI
cUkyo hoya che. eTale te yoga-kriyA-phala e traNa avaMcaka yugathI saMpanna hoya
che. ane Ama jene A avaMcakatrayane lAbha thayela che, jene IcchAyAma ne
pravRttiyamanI prApti thaI cUkI che, ane je thiyama ne siddhiyamanI prApti IcchI
tenA sadupAyanI pravRttimAM 2Dha lagADIne maMDI paDyA che,-evA A pravRttacaka
gIo A yoga prAganA adhikArIo che. ema keganA jJAtA puruSa-gavido vade che. A
yuga kharekhara! mahAprayoga che, eka lekottara kaTine moTo akhatare (Great &
grand experiment) che. kAraNa ke te jo savaLo utare te beDo pAra thaI
jAya,-jIvanuM ka9yANa kalyANa thaI jAya, ane avaLo paDe te caga-mahA- jIvanuM
nAvaDuM DUbI jAya ! mahad vastunI hIna upayogarUpa AzAtanAthI pravega akalyANa
thaI mahAhAni thAya-vijJAnanA prayoganI peThe. vijJAnano prayoga je tenI vidhinA
jANa yogya vijJAnInA hAthe thAya che temAMthI camatkArika pariNAma Ave; paNa
vidhithI ajANa ayogya ajJAnInA hAthe thAya te temAMthI UlaTuM hAnikAraka
pariNAma Ave ane kadAca pote paNa dhaDAkAbaMdha UDI jAya ! tema A yogavijJAnano
prayoga je vidhijJAtA yaMgya jJAnI yegInA hAthe thAya, te temAMthI parama
camatkArika pariNAma Ave; paNa vidhithI anabhijJa-ajANa ayogya ajJAnInA hAthe
thAya, te temAMthI ulaTuM aniSTa pariNAma Ave, ane AtmanAza paNa thAya !
vartamAnamAM mahAzaktisaMpanna aNu bombanuM (Atom-Bomb) rahasya (vijJAnI)
viparIta jJAnavALA arthAt paramArthathI ajJAna vijJAnIonA agya hAthamAM AvI
paDayuM hovAthI jagane keTalI hAni thayelI che te pratyakSa dekhAya che. tema A
paramazaktisaMpanna ga-rahasya paNa je agya jananA-agInA hAthamAM AvI paDe, te
keTalI badhI hAni thAya te saheje samajI zakAya che. jema jaDavAdanuM vijJAna
"vAMdarAne nIsaraNI batAvavA jevuM" viparIta paNe pariNamatAM jagatane
mahAanarthakAraka thaI paDe che, tema adhyAtmavAdanuM vijJAna anadhikArI jIvane
"markaTane madirApAnanI peThe" viSamapaNe pari. mumatAM mahAanarthakAraka thaI
paDe che! eka ne eka vastumAMthI tenA upayoga pramANe jhera ke amRta nIkaLe che!
tema ga-praganA sadupayogathI amRta nIkaLe ne durupayogathI jhera nIkaLe ! mATe
A yoga prayAgarUpa jabarajasta akhataro (Grand experiment)

Page #786 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(710) Now, the appropriate authority is needed to test the collection of
Gadasti, and that authority is the Kulagi with the great characteristics
mentioned here, and the active Cakgis. Moreover, just as it is not easy to
digest glass, and it comes out in reverse without the power to digest, so it is
not easy to digest this G-prayagraupa Paro, and if it does not have the strength
to digest, it comes out in reverse, in the form of harm! Or, just as it is not
easy to digest nutritious yoga-rasayana, and if it is given to an unqualified,
weak human being with a weak digestive fire, it becomes heavy for him, and gives
a reverse result, to the extent that it even takes his life; but if it is given
to an authority with a proper gastric fire, it gives him health and grants him
long life; similarly, if this G-rasayana is given to an unqualified being with
weak power, it does not digest, and instead, it produces indigestion in the form
of false pride, and becomes useless, even causing death in the form of Bhav-
pran-haran, Bhav-mrityu; but if it is given to an authority who is a Thegi
Purusha, with awakened, powerful energy, it digests properly, and eradicates the
disease of birth, giving immortality. (1) The weapon given to a child who does
not even know how to hold a weapon, becomes a killer of himself, and becomes a
devourer; but in the hands of a proper weapon expert, a valiant warrior, it
becomes a protector. Similarly, this yoga-darshit experiment, if given to an
unqualified, inexperienced, ignorant child-being, becomes a devourer of his own
misfortune, because it is ill-conceived; and if it comes into the hands of a
proper, wise, yoga-authority, it becomes well-conceived, and becomes a protector
from the fear of birth. (2) Or, if fire is not held properly, it burns,
similarly, if the yoga-agni is not held properly, it burns with the heat of
birth-wandering, because it is ill-conceived! (3) Or, a snake, if it is ill-
conceived, and held by the tail, kills the holder, similarly, G-prayag, if it is
ill-conceived, becomes a cause of death in the form of Bhav-mrityu. As Shriman
Haribhadrasuriji said in Shri Yogabindu, if Shramanya-Shramanapan is ill-
conceived, it becomes the cause of endless samsara, similarly, if yoga-prayog is
ill-conceived, it becomes the cause of endless birth-wandering! Thus, in all
respects, this G-prayog should be placed only in the hands of a proper
G-purusha. "Mat ga gha ra nana vyasu dani mih | Shram garud shvat raaj karo mam
|" Yogabindu, 184.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (710) gadaSTisamuccaya ajamAvavA mATe yogya adhikArI ja have joIe ane te
adhikArI atre kahyA te mahAt lakSaNa-gyatAvALA kulagI ne pravRttacaka gIo che.
vaLI kAca pAra pacAva jema saheluM nathI, ane jIravavAnI zakti vinA ulaTa phUTI
nIkaLe che, tema A ga-prayAgarUpa pAro pacAvo saheluM nathI, ane te pacAvavAnI
tAkAta na hoya te UlaTo anartharUpe phUTI nIkaLe che ! athavA pauSTika yoga-
rasAyana rasAyana pacAvavuM jema saheluM nathI, ane tene prayoga maMdAgnivALA
anadhikArI durbaLa manuSya para karavAmAM Ave, to te tene bhAre paDI jAya che,
ane viparIta pariNAma Ape che, te eTale sudhI ke tene prANa paNa hare che; paNa
je yogya jaTharAgnivALA adhikArI para tene prayoga karavAmAM Ave te tene Arogya
ApI dIrdhAyu bakSe che; tema A ga-rasAyanane prayoga maMda zaktivALA anadhikArI
jIva para karavAmAM Ave che te tene pacatuM nathI, ane ulaTuM tenuM mithyA
abhimAnarUpa ajINa upajAvI anarthakArI thaI paDe che, yAvat bhAva-prANa
haraNarUpa bhAvamRtyu kare che; paNa je egya uddIpta zaktisaMpanna thegI
puruSarUpa adhikArIne ApavAmAM Ave to te tene barAbara pace che, ane bhavaroga
nimULa nAza karI ajarAmarapaNuM Ape che. (1) zastra pakaDatAM paNa na AvaDatuM
hoya evA bAlanA hAthamAM je zastra ApavAmAM Ave, te te ulaTuM tenuM ja gaLuM
kApanArUM thaI paDI bhakSaNa karanAra ja thaI paDe che; paNa yegya zastrajJa
subhaTanA hAthamAM te rakSaNa karanAra thAya che. tema A yuga darzIta prayoga
paNa je anadhikArI anabhijJa ajANa evA bAlajIvanA zastrAdinuM hAthamAM ApavAmAM
Ave, te dugRhIta hovAthI, tenuM ja akalyANarUpa daSTAMta bhakSaNa karanAra thaI
paDe; ane je yogya sujJa yegAdhikArInA hAthamAM Ave, te sugRhIta thavAthI, tenuM
bhavabhayamAMthI rakSaNa karanAra thaI paDe. ( 2 ) athavA agnine je barAbara na
pakaDyo hoya to dajhADI de, tema yogAgnine prayoga je barAbara-vidhithI na
pakaDayo heya, dugRhIta hoya te bhavabhramaNatApathI dajhADI de ! (3) athavA
vyAla-sApa je dugRhIta hoya, Gdha pUMchaDethI pakaDayo hoya, te te pakaDanArane
ja sa mArI mRtyu nIpajAve che, tema ga-prayAga paNa je dugRhIta hoya te
bhavahetu thaI paDI bhAva-mRtyu nIpajAve che. zrImAna haribhadrasUrijIe zrI
yogabindumAM kahyA pramANe zramaNya-zramaNapaNuM jo duhIta hoya te anaMta
saMsAranuM kAraNa thaI paDe che, tema yoga-prayoga ja dugRhIta hoya to anaMta
bhavabhramaNanuM kAraNa thaI paDe che ! Ama sarvathA A ga-prayoga yogya evA gI
puruSanA hAthamAM ja mUkavA x " mata ga gha rANAnavyAsudanimaH |
zrAmagaruDazvataH rAja karo mAmaH | >> gabiMdu, 184.

Page #787 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Conclusion:**  G-Sayan and Duhit Gamga  (711) It is appropriate, and it is
worth trying, and it is worth collecting, Otherwise, there is a complete fear of
becoming a great meaningless due to the reverse hope-achievement-miracle-vision
etc., and there is every possibility of becoming a Gamga that falls down in the
form of yoga corruption. Therefore, here Such fasters with the above mentioned
characteristics are called the authorities of this misuse. Just as a man with
royal qualities is fit to sit on the throne, so also a man with yogic qualities
is fit to sit on this yogic throne. However, if an unfit-unworthy person dares
to climb on it, he will do it - "Fools rush in where angels fear to tread" - he
will do the same! Therefore, the above mentioned Kulgi and the active yogis are
the authorities here, according to the experienced knowledgeable yogi men. Even
in this song, there are junior, middle and superior characters, whose
characteristics have been described by the supreme Yogi Shrimad Rajchandraji in
his last immortal poem as follows: "Manda Vishay ne Saralata, Sah Aajna Suvichar
Karuna Kamaltadhi Gun, Pratham Bhoomika Dhar. Rokya Shabdadic Vishay, Samyam
Sadhan Rag; Jagat Ishta Nahi Atmathi, Madhy Patra Maha Bhag. Nahin Trushna
Jiviya Tani, Maran Yog Nahin Kshebh; Mahapatra Te Margna Param Yog Jitabh" -
Shrimad Rajchandraji.  The form of Yamadi is explained - इहाहिंसादयः पञ्च
सुप्रसिद्धा यमाः सताम् । अपरिग्रहपर्यन्तास्तथेच्छादिचतुर्विधाः ॥२१४ ॥ Here, in
this place, Ahimsa-Ahimsa-adi Dharmas, Panch-Panch-number, Sak Briyad-
Suprasiddha, Sarvatantrasadharanapanue, Yama-Yamos, above Icchay, Pravrittiyama,
Sthiyame, Siddhi Me, so Satam-Santane Munio, what is the limit? That is,
Researchanta - Aparigraha Payat. "Hansaatyantyatradavaparished: ChaT:-" (Patano
2-30) Ahimsa, Satya, Asteya, Brahmacharya, Aparigraha are the Yamas - from this
statement. Tathaahituturvidha:- Thus, there are four types of Iccha-adi - each
one has Icchayam, Pravrittiyama, Sthira Yama and Siddhi Yama.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 upasaMhAra : ga-sAyana ane duhIta gamaga (711) yogya che, ane enA para ja
ajamAvavA yogya che, ane sugrahIta ja karavA yogya che, nahi te UlaTo AzAtanA-
siddhivyAha-camatkAra darzana Adi kAraNe sugrahIta mahAanarthakAraka thaI
paDavAne pUrepUre bhaya che, yogabhraSTatArUpa gamaga adha:patana karanAro thaI
paDavAne pratyeka saMbhava che. eTalA mATe ahIM AvA ukta lakSaNavALA vegIone ja
A gaprayoganA adhikArI kahyA che. rAjyAsana para jema egya rAjaguNasaMpanna
puruSa ja birAjavA yogya che, tema A yogarAjyasana para paNa yogya yogI
guNasaMpanna megI puruSa ja birAjavA gya che. chatAM jo ke ayogya-ayogI tenA
para caDhI besavAnI dhRSTatA-dhIThAI kare, te te-"phiratAo jyAM paga mUkatAM
Dare che, tyAM mUkha dhasI jAya che." "Fools rush in where angels fear to
tread,-tenA jevuM ja ceSTita kare che ! mATe ukta kulagI ne pravRttacaka yogIo
ja ahIM adhikArI che, ema keganA anubhavI jJAnI yegI puruSonuM kathana che. A
gItamAM paNa kaniSTha, madhyama ne uttama pAtra paNa hoya che,jenA lakSaNa
lAkSaNika rIte parama bhegI zrImad rAjacaMdrajIe temanA chellA amara kAvyamAM A
prakAre bhAkhyA che " maMda viSaya ne saraLatA, saha AjJA suvicAra karuNA
kamaLatAdi guNa, prathama bhUmikA dhAra. rokyA zabdAdika viSaya, saMyama sAdhana
rAga; jagata ISTa nahi AtmathI, madhya pAtra mahAbhAga. nahiM tRSNa jIvyA taNI,
maraNa yoga nahiM kSebha; mahApAtra te mArganA parama yoga jitabha "-zrImad
rAjacaMdrajI. upanyasta yamAdinuM svarUpa kahe che- ihAhiMsAdayaH paJca
suprasiddhA yamAH satAm  /  aparigrahaparyantAstathecchAdicaturvidhAH  // 214
//  ahI ahiMsAdi yama, prasiddha paMca prakAra aparigraha paryata te, tyama
irachAdika cAra. 214, - kRtti: ahIM, lekamAM, ahiMsA -ahiMsAdi dharmo, paMja-
paMca-saMkhyAthI, saka briAda-saprasiddha, sarvataMtrasAdhAraNapaNue karIne,
yama-yamo, upara icchAya, pravRttiyama, sthiyame, siddhi me, ema satAM-saMtane
munione, zuM paryata ? te ke rijharcantA - aparigraha payata. "
haMsAtyAntayatradAvapariSada: caT:-" ( pataM0 2-30 ) ahiMsA, satya, asteya,
brahmacarya, aparigraha e yame che,-e vacanathI. tathawAhiturvidhA:- tathA IcchA
Adi cAra prakAranA,-pratyeka paNe IcachAyama, pravRttiyama, sthirayama ane
siddhiyama.

Page #788 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(712) **Yoga-Dristi-Samuchaya Meaning** - Here, the five Yamas, beginning with
Ahimsa and ending with Aparigraha, are well-known to the Saints. And each of
these Yamas is of four types: Iccha, Pravritti, Sthira, and Siddhi.
**Discussion** - Here, the five Yamas, beginning with Ahimsa and ending with
Aparigraha, are well-known to the Saints - the Munis - and are commonly known by
all. Because, "Ahimsa, Satya, Asteya, Brahmacharya, and Aparigraha are the
Yamas," is the dictum. And each of these five Yamas is of four types: Iccha-
Yama, Pravritti-Yama, Sthira-Yama, and Siddhi-Yama.  Just as these five,
beginning with Ahimsa, are called Yoga-Sankhya-Adi Yamas, so the Jains call them
"Vrat," and the Buddhists call them "Shila." Thus, despite the difference in
words, there is no difference in meaning. Therefore, these five well-known Yamas
are common to all religions, universally accepted, and well-known to all schools
of thought. There is no need for other evidence to prove these well-known Yamas.
The nature of these, beginning with Ahimsa, should be understood from the
perspective of substance, feeling, and type, and should be understood and
practiced accordingly. From the perspective of substance, it means from the
external, from the practical, from the physical; and from the perspective of
feeling, it means from the internal, from the ultimate, from the equal.  Ahimsa
means not harming any living being. "Na Hindya Sarvaali Muutani, Em Vedakruti
Che." And "Kamatraavyo Hinsa - Pramattayegthi Prannu Harvu Te Hinsa Che," is the
dictum of the Shri Tavaarth Sutra. That is, harming any living being, whether
from the perspective of substance, through the senses, or from the perspective
of feeling, through the soul, through the mind, speech, and body, with a
careless attitude, is called violence; the opposite of this is non-violence. The
word "Pramudag" is particularly important here. Violence is only when there is a
careless attitude in harming a living being, not otherwise. That is, if a living
being is harmed, but there is no careless attitude of the mind, speech, and
body, it is not violence. And even if a living being is not harmed, but there is
a careless attitude of the mind, speech, and body, it is violence. Thus, if the
mind, speech, and body are careful, attentive, and vigilant, and there is a
careful effort to protect living beings with a true inner feeling, even if there
is physical harm, it is not considered violence. And if the mind, speech, and
body are careless, inattentive, and negligent, and there is carelessness in
protecting living beings, even if there is no physical harm, it is still
considered violence.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (712) yogadaSTisamucaya artha -ahiMsAdi aparigraha paryata ema pAMca yamo
saMtene suprasiddha che. tathA te pratyeka yama IcchA Adi cAra prakArano che.
vivecana ahIM lekamAM ahiMsA Adi ne aparigraha paryata pAMca yame saMtane-
munione suprasiddha che, sarvataMtra sAdhAraNapaNue karIne sArI peThe jANItA
che; kAraNa ke "ahiMsA, satya, asteya, brahmacarya ane aparigraha e yama che,"
evuM vacana che. tathA A pAMcamAMthI pratyeka yama icchA Adi cAra prakAra cheH
IcchAyama, pravRttiyama, sthirayama ane siddhiyama. A ahiMsAdi pAMcane jema
yoga-sAMkhyAdi yama kahe che, tema jaine tene "vata' nAmathI oLakhe che, bauddho
"zIla" nAma Ape che. Ama zabdabheda chatAM arthabheda nathI, eTale suprasiddha
evA A pAMca yama savataMtrasAdhAraNa (Common to all religions) heI sarvamAnya
che, sarvasaMmata che, sarvadarzanavAdIone suparicita che. AvA suprasiddhane
suprasiddha karavA anya pramANanI AvazyakatA nathI. A ahiMsAdinuM svarUpa
dravyathI ane bhAvathI ane prakAre samajavA yogya che ane samaja AcaravA yogya
che. dravyathI eTale bAhyathI, vyavahArathI, zUlapaNe; ane bhAvathI eTale
aMtathI, paramArthathI, samapaNe. ahiMsA eTale kaI paNa jIvanI hiMsA na karavI
te. "nA hiMDyA sarvALi mUtAni ema vedakRti che. ane kamAtrAvyo hiMsA -
pramattayegathI prANanuM haravuM te hiMsA che ema zrI tavArtha sUtranuM vacana
che. arthAt idriyAdi hiMsA-ahiMsA daza prakAranA dravya prANamAMthI athavA
jJAna-darzanAdirUpa AtmAnA bhAva prANumAMthI koI paNa prANunuM mana-vacana-
kAyAnA pramAda yogathI haravuM tenuM nAma hiMsA che; tethI viparIta te ahiMsA
che. AmAM "pramAdaga' zabda khAsa agatyanuM che. je prANa haraNamAM pramAda vega
hoya, te ja hiMsA che, nahi te nahiM. eTale kadAca prANa harAyA hoya, paNa mana-
vacana-kAyAne pramatta yoga na hoya te hiMsA nathI. ane prANa na paNa harAyA
hoya, paNa mana-vacanakAyAne pramatta yoga hoya te hiMsA che. Ama mana-vacana-
kAyAne apramAda hoya, yatanA hoya, jayaNA hoya, jema bane tema sAcA aMtaraMga
bhAvathI jIvarakSA karavAnI jALavaNIrUpa yatna (Careful effort) heya, kALajI-
takedArI heya, te dravya-prANaharaNathI paNa hiMsA lAgatI nathI. ane mana-
vacana-kAyAne pramAda vega hoya, jema bane tema jIvarakSA karavAmAM
bedarakArIrUpa (Carelessness) ayatna haya, bekALajI hoya, te dravya prANaharaNa
na hoya chatAM paNa hiMsA jarUra lAge che.

Page #789 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Conclusion: Non-violence, Truth, etc.  (713) The opposite of violence is non-
violence. It means to protect all living beings with utmost care, by keeping the
mind, speech, and body free from harm, and by being vigilant and aware. This is
non-violence. Thus, non-violence is primarily based on action, but also on
intention. (1) When there is no violence in action and no violence in intention,
it is the highest form of non-violence. (2) When there is violence in action but
no violence in intention, it is a slightly lower form of non-violence. (3) When
there is no violence in action but violence in intention, it is not non-
violence, but violence itself. (4) When there is violence in action and violence
in intention, it is not non-violence, but the worst form of violence. Thus, the
foundation of violence and non-violence lies in the impact on the soul. When the
soul's inherent knowledge and perception, which are the essence of its being,
are harmed by emotions like attachment and aversion, there is violence. When
there is no such harm to the soul's knowledge and perception due to the absence
of attachment and aversion, there is no violence. This rule applies universally.
(See pages 105 to 107)  To speak as things are, to speak the truth, is truth.
Or, to speak the truth of things as they are, is truth. To speak truth as truth,
and falsehood as falsehood, is truth. And to speak falsehood as truth, and truth
as falsehood, is falsehood. Or, to speak without hypocrisy, with sincerity,
according to the truth and falsehood in the mind, and according to the actions,
to show unity of mind, speech, and body, is truth. Not taking anything belonging
to others without their permission is non-stealing. Not stealing the wealth of
others, not being a thief, is non-stealing. To practice celibacy with mind,
speech, and body is celibacy. To engage in sexual intercourse with a human
woman, an animal woman, or a celestial woman, with mind, speech, and body, is
non-celibacy. Not accepting any possessions, such as wealth, grain, house,
children, etc., is non-possession. Not owning anything belonging to anyone,
being completely without possessions, is non-possession. Thus, this is the
general form of non-violence, etc., in action.  And in intention, (1) non-
violence means not harming the pure nature of the soul. Attachment and aversion,
through their destructive power, harm the soul's inherent knowledge and
perception, which are the essence of its being. To prevent this harm to the pure
nature of the soul, due to the destructive power of attachment and aversion, is
non-violence. The essence is that the state of being the pure soul itself is the
ultimate, transcendental, and supreme non-violence. And it can be achieved in
this way through action, space, time, and intention: (1) To be free from the
emotions that hinder the qualities of the soul, etc.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 upasaMhAra: hiMsA-ahiMsA, satya-asteya Adi (713) A hisAthI je viparIta te
ahiMsA che, eTale mana-vacana-kAyAne apramAda rAkhI, yatanA karavI, jANa karavI,
sAcA bhAvathI jema bane tema jIvarakSA karavAnI jALavaNIrUpa yatna kara,
upayoga-jAgRti rAkhavI te ahiMsA che. Ama dravyathI hiMsA-ahiMsAne mukhya AdhAra
paNa bhAvathI hiMsA-ahiMsA upara che-(1) dravyathI hiMsA na hoya, ane bhAvathI
paNa na hoya, te te utkRSTa ahiMsA che. (2) dravyathI hiMsA hoya, paNa bhAvathI
na hoya, te te tethI kaMIka utaratI ucca ahiMsA che. (3) dravyathI hiMsA na hoya
paNa bhAvathI hiMsA hoya, te te ahiMsA nathI, paNa hiMsA ja che. (4) dravyathI
hiMsA hoya ane bhAvathI paNa hiMsA hoya, te te ahiMsA nathI, paNa nikRSTa hiMsA
ja che. Ama hiMsA-ahiMsAne mukhya AdhAra AtmapariNAmanI ghAta-aghAta para che.
rAgadveSAdi pariNAmathI jyAM AtmAnA svabhAvabhUta jJAna-darzanarUpa bhAva-
prANanI hiMsA thatI hoya tyAM avazya hiMsA che; ane tevA rAgadveSAdi pariNAmanA
abhAve jyAM AtmAnA jJAna-darzana bhAva prANanI hiMsA na thatI hoya, tyAM hiMsA
nathI. A niyama sarvatra lAgu paDe che. (juo pR. 105 thI 107) je jema che tema
bolavuM, sAcuM bolavuM te satya che; athavA jema che tema vastusvarUpa kahevuM
te satya che. sane sat kahevuM, ane asat kahevuM te satya che, ane asatane sat
kahevuM, satane asat kahevuM te asatya che. athavA jevuM satya-asteya manamAM
hoya, jevuM AcaraNamAM hoya, tevuM nidaMbha niSkapaTa vacana uccAravuM, mana-
vacana-kAyAnI ektA dAkhavavI te satya che. pArakI vastu aNudIdhI-tenI rajA
vagara na levI te asteya-acaurya che. arthAta paradhanaharaNa na karavuM-zerI na
karavI te asteya che. mana-vacana-kAyAthI brahmacaryanuM pAlana te brahmacarya
che. manuSyaNI, tiryaciNI ke devAMganA sAthe mana-vacana-kAyAthI
mithunanuMabrahmacaryanuM vajana te brahmacarya che. dhana-dhAnya-gRha-putra Adi
kaI paNa parigraha na graha te aparigraha che; koI paNa pitAnI mAlIkInI vastu na
hovI te, pitAnuM kaMI paNa nathI evuM akiMcanapaNuM te aparigraha che. Ama
sAmAnyapaNe dravyathI ahiMsA AdinuM svarUpa che. ane bhAvathI te (1) ahiMsA
eTale AtmAnA zuddha svarUpanI hiMsA na thavI te. rAga-dveSa-maha vibhAvathI
AtmAnA svabhAvabhUta jJAna-darzanarUpa bhAva prANunI hiMsA thAya che; A rAgAdi
vibhAga pariNAme karIne zuddha AtmapariNAmanI ghAta bhAva ahiMsA na thavA devI
te ahiMsA che. tAtparya ke-zuddha AtmasvarUpe sthiti e ja pAramArthika-tAvika
parama ahiMsA che, ane te dravya-kSetrakALa-bhAvathI A prakAre ghaTAvI zakAya
che :-(1) AtmAnA guNa bAdhakabhAvathI rahitapaNe Adi

Page #790 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(714) Yoga-Dristi-Samuccaya When the perfection of qualities results in the
perfection of the self, and the self-substance is non-associative with other
substances, and the self-substance has no association with the substance of the
body, then this is pure non-violence from the perspective of substance. (2) When
there is no possibility of influence from the field to all regions, and the
awareness of the soul is unbroken with a feeling of being bodiless and pure,
then this is pure non-violence from the perspective of the field. (3) Where the
origination and destruction of things are subtly perfected, and where the
cutting and birth of things are not present, and the nature of things is
contained within itself, then this is pure non-violence from the perspective of
time. (4) Where infinite qualities and their causes result in their own
respective perfections, then this is pure non-violence from the perspective of
feeling. Thus, the pure non-violence from the perspectives of substance, field,
time, and feeling, is the abode of the supreme non-violent, the supreme
compassionate, the supreme merciful, Shri Jinraj, because he is the ship of
salvation, the protector of life, both for oneself and others. Thus, non-
violence finds its highest ideal in Shri Jin Vitrag, whose beautiful and heart-
touching form has been sung by the great soul Devchandraji as follows:  "When
qualities result in the perfection of qualities, free from obstructive
feelings...O Lord! The substance is non-associative with others, pure non-
violent...O Lord! The compassionate Jin. In the field, in all regions, there is
no possibility of influence...O Lord! With a feeling of being bodiless and pure,
the awareness is unbroken...O Lord! Origination and destruction are subtly
perfected...O Lord! Cutting and birth are not present, the nature of things is
contained within itself...O Lord! Infinite qualities and their causes result in
their own respective perfections...O Lord! Thus, non-violent from the
perspective of feeling...O Lord! Thus, non-violent, you are seen as Jinraj...O
Lord! The protector of life, both for oneself and others, the ship of
salvation...O Lord!" - Shri Devchandraji.  Substance non-violence is also
helpful in the practice of feeling non-violence, because substance is the cause
of feeling, and substance non-violence is also the natural result of feeling
non-violence. Thus, both have a cause-and-effect relationship.  "Through
substance, one does not harm the six bodies...O Lord! This is the practice of
feeling compassion...O Lord! The qualities of the self are unobstructed, the
treasury of feeling compassion...O Lord! Through the qualities of the path of
liberation, there is a new propagation of dharma...O Lord!" - Shri Devchandraji.
(2) Truth from the perspective of feeling means speaking truthfully from the
perspective of ultimate reality, from the perspective of truth. To speak of a
thing as it truly is, is truth. To call oneself oneself, and another another;
not to call oneself another,

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (714) yogadaSTisamuccaya guNapariNatie pariName ane Atma dravya anya dravyanuM
asaMgI hoya, Atma dravyane padravyane saMga na hoya,-te dravyathI zuddha evI
puSTa ahiMsA che. (2) kSetrathI sarva pradezamAM parabhAvano prasaMga na hoya,
ane azarIrI agI evA bhAvathI AtmAnI avagAhanA abhaMga hoya, te kSetrathI zuddha
evI ahiMsA che. (3) jyAM utpatti-vyaya ne dhrauvyapaNe saheje pariNati thAya
che, ane jyAM chedana-janapaNuM nahi heI vastu svabhAvane viSe samAya che,-te
kALathI zuddha evI ahiMsA che. (4) anaMta guNa paryAya, temaja kAraka pariNati
jyAM nija nija pariNatie pariName che, te bhAvathI zuddha evI ahiMsA che. Ama
dravya-kSetra-kALa-bhAvathI zuddha evI ahiMsAnuM je kaI eka dhAma hoya, te
parama ahiMsakatAmaya, parama dayAmaya, parama kRpALu zrI jinarAja che, kAraNa
ke te ja sva-para jIvana rakSaka evA tAraNa-taraNa jahAja che. Ama ahiMsAne
UMcAmAM UMce Adarza zrI jina vItarAgamAM daSTa thAya che--jenuM parama suMdara
hRdayaMgama svarUpa mahAtmA devacaMdrajIe Ama saMgIta karyuM che - guNa guNa
pariNati pariName, bAdhaka bhAvavihIna...prabhujI! dravya asaMgI anyane, zuddha
ahiMsaka pIna...bAhu jiNuMda dayAmayI. kSetre sarva pradezame, nahiM parabhAva
prasaMga..prabhujI ! atanu agI bhAvathI, avagAhanA abhaMga...prabhujI ! bAha0
utpAda vyaya dhruvapaNe, saheje pariNati thAya. prabhujI ! chedana janatA nahiM,
vastu svabhAva samAya... prabhujI ! guNa paryAya anaMtatA, kAraka pariNati
tema...prabhujI ! bAhu nija nija pariNati pariName. bhAva ahiMsaka ema.prabhujI
! bAha0 ema ahiMsakatAmayI, dITho tuM jinarAja..prabhujI ! rakSaka nija para
jIvane, tAraNataraNa jihAja prabhujI !"---zrI devacaMdrajI. dravya ahiMsA paNa A
bhAva ahiMsAnI sAdhanAmAM upakArI thAya che dravya e bhAvanuM kAraNa che mATe
temaja dravya ahiMsA e bhAva ahiMsAnuM svAbhAvika pariNAma paNa che. Ama bannene
paraspara kArya-kAraNa saMbaMdha che. " dravya thakI cha kAyane, na haNe jeha
lagAra...prabhujI ! bhAva dayA pariNAmane, ehI ja che vyavahAra..prabhujI ! bAhu
Atama guNa avirAdhanA, bhAva dayA bhaMDAra....prabhujI ! kSAyika guNa paryAyame,
navi para dharma pracAra...prabhujI !" -zrI devacaMdrajI. (2) bhAvathI satya
eTale paramArthathI-tattvathI satya vacana vadavuM te. je vastu tatvathI jema
che temaja kahevI te satya che. svane sva kahevuM, parane para kahevuM; svane
para na kahevuM,

Page #791 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Conclusion: भाव अहिंसा, भाव सत्य आदि (715)  **Not calling the non-self as
self is truth.** Calling the true as true and the false as false, feeling the
truth, etc., and not calling the true as false and the false as true is truth.
Except for the pure soul, no other thing is one's own, it is another's, calling
that other thing as other, not as self is truth; calling the other thing as
self, not as other is falsehood. Thus, calling the non-self as self is
falsehood; not calling the non-self as self and calling the self as self, is the
ultimate truth. For the ultimate contemplation of this, the appropriate
philosophical inquiry has been illuminated by Shrimad Rajchandraji in this way:
"The ultimate truth is that except for the soul, no other object can become the
soul. Knowing this with certainty, in practice, while speaking in the context of
body, wife, son, friend, wealth, grain, house, etc., one should use the
expression that except for the soul, nothing else is mine. While speaking about
another soul, even though that soul is not mine due to differences in caste,
gender, and such formal distinctions, it is called mine only for the sake of
practical conduct; speaking in this way is the ultimate language." etc. (See) -
Shrimad Rajchandra, Letter No. 545.  **(3) Not stealing the other's property is
non-stealing in the ultimate sense.** Except for the pure soul, nothing else,
even an atom, is one's own, it is another's. Taking that other's property is
stealing - non-giving. Not doing that is non-stealing. The feeling of taking and
giving to others is stealing, not doing that is non-stealing. He who does not
commit this feeling-stealing, why would he commit the petty stealing of material
objects?  **(4) Wandering - playing in Brahman, i.e., in the pure soul form, is
Brahmacharya in feeling.** Wandering - playing in non-Brahman, in the non-self,
in the other's property is non-Brahmacharya, or adultery, or sexual union with
the other's property, duality. Giving up wandering in the other's property,
abandoning adultery, avoiding contact with the other's feeling, playing in the
pure non-dual soul is Brahmacharya. Such feeling-Brahmacharya is helpful in
achieving material Brahmacharya, and such feeling-Brahmacharya is helpful in
strengthening material Brahmacharya. Thus, material and feeling are mutually
complementary and supportive feelings.  **(5) Having a feeling of possessiveness
towards another thing - other than the soul, fainting, and taking possession of
it is possession.** Not having that feeling of possessiveness - possession is
non-possession in the ultimate sense. Not considering the other's property as
one's own, not considering it as mine, not having the feeling of possessiveness,
not taking even an atom of the other's property as one's own is non-possession.
He who has this feeling of non-possession, why would he accumulate material
possessions? And he who does not take material possessions, which are the extent
of fainting, why would his feeling of non-possession not become firm? Thus, both
have a cause-and-effect relationship.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 upasaMhAra : bhAva ahiMsA, bhAva satyAdi (715) parane sva na kahevuM te satya
che. satane sat ne asatane asata kahevuM, bhAvathI satyAdi tathA sane asat ne
asatane sat na kahevuM te satya che. eka zuddha AtmA sivAyanI koI paNa vastu
pitAnI nathI, para vastu che, te para vastune para kahevI, sva na kahevI te
satya che; para vastune sva kahevI, para na kahevI te asatya che. Ama anAtma
vastune AtmarUpa kahevI te asatya che; anAtma vastune AtmarUpa na kahevI ne Atma
vastune ja AtmarUpa kahevI, te ja paramArtha satya che. AnI parama manana karavA
yaMgya tAtvika mImAMsA zrImad rAjacaMdrajIe A prakAre prakAzI che - paramArtha
satya eTale AtmA sivAya bIje kaI padArtha AtmAno thaI zakate nathI ema nizcaya
jANI belavAmAM vyavahArathI deha, strI, putra, mitra, dhana, dhAnya, gRha Adi
vastuonA prasaMgamAM bolatAM eka AtmA sivAya bIjuM kAMI mAruM nathI; e upayoga
rahevo joIe. anya AtmAnA saMbaMdhI belatAM AtmAmAM jAti, liMga, ane tevA
upacArika bhedavALe te AtmA na chatAM mAtra vyavahAra nayathI kAryane mATe
bolAvavAmAM Ave che; evA upayogIpUrvaka bolAya te te pAramArthika bhASA che, ema
samajavAnuM che." ItyAdi. (juo) - zrImad rAjacaMdra, patrAMka 54pa. (3) para
vastunuM apaharaNa-corI na karavI te paramArthathI asteya che eka zuddha AtmA
sivAya bIjuM kAMI paNa paramANumAtra paNa pitAnuM nathI, pArakuM che. te para
vastunuM grahaNa karavuM te cerI che-adattAdAna che, te na karavuM te asteya
che. parabhAvavibhAva pariNAma te corI che, te na karavA te asteya che. A
parabhAva-vibhAvarUpa bhAvacerI je karato nathI, te para dravyaharaNarUpa kSudra
dravya-cerI te kare ja kema? (4) brahmamAM arthAt zuddha AtmasvarUpamAM
vicaravuM-ramaNa karavuM te bhAvathI brahmacarya che. abrahmamAManAtmamAM, para
vastumAM vicaravuM-ramaNa karavuM te abrahmacarya, athavA vyabhicAra, athavA
para vastunA saMzleSarUpa maithuna che, dvata che. para vastumAM vicaravuM
cheDI, vyabhicAra tyajI, parabhAvane sparza pariharI, zuddha advaita evA AtmAmAM
ramavuM te brahmacarya che. AvA bhAva brahmacaryanI siddhimAM dravya brahmacarya
upakArI thAya che, ane dravya brahmacaryanI daDhatAmAM AvuM bhAva brahmacarya
upakArI thAya che. Ama dravya-bhAvane paraspara pUrakarUpa sahAyaka bhAva che.
(5) AtmA sivAyanI bIjI-para vastu pratye mamatva bhAva karI, mUrchA karI, tenuM
parigrahaNa karavuM te parigraha che. te maccha3pamamatva bhAvarUpa parigraha na
ho te paramArthathI aparigraha che. para vastune potAnI mAnI, mArI che ema mAnI,
mUccha-mamatva na karatAM, para vastunuM paramANu paNa AtmabhAve na grahavuM te
aparigraha che. AvI jenI aparigraha bhAvanA heya, te pachI dravya parigraha zAne
ekaThe kare ? ane je mUcchanA AyatanarUpa dravya parigraha na grahe, tene ukta
aparigraha bhAvanA kema daDha na thAya? Ama bannene kArya kAraNa saMbaMdha che.

Page #792 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(716) This is a summary of the Yogadristi Samuchaya, in terms of substance and
emotion, regarding the five yamas of ahimsa (non-violence) and the rest. Its
explanation is wonderful. It is like this: A worldly human being, for the sake
of worldly self-interest, commits violence against others, considers them as his
own, and then engages in taking and stealing. After stealing, he develops a
close connection and association with the stolen object. Due to this close
association and familiarity, he develops a sense of attachment, possessiveness,
and greed towards it, which makes him become attached to it and bound by it. But
a soul seeking liberation, for the sake of its own liberation, does not commit
violence against others, does not consider them as his own, and therefore does
not engage in taking or stealing. Hence, he does not develop any connection or
association with them, and due to the lack of such familiarity, he does not
develop any attachment, possessiveness, or greed towards them. Therefore, he
does not become attached to them and is not bound by them. Thus, this seeker of
liberation, in his state of being, practices ahimsa, which is the essence of his
being. And then, he does not allow his state of being to be harmed by falsehood,
which is a form of self-deception, or by stealing, which is a form of taking
away from others, or by sexual misconduct, which is a form of violation of
others, or by possessiveness, which is a form of attachment to others. Thus, the
seeker of liberation, for the sake of the highest good, practices the five yamas
of ahimsa, satya (truthfulness), asteya (non-stealing), brahmacharya
(continence), and aparigraha (non-possessiveness). The word yama or uparama is
also very significant. Because, restraint in one's own being, keeping the soul
under control, is yama; and refraining from harming others is uparama.
Therefore, that which makes the soul restrained in its own being is yama, and
that which makes it refrain from harming others is uparama. The meaning of both
words is the same. Each of these five yamas has four types, due to the intensity
of purity, which are: ichchayma (desire-based yama), pravrittiyma (action-based
yama), sthiriyma (stable yama), and sidiyma (achieved yama). Therefore, there
are twenty types of yamas (5 x 4 = 20). For example, ichchahimsa (desire-based
non-violence), pravrittihimsa (action-based non-violence), sthirihimsa (stable
non-violence), siddhihimsa (achieved non-violence), ichchasatya (desire-based
truthfulness), pravrittisatya (action-based truthfulness), sthirisatya (stable
truthfulness), siddhisatya (achieved truthfulness), and so on. Now, the nature
of each of these types is explained.  Their special characteristics are
described: तद्वत्कथाप्रीतियुता तथाविपरिणामिनी । यमेष्विच्छावसेयेह प्रथमो यम एव
तु ॥ २१५ ॥  kritti-tattvatha kiriyuta- tadvant arthat yamavantni katha pratyeni
pritiyukta, taviparinamini- tatha aviparinamini, tadbhavana sthiravathaki,
chamey-ukt lakshanavala yamama cha-i, ava-samajva yogya che, ru-aheen,
yamachakrama, ane a prathama tham ga ta-prathama yama j che, anantar-hamunu j
kaheva lakshanavali ichchi j ichchayma che, etla mate.  (Translation of the
Sanskrit verse): One who is delighted by the stories of those who have attained
the yamas, and whose mind is steady in the thought of the yamas, and who
possesses the qualities mentioned above, is considered to have attained the
first yama, which is ichchayma (desire-based yama).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (716) yogadaSTisamuccaya Ama saMkSepe dravyathI-bhAvathI ahiMsAdi pAMca yamanuM
svarUpa che. tenI saMkalanA abdubhuta che. te A prakAre svAthI manuSya sAMsArika
lebharUpa svArthanI khAtara paranI hiMsA kare che, parane potAnuM kahe che-mAne
che, eTale pachI te levA-apaharavAahiMsAdinI caravA pravarte che, apaharaNa
pachI tene gADha saMzleSa-saMsarga kare che, saMkalanA ane tevA gADha
paricayathI tene pratye tene mUccha bhAva-mamatva-parigrahabuddhi upaje che,
jethI te para parigrahathI parigRhIta thAya che, copAsathI jakaDAya che. paNa
AtmAthI mumukSu jIva AtmArtharUpa svArthanI khAtara paranI hiMsA karatuM nathI,
parane pitAnuM kahetA nathI-mAnatuM nathI, eTale pachI te levA-apaharavA-ravA
pravartate nathI, ethI tene saMleSa saMbaMdha thatuM nathI, ane tevA paricayanA
abhAvathI tene te pratye mUcchabhAva-mamatva-parigrahabuddhi upajatI nathI jethI
te parigrahathI parigrahIta thatuM nathI, cetaraphathI jakaDA nathI eTale A A
mumukSu mumukSunuM puruSa svarUpamAM sthitirUpa ahiMsAne bhaje che, ane pachI
parane sva AcaraNa kahevArUpa asatyathI, ke paranA apaharaNarUpa cerIthI, ke
para pratye vyabhicaraNarUpa maithunathI, ke para pratye mamavarUpa
parigrahabhAvathI, te svarUpasthitine hAni pahoMcavA detuM nathI. Ama mumukSu
yogIpuruSa paramArthathI ahiMsA, satya, asteya, brahmacarya ne aparigraha e
pAMca yamanuM-uparamanuM sevana kare che. A yama athavA uparama zabda paNa ghaNo
sUcaka che, kAraNa ke svarUpamAM saMyamana-AtmAne zekI rAkha-dAbI rAkhavo te
yama che; ane pararUpathI viramaNa te uparama che. eTale jenA vaDe karIne AtmA
svarUpamAM saMyamita thAya te yama che, ane parabhAvathI viramita thAya te
uparama che. banne zabdano phalitArtha eka che.-A ahiMsAdi pAMca yamanA
pratyekanA pAchA cAra cAra prakAra che, zuddhinI taratamatAnA-ochAvattApaNAnA
kAraNe te pratyekanI cAra cAra keTa-kathA che. ichAyama, pravattiyama.
sthirayama ane sidiyama. eTale A yamanA (544420) vIza prakAra thayA. jemake-
IcchAahiMsA, pravRttiahiMsA, sthiraahiMsA, siddhiahiMsA, IcchAsatya,
pravRttisatya, sthirasatya, siddhisatya, ItyAdi. A IcchAdi pratyeka prakAranuM
svarUpa have pachI kahe che. eonuM vizeSa lakSaNa kahe che -
tadvatkathAprItiyutA tathAvipariNAminI  /  yameSvicchAvaseyeha prathamo yama eva
tu  //  215  //  kRtti-tattvathA kIriyutA- taddavaMta arthAta yamavaMtanI kathA
pratyenI prItiyukta, tAvipariNAminI-tathA avipariNAminI, tadbhAvanA
sthiravathakI, camey-ukta lakSaNavALA yamamAM chA-I, avA -samajavA yogya che,
rU-ahIM, yamacakramAM, ane A prathama thama ga ta-prathama yama ja che,
anaMtara-hamaNuM ja kahevA lakSaNavALI IcchI ja ichAyama che, eTalA mATe.

Page #793 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Conclusion: The nature of *Icchayam* and the practice of non-violence etc. by
the *Mumukṣu*  (717) The one who has love for the story of Yamavant and is
*aviparinami* (steadfast), the desire in them for *Yama* is to be known as the
first *Yama* (i.e., *Icchayam*). 215.  **Meaning:** The desire for *Yama* in one
who has love for the story of Yamavant and is *aviparinami* (steadfast), is to
be known as the first *Yama* (i.e., *Icchayam*) in this cycle of *Yama*.
**Commentary:** The desire for *Yama* in one who has love for the story of
Yamavant and is *aviparinami* (steadfast) due to their unwavering nature, is the
first *Yama* in this cycle of *Yama*, meaning it is *Icchayam*.  The desire that
arises for *Yama* like non-violence etc. is the first *Icchayam*. Ah! How
beautiful, beneficial, and auspicious are these non-violent practices! How
wonderful it would be if I could attain these! When will I be fortunate enough
to attain these non-violent practices? The true inner desire, longing, taste,
and feeling that arises for attaining these non-violent practices is *Icchayam*.
It is a great thing to have such a desire from the depths of one's soul. True
inner desire is the first and greatest step towards attaining liberation, the
first door to entering the righteous path, and the grand entrance to the path of
liberation. Without this inner desire, no one can enter this path of yoga, and
how can there be any activity etc.? And those who appear to have entered this
path through external means - material things - and are hypocrites, they too
cannot truly enter this path. They are merely pretending, and their external
actions are just a facade. Therefore, true entry into this path cannot happen
without *Icchayam*.  Just as there is no sweetness in food without taste and
feeling, and it does not go down the throat easily, or it has to be forced down,
and it causes nausea and indigestion; similarly, without inner desire, taste,
and feeling, there is no true sweetness in the food of the ultimate truth, no
emotional sweetness arises, the truth of the food does not go down the throat
easily - it does not settle in the heart. Or it has to be forced down the throat
- it has to be dragged and pushed into the heart through egotism. It results in
distaste and aversion, and that truth does not stay in the stomach - it is
vomited out for show, or it causes indigestion and dyspepsia due to false pride.
But food taken with taste and feeling is sweet, and it goes down the throat
willingly - it does not have to be forced down, it stays in the stomach, and it
is enjoyable.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 upasaMhAra : mumukSanuM ahiMsAdi AcaraNa, IrachAyamanuM svarUpa (717) yamavaMta
kathA prIti yutA, avipariNAminI tema; icachA yamamAM jANavI, prathama yama ja te
ema. 215. artha -yamavatanI kathA pratye prItiyukta, tathA avipariNAminI evI je
yamamAM IcchA, te ahIM macakramAM prathama yama ja (IskAyama ja) jANavI.
vivecana yamavatanI kathA pratyenI prItivALI ane taddabhAva sthirapaNAe karIne
avipariminI evI je yama pratyenI IcchA, te ahIM yamacakramAM prathama yama che,
arthAta IcchAyama che ema jANavuM. ahiMsAdi yamane viSe je icchA utpanna thavI
te ja prathama e IrachAyama che. ahA ! A ahiMsAdi kevA suMdara che! kevA upakArI
che! kevA kalyANakArI che. A ahiMsAdi mane paNa prApta hoya te kevuM sAruM ! A
ahiMsAdi pAmavAne huM kayAre bhAgyazALI thaIza? evA bhAvanI je sAcI aMtaraMga
IcchA, spRhA, ruci, bhAvanA thavI te ja irachAyama che. aMtarAtmAthI tevI IcchA
thavI e paNa moTI vAta che. sAcI aMtarachA e sadyegaprAptinuM prathama ane
mahAna pagathiyuM che, sanmArga pravezanuM prathama dvAra che, mokSamArgane
bhavya daravAja che. e aMtaraMga bhAvarUpa icchA vinA keIne paNa A yoga
sanmArgamAM praveza paNa ghaTato nathI, te pravRtti Adi te kyAMthI hoya? ane
bAhyathI- dravyathI temAM parANe ghUsI gayelA dekhAtA koI daMbhI oLaghAlu temAM
pravezane dA karatA hoya, te paNa paramArthathI teone te sanmArgamAM
aMta:praveza ghaTatuM nathI, te te hAranA hAra ja, cogamArga bAhya ja rahe che,
mATe kharo mArga praveza te icchAyoga vinA thaI zakato ja nathI, ruci-bhAva
vinAnA bhojanamAM jema mIThAza AvatI nathI, kaLIo gaLe utarato nathI, athavA
parANe utAravo paDe che, moLa Ave che ane vamana ke ajIrNa thAya che; - tema
aMtaraMga IcchArUpa ruci-bhAva vinAnA paramArtharUpa paramAna ruci vinAnA
bhejanamAM sAcI mIThAza AvatI nathI, saMvega-mAdhurya nIpajatuM nathI,
bhejananuM dRSTA satya tatva gaLe utaratuM nathI-aMtamAM ThasatuM nathI athavA
parANe gaLe utAravuM paDe che-matAgrahathI tANI teSIne aMtaramAM ThasAvavuM paDe
che, arucirUpa-aNagamArUpa meLa Ave che, ane te satya tatva peTamAM TakatuM
nathI- jagane dekhADArUpa tenuM vamana thAya che, athavA mithyA abhimAnarUpa
ajIrNa-apaco upaje che. paNa ruci-bhAvathI karelA bhejanamAM mIThAza Ave che,
keLIo hoMze hoMze enI meLe gaLe utare che-paraNe utAre paDatuM nathI, peTamAM
Take che, meLa AvatI

Page #794 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(718) The yogadrishti-samudrachaya (spiritual vision-ocean) does not cause
vomiting or indigestion, but properly digests and nourishes all the body's
dhatus (elements) uniformly. Similarly, the true sweetness comes in the
paramārtha-rūpa (spiritual) paramāna (food) made with the true desire-like
relish - it generates enthusiasm and joy, the truth and essence naturally settle
down without any force or obstruction, there is no arising of dislike or
pretentious vomiting or arrogant indigestion; but transformed into the nature of
the inner self, it is properly digested and becomes the supreme nectar-like
essence that nourishes the pure natural state of all the dhatus of the soul.
From this example, one can well understand how much importance the path of
desire-like relish (ruchi) has in the entry into the right path, and how much
significance the word "desires" has in the phrase "as the ascetics desire". Just
as there is no joy in a meeting without the mind, there is no true joy in a
meeting without desire-like relish on the right path. "Meeting without the mind
is like wandering aimlessly" - this is the state it leads to. In the marriage of
the right path, the form of inner love, "without the arising of longing, true
bliss is not experienced". Therefore, this desire-like relish has been given the
primary place in this right path, because without it, not even a single step can
be taken forward.  Further, if we consider the secret of accomplishing any task,
the first and foremost thing required is the arising of the inner desire-like
relish and enthusiasm for that particular task. If such inner desire exists,
then the way opens up for it. "Where there is a will, there is a way" -
according to this famous English saying, effort (prayatna) is made for the
activity or task, and if obstacles (vighna) come in the way while proceeding
enthusiastically, they are overcome, and gradually the completion and perfection
of the task is achieved. But the work done without relish (ruchi) remains
fruitless and the activity becomes like "plastering on ashes"! This is the
general rule. When the soul has the relish for the task, all the causal factors
(kāraka) get transformed. The six kārakas - kartā (doer), karma (object), karaṇa
(instrument), sampradāna (recipient), apādāna (source), and adhikaraṇa
(location) - which were previously obstructing, now function in a facilitative
manner towards the task of self-realization due to the arising of inner relish-
desire.  Thus, the activities of the soul undergo an amazing transformation due
to the quality of inner desire-like relish, because the self-energy (ātmavīrya)
manifests in accordance with the arising relish. (Refer to the poem on page 291)
When the heart is filled with love, then the soul awakens, and then the true
color (ranga) manifests. Such an extraordinary quality of desire is also filled
with love towards the story of Yama (the lord of death), and...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (718) yogadaSTisamuracaya nathI, ane vamana thatuM nathI ke ajIrNa upajatuM
nathI, paNa barAbara pAcana thaI ekarasa banI zarIranI sarva dhAtuone puSTa kare
che. tema sAcI IcchArUpa rucibhAvathI karelA paramArtharUpa paramAna bhejanamAM
sAcI mIThAza Ave che-saMvega mAdhurya nIpaje che, satya tattvane keLIo hoMse
hase enI meLe gaLe utare che-saheje aMtamAM Thase che, parANe utAre paDato
nathI, matAgrahathI tANakheMca karIne ThasAva paDatuM nathI, aMtamAM Thare che,
arucirUpa meLa AvatI nathI, dAMbhika oLaghAla dekhAvarUpa tenuM vamana thatuM
nathI, ke abhimAnarUpa ajIrNa--apa upaja nathI; paNa aMtarAtmapariNAmarUpe,
barAbara pariNata thaI-pAcana thaI eka parama amRtarasarUpa banI AtmAnI sarva
dhAtunezuddha svabhAva bhAvane puSTa kare che. A daSTAMta uparathI, rucinuM-
IcchAnuM sanmArga-pravezamAM keTaluM badhuM mahatva che, "Icache che je
jogIjana" padamAM iche che padanuM keTaluM badhuM arthagaurava che te sArI peThe
samajI zakAya che. vaLI mana vinAnA milanamAM jema majhA AvatI nathI, tema mana
vinAnA-IcchA vinAnA sanmArga milanamAM kharI majhA AvatI nathI. "mana vinAnuM
maLavuM ne bhIMta sAthe bhaTakAvuM" -enA je A ghATa thAya che. sanmArgAgarUpa
paramArtha-lagnamAM aMtaraMga prItirUpa "laganI lAgyA vinA khare AnaMda
anubhavAte nathI. eTalA mATe ja aMtaraMga prItirUpa A icchAgane A gamArgamAM
prathama sthAna ApyuM che, kAraNa ke tenA vinA AgaLa eka DagaluM paNa maMDAtuM
nathI. . vaLI kAryasiddhinuM rahasya vicArIe te kaI paNa kAryanI siddhimAM
sauthI prathama te te kArya mATenI aMtaraMga icchA-ruci-dhagaza jAgavI joIe. evI
aMtaraMga IcchA hoya, to ja tene raste maLI Ave che. "Where there is a will
there is a way"--e prasiddha aMgrejI ukti anusAra tene mArga maLI AvatAM
pravRtti arthAt kArya mATe prayatna (Effort) thAya che. ane ema utsAhathI
pravartatAM mArgamAM vina (Obstacle) Ave to tene jaya karAya che, ane ema
karatAM karatAM anakame kAryanI pUrNatA-siddhi thAya che. paNa ruci vinA je
kArya karavAmAM Ave che, te te TharUpa hoI, kadI siddha thatuM nathI, ane te
mATenI kriyA pravRtti "chAra para liMpaNa" jevI thaI paDe che! Ama sAmAnya kama
che. AtmA kAryarucivALe thaye badhA kAraka pharI jAya che, palaTAI jAya che.
kartA, karma, karaNa, saMpradAna, apAdAna ane adhikAraNa e cha kAraka je pUrve
bAdhakapaNe pariNamatA hatA, te Atmasiddhi kArya pratye aMtaraMga ruci-IcchA
upajatAM sAdhakapaNe pravarte che. Ama aMtaraMga bhAvarUpa ruci-IcchA guNathI
jIvanI vRttimAM ajaba palaTe AvI jAya che, camatkArika pheraphAra thaI jAya che,
kAraNa ke jevI ruci upaje che, tevuM tene anuyAyIanusaratuM AtmavIrya
skurAyamAna thAya che. ( juo kAvya pR. 291 ) jyAre jIgarane prema lAge che,
tyAre ja AtmA jAge che, ane tyAre ja kharekharo raMga lAge che. AvI apUrva
guNavALI je IcchA che, te vaLI yamavatanI kathA pratyenI prItivALI tathA

Page #795 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Conclusion: The Love for the Path of Restraint: "Blessed are those great
ascetics!"  (719) Such is the nature of non-retrogression. In this world,
whoever practices non-violence in thought, word, or deed, speaks truth, acts
righteously, observes celibacy, and practices non-possession, upon hearing or
reading their story, develops an inner love and affection for them. This is a
sign of the desire for liberation. Whether fully or partially, from all or from
a particular country, completely or partially, whoever truly practices the
restraints of non-violence, etc., or has attained liberation, evokes in the
desire-for-liberation a deep sense of admiration and love. For example:  Blessed
are these non-violent great ascetics! Who, through their efforts, protect the
six categories of beings, consider all beings equal, do not harm even the most
subtle of living beings, do not cause even the slightest pain, do not engage in
mental violence through attachment, aversion, etc., and are like an ocean of
compassion, free from any cause! These ascetic lords, who are constantly in
their true nature, do not even touch the slightest trace of external influence!
Oh! Their compassion! Oh! Their freedom from attachment! Oh! Their state of
being in their true nature! Oh! How amazing is the truthfulness of these saints!
Even in their dreams, these men of virtuous conduct do not utter false words!
They never call themselves superior to others. In both their actions and their
ultimate goal, they speak only truth, truth, and truth. Blessed is their vow of
truth! Oh! These supremely honest great souls, who are detached even in their
own bodies, do not take even a single grain of what is not given, and do not
desire even an atom of external possessions! Oh! Their detachment! How wonderful
is the vow of Brahman of these true renunciants and ascetics! They practice a
strict vow of celibacy, both in thought and deed! Even in their dreams, even in
their play, there is no shadow of sensual desire! They constantly dwell in
Brahman, in their pure true nature! Oh! Their great vow of non-possession!
Blessed is the ultimate non-possession of these Nirgranthas! They have destroyed
all attachments, both material and mental! They do not have even a trace of
possessiveness towards even an atom of external things! In this entire world,
they have nothing belonging to them except their own soul, they are the ultimate
renunciants, free from all possessions! Oh! Their detachment! (See pages 190 and
197-198).  Due to this love and admiration, the seeker spontaneously exclaims:
"Namo Ttop Salahool" - salutations to all the ascetics, to all those who are
truly virtuous, to all those who are of virtuous conduct! And the one who
develops this love and admiration for such a person of restraint, becomes very
dear to them, and they naturally develop a fondness, interest, and desire for
them. Therefore, they desire: "How wonderful it would be if I could become like
these non-violent ones!" "When will I be able to practice these restraints of
non-violence?"

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 upasaMhAra : yamavata kathAprItiH "dhanya te munivarA re!' (719) avipariNaminI
evI hoya che. A jagamAM je koI dravyathI ke bhAvathI ke bannethI ahiMsA seva
hoya, satya bolate heya, arateya Acarato hoya, brahmacarya pALatA hoya,
aparigraha dhArato hoya, tenI kayAMyathI paNa kathAvArtA sAMbhaLavAmAM ke
vAMcavAmAM AvatAM, tenA pratye aMtaraMga prIti upajAvI-prema kure te A IcchAnuM
lakSaNa che. saMpUrNapaNe ke apUrNapaNe, sarvathI ke dezathI, sakalapaNe ke
vilapaNe je kaI sAcA sAdhu puru-sAdhaka mumukSuo A ahiMsAdi yamanI sAdhanA
karatA hoya ke siddhi pAmelA hoya, tenA pratye A IcchAyamavaMtane atyaMta
guNapramoda-guNAnurAga upaje che. jema ke - dhanya che A ahiMsaka mahA munio !
ke jeo yatanAthI cha kAyanI rakSA kare che, sarva jagajjatune sama gaNI
sUkSmamAM sUkSma jIvane paNa haNatA nathI, lezamAtra duHkha upajA vatA nathI,
rAga-dveSAdi bhAvahiMsA karatA nathI bhAvadayArasanA sAgaradhanya te niSkAraNa
karUNAsiMdhu evA A sAdhu bhagavAna niraMtara AtmasvarUpamAM munivara re" sthiti
karI parabhAvanA lezane paNa sparzatA nathI ! aho ! emanI karuNA! aho ! emanI
vItarAgatA ! ahe! emanI svarUpasthiti ! aho! A saMtanI satyavAditA paNa kevI
AzcaryakArI che! svapnamAM paNa A sAdhucarita puruSe asatya vacana vadatA nathI
! paravaratune potAnI kadI kahetA nathI. vyavahArathI ne paramArthathI te kevaLa
satya satya ne satya ja vade che. dhanya che emanA satya vratane ! aho !
svadehamAM paNa nirIha evA A parama pramANika mahAtmAo saLI mAtra paNa adatta
letA nathI, parabhAvanuM paramANu paNa AtmabhAvathI IcchatA nathI ! ahe emanI
niHspRhitA ! A sAcA tyAgI-saMnyAsI jegIjanonuM brahmavrata paNa kevuM adbhuta
che! dravyathI ne bhAvathI teo kevuM kaThora brahmacaryavrata pALe che !
svapnAMtare paNa emanA ramamAtramAM paNa viSayavikAranI chAyA dekhAtI nathI !
niraMtara teo brahmamAM-zuddha AtmasvarUpamAM vicarI rahyA che ! ahA temanuM A
mahAasidhArAgrata dhanya che A nigraMthanI parama nigraMtha vRttine ! dravya-
bhAva samasta graMthane-parigraha baMdhanene temaNe uccheda karyo che !
paravastunA paramANu mAtra pratye paNa teo mamatvabhAva-mUrchA dharAvatA nathI !
A AkhA jagamAM eka AtmA sivAya emanI pitAnI mAlIkInuM bIjuM kAMI nathI, evA te
parama akiMcana-niSparigrahI che! ahe! emanI ni thatA ! (juo pR. 190 tathA 197-
198). AvA guNAnurAgane lIdhe te mumukSunA sahaja svayaMbhU ugAra nIkaLI paDe che
ke - "namo Topa salAhULa" -A lekamAM sarva sAdhuone-sAcA sAdhuguNasaMpanna sarva
sAdhucarita sahune namaskAra ho ! ane AvA yamavaMte pratye jene AvI guNAnurAga
janya prIti upaje che, tene te yame atyaMta gamI jAya che, eTale tenA pratye
tene sahaja svAbhAvika spRhA-ruci-IcchA upaje che. eTale te pRhA kare che ke AvA
ahiMsAdine mane ga thAya to kevuM sAruM ! AvA ahiMsAdi sAdhavA huM kayAre

Page #796 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(720) Yoga-drushti-suskshay 6 Will I be fortunate? When will this opportunity to
become a Nigrantha, free from material and mental attachments, come to me? When
will we become external and internal Nigranthas? (Shrimad Rajchandraji)
“Thoughts of attachment are subdued, the eyes do not look at others; Consider
wealth as equal to stone, and absorb the essence of non-attachment. Embrace the
twelve vows and humility, and consider yourself to be of a sattvic nature; This
is my vow, always auspicious and prosperous, eternally unbroken, remaining
throughout the cycle of births.” —Shri Moksha Mala. Just as a shrewd
businessman, hearing of a place with great business opportunities and abundant
wealth, is eager to go there and acquire great wealth; similarly, hearing of the
benefits of non-violence and other yogic practices, a seeker of liberation is
also eager to engage in such yogic practices and acquire great spiritual wealth.
This creates interest and desire, and awakens the desire for liberation. “Your
virtues, like knowledge, are infinite and boundless; Hearing them, your interest
transcends all limits…Ajit Jin.” —Shri Devchandraji. And this desire that arises
is non-perishable, it never experiences a change or a contrary result; because
it is based on a stable state of mind, so this desire never becomes undesirable,
love never becomes hatred, and interest never becomes disinterest. The feelings
of desire that arise, remain as they are, they never become non-existent due to
a change. Such intense and pure desire arises here. The color of this desire and
interest has stained the inner being, and it never fades away. Just as the color
of a dyed cloth never fades, similarly, this firm color of desire that has
stained the soul never fades away. The garment may become thin and tear, but the
dye never fades; similarly, the body may become thin and fall away, but this
feeling that has stained the awakened soul never fades away; it follows the soul
in the next life, like a devoted servant. The mold and the form may disappear,
but gold never becomes non-existent; similarly, the form of the body may
disappear, but the inner color that has stained the awakened soul, like gold,
never fades away. (See, Kavya p. 239) And— 節 सर्वत्र शमसारं तु यमपालनमेव यत् ।
प्रवृत्तिरि विज्ञेया द्वितीयो यम एव तत् ।। २२६ ॥ Vritti: Everywhere, in general,
the essence of peace is the observance of Yama. That which is specific to the
cycle of actions is to be known as the practice of Yama. In Yama, the second is
the practice of Yama.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (720) yogadRSTisasukSaya 6 bhAgyazALI thaIza ? AvA dravya-bhAva nigraMtha
thavAne mane apUrva avasara evA kayAre Avaze ? kayAre thaizu' bAhyAMtara
nigraMtho ? '( zrImad rAjacaMdrajI ) " mAhinIbhAva vicAra adhIna thai, nA
nirakhu nayane paranArI; patthara tulya gaNu para vaibhava, ni`La tAttvika
leAbha samArI. dvAdaza vrata ane dInatA dharI, sAttvika thAu' svarUpa vicArI; e
muja nema sadA zubha kSemaka, nitya akhaMDa raheA bhavahArI. '--zrI meAkSamALA.
jema keI amuka sthaLe vyApAranI bhArI anukUlatAne lIdhe dravyalAbha khUba thAya
che, ema sAMbhaLIne svA'paTu vyApArI vaNikane tyAM zIghra de|DI jai vipula
dhanasa'patti prApta karavAnuM mana thaI Ave; tema atre paNa ahiMsAdi
yogavyApAranI anukULatAe apUrva AtmalAbha thAya che ema sAMbhaLIne, AtmApaTu
mumukSune paNa tevA ahiM'sAdi yeAgavyApArathI apUrva Atmagusapatti meLavavAnu
mana thai Ave che, ruci-icchA upaje che, keDa-manAratha jAge che. " jJAnAdika
guNu sapadA re, tuja anaMta apAra; te sAMbhaLatAM upanI re, ruci tithaeN pAra
utAra....ajita jina."--zrI devaca'drajI, tathA A je icchA upaje che te
avipariNAminI hAya che, kadI vipariNAmaneviparIta pariNAmane pAmatI nathI;
kAraNa ke tadbhAvanI sthiratA heAya che, eTale te icchA kadI anicchArUpa thatI
nathI, prIti aprItirUpa thatI nathI, ruci arucirUpa thatI nathI. je icchArUpa
bhAva upajyA te upajyeA, te kadI vipariNAma pAmI abhAvarUpa thatA nathI. evA
utkaTa ataraga icchAbhAva atra pragaTe che. te icchA-rucine aMtaraMga raMga
lAgyA te lAgyA, kadI bhUMsAtA ja nathI. jema cALa maDhanA raMga kadI jatA nathI,
tema AtmAne lAgelA A dRDha icchA-ra'ga kadI jatA nathI vastra jINu thaIne phATI
jAya paNa pAke mane raga jAya nahi; tema deha jINu thaIne paDI jAya paNa jAgelA
AtmAne lAgele A bhAvaraga kaDhI jAya nahi; te bhavAMtaramAM paNa AjJAMkita
anucaranI jema anugAmI thaine pAchaLa pAchaLa cAlyA Ave. ghATa ghaDAmaNu bhale
jAya, paNa seAnuM kadI viSNuse nahi; tema dehanA ghATa bhale jAya, paNa senA
jevA A jAgrata AtmAne lAgelA aMtaraMga raMga TaLe nahiM. ( jue, kAvya pR. 239 )
tathA-- Jie  sarvatra zamasAraM tu yamapAlanameva yat  /  pravRttiri vijJeyA
dvitIyo yama eva tat  /  /  226  //  vRtti:--satra-saCtra sAmAnyathI, samasAmAM
OM-zramasAra ja, upazamasAra ja, yamAnameSa ca-kriyAviziSTa evuM je yamapAlana,
pravRttiSi vijJeyA-te ahIM pravRtti jANavI. yameAmAM-dvitIyo cama va tat-te
dvitIya yama ja che, pravRttiyama che ema atha che.

Page #797 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Conclusion:** The desire for non-attachment, the characteristic of the vow of
activity. (721) The one who follows it, is a renunciant everywhere; Activity
here is to be known, the second vow is that. 216 **Meaning:** The vow observance
which is renunciant everywhere, is to be known as activity here; and that is the
second vow. **Discussion:** The vow observance which is renunciant everywhere,
is to be known as activity here, and that vow is the second one, the vow of
activity. The vows of non-violence, etc., which are desired from the heart,
considered desirable from the soul, their observance in action is the vow of
activity. It is to put non-violence, etc., into action, to bring them into
practice, into character, to weave them into daily desires and then into life's
dealings, that is the vow of activity. To live a life of non-violence,
truthfulness, non-stealing, celibacy, non-possession, that is the vow of
activity. To be diligent in observing non-violence, etc., with the feeling of
having done, having caused, having approved, in the activities of mind, speech,
and body, and to make the inner desire active, that is the second vow, the vow
of activity. Because, when anything is truly desired from the heart, when it is
truly loved, then man necessarily strives for the attainment of that desired
thing, he makes an effort. Similarly, the one who has developed a true inner
desire for the vows of non-violence, etc., then he necessarily strives for the
practice of the desired non-violence, etc., he necessarily makes an effort, and
in the attainment of that desired thing which has been loved, which has been
embraced, no matter how many obstacles come in the way, no matter how many
calamities befall him, even then that man does not give up, but on the contrary,
with double enthusiasm, he faces those obstacles, overcomes them, and moves
forward. Similarly, in the path of attaining non-violence, etc., which are
considered supremely desirable from the soul, no matter how many mountains of
obstacles come in the way, no matter how many rivers of calamities come in the
way, even then the soul-liberated seeker does not give up the pursuit of his
desired goal, but on the contrary, with doubled enthusiasm, he overcomes those
obstacles, those hindrances, and moves forward, "He perseveres and travels the
path." The supremely powerful, knowledgeable man, with his supremely moving,
nectar-like words, says: "No matter what, no matter how much suffering you
endure, no matter how much you bear, no matter how many obstacles you endure, no
matter how many diseases you endure, no matter how many attachments come your
way, no matter how many addictions come your way, even if your life span is only
a moment, and a worldly affair, but you must do it, until you are free! There is
no escape." - Shrimad Rajchandraji.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 upasaMhAra : avipariNAminI IchA, pravRtti yama lakSaNa (721) ne je pAlana
mataNuM, sarvatra ja zamasAra; pravRtti ahiM te jANavI, bIjo yama ja te dhAra.
216 artha -sarvatra zamasAra-zamapradhAna evuM je yamapAlana te ahIM pravRtti
jANavI; ane te ja dvitIya yama che. vivecana sAmAnyathI sarvatra zamasAra ja
evuM je yamapAlana che, te ja ahI pravRtti jANavI, ane te yamane viSe bIjo evo
pravRttiyama che. je ahiMsAdi yama icchAyamathI IcchavAmAM AvyA, aMtarAtmAthI
ISTa-spRhaNIya gaNavAmAM AvyA, tenuM kriyAviziSTa (In action) pAlana karavuM te
pravRttiyama che. te ahiMsAdine kriyAmAM utAravA, AcaraNamAM-cAritramAM ANavA,
dainika IcchA pachI jIvanavyavahAramAM vaNa devA te pravRttiyama che. jIvanane
ahiMsAmaya, pravRtti satyamaya, asteyamaya, brahmacaryamaya, aparigrahamaya
karavA pravartavuM te pravRttiyama che. manavacana-kAyAnA gavyApAramAM kRta-
kArita- anumodita bhAvathI ahiMsAdi pALavAmAM prayatnazIla thaI aMtarecchAne
sakriya karI dekhADavI te yamomAM bIje evo pravRttiyama che. kAraNa ke kaI paNa
vastu sAcA dilathI ruci gayA pachI-gamI gayA pachI te ISTa vastunI prApti mATe
manuSya jarUra pravartana kare che-prayatna kare che. tema A ahiMsAdi yama
pratye jene sAcI aMtarecchA upajI che, te pachI te ISTa ahiMsAdinI sAdhanA mATe
avazya pravarte che, avazya prayatna kare che, ane te gamI gayelI-gaThI gayelI
ISTa vastunI prAptimAM game teTalA vidane naDe, game teTalI vipattio AvI paDe,
te paNa te manuSya tene pIcho choDatuM nathI, paNa ulaTa bamaNA utsAhathI te
vighane paNa sAmano karI-vikrUjaya karI AgaLa dhape che. tema aMtarAtmAthI
parama ISTa mAnelA ahiMsAdinI prAptinA mArgamAM game teTalA viddhanA DuMgarA ADA
AvI paDe, game teTalI vipatti-saritAo vacce naDe, te paNa AtmArthI mumukSu
pitAnA ISTa dhyeyano keDe kadI mUkato nathI, paNa ulaTa dviguNita utsAhabaLathI
te vidane-aMtarAyone paNa parAjaya karI AgaLa vadhavA mathe che, "dhIThAI karI
mArga saMcare che. " parama AtmaparAkramavaMta jJAnI puruSanA parama
saMvegapUrNa amRtavacane che ke - game tema che, game teTalA duHkha veTha, game
teTalA parisaha sahana kare, game teTalA upasarga sahana kare, game teTalI
vyAdhio sahana kare, game teTalI upAdhio AvI paDo, game teTalI Adhio AvI paDo,
game to jIvanakALa eka samayamAtra he, ane dunimitta he, paNa ema karavuM ja
tyAM sudhI he jIva! chUTake nathI."-zrImad rAjacaMdrajI.

Page #798 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(722) Yoga-darshan samurachay “Many mountains stand across your path, O
Jagannath! With steadfastness, travel the path, with no one as your companion.
Greetings to the Jina, for whom you yearn.” - Shri Anandghanaji. First, someone
who is a traveler wishes to go to a certain place, so they begin to walk on
their path - they perform the act of travel. And then, while they are on their
way, they continue to perform the act of travel until they reach their father’s
desired place, overcoming obstacles along the way. In this process, they reach
three types of places. They encounter three main types of obstacles in between:
Kantak-vin, Javar-vin, and Digmeh-vin. (1) Kantak-vin means that a thorn pricks
them, causing a brief moment of pain, but they continue their journey as soon as
it is removed. This is the smallest, most insignificant obstacle. (2) The second
is Javar-vin, where they develop a fever on the road, forcing them to stop their
journey. Once the fever subsides, they continue their journey. This second
obstacle is more severe than the first, it is of medium intensity. (3) The
third, Digmeh-vin, is the most severe and the most significant type of obstacle.
Because of a loss of direction, the traveler forgets their intended destination,
they wander off the path, and they continue to face this obstacle until they
find their way back to the path and reach their destination. Similarly, even
while practicing the path of yoga, which includes ahimsa (non-violence), the
seeker, the yogi, encounters these insignificant, medium, and significant types
of obstacles. They overcome these obstacles and the seeker continues to move
forward. For example, cold, heat, etc., are like Kantak-vin, fever, etc., are
like Javar-vin, and wrong belief, which is an internal ailment, is like Digmeh-
vin. They protect themselves from violating the principles of ahimsa, etc., and
they continue to move forward, overcoming obstacles. “Without overcoming
obstacles, O sage, your journey will not be uninterrupted. How can you reach
Shiva-puri through action, if you are unaware? Cold, heat, and external
obstacles are like thorns, internal ailments are like fever, wrong belief is
like a fever, and its intensity is mild, medium, or severe. The obstacles of
food, seat, and victory are overcome by the guru’s grace. Obstacles cannot be
overcome without knowledge and practice.” - Prabhu. Just as a skilled gardener
carefully nurtures and protects a delicate plant from its cradle, so too does
the seeker, the mumukṣu, carefully nurture and protect the delicate plant of
ahimsa, etc., with the help of right conduct, which is like the cradle.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (722) yogadaSTisamuracaya " ghAti DuMgara ADA ati ghaNA, tuja darizaNa
jaganAtha ! dhIThAI karI mAraga saMcarUM, seMgU koI sAtha abhinaMdana jina
darizana tarasiye."--zrI AnaMdaghanajI. prathama te koI vaTemArgu amuka sthaLe
javA icche che, eTale te tenA mArge cAlavA mAMDe che-gamanakriyA kare che. ane
pachI vacce AvI paDatA vinAno jaya karate rahI te pitAnA ISTa sthaLa paryata
gamanakriyA cAlu rAkhe, to anukrame te traNa prakAranA sthaLe pahoMce che. ene
vaccamAM traNa prakAranA mukhya vipna saMbhave chevina keTakavita, kveravina,
ane digamehavina. (1) kaMTakavita eTale kAMTo lAgavAthI jarA kSaNabhara vina
naDe paNa te nikaLI jatAM tarata musApharI cAlu thAya che. A jaghanya-nAnAmAM
nAnuM vina che. (2) bIjuM javaraviddha, rastAmAM tAva AvatAM musApharI mekupha
rAkhavI paDe che, ane te utarI jatAM musApharI cAlu thAya che. A bIjuM viM
pahelA karatAM AkaruM heI madhyama che, vacalA vAMghAnuM che. (3) trIjuM
dimehavina sauthI AkarUM hoI moTAmAM moTuMutkRSTa prakAranuM vidhya che.
kAraNake dizAhathI te musAphara potAnI javAnI dizA ja bhUlI jAya che, ADapheTe
caDhI javAthI gothAM khAya che, ane punaH mAge caDhe-ThekANe Ave tyAMsudhI A
vina naDe che. tema ahiMsAdi yogamArga pravartatAM paNa sAdhaka yogIne AvA
jaghanya madhyama-utkRSTa prakAranAM vidane naDe che. tene jaya karI te mumukSu
puruSa AgaLa vadhavA mathe che. jemake, zIta-tApa vagere kaMTaka vijJa samAna
che, javara vagere bAhA vyAdhi te vara viddha samAna che, ane mithyA darzanarUpa
aMtar vyAdhi te digameha vina samAna che. A vidamAMthI A ahiMsAdinuM pAlana-
bhaMgasaMrakSaNa te kare che, ane ema vina jaya karate karato te AgaLa dhape
che. vinA vighanajaya sAdhune re, navi avicchinna prayANa re; kiriyAthI zivapurI
hAya re, kema jANe annANuM re ? prabhutva zIta tApa mukha vighana che re, bAhera
aMtara vyAdhi re; mithyAdarzana ehanI re, mAtrA mRdu madhyAdhi re. prabhu Asana
azana jayAdike re, guruyege jaya tAsa re; vighana jera e navi TaLe re, vagara
jJAna abhyAsa re. prabhu" sA. 2, gA sta, hAla 10 ane jema kuzala mALI
AlavAlathI-kayArAthI kumaLA choDanuM kALajIthI "pAlana"saMrakSaNa kare che, tema
sAdhaka mumukSu samyapha AcaraNarUpa-samitiguptirUpa AlavAlathI yArAthI A
ahiMsAdirUpa kemaLa choDanuM yatanAthI "pAlana-saMrakSaNa

Page #799 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Conclusion:** The observance of the three types of vows, non-violence, etc.
(723) One who observes non-violence, etc. Just as a loving mother lovingly
nurtures her child, so does a liberated-minded seeker lovingly observe the vows
of non-violence, etc. Just as a king who loves his people lovingly protects his
kingdom, so does a liberated-minded yogi lovingly protects his kingdom of non-
violence, etc. Or if someone has a precious jewel, how carefully does he protect
it? He keeps it safe from falling, from being lost, from being stolen, from
being damaged by mistake, so he wraps it in silk cloth and puts it in a small
box, and keeps it in a cupboard or a safe, and he checks it frequently to make
sure it is safe. And thus he constantly protects, hides, preserves, safeguards,
and maintains it. Then, how much effort should there be for the protection,
constant observance, hiding, preservation, protection, safeguarding, and
maintenance of this priceless Chintamani jewel, which is even greater than the
great Meru? How much constant awareness should there be? How much undivided
effort should there be? There, "The fifth arrow is difficult, what should we
do?" etc., why should one indulge in such petty talk and be complacent? The
situation of the world is not yet ripe, when it ripens, then we will talk, so
saying, why should one be complacent and take things lightly? (See. p. 153-154)
Everywhere there is peace, and this observance of vows is unique. It is because
everywhere there is peace, i.e., peace is the essence, or peace is the essence,
or peace is the essence. The essence of this observance of vows is peace, or
peace is the essence of this observance of vows, or this observance of vows is
the essence of peace. The meaning is that peace arises as the result of the
vows, peace is its essential fruit; and vows arise as the result of peace, vows
are its essential fruit. Thus, there is a close relationship between vows and
peace. Peace arises everywhere as the essential fruit of the vows, the kingdom
of peace spreads everywhere, everywhere, i.e., to the father and the mother, to
the material and the emotional, in every way, there is only peace. Because (1)
one who serves the essence of peace, which is the vows of non-violence, etc.,
experiences wonderful inner peace, and also brings peace to others. One who
observes non-violence, etc., does not suffer himself, nor does he cause
suffering to others. But like cool sandalwood, he soothes the heat everywhere
and brings coolness, like the cool moon, he brings joy to all.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 upasaMhAra : traNa prakAranA vita, ahiMsAdi choDanuM pAlana (723) ahiMsAdi kare
che. jema vatsala mAtA bAlakanuM yatnathI lAlana-pAlana kare che, cheDanuM
pAlana" tema mukti anurAgI mumukSu ahiMsAdi yamanuM yatnathI pAlana kare che.
jema prajAvatsala rAjA nija rAjyanuM premathI pAlanarakSaNa kare che, tema
mukti-vatsala yogIrAja nija ahiMsAdi yoga-sAmrAjyanuM prItithI pAlanarakSaNa
kare che. athavA koInI pAse mahAmUlya ratna hoya, to te tenuM pAlana kevA
yatnathI kare? te rakhene paDI na jAya, gumAvI na besAya, keI tene cerI na jAya,
bhUlecUke tene DAgha na lAgI jAya, eTalA mATe tene sAcavI saMbhALIne rezamI
kapaDAmAM viMTALI nAnI peTImAM mUkI, tene kabATamAM ke tejUrImAM te rAkhI mUke
che, ane te barAbara salAmata che ke nahi tenI vAraMvAra cesI kare che. ane Ama
tenuM niraMtara pAlana, gopana, bhaMga-saMrakSaNa, sAcavaNI-jALavaNI kare che,
to pachI A to amUlya cintAmaNi ratnathI paNa adhika, mahA meruthI paNa
mahAmahimAvAna, evA ahisAdi yogaciMtAmaNinA jatana mATe, niraMtara pAlana mATe,
gepana mATe, abhaMga mATe, rakSaNa mATe, sAcavaNI mATe, jALavaNI mATe keTale
badhe prayatna hovo joIe? keTalI badhI satata jAgRti hovI joIe? keTalI badhI
akhaMDa puruSArtha pravRtti hovI joIe? tyAM "pAMcame Aro kaThaNa che, zuM
karIe?" ItyAdi peTA nhAnA-eThA daI pramAda karavo kema pAlave ? haju bhavasthiti
pAkI nathI, pAkaze tyAre vAta, ema kahI lamaNe hAtha daI, pAdaprasArikA karavI
kema posAya? (jue. pR. 153-154) sarvatra zamasAra ane AvuM A yamapAlana kevuM
viziSTa che? te ke sarvatra zamasAra ja che, arthAt zama ja jene sAra che,
athavA zamathI ja je sAra che,-pradhAna che, athavA zamane ja je sAra che, evuM
che. A yamapAlanane sAra zama che, athavA zamane sAra A yamapAlana che, athavA
zamathI ja A yamapAlana sAra che-pradhAna che. tAtparya ke yamanA pariNAme
sArabhUta evo zama ja upaje che, zama ja enuM sArabhUta phaLa che; ane zamanA
pariNAme sArabhUta evo yama ja upaje che, yama ja enuM sArabhUta phaLa che. Ama
yamane ne zamane paraspara ghaniSTha saMbaMdha che. yamanA sArabhUta
phalapariNAmarUpa sarvatra zama ja upaje che, sarvatra zAMtinuM sAmrAjya chavAI
rahe che, sarvatra-sarva sthaLe eTale pitAne ane parane, dravyathI ane bhAvathI,
sarva prakAre zama ja-zAMti ja upaje che. kAraNa ke (1) je ahiMsAdi yamano sAra
zama seve che te pote adbhuta AtmazAMti anubhave che, ane parane paNa zAMti
upajAve che. je ahiMsAdi seve che, te pite tApa pAmate nathI ne anya jIne paNa
tApa pamADato nathI. paNa zItala caMdananI jema sarvatra tApanuM zamana karI
zItalatA Ape che, zItala caMdranI jema sarvane AnaMda AnaMda upajAve che.

Page #800 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(724) **The Collection of Gadasti (2)** or the fruit of Yama is Upshama, meaning
the cessation of all Kshayas, such as anger, etc. The one who observes Yama,
such as Ahimsa, etc., experiences the cessation of Kshayas, such as anger, etc.,
and also brings about the cessation of Kshayas in others. Because Ahimsa, Satya,
etc., naturally eliminate the causes of Kshayas, such as anger, etc., and the
influence of the character of the non-violent, truthful speaker naturally
affects other beings, thus leading to the cessation of Kshayas in oneself and
others. (3) Or, the one who serves Yama, such as Ahimsa, etc., attains
Samabhava, a state of equanimity and peace. Because the soul that is equanimous
considers all beings equal, considering honor and dishonor, praise and blame,
etc., as equal, therefore, it does not experience the disharmony of unrest. (4)
Or, the one who observes Yama, such as Ahimsa, etc., experiences Shama, meaning
peace in one's own form, and becomes absorbed in that form. The natural fruit of
the excellent Yama, such as Ahimsa, etc., is to become absorbed in one's own
form. Because not allowing the destruction of one's own form and not moving
towards external influences is the ultimate essence of Ahimsa, etc. Therefore,
through such Ahimsa, etc., the being becomes free from all external influences
and enjoys the ultimate peace of the soul, which is the peace of one's own form,
meaning it becomes absorbed in its own form. (See page 395 and page 572) Or,
conversely, the observance of Yama is the essence of Shama everywhere. Because
(1) when a being attains Shama, meaning the cessation of Kshayas, its evil
thoughts of greed, pride, delusion, and attachment are eliminated. The essence
of Shama is Yama, meaning that one does not succumb to anger, etc., and does not
engage in violence, etc., and naturally leans towards Ahimsa, etc. (2) Or, when
a being attains peace, it also brings peace to others, and does not cause
suffering to others through violence, etc. (3) Or, when a being attains Shama,
meaning equanimity, it considers all beings equal and does not engage in
violence, etc., and observes Ahimsa, etc. (4) Or, when a being attains the
ultimate peace of the soul, which is the peace of one's own form, and becomes
absorbed in its own form, it naturally observes the excellent Yama, such as
Ahimsa, etc. Thus, the observance of Yama is the essence of Shama, and Shama is
the essence of the observance of Yama, meaning they are mutually integrated. The
seeker who attains Yama, meaning Uparam (restraint), also attains Shama, meaning
Upshama (cessation), and the one who attains Shama-Upshama also attains Yama-
Uparam. Yama is there, Shama is there, because the one who attains the cessation
of Kshayas, etc., experiences Shama due to the objects of sense, etc., and there
is necessarily Uparam-restraint from violence, etc., due to Yama. And the one
who has Uparam from violence, etc., due to the objects of sense, etc.,
experiences the cessation of Kshayas, etc., because there is Kshaya from the
object of sense, and the object of sense from Kshaya. Therefore, the one who
attains restraint also attains peace, and the one who attains peace also attains
restraint. "The wise one has 8 restraints, meaning (1) the one who is free from
external influences...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (724) gadaSTisamuccaya (2) athavA yamanuM phala upazama arthAt sarvatra
kaSAyAdinI upazAMti che, je ahiMsAdi yama pALe che, tene krodhAdi kaSAya
upazAMta thaI jAya che, ane te bIjAonA kaSAyane paNa upazAMta kare che. kAraNake
ahiMsA-satyAdithI krodhAdi kaSAyanA ghaNuM ghaNuM kAraNe svayameva dUra thaI
jAya che, ane ahiMsaka satya vaktAne cAritra prabhAva anya jIva para paNa sahaja
svabhAve paDe che, tethI sva-paranA kaSAyane upazama thAya che. (3) athavA
ahiMsAdi yama je seve che, te samabhAvarUpa zamane-zAMtine pAme che. kAraNa ke
samabhAvI AtmA "sarva jagajatune sama gaNe che, mAna-apamAna, vaMdaka-nidaka
Adine sama gaNe che, eTale tene viSamatArUpa azAMti hotI nathI. (4) athavA
ahiMsAdi je pALe che, tene zama arthAt svarUpazAMti upaje che, te svarUpamAM
samAya che. utkRSTa ahiMsAdinuM sahaja svabhAvika phaLa svarUpamAM zamAvuM e
che, kAraNa ke svarUpanI ghAta na thavA devI ane parabhAva pratye gamana na
karavuM, e ja pAramArthika bhAva ahiMsAdinuM parama svarUpa che. eTale AvA
ahiMsAdithI jIva samasta parabhAvathI virAma pAmI svarUpavizrAMtirUpa parama
AtmazAMtine bhaje che, arthAt svarUpamAM samAya che. (juo pR. 395 tathA pR. 572)
athavA ulaTI rIte laIe te sarvatra zamanA sArarUpa yamapAlana ja che. kAraNa ke
(1) jIva jyAre zamane pAme che, arthAta kaSAyanI upazAMtine-upazamane pAme che,
tyAre tenA dha-mAna-mAyA-lobhAdi duSTa bhAva meLA paDe che, zamane sAra yama
eTale krodhAdine vaza thaI te hiMsAdi karatA nathI, ane svAbhAvika rIte ahiMsAdi
pratye ja DhaLe che. (2) athavA jIva jyAre amanezAMtine pAme che tyAre te anyane
paNa zAMti Ape che, hiMsAdithI parane upatApa upajAvato nathI. (3) athavA jIva
jyAre zamane-samabhAvane pAme che tyAre te sarva jagata jIne sama gaNato hAI
hiMsAdi karato nathI ane ahiMsAdi pALe ja che. (4) athavA jIva jyAre
svarUpavizrAMtirUpa parama AtmazAMtine pAme che, svarUpamAM samAya che, tyAre te
svarUpa ahiMsAdirUpa utkRSTa ahiMsAdi yamapAlana kare ja che. Ama yamapAlanane
sAra zama ane zamane sAra yamapAlana, ema paraspara saMkalita che. je mumukSu
yama eTale uparama (virati) pAme che, te zama eTale upazama pAme che, ane je
zama-upazama pAme che, te yama-uparama pAme che. yama tyAM zamaH kAraNa ke je
kaSAyAdine upazama pAme che tene viSayAdi nimitte zama tyAM yama thatA hiMsAdine
uparama-viramaNana avazya hoya che, ane jene viSayA thatI hiMsAdine uparama hoya
che, tene kaSAyAdino upazama hoya che, kAraNa ke viSayathI kaSAya ne kaSAyathI
viSaya hoya che, eTale virati pAme che te zAMti pAme che, ane zAMti pAme che te
virati pAme che. "jJAnI 8 viratiH tAtparya ke-(1) je parabhAvathI

Page #801 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Upashar:  Chamne Saar Sham, Shamna Saar Cham (725)  **Translation:**
**Upashar:**  The essence of calmness is peace, and the essence of peace is
calmness.  **Explanation:**  * **(725)** This is a statement about the
interconnectedness of calmness (sham) and peace (viriti).  * **(2)**  The one
who attains peace (viriti) through restraint (uparama) experiences calmness
(upashma) in that very form. And the one who experiences calmness (upashma) in
that form attains peace (uparama) through restraint (viriti) from external
influences. * **OR** The one who practices restraint (samyama) towards the
soul's journey towards liberation experiences calmness (sham) in that form. And
the one who experiences calmness (sham) in that form attains restraint (samyama)
towards the soul's journey towards liberation.  **Further Explanation:**  This
passage explains the process of achieving calmness (upashma) through restraint
(viriti). It states that:  * Initially, the soul experiences calmness (upashma)
as a result of restraint (viriti). This leads to a state of peace (viriti) where
the soul is free from violence and other negative actions. * This peace (viriti)
leads to the experience of inner peace and happiness, which in turn motivates
further restraint (viriti). * This cycle continues, with increasing levels of
restraint (viriti) leading to deeper levels of calmness (sham) and happiness. *
Ultimately, complete restraint (viriti) leads to complete calmness (sham) and
the soul attains its true nature.  **The Essence of Restraint (Yama):**  The
passage emphasizes that calmness (sham) is the essence of restraint (yama). The
more calmness (sham) one experiences, the more successful one is in practicing
restraint (yama). The attainment of calmness (sham) is the key to the success of
restraint (yama).  **The Fruit of Restraint (Yama):**  When the soul experiences
the cessation of passions (kashya), equanimity (samabhava), and inner peace
(atmashakti), it signifies that the fruit of restraint (yama) has been achieved.
Just as every action has a specific result, the result of restraint (yama) is
calmness (sham). This calmness (sham) surpasses even the happiness of Indra, the
king of the gods, and other worldly pleasures.  **Quote from Uma Swami:**
"There is no happiness for the king of kings, nor for the king of gods. The
happiness of the soul is greater than all other happiness." - Shri Prashamati
**Third Yama:**  The passage also mentions the third yama, which is the state of
stability achieved through restraint (yama) free from any external influences.
**Conclusion:**  This passage highlights the importance of restraint (yama) in
achieving calmness (sham) and ultimately attaining liberation. It emphasizes
that calmness (sham) is the essence of restraint (yama) and its ultimate fruit.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 upasa'hAra : camane sAra zama, zamanA sAra cama ( 725) viratirUpa uparama pAme
che, te svarUpamAM zamanarUpa upazama pAme che; ane je svarUpamAM zamanarUpa
upazama pAme che, te parabhAvathI viratirUpa uparama pAme che. (2) athavA
parabhAva pratye jatA AtmAnA saMyamanarUpa sayamayama je seve che, te svarUpamAM
zamAvArUpa zama pAme che, ane je svarUpamAM zamAvArUpa zama pAme che, te
parabhAva pratye jatA AtmAnA sayamanarUpa saMyama-yama pAme che. atre upa-
mazamanA A upakrama jaNAya che:- prathama te jIvane upazama pariNAma upaje che,
jIva zAMta thAya che. eTale tene viratibhAva upaje che, eTale te hiMsAdithI
virAma pAme che, tethI tene zAMtisukhanA anubhava thAya che, eTale te vizeSa
virati kare che, tethI tene era vizeSa zamasukhane anubhava thAya che, eTale te
vizeSa vizeSa virati kare che, ethI zamasukha era adhika thAya che. Ama jema
jema viratinI mAtrA vadhatI jAya che, tema tema zamasukhanI adhikAdhika laharIe
chUTatI jAya che. yAvat pUrNa virati thatAM pUrNa zamasukhane anubhava thAya che
ne AtmA nija svarUpamAM zamAya che. vaLI A yamapAlana zamathI ja sAra che-
pradhAna che. zama utpanna thavA e ja A yamapAlanane sAra che. jeTale aze zama
upaje teTale aMze A yamapAlananI sArabhUtatA. zamanI utpatti e ja A yamapAlananI
saphaLatAnI cAvI che. AtmAne kaSAyanI upazAMti thai, satra samabhAva AvyA,
svarUpa-vizrAMtirUpa AtmazAMti upajI, te samajavu' ke A yamapAlananuM sArabhUta
phaLa maLI cUkayuM che. ane jema keAI paNa pravRttinuM--kriyAnuM kai ne kai
viziSTa phaLa hoya che ja, tema A yamapAlanarUpa pravRttinuM- kriyAnuM sArabhUta
phaLa A zama' ja che, ke je zamasukhanI AgaLa iMdra cakravattI AdinuM sukha
tRNamAtra paNa nathI. vAcakavarya zrI umAsvAtijInuM vacanAmRta che ke-- "
naivAsti rAjarAjasya tatsukhaM naiva devarAjasya  /  cakSurvAmadeva sAorTe
vyApAra,ttisya || '--zrI prazamati. vipakSacintArahitaM yamapAlanameva yat  /
tatsthairya miha vijJeyaM tRtIyo yama eva hi  /  /  217  //  vipakSa cintAthI
rahita, te yamapAlana je; te sthaya ahI' jANavuM, trIjo yama ja che teha. 217
vRtti:-vipakSacintA tik--vipakSa ciMtA rahita, aticArAdi ciMtAthI rahita ema
atha che, amAnameSa cat--je yamapAlana ja vigniSTa kSaye pazamavRttivaDe karIne,
tat aimid vijJayam--te ahIM-yameAmAM thai jANuvuM, ane A tRtIyo yama jJa
-itRtIya yatra ja che, sthira yama che, ema atha che.

Page #802 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(726) Yoga-drushti-samuccaya Meaning: The observance of Yama, which is free from
the anxiety of opposition, is known here as sthaya Yama; and that is the third
Yama, sthira Yama. Commentary: The observance of Yama, which is free from the
anxiety of opposition, such as aticara, etc., and which is characterized by the
specific cessation of kshaya, is sthaya in Yama; and that is the third sthira
Yama. Therefore, the observance of ahimsa Yama becomes so strong that there is
no need to worry about the possibility of aticara, etc., by mistake. This is
called stability. There was also observance of Yama in pravritti Yama, but there
was still the possibility of faults such as aticara, deshabhang, aticara, etc.;
and here, in sthira Yama, it becomes so free from anxiety, so stable, that there
is no possibility of faults such as aticara, etc. In pravritti Yama, there was
still the fear of deshabhang, aticara, and vyaghata due to the possibility of
the opposite faults of himsa, etc., to ahimsa, etc., but now there is no scope
for such fear. There was fear of the obstacle of previous aticara, the obstacle
of himsa, etc., and the obstacle of digmeha due to matimeha-mithyatva. But now
there is no fear of any such obstacle. There is definite activity in the path of
Yama, because the one who walks the path for the first time is ignorant and
stumbles and encounters obstacles; therefore, he has to walk with care, worrying
about not stumbling and not encountering obstacles, or about removing them; but
later, when he becomes familiar with the path and becomes a seasoned traveler,
he does not have to fear stumbling or encountering obstacles, so he walks
confidently and fearlessly. Similarly, in the path of ahimsa, etc., the one who
walks the path for the first time is ignorant and inexperienced, and he
stumbles, encounters aticara, etc., and encounters obstacles of himsa, etc., so
he has to walk with care, worrying about not stumbling, not encountering
obstacles, or about removing them; but later, when he becomes knowledgeable and
experienced, he does not fear stumbling or encountering obstacles of himsa,
etc., so he walks confidently and fearlessly in the path of ahimsa, etc. The
beginner yogi is 'raw' and still has the possibility of stumbling and aticara,
but the mature, experienced yogi is 'ripe' and does not have the possibility of
stumbling, even by mistake. (1) A new student makes mistakes when learning a
lesson.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (726) yogadRSTisamuccaya artha :--vipakSa cintAthI rahita evuM je yamapAlana
ja, te ahIM yamAmAM sthaya jANavuM; ane te trIjo yama ja-sthira yama ja che.
vivecana aticArAdi vipakSa cintAthI rahita evu* je viziSTa kSayApazamavRttithI
yamapAlana ja che, te ahI' yamAmAM sthaya che; ane te ja trIjo sthirayama che.
eTale A ahi'sADhi yamanu pAlana evuM tA sudRDha thai jAya ke rakhene bhUlecUke
aticAra Adi lAgI jaze evI ciMtA rAkhavI na paDe, tenuM nAma sthirapaNuM che.
pravRttiyamamAM paNa yamapAlana hatuM ja, paNa tyAM haju aticAra-dezabhaga
aticArAdi Adi doSanA saMbhava hatA; ane ahI. sthirayamamAM te eTalu
ciMtArahitapaNuM badhu sthirapaNuM thai jAya che ke aticArAdi doSanesa'bhava
rahetA nathI. pravRttiyamamAM haju ahi'sAdinA pratipakSI rhiMsAdi doSanI
sa'bhAvanAne lIdhe ahiMsAdine dezabhaMga thavAnA, aticAra lAgavAnA, vyAghAta
thavAnA bhaya hatA, paNa have ahIM te tevA bhayane avakAza nathI. pUrva
aticArarUpa kaTaka vighnanA, hiMsAdirUpa jvara vighnane, ane matimeha-
mithyAtvarUpa digmeha vighnanA bhaya rahyA karatA hatA. paNa have tevA keAi
vighnanA bhaya rahetA nathI. yAgamAge iivaghna nizci'ta pravRtti hoya che,
kAraNa ke prathama mAge pravRtti karatA DhAya, te mAenA ajANu hAi tene Thokara
paNa lAge che, vighnA paNa ADA Ave che; eTale Thokara na lAge, vighnA ADA na
Ave, athavA dUra thAya, ema ciMtA karatAM karatAM, kALajI rAkhatAM rAkhatAM tene
cAlavuM paDe che; paNa pachI rastAnA rIDhA mAhitagAra bhemiyA thai jatAM tene
Thokara lAgavAnI ke vighnA naDavAnI bIka rAkhavI paDatI nathI, eTale pachI te
nizcitapaNe bedhaDaka cAlyA jAya che. tema A ahiMsAdi ceAgamAge je prathama
pravRtti karatA heAya te mAnA ajANu-anabhyAsI hAi, tene aticArAdvirUpa skhalanA
paNa thAya che, Thokara lAge che, hiMsAdi vighnA paNa naDe che, eTale punaH
skhalanA na thAya, vighnA ADA na Ave athavA kema dUra thAya, ema ciMtA karatAM
karatAM-upayAgarUpa kALajI rAkhatAM rAkhatAM tene gamana karavuM paDe che. paNa
pachI mAnA sujANu--abhyAsI thaI gayA pachI tene aticArAdi skhalanA thavAnI ke
hiMsAdi vidhna naDavAnI bhIti rahetI nathI, eTale pachI te nizcitapaNe edhaDaka
ahiM'sAdi ceAgamAge gamana karyAM kare che. prAra'bhaka ceAgI 'kAcA' hAi tene
haju skhalanAnA--aticAranA sabhava che, paNa prauDha abhyAsI yAgI pAko ' thaI
gayA heAvAthI tene bhUlecUke paNa skhalanAnA sa`bhava nathI. (1) * navA nizALIe'
pATha le temAM bhUlacUka thavAne sabhava

Page #803 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Supplement: Stable characteristics of the vows, freedom from thoughts of
transgression, etc.  (727)  It is true that a mature scholar can effortlessly
perform even the most difficult tasks, without the slightest chance of error.
Similarly, while those who are new to the practice of non-violence, etc., may
fear committing transgressions while performing these primary activities, those
who have become adept through steadfast adherence to these principles are free
from the fear of such transgressions. (2) For a novice who begins exercising, it
is initially difficult to even lift a small weight, and it may slip from their
hands. However, for a seasoned athlete with a well-trained body, lifting heavy
weights becomes a game, and the weight never slips from their grasp. Similarly,
for those who are new to the practice of the vows of non-violence, etc., it may
initially seem difficult, and there may be a fear of transgression. But for
those who have become strong and well-trained in the practice of the vows,
through consistent effort, the observance of these heavy vows becomes a game,
and there is no fear of transgression. (3) Even standing on the edge of a sword
is initially difficult for a novice, and they may stumble. But with practice,
they can not only stand on the edge of the sword, but also dance gracefully upon
it without stumbling! They become like a fearless warrior! Similarly, for those
who are new to the practice of the vows of non-violence, etc., standing on the
edge of the vow, like a sharp sword, is initially difficult, and they may
stumble and commit transgressions. But with repeated practice, they become
firmly rooted in the vow, and not only can they stand firmly on the edge of the
vow, but they can also dance gracefully upon it with restraint! This is the
extraordinary feat that a stable and steadfast practitioner demonstrates! (See
page 530, "The Edge of the Sword") (4) When someone first begins learning to use
weapons, they may not even be able to hold the weapon properly, and there is a
fear of dropping it. But after mastering the art of weaponry, a skilled warrior
can wield the weapon with ease, and the weapon never slips from their firm grip.
Similarly, for those who are new to the practice of the vows of non-violence,
etc., they may not be able to perform these actions properly, and there may be a
fear of falling. But after mastering the art of these vows, a skilled
practitioner can perform them with ease, and due to their unwavering commitment,
there is no chance of transgression. (5) For a novice poet, composing poetry is
initially difficult, and there is a possibility of errors such as metrical
irregularities. But for a mature and accomplished poet, composing poetry is easy
and natural, and there is no chance of such errors. Similarly, for those who are
new to the practice of the vows of non-violence, etc., it may initially be
difficult, and there may be transgressions like "metrical irregularities."
Examples of practitioners

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 upasa'hAra : sthira yama lakSaNa, aticArAdi ciMtArahitapaNu* (727 ) che, paNa
prauDha vidyAthI kaDakaDATa pADe eTalI jAya temAM leza paNa skhalanAnA
'bhavanathI hAtA. tema A ahiMsAdimAM prAthamika pravRtti karanArA-kAcA abhyAsI
ahiMsAddhi Acare temAM aticAra lAgavAnA bhaya che, paNa tenA dRDha pAlanathI
rIDhA thaI gayelA pAkA abhyAsI te Acare temAM aticAra doSane bhaya nathI. ( 2 )
kasarata zarU karanArA zikhAune prathama magadaLa pheravavu bhAre thaI paDe che,
ne te hAthamAMthI 'paDuM paDuM' thaI jAya che, paNa sArI peThe vyAyAma karI
cUkelA kasAyelA zarIravALA kasaratakhAja mallane te bhArI magadaLa pheravavu
ramata thaI paDe che, ne te tenA hAthamAMthI skhalanA pAmatuM nathI. tema
ahiMsAdi yamane vyAyAma zarU karanArane prathama te tenuM AcaraNa kaThina lAge
che ne temAM skhalanA thaI ke thaze evI ci'tA rahe che. paNa sArI peThe
yamapAlananA vyAyAma karI cUkelA puSTa kasAyelA cAritra-dehavALA cegIne te meru
jevu' bhArI vrata pAlana-yamapAlana karavuM ramata thaI paDe che, ne te kadI
skhalanA pAmavAnA bhaya raheteA nathI. ( 3 ) talavAranI dhAra para UbhA rahetAM
paNa zIkhavAnuM prathama abhyAsIne Akaru` paDe che, ane tenI skhalanA paNa thAya
che; paNa pachI abhyAsa karatAM karatAM te talavAranI dhAra para Ubhe rahI zake
che, eTalu ja na&i. paNa tenA para shelAithI tAlakhaddha nRtya karI zake che,
chatAM skhalanA pAmatA nathI ! evA ajakhamAjIgara te banI jAya che! tema
ahiMsAdi pAlanarUpa asidhArA vrata para ubhA rahetAM paNa zIkhavAnu.
prAra`bhakane kaThina paDe che, ane tema karatAM tenI aticArarUpa skhalanA paNa
thAya che; pachI punaH puna: AsevanArUpa abhyAsa karatAM karatAM tenI pAchaLa -
raDha lagADIne maDayA rahetAM, ' te asidhArAvrata para sthira UbhA rahI zake
che, eTalu ja nahui paNa tenA para shelAithI saMyamarUpa tAlabaddha nRtya paNa
karI zake che! evuM ajaba khAjIgarapaNu A sthira yAgirAja dAkhave che ! ( jue
pR. 530, dhAra taravAranI' i.) (4) zastra vyApAra zIkhanArane prathama teA
hAthamAM kharAkhara zasra pakaDatAM paNa AvaDatu nathI, ne te paDI javAne paNa
bhaya rahe che; pa zastravidyA sArI peThe zIkhI lIdhA pachI te zastrajJa
zastrane game tema vijI zake che, ne hAtheA daDhapaNe hAthamAM pakaDayo hAvAthI
tenI skhalanA thavI saMbhavatI nathI. tema A ahiMsAdi ce|gavyApAranA abhyAsIne
prathama tA A cegavyApAra kharAkhara AvatA nathI ne tenuM patana thavAneA bhaya
paNa rahe che; paNa A vaigazAstra vidyA sArI peThe abhyAsI lIdhA pachI zAsrajJa
abhyAsI yAgIne te ahiMsAdi yAgavyApAra lIlArUpa thaI paDe che, ane atyaMta
dRDhatAne lIdhe tenI skhalanA thavAneA sabhava nathI hotA. ( 5 ) zikhAu kavine
prathama kAvya karatAM kaThina paDe che ne yatibhaMga Adi doSanA saMbhava che,
paNa prauDha siddhaThusta kavine kAvya karavuM saheluM che, sahaja che, ne
yatibhaMga Adi doSanA sabhava nathI hAtA. tema prArabhapha cegIne prathama
ahiMsAdi yamapAlana kani paDe che, ne aticArarUpa ' yatibhaMga ' abhyAsI AdinA
dRSTAMta

Page #804 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(728) It is possible for **yogadristi** (yogic vision) and **samurchay**
(harmonization) to be affected by **doshas** (faults), but for a mature,
skilled, and restrained **gini** (Jain ascetic), adherence to **ahimsa** (non-
violence) and other **yamas** (ethical restraints) is easy, and **yatibhang**
(violation of vows) and other faults do not affect them. Thus, adherence to
**yamas** is common in both **pravrittiyam** (active state) and **sthira yam**
(stable state), but **doshas** like **atichaar** (excess) are possible in
**pravrittiyam**, while they are impossible in **sthira yam**. This is the main
difference between the two.  Another difference is that adherence to **sthira
yam** is accompanied by a unique **kshayopshma** (state of diminishing passions)
compared to adherence to **pravritti yam**. Just as in general education, as
studies progress, the student's **kshayopshma** increases, their intellect
develops, and their intellectual strength grows, so too in this **yogavidya**
(yogic knowledge), as the **yogi** (practitioner) progresses in their studies,
their **kshayopshma** increases, their knowledge develops, and their
**charitrabal** (moral strength) grows. This allows them to further their
**yogabhyas** (yogic practice) with their developed **kshayopshma** strength.
Just as in physical exercise, initially only a little exercise is possible, but
as the body becomes stronger through exercise, more intense exercise becomes
possible, so too in **yogavyapar** (yogic practice), initially only a little
practice is possible, but as the **charitra-sharira** (moral body) becomes
stronger through practice, the **charitra-deha** (moral body) develops, and the
**charitra-kaya** (moral body) becomes robust, more intense practice becomes
possible. Thus, the adherence to **yamas** in **sthira yam** is more powerful,
more energetic, more **kshayopshma**-filled, and more stable than the adherence
to **yamas** in the initial stages. It is so stable that even in the midst of
**achal** (immovable) movement, the **sadhak yogi** (practitioner) does not
deviate from their adherence to **yamas**. The best example of this stability is
found in **Shri Jin Bhagwan** (Lord Mahavira):  “**Ati rudi re ati rudi, jinjini
thirata ati rudi; Sakal pradeshe ananti, gunparyay shakti mahanti lal. Ati tasu
ramane anubhavavanti, parramanje je na ramati lal. Ati par dravya je navi
gamani, kshetramantaramhi na ramani lal. Ati atishyaye yage je navi dipe,
parabhav bhani navi chipe lal. Ati nij tatva rase je lini, bije kin hi navi kini
lal. Ati**” – **Shri Devchandraji**  And just as the **shmasarpana** (state of
calmness) of **yam** adherence is present in the initial stages, it is even more
present here. As the stability and firmness of **yam** adherence increases, the
amount of **prashma** (calmness) happiness increases.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (728) yogadaSTisamuracaya Adi doSane saMbhava che, paNa prauDha siddhahasta
saMyamI gIne ahiMsAdi yamapAlana saheluM che, ne te "yatibhaMga' Adi doSa naDato
nathI.-Ama pravRttiyamamAM ane sthira yamamAM yamapAlana te sAmAnya ja che, paNa
pravRttiyamamAM aticArAdi doSa saMbhava che, ane sthirayamamAM te doSane
asaMbhava che,-A mukhya taphAvata e be vacce che. tema ja bIjo taphAvata e che
ke-pravRtti yamanA pAlana karatAM sthirayamanuM pAlana viziSTa kSayopazama
vRttithI yukta evuM hoya che. sAmAnya vidyAbhyAsamAM paNa ekaDIA karatAM jema
jema AgaLa abhyAsa vadhato jAya che, tema tema vighAthIne viziSTa kSapazama
vadhato jAya che-buddhivikAsa thato jAya che, buddhibaLa vadhatuM kSayopazama
jAya che, eTale te vikasita buddhibaLathI abhyAsa AgaLa vadhArate jAya che tema
A yogavidyAbhyAsamAM paNa prAthamika abhyAsa karatAM jema jema AgaLa abhyAsa
vadhatuM jAya che, tema tema A yogavidyAbhyAsI AtmAthI yogIne kSayopazama
vadhatuM jAya che, jJAnavikAsa thato jAya che, cAritrabaLa vadhatuM jAya che,
eTale te vikasita viziSTa pazama baLathI era ne era yogAbhyAsa AgaLa vadhArate
jAya che. vyAyAma zarU karatAM prathama te thoDo thoDo vyAyAma thaI zake che,
paNa pachI vyAyAmathI jema jema zarIra kasAtuM jAya che, tema tema adhika
baLathI vizeSa vyAyAma thaI zake che. tema coga-vyAyAma zaru karatAM prathama te
thoDo vyAyAma thaI zake che, paNa pachI yogavyApArathI jema jema cAritra-zarIra
kasAtuM jAya che, cAritra dehano vikAsa thato jAya che, cAritra-kAyA puSTa thatI
jAya che, tema tema adhika baLathI vizeSa vyAyAma thaI zake che. Ama prathamanA
yamapAlana karatAM sthirayama yegInuM A yamapAlana adhika baLavAna, adhika
saMvegavAna, adhika kSepazamavAnuM, ne atyaMta sthiratAvAnu hovAthI viziSTa
jANavuM. te eTale sudhI ke acala caLe paNa A sAdhaka yogInuM yamapAlana na caLe.
A sthiratAnuM uttama udAharaNa zrI jina bhagavAnamAM prApta thAya che - "ati
rUDI re ati rUDI, jinajInI thiratA ati rUDI; sakaLa pradeze anaMtI, guNaparyAya
zakti mahaMtI lAla. ati tasu ramaNe anubhavavaMtI, pararamaNe je na ramatI lAla.
ati para dravya je navi gamaNI, kSetramaMtaramAMhi na ramaNI lAla. ati atizaya
yege je navi dIpe, parabhAva bhaNI navi chIpe lAla. ati nija tatva rase je lInI,
bIje kINa hI navi kInI lAla. ati"-zrI devacaMdrajI. ane yamapAlananuM ja je
zamasArapaNuM che te te AgaLanI jema atre paNa adhika adhikapaNe anuvarte che ja
ema jANavuM. jema jema yamapAlananuM sthirapaNuM-daDhapaNuM thatuM jAya che,
tema tema prazama sukhanI mAtrA vadhatI jAya che.

Page #805 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Translation:  **Upas'har:**  The achievement of the fourth Yama is through
the inconceivable power of the pure inner self, which is the achievement of the
pararthasadhak.   **Verse 218:** This achievement is the pararthasadhak, the
achievement of the pure inner self. It is the fourth Yama, through the
inconceivable power of yoga.  **(729)** **Ah:** This observance of Yama, which
is pararthasadhak, is the achievement of the pure inner self through the
inconceivable power of yoga. This is the fourth Yama, the achievement of Yama.
**Commentary:** This observance of Yama, which is pararthasadhak, is the
achievement of the pure inner self, not of another, because it has non-
attachment in its presence. This is the inconceivable power of the achievement.
This achievement is the fourth Yama.  The observance of Yama mentioned above, as
it progresses towards purity, becomes so refined that it naturally becomes
pararthasadhak. It has such inconceivable power of yoga that it effortlessly
benefits others. For example, it has non-attachment in its presence, "Ahimsa
pratiṣṭhāryā tat-sannidhau vaira-khyāgaḥ" (Pāta. Chā.). (See page 20, "Te ātmā-
svarūpa-thī mahat 40").  Thus, this observance of Yama, which is pararthasadhak,
is the achievement of the pure inner self, not of another. The inner self
becomes so pure that its inconceivable influence naturally falls upon other
beings, so that even violent and cruel creatures forget their innate hatred and
other such powers. For example, in the presence of the Bhagavan Tīrthankara,
even creatures with innate hatred forget their hatred and sit side by side with
love, listening to the Dharma. For example, a doe touches a lion cub with
maternal affection, a cow considers a tiger cub as her own and nurtures it, a
cat becomes enamored with a snake and touches it with love, a peacock...
**Vṛtti:** This observance of Yama, which is pararthasadhak, is called the
achievement of Yama. And this is the achievement of the pure inner self, not of
another. Through the inconceivable power of yoga, through non-attachment in its
presence, this is the fourth Yama, the achievement of Yama.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 upasa'hAra : acinya zaktiyogathI parA sAdhaka siddhiyama parArthasAdhakaM
tvetatsiddhiH zuddhAntarAtmanaH  /  acintya zaktiyogena caturthI yama eva tu  /
/  218 //  parA sAdhaka siddhi A, zuddha AtmanI sAra acinya zakti yogathI,
caturthAM yama A dhAra. 218 (729) aH--ane parA sAdhaka evuM A yamapAlana te
acinha zaktiyoge karIne zuddha antarAtmAnI siddhi che; ane A caturtha yama ja-
siddhiyama ja che. vivecana parAtu -parApakAranu sAdhaka evu je A yamapAlana che
te siddhi che; ane A zuddha antarAtmAnI siddhi che--bIjAnI nahiM, kAraNa ke tenI
sa`nidhimAM vairAga hoya che, evu' te siddhinuM acinha sAmarthya hAya che. ane A
je siddhi che te ja ceAthe siddhiyama che. uparamAM je ahi sAdi yamapAlana
kahyuM, te ja uttarAttara zuddhine pAmatuM pAmatu, evuM utkRSTa kATinuM thaI
jAya ke te sahaja svabhAve paramAtuM sAdhaka thai paDe; enA evA acittva
zaktiyega hAya che, ke jethI paranA upara saheje upakAra thAya. jemake-tenI
sanidhimAM--nikaTatAmAM vairatyAga hAya che, ahiMsApratiSThAryA tatsannidhau
vairakhyAgaH ' ( pAta. cA. ) ityAdi. ( jue pR. para0, 'te AtmasvarUpathI mahat
40 ' ) " te zuddha Ama macinya zaktiyeAgathI parA sAdhaka evuM je yamapAlana
antarAtmAnI ja siddhi che,-khIjAnI nahi. arthAt aMtarAtmA eTaleA badhA zuddha
thaI jAya che ke tenA acinha cAritraprabhAva sahaja svabhAve anya jIvA acinha
para paDe che, jethI rhiMsaka krUra prANIo paNa peAtAnA jAtivaira Adi zaktiyeAga
bhUlI jAya che. dA. ta.-bhagavAn tItha"karanA samavasaraNamAM jAtivairavALA
prANIo paNa jAtivaira bhUlI jaI premathI khAju-khAjumAM besIne dezanA suNe che.
jemake-hariNI siMhazizune putrabuddhithI sparze che, gAya vAghanA baccAne
peAtAnA putra mAnI papALe che, bilADI hu'samAlane prema paravaza thaI spaze che,
mayUrI vRtti:pArthasApa dvetavuMparA sAdhaka evuM A yamapAlana, siddhi-siddhi
kahevAya che. ane AzuddhAntamana:-zuddha aMtarAtmAnI--anyanI nahiM.
cittpattiyonena-acinta zaktiyogathI, tenI sa MnidhimAM vairatyAga thakI, AthI A
--caturthAM yama va tu-catutha' yama ja che, siddhiyama che evA bhAva che. ra

Page #806 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(730) Yoga-drishti-samurachay touches the snake, - thus, with the support of a
Ksheen-meh Yogi, who is equal-minded and free from the defilement of kshaya,
other beings also become free from malice and abandon the innate enmity of
birth. "Sarangi Singh-shavam sprushati sutadhiya Nandini vyagrapottam, marjari
Hans-balam pranay-paravasha Kekikanta bhujangam. Vairanya janma-jatanapi galit-
mada jantavo'nye tyajanti, shritya lagaudu ghamit-sush yoni kshanamom" - Shri
Shubhachandracharya-ji-krit Shri Jnanav. When ahimsa is established in the soul,
- when there is extreme stability, then even the caste-enmity is abandoned in
the presence of the great soul, the great Gishwar. Similarly, in the
establishment of satya, etc., and in the types, it has a great influence, etc.,
as described in the Patanjali, etc., Gashastra, it appears that all this is
manifested in the character of the Tirthankara, like the supreme Yogi, and it is
understood that it is contained in one country of the supreme Yogeshwar's
unchangeable great influence. Such pure inner-soul attainment is called Siddhi,
- not the attainment of miracles, etc., which produce other vehicles. Such
attainment, which shows miracles, etc., and makes people bow down, is
destructive to oneself and others, and makes the Yogi degenerate. In this
regard, there is the supreme mental nectar of Shrimad Rajchandraji, who is
supremely endowed with G-siddhi, which says - A Samyak-drishti Purusha, who is
possible in the fourth Gun-thana, has Siddhi sometimes, and sometimes he does
not have Siddhi. The one who has it, does not usually desire it, and when he
does desire it, it happens when the being is in a state of intoxication, and
when such a desire arises, it reduces his ability to fall from Samyak-krutva.
Usually, in the fifth and sixth Gun-thana, the possibility of Siddhi increases,
and even there, the being who acts in Siddhi due to intoxication, etc., can be
in the state of the first Gun-thana. In the seventh, eighth, ninth, and tenth
Gun-thana, there is much scope for intoxication, and in the eleventh Gun-thana,
knowing that it is possible to obtain Siddhi, it is possible to be in the state
of the first Gun-thana. The rest of the places of Samyak-krutva, and as long as
the soul is Samyak-parinaami, the being cannot act in any one Yoga for three
periods of time." - Shrimad Rajchandra, Patranka 369 (420) Thus, the four types
of Yama are said: Ichchha-yam, Pravritti-yam, Sthira-yam, and Siddhi-yam. Of
these, Ichchha-yam is in the form of interest in the path of yoga, such as
ahimsa, etc., Pravritti-yam is in the form of movement on the path, Sthira-yam
is in the form of non-deviation, non-wavering movement, extreme stability,

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (730) yogadaSTisamuracaya sApane sparze che,-Ama eka samabhAvarUDha, kaSAya
kaluSatA rahita evA kSINameha yegInA Azraye bIjA prANIo paNa mada rahita thaI
pitAnA Ajanma vaira choDI dIe che." " sAraGgI siMhazAvaM spRzati sutadhiyA
nandinI vyAghrapotam , mArjArI haMsabAlaM praNayaparavazA kekikAntA bhujaGgam  /
vairANyA janmajAtAnyapi galitamadA jantavo'nye tyajanti, zrityA lAgaiADhuM
ghAmitasuSa yoniM kSaNamoma "--zrI zubhacaMdrAcAryajIkRta zrI jJAnAva. AtmAmAM
ahiMsAnI pratiSThA thatAM-atyaMta sthiratA thatAM, te parama ahiMsaka mahAtmA
gIzvaranI saMnidhimAM Ama jAtivairane paNa tyAga hoya che. temaja satyAdinI
pratiSThAmAM tathA prakArane te tene mahAprabhAva varte che, ItyAdi pAtaMjala
Adi gazAstramAM je varNavavAmAM AvyuM che, te sarva atra tIrthakara jevA
paramayogInA caritamAM pragaTa caritArtha thayuM pratIta thAya che, te parama
yogezvaranA acitya mahAprabhAvanA eka dezamAM samAI jAya che. AvI je zuddha
aMtarAtmAnI siddhi tenuM nAma siddhi che, -nahiM ke anya vAha upajAvanArA
camatkArAdinI siddhi te siddhi. tevI camatkArAdi batAvI namaskAra karAvavArUpa
siddhi te svane ne parane pADanArI che, yogIne adhaHpatitabhraSTa karanArI che.
A aMge parama gasiddhisaMpanna zrImad rAjacaMdrajInA parama mananIya vacanAmRta
che ke - samyagadaSTi puruSa ke jeno cothe guNaThANe saMbhava che, tevA jJAnI
puruSane viSe kvacit siddhi hoya che, ane kavacit siddhi hotI nathI. jene viSe
hoya che tene te skuraNa viSe prAye icchA thatI nathI, ane ghaNuM karI jyAre
icchA thAya che, tyAre jIva pramAdavazapaNe hoya te thAya che, ane je tevI IcchA
thaI te samyakRtvathI paDavApaNuM tene ghaTe che. prAye pAMcame chaThuM
guNaThANe paNa uttarottara siddhigane vizeSa saMbhava thata jAya che, ane tyAM
paNa je pramAdAdi jege siddhimAM jIva pravarte te prathama guNaThANane viSe
sthiti thavI saMbhave che. sAtame guNaThANe, AThame guNaThANe, navame, dazame
ghaNuM karI pramAdane avakAza che che agiyArame guNaThANe siddhiogane lebha
saMbhavate jANI prathama guNaThANe sthiti hevI saMbhave che. bAkI jeTalA
samyaktvanA sthAnaka che, ane jyAMsudhI samyagra pariNAmI AtmA che tyAM sudhI te
eke jogane viSe jIvane pravRtti trikALa saMbhavatI nathI."-zrImad rAjacaMdra,
patrAMka 369 (420) Ama yamanA cAra prakAra kahyAH IcchAyama, pravRttiyama,
sthirayama ne siddhiyama. temAM IcchAyama te ahiMsAdi yogamArga pratyenI
rucirUpa che, pravRttiyama te mAge saMcaravA rUpa-gamanarUpa che, sthirayama te
mAge niraticAra nirviba gamanarUpa-atyaMta sthiratA

Page #807 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Conclusion:** The attainment of a pure soul is the same as **siddhi**
(perfection), and **siddhiyam** is the attainment of the ultimate goal of the
path. As the yogi progresses from **icchayaman** (desire) onwards, his self-
purification increases, the momentum of **samvega** (spiritual fervor) becomes
extremely rapid, the power of **kshapashama** (control over passions) grows, and
finally the attainment of a pure soul is achieved.  This attainment of a pure
soul encompasses the highest **yama** (self-restraint); because then the soul
becomes completely non-violent due to the absence of material attachment, it
does not harm itself through passions like attachment, aversion, etc.; it
becomes completely truthful - it does not speak falsehoods that are harmful to
others; it becomes completely non-stealing - it does not even steal a speck from
others; it becomes completely celibate - it dwells in the pure self, in Brahman,
and does not engage in sexual misconduct towards others; it becomes completely
non-possessive, it does not have a sense of ownership even towards an atom
belonging to others. Thus, having renounced all external objects and abandoned
all external consequences, the yogi rests in his own nature, and constantly
engages in the pure self-realization. And thus, the state of being in the pure
form is called the supreme non-violence, it is called the supreme truth, it is
called the supreme non-stealing, it is called the supreme celibacy, it is called
the supreme non-possessiveness, and thus these five, which are perfectly
fulfilled, are the very living Supreme Soul, the moving wish-fulfilling tree
that is served by the blessed ones. (See poem, p. 602).  The essence of the
types of **yamas** is that the five **yama-sheel-vrata** (self-restraint vows)
of non-violence, truth, non-stealing, celibacy, and non-possessiveness are well-
known to all saints. There are four types of each **yama**: **icchayaman**,
**pravrittiyam**, **sthiriyam**, and **siddhiyam**. (1) The desire for non-
change in the **yama** that one is devoted to is called **icchayaman**. (2) The
practice of **yama** everywhere is called **pravrittiyam**. (3) The practice of
**yama** without any anxiety about violence, etc., is called **sthiriyam**. (4)
The practice of **yama** that is the result of inconceivable power-yoga and
benefits others, not oneself, is called **siddhiyam**. Inconceivable power-yoga
leads to the renunciation of attachment. - The first two types are already
attained by the active yogi, and he constantly strives for the last two types.
; The unchanging form says -

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 upasaMhAra : zuddha aMtarAtmAnI siddhi te ja siddhi (731) rUpa che, ane
siddhiyama te mArganA aMtima dhyeyane pAmI papakAra karavArUpa che. IcchAyamathI
mAMDIne jema jema yogI AgaLa vadhatuM jAya che, tema tema tenI Atmavizuddhi
vadhatI jAya che, saMvegarUpa vega ati vega pakaDate jAya che, kSapazama baLa
vRddhi pAmatuM jAya che, ane chevaTe zuddha aMtarAtmAnI siddhi thAya che. A
zuddha aMtarAtmAnI siddhi, temAM utkRSTa keTinuM yamapAlana zamAI jAya che;
kAraNa ke tyAre AtmA dravya-bhAvathI pUrNa ahiMsAmaya banI jAya che, rAgAdi
vibhAvathI svarUpanI hiMsA karato nathI; pUrNa satyamaya banI jAya che-
parabhAvane zuddha aMtarA- pitAne kahevArUpa asatya vadata nathI; pUrNa
asteyamaya banI jAya tmAnI siddhi che-parabhAvane leza paNa apaharate nathI;
pUrNa brahmacaryamaya banI jAya che,-zuddha AtmasvarUpamAM, brahmamAM care che
ne parabhAva pratye vyabhicarata nathI; pUrNa aparigrahamaya bane che,
parabhAvanA paramANu pratye paNa AtmabhAvarUpa mamatvabuddhi dharatA nathI. Ama
samasta parabhAvathI virAma pAmI, samasta parapariNatine parityAga karI, te
AtmArAmI yogI svabhAvamAM ArAma kare che, ne zuddha AtmapariNatine niraMtara
bhajyA kare che. ane Ama zuddha svarUpa padamAM sthiti tenuM nAma ja parama
ahiMsA, tenuM nAma ja parama satya, tenuM nAma ja parama asteya, tenuM nAma ja
parama brahmacarya, tenuM nAma ja parama aparigraha, ane Ama A pAMce jene parama
paripUrNa varte che, te ja sAkSAt jIvaMta paramAtmA, te ja jaMgama kalpavRkSa ke
jene dhanya jana seve che. (jue kAvya, pR. 602). yama prakArono sAra ahIM
ahiMsA, satya, asteya, brahmacarya, aparigraha e pAMca yama-zIla-vrata sarva
taMtra sAdhAraNapaNAthI saMta janene suprasiddha che. te pratyeka yamanA cAra
cAra prakAra che? IcchAyama, pravRttiyama, sthirayama, siddhiyama. (1)
yamavaMtanI kathA pratye prItivALI evI je yamane viSe avipariNAminI IcchA, te
pahele IcchAyama che. (2) sarvatra zamasAra evuM je yamapAlana te ja ahIM
pravRtti che, ane te ja bIjo pravRttiyama che. (3) aticArAdi cintAthI rahita
evuM je yamapAlana te ja ahIM ravairya che, ane te ja trIjo sthirayama che. (4)
aciMtya zaktiyogathI parArthanuM sAdhaka evuM je A yamapAlana te zuddha
aMtarAtmAnI siddhi che, nahiM ke anyanI, ane A ja ce siddhiyama che. acinya
zaktiyogathI tenI saMnidhimAM viratyAga hoya che.-AmAM pahelA be prakAra
pravRttacaka yogIne prApta thaI cUkyA hoya che, ane chellA be prakArane arthe te
satata puruSArthazIla rahe che. ; avaMcaka svarUpa kahe che -

Page #808 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(732) Yogadarisamuccaya Sadbhih kalyanasampannairdarshanadapi pavanair. Tatha
darshanato yoga adyavascaka uchyate || 219 || What are the saints who are
blessed with auspiciousness and are pure even by their vision? And from that
vision, the yoga is called adyavachak, 219 Meaning- The yoga that happens from
the vision of the blessed men who are pure even by their vision, is called
adyavachak-chagavachak. Commentary- Blessed with auspiciousness- distinguished
virtuous, and pure even by their vision, such saints, without any contradiction,
in that way, by quality, and from that vision, the yoga-relation that happens,
is called avavachak-chagavachak. The ga-relation that happens with the saints
from that vision, means the yoga that happens with the virtuous man by knowing
him in that way, is called gavachak. The way the virtuous man's "form" is, from
that form-vision, from the recognition of the form, the yoga that happens with
the virtuous man from that vision, the self-relation, the Brahma-relation, or
the name-form recognition is called gavachak. Just by coming in external contact
with the virtuous man, just by the momentary recognition, this yoga doesn't
happen, but it happens only from the vision-recognition of his form. So, the
vision-recognition-identification of the form in the world of the virtuous man
is the most important thing. When this inner form-vision happens, then the real
yoga happens with the virtuous man. And this yoga that happens is called
avachak. What are these virtuous men? They are kalyanasampanna, meaning they are
distinguished virtuous. Due to the direct attainment of the supreme gem of
thought, they are supremely virtuous, they have attained auspiciousness. Such
men are pure even by their vision. Even by seeing them, the soul becomes pure,
they are such supremely pure souls. Their pure soul-character has such a
wonderful silent influence that- other beings Juttisaddhih valyanarampha-
blessed with auspiciousness, such saints-virtuous men, with distinguished
virtuous saints, navinaih- pure even by vision, pure even by observation, tatha
tatha prakare, in that way, by quality-by being endowed with qualities-without
any contradiction, by body-wealth, from that vision, therefore-by that, the cho-
ga-relation, happens with them, bavavad uchchare- this is called avachak, this
is the meaning of avachak.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (732) yogadarisamucaya sadbhiH kalyANasaMpannairdarzanAdapi paavnaiH|
tathAdarzanato yoga AdyAvazcaka ucyate  //  219  /  /  darzanathI paNa
pAvanAkalyANa saMta zuM ; tathA darzanathI yoga te, Agha avaMcaka eha, 219
artha-darzanathI paNa pAvana evA kalyANasaMpanna puruSo sAthe tathA prakAre
darzanathakI je yoga tha, te Adya avaMcaka-cagAvaMcaka kahevAya che. vivecana
kalyANasaMpanna-viziSTa puNyavaMta, tathA darzanathI paNa pAvana, evA saMte
sAthe viparyaya abhAve te prakAre guNavattAthI tathAdarzanathakI, je yoga-
saMbaMdha thavo te AvaavaMcaka-cagAvacaka che. saMte sAthe tathAdarzanathakI je
ga-saMbaMdha thavo arthAt satapuruSane tathArUpe oLakhANapUrvaka yoga tha te
gAvaMcaka che. satapuruSanuM je prakAre "svarUpa che, te prakAre tenA
svarUpadarzanathakI, svarUpanI oLakhANathakI, sapuruSa sAthe tathAdarzanaH sva-
je ega the, AtmasaMbaMdha , brahmasaMbaMdha ke, tenuM nAma rUpa oLakhANa
gAvaMcaka che. satapuruSa sAthe bAhya samAgamamAM AvavA mAtrathI, upalaka
oLakhANa mAtrathI A yaMga thatuM nathI, paNa tenuM puruSa svarUpe darzana-
oLakhANa thavAthakI ja A cega sAMpaDe che. eTale puruSanA jagamAM tathAsvarUpe
darzana-oLakhANa-pichAna e ja moTAmAM moTI agatyanI vastu che. A AtyaMtara
svarUpadarzana thAya, te ja puruSane kharekhara yoga thAya che. ane A yoga thAya
te ja avaMcaka ga che. A satpaSa kevA hoya che? te ke-kalyANasaMpanna arthAta
viziSTa puNyavaMtA hoya che. parama gaciMtAmaNiratnanI sAkSAt prAptine lIdhe te
parama puNyazALI che, kalyANane pAmelA che. AvA puruSa darzanathI paNa pAvana
hoya che. emanA darzana karatAM paNa AtmA pAvana thaI jAya che, evA te parama
pavitrAtmA hoya che. eozrInA pavitra AtmacAritrane ja koI e addabhuta mUka
prabhAva paDe che ke-bIjA jIvone jUttisaddhiH valyANaraMpaH-kalyANa saMpanna evA
saMta-sapuruSa sAthe, viziSTa puNyavaMta evA saMta sAthe, nA ivanaiH-darzanathI
5Na pAvana, avalokanathI 5NuM pAvana evA sAthe, tathA tathA prakAre, te prakAre
guNavattAthI-guNayuktapaNathI-viparyaya abhAve karIne, tana-dhanate
tathAdarzana, tethI karIne-tenA vaDe karIne je-cona:-ga, saMbaMdha, teonI sAthe
thAya che, bAvAda uccare-Ai avaMcaka kahevAya che, A avaMcaka ema artha che.

Page #809 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Conclusion: The speed-giving (vegaachhak) due to the true vision (tathaadarshan)
of the Purusha form.  (733) Seeing such a blessed, pure by vision, innocent,
passionless, and detached (vitraag) Jnanee Purusha, even by their natural
vision, the true seeker (mumukhu) yogi is quickly recognized due to the magical
effect of their purifying vision. Because the vision of a silent Muni is
infinitely more accurate than the lakhs of explanations of thousands of boastful
speakers. (See page 253, "He is the nectar of all words" etc.) The natural
qualities of such an Avadhoot Vitraag Muni, who is free from even his own body,
are so wonderful. For example:  "The dirt becomes gold, the low becomes a king,
the deceit becomes friendship, the pride becomes humility; the poison becomes
medicine, the cruelty becomes miracle, the violence becomes the image of the
soul, the poison becomes nectar. The world becomes a game, the earth becomes a
dwelling, the time becomes family business, the shame becomes a joke; the
learning becomes wisdom, the time becomes respect, such is the way of that one,
bound by Banarasi." - Poet Banarasi Dasji.  To recognize such a supremely
innocent, supremely passionless, supremely detached Jnanee Purusha - Sadhujan -
in their true qualities, to see them in their natural pure self-form, is
"Tathaadarshan". This Tathaadarshan gives speed to the virtuous person, and
their era is called Yogavanchak. - Thus, three main things are essential for the
attainment of this Yogavanchak: (1) The person who is to be united (yog) must be
a virtuous person, a true saint, a true Guru. (2) Their vision - association
must happen. (3) Their vision - recognition must be in their true form. If even
one of these is lacking, Yogavanchak does not happen.  Because (1) Firstly, the
one with whom the union is to happen must be a true, virtuous person, a true
saint, a true Guru who has attained the direct form of truth; they must be a
true devotee of good conduct, adorned with all the virtues prescribed in the
scriptures; they must be a pure, virtuous person like pure gold, sweet like
nectar, pure like crystal; they must be a true "Sannyasi" who has renounced all
external influences and is self-absorbed; they must be a true Nigranth -
Bhavasraman, free from the bondage of external influences - possessions; they
must be a "Muni" who is a self-knowing, detached Jnanee, silent towards external
influences; they must be a true devotee who has directly realized the natural
self-form; they must be a "Saint" who is a peaceful being, free from the
illusion of form; in short, they must be "true" according to their name "Sat",
they must be "Sat" - true, endowed with the direct manifestation of the soul's
true form. But if such a true saint - virtuous person, endowed with the "Sat"
form, is not found, and an untrue, non-saint, non-devotee, or a bad devotee is
considered true, then this speed does not happen, the union does not happen.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 upasaMhAra : puruSa svarUpanA tathAdazanathI vegAcaka (733) dekhatAM veta ja
tenI ajaba jAduI asara thAya che. AvA kalyANasaMpanna, darzanathI paNa pAvana,
nirdoSa nirvikAra vItarAga evA jJAnI puruSa, emanI sahaja darzanamAtrathI paNa
pAvanakAriNI jAduI asarathI sAcA mumukSu yogIone zIdhra eALakhAI jAya che,
kAraNa ke mauna muninuM darzana paNa hajAra vAgADaMbarI vaktAonA lAkhe vyAkhyAne
karatAM anaMtagaNe sacoTa baMdha Ape che. (juo pR. 253, "he sahuruSanA
vacanAmRta" ItyAdi.) svadehamAM paNa nimama evA A avadhUta vItarAga muninuM
sahaja guNasvarUpa ja evuM adbhuta hoya che. jemake "kIcaso kanaka jAke, nIcaso
narezapada, mIcasI mittAI, garavAI jAke gArasI; jaharasI jega jAti, kaharasI
karAmati, harasI hIMsa pudgala chabI chArasI. jAlo jagavilAsa, bhAla
bhuvanavAsa, kAlaso kuTuMbakAja, lokalAja lArasI; sIThaso sujasa jAne, vIThaso
vakhata mAna, esI jAkI rIti tAhI, baMdata banArasI." -kavivara banArasIdAsajI.
AvA parama nirdoSa, parama nivikAra, parama vItarAga jJAnI puruSane-sAdhujanane
tenA yathArtha guNasvarUpe oLakhavA, temanuM je sahaja zuddha AtmasvarUpa che te
svarUpe temanuM darzana karavuM te "tathAdarzana' che. A tathAdazanathI
satparuSane vega thAya che, ane te yuganuM nAma yogAvaMcaka che.-Ama A
gAvaMcakanI prAptimAM traNa mukhya vastu Avazyaka cheH (1) jene yoga thavAne
che, te satparuSa, sAcA saMta, sadguru hovA joIe. (2) tenA darzana-samAgama
thavA joIe. (3) tenuM tathAsvarUpe darzana-oLakhANa thavuM joIe. AmAMthI ekanI
paNa nyUnatA-khAmI hoya te gAvaMcaka thatuM nathI. kAraNa ke (1) prathama te
jenI sAthe yoga thavAnA che te pote sata, sAcA sapuruSa, pratyakSa sat svarUpane
prApta thayelA saddaguru hevA jaIe; zAstrokta sakala sAdhuguNathI zobhatA evA
sAdhucarita sAcA bhAvasAdhu hevA joIe; sapuruSa svarUpa zuddha sonA jevA zuddha,
parama amRta jevA mIThA, zuddha sphaTika jevA nirmala pavitra puruSa hovA joIe;
sarva parabhAvanA tyAgI AtmArAmI evA sAcA "saMnyAsI' hovA joIe; bAdhAvyaMtara
graMthathI-parigrahathI rahita evA sAcA nigraMtha-bhAvazramaNa hovA joIe,
parabhAva pratye mauna evA AtmajJAnI vItarAga jJAnI "muni" hovA joIe; sahaja
AtmasvarUpapadane jene sAkSAt ga thayo che evA yathArtha bhAvagI havA joIe;
svarUpavizrAMta evA zAMtamUrti "saMta" hovA joIe; TUMkAmAM temanA "sata" nAma
pramANe "sat'-sAcA hovA joIe, AtmAnA pratyakSa pragaTa sat svarUpathI yukta evA
"sata" hovA joIe. paNa AvA "sata" svarUpayukta sAcA saMta-sapuruSa na maLyA
hoya, ane asat asaMta asAdhu ke kusAdhune sat mAnI lIdhA hoya, te A pega banatuM
nathI, yoga agarUpa

Page #810 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(734) A collection of wrong views is formed, therefore, the one with whom yoga
is to be formed, should be a true, virtuous, and righteous person. Otherwise,
there are many so-called saints in the world, outwardly-dressed saints,
ascetics, and babas, tangled-up, name-calling yogis, and various types of
deceptive, material-bodied beings. But such saints are devoid of virtues, false,
like counterfeit money, material-bodied beings, from whom "nothing good comes
back." The soul does not benefit in any way. (See pp. 128-129). (2) Secondly,
such a virtuous person may exist, but if one does not have darshan (vision) of
him, or if there is no association or acquaintance, what is the use? If a
Kalpavriksha (wish-fulfilling tree) grows in the courtyard, but one does not
benefit from it, what is the use? If one gets an inconceivable, precious,
Cintamani gem, but does not use it to benefit oneself, what is the use? If one
gets a Kamadhenu (wish-fulfilling cow), but does not worship it, what is the
use? If the true nectar of liberation is raining down, but one does not absorb
it, what is the use? Therefore, darshan (vision) and association with a saint is
just as essential (See p. 162, "Parichay Patak Ghatak Sadhu Shunu" etc.). (3)
Thirdly, if one has darshan (vision) and association with a saint outwardly, but
does not have darshan (vision) of the saint's true form inwardly, or does not
recognize the saint's true form, then even that outward association becomes
useless, unsuccessful, and a failed darshan (vision). Or, if one has met a
virtuous person, but does not have the capacity to have inner darshan (vision)
and recognition, then it is as if one has not met him at all. Of these three,
the third point is the most important, because even if one has a virtuous
person, and even if one has outward darshan (vision) and association with him,
but does not have darshan (vision) of his true form, what is the use? Because
without darshan (vision) of the true form, yoga with a virtuous person becomes
useless and fails. Thus, this being may have seen many times, the supreme beings
like the Tirthankaras, but due to the lack of capacity of this being, he did not
have darshan (vision) of the true form of those beings, therefore, that yoga was
unsuccessful. Therefore, the real secret key to yoga with a virtuous person is
to have darshan (vision) and recognition of his true form. And when that
happens, then unshakeable yoga happens. What is "unshakeable"? That which is not
shaky, that which is not deceptive, that which does not cheat, that is
unshakeable. That which never becomes empty, that which never fails, that is
unshakeable, infallible, unwavering, and unfailing. That which is unwavering, a
panacea, that is unshakeable. Yoga is that which does not shake, that which does
not become empty, that which does not go away, that is unshakeable yoga. What is
the aim of this unshakeable arrow? That is right. (See pp. 159-160, Figure 6) In
the action of the arrow, the first step is to aim properly at the target
(Aiming). Only after aiming properly, does the second action of releasing the
arrow happen. Similarly, in this...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (734) gadaSTisamuccaya thAya che, mATe jenI sAthe yoga thavAne che, te sat-
sapuruSa sAcA bhAvasAdhu-bhAvayegI hovA joIe. bAkI jagatamAM kahevAtA sAdhuone,
bAhA veSadhArI sAdhu-saMnyAsIbAvAone, jaTAjUTa vadhAranArA nAmadhArI jogIone,
aneka prakAranA veSaviDaMbaka dravyaliMgIono kAMI toTo nathI. paNa tevA sAdhu
guNavihIna, khoTA rUpIA jevA dravyaliMgIothI "kAMI zukaravAra vaLato nathI."
AtmAnuM kAMI kalyANa thatuM nathI. (juo pR. 128-129). (2) bIju,-AvA puruSa
sadguru vidyamAna hoya, paNa tene darzana joga je na thAya, samAgama-paricaya na
thAya te zuM kAma Ave ? AMgaNAmAM kalpavRkSa UgyuM hoya, paNa tene lAbha na
levAya te zuM kAmanuM? aciMtya ciMtAmaNiratna hAtha lAgyuM hoya, paNa tene sevI
ciMtita lAbha na uThAvAya te zuM kAmanuM? kAmadudhA kAmadhenu maLI hoya paNa
tenI ArAdhanA na thAya te zuM kAmanuM? sAkSAt paramAmRtane megha varasate hoya,
paNa tene jhIlavAmAM na Ave, te zuM kAmanuM ? mATe saMtanA darzana-samAgamanI
teTalI ja AvazyakatA che (juo pR. 162, "paricaya pAtaka ghAtaka sAdhu zuM" I. )
(3) trIjuM-bAhyathI saMtanA darzana-samAgama thAya, paNa aMtathI saMtanuM tathA
prakAre saMtasvarUpe darzana na thAya, satasvarUpe oLakhANa svarUpanuM na thAya,
te tene bAhya samAgamaga paNa agarUpa thAya che, niSphaLa tathA darzana thAya
che. athavA sapuruSa maLyA hoya, paNa tenuM aMtara darzana oLakhANa thaI zake
evI pitAnAmAM yogyatA na hoya, te pega na maLyA barAbara thAya che. A traNamAM
paNa trIje muddo sauthI vadhAre mahattvanuM che, kAraNa ke puruSa hoya, tene
bAhya darzana-samAgama paNa thayA hoya, paNa tenuM tathAsvarUpe Atmadarzana" na
thayuM hoya te zuM kAmanuM? kAraNa ke tathAsvarUpe darzana vinA sapuruSano yoga
aga thAya che aphaLa jAya che. ema te A jIve aneka vAra bhagavAna tIrthakara
jevA parama puruSanA darzana karyA haze, paNa A jIvanI yogyatAnI khAmIne lIdhe
te puruSanuM tathAdarzana na thayuM, tethI te yuga aphaLa gaye, mATe puruSanA
yoganI kharekharI rahasya cAvI (Master-key ) tenuM tathAsvarUpe darzana karavuM-
oLakhANa thavI te che. ane ema thAya tyAre ja avaMcaka yoga thAya che. A
"avaMcaka eTale zuM? vaMcaka nahi te avecakavace nahi, chetare nahi, Thage nahiM
te avaMcaka. je kadI khAlI na jAya, cUke nahiM, e amegha, acUka, avi. saMvAdI,
rAmabANa te avaMcaka. yoga e ke krI vaMce nahiM, khAlI coga, avaMcaka jAya
nahiM, te yogAvaMcaka. A gAvaMcaka bANanA lakSya tAkavA eTale? barAbara che.
(jue pR. 159-160, AkRti 6 ) bANunI lakSyakriyAmAM prathama pagathiyuM lakSya-
nizAnane barAbara tAkavuM (Aiming) te che. te laya barAbara tAkyA pachI ja bIjI
nizAna vidhavAnI kriyA bane che. tema A

Page #811 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Conclusion: From the Gavanchak to the Path of Life  (735) In the entirety of
the Gavanchak, the first step is to firmly fix the target, the goal, which is
the Sadhya. This union, this connection with the Sadhya, is called Yogavanchak.
And this ultimate, decisive Sadhya is the very form itself, so the Gavanchak is
the G performed with the form as the object. (See page 693)  Why then is so much
emphasis placed on the Yog, the vision of the Purusha? The reason is simple: the
Sapurusha is the manifest form, the direct, visible, manifest form. The G, which
is the manifest form, is the G that has gained momentum. The Sapurusha is the
direct, inherent, natural form of the Lord. Therefore, the vision of such a
direct Yogi Purusha leaves an indelible mark on the soul of the seeker. Seeing
the extraordinary self-biography of the Sapurusha, who is the form itself, the
soul easily leans towards the form as the goal. What countless teachings of
eloquent speakers cannot bind, can be achieved by the presence of such a
Purusha. Thus, the vision of the Yogi Purusha focuses the life's goal on the
Sadhya, the form as the target, and all its activities become form-oriented.
Therefore, the Yog of the Purusha, who makes the form the direct goal, is called
Yogavanchak.  This Gavanchak, obtained through the Yog of the Purusha,
transforms the entire life cycle of the soul. What was previously the soul's
conduct, focused on worldly matters, now, after becoming form-oriented, becomes
solely focused on the soul. What was previously the soul's Gavanchak, where all
actions and activities were detrimental to the soul, now, with the
transformation of the soul's life, becomes beneficial. What was previously all
means, binding in nature, now becomes true means. What was previously moving in
the opposite direction, without the form as the object, becoming self-alienated,
now moves in the right direction, becoming self-aware. (See Figure 20) What was
previously the soul's movement, driven by Asrava-bondage, moving in the wrong
direction, now becomes the soul's own form, moving in the right direction. What
was previously the soul's entire momentum, actions, etc., missing the form as
the target, moving crookedly, being crooked, being a Vanchak, now, with the form
as the target, moves straight, becomes "A-Vankagami," becomes A-Vanchak. Such a
miraculous transformation occurs in the soul. When this Gavanchak, the entire
life of the Yogi, is attained by the soul, then its true "Yogi life" begins. And
that is why it is called "A" - first of all, it is A-Vanchak. Only after being
A-Vanchak can everything else be A-Vanchak. Otherwise, it is just Vanchak,
because its previous means of Yog are all Vanchak.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 upasaMhAra gAvaMcakathI jIvanapade (735) samasta gakriyArUpa rAdhAvedhamAM paNa
prathama pagathiyuM sAdhyarUpa lakSyane-nizAnane sunizcita karI barAbara tAkavuM
te che. A sAdhya lakSyanI sAthe yoga tha-DANa thavuM, tenuM nAma ja yegAvaMcaka
che. ane te parama nizcayarUpa sAdhya lakSya te svarUpa ja che, eTale svarUpa
lakSyane anulakSIne karavAmAM Avela ga te yogAvaMcaka che. (juo pR 693) te pachI
atre puruSanA tathAdarzanarUpa yoga para ATalo badho bhAra mUkavAnuM zuM kAraNa?
kAraMNa eTaluM ja ke-sapuruSa mUrtimaMta pragaTa svarUpa che, sAkSAt-pratyakSa
mUrtimaMta pragaTa sasvarUpane vega pAmela pragaTa "gI" che, sAkSAt sAkSAt sat
sahajAnmasvarUpa prabhu che. eTale AvA sAkSAt yegI puruSanA svarUpa javalaMta
AdarzadarzanathI na bhUMsAya evI camatkArika chApa mumukSu AtmAmAM paDe che.
jethI ekAMta svarUpalakSI sapuruSanuM parama adbhuta AtmacAritra dekhI, tene
AtmA saheje svarUpa lakSya bhaNI DhaLe che. vAcAla vaktAonA lAkhe upadeze je
baMdha nathI karI zaktA, te AvA eka puruSane jIvate jAgate dAkhala karI zake
che. Ama yegI puruSanA tathAdazanathI jIvanuM lakSya eka sAdhya svarUpa nizAna
prati kendrita thAya che, ane pachI tenI badhI pravRtti te svarUpalakSI ja hoya
che. teTalA mATe svarUpane sAkSAt lakSya karAvanAra puruSanA yegane yogAvaMcaka
kahyo che. - A puruSanA yegathI prApta thate degavaMcaka ga jIvanuM AkhuM
jIvanacakra badalAvI nAMkhe che. prathama je jIvanuM samasta AcaraNa saMsArArtha
thatuM hatuM, te have sva rUpalakSI thayA pachI kevaLa AtmArtha ja thAya che.
prathama je jIvanI cagAvaMcathI samasta kriyA-pravRtti AtmabAdhaka thaIne
pravartatI hatI, te have Atma jIvanapalaTe sAdhaka thaIne pravarte che. prathama
je sahu sAdhana baMdhanarUpa nIvaDatA hatA, te have satya sAdhanarUpa thaI paDe
che. prathama je svarUpalakSa vinA SakAraka caka AtmavimukhapaNe ulaTuM cAlatuM
hatuM, te have AtmasanmukhapaNe sulaTuM cAle che. (juo Akati 20). prathama je
AtmAnI badhI cAla Azrava-baMdhapaNe avaLI cAlatI hatI, savA ra-nija rArUpa thaI
savaLI cAle che. prathama je jIvanA samasta vega-kriyAdi svarUpa lakSane cUkI
vAMkAcUMkA cAlatA hoI, vaMkagAmI hoI, vaMcaka thaIne pravartatA hatA, te have
svarUpa lakSyane sAMdhI sarala cAlI, "avaMkagAmI' thaI, avaMcaka thaIne pravarte
che. Avo camatkArika palaTo pheraphAra A jIvamAM thaI jAya che. sakala
jogajIvanarUpa A gAvaMcaka jyAre jIvane prApta thAya che, tyAre ja tenuM
kharekharUM jogIjIvana' zarU thAya che. ane eTalA mATe ja ene "A"--sauthI
prathama e avaMcaka kahyo che, prathama e avaMcaka hoya te ja pachI bIjuM
badhuMya avaMcaka hoya che, nahiM te vaMcaka ja hoya che, kAraNa ke te pahelAMnA
tenA sava yogasAdhana vaMcaka ja

Page #812 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(736) The Chagadashtisusmay were like thugs, deceiving and depriving people of
their true goals. (See pages 162, 163, "Yam Niyam Sayam Aap Kriya" etc.
regarding the deceitful yogis.) Thus, since time immemorial, without the Chaug
of the Shrimad Sadguru, all the yogic practices of the jiva have been
ineffective, but when the jiva receives the Chaug of the Shri Sadguru, those
practices become effective. Such is the extraordinary power of the Chaugavchak
yoga. When the jiva receives the Chaugavchak, which is like a vision of the true
form of the Satpurush, the entire yogic cycle of the jiva starts functioning.
Just as a wheel starts turning when it is spun, so too does the entire yogic
cycle start turning when the Chaugavchak, like a spinning hand, is applied.
Therefore, recognizing the true form of the Satpurush Sadguru is the most
important thing. Once this happens, the yogic chariot of the jiva is set on the
right track and it starts moving in the right direction. When the jiva receives
the Chaug, which is like the grace of the Satpurush Sadguru who is established
in his true form, the soul attains its true nature and receives the nectar of
love. Sat is not a delusion, it is completely different from delusion, it is
beyond imagination. Therefore, those who have a firm resolve to attain Sat
should first contemplate with a firm conviction that they know nothing, and then
surrender to the knower for the attainment of Sat. This will surely lead to its
attainment. (See page 321) 66 "The jiva has been in the company of such knowers
for countless ages, yet it has not taken refuge in them. This is because the
jiva has not understood the true nature of the knower, and this is the reason
for its continuous cycle of birth and death. We firmly believe this. ... We know
of three major flaws in the jiva that prevent it from recognizing the knower:
(1) The ego that says, "I know, I understand." (2) A greater attachment to
worldly possessions than to the knower. (3) Avoiding the knower due to fear of
public opinion, fear of criticism, and fear of humiliation. It should not be
like this, but rather it should be drawn to the knower." - Shrimad Rajchandra.
Patranka 181, 342 (211, 416) 5 Sadguru Yoga Avchak teshameva pranamaadi
kriyanayam ityalam | kriyavanchak yogah syanmahapapakṣayodayah || 220 || tene ja
pranamaahit, kriyanayam je sar; kriya avchak yag te, papakṣaya kar, 220
Vṛtti:——teshameva–teono ja, santane ja, tralaamaahikryanayam chad—pranamaadi
kriyanayam e ja khas, triyayogah chat—kriṣavchak yag hey, ane a—mahapapody:-maha
papakṣaṣana udayarup chhe, nich gatra kamana kṣam karanaara chhe, em bhav chhe.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (736) cagadaSTisasumAya hatA, sat sAdhyathI vacita karI-cUkAvI chetaranAra,
ThaMga jema ThaganAra hatA. ( jue pR. 162, 163, * yama niyama sayama Apa kriyA '
ityAdi jogI draga nA.) Ama anAdi kALathI zrImad sadgurunA caiAga vinA jIvanA
sava" yeAga-sAdhana va'caka nIvaDathA che, paNa zrI sadgurune cega thatAM te sa
yAga ava'caka thai paDe che. AvA parama adbhuta mahimA A ceAgAMcaka yoganA che.
A satpuruSanA svarUpadarzanarUpa A ceAgAva'caka nAmanI ceAgasaMjIvanI prApta
thatAM jIvanuM AkhuM yeAgacakra cAlu thaI jAya che. jema hAtheA pheravatAM AkhuM
cakra cAlavA mAMDe che, tema A cagAvacakarUpa hAtheA pheravatAM AkhuM yeAgacakra
cAlavA mAMDe che, mATe satpuruSa sadgurunA svarUpanI eLakhANu thavI e meATAmAM
mATI vAta che. te thaye jIvanI yeAga-gADI saraeNDe caDI-pATA para caDhI sAcI
dizAmAM saDeDATa prayANa kare che. svarUpasthita satpuruSa sadgurune
tathAda"narUpa cega thaye ja AtmAnuM nija kAya siddha thAya che, ane premadhana
evA amRtarasa prApta thAya che. sat te brAMti nathI, bhrAMtithI kevala
vyatirikta (jUduM.) che, kalpanAthI para ( Aghe ) che; mATe jenI prApti karavAnI
dRDha mati thai che, teNe pAte kai ja jANatA nathI evA dRDha nizcayavALA
prathama vicAra karavA, ane pachI 'sat'nI prApti mATe jJAnIne zaraNe javuM; te
jarUra mAnI prApti thAya. ( jue pR. 321) 66 " jJAnI puruSane| tevA tevA saMga
jIvane anaMtakALamAM ghaNIvAra thaI gayA che, tathApi A puruSa jJAnI che, mATe
have tenA Azraya grahaNa karavA e ja kanya che, ema jIvane Avyu nathI, ane te ja
kAraNa jIvane paribhramaNanuM thayuM che, ema amane tA dRDha karIne lAge che.
xxx jJAnI puruSanI eLakhANa nahi thavAmAM ghaNu karIne jIvanA traNa moTA doSa
jANIe chIye:--(1) eka te huM jANuM chuM, huM samajuM chuM evA prakAranuM je mAna
jIvane rahyA kare che te mAna. (2) khIjuM, parigrahAne viSe jJAnI puruSa para
rAga karatAM paNa vizeSa rAga. ( 3 ) trIjuM, leAkabhayane lIdhe, apakIti bhayane
lIdhe, ane apamAnabhayane lIdhe jJAnIthI vimukha rahevuM, tenA pratye niyAnvita
thavu joIe tevu na thavuM. " --zrImad rAjacaMdra. patrAMka 181, 342 (211, 416) 5
sadguru yoge avacaka teSAmeva praNAmAdikriyAniyama ityalam  /  kriyAvaJcakayogaH
syAnmahApApakSayodayaH  //  220  //  tene ja praNAmAhita, kriyAniyama je sAra;
kriyA avacaka yAga te, pApakSAya kAra, 220 vRtti:----teSAmeva-teone ja, sa MtAne
ja, traLAmAiikrayAniyama caDha--praNAmAdi kriyAniyama e ja khasa, triyAyogaH cAt
--kriSAvacaka yAga heya, ane A--mahApApodya:-mahA pApakSaSanA udayarUpa che,
nIca gAtra kamanA kSama karanArA che, ema bhAva che.

Page #813 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Conclusion:** Sadguru Yoga, Avachak Yoga, Avachak Kriya (737) Meaning - The
same is the rule of Pranamadi Kriya, the same is the Kriyavachak speed - which
is the form of the rise of Mahapapakṣaya. Discussion - The same is the
Kriyavachak Yoga, the rule of Pranamadi Kriya towards that Saint; and this is
the form of the rise of Mahapapakṣaya, - it destroys the low lineage. Such as
the ones mentioned above, the rule of Pranamadi Kriya towards those peaceful,
tolerant, and forgiving true virtuous men - Bhavasadhus is Kriyavachak. The true
Bhavagī Purusha, whose soul has attained the true form, has seen the virtuous
form of the virtuous man, the Pranamadi Kriya towards that man is Kriyavachak.
Here, the word 'Adi' in Bhakti should be taken as praise, chanting,
conversation, service, etc. The one who sees the wonderful form of the Purusha -
his virtuousness, his form becomes the target, his soul naturally falls at the
feet of that Saint with devotion, he is mine. He plays in the contemplation of
the virtues of that virtuous man, he likes the words of that virtuous man, he
always bows at the feet of that man, his entire self-region turns towards that
virtuous man - "Parigṇaman" does. Thus, he becomes engrossed in the devotional
act towards that virtuous man with all the power of mind, speech, and body. (See
p. 3, "Prabhupane Prabhu Olakhi" etc.) Therefore, this devotional soul
continuously performs humility, respect, and honor towards the virtuous man; he
places their command above his head with his body, mind, and wealth, and serves
them with his whole soul; he stands with folded hands in their service, he
offers his body, mind, and wealth in their service. Although the Purusha is
completely detached and completely unconscious even in the body, etc., he does
not expect even an atom, even then, the soul who is eager for liberation,
knowing him to be his supreme benefactor, surrenders his soul at his feet - he
offers himself, he offers his own soul, and he thinks, "What should I offer at
the feet of the Lord?" (See p. 132, "Ah Aho Shri Sadguru" etc.) - etc. The
Pranamadi Bhakti Kriya performed towards the supremely detached, self-absorbed,
virtuous man is the Kriyavachak Yoga, the same Kriya is Avachak. Kriya is such
that it never stops, never misses, never goes in vain, Kriyavachak is aimed at
the target - the arrow thrown at the target, its movement is towards the target,
it is accurate and unwavering, it is not crooked, it is not misleading.
Similarly, this Vandanadi Kriya performed with the form-target of the virtuous
man in mind is also the means.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 upasaMhAra : sadaguru yoge, avaMcaka yoga, ava'caka kriyA (737) artha -te ja
tenA prAmAdi kriyAne niyama e ja kriyAvaMcaka vega che - ke je mahApApakSayanA
udayarUpa che. vivecana te saMte pratye ja praNAmAdi kriyAno niyama e ja basa
kriyAvaMcaka yoga che; ane A mahApApakSayanA udayarUpa che,-nIca gotra kamane
kSaya karanAra che. AvA je uparamAM hamaNuM ja kahyA te zAMta, dAMta ne kSAMta
sAcA sapuruSo-bhAvasAdhuo pratye ja praNAmAdi kriyAne niyama te kriyAvaMcaka
che. AtmAnA sat svarUpane yoga thayo che evA je sAcA bhAvagI puruSanuM
sapuruSasvarUpe satpuruSanI darzana thayuM, te puruSa pratye ja pramAdi kriyA
karavI te kiyAvaMcaka che. bhakti atre Adi zabdathI stavana, kIrtana,
vaiyAvacca, sevA vagere grahaNa karavA. jene puruSanA svarUpanuM-
guNavaMtapaNAnuM adbhuta darzana thAya che, tenA svarUpane lakSya thAya che,
tene AtmA pachI sahaja svabhAve bhaktibhAvathI te saMtanA caraNakamaLamAM DhaLI
paDe che, tene mane. te satapuruSanA guNaciMtanamAM rame che, tenA vacana yegane
te sapuruSanuM guNastavana game che, tene kAyama te puruSanA caraNe name che,
tenA samasta Atmapradeza te sapuruSa pratye pariNamana-"parignamana kare che.
Ama te sapuruSa pratyenI bhakti kriyAmAM mana-vacana-kAyAnI samasta zaktithI
tallIna bane che. (juo pR. 3, "prabhupaNe prabhu oLakhI" I.) eTale A bhaktivaMta
jIva niraMtara sapuruSanA vinaya, bahumAna, Adara Adi kare che; tanathI,
manathI, dhanathI, sarvathI temanI AjJA mAthe caDhAve che, ane sarvAtmAthI
temanI vaiyAvacca-sevA vagere kare che; kara joDI temanI sevAmAM khaDe page
ubhuM rahe che, temanI sevAmAM tana-mana-dhana sarva arpaNa kare che. joke
puruSa te paripUrNa ni:spRha che ane dehAdimAM paNa sarvathA mUccharahita heI
paramANumAtranI paNa apekSA rAkhatA nathI, te paNa sapuruSane potAnA parama
upakArI jANI AtmArthI mumukSu jIva temanA caraNakamaLamAM AtmArpaNa kare che-
Atmanivedana kare che, nija AtmAnuM naivedya dhare che, ane bhAve che ke "zuM
prabhu caraNa kane dharuM ?" (juo pR. 132, "Aha aho zrI sadguru' I.) - ItyAdi
prakAre je parama niHpRhI AtmArAmI sapuruSa pratye praNAmAdi bhakti kriyA
karavAmAM Ave che, te ja kriyAvaMcaka yuga che, te ja kiyA avaMcaka che. kriyA
evI ke je kadI vace nahiM, cUke nahiM, phogaTa jAya nahi, te kriyAvaMcaka
lakSyane-nizAnane barAbara tAkIne pheMkavAmAM AvelA bANanI gamana kiyA lakSya
bhaNI ja hoya, acUkaavaMcaka ja heya, ADIavaLI na haya, vaMcaka-sUkanArI na
hoya. tema sapuruSanA svarUpa-lakSyane barAbara lakSamAM rAkhIne karavAmAM AvelI
A vaMdanAdi kriyA paNa sAdhya

Page #814 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(738) The Yogadristi-samuccaya (the collection of yogic vision) is the form of
the goal, it is unwavering and accurate, it is not crooked or deviating, it is
not wavering or erring. Thus, in this example of the arrow, the arrow's
unwavering movement is accurate; because the arrow is aimed at the target with
unwavering speed and pursuit, its movement towards the target is also accurate
and unwavering. And if the arrow is not aimed at the target with unwavering
speed and pursuit, it is wavering and erring, its movement towards the target is
also crooked and wavering. Similarly, if the yoga is unwavering, its action is
also unwavering; and if the yoga is wavering, its action is also wavering, this
is the rule.  Therefore, after the yoga, which is the form-vision-recognition of
the Purusha, any action like veneration, etc., is unwavering. The action that is
before that recognition is wavering, it is unsuccessful and drying up. Because
this being has not kept any grains in the infinite actions of the Satpurusha
from time immemorial, it has not left anything behind in the infinite effort
without effort. (See p. 162) Indeed! This being has been born in the world of
the beloved countless times, perfectly observing the infinite actions of the
Dravya Shramanavachka. But without that feeling, all this effort of the father
has gone to waste! Because this life was in the opposite direction, in the wrong
direction. What is the use of cutting millions of miles in the wrong direction?
Even one step in the right direction brings you closer to the goal, but this
being did that, and therefore it wandered. All this failed, the reason is that
it did not have the yoga of the Purusha. It may have met the Purusha many times,
but it did not recognize the Satpurusha as its own form, so it did not attain
welfare. If it had once recognized the form of the Purusha and offered it
veneration and prostration, it would have crossed the ocean long ago! Because
"one prostration to Jinavaravrushabha Vadhamana saves men and women from the
ocean of samsara" - this is evident from the scriptures. If it had once offered
veneration according to the scriptures, it would have realized the success of
the action due to the true cause. (See p. 3, "Fuve Namuad" etc.)  Thus, it may
have offered veneration, etc., to the Purusha countless times, but without
recognition, this action of veneration, etc., became wavering, unsuccessful and
erring! Yes, it became bound by auspiciousness, it earned merit, but the
wandering towards the goal of the world did not stop; it got the many-faceted
fruit of the four paths, but it did not get the one-faceted fruit of liberation!
Moreover, this being was in the same delusion, even more than the wavering of
infinite actions without the form of the goal, that I am doing dharma, I am
striving, I am doing actions that lead to liberation. And with such a deluded
belief, it...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (738) yogadaSTisamuccaya svarUpa lakSya bhaNI ja hoya, avaMcaka-acUka ja hoya,
ADIavaLI na hoya, vaMcaka-cUkanArI na hoya. Ama A kriyAvaMcaka prastuta bANanA
daSTAMtamAM bANanI avaMcaka gamanakriyA barAbara che; kAraNa ke je nizAna pratye
bANane vega-anusaMdhAna barAbara tAkela-avaM. caka hoya, te nizAna pratyenI
gamanakriyA paNa barAbara acUka-avaMcaka ja hoya. ane je nizAna pratye bANane
vega-anusaMdhAna barAbara tAkela na hoya, vaMcaka-cUkI janAra hoya, te nizAna
pratyenI gamanakriyA paNa ADIavaLI-vaMcaka heya. tema yaMga je avaMcaka hoya, te
kriyA paNa avaMcaka hoya; ane yoga je vaMcaka hoya te kriyA paNa vaMcaka hoya, A
niyama che. eTale puruSanA svarUpadarzanarUpa-oLakhANurUpa yoga pachInI je kAMI
vaMdanAdi kriyA che, te ja avaMcaka hoya che. te oLakhANa pahelAMnI je kriyA
che, te vaMcaka hoya che-saphaLathI sUkAvanArI hoya che. kAraNa ke anaMtakALathI
A jIve satpuruSanA anaMta kriyA karavAmAM kaMI maNA rAkhI nathI, anaMta
parizrama UThAvayoga vinAnI vAmAM kAMI bAkI rAkhI nathI. (juo pR. 162) are !
dravya zramaNavaMcaka kiyA paNAnI anaMta kriyA uttama rIte pALIne A jIva
priyakamAM paNa anaMta vAra upajya hatuM. paNa tathArUpa bhAva vinA
paramArthathI te bApaDAnI A badhI mahenata pANImAM gaI che ! kAraNa ke jIvana A
badhe prayAsa ulaTI dizAmAM-uMdhI dizAmAM hato. uMdhI dizAmAM lAkho gAu kApI
nAMkhe zuM vaLe? sAcI dizAmAM eka DagaluM paNa vadhe te lakSyasthAna nikaTa
AvatuM jAya, paNa tema te A jIve karyuM hotuM ne tethI te rakhaDyo. A badhuM
niSphaLa thayuM, tenuM kAraNa tene puruSano yoga thaye nahiM te che. puruSane
bheTe te tene aneka vAra thayuM haze, paNa teNe sapuruSane tasvarUpe oLakhyA
nahi, eTale kalyANa thayuM nahiM. puruSanuM svarUpa oLakhI tene je eka vAra paNa
bhAvavaMdana-namaskAra karyo hota, te tene beDo kayArane pAra thaI gayo hota!
kAraNa ke "jinavaravRSabha vadhamAnane eka paNa namaskAra saMsArasAgarathI nara
ke nArIne tAre che-e zAstravacanathI e pratIta thAya che. ema eka vAra paNa je
teNe AgamarIte vaMdanA karI hota to satya kAraNe kAryanI siddhi tene pratIta
thaI jAta. (juo pR. 3, "phuve namuad" I.) Ama teNe puruSane eze anaMtavAra
vaMdanAdi karyuM haze-paNa oLakhyA vinA, eTale ja tene A vaMdanAdi kriyA vacaka
thaI paDI, saphaLathI cUkavanArI-vaMcanArI thaI paDI ! hA, tethI zubhabaMdha
thaye-puNyopArjana thayuM, paNa saMsAra parisvarUpalakSya bramaNa aTakyuM nahi;
catugatirUpa anekAMta phaLa maLyuM, paNa mokSarUpa vinAnI ekAMta phaLa maLyuM
nahiM! vaLI A svarUpa lakSya vinAnI anaMta kriyA yiA vaMcaka karatAM paNa A jIva
evI ja bhramaNAmAM hatuM ke huM dharma karuM chuM, vega sAdhuM chuM,
mekSasAdhaka kriyA karuM chuM. ane evI brAMta mAnyatAthI te

Page #815 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Upas'har: The 'Chak Kriya' without the Yaga of a Sat Purusha (739)  They
were engaging in self-talk, reading to themselves, deceiving themselves;
therefore, all these actions were deceptive, misleading, and deceitful. Because
under the guise of these actions, they considered themselves 'righteous', took
pride in their deceptive actions, deceived their own souls, and remained
deprived of the truth. In essence, all actions, including veneration, etc.,
after recognizing the true form of a Sat Purusha, are deceptive, and that very
deceptive action is the Yaga. This deceptive Yaga is conducive to the rise of
great sins, meaning it leads to the rise of great sins and the ultimate
destruction of great sins. Devotion to a Sat Purusha destroys the lower karma;
because serving the higher and the best makes one higher and better, therefore,
by serving the supremely excellent Sat Purusha, even the name and trace of the
lower karma is not left. Association with the excellent increases excellence.
(See page 112, 'Uttam Gunu Anuragthi' etc.)  5 Falav'anchak Yogaastu Sadbhya Ev
Niyogatah | Sanubandha Falavaptir Dharma Siddhau Satan Mata || 221 ||
Therefore, the Falav'anchak Yaga is only through the Niyog of the Saints, and
the Saints agree that the attainment of the fruits of the Sanubandha is in the
matter of Dharma Siddhi.  ##  Discussion  And what is the last Yaga, called
Falav'anchak? It is as follows: Just as we have said, through the Niyog of the
Saints, by means of good teachings, etc., the attainment of the fruits of the
Sanubandha in the matter of Dharma Siddhi is the Falav'anchak Yaga, which is
agreed upon by the Saints.  Those who have attained the Chagav'anchak through
the recognition of the true form of the Sat Purusha, and those who have attained
the Yogav'anchak through the actions of veneration, etc., towards the Sat
Purusha, they also attain the Falav'anchak Yaga through the great influence of
the great Sat Purusha. Because if the Yaga is deceptive, then the action is also
deceptive, and therefore the fruit obtained is also deceptive, like a mine. (See
page 159). In this example, the attainment of the form of the object, which is
like a widow to the target, is the Falav'anchak. (See page 161)  ##  Vritti
Falav'anchak Yogaastu, the last and most excellent Yoga, what is it? It is as
follows: Just as we have said earlier, through the Niyog of the Saints, through
the Niyog, inevitably through the Sanubandha, by means of good teachings, etc.,
in the matter of Dharma Siddhi, the Saints agree.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 upasa'hAra H sat puruSanA yAga vinAnI 'caka kriyA (739) AtmavacanA karatA hatA,
pAte pAtAne vaMcatA hatA, ThagatA hatA; tethI paNa A badhI kriyA vaMcaka,
chetaranArI, ThaMga hatI. kAraNa ke A kriyAnA oThA heThaLa te pAte peAtAne
'dharmiSTha' mAnI, vAMcaka kriyAnuM abhimAna rAkhI, peAtAnA AtmAne chetaratA
hatA, ane satLathI vaMcita rahetA hatA. tAtka ke--satpuruSanI svarUpapIchAna
pachInI vaMdanAdi samasta kriyA ava'caka ja hoya che, ane te ja kriyAacaka yAga
che. A kriyAva'caka yAga mahApApakSayanA uyarUpa che, arthAt ethI karIne
mahApApakSanA udaya thAya che, mahApApanA atyaMta kSaya thAya che. satpuruSanI
bhaktithI nIca getra karmanA kSaya thAya che; kAraNa ke uccane-uttamane seve
ucca-uttama thAya che, eTale parama uttama evA satpuruSanA sevanathI nIca
geAtranuM nAmanizAna paNa hAtu' nathI. uttamanA saMgathI uttamatA vadhe che.
(jue pR. 112, 'uttama guNu anurAgathI' i.) 5 phalAvaJcakayogastu sadbhya eva
niyogataH  /  sAnubandhaphalAvAptirdharmasiddhau satAM matA  /  /  221  /  /
saMta thakI ja niyegathI, phela ava'caka yoga, dha siddhimAM saMta mata,
sAnubaMdha phlu yoga. 221 aH--ane lAvacaka yAga tA sa MtA thakI ja niyeAgathI
sAnubaMdha laprApti dha siddhi viSayamAM saMtAne saMmata che. vivecana ane
phlAvacaka nAmanA je chello ceAgAttama che, te kevA che? te ke-hamaNAM ja kahyA
te sa Mte thakI ja niyAgathI, je tathAprakAre sadupadezAdivaDe karIne,
dharmasiddhi viSayamAM sAnukha dha phalaprApti te ja lAvacaka yAga satAne samata
che. je satpuruSanA tathAdaza nathI-svarUpaeLakhANuthI ceAgAva'cakanI prApti
thai, tathA yeAgAvacakanI prApti thaye je satpuruSa pratye ja vaMdanAdi kriyAthI
kriyAvacanI prApti thai, te ja mahAnubhAva satpuruSanA mahAprabhAvathakI ja
lAva'caka yAganI paNa prApti heAya che. kAraNa ke jo yAga ava'caka che, te kriyA
paNa avacaka hAya che, ane tethI prApta thatuM kula paNa avaMcaka heAya
che,-khANunI peThe. (jue pR. 159). A dRSTAMtamAM nizAnane vidhavArUpa je eka
svarUpalakSyanI siddhi thavI te phalAvacaka che. (jue pu. 161)
vRtti:srAvandrayoHstu-lAva'caka yoga te, carama-chelle yegAttama uttama yeAga,
kevA che ? tA ke sarco va-anaMtara kahelA satA thakI ja, niyonata:-niyAgathI,
avazyapaNe sAnuvanyATAvAti:-sAnubA~dha laprApti,tathAprakAre sadupadezAdivaDe
karIte, dharmasiddhau-dhama siddhirUpa viSayamAM, satAM matA-saMtAne mata che,
saMmata che.

Page #816 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(740) From the above, it will be clear that the fruits that the soul experienced
before the identification of the man were all deceitful; because without the
goal of form, this soul performed infinite actions, and it received many fruits
for them, but the deceitful fruits were many, and they were in the form of
worldly wandering. (See Pu. 161, "Ek Kahe Sadhiye" etc.) He received many fruits
in the form of divine motion, but they were scattered and disorganized, not
connected in a chain leading to a single attainable goal. Or, the fruits that
were obtained were in a direction away from the one supreme fruit, which is the
attainment of form, so the soul remained far away from the attainment of form,
and thus, being deprived of success, all the fruits it obtained were deceitful.
But now, after the non-deceitful yoga of the righteous man, the non-deceitful
fruit action has also become non-deceitful, and there is definitely a non-
deceitful fruit velocity due to the grace of the supremely merciful righteous
man. That is, the attainment of connected fruit occurs. Connected fruit is that
which is connected with another successful fruit, in which the connection of the
fruit continues - it does not break. Connected fruit attainment is that in which
the fruit is not scattered or disorganized, but is connected in a chain, leading
in the direction of one form goal, a fruit that is conducive to liberation.
Thus, the soul progresses further and further in the direction of the form goal,
and comes closer to the form, due to the connection of the virtuous, which is
increasingly higher from one to the next. This series of form-conducive,
unbroken fruit tradition is called connected fruit or non-deceitful fruit. (See
Pu. 398, "Shri Jine Sahasragame Kriyaao" etc.) Figure 21 Connected Liberation-
Conducive Fruit 0-0-0-0-0-0-> Liberation. This connected fruit attainment and
the types of good advice, etc., are due to the service of the righteous man - by
"dwelling near his feet", by worship, by "Upanishad", by listening to the nectar
of true words from his mouth, one attains supreme benefit, and this results in
the recipient being worthy of good advice. Therefore, the fruit of all actions
performed in accordance with the good advice of the righteous man, which are
solitary and form-oriented, is also non-deceitful. Because the advice of the
self-realized, dispassionate righteous man, who is established in form, is
always directed towards the form goal. The righteous man's advice is to perform
actions in the way that the attainment of yoga, which is the pure nature of the
self, occurs. The advice of the righteous man, who has attained the form, is
true, the true form is everywhere, so every action performed with the true form
in mind is also connected with the form, and therefore bears non-deceitful
fruit. (See Pu. 161, "Jivne Gyanee Purushnu"

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (740) gadaSTisamuccaya A uparathI spaSTa samajAze ke puruSanI oLakhANa
pahelAMnA jIvane je je phaLa thatA hatA, te badhA vaMcaka hatA-chetaranArA hatA;
kAraNa ke svarUpa lakSya vinA A jIve je je anaMta kriyA karI, tenA tene phaLa te
tene aneka maLyA, paNa vaMcaka phaLa aneka te saMsAratyathI heI saMsAra
paribhramaNarUpa hatA. (juo pu. 161, "eka kahe sAdhiye" I. ) devAdi gatirUpa
Idhara-udhara anekAneka phaLa tene maLyA, paNa te chUTAchavAyA-vizRMkhala hatA,
eka sAdhya lakSya pratye ja dorI janArA kaDIbaMdha-zRMkhalAbaddha hatA. athavA
tethI je phaLaprApti thatI hatI, te svarUpasiddhirUpa eka mekSaphaLathI vimukha
dizAmAM hatI, eTale te jIva svarUpasiddhithI dUra ne dUra rahetuM hatuM, ane Ama
te saphaLathI vaMcita rahetuM hovAthI tene prApta badhA phaLa vaMcaka ja thatA
hatA. paNa have satparuSane avaMcaka yoga thayA pachI avaMcaka phaLa kriyA paNa
avaMcaka thaye, te parama kRpALu satparuSanA kRpA-prasAdathakI ja eka sAnubaMdha
avazya avaMcaka phalana vega hoya che. arthAt sAnubaMdha phalanI prApti hoya
che. eka saphaLa bIjA salphaLanI sAthe jemAM saMkaLAyeluM hoya che, jemAM
phaLane anubaMdha cAlu rahe che-truTI jato nathI, te sAnubaMdha phalaprApti che.
jemAM phala chUTuM chavAyuM-vizrRMkhala nathI hotuM, paNa aMkoDAbaMdha-
ekavRMkhalAbaddha hoya che, te eka svarUpalakSyanI dizAmAM derI jatuM eka
mokSapratyayI phaLa te sAnubaMdha phaLa che. Ama eka ekathI uttarottara
caDhIyAtA puNyAnubaMdhI puNyanA anubaMdhathI jIva svarUpalakSyanI dizAmAM AgaLa
ne AgaLa pragati karate jAya che, ne svarUpanI nikaTa Avate jAya che. A svarUpa
pratyayI eka zreNIrUpa je akhaMDa phaLaparaMparA tenuM nAma ja sAnubaMdha phaLa
athavA phelAvaMcaka che. (juo pu. 398, "zrI jine sahastragame kriyAo" I. ) AkRti
21 sAnubaMdha mokSapratyayI phala 0-0-0-0-0-0-> mokSa. A sAnubaMdha phalaprApti
tathA prakAranA sadupadezAdithI hoya che, kAraNa ke satapuruSanA
caraNasevanathI-temanA "padakaja nikaTa nivAsa"thI, upAsanathI, "upaniSad' thI
temanA zrImukhe satavacanAmRta zravaNane parama lAbha prApta thAya che, ane
sadupadezane te tathArUpa yogyatAvALA te pAtra chavane pariName che. eTale te
sahuprabhAva ruSanA sadupadezAnusAra karavAmAM AvatI ekAMta svarUpalakSI samasta
kriyAnuM phaLa paNa avaMcaka hoya che. kAraNa ke svarUpasthita AtmajJAnI
vItarAga sapuruSane upadeza sadA mukhya evA svarUpa sAdhyane anulakSIne ja hoya
che. zuddha AtmasvabhAvarUpa yoganI siddhi che je prakAre thAya che te prakAra
AcaravAno temane pragaTa saupadeza hoya che. sasvarUpaprApta sapuruSane upadeza
sat ja hoya, sata svarUpa ja badhe, eTale satasvarUpane anulakSIne thatI
pratyeka kriyA paNa svarUpanusaMdhAnavALI hovAthI avaMcaka phalavatI ja hoya
che. (juo pu. 161, "jIvane jJAnI puruSanuM

Page #817 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Conclusion: The offering (yāga) made to the Sadguru is avacchaka (unwavering) in
three ways (dravya-bhāva-thi) (741)  "The recognition (ī) and the fruit of this
connection, which is called fruit attainment, is also only in the subject of
dharma-siddhi, not in any other subject. Because, the satpurusha (righteous
person) does not desire any other fruit except dharma-siddhi. As much as
possible, the pure nature of the soul should be revealed, the soul should be
established in its own nature, and the soul should attain the state of being one
with its own nature, that is what they constantly desire, yearn for, and pray to
the Lord. (See page 494, "Shri Simandhar Jinavar" etc.) The satpurusha never
desires the fruit of Indra-chakravarti etc., which are worldly positions, but
due to the influence of the dharma-ratna (jewel of dharma), which is like the
incomparable Chintamani (wish-fulfilling gem), it is not difficult to attain
them. The attainment of these worldly positions is also a consequence of the
attainment of the yāga-ratna (jewel of offering), but it is like a shadow that
follows the substance. The satpurusha does not delight in such consequential
fruits, and therefore, they do not get lost in them and miss the main goal of
their own nature. Because, just as an animal desires a shadow, a human being
desires a worldly position. Similarly, only a worldly person desires the
consequential fruits that come along with the main goal, but a learned saint
does not get distracted by them; they are like a wise merchant who never forgets
the main goal of their soul, which is the main goal of their soul.  Thus, this
avacchaka-tripuți (three-fold unwavering) is truly comparable to the action of
an arrow hitting its target; it has been explained here as much as possible.
(See pages 158 to 164). From all this, it is concluded that the yoga (union) of
the satpurusha with their own nature is avacchaka, and the actions of veneration
etc. towards the satpurusha, who is the goal of their own nature, and their
fruit are also avacchaka; and if the yoga is not avacchaka, then the actions of
veneration etc. towards the goal of their own nature, and their fruit are also
not avacchaka. From this, it will be clear that if the yoga is not truly
avacchaka, then everything becomes unsteady. And this yoga is dependent on the
Sadguru, the satpurusha, so if the yoga is not truly avacchaka due to the
darshan (vision) of the Sadguru, the true person, then the action and its fruit
also become unsteady. Thus, without the shelter of the feet of the saint, all
the means of yoga, actions etc., become unsuccessful, become self-deceiving, and
prove to be deceivers and exploiters of the soul. If one takes shelter of the
true satpurusha, the bhavagya bhavasadhu (one who is worthy of devotion), then
only will the yāga be avacchaka, the action be avacchaka, and the fruit be
avacchaka. That is why the great sage, the author of the scriptures, has
emphasized the words "siddhi" and "sadhunashritya" here. And thus, if one takes
shelter of the Sadguru, and performs the yāga, which is the connection with the
goal of one's own nature, and performs actions that are in accordance with that
connection, and receives the fruit that is in accordance with that connection,
then all three are avacchaka - the yāga is avacchaka, the action is avacchaka,
and the fruit is avacchaka. (See page 164, "From the beginning of time..." etc.)
The yāga made to the Sadguru is avacchaka."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 upasaMhAra : phalAva caka: sadguru yAge ava"catrayI (dravya-bhAvathI ) (741) "
eLakhANu ' i.) ane A je sAnubaMdha phala prApti kahI, te paNa dharmasiddhi
viSayamAM ja saMtAne saMmata che,-nahi. ke anya viSayamAM. kAraNake satpuruSo
kevaLa dhasiddhi' sivAya bIjA koI phaLane icchatA ja nathI. jema bane tema
AtmAnA zuddha svabhAvadhama pragaTe, AtmA svabhAva dhadmAM Ave, nija svabhAva
sAthe ceAgarUpa dhama'nI siddhi thAya, ema ja te niraMtara icche che-jha Mkhe
che, ane prabhu pAse prAthe che. (jue pR. 494, * zrI sIma`dhara jinavara' i. )
khAkI iMdra-cakravatI Adi padavIrUpa phaLane te niSkAma saMtajanA kadI IcchatA
ja nathI, chatAM aciMtya ciMtAmaNi samA dharmaratnanA prabhAvathI te prApta
thavA kAMi durlabha nathI. yAgarUpa dharatnanI siddhithI tenI AnuSa`gika prApti
paNa hAya che, paNa te te jAranI pAchaLa sAMThA hAya ja tenA jevI che. satpuruSA
kAMi tevA AnuSaM gika phaLamAM rAcatA nathI, ane tethI bhALavAI jaI mULa
svarUpalakSyane cUkatA nathI, kAraNa ke pazu heAya te sAMThA-kaDakha icche te
manuSyatA jAra ja grahaNa kare. tema sAMThA jevA AnuSa gika-sAthe sAthe thatA
phaLane pazu jevA khAlajIva ja Icche, paNa pa'Dita saMtajana tethI phAsalAya
nahi; te tA pAkA vANIA ' jevA svACpaTu hAI AtmArUpa mukhya mULa muddAne kadI
bhUle nahi! Ama A avacakatripuTIne bANunI lakSyakriyAnI upamA kharAkhara ghaTe
che; te atra yathAsaMbhava ghaTAvI che. (jue pR. 158 thI 164). A sava parathI e
pA kulita thAya che ke satpuruSanA svarUpadana yeAgathI yeAga avaMcaka hAya, te
svarUpa lakSyavALI satpuruSa pratyenI vaMdanAdi kriyA ane tenu phUla paNa
avaMcaka heAya; ane svarUpadarzanayuga vinA jo cega vAMcaka hoya, te svarUpa
lakSya vagaranI vaMdanAdi kriyA ane tenu phaLa paNu vAMcaka hAya. A uparathI
spaSTa samajAze ke eka ceAga ja kharAkhara na hAya teA badhI mAcha khagaDI jAya
che. ane A ceAga paNa sadguru satpuruSane AzrayIne che, eTale sAdhu sAcA
puruSane-sadgurune svarUpadazanathI thate ceAga ' kharAkhara na ane, tA kriyAnA
ne phaLane ghANu paNu bagaDI jAya che. Ama sAMtacaraNanA AzrayayeAga vinA
samasta cAgasAdhana kriyAdi niSphaLa gayA che, AtmavaMcaka banyA che, jIvane
ThaganArA-khetaranArA pUravAra thayA che. sAcA satpuruSane-bhAvayegI
bhAvasAdhune Azraya karavAmAM Ave, tA ja avAMcaka yAga, avacaka kriyA ne
avaMcaka phaLa thAya. eTalA mATe ja atre mahAtmA zAstrakAra maharSi e'saddhi: '
'sAdhUnazritya' e zabdo para khAsa bhAra mUkayeA che. ane Ama sadgurunA
avalaMbane eka ja svarUpalakSyanA anusa dhAna-joDANurUpa yAga ane, tenA ja
anusaMdhAnarUpa kriyA karavAmAM Ave, ane tenA ja sAnukha'dha sa dhAnarUpa eka
mAkSapratyayI phaLa maLe, te e traNe avacaka che,-cAgAva'caka kriyAva'caka ne
lAva caka che. (juo pR. 164, 'ana ta kALathI AthaDaye ' I. ) sadguru yAge
avacake yI

Page #818 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(742) “The virtuous Sadhu, having attained devotion… the friend, the object of
devotion is unwavering… the friend, the action is unwavering… the friend, the
result is unwavering… the friend.” Shri Aanghanji further explains that the
attainment of this threefold unwaveringness occurs in two ways: through matter
and through feeling. Through matter, it means that the external, material aspect
of the true, virtuous Sadhu, the Bhavasadhu, is characterized by subtle
virtuousness and non-duality. This is the unwaveringness through matter. The
action towards such a virtuous Sadhu, such as bowing down, etc., is the
unwaveringness through action. And the fruit obtained through such material
action towards such a virtuous Sadhu is the unwaveringness through result. These
three unwaveringnesses through matter, which are attained by taking refuge in,
honoring, and observing the true virtuous Sadhu, are also beneficial to the
soul, because they become the cause of the threefold unwaveringness through
feeling. Through feeling, it means that the inner, subtle aspect of the true
virtuous Sadhu, the Bhavasadhu, is characterized by subtle virtuousness and non-
duality. This is the unwaveringness through feeling. The feeling of devotion,
bowing down, etc., towards such a virtuous Sadhu is the unwaveringness through
action. And the feeling of Dharma Siddhi, the attainment of liberation, obtained
from such a virtuous Sadhu is the unwaveringness through result. Alternatively,
the soul's attainment of its true form through the teachings of the Sadguru and
the good conduct of the soul is the unwaveringness through action. Then, the
action of the soul in accordance with its true form is the unwaveringness
through action, and the attainment of the true form, the attainment of self-
realization, is the unwaveringness through result. Thus, whoever attains the
threefold unwaveringness through matter or through feeling is eligible for this
practice of devotion and effort. However, the feeling is more important. In both
these ways, the main point is that this threefold unwaveringness should be
attained through taking refuge in the virtuous Sadhu, the true, genuine
Bhavasadhu, by honoring and taking refuge in him. What more? The essence of the
matter is that the recognition of the virtuous Sadhu's true form is the
unwaveringness through object. The action of bowing down, etc., towards the
virtuous Sadhu, recognizing him as the virtuous Sadhu, is the unwaveringness
through action. And the fruit of Dharma Siddhi, the attainment of liberation,
obtained from the virtuous Sadhu is the unwaveringness through result.
Alternatively, recognizing the true form is the unwaveringness through object,
practicing the true form is the unwaveringness through action, and attaining the
true form is the unwaveringness through result. The threefold unwaveringness
through matter and feeling The collection of yogic perspectives E Thus, the
nature of this is explained by the author of the Prakrutiyojan: “Even for those
who are dull-witted, who are not yogis, there is benefit from hearing, from
being free from bias, etc., from this collection of yogic perspectives.” (222)
Commentary: “Hayoginaam” – those who are not yogis, “kulaadiyoginaam” – those
who are not yogis, etc., “asmaan” – from this, “matto’ashi” – even more than me,
“gadhimataam” – those who are dull-witted, “shravanat” – from hearing,
“pakshapaataat” – from bias, “shubhechchhaa” – from good wishes, “aadin” – etc.,
“leshathi” – slightly, “upakaara” – benefit, “chhe” – is, “tathaprakaare” – in
this way, “khijapushti” – by strengthening the mind, “vade” – by means of,
“karine” – by doing.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (742) " nimA~la sAdhu bhagati lahI....sakhI yAga avaMcaka hAya....sakhI
kiriyAva'caka tima sahI....sakhI. kula ava'caka joya....sakhI" zrI AnaghanajI
vaLI A avacakatrayanI prApti e prakAre ghaTe che-dravyathI ane bhAvathI.
dravyathI eTale sAcA satpuruSa-bhAvasAdhunuM bAhyathI-dravyathI skUla
guNavaMtapaNuM tathA'na thavuM te dravyathI ceAgAva'caka che; tevA satpuruSA
pratye dravyathI vadhanAdi kriyA te dravyathI kriyAvaMcaka che; ane tevA
satpuruSA pratyenI te dravya kriyAthI prApta thatu phaLa te dravyathI
phalAvacaka che. sAcA satpuruSane AzrInebhAvayeAgIne avalakhIne thatA A dravya
avaMcakatraya paNa jIvane upakArI thAya che, kAraNa ke te bhAva ava`cakatrayInA
kAraNarUpa thai paDe che. bhAvathI-sAcA satpuruSanuM, bhAvasAdhunuM satpuruSa
svarUpe aMtathI--bhAvathI sUkSma guNava'tapaNe tathAdana thavu te bhAvathI
ceAgAvacaka che. ane tevA satpuruSA pratye je bhAva vaMdanAdi kriyA te bhAvathI
kriyAvaMcaka che. ane tevA satpuruSA thakI je bhAva dhama lisiddhi thavI te
bhAvathI phalAva'caka che athavA sadgurunA saupadezajanma sadbAdha thakI jIvane
svarUpa lakSyanA yoga thavA te bhAvathI yeAgAvacaka, pachI te svarUpalakSyane
anulakSI svarUpasAdhaka kriyA te bhAvathI kriyAva'caka ane svarUpalakSyanI
siddhi thavI-Atmasiddhi pAmavI te bhAvathI phelAva'caka, Ama dravyathI ke
bhAvathI avaMcakatrayanI prApti jene hAya, te koi paNa mumukSu yAgI A yAga
prayAganA adhikArI che ema tAtpaya che. paNa temAMye mukhyatA te bhAvanI ja che.
A banne prakAramAM paNa mukhya mahatvanA muddo eTalA ja che ke A ava'cakatraya
satpuruSa AzrI hAvA joie, sAcA sata-kharekharA bhAvasAdhu bhAvayAgIne AzrIne ja
hAvA joie. vadhAre zu? tApa rUpa sArAMza ke--satpuruSanuM tathAdana arthAt tenA
svarUpanI oLakhANa te ceAgAva'caka che. satpuruSane satpuruSa svarUpe eALakhI
tenA pratye praNAmAdi kriyA karAya te kriyAvaMcaka che. ane satpuruSa thakI
dharma siddhi khAkhatamAM prApta thatuM je sAnukha dha phala te phalAvacaka che.
athavA svarUpane oLakhavu. te ceAgAva'caka, svarUpane sAdhavuDa te kriyAva'caka,
ne svarUpane pAmavuM te phlAva'caka dravya-bhAva avacatrayI yogadRSTisamuccaya E
ema eenuM svarUpa kahI dekhADI prakRtayeAjana kahe che :--
kulAdiyoginAmasmAnmato'pi jaDadhImatAm  /  zravaNAtpakSapAtAderupakAre 'sti
zvataH || 222  //  vRtti--hayoginAm-ukta lakSaNatA kulayogI Adita, asmA-A thakI,
A yogadRSTisamuccaya thakI, matto'Si-mhArA karatAM paNu,g2ahImatAm--jaDabuddhi
evA bIjAene zuM ? teA ke tratraLAt zravaNacakI, pakSapAta re:-pakSapAta,
zubhecchA Adine lIdhe, 31 'sti cherAta:lezathI upakAra che,tathAprakAre
khIjapuSTi vaDe karIne.

Page #819 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Conclusion: This text may benefit even those like Kulgi, who are dull-witted,
(743) Kulgi and others, even those with dull intellect,  By listening, they may
benefit even slightly from the bias, etc., 222. Meaning - This collection of
Gadashtti, even those with dull intellect like Kulgi, etc., who are even more
dull than me, by listening to this, they may benefit even slightly from the
bias, etc., that arises. Discussion: Those like Kulgi, etc., who have the above
mentioned characteristics, who are even more dull than me, even they may benefit
slightly from this collection of Gadashtti, due to the bias, good wishes, etc.,
that arise from listening to this, and due to the strengthening of the second,
etc. Compassion, peace, equality, forgiveness,  Truth, renunciation, detachment;
May be in the pot of the seeker, these are always awake. - Shri Atmasiddhi. As
mentioned above, - those who are born in the Gikul and have attained the
Gidharma from birth, and others who are also followers of the Gidharma by
nature, by substance and by feeling, are the Kulgis. These great Kulgis and the
Pravritchakras, due to the lack of attachment, are full of diseases in the
world, due to the influence of Dharma, they are dear to the Guru, Dev, and Dwij,
and due to the lack of Kilsht and sin, they are compassionate by nature, due to
the good deeds, they are humble and polite, due to the understanding of the
knots, they are knowledgeable and understand the truth, and due to their
character, they are self-controlled. And the Pravritchakras are the ones who
take refuge in the first two types of Yama - Ichchhayam and Pravrittiyam, and
the other two Yamas - Sthiraayam and Siddhiyam, they are always engaged in
virtuous activities. And therefore, they are endowed with eight virtues like
Shushrusha, etc. And due to the attainment of the Awanchak, they have benefited
from the other two Awanchaks, i.e., due to the attainment of the Yegavanchak,
they have also attained the Kriyavanchak and Falavanchak. - These great Kulgis
and Pravritchakras are the ones who are entitled to this great fourfold
experiment, says the Gavid. Meaning - This Yugprayog is suitable for those who
are worthy, those who have these characteristics, those who are endowed with
these excellent qualities, those who are true seekers, those who are true souls,
that is the meaning here. And addressing these special qualified Megis, the
great Yegis, the great scholar, the Maharshi says - Among these Kulgis and
Pravritchakras,

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 upasaMhAra : kulagI Adine A graMthathI kaIka upakAra (743) kulagI Adikane,
mujathIye jaDamatidhAra; zravaNathI pakSapAtAdithI, AthI leza upAra, 222. artha
- A gadaSTisamuccaya thakI, mhArA karatAM paNa jaDabuddhi evA kulagI Adine,
zravaNa vaDe karIne pakSapAta Adine lIdhe, lezathI upakAra che. vivecana ukta
lakSaNavALA kulagI Adi ke je mahArA karatAM paNa jaDabuddhi hoya tevA bIjAone, A
cagadaSTisamuccaya graMthathakI, AnA zravaNathI upajatA pakSapAta-zubhecchA
Adine lIdhe bIjapuSTi AdivaDe karIne lezathI upakAra che. dayA zAMti samatA
kSamA, satya tyAga vairAgya; hoya mumukSu ghaTa viSe, eha sadAya sujAgya."--zrI
Atmasiddhi. uparamAM kahyuM tema,-je gikulamAM janmyA che ane janmathI ja
gidharmane pAmelA che, tathA bIjAo paNa je prakRtie karIne dravyathI ane
bhAvathI gidharmane anugata che-anusaranArA "anuyAyI" che, te kulagIo che. A
mahAnubhAva kuyogI ne kulagIo tathA prakAre grahanA abhAvane lIdhe jagatamAM
sarvatra aDhaSI pravRttacaka rogI hoya che, dharmaprabhAvane lIdhe guru-deva-
dvija teone priya hoya che, tathA kilaSTa pApanA abhAvane lIdhe teo prakRtithI-
svabhAvathI dayALu hoya che, puNyAnubaMdhI puNyane lIdhe vinIta-vinayavAna hoya
che, graMthibheda vaDe karIne bodhavaMta-tatvasaMmajaNavALA hoya che, ane
cAritrabhAve karIne teMdriya-jiteMdriya hoya che. ane pravRttacaka gIo
prathamanA be prakAranA yama-IcchAyama ane pravRttiyamano samyaka prakAre Azraya
karanArA hoya che, ane bAkInA be yama-sthirayama ane siddhiyamanA atyaMta athI-
abhilASI hAI sadA temAM sadupAya pravRtti karanArA hoya che, ane tethI karIne
zuzraSA Adi ATha guNathI yukta evA hoya che. tathA Adha avaMcaka ganI prAptithI
tenAthI anya evA be avaMcakane lAbha pAmelA hoya che, arthAt yegAvaMcakanI
prAptine lIdhe kriyAvaMcaka ne phalAvaMcaka paNa pAmelA hoya che.-AvA A mahAtmA
kulagIo ane pravRttacakra gIo A mahAn coga prayoganA adhikArIo che ema gavido
vade che. arthAt A yugaprayoga yogya je "jegijane hoya te AvA lakSaNavaMtA-AvA
uttama guNasaMpanna avazya hoya, sAcA-mumukSuo, sAcA AtmAthIo hoya, ema atra
tAtparya che. ane AvA viziSTa adhikArI megIone uddezIne A parama
paropakAraparAyaNa mahAyegI zAstrakAra maharSi kahe che ke- A kulagI-
pravRttacaka yegIomAM

Page #820 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(744) This "Gadashti Laghuta Darshan Samuchchay" text will be of some benefit
even to those who are more dull-witted than I am. The great scholar Mahatma,
through this word, has shown in a very simple way the extreme humility of the
father, and has also suggested who this text will be particularly beneficial to.
Because in the phrase "even more dull-witted than I am," the word "even"
acknowledges his own dull-wittedness in a humble way. So I am indeed dull-
witted, but I hope that this will be of some benefit to those souls who are even
more dull-witted than I am. Because the development of intellect is in
proportion to the soul's क्षोपशम (kshaypashma), that is, the intellect's
sharpness and old-fashionedness is in proportion to the क्षपशम (kshaypashma) of
the karma-covering. So even though I am one with a weak क्षोपशम (kshaypashma), I
hope that this work will be of some benefit to those who are even weaker in
क्षयपक्षम (kshaypashma) than I am, those who are our soul-relatives. Here, the
word "a little" is also indicative of humility. Because this text is not just a
little beneficial to the seeker, it is supremely beneficial, yet it is said to
be "a little" beneficial. Moreover, there is also a deeper meaning to calling
the father "dull-witted." Because whatever क्षयोपशम (kshaypashma) there is, it
is weak in energy and strength compared to the क्षायिक (kshaayik) state, and is
dull-witted. So even those who have the most excellent क्षयोपशम (kshaypashma)
are considered dull-witted and weak compared to the क्षायिक (kshaayik) state.
Therefore, it is not appropriate to help even those with the most क्षयपक्षम
(kshaypashma), and so the author, the great sage, says that even though I have a
weak क्षयपक्षम (kshaypashma), I am dull-witted, yet those who have a weaker
क्षयपक्षम (kshaypashma) than I do will be able to benefit from this. Because it
is the way of things that those with a weaker क्षयपक्षम (kshaypashma) learn from
those with a stronger क्षयपक्षम (kshaypashma), just as those who are less
learned can learn from those who are more learned. (See page 94, "अपवीर્ય
ક્ષેપશમ અછે" (apveery kshaypashma ache) etc.) Thus, this great sage,
Haribhadracharya, who is truly dyed through and through with the color of
spirituality, has revealed his true greatness by expressing extreme humility.
Because, "Humility is where greatness resides, and greatness is where the Lord
is far away." Here, it is said that there will be some benefit, but what benefit
is it, and how will it happen? This is also explained here. It is like this: by
listening to this scripture, these great, worthy, and qualified seekers will
receive benefits such as partiality, good wishes, etc., and thus they will be
benefited in some way by being strengthened with the seed of the right path.
These great souls will listen to this scripture, and because of their natural
inclination towards virtue, they will develop partiality towards it, good wishes
will arise, devotion will flourish, they will gain knowledge of the true path,
and their desire to walk on that path will grow. Therefore, they will attain...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (744) yogadakTisamuccaya je hArA karatAM paNa jaDabuddhivALA hoya teone A
"gadaSTi laghutA darzana samuccaya' graMtha thakI lezathI-kaMIka upakAra
saMbhave che. A zabda uparathI mahAnubhAva zAstrakAra mahAtmAe pitAnI atyaMta
laghutA saraLabhAve darzAvavA sAthe, kene kene A graMtha khAsa upakArI thaI
paDaze, tenuM sUcana karyuM che. kAraNake "hArAthI paNa jaDabuddhivALA" e
padamAM "paNa" zabdathI potAnA paNa jaDabuddhipaNAne laghutvabhAve svIkAra karyo
che. eTale huM te jaDabuddhi-maMdamati chuM ja, paNa mahArA karatAM paNa je
vadhAre jaDabuddhivALA-maMdamati AtmAo hoya, tene AthI kaMIka upakAra thaze ema
Azaya che. kAraNake matine vikAsa AtmAnA kSopazama pramANe hoya che, arthAt
karmAvaraNanA kSapazama pramANe buddhinI taratamAtA-jUnAdhikatA hoya che. eTale
huM je ke maMda thayopazamavALe chuM, chatAM mahArA karatAM paNa maMda
kSayapakSamavALA je cho hoya, je AtmabaMdhuo hoya, teone A hArI kRti thakI
kaMIka AtmalAbha tha saMbhave che. atre "lezathI"--kaMIka (a little) e zabda
paNa laghutvabhAvane sUcaka che. kAraNake A graMtha mumukSune kAMI jevo te
upakArI nathI, parama upakArI che, chatAM ema kahyuM che. vaLI atre pitAne paNa
"jaDabuddhi" kahyA tenuM pAramArthika kAraNa paNa che. kAraNake je je
kSayopazamabhAva che te te kSAyika bhAvanI apekSAe alpa vIrya chemaMdazaktivALA
che, jaDabuddhirUpa che. eTale kaI game tevA utkRSTa kSayopazamavaMta hoya te
paNa kSAyikabhAvanI apekSAe te maMdamati-alpamati ja gaNAya. eTale game tevA -
pazamane paNa mada karavA yogya nathI, e nyAye graMthakAra maharSi kahe che ke-
hAro kSayepazama bhale game te hoya, paNa huM te jaDamati chuM, tathApi hAra
karatAM alpa kSayapazamI che je haze, te AthI kaMIka lAbha uThAvI zakaze. kAraNa
ke adhika kSapazamavaMta pAsethI alpatara kSayopazamavaMtane zIkhavAnuM
jANavAnuM maLe e rIti che;-jema vadhAre bhaNelA pAsethI ochuM bhaNele zIkhI-jANI
zake tema. (juo pR. 94 "apavIrya kSepazama ache" I.) Ama sAcA daDha
adhyAtmaraMgathI hADohADa raMgAyelA A mahAnubhAva maharSi haribhadrAcAryajIe
atyaMta atyaMta saraLabhAve AtmalaghutA nivedana karI, potAnI kharekharI mahattA
pragaTa karI che. kAraNa ke-laghutA meM prabhutA vase, prabhutA se prabhu dUra."
ahIM je kaMIka upakAra che ema kahyuM, te upakAra karyo? ane kevI rIte thaze?
tene paNa atra khulAso batAvyuM che. te A prakAre-A sazAstranA zravaNa thakI te
mahAnubhAva supAtra adhikArI megIone atre pakSapAta-zubhecchA Adi upakAra kevI
upajaze, ane tethI karIne teone yathAsaMbhava bIja puSTi vaDe karIne rIte ?
kaMIka upakAra thaze. te mahAtmA gIjane A satazAstra sAMbhaLaze, eTale te
guNagrAhI mahAjanene enA pratye kudaratI pramedabhAva upajavAthI pakSapAta
thaze, zubhecchA upajaze, bhaktibhAva phuraze, yathArtha egamArganuM jJAna
thaze, ane te gamArge pravartAvAnI abhilASA vRddhi pAmaze. eTale teone prApta

Page #821 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Preface: The Author's Humility, How Can There Be Benefit? (745)  "The
confirmation of the existing vows will be achieved, the pure devotion will
blossom as a means, and the tree of sacrificial fulfillment will flourish and
bear the fruit of liberation, the supreme nectar. Thus, even these ascetics will
benefit from this scripture. Moreover, the word 'something' is used to indicate
the secondary nature of the benefit to others. Because the author's opinion is
that others will benefit from this 'something', but the main benefit, the main
self-benefit, is mine. This scripture, as I said before, is composed to remind
the soul, so the main purpose of this scripture is to benefit my own soul, to
achieve my own soul's liberation. It is secondary that other ascetic souls may
benefit from this scripture. They are most worthy to receive it! They too may
achieve their desired self-benefit from this! They are all invited to do so with
utmost love! I have composed this to partake in the supreme nectar of
liberation, and those who are aware, may dive deep and partake in this supreme
nectar of sacrifice and be satisfied! And experience the realization of the
supreme soul!"  ##  Addressing the Doubt of Bias To dispel the doubt that
benefit can only arise from bias, it is said:  "The essence of bias and action
devoid of emotion, these two should be understood as distinct, like the sun and
the moon." (223)  Meaning: The essence of bias and action devoid of emotion,
their distinction should be understood like the sun and the moon.  ##
Commentary Pure emotion and empty action, the difference between them is vast;
Like the blazing sun and the moon, their brilliance is distinct. - Shri Cha. Sa.
8-6.  Here, the doubt is dispelled that benefit can only arise from bias. The
author has stated the intention of benefiting others. 'Tattvik' means that which
is transcendental, 'Tattvik Pakshapat' means transcendental bias, 'Bhavashoonya'
means action devoid of emotion. The distinction between these two should be
understood like the sun and the moon, which are vastly different.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 upasa"hAra: graMthakartAnu' laghutAdarzIna, upakAra kevI rIte ? (745) 6 "
thayelA ceAgakhIjanI puSTi thaze, temAM sadvega sAdhanarUpa akurA phUTaze ane
yAgasiddhirUpa vRkSa phAlIphUlIne meAkSarUpa parama amRta phaLa Apaze. Ama A
jogIjanAne paNa A zAstra thakI AtmalAbharUpa kaMika upakAra lezathI thavA
sabhave che. vaLI lezathI '-kaMika ema kahyuM che, te anya pratyenA upakAranu
gauNapaNuM sUcavavA mATe che. kAraNake graMthakartAne abhiprAya e che ke-bIjAone
te AthI lezathI-kaika ja upakAra thavA sabhave che, paNu A graM thagraMthanathI
mukhya upakAra-mukhya AtmalAbha te mane ja che. A graMtha te meM uparamAM kahyuM
hatuM tema AtmAnusmRtine artha' racyA che eTale A graMthanuM mukhya prayeAjana
teA mhArA peAtAnA AtmAneA upakAra che-mhArA peAtAnA AtmAnI siddhi che. khAkI
gauNapaNe bIjA jogI jIvAne A graMtharacanAthI kaMi AnuSaMgika lAbha thatA hAya
tA bhale thAo ! te levAne tee parama caiAgya che ! tee paNa AnAthI yatheccha
AtmalAbha bhale UDAvA! parama premathI Ama karavAnuM temane sarvane AmaMtraNa
che! parama ceAgAmRtanuM AkaDapAna karavA mATe meM je A racanA karI che, temAM
avagAhana karI-UMDA utarI te paNa bhale A parama yAgAmRtanuM pAna karI tRpta
thAe ! ane parama AtmAna'darasanA anubhava karI ! & pakSapAta mAtra thakI ze|
upakAra ? evI AzaMkA dUra karavA mATe kahe che-- tAttvikaH pakSapAtaca
bhAvazUnyA ca yA kriyA  /  anayorantaraM jJeyaM bhAnukhadyotayoriva  //  223  //
pakSapAta tAttvika ane, kriyA bhAvahIna tema; enuM aMtara jANavuM, sUraja
khajumA jema. 223 artha :--tAttvika pakSapAta ane bhAvazUnya je kriyA,-e enu
aMtara sUrya -khadyotanI peThe jANavuM. vivecana zuddha bhAva ne sUnI kariyA,
kheDumAM aMtara keteAjI; jhaLahaLatA sUraja ne khajue, tAsa tejamAM tetAjI. '"--
zrI cA. sa. 8-6. uparamAM atre pakSapAta mAtrathI paNa kema banI zake ? evI
AzaMkA ahIM dUra bIjAone upakAra thavAnI sabhAvanA kahI, te karI che. tAttvika
eTale ke je pAramArthika vRtti:-tAttvi: pakSapAta:-tAvika pakSapAta,
pAramArthika pakSapAta, mAvAnyA 1 cA yiA-ane bhAvazUnya evI je kriyA, anayontara
jJeyaM-A benuM aMtara jANavuM. kAnI jema ? te ke-mAnulaghotayoyisUrya' ane
khadyotanI jevuM mahad aMtara ema atha' che. 94

Page #822 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(746) Yogadristi Samuccaya is biased, and action without emotion is neutral. The
difference between these two is so vast that it can be compared to the distance
between the sun and a firefly. The blazing sun and the flickering fireflies, the
distance between these two lights is the same as the distance between the biased
and the neutral action. The biased is like the sunlight, and the neutral action
is like the firefly light. So the biased is much greater.  Someone might doubt
that what benefit is there in just having bias towards this subject? The benefit
comes from action, how can it come from just a biased interest? The answer to
this is given in the above example. This Ganasastra, the biased towards the
subject, the philosophical bias, the true emotional bias, the benefit from this
is not a small matter, because such bias does not arise without inner interest
and love, it does not arise without inner emotion. So the value of this
emotional bias arising from inner interest and emotion is as much as we can
estimate, and compared to the infinite material action that we do without
emotion, it is the extremely small value of that emotionless action. If one
person has true emotion and only bias towards this subject, and does not do any
Yogasadhana action, and another person does infinite material action without
discrimination and emotion, the difference between these two is as much as the
distance between the sun and the firefly. Even the one who has only bias with
emotion is infinitely greater than the one who does infinite action without
emotion. The emotional bias is like the sun, and the emotionless action is like
the firefly. So how can these two be compared? Where is the mountain, where is
the mustard seed? Where is the ocean, where is the drop? Where is the sun, where
is the firefly?  “Those who are engrossed in external action, have no
discrimination; The path of knowledge is forbidden, such action is inert.” Shri
Atmasiddhi “Mariya: Itijarjari Na Mavaacha” - Shri Kalyanumandhir Stotra.  And
the bias that is being talked about here is the philosophical bias.
Philosophical means understanding the ultimate truth, the ultimate truth, the
ultimate truth, the bias that arises naturally towards it, understanding the
ultimate truth, that is the philosophical bias. There is a lot of difference
between this philosophical bias and the non-philosophical bias, it is the
distance between heaven and earth, because the bias arising from the desire for
votes, the bias arising from the ego of the vote, that is non-philosophical. In
that, “mine is true”

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (746) yogadaSTisamuccaya pakSapAta che, ane je bhAvazUnya kriyA che,-A benI
vaccenuM aMtara eTaluM badhuM moTuM che ke tene sUrya-khadyotanA aMtaranI upamA
ApI zakAya. jhaLahaLato sUraja ane tagatagate khajUo-AgIo e baMne prakAza vacce
jeTaluM moTuM aMtara che, teTaluM aMtara tAttvika pakSapAta ane bhAvazUnya kriyA
e benI vacce che. tAvika pakSapAta sUryaprakAza same che, ane bhAvazUnya yiA
khadyota prakAza samI che. eTale tAtvika pakSapAtanI vAta moTI che. keIema zaMkA
kare ke A pega viSaya pratye pakSapAta mAtra upajavAthI ze upakAra thAya?
upakAra te kriyA pravRttithI thAya, mAtra rucirUpa pakSapAtathI zI rIte thAya?
tenuM nivAraNa atre ukta daSTAMtathI karyuM che. A gazAstra viSaya pratye tAvika
pakSa- tAtvika pakSapAta, pAramArthika pakSapAta, kharekharo bhAva pakSapAta
upaja pAtathI upakAra te paNa kAMI nAnIsUnI vAta nathI, kAraNa ke tathArUpa
pakSapAta aMtaraMga ruci-prema vinA upajatuM nathI, aMtaraMga bhAva vinA
upajatuM nathI. eTale aMtaraMga ruci-bhAvathI upajatA A bhAvapakSapAtanuM mUlya
jeTaluM AMkIe teTaluM ochuM che, enI sAthe ApaNe je bhAva vagaranI karavAmAM
AvatI anata dravya kriyAnI sarakhAmaNI karIe, te te bhAvazUnya kriyAnI ati ati
alapa kiMmata che. keI eka manuSya sAcA bhAvathI A yuga viSaya pratye mAtra
pakSapAta ja dharAvatuM hoya, ane kAMI yegasAdhaka kiyA na paNa karatA hoya ane
bIje kiyA jaDa manuSya aMtabheda vinAnI-bhAva vinAnI anaMta dravya kriyA karato
hoya,-te A baMnenI vaccenuM aMtara sUraja ne AgIAnA aMtara jeTaluM che. bhAvathI
pakSapAta mAtra dharAvanAra paNa, bhAvazUnya anaMta kriyA karanAra kriyAjaDa
karatAM anaMtagaNe mahAna che. bhAva pakSapAtI sUrya samo che, ane bhAvazUnya
kriyAjaDa khadyota same che. eTale A benI tulanA kema thaI zake ? kayAM meru,
kayAM sarasava? kayAM siMdhu, kayAM biMdu? kayAM sUrya, kayAM khadyota? "bAhya
kriyAmAM rAcatA, aMtabheda na kAMI; jJAnamArga niSedhatA, teha kriyA jaDa ahi."
zrI Atmasiddhi "mAriyA: itijarjari na mAvAcA "--zrI kalyANumaMdira stotra. ane
atre je pakSapAtanI vAta che, te tAtvika pakSapAtanI vAta che. tAtvika eTale
pAramArthika-paramArtha sat satya tatva samajIne-paramArtha samajIne tenA pratye
sahaja svabhAve upajate pakSapAta te tAvika pakSapAta che. A tAtvika
pakSapAtamAM ane atAtvika pakSapAtamAM ghaNe phera che, AkAza-pAtAlanuM aMtara
che, kAraNa ke matAgrahathI upajate pakSapAta-matanA mamatvathI upajate
pakSapAta te atAvika che. temAM mAruM te sAcuM"

Page #823 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Upas'har: The Inseparability of  Tattvik  Bias and Emotionless Action (747)
The essence of such a sentiment lies in the fact that the bias arising from the
true understanding of the true nature of the Self (Sat-swaroop) is Tattvik. In
this, the feeling of "this is mine" is paramount. In A-tattvik bias, opinion
takes precedence, while in Tattvik bias, 'Sat' (Truth) takes precedence.
A-tattvik bias is rooted in attachment to opinion, while Tattvik bias is rooted
in the understanding of Truth. This is the key difference between the two. Just
as A-tattvik bias is undesirable and harmful, Tattvik bias is desirable and
beneficial. This Tattvik bias is the one presented here, and it is the most
desirable because it arises from the inner interest, understanding, and feeling
towards the true object due to the love born from virtue. What a pure feeling-
based bias this is! In its presence, inert material action is insignificant,
like a firefly in front of the sun. From this, it is essential to understand
that the emphasis should be infinitely more on feeling than on external material
action. However, the compassionate saints, saddened by the opposite situation
prevalent among people, have lamented:  "Material action is the lifeblood, but
devoid of feeling, Even the teachers are like that, what will they do for the
new life?.... Chandranan" - Shri Devchandraji  And they say in the same vein:
"The brilliance of the firefly is small and perishable, The brilliance of the
sun is the opposite, this is the understanding of the wise." - 224  A: The
brilliance of the firefly is small and perishable, and the brilliance of the sun
is the opposite, this is the understanding of the wise, this is worthy of
contemplation.  **Discussion**  The luminous brilliance of the insect called
Khadyaut is small and perishable in nature. And the luminous brilliance of the
sun is the opposite, meaning it is vast and imperishable.  **Interpretation:**
The essence of the firefly, which is luminous, is small and perishable. The
brilliance of the sun is the opposite, meaning it is vast and imperishable. This
is the understanding of the wise, worthy of contemplation, based on the
authoritative bias, through action and other things, by the wise.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 upasa'hAra : tAttvika pakSapAta ane bhAvazUnya kriyAnuM ataraM (747) evI
bhAvanAnI mukhyatA hAya che. ane satsvarUpanA yathArtha grahaNathI--yathAtha
samajaNuthI upajatA pakSapAta te tAttvika che, temAM sAcuM te mAru'' evI
bhAvanAnI mukhyatA hAya che. atAttvika pakSapAtamAM matanu prAdhAnya che, tyAre
tAttvika pakSapAtamAM ' sat 'tuM prAdhAnya che. atAttvika pakSapAta
matAbhinivezarUpa che, tAttvika pakSapAta tattvapravezarUpa che. AvA mahatvanA
phera e be vacce che. eTale atAttvika pakSapAta jema aprazasta che, aniSTa che,
tema tAttvika pakSapAta prazasta che, ISTa che. A tAttvika pakSapAta ja atra
prastuta che, ane te guNAnurAgajanya premane lIdhe sat vastu pratyenI aMtaraMga
rucithI-pratItithI-- bhAvathI upajatA hAI parama prazasta che. A zuddha
bhAvarUpa pakSapAtanI vAta kaMi Ara che! tenI pAse bhAvavihIna jaDa dravya kriyA
kai gaNanAmAM nathI, sUrya pAse AgIA jevI tuccha che. A uparathI sAra bAdha e
levA yAgya che ke bAhya dravya kriyA upara je bhAra mUkavAmAM Ave che tenA
karatAM anaMtagaNe| bhAra bhAva * upara mUkavA joie. paNa leAkeAnI ghaNuM karI
ethI ulaTI ja sthiti dekhI kheda pAmelA karuNALu saMtujane pAkAra karI gayA che
ke:-- " dravya kriyAruci jIvaDA re, bhAva dhama rucihIna, upadezaka paNa tevA
re, zuM kare jIva navIna ?....caMdrAnana. "--zrI devaca'drajI Pin  ane tevA
prakAre kahe che-- khadyotakasya yattejastadalpaM ca vinAzi ca  /  viparItamidaM
bhAnoriti bhAvyamidaM budhaiH  //  224  //  khajuAnu' je teja che, alpa vinAzI
teha; viparIta A che sUryanuM, bhAvya kSudhAe eha. 224 a:--khadyotakanuM (
AgIAvu ) je teja che, te alpa ane vinAzI che; ane sUryanu' A teja ethI viparIta
che, ema A budheAe bhAgya che, bhAvavA yeAgya che. vivecana khadyota nAmanA
jaMtuvizeSanuM je prakAzAtmaka teja che, te svarUpathI alpa ane vinAzI che. ane
sUryanuM A prakAzAtmaka teja tethI viparIta che, arthAt aDu ane
vRtti:-srotadasya--khadyotanuM sattvavizeSNu, cattunaH--je teja-prakAzAtmaka
che, ta--te, zu ? to ke-atyaMta ravinAzi6-apa ane vinAzI che,-svarUpathI
vinImiTuM mAnoH--bhAnunu A viparIta che, eTale ke sUryanuM teja bahu ane avinAzI
che. rUtti--ema, evA bhAvanuM, mAnyamit A bhAgya che, bhAvavA yAgya che,
adhikRta pakSapAta thakI, A kriyAdika, yudhai:--budhAthI, tattvanItie karIne.

Page #824 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(748) Yoga-drishti-samuccaya It is imperishable. Such is the feeling. Through
this presented bias, these action-etc. wise ones are worthy of feeling through
tattva-niti. The example of the sun-firefly given above is clarified here:-
"There is a small creature named firefly, which is also called a glowworm, which
shines in the part of the night. Its luminous brilliance, in its form, is small
and perishable. It shines, flickers, and glows every now and then, in which it
itself is not really visible, it makes faint flashes for a moment, and then
disappears somewhere. But the luminous brilliance of the sun is the opposite.
The brilliance of the sun is great and imperishable. It shines brightly,
sparkles, in which the whole world substance is truly illuminated, it casts an
extraordinary brilliant and imperishable light, and thus it continuously shines
for a long time. This is a well-known example. Where is the sun? Where is the
firefly? From this example, the wise ones, the learned ones, the discerning
gentlemen, should consider the ultimate meaning through tattva-niti - they are
worthy of feeling. The future mechanical material action is like a firefly, its
brilliance is small and perishable; and the feeling-like tattvic bias is like
the sun, its brilliance is great and imperishable. The visible action shines,
flickers, and glows every now and then, like the firefly, it makes faint flashes
for a moment, in which its own form is not even visible, and it disappears
somewhere, its trace is not found. But the presented feeling, like the sun,
shines brightly, sparkles, in which its own self-form, what it is, is also
illuminated, the whole world form is illuminated, it casts an extraordinary
brilliant and imperishable knowledge-light; and thus it continuously shines, the
imperishable luminous feeling. Thus, in front of the infinite and imperishable
luminous sun, the firefly-like insect's faint glow appears as faint as it is;
similarly, in front of the infinite and imperishable luminous knowledge-light
spreading feeling, the whole material action cycle appears as small and
perishable; therefore, material action is not in any calculation compared to the
pure feeling, which is the tattvic bias. Etc. is worthy of feeling. Feeling:
Material action is like a firefly This The main people who mechanically perform
material action believe that our welfare will happen, but it is their delusion;
because Shri While performing action, Haribhadracharya Ji has

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (748) yogadRSTisamuccaya avinAzI che. evA bhAvanuM. A prastuta pakSapAta thakI
A kriyAdika budheAe tattvanItithI bhAvavA yeAgya che. uparamAM je sUrya-
adyotanuM dRSTAMta ApyuM tene ahIM spaSTa karyuM" che:-khadyota nAmanuM eka
nAnakaDu* jIvaDuM, ke jene AgIe paNa kahe che, te rAtrInA bhAgamAM camake che.
tenuM je prakAzarUpa teja che, te svarUpathI alpa-theDu' ane vinAzI Aya che.
AgIe ghaDI ghaDI camake che, tagatage che, jemAM te peAte paNa kharAkhara
dekhAtA nathI evA kSaNabhara maMdamaMda camakArA kare che, ane pAchA kyAMya
vilIna thaI jAya che. paNa sUryanuM prakAzamaya teja ethI viparIta-ulaTuM che.
sUryAMnu teja ghaNuM ane avinAzI hAya che. te ekasarakhA jhaLahaLATa kare che,
jhagajhage che,--jemAM samasta vizva padArtha kharAkhara prakAzita thAya che,
eve asAdhAraNu tejasvI ne avinAzI prakAza pAthare che, ane Ama akhaMDapaNe
dIrgha kALa sudhI te tejonidhi prakAzyA kare che. Ama A leAkaprasiddha dRSTAMta
che. kayAM sUrya ? kayAM khadyota ? A dRSTAMta uparathI budhajanAe, prAjJajanAe,
vivekI sajjanAe tattvanItithI paramArtha vicAravA ceAgya che-bhAvavA yeAgya che.
bhAviSeANI yaMtravat jaDapaNe karAtI dravya kriyA khadyota samI heAi, tenuM teja
alpa ane vinAzI che; ane bhAvarUpa tAttvika pakSapAta sUrya sameA hAI, tenuM
teja ahu ane avinAzI che. draSya kriyA AgIAnI jema ghaDI ghaDI camake che,
tagatage che, jhAMkhA prakAza kare che, jemAM peAtAne peAtAnu svarUpa paNa
dekhAtuM nathI evA kSaNika mada maMda camakAro kare che, ane kayAMya vilIna thaI
jAya che, eneA patto maLatA nathI. paNa prastuta bhAva tA sUryanI peThe
ekasarakhA asAdhAraNa jhaLahaLATa kare che--jhagajhage che, jemAM peAtAnuM
AtmasvarUpa te zuM paNa samasta vizvasvarUpa prakAzita thAya evA asAdhAraNa
tejasvI ne avinAzI jJAnaprakAza pAthare che; ane Ama akhaMDapaNe te avinAzI
tejonidhirUpa bhAva prakAzyA kare che. Ama anaMta ne avinAzI tejomaya sUryanI
samakSa alpa ne vinAzI tejanA camakArA karatuM AgIA jevuM jaMtunu jeTalu jhAMkhu
lAge che; teTaluM ja anaMta ne avinAzI tejomaya jJAnaprakAza pAtharatA bhAvanI
samakSa, alpa ne vinAzI camakArA karatuM Akhu dravya kriyAcakra AMkhuM lAge che;
mATe tAttvika pakSapAtarUpa zuddha bhAvanI apekSAe dravya kriyA kai gaNatrImAM
nathI. ityAdi atha bhAvavA yeAgya che. bhAva sU : dravya kriyA khadyota A
jaDapaNe dravya kriyA karanArA mukhya leAkeA ema mAne che ke ApaNu. kalyANu
thaze, paNa te temanI brAMti che; kAraNa ke zrI kriyA karatAM karatAM
haribhadrAcAya jIe

Page #825 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Conclusion: The essence is that the activity (kriya) without the right attitude
(bhava) is not an activity. This is because it lacks the inherent fruition.
Here, the example of the Saivaiyaka is given. This soul has taken infinite
bodies in the Saivaiyaka celestial realm due to the flow of karmic influx
(aghati-praväha). And the attainment of the Graivaiyaka realm is also not
possible without the complete observance of the monk's activities, but it is
only possible through the perfect observance of the monk's activities. Thus,
even though the monk has attained the complete activity (kriya) infinite times,
the well-being of this soul has not occurred! Alas! Even the right vision
(darśana) has not been accomplished! The reason for this is the lack of the
appropriate attitude (bhava). From this, the primacy of attitude (bhava) is
evident.  Further, it is said: "The worthy ones are never to be prayed to for
listening, for the effort of the virtuous ones is established in the great jewel
(mahäratna)." (225)  The meaning is that the worthy ones are never to be prayed
to for listening, because the effort of the virtuous ones is established in the
great jewels like the Cintämani (wish-fulfilling gem), etc.  The commentator
says that the unworthy ones are never to be prayed to for listening, because due
to the lack of reverence, they are naturally inclined towards it. The virtuous
ones - the meritorious ones - their effort is established in the great jewels
like the Cintämani, etc., and in this way, due to the appropriateness, even by
favoritism, etc., their attainment occurs in the next birth, as is heard in the
scriptures.  For such worthy yogis as mentioned above, there is never a need to
pray for them to listen. Oh, the ignorant ones! Oh, the active cycle yogis! Oh,
the knowledgeable ones! Listening is not to be prayed for, no, no, never to be
prayed, because due to the lack of reverence, they are naturally inclined
towards it. And in this way, it is said - the effort of the virtuous ones, the
meritorious ones, is in the great jewels like the Cintämani, etc., because they
are established in them, and also in this way, due to the grace, even by
favoritism, etc., their attainment occurs in the next birth.  "Indeed, the
complete activity (kriya) is not without the attitude (bhava), because it lacks
the inherent fruition." - From Pancasaka Sastra

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 upasaMhAra : bhAva suya same: dravya kiyA khadyota samI (749)
paMcAzakazAstramAM spaSTa kahyuM che ke "saMpUrNa kriyA paNa bhAva vinA kriyA ja
nathI; kAraNa ke tene nija phalanuM vikalapaNuM che. atre 2thaka upapAtanuM
dRSTAMta che." e aMge AgamamAM kahyuM che ke-eghathI-pravAhathI A jIve
caiveyakamAM anaMtA zarIre mUkyA che, arthAt A jIva saiveyaka devalokamAM anaMta
vAra upaje che. ane A greveyaka prApti paNa sAdhunI saMpUrNa kiyAnA pAlana vinA
hetI nathI, uttamapaNe sAdhunI saMpUrNa kiyAnA pAlanathI ja hoya che. Ama
sAdhunI saMpUrNa kriyA anaMtavAra prApta thayA chatAM A jIvanuM kalyANa thayuM
nahiM! are ! darzana paNa siddha na thayuM ! Ama thayuM tenuM kAraNa yathAyogya
bhAvanI ja khAmI hatI. A uparathI paNa bhAvanuM ja prAdhAnya pratIta thAya che.
vizeSa kahe che- zravaNe prArthanIyAH syuna hi yogyAH kadAcana  /  yatnaH
kalyANasattvAnAM mahAratne sthito yataH  // 225 //  zravaNe prArthanA egya ne,
kadI yogya jana ratna: sthita che kalyANasane, mahAratnamAM yatna, 225. artha
-Agya janone kadI zravaNa viSayamAM prArthanA karavA gya nathI, kAraNa ke
kalyANasane mahAratna viSayamAM yatna sthita ja che. vivecaka zravaNa viSayamAM
gRjane kadI prArthanA karavA yogya nathI, kAraNa ke zuzraSAbhAvane lIdhe teonI
temAM svata: pravRtti hoya che. kalyANasane-puNyavaMteno yatna ciMtAmaNi Adi
mahAratna viSayamAM sthita ja che, rahelo ja che,-tathA prakAre aucityayogathI
pakSapAta Adine lIdhe paNa janmAntaramAM tenI prApti hoya che, ema zAstramAM
zravaNa thAya che. AvA upara kahyA te je yogya yogIjane che, tene zravaNa karavA
bAbatamAM kadI prArthanA karavA yogya nathI. aho kulagIe ! ahe pravRttacakra
yogIo ! ahe kRtti -Ane zravaNa viSayamAM, prArthanIyA: yu-prArthanIya heya
prArthavA yogya hAya, nahi-nahi, coda: rana-gya kadI paNa -zuzraSAbhAvathI
saMvata pravRttine lIdhe. ane tevA prakAre kahe che-caranA vanyAnasavAnAM-
kalyANa sane-puramavaMtone yatna, mahA-mahAratnamAM, cintAmaNi Adi viSayane,
hiro :-kAraNa ke sthita ja che,-tathA prakAre cirAgathI, pakSapAta Adi thakI 5Na
janmAktaramAM prApti kRtine lIdhe. * "saMpuNNAvi hi kiriyA bhAveNa viNA Na hoti
kiriyatti  /  vizvavidattAno vikasAvAzaging -zrI paMcAzaka,

Page #826 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(750) O seekers of liberation, travelers on the path of liberation, who are
united in the vision of yoga! O great, righteous, soul-bound seekers of the path
of liberation! Listen to this scripture! Partake of this direct nectar of
liberation and attain supreme bliss! - and so on. This type of prayer is not
necessary for the seeker of liberation, the worthy person; because due to their
eagerness to listen, due to their true inner desire to listen, their
participation in the constant listening of the scriptures is automatic. So,
where is the space to inspire them to listen or to make a prayer in the form of
an announcement? Their desire to listen to the true scriptures, their eagerness
to listen, is so intense that they are already engaged in it on their own,
without being told to do so. Because, just as the seeker of liberation is
certain to attain liberation, the effort of the worthy person in this great,
virtuous gem is already established, it does not need to be established.
Because, in this way, they have the appropriate yoga, it is appropriate for them
to do so, so they will inevitably do so automatically. It is stated in the
scriptures that due to bias, etc., such eagerness to listen, etc., is attained
in past lives. Due to the inherent bias of the great souls towards constant
listening, they will inevitably attain such eagerness to listen, etc., even in
past lives. So, what is the point of saying, "Listen to this! Listen to this!"
to such worthy people who are inherently biased towards the scriptures, who are
eager to listen, who are inherently interested in the scriptures, and who are
already engaged in listening with great enthusiasm?  To those who are not
worthy, it is said to avoid the sin of giving: नैतद्विदस्त्वयोग्येभ्यो ददत्येनं
तथापि तु । हरिभद्र इदं प्राह नैतेभ्यो देय आदरात् ॥ २२६ ॥  अग्यने ते गवि६, दीए न
एह छतांय; हरिभद्र सादर कहे, एने देय न आ ય, ૨૨૬  Meaning - But those who know
this (the teachers) do not give this scripture to those who are not worthy.
However, Haribhadra has said with respect that this should not be given to them.
Kritti - Naitih - Those who do not know this, the teachers, A yogye - and, those
who are not worthy, others, Ri - giving, giving, Inan - this Yogadrishti
Samuchaya named scripture, Tathapi Tathapi, even so, systematically, Rimo -
Haribhadra, the author, Hun Kadu - this has been said. What? That is to say - Na
Aane - to those who are not worthy, Revad - giving this Yogadrishti Samuchaya,
Bavaran - with respect, this has been said with respect.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (750) yogadaSTisamuccaya mokSamArganA pravAsI mumukSu AtmArthIo! ahi gamArganA
jijJAsu mahArA sAdharmika AtmabaMdhuo ! tame A zAstranuM zravaNa kare ! A sAkSAt
parama gAmRtanuM pAna karI paramAnaMdanI prApti kare!-ityAdi prakAre A mumukSu
yogya janane prArthanA karavAnI rahetI nathI; kAraNa ke zuzraSAbhAvane lIdhe-
sAcI aMtaraMga zravaNecchAne lIdhe te sajanenI satazAstrazravaNamAM svataH
pravRtti che ja. eTale temane zravaNa mATe preraNA karavAne ke vijJaptirUpa
prArthanA karavAne avakAza che ja kyAM? teone te sAcI zuzraSA-sata zAstra
sAMbhaLavAnI IcchA eTalI badhI utkaTa hoya che, ke teo vagara kalyANa kahe ja
potAnI meLe temAM pravRtta che ja; kAraNa ke je kalyANasa sa ne che, je jI
kalyANa avazya pAmavAnA ja che, evA mahApuNyavaMta ratnamAM yatna janeno
ciMtAmaNi Adi mahAratnanA viSayamAM yatna sthita ja che rahelo ja che,
sthApavAno nathI. kAraNa ke tathA prakAre temane aucitya yega hoya che, teone
tema karavuM ucita che, eTale teo te prakAre ApameLe avazya kare ja che.
pakSapAta Adi thakI paNa janmAntaramAM tevA zuzruSAdi bhAvanI prApta hoya che,
ema zAstramAM zrata thAya che. te mahAnubhAne satazravaNanA tAvika pakSapAta
thakI janmAktaramAM paNa tathA prakAre zuzruSAdi bhAvanI avazya prApti heya ja
che. eTale AvA tAttvika pakSapAtavALA yogya gijane je sadA zuzruSAbhAvavALA,
sAcI zravaNecchAvALA tatvarasika heI svarasathI ja zravaNamAM pravRtta che,
tene, "A zravaNa kare! A sAMbhaLo !" evI prArthanA karyAthI zuM? ayogyane
dAnadaSanA parihArathe kahe che- naitadvidastvayogyebhyo dadatyenaM tathApi tu
/  haribhadra idaM prAha naitebhyo deya AdarAt  //  226  //  agyane te gavi6,
dIe na eha chatAMya; haribhadra sAdara kahe, ene deya na A ya, 226 artha-paraMtu
AnA jANakAra (AcA) a ne A graMtha detA nathI, tathApi haribhadre A AdarathI
kahyuM che ke-A eone devA gya nathI. kRtti-naitiH -nathI AnA jANanArA AcAryo,
ayogye- ane, ayogya evA bIjAone, ri-detA, ApatA, inaM-A gaTisamucaya nAmane
graMtha, tathApi tatathApi, ema paNa vyavasthita sate, rimo-haribhadre,
graMthakartAe, huM kAdu-A kahyuM che. zuM? te ke -na eene--ayogyane, revaDa-devA
gya A yogadaSTisamuccaya, bAvarAna-Adara thakI, AdarathI A kahyuM che,

Page #827 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Conclusion: What is not worthy is not given, and what is not suitable is not
given. (751) Discussion: "The assembly, the three qualities of the listener, the
merits and demerits, the ten principles of the Nand Sutra; knowing this, this
text should be given, the good qualities will be spread in the world." - Ye.
Saza. 8-8 But the Acharyas who know this, they do not give this text, which is a
collection of yogic insights. Even though it is organized in this way, the
author Haribhadra has said with respect that this text is not suitable to be
given to those who are not suitable. Above, it was said that this text will be
somewhat beneficial to those who are yogis, and that there is no need to request
them to listen to it, because they are already engaged in it with interest.
After that, the question arises slightly, what is this text for? Why is it
avoided? Why is there no encouragement to give it to those who are not suitable
to listen to it? What wrong has it done? Here, the answer is given clearly that
the wise men who know this path of liberation, the Acharyas, do not give this
text to those who are not worthy. Even so, Haribhadra says with respect that
this text is not suitable to be given to those who are not suitable. The
Acharyas do not give this text to those who are not worthy, but the author of
this text, who is the embodiment of compassion and sweetness, says with respect,
in a soft voice, with explanation, with understanding, with sweetness, with
humility, that this text is not suitable to be given to those who are not
worthy, so that they do not feel wrong, so that their soul does not suffer, so
that they are explained with respect, with compassion, and with reason. This
text is not given to those who do not have the "yogic quality" mentioned above,
who do not have the capacity to truly understand, grasp, or absorb this supreme
secret. Because those who are not worthy, who cannot digest this supreme yogic
principle with proper understanding, who cannot assimilate it, who cannot become
the cause of its negation, this text can have the opposite effect, causing false
pride, indigestion, or "upset to knowledge"! Just as nutritious food does not
digest for those with weak digestive power, but instead causes indigestion, so
too, this supreme knowledge does not digest for those who are not qualified, and
not only that, but it also causes false pride, thinking, "I am a yogi," and
without achieving the yogic state, without attaining the state of knowledge,
they start talking big about yogic knowledge everywhere, and show off their
scholarship! In this way, the scriptures are not digested!

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 upasaMhAra : keya mAthanIya nathI, ne ayogyane A deya nathI (751) vivecana
"sabhA traNa zrotA guNa avaguNa, naMdisUtre dasejI; te jANI A graMtha gyane,
deje suguNa jagaze.--ye. sajhA. 8-8 paraMtu AnA jJAtA evA AcAryo te A
yogadaSTisamucca graMtha a ne detA ja nathI, tathApi Ama vyavasthita chatAM
graMthakartA haribhadre A AdarathI kahyuM che ke-A graMtha eone-ayogyane "devA
yogya nathI." uparamAM egya evA yogIjanene A graMtha kaMIka upakArI thaze ema
kahyuM, ane te gRjanene zravaNa karavA mATe prArthanA karavAnI paNa jarUra
rahetI nathI, kAraNake teo svarasathI temAM pravRtti karI ja rahyA che ema
kahyuM. te pachI saheje prazna UThe A graMtha che ke agyanuM zuM? tene TALa kema
pADyo? tene zravaNa karavAnI ayogyane devA preraNA kAM karatA nathI? teNe zI
gunhegArI karI? tene ahIM spaSTa gya nathI javAba Ape che ke-A gamArganA jJAtA
evA jJAnI puruSa-gItArtha AcAryo te A gadaSTisamuccaya graMtha a ne detA ja
nathI. tathApi "haribhadra' te AdarathI A kahe che ke-A graMtha e ene "devA
yogya nathI."yegA cAryo te A graMtha tevA apAtra janenA hAthamAM ApavAnI ghasIne
cakakhI "nA ja pADe che, paNa mArdavanI ane mAdhuryanI mUrti samA A graMthakartA
te eene A graMtha devA yogya nathI' evuM narama vacana samajAvaTa bharI rIte
AdarathI kahe che, vivekabharI mIThAzathInamratAthI kahe che, eone paNa khoTuM
na lAge-emanA AtmAne paNa duHkha na thAya, e rIte parama karuNAbhAvathI
mAnapUrvaka sahetuka samajAvIne kahe che. jenAmAM ukta lakSaNavALuM gya
"yogIpaNuM" na hoya, jenAmAM A parama garahasya yathArthapaNe grahaNa karavAnI
ke samajavAnI ke jhIlavAnI pAtratA na hoya, evA agya janone A parama yegyatAvALe
gaprarUpaka graMtha ApavA gya nathI. kAraNa ke ayogyane A parama yogatatvane jeo
samyaphabhAvathI AtmapariNamI karI pacAvI niSedhanuM kAraNa zake ema na haya,
jIravI zake ema na hoya, tevA apAtra janene te A viparIta-pariNAmI thaI
mithyAbhimAnAdi ajIrNavikAra athavA "jJAnane apa" paNa upajAve! jema maMda
pAcana zaktivALAne pauSTika anna pAcana na thAya, paNa tethI te ulaTuM ajIrNa
upaje, tema adhikArI jIvane A paramAna pace nahi, eTaluM ja nahiM paNa "huM A
yogazAstra bhaye chuM" ema mithyAbhimAna dharI, tathArUpa yogabhAvanI siddhi
vinA, jJAnadazAnI prApti vinA, te jyAM tyAM yega-jJAnanI moTI moTI vAto karavA
maMDI paDe ne potAnA pAMDityanuM pradarzana kare ! ItyAdi prakAre tene zAstrane
apaco thAya!

Page #828 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(752) C : “Knowledge spoken from the mouth, but the inner self remains
untouched; Such a creature, only betrays the knower.” —Shri Atmasiddhi “One’s
own self is true, the mind is not spent, one reads the scriptures, But if one is
deceitful and does not value the truth, then one’s vows are not fulfilled.” —Sa,
Tr. Ga, St.  Furthermore, the scriptures mention three types of assemblies –
audiences. Accordingly, there is a style – a method – for the teacher to deliver
teachings after examining the virtues and vices of the listener. If an unworthy
listener is taught something inappropriate for them, it will be
counterproductive, because they are not capable of absorbing it and it will lead
to further harm. The nature of this type of listener can be understood from the
Shri N...di Sutra:  “We should speak to those who have a secret desire, who
break through the inner self, whose mind is pure, to them it is not appropriate;
The appropriate and inappropriate divisions are separate, one should speak
accordingly, Those who are capable will be in the assembly of the learned, they
will be able to withstand blows and kicks.” —Ya. 6, Sajja, 8-7  There are
listeners who are like the roar of a lion, who hear the roar from afar and are
frightened, become terrified, and flee, so why would they come before it?
Similarly, there are listeners who are like a herd of deer, who hear the clear,
heroic, naked truth, and are tormented, become terrified, and flee! So why would
they stand before it and listen? Such listeners, who are like a herd of deer,
who are accustomed to the old ways, who are dull and foolish, how can they
absorb this truth? And this speech of the Chaug Granth is like the roar of a
true hero, like the roar of a lion, so why would creatures like deer, who are of
low character, be worthy of hearing it? Because the naked truth, the ultimate
truth, is revealed here. The method of pure Yagbhav, which unites with the pure
nature of the soul, is embedded in it. Why would cowardly creatures of low
character be worthy of absorbing such a heroic roar, like the roar of a lion?  *
Among them, those who are like a herd of deer, who are tormented by hearing it!
A herd of deer…

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (752) ceAJadaSTisasurajIya ane Ama atanA meha chUTyA vinA pApaTIe pati anI
meDhethI jJAnanI vArtA karI, jJAnImAM khapavAnI khAtara, te pAmara prANI mAtra
jJAnInA droha kare! ne pAkaLa jJAnI- zuSkajJAnI evA te pAte graMtha vAMcyA che'
ema jANe che, paNa AtmAne vacce che? ema jANatA nathI! ane graMtha bhaNI te
janane paNa vace che! eTale AvA ayeAgya jIvA AvA parama vaigya uttama cAga
grathanA adhikArI kema hAya ? C : " mukhathI jJAna kathe ane, aMtar chUTyo na
mAha; te pAmara prANI kare, mAtra jJAnInA droha. "--zrI Atmasidi "nija gaNu sace
mana navi kharce, graMtha bhaNI jana vAMce, luce keza na mulye mAyA, te na rahe
vrata pace."--sA, tra. gA, sta. vaLI zAstramAM traNa prakAranI sabhA-
zrotApariSad kahI che. te pramANe zrotAnA guNu-avaguNa tapAsIne upadeza devAnI
zAsrakAranI zailI che--paddhati che. apAtra zrotAne tene ayeAgya evI upadezavAr
karavAmAM Ave teA ulaTI anathakAraka thaI paDe che, kAraNa ke te tene jhIlI
zakavAne samartha nathI ane uSA anathakAraka atha mAM laI jAya che. A zrotAnA
prakAranuM svarUpa zrI na...dIsUtrathI jANavA ceAgya che ke guhya bhAva e tehane
kahIe, jeha thru aMtara bhAMjejI, jezu citta paTa tara hAve, tehazu' gruhya na
chAjejI; ceAgya aAgya vibhAga alahatA, karaze mATI vAtejI, khamaze te paDita
paraSadamAM, muSTi prahAra ne lAtAjI."-- yA. 6, sajjhA, 8-7 zrotAjane che, te
siMhanAda jevI cAkhI caTa vIravANI dUrathI sahunAda sAMbhaLIne bhaya pAme che,
gabharAi jAya che, ane bhaDakIne bhAge che, teA sanmukha Ave ja kema ? tema
siMhanAda jevI je mRgalAMnA ToLA jevA zrotAe che, te siMhanAda jevI spaSTa
vIravANI nagna satyarUpa vIravANI zravaNu karIne trAse che, gabharAI jAya che,
ane bhaDakIne bhAge che! teA sanmukha dRSTi karIne zravaNu karavAne ubhA ja zenA
rahe ? evA gatAnugatika, gADarI TALA jevA rUDha ne mUDha zreAtAjane A satya
tattvavArtA kema jhIlI zake? ane A je ceAgagraMthanI vANI che, te te sAcA
vIraputranI si'hanAda jevI parama vIravANI che, eTale te sAMbhaLavAne mRgalAM
jevA hInasattva jIvA kema ceAgya hAya ? kAraNake nagna satyarUpa parama
tattvavArtA atra pragaTa kahI che. zuddha AtmasvabhAva sAthe yuMjana karavArUpa
zuddha yAgabhAvanI paddhati emAM khatAvI che. AvI si'huganA samI vIravANI
jhIlavAne alpasattva kAyara jane kema ceAgya hAya ! karege * temAM je mRga
pariSadU jevA sAMbhaLI trAse che! mRgalAnuM TALuM

Page #829 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Supplement: The Heroic Song of Shri Haribhadraji, Like the Roar of a Lion**
(943) **Or** 6 Just as cowards flee in fear upon hearing the heroic song of a
valiant man who says, "I will die," or "Death is my subject," so too, upon
hearing the words of this valiant Chaugaveer, the lowly beings flee in fear.
What is surprising about this? Because here, it is the story of "Nagad Narayan,"
the story of the "Hirna Marag Kaldaar" in the form of a deer, and the story of
the spiritual culmination of the feelings of the "Shura." It is the story of the
"Chauga Vijay" or the "Subhat," who, like a warrior, consumes himself in the
process of performing sacrifices. "First, place your head down, then take the
name, you see!" - It is the story of taking the name of this Chauga after first
placing your head down. It is the story of moving forward on the path of Chauga,
with a heart free from deceit, and surrendering oneself. It is the story of the
ultimate heroic act of showing "Vipan" in one's own place. This "Hir" - the one
who conquers the "Kam" - is the path of the "Prabhu," the path of the "Shura,"
and it is not the work of a coward. (See page 8, "Veerpanu Te Atamthane" etc.).
4 "The path of the "Hir" is the path of the "Shura," it is not the work of a
coward, you see; First, place your head down, then take the name, you see." -
Shri Pritam Bhakt Due to these reasons, the wise Acharyas never give such an
excellent Chauga-related text into the hands of the "Ayogya." That is why the
author of this text, Shri Haribhadracharya, says that this text is not suitable
for the "Ayogya." And we are not saying this out of disrespect or contempt for
the "Ayogya" beings, but we say it respectfully; because we have no hatred
towards those beings, nor do we disrespect or despise them, but we have equal
regard for all beings, and towards such "Ayogya" beings, we have a special
feeling of compassion, that if these beings were to attain this path of Chauga,
how good it would be! But for that, they must also acquire the necessary
qualifications. Once they acquire the qualifications, they too will become
eligible for this. Therefore, just as the "Yogya" should strive to increase
their qualifications, so too, the "Ayogya" should strive to acquire
qualifications. Therefore, they should not be discouraged at all. Because as
they increase their qualities of detachment, calmness, etc., they will become
eligible. Therefore, they should strive to increase their detachment, etc. But
until such qualifications have come, they are not eligible for this. That is why
we have said this respectfully, and that too only for the benefit of those
beings. Because it is a general rule that a doctor should examine the patient's
pulse properly, understand their nature, and administer medicine keeping in mind
their age, digestive capacity, etc. If he does not do so, 95 With respectful
salutations to Haribhadraji.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 upasa'hAra : zrI haribhadrajInI siMhanAda jevI vIravANI (943) ke 6 yA mareMge
'* Door Die, ' ' viSaya athavA mRtyu * evI vIra puruSanI vIravANI sAMbhaLIne
kAyara janA jema bhaya pAmIne bhAgI jAya, tema A dharadhara ceAgavIranI vANI
sAMbhaLIne hInasattva jIve bhaya pAmIne bhAgavA mAMDe emAM zI navAI ? kAraNa
ahIM te ' nagada nArAyaNu nI vAta che, tathAbhAvarUpa rIkaDA 'hiranA mAraga
kaladAra' rUpIAnI vAta che, tathArUpa adhyAtmapariNatimaya bhAvakriyA che zUrAnA
' karatAM cegavijaya varavAnI athavA subhaTanI jema te yAgasAdhanA karatAM
karatAM khapI javAnI vAta che. * parathama paheluM mastaka mUkI, vaLatI levuM
nAma jone ! '--paheluM mAthuM mUkI pachI A ceAganuM nAma levAnI vAta che.
bhAvathI kapaTa rahitapaNe AtmApaNu karI cegamArge AgaLa vadhavAnI vAta che.
AtmasthAne vIpaNu' dAkhavavAnI parama zUravIra vAta che. AvA A hirane-kamane
haranArA vIra' prabhunA mAga zUrAne mAga che, emAM kAyaranuM kAma nathI. (jue
pR. 8, 'vIrapaNuM te AtamaThANe ' i. ). 4 " hiranA mAraga che zUrAnA, naDhuiM'
kAyaranuM kAma jone; parathama pahelu mastaka mUkI, vaLatI levu nAma jone. "--
zrI prItama bhakta ityAdi kAraNeAne lIdhe jJAnI AcAryAM AvA A utkRSTa
cAgaviSayaka graMtha ayeAgyAnA hAthamAM detA ja nathI. eTale ja A graMthanA
kartA zrI haribhadrAcAya jI kahe che ke- A graMtha ayeAgyAne devA ceAgya nathI.
ane A ame kahIe chIe te kAMi ayeAgya jIveA pratye anAdarathI ke tiraskArathI
kahetA nathI, paNa AdarathI ( Respectfully ) kahIe chIe; kAraNa ke amane te jIve
pratye kAMi dveSa nathI ke ame tene anAdara ke tiraskAra karIe, paNa amane tA
sarva jIva pratye samabhAva che, ane tevA ayeAgya jIva pratye te vizeSe karIne
bhAva karuNAmuddhi che ke A jIvA paNa A yAgamAga pAmavA ceAgya thAya tA kevuM
sAru' ! paNa te mATe paNa yathAyeAgyatA meLavavI joie. ceAgyatA meLaLye te paNa
A mATe cAgya thAya. eTale yeAgye jema ceAgyatA vRddhi mATe prayatna karavA joIe,
tema aAgye paNa ceAgyatA prApta karavA mATenA prayatna-puruSAtha karavA joie.
eTale teoe khilakula nirAza thavAnI jarUra nathI. kAraNa ke jema bane tema
vairAgya-upazamAdi guNanI vRddhi thAya tema tema tevI cegyatA AvatI jAya, mATe
te vairAgyAdinI vRddhi mATenA prayAsa teoe karavA joie. paNa jyAMsudhI tevI
yeAgyatA AvI nathI, tyAMsudhI te teo A mATe ceAgya nathI ja. eTale ja A ame
AdarathI kahyuM che, ane te paNa mAtra te jIveAnA hitArthe ja. kAraNa ke
savaidye daradInI kharAbara nADa joi, prakRti pArakhI, vaya- pAcanazakti Adi
lakSamAM rAkhI davA karavI joie, eve| sAmAnya niyama che. ema na kare 95
haribhadrajInu sAdara thana

Page #830 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(754) If the dosage of the Yogadristi Samuchaya meant for an adult is given to a
child, how much harm will it cause? What kind of adverse results will it bring?
What kind of imbalance will be created? Just as a skilled physician, a Sadguru
should also carefully observe the pulse and nature of a worldly being, taking
into account their age, digestive capacity, and other factors, and provide
spiritual treatment accordingly. If they do not do so, and give the dosage of
teachings suitable for an adult or a learned person to a child, how much harm
will it cause? What kind of adverse results will it bring? Keeping this analogy
in mind, we clearly prohibit giving this Yogadristi Samuchaya to someone who is
not ready for it. This is what Shri Haribhadrasuri says.  Why is this so?
Because:  "Even a small amount of disrespect, if done towards this, becomes a
great harm. Therefore, it was said for the sake of remedy, not out of any
personal bias." (227)  Here, even a small amount of disrespect shown towards
this Yogadristi Samuchaya text, due to its profound subject matter, becomes a
great harm. Therefore, Haribhadra said this for the sake of remedy, not out of
any personal bias.  Here, even a small amount of disrespect shown towards this
text called Yogadristi Samuchaya, due to its profound subject matter, becomes a
great harm. Therefore, Haribhadra said this for the sake of remedy, not out of
any petty personal bias.  In the above verse, when it is said that "Haribhadra
says that this should not be given," what is the reason for this statement? This
is clearly explained here. If even a small amount of disrespect is shown towards
this Yogadristi Samuchaya text, it will become a great harm for the one who
disrespects it.  "Even a small amount of disrespect, if done towards this,
becomes a great harm. Therefore, it was said for the sake of remedy, not out of
any personal bias." (227)  "Just as a medicine that is beneficial for the wind
can be harmful for phlegm, so too, the medicine of true Dharma can be harmful
for those who are not ready for it." - Shri Haribhadrasuri Padshaka.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (754) yogadaSTisamucaya ne moTA mANasane ApavAnI mAtrA bAlakane ApI che, te
tenuM keTaluM badhuM ahita thAya? kevuM viparIta pariNAma Ave ? kevuM oDanuM
coDa vetarAI jAya ? tema sadaguru savaidya paNa bhavaragI evA saMsArI jIvanI
barAbara nADa joI, prakRti pArakhI, bhAvathI bAlAdi vaya-pAcanazakti Adi
lakSamAM rAkhI, tenI bhAvacikitsA (Spiritual treatment) karavI joIe. ema na kare
ne moTA mANasane-paMDita janane ApavA yogya upadezamAtrA bAla jIvane Ape, te
tenuM keTaluM badhuM ahita thAya ? kevuM viSama pariNAma Ave ? A daSTAMtanuM
daSTibindu lakSamAM rAkhIne ame A gadaSTisamuccaya agyane devA yogya nathI, evo
atra spaSTa niSedha karIe chIe,-Ama zrI haribhadrasUrinuM kahevuM che.* A ema
kema ? te ke- avajJaha kRtAlpApi yadanAya jAyate  /  atastatparihArArtha na
punarbhAvadoSataH  //  227  //  anarthakArI alpa paNa, thAya avajJA ahi;
parihArArthe tasa kahyuM, bhAvadoSathI nahi. 227 atha--ahIM-A yogadakTisamuccaya
graMtha pratye karavAmAM AvelI apa paNa avajJA anarthane arthe thAya che, eTalA
ja mATe tenA parivAra arthe haribhadre A kahyuM che, nahi ke bhAvadaSathI kahyuM
che. vivecana ahIM-A yogadaSTisamuccaya nAmanA graMtha pratye karavAmAM AvelI
alpa paNa avajJA, mahAviSayapaNAe karIne anarthane arthe thAya che, eTalA mATe
tenA parivAra arthe haribhadre A kahyuM che nahike kSudratArUpe bhAvadaSathI.
uparanA zlokamAM je kahyuM kea ne A devA gya nathI ema haribhadra kahe che," te
kahevAnuM kAraNa zuM ? teno ahIM spaSTa khulAso karyo che. A gadaSTisamuccaya
graMtha pratye apa paNa avajJA karavAmAM Ave, te te avajJA karanArane pitAne
mahAanartharUpa thaI paDe, kRttiH - avase-avajJA ahIM -gadaSTisamuccaya nAmanA
graMthamAM, kRtAtpana-karavAmAM AvelI, svarUpathI 95 paNa, thar-kAraNa ke,
naryAya gAyo-anathathe thAya che,-mahAviSayapaNuAe karIne, atarata jillAvArtha-
eTalA mATe tenA parihArathe, 1 punarmAvata :-5Na nahiM ke bhAvadoSathI-sutAthI
haribhadre A kahyuM che. x " hitamapi vAyorauSadhamahita tat zleSmaNo
yathA'tyantam  /  saddharmadevanauSadhamerve vATAghavekSamiti | "--zrI
haribhadrasurita paDazaka.

Page #831 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Upas'haar: The reason for not giving it to the unworthy - even a slight
disregard leads to great anath (75)**  Because the subject of this text is
great, therefore disregard for it also leads to great anath. Therefore,
Haribhadra has said this to prevent such great anath from arising from giving it
to the unworthy, not because of a feeling of inferiority.  This collection of 8
yogadrishtis is a text related to the great fourfold subject, therefore this
yogashastra is also great because of its great subject matter. Knowing or not
knowing this great yogashastra, even a slight disregard, even by mistake, will
lead to great anath - it will become a great loss for the one who disregards it;
because even a slight disregard, even a slight disrespect, even a slight lack of
courtesy, even a slight disrespect, even a slight lack of devotion towards the
great truth will lead to the terrible fruit of endless samsara paribhramana.
Just as great happiness is obtained from respect, courtesy, devotion, and honour
towards the great truth, so too is unhappiness obtained from disrespect,
disrespect, lack of courtesy, lack of devotion, and lack of honour. Just as
great happiness is obtained from worship, so too is great unhappiness obtained
from opposition. Just as a king, when pleased, grants justice and when
displeased, even destroys a house, so too, when pleased, the truth brings about
the welfare of the soul, and when displeased, it brings about great misfortune.
A satpurusha and the nectar of his words are the saviour from samsara. Devotion
to him leads the soul across the ocean, and disrespect causes the soul's boat to
sink! That is why Shri Viravijayaji has truly sung in the praise of puja: "Do
not disrespect the tirtha, do not disrespect the tirtha, do not disrespect the
tirtha." (See page 110, "Chakri Dharma Tirthathano" etc.)  If even a slight
disregard for such a great shastra leads to great anath, then what to say about
greater disregard? And if such a great shastra is given to the unworthy, it is
possible that they will disregard it, disrespect it, etc. I will explain - and
if that happens, they will suffer great anath, they will have to suffer the pain
of endless samsara paribhramana. Therefore, Haribhadra has said that it is not
appropriate to give this to the unworthy, so that they do not suffer great
anath, so that great anath stays away, not because of a feeling of inferiority,
that is, not because of inferiority or triviality. The great soul
Haribhadracharya says that we have no hatred, no envy, no lack of anything
towards these unworthy beings, so that we would have forbidden them from
receiving this shastra because of inferiority or trivial thoughts. We are not
like that, we do not forbid these ignorant beings from receiving this shastra
because of their ignorance.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 upasa'hAra : ayeAgyane na devAnu kAraNa-mahattnI leza avajJAthI mahAanatha (75)
kAraNa ke A graMthanA viSaya mahAt che. eTale A pratye avajJA karavAthI anatha
paNa mahAna thAya. ethI karIne ayeAgyane dIdhAthI tene tevA mahAanatha na upaje,
tenI khAtara haribhadre A kahyu che,-nahi' ke kSudratArUpa bhAva deSathakI. 6
ana A 8 yogadRSTisamuccaya ' mahAn evA caiAga viSaya saMbadhIneA graMtha che,
eTale evA mahAviSayapaNAthI A yegazAsra paNa mahAna che. AvA mahAna yegazAstranI
jANatAM-ajANatAM, bhUle cUke paNa theADI paNa avajJA karavAmAM Ave, te mahetanA
anA- te avajJA karanArane mahAanatha rUpa thai paDe, meATI hAnirUpa thaI darathI
mahA- paDe; kAraNa ke mahatevA sata pratye jo leza paNa avajJA karavAmAM Ave,
leza paNa anAdara karavAmAM Ave, leza paNa avinaya atAvavAmAM Ave, leza paNa
AzAtanA karavAmAM Ave, leza paNa abhakti karavAmAM Ave, teA tenu' anata saMsAra
paribhramaNurUpa bhayakara phaLa bhegavavuM paDe. jema mahat evA sat pratyenI
anAzAtanAyI, AdarathI, vinayathI, bhaktithI, bahumAnathI mahA sat phaLa maLe;
tema AzAtanAthI, anAdarathI, avinayathI, abhaktithI, abahumAnathI asat phaLa
maLe. jema sattA ArAdhanathI mArUpa mahat phaLa maLe, tema virAdhanathI
mahAsa'sArarUpa phaLa maLe. jema rAjA rIjhe te nyAla karI dye ne khIje  /
gharakhAra paNa jAya; tema ArAdhanAthI sat prasanna thAya teA jIvanuM kalyANu
kalyANa thaI jAya, ane virAdhanAthI aprasanna thAya tA mahAakalyANa thAya.
satpuruSa ne satpuruSanuM vacanAmRta saMsArathI tAranAra tIsvarUpa che. tenI
bhaktithI jIvanA kheDA pAra thAya, ane AzAtanAthI jIvanuM nAvaDuM DUbI jAya !
eTalA mATe ja pUjAnI DhALamAM zrI vIravijayajIe sAcuM ja gAyu che ke- tIrathanI
AzAtanA navi kariye, hAMre niva kariye re navi kariye. ' ( jue pR. 110, 'cakrI
dharama tIrathataNeA ' I. ) AvA satzAsra pratye jo gheADI paNa avajJA mahAanatha
kArI thai paDe, teA pachI vizeSa avajJAnu teA pUchavuM ja zuM? ane ayeAgyAne jo
AvuM sattzAstra devAmAM Ave te tee thakI AvI avajJA-AzAtanAdi thai jAya evA
saMbhava che. niSkAraNu karu- ane ema thAya, te teone mahA anatha thai paDe,
anaMta sa'sAra NAthI niSedha paribhramaNa duHkha bhAgavavu paDe. eTale Ama
avajJAthakI teone mahAana na sAMpaDe tenI khAtara, mahAanatha dUra rahe tenI
khAtara, ayeAgyAne A devA yeAgya nathI, ema haribhadre kahyuM che, nahi ke
bhAvadoSathI, arthAt kSudratAthI--tucchatAthI ema kahyuM nathI. parama
bhAvitAtmA haribhadrAcAya jI kahe che keamane A aceAnya apAtra jIva pratye kAMi
dveSa nathI, ke matsara nathI, ke kaI abhAva nathI, ke jethI karIne kSudratAne
lIdhe-tuccha vicArane lIdhe ame teene A zAsradAnane niSedha karyAM hAya. ame tA
tevA ajJAna jIve bicArA avajJA karI A zAsranI

Page #832 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(756) This text, the *Gadasimuccaya*, is written with the intention of
preventing the accumulation of negative karma. It is written with compassion and
for the benefit of the reader. Therefore, do not be upset or angry with the
author, but instead try to cultivate the qualities of a good listener and first
try to remove your own negativity.  It is important to avoid even the slightest
disrespect towards this sacred text. This is the intention of the author. For
example, giving this text to someone who is not receptive, who does not have a
genuine desire to listen, or who is not interested in the subject matter, is
equivalent to disrespecting this great text. It is like offering a *bhagavat* to
a buffalo or throwing pearls before swine. Therefore, it is not appropriate to
give this text to those who lack the qualities of a good listener.  This is a
duty that must be undertaken. As it is said:  *योग्येभ्यस्तु प्रयत्नेन देयोऽयं
विधिनान्वितैः । मात्सर्यविरहेणोच्चैः श्रेयोविघ्नप्रशान्तये ॥ २२८ ॥*  This text
should be given to worthy listeners, with effort, by those who are qualified,
without any jealousy, for the sake of removing obstacles to liberation.
**Commentary:**  This text is not meant for unworthy listeners, as explained
above. However, it is essential to give it to worthy listeners, without any
jealousy, and with effort. This should be done by those who are qualified in the
matters of listening and other related practices. Otherwise, there is a risk of
negative consequences. The author emphasizes the importance of giving this text
with effort, by those who are qualified, and without any jealousy, for the sake
of removing obstacles to liberation.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (756) gadasimuccaya AzAtanAthI nibiDa karma bAMdhI anartha na pAme ema IcchatA
heI, atre bhAvadayAthI prerAIne niSedha karyo che, ane te paNa kevaLa temanI
hitabuddhithI, ekAMta niSkAraNuM karaNathI kahyuM che. mATe te e AthI duHkha
lagADavuM nahiM ke amArA pratye beTuM lagADavuM nahiM, paNa yogyatA gya guNa
pitAnA AtmAmAM pragaTa karI prathama te pitAnI agyatA dUra karavA prayatna karo,
ane jema bane tema A sazAstranI alpa paNa avajJA dUrathI varjavI. eTale ja A
amAre kahevAno Azaya che. dAkhalA tarIke-jene A graMtha pratye zuzraSA na hoya,
sAMbhaLavAnI sAcI aMtarachA na hoya, enA uddiSTa viSaya pratye rasa na hoya,
teone A graMtha deva, zravaNa karAve te A mahAgraMthanI avajJA-apamAna-AzAtanA
karavA barAbara che, anAdara karavA barAbara che. evA zuzraSA rahitane zravaNa
karAvavuM te "bheMsa AgaLa bhAgavata' jevuM che, ane metIne cAra Dukkara pAse
nAMkhavA barAbara che. "Casting pearls before swine,' mATe zuzraSAdi guNa
jenAmAM na hoya, evA agya zrotAone A graMtha devA gya nathI ja, e yukta kahyuM
che. ane A Ama aMgIkAra kartavya che, jethI karIne ja kahe che- yogyebhyastu
prayatnena deyo'yaM vidhinAnvitaiH  /  mAtsaryaviraheNoccaiH
zreyovighnaprazAntaye  //  228  //  gyane deve yatnathI, vidhivate ja samartha
mAtsarya "virahathI ati, zreya vizva zAMtyartha. 228 artha--ane yogya zrotAone
te A graMtha vidhithI yukta evA janee, sarvathA mAtsaryA vinA, eviSyanI
prazAMtine arthe prayatnathI deva yegya che. | vivecana A graMtha ayogya
zrotAone devA gya nathI, ema uparamAM hetupUrvaka kahI batAvyuM; paNa cagya
zrotAone te mAtsarya rahitapaNe A avazya prayatnathI devA yogya che; ane te paNa
zravaNAdi viSaya saMbaMdhI vidhithI yukta evAo dvArA,-nahiM te ' vRttA-
cokhyag-5Na yogya srotAone te, prathA prayatnathI, upayogasAra evA prayatnathI,
joDazaM-A deva egya che, vidhinAvidhithI, zravaNAdi gocara vidhithI, anvitaiH-
anvita, yukta avAAthI nahi to pratyavAyanA saMbhava thakI de.Sa che, ema AcArya
kahe che. mAryAviLa-mAtsarya virahathI. mAtsarya abhAvathI sajajaiatyaMtapaNe
yovidana rAjya-zreya vinanI prazAMtine athe, puca-aMtarAmanI pragatine arthe.  /
samApto'yaM yogadRSTisamuccayaH  /

Page #833 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Upasanhara: Gyane te prayatnathi deva yogya: parama shrutani prabhavana  (757)
Pratyavayasya-hanina sambhavat dosah lage chhe ema acharyo kahe chhe. Aa deva
gya chhe, te atyantapane grayinani prasanti arthe chhe, punyantarayani prasanti
arthe chhe.  Upara varnnavya eva shushrushadigunasamapanna yogya adhikari
shrotaone te aa granth avashya deva gya chhe. Jene aa shushrusha chhe, aa granth
shravana karavani sachi antariccha-jijnasa chhe, aa gavishaya prati je ne
antaranga ruchi-rasa chhe, matsarya eva vinayadi yathokta gunavaala shrotaone te
aa granth upayogasara'viraha thi upayoga pradhana prayatnathi jarur jarur deva
yogya chhe-shravana karavava gya chhe. Ane te pani sarvatha matsarya
virahathi–matsarya rahitapane. Keipani prakarene gunadvesh, irsya, adekhai
rakhya vina, pitani samasta shaktithi–sarvatmathi aa parama jnanadana deva yogya
chhe. Tana-mana-dhanaparam kritani vachanani samasta shakti khachi nankine,
ovaari nankhine aa jnanani prabhavana prabhavana parama udaratathi karava yogya
chhe. Pana aa devathi aa maharaja kartaan gaggunaman aagal vadhi jase ne hun
jhanku padi jaishu te! Eva tejovadharupa gunastha thi–matsarathi preraaine
muktahridaye-khulla dile aa jnanadana detaan achakavu yogya nathi. Pana aa
tajane aa jnanadanathi kema atmakarsah pame, kema gaggunani vriddhikare, ne te
dekhine hun raji thaun-prasanna thaun, evi pramoda bhavana sahita parama udara
bhavathi chhute hridaye ne chhuta hathe aa jnanadhananun dana deva yogya chhe.
Aa jnanadhana te akshayanidhichhe. E dana deta kadhi khutatu nathi, ane datanu
kainj jnanadhana ochhu thai jatu nathi, ulta jalvaai rahe chhe ne vriddhipame
chhe. Mate matsaryano viraha' kari, matsarabhava sarvatha chedi dai, jem bane
tem bahela hathe aa jnanadana api parama shrutani prabhavana karavvi, e j yogya
chhe. Atra "viraha' shabdathi shrimad haribbhadraacharyajine pitani kritina
pranate virahanka mukvani paddhatinu anusarana karyu chhe.  Ane tenun dana
karanara jnanadataa pani keva heva joie? Te mate ahi kahyu ke–je shravanaadi
vishayani vidhithi yukta hoy, evao dvara anun dana thavu joie.  Shravana,
grahana, dharana, vijnana, iha, apaha, tattvabhinivesh aadi vidhi yukta yukta
gunathi je yukta chhe, teoo dvara anun dana thava gya chhe. Jnanadataa jene aa
granthanu shravana karyu chhe, grahana karyu chhe, hridayne vishe dharana karyu
chhe, vijnana karyu chhe, te sambandhi jene iha-apehh arthaat tattvachintanarupa
undho vichaar karyo chhe, ane aam kari jene tattvabhinivesh karyo chhe, eva
sugam vidhisampanna vaktaa dvara, shushrushavantan-shravana karavani sachi
utkata icchhavalaa eogya paatra mumuksune aa devamaan aave, shravana
karavavamaan aave, tenun naam vidhi dana chhe bakee ava vidhiyukta na hoy
arthaat jene ukt shravanaadi na karya hoy eva vaktaa.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 upasaMhAra : gyane te prayatnathI devA yogya : parama zratanI prabhAvanA (757)
pratyavAyanA-hAninA saMbhavathI doSa lAge che ema AcAryo kahe che. A devA gya
che, te atyaMtapaNe grevinanI prazAMti arthe che, puNyaaMtarAyanI prazAMti arthe
che. uparamAM varNavyA evA zuzraSAdi guNasaMpanna yogya adhikArI zrotAone te A
graMtha avazya devA gya che. jene A zuzruSA che, A graMtha zravaNa karavAnI sAcI
aMtarachA-jijJAsA che, A gaviSaya pratye jene aMtaraMga ruci-rasa che, mAtsarya
evA vinayAdi yathokta guNavALA zrotAone te A graMtha upayogasAra'viraha thI
upayoga pradhAna prayatnathI jarUra jarUra devA yogya che-zravaNa karAvavA gya
che. ane te paNa sarvathA mAtsarya virahathI-mAtsarya rahitapaNe. keIpaNa
prakArane guNadveSa, IrSyA, adekhAI rAkhyA vinA, pitAnI samasta zaktithI-
sarvAtmAthI A parama jJAnadAna devA yogya che. tana-mana-dhanaparama kRtanI
vacananI samasta zakti khacI nAMkhIne, ovArI nAMkhIne A jJAnanI prabhAvanA
prabhAvanA parama udAratAthI karavA yogya che. paNa A devAthI A mahArA karatAM
gaguNamAM AgaLa vadhI jaze ne huM jhAMkhuM paDI jaIza te ! evA tejovadharUpa
guNaSathI-matsarathI prerAIne muktahRdaye-khullA dile A jJAnadAna detAM acakAvuM
yogya nathI. paNa A tAjane A jJAnadAnathI kema AmatkarSa pAme, kema gaguNanI
vRddhi kare, ne te dekhIne huM rAjI thAuM-prasanna thAuM, evI pramodabhAvanA
sahita parama udAra bhAvathI chUTe hRdaye ne chUTA hAthe A jJAnadhananuM dAna
devA yogya che. A jJAnadhana te akSayanidhi che. e dAna detAM kadI khUTatuM
nathI, ane dAtAnuM kaMI jJAnadhana ochuM thaI jatuM nathI, ulaTuM jaLavAI rahe
che ne vRddhi pAme che. mATe mAtsaryano viraha' karI, matsarabhAva sarvathA
cheDI daI, jema bane tema baheLA hAthe A jJAnadAna ApI parama zratanI prabhAvanA
karavI, e ja yegya che. atra "viraha' zabdathI zrImad haribhadrAcAryajIe pitAnI
kRtinA prAMte virahAMka mUkavAnI paddhatinuM anusaraNa karyuM che. ane tenuM
dAna karanArA jJAnadAtA paNa kevA hevA joIe? te mATe ahIM kahyuM ke-je zravaNAdi
viSayanI vidhithI yukta heya, evAo dvArA AnuM dAna thavuM joIe. zravaNa,
grahaNa, dhAraNa, vijJAna, IhA, apaha, tattvAbhiniveza Adi vidhi yukata yakta
guNathI je yukta che, teo dvArA AnuM dAna thavA gya che. jJAnadAtA jeNe A
graMthanuM zravaNa karyuM che, grahaNa karyuM che, hRdayane viSe dhAraNa karyuM
che, vijJAna karyuM che, te saMbaMdhI jeNe IhA-apeha arthAta tattvaciMtanarUpa
UMDo vicAra karyo che, ane Ama karI jeNe tavAbhiniveza karyo che, evA sugya
vidhisaMpanna vaktA dvArA, zuzraSAvaMtane-zravaNa karavAnI sAcI utkaTa icchAvALA
egya pAtra mumukSune A devAmAM Ave, zravaNa karAvavAmAM Ave, tenuM nAma
vidhidAna che bAkI AvA vidhiyukta na hoya arthAt jeNe ukta zravaNAdi na karyA
hoya evA vaktA

Page #834 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Yoga Disamucchaya (058)  If this is given by someone who has not themselves
heard (Shravana) etc., it is Avidhyan (ignorance). Because, how absurd is it for
someone who has not themselves heard (Shravana) etc., to give it to others, to
make them hear? How senseless is it? And thus, if it is given by someone who is
not qualified, it leads to blame due to the possibility of the recipient's
(Pratyavayana) acceptance, as Shri Aachaarya Bhagavate says.  Therefore, just as
there is a need for a worthy listener (Shrota), there is an even greater need
for a worthy speaker (Vakta) - a compassionate teacher (Vyakhyata). Only someone
who is knowledgeable (Jagnu), wise (Sujanu), learned (Jnani), experienced
(Anubhavi), and a true speaker of the Gita (Gita Vakta) is qualified to give
teachings (Upadesh) and can give good teachings (Sadupadesh). But if the speaker
is ignorant (Ajagnu), uninformed (Ajnani), inexperienced (Khinanubhavi), and not
a true speaker of the Gita (Agitaatha Gita Jnani Vakta), then they can never be
qualified to give teachings (Upadesh). And if such a person climbs onto the
platform (Vyakhyanpith) and pretends to be a speaker (Vakta Khaji),  showing off
their eloquence (Vachalpana) for the sake of praise (Manava) and worship
(Poojava), then they are only acting ignorantly (Avidhiye Vatata) and betraying
the trust of the learned (Jnani). Therefore, only a virtuous person (Satpurush)
who is qualified in the rituals of hearing (Shravana) etc., experienced in the
path of liberation (Chaugmag), compassionate (Bhavyogi), and a true speaker of
the Gita (Gita Jnani) is worthy of being a teacher of this path of liberation
(Chaugmag). Only from such a good teacher (Sadupadeshta) can good teachings
(Sadupadesh) be received, and only from such a great teacher (Mahatma
Sadupadeshta) can the path (Mag) be followed.  *  "A good teacher is very
necessary. A good teacher is very necessary." - Shrimad Rajchandraji  And the
giving of this knowledge (Jnandaan) by such good teachers (Sadupadeshta) -
virtuous people (Satpurush) - is also extremely beneficial for the sake of peace
(Prashaanati) of the knowledge of one's own good (Shreyavidhmani), and for the
sake of peace (Prashaanati) of the obstacles (Vighna) in the path of virtue
(Punyantaraay). Because, such acts of giving knowledge (Jnandaan) - the highest
good deeds (Param Satkaryan) - bring peace (Prashaanati) to the obstacles
(Vighna) in one's own good (Shreyavidhni) - one's own welfare (Atmakalyan). It
brings extreme peace (Atyant Prashaanati). In other words, it brings peace
(Prashaanati) - extreme peace (Atyant Shaanti) - to the obstacles (Antaraya) in
the virtue (Punya) that is connected to virtue (Puny anubandhi). Therefore, by
giving such sacred scriptures (Shashtra), the obstacles (Antaraye) to one's own
attainment of good (Shreyaprapti) are removed, and thus one attains the nectar-
like (Maksharoop) success (Safalni) of the highest good (Param Shruti). Thus,
since these sacred scriptures (Param Satshastra) themselves bring peace
(Prashaanati) to the obstacles (Shreyavighna) in one's own good, their giving
(Daan) also brings peace (Prashaanati) to the obstacles (Shreyavighna) in one's
own good (Sw-Parne). Therefore, with a selfless (Nishkaam) attitude of welfare
(Bhavana) for one's own welfare (Atmakalyanu),  Influence  ...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 yogadisamuccaya (058) dvArA jo A apAya te te avidhijJAna che. kAraNa ke jeNe
pAte zravaNAdi kayu nathI, te bIjAne devA bese-zravaNu karAvavA bese te keTaluM
badhuM ajUgatuM che? kevu' behUdu' che ? ane Ama jo avidhivatathI devAmAM Ave te
pratyavAyanA--apAyanA saMbhavathI doSa Ave che, ema zrI AcAya bhagavate bhAkhe
che. mATe jeTalI sucAgya zrotAnI jarUra che, teTalI ja khalke tethI vadhAre
suryAgya vaktAnI-bhAvitAtmA vyAkhyAtAnI jarUra che. je yAgamAne jANu, sujANu,
jJAnI, anubhavI, gItA vaktA heAya, te ja upadeza devAnA adhikArI hAI sadupadeza
zake. paNa yAgamAthI ajANu, ajJAnI, khInaanubhavI, agItAtha gItA jJAnI vaktA
heAya, te kadI paNa upadezadAnanA adhikArI hAi zake ja nahi', ane tevA adhikArI
jo vyAkhyAnapITha para caDhI vaktAkhAjI kare, manAvA-pUjAvA mATe peAtAnuM
janamanara Mjana vAcAlapaNuM dAkhave, teA te kevaLa avidhie vattatA hAI, jJAnInA
mAnA droha ja kare che. mATe zravaNAdi vidhisa'panna, ceAgamAganA anubhavI,
bhAvayeAgI, evA gItA jJAnI satpuruSa ja A cegamAganA upadezadAtA hAvA ceAgya
che. evA sadupadeSTA thakI ja Anu sadupadeza dAna zele che, ane tevA mahAtmA
sadupadeSTAthI ja mAga pravarte che. * zrAddhaH zrotA sudhIrvaktA yujyeyAtAM
yadIza tat  /  tvacchAsanasya sAmrAjyamekachatraM kalAvapi  //  --zrI
hemaca'drAcAryajIkRta vItarAgastava. "sadupadeSTAnI bahu jarUra che.
sadupadeSTAnI bahu jarUra che." -zrImad rAjacaMdrajI ane tevA sadupadeSTA yathA
vaktA satpuruSo thakI devAtA A jJAnadAnanuM prayAjana paNa atyaMtapaNe
zreyAvidmanI prazAMti arthe hAya che, puNyAntarAyanA vighnanI prazAMti arthe
hAya che; kAraNa ke AvA jJAnadAnarUpa parama satkAryAMthI peAtAnA zreyAvijJa
zreyaslRmAM-AtmakalyANamAM je vighna che, tenI prazAMti hAya che, atyaMta
prazAMti arthe zAMti heAya che. arthAt puNyAnubaMdhI puNyamAM je aMtarAya che
tenI prazAMti-atyaMta zAMti hAya che. eTale AvA sazAstranA dAnathI potAnA
zreyaprAptinA atarAye| chUTe che, ne tethI peAtAne zreyasUnI- parama zrutanI
mekSarUpa saphaLanI prApti heAya che. Ama A parama satzAsra pAte zreyAvighnanI
prazAMti karanAra heAvAthI, tenuM dAna paNa sva-parane zreyAvighnanI prazAMti
karanAra che. eTalA mATe AtmakalyANunI niSkAma bhAvanAthI prabhAvanA

Page #835 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Conclusion:  Shreyavighaprashanti and Continuous Giving: Kalash Kavya**  (759)
In order to bring about the influence of the Supreme Being, the virtuous
teachers, the good men, have given the knowledge of this virtuous scripture for
the sake of the peace of the Shreyavins.  So be it!  "Filled with their own
desires, with the qualities of yoga-bhaav, the wise followers of Shri Nayavijay,
the readers, are praised." -  Sakshat. 88  - Conclusion Kalash Kavya -  The
ocean of many scriptures, like the Vasantatilaka Sagar, was churned, this
beautiful, well-written scripture, full of wisdom, emerged.  The wise ones
extracted the nectar from the ocean of milk, the wise Shri Haribhadra planted
it.  167  The essence is like pure butter, this is the essence of the scripture.
The wise one has summarized it concisely, the meaning of the self, the meaning
of the world, the meaning of the Supreme.  168  The summary is the complete
path, this is an unprecedented, excellent power of synthesis.  The seed is in
the tree, and the tree is in the seed.  169  Each sutra is a treasure trove, in
the point, the accomplished is known.  For the sake of guidance, the wise one
has explained it in detail.  170  The yogis are like the light that illuminates
the world, the nectar of nectar, Shri Haribhadra Deva.  Oh, what can be said
about his speech?  What can be said about the greatness of Vamana in the realm
of heaven?  171  For those who are engaged in the cycle of action, this is
beneficial and useful.  This scripture of yoga is the right of those who are
seeking liberation from the world through the self.  172  Those who are engaged
in the cycle of action, those who are followers of the true Dharma, are free
from hatred, they love God, the Guru, and the twice-born.  They are humble,
compassionate, and have conquered their senses.  173  Those who have received
the good qualities from their parents, who are the light of their family, those
sons of good families, who are well-behaved, do not take on the qualities of
their family.  174  The eight qualities, such as Shreshtha, are clearly evident.
Desire, action, and the two Yamas are present.  The yogis are known as those who
are engaged in the cycle of action, who are eager for the stability and
attainment of the Yamas.  175  The actions of the senses, the cycle of karma,
are for the sake of others.  Now, the cycle of action for the sake of the self
has emerged.  The self is the action of the self, the self is the action of the
self, the great soul acts from the self.  176  The nature of the self is not
destroyed by division, the self is not taught as something other than the self.
The self does not destroy the substance, it does not gather, it does not have
the thought of possessiveness.  177

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 upasaMhAra : zreyavighaprazAMti athe satatadAna : kaLaza kAvya (759) zrevinanI
prazAMtine arthe sadupadeSTA sapuruSoe A satuzAstranuM jJAnadAna karI parama
sadbhutanI prabhAvanA karavA gya che. tathAtu! leka pUraje nija nija IcchA,
yogabhAva guNarayaNejI; zrI nayavijaya vibudha payasevaka, vAcaka yazane vayaNe
che."--I. . sakjhA. 88 - upasaMhAra kaLaza kAvya - vasaMtatilakA sAgarUpa bahu
zAstra samudra maMthya, A gadaSTimaya ga sugraMtha gu; dugdhAbdhimAMtha vibudhe
amRta vaLyuM, gAmRta zrI haribhadra budhe vAvyuM. 167 che sAra te kSarataNe
navanIta mAtra, A tema gabhRtasAra ja gazAsa; saMkSepamAM kayuM samuddhata A
sUrIke, AtmArtha artha paramArthaparA munI. 168 saMkSepa teya paripUrNa ja mArga
vyakti, evI apUrva ahiM zreSTha samAsazakti, che sidhu bindumahiM binduya
sidhumAMhi, che vRkSa bIjamahi ne bIja vRkSamAMhi. 169 pratyeka sUtra
gabharAzaya eha sthAne, bindumahIM ulasiye kRtasibdha jANe! digadarzanArtha kaMI
teha taNA ulAse, lAMbuM vivecana karyuM bhagavAnadAse. 170 jogIdra jeha jaga
jAgatI jyota jevA, vAamRte amRta zrI haribhadra devA; vANI taNe tasa aho ! kuNu
tAga pAme ? AMbe zuM ka5TTama vAmana svarga dhAme? 171 je kulago vaLa
pravRttacakra yegI, teneya eha upakAraka upayogI; AtmAthI jagajana eha mumukSu
mAtra, A yegazAstra adhikAra kahyA supAtra. 172 te kulagI jana yogikule ja
jamyA, ne gidharma anuyAyi yathArtha anyA; adveSa deva guru dvija zuM
premavaMtA, vinIta dayALuya jitendriya bedhavaMtA. 173 saMskAra janma lahIM yegI
pitAdidvArA, je kuladIpa kulane ajavALanArA; te kulaputra kulagI suzIla epe,
maryAda kulavadhuM zuM kulanI na lepe. 174 tazazreSAdi guNa aSTa suspaSTa varte,
IcchA pravRtti yama Adi dvaya prava; ne sthira siddhi yamanA atize ja kAmI, te
jANa jogIjana pravRttacaka nAmI. 175 karnAdi kAraka kucakra parArtha varyuM, te
AtmasAdhaka sucakra have pravatyuM; AtmArtha Atma thakI AtmakriyA ja AtmA,
AtmAthI AtmamahiM A karate mahAtmA. 176 AtmasvabhAva na vibhAvathI te haNe che,
AtmA zivAya parabhAva sva nA bhaNe che; AtmAtivikti para dravya na te hare che,
nA bhegave na ja mamatva mati kare che. 177

Page #836 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(760) Thus, the non-violent sacrificial cycle of the form, along with the well-
established four-fold activity cycle, which was running as a causal cycle, was
set in motion. On the straight path of liberation, the 178th Aavachchak Yaga is
the initial Yaga, and from it, the two Aavachchak Yagyas are born. These Yagyas
are the auspicious cause of the four-fold Yaga, and they are the recipients of
the right opportunity Yaga. 17 Those who recognize the form of the saint and
serve the saint, receive the saint's fruit and the saint's grace. This is the
right opportunity of the three Aavachchak Yagyas, and this is the
appropriateness of the four-fold Yaga. 180 This entire four-fold activity cycle,
may this treatise be of some benefit to it. By holding onto the right side and
the main hearing, and by strengthening the four-fold Yaga. 181 The right side is
the action of the feeling of devotion, and it is considered to be as clear as
the sun's light. The sun's light is very small and perishable, and in contrast
to this, the light of the sun is vast and imperishable! 182 Such a treatise,
which is a revealer of secrets, is not suitable for the unworthy. For the
unworthy, it will lead to great disrespect. Therefore, the learned Shri
Haribhadra, out of compassion, 183 gives it only to the worthy, with love, so
that the supreme teachings have their effect in the world. And Shri Haribhadra
says that this is the way to avoid obstacles to liberation. This is what
Bhagvandas has said in accordance with it. 184  Yoga-drishti-samuccaya ॥ इति
महर्षिश्रीहरिभद्राचार्यविरचिते किरत्चंद्रसूनुमनःसुखनंदनेन भगवानदासेन
सुमनोनन्दनीबृहत टीकाना मकविवेचनेन सप्रपचं विवेचिते श्रीयोगदृष्टिसमुच्चयशास्त्रे
उपसंहारः ॥ ॥ This is the conclusion of the Shri Yoga-drishti-samuccaya Shastra,
composed by the great sage Shri Haribhadracharya, and explained in detail with
the commentary called "Sumanonandani Brihattika" by Bhagvandas, the son of
Kiratchandra, who is known for his happiness of mind. ॥

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (760) evu. svarUpanuM ahi'saka yAgacakra, sAdhe susAdhu nita cArgI
pravRttacakra je cAlatu hatuM ja kAraka cakra vakra, tene calAvyu. Rju
meAkSapathe ava. 178 ne Adya yAga ja ava'caka yAga yAge, tethI mIMjA dvaya
avaMcaka yAga yAge; A yAgIe ja zubha caiAga taNA prayAge, che pAtra atra
adhikArI suyeAga yAge. 17 je saMtanuM svarUpa oLakhA~ saMta seve, te sa Mta
saMtaphala saMta kRpArthI leve; AvA avAMcaka triyAga taNA suyeAge, A yAginuM
ahiM ceAgyapaNu ja cege. 180 A kulaceArgI tyama pravRttacakranAya, A graMthathI
kaMI vaLI upakAra hAya; satu pakSapAta pramukha zravaNe dharIne, sAga khIja taN
puSTivaDe karIne. 181 sad pakSapAta tyama bhAvazUnI kriyAnuM, khadyota bhAnu
sama aMtara spaSTa mAnu; khadyota teja ati alpa ane vinAzI, A viparIta ravinu-
budha lyA vimAsI! 182 evAM rahasya suprakAzaka graMtha evA, A te ayeAgya janane
na ja ceAgya devA; bhArI anaya kara leza ahiM avajJA, tethI vadyA zrI haribhadra
dharI karuNA, 183 devA ja ceAgya janane para prema bhAve, jethI jage parama
zruta prabhAva thAve; ne zreya vighna viraDe,-haribhadra bhAkhe, tene anuvA~
kahyuM bhagavAnadAse. 184 yogadRSTisasukSaya  //  iti
maharSizrIharibhadrAcAryaviracite kiratcaMdrasUnumanaHsukhanaMdanena
bhagavAnadAsena sumanonandanIbRhata TIkAnA makavivecanena saprapacaM vivecite
zrIyogadRSTisamuccayazAstre upasaMhAraH  //   //  iti maharSi zrI
haribhadrAcArye vicelA ane zrImana:sukhabhAI karacaMdranA putra DaoN,
bhagavAnadAse svaracita sumaneAMnaMdanI bRhIkA nAmaka vivecanathI savistara
vivecelA zrI yogadRSTisamuccaya zAstramAM upasa'hAra  //

Page #837 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Appendix (761) Appendix The Essence of Icchaya Yoga, Shastra Yoga and Sama
Yoga  A truly aspiring soul, a selfless being, on the path to liberation,
touches upon three stages: Icchaya Yoga, Shastra Yoga and Sama Yoga, in
succession, before attaining liberation. To understand the essence of these
stages, let's use a simple analogy.  Imagine a traveler, representing the soul,
lost in a terrifying forest, representing the world. First, he desperately wants
to escape this forest, to attain liberation. He searches and searches, and
finally, he finds a knowledgeable guide, a Sadguru. He learns from the guide and
develops faith. Thus, he starts walking on the path of liberation, guided by
knowledge and faith. However, he sometimes makes mistakes. This is the stage of
Icchaya Yoga, where he progresses on the path of liberation.  During this
journey, the guide, representing the scriptures, remains with him. Following the
guide's instructions, he gains complete and unwavering knowledge of the
scriptures. With the help of the scriptures, he sees the path clearly and
progresses with faith, to the best of his ability, without making mistakes.
Eventually, he crosses the terrifying forest and reaches a beautiful highway, a
straight path. The destination of liberation appears like a beacon in the
distance. Now, the guide, the scriptures, are no longer needed to guide him. He
leaves the guide behind, but continues to follow the general instructions. With
his own self-power, he progresses with great enthusiasm and speed, this is the
stage of Sama Yoga.  With the light of knowledge, he sees the path clearly and
overcomes the obstacles, the negative tendencies, with his own self-power. He
climbs the ladder of liberation, crossing the 8th, 9th, 10th, and 12th stages
with great speed, and reaches the 13th stage. He attains Keval Jnana, the
perfect knowledge, and directly sees the true nature of reality. The city of
liberation appears before him. He feels he has reached his destination! He then
enjoys the fruits of his knowledge for some time (according to his lifespan) and
shares his knowledge with others, benefiting the world. When his lifespan comes
to an end, he renounces the body, speech, and mind, and enters the city of
liberation through a magnificent door, like a mountain peak, a state of complete
detachment. He becomes a Siddha Purusha, a liberated soul, and dwells in eternal
bliss, in infinite samadhi, for an infinite period.  ## The Essence of the Eight
Stages of Consciousness  Friend, Tara, Mala, Diya, Sthira, Kanta, Prabha, Para -
these are the eight stages of consciousness, each representing a higher level of
self-awareness. They represent increasing levels of light, like a spark, a
flame, a fire, etc.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pariziSTa (761) pariziSTa icchAyAga, zAstrayoga ane sAma yAganA sAra meAkSamAge
gamana karatA kharekhara mumukSu-nirdabha AtmAthI puruSa anukrame icchAyAga,
zAyeAga ane sAmAga e traNa bhUmikAone spazIne mekSa pAme che. eneA sArasamuccaya
samajavA mATe sthUla rUpaka-ghaTanA karIe. A saMsArarUpa bhayaMkara aTavImAM
bhUvA paDele jIvarUpa musAphara prathama tA temAMthI chUTavAnI tIvra IcchA rAkhe
che, meAkSa meLavavA icche che; eTale DhUMDhatA hU~DhatA te tenA mA jANukAra
sadgurune pUche che; tenI pAsethI te jANIne saddhe che. Ama te zrutA ne jJAnI
ane che ne zraddhApUrvaka te uSTi mArge cAlavA prayAsa kare che, chatAM tene
kvacit pramAda thaI Ave che. Ama A icchAyegI mekSamArge AgaLa vadhatA jAya che.
A musApharI daramyAna zAsrarUpa bhomIe (guide) sadA tenI sAthe che, eTale tenI
AjJA pramANe cAlatAM tene zAstranuM sapUrNa avikala jJAna prApta thAya che, ane
tenI sahAyathI mAga dekhA dekhate te zraddhApUrvaka, potAnI zakti pramANe,
apramAdIpaNe AgaLa pragati karatA jAya che. AAma te bhayAnaka aTavI vaTAvI jaIne
suMdara rAjamAga para-dhArI rastA para AAvI jAya che. eTale AgaLanA meAkSasthAna
bhaNIne raste cAkakhe cAkhA dIvA jevA dekhAya che. eTale zAsrarUpa seminI have
TheTha vaLAvavA AvavAnI jarUra nahi. hAvAthI tene cheDIne, paNa tenI mAtra
digdarzanarUpa sAmAnya sUcanAne anusarIne te sama yAgI AtmasAmarthyathI cegamAge
tIvra saMvegathI atyaMta vegathI jhapATAbaMdha doDatho jAya che. prAtila
jJAnathIpratibhAsa'puna anubhavajJAna dRSTithI AgaLa AgaLane mAga cAkhA dIvA
jevA dekhatA te kSAryapathamika dharmAMne-kSayApazama bhAvAne phagAvI i,
dharmAMsanyAsa karatA karatA, apUrva AtmasAmarthyathI kSapaka zreNI para caDhI,
8-9-10-12 guNuThANA jhapATAbaMdha vaTAvI 13mA guThANuM paheAMce che, kevalajJAna
pAmI sadravya-paryAya pratyakSa dekhe che. tyAM tA mAkSanagara sAkSAt dekhAya
che. te jANe tenA parAmAM AvI pahoMcyA che! tyAM pachI te thADA vakhata (AyuSpa
pramANe) visAmeA khAya che ne peAtAne thayelA jJAnanA lAbha bIjAne-jagatane ApI
parama paropakAra kare che. pachI AyuSyanI mudata pUrI thavA ALye, te mana-
vacana-kAyAnA ceAgAne nizaSa karI-tyAga karI, cegasanyAsa karI meru jevI niSkapa
zailezI avasthArUpa bhavya daravAjAmAMthI sAkSAta mAkSanagaramAM praveza kare
che, ane siddha puruSa banI sAdi anaMtA kALa anaMta samAdhimukhamAM zAzvata
sthiti kare che. AThe ceAgadaSTinA sAmAnya kathananA sAra mitrA, tArA, malA,
dIyA, sthira, kAMtA, prabhA, parA--e uttarAttara vadhatI AtmadazAvALI ATha
ceAgaSTi che. temAM uttarAttara vadhatA jatA edhaprakAza, tRNuagnikaNu,

Page #838 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Essence of Eight Yogic Visions (762)  The eight yogic visions can be
compared to the light of a straw fire, a village fire, a wooden fire, a lamp, a
jewel, a star, the sun, and the moon, respectively. These eight visions
correspond to the eight limbs of yoga: Yama, Niyama, Asana, Pranayama,
Pratyahara, Dharana, Dhyana, and Samadhi. They are attained by overcoming the
eight types of mental defilements: Khed (sorrow), Udvega (anxiety), Kshepa
(agitation), Utthana (excitement), Bhrānti (delusion), Anyamud (confusion),
Rugna (illness), and Asanga (attachment). The eight virtues: Advesha (non-
attachment), Jijnasa (curiosity), Shushrusha (service), Shravana (listening),
Adhyayana (study), Mimamsa (reflection), Pratipatti (understanding), and
Pravritti (action) manifest in these eight visions. (For clarity, refer to the
accompanying table.)  Here, the word "Dristi" signifies a vision that is aligned
with the right faith and the teachings of the scriptures. It leads to the
cessation of wrong actions and the manifestation of right actions.  In these
eight yogic visions, the first four, starting with Mitra, are characterized by
Mithyatva (false belief). Samyaktva (right belief) begins with the fifth vision,
called Sthira. Although the first four visions are marked by Mithyatva, they are
still considered part of the six visions because they contribute to the
attainment of Samyaktva. Just as sugarcane juice and molasses are essential for
the production of pure sugar, the stages of Mitra, etc., are crucial for the
attainment of pure soul liberation. The vision of Mitra, etc., is like
sugarcane, as it yields the sweetness of the nectar of right conduct.  The first
four visions, starting with Mitra, are considered to be either "Pratipati"
(reversible) or "A-pratipati" (irreversible). However, the last four visions,
starting with Sthira, are always irreversible. Once attained, they cannot be
lost, and therefore, there is no possibility of suffering in hell, etc. After
attaining these irreversible visions, the journey towards liberation becomes
continuous and unbroken. If there are any remaining karmic burdens, one may have
to take temporary birth as a god or human, but ultimately, one will reach the
city of liberation, the "true home."  **Table**  | Yogic Vision | Limb |
Defilement | Virtue | Comparison | |---|---|---|---|---| | Mitra | Yama | Khed |
Advesha | Straw fire | | Tara | Niyama | Udvega | Jijnasa | Village fire | | La
| Asana | Kshepa | Shushrusha | Wooden fire | | Digra | Pranayama | Utthana |
Shravana | Lamp | | Sthira | Pratyahara | Bhrānti | Adhyayana | Jewel | | Kanta
| Dharana | Anyamud | Mimamsa | Star | | Prabha | Dhyana | Rugna | Pratipatti |
Sun | | Para | Samadhi | Asanga | Pravritti | Moon |  **Note:** Mithyatva (false
belief) prevails in the first four visions. Samyaktva (right belief) begins with
the fifth vision.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ATha yogadRSTinA sAmAnya sAra (762 ) geAmayaagnikaNa, kASThaagnikaNa, dIpaka,
ratna, tArA, sUrya ane caMdranA prakAza sAthe, anukrame sarakhAvI zakAya che. A
ATha dRSTimAM yama, niyama, Asana, prANAyAma, pratyAhAra, dhAraNA, dhyAna ane
samAdhi e ceAganA AThe aMganI anukrame ekeka ema prApti hAya che kheda, udvega,
kSepa, utthAna, bhrAMti, anyamud, rugN ane AsaMga e ATha prakAranA citta-Azaya
doSanA tyAga thatAM anukrame A ATha dRSTi sAMpaDe che; ane adveSa, jijJAsA,
zuzruSA, zravaNa, edha, mImAMsA, pratipatti ane pravRtti e ATha guNamAMthI ekeka
anukrame A ATha hRSTimAM AvirbhAva pAme che-pragaTe che. (spaSTa samajavA mATe
jue A sAthe joDeluM kASTaka.) atre dRSTi' zabdaneA artha satzAsrazraddhAthI
yukta, sadAgamanI AjJAne anukUla evA eSa che; ane tenA phaLarUpe
asatpravRttipada aTake che, ne satpravRttipada pragaTe che. A ATha ceAgaSTimAM
mitrA Adi pahelI cAra sudhI mithyAtva hAya che, pAMcamI sthirA dRSTithI
samyaktvanA prAraMbha thAya che. mitrA Adi cAramAM mithyAtva hovA chatAM tene
saSTimAM gaNI, tenuM kAraNa e che ke te samyaktvanA kAraNarUpa thAya che. jema
zuddha sAkaranI banAvaTamAM zeraDI-rasa-kAvA vagere avasthAe Avazyaka che, tema
zuddha AtmAnI niSpattimAMsiddhimAM mitrA vagere avasthAe AtmadazAo avazya
upayegI hAya che. mitrA Adi dRSTi zeraDI jevI che, kAraNa ke temAMthI
saMvegarUpa mAya nI-mIThAzanI niSpatti thAya che. A ATha dRSTimAM mitrA mAdi
pahelI cAra dRSTi pratipAtI pAchI paDanArI ke apratiSThAtI-pAchI na paDanArI
hAya, ema vikalparUpa bhajanA che; paNa chellI cAra sthirA Adi dRSTi te
apratipAtI ja hoya--AvyA pachI pAchI paDe ja nahi, ane tethI temAM narakAdi
apAya (hAni-mAdhA) paNa heya nahi. ane AvI apratipAtI-pAchI nahi paDatI dRSTi
sAMpaDavA pachI, muktinagara pratyenuM prayANu-gamana akhaMDa abhaMgapaNe cAlyA
kare. vaccamAM kadAca kanA bheAga bAkI hAya teA uttama deva-manuSyanA alpa bhava
karavArUpa rAtavAseA karavA paDe tA bhale, paNa chevaTe tA muktipure hAMce ja,
'svarUpa svadeza' jAya ja. kaTaka yogadRSTi 1 mitrA 2. tArA 3. lA 4. dIgrA 5.
sthirA kaiM. kAMtA 7. prabhA 8. parA cemAMga mama niyama Asana prANAyAma
pratyAhAra dhAraNA dhyAna samAdhi doSatyAga kheda uddega kSepa utthAna bhrAMti
anyamud rum (raNa) Asaga guNaprApti adveSa jijJAsA zubhraSA zravaNa mAdha
mIma'sA pratipatti pravRtti eSaupamA tRNuagnikaNa gAmayaagnikaNu kAagnikaNu
dIpaprabhA ratnaprasA tArAprabhA sUrya prabhA caMdraprabhA vizeSatA mithyAtva 39
,, ,, samyaktva ,, "P

Page #839 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Essence of Citradrusti, Taradrusti, and Aladrusti (763)  **1. The Essence
of Mitradrusti**  In this first 'Mitra' Chegadrusti, the vision-intellect
illumination is like the light of a blade of grass in fire; the first limb of
the vow, Yama, is attained; the first mental defect, called Khed, is abandoned;
and the first virtue, called Advesha, manifests.  Here, the seeker, rather than
the stationary person, embraces the superior yogic practices, which become the
middle-cause of the fruit of the path. The main yogic practices are: (1) pure
devotion to the Vitaraga Supreme Being, (2) service-devotion to the soul-
liberated, compassionate, and insightful Sadguru, (3) natural detachment from
the world, (4) adherence to the principle of non-possession, (5) devotion to the
scriptures through study and contemplation, (6) firm belief in the stories of
the path and its seeds, and (7) pure feelings of the path's teachings.  The
embrace of these superior yogic practices leads to the destruction of many
emotional impurities, and through the ripeness of Tathabhavya, it is often found
in humans. The main characteristics of the soul in this final stage are: (1)
extreme compassion for the suffering, (2) absence of hatred towards the
virtuous, and (3) service to all beings with a sense of oneness. Such virtuous
and enlightened souls receive the teachings, actions, and guidance of the
Sadguru and the righteous. This trio of teachings is truly comparable to the
target-action of a mine.  Where all this is attained, in this Mitradrusti,
according to the true meaning of the term 'Gunasthan', the first and foremost
Gunasthan is present.  **2. The Essence of Taradrusti**  In the second
Taradrusti, the vision-intellect illumination is like the embers of dung; the
second limb of the vow, Niyama, is attained; the second mental defect, called
Udvega, is abandoned; and the second virtue, called Jijnasa, is present.  Here,
there are five types of Niyama: Shaucha, Santapa, Tapa, Swadhyaya, and
Ishwarpranidhan. Their detailed description is given here.  Furthermore, this
group of virtues is also present: (1) supreme love for the stories of the path,
(2) respect for those who practice pure truthfulness, and helping them as much
as possible, (3) escape from the fear of rebirth, (4) appropriate conduct, and
avoidance of inappropriate conduct, (5) curiosity towards those who are more
virtuous, (6) regret and fear towards one's own lack of virtue, (7) detachment
from the world and a desire to be free from it, (8) wonder at the virtuous
actions of the righteous, (9) the feeling of 'what the righteous say is the
truth', and the abandonment of self-will.  **3. The Essence of Aladrusti**  In
this third Aladrusti, the vision is like a half-burnt piece of wood; the third
limb of the vow, Asana, is attained; due to the absence of false desires, there
is a state of comfortable sitting everywhere, there is a complete and
uninterrupted flow of breath, and there is a commitment to the practice of non-
attachment and non-possession.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 citrAdaSTi, tArAdRSTi, alASTinA sAra (763) 1. mitrAdaSTinA sAra A pahelI
'mitrA' cegadRSTimAM dazana-medhaprakAza tRNuagnikaNanA prakAza jeve mada hAya
che, ceganuM prathama aMMga-yama prApta thAya che, kheda nAmanA prathama
AzayadoSane tyAga heAya che, ane adveSa nAmanA prathama guNa pragaTe che. ahIM'
sthiti karatA yAgI puruSa uttama cAgamIjonuM grahaNa kare che,-je yAgamIja
mAkSa-phaLanuM madhya-amegha kAraNa thaI paDe che. mukhya cAgamIja A che--(1)
vItarAga paramAtmAnI zuddha bhakti, (2) bhAvayeAgI evA bhAvAcAyaeN rUpa AtmArAmI
sadgurunI sevA-bhakti, (3) sahaja bhavavairAgya, (4) dravya abhigraDanuM pAlana,
(5) lekhanAdi vaDe satzAstranI bhakti, (6) cAgabIja kathAnA zravaNa pratye
sthira AzayavALI mAnyatA, (7) ane tenA zuddha upAdeya bhAva. A uttama
yeAgakhIjonuM grahaNa ghaNA bhAvamalanA kSaya thaye chellA pudgalAvattamAM
tathAbhavyatAnA paripAkathI prAye manuSyAne hoya che. A chellA pudgalAvamAM
vattatA jIvanA mukhya lakSaNa A che-(1) duHkhIA pratye atyaMta dayA, (2) guNavAn
pratye adveSa, (3) sa kAInI abhedabhAve catheAcita sevA. AvA lakSaNavALA
bhadrabhUtti mahAtmA jIvane sadguru satpuruSanA yAgathakI cagAvacaka,
kriyAvaMcaka ne lAvacaka prApta thAya che. A avaMcakatrayane khANunI
lakSyakriyAnI upamA sAMgApAMga kharAkhara ghaTe che. A badhu'ya jyAM prApta
thAya che, evI A mitrAdRSTimAM 'guNusthAna' zabdanA kharekharA atha pramANe,
mukhya evuM pahelu' guNasthAnaka varte che. 2. tArASTinA sAra bIjI tArASTimAM
darzana-medhaprakAza chANAnA agnikaNu samAna haiAya che; yAganu khIjuM aMga
niyama udvega nAmanA khIjAM cittadoSanA tyAga ane jijJAsA nAmanA khIne guNa hoya
che. atre zauca, satASa, tapa, svAdhyAya ane IzvaraprANidhAna e pAMca prakAranA
niyama hAya che, tenu savistara varNana ahIM karyuM che. te uparAMta atre A
guNasamUha paNa hAya che--(1) yAgakathAo pratye parama prema. (2) zuddha
satyeAga sAdhanArA cegIe pratye bahumAna, teone yathAzakti upacAra. tethI
hitAya, kSudraupadravahAni ane ziSTasammatatA. (3) bhavabhaya palAyana. (4)
ucita AcaraNu, anucita anAcaNu. (5) adhika guNavaMta pratye jijJAsA. (6) nija
guNuhInatAthI pAtA pratye kheda-trAsa. (7) bhavavairAgya-sa'sArathI chUTavAnI
kAmanA. (8) satpuruSAnI citra pravRttithI AzcayaeN. (9) 'ziSTa kahe te pramANa'
evI bhAvanA, svacchaMda tyAga. 3. alAdaSTinA sAra A trIjI alAdaSTimAM darzana
deDha-kASTha agnikaNu samAna heAya che, ane yAganuM trIju` aMga Asana prApta
thAya che; asat tRSNAnA abhAvathI sarvatra sukhAsana ja hoya che, avarApUrNAMka
satra gamana hoya che, ane apAyaparihArathI srava kRtya praNidhAnayukta hAya
che.

Page #840 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(764) The third virtue attained here, for the Domadashti, is called Shushrusha.
This Shushrusha is as intense as the desire of a young, happy man to hear divine
music. This Shushrusha is like a stream of nectar, without which, hearing is
like a bad medicine in barren land - it is futile, perhaps hearing may not
happen, but due to the influence of this Shushrusha, auspicious feelings lead to
the fruit of karma-destruction, which is the cause of excellent knowledge. Also,
here, the third mental defect called Kshepa is abandoned, meaning there is an
accusation related to the senses, and it is the skill of the cowherd. Here, the
yogi does not bind the instruments of the Dharma, which are the means of
achieving liberation, but always remains free from sin and attains the great,
unwavering, compassionate one.  4. For the Deepradashti, the essence is that, as
per its name, it has a light of knowledge like a lamp, the fourth limb of the
path is Pranayama (Bhavpranayama), the fourth mental defect called Utthana is
destroyed, and the fourth virtue called Tav Shravan is attained. However, here,
there is still no subtle knowledge. The reason for this is the absence of the
Vedhasanvedya-pad, which is pure self-awareness, and the presence of the
Adhyasanvedya-pad.  This Adhyasanvedya-pad, which is the characteristic of the
Bhava-abhinandi, is like blindness and leads to misery. It is hidden in this
very state by the great souls through satsang, agama, and yoga, and it is
impossible to reveal it at other times. Even though this Avasanvedya-pad is
hidden, the human being's contradictory, illogical arguments are automatically
avoided by the law. The seeker is not attached to these evil arguments, which
are enemies of the mind in many ways, but is attached to shraddha, shila,
samadhi, and pure charity, because the effort of thoughtful beings is for the
attainment of the transcendental meaning, and that transcendental meaning is
never accessible to dry logic. The knowledge of the omniscient is
transcendental, and it is generally understood that there are not many who have
a different opinion from the truth, so those who consider it different are
deluded by their excessive devotion. Because whatever is called omniscient is
truly transcendental, it is one and the same everywhere, despite individual
differences. Therefore, what it accepts as common is the same in the minds of
all intelligent beings, like many servants of a king. So, the omniscient truth,
which is worthy of worship, is not different in its devotees, all the
omniscient-believers. Two types of devotion, Chitra and Achitra, are described
in the yoga scriptures, which also confirm the unity of the omniscient.  Also,
even in the same practice, there are different fruits according to the intention
of the seeker, and this intention is also different according to the intensity
of attachment, etc., and the difference in the intellect, etc.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (764) domAdaSTine sAra zuzruSA nAmane trIjo guNa ahIM prApta thAya che. A
zuzraSA yuvAna sukhI puruSanI divya gAna zravaNecchA jevI tIvra hoya che. A
zuzraSA bejalapravAhanI saravANI jevI che, e vinAnuM zravaNa saravANI vinAnI
bhUmimAM ku davA jevuM-phegaTa che kadAca zravaNa na thAya tepaNa A zuzraSAnA
prabhAve zubhabhAvathI karmakSayarUpa phala thAya che,-je uttama bodhanuM kAraNa
thAya che. temaja kSepa nAmanA trIjA cittadoSano ahI tyAga hoya che eTale
meMgasaMbaMdhI akSepa hoya che, ane te gaupAyanuM kauzala hoya che. atre yogI
dharmanA upakaraNarUpa sAdhanamAM mUcchanA dharAvI sAdhanone baMdhane banAvato
nathI, paNa sadA pApathI bhAgate rahI mahAdayavaMta aviratane pAme che. 4.
dIprAdaSTine sAra cathI dImA daSyimAM tenA nAma pramANe dIpaka samAna
bodhaprakAza hoya che, veganuM cAthuM aMga prANAyAma (bhAvaprANAyAma) prApta
thAya che, utthAna nAmanA cethA cittadoSane nAza tathA tava zravaNa nAmanA cethA
guNanI prApti hoya che. chatAM atre haju sUkSma bodha hetuM nathI. tenuM kAraNa
atre zuddha AtmasaMvedanarUpa vedhasaMvedyapadano abhAva ane ethI viparIta
adyasaMvedyapadanuM hovApaNuM e che. bhavAbhinaMdI jenuM pAtra che evuM A
adyasaMvedyapada aMdha5NArUpa hoI durgatimAM pADanArUM che, ane te satsaMga-
Agama yoga vaDe dhuraMdhara mahAtmAothI ja A ja bhUmikAmAM chatAvA gya che, anya
samaye jatAvuM azakya che ane A avevasaMvedya pada chatAtAM manuSyanA viSama
kutarkagraha ApoApa niyamathI TaLe che. je cittane aneka prakAre bhAvazatru che
evA A duSTa kutaka mAM mumukSue Agraha kara yukta nathI, paNa zratamAM, zIlamAM,
samAdhimAM ane suvizuddha paropakAramAM te kara yukta che, kAraNa ke vicAravaMta
jIvono prayAsa te atIndriya arthanI siddhi arthe hoya che, ane te atIndriya
artha kadI zuSka tarkane gocara hetuM nathI. sarvajJatatva atIndriya che, te
aMge sAmAnyapaNe vicAratAM jaNAya che ke tatvathI ghaNA sarva bhinna matavALA
nathI, tethI tene bheda mAnave te tenA atibhaktone moha che. kAraNa ke sarvajJa
nAmane je kaI pAramArthika ja che, te vyaktibheda chatAM tanathI sarvatra eka ja
che. tethI te sarvane je sAmAnyathI mAnya kare che, te sarve buddhimAnane mana
samAna che, eka rAjAnA Azrita bahu sevakenI jema eTale Ama upAsya evA
sarvajJatatvane je abheda che, te tenA upAsaka sarva sarvajJavAdImAM paNa bheda
nathI. citra ane acitra ema be prakAranI bhakti yegazAstromAM varNavavAmAM AvI
che, te parathI paNa A sarvajJanI ekatAne puSTi maLe che. temaja-samAna
anuSThAnamAM paNa abhisaMSi-Azaya pramANe bhinna bhinna phaLa hoya che, ane A
Azaya paNa rAgAdinI taratamatA pramANe tathA buddhi Adi beghanA bheda pramANe

Page #841 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Essence of the Fifth Insight (765)  There are many types of distinctions
in the fifth insight, because there are three types of knowledge: (1) **Buddhi**
(intellect), (2) **Jnana** (knowledge), and (3) **Asamaah** (non-attachment).
These distinctions arise from the three types of knowledge.   **Buddhi** is
knowledge that relies on the senses, **Jnana** is knowledge that is based on
scriptures, and **Asamaah** is knowledge that is free from attachment and is
accompanied by right conduct.   The fruit of **Buddhi** is **Samsara** (cycle of
birth and death), the fruit of **Jnana** is **Parapara** (liberation through
gradual progress), and the fruit of **Asamaah** is **Shighra Maaks** (swift
liberation).   **Asamaah** is only possible for those who are **Bhavatit**
(transcended the cycle of birth and death) and are **Mumukshu** (aspirants for
liberation). Those who are **Bhavabhagavirkt** (completely detached from the
world) and are **Mumukshu** are only guided by **Sham Parayan** (the path of
peace).   Despite these distinctions, the fifth insight is like a single arrow
on the ocean, one and the same. This is because the essence of the fifth insight
is **Nirvana** (liberation), which is the same as **Sadashiv Parbrahma
Siddhatma** (the supreme consciousness), even though it is known by different
names.   Therefore, the essence of **Nirvana** is one and the same, and there is
no dispute about its nature. This essence is **Sajn** (self-aware) and **Sthit**
(stable), so how can there be distinctions in **Sajn**? And if there are no
distinctions in **Sajn**, then how can there be distinctions in its devotees?
Then, how are there distinctions in the **Sarvagnani** (omniscient) **Deshna**
(teachings)? The answer is:  (1) The **Deshna** is like a painting, and its
variations are due to the **Shikshya** (disciple's) understanding.   (2) Or, the
**Deshna** is one, but it appears different due to the **Shraata** (listener's)
**Machinty** (thought) and **Punyasamarthya** (merit).  (3) Or, the **Deshna**
is different due to **Desh** (place), **Kala** (time), etc., and it is
transmitted by **Rishi** (sages). The essence of the **Rishi Deshna** is also
**Sarvagnani** (omniscient).  Therefore, it is not appropriate to oppose or
contradict the **Sarvagnani** without understanding their perspective. It is not
appropriate to engage in dry arguments and debates about **Ateeindriya**
(supernatural) subjects like **Sarvagnani** with **Chhadmastha** (pretenders).
For a **Mumukshu**, it is not appropriate to grasp **Sarvatra** (everything)
with **Ayuka** (attachment). So, what is the point of grasping **Tuchch**
(trivial) and **Shushk** (dry) **Kutarak** (arguments)?   Therefore, a
**Mumukshu** should follow the teachings of these great beings:  (1) Avoid even
**Sukhsma Parpiden** (subtle harm).  (2) Always strive for **Papakar** (good
deeds).  (3) Worship **Gurudev** (spiritual teacher), **Dwij** (Brahmin),
**Yati** (ascetic), etc., appropriately.  (4) Be compassionate towards **Papi
Jiwa** (sinful beings).  The essence is that those who are free from the poison
of **Aagrah** (attachment) will attain the nectar of **Samyaktva** (right
conduct).  ## The Essence of the Fifth Insight  In the fifth insight, (1)
**Dan** (charity) is like **Ratna Prabha** (jewel light), **Nitya** (eternal)
and **Apratipati** (unbreakable). (2) The fifth **Yaganga** (limb of sacrifice),
**Pratyahar** (withdrawal of senses), is attained. (3) The fifth **Chitt Dosh**
(mental flaw), **Bhrant** (delusion), is eliminated. (4) The fifth **Gun**
(quality), **Sukhsma Bel** (subtle strength), is acquired.  Therefore, through
the distinction of **Granthi** (knots), the experience of **Shuddhatma** (pure
soul) is attained, which is the **Vedya** (object of knowledge) and **Svedya**
(subject of knowledge). This removes **Mahatmas** (great darkness) and reveals
the dawn of **Bhed Jnana** (knowledge of distinctions). It leads to the
understanding of **Swapar Vastu** (self and other), and all external activities
appear like **Dhuligruhakrida** (playing in a dust house), **Mrugjal** (mirage),
**Swapna** (dream), etc., which are **Asar** (unreal) and **Asthira**
(unstable). All external feelings appear like **Mrugjal** and **Swapna**, and
only **Atmayati** (self-realization) is considered **Praman** (proof), while
everything else is considered **Upplav** (illusion).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 sthisaSTine sAra (765) aneka prakAranA bhedavALA hoya che, kAraNa ke kheAdha
traNa prakAranA hoya che : ( 1 ) buddhi, (2) jJAna (3) asamAha. te beSa thakI
sarva karmAMmAM bheda paDe che. temAM iMdriyAnA Azraya kare te buddhi,
AgamapUrvaka hoya te jJAna, ane sadanuSThAnayukta je jJAna te asamAha
buddhikriyAnuM phaLa sa`sAra, jJAnakriyAnuM phaLa paraparAe meAkSa ane asamAhu
kriyAnuM phaLa zIghra mAkSa che. A asamAha kama bhavAtIta agAmI mumukSuone ja
heAya che, ane bhavabhAgavirakta A kharekharA mumukSuone mAtra eka ja
zamaparAyaNa evA che, ane avasthAbhedane bheda chatAM te sAgara paranA tIramAnI
jema eka ja che. kAraNa ke te saMsArAtIta para tattva 'nirvANa' nAmanuM che, te
sadAziva parabrahma siddhAtmA Adi zabdabhede oLakhAtu chatAM tattvathI niyamathI
eka ja che. eTale A nirvANutattva asaMmeAhathI tattvathI jANye prekSAvAne tenI
bhaktinI bAbatamAM vivAda ghaTatA ja nathI. ane A nirvANutattva niyamathI ja
sa`jJapUrvaka sthita che, eTale te sajJanA bheda kema hAya ane te na heAya tA
tenA bhaktonA bheda paNa kema hAya ? tA pachI sarvajJAnI dezanAnA bheda kema
che? tenuM samAdhAna--(1) ziSyanA anugrahAthe te citra-nAnA prakAranI che. (2)
athavA eenI dezanA eka chtAM zrAtAbhede tenA macintya puNyasAmarthyane lIdhe
citra bhAse che. (3) athavA te te deza-kAlAdi apekSAe citra dezanA RSie thakI ja
pravatI che, ane A RSidezanAnuM mUla paNa tattvathI sarvajJa ja che. eTalA mATe
te sarvajJanA abhiprAya jANyA vinA tenA pratikSepa-virodha karavA yukta nathI.
eTale AvA sarvajJa jevA atIndriya viSayamAM adha jevA chadmasthAe zuSka tarka-
grahathI vAdavivAda karavA yukta nathI. mumukSune te tattvathI sarvatra graha
ayukta che, te pachI A tuccha zuSka kutarka grahathI zuM? mATe mumukSue te A
mahat puruSonA mAne samyakSaNe anusaravu' ceAgya che : (1) sukSma parapIDana
paNu varjavuM, (2) pApakAramAM sadeva yatna karavA. (3) gurudeva dvija-yati
Adine yathAyeAgyapaNe pUjavA, (4) pApI jIvA pratye paNa dayAparAyaNa thavuM.
tAtparyaM ke je AgrahanuM viSa vaze, te ja samyakttva amRtane pAmaze. 5.
sthirAdaSTinA sAra A pAMcamI sthirA daSTimAM (1) dana ratnaprabhA samAna, nitya-
apratipAtI evuM hAya che, ( 2 ) pratyAhAra nAmanuM pAMcamuM yAgAMga prApta thAya
che, (3) bhrAMti nAmanA pAMcamA cittadoSa TaLe che, ane (4) sUkSma bela nAmanA
pAMcamA guNa sAMpaDe che. eTale graMthibheda thakI zuddhAtmAnubhUtirUpa vedyasa
MvedyapadanI prAptithI maha-tamas dUra thai bhedajJAnanuM prabhAta khulle che,
sva-para vastunA viveka upaje che, samasta zavaceSTA mAlakanI dhUligRhakrIDA
jevI, mRgajala svapnAdi jevI asAra ne asthira lAge che, sava` bAhya bhAvA
mRgajala ne svapnAdi samAna bhAse che, abAhya evI kevala eka Atmayaiti ja
pramANa gaNI mAkI bIjo badhA upaplava jANuM che.

Page #842 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(766) The wise, with a discerning vision, always withdraws the senses from
objects, never gets attached to the aggregates that are like sin, considers even
the aggregates obtained through Dharma as undesirable, and renounces the objects
of the senses from afar, worshipping the nectar of the Self. The eight great
Siddhis, the nine treasures, and all the powers become the servants of this wise
one, coming themselves to offer themselves to the yogi, but this yogi with right
vision does not even look at them. Where the infinite radiance of the soul is
revealed, what is the use of attainments and Siddhis? Knowing this, the wise
yogi with right vision strives only in Dharma, remaining steadfast in his own
Dharma. 6. The essence of the sixth right vision is that the vision is like the
sun; one attains the sixth Gana called Dharana, abandons the sixth mental
defilement called Anyamuda, and attains the sixth virtue called Mimamsa. Just as
the sword is distinct from the scabbard, so too, the yogi with right vision, who
knows the Self, knows the soul to be distinct from the body, etc., remains
steadfast in the Self, never getting attached to the external world, and through
his conduct in accordance with the nature of the Self, he attains perfect purity
of conduct. The mind of this great soul, who is the embodiment of Dharma,
remains constantly engaged in Dharma, like a faithful wife, while the body is
engaged in other activities. This yogi, whose mind is constantly attracted by
the knowledge of the Self, does not even get attached to the aggregates! Even
amidst the illusory world of Maya, he, who is the Self, remains unstained, like
the lotus in water. He who sees the aggregates in their true form, even amidst
the ocean of Maya, remains unattached to them and goes towards the supreme
state. But he who considers the aggregates as real, that man, who is the servant
of the Lord, floats in the ocean of existence. By drinking the nectar of the
firm truth of Mimamsa, which says, "I am pure knowledge, everything else is
undesirable," this yogi, who is established in this vision, constantly
experiences the progress of the Self, which is the rise of benefit. 7. The
essence of the seventh right vision is that the light of the seventh right
vision is like the sun; here, one attains the seventh Gana called Dhyana, the
seventh mental defilement called "Reg" is abandoned, and the seventh virtue
called "Tava Pratipatti" is revealed. Here, the yogi experiences the true bliss
of meditation, which is born from the knowledge of the difference between the
Self and the non-Self, and is filled with the nectar of peace; because this
great wise one, with pure knowledge, constantly meditates on the Self, day and
night. Therefore, this yogi experiences the true bliss of meditation on the
Self, which is his own, while everything else is suffering and everything else
is happiness.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (766) kAntAdaSTi, prabhASTine sAra ema vivekasaMpanna gI sadAya pratyAhAra karI
viSayomAMthI indriyone pAchI kheMce che, pApakhArUpa bhegamAM Asakti dharatA
nathI, dharmathI sAMpaDatA bhegane paNa aniSTa mAne che, ane viSayaviSane
dUrathI tyajI AtmasvarUpa amRtane bhaje che. aSTa mahAsiddhi, navanidhi ane
sarva vibhUtio A gInI dAsI thaI phare che, svayaM AvIne yogIne vare che, paNa A
samyagdaSTi yogI te sAme dRSTi paNa karatA nathI. jyAM AtmAnI anaMta trAddhi
pragaTI che. tyAM labdhi siddhi zI visAtamAM che? ema jANatA samyagadaSTi jJAnI
yogI tatvathI dharmamAM ja yatna karI AtmadharmamAM sthiratA dhare che. 6.
kAMtAdRSTine sAra chaThThI kAMtA dRSTimAM darzana tArA prabhA samAna hoya che;
dhAraNa nAmanA chaThThA gAMganI prApti, anyamud nAmanA chaThThA cittadoSano
tyAga, ane mImAMsA nAmanA chaThThA guNanI prApti hoya che. myAnathI talavAranI
jema dehAdithI AtmAne jeNe bhinna jANe che, e A AtmajJAtI samyagadaSTi yogI
AtmasvarUpamAM dhIra dhAraNa dhArI parabhAva-vibhAvamAM kadI moha dharAvatA
nathI, AtmasvabhAvamAM vartanArUpa dharmamAM vartanathakI samyapha AcArazuddhi
pAme che. dharmamAM ekAgramana A dharmamUrtAi mahAtmAnuM mana, pativratA strInI
jema, sadAya kRtadharmamAM lIna rahe che, ane kAyA ja bIjA kAmamAM hoya che Ama
mRtadharma jenA cittane nitya AkSepe che-AkaSI rAkhe che evA A
jJAnAkSepakavaMtane bhege paNa vahetu thatA nathI ! mohamayI mAyA madhye paNa
ahasvarUpI te duSkarakArI, jalamAM kamalanI jema, kadI paNa lepAtA nathI!
mAyAjala samA bhogane je ahIM tenA svarUpathI dekhe che, te bhegavatAM paNa
asaMga rahI parama pada pratye jAya ja che; paNa bhegane je tattvarUpa-sAcesAcA
mAne che, te bhagatattva puruSa te bhavasamudra taratuM nathI. huM eka zuddha ja
jJAnamaya, bAkI badhuMya aniSTa che evI mImAMsArUpa puSTa tattvasudhAnA
rasapAnathI je nitya puSTa che, e A daSTimAM sthita bhegI uttarottara AtmadazAnI
pragatirUpa hitaudaya sadAya pAme che. 7. prabhASTino sAra sAtamI prabhASTino
badhaprakAza sUrya samAna hoya che atre sAtamuM gAMgadhyAna prApta thAya che,
"rega' nAmane sAtamA cittadoSa TaLe che ne tava pratipatti nAmano sAtamo guNa
pragaTe che. sva5ra vastunA bhedajJAnathI janmeluM evuM prazamarasathI sAra
sAcuM dhyAnasukha atre anubhavI yogI cAkhe che; kAraNa ke nirmala bodha karIne
AtmAnuM zukala dhyAna A mahAtmA jJAnIne ahoniza varte che; eTale paravaza te
saghaLuM duHkha ne nijavaza te saghaLuM sukha hoI, A yogI Atmavaza evuM sAcuM
AtmadhyAna sukha anubhave che.

Page #843 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Essence of the Raddi  (767) Where there is no attachment to the
consequences of actions, where even the dreams of the past are not a shadow,
where there is no mental activity even in time, and where there is only the
state of pure soul in the self-time, there exists the eternal, unattached
activity. This state of pure activity, known as "Asanganushthan," is attained
here. This Asanganushthan, which bestows the eternal path, is praised by yogis
with many names like Prasantavahitta, Vibhag Parikshay, Shivvatm, Dhruv Bhag.
The yogi situated here attains this quickly, therefore this vision, which
bestows this state, is dear to the wise.  8. The Essence of the Para-drishti: In
the eighth Para-drishti, where there are two lights like the moon, the eighth
yoga-anga, Samadhi, is attained. In the eighth, the mental affliction called
Asanga is destroyed, and the eighth activity-guna is manifested. Therefore, in
this Para-drishti, which is established in Samadhi, where all external
influences and mental activities are absorbed, the soul is always established in
its pure nature, the mind is always merged in the soul, and the supreme blissful
Atma-Samadhi is manifested. In all regions, by the principle of sandalwood
fragrance, the self-nature is fully active, and the self-activity in the form of
the self is manifested. This supreme yogi, who is established in yoga, is beyond
all actions, and is devoid of any form. Therefore, just as there is no need for
climbing for one who has already climbed, there is no need for him to follow any
actions.  Just as the forest of jewels is created by the arrangement and
activity of jewels in this lake, so too, this great sage is created by the
arrangement and activity of Dharma-Sannyasa. In other words, this yogi-ishwar,
who has attained the yoga of Dharma-Sannyasa, which is the renunciation of all
the causes of decay, ascends the series of destructions and attains the eternal,
unobstructed, and pure state of Kevalashri. Just as the moon in the sky is
situated by its pure nature, and there is no need to establish it, so too, this
moon-like pure nature is situated. Its knowledge-veil, like the cloud, is
dispelled by the wind of Dharma-Sannyasa, and this great sage attains supreme
Keval-jnana and is called "Jnana-kevali." Thus, he whose all faults are
completely destroyed, and who is the gatherer of all the fruits of attainment,
this true great sage, Srimad Sarvajna, performs supreme selfless service and
then attains the end of yoga. In other words, in the state of Shaileshi, he
attains the supreme "A-yoga Yoga" and this Lord, who is of the nature of
spontaneous birth, destroys the disease of existence and attains supreme
blissful Nirvana.  The Essence of Mukta-Tattva-Mimamsa: The man who is free from
disease, who is in this lake, is this liberated soul, free from the disease of
existence. He is not non-existent, nor is he free from disease, nor is he the
one who was previously diseased. Here, the world is the great disease, and
birth, death, etc., are its...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 rAdadine sAra (767) jyAM parapariNatine kAMI saMga heta nathI, parasamayanI
jemAM svapna paNa chAMyA paDatI nathI, samaya mAtra paNa jemAM vibhAvavRtti hotI
nathI, ane zuddha AtmArUpa svasamayamAM ja sthiti hoya che, evI sata asaMga
pravRtti jyAM vatte che, evuM "asaMgAnuSThAna' saMjJAthI oLakhAtuM
satpavRttipada atra prApta hoya che. mahApathanA prayANurUpa heI nityapada
pamADanAruM A asaMgAnuSThAna prazAMtavAhitA, vibhAgaparikSaya, zivavatma,
dhruvabhAga-ema aneka nAme yogIothI gavAya che. Ane atra sthita yogI zIdhra
sAdhe che, tethI A pada pamADanArI A dRSTi ja gavidone ISTa che. 8. 5rAdaSTine
sAra jyAM be prakAza caMdra samAna hoya che, evI AThamI parA draSTimAM AThamuM
yogAMga samAdhi prApta thAya che, AThame AsaMga nAmane cittadoSa naSTa thAya
che, ane AThamo pravRtti guNa pragaTe che. eTale samAdhiniSTha evI A parA
dRSTimAM jyAM sarva parabhAva-vibhAva samAI jAya che, AtmA sadA zuddha
svabhAvamAM samAya che, mana AtmAmAM sadAya vilIna thAya che, evI parama
sukhadAyI AtmasamAdhi pragaTe che; sarva pradezamAM caMdanagaMdhanyAye
AtmasvabhAve pUrNa pravRttivALI sahAtmasvarUpa AtmapravRtti thAya che. A parama
yogArUDha puruSa sarva AcArathI para e nirAcAra padavALo hoya che, eTale
ArUDhane ArohaNanA abhAvanI jema ene kaI AcAra pALavApaNuM rahetuM nathI.
ratnanA niyogathI-vyApArathI ahIM lekamAM ratnAvaNika jema kRtakRtya thAya che,
tema dharmasaMnyAsanA viniyogathI-vyApArathI A mahAmuni kRtakRtya thAya che.
arthAt sarva kSAyopathamika dhane saMnyAsa-tyAga karavArUpa dharmasaMnyAsa
yogane pAmele A yogIzvara apUrvakaraNe kSapakazreNI para ArahI nityeAdayI ne
nirAvaraNa evI kevalazrI vare che. eTale AkAzamAM caMdra jema bhAvazuddha
prakRtithI sthita ja che, kAMI sthApita karavAno nathI, tema AmacaMdra je zuddha
svabhAva sthita che, tenuM meghapaTala jevuM jJAna AvaraNa Ama dharma
saMnyAsarUpa vAyunA sapATAthI vikherAI jatAM, te zrImAn gIzvara parama
kevalajJAna pAmI jJAnakevalI' kahAya che. Ama jenA sarva doSa sarvathA kSINa
varte che, ane je sarva labdhiphalanA bhegavanArA che, evA A kharekharA zrImad
sarvajJa mahAmuni parama parArtha-paropakAra karIne pachI yoganA aMtane pAme
che; arthAt zailezI avasthAmAM parama evA "ayoga yogane pAmIne A bhagavAna
sahajAnmasvarUpa svAmI bhavavyAdhine kSaya karI parama bhAva nirvANane pAme che.
mukta tattva mImAMsAne sAra vyAdhimukta puruSa je ahIM lekamAM hoya che, te A
bhava-vyAdhimukta mukta AtmA hoya che. te abhAvarUpa nathI, vyAdhithI mukta
nathI ema paNa nathI ane pUrve vyAdhivALo heta ema paNa nathI. atre saMsAra e ja
mahAvyAdhi che, janma-mRtyu Adi tenA

Page #844 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(768) The essence of the liberated soul's contemplation, the essence of the
conclusion, is the essence of change, which gives rise to a strange kind of
attachment and causes intense suffering like attachment, aversion, etc. This
karma-born suffering of birth and death is the primary cause, therefore, being
liberated from it, the liberated soul also becomes the primary cause, because by
getting rid of the defects of birth, death, etc., it attains the state of being
free from defects, the state of being free from defects. Therefore, the true
nature of the soul, the state of being self-existent, the state of being
naturally self-existent, is the state of liberation, the state of being
liberated. A patient, or his lack, or another who liberates him from the
disease, does not diminish the patient's primary nature; similarly, a being born
into the cycle of birth and death, or his lack, or another who liberates him
from it, does not diminish the primary nature of the being born into the cycle
of birth and death. But just as a man who has been cured of a disease is in a
state of being free from disease in the lake; similarly, the soul which has been
cured of the disease of birth, the being born into the cycle of birth and death,
is said to be free from the disease of birth in the scriptures. The absence of
disease does not make the patient disappear, but it is the state of being
healthy, the state of being free from disease, that is the state of being
healthy; similarly, the absence of the disease of birth does not make the soul
disappear, but it is the state of being free from the disease of birth, the
state of being the true nature of the soul, the state of being a healthy soul,
that is the state of being naturally self-existent, and that is the state of
liberation. The essence of the conclusion, the churning of the great ocean of
yoga scriptures, has been taken by the sage Shri Haribhadrasuri, the seer of
yoga, in the form of the book "Yoga Drishti Samuccaya"; each of its sutras is as
if a full ocean of knowledge is contained in a single drop, it is full of
profound meaning, for the purpose of guiding it, Bhagvandas has written a long
commentary on this book with great enthusiasm, and in it, with even greater
enthusiasm, he has created this new work of poetry, which shows the essence of
the book and the commentary. This yoga scripture will be beneficial to all those
who are seekers of liberation, who are free from the cycle of birth and death
and who are engaged in the cycle of birth and death. The characteristics of
those who are free from the cycle of birth and death and those who are engaged
in the cycle of birth and death have been clearly described here. Those who
recognize the true nature of the saints and serve them, they receive the
blessings of the saints, the fruits of the saints - such are the three types of
seekers, those who are attracted by the greatness, those who are attracted by
the knowledge, and those who are attracted by the fruits, they are the ones who
are worthy of this scripture in this age, and they are the ones who are worthy
of this scripture. The difference between pure feeling and feelingless action is
like the difference between the sun and the moon, etc., the secrets that this
scripture reveals, it does not give to the ignorant, but it gives to the wise
with great love, so that there may be a great impact on the world and the
seekers of liberation may be freed from suffering.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
(768 ) mukta tava mImAMsAne sAra-upasaMhArano sAra vikAra che, te vicitra
prakArano moha upajAve che ane rAgAdi tIvra vedanA pamADe che. karma janya A
bhavyAdhi mukhya che, mATe ethI mukta thayele mukta paNa mukhya ja ghaTe che,
kAraNa ke janmamaraNAdi deSa TaLavAthI tene adeSapaNAnI saMgati-ghaTamAnapaNuM
thAya che. eTale AtmAnI svarUpa sattA ja-svabhAva sthiti-sahajAmasvarUpa e ja
mokSabhAva-muktabhAva che. rogI, ke tene abhAva, ke tenAthI bIje te rogamukta
karI sannItithI ghaTata nathI; tema janmaregI, tene abhAva, ke tenAthI bIje te
mukta te paNa mukhyapaNe mukhya ghaTatuM nathI. paNa je puruSane vyAdhi kSINa
thaI gayo che, te jema lekamAM vyAdhimukta sthita che; tema je AtmAne
janmavyAdhi kSINa thayo che, te janmarogI te janmarogathI mukta zAstramAM kahyo
che. roganA abhAvathI kAMI rogIno abhAva thaI jato nathI, paNa te te rogamukta
nIrogIne ja svastha bhAva che; tema janmoganA abhAvathI kAMI AtmAne abhAva thaI
jato nathI, paNa te te naragI AtmasvarUpa svastha AtmAne svabhAvabhAva AvirbhAva
che, ane te ja mukta bhAva che. upasaMhArane sAra mahA yogazAstra-samudranuM
maMthana karI ArSadRSTA maharSi zrI haribhadrasUrie yogadRSTi samuccaya
graMtharUpa gAmRta levyuM che; bindumAM jANe kRtasidhu ulla heya ema tenuM
pratyeka sUtra gaMbhIra AzayabharyuM che, tenA digadarzanArthe A bhagavAnadAse
ullAsathI te graMtha para lAMbuM vivecana karyuM che, ane temAM paNa viziSTa
bhAva ullAsathI te graMthanuM ane vivecananuM sArabhUta tAtparya darzAvatA A
kaLazakAvyanI navaracanA svayaM karI che. je kulagI ane pravRttacakagI-AtmAthI
mumukSu jogIjanamAtra che, teone A yogazAstra upakArI thaI paDaze. A kulagI ane
pravRttacakra yegInuM lakSaNa atra spaSTa varNavyuM che. je saMtanuM svarUpa
oLakhI saMtane seve che, te saMta saMtakRpAthI saMta phala pAme che,-AvA
megAvaMcaka, kiyAvaMcaka ne phalAvaMcaka e traNa avaMcaka yuganA vege o yegIonuM
ja ahIM yugamAM gyapaNuM-yogya pAtrapaNuM che, ane e ja A graMthanA yogya
adhikArI che. zuddha bhAva ane bhAvazUnya kriyAnuM aMtara bhAnu-khadyota jevuM
che, ItyAdi rahasya je prakAze che, e A graMtha agya janane deve egya nathI,
paNa gya janane te parama premabhAve deva ja che, ke jethI jagatamAM paramakRta
prabhAva thAya ane zreyavinane viraha thAya.

