Catalog link: https://jainqq.org/explore/002418/1

Page #1 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Kalikāl Sarvajña Śrī Hemacandrācārya Racita Yogśāstra Śrī Padmasūrijī Kṛta Hindī
Anuvāda Sahita Sampaadak Muni Śrī Jayānanda Vijayajī CECECETTETELEITOU
XXXCOXXXOOOOOOOOOXX Varaṃ bubhukṣātūrasimhasajataṃ, varaṃ
suruṣṭhoragabhogaghattanam | Varaṃ kṛtāntānanasampraveśanaṃ, na tu pramādaḥ
śubhadaḥ prayojane ||| Bhūkhe simha kī sangat accī, krodhit sarpa kā sparśa
accī, yama rājā ke muṃh meṃ praveśa karana accā parantu śubha kārya ke samay
pramāda karana accā nahīṃ || 'Ataḥ is pustak ko padhne meṃ pramāda na kare ||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 kalikAla sarvajJa zrI hemacaMdrAcArya racita yogazAstra zrI padmasUrijI kRta
hindI anuvAda sahita sampAdaka muni zrI jayAnaMda vijayajI CECECETTETELEITOU
XXXCOXXXOOOOOOOOOXX varaM bubhukSAturasiMhasajataM, varaM
suruSToragabhogaghaTTanam  /  varaM kRtAntAnanasaMpravezanaM, na tu pramAdaH
zubhadaH prayojane  /  /  /  bhUkhe siMha kI saMgata acchI, krodhita sarpa kA
sparza acchA, yama rAjA ke muMha meM praveza karanA acchA paraMtu zubha kArya ke
samaya pramAda karanA acchA nhiiN|| 'ataH isa pustaka ko par3hane meM pramAda na
kre||

Page #2 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
These are the scriptures of the Tirthankaras, written by those who have acquired
the wealth through righteous means. They are indeed writing the certificate of
acceptance of residence in the city of liberation. Whomsoever they may be, the
fathers are worshipful for the virtuous. The renowned must indeed renounce what
is opposed to all people. Self-praise and criticism of others is indeed shameful
for the virtuous. The scholarship of the hypocrites indeed flourishes only among
the ignorant masses.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ye tIrthanAthAgamapustakAni, nyAyArjitAthairiha lekhayanti  /  te tattvato
muktipurI nivAsa-svIkArapatraM kila lekhayanti  /  /  jo tIrthaMkaroM ke Agama
pustaka nyAyadravya se upAjita dravya se likhavAte haiM, prakAzita karavAte
haiM, ve tattva se to muktipurI meM nivAsa kA svIkAra patra likhavAte haiM yAni
sarTIphikTa prApta karate hai| yAdRzastAdRzo vApi pUjanIyaH pitA satAm cAhe
jaise ho pitA ve pitA sajjanoM ke lie pUjanIya hI hai| sarvaloka viruddhaM tu
tyAjyameva yshsvinH| yazasvI manuSya ko lokaviruddha pravRtti ko choDa denA
caahie| svaprazaMsovA'nyanindA satAM lajjAkArI khlu| 'sajjanoM ko sva prazaMsA
aura paranindA meM lajjA kA anubhava hotA hai| pAkhaNDinAM hi pANDityaM
prAkRteSveva jRmbhate kahe jAnevAle sAdhuoM ke pAMDitya kA abudha samAja meM hI
Adara mile||

Page #3 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
॥ Shri Shankeshwar Parshvanathaay Namah ॥ ॥ Prabhu Shreemadvijay
Rajendrasureeshwaraya Namah ॥ P. Poo. Kalikaal Sarvagya
Shreehemachandraacharyaji Ashtam Shatabdi Upalaksharth ॥ Om Arhate Namah ॥
Kalikaal Sarvagya Shreehemachandraacharyarachit A. Shree Padmasuriji Krit Hindi
- Anuvaad Sahith Yogashastra Swopgyan Vyakhya Divyaasheesh A. Shree
Vidyachandrasureshwaraji • Muni Raj Shree Ramchandra Vijayaji Sampadak .. Muni
Shree Jayanand Vijayaji .. Prakashk .. Shree Guru Ramchandra Prakashan Samiti,
Bhinmal, (Raj.) Mukhya Sanrakshak .. Muni Shree Jayanand Vijayaji Aadi Thana ki
Nishra mein 2065 mein Palitana mein Chaturmas evam Updhaan karvaya us Leher
Kundan Group Shrimati Gerodevi Jethamalji Balgota Parivaar, Mangalwa Mumbai,
Delhi, Chennai, Haryana

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
  //  zrI zaMkhezvara pArzvanAthAya namaH  //   //  prabhu zrImadvijaya
rAjendrasUrIzvarAya namaH  //  pa. pU. kalikAla sarvajJa zrIhemacaMdrAcAryajI
aSTama zatAbdi upalakSArtha  //  OM arhate namaH  //  kalikAlasarvajJa
zrIhemacaMdrAcAryaracita A. zrI padmasUrijI kRta hindI - anuvAda sahita
yogazAstra svopajJa vyAkhyA divyAzISa A. zrI vidyAcaMdrasUrIzvarajI * munirAja
zrI rAmacaMdra vijayajI saMpAdaka .. muni zrI jayAnaMda vijayajI .. prakAzaka ..
zrI guru rAmacaMdra prakAzana samiti, bhInamAla, (rAja.) mukhya saMrakSaka ..
muni zrI jayAnaMda vijayajI Adi ThANA kI nizrA meM 2065 meM pAlItAnA meM
cAturmAsa evaM upadhAna karavAyA usa lehara kuMdana grupa zrImatI gerodevI
jeThamalajI bAlagotA parivAra, maMgalavA muMbaI, dillI, cennaI, hariyANA

Page #4 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The one who is worthy of being compared to the moon, whose eyes are pleasing to
the senses, whose body shines like the sun, whose character is pure and inspires
awe in people, who has endured twenty-two types of hardships and has a strong
resolve, whose wisdom is renowned throughout the world, who has defeated his
opponents and whose fame has spread far and wide, who has delved deep into the
scriptures and whose teachings are sweet and nourishing, like honey and milk,
and who has the ability to enlighten even the most skeptical minds.    Such are
the extraordinary qualities of Hemachandracharya. His complexion was as radiant
as gold, his face had the coolness of the moon, his eyes were as beautiful as
lotuses, and his body radiated a brilliance that filled people with joy. He was
a celibate from a young age, and his pure character inspired wonder in everyone.
He had the strength to endure twenty-two types of hardships and had a strong
resolve due to his intense austerities. His intellect was world-renowned, and he
had defeated his opponents. His fame spread far and wide. He had a deep
understanding of the scriptures and his teachings were sweet and nourishing,
like honey and milk, and had the power to enlighten even the most skeptical
minds.  Seeing these extraordinary qualities in Hemachandracharya, even the most
intelligent person would believe that they have never seen such a great soul,
even among the disciples of the Tirthankaras. Yet, in ancient times, such great
beings must have existed and their presence must have filled the world with
fragrance.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 tuliyatavaNijjakaMtI syvttsvttnynnrmnnijjaa| pallaviyaloyaNaharisappasarA
sriirsirii|| AbAlattaNao vi hu cArittaM jnniyjnncmkkaarN|
bAvIsaparIsahasahaNaduddharaM tivvtvpvrN|| muNiyavisimatthasatthA
nimmiyvaayrnnpmuhgNthgnnaa| paravAiparAjayajAyakittI maI jypsiddhaa||
dhammapaDivattijaNaNaM atucchamicchattamucchiANaM pi|
mahuravIrapamuhamahurattanimmiyaM dhammavAgaraNaM  /  /  iccAiguNohaM hemasUriNo
pecchiUNa cheyjnno| saddahai adiDhe vi hu titthaMkaragaNaharappamuhe  /  /
("kumArapAla pratibodha" kartAH zrI somaprabhAcArya) zrI hemacaMdrAcArya-
vyaktitva adbhuta htu| temano varNa hema jevo tejasvI hato. temanI mukhamudrAmAM
caMdranI zItaLatA vasI htii| temanAM netro kamalasamAM ramaNIya htaaN| temanI
dehakAMti lokonA locanamAM harSanA vistArane pallavita kare tevI htii| teo bAla
brahmacArI htaa| temanuM zuddha cAritra lokone camatkAra upajAve tevU htuN|
bAvIsa prakAranA pariSahone sahana karI zake tevU ane tIvra tapathI kasAyeluM
temanuM khamIra htuN| temanI buddhi jagaprasiddha htii| paravAdIono temaNe
parAjaya ko hto| temanI kIrti digaMtamAM vyApI htii| gaMbhIra arthanAM zAstromAM
temaNe avagAhana karyu htuN| madhu ane kSIra samAna madhuratAthI bhayuM bharyu
amanuM dharma kathana mithyAmati janone paNa dharmabodha kraavtuN| hemasUrinA A
lokottara lakSaNo dekhI koI paNa buddhizAlI mAnavI ne AsthA besatI ke ApaNe
tIrthaMkara ke gaNadharoM ne joyA nathI, chatAM paNa kharekhara purAtana kAlamA
te bhagavaMtonuM vyaktitva jagatamA saurabha phelAvatuM haze.

Page #5 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
NokranelAGARokalukelebrations.larki . Dravya Sahayak A. Shri
Vidhyachandrasurishwarji ke Shishya evam Muniraj Shri Ramchandravijayji ke
Chaturmas Praramb Kripapatra Ashadh Sudi 13 Budhwar, 16/U/08 Muniraj Shri
Jayanandvijayji Chaturmas Samapan Kartik Sudi 15 Guruvaar, Muni Shri
Divyanandvijayji 13/11/08 Muni Shri Viragyanandvijayji Muni Shri
Tattvanandvijayji Muni Shri Raivatchandravijayji Muni Shri Amritvijayji adi
Thana evam Rashtrasant Shiromani A. Shri Hemendrasurishwarji ke Agyan. Sha. Di.
Pra. Vi. Sadhvisri Muktisriji ki Sushishyaen Sa. Shri Kushalprabbhasriji Sa.
Shri Kirtiprabbhasriji - Sa. Shri Vasantbalashriji Sa. Shri Muktiprajnasriji -
Sa. Shri Muktiratnasriji Sa. Shri Muktidarshitasriji - Sa. Shri Muktiridhishriji
Sa. Shri Muktisiddhisriji - Sa. Shri Muktipriyashriji adi Thana ka Shashwat
Tirth Shatrujay Kshetre Palitana Nagare 2065 mein Chaturmas evam Upadhan karvaya
us samay ki Gyan Khata ki Aay mein se... Leher-Kundan Gup Mengalwa, Mumbai,
Delhi, Chennai, Haryana Shrimati Gerodevi Jethamalji Kundanmalji Balgota
Parivaar Mengalwa...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 NokranelAGARokalukelebrations.larki . dravya sahAyaka A. zrI
vidyAcaMdrasUrIzvarajI ke ziSya evaM munirAja zrI rAmacaMdravijayajI ke
cAturmAsa prAraMbha kRpApAtra ASADha sudi 13 budhavAra, 16/U/08 munirAja zrI
jayAnaMdavijayajI cAturmAsa samApana kArtika sudi 15 guruvAra, muni zrI
divyAnaMdavijayajI 13/11/08 muni zrI vairAgyAnaMdavijayajI muni zrI
tattvAnaMdavijayajI muni zrI raivatacaMdravijayajI muni zrI amRtavijayajI Adi
ThANA evaM rASTrasaMta ziromaNI A. zrI hemendrasUrIzvarajI ke AjJA. zA. dI. pra.
vi. sAdhvIzrI muktizrIjI kI suziSyAe~ sA. zrI kuzalaprabhAzrIjI sA. zrI
kIrtiprabhAzrIjI - sA. zrI vasaMtabAlAzrIjI sA. zrI muktiprajJAzrIjI - sA. zrI
muktiratnAzrIjI sA. zrI muktidarzitAzrIjI - sA. zrI muktiriddhizrIjI sA. zrI
muktisiddhizrIjI - sA. zrI muktipriyAzrIjI Adi ThANA kA zAzvata tIrtha zatrujaya
kSetre pAlItAnA nagare 2065 meM cAturmAsa evaM upadhAna karavAyA usa samaya kI
jJAna khAte kI Aya meM se... lehara-kuMdana gupa meMgalavA, muMbaI, dillI,
cennaI, hariyANA zrImatI gerodevI jeThamalajI kuMdanamalajI bAlagotA parivAra
meMgalavA...

Page #6 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The five great vows (Mahavratas) are: 1. **Ahimsa** (non-violence) 2. **Satya**
(truthfulness) 3. **Asteya** (non-stealing) 4. **Brahmacharya** (continence) 5.
**Aparigraha** (non-attachment)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================


Page #7 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Patrons**  (1) Sumermal Kevalji Nahar, Bhinmal, Raj.. K. S. Nahar, 201 Sumer
Tower, Love Lane, Mazgaon, Mumbai-10. (2) Melion Group, Surana, Mumbai, Delhi,
Vijayawada. (3) M. R. Impex, 16-A, Hanuman Terrace, Second Mala, Taratempel
Lane, Lemington Road, Mumbai-7. Phone: 23801086. (4) Shri Shantidevi Babulalji
Bafna Charitable Trust, Mumbai. Mahavideh Bhinmaldham, Palitana-364270. Sanghvi
Jugraj, Kantilal, Mahendra, Surendra, Dilip, Dheeraj, Sandeep, Raj, Jainam,
Akshat son grandson Kundanmalji Bhutaji Shrishirmal, Vardhaman Gotriya Ahor
(Raj.) Kalptaru Jewelers, 305, Station Road Sanghvi Bhavan, Thane (W)
Maharashtra. (6) Doshy Amritlal Chimanlal Panchso Vora Tharaad Palitana mein
Upadhan karvaya us nimitte. (7) Shatrujay Tirthe Navvanu Yatra ke Aayojan
nimitte Sha. Jethmal, Lakshmanraj, Prithviraj, Premchand, Gautamchand,
Ganpatraj, Lalitkumar, Vikramkumar, Pushpak, Vimal, Pradeep, Chirag, Nitesh son-
grandson Kinaji Sanklecha family Mengalwa, Firm - Arihant Novelties, GF3 Aarti
Shopping Center, Kalupur Tankashala Road, Ahmedabad. Prithvichand and Co.,
Tiruchirappalli. (8) Tharaad resident Bhansali Madhuben Kantilal Amulkhbhai
family. (9) Sha Kantilal Kevalchandji Gandhi Siana resident by 2063 in Palitana
Upadhan karvaya us nimitte. (10) 'Leher Kundan Group' Sha Jethmalji Kundanmalji
Mengalwa (Jalore) (11) 2063 in Gudamen Chaturmas and Upadhan karvaya us time
Padmavati Sunane ke Upakshya mein Sha Champalal, Jayantilal, Suresh Kumar,
Bharat Kumar, Prinkesh, Kenit, Darshit Chunnilalji Makaji Kasham Gotra Twar
family Gudabalotan Jayachintamani 10-543 Santapet Nellore-524001 (A.P.) (12)
Poo. Pitasri Poonamchandji Matushri Bhuribai ke Smaranarthe Putra Pukharaj,
Putravadhu Lilabai Pautr Phutermal, Mahendrakumar, Rajendrakumar, Ashok Kumar
Mithun, Sankesh, Somil, son grandson great-grandson Sha. Poonamchandji Bhimaji
Ramani Gudabalotan 'Nakoda Gold' 70, Kansara Chal, Bijamale, Room No. 67,
Kalbadevi, Mumbai-2 (13) Sha Sumermal, Mukeshkumar, Nitin, Amit, Manisha,
Khushbu son grandson Perajmalji Pratapji Ratanpura Bohra family, Modra (Raj.)
Rajratan Gold Prod. K. V. S. Complex, 3/1 Arundelpet, Guntur A.P. (14) A
Sadgurusth, Dhansa. (15) Gulabchand Dr. Rajkumar Chaganlalji Kothari America,
Ahor (Raj.)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 saMrakSaka (1) sumeramala kevalajI nAhara, bhInamAla, rAja.. ke. esa. nAhara,
201 sumera TaoNvara, lava lena, majhagAMva, muMbaI-10. (2) mIliyana grupa,
sUrANA, muMbaI, dillI, vijayavADA. (3) ema. Ara. impeksa, 16-e, hanumAna Teresa,
dUsarA mAlA, tArATempala lena, lemIgTana roDa, muMbaI-7. phona : 23801086. (4)
zrI zAMtidevI bAbulAlajI bAphanA cerITebala TrasTa, muMbaI. mahAvideha
bhInamAladhAma, pAlItAnA-364270. saMghavI jugarAja, kAMtilAla, mahendra,
surendra, dilIpa, dhIraja, saMdIpa, rAja, jainama, akSata beTA potA
kuMdanamalajI bhutAjI zrIzrImALa, vardhamAna gautrIya Ahora (rAja.) kalpatarU
jvelarsa, 305, sTezana roDa saMghavI bhavana, thAnA (pa.) mahArASTra. (6) dozI
amRtalAla cImanalAla pAMcazo vorA tharAda pAlItAnA meM upadhAna karavAyA usa
nimitte| (7) zatrujaya tIrthe navvANuM yAtrA ke Ayojana nimitte zA. jeThamala,
lakSmaNarAja, pRthvIrAja, premacaMda, gautamacaMda, gaNapatarAja, lalItakumAra,
vikramakumAra, puSpaka, vimala, pradIpa, cirAga, niteSa beTA-potA kInAjI
saMkalecA parivAra meMgalavA, pharma - arihanta novelhaTI, GF3 AratI zopIMga
senTara, kAlupuraTaMkazAlA roDa, ahamadAbAda. pRthvIcaMda anDa kaM.,
tirucirApalI. (8) tharAda nivAsI bhaNazALI madhubena kAMtilAla amulakhabhAI
parivAra. (9) zA kAMtIlAla kevalacaMdajI gAMdhI siyAnA nivAsI dvArA 2063 meM
pAlItAnA meM upadhAna karavAyA usa nimitte. (10) 'lahera kuMdana grupa' zA
jeThamalajI kuMdanamalajI meMgalavA (jAlora) (11) 2063 meM guDAmeM cAturmAsa
evaM upadhAna karavAyA usa samaya padmAvatI sunAne ke upalakSa meM zA caMpAlAla,
jayaMtilAla, surezakumAra, bharatakumAra, prinkeza, kenita, darzita cunnIlAlajI
makAjI kAzama gautra tvara parivAra guDAbAlotAn jayaciMtAmaNi 10-543 saMtApeTa
nellUra-524001 (A.pra.) (12) pU. pitAzrI pUnamacaMdajI mAtuzrI bhurIbAI ke
smaraNArthe putra pukharAja, putravadhu lIlAbAI pautra phuTaramala,
mahendrakumAra, rAjendrakumAra, azokakumAra mithuna, saMkeza, somIla, beTA potA
parapotA zA. pUnamacaMdajI bhImAjI rAmANI guDAbAlotAn 'nAkoDA golDa' 70, kaMsArA
cAla, bIjAmAle, rUma naM. 67, kAlabAdevI, muMbaI-2 (13) zA sumeramala,
mukezakumAra, nitIna, amIta, manISA, khuzabu beTA potA perAjamalajI pratApajI
ratanapurA boharA parivAra, modarA (rAja.) rAjaratana golDa proDa. ke. vI. esa.
komplekSa, 3/1 aruMDalapeTa, gunTUra A.P. (14) eka sadgRhastha, dhANasA. (15)
gulAbacaMda DaoN. rAjakumAra chaganalAlajI koThArI amerIkA, Ahora (rAja.)

Page #8 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(16) Shantirupchand Ravindrachand, Mukesh, Sanjesh, Rishabh, Lakshit, Yash,
Dhruv, Akshay, son and grandson of Milapchandji Mehta, Jalore, Bangalore. (17)
In VS 2063, Upadhan Tap Aaradhana was performed in Ahore, and on the occasion of
Padmavati Shravan, father Thanamaji, mother Sukhidevi, Bhanwarlal, Ghevarchand,
Shanti Lal, Pravin Kumar, Manish, Nikhil, Mittul, Ashish, Harsh, Vinay, Vivek,
son and grandson of Kanaji Hukmajimutha, Sha. Shanti Lal Pravin Kumar & Co., Ram
Gopal Street, Vijayawada. Bhiwandi, Ichalkaranji (18) On the occasion of the
construction of the Jain temple in Bafna Wadi, according to the wishes of mother
Prakashdevi Champalalji, Prithviraj, Jitendrakumar, Rajeshkumar, Ramesh Kumar,
Vansh, Jainam, Rajveer, son and grandson of Champalal Sanwalchandji Bafna,
Bhinmal. Navkar Time, 51, Nakoda State New Bohra Building, Mumbai-3. (19) Sha
Shanti Lal, Dilipkumar, Sanjaykumar, Amankumar, Akhilkumar, son and grandson of
Mulchandji Umaji, Talavat Ahore (Raj.) Rajendra Marketing, P.O. Box No.-108,
Vijayawada. (20) Smt. Sakudevi Sankalchandji Nethiji Hukmani family, Panthedi,
Raj. Rajendra Jewelers, 4-Rehman Bhai B.S.G. Marg, Taddeo, Mumbai-34. (21) In
memory of revered father Shri Sumermalji, with the inspiration of mother
Jethibai, Jayantilal, Mahavirchand, Darshan, son and grandson of Sumermalji
Varadichandji, Ahore, J.G. Impex Pvt. Ltd.-55 Narayan Mudali Street, Chennai-79.
(22) In memory of late Hastimalji Bhalaji Nagotra Solanki, Hasti family, Bakra
(Raj.) (23) Under the guidance of Munishri Jayanand Vijayji, Chaturmas Upadhan
was performed by Lehar Kundan Group at Shatrujay Tirth in 2065. From the income
of the participants and guests at that time, Samvat 2065. (24) Kundan Group,
Mangalwa, Chennai, Delhi, Mumbai. (25) Sha Sumermalji Narasaji - Mangalwa,
Chennai. (26) Sha Dudhmalji, Narendra Kumar, Ramesh Kumar, son and grandson of
Lalchandji Mandot family, Bakra (Raj.) Mangal Art, Doshy Building, 3-Bhoiwada,
Bhuleshwar, Mumbai-2 (27) Katariya Sanghvi Lalchand, Ramesh Kumar, Gautamchand,
Dinesh Kumar, Mahendra Kumar, Ravindrakumar, son and grandson of Sonaji Bheraji
Dhansa (Raj.) Shri Super Spares, 11-31-3A Park Road, Vijayawada, Secunderabad.
(28) Sha Narpatraj, Lalit Kumar, Mahendra, Shailesh, Nilesh, Kalpesh, Rajesh,
Mahipal, Dikshit, Ashish, Ketan, Ashwin, Rinklesh, Yash, Meet, son and grandson
of Khimrajji Thanaji Katariya Sanghvi, Ahore (Raj.) Kalajali Jewelers, 4/2 Brady
Peth, Guntur-2. (29) Sha Lakshmichand, Seshamal, Rajkumar, Mahavirkumar, Pravin
Kumar, Dilipkumar, Ramesh Kumar, son and grandson of Pratapchandji Kaluji
Kankariya, Modra (Raj.) Guntur. (30) A Sadgurusth (Khacharoud) (31) On the
occasion of Upadhan of Smt. Suadevi Ghevarchandji, Champalal, Dinesh Kumar,
Dharmendra Kumar, Hitesh Kumar, Dilip, Roshan, Nikhil, Harsh, Jainam, Divesh,
son and grandson of Ghevarchandji Saremalji Durgani, Bakra. Hitendra Marketing,
11-x-2-Kashi, Chetti Lane, Sattar Shala Complex, First Mala, Chennai-79.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (16) zAMtirUpacaMda ravindracaMda, mukeza, saMjeza, RSabha, lakSita, yaza,
dhruva, akSaya beTA potA milApacaMdajI mahetA jAlora, beMgalora. (17)
vi.saM.2063 meM Ahora meM upadhAna tapa ArAdhanA karavAyI evaM padmAvatI zravaNa
ke upalakSa meM pitAzrI thAnamalajI mAtuzrI sukhIdevI, bhaMvaralAla,
ghevaracaMda, zAMtilAla, pravINakumAra, manISa, nikhila, mittula, AzISa, harSa,
vinaya, viveka beTA potA kanAjI hakamAjImuthA, zA. zAMtilAla pravINakumAra enDa
ko. rAma gopAla sTrITa, vijayavADA. bhIvaMDI, icalakaraMjI (18) bAphanA vADI meM
jina mandira nirmANa ke upalakSa meM mAtuzrI prakAzadevI caMpAlAlajI kI
bhAvanAnusAra pRthvIrAja, jitendrakumAra, rAjezakumAra, ramezakumAra, vaMza,
jainama, rAjavIra, beTA potA caMpAlAla sAMvalacandajI bAphanA, bhInamAla.
navakAra TAima, 51, nAkoDA sTeTa nyu boharA bilDIMga, muMbaI-3. (19) zA
zAMtilAla, dIlIpakumAra, saMjayakumAra, amanakumAra, akhIlakumAra, beTA potA
mUlacaMdajI umAjI talAvata Ahora (rAja.) rAjendra mArkeTIMga, po.bo.naM.-108,
vijayavADA. (20) zrImatI sakudevI sAMkalacaMdajI nethIjI hukamANI parivAra,
pAMtheDI, rAja. rAjendra jvelarsa, 4-rahemAna bhAI bi. esa. jI. mArga, tADadeva,
muMbaI-34. (21) pUjya pitAjI zrI sumeramalajI kI smRti meM mAtuzrI jeThIbAI kI
preraNA se jayantilAla, mahAvIracaMda, darzana, beTA potA sumeramalajI
varadIcaMdajI Ahora, je. jI. impeksa prA. li.-55 nArAyaNa mudalI sTrITa,
cennaI-79. (22) sva. hastImalajI bhalAjI nAgotrA solaMkI kI smRti meM haste
parivAra bAkarA (rAja.) (23) munizrI jayAnaMda vijayajI kI nizrA meM lehara
kuMdana grupa dvArA zatrujaya tIrthe 2065 meM cAturmAsa upadhAna karavAyA usa
samaya ke Aradhaka evaM atithi ke sarva sAdhAraNa kI Aya meM se savaMta 2065.
(24) kuMdana grupa, meMgalavA, cennaI, dillI, muMbaI. (25) zA sumeramalajI
narasAjI - maMgalavA, cennaI. (26) zA dUdhamalajI, narendrakumAra, ramezakumAra
beTA potA lAlacaMdajI mAMDota parivAra bAkarA (rAja.) maMgala ArTa, dozI
bilDIMga, 3-bhoIvADA, bhUlezvara, muMbaI-2 (27) kaTArIyA saMghavI lAlacaMda,
ramezakumAra, gautamacaMda, dinezakumAra, mahendrakumAra, ravindrakumAra beTA
polA sonAjI bherAjI dhANasA (rAja.) zrI supara spearsa, 11-31-3A pArka roDa,
vijayavADA, sikandrAbAda. (28) zA narapatarAja, lalItakumAra, mahendra, zaileSa,
nileSa, kalpeza, rAjeza, mahIpAla, dikSIta, AzISa, ketana, azvIna, rIMkeza,
yaza, mIta, beTA potA khImarAjajI thAnAjI kaTArIyA saMghavI Ahora (rAja.)
kalAMjalI jvelarsa, 4/2 brADI peTha, gunTUra-2. . (29) zA lakSmIcaMda, zeSamala,
rAjakumAra, mahAvIrakumAra, praviNakumAra, dilIpakumAra, ramezakumAra beTA potA
pratApacaMdajI kAlujI kAMkarIyA modarA (rAja.) gunTUra. (30) eka sadgRhastha
(khAcarauda) (31) zrImatI suAdevI ghevaracaMdajI ke upadhAna nimitte caMpAlAla,
dinezakumAra, dharmendrakumAra, hitezakumAra, dilIpa, rozana, nIkhIla, harSa,
jainama, diveza beTA potA ghevaracaMdajI saremalajI durgANI bAkarA. hitendra
mArkeTIMga, 11-x-2-Kashi, ceTI lena, sattara zAlA kompleksa, pahalA mAlA,
cennaI-79.

Page #9 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(32) In memory of Manjulaben Pravin Kumar Patiyat's mass-feeding and late Shri
Bhanwarlalji, Pravin Kumar, Jitesh Kumar, Chetan, Chirag, Kunal, son-grandson
Tilokchandji Dharmajee Patiyat Dhansa. P.T. Jain, Royal Samrat, 406-C Wing,
Goregaon (West) Mumbai-62. (33) Gold Medal Industries Pvt. Ltd., Revatda,
Mumbai, Vijayawada, Delhi. (34) Raj Rajendra Textiles, Exports Limited, 101, Raj
Bhavan, Daulatnagar, Borivali (East), Mumbai, resident of Modhera. (35) Inspired
by the teachings of Pr. Sha. Di. Vi. Sa. Shri Muktisreeji and his disciple Mukti
Darshitashreeji, in memory of late father Danamalji and mother Teejobai,
Champalal, Mohanlal, Mahendrakumar, Manoj Kumar, Jitendrakumar, _ Vikaskumar,
Ravikumar, Rishabh, Milan, Hritik, Ahore. Kothari Marketing, 10/11 Chituri
Complex, Vijayawada. (36) By the family of late father Shri Sonrajji and mother
Madanbai, for the purpose of the Samet Shikhar pilgrimage and the celebration of
life, Deepchand Uttamchand, Ashok Kumar, Prakash Kumar, Rajesh Kumar, Sanjay
Kumar, Vijay Kumar, son-grandson Sonrajji Meghrajji Katariya Sanghvi Dhansa.
Alka Steel 857 Bhawani Peth, Pune No. 2. (37) Under the guidance of Muni Shri
Jayanand Vijayji Aadi Thana, in the year 2066, during the Chaturmas and Upadhan
in Tirtheendra Nagare-Bakra Road, by the hands of Smt. Metidevi Perajmalji
Ratanpura Vohra family - Modhera (Rajasthan). (38) Under the guidance of Muni
Shri Jayanand Vijayji Aadi Thana, in the year 2062, during the Chaturmas and
Upadhan in Palitana, by Shanti Lal, Babulal, Mohanlal, Ashok Kumar Vijay Kumar,
Shri Hanjadevi Sumermalji Nagori family - Ahore. (39) Sanghvi Kantilal,
Jayantilal Ganpatraj Rajkumar, Rahul Kumar, all Shri Shri Shrimal Gudal Gotra
Fuani family Alasan. Sanghvi Electric Company, 85, Narayan Mudali Street,
Chennai - 600 079. (40) In commemoration of the bus journey in 1992, the 28th
anniversary in 1995, and the self-respect of Sanghvi Sonamalji, for the benefit
of the first conference of the Nanesha family, Sanghvi Bhabutmal Jayantilal,
Prakash Kumar, Pravin Kumar, Naveen, Rahul, Ankush, Ritesh Nanesha, Prakash
Novelties, Sundar Furniture, 794 Sadashiv Peth, Bajirao Road, Pune - 411 030
(Siana). 4) Co-Patron (41) Sha Samarthmal, Sukraj, Mohanlal, Mahavir Kumar,
Vikaskumar, Kamlesh, Anil, Vimal, Shripal, Bharat, Fula Mutha family Sayla
(Raj.) Arun Enterprises, 4 Lane Brady Peth, Guntur-2. (42) Sha Tilokchand
Mayachand & Co. 116, Gulalwadi, Mumbai-4 (43) Sha Bhanwarlal Jayantilal, Suresh
Kumar, Prakash Kumar, Mahavir Kumar, Shrenik Kumar, Pritam, Pratik, Sahil,

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (32) maMjulAbena pravINakumAra paTIyAta ke mAsakSamaNa evaM sva. zrI
bhaMvaralAlajI kI smRti meM pravINakumAra, jItezakumAra, cetana, cirAga, kuNAla,
beTA potA tilokacaMdajI dharmAjI paTiyAta dhANasA. pI. TI. jaina, royala
samrATa, 406-sI vIMga, goregAMva (vesTa) muMbaI-62. (33) golDa meDala inDasTrIsa
prA. lI., revataDA, muMbaI, vijayavADA, dillI. (34) rAja rAjendra TeksaTAIlsa,
eksaporTasa limITeDa, 101, rAjabhavana, daulatanagara, borIvalI (IsTa), muMbaI,
modharA nivAsI. (35) pra. zA. dI. vi. sA. zrI muktizrIjI kI suziSyA mukti
darzitAzrIjI kI preraNA se sva. pitAjI dAnamalajI, mAtuzrI tIjobAI kI puNya
smRti meM caMpAlAla, mohanalAla, mahendrakumAra, manojakumAra, jitendrakumAra, _
vikAsakumAra, ravikumAra, riSabha, milana, hritika, aahor| koThArI mArkeTIMga,
10/11 citurI kaoNmpalekSa, vijayavADA. (36) pitAjI zrI sonarAjajI, mAtuzrI
madanabAI parivAra dvArA sametazikhara yAtrA pravAsa evaM jIvita mahotsava
nimitte dIpacaMda uttamacaMda, azokakumAra, prakAzakumAra, rAjezakumAra,
saMjayakumAra, vijayakumAra, beTApotA sonarAjajI meghAjI kaTArIyA saMghavI
dhANasA. alakA sTIla 857 bhavAnI peTha, pUnA naM.2. (37) muni zrI jayAnaMda
vijayajI AdI ThANA kI nizrA meM savaMta 2066 meM tIrthendra nagare-bAkarA roDa
madhye cAturmAsa evaM upadhAna karavAyA usa nimitte haste zrImatI maitIdevI
perAjamalajI ratanapurA voharA parivAra-modharA (rAjasthAna) . (38) muni zrI
jayAnaMda vijayajI AdI ThANA kI nizrA meM savaMta 2062 meM pAlItAnA meM
cAturmAsa evaM upadhAna karavAyA usa nimitte zAMtIlAla, bAbulAla, mohanalAla,
azokakumAra vijayakumAra, zrI haMjAdevI sumeramalajI nAgorI parIvAra - Ahora.
(39) saMghavI kAMtilAla, jayaMtilAla gaNapatarAja rAjakumAra, rAhulakumAra
samasta zrIzrIzrImAla guDAla gotra phuAnI parivAra aalaasnn| saMghavI ilekTrIka
kaMpanI, 85, nArAyaNa mudalI sTrITa, cennaI - 600 079. (40) 1992 meM basa yAtrA
pravAsa, 1995 meM aTThAI mahotsava evaM saMghavI sonamalajI ke AtmazreyArthe
nANezA parivAra ke prathama sammelana ke lAbha ke upalakSya meM saMghavI
bhabutamala jayaMtilAla, prakAzakumAra, praviNakumAra, navIna, rAhula, aMkUza,
riteza nANezA, prakAza novelTIj, sundara pharnIcara, 794 sadAzIva peTha,
bAjIrAva roDa, pUnA - 411 030 (siyANA) 4) saha saMrakSaka (41) zA samarathamala,
sukarAja, mohanalAla, mahAvIrakumAra, vikAsakumAra, kamaleza, anila, vimala,
zrIpAla, bharata pholA muthA parivAra sAyalA (rAja.) aruNa enTaraprAijesa, 4
lena brADI peTha, gunTUra-2. (42) zA tIlokacaMda mayAcanda enDa kaM. 116,
gulAlavADI, muMbaI-4 (43) zA bhaMvaralAla jayaMtilAla, surezakumAra,
prakAzakumAra, mahAvIrakumAra, zreNikakumAra, pritama, pratIka, sAhIla,

Page #10 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Paksala beta, grandson-great grandson of Samarthmalji, Sogaji Durgrani Bakra
(Raj.) Jain Stores, Station Road, Ankapali - 531001. (44) Sha Gajraj, Babulal,
Mithalal, Bharat, Mahendra, Mukesh, Shailesh, Gautam, Nikhil, Manish, Honey,
grandson-great grandson of Ratanchandji Nagotra Solanki Santhu (Raj.) -
Phoolchand Bhanwarlal, 180 Govindappa Nayak Street, Chennai - 1 (45) Sanghvi
Bhanwarlal Mangilal, Mahavir, Nilesh, Bunty, grandson-great grandson of
Harkachandji Shri Shrimali Family Alasan Rajesh Electricals 48, Raja Building,
Tirunelveli - 627001. (46) Bhansali Bhanwarlal, Ashok Kumar, Kantilal,
Gautamchand, Rajesh Kumar, Rahul, Ashish, Naman, Akash, Yogesh, grandson-great
grandson of Lilaji Kasnaji, Mu. Surat. Firm: Mangal Moti Syndicate, 14/15 S.S.
Jain Market, M.P. Lane, Chickpet Cross, Bangalore - 53. (47) In memory of late
mother Mohan Devi and father Shri Gumanmalji, son Kantilal Jayantilal, Suresh,
Rajesh Solanki Jalore. Pravin & Co. 15-8-110/2, Begum Bazaar, Hyderabad - 12.
(48) Sha Kantilalji, Mangalchandji Haran, Daspa, Mumbai. (49) Sha Tarachandji
Bhonaji, Ahore. Mehta Naresh Kumar & Co. 1st, Bhoiwada Lane, Gulalwadi,
Mumbai-2. (50) Smt. Fancyben Sukhrajji Chamanaji Kabdi Dhansa, Golden
Collection, No. 5 Chandi Gali, 3rd Bhoiwada, Bhuleshwar, Mumbai - 2. (51) Sha
Bhanwarlal, Suresh Kumar, Shailesh Kumar, Rahul, grandson-great grandson of
Tejarajji Sanghvi Komtavala Bhinmal, S.K. Marketing, Rajratan Electricals,
K.C.I. Warriors Pvt. Ltd. 163, Govindappa, Nayakan Street, Chennai-600001. (52)
Ballu Gagandas Virchandbhai Family Tharaad. (53) In memory of Sha Jethmalji
Sagarmalji, Mulchand, Mahavir Kumar, Ayushi, Mehul, Riyansu, Dolly, Praggani
Group-Sankelecha, Mangalwa. Raj Ratan Assembly Works, 146/1169, Motilal Nagar
No. - 1. Opposite Sai Temple, Road No. - 3, Goregaon (West), Mumbai - 104.
Sankelecha Marketing, 11 - 13 - 16, Samacharwari Street, Vijayawada - 1. Receipt
Location Sha Devichand Chhaganlalji 'Sumatidarshan' Opposite Nehru Park,
Bhinmal-343021. Phone: (02969) 220387 Shri Adinath Rajendra Jain Pedhi Sanyu.
343026. Phone: 254221 Shri Vimalnath Jain Pedhi Bakra, Rajasthan - 343025.
Mahavideh Bhinmal Dham Taleti Hastagiri Link Road, Palitana (Saurashtra) -
364270 Phone: (02848) 243018

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pakSAla beTA potA-parapotA zA samarathamalajI sogAjI duragANI bAkarA (rAja.)
jaina sTorsa, sTezana roDa, aMkApalI - 531001. (44) zA gajarAja, bAbulAla,
mIThAlAla, bharata, mahendra, mukeza, zailesa, gautama, nIkhIla, manISa, hanI
beTA-potA ratanacaMdajI nAgotrA solaMkI sA~thU (rAja.) - phUlacaMda
bhaMvaralAla, 180 govIMdAppA nAyaka sTrITa, cennaI - 1 (45) saMghavI
bhaMvaralAla mAMgIlAla, mahAvIra, nIleza, banTI, beTA potA harakacaMdajI zrI
zrImAla parivAra AlAsana rAjeza ilekTrIkalsa 48, rAjA bilDIMga, tirunelavelI -
627001. (46) bhaMsAlI bhaMvaralAla, azokakumAra, kAMtilAla, gautamacaMda,
rAjezakumAra, rAhula, AzISa, namana, AkAza, yogeza, beTA potA lIlAjI kasanAjI
mu. surata. pharma : maMgala motI senDIkeTa, 14/15 esa. esa. jaina mArkeTa, ema.
pI. lena, cIkapeTa krosa, beMgalora - 53. (47) sva. mAtRzrI mohanadevI pitAjI
zrI gumAnamalajI kI smRti meM putra kAMtilAla jayantilAla, sureza, rAjeza
solaMkI jAlora. praviNa eNDa kaM. 15-8-110/2, begama bAjAra, haidarAbAda - 12.
(48) zA. kAntIlAlajI, maMgalacandajI haraNa, dasapA, muMbaI. (49) zA.
tArAcandajI bhonAjI, Ahora. mahetA narezakumAra enDa kAM. 1st, bhoivADA lena,
gulAlavADI, muMbaI-2. (50) zrImatI phensIbena sukharAjajI camanAjI kabadI
dhANasA, golDana kalekzana, naM-5 cAMdI galI, 3rA bhoIvADA, bhUlezvara, muMbaI -
2. (51) zA bhaMvaralAla, surezakumAra, zaileSakumAra, rAhula beTA potA
tejarAjajI saMghavI komatAvAlA bhInamAla, esa. ke. mArkeTIMga, rAjaratana
ilekTrIkalsa, ke. sI. AI. vAryarsa prA. li. 163, goviMdAppA, nAyakana sTrITa,
cennaI-600001. (52) ballu gaganadAsa viracaMdabhAI parivAra tharAda. (53) zA
jeThamalajI sAgaramalajI kI smRti meM mulacaMda, mahAvIrakumAra, AyuSI, mehula,
riyAnsu, DolI, prAgANI grupa-saMkhalecA, maMgalavA. rAja ratana eseMbalI varksa,
146/1169, motIlAla nagara naM.- 1. sAMI maMdira ke sAmane, roDa naM.-3,
goregAMva (vesTa), muMbaI - 104. saMkhalecA mArkeTIMga, 11 - 13 - 16,
samAcAravArI sTrITa, vijayavADA - 1. prAptisthAna zA devIcaMda chaganalAlajI
'sumatidarzana' neharU pArka ke sAmane, bhInamAla-343021. phona : (02969) 220387
zrI AdinAtha rAjendra jaina per3hI sA~yUM. 343026. phona : 254221 zrI
vimalanAtha jaina per3hI bAkarA, rAjasthAna - 343025. mahAvideha bhInamAla dhAma
taleTI hastagiri liMka roDa, pAlItANA (saurASTra ) - 364270 phona : (02848)
243018

Page #11 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Yogaśālā: A Contemplation  In Jainism, **Samyagdarshan**, **Samyagjnana**,
and **Samyakcharitra** are considered essential for attaining liberation
(Moksha). The harmonious combination of these three is called the path to
liberation or the means to liberation (Mokshamarg or Mokshaupaya). As Shri
Hemchandracharya has said in the 'Abhidhanachintamani-kosha', "Mokshaupayo yogo
jnanashraddhanacharanatmakah", meaning - the three yogas of knowledge, vision,
and conduct are the means to liberation. Vedic Dharma has referred to these same
three as **Jnanyoga**, **Karmayoga**, and **Bhaktiyoga**. Yogaśāstra provides a
comprehensive description of these three.  Yogaśāstra has a total of 12 chapters
(Prakash). There are 1012 verses in total, and there is a self-composed
commentary of 12750 verses by the revered Shri Hemchandracharya, the omniscient
of the Kali Yuga. The first three chapters describe the **Yoga-vidyamanya**
(knowledge of yoga), **Yama** (restraint), and **Niyama** (observance), which
are the two limbs of the aforementioned three yogas, explained from a Jain
perspective. The fourth chapter elaborates on **Atmaswaroop-raman**
(contemplation of the self), **victory over passions and objects**,
**purification of the mind**, **control of senses**, **conquest of the mind**,
**equanimity**, **meditation**, **twelve reflections (Anupreksha)**, **four
emotions (Maitri, etc.)**, and **asanas** for the union of the soul with the
Supreme Soul. The fifth chapter describes **Pranayama** (breath control),
**purification of the mind**, the nature of the **five vital breaths
(Panchpran)**, **conquest of the breath**, **concentrations (Dharana)**, the
four related **mandalas**, and the knowledge of **favorable and unfavorable**,
**life and death**, etc., through **pranavayu** (vital breath), as well as
**time knowledge (Kalajnana)** through **instruments, mantras, knowledge,
auspicious time, shadow, and whispers**, **purification of the nadis**, and
**entering other bodies (Parakayapravesh)**. The sixth chapter discusses
**pratyahara** (withdrawal of senses) and **dharana**, while the seventh chapter
provides insight into the **four aims of meditation (Pindastha, etc.)** and the
**five concentrations (Parthavi, etc.)**. The eighth chapter briefly describes
the nature and method of meditation corresponding to the **padastha-dhyeya**
(meditation on the feet). Subsequently, the ninth chapter discusses
**rupastahdhyana** (meditation on form), and the tenth chapter discusses
**rupaatita** (meditation beyond form). Then, the eleventh and twelfth chapters
provide an unparalleled description of **Dharmadhyana** (meditation on Dharma),
**Shukladhyana** (meditation on purity), **Nirvikalpaka Samadhi** (meditation
without thought), **Moksha** (liberation), and **types of mind**, including all
the steps.  It must be said that the revered Acharya Shri has shifted Indian
yoga practices away from the complex physical processes of **Hatha Yoga**, etc.,
and towards the **self-contemplation** (Atma-chintandhara) approach, connecting
it to the processes of **Sahaj Yoga** (natural yoga) or **Jivan Yoga** (life
yoga). This is the unique feature of this Yogaśāstra compared to the 'Yoga
Darshan' and other texts written by Patanjali and other yogis, where they have
limited yoga to the eight limbs of **Yama-Niyama**, etc., for all beings,
starting with **control of mental fluctuations (Chittavrittinirodha)**. However,
Shri Hemchandracharya, the omniscient of the Kali Yuga, has presented a
beautiful sequence of **knowledge-vision-conduct** (Jnana-Darshan-Charitra) yoga
practices to reach from the **path-follower (Marganusari)** to the
**householder-devotee-religion (Grihastha-Shravak-Dharma)**, **saintly religion
(Sadhudharma)**, and other higher spiritual realms, elaborating on **Dharma-
Shukladhyana**, **control of senses-passions-mind**, **equanimity**, **twelve
reflections**, **four emotions**, etc., to help the soul become the Supreme
Soul. The subject matter is explained well with interesting examples, making the
description easily understandable. Acharya Shri has bound the verses of
Yogaśāstra with **Anushtup** meters, describing yoga in a simple, clear, and
understandable style. The description of the **greatness of yoga**, its
**dignity**, the **fruits of its practice**, and its **miracles** at the
beginning is so lively and engaging that every inquisitive seeker can be
attracted to yoga practice, eager to devote their precious life and dedicate
themselves accordingly. Truly, Yogaśāstra is like an ocean of meaning, a
vigilant guardian of the soul like the Himalayas, an Upanishad of spirituality,
an inexhaustible treasure of self-knowledge, a divine treasure chest of self-
virtue; it is a guide to self-realization of the highest order for the life of a
seeker; it leaves no aspect of self-practice untouched. It provides a
comprehensive discussion of the processes of practicing the body, mind, and
senses bound to the soul. Acharya Shri has introduced his omniscience and
extraordinary brilliance by adopting a style that is often based on personal
experience, rather than the traditional style in terms of emotion, language, and
compilation. The twelve chapters of this work guide the lifeboat of the seeker
of liberation (Mumukshu) and the seeker of self (Atmarthi), or the inquisitive,
devout devotee (Dharmbhiru Shravak), through the storms of worldly subjects, the
turbulent waves of unfavorable events, and the roars of the material world,
rising in the vast ocean of life and the world.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 yogazAlA : eka ciMtana . jainadharma meM mokSaprApti ke lie samyagdarzana,
samyagjJAna aura samyakacAritra ina tInoM kA honA anivArya mAnA gayA hai| ina
tInoM ke yoga-saMyoga ko mokSamArga yA mokSopAya batAyA gayA hai| jaisA ki zrI
hemacaMdrAcArya ne 'abhidhAnacintAmaNikoSa' meM kahA hai'mokSopAyo yogo
jJAnazraddhAnacaraNAtmakaH' arthAt - jJAna-darzana-cAritrAtmaka tInoM yoga mokSa
kA upAya hai| vaidikadharma ne unhIM kA jJAnayoga, karmayoga aura bhaktiyoga ke
nAma se nirdeza kiyA hai  /  yogazAstra meM inhIM tInoM se saMbaMdhita AdyopAnta
nirUpaNa hai| yogazAstra meM kula 12 prakAza haiN| saba zloka 1012 haiM aura una
para kalikAlasarvajJa pUjya zrIhemacaMdrAcArya kI hI 12750 zloka parimita
svaracita vyAkhyA hai| pahale ke tInoM prakAzoM ke yoga-vidyAmAnya yama-niyama,
ina donoM aMgoM ke rUpa meM pUrvokta tInoM yogoM kA jainadRSTi se sphuTa varNana
hai| cauthe prakAza meM AtmA ke paramAtmA se yoga ke lie AtmasvarUpa-ramaNa,
kaSAyoM aura viSayoM para vijaya, cittazuddhi, indriya-nigraha, manovijaya,
samatva, dhyAna, bAraha anuprekSAoM, maitrI Adi cAra bhAvanAoM evaM AsanoM kA
vizada vivecana hai| pA~caveM prakAza meM prANAyAma, mana-zuddhi, paMcaprANoM kA
svarUpa, prANavijaya, dhAraNAoM, unase saMbaMdhita 4 maMDaloM tathA prANavAyu
dvArA ISTa-aniSTa, jIvana-mRtyu Adi ke jJAna evaM yaMtra, maMtra, vidyA, lagna,
chAyA, upazruti Adi dvArA kAlajJAna, nAr3Izuddhi evaM parakAyapraveza Adi kA
varNana hai| chaThe prakAza meM pratyAhAra evaM dhAraNA kA, sAtaveM prakAza meM
dhyAna ke piNDastha Adi cAra dhyeyoM aura pArthivI Adi 5 dhAraNAoM kA digdarzana
karAyA gayA hai| AThaveM prakAza meM padastha-dhyeyAnurUpa dhyAna kA svarUpa
evaM vidhi kA saMkSipta varNana hai| tadanantara nauveM meM rUpasthadhyAna kA
aura daza meM rUpAtIta kA digdarzana hai| phira gyArahaveM aura bArahaveM
prakAza meM samasta caraNoM sahita dharmadhyAna aura zukladhyAna se lekara
nirvikalpaka samAdhi, mokSa tathA citta ke prakAroM Adi kA anupama varNana hai|
kahanA hogA ki bhAratIya yoga-sAdhanoM ko haThayoga Adi kI jaTila bhautika
prakriyAoM se haTAkara paramapUjya AcAryazrI ne use Atma-ciMtanadhArA kI ora
mor3akara sahajayoga yA jIvanayoga kI prakriyAoM se jor3a diyA hai| pataMjali
Adi yogAcAryoM dvArA racita 'yogadarzana' Adi graMthoM kI apekSA isa yogazAstra
meM yahI vizeSatA hai ki pataMjali Adi ne yoga ko cittavRttinirodha se lekara
sarvabhUmikAoM ke lie samAnarUpa se yama-niyamAdi ATha aMga batAkara unhIM meM
parisImita kara diyA hai| jabaki kalikAlasarvajJa zrIhemacaMdrAcArya ne
mArgAnusArI se lekara gRhastha-zrAvaka-dharma, sAdhudharma Adi ucca AdhyAtmika
bhUmikA taka pahu~cane ke lie jJAna-darzana-cAritrAtmaka yoga-sAdhana kA suMdara
krama batAkara AtmA ko paramAtma rUpa banane ke lie dharma-zukladhyAna, iMdriya-
kaSAya manovijaya, samatA, dvAdaza anuprekSA, cAra bhAvanA Adi kA vizada
vivecana kiyA hai| bIca-bIca meM pratipAdya viSaya ko rocaka dRSTAMtoM se bhalI-
bhA~ti samajhAkara varNana ko sahaja bodhagamya banA diyA hai| AcAryazrI ne
yogazAstra ke zlokoM ko prAyaH anuSTupachaMdoM se Abaddha karake sarala prAMjala
aura subodha zailI meM yoga kA varNana kiyA hai| prAraMbha meM yoga kA mAhAtmya,
usakI garimA aura usakI sAdhanA ke phala aura camatkAroM kA varNana itanA sajIva
aura sarasa hai ki hara jijJAsu sAdhaka yogasAdhanA ke lie AkarSita hokara apane
bahumUlya jIvana ko khapA dene aura tadanurUpa juTa jAne ke lie udyata ho sakatA
hai| sacamuca yogazAstra samudra kI taraha arthagaMbhIra hai, himAcala kI taraha
AtmA kI surakSA ke lie sajaga praharI hai, adhyAtmopaniSad hai, AtmavijJAna kA
akSaya bhaMDAra hai, Atma-guNarUpI dhana kI alaukika nidhi-maMjuSA hai;
sAdhakajIvana ke lie adhyAtmajJAna uccakoTi ke AtmasAkSAtkAra kA mArgadarzaka
hai; isameM AtmasAdhanA kI koI vidhA nahIM chodd'ii| AtmA ke sAtha ba~dhe hue
zarIra, mana evaM iMdriyoM ko sAdhane kI prakriyAoM kA sAMgopAMga vivecana hai|
AcAryazrI ne bhAva, bhASA aura saMkalanA meM paramparAgata zailI kI apekSA
prAyaH svAnubhavayukta zailI apanAkara apanI kalikAlasarvajJatA aura adbhuta
pratibhA kA paricaya diyA hai| isake bAraha prakAza jIvana aura jagat ke
mahAsamudra meM uThate hue sAMsArika viSayoM ke tUphAnoM, uttAla aniSTa
taraMgoM, evaM bhautika-garjanAoM se mumukSu aura AtmArthI sAdhaka athavA
jijJAsu dharmabhIru zrAvaka kI jIvananaiyA ko

Page #12 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
A beacon of great light, guiding towards the truth and preventing collisions; it
was instrumental in helping him reach the shores of liberation. This vast
collection of scriptures was created by the grace of the Chalukya dynasty's
jewel, the supreme sage, Sri Kumarapala, the king. The king was very curious
about the science of yoga; he had recited many scriptures on the yoga science of
that time, but his mind was not satisfied. Therefore, Acharya Shri, due to the
intense request of King Kumarapala, composed this science of yoga. | By studying
this collection of scriptures daily, the king became an expert in the science of
yoga from the Jain perspective. The revered Acharya Shri played a huge role in
making Gujarat a place of non-violence and righteousness. King Kumarapala was
your devoted follower, yet you did not ask him for any favors for your comfort.
Your talent was multifaceted. Poetry, meter, rhetoric, grammar, ethics, yoga,
history, lexicon, logic, hymns, devotion, evidence, etc. | You did not leave any
subject untouched, on which you did not wield your pen. Yoga Shastra,
Svopjnavritti, Dwayashraya Kavya, Abhidhanachintamani, Pramanamimamsa,
Anekarthasangraha, Trishatishalakapurushcharitra, Siddhahemashabdanusasan,
Linganusasan, Chhandanusasan, Kavyanusasan, Mahadevastotra,
Anyayogavyavchhedhika (stotra), Ayogavyavchhedhika, Vitragastotra,
Prakritvyakaran, Haimdhaatuprayan, etc. are your vast scriptures. In this way,
along with the pursuit of self-welfare, your literary pursuit was also
unmatched. Your guru was Acharya Shri Devchandrasuri. Once, while wandering,
Acharya Shri visited Dhundhuka. To listen to his nectar-like words, Pahini
(Hemachandracharya's mother) also came to the shelter with her son Changdev
(Acharya Shri's name in the householder stage). Acharya Shri Devchandrasuriji,
seeing Changdev's unique appearance, characteristics, and actions, predicted
that he would become the savior of the community in the future, becoming
proficient in all scriptures and a benefactor of self-welfare, and made a
special request to his mother to hand him over. The mother initially hesitated;
but understanding it as a supreme favor, she happily handed over Changdev.
Later, his father, Shri Chaching Seth (Modhvanik), reached Kर्णपुरी near Acharya
Shri. After much debate with Acharya Shri, impressed by him, Chaching Seth
happily gave his permission to initiate Changdev. At the age of about 8-9, in
Vikram Samvat 1154, Changdev was initiated by his guru, and named Somdev. By the
grace of his guru, Somdev Muni became proficient in all scriptures. Seeing his
competence, Acharya Shri Devchandrasuri, in Samvat 1166, | gave Somdev Muni the
position of Acharya at the age of 21, and named him Hemachandracharya. After
becoming an Acharya, Hemachandracharya gave a new turn to the politics of
Gujarat. The then king of Gujarat, Siddha Raj Jaisingh, wanted to make
Kumarapala his successor. One reason behind this was that Kumarapala was
indebted to Acharya Shri's favors, secondly, he wanted to carry out the work of
non-violence in Gujarat; thirdly, he wanted to spread the principles of Jainism
among the people of Gujarat. The credit for making King Kumarapala a Shaiva
devotee and a righteous person goes to Acharya Shri. Acharya Shri, from time to
time, gave religious inspiration to King Kumarapala, and saved him from going on
the path of irreligion. Impressed by Acharya Shri's vast literary creation, King
Kumarapala and the contemporary learned listeners and kings | bestowed upon him
the title of 'Kalikalasarvjna'. Acharya Shri's literary creation has made him
immortal. I am fascinated by many of Acharya Shri's works. I read the Yoga
Shastra written by you. Seeing its vast Svopjnavritti, I was inspired that why
not, present this Yoga Shastra with a vast explanation in Hindi translation; so
that the common people can benefit from the experienced words of Pujya Acharya
Shri Maharaj. In the courage of my Hindi translation, I got the opportunity of
the learned coordinator thinker Muni Shri Nemichandraji Maharaj. With his help
in the revision and editing of this book, I | was able to present this Yoga
Shastra to the discerning readers along with the Hindi translation. If any
principle-contradictory statement has been written in the translation due to a
visual defect, carelessness, then the discerning reader will forgive me. If any
noble person suggests any mistake to me, I will gladly accept it. _ I hope that
the religious readers will benefit from this collection of scriptures and
develop themselves; with this good wish,

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 TakarAne se bacAkara yathArtha dizAdarzana karane vAle mahAprakAza staMbha hai;
jo use mokSa ke taTa taka pahu~cane meM sahAyaka hote isa vizAlakAya graMtharAja
kI racanA meM nimitta bane the-caulukyavaMzabhUSaNa paramArhata zrIkumArapAla
nresh| rAjA yogavidyA ke atIva jijJAsu the; unhoMne tatkAlIna yogavidyA para
aneka graMthoM kA pArAyaNa kiyA thA, kintu unakA manaHsamAdhAna nahIM huA thaa|
ataH AcAryazrI ne nRpa kumArapAla ke atyaMta anurodha ke kAraNa isa yogazAstra
kI racanA kii| | isa graMtharAja kA pratidina svAdhyAya karane se rAjA
jainadRSTi se yogavidyA kA vizeSajJa ho gayA gujarAta ko ahiMsA-pradhAna evaM
dharmamaya banAne meM pUjya AcAryazrI kA bahuta bar3A hAtha rhaa| kumArapAla
rAjA ApakA paramabhakta thA, phira bhI Apane apanI sukha-suvidhA ke lie usase
koI yAcanA nahIM kii| ApakI pratibhA sarvatomukhI thii| kAvya, chaMda, alaMkAra,
vyAkaraNa, nIti, yoga, itihAsa, koza, nyAya, stotra, bhakti, pramANa Adi koI |
bhI viSaya nahIM chor3A, jisa para Apane apanI lekhanI na calAI ho| yogazAstra
svopajJavRtti, dvayAzraya kAvya, abhidhAnaciMtAmaNi, pramANamImAMsA,
anekArthasaMgraha, triSaSTizalAkApuruSacaritra, siddhahaimazabdAnuzAsana,
liMgAnuzAsana, chaMdo'nuzAsana, kAvyAnuzAsana, mahAdevastotra,
anyayogavyavacchedikA (stotra), ayogavyavacchedikA, vItarAgastotra,
prAkRtavyAkaraNa, haimadhAtuparAyaNa Adi Apake race hue vizAlakAya graMtha hai|
isa taraha svapara-kalyANasAdhanA ke sAthasAtha ApakI sAhitya-sAdhanA bhI
bejor3a rahI hai| Apake gurudeva AcAryazrI devacaMdrasUri the| eka bAra vihAra
karate hue AcAryazrI dhaMdhukA pdhaareN| unakI amRtavANI sunane ke lie pAhinI
(hemacaMdrAcArya kI mAtA) bhI apane putra cAMgadeva (AcAryazrI kA gRhasthAvasthA
kA nAma) ko lekara upAzraya meM AyI huI thii| AcArya zrI devacaMdrasUrijI ne
cAMgadeva kI vilakSaNa AkRti, lakSaNa evaM ceSTAe~ dekhakara bhaviSya meM usake
saMgha ke uddhAraka eva sarvazAstrapAraMgata hokara svaparakalyANakAraka hone kA
saMketa kiyA aura usakI mAtA se cAMgadeva ko sauMpane kA vizeSa anurodha kiyaa|
mAtA ne pahale to AnAkAnI kI; lekina parama upakAra samajhakara cAMgadeva ko
saharSa sauMpa diyaa| bAda meM usake pitA zrIcAciMga seTha(mor3havaNik)
AcAryazrI ke pAsa karNapurI pahu~ce, AcAryazrI ke sAtha bahuta tarka-vitarka ke
bAda unase prabhAvita hokara cAciMgaseTha ne cAMgadeva kI dIkSA dene ke lie
saharSa apanI anumati de dii| lagabhaga 8-9 varSa kI umra meM vikrama saMvat
1154 meM cAMgadeva ko gurudevane dIkSA dI, somadeva nAma rkhaa| gurudeva kI kRpA
se somadeva muni sarvazAstroM meM pAraMgata hue| unakI yogyatA dekhakara
AcAryazrI devacaMdrasUri ne saMvat 1166 meM| somadeva muni ko 21varSa kI umra
meM AcAryapada diyA, aura unakA nAma rkhaa-hemcNdraacaary| AcArya banane ke
pazcAt hemacaMdrAcArya ne gujarAta kI rAjanIti ko eka nayA mor3a diyaa| gujarAta
ke tatkAlIna | rAjA siddharAja jayasiMha kA uttarAdhikArI ve kumArapAla ko
banAnA cAhate the| isake pIche eka kAraNa yaha thA ki kumArapAla AcAryazrI ke
upakAroM se upakRta thA, dUsare, ve gujarAta meM ahiMsA ke kArya karavAnA cAhate
the; tIsare, gujarAta meM jainadharma ke siddhAMtoM kA janatA meM pracAra-
prasAra karanA thaa| kumArapAla rAjA ko zaiva se paramAhata aura dharmaparAyaNa
banAne kA zreya AcAryazrI ko hI thaa| AcAryazrI ne samaya-samaya para rAjA
kumArapAla ko dharma preraNAe~ dI haiM, aura dharma-vimukha mArga para jAne se
bacAyA hai| AcAryazrI ke vipula sAhitya-sarjana se prabhAvita hokara rAjA
kumArapAla evaM tatkAlIna vidvAn zrAvakoM va rAjAoM | ne inheM
'kalikAlasarvajJa' pada pradAna kiyaa| AcAryazrI kI sAhitya-sarjanA unheM amara
banA gayI hai| maiM pUjya AcAryazrI kI aneka kRtiyoM para mugdha huuN| maiMne
Apake dvArA racita yogazAstra pddh'aa| mujhe isakI vizAla svopajJavRtti
dekhakara aMtaH sphuraNA huI ki kyoM nahIM, isa vizAla vyAkhyAsahita yogazAstra
kA hindI-anuvAda prastuta kiyA jAya; jisase Ama janatA pU. AcAryazrI jI mahArAja
ke anubhavayukta vacanoM se lAbhAvita ho ske| mere dvArA kiye gaye hindI-anuvAda
ke sAhasa meM vidvadavarya samanvayavAdI vicAraka munizrI nemicaMdra jI mahArAja
kA suyoga mila gyaa| isa graMtha ke saMzodhana eva saMpAdana meM unake sahayoga
se maiM| isa yogazAstra ko hindI-anuvAda-sahita sujJa pAThakoM ke samakSa
prastuta kara sakA huuN| graMtha ke anuvAda meM dRSTidoSa se, asAvadhAnI se koI
siddhAMta viruddha bAta likhI gayI ho to sujJa pAThaka mujhe kSamA kreNge| koI
mahAnubhAva mujhe isameM bhUla sujhAyeMge to maiM use saharSa svIkAra kruuNgaa|
_ AzA hai, dharmapremI pAThaka isa graMtharAja se adhikAdhika lAbha uThAkara
AtmavikAsa kareMge; isI zubhAkAMkSA ke

Page #13 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Together Jain Upashray Bhaanvad (Jamnagar, Saurashtra) Samvat 2030,
Vijayadashami 25-10-74 - Muni Padmavijay (Present Panyas Padmavijayji) The
second edition is being published, this is a very commendable work of knowledge
devotion-knowledge growth. By publishing this book in many languages, the
propagation of Jain Yogashastra in the country and abroad should take place and
all the souls should attain the path of liberation by accepting the pure path of
the Vitrag Paramatma, this is a heartfelt auspicious wish. 2046 Vasant Panchami
Panyas Padmavijay Charakhi Dadri Bhiwani (Haryana) Dharmalab 31-01-90 • This
translation of Yogashastra was seen, read and its usefulness was known in the
Shri Rajendra Jain Brihad Gyana Bhandar of Ahor, and then the idea of
republishing it was conceived. Currently, keeping in mind the desire to promote
the second edition of Shri Padmasuri Shwarji, it is being published. Sariji has
highlighted the importance of this book in the introduction of Yogashastra. It
is sufficient, so I confirm it. This book will be published by Shri Guru
Ramchandra Prakashan Samiti, Bhinmal and will be distributed free of cost for
the benefit of the people. Therefore, the readers should benefit. - Jayanand
Shankeshwar Tirth . 2065 Chaitra Vadi 12 23-03-2009 Upadhan Mala Prasange _
"Special Details" In the Gujarati translation of Yogashastra, in the explanation
of Samayik, under the third light 82-83 verses, on page no. 210 of Hindi, after
the explanation of the word Voshirami, the translator has given the following
special explanation in the Gujarati translation: While doing Samayik, the soul's
sinful past cycle is abandoned and the new cycle of the soul, which is full of
knowledge, vision and character, is born, so it can be said that the past cycle
soul has been abandoned. Because cycles are different states of the soul that
appear gradually, and the cycle is the basis of those states, the soul. Because
these cycles and the cycle-maker are different, I am different from my soul. It
is not false to say that I am newly born. In Acharang Sutra it is said that
Aayakhalu Samaiyan, that is, the soul is Samayik. The meaning is that just as
Samayik is one cycle of the soul and the soul is somehow inseparable from its
cycle, so the soul is called Samayik. Similarly, here, considering the
difference of cycles, I am Voshiravam from my soul, what is this? The meaning is
that I am Voshiravam from my sinful past cycle. - Ninth Ashtoti page no. 225.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 sAtha jaina upAzraya bhANavar3a (jAmanagara, saurASTra) saMvat 2030,
vijayAdazamI 25-10-74 -muni padmavijaya (vartamAna paMnyAsa padmavijayajI)
dUsarI AvRtti prakAzita kI jA rahI hai, yaha jJAnabhakti-jJAnavRddhi kA atIva
prazaMsanIya kArya ho rahA hai| isa graMtha ko aneka bhASAoM meM prakAzita
karake deza videza meM jaina yogazAstra kA pracAra ho aura vItarAga paramAtmA kA
zuddha mArga grahaNa kara sabhI jIvAtmA mokSa pada prApta kare yahI eka hArdika
zubha abhilASA hai| 2046 vasaMta paMcamI paMnyAsa padmavijaya carakhI dAdarI
bhivAnI (hariyANA) dharmalAbha 31-01-90 * yaha yogazAstra kA bhASAMtara Ahora ke
zrI rAjendra jaina bRhad jJAna bhaMDAra meM dekhA, par3hA aura isakI upayogitA
ko jAnakara ise punaH prakAzita karavAne kA vicAra kiyaa| vartamAna meM zrI
padmasUrIzvarajI kI dUsarI AvRti meM pracAra karane kI bhAvanA ko lakSa meM
rakhakara ise prakAzita karavA rahe haiN| sarijI ne yogazAstra kI prastAvanA meM
isa graMtha kI mahattA ko ujAgara kI hai| vaha paryApta hone se maiM usI kI
puSTI karatA hai| yaha graMtha zrI gururAmacaMdra prakAzana samiti, bhInamAla ke
dvArA prakAzita hokara jana-jana ke lAbhArtha niHzulka vitaraNa kiyA jaayegaa|
ataH pAThaka gaNa lAbhAnvita bneN| - jayAnaMda zaMkhezvara tIrtha . 2065 caitra
vadi 12 23-03-2009 upadhAna mAlA prasaMge _ "vizeSa vivaraNa" yogazAstra ke
gujarAtI anuvAda meM sAmAyika kI vyAkhyA meM tRtIya prakAza 82-83 gAthA ke
antargata hindI ke peja naM. 210 . para vosirAmi zabda kI vyAkhyA ke bAda
gujarAtI bhASAMtara meM bhASAMtara kAra ne jo vizeSa vyAkhyA kI hai vaha
nimnAnusAra hai : ahiM sAmAyika karavAnA samaye AtmAno pApayukta je pUrva
paryAya teno tyAga ane jJAna-darzana-cAritra e ratnamaya AtmAno navo paryAya
tenI utpatti thatI hovAthI te pUrva paryAyI AtmAne taju chu ema kahI zakAya che.
kAraNa ke paryAyo eTale bhinna bhinna kramazaH prakaTa thatI AtmAnI avasthAo ane
paryAyI eTale te avasthAono AdhAra AtmA. e paryAyo ane paryAyI banne apekSAe
bhinna hovAthI mArA AtmAne tanuM chu. huM navo utpanna thayo ema kahevU te
asatyarUpa nathI. AcArAMga sUtramA kaDaM che ke AyAkhalu sAmAiaM arthAt AtmA eja
sAmAyika che. tAtparya ke jema sAmAyika AtmAno eka paryAya che ane potAnI e
paryAyathI AtmA kathaMcit abhinna che. ema mAnI tyAM AtmAne ja sAmAyika rUpe
kahyo che. tema ahiM apekSAe paryAyano bheda mAnIne huM mArA te AtmAne vosirAvaM
cha, ema kA che. temAM tAtparya e che ke huM mArA pUrvanA te pApI paryAya ne
vosirAvaM - navI aSTuti peja naM. 225.

Page #14 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Introduction  In scriptures, attaining human birth is said to be extremely
rare. While the state of being a god is considered abundant with happiness and
material possessions, it is not considered rare. However, human birth is
considered rare because it is the only path to the highest state - liberation
(moksha). This birth allows for the attainment of all stages of self-development
and virtues. Gods and hell beings cannot progress beyond the four and five
stages of virtues respectively. They lack the means for wisdom, penance,
sacrifice, and self-improvement. Hell beings are bound by the suffering caused
by their actions and karmic seeds, leaving no room for self-improvement. The
state of being a hell being is a life of dependence and devoid of wisdom. This
makes their state of self-development inferior. Human birth is the only birth
where all possibilities for favorable conditions exist.  Even in human birth,
due to the influence of environment and karmic impressions, there are many
obstacles to self-development. Extremely hot regions, forests, mountainous
areas, coastal regions, and islands all have their own unique challenges in
terms of food, shelter, and lifestyle, making self-development a distant
thought. These areas devoid of self-development are called "Anarya" regions in
scriptures.  Attaining human birth is one of the rarest things in life.
Similarly, a region where the principles of religion and ethics are prevalent,
and the environment is conducive to self-development, is called an "Arya"
region. Attaining such a region is also one of the rarest things in life. India
is an Arya region. From its forests, mountains, valleys, villages, and cities,
one can see the influence of religion and ethics in every aspect. The worship of
the Supreme Being, fear of the afterlife, the impermanence of human life, and
the worship of any principle worthy of worship are deeply ingrained in every
corner of India. Every village, forest, and mountain in India expresses its
impermanence through songs, stones, trees, and the application of vermillion,
and worships deities.  For millions of years, this land has been immersed in
religious principles. Saints, ascetics, and powerful individuals have left their
mark on every corner of this land, ensuring the continuation of these
principles. This is why India has always been the land of saints. Kings,
emperors, merchants, and scholars, despite enjoying all the comforts of life,
have always pondered the afterlife. This is why India has produced many kings
who renounced their kingdoms and sought refuge in the forest. It has produced
many merchants who donated their millions of wealth. It has produced many
scholars who traveled far and wide in search of truth. India is not just
concerned with material happiness but also with the pursuit of spiritual
happiness.  This pursuit of spiritual happiness has led to the emergence of many
religions in India. Each religion has established its own principles and created
a framework for conduct and thought.  The classification of these diverse
religions and thoughts is called "Shatdarshan" (Six Schools of Philosophy). The
synthesis of these six schools of philosophy, or the synthesis of all religions,
is Jainism. This is why Anandghanji Maharaj, in his praise of Lord Naminath,
says that all philosophies are encompassed within Jainism. This synthesis is
evident in the three verses "Uppenna E Va, Vigame E Va, Dhume E Va" spoken by
Lord Mahavira, which were expanded upon by Ganadhar Bhagwan in the form of
"Dwadashanga" (Twelve Angas).  These twelve Angas are divided into four "Anuyog"
(Categories): Dravyanuyog, Ganitanuyog, Kathanyog, and Charan-Karananuyog.
Dravyanuyog deals with the nature of karma, its classification, bondage,
emergence, liberation, existence, causes, and other subtle aspects of the six
substances.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prAstAvika zAstromAM 'cattAri paramaMgANi' kahI manuSyapaNAnI prApti durlala
gaNAvI che. devagati pracura sukhasAmagrIvALI hovA chatAM tene durlabha na
gaNAvI paNa manuSyagatine durlabha aTalA mATe gaNAvI ke A gati paramoccasthAna -
mokSaprApti mATe ananya kAraNarUpa che. jIvane AtmavikAsanA sarva pagathAra-
guNasthAnakonI prApti karavI hoya to A gatimAM thaI zake che. deva nArakamAM
cAraguNasthAnaka ane tiyaMcamAM pAMca guNasthAnakothI AgaLa vadhI zakAtuM nathI.
viveka, tapa, tyAga ane AtmonnatinAM sarva sAdhano ahIM jeTalAM nathI. narakamAM
kSetrajanya ane bIjAM parasparodArita duHkho aTalAM badhAM che ke tyAM koI
Atmonnatino avakAza nathI. tiyaMcagati parAdhIna jIvana ane viveka vinAnI che.
jethI tyAM paNa AtmavikAsanuM ochraM sthAna che. mAnavabhavaja oka ovo bhava che
ke jyAM badhI anukuLatA maLavAno saMbhava che. kSetra ane saMskArane laI
mAnavabhavamAM paNa AtmavikAsa mATe aneka jAtanI pratikuLatA hoya che. atyaMta
uSNa pradezo, jaMgala ane khINa pradezo, dariyAkAMThA ane TApuo, A badhAmAM te
te kSetrane anusarI khorAka, raheNI-kaheNI ane jIvananuM avuM ghaDatara hoya che
ke jyAM AtmavikAsano koI vicAra ja na Ave. AvA AtmavikAsa zUnya pradezone zAstre
anArya pradeza kahyA che. mAnavabhavanI prApti se jIvane durlabha vastuonI
prApti paikI eka che temaja je pradezamAM dharma ane nItinA saMskAra hoya, je
pradezanuM vAtAvaraNa AtmavikAsa mATe anukuLa hoya te Arya deza. A Arya dezanI
prApti a paNa jIvanamAM durlabha vastunI prApti paikImAM eka che. A bhArata Arya
deza che. A dezanA jaMgala, parvata, khINa, gAmaDuM ke zahera jyAM najara
nAMkhazo tyAM badhe koI ne koIpaNa rIte dharma ane nItinA saMskArano AvirbhAva
che. paramAtmAnI upAsanA, parabhavano bhaya, mAnavajIvananI | anityatA ane
jIvanamAM koI paNa upAsya tattvanI upAsanA bhAratanA khUNe-khUNe patharAyela
che. tethI ja bhAratanuM pratyeka gAmaDuM, pratyeka jaMgala ke parvata kAMI ne
kAMI gIta, ke patthara yA vRkSanA thaDa upara siMdura DhoLI deva-devInA AropaNa
dvArA potAnI anityatA pAmaratA jAhera karI tenI upAsanA kare che. Ama karoDo
varSathI A bhUmi dharma saMskArathI plAvita che. ane A dharma saMskArane sadA
pallavita rAkhanAra koI | ne koI saMta, mahaMta ochI ke vadhu zaktizALI dareka
jagyAo patharAyelA che. AthI ja bhArata se sadA saMtonI bhUmi rahI che. rAjA,
mahArAjA, zreSThI, sAmaMta ke vidvAno aneka jAtanI paudgalika suvidhA jIvanamAM
hovA chatAM te harahamezA parabhavanI vicAraNA karatA AvyA che. ane tethI ja
bhAratamAM rAjyapATa ane vaibhava choDI tapovanano Azaro lenArA aneka rAjavIo
nIkalyA che. karor3onI saMpattine chUTe hAthe dAna denArA zreSThIvaryo nIkalyA
che ane tattvagaveSaNA pAchaLa Thera-Thera ghUmI satyanI zodha karanArA vidvAno
bhAratamAM pAkyA che. Ama bhAratanI kevala auhika sukha pAchaLanI doTa nathI
paNa pAramArthika sukha pAchaLa tenuM ciMtana sadAkALa che. A pAramArthika
sukhanI gaveSaNAne laIne bhAratamAM aneka dharmo nIkalyA ane te te dharmoo koI
ne koI siddhAMta sthira karI tenI dvArA AcAra vicAranuM vartuLa sthira karyu. A
aneka jAtanA dharmo - vicAronuM vargIkaraNa te SaDdarzana che. A cha darzanano
samanvaya agara samagra dharmano samanvaya te jaina darzana che. AthI ja
AnaMdaghanajI mahArAje naminAtha bhagavAnanA 'SaDdarzana jina aMga bhaNI je'
stavanamAM jainadarzanamAM badhAM darzana samAI jAya che te jaNAvyuM che. A
samanvaya dRSTinA pratApe ja bhagavAna pAsethI 'uppanne I vA, vigame I vA, dhuve
I vA' A traNa tripadIne vistArI gaNadhara bhagavaMtoo dvAdazAMgInI racanA karI
che. A dvAdazAMgI cAra anuyogamaya che. dravyAnuyoga, gaNitAnuyoga, kathAnuyoga
ane caraNakaraNAnuyoga. karmanuM svarUpa tenI vargaNA, baMdha, udaya, udIkaraNa,
sattA, karaNo vigere sUkSmAtisUkSma SaDdravyanI vicAraNA te dravyAnuyoga che.

Page #15 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The measurement and quantity of various places like Devavimanas, Jyotishchakra,
Narakavasa, Dweesha, Samudra, Parvata etc. in the fourteen Rajalokas are
considered through Ganitanuyog. The detailed explanation of stories that destroy
eternal sins and lead the soul to the path of salvation is called Kathanyog. The
consideration of the qualities of the path of conduct, the various practices of
life, the detailed explanation of Charan Sittari and Karan Sittari, starting
from Sarva Virati and Deshvirati is called Charan Karananyog. These four Anuyogs
are called Dwadashangi and the Dwadashangi gradually becomes thinner and
thinner. The Agam Shruti that we have today is also based on these four Anuyogs.
Following the Agam Shruti, our ancestors and authorities have created various
types of literature. All this literature is also based on the four Anuyogs. The
fruit of these four Anuyogs is Moksha. Dravyanyog, Ganitanuyog and Kathanyog are
the three Anuyogs that are part of Charan Karananyog. Yogshastra is the
reference point for Charan Karananyog. The main focus is on Charan Karananyog.
However, this Yogshastra also refers to the other three Anuyogs. The knowledge
of the division of Karma, the nature of Gunasthan etc. is explained through
Dravyanyog, the nature of the fourteen Rajalokas etc. is explained through
Ganitanuyog and detailed stories are used to explain each vow and its related
topics through Kathanyog. The fruit of Charan Karananyog is knowledge, vision
and character. The combination of these three is called Yoga. This is what the
omniscient Hemchandrasuri Maharaj has said in the latter half of the 15th verse
of the first Prakashana: "Knowledge, faith and character are the three jewels."
This Yoga is in the form of the three jewels of knowledge, vision and character.
Therefore, this Yogshastra describes knowledge, vision and character in detail.
The description of knowledge is given in the 16th verse of the first Prakashana.
"The understanding of the true nature of things, whether in brief or in detail,
is called right knowledge by the wise." The nature of vision and character is
explained in the 70th and 18th verses of the first Prakashana. The explanation
of character is given from the 19th to the 46th verse of the first Prakashana,
explaining the nature of the five great vows, the five samitis and the three
secrets. "This character is said to be the best for all the great sages and for
the householders who are attached to the duties of a sage." The character of
Deshvirati is for those who are attached to the duties of a sage and for the
householders who are attached to the duties of a sage. To explain how a
householder can become a Dharmaadhikari with this Deshvirati character, the 35
qualities of the path of conduct are described in the 47th to 56th verses of the
first Prakashana, completing the first Prakashana. This is actually the
introduction to the first Prakashana. In the second Prakashana, Yoga is called
"knowledge, faith and character." The other parts are explained there. vi

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 devavimAno, jyotiSacakra, narakAvAsAo, dvISo, samudro, parvato vigere cauda
rAjalokamAM zAzvata azAzvata anekAneka sthAnonA mApa parimANanI vicAraNA te
gaNitAnuyoga che. 'cirasaMciyapAvapaNAsaNIi..' ciraMtana pApano nAza karanArI
jIvone kalyANamArganA AlaMbanarUpa kathAno vistAra te kathAnuyoga che. sarva
virati, dezaviratithI mAMDIne mArgAnusAripaNAnA guNa sudhInI vicAraNA, nAnA-moTA
jIvananA anuSThAno, caraNa sittari, karaNasittarino vistAra A caraNakaraNAnuyoga
che. A cAre anuyogamaya dvAdazAMgI che ane o dvAdazAMgImAMthI utarI AveluM
uttarottara kSINa thatuM AvekheM Aje ApaNI pAse raheluM je Agamazruta che te
paNa a cAra anuyogamaya che. Agamazrutane anusarI ApaNA pUrvAcAryo te te
adhikArIone anulakSI anekavidha sAhitya sarjana kayuM che. te paNa saghaLu
sAhitya cAra anuyogarUpa che. _ A cAre anuyoga, phaLa se mokSaprApti che. ane
dravyAnuyoga, gaNitAnuyoga ane kathAnuyoga A traNe anuyogasImAnta
caraNakaraNAnuyoga che. A caraNakaraNAnuyoganA saMdarbharUpa yogazAstra che.
AmAM mukhyatve caraNakaraNAnuyoga che. tema chatAM A yogazAstramA svopajJa
vRttikAre bIjA traNa anuyogano saMdarbha paNa Apyo che. karmanA bheda,
guNasthAnakonuM svarUpa vigere jaNAvI dravyAnuyoga, cauda rAjalokanuM svarUpa
vigere raju karI gaNitAnuyoga ane dareka vrato upara te te viSayane spaSTa
karavA suvistRtaM kathAo dvArA kathAnuyoga paNa A graMthamA saMkalita che. ane A
caraNa-karaNAnuyoganuM phalitArtha jJAnadarzana ane cAritra che. A traNeno
samuccaya te yoga che. _ AthI ja kalikAla sarvajJa hemacaMdrasUri mahArAje
pahelA prakAzanA 15mA zlokanA uttarArdhamA jaNAvyuM che ke : jJAna-zraddhAna-
cAritrarUpaM ratnatrayaM ca saH ||15|| A yoga jJAna, darzana ane cAritrarUpa
ratnatrayIrUpa che. AthI A yogazAstramA jJAna, darzana ane cAritranuM varNana |
ane vistAra che. yogazAstramA prathama prakAzanA 16mA zlokamAM jJAna- varNana
che. yathAvasthitatattvAnAM saGkSapAda vistareNa vA  /  yo'vabodhastamatrAhuH
samyagjJAnaM manISiNaH  /  / 1 /  /  yathAvasthita tattvono saMkSepa ke
vistArathI je avabodha thavo tene paMDito samyagjJAna kahe che.
rUcirjinoktatattveSu...... prathama prakAzanA sattaramAM ane aDhAramAM zlokathI
darzana ane cAritranuM svarUpa batAvyuM che, prathama prakAzanA 19mAM zlokathI
46mAM zloka sudhI cAritranI vyAkhyA pAMca mahAvratotuM svarUpa, pAMca samiti,
traNa guptino paricaya batAvI sarvAtmanA yatIndraNAmetazcAritramIritam  /
yatidharmAnuraktAnAM dezataH syAdagAriNAm  /  /  sarva sAvadyayoganI viratirUpa
A cAritra uttama munivarone hoya che ane yatidharma tarapha anurAgavALA
gRhasthone | | dezathI dezavirati cAritra hoya che. A dezavirati cAritramA kevA
prakArano gRhastha dharmAdhikArI banI zake te mATe dharmAdhikArI banavA mATe
mArgAnusArIpaNAnA 35 guNonuM varNana prathama prakAzamA 47 thI 56 zloka sudhImAM
ApI prathama prakAza pUrNa karela che. Ama kharI rIte prathama prakAza graMthanI
prastAvanA svarUpa che. bIjA prakAzamAM 'jJAna-zraddhAna-cAritra rUpaM' kahI
yogane jJAna, darzana, cAritra rUpa kahela che. tenA bIjA aMza tethI vi

Page #16 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The text explains the Jain principles of Dharma and Dharma-karma in detail,
covering 17 chapters (Prakashas) of the Yoga Shastra.  **Prakash 1-3:**  *
**Chapters 1-17:**  Explains the 67 types of "Bhed" (differences) in detail. *
**Chapters 18-53:**  Describes the first vow of "Sthula Himsa-Viraman"
(refraining from gross violence) for Shravakas (lay followers). * **Chapters
54-64:**  Describes the second vow of "Sthula Mrishvad-Asaty Viraman"
(refraining from gross falsehood). * **Chapters 65-75:**  Describes the third
vow of "Sthula Adattadan-Chori Viraman" (refraining from gross theft). *
**Chapters 76-105:**  Describes the fourth vow of "Sthula Brahmacharya"
(refraining from gross sexual misconduct). * **Chapters 106-115:**  Describes
the fifth vow of "Parigraha Pariman" (limiting possessions). * **Chapters 1-3:**
Describes the three "Gunavratas" (virtuous vows):     * **Chapters 1-3:**
"Gunavat-Dig Pariman" (limiting the extent of one's actions).     * **Chapters
4-72:**  "Bhogopbhog Pariman" (limiting the enjoyment of worldly pleasures).
* **Chapters 73-81:**  "Anarth-Dand Viraman" (refraining from causing harm).
**Prakash 4-12:**  * **Chapters 82-83:**  Describes the first "Shikshavrata"
(educational vow) of "Samayik" (meditation). * **Chapters 84-85:**  Describes
the second "Shikshavrata" of "Deshavakashik" (limiting one's movements). *
**Chapter 86:**  Describes the third "Shikshavrata" of "Poushadh" (refraining
from harmful substances). * **Chapters 87-88:**  Describes the fourth
"Shikshavrata" of "Atithi Sanvibhaag" (sharing with guests). * **Chapters
89-118:**  Describes the 12 "Anuvratas" (minor vows) and their transgressions. *
**Chapters 119-155:**  Describes the duties of a Shravaka, including Samayik,
Chaityavandan (paying homage to the temple), the meaning of Sutras (sacred
texts), Guruvandan (paying homage to the teacher), Devavandan (paying homage to
the gods), daily routine, and the three jewels (knowledge, faith, and conduct)
that lead to liberation. * **Prakash 4:**  Explains the concept of "Abhed" (non-
duality) between Dharma and Dharma-karma, discussing the four "Kshayas"
(passions), "Leshya" (subtle karmic tendencies), "Swar" (self), "Anitya"
(impermanence), and the four "Bhavana" (emotions). * **Prakash 5:**  Describes
"Pranayama" (breath control), including "Rechak" (exhalation), "Kumbhak"
(retention), "Purak" (inhalation), the different types of "Vayu" (air), "Nadi"
(energy channels), and "Swapna" (dreams). * **Prakash 6:**  Describes
"Pratyahar" (withdrawal of senses) and "Dharana" (concentration) and their
benefits. * **Prakash 7-10:**  Describes the four types of "Dhyana"
(meditation): "Pindasth" (focused on the body), "Padasth" (focused on the feet),
"Rupast" (focused on form), and "Rupaatit" (transcending form). * **Prakash
11:**  Describes "Shukla Dhyana" (pure meditation), the virtues of Tirthankaras
(liberated souls), and "Samudghat" (spiritual awakening). * **Prakash 12:**
Describes the "Tattva" (truths) experienced through meditation, including
"Vिक्षिप्त" (distracted), "यातायात" (wandering), "संश्लिष्ट" (connected), and
"संलीन" (merged) states of meditation.  **Yoga:**  * The text emphasizes that
true Yoga is not merely physical postures and breathing exercises, but a path to
liberation through the realization of the true self. * It highlights the power
of Yoga to purify the mind and overcome even the most severe karmic burdens. *
The text attributes the creation of this Yoga Shastra to the great Jain sage
Hemchandrasuri.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 darzana- spaSTikaraNa 1 thI 17 zloka sudhImAM samAkitanuM tenA 67 bhedanA
varNana pUrvaka vistArathI svarUpa batAvyuM che. bIjA prakAzanA 18mA zlokathI
53mA zloka sudhI zrAvakanA pahelA sthUla hiMsA-viramaNa rUpa prathama vratarnu,
54mA zlokathI 64 sudhI sthulamRSAvAda asatya viramaNa rUpa bIjA vratanuM, 65 thI
75mAM zloka sudhI sthula adattAdAna-corI viramaNarUpa trIjA vratarnu, 76 thI 105
zloka sudhI sthula brahmacarya vratanuM ane 106 thI 115 zloka sudhImAM parigraha
parimANa vratanuM vistuta svarUpa ApyuM che. ane te te vratone anusaratAM dareka
vrato uparanA suvistRta kathAnako paNa ApyA che... trIjA prakAzamAM 1 thI 3
zloka sudhI pahelA guNavata-dig parimANa vratanuM svarUpa, 4 thI 72 zloka sudhI
bhogopabhoga parimANa vrata rUpa bIjA guNavatarnu, 73 thI 81 zloka sudhI
anarthadaMDaviramaNa vrata rUpa trIjA guNavatanuM vistRta | nirUpaNa dvArA traNa
guNavratanuM nirUpaNa kayuM che. zloka 82-83mAM sAmAyika vratarUpa prathama
zikSAvratarnu, 84-85 sudhImAM dezAvakAzika vratarnu, 86mA mAM pauSadha |
vratarnu, 87-88mA atithi saMvibhAga vratanuM vistRta svarUpa batAvyuM che. 89mAM
zlokathI 118 zloka sudhI 12 aNuvratanA aticAronuM svarUpa batAvavAmAM AvyuM che.
119 thI 155 zloka sudhImAM zrAvakajIvananA samagra kartavyonuM varNana,
sAmAyika, caityavaMdana vigeremA AvatA sUtrono viziSTha artha paccakhANa-
guruvaMdana ane devavaMdana bhASyano saMkSepa, zrAvakanI dinacaryA Adi viziSTha
karaNInA savistara nirUpaNA dvArA dharma-dharmInA bheda nayane AzrayIne jJAnAdi
traNa ratno je muktinA kAraNa rUpa che tenuM nirUpaNa karyu A rIteM bhedanayanI
dRSTithI 1 thI 3 prakAzamAM dharma ane dharmI vacceno bheda mAnI AtmAnA jJAnAdi
traNa guNono vicAra karavAmAM Avyo che. cothA prakAzamAM dharma ane dharmIne
abheda mAnIne vicAra karavAmAM Avyo che. temAM cAra kaSAya, lezyAogeM svara
anityAdi bAra bhAvanA ane maitryAdi cAra bhAvanAnuM vistRta svarUpa ApavAmAM
AvyuM che. pAMcamAM prakAzamAM, prANAyAma recaka, kuMbhaka ane puraka vigerenA
bhedonuM varNana, vAyunA bhedonuM varNana ane svarUpa, nADI, svapna, vagerenuM
varNana ApavAmAM AvyuM che. chaTThA prakAzamAM pratyAhAra ane dhAraNAnuM svarUpa
ane phaLa batAvyuM che. sAta-ATha-nava ane dasamAM prakAzamAM anukrame piNDastha
padastha, rUpastha ane rupAtIta dhyAna- varNana ane svarUpa vistRta rIte
ApavAmAM Avela che. 11mA prakAzamAM zukla dhyAna- svarUpa, tIrthakara
bhagavAnonA atizayo ane samudghAta vigerenuM varNana ApavAmAM AvyuM che. 12mAM
prakAzamAM anubhavasiddha tattva, varNana karela che. ane temAM vikSipta,
yAtAyAta, saMzliSTa ane saMlIna vigere dhyAnacaM varNana karela che. A rIte
yogazAstranA bAra prakAzamAM vividha rIte yoganuM varNana karela che. yoga aTale
padmAsanAdi Asana jamAvIne zvAsozvAsanI prakriyA karavI te lokaprasiddha yogamAM
yogaparirpa thato nathI. paraMta jenA dvArA paramasakhanidhAna AtyaMtika sakha
rUpa mokSanI prAptimA je kAraNa rUpa bane che te yoga che. AvA yoganA pariNAmo
cakravarti ArisAbhuvanamA rahyA chatAM anityatAnI vicAraNA dvArA kevaLajJAna
pAmyA. brAhmaNa, strI, bALaka ane gAya rUpa mahApAtakanA karanAra dRDhaprahArI
temaja bhayaMkara duSkarma karanAra cilAtI putra jevA A yoganA pratApe
kevaLajJAna pAmyA che. TaMkamAM cittavattine AtmalakSI banAvavAthI yogI yoga
dvArA kSiNoti yogaH pApAni cirakAlArjitAnyapi aneka bhavonA upArjana karelA
pApone kSaNamAtramA yoga bALI muke che. A yogazAstranI racanA kalikAla sarvajJa
hemacaMdrasUri mahArAje| zrutAmbhogheradhigamya sampradAyAcca sadguroH  /  vii

Page #17 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
I am composing this treatise on Yoga based on the ocean of scriptures, the
tradition of the true Gurus, and my own experiences. I am composing this
treatise on Yoga based on the scriptures of our revered Hemchandrasuri Maharaj,
the teachings of the Gurus, and my own experiences. The first four chapters are
a compilation of the principles described in the Jain Agamas and scriptures,
presented in the form of Darshan, Gyan, and Charitra. The fifth to eleventh
chapters are a compilation of knowledge gathered from Jain scriptures, other
scriptures, and the teachings of the Guru Bhagavants. The twelfth chapter is
based on my own experiences. This treatise on Yoga has 1009 original verses, and
the commentary on them is written by me, the author. The commentary has
approximately 12,000 verses. This treatise on Yoga is composed at the request of
the omniscient Hemchandrasuri Maharaj in the Kali Yuga, for the sake of the
supreme Kumarapal Maharaj. May the merit earned from the composition of this
treatise on Yoga lead to the attainment of enlightenment for all beings. With
this blessing, I conclude this self-explanatory description. Inspired by the
request of the Chalukya ruler, I have composed this treatise on Yoga and its
commentary. May the merit earned from this work lead to the attainment of
enlightenment for all beings. Inspired by the request of the Chalukya king
Kumarapal Maharaj, I have composed this self-explanatory description of the
ocean of true knowledge. May the merit earned from the composition of this
treatise on Yoga lead to the attainment of enlightenment for all beings. This
treatise on Yoga is composed keeping in mind the request of Maharaj Kumarapal,
and is intended to benefit others as well, based on scriptures, the Guru
tradition, and my own experiences. Date: 21-8-72 - Mafatlal Jhaverchand Gandhi.
"Special Details" - It is also not permissible to engage in other businesses
such as: extracting the heart, testicles, or kidneys of living beings;
extracting fish oil; making medicines from the blood of animals; performing
abortions; using birth control methods; selling such devices; selling cremation
materials; selling pesticides; spraying phenyls; killing rats, monkeys, dogs,
etc.; running slaughterhouses; earning money through cinema, drama, etc.;
selling TVs, TV parts, etc.; carrying out executions; selling or making violent
medicines; and other similar businesses. These acts of violence fall under the
category of Karmadan, both in the context of the first vow and as a means of
livelihood. This treatise on Yoga, in the third chapter, verse 111, provides a
Gujarati translation of this meter, which is useful and therefore included here.
- [This image is special because: not bathing, abstaining from all four types of
food at night, keeping the dhoti loose, observing complete celibacy on the four
festival days, and limiting it on other days, meditating on Jineshwar in
Kaussag, and mentally condemning lust and enjoyment for five months] (This meter
is found in the fifth image in the Gujarati translation).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 | sva saMyedanatazcApi yogazAstraM viracyate  /  /  zrutarupa samudrathI,
sadguruonI paraMparAthI ane svAnubhavathI jANIne huM yogazAstra racuM chu. Ama
pU. hemacaMdrasUri mahArAje zAstrothI, guruonA upadezathI ane potAnA anubhavathI
A traNa sAdhano dvArA yogazAstranI racanA karI che. prathamanA cAra prakAza
jainaAgamomAM ane zAstromAM varNita vastune saMkalita karI darzana-jJAna ane
cAritramA varNanarUpe Apela che. pAMcathI agiyAra prakAza jainazAstro,
itarazAstro ane gurubhagavaMto dvArA jANela jJAnane ekatrita karI saMkalita
karyA che. ane bAramo prakAza potAnA anubhavo dvArA lakhyo che. A yogazAstramA
muLazloka 1009 che ane tenI vRtti graMthakAre pote lakhI che. te vRttinuM
pramANa 12,000 zloka pramANa che. A yogazAstranI racanA kalikAla sarvajJa
hemacaMdrasUri mahArAje paramArhat kumArapALa mahArAjAnI prArthanAthI karela
che. ane A yogazAstranI racanAthI je kAMi sukRta meM upArjana kaya hoya tethI
bhavya prANIo bodhilAbhane pAme tevA AzIrvAda pUrvaka potAna svopajJa vivaraNa
samApta karela che. zrI caulukyakSitipatikRtaprArtha nAprerito'haM, saMprAti
yogazAstrAt tadvivRtezcApi yanmayA sukRtamaH tena jinabodhilAbhapraNayI bhavyo
jano bhavatAt  /  /  caulukyavaMzI kumArapAla mahArAjAo karelI prArthanAthI
prerAi ne meM A tattvajJAnanA samudrarUpa svopajJa vivaraNa karyu A yogazastranI
racanA dvArA je meM kAMi puNya upArjana karyu hoya tethI bhavyajIvo bodhi pAmo.
Ama A yogazAstranI racanA mahArAjA kumArapAlane lakSamA rAkhI zAstro,
guruparaMparA ane anubhavathI mahArAjA kumArapAlanI mAphaka bIjAone paNa upakArI
thAya te rIte racanA karI che. tA. : 21-8-72 -maphatalAla jhaveracaMda gAMdhI.
'vizeSa vivaraNa" prasaMgopAta aise dUsare vyApAra bhI na karane, jaise -
prANiyoM kA hRdaya nikAlanA, aMDakoSa nikAlanA, kIDanI nikAla denA, machalI kA
tela nikAlanA, pazuoM ke zarIra meM se rakta nikAlakara davAiryA banAnA,
garbhapAta karavAnA, saMtati niyamana ke prayoga karanA, aise sAdhana becanA,
zaba ke dAhadene kA sAmAna becanA, jaMtunAzaka pAvaDara becanA, phInAina
chAMTanA, cUhe, baMdara, kutte Adi ko mArane kA vyApAra, kUTaNa khAne calAnA,
sInemA nATaka Adi ke dvArA dhanArjana karanA, TI.vI becanA, TI.vI. ke pArTasa
Adi becanA, phAMsI kI sajA denA, hiMsaka davAiryA becanA, banAnA, ye aura isake
jaise aura bhI vyApAra karmAdAna ke antargA hai| isameM hiMsA kA kArya prathama
vata ke aticAra meM bhI aura AjIvi kA ke lie aisA vyApAra karmAdAna ke antargata
smjhnaa| yogazAstra tRtIya prakAza zloka naM. 111 ke antargata gujarAtI
bhASAMtara meM isa prakAra kA meTaradiyA hai upayogI hone se yahAM bhI liyA hai|
- [isa pratimA meM itanA vizeSa hai ki- snAna na karanA, rAta ko cAro prakAra kA
AhAra tyAga, dhotI kI lAMga khullI rakhanA, cAra parva ke dinoM meM saMpUrNa
brahmacarya pAlana, anya dinoM meM parimANa nizcita karanA, kAussaga meM
jinezvara kA dhyAna, pAMca mahine taka kAma-bhoga kI manomana niMdA] (gujarAtI
bhASAMtara meM pAMcavI pratimA meM yaha meTara hai|) viji

Page #18 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Anukrama Vishaya Prishtha Vishaya Prishtha 03 Chaar atishayoṃ se garbhita
mahāvīra-stuti indra dvārā shakrastava se stuti indra dvārā deva sabhā meṃ
prashansā, eka deva kā parīkshā karane āna, dīkshā gvāle kā upasarga
chaṇḍakoshika sarpa ko pratiboddha evam usakī samatā bhagavān mahāvīra kī
mahākaruṇā, saṃgama devakṛtaghora upasarga saṃgamadeva dvārā bhagavān mahāvīra
para ghora upasarga saṃgamadeva kṛta ghora upasarga saṃgamadeva dvārā antima
upasarga yogashāstra racane kā nirnaya yoga mahānmya, sanatkumāra chakravarti ko
rūpa para garva aura vairāgya yoga ke prabhāva se prāpta labdhiyāṃ yoga ke
prabhāva se prāpta honevālī vividha labdhiyāṃ yoga ke prabhāva se prāpta
labdhiyāṃ chāraṇalabddhi aura usakē vividha prakāra, ṛṣabhakumāra kā janma evam
aṃgopāṃgoṃ evam vivāha kā varṇana ṛṣabharājā kā rājyābhisheka rājya vyavasthā,
devōṃ dvārā vinanti ṛṣabhadeva dīkshā, nami - vinati dharaṇendra kā vidyā dena,
āhāra graha ṇa prabhu ko kevalajñāna, bharata kā chintana ṛṣabha prabhu kī
deshana, marudevā kā moksha saṃgha sthāpana bharata dvārā shaṭkhaṇḍavijaya,
bharata dvārā 98 bhāiyōṃ ko adhīna hone kā sandesh 98 bhāiyōṃ kī dīkshā bāhubali
ke pāsa dūta bharata bāhubali yuddha bāhubali kī dīkshā, bharata dvārā stuti
ṛṣabha prabhu kā nirvāṇa bharata ko kevalajñāna aura marudevā kā varṇana
dṛḍhaprahārī kā varṇana dṛḍhaprahārīmuni dvārā samabhāva se upasarga-sahana
chilātī putra chilātīputra ke jīvana meṃ yoga kā chamatkāra chilātīputra kā
dṛṣṭānta Yoga kī prashansā moksha-puruṣārtha kā mūla kāraṇa - yoga; jñāna-yoga-
jīva tattva chaudaha guṇasthāna ajīvatattva āshrava tattva kā varṇana āshrava se
moksha tattva kā varṇana pāñcajñāna kā svarūpa darshana-chāritra ratna kā
svarūpa chāritra ratna ke mahāvratōṃ kā svarūpa . mahāvratōṃ kā svarūpa
mahāvratōṃ kī bhāvanāōṃ kā svarūpa aṣṭa pravachana mātā kā svarūpa bhikṣācaryā
svarūpa-udgama doṣa bhikṣācaryā svarūpa - utpādana doṣa bhikṣācārī ke 10
eṣaṇādoṣa bhikṣācaryā kā svarūpa-gochari samaya ke doṣa aṣṭa pravachana mātā
mātṛtva evam dharmādhikārī ke 35 guṇōṃ para vivechana samyaktva ke vipakṣī
mithyātva kā svarūpa aura . usakē prakāra devādi kā svarūpa chāra atishayōṃ se
yukta devādhideva arhan kī vishēṣatā sāmānya deva dvārā mukti kā abhāva suguru
aura kuguru kā antardharmma svarūpa, pauruṣeya apauruṣeya vacana nirnaya
kudēvādi ko mānane se hāni samyaktva ke pāñcha lakṣaṇa samyaktva ke pāñcha
bhūṣaṇa hiṃsaka nindanīya samyaktva ke pāñcha dūṣaṇa aṇuvrata svarūpa hiṃsā ke
phala duḥkhamochakatatā aura chārvākamat kā khaṇḍana hiṃsaka nindanīya hiṃsā ke
phalasvarūpa narakagāmī subhūma chakravarti jamadagni kā reṇukā ke sātha
pāṇigrahana aura parashurāma kā janma, rājya graha ṇa hiṃsā ke kāraṇa
subhūmachakravarti ko naraka kī prāpti brahmadatta chakravarti kī kathā hiṃsaka
kī sthiti 111 xii

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 anukrama viSaya pRSTha viSaya pRSTha 03 cAra atizayoM se garbhita mahAvIra-
stuti iMdra dvArA zakrastava se stuti iMdra dvArA deva sabhA meM prazaMsA, eka
deva kA parIkSA karane AnA, dIkSA gvAle kA upasarga caNDakozika sarpa ko
pratibodha evaM usakI samatA bhagavAn mahAvIra kI mahAkaruNA, saMgama
devakRtaghora upasarga saMgamadeva dvArA bhagavAn mahAvIra para ghora upasarga
saMgamadeva kRta ghora upasarga saMgamadeva dvArA aMtima upasarga yogazAstra
racane kA nirNaya yoga mahAnmya, sanatkumAra cakravartI ko rUpa para garva aura
vairAgya yoga ke prabhAva se prApta labdhiyA~ yoga ke prabhAva se prApta hone
vAlI vividha labdhiyA~ yoga ke prabhAva se prApta labdhiyA~ cAraNalabdhi aura
usake vividha prakAra, RSabhakumAra kA janma evaM aMgopAMgoM evaM vivAha kA
varNana RSabharAjA kA rAjyAbhiSeka rAjya vyavasthA, devoM dvArA vinaMti
RSabhadeva dIkSA, nami - vinati dharaNendra kA vidyA denA, AhAra grahaNa prabhu
ko kevalajJAna, bharata kA ciMtana RSabha prabhu kI dezanA, marudevA kA mokSa
saMgha sthApanA bharata dvArA SaTkhaNDavijaya, bharata dvArA 98 bhAiyoM ko
adhIna hone kA saMdeza 98 bhAiyoM kI dIkSA bAhubalI ke pAsa dUta bharata
bAhubalI yuddha bAhubalI kI dIkSA, bharata dvArA stuti RSabha prabhu kA nirvANa
bharata ko kevalajJAna aura marudevA kA varNana dRr3haprahArI kA varNana
dRr3haprahArImuni dvArA samabhAva se upasarga-sahana cilAtI putra cilAtIputra ke
jIvana meM yoga kA camatkAra cilAtIputra kA dRSTAMta yoga kI prazaMsA mokSa-
puruSArtha kA mUla kAraNa - yoga; jJAna-yoga-jIva tattva caudaha guNasthAna
ajIvatattva Azrava tattva kA varNana Azrava se mokSa tattva kA varNana
pAMcajJAna kA svarUpa darzana-cAritra ratna kA svarUpa cAritra ratna ke
mahAvratoM kA svarUpa . mahAvratoM kA svarUpa mahAvratoM kI bhAvanAoM kA svarUpa
aSTa pravacana mAtA kA svarUpa bhikSAcaryA svarupa-udgama doSa bhikSAcaryA
svarUpa - utpAdana doSa bhikSAcarI ke 10 eSaNAdoSa bhikSAcaryA kA svarUpa-gocarI
samaya ke doSa aSTa pravacana mAtA mAtRtva evaM dharmAdhikArI ke 35 guNoM para
vivecana samyaktva ke vipakSI mithyAtva kA svarUpa aura . usake prakAra devAdi
kA svarUpa cAra atizayoM se yukta devAdhideva arhan kI vizeSatA sAmAnya deva
dvArA mukti kA abhAva suguru aura kuguru kA aMtaradharma svarUpa, pauruSeya
apauruSeya vacana nirNaya kudevAdi ko mAnane se hAni samyaktva ke pAMca lakSaNa
samyaktva ke pAMca bhUSaNa hiMsaka niMdanIya samyaktva ke pAMca dUSaNa aNuvrata
svarUpa hiMsA ke phala duHkhamocakatA aura cArvAkamata kA khaMDana hiMsaka
niMdanIya hiMsA ke phalasvarUpa narakagAmI subhUma cakravartI jamadagni kA
reNukA ke sAtha pANigrahaNa aura parazurAma kA janma, rAjya grahaNa hiMsA ke
kAraNa subhUmacakravartI ko naraka kI prApti brahmadatta cakravartI kI kathA
hiMsaka kI sthiti 111 xii

Page #19 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
173 178 179 181 149 Renunciation of violence by tradition by Sulasa 112
Condemnation of violent teachings, individuals and so-called teachings 118
Animal violence in yajna is cruel and sinful 119 Examples of violent scriptures
120 The glory of non-violence. 121 Examples of violent scriptures, the fruit of
non-violence 122 Five types of gross untruth 123 Prohibition of untruth 124 Four
types of untruth and the fruit of untruth 129 The story of Kalikaacharya 12 The
story of Vasuraja 17 Vasuraja's descent into hell, Kaushik's descent into hell
130 The fault of untruthful speech and the glory of truthful speech 131
Description of the giving of ungiven gifts and the resulting bad consequences.
132 The story of Muladeva 133 The story of Muladeva 134 The fruit of abstaining
from theft 147 Violence against living beings from sexual intercourse 148 The
wickedness of a lustful woman, various harms from intercourse with immoral women
150 The fault of going to another's wife, the terrible faults of going to a
prostitute and going to another's wife, the story of Ravana 153 The decision of
Ramachandra's exile 155 Chandranakha attracting Ravana towards Sita 156 Ravana's
abduction of Sita and the meeting of Viradha with Rama 157 Fake Sugriva 158
Battle between fake and real Sugriva, death of Saahasagati 159 Hanuman's meeting
with Sita, entry into Lanka for war 160 Use of infallible power, Lakshmana
faints, Rama and Ravana's war, Ravana's death, the story of Sudarshan, the story
of Sudarshan, Sudarshan firm in virtue, not caught in Kapila's web 165 The
decision of Abhayarani to trap Sudarshan in the web 166 Bringing Sudarshan by
Abhaya 167 Accusation by Abhaya, order of execution 168 The throne of the Shuli,
the disturbance of Diksha Vyantari and Kevalgyan, Moksha 170 Useful moral
education for observing celibacy 171 Renunciation of possessions is necessary,
faults from possessions, description of the quantity of possessions, faults
arising from possessions. 174 The story of Sagarchakra 175 The story of
Sagarchakravarti 176 The story of Gau Sangrahi Kuchikarna, Teelak Seth, Nandraja
177 The story of the greedy Nandraja, the glory of contentment and the wise
Abhayakumar, the story of Abhayakumar 180 The story of Abhayakumar, the division
in Chandrapradyot's army due to Abhayakumar's intelligence 182 Abhay is handed
over to Chandrapradyot by the illusionary Shravaka 183 Abhayakumar's liberation,
bringing Chandrapradyot bound 185 Removal of disbelief towards the earth,
Abhay's initiation, praise of contentment 186 The glory of contentment 187 The
characteristics, nature and types of the Bhogopbhogparimanavrat 190 Harm from
alcohol 191 The evils and irony of drinking alcohol and eating meat 192 Faults
arising from meat eating 193 Description of the renunciation of meat in
Manusmriti etc. and the plight of meat eaters, worshipping gods and ancestors
with meat is also unrighteous, there is no similarity between meat eating and
non-meat eating, the fault in butter, the excrement of honeybees, honey produced
from violence is also to be renounced 197 Description of Udumbar, Anantakaaya
etc. 198 The fault in eating at night 199 The harms arising from eating at night
200 The views of other scriptures and Ayurveda on the renunciation of eating at
night 201 The bad fruit of eating at night and the good fruit of its
renunciation 202 Description of eating at night and the two-leafed plant 203
Renunciation of food contaminated with microscopic organisms and four types of
punishment for evil 204 The nature of Artarodradhyan and the punishment for evil
in the form of teaching of sin 205 Description of Pramadaacharan, renunciation
of the punishment for evil in the form of Pramadaacharan and the characteristics
of Samayikvrat 207 152 194 196 161 206 xiii

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 173 178 179 181 149 sulasa ke dvArA kulaparaMparAgata hiMsA kA tyAga 112
hiMsopadeza vyakti aura tathAkathita upadeza kI niMdA 118 yajJa meM kI gayI
pazuhiMsA krUrapApaphaladAyinI hai 119 hiMsAparaka zAstravacanoM ke namUne 120
ahiMsA kI mahimA  /  121 hiMsAparaka zAstravacanoM ke namUne, ahiMsA kA phala
122 sthUla asatya ke pAMca prakAra 123 asatya niSedha 124 asatya ke cAra bheda
evaM asatya kA phala 129 kAlikAcArya kI kathA 12 vasurAjA kI kathA 17 vasurAjA
kA naraka gamana, kauzika kA naraka gamana 130 asatyavacana se doSa aura
satyavacana kI mahimA 131 adattAdAna aura usase hone vAle duSpariNAmoM kA
varNana . 132 mUladeva kI kathA 133 mUladeva kI kathA 134 corI se nivRtta hone
kA phala 147 maithuna sevana se jIvahiMsA 148 kAmuka strI kI duSTatA duzcaritra
striyoM ke sAtha sahavAsa se nAnA prakAra kI hAniyA~ 150 parastrI gamana se doSa
vaizyAgamana va parastrIgamana ke bhayaMkara doSa rAvaNa kI kathA 153 rAmacaMdra
kA vanavAsa nirNaya 155 caMdraNakhA dvArA rAvaNa ko sItA ke prati AkarSita
karanA 156 rAvaNa dvArA sItA kA haraNa aura rAma se virAdha kA milana 157 nakalI
sugrIva 158 nakalI asalI sugrIva meM yuddha, sAhasagati kI mRtyu 159 hanumAna kA
sItA se milanA, yuddha ke lie laMkA meM praveza 160 amogha zakti kA prayoga,
lakSmaNa mUrchita rAma aura rAvaNa kA yuddha, rAvaNa kI mRtyu, sudarzana kI
kathA sudarzana kI kathA zIla meM dRr3ha sudarzana kapilA ke kAmajAla meM nahIM
phaMse 165 abhayArAnI dvArA sudarzana ko kAmajAla meM phaMsAne kA nirNaya 166
abhayA dvArA sudarzana ko lAnA 167 abhayA dvArA doSAropaNa vadha kA Adeza 168
zUlI kA siMhAsana, dIkSA vyaMtarI kA upadrava evaM kevalajJAna, mokSa 170
brahmacarya pAlana ke lie upayogI hitazikSA 171 parigrahatyAga Avazyaka,
parigraha se doSa parigraha parimANa varNana parigraha se hone vAle doSa  /  174
sagaracakrI kI kathA 175 sagaracakravartI kI kathA 176 gau saMgrahI kucikarNa,
tIlaka seTha, naMdarAjA kI kathA 177 artha lolupa naMdarAjA saMtoSa kI mahimA
aura buddhimAna abhayakumAra abhaya kumAra kI kathA 180 abhaya kumAra kI kathA
abhayakumAra ke buddhibala se caMDapradyota kI senA meM phUTa 182 abhaya ko
mAyAvinI zrAvikA ne caMDapradyota ko sauMpA 183 abhayakumAra kI mukti,
caMDapradyota ko bAMdhakara lAnA 185 bhuni ke prati azraddhA nivAraNa abhaya kI
dIkSA, saMtoSa kI prazaMsA 186 saMtoSa kI mahimA 187 bhogopabhogaparimANavrata
kA lakSaNa svarUpa aura prakAra 190 madya se nukazAna 191 madyapAna evaM mAMsa
se hone vAle anartha aura viDaMbanA 192 mAMsAhAra se hone vAle doSa 193
manusmRti Adi meM mAMsatyAgavarNana aura mAMsabhojI kI durdazA mAMsa se devoM
aura pitaroM kI pUjA karanA bhI adharma hai mAMsAhAra aura allAhAra meM koI
samAnatA nahIM, makkhana meM doSa madhumakSikA dvArA ucchiSTa, hiMsA se utpanna
madhu bhI tyAjya hai 197 uduMbara, anaMtakAya Adi kA vivaraNa 198 rAtri bhojana
meM doSa 199 rAtribhojana se hone vAlI hAniyA~ 200 rAtribhojanatyAga ke
saMbaMdha meM anya dharmazAstroM va AyurvedazAstra ke mata 201 rAtribhojana kA
duSphala aura usake tyAga suphala 202 rAtribhojana evaM dvidala kA vivaraNa 203
tyAjya sUkSmajIvasaMsakta bhojana evaM cAra prakAra kA anarthadaMDa 204
ArtarodradhyAna kA svarUpa aura pApopadezarUpa anarthadaMDa 205 pramAdAcaraNa kA
varNana pramAdAcaraNarUpa anarthadaMDa kA tyAga evaM sAmAyikavrata kA lakSaNa
207 152 194 196 161 206 xiii

Page #20 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## English Translation:  **Samayik Sutra**  **Meaning and Explanation of Samayik
Sutra** **Meaning and Method of Samayik Sutra** **Example of Samadhi-Sth
Chandravatansak in Samayik** **Deshavanasik Vrat** **Method of Observing
Poushadhavrat** **Story of the Strong Chulani-Pita Shravak and Chulani-Pita in
Poushadhavrat** **Nature and Method of Atithisanvibhaga Vrat** **Importance of
Giving Clothes, Utensils, and Accommodation to Sadhus and Sadhvis, and Their
Acceptance** **Importance of Giving Clothes, Utensils, and Accommodation to
Sadhus and Sadhvis, and Their Acceptance** **Method of Offering Food to
Shramanopasak** **Importance of Giving Food and Other Donations to Sadhus and
Sadhvis for Shramanopasak** **Giving Donations to Worthy and Deserving
Individuals, Avoiding the Unworthy and Undeserving** **Benefits of Giving
Donations to Worthy Individuals** **Shali-Bhadra, a Worthy Recipient of
Donations, Became Rich and Prosperous** **Shali-Bhadra, Drowned in the Immense
Ocean of Enjoyments, Turned Towards Renunciation** **Dhanna and Shali-Bhadra,
Fasting by the Munis and Regret Expressed by Mother Bhadra** **Description of
Atichara (Transgressions)** **Discussion on Five Atichara of the First Anuvrat**
**Description of Atichara of the First Anuvrat** **Discussion on Five Atichara
of the Second Anuvrat** **Atichara of the Second Vrat** **Discussion on Five
Atichara of the Third Anuvrat** **Discussion on Five Atichara of Brahmacharya
Anuvrat** **Explanation of Atichara of the Vrat Called Swadar Santosh and
Pardaratyaag** **Atichara of the Fifth Vrat** **Atichara of the Fifth
(Parigrahapariman) Vrat and Their Causes** **Discussion on Atichara of the Sixth
Dishapariman Vrat** **Atichara of Digvirati and Bhogopabhog** **Discussion on
Atichara of the Second Gunavrat Called Bhogopabhogpariman** **Nature of
Angarajeevika, Banajeevika, and Shakatnivika** **Nature of Dent-Laksharasa Kesha
Vanijya Karma** **Vishvaanijya and Yantra Pidan Karma** **Discussion on Five
Atichara of Anarthadandaviraman Vrat** **Explanation of Atichara of Samayik
Vrat** **Explanation of Atichara of Samayik Vrat** **Five Atichara of Poshan**
**Five Atichara of Atithisanvibhaga Vrat** **Spending Wealth in the Jin Mandir**
**Proper Use of Shravak's Wealth** **Greatness of Giving Donations in the Sadhu-
Sadhvi Kshetra in Jinagam** **Glory of the Seventh Shravak Kshetra and the
Secret of the Mahashravak Pad** **Wealthy Individuals Should Donate Their
Wealth** **Description of the Daily Routine of a Mahashravak** **Entering the
Jin Mandir, Darshan-Poojan Method and Faults** **Suitable Stotra, Iriyaavahya
Path, and Explanation** **Kayotsarg, Its Storehouse, and Types of
Chaityavandan** **Discussion on the Words Arihant and Bhagavan** **Explanation
of Namotthurn (Shakrastav)** **Praiseworthy Description of the State of a
Tirthankara After Liberation** **Meaning of Arihant Chehayaan** **Chaturvinshati
Stav (Logass) Sutra Path and Its Discussion** **Meaning of Giving Symbolic Names
to the Twenty-Four Tirthankaras** **Praise of Tirthankaras and Siddhas Based on
Their Fruits and Its Meaning** **Aagam Stuti (Praise of Pukkhavriddavada)**
**Praise of Shruta, Charitra, and Dharma with Namaskar** **Meaning of Siddhanam
Buddhanam** **Discussion on the Gatha 'Siddhanam Buddhanam'** **Fifteen Types of
Siddhas** **Attainment of Siddhi by a Female Siddha** **Meaning of Siddhanam
Buddhanam** **Prayer by a Dharma-Seeking Sadhak and Its Discussion**
**Description of the Daily Routine of a Shravak After Devavandan** **Evening
Program, Guruvandan Method, and Discussion on 32 Faults of Vandan** **Guruvandan
Path Method and Discussion** **Meaning of Guru Vandan Sutra**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 sAmAyikasUtra ke pATha kA vyAkhyAsahita artha sAmAyika sUtra kA artha sAmAyika
sUtra kA artha evaM vidhi sAmAyika meM samAdhistha caMdrAvataMsaka kA udAharaNa
dezAvaNAsika vrata pauSadhavrata paripAlana kI vidhi pauSathavrata meM sudRDha
culanIpitA zrAvaka culanI pitA kI kathA atithisaMvibhAgavrata kA svarUpa aura
vidhi 211 212 213 214 215 sAdhusAdhvI ko AhAra kI taraha vastrapAtra - AvAsAdi
dene evaM unake dvArA lene kA mahattva 216 sAdhusAdhvI ko AhAra kI taraha
vastrapAtra AvAsAdi dene evaM unake dvArA lene kA mahattva zramaNopAsaka kI
AhAra vahorAne kI vidhi zramaNopAsaka ke lie sAdhusAdhviyoM ko AhArAdi dAna dene
kA mahattva kupAtra aura apAtra ko chor3akara pAtra aura supAtra ko dAna denA
saphala aura suphalavAna hai supAtra dAna kA suphala zAli bhadra supAtradAna se
daridra saMgama gvAlA zreSThiputra zAlibhadra banA bhogoM ke athAhasamudra meM
DUbA huA zAlibhadra tyAga kI ora dhannA - zAlibhadra muniyoM dvArA anazana aura
mAtA bhadrA dvArA kheda prakAzana aticAroM kA varNana prathama aNuvrata ke pAMca
aticAroM para vivecana prathama aNuvrata ke aticAroM kA varNana dvitIya aNuvrata
ke pAMca aticAroM para vivecana dUsare vrata ke aticAra 208 2016 210 tRtIya
aNuvrata ke pAMca aticAroM para vivecana brahmacaryANuvrata ke pAMca aticAroM
para vivecana svadAra saMtoSa aura paradArAtyAga nAmaka vrata ke aticAroM ke
bAre meM spaSTIkaraNa pAMcave vrata ke aticAra pAMcaveM (parigrahaparimANa)
vrata ke aticAra aura unake lagane ke kAraNa chaThe dizAparimANavrata ke
aticAroM para vivecana digvirati evaM bhogopabhoga ke aticAra
bhogopabhogaparimANa nAmaka dUsare guNavrata ke aticAroM para vivecana 5.
aMgArajIvikA, banajIvikA aura zakaTanIvikA kA svarUpa daMta- lAkSArasa keza
vANijya karma kA svarUpa 217 218 219 220 221 222 223 224 221 * 226 20 228 226
230 231 232 TIT 234 235 236 237 238 S Xiv viSavANijya aura yaMtra pIDana karma
anarthadaMDaviramaNavrata ke 5 aticAroM para vivecana sAmAyikavrata ke aticAroM
kA spaSTIkaraNa sAmAyikavrata ke aticAroM kA spaSTIkaraNa poSaNa ke pAMca
aticAra atithisaMvibhAgavrata ke pAMca aticAra jina maMdira meM dhana vyaya
zrAvaka ke dhana kA sadupayoga jinAgama meM sAdhu-sAdhvIkSetra meM dAna dene kA
mAhAtmya sAtaveM zrAvikAkSetra kI mahimA aura mahAzrAvakapada kA rahasya
dhanavAna ko dhana kA dAna karanA cAhie mahAzrAvaka kI dinacaryA kA varNana jina
maMdira praveza darzana-pUjana vidhi evaM doSa yukta stotra iriyAvahiyA pATha
para vyAkhyA kAyotsarga, usake AgAra caityavaMdana ke prakAra arihaMta aura
bhagavAn zabda para vivecana namotthurNa ( zakrastava) para vyAkhyA tIrthaMkara
ke mukta hone ke bAda kI sthiti kA stutimUlaka varNana arihaMta cehayANaM ke
artha caturviMzatistava (logassa) sUtrapATha aura usa para vivecana caubIsa
tIrthaMkaroM ke anvayArthaka nAma rakhane kA tAtparya tIrthaMkara aura siddhoMkI
phalApekSI stuti aura usakA artha Agama stuti (pukkhavarIdavaDe kI stuti) Agama
kI zruta cAritradharma kI namaskArapUrvaka stuti siddhANaM buddhANaM ke artha
'siddhANaM buddhANaM' gAthA para vivecana pandraha bhede siddha strI siddhi kI
siddhi siddhANaM buddhANaM ke artha dharmArthI sAdhaka dvArA kI jAne vAlI
prArthanA evaM usa para vivecana devavaMdana ke bAda zrAvaka kI dinacaryA kA
varNana saMdhyA kA kAryakrama, guruvaMdana vidhi vaMdana ke 32 doSoM para
vivecana guruvaMdana pATha vidhi aura vivecana guru vaMdana sutra ke artha 240
241 242 243 244 245 246 248 249 250 251 252 253 254 256 257 258 260 267 269 270
271 273 guja 275 276 27 204 201 280 281 22 282 284 285 286 280

Page #21 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Veneration Sutra Residual Text Discourse, Meaning of Agamic Verses on Veneration
Procedure, Discourse on Guru's Aspiration, Meaning of Alochana Patha, Meaning of
Alochana Patha, Meaning of Alochana Patha and Abbhutthiyas Sutra, Meaning of the
Word Pratikramana, Discourse, Benefit of Veneration, General Form of
Pratikramana, Procedure of Daily, Nightly and Fortnightly Pratikramana, Defects
of Kayotsarga, Explanation of Pratakhyana, Explanation of the Refuges of
'Namukkarasahiya' (Nokarasī) Porasi Paccakkhaṇa, Paurusi and 'Purimai' - Text of
Paccakkhaṇa and its Discourse, Discourse on Ekāsana-Ekalatthaṇa, Text and
Discourse of Āyambila and Abbhattaṭṭha (Upavāsa) Paccakkhaṇa, Text and Discourse
of Āyambila and Abbhattaṭṭha (Upavāsa) Paccakkhaṇa, Nature of Pani, Carama and
Abhiggraha Paccakkhaṇa, Text and Explanation of Abhiggaha and Vigga'i
Paccakkhaṇa, Enumeration of the Refuges of all Paccakkhaṇas and Method of
Purification of Pratakhyana, Layman's Conduct before and after Sleep, Example of
Sthulabahadra Muni, Mutual Enmity between Sakatala Minister and Vararuci Pandit,
Sthulabahadra's Detachment from the World and Vararuci's Corruption by Upakosa,
Vararuci's Death - Sthulabahadra's Successful Chaturmas at the Courtesan's
Place, Sthulabahadra Muni's Successful Chaturmas at the Courtesan's Place,
Awakening of the Hermit in the Lion Cave and the Charioteer by Kosa,
Sthulabahadra Muni with Acharya Bhadrabahu Swami, Study of the Twelfth Anga by
Sthulabahadra Muni from Acharya Bhadrabahu Swami, True Nature of a Woman's Body
and its Abhorrent Condition, Contemplation on the Miserable Condition of Various
Modes of Existence and Steadfastness in Adversities, Story of Kamadeva, Kamadeva
the Layman Passing the Severe Test by the Devas, Description of the 6
Aspirations of a Layman, 11 Pratimas of a Layman: Characteristics, Place,
Procedure and Transgressions, Discourse on Sanlekhana, Parisha Form and 22
Parishas, Last Rites of Ananda Shravaka, Story of Ananda Shravaka, Future
Auspicious Destiny of a Householder Observing Shravakadharma, Future Auspicious
Destiny of a Householder Observing Shravakadharma, Nature, Divisions-
Subdivisions and Discourse on Kashayas, Nature of Anger, its Evil Consequences
and Means to Conquer it, Nature of Mana Kashaya and its Ill Effects, Nature of
Mardava and Maya and their Consequences, Nature of Maya and Simplicity,
Greatness of Simplicity and Nature of Lobha Kashaya, Main Means to Conquer Lobha
- Cultivation of Contentment, Victory over the Four Kashayas and Description of
Sense Control, Story of King Sudama, Defects of Senses and Victory over Them,
Uncontrolled Mind and Means to Restrain It, Victory over the Mind, Importance of
Mental Purity and Description of Leshya, Description of Mental Purity, Means to
Protect the Mind from Intense Attachment-Aversion and Means of Karmic
Destruction - Equanimity, Description of Equanimity, Greatness of Equanimity,
'Nature of Bhavana', Nature of Anitya Bhavana, Bhavana of Asharana and Samsara,
Bhavana of Samsara, Suffering of Nargati, Suffering of Tiryancagati, Suffering
of Manushya and Devagati, Ekatva Bhavana, Avyakta Bhavana, Ashuchi Bhavana,
Ashrava Bhavana, Nature of Ashrava Bhavana - Causes of the Eight Karmas.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 266 da 323 269 321 299 guruvaMdana sUtra ke avaziSTa pATha para vivecana
vaMdanavidhi kI Agamokta gAthAoM kA artha 28s guru AzAtanA para vivecana 26o
AlocanA pATha ke artha 211 AlocanA pATha ke artha 212 AlocanA pATha evaM
abbhuThiyoM sUtra ke artha 293 pratikramaNa zabda kA artha, vivecana, vaMdana se
lAbha 204 sAmAnya pratikramaNa svarupa devasika, rAtrika evaM pAkSika
pratikramaNa kI vidhi 26 kAyotsarga ke doSa 297 pratyAkhyAna kI vyAkhyA 298
'namukkArasahiya' (nokArasI) porasI paccakkhANa ke AgAroM kI vyAkhyA porisI aura
'purimaI' - paccakkhANa ke pATha aura una para vivecana 300 ekAzana-ekalaThANA
para vivecana 301 AyaMbila aura abbhattaTTha (upavAsa) paccakkhANa ke pATha aura
vivecana 302 AyaMbila aura abhattaTTha (upavAsa) paccakkhANa ke pATha aura
vivecana 303 pAnI, carama evaM abhigraha paccakkhANa kA svarUpa 304 abhiggaha
aura viggaI paccakkhANa ke pATha aura unakI vyAkhyA samasta paccakkhANoM ke
AgAroM kI gaNanA evaM pratyAkhyAnazuddhi kI vidhi 306 nidrA lene ke pahale aura
nidrAtyAga ke bAda zrAvaka kI caryA sthUlabhadramuni kA dRSTAMta 306 zakaTAla
maMtrI aura vararuci paMDita kI paraspara tanAtanI 309 sthUlabhadra ko saMsAra
se virakti aura upakozA dvArA dharmabhraSTa vararuci mRtyu ke lie badhya
vararuci kI mRtyu - sthUlabhadra kozA ke vahAM cAturmAsa sthUlabhadra muni kA
kozAvezyA ke yahAM saphala ' cAturmAsa sthUlabhadra muni kA kozAvezyA ke yahAM
saphala cAturmAsa 313 kozA dvArA siMhaguphAvAsI muni evaM rathakAra ko
pratibodha 314 sthUlabhadra muni Adi sAdhu zrI bhadrabAhu svAmi ke pAsa 315
AcArya bhadrabAhusvAmI se sthUlabhadramuni dvArA bArahaveM aMga kA adhyayana
strI ke aMga kA vAstavika svarUpa tathA usakA ghRNita zarIra 317 305 vividha
gatiyoM kI duHkhamaya sthiti evaM upasargoM meM dRr3hatA kA ciMtana kare 318
kAmadeva kA kathAnaka 319 deva dvArA kaThora parIkSA meM uttIrNa kAmadeva
zrAvaka 320 zrAvaka ke 6 manorathoM kA varNana zrAvaka ke manoratha 322 zrAvaka
kI 11 pratimA saMlekhanA : lakSaNa, sthAna, vidhi aura aticAra 324 saMlekhanA,
pariSaha svarUpa bAisa pariSahoM para vivecana 326 AnaMdazrAvaka kI aMtima
dharmakriyA 37 AnaMdazrAvaka kI kathA 328 zrAvakadharma pAlaka gRhastha kI bhAvI
sadgati 329 zrAvakadharma pAlaka gRhastha kI bhAvI sadgati 330 kaSAya : lakSaNa,
bheda-prabheda evaM vivecana kaSAya-svarUpa 333 krodha kA svarUpa, duSpariNAma
evaM use jItane kA upAya 334 mAnakaSAya aura usake kuphala 335 mArdava evaM mAyA
kA svarUpa aura usake pariNAma 336 mAyA evaM saralatA kA svarUpa 337 saralatA kI
mahimA aura lobhakaSAya kA svarUpa 338 lobha para vijaya pAne kA mukhya upAya-
saMtoSadhAraNa 339 cAroM kaSAyoM para vijaya evaM iMdriya vijaya varNana 340
sudAma rAjA kI kathA 341 iMdriyoM ke doSa evaM una para vijaya iMdriyoM ke doSa
evaM una para vijaya 343 aniyaMtrita mana aura usake nirodha ke upAya . 344 mano
vijaya 345 mana kI zuddhi kA mahattva aura lezyA kA varNana 346 manaH zuddhi
varNana 347 manaHzuddhi evaM prabala rAgadveSAdi se mana rakSA ke upAya-
rAgadveSanivAraNa evaM karmakSaya kA upAya samatva 348 samatva kA vivaraNa 349
samabhAva kI mahimA 'bhAvanA kA svarUpa' 350 anitya bhAvanA kA svarUpa 351
azaraNa evaM saMsAra bhAvanA 352 saMsAra bhAvanA, narakagati ke duHkha 353
tiryaMcagati ke duHkha 354 manuSya evaM devagati ke duHkha 355 ekatva bhAvanA
356 avyatva bhAvanA 357 azuci bhAvanA 358 Azrava bhAvanA 359 Azrava bhAvanA
svarUpa - ATha karma ke Azrava hetu. 360 242 3la 316 XV

Page #22 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Knowledge of Time  **412** Knowledge of death through one's own body parts
**413** Knowledge of time through omens **414** Determining time through two
types of hearsay **415** Determining time through the Saturn device and
knowledge **416** Knowledge of time of victory and defeat **417** Knowledge of
victory and defeat, profit and loss at the time of asking a question **418**
Answers to questions about success and failure of work, sons and daughters
**419** Determining time through dot knowledge **420** Results of knowledge of
pulse circulation, method of observation **421** Method of observation, method
of entering another's body, and conclusion **422** Place of concentration
**425** Order of meditation practice, nature of the body-dwelling **427**
Greatness of body-dwelling meditation **428** Nature of foot-dwelling
meditation, nature of form-dwelling meditation **439** Nature of form-
transcendent meditation, types of Dharma meditation, nature of Dharma meditation
**442** Nature of Dharma meditation **443** Nature of white meditation,
description of experienced yoga **456** Description of experienced yoga -
conclusion **461** Conclusion  **375** **426** **381**  **361** Nature of inflow
contemplation - inflow causes of the eight karmas **362** Nature of restraint
contemplation and depletion contemplation **363** Nature of depletion
contemplation **364** Nature of depletion contemplation, nature of austerity
**365** Ten types of atonement austerities, their characteristics and results
**366** Explanation of internal austerity **367** Explanation of internal
austerity **368** Cause of depletion austerity **369** Ten types of right faith
**370** Dharma 'fruit' and Dharma 'thought' **373** Dharma explained in Dharma
contemplation is not found in other non-Jain scriptures  **34** Detailed
description of the world contemplation, nature of the world contemplation **27**
Description of the Vyantara Devas and Jyotishka Devas **37** Description of the
Vyantara Devas and Jyotishka Devas **378** Description of Jambudvipa and other
continents **379** Description of Jambudvipa and other continents and regions
**380** Description of the inner continents, non-Aryan countries, inner
continents, Nandihara continent **282** Description of Nandihara continent and
the heaven world, description of the heaven world, special nature of the world,
contemplation of the rarity of enlightenment **385** Contemplation of the rarity
of enlightenment, nature of equality and rights **387** Nature of meditation
**366** Nature of Maitri and other contemplations, where and who should
meditate? What should the posture be? **390** Various postures and their
characteristics **391** Description of various postures **362** Posture that
keeps the mind steady **393** Postures suitable for meditation, their method and
usefulness **394** Nature of Pranayama etc. **396** Nature of Pranayama **397**
Nature of Pranayama etc. **398** Concentration and its results **399** Nature of
mandalas **400** Auspicious and inauspicious results of wind **401** Knowledge
of time of death through wind **404** Description of external time signs **408**
Knowledge of time through eyes, ears, head, and other ways **409** Methods of
knowledge of time **410** Various methods of knowledge of death **446**  **383**
**384** **386** **389** **411**  **XVI**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 kAla jJAna kA vijJAna 412 apane aMgopAMgoM se mRtyu jJAna 413 zukuna dvArA kAla
jJAna 414 dvividha-upazruti se kAlanirNaya 415 zanaizcara yaMtra evaM vidyA se
kAla nirNaya 416 jaya parAjaya kAla jJAna 417 jaya parAjaya kA jJAna prazna
karane ke samaya se lAbha hAni 418 kAryasiddhi-asiddhi putra-putrI viSayaka
praznoM ke uttara 419 bindu jJAna se kAla nirNaya 420 nAr3I saMcArajJAna kA
phala, vedha vidhi 421 vedha-vidhi parakAya praveza vidhi - evaM upasaMhAra 422
dhAraNA ke sthAna 425 dhyAna sAdhanA kA krama, piNDastha kA svarUpa 47
piMDasthadhyAna kA mahAtmya 428 padastha dhyAna kA svarupa rupastha dhyAna kA
svarUpa 439 rUpAtIta dhyAna kA svarupa, dharmadhyAna ke bheda dharmadhyAna
dhyAna kA svarUpa 442 dharmadhyAna kA svarUpa 443 zukladhyAna kA svarUpa
anubhavita yoga kA varNana 456 anubhavita yoga kA varNana - upasaMhAra 461
upasaMhAra 375 426 381 Azrava bhAvanA svarUpa - ATha karma ke Azrava hetu 361
saMvarabhAvanA kA svarUpa 362 saMvarabhAvanA evaM nirjarA bhAvanA kA svarUpa 363
nirjarA bhAvanA kA svarUpa 364 nirjarA bhAvanA tapa kA svarUpa 365 prAyazcitta
tapa ke dasa bheda, unakA lakSaNa aura phala 366 abhyaMtara tapa kI vyAkhyA 367
abhyaMtara tapa kI vyAkhyA 368 tapa nirjarA kA kAraNa 369 samyagdharma ke 10
bheda 370 dharma 'phala' evaM dharma 'vicAra' 373 dharmasvAkhyAtabhAvanA meM
prayukta dharma anyamatIya graMthoM meM nahIM 34 loka bhAvanA kA vistRta varNana
loka svarupa bhAvanA 27 vyaMtaradevoM aura jyotiSkadevoM kA varNana 37 vyaMtara
devoM aura jyotiSkadevoM kA varNana 378 jaMbuddhIpa Adi dvipoM kA varNana 379
jaMbudvIpa Adi dvIpa-kSetra kA varNana 380 antaraddhIpa varNana anArya deza
aMtaraddhIpa, naMdIdharaddhIpa varNana 282 naMdIzvara dvIpa evaM devaloka kA
varNana devaloka kA varNana loka kA vizeSa svarUpa bodhi durlabha bhAvanA 385
bodhi durlabha bhAvanA samatAdhikAra svarUpa 387 dhyAna svarupa 366 maitryAdi
bhAvanA svarUpa dhyAna kahA~ aura kauna kare? Asana kaisA ho? 390 vividha Asana
aura unake lakSaNa 391 vividha AsanoM kA varNana 362 mana kI sthiratA rahe vaisA
Asana 393 dhyAna ke yogya Asana, unakI vidhi evaM upayogitA 394 prANAyAma Adi kA
svarUpa 396 prANAyAma kA svarUpa 397 prANAyAma Adi kA svarupa 398 dhAraNA aura
usakA phala 399 maMDaloM kA svarUpa 400 vAyu ke zubhAzubha phala 401 vAyu se
mRtyu kAla kA jJAna 404 bAhya kAla lakSaNa kA varNana 408 AMkha, kAna, mastaka
tathA anya prakAra se hone vAlA kAlajJAna 409 kAla jJAna ke upAya 410 mRtyujJAna
ke vividha upAya 446 383 384 386 389 411 Xvi

Page #23 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Meaning:**  **The Greatness of Yoga**  Yoga is a sharp axe that cuts down all
the vines of misfortune, and it is a herb that subdues the goddess of
liberation, free from any mantras or tantras, and a charm that conquers karma.
Just as a fierce wind scatters a dense array of clouds, so too does yoga destroy
many sins.  Just as a blazing fire consumes fuel accumulated over a long time in
an instant, so too does yoga destroy sins accumulated over many lifetimes in an
instant.  For a yogi, phlegm, mucus, excrement, touch, and all other medicinal
properties are great wealth, and the ability to know the objects of all senses
through one sense is a miracle of yoga practice.  Similarly, the wealth of
knowledge of the fourfold path, the ability to acquire poison and its antidote,
the knowledge of the future, and the ability to know the thoughts of others are
the blossoming flowers of the wish-fulfilling tree of yoga.  Indeed, how great
is the power of yoga that even while bearing the responsibility of a vast
empire, the king of the Bharata land, Bharata Chakravarti, attained omniscience.
For those who have committed the great sins of killing a Brahmin, a woman, a
fetus, or a cow, and who are like guests of hell, and for those who are strong
and powerful, yoga is the only support.  Of the four goals of life - dharma,
artha, kama, and moksha - moksha is the foremost, and yoga is the cause of its
attainment.  It is composed of the three jewels of right knowledge, right faith,
and right conduct.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 artha : yoga kA mAhAtmya yogaH sarvavipadvallI-vitAne parazuH zitaH  /
amUlamantratantra ca, kArmaNaM nirvRtizriyaH  // 5 //  bhUyAMso'pi hi pApmAnaH
pralayaM yAnti yogataH  /  caNDavAtAt ghanaghanA ghanAghanaghaTA iva  //  6  //
kSiNoti yogaH pApAni, cirakAlArjitAnyapi  /  pracitAni yathaidhAMsi
kSaNAdevAzuzukSaNiH  // 7 //  kaphavipruNmalAmarza- sarvauSadhi-maharddhayaH  /
sambhinnasrotolabdhizca, yogaM tANDavaDambaram  // 8 //  . cAraNAzIviSAvadhi-
manaHparyAyasampadaH 1 yogakalpadrumasyaitAH vikAsikusumazriyaH  // 9 //  aho
yogasya mAhAtmyaM, prAjyaM sAmrAjyamudvahan  /  avApa kevalajJAna bharato
bharatAdhipaH  // 10 //  brahma-strI-bhrUNa - goghAta-pAtakAnnarakAtitheH  /
dRDhaprahAriprabhRteryogo hastAvalambanam  // 12 //  caturvarge'graNIrmokSo,
yogastasya ca kAraNam  /  jJAna - zraddhAna- cAritrarUpaM ratnatrayaM ca saH  //
15  //  samasta vipatti rUpI latAoM ko kATane ke lie yoga tIkhI dhAra vAlA
kuThAra hai tathA mokSalakSmI ko vaza meM karane ke lie yaha jar3I-bUTI, maMtra-
taMtra se rahita kArmaNa vazIkaraNa hai| pracaNDa vAyu se jaise ghane bAdaloM kI
zreNI bikhara jAtI hai, vaise hI yoga ke prabhAva se bahuta se pApa bhI naSTa ho
jAte haiN| jaise cirakAla se saMcita IMdhana ko pracaMDa Aga kSaNabhara meM jalA
DAlatI hai, vaise hI aneka bhavoM ke cirasaMcita pApoM ko bhI yoga kSaNabhara
meM kSaya kara detA hai| yogI ko kapha, zleSma, viSThA, sparza Adi sabhI auSadhi
rUpI mahAsaMpadAe~ tathA eka indriya se sabhI indriya viSayoM ko jJAna ho jAne
kI zakti prApta honA yogAbhyAsa ka hI camatkAra hai| isI prakAra cAraNavidyA
AzIviSalabdhi, avadhijJAna aura manaH paryavajJAna kI saMpadAe~; yoga rUpI
kalpavRkSa kI vikasita puSpazrI hai| sacamuca, yoga kA kitanA mAhAtmya hai ki
vizAla sAmrAjya kA dAyitva nibhAte hue bhI bharatakSetrAdhipati
bharatacakravartI ne kevalajJAna prApta kara liyaa| brAhmaNa, strI, garbhahatyA
va gohatyA ke mahApApa karane se naraka ke atithi ke samAna dRr3haprahArI Adi ko
yoga kA hI AlaMbana thaa| dharma, artha, kAma aura mokSa ina cAroM puruSArthoM
meM mokSa agraNI hai| aura usa mokSa kI prApti kA kAraNa yoga hai, jo
samyagjJAna - darzana - cAritra rUpI ratnatraya - maya hai|

Page #24 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## First Light || Om Arhate Namah || ||
Prabhushrimadvijayrajendrasuriswarasadgurubhyoh Namah || Kalikalasarvagna - Shri
Hemachandracharya-pranita Yogashastra Swopagnavivarana Sahit || 1 || Namo
Durvararagadi, - Vairivar - Nivarinne. Arhate Yoginathaaya, Mahaviraaya Ne ||1||
**Meaning:** My salutations to the Arhant, the Lord of Yogis, and the protector
of the beings of the world, Shri Shraman Bhagwan Mahavira, who removes the
enemies like raga-dvesha, etc., which are very difficult to overcome. || 1 ||
|| 1 || Pranamya Siddhadhbhuta-yogasampadae, Shriviranathaaya, Vimuktishaline.
Swayoga- Shastraarth - Visheshnirnayoh, Bhavyavabodhaaya Maya Vidhasyate ||
**Meaning:** Having paid my respects to Shri Mahavira Swami, who is endowed with
extraordinary yogic powers and is free from the defects of raga, etc., I will
present a detailed explanation (commentary) of my own Yogashastra, which is full
of special meanings, for the understanding of the worthy beings.  **Meaning** ;
**Intention:** Kalikalasarvagna Shrimad Hemachandracharya, while composing this
Yogashastra, states the purpose of writing his own commentary on it with the
mangalacharan - 'Swayogashastraarth - Visheshnirnayoh Bhavyavabodhaaya Maya
Vidhasyate', meaning, 'I am writing this commentary (tika) to give the true
meaning of my Yogashastra to the worthy beings.' So that no one can interpret it
arbitrarily with their own intellect and mislead the inquisitive people.
Inspired by this intention, Shri Hemachandracharya has written a commentary on
his own work.  **Commentary:** In the first verse of Mahavira - Yogashastra, the
word 'Mahavira' is the special. The meaning of Mahavira is - greater than the
heroes. A warrior who defeats thousands of soldiers in battle is not truly
called a hero. A hero, in the true sense, is one who 'destroys (defeats) the
enemies of karma in a special way'. Or, one who is strong and enthusiastic in
penance by destroying karma, is called a hero. This is the definition of the
word 'veer' from the point of view of characteristics or etymology. But Bhagwan
Vardhaman was even more heroic than other heroes. How did Bhagwan become famous
as Mahavira? In this regard, we present a special incident from his life here.
**The title of Mahavira bestowed by Indra:** When the birth festival of the
infant (Bhagwan) Mahavira was being celebrated, Indra (who had arrived a short
time earlier) had a doubt in his mind - how will this small child Vardhaman bear
the weight of the water that will be poured on his body during the coronation?
The infant Vardhaman, by his physical strength, increased his mental strength,
and to dispel Indra's aforementioned doubt, as soon as he touched Mount Sumeru
with the big toe of his right foot, the peak of Mount Sumeru and the earth began
to tremble, the sea also became agitated; the entire universe was terrified. At
that time, Indra  2

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 1. prathama prakAza  /  /  OM arhate namaH  /  /   /  /
prabhuzrImadvijayarAjendrasUrIzvarasadgurubhyoH namaH  /  /  kalikAlasarvajJa -
zrI hemacaMdrAcArya-praNIta yogazAstra svopajJavivaraNa sahita  /  1  /  namo
durvArarAgAdi, - vairivAra - nivAriNe  /  arhate yoginAthAya, mahAvIrAya ne  //
1 //  artha :- atyaMta kaThinatA se dUra kiye jA sake aise rAga-dveSAdi zatru
gaNa kA nivAraNa karane vAle arhanta, yogiyoM svAmI aura jagat ke jIvoM kI rakSA
karane vAle zrI zramaNa bhagavAn mahAvIra ko merA namaskAra ho  /   /  1  /   /
/ 1 /  praNamya siddhAdbhuta-yogasampade, zrIvIranAthAya, vimuktizAline  /
svayoga- zAstrArtha - vizeSanirNayo, bhavyAvabodhAya mayA vidhAsyate  //  *
siddha adbhuta yoga sampadAoM se yukta evaM rAgAdi doSoM se vimukta zrI mahAvIra
svAmI ko namaskAra kara ke bhavyajIvoM ko bodha dene hetu svaracita yogazAstra
kA vizeSa arthoM se yukta vivaraNa (vyAkhyA) prastuta kruuNgaa| artha ; Azaya :-
kalikAlasarvajJa zrImad hemacandrAcArya isa yogazAstra kI racanA kara ke isI
para svopajJa vyAkhyA karane kA prayojana maMgalAcaraNa ke sAtha batAte haiM-
'svayogazAstrArtha - vizeSanirNayo bhavyAvabodhAya mayA vidhAsyate' arthAt, maiM
apane dvArA racita yogazAstra ke vAstavika artha kA bodha bhavya jIvoM ko dene
ke lie yaha vyAkhyA (TIkA) likha rahA huuN|' tAki koI bhI vyakti apanI buddhi se
isakA manamAnA artha na kara baiThe aura jijJAsu janoM ko na bahakA de| isI
Azaya se prerita hokara zrIhemacandrAcArya ne apane graMtha para svayaM vyAkhyA
likhI hai| vyAkhyA:- mahAvIra - yogazAstra ke pahale zloka meM jo 'mahAvIra'
pada hai, vaha vizeSya hai| mahAvIra kA artha hotA | hai - vIroM se bhI
bar3hakara vIra  /  yuddha meM hajAroM subhaToM ko jIta lene vAlA yoddhA vAstava
meM vIra nahIM khlaataa| vIra sacce artha meM vahI kahalAtA hai- 'jo vizeSa rUpa
se karmazatruoM ko naSTa (parAjita ) karatA hai  /  athavA karmoM kA nAza karake
jo tapazcaryA meM vIryavAn zakti aura utsAha se yukta ho, vahI vIra kahalAtA
hai| lakSaNa athavA nirukti se vIra zabda kI yaha paribhASA hotI hai| paraMtu
bhagavAn varddhamAna to anya vIroM kI apekSA bhI adhika vIra the| bhagavAn
mahAvIra ke rUpa meM kaise prasiddha hue? isa viSaya meM hama unake jIvana kI
eka vizeSa ghaTanA yahA~ dete haiM | indra dvArA pradatta mahAvIrapada : jisa
samaya zizu (bhagavAn) mahAvIra kA janma - mahotsava manAyA jA rahA thA, usa
samaya (thor3e samaya pUrva hI Aye hue) indra ke mana meM zaMkA paidA huI ki ye
laghukAya zizu varddhamAna abhiSeka ke samaya zarIra para DAle jAne vAle
jalabhAra ko kaise sahana kareMge? zizu varddhamAna ne zarIrabala se Atmabala
bar3hakara hai, isa bAta ko pratyakSa samajhAkara indra kI pUrvokta | zaMkA ko
dUra karane kI dRSTi se apane dAhine paira ke aMgUThe se sumeruparvata kA jyoM
hI sparza kiyA, tyoM hI sumeruparvata kA zikhara aura bhUtala kaMpAyamAna hone
lage, samudra bhI kSubdha ho uThA; sArA brahmANDa AtaMkita ho utthaa| usI samaya
indra 2

Page #25 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  A Hymn to Mahavira Embodied with Four Atishayas  The first verse of the
hymn, using the knowledge of Avadhigyan, recognizes the extraordinary power of
the Lord's self-strength. Impressed by this, Indra bestowed the title of
Mahavira upon Lord Vardhaman at that very moment. Other reasons for receiving
the name Mahavira: _ The immense capacity to uproot the karmas bound as knots
and smooth in countless births, and the effort to achieve this, are also reasons
for the title Mahavira. His parents named him Vardhaman. Others addressed him as
'Shraman' and 'Devarya'.  Thus, the purpose of bowing down to Mahavira is
explained here.  The four epithets - 'Durvara Ragādi-Vairivar Nivarinē',
'Arhate', 'Yogināthāya', and 'Tāyinē' - reveal the four well-known Atishayas of
the Tirthankara Mahavira. These four Atishayas are: 1. Apayapagamātishaya, 2.
Pūjātishaya, 3. Jñānātishaya, and 4. Vachanātishaya. Apaya refers to obstacles,
hindrances. Raga, Dvesha, Kama, Krodha, etc., are obstacles in the practice of
Vitaragata. By removing these obstacles in the form of enemies like Raga, etc.,
the Lord's self-nature manifests as Apayapagamātishaya. Therefore, the first
epithet 'Durvara Ragādi-Vairivar-Nivarinē' for Lord Mahavira is meaningful.  •
By destroying the enemies like Raga, Dvesha, etc., the Lord attained the Arihant
state; for this reason, he became worthy of worship (Arhat) by all gods, Asuras,
and humans. Therefore, the second epithet 'Arhate' signifies the Lord's
Pūjātishaya.  By the power of pure Kevalgyan, the Lord is the master of all
Yogis, being the complete knower of the nature of the Lokaloka and the welfare
of all beings. Therefore, the epithet 'Yogināthāya' reveals his Jñānātishaya.
The Lord delivers his nectar-like sermons for the protection of all beings in
the world, and through this, all beings in the world receive the gift of
fearlessness. In this form, the Lord's Vachanātishaya is evident. Therefore, his
fourth epithet 'Tāyinē' (protector) is also meaningful. All beings understand
the sermons of the Tirthankara Mahavira in their own language. This is why,
through his all-being-touching sermons (Dharmopadeśa), the Lord shows the way
for beings in the world to escape birth, old age, death, etc., and truly
protects their souls. Therefore, he is the true protector, nourisher, and
guardian of the entire world. Even lions, tigers, etc., protect and nurture
their young, but that nurturing is filled with attachment. The Lord's nurturing
and protection of all beings is free from attachment, selfless.  Thus, by
describing the four Atishayas, the hymn praises the ultimate truth of Lord
Mahavira. Now, the hymn praises the Lord Mahavira, who is embodied with Yoga.
**Verse 2:**  **Pannāge cha Surendre cha, Kaushike Pādasansprishi |
Nirvisheshmanaskaaya, Shreeviraswamine Namah ||2||**  **Meaning:** My
salutations to Lord Mahavira, who has the same mind (equanimity) towards both
Surendra (Kaushika) who touched his feet with devotion and the Kaushika serpent
who touched his feet with the intention of biting.  **Explanation:** In his
previous birth, Chandakoushika was named Kaushika. When Lord Mahavira
enlightened him, he said, 'Chandakoushika, attain enlightenment, awaken.'
Indra's other name is also Kaushika. The Kaushika serpent touched the Lord's
feet with the intention of biting, and Kaushika Indra touched his feet with
devotion. The Lord had neither hatred for the Chandakoushika serpent nor
attachment for Indra; he was free from attachment and hatred towards both, and
he was equanimous.  **Note:** Other texts mention 17 names of the Lord: 1.
Jnatakuloutpanna, 2. Videh, 3. Videhdatt, 4. Videhjatya, 5. Videh Sukumal, 6.
Sanmati, 7. Mahateevir, 8. Mahavira, 9. Antya Kashyap, 10. Veer, 11. Devarya,
12. Jnatānwaya, 13. Jnatānandan, 14. Nataputra, 15. Vardhaman, 16. Nayaputta,
17. Charam Tirthankara.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 cAra atizayoM se garbhita mahAvIra-stuti prathama prakAza zloka 2 ne
avadhijJAna ke upayoga dvArA yaha jAna liyA ki yaha to prabhu ke Atmabala ke
atizaya kI abhivyakti hai| isase indra ne prabhAvita hokara usI samaya bhagavAna
varddhamAna ko mahAvIra pada se vibhUSita kiyaa| mahAvIra nAma prApra hone ke
anya kAraNa :_ anaMta-anaMta janmoM ke snigdha evaM gAMTha ke rUpa meM baMdhe
hue karmoM ko jar3amUla se ukhAr3ane kA apAra sAmarthya aura | puruSArtha karanA
bhI mahAvIrapada ko sArthaka karane kA eka kAraNa hai| unake mAtA-pitA ne unakA
nAma varddhamAna rakhA thaa| anya logoM ne 'zramaNa' aura 'devArya' nAma se bhI
unheM saMbodhita kiyaa| isa prakAra yahA~ mahAvIra ko namana karane kA prayojana
batAyA gayA hai| durvArarAgAdi-vairivAra nivAriNe, arhate, yoginAthAya, tAyine-
ye cAroM vizeSaNa tIrthaMkara mahAvIra ke suprasiddha cAra atizayoM ko prakaTa
karate haiN| ve cAra atizaya isa prakAra haiM-1. apAyApagamAtizaya, 2.
pUjAtizaya, 3. jJAnAtizaya aura 4. vcnaatishy| apAya kahate haiM-vighna ko,
aMtarAya ko| rAga, dveSa, kAma, krodha Adi vItarAgatA kI sAdhanA meM aMtarAya
hai| ina aMtarAyoM ke rUpa meM rAgAdi-zatruoM ko dUra karane se bhagavAn meM
Atma svarUpa apAyApagamAtizaya ke rUpa meM prakaTa hotA hai| isa kAraNa bhagavAn
mahAvIra kA prathama 'durvArarAgAdi-vairivAra-nivAriNe' vizeSaNa sArthaka hai| *
rAgadveSAdi zatruoM kA kSaya kara prabhu ne arihaMta pada prApta kiyA; isI
kAraNa ve samasta devoM, asuroM aura mAnavoM ke pUjanIya (arhat) bne| ataH
dvitIya 'arhate' vizeSaNa se bhagavAn kA pUjAtizaya parilakSita hotA hai|
nirmala kevalajJAna ke sAmarthya se lokAloka ke svabhAva evaM prANimAtra ke
hitoM ke yoga ke pUrNa jJAtA hone se | bhagavAn avadhijJAna Adi yogiyoM ke nAtha
siddha hote haiN| ataH 'yoginAthAya' vizeSaNa unake jJAnAtizaya ko prakaTa
karatA hai| bhagavAn jagat ke samasta jIvoM kI rakSA ke lie apanA amRtamaya
pravacana dete haiM aura isase vizva ke sabhI prANiyoM ko abhayadAna mila jAtA
hai; isa rUpa meM bhagavAn kA vacanAtizaya pratIta hotA hai| ataH unakA cauthA
tAyine (trAtA) vizeSaNa bhI sArthaka hai| tIrthaMkara mahAvIra ke pravacana ko
sabhI prANI apanI-apanI bhASA meM samajha lete hai| yahI kAraNa hai ki apane
sarvajIva-sparzI pravacana (dharmopadeza) dvArA bhagavAn jagata ke jIvoM ko
janma, jarA, mRtyu Adi se bacane kA upAya batAkara vastutaH unakI AtmarakSA
karate haiN| ataH ve sAre vizva ke vAstavika trAtA, pAlaka aura rakSaka hai|
apane baccoM kA pAlana aura rakSaNa to siMha, vyAghra Adi bhI karate haiM,
paraMtu vaha pAlana mohagarbhita hotA hai, bhagavAn ke dvArA sarva jIvoM kA
pAlana-rakSaNa moha rahita, niHsvArthabhAva se hotA hai| isa prakAra cAroM
atizayoM se yukta batAkara bhagavAn mahAvIra kI paramArtha-stuti kI hai||1|| aba
bhagavAn mahAvIra kI yoga-garbhita stuti karate haiN|2| pannage ca surendre ca,
kauzike pAdasaMspRzi  /  nirvizeSamanaskAya, zrIvIrasvAmine namaH  // 2 //
artha :- bhaktibhAva se caraNa sparza karane vAle surendra (kauzika) aura daMza
dene (Dasane) kI buddhi se caraNa sparza karane vAle kauzikasarpa, donoM para
samAna mana (samabhAva) rakhane vAle zrI mahAvIra svAmI ko merA namaskAra ho!  /
/ 2 /  /  vyAkhyA :- caNDakauzika kA pUrvajanma meM kauzika nAma thaa| use
bhagavAn mahAvIra ne bodha dene ke samaya kahA thA'caNDakauzika bodha prApta
kara, jAgrata ho|' indra kA dUsarA nAma bhI kauzika hai| kauzika sarpa ne Dasane
kI dRSTi se bhagavAna ke caraNoM kA sparza kiyA thA aura kauzika indra ne
bhaktibhAva se prerita hokara caraNa sparza kiyA thaa| bhagavAn kA na to
caMDakauzika sarpa ke prati dveSa thA aura na indra ke prati rAga; donoM ke
prati bhagavAn rAga-dveSa rahita evaM samabhAvI 1. anyAnya graMthoM meM prabhu
ke 17 nAma batAye haiN| 1. jJAtakulotpanna, 2. videha, 3. videhadatta, 4.
videhajAtya, 5. videha sukumAla, 6. sanmati, 7. mahatIvIra, 8. mahAvIra, 6.
antya kAzyapa, 10. vIra, 11. devArya, 12. jJAtAnvaya, 13. jJAtAnaMdana, 14.
nAtapUtra, 15. vardhamAna, 16. nAyaputta, 17. carama tIrthaMkara

Page #26 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Praise of the Lord by Indra through the Shakrastava  The first chapter of the
Yoga Shastra, verses 1-2, were like this. My salutations to such an impartial,
valiant Lord. The impartiality of Lord Mahavira is explained through the events
of his life. The equality of Mahavira in various situations:  The pure soul,
Mahavira Deva, due to the Tīrthankara karma acquired in a previous birth, fell
from the Pushpottar Vimana of the Pranat Devaloka and was born in the house of
King Siddhartha, like a swan in a lake, with three kinds of knowledge. He was
born in the womb of Queen Trishala Devi.  At that time, due to the influence of
the excellent womb, Trishala Devi saw 14 great dreams in sequence: 1. Lion, 2.
Elephant, 3. Bull, 4. Lakshmi Devi adorned with abhisheka, 5. Garland of
flowers, 6. Moon, 7. Sun, 8. Indra flag, 9. Full pot, 10. Lotus lake, 11. Ocean,
12. Divine aircraft, 13. Treasure of jewels, and 14. Smokeless fire. After that,
on a day filled with auspicious yogas, the Lord was born, who illuminates the
three worlds, shakes the seats of gods and demons, and makes even the beings in
hell and the animal realm experience happiness for a moment.  At that time,
fifty-six Dikumaris performed the Sutika karma. Afterwards, Saudharmendra took
the Lord to the peak of Mount Meru to perform the Janmabhisheka. He sat on the
throne, holding the Jagadguru Prabhu in his lap. At that time, Indra, whose
heart was softened by devotion, had a doubt: How could the Lord bear the weight
of so much water? To dispel this doubt, the Lord simply pressed Mount Meru with
the big toe of his right foot. The peak of the mountain began to bend as if
bowing to the Lord. Or, all those mountains moved as if they wanted to come to
the Lord. The ocean began to surge as if it wanted to perform a bath festival.
The earth suddenly trembled as if preparing to dance.  "What happened?" Thinking
this, Indra used his Avadhijnana and, knowing the power of the Lord's inner
strength compared to his physical strength, said to the Lord, "Swamin! How can a
simple person like me know your great influence? Therefore, I apologize for my
contrary thoughts." Saying this, he bowed to the Lord. Then, joyful music began
to play. On the other hand, all the Indras together performed the abhisheka
festival of the Lord with fragrant water from holy pilgrimages. The gods, the
Asuras, and the Bhavanapati Devas repeatedly poured this abhisheka water on
their heads and sprinkled it on everyone. Even the earth touched by the Lord's
bath water became worthy of worship; because even a small person gains glory
from the company of great souls. Afterwards, Saudharmendra placed the Lord in
the lap of Ishaneindra (in the form of a bull), had him bathed, performed eight
types of worship, offered aarti, and praised him.  O (future) Arihant Bhagavan!
Self-enlightened, Brahma, Tīrthankara, the originator of Dharma, the best among
all men, I bow to you. O illuminator of the world, the one who illuminates the
world, the best in the world, the master of the world, the one who benefits the
beings of the world, I bow to you. The best among men, the one who gives
happiness like a lotus flower, the one who is like a lion among men, the one who
is like a unique fragrant elephant among men, Prabhu! I bow to you. The giver of
the eye of Shruta Jnana. The one who removes fear! The one who gives Samyaktva,
the one who shows the path to liberation, the one who gives Dharma, the one who
preaches Dharma, the one who gives refuge to frightened beings, I bow to you. O
charioteer of Dharma! The one who inspires Dharma, the best emperor of Dharma,
free from hypocrisy, the one who holds Samyag Jnana Darshan, the one who
conquers the enemies of raga, etc., and conquers other beings, the one who
crosses the ocean of the world and saves other beings, the one who is free from
the bonds of karma himself and liberates others, the one who has attained
enlightenment himself and enlightens others, I bow to you. O Omniscient! O Lord!
The one who knows and sees all things, the one who possesses the power of
excess, the one who pulverizes the eight karmas, O Bhagavan! I bow to you. The
one who sows the seeds of excellent punya, the one who is the field, the one who
is the best vessel, the one who is the pilgrimage, the one who is the Supreme
Soul, the one who is the embodiment of Syadvada, the one who is free from
attachment, Vitragamune! I bow to you. The character of Devnanda's womb to
Trishala's womb is also mentioned in the character of the three.sh.pu. Here, due
to the brief description, it is written like this. - Editor

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 iMdra dvArA zakrastava se stuti yogazAstra prathama prakAza zloka 1-2 the| aise
samabhAvI vIra prabhu ko merA namaskAra ho| bhagavAn mahAvIra ke samabhAva ko
unake jIvana kI ghaTanAoM se samajhAte haiMvividha paristhitiyoM meM mahAvIra kI
samatA : pavitrAtmA mahAvIradeva pUrvajanma meM upArjita tIrthakara nAmakarma ke
kAraNa prANata nAmaka devaloka ke puSpottara vimAna se cyava kara sarovara meM
rAjahaMsa kI taraha siddhArtha rAjA ke yahA~ tIna jJAna se yukta hokara Aye aura
mahArAnI trizalAdevI kI kukSi meM utpanna hue| usa samaya uttama garbha ke
prabhAva se trizalAdevI ne 1. siMha, 2. hAthI, 3. vRSabha, 4. abhiSekayukta
lakSmIdevI, 5. puSpamAlA, 6. candra, 7. sUrya, 8. indradhvajA, 9. pUrNakuMbha,
10. padmasarovara, 11. samudra, 12. devavimAna, 13. ratnarAzi aura 14. nirdhUma
agni; ina 14 mahAsvapnoM ko kramazaH dekhaa| usake bAda uttama yogoM se yukta
dina ko tIna jagat meM udyota karane vAle, deva aura dAnava ke Asana ko kaMpita
karane vAle va nArakI va tiryaMca gati ke jIvoM ko bhI kSaNabhara sukhamaya
banAne vAle, prabhu kA sukhakAraka janma huaa| usa samaya chappana dikkumAriyoM
ne sUtikAkarma kiyaa| tatpazcAt saudharmendra janmAbhiSeka karane ke lie
meruparvata ke zikhara para le gye| jagadguru prabhu ko goda meM lekara ve
siMhAsana para baitthe| usa samaya bhakti se komalahRdaya vAle indra ko zaMkA
huI ki itane pAnI kA bhAra svAmI kisa taraha sahana kara sakeMge? isa zaMkA ko
dUra karane ke lie prabhu ne dAhine paira ke aMgUThe se sahajabhAva se jyoM hI
meruparvata ko dabAyA, tyoM hI usake zikhara isa prakAra jhukane lage, mAno
prabhu ko namaskAra karate hoN| athavA ve saba parvata isa taraha calAyamAna ho
gaye, mAno bhagavAn ke pAsa AnA cAhate hoN| samudra isa prakAra uchalane lagA,
mAno snAtra-mahotsava karanA cAhatA ho| pRthvI ekAeka aise kAMpane lagI, mAno
nRtya karane kI taiyArI kara rahI ho| 'are, yaha kyA huA?' yoM vicAra karate hI
indra ne avadhijJAna prayukta karake bhagavAn ke zarIrabala kI apekSA Atmabala
kA sAmarthya jAnakara prabhu se kahA-"svAmin! mujha-sA mAmUlI vyakti Apake isa
mahAn prabhAva ko kaise jAna sakatA hai? ataH maiMne jo viparIta vicAra kiyA
usake lie kSamA cAhatA huuN|" yoM kahakara usane prabhu ko namaskAra kiyaa|
phira AnaMdapUrvaka bAje bajane lge| idhara sabhI indroM ne milakara pavitra
tIrthoM ke sugaMdhita jala se prabhu kA abhiSekamahotsava kiyaa| usa abhiSeka-
jala ko devoM ne, asuroM tathA bhavanapatidevoM ne bAra-bAra zirodhArya kiyA
aura sabhI para use chiiNttaa| prabhu ke snAtrajala se spRSTa miTTI bhI
vaMdanIya bana gayI; kyoMki mahApuruSoM kI saMgati se choTA vyakti bhI gaurava
prApta kara letA hai| tatpazcAt saudharmendra ne prabhu ko IzAnendra kI goda meM
biThAkara (vRSabha rUpa kara) pakSAla karAyA aura unakI aSTaprakArI pUjA karake
AratI utArakara stuti kii| he (bhAvI) arihaMta bhagavan! svayaMbuddha, brahmA,
tIrthakara, dharma kI Adi karane vAle, sarva puruSoM meM uttama Apako namaskAra
ho| he loka-prakAzaka, lokodyota karane vAle, loka meM uttama, loka ke svAmI,
vizva ke jIvoM kA hita karane vAle, Apako namaskAra ho| puruSoM meM zreSTha,
puMDarIka kamala ke samAna sukha dene vAle, puruSoM meM siMha ke samAna, puruSoM
meM advitIya gaMdhahastI ke samAna prabho! Apako namaskAra ho| zrutajJAna rUpI
cakSu ke daataa| bhayarahita karane vAle! samyaktva dene vAle, mokSamArga batAne
vAle, dharma ko dene vAle, dharma kA upadeza karane vAle, bhayabhIta jIvoM ko
zaraNa dene vAle Apako namaskAra ho| he dharma ke sArathI! dharma kI preraNA
dene vAle, dharma ke zreSTha cakravartI, chadmasthatA se rahita, samyag-jJAna-
darzanadhAraka, rAgAdi zatruvarga ko jItane vAle aura dUsare jIvoM ko jitAne
vAle, saMsAra rUpI samudra se tarane vAle aura anya jIvoM ko tArane vAle, svayaM
karmapAza se mukta aura dUsaroM ko mukta karane vAle, svayaM bodha pAye hue aura
dUsaroM ko bodhita karane vAle Apako namaskAra ho| he sarvajJa! he svAmina! saba
padArthoM ko jAnane evaM dekhane vAle atizaya ke adhikArI, ATha karmoM ko cUrNa
karane vAle, he bhagavan! Apako namaskAra ho| uttama puNyabIja bone ke lie
kSetra rUpI, uttamapAtra, tIrtha, paramAtmA, syAdvAda ke prarUpaka,
vItarAgamune! Apako merA namaskAra ho| pUjyoM ke bhI 1. tri.za.pu. caritra meM
devAnaMdA kI kukSI se trizalA kI kukSI meM Ane kA varNana hai| yahAM saMkSipta
varNana hone se aisA likhA hai| - saMpAdaka

Page #27 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Indra's praise in the assembly of gods, a god coming to test a god, initiation.
Yoga Shastra, First Light, Verses 1-2.  Reverend, greater than even the great
men, the teacher of teachers, the elder of elders, O Lord! Greetings to you.
Filled with the universe by pure knowledge, the master of yogis, the holder of
yoga, self-pure and purifier of others, the unsurpassed supreme person!
Greetings to you.  Yoga Acharya, the one who purifies the soul by removing
karma, the best, the foremost, the master of speech, the auspicious one, O Lord!
Greetings to you.  The first to rise, the unparalleled hero!  Worthy of praise
with words like Surya Stuti (Om Bhurbhuvah Svah), O Lord, greetings to you.
Benefactor of all beings, achiever of all purposes, attaining immortality, the
rising sun, the holder of celibacy, the one who crosses the ocean of the world,
skillful, unchanging, protector of the world, with a body endowed with Vajra
Rishabha Narachasanahanan, the seer of the true reality! Greetings to you.  The
one who is present in all three times, Jinenndra, self-born, endowed with
knowledge, strength, vigor, brilliance, power, and wealth, O Lord! Greetings to
you.  The original person of Dharma, the Supreme Lord, the Great God, the
embodiment of the light principle, O Master! Greetings to you.  Like the moon to
the ocean of the lineage of King Siddhartha, the master of the three worlds!
Lord Sri Mahavira Prabhu! Greetings to you.  Indra, with this kind of praise,
greeted the Lord and took him back to his mother.  The Lord's parents, due to
the increase of wealth and grain in their house, named him 'Vardhaman'
accordingly.  There was a competition among the gods and demons to serve and
worship the Lord.  Watering the earth with nectar-showering eyes, growing with a
thousand and eight natural qualities, the Lord also grew with age.  Once, the
unparalleled strong Vardhaman, due to his childhood, went to play with his
peers, the princes.  At that time, Indra, knowing by his knowledge of
perception, praised in the assembly of gods, "There is no hero greater than
Mahavira Prabhu in the whole world."  An envious god was angered by this and
took it upon himself to distract Vardhaman.  He went straight to where the boy
Vardhaman was playing the game of Amlaki with his peers.  The god, deceitfully,
took the form of a serpent and clung to the tree.  Seeing that terrible serpent,
all the princes ran here and there in fear.  But Vardhaman, laughing, caught the
snake like a rope and threw it on the ground.  The ashamed princes came back to
play.  The god then took the form of a young man and came there again.  All the
boys climbed the tree.  Vardhaman had already climbed to the top of the tree.
For the one who is going to the highest state (moksha), climbing to the top of a
tree is no big deal!  Vardhaman, already sitting on the peak, was shining like
the sun on the peak of Mount Meru.  While the other princes looked like monkeys
hanging on the branches.  Later, Vardhaman set a condition in the game that
whoever wins will ride on the back of the loser.  The victorious Vardhaman
prince also rode on the backs of the princes like a horseman.  Gradually, the
mighty victorious Vardhaman sat on the back of the god.  That evil-minded god,
taking the form of a terrible Vetala who could defeat even mountains, began to
grow tall, making a mouth like the netherworld, showing a tongue like a serpent.
And the long yellow hair on his head, like a mountain, appeared like a wildfire.
His terrible beard appeared like a sickle.  His nostrils appeared like the cave
of a huge mountain.  Frowning, his terrible eyebrows appeared like two she-
snakes.  Climbing like a palm tree, that god did not stop; then the mighty Lord
punched him on his back and made him a dwarf.  Thus, experiencing firsthand the
patience of Vardhaman, as described by Indra, the god appeared in his original
form and, greeting the Lord, returned to his place.  One day, Vardhaman
Mahavira's parents were preparing to send him to school after celebrating his
Vidyaarambh festival.  Knowing this, Indra thought, 'Should the omniscient one
also become a student of a school?'  Thinking this, Indra himself came there in
the form of a Brahmin and, seating Vardhaman on the teacher's seat, greeted him
and requested the Lord to speak on the science of words.  The eloquent and
omniscient Mahavira discussed the science of grammar.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 iMdra dvArA deva sabhA meM prazaMsA, eka deva kA parIkSA karane AnA, dIkSA yoga
zAstra prathama prakAza zloka 1-2 pUjya, mahApuruSoM se bhI mahAn, AcAryoM ke
bhI AcArya, bar3oM ke bhI bar3e, he bhagavan! Apako namaskAra ho| kevalajJAna se
vizva meM vyApta, yogiyoM ke svAmI, yoga ke dhAraka, svayaM pavitra aura dUsaroM
ko pavitra karane vAle, anuttara zreSThapuruSa! Apako namaskAra ho| yogAcArya,
AtmA ko karmamala se rahita kara nirmala karane vAle, zreSTha, agragaNya,
vAcaspati, maMgalasvarUpa he bhagavan! Apako namaskAra ho| sabase prathama udaya
hue, apUrvavIra! sUryastuti (OM bhUrbhuvaH svaH) ke sadRza vacanoM se stuti
karane yogya, he prabhu Apako namaskAra ho| sarva-jIvoM ke hitakArI, sarva-artha
ke sAdhaka, amaratva ko prApta, udIyamAna sUrya, brahmacarya ke dhAraka,
saMsArasamudra se pAra utarane vAle, kauzalyavAna, nirvikArI, vizvarakSaka,
vajraRSabhanArAcasaMhanana se yukta zarIra vAle, yathArtha vastutattva ke
darzaka! Apako namaskAra ho| trikAla, jinendra, svayaMbhu, jJAna, bala, vIrya,
teja, zakti aura aizvarya se saMpanna, prabho! Apako namaskAra ho| dharma ke
AdipuruSa, parameSThI, mahAdeva, jyotistattvasvarUpa, he svAmin! Apako namaskAra
ho| siddhArtha rAjA ke kula rUpI samudra ke lie caMdramA ke samAna, tInoM lokoM
ke svAmI! bhagavAn zrI mahAvIra prabho! Apako namaskAra ho| indra ne isa prakAra
ke stuti pATha se namaskAra kiyA aura prabhu ko lekara vApisa unheM unakI mAtA
ko sauNpaa| prabhu ke mAtA-pitA ne apane ghara meM dhana-dhAnya kI vRddhi hone
se usake anurUpa prabhu kA nAma 'vardhamAna' rkhaa| devoM aura asuroM meM
bhagavAn kI sevA-bhakti karane kI hor3a laga gyii| amRtavRSTi karane vAle
pIyUSavarSI netroM se pRthvItala ko siMcana karate hue, eka hajAra ATha lakSaNa
vAle svAbhAvika guNoM se vRddhi ko prApta kara kramazaH vaya se bhI bhagavAn
bar3hane lge| eka bAra advitIya balazAlI vardhamAna bAlyAvasthA ke kAraNa
samavayaska rAjaputroM ke sAtha khela khelane gye| usa samaya indra ne
avadhijJAna se jAnakara devasabhA meM prazaMsA kI ki "sAre jagat meM mahAvIra
prabhu se bar3hakara koI vIra nahIM hai|" eka IrSyAlu devatA isa bAta se kSubdha
ho uThA aura usane vardhamAna ko vicalita karane kA bIr3A utthaayaa| vaha sIdhA
vahAM A pahuMcA, jahAM bAlaka vardhamAna apane hamajolI samavayaska lar3akoM ke
sAtha AmalakI krIr3A khela rahe the| deva ne kapaTa pUrvaka sarpa kA rUpa banAyA
aura vaha per3a se lipaTa gyaa| usa bhayaMkara sarpa ko dekhakara sabhI
rAjakumAra Darakara idhara-udhara bhAga gye| paraMtu vardhamAna ne ha~sate-
ha~sate rassI kI taraha sA~pa ko pakar3akara jamIna para pheMka diyaa| zarmiMdA
bane hue rAjakumAra phira khelane aaye| deva ne aba kumAra kA rUpa dhAraNa kiyA
aura phira vahA~ A phuNcaa| sabhI bAlaka vRkSa para car3ha gye| vardhamAna to
pahale se hI vRkSa kI coTI para car3ha gaye the| loka ke agrabhAva (mokSa) para
jAne vAle ke lie vRkSa ke zikhara para car3hanA kauna bar3I bAta thI! vahAM
pahale se baiThe hue vardhamAna zikhara para aise zobhAyamAna ho rahe the, jaise
meruparvata ke zikhara para sUrya suzobhita hotA hai| jaba ki dUsare rAjakumAra
DAlI para laTake hue baMdara ke samAna dikhAI dete the| bAda meM vardhamAna ne
khela meM aisI zarta rakhI ki jo koI jItegA vaha hArane vAle kI pITha para
cddh'egaa| vijita vardhamAna rAjakumAra bhI ghur3asavAra kI taraha rAjakumAroM
kI pITha para savAra hue| kramazaH mahAparAkramI vijayI vardhamAna deva kI pITha
para car3ha baitthe| vaha duSTabuddhi deva parvatoM ko bhI mAta karane vAle
vikarAla vaitAla kA rUpa banAkara U~cA hone lagA, pAtAla ke sadRza muMha
banAkara sarpa ke samAna jIbha dikhAne lgaa| aura usake mastaka rUpI parvata
para pIle aura laMbe bAla dAvAnala ke samAna pratIta hone lge| usakI
atibhayaMkara dAr3he karavata ke samAna pratIta hone lgii| mahAghora parvata kI
guphA ke samAna usake nAsA chidra dikhAyI dene lge| bhRkuTi car3hAne se
bhayaMkara bhauMhe do nAganiyoMkI-sI mAlUma hone lgii| isa taraha tAr3a ke
samAna car3hatA huA vaha deva rukA nahIM; taba mahAbalI prabhu ne usakI pITha
para mukkA mArakara use baunA banA diyaa| isa prakAra indra ke dvArA varNita
varddhamAna ke dhairya kA pratyakSa anubhava karake deva | apane mUla svarUpa
meM prakaTa huA aura prabhu ko namaskAra karake apane sthAna para vApisa lauTa
gyaa| . eka dina vardhamAna mahAvIra ke mAtA-pitA unheM vidyAraMbha-utsava
karake pAThazAlA bhejane kI taiyArI kara rahe the| indra ne yaha jAnakara vicAra
kiyA-kyA sarvajJa ko bhI pAThazAlA kA vidyArthI bananA hai?' yoM socakara indra
svayaM vahA~ brAhmaNa ke rUpa meM AyA aura vardhamAna ko upAdhyAya (adhyApaka)
ke Asana para biThAkara svayaM namaskAra karake usane prabhu se zabdazAstra para
kucha kahane kI prArthanA kii| vAgmI evaM sarvazAstrajJa mahAvIra ne
vyAkaraNazAstra para vivecana kiyaa|

Page #28 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Prefix of the Cowherd  The first chapter of the Yoga Shastra, "First
Light," states that the text became known as "Aindra Vyakaran" (Aindra Grammar)
because Lord Mahavira instructed Indra in the art of language.  Despite his
yearning for initiation, the Lord remained in his home for twenty-eight years,
respecting his parents' wishes. After their passing, he expressed his desire to
renounce worldly possessions and take monastic vows. His elder brother,
Nandivardhan, pleaded with him, "Brother, I am alone and unable to bear the
fresh grief of our parents' loss. Your presence provides me great comfort.
Please do not speak such words, like sprinkling salt on a fresh wound." He tried
to dissuade the Lord from taking initiation, but during this time, the Lord
remained in Kayotsarga (meditation) even amidst the opulent surroundings of his
palace, adorned with various ornaments and jewels. He maintained the conduct of
a monk, consuming only uncooked food and water, adhering to the principles of a
Sadhu's conduct. In this way, the Lord, with his vast aspirations, spent a year.
Then, the Lokantik Devas (celestial beings) approached the Lord, bowing down and
saying, "Lord, the time for your initiation is near. Prepare yourself and
establish a Tirtha (sacred place)."  Knowing his initiation was imminent, Lord
Mahavira began to generously donate to the needy for a year. He considered the
earth to be free from debt and renounced worldly wealth, equating it to a mere
straw. In the second year, he relinquished all possessions. All the celestial
beings of the various realms celebrated his initiation. A thousand Devas carried
a palanquin named Chandra Prabha (Moon Light). The Lord sat within it and
arrived at the garden known as Jnatrikhand. There, he renounced all worldly
activities (pravrittis) and took initiation at the fourth watch of the day. At
that moment, the Lord attained the fourth stage of knowledge, Manahparyaya Jnana
(knowledge of the thoughts of all beings).  From there, the Lord continued his
journey and stood in Kayotsarga, unwavering like Mount Meru, outside Kumaragram
at dusk. That night, a cowherd, filled with unprovoked anger, became an enemy of
the Lord and inflicted an Upasarg (severe affliction) upon him. Indra, with his
Avadhi Jnana (clairvoyance), perceived the potential for increased suffering
upon the Lord. He thought, "Just as a mouse attempts to dig through a great
mountain, this wicked cowherd seeks to inflict harm upon the Lord." Driven by
his devotion to the Lord's well-being, Indra appeared at the Lord's feet. The
cowherd, like a bedbug, fled in fear. Indra circumambulated the Lord thrice,
bowed his head in reverence, and prayed, "Lord, for twelve years, you will face
a barrage of afflictions. I wish to remain at your feet and try to prevent these
hardships."  Having completed his Kayotsarga, the Lord said to Indra, "Indra, an
Arihant (liberated soul) never expects assistance from others."  Thereafter, the
Lord Mahavira, with a coolness like the moon, a brilliance like the sun, a fiery
intensity that could be seen with sorrow, a strength like an elephant, an
unshakeable resolve like Mount Meru, an endurance like the earth, a depth like
the ocean, a fearlessness like a lion, a fierce fire for the misguided, a
solitary nature like a rhinoceros' horn, a strength like a great bull,
controlled senses like a tortoise, a solitary vision like a serpent, a purity
like a conch, a beautiful form like gold, a free flight like a bird, an
uninterrupted movement like consciousness, a supportless nature like the sky, an
unwavering focus like a Bharand bird, a detachment like a lotus leaf, with
equanimity towards enemies and friends, grass and kingdom, gold and stone, jewel
and dirt, this world and the next, pleasure and pain, the world and liberation,
all things; with selfless compassion, ready to help; with mental strength, a
savior of beings drowning in the ocean of existence, seeking their own
liberation; unattached like the wind; the Jagadguru (world teacher) Mahavira,
adorned with the ocean-like Karadhani (a type of garment), began to wander
across the earth, adorned with numerous villages, cities, and forests.  While
wandering, he once reached the southern region of Jabal. From there, he was
traveling towards the city of Shwetaambika. On the way, some cowherds said, "O
Devaraya! This path is indeed straight to Shwetaambika, but in between lies the
deserted hermitage of Kanak Khal, a tapasvi (ascetic). There, a venomous
serpent..."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 gvAle kA upasarga yogazAstra prathama prakAza 1-2 bhagavAna mahAvIra ke dvArA
indra ko isa prakAra zabdAnuzAsana ke kahane se upAdhyAya tathA anya logoM meM
yaha graMtha 'aindra vyAkaraNa' ke nAma se prasiddha huaa| dIkSA kI utkaMThA
hone para bhI prabhu aTThAisa varSa taka mAtA-pitA ke Agraha se virakta-se
hokara gRhavAsa meM rhe| mAtA-pitA kA svargavAsa hone para prabhu ne rAja-
saMpatti chor3akara muni-dIkSA lene kI icchA prakaTa kii| taba unake bar3e bhAI
nandIvardhana ne kahA-'he bhAI! mAtA-pitA ke tAje viraha ko sahana karane meM
maiM akelA asamartha huuN| tumhAre rahane se mujhe bahuta hI sahayoga milegaa|
ataH tuma tAje ghAva para namaka chir3akane ke-se vacana mata bolo| yoM bahuta
kucha kahakara prabhu ko dIkSA lene se rokaa| paraMtu isa daurAna prabhu vividha
prakAra ke abhigraha rUpI AbhUSaNa, gahane-pahane citrazAlA meM bhI kAyotsarga
(dhyAna) meM rahe, bhAva se sAdhutva kA pAlana karate hue sAdhu ke kalpa (AcAra)
ke samAna acitta AhAra-pAnI se prabhu nirvAha karate rhe| isa prakAra vizAla
Azaya ke dhAraka bhagavAn ne eka varSa bitaayaa| tatpazcAt lokAntika devoM ne
Akara prabhu ko namaskAra karake kahA-'svAmin! aba ApakA dIkSA grahaNa kA samaya
nikaTa A gayA hai| isalie usakI taiyArI karie, tIrthasthApanA kiijie|' prabhu
mahAvIra ne apanA dIkSA-samaya nikaTa jAnakara eka varSa taka yAcakoM ko mukta
hasta se dAna denA prAraMbha kiyaa| unhoMne pRthvI ko RNamukta kara rAjalakSmI
ko tinake ke samAna samajhakara dUsare varSa usakA tyAga kiyaa| sabhI nikAya ke
devoM ne prabhu kA dIkSA mahotsava kiyaa| hajAra devatAoM ne caMdraprabhA nAma
kI pAlakI utthaaii| prabhu usameM baiThakara, jJAtRkhaMDa nAmaka udyAna meM
pdhaareN| vahA~ sarvasAvadha (sadoSa) vyApAroM (pravRttiyoM) kA tyAga karake
dina ke cauthe prahara meM prabhu ne dIkSA aMgIkAra kii| una samaya bhagavAn ko
sabhI prANiyoM ke mana ke bhAvoM ko jAna sakane vAlA cauthA manaHparyAyajJAna,
utpanna huaa| prabhu vahA~ se vihAra kara saMdhyA-samaya kumAragrAma ke bAhara
meruparvata kI taraha aDola hokara kAyotsarga meM khar3e rhe| usI rAta ko
akAraNa kruddha hokara Atma-zatru rUpa gvAlA bhagavAn ko upasarga (bhayaMkara
ksstt)| dene lgaa| usa samaya indra ne avadhijJAna se prabhu para Ane vAle
upadravoM kI vRddhi kI saMbhAvanA jAnakara socA ki cUhA jaise mahAparvata ko
khodanA cAhatA hai, vaise hI yaha duSkarmI gvAlA bhI prabhu ko upadrava denA
cAhatA hai| ataH | kalyANakAriNI bhaktivaza indra usI samaya prabhu ke caraNoM
meM upasthita hue| isase upadrava karane vAlA gvAlA khaTamala kI taraha kahIM
bhAga gyaa| indra ne tIna bAra pradakSiNA dekara bhagavAn ko mastaka jhukAkara
praNAma kiyA aura prabhu se prArthanA kI-svAmin! Apa para bAraha varSa taka
upasargoM kI jhar3I lagane vAlI hai| ataH Apake zrI caraNoM meM rahakara maiM
una upadravoM ko rokane kA prayAsa karanA cAhatA huuN|" kAyotsarga pUrNa kara
bhagavAn ne indra se kahA-'indra! arihaMta kabhI dUsare kI sahAyatA kI apekSA
nahIM rkhte|' usake bAda candra ke samAna zItalezyA vAle, sUrya ke samAna
prakhara evaM duHkha pUrvaka dekhe jA sake aise tapa-teja vAle, hAthI ke samAna
balavAna, meruparvata ke samAna aTala, pRthvI ke samAna saba kucha sahana karane
vAle, samudra ke samAna gaMbhIra, siMha ke samAna nirbhaya, mithyAdRSTiyoM ke
lie pracaMDa Aga ke samAna, geMDe ke sIMga ke samAna ekAkI, mahAna vRSabha ke
samAna balavAna, kachue ke samAna gusendriya, sarpa ke samAna ekAntadRSTi vAle,
zaMkha ke samAna niraMjana, svarNa samAna uttama rUpa vAle, pakSI kI taraha
mukta ur3Ana bharane vAle, caitanya kI bhA~ti apratihata (berokaToka) gati vAle,
AkAza ke samAna nirAlaMba, bhAraMDa pakSI ke samAna apramatta, kamalinIpatra ke
samAna nirlepa; zatru aura mitra, tRNa aura rAjya, suvarNa aura patthara, maNi
aura miTTI, ihaloka aura paraloka, sukha aura duHkha, |saMsAra aura mokSa, ina
sabhI padArthoM para samabhAvI; niHsvArthabhAva se karuNA karane meM tatpara,
manobalI hone se saMsArasamudra meM DUbate hue evaM apanA uddhAra cAhane vAle
jIvoM ke uddhArakartA, vAyu ke samAna apratibaddha, jagadguru mahAvIra, samudra
rUpI karadhanI pahanI huI, aneka gAMvoM, nagaroM aura vanoM se suzobhita pRthvI
para vicaraNa karane lge| vicaraNa karate-karate eka bAra ve dakSiNa jAbAla
pradeza meM phuNce| vahA~ se vihAra karate hue prabhu zvetAmbikA nagarI jA rahe
the| rAste meM kucha gopAlakoM ne kahA- 'he devArya! zvetAmbI nagarI kI ora jAne
ke lie yaha rAstA sIdhA jarUra haiM, paraMtu isake bIca meM kanakakhala nAmaka
tApasa kA eka sUnA Azrama par3atA hai, vahA~ aba eka dRSTiviSa sarpa apanI 1.
yahAM bhI saMkSipti karaNa hai| saMpAdaka

Page #29 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The story of the Chanda-Koushika serpent and its awakening and its equality  The
first light of the Yoga Shastra, verse 1-2, says that it remains like a snake.
There, no animal, bird, human or any creature can go safe. Therefore, you should
leave this path and go by this slightly winding path. The proverb says, "What is
the use of wearing gold that cuts the ears?" The Lord, diving into his self-
knowledge, knew that the serpent was none other than the ascetic sage of his
previous birth, who was going for alms, when his foot fell on a frog, killing
it. A small sage asked him to criticize his fault and also showed him the dead
frog. But instead of criticizing his mistake, the ascetic sage started telling
the dead frogs by saying, "Oh! Wicked, insignificant Muni! Tell me, did I kill
all these frogs?" The pure-minded, young Muni did not answer anything and
assumed that even if this great man does not accept it now, he will surely take
atonement by criticizing it in the evening. But in the evening, at the time of
Pratikraman, the Muni sat down without criticizing and taking atonement. Then
the young Muni thought that he seems to have forgotten the matter of the frog's
contradiction. To remind him of this matter, he said, "Muni! Why don't you
criticize and atone for the contradiction of that frog?" As soon as he said
this, the ascetic sage, filled with anger, ran to kill the young Muni. Due to
extreme anger, the ascetic sage collided with the pillar and died there. Due to
the contradiction of Sadhutva, he was born in the Jyotishka Devaloka. From
there, he was born as a son named Koushika from the wife of the head of the five
hundred tapaswis in the Kanakakhal ashram. There were many other sages living
there who belonged to the Koushika gotra. But this Koushika was very angry, so
people named him Chanda-Koushika. After the death of his father, Chanda-Koushika
became the head. This head used to roam in the forest day and night due to his
attachment to the forest. And he did not allow anyone to take flowers, fruits,
roots, leaves etc. from this forest. If anyone took even the destroyed useless
fruits etc., he would beat him with wood, stone, stone, axe etc. Therefore, the
tapaswis started getting very sad due to not getting fruits etc. Just as crows
fly away when stones are thrown, similarly those tapaswis, tired of the
atrocities of this Koushika, went in different directions. One day this Chanda-
Koushika went out of the ashram to take thorny bushes. From behind, many princes
from the Shwetaambari city came and destroyed his ashram and garden. Koushika
was returning with thorns when the cowherds told him, "Today someone is
destroying your garden! Go quickly and take care of it!" Just as fire flares up
with ghee, similarly, he became extremely angry with anger and ran to kill them
with a sharp-edged axe. Just as other birds flee in fear of the hawk, similarly,
those princes also ran away seeing Chanda-Koushika coming with an axe. The
ascetic was running wildly when, due to not being aware in anger, he suddenly
fell into a deep well, like the mouth of Yama. While falling, the axe he was
holding in his hand came in front of his face and its edge got stuck in his head
and his head burst. It is true, "The fruits of the deeds done have to be
enjoyed!" The same Chanda-Koushika ascetic died and became a very angry, vision-
poisoning serpent in this forest. In fact, intense, endless anger goes with you
in other births as well. But 'he will surely attain enlightenment.' Thinking
this, the world-loving Lord, not considering his suffering as suffering, went on
the same path to alleviate the suffering of the serpent's birth-wandering. The
forest was rough and desolate due to the lack of human traffic. The water of the
small river there became sandy and muddy due to not being drunk. The trees there
had become stumps, their leaves had dried up. Termites had built their mounds on
the trees at various places. The huts were deserted. The world-loving Lord
entered this desolate forest. And in the pavilion of the dilapidated temple of
the Yaksha, he stood in Kayotsarga (meditation) with his gaze fixed on the front
of his nose. The arrogant Chanda-Koushika serpent, like the night of Kali, came
out of his den with his tongue licking. He was roaming in the forest, writing
the script of his command with the line of his body as it passed through the
sand. As soon as he saw the mighty Lord, he considered it a challenge to his ego
and thought, 'Who is this stump-like person who is coming to me without fear?'

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 caNDakozika sarpa ko pratibodha evaM usakI samatA yogazAstra pathama prakAza
zloka 1-2 bAMbI banAkara rahatA hai| vahA~ pazu-pakSI, manuSya yA koI bhI prANI
sahI salAmata nahIM jA skte| ataH Apa isa mArga ko chor3akara thor3e se cakkara
vAle isa mArga se cale jaayeN| kahAvata hai-jisa sone se kAna kaTa jAya, use
pahanane se kyA lAbha?' bhagavan ne apane AtmajJAna meM DubakI lagAkara jAnA ki
vaha sarpa aura koI nahIM, vahI pUrvajanma kA tapasvI sAdhu hai, jo bhikSA ke
lie jA rahA thA ki mArga meM usakA paira eka meMDhakI para par3ane se vaha mara
gyii| eka choTe sAdhu ne usase usa doSa kI AlocanA karane kA kahA aura use marI
huI meMr3hakI bhI btaayii| magara vaha tapasvI sAdhu apanI galatI kI AlocanA
karane ke badale anya logoM ke pairoM tale kucala jAne se marI huI mair3hakiyA~
batAkara kahane lagA'are! duSTa, kSullaka muni! batA, ye sArI meMr3hakiyA~ kyA
maiMne hI mArI hai?' pavitra buddhi vAle, bAlamuni ne kucha bhI uttara nahIM
diyA aura aisA mAnA ki abhI yaha mahAnubhAva bhale hI ise na mAneM, paraMtu
saMdhyA ko to AlocanA karake prAyazcitta le hI leNge| magara zAma ko
pratikramaNa ke samaya vaha muni AlocanA karake prAyazcitta liye binA hI baiTha
gye| taba bAlamuni ne vicAra kiyA ki ye usa meMr3hakI kI virAdhanA kI bAta bhUla
gaye mAlUma hote haiN| ira kI bAta yAda dilAne hetu usane kahA-'munivara! Apa
usa meMDhakI kI virAdhanA kI AlocanA va prAyazcitta kyoM nahIM karate? aisA
kahate hI yaha tapasvI sAdha krodha se Aga-babalA hokara bAlamuni ko mArane ke
lie daudd'aa| ugratama krodha ke kAraNa vaha tapasvI sAdha staMbha ke sAtha aisA
TakarAyA ki vahIM khatma ho gyaa| sAdhutva kI virAdhanA ke kAraNa vaha jyotiSka
devaloka meM utpanna haa| vahA~ se cyava kara yaha kanakakhala Azrama meM pA~ca
sau tApasoM ke kulapati kI strI se kauzika nAma kA putra huaa| vahA~ kauzika
gotra vAle aura bhI bahuta-se sAdhu rahate the| kintu yaha kauzika atikrodhI
hone se logoM ne isakA nAma caMDakauzika rakhA thaa| apane pitA ke mara jAne ke
bAda caMDakauzika kulapati bnaa| yaha kulapati vanakhaMDa kI Asakti se dina-rAta
vana meM bhramaNa karatA thaa| aura isa vana se kisI ko bhI puSpa, phala, mUla,
patte Adi nahIM lene detA thaa| naSTa hue nirupayogI phalAdi ko bhI koI grahaNa
karatA to use lakar3I, DhelA, patthara, kulhAr3I Adi se mAratA thaa| ataH
phalAdi nahIM milane se ve tApasa bar3e duHkhI hone lge| jaise Dhele pheMkane se
kaue~ ur3a jAte haiM, vaise hI ve tApasa isa kauzika ke atyAcAra se taMga Akara
alaga-alaga dizAoM meM cale gye| eka dina yaha caMDakauzika tApasa kAMTedAra
jhAr3I lene ke lie Azrama se bAhara gayA huA thaa| pIche se zvetAmbarI nagarI se
bahuta se rAjakumAroM ne Akara usake Azrama aura bAga ko ujAr3a diyaa| kauzika
kaMTikA lekara vApasa lauTa rahA thA to gvAloM ne use kahA ki-'Aja to ApakA
bagIcA koI tahasa-nahasa kara rahA hai! jaldI jAkara sa~bhAlo!' ghI se jaise Aga
bhar3akatI hai, vaise hI krodha se atyaMta bhar3akakara vaha kauzika tIkhI dhAra
vAlA kulhAr3A lekara unheM mArane daudd'aa| jaise bAja se Darakara dUsare pakSI
bhAga jAte haiM, vaise hI ve rAjaputra bhI caMDakauzika ko kulhAr3I liye Ate
dekha nau-do-gyAraha ho gye| tapasvI betahAzA daur3A A rahA thA ki, krodha meM
bhAna na rahane se acAnaka yama ke mukha sadRza eka gahare kuMe meM gira pdd'aa|
girate samaya hAtha meM pakar3I huI kulhAr3I muMha ke sAmane ho jAne se usakI
dhAra mastaka meM gar3a gayI aura usakA mastaka phaTa gyaa| saca hai, "kRta
kamoM ke phala avazya hI bhogane par3ate haiM!" vahI caMDakauzika tApasa
marakara isI vana meM atikrodhI dRSTiviSa sarpa banA huA hai| vAstava meM, tIvra
anaMtAnubaMdhI krodha anya janmoM meM bhI sAtha jAtA hai| lekina 'yaha avazya hI
bodha prApta kregaa|' aisA vicArakara vizvavatsala prabhu apane kaSTa ko kaSTa
na samajhakara usa sarpa kI bhava-bhramaNa-pIr3A miTAne hetu usI mArga se cle|
vaha jaMgala manuSyoM ke pairoM kA saMcAra na hone se Ubar3a-khAbar3a aura
vIrAna ho gayA thaa| vahA~ kI choTI-sI nadI kA pAnI pIyA na jAne se pravAha
rahita retIlA va gaMdalA ho gayA thaa| vahAM ke peDa-paudhe DhUMTha bana gaye
the, unake patte sUkha gaye the| per3oM para jagaha-jagaha dImakoM ne apane TIle
banA DAle the| jhoMpar3iyA~ ujar3a gayI thii| vizvavatsala prabhu ne isa vIrAna
jaMgala meM praveza kiyaa| aura yakSa ke jIrNazIrNa maMdira ke maMDapa meM ve
nAsikA ke agrabhAga para dRSTi TikAkara kAyotsarga (dhyAna) meM khar3e ho gye|
ahaMkArI caMDakauzika sarpa kAlarAtri kI taraha jIbha lapalapAtA huA apanI bAMbI
se niklaa| vaha vana meM ghUmatA huA retI meM saMkramaNa hotI huI apane zarIra
kI rekhA se mAno apanI AjJA kA lekha likha rahA thaa| jyohi usane mahAbalI
prabhu ko dekhA, tyoMhI apane ahaM ko cunautI samajhakara socane lagA-'yaha
kauna DhUMTha-sA niHzaMka hokara mujhe jatAe binA hI

Page #30 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
"The great compassion of Lord Mahavira, the confluence of the terrible
calamities caused by Sangamdeva.  Yoga Shastra, First Light, Verse 3 | 'How dare
he stand here, being stubborn, defying me? How did he even dare to enter this
forest? Therefore, I will burn him now. I will turn him to ashes.' Thus, burning
with anger, the serpent raised its hood. It spat flames of poison from its
mouth, and with a terrifying roar that scorched the trees, it fixed its gaze on
the Lord. Its blazing eyes, like a meteor falling from the sky onto a mountain,
fell upon the Lord's body, but just as the great wind cannot move Mount Meru, so
too could it not harm the Lord in any way. 'Why hasn't this wood burned yet?'
Thinking this, the serpent, burning with even greater anger, looked repeatedly
towards the sun and then released more flames. But those flames too became like
streams of water for the Lord. Therefore, the merciless serpent bit the Lord's
lotus feet and spat its poison. Thus, it bit repeatedly, and then moved away,
thinking, 'Perhaps this one will faint from my poison and fall upon me, crushing
me.' Yet, the Lord was not affected by its poison in the slightest. From his
thumb, bright, fragrant blood flowed like a stream of milk. After that, the
serpent stared at the Lord in astonishment and thought, 'Who is this, upon whom
my poison has no effect?' Later, seeing the wondrous form of Jagannath Mahavira,
its eyes were dazzled by his radiance and gentleness. Knowing the serpent was
calm, the Lord said to it, 'Chandakoushik! Even now, attain enlightenment,
understand, awaken, do not be deluded.' Hearing these words of the Lord, the
serpent, pondering them in its mind, remembered its past life - it regained its
jati-smriti. Now, Chandakoushik was free from passions and calm. He
circumambulated the Lord three times and mentally vowed to observe a fast.
Seeing the great serpent, free from sinful deeds and immersed in the nectar of
peace, accept the fast, the Lord instructed him, 'Vats! Do not go anywhere now,
your eyes are filled with poison.' Hearing this, the serpent put its mouth into
the bamboo and drank the nectar of equality. Out of compassion, the Lord also
stayed there. Truly, the actions of great souls are for the benefit of others.'
Seeing the Lord in this state, the cowherds, their eyes wide with astonishment,
rushed there. Hiding behind the trees, they took the stones and pebbles they had
brought and mercilessly struck the serpent, who was like a great being. But
seeing it unmoved and steady, they were convinced that it was peaceful. Then,
they went near it and scratched its body with a piece of wood; yet, it remained
still. The cowherds told this to the villagers, and they began to worship the
Lord and the great serpent. The milkmaids, who were going to sell ghee on that
path, began to smear ghee and butter on the Nagraj's body. The smell attracted
sharp-biting ants, which bit and bit, making his body like a sieve. 'This pain
is nothing compared to my cruel deeds,' thus reasoning with his soul, the great
serpent began to endure that unbearable pain. 'These poor, weak ants might get
crushed and die if I move around!' With this thought, the great serpent did not
move its limbs even a little. Nourished by the merciful rain of the Lord's
grace, and with a steady mind, the serpent died on the fifteenth day and became
a god in the Vaimanika Devaloka, called Sahasrar.  Thus, the Lord Mahavira, the
supreme Tirthankara, the unique brother of the three worlds, held the same
attitude towards both the venomous serpent who inflicted various calamities upon
him, and Indra, who worshipped him. ||2||  ||3||  **Krtaparadhe'pi jane,
kripamantharatarayoh. Ishd-bashpardrayoh bhadram, shrivirajinanetrayoh ||3||**
**Meaning:** May the eyes of Lord Mahavira, filled with compassion and moist
with tears of mercy, be auspicious even for those beings who have committed
offenses.  **Explanation:** The eyes of Lord Mahavira were filled with boundless
compassion even for Sangamdeva and others who had committed offenses. His eyes,
overflowing with great compassion within, were always wet with tears. Such were
the eyes of Lord Mahavira."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bhagavAn mahAvIra kI mahAkaruNA, saMgama devakRtaghora upasarga yogazAstra
prathama prakAza zloka 3 | merI avajJA karake DhITha banakara khar3A hai? isane
isa jaMgala meM ghusane kA sAhasa hI kaise kiyA ? ataH abhI ise jalAkara |
bhasma karatA huuN|' isa prakAra krodha se jalate hue usa sarpa ne phana U~cA
kiyaa| apane mu~ha se viSajvAlAe~ ugalatA huA aura vRkSoM ko jalAtI huI dRSTi se
bhayaMkara phuphakAra karatA huA prabhu ko ekaTaka dRSTi se dekhane lagA  /
AkAza se parvata | para girate hue darzanIya ulkApAta ke samAna usakI
jAjvalyamAna dRSTi - jvAlAe~ bhagavAn ke zarIra para par3I, paraMtu jaise |
mahAvAyu meruparvata ko calAyamAna karane meM samartha nahIM ho sakatA, vaise hI
mahAprabhAvazAlI prabhu kA vaha kucha bhI nukasAna nahIM kara sakA  /  "are!
abhI taka yaha kASTha kI taraha jalA kyo nahIM?" yaha socakara krodha se adhika
tapta hokara vaha sUrya kI ora bAra-bAra dRSTi karake phira jvAlAe~ chor3ane
lagA  /  paraMtu ve jvAlAe~ bhI prabhu ke lie jaladhArA ke samAna | bana gayI  /
ataH usa nirdayI sarpa ne prabhu ke caraNakamala para daMza mArA aura apanA
jahara uglaa| isa prakAra kaI bAra | lagAtAra Dasakara vaha vahA~ se haTatA jAtA
thA, yaha socakara ki kahIM yaha mere jahara se mUrcchA khAkara mujha para hI
girakara | mujhe dabA na de| phira bhI prabhu para usake jahara kA jarA bhI
asara nahIM huaa| unake aMgUThe se dUdha kI dhArA ke samAna | ujjvala sugaMdhita
rakta bahane lgaa| usake bAda vaha prabhu ke sAmane Azcarya pUrvaka TakaTakI
lagAkara dekhane lagA aura socane lagA- 'are! yaha kauna hai, jisa para mere
viSa kA koI prabhAva na huA? bAda meM jagannAtha mahAvIra ke adbhuta rUpa ko |
dekhakara usakI kAMti aura saumyatA se usakI AMkheM sahasA cakAcauMdha ho gayI
/  sarpa ko zAMta jAnakara bhagavAn ne use | kahA - 'caMDakauzika ! aba bhI
bodha prApta kara, samajha jA, jAgRta ho jA, moha mata kr|' bhagavAn ke ye
vacana sunakara mana | hI mana una para uhApoha ( cintana-manana) karate-karate
use pUrva janma kA jJAna - jAtismaraNa ho gayA  /  aba caMDakauzika kaSAyoM se
mukta va zAMta ho cukA thaa| usane bhagavAn kI tIna bAra pradakSiNA dekara mana
se anazana aMgIkAra kara liyaa| | mahAprabhu ne pApakarma se rahita aura
prazamarasa meM tallIna usa mahAsarpa dvArA svIkRta anazana ko dekhakara use
upadeza diyA| 'vatsa ! aba tUM kahIM para bhI mata jAnA, terI A~khoM meM jahara
bharA huA hai|' yaha sunakara vaha bAMbI meM muMha DAlakara samatA | rUpa amRta
kA pAna karane lgaa| usa para anukaMpAvaza bhagavAna bhI vahIM ruke rhe| saca
hai - mahApuruSoM kI pravRttiyAM dUsaroM | ke upakAra ke lie hotI hai|' aisI
sthiti meM bhagavAn ko dekhakara Azcarya se A~kheM phAr3ate hue gvAle ekadama
vahA~ daur3e hue Aye  /  vRkSoM kI oTa meM chipakara ve hAtha meM jo patthara va
Dhele Adi lAye the, unase mahAtmatulya bane hue sarpa para | nirdayatApUrvaka
prahAra karane lge| kintu use aDola aura sthira dekhakara unheM vizvAsa ho gayA
ki yaha zAMta hai; taba usake | pAsa jAkara usake zarIra ko lakar3I chuA kara
kuredane lage; phira bhI vaha sthira rhaa| gvAloM ne yaha bAta gAMva ke logoM |
se batAyI to ve loga bhagavAn kI aura usa mahAsarpa kI pUjA karane lge| usa
mArga se ghI becane jAtI huI gvAlineM | nAgarAja ke zarIra para ghI aura
makkhana cupar3ane lagI, usakI gaMdha se tIkSNadaMzI cIMTIyoM ne kATa-kATakara
usake zarIra ko chalanI ke samAna banA diyA  /  'mere krUra karmoM kI tulanA meM
yaha vedanA to kucha bhI nahIM hai;' isa taraha apanI AtmA | ko samajhAtA huA
vaha mahAnubhAva sarpa usa atiduHsaha vedanA ko sahana karane lagA  /  ye bicArI
nirbala cIMTiyA~ kahIM | mere idhara-udhara hilane-Dulane se dabakara mara na
jAyeM ! isa vicAra se vaha mahAsarpa apane aMga ko aba jarA bhI calAyamAna |
nahIM karatA thA  /  bhagavAn kI kRpAmayI sudhAvRSTi se siMcita va sthiracitta
vaha sarpa paMdrahaveM dina marakara sahasrAra nAmaka | vaimAnika devaloka meM
deva banA  /  isa prakAra apane para vividha upasarga karane vAle dRSTiviSa
phaNidhara aura bhakti karane vAle indra, ina donoM para carama tIrthaMkara,
tIna jagat ke advitIya baMdhu, zrI mahAvIra paramAtmA samAna bhAva rakhate the
/  / 2 /  /   / 3 /  kRtAparAdhe'pi jane, kRpAmantharatArayoH  /  ISad -
bASpArdrayorbhadraM, zrIvIrajinanetrayoH ||3|| artha :- aparAdha karane vAle
jIvoM para bhI dayA se pUrNa aura karuNAzrU se Ardra (gIle) zrI mahAvIraprabhu
ke netroM kA kalyANa ho  /  vyAkhyA :- bhagavAn mahAvIra kI A~kheM aparAdha
karane vAle saMgamadeva Adi para bhI agAdha karuNA se paripUrNa thii| aMtara meM
mahAna karuNA se AplAvita unakI A~kheM sadaiva azrujala se bhIgI rahatI thii|
bhagavAn mahAvIra kI aisI 8

Page #31 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Severe Affliction Inflicted Upon Lord Mahavira by Sangamdeva  **May the
eyes of Sudhama be blessed.** This means that we offer our salutations to the
Lord who is endowed with such powerful yoga. To confirm this statement, we are
presenting an account from the life of Lord Mahavira.  **The Great Compassion of
Lord Mahavira:**  While traveling from village to village and city to city, Lord
Mahavira once arrived at "Dridhbhoomi," a land inhabited by Mlechchha tribes.
After performing the austerity of the eighth-fold rejection of attachments
(tele), he entered a temple called "Polash" in the forest of "Pedhal" near the
village of "Pedhal." He ascended a comfortable stone platform, stood with his
hands outstretched to his knees, his body bent, his steady mind focused, his
eyes open, and remained in a state of deep meditation for the entire night.  At
that time, in the assembly of Saudharma, Indra, the king of the gods, who was
seated on his throne, surrounded by eighty-four thousand ordinary gods, thirty-
three Trayastrimsa, three Parishadya, four Lokapala, countless scattered gods,
and eighty-four thousand guardian gods with armor and weapons all around their
bodies, seven commanders, Abhiyogika, Kilvishika, and other gods and goddesses,
all adorned with three types of musical instruments, enjoying a joyous time,
became aware of the Lord's state through his divine knowledge. He immediately
stood up, discarded his sandals, donned his upper garment, placed his right foot
on the ground, raised his left foot slightly, bowed his head to the earth, and
began to praise the Lord with the Shakrastava (Namutthunan). Indra's entire body
was filled with joy. Standing up, he addressed the entire assembly, saying, "O
noble gods of the Saudharma heaven! I will tell you about the extraordinary
glory of Lord Mahavira, listen. The holder of the five committees, purified by
the three secrets, the one who controls anger, pride, delusion, and greed, the
one who is without refuge, the one who is indifferent to wealth, territory,
time, and emotions, the one who remains steadfast in Kayotsarga (meditation) by
focusing his gaze on a tree or a single particle, no one, whether a god, a
demon, a Yaksha, a Rakshasa, a Naga, a human, or anyone in the three realms, can
distract him from his meditation."  Upon hearing Indra's words, a proud,
arrogant, ordinary god named Sangam, with a furrowed brow, fierce eyes, lips
chewing in anger, and red eyes, spoke, "O Indra! To praise a human being so
highly and elevate him to such a lofty peak is a result of your free-willed
authority in the debate of truth and falsehood. It is impossible that even gods
cannot distract a person from the mortal realm. Therefore, how can such a
boastful statement about the master be held in the heart? Even if it is held,
how can it be revealed to everyone? The Meru mountain, which is as tall as the
sky and reaches down to the roots of the underworld, which gods can lift like a
pebble with two hands, which can submerge the entire earth along with the
mountains, which can make the vast ocean like a small river, which can
effortlessly lift the massive earth burdened with countless mountains with its
club, what is a human being in front of such extraordinary powers, great valor,
and the ability to achieve anything simply by wishing? I will go to the person
praised by Indra and distract him from his meditation." Saying this, he struck
the earth with his hand and stood in the assembly hall. Indra tried to reason
with him, explaining that the Arihantdeva performs his unbroken austerities
without the help of others, but when he did not understand even a little, Indra
ignored the foolish god. The foolish god, being stubborn, left to distract the
Lord. Due to his departure, the wind blew fiercely, scattering the clouds. His
ferocious form made him appear terrifying. Apsaras (celestial nymphs) moved out
of his way in fear. He seemed to have gathered the celestial bodies by colliding
with them with his vast chest.  Thus, the wicked god arrived where the Lord was
standing in meditation, absorbed in his image. Seeing the peaceful Lord
Jagabandhu Shrivira in this way without any reason, he became even more envious.
First, the wicked god showered the Jagadguru Mahavira with an immeasurable
amount of dust. Just as Rahu covers the moon, and the clouds cover the sun, he
covered the entire body of the Lord with a shower of dust. The dust falling from
all sides closed the doors of his five senses, and his breathing became
obstructed. Still, the Jagadguru did not move even a little. Can elephants
ever...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 saMgamadeva dvArA bhagavAn mahAvIra para ghora upasarga yogazAstra prathama
prakAza zloka 3 sudhAmayI A~khoM kA kalyANa ho| isakA Azaya yaha hai ki aise
sAmarthyayoga se yukta prabhu ko hamArA vaMdana-namaskAra ho|| ukta bAta kI
puSTi ke lie mahAvIra prabhu ke jIvana kA eka vRtAMta de rahe haiMbhagavAna
mahAvIra kI mahAkaruNA : eka gA~va se dUsare gA~va aura eka zahara se dUsare
zahara vihAra karate hue bhagavAn mahAvIra eka bAra mleccha-kuloM kI bastI vAlI
'dRr3habhUmi' meM pdhaareN| aSTamabhakta-pratyAkhyAna (tele) kI tapasyA karake
ve peDhAlagA~va ke nikaTa per3hAla nAmaka vana meM polAza nAma ke maMdira meM
praveza kara eka prAsuka zilAtala para ArUr3ha hokara ghuTanoM taka hAtha laMbe
karake, zarIra ko jhukAkara apane sthira aMtaHkaraNa se A~kha baMda kiye binA
ekarAtri-saMbaMdhI mahApratimA dhAraNa karake dhyAnastha khar3e rhe| usa samaya
saudharmasabhA meM caurAsI hajAra sAmAnika devoM se parivRta, taiMtIsa
trAyastriMza, tIna pAriSadya, cAra lokapAla, asaMkhya prakIrNaka deva tathA
apane zarIra para cAroM ora se bakhtara aura hathiyAra bAMdhe, caurAsI hajAra
aMgarakSaka deva-senAoM se parivRta, sAta senApati, abhiyogika, kilviSika Adi
deva-deviyoM tathA tIna prakAra ke vAdya Adi se susajjita hokara vinodapUrNa
samaya bitAte hue, dakSiNa lokArdha ke rakSaka zakra nAma ke devendra ne
siMhAsana para baiThe-baiThe avadhijJAna se bhagavAn ko ukta sthiti meM jaanaa|
ve turaMta khar3e hue aura pAdukA tyAgakara uttarAsaMga dhAraNa kara, dAhinA
paira bhUmi para rakhakara aura bAMyA paira jarA U~cA karake bhUtala para
mastaka jhukAkara zakrastava (namutthuNaM) se bhagavAn kI stuti karane lge|
indra kA aMga-aMga pulakita ho rahA thaa| usane khar3e hokara sArI sabhA ko
saMbodhita karate hue kahA'saudharma devalokavAsI uttama devo! tumheM bhagavAn
mahAvIra kI adbhuta mahimA sunAtA hUM, suno| pA~ca samiti ke dhAraka, tIna gupti
se pavitra, krodha-mAna-mAyA aura lobha ko vaza karane vAle, Azravarahita,
dravya-kSetra-kAla aura bhAva meM nirmamatvI, vRkSa yA eka pudgala para dRSTi
ekAgra karake kAyotsarga (dhyAna) meM sthira mahAvIra svAmI ko deva, dAnava,
yakSa, | rAkSasa, nAgakumAra, manuSya yA tIna loka meM se koI bhI dhyAna se
vicalita karane meM samartha nahIM hai|' indra ke ye vacana sunakara eka
abhavya, gAr3hamithyAtvI saMgama nAmaka indra kA sAmAnika deva bhauMhe tAna
kara, vikarAla AMkheM banAkara, krodha se oTha cabAkara, A~khe lAla karate hue
bolA- 'he devendra! eka manuSya kA itanA bar3ha-car3hakara guNagAna karake use
U~ce zikhara para car3hAnA, satyAsatya ke vivAda meM ApakI svacchaMdatAyukta
prabhutA kA pariNAma hai| yaha asaMbhava hai ki martyaloka ke vyakti ko deva bhI
dhyAna se calAyamAna nahIM kara skte| ataH svAmI kA aisA uddhata vacana hRdaya
meM kaise dhAraNa kiyA jA sakatA hai? kadAcit dhAraNa bhI kara liyA gayA ho,
phira bhI use sabake sAmane prakaTa kaise kiyA jA sakatA hai? gaganacuMbI
uccazikharayukta evaM pAtAlamUlagAmI jisa meruparvata ko deva do hAthoM se Dhele
kI taraha uThAkara pheMka sakatA hai, parvatoM sahita samagra pRthvI ko DubA
sakatA hai| mahAsamudra ko choTI sI nadI ke samAna banA sakatA hai| aneka
parvatoM se bojhila vizAla pRthvI ko anAyAsa hI apane bhujadaMDa se uThA sakatA
hai, aisI asAdhAraNa Rddhi, mahAparAkrama aura icchAmAtra se kAryasiddhi kI
upalabdhi se yukta devoM ke sAmane manuSya kyA cIja hai? maiM abhI indra dvArA
prazaMsita vyakti ke pAsa jAkara use dhyAna se vicalita karatA huuN| yoM
kahakara hAtha se pRthvI ko Thokakara vaha deva sabhAmaMDapa meM A khar3A huaa|
indra ne use bahuterA samajhAyA ki zrI arihaMtadeva dUsaroM kI sahAyatA liye
binA svayaM akhaMDa tapa karate haiM' kintu jaba vaha raMcamAtra bhI nahIM
samajhA, taba indra ne usa durbuddhideva kI upekSA kii| durbuddhideva haThAgrahI
hokara bhagavAn ko vicalita karane ke lie vahA~ se claa| usake gamana se
pracaMDa vAyuvega ke kAraNa bAdala bhI bikharane lge| apanI raudra AkRti ke
kAraNa vaha mahAbhayaMkara dikhane lgaa| usake bhaya se apsarAe~ bhI mArga se
haTa gyii| vizAla vakSaHsthala se Takkara mArakara usane mAno grahamaMDala ko
ekatrita kara diye the| - isa prakAra vaha adhama deva vahA~ AyA, jahA~ bhagavAn
pratimA dhAraNa kara dhyAnastha khar3e the| akAraNa jagabaMdhu zrIvIraprabhu ko
isa prakAra se zAMta dekhakara use adhika IrSyA huii| sarvaprathama usa duSTa
deva ne jagadguru mahAvIra para aparimita dhUla kI varSA kii| jaise rAhU
caMdramA ko Dhaka detA hai, meghADaMbara sUrya ko Dhaka detA hai, vaise hI
dhUli-varSA se usane prabhu ke sAre zarIra ko Dhaka diyaa| cAroM ora se dhUla kI
vRSTi hone se unakI pAMcoM indriyoM ke dvAra baMda ho gaye, unakA zvAsocchvAsa
avaruddha-sA hone lgaa| phira bhI jagadguru raMcamAtra bhI calAyamAna nahIM hue|
kyA hAthiyoM se kabhI

Page #32 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Sangamdeva, driven by intense malice, created a terrible affliction.  Could the
three Kula Parvata mountains in the first light of Yoga Shastra be moved? Then,
that wicked one, having removed the dust, produced ants with vajramukhi
(diamond-like) mouths that tormented the Lord's every limb.  Those ants, with
needle-like, sharp mouths, climbed freely from one side of the Lord's body to
the other.  Like the desires of the unfortunate, the ants' torment also proved
futile.  Then he took the form of a dance.  Truly, "The evil deeds of the wicked
never end."  Taking the form of a dance, he bit the Lord's body in many places,
causing blood to flow like cow's milk.  The Lord appeared as if a waterfall was
flowing from a mountain.  When the Lord was not disturbed by such affliction,
the evil-minded Sangamdeva, eager to inflict a fierce bite, took the form of red
ants that could not be driven away by pain and deeply embedded their mouths in
the Lord's body.  At that time, those ants appeared as if the Lord's body had
suddenly become covered in goosebumps.  Even during such affliction, the Lord
remained steadfast in his yoga.  But the deva was determined to break his
concentration by any means.  Therefore, he created large, poisonous scorpions,
as fierce as the sparks of the fire of the apocalypse or like heated arrows,
with their twisted tails, they began to cut the Lord's body with their thorns.
When the Nath was not disturbed by that either, the deceitful deva created
weasels with sharp teeth, who, with a "khi-khi" sound, tore pieces of flesh from
the Lord's body with their teeth and dropped them to the ground.  When his
desire was still not fulfilled, in anger, he created serpents with fierce,
extremely hot fangs, like the arms of Yama Raja.  Just as a vine wraps around a
large tree, they wrapped around the Lord Mahavira's body from head to toe and
struck with their fangs in such a way that their fangs began to break.  They bit
so fiercely that their teeth broke.  They became venomless and fell like ropes.
After that, the merciless deva immediately created rats with vajra-like hard,
sharp claws and teeth.  They began to gnaw and eat the Lord's limbs with their
teeth and mouths.  And like sprinkling salt on a wound, they urinated on the
wounds they had inflicted.  But even when they were completely unsuccessful in
disturbing the Lord, the demon-possessed one took the form of an elephant with a
sharp, pestle-like tusk.  The earth trembled when its feet touched the ground,
and it raised its trunk so high that it seemed to measure the constellations and
the sky, and it crashed down on the Lord.  It grabbed the Lord with its powerful
trunk and threw him high into the sky.  With the intention of tearing him to
pieces when he fell, the elephant raised its tusk high and caught the falling
Lord on the tip of its tusk.  The Lord's vajra-like hard body struck his chest
when he landed on the tip of the tusk, causing sparks to fly.  Still, the poor
elephant could not even bend a hair on the Lord's head.  Then that deva created
a she-elephant like a Vaarini, who, with all her strength in her trunk and
tusks, tried to pierce the Lord's body and began to spray poisonous water on
him.  But the use of the she-elephant also came to naught.  Then that wicked
deva took the form of a terrifying demon, whose fangs were as fierce as a
crocodile's.  His mouth was as wide and terrifying as a fire pit filled with
many flames, open like a hollow.  His arms were as long as the torana pillars of
Yama Raja's palace.  His thighs were as tall and long as a palm tree.  He was
wearing leather clothes and carrying a dagger, laughing loudly, roaring,
sometimes giggling, trying to frighten the Lord.  He brought many calamities
upon the Lord.  But like a lamp that goes out when the oil runs out, that demon
was bewildered in front of the Lord, burning with anger.  Then, in anger, that
merciless deva immediately took the form of a lion and roared, flicked his tail,
as if tearing the earth apart, echoing through the sky and the earth with his
cruel roar, he crashed down on the Lord.  He began to attack the Lord
continuously with his vajra-like fangs and nail-like thorns.  When he was
unsuccessful in this, like a tree burned by a wildfire, the wicked deva took the
form of King Siddhartha and Trisala Devi and said to the Lord, "Son! Why are you
doing such an extremely difficult penance? Give up this initiation, do not
reject our request.  Nandivardhana has abandoned us in our old age, and we are
helpless.  Protect us."  Saying this, they both began to lament in a mournful
voice.  Even their lamentations did not move the Lord's heart.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 saMgamadeva kRta ghora upasarga yogazAstra prathama prakAza 3 kulaparvata
calAyamAna ho sakatA hai? phira usa duSTa ne dhUla haTAkara bhagavAn ke aMga-
aMga ko pIr3ita karane vAlI vajramukhI cITiyA~ utpanna kii| ve suI kI noka ke
samAna, tIkhe mukhAgra vAlI cITiyA~ prabhu ke zarIra ke eka ora se svecchA se
car3hakara dUsarI ora se utarane lgiiN| bhAgyahIna kI icchA kI taraha cIMTiyoM
kA upadrava bhI niSphala huaa| taba usane DAMsa kA rUpa bnaayaa| saca hai,
'durAtmAoM ke duSkRtya samApta nahIM hote|' DAMsa banakara jaba usane bhagavAn
ke zarIra para kaI jagaha DasA to usase gAya ke dUdha ke samAna rakta bahane
lgaa| usase bhagavAn aise pratIta hone lage mAno parvata se jharanA baha rahA
ho| aise upasarga se bhI jaba prabhu kSubdha nahIM hue to durmati saMgamadeva ne
atipracaMDa daMza dene meM tatpara evaM duHkha se haTAI jA sakane vAlI lAla
raMga kI cIMTiyoM kA rUpa banAyA aura prabhu ke zarIra meM apanA muMha gaharA
gaDA diyaa| usa samaya ve cITiyA~ aisI mAlama hotI thI. mAno prabhu ke zarIra
para eka sAtha roMgaTe khar3e ho gaye hoN| aise upasarga ke samaya bhI prabhu
apane yoga meM dRr3ha citta rhe| paraMtu deva to kisI bhI taraha se unakA
dhyAna-bhaMga karane para tulA huA thaa| ataH usane bar3e-bar3e jaharIle bicchU
banAye, ve pralayakAla kI Aga kI cinagAriyoM ke samAna yA tape hue bANa ke
samAna bhayaMkara Ter3hI paMcha karake apane kAMToM se prabhu ke zarIra ko
kATane lge| usase bhI jaba nAtha kSubdha nahIM hue to kUTa-saMkalpI deva ne
tIkhe dAMtoM vAle nevale banAye, ve khi-khi zabda karate hue dAMtoM se bhagavAn
ke zarIra se mAMsa ke TakaDe toDa toDakara nIce girAne lge| usase bhI jaba usakI
icchA pUrNa na haI to kraddha hokara usane yamarAja kI bAhoM ke samAna pracaMDa
evaM ati utkaTa phanoM vAle sarpa bnaaye| jaise mahAvakSa para bela lipaTa jAtI
hai, vaise hI mastaka se lekara paira taka prabhu mahAvIra ke zarIra se ve
lipaTa gaye aura phanoM se isa prakAra prahAra karane lage ki unake phana bhI
kaTane lge| unhoMne isa prakAra DasA ki unake dAMta bhI TUTa gye| ve nirviSa
banakara rassI kI taraha gira pdd'e| usake bAda nirdaya deva ne tatkAla
vajrasama kaThora tIkhe nakhoM evaM dAtoM vAle cUhe bnaae| ve apane dAMtoM aura
muMha se prabhu ke aMgoM ko noca-nocakara khAne lge| aura ghAva para namaka
chir3akane kI taraha kiye hue ghAva para pezAba karane lge| paraMtu aisA karane
para bhI jaba ve bhagavAn ko vicalita karane meM sarvathA asaphala rahe, taba
bhUtAviSTa aura mUsala ke samAna tIkhe daMtazUla vAle hAthI jaisA rUpa bnaayaa|
jisake paira dharatI para par3ate hI dharatI kAMpa uThatI thI aura mAno
nakSatramaMDala aura AkAza ko nApa legA, itanI U~cI sUMDa uThAkara prabhu para
TUTa pdd'aa| usane apanI pracaMDa sUMDa se prabhu ko pakar3akara AkAza meM
bahuta U~cA uchaalaa| nIce girate hI isake zarIra ke Tukar3e-Tukar3e ho jAyeMge,
isa badanIyata se phira hAthI ne apane daMtazUla ko U~cA uThAkara AkAza se
girate hue prabhu ko dAMta kI noka para jhela liyaa| dA~ta kI noka para par3ane
se bhagavAn kA vajramaya kaThora zarIra chAtI se TakarAyA, jisake kAraNa
cinagAriyA~ utpanna huii| phira bhI becArA hAthI bhagavAn kA bAla bhI bAMkA na
kara skaa| phira usa deva ne vairiNI ke samAna hathinI banAI, jisane apanI sUMDa
aura dAMta kI pUrI tAkAta lagAkara bhagavAn ke zarIra ko bhedana karane kA
prayatna kiyA aura usa para viSailA jala chIMTane lgii| magara hathinI kA
prayoga bhI miTTI meM mila gyaa| phira usa adhama deva ne bhayaMkara pizAca kA
rUpa banAyA, jisakI dAr3he magaramaccha ke samAna utkaTa thii| usakA mukha aneka
jvAlAoM se yukta agnikuMDa ke samAna bhayAnaka caur3A, khokhale ke samAna khulA
thaa| usakI bhujAe~ yamarAja ke mahala ke toraNa-staMbha ke samAna laMbI thii|
usakI jAMghe tAr3avRkSa ke samAna U~cI va laMbI thii| vaha camar3e ke vastra
pahane va kaTAra dhAraNa kiye hue atyaMta aTTahAsa karatA huA, phutkAra karatA
huA, kabhI kilakAriyAM karatA huA prabhu ko DarAne lgaa| usane bhagavAn para
anekoM AphateM ddhhaaii| magara tela samApta ho jAne para bujhe dIpaka kI taraha
vaha pizAca AgababUlA hokara prabhu ke sAmane hataprabha ho gyaa| taba krodha se
usa nirdayadeva ne ekadama siMha kA rUpa banAyA aura dahAr3atA huA, pUMcha
phaTakAratA huA, pRthvI ko mAno phAr3atA huA, AkAza aura pRthvI ko apane krUra
ninAda se gUMjAtA huA bhagavAn para TUTa pdd'aa| apanI vajrasama dAr3hoM va zUla
ke samAna nakhoM se vaha bhagavAn para lagAtAra AkramaNa karane lgaa| dAvAnala
se jale vRkSa ke samAna use isameM niSphalatA milane para duSTa deva ne
siddhArtha rAjA aura trizalAdevI kA rUpa banAkara prabhu se kahA-"putra! tUM
aisA atiduSkara tapa kyoM kara rahA hai? tUM yaha dIkSA chor3a de, hamArI
prArthanA ko mata tthukraa| vRddhAvasthA meM naMdIvarddhana ne hamArA tyAga kara
diyA hai aura hama nirAdhAra ho gaye haiN| tUM hamArI rakSA kr|" yoM kahate hue
ve donoM dIna svara se vilApa karane lge| unake aise vilApoM se bhI prabhu kA
hRdaya 10

Page #33 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Final Assault by Sangamdeva  Yoga Shastra, First Light, 3: He was not
disturbed by attachment. Therefore, the wicked god set up his army camp near the
Lord, where he was meditating. When the cooks could not find stones to build a
hearth, they used the Lord's two feet as a hearth and placed a pot on it. They
lit a fire below. It seemed as if a wildfire had erupted at the foot of a
mountain. Even though the intense flames burned fiercely, the Lord's body did
not lose its radiance, but instead, it grew brighter, like glowing gold. Then,
the wicked god created a settlement of wild Bhils, where the Bhils shouted
loudly. The Bhils hung cages of small birds around the Lord's neck, ears, arms,
and thighs. The birds pecked and clawed at the Lord's body, making it full of
holes. It looked like a cage with many holes. This experiment also proved futile
for the god, like a dry leaf. Then, he unleashed a great storm called Samvartak,
which made huge trees appear to fly in the sky like straws and then fall down.
Pebbles and stones flew like dust in every direction. He blew air like a
bellows, tossing the Lord up and down in the sky and throwing him down on the
earth. But even this great wind did not fulfill the god's desire. Then, the
disgrace of the gods unleashed a whirlwind called Vayu-vartul. This whirlwind,
which could shake large mountains, spun the Lord like a lump of clay on a
potter's wheel. But even when this whirlwind, like water in the ocean, spun the
Lord, he did not budge from his meditation. Then, the god thought, "Oh! This man
with a mind of iron has not been disturbed at all by the many kinds of tortures
I have inflicted on him. So, how can I go to the assembly of gods without
fulfilling my vow and disturbing his meditation? Therefore, it would be best to
find a way to end his life. Only then will his meditation be broken, otherwise
not." Thinking this, the wicked god created a solid, vajra-like Kalchakra (wheel
of time) weighing a thousand palas of iron. He lifted it up like Ravana had
lifted Mount Kailash. It was as if he had prepared another garment to wrap
around the earth. He lifted this Kalchakra up and threw it at the Lord. It fell
on the Lord like a wildfire in the ocean, making all directions terrifying with
its flames. The Lord sank into the ground up to his knees under the impact of
this wheel, which could pulverize large mountains. Even in this situation, the
Lord thought, "Even though I am eager to save all the creatures of the world, I
have become the cause of this poor fellow's wandering in the world." Sangamdeva
thought, "Oh! I have tried the final measure of using the Kalchakra, but he is
still alive. Therefore, I should try something else besides weapons. Perhaps he
will be disturbed by this assault in some way." With this intention, he came
before the Lord, sitting in his chariot, and said, "O great sage! I am satisfied
with you because of your virtue and the effect of the penance you have begun by
risking your life. Therefore, give up this penance that torments your body. What
is the benefit of such penance? Ask for whatever you want. Tell me, what can I
give you? Do not doubt this in the least; your desire will be fulfilled. Shall I
give you heaven through this body? Or shall I free you from the karmas of
countless births and give you liberation, which is the state of eternal bliss?
Or shall I give you an inexhaustible kingdom where all kings will obey your
commands?" When the Lord's mind did not waver even at these tempting words of
the god and he did not receive any reply from the Lord, the sinful god thought
again, "He has made all my experiments and powers unsuccessful. Now, only one
infallible measure remains, and that is the science of love. I will try that
too. Because, like the weapon of love, the sight of beautiful women breaks even
the masculinity of great yogis." With this determination in his mind, he created
celestial nymphs and the six seasons that help in their enjoyment. Along with
this, Vasant-Lakshmi, like the main dancer in the play of Kamadeva, adorned the
place with the sweet sounds of the mad cuckoo. The summer season, like a maid
who has learned art from her companions, shone brightly, spreading the fragrance
of her face with the pollen of blooming Kadamba flowers. The season of spring,
excited by the fragrant Kevada flowers, which were like auspicious tilak marks
at the coronation of Kamadeva, was adorned with...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 saMgamadeva dvArA aMtima upasarga yogazAstra prathama prakAza 3 Asakti meM
kSubdha nahIM huaa| ataH prabhu jahA~ dhyAnastha the, unake pAsa hI duSTa deva
ne senA kA par3Ava ddaalaa| vahA~ rasoiye | ko cUlhA banAne lie patthara nahIM
milA, to dhyAnastha prabhu ke donoM pairoM ko cUlhA banAkara usa para haMDiyA
rkhii| nIce Aga jlaaii| vaha aisI pratIta ho rahI thI, mAno parvata kI talahaTI
meM dAvAnala prakaTa huA ho| Aga kI pracaMDa jvAlAoM ke atyadhika jala jAne para
bhI prabhu ke zarIra kI kAMti phIkI na huI, balki tapta sone ke samAna
adhikAdhika bar3hatI hI gyii| taba usa adhama deva ne jaMgalI bhIloM kI bastI
banAyI, jahA~ bhIla loga jora-jora se cillAte the| bhIloM ne prabhu ke gale,
kAnoM, bAhoM aura jAMghoM meM kSudra pakSiyoM ke pIjare laTakA diye| jisase una
pakSiyoM ne coMca aura nakha mAramArakara prabhu kA zarIra chidramaya banA
ddaalaa| vaha aisA lagatA thA, mAno aneka chedoM vAlA koI pIjarA ho| deva ke lie
| yaha prayoga bhI pakke patte ke samAna niHsAra siddha huaa| taba usane
saMvartaka nAmaka mahAna aMdhar3a calAyA, jisase vizAla vRkSa tinake ke samAna
AkAza meM ur3ate aura phira nIce girate-se pratIta hone lge| pratyeka dizA meM
kaMkaDa-patthara dhUla ke samAna ur3ane lge| dhauMkanI kI taraha havA bharakara
bhagavAn ko vaha AkAza meM uchAla-uchAlakara nIce dharatI para pheMkane lgaa|
paraMtu usa mahAvAyu se bhI deva kA manoratha siddha na huA, taba usa deva-
kulakalaMka ne vAyu-vartula claayaa| bar3e-bar3e parvatoM ko hilA dene vAle usa
cakkaradAra aMdhar3a ne prabhu ko bhI, cAka para car3hAye hue miTTI ke piMDa ke
samAna ghumaayaa| paraMtu samudra ke aMdara jala ke samAna usa cakkaradAra
aMdhar3a ke calAne para bhI prabhu apane dhyAna se Tasa-se-masa nahIM hue| taba
deva socane lagA 'aho! vajramaya manobala vAle isa puruSa ko aneka prakAra kI
yAtanAe~ dene para jarA bhI kSubdha nahIM huaa| ataH aba maiM pratijJAbhraSTa
hokara ise dhyAna se vicalita kiye binA devasabhA meM kaise jAUM? isalie aba to
yahI acchA hogA ki isake prANanAza kA koI upAya kruuN| tabhI isakA dhyAnabhaMga
hogA, anyathA nhiiN| yoM vicArakara adhama deva ne eka hajArapala vajana vAle
lohe kA Thosa vajramaya kAlacakra banAyA aura rAvaNa ne jaise kailAzaparvata ko
uThAyA thA; vaise hI isa deva ne use utthaayaa| pRthvI ko lapeTane ke lie mAno
yaha dUsarA veSTana taiyAra kiyA ho, aise kAlacakra ko Upara uThAkara prabhu
para pheNkaa| nikalatI huI jvAlAoM se samasta dizAoM ko bhayaMkara banAtA huA,
samudra meM var3avAnala ke samAna vaha prabhu para giraa| bar3e-bar3e parvatoM
ko cUrNa karane meM samartha usa cakra ke prabhAva se bhagavAn ghuTane taka
jamIna meM dhaMsa gye| aisI sthiti meM bhI bhagavAn vicAra karane lage ki vizva
ke samagra jIvoM ko tArane kA abhilASI hone para bhI maiM isa becAre ke lie
saMsAra-paribhramaNa karAne kA nimitta banA huuN| _saMgamadeva ne vicAra
kiyA-'aho! maiMne kAlacakra ke prayoga kA aMtima upAya bhI ajamAyA, lekina yaha
to abhI bhI jItA-jAgatA baiThA hai| ataH aba zastra-astra ke alAvA aura koI
upAya karanA caahie| saMbhava hai upasarga se yaha kisI prakAra vicalita ho
jaay|' aisI nIyata se vimAna meM baiThe-baiThe vaha prabha ke Age Akara kahane
lagA-'he maharSi! tumhAre sattva se aura prANoM kI bAjI lagAkara prAraMbha kiye
gaye tapa ke prabhAva se maiM tuma para saMtuSTa huA huuN| ataH aba chor3o, isa
zarIra ko kleza dene vAle tapa ko| aise tapa se kyA lAbha? tuma jo cAho so mAMga
lo| bolo, maiM tumheM kyA-kyA de dUM? isa viSaya meM jarA bhI zaMkA mata karanA;
tumhArA jo manoratha hogA, pUrNa kiyA jaaygaa| kaho to maiM tumheM isa zarIra
dvArA hI svarga prApta karA dUM? yA kaho to anaMta-anaMta janmoM ke kiye hue
karmoM se mukta karake ekAMta paramAnaMdaprApti-svarUpa mokSa maiM tumheM prApta
karA dUM? athavA samasta rAjA tumhArI AjJA zirodhArya kareM, aisA akSaya-
saMpatti vAlA sAmrAjya tumheM dilA dUM? isa taraha kI deva kI pralobhanabharI
bAtoM se bhI jaba prabhu kA mana calAyamAna nahIM huA aura use koI pratyuttara
prabhu se nahIM milA to pApI deva ne phira yoM vicAra kiyA ki isane mere sAre
prayogoM aura zaktiyoM ko asaphala banA diyaa| aba to kevala eka hI amogha upAya
zeSa raha jAtA hai, vaha hai kAma-zAstra kaa| use bhI ajamAkara dekha luuN|
kyoMki kAma ke astra ke samAna kAminiyoM kI dRSTi par3ate hI bar3e-bar3e yogI
puruSoM taka kA bhI puruSatva khaMDita ho jAtA hai|' citta meM yoM nizciya
karake usane devAMganAe~ aura unake vilAsa meM sahAyaka chaha Rtue~ bnaayii|
sAtha hI unmatta kokilA ke madhura zabdoM se gUMjAyamAna kAmadeva nATaka kI
mukhya naTI ke samAna vasaMta-lakSmI vahA~ suzobhita hone lgii| vikasita
kadaMbapuSpoM ke parAga se mukha kI sugaMdha phailAtI huI dizA-baMdhuoM se kalA
sIkhI huI dAsI ke samAna grISma Rtu zobhAyamAna hone lgii| kAmadeva ke
rAjyAbhiSeka meM maMgalatilaka-rUpa kevar3e ke phUla ke bahAne se romAMcita 11

Page #34 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Decision to Compose the Yoga Shastra  The first volume of Yoga Shastra was
published in the fourth month of the rainy season. The autumn season, adorned
with newly bloomed lotuses, also shone brightly, displaying its magnificent
wealth with thousands of eyes. As if writing a proclamation of victory for
Kamadeva with fresh jasmine buds like white letters, the Hemant season also
arrived. The Hemant season, adorned like a courtesan with jasmine and Sindhuvar
flowers, was followed by the Shishir season, which also enhanced its beauty. In
this way, all four seasons appeared. Then, like the flag of Kamadeva, the
celestial maidens appeared. They played musical tunes like mantras to conquer
Kamadeva, revealing their limbs to the Lord. Many celestial maidens played the
Veena with the Gandhar raga, singing songs in rhythmic order. Others played the
Veena sweetly, expressing the rhythm in reverse and forward order, using their
full artistry. Many celestial maidens played three types of Mridanga, with deep
voices like clouds, using different types of beats and rhythms. Some celestial
maidens danced, creating wonder in the sky and on earth, with new and
captivating gestures and glances. Many maidens twisted their limbs and swayed,
showing their armpits, pretending to tie their broken garments and loose hair.
Many, under the pretense of acting with their long legs, repeatedly showed their
thighs and lower body, adorned with beautiful Gorocan paste and fair complexion.
Many goddesses pretended to tie the loose knot of their Ghaghra, revealing their
navel. Many, under the pretense of acting with their ivory-like hands, gestured
to embrace their limbs. Some maidens, under the pretense of tightly tying the
string of their inner garment below the waist, removed their upper saree,
revealing their buttocks. Many beautiful goddesses, under the pretense of
twisting their limbs, showed their firm and prominent breasts for a long time,
and said, "If you are free from attachment, then why do you create attachment in
us? If you are detached from the body, then why don't you offer us your chest?
And if you are merciful, then why don't you protect us from Kamadeva, who
suddenly draws his bow-shaped weapon? It is fine to scorn our love with
curiosity for a while, but it is not appropriate to hold onto this stubbornness
until death." And many other goddesses said, "Lord! Abandon your harshness and
make your mind gentle. Fulfill our desire. Do not ignore our prayers." In this
way, the Lord was not moved even a little by the songs, dances, musical
performances, gestures, and sweet words of love of the celestial maidens. In
this way, the entire night passed, enduring many favorable and unfavorable
obstacles. After this, Sangamdeva, the demon, obstructed the Lord's pure food
for six months and continued to create various disturbances. But in the end,
defeated and exhausted, he said to the Lord, "Bhattarak! Stay happily and travel
as you wish; now I am leaving." Thus, he left after six months, burdened with
heavy sins. The Lord's compassionate heart was moved, thinking, "Where will this
poor creature go with such sins? What will happen to him? Even I, the savior,
could not save him!" Thinking in this way, his eyes became moist with tears of
compassion.  In this way, after saluting the Ishtadev, he now presents the Yoga
Shastra, with the desire to speak about Yoga, the cause of the path to
liberation.  **4. श्रुताम्भोधेरधिगम्य, सम्प्रदायाच्च सद्गुरोः ।
स्वसंवेदनतश्चापि, योगशास्त्रं विरच्यते ॥४॥**  **Meaning:** Knowing from the
ocean of scriptures, from the tradition of the true Guru, and from my own
experience, I compose the Yoga Shastra.  **Decision to Compose the Yoga
Shastra:**  This verse states that it is appropriate to compose a Shastra after
deciding on the meaning of the word "Yoga" (knowledge). Therefore, to decide on
the meaning of Yoga, one must know three things: 1. From the scriptures, 2. From
the Guru tradition, and 3. From one's own experience. This 'Yoga Shastra' is
being composed after deciding on the meaning of the word "Yoga" through these
three methods. This is the same thing...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 yoga zAstra kI racanA kA nirNaya yogazAstra prathama prakAza 4 sAMgI varSARtu
bhI zobhAyamAna huii| naye-naye kamaloM ke bahAne se hajAroM nayana vAlI
banakara apanI utkRSTa saMpatti | ko dikhAtI huI zarad Rtu bhI suzobhita hone
lgii| mAno zveta akSara ke samAna tAje mogare kI kaliyoM se kAmadeva kI
jayaprazasti likha rahI ho; isa prakAra hemaMtaRtu bhI upasthita huii| mogarA
aura siMduravAra ke puSpoM se gaNikA kI taraha karane vAlI hemaMta ke samAna
sarabhita ziziraRta ne bhI apanI zobhA bddh'aaii| isa taraha cAroM tarapha sArI
Rtae~ prakaTa ho gyii| taba kAmadeva kI dhvajA ke samAna devAMganAe~ prakaTa
huii| unhoMne bhagavAn ke pAsa apane aMgopAMga kholakara dikhAte hue kAmadeva ko
jItane ke maMtrAstra ke samAna saMgIta kI tAna chedd'ii| kaI devAMganAe~ laya ke
krama se gaMdhArarAga se manohara vINA bajAtI huI gIta gAne lgiiN| aura ulaTe-
sIdhe krama se tAla vyakta karatI huI ve apanI pUrI kalA lagAkara
madhuratApUrvaka vINA bajA rahI thii| kitanI hI devAMganAe~ prakaTa rUpa meM
takAra-dhoMkAra ke bhedoM se megha-samAna gaMbhIra AvAja vAle tIna prakAra ke
mRdaMga bajA rahI thii| kitanI devAMganAe~ to AkAza aura dharatI para calatI huI
Azcarya paidA karane vAle naye-naye hAvabhAva se kaTAkSa karatI huI nRtya karane
lgiiN| kitanI hI aMganAe~ to aMga mor3atI va balakhAtI huI abhinaya karate
samaya TUTate hue kaMcuka aura zithila hue kezapAza ko bAMdhane kA abhinaya
karatI huI apanI bagaleM dikhAtI thiiN| kaI apane laMbe paira ke abhinaya ke
bahAne manohara gorocana kI lepa lagI huI aura gaura varNa vAlI, apanI jaMghA se
mUla bhAga ko bAra-bAra dikhAtI thii| kitanI hI deviyA~ ghAghare kI DhIlI huI
gAMTha ko majabUta bA~dhane kA nATaka karatI huI nAbhimaMDala dikhAtI thiiN| kaI
hastidaMta-samAna hAtha ke abhinaya ke bahAne se aMga ke gAr3ha AliMgana karane
kA izArA karatI thiiN| katipaya a~ganAe~ to kamara ke nIce ke aMdara ke vastra
kA nAr3A majabUtI se bA~dhane ke bahAne Upara kI sAr3I haTA kara apane nitaMba
batAne lagIM, kaI sulocanA deviyA~ aMga ko mor3ane ke bahAne chAtI para puSTa
aura unnata stanoM ko laMbe samaya taka dikhAne lagI aura kahane lagI ki 'yadi
Apa vItarAga haiM, to hama logoM meM rAga kyoM paidA karate haiM? zarIra se
nirapekSa haiM to hama logoM ko apanI chAtI kyoM nahIM arpaNa kara dete? aura
yadi Apa dayAla haiM, to phira acAnaka khIMce hue dhanuSya rUpa astra vAle
kAmadeva se hamArI rakSA kyoM nahIM karate? hamArI prema kI lAlasA para kautuka
se Apake dvArA tiraskAra karanA kucha samaya taka to ThIka hai, paraMtu mRtyu
paryanta isa haTha ko pakar3e rakhanA yogya nahIM hai| aura kitanI hI deviyA~
yoM kahane lagIM-'svAmin! kaThoratA kA parityAgakara apanA mana komala bnaao|
hamArA manoratha pUrNa kro| hamArI prArthanA kI upekSA na kro|' isa taraha
devAMganaoM ke gIta, nRtya, vAdya-vilAsa, hAvabhAva tathA | prema kI mIThI-mIThI
bAtoM se jagadguru tilabhara bhI nahIM ddige| isa taraha anekoM anukUla aura
pratikUla upasarga sahana karate-karate sArI rAta bIta gyii| isake bAda
asuradharmI saMgamadeva ne chaha mahIne taka prabhu ko zuddha AhAra milane meM
vighna upasthita kiye aura taraha-taraha ke upadrava karatA gyaa| kintu aMta meM
hAra-thakakara vaha bhagavAn se bolA- 'bhaTTAraka! Apa sukha se raho aura
icchAnusAra bhramaNa karo; aba maiM jAtA huuN|' isa prakAra vaha bhArI pApakarma
bA~dhakara chaha mahIne ke aMta meM gyaa| bhagavAn kA karuNAI hRdaya pasIja uThA
ki isa prakAra ke pApakarma se yaha becArA kahA~ jAyegA? isakI kyA gati hogI?
mere jaisA tAraka bhI ise tAra nahIM sakA! isa prakAra ciMtana karate-karate
unakI AMkheM karuNA ke A~suoM se Ardra ho gyii| isa taraha iSTadeva ko namaskAra
kara mokSamArga ke kAraNabhUta yoga ke saMbaMdha meM kahane kI icchA se aba vaha
yogazAstra prastuta karate haiM  / 4 /  zrutAmbhodheradhigamya, sampradAyAcca
sadguroH  /  svasaMvedanatazcApi, yogazAstraM viracyate  // 4 //  artha :-
siddhAMta rUpI samudra se, sadguru-paraMparA se aura svAnubhava se jAnakara maiM
yoga-zAstra kI racanA karatA huuN||4|| | yogazAkha kI racanA kA nirNaya :
prastuta zloka meM batAyA hai ki yogapada kA nirNaya (jJAna) karane ke bAda
zAstra racanA karanA ucita hai| isalie yoga ke nirNaya ke lie tIna hetu jAnanA -
1.zAstra se, 2. guru-paraMparA se aura 3. apane anubhava se| ina tInoM prakAroM
se yogazabda kA nirNaya kara isa 'yogazAstra' kI racanA kI jA rahI hai| isI bAta
12

Page #35 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Greatness of Yoga: Pride and Detachment in the Form of Sanatkumara
Chakravarti  The Yoga Shastra, in the first light, verses 5 and 6, states that
this Yoga Shastra is being composed based on the ocean of Agamas, the words of
our Gurus, and our own experience. This will be stated again at the end of this
text. What I have learned from the Shastra, the Guru's words, and my own
experience, is the Upanishad of Yoga, which will amaze the minds of the wise.
Therefore, at the earnest request of King Kumarapala of the Chalukya dynasty,
Acharya Bhagwan Shri Hemchandrasuri Shwarji has composed this Yoga Shastra
through his words. ||4|| Now, we will explain the greatness of Yoga. ||5||  Yoga
is a sharp axe that cuts through the thicket of all kinds of calamities, and it
is a charm that subdues the Lakshmi of liberation, free from herbs, mantras, and
tantras. ||5||  **Meaning:** Yoga is like a sharp axe that cuts through the
thicket of all kinds of calamities, both spiritual, material, and divine. It
destroys the fruits of evil deeds. The second half of the verse explains that
Yoga leads to the attainment of the ultimate goal of liberation, the Lakshmi of
liberation. In the world, to perform charms, one has to use herbs, mantras, and
tantras, but Yoga is an infallible means of subduing the Lakshmi of liberation
without herbs, mantras, and tantras. ||5||  **Implication:** How can the work of
calamities be destroyed without removing the cause? Therefore, we speak of Yoga,
which destroys the sins that are the root cause. ||5||  **Verse 6:** Even great
sins are destroyed by Yoga, like dense clouds are scattered by a fierce wind.
||6||  **Meaning:** Just as a fierce wind scatters a series of dense clouds, so
too, many sins are destroyed by the influence of Yoga. ||6||  **Question:** It
is possible that sins acquired in one birth may be destroyed by the influence of
Yoga, but how can the destruction of many sins acquired over countless births be
possible through Yoga? We answer this in the next verse. ||6||  **Verse 7:**
Yoga destroys even sins acquired over a long time, just as a fierce fire burns
up accumulated firewood in an instant. ||7||  **Meaning:** Just as a fierce fire
burns up firewood accumulated over a long time in an instant, so too, Yoga
destroys sins accumulated over countless births in an instant. ||7||  We also
explain another fruit of Yoga. ||8||  **Verse 8:** The yogi obtains all
medicinal wealth (powerful) like phlegm, mucus, excrement, touch, etc., and the
ability to perceive the objects of all senses through any one sense, this is the
wonder of the practice of Yoga. ||8||  **Explanation:** For the yogi, phlegm,
mucus, excrement, earwax, tooth decay, eye and tongue dirt, touch of hands,
etc., excrement, urine, hair, nails, etc., all these things, whether spoken or
unspoken, become medicinal in nature due to the influence of Yoga. They act as
medicine. What medicines do, these things can do. Not only that, but Yoga also
grants the abilities (powers) of anima, etc., and the ability to perceive all
senses through one sense. It was the influence of Yoga that enabled yogis like
Sanatkumara to obtain the power to cure all diseases through phlegm points due
to the influence of their Yoga. ||8||  Below, we present the example of
Sanatkumara Chakravarti.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 yoga mAhAtmya, sanatkumAra cakravartI ko rUpa para garva aura vairAgya
yogazAstra prathama prakAza zloka 5 se 6 ko batAne ke lie kahate haiM ki Agama
rUpI samudra se, apane gurujanoM ke mukha se aura svAnubhava se nirNaya kara
yaha yoga-zAstra racA jA rahA hai| yahI bAta isa graMtha ke aMta meM kheNge|
zAstra se, guru ke mukha se aura apane anubhava se jo kucha maiMne jAnA hai,
vaha yoga kA upaniSad vivekiyoM kI pariSad ke citta ko camatkRta karane vAlA
hai| ataH caulukyavaMza ke rAjA kumArapAla kI atyaMta prArthanA se AcArya
bhagavAn zrI hemacaMdrasUrIzvarajI ne vANI ke mAdhyama se isa yogazAstra kI
racanA kI hai||4|| aba yoga kA hI mAhAtmya batAte haiN|5| yogaH
sarvavipadvallIvitAne parazuH zitaH  /  amUlamantratantraM ca, kArmaNaM
nirvRtizriyaH  /  / 5 /  /  artha :- yoga sarva-vipatti rUpI latAoM ke samUha ko
kATane ke lie tIkhIdhAra vAlA kuThAra hai tathA mokSa-lakSmI ko vaza karane ke
lie yaha jar3I-bUTI, maMtra aura taMtra se rahita kArmaNa vazIkaraNa hai||5||
Azaya :- yoga AdhyAtmika, bhautika, daivika sarva-vipatti rUpI latA samUha kA
chedana karane ke lie tIkSNa parazu ke samAna hai| vaha anarthaphala kA nAza
karatA hai| uttarArddha ke Adhe zloka se yoga se parama puruSArtha mokSalakSmI
kI prApti batAyI hai| jagat meM kArmaNa (jAdU) karane ke lie jar3I-bUTI, maMtra-
taMtra kI vidhi karanI par3atI hai, paraMtu yoga jar3I-bUTI, maMtra aura taMtra
ke binA hI mokSa-lakSmI ko vaza karane kA amogha upAya hai||5|| kAraNa ko dUra
kiye binA vipatti rUpI kArya kA nAza kaise ho sakatA hai? isI hetu se
kAraNabhUta pApoM kA nAza karane vAle yoga ke bAre meM kahate haiN|6|
bhUyAMso'pi hi pApmAnaH, pralayaM yAnti yogataH  /  caNDavAtAd ghanaghanA,
ghanAghanaghaTA iva  // 6 //  artha :- pracaMDa vAyu se jaise ghane bAdaloM kI
zreNI bikhara jAtI hai, vaise hI yoga ke prabhAva se bahuta se pApa bhI . naSTa
ho jAte haiN||6|| prazna hotA hai ki eka janma meM upArjita kiye hue pApa yoga
ke prabhAva se kadAcit naSTa ho sakate haiM; kintu janmajanmAMtara meM upArjita
aneka pApoM kA vinAza yoga se kaise ho sakatA hai? isakA uttara kahate haiM 7 /
kSiNoti yogaH pApAni, cirakAlArjitAnyapi  /  pracitAni yathaidhAMsi,
kSaNAdevAzuzukSaNiH  /  / 7 /  /  artha :- jaise cirakAla se ikaTThI kI huI
lakar3iyoM ko pracaMDa agni eka kSaNa meM jalA detI hai| vaise hI anekAneka
bhavoM ke cirasaMcita pApoM ko bhI yoga kSaNabhara meM kSaya kara detA hai  /  /
7 /  /  yoga kA dUsarA phala bhI batAte haiN18| kaphavipuNmalAmarza, -
sarvauSadhi-maharddhayaH  /  sambhinnasrotolabdhizca, yogaM tANDavaDambaram  //
8 //  artha :- yogI ko kapha, zleSma, viSThA, sparza Adi sabhI auSadhimaya
mahAsaMpadAe~ (prabhAvazAlI) tathA saMbhinnasrotalabdhi (kisI bhI eka indriya se
sArI indriyoM ke viSayoM kA jJAna ho jAne kI zakti) prApta honA yogajanita
abhyAsa kA hI camatkAra hai||8|| vyAkhyA :- yogI ke kapha, zleSma, viSThA, kAna
kA maila, dAMta kA maila, A~kha aura jIbha kA maila, hAtha Adi kA sparza,
viSThA, mUtra, keza, nakha Adi kathita yA akathita sabhI padArtha yoga ke
prabhAva se auSadhi rUpa bana jAte hai| ve auSadhi kA kAma karate haiN| jo kAma
auSadhiyA~ karatI haiM, vahI kAma kaphAdi kara sakate haiN| itanA hI nahIM; yoga
se aNimAdi saMbhinnasrota Adi labdhiyA~ (zaktiyA~) bhI prApta hotI hai| yaha
yoga kA hI prabhAva thA ki sanatkumAra jaise yogI ko apane yoga-prabhAva se
kaphabinduoM dvArA saba roga miTAne kI zakti prApta huii||8|| nIce hama
sanatkumAra cakravartI kA dRSTAMta de rahe haiM

Page #36 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Benefits of Yoga  **Yoga Shastra, First Light, Verse 8, The Story of
Sanatkumar Chakravarti:**  In the city of Hastinapur, the fourth Chakravarti
named Sanatkumar ruled over six regions. Once, in the assembly of the gods,
Indra Maharaj, filled with wonder, praised his unparalleled beauty and wealth,
saying, "The appearance of Sanatkumar Chakravarti, the crown jewel of the Kuru
dynasty, is unmatched in the heavens or on earth."  Not believing this praise,
two gods named Vijay and Vaijayant came to the mortal realm to test Sanatkumar.
They assumed the form of Brahmins and approached the gatekeeper of Sanatkumar's
palace to see his form. At that time, Sanatkumar was preparing for his bath,
having removed all his clothes and wearing only a loincloth, while receiving an
oil massage. The gatekeeper informed Sanatkumar Chakravarti about the arrival of
the two Brahmins at the gate. The just Chakravarti immediately granted them
entry.  Seeing Sanatkumar, the two gods, their eyes wide with wonder, shook
their heads and pondered, "Oh! His forehead is like the moon on the eighth
night, his eyes reach his ears, his body radiates a brilliance that surpasses
the blue lotus. His lips are like ripe bimba fruit, his ears like conch shells,
his neck surpasses even the Panchajanya conch, his arms rival the trunk of an
elephant, his chest steals the glory of Mount Meru, his waist is like the belly
of a lion cub. What more can we say, the beauty of his entire body is beyond
description. Oh! We cannot comprehend the loveliness of his radiance, like the
moonlight, bathing his body in the flow of the river. His form is even more
magnificent than Indra Maharaj described."  The great ones never speak
falsehood. At that moment, the Chakravarti spoke, "O learned Brahmins, what is
the purpose of your visit?" They replied, "O Narasimha! Your form is
extraordinary and wondrous in this world of moving and unmoving beings. Hearing
descriptions of your form from far and wide, a desire to see it arose in our
hearts, and that is why we have come here. Until today, we had only heard
descriptions of your wondrous form, but never seen it with our own eyes. Now,
seeing your form, our eyes are satisfied."  Smiling, Sanatkumar said, "O learned
Brahmins! The radiance of an oiled body is nothing. Stay a while, sit down, and
wait until I have finished my bath. See, when I am adorned with various wondrous
garments and precious ornaments, then behold my form, like golden studded with
jewels."  Saying this, Sanatkumar bathed, donned his garments and ornaments, and
sat on his throne in the royal court, shining like the moon in the sky. The king
immediately summoned the two Brahmins. Standing before the king, they gazed at
his form and thought, "Where is that form and radiance, and where is this faded
form and loveliness now? Truly, all things in the world are transient."  The
king asked, "O learned Brahmins! You were delighted to see me earlier, why is
your face now so gloomy?" Then, with words like nectar, they said, "O great one!
We are both gods, residents of the Saudharma heaven. Indra Maharaj praised your
form in the assembly of the gods. We did not believe his words. Therefore, we
assumed the form of humans and came here to see your form. We saw your form, as
described by Indra Maharaj, in its true form earlier. But now, that form is no
longer the same. Just as a mirror becomes tarnished by breath, so too has the
radiance of your body become tarnished. Your form has become distorted, your
loveliness faded. Your body is now surrounded by many diseases."  Having spoken
the truth, the two gods disappeared.  The king looked at his lifeless body, like
a scorched tree. He thought, "This body, always like a house of disease, is to
be condemned! Foolish fools, with dull minds, are attached to it in vain. Just
as a large log is eaten by terrible worms, so too are various kinds of terrible
diseases, born in the body, eating away at it. No matter how good this body may
appear from the outside, it is full of worms inside, like a ripe fruit. Just as
the beauty of a magnificent lake is destroyed when algae covers its water, so
too is the beauty of this body destroyed when disease covers it."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 yoga ke prabhAva se prApta labdhiyA~ yogazAstra prathama prakAza zloka 8
sanatkumAra cakravartI kI kathA : hastinApura nagara meM SaTkhaNDAdhipati
sanatkumAra nAmaka cauthA cakravartI rAjya karatA thaa| eka bAra sudharmA nAma
kI devasabhA meM indra mahArAja ne vismita hokara usakI apratima rUpa saMpadA kI
prazaMsA kI-'kuruvaMza-ziromaNi sanatkumAra cakravartI kA jisa prakAra kA rUpa
hai, vaisA Aja devaloka meM yA manuSyaloka meM kisI kA bhI nahIM hai|' isa
prakAra kI rUpa-prazaMsA para vizvAsa na karake vijaya aura vaijayaMta nAma ke
do deva sanatkumAra kI parIkSA karane ke lie martyaloka meM aaye| una donoM
devoM ne yahA~ Akara brAhmaNa kA rUpa banAyA aura sanatkumAra ke rUpa ko dekhane
ke lie usake rAjamahala ke dvAra para dvArapAla ke pAsa aaye| sanatkumAra bhI
usa samaya snAna karane kI taiyArI meM thaa| sabhI pozAka kholakara vaha kevala
eka kaTivastra pahane hue tela mAliza karavA rahA thaa| dvArapAla ne daravAje
para khar3e do brAhmaNoM ke Agamana ke bAre meM sanatkumAra cakravartI se
nivedana kiyaa| ataH nyAyasaMpanna cakravartI ne usI samaya unakA praveza
kraayaa| sanatkumAra ko dekhakara vismaya se A~khe tarerate hue ve donoM deva
sira hilAte hue vicAra karane lage-aho! aSTamI kI rAtri ke candrasadRza isakA
lalATa hai, kAna taka pahuMce hue do netra haiM, nIla-kamala ko mAta karane vAlI
isakI zarIra-kAMti hai? pakke biMbaphala ke samAna kAMtimaya oTha haiM, sIpa ke
samAna do kAna haiM, pa~cajanya zaMkha se bhI zreSTha isakI gardana hai, hAthI
kI sUMDa ko mAta karane vAle do hAtha haiM, meruparvata kI zobhA ko bhI haraNa
karane vAlA isakA vakSaHsthala hai, siMha-zizu ke udara ke samAna isakI kamara
hai, adhika kyA kaheM, isake pUrNa zarIra kI zobhA varNanAtIta hai| aho!
caMdramA kI cAMdanI ke samAna isake lAvaNya ko nadI ke pravAha meM snAna karake
zarIra ko svaccha karane vAlA hama nahIM jAna skte| iMdramahArAja | ne isake
rUpa kA jaisA varNana kiyA thA, usase bhI adhika uttama isakA rUpa hai|
mahApuruSa kabhI asatya nahIM bolate itane meM cakravartI bolA-'vipravaro, Apa
donoM yahA~ kisa prayojana se Aye haiM?' taba unhoMne kahA 'he narasiMha! isa
carAcara jagat meM tumhArA rUpa lokottara aura AzcaryakArI hai| dUra-dUra se
tumhAre rUpa kA varNana sunakara hamAre mana meM ise dekhane kA kutUhala paidA
huA, isa kAraNa hama yahA~ Aye haiN| Aja taka hamane Apake adbhuta rUpa kA
varNana sunA thA, A~khoM se dekhA nahIM thA; paraMtu Aja ApakA rUpa dekhakara
A~khoM ko tRpti huii| taba muskarAkara sanatkumAra ne kahA'vipravaro! tela
mAliza kiye hue zarIra kI kAMti to kucha bhI nahIM hai; kucha dera Thaharo,
baiTho aura merA snAna ho jAya taba taka jarA iMtajAra kro| dekho, jaba maiM
aneka AzcaryakArI vividha veSa-bhUSA aura bahumUlya AbhUSaNoM se susajjita ho
jAU~, taba ratnajar3ita suvarNa ke samAna merA rUpa dekhnaa|' yoM kahakara
sanatkumAra snAna karake veSa-bhUSA evaM alaMkAra Adi dhAraNa karake AkAza meM
caMdra kI taraha suzobhita hokara rAja sabhA meM siMhAsana para baitthe| rAjA ne
usI samaya donoM brAhmaNoM ko bulaayaa| ataH rAjA ke sAmane Akara rAjA ke rUpa
ko nihArakara donoM vicAra karane lage-'kahA~ vaha rUpa evaM kAMti aura kahA~
aba kA yaha phIkA rUpa aura lAvaNya! sacamuca saMsAra ke sabhI padArtha kSaNika
hai|' rAjA ne pUchA'vipravaro! pahale mujhe dekhakara Apa harSita hue the; aba
ApakA mukha viSAda se ekadama malina kyoM ho gayA?' taba amRtopama vacanoM se ve
kahane lage-'he mahAbhAga! hama donoM saudharma devaloka ke nivAsI deva haiN|
indramahArAja ne devasabhA meM Apake rUpa kI prazaMsA kI thI! unake kathana para
hameM vizvAsa nahIM huaa| ataH hama manuSya kA rUpa banAkara ApakA | rUpa
dekhane ke lie yahA~ Aye haiN| iMdramahArAja dvArA varNita ApakA rUpa pahale
hamane yathArtha rUpa meM dekhA thA; paraMtu vartamAna meM vaha rUpa vaisA nahIM
rahA hai| jaise nizvAsa se darpaNa malina ho jAtA hai, vaise hI aba ApakI zarIra
kI kAMti malina ho gayI hai| ApakA rUpa vikRta ho gayA hai, lAvaNya phIkA par3a
gayA hai| aba ApakA zarIra aneka rogoM se ghirA huA hai|' isa taraha saca-saca
bAta batAkara ve donoM deva adRzya ho gye| rAjA ne jhulase hue vRkSa ke samAna
apane nisteja zarIra ko dekhaa| vaha vicAra karane lagA-sadaiva roga ke ghara ke
samAna isa zarIra ko dhikkAra hai! maMdabuddhi mUrkha vyartha hI isa para mamatA
karate haiN| jaise bar3e lakkar3a ko bhayaMkara ghuna khAte haiM; vaise hI
zarIra meM utpanna hue vividha prakAra ke bhayaMkara roga isa zarIra ko khA jAte
haiN| bAhara se yaha zarIra cAhe kitanA hI acchA dikhe, magara bar3a ke phala ke
samAna aMdara se to kIr3oM se vyAsa hotA hai| jaise suzobhita mahAsarovara ke
pAnI para zaivAla chA jAne se usakI zobhA naSTa ho jAtI hai, vaise hI isa zarIra
para roga chA jAne se vaha isakI rUpa saMpatti 14

Page #37 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The various benefits obtained from the influence of yoga The first light verse 8
of Yoga Shastra destroys it. The body becomes loose, but hope does not become
loose; the form goes away, but the sinful mind does not go away; old age
increases, but knowledge does not increase. Damn, such a form of worldly beings!
Like a drop of dew on the tip of a blade of grass, all things in this world,
such as form, beauty, radiance, body, wealth, etc., are fickle. The nature of
the body was today, it will not remain tomorrow. Therefore, it is the cause of
attaining great fruits to perform penance with this body and to make the karma
of desires dry (diminish). Thus, immersed in the feeling of detachment, the
Chakravarti awakened the desire to take Muni initiation. He immediately crowned
his son and handed over the kingdom, and himself went to the garden with
humility and took Muni initiation from Shri Vinayadhar Suriji and adopted the
restraint of the form of all virtues. Wearing the great vows and the subsequent
virtues, the Rajarshi wandered from village to village with equanimity and
single-minded devotion. Just as his community follows behind the leader of the
herd of elephants, so did the people follow behind the Rajarshi with deep
affection. The people of that kshayarahit, indifferent, selfless, and non-
possessive Rajarshi served for six months. Still, their mind did not want to
return in any way. (Then the family went away) They used to take alms as per the
rules. Due to not getting food on time and eating unwholesome food, many
diseases took up residence in their body. Itching, swelling, fever, breathing,
loss of appetite, stomach ache and eye pain, the Rajarshi endured the pain of
these seven types of diseases with equanimity for seven hundred years. By
enduring all the unbearable hardships and not taking any measures to prevent
them, he obtained many benefits. At that time, out of wonder in his heart, Indra
Maharaj praised that Muni in front of the gods - 'Leaving the glory of being a
Chakravarti like a burning blade of grass, this Sanatkumar Muni is doing
difficult penance, due to the influence of penance, he has obtained all the
benefits. Still, he is indifferent to his body. Even they do not treat their
diseases.' On Indra's words, the gods named Vijay and Vaijayant did not believe,
so they came to Sanatkumar Muni in the form of a physician and said - 'Fortunate
Muni! Why are you suffering from illness? We both are physicians. We treat
patients all over the world, and you are sick | So give us permission! We will
cure your disease in one day.' Hearing this, Sanatkumar Muni replied - 'Doctors!
This creature has two types of diseases - one is physical disease and the other
is emotional disease. Anger, pride, illusion and greed etc. are emotional
diseases, which are suffered by the soul who has a body and follow the creature
for thousands of births and give immense suffering. If you can cure those
diseases, then treat them. But if you only cure the physical diseases of the
body | | Then I also have the power to cure such diseases.' Saying this, he
applied his phlegm on his rotten finger filled with pus. Just as copper starts
to shine when applying Siddha Rasa, so that finger started to shine like gold
when applying phlegm. Seeing the finger like a golden needle, those gods fell at
his feet and said - 'Muni! We are the same gods who came to see your form
before. Indra Maharaj had said that 'even after obtaining benefits, Sanatkumar
Rajarshi is doing wonderful penance by voluntarily enduring the pain of
disease.' That is why we came here. We have come here and tested you directly.
You passed in it.' Saying this, both the gods saluted him and became invisible.
We have given one example of the benefit of the phlegm they obtained. They had
many other benefits | obtained, but we do not describe them here for fear of the
book becoming too long. Other benefits obtained from the influence of yoga:. Due
to the influence of yoga, the yogi's excreta is also capable of destroying
diseases and it also has the fragrance of a lotus | also comes. The excreta of
all body-bearers is considered to be of two types. One is the one that comes out
of the ears, eyes etc. and the other is the excreta, urine, sweat etc. that
comes out of the body. The yogis have such a powerful effect of yoga that their
aforementioned two types of excreta remove the diseases of all patients. Both
the aforementioned types of excreta have the fragrance of musk. 15

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 yoga ke prabhAva se prApta hone vAlI vividha labdhiyA~ yogazAstra prathama
prakAza zloka 8 ko barbAda kara detA hai| zarIra zithila ho jAtA hai, magara AzA
zithila nahIM hotI; rUpa calA jAtA hai, paraMtu pApabuddhi nahIM jAtI;
vRddhAvasthA bar3hatI jAtI hai, paraMtu jJAnavRddhi nahIM hotii| dhikkAra hai,
saMsArI jIvoM ke aise svarUpa ko! ghAsa kI noka para par3e osabindu ke samAna
isa saMsAra meM rUpa, lAvaNya, kAMti, zarIra, dhana Adi sabhI padArtha caMcala
hai| zarIra kA svabhAva Aja thA, vaha kala nahIM rhtaa| ataH isa zarIra se
tapasyA karake karmoM kI sakAma nirjarA karanA (kSINa karanA) yahI mahAphala-
prApti kA kAraNa hai| isa prakAra vairAgyabhAvanA meM DUbe hue cakravartI ko
muni dIkSA lene kI abhilASA jAgRta huii| usane tatkAla apane putra ko
rAjyAbhiSikta karake rAjapATa sauMpa diyA aura svayaM vinayapUrvaka udyAna meM
jAkara zrI vinayadharasUrijI ke pAsa munidIkSA lekara sarvasAvadyavirati rUpa
saMyama aMgIkAra kiyaa| mahAvratoM aura uttaraguNoM ko dhAraNa kara rAjarSi eka
gAMva se dUsare gAMva samatAbhAva se ekAgracitta hokara vihAra karate the|
hAthiyoM ke yUthapati ke pIche-pIche jaise usakA samudAya calatA hai, vaise hI
rAjarSi ke pIche-pIche gAr3ha-anurAga se prajAmaMDala calane lgaa| una
kaSAyarahita, udAsIna, mamatvarahita, niSparigraha rAjarSi kI prajA ne chaha
mahIne taka sevA kii| phira bhI kisI prakAra bhI vApasa lauTane kA unakA mana
nahIM hotA thaa| (taba parivAra calA gayA) ve yathAvidhi bhikSA grahaNa karate
the| bhojana samaya para na milane se tathA apathya bhojana karane se aneka
vyAdhiyoM ne unake zarIra meM DerA jamA liyaa| khujalI, sUjana, bukhAra, zvAsa,
aruci, peTa meM darda aura AMkhoM meM vedanA, ina sAta prakAra kI vyAdhiyoM kI
vedanA ko sAtasau varSa taka rAjarSi ne samatA pUrvaka sahana kiyaa| samagra
duHsaha pariSahoM ke sahana karane se tathA unake nivAraNa kA upAya nahIM karane
se unheM aneka labdhiyAM prApta ho gyii| usa samaya hRdaya meM Azcarya hone se
indra mahArAja ne devoM ke sAmane usa muni kI prazaMsA kI-'jalate hue ghAsa ke
pule ke samAna cakravartI-pana kA vaibhava chor3akara yaha sanatkumAra muni
duSkara tapa kara rahe haiM, tapa ke prabhAva se unheM samasta labdhiyAM prApta
huI hai| phira bhI ve apane zarIra ke prati nirapekSa hai| yahAM taka ki apane
rogoM kI cikitsA bhI nahIM krte|' indra ke isa vacana para vijaya aura
vaijayaMta nAmaka devoM ko vizvAsa na hone se ve vaidya kA rUpa banAkara
sanatkumAra muni ke pAsa Aye aura kahane lage-'bhAgyazAlI munivara! Apa roga se
kyoM duHkhI hote haiM? hama donoM vaidya haiN| hama sAre vizva ke rogiyoM kI
cikitsA karate haiM, aura Apa rogagrasta haiM | to hameM AjJA dIjie na! hama eka
hI dina meM ApakA roga miTA dete haiN|' yaha sunakara sanatkumAra muni ne
pratyuttara diyA'cikitsako! isa jIva ko do prakAra ke roga hote haiM-eka to
dravyaroga aura dUsarA bhaavrog| krodha, mAna, mAyA aura lobha Adi bhAvaroga
hai, jo zarIradhArI AtmAoM ko hote haiM aura hajAroM janmoM taka jIva ke sAtha
calate haiM aura asIma duHkha dete haiN| agara Apa una rogoM ko miTA sakate hoM
to cikitsA kiijie| kintu yadi kevala zarIra ke dravyaroga miTAte hoM| | to aise
roga miTAne kI zakti to mere pAsa bhI hai|' yoM kahakara unhoMne mavAda se bharI
apanI sar3I aMgulI para apane | kapha kA lepa kiyaa| siddharasa kA lepa karate
hI jaise tAMbA camakane lagatA hai, vaise hI vaha aMgulI kapha kA lepa karate hI
sone-sI camaka ne lgii| sone kI salAI ke samAna aMgulI dekhakara ve deva unake
caraNoM meM gira par3e, aura kahane lage-'munivara! hama ve hI deva haiM, jo
pahale ApakA rUpa dekhane Aye the| indra mahArAja ne kahA thA ki 'labdhiyAM
prApta hone para bhI sanatkumAra rAjarSi svecchA se vyAdhi kI pIr3A sahana
karate hue adbhuta tapa kara rahe haiN|' isI kAraNa hama yahA~ Aye haiN| hamane
yahA~ Akara ApakI pratyakSa parIkSA kii| usameM Apa uttIrNa hue|' yoM kahakara
ve donoM devatA unheM namaskAra karake adRzya ho gye| unako prApta kaphalabdhi
kA to eka udAharaNa hamane diyA hai| unheM dUsarI aneka labdhiyA~ | prApta thIM,
paraMtu graMtha bar3ha jAne ke Dara se hama unakA varNana yahA~ nahIM krte| yoga
ke prabhAva se prApta anya labdhiyA~ :. yoga ke prabhAva se yogI puruSa kI
viSThA bhI roga nAza karane meM samartha hotI hai aura usameM kamala kI-sI
mahaka | bhI AtI hai| sabhI dehadhAriyoM kA mala do prakAra kA mAnA hai| eka to
kAna, netra Adi se nikalane vAlA aura dUsarA zarIra se nikalane vAlA mala,
mUtra, pasInA aadi| yogiyoM ke yoga kA itanA jabardasta prabhAva hotA hai ki
unake pUrvokta donoM prakAra ke mala samasta rogiyoM ke roga ko miTA dete haiN|
ukta donoM prakAra ke maloM meM kastUrI kI-sI sugaMdha AtI 15

Page #38 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Benefits Gained Through Yoga  Yoga Shastra, the first light, verse 8
states: Just as the sprinkling of nectar destroys all diseases, so too, the
touch of a yogi's body instantly destroys all diseases. The nails, hair, teeth,
and other parts of a yogi's body become medicinal. Therefore, they are called
"Sarvaushadhilabdhiman" (possessors of all medicines). For this reason, the
bones and other parts of the Tirthankara's body are enshrined and worshipped in
the Devaloka.   In addition, many other benefits manifest in the body of a yogi.
The mere touch of a yogi's body makes rainwater, river water, lake water, or
water from any reservoir capable of curing all diseases. Their touch detoxifies
poisonous air and revives unconscious beings. Poisonous food, upon entering a
yogi's mouth, becomes non-poisonous. Even those suffering from severe poison or
a deadly disease become free from poison and disease simply by hearing their
words or seeing them. This is the secret of "Sarvaushadhi" (all medicines).   In
essence, the yogi's "Kaf" (phlegm) and other great powers are similar to, or
different aspects of, "Riddhis" (supernatural powers). "Vaikriya Labdhi" (power
of transformation) also has many forms. These include: "Anutva" (becoming as
small as an atom), "Mahattva" (becoming as large as Mount Meru), "Laghutva"
(becoming lighter than air), "Gurutva" (becoming heavier than a thunderbolt),
"Praapti" (being able to touch the tip of Mount Meru and the sun with the tip of
one's finger while standing on earth), "Praakamy" (being able to walk on water
like walking on land, and float or sink on land like swimming in water),
"Ishitva" (having dominion over the three realms, attaining the power of a
Tirthankara or Indra), and "Kamaroopitva" (being able to assume multiple forms
simultaneously). All these "Vaikriya Labdhis" are also included within the great
"Riddhis".   Beyond these, there are many other benefits related to knowledge
and intellect that are gained through yoga practice. For example, due to the
intense destruction and cessation of "Shrutagyanavaraneya" and "Veeryantaraya"
karmas, the practitioner attains the extraordinary "Mahaprajna Riddhi" (great
wisdom). This power enables them to expound the knowledge of the twelve angas
and fourteen purvas even without formally studying them. The intellect of such a
"Mahaprajnavan" (possessor of great wisdom) can clearly explain the most
profound and complex meanings.   Some "Vidyadhari" (knowledge-possessing) monks
attain "Vidyalabdhi" (knowledge power) and study up to ten purvas. Some become
knowledgeable in "Mahavidyas" (great knowledge) like "Rohini" and "Prajni", and
in "Alpavidyas" (minor knowledge) like "Angushthaprashna". They are then not
under the control of any "Riddhiman" (possessor of supernatural powers). Many
practitioners become skilled in presenting and analyzing topics beyond their
studied subjects. Among these "Vidyadharashraman" (knowledge-possessing monks),
some attain "Beejabuddhi" (seed intellect), "Kosthabuddhi" (storehouse
intellect), and "Padanusaribuddhi" (sequential intellect).   Those who possess
"Beejabuddhi" are able to grasp many meanings from a single seed-like word due
to the intense destruction and cessation of "Gyanavaraneya" and other karmas.
Just as a farmer, by sowing a single seed in well-tilled land, obtains many
seeds through the combined effect of rain or irrigation, sunlight, and wind, so
too, these individuals, upon hearing a single word, acquire many meanings.
Those with "Kosthabuddhi" are like skilled farmers who store a large amount of
grain in granaries, ensuring that different grains do not mix or spoil.
Similarly, they remember the various meanings of each "Shruta" (scripture) they
hear, without needing to repeat them, and retain them securely in their "Kostha"
(storehouse) of the mind.   There are three types of "Padanusaribuddhi":
"Anusrot", "Pratirot", and "Ubhayapad". 1. Those with "Anusrotpadanusaribuddhi"
have an extremely sharp intellect that, upon hearing the meaning of the first
word of a text, can recall the entire text up to the last word. 2. Those with
"Pratirotpadanusaribuddhi" have an intellect that, upon hearing the meaning of
the last word or the entire text, can recall the meaning or text from the
beginning. 3. Those with "Ubhayapadpadanusaribuddhi" have an exceptionally sharp
intellect that, upon hearing the meaning of a word in the middle of a text, can
recall the entire group of words from beginning to end, along with their
corresponding meanings, and traverse the entire ocean of knowledge.   The
difference between "Beejabuddhi" and "Padanusaribuddhi" is that "Beejabuddhi" is
skilled in explaining many meanings from a single word, while "Padanusaribuddhi"
is capable of knowing all other words by knowing one word.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 yoga ke prabhAva se prApta labdhiyA~ yogazAstra prathama prakAza zloka 8 hai  /
amRtarasa ke siMcana kI taraha yogiyoM ke zarIra kA sparza bhI tatkSaNa sarva
rogoM kA vinAza karane meM samartha hotA hai| yogiyoM ke zarIra ke nakha, bAla,
dAMta Adi vibhinna avayava bhI auSadhimaya bana jAte haiN| isIlie unheM bhI
sarvauSadhilabdhimAna kahA hai| isI kAraNa tIrthaMkaradevoM ke zarIra ke haDDI
Adi sarva avayava devaloka meM sarvatra pratiSThita kiye jAte haiM, pUje jAte
haiN| isake atirikta yogiyoM ke zarIra meM aura bhI aneka labdhiyAM prakaTa ho
jAtI hai| yogI ke zarIra ke sparzamAtra se varSA kA pAnI, nadiyoM, sarovaroM yA
jalAzayoM kA pAnI sabhI rogoM ko haraNa karane | vAlA bana jAtA hai| unake
zarIra-sparza se viSAkta vAyu nirviSa ho jAtI hai; mUrcchita prANI hoza meM A
jAtA hai| viSa| mizrita anna yogI ke mukha meM praveza karate hI nirviSa bana
jAtA hai| mahAviSa yA mahAvyAdhi se pIr3ita vyakti bhI unake | vacana - zravaNa
mAtra se yA darzana - mAtra se bhI viSa rahita va roga rahita ho jAtA hai  /
sarvauSadhi kA yahI rahasya hai| kahane | kA tAtparya yaha hai ki yogiyoM ke
kapha Adi mahAn RddhiyoM ke samAna hai, athavA RddhiyoM ke alaga-alaga bheda
haiN| | vaikriyalabdhi bhI aneka prakAra kI hai| usake aNutva, mahattva,
laghutva, gurutva, prApti, prAkAmya, Izitva, vazitva, apratighAtitva,
aMtardhAna, kAmarUpitva Adi aneka bheda haiN| aNutva kA artha hai= aNu jitanA
zarIra banAkara bArIka se bArIka cheda meM praveza karane kA sAmarthya |
mahattva= meru | parvata se bhI mahAn banane kA sAmarthya  /  laghutva= vAyu se
bhI halkA zarIra banAne kI zakti  /  gurutva = indrAdi ke lie duHsaha | tathA
vajra se bhI adhika vajanadAra zarIra banAne kI zakti | prApti = dharatI para
rahe hue hI aMgulI ke agrabhAga se meruparvata | ke sire ko aura sUrya ko bhI
sparza kara sakane kA sAmarthya  /  prAkAmya = bhUmi para calane kI taraha pAnI
para calane kI aura | pAnI para tairane kI taraha bhUmi para tairane va DUbane
kI zakti  /  Izitva = tIna loka kI prabhutA, tIrthaMkara aura indra kI sI Rddhi
pAne kI zakti aura kAmarUpitva = = eka sAtha hI aneka rUpa dhAraNa karane kI
zakti  /  ye saba vaikriya - labdhiyAM bhI | mahARddhiyoM ke aMtargata hai  /
isake atirikta vidyA aura buddhi se saMbaMdhita aneka labdhiyA~ haiM, jo
yogAbhyAsa se prApta hotI | hai| jaise zrutajJAnAvaraNIya evaM vIryAntarAya
karma ke prakarSa kSayopazama se sAdhaka ko asAdhAraNa mahAprajJA Rddhi prApta
hotI hai, jisake prabhAva se vaha dvAdazAMga aura caturdaza pUrva kA vidhivat
adhyayana na hone para bhI bAraha aMgoM aura catudarza pUrvo ke jJAna kA
nirUpaNa kara sakatA hai| tathA usa mahAprajJAvAn zramaNa kI buddhi gaMbhIra se
gaMbhIra aura kaThina se kaThina artha | kA spaSTa vivecana kara sakatI hai| koI
vidyAdhArI zramaNa vidyAlabdhi prApta kara dasapUrva taka par3hatA hai; koI
rohiNI, prajJi | Adi mahAvidyAoM va aMguSThaprazna Adi alpavidyAoM ke jAnakAra
ho jAte haiM, phira ve kisI RddhimAna ke vaza nahIM hote  /  | kaI sAdhaka
par3he hue viSaya ke atirikta viSayoM kA pratipAdana evaM vizleSaNa karane meM
kuzala hote haiN| ukta vidyAdharazramaNoM meM se kaiyoM ko bIja, koSTha va
padAnusArI buddhi kI labdhi prApta hotI hai| bIjabuddhi ke labdhidhArI ve
kahalAte haiM, jo jJAnAvaraNIyAdi karmoM ke atizaya kSayopazama se eka artha
rUpI bIja ko sunakara aneka artha vAle bahuta se bIjoM | ko usI taraha prApta
kara letA hai jisa taraha eka kisAna acchI taraha jotI huI jamIna meM varSA yA
siMcAI ke jala, sUrya kI dhUpa, havA Adi ke saMyoga se eka bIja bokara aneka
bIja prApta kara letA hai| jaise - koSThAgAra (koThAra) meM rakhe hue | vividha
dhAnya eka dUsare meM mila na jAya, sar3akara bigar3a na jAya isa dRSTi se
kuzala buddhi vAlA kisAna bahuta-sA dhAnya koThAroM meM acchI taraha
saMbhAlakara surakSita rakhatA hai; vaise hI dUsare se sunakara avadhAraNa kiye
hara zruta (zAstra) ke aneka arthoM ko yA bAra-bAra AvRtti kiye binA hI vibhinna
arthoM ko bhalIbhA~ti yAda rakhatA hai, bhUlatA nahIM hai, isa prakAra |
mastiSka rUpI koSThAgAra meM artha surakSita rakhatA hai, vaha koSTha-buddhivAna
kahalAtA hai| padAnusArI buddhi vAle tIna prakAra ke hote haiM - anusrota,
pratisrota aura ubhayapada  /  1. jinakI buddhi graMtha ke prathama pada ke
artha ko dUsare se sunakara aMtima | pada taka ke saMpUrNa graMtha kA vicAra
(smaraNa) karane meM samartha buddhi atyaMta tIvra hotI hai, vaha
anusrotapadAnusArI-buddhivAn | kahalAtA hai  /  2. jisakI buddhi aMtima pada ke
artha yA graMtha ko dUsare se sunakara Adi pada taka ke artha yA graMtha ko
smaraNa kara sakane meM samartha ho, vaha pratisrota - padAnusArI buddhivAn
kahalAtA hai aura 3. jisakI buddhi graMtha ke bIca ke artha yA pada ko dUsare se
jAnakara Adi se aMta taka ke tamAma pada samUha aura unakA pratiniyata artha
karake sAre graMtha - samudra ko pAra karane meM samartha asAdhAraNa tIvra ho,
vaha ubhayapadAnusArI buddhivAn kahalAtA hai| bIjabuddhi aura padAnusArIbuddhi
meM yahI aMtara hai ki bIjabuddhi to eka pada kA artha batAne para aneka padoM
kA artha batAne meM kuzala hotI hai, jaba ki padAnusArIbuddhi eka pada ko
jAnakara dUsare tamAma padoM ko jAnane meM samartha hotI hai| 16

Page #39 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Charan Labdhi and its Various Types  **Yoga Shastra Pratham Prakash Shloka
9:** In the same way, Mano-bali, Vachan-bali, and Kaya-bali are also types of
Labdhi-dharis. The one whose pure mind, due to the special characteristic of the
extreme destruction of Manojnaanaavaran and Veeryantaraay karmas, is able to
extract the essential element in an instant and dive into the entire ocean of
Shrutis, is called a Mano-bali Labdhiman. The one whose power of speech is able
to speak the entire Shruti-vastu in an instant is called a Vag-bali Labdhiman;
or, the one whose speech flows uninterruptedly and without any hindrance in the
throat while uttering words, sentences, and figures of speech, is also called a
Vag-bali. The one in whom extraordinary Kaya-bali Yoga manifests due to the
destruction of Veetaraay karmas, so that even after standing for a long time in
Kayotsarga, there is no fatigue or restlessness, is called a Kaya-bali
Labdhiman. For example, Bahubali Muni, who stood for a year in Kayotsarga-
pratima, was a Kaya-bali.  Similarly, there are Yogas like Ksheera Labdhi, Madhu
Labdhi, and Amrita Labdhi. The one whose vessel, even if it contains spoiled
food, transforms into the taste of milk, honey, ghee, and nectar, becoming a
strength-enhancing substance, or the one who, like Kheer, brings joy to souls
who have experienced verbal, physical, and mental suffering, are called
Ksheerasrav, Madhvasrav, Sarpirasrav, and Amritasrav Labdhi holders
respectively. They are of two types: one is Aksheen-Mahanas Labdhiman and the
other is Aksheen-Mahalay Labdhi Dhar. The one whose vessel, due to the
destruction of extraordinary Antaraay karmas, even if given a small amount of
food, does not get exhausted even after giving it to many, like Gautam Swami, is
called Aksheen-Mahanas Labdhiman. In a limited area of land where countless
gods, Tithanchas, and humans with their families are packed together, with no
space to sit, the presence of an Aksheen-Mahalay Labdhi Dhar creates enough
space for everyone to sit comfortably, like the Samavasaran of a Tirthankara.
Similarly, it is said that Mahaprajna and other Labdhis are also attained by
Prajna Shramanas and other Sadhakas; due to their influence, they can know the
objects of all senses through a single sense; such Maha-ridhi is called
Sambhinna-Srot Labdhi.  **8.**  **9.** Charanasheevishavadhi-Manah-Paryaya
Sampadah. Yogakalp-druma-syaitah, Vikasiku-sumashriyah.  **9.** **Meaning:** The
wealth of Charan Vidya, Asheevisha Labdhi, Avadhi Jnana, and Manah-Paryaya
Jnana; all these are the developed flower-glory of the Kalpa-vriksha, which is
Yoga.  **Explanation:** The extraordinary power that allows one to move freely
in water, land, or sky is called Charan Labdhi. The Labdhi that enables a
Sadhaka to harm (curse) or benefit (bless) others is called Asheevisha Labdhi.
The Labdhi that allows one to directly perceive the unknowable, indirect
substance through the senses, without the help of the senses, is called Avadhi
Jnana Labdhi. The power to directly see the permutations of another's mind-
substance, which is achieved through the influence of Labdhi, is called Manah-
Paryaya Jnana Labdhi. All these Labdhis are like flowers of the Kalpa-vriksha,
which is Yoga. The fruit obtained from them is Keval Jnana or Moksha, which we
will explain further with the examples of Bharat Chakravarti and Marudevi.
Charan Labdhi is of two types: Jangha Charan Labdhi and Vidya Charan Labdhi.
Both these Labdhis are attained only by Munis. The Jangha Charan Labdhi Dhar
Muni can easily fly and reach the Ruchak Dweep in one step; while returning,
they can also fly from Ruchak Dweep to Nandishwar Dweep in one step and return
to their original place in another step. They can also fly upwards and reach the
peak of Mount Meru in one step, then stay there and reach Panduvan; while
returning, they can also fly back to Nandishwar Dweep in one step and return to
their original place in another step. The Vidya Charan Labdhi Dhar Muni can fly
to the Manushottar Parvat in one step and to Nandishwar Dweep in another step;
from there, they can fly back to their original place in one step. Many Charan
Labdhi Dhar Munis can also move upwards and downwards in the same way in the
Tiryanch-gati.  **17**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 cAraNalabdhi aura usake vividha prakAra yogazAstra prathama prakAza zloka 9 isI
prakAra manobalI, vacanabalI, kAyabalI bhI eka prakAra ke labdhidhArI hote haiN|
jisakA nirmala mana matijJAnAvaraNIya aura vIryAntarAya karma ke atizaya
kSayopazama kI vizeSatA se aMtarmuhUrta meM sArabhUta tattva uddhRta karake sAre
zruta-samudra meM avagAhana karane meM samartha ho, vaha sAdhaka manobalI-
labdhimAna kahalAtA hai| jisakA vacanabala eka aMtarmuhUrta meM sArI zrutavastu
ko bolane meM samartha ho, vaha vAgbalI-labdhimAna kahalAtA hai; athavA pada,
vAkya aura alaMkAra-sahita vacanoM kA uccAraNa karate samaya jisakI vANI kA
pravAha akhaMDa askhalita calatA rahe, kaMTha meM jarA bhI rukAvaTa na Aye, vaha
bhI vAgabalI kahalAtA hai| vItarAyakarma ke kSayopazama se jisameM asAdhAraNa
kAyabala-yoga prakaTa ho gayA ho ki kAyotsarga meM cirakAla taka khar3e rahane
para bhI thakAvaTa aura becenI na ho, vaha kAyabalIlabdhimAna kahalAtA hai|
udAharaNArtha-bAhubali muni jaise eka varSa taka kAyotsarga-pratimA dhAraNa
karake khar3e rahe the, ve kAyabalI the| isI prakAra kSIralabdhi, madhulabdhi
aura amRtalabdhi vAle bhI yoga hote haiN| jinake pAtra meM par3A huA kharAba
anna bhI dUdha, madhu, ghI aura amRta ke rasa ke samAna banakara zaktivarddhaka
ho jAtA hai, athavA vAcika, zArIrika aura mAnasika duHkha prApta hue AtmAoM ko
khIra Adi kI taraha jo AnaMdadAyaka hote haiM; ve kramazaH kSIrAsrava,
madhvAsrava, sarpirAsrava aura amRtAsrava labdhi vAle kahalAte haiN| ve do
prakAra ke hote haiM eka hote haiM, akSINa-mahAnasalabdhimAna aura dUsare hote
haiM, akssiinnmhaalylbdhidhr| asAdhAraNa aMtarAya karma ke kSayopazama hone se
jinake pAtra meM diyA huA alpa AhAra bhI gautamasvAmI kI taraha anekoM ko de
diyA jAya, phira bhI samApta nahIM hotA; ve akSINamahAnasalabdhimAna kahalAte
haiN| jisa parimita bhUmibhAga meM asaMkhyAta deva, tithaMca aura manuSya
saparivAra khacAkhaca bhare hoM, baiThane kI suvidhA na ho, vahAM
akSINamahAlaya-labdhidhArI ke upasthita hote hI itanI jagaha ho jAtI hai ki
tIrthakara ke samavasaraNa kI taraha sabhI loga sukhapUrvaka baiTha sakate haiN|
isI taraha prAjJazramaNa Adi sAdhakoM meM mahAprajJA Adi labdhiyAM bhI prApta
honI batAyI hai; jinake prabhAva se ve eka hI indriya se sabhI indriyoM ke
viSayoM kI jAnakArI kara sakate haiM; aisI mahARddhi saMbhinna-srotalabdhi
kahalAtI hai  /  / 8 /  /  aura bhI kaI labdhiyA~ batAte haiM  / 9 /
cAraNAzIviSAvadhi-mana:-paryAyasampadaH  /  yogakalpadrumasyaitAH,
vikAsikusumazriyaH  // 9 /  /  artha :- cAraNavidyA, AzIviSalabdhi, avadhijJAna
aura manaHparyAyajJAna kI saMpadAeM; ye saba yoga rUpI kalpavRkSa | kI hI
vikasita puSpazrI hai| vyAkhyA :- jisa labdhi ke prabhAva se jala, sthala yA
nabha meM nirAbAdha gati ho sake, usa atizaya zakti ko cAraNalabdhi kahate haiN|
jisa labdhi ke prabhAva se sAdhaka dUsare para apakAra (zApa) yA upakAra
(varadAna) karane meM samartha ho; vaha AzIviSalabdhi kahalAtI hai| jisa labdhi
ke prabhAva se iMdriyoM se ajJeya parokSa rUpI dravya kA jJAna iMdriyoM kI
sahAyatA ke binA hI pratyakSa kiyA jA sake, use avadhijJAnalabdhi kahate haiN|
dUsare ke manodravya ke paryAyoM ko pratyakSa dekhane kI zakti, jisa labdhi ke
prabhAva se ho jAya, use manaHparyAyajJAnalabdhi kahate haiN| ye sArI labdhiyAM
yoga rUpI kalpavRkSa ke hI puSpa samAna hai| inase phala kI prApti ho to
kevalajJAna athavA mokSaprApti hotI hai, jise hama bharatacakrartI aura marudevI
ke udAharaNa se Age btaaeNge| cAraNalabdhi do prakAra kI hotI hai-
jaMghAcAraNalabdhi aura vidyaacaarnnlbdhi| ye donoM labdhiyAM muniyoM ko hI
prApta hotI hai| unameM jaMghAcaraNa-labdhidhArI muni sugamatA se ur3akara eka
kadama meM sIdhe rucakadvIpa meM pahuMca jAte haiM; vApisa Ate samaya bhI
rucakadvIpa se eka kadama meM ur3akara naMdIzvaradvIpa meM A jAte haiM aura
dUsare kadama meM jahA~ se gaye hoM, vahIM mUla sthAna para vApasa A jAte haiM,
aura ve Urdhvagati se ur3akara eka kadama meM meruparvata ke zikhara para
Thaharakara pAMDuvana meM pahuMca jAte haiM; vahAM se bhI vApasa Ate samaya eka
kadama meM naMdanavana meM A jAte haiM aura dUsare kadama meM ur3akara jahA~ se
pahale ur3e the, usI mUla sthAna para A jAte haiN| vidyAcAraNalabdhidhara muni
to eka kadama se ur3akara mAnuSottara parvata para pahuMca jAte haiM aura dUsare
kadama se naMdIzvaradvIpa meM jAte haiM, vahA~ se eka hI kadama meM ur3akara,
jahA~ se gaye the, vahIM | vApasa A jAte hai| kaI cAraNalabdhidhara muni
tiryaggati meM bhI usa krama se Urdhva gamanAgamana kara sakate haiN| 17

Page #40 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Charan Labdhi and its Various Types  **Yoga Shastra, First Light, Verses
9-10**  There are many types of Charanmunis. Some can travel through the sky by
sitting cross-legged, or with their legs in Kayotsarga, without moving their
feet up and down. Some are skilled in moving by taking support from water,
thighs, fruits, flowers, leaves, flames, smoke, snow, rain, spider webs, rays of
light, and wind.   Among them, some Charan Labdhi-possessing Munis are skilled
in walking on water like land, without harming aquatic creatures in wells,
rivers, and oceans; they are called Jalcharan Labdhiman Munis. Those who are
skilled in walking in the lower sky, four anguli-praman (finger-widths) above
the ground, and moving their feet up and down, are called Janghcharan Labdhiman
Munis.   Some are skilled in walking on the surface of fruits, without harming
the creatures living on them, by taking support from different types of fruits;
they are called Falcharan Labdhi-possessing Munis. Similarly, some can move by
taking support from the petals of flowers, without harming the subtle creatures
living on them, by holding onto various types of trees, vines, plants, or
flowers; they are called Pushpcharan Labdhi-possessing Munis.   Those who are
skilled in walking by taking support from various types of plants, vines,
sprouts, new shoots, leaves, etc., without harming the subtle creatures living
on them, and moving their feet up and down, are called Patracharan Labdhi-
possessing Munis.   Those who are skilled in climbing up and down the peak of a
Nishdha or Neel mountain, which is four hundred yojanas high, by taking support
from its peak, are called Shrenicharan Labdhiman Munis.   Those who have the
power to travel by taking hold of the flame of fire, without harming the
creatures living in the fire and without burning themselves, are called
Agnishikhacharan Labdhi-possessing Munis.   Those who can travel smoothly by
taking support from the high or slanted series of smoke, are called Dhumcharan
Labdhi-possessing Munis.   Those who can travel smoothly by taking support from
ice, without harming the creatures living in it, are called Niharcharan Labdhi-
possessing Munis.   Those who have the ability to travel by taking support from
fog, without harming the creatures living in it, are called Avshaycharan
Labdhiman Munis.   Those who have the power to travel in the vast expanse of
clouds in the sky, without harming the creatures living there, are called
Meghacharan Labdhi-possessing Munis.   Those who have the power to travel by
taking support from the flow of water, such as rain, during the rainy season,
without harming the creatures living there, are called Varidharacharan Labdhi-
possessing Munis.   Those who are skilled in walking by taking support from the
threads of spider webs built in the hollows of ancient trees, without breaking
the threads and lifting their feet, are called Markatkatantucharan Labdhi-
possessing Munis.   Those who have the power to walk on the sky like land, by
taking support from the rays of any light, such as the moon, sun, planets, and
stars, are called Jyotirrashmicharan Labdhi-possessing Munis.   Those who are
skilled in walking smoothly by taking support from the wind, in any direction,
whether it is unfavorable or favorable, and no matter how strong it is, are
called Vayucharan Labdhi-possessing Munis.   **Beyond Tapas and Charitra**  Even
without the influence of Tapas and Charitra, other qualities can lead to Labdhis
and Riddhis.   **Aashivish Labdhi**  Those who possess Aashivish Labdhi are
capable of both harming and benefiting others.   **Avadhigyan Labdhi**  The
ability to directly perceive all types of objects that are beyond the reach of
the senses, within a certain limit, is called Avadhigyan Labdhi.
**Manahparyaygyan Labdhi**  The ability to illuminate the mental states or
mental objects of beings living in the two and a half islands surrounding the
human realm is called Manahparyaygyan Labdhi. It has two types: Rijumati and
Vipulmati.   Vipulmati Manahparyaygyan, once attained, is never lost and becomes
purer. Rijumati is less pure and can be lost.   **The Greatness of Yoga**  Now,
we will discuss the greatness of Yoga and the fruit of Kevalgyan, which is
attained as a result of it.   **Verse 10**  **Aho Yogasya Mahatmyam, Prajya
Samrajyam Udvahan | Avaap Kevalgyanam, Bharato Bharataadhip ||10||**
**Meaning:** Oh, how great is Yoga! Even the ruler of the Bharat Kshetra, who
bears the responsibility of a vast empire, Shri Bharat Chakravarti, attained
Kevalgyan.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 cAraNa labdhi aura usake vividha prakAra yogazAstra prathama prakAza zloka 9 se
10 _isake alAvA aura bhI aneka prakAra ke cAraNamuni hote haiN| kaI pAlathI
mArakara, baiThe hue aura kAyotsarga kiye hue pairoM ko UMce-nIce kiye binA
AkAza meM gamana kara sakate haiN| kitaneka to jala, jaMghA, phala, phUla,
patra-zreNI, agnizikhA, dhUma, hima-tuSAra, megha-jaladhArA, makar3I kA jAlA,
jyotiSkiraNa, vAyu Adi kA AlaMbana lekara gati karane meM kuzala hote haiN|
usameM kaI cAraNalabdhi vAle muni bAvar3I, nadI, samudra Adi jalAzayoM meM
jalakAyika Adi jIvoM kI virAdhanA kiye binA pAnI para jamIna kI taraha paira
U~ce-nIce karate hue rakhane meM kuzala hote haiM; ve jalacAraNalabdhimAn muni
kahalAte haiN| jo jamIna se cAra aMguli-pramANa Upara adhara AkAza meM calane
meM aura pairoM ko U~ce-nIce karane meM kuzala hote haiM, ve bhI
jaMghAcAraNalabdhimAna muni kahalAte haiN| kaI bhinna-bhinna vRkSoM ke phaloM ko
lekara phala ke Azrita rahe hue jIvoM ko pIr3A na dete hue phala ke tala para
paira U~ce-nIce rakhane meM kuzala hote haiM, ve phalacAraNalabdhidhArI muni
kahalAte haiN| isI prakAra vibhinna prakAra ke vRkSoM, latAoM, paudhoM yA phUloM
ko pakar3akara unake Azrita sUkSma jIvoM kI virAdhanA kiye binA phUla kI
paMkhur3iyo kA AlaMbana lekara gati kara sakate haiM, ve puSpacAraNalabdhidhara
muni kahalAte haiN| vividha prakAra ke paudhoM, beloM, vividha aMkuroM, nayI
koMpalo, pallavoM yA pattoM Adi kA avalaMbana lekara sUkSmajIvoM ko pIr3A diye
binA apane caraNoM ko UMce-nIce rakhane aura calane meM kuzala hote haiM, ve
patracAraNalabdhidhArI muni kahalAte haiN| cAra sau yojana UMcAI vAle niSadha
athavA nIla parvata kI zikhara-zreNI kA avalaMbana lekara jo Upara yA nIce
car3hane-utarane meM nipuNa hote haiM, ve zreNIcAraNalabdhimAna muni kahalAte
haiN| jo agnijvAlA kI zikhA grahaNa karake agnikAyika jIvoM kI virAdhanA kiye
binA aura svayaM jale binA vihAra karane kI zakti rakhate haiM ve,
agnizikhAcAraNalabdhiyukta muni kahalAte haiN| dhuMe kI UMcI yA tirachI zreNi kA
avalaMbana lekara askhalitarUpa se gamana kara sakane vAle
dhUmacAraNalabdhiprAsa muni kahalAte haiN| barpha kA sahArA lekara apkAya kI
virAdhanA kiye binA askhalita gati kara sakane vAle nIhAracAraNalabdhidhArI muni
kahalAte haiN| kohare ke Azrita jIvoM kI virAdhanA kiye binA usakA Azraya lekara
gati kara sakane kI labdhi vAle avazyAyacAraNa labdhimAna muni kahalAte AkAza
mArga meM vistata megha-samaha meM jIvoM ko pIDA na dete hae calane kI zakti
vAle meghacAraNalabdhivaMta mani kahalAte haiN| varSAkAla meM varSA Adi kI
jaladhArA kA avalaMbana lekara jIvoM ko pIr3A diye binA calane kI zakti vAle
vAridhArAcAraNalabdhivaMta muni kahalAte haiN| vicitra aura purAne vRkSoM ke
koTara meM bane makar3I ke jAle ke taMtu kA AlaMbana lekara una taMtuoM ko
TUTane na dete hue paira uThAkara calane meM jo kuzala hote haiM, ve
markaTakataMtucAraNalabdhidhArI muni kahalAte haiN| caMdra, sUrya, graha,
nakSatra Adi kisI bhI jyoti kI kiraNoM kA Azraya lekara nabhastala meM jamIna kI
taraha lane kI zakti vAle jyotirazmicAraNalabdhivaMta muni kahalAte haiN| aneka
dizAoM meM pratikUla yA anukUla cAhe jitanI teja havA meM, vAya kA AdhAra lekara
askhalita gati se paira rakhakara calane kI kazalatA vAle vAyucAraNalabdhiprApta
muni kahalAte haiN| tapa aura cAritra ke prabhAva ke binA dUsare guNoM ke
atizaya se bhI labdhiyA~ aura RddhiyA~ prApta hotI haiN| AzIviSalabdhi vAlA
apakAra aura upakAra karane meM samartha hotA hai| amuka sImA meM rahe hue sabhI
prakAra ke iMdriyaparokSa dravyoM kA hastAmalakavat pratyakSa jJAna prApta
karane kI labdhi avadhijJAna labdhi kahalAtI hai| manuSyakSetravartI DhAI dvIpa
meM sthita jIvoM ke manogata paryAyoM yA manogata dravyoM ko prakAzita karane
vAlI labdhi manaHparyAyajJAnalabdhi kahalAtI hai| isake do bheda haiM-Rjumati
aura vipulmti| vipulamati-manaH paryAyajJAna eka bAra prApta hone para phira
naSTa nahIM hotA aura vizuddhatara hotA hai| Rjumati kama vizaddha hotA hai aura
jA sakatA hai||9|| aba yoga kA mAhAtmya evaM usake phalasvarUpa prApta hone vAle
kevalajJAna rUpI phala kA nirupaNa karate haiN|10| aho yogasya mAhAtmyaM,
prAjyaM sAmrAjyamudvahan  /  avApa kevalajJAnaM, bharato bharatAdhipa  // 10 //
artha :- aho! yoga kA kitanA mAhAtmya hai ki vizAla sAmrAjya kA dAyitva nibhAne
vAle bharatakSetra ke adhipati zrIbharata cakravartI ne bhI kevalajJAna prApta
kara liyaa| 18

Page #41 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Birth, Body, and Marriage of Rishabhdev  **Chapter 1 of Yoga Shastra,
Verse 10 Commentary:** The story of Bharat Chakravarti is as follows:  **The
Birth and Coronation of Rishabhdev:** After the passing of the first era, called
Sushma-Sushma, which spanned four Koti-Koti Sagaropama (billions of billions of
oceans) years, and the second era, called Sushma, which spanned three Koti-Koti
Sagaropama years, and after the passing of eight parts of a Palyopama (a unit of
time) less than two Koti-Koti Sagaropama years of the third era, called Sushma-
Dushma, seven Kulkaras (patriarchs) were born in the southern part of Bharat: 1.
Vimlavahan, 2. Chakshusman, 3. Yashasvi, 4. Abhichandra, 5. Prasenajit, 6.
Marudeva, and 7. Nabhi, in that order. The wife of Nabhi Kulkar was Marudevi,
who purified the three worlds with her supreme virtue. Eighty-four lakh
(840,000) years before the end of the third era, when three years and eight and
a half months remained, the first Jineshwara (Jain Tirthankara) was born in the
womb of Marudevi, descending from the Sarvarth Siddha Vimana (a celestial
vehicle) and heralding his arrival with fourteen great dreams. At that time,
Nabhi Raja and Marudevi could not understand the meaning of these fourteen
dreams. Therefore, Indra (the king of the gods) came and explained their meaning
with joy. Then, on the auspicious day of the fourth day of the waning moon in
the month of Ashadha, Rishabhdev was born. Fifty-six Dikkumari (celestial
maidens) came and performed the delivery rituals. Indra took the Lord to Mount
Meru, placed him on his lap, and performed the Lord's abhisheka (coronation)
with holy water and his own tears of joy. Later, Indra took the Lord and handed
him over to his mother. The Lord's entire dhaatri karma (childcare rituals) was
performed by the goddesses. Seeing the mark of a bull on the Lord's right thigh,
his parents happily named him Rishabh. The Lord, like the rays of the moon,
brought immense joy and grew up nourished by divine food.  **Naming the Lord's
Lineage:** Once, Indra came to serve the Lord. He began to think about what name
to give to the lineage of the first Tirthankara, Rishabhdev. The Lord, knowing
Indra's thoughts through his Avadhigyan (clairvoyance), extended his hand like
an elephant's trunk to take the Ikshudanda (cane) from Indra's hand. Indra
offered the cane to the Lord, bowed down, and at that moment, the Lord's lineage
was named Ikshvaku.  **A Poetic Description of the Lord's Body:** After spending
his childhood, the Lord, like the midday sun, entered his youth. In his youth,
the soles of the Lord's feet were flat, red, and soft like lotus petals. They
were warm, free from tremors, and did not sweat. On the Lord's feet were the
marks of a wheel, Lakshmi Devi (goddess of wealth) performing abhisheka, an
elephant, flowers, garlands, a goad, and a flag. These marks seemed to be there
to erase the sorrows of those who bowed down to his feet. In the Lord's feet,
which were like the playhouse of Lakshmi Devi, were the auspicious marks of a
conch, a pot, a fish, and a swastika. The Lord's thumbs were full, strong,
round, and high, resembling a serpent's hood and adorned with the Srivatsa mark
like a calf. The Lord's toes were straight, without holes, free from tremors due
to the absence of air, shining like a lamp flame, and resembling lotus petals.
Underneath the Lord's toes were Nandyaavarta (swirling patterns) that shone so
brightly that their reflection on the ground seemed to be the cause of Dharma
(righteousness). The joints of the toes were beautiful like wells. They seemed
to be the seeds sown for the Lord's marriage to the world's Lakshmi. The Lord's
heels were round like tubers and long and wide in proportion. His nails seemed
like the head ornaments of the elephants that were his thumbs and toes. The
Lord's ankles were adorned like the half-opened petals of a golden lotus. The
Lord's legs, from top to bottom, were gradually elevated like a tortoise's. His
veins were not visible. His hair shone with its own radiance. The Lord's thighs
were round, fair, and strong, like a deer's thighs, with flesh so firm that the
bones inside were not visible. His soft, shining, strong thighs were beautiful
like a banana tree trunk. His round, fleshy knees seemed like a mirror set in a
pillow filled with cotton. The Lord's two testicles were hidden like an
elephant's. His male organ, like that of a noble horse, was extremely hidden,
with no visible veins. It was neither low, high, nor loose, but straight, soft,
hairless, round, fragrant, cool, resembling a clockwise conch, with a single
edge, free from any ugliness.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 RSabhakumAra kA janma, RSabhakumAra ke aMgopAMgoM evaM vivAha kA varNana
yogazAstra prathama prakAza zloka 10 vyAkhyA :- bharata cakravartI kA vaha
prasaMga isa prakAra haibharata cakravartI kA AdyopAMta vistRta AkhyAna : _
RSabhadeva prabhu kA janma evaM janmAbhiSeka - isa avasarpiNIkAla ke suSama-
suSamA nAmaka cAra koTAkoTi sAgaropama pramANa vAle pahale Are ke bItane ke
bAda, tIna koTAkoTi sAgaropama pramANa vAle, suSama nAmaka dUsare Are ke bItane
ke bAda aura do koTAkoTi sAgaropama pramANa vAle suSama-duHSama nAmaka tIsare
Are kA palyopama ke AThaveM bhAga nyUna samaya vyatIta ho jAne ke bAda
dakSiNArddha bharata meM 1. vimalavAhana, 2. cakSuSmAna, 3. yazasvI, 4.
abhicandra, | 5. prasenajit, 6. marudeva aura 7. nAbhi nAma ke kramazaH sAta
kulakara hue| unameM nAbhikulakara kI patnI tIna jagat ko uttamazIla se pavitra
karane vAlI marudevI thii| jaba tIsare Are ke caurAsI lAkha pUrva, tIna varSa
sAr3he ATha mahIne zeSa rahe taba sarvArthasiddha vimAna se cyava kara marudevI
mAtA kI kukSi meM caudaha mahAsvapnoM ko sUcita karate hue prathama jinezvara
utpanna hue| usa samaya una 14 svapnoM ke artha ko nAbhirAjA aura marudevI
yathArtha rUpa se nahIM jAna ske| ataH indra ne Akara harSa pUrvaka unake artha
sunaaye| usake bAda aSADha vadi cautha ke zubha dina meM RSabhadeva kA janma
huaa| chappana dikkumAriyoM ne Akara prasavakarma kiyaa| indra ne prabhu ko
meruparvata para le jAkara apanI goda meM biThAyA aura tIrthajala se prabhu kA
tathA harSAzrujala se apanA abhiSeka kiyaa| bAda meM indra ne prabhu ko le
jAkara unakI mAtA ko sauMpa diyaa| prabhu kA sabhI dhAtrIkarma deviyoM ne kiyaa|
prabhu kI dAhinI jaMghA meM vRSabha kA AkAra-laMchana dekhakara mAtA-pitA ne
prasannatA pUrvaka unakA nAma RSabha rkhaa| prabhu RSabha caMdra kiraNa ke
samAna atizaya AnaMda utpanna karate hae evaM divya AhAra se poSaNa pAte hue
kramazaH bar3hane lge| prabhu ke vaMza kA nAmakaraNa - eka bAra indra prabhu kI
sevA meM upasthita hue| taba vicAra karane lage ki AdinAtha RSabhadeva bhagavAn
ke vaMza kA kyA nAma rakhA jAya? prabhu ne avadhijJAna se indra kA vicAra
jAnakara usake hAtha se ikSudaMDa lene ke lie hAthI kI sUMDa-sA apanA hAtha
laMbA kiyaa| indra ne prabhu ko ikSu arpaNa karake namaskAra kiyA aura tabhI
prabhu ke vaMza kA nAma ikSvAku rkhaa| prabha ke aMgoM kA alaMkArika varNana -
bAlyakAla bitAkara madhyAhna ke sarya ke samAna prabha ne yauvanavaya meM
padArpaNa kiyaa| yauvanavaya se prabhu ke donoM pairoM ke talue samatala, lAla
aura kamala ke samAna komala the| uSNa va kaMpana-rahita hone se unameM pasInA
nahIM hotA thaa| prabhu ke caraNoM meM cakra. abhiSekayakta lakSmIdevI. hAthI.
puSpa.. puSpa, puSpamAlA, aMkuza evaM dhvaja ke cihna the| mAno ye caraNoM meM
namana karane vAloM ke duHkhoM ko miTAne ke lie hI hoN| lakSmIdevI ke krIr3AgRha
ke samAna bhagavAn ke donoM caraNataloM meM zaMkha, kalaza, matsya aura svastika
suzobhita ho rahe the| svAmI ke aMgUThe bharAvadAra, puSTa, gola aura U~ce the,
ve sarpa ke phana ke samAna, vatsa ke samAna zrIvatsacihna se yukta the| prabhu
ke caraNakamala kI aMguliyA~ chidrarahita sIdhI, vAyu praveza rahita hone se
niSkaMpa, camakatI dIpazikhA ke samAna tathA kamala kI paMkhur3iyoM ke samAna
thiiN| prabhu ke caraNoM kI U~galiyoM ke nIce naMdyAvarta aise suzobhita hote
the ki jamIna para par3ane vAle pratibimba dharmapratiSThA ke kAraNabhUta
pratIta ho rahe the| aMgulI ke parva bAvar3I ke samAna zobhA dete the| ve aise
mAlUma hote the, mAno vizva-prabhu ke vizva-lakSmI ke sAtha hone vAle vivAha ke
lie jo boye gaye ho| prabhu ke caraNa-kamala kI er3I kaMda ke samAna gola va
pramANopeta laMbI-caur3I thii| aura unake nakha aise pratIta hote the, mAno,
aMgUThoM aura a~guliyoM rUpI soM kI mastaka-maNiyA~ ho| prabhu ke paira ke gaTTe
suvarNakamala ke arddhavikasita dala kI taraha suzobhita the| prabhu ke donoM
paira Upara se nIce taka kramazaH kachue ke samAna unnata the| unameM naseM
nahIM dikhatI thiiN| unake roma apanI kAMti se camakate the| jagatpati kI jAM
hiranI kI jAMghoM ke samAna kramazaH gola, gauravarNa kI evaM mAMsa se aisI
puSTa thI ki aMdara kI haDiyA~ mAMsa se lipaTI hone ke kAraNa dikhatI nahIM
thiiN| unakI komala, camakIlI puSTa jaMghAe~ kele ke staMbha kI taraha
zobhAyamAna thiiN| golAkAra mAMsala ghuTane aise lagate the, mAno rUI se bhare
takiye meM darpaNa jar3A huA ho| svAmI ke do vRSaNa (aMDakoSa) hAthI ke vRSaNa
ke samAna gupta the| kulIna ghor3e ke liMga ke samAna prabhu kA puruSacihna ati
gupta thA, tathA usameM naseM jarA bhI nahIM dikhatI thiiN| aura vaha nIcA,
U~cA-laMbA yA DhIlA nahIM thA, apitu sarala, komala, roma-rahita, gola,
sugaMdhita jananendriyayukta, zItala, pradakSiNAvarta-zaMkhasadRza,
ekadhArayukta, bIbhatsatArahita, 19

Page #42 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Description of the Body and Marriage  Yoga Shastra, First Light, Verse 10 | The
cycle was recurring. The linga was like the covering of a cell. Their waist was
long, thick, fleshy (full), large and hard. The middle part of the waist was
thin, making it look like the middle part of Indra's thunderbolt. Their navel
was adorned like the whirlpool of a deep river. Their abdomen was smooth,
fleshy, soft, simple and even. Their chest, as vast and elevated as a golden
rock, seemed like the pedestal of the Srivatsa gem or the platform for Lakshmi
Devi to play on. Their shoulders were elevated, strong and robust like those of
a bull, and under both shoulders their armpits were free of odor, sweat and
dirt, with sparse hair. Two arms, strong like a serpent's hood and long to the
knees, seemed like a serpent's noose to subdue the fickle Lakshmi. The Lord's
palm was red like the new leaves of a mango tree, hard without labor, free of
sweat, poreless and warm. In the middle of it were the marks and signs of the
bow, fish, Srivatsa, thunderbolt, goad, flag, pot, fly whisk, umbrella, conch,
lotus, ocean, Mount Meru, crocodile, bull, lion, horse, chariot, swastika,
elephant, palace, torana, etc. Their thumbs and fingers, with red, simple and
blood-red nails, seemed like the buds of ruby-like flowers on the top of a wish-
fulfilling tree. On the Lord's thumb, full barley grains were prominently
displayed, as if they were specially nourishing his fame-like excellent horse.
In the upper part of the Lord's finger were clockwise conch-like lines that
bestowed all wealth. On the wrist at the base of the hand, three lines were
inscribed, indicating the removal of suffering from the three worlds. Their neck
was round, long, sanctified by three lines, sweet and deep-voiced, and resembled
a conch. The Lord's pure, round and radiant face seemed like a second moon
without blemish. The Lord's two cheeks, fleshy, soft and bright, seemed like two
golden mirrors that resided with Saraswati and Lakshmi. The Lord's two ears,
hanging down to the shoulders due to their inner whorl, were shining like two
conch shells of the Lord's face-like radiance, lying on the seashore. The Lord's
two lips were like bimba fruits. Their thirty-two bright teeth were adorned like
jasmine flowers. Their nose, gradually high and wide, resembled bamboo. The
Lord's chin was neither too long nor too short, but even, full of flesh, round
and soft. And their beard and mustache were full, shiny, black and soft, filled
with thick black hair. The Lord's tongue was red and soft like the newly born
leaves of a wish-fulfilling tree. It was neither very long nor thick. It was a
tongue that spoke the meaning of the twelve limbs. The Lord's eyes, black and
bright in the middle and red at both ends, and long to the end of the ear,
seemed as if they were made of blue crystal and ruby. Their black and curved
eyebrows, like those of collyrium, seemed like bees sitting on blooming lotuses.
The Lord's black and curved eyebrows were giving the beauty of a creeper born on
the bank of a vision-like stream. The Lord's forehead was vast, soft, round,
pleasant and hard, like the eighth-day moon. The Lord's head, elevated and round
like an umbrella, indicated the lordship of the three worlds. The turban placed
on the Lord's head, supporting the middle part of the head, was enhancing the
beauty of the pot placed on the head. The hair on the Lord's head was black,
curly, soft and smooth like a bee, appearing like the waves of the Yamuna river.
The skin of the Lord's body, white and smooth like the womb of a white arsenic,
seemed as if it were smeared with liquid gold. On the Lord's body, unique black
hairs, soft and like the color of a bee, finer than lotus filaments, were
growing. The Lord's breath was odorless, like the fragrance of a blooming lotus,
and the flesh was red, and the blood was white like a stream of cow's milk.
Thus, just as the ocean is served by gems, so too was the Lord, made of a
treasure trove of extraordinary and diverse qualities, not served by whom?
Description of Rishabha Kumar's Marriage - Once, while playing naturally due to
his childhood, a young couple came under a palm tree. As if lightning had
suddenly struck an castor oil plant, a large palm fruit fell on the head of that
couple at that time due to misfortune. As a result, he immediately died an
untimely death. 20

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 aMgopAMgo kA evaM vivAha varNana yogazAstra prathama prakAza zloka 10 |
AvartakAra thaa| liMga kA AvaraNa koza ke samAna thaa| unakI kamara laMbI, moTI,
mAMsala (bharI huI) vizAla va kaThora | thii| kaTi kA madhyabhAga patalA hone se
aisA mAlUma hotA thA indra ke vajra kA madhyabhAga ho| unakI nAbhi gaMbhIra nadI
ke Avarta kI taraha suzobhita ho rahI thii| unakI kukSi snigdha, mAMsala,
komala, sarala aura samAna thii| svarNazilA ke samAna vizAla aura unnata unakA
vakSaHsthala aisA mAlUma hotA thA, mAno zrI vatsaratna kI pIThikA ho athavA
lakSmIdevI ke krIr3A karane kI vedikA ho| unake kaMdhe baila ke kaMdhoM ke
samAna unnata majabUta va puSTa the aura donoM kaMdhoM ke nIce unakI kAMkha alpa
roma vAlI durgaMdha, pasInoM aura mala se rahita thii| sarpa ke phana ke samAna
puSTa evaM ghuTane taka laMbI do bAheM aisI lagatI thIM, mAno caMcala lakSmI ko
vaza meM karane ke lie nAgapAza ho| prabhu kI hathelI AmravRkSa ke navIna |
pallava ke samAna lAla, binA zrama kiye kaThora, pasIne se rahita, chidrarahita
aura uSNa thii| usake madhyabhAga meM daM dhanuSa, matsaya, zrIvatsa, vajra,
aMkuza, dhvaja, kalaza, cAmara, chatra, zaMkha, kamala, samudra, meruparvata,
magaramaccha, vRSabha, siMha, ghor3A, ratha, svastika, diggaja, prAsAda, toraNa
Adi lakSaNa aura cihna the| lAla, sarala evaM raktima nakhoM se yukta unake
aMgUThe aura aMguliyA~ aisI lagatI thIM, mAno kalpavRkSa ke sire para mANikya-
rUpa puSpoM ke aMkura hoN| svAmI ke aMgUThe para pUrNa yava (jau) prakaTa rUpa
se aise zobhAyamAna the, mAno ve unake yaza rUpI uttama-azva ko vizeSa puSTa
kara rahe hoN| prabhu kI aMguli ke UrdhvabhAga meM dakSiNAvarta zaMkha kI sI
sarvasaMpatti-dAyinI rekhAeM thiiN| hAtha ke mUla meM maNibaMdha para aMkita
tIna rekhAe~ tIna jagata ko kaSToM se ubAranA sUcita kara rahI thii| unakA
kaMTha gola, laMbA, tIna rekhAoM se pavitra, madhura evaM gaMbhIra AvAja vAlA
aura zaMkha ke sadRza lagatA thaa| prabhu kA nirmala, gola aura tejasvI mukha
aisA lagatA thA, mAno lAMchana-rahita dUsarA caMdramA ho| mAMsa se puSTa, komala
aura camakIle prabhu ke donoM gAla aise lagate the, mAno sarasvatI aura lakSmI
ke sAtha-sAtha rahane vAle do svarNa-darpaNa hoN| apane bhItara ke Avarta ke
kAraNa kaMdhe taka laTakate hue prabhu ke donoM kAna aise zobhAyamAna ho rahe
the, mAno prabhu ke mukha kI prabhA rUpI do sIpa hoM, jo samudra | ke kinAre
par3I hoN| prabhu ke donoM oTha biMbaphala ke samAna the| unake battIsa ujjvala
dAMta mogare ke phUla ke samAna suzobhita the| kramazaH UMcI va vistArayukta
unakI nAka bAMsa ke samAna lagatI thii| prabhu kI ThuDDI na bahuta laMbI thI
aura na bahuta choTI, apitu sama, mAMsa paripUrNa, gola evaM komala thii| tathA
unakI dAr3hI-mUMche ghane kAle kezoM meM bharAvadAra, camakIlI, kAlI evaM komala
thii| prabhu kI jIbha kalpavRkSa ke naye paidA hue pallava ke samAna lAla aura
komala thii| vaha na to atyaMta laMbI thI aura na sthuul| vaha bAraha aMga ke
arthako kahane vAlI jIbha thii| bIca meM kAlI aura ujjvala tathA donoM siroM
para lAla evaM kAna ke AkhirI sire taka laMbI prabhu kI AMkheM, aisI mAlUma hotI
thIM, mAno ve nIlasphaTika aura mANikyaratna se nirmita ho| unakI aMjana ke
samAna zyAma palakeM aisI mAluma hotI thI, mAnoM vikasvara kamaloM para bhaure
baiThe hoN| prabhu kI zyAma aura vakra bhauMhe dRSTi rUpI vApi ke kinAre utpanna
huI latA kI-sI zobhA de rahI thii| prabhu kA bhAla-sthala aSTamI ke caMdramA ke
samAna vizAla, komala, gola, suhAvanA aura kaThora thaa| chatra ke samAna unnata
evaM golAkAra prabhu kA mastaka tInoM lokoM ke svAmItva ko sucita karatA thaa|
mastaka ke madhya bhAga ko sahArA dene vAlI prabhu ke mastaka para rakhI huI
pagar3I mastaka para rakhe hue kalaza kI-sI zobhA bar3hA rahI thii| prabhu ke
mastaka ke bAla bhaure ke samAna zyAma, dhuMgharAle, komala va cikane the, ve
yamunAnadI kI taraMgo ke samAna pratIta ho rahe the| gorocana ke garbha ke
samAna gorI aura cikanI, trilokInAtha ke zarIra kI camar3I (tvacA) aisI pratIta
ho rahI thI, mAno vaha sone ke taralarasa se lisa ho| svAmI ke zarIra para
kamalataMtu se bhI patale, komala bhaure ke raMga ke sadRza zyAma advitIya roma
uge hue the| prabhu kA zvAsa vikasita kamala kI sugaMdhI ke samAna durgadha-
rahita thA aura mAMsa lAla thA, aura khUna-gAya ke dUdha kI dhArA ke samAna
sphed| isa prakAra ratnoM ke kAraNa jaise ratnAkara sevya ho jAtA hai, vaise hI
asAdhAraNa vividha guNaratnoM se guNaratnAkara bane hue prabhu kisake lie sevya
na the? RSabhakumAra ke vivAha kA varNana-eka bAra bAlyAvasthA ke kAraNa sahaja
rUpa se krIr3A karatA-karatA koI yaugalika bAlaka eka tAr3a ke per3a ke nIce A
gyaa| jaise eraMDa ke per3a para acAnaka bijalI gira gayI ho, vaise hI durdaiva
se usa yaugalika ke sira para usa samaya eka bar3A-sA tAla-phala gira pdd'aa|
isa kAraNa vaha turaMta akAla ke maraNa 20

Page #43 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Coronation of King Rishabha  **Yoga Shastra, First Light, Verse 10**  The
young girl, bereaved of her partner, was like a doe, bewildered and lost. The
untimely death of her beloved, like a thunderbolt in the sky, left the other
couples stunned and confused. They brought the girl, now alone, to the
Nabhikulkar, asking, "What should we do with this girl now?" He suggested, "This
girl shall become the wife of Rishabha Kumar."  Hearing this, everyone's faces
lit up with joy.  When the girl accepted, her moon-like face blossomed like the
moon, and her eyes opened like lotuses.  Knowing that the auspicious deeds of
her past life were bearing fruit, they chose an auspicious day for the wedding.
The divine family, led by Indra, arrived to celebrate the union.  The Devas, in
that very moment, created a magnificent pavilion, adorned with golden pillars
and jeweled statues, with numerous entrances and exits.  The pavilion was so
resplendent, draped in white and divine fabrics, that it seemed as if the Milky
Way had descended from the sky to witness its beauty.  Toranas, made of rows of
leaves, were erected in all four directions, resembling bows crafted by
Kamadeva.  Four jeweled kalashas, filled with the essence of love, were placed
in each direction by the Devis, high in the sky.  At the entrance of the
pavilion, clouds rained down fragrant garments, while the Devis anointed the
ground with sandalwood paste, played music, and sang auspicious songs.  The
celestial maidens echoed their melodies, creating a symphony of joy.  Indra
Maharaj, along with the auspicious Sumangala and Sunanda, performed the ceremony
of the Lord's hand-holding.  After the wedding, Sumangala Devi, blessed by the
Devas, gave birth to the couple Bharat and Brahmi.  Sunanda Devi, bringing joy
to all three realms, gave birth to the mighty Bahubali and the beautiful
Sundari.  Sumangala Devi then gave birth to forty pairs of strong and valiant
men, all of whom surpassed the Devas in their divine forms.  One day, all the
couples gathered, raising their hands and calling out to the Nabhikulkar,
"Injustice has been done, injustice has been done!  Those who commit wrong deeds
no longer heed the beautiful principles of Hakaar, Makaar, and Dhikkaar."
Hearing this, the Nabhikulkar addressed the couples, "Rishabha will protect you
from this injustice.  Therefore, follow his commands."  At that time, following
the Nabhikulkar's instructions, three wise beings instructed the couples, "Only
a king can stop those who break the rules.  Therefore, he should be seated on a
high throne and crowned with water."  Hearing the words of the wise beings, the
couples, following their instructions, went to the reservoir to collect water in
leaf bowls.  At that moment, Indra's throne began to move, indicating that the
time for the Lord's coronation had arrived.  Indra Maharaj arrived and seated
the Lord on a throne adorned with jewels, crowning him with a crown and other
ornaments.  The couples, with folded hands and bowls of pure water, arrived,
their hearts as pure as the water they carried.  The Lord, crowned and adorned
with ornaments, seated on the throne, resembled the sun shining on Mount Meru.
His white garments shone like the clouds of autumn in the sky.  On either side
of him, beautiful, white chamaras, like fresh butter and swans, waved gently.
**The Construction and Description of Vinita Nagari**  Seeing the crowned Lord,
the couples were filled with wonder.  Thinking that it was not appropriate to
pour water on the head of such a magnificent being, they poured the water on the
Lord's lotus feet.  Seeing this, Indra Maharaj, filled with joy, commanded
Kubera to build Vinita Nagari, a city twelve yojanas long and nine yojanas wide.
Indra then returned to his abode.  Kubera, following the command, built Vinita
Nagari, a city adorned with jewels like a crown, invincible on earth, which
later became known as Ayodhya.  **The Lord**  21

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 RSabharAjA kA rAjyabhiSeka yogazAstra prathama prakAza zloka 10 | zaraNa ho
gyaa| usa bAlaka ke mara jAne se usake sAtha vAlI lar3akI apane jor3e kA akasmAt
viyoga ho jAne se hiraNI ke samAna kiMkarttavya vimUr3ha ho gyii| akAla meM
vajrapAta ke samAna usakI kumRtyu se dUsare yugaliye bhI mUrchita aura
kiMkartavya vimUr3ha ho gye| ve loga puruSa-rahita usa kanyA ko Age karake
nAbhikulakara se parAmarza lene Aye ki "aba | isa kanyA kA kyA kiyA jAya?"
unhoMne sujhAva diyA- 'yaha kanyA vRSabhakumAra kI dharmapatnI bnegii|' yaha
sunakara sabake | cehare para prasannatA chA gyii| jaba usa kanyA ko svIkAra
kara liyA to usakA mukhacaMdra bhI caMdrikA ke samAna khila uThA; | usake netra
bhI kamala ke samAna vikasita ho uThe  /  pUrvabhava meM prabhu dvArA bAMdhe hue
zubhakAryoM ke udaya rUpa suphala jAnakara | zubha muhUrta dekhakara eka dina
deva parivAra sahita, indra prabhu kA vivAha karane hetu Aye  /  devatAoM ne usI
samaya suvarNamaya | staMbha para zobhAyamAna ratnaputtaliyoM vAlA, pravezadvAra
aura bAhara jAne ke aneka dvAra vAlA bhavya maMDapa taiyAra kiyaa| vaha maMDapa
zveta aura divya vastra ke caMdrove se itanA bhavya lagatA thA mAno maMDapa kI
zobhA nihArane kI icchA se AkAzagaMgA | AkAza se dharatI para utara AyI ho|
cAroM dizAoM meM vRkSoM ke pattoM kI katAra se bane toraNa aise bAMdhe gaye the,
mAnoM | kAmadeva dvArA nirmita dhanuSa hoN| AkAza meM bahuta UMcAI para pahuMce
hue rati-nidhAna se paMktibaddha cAra ratna- kalaza cAroM | dizAoM meM deviyoM
dvArA sthApita kiye gaye the| maMDapa ke dvAra para megha sugaMdhita vastroM kI
varSA karate the aura deviyAM maMDapa ke madhyabhAga kI bhUmi para caMdanarasa
kA lepa kara rahI thIM aura bAje bajA rahI thIM tathA maMgalagIta gA rahI thIM
/  devAMganAe~ pratidhvani ke rUpa meM usI taraha gAne aura bajAne lgiiN|
iMdramahArAja ne sumaMgalA aura sunaMdA kanyA ke sAtha prabhu ke pANigrahaNa kA
mahotsava saMpanna kiyA  /  usake bAda devoM dvArA mAMgalya kI huI sumaMgalAdevI
ne bharata aura brAhmI ke jor3e ko janma diyaa| tInoM loka ko AnaMdita karane
vAlI sunaMdAdevI ne mahAbalazAlI bAhubali aura atisuMdara rUpa vAlI suMdarI ko
yugalarUpa meM janma diyaa| | isake bAda bhI sumaMgalA ne unacAsa, balavAna
puruSa yugaloM ko janma diyaa| sabhI saMtAna sAkSAt devoM ke rUpoM ko mAta
karane vAlI thii| RSabhakumAra kA rAjyAbhiSeka eka dina sabhI yugalie ekatrita
hokara hAtha U~ce karake nAbhikulakara se pukAra | karane lage- 'anyAya huA,
anyAya huaa|' aba to akArya karane vAle loga hakAra, makAra aura dhikkAra nAma
kI suMdara nItiyoM ko bhI nahIM maante|' yaha sunakara nAbhi kulakara ne
yugaliyoM se kahA- 'isa akArya se tumhArI rakSA RSabha | kregaa| ataH aba usakI
AjJAnusAra clo|' usa samaya nAbhikulakara kI AjJA se rAjya kI sthiti prazasta
karane hetu | tIna jJAnadhArI prabhu ne unheM zikSA dI ki 'maryAdAbhaMga karane
vAle aparAdhI ko agara koI roka sakatA hai, to rAjA hI  /  | ataH use U~ce Asana
para biThAkara usakA jala se abhiSeka karanA cAhie  / ' prabhu kI bAta sunakara
unake kahane ke anusAra sabhI yugalie pattoM ke doneM banAkara usameM jala lene
ke lie jalAzaya gye| usa samaya iMdra kA Asana | calAyamAna huA  /  usase
avadhijJAna se jAnA ki bhagavAn ke rAjyAbhiSeka kA samaya ho gayA hai| ataH
iMdramahArAja vahAM | aaye| usane prabhu ko ratnajaTita siMhAsana para biThAkara
rAjyAbhiSeka kiyaa| mukuTa Adi AbhUSaNoM se unheM susajjita | kiyaa| idhara
hAtha jor3akara aura kamalapatra ke donoM meM apane mana ke samAna svaccha jala
lekara yugalie bhI phuNce| usa | samaya abhiSikta evaM vastrAbhUSaNoM se
susajjita mukuTa sira para dhAraNa kiye hue siMhAsanAsIna prabhu aise pratIta ho
rahe the | mAno udayAcala parvata para sUrya birAjamAna ho  /  zubhra vastroM se
ve AkAza meM zarad Rtu ke megha ke se suzobhita ho rahe the| ke donoM ora zarad
Rtu ke navanIta evaM haMsa ke samAna manohara ujjvala cAmara DhUla rahe the|
vinItA nagarI kA nirmANa evaM varNana abhiSeka kiye hue prabhu ko dekhakara
yugaliye Azcarya meM par3a gye| una vinIta yugaliyoM ne yaha socakara ki aise
alaMkRta bhagavAn ke mastaka para jala DAlanA yogya nahIM hai ataH prabhu ke |
caraNakamaloM para jala DAla diyaa| yaha dekhakara iMdramahArAja ne khuza hokara
nau yojana caur3I bAraha yojana laMbI vinItA | nagarI banAne kI kuberadeva ko
AjJA dii| iMdra vahA~ se apane sthAna para lauTa aaye| udhara kubera ne bhI
mANikya - mukuTa | ke samAna ratnamaya aura dharatI para ajeya vinItA nagarI
basAyI, jo bAda meM ayodhyA nAma se prasiddha huI  /  prabhu 21 -

Page #44 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Description of the Kingdom - A Request by the Lokantik Devas  **Chapter 1,
First Light, Verse 10**  Kubera, the lord of wealth, built that city and filled
it with inexhaustible jewels, clothes, and grains. The palaces, made of
diamonds, sapphires, and vaidurya gems, cast various colored rays in the sky,
creating paintings without walls. The fortresses were adorned with brilliant
ruby pinnacles, serving as mirrors for the celestial beings. Wealth flowed into
every house in the city. They had made swastikas of pearls, with which young
girls played freely like pebbles. In the city's gardens, the tops of tall trees
brushed against the celestial chariots, making them seem like bird nests for a
while. The heaps of large, tall gems in the city's markets and palaces made
Mount Rohana look like a pile of mud. There, the women, engrossed in water
sports, shone like the Tamraparni river due to the scattered pearls from their
broken necklaces. The city was inhabited by great wealthy people. It seemed as
if even Kubera, the merchant prince, had come to do business with one of them.
At night, the water flowing from the walls of the palaces made of Chandrakanta
gems washed away the dust from the paths. In that same city, there were millions
of wells, ponds, lakes, and new amritakunds, filled with sweet, nectar-like
water, surpassing even the Nagaloka.  **Description of the Governance**  King
Rishabha adorned that city and nurtured his subjects like his own sons. For the
welfare of the people, King Rishabha taught his subjects five arts, each with
twenty variations. For the stability of the kingdom, he gathered cows, horses,
elephants, etc., and made them domesticated. He also taught the art of
statecraft, which included strategies like Sama, Dama, etc. He taught his eldest
son, Bharata, seventy-two arts. Bharata, in turn, taught those arts to his
brothers, his sons, and other men. King Rishabha taught Bhallata the various
characteristics of elephants, horses, women, and men. He taught his daughter
Brahmi eighteen scripts with her right hand and his daughter Sundari mathematics
with her left hand. After that, he established the Varna system and implemented
the path of justice. In this way, Shri Rishabhdev, the son of Nabhi, completed
eighty-three lakh years of his life.  **The Request of the Lokantik Devas**
Once, in the month of Vaishakh, at the insistence of his family, King Rishabha
went to a garden that was like a dwelling built by Kamadeva for him. Seeing the
blooming mango blossoms, the Lord was filled with joy. The bees hummed, as if
welcoming the Lord. It was as if Vasantalakshmi had manifested in the garden.
The cuckoo sang in five notes, as if acting as the sutradhar of a play,
introducing the scene. The wind made the creepers dance. The gentle, fragrant
Malaya breeze made the Lord seem as if he were sitting in a flower house,
adorned with flower ornaments, holding a flower staff in his hand. Seeing the
group of women gathered around the branches of the trees, curious to pick
flowers, it seemed as if these trees were filled with female fruits. Thus, the
Lord became so adorned in that garden, as if he were the spring itself. There,
many children were playing happily. Seeing them, the Lord thought, "Is the play
of the Douguindak Devas like this?" At that time, the Lord, using his knowledge
of the past, contemplated the pleasures of his previous births in the Uttara
Devaloka, and delved deeper into the experience of the known pleasures of the
higher Devalokas. The Lord's attachments were destroyed, so he immediately
changed his thoughts, thinking, "He who does not understand his own self-
interest gets trapped in these worldly pleasures." "Shame on that soul who, like
the bells of a well-wheel, keeps going up and down in various high and low
places due to karma, in this well of the world." Thus, diving into the ocean of
thought, the Lord's mind turned away from the world. At that moment, the
Lokantik Devas, including Sarasvat, arrived to serve the Lord. They bowed with
folded hands and prayed to the Lord, "Lord! Now, please establish the
pilgrimage." After the Devas left, the Lord returned to the city from the Nandan
garden and summoned the kings. He organized a ceremony and, in the presence of
all the kings, crowned his eldest son, Bharata, as king. After that, the Lord
distributed the kingdom to his sons, including Bhallata. Then, he gave charity
for a year (Samvatsari), so that there would be no begging in the earth, no one
would have to say, "Give me." The thrones of all the Indras trembled, so they
came there and, like rain falling on a mountain, they performed the Lord's
abhisheka. They showered him with garlands of flowers, fragrant

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 rAjya vyavasthA varNana - lokAMtika devoM dvArA vinati yogazAstra prathama
prakAza zloka 10 usa nagarI kA nirmANa kara saralasvabhAvI kubera ne akSaya
ratna, vastra aura dhana-dhAnya se use bhara dii| hIreM, nIlama | aura
vaiDUryaratna se banAye hue mahala kI vividha raMga kI kiraNoM se AkAza meM binA
dIvAra ke hI citra bana gaye the| usake kile para tejasvI mANikya ke banAye hue
kaMgUre khecaroM ke lie anAyAsa darpaNa kA kAma karate the| usa nagarI ke
ghara|ghara meM dhana A gyaa| motiyoM ke svastika banA diye the, jisase bAlikAe~
svecchA se kaMkar3oM kI taraha khelatI thii| usa nagarI ke udyAna meM lage hue
U~ce vRkSoM kI coTI se TakarAkara khecariyoM ke vimAna thor3I dera ke lie
pakSiyoM ke ghoMsale se lagate the| usa nagarI ke bAjAroM meM aura mahaloM meM
bar3e-bar3e U~ce ratnoM ke Dhera ko dekhakara rohaNAcala parvata bhI kIcar3a ke
Dhera jaisA lagatA thaa| vahA~ gRhavApikAe~ jala-krIr3A meM ekAgra banI striyoM
ke TUTe hue hAra ke motiyoM ke kAraNa tAmraparNI kI taraha zobhAyamAna hotI
thii| nagarI meM bar3e-bar3e dhanADhya rahate the| aisA pratIta hotA thA, mAno
unameM se kisI ekAdha ke pAsa vaNikputra kubera bhI vyavasAya karane ke lie gayA
ho| caMdrakAMtamaNi kI banI mahaloM kI dIvAroM meM se rAta ko jharate hue jala
se mArga kI dhUla jamA dI jAtI thii| usI nagarI meM amRtopama madhura jala kI
lAkhoM kI saMkhyA meM bAvar3I, kuMe sarovara, navIna amRtakuMDa, 'nAgaloka' ko
bhI mAta kara rahe the| rAjya-vyavasthA kA varNana - rAjA RSabha usa nagarI ko
vibhUSita karate hue apanI prajA kA putravat pAlana karate the| lokopakAra kI
dRSTi se RSabha rAjA ne pA~ca zilpakalAe~, jo pratyeka 20-20 prakAra kI thIM,
prajA ko sikhaayii| rAjya kI sthiratA ke lie gAya, ghor3e, hAthI Adi ekatrita
karake unheM pAlatU banAye aura sAma-dAma Adi upAyoM vAlI sajanIti bhI btaayii|
apane jyeSTha putra bharata ko bahattara kalAe~ sikhaayii| bharata ne bhI apane
bhAIyoM, apane putroM evaM anya puruSoM ko ve kalAe~ sikhaayii| RSabha rAjA ne
bAhubali ko hAthI, ghor3e, strI aura puruSa ke vividha lakSaNa sikhaaye| 'apanI
putrI brAhmI ko dAhine hAtha se aThAraha lipiyAM aura putrI suMdarI ko bAMye
hAtha se gaNita vidyA sikhaayii| usake bAda varNa-vyavasthA karake nyAyamArga
pravartita kiyaa| isa taraha nAbhiputra zrI RSabhadeva ne apanI jiMdagI ke
tirAsI lAkha | pUrva varSa pUrNa kiye| eka bAra vaizAkha ke mahIne meM parivAra
ke Agraha se rAjA RSabha kAmadeva ke dvArA apane liye banAye gaye AvAsa . ke
tulya udyAna meM pdhaareN| vahA~ vikasita Amra-maMjarI dekhakara prabhu
AnaMdamagna hue| bhaure gunagunAkara mAno prabhu kA svAgata kara rahe the|
udyAna meM mAno vasaMtalakSmI prakaTa ho cukI thii| koyala paMcamasvara se
gAkara mAno nATaka kI sUtradhAra banakara prastAvanA kara rahI thii| vAyu latAoM
ko nRtya karA rahI thii| maMda, sugaMdha malayAnila se mAno puSpoM ke vAsagRha
meM baiThe, puSpa ke AbhUSaNoM se bhUSita, prabhu puSpadaMDayukta hasta vAle
lagate the| vRkSa kI DAliyoM ke AsapAsa kutUhalavaza phUla cunane ke lie
ekatrita hue nArIsamUha ko dekhakara lagatA thA mAno ye per3a strI rUpI phaloM
se yukta hoN| isa prakAra usa | udyAna meM prabhu aise suzobhita hone lage mAno
sAkSAt vasaMta ho| vahIM aneka bAlaka AnaMda se khela rahe the, unheM dekhakara
prabhu ne vicAra kiyA-kyA doguMdaka devoM kI krIr3A isI prakAra hotI hogI? usa
samaya prabhu avadhijJAna ke prayoga se anuttara devaloka ke pUrvajanma bhukta
sukhoM para ciMtana karate hue Age se Age ke devaloka ke jJAta-sukhoM ke
anubhava kI gaharAI meM utara gye| prabhu ke mohabaMdhana naSTa ho gaye the,
isalie eka hI jhaTake meM vicAroM ko nayA mor3a diyA ki ina svargIya
viSayasukhoM meM vahI phaMsatA hai, jo apanA Atmahita nahIM smjhtaa| dhikkAra
hai usa AtmA ko, jo isa saMsAra | rUpI kue meM rehaTa kI ghaMTikAoM kI taraha
karmavaza vividha U~ce-nIce sthAnoM meM car3hAva-utAra kI kriyA karatA rahatA
hai|' yoM vicArasAgara meM gote lagAte hue prabhu kA mana saMsAra se parAGmukha
ho gyaa| itane meM to sArasvata Adi lokAMtika deva prabhu kI sevA meM A phuNce|
mastaka para aMjali karake unhoMne namaskAra kiyA aura prabhu se prArthanA
kI-'prabho! aba tIrtha-pravartana kiijie|' una devoM ke jAne ke bAda naMdana
nAmaka udyAna se nagarI meM lauTakara prabhu ne rAjAoM ko bulaayaa| eka samAroha
kA Ayojana karake sabhI rAjAoM ke samakSa bar3e putra bharata kA rAjyAbhiSeka
kiyaa| usake bAda prabhu ne bAhabali Adi patroM ko rAjya vitarita kiyaa| phira
saMvatsarI (eka varSabhara taka) dAna dekara pathvI jisase kahIM para bhI 'mujhe
do' isa prakAra ke yAcanA ke dIna vacana na rheN| sabhI iMdroM ke Asana
kaMpAyamAna hone se ve vahA~ Aye aura jaise vRSTi parvata para pAnI barasAtI
hai, vaise hI unhoMne prabhu kA abhiSeka kiyaa| puSpamAlA, sugaMdhita 22

Page #45 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Rishabhdev's initiation, the arrival of Nami and Vinami  The Lord was adorned
with fragrant garlands of flowers, established by the Angaragas and the Devas,
as if he were shining with his own white glory. Dressed in various garments and
adorned with jeweled ornaments, the Lord shone like the evening clouds in the
sky or like the sky illuminated by the stars. Indra beat the Dundubhi in the
sky, and it seemed as if he were sharing his joy with the world, leaping from
his soul. The Lord's initiation ceremony was performed in a palanquin carried by
the Devas, Danavas, and humans, as an excuse to show the world the path of
upward progress; the spectators, seeing it with unwavering eyes, considered
their eyes fulfilled.  From there, reaching the garden called Siddhartha, the
Lord completely renounced flowers and ornaments like kṣayās, and plucked his
hair with four fists, later plucking it with a fifth fist. Then Indra prayed,
"Lord! Your golden, indescribable locks of hair are beautiful, so let them
remain as they are." Hearing this, the Lord let them remain as they were.
Saudharma Indra took the Lord's hair in his Uttarasanga garment and placed it in
the Kṣīrasamudra and returned. Indra, like a Natyacharya, stopped the noise that
was happening in the assembly with a gesture of his fist and clap. "I renounce
all sinful tendencies for the rest of my life," the Lord said, and mounted the
chariot of excellent character to embark on the path of liberation. At that
time, the Lord attained Manahparyaya-jnana, by which he could know the mental
substances of all beings. Four thousand kings who followed their master also
embraced the path; for this is the conduct of noble men. After that, all the
Indras returned to their respective places. Just as the leader of the herd walks
with the elephants, so the Lord wandered with those four thousand Manis. At that
time, the good people were unaware of the method of offering alms to the Lord,
so when they went to their homes for alms, the emotional men and women presented
them with pearls, jewels, elephants, horses, etc. Truly, simplicity sometimes
becomes disdainful. Due to the simplicity and ignorance of the simple-minded
people, the Lord did not receive suitable alms, so he did not accept those
unimaginable things, but returned. The Lord silently endured this situation with
humility. But seeing the Lord's austere and unbearable conduct, marked by silent
endurance, his 4000 hungry disciples, who were wandering with him, left him.
They all donned the garb of ascetics and sustained themselves by eating wild
fruits and flowers. Who else could be as strong-willed as the Lord? Thus,
frightened by the hardships, they had abandoned the royal path of liberation and
set foot on the wrong path.  Meanwhile, Nami and Vinami, the sons of Kachchha
and Mahakachchha, who had gone according to the Lord's command, came to the
meditating Lord and both bowed to him and prayed, "Lord! We have no master other
than you; therefore, please give us back our kingdom." The Lord remained silent,
giving them no answer. The selfless, ruthless great man stays away from the
world's machinations. Seeing the Lord's silence, both of them, from that day on,
stood guard in the service of their master, with naked swords in their hands.
They seemed like the sun and moon around Mount Meru. At that time, Dharanendra
came to pay homage to the Lord. He asked them, "What is the purpose of your
coming here?" In reply, they said, "This is our master. We are his servants.
When he was king, he sent us out on some business. Later, he distributed his
kingdom to all his sons. We returned, and by then he had become a muni. Now it
is clear to us that he has renounced everything, so where will he give us the
kingdom? We are not at all concerned about whether he has anything or not. A
servant must always serve his master. Therefore, we are stationed in his
service." Dharanendra said, "This master is devoid of affection and non-
possessive. It would have been good if you had gone to Bharatji and asked for
the kingdom. What can this sadhu give you?" To this, they replied, "Having found
the Lord, the master of the universe, we do not want to make anyone else our
master. Having found the Kalpavriksha, who would seek shelter in the Karira
(kar) tree? We do not go to anyone else to ask for anything except God. The
Chatak  23.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 RSabhadeva kI dIkSA, nami-vinami kA AnA yogazAstra prathama prakAza zloka 10
aMgarAga aura devoM dvArA sthApita sugaMdhita puSpa samUha se prabhu aise
suzobhita ho rahe the, mAno apane dhavala yaza se zobhAyamAna ho rahe hoN|
vividha vastra pahanakara tathA ratnajaTita AbhUSaNoM se susajjita hokara prabhu
saMdhyA samaya ke bAdala mAkAza ke samAna yA tArAgaNa se prakAzamAna AkAza ke
samAna zobhAyamAna hone lge| iMdra ne AkAza meM duMdubhi bajAyI, to aisA mAlUma
hone lagA, mAno apanI AtmA meM se uchalatA huA AnaMda jagat ko bAMTa rahA ho|
Urdhvagati kA mArga jagat ko batalAne ke bahAne devoM, dAnavoM aura manuSyoM
dvArA uThAI gayI zivikA meM prabhu kA dIkSAniSkramaNa-mahotsava kiyA; jise
nirnimeSa dRSTi se dekhakara darzakoM ne apane netroM ko kRtArtha kiyaa| vahA~
se siddhArtha nAmaka udyAna meM pahuMcakara prabhu ne kaSAyoM kI taraha puSpoM
aura AbhUSaNoM kA sarvathA tyAga karake cAra muSTi se bAloM kA loca kiyA, bAda
meM pA~cavI muSTi se loca karane lage, taba iMdra ne prArthanA kI-'prabho! Apake
svarNakAMtimaya avarNanIya keza kI julpheM zobhA detI haiM, isalie inheM aise hI
rahane diijie|' yaha sunakara bhagavAn ne unheM vaise hI rahane diiN| saudharma
iMdra ne apane uttarAsaMga vastra meM prabhu ke bAloM ko grahaNa kiye aura unheM
kSIrasamudra meM | DAlakara vApisa aaye| sabhA meM hone vAle kolAhala ko
nATakAcArya kI taraha iMdra ne muSTi evaM capata kA IzArA karake baMda kraayaa|
'maiM yAvajjIva sarvasAvadya (sadoSa) pravRttiyoM kA pratyAkhyAna (tyAga) karatA
hU~,' yoM bolakara prabhu mokSa-mArga meM prayANa karane ke lie uttama cAritra
rUpI ratha para ArUr3ha hue| usa samaya prabhu ko manaHparyAyajJAna prApta huA,
jisase ve sabhI jIvoM ke manogata dravyoM ko jAna sakate the| apane svAmI kA
anusaraNa karane vAle cAra hajAra rAjAoM ne bhI patha ko aMgIkAra kiyA; kyoMki
kalIna puruSoM kA yahI AcAra hai| isake bAda sabhI iMdra apaneapane sthAna ko
lauTa gye| jaise yuthapati hAthiyoM ko sAtha liye hae calatA hai, vaise hI
bhagavAna una cAra hajAra maniyoM ko sAtha liye hue vicaraNa karane lge| usa
samaya bhadrajana prabhu ko bhikSA dene kI vidhi se anabhijJa the, isalie jaba
ve gharoM meM bhikSA ke lie jAte to bhAvuka nara-nArI motI, ratna, hAthI, ghor3e
Adi vastue~ unake samakSa hAjira karate the| saca hai, saralatA bhI kabhI
tiraskAra karane vAlI bana jAtI hai|' bhole bhAvuka logoM kI saralatA evaM
anabhijJatA ke kAraNa prabhu ko anukUla bhikSA na milane ke kAraNa ve una
akalpanIya vastuoM kA svIkAra nahIM karate the, balki vApisa lauTa Ate the|
prabhu adInabhAva se mauna rahakara isa pariSaha ko sahana kara rahe the|
paraMtu prabhu kI maunAvalaMbana-yukta isa kaThora evaM asahya caryA ko
dekhakara unake sAtha vicaraNa karane vAle unake 4000 kSudhApIr3ita sAdhu unheM
chor3akara cale gye| ve sabake saba tApasaveSa dhAraNa karake vanya phala-phUla
khAkara apanA nirvAha karane lge| bhagavAn jaise sattvazAlI anya kauna ho sakate
haiM? isa prakAra kaSToM se ghabarAkara unhoMne mokSa kA rAjamArga chor3akara
utpatha para paira rakha diyA thaa| idhara prabhu kI AjJA se gaye hue kaccha
aura mahAkaccha ke putra nami aura vinami dhyAnastha prabhu ke pAsa Aye aura
donoM ne prabhu ko namaskAra karake unase prArthanA kI-'prabho! hamArA svAmI
Apake sivAya aura koI nahIM hai; ataH Apa hameM hamArA rAjya vApisa diijie|'
prabhu ke mauna hone se una donoM ko kucha bhI javAba nahIM diyaa| niHspRha,
nirmamatva mahApuruSa isa jagat ke prapaMca se dUra hI rahate hai| prabhu ko
mauna dekhakara donoM usI dina se hAtha meM naMgI talavAra liye svAmI kI sevA
meM paharedAra banakara rahane lge| ve aise mAlUma hote the, jaise meruparvata
ke irdagirda sUrya aura caMdramA hoN| usa samaya prabhu ke vaMdanArtha
dharaNendra aaye| unhoMne una donoM se pUchA-tumhAre yahA~ Ane kA kyA prayojana
hai?' uttara meM unhoMne kahA-'yaha hamAre svAmI haiN| hama inake sevaka haiN|
jaba ye rAjA the to hameM inhoMne kisI kAryavaza bAhara bhejA thaa| pIche se
inhoMne apane sabhI putroM ko rAjya bAMTa diyaa| hama vApisa lauTakara Aye, taba
taka to ye muni bana gye| aba hameM yaha sApha dikhAyI detA hai ki inhoMne
sarvasva tyAga diyA hai to hameM rAjya kahA~ se de degeM? 'inake pAsa aba kucha
bhI hai yA nahIM?' isakI hameM jarA bhI ciMtA nahIM hai| sevaka ko to hamezA
svAmI kI sevA karanI hotI hai| isalie hama inakI sevA meM tainAta hai|'
dharaNendra ne kahA-'yaha svAmI to mamatA-rahita aura aparigrahI hai| acchA
hotA, Apa bharatajI ke pAsa jAkara rAjya kI mAMga krte| ye sAdhu Apako kyA de
sakege?' isa para unhoMne javAba diyA-'vizva ke svAmI prabhu ke mila jAne para
aba hama dUsare kisI ko bhI apanA svAmI nahIM banAnA caahte| kalpavRkSa mila
jAne para karIra (kara) vRkSa kA Azraya kauna lenA cAhegA? paramezvara ko
chor3akara hama dUsare kisI ke pAsa mAMgane nahIM jaate| cAtaka 23.

Page #46 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Dharanendra giving knowledge, taking food Yoga Shastra First Light Verse 10
Except for the year-long fast, he does not ask for water from anyone else. Thus,
may the welfare of Bharata and others be! Do not worry about us. Whatever we
need will be given to us by these Swamis. What do we have to do with others?'
Hearing their selfless reply, Dharanendra was astonished and pleased. He said,
'I am also a servant of these Swamis, Dharanendra, the lord of the netherworld.
Your pledge is excellent. You should serve these Swamis. Look, I am pleased with
your devotion to the Swamis and I grant you the wealth of the Vidyadharas as a
result of your service to the Swamis. This has come to you only through your
service to the Swamis. Do not think that it has come from anyone else.' Thus,
after explaining to them, Dharanendra taught them the knowledge of Prajnapti,
etc.  Pleased with this, they both came to the Vaitalya mountain, which was
fifty yojanas wide and twenty-five yojanas high, as per the Swamis' command.
There, Vinamikumar, with the power of knowledge, established fifty cities, each
ten yojanas wide, in the middle of the southern range of the earth. Similarly,
Vidyadharapati Vinamikumar established sixty cities, each ten yojanas wide, in
the northern range. There, for a long time, they both ruled happily as the kings
of the Vidyadharas. It is true that 'service to the Swamis does not go in vain.'
One year had passed since Rishabhdev Bhagwan had remained silent and without
food. While wandering in search of a suitable food, he arrived in Hastinapur
with the desire to break his fast. At that time, Shreyanskumar, the son of
Somayasha, had a dream: 'I washed the Meru mountain, which was black, with pots
of nectar and made it bright.' Seth named Subuddhi also had a dream: 'Thousands
of rays fell from the sun, which Shreyanskumar re-established in his place,
making the sun bright again.' King Somayasha also had a dream: 'A king was
surrounded by many enemies, but with the help of Shreyans, he won.' All three
narrated their dreams to each other in the royal court. But, not knowing the
fruit of their dreams, they returned to their respective places. At that time,
as if to give a direct decision on the fruit of that dream, Bhagwan arrived at
Shreyans' place for alms. Just as the sea starts to churn when it sees the moon,
so too, Shreyans, the recipient of blessings, danced with joy at the sight of
Bhagwan. As soon as Shreyanskumar saw the Swami, he thought to himself, and from
this, he gained the knowledge of remembering his past life, like a lost
treasure. All the things of his past life began to appear before him like a
moving picture: in his previous life, he was the Chakravarti Vajranabha, and he
was his charioteer. He had also taken initiation at that time. Therefore, the
intelligent Shreyanskumar remembered the method of giving alms without fault. He
gave the Lord Prasook Ikshu-rasa, suitable for breaking the fast. Although there
was a lot of juice, it fit into the Lord's hand-bowl. At that time, joy did not
fit in Shreyans' heart. That same juice, as if solidified in the offering,
became a tall, crested one, taking it to the sky (upper world), because the
influence of great men is incomprehensibly powerful. The Lord drank the Ikshu-
rasa, and the Asuras and humans also partook of the nectar of the Lord's sight.
In the sky, the gods rained down jewels and flowers like rain, with a thunderous
sound like clouds. After this, the Lord went on a tour and arrived in
Takshashila, the capital of King Bahubali. He meditated in the garden outside
the city for one night.  Bahubali thought, 'I will see the Swami in the morning
and make others see him, purifying their eyes.' When will it be morning, and
when will I reach the Lord to see him?' In this anxiety, the night seemed like a
month. When Bahubali reached there in the morning, the Lord had gone elsewhere.
Seeing the garden dull like a moonless sky, he thought to himself, 'Just as
seeds are destroyed on uneven ground, so too, the desires of my heart have been
destroyed. Shame on me, the careless one.' Saying this, Bahubali began to self-
reproach. At the place where the Lord was standing in meditation, Bahubali made
a platform of jewels and a bright Dharmachakra with a thousand eyes like the
sun. Wearing various ornaments, the Swami wandered in the land of the Mlechchas,
just as he did in the land of the Aryas. Yogis are always equanimous. By the
Lord's wandering, even the sinful people there became more steadfast in their
faith. 1. There is also a mention that Dharanendra entered the Lord's mouth and
gave him knowledge. 2. There is also a mention that Bahubali shouted loudly. 24

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dharaNendra kA vidyA denA, AhAra grahaNa yogazAstra prathama prakAza zloka 10
varSAkaNa ko chor3akara dUsare ke pAsa jala kI yAcanA nahIM krtaa| astu,
bharatAdi kA kalyANa ho! Apa hamArI ciMtA na kreN| inhIM svAmI se hameM jo kucha
milanA hogA, vaha mila jaayegaa| hameM dUsare se kyA lenA-denA hai?' unakA
niHspRhatApUrNa pratyuttara sunakara dharaNendra vismita aura prasanna hokara
bole-'maiM bhI inhIM svAmI kA sevaka pAtAlapati dharaNendra huuN| Apa donoM kI
yaha pratijJA bahuta uttama hai| Apako inhIM svAmI kI sevA karanI caahie| lo,
maiM Apa donoM kI svAmibhakti se prasanna hokara svAmisevA ke phala ke rUpa meM
vidyAdharoM kA aizvarya pradAna karatA huuN| aisA yaha Apako svAmI kI sevA se hI
milA hai| aisA mata socanA ki yaha aura kisI se milA hai|' yoM donoM ko
samajhAkara dharaNendra ne unheM prajJapti Adi vidyAe~ sikhaaii|' isase ve donoM
prasanna hokara svAmI kI AjJA lekara pacAsa yojana vistRta evaM paccIsa yojana
U~ce vaitADhya parvata para Aye; jahA~ namikumAra ne ukta vidyAbala se
dakSiNazreNi ke madhya bhUbhAga meM dasa-dasa yojana vistRta 50 nagara bsaaye|
isI taraha vidyAdharapati vinamikumAra ne uttarazreNi meM dasa-dasa yojana
vistRta |60 nagariyAM bsaayii| vahAM cirakAla taka ve donoM vidyAdharoM ke rAjA
cakravartI banakara sukhapUrvaka rAjya karate rhe| saca hai-'svAmIsevA niSphala
nahIM jaatii|' RSabhadeva bhagavAn ko mauna evaM nirAhAra rahate hue eka varSa
ho gayA thaa| ve kalpanIya AhAra kI zodha meM vicaraNa karate-karate pAraNe kI
icchA se hastinApura pdhaareN| usa samaya somayazA ke putra zreyAMsakumAra ne
svapna dekhA ki 'maiMne kAle bane hue meruparvata ko amRtakalazoM se prakSAlita
kara ujjvala bnaayaa|' subuddhi nAmaka seTha ne bhI svapna dekhA ki sUrya se
girI huI hajAroM kiraNe zreyAMsa kumAra ne apane yahA~ punaH sthApita kI, jisase
vaha sUrya punaH tejasvI ho utthaa| somayazA rAjA ne bhI svapna dekhA ki 'eka
rAjA bahuta se zatruoM se ghirA huA thA, paraMtu zreyAMsa kI sahAyatA se usakI
jIta huii|' tInoM ne apanA-apanA svapna rAjasabhA meM eka dUsare ke sAmane
nivedana kiyaa| paraMtu unheM apane-apane svapna ke phala kA jJAna na hone se ve
apane-apane sthAna para lauTa aaye| usI samaya usa svapna-phala kA pratyakSa
nirNaya dene ke lie hI mAno bhagavAn zreyAMsa ke yahAM bhikSArtha pdhaareN|
caMdramA ko dekhakara jaise samudra uchalane lagatA hai, vaise hI bhagavAn ko
dekhakara kalyANa bhAjana zreyAMsa harSa se nAca utthaa| zreyAMsakumAra ne svAmI
ke darzana pAte hI mana meM UhApoha kiyA, isase use pahale ke khoye hue nidhAna
ke samAna jAtismaraNajJAna paidA huaa| pUrvajanma kI ve saba bAteM calacitra kI
taraha usake sAmane Ane lagI ki pUrvajanma meM ve vajranAbha cakravartI the,
taba vaha inakA sArathI thaa| inhoMne usa samaya dIkSA bhI grahaNa kI thii| ataH
buddhizAlI zreyAMsakumAra ko nirdoSa bhikSA dene kI vidhi kA smaraNa ho aayaa|
usane prabhu ko pAraNe meM lene yogya prAsuka ikSu-rasa diyaa| rasa bahuta thA
to bhI bhagavAn ke kara pAtra meM vaha samA gyaa| usa samaya zreyAMsa ke hRdaya
meM harSa nahIM smaayaa| vahI rasa mAno aMjali meM jamakara sthira hokara U~cI
zikhA vAlA banakara AkAza meM (uccaloka meM) le jAne vAlA banA kyoMki
mahApuruSoM kA prabhAva aciMtya zaktizAlI hotA hai| prabha ne IkSarasa: asuroM
tathA manuSyoM ne bhI netroM se prabhu ke darzanAmRta se pAraNA kiyaa| AkAza meM
devoM ne megha ke samAna duMdubhi-nAda aura jalavRSTi ke samAna ratnoM aura
puSpoM kI vRSTi kii| isake pazcAt prabhu vihAra karake bAhubali rAjA kI
rAjadhAnI takSazilA | pdhaare| nagara ke bAhara udyAna meM ve eka rAtri taka
dhyAnastha rhe| bAhubalI ne vicAra kiyA ki 'maiM subaha hote hI svAmI ke darzana
karUMgA tathA aura logoM ko darzana karAkara netra | pavitra kraauuNgaa| kaba
prAtaHkAla ho aura kaba maiM prabhu ke darzanArtha phuNcuuN|' isI ciMtA hI ciMtA
meM rAtri eka mahIne-sI pratIta huii| prAtaHkAla jaba bAhubalI vahAM pahuMcA to
prabhu anyatra vihAra kara gye| caMdra rahita AkAza ke samAna udyAna ko nisteja
dekhakara mana meM vicAra kiyA ki jaise Ubar3a-khAbar3a jamIna para bIja naSTa
ho jAtA hai, vaise hI mere hRdaya ke manoratha naSTa ho gye| dhikkAra hai mujha
pramAdI ko|' yoM kahakara bAhubalI Atma-niMdA karane lgaa| jisa sthAna para
prabhu dhyAnastha khar3e the, usa sthAna para bAhubalI ne ratnoM kI eka vedikA
aura sUrya ke samAna hajAra AMkhoM vAlA tejasvI dharmacakra bnaayaa| vividha
abhigraha dhAraNa karate hue svAmI Aryadeza kI hI taraha adhArmika mlecchadeza
meM bhI vicaraNa karate rhe| yogijana sadaiva samabhAvI hote haiN| prabhu ke
vicaraNa karane se vahA~ ke pApakarmI loga bhI aura adhika dRr3hadharmI 1. kahIM
bhagavAna ke mukha meM dharaNendra ne praveza kara vidyAe~ dI aisA ullekha bhI
hai| 2. bAhubalI ne jora se bAMga pukArane kA ullekha bhI AtA hai| 24

Page #47 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Lord attained Kevalgyan, Bharat's contemplation, The first chapter of
Yogashastra, verse 10, became. In this way, while wandering, a thousand years
had passed for the Lord. While wandering, once the Lord arrived in the city of
Purimatal (Ayodhya). In the northeast corner of the city was a grove called
Shaktal. There, under a banyan tree, he remained stable in Kayotsarga
(meditation) by performing Atthamatap. The Lord ascended the Kshapak श्रेणी and
reached the middle of the pure white meditation in the order of Aapuurvakaran,
and then he shattered his karmic deeds like clouds, from which the sun of
Kevalgyan manifested in the Lord's Atma Pradesh.  At that time, due to extreme
crowding in the sky path, the planes started colliding with each other. Thus,
sixty-four Indras came there along with many gods. The Vayukumar gods, who
cleanse the earth, cleaned the place of the Lord's Samavasaran and made it
level. The Meghkumar gods rained fragrant water there, which settled the dust
there. The gods spread flowers of six seasons on the earth up to the knees.
Truly, the contact of the revered ones is only for worship. The Vahnikumar gods
made the land of Samavasaran fragrant with fragrant incense, making the entire
sky fragrant. The creation of Samavasaran adorned with colorful Ratnakanti by
Indra and the gods looked as if hundreds of rainbows had come together. The
Bhavanpati, Jyotishka and Vaimanika gods built three forts there of silver, gold
and ruby. The flags fluttering on the fort seemed to be informing the beings
that this path is of heaven, this path is of liberation. The fort was adorned
with statues of Vidyaadharis made of gems. The gods did not allow them to enter
the Samavasaran, thinking that perhaps the inclusion would not be possible
inside. The enchanted divine women, delighted, kept looking at the ruby
pinnacles for a long time. Each fort had four doors adorned like four windows of
four types. The gods built a Kalpavriksha three kos high on the land of
Samavasaran, which seemed to be indicating the three jewels of Samyagdarshan
etc. Under the same tree, a throne made of gems with a superior footstool was
built in the east direction; which was giving the beauty of heaven. The Lord
entered from the east direction and bowed to the Tirth (Sangha) saying 'Namo
Tithass'. The Lord, like the sun who removes darkness on the eastern mountain,
was seated on that throne established in the east direction. At the same time,
the gods established the image of the Lord on the throne in the remaining three
directions. Above the Lord, three umbrellas, which were removing the beauty of
the full moon, and the symbol of ownership of the three worlds, were shining. In
front of the Lord, a gem-studded Indra flag was shining so brightly, as if Indra
was raising one hand high, indicating that the Lord is the only one who is our
master. The Dharmachakra, adorned with an extremely wonderful group of lights,
was shining in front of the Lord, as if it was indicating the Lord's
Chakravartitva on the Kevalgyanis. Two chamaras, as bright and beautiful as the
white waves of the Ganges river, seemed like swans running towards the Lord's
lotus face. The sun also seemed like a firefly child in front of the Bhamandala
that appeared behind the Lord's body. The Dundubhi resounding in the sky was as
deep as thunder. It was echoing in all directions with its reverberation. The
gods rained flowers with petals drooping down all around at that time. It seemed
as if Kamadeva had abandoned his other weapons on those who had attained power.
The Lord began to preach Dharma with a voice endowed with thirty-five qualities,
which benefited (saved) the three worlds.  At that time, a messenger came and
requested King Bharat - 'Swamin! Lord Rishabh has attained Kevalgyan.' Another
messenger came and informed - 'A Chakra Ratna has appeared in your armory.' 'On
the one hand, my father has attained Kevalgyan, on the other hand, I have
received the Chakra Ratna, which of the two should I worship first?' Bharat Nrip
remained in this dilemma for a moment. In the next moment, he thought clearly
that where is my father who gives protection to the beings of the world and
where is this chakra which destroys the beings! Thus, deciding, he ordered his
family to go to worship the Lord. Hearing the news of the calamities coming upon
his son, Bharat bowed to his grandmother Marudevi, who had become blind due to
constantly shedding tears of sorrow, and prayed - 'Grandmother! You always used
to reproach me that my delicate son suffers the trouble of water like the lotus
grove in the monsoon and cold 25

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prabhu ko kevalajJAna, bharata kA ciMtana yogazAstra prathama prakAza zloka 10
bana gye| isa taraha vihAra karate hue prabhu ko eka hajAra varSa ho cuke,
vicaraNa karate hue eka bAra svAmI purimatAla (ayodhyA) nagara meM pdhaareN|
nagara ke IzAnakoNa meM zakaTAla nAmaka upavana thaa| vahAM vaTavRkSa ke nIce,
aTThamatapa karake kAyotsarga (dhyAna) meM sthira rhe| prabhu kSapakazreNI para
ArUr3ha hokara apUrvakaraNa ke krama se nirmala zukladhyAna ke madhya meM A
pahuMce aura tabhI unhoMne apane ghAtikarmoM ko bAdaloM kI taraha chinna-bhinna
kara diyA, jisase svAmI ke Atma pradeza meM kevalajJAna rUpI sUrya prakaTa huaa|
usa samaya AkAza mArga meM atyaMta bhIr3a ho jAne ke kAraNa vimAna paraspara
TakarAne lge| isa prakAra aneka devoM ke sAtha causaTha iMdra vahAM aaye| bhUmi-
pramArjana karane vAle vAyukumAra devoM ne prabhu ke samavasaraNa kA sthAna
sApha karake samatala banA diyaa| meghakumAra devoM ne vahA~ sugaMdhita jala kI
vRSTi kI, jisase vahA~ kI dhUla jama gyii| devoM ne chaha RtuoM ke phUla pRthvI
para ghuTanoM taka bichA diye| saca hai, pUjyoM kA saMsarga pUjA ke lie hI hotA
hai| vahnikumAradevoM ne samavasaraNa kI bhUmi ko sugaMdhita dhUpa se
sugaMdhamaya banAkara sAre AkAza ko bhI surabhita kara diyaa| iMdra aura devoM
dvArA raMgabiraMgI ratmakAMti se susajjita samavasaraNa kI racanA aisI laga rahI
thI, mAno eka sAtha saikar3oM iMdradhanuSa ho gaye hoN| bhavanapati, jyotiSka
aura vaimAnika devoM ne cAMdI, sone aura mANikya ke tIna kile vahAM bnaaye| kile
para phaharAtI huI patAkAe~ mAnoM jIvoM ko sUcita kara rahI thI ki yaha mArga
svarga kA hai, yaha mArga mokSa kA hai| kile para vidyAdhariyoM kI ratnanirmita
putaliyA~ suzobhita ho rahI thii| devatAoM ne samavasaraNa meM yaha socakara
unakApraveza nahIM karavAyA ki zAyada samAveza aMdara nahIM ho skegaa| mugdha
devAMganAe~ harSita hokara cirakAla taka mANikya ke kaMgUre dekhatI rhiiN| cAra
prakAra ke cAra gavAkSoM kI taraha pratyeka kile ke cAra daravAje suzobhita ho
rahe the| devoM ne samavasaraNa kI bhUmi para tIna kosa U~cA eka kalpavRkSa
banAyA, jo mAno samyagdarzana Adi tIna ratnoM ko sUcita kara rahA thaa| usI
vRkSa ke nIce pUrvadizA meM zreSTha pAdapITha se yukta ratnajaTita siMhAsana
banAyA; jo svarga kI-sI zobhA de rahA thaa| pUrvadizA se prabhu ne praveza kiyA
aura 'namo titthassa' kahakara tIrtha (saMgha) ko namaskAra kiyaa| pUrvAcala
para aMdhakAra ko dUra karane vAle | sUrya ke samAna prabhu pUrvadizA meM
sthApita usa siMhAsana para virAjamAna hue| usI samaya devoM ne zeSa tIna dizAoM
meM bhagavAn kA pratibiMba siMhAsana para sthApita kiyaa| prabhu ke Upara
pUrNimA ke caMdramaMDala kI zobhA kA haraNa karane vAle evaM tIna loka ke
svAmitva ke cihnarUpa tIna chatra suzobhita ho rahe the| prabhu ke sanmukha
ratnamaya iMdradhvaja aisA zobhAyamAna ho rahA thA, mAno iMdra eka hAtha U~cA
kiye hue yaha sUcita kara rahA ho ki bhagavAn hI ekamAtra hamAre svAmI hai|
atIva | adbhuta prabhA samUha se yukta dharmacakra prabhu ke Age aisA suzobhita
ho rahA thA, mAno vaha kevalajJAniyoM para prabhu kA cakravartitva sUcita kara
rahA ho| gaMgAnadI kI zveta taraMgoM ke samAna ujjvala evaM manohara do cAmara
prabhu ke mukha-kamala kI ora daur3ate hue haMsa ke samAna pratIta ho rahe the|
prabhu ke zarIra ke pIche prakaTa hue bhAmaMDala ke samakSa sUryamaMDala bhI
juganU ke bacce kI taraha pratIta ho rahA thaa| AkAza meM baja rahI duMdubhi
meghagarjanA ke samAna gaMbhIra thii| vaha apanI pratidhvani se dazoM dizAoM ko
gUMjA rahI thii| devoM ne usa samaya cAroM ora nIce DuMTI vAle paMkhur3iyoM
sahita phUloM kI varSA kii| vaha aisI mAlUma hotI thI mAno kAmadeva ne zakti
prApta logoM para apane dUsare astroM kA tyAga kiyA ho| bhagavAn ne tInoM lokoM
kA upakAra (uddhAra) karane vAlI paitIsa guNoM se yukta vANI se dharmadezanA
AraMbha kii| usI samaya eka dUta ne Akara bharata rAjA se nivedana kiyA-'svAmin!
RSabha prabhu ko kevalajJAna utpanna huA hai|' dUsare dUta ne Akara sUcanA
dI-'ApakI AyudhazAlA meM cakraratna prakaTa huA hai|' 'eka ora pitAjI ko
kevalajJAna utpanna huA hai, dUsarI ora mujhe cakraratna kI prApti huI ina donoM
meM se pahale kisakI pUjA karUM? bharatanRpa kSaNabhara isI udher3abuna meM
par3e rhe| dUsare hI kSaNa unhoMne spaSTa ciMtana kiyA ki kahA~ vizva ke jIvoM
ko abhayadAna dene vAle pitAjI aura kahAM jIvoM kA saMhAra karane vAlA yaha
cakra! yoM nizcaya kara unhoMne apane parivAra ko prabhu kI pUjA ke lie calane
kI AjJA de dii| putra para Ane vAle pariSahoM ke samAcAra suna-sunakara
niraMtara duHkhAzru bahAne ke kAraNa netrarogI banI haI mAtAmahI marudevI ke
pAsa Akara bharata ne namana kiyA aura prArthanA kI-dAdI-mAM! Apa majhe sadA
upAlaMbha diyA karatI thI ki merA sukumAra putra caumAse meM padmavana kI taraha
jala kA upadrava sahana karatA hai aura zardI 25

Page #48 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Rishabha Prabhu's teachings, Marudeva's liberation, establishment of the order
In the first chapter of the Yoga Shastra, verse 10, it is said that in the
forest, due to snowfall, he experiences the state of distress like the pillar of
Malati, and in the summer, he experiences excessive heat from the scorching rays
of the sun like an elephant. In this way, my forest-dwelling son is always
alone, without shelter, suffering like a lowly person in all seasons. Therefore,
if you want to see the prosperity of your son who has attained the ownership of
the three worlds, let's go.' Thus saying, the mother, who was as happy as
Lakshmi herself, was seated on an elephant, adorned with ornaments of gold,
diamonds, and rubies, and Bharat set out towards the Samvasaran with elephants,
horses, chariots, and infantry. While going with the army, King Bharat saw from
afar a gem-studded flag, like a moving torana, with ornaments gathered together
in front. Seeing this, Bharat said to his mother Marudevi, 'Grandmother! Look,
this is the Samvasaran prepared by the gods for the Lord! Here, the cries of
victory of the gods who have come to celebrate the service of my father's lotus
feet are echoing. And the teachings of the Lord, pure and filled with nectar for
the ears, are being heard from the villages of Malakosh, etc. Listen attentively
with wonder, grandmother, to the voice of the Lord, sweeter than the voices of
peacocks, cranes, herons, swans, and other birds. Grandmother! My father's
voice, as deep as the sound of thunder, travels for yojanas, and my mind, like a
cloud, rushes towards it.' Mother Marudevi listened with joy to the deep voice
of the Lord of the three worlds, who was as steady as a lamp in the void, the
savior of the world. Her eyes were cleansed by the tears of joy, and she could
see. She saw the power of the great Tirthankara Rishabhadev. Seeing him, her
attachment ended. Her actions were extinguished by the stability of joy. At that
very moment, she attained omniscience. And at that very moment, she completed
her lifespan and departed to liberation. In this descending time, Mother
Marudevi was the first to become liberated and perfected. After that, the gods
cast her earthly body into the sea and celebrated the Nirvana festival there.
Knowing that his grandmother had attained liberation, King Bharat felt both joy
and sorrow, just as the shadow of autumn clouds and the heat of the sun are both
present.  Thereafter, Bharat Chakravarti, abandoning the royal insignia, entered
the Samvasaran on foot with his family. King Bharat, with eyes like a cuckoo,
gazed intently at the Lord, surrounded by the four divine groups, like the moon,
and circumambulated the Lord three times and bowed down. Then, with his hands
folded above his head, he began to praise the Lord: 'O Lord of the entire
universe! Victory to you; O giver of protection to the entire world! Victory to
you; O first Jineshwara! Victory to you, O savior of the world! Victory to you!
O Lord, like the sun, you have awakened the lotus of the glorious beings of this
descending time. Today, by seeing you, darkness has been destroyed, and dawn has
arrived. O Lord! Your words are like pure water that purifies the minds of the
glorious beings, like pure water. O ocean of compassion! Whoever mounts your
chariot of rule, liberation is not far away for him. O God! The world where one
sees the real form of the uncaused savior is considered by us to be greater than
liberation. O Lord! By seeing you, my eyes, fixed in great bliss, experience the
taste of liberation even in the world. O Lord, the giver of protection! You
alone will save the world, which is surrounded by enemies in the form of
attachment, aversion, and passions. O Lord! You yourself understand the truth.
You alone show the path to liberation. You yourself protect the world.
Therefore, Lord! Whom else should I praise now, except you?' Thus, Bharat
Chakravarti praised the Lord, made his two ears into cups, and drank the nectar
of the teachings. At that time, Rishabhasen and the other eighty-four Ganadharas
were also initiated by Lord Rishabhadev. After that, the Lord initiated the five
sons of Brahmi and Bharat Chakravarti, and seven hundred grandsons, into the
Bhagavati order. In this way, at that time, the Lord established the fourfold
order. In the fourfold order of Lord Rishabhadev, the chief were the sadhus like
Pundarik, the sadhvis like Brahmi, the shravaks like Shreyans, and the shravikas
like Sundari. From that time till today, this order has continued in the same
way. Thereafter, the Lord, along with his disciples, went to other places to
awaken the glorious beings. Bharatnaresh also bowed to the Lord and returned to
Ayodhya.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 RSabha prabhu kI dezanA, marudevA kA mokSa, zAsana sthApanA yogazAstra prathama
prakAza zloka 10 meM vana meM himapAta hone se mAlatI ke staMbha kI taraha
parikleza-avasthA kA sadA anubhava karatA hai aura garmI meM sUrya kI
atibhayaMkara uSNa kiraNoM se hAthI ke samAna adhika saMtApa anubhava karatA
hai| isa taraha merA vanavAsI putra sabhI RtuoM meM sadaiva akelA, Azraya
rahita, tuccha jana kI taraha kaSTa uThA rahA hai| ataH Aja tIna loka ke
svAmitva ko prApta hue apane putra kI samRddhi dekhanA ho to clo|' yoM kahakara
sAkSAt lakSmI ke samAna parama prasanna mAtAmahI ko hAthI para biThAkara sone,
hIre evaM mANikya ke AbhUSaNoM se vibhUSita hokara hAthI, ghor3e, ratha aura
paidala senA ke sAtha bharata ne samavasaraNa kI ora prasthAna kiyaa| sainya ke
sAtha jAte hue bharata rAjA ne dUra se hI sAmane AbhUSaNoM ko ekatrita kiye hue
jaMgama toraNa ke samAna eka ratnadhvaja dekhaa| dekhate hI bharata ne mAtA
marudevI se kahA- 'dAdI mAM! dekho, yaha sAmane devatAoM dvArA taiyAra kiyA huA
prabhu kA samavasaraNa! yahAM pitAjI ke caraNa-kamaloM kI sevA meM utsava manAne
ke lie Aye hae devoM ke jaya-jayanAda ke nAre sanAyI de rahe hai| aura yaha
mAlakoza Adi grAma rAgo se pavitra evaM karNAmRta |saMpanna bhagavAna kI dezanA
sunAyI de rahI hai mora, sArasa, krauMca, haMsa Adi pakSiyoM kI AvAja se bhI
adhika madhura svara vAlI bhagavAn kI vANI, vismaya pUrvaka ekAgratA se kAna
dekara suno| dAdI mAM! mere pitAjI kI megha-dhvani ke samAna gaMbhIra
yojanagAminI vANI sunakara mana bAdala ke samAna balavAna hokara usI tarapha
daur3atA hai|' marudevI mAtA ne saMsAra| tAraka, nirvAta dIpaka ke samAna
sthira, trilokInAtha kI gaMbhIra vANI harSa se sunI to unake netrapaTala
AnaMdAzrujala se dhulakara sApha ho gye| unakI AMkhoM se dikhAyI dene lgaa|
unhoMne atizayayukta tIrthaMkara RSabhadeva kI Rddhi dekhii| use dekhane se
unakA moha samApta ho gyaa| AnaMda kI sthiratA se unake karma khatma ho gye| usI
samaya unheM kevalajJAna prApta ho gyaa| aura usI samaya Ayu pUrNa kara mokSa
meM padhAra gyii| isa avasarpiNI-kAla meM marudevI mAtA sarva prathama mukta-
siddha huii| usake bAda devoM ne unake pArthiva zarIra ko samudra meM bahA diyA
aura vahIM nirvANa-mahotsava kiyaa| dAdI-mAM kA mokSa huA jAnakara bharata rAjA
ko harSa aura zoka donoM usI taraha sAtha-sAtha hue, jaise zaratkAlIna bAdaloM
kI chAyA aura sUrya kA tApa donoM hoN| tadanaMtara bharatacakravartI rAjacihnoM
kA parityAgakara saparivAra paidala calakara samavasaraNa meM praviSTa hue|
cAroM . devanikAyoM se ghire hue prabhu ko dRSTi rUpI cakora se caMdramA kI
taraha bharata rAjA ne TakaTakI lagAkara dekhA aura bhagavAn ko tIna bAra
pradakSiNA karake namaskAra kiyaa| phira mastaka para aMjali karake vaha isa
taraha prabhu kI stuti karane lagA 'he saMpUrNa jagat ke nAtha! ApakI jaya ho;
saMpUrNa vizva ko abhayadAna dene vAle! ApakI jaya ho; he prathama jinezvara!
ApakI jaya ho, he saMsAra ke tAraka! ApakI jaya ho! isa avasarpiNIkAla ke
bhavyajIva rUpI kamala ko pratibodha karane ke lie sUryasamAna prabho! Aja Apake
darzana hone se aMdhakAra kA nAza huA hai, prabhAta kA udaya huA hai| he nAtha!
nirmalI ke samAna bhavyajIvoM ke mana rUpI jala ko nirmala karane vAlI ApakI
vANI hai| karuNA ke kSIrasamudra! Apake zAsana rUpI mahAratha meM jo car3ha
gayA, usake lie phira lokAgra mokSa dUra nahIM rhtaa| deva! akAraNa jagabaMdhu
ke sAkSAt darzana jisa bhUmi para ho jAte haiM, usa saMsAra ko bhI hama lokAgra
mokSa se bar3hakara samajhate haiN| svAmin! Apake darzana se mahAnaMdarasa meM
sthira huI A~khoM meM saMsAra meM bhI mokSa-sukha ke AsvAdana kA-sA anubhava
hotA hai| he abhayadAtA nAtha! rAgadveSa-kaSAya rUpI zatruoM se ghire hue jagat
kA uddhAra Apa hI se hogaa| he nAtha! Apa svayaM tattva ko samajhate haiN| Apa
hI mokSamArga batalAte haiN| svayaM vizva kA rakSaNa karate haiN| isalie prabho!
aba Apako chor3akara maiM aura kisakI stuti karUM?' isa taraha bharata-
cakravartI ne prabhu kI stuti karake donoM karNapuToM ko pyAlA banAkara dezanA
ke rUpa meM amRtavANI kA pAna kiyaa| usa samaya RSabhasena Adi caurAsI
gaNadharoM ko bhI zrIRSabhadeva bhagavAn ne dIkSA dii| usake bAda brAhmI aura
bharata-cakravartI ke pAMca putroM tathA sAta sau pautroM ko bhagavAn ne
bhAgavatI dIkSA dii| isa taraha usa samaya prabhu ne caturvidha zrI saMgha kI
sthApanA kii| bhagavAn RSabhadeva ke caturvidha saMgha meM puMDarIka Adi sAdhu,
brAhmI Adi sAdhviyA~ zreyAMsa Adi zrAvaka aura suMdarI Adi zrAvikAe~ pramukha
huii| usa samaya se lekara Aja taka usI taraha yaha saMgha-vyavasthA calatI rahI
hai| tatpazcAt prabhu ne bhavyajIvoM ko pratibodha dene ke lie ziSya parivAra
sahita anyatra vihAra kiyaa| | bharatanareza bhI prabhu ko namaskAra kara
ayodhyA lauTa gye| 26

Page #49 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Conquest of the Six Regions by Bharat  **Yoga Shastra, First Light, Verse
10**  _The ocean of the lineage of Rishabhdeva, like the moon, was delighted by
the embodiment of justice, the glorious King Bharat. Lakshmi Devi was his
servant in the presence of his beauty. He had sixty-four thousand queens. When
King Bharat sat on the half-seat with Indra, the gods, unable to understand the
difference, were filled with doubt._  Like the sun, the world's light, rising in
the east, the radiant King Bharat, whose brilliance eclipsed others, set out
from the east to conquer the world. He arrived at the eastern seashore, made
beautiful by the confluence of the Ganga, where the waves, like hands, tossed
the flow, as if throwing wealth. There, remembering the Kumardeva of Magadha
Tirtha, the Chakravarti embraced the eight tapas, the first door to wealth.
Then, seated in his chariot, the mighty-armed Bharat Chakravarti entered the
vast ocean, like Mount Meru. Keeping the chariot upright in the water, he sent
his arrow, marked with his name, like his messenger, towards Magadha, twelve
yojanas away. The arrow fell in Magadha. Seeing it, the King of Magadha frowned
and became extremely angry. But as soon as the Naga Kumar saw the name of Bharat
Chakravarti on the arrow, like a mantra, his mind became calm. "This must be the
first Chakravarti born," he thought, and came to Bharat like the embodiment of
victory. He brought back the arrow, like the jewel on his head and the
brilliance he had earned over time, to the Chakravarti and said, "I am your
servant. I am the protector of the eastern direction. Tell me, what task can I
do for you?" Hearing this request, the mighty Bharat accepted him as the King of
Magadha, like a victory pillar.  From there, the King Bharat, shaking the earth
and mountains with his four-armed army, reached the southern sea from the
eastern seashore. The mighty-armed Bharat set up camp on this seashore, where
the coastal islands produce pistachios, cashews, and other things in abundance.
The glorious Bharat, like a second sun, with his hidden brilliance, mounted a
chariot drawn by horses. Then, seated in that chariot, drawn by high-spirited
horses like leaping waves, he took the chariot into the sea, up to its navel.
Then, Bharat, drawing the bowstring to his ear, made the sound of the bow like
the Om of the Dhanurveda. Then, the powerful Bharat, like Indra, placed a golden
arrow, like a golden earring, like a lotus stalk, marked with his own name, on
the bow and released it towards the lord of Varadam Tirtha. The lord of Varadam
Tirtha saw the arrow and caught it. He knew its purpose. Therefore, he came to
Bharat with offerings. With folded hands, he said to Bharat, "You have graced my
place, making me fulfilled. By obtaining a lord like you, I have become a lord."
Then, making him his subordinate king, the appreciative Bharat, shaking the
earth with his army, moved towards the western direction.  Reaching the western
seashore, King Bharat also threw a blazing arrow, like a thunderbolt, towards
the lord of Prabhas Tirtha. Prabhaspati read the inscription on the arrow: "If
you wish to live happily, obey my command and also give me tribute." Reading
this, he came to Bharat with abundant offerings, to please the King. He offered
Bharat, the crown of men, a beautiful garland of jewels, white like snow, and
the best of jewels, the Kaustubha gem, and a unique gem, as well as a crown
shining with Kaustubha gems and gold, like the embodiment of brilliance, and
pleased him with his sincere devotion. From there, King Bharat set out towards
the Sindhu River, like the threshold of the northern gate. There, near the
temple of Sindhu Devi, the king set up camp.  To invoke Sindhu Devi, he
performed severe tapas. Sindhu Devi, sensing the arrival of a Chakravarti by the
trembling of her seat, came with divine offerings. She worshipped King Bharat.
King Bharat accepted her offerings and dismissed her. He then broke his fast and
celebrated his victory for eight days. Then, following the cycle, he went to the
northeast, to the city of Vidisha, and reached the Vaithadya mountain, which
connects the two divisions of Bharat Kshetra. There, Bharat set up camp at the
foot of the southern division. Here also...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bharata dvArA SaTkhaNDavijaya yogazAstra prathama prakAza zloka 10 _RSabhadeva-
vaMza rUpI samudra ko caMdra ke samAna AhlAdita karane vAle, sAkSAt mUrtimAna
nyAya zrI bharatanareza ne pRthvI kA yathArtha rUpa se pAlana kiyaa| unakI rUpa-
saMpatti ke samakSa lakSmIdevI dAsI rUpa thii| unake causaTha hajAra rAniyA~
thiiN| jisa samaya bharatanareza iMdra ke sAtha ardhAsana para baiThate the. usa
samaya aMtara ko nahIM samajhane vAle deva saMzaya meM par3a jAte the|
jagatprakAza sUrya jaise pUrva meM udaya hotA hai, vaise hI apane teja se
dUsaroM ke teja ko parAjita karane vAle tejasvI bharatarAjA ne digvijaya karane
ke lie pUrvadizA se prasthAna prAraMbha kiyA; aura vaha vahAM A pahu~cA, jahAM
gaMgA ke saMgama se manohara banA huA pUrvIya samudrataTa apane kallola rUpI
karoM se pravAha ko uchAlate hue aisA laga rahA thA, mAno dhana uchAla rahA ho|
vahAM mAgadhatIrtha ke kumAradeva kA mana meM smaraNa kara cakravartI ne
arthasiddhi ke prathamadvAra rUpa aTThamatapa ko aMgIkAra kiyaa| tadanaMtara
ratha meM baiThakara mahAbhujA vAle bharata cakravartI ne meru ke samAna vizAla
samudra meM praveza kiyaa| ratha ko dhurI taka jala meM khar3A rakhakara apane
dUta ke samAna apane nAma se aMkita bANa ko bAraha yojana sthita mAgadha kI ora
bhejaa| bANa mAgadha meM giraa| use dekhate hI mAgadhapati deva bhRkuTi
car3hAkara atyaMta krodhAviSTa ho gyaa| lekina jyoM hI nAgakumAra ne bANa para
maMtrAkSara ke samAna bharata cakravartI ke nAmAkSaroM ko dekhA; tyoMhI usakA
mana atyaMta zAMta ho gyaa| ho na ho, yaha prathama cakravartI paidA huA hai;
yoM vicArakara vaha mUrtimAna vijaya kI taraha bharata ke pAsa aayaa| vaha apane
mastaka ke maNi evaM cirakAla se upArjita teja ke samAna bANa cakravartI ke pAsa
vApasa le AyA aura kahane lagA-'maiM ApakA sevaka huuN| pUrvadizA kA pAlaka
huuN| ataH batalAie maiM ApakA kauna-sA kArya kruuN|' isa prakAra kI vinati
sunakara mahAparAkramI bharata ne use jayastaMbha ke samAna mAgadhAdhipati ke
rUpa meM svIkAra kiyaa| vahA~ se pUrvI samudrataTa se bharata-nareza phira eka
pRthvI se dUsarI pRthvI evaM eka parvata se dUsare parvata ko kaMpita karate hue
caturaMgiNI senA ke sAtha dakSiNa-samudra phuNce| mahAbhujabalI bharata ne isa
samudrataTa para senA kA par3Ava DAlA, taTavartI dvIpa meM pizte, kAjU Adi
vastue~ pracura mAtrA meM paidA hotI haiN| apane gupta teja se dUsare sUrya ke
samAna tejasvI bharateza ghor3e jute hue eka mahAratha meM ArUr3ha hue| usake
bAda uchalate taraMga ke samAna U~ce ghoDoM se jute hue ratha meM baiThakara usI
ratha ko vaha samudra meM nAbhi taka pAnI meM le gye| phira bharateza ne bANa
taiyAra karake kAna taka pratyaMcA khIMcakara dhanurveda ke oMkAra ke samAna
dhanuSaTaMkAra kiyaa| usake bAda iMdra ke samAna balazAlI bharateza ne sone ke
kuMDala ke samAna, kamalanAla ke samAna svanAmAMkita svarNabANa dhanuSa para
car3hAyA aura varadAma tIrtha ke svAmI kI ora chodd'aa| varadAma tIrtha ke svAmI
ko dekhA aura use grahaNa kiyaa| vaha usakA upAya jAnane vAlA thaa| ataH bheMTa
lekara bharateza ke pAsa phuNcaa| bharatAdhipa se usane hAtha jor3akara kahA ki
'Apa mere yahAM padhAreM, isase maiM kRtArtha huaa| Apa jaise nAtha ko pAkara
aba maiM sanAtha bnaa|' isake bAda use apanA adhInastha rAjA banAkara, kArya kI
kadara karane vAle bharatezvara sainya se pRthvItala ko kaMpAte hue pazcimI dizA
kI ora cala pdd'e| pazcimI samudrataTa para pahuMcakara bharatanareza ne bhI
prabhAsatIrtha ke svAmI kI ora vidyudaMDa ke samAna prajvalita bANa pheNkaa|
prabhAsapati ne usa bANa para aMkita vAkya-'yadi sukha se jInA cAhate ho to merI
AjJA kA pAlana karo aura merA daMDa (kara) bhI do;' akSara pddh'e| par3hate hI
bharatarAjA ko prasanna karane ke lie| vaha AzcaryakArI pracura bheTa ke sAtha
usa bANa ko lekara bharateza ke samIpa aayaa| apane cirakAla meM upArjita yaza
evaM hima ke samAna ujjvala manohara hAra aura maNiyoM meM zreSTha kaustubha
maNi tathA advitIya maNiratna naraziromaNi bharata ko arpaNa kiye aura
kaustubharatna va suvarNa Adi se dedIpyamAna, mUrtimAna teja kI taraha mukuTa
arpaNa kara apanI niSkapaTabhakti se usane bharata ko prasanna kiyaa| vahAM se
bharatanareza ne uttaradvAra kI dehalI ke samAna siMdhu nadI kI ora prasthAna
kiyaa| vahAM siMdhudevI ke maMdira ke pAsa rAjA ne senA kI chAvanI ddaalii|
siMdhadevI ko AhvAna karane ke uddezya se unhoMne adama tapa kiyaa| siMdha devI
ne apanA Asana kaMpAyamAna hone se jAnA ki koI cakravartI AyA hai| ataH vaha
divya bheMTa lekara aayii| aura bharata mahArAjA kI pUjA kii| bharatanareza ne
usakA svIkAra kara use vidA dI aura tapa kA pAraNA kiyaa| phira ATha dina taka
usakA vijaya-mahotsava kiyaa| usake bAda cakra kA anusaraNa karate hue ve uttara
pUrva kI IzAna vidizA meM jAte hue bharatakSetra ke do vibhAgoM ko jor3ane vAle
vaitADhya parvata ke nikaTa phuNce| vahA~ bharateza ne dakSiNa-vibhAga kI
talahaTI meM senA kA par3Ava ddaalaa| yahA~ bhI 27

Page #50 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Bharat's Conquest of the Six Regions  **Yoga Shastra, First Light, Verse 10**
Bharat, the king, performed the eighth *attham* penance with the aim of
conquering Vaithaḍya Kumar Dev. Through his *avadhi* knowledge, he learned of
the dev's strength and, accordingly, presented him with gifts. Vaithaḍya Kumar
Dev accepted Bharat's sovereignty and was then dismissed. Bharat then performed
the *parana* of the eighth *attham* penance and celebrated the *Ashtahnika*
festival in his honor.  After this, Bharat, radiant like the sun, arrived near
the cave of Tamisra and set up his camp nearby. He performed the eighth *attham*
penance with the aim of conquering Krtimal Dev. The dev's seat trembled, and he
came forth to accept Bharat's sovereignty. Bharat dismissed him, performed the
*parana* of the eighth *attham* penance, and celebrated the *Ashtahnika*
festival in his honor.  On Bharat's command, his general, Susheṇ, crossed the
Sindhu river with the help of the *charmaratna* and conquered Nishkut, the ruler
of South Sindhu.  Bharat, son of Rishabha, ordered Susheṇ to open the cave of
Tamisra, which was blocked by a vajra-kapaṭ (diamond door) in the Vaithaḍya
mountain. Susheṇ, with reverence for his master's command, went to the region
near the Tamisra cave. With a pure mind, he performed the eighth *attham*
penance in the *paushadhashala* (medicine room) to remember Krtimal Dev, the
guardian of the cave.  After completing the eighth *attham* penance, Susheṇ
bathed and cleansed himself internally and externally. He then donned pure
garments and various ornaments. He then took a *dhoopadani* (incense burner)
filled with burning fire, like a *homakunda* (sacrificial fire pit), and, with
his fists, offered incense like a sacrifice to the self. He then cautiously
approached the cave entrance, like a storehouse door, and prepared to open it
quickly. He saw the double doors and bowed to them, for how else could he enter?
He then marked eight auspicious symbols on the cave entrance and celebrated the
*Aṭṭhai* festival.  After this, the general, in accordance with his glory, took
the *dandaratna* (a weapon made of a precious stone), like a vajra that destroys
all enemies. He then stepped back a few steps, like a *vakragrha* (a celestial
body that moves in a retrograde motion), and struck the door three times with
the *dandaratna*. Just as a vajra cuts through the wings of a mountain, the
*dandaratna* shattered the two doors with a loud crack.  As the cave entrance
opened, Susheṇ jumped with joy. He bowed to Bharat, the emperor, and said, "O
King! Just as the doors of liberation open for a *yati* (ascetic) through
intense penance, so too has the cave door opened without any obstacle due to
your influence."  Hearing this, Bharat, like Indra on his elephant Airavaṇ,
mounted his elephant Gandhasti and proceeded towards the cave entrance. To
dispel the darkness of the cave, he placed a *maniratna* (gemstone) on the right
tusk of his elephant, which shone like the sun in the east. With this light, he
could see for a yojana (a unit of distance) in both directions. Like the sun in
the clouds, Bharat entered the cave. His army followed behind, and the *chakra*
(wheel) led the way.  Bharat's servants illuminated the cave by marking circles
of *kakiniratna* (a type of gemstone) in the shape of *gomutrika* (a type of cow
urine) every yojana in both directions. These circles shone like the sun, and
the light of these 49 illuminated circles allowed Bharat's army to proceed
comfortably.  On the way, Bharat saw two rivers in the cave, named Unmanna and
Nimanna. One river carried stones, while the other drowned a *tumba* (a type of
gourd). He crossed these difficult rivers by creating a path with the *vardhki-
ratna* (a type of gemstone), and emerged from the cave like the sun emerging
from a cloud.  From there, Bharat entered the Uttarakhaṇḍ of Bharatkshetra. Like
Indra fighting the demons, Bharat fought the Mlechchhas and defeated them. The
Mlechchhas, with the aim of conquering Bharat, worshipped their own gods,
including Meghakumar. Due to their influence, a torrential downpour began, like
the deluge.  To protect himself, Bharat spread out the *charmaratna* (a type of
leather) for twelve yojanas and placed the *chattraratna* (a type of umbrella)
on top. He stationed his army in the middle. To dispel the darkness caused by
the storm, he placed a *maniratna* on the *chattrdanda* (umbrella staff), which
shone like the sun in the east. The *charmaratna* and *chattraratna*, both
floating like eggs, were a sight to behold. Perhaps this is how the concept of
the universe began in the world.  Bharat had a *grihapatiratna* (a type of
gemstone) that could make seeds sown in the morning grow and mature by evening.
This allowed Bharat to provide food for everyone in his entourage.  Meanwhile,
the Mlechchha god Meghakumar, exhausted from the rain, said to his followers,
...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bharata dvArA SaTkhaNDavijaya yogazAstra prathama prakAza zloka 10 |
vaitADhyakumAra deva ko uddezya karake bharata rAjA ne aTThama tapa kiyaa|
avadhijJAna se use jJAta huA to apanI zakti ke | anusAra bheMTa lekara pahuMcA
aura bharata kI AjJAdhInatA svIkAra kI  /  use vidA karake rAjA ne aTThama tapa
kA pAraNA kiyA | aura usake nAma kA yathAvidhi aSTAhnikA mahotsava kiyaa|
tatpazcAt kAMti meM sUrya ke samAna rAjA bharata tamisrA nAma kI guphA ke pAsa
AyA aura vahI pAsa meM hI sainya kA par3Ava DAlA  /  kRtamAla nAma ke deva ko
lakSya karake vahA~ unhoMne aTThama tapa kiyaa| usa deva kA Asana kaMpita hone
se vaha vahA~ AyA aura rAjA kI adhInatA svIkAra kI  /  use bhI vidA (ravAnA)
karake bharateza ne aTThama tapa kA pAraNA kiyA aura usakA aSTAhnikA mahotsava
kiyaa| bharata kI AjJA se suSeNa nAma ke senApati ne carmaratna kI sahAyatA se
siMdhunadI ko pAra kara dakSiNasiMdhu ke adhipati ke niSkuTa ko usI samaya |
jIta liyaa| vaitADhya parvata meM vajra-kapATa se avaruddha tamisrA guphA ko
kholane ke lie suSeNa senApati ko RSabhaputra bharata ne AjJA dii| suSeNa svAmI
kI AjJA zirodhArya kara tamisrA guphA ke nikaTavartI pradeza meM gyaa| usake
adhiSThAyaka | kRtamAladeva kA smaraNa karane hetu vizuddhabuddhi suSeNa ne
pauSadhazAlA meM aTThama kiyA  /  aTThama tapa ke aMta meM snAna kara | bAhya -
AbhyaMtara zauca se nivRtta hokara usane pavitra vastra aura vividha AbhUSaNa
dhAraNa kiye| usake bAda homakuMDa ke | samAna jalatI agni vAlI dhUpadAnI meM
svArtha-sAdhanA kI Ahuti kI taraha muSTiyoM se dhUpa DAlatA huA bhaMDAra ke
dvAra kI taraha guphA ke dvAra kI ora sAvadhAnI gayA aura jaldI se guphAdvAra
kholane ko udyata huaa| usane kapATa yugala dekhate netA ko namana kI taraha
namaskAra kiyA; anyathA aMdara praveza kaise karatA ? phira guphA ke dvAra para
ATha-ATha | maMgaloM kA Alekhana kara aThAI - mahotsava kiyaa| tatpazcAt apane
gaurava ke anurUpa senApati ne sarva-zatruoM ke nAzaka vajra kI taraha
daMDaratna grahaNa kiyA aura vakragraha ke samAna kucha kadama pIche haTakara
daMDaratna se daravAje ko tIna bAra pratAr3ita kiyA  /  ataH jaise vajra parvata
ke paMkha kATa detA hai, vaise hI daMDaratna se tar3a tar3a karate hue donoM
kapATa alaga| alaga ho gye| guphAdvAra ke khulate hI suSeNa prasannatA se uchala
pdd'aa| usane bharata-samrAT ke pAsa Akara namaskAra|pUrvaka nivedana kiyA-
'rAjan! jaise adhika tapa se yati ke mukti dvAra khula jAte haiM, vaise hI Apake
prabhAva se Aja guphA kA dvAra argalA rahita hokara khula gayA hai| yaha sunate
hI airAvaNa - hAthI para iMdra kI taraha bharatanareza gaMdhahastI para savAra
hue aura guphA dvAra kI ora cle| rAjA ne guphA ke aMdhakAra ko dUra karane ke
lie pUrvAcala para sUrya ke samAna, hAthI ke dAhine kuMbhasthala para maNiratna
rakhA aura usake prakAza meM eka eka yojana taka donoM tarapha dekhate hue
bAdaloM meM sUrya | kI taraha bharatanareza bhI guphA meM praveza kara rahe the|
unake pIche-pIche senA cala rahI thI aura Age-Age cala rahA thA- cakra  /
bharateza ke sevakoM ne guphA meM aMdhakAra-nivAraNa ke lie eka-eka yojana para
donoM tarapha gomUtrikA ke AkAra | vAle maMDala kAkiNIratna se Alekhita kiye, jo
sUryamaMDala ke samAna udyota karate the| isa prakAra se prakAzamAna 49 |
maMDaloM ke prakAza se cakravartI bharata kI senA sukhapUrvaka Age bar3ha rahI
thI  /  rAste meM guphA meM rAjA ne unmannA aura nimannA | nAma kI do nadiyA~
dekhii| jinameM se eka nadI meM patthara bhI taira rahA thA; jabaki dUsarI nadI
meM tUMbA bhI DUba rahA thaa| | atikaThinatA se pAra kara sakane yogya nadiyoM
ko unhoMne varddhakI - ratna se paidala calane yogya pagaDaMDI nadI meM banAkara
| donoM nadiyA~ pAra kI; aura guphA se isa prakAra bAhara nikale jaise
mahAmeghamaMDala se sUrya nikalatA hai| vahA~ se bharateza | ne bharatakSetra ke
uttarAkhaMDa meM praveza kiyaa| jaise iMdra dAnavoM ke sAtha yuddha karatA hai,
vaise hI bharateza ne vahAM mlecchoM ke | sAtha yuddha karake unheM parAjita
kiyA  /  mlecchoM ne bharatacakravartI ko jItane ke uddezya se meghakumAra Adi
apane kula - | devatAoM kI upAsanA kii| usake prabhAva se pralaya kAla ke samAna
cAroM tarapha mUsaladhAra vRSTi hone lagI  /  bharatamahArAjA ne usase bacAva ke
lie nIce bAraha yojana taka carmaratna bichA diyA aura usake Upara rakhavAyA
chatraratna; usake | bIca meM apanI senA rakhI  /  vahAM aMdhar3a se hue mahA-
aMdhakAra ko naSTa karane ke lie pUrvAcala para sUrya ke samAna chatradaMDa |
para maNiratna rakhavAyA  /  carma - ratna aura chatraratna donoM ratna -
saMpuTa tairate hue aMDe ke samAna pratIta ho rahe the; loka meM brahmAMDa kI
kalpanA bhI zAyada isI kAraNa prAraMbha huI hai| bharatacakravartI ke pAsa
gRhapatiratna eka aisA thA, jisake prabhAva | se subaha boyA huA anAja zAma ko
Ugakara taiyAra ho jAtA thaa| isa kAraNa bharatacakravartI apane kAphile ke
pratyeka | vyakti ko bhojana muhaiyA kara detA thaa| idhara varSA karate-karate
thakakara mlecchoM ke duSTa devatA meghakumAra ne unase kahA 28

Page #51 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Bharat's Conquest of the Six Continents  **Chapter 1 of the Yoga Shastra,
Verse 10:** "This is Bharat Chakravarti. He cannot be conquered by someone like
us." Disheartened by Meghakumar's words, the Mlechchha people sought refuge in
Bharatesh. Truly, "Fire is the medicine for that which is ignited by fire." Just
as a Yogi conquers the world, similarly, the invincible Nishkut, situated north
of the Sindhu River, was conquered by the army under the command of the Lord.
Traveling with the joy of an Airavata elephant, Bharatesh reached the southern
foothills of the Ksudrahimalaya mountain. There, he performed the Atthama Tapa
for the purpose of the Ksudrahimalaya Kumar Dev. "Tapa is the first auspicious
act for the fulfillment of work." After his Atthama Tapa, the King of Kings,
Bharat, went to the Himalayas and, while seated in his chariot, struck the
mountain three times with the end of his chariot. He then released an arrow,
marked with his name, which traveled 72 yojanas and landed on the peak of the
mountain. Upon seeing the arrow, the Himalayan Kumar appeared before Bharatesh.
He accepted his command as a crown upon his head.   Then, the son of Rishabha,
Bharatesh, reached the Rishabhakut mountain and, approaching it, struck it three
times with the end of his chariot, like the tusk of an Airavata elephant. In the
middle of the mountain, he inscribed with Kakini gems, "I am Bharat Chakravarti,
born in the last part of the third Ara of the Avasarpini Kal." After that, he
returned to his camp and performed the Parana of the Atthama Tapa. Then, the
Chakravarti, in accordance with his wealth, celebrated the Atthais Mahotsav in
honor of the Ksudrahimalaya Kumar Dev.   After that, the Chakravarti Bharat,
following the path of his Chakra, traveled with his great army, crossing the
distance between the Sindhu and Ganga rivers, and returned. Gradually, they
reached the foothills of the Vaitalya mountain in the north. There, the army and
family settled down comfortably. After a few days, they sent an arrow to the
Vidyaadharas, the rulers of that region, demanding their submission to their
Lord. Angered by the demand for submission, both Vidyaadharas descended from the
Vaitalya mountain and, with their army, came to fight Bharatesh. At that time,
Bharat saw that the sky was filled with lightning, illuminated by the many suns,
and resonated with the thunderous roar of drums, as the Vidyaadharas' army
launched projectiles from their gem-encrusted flying machines. They challenged
Bharat to battle, "Oh, you who demand submission! If you want to take submission
from us, then come to the battlefield."   Throwing his vast army into battle,
Bharatesh fought various battles with them. Victory cannot be achieved without
fighting. Finally, after fighting for 12 years, the Vidyaadharapatis, Nami and
Vinami, were defeated. After their defeat, they folded their hands in salutation
and said to Bharat Raja, "Just as there is no one brighter than the sun, no one
faster than the wind, and no happiness greater than Moksha, similarly, there is
no warrior greater than you. Oh, Bharatnaresh! Seeing you today, we have seen
Rishabhdev Bhagwan himself. Master! We fought with you out of ignorance. Please
forgive us. Your command will now be on our heads like a crown. This wealth,
treasure, body, sons, etc., are all yours."   Speaking these words of devotion,
the extremely humble Vinami offered his daughter (a gem among women) and Nami
offered a treasure of gems. Taking permission, both of them crowned their sons
as kings and, with a sense of detachment, went to Bhagwan Rishabhdev and took
initiation.   After that, following the Chakra Ratna, they reached the banks of
the Ganga River. The army commander, Sushen, conquered the Uttar Pradesh region
bordering the Ganga. What is impossible for a great soul? The king performed the
Atthama Tapa and worshipped Ganga Devi. The goddess also presented divine
offerings and honored Bharat. The entire bank of the Ganga was fragrant with the
scent of lotus. Bharatesh built a palace-like Patbhavan on the banks of the
Ganga and resided there. Seeing the beauty of Bharat, like that of Kamadeva, the
Ganga River was thrilled. Adorned with pearl ornaments and fine clothes, like
the thin membrane inside a banana, the moon-faced Ganga Devi approached
Bharatesh. Assuming a form filled with flowing water, she gracefully moved her
limbs and gestures, and with a voice filled with love, she pleaded with the
king. Then, with a desire to engage in love play, she took him to her abode.
There, with Bharatnaresh, she indulged in various pleasures and luxuries.   1.
While erasing a name and writing his own, a tear fell from Bharatesh's eye. He
thought, "I am erasing the name of a Chakravarti. In the future, someone will
erase my name too." This is also mentioned.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bharata dvArA SaTkhaNDa vijaya yogazAstra prathama prakAza zloka 10 yaha
bharatacakravartI hai| ise hamAre jaise nahIM jIta skte|' meghakumAra kI isa
bAta se nirAza hokara mleccha loga bharateza kI zaraNa meM aaye| saca haiM,
'agni se prajvalita ke lie agni hI mahauSadhi hotI hai| usake bAda yogI jaise
saMsAra | ko jIta letA hai, vaise hI siMdhunadI se uttara meM sthita ajeya
niSkuTa ko svAmI kI AjJA se senA ne jIta liyaa| airAvata hAthI ke samAna mastI
se prayANa karate hue bharateza kSudrahimavAna parvata kI dakSiNa talahaTI
phuNcaa| vahA~ kSudrahimavatkumAra deva ke uddezya se unhoMne aTThama tapa
kiyaa| 'tapa kAryasiddhi kA prathama maMgala hai|' nRpaziromaNi bharata ne apane
aTThamatapa ke pazcAt himavAn parvata jAkara apane ratha para baiThe-baiThe hI
ratha ke aMtima chora se parvata para tIna bAra tAr3anA kii| aura parvata-
zikhara para 72 yojana dUra svanAmAMkita bANa chodd'aa| bANa ko dekhate hI
himavatkumAra bharateza ke sAmane svayaM upasthita huaa| unakI AjJA mukuTa ke
samAna zirodhArya kii| phira RSabhaputra bharateza RSabhakUTa parvata pahuMce
aura nikaTa jAkara airAvata hAthI ke daMtazUla kI taraha ratha ke aMtima chora
se tIna bAra khaTakhaTAyA; aura usa parvata ke parva ke bIca meM kAkiNIratna se
likhA-'maiM avasarpiNI kAla ke tIsare Are ke aMtima bhAga meM utpanna bhArata kA
bharatacakravartI huuN| tatpazcAt vahAM se lauTakara apanI0 chAvanI meM Akara
bharateza ne aTThama tapa kA pAraNA kiyaa| phira cakravartI ne apanI saMpatti ke
anurUpa kSudra himavatkumAra deva ke Azrita aTThAI mahotsava kiyaa| usake bAda
cakravartI bharata apane cakra ke mArga kA anusaraNa karate hue mahAsenA ke
sAtha calate-calate siMdhu aura gaMgA kA aMtara dUra-sA karake vApasa ghuume|
aura kramazaH vaitADhya-parvata ke uttara kI talahaTI ke pAsa phuNce| vahAM
sainya-parivAra ne svastha hokara DerA jamA diyaa| kucha hI dinoM bAda unhoMne
vahAM ke rAjyAdhipa vidyAdharoM se apane svAmI kA daMDa mAMgane hetu bANa
bhejaa| daMDa mAMgane kI bAta se kupita hokara donoM vidyAdhara vaitADhya
parvata se nIce utarakara apane sainya ke sAtha bharateza se yuddha karane aaye|
usa samaya bharata ne dekhA ki vidyAdhara sainya dvArA maNiratna-nirmita vimAnoM
se chor3e jAte hue prakSepaNAstroM se vidyunmaya banA huA AkAza aneka sUryoM kA-
sA prakAzamAna evaM pracaMDa duMdubhinAda se meghagarjanAmaya ho rahA hai| sAtha
hI unhoMne bharata ko yuddha ke lie lalakArA-'aya daMDArthI! agara hamase daMDa
lenA hai, to A jAo maidAna meN|' apanI vizAla senA yuddha meM jhoMkakara
bharateza ne bhI unake sAtha eka sAtha vividha yuddha kiye| yuddha kiye binA
jayazrI prApta nahIM hotii| Akhira 12 varSa taka yuddha karane ke bAda
vidyAdharapati nami-vinami hAra gye| apanI parAjaya ke bAda ve hAtha jor3akara
namaskAra karake | bharatarAjA se kahane lage-'jaise sUrya se bar3hakara koI
tejasvI nahIM hotA, vAyu se bar3hakara koI vegavAna nahIM hotA; mokSa se adhika
sukha kahIM bhI nahIM hotA; isI prakAra Apa se bar3hakara aura kauna zUravIra
hai? he bharatanareza! Aja Apako dekhakara hameM sAkSAt RSabhadeva bhagavAn ke
hI mAno darzana ho gaye haiN| svAmin! ajJAnatA se hamane Apake sAtha yuddha
kiyaa| usake lie hameM kSamA kiijie| aba Apa kI AjJA mukuTa ke samAna hamAre
sira-mAthe para hogii| yaha dhana, bhaMDAra, zarIra, putra Adi saba ApakA hI
hai| isa taraha bhaktipUrNa vacana kahakara ativinayI vinami ne apanI putrI
(strI ratna) aura nami ne ratnarAzi arpita kI aura AjJA lekara donoM ne apane
putroM ko rAjyAbhiSikta kara vairAgyabhAva se bhagavAn RSabhadeva ke pAsa jAkara
dIkSA aMgIkAra kii| usake bAda cakraratna kA anusaraNa karate hue calate-calate
ve gaMgAnadI ke taTa para aaye| senApati suSeNa ne gaMgAtaTavartI uttara-pradeza
jIta liyaa| mahAn AtmA ke lie kauna-sI bAta asAdhya hai? rAjA ne aTThama tapa
kara gaMgAdevI kI ArAdhanA kI, devI ne bhI divya bheMTa prastuta kara bharata kA
satkAra kiyaa| sArA gaMgAtaTa kamala kI sugaMdha se mahaka rahA thaa| bharateza
ne gaMgAtaTa para hI apane mahala kA-sA paTabhavana banavAyA aura vahA~ nivAsa
karane lgaa| bharata kA kAmadeva-sA rUpa lAvaNya dekhakara gaMgAnadI ko romAMca
ho utthaa| mauktika AbhUSaNoM evaM kele ke aMdara kI patalI jhillI ke samAna
bArIka vastroM se susajjita hokara caMdramukhI gaMgAdevI bharateza ke pAsa
phuNcii| jalapravAhamaya vicitra rUpa dhAraNa karake aMgavinyAsa evaM hAvabhAva
karatI huI gaMgAdevI ne nareza se premagadgad svara meM prArthanA kii| tatpazcAt
kAma-krIr3A karane kI abhilASA se vaha unheM apane bhavana meM le gyii| vahAM
bharatanareza ke sAtha vividha bhoga-vilAsa meM cAMdI se 1. kahIM eka nAma
miTAkara apanA nAma likhate samaya bharateza ke AMkha meM AMsu Aye ki maiM eka
cakravartI kA nAma miTA rahA huuN| bhaviSya meM merA nAma bhI koI mittaayegaa|
aisA ullekha bhI hai| 29

Page #52 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Bharat's Message to His 98 Brothers  Days and nights like gold began to pass.
A thousand years passed like a single day. Just as an elephant moves from one
forest to another, Bharat Raja, bidding farewell to Gangadevi, reached the
Khandprapaat cave. There, like Krtimalayaksha, he performed Attham Tapa and
worshipped Natyamal, celebrating an eight-day festival in the same manner. Then,
Sushena, the commander, opened the door of the cave and entered. Thus, the
southern door opened on its own. From the middle of that cave, Bharat
Chakravarti emerged like a Kesari lion. He set up camp on the western bank of
the Ganga. At the time the Chakravarti reached the banks of the Ganga, the nine
Nidhis, presided over by the Naga Kumar Dev, appeared and said, "O Great One! We
reside in Magadhdesh at the mouth of the Ganga and, attracted by your fortune,
we have come here to you. Use us as you wish or donate us. Perhaps the water in
the ocean can run out, but our wealth can never be depleted. Our length is 12
yojanas and our width is 9 yojanas. Even though we are so vast, we will always
remain at your service like a watchman. We will also accompany you underground.
We are established on eight chakras and assure you that our 9,000 obedient
Yakshas will always replenish your treasures." Just as the wind makes a great
forest desolate, so too did Sushena, the commander, make the southern region of
the Ganga desolate and returned. In this way, after conquering six continents in
sixty thousand years, Bharat Chakravarti, with his army, reached Ayodhya,
following the designated path. For twelve years, kings from far and wide came
and accepted Bharat Maharaja's Chakravartihood.  One day, Bharat Chakravarti,
seeing his sister Sundari, who cared for his family, weak and with bones
protruding, angrily said to his close servants, "Servants! Is there a shortage
of food here? Then why is this woman of my family reduced to mere bones? Is she
not given nourishing food?" The servants replied, "Master! Ever since you went
on your victory march, she has been observing a Parana-less Achaml (Ayambil)
tapa, desiring to take initiation. At that time, the news came that "Lord
Rishabhdev, while wandering the earth, has arrived at the Ashtapad mountain."
Hearing this, Chakravarti Bharat, taking Sundari with him, went to pay his
respects to the Lord. Following the Lord's teachings, Sundari, with the
Chakravarti's permission, took initiation. Meanwhile, preparations were underway
for the Chakravarti's coronation ceremony. Bharatesh sent messengers to all the
concerned kings, conveying the message, "If they want their kingdom safe and
sound, they should accept the authority of Chakravarti Bharat and come to serve
him." Hearing this, all the kings accepted his authority, except for Bharat's 98
brothers. They discussed among themselves and sent a message to Bharat through a
messenger, saying, "As brothers, we are ready to serve him, but we are not
willing to accept his authority and give him the kingdom. Our father gave us the
kingdom. What more will we get by serving Bharat? When Yama Raja comes, will he
be able to stop him? Will he be able to subdue the body that weakens? Will he be
able to eliminate the suffering, the disease that hunts us? Will he be able to
subdue the growing Tishna-Pishachi? If Bharat is not capable of giving the fruit
of our service in this form, then we are equal to him. In what way are we
inferior to him? Therefore, our humanity is equal; then who is the servant of
whom? Does he want to forcibly seize the kingdom from us and increase his
kingdom due to his personal dissatisfaction? This competition is not right among
equal brothers. The father whose son we are, he is also his son. Therefore,
messenger, tell your master, "Without our father's say, we will not fight with
our elder brother, but we will not tolerate our humiliation." Saying this, the
98 brothers went to Lord Rishabhdev and, after paying their respects, informed
him about the message Bharat had sent through the messenger, saying, "Father!
You gave us the kingdom; how can we hand over your given kingdom to Bharat? We
will follow your command according to whatever guidance you give us." Lord
Rishabhdev, in the mirror of pure knowledge, saw the entire universe clearly...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bharata kA 98 bhAI ko saMdeza yogazAstra prathama prakAza zloka 10 |dina aura
sone-sI rAteM kaTane lgiiN| eka hajAra varSa eka dina ke samAna vyatIta hue|
jaise hAthI eka vana se dUsare vana meM jAtA hai, vaise hI bharatarAjA gaMgAdevI
se vidA lekara khaMDaprapAta guphA meM phuNcaa| vahA~ para bhI kRtamAlayakSa kI
taraha aTThama tapa karake nATyamAla kI ArAdhanA kI aura usI taraha usakA ATha
dina kA mahotsava kiyaa| phira suSeNa senApati dvAra kA kapATa kholakara usa
guphA meM praviSTa huaa| ataH dakSiNa kA dvAra apane Apa khula gyaa| usa guphA
ke madhyabhAga meM se bharatacakravartI aise hI bAhara nikale jaise kesarIsiMha
nikalA ho| unhoMne gaMgA ke pazcima taTa para senA kA par3Ava ddaalaa| jisa
samaya cakravartI gaMgA ke kinAre phuNcaa| usa samaya nAgakumAra deva dvArA
adhiSThita nau nidhiyAM prakaTa hokara kahane lagI-'he mahAbhAga! gaMgA ke
muhAne para mAgadhadeza meM hama rahatI hai aura Apake bhAgya se AkRSTa hokara
hama yahA~ Apake pAsa AyI hai| Apa apanI icchAnusAra hamArA upayoga kIjie yA
hameM dAna meM diijie| samudra meM to kadAcit jala khatma ho sakatA hai| lekina
hamArA dhana kadApi kSaya nahIM ho sktaa| hamArI laMbAI 12 yojana aura caur3AI 9
yojana hai| itanI vistRta hokara bhI hama sadA caukIdAra sevaka kI taraha ApakI
sevA meM rheNgii| hama bhUgarbha meM bhI Apake sAtha cleNgii| hama ATha cakroM
para pratiSThita haiM aura Apako AzvAsana detI haiM ki hamAre 9 hajAra
AjJApAlaka yakSa sadA ApakI nidhiyoM ko bharate rheNge| vAyu jaise mahAvana ko
vIrAna banA detA hai, vaise hI suSeNa senApati gaMgA ke dakSiNa pradeza ko
vIrAna-sA banAkara lauTa aayaa| isa taraha sATha hajAra varSa meM chaha khaMDa
pRthvI ko jItakara cakra nirdiSTa mArga se usake pIche-pIche calate hue sasainya
bharatacakravartI ayodhyAnagarI meM phuNce| dUra-sudUra bhUbhAgoM se bAraha
varSa taka rAjAoM ne A-Akara bharata mahArAjA kA cakravartitva svIkAra kiyaa|
eka dina bharata-cakravartI ne apane parivAra kI sArasaMbhAla karane vAlI bahana
suMdarI ke aMga-aMga durbala aura haDDiyAM nikalI huI dekhakara apane
nikaTavartI sevakoM se kupita hokara kahA-'sevako! kyA mere yahAM bhojana kI
kamI hai? phira kyA kAraNa hai ki mere parivAra kI yaha mahilA asthipaMjara
mAtra raha gayI hai| kyA ise poSaka kharAka nahIM diyA jAtA?' sevako ne uttara
diyA-svAmin! Apa jaba se vijayayAtrA karane gaye haiM, taba se aba taka yaha
dIkSA lene kI icchA se pAraNA rahita AcAmla (AyaMbila) tapa kara rahI hai| usI
samaya yaha samAcAra milA kI 'RSabhadeva bhagavAn bhUmaMDala meM vicaraNa
karate-karate aSTApada-parvata para padhAra gaye haiN|' yaha sunate hI
cakravartI bharata suMdarI ko sAtha lekara prabhu ko vaMdanArtha gye| prabhu ke
upadeza se cakravartI kI AjJA lekara suMdarI ne dIkSA grahaNa kii| idhara
cakravartIpada ke rAjyAbhiSekamahotsava kI taiyAriyAM ho rahI thii| bharateza ne
sabhI saMbaMdhita rAjAoM ke pAsa dUta bhejakara saMdeza kahalavAyA ki 'agara ve
apanA rAjya sahIsalAmata cAhate haiM to cakravartI bharata kI adhInatA svIkAra
kreN| aura sevA meM phuNce|' yaha sunakara aura saba rAjAoM ne to adhInatA
svIkAra kara lI, lekina bharata ke 98 bhAIyoM ne usakI adhInatA svIkAra karane
se inkAra kara diyaa| unhoMne paraspara vicAra kara dUta dvArA bharata ko
kahalavAyA ki 'hama bhAI ke nAte unakI sevA meM taiyAra haiM. paraMtu unakI
AdhInatA svIkAra karake rAjya dene ko taiyAra nhiiN|' rAjya hameM hamAre pitAjI
ne diyA hai| bharata kI sevA karane se hameM adhika kyA milegA? jaba yamarAja
AyegA taba kyA vaha use roka sakegA? zarIra ko durbala karane vAlI  /  vaha
nigraha kara legA? duHkha dene vAle roga rUpI zikAra ko kyA vaha miTA sakegA!
bar3hatI huI taSNA-pizAcI kA kyA vaha mardana kara sakegA? hamAre dvArA kI gayI
sevA kA phala isa rUpa meM dene meM jaba bharata samartha nahIM hai to hama aura
vaha samAna hai| hama unase kisa bAta meM kama hai? ataH hama donoM kA
manuSyatva samAna hai; to phira kauna kisake lie sevya hai? kyA apane nijI
asaMtoSa ke kAraNa vaha hamase jabarana rAjya chInakara rAjyavRddhi karanA
cAhatA hai? barAbarI ke bhAIyoM meM yaha spardhA ThIka nhiiN| hama jisa pitA ke
putra haiM, vaha bhI unhIM kA putra hai| ataH saMdezavAhaka dUta! Apa apane
svAmI se kaha denA-'pitAjI ke kahe binA apane sahodara bar3e bhAI ke sAtha hama
yuddha to kareMge nahIM; lekina hama apanA apamAna sahana nahIM kareMge?" yoM
kahakara ve 98 bhAI zrI RSabhadeva bhagavAna ke pAsa Aye aura namaskAra karake
bharata ne dUta dvArA jo saMdeza bhijavAyA thA, usake bAre meM nivedana karake
kahA ki 'pitAjI! rAjya hameM Apane diyA hai; ApakA diyA huA rAjya bharata ko
hama kaise sauMpa deM? Age Apa jaisA bhI mArgadarzana kareMge, tadanusAra ApakI
AjJA kA pAlana kareMge?' bhagavAn RSabhadeva ko to kevalajJAna rUpI darpaNa meM
sArA carAcara jagat spaSTa 30

Page #53 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Initiation of 98 Brothers  **Yoga Shastra, First Light, Verse 10**  It
was evident, how could this remain hidden from them? Therefore, the gracious
Lord, Shri Adiswar, addressed his sons, saying: "My sons! I have brought for you
an extraordinary spiritual kingdom of wealth. Material wealth is fickle and
breeds ego. In the end, due to its destructive nature, it leads the ruler to
hell. It increases the cycle of birth and death. Even if you attain heavenly
pleasures after acquiring material wealth, the thirst for such pleasures will
only grow. Just as the thirst of a fire-brand does not quench, similarly, the
desire for enjoyment will not be satiated in the next birth. If the thirst is
not quenched by heavenly pleasures in the next life, how can it be quenched by
human enjoyment, which is like a fire-brand?  **The Analogy of the Fire-Brand:**
There was a foolish man named Angaradahak who went to a deserted forest to make
charcoal, carrying a water-skin filled from a pond. The heat of the fire and the
scorching sun of midday doubled his thirst. Due to this, he drank all the water
in the water-skin. Still, his thirst did not quench; then he fell asleep. He had
a dream in which he saw himself going home and drinking all the water from the
pitchers, pots, and water vessels kept in his house. Just as fire is not
quenched by oil, similarly, even after drinking so much water, his thirst did
not subside. Then he drank the water from wells, ponds, and other water bodies,
emptying them. Still, he was not satisfied. Therefore, he went to the river; he
went to the sea, drank its water too; yet, his thirst did not abate, like the
torment of a hellish being. Later, he would see any water body and drink its
water, emptying it. Then he reached the well of Marwar to drink its water. He
tied a tuft of grass to a rope and lowered it into the well to draw water. What
does a distressed man not do? The water of the Marwar well was deep, and due to
drawing water from deep down, much of it would be squeezed out before reaching
the top. Still, he squeezed the water drops clinging to the blades of grass and
drank them. Whose thirst is not quenched even by the water of the sea; how can
it be quenched by the water of a tuft of grass? This means that his thirst was
not quenched in any way.  Similarly, how can the thirst of one who is not
satisfied by heavenly pleasures be quenched by acquiring material wealth?
Therefore, my dear sons! It is only fitting for wise men like you to attain the
kingdom of restraint, which bestows bliss and leads to liberation.  Hearing this
detached discourse of the Lord, those 98 brothers also became detached at that
very moment and took initiation from the Lord. Meanwhile, the messenger,
silently praising the patience, truthfulness, and increasing detachment of those
98 brothers, reached the king of Bharata. He informed him of all the happenings
of the 98 brothers. Hearing this, the king of Bharata took possession of the
kingdom of those 98 brothers. Truly, greed increases with gain (acquisition of
wealth). This has always been the case in politics.  The commander-in-chief,
distressed, humbly requested Bharat Chakravarti: "O King! The Chakra Ratna has
not yet entered your armory. Therefore, it seems that there is still some king
who does not accept your authority. And until all kings accept your authority,
your conquest of the world remains incomplete for you to become a Chakravarti."
Bharat replied: "Yes! I know that it remains to conquer my younger brother, the
extraordinary powerful, mighty-armed, and immensely strong Bahubali. My
situation is like that of a person who has a Garuda on one side and a swarm of
snakes on the other. I know that Bahubali, like a lion, can defeat thousands
alone; because the valor that a single lion displays, thousands of deer cannot
display together. No one, be it a rival, a god, a demon, or a human, is capable
of defeating the invincible Bahubali alone. A great moral dilemma has arisen
before me. On the one hand, I want to become a Chakravarti, but the Chakra Ratna
is not entering my armory; on the other hand, Bahubali is not willing to accept
anyone's authority. What..."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 98 bhAiyoM kI dIkSA yogazAstra prathama prakAza zloka 10 pratibhAsita ho rahA
thA, unase yaha bAta kaba chipI raha sakatI thI  /  ataH kRpAnAtha zrIAdIzvara
bhagavAn ne putroM ko | saMbodhita karate hue kahA - ' - 'putro ! maiM tumhAre
liye adbhuta adhyAtmarAjyalakSmI lAyA huuN| bhautika rAjyalakSmI to caMcala hai
aura ahaMkAra paidA karane vAlI hai| aMta meM apane anarthakara svabhAva ke
kAraNa vaha rAjyakartA ko naraka meM le jAtI | hai| yaha janma-maraNa kA cakra
bar3hAne vAlI hai| bhautika-rAjyalakSmI pAkara bhI kadAcit svarga sukha mila
jAya to bhI usa sukha kI tRSNA bar3hatI rahegI aura jaise aMgAradAhaka kI pyAsa
zAMta na huI, vaise agale janma meM bhI bhogalipsA zAMta nahIM hogI ; svarga ke
sukha se yadi tRSNA agale bhava meM zAMta nahIM huI to vaha tRSNA aMgAradAhaka
ke samAna manuSya ke | bhoga se kaise zAMta ho sakatI hai? aMgAradAhaka kA
dRSTAMta : aMgAradAhaka nAma kA eka mUrkha tAlAba se pAnI kI mazaka bharakara
koyale banAne ke lie nirjana jaMgala meM gyaa| | agni kA tApa aura tapatI
dupaharI ke sUrya kI cilacilAtI dhUpa se usakI pyAsa dugunI ho utthii| isa
kAraNa vahA~ mazaka kI thailI meM jitanA pAnI thA, utanA pI gyaa| phira bhI
usakI pyAsa zAMta nahIM huI; taba vaha so gyaa| use eka svapna | dikhAyI diyA,
jisameM usane dekhA ki vaha ghara gayA aura ghara meM rakhe hue ghar3oM, maTakoM
aura pAnI ke bhare bartanoM kA sArA pAnI pI gyaa| jaise tela se Aga zAMta nahIM
hotI, vaise hI itanA pAnI pI jAne para bhI usakI pyAsa kama na huI  /  taba
usane bAvar3I, kue~, tAlAba Adi kA pAnI pIkara unheM khAlI kara diyaa| phira bhI
vaha tRpta na huaa| ataH vaha nadI | para gayA; samudra para gayA, usakA pAnI
bhI pI gayA; phira bhI nArakIya jIva kI vedanA kI taraha usakI pyAsa kama nahIM
| huii| bAda meM vaha jisa jalAzaya ko dekhatA, usI kA pAnI pIkara use khAlI
kara detA  /  phira vaha mAravAr3a ke kue~ kA | pAnI pIne ke lie pahu~cA  /
usane kue~ se pAnI nikAlane ke lie rassI ke sAtha ghAsa kA eka pUlA bAMdhA aura
use kue~ meM utaaraa| parezAna manuSya kyA nahIM karatA?' mAravAr3a ke kue~ kA
pAnI gaharA thA aura gaharAI se bahuta nIce se pAnI khIMcane ke kAraNa bahuta-sA
pAnI to Upara Ate-Ate nicur3a jAtA thaa| phira bhI vaha pUle ke tinakoM para
lage | jalabinduoM ko nicor3akara pIne lgaa| jisakI pyAsa samudra ke jala se bhI
zAMta nahIM huI; vaha bhalA pUle ke pAnI se kaise zAMta hotI? matalaba yaha hai
ki usakI pyAsa kisI bhI taraha se nahIM bujhI  /  isI taraha jise svarga ke
sukha se zAMti nahIM huI, usakI tRSNA rAjya lakSmI ke le lene se kaise zAMta ho
jAyegI? | ataH vatso! AnaMdarasa dene vAlA aura nirvANa prApti kA kAraNa rUpI
saMyama sAmrAjya prApta karanA hI tuma jaise vivekiyoM ke lie ucita hai|' isa
prakAra prabhu kA vairAgyamaya upadeza sunakara una 98 bhAIyoM ko bhI usI samaya
vairAgya ho jAne | se unhoMne bhagavAn ke pAsa dIkSA dhAraNa kii| udhara dUta
una 98 bhAIyoM ke dhairya, satya aura vairAgyavRddhi kI mana hI mana | prazaMsA
karatA huA bharatanareza ke pAsa phuNcaa| unase 98 bhAIyoM kI sArI bAteM
nivedana kii| use sunakara bharatanRpa ne una | 98 bhAIyoM kA rAjya apane
adhikAra meM kara liyaa| saca hai, lAbha ( dhanaprApti) se lobha bar3hatA jAtA
hai| rAjanItI meM sadA | se hI prAyaH aisA hotA AyA hai| senApati ne vyAkula
hokara bharatacakravartI se savinaya nivedana kiyA- 'cakrIza ! abhI taka Apa kI
AyudhazAlA meM cakraratna praveza nahIM kara rahA hai| isalie mAlUma hotA hai ki
koI na koI aisA rAjA bacA hai, jo ApakI AjJAdhInatA | svIkAra nahIM krtaa| aura
jaba taka sabhI rAjA ApakI AjJAdhInatA svIkAra na kareM taba taka cakravartitva
ke lie, | ApakI digvijaya adhUrI hai|' bharata ne isake uttara meM kahA hai
'hA~! maiM jAnatA hUM ki lokottara - parAkramI mahAbAhu | mahAbalazAlI mere
laghubaMdhu bAhubali ko jItanA abhI bAkI hai| merI sthiti isa samaya usa vyakti
kI - sI banI huI hai, jisake eka ora garur3a ho aura dUsarI ora sarpoM kA jhuMDa
/  maiM jAnatA hUM ki bAhubali siMha ke samAna akelA hI hajAroM | vyaktiyoM ko
parAsta kara sakatA hai; kyoMki jaisA parAkrama akelA siMha dikhalAtA hai, vaisA
parAkrama hajAroM hiraNa milakara bhI nahIM dikhalA skte| ekAkI ajeya bAhubali
ko jItane meM pratimalla yA deva, dAnava yA mAnava samartha nahIM hai| mere |
sAmane bahuta bar3A dharmasaMkaTa paidA ho gayA hai| eka ora maiM cakravartI
bananA cAhatA hU~, lekina merI Ayudha - zAlA meM | cakraratna praveza nahIM kara
rahA hai, dUsarI ora bAhubali kisI kI AjJAdhInatA svIkAra karane ko taiyAra
nahIM hai| kyA 31

Page #54 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Messenger to Bahubali Yoga Shastra First Light Verse 10  "Will Bahubali
agree to obey in any way? Does a lion tolerate a burden on its back?" Bharat was
pondering such thoughts when his commander said, "My Lord! In the face of your
prowess, even the three worlds are like a straw." Bharat sent a messenger to his
half-brother Bahubali's capital with a message. The clever messenger bowed to
Bahubali, seated on a high throne, and delivered Bharat's message with reason:
"O King! You are truly an admirable person, whose elder brother is the conqueror
of the world, the master of the six continents of Bharat, and a superhumanly
powerful being. Which king does not come to the coronation ceremony of your
elder brother, the Chakravarti, with auspicious offerings and in submission?
Indeed, every king has come. Just as the lotus grove is adorned by the sunrise,
so is the rise of Bharat for your glory. But we are surprised why you did not
come to his coronation?"  "O Kumar! The wise king has sent me to your service to
know the reason for your absence; and for this purpose I have come to your
service. It may be that you did not come naturally; but in such a great
festival, how many people consider your absence as your rudeness, as a younger
brother? Because low men always seek loopholes. We want such low people to have
no chance to speak. You should pay close attention to this and defend yourself
from the beginning. Therefore, we humbly request you to come to the service of
your elder brother. The elder brother is the Maharaja, what is there to be
ashamed of in worshipping him? Perhaps you did not come thinking, 'I am his
equal brother; how can I go?' Then it will only reveal your arrogance. Obedient
kings do not care about kinship. Just as iron is drawn near a magnet, so are
gods, demons, and humans drawn by the brilliance and power of Bharatnaresh. At
present, all kings follow only Bharat. Even Indra Maharaj has made friendship
with him by giving him half the seat. Then it is not understood why you are
shying away from going to his service? Perhaps you are considering yourself more
valiant and defying the king, then this will be your great delusion. Your
handful of army looks like a small stream in front of his army, like a small
stream in front of the ocean. And he has eighty-four lakh elephants like
Airavata, who can move them like movable mountains? There are as many horses and
chariots, whose speed is like the storm of the apocalyptic ocean. Who can stop
their speed? Then there are 98 crore villages under that Chakravarti and a foot
army of 96 koti like lions; with whom he can distress whomever he wants, and
they have a commander named Sushena, who holds the Danda Ratna in his hand, like
Yama Raja; whose punishment even gods and Asuras cannot bear. Along with that,
the Amogh Chakra Ratna moves ahead of that Bharat Chakravarti; as if the sun's
disc is moving. Darkness cannot stand in front of the sun, so how can anyone
stand in front of his brilliance in the three worlds? Therefore, O Bahubali!
Bharat Maharaja is superior to all kings in strength, virility, and brilliance.
Therefore, if you want the safety of your kingdom and life, you should take his
shelter."  Bahubali, who defeated the strength of the world with his arms,
raised his eyebrows and said in a deep voice like the roaring of the sea,
"Messenger! You have spoken such words, which are greedy and disturbing.
Messengers always deliver the words of their master as a true message. O
Messenger! You have not said anything new that my father, who is revered by the
gods, Asuras, and kings, is not worthy of worship and praise for me, but Bharat
is also worthy of worship and praise for me. Kings who give, may stay away from
them, but whose strong brother is Bahubali, he is close to his brother even
while staying away from the field. We both have a deep affection for each other,
like the sun and the lotus grove. My brother has a place in my heart. Then what
is the purpose of going there? Our affection is natural from birth. It is true
that we did not reach our brother naturally, but why should this be considered
my cunning towards brother Bharat?"

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bAhubalI ke pAsa dUta yogazAstra prathama prakAza zloka 10 yaha bAhubalI kisI
bhI taraha se AjJA mAnane ko taiyAra hogA ? kyA siMha apanI pITha para palANa kA
lAdanA sahana karatA hai?' bharata aise vicArasAgara meM gote lagA rahA thA,
tabhI usake senApati ne kahA - 'svAmin! Apake parAkrama ke sAmane | tIna jagat
bhI tinake ke samAna hai|' bharata ne apane sautele choTe bhAI bAhubalI kI
rAjadhAnI meM dUta bhejakara saMdeza kahalavAyA  /  catura dUta ne U~ce
siMhAsana para baiThe bAhubali ko praNAma kiyA aura bharateza kA saMdeza
yuktipUrvaka kaha | sunAyA- 'rAjan! Apa vAstava meM eka prazaMsanIya vyakti
haiM, jinake bar3e bhAI jagat ko jItane vAle, bharata ke chaha khaMDa ke svAmI
aura lokottara parAkramazAlI hai| Apake bar3e bhAI ke cakravartitva ke
rAjyAbhiSeka - utsava meM maMgalamaya bheMTa | lekara aura AjJAdhIna banakara
kauna rAjA nahIM AtA ? arthAt pratyeka rAjA Aye haiN| sUryodaya se jaise
kamalavana suzobhAyamAna hotA hai, vaise hI bharata kA udaya ApakI hI zobhA ke
lie hai| paraMtu hameM Azcarya hotA hai ki Apa unake | rAjyAbhiSeka meM kyoM
nahIM padhAre ? 'kumAra! Apake nahIM Ane kA kAraNa jAnane ke uddezya se hI
nItijJa rAjA ne mujhe ApakI sevA meM pahuMcane kI AjJA dI hai; aura isI hetu se
maiM ApakI sevA meM upasthita huA huuN| ho sakatA hai ki Apa | svAbhAvika rUpa
se nahIM padhAre hoM; paraMtu itane bar3e utsava meM eka laghubaMdhu ke nAte
Apake na padhArane se kitane hI loga | ise ApakI avinitatA samajhate haiN|
kyoMki nIca puruSa sadA chidra DhUMDhA karate haiN| hama cAhate haiM ki aise
nIca logoM ko bolane kI kataI guMjAiza na rhe| isa bAta para Apako bhalIbhAMti
dhyAna denA cAhie aura pahale se hI isakA bacAva | karake calanA caahie| ataH
Apase hamArA namra nivedana hai ki Apako apane bar3e bhaiyA kI sevA meM
padhAranA caahie| bar3A bhAI mahArAjA hotA hai, usakI upAsanA karane meM kauna-
sI lajjA kI bAta hai? Apa kadAcit yaha socakara nahIM padhAre ki maiM to unake
barAbarI kA bhAI hU~; kaise jAU~? to isase ApakI dhRSTatA hI prakaTa hogii|
AjJApAlaka rAjA nAte| riztedArI kA khayAla nahIM rkhte| lohacuMbaka ke nikaTa
rakhate hI jaise lohA khiMcA calA AtA hai, vaise hI bharatanareza ke teja aura
parAkrama se deva, dAnava aura manuSya sabhI khiMce cale Ate haiN| vartamAna meM
to sabhI rAjA ekamAtra bharata kA hI anusaraNa karate hai| iMdra mahArAja bhI
unheM AdhA Asana dekara unase mitratA bAMdhe hue haiN| phira samajha meM nahIM
AtA ki Apa unakI sevA meM jAne se kyoM pIche haTa rahe haiM? zAyada Apa apane
Apako adhika vIra samajhakara rAjA kI avajJA kara rahe haiM, to yaha ApakI bar3I
bhrAMti hogii| unakI senA ke sAmane ApakI muTThI bhara senA aisI lagatI hai,
jaise samudra | ke sAmane eka choTA-sA naalaa| aura unake pAsa airAvaNa jaise
caurAsI lAkha hAthI hai, jinheM jaMgama parvata ke samAna calAyamAna karane meM
kauna samartha hai ? utanI hI saMkhyA meM ghor3e aura ratha haiM, jinakA vega
pralayakAlIna samudra ke tUphAna ke samAna hai| unake vega ko rokane meM bhalA
kauna samartha hai? phira usa cakravartI ke adhIna 98 karor3a gAMva haiM aura
siMha | ke samAna 96 koTi paidala senA hai; jinase vaha cAhe jisako vyathita
kara sakatA hai tathA unake pAsa hAtha meM daMDaratnadhAraka | yamarAja-sA
suSeNa nAmaka eka senApati bhI hai; jisake daMDa ko deva aura asura bhI sahana
nahIM kara skte| sAtha hI amogha | cakraratna usa bharata cakravartI ke Age-Age
aise calatA hai; mAnoM sUrya kA maMDala cala rahA ho  /  sUrya ke sAmane
aMdhakArasamUha Tika nahIM sakatA, vaise hI tIna loka meM koI bhI usake teja ke
sAmane kaise Tika sakatA hai? ataH he bAhubali ! bharata mahArAjA bala, vIrya
aura teja meM samasta rAjAoM se bar3hakara hai  /  isalie agara Apa apane rAjya
aura jIvana kI surakSA cAhate hoM to Apako unakA Azraya grahaNa karanA cAhie  /
' apanI bAhuoM se jagata ke bala ko parAsta karane vAle bAhubali ne apanI
bhrakuTi car3hAkara samudra kI taraha garjatI | huI gaMbhIra vANI meM kahA -
'dUta ! tumane aise vacana kahe haiM, jo lobha se lipta aura kSubdha karane vAle
haiN| dUta to sadA svAmI ke vacana ko yathArtha saMdeza ke rUpa meM pahuMcAne
vAle hote haiN| ai dUta ! suroM, asuroM aura narendroM ke pUjya, uttama -
parAkramI | pitAjI hI mere liye pUjanIya aura prazaMsanIya nahIM, apitu bharata
bhI mere liye pUjanIya va prazaMsanIya hai, yaha bAta tumane nayI nahIM sunAyI
/  kara dene vAle rAjA cAhe unase dUra raheM, paraMtu jisakA balavAna bhAI
bAhubali hai, vaha kSetra se dUra | rahate hue bhI apane bhAI ke nikaTa hI hai|
sUrya aura kamalavana ke samAna hama donoM kI paraspara gAr3ha prIti hai| apane
bhAI kA mere hRdaya meM sthAna hai| phira vahAM jAne se kyA prayojana hai?
hamArI prIti to janma se hI svAbhAvika hai| hama sahajabhAva se bhaiyA ke pAsa
nahIM pahuMce, yaha bAta satya hai| paraMtu ise bhaiyA bharata ke prati merI
kuTilatA kyoM samajhI jAya ? 32

Page #55 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Battle of Bharat and Bahubali  **Chapter 1 of Yoga Shastra, First Light,
Verse 10**  A wise person, who acts thoughtfully, does not get swayed by the
words of the wicked. Lord Rishabhdev Swami is the master of both of us. He is
the only victor, so why do I need another master? He considers me his brother,
so why should a brother fear his brother? The masters are those who command;
they may command or not. What is special about the relationship of kinship? Does
a diamond not cut another diamond? If Bharat Dev is served by demons and humans,
and they have special affection for him, what concern is it of mine? A chariot
that travels on the straight path does not suffer any harm, but a chariot that
travels on the wrong path, even if it is the best chariot, will be shattered by
hitting a rock or a tree. Indra is a devotee of his father; perhaps he will
allow Bharat to sit on half his throne out of respect for his father. It is not
right to become arrogant just because of this. You said that his army is like
the ocean, and the armies of other kings are like salt in dough in comparison,
but I am even more formidable, like a raging fire. Other lights merge into the
brilliance of the sun, just as Bharat's infantry, chariots, horses, elephants,
commanders, and Bharat himself will merge into my army. Therefore, O messenger!
Go and tell your master that if he does not want to lose his kingdom and life in
battle, then he should come to fight happily. I have no desire to take his
kingdom. I am content with the kingdom given to me by my father.'  The messenger
returned and told Bharat all that Bahubali had said. Therefore, Bharat, with a
desire to fight Bahubali, marched with his army. Just as the sky is covered with
clouds during the four months of Chaturmas, so too did the mighty Bahubali, with
his army, cover the earth with dust as he marched towards Bharat. On the
battlefield, the clash of weapons of the warriors, great warriors, and soldiers
of both sides, who were eager for battle, sounded like the clash of waves in the
ocean. The battle of the spearmen against the spearmen and the archers against
the archers seemed as if Yama himself was present.   Then, the mighty Bahubali,
pushing his entire army aside like a ball of cotton, said to Bharat, 'Brother!
Why are you accumulating unnecessary sin by causing the destruction of
elephants, horses, chariots, and infantry? If you are capable of fighting alone,
then come; let us both fight and settle this. Why are you needlessly throwing
your army into destruction?'  Hearing this, both of them ordered their soldiers
to leave the battlefield. Therefore, they stood on either side of the
battlefield as spectators, as witnesses. The gods were also witnesses. Both
brothers decided to fight each other in a duel. First, the battle of eyes began.
Seeing both these human gods standing face to face, without blinking, even the
gods were confused, thinking that these two must be gods with unwavering vision.
Bharat was defeated in the battle of eyes. Therefore, the battle of words began,
in which arguments were made by establishing the pros and cons. Bharat was
defeated in this as well. Therefore, the two mighty warriors began the battle of
arms. Bahubali stretched out his arm, and Bharat tried to bend it. But Bharat
seemed like a monkey hanging on the branch of a large tree. Then it was
Bahubali's turn, and the mighty Bahubali bent Bharat's arm like a vine with one
hand. Then came the fistfight. Bharat struck the first blow on Bahubali, but
like the waves of the ocean crashing against the coastal mountains, his fist
only hit and remained there. It could not do anything to Bahubali. Then it was
Bahubali's turn, and he struck Bharat with a blow like a thunderbolt, causing
Bharat to faint and fall to the ground. Tears welled up in the eyes of the army.
As soon as Bharat regained consciousness, he began to strike Bahubali with his
club, like an elephant striking a mountain with its tusks. Bahubali also struck
Bharat with his club, causing him to sink into the ground up to his knees, like
a pit dug in the earth. Bharat began to doubt if this Bahubali was not a
chakravarti. When he remembered the chakra, he remembered that...   **(Note: The
text ends abruptly here. The last sentence seems to be incomplete and refers to
a possible mention of Indra's statement twelve years later.)**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bharata-bAhubalI yuddha yogazAstra prathama prakAza zloka 10 vicArapUrvaka
kArya karane vAle sajjana durjanoM ke vacanoM se bahakate nhiiN| bhagavAn
RSabhadeva svAmI hI hama donoM ke svAmI hai| ve svAmI hI ekamAtra vijayI haiM,
to phira mujhe dUsare svAmI kI kyA AvazyakatA hai? ve mujhe apanA bhAI samajhate
haiM to bhAI ko bhAI se Dara kyoM? AjJA karane vAle to svAmI haiM; ve AjJA deM
cAhe na deN| rizte-nAtedArI kA saMbaMdha ho, isameM kyA vizeSatA hai? kyA hIrA
hIre ko nahIM kATatA? yadi bharata deva, dAnava aura mAnava ke dvArA sevya ho
aura unake prati unakI vizeSa prIti ho, isase mujhe kyA lenA-denA? sIdhe mArga
para calane vAle ratha ko koI hAni nahIM hotI, magara utpatha para calane vAlA
acchA se acchA ratha kisI DhUMTha yA per3a se TakarAkara cakanAcUra ho jAtA hai|
iMdra pitAjI ke bhakta haiM, ve pitAjI ke lihAja se kadAcit bharata ko apane
Adhe Asana para baiThane kA adhikAra de deN| itane mAtra se unameM ahaMkAra A
jAnA ThIka nahIM hai| tumane kahA ki samudra ke samAna usakI senA ke sAmane
dUsare rAjAoM kI senA ATe meM namaka ke jitanI hai, paraMtu maiM usase bhI
bar3hakara duHsaha var3avAnala ke samAna huuN| sUrya ke teja meM dUsare teja
vilIna ho jAte haiM, vaise hI merI senA meM bharata kI paidala, ratha, ghor3e,
hAthI, senApati aura bharata bhI pralIna ho jaayegaa| ataH he dUta! tuma jAo
aura apane svAmI se kaho ki yadi vaha apane rAjya aura jIvana ko lar3AI se sahI
salAmata rakhanA nahIM cAhatA hai, to khuzI se lar3ane aaye| mujhe usakA rAjya
lene kI khvAhiza nahIM hai| pitAjI ke diye hue rAjya se hI mujhe saMtoSa hai|' _
dUta ne vahA~ se vApisa Akara bAhubali kA sArA vRttAMta bharatanareza ko
sunaayaa| ataH bharata ne bhI bAhubali ke sAtha yuddha karane kI abhilASA se
senA ke sAtha kUca kiyaa| cAturmAsa meM jaise bAdaloM se AkAza Dhaka jAtA hai,
vaise hI parAkramI bAhubali bhI apanI senA ke kUca karane se ur3atI huI dhUli se
pRthvItala ko AcchAdita karatA huA bharata se phuNcaa| yuddha ke maidAna meM
yuddha ke lie udyata Amane-sAmane khar3e donoM pakSoM ke vIroM, mahAsubhaToM
aura sainikoM ke zastrAstroM kI Takkara aisI lagatI thI, mAno jalajaMtuoM kI
sAmudrika taraMgoM ke sAtha paraspara Takkara ho rhii| ho| bhAle vAloM kA bhAle
vAloM aura bANa vAloM kA bANa vAloM ke sAtha saMgrAma aisA pratIta hotA thA,
mAno sAkSAt | yamarAja hI upasthita ho gaye hoN| tatpazcAt mahAbalazAlI bAhubalI
ne samagra senA ko rUI kI pUnI ke samAna dUra haTAkara bharata se kahA-'are
bhAI! yoM hI hAthI, ghor3oM, ratha aura paidala senA kA saMhAra karavAkara
vyartha pApa kyoM upArjana kara rahe ho? agara tuma akele hI lar3ane meM
samartha ho to A jAo; hama tuma donoM hI Apasa meM lar3akara phaisalA kara leN|
becArI senA ko vyartha hI kyoM saMhAra ke lie jhauMka rahe ho?' yaha sunakara
donoM ne apane-apane sainikoM ko yuddhakSetra se haTa jAne ko khaa| isa kAraNa
ve sAkSI ke rUpa meM raNakSetra ke donoM ora darzaka ke taura para khar3e ho
gye| deva bhI isameM sAkSI rUpa the| donoM bhAIyoM ne svayaM hI paraspara
dvaMdayuddha karane kA nizcaya kiyaa| sarva prathama dRSTiyuddha prAraMbha huaa|
Amane-sAmane palaka jhapakAe binA khar3e donoM naradevoM ko dekhakara devoM ko
bhI bhrama ho gayA ki ye donoM animeSa dRSTi vAle deva to nahIM hai| donoM ke
dRSTi-yuddha meM bharata kI parAjaya huii| ataH vAgyuddha huA, jisameM pakSa
aura pratipakSa kI | sthApanA karake vAda-vivAda kiyA jAtA hai| isameM bhI
bharata kI hAra huii| ataH mahAbhujabalI donoM balavAnoM ne bAhuyuddha prAraMbha
kiyaa| bAhubali ne apanI bAMha laMbI kI, bharata use jhukAne lgaa| paraMtu
bharata aisA mAlUma hotA thA ki mahAvRkSa kI zAkhA para baMdara laTaka rahA ho|
tatpazcAt bAhubali kI bArI AyI to mahAbalazAlI bAhubali ne bharata kI bhujA ko
eka hI hAtha se latA kI nAla kI taraha namA dii| usake bAda muSTiyuddha huaa|
bAhubali para bharata ne prathama muSTiprahAra kiyA, paraMtu jaise sAgara kI
lahareM taTavartI parvata para TakarAtI hai, usI prakAra usakI muSTi sirpha
TakarA kara raha gyii| bAhubali kA kucha bhI na kara skii| usake bAda bAhubali
kI bArI AyI to usane bharata para vajra. ke samAna prahAra kiyA; jisase bharata
gaza khAkara nIce gira pdd'aa| senA kI AMkhoM meM AMsU the| mUrchA dUra hote hI
jaise | hAthI daMtazala se parvata para tADana karatA hai. vaise hI daMDa se
bharata ne bAhabali ko tADana karanA zarU kiyaa| bAhabali ne bhI bharata para
daMDa prahAra kiyaa| jisase vaha bhami meM khode hae gaDaDhe kI taraha ghaTanoM
taka jamIna meM dhaMsa gyaa| bharata ko jarA saMzaya haA ki yaha bAhabalI kahIM
cakravartI to nahIM hogaa| jaba usane cakra ko yAda kiyA taba itanA yAda 1.
kahIM iMdra ne bAraha varSa bAda yaha bAta kahI aisA ullekha AtA hai| 33

Page #56 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Initiation of Bahubali and Praise by Bharat  **Yoga Shastra, First Light,
Verse 10**  As soon as the chakra came into Bharat's hand, he roared in anger,
emerged from the ground, and hurled the blazing chakra at Bahubali. The army
cried out in alarm. But what was this? The chakra circled Bahubali and returned
to Bharat. Because a weapon empowered by the gods cannot defeat a member of the
same lineage. Seeing his brother acting unjustly, Bahubali's eyes turned red
with anger. He thought, "Why not crush him along with the chakra?" With this
thought, Bahubali clenched his fist and raised it to strike.  At that moment, a
thought flashed through Bahubali's mind like lightning - "How much destruction
will occur if I kill my elder brother under the influence of passions? It would
be better to use this fist, which I have raised to strike my brother, to perform
the Panchamoustik Loch and destroy the passions." Thus, contemplating,
reflecting, and observing, Bahubali became detached from the world. He
immediately performed the Loch with his raised fist, touching his hair. He
became a forgiving Muni. Seeing this sudden transformation, the gods rejoiced,
praising him, "You have done very well, you have done very beautifully!" They
showered flowers on Bahubali and raised a joyous cry.  Becoming a Muni, Bahubali
thought, "How can I, being a Muni, go to the Lord and bow to my younger
brothers, who became Munis before me? It would be better to go directly to the
Lord's Dharma Sabha and sit in the assembly of Kevalgnanis when I attain
Kevalgyan. I will not have to bow to anyone or do anything else."  Thinking
thus, Bahubali, content with his renunciation, stood there, assuming the
Kayotsarga posture, silent and absorbed in meditation. Seeing Bahubali in this
state, Bharat was filled with remorse for his wrong actions. He felt as if he
was sinking into the earth with shame. He bowed to his brother, who was now a
Muni, the embodiment of peace. Tears of remorse flowed from Bharat's eyes. It
was as if his pent-up anger was being released in the form of tears. As Bharat
bowed at Bahubali's feet, the reflection in the mirror-like nails of Bahubali's
feet showed the various emotions of service, devotion, remorse, etc., that were
arising in Bharat's mind. Bharat, like a medicine for the disease of his guilt,
began to self-reproach and praise Bahubali Muni in front of him - "O Muni, you
are blessed! You have renounced the kingdom like a straw, out of compassion for
me. I am truly wicked, sinful, dissatisfied, and falsely arrogant; I have caused
you pain. I am the leader of all those who do not recognize their own strength,
who are inclined towards injustice, and who are under the influence of greed.
The kingdom is truly the seed that nourishes the tree of the world. Those who do
not understand this are unfortunate. Even knowing this, I could not give up the
kingdom, therefore I am more wicked than the wicked. A true son is one who
follows his father's path. I also aspire to become a true son of Lord Rishabhdev
like you." Thus, washing away the mud of sorrow with the water of remorse,
Bharat Maharaj placed his son, Somayasha, on the throne and performed his
coronation. From that time until today, the Soma dynasty has continued, with
hundreds of branches still existing today, which has given birth to many great
men. Thus, Bharat, bowing to Bahubali Muni, returned to his Ayodhya city with
his family, like the goddess of fortune.  A year passed as Bahubali Muni
performed difficult austerities and destroyed the karmas accumulated from past
lives. When the time was ripe for Bahubali's pride to be destroyed, Lord
Rishabhdev, with his unconfused vision, instructed Brahmi and Sundari to go to
Bahubali and inspire him to be free from pride. Therefore, following the Lord's
command, the two great Sadhvis went to Bahubali Muni and said, "O Great Being!
Equal-minded in gold and stone! Renouncer of association!   1. The mention of
the Chakra coming into the hands of the Dand Ratna Chakri is in the Sangatyagi
Sanveg Rangshala. 2. In the Avasarpini time, injustice began from here. 34

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bAhubalI kI dIkSA aura bharata dvArA stuti yogazAstra prathama prakAza zloka 10
karate hI cakra bharata ke hAtha meM A gyaa| krodha se huMkArate hue bharata
jamIna se bAhara nikale aura pracaMDa cakAcauMdha vAlA | cakra bAhubali para
pheNkaa| senA hAhAkAra kara uThI  /  kintu yaha kyA! cakra bAhubali kI parikramA
karake vApasa bharata ke pAsa lauTa aayaa| kyoMki devatAoM se adhiSThita zastra
eka gotra vAle svajana kA parAbhava nahIM kara sktaa| bhAI bharata ko anIti
karate dekhakara krodha se AMkhe lAla karate hue bAhubali ne socA- 'cakra sahita
ise kyoM na cUra-cUra kara duuN|' | isa vicAra ke sAtha bAhubali ne apanI muTThI
bAMdhakara mArane ke lie utthaayii| 2 tatkSaNa bAhubali ke dimAga meM eka vicAra
bijalI kI taraha krauMdha uThA - 'kaSAyoM ke vazIbhUta hokara bar3e bhAI ko |
mArane se kitanA anartha ho jAyegA? isase to acchA yaha hogA ki jo muSTi maiMne
bhAI ko mArane ke lie tAnI hai, usase | kaSAyoM ko mArane ke lie paMcamauSTika
loca kyoM na kara luuN|' isa prakAra ciMtana-manana- anuprekSaNa karate-karate
bAhubali | ko saMsAra se virakti utpanna ho gayI, aura unhoMne tatkAla hI uThAI
huI muSTi se sira ke bAloM kA loca kara liyaa| | ve kSamAzIla muni bana gye|
acAnaka yaha parivartana dekhakara 'bahuta hI zreSTha kiyA, bahuta hI suMdara
kiyA', yoM prazaMsA karate hue devoM ne harSa se jayadhvani kI aura bAhubali
para puSpavRSTi kii| muni banakara bAhubali ne mana meM vicAra kiyA- 'bhagavAn
ke pAsa jAkara mujhase pahale muni bane hue apane ratnAdhika | kiMtu
laghuvayaska bhAIyoM ko maiM bar3A bhAI hokara kaise vaMdanA karU~? acchA to
yahI hogA ki jaba mujhe kevalajJAna ho jAyegA, tabhI sIdhA bhagavAn kI
dharmasabhA meM jAkara kevalajJAniyoM kI parSadA meM baiTha jaauuNgaa| na kisI
ko vaMdanA karanI | par3egI aura na kucha aur| ' yoM socakara apane kRta tyAga
ke abhimAna meM svasaMtuSTa hokara bAhubali muni vahIM kAyotsarga pratimA
dhAraNa kara | mauna sahita dhyAna meM sthira khar3e ho gaye  /  bAhubali kI
aisI sthiti dekhakara apane anucita AcaraNa se bharata ko pazcAttApa | huaa|
zarma se vaha mAno pRthvI meM gar3A jA rahA thaa| usane zAMtarasa kI mUrti muni
bane hue apane baMdhu ko namaskAra kiyaa| bharata kI AMkhoM se pazcAttApa ke
garma azrubindu Tapaka pdd'e| mAno rahA-sahA krodha bhI AMsuoM ke rUpa meM
bAhara nikala | rahA thaa| bharatanareza jisa samaya bAhubali ke caraNoM meM
jhuka rahe the, usa samaya bAhubali ke pairoM ke nakha rUpI darpaNa meM |
pratibimba par3ane se bharata ke mana meM uThe hue sevA, bhakti, pazcAttApa Adi
aneka bhAvoM ke vividha rUpa dikhAI de rahe the  /  bharatanareza bAhubali ke
sAmane apane aparAdha rUpa roga kI auSadhi ke samAna AtmaniMdA aura bAhubali
muni kI guNastuti karane lagA - 'munivara, dhanya hai Apako! Apane mujha para
anukaMpA karake tinake kI taraha rAjyatyAga kara diyaa| 'maiM vAstava meM
adhama, pApI, asaMtoSI aura mithyA - ahaMkArI hU~; jisase maiMne Apako duHkhita
kiyaa| jo apanI zakti ko nahIM | pahicAnate, anyAyamArga meM pravRtta hote haiM
aura lobha ke vazIbhUta ho jAte haiM, una saba meM maiM aguA huuN| rAjya vAstava
meM saMsAravRkSa ko bar3hAne vAlA bIja hai| isa bAta ko jo nahIM samajhate, ve
adhanya hai| rAjya ko isa taraha kA jAnatA huA bhI maiM use nahIM chor3a sakA,
isa kAraNa maiM adhama se bhI adhama huuN| saccA putra vahI kahalAtA hai, jo
pitAjI ke mArga para cle| maiM bhI ApakI taraha bhagavAn RSabhadeva kA saccA
putra banUM aisI abhilASA hai| yoM pazcAttApa rUpI pAnI se | viSAda rUpI kIcar3a
ko sApha karake bharata mahArAja ne bAhubali ke putra somayazA ko rAjagaddI para
biThAkara usakA | rAjyAbhiSeka kiyaa| usa samaya se lekara Aja taka somavaMza
calA A rahA hai, jisakI saiMkar3oM zAkhAe~ Aja bhI vidyamAna hai; jo aneka
mahApuruSoM ko janma dene vAlA huA hai| isa prakAra bharateza bAhubalI muni ko
namaskAra kara parivAra sahita | rAjya lakSmI ke samAna apanI ayodhyAnagarI meM
Aye  /  bAhubali muni ko duSkara tapa karate evaM pUrvajanmopArjita karmoM ko
naSTa karate hue eka varSa vyatIta ho gayA  /  | amUDhalakSya vAle bhagavAn
RSabhadeva ne bAhubali kI abhimAnajanaka sthitI naSTa hone kA samaya paripakva
hone para brAhmI aura suMdarI ko bAhubali ke pAsa jAkara abhimAnamukta hone kI
preraNA dene kI AjJA dii| ataH bhagavAn kI AjJA se ve donoM mahAsAdhviyA~
bAhubalimuni ke pAsa Akara kahane lagIM- 'he mahAsattva! svarNa aura pASANa meM
samacitta ! saMgatyAgI 1. saMvega raMgazAlA meM daMDa ratna cakri ke hAtha meM
Ane kA ullekha hai| 2. avasarpiNInI kAla meM anIti kA yahAM se prAraMbha huaa|
34

Page #57 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Nirvana of Rishabha Prabhu  **Chapter 10 of Yoga Shastra, First Light**
"Brother Muni! Descend from the elephant's shoulder; it is not proper to remain
mounted. How will you attain knowledge this way? If fire burns below the
lindens, new leaves do not sprout on the tree. Brother Muni! If you wish to swim
across the ocean of the world, then consider for yourself and descend from this
elephant, like a boat made of iron."  Bahuvali Muni began to ponder, "On what
elephant am I mounted? What connection do I have with an elephant? Vines climb
trees, how can an elephant touch my body? The ocean may perhaps abandon its
boundaries, mountains may become mobile, yet a Sadhvi, a disciple of the Lord,
can never speak falsely. Oh yes! I have understood, I am mounted on this
elephant of pride, and it has destroyed my tree of knowledge, the tree of
humility bearing the fruit of knowledge, the fruit of Kevala Jnana. How can I
pay homage to my younger brothers, who were initiated before me? This very
thought has kept me mounted on the elephant of pride. Shame on such thoughts!
Though they may be younger than me in age, they are older than me in knowledge,
vision, and character. They were initiated before me. May this evil (sinful
thought) of mine be false. I will go now and pay homage to those younger
brothers and their disciples, becoming like an atom."  As Bahuvali Muni took a
step to go to the Lord, he attained Kevala Jnana, like the door to the Nirvana
Bhavan. He began to see the entire world as if in the palm of his hand, with the
wealth of Kevala Jnana. He went to the Lord and sat among the assembly of Kevala
Jnanas.  Meanwhile, Bharat Chakravarti, though possessing fourteen great jewels,
sixty-four thousand women in his inner palace, and nine treasures, remained
detached, using the wealth of his empire in accordance with Dharma, Artha, and
Kama, at the appropriate time.  Once, while wandering, the Lord arrived at the
Ashtapada mountain. Filled with the desire to pay homage at the Lord's feet,
Bharat Chakravarti reached there. The Lord Rishabhadev, the world's master,
worthy of worship by gods and demons, was seated in the Samavasaran. Bharat paid
his respects with three circumambulations and began to praise him, saying,
"Lord! You are the very embodiment of faith. You are the capital of good
conduct. You are the form of solitary grace for the entire world. You are the
embodiment of direct knowledge. You are the very essence of merit. You are the
totality of all beings with bodies, gathered in one place. You are the
embodiment of restraint. You are the benefactor of the world without any reason.
You are like the mobile nature. You are without a body, even though you have a
body. You are forgiving. You are like the secret of Yoga. You are the
concentrated essence of the world's vitality. You are the successful means of
achieving Siddhi. You are all-auspicious. You are the form of all good. You are
the embodied mediator. You are the combined form of penance, calmness, true
knowledge, Yoga, and so on. You are the very form of humility. You are like
extraordinary Siddhi. You are like a vast heart towards all the treasures of
knowledge. You are the integral meaning of the mantras like Namah, Swasti,
Swadha, Swaha, Vashad. You are the pure embodiment of Dharma. You are like the
excess of creation. You are the concentrated form of all penance. You are the
result of all. You are the entire group of eternal virtues. You are the form of
excellence, the unimpeded means of attaining Moksha Lakshmi. You are the unique
place of influence. You are the reflection of Moksha. You are like the ancestral
home of the learned. You are the result of all blessings. You are like the best
mirror to see the best character of the Aryans. You are the seer of the world.
You are the calm, detached form. You are like the door to peace for the
suffering. You are living, awake Brahmacharya. You are the unparalleled living
being of the Jiva Loka, earned through brilliant merit. You are compassionate,
with long arms, as if pulling the beings of the world from the mouth of the lion
of death. You are the nectar, churned out from the ocean of knowledge, using the
Meru mountain as the churning stick, from the churning of the churning stick.
You are the cause of the immortality of beings. You are the giver of protection
to the entire world. You are the assurance to the three worlds. Oh Lord of Love!
I take refuge in you. Be pleased with me."  In this way, Bharat Maharaj, with a
focused mind, worshipped the Lord Rishabhadev, the lord of the three worlds, for
a long time.  After taking initiation, one lakh years minus one thousand years
of the past time elapsed, the Lord attained Moksha on the Ashtapada mountain,
along with ten thousand Sadhus. At that time, Indra and other gods celebrated
the Lord's Nirvana Mahotsav. Indra Maharaj comforted and reassured the deeply
grief-stricken Bharat. Later, on the Ashtapada mountain, Bharat Maharaj built a
temple of gems, called Nishadya, like the second Ashtapada. In it, Bharat
Chakravarti installed a statue made of precious stones, adorned with the form,
color, and posture of Lord Rishabhadev. Along with Rishabhadev, the future 23
Tirthankaras...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 RSabha prabhu kA nirvANa yogazAstra prathama prakAza zloka 10 | bhrAtA
munivara! hAthI ke kaMdhe se nIce utaro; hAthI para car3he rahanA ucita nahIM
hai| isase Apako kevalajJAna kaise prApta hogA? nIce liMDiyoM kI Aga prajvalita
ho to vRkSa meM nava pallava ugate nhiiN| bhrAtAmunivara! yadi Apa saMsAra-
samudra se taranA cAhate haiM to Apa svayaM hI vicAra kareM aura lohe kI naukA
ke samAna isa hAthI para se nIce utreN|' bAhubali muni vicAra karane lage-'maiM
kauna-se hAthI para car3hA huA huuN| merA hAthI ke sAtha kyA vAstA? vRkSa para
beleM car3hatI haiM, vaise hAthI mere zarIra se kaise saMparka kara sakatA hai?
samadra kadAcita apanI maryAdA choDa de. parvata calAyamAna ho jAya, phira bhI
bhagavAn kI ziSyA sAdhvI kabhI asatya nahIM bola sktii| are hAM! maiMne jAna
liyA, maiM to isa mAna rUpI hAthI para car3hA hUM aura isIne mere kevalajJAna
rUpI jJAna-phala vAle vinayavRkSa kA nAza kiyA hai| mere pUrva-dIkSita choTe
bhAIyoM ko maiM kaise vaMdana karU~? yahI vicAra mujhe abhimAna ke hAthI para
car3hAye hue thaa| dhikkAra hai, aise vicAroM ko| ve cAhe mujhase umra meM choTe
hoM, magara jJAna, darzana aura cAritra meM to ve mere se bar3e haiM, mere se
pahale dIkSita hai| merA yaha duSkRta (pApamaya vicAra) mithyA ho| abhI jAkara
una choTe bhAIyoM ko aura unake ziSyoM taka ko paramANu-samAna banakara maiM
vaMdana karU~; yoM vicAra karate hue jyoM hI bAhubali muni ne bhagavAn ke pAsa
jAne ke lie kadama uThAyA; tyoMhI unako nirvANabhavana ke dvAra ke samAna
kevalajJAna prApta huaa| kevalajJAna-lakSmI se samasta vizva ko ve
hastAmalakavat dekhane lge| aura bhagavAn ke pAsa jAkara kevalajJAniyoM kI
parSadA meM jA baitthe| _ idhara caudaha mahAratnoM, causaTha hajAra aMtaHpura
kI striyoM aura nau nidhAnoM se saMpanna hone para bhI bharata cakravartI
sAmrAjya-saMpatti kA upayoga dharma, artha aura kAma kA aviruddha rUpa se
yathAsamaya sevana karate hue nirlipta bhAva se rahate the| _eka bAra vihAra
karate hue prabhu aSTApada parvata para pdhaareN| prabhu ke caraNoM meM vaMdana
karane kI utkaMThA se bharata cakravartI vahA~ phuNce| devoM aura dAnavoM ke
dvArA pUjanIya vizvapati bhagavAn RSabhadeva samavasaraNa meM baiThe the|
bharateza ne unakI tIna bAra pradakSiNA kI aura namaskAra karake stuti karane
lage 'prabho! Apa sAkSAt vizvAsa kI mUrti haiN| pUMjIbhUta sadAcAra hai; samagra
jagat ke lie ekAMta prasAda rUpa haiN| pratyakSajJAna ke puMja rUpa haiN| puNya
ke samUha-svarUpa haiN| eka hI sthAna para ekatrIbhUta dehadhArI samasta loka ke
sarvasva haiN| saMyamasvarUpa haiN| akAraNa vizvopakArI haiN| jaMgama zIla ke
samAna haiN| dehadhArI hote hue bhI videha haiN| kSamAvAna haiM, yoga ke
rahasya-samAna haiN| jagat ke ekatra pUMjIbhUta vIrya haiN| siddhi ke saphala
upAyabhUta haiN| Apa sarvatobhadra haiN| Apa sarvamaMgala rUpa haiN| mUrtimAna
madhyastha haiN| ekatrita tapa, prazama sadjJAna, yoga Adi rUpa haiN| sAkSAt
vinaya-rUpa haiN| asAdhAraNa siddhi ke samAna haiN| sakala zAstra-saMpattiyoM ke
prati vyApaka hRdaya-samAna hai| 'namaH svasti, svadhA, svAhA, vaSaD Adi maMtroM
| ke abhinna artha-samAna hai| vizuddha dharmamUrti haiM, nirmANa ke atizaya-
samAna haiN| piMDIbhUta samagra tapa hai| samagra phalasvarUpa hai| samasta
zAzvataguNa-samUha hai| guNotkarSa-svarUpa mokSa-lakSmI ke nirvighna upAya haiN|
prabhAvanA ke advitIya sthAna haiN| mokSa ke pratibiMba svarUpa haiN| vidvAnoM
ke mAno kulagRha haiN| samasta AzIrvAdoM ke phalarUpa haiN| AryoM ke zreSTha
caritra kA darzana karane ke lie zreSTha darpaNa ke samAna haiN| jagata ke dRSTA
haiN| kUTastha prazama rUpa haiN| duHkhiyoM ke lie zAMti ke dvAra ke samAna
haiN| jIte jAgate brahmacarya haiN| ujjvala puNya se upArjita jIvaloka ke apUrva
jIvita haiN| mRtyu rUpI siMha ke mukha se khIMcakara jagat ke jIvoM ko bacAne ke
lie mAno laMbe hAtha kiye hue kRpAlu haiN| jJeya samudra meM se jJAna rUpI
meruparvata ko maMthanadaMDa banAkara maMthanadaMDa se maMthana karake nikAle
hue sAkSAt amRta haiN| tathA jIvoM kI amaraNatA ke kAraNa-svarUpa haiN| sAre
vizva ko abhayadAna dene vAle haiN| tIna loka ko AzvAsana dene vAle haiN| he
paremazvara! maiM ApakI zaraNa grahaNa karatA huuN| mujha para prasanna hoN| isa
taraha trilokInAtha zrI RSabhadeva svAmI ke sAmane ekAgracitta hokara cirakAla
taka bharata mahArAja ne unakI upAsanA kii| dIkSA lene ke bAda eka hajAra varSa
kama eka lAkha pUrva kAla vyatIta hone para prabhu ne dasa hajAra sAdhuoM ke
sAtha aSTApada-parvata para mokSa prApta kiyaa| usa samaya iMdra Adi devatAoM ne
prabhu kA nirvANa-mahotsava kiyaa| mahAzokamagna bharata ko iMdramahArAja ne
AzvAsana dekara smjhaayaa| bAda meM aSTApada-parvata para bharatamahArAja ne
dUsare aSTApada ke samAna niSadyA nAma kA ratnajaTita prAsAdamaya-maMdira
bnvaayaa| usameM bharata cakravartI ne zrI RSabhadeva bhagavAn ke zarIra, varNa
aura saMsthAna kI AkRti se suzobhita ratnapASANamaya pratimA kI sthApanA kii|
RSabhadeva ke sAtha bhAvI 23 tIrthaMkaroM 35

Page #58 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Description of Bharat and Marudeva Mata's Attainment of Kevalgyan  Bharat,
after establishing the principles of Yoga Shastra in the first chapter of the
first book, built magnificent stupas for ninety-nine of his brother monks. He
then returned to his capital and dedicated himself to ruling his people. As a
result of his past karma, Bharat enjoyed various pleasures like Indra, the king
of the gods.   One day, Bharat, adorned with clothes and jewels, went to his
mirror chamber. He stood before the mirror, admiring his reflection, which was
adorned with the jewels he wore. Suddenly, a ring fell from his finger, leaving
his finger looking dull and lifeless. This made him ponder: if the removal of a
single ring diminished the beauty of his finger, what would happen if he removed
all his ornaments?   He removed all his ornaments and looked at his reflection.
He saw his body, devoid of ornaments, as lifeless as a tree without leaves. He
delved deeper into contemplation: "Is the beauty of this body due to ornaments?
Instead of adorning this body with jewels, why not adorn my soul with the jewels
of knowledge and other virtues? Those ornaments are permanent, their shine will
never fade. What is the benefit of adorning this body, filled with excrement and
other impurities, with external sources? It is like plastering a hollow wall to
enhance its beauty. Just as rain on barren land is useless, so too does this
body, adorned with camphor, musk, and other substances, only pollute those
beautiful substances. Therefore, to make this body meaningful, one must renounce
the attachment to the means of happiness, which are ultimately painful, and
embrace the practice of austerity and self-restraint, which leads to liberation.
This is how one can achieve the highest fruit."  Thus, filled with the nectar of
detachment, Bharat contemplated the impermanence of all things. Through this
contemplation, he attained Kevalgyan. This is the extraordinary power of Yoga!
At that time, the devout Indra presented him with the monks, including
Rajoharan, and then paid his respects. He then placed Bharat's son, Aditya
Yasha, on the throne. From that day to this, the lineage of the kings has
continued.  A question arises: "Bharat Chakravarti had attained the experience
of Yoga in a previous life by taking monastic vows. With the strength of that
yogic attainment, he did not have to exert much effort to destroy his negative
karma and eliminate karmic afflictions. From this perspective, it is appropriate
to use the example of Bharat Maharaja to explain the greatness of Yoga. But how
can a being who has not attained the three jewels (faith, knowledge, and
conduct) in previous lives, and has not destroyed his karma, and has not
attained human birth in a previous life, destroy the accumulated karma of
countless lifetimes?"  The answer is given in the following verse:  **Verse
11:**  > Even though she had not attained Dharma in any previous birth, Marudeva
Mata, filled with supreme bliss, attained the supreme state through the power of
Yoga.  **Explanation:**  Marudeva Mata had not attained true Dharma in any
birth, nor had she experienced the three lower realms or human birth. Only in
her present birth, through the power of Yoga, did she burn away the fuel of
long-accumulated karma with the great fire of Shukla Dhyana. As it is said, "Jah
Marudeva Accanta Thavara Siddha" (A. Ni. 1036), meaning, "Just as Marudeva
alone, without going to any other realm and without wandering in the world,
directly attained liberation from the eternal, unchanging (Anadi Nigoda) state."
Marudeva's character has been briefly described earlier.  Marudeva Mata had not
committed intense karma in her previous lives, so she attained liberation
effortlessly with a little practice of Yoga.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bharata ko kevalajJAna evaM marudevA mAtA kA varNana yogazAstra prathama
prakAza zloka 11 kI bhI sthApanA kI usake bAda unhoMne ninyAnave bhrAta-
munivaroM ke bhI ratnapASANamaya anupama stUpa bnvaaye| phira apanI rAjadhAnI
meM Akara prajA kA pAlana karane ke lie kaTibaddha hokara rAjya karane lge|
bharateza bhogAvalI karma ke phala svarUpa udaya prApta vividha bhogoM kA iMdra
ke samAna sadA upabhoga karate the| | eka dina vastra. AbhUSaNa Adi pahanakara
susajjita hone ke lie bharata cakravartI apane zIzamahala meM phuNce| usa samaya
ve aMtaHpura kI aMganAoM ke bIca meM aise suzobhita ho rahe the, jaise tAroM ke
bIca meM caMdramA suzobhita hotA hai| zIzamahala meM jaba bharata nareza zIze ke
sAmane khar3e hokara apanA ceharA va aMga dekhane lage to sAre aMgoM meM pahane
hue ratnajaTita AbhUSaNa kA pratibiMba usameM par3a rahA thaa| acAnaka unake
hAtha kI eka aMgulI meM se aMgUThI gira pdd'ii| usake girane se nisteja
caMdrakalA-sI zobhArahita aMguli dikhAI dene lgii| unake mana meM maMthana
jaagaa| jaba eka aMgUThI ke nikAla dene se aMguli kI zobhA kama ho gayI hai to
AbhUSaNoM ke utAra dene se patA nahIM kyA hogA? yoM socakara unhoMne apane sAre
AbhUSaNa utArakara apanA pratibiMba dekhA to pattoM se rahita vRkSa ke samAna
apanA zarIra zobhArahita jAna pdd'aa| | bharata ciMtana kI gaharAyI meM DUba
gaye, ki 'kyA isa zarIra kI zobhA AbhUSaNoM se hai? ataH isa zarIra ko gahanoM
se sajAne kI apekSA apanI AtmA ko jJAnAdi guNa rUpI AbhUSaNoM se kyoM na sajA
lUM! ve AbhUSaNa sthAyI hoMge, unakI camaka kabhI phIkI na hogii| viSThA Adi
maloM se bhare hue isa bAhyasrota vAle zarIra ko sajAne se kyA lAbha? yaha to
aMdara se khokhalI dIvAra para palastara karake usakI zobhA ko bar3hAne jaisA
hogaa| jaise utpatha (USara) bhUmi meM huI varSA vyartha hI jala ko bigAr3atI
hai vaise hI kapUra, kastUrI Adi padArthoM se zRMgArita yaha zarIra bhI suMdara
padArthoM ko dUSita hI karatA hai| isalie pariNAma meM duHkhada viSaya sukha
sAdhanoM kI Asakti kA tyAga karake mokSaphala dene vAle tapa-saMyama kA sevana
karane se hI yaha zarIra sArthaka ho sakatA hai| isI prakAra isase uttama phala
prApta kiyA jA sakatA hai|' isa prakAra vairAgyarasa se sarobAra hokara bharata
ne anityabhAvanA para anaprekSA kii| isa prakAra ke zakladhyAna ke yoga se unheM
kevalajJAna utpanna huaa| yaha hai yoga kA adbhuta sAmarthya! usI samaya
bhaktimAna iMdra ne unheM rajoharaNa Adi muniveza arpaNa kiyA, bAda meM vaMdana
kiyA aura bharata ke sthAna | para unake putra AdityayazA ko rAjagaddI para
biThAyA. taba se lekara Aja taka ke rAjAoM kA sUryavaMza cala rahA hai| yahA~
para zaMkA paidA hotI hai ki 'bharata cakravartI ne pUrvajanma meM muni dIkSA
lekara yoga kA anubhava kiyA thA aura usa yogasamRddhi ke bala se azubha karma
naSTa karane meM tathA karmakleza ko miTAne meM yoga ke prabhAva se unheM adhika
AyAsa nahIM karanA pdd'aa| isa dRSTi se yoga kA mAhAtmya batAne hetu bharata
mahArAjA kA udAharaNa denA ucita hai| paraMtu jisa jIva ne janmAMtara meM
darzanAdi tIna ratnoM ko prApta nahIM kiyA aura karmakSaya nahIM kiyA hai,
jisane pUrvajanma meM manuSyatva prApta nahIM kiyA, vaha jIva anaMtakAla taka
ekatrita kiye hue karmoM kA samUla nAza kaise kara sakatA hai? isakA uttara
nimnokta zloka dvArA dete haiN|11| pUrvamaprAptadharmA'pi, paramAnandananditA  /
yogaprabhAvataH prApaH, [prApta], marudevA paraM padam  // 11 //  artha :-
pahale kisI bhI janma meM dharma-saMpatti prApta na karane para bhI yoga ke
prabhAva se parama AnaMda se mudita (prasanna) marudevI mAtA ne paramapada mokSa
prApta kiyA hai  /  / 11 /  /  vyAkhyA :- zrI marudevI mAtA ne kisI bhI janma
meM saddharma prApta nahIM kiyA thA aura na trasayoni prApta kI thI aura na
manuSyatva kA hI anubhava kiyA thaa| kevala marudevI ke bhava meM yogabala se
samRddha zukladhyAna-rUpI mahAnala se dIrghakAla saMcita karma rUpI iMdhana ko
jalAkara bhasma kara diyA thaa| kahA bhI hai-'jaha marudevA accaMtaM thAvarA
siddhA' [A. ni. 1036] arthAt jaise akelI marudevI ne dUsarI kisI gati meM gaye
binA va saMsAra-paribhramaNa kiye binA sIdhe anaMtakAlika sthAvara (anAdi
nigoda) paryAya se nikalakara mokSa prApta kara liyaa| marudevI kA caritra
saMkSepa meM pahale kahA gayA hai||11|| marudevI mAtA ne pUrvajanma meM tIvra
karma nahIM kiye the, isalie yoga kI thor3I-sI sAdhanA se anAyAsa hI mokSapada |
36

Page #59 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Description of Dridhaprāhārī The solution to the question of whether even an
extremely cruel person can attain success through the influence of yoga is
presented in the following verse.  12. Brahma-strī-bhruṇa-go-ghāta-pātakān-
narakātiteḥ | Dṛḍhaprāhāri-prabhūter-yogaḥ hastāvalambanaṃ ||12||  Meaning: For
the Dṛḍhaprāhārī (the extremely violent one), who had committed the great sins
of killing a Brahmin, a woman, an embryo, and a cow, and thus became a guest of
hell, yoga was the only support.  Explanation: Killing a Brahmin, a woman, an
embryo, and a cow are considered the greatest sins in the world. Although for
one who considers all souls equal, whether a Brahmin or a non-Brahmin, a woman
or a man, an embryo or a youth, a cow or any other animal, the sin of killing
any five-sensed being is almost the same. It is said that one should not commit
violence against any being, be it a king or a water-fetching servant. The vow of
non-violence (ahiṃsā-vrata) prohibits causing harm to any living being. However,
in worldly practice, the killer of these four (Brahmin, woman, child, and cow)
is considered a great sinner. Others do not consider the killing of other beings
as much of a sin as the killing of these four. Therefore, the killing of these
four is called a great sin (mahāpātaka) here.  As a result of this great sin,
the Dṛḍhaprāhārī became eligible for hell. But due to the power of yoga attained
by him, he became eligible for liberation in the same birth. Similarly, other
great sinners who have understood the Jain scriptures and acquired the wealth of
yoga have purified their hell-bound karmas and attained the supreme state of
liberation.  Transformation of Dṛḍhaprāhārī's heart: In a certain city, there
lived an extremely unruly Brahmin. He was so sinful that whenever he was seen,
he would astonish the innocent people and inflict oppression on them. The state
protectors expelled him from the city. Thus, he ended up in the thieves'
village, like a hawk falling into the hands of hunters. The captain of the
thieves, impressed by his merciless behavior and violent conduct, and
considering him suitable for his work, accepted him as his son. One day, the
captain of the thieves was suddenly killed in a clash. Therefore, this cruel
youth was accepted as the new captain, considering him as the son and a valiant
person. He did not hesitate or delay even a bit in committing the murder of
living beings mercilessly. Due to this, he became famous among the people as
Dṛḍhaprāhārī (the extremely violent one).  One day, taking some brave warriors
with him, he went to loot the village of Kuśasthala. In that village, there
lived a very poor Brahmin named Devaśarmā. His children, like hoping for fruits
from a fruitless tree, expressed their desire to eat khīra (a sweet dish) in
front of their father. The Brahmin went around the entire village, begging for
rice from one place, milk from another, and jaggery from somewhere else. After
collecting the ingredients for khīra, he went to the river to bathe. Meanwhile,
those very thieves barged into his house. Thinking that the weak are destroyed
by fate, one of the thieves, like a hungry ghost, quickly grabbed the pot of
khīra and fled. Seeing their khīra stolen, the Brahmin's sons cried and
complained to their father about it.  Burning with anger, the Brahmin
immediately grabbed a pestle and, like a messenger of Yama (the god of death),
rushed towards the thieves. Summoning all his courage and strength, he started
beating the thieves mercilessly with the pestle. Seeing his fellow thieves being
beaten, the Dṛḍhaprāhārī rushed to confront him. As he was running, by divine
arrangement, a cow came in his way, as if to obstruct his path of misfortune.
The leader of these wicked thieves...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dRr3haprahArI kA varNana yogazAstra prathama prakAza zloka 12 prApta kara liyA
thaa| magara jo atyaMta krUrakarmI hai, kyA vaha bhI yoga ke prabhAva se
saphalatA prApta kara sakatA hai? isa prazna kA samAdhAna nimnokta zloka dvArA
prastuta karate haiN|12| brahma-strI bhrUNa-go-ghAta-pAtakAnnarakAtitheH  /
dRDhaprahAriprabhUte ryogo hastAvalambanam  // 12 //  artha :- brAhmaNa, strI,
garbhahatyA (bAlahatyA) aura gAya kI hatyA ke mahApApa karane se naraka ke
atithi-samAna dRr3haprahArI Adi ko yoga hI AlaMbana thA  /  / 12 /  /  vyAkhyA
:- brAhmaNa, nArI, garbhastha bAlaka aura gAya ina cAroM kI hatyA loka meM
mahApApa mAnA jAtA hai| yadyapi | sabhI AtmAe~ samAna mAnane vAle ke lie
brAhmaNa ho yA abrAhmaNa, strI ho yA puruSa, garbhastha bAlaka ho athavA yuvaka,
gAya ho yA anya pazu, kisI bhI paMceMdriya prANI kI hatyA kA pApa to prAyaH
samAna hI hotA hai| kahA bhI hai ki-'kisI kI bhI hiMsA nahIM karanI cAhie, rAjA
ho yA pAnI bharane vAlA naukr|' abhayadAnavratI (ahiMsAvratI) ko kisI bhI | jIva
kI hiMsA nahIM karanI caahie| phira bhI lokavyavahAra meM brAhmaNa, strI, bAlaka
aura gAya ina cAroM kI hatyA karane vAlA mahApApI mAnA jAtA hai| dUsare loga
anya jIvoM kA vadha karane meM utanA pApa nahIM mAnate, jitanA pApa ina cAroM ke
vadha meM mAnate haiN| isalie yahA~ para ina cAroM kI hatyA ko mahApAtaka kahA
hai| aise mahApAtaka ke phala svarUpa narakagamana ke adhikArI bane hue
dRr3haprahArI Adi ko yogabala prApta hone se ve usI janma meM mokSa ke adhikArI
bana jAte haiN| isI prakAra dUsare mahApApI bhI jinhoMne jinavacana ko samajhA
hai aura usase yoga saMpatti prApta kI hai| unhoMne narakagamana-yogya karmoM kA
nirmala karake paramapada-mokSasaMpatti prApta kI hai| kahA bhI hai-'koI vyakti
svabhAva se kara ho| gayA ho, atyaMta viSayAsakta ho gayA ho, kiMtu agara usakA
citta jinavacana ke prati bhakti yukta ho jAya to vaha bhI tInoM lokoM ke sukha
kA bhAgI bana sakatA hai| dRr3haprahArI kA hRdaya-parivartana :.. kisI nagara
meM atyaMta uddaNDa svabhAva kA eka brAhmaNa rahatA thaa| vaha itanA pApabuddhi
thA ki jaba dekho, taba nirdoSa janatA ko hairAna karatA thA, una para julma
DhahAtA thaa| rAjya-rakSaka puruSoM ne use nagara se bAhara nikAla diyaa| ataH
bAjapakSI jaise zikArI ke hAtha meM calA jAtA hai, vaise hI vaha corapallI meM
pahu~ca gyaa| vahA~ coroM ke senApati (aguA mukhiyA) ne usake nirdaya-vyavahAra
aura hiMsaka AcaraNa se prabhAvita hokara tathA use apane kAma ke lie yogya
samajhakara putra rUpa meM svIkAra kara liyaa| eka dina akasmAt kisI jagaha
muThabher3a meM coroM kA senApati mArA gyaa| ataH usa krUra yuvaka ko usakA
putra samajhakara tathA parAkramI jAnakara senApati kI jagaha svIkAra kara
liyaa| vaha nirdayatA pUrvaka jIva hatyA karane meM jarA bhI saMkoca evaM
vilaMba nahIM karatA thaa| isa kAraNa logoM meM vaha dRr3haprahArI nAma se
prasiddha ho gyaa| eka dina lUTapATa karane meM sAhasI kucha vIra subhaToM ko
sAtha lekara vaha kuzasthala nAmaka gA~va ko lUTane gyaa| usa gAMva meM
devazarmA nAma kA eka mahAdaridra brAhmaNa rahatA thaa| usake baccoM ne eka dina
phala rahita vRkSa se phala kI AzA rakhane ke samAna apane pitA ke sAmane khIra
khAne kI icchA prakaTa kii| brAhmaNa ne sAre gA~va meM ghUmakara kahIM se cAvala
mAMgA, kahIM se dUdha aura kahIM se khA~Da maaNgii| yoM khIra kI sAmagrI ikaTThI
karake ghara meM khIra banAne ko kahakara svayaM nadI para snAna karane calA
gyaa| itane meM ve hI cora usI ke ghara para A dhmke| 'daiva bhI durbala ko hI
mAratA hai, isa nyAya se una coroM meM se eka cora taiyAra kI huI khIra ko
dekhakara kSudhAtura preta ke samAna lapakakara khIra kI haMDiyA uThAkara | le
bhaagaa| apane prANa ke samAna khIra luTa jAne se brAhmaNaputroM ne apane pitA
se rote-cillAte hue sArI zikAyata kI'hama to muMha bAe~ hue khIra khAne kI
iMtajAra kara hI rahe the, itane meM to jaise phaTI huI A~kha vAle ke kAjala ko
vAyu haraNa kara letA hai, vaise hI hamAre dekhate-dekhate eka cora Akara hamArI
khIra uThA le gyaa| baccoM kI bAta sunakara krodhAgni se jalatA huA brAhmaNa
ekadama argalA lekara yamadUta-sA daudd'aa| apanA sArA sAhasa aura bala baTora
kara rAkSasa kI taraha argalA se vaha coroM para TUTa par3A aura coroM ko
dhar3Adhar3a pITane lgaa| apane sAthI coroM ko piTate dekhakara dRr3haprahArI
usakA sAmanA karane ke lie daudd'aa| jaba vaha daur3a rahA thA taba, daivayoga
se rAste meM usakI gati ko rokane ke lie eka gAya bIca meM A gyii| mAnoM vaha
gAya usake durgatipatha ko rokane AyI ho| adhama coroM ke isa aguA 37

Page #60 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Drdhaprahari Muni's endurance of adversity with equanimity  Yoga Shastra, First
Light, Verse 12 (Mukhiya) - He saw and did not hesitate, like a butcher, he
killed the poor cow with a single stroke of his sword. The impoverished Brahmin,
who had come to confront the thief, was also beheaded with a single blow of the
sword, falling to the ground like a pineapple tree. At that time, his pregnant
wife came before him and cried out, "Oh, merciless sinner, what have you done?"
But he did not listen to her, and like a wolf suddenly attacking a pregnant
goat, the cruel man attacked the pregnant woman and cut her in two with his
sword. The child in her womb was also torn to pieces. It was an extremely tragic
sight, seeing the child trembling like bel leaves, writhing and convulsing, even
a heart of stone would have sprouted seeds of compassion. At that very moment,
the Brahmin's son came there, wailing loudly, "Alas, father, alas, father!"
Seeing the hungry, naked, thin, and black-haired children with dirt on their
bodies, Drdhaprahari began to repent and think, "Alas! I have become merciless
and killed this Brahmin couple! What will happen to these poor unfortunate
children? Just as fish cannot survive without water in a reservoir, how can
these children survive without their parents? Oh! This cruel act, I don't know
what misfortune it will lead me to? Who will save me from the fruits of this
sin? Whose refuge should I seek now?" Thinking in this way, a sense of
detachment arose. Therefore, instead of going to the village, he reached a
garden outside the village. There he saw a sage-Muni, like a medicine for the
disease of sin. The murderer Drdhaprahari greeted him and said, "Lord! I am a
great sinner. Not only that, even the one who talks to me becomes a sinner.
Because the person who touches a person covered in mud also gets mud on him. It
is a common belief that whoever kills even one of a child, woman, Brahmin, or
cow, is surely destined for hell. I, being merciless, have killed all four.
Lord! Only a holy sage like you can protect a merciless and sinful person like
me." When it rains, it does not consider whether it is fertile land or barren
land?" That purifier of the fallen, the Muni, instructed him in the path of
virtuous conduct, full of austerity and self-control, to completely free him
from sin. Just as a man who is afraid of the heat puts on an umbrella, so too,
with great curiosity, he accepted the virtuous path to escape the fear of the
suffering of sin. He also took this vow: "As long as I remember this sin, I will
not eat and I will seek complete forgiveness." The great-minded Drdhaprahari
Muni, desiring the destruction of karma, while wandering, reached near the same
village where he had previously spread terror. When the villagers saw him, they
recognized him and said, "This is the same head of sinners, the great sinner,
the cunning one has now deceitfully donned the garb of a sage. Drive him away."
Many people said, "This is the same murderer of the cow, the Brahmin, the child,
and the woman. A hypocrite! Let him come, we will make him taste the
consequences!" Thus, for many days, people cursed, scolded, rebuked, and
condemned the Mahatma in various ways. Wherever he went for alms, people would
hit him with stones, just as dogs are hit with stones. In this way, Drdhaprahari
Muni, when he went to the village every day for alms, etc., would hear these
slanderous words, and because of this, he would remember his sins and, according
to his vow, would not respond to anyone, but would remain in a state of
forgiveness; he would also not eat. Truly, for a courageous soul, nothing is
difficult. Sometimes in the morning, sometimes in the afternoon, and sometimes
in the evening, whenever he met the villagers, they would remind him of his past
sins. Therefore, he did not eat even for a single day. People would beat him
with stones, sticks, fists, etc., throw dust on him; yet he endured all these
disturbances with equanimity and thought, "Self! Just as you have committed
sins, so too, you must experience the fruits of sin! As you sow, so shall you
reap. It is very good that these people, by being angry with me, are unknowingly
giving me the opportunity to attain the perfection of being free from desire. If
their hearts are filled with joy by being angry with me, let them be; I endure
their harsh words with love. Therefore,  .38

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dRr3haprahArImuni dvArA samabhAva se upasarga-sahana yogazAstra prathama
prakAza zloka 12 (mukhiyA) ne Ava dekhA na tAva, becArI gAya ko kasAI ke samAna
talavAra ke eka hI jhaTake meM mAra ddaalii| daridra brAhmaNa, jo ukta cora se
mukAbalA karane AyA thA, usake mastaka ko bhI talavAra ke eka hI prahAra se
anannAsa ke per3a ke samAna kATakara jamIna para girA diyaa| usa samaya usakI
garbhavatI patnI usake sAmane Akara cillA uThI-'o nirdaya pApI yaha kyA kara
DAlA tUMne?" paraMtu usane usakI eka na sunI aura jaise bher3iyA garbhavatI
bakarI para sahasA hamalA kara detA hai, vaise hI usa krUra ne usa garbhavatI
strI para hamalA karake talavAra se usake do Tukar3e kara ddaale| usake garbha
meM jo bAlaka thA usake aMga ke bhI Tukar3e-Tukar3e ho gye| bela ke pattoM kI
taraha thara-thara kAMpate, tar3aphar3ate aura chaTapaTAte hue usa bAlaka ko
dekhakara patthara-se hRdaya meM bhI karuNA ke aMkUra phUTane lage, aisA atyaMta
karuNa dRzya thaa| ThIka usI samaya brAhmaNa ke putra jora-jora se karuNa svara
se 'hAya pitAjI, hAya pitAjI! isa prakAra vilApa karate hue vahA~ aaye| bhUkhe,
naMgadhaDaMga, dubale aura zarIra para maila jamA hone se kAlekalUTa bAlakoM ko
dekhakara, dRr3haprahArI pazcAttApa karane lagA aura vicAra karane lagA-'hAya!
maiMne nirdayI banakara isa brAhmaNa-daMpatI kA vadha kara DAlA! ina becAre
abhAge bAlakoM kA aba kyA hogA? jaise jalAzaya meM pAnI ke binA machaliyA~
jIvita nahIM raha sakatI haiM, vaise hI ye bacce mAtApitA ke binA kaise jIvita
raha sakeMge? opha! yaha krUra karma aba na mAlUma mujhe kisa durgati meM le
jAyegA? isa pApa ke phala se mujhe kauna bacAyegA? aba maiM kisakI zaraNa lU~?'
isa taraha ciMtana karate-karate vairAgyabhAva jAgRta ho gyaa| ataH gA~va meM na
jAkara gA~va ke bAhara hI eka udyAna meM phuNcaa| vahA~ pApa rUpI roga ke
nivAraNa ke auSadha ke samAna eka sAdhu-munirAja ko dekhaa| hatyAre
dRr3haprahArI ne unheM namaskAra kiyA aura kahA-'bhagavan! maiM mahApApI huuN|
itanA hI nahIM, mere sAtha vArtAlApa karane vAlA bhI pApI ho jAtA hai| kyoMki
kIcar3a se lathapatha vyakti ko jo manuSya sparza karatA hai, usake bhI kIcar3a
laga jAtI hai| lokamAnyatA yaha hai ki bAlaka, strI, brAhmaNa aura gAya inameM
se jo eka kI bhI hatyA karatA hai, vaha avazya hI naraka kA adhikArI banatA hai|
maiMne to nirdaya banakara ina cAroM kI hatyA kI hai| prabho! majha sarIkhe
nirdaya evaM pApI kI rakSA Apa sarIkhe pavitra sAdhu hI kara sakate haiN|' varSA
jaba barasatI hai, taba vicAra nahIM karatI ki yaha upajAU jamIna hai yA
USarabhUmi?' usa patitapAvana munivara ne use pApa se sarvathA mukta hone ke lie
tapa-saMyamamaya sAdhudharma kA upadeza diyaa| sunakara jisa taraha koI garmI se
ghabarAyA huA manuSya chAtA dhAraNa karatA hai usI taraha atIva jijJAsA se
pApAtApa-bhaya se chuTakArA pAne hetu usane sAdhu dharma svIkAra kiyaa| sAtha hI
yaha abhigraha bhI dhAraNa kiyA ki jaba taka yaha pApa mujhe yAda AyegA, taba
taka maiM bhojana nahIM karU~gA aura sarvathA kSamA rluuNgaa|' jisa kuzasthala
gAMva meM usane pahale AtaMka macAyA thA, vihAra karate hue karmakSaya kI icchA
se mahAmanA dRr3haprahArI muni usI gAMva ke nikaTa pahuMca gye| gA~va ke logoM
ne jaba use dekhA to ve use pahacAna gaye aura kahane lage ki yaha to vahI
pApiyoM kA ziromaNi hai, mahApApI hai, dhUrta ne aba kapaTa se sAdhuveSa pahana
liyA hai| mAra bhagAo ise|' kaI loga kahane lage-'yaha to vahI gau, brAhmaNa,
bAlaka aura strI kA hatyArA hai| DhoMgI kahIM kA! Ane do ise majA cakhAyeMge!'
yoM kaI dinoM taka loga tarahataraha se usa mahAtmA ko kosate, DAMTate,
phaTakArate evaM niMdA karate rhe| jahAM kahIM bhI vaha bhikSA ke lie jAtA thA,
vahIM para loga usako usI prakAra Dhele se mArate the, jaise kuttoM ko Dhele se
mArA jAtA hai| isa prakAra dRr3haprahArI muni pratidina gA~va meM bhikSA Adi ke
lie jaba jAtA to ye niMdAmaya bAteM sunatA rahatA thA, isa kAraNa use apane pApa
yAda A jAte the aura vaha apanI pratijJAnusAra kisI ko pratyuttara na dekara
kSamAbhAva rakhatA thA; AhAra bhI nahIM karatA thaa| saca hai sAhasI AtmA ke lie
kucha bhI duSkara nahIM hai| kisI samaya prAtaHkAla, kisI samaya dopahara ko
aura kisI samaya saMdhyA ko jaba bhI use gA~va ke loga milate, usake pUrvapApoM
kA smaraNa dilA dete the| ataH eka dina bhI usane bhojana nahIM kiyaa| loga usa
muni ko Dhele, lAThI, muSTi ityAdi se mArate the, usa para dhUla uchAlate the;
phira bhI vaha una sAre upadravoM ko samabhAva se sahana karatA thA aura aisI
bhAvanA kiyA karatA thA-Atman! tUMne jisa prakAra se pApa kiye haiM, usI prakAra
se pApa-phala ko bhoga! jaisA bIja boyA hai, vaisA hI to phala milatA hai| yaha
to bahuta hI acchA hai ki ye loga mujha para Akroza karake anAyAsa hI mujhe
sakAmanirjarA kI siddhi kA avasara de rahe haiN| mujha para Akroza karane vAloM
ke dila meM harSa umar3atA hai to bhale hI umar3e; maiM unake kaTuvacanoM ko
prema se sahana karatA huuN| isa kAraNa .38

Page #61 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Yoga Shastra, First Light, Verse 13  **Chilatiputra**  "My karmas are being
cut. This is a cause of joy for me. These people are happy by troubling me; let
them be happy today, because attaining happiness in the world is rare. Just as a
physician cures diseases with alkali, so these people, by speaking harsh words,
are trying to destroy my evil deeds. Therefore, they are my true well-wishers.
Just as the heat of fire removes the dirt on gold, making it bright and shining,
so these people, by beating me or by anger, etc., are making my soul free from
karma and bright. By attacking me, they are pulling me out of the prison of
hell; should I be angry with such benefactors? They are removing my sins by
giving their own punya. Who else can be greater than such selfless brothers?
Such killing or pain, etc., which is the cause of liberation from the world, is
a source of joy for me. But I am saddened that the torture given to me will be
the cause of the growth of the infinite world. In this world, many people
sacrifice even their wealth and body for the happiness of others, so in front of
them, anger or killing, etc., which gives them happiness, is nothing. Some
people have only scorned me, they have not beaten me. Many have beaten me, but
they have not deprived me of life. Some people were about to free me from life,
but they did not separate me from my supreme friend, Dharma. Therefore, may they
be well; may they get good sense. Those who are angry with the seeker of
liberation, who speak harsh words, who bind with ropes, who trouble with
weapons, or who bring death, should be tolerated with equanimity and with a
feeling of friendship; because there are many obstacles in the path of
liberation." Thus, the Muni, immersed in beautiful emotions, began to condemn
his evil deeds. Just as fire burns all the grass flowers, so the steadfast Muni
burned all his karma with the fire of repentance and, attaining the extremely
rare, pure, Kevala Jnana, reached the state of Aayogikevali and also attained
liberation.  Just as the steadfast Muni, giving up being a guest of Naraka,
attained the supreme state of infinite, eternal happiness (Moksha) through the
power of Yoga, so others should also strive in this Yoga with certainty. || 12
|| Now we will increase faith in Yoga by giving another example. || 13 ||
**Tatkalakritadushkarma**  **Meaning**  "Who will not desire Yoga, to protect
Chilatiputra, the evil-minded, who was very bold in committing evil deeds just a
short time ago?" || 13 ||  **Explanation:** - Who will not desire such a Yoga-
sadhana, who saved Chilatiputra, the evil-minded, who was a brave warrior in
committing the great sin of killing a woman, from hell? Below we are giving the
story of Chilatiputra.  **The Story of Chilatiputra:**  In a city established on
earth, there lived a Brahmin named Yajnadeva. He considered himself a scholar,
but always condemned Jainism. A disciple (Muni) could not tolerate this. Even
after his Guru stopped him, he challenged the Brahmin to a debate, with the
intention of defeating him. They agreed on a condition that whoever lost the
debate would become the disciple of the winner. The intelligent Jain Muni
defeated his opponent Brahmin in the debate. Yajnadeva had to accept his defeat,
and as per the agreement, the victorious Jain Muni gave Yajnadeva-Brahmin Jain
initiation. After taking initiation, Shasana Devi explained to Yajnadeva that
now you have attained Charitra (five great vows), therefore you have become
knowledgeable and faithful. Now do not violate Charitra. Yajnadeva Muni truly
followed Charitra; but due to past impressions, he hated the dirt that
accumulated on his clothes and body. It is true, "It is very difficult to give
up past impressions." By the association of this great Muni, even his relatives
became like the rays of the sun, in contact with the clouds of the rainy season.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 yogazAstra prathama prakAza zloka 13 cilAtI putra | mere karma kaTate haiM  /
yaha to mere liye AnaMda kA kAraNa hai| ye loga mujhe parezAna karake sukhI hote
haiM; unheM bhI Aja sukhI hone do, kyoMki saMsAra meM sukhaprApti hI to durlabha
hai| jaise cikitsA karane vAle vaidya kSAra se roga miTAte haiM; vaise hI | ye
loga mujhe kaThora vacana kahakara mere duSkarma ko kSaya karane kA pratyana
karate haiN| isalie ye mere vAstavika hitaiSI mitra haiN| agni kI AMca sone para
car3he hue maila ko dUra karake sone ko ujjvala evaM camakadAra banA detI hai,
vaise hI ye loga bhI mujhe mArapITakara yA Akroza Adi karake merI AtmA ko
karmamukta banAkara ujjvala banAte haiN| mujha para prahAra karake | durgati
rUpI kArAgAra meM par3e hue mujha pApI ko bAhara khIMca rahe haiM; kyA meM aise
upakArI para kopa karUM? ye to apanA | puNya dekara bhI mere pApa dUra kara rahe
haiN| isase adhika akAraNa mahAn baMdhu aura kauna hoMge ? saMsAra se mukta
karAne meM | kAraNabhUta aisA vadha yA pIr3A Adi mere liye to AnaMdadAyI hai|
paraMtu ina gAMva vAloM ke lie mujhe dI jAne vAlI yAtanA | anaMta-saMsAra vRddhi
kI kAraNa rUpa hogI, isakA mujhe duHkha hai| isa saMsAra meM kitane hI loga
dUsaroM ke AnaMda ke lie apane dhana aura tana taka kA bhI tyAga kara dete haiM
to inake sAmane to inheM AnaMda dene vAlA Akroza yA vadha Adi kucha bhI nahIM
hai  /  merA kinhIM logoM ne tiraskAra hI to kiyA mujhe pITA to nhiiN| kaiyoM ne
mujhe pITA jarUra para, mujhe | jIvana se rahita to nahIM kiyaa| kucha loga
mujhe jIvana se mukta karane para tule hue the, paraMtu unhoMne mujhe apane
paramabaMdhu | dharma se to dUra nahIM kiyA  /  ataH kalyANa ho inakA; sadbuddhi
mile inheM  /  zreyArthI sAdhaka ko krodha karane vAle, durvacana kahane vAle,
rassI se bAMdhane vAle, hathiyAra se parezAna karane vAle yA mauta kA kahara
barasAne vAle, ina sabhI para | maitrIbhAva rakhakara samabhAva se sahana karanA
cAhie; kyoMki kalyANa mArga meM aneka vighna Ate hI haiN|' isa prakAra suMdara |
bhAvanAoM meM DUbate-utarate hue muni apane duSkRta karmoM kI niMdA karane lge|
jaise agni ghAsa ke sAre pUloM ko jalA | detI hai, vaise hI dRr3ha - prahArI
muni ne apanI samasta karmarAzi ko pazcAttApa kI Aga meM jalA diyA aura
atidurlabha, nirmala | kevalajJAna prApta karake ayogikevalI nAmaka guNasthAnaka
taka pahuMca kara mokSapada bhI prApta kiyaa| jisa taraha dRr3haprahArI muni ne
naraMka kA mehamAna bananA chor3akara yoga ke prabhAva se anaMta zAzvata sukha -
rUpa paramapada (mokSa) prApta kara liyA; isI taraha dUsare ko bhI asaMdigdha
hokara isa yoga meM prayatna karanA cAhie  /  /  12  /  /  aba hama dUsare
udAharaNa dekara yoga ke prati zraddhA meM hI vRddhi karAte haiM || 13 |
tatkAlakRtaduSkarma artha karmaThasya durAtmanaH  /  goptre cilAtiputrasya,
yogAya spRhayanna kaH ? || 13 || kucha hI samaya pahale duSkarma karane meM
atisAhasI durAtmA cilAtIputra kI rakSA karane vAle yoga kI spRhA kauna nahIM
karegA ?  /  /  13  /  /  vyAkhyA : - tatkAla strIhatyA rUpI mahApApa karane meM
zUravIra, durAtmA cilAtIputra ko durgati se bacAne vAle yoga kI kauna spRhA
(abhilASA) nahIM karegA? arthAt aise yoga-sAdhana kI sabhI icchA kreNge| nIce
hama cilAtI putra kI | kathA de rahe haiM cilAtI putra kI kathA :
kSitipratiSThita nagara meM yajJadeva nAma kA eka brAhmaNa rahatA thaa| vaha
apane Apako paMDita mAnatA thA, kintu jainadharma kI sadaiva niMdA karatA thaa|
eka ziSya ( muni) ko yaha bAta sahana nahIM huii| usake guru ke rokane para bhI
usane usa brAhmaNa ko harAne kI dRSTi se vAda-vivAda ke lie llkaaraa| donoM meM
aisI zarta taya huI ki vAdavivAda meM jo hAregA, | vaha vijetA kA ziSya bana
jaayegaa| jainavAdI buddhikauzala muni ne zAstrArtha meM apane prativAdI
brAhmaNa ko niruttara kara | diyA  /  yajJadeva ko apanI hAra mAnanI par3I aura
vijetA jainamuni ne pratijJAnusAra yajJadeva - brAhmaNa ko jainadIkSA de dii| |
dIkSA lene ke bAda zAsanadevI ne yajJadeva ko samajhAyA ki aba Apane cAritra
(paMcamahAvrata ) prApta kara liyA hai, ataH Apa jJAnI aura zraddhAvAn bana gaye
haiN| aba cAritra kI virAdhanA mata karanA  /  yajJadevamuni cAritrapAlana to
yathArtha rUpa se karatA thA; magara pUrvasaMskAravaza vastra aura zarIra para
jama jAne vAle maila ke prati ghRNA karatA thA  /  saca hai, 'pUrva saMskAra
chor3anA atikaThina hai|' isa mahAmuni ke saMsarga se svajana bhI varSARtu ke
megha ke saMparka se sUrya kI kiraNoM kI taraha 39

Page #62 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Miracle of Yoga in the Life of Chilatiputra  Yoga Shastra, First Light,
Verse 13: He did not remain calm. The one with whom he was married was also very
attached to him. Just as the color of a saree dyed blue does not fade, so too
did her love for Yajnadeva not fade. With the intention of subduing Yajnadeva
Muni, she put some kind of mesmerizing powder in the food for breaking the fast,
under the influence of which Yajnadeva Manika's body became increasingly
emaciated like the moon in the dark fortnight. Just as the moon, upon setting,
enters the solar system, so too, one day, upon death, that Muni went from there
to heaven. It is true that a woman, whether lustful, attached, or detached, does
not leave anyone without killing them. Upon the death of her husband (Muni), his
wife, renouncing the world, embraced restraint (Sadhvi Diksha) as a result of
the fruit of the human chest. Without criticizing the sin of the mesmerizing
experiment she had performed on her husband, she died and was born in the
heavenly realm. Truly, "tapasya and restraint do not go in vain." On the other
hand, Yajnadeva's soul, having fallen from the heavenly realm, was born in the
form of a letter from the womb of a maid named Chilati in the house of a wealthy
merchant in Rajgriha. Being the son of Chilati Dasi, he came to be known among
people as Chilatiputra. Therefore, he was not given another name. What is a
birth celebration for the son of a maid! Yajnadeva's wife, having fallen from
heaven, was born as a daughter named Sushama, after five sons, from the womb of
Bhadhra, the wife of the wealthy merchant. The Seth appointed Chilatiputra to
take care of that daughter. As Chilatiputra grew older, he became very arrogant.
He began to torment people. His complaints reached the king. The Seth was afraid
of the king. Because he saw the danger that "the master is punished for the
crime of the servant." Therefore, the Seth wisely and quietly removed that
constantly troublesome maid's son (Chilatiputra) from the house, just as a snake
charmer removes a snake from a pit by beating it. This aroused a terrible
reaction in Chilatiputra's mind. He was already arrogant. To justify his
arrogance, he reached the den of thieves called Singhagupha, like a vine of
great crimes. It is said, "People with similar habits and nature quickly become
friends." According to this justice, he quickly became friends with the thieves
there. As a result, just as fire increases with the contact of wind, so too did
his crimes increase with the company of those thieves. After a few days, the
lord of Singhagupha, the thief commander, died. As if he had been prepared for
this, Chilatiputra was made the commander of the thieves to fill the vacant
position.  Meanwhile, adorned with beauty, grace, and other qualities, Sushama
had reached the lion's gate of youth. When she was adorned, she looked like the
goddess of the earth. She had also become proficient in many arts. The new thief
commander, Chilatiputra, said to his servants, "Let's all go to Rajgriha. There,
the wealthy merchant is a very wealthy man. Let's raid his house and loot as
much wealth as we can, and you all can share it. And I will take his daughter
named Sushama." Thus, agreeing among themselves, Chilatiputra reached the house
of the wealthy merchant that very night with his fellow thieves. He used the art
of sleep-inducing magic there and put everyone in the house to sleep. Announcing
his arrival, he had the thieves take a large amount of wealth and he himself
captured Sushama. When the wealthy merchant's entire family, including his five
sons, was asleep, he said, "This is just for him," and, taking Sushama with all
his might, he set off. His fellow thieves, taking the stolen wealth, disappeared
with Chilatiputra. When the wealthy merchant woke up, he quickly understood the
whole situation. He was very distressed that Chilatiputra, who was the son of
the maid who lived in his house, had run away with both my daughter and my
property. He immediately called the Kotwal and other city guards and said, "Find
out where the thieves have taken the wealth and Sushama and bring them back!"
Then, taking the Kotwal and some guards with him, the wealthy merchant himself,
armed with weapons, along with his sons, ran swiftly like a gust of wind to
chase the thieves. Just as a person who drinks datura becomes intoxicated and
sees yellow everywhere, in water, on land, in vines, trees, or on the path, so
too did the wealthy merchant, in his anger, see yellow everywhere.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 cilAtIputra ke jIvana meM yoga kA camatkAra yogazAstra prathama prakAza zloka
13 zAMta na hue| jisake sAtha usakA vivAha huA thA, vaha bhI usa para atyaMta
anurakta thii| jaise nIle raMga se raMgI huI sAr3I kA raMga nahIM chUTatA, vaise
hI usakA yajJadeva para se rAga nahIM chuuttaa| usane yajJadeva muni ko vaza
karane ke vicAra se pAraNe ke bhojana meM koI aisA vazIkaraNa cUrNa DAla diyA,
jisake prabhAva se kRSNapakSa ke caMdramA kI taraha yajJadevamanikA zarIra
dinoMdina kSINa hotA gyaa| caMdra jaise asta hone para sUryamaMDala meM praviSTa
ho jAtA hai, vaise hI eka dina dehAvasAna hone para vaha muni vahA~ se svarga
meM gyaa| saca hai, kAminI, rAgI yA vairAgI kisI ko mAre binA nahIM chodd'tii|
muni (pati) kI matya ho jAne se usakI patnI ne saMsAra se virakta hokara
manaSya-rUpI vakSa ke phalasvarUpa saMyama (sAdhvIdIkSA aMgIkAra kara liyaa|
pati para apane dvArA kiye gaye vazIkaraNa-prayoga ke pApa kI AlocanA kiye binA
hI vaha marakara devaloka meM utpanna huii| sacamuca, 'tapa-saMyama niSphala
nahIM jaataa|' udhara yajJadeva ke jIva ne devaloka se cyavakara rAjagaha nagara
meM dhanya sArthapati ke yahA~ cilAtI nAma kI dAsI kI kakSI se patra rUpa meM
janma liyaa| cilAtIdAsI kA putra hone se logoM meM vaha cilAtIputra ke nAma se
pukArA jAne lgaa| isalie usakA dUsarA nAma nahIM rakhA gyaa| putrajanmotsava to
dAsI ke putra kA hotA hI kyA! yajJadeva kI patnI svarga se cyavakara dhanya
sArthapati kI patnI bhadrA kI kukSi se pA~ca putroM ke bAda suSamA nAma kI putrI
ke rUpa meM paidA huii| usa putrI kI dekhabhAla karane ke lie seTha ne
cilAtIputra ko niyukta kara diyaa| cilAtIputra sayAnA hote hI bar3A uddaNDa ho
gyaa| vaha logoM ko satAne lgaa| usakI zikAyata rAjA taka phuNcii| seTha ko
rAjabhaya lgaa| kyoMki use yaha khatarA dikhAI detA thA ki 'sevaka ke aparAdha
se svAmI hI daMDa kA bhAgI hotA hai| ataH seTha ne samajhadArI se satata
upadravI usa dAsIputra (cilAtIputra) ko usI taraha ghara se cupacApa nikAla
diyA, jaise saperA sAMpa ko piTAre se bAhara nikAla detA hai| isase cilAtIputra
ke mana meM bhayaMkara pratikriyA jaagii| vaha uddaNDa to thA hii| apane
uddaNDatA ko sArthaka karane ke lie bar3e-bar3e aparAdhoM kI latA ke samAna
siMhaguphA nAmaka corapallI meM phuNcaa| kahAvata hai- 'eka sarIkhI Adata aura
prakRti vAle vyaktiyoM meM jaldI hI mitratA ho jAtI hai|' isI nyAya ke anusAra
vahAM ke coroM ke sAtha usakI jhaTapaTa mitratA ho gyii| isa kAraNa jaise havA
ke saMparka se Aga bar3hatI jAtI hai; vaise hI una coroM ke sahavAsa se usake
aparAdha bar3hate hI gye| kucha dinoM ke bAda siMhaguphA kA svAmI cora senApati
mara gyaa| usake rikta sthAna kI pUrti ke lie hI mAno ise taiyAra kiyA gayA ho,
isa dRSTi se cilAtIputra ko coroM kA senApati banA diyA gyaa| idhara rUpa,
lAvaNya Adi guNoM se suzobhita hokara suSamA yauvana ke siMhadvAra para pahuMca
gayI thii| vaha susajjita hone para aisI mAlUma hotI thI, mAno pRthvI kI devI
ho| aneka kalAoM meM bhI vaha nipUNa ho gayI thii| naye corasenApati cilAtIputra
ne apane sevakoM se kahA-'calo, hama saba rAjagRha cleN| vahA~ dhanya-sArthapati
bahuta hI dhanADhya vyakti hai| usake yahAM para chApA mArakara jitanA dhana
lUTA jA sake use lUTakara Apa saba loga bAMTa lenaa| aura maiM usakI suSamA
nAmaka kanyA ko le luuNgaa|' isa prakAra Apasa meM samajhautA karake cilAtIputra
cora sAthiyoM ke sAtha usI rAta ko dhanya sArthapati ke yahA~ phuNcaa| usane
vahAM avasvApinI-vidyA kA prayoga karake ghara ke sabhI logoM ko nidrAdhIna kara
diyaa| apane Ane kI ghoSaNA karake usane coroM se pracuramAtrA meM dhana-grahaNa
karavAyA aura suSamA ko svayaM ne pakar3a liyaa| pAMcoM putroM sahita
dhanyasArthapati kA sArA parivAra jaba soyA huA thaa| taba 'isake lie yaha
nyAyayukta hai,' yoM kahatA huA jI-jAna se suSamA ko lie hue vaha cala pdd'aa|
usake sAthI cora curAye hue dhana ko lekara cilAtIputra ke sAtha nau-do-gyAraha
ho gye| sArthapati dhanya jAgA to use sArI sthiti samajhate dera na lgii| use
isa bAta kA bahuta hI raMja huA ki cilAtIputra, jo usake ghara meM rahane vAlI
dAsI kA hI putra thA, vaha merI lar3akI aura saMpatti donoM ko lekara bhAga
gyaa| usane phaurana hI kotavAla Adi nagararakSaka puruSoM ko bulAkara kahA ki
'coroM dvArA lUTe hue dhana aura suSamA kA patA lagAo aura unheM vApisa le Ao!
tatpazcAt kotavAla tathA kucha rakSakapuruSoM ko sAtha lekara dhanya |sArthapati
svayaM apane putroM ke sAtha hathiyAroM se laisa hokara coroM kA pIchA karane ke
lie manovega kI taraha phurtI se daudd'aa| jaise dhatUrA pIne vAle ko nazA
car3ha jAne se jala, sthala, latA, vRkSa yA rAste meM par3ane vAlI pratyeka
vastu meM sarvatra pIle 40

Page #63 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Parable of Chilatiputra  **Chapter 1 of Yoga Shastra**  **Verse 13**  The
wealthy merchant, like gold that appears to be real, saw only prosperity
everywhere. Driven by this delusion, he ran wildly. Wherever he found footprints
or any sign, he would exclaim, "Look! They drank water here; they ate here; they
sat here; they passed this way." Thus, talking and taking long strides, he
followed the trail of the thieves, tracking their footprints until he reached
them. Upon seeing the thieves, the royal guards shouted, "Catch them! Kill them!
Don't let them escape!" Hearing this, the thieves, fearing arrest, abandoned
their loot and fled in different directions to save their lives. But just as a
lion does not let go of a captured deer, Chilatiputra did not let go of the
prosperity. The Kotwal and other royal officials, upon receiving a large sum of
money as a bribe, returned. It is true, "When self-interest is fulfilled,
everyone's mind becomes corrupted." Just as an elephant lifts a creeper,
Chilatiputra lifted the prosperity onto his shoulder and fled into a terrifying
jungle. For the wealthy merchant, rescuing his daughter from the hands of the
thief was as difficult as rescuing the moon from the mouth of Rahu. Yet, the
wealthy merchant, with courage, pursued Chilatiputra like a lion, along with his
five sons. Meanwhile, Chilatiputra, with cunning, severed the head of Sushama,
fearing that the wealthy merchant would take her into his possession if he
reached him. Now, with a naked sword in one hand and the severed head of Sushama
in the other, he ran wildly. At that time, he looked like the guardian of Yama's
realm. The wealthy merchant, upon reaching the separated torso of Sushama, began
to weep. It was as if he was offering Sushama an offering of tears. Afterward,
he thought, "It is useless to stay here now. My daughter Sushama is gone. The
wealth is also gone." Therefore, leaving the severed torso of Sushama there, he
returned with his sons, his steps heavy with grief. The wealthy merchant,
pierced by the thorns of sorrow, wandered through the terrifying jungle. The sun
of the summer afternoon was scorching. Its blazing, harsh rays were burning
their foreheads. There was no sign of shade anywhere. The wealthy merchant and
his five sons, afflicted by grief, fatigue, hunger, thirst, and the heat of
midday, looked as if they were undergoing the five fires. In that dense forest,
they found no water, edible fruit, or any life-giving medicine on their way;
instead, they saw ferocious wild animals that devoured flesh, as if they had
come to invite death. Seeing the plight of himself and his sons, the wealthy
merchant, while walking a long distance, thought, "Alas! All my wealth is lost;
my daughter, dearer than life, is also dead, and now we are also on the brink of
death. Oh! Curse this cruel play of fate! Where a man cannot achieve his desired
object through effort or intellectual brilliance, there, in the wilderness, fate
is the only refuge. It is very powerful. But this fate is not pleased by
charity, it cannot be subdued by humility, it cannot be controlled by service.
How difficult is this fate-subduing practice? Even scholars cannot understand
its essence. Even the valiant cannot stop its complex processes. Who else will
be equal to this fate? And it is also true that this fate sometimes bestows
grace like a friend, and sometimes destroys mercilessly like an enemy. Sometimes
it protects completely like a father, and sometimes it inflicts pain like the
wicked. Sometimes fate brings one who is on the wrong path to the right path,
and sometimes it inspires one to go from the right path to the wrong path.
Sometimes it brings a distant object close, and sometimes it snatches away even
an object that is in hand. Like illusion and magic, the movement of fate is very
deep and strange. By the favor of fate, poison becomes nectar, and by its
disfavor, nectar becomes poison." Thus, the grief-stricken wealthy merchant,
caught in the cycle of worry, somehow reached his capital city with his sons. He
performed the last rites for the body of his daughter Sushama. Later, becoming
detached from the world, he accepted initiation from Lord Mahavira and, after
performing arduous austerities, attained his full lifespan and went to heaven.
**Note:** The text mentions the consumption of the daughter's flesh to satisfy
hunger in the necessary explanation.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 yogazAstra prathama prakAza zloka 13 cilAtIputra kA dRSTAMta raMga ke sone kA
AbhAsa hotA hai, vaise hI dhanya sArthapati ko bhI sarvatra suSamA hI suSamA
najara AtI thii| usIkI dhuna meM vaha betahAzA daur3A calA jA rahA thaa| rAste
meM jahA~-jahA~ unheM pairoM ke yA koI cihna milate, vahAM ve bola uThate|
'dekho! yahAM unhoMne pAnI pIyA hai; yahA~ bhojana kiyA hai; yahA~ ve baiThe
haiM; yahA~ se ve gujare haiN|' yoM bAta karate karate | laMbe-laMbe kadama
rakhate hue coroM ke pairoM kA patA lagAte hue unakA pIcha karate hue ve saba
unake pAsa pahuMca gye| coroM ko dekhate hI rAjapuruSoM ne kahA-' -
'pakar3o-pakar3o! mAro inheM! kahIM ye bhAga na jAyeM!' yaha AvAja sunakara cora
giraphtArI ke bhaya se dhanamAla saba vahIM chor3akara jAna bacAkara alaga-alaga
dizAoM meM bhAge  /  paraMtu siMha jaise pakar3I huI hiranI ko nahIM chor3atA,
vaise hI cilAtIputra ne suSamA ko nahIM chodd'aa| kotavAla vagairaha
rAjyAdhikArI rizvata ke rUpa meM bahuta| sA dhana mila jAne para vApisa lauTa
gye| saca hai - 'svArtha siddha hone para sabhI kI buddhi bigar3a jAtI hai|'
hAthI jaise latA ko uThA le jAtA hai; vaise hI cilAtIputra suSamA ko apane
kaMdhe para uThAye bhAgatA huA eka mahAbhayaMkara jaMgala meM jA phuNcaa|
dhanyasArthapati ke lie cora ke hAtha se putrI ko chur3AnA utanA hI kaThina
kArya thA, jitanA rAhu ke mukha se caMdrakalA ko chudd'aanaa| phira bhI
dhanyasArthapati sAhasa karake apane pAMco putroM sahita siMha kI taraha usakA
pIchA karatA rhaa| idhara cilAtIputra ne bhI isa buddhi se suSamA kA sira kATa
DAlA ki kahIM dhanyasArthapati mere pAsa A gayA to merI suSamA ko vaha apane
kabje meM kara legaa| aba vaha eka hAtha meM naMgI talavAra aura eka hAtha meM
suSamA kA kaTA mastaka liye betahAzA daur3A jA rahA thaa| usa samaya vaha aisA
laga rahA thA, mAno yamapurI kA kSetrapAla ho  /  idhara dhanyasArthapati suSamA
ke alaga par3e hue dhar3a ke pAsa Akara rudana karane lgaa| mAno vaha suSamA ko
AMsuoM kI aMjali arpaNa kara | rahA ho  /  tatpazcAt usane socA- 'aba yahA~
rukanA vyartha hai| beTI suSamA gyii| dhana bhI gyaa|' ataH vaha suSamA ke kaTe
hue dhar3a ko vahIM chor3akara apane putroM ke sAtha bhArI kadamoM se vApisa
cala pdd'aa| zoka ke kAMToM se bIMdhA huA dhanyasArthapati bhayaMkara jaMgala
meM bhaTaka rahA thA  /  grISmaRtu kI dopaharI kA sUrya tapa rahA thA  /  usakI
cilacilAtI sakhta dhUpa unake lalATa ko tapA rahI thii| kahIM chAyA kA
nAmonizAna bhI nahIM thaa| zoka, thakAna, bhUkha, pyAsa aura madhyAhna ke tApa
se pIr3ita dhanyasArthapati aura usake pAMcoM putra aise lagate the mAno ve
paMcAgni tapa kara rahe hoN| usa bIhar3a meM unheM rAste meM kahIM pAnI, khAne
lAyaka phala yA jIvana ko dene vAlI koI bhI auSadhi najara nahIM AyI; pratyuta
phAr3a khAne ke vAle hiMsaka jaMgalI jAnavara jarUra dikhAI diye; mAno ve mauta
kA nyautA lekara Aye hoN| apanI aura putroM kI | aisI viSama avasthA dekhakara
dhanyasArthapati ne laMbe mArga meM calate-calate vicAra kiyA ki 'hAya merI sArI
saMpatti naSTa ho gayI; prANAdhikA putrI bhI mara gayI aura aba hama bhI mRtyu
ke kinAre pahuMce huye haiN| aho ! dhikkAra hai daiva ke isa krUra vilAsa ko !
puruSArtha karane se yA bauddhika vaibhava se jahA~ manuSya apane ISTa padArtha
ko nahIM sAdha sakatA; vahA~ aTavI meM daiva (bhAgya) hI ekamAtra sahArA hai|
vaha bar3A balavAn hai  /  magara yaha daiva dAna se prasanna nahIM hotA, vinaya
se ise vaza meM nahIM kiyA jA sakatA, sevA se ise kAbU meM nahIM kiyA jA sktaa|
yaha daiva- vazIkaraNa - sAdhanA kitanI muzkila hai ? | paMDita bhI isakA marma
nahIM samajha sakate  /  parAkramI bhI isakI viSama prakriyAoM ko roka nahIM
skte| aise daiva ko jItane vAlA isake jor3a kA aura kauna hogA? aura yaha bhI
hai ki yaha daiva kisI samaya mitra ke samAna kRpA karatA hai, to kabhI zatru ke
samAna bedhar3aka nAza bhI kara detA hai| kabhI pitA ke samAna sarvathA rakSA
karatA hai, to kisI samaya duSToM ke samAna | pIr3A detA hai| kabhI daiva
unmArga para car3he hue ko sanmArga para le AtA hai, to kabhI acche mArga se
galata mArga meM jAne kI preraNA detA hai| kisI samaya dUrastha vastu ko nikaTa
le AtA hai, to kabhI hAtha AyI huI vastu bhI chIna letA hai| | mAyA aura
iMdrajAla ke samAna daiva kI gati atIva gahana aura vicitra hotI hai  /  daiva
kI anukUlatA se viSa amRta bana jAtA hai aura pratikUlatA se amRta bhI viSa bana
jAtA hai|' yoM cintAcakra para car3hA huA zokamagna dhanyasArthapati jaisetaise
apane putroM ke sAtha rAjagRha phuNcaa| apanI putrI suSamA ke zarIra kI
uttarakriyA kii| bAda meM saMsAra se virakti ho jAne se usane zrI mahAvIra
prabhu ke pAsa dIkSA svIkAra kI aura duSkara tapa karake Ayu pUrNakara svarga
meM gyaa| 1. Avazyaka niryukti meM putrI ke mAMsa ko khAkara kSudhA miTAne kA
kathana hai| 41

Page #64 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Praise of Yoga  **Yoga Shastra, First Light, Verse 14**  Chilatiputra, driven
by intense love for his beloved, was heading south, ignoring the path. On his
way, he saw a sage, steady in Kayotsarga (meditation), like a shady tree that
removes all suffering. Chilatiputra's mind was constantly tormented by his
actions. Seeing the sage's peaceful countenance, he was deeply impressed. As the
sage finished his meditation, Chilatiputra said, "Tell me the Dharma briefly, or
I will cut off your head with this sword, just like you cut off the banana tree
for its fruit." The sage, with his knowledge, knew that the seed of
enlightenment could be sown in this soul. He said, "One should diligently
practice Upshama, Vivek, and Sanvar." Saying this, he flew away like a bird.
Hearing these three words, Chilatiputra grasped them well and began to remember
them repeatedly. Gradually, he understood their meaning: "Wise men should subdue
the passions like anger. Alas, I am surrounded by these passions like a
sandalwood tree surrounded by snakes. To cure this great disease of passions, I
must stay away from them. My first resolution for subduing passions is to
consume the medicines of forgiveness, humility, simplicity, and contentment. My
second resolution is to accept the Vivek of renunciation of wealth, gold, and
other material possessions, which is the unparalleled seed of the great tree of
knowledge. I also renounce this Sushma, like a flag of sinful wealth, and the
sword in my hand, and all the meaning that is harmful. My third resolution is to
embrace the renunciation of the objects of the senses and mind, and the Sanvar,
like the crown of the goddess of self-control." Thus, controlling all his senses
and contemplating the true nature of things, he became so absorbed that his mind
became one-pointed. He became still and motionless in samadhi.  Meanwhile,
thousands of ants were attracted by the smell of blood clinging to
Chilatiputra's body. They covered his body like armor and made hundreds of holes
in it. Even with this unbearable torment, Chilatiputra remained motionless like
a pillar. He endured this intense suffering with equanimity for two and a half
days and then left his body. From there, he went to the heaven world.  Other
sources also narrate the story of Chilatiputra. They say that I bow to
Chilatiputra, the devotee of Upshama, Vivek, and Sanvar, who, after hearing
these three words, understood Dharma well and embraced self-control. I bow to
the ascetic who remained in samadhi even when ants, attracted by the smell of
blood, climbed his body from his feet to his head and gnawed at his entire body.
I bow to the steadfast Chilatiputra, whose body was made like a sieve by the
ants, who remained steadfast on the path of equanimity. In just two and a half
days, through the power of yoga, he attained the divine state, adorned by
apsaras.  Indeed, Chilatiputra, with his Chandala-like behavior, was deserving
of condemnation and hell, but by embracing yoga, he became worthy of the
happiness of heaven. Similarly, yoga is the root cause of all happiness, through
which a person achieves victory everywhere. ||13||  Again, in praise of yoga, it
is said: ||14||  **Tasyajanniravastu, nripashormoghajanmanah | Aviddhakarnho yo
'yoga', ityaksara-shalakaya ||14||**  **Meaning:** The birth of a man whose ears
are not pierced by the two and a half-letter-long needle of "yoga" is like that
of an animal. Such a person should not have been born at all. ||14||  Even if
the ears are pierced with an iron needle, but not with the two and a half-
letter-long needle of "yoga," or if "yoga" has not entered his ears, he is not
worthy of being called a human among humans. His birth is futile and ironic,
like that of an animal. It would have been better if he had not been born at
all. ||14||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 yoga kI prazaMsA yogazAstra prathama prakAza zloka 14 | idhara cilAtIpatra bhI
saSamA para gADha anurAga ke kAraNa bAra-bAra usakA mukha dekhatA huA mArga
paravAha na karake dakSiNadizA kI ora calA jA rahA thaa| mArga meM use saba
prakAra ke saMtApa ko dUra karane vAle chAyAdAra vRkSa ke samAna kAyotsarga
(dhyAna) meM sthira eka sAdhu ke darzana hue| cilAtIputra ke mana ko apanA
akArya bAra-bAra kacoTa rahA thaa| ataH muni kI zAMta mukha mudrA dekhakara vaha
bahuta hI prabhAvita huaa| dhyAna pUrNa hote hI usane muni se kahA-'mujhe
jhaTapaTa saMkSepa meM dharma kaho; nahIM to isI talavAra se isa suSamA kI
taraha kele ke per3a ke samAna tumhArA bhI sira ur3A duuNgaa| muni ne jJAnabala
se jAnA ki-'isa AtmA meM bodhi-bIja bone se dharma rUpI aMkura phUTane kI avazya
saMbhAvanA hai|' ataH unhoMne kahA-'upazama, viveka aura saMvara kI acchI taraha
ArAdhanA karanI caahie|' yoM kahakara ve pakSI ke samAna AkAza meM ur3a gye|
cilAtIputra una tInoM padoM ko sunate hI bhalIbhAMti grahaNa karake bAra-bAra
unako smaraNa karane lgaa| dhIre-dhIre una tInoM padoM kA bhAvArtha use isa
prakAra samajha meM AyA-'samajhadAra puruSoM ko krodhAdi kaSAyoM kA upazama
karanA caahie| paraMtu aphasosa hai, sarpo se jaise caMdanavRkSa ghirA rahatA
hai, vaise maiM bhI kaSAya rUpI so se ghirA huA huuN| ataH isa kaSAya rUpI
mahAroga kI yathArtha cikitsA ke lie mujhe ina kaSAyoM se dUra hI rahanA hai|
kaSAyoM ke upazama ke lie merA pahalA saMkalpa hai ki Aja se maiM kSamA.
namratA, saralatA aura saMtoSa rUpI mahauSadhiyoM kA sevana kruuNgaa| merA
dUsarA saMkalpa yaha hogA ki maiM Aja se dhana, sonA Adi padArthoM ke tyAga rUpI
viveka kA; jo jJAna rUpI mahAvRkSa kA bejor3a bIja hai, svIkAra karUMgA tathA
pApamaya saMpatti kI dhvajA ke samAna isa suSamA kA mastaka aura hAtha meM
pakar3I huI talavAra evaM anartha rUpa samasta artha kA bhI tyAga karatA huuN|
merA tIsarA saMkalpa yaha hai ki Aja se meM iMdriyoM aura mana ke viSayoM se
nivRtti rUpI tyAga tathA saMyama-lakSmI ke mukuTa-samAna saMvara aMgIkAra karatA
huuN|' isa prakAra samasta iMdriyoM ko vaza karake vastutattva kA ciMtana-manana
karate-karate vaha itanI gaharAyI meM DUba gayA ki usakA mana ekAgra ho gayA;
vaha samAdhistha aura nizceSTa ho gyaa| idhara cilAtIputra ke zarIra para lipaTe
hue khUna kI durgaMdha se vahA~ hajAroM cIMTiyA~ A gayI aura ve kavaca ke samAna
zarIra ke cAroM ora lipaTa gayI, una cIMTiyoM ne | milakara cilAtIputra ke
zarIra meM saiMkar3oM cheda kara ddaale| cIMTiyoM kA itanA asahya upasarga
(kaSTa) zarIra para A par3ane para bhI cilAtIputra staMbha ke samAna nizcala
rhaa| DhAI dinoM taka isa ghora kaSTa ko samabhAva pUrvaka sahana karate hue
usane zarIra chodd'aa| vahAM se marakara vaha devaloka meM gyaa| dUsare sUtroM
meM bhI cilAtIpatra kA AkhyAna hai| vahAM batAyA gayA hai ki tIna padoM kA
zravaNa karake dharma ko bhalIbhAMti samajhakara saMyama ko svIkAra karane vAle,
upazama, viveka aura saMvara pada ke ArAdhaka cilAtIputra ko maiM namaskAra
karatA huuN| khUna kI gaMdha se cIMTiyoM ne jinake pairoM se car3hakara mastaka
taka pahuMca kara sAre zarIra ko kureda-kureda | kara noca khAyA, phira bhI jo
samAdhistha rahe, aise duSkara tapasvI ko vaMdana karatA huuN| cIMTiyoM ne
jisake zarIra ko calanI-sA chidrayukta banA diyA aura jagaha-jagaha se kATA;
phira bhI jo samabhAva kI sAdhanA ke patha para sthira rahe aise dhIra
cilAtIputra ne to sirpha DhAI dina meM hI yoga ke prabhAva se apsarAoM se
ramaNIya bane hue devabhava ko prApta kiyaa| vAstava meM dekhA jAya to
cilAtIputra apane cAMDAla-sama vyavahAra se dhikkAra kA bhAgI aura naraka kA
adhikArI thA, lekina yoga kA AlaMbana lene se hI vaha devaloka ke sukha kA
adhikArI bana gyaa| isI taraha samagra-sukha kA mUla kAraNa yoga hI hai, jisake
prabhAva se manuSya sarvatra vijaya prApta karatA hai  /  / 13 /  /  punaH yoga
kI hI prazaMsA meM kahate haiN|14| tasyAjananirevAstu, nRpazormoghajanmanaH  /
aviddhakarNo yo 'yoga', ityakSara-zalAkayA  /  / 14 /  /  artha :- jisa manuSya
ke kAna 'yoga' ke DhAI akSara rUpI zalAkA (salAI) se nahIM bIMdhe hai, aise
manuSya kA janma pazu kI taraha nirarthaka hai| aise vyakti kA janma hI nahIM
honA cAhie thA  /  / 14 /  /  cAhe lohe kI salAI se kAna bIMdhe ho. paraMtu
'yoga' ke DhAI akSara rUpI zalAkA se jisake kAna pavitra nahIM - hue athavA
'yoga' jisake kAna meM nahIM par3A; vaha manuSyoM meM manuSya kahalAne yogya
nahIM hai| usakA janma paza ke samAna niSphala aura viDaMbanA-rUpa hai| isase
behatara to yaha thA ki vaha manuSya janma meM hI nahIM AtA  /  / 14 /  /  42

Page #65 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The root cause of liberation (moksha) is yoga, which is the essence of knowledge
and the essence of the soul.  The first chapter of the Yoga Shakha, verses 15
and 16, begin by praising yoga and then explain its nature.  **Verse 15:**  *
**Meaning:** Among the four goals of human life (dharma, artha, kama, and
moksha), liberation (moksha) is the most important. The cause of attaining
liberation is yoga. Yoga is comprised of three jewels: knowledge, faith, and
conduct.  **Explanation:**  * Among the four goals of life, liberation is the
most important.  * Artha (wealth) is not the primary goal because it is tainted
by suffering, as we experience pain when we acquire, protect, or lose it. * Kama
(desire) is merely sensual pleasure, which is fleeting and insignificant. It is
better than artha, but ultimately leads to great suffering. Desire does not
satisfy, and often leads to bad karma, making it not the primary goal. * Dharma
(righteousness) is superior to both artha and kama because it leads to happiness
in this life and the next. However, even good deeds, like chains of gold, can
bind the soul. They bring happiness, but not spiritual happiness. Physical
happiness is temporary and fleeting. Therefore, dharma is not the ultimate goal.
* True spiritual happiness is found in liberation. Liberation occurs when karma
is destroyed, and it is free from suffering. It is not like poisoned food, which
is pleasant at first but leads to pain. It is also not tainted by the desire for
results in this life or the next. Therefore, liberation, which is filled with
eternal bliss, is the most important of the four goals. * Yoga is the means to
attain liberation. Yoga leads to liberation.  **Verse 16:**  * **Meaning:** Wise
people call it right knowledge (samyak jnana) when one understands the nature of
the principles (tattvas) as they truly are (yathā), either briefly or in detail.
**Explanation:**  * The principles (tattvas) are those whose nature is
established through logic, evidence, and proof. These principles are the soul
(jiva), non-soul (ajiva), inflow (āśrava), restraint (samvara), stoppage
(nirjarā), bondage (bandha), and liberation (moksha). * The true understanding
(knowledge) of these principles comes to some people briefly and to others in
detail, depending on their karmic exhaustion. * The seven principles are: soul,
non-soul, inflow, restraint, stoppage, bondage, and liberation.  **The Soul
(Jiva):**  * There are two types of souls: liberated and bound. * All souls are
inherently infinite knowledge, vision, and bliss. * Liberated souls are free
from all karma and are eternally free from birth, death, and suffering. They are
filled with infinite vision, knowledge, and bliss. * Bound souls are divided
into two categories: mobile (tras) and immobile (sthāvara). * Both mobile and
immobile souls are further divided into two categories: sufficient and
insufficient. * Sufficient souls are of six types: 1. food sufficiency, 2. body
sufficiency, 3. sense organ sufficiency, 4. breath sufficiency, 5. speech
sufficiency, and 6. mind sufficiency. * One-sense immobile souls have four
types, two-sense, three-sense, and four-sense (impaired) immobile souls have
five types, and five-sense immobile souls have six types. * One-sense immobile
souls have five types: earth-bodied, water-bodied, fire-bodied, air-bodied, and
plant-bodied. The first four have subtle and gross forms, while plants have only
one form.  **Footnotes:**  * 1. Dharma here refers to "merit" and not to the
purification of the soul or restraint and stoppage. * 2. Most teachers include
"merit" and "demerit" as two additional principles, making a total of nine.
Here, these two principles are included in the principle of inflow.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 mokSa kA mUla kAraNa-yoga-jJAna-yoga jIva tattva yogazAkha prathama prakAza
zloka 15 se 16 aba phira Adhe zloka se yoga kI stuti karake zeSa Adhe zloka se
yoga kA svarUpa batAte haiN|15| caturvarge'graNIrmokSo yogastasya ca kAraNam  /
jJAna-zraddhAna-cAritra-rUpaM ratnatrayaM ca saH  /  / 15 /  /  artha :- dharma,
artha, kAma aura mokSa-rUpa cAra puruSArthoM meM mokSa agraNI hai| aura usa
mokSa kI prApti kA kAraNa yoga hai| tathA vaha yoga jJAna, zraddhA tathA cAritra
rUpI ratnatraya rUpa hai  // 15 //  vyAkhyA :- dharma, artha, kAma aura mokSa
ina cAroM vargoM meM mokSa pradhAna hai| artha ke upArjana karane meM, usakI
rakSA karane meM tathA usake nAza hone para duHkha hotA hai| isalie duHkha ke
saMsarga se dUSita hone ke kAraNa cAra vargoM meM artha agrasara nahIM hai| kAma
to iMdriya-janita sukha hai, jo kSaNika aura tuccha hai| vaha artha se kucha
acchA hai, lekina aMta "pariNAma) meM mahAn duHkhadAyI hai| kAmasevana se
manuSya kI tRpti to hotI nahIM, balki kAma-sevana prAyaH durgati kA sAdhana hone
se vaha bhI pradhAna nahIM hai| dharma to isa loka aura paraloka ke sukha kA
kAraNa rUpa hone se artha aura kAma donoM se adhika zreSTha hai| phira bhI sone
kI ber3I ke samAna puNya karma baMdhana kA kAraNa hai| puNya se sukha milatA
hai, paraMtu Atmika sukha nahIM miltaa| paudgalika sukha to saMyogika-viyogika
hai| kucha hI arse taka rahakara naSTa ho jAtA hai| isalie dharma bhI mukhya
nahIM hai| Atmika sukha kI paripUrNatA mokSa meM hai| mokSa to puNya pApa ke
kSaya hone para hotA hai; isalie aMza mAtra kleza kara nhiiN| mokSa viSa-mizrita
bhojana ke samAna bhoga ke samaya manohara aura pariNAma meM duHkhadAyaka nahIM
hai aura isa loka yA paraloka ke phala kI icchA ke doSa se dUSita bhI nahIM hai|
isa kAraNa paramAnaMdamaya mokSa ina cAroM vargoM meM sarvazreSTha hai| usI
mokSa ko prApta karAne kA kAraNa yoga hai| yoga se mokSa milatA hai| usa yoga kA
kyA svarUpa hai? isake uttara meM AcArya bhagavAn kahate haiM-vaha mokSa jJAna,
zraddhA aura cAritra-rUpI ratnatraya-svarUpa hai  /  / 15 /  /  aba
sarvaprathama mokSa ke hetubhUta jJAnayoga kA svarUpa batalAte haiMjJAna-yoga :
/ 16 /  yathAvasthitatattvAnAM sa'kSepAd vistareNa vA  /  yo'vabodhastamatrAhuH
samyagjJAnaM manISiNaH  // 16 //  artha :- jo tattva jaisI (yathA) sthiti meM
hai, una tattvoM ke svarUpa ko saMkSepa se yA vistAra se avabodha yA jAnane . ko
manISiyoM (vicArakoM) ne samyagjJAna kahA hai| vyAkhyA :- jinakA svarUpa naya,
nikSepa aura pramANa Adi se siddha hai, ve tattva kahalAte haiN| ve tattva jIva,
ajIva, Azrava, saMvara, nirjarA, baMdha aura mokSa-rUpa hai| unakA vAstavika
bodha (jJAna) kisI ko saMkSepa se aura kisI ko karma kSayopakSama ke kAraNa
vistAra se hotA hai| vaha isa prakAra-jIva, ajIva, Azrava, saMvara, nirjarA,
baMdha aura mokSa; ye sAta tattva paMDita-puruSoM ne batAye haiN| jIvatatya :
unameM se jIva ke do bheda haiM-mukta aura sNsaarii| sabhI jIva anAdi-anaMta
jJAna-darzana-svarUpa hote haiN| karma se sarvathA mukta jIvoM kA svarUpa eka
sarIkhA hotA hai| ve sadA ke lie janma-maraNAdi klezoM aura duHkhoM se rahita ho
jAte haiM; tathA anaMta darzana-jJAna-zakti aura AnaMdamaya-svarUpa bana jAte
hai| saMsArI jIvoM ke trasa aura sthAvara ye do bheda haiN| ina donoM ke bhI do
bheda hai-paryApta aura apryaapt| paryAptiyAM 6 prakAra kI hotI haiM-1.
AhAraparyApti, 2. zarIraparyApti, 3. iMdriyaparyApti, 4. zvAsocchvAsa-paryApsi,
5. bhASAparyApti aura 6. mnHpryaapti| ekendriya jIva ke cAra, dvIndriya,
trIndriya aura caturindriya (vikalendriya) jIvoM ke pAMca tathA paMcendriya
jIvoM ke chaha paryAptiyAM hotI hai| ekendriya sthAra-jIva ke 5 bheda hai-
pathvIkAya. apa (jala) kA teU (agni) kAya, vAyukAya aura vanaspati kaay| inameM
se prathama cAroM ke sUkSma aura bAdara do-do bheda hote haiN| aura vanaspati
1.dharmazabda yahAM 'puNya' ke artha meM liyA gayA hai| AtmA kI zuddhapariNati
yA saMvara-nirjarA ke artha meM nhiiN| -saMpAdaka 2. adhikAMza AcAryoM ne
'puNya' aura 'pApa' ye do tattva aura milA kara nau tattva mAne haiN| yahAM ina
do tattvoM kA samAveza Azrava tattva meM mAnA -saMpAdaka 43

Page #66 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Fourteen Gunasthana  There are two divisions of each and ordinary: each is a
*badar* and the ordinary has two divisions: subtle and *badar*. Those with two,
three, four, and five senses are called *Trasajiva*; they are of four types.
Among the five-sensed beings, there are two divisions: 1. *Sanjni* and 2.
*Asanjni*. Those who understand or know education, teachings, conversation, etc.
are called *Sanjni*, and those who do not have mind or breath are called
*Asanjni* five-sensed. Touch, tongue, nose, eye, and ear; these are the five
senses. Touch, taste, flavor, smell, form, and sound are their respective five
objects. There are many types of two-sensed beings like worms, conch shells,
cowries, scallops, leeches, etc. Ants, bedbugs, *j*, *mankoda*, etc. are three-
sensed beings. Locusts, moths, flies, mosquitoes, bees, scorpions, etc. are
four-sensed beings. The rest of the *tiryach-yoni*, including aquatic,
terrestrial, and aerial, hellish, human, and divine, are all five-sensed beings.
Mind, speech, and body-form are three forces, five senses, lifespan, and
inhalation-exhalation are called ten *pranas*. One-sensed beings have four
*pranas*: body, lifespan, inhalation-exhalation, and sense. Two-sensed have six,
three-sensed have seven, four-sensed have eight, *Asanjni* five-sensed have
nine, and *Sanjni* five-sensed have ten *pranas*. Among the five-sensed, gods
and hellish beings are born from *upapat* birth, while humans and *tiryach* are
mostly born from the womb, and among *tiryach*, there are viviparous,
ovoviviparous, and oviparous (born from eggs). All these are *Sanjni* five-
sensed, and the rest, born from *samurchhim*, are called *Asanjni* five-sensed.
*Samurchhim* beings and sinful beings of hell are eunuchs. There are three
*vedas*: female *veda*, male *veda*, and eunuch *veda*. Among gods, there are
two *vedas*: female *veda* and male *veda*. Humans and *tiryach* have three
*vedas*. All beings have two divisions: *vyavahar-rashi* and *avyavahar-rashi*.
Subtle *nigod* beings are considered to be in *avyavahar-rashi*, and the rest of
all beings are called *vyavahar-rashi*. Conscious, unconscious, mixed, closed,
open, and mixed, cold, hot, and lukewarm, thus there are nine types of *yoni* of
beings. That is, places of origin. Earth-bodied, water-bodied, fire-bodied, and
air-bodied, each of the seven beings has seven hundred thousand *yoni*. Each
plant-bodied has one million, and ordinary plant-bodied, infinite-bodied, has
fourteen hundred thousand, two, three, and four-sensed, each has two hundred
thousand, hellish, *tiryach*, and divine, each has four hundred thousand, and
human has fourteen hundred thousand *yoni*. In total, eighty-four million *jiva-
yoni* have been mentioned by the omniscient ones. One-sensed beings are 1.
subtle and 2. *badar*, five-sensed - 3. *Sanjni* and 4. *Asanjni*, 5. two, 6.
three, and 7. four-sensed beings, these seven are sufficient and insufficient.
Thus, Jinendradev has described fourteen places of beings.  On these fourteen
places (brief divisions) of beings, the omniscient ones have also described
fourteen *marganadwaras*. The fourteen *marganas* are as follows: 1. motion, 2.
sense, 3. body, 4. yoga, 5. *veda*, 6. knowledge, 7. *kṣayā*, 8. restraint, 9.
diet, 10. vision, 11. *leśyā*, 12. *bhavyatva*, 13. *samyaktva*, and 14.
*sanjni*. Now, these are called fourteen *gunasthana* of beings. Fourteen
*gunasthana* of beings:  1. *Mithyatva*, 2. *Sasvadan*, 3. *Samyaktva-Mithyatva*
(mixed), 4. *Avirati Samyagdristi*, 5. *Deshaviriti* (Shravak), 6.
*Pramattasanyata*, 7. *Aparamattasanyata*, 8. *Nivrittibadar*, 9.
*Anivrittibadar*, 10. *Sukshmasampray*, 11. *Upashantamooh*, 12. *Kshinamooh*,
13. *Sayogi Kevali*, and 14. *Ayogi Kevali*; these are the fourteen
*gunasthana*.  (1) Until the rise of *mithyadarshan*, it is called
*mithyadristi* *gunasthana*, (2) When *mithyatva* does not arise, but the
quartet of infinite-connected *kṣayā* (anger, pride, deceit, and greed) arises,
then the *gunasthana* that stays up to the excellent six *avalika* is called
*sasvadan-gunasthana*. (3) The combination of both *samyaktva* and *mithyatva*
is called the third (mixed) *gunasthana*; which lasts for a moment. (4) When the
quartet of *apratyakhyanavaran* arises, there is *avirati samyagdristi*. (5)
When the *kṣayā* of *pratyakhyanavaran* arises, there is *deshaviriti* (Shravak)
*gunasthana*. (6) After attaining restraint, if one indulges in carelessness,
then his *gunasthana* is called *pramattasanyata*. (7) The restrained one who
does not indulge in carelessness, his *gunasthana* is called *apramattasanyata*.
The sixth and seventh, both these *gunasthana* are for a moment, respectively.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 caudaha guNasthAna yogazAstra prathama prakAza zloka 16 ke pratyeka aura
sAdhAraNa do bheda hote haiN| pratyeka vanaspati bAdara hotI hai aura sAdhAraNa
vanaspati ke sUkSma aura bAdara ye do bheda hote haiN| do, tIna, cAra aura pAMca
iMdriya vAle trasajIva kahalAte haiM; ve cAra prakAra ke haiN| inameM
paMceMdriya jIvoM ke do bheda hote haiM-1. saMjJI aura 2. asNjnyii| jo zikSA
upadeza, AlApa Adi samajhate haiM yA jAnate haiM, ve saMjJI kahalAte haiM aura
jisake mana-prANa na ho, ve asaMjJI paMceMdriya kahalAte haiN| sparza, jIbha,
nAsikA, AMkha aura kAna; ye pAMca iMdriyAM hai| sparza, svAda, rasa, gaMdha,
rUpa aura zabda ye kramazaH inake pAMca viSaya hai| kRmi, zaMkha, kaur3I, sIpa,
jauMka Adi aneka prakAra ke dvIndriya jIva hote haiN| cIMTI. khaTamala. ja.
maMkoDA Adi trIndriya jIva hote haiN| TiDI. pataMgA, makkhI, macchara, bhaure,
bicchu Adi caturindriya jIva hote haiN| zeSa tiryaca-yoni meM hae jalacara,
sthalacara aura khecara, nArakI, manuSya aura deva ye sabhI paMcendriya jIva
hote haiN| mana, vacana aura kAyA-rUpa tIna bala, pAMca indriyA~, AyuSya aura
zvAsocchvAsa ye 10 prANa kahalAte haiN| ekendriya jIvoM ke zarIra (kAyA) AyuSya,
zvAsocchvAsa aura iMdriya ye 4 prANa hote haiN| dvIndriya ke 6, trIndriya ke 7,
caturindriya ke 8 asaMjJI paMcendriya ke 9 aura saMjJI paMcendriya ke 10 prANa
hote haiN| paMcendriyoM meM deva aura nAraka upapAta janma vAle tathA manuSyoM
aura tiryaMcoM meM prAyaH garbha se janma lene vAle tathA tiryaMcoM meM
jarAyuja, potaja aura aMDaja (aMDe se hone vAle) ye saba saMjJI paMcendriya hote
haiM aura zeSa saMmUrchima rUpa se utpanna hone vAle asaMjJI paMcendriya
kahalAte hai| saMmUrchima jIva aura naraka ke pApI jIva napuMsaka hote haiN|
veda tIna haiM-strIveda, puruSaveda, npuNskved| devoM meM strIveda aura
puruSaveda; ye do veda hote haiN| manuSyoM aura tiryacoM ke tIna veda hote haiN|
sabhI jIvoM ke vyavahAra-rAzi aura avyavahAra-rAzi, ye do bheda hote haiN|
sUkSma nigoda ke jIva avyavahAra-rAzigata mAne jAte haiM, aura zeSa samasta jIva
vyavahArarAzigata kahalAte haiN| sacitta, acitta, mizra, saMvRta, vivRta aura
mizra, zIta, uSNa aura zItoSNa, isa prakAra | jIva ke nau prakAra kI yoniyA~
hai| arthAt utpatti hone ke sthAna haiN| pRthvIkAya, apakAya, teukAya aura
vAyukAya sAta jIvoM kI pratyeka kI sAta-sAta lAkha yoniyA~ hai| pratyeka
vanaspatikAya kI dasa lAkha aura sAdhAraNa vanaspatikAya anaMtakAya kI caudaha
lAkha, do, tIna aura cAra iMdriya vAle vikalendriya jIvoM kI pratyeka kI do-do
lAkha, nAraka, tithaMca aura devatA kI pratyeka kI cAra-cAra lAkha aura manuSya
kI 14 lAkha yoniyAM hai| kula milAkara caurAsI lAkha jIvayoniyAM sarvajJoM ne
kahI haiN| ekendriya jIva 1. sUkSma aura 2. bAdara, paMcendriya-3. jIva saMjJI
aura 4. asaMjJI, 5. do 6. tIna aura 7. cAra iMdriyoM vAle jIva ye sAtoM
paryAptaka aura aparyAptaka hote haiN| isa taraha jinezvaradevoM ne jIvoM ke
caudaha-sthAna batAye haiN| jIvoM ke ina 14 sthAnoM (saMkSisa bhedoM) para
nimnokta 14 mArgaNAdvAroM kI bhI prarUpaNA sarvajJoM ne kI hai| 14 mArgaNAeM isa
prakAra hai-1. gati, 2. iMdriya, 3. zarIra, 4. yoga, 5. veda, 6. jJAna, 7.
kaSAya, 8. saMyama, 9. AhAra, 10. darzana, 11. lezyA, 12. bhavyatva, 13.
samyaktva tathA 14. sNjnyii| aba jIva ke caudaha guNa sthAnaka kahate haiN| jIya
ke caudaha guNasthAna : 1. mithyAtva, 2. sAsvAdana, 3. samyaktva-mithyAtva,
(mizra), 4. avirati samyagdRSTi, 5. dezavirati (zrAvaka), 6. pramattasaMyata, 7.
apramattasaMyata, 8. nivRttibAdara, 9. anivRttibAdara, 10. sUkSmasaMparAya, 11.
upazAMtamoha, 12. kSINamoha, 13. sayogI kevalI aura, 14. ayogI kevalI; ye
caudaha guNasthAnaka hai| (1) mithyAdarzana kA udaya ho taba taka mithyAdRSTi
guNasthAnaka kahalAtA hai, (2) mithyAtva kA udaya na ho, kintu anaMtAnubaMdhI
kaSAya kI caukar3I (krodha, mAna, mAyA, aura lobha) kA udaya ho to utkRSTa chaha
AvalikA taka rahane vAlA guNasthAna sAsvAdana-guNasthAnaka kahalAtA hai| (3)
samyaktva aura mithyAtva donoM kA yoga hone se tIsarA (mizra) guNasthAnaka
kahalAtA hai; jo aMtarmuhUrta rahatA hai| (4) apratyAkhyAnAvaraNIya caukar3I ke
udaya hone para avirata samyagdRSTi hotA hai| (5) pratyAkhyAnAvaraNIya kaSAya kA
udaya hone para dezavirati (zrAvaka) guNasthAna hotA hai| (6) saMyama prApta
hone ke bAda yadi pramAda-sevana kare to usakA guNasthAna pramatta-saMyata
kahalAtA hai| (7) jo saMyamI pramAdasevana nahIM karatA, usakA guNasthAna
apramatta-saMyata kahalAtA hai| chaThA aura sAtavA~ ye donoM guNasthAna kramazaH
aMtarmuhUrta 44

Page #67 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Description of Ajiva and Ashrava Tattva  **Yoga Shastra, First Light, Verse
16**  (8) The eighth Gunasthanaka, called A-poorvakarana, is where the karma of
A-poorva-sthiiti is destroyed. From this Gunasthanaka, two categories begin:
Upshama श्रेणी and Kshapaka श्रेणी.  (9) The Gunasthanaka of a Sadhaka who
internally pacifies (Upshant) the results of gross Kashaya that have arisen is
called Nivritti-badar.  (10) The ninth Gunasthanaka, called Anivritti-badar, is
where there is no internal pacification (Upshama) of the results through effort.
Both categories remain in this Gunasthanaka.  (11) The tenth Gunasthanaka,
called Sukshma-Samparaya-Gunasthanaka, is where the Kashaya of Lobha exists in a
subtle form. Both categories are present here.  (12) The eleventh Gunasthanaka,
called Upshant-Moha, is where Moha is in a pacified state, but not completely
destroyed.  (13) The twelfth Gunasthanaka, called Ksheen-Moha, is where Moha is
completely destroyed (nirmool).  (14) The thirteenth Gunasthanaka, called
Sayogi-Kevali, is where the four Ghatis (Ghatis that destroy Atma-gunas: Jnana-
avareeniya, Darshan-avareeniya, Mohaniya, and Antaray) are destroyed.  (15) The
fourteenth Gunasthanaka, called A-yogi-Kevali, is where the yoga of Man, Vachan,
and Kaya is destroyed, and where the remaining Vedaniya, Nama, Gotra, and
Aayushya karmas, which are called Aghati, are also destroyed. This is how the
nature of the Jiva-tattva is understood in brief.  **Ajiva-Tattva:**  Dharma-
astikaya, Adharma-astikaya, Akasha-astikaya, Pudgala-astikaya, and Kala are
called Ajiva. The Sarvagnas have combined these five with Jiva to form the
concept of Shad-dravya. Except for Kala, all the other substances gather in the
form of Pradesh; therefore, they are Dravya-swaroop, and except for Jiva, the
rest of the Dravyas are considered to be devoid of consciousness and inactive.
Kala is devoid of Astikaya. Except for Pudgala-astikaya, the rest of the Dravyas
are considered to be intangible or formless. All these Dravyas are born,
destroyed, and remain stable. The characteristic of Pudgala is that it has
touch, taste, smell, and color. There are two types of Pudgala: Anuroop and
Skandh-roop. Anuroop is very subtle, and a group of infinite Anuroop is called
Skandh. Skandh is called Pudgala-Skandh when it has form like smell, sound,
subtlety, grossness, etc., and when it gives darkness, heat, light, division,
shadow, Karma-vargana, Audarik-adi body, mind, language-vargana, breathing,
pleasure-pain, and helps in life and death. Dharma-astikaya, Adharma-astikaya,
and Akasha-astikaya are all three separate Dravyas. These three Dravyas are
always intangible, inactive, and stable. There are countless Pradesh of one
Jiva-dravya. There are as many Pradesh of Dharma-astikaya and Adharma-astikaya
as there are Pradesh of Lokakasha. There are neither more nor fewer Pradesh in
these two. Just as water helps aquatic creatures to move in water, similarly,
Dharma-astikaya helps Jiva or Ajiva to move around. Just as shade helps a
traveler to be stable, similarly, Adharma-astikaya helps Jiva and Pudgala to
become stable. Akasha-astikaya is that which gives space (place) to Jivas and
Pudgalas, remaining stable in its own place. It is infinite-Pradesh-swaroop, and
it pervades both Lok and Alok.  Kala is a Dravya different from the Dravyas that
reside in the Pradesh of Lokakasha; it is that which is capable of changing
substances. For example, making the new old, making a young man old; all this is
the work of Kala. In astrology, time, pal, vipal, ghadi, muhurta, prahar, day,
night, month, year, yuga, etc., which are words that indicate time, are all
considered to be the result of Kala. Those who know the essence of Kala have
called it Vyavharik Kala. Substances that are called new, old, etc., keep
changing in the world; all this is the power of Kala. Due to Kala, the present
substance gets the name of the past, and the future substance gets the name of
the present. In this way, Ajiva-tattva is complete.  **Ashrava-Tattva:**  The
entry of Karma-roop water into the Jiva-roop reservoir through the yoga of Man,
Vachan, and Kaya is called Ashrava. Shubh-karma

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ajIva evaM Azrava tattva kA varNana yogazAstra prathama prakAza zloka 16 |
samaya vAle haiN| donoM eka sAtha ATha varSa kama pUrva kroDa varSa taka hote
haiN| (8) jisameM karmoM kI apUrva-sthiti kA ghAta | Adi kare, use apUrvakaraNa
nAmaka AThavA~ guNasthAnaka kahate haiN| isa guNasthAna se do zreNiyAM prAraMbha
hotI hai-upazama | zreNI aura kSapaka zreNI  /  udaya meM Aye hue sthUla kaSAya
ke pariNAma ko aMdara hI aMdara nivartana ( upazAMta) karane vAle | sAdhaka kA
guNasthAna nivRttibAdara kahalAtA hai  /  (9) jisameM prayatnapUrvaka aMdara hI
aMdara pariNAmoM kI nivRtti ( upazama) na ho, vaha anivRttibAdara nAma kA nauvAM
guNasthAnaka kahalAtA hai| isameM donoM zreNiyA~ rahatI haiN| (10) lobha nAmaka
kaSAya jahAM sUkSmarUpa meM rahatA ho, vahA~ dazavA~ sUkSma-saMparAya-guNasthAna
kahalAtA hai| isameM bhI donoM zreNiyA~ hotI hai| (11) jahAM moha upazAMtadazA
meM rahatA ho, sarvathA kSINa na huA ho, vahAM upazAMta moha nAmaka gyAharavA
guNasthAna hotA | hai | ( 12 ) jahAM moha sarvathA kSINa (nirmUla) ho jAya,
vahAM kSINamoha nAmaka bArahavAM guNasthAna hotA hai  /  (13) AtmaguNoM kA ghAta
karane vAle 4 ghAtI (jJAnAvaraNIya darzanAvaraNIya, mohanIya aura aMtarAya)
karmoM kA kSaya ho jAya; vahAM terahavAM | sayogI kevalI guNasthAna kahalAtA
hai| (14) mana-vacana-kAyA ke yoga kA jahAM kSaya jAya, aura jahAM zeSa
vedanIya, nAma, gotra aura AyuSya karma jo aghAtI kahalAte hai unakA bhI kSaya
jAya vaha ayogI - kevalI nAmaka caudahavA~ guNasthAnaka hotA hai| isa taraha
jIvatattva kA svarUpa saMkSepa meM samajhanA  / ' ajIva-tattva : dharmAstikAya,
adharmAstikAya, AkAzAstikAya, pudgalAstikAya aura kAla ina padArthoM ko ajIva
kahA hai| sarvajJoM ne ina pAMcoM ke sAtha jIva ko milAkara SaDdravya kI
prarUpaNA kI hai| inameM se kAla ko chor3akara zeSa sabhI padArtha | pradezoM ke
rUpa meM ikaTThe hote haiM; isalie ye dravya-svarUpa haiM aura jIva ke sivAya
zeSa dravya cetanA-rahita aura akartA| rUpa mAne gaye haiN| kAla astikAya rahita
hai| pudgalAstikAya ko chor3akara zeSa dravya amUrtasvarUpa athavA arUpI mAne
jAte haiN| ye sabhI dravya utpanna hote haiM; naSTa hote haiM aura sthira rahate
haiM  /  pudgala kA lakSaNa hai - jo sparza, rasa, gaMdha aura | varNa vAlA ho|
pudgala ke do prakAra haiM- aNurUpa aura skndhruup| isameM aNu bahuta hI sUkSma
hotA hai aura anaMta aNuoM ke samUha ko skaMdha kahate haiN| aura gaMdha, zabda,
sUkSmatA, sthUlatA Adi AkRti vAle tathA aMdhakAra, Atapa, udyota, khaMDa, chAyA,
karma - vargaNA, audArikAdi zarIra, mana, bhASA vargaNA, zvAsocchvAsa, sukha-
duHkha dene vAlA va jIvanamRtyu meM sahAyatA dene vAlA pudgala skaMdha kahalAtA
hai| dharmAstikAya, adharmAstikAya aura AkAzAstikAya, ye tInoM dravya alaga-
alaga haiN| tathA ye tInoM dravya sadA amUrta, niSkriya aura sthira hote haiN|
eka jIvadravya ke asaMkhyAta pradeza | hote haiN| jitane lokAkAza ke pradeza
hai, utane hI dharmAstikAya aura adharmAstikAya ke pradeza hote haiN| ina donoM
meM pradeza adhika yA kama nahIM hote| jalacara jIvoM ko jaise jala meM gati
karane meM pAnI sahAyatA karatA hai, vaise hI jIva yA ajIva ko cAroM tarapha
gamanAgamana kI pravRtti karane meM dharmAstikAya sahAyatA karatA hai| jaise
pathika ke lie sthira hone meM chAyA sahAyaka banatI hai, vaise hI jIva aura
pudgala jo svayaM sthira banate haiM, unako jo sahAyatA dekara sthira karatA hai
vaha | adharmAstikAya hai| apane sthAna para rahate hue svayaM meM pratiSThita
hokara jo jIvoM aura pudgaloM ko avakAza (sthAna) detA hai, vaha AkAzAstikAya
kahalAtA hai| vaha anaMta- pradeza - svarUpa hai, loka aura aloka donoM meM
vyApta hai| lokAkAza ke pradeza meM rahe hue dravyoM se bhinna dravya kAla hai;
jo padArthoM ko parivartana karane meM samartha hai, vahI kAla kahalAtA hai|
jaise naye ko purAnA karanA, yuvaka se vRddha banAnA; yaha saba kAla kA hI kAma
hai| jyotiSazAstra meM samaya, pala, vipala, ghar3I, muhUrta, prahara, dina,
rAta, mahinA, varSa, yuga ityAdi jo samaya sUcaka zabda hai, ina sabako kAla kA
hI pariNAma | kahA hai| usa kAla ke tattvajJoM ne use vyavahArika kAla kI saMjJA
dI hai| navIna, jIrNa Adi ke rUpa meM pukAre jAne vAle | padArtha jagat meM
parivartana hote rahate haiM; yaha saba kAla kA hI sAmarthya hai| kAla ke hI
kAraNa vartamAna padArtha bhUtakAla kI saMjJA ko aura bhAvI padArtha vartamAna
bhAva ko prApta karatA hai| isa taraha ajIvatattva pUrNa huaa| Azravatattva :
mana, vacana aura kAyA ke yoga se jIva rUpI jalAzaya meM karma rUpI jala kA AnA
Azrava kahalAtA hai| zubhakarma 45

Page #68 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Description of the Principles of Restraint and Liberation, the Nature of the
Five Kinds of Knowledge  **Chapter 16 of the First Light of Yoga Shastra**  Good
inflow, or merit, is caused by auspicious actions, while inauspicious inflow, or
sin, is caused by inauspicious actions. Thus, the inflow of karma-water into the
pond of the soul is called *āśrava*.  **Restraint (Samvara) and Cessation
(Nirjara):**  Preventing inflows is called *samvara*. Partially separating the
karmas, which are the cause of birth and death in the world, from the soul is
called *nirjara*. Thus, the nature of both these principles has been explained
together. The nature of *āśrava*, *samvara*, and *nirjara* is not being
explained in detail here, as it will be discussed extensively in the section on
contemplation. The reader can learn about it in detail there. Here, these three
principles have been briefly explained to avoid repetition.  **Bondage
(Bandha):**  Due to passions, the soul acquires karmic particles that are
capable of binding. The principle that causes the soul to become dependent in
this way is called *bandha*. Just as a prisoner bound by chains becomes
dependent, similarly, the independent soul, bound by the chains of karma, also
becomes dependent. There are four types of *bandha*: *prākṛtibandha*,
*sthitibandha*, *anubhāgabandha*, and *pradeśabandah*. *Prākṛti* means the
nature of karma. There are eight types of *prākṛtibandha*: 1. *jñānāvaraṇīya*,
2. *darśanāvaraṇīya*, 3. *vedanīya*, 4. *mohanīya*, 5. *āyuṣya*, 6. *nāma*, 7.
*gotra*, and 8. *antarāya*. These are the eight fundamental natures of karma.
The state of having more or less karma, i.e., the duration or time-rule of
experiencing karma, is called *karma-sthiti* (*sthitibandha*). *Anubhāgabandha*
refers to the taste of the result, and *pradeśabandah* refers to the groups of
karmas.  The soul becomes bound by karma due to these five causes: *mithyātva*,
*avīrati*, *pramāda*, *kaṣāya*, and *yoga*. Thus, the nature of *bandha* has
been explained briefly.  **Liberation (Mokṣa):**  The complete destruction of
all karmas, or the complete absence of the causes of karmic bondage, is called
*mokṣa*. Before liberation, the destruction of the four *ghātikarmas* leads to
*kevalajñāna*. After that, the destruction of the remaining causes leads to the
liberation of the soul. The happiness of the gods, demons, and emperors in the
three realms is not even a fraction of the infinite happiness of liberation. The
happiness that is found in the stability of one's own soul, or in the delight of
one's own nature, is transcendental, eternal, and never-ending. Because of this
infinite happiness, liberation is considered to be the ultimate goal of all
beings. Thus, the nature of *mokṣa* has been explained.  **The Nature of the
Five Kinds of Knowledge:**  There are five main types of *samyagjñāna*:
*matijñāna*, *śruta-jñāna*, *avadhi-jñāna*, *manaḥparyava-jñāna*, and
*kevalajñāna*. These five kinds of knowledge are progressively superior. Each of
these five types has further subdivisions.  * **Matijñāna:** Knowledge that
arises from the senses and mind, with subdivisions like *avagraha*, *īhā*,
*avāya*, *dhāraṇā*, *bahu*, *bahuvidha*, etc. * **Śruta-jñāna:** Knowledge that
is based on the scriptures, including the *angas*, *upangas*, and *prakirṇas*,
and is characterized by detailed explanation and the use of *syādvāda*. There
are many subdivisions of *śruta-jñāna*. * **Avadhi-jñāna:** Knowledge of
substances, in the form of a specific duration, that arises from the soul
without the help of the senses or mind. There are two types of *avadhi-jñāna*:
1. *bhavapratyayika* and 2. *guṇa-pratyayika* (caused by the cessation of
karmas). Gods and hell-beings have *avadhi-jñāna* from birth, but animals
acquire it through the cessation of karmas. There are six types of *avadhi-
jñāna*: *anugāmi*, *ananugāmi*, *vardhamāna*, *hīyamāna*, *pratipāti*, and
*apratipāti*. * **Manaḥparyava-jñāna:** There are two types of *manaḥparyava-
jñāna*: *ṛjumati* and *vipulamati*. *Ṛjumati* is generally... while *vipulamati*
is... Once *manaḥparyava-jñāna* is attained, it never goes away. *
**Kevalajñāna:** Direct knowledge of all times, all substances, and all
categories, arising from the soul, like the all-seeing eye, infinite,
transcendental, and unprecedented.  Through these five kinds of knowledge, all
principles can be known. Through knowledge, the seeker can become aware of the
first aspect of the three jewels, which are the cause of liberation. Like a
maddened elephant, ignorance...   **[The text continues]**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 saMvara se mokSa tattva kA varNana, pAMca jJAna kA svarUpa yogazAstra prathama
prakAza zloka 16 ke kAraNa zubha Azrava athavA puNya aura azubhakarma ke kAraNa
azubha Azrava arthAt pApa kahalAtA hai| isa prakAra jIva rUpI tAlAba meM karma
rUpI pAnI kA AnA Azrava hai| saMvaratatya aura nirjarAtatya : AzravoM ko rokanA
saMvara kahalAtA hai| saMsAra ke janma-maraNa ke hetubhUta karmoM ko AtmA se
aMzataH alaga karanA nirjarA hai| isa taraha donoM tattvoM kA svarUpa eka sAtha
batalA diyA hai| Azrava, saMvara aura nirjarA tattva kA svarUpa yahAM vistRta
rUpa se nahIM batA rahe haiM; kyoMki Age calakara bhAvanA ke prakaraNa meM inheM
vistAra se batAyA jaayegaa| pAThaka vahIM para vistRta rUpa se jAna leN| yahAM
para punarukti hone ke bhaya se tIna tattvoM ko saMkSepa meM hI batA diyA hai|
baMdhatatya : kaSAyoM ke kAraNa jIva, karmayogya pudgaloM ko grahaNa karatA hai;
jIva ko isa prakAra parataMtratA meM DAlane kA kAraNabhUta tattva baMdha
kahalAtA hai| jaise ber3I se jakar3A huA kaidI parAdhIna ho jAtA hai, vaise hI
karma rUpI ber3I meM jakar3A huA svataMtra AtmA bhI parAdhIna ho jAtA hai|
baMdha ke prakRtibaMdha, sthitibaMdha, anubhAgabaMdha aura prdeshbNdh| ye cAra
bheda haiM; prakRti kA artha hai-karma kA svbhaav| isake (prakRtibaMdha ke)
jJAnAvaraNIya Adi nimnokta ATha bheda hote haiM-1. jJAnAvaraNIya, 2.
darzanAvaraNIya, 3. vedanIya, 4. mohanIya, 5. AyuSya, 6. nAma, 7. gotra aura 8.
aNtraay| karma kI ye mUla ATha prakRtiyA~ kahalAtI hai| adhika yA kama karmoM kI
sthiti arthAt karma bhogane kI avadhi yA kAla-niyama ko karmasthiti
(sthitibaMdha) kahate haiN| anubhAga baMdha vipAkarasa ko aura pradeza baMdha,
karmoM ke daloM ko kahate haiN| mithyAtva, avirati, pramAda, kaSAya aura yoga
ina pAMca kAraNoM se jIva karma-baMdhana karatA hai| isa taraha baMdhatattva kA
svarUpa saMkSepa meM batAyA gayA hai| mokSatatya : saMpUrNa karmoM kA sarvathA
kSaya ho jAnA yA karmabaMdha ke kAraNoM kA sarvathA abhAva ho jAnA mokSa
kahalAtA hai| mokSa se pahale cAra ghAtIkarmoM ke kSaya hone se kevalajJAna hotA
hai| usake bAda zeSa rahe kAraNoM kA kSaya hone se jIva kA mokSa hotA hai| tInoM
lokoM meM devoM, asuroM aura cakravartiyoM ko jo sukha hai, vaha mokSa-sukha-
saMpatti ke anaMtaveM bhAga meM bhI nahIM hai| apanI AtmA meM sthiratA rUpa yA
Atma-svarUpa meM ramaNatA rUpa jo sukha hai, vahI atIndriya hai, nitya hai aura
usakA kabhI aMta nahIM hotaa| isa prakAra kA asIma sukha hone se mokSa ko cAroM
vargoM meM agrasara kahA hai| isa taraha mokSatattva kA kathana kiyA gyaa| pAMca
jJAnoM kA svarUpa : samyagjJAna ke mukhya pAMca prakAra haiM-matijJAna,
zrutajJAna, avadhijJAna, manaHparyavajJAna aura kevljnyaan| ye pAMcoM jJAna
uttarottara zreSTha hai| inake pAMca bhedoM ke pratyeka ke uttara bheda bhI
haiN| avagraha, IhA, avAya, dhAraNA, bahu, bahuvidha Adi bhedayukta, iMdriya
aura mana se hone vAle jJAna ko matijJAna kahate haiN| zrutajJAna - aMga,
upAMga, prakIrNa Adi ko vistAra yukta syAdvAda se yukta jJAna ko zrutajJAna
kahate haiN| zrutajJAna ke aneka bheda haiN| iMdriyoM aura mana kI sahAyatA ke
binA AtmA se amuka avadhi taka rUpI dravyoM kA jJAna hotA rahe vaha avadhijJAna
hai| avadhijJAna ke do prakAra haibhavapratyayika aura 2. guNa-pratyayika
(kSayopazama jny)| devatA aura nArakoM ko janma se hI avadhijJAna hotA hai;
kiMtu aura tiryacoM ko yaha jJAna kSayopazama se hotA hai| vaha chaha prakAra kA
hotA hai-anugAmi, ananugAmi, vardhamAna, hIyamAna, pratipAti aura aprtipaati|
manaHparyavajJAna ke Rjumati aura vipulamati ye do bheda haiN| Rjumati
sAdhAraNataH paraMta vipalamati manaHparyavajJAna eka bAra prApta hone para
kadApi nahIM jaataa| jagata ke sarvakAloM sarvadravyoM, sarvaparyAyoM kA AtmA se
sIdhA hone vAlA vizvalocana ke samAna anaMta, atIndriya, apUrvajJAna,
kevalajJAna kahalAtA hai| isa taraha pAMca jJAna se sabhI tattva jAne jA sakate
haiN| jJAna se sAdhaka, mokSa ke kAraNa rUpa ratnatraya ke prathama bheda kA
jJAtA bana sakatA hai| saMsAra-rUpI vRkSa ke samUla-unmUlana ke lie madonmatta
hAthI ke samAna, ajJAna 46

Page #69 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Nature of Darshan and Charitra Ratna  **Yoga Shastra, First Light, Verses
17-18**  **Verse 16:**  Like the sun that destroys darkness, like an
extraordinary eye that illuminates the elements of the world, and like a net
that subdues the deer-like senses, this right knowledge (Samyakgyan) is.
**Verse 17:**  Now, regarding the second Darshan Ratna, it is said:  > **"Ruchir
Jinoktatattveshu, Samyak Shraddhanamuchyate. Jayate Tannisargena Guror Adhigamen
Va."**  **Meaning:**  Having interest in the principles spoken by the Jineshwara
Bhagwan is called Samyak Shraddha. This Samyak Shraddha arises naturally (from
one's nature) or through the teachings of the Guru Maharaj (Adhigam).
**Explanation:**  Having interest in the principles of Jiva and other elements
as spoken by Jineshwara is Samyak Shraddha (Darshan). Without Samyak Shraddha,
there is no attainment of liberation. Even knowing the nature of vegetables,
grains, etc., without interest, a person cannot obtain satisfaction or taste
from them. Angaramardak, etc., who have Shrutagyan, but are Abhavya or
Durbhavyas, do not have interest in Jinoktatattva, so they cannot obtain the
true fruits of tapasya and other practices. This Samyak Darshan is of two types:
1. **Nisarga Samyaktv:** This is the natural Samyaktv that arises without the
teachings of the Guru Maharaj. 2. **Adhigam Samyaktv:** This is the Samyaktv
that arises through the teachings of the Guru Maharaj or by seeing an image,
pillar, woman, or any other object.  In the whirlpool of the endless cycle of
birth and death, the covering of knowledge (Gyanavaran), covering of vision
(Darshanavaran), Vedaniya, and Antarayakarma are attached to the Jivas. The
highest state of these karmas is 30 kotikot (trillions) of sagaropama. The
highest state of Gotra and Namakarma is 20 kotikot, and the highest state of
Mohaniyakarma is 70 kotikot sagaropama. In this state, just as many rough stones
become round on their own as they roll and collide in a river flowing from a
mountain, similarly, the state of each karma naturally decreases due to the
combination of its own results. When only one kotikot sagaropama state remains,
then each worldly being, due to the combination of Yathapravrittikaran, comes
close to the Granthi-Pradesh. The results of attachment and aversion, which are
very difficult to break, are called Granthi. It is like the original knot of the
Rayan, which is very difficult to cut. Even the being who has reached the
Granthi-Pradesh, due to being influenced by attachment, etc., again binds the
highest state of karma and as a result, wanders in the four gatis. Among them,
there are Bhavyas who will attain liberation in the future. They manifest their
Mahavirya and break through the Granthi, which is difficult to break, just as a
traveler crosses a long path and quickly reaches his desired destination. This
is called Apurvakaran. After this, by doing Anivrittikaran, they break the
groups of Mithyatva, which are capable of being broken, and at that very moment,
they attain the Aupashmik Samyak Darshan, which is in the state of Antarmuhurt.
This Samyak Darshan is called Nisarga Samyaktv. Ordinary beings attain Samyak
Darshan through the teachings of the Guru Maharaj or through some kind of
support. This is called Adhigam Samyaktv. This Samyak Darshan is like medicine
for Yama and Prasham, and it is the cause of knowledge, character, and Shruta,
etc. Even if Samyaktv is devoid of knowledge and character, it is still
praiseworthy. But knowledge and character contaminated by the poison of
Mithyatva are not praiseworthy. Even without knowledge and character, Emperor
Shrenik, due to the influence of Samyaktv, earned the Tirthankara name karma,
which is like an incomparable treasure of happiness. It is like a boat for those
who are drowning in the ocean of the world. It is like a fire that burns the
forest of suffering. Therefore, one should accept (obtain) the gem of Samyak
Darshan.  **Verse 18:**  Now, the third Charitra Ratna is described:  > **"Sarva
Savadya Yoganan, Tyagash Charitramishyate. Kirtitam Tadahinsadi Vratabheden
Panchadha."**  **Meaning:**  Abandoning all sinful (Sadosha) actions is called
Charitra. This Charitra is said to be of five types, according to the difference
of vows like Ahimsa, etc.  **Explanation:**  Knowingly abandoning all Savadya,
sinful actions of mind, speech, and body is called Charitra.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 darzana cAritra ratna kA svarUpa yogazAstra prathama prakAza zloka 17 se 18 |
aMdhakAra ko naSTa karane ke lie sUrya ke samAna, jagat ke tattvoM ko prakAzita
karane ke lie apUrva netrasamAna tathA iMdriyoM rUpI hiraniyoM ko vaza karane
hetu jAla ke samAna yaha samyagjJAna hI hai  /  / 16 /  /  aba dUsare
darzanaratna ke saMbaMdha meM kahate haiM -  / 17 /  rucirjinoktatattveSu,
samyak zraddhAnamucyate  /  jAyate tannisargeNa guroradhigamena vA ||17|| artha
:- zrI jinezvara bhagavAn ke dvArA kathita tattvoM meM ruci honA samyak zraddhA
kahalAtI hai| vaha samyak zraddhA nisarga se ( svabhAvataH ) tathA guru mahArAja
ke upadeza se (adhigama ) hotI hai ||17|| vyAkhyA : - zrI jinezvara - kathita
jIvAdi tattvoM meM ruci honA samyak zraddhA (darzana) hai| samyak zraddhA ke
binA | phalasiddhi nahIM hotii| sabjI, anAja Adi kA svarUpa jJAta hone para bhI
ruci ke binA manuSya usakI tRpti athavA svAda | kA phala prApta nahIM kara
sakatA  /  zrutajJAna vAle aMgAramardaka Adi, abhavya jIva athavA durbhavya jIva
ko jinokta tattva | para ruci nahIM hone se ve tapa-anuSThAnAdi kA vAstavika
phala prApta nahIM kara ske| vaha samyagdarzana do prakAra kA hotA | hai  /
guru mahArAja ke upadeza ke binA jo svAbhAvika hotA hai; use prathama nisarga-
samyaktva kahate haiM; aura jo guru mahArAja | ke upadeza se athavA pratimA,
staMbha, strI Adi kisI bhI vastu ko dekhakara hotA hai, use adhigama - samyaktva
kahate haiN| anAdi-anaMta saMsAra ke bhaMvarajAla meM paribhramaNa karate hue
jIvoM ke sAtha lage hue jJAnAvaraNIya, darzanAvaraNIya | vedanIya aura
aMtarAyakarmoM kI utkRSTa sthiti tIsa koTAkoTi sAgaropama kI hai, gotra aura
nAmakarma kI bIsa koTAkoTi | tathA mohanIyakarma kI sattara koTAkoTi sAgaropama
kI utkRSTa sthiti hai| isa sthiti meM jisa prakAra parvata para se bahatI nadI
meM lur3hakate TakarAte hue kitane hI beDaula patthara apane Apa golAkAra bana
jAte haiM; usI prakAra anAyAsa hI | svayameva pratyeka karma kI sthiti usI
prakAra ke pariNAmoM ke yoga se kama ho jAtI hai aura jaba sirpha eka koTAkoTi |
sAgaropama sthiti bAkI raha jAtI hai; taba pratyeka saMsArI jIva
yathApravRttikaraNa ke yoga se graMthi-pradeza ke najadIka A | hai | atyaMta
kaThinAI se bhedana ho sakane yogya rAga-dveSa ke pariNAmoM ko graMthI kahate
haiN| jo sadA rAyaNa kI mUlagAMTha ke | samAna atyaMta kaThinatA se chinna ho
sakatI hai| graMthi sthAna taka pahuMcA huA vaha jIva bhI rAgAdi se prerita
hokara phira karma kI utkRSTa sthiti bAMdhatA hai aura usake phalasvarUpa cAra
gatiyoM meM bhramaNa karatA rahatA hai| usameM kaI bhaviSya meM | kalyANa prApta
karane vAle bhavyajIva hote haiM, ve apane mahAvIrya ko prakaTa karate hue
kaThinatA se ullaMghana (bheda) kI jA | sakane vAlI graMthi kA ekadama
ullaMghana bhedana karake usI prakAra Age pahuMca jAte haiM, jisa prakAra koI
pathika laMbe patha | ko pAra karake jhaTapaTa ISTa sthAna para pahu~ca jAtA
hai; ise apUrvakaraNa kahate haiN| isake bAda anivRttikaraNa karane para chinna
| karane yogya mithyAtva ke daloM ko chinna kara usI samaya aMtarmuhUrta kI
sthiti vAlA aupazamika samyagdarzana prApta karatA hai| yaha samyagdarzana
nisarga-samyaktva kahalAtA hai| Ama jIvoM ko gurumahArAja ke upadeza se athavA
kisI prakAra ke | AlaMbana se samyagdarzana prApta hotA hai| jise adhigama -
samyaktva kahA jAtA hai| yaha samyagdarzana yama aura prazama ke auSadha-
samAna, jJAna, cAritra evaM zrutAdi kA hetu hai| jo samyaktva jJAna aura cAritra
se rahita hotA hai, to bhI vaha | prazaMsanIya hai; lekina mithyAtva rUpI viSa
se dUSita jJAna aura cAritra prazaMsanIya nahIM hai| jJAna aura cAritra se
rahita hone para bhI samrAT zreNika ne samyaktva ke prabhAva se anupama
sukhanidhAna ke samAna prApta tIrthaMkara nAma karma upArjana kiyaa| |
saMsArasamudra meM DUbane vAle ke lie yaha naukA ke samAna hai| duHkha rUpI vana
ko jalAne ke lie dAvAnala ke samAna hai| | ataH samyadarzana rUpI ratna ko
grahaNa ( prApta) karanA cAhie ||17|| aba tIsare cAritraratna kA varNana karate
haiM  / 18 /  sarva-sAvadya-yogAnAM, tyAgazcAritramiSyate  /  kIrtitaM
tadahiMsAdi - vratabhedena paJcadhA  // 18 //  artha :- samasta pApayukta
(sadoSa) yogoM kA tyAga karanA cAritra kahalAtA hai| yaha cAritra ahiMsA Adi
vrata ke bheda se pAMca prakAra kA kahA hai  /  /  18  /  | vyAkhyA :- samasta
sAvadya sapApa vyApAra-mana-vacana-kAyA ke yogoM kA jJAna pUrvaka tyAga karanA
cAritra kahalAtA hai| 47

Page #70 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Nature of the Five Great Vows of the Ratnatray  **Yoga Shastra, First
Light, Verses 19-22**  **Without knowledge and faith, conduct is not called
right conduct. Here, the word "all" is used to distinguish it from the conduct
of the worldly. Conduct has been divided into two parts - original qualities and
subsequent qualities. One should adopt the five great vows from the conduct of
the original qualities.** ||18||  **Now, the five great vows, the original
qualities of conduct, are described.** ||19||  **Non-violence, truthfulness,
non-stealing, celibacy, and non-possession: these are the five great vows. Each
of these five great vows is endowed with five attitudes. These attitudes are
(helpful) for liberation.** ||19||  **Explanation:** - There are five attitudes
for each of the five great vows of non-violence, etc. Therefore, it is said that
if the attitude is constantly awakened, the seeker can attain liberation from
it. ||19||  **Now, the nature of the first great vow of non-violence is
described.** ||20||  **That vow of non-violence is considered to be:** ||20||
**Not to kill any living being, whether mobile or immobile, through
carelessness.** ||20||  **Explanation:** - Carelessness means ignorance, doubt,
delusion, attachment, aversion, loss of memory, and acting contrary to the yogas
of mind, speech, and body, and disrespecting dharma. Thus, carelessness is said
to be of eight types. To kill any mobile (two-sensed, three-sensed, four-sensed,
and five-sensed) or immobile (earth, water, fire, air, and plant) being through
the above-mentioned carelessness is violence. And the prohibition of violence or
the protection of living beings is called the first vow of non-violence. ||20||
**Now, the nature of the second great vow is described.** ||21||  **Speaking
words that are pleasant, beneficial, and truthful is called the vow of
truthfulness. But that which is truthful, yet unpleasant or harmful, is not
called truthful speech.** ||21||  **Explanation:** - Truthful speech, which is
free from falsehood, is called the vow of truthfulness. That which gives joy
merely by hearing it is pleasant speech, and that which is beneficial in the
future is beneficial speech. To speak of a thing as it is, that is truth, that
is truthful speech. Here, truth is an attribute of the vow of truthfulness.
There is a doubt here: what is the purpose of mentioning these attributes of
pleasant and beneficial along with truth? In answer to this, it is said that,
"Many times, even though it is truthful in practice, to call a thief a thief or
a leper a leper, etc., is unpleasant (shocking) speech, and therefore it is not
called truth. Similarly, even if something is truthful, if it is harmful, it is
not called truth. A hunter asks a truthful person in the forest, "Which way did
the deer go? Did you see it?" If the truthful person says at that time, "Yes, I
saw the deer going this way," then there is a possibility of animal cruelty in
such a statement. Therefore, such speech, being harmful to animals, cannot be
called truth even though it is truthful speech, because it is not beneficial
(beneficial) to animals.  **The conclusion is that truthful speech that causes
pain to others and is harmful in its consequences is not truth; rather, truthful
speech that is pleasant and beneficial is the real truth.** ||21||  **Now, the
third great vow is described.** ||22||  **Not taking what is not given is called
the vow of non-stealing. The external life and wealth of people are theirs;
those who take them are like those who kill them.** ||22||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 cAritra ratna ke mahAvratoM kA svarUpa yogazAstra prathama prakAza zloka 19 se
22 | jJAna aura zraddhA ke binA cAritra samyak cAritra nahIM khlaataa| yahAM
dezaviraticAritra se isakI pRthaktA batAne ke lie 'sarva' zabda kA grahaNa kiyA
gayA hai| cAritra ke do bheda kiye gaye haiM- mUlaguNa aura uttaraguNa  /
mUlaguNa rUpa cAritra se paMca mahAvratoM kA grahaNa karanA cAhie  /  / 18 /  /
aba cAritra ke paMca mahAbhUta rUpa mUlaguNoM kA varNana karate haiM  / 19 /
ahiMsA-sUnRtAsteya - brahmacaryA'parigrahAH  /  paJcabhi: paJcabhiryuktA,
bhAvanAbhirvimuktaye  // 19 //  artha :ahiMsA, satya, asteya, brahmacarya aura
aparigraha ye pAMca mahAvrata haiM aura ina pAMcoM mahAvrato meM se pratyeka
mahAvrata pAMca-pAMca bhAvanAoM se yukta hotA hai| ye bhAvanAe~ mukti ke lie (
sahAyaka ) hotI hai  /   /  19  /  /  vyAkhyA : - ahiMsA Adi pAMca mahAvratoM kI
pratyeka kI pAMca-pAMca bhAvanAe~ hai  /  isIlie kahA gayA hai ki yadi | bhAvanA
kI satata jAgRti rahe to sAdhaka usase mukti prApta kara sakatA hai  /  / 19 /
/  aba ahiMsA rUpa prathama mahAvrata kA svarUpa kahate haiM tadahiMsAvrataM
matam  // 20 //   / 20 /  na yat pramAdayogena, jIvita - vyaparopaNam  /
trasAnAM sthAvarANAM ca artha :- pramAda ke yoga se trasa yA sthAvara jIvoM ke
prANoM kA hanana na karanA, prathama ahiMsA mahAvrata mAnA gayA hai ||20||
vyAkhyA :- pramAda kA artha hai - ajJAna, saMzaya, viparyaya, rAga, dveSa,
smRtibhraMza, mana, vacana aura kAyA ke yogoM ke pratikUla AcaraNa karanA aura
dharma kA anAdara karanA  /  isa prakAra pramAda ATha prakAra kA kahA gayA hai|
ukta pramAda ke yoga se trasa (dvIndriya, trIndriya, caturindriya aura
paMcendriya) athavA sthAvara (pRthvI, pAnI, agni, vAyu aura vanaspatikAya ke)
jIvoM ke prANoM kA nAza karanA hiMsA hai aura hiMsA ke niSedha yA jIvoM ke
rakSaNa ko hI prathama ahiMsA - vrata kahA gayA hai  /  /  20  /  /  aba dUsare
mahAvrata kA svarUpa kahate haiM | 21 | priyaM pathyaM vacastathyaM,
sUnRtavratamucyate  /  tat tathyamapi no tathyam, apriyaM cAhitaM ca yat  // 21
//  dUsare ko priya, hitakArI aura yathArtha vacana bolanA satyavrata kahalAtA
hai| paraMtu jo vacana apriya yA - ahitakara hai, vaha tathyavacana hone para
bhI satyavacana nahIM kahalAtA ||21|| artha : vyAkhyA H- amRSAsvarUpa
satyavacana sUnRtavrata kahalAtA hai| sunane mAtra se jo AnaMda de, vaha priya
vacana hai aura bhaviSya meM jo hitakArI ho vaha pathya vacana hai| jo vastu
jaisI hai, vaisI hI kahanA yahI tathya hai, yahI yathArtha vacana | kahalAtA
hai| yahAM satya vrata kA adhikAra hone se tathya usakA eka vizeSaNa hai| yahAM
zaMkA hotI hai ki satya ke sAtha priya aura pathya ina vizeSaNoM ke kahane kA
kyA prayojana hai? isake uttara meM kahate haiM ki, 'kaI bAra vyavahAra se
tathya hone para bhI cora ko cora yA kor3hI ko kor3hI Adi kahanA apriya
(AghAtakArI) vacana hone se vaha satya nahIM khlaataa| | isI prakAra koI bAta
tathyayukta hone para bhI ahitakArI hogI to vaha bhI satya nahIM khlaayegii|
zikArI jaMgala meM kisI | satyavratI se pUchate haiM ki 'hiraNa kisa aura gayA
hai? kyA tumane dekhA hai?' agara satyavratI usa samaya kahatA hai ki 'hA~, |
maiMne hiraNa ko isa ora jAte dekhA hai|' to isa prakAra ke kathana meM
prANihiMsA kI saMbhAvanA rahI huI hai| ataH aisA vacana hiMsAkAraka hone se
yathArtha vacana hote hue bhI prANihitakArI (pathya) na hone ke kAraNa satya
nahIM kahA jA sktaa| niSkarSa yaha hai ki dUsaroM ko kheda pahuMcAne vAlA aura
pariNAma meM anarthakara satya vacana bhI satya nahIM hai; apitu priya aura
hitakara tathya vacana hI vAstavika satya hai 1  /  /  21  /  /  aba tIsare
mahAvrata kA varNana karate haiM  / 22 /  anAdAnamadattasyAsteyavratamudIritam
/  bAhyAH prANA nRNAmartho, haratA taM hatA hi te ||22|| 1. isalie mahAbhArata
meM satya kI paribhASA kI gayI hai- 'yad bhUtahitamatyantametatsatya mataM mama
jisameM prANiyoM kA ekAMta hita ho use hI maiMne satya mAnA hai| 48

Page #71 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Nature of the Great Vows  **Verse 23-24 of the First Light of Yoga
Shastra:**  **Meaning:** Not accepting any object without the permission of its
owner is called the vow of non-stealing (Asteya). Wealth is the external life
force of humans; by stealing it, their life force is considered to be destroyed.
**Explanation:** Not accepting wealth or any object without the owner's
permission or without giving it to them is called the third great vow of
Adattadan. For renunciants, it is described as four types: 1. Swami-Adatt, 2.
Jiva-Adatt, 3. Tirthankar-Adatt, and 4. Guru-Adatt.  * **Swami-Adatt:**
Accepting grass, straw, stones, wood, etc., without the owner's permission or
without their permission to take it. * **Jiva-Adatt:** Accepting something from
the owner, but not from the living being itself. For example, giving initiation
to a person (living being) without their own consent, even though their parents
or guru have given permission. * **Tirthankar-Adatt:** Accepting food that is
contaminated with the prohibited Adhakarma, etc., as forbidden by the
Tirthankar. * **Guru-Adatt:** Accepting an object that is free from Adhakarma,
etc., and the owner has given permission, but the guru has not given permission
to accept it.  All the vows after non-violence are for the protection of the
first vow of non-violence. There is a doubt here: how is violence possible in
Adattadan? In response, it is said that wealth is considered the eleventh
external life force in social interactions. Due to the strong attachment to
wealth, it is considered equal to life. Stealing it or losing it breaks the
heart of the living being, causing great harm and even death. Therefore, the
scholars have called wealth the external life force. From this perspective, the
one who steals wealth is actually killing the owner of that wealth.  Now,
regarding the fourth great vow:  **Meaning:** Renunciation of the desire for
divine (divine-related) and worldly (lustful) pleasures through mind, speech,
and body, as well as the act of causing others to do so and approval, is called
Brahmacharya, which is of eighteen types.  **Explanation:** Renunciation of the
enjoyment of sexual pleasure through mind, speech, and body, related to the
divine body of the gods and the worldly body of humans and animals, as well as
the act of causing others to do so and approval, is called Brahmacharya. It is
said to be of eighteen types because it is of eighteen types of renunciation of
sexual pleasure. Divine-related sexual pleasure is of nine types, as it is of
three types (mind, speech, and body) and three types (act, cause, and approval).
Similarly, there are nine types of renunciation of worldly sexual pleasure,
making a total of eighteen types of Brahmacharya.  Just as the middle vows are
explained in terms of mind, speech, and body, as well as act, cause, and
approval, so too should the first and last great vows be understood.  Now,
regarding the fifth great vow:  **Meaning:** Renunciation of attachment to all
things in the world (living and non-living) is the great vow of Aparigraha. Even
when there is no object nearby, the mind is constantly agitated by attachment.
**Explanation:** Renunciation of attachment to all things in the world (living
and non-living) through mind, speech, and body, as well as act, cause, and
approval, is called the great vow of Aparigraha. Simply giving up the object is
not called renunciation. True renunciation is the renunciation of attachment,
delusion, desire, passion, attachment, or affection towards that object.  There
is a doubt here: if the vow of Aparigraha is achieved by renouncing attachment,
then why is its characteristic described as the renunciation of attachment? In
response, it is said that even in the absence of objects, attachment to
substance, space, time, and feeling causes mental unrest and various types of
mental fluctuations. A seeker with such an unstable mind cannot experience the
peace of tranquility. Even without wealth, the desire for wealth creates
impurity in the mind, like the beggar named Dramuk in Rajgriha, and it is the
cause of falling into hell.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 mahAvratoM kA svarUpa yogazAstra prathama prakAza zloka 23 se 24 artha :- vastu
ke svAmI kI AjJA ke binA kisI bhI vastu ko grahaNa nahIM karanA, asteya
(acaurya) vrata kahA gayA hai| dhana manuSyoM kA bAhya prANa hai; usake haraNa
karane se usake prANoM kA hanana ho gayA, smjho||22|| vyAkhyA :- dhana yA kisI
bhI cIja ko svAmi ke diye binA yA usakI AjJA ke binA grahaNa na karanA tIsarA
adattAdAna mahAvrata kahA hai| vaha tyAgiyoM ke lie 1. svAmI-adatta, 2. jIva-
adatta, 3. tIrthakara-adatta aura, 4. guru-adatta; isa taraha cAra prakAra kA
batAyA hai| ghAsa, tRNa, patthara, lakar3I Adi padArtha usake svAmI ne nahIM
diye ho athavA lene kI AjJA na dI ho; use grahaNa karanA svAmIadatta hai| svAmI
kI AjJA to ho, paraMtu svayaM jIva kI AjJA na ho, jaise ki dIkSA ke pariNAma-
rahita jIva (manuSya) ko usake mAtA-pitA, guru ko de deM; paraMtu usa vyakti
(jIva) kI svayaM kI icchA ke binA dIkSA denA jIva-adatta hai| tIrthaMkara
bhagavAn ke dvArA niSiddha AdhAkarmAdi doSayukta AhAra grahaNa karanA;
tIrthaMkara-adatta hai| kisI vastu ke lene kI svAmI ne AjJA de dI; vaha vastu
AdhAkarma Adi doSa se bhI rahita hai, kintu guru kI AjJA usa vastu ko grahaNa
karane kI nahIM hai, to guru kI AjJA ke binA usa vastu ko lenA garu-adatta
(corI) hai| ahiMsA se Age ke sabhI vrata prathama ahiMsAvrata kI rakSA ke heta
haiN| yahAM zaMkA hotI hai ki adattAdAna meM hiMsA kaise saMbhava hai? isake
uttara meM kahate haiM ki dhana ko 11vA~ bAhya-prANa loka-vyavahAra meM kahA
hai| dhana para mamatvabhAva adhika hone se vaha prANa samAna hai| usake curAye
jAne athavA cale jAne se jIva kA hRdaya phaTa jAtA hai, bar3A AghAta pahuMcatA
hai aura mRtyu taka bhI ho jAtI hai| isalie zAstrakAroM ne dhana ko bAhya prANa
kahA hai| isa dRSTi se dhanaharaNa karane vAlA vAstava meM usake mAlika ke
prANa-haraNa karatA hai  /  / 22 /  /  aba cauthe mahAvrata ke viSaya meM kahate
haiN|23| divyaudArikakAmAnAM, kRtAnumatikAritaiH  /  mano-vAk-kAyatastyAgo,
brahmASTAdazadhA matam  /  / 23 /  /  artha :- divya (deva-saMbaMdhI) aura
audArika kAma (madanakAma-maithuna) kA mana, vacana aura zarIra se karane,
karAne | . aura anumodana kA tyAga karanA brahmacarya hai, jo aThAraha prakAra
kA hai  /  / 23 /  /  vyAkhyA :- devatAoM ke vaikriya-zarIra tathA manuSya jAti
aura tiryaMca jAti ke audArika zarIra se saMbaMdhita kAmabhoga (maithuna) kA
mana, vacana aura kAyA se sevana karane, karAne aura anumodana kA tyAga karanA
brahmacarya hai, jo aThAraha prakAra ke maithuna-tyAga-rUpa hone se 18 prakAra
kA kahA hai| devatA-saMbaMdhI ratisukha, mana, vacana aura kAyA se tathA kRta
kArita aura anumodana ke bheda se trividha-trividha (343=9) virati rUpa hone se
9 prakAra kA hotA hai| tathA audArika saMbaMdhI kAma ke bhI usI taraha trividha-
trividha tyAga hone se nau bheda hote haiM, kula milA kara 18 prakAra kA
brahmacarya mahAvrata hotA hai| karanA; karAnA aura anumodanA ke mana, vacana
aura kAyA ke bheda se 9 bheda jaise bIca ke vrata meM batAye haiM; vaise hI
sabase pahale ke aura bAda ke mahAvratoM ke bhI samajha lene cAhie  /  / 23 /  /
aba pAMcaveM mahAvrata ke saMbaMdha meM kahate haiN|24| sarvabhAveSu
mUrchAyAstyAgaH syAdaparigrahaH  /  yadasatsvapi jAyeta, mUrcchayA cittaviplavaH
// 24 //  artha :- saMsAra ke sAre (sajIva-nirjIva) padArthoM para mUrchA kA
tyAga karanA aparigraha mahAvrata hai| pAsa meM vastu nahIM hone para bhI Asakti
se mana meM vicAroM kI uthala-puthala hotI rahatI hai  /  / 24 /  /  vyAkhyA :-
mana, vacana aura kAyA se tathA kRta, kArita aura anumodita-rUpa se dravya,
kSetra, kAla aura bhAva| rUpa sarva bhAvoM meM mUrchA yA Asakti kA tyAga karanA
aparigraha mahAvrata kahalAtA hai| kevala padArtha kA tyAga kara denA hI tyAga
nahIM khlaataa| usa padArtha ke prati mUrchA, moha, IcchA, rAga, Asakti yA sneha
kA tyAga karanA hI vAstava meM aparigraha mahAvrata kahalAtA hai| yahAM zaMkA
hotI hai ki 'parigraha' kA tyAga karane se aparigraha vrata ho hI gayA, phira
isakA lakSaNa mUrchA-tyAga-rUpa kyoM batAyA? isake uttara meM kahate haiM ki
avidyamAna padArthoM meM bhI dravya, kSetra, kAla aura bhAva se marz2A hone se
mana meM azAMti rahatI hai aura mana meM aneka prakAra ke vikalpa-jAla athavA
vikAra uThate haiN| isa prakAra ke asthira mana vAlA sAdhaka prazama sukha kA
anubhava nahIM kara sktaa| dhana na hone para bhI dhana kI tRSNA rAjagRha ke
dramuka nAmaka bhikhArI ke samAna citta meM malinatA paidA karatI hai aura vaha
durgati meM girAne kA kAraNabhUta 49

Page #72 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Nature of the Emotions of the Great Vows  **Yoga Shastra, First Light,
Verses 25-26**  Even though it is composed of specific material with
characteristics of substance, field, time, and emotion, the mind that is free
from the affliction of the black serpent of craving, experiences the attainment
of peace and happiness, and in it, there is complete stability. For this reason,
the ascetics who observe the religious observances are described as being in the
category of non-possessors, as they do not have attachment to their bodies and
instruments. It is also said:  > "Just as a horse, even when adorned with
ornaments, does not have attachment to them, similarly, a Nirgrantha muni, even
when possessing some things as religious observances, does not have attachment
to them." (Prashma 141)  Just as a muni does not incur blame by observing
religious observances while in a state of unconsciousness, similarly, Nirgrantha
sadhvis, who are devoted to the three jewels, also do not incur the blame of
possession by observing religious observances without attachment, as per the
instructions of their guru. Therefore, the statement of those who say, "For
Nirgrantha sadhvis, religious observances are in the form of possession, and
because of possessing, women do not attain liberation," is mere pralāpa (idle
talk). ||24||  Now, the glory of the five emotions (which are helpful in
attaining liberation) of each great vow is explained. ||25||  > "By the five
emotions, the five great vows are imbued (animated), who cannot attain the
imperishable (liberation) state?" ||25||  Meaning: Those who practice these
great vows with their emotions, surely attain the state of liberation. ||25||
Now, the five emotions of the first great vow are explained:  > "The wise should
cultivate the vow of non-violence with the five emotions of mental restraint,
restraint in seeking, restraint in taking and placing containers, restraint in
movement, and the taking of food and water after seeing." ||26||  Meaning: The
wise ascetic should strengthen the vow of non-violence with these five emotions:
mental restraint, restraint in seeking (food, water, etc.), restraint in taking
and placing containers (for food, water, etc.), restraint in movement, and
taking food and water after seeing (it). ||26||  **Explanation:**  1. The
characteristics of the first emotion, mental restraint, will be explained later.
2. Restraint in seeking is to take only that food, water, or clothing, etc.,
which does not cause suffering to any living being. 3. Restraint in taking and
placing containers is to take and place instruments like feet, foot-rests,
clothing, containers, etc., in such a way that they do not cause harm to any
living being. 4. Restraint in movement is to move with care, keeping one's gaze
downwards while walking, so as not to harm any living being. 5. The emotion of
taking food and water after seeing is to take food and water after seeing it,
and even when taking food based on signs, to maintain the emotion of non-
violence, so as not to harm ants, worms, etc.  Here, restraint and restraint in
seeking are to be understood as the emotional form of the great vow. The three
restraints, etc., will be explained in detail in this text later, so they can
also be understood as secondary qualities.  It is also said: "Purity of the
body, five restraints, emotions, two types of austerities, images, and non-
possession are the divisions of secondary qualities." (Ni. Bha. 6534)  Now, see
the emotion of mental restraint. All violence first arises in the mind. That is,
mental activity is paramount in violence. It is heard that King-Sage
Prasannachadra did not cultivate the emotion of mental restraint in the great
vow of non-violence, and therefore, even though he did not commit violence
externally, he once accumulated the karma-bundle worthy of the seventh hell.
Restraint in seeking, restraint in taking and placing containers, and restraint
in movement are very beneficial for the great vow of non-violence. Therefore,
one should cultivate the inner mind with these emotions. The emotion of taking
food and water after seeing (and the renunciation of food and water, including
insects, etc., with this emotion) is also beneficial for the great vow of non-
violence. Thus, the description of the five emotions of the great vow of non-
violence is complete. ||26||  Now, see the five emotions of the second great
vow...  50

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 mahAvratoM kI bhAvanAoM kA svarUpa yogazAstra prathama prakAza zloka 25 se 26
hai  /  dravya, kSetra, kAla aura bhAva rUpa lakSaNoM se yukta vizeSa sAmagrI
hone para bhI jisakA mana tRSNA-rUpI kAle sarpa ke upadrava se rahita ho, usIko
prazama- sukha prApti hotI hai aura usIke citta meM pUrNa sthiratA hotI hai| isI
kAraNa se | dharmopakaraNa rakhane vAle sAdhuoM ko zarIra aura upakaraNoM para
mamatA nahIM hone se, aparigrahI kI koTi meM batAyA hai| |kahA bhI hai
yadvatturaGgaH satsvapyAbharaNabhUSaNeSvabhiSaktaH  /  tadvadupagrahavAnapi na
saGgamupayAti nirgranthaH  //  ( prazama. 141) jaise AbhUSaNoM se vibhUSita hone
para bhI ghor3e ko una AbhUSaNoM para mamatA nahIM hotI, isI prakAra
dharmopakaraNa ke rUpa meM kucha vastue~ rakhane para bhI nigraMtha muni una
para mamatva nahIM rakhatA  /  jisa taraha mUrchA - rahita hokara dharmopakaraNa
rakhane se muni ko doSa nahIM lagatA, usI taraha mahAvratadhAriNI
ratnatrayArAdhikA, nigraMtha-sAdhviyAM bhI guru ke | upadezAnusAra mamatvabhAva
se rahita hokara dharmopakaraNa rakhatI haiM to unheM bhI parigrahatva kA doSa
nahIM lgtaa| isa kAraNa se 'nigraMtha-sAdhviyoM ke lie dharmopakaraNa parigraha
rUpa hai aura parigraha rakhane ke kAraNa striyoM ko mokSa nahIM hotA,' aisA |
kathana kahane vAloM kA pralApamAtra hai  /  / 24 /  /  aba pratyeka mahAvrata
kI pAMca-pAMca bhAvanAoM (jo mukti prApti meM sahAyaka hai) kI mahimA batAte
haiM  /  25 /  bhAvanAbhirbhAvitAni paJcabhiH paJcabhiH kramAt  /  mahAvratAni
no kasya, sAdhayantyavyayaM padam ||25|| artha :- kramazaH pAMca-pAMca bhAvanAoM
se vAsita (anuprANita) mahAvratoM se kauna avyaya (mokSa) pada prApta nahIM kara
sakatA?' arthAt ina mahAvratoM kI bhAvanA - sahita ArAdhanA karane vAle
avazyameva mokSa pada prApta karate haiM  /  / 25 /  /  aba prathama mahAvrata
kI pAMca bhAvanAe~ batAte haiM :  / 26 /  manoguptyeSaNAdAneryAbhiH samitibhiH
sadA  /  dRSTAnna - pAnagrahaNenAhisAM bhAvayetsudhIH  /  / 26 /  /  artha
manogupti, eSaNAsamiti AdAnabhAMDa- nikSepaNasamiti, IryAsamiti tathA prekSita (
dekhakara) anna-jala grahaNa karanA, ina pAMcoM bhAvanAoM se buddhimAn sAdhu ko
ahiMsAvrata ko puSTa karanA cAhie  /  /  26  /  /  vyAkhyA : 1. pahalI
manogusibhAvanA ke lakSaNa Age kaheMge  /  2. jisa AhAra- pAnI yA vastra - pAtra
Adi ke lene meM kisI bhI jIva ko duHkha na pahu~ce, aisA nirdoSa AhAra Adi lenA
eSaNAsamiti hai  /  3. pAda, pAdapITha, vastra, pAtra | Adi upakaraNa lene-
rakhane meM jIva kI virAdhanA na ho, isa prakAra kI yatanA ( upayoga ) sahita
pravRtti karanA AdAnasamiti hai  /  4. rAste meM jAte-Ate nIce kI ora samyag
dRSTi rakhakara kisI jIva kI virAdhanA kiye binA yatanA | pUrvaka gamanAgamana
karanA IryAsamiti hai  /  5. AhAra- pAnI dekhakara lenA aura upalakSaNa se AhAra
karane ke samaya bhI | ahiMsA - bhAva rakhanA, ,jisase cIMTI, kuMthu Adi jIvoM
kI virAdhanA na ho, yaha dRSTAnnapAnagrahaNa-bhAvanA kahalAtI hai| | yahA~ para
gupti aura samiti ko mahAvrata kI bhAvanA rUpa samajhanA  /  tIna gupti Adi kA
Age isI graMtha meM vistAra se varNana | kiyA jAyegA, isalie guptiyoM aura
samitiyoM ko uttaraguNa ke rUpa meM bhI samajhA jA sakatA hai| kahA bhI hai-
'piMDa - vizuddhi, pAMca samiti, bhAvanA, do prakAra kA tapa, pratimA aura
abhigraha ye uttara guNa ke bheda haiN| (ni. bhA. 6534) aba manogupti kI bhAvanA
dekhie  /  jitanI bhI hiMsA hai, vaha sabase pahale mana meM paidA hotI hai  /
/  | yAnI hiMsA meM manovyApAra kI pradhAnatA hai| sunA jAtA hai ki rAjarSi
prasannacaMdra ne ahiMsA mahAvrata kI manogupti rUpabhAvanA nahIM kI, isa kAraNa
bAhara se hiMsA nahIM karane para bhI eka daphA to unhoMne sAtaveM naraka ke
yogya pApakarmadala | ikaTThe kara liye the  /  eSaNAsamiti, AdAnasamiti aura
IryAsamiti; ye ahiMsA mahAvrata ke lie atyaMta upakArI hai| | isalie ina
bhAvanAoM se aMtaHkaraNa suvAsita karanA cAhie, dRSTAnnapAnagrahaNa ( dekhakara
anna pAnI grahaNa karane kI bhAvanA se evaM trasAdi jIvoM sahita AhAra- pAnI kA
tyAga karane se yaha bhI ahiMsA - mahAvrata kI upakAriNI hotI hai| | isa prakAra
ahiMsA - mahAvrata kI pAMca bhAvanAoM kA varNana pUrNa huA  /  /  26 /  /  aba
dUsare mahAvrata kI pAMca bhAvanAe~ dekhie . 50

Page #73 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Nature of the Sentiments of the Great Vows  **Yoga Shastra, First Light,
Verses 27 to 29**  **27.**  By constantly abandoning laughter, greed, fear, and
anger, and by speaking after careful consideration, one should strengthen the
vow of truthfulness.  **Meaning:**  One should speak truthfully, abandoning
laughter, greed, fear, and anger, and speaking only after careful consideration.
These five sentiments strengthen the vow of truthfulness.  **Explanation:**  A
person may speak falsely when laughing and joking with others, when driven by
greed and desiring wealth, when fearing for their life or reputation, or when
agitated by anger.  These four sentiments, laughter, etc., must be abandoned.
The fifth sentiment is to speak thoughtfully and with right knowledge, rather
than blindly and carelessly.  Attachment is the cause of false speech, as is
well known in the world.  As it is said, "Speech uttered out of passion, hatred,
or delusion is false."  **Now we describe the five sentiments of the third great
vow.**  **28.**  To request a place to stay after careful consideration, to
request it repeatedly from the owner, and to accept only as much space as is
needed.  **29.**  To request a place to stay from a fellow practitioner of the
same religion, to consume food and water only with permission, and to cultivate
the sentiment of non-stealing.  **Meaning:**  Before staying in any place, a
monk or nun should carefully consider the place and its owner, and request
permission to stay there.  There are five types of places to stay:  the abode of
Indra, the abode of a Chakravarti, the abode of a king, the abode of a
householder, and the abode of a fellow practitioner of the same religion.  The
abode of Indra is understood as follows:  Just as the sovereign Indra is
considered the lord of the southern half of the world, and the sovereign
Shakenndra is considered the lord of the northern half of the world, so too, in
the case of a place where there is no owner in the common understanding, the
owner of that place is considered to be Indra, according to the aforementioned
principle.  The territory of a Chakravarti or a common king, such as Bharat, is
considered their abode.  The owner of a house is considered the householder of
that house.  Their abode is called the householder's abode.  In the scholarly
definition, this is also called "Shayyatar" (the owner of a dwelling or house).
If monks or nuns are already staying in a place or house, and the householders
have given them space, then that is considered the abode of a fellow
practitioner of the same religion.  A newly arriving monk or nun should request
permission to stay from them.  In this way, one should request permission to
stay in a place, knowing each type of abode and following the proper procedure.
**(1)**  If one does not request permission from the owner, it can lead to
conflict, unnecessary fighting, quarrels, and other worldly troubles.  Using a
place without permission leads to the bondage of sinful karma.  One will also
suffer in the afterlife.  This is the first sentiment.  **(2)**  One should
repeatedly request permission from the owner for the place that has been granted
once.  It is possible that the householder may object to the monk or nun using
the place for other purposes, such as caring for a sick, weak, or bound monk or
nun, or for washing their hands and feet or disposing of their waste.
Therefore, one should clearly explain the situation to the householder and
request permission to use the space for these purposes, so that the giver of the
abode is not troubled and remains happy.  This is the second sentiment.  **(3)**
The third sentiment is that the monk or nun should consider how much space they
need for their meditation, study, and meals.  They should not need more than
that, and should request and arrange for only that much space.  By accepting
only that much space and performing their activities of contemplation, study,
and meals within it, they will not trouble the giver.  Otherwise, the giver may
have little space left for their own use, which could cause them trouble.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 mahAvratoM kI bhAvanAoM kA svarUpa yogazAstra prathama prakAza zloka 27 se 29
/ 27 /  hAsya-lobha-bhaya-krodha-pratyAkhyAnairnirantaram  /  Alocya
bhASaNenApi, bhAvayeta sUnRtavratam  /  / 27 /  /  artha :- hAsya. lobha. bhaya
aura krodha ke tyAga (niyaMtraNa) pUrvaka evaM vicAra karake bole; isa prakAra
(pAMca bhAvanAoM dvArA) satyavrata ko sudRr3ha kare  /  / 27 /  /  vyAkhyA :-
manuSya eka dUsare kI haMsI majAka karate samaya jhUTha bola detA hai,
lobhAdhIna banakara dhana kI AkAMkSA se jhUTha bola detA hai, prANoM kI rakSA yA
pratiSThA jAne Adi ke bhaya se aura krodha se manacalita hone ke kAraNa jhUTha
bolatA hai| ina hAsya Adi cAroM ke tyAga ke niyama rUpa cAra bhAvanAe~ haiM aura
ajJAnatA pUrvaka aMdhAdhuMdha aMTasaMTa na bolakara samyagjJAna se yukta acchI
taraha vicArakara bolA jAya, yaha pAMcavI bhAvanA hai| moha mRSAvAda kA kAraNa
hai, yaha jaga meM prasiddha hI hai| kahA bhI hai-rAgAdvA, dveSAdvA, mohAdvA,
vAkyamucyate tddhynRtm|' 'rAga se, dveSa se athavA moha se jo vAkya bolA jAtA
hai. vaha asatya kahalAtA hai  /  / 27 /  /  /  aba tIsare mahAvrata kI 5
bhAvanAoM kA varNana karate haiM  / 28 /
AlocyAvagrahayAJcA'bhIkSNAvagrahayAcanam  /
etAvanmAtramevaitadityavagrahadhAraNam  // 28 /  /   / 29 /
samAnadhArmikebhyazca, tathA'vagrahayAcanam  /
anujJApitapAnAnnAzanamasteyabhAvanAH ||29||(yugmm) 'artha :- mana se vicAra
karake avagraha (rahane kI jagaha) kI yAcanA karanA; mAlika se bAra-bAra
avagraha kI yAcanA karanA; jitanI jagaha kI AvazyakatA ho, utanI hI jagaha ko
rakhanA; svadharmI sAdhu se bhI avagraha kI yAcanA karake rahanA yA ThaharanA,
guru kI AjJA se AhAra-pAnI kA upayoga karanA, ye pAMca asteya (acaurya)
mahAvrata kI bhAvanAe~ haiM  /  / 28-29 /  /  vyAkhyA :- sAdhu-sAdhviyoM ko kisI
bhI sthAna para rahane yA Thaharane se pUrva usa sthAna va sthAna ke mAlika Adi
ke viSaya meM mana meM bhalIbhAMti ciMtana karake usase rahane yA Thaharane kI
yAcanA karanI caahie| iMdra, cakravartI, rAjA, | gRhapati aura sAdharmika sAdhu;
isa taraha pAMca prakAra ke vyaktiyoM ke avagraha kahe haiN| Age-Age kA avagraha
bAdhya hai | aura pIche-pIche ke avagraha bAdhaka hai| isameM devendra kA
avagraha isa taraha samajhanA-jaise saudharmAdhipati devendra, dakSiNalokArdha
kA aura IzAnAdhipati zakendra uttara-lokArdha kA svAmI mAnA jAtA hai| isalie
jisa sthAna kA koI bhI mAlika lokavyavahAra meM na ho, usa avagraha kA mAlika
pUrvokta nyAya se devendra mAnA jAtA hai| jisa cakravartI yA sAmAnya rAjA ke
adhikAra meM jitanA rAjya ho, utanA (bharata Adi) kSetra usakA avagraha mAnA
jAtA hai| jisa ghara kA jo mAlika ho, vaha usa ghara kA gRhapati mAnA jAtA hai|
usakA avagraha gRhapati-avagraha kahalAtA hai| ise zAstrIya paribhASA meM
zayyAtara (vastI yA makAna kA mAlika bhI) kahate haiN| agara kisI sthAna yA
makAna meM pahale se sAdhu Thahare hue hoM aura gRhasthoM ne unheM sthAna diyA
huA hai, to vahA~ sAdharmika-avagraha hotA hai, unhIM se yAcanA karake naye Ane
vAle sAdhu ko ThaharanA caahie| isa prakAra pratyeka avagraha ko jAnakara
vidhiyukta krama se rahane kI yAcanA karanI caahie| (1) mAlika se yAcanA nahIM
karane se paraspara virodha paidA hone para akAraNa hI lar3AI-jhagaDA yA kisI
prakAra kA kleza, jhaMjhaTa Adi ihaloka-saMbaMdhI doSa paidA hote haiM aura binA
diye hue sthAna kA sevana karane se pApakarma kA baMdha hotA hai| paraloka meM
bhI duHkha pAtA hai| isa prakAra pahalI bhAvanA huI (2) mAlika ke dvArA ekabAra
anujJAta (AjJA diye) sthAna (avagraha kI bAra-bAra yAcanA karate rahanA cAhie;
saMbhava hai, pahale prApta hue sthAna meM aura rogI, glAna, vaddha. azakta
sAdhu yA sAdhvI ke malamatra Adi paraTha dene meM gRhapati aitarAja mAnatA ho;
isalie usake sAmane pUrA spaSTIkaraNa karake hAtha-paira yA pAtra dhone athavA
mala-mUtra paraThane Adi ke lie jagaha kI yAcanA karake anumati prApta karanI
cAhie, tAki avagraha-dAtA ke citta meM kleza na ho, prasannatA rhe| isa prakAra
kI yaha dUsarI bhAvanA pUrNa huii| (3) tIsarI bhAvanA yaha hai ki sAdhu ko yaha
vicAra karanA cAhie ki mujhe apane dhyAna, svAdhyAya, AhAra Adi karane ke lie
itanI sImA (hada) taka kI jagaha kI jarUrata hai| isase adhika jarUrata nahIM
hai, to utane hI avagraha kI yAcanA va vyavasthA kruuN| isa taraha avagraha
dhAraNa karane se aura usake aMdara hI kAyotsarga, svAdhyAya, AhAra Adi kriyA
kara lene se dAtA ko parezAnI nahIM hotii| nahIM to, kaI bAra dAtA ke apane
upayoga ke lie jagaha thor3I rahane se use 51

Page #74 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Nature of the Feelings of the Great Vows  **Regarding the first light of
Yoga Shastra, verses 30 and 31, there is a difficulty. Even for a Sadhu, there
is a possibility of carelessness in taking more than what is needed from the
giver, in the process of transcription, cleaning (Poojan), etc. There is a
possibility of anxiety arising in the mind of the giver, and the Sadhu himself
incurs karmic bondage due to the consumption of unoffered food. This is the
third feeling.** (4) Those who follow the same Dharma or are travelers on the
same path of Dharma are called Sadharmic. Sadharmic Sadhus are equal in their
attire, equal in their conduct and thoughts. The Sadhus who have accepted a
particular area (place) before, the Sadhus who come later should stay there only
after taking permission from them. Otherwise, it is considered theft. This is
the fourth feeling. (5) According to the scriptural method, one should bring
only the food and water that is free from defects, desirable, and acceptable, as
alms, and after examining it, request the Guru Maharaj. Then, after taking the
Guru's permission, one should eat in the group or alone. As a sign, one should
keep in mind that "all the instruments that have medicinal or auxiliary
differences, that is, the instruments in the form of Dharma-sadhana, should be
used only after obtaining the Guru's permission. By doing so, the third
Mahavrata is not violated. In this way, these five feelings of the third
Mahavrata should be understood. ||29|| Now, we describe the five feelings of the
fourth Mahavrata. ||30||**  **Stri-Shanḍha-Pashu-Madveshma-Asana-Kudya-Antar-
Ujjhanat | Saraga-Stri-Katha-Tyagat Pragrat-Smriti-Varjanat ||30|| ||31|| Stri-
Ramya-Angrekshan-Swanga-Sanskar-Parivarjanat | Pranita-Atyashan-Tyagad,
Brahmacharya-Tu Bhavayet ||31|| (Yugmam)**  **Meaning:** The Brahmachari Sadhak
should renounce the place where women, eunuchs, and animals live (and their
seats or the places where they sit). Similarly, he should not stay in a place
where words that are arousing or related to sexual intercourse are heard, even
if there is only a curtain, a wall, or a partition in between. And he should
renounce stories about women that arouse attachment. He should renounce the
memory of past sexual activities. He should not look at the beautiful limbs of
women. He should renounce the use of adornments or decorations that enhance the
beauty of his body, and he should renounce food that is excessively delicious
and beyond measure. In this way, one should protect the Brahmacharya Vrata
through the five feelings within these ten Brahmacharya-Gupshis. ||30-31||
**Explanation:** It is essential for a Brahmachari man to be cautious of women,
and for a woman to be cautious of men. There are two types of women in the
world: Dev-Stri and Manushya-Stri. Both are living beings. But a woman in the
form of a picture or a statue (made of wood, clay, etc.) is inanimate. Contact
with both types of women is arousing. Similarly, a eunuch (one who has the third
Veda rising) is filled with the great delusion karma and is attached to the
enjoyment of both women and men. Animals like cows, buffaloes, mares, donkeys,
goats, sheep, etc., also have the possibility of sexual intercourse. Therefore,
the first feeling is explained. One should renounce the place where women,
eunuchs, and animals live day and night. It is forbidden to sit even for a
moment on the seat where they sit or on the bedding (Santhare) or the platform,
etc., that they have used. Or, one should renounce the place where, upon staying
there, one hears the arousing words of a couple behind a wall, a partition, or a
curtain, as there is a possibility of violating Brahmacharya. This is the first
feeling. Renouncing talking to women with attachment or telling stories about
women. The country, caste, lineage, attire, language, gait, gestures, mind,
examination, laughter, play, glances, love quarrels, or romantic conversations
related to women are like wind, creating a storm of attachment and delusion in
the sea of the mind. Therefore, it is essential to stay away from them. This is
the second feeling. One who has taken Sadhu-Diksha or the Brahmacharya Vrata
should not remember the sexual activities, embraces, etc., that he has done with
women in the past. If he happens to remember, he should immediately renounce it.
Because the fire of lust is further intensified by the fuel of remembering past
sexual activities. Therefore, one should renounce it. This is the third feeling.
One should not look at the beautiful, attractive face, eyes, breasts, thighs,
etc., of women, which arouse lust in the mind, with a gaze of wonder or with a
lustful gaze.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 mahAvratoM kI bhAvanAoM kA svarUpa yogazAstra prathama prakAza zloka 30 se 31
parezAnI hotI hai, sAdhu ko bhI jarUrata se jyAdA jagaha dAtA se lene para usake
pratilekhana-pramArjana (pUMjana) Adi meM | asAvadhAnI hone kI saMbhAvanA rahatI
hai| dAtA ke mana meM udvignatA Ane kI saMbhAvanA rahatI hai aura svayaM ko bhI
adattaparibhoga ke kAraNa karmabaMdha hotA hai, yahI tIsarI bhAvanA hai| (4) jo
eka samAna dharma kA pAlana karate hoM yA eka hI dharmapatha ke pathika hoM, ve
sAdharmika kahalAte haiN| sAdharmika sAdhu-veSa se bhI sama hote haiM, AcAra
vicAra se bhI sama hote haiM, aise sAdharmI sAdhuoM ne pahale kA jo kSetra
(sthAna) svIkAra kiyA ho; bAda meM Ane vAle sAdhuoM ko unase AjJA lekara rahanA
cAhie; nahIM to unakI corI mAnI jAtI hai| yaha cauthI bhAvanA huii| (5)
zAstrokta vidhi-anusAra doSa rahita acitta, eSaNIya aura kalpanIya AhAra-pAnI
mile use hI bhikSA rUpa meM lAkara AlocanA karake guru mahArAja ko nivedana kre|
tatpazcAt guru kI AjJA lekara maMDalI meM athavA akelA AhAra kre| upalakSaNa se
isake sAtha yaha dhyAna rakhanA cAhie ki 'jo kucha audhika aupagrahika bheda
vAle upakaraNa arthAt dharma-sAdhana rUpa upakaraNa hoM, una sabhI kA upayoga
guru kI AjJA prApta karane ke bAda hI karanA caahie| aisA karane se tIsare
mahAvrata kA ullaMghana nahIM hotaa| isa taraha tIsare mahAvrata kI ye pAMca
bhAvanAe~ samajhanI cAhie  /  / 29 /  /  aba cauthe mahAvrata kI pAMca bhAvanAoM
kA varNana karate haiN|30| strI-SaNDha-pazumadvezmA''sanakuDyAntarojjhanAt  /
sarAgastrIkathAtyAgAt prAgratasmRtivarjanAt  // 30 //   / 31 /
strIramyAGgrekSaNa-svAGga-saMskAraparivarjanAt  /  praNItAtyazana-tyAgAd,
brahmacaryaM tu bhAvayet ||31||(yugmm) artha :- brahmacArI sAdhaka, strI,
napuMsaka aura pazuoM ke rahane ke sthAna (tathA unake baiThe hue Asana yA Asana
vAle sthAna) kA tyAga kre| isI prakAra jahAM kAmottejaka yA rati sahavAsa ke
zabda sunAyI deM, bIca meM kevala eka pardA, TaTTI yA dIvAra ho, aise sthAna meM
bhI na rhe| aura rAga paidA karane vAlI strI-kathAoM kA tyAga kre| pUrva-avasthA
kI ratikrIr3A ke smaraNa kA tyAga kre| striyoM ke manohara aMgopAMgoM ko nahIM
dekhe| apane zarIra para zobhA varddhaka zrRMgAra-prasAdhana yA sajAvaTa kA
tyAga kare aura atisvAdiSTa tathA pramANa se adhika AhAra kA tyAga kre| isa
prakAra ina dasa brahmacaryagupsiyoM ke aMtargata paMcabhAvanAoM dvArA
brahmacarya-vrata kI surakSA karanI cAhie  // 30-31 /  /  . vyAkhyA :-
brahmacArI puruSa ko nArIjAti se, nArI ko puruSajAti se sAvadhAna rahanA
anivArya hai| saMsAra meM strIjAti ke do prakAra haiM-deva-strI aura mnssy-
strii| ye donoM sajIva haiN| kinta citra ke rUpa meM yA patalI ke rUpa meM
(kASTha yA miTTI Adi kI) strI nirjIva hai| ina donoM prakAra kI striyoM kA
saMsarga kAmavikArotpAdaka hotA hai; tathaiva | napuMsaka (tIsare veda ke udaya
vAlA) mahAmohakarma se yukta aura strI aura puruSa ke sevana meM Asakta hotA
hai| tiryaMcayoni vAle gAya, bhaiMsa, ghor3I, gadhI, bakarI, bher3a Adi meM bhI
maithunasaMjJA kI saMbhAvanA rahatI hai| isalie pahalI bhAvanA batAI | gayI hai
ki strI, napuMsaka aura pazu jahAM rAta-dina rahate hoM, aise sthAna kA tyAga
karanA caahie| ye jahAM Asana lagAkara baiThe hoM athavA unhoMne jisa bichaune
(saMthAre) yA takhta Adi AsanoM kA upayoga kiyA ho, usa para bhI aMtarmuhUrta
taka baiThanA varjita hai| athavA jisa sthAna meM rahane para dIvAra, TaTTI yA
parde ke pIche rahane vAle daMpati ke mohotpAdaka zabda sune jAyeM, aise sthAna
kA brahmacarya-bhaMga kI saMbhAvanA se tyAga karanA caahie| yaha prathama
bhAvanA huii| rAga-pUrvaka striyoM ke sAtha bAteM karane athavA strI-vikathA
karane kA tyAga krnaa| striyoM se saMbaMdhita deza, jAti, kUla, vezabhUSA,
bhASA, cAla-DhAla, hAvabhAva, mana, parIkSA, hAsya, lIlA, kaTAkSa, praNaya-
kalaha yA zRMgAra-rasavAlI bAteM bhI vAyuvega ke |samAna citta-samudra meM rAga
aura moha kA tUphAna paidA kara detI hai| ataH inase dUra rahanA Avazyaka hai|
yaha dUsarI bhAvanA huii| jisane sAdhudIkSA yA brahmacaryavrata dhAraNa kiyA ho,
usane pUrva-avasthA meM strI ke sAtha jo rati-krIr3A, AliMgana Adi kiyA ho,
usakA smaraNa nahIM karanA caahie| kadAcit smaraNa ho jAya to phaurana usakA
tyAga karanA caahie| kyoMki pUrva kI rati-krIr3A ke smaraNa-rUpa-iMdhana se
kAmAgni adhika pradIpta hotI hai| ataH isakA tyAga karanA caahie| | yaha tIsarI
bhAvanA huii| striyoM ke manohara, mana meM kAmAbhilASA paidA karane vAle,
AkarSaka mukha, netra, stana, jaMghA Adi | aMgopAMgoM ko apUrva vismayarasa kI
dRSTi se yA vikAra kI dRSTi se tAka-tAkakara yA AMkheM phAr3akara nahIM dekhanA
caahie| 52

Page #75 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Nature of the Eight Sermons of the Mother  **Yoga Shastra, First Light,
Verses 32-34**  Because the mind becomes agitated by seeing the beautiful limbs
of women, adorned with beauty and grace; just as a moth is destroyed by falling
on a flame, so too, one who looks with desire is consumed by the fire of lust.
There is no fault in seeing if it is done without desire or aversion. It is also
said, "It is impossible not to see the form of an object that comes into the
field of vision of the eye. But a wise man should not have desire or aversion
for that form."  Similarly, one should renounce the adornment of one's body with
bathing, anointing, makeup, etc., decorating, perfuming, making nails and teeth
shiny, grooming hair well, or using cosmetics, etc., and the various forms of
adornment and beautification. A foolish man, engrossed in the adornment of an
impure body, with his insane thoughts, needlessly throws his soul into the abyss
of suffering. Thus, renouncing the desire to look at the beautiful limbs of
women and the adornment of one's own body is included in the fourth sentiment.
Similarly, one should renounce the consumption of delicious, aphrodisiac,
nourishing, sweet-tasting food, and even if the food is tasteless, one should
not eat it in excess. That is, one should not stuff oneself with dry and bland
food. Thus, a celibate should renounce both types of food. By constantly
consuming nourishing, aphrodisiac, delicious, oily, juicy food, one strengthens
the primary element in the body, and from that, the awakening of the Vedas
occurs, which leads to the possibility of indulging in non-celibacy. Eating in
excess not only destroys celibacy but also harms the body. It causes many
diseases in the body, such as indigestion, etc. Therefore, it should be
renounced. The Ayurveda Shastra says that a person should keep half of their
stomach for food, including vegetables, two parts for water, and one-sixth for
air circulation (Pindani. 650). Thus, the fifth sentiment is established.  In
this way, the five sentiments of celibacy are explained, encompassing nine types
of celibacy practices. || 31 ||  Now, the five sentiments of the fifth great vow
are described:  || 32 || In touch, taste, smell, form, and sound, one should
renounce excessive attachment to these five objects of the senses. || 32 ||  ||
33 || In these same objects, which are not pleasing, one should completely
renounce aversion. Thus, the five sentiments of the vow of non-possession
(Aparigraha or Nirmama) are described. || 33 || (Pair)  **Meaning:** Renouncing
excessive attachment to the five objects of the senses, which are pleasing to
the mind, such as touch, taste, smell, form, and sound, and completely
renouncing aversion to these same five objects, which are unpleasant, are the
five sentiments of the great vow of non-possession (Aparigraha or Nirmama). ||
32-33 ||  **Explanation:** One should renounce desire for objects of the senses,
such as touch, etc., which are pleasing to the mind. One should not have
aversion (hatred) for objects of the senses, such as touch, etc., which are
unpleasant to the senses. A person who is attached has desire for pleasing
objects and aversion for unpleasant objects. One who is neutral does not have
any attachment or aversion for these objects because they are not affected by
them. Aversion is inevitable with desire. Therefore, it is mentioned later.
"Kinchan" refers to external and internal possessions. One who does not possess
anything is called "Akichana." The meaning is that non-possession is another
name for Aparigraha. It is the form of the fifth great vow. One should
understand these five sentiments. || 32-33 ||  After describing the nature of
the virtue of the primary qualities, now the nature of the virtue of the
secondary qualities is described:  || 34 || Or, the virtue purified by the five
Samitis and three Guptis is called Samyak Charitra by the wise sages. || 34 ||
**Meaning:** The wise sages have called the virtue of the monks, purified by the
five Samitis and three Guptis, as Samyak Charitra. || 34 ||  **Explanation:**
Samiti means "Samyak Pravritti," i.e., the technical term for five types of
actions, or, according to the teachings of the Arhats, the term for praiseworthy
actions. Gupti means "protection of the soul." The control of the mind, speech,
and body (actions of the mind, speech, and body) of a seeker is called Gupti.
The virtue of the holy ones, purified by these five Samitis and three Guptis, is
called Samyak Charitra by the wise sages. || 34 ||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 aSTa pravacana mAtA kA svarUpa yogazAstra prathama prakAza zloka 32 se 34 |
kyoMki striyoM ke saundarya evaM lAvaNya se yukta manohara aMgopAMgoM ke dekhane
se mana calAyamAna ho jAtA hai; jaise pataMgA | dIpazikhA para girane se naSTa
ho jAtA hai, vaise hI rAga pUrvaka dekhane vAlA kAmAgni-zikhA meM bhasma ho jAtA
hai| rAga| dveSa-rahita bhAva se yadi dikhAI de to usameM koI doSa nahIM hai|
kahA bhI hai- 'cakSu ke dRSTipatha meM Aye hue rUpa viSaya kA na dekhanA azakya
hai| paraMtu vivekI puruSa ko usa rUpa meM rAga-dveSa nahIM karanA caahie|' isI
prakAra apane zarIra ko snAna, vilepana, zRMgAra Adi se vibhUSita karane,
sajAne, dhUpa dene, nakha, dAMta Adi camakIle banAne; kezoM ko bhalIbhAMti
saMvArane yA prasAdhana Adi karane, vividha rUpoM se sAjasajjA kA, zRMgAra -
saMskArita karane kA tyAga karanA | caahie| apavitra zarIra ke saMskAra meM
mUr3ha banA huA manuSya unmAda pUrNa vicAroM se apanI AtmA ko vyartha hI kleza
ke garta meM girAtA hai| isa prakAra striyoM ke ramya aMgoM kI ora rAga pUrNa
dRSTi karane tathA apane aMga ko zRMgArita karane kA tyAga karanA cauthI bhAvanA
ke aMtargata hai  /  isI prakAra svAdiSTa, vIryavarddhaka, puSTikAraka, madhura
rasa- saMyukta AhAra | kA tathA rasa rahita AhAra hone para bhI adhika mAtrA meM
karane kA tyAga karanA caahie| arthAt rUkhA-sUkhA bhojana bhI gale taka
ThUMsakara nahIM khAnA caahie| isa taraha brahmacArI ko donoM prakAra ke AhAra
kA tyAga karanA caahie| sadA puSTikAraka, vIryavarddhaka, svAdiSTa, snigdha,
rasadAra AhAra sevana karane se, vaha zarIra meM pradhAna dhAtu ko vizeSa puSTa
karatA hai aura usase vedodaya jAgrata hotA hai; jisake kAraNa abrahmacarya
sevana kI saMbhAvanA rahatI hai| adhika mAtrA meM | bhojana karane se
brahmacarya kA hI nAza nahIM hotA, apitu zarIra kI bhI hAni hotI hai| zarIra meM
ajIrNa Adi aneka roga |paidA ho jAte haiN| isalie isakA tyAga karanA caahie|
Ayurveda - zAstra meM kahA hai ki manuSya ko peTa meM AdhA hissA vyaMjana |
(sabjI) sahita bhojana ke lie, do hisse pAnI ke lie aura chaTThA hissA vAyu
saMcAra ke lie rakhanA cAhie (piNDani. | 650 ) isa prakAra pAMcavIM bhAvanA
huii| isa taraha nau prakAra kI brahmacarya - gupti kA samAveza karake
brahmacarya kI pAMcoM bhAvanAe~ batAyI gayI hai  /  /  31 //  aba pAMcaveM
mahAvrata kI 5 bhAvanAoM kA varNana karate haiM | 32 | sparze rase ca gandhe ca
rUpe zabde ca hAriNi  /  paJcasvatIndriyArtheSu, gADhaM gArdhyasya varjanam
||32||  /  33  /  eteSvevAmanojJeSu, sarvathA dveSavarjanam  /
AkiJcanyavratasyaivaM, bhAvanAH paJca kIrtitAH ||33||(yugmam) artha :- manohara
sparza, rasa, gaMdha, rUpa zabda ina pAMcoM iMdriyoM ke viSayoM meM atigAr3ha
Asakti kA tyAga karanA aura inhIM pAMcoM iMdriyoM ke bure viSayoM meM sarvathA
dveSa kA tyAga karanA, ye AkiMcanya ( aparigraha yA nirmamatva ) mahAvrata kI
pAMca bhAvanAeM kahI haiM  /  /  32-33  /  /  vyAkhyA :- sparza Adi jo viSaya
manojJa hoM, una para rAga kA tyAga karanA caahie| iMdriyoM ke pratikUla jo |
sparzAdi - viSaya apriya hoM, una para dveSa (ghRNA) nahIM kre| AsaktimAna
vyakti manohara viSayoM para rAga aura aniSTa viSayoM para dveSa karate haiN| jo
madhyastha hotA hai, usakI viSayoM para mUrcchA nahIM hone se kahIM para bhI
inase prIti - Asakti nahIM hotI aura na aprIti (ghRNA) hotI hai| rAga ke sAtha
dveSa avazyambhAvI hotA hai| isalie bAda meM grahaNa kiyA gayA hai| kiMcana
kahate haiM - bAhya aura abhyaMtara parigraha ko, vaha jisake nahIM hai; vaha
akiMcana kahalAtA hai| Azaya yaha hai ki akiMcanatA kA hI dUsarA nAma aparigraha
hai| vaha paMcama mahAvrata rUpa hai| usakI yaha pAMca bhAvanAeM samajhanA cAhie
/  / 32-33 /  /  mUlaguNa rUpa cAritra kA varNana karane ke bAda aba uttaraguNa
rUpa cAritra kA varNana karate haiM  / 34 /  athavA paJcasamiti - guptitraya -
pavitritam  /  cAritraM samyakcAritramityAhurmunipuGgavAH  /  / 34 /  /  artha
:- athavA pAMca samiti aura tIna gupti se pavitra bane hue muni puMgavoM ke
cAritra ko zrI tIrthaMkara devoM ne samyak cAritra kahA hai  /  /  34  /  /
vyAkhyA :- samiti kA artha hai - samyak pravRtti  /  arthAt pAMca prakAra kI
ceSTAoM kI tAMtrika saMjJA ko athavA | arhatpravacanAnusAra prazasta ceSTA ko
samiti kahate haiN| guti arthAt AtmA kA saMrakSaNa  /  mumukSu ke mana, vacana,
kAyA ke yoga (mana, vacana, kAyA ke vyApAra) nigraha ko gupti kahA hai| ina
pAMca samiti aura tIna gupti se pavitra sAdhuoM kI 53

Page #76 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Nature of the Eight Precepts (Aṣṭa Pravacana)  **The Nature of the
Mother**  Yogaśāstra, the first light, verses 35 and 36, describe **samyak
cāritra** (right conduct) as effort. **Samiti** is the nature of right conduct
and the characteristic of **guptī** (secrecy) is the withdrawal from conduct.
Both of these have the same characteristic. ||34||  Now, the names of **samiti**
and **guptī** are mentioned. ||35||  **Īryā-bhāṣaiṣaṇādāna-nikṣepautsarga-
sañikāḥ | Pañcāhuḥ samititisro, guptīstriyogani-grahāt ||35||**  **Meaning:**
Ī-samiti, bhāṣā-samiti, eṣaṇā-samiti, ādāna-nikṣepa-samiti, and uccāra-
prasravaṇa-khelajalla-siṅghāṇapariṣṭhāpanikā (utsarga) samiti; these are the
five samitis, and there are three guptīs which restrain the three yogas; these
are said to be of three types, namely, mano-guptī (mental secrecy), vacana-guptī
(verbal secrecy), and kāya-guptī (physical secrecy).  **Explanation:** The above
five samitis are right conducts. The restraint of the activity of the mind,
speech, and body (āgama) by the method, i.e., stopping the conduct of the yoga
of the mind, speech, and body while going on the right path, is called guptī by
the Tirthankara Bhagavān.  Now, the characteristic of **īryā-samiti** is
mentioned. ||36||  **Lokātivahīte mārge, cumbite bhāsvadāṃśubhiḥ |
Janturakṣārthamālokya, gatirīryā matā satām ||36||**  **Meaning:** The movement
done by the virtuous ones, looking down on the path where people come and go,
and where the rays of the sun fall, for the protection of living beings, is
considered **īryā-samiti**. ||36||  **Explanation:** While going for necessary
work, the initiated sadhu, in order to give protection to all living beings,
both mobile and immobile, and for the protection of his own body, looks from the
front part of his feet to the area of the measure of a dhūsra (a unit of
measurement) while walking, this is called **īryā-samiti**. The meaning of
**īryā** is conduct, movement, and the meaning of **samiti** is to do right
conduct. That is, doing right conduct in the act of walking is called **īryā-
samiti**. The implication is that the muni, with his hands (on the ground),
looks at the ground, protecting seeds, greenery, living beings, water, earth-
bodied beings, etc., while walking on the ground. If there are stones, pillars,
mud without water, a river, etc., on the path, and there is another path, then
he should not go on that path. (Daśa. Vai. 5/3-4) Movement is done on the path,
therefore, the characteristic of the path is mentioned, "The path on which the
rays of the sun touch, which is very active and uninterrupted due to people
coming and going." That is, the path should be clearly visible, and the rule is
to walk on that path. The muni does not harm the six-bodied living beings by the
path mentioned in the first adjective. One should not walk on a bad path either,
for this reason, it is said that walking on the path mentioned by the people at
night, flying beings coming from above are harmed. In darkness, there is a
possibility of harm to the living beings and oneself due to the living beings
coming under the feet or by a poisonous creature. Therefore, to prohibit walking
on such a path, the second adjective says to walk in the rays of the sun. If a
muni walking like this harms a living being, even then, he does not incur the
sin of killing a living being. It is said that:  **1] Uccāliyammi pāe
iriyāsamiāss sankamatṭhāe | Vāvajjejj kulingī marejj yā tām jogamāsajj
|| || Na yā tassa tannimitto bandho suhamovi desio samaye | Aṇavajjo uyogāeṇa
savvabhāvena so jamhā ||**  The muni, walking with effort, with **īryā-
samiti**, while walking, lifts his feet, if by chance, a two-sensed being, etc.,
dies, then the scriptures say that he does not incur any karmic bondage due to
that, because this is a blameless conduct done with equanimity and for the sake
of all beings. And, if one conducts oneself without effort and without blame,
then whether a living being dies or not, he will definitely incur the sin of
violence. And, the one who walks with right conduct, with effort, and for the
sake of all beings, if by chance, he commits violence, then he does not incur
karmic bondage due to that violence. (Ogh Ni. 748-749) ||36||  Now, regarding
the second **bhāṣā-samiti**, it is said...  54

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 aSTa pravacana mAtA kA svarUpa yogazAstra prathama prakAza zloka 35 se 36 ceSTA
ko samyak cAritra kahA hai| samiti samyak pravRtti-svarUpa hai aura gupti kA
lakSaNa hai-pravRtti se nivRtti| ina donoM meM itanI hI vizeSatA hai  /  / 34 /
/  aba samiti aura gupti ke nAma kahate haiN|35| IryA-bhASaiSaNAdAna-
nikSepotsarga-saJikAH  /  paJcAhuH samititisro, guptIstriyoganigrahAt  // 35 /
/  artha :- I-samiti, bhASA-samiti, eSaNA-samiti, AdAna-nikSepa-samiti aura
uccAraprasravaNa khelajallasiMghANapariSThApanikA (utsarga) samiti; ye pAMca
samitiyAM haiM aura tIna yogoM kA nigraha karane vAlI gupti hai; jo mano gupsi,
vacana gupti tathA kAya gupti ke bheda se tIna prakAra kI kahI hai| vyAkhyA :-
uparyukta pAMca samitiyA~ samyak pravRttiyA~ hai| mana, vacana aura kAyA ke
vyApAra kA pravartana kA (Agama) vidhi se nirodha karane arthAt unmArga meM jAte
hue mana, vacana aura kAyA ke yoga kI pravRtti rokane ko zrI tIrthakara bhagavAn
ne gupti kahI hai| aba IryAsamiti kA lakSaNa kahate haiN|36| lokAtivAhite mArge,
cumbite bhAsvadaMzubhiH  /  janturakSArthamAlokya, gatirIryA matA satAm  // 36 /
/  artha :- jisa mArga para logoM kA AnA-jAnA hotA ho tathA jisa mArga para
sUrya kI kiraNeM par3atI hoM, jIvoM kI rakSA ke lie aise mArga para nIce dRSTi
rakhakara sAdhu puruSoM dvArA kI jAne vAlI gati ko IryAsamiti mAnA hai  // 36 /
/  vyAkhyA :- trasa aura sthAvara jIvamAtra ko abhayadAna dene ke lie dIkSita
sAdhu kA Avazyaka kArya ke lie gamanAgamana karate samaya jIvoM kI rakSA ke lie
tathA apane zarIra kI rakSA ke lie pairoM ke agrabhAga se lekara dhUsara-pramANa
kSetra taka dRSTi rakhakara calanA IryAsamiti kahalAtA hai| IryA kA artha hai-
caryA gati aura samiti kA artha hai-samyak pravRtti krnaa| arthAt gamana-kriyA
meM samyak pravRtti karane ko IryA-samiti kahate haiN| tAtparya yaha hai ki muni
yugamAtra hAtha) bhUmi ko dekhate hue bIja, hariyAlI, jIva, jala, pRthvIkAya Adi
jIvoM ko bacAte hue jamIna para calate haiN| mArga meM khaDaDe. staMbha. binA
pAnI kA kiccar3a ho, nadI Adi ko pAra karane ke lie patthara, kASTha rakhA ho to
dUsarA mArga ho to usa mArga se na jaay| (daza. vai. 5/3-4) gati mArga para kI
jAtI hai, ataH usa mArga kI hI vizeSatA batAte haiM 'logoM ke Ane-jAne se bahuta
cAlU aura avirata jisa mArga para sUrya kI kiraNe sparza karatI hoM| |arthAt
mArga bhalIbhAMti dikhAI detA ho, usI para gamana karane kA vidhAna hai|
prathama vizeSaNokta mArga se Ane-jAne vAle | | muni se SaTkAyika jIva kI
virAdhanA nahIM hotii| kharAba mArga meM bhI nahIM jAnA cAhie, isI hetu se
kahate haiM ki lokapracalita ukta mArga para bhI rAta ko calane se ur3akara Aye
hue saMpAtima jIvoM kI virAdhanA hotI hai| aMdhakAra meM jIva- | jaMtuoM ke
paira ke nIce Ane se unakI tathA kisI jaharIle jaMtu dvArA apanI bhI hAni hone
kI saMbhAvanA hai| ataH aise | mArga se calane kA niSedha karane hetu dUsare
vizeSaNa meM 'sUrya kI kiraNa meM calane ko kahA hai, isa prakAra ke upayoga
vAle muni ko calate-calate yadi jIva kI virAdhanA ho bhI jAya to bhI jIva-vadha
kA pApa nahIM lgtaa| kahA hai ki 1] uccAliyammi pAe iriyAsamiyassa saMkamaTThAe
/  vAvajjejja kuliMgI marejja yA taM jogamAsajja  //   //  na ya tassa
tannimitto baMdho suhamovi desio samaye  /  aNavajjo uyaogeNa savvabhAveNa so
jamhA  //  IryAsamiti pUrvaka yatanA se calatA huA muni calate samaya paira U~cA
kare, usameM kadAcit koI dvIndriyAdi jIva mara jAya to usake lie zAstra meM kahA
hai ki usa nimitta se use jarA-sA bhI karmabaMdhana nahIM hotA, kyoMki samabhAva
se sarvathA upayoga pUrvaka kI huI yaha niravadya pravRtti hai tathA ayatanA
evaM avadya pUrvaka pravRtti karane se jIva mare yA na mare to bhI use hiMsA kA
pApa avazya lagatA hai aura jo samyak prakAra se upayoga pUrvaka evaM yatanA
pUrvaka gamanAgamana karatA hai, usa sAdhaka se kadAcit hiMsA ho bhI jAya to bhI
usa hiMsA se karma-baMdhana nahIM hotaa| (ogha ni. 748-749)  /  / 36  /  /  aba
dUsarI bhASAsamiti ke saMbaMdha meM kahate haiM 54

Page #77 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Bhikshacharya Swaroop-Udgam Dosha  **Yoga Shastra Pratham Prakash Shloka 37
to 38**  **37.** Avadyatyagatah Sarvajaninam Mitbhaashanam | Priya
Vaachanyamaanaam Sa Bhaashaasamirituchyate ||37||  **Meaning:**  Speaking in a
way that is free from faults, beneficial to all, limited, pleasant, and spoken
with care is called Bhaasha Samiti. ||37||  **Explanation:** According to the
study of Vaakya Shuddhi (seventh study in Dasha Vaikalik Sutra), one should
completely abandon harsh words like "You are a cheat," "You are lustful," "You
eat meat," "You are a thief," or "You are an atheist." One should speak in a
language that is pure and free from faults.  The speech should be beneficial to
all, pleasant, limited, and sufficient to fulfill the purpose. It is said, "One
should speak words that are sweet, wise, short, necessary for achieving the
goal, free from pride, generous, hopeful, held in the mind before speaking, and
righteous." [Upadesh 80] This type of speech is called Bhaasha Samiti, or being
careful in speaking in the right way. This kind of language is pleasing to the
Munis. The scriptures state that a wise seeker should not speak a language that
is false, or untrue, and not practiced by the learned (Dasha. 7/2). ||37||  Now,
we will describe the third Eshanasamiti. ||38||  **38.** Dvichatvārishta-
Bhikshaadoshainitayamadūshitam | Muniryadannamaadatte, Saeṣhāna-Samitirmata
||38||  **Meaning:** The Muni who takes food and water always free from 42
faults of Bhiksha is called Eshana Samiti.  **Explanation:** The 42 faults
associated with Bhiksha are divided into three categories: (a) Udgam Dosha, (b)
Utpadan Dosha, and (c) Eshana Dosha. ||38|| (Pi. Ni. 92-93)  The first sixteen
faults of Udgam are committed by householders. They are as follows:  1.
Adhakarma, 2. Auddeshik, 3. Pootikarma, 4. Mishrajat, 5. Sthapana, 6. Prabhriti,
7. Pradushkaran, 8. Krit, 9. Pramityak, 10. Parivartita, 11. Abhyahrit, 12.
Udbhinna, 13. Malapahrit, 14. Aachhedya, 15. Anisrishta, and 16. Adhyavapurka.
1. **Adhakarma:**  If a householder, with the intention of offering food to a
Muni, prepares food with a mind that is not pure, or prepares food that is not
pure, and the Muni accepts it, then the fault of Adhakarma is incurred.  2.
**Auddeshik:** If a householder prepares food specifically for a particular
Muni, and makes it extra delicious with ghee, sugar, yogurt, spices, etc., then
the fault of Auddeshik is incurred.  3. **Pootikarma:** If a householder mixes
impure food with pure food with the intention of offering it to the Muni, then
the fault of Pootikarma is incurred.  4. **Mishrajat:** If a householder
prepares food with the intention of eating it themselves and also offering it to
the Muni, then the fault of Mishrajat is incurred.  5. **Sthapana:** If a
householder prepares food like kheer, laddoos, or peda, and keeps it aside with
the intention of offering it to the Muni, then the fault of Sthapana is
incurred.  6. **Prabhriti:** If a householder prepares food for a festival or
wedding that is going to happen in a few days, but the Muni is present now, and
the householder thinks that the food will be useful for the Muni as well, then
the fault of Prabhriti is incurred. Or, if the festival is approaching, but the
householder delays it thinking that the Muni will arrive then, and they will get
the benefit of offering food, then the fault of Prabhriti is incurred.  7.
**Pradushkaran:**  If a householder searches for an object in the dark using
fire or a lamp, or breaks a wall or curtain to bring something out, then the
fault of Pradushkaran is incurred.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bhikSAcaryA svarUpa-udgama doSa yogazAstra prathama prakAza zloka 37 se 38  /
37 /  avadyatyAgataH sArvajanInaM mitabhASaNam  /  priyA vAcaMyamAnAM sA
bhASAsamitirucyate  // 37 //  artha :- vacana para saMyama rakhane vAle yA
prAyaH maunI sAdhakoM dvArA nirdoSa, sarva hitakara evaM parimita, priya evaM .
sAvadhAnI pUrvaka bolanA bhASAsamiti kahalAtI hai  // 37 //  vyAkhyA :-
vAkyazuddhi nAmaka (dazavaikAlika sUtra ke sAtaveM) adhyayana meM pratipAdita
bhASA-doSa ke anusAra 'tUM dhUrta hai, tUM kAmI hai, tUM mAMsa khAne vAlA hai,
tUM cora hai yA nAstika hai', ityAdi durvacanoM kA niSkapaTabhAva se tyAga
karanA cAhie aura vacanazuddhi-yukta bhASA bolanI caahie| sabhI logoM ke lie
hitakArI, priya,parimita vANI bhI aise bole, jo paryApta prayojana ko siddha
karane vAlI ho| kahA bhI hai-'vahI vacana bolanA cAhie, jo madhura ho,
buddhiyukta ho, alpa ho, kAryasAdhana ke lie yathAvazyaka, garva-rahita, udAra,
AzAyukta, buddhi se pahale dhAraNa kiyA huA aura dharma-yukta ho| [upadeza 80]
isa prakAra kI vANI ko bhASA-samiti kahate haiM athavA bolane meM samyak prakAra
se sAvadhAnI rakhanA, bhASAsamiti hai| isa taraha kI bhASA muniyoM ko iSTa hotI
hai| zAstroM meM batAyA gayA hai ki buddhizAlI sAdhaka usa bhASA ko na bole jo
satyamRSA ho, yA mRSA ho aura paMDitoM dvArA Acarita na ho (daza. 7/2) /  / 37 /
/  aba tIsarI eSaNAsamiti kA varNana karate haiN||38| dvicatvArizatA-
bhikSAdoSainityamadUSitam  /  muniryadannamAdatte, saiSaNA-samitirmatA  // 38 /
/  artha :- muni hamezA bhikSA ke 42 doSoM se rahita jo AhAra-pAnI grahaNa
karatA hai, use eSaNA-samiti kahate haiN| vyAkhyA :- bhikSA meM lagane vAle 42
doSoM ko tIna vibhAgoM meM bAMTA gayA hai-(a) udgama-doSa, (ba) utpAdanadoSa
aura (sa) eSaNA-doSa  /  / 38 /  /  (pi. ni. 92-93) isameM prathama udgama ke
solaha doSa gRhasthoM dvArA lagate haiN| ve isa prakAra se hai 1. AdhAkarma, 2.
auddezika, 3. pUtikarma, 4. mizrajAta, 5. sthApanA, 6. prAbhRtikA, 7.
prAduSkara, 8. krIta, 9. prAmityaka, 10. parivartita, 11. abhyAhRta, 12.
udbhinna, 13. mAlApahRta, 14. Acchedya, 15. anisRSTa aura 16. adhyvpuurk| 1.
AdhAkarma - mana meM sAdhu munirAja kA saMkalpa karake sacitta ko acitta banAe~
athavA acita padArtha bhI sAdhu ke lie pakAe~ aura isa prakAra kA AhAra sAdhu
grahaNa kare to vahAM AdhAkarmI doSa lagatA hai| 2. auddezika - amuka sAdhu ko
hI uddezya karake banAne kA saMkalpa kare aura taiyAra kiye hue laDDU, cAvala,
roTI, dAla Adi ko gRhastha ghI, zakkara, dahI, masAle Adi se vizeSa svAdiSTa
banAye, aise AhAra ko lene se auddezika doSa lagatA hai| 3. pUtikarma - zuddha
nirdoSa AhAra ko sAdhuoM ko dene kI icchA se AdhAkarmI AhAra meM milAye, vaha
pUtikarma doSa hotA hai| 4. mizrajAta - apane aura sAdhuoM ke uddezya se yaha
socakara ki hama bhI khAe~ge aura sAdhu bhI khAe~ge; isa vicAra se banAye AhAra
ko lene meM mizradoSa mAnA hai| 5. sthApanA - khIra, laDDU, per3e Adi banAkara
sAdhuoM ko dene kI bhAvanA se alaga rakhe, use le le to vahAM sthApita doSa
lagatA hai| 6. prAbhRtikA - utsava, vivAha Adi kucha dinoM bAda hone vAlA hai;
kintu abhI sAdhu yahAM hai, unake bhI upayoga meM jAyegA; isa buddhi se usa
utsava Adi ke prasaMga ko abhI cAlU kara leM; isa nIyata se jahAM AhArAdi
banAkara sAdhu ko diyA jAya use Agama-paribhASA meM prAbhRtikA doSa kahA hai|
athavA utsava-prasaMga nikaTa A gayA ho, lekina yaha socakara ki jaba sAdhu
AyeMge, tabhI yaha utsava manAe~ge, tAki AhArAdi dene kA lAbha milegA, aisA
vicArakara usa prasaMga ko Age Thela de, vahAM bhI yaha doSa lagatA hai| 7.
prAduSkaraNa - aMdhere meM par3I huI vastu ko Aga yA dIpaka ke prakAza se
DhU~Dhakara athavA dIvAra yA parde ko tor3a kara bAhara lAnA yA prakaTa karanA
prAduSkaraNa doSa hai| 55

Page #78 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Bhikshacharya Swaroop - Utpadaan Dosha  **Yoga Shastra Pratham Prakash Shlok
38**  8. **Krit:**  For Sadhus, obtaining goods by purchasing them with money
and giving them to them, results in Krit Dosha.  9. **Pramityak:**  Giving food
to Sadhus by borrowing it for them, results in Pramityak Dosha.  10.
**Parivartita:**  Exchanging one's own goods for another's goods and giving them
to Sadhus, results in Parivartita Dosha.  11. **Abhyahruta:**  Bringing food,
etc., from another village to give to Sadhus, with the intention of not causing
them any trouble or out of devotion, results in Abhyahruta Dosha.  12.
**Udabhinna:**  Giving Sadhus ghee, oil, etc., after removing the mud or coating
from the vessels, results in Udabhinna Dosha.  13. **Malapahruta:**  Giving
food, etc., to Sadhus by climbing on a platform or descending into a basement,
or by lowering it from a great height or from a deep pit, or by using a pulley,
results in Malapahruta Dosha.  14. **Aachhedya:**  Taking someone else's goods,
whether from a merchant, king, thief, or anyone else, and giving them to Sadhus,
results in Aachhedya Dosha.  15. **Anissushta:**  If food, etc., belongs to many
people or a group, and one person gives it to Sadhus without the permission of
all those people or the group, then Anissushta Dosha occurs.  16.
**Adhyavpurak:**  If one sows rice in one's own field, but also sows rice for
Sadhu-Maharaj when they arrive in the village, then Adhyavpurak Dosha occurs.
Or, if one cooks a little for oneself, but adds more to the pot when one sees
Sadhus, then this Dosha also occurs. Thus, the discussion of the first Udgam
Dosha is complete.  **(b) Utpadaan Dosha:** These sixteen types of Dosha are
incurred by Sadhus. They are as follows:  1. **Dhatri Pind:**  If a Sadhu or
Sadhvi obtains alms by feeding, bathing, dressing, adorning, pampering, feeding,
or holding in their lap the children of a householder, or by performing other
such Dhatri Karma (work like a wet nurse), then Dhatri Pind Dosha occurs.  2.
**Duti Pind:**  If one obtains food by delivering messages for others like a
messenger, then Duti Pind Dosha occurs.  3. **Nimitta Pind:**  If one obtains
alms by telling about past, future, and present business matters or other
worldly gains and losses, then Nimitta Pind Dosha occurs.  4. **Aajeev Pind:**
If one obtains food by boasting about one's caste, lineage, clan, karma,
profession, craft, art, etc., or by working like a servant in a householder's
house, then Aajeev Pind Dosha occurs.  5. **Vanipak Pind:**  If one presents
oneself as a devotee of Shraman, Brahman, Kshapan, Atithi, Shwan, etc., in front
of their devotees, and obtains food by showing oneself to them, then Vanipak
Pind Dosha occurs.  6. **Chikitsa Pind:**  If one obtains food by becoming a
physician and prescribing medicine for illness, such as vomiting or purging,
then Chikitsa Pind Dosha occurs.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bhikSAcaryA svarUpa - utpAdana doSa yogazAstra prathama prakAza zloka 38 8.
krIta - sAdhuoM ke lie mUlya se kharIdakara vastue~ lAkara unheM de de, vahA~
krItadoSa hotA hai| 9. prAmityaka - sAdhuoM ko dene ke lie udhAra lAkara AhAra
denA prAmityaka doSa hai| 10. parivartita - apanI eka vastu ko kisI dUsare kI
vastu ke sAtha adalA-badalI karake sAdhuoM ko dene para parivartita doSa hotA
hai| 11. abhyAhRta - sAdhuoM ko takalIpha na ho, isa dRSTi se athavA bhakti kI
bhAvanA se dUsare gAMva se AhAra Adi | sAmane lAkara denA abhyAhRta doSa hai|
12. ubhinna - ghI, tela Adi ke bartanoM para lage hue miTTI Adi ke lepa yA
AcchAdana Adi sAdhuoM ke nimitta dara karake yA utArakara unameM se sAdhaoM ko
denA. udabhinna doSa hai| 13. mAlApahRta - nizreNI Adi rakhakara usa para
car3hakara yA nIce talaghara Adi meM utarakara AhAra Adi vastu denA; bahuta
Upara se athavA bahuta nIce bhoMyare Adi se athavA chIMkA Adi se utArakara sAdhu
ko AhAra denA mAlApahRta doSa hai| 14. Acchedya - seTha, rAjA yA cora Adi se yA
anya kisI se unakI vastu ko chInakara sAdhuoM ko deM, use lene se Acchedya doSa
lagatA hai| 15. aniHsuSTa - bhojana Adi koI bhI bahuta-se manuSyoM kI athavA
samUha kI ho| una saba manuSyoM kI yA samUha kI anumati liye binA koI eka vyakti
apanI marjI se hI sAdhuoM ko bhojana Adi detA hai to vahA~ aniHsRSTa doSa lagatA
hai| 16. adhyavapUraka- apane liye kheta meM dhAna boyA ho paraMtu sAdhu-
mahArAja kA gAMva meM Agamana sunakara unake lie bhI dhAna Adi boye, vahAM
adhyavapUraka doSa lagatA hai| athavA apane liye thor3A-sA pakAyA ho, lekina
sAdhuoM ko dekhakara hAMDI Adi bartana meM aura adhika DAlA gayA ho, vahA~ bhI
yaha doSa hai| isa prakAra prathama udgama-doSa kA vivecana pUrNa huaa| (ba)
utpAdana-doSa :- ye solaha prakAra ke doSa sAdhuoM se lagate haiN| ve
nimnalikhita hai 1. dhAtrIpiMDa, 2. dUtipiMDa, 3. nimittapiMDa, 4. AjIvapiMDa,
5. vanIpakapiMDa, 6. cikitsA piMDa, 7. krodhapiMDa, 8. mAnapiMDa, 9. mAyApiMDa,
10. lobhapiMDa, 11. pUrvapazcAt saMstavapiMDa, 12. vidyApiMDa, 13. maMtrapiMDa,
14. cUrNapiMDa, 15. yogapiMDa aura 16. mulkrmpiNdd| (408-409 piNDani.) inakA
varNana nimna prakAra se haiM1. dhAtrIpiMDa - sAdhu yA sAdhvI bhikSA prApta
karane ke lie gRhasthI ke bAlabaccoM ko dUdha pilAkara, snAna karavAkara, vastra
yA AbhUSaNa pahanAkara, lADa-pyAra karake yA unako khilAkara tathA goda meM
biThAkara, ye aura isa prakAra ke anya dhAtrIkarma (dhAyamAtA kI taraha kA kAma)
karake bhikSA prApta kareM to vahA~ dhAtrIpiMDa doSa lagatA hai| 2. dUtipiMDa -
dUtI kI taraha eka dUsare ke saMdeza pahuMcAkara AhAra le to vahAM dUtipiMDa
doSa lagatA hai| 3. nimittapiMDa - bhUta, bhaviSya aura vartamAnakAla ke
vyApAra-saMbaMdhI yA anya sAMsArika lAbha-hAni batAkara nimitta kathana karake
bhikSA grahaNa kare vahAM nimitta piMDa doSa lagatA hai| 4. AjIvapiMDa - apanI
jAti, kula, gaNa, karma, vyApAra, zilpa, kalA Adi kI bar3AI karake AhAra lenA yA
gahastha ke yahAM naukara kI taraha koI kAma karake bhikSA lenA AjIvapiMDa doSa
hai| 5. vanIpakapiMDa - zramaNa, brAhmaNa, kSapaNa, atithi, zvAna Adi ke bhaktoM
ke sAmane apane ko bhI unakA bhakta batAkara AhAra ke lie svayaM darzana de aura
AhAra le vahA~ vanIpaka-piMDa doSa hotA hai| 6. cikitsApiMDa- vaidya banakara
vamana, virecana Adi roga kI auSadhi batAkara AhAra le, vahAM cikitsApiMDa doSa
lagatA hai| 56

Page #79 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Ten Aeshana Doshas of Bhikachari  **7. Krodha Pind:** Taking food by
intimidating householders with threats of curses or by showing anger due to the
influence of knowledge, penance, etc., or by saying that one's worship is done
by the king, etc.  **8. Mana Pind:** Taking food with pride by praising one's
own achievements, knowledge, influence, etc., or by getting praise from others
in a shallow, superficial, or petty way, or by criticizing a particular
householder or getting others to do so.  **9. Maya Pind:** Taking food by
adopting different disguises or changing one's language for begging.  **10.
Lobha Pind:** Wandering around for begging with an excessive desire for
delicious food.  **11. Purva-Pashchat-Sansthava Pind:** Taking food by praising
the parents of the householder who is offering food before taking it, and
praising the mother-in-law, father-in-law, etc., after taking it, or by
introducing one's relationship with them.  **12. Vidya Pind:** Using knowledge,
mantras, powders, and yoga to obtain alms. Knowledge is that which is achieved
through mantras, japa, homa, etc., presided over by female deities. Taking food
using such knowledge is Vidya Pind dosha. A group of words presided over by male
deities, which are realized by mere pronunciation, is called a mantra. Taking
food using mantras is called Mantra Pind.  **13. Mantra Pind:** Taking food
using mantras.  **14. Churna Pind:** Taking food by applying a powder that makes
one invisible or has other effects, or by giving such a powder to the
householder.  **15. Yoga Pind:** Taking food by using yoga, which is a process
of creating wonder by applying a paste to one's feet that brings good or bad
fortune.  **16. Mulakarma Pind:** Taking food by performing actions like
preventing conception, causing conception, childbirth, or protection (kavach).
**Other Aeshana Doshas:**  These doshas apply to both householders and sadhus.
**1. Sankit:** Taking food when there is doubt about the purity of the food.
**2. Prakshit:** Taking food that is mixed with or contaminated by impure
substances like blood, alcohol, meat, and fat, which are derived from sentient
beings like earth, water, and plants.  **3. Nikshipt:** Taking food that is
placed on sentient substances like the six bodies (earth, water, fire, air,
ether, and mind).  **4. Pihit:** Taking food that is covered with sentient
fruits, flowers, etc.  **5. Sanhrit:** Taking food that has been removed from
the serving vessel because it was unusable or impure, or food that has been
placed in another vessel after being discarded in sentient earth, etc.  **6.
Dayak:** Giving food to a sadhu with the intention of receiving something in
return.  **7. Unmishra:** Taking food that is mixed with impure substances.
**8. Aparinat:** Taking food that is not fully cooked or processed.  **9.
Lips:** Taking food with the intention of eating it later.  **10. Chardit:**
Taking food that has been vomited or regurgitated.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bhikSAcarI ke 10 eSaNAdoSa 7. krodhApiMDa 8. mAnapiMDa 12. vidyApiMDa - apanI
labdhi, vidyA, prabhAva Adi kI prazaMsA karake aura chichorapana se, agaMbhIra
rUpa se yA kSudra rUpa se dUsaroM se prazaMsA karavAkara athavA amuka gRhastha
kI niMdA kara yA karavAkara, abhimAna karake liyA huA AhAra mAnapiNDadoSa
kahalAtA hai| 9. mAyApiMDa bhikSA ke lie alaga-alaga veza dhAraNa karake yA
bhASA ko badalakara AhAra lenA mAyApiMDadoSa mAnA gayA hai| 10. lobhapiMDa
svAdiSTa AhAra kI atilAlasA se bhikSA ke lie idhara-udhara ghUmanA
lobhapiMDadoSa mAnA gayA hai| 11. pUrvapazcAtsaMstavapiMDa - sAdhu jahAM AhAra
Adi lene jAye, vahAM usake pUrva paricaya vAle mAtA-pitA aura pazcAt paricaya
vAle sAsa, zvasura Adi kI prazaMsA karake yA apane sAtha unake saMbaMdha kA
paricaya dekara liyA huA AhAra pUrva-pazcAtsaMstava - piMDa hai| vidyA, maMtra,
cUrNa aura yoga ina cAroM kA bhikSAprApti ke lie upayoga kare to vaha
vidyAdipiMDa kahalAtA hai| strI-devatA se adhiSThita maMtra, japa yA homAdi se
jo siddha kiyA jAya, vaha vidyA kahalAtI hai| isa prakAra kI vidyA kA upayoga
karake AhAra lenA vidyApiMDa - doSa hai| uccAraNa mAtra se siddha hone vAlA
puruSa - devatA - adhiSThita zabda samUha maMtra kahalAtA hai| ataH maMtra kA
prayoga karake AhAra lenA maMtrapiMDa kahalAtA hai| 1. zaMkita 2. prakSita 3.
nikSipta 4. pihita 5. saMhRta - - 13. maMtrapiMr3a 14. cUrNapiMDa 15. yogapiMDa
16. mUlakarmapiMDa kucha doSa gRhastha aura sAdhu donoM ke nimitta se lagate
haiM; unheM eSaNA - doSa kahate haiN| eSaNAdoSa ke dasa bheda haiM 1. zaMkita,
2. prakSita, 3. nikSipta, 4. pihita, 5. saMhRta, 6. dAyaka, 7. unmizra, 8.
apariNata, 9. lipsa, 10. chrdit| (pi. ni. 520 ) inakA varNana isa prakAra se hai
- - - - yogazAstra prathama prakAza zloka 38 vidyA, tapa Adi kA prabhAva
batAkara yA merI pUjA rAjA kI ora se hotI hai, aisA kahakara gRhasthoM para kopa
karake yA AhAra nahIM doge to maiM zrApa de dUMgA ityAdi prakAra se dhauMsa
batAkara AhAra Adi lenA krodhapiMDa doSa kahalAtA hai| - - - jisa cUrNa ke
prabhAva se AMkhoM meM aMjana karane se adRzya ho jAya yA aura koI prabhAva ho;
aise cUrNa ko lagAkara yA gRhastha ko aisA cUrNa dekara AhArAdi lenA cUrNapiMDa
doSa kahalAtA hai| saubhAgya yA durbhAgya karane vAlA lepa pairo para lagAkara
vismaya paidA karanA yoga kahalAtA hai| usakA prayoga kara AhArAdi grahaNa
karanA yogapiMDa doSa kahalAtA hai| garbha-staMbhana, garbhadhAraNa, prasava,
rakSAbaMdhana (kavaca ) Adi karake AhAra Adi lenA mUlakarmapiMDa doSa hai|
AdhAkarmAdika doSa kI zaMkA hone para bhI AhAra Adi grahaNa kare to vahA~
zaMkita doSa lagatA hai| pRthvI, jala, vanaspati Adi sacitta padArthoM kA rakta,
madya, mAMsa, carbI Adi kharAba acitta padArthoM ke sAtha mizrita kiye hue
athavA unase lipta AhArAdi jAnakara le to vahA~ prakSita doSa hai  /
pRthvIkAyAdi chaha kAya se yukta sacita padArthoM para rakhA huA AhArAdi le to
vahAM nikSipta doSa hotA hai| sacitta phala-phUla Adi se DhakA huA AhAra Adi le,
to vahAM pihita doSa hotA hai| dene ke bartana meM se jo khAdya bekAra va ayogya
ho use nikAlakara athavA sacitta pRthvI Adi meM DAlA huA bhojanAdi dUsare
bartana meM DAlakara de aura sAdhu le le to vahAM saMhRta doSa mAnA gayA hai| 57

Page #80 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Nature of Bhikshacharya - Faults in the Time of Going for Food  **Yoga
Shastra, First Light, Verse 306**  **6. Dayak:** If the giver is a very young
child, an old person, an impotent person, or someone whose hands and feet are
trembling, who has a fever, is blind, arrogant, or insane, or whose hands and
feet are cut off, who is bound by chains, who is pounding, grinding, roasting,
or preparing vegetables, who is spinning cotton, sowing seeds, or eating, or who
is violating the six living beings, then if the sadhu takes food etc. from such
a giver, it is considered a Dayak fault. If a woman who is about to give birth,
a woman carrying a child, or a woman breastfeeding a child, gives food etc.,
then also the Dayak fault is incurred.  **7. Unmisra:** If the substance to be
given, such as sugar, is mixed with grains etc., and the sadhu takes that food,
it is considered an Unmisra fault.  **8. Aparinat:** If any substance is given
to the sadhu without being completely purified, then the Aparinat fault is
incurred.  **9. Lipta:** If the giver gives food etc. with hands smeared with
oil or ghee, or with hands that have touched food, then it is considered a Lipta
fault.  **10. Chardit:** If the giver gives food while dropping drops of oil,
ghee, milk, or yogurt on the ground, and the sadhu takes it, then it is
considered a Chardit fault. This is because, like drops of honey falling down,
there is a possibility of violating many beings.  Thus, the faults of origin,
production, and consumption total forty-two.  To consume food etc. that is free
from these two faults, water from a Sauvira well etc. as per the auspicious
signs, and clothes, utensils, etc. like Rajoharan, Mukhavaskrika, and Cholpatta,
which are suitable for the Sthavirakalpis, fourteen types of medicinal equipment
suitable for the Jinakalpis, twelve types of equipment suitable for the Sadhvis,
twenty-five types, and the auxiliary equipment like Santhara (seat), Pat, Patta,
Bajot, Charmadanda, Dandasan, etc., which are free from the aforementioned
faults, to accept them is called Eshanasamiti.  It is impossible to observe the
Mahavrata in the cold, heat, and rainy seasons without medicinal equipment like
Rajoharan etc., and auxiliary equipment like Patta, Pat, Patla, Bajot, Shayya,
Chauki, etc., on cold, sunny, or wet ground. Therefore, the Muni should search
for all these essential things for life, including food etc., which are free
from the aforementioned faults, faultless, conceivable, and pure. This is called
Eshana.  To investigate food etc. according to the method mentioned in the Agam,
and to strive for its proper use with diligence, is also Eshanasamiti.  This
Eshana is of two types, based on the distinction between investigation and
consumption. The meaning of Grasaeshan is that when the sadhu-sadhvi sits in the
food circle and takes a bite of food into their mouth, even then the following
five faults should be avoided.  **1. Sanyojana:** To make food tasty and spicy
or juicy, to mix sugar, ghee, or hot spices etc. (suitable for making food
tasty) with the food items that have come in the Gochari, either in the shelter
or outside, to make them tasty or spicy, is the first fault of Sanyojana.  **2.
Pramanatiriktata (Aapraman):** One should eat only as much food as is necessary
to maintain the body, keeping the fortitude, strength, restraint, and the yoga
of mind, speech, and body stable. Eating more than the required amount leads to
many diseases like vomiting etc., and sometimes even death. Therefore, eating
more than the required amount is considered the second fault of Pramanatiriktata
or Aapraman.  **3. Angar:** While eating, praising the delicious food items like
sweets etc., or praising the giver of those items, saying "Oh! How beautiful it
is! How delicious it is! How generous the giver is!" This kind of statement
fuels the fire of attachment, which turns the fuel of character into embers.
Therefore, the third fault is called Angar fault.  **4. Dhum:** If one eats
while criticizing the tasteless or bland food, or the one who gave it, then the
sadhu incurs the fourth fault of Dhum. Just as smoke blackens the picture
gallery of a palace, so too does the sadhu's criticism, like smoke, pollute the
palace or picture gallery of character.  **5. Karanaabhav:** The fifth fault of
Karanaabhav is not mentioned in the text.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bhikSAcaryA kA svarUpa-gocarI samaya ke doSa yogazAstra prathama prakAza zloka
30 6. dAyaka - atyaMta choTA bAlaka ho, bUr3hA ho, napuMsaka ho yA jisake hAtha-
paira kAMpa rahe ho, bukhAra A rahA ho, aMdhA ho, ahaMkArI yA pAgala ho yA
jisake hAtha paira kaTe hue ho, ber3I se jakar3A ho, jo kUTa rahA ho, pIsa rahA
ho, bhuna rahA ho, sAgabhAjI Adi sudhAra rahA ho, ruI Adi pIja rahA ho. bIja bo
rahA ho, bhojana kara rahA ho, SaDjIvanikAya kI virAdhanA kara rahA ho| aise
dAtA se sAdhu AhArAdi le-to, dAyaka-doSa lagatA hai| thor3e samaya meM prasUti
hone vAlI strI, bAlaka ko goda meM uThAyI strI, bAlaka ko dUdha pilAtI strI
ityAdi ke hAthoM se AhArAdi le to bhI dAyakadoSa lagatA hai| 7. unmizra - dene
yogya dravya, khAMDa, zakkara Adi padArtha sacitta dhAnya Adi se milA ho aura
usa AhAra ko leve to vaha unmizra doSa hai| 8. apariNata - pUrI taraha se acitta
hue binA koI bhI padArtha sAdhu ko dene para vaha le le to, vahA~ apariNata doSa
lagatA hai| 9. lisa - carbI Adi se lipta hAtha yA bhojana Adi ke hAtha se deve
to vahAM lipta doSa hotA hai| 10. chardita - tela, ghI, dUdha, dahI Adi ke
chIMTe jamIna para girAte hue dAtA AhAra de aura sAdhu le le to| _ vahAM
charditadoSa hotA hai; kyoMki madhubindu kI taraha nIce girane se vahAM kaI
jIvoM kI virAdhanA | hone kI saMbhAvanA hai| isa prakAra udgama, utpAdana aura
eSaNA ke doSa kula milAkara bayAlIsa hote haiN| ina donoM se adUSita, azana,
khAdya Adi grahaNa karanA; upalakSaNa se sauvIra Adi kA pAnI tathA rajoharaNa,
mukhavasrikA, colapaTTa Adi vastra-pAtra vagairaha sthavirakalpiyoM ke yogya
caudaha prakAra kI audhika upadhi (upakaraNa) jinakalpiyoM ke yogya bAraha
prakAra kI upadhi, sAdhviyoM ke yogya paccIsa prakAra kI aura aupagrahika
saMthArA (Asana), pATa, paTTe, bAjoTa, carmadaNDa, daNDAsana Adi ukta doSoM se
adUSita hoM, unheM grahaNa karanA eSaNAsamiti hai| rajoharaNa Adi audhika
upakaraNa tathA paTTe, pATa, pATalA, bAjoTa, zayyA, caukI Adi aupagrahika
upakaraNa ke binA sardI, garmI aura varSAkAla meM ThaMDa, dhUpa, varSA Adi se
gIlI yA nama bhUmi para mahAvrata kA rakSaNa karanA azakya hai| ataH AhArAdi
sahita ye saba jIvanopayogI Avazyaka vastue~ pUrvokta doSoM se rahita hoM,
nirdoSa, kalpanIya aura vizuddha ho; unheM hI grahaNa karane hetu muni zodha
kare use eSaNA kahate haiN| Agama meM kathita vidhi ke anusAra AhArAdi kA
anveSaNa karanA; usake viSaya meM samyak prakAra ke upayoga pUrvaka yatanA se
pravRtti karanA bhI eSaNA-samiti hai| gaveSaNA aura grAsaiSaNA ke bheda se yaha
eSaNA do prakAra kI hai| grAsaiSaNA kA artha hai-AhAra-maMDalI meM baiThakara
sAdhu-sAdhvI AhAra kA grAsa muMha meM le; usa samaya bhI nimnokta pAMca doSa
varjita karane caahie| ve pAMca doSa isa prakAra se haiM 1. saMyojanA, 2.
pramANAtiriktatatA (apramANa), 3. aMgAra, 4. dhUma aura 5. kaarnnaabhaav| AhAra
ko svAdiSTa aura caTapaTA yA rasadAra banAne ke lobha se gocarI meM AyI huI
khAdyavastuoM ke sAtha khAMDa, ghI yA garma masAlA Adi (svAdiSTa banAne ke
yogya) dUsare padArtha upAzraya meM yA bAhara milAkara unheM svAdiSTa athavA
caTapaTI banAnA prathama saMyojanA-doSa hai| dhRti, bala, saMyama tathA mana,
vacana aura kAyA kA yoga sthira rahe; zarIra kA nirvAha ho sake, utanI hI mAtrA
meM AhAra karanA caahie| mAtrA se adhika AhAra karane para vamana Adi anekoM
vyAdhiyA~ | aura kisI samaya mRtyu taka ho jAtI hai| ataH pramANa se adhika
AhAra karane para dUsarA pramANAtiriktatA yA apramANa doSa lagatA hai| bhojana
karate samaya miSTAnna Adi svAdiSTa padArthoM kI yA una padArthoM ke dAtA kI
prazaMsA karanA ki ahA! | yaha kitanA suMdara hai! kaisA svAdiSTa hai! vaha dAtA
kitanA udAra hai! isa prakAra ke kathana meM rAga rUpI Aga pAlana kiye hue
cAritra rUpI iMdhana ko aMgAreM banA detI hai| isa kAraNa tIsare doSa ko
aMgAradoSa batAyA hai| asvAdiSTa yA nIrasa AhAra kI yA usake dene vAle kI niMdA
karate hue AhAra kare to sAdhu ko cauthA dhUmradoSa lagatA hai| jisa prakAra
dhuMA mahala kI citrazAlA ko kAlA kara detA hai, vaise hI sAdhu nindA rUpI
dhuMe~ se cAritra rUpI mahala yA citrazAlA ko dUSita kara detA hai|

Page #81 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Nature of the Eight Precepts Mother  **A Sadhu should take food for six
reasons:**  1. **Kshudha:** When unable to bear hunger. 2. **Acharya-Adi:** To
serve and show devotion to elders. 3. **E-Samiti:** To properly follow the eight
precepts, including the E-Samiti. 4. **Preksha-Utpreshka:** To maintain
restraint. 5. **Prabadh:** To protect life from the arising of digestive fire.
6. **Aart-Roudra-Dhyan:** To abandon agitated and angry meditation and attain
stability in Dharma meditation.  **If a Sadhu takes food for any other reason,
they incur the fifth fault called "Karana-Abhav."**  It is said: "The
purification, investigation, and detailed analysis of food free from the eight
food faults - Udgham, Utpadan, Eshna, Samyogan, Apruman, Angar, Dhum, and
Karana-Abhav - is explained by the Eshna-Samiti for the sake of Munis."  **Now,
the fourth Adan-Nikshep-Samiti is described:**  "Taking or placing things after
carefully observing the Asana and other things, and cleaning them with Rajo-
haran, is called Adan-Nikshep-Samiti."  **Explanation:**  Asana refers to the
ground or mat used for sitting. The word "Adi" includes things like clothes,
vessels, belts, staffs, and other equipment. The meaning is that a Sadhu should
carefully observe all their Dharma-Upakaran with their eyes during the day. At
night, if they cannot see living beings, they should carefully clean them with
Rajo-haran or a Guchhak, and then lift or place them. If this is not done,
proper "Pratilekhana" does not occur.  The scriptures say: "When performing
Pratilekhana, if one talks to others, engages in worldly conversations, rejects
others, or reads or listens to others, then that Sadhak is a violator of the
Earth, Water, Fire, Air, Plants, and Tris-Kaya beings, and is negligent in
Pratilekhana."  Therefore, whatever equipment is lifted or placed, one should
first look at it, then clean it with Rajo-haran, and then take or place it. This
type of action is called Adan-Nikshep-Samiti. Just as Bhima is referred to as
"Bhim" in short, here the long name of this Samiti is referred to as "Adan" in
short.  **Now, the fifth Utsarg-Samiti is described:**  "A Sadhu who carefully
discards phlegm, urine, feces, and other things that need to be discarded on a
ground free from living beings, is called Utsarg-Samiti."  **Explanation:**
Phlegm and mucus coming out of the mouth, nose, etc., urine, feces, etc., are
generally considered impure and discarded substances of the body. The word
"Prayah" should be understood to include broken or leftover clothes, vessels,
food, water, etc., that need to be discarded. Carefully discarding all these
things on a non-sentient ground free from Tris-Sthavar-Jantu, in dust or sand,
is called Utsarg-Samiti.  **Now, regarding the first of the three "Guptis" -
Manogupti:**  "The protection of the mind from the web of imagination, its
stability in equanimity, and its immersion in the contemplation of the Self, is
called Manogupti by wise men."  **Explanation:**  Here, Manogupti (protection of
the mind from its negative tendencies) is described as three types:  1.
**Separation of the mind from the web of imagination arising from Aart-Dhyan and
Roudra-Dhyan.** 2. **Establishment of the mind in Madhyastha-Parinati or
equanimity, which is in accordance with the scriptures, conducive to the
afterlife, and involves Dharma-Dhyan.** 3. **Immersion of the mind in Atma-
Ramanta, i.e., the state of being the Self, by stopping skillful and unskillful
mental activities and creating a state of Yoga-Nirodha.**  From this
perspective, Manogupti...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 aSTa pravacana mAtA kA svarUpa yogazAstra prathama prakAza zloka 39 se 41 sAdhu
ko chaha kAraNoM se AhAra karanA cAhie-1. kSudhA-bhUkha sahana na hone para, 2.
AcAryAdi bar3oM kI sevAbhakti karane ke lie, 3. I-samiti Adi ATha pravacana-mAtA
kA acchI taraha pAlana karane ke lie, 4. prekSAutprekSA-saMyama ke pAlana ke
lie, 5. prabAdha-jaTharAgni ke udaya se prANoM kI rakSA ke lie, 6.
ArttaraudradhyAna kA tyAga karake dharmadhyAna meM sthiratA lAne ke lie| ina 6
kAraNoM se sAdhu AhAra kre| inake alAvA aura kisI kAraNa se AhAra kare to use
pAMcavAM kAraNAbhAva nAma kA doSa lagatA hai| kahA bhI hai ki-'udgama, utpAdana,
eSaNA, saMyojana, apramANa, aMgAra, dhUma aura kAraNAbhAva nAmaka AhAra-doSoM se
rahita piMDa (AhAra) kA zodhana, anveSaNa aura bArIkI se vizvaleSaNa karate hue
AhArAdi meM pravRtti karane hetu muniyoM ke lie eSaNAsamiti batAyI hai  /  / 38
/  /  _ aba cauthI AdAna-nikSepa-samiti kA nirUpaNa karate haiN|39| AsanAdIni
saMvIkSya, pratilikhya ca yatnataH  /  gRNIyAnikSipedvA, yat sA''dAnasamitiH
smRtA  // 39 /  /  artha :- AsanAdi ko dRSTi se bhalIbhAMti dekhakara aura
rajoharaNa Adi se pramArjana kara yatanApUrvaka lenA athavA rakhanA
AdAnanikSepasamiti kahalAtI hai  /  / 39 /  /  vyAkhyA :- baiThane kI bhami yA
pATa ye Asana kahalAte haiN| Adi zabda se vastra, pAtra. paTTA. daMDa Adi
upakaraNoM ko grahaNa karanA caahie| Azaya yaha hai ki sAdhu ke pAsa jo bhI
dharmopakaraNa hoM; unheM AMkhoM se bhalIbhAMti dina meM | dekhakara, rAtri ko
AMkhoM se jIvajantu na dIkheM to rajoharaNa se yA gucchaka Adi se yatanA pUrvaka
pramArjana karake paira uThAnA yA rakhanA caahie| isa taraha na kiyA jAya to
acchI taraha pratilekhanA nahIM hotii| zAstra meM kahA hai ki-'pratilekhanA
karate samaya paraspara bAteM kare, deza kathAdi kare pratyAkhyAna karAye,
svayaM vAcanA de yA dUsare se vAcanA le, to vaha sAdhaka pRthvI, jala, agni,
vAyu, vanaspati aura trasa kAya ke jIvoM kA virAdhaka hai aura pratilekhanA meM
pramAdI hai|' (ogha ni. 273-274) isalie jo kucha bhI upakaraNa uThAe yA rakheM
jAya, pahale usa para dRSTipAta kare, bAda meM oghe (rajoharaNa) se usakA
pramArjana kare phira use grahaNa kare yA rkhe| isa prakAra kI pravRtti ko
AdAna-nikSepa-samiti kahate haiN| jaise bhImasena kA saMkSepa meM 'bhIma' nAma
se prayoga kiyA jAtA hai; vaise hI yahAM isa samiti ke vistRta nAma kA saMkSipta
'AdAna' zabda se prayoga kiyA gayA hai  /  / 39 /  /  aba pAMcavIM utsarga-
samiti kA vivaraNa prastuta karate haiN|40| kapha-mUtra-malaprAyaM,
nirjantujagatItale  /  yatnAdyadutsRjet sAdhuH, sotsargasamitirbhavet  // 40 //
artha :- sAdhu jo kapha, mala, mUtra Adi pariSThApana karane (DAlane yA
phaikane) yogya padArthoM ko jIva-jaMtu-rahita jamIna para yatanA vidhipUrvaka
tyAga (pariSThApana) karate haiM, vaha utsargasamiti hai  /  / 40 //  vyAkhyA :-
mukha, nAka Adi se nikalane vAle kapha aura zleSma, mUtra, viSThA Adi prAyaH
zarIra ke dUSita va pheMkane yA DAlane yogya padArtha hai| 'prAyaH' zabda se
pariSThApana-yogya TUTe-phUTe yA avaziSTa vastra, pAtra, bhojana pAnI Adi
samajhane caahie| ina saba kA trasa-sthAvara-jaMtu se rahita acitta pRthvItala
para dhUla yA retI meM yatanA se upayogapUrvaka utsarga karanA; utsargasamiti
kahalAtI hai| aba tIna guptiyoM meM se prathama manogupti ke saMbaMdha meM
kahate haiN|41| vimuktakalpanAjAlaM, samatve supratiSThitam  /  AtmArAmaM
manastajjJairmanoguptirudAhRtA  // 41 //  artha :- mana kI kalpanA-jAla se
mukti, samabhAva meM sthiratA aura Atma svarUpa ke ciMtana meM ramaNatA ke rUpa
meM rakSA karane ko paMDita puruSoM ne manogupti kahI hai  /  / 41 /  /  .
vyAkhyA :- yahAM manogupti (mana kI duSpravRttiyoM se rakSA) tIna prakAra kI
batAyI gayI hai-1. ArtadhyAna aura raudradhyAna ke phala svarUpa uThane vAle
kalpanAjAla se mana kA viyoga karAnA, 2. zAstrAnusArI, paraloka-sAdhaka,
dharmadhyAna karane vAlI madhyastha-pariNati yA samatA meM mana ko pratiSThApita
karanA, 3. kuzala-akuzala manovRtti ko rokakara yoga-nirodha avasthA paidA
karane vAlI AtmaramaNatA arthAt AtmabhAva meM mana ko lIna krnaa| isa dRSTi se
manogupti 59

Page #82 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Nature of the Eight Precepts Mother  The first light of Yoga Shastra,
verses 42 to 44, describe three specific qualities and say that "freeing the
mind from suffering, anger, and meditation, establishing it in the nature of the
self, and dwelling in the qualities of the self are the true means of mind
control. This is called मनोगुप्ति (manogupti)." || 41 ||  **Explaining the
concept of अवाप्ति (avapti)**  || 42 || By abandoning gestures and the like, the
reliance on silence, or the restraint of speech, or the practice of right
speech, is called वाग्गुप्ति (vaggupti) here. || 42 ||  **Explanation:** -
संज्ञा (sanjna) means - to indicate one's intention to others through the mouth,
eyes, raising the eyebrows, pointing with a finger, or snapping fingers; the
word "आदि" (adi) includes throwing pebbles, coughing loudly, making a "hum"
sound, etc. These actions are also considered संज्ञा (sanjna). Abandoning all
these संज्ञा (sanjna) and remaining silent by stopping the act of speaking, or
restraining or reducing the flow of speech and practicing right speech is called
वचनगुप्ति (vacanagupti). If a silent practitioner indicates their intention
through संज्ञा (sanjna) etc., their silence becomes ineffective. However, if it
is necessary to recite scriptures, ask questions related to them, or answer
questions, then there is no conflict with the world or the scriptures in this
वाग्गुप्ति (vaggupti). Similarly, speaking with a cloth covering the mouth or
controlling speech is another type of वाग्गुप्ति (vaggupti). These two types
represent the complete restraint of impure speech, the protection of the speech
organ from impure speech, or the practice of silence. This is the explanation of
these three forms. भाषासमिति (bhasasamiti) is speaking correctly, and वाग्गुप्ति
(vaggupti) is the correct protection of speech from impurities. This is the
difference between वाग्गुप्ति (vaggupti) and भाषासमिति (bhasasamiti). Therefore,
it is said that "the one who practices समिति (samiti) is definitely the one who
practices गुप्ति (gupti); but the one who practices गुप्ति (gupti) may or may
not be the one who practices समिति (samiti) (the one who worships)." When
speaking skillfully, the practitioner is endowed with both वाग्गुप्ति (vaggupti)
and भाषासमिति (bhasasamiti). (Bri. Ka. Bha. || 4451) || 42 ||  || 43 || Even in
the face of adversity, the steady state of the body of a silent sage who is
engaged in कायोत्सर्ग (kayotsarga) is called कायगुप्ति (kayagupti). || 43 ||
**Explanation:** - Adversity is caused by gods, humans, and animals. Here, the
word "अपि" (api) should be understood as an indication of hunger, thirst, and
other twenty-two afflictions, or difficulties arising from evil deeds, or lack.
The meaning is that remaining indifferent to the body in the face of all these
adversities, etc., and keeping it steady or still, or restraining the fickleness
of the yogas, is called कायगुप्ति (kayagupti). || 43 ||  Now, we explain the
second type of कायगुप्ति (kayagupti).  || 44 || Control (regulation) over
actions or movements in lying down, sitting, placing, taking, and walking, etc.,
and abandoning spontaneous activity is the second type of कायगुप्ति (kayagupti).
|| 44 ||  **Explanation:** - The scriptures state that night is the time for
sleep. From this perspective, the virtuous are primarily prohibited from
sleeping during the day. Except for illness, weakness, fatigue from travel, or
old age, etc., the practitioner should not sleep during the day. Even at night,
after one watch has passed, when the Guru Maharaj has gone to sleep, the
practitioner should look for a limited (according to their height) place, purify
the ground, spread the संस्तारक (sanstarak) (sitting mat), and spread the
उत्तरपट्टा (uttarpatta) (upper mat). After purifying the body from head to toe
(top to bottom) with मुखवस्त्रिका (mukhavastrika) (face cloth), प्रमार्जनिका
(pramardanika) (cleaning cloth), and रजोहरण (rajoharan) (dust remover), the
practitioner should ask permission from the Guru Maharaj to spread the संस्तारक
(sanstarak) (bedding), recite the नमस्कारमंत्र (namaskaramantra) (salutation
mantra) and the सामायिक सूत्र (samayik sutra) (Samayik Sutra), make a pillow
with the right hand, curl the feet, or place the feet in the air like a rooster,
purify them with the प्रमार्जनिका (pramardanika) or the buds of the रजोहरण
(rajoharan), and then place them on the ground. Then, when contracting, purify
with the प्रमार्जनिका (pramardanika) or the buds of the रजोहरण (rajoharan), and
when turning over, use the मुखवस्त्रिका (mukhavastrika)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 aSTa pravacana mAtA kA svarUpa yogazAstra prathama prakAza zloka 42 se 44 ke
tIna vizeSaNa batAkara kahate haiM ki 'Artta - raudra - dhyAna se mana ko mukta
karake Atma svarUpa meM use sthApita karanA aura AtmaguNoM meM ramaNa karanA hI
manonigraha ke vAstavika upAya haiN| inheM hI manogupti kahA hai  /   /  41  /
/  avApti kA nirupaNa karate haiM  / 42 /  saJjJAdi- parihAreNa,
yanmaunasyAvalambanam  /  vAgvRtteH saMvRtirvA yA, sA vAgguptirihocyate  //  42
//  artha :saMjJAdi ( izAre Adi) kA tyAga karake mauna kA AlaMbana karanA athavA
vacana kI pravRttiyoM ko rokanA yA samyag vacana kI hI pravRtti karanA,
vacanagupti kahalAtI hai  /  /  42  /  /  vyAkhyA : - saMjJA kA artha hai -
dUsaroM ko abhiprAya sUcita karane hetu mukha, netra, bhRkuTi car3hAne, aMgulI
se batAne yA cuTakI bajAne kI ceSTA karanA; Adi zabda se kaMkar3a pheMkanA, ucca
svara se khAMsanA, huM zabda prakaTa karanA ityAdi | ceSTAe~ bhI saMjJA ke
aMtargata samajhanA  /  ina saba saMjJAoM kA tyAga karake, bolane kI kriyA baMda
karake mauna dhAraNa karanA | athavA vANI kI pravRtti ko rokanA yA kama karanA
tathA vaisA abhigraha karanA vacana- gupti hai  /  yadi maunAvalaMbI sAdhaka
saMjJA Adi se apanA abhiprAya sUcita karatA hai; to usakA mauna niSphala ho jAtA
hai| hAM, Agama-sUtrAdi kI vAcanA denI ho, tatsabaMdhI zaMkA pUchanI ho athavA
zaMkA kA uttara denA ho to usa vAggupti meM loka yA Agama se virodha nahIM |
aataa| isI taraha mukha ke Age muhapatti rakhakara bolanA athavA vANI para
niyaMtraNa karanA bhI vAggupti kA, dUsarA prakAra hai| ina donoM prakAroM se
dUSita vANI ke sarvathA nirodha kA, dUSita vANI se vAgindriya kI rakSA karane kA
athavA mauna rakhane kA, ina tInoM rUpoM kA pratipAdana kiyA hai| bhASAsamiti
samyak prakAra se bolanA hai aura vAggupti vANI kI dUSaNoM | se samyak prakAra
se rakSA karanA hai| isa taraha vAggupti aura bhASA samiti meM itanA sA bheda
hai| isalie kahA hai ki'samiti vAlA nizcaya hI gupti vAlA hotA hai; kintu gupti
vAlA samiti vAlA hotA bhI hai aura nahIM bhI ( bhajanA vAlA) hotA hai| kuzala
vANI ko bolate samaya sAdhaka vAggupti aura bhASAsamiti donoM se yukta hotA hai|
(bR. ka. bhA. | 4451)  /  /  42  /  /   / 43 /  upasarga-prasaGge'pi,
kAyotsargajuSo muneH  /  sthirIbhAvaH zarIrasya kAyaguptirnigadyate  //  43  //
artha ;- kAyotsarga (dhyAna) se yukta muni ke dvArA upasarga ke prasaMga meM bhI
zarIra ko sthira yA nizcala rakhanA kAyagusa ( prathama ) kahalAtI hai  /  /  43
/  /  vyAkhyA : - devatA, manuSya aura tiryaMcoM dvArA kiye gaye upadrava
upasarga kahalAte haiN| yahAM 'api' zabda se upalakSaNa se kSudhA, tRSA Adi
bAIsa pariSahoM yA duSkarmodaya-janita saMkaToM yA abhAvoM ko bhI samajha lenA
caahie| phalitArtha yaha ki ina saba upasarga Adi prasaMgoM para muni dvArA kAyA
ke prati nirapekSa hokara use nizcala yA sthira rakhanA athavA | yogoM kI
capalatA kA nirodha karanA kAyA gupti kahalAtI hai  /  /  43  /  /  huA aba
dUsarI kAyagupti kA nirUpaNa karate haiM  /  44  /  zayanAsana-nikSepAdAna -
caGkramaNeSu yaH  /  sthAneSu ceSTAniyamaH, kAyaguptistu sA'parA  // 44 //
sonA, baiThanA, rakhanA, lenA aura calanA Adi kAryoM kI kriyAoM yA ceSTAoM para
niyaMtraNa ( niyamana ) rakhanA va svacchaMda pravRtti kA tyAga karanA, dUsare
prakAra kI kAyagupti hai  /  /  44  /  /  artha : vyAkhyA : - Agama meM rAta ko
hI nidrA-kAla batAyA gayA hai| isa dRSTi se sAdhu ko mukhyatayA dina meM zayana
karane | kA niSedha kiyA hai| bImArI, azakti yA vihAra kI thakAvaTa athavA
vRddhAvasthA Adi ke sivAya sAdhaka ko dina meM sonA nahIM caahie| rAta ko bhI
eka prahara bIta jAne ke bAda, gurumahArAja ke so jAne para sImita (apane kada
ke anusAra | maryAdita) jagaha dekhakara jamIna ko pUMjakara saMstAraka (
bichAne kA Asana) aura uttarapaTTA kholakara aura bichAkara kAyA kA sira se
paira taka ( Upara se nIce taka) mukhavastrikA, pramArjanikA evaM rajoharaNa se
pramArjana kara saMstAraka ( bichaunA ) | karane ke lie gurumahArAja kI AjJA
lekara, namaskAramaMtra aura sAmAyika sUtra (karemi bhaMte sAmAiyaM) par3hakara,
dAhine hAtha kA takiyA banAkara, pairoM ko sikor3akara athavA murge ke samAna
AkAza meM paira rakhakara pramArjana karake phira bhUmi para rkheN| | phira
saMkoca karane ke samaya pramArjanikA se yA rajoharaNa kI kaliyoM se pramArjanA
kare aura karavaTa lete samaya mukhavastrikA 60

Page #83 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Discourse on Eight Mothers and 35 Qualities of a Dharma-Adhikari
**Discussion on the Motherhood of Eight Mothers and the 35 Qualities of a
Dharma-Adhikari**  **Yoga Shastra, First Light, Verses 45-46**  Cleanse the body
with the first light of Yoga Shastra, verses 45-46. However, do not sleep
excessively at either time. Wherever you stay, in a space of three hand-spans,
each Sadhu should keep all their utensils, including their bowl. Before sitting
on any seat or place, inspect it with your eyes and cleanse it with a broom. Sit
on a mat that is clean and free of dust. If you need to stretch or fold your
legs after sitting, inspect and cleanse the area as mentioned before. During the
four months of the rainy season, sit on a Darbha-asana (seat made of Darbha
grass) or a mat, following the above practices. Inspect and cleanse the staff
and other utensils. If a Sadhu needs to go outside for essential work, they
should look ahead in a space of three hand-spans, and with mindfulness, protect
both mobile and immobile beings, walking slowly. When standing or sitting with
support, one should first look around and remove any obstacles, then cleanse the
area with a staff. Controlling all these actions and abandoning spontaneous
movements is another type of bodily restraint. ||4||  Now, the five committees
and three secrets are described as motherhood, as is well-known in the
scriptures. ||45||  **Meaning:** The five committees and three secrets mentioned
above are known as the "Eight Mothers" because they give birth to the body of a
Sadhu's character, nurture it, and purify it, keeping it clean and pure. ||45||
**Explanation:** The committees and secrets are known as the "Eight Mothers" in
the scriptures. The reason for this is that just as a mother gives birth to her
child's body, nourishes it with milk, and keeps it clean by removing waste,
these Eight Mothers give birth to the body of a Sadhu's character, protect it
from harm, nourish it, and purify it from any impurities. ||45||  Now, we
conclude by describing character. ||46||  This character is for all the great
ascetics who have renounced everything. For those who are devoted to the Dharma
of an ascetic, it is partial, depending on the country. ||46||  **Meaning:**
There are two types of character: complete renunciation and partial
renunciation. Complete renunciation is the complete abandonment of all harmful
actions. This complete renunciation is the essence of the primary and secondary
qualities. Who is the one who practices partial renunciation? In response, it is
said that since the word "country" has many meanings, here it also means that a
householder who practices partial renunciation should be deeply devoted to
complete renunciation. A householder has a partial character, depending on the
country. What is a householder? Due to living in the household, they are
entangled in the affairs of family, livelihood, and other worldly matters, and
due to the faults of association and other things, they cannot practice complete
renunciation. It is also said, "A Shravaka who practices partial renunciation
desires complete renunciation." Without devotion to the Dharma of an ascetic, it
is possible for a householder to practice the vows of a Shravaka, but when their
vows are violated from time to time, it is only possible to purify them through
criticism, atonement, warnings, and the observance of the vow of hospitality if
there is an ascetic who practices complete renunciation. Therefore, it is
essential for householders to be connected to ascetics. ||46||  1. **Vrishi-
Peetha, etc., are mentioned in the book, page 66.** 2. **For this reason, it is
forbidden for a Shravaka to stay in an area where a Sadhu does not reside, as it
is essential for them to be in the presence of a Sadhu.** - Editor 61

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 aSTa pravacana mAtA kA mAtRtva evaM dharmAdhikArI ke 35 guNoM para vivecana
yogazAstra prathama prakAza zloka 45 se 46 se zarIra pramArjana kare, kiMtu
donoM samaya meM atitIvra nidrA se zayana na kre| jahAM rahe, vahAM pramANopeta
vasati meM tIna hAtha parimANa vAle pradeza meM pratyeka sAdhu apane pAtrAdi
tamAma upakaraNoM ko samAviSTa kara de| jisa Asana yA sthAna para baiThane kI
icchA ho, pahale use cakSu se nirIkSaNa kara rajoharaNa se pramArjana kre|
bAhara kA rajoharaNa-saMbaMdhI nizithiyA bichAkara baiThe, baiThane ke bAda bhI
paira laMbe karane hoM yA sikor3ane hoM to pahale kahe anusAra nirIkSaNa va
pramArjana kre| caumAse ke kAla meM darbhAsana' va paTTe Adi para uparyukta
sAmAcArI se baitthe| daMDa Adi upakaraNa kA bhI nirIkSaNa karake pramArjana kre|
Avazyaka kArya ke lie sAdhu ko bAhara jAnA ho to Age dhUsara-pramANa pradeza meM
dRSTi DAlakara apramAdabhAva se trasa aura sthAvara jIvoM kA rakSaNa karate hae
dhImI-dhImI gati se gamana karanA prazasta hai. kAyotsargastha hokara khar3e
rahane ke yA sahArA lekara baiThane ke saMstAraka ko pahale najara DAlakara
paDilehaNa karanA aura phira daMDAsana se pramArjana karanA caahie| ina sabhI
ceSTAoM para niyaMtraNa rakhanA aura svacchaMdana ceSTAoM kA tyAga karanA,
dUsare prakAra kI kAyagupti hai  /  / 4 /  /  _ aba pAMca samitiyoM aura tIna
guptiyoM kA Agama-prasiddha mAtRtva batAte haiN|45| etAzcAritragAtrasya, jananAt
paripAlanAt  /  saMzodhanAcca sAdhUnAM, mAtaro'STau prakIrtitAH  // 45 //  .
artha :- uparyukta pA~ca samiti aura tIna gupti sAdhuoM ke cAritra-rUpI zarIra
ko mAtA kI taraha janma dene se, . usakA paripAlana karane se tathA usakI
azuddhiyoM ko dUra karane ke kAraNa va use svaccha nirmala rakhane ke kAraNa
'ATha pravacana-mAtA' ke nAma se prasiddha haiM  /  / 45 /  /  vyAkhyA :- samiti
aura gupti zAstra meM ATha mAtAoM ke nAma se prasiddha hai| mAtRtva ke kAraNa ye
haiM-jaise mAtA putra ke zarIra ko janma detI hai, dugdhAdi pilAkara zarIra kA
rakSaNa karatI hai aura mala-mUtra sApha karake bAlakoM ko svaccha rakhatI hai;
vaise hI sAdhuoM ke cAritra rUpI zarIra ko janma dene vAlI, upadrava kA nivAraNa
karake pAlana karane vAlI, poSaNa karake bar3hAne vAlI aticAra se malina ho to
use sApha karake nirmala karane vAlI ye aSTapravacanamAtAe~ haiN||45|| aba
cAritra kA varNana karake upasaMhAra karate haiN|46| sarvAtmanA
yatIndrANAmetaccAritramIritam  /  yati-dharmAnuraktAnAM, dezataH syAdagAriNAm
// 46 /  /  artha :- upara varNita mahAvrata aura aSTa pravacana mAtAe~
sarvaviraticAritra dhAraNa karane vAle munIndroM ke lie haiM| aura yati (sAdha)
dharma para ati-anurAga rakhane vAle zramaNopAsakoM gRhasthoM ke lie to deza se
(AMzika) cAritra hotA hai  // 46 //  vyAkhyA :- sarvavirati aura dezavirati ye
do prakAra ke cAritra kahe haiN| samasta sAvadha (pApakArI) vyApAroM kA sarvathA
tyAga karanA sarvaviraticAritra hai| vaha sarvaviraticAritra (zreSTha
sAdhudharma) mUlaguNa aura uttaraguNa-svarUpa hotA hai| dezacAritra ke adhikArI
kauna hai? isake uttara meM kahate haiM ki-dhAtuoM ke aneka artha hone se yahAM
yaha artha bhI gRhIta hai ki dezavirati-gRhastha, dezaviraticAritradhAraka hote
hue bhI sarvaviraticAritra meM atyaMta anurAgI honA caahie| gRhasthoM kA eka
deza se (AMzika) cAritra hotA hai| gRhastha kaisA hotA hai? gRhasthAzrama meM
rahane se parivAra ke pAlanapoSaNa, AjIvikA Adi prapaMcoM meM grasta hone ke
kAraNa va saMghayaNa Adi doSa ke kAraNa vaha sarvavirati kI ArAdhanA nahIM kara
sktaa| kahA bhI hai-'dezavirati-pariNAma vAlA zrAvaka sarva-virati kA abhilASI
hotA hai| yatidharma ke prati anurAga ke binA gRhastha-zrAvakoM kA zrAvakavrata
to saMbhava hai, lekina samaya-samaya para unake vratoM meM aticAra (doSa)
lagane para usakI zuddhi ke lie AlocanA, prAyazcitta Adi tathA cetAvanI evaM
atithisaMvibhAgavrata kA pAlana bhI sarvavirati zramaNa ke hone para hI saMbhava
hai| isalie zramaNopAsakoM kA zramaNoM se anubaddha honA anivArya hai||46|| 1.
vRSIpIThAdiSUktayaiva peja naM. 66 patrAkAra yo. zA. 2. isI kAraNa Avazyaka
cUrNi meM zrAvaka ko sAdhu kA vihAra jisa kSetra meM na ho vahAM rahane kA
niSedha kiyA hai| - saMpAdaka 61

Page #84 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Discussion on the 35 Qualities of a Dharmadikari Following the Path  **How
can a householder with Deshaviriti-Charitra become a Dharmadikari?** To explain
this, we begin with the phrase "Tathahi" as an introduction.  **Qualities of a
Dharmadikari following the path:**  **47.** Possessing wealth acquired through
righteous means, a devotee of good conduct, marrying someone from a family with
similar good character, and actively engaging with others from different
lineages.  **48.** Fearful of sin, following the established customs of the
land, not being prejudiced against anyone, especially not against kings or other
dignitaries.  **49.** Living in a place that is neither too hidden nor too
exposed, with a good neighborhood, and a house that does not have many entrances
and exits.  **50.** Always associating with virtuous people, honoring one's
parents, abandoning places of trouble, and not engaging in blameworthy
activities.  **51.** Spending according to one's income, dressing according to
one's wealth, possessing the eight virtues of intelligence, and listening to
Dharma every day.  **52.** Abstaining from food when indigestion occurs, eating
at the right time and in a way that suits one's constitution, fulfilling the
three goals of life (Dharma, Artha, Kama) without hindering each other, and
serving guests, saints, and the poor and needy according to one's capacity.
**53.** Always free from false claims, impartial in matters of virtue, and
abandoning inappropriate customs and times.  **54.** Knowing the strengths and
weaknesses of things, abandoning them accordingly, being steadfast in one's vows
and rules, honoring those who are knowledgeable and elderly, and supporting and
nurturing dependents.  **55.** Having foresight, being knowledgeable, grateful,
beloved by the people, modest, compassionate, gentle, and dedicated to helping
others.  **56.** Focused on eliminating the six internal enemies (lust, anger,
greed, attachment, pride, and jealousy), controlling the senses, and being fit
for the duties of a householder.  **Meaning:**  1. **Nayasampanna-Vibhava:** A
righteous householder should first abandon acts like betrayal of the master,
betrayal of friends, treachery, and theft, and acquire wealth through good
conduct and justice according to their caste. Wealth acquired through righteous
means is beneficial in this world. One who possesses wealth acquired through
righteous means can enjoy its fruits without any guilt and can also share it
with friends and relatives.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dharmAdhikArI-mArgAnusArI ke 35 guNoM para vivecana yogazAstra prathama prakAza
zloka 47 se 56 dezavirati-cAritra vAlA gRhastha dharmAdhikArI kaise bana sakatA
hai? ise batAne ke lie 'tathAhi' kahakara usakI prastAvanA karate
haiMdharmAdhikArI-mArgAnusArI kI yogyatA : / 47 /  nyAyasampannavibhavaH
ziSTAcAra-prazaMsakaH  /  kulazIlasamaiH sArdhaM, kRtodvAho'nyagotrajaiH  //
47||  / 48 /  pApabhiruH prasiddhaM ca, dezAcAraM samAcaran  /  avarNavAdI na
kvApi, rAjAdiSu vizeSataH  // 48||  / 49 /  anativyakta gupte ca sthAne
suprAtivezmike  /  anekanirgamadvAravivarjitaniketanaH  // 49 /  /  50 /
kRtasaGgaH sadAcArairmAtA-pitrozca pUjakaH  /  tyajannupaplutaM
sthAnamapravRttazca garhite  // 50 //  151 /  vyayamAyocitaM kurvan, veSaM
vittAnusArataH  /  aSTabhirdhIrguNairyuktaH, zRNvAno dharmamanvaham  // 51 //
/ 52 /  ajIrNe bhojanatyAgI, kAle bhoktA ca sAtmyataH  /  anyo'nyApratibandhena,
trivargamapi saadhyn||52|| 153 /  yathAvadatithau sAdhau, dIne ca pratipattikRt
/  sadA'nabhiniviSTazca, pakSapAtI guNeSu ca  // 53 /  /   / 54 /
adezAkAlayozcayA~, tyajan jAnan balAbalam  /  vRttasthajJAnavRddhAnAM, pUjakaH
poSya-poSakaH  // 54||  / 55 /  dIrghadarzI vizeSajJaH kRtajJo lokavallabhaH  /
salajjaH sadayaH, saumyaH, paropakRtikarmaThaH  // 55 /  /  56 /
aMtaraGgAriSaDvarga-parihAra-parAyaNaH  /  vazIkRtendriyagrAmo, gRhIdharmAya
kalpate  // 56 //  [kahIM krama meM taphAvata hai] (dazabhiH kulakam) artha :-
1. jisakA dhana-vaibhava nyAya se upArjita ho, 2. ziSTAcAra (uttama AcaraNa) kA
prazaMsaka, 3. samAna kula-zIla vAle anya gotra ke sAtha vivAha karane vAlA, 4.
pApabhIru, 5. prasiddha dezAcAra kA pAlaka, 6. kisI kA bhI avarNavAdI nahIM,
vizeSakara rAjAdi ke avarNavAda kA tyAgI, 7. usakA ghara na atiguptaH | ho aura
na ati prakaTa tathA usakA par3osa acchA ho aura usake makAna meM jAne-Ane ke
aneka dvAra na hoN| 8. sadAcArI kA satsaMga karane vAlA, 9. mAtA-pitA kA pUjaka,
10. upadrava vAle sthAna ko chor3a dene vAlA, 11. niMdanIya kArya meM pravRtti
na karane vAlA, 12. Aya ke anusAra vyaya karane vAlA, 13. vaibhava ke anusAra
pozAka dhAraNa karane vAlA, 14. buddhi ke ATha guNoM se yukta, 15.. hamezA
dharmazravaNakartA, 16. ajIrNa ke samaya bhojana kA tyAgI, 17. bhojanakAla meM
svasthatA rUpa se pathyayukta bhojana karane vAlA, 18. dharma, artha aura kAma
ina tIna vargoM kA paraspara abAdhaka rUpa se sAdhaka apanI zakti ke anusAra
atithi, sAdhu evaM dIna-dukhiyoM kI sevA karane vAlA, 20. mithyA-Agraha se sadA
dUra, 21. guNoM kA pakSapAtI, 22. niSiddha dezAcAra evaM niSiddha kAlAcAra kA
tyAgI, 23. balAbala kA samyag jJAtA, 24. vrata-niyama meM sthira, jJAna-vRddhoM
kA pUjaka, 25. AzritoM kA poSaka, 26. dIrghadarzI, 27. vizeSajJa, 28. kRtajJa,
29. lokapriya, 30. lajjAvAna, 31. dayAlu, 32. zAMta-svabhAvI, 23. paropakAra
karane meM karmaTha, 34. kAmakrodhAdi aMtaraMga chaha zatruoM ko dUra karane meM
tatpara, 35. iMdriya-samUha ko vaza meM karane vAlA; ina pUrvokta 35 guNoM se
yukta vyakti gRhasthadharma (dezaviraticAritra) pAlana karane ke yogya bana
sakatA hai  // 47-56 /  /  vyAkhyA : 1. nyAyasaMpanna-vibhava - nItimAna
gRhastha ko sarvaprathama svAmidroha, mitradroha, vizvAsaghAta tathA corI Adi
niMdanIya upAyoM kA tyAga karake apane-apane varNa ke anusAra sadAcAra aura
nyAyanIti se hI upArjita dhana-vaibhava se saMpanna honA caahie| nyAya se
upArjita kiyA huA dhana-vaibhava hI isa loka meM hitakArI ho sakatA hai| jisakA
dhana nyAyopArjita hotA hai; vaha niHzaMka hokara apane zarIra se usakA
phalopabhoga bhI kara sakatA hai; aura mitroM evaM svajanoM 62

Page #85 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## A Commentary on the 35 Ethical Rules According to the Dharmadikari Path
**Yoga Shastra, First Light, Verses 47-56**  A virtuous man, who earns through
his own efforts and strength, is self-respecting and pure in every place. A
sinner, who engages in evil deeds and stains his soul with misdeeds, is doubtful
in every place. A righteous householder can use his justly earned wealth for the
benefit of the next life by giving it to the seven worthy recipients (Sapt-
Kshetra) and by showing compassion to the poor, orphans, etc. However, wealth
accumulated through injustice brings harm in both worlds. Unjust actions are
against the welfare of the world and result in punishment, imprisonment, and
disgrace in this life. In the next life, such sins lead to hell and other
miserable states. It may be that an unjust and unethical person does not face
any calamity in this life due to the karmic effect of virtuous deeds. However,
he will surely face calamity in the future or in the next birth. It is said, "A
being blinded by the attachment to wealth, inevitably receives the fruits of his
sinful actions at some point. Like meat pierced with thorns, the sin will not
end without its destruction." Therefore, earning wealth through justice and with
a view to the ultimate good is the best course of action. It is said, "Just as
frogs are drawn towards water bodies and birds towards full lakes, so too, all
wealth comes under the control of a person who performs good deeds." Since
wealth is the primary factor in household life, the first quality is called
"Nyaya Sampanna Vibhav" (justly earned wealth).  **2. Etiquette - The
Appreciator**  A refined man is one who observes vows, practices austerities,
and serves the learned. He has received pure education, especially has good
conduct. For example, he fears public censure, rescues the distressed, respects
every human being, is grateful, and possesses the qualities of generosity. (Yoga
Bindu 126) A man with all these qualities is called a virtuous man (Shista). A
righteous householder should be an appreciator and supporter of his conduct and
thoughts. The conduct of refined men is as follows: they do not abandon a good
place in times of difficulty, they follow great men, they earn their livelihood
through a popular and just profession, they do not engage in blameworthy actions
even when facing death, they never beg from wicked people, and they do not ask
for even a little money from friends. Truly, who taught this difficult and hard
vow, like a river of swords, to the virtuous? It is the virtuous themselves who
taught it.  **3. Marriage with a Person of the Same Lineage and Character but
Different Gotra**  A person with a lineage (Khanadani) similar to that of his
ancestors, father, grandfather, etc., and with the same character and virtuous
conduct, such as the abandonment of vices like alcohol and meat, is called "Sama
Kula Shila." A man of such lineage and character is called "Ek Gotriya" (of the
same Gotra), while one born in a different Gotra is called "Bhinna Gotriya." The
implication is that a righteous householder should marry a person of the same
lineage and character but a different Gotra. Taking the hand of a woman in the
presence of fire (and the five elements) is called marriage. Marriage is said to
be of eight types in social practice: 1. Giving a daughter in marriage after
adorning her with clothes and ornaments is called Brahma marriage. 2. Giving a
daughter in marriage after investing wealth is called Prajapati marriage. 3.
Giving a daughter in marriage with the gift of a cow, bull, etc., is called
Arsha marriage. 4. The marriage in which the host gives the daughter as a gift
to the priest performing the Yajna as Dakshina is called Daiva marriage. These
four are called Dharma marriages. 5. Secretly forming a love relationship with
mutual attraction without the permission of parents or brothers is called
Gandharva marriage. 6. Giving a daughter in marriage under the compulsion of a
condition is called Asura marriage. [A marriage where the groom demands dowry
before the wedding is Asura marriage]. 7. Abducting a girl by force and marrying
her is called Rakshasa marriage. 8. Abducting a girl who is asleep or in a state
of unconsciousness and marrying her is called Pishacha marriage. These four are
considered unrighteous marriages. If the marriage is done with the consent and
happiness of both the groom and the bride, even an unrighteous marriage becomes
a righteous marriage. Marriage with a pure girl of good lineage and character is
beneficial and successful. However, a marriage with a bad woman or man brings
harm in this life as well.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dharmAdhikArI mArgAnusArI ke 35 naitika niyamoM para vivecana yogazAstra
prathama prakAza zloka 47 se 56 ko bhI yathAyogya bAMTa sakatA hai| kahA hai-
'apane puruSArtha aura bala se upArjita karane vAlA dhIra puruSa svAbhimAnI |
aura pratyeka sthAna meM pavitra tathA niHzaMka hotA hai aura burA kArya karane
vAlA tathA apanI AtmA ko kukarma se malina karane vAlA pApI pratyeka sthAna para
zaMkAzIla hotA hai|' nItimAna gRhastha paraloka ke hita ke lie apane nyAyArjita
dhana kA viniyoga sapta-kSetra rUpI satpAtra kara sakatA hai tathA dInoM,
anAthoM Adi para anukaMpA karake unheM dAna de | sakatA hai; kintu anyAya se
ikaTThe kiye hue dhana se to donoM lokoM meM ahita hI hotA hai| anyAyayukta
kArya lokaviruddha | hone se usake kartA ko isa loka meM vadha, baMdhana,
apakIrti Adi milate haiM; aura paraloka meM bhI ukta pApa se narakAdi durgati
meM bhramaNa karanA par3atA hai| kadAcit kisI anyAya-anItimAna vyakti ko
pApAnubaMdhI puNyakarma ke yoga se isa | loka meM vipatti najara na Aye; paraMtu
bhaviSya meM yA AgAmI bhava meM to usa para avazya hI vipatti AtI hai| kahA bhI
| hai - 'artha ke moha meM aMdhA banA huA jIva pApakarma karake kisI bhI samaya
usakA phala avazya prApta karatA hai| kAMTe meM piroye hue mAMsa ke samAna usakA
nAza kiye binA usa pApa kA aMta nahIM aataa|' isalie nyAyavRtti evaM
paramArthadRSTi | se dhana upArjana karanA hI zreSTha upAya hai, jisake lie kahA
hai- 'jaise meMDhaka jalAzayoM kI ora evaM pakSI pUrNa sarovara | kI tarapha
svataH khiMce cale Ate haiM, vaise hI zubhakarma vAle vyakti ke pAsa sabhI
saMpattiyAM vazIbhUta hokara calI AtI  /  hai|' 'gRhastha jIvana meM
dhanavaibhava pradhAna kAraNa hone se prathama 'nyAyasaMpannavibhiva' nAma kA
guNa batAyA hai| 2. ziSTAcAra - prazaMsaka *ziSTa puruSa vaha kahalAtA hai, jo
vrata, tapa Adi karatA ho, jJAna vRddhoM kI sevA se | jise vizuddha zikSA milI
ho, vizeSataH jisakA suMdara AcaraNa ho, udAharaNa ke taura para vaha lokApavAda
se DaratA ho, | dIna-dukhiyoM kA uddhAra karane vAlA ho, pratyeka manuSya kA
Adara karatA ho, kRtajJa ho aura dAkSiNya-guNoM se yukta ho  /  ( yogabindu 126
) ina saba guNoM se yukta puruSa ko sadAcArI ( ziSTa) kahA jAtA hai| sadgRhastha
ko usake AcAra-vicAra | kA prazaMsaka - samarthaka honA cAhie  /  ziSTa puruSoM
ke AcAra meM aisA hotA hai- ApattikAla meM uttama sthAna ko na chor3e, |
mahApuruSoM kA anusaraNa kare, janapriya evaM prAmANika (nyAyanItiyukta) vRtti
se jIvana-nirvAha kare; prANatyAga karane kA | avasara Aye to bhI niMdanIya
kArya nahIM kare, durjana se kabhI yAcanA na kare, mitroM se jarA bhI dhana
nahIM maaNge| sacamuca | isa taraha kA duSkara evaM asidhArA ke samAna kaThora
vrata kA sajjanoM ko kisane upadeza diyA? arthAt sajjanoM ne hI upadeza diyA
hai| - 3. samAna kula aura zIla vAle bhinna gotrIya ke sAtha vivAha saMbaMdha -
pitA, dAdA Adi pUrvajoM ke vaMza ke samAna ( khAnadAnI ) vaMza ho; madya, mAMsa
Adi durvyasanoM ke tyAga rUpI zIla-sadAcAra bhI samAna ho, use | samAnakulazIla
kahate haiM, usa prakAra ke kula, zIla yukta vaMza ke eka puruSa eka gotrIya
kahalAte haiM, jabaki unase bhinna gotra meM janme hue bhinna gotrIya kahalAte
haiN| tAtparya yaha hai ki pUrvokta lakSaNa ke anusAra samAnakulazIla vAle
bhinna| gotrIya ke sAtha hI sadgRhastha ko vivAhasaMbaMdha karanA caahie| agni (
evaM paMcoM) kI sAkSI se pANigrahaNa karanA vivAha | kahalAtA hai| vaha vivAha
loka-vyavahAra meM ATha prakAra kA kahA hai- 1. vastrAbhUSaNa se susajjita
karake kanyAdAna karanA | brAhma vivAha kahalAtA hai  /  2. vaibhava kA viniyoga
karake kanyAdAna karanA prAjApatya vivAha hai| 3. gAya, baila Adi ke |
dAnapUrvaka kanyAdAna karanA ArSa vivAha hai| 4. jisa vivAha meM yajJa karane ke
hetu yajamAna yAjJika ko dakSiNA meM | kanyAdAna de, vaha daiva-vivAha hai| ye
cAroM dharmyavivAha kahalAte haiM  /  5. mAtA-pitA yA bhAI kI anumati ke binA
paraspara ke anurAga se gupta rUpa se prema-saMbaMdha jor3a lenA gAMdharvavivAha
kahalAtA hai| 6. kisI zarta ke baMdhana meM Akara kanyAdAna | denA, asura -
vivAha hai| [zAdi ke pUrva daheja mAMgakara lene vAle kA vivAha asura vivAha
hai] 7. balAtkAra se kanyA kA | apaharaNa karake vivAha kara lenA rAkSasa vivAha
hai| aura 8. soyI huI athavA pramatta dazA meM par3I huI kanyA kA apaharaNa |
karake vivAha karanA pizAca vivAha hai| ye cAroM adhArmika vivAha haiN| yadi
vara aura kanyA donoM kI sammati se | prasannatApUrvaka vivAha ho to vaha
adhArmika vivAha bhI dhArmika vivAha bana jAtA hai| uttama - kulazIla vAlI
zuddha kanyA | ke sAtha vivAha lAbhadAyaka aura saphala hotA hai| kintu burI
strI yA puruSa ke sAtha vivAha saMbaMdha se isa loka meM bhI 63

Page #86 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Dharmadikari - Discussion on the 35 Qualities of a Marganusari **Yoga Shastra
Pratham Prakash Shloka 46 to 56**  | Klesh - Kalha happens, and one gets hell
even in the afterlife. 1 The benefits of a pure, noble, and chaste housewife
coming into a family are: 1. She protects the bride, 2. She gives birth to good
sons and makes them cultured, 3. There is unbroken peace in her mind, 4. She
keeps the household well-organized, 5. She protects the purity of the family
traditions, 6. She ensures proper respect for Gods, Guru, guests, relatives,
friends, etc. in the house. Similarly, the ways to protect the bride are: 1. To
assign her household duties, 2. To give her appropriate wealth, 3. To prevent
her from being free and not to encourage her towards independence, 4. To give
her maternal affection like that of a woman in the group of women and teach her
to behave in the same way. ― 4. Papbhiru - One who is afraid of sins due to
visible and invisible suffering is called Papbhiru. He commits sins like theft,
adultery, gambling, etc., which are well-known (seven vices) and cause direct
harm in this world. They are the cause of worldly ironies. It is said in the
scriptures that one has to suffer immense pain due to drinking alcohol. These
are the indirect causes of harm. 5. Follower of the Famous Customs - A good
householder should not easily abandon the traditional dress, language, attire,
food, etc., which are accepted by the noble people and have been followed for a
long time. He should follow the various customs and practices prevalent in his
entire clan, which are accepted by them. By violating the customs of the country
or caste, a person becomes an object of hatred and a cause of misfortune for the
people of that country and caste. 6. Not Being a Varnawadi - Varnawad means
criticism. A good householder should not criticize anyone, whether the person is
low, middle, or high. Criticizing others will lead to hatred, malice, and
animosity in the mind, and it will also increase many other faults. By
criticizing others and praising oneself, a person commits a low-caste karma,
which manifests in many births. This low-caste karma does not leave even after
millions of births. Thus, when general social criticism is harmful, then what to
say about the criticism of kings, ministers, priests, etc., who are accepted by
the majority? Therefore, one should especially avoid criticizing such special
people, as it immediately leads to adverse consequences. 7. The Place of
Residence of a Good Householder - The house where a good householder lives
should not have many doors, as having many doors leads to fear of theft,
adultery, etc. Therefore, while prohibiting many doors, it is said that a
householder should live in a house with fewer doors and a secure house, and the
house should be in a suitable place. Where there is no pile of bones, no sharp
thorns, and where there is a lot of grass, plants, corals, plants, and lush
vegetation around the house. Where the soil is of good color and fragrant, where
the water is tasty, such a place is considered auspicious. The merits and
demerits of a place can be known by the power of Shakun Shastra, Swapna Shastra,
or the scriptures on that subject. Similarly, the place is described in more
detail: 'That house should not be too exposed and not too hidden. Being too
exposed, i.e., being in a completely open place, increases the possibility of
trouble. And being too hidden, being surrounded by houses on all sides, hides
the beauty of the house. It is very difficult to escape from such a house in
case of fire. Then what kind of place should it be? So it is said that the third
thing to look at in relation to the house is the presence of good, virtuous
neighbors. Bad or dirty neighbors, who will be near the house, their
conversation will be heard, and their behavior will be seen. - 1. A girl who has
broken her chastity with male friends in the present and has not purified
herself by doing penance is considered a bad woman. This statement applies to a
girl who has broken her chastity willingly. 64

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dharmAdhikArI - mArgAnusArI ke 35 guNoM para vivecana yogazAstra prathama
prakAza zloka 46 se 56 | kleza- kalaha hotA hai, paraloka meM bhI naraka milatA
hai| 1 saccaritra zuddha kulIna gRhiNI ke kisI parivAra meM Ane ke | suphala ye
haiM - 1. vaha vadhU kI rakSA karatI hai, 2. suputroM ko janma detI hai, unheM
saMskArI banAtI hai, 3. citta meM akhaMDa zAMti rahatI hai, 4. gRhakAryoM kI
suvyavasthA rakhatI hai  /  5. usase zreSTha kulAcAra kI vizuddhi kI surakSA
hotI hai  /  6. deva, guru, atithi, baMdhu-bAMdhava, sage-saMbaMdhI, mitra Adi
kA ghara meM satkAra hotA hai| isI taraha vadhU kI rakSA ke upAya batAte haiM -
1. use ghara ke kAryoM meM niyukta karanA, 2 . use yathocitta dhana sauMpanA, 3.
use svacchaMdatA se rokanA, svataMtratA kI ora na mor3anA, 4. use nArI - jana-
samUha meM mAtRtvatulya vAtsalya denA aura vaisA vAtsalya - vyavahAra karanA
sikhAnA  /  -- 4. pApabhIru * dRSTa aura adRSTa duHkha ke kAraNa rUpa karmoM
(pApa) se Darane vAlA pApabhIru kahalAtA hai| usameM corI, paradArAgamana, juA
Adi loka- prasiddha (sAta vyasana) pApakarma hai, jo isa loka meM pratyakSa hAni
pahuMcAne vAle haiN| sAMsArika viDaMbanAe~ paidA karane ke kAraNa hai| madyapAna
se apAra vedanA bhoganI par3atI hai, yaha zAstroM meM batAyA gayA hai| hAni
pahu~cAne ke ye parokSa kAraNa haiN| 5. prasiddha dezAcAra kA pAlaka sadgRhastha
ko ziSTa-puruSoM dvArA mAnya, cirakAla se cale Ate hue paraMparAgata veza-bhUSA,
bhASA, pozAka, bhojana Adi sahasA nahIM chor3ane caahie| apane samagra
jJAtimaMDala ke dvArA mAnya pracalita vividha rItirivAjoM va kriyAoM kA acchI
taraha pAlana karanA caahie| deza yA jAti ke AcAroM kA ullaMghana | karane se
usa deza aura jAti ke logoM kA virodha hone se vyakti unakA kopabhAjana tathA
akalyANa kA kAraNa-bhUta banatA hai| 6. avarNavAdI na honA - avarNavAda kA artha
hai -nindA | sadgRhastha ko kisI kA bhI avarNavAda nahIM karanA | cAhie; cAhe
vaha vyakti jaghanya ho, madhyama ho yA uttama  /  dUsare kI niMdA karane se
mana meM ghRNA, dveSa, vairavirodha to hogA hI, isase aneka doSoM ke bar3hane kI
bhI saMbhAvanA hai| dUsare kI niMdA aura apanI prazaMsA karane se vyakti nIca -
gotra karmabaMdha karatA hai  /  jo aneka janmoM meM udaya meM AtA hai| vaha
nIcagotra karor3oM janmoM meM bhI nahIM chuutttaa| isa prakAra | sAmAnya
janasaMbaMdhI avarNavAda (niMdA) jaba hAnikAraka hai, to phira bahujanamAnya
rAjA, maMtrI, purohita Adi kA to kahanA hI kyA? ataH aise viziSTa logoM kI niMdA
kA khAsataura se tyAga karanA cAhie; kyoMki usase tatkAla viparIta pariNAma AtA
hai| 7. sadgRhastha ke rahane kA sthAna sadgRhastha ke rahane kA ghara aisA ho,
jahA~ Ane-jAne ke dvAra adhika na | ho; kyoMki aneka dvAra hone se corI, jArI
Adi kA bhaya hotA hai| isalie aneka dvAroM kA niSedha karate hue kahate haiN| ki
'gRhastha ko kama dvAra vAle evaM surakSita ghara meM rahanA cAhie aura ghara
bhI yogya sthAna meM ho| jahAM haDDiyA~ Adi kA Dhera na ho, tIkSNa kAMTe na ho
tathA ghara ke Asa-pAsa bahuta-sI dUba, ghAsa, pravAla, paudhe, prazasta
vanaspati ugI huI ho| jahAM miTTI acche raMga kI aura sugaMdhita ho, jahAM kA
pAnI svAdiSTa ho, aise sthAna ko prazasta mAnA gayA hai| sthAna ke guNa-doSa
zakunazAstra, svapnazAstra yA usa viSaya ke zAstra Adi ke bala se jAne jA sakate
haiN| isI taraha sthAna kA aura bhI vizeSa varNana karate haiM- 'vaha makAna na
atiprakaTa ho aura na atigupta ho  /  atiprakaTa hone se arthAt bilkula khulI
jagaha meM hone se upadrava kI saMbhAvanA rahatI hai| aura atigupta hone se
cAroM tarapha se gharoM ke kAraNa ghirA rahane se ghara | kI zobhA chipa jAtI
hai| Aga lagane para aise makAna se bAhara nikalanA bar3A kaThina hotA hai|
phira sthAna kaisA honA | cAhie? to kahA ki tIsarI bAta, jo ghara ke saMbaMdha
meM dekhanI cAhie, vaha hai-acche sadAcArI par3ausI kA honaa| bure yA gaMde
AcaraNa vAle par3ausI, jisa ghara ke pAsa hoMge, vahAM unakA vArtAlApa sunakara
unakI - 1. vartamAna meM puruSa mitroM ke sAtha zIla bhaMga karane vAlI kanyA
jisane prAyazcitta lekara zuddhi nahIM kI vaha kanyA burI strI ke aMtargata hai
/  svecchA se zIla bhaMga karane vAlI kanyA ko yaha kathana lAgu hotA hai| 64

Page #87 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Discussion on the 35 Qualities of a Dharmadikari as per the Path
**Considering verses 46 to 56 of the Yoga Shastra, the first light, even the
qualities of virtuous people can be lost.**  The scriptures describe bad
neighbors as follows: prostitutes, maidservants, eunuchs, dancers, beggars,
mendicants, paupers, Chandals, fishermen, hunters, sorcerers-tantrics (Aghoris),
low-caste Bhils, etc. Having such neighbors is not good. Therefore, one should
not build a house near such neighbors. (Ogh Ni. 467) [Currently, one should not
build a house near alcoholics, gamblers, thieves, atheists, etc., and near movie
theaters.]  **8. Association with the Virtuous:** For a good householder, the
company of the virtuous is of great importance. Those who engage in activities
beneficial in this world and the next are considered good company. Association
with wicked people, cheats, adulterers, bards, cruel people, soldiers, clowns,
etc., destroys one's character. Ethicists have said, "If you associate with
virtuous men, your future will improve, and if you associate with wicked people,
your future will be destroyed."  Firstly, attachment (Sanga) is completely to be
abandoned, but if one must associate, then one should associate with virtuous
men, because the company of virtuous men is like medicine.  **9. Reverence for
Parents:** The good householder is considered excellent who salutes his parents
three times a day; engages them in afterlife-beneficial religious practices;
honors and respects them; and obeys their commands in every action. He offers
them flowers, fruits, etc., with good color and fragrance, before using them
himself. He feeds them first and then eats himself.  Those who do not do this
will not have a tradition of humility in their family; and there will be many
unruly, uncultured, talkative, and quarrelsome people. Therefore, every
householder should serve, worship, and revere his parents. The mother is given
the first place because she is more worthy of worship than the father.
Therefore, instead of saying "father-mother," we say "mother-father," and the
mother is given the first place. The Manusmriti says, "A teacher is equal to ten
Upadhyayas, a father is equal to a thousand teachers, and a mother is equal to a
thousand fathers." Therefore, the mother's glory is greater. (Here, understand
worldly Upadhyaya and Acharya.)  **10. One who Quickly Leaves a Troubled
Place:** If there is fear from one's own kingdom or from the kingdom of another
country, famine, epidemic diseases, a great war breaks out, or there is unrest
everywhere in a place, village, or city due to opposition from the people, and
there is fighting and quarreling day and night, then the good householder should
leave that place immediately. If he does not leave that place, he will destroy
the dharma, wealth, and desires he has earned before, and he will not be able to
earn new ones, thus ruining both his worlds.  **11. One who Abandons
Reprehensible Actions:** A good householder should not engage in actions that
are reprehensible from the perspective of the country, caste, and family. For
example, from the perspective of the country, farming in the Sauvira country and
drinking alcohol in the Latadesh country are considered reprehensible. From the
perspective of caste, drinking alcohol, trading in sesame seeds, salt, etc., are
considered reprehensible for Brahmins. From the perspective of family, drinking
alcohol is considered reprehensible in the Chalukya dynasty. Thus, those who
engage in such reprehensible actions from the perspective of country, family,
and caste, even if they perform other good religious deeds, are considered
objects of ridicule among people. [Currently, the trade of blue films, wine,
meat exports, etc.]  **12. Spending According to Income:** A good householder
should always spend with the thought, "How much is my income?" Before spending
money for his family, for the maintenance of his dependents, for his personal
use, and for the worship and hospitality of deities and guests, he should see
how much income he has from his farming, animal husbandry, or business, etc. He
should spend accordingly. Ethics says, "Give charity according to what you have
earned in business, etc., consume according to your profit, and save a
reasonable amount for safekeeping."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dharmAdhikArI mArgAnusArI ke 35 guNoM para vivecana yogazAstra prathama prakAza
zloka 46 se 56 ceSTAe~ dekhakara, guNI logoM ke guNoM kI bhI hAni ho jaayegii|
zAstra meM kharAba par3osI isa prakAra ke batAye gaye haiMvezyA, dAsI,
napuMsaka, nartaka, bhikSuka, maMgatA, kaMgAla, cAMDAla, machuArA, zikArI,
mAMtrika-tAMtrika (aghorI), nIcajAtIya bhIla aadi| isa prakAra ke par3osiyoM kA
honA acchA nahIM hotaa| isalie aise par3osiyoM ke pAsa ghara nahIM banAnA
caahie| (ogha ni. 467) [vartamAna meM zarAbI, jUArI, dANacora, nAstika Adi evaM
TaoNkIja ke pAsa makAna nahIM |banAnA] 8. sadAcArI ke sAtha saMgati -
sadgRhastha ke lie satsaMga kA bar3A mahatva hai| jo isa loka aura paraloka meM
hitakara pravRtti karate hoM, unhIM kI saMgati acchI mAnI gayI hai, jo khala,
Thaga, jAra, bhATa, krUra, sainika, naTa Adi hoM unakI saMgati karane se apane
zIla kA nAza hotA hai| nItikAroM ne kahA hai-'yadi tuma sajjana puruSoM kI
saMgati karoge to tumhArA bhaviSya sudhara jAyegA aura durjana kA sahavAsa
karoge to bhaviSya naSTa ho jaayegaa| avvala (vAstava meM) to saMga (Asakti)
sarvathA tyAjya hai, lekina karanA hI hai to sajjana puruSoM kA saMga karanA
cAhie, kyoMki satpuruSoM kA saMga auSadha rUpa hotA hai| 9. mAtA-pitA kA pUjaka
- vahI sadgRhastha uttama mAnA gayA hai, jo tInoM samaya mAtA-pitA ko namaskAra
karatA hai; unako paraloka-hitakArI dharmAnuSThAna meM lagAtA hai; unakA
satkAra-sanmAna karatA hai tathA pratyeka kArya meM unakI AjJA kA pAlana karatA
hai| acche raMga aura sugaMdha vAle puSpa-phalAdi pahale unheM dekara bAda meM
svayaM upayoga karatA hai| unako pahale bhojana karavAkara phira svayaM bhojana
karatA hai| jo aisA nahIM karatA usake parivAra meM vinaya kI paraMparA nahIM
par3a sakegI; tathA vahA~ prAyaH ucchRkhala, avinIta, bahuta bakajhaka karane
vAle, kalahakArI bddh'eNge| isalie mAtA-pitA kI sevAbhakti-pUjA pratyeka
gRhastha ko karanI caahie| mAtA ko pahalA sthAna isalie diyA gayA hai ki pitA kI
apekSA mAtA adhika pUjanIya hotI hai| isalie 'pitA-mAtA' nahIM kahakara 'mAtA-
pitA' kahA jAtA hai aura mAM ko prathama sthAna diyA jAtA hai| manusmRti meM
kahA hai ki 'dasa upAdhyAyoM ke barAbara AcArya hotA hai, so AcAryoM ke barAbara
eka pitA aura hajAra pitAoM ke barAbara eka mAtA hotI hai| isa kAraNa mAtA kA
gaurava adhika hai| (yahAM laukika upAdhyAya aura AcArya-samajhanA) 10. jo
upadrava vAle sthAna ko zIghra chor3a detA hai - apane rAjya yA dUsare deza ke
rAjya kI ora se bhaya ho, duSkAla ho, mahAmArI Adi roga kA upadrava ho,
mahAyuddha chir3a gayA ho, logoM ke virodha hone se usa sthAna, gAMva yA nagara
Adi meM sarvatra azAMti paidA ho gayI ho. rAta-dina laDAI-jhagaDA rahatA ho to
sadagahastha ko vaha sthAna zIghra chor3a denA caahie| yadi vaha usa sthAna kA
tyAga nahIM karatA hai to pahale ke kamAye hue dharma, artha aura kAma kA bhI
vinAza kara baiThatA hai aura navIna upArjana nahIM kara sakane se apane donoM
loka bigAr3atA hai| 11. niMdanIya kArya kA tyAgI - sadgRhastha ko deza, jAti
evaM kula kI dRSTi se garhitaniMdita kArya meM pravRtti nahIM karanI caahie|
udAharaNa ke taura para, deza kI dRSTi se garhita jaise sauvIra deza meM khetI
aura lATadeza meM madirApAna, niMdanIya mAne jAte haiN| jAti kI apekSA se
'brAhmaNa kA surApAna karanA, tila, namaka Adi kA vyApAra karanA niMdya mAnA
jAtA hai| kula kI apekSA se caulukya vaMza meM madirApAna niMdya samajhA jAtA
hai| isa prakAra deza, kula aura jAti kI dRSTi se aise niMdanIya kArya karane
vAle loga anya acche dhArmika kArya karate haiM to bhI logoM meM haMsI ke pAtra
samajhe jAte haiN| | [vartamAna meM blU philma kA vyApAra, vAIna, mAMsa niryAta
Adi] 12. Aya ke anusAra vyaya karanA - sadgRhastha ko sadA yaha socakara hI
kharca karanA cAhie ki merI Aya | kitanI hai? use apane parivAra ke lie, AzritoM
ke bharaNa-poSaNa ke lie, apane nijI upayoga ke lie tathA devatA aura atithiyoM
ke pUjana-satkAra meM dravya kharca karane se pahale yaha dekhanA cAhie ki mujhe
apanI khetI, pazupAlana yA vyApAra Adi se kitanI Aya hai? yaha dekhakara hI
tadanusAra kharca karanA caahie| nItizAstra meM kahA gayA hai-'vyApAra Adi meM
jo kamAI huI ho, tadanusAra hI dAna denA, lAbha ke anusAra upabhoga karanA aura
ucita rakama bacAkara amAnata 65

Page #88 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Dharmadikari - Discussion on the 35 Qualities of a Marganusari ## Yogashastra
Pratham Prakash Shloka 46 to 56  **(Safe)** should be kept as a treasure (in
times of crisis).’ Many ethicists have said - ‘According to earnings | Four
divisions should be made. (Panch Su. 2) One-fourth of one's income should be
kept in reserve (safe). One-fourth in interest or business, one-fourth in
religious work and consumption, and one-fourth in the maintenance of
dependents.’ Some | ethicists say that, ‘Out of the earned amount, more than
half should be spent on religious works and the remaining small amount should be
actively spent on the work of this world. If a householder spends
inappropriately, then just as a disease that grows day by day weakens the body,
so too does excessive daily waste | makes a man incapable of all good conduct.
It has also been said - that whoever spends excessively like Kubera without
keeping an account of income and expenditure, becomes a beggar in a short time.
-  13. Dress according to wealth - A good householder should wear clothes, •
ornaments etc. according to his wealth, status, wealth, age, country, time and
caste. Whoever does not dress according to his status or wealth; but shows off
by wearing flashy clothes, becomes a laughing stock among people. People | can
tell from his flashy or expensive clothes that he must have earned money by
dishonesty, injustice, oppression or reprehensible deeds. Or people start
suspecting about him that nowadays he must be earning a lot | because he spends
so lavishly and wears such fine, expensive clothes. Another meaning of this is
that even if there is income, he does not spend it frugally; even though he is
wealthy, he wears bad, dirty, torn clothes, then he also becomes an object of
censure among people and he cannot become a follower of Dharma.  14. A good
householder should possess the eight qualities of intellect - A good householder
should possess the following eight qualities of intellect - 1. Shushrusha, 2.
Shravan, 3. Grahan, 4. Dharan, 5. Uha, 6. Apoh, 7. Arth-Vigyan and 8. Tattvajnan
| Their meaning is as follows - 1. Shushrusha - Desire to listen to Dharma
Shastra. 2. Shravan - Listening to Dharma. 3. Grahan - Accepting after
listening. 4. Dharan - Keeping it in mind by holding it so that the heard word
is not forgotten. 5. Uha - Reasoning about other meanings besides the known
meaning. 6. Apoh - Moving away from the opposite meaning from utterance
(Shruti), reasoning and experience | or separating oneself from things that harm
the soul like violence etc. | Or Uha means general knowledge and Apoh means
analysis of special knowledge. 7. Arth-Vigyan - Obtaining specific correct
knowledge of the object by removing delusion and doubt through the combination
of Uha and Apoh and 8. Tattvajnan - Obtaining pure definite knowledge from a
special type of knowledge of Uha | Apoh. Thus, the householder who acquires the
intellectual qualities from Shushrusha to Tattvajnan; he never does his own
harm. Therefore, a good householder should adopt these eight intellectual
qualities as much as possible.  -  -  15. Daily Dharma-Shravan-Karta - A good
householder should be engaged in listening to Dharma, which is the cause of
progress and liberation (Moksha). The mind of those who listen to Dharma daily
is very far from restlessness and experiences joy. Its benefits have been told
that listening to Dharma - lectures is useful, it is a good saying, it removes
the anxiety of a frightened person, | calms the one who is tormented by the
three kinds of suffering, the ignorant person gets enlightenment from it and the
disorganized, restless mind becomes stable. Therefore, daily Dharma-Shravan is
helpful in the progressive growth of qualities in life. There is a slight
difference between Shravan (desire to listen) and Shravan (listening) mentioned
in the qualities of intellect.  16. Leaving food during indigestion - A good
householder should leave food during indigestion. One should not eat new food
until the previously eaten food is digested. Because it is said in medical
science that indigestion is the root of all diseases and eating during
indigestion (indigestion) aggravates the disease. Indigestion can be recognized
by its signs. | Bad smell from stool and apanavayu due to their decay, heaviness
of the body, loss of appetite, sour and bad belches, these are the signs of
indigestion.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dharmAdhikArI - mArgAnusArI ke 35 guNoM para vivecana yogazAstra prathama
prakAza zloka 46 se 56 (surakSita) nidhi ke rUpa meM (saMkaTa ke avasaroM para)
rakhanA caahie|' kaI nItikAroM ne to kahA hai- 'kamAI ke anusAra | cAra vibhAga
karane caahie| (paMca sU. 2) apanI Aya kA cauthA bhAga bhaMDAra meM (surakSita)
rakhanA caahie| cauthA bhAga byAja yA vyApAra meM, cauthA bhAga dharmakArya aura
upabhoga meM aura cauthA bhAga AzritoM ke bharaNa-poSaNa meM lagAye  / ' kucha |
nItikAroM kA kahanA hai ki, 'kamAI huI rakama meM se AdhI se adhika rakama
dhArmika kAryoM meM lagAye aura zeSa bacI huI thor3I rakama sakriya hokara isa
loka ke kArya meM lagAye  /  yadi gRhastha anucita rUpa se anApa- sanApa kharca
karatA hai, to jaise dinoMdana bar3hatA huA roga zarIra ko durbala banA detA hai
vaise hI samagra vaibhava bhI pratidina ke atyadhika apavyaya se | puruSa ko
sabhI suvyavahAroM ke lie asamartha banA detA hai| aura bhI kahA hai-ki Aya aura
vyaya kA hisAba kiye binA jo kubera ke samAna atyadhika kharca karatA hai, vaha
thor3e hI samaya meM bhikhArI bana jAtA hai| - 13. saMpatti ke anusAra
veSadhAraNa - sadgRhastha ko apanI saMpatti, haisiyata, vaibhava, avasthA deza,
kAla aura jAti ke anusAra hI vastra, * alaMkAra Adi dhAraNa karanA caahie| jo
apanI haisiyata yA saMpatti ke anusAra pozAka dhAraNa | nahIM karatA; pratyuta
tar3akIlI-bhar3akIlI pozAka pahanakara dikhAvA karatA hai, vaha logoM meM haMsI
kA pAtra hotA hai| loga | usakI caTakIlI yA bahumUlya pozAka para se anumAna
lagA lete haiM ki isane beImAnI, anyAya, atyAcAra yA niMdanIya karma karake
paisA kamAyA hogA  /  athavA loga usake bAre meM zaMkA karane lagate haiM ki
Aja-kala to isake bahuta kamAI | hotI hogI; tabhI to itanA aphalAtUna kharca
karatA hai aura aisI bar3hiyA bezakImatI pozAka pahanatA hai| isakA eka dUsarA
artha yaha bhI hai ki AmadanI hotI ho, phira bhI kaMjUsI se kharca nahIM karatA;
vaibhava hone para bhI kharAba, gaMde, phaTeTUTe kapar3e pahanatA hai, to vaha
bhI logoM meM niMdA kA pAtra banatA hai aura vaha dharma kA adhikArI bhI nahIM
bana sakatA 14. buddhi ke ATha guNoM kA dhanI sadgRhastha meM buddhi ke
nimnalikhita ATha guNa hone Avazyaka hai - 1. zuzrUSA, 2. zravaNa, 3. grahaNa,
4. dhAraNa, 5. Uha, 6. apoha, 7. artha-vijJAna aura 8. tattvajJAna | inakA artha
kramazaH isa prakAra hai - 1. zuzrUSA - dharmazAstra sunane kI abhilASA  /  2.
zravaNa - dharma-zravaNa krnaa| 3. grahaNa - zravaNa karake grahaNa karanA  /
4. dhAraNa- sunI huI bAta ko bhUla na jAye, isa taraha use dhAraNa karake mana
meM rakhanA  /  5. Uha - jAne hue artha ke alAvA dUsare arthoM ke saMbaMdha meM
tarka karanA  /  6. apoha - ukti (zruti), yukti aura anubhUti se viruddha artha
| se haTanA athavA hiMsA Adi AtmA ko hAni pahuMcAne vAle padArthoM se pRthak ho
jAnA yA apane ko pRthak kara lenA  /  | athavA Uha yAnI sAmAnyajJAna kA aura
apoha yAnI vizeSajJAna kA vyAvartana (vizleSaNa) karanA  /  7. artha-vijJAna
UhApoha ke yoga se moha aura saMdeha dUra karake vastu kA viziSTa samyagjJAna
prApta karanA aura 8. tattvajJAna - UhA| poha ke vizeSa prakAra ke jJAna se
vizuddha nizcita jJAna prApta karanA  /  isa prakAra zuzrUSA se lekara
tattvajJAna taka ke bauddhika guNa jo gRhastha prApta kara letA hai; vaha kabhI
apanA akalyANa nahIM karatA  /  ataH sadgRhastha ko yathAsaMbhava ina AThoM
buddhi-guNoM ko apanAne caahie| - - 15. pratidina dharma-zravaNa-kartA -
sadgRhastha ko pratidina abhyudaya aura niHzreyasa (mokSa) ke kAraNa rUpa dharma
ke zravaNa meM udyata rahanA cAhie  /  pratidina dharma-zravaNa karane vAloM kA
mana azAMti se atyaMta dUra rahakara AnaMda kA anubhava karatA hai| isake lAbha
batAye haiM ki dharma - vyAkhyAna kA zravaNa upayogI hai, yaha subhASita hai,
ghabar3Aye hue vyakti | kI vyAkulatA dUra karatA hai, trividha tApa se tape hue
ko zAMta karatA hai, mUr3ha ko isase bodha prApta hotA hai aura avyavasthita
caMcala mana sthira ho jAtA hai| ataH pratidina dharma-zravaNa jIvana meM
uttarottara guNoM kI vRddhi meM sahAyaka hai| buddhi ke guNoM meM batAye hue
zravaNa (sunane kI icchA hai, yahAM sunanA hI hai) meM itanA sA aMtara hai| 16.
ajIrNa ke samaya bhojana chor3a denA sadgRhastha ko ajIrNa ke samaya bhojana
chor3a denA caahie| pahale kiyA huA bhojana jaba taka hajama na ho, taba taka
nayA bhojana nahIM karanA caahie| kyoMki vaidyakazAstra meM batAyA hai ki ajIrNa
saba rogoM kA mUla hai aura ajIrNa (badahajamI) ke samaya bhojana karane para
vaha roga ko bar3hAtA hai| ajIrNa usake cihnoM | se jAnA jA sakatA hai| mala
aura apAnavAyu kI sar3Ana se unameM badabU AnA, zarIra kA bhArI ho jAnA, bhojana
meM aruci honA, khaTTI aura kharAba DakAreM AnA, ye ajIrNa ke cihna hai| 66 -

Page #89 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Discussion on the 35 Qualities of Dharmadikari-Marganusari **Yoga Shastra
Pratham Prakash Sloka 46 to 56**  **17. Eating Pathya Food at the Right Time**
It is essential for a Sadgrihastha (householder) to eat food in accordance with
their nature, taste, digestive fire, and capacity, without attachment, when they
feel hungry. If they eat more than their capacity, they will suffer from
vomiting, diarrhea, indigestion, or other diseases, and may even die. Therefore,
overeating is not advisable. However, even nectar consumed without hunger
becomes poison. And if one eats after the time of hunger has passed, they will
experience aversion and disgust towards food, and suffer pain in the body.
"Adding fuel to a fire after it has been extinguished is useless."  Consuming
food and water that are suitable for one's body and capacity, and that are
enjoyable, is called "Satmya." Such Satmya, if practiced throughout life, even
if the food is poison, will be beneficial once. One should consume only those
foods that are Pathya (suitable) even if they are excessively Satmya. One should
not consume unsuitable and harmful substances, even if they are considered
Satmya due to their taste. "Everything is beneficial for the strong," do not
consume poison thinking this way. Even a person who is knowledgeable about
poisons and highly skilled can die from poison at some point.  **18. Practicing
the Three Purusharthas (Goals of Life) Without Hindrance**  Dharma, Artha, and
Kama are called the three Purusharthas. Dharma is that which leads to Abhyudaya
(worldly progress) and Moksha (liberation). Artha is that which fulfills all
worldly purposes. Kama is the pleasure derived from the senses, born out of
pride, and associated with all sensual pleasures. A Sadgrihastha should practice
these three Purusharthas in such a way that they do not hinder each other.
However, it is not advisable to practice only one or two of them.  Ethics
experts also say, "Without practicing the three Purusharthas - Dharma, Artha,
and Kama - in a way that does not contradict each other, a person is no
different from a blacksmith's bellows, breathing but not truly alive." If
someone neglects Dharma and becomes greedy for worldly pleasures, they become
like a wild elephant, prone to disaster. Because one who is indifferent to
Dharma and Artha and is excessively attached to sensual pleasures will lose
Dharma, Artha, and their body, becoming dependent and miserable. Similarly, one
who neglects Dharma and Kama and is solely focused on earning wealth will not
experience true joy in life nor find mental peace. Ultimately, others will enjoy
their wealth. Sons-in-law, partners, the government, or others will seize their
wealth. They will only be left with their hard work. Just as a lion, by killing
an elephant, only becomes a partaker of sin, so too will they only become a
partaker of sin.  It is not appropriate for a householder to neglect Artha and
Kama and only practice Dharma, because they have duties towards their family,
society, and country. If they become engrossed in solitary religious practices,
they will become irresponsible and unhappy. They will have to depend on others
for their livelihood. Therefore, while Sadhus (ascetics) can fully dedicate
themselves to Dharma, householders are often unable to do so. They can worship
and serve the Shramans (ascetics). Therefore, one should practice Artha and Kama
in a way that does not hinder Dharma. A farmer who eats the seeds meant for
sowing will suffer with his family due to a lack of seeds in the future.
Similarly, a person who does not practice Dharma in the present will not attain
happiness or welfare in the future. Truly, only that person is happy who
experiences the happiness of this world in a way that does not hinder the
happiness of the next birth.  One who abandons earning wealth and only practices
Dharma and Kama becomes indebted. One who abandons Kama and only practices
Dharma and Artha becomes a misfortune for their household, and their family
members remain dissatisfied. Therefore, a householder who completely neglects
Kama cannot sustain their household life.  A householder who practices each of
the three Purusharthas in isolation becomes like a Tadatmik, Mulahar, and
Kadarya, hindering their own growth. A Tadatmik is one who spends their earned
wealth without thinking. A Mulahar is one who consumes the wealth inherited from
their ancestors or other forefathers in an unethical manner. A Kadarya is one
who...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dharmAdhikArI-mArgAnusArI ke 35 guNoM para vivecana yogazAstra prathama prakAza
zloka 46 se 56 17. samaya para pathya-bhojana karanA sadgRhastha ke lie yaha
Avazyaka hai ki vaha bhUkha lagane para Asakti| rahita hokara apanI prakRti,
ruci, jaTharAgni evaM khurAka ke anusAra ucitamAtrA meM bhojana kre| yadi vaha
mAtrA se adhika | bhojana karegA to use vamana, atisAra yA ajIrNa Adi roga hoMge
aura kabhI mRtyu bhI ho sakatI hai| isalie mAtrA se adhika khAnA ucita nahIM
hai; paraMtu bhUkha ke binA amRta bhI khAtA hai, to bhI vaha jahara ho jAtA hai
aura kSudhAkAla | samApta hone ke bAda bhojana karegA to use bhojana para aruci
aura ghRNA hogI aura zarIra meM pIr3A hogii| 'Aga bujha jAne ke bAda IMdhana
jhauMkanA vyartha hotA hai|' AhAra- pAnI bhI apane zarIra kI prakRti evaM
khurAka ke anukUla pathyakAraka tathA | sukhapUrvaka grahaNa karanA 'sAtmya'
kahalAtA hai| isa prakAra ke sAtmya rUpa meM jiMdagIbhara mAtrA ke anusAra kiyA
huA bhojana agara viSa bhI ho to vaha eka bAra to hitakArI hotA hai| atisAtmya
khAdya vastu bhI jo pathya-rUpa ho, usI | kA sevana kre| ruci ke anukUla apathya
aura ahitakArI vastu ko sAtmya samajhakara bhI sevana na kare  /  'zaktizAlI ke
lie sabhI vastu hitakArI hai;' aisA mAnakara kAla kUTa viSa na khAye  /
viSataMtrajJAtA aura atyaMta dakSa vyakti kI bhI kisI | samaya viSa se mRtyu ho
jAtI hai| 18. paraspara abAdhita rUpa se tIno vargoM kI sAdhanA dharma, artha
aura kAma; ye tIna varga kahalAte hai| jisase abhyudaya aura mokSa kI siddhi ho,
vaha dharma hai| jisase laukika sarva-prayojana siddha hote hoM, vaha artha hai
aura abhimAna se utpanna, samasta iMdriya sukhoM se saMbaMdhita rasa yukta prIti
kAma hai  /  sadgRhastha ko ina tInoM vargoM kI sAdhanA isa prakAra se karanI
cAhie, ki ye tInoM varga eka dUsare ke lie paraspara bAdhaka na bneN| paraMtu
tInoM meM se kevala kisI eka kI yA | kinhIM do kI sAdhanA karanA ucita nahIM hai
/  nItikAra bhI kahate haiM - 'trivarga arthAt dharma, artha kAma ina tInoM
vargoM kI | paraspara avirodhI - rUpa se sAdhanA kiye binA jisakA dina vyatIta
hotA hai, vaha puruSa lauhAra kI dhauMkanI ke samAna zvAsa | lete hue bhI jIvita
nahIM hai| yadi koI ina tInoM meM dharma kI upekSA karake kevala tattvahIna
(atathya) sAMsArika viSayasuqhoM meM lubdha banatA hai, vaha jaMgalI hAthI ke
samAna Aphata kA zikAra banatA hai, kyoMki jo dharma aura artha se udAsIna |
hokara kevala viSayabhogoM meM hI atyaMta Asakta rahegA; vaha dharma, artha aura
zarIra tInoM ko khokara parAdhIna evaM duHkhI ho jAyegA  /  isI prakAra jo
dharma aura kAma kA atikramaNa karake kevala arthopArjana meM hI lagA rahatA
hai, vaha jIvana kA saccA AnaMda nahIM prApta kara pAtA na hI mAnasika zAMti
pAtA hai| aMtatogatvA, usake dhana kA upabhoga dUsare karate hai| dAmAda,
hissedAra, sarakAra yA anya loga usake dhana para kabjA jamA lete haiN| usake to
sirpha mehanata hI palle par3atI hai| jaise siMha, hAthI kA vadha karake kevala
pApa kA bhAgI banatA hai, vaise vaha bhI kevala pApa kA adhikArI banatA hai|
artha aura kAma kA atikramaNa karake kevala dharma kA sevana bhI gRhastha ke lie
ucita nahIM, kyoMki use apane sAre parivAra, samAja va deza ke prati kartavyo kA
bhI pAlana karanA hai| yadi vaha ekAMta dharmakriyA meM laga jAyegA to
gairajimmedAra | banakara duHkhI hogaa| apanI roTI ke lie bhI use dUsaroM kA
muMha tAkanA pdd'egaa| isalie sAdhu to sarvathA dharma kA sevana kara sakate
haiM; lekina gRhastha sarvathA dharma kA pAlana karane meM prAyaH asamartha hotA
hai| vaha zramaNoM kI upAsanA va | sevAbhakti kara sakatA hai| isIlie dharma meM
rukAvaTa na Aye, isa prakAra artha aura kAma kA sevana kre| bone ke lie |
surakSita bIjoM ko khA jAne vAlA kisAna samaya para bIja na rahane ke kAraNa
saparivAra duHkhI hotA hai, vaise hI vartamAna meM dharmAcaraNa na karane vAlA
vyakti bhaviSya meM sukhada phala yA kalyANa prApta nahIM kara pAtA  /  vAstava
meM vahI vyakti sukhI kahalAtA hai; jo agale janma ke sukha meM bAdhA na
pahuMce, isa prakAra se isa loka ke sukha kA anubhava kre| isa taraha
arthopAjana karanA baMda karake jo dharma aura kAma kA hI sevana karatA hai;
vaha karjadAra bana jAtA hai| kAma ko chor3akara jo kevala dharma aura artha kA
sevana karatA hai; vaha gRhastha manahUsa bana jAtA hai, usake ghara ke loga
asaMtuSTa rahate haiN| isa | kAraNa kAma - puruSArtha kI sarvathA upekSA karane
vAlA gRhastha-avasthA meM Tika nahIM sktaa| dharma, artha aura kAma ina tInoM
meM se pratyeka ke ekAMtasevI gRhastha tAdAtvika, mUlahara aura kadarya ke
samAna apane jIvana ke vikAsa meM svayaM rukAvaTa | DAlate haiN| tAdAtmika use
kahate haiM, jo binA soceM - vicAreM upArjita dhana ko kharca kara DAlatA hai|
mUlahara use kahate haiN| jo bApa-dAdoM yA anya pUrvajoM se prApta dhana kA
anIti pUrNa DhaMga se upabhoga karake khatma kara detA hai| kadarya use 67

Page #90 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Discussion on the 35 Qualities of Dharmadikari-Marganusari  **Yoga Shastra,
First Light, Verses 46 to 56 states:** One who gathers wealth by troubling
servants and himself, but does not spend it in the right place, does not benefit
from it. The destruction of wealth by Datvik and the destruction of Dharma and
Kama by Malhar do not lead to the welfare of both. The wealth of Kadarya is
taken away by the government, officials, or thieves. That wealth does not remain
for his Dharma and Kama. Therefore, it is stated here that a householder should
not obstruct the unimpeded enjoyment of the Trivarga. If, by chance, the time
comes when there is an obstacle in the enjoyment of any of these Purusharthas,
then one should abandon the enjoyment of the subsequent Purushartha and protect
the previous Purushartha from the obstacle. For example, if there is an obstacle
in Kama, then one should protect Dharma and Artha from obstacles. Because with
Dharma and Artha, Kama can also be easily obtained. If there is an obstacle in
Kama and Artha, then one should protect Dharma. Because the root of Artha and
Kama is Dharma. A wise person has said, "Even if I have to beg for my
livelihood, if Dharma is protected, I consider myself wealthy." Indeed, the
virtuous are wealthy with Dharma-like wealth.  **19. Hospitality towards Guests
etc.** - A virtuous householder must welcome guests who come to his house. A
guest is one who has no fixed date due to his constant focus on the beautiful
tendency of self-welfare. Ethicists have said, "One should consider as a guest
the great soul who has renounced the celebration of dates and festivals; and the
rest as visitors." Sadhu-Sadhvi-gana are always praiseworthy in the entire
world, without fixing any date or festival. Therefore, they are excellent
guests. The implication is that one should properly honor guests, Sadhus, and
the poor, whose power to worship Dharma, Artha, and Kama has become weak. The
synonym for date is day. Both the words day and Din are derived from the root
'Do Avakhandane' (meaning destruction). Therefore, Din is also taken in the
sense of a guest. On the one hand, there is only one quality of righteousness,
and on the other hand, there is a sea of qualities without righteousness; even
then, those qualities are like poison. That is, one should give to a virtuous
guest with devotion, and to the poor, the distressed, and the orphans and the
disabled with compassion; this is the right way.  **20. Always Stay Away from
Attachment** - A virtuous householder should always stay away from false
attachment. Attachment is called false attachment. A person with false
attachment is one who is ignorant of the path of righteousness and starts a task
with stubbornness to belittle or defeat others. Therefore, it is said, "Egotism
brings failure to the lowly, it breeds unrighteousness, vices, and regret from
the beginning of the task." The habit of swimming against the current is a
futile effort like that of aquatic fish. In fact, a person with attachment is
stubborn and arrogant. He suffers from his own vices. Therefore, a virtuous
householder should be free from attachment. Since the absence of attachment is
sometimes seen even in lowly people, but it is deceitful. Therefore, the word
'always' is used here.  **21. A Supporter of Virtue** - A virtuous householder
should be a supporter of virtues and virtuous people by their characteristics.
The intention is that whenever virtuous people come into his contact, he should
behave with them with courtesy, kindness, generosity, and seriousness. He should
welcome them with loving words like "Come, please come"; he should also honor
virtuous people from time to time, praise them, give them prestige; be helpful
in their work, take their side; etc. Such a person who is partial towards
virtuous people and towards his own self-righteousness, which is the form of
self-virtue, certainly sows the seeds of merit and obtains a wealth of virtues
in the afterlife.  **22. Renunciation of Forbidden Country, Time, and Conduct**
- A virtuous householder should abandon the conduct that is forbidden in a
particular country and time. If someone stubbornly adopts forbidden country
customs or prohibited time customs, he often faces the harassment of thieves,
robbers, etc.; he also suffers a loss of Dharma.  **23. Knower of Strength** - A
virtuous householder should know the strength of his own or another's wealth,
territory, time, and feelings.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dharmAdhikArI-mArgAnusArI ke 35 guNoM para vivecana yogazAstra prathama prakAza
zloka 46 se 56 kahate haiM; jo naukaroM ko aura khuda ko parezAna karake dhana
ko ikaTThA kara letA hai, paraMtu usakA ucita sthAna para vyaya dAtvika ke pAsa
artha (dhana) kA nAza hone se aura malahara ke pAsa dharma aura kAma kA vinAza
hone se donoM kA kalyANa nahIM hotaa| kadarya kA dhana sarakAra, rAjakarmacArI
yA cora le jAte haiN| vaha dhana usake dharma aura kAma ke lie nahIM rhtaa|
isalie yahAM yaha pratipAdana kiyA gayA hai ki gRhastha ko trivarga ke abAdhita
rUpa se sevana meM aMtarAya nahIM DAlanA caahie| kadAcit daivayoga se inameM se
kisI bhI puruSArtha ke sevana meM bAdhA upasthita hone kA samaya A jAye to
uttarottara kA sevana chor3akara pUrva ke puruSArtha kI bAdhA se rakSA karanI
caahie| jaise kAma meM bAdhA upasthita ho to dharma aura artha meM bAdhA kI
rakSA karanI caahie| kyoMki dharma aura artha ke hone para kAma kI prApti bhI
AsAnI se ho sakatI hai| kAma aura artha meM bAdhA Aye to dharma kI rakSA karanI
caahie| kyoMki artha aura kAma kA mUla dharma hai| | eka nItijJa ne kahA
hai-"bhikSA mAMgakara nirvAha karane se bhI agara dharma kI rakSA hotI hai, to
maiM apane ko saMpattizAlI mAnatA huuN|" vAstava meM sajjana dharma rUpI dhana
se dhanADhya hote haiN| 19. atithi Adi kA satkAra - sadgRhastha ko ghara Aye hue
atithi kA svAgata karanA Avazyaka hai| atithi use kahate haiM-satata svapara-
kalyANa kI suMdara pravRtti meM ekAgra hone se jisakI koI nizcita tithi na ho|
nItikAroM ne kahA hai-'jisa mahAtmA ne tithi aura parvo ke utsava kA tyAga kiyA
hai; use atithi samajhanA cAhie aura zeSa ko abhyaagt|' sAdhu-sAdhvIgaNa koI eka
tithi yA parva nizcita na karake sadA hI samagra loka meM prazaMsanIya hote
haiN| isalie ve utkRSTa atithi hai| tAtparya yaha hai jisakI dharma, artha aura
kAma kI ArAdhanA karane kI samagra zakti kSINa ho gayI| ho, usa atithi, sAdhu
aura dInoM kA yathAyogya satkAra karanA caahie| tithi kA paryAyavAcI zabda dina
hai| dina aura dIna donoM zabda 'do avakhaMDane' (kSayArthaka) dhAtu se bane
haiN| isalie dIna bhI atithi artha meM gRhIta ho jAtA hai, eka tarapha kevala
eka guNa aucitya ho aura dUsarI ora aucitya-rahita aneka guNa-samudra ho; phira
bhI ve guNa viSa-samAna hai| arthAt guNavAn atithi sAdhu ko bhaktipUrvaka aura
dIna-duHkhI evaM anAtha-paMguoM ko anukaMpA pUrvaka denA; yahI ucita rIti hai|
20. sadA abhiniveza se dUra - sadgRhastha ko mithyA-Agraha se sadA dUra rahanA
caahie| abhiniveza kahate haiM|mithyA Agraha ko| mithyAbhinivezI vahI vyakti
hotA hai, jo nItimArga se anabhijJa hotA hai aura dUsaroM ko nIcA dikhAne yA
parAbhUta karane ke lie kisI kArya kI jidda pakar3akara AraMbha karatA hai|
isalie kahA hai-ahaMkAra nIca puruSoM ko niSphalatA dilAtA hai, usameM anIti,
durguNa aura kAryAraMbha se kheda paidA karatA hai| ulaTe pravAha meM tairane kA
vyasana jalacara machaliyoM ke samAna vyartha parizrama hai| vAstava meM
abhinivezayukta vyakti jiddI aura abhimAnI hotA hai| vaha apane hI durguNoM se
duHkhI hotA hai| isalie sadgRhastha ko abhiniveza se rahita honA caahie| cUMki
kadAgraha se rahita bhAva nIca vyaktiyoM meM bhI yadAkadA dikhAI detA hai, kiMtu
vaha hotA hai kpttyukt| isalie yahAM 'sadA' zabda kA prayoga kiyA 21. guNa kA
pakSapAtI - sadgRhastha guNoM kA aura upalakSaNa se guNIjanoM kA pakSapAtI honA
caahie| Azaya yaha hai ki guNIjana jaba bhI usake saMparka meM Aye, vaha unake
sAtha saujanya, dAkSiNya, audArya tathA gAMbhIrya kA vyavahAra kre| 'Ao padhAro'
jaise priya zabdoM se svAgata kare; sAtha hI guNIjanoM kA samaya-samaya para
bahumAna kare, unakI prazaMsA kare, unheM pratiSThA de; unake kAryoM meM
sahAyaka baneM, unakA pakSa le; ityAdi prakAra se guNIjanoM ke anukUla pravRtti
kre| aisA guNIjanoM ke prati evaM svapara-kalyANakArI Atmadharma rUpI AtmaguNoM
ke prati pakSapAtI vyakti nizcaya hI puNya kA bIja bokara paraloka meM
guNasamUha-saMpatti prApta karatA hai| 22. niSiddha deza-kAla-caryA kA tyAga -
jisa deza aura kAla meM jisa AcAra kA niSedha kiyA gayA ho, use sadgRhastha ko
chor3a denA caahie| agara koI haThavaza niSiddha dezAcAra yA varjita kAlAcAra ko
apanAtA hai, to use prAyaH | | cora, DAkU Adi ke upadrava kA sAmanA karanA
par3atA hai; usase dharma kI hAni bhI hotI hai|  /  23. balAbala kA jJAtA -
sadgRhastha ko apanI athavA dUsare kI dravya, kSetra, kAla aura bhAva kI zakti
jAnakara 68

Page #91 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Reflections on the 35 Qualities of a Dharmadikari-Marganusari  **All actions
should be initiated after considering one's strengths and weaknesses, as per the
teachings of Yogashastra, First Light, verses 46 to 56. Failure to do so often
leads to adverse consequences. As the saying goes, "Even with strength, one who
endures grows stronger, just as the body strengthens with nourishment. But
actions undertaken without considering one's strength lead to the depletion of
body, wealth, and other possessions."**  **24. Reverence for Vrittasthas and
Gnanavruddh: Those who are steadfast in following the right conduct, abandoning
wrong conduct, are called Vrittasthas. A householder should respect them in
every way. One should revere those who are great in the knowledge of reality or
those who are companions of Vrittasthas, who are Gnanavruddh. Reverence means
serving, offering salutations with folded hands, providing a seat, standing up
in respect upon their arrival, offering respect and honor, etc. By revering
Vrittasthas and Gnanavruddh, one inevitably receives the fruits of good advice,
like a Kalpavriksha (wish-fulfilling tree).**  **25. Nourishing the Dependent:
It is the responsibility of a righteous householder to provide sustenance to
their family, including mother, father, wife, son, daughter, and others who are
dependent or related. They should take care of their well-being. This will
ensure harmony and cooperation from all. In the future, they will all become
useful.**  **26. Farsighted: A righteous householder should be farsighted before
undertaking any action. They should consider the benefits and drawbacks of the
action from its inception to completion. Farsightedness means thinking ahead in
every action.**  **27. Expert: A righteous householder should also be an expert.
An expert is one who knows the difference between objects and non-objects,
actions and non-actions, self and others. One who is certain of reality is truly
called an expert. An unexpert does not understand the difference between a
person and an animal. Or, specifically, one who knows the qualities and defects
of the soul is called an expert. It is said, "A person should observe their
character daily, whether their conduct is like that of an animal or like that of
a righteous person. This observation is the root of virtue and prosperity."**
**28. Grateful: A righteous householder should be grateful. Gratitude means
knowing the kindness done by others. A grateful person does not forget the
kindness of others. In return for the benefit of well-being received from the
benefactor, one should honor them. Gratitude cannot be repaid. And it is said of
the ungrateful, "There is no redemption for the ungrateful." The ungrateful
forget the kindness done to them. One should not become like that.**  **29.
Beloved of the People: It is essential for a righteous householder to be
popular. One can be popular only if they possess qualities like humility,
modesty, service, simplicity, empathy, compassion, etc. Who does not love
virtues? Everyone is attracted to virtues. Those who lack popularity, through
hatred, malice, enmity, conflict, or opposition, not only corrupt their own
religious practices but also incite and provoke others, filling them with
selfishness and becoming instrumental in corrupting their understanding.**
**30. Shameful: The quality of shame is paramount for a righteous householder. A
shameful person will hesitate and feel ashamed while committing any sinful act.
They will not abandon their vows and rules even if their life is at stake. The
wise say that shame is the mother of many virtues. It is like the pure-hearted
Aryamata (noble mother). By acquiring shame, the seeker remains steadfast in
truth and principles. Shameful, strong-willed great souls abandon even comforts
and life, but never abandon their accepted vows.**  **31. Compassionate:
Compassion is an important quality of a righteous householder. The desire to
alleviate the suffering of living beings is called compassion. As Prasham (168)
says, "Just as a person cherishes their own life, so too do all living beings
cherish their own lives. Therefore, a righteous householder should never miss an
opportunity to show compassion." A person desires compassion for themselves in
times of distress, so they should show compassion to all living beings.**  **32.
Gentle: The nature and appearance of a righteous householder should be gentle. A
cruel appearance and a terrifying nature**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dharmAdhikArI-mArgAnusArI ke 35 guNoM para vivecana yogazAstra prathama prakAza
zloka 46 se 56 tathA apanI nirbalatA-sabalatA kA vicAra karake sabhI kArya
prAraMbha karanA caahie| aisA na karane para prAyaH pariNAma viparIta AtA hai|
kahA bhI hai-'zakti hone para bhI sahana karane vAlA zakti meM usI taraha vRddhi
karatA hai, jaise zakti ke anusAra zarIra kI puSTi hotI hai| paraMtu balAbala kA
vicAra kiye binA kiyA huA kAryAraMbha zarIra, dhana Adi saMpattiyoM kA kSaya
karatA hai| 24. vRttasthoM aura jJAnavRddhoM kA pUjaka - anAcAra ko chor3akara
samyag AcAra ke pAlana meM dRr3hatA se sthira rahane vAloM ko vRttastha kahate
haiN| gRhastha ko unakA hara taraha se Adara karanA caahie| vastutva ke
nizcayAtmaka jJAna se jo mahAn ho athavA vRttastha ke sahacArI, jo jJAnavRddha
hoM, unakI pUjA karanI caahie| pUjA kA artha hai-sevA karanA, donoM hAtha
joDakara namaskAra karanA. Asana denA unake Ate hI khar3e hokara Adara denA,
satkAra-sammAna denA aadi| vRttastha aura jJAnavRddha-puruSoM kI pUjA karane se
avazya hI kalpavRkSa ke samAna unase sadupadeza Adi phala prApta hote haiN|  /
25. poSya kA poSaNa karanA - sadgRhastha kA yaha uttaradAyitva hai ki parivAra
meM mAtA, pitA, patnI, putra, putrI Adi ko jo vyakti usake Azrita hoM yA
saMbaMdhita hoM, unakA bharaNa-poSaNa kre| unakA yogakSema vahana kre| isase una
saba kA sadabhAva va sahayoga prApta hogaa| bhaviSya meM ve saba upayogI bneNge|
26. dIrghadarzI - sadgRhastha ko kisI bhI kArya ke karane se pUrva dUradarzI
banakara usa kArya ke prAraMbha se pUrNa hone taka ke artha-anartha kA vicAra
karake kArya karanA caahie| dUradarzI kA artha hai-hara kArya para dUra kI
socane vaalaa| 27. vizeSajJa - sadgRhastha ko vizeSajJa bhI honA caahie|
vizeSajJa vaha hotA hai-jo vastu-avastu kRtyaakRtya, sva-para Adi kA aMtara
jAnatA ho| vastutva kA nizcaya karane vAlA hI vAstava meM vizeSajJa kahalAtA
hai| aura avizeSajJa. vyakti aura paza meM koI aMtara nahIM smjhtaa| athavA
vizeSataH AtmA ke guNoM aura doSoM ko jo jAnatA hai, vahI vizeSajJa kahalAtA
hai| kahA hai ki 'manuSya ko pratidina apane caritra kA avalokana karanA cAhie
ki merA AcaraNa paza samAna hai yA satpuruSoM ke samAna hai? [yaha avalokana
guNa samRddhi kA mUla hai|] 28. kRtajJa - sadgRhastha ko kRtajJa honA caahie|
kRtajJa kA artha hai-jo dUsaroM ke kiye upakAra ko jAnatA ho| kRtajJa manuSya
dUsaroM ke upakAra ko bhUlatA nhiiN| isa prakAra upakArI kI ora se jo kalyANa kA
lAbha hotA hai, usake badale usakA bahumAna karanA caahie| kRtajJatA kA badalA
nahIM cukAyA jA sktaa| aura kRtaghna ke lie kahA hai'kataghne nAsti nissktiH|'
kataghna kiye hae upakAra ko bhala jAtA hai| apane ko aisA nahIM bnnaa| 29.
lokavallabha - sadgRhastha kA lokapriya honA jarUrI hai| lokapriya vahI ho
sakatA hai-jo vinaya, namratA, sevA, saralatA, sahAnubhUti, dayA Adi guNa yukta
ho| guNoM ke prati kise prIti nahIM hotI? sabhI loga guNoM se AkRSTa hote haiN|
jinameM lokapriyatA nahIM hotI, ve janatA se ghRNA, dveSa, vaira, saMgharSa yA
virodha karake apanA dharmAnuSThAna to dUSita kara hI lete haiM; dUsaroM ko bhI
ukasA evaM bhar3akAkara va svArthabhAvanA bharakara bodhilAbha se bhraSTa karane
meM nimitta banate 30. lajjAvAna - sadgRhastha ke lie lajjA kA guNa
paramAvazyaka hai| lajjAvAna vyakti kisI bhI pApakarma ko| karate hue saMkoca
karegA, zarmAyegA aura prANa cale jAyeM, magara aMgIkAra kiye hue vrata-niyamoM
kA tyAga nahIM kregaa| nItijJa kahate haiM ki lajjA aneka guNoM kI jananI hai|
vaha atyaMta zuddha hRdara vAlI AryamAtA ke samAna hai| aneka guNoM kI
janmadAtrI lajjA ko pAkara sAdhaka satya-siddhAMta para DaTA rahatA hai|
lajjAzIla satvazAlI mahApuruSa sukhasuvidhAoM aura prANoM kA bhI parityAga kara
dete haiM, paraMtu aMgIkRta pratijJA ko kadApi nahIM chodd'te|| _31. dayAvAna -
dayA sadgRhastha kA mahattvapUrNa guNa hai| duHkhI jIvoM kA duHkha dUra karane
kI abhilASA dayA kahalAtI hai| prazama (168) kahA bhI hai-'vyakti ko jaise apane
prANa priya hai, vaise hI sabhI jIvoM ko bhI apane prANa utane hI priya hai|
isalie dharmAtmA gRhastha dayA ke avasara kadApi na cuuke|' manuSya apanI AtmA
para saMkaTa ke samaya dayA cAhatA hai, vaise hI samasta pratyeka jIvoM para
dayA kre| _32. saumya - sadgRhastha kI prakRti aura AkRti saumya honI caahie|
krUra AkRti aura bhayaMkara svabhAva vAlA 69

Page #92 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Discussion on the 35 Qualities of a Dharma-Adhikari (Dharma-Follower)  **Yoga
Shastra, First Light, Verses 46-56**  A person who is agitated creates distress
in others, and their impact is temporary. On the other hand, a gentle person
attracts everyone, causing no fear but rather influencing them.  **33. Diligent
in Performing Acts of Charity:** A righteous householder should also engage in
acts of charity. They should not be solely focused on their own self-interest. A
person who is a champion of charity and diligent in charitable acts is like
nectar to the eyes of all.  **34. Dedicated to Eliminating the Six Internal
Enemies:** A righteous householder is always dedicated to eliminating the six
internal enemies. For refined householders, these six internal enemies are: 1.
Lust, 2. Anger, 3. Greed, 4. Pride, 5. Arrogance, and 6. Envy.  * **Lust:**
Desire for sexual intercourse with another's wife, whether married or unmarried.
* **Anger:** Becoming enraged without considering the consequences for oneself
or others. * **Greed:** Not giving to those who deserve charity and accepting
another's wealth without reason. * **Pride:** Not accepting someone's worthy
advice due to stubbornness. * **Arrogance:** Causing unnecessary suffering to
others and finding pleasure in harmful activities like gambling and hunting. *
**Envy:** Feeling resentment and jealousy towards someone's progress.  These six
are harmful and should be abandoned. It is said:  1. **Lust:** The one who lusts
after a Brahmin girl, the one who rapes her, and the one who enjoys the
"Dandakya" feast with his relatives and the kingdom, all perished. Similarly,
the "Vaideha Karala" also perished. 2. **Anger:** The one who attacked the
Brahmins due to anger, Janamejaya, and the one who terrorized the Bhrigus,
Talajangha, both perished. 3. **Greed:** The one who seized the wealth of all
four classes due to greed, Aila (Pururava), and the one who ruled the Sauvira
region, Ajabindu, both perished. 4. **Pride:** Due to pride, Ravana and
Duryodhana perished because they refused to return another's wife. 5.
**Arrogance:** Due to arrogance, Ambhodbhava and the Haihaya (Kartavīrya Arjuna)
perished. 6. **Envy:** Due to envy, Vatapi perished for obtaining Agastya, and
the community of Shri Krishna perished for not obtaining Dvaipayana.  **35.
Eager to Control the Senses:** A righteous householder should practice
controlling their senses in a reasonable manner. The one who abandons the
freedom of the senses, relinquishes excessive attachment to them, and restrains
the passions of touch, etc., conquers the senses. Such a person attains great
wealth. It is said:  "Indriyanam asanyamah, apadaam kathithah panthah | Tajjayah
sampada margah, yeneeshtan ten gamyataam ||"  "The lack of control over the
senses is the path to misfortune, and conquering them is the path to wealth.
Choose the path that seems beneficial to you and proceed."  These senses are the
essence of life. They are both heaven and hell. They are both. The one who
controls them attains heaven, and the one who allows them to roam freely on the
wrong path attains hell. Complete restraint of the senses is possible only for
the virtuous. Here, the context is of a righteous householder who is on the path
to becoming a Shravaka (Jain lay follower). Therefore, it is considered
necessary for them to practice reasonable control over their senses.  A
righteous householder possessing these 35 qualities becomes eligible for the
Shravaka Dharma.  **47-56**  Thus, the first light of the "Adhyatma Upanishad,"
a treatise written by Acharya Hemchandrasuri, composed at the request of King
Kumarapala, is complete, along with its own explanation.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dharmAdhikArI-mArgAnusArI ke 35 guNoM para vivecana yogazAstra prathama prakAza
zloka 46 se 56 vyakti logoM meM udvega paidA kara detA hai, usakA prabhAva
kSaNika hotA hai| jabaki saumya vyakti se sabhI AkRSTa hote haiM, koI bhayabhIta
nahIM hotA balki prabhAvita ho jAtA hai| _33. paropakAra karane meM karmaTha -
sadgRhastha ko paropakAra ke kArya bhI karane caahie| use kevala apane hI
svArtha meM racApacA nahIM rahanA caahie| paropakAravIra evaM paropakArakarmaTha
manuSya sabhI ke netroM meM amRtAMjana ke samAna hotA hai| 34. SaT aMtaraMga
zatruoM ke tyAga meM udyata - sadgRhastha sadA chaha aMtaraMga zatruoM ko miTAne
meM udyata rahatA. hai| ziSTa gRhasthoM ke lie 1. kAma, 2. krodha, 3. lobha, 4.
mAna, 5. mada aura 6. harSa yA matsara; ye chaha aMtaraMga zatru kahe haiN|
dUsare kI pariNItA athavA apariNItA strI ke sAtha sahavAsa kI icchA karanA kAma
hai| apanI athavA parAyI hAni kA soca-vicAra kiye binA kopa karanA krodha hai|
dAna dene yogya vyakti ko dAna na denA tathA akAraNa parAyA dhana grahaNa karanA
lobha hai| kisI ke yogya upadeza ko durAgrahavaza nahIM mAnanA mAna hai| binA
kAraNa duHkha dekara tathA juA, zikAra Adi anarthakArI kAryoM meM AnaMda mAnanA
harSa kahalAtA hai| kisI kI unnati dekhakara kur3hanA, usase DAha karanA,
matsara hai| ye chahoM hAnikAraka hone se inakA tyAga karanA caahie| kahA hai
ki-1. kAma se brAhmaNa kanyA ko, balAtkAra se satAne vAlA dAMDakya nAma kA bhoja
baMdhuoM aura rAjya ke sahita naSTa huaa| tathA vaideha karAla bhI naSTa huaa|
2. krodha se brAhmaNoM para AkramaNa karane vAlA janamejaya aura bhRguoM para
AtaMka DhahAne vAle tAlajaMgha kA bhI vinAza huaa| 3. lobha se cAroM vargoM kA
sarvasva har3apa jAne vAle aila (purUravA) aura sauvIradeza ke ajabindu kA
vinAza huaa| 4. mAna se parastrI ko vApisa na karane ke kAraNa rAvaNa aura
duryodhana kA vinAza huaa| 5. mada se aMbhodbhava aura bhUtAvamAnI haihaya
(kArtavIrya) arjuna kA vinAza huaa| 6. harSa se agatsya ko prApta karane se
vAtApi aura dvaipAyana ko prApta na karane ke kAraNa zrIkRSNajI ke samudAya kA
nAza huaa| 35. iMdriya-samUha ko vaza karane meM tatpara - sadgRhastha ko apane
iMdriya-samUha ko yathocitta mAtrA meM vaza meM karane kA abhyAsa karanA caahie|
jo iMdriyoM kI svacchaMdatA kA tyAga karatA hai; una para atyaMta Asakti ko
chor3atA hai, tathA sparzAdi vikAroM ko rokatA hai; vahI iMdriyoM para vijaya
prApta karatA hai| aisA vyakti mahAsaMpatti ko prApta karatA hai| kahA bhI hai
ApadAM kathitaH panthA indriyANAmasaMyamaH  /  tajjayaH sampadA mArgA, yeneSTaM
tena gamyatAm  //  'iMdriyoM kA asaMyama, vipattiyoM kA mArga hai aura una para
vijaya prApta karanA saMpattiyoM kA mArga hai| ina donoM meM se jo mArga ISTa
(hitakara) lage, usI mArga se jaao|' ye iMdriyA~ jIvana-sarvasva hai| ye hI
svarga aura ye hI naraka hai| donoM ye hI hai| jo inheM vaza meM kara letA hai,
use svarga milatA hai aura jo svacchaMdatA pUrvaka inako viparIta mArga para
jAne detA hai, use naraka milatA hai| sarvathA iMdriya-nirodha-dharma to sAdhuoM
ke lie hI saMbhava hai| yahAM to zrAvakadharma kI bhUmikA prApta karane ke
pahale dharma-mArgAnusArI sadgRhastha kA prasaMga hai| isalie yathocita mAtrA
meM iMdriya-saMyama karanA usake lie Avazyaka batAyA hai| ina uparyukta paitIsa
guNoM se yukta sadgRhastha zrAvakadharma ke yogya adhikArI banatA hai||47-56||
//  isa prakAra paramAta zrI kumArapAla rAjA kI jijJAsA se AcAryazrI
hemacaMdrasUrIzvara racita adhyAtmopaniSad nAmaka paTTabaddha aparanAma yogazAla
kA svopajJavivaraNasahita prathama prakAza saMpUrNa huA  /  70

Page #93 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
|| Om Arhate Namah || 2. The Nature of Right Faith (Samyaktvam)  Previously, the
description of a worthy householder, a follower of the path, was given. However,
the Shravak Dharma is for a special worthy householder who is endowed with the
twelve vows, including the five Anuvratas. This Shravak Dharma, which is based
on the twelve vows, is rooted in Right Faith (Samyaktvam).  Therefore, we now
explain the nature of Right Faith, the foundation of Shravak Dharma. 57. The
five Anuvratas, the three Gunavratas, and the four Shikshavrata; these twelve
vows together constitute the Shravak (householder) Dharma, which is rooted in
Right Faith. ||1||  Meaning: The five Anuvratas, the three Gunavratas, and the
four Shikshavrata; these twelve vows together constitute the Shravak
(householder) Dharma, which is rooted in Right Faith. ||1||  Explanation: The
root cause of the Shravak vows is Right Faith (Samyaktvam). In other words,
Right Faith is the foundation of the twelve vows. The five Anuvratas, such as
non-violence, are called Anuvratas because they are smaller than the Mahavrata
(great vows). They are the fundamental virtues. The three Gunavratas, such as
those related to direction, measurement, etc., are called Gunavratas because
they are the virtues that lead to liberation. The four Shikshavrata, such as
Samayik, are called Shikshavrata because they are meant to be practiced
repeatedly. This is why the Shikshavrata are distinguished from the Gunavratas.
Out of these twelve vows, the five Anuvratas and the three Gunavratas are
generally observed by the householder Shravak for their entire life. ||1||
Since the twelve vows are rooted in Right Faith, we now explain the nature of
Right Faith. 58. The understanding of the divine (Arhant, etc., the liberated
ones) as divine, the understanding of the Guru as worthy of respect, and the
pure understanding of Dharma; this is called Right Faith. ||2||  Meaning: The
understanding of the divine (Arhant, etc., the liberated ones) as divine, the
understanding of the Guru as worthy of respect, and the pure understanding of
Dharma; this is called Right Faith. ||2||  Explanation: We will explain the
characteristics of divinity, worthiness, and Dharma later. Essentially, Right
Faith is defined as the pure, unwavering faith in the divine, the Guru, and
Dharma, free from ignorance, doubt, and wrong perception. Although the same
interest in the principles of Jina is also a characteristic of Right Faith for
both the Sadhus and the Shravaks; however, for householders, it is appropriate
to establish the reverence for the divine, the Guru, and the principles of
Dharma, and to perform worship and practices accordingly. Therefore, for them,
Right Faith is defined as the understanding of the divine, the Guru, and the
principles of Dharma.  There are three types of Right Faith: Aupashmik,
Kshayopa-shmik, and Kshayik. Aupashma refers to the state of non-arising of the
four karmas that are destroyed by the destruction of false belief (Mithyatva-
mohaniya karma) and the four infinite karmas (Anantanu-bandhi karma) - anger,
pride, deceit, and greed, which are like fire covered with ashes. Right Faith
with this type of Aupashma is called Aupashmik Right Faith. It lasts for a
moment (Antarmukhurta) and is experienced by the soul that has been in the state
of false belief (Mithyatva) since beginningless time. It is experienced by
beings in all four realms of existence. Alternatively, it is experienced by a
seeker who has ascended the ladder of Aupashma. Therefore, the scriptures state
that a person who has ascended the ladder of Aupashma experiences Aupashmik
Right Faith. Alternatively, a person who has not performed the three bundles (of
karmas) but has destroyed false belief (Mithyatva) attains Aupashma Right Faith.
The second type of Right Faith, Kshayopa-shmik Right Faith, is the complete
destruction (Samul-nash) of the four karmas that are destroyed by the
destruction of false belief (Mithyatva-mohaniya karma) and the four infinite
karmas (Anantanu-bandhi karma) that have arisen, and the non-arising of those
that have not arisen. This type of Right Faith, which is characterized by both
destruction (Kshaya) and non-arising (Aupashma), is called Kshayopa-shmik Right
Faith. The Right Faith associated with Kshayopa-shma is called Kshayopa-shmik
Right Faith. This Right Faith is also called Vedak Right Faith because it
involves the experience of the fruits of good deeds. Aupashmik Right Faith, on
the other hand, is devoid of the experience of the fruits of good deeds. This is
the difference between Aupashmik and Kshayopa-shmik Right Faith. The knowers of
truth have said, "In Kshayopa-shmik Right Faith, the soul experiences the fruits
of good deeds to some extent.  71

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
  /  /  OM arhate namaH  /  /  2. dvitIya prakAza samyaktya kA svarUpa : isase
pahale zrAvakadharma ke yogya adhikArI-mArgAnusArI sadgRhastha kA varNana kiyA
gyaa| kiMtu zrAvakadharma paMcaaNuvratAdi 12 vratoM se yukta vizeSa yogya
gRhastha ke lie hotA hai| vaha dvAdazavrata yukta zrAvakadharma samyaktvamUlaka
hotA hai| isalie aba hama zrAvakadharma ke mUla-samyaktva kA svarUpa batAte
haiN|57| samyaktvamUlAni, paJcANuvratAni guNAstrayaH  /  zikSApadAni catvAri,
vratAni gRhamedhinAm  /  / 1 /  /  artha :- pAMca aNuvrata, tIna guNavrata aura
cAra zikSAvrata; yoM milAkara gRhastha (zrAvaka) dharma ke bAraha vrata
samyaktvamUlaka hote haiM  // 1 //  vyAkhyA :- zrAvakavratoM kA mUla kAraNa
samyaktva hai| yAnI bAraha vratoM kI jar3a samyaktva hai| mahAvratoM kI apekSA
se choTe hone se ahiMsAdi pAMca aNuvrata kahalAte haiM, ve hI mUlaguNa hai|
dizAparimANAdi tIna uttaraguNa rUpa hone se guNavrata hai| sadaiva punaH punaH
abhyAsa karane yogya hone se sAmAyika Adi 4 zikSAvrata kahalAte haiN| isI kAraNa
zikSAvratoM ko guNavratoM se alaga batAye haiN| ina bAraha vratoM meM se pAMca
aNuvrata aura tIna guNavrata gRhasthazrAvaka ke lie prAyaH jIvanabhara ke lie
hote haiM  /  / 1 /  /  - bArahavratoM ko samyaktvamUlaka kahA hai, isalie aba
samyaktva kA svarUpa batAte haiN|58| yA deve devatAbuddhirgurau ca gurutAmatiH
/  dharme ca dharmadhI: zuddhA, samyaktvamidamucyate  // 2 //  artha :- sAdhaka
kI deva (arhanta Adi vItarAga) meM jo devatvabuddhi, guru meM jo gurutvabuddhi
aura dharma meM zuddha dharma kI buddhi hotI hai, use hI samyaktva kahA jAtA hai
// 2 //  vyAkhyA :- devatva, gurutva aura dharmatva kA lakSaNa hama Age
btaayeNge| mUla meM to deva, guru aura dharma meM ajJAna, saMzaya aura viparyaya
se rahita nizcaya pUrvaka nirmala zraddhA ko samyaktva kahA hai| yadyapi sAdhuoM
aura zrAvakoM kI jinokta tattvoM para samAna ruci bhI samyaktva kA lakSaNa hai;
tathApi gRhasthoM ke lie deva, guru aura dharmatattva meM pUjyatva sthApita
karake unakI upAsanA aura tad yogya anuSThAna karanA upayukta hone se usake lie
deva, guru aura dharmatattva ke pratipattilakSaNa ko samyaktva kahA hai|
samyaktva ke tIna bheda hote haiM aupazamika, kSAyopamika aura kssaayik| upazama
kahate haiM-rAkha se DhakI huI agni ke samAna mithyAtvamohanIya karma tathA
anaMtAnubaMdhI krodha, mAna, mAyA aura lobha kI anudayAvasthA ko| isa prakAra ke
upazama se yukta samyaktva ko aupazamika samyaktva kahate haiN| vaha anAdikAlIna
mithyAdRSTi AtmA ko tIna karaNa pUrvaka aMtarmuhUrta-parimita kAla ke lie hotA
hai| aura cAroMgati meM rahane vAle jIvoM ko hotA hai| athavA upazamazreNi para
car3he hue sAdhaka ko hotA hai| isIlie zAstra meM kahA hai-upazamazreNi para
ArUr3ha vyakti ko aupazamika samyaktva hotA hai| athavA tIna puMja nahI kiye
hoM, kintu mithyAtva naSTakara diyA ho, vaha upazama samyaktva prApta karatA
hai| dUsarA kSAyopazamika samyaktva udaya meM Aye hue mithyAtva-mohanIya aura
anutAnubaMdhI cAra kaSAyoM ko aMzataH (deza se) samUla-nAza rUpa kSaya kara denA
aura udaya meM nahIM Aye hue kA upazama karanA; isa prakAra kSaya se yukta
upazama-kSayopazama kahalAtA hai aura kSayopazama se saMbaMdhita samyaktva
kSayopazamika kahalAtA hai| isa samyaktva meM zubhakarmoM kA vedana hone se ise
vedaka-samyaktva bhI kahate haiN| jabaki aupazamika samyaktva zubhakarmoM ke
vedana se rahita hotA hai| yahI aupazamika aura kSAyopazamika meM aMtara hai|
tattvajJoM ne kahA hai-'kSAyopazamika meM to jIva kisI aMza taka satkarmoM kA
vedana kara 71

Page #94 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Nature of Mithyatva, the Opposite of Samyaktv, and its Types  **Yoga
Shastra, Second Light, Verses 1-3**  This verse explains the nature of
Mithyatva, the opposite of Samyaktv, and its types.  **Verse 1:**  A being with
subdued passions, while in the state of *Upshamik Samyaktv*, cannot experience
the joy of good deeds. (Vibha. 1290) Therefore, the state of *Kshayopa-shamik
Samyaktv* is like the vast ocean, encompassing 66 *Sagars*. It is said that a
being in *Kshayopa-shamik Samyaktv* goes to the *Devaloka* (heavenly realm)
twice and is mostly born as a human. (Vibha. 434) *Kshayopa-shamik Samyaktv* is
a state that persists throughout all time, compared to all other beings. The
third type, *Kshayik Samyaktv*, is the complete eradication of the four
*Kshayas* (passions) - *Mohaniya* (delusion), *Ananta-anubandhi* (infinite
attachments), etc. This state is infinite and eternal.  **Verse 2:**  The glory
of *Samyaktv* is described in these verses: "Samyaktv is the root of the
*Bodhivriksha* (tree of enlightenment), the gateway to the city of virtue, the
foundation of the palace of liberation, and the treasure of all wealth. Just as
the ocean is the foundation of all jewels, so is *Samyaktv* the foundation of
all virtuous jewels and the vessel of the wealth of character. Just as wealth
cannot exist without a vessel, so too, character cannot exist without
*Samyaktv*. Who would not praise such a noble *Samyaktv*? Just as darkness
cannot endure the rising sun, so too, ignorance cannot endure the presence of a
person imbued with *Samyaktv*. *Samyaktv* is like a barrier that prevents the
doors to the animal realm and hell from opening. *Samyaktv* is like a key that
unlocks the doors to the joys of heaven, the human realm, and liberation. If a
being does not have a *Ayushya-bandha* (life-span) before attaining *Samyaktv*,
and does not abandon *Samyaktv* before having a *Ayushya-bandha*, then that
being will not have another life-span except as a *Vaimanik Deva* (celestial
being). Even if a being has only tasted *Samyaktv* for a moment and then
abandoned it, they will not wander in the four realms of existence for long. And
what can be said of a person who enjoys *Samyaktv* for a long time and always
maintains it? Such a being will quickly become the possessor of the joy of
liberation.  **Verse 3:**  The true nature of *Samyaktv* can be understood by
knowing its opposite. Therefore, we will now explain the nature of *Mithyatva*,
the opposite of *Samyaktv*.  **Verse 3:**  "To have the belief of divinity in
something that is not divine, to have the belief of a guru in something that is
not a guru, and to have the belief of righteousness in something that is not
righteous, this is *Mithyatva*. It is called *Mithyatva* because it is the
opposite of *Samyaktv*."  **Explanation:**  *Mithyatva* is present in a person
who believes in divinity in something that is not divine, who believes in a guru
in something that is not a guru, and who believes in righteousness in something
that is not righteous. This is *Mithyatva* because it is the opposite of
*Samyaktv*. *Mithyatva* is the belief in the non-divine, the non-guru, and the
non-righteous. The direct characteristic of *Mithyatva* is to understand it as
the opposite of *Samyaktv*. It should also be understood that *Mithyatva* is the
belief in the non-divine in something that is divine, the non-guru in something
that is a guru, and the non-righteous in something that is righteous.
*Mithyatva* is of five types: *Abhigrahik*, *Anabhigrahik*, *Abhiniveshik*,
*Sanshayik*, and *Anabhogik*.  1. **Abhigrahik:** This type of *Mithyatva* is
present in a person who, like a hypocrite, is skilled in defending their own
false beliefs and opposing the truth. 2. **Anabhigrahik:** This type of
*Mithyatva* is present in a person who, like an ordinary uneducated person, is
easily swayed and believes in all gods without any critical thinking. They
accept all gurus and religions without any investigation. 3. **Abhiniveshik:**
This type of *Mithyatva* is present in a person who, even though they understand
the truth, clings to false beliefs and, like a *Jamali* (a type of bird), denies
the truth and holds onto falsehood. 4. **Sanshayik:** This type of *Mithyatva*
is present in a person who is doubtful and uncertain about the truth. 5.
**Anabhogik:** This type of *Mithyatva* is present in a person who does not
experience the truth and therefore does not understand it.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 samyaktva ke vipakSI mithyAtva kA svarUpa aura usake prakAra yogazAstra dvitIya
prakAza zloka 1 se 3 | bhI letA hai, hAlAMki rasodaya se nahIM karatA; magara
aupazamika samyaktva meM upazAMtakaSAya yukta jIva to satkarma kA vedana
bilakula nahIM kara paataa| (vi. bhA. 1290) isalie kSAyopazamika samyaktva kI
sthiti 66 sAgaropama kI hotI hai| kahA hai ki kSAyopazamika samyaktvI vijayAdika
devaloka meM do bAra jAtA hai aura adhikatara manuSyajanma prAra | uparyukta
sthiti ko pUrNa karatA hai| (vi. bhA. 434) kSAyopazamika samyaktva samasta jIvoM
kI apekSA meM sarvakAla meM rahatA hai| tIsarA kSAyika-samyaktva-mithyAtva
mohanIya aura anaMtAnubaMdhI cAra kaSAyoM kA samUla naSTa honA kSaya kahalAtA
hai aura kSaya se saMbaMdhita samyaktva kSAyika kahalatA hai| yaha sAdi anaMta
hai| aba kucha AMtarazlokoM meM samyaktva kI mahimA batalAte haiM_ 'samyaktva
bodhivRkSa kA mUla hai; puNyanagara kA dvAra hai; nirvANa-mahala kI pIThikA hai;
sarvasaMpattiyoM kA bhaMDAra hai| jaise saba ratnoM kA AdhAra samudra hai, vaise
hI samyaktva guNaratnoM kA AdhAra hai aura cAritra rUpI dhana kA pAtra hai|
jaise |pAtra (AdhAra) ke binA dhana raha nahIM sakatA, vaise hI samyaktva ke
binA cAritra rUpI dhana raha nahIM sktaa| aise uttama samyaktva kI kauna
prazaMsA nahIM karegA? jaise sUryodaya hone se aMdherA Tika nahIM sakatA, vaise
hI samyaktva-suvAsita vyakti meM ajJAnAMdhakAra Tika nahIM sktaa| tiryacagati
aura narakagati ke dvAra baMdha karane ke lie samyaktva argalA (Agala) ke samAna
hai| devaloka, mAnavaloka tathA mokSa ke sukha ke dvAra kholane ke lie samyaktva
kuMjI ke samAna hai| samyaktva prApta karane se pahale agara AyuSyabaMdha na huA
ho aura AyuSyabaMdha hone se pahale samyaktva kA tyAga na kiyA ho to vaha jIva
sivAya vaimAnika deva ke dUsarA AyuSya nahIM baaNdhtaa| jisane sirpha
aMtarmuhUrtabhara yadi isa samyaktva kA sevana karake isakA tyAgakara diyA ho to
bhI vaha jIva caturgati rUpa saMsAra meM adhika samaya taka paribhramaNa nahIM
karatA aura jo manuSya isakA dIrghakAla taka sevana karatA hai, sadA hI ise
dhAraNa karatA hai, usake lie to kahanA hI kyA? tAtparya yaha hai ki aisA
samyaktvI jIva alpasamaya meM hI mokSa-sukha kA adhikArI bana jAtA hai  /  / 2 /
/  usa samyaktva kA vAstavika svarUpa usake vipakSa kA jJAna hone se hI
bhalIbhAMti samajhA jA sakatA haiM, isalie samyaktva ke vipakSI mithyAtva kA
svarUpa batAte haiM  / 59 /  adeve devabuddhiryA, gurudhIragurau ca yA  /
adharme dharmabuddhizca, mithyAtvaM tadviparyayAt  // 3 //  artha :- jisameM
deva ke guNa na hoM, usameM devatvabuddhi, guru ke guNa na hoM, usameM
gurutvabuddhi aura adharma meM dharmabuddhi rakhanA mithyAtva hai| samyaktva se
viparIta hone ke kAraNa yaha mithyAtva kahalAtA hai  /  / 3 /  /  vyAkhyA :-
jisa vyakti kI adeva meM devabuddhi ho, aguru meM gurubuddhi aura adharma meM
dharmabuddhi ho, vahA~ mithyAtva kahalAtA hai| yaha samyaktva se viparIta-tattva
rUpa hone se (jisakA lakSaNa Age batAyA jAyegA) adeva, aguru aura adharma kI
mAnyatA rUpa mithyAtva hai| mithyAtva kA sIdhA lakSaNa samyaktva se viparIta
hone se samyaktva se viparIta svarUpa kA samajhanA caahie| yahAM mithyAtva kA
yaha lakSaNa bhI grahaNa kara lenA cAhie ki deva meM adevatva, guru meM agurutva
aura dharma meM adharmatva kI mAnyatA rkhnaa| vaha mithyAtva pAMca prakAra kA
hai-Abhigrahika, anAbhigrahika, Abhinivezika, sAMzayika aura anaabhogik| 1.
Abhigrahika - jahAM pAkhaMDI kI taraha apane mAne hue (asat) zAstra ke jJAtA
hokara parapakSa kA pratIkAra karane meM dakSatA hotI hai, vahAM Abhigrahika
mithyAtva hotA hai| 2. anAbhigrahika - sAdhAraNa azikSita logoM kI taraha
tattvaviveka kiye binA hI bahakAve meM Akara sabhI devoM ko vaMdanIya mAnanA;
sabhI guruoM aura dharmoM ke tattva kI chAnabIna kiye binA hI samAna mAnanA,
anAbhigrahika hai| 3. Abhinivezika - aMtara se yathArtha vastu ko samajhate hue
bhI mithyA kadAgraha (jhUThI pakar3a) ke vaza hokara jamAli kI taraha satya ko
jhuThalAne yA mithyA ko pakar3e rakhane kA kadAgraha karanA, Abhinivezika
mithyAtva hai| 12

Page #95 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Form of a Deva  **Yoga Shastra, Second Light, Verses 3 to 44.**  **5.
Doubtful (Sāṃśayika):** When a person remains in a state of doubt regarding
Deva, Guru, and Dharma, wondering "Is this true or that true?", there is
Doubtful Mithyatva.  **5. Non-Experiential (Anābhōgika):** Just as one-sensed
(Ekaindriyadi) beings are devoid of thought and special knowledge, similarly,
when a person's mind becomes inert and does not think about Samyaktva or
Mithyatva, there is Non-Experiential Mithyatva.  Thus, there are five types of
Mithyatva. (Pancha San. 186)  Here are some verses regarding Mithyatva:
"Mithyatva is a great disease, Mithyatva is great darkness, Mithyatva is the
great enemy of the soul; Mithyatva is great poison. Disease, darkness, and
poison cause suffering only once in life, but if the disease of Mithyatva is not
treated, it causes suffering for thousands, millions, and billions of births.
The soul whose mind is enveloped in deep Mithyatva does not know the difference
between truth and falsehood. How can a blind person from birth know the beauty
or ugliness of any object? ||3||  Now, describing the characteristics of Deva
and Adeva, Guru and Aguru, and Dharma and Adharma, we first describe the form of
Deva. 60.  **"Sarvajño Jitragādidoṣastrailōkyapūjitaḥ | Yathāsthitārthavādī ca
Devō'rhan Paramēśvaraḥ ||4||"**  **Meaning:** The Deva, Arhan, or Paramēśvara is
the one who knows all, has conquered the vices of attachment, aversion, etc., is
worshipped by the three worlds, and speaks the truth as it is. ||4||
**Explanation:** Four excellences are considered essential for the Deva-tattva.
They are: 1. Excellence of Knowledge (Jñānātiśaya), 2. Excellence of Freedom
from Suffering (Apāyapagamātiśaya), 3. Excellence of Worship (Pūjātiśaya), and
4. Excellence of Speech (Vachanātiśaya).  By describing the Deva-ādhideva Arhan
as "Sarvajña" (all-knowing), the excellence of his knowledge is indicated. He
knows all beings, non-beings, and other principles. However, his knowledge is
not like that of other philosophers whose scriptures contain contradictory
statements. Other philosophers say, "Look at all the things in the world,
whether you see them or not, see the desired principle. How many insects are
there in the dung of insects? What use is this knowledge to us? See far and wide
or not; we should only see what is useful to us. If those who see far are to be
considered as evidence, then worship the vultures who have farsightedness."
(Prā. Vā. 1/33-35)  But Jain philosophy says, "The knowledge of a desired object
cannot be obtained without the knowledge of all objects. Without the
comprehensive knowledge of every principle, both in its ordinary and
extraordinary forms, in relation to other principles, no single principle can be
known with its characteristics and its opposite, in terms of affirmation and
negation."  It is also said, "He who has seen one principle in all its forms
knows all principles (all principles in the form of substance, category, and
modification) in essence; he who has seen all principles in all their forms has
seen one principle in essence."  The second epithet, "Jitragādidoṣaḥ" (who has
conquered the vices of attachment, aversion, etc.), indicates the excellence of
freedom from suffering of the Bhagavan Deva-ādhideva Arhan. Apāya means obstacle
or vice. It is well known throughout the world that vices like attachment,
aversion, lust, anger, greed, and delusion are obstacles to self-realization,
they pollute the soul, and therefore they are vices. Therefore, Bhagavan Deva-
ādhideva has overcome these vices and conquered them forever.  The implication
is that Arhan Deva has banished all these vices forever. Many people who are
ignorant of this principle say, "It is just a verbal embellishment to say that a
man is free from attachment, aversion, etc." But this statement is erroneous.
How can one who has not conquered the vices of attachment, aversion, etc.,
attain the Deva-ādhideva-tattva? Therefore, it is not even possible to imagine
that Arhan Deva is possessed by attachment, aversion, etc.  The third epithet of
Arhan Deva, "Trailōkyapūjitaḥ" (worshipped by the three worlds), expresses his
excellence of worship. A person cannot be considered a Deva simply because of
the worship and devotion offered by a few deluded beings of good intellect;
rather, the true sign of Deva-tattva is when the Devas of the moving and
stationary worlds, the Asuras, and the intelligent humans who speak various
languages of different countries, all become united in friendship, abandoning
their mutual racial hatred, and even the animals compete to enter into their
presence.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 devAdi kA svarupa yogazAstra dvitIya prakAza zloka 3 se 4 4. sAMzayika - deva,
guru aura dharma ke saMbaMdha meM vyakti kI saMzaya sthiti banI rahanA ki 'yaha
satya hai yA vaha satya hai?' vahAM, sAMzayika mithyAtva hotA hai| 5. anAbhogika
- jaise ekendriyAdi jIva, vicAra se zUnya aura vizeSajJAna se rahita hote haiM,
vaise hI vyakti bhI jaba vicAra jar3a ho jAtA hai samyaktva yA mithyAtva ke bAre
meM kucha bhI socatA nahIM hai, taba vahAM anAbhogika mithyAtva hotA hai| isa
taraha yaha pAMca prakAra kA mithyAtva hai| (paMca saM. 186) mithyAtva ke
saMbaMdha meM kucha zloka yahA~ prastuta kiye gaye haiM-'mithyAtva mahAroga hai,
mithyAtva mahAn aMdhakAra hai, mithyAtva jIva kA mahAzatru hai; mithyAtva
mahAviSa hai| roga, aMdhakAra aura viSa to jiMdagI meM ekabAra hI duHkha dete
haiM, paraMtu mithyAtvaroga kI cikitsA na kI jAya to yaha hajAroM lAkhoM,
karoDoM janmoM taka pIr3A detA rahatA hai| gAr3ha-mithyAtva se jisakA citta
ghirA rahatA hai, vaha jIva, tattva atattva kA bheda nahIM jaantaa| jo janma se
aMdhA ho, vaha bhalA kisI bhI vastu kI manoharatA yA amanoharatA kaise jAna
sakatA hai?  /  / 3 /  /  aba deva aura adeva, guru aura aguru tathA dharma aura
adharma kA lakSaNa batAte hue sarva prathama deva kA svarUpa batAte haiN|60|
sarvajJo jitarAgAdi-doSastrailokyapUjitaH  /  yathAsthitArthavAdI ca devo'rhan
paramezvaraH  // 4 //  artha :- sarvabhAva ko jAnane vAle, rAga-dveSAdi doSoM ko
jItane vAle, tIna loka ke pUjanIya aura padArtha ke yathArtha | svarUpa ko
kahane vAle deva arhan athavA paramezvara kahalAte haiM  // 4 //  vyAkhyA :-
deva meM devatattva ke lie cAra atizaya Avazyaka batAye haiN| ve isa prakAra
haiM-1. jJAnAtizaya, 2. apAyApagamAtizaya, 3. pUjAtizaya aura 4. vcnaatishy|
devAdhideva arhan kA pahalA vizeSaNa 'sarvajJa' batAkara, samagra jIva-ajIvAdi
tattva ko jAnane vAle hone se unakA jJAnAtizaya sUcita kiyA hai| paraMtu unakA
jJAna apane race hue zAstra meM paraspara-viruddha kathana vAle anya dArzanikoM
kA-sA nahIM hai| anya dArzanikoM kA kahanA hai-'saMsAra kI sabhI vstueN| dekho,
cAhe na dekho, ISTa tattva ko dekho| kIr3oM ke dara meM kitane kITa hai? yaha
jJAna hamAre kisa kAma kA? dUra-sudUra taka dekho yA na dekho; hameM prayojana
ho, utanA hI dekhanA caahie| yadi dUra taka dekhane vAloM ko pramANabhUta mAnanA
hai to dUradRSTi vAle giddhoM kI upAsanA kro|' (prA. vA. 1/33-35) paraMtu
jainadarzana kA kahanA hai 'vivakSita eka ISTa padArtha kA (sarvathA) jJAna
samagrapadArtha ke jJAna ke binA nahIM ho sktaa| pratyeka bhAva ke dUsare bhAvoM
ke sAtha sAdhAraNa aura asAdhAraNa rUpa se samagra jJAna ke binA eka bhI
padArtha lakSaNa sahita tathA usake viparIta anvaya-vyatireka ke rUpa meM jA
sktaa| kahA bhI hai-'jisane sarva prakAra meM se eka bhAva dekhA hai. vaha
tattvataH sarvabhAvoM (dravya-gaNa-paryAya rUpa sarvabhAvoM) ko jAnatA hai;
jisane sarvabhAvoM ko sarvaprakAra se dekhA hai; usane tattvataH ekabhAva ko
(sarvathA) dekhA hai| dUsarA 'jitarAgAdidoSaH' (jisane rAga-dveSa Adi doSoM ko
jIta liyA hai) vizeSaNa bhagavAn devAdhideva arhanta ke apAyApagamAtizaya ko
sUcita karatA hai| apAya kA artha hai vighna yA doss| sAre saMsAra meM yaha bAta
prasiddha hai ki-rAga, dveSa, kAma, krodha, lobha, moha Adi vikAra Atma-sAdhanA
meM vighna rUpa hai, ye AtmA ko dUSita karane vAle haiM, isalie ye doSa rUpa
hai| isalie bhagavAn devAdhideva inase jUjhakara inheM jIta cUke hote haiN|
tAtparya yaha hai ki arhantadeva ne ina sabhI apAyabhUta doSoM ko sadA ke lie
khader3a diyA hai| isa tattva se anabhijJa kaI loga kahate haiM-koI puruSa
rAgAdi rahita hai, aisA kahanA sirpha vANI vilAsa hai|' lekina yaha kathana
bhrAMtipUrNa hai| rAgAdi vikAroM ko nahIM jItane vAlA vaha kaise
devAdhidevatattva ko prAptakara sakatA hai? isalie arhantadeva ke lie rAgAdi se
yukta hone kI kalpanA bhI nahIM kI jA sktii| * arihaMtadeva kA tIsarA
'trailokyapUjitaH' vizeSaNa unake pUjAtizaya ko vyakta karatA hai| kucha
thor3e-se Thage gaye bhadrabuddhi jIvoM ke dvArA kI gayI pUjA-bhakti se hI kisI
vyakti meM devatva nahIM mAnA jA sakatA; apitu devatva kA sahI patA to taba
lagatA hai, jaba calitAsana deva, asura aura vividha dezoM kI bhASA bolane vAle
buddhizAlI manuSya pArasparika jAti vaira chor3akara maitrIbhAva se otaprota ho
jAte haiM, tiryoM meM bhI jinake samavasaraNa meM praveza karane kI hor3a laga
jAtI 73

Page #96 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Characteristics of the Supreme Arhan, Possessing Four Atishayas  **Verse
4 & 5 of the Yoga Shastra, Second Light**  The praise of the Lord, the
performance of Anjali Puja, the glorification of His virtues, and the enjoyment
of the nectar of Dharmadeshana create a kind of competition among people. When
even the gods are seen worshipping Him, then the true vision of His
Devadidevatva (Supreme Divinity) is realized.  The epithet "Yatha-sthita-artha-
vadi" (one who speaks the truth of a thing as it is) reveals the Lord's Vachana-
atishaya (excellence of speech). One who speaks of a thing in its true form, as
it is, can be called a Yatha-sthita-artha-vadi. As stated in the Veetrag Stuti:
"Even if we want to test you impartially, we know for sure that we cannot
compare you, the Veetrag Deva, with the Ragi-Dveshi Deva (passionate-hateful
god). Because your quality of speaking the truth as it is, is considered to be a
binding nectar that automatically restricts the qualifications of other gods."
(A-yog 32:22)  Whether the bowing down by the likes of Surendra is considered as
disregard for others by you, or whether you are considered equal to others, how
can others disregard you because of your quality of speaking the truth as it is?
(A-yog 12)  The Devadidev Arhan - the word "deva" is derived from the root "divu
kreeḍa vijigīshu..." which, according to word etymology, means "divyate iti
devaḥ" - that which is worshipped or praised is a deva. Such a deva, possessing
the aforementioned powers and characteristics, can only be the Supreme Lord, the
Devadidev Arhan, and no other. ||4||  Now, an earnest request is being made to
worship, serve, and be devoted to such devas possessing four Atishayas, to
accept their rule (Dharma-sangha), to meditate with them in front, and to seek
their refuge. ||61||  **Verse 5**  **Dhyatavyo'yam upasyo'yam ayam saranam
ishyataam | Asyaiva pratipattavyam, shasanam cetana'sti cet ||5||**
**Meaning:** If you have the consciousness-intellect to discern between right
and wrong, then you should meditate on such a deva, worship him, seek his
refuge, and accept his rule (Dharma-sangha). ||5||  **Explanation:** One should
meditate on such a Devadidev possessing Atishayas, in the form of Pindastha,
Padastha, Roopastha, and Roopateet, like King Shrenik. King Shrenik meditated on
the color, form, institution, and strength of the Shraman Bhagwan Mahavira
Swami, and his 34 Atishaya-filled yogic qualities. Due to the influence of this
meditation, he will become the first Tirthankara named Padma-nabha in the coming
24th cycle, possessing the same color, form, institution, strength, and
Atishayas. We have also said in praise: "You have previously meditated on
Mahavira Paramatma with a focused mind, so you will surely be a Tirthankara with
the same form." Truly, the effect of yoga is amazing! The Agam also says: "Just
as Arihant Shri Mahavira Bhagwan is endowed with good conduct and morality, you
will be endowed with the same good conduct and morality in the form of Shri
Padma-nabha Arihant." Therefore, one should serve and worship this deva. The
condemnation of our misdeeds and the approval of our good deeds can save us from
the fear and suffering of the world, with the help of this deva. Therefore,
desire to take refuge in him. Do not accept other rules (Dharma-sangha)
described (instructed) by men devoid of the aforementioned Atishayas, but accept
the rule of the Devadidev Veetrag, possessing the aforementioned
characteristics. If you have consciousness (the power of knowledge to discern
between right and wrong), then meditate on the deva possessing the
aforementioned characteristics. In fact, the advice given to a conscious person
is successful, while the advice given to a person devoid of consciousness
(discriminating intellect) is futile. It is also said: "Crying in the forest,
massaging a dead body, trying to straighten a dog's crooked tail, playing music
for a deaf person, sowing lotus seeds in the ground, and rain falling on barren
land - all these things become futile, just as the advice given to an ignorant
person goes in vain." ||5||  **Now, the characteristics of Adev are described.**
**74**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 cAra atizayoM se yukta devAdhideva arhan kI vizeSatA yogazAstra dvitIya prakAza
zloka 4 se 5 hai tathA prabhu kI bhakti karane, aMjalipUjA, guNastuti karane
evaM dharmadezanA rUpI amRta ke AsvAdana karane kI logoM meM hor3a-sI laga jAtI
hai| tiyoM aura manuSyoM se to kyA, devoM se bhI jaba ve pujate dekhe jAte haiM;
tabhI unake devAdhidevatva ke vAstavika darzana hote haiN| 'yathAsthitArthavAdI'
(jo padArtha jisa rUpa meM hai, usakA usI rUpa meM yathArtha kathana karane
vAle) vizeSaNa se prabhu kA vacanAtizaya parilakSita hotA hai| jisa padArtha kA
jo svarUpa ho, usa sadbhuta padArtha kA vaise hI rUpa meM kathana karane vAlA hI
yathAsthitArthavAdI kahA jA sakatA hai| jaisA ki vItarAgastuti meM kahA gayA
hai-ApakI hama pakSapAtarahita parIkSA karanA cAheM to bhI hama pratItipUrvaka
jAnate hai ki-rAgI-dveSI deva kI aura Apa vItarAgadeva kI; donoM kI tulanA hama
nahIM kara sakate; kyoMki ApakA yathAvasthita artha kathana rUpa guNa dUsare
devoM kI yogyatA para svataH pratibaMdha lagAne vAlA nibaMdharasa mAnA jAtA hai|
(ayoga batrIzI 22) surendra jaisoM dvArA namana ko ApakI ora se dUsaroM kI
avagaNanA samajhI jAya yA Apako dUsaroM ke samAna mAnA jaay| vastutaH Apake isa
yathAsthita-vastu kathana rUpa guNa se anya loga bhI ApakI avagaNanA kaise kara
sakate haiM? (ayoga - 12) devAdhideva arhan-'divu krIr3A vijIgISu....' dhAtu se
deva-zabda banA hai; jisakI zabdazAstra ke anusAra vyutpatti hotI hai-'divyate
iti devaH' arthAt jisakI pUjA yA stuti hotI hai, vaha deva hai| aise deva
pUrvokta sAmarthya evaM lakSaNa vAle paramezvara, devAdhideva arhan hI ho sakate
haiM; dUsare nahIM  /  / 4 /  /  aba isa prakAra ke cAra atizaya vAle devoM kI
upAsanA-sevA-bhakti karanA, unake zAsana (dharmasaMgha) kA svIkAra karanA, unako
sAmane rakhakara dhyAna-dhAraNa karanA, unakI zaraNa svIkAra karanA Adi bAtoM ke
lie sAgraha anurodha kara rahe haiN|61| dhyAtavyo'yamupAsyo'yamayaM
zaraNamiSyatAm  /  asyaiva pratipattavyaM, zAsanaM cetanA'sti cet  // 5 //
artha :- agara Apa meM sad-asad kA vicAra karane kI cetanA-buddhi hai; to aise
deva kA dhyAna karanA, upAsanA karanA, zaraNa meM jAnA aura inake hI zAsana
(dharmasaMgha) kA svIkAra karanA cAhie  /  / 5 /  /  vyAkhyA :- isa prakAra ke
atizaya vAle devAdhideva kA rAjA zreNika ke samAna piNDastha, padastha, rUpastha
aura |rUpAtIta rUpa meM dhyAna karanA caahie| zreNika rAjA zramaNa bhagavAn
mahAvIra svAmI ke varNa, pramANa, saMsthAna, saMhanana, cautIsa atizaya vAle
yoga guNa Adi guNoM ke mAdhyama se unakA dhyAna karatA thA, jisake prabhAva se
hI vaha AgAmI cauvIsI meM unhIM ke varNa, pramANa, saMsthAna, saMhanana aura
atizayoM se yukta padmanAbha nAmaka prathama tIrthaMkara bneNge| Age hamane
stuti karate hue kahA bhI hai-'Apane pahale tanmayacitta hokara mahAvIra
paramAtmA kA dhyAna kiyA hai, jisase Apa unake samAna svarUpa vAle tIrthakara
avazya hI hoNge| sacamuca, yoga kA prabhAva adbhuta hai! Agama meM bhI kahA
hai|'arihaMta zrI mahAvIra bhagavAn jisa prakAra ke zIla-sadAcAra se yukta haiM;
Apa usI prakAra ke zIla-sadAcAra se yukta | zrIpadmanAbhaarihaMta ke rUpa meM
hoNge| isalie isI deva kI sevA aura upAsanA karanI caahie| hamAre dvArA duSkRta
kI niMdA aura sukRta kI anumodanA isI deva ke sahAre se saMsAra ke bhaya aura
duHkhoM se hameM bacA sakatI hai| isIlie inhIM kI zaraNa lene kI abhilASA kro|
pUrvokta atizaya rahita puruSoM dvArA varNita (upadiSTa) anya zAsana
(dharmasaMgha) kA svIkAra na karake. pUrvokta lakSaNoM se yukta devAdhideva
vItarAga ke zAsana ko svIkAra kro| yadi tuma meM cetanA (sadaasad kA viveka
karane kI jJAnazakti) hai to pUrvokta lakSaNa yukta deva kA dhyAna Adi kro|
vAstava meM, cetanAvAn ko diyA huA upadeza saphala hotA hai, cetanA (viveka
buddhi) se rahita vyakti ko diyA gayA upadeza niSphala hotA hai| kahA bhI hai-
araNya meM rudana, murde ke zarIra para mAliza, kutte kI Ter3hI pUMcha ko sIdhI
karane kA prayatna, bahare ko saMgIta sunAnA, jamIna meM kamala kA bIja bonA
evaM USarabhUmi para huI varSA; ye saba bAteM niSphala ho jAtI hai, vaise hI
ajJAnI vyakti ko diyA gayA upadeza vyartha jAtA hai  /  / 5 /  /  aba adeva kA
lakSaNa kahate haiM 74

Page #97 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Lack of Liberation by Ordinary Devas  **Yoga Shastra, Second Light,
Verses 6-7 (62)**  Those Devas who are tainted by the marks of attachment, such
as women, weapons, prayer beads, etc., and who are engaged in giving curses and
boons, their worship, etc., does not lead to liberation. ||6||  **Explanation:**
Devas who adorn themselves with women, beautiful women, weapons like tridents,
prayer beads, damaru (a small hand drum), etc., and who perform dances,
destruction, laughter, or ostentatious displays, become worshipped by the
people. But in truth, these women, weapons, prayer beads, etc., are all
indicators of their attachment, aversion, and delusion. Women are the cause of
attachment. If a Deva is truly detached, then what is the purpose of having a
woman? Even ordinary humans in the world have women, and these Devas also have
women, so what is the difference between the two? Weapons are a sign of
aversion, they are kept out of fear of an enemy or opponent, or due to one's own
weakness. Prayer beads are a sign of one's ignorance. Beads are used to remember
a great person. Therefore, there must be a greater Deva than these so-called
Devas. Those who are truly detached Devas, free from attachment and delusion, do
not have women. Because they are free from aversion, they do not have prayer
beads, which are a sign of forgetfulness or a symbol of great worship.
Attachment, aversion, and delusion are the root of all vices. These three are
the source of all vices. Being eager to punish through killing, binding,
cursing, or striking, and to grant boons, etc., as a form of grace, are both
caused by attachment and aversion. If even the supreme Devas are like this, then
they cannot be the cause of liberation. In the world, even ghosts, spirits, and
demons are considered to be Devas, and no one can stop them from believing in
their own divinity. ||6||  This indicates the lack of the cause of liberation in
those ordinary Devas. ||63||  How can those Devas who are unstable in their
minds due to engaging in plays, laughter, music, etc., which increase attachment
(delusion), grant liberation, the peaceful state, to the beings who have come to
them for refuge? ||7||  **Explanation:** Here, liberation, free from all worldly
entanglements, can only be understood through words like "perfect knowledge,"
etc. How can Devas who are unstable in their minds due to worldly titles like
plays, laughter, music, etc., grant the peaceful state of liberation to their
devotees who have come to them for refuge? A castor oil plant cannot be compared
to a wish-fulfilling tree. Therefore, only the truly detached Deva, free from
the vices of attachment, aversion, and delusion, can grant liberation; not other
Devas who are tainted by many vices. For this, we present many useful verses
(verse meanings) here:  "How can Rudra, Brahma, and Vishnu, who engage in wrong
and inappropriate activities, be omniscient or detached, being inferior to
ordinary people? Having a woman is a sign of lust, taking up weapons is a sign
of aversion, prayer beads are a sign of ignorance, and a water pot is a sign of
impurity. Rudra has Rudrani, Brihaspati has Tara, Brahma has Savitri,
Pundarikaaksha has Padmalaya, Indra has Sachi, Surya has Rannadevi, Chandra has
Rohini, the daughter of Daksha, Agni has Swaha, Kamadeva has Rati, and Yamadeva
has Dhumoorna as their wives. Thus, it is clear that Devas have women, and each
of them has weapons. And since each of them has worldly pleasures, there is
doubt about their divinity. Therefore, it can be said without a doubt that they
have not touched the state of the supreme Deva.  Even in the Sugata, who
proclaims the world to be void due to ignorance, divinity does not arise. After
the voidness is proven to be false, it is futile to speak of nihilism. And even
if it is proven, without proof (when the proof itself becomes void), the
voidness of the other side cannot be established. Then how can the voidness of
one's own side be established? The Sugata believes in the momentariness of all
things, then how can the doer be connected to the fruit of his action? How can
the momentarist be the cause of the violence he commits? Similarly, how can the
momentarist's memory recognize him or how can he behave? To give one's own body,
filled with worms and other creatures, to a tiger; this is also a gift..." ||7||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 sAmAnya deva dvArA mukti kA abhAva yogazAstra dvitIya prakAza zloka 6 se 7 (62)
ye strI-zastrAkSasUtrAdi rAgAdyakakalaGkitA  /  nigrahAnugrahaparAste devAH
syurna muktaye  // 6 /  /  artha :- jo deva strI, zastra, japamAlA Adi rAgAdi
sUcaka cihnoM se dUSita haiM, tathA zApa aura varadAna dene vAle haiM, aise
devoM kI upAsanA Adi mukti kA prayojana siddha nahIM karatI  /  / 6 /  /
vyAkhyA :- strI, kAminI, trizUla Adi astra-zastra, japamAlA, DamarU Adi vastuoM
ko dhAraNa karane vAle deva inase tAMDavanRtya, saMhAra, aTTahAsa yA ADaMbara
karake lokapUjita bana jAte haiM, lekina saca kahA jAya to ye strI, zastra,
japamAlA Adi saba cihna unake rAga, dveSa, moha Adi ke sUcaka hai| strI rAga kA
kAraNa hai, yadi vaha svayaM virAgI hai to phira strI rakhane kA kyA prayojana?
saMsAra meM sAdhAraNa manuSya bhI strI rakhatA hai aura ve deva bhI strI rakhate
haiM, to phira donoM meM aMtara kyA rahatA hai? zastra dveSa kA cihna hai, vaha
bhI kisI zatru yA virodhI ke bhaya se athavA apanI durbalatA se rakhA jAtA hai|
japamAlA apanI ajJatA kI nizAnI hai| mAlA apane se kisI mahAn vyakti kI phirAI
jAtI hai| ataH tathAkathita devoM kA bhI unase bar3hakara koI mahAn deva honA
caahie| jo vItarAgadeva hote haiM, rAga-moha rahita hone se | unake strI kA
saMga nahIM hotA; dveSa rahita hone se vismRti kI sUcaka athavA mahatpUjA ke
cihna rUpa meM japamAlA bhI nahIM hotii| rAga, dveSa aura moha se hI AtmA meM
samasta doSa Akara jamA ho jAte haiN| samasta doSoM ke mUla ye tIna hI haiN|
vadha, baMdhana, zApa yA prahAra rUpa nigraha evaM pApoM kI sajA mApha karanA va
varadAnAdi rUpa anugraha ina donoM meM tatpara rahanA bhI rAga-dveSa ke kAraNa
hotA hai| agara paramadeva bhI isa prakAra ke hoM to ve mukti ke kAraNabhUta
nahIM ho skte| vaise to saMsAra meM bhUta, preta, pizAca Adi krIr3A karane vAloM
meM bhI devatva mAnA jAtA hai, unake usa devatva ko mAnane ko koI roka bhI nahIM
sakatA  // 6 //  una sAmAnya devoM meM mukti ke kAraNa kA abhAva sUcita karate
haiN|63| nATayATTahAsasaGgItAdyupaplavavisaMsthulAH  /  lambhayeyuH padaM
zAntaM, prapannAn prANinaH katham?  // 7 //  artha :- jo deva nATaka, aTTahAsa,
saMgIta Adi rAga (moha)-varddhaka kAryoM meM asthira citta vAle haiM, ve apanI
zaraNa meM Aye hue jIvoM ko zAMta pada rUpI mukti sthAna kaise prAsa karAyeMge?
// 7 //  vyAkhyA :- yahAM sakala sAMsArika prapaMcajAla se rahita mukti,
kevalajJAna Adi zabdoM se samajhA jA sake, aisA zAMta mokSapada, nATaka
aTTahAsa, saMgIta Adi sAMsArika upAdhi se DAMvADola cittavRtti vAle deva apane
Azraya meM Aye hue bhakta varga ko kaise prApta karA sakate haiM? eraMDa kA
per3a kalpavRkSa kI samAnatA nahIM kara sktaa| isalie rAga, dveSa aura moha ke
doSa se rahita ekamAtra vItarAgadeva hI mukti ko prApta karAne vAle ho sakate
haiM; aneka doSoM se dUSita anya deva nhiiN| isake lie yahAM kaI upayogI zloka
(zlokArtha) prastuta karate hai 'galata evaM ayogya pravRttiyA~ karane vAle hone
se sAmAnya jana se nimna bhUmikA ke rudra, viraMci evaM mAdhava sarvajJa yA
vItarAga kaise ho sakate haiM? strI kA saMga kAma kA sUcaka hai, hathiyAra kA
grahaNa dveSa kA dyotaka hai| japamAlA ajJAna kA sUcaka hai aura kamaMDalu
azauca kA dyotaka hai| rudra ke rudrANI, bRhaspati ke tArA, viraMci ke sAvitrI,
puMDarIkAkSa ke padmAlayA, iMdra ke zacI, sUrya ke rannAdevI, caMdra ke
dakSaputrI rohiNI, agni ke svAhA, kAmadeva ke rati, yamadeva ke dhUmorNA strI
hai| isa taraha devoM ke sAtha striyoM kA saMga prakaTa hai aura pratyeka ke
pAsa zastra bhI hai. tathA pratyeka ke pAsa moha-vilAsa hone se unake
devAdhidevatva meM saMdeha hai hii| ataH niHsaMdeha kahA jA sakatA hai ki
devAdhideva pada kA sparza unhoMne nahIM kiyaa| ajJAnatA pUrvaka sAre saMsAra ko
zUnya batalAne vAle sugata meM bhI devatva ghaTita nahIM hotaa| zUnyatva pramANa
se asiddha hone ke bAda zUnyavAda kA kathana karanA vRthA hai aura pramANa hone
para bhI pramANa ke binA (pramANa ke bhI zUnya ho jAne para) parapakSa kI bhI
zUnyasiddhi nahIM ho sakatI; to phira apane pakSa kI siddhi kisa taraha ho
sakatI hai? sugata sarvapadArthoM meM kSaNikatva mAnate haiM to sAdhaka kA apanI
kriyA ke phala ke sAtha saMbaMdha kaise jur3a sakatA hai? kSaNikavAdiyoM kA
vadha karane vAlA bhI phira usa hiMsA kA kAraNa kaise hogA? isI prakAra
kSaNikavAdI kI smRti bhI use kaise pahicAna pAyegI yA kaise vyavahAra kara
sakegI? kRmiyoM Adi jIvoM se bharA huA apanA zarIra vyAghra ko sauMpa denA; yaha
bhI deya 75

Page #98 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Difference Between a Good Guru and a Bad Guru  **From the second light of
Yoga Shastra, verses 6 to 9:**  How can a philosophy that advocates for the
destruction of the womb and the consumption of flesh at birth be considered
compassionate? How can a philosophy that considers the laws of nature
meaningless and the soul (purusha) as devoid of qualities and inactive be
considered wise? How can Kapil, who is mentally deranged by such a philosophy,
be considered a god? How can the leaders of the gods, Skanda, Kartikeya, Vayu,
and others, who are the source of all vices, be considered (supreme) gods?  Cows
are animals, they often eat excrement, they frequently engage in sexual
intercourse with their own offspring, and they kill living beings with their
horns when the opportunity arises. How can they be considered worthy of worship?
"They give milk," you say. If that is the reason for worshipping them, then why
not worship buffaloes, which also give milk? There is no special difference
between a cow and a buffalo. If you consider the cow to be the abode of every
pilgrimage, sage, and god, then why do you milk them? Why do you kill them and
sell them? And if you consider the pestle, mortar, stove, doorframe, peepal,
neem, banyan, ak, and water, etc., as gods, then who has renounced them? If
these things are considered divine, then their use should be abandoned
altogether, and they should only be worshipped. For this reason, we have said in
the Vitaragastotra: "We, who are satisfied with the gods who are manifested in
the form of the belly and the genitals, are devotees of the gods. Those who have
such a deluded mind, like you (Vitarag), speak ill of those who are devoid of
divinity. This is truly a matter of sorrow." (Vitarag Stotra 6/8)  Now we will
describe the characteristics of a good guru. 64. Those who are steadfast in the
five great vows, who are patient in the face of adversity and hardship, who live
on alms alone, who are steadfast in Samayika, and who teach pure Dharma are
considered gurus. 8.  Meaning: Those who uphold the five great vows of non-
violence, etc., who remain steadfast in their vows even in times of adversity or
hardship, without succumbing to fear, are worthy of being gurus. Having
established the fundamental qualities of a guru, we now describe the secondary
qualities: "They live on alms alone," meaning that such gurus obtain only water
and essential religious necessities from the giver householders in the form of
alms. They do not possess wealth, grain, gold, silver, villages, or cities,
etc., as possessions (attachment). Now we describe the qualities that are the
cause of the guru possessing both fundamental and secondary qualities: "They are
steadfast in Samayika." They remain stable in the practice of Samayika. Only by
being established in Samayika can they be capable of upholding a character that
is free from the duality of fundamental and secondary qualities. This is a
common characteristic of all monks. Now we describe the extraordinary
characteristic of a guru: "They teach Dharma." True gurus teach pure Dharma,
which is in the form of the Dharma-sutra-charitra, free from the defilement of
attachment, or the Dharma that is free from the duality of the relationship
between the virtuous and the listener. For this reason, we have stated in the
Abhidhanachintamani lexicon: "A guru is one who teaches Dharma." A guru who
imparts the true (wonderful) meaning of the scriptures is called a guru. 8.  Now
we will describe the characteristics of a bad guru. 65. Those who desire
everything, who eat everything, who possess possessions, who are not celibate,
and who teach falsehood are not gurus. 9.  Meaning: Those who desire everything,
such as women, wealth, grain, gold, land, houses, and four-legged animals, in
return for teaching, etc., who collect all kinds of things, necessary and
unnecessary, and claim them as their own, who are omnivorous, eating anything
they can find, such as meat, alcohol, intoxicants, rotten food, and endless
food, who possess possessions such as land, property, women, and children, and
who are not celibate due to these possessions, are not gurus. 1. How can a Jain
monk who claims ownership of villages, devotees, and pilgrimages be considered a
Jain monk?

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 suguru aura kuguru kA aMtara yogazAstra dvitIya prakAza zloka 6 se 9 adeya-
viveka se zUnya kaisI vicitra saugata-dayA hai? apane janma ke samaya hI mAtA ke
udara ko cIrane tathA mAMsa khAne | ke upadeza ko saugata dayA kaise kaha sakatA
hai? prakRti ke dharma kI nirarthakatA ko jJAna mAnakara AtmA (puruSa) ko
nirguNa, niSkriya mAnate haiM, aise vivekavikala kapila ko deva mAnanA kaise
susaMgata ho sakatA hai? samasta doSoM ke Azraya ke samAna gaNAdhipa, skanda,
kArtikeya, pavana Adi ko bhI (parama) deva kaise kahA jA sakatA hai? gAya pazu
hai prAyaH viSThA bhI khAtI hai, kaI daphA apane hI putra ke sAtha maithuna-
sevana karatI hai, maukA Ane para apane sIMgoM se jIvoM kA ghAta bhI kara DAlatI
hai, ataH vaha vaMdanIya kaise ho sakatI hai? 'vaha dUdha detI hai' isalie | use
vaMdanIya mAnA jAya to bhaiMsa bhI dUdha dene vAlI hone se vaMdanIya kyoM nahIM?
bhaiMsa se gAya meM khAsa vizeSatA nahIM hai| yadi gAya ko pratyeka tIrtha, RSi
aura deva kA AzrayasthAna mAnate ho to use dUhate kyoM ho? mArate aura becate
kyoM ho? aura mUsala, Ukhala, cUlhA, caukhaTa, pIpala, nIma, vaTa, Aka aura jala
Adi ko devatA mAnate ho, inameM se kisakA kisane tyAga kiyA? inameM devatva kI
mAnyatA hone para to inakA istemAla karanA hI chor3a denA cAhie, inheM sirpha
pUjanA hI cAhie na? isI kAraNa vItarAgastotra meM hamane kahA hai-'udara aura
upastha rUpa iMdriyavarga meM viDaMbita devoM se kRtakRtya bane hue hama devoM
ko mAnane vAle devAstika hai, isa prakAra kI ahaMbuddhi vAle kutIrthI Apa
(vItarAga) jaisoM kA (devatvahIna mAnakara) apalApa karate haiM, sacamuca yaha
duHkha kA viSaya hai' (vIta. stotra 6/8)  /  / 7 /  /  aba suguru kA lakSaNa
batAte haiN|64| mahAvratadharA dhIrA, bhaikSamAtropajIvinaH  /  sAmAyikasthA
dharmopadezakA guravo matAH  // 8 //  artha :- paMca mahAvrata dhAraNa karane
vAle, upasargoM aura pariSahoM ke samaya dhairya dhAraNa karane vAle,
bhikSAmAtra se apanA nirvAha karane vAle, sAmAyikacAritrI evaM zuddha dharma ke
upadeSTA guru mAne gaye haiM  /  / 8 /  /  vyAkhyA :- ahiMsA Adi pAMca
mahAvratoM ke dhAraka, ApatkAla meM, upasarga yA pariSaha Ane para unheM
kAyaratA se rahita hokara dhairyapUrvaka sahakara apane mahAvratoM ko akhaMDita
rakhane vAle muni hI guru ke yogya hai| guru meM mUlaguNoM kA pratipAdana karake
aba unameM uttaraguNoM kA bhI astitva batAne kI dRSTi se kahate haiM-
'bhaikSamAtropajIvinaH' arthAt ve guru pAnI yA Avazyaka dharmopakaraNa sirpha
dAtA gahasthoM se bhikSA ke rUpa meM prApta kara ekamAtra bhikSAvatti se nirvAha
karate haiM. na ki apane pAsa ukta padArthoM kI parti ke lie dhana, dhAnya.
sonA-cAMdI. gAMva yA nagara Adi para svAmitva(mamatva) rUpa parigraha rakhate
haiN| aba guru meM mUlaguNa aura uttaraguNa ko dhAraNa karane meM kAraNabhUta
guNa batAte haiM'sAmAyikasthAH ' ve sAmAyika cAritra meM sthira rahate haiN|
sAmAyika meM sthita hokara hI ve mUlaguNa aura uttaraguNa se bheda yukta cAritra
kA pAlana karane meM samartha ho sakate haiN| yaha sabhI muniyoM kA sAdhAraNa
lakSaNa hai| aba guru kA asAdhAraNa lakSaNa batAte haiM-'dharmopadezakAH' sacce
guru hote hai ve zuddha dharma-sUtra-cAritra rUpa, saMvaranirjarAmaya athavA
sAdhuzrAvaka-saMbaMdhi bheda yukta dharma kA upadeza karate haiN| isI kAraNa
'abhidhAnacintAmaNi' koza meM hamane batAyA hai'gurudharmopadezakaH guru vaha
hai, jo dharmopadeza detA hai,' suzAstra ke yathArtha (sadbhuta) artha kA bodha
dene vAlA guru kahalAtA hai  /  / 8 //  aba kuguru kA lakSaNa batAte haiN|65|
sarvAbhilASiNaH sarvabhojinaH saparigrahAH  /  abrahmacAriNo mithyopadezA guruvo
na tu  // 9 //  artha :- sabhI vastuoM kI cAha vAle, sabhI prakAra kA bhojana
kara lene vAle; samasta parigrahadhArI, abrahmacArI evaM mithyA upadeza dene
vAle guru nahIM ho sakate  // 9 //  vyAkhyA :- upadeza Adi dekara badale meM
strI, dhana, dhAnya, svarNa, kSetra, makAna, caupAye pazu Adi sabhI cIjeM
baTorane ke abhilASI, Avazyaka-anAvazyaka sabhI prakAra kI vastue~ saMgraha
karake apane adhikAra aura svAmitva meM 1. mAMsa. madirA, nazIlI cIjeM. saDI-
bAsI. anaMtakAya Adi jo bhI cIja mila jAya use khA-pI lene vAle sarvabhojI,
jamIna jAyadAda, strI, putra Adi parigraha rakhane vAle tathA ukta parigraha ke
kAraNa abrahmacArI aguru hote haiN| 1. gAMva, bhakta gaNa, tIrtha Adi para
svAmItva rakhane vAle jaina sAdhu kaise kahe jA sakate haiM?

Page #99 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Dharma's Essence, Deciding Between Human and Non-Human Words  **Chapter Two,
Light of Yoga, Verses 10-12**  Due to the aforementioned major flaws, they are
declared as **abrahmachari** (one who delights in external pudgalas,
**pudgalanandi**). Finally, an extraordinary reason for **agurutva** (lack of
authority) is given: **"mithyopadesha"**. The teachings of an **aguru**
(unworthy teacher) are not imbued with pure dharma; they are filled with words
that promote violence, desire, falsehood, consumption of alcohol or intoxicants,
etc. Such teachings lack the guidance of **aptpurushas** (worthy individuals),
and therefore cannot be called **dharmopadeśa** (teachings of dharma). || 9 ||
Here arises the question: if their authority is established by giving
**dharmopadeśa**, then what is the need to search for qualities like
**niṣparigrahatva** (non-attachment) in them? In response to this, it is said:
**Verse 10:**  **"Parigrahaaram bhamagnastaryeyuḥ katham parān? | Svayam daridro
na parameshwarikartumiśhwaraḥ ||"**  **Meaning:** How can one who is drowned in
attachment and its beginnings save others? One who is poor himself, how can he
make another wealthy? || 10 ||  **Explanation:** One who is immersed in the
beginnings of attachment, like attachment to wife, children, wealth, grain,
land, property, etc., leading to violence and other actions, who desires to
possess all things and is an omnivore, is himself drowned in the ocean of
samsara. How can he then be capable of rescuing others from the ocean of
existence? This is explained through a simple analogy: "How can a poor man make
another rich?" || 10 ||  Now, the characteristics of dharma are explained:
**Verse 11:**  **"Durgatiprapatpraanidharanaad dharmo uchyate |
Samyamaadirdasavidhaḥ, sarvajnoktō vimuktaye ||"**  **Meaning:** Dharma is
called so because it sustains and protects beings who are falling into
**durgati** (hellish realms). It is of ten types, beginning with **samyama**
(self-control), and is spoken by **sarvajnas** (omniscient beings) for the sake
of liberation. || 11 ||  **Explanation:** **Naraka** (hell) and **tiryanch**
(animal realms) are both **durgati**. Dharma is that which sustains and protects
beings who are falling into **durgati**, i.e., it saves them from these realms.
This is the meaning of the word **dharma** (etymologically), and this is its
characteristic. Or, in another way, **dharma** is that which sustains and
establishes beings in **sadgati** (good realms), **devagati** (heavenly realms),
**manushya** (human realms), or **moksha** (liberation). The ancient teachers
have also said: "This sustains beings who are falling into **durgati** and
establishes them in auspicious realms, hence it is called **dharma**." This
tenfold dharma, beginning with **samyama**, being spoken by **sarvajnas**,
fulfills the purpose of liberation. We will discuss this further. Since other
gods are not **sarvajnas**, their words cannot be considered authoritative.
Here, the opponent may raise this doubt: there are no words spoken by
**sarvajnas**; because the **Vedas** are eternal and **apौरुषेय** (not created
by humans), therefore their words are not spoken by any human. So, the truth
should be decided based on the **Vedas** alone, or the essence of dharma should
be known from them. What is the need for **sarvajnokt** (words of omniscient
beings) or **tattvanirnaya** (determination of truth)? It is also said: "Through
**nodana** (inspiration of the Vedas), every individual will be able to know the
past, future, and present, the gross and subtle, the distant and near. The
senses alone cannot know anything." (Shabara Bhashya 1.1-2) Since the **Vedas**
are **apौरुषेय**, there is no possibility of any human-related flaw entering
their inspiration (**nodana**). Therefore, they should be considered
authoritative. In **Nyaya Shastra** (Logic) it is also said: "Words are subject
to the speaker; the speaker is prone to flaws." When even a virtuous speaker can
lack flawlessness at times, then there is certainly a possibility of flaws
entering the words of a speaker who is devoid of virtues. Or, the doubt about
whether a statement is flawed or not can only arise in the case of human words.
Where the speaker is not a human, in the absence of a speaker, flaws cannot
exist without a basis. (Mimamsa Sloka Varttika 1.1-2-62/63) Therefore, since the
words of the **apौरुषेय** **Vedas** lack a creator, there is no possibility of
any flaw whatsoever. || 11 ||  Addressing this doubt, it is said:  **Verse 12:**
**"Apौरुषेयं vachanam sambhavi bhaved yadi | Na pramanam bhaved vaachaam
hyaptaadheenā pramanata ||"**  **Meaning:** If non-human words were possible,
then they would not be authoritative. For the authority of words lies in the
**aptas** (worthy individuals). || 12 ||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dharma svarUpa, pauruSeya apauruSeya vacana nirNaya yogazAstra dvitIya prakAza
zloka 10 se 12 pUrvokta mahAdoSoM ke kAraNa unheM abrahmacArI (AtmA se bAhya
pudgaloM meM ramaNa karane vAlA-pudgalAnaMdI) batalAyA hai|| aMta meM agurutva
kA eka asAdhAraNa kAraNa batAyA hai-'mithyopadezAH' aguru kA upadeza zuddha
dharma se yukta nahIM hotA; usameM hiMsA, kAmanA, asatya, madya yA nazIlI cIjoM
ke sevana Adi ke poSaka vacana adhika hote haiN| vaha upadeza AptapuruSoM ke
upadeza se rahita hotA hai, isIlie use dharmopadeza nahIM kahA jA sakatA  /  / 9
/  /  yahAM prazna hotA hai ki dharmopadeza dene se hI unakA gurutva siddha ho
gayA, phira unameM niSparigrahatva Adi guNoM ko khojane kI kyA AvazyakatA raha
jAtI hai? isI ke uttara meM kahate haiM  / 66 /  parigrahA'rambhamagnAstArayeyuH
kathaM parAn?  /  svayaM daridro na paramIzvarIkartumIzvaraH  // 10 //  artha :-
svayaM parigraha aura AraMbha meM gale taka DUbA huA, dUsaroM ko kaise tAra
sakatA hai? jo svayaM daridra ho, . vaha dUsare ko dhanADhya kaise banA sakatA
hai?  // 10 //  vyAkhyA :- strI-putra, dhana-dhAnya, jamIna-jAyadAda Adi ke
parigraha ke kAraNa jIvahiMsA Adi aneka AraMbho meM DUbA rahane vAlA, sabhI
padArthoM ko pAne kI lAlasA karane vAlA evaM sarvabhojI, hone se svayaM hI
saMsArasamudra meM DUbA huA hai to phira dUsaroM ko bhavasamudra se pAra karane
meM kaise samartha ho sakatA hai? ise hI sAdhaka dRSTAMta dvArA samajhAte haiM-
'jo svayaM kaMgAla ho, vaha dUsaroM ko zrImAn kaise banA sakatA hai?'  /  / 10 /
/  aba dharma kA lakSaNa batAte haiN|67| durgatiprapatatprANidhAraNAd dharma
ucyate  /  saMyamAdirdazavidhaH, sarvajJokto vimuktaye  // 11 //  artha :-
durgati meM girate hue jIvoM ko dhAraNa-rakSaNa karane ke kAraNa hI use 'dharma'
kahate haiN| vaha saMyama Adi daza prakAra kA hai, sarvajJoM dvArA kathita hai
aura mokSa ke lie hai  /  / 11 /  /  vyAkhyA :- narakagati aura tiryaMcagati ye
donoM durgati hai| durgati meM girate hue jIvoM ko dhAraNa karake rakhane
vAlAarthAt durgati se bacAne vAlA dharma kahalAtA hai| yahI dharmazabda kA
(vyutpatti se) artha hotA hai, yahI dharma kA lakSaNa hai| athavA prakArAMtara
se niruktArtha yaha bhI hotA hai ki jo sadgati, devagati, manuSyagati yA mokSa
meM jIvoM ko dhAraNasthApita kare vaha dharma hai| pUrvAcAryoM ne bhI kahA
hai-'yaha durgati meM girate hue jIvoM ko dhAraNa karatA hai aura zubha sthAna
meM sthApita karatA hai, isI kAraNa ise dharma kahA jAtA hai|' vaha saMyamAdi
dasa prakAra kA dharma sarvajJa kathita hone se mukti ke prayojana ko siddha
karatA hai| isa saMbaMdha meM hama Age btaayeNge| dUsare devoM ke asarvajJa hone
ke kAraNa unakA kathana pramANabhUta nahIM mAnA jA sktaa| yahAM pratipakSI kI
yaha zaMkA ho sakatI hai ki sarvajJa ke kahe hue to koI vacana hai hI nahIM;
kyoMki veda to nitya apauruSeya (puruSa-kartRtva se rahita) hai, isIlie usake
vacana to kisI puruSa ke dvArA kahe hue hai hI nhiiN| ataH vedavAkya se hI
tattva kA nirNaya kara liyA jAyegA athavA dharma kA svarUpa jAna liyA jAyegA,
phira sarvajJokta dharma yA tattvanirNaya kI kyA jarUrata hai? kahA bhI
hai-'nodanA (veda-preraNA) se hara vyakti bhUta, bhaviSya aura vartamAna, sthUla
aura sakSma, dara aura nikaTa ke padArthoM ko jAna sakegA: kevala iMdriyA~ to
kacha bhI nahIM jAna sktiiN| (zAbara bhA. 1. 1-2) veda apauruSeya hone se usakI
preraNA (nodanA) meM puruSa-saMbaMdhI kisI bhI doSa ke praveza kI saMbhAvanA
nahIM hai| isalie vahI pramANabhUta honA caahie| nyAyazAstra meM bhI kahA hai-
zabda vaktA ke adhIna hotA hai; vaktA meM doSa kI saMbhAvanA hai| jaba guNavAna
vaktA meM bhI kisI samaya nirdoSatA kA abhAva ho sakatA hai, taba guNoM se
rahita vaktA ke zabda meM doSoM ke Ane (saMkramaNa) kI saMbhAvanA to avazyameva
hai| athavA kisI vacana meM doSa hai yA nahIM; isa prakAra kI zaMkA puruSa ke
vacanoM meM hI ho sakatI hai, jisakA vaktA koI puruSa hI na ho, vahAM vaktA ke
abhAva meM Azraya ke binA doSa ho hI nahIM skte| (mI. zloka. vA. 1-1-2-62/63)
isalie apauruSeya veda ke vacanoM meM kartatva kA abhAva hone, kisI doSa ke hone
kI kathamapi zaMkA nahIM ho sktii||11|| ukta zaMkA kA samAdhAna karate hue
kahate haiN68| apauruSeyaM vacanamasambhavi bhavedyadi  /  na pramANaM bhaved
vAcAM hyAptAdhInA pramANatA  // 12 //  77

Page #100 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Harm of Believing in False Gods, Teachers, and Dharma  **Yoga Shastra,
Second Light, Verses 12-14:**  **Verse 12:** No word is possible without a
speaker, it is considered impossible. Even if such a word exists, it is not
proof. Because the authenticity of words depends on the true speaker, the wise
person.  **Explanation:** A word spoken by a person is called a "paurusheya"
word. What is spoken through the impact of the throat, palate, etc., and their
causes, is called a word. Therefore, any word will be "paurusheya" - created by
the effort of a person. An "apaurusheya" word is contradictory, like a flower in
the sky (or a speck of dust in the sky), impossible, and cannot be proven by any
evidence. Nor can it be called intangible and invisible. Because words are
tangible, only a tangible and embodied being can speak them; not an incorporeal
or intangible being. If you consider the sound of clapping hands as proof, then
this statement is also not true. Because believing that sound originates from
clapping or snapping fingers leads to the opposite fault of "apaurusheya". Even
for a single word, the need for the throat, palate, etc., the instrument, and
the impact is felt, then for other words like it, the need for the place,
instrument, etc., will also be required. And then, even if the place, etc., are
not visible in figurative words, how will their "apaurusheya" nature, expressing
their implied meaning, be possible? If a lamp is lit in a householder's house to
see yogurt and a pot, then it also reveals the bread, like the yogurt, etc.
Therefore, by the aforementioned logic, the "apaurusheya" nature of a word is
not proven. (Nyaya Man. p. 195) Even if we accept the word as "apaurusheya" like
a flower in the sky, etc., based on the habit of unauthenticity, it will still
not be considered proof. Because only words spoken by a wise person are
considered proof; not other words. Since the quality in a word is created by the
speaker, how can the quality be transferred (attributed) to the words of a
flawed speaker? There is no recognition of such words; which have no speaker, or
because of the absence of a speaker, the words cannot remain with qualities
without a support.  And whether these words have qualities or not? This can also
be determined only by "paurusheya" words. Since there is no human creator of the
Vedic words, there is no doubt whether they have qualities or not.  **Verse
13:** Dharma, taught by those with false views, and contaminated by violence,
etc., even if it is known as Dharma in the world, is the cause of worldly
wandering.  **Explanation:** Dharma taught by those with opposing views
(contaminated by extreme views), like Rudra, Daityari, Viranchi, Kapil, Sugata,
etc., and accepted by simple-minded people, even if it is famous in the world,
is still a cause of birth and death in the four realms of existence, and is
therefore a form of "adharma". Why and how? In response, it is said that this
Dharma is contaminated by violence, etc. And scriptures created by those with
false views are often contaminated by violence, etc.  **Verse 14:** If a god is
attached, a teacher is not celibate, and Dharma is devoid of compassion, then it
is a great pity! It is because of these that the world is sinking.
**Explanation:** If a god is filled with attachment, hatred, and delusion, a
teacher is not celibate and indulges in the five great sins, like killing, etc.,
and Dharma is devoid of compassion and lacks fundamental and secondary
qualities, and is prevalent in the world, then we are deeply saddened! It is a
pity that because of such gods, teachers, and Dharma, the path to hell is
increasing, and the world is falling into the abyss of destruction. Someone has
said - If the gods who are considered worthy of worship are themselves attached
and hateful; or are nihilists, drinking alcohol, eating meat, and killing living
beings is Dharma, and the so-called Dharma teachers are attached to worldly
pleasures, intoxicated by lust, and

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 kudevAdi ko mAnane se hAni yogazAstra dvitIya prakAza zloka 12 se 14 artha :-
puruSa ke binA koI bhI vacana saMbhava nahIM hotA, yAnI asaMbhava mAnA jAtA hai|
kadAcit aisA vacana ho to bhI vaha pramANa rUpa nahIM hai| kyoMki vacanoM kI
prAmANikatA yathArtha vaktA-AsapuruSa ke adhIna hai||12|| vyAkhyA :- kisI puruSa
ke dvArA kahA huA vacana pauruSeya vacana kahalAtA hai| kaMTha, tAlu Adi sthAnoM
evaM kAraNoM ke AghAta pUrvaka jo bolA jAya, vaha vacana kahalAtA hai| isalie jo
bhI vacana hogA vaha pauruSeya-puruSa-prayatna kRta hogaa| apauruSeya vacana
paraspara viruddha, AkAzakusuma (yA nabhatrasareNu) ke samAna asaMbhava hai
tathA yaha kisI pramANa se | bhI siddha nahIM hotA aura na hI use amUrta
kahakara adRzya kahA jA sakatA hai| kyoMki zabda to mUrta hai, unheM mUrta aura
zarIradhArI hI kaha sakegA; azarIrI yA amUrta nhiiN| hAtha se tAlI bajAne ke
zabda kI taraha zabda-zravaNa ko hI yadi pramANa mAnate ho to yaha kathana bhI
yathArtha nahIM hai| kyoMki tAlI bajAne yA cuTakI bajAne Adi se zabda kI utpatti
mAnane para to ulTA apauruSeya doSa AtA hai| eka zabda ke lie hI jaba kaMTha,
tAlu Adi sthAna, karaNa evaM abhighAta kI AvazyakatA mahasUsa hotI hai, taba
usake jaise anya aneka zabdoM ko prakaTa karane ke lie bhI sthAna, karaNa Adi |
kI AvazyakatA pdd'egii| aura phira vyaMgyazabdoM meM bhale hI sthAna Adi nahIM
dikhAI dete hoM, lekina zabdoM ko apauruSeya unakI pratiniyama vyaMjaka-
vyaMgyatA kaise saMbhava hogii| kisI gahastha ke ghara meM dahI aura ghar3e ke
dekhane ke lie dIpaka jalAyA to vaha dahI Adi kI taraha roTI ko bhI batA detA
hai| isalie pUrvokta yukti se vacana kA apauruSeya siddha nahIM hotaa| (nyAya
maM. pR. 195) yadi apramANikatA kI Adata ke bala para vacana ko AkAzakusuma Adi
ke samAna apauruSeya mAna bhI leM to bhI vaha pramANabhUta nahIM mAnA jAyegA;
kyoMki AptapuruSa ke mukha se nikale hue vacana hI pramANabhUta mAne jAte haiM;
anya vacana nhiiN| cUMki zabda meM guNa paidA karanA to bolane vAle ke adhIna
hotA hai| kisI doSa yukta vaktA ke zabdoM meM guNoM kA saMkramaNa (AropaNa)
kaise ho sakatA hai? aise zabdoM kI koI pratIti nahIM hotI; jinakA koI kahane
vAlA na ho athavA kisI kahane vAle ke na hone se zabdoM meM bhI Azraya ke binA
guNa raha nahIM skte| tathA ina vacanoM meM guNa hai yA nahIM? isakA nizcaya bhI
pauruSeya vacanoM se hI kiyA jA sakatA hai| vedavacana | puruSa kartA ke na hone
se unameM guNa hai yA nahIM, aisI zaMkA nahIM hotii||12|| isa prakAra apauruSeya
kathana kI asaMbhAvanA batAkara vividha yuktiyoM se usake abhAva kA pratipAdana
karane ke bAda aba asarvajJa puruSa ke dvArA kathita dharma kI apramANikatA
batAte haiN|69| mithyAdRSTibhirAmnAto, hiMsAdyaiH kaluSIkRtaH  /  sa dharma iti
vitto'pi, bhavabhramaNakAraNam  // 13 /  /  artha :- mithyAdRSTiyoM dvArA
pratipAdita tathA hiMsA Adi doSoM se dUSita dharma saMsAra meM dharma ke rUpa
meM prasiddha hone | para bhI vaha saMsAra-paribhramaNa kA kAraNa hai  /  / 13 /
/  vyAkhyA :- rudra, daityAri, viraMci, kapila, sugata Adi viparIta (ekAMtavAda
ke kAraNa duSita) daSTi vAloM se pratipAdita aura bhole-bhAle maMdabaddhi logoM
dvArA svIkRta dharma, cAhe duniyA meM prasiddha ho gayA ho, phira bhI
caturgatika saMsAra meM janma-maraNa kA kAraNa hone se eka taraha se adharma hI
hai| vaha kyoM aura kaise? isake uttara meM kahate haiM ki vaha dharma hiMsA Adi
doSoM se dUSita hai| aura mithyAdRSTipraNIta zAstra prAyaH hiMsAdi doSoM se
dUSita hai  /  / 13 /  /  _ aba kudeva, kuguru aura kudharma kI bhartsanA karate
hue unake mAnane se hAni kA pratipAdana karate haiN||70| sarAgo'pi hi devazced,
gururbrhmcaarypi| kRpAhIno'pi dharmaH, syAt kaSTaM naSTaM hahA! jgt||14|| artha
:- deva yadi sarAgI ho, dharmaguru abrahmacArI ho aura dayArahita dharma ko
agara dharma kahA jAya to, bar3A aphasosa hai! inase hI to saMsAra kI luTiyA
DUbI hai  // 14 //  vyAkhyA :- rAga, dveSa aura moha se yukta deva ho,
prANAtipAta Adi pAMca mahApApoM kA sevana karane vAle abrahmacArI | guru hoM,
dayArahita evaM mUlaguNa-uttaraguNa rahita dharma kA hI saMsAra meM bolabAlA ho;
ise dekhakara hameM apAra kheda hotA hai! aphasosa hai ki aise deva, guru aura
dharma ke kAraNa durgatigamana bar3ha jAne ke kAraNa jagat vinAza ke garta meM
calA jA rahA hai| kisI ne kahA hai-yadi ArAdhya mAne jAne vAle deva hI rAgI-
dveSI hoM; yA zUnyavAdI ho, madirA pInA, mAMsa khAnA aura jIva hiMsA karanA hI
dharma ho, tathA tathAkathita dharmaguru hI viSayoM meM Asakta hoM, kAma meM
matta hoM, kAMtA 78

Page #101 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Five Characteristics of Samyaktvam  **Yoga Shastra, Second Light, Verse 15**
It is a great sorrow when those who are attached to worldly things are still
considered worthy of respect. 1 For simple-minded people who are easily misled
take refuge in them and continue on the path of downfall and destruction. 14.
Thus, the abandonment of *kudev*, *kuguru*, and *kudharma* and the realization
of *sudev*, *suguru*, and *sudharma* are beautifully explained as *samyaktvam*.
But from the perspective of *nishchayadristi*, *samyaktvam* is the pure result
of a good soul; it is itself intangible, we cannot see it, but we can know it
through its five signs. Therefore, now we describe these five signs.  71.
*Sham*, *sanveg*, *nirved*, *anukampa*, and *astikya* are the five
characteristics by which *samyaktvam* is well recognized. 15.  **Explanation:**
Even indirect *samyaktvam* residing in one's own soul or in the soul of another
can be known through the five signs of *sham*, *sanveg*, *nirved*, *anukampa*,
and *astikya* in external behavior. The nature of these five is as follows:  1.
**Sham:** *Sham* means *prasham* or the non-arising of cruel, infinite *kṣayās*.
It means restraining *kṣayās* from arising, either by their nature or by knowing
and seeing the bitter fruits of their maturation. It is said that knowing the
inauspicious results of *karma* (karma-phala), the practice of *upshamabhav*
(state of calmness) in the soul, even not getting angry at the offender is
*prasham*. Many *ācāryas* call the calming of the itch of anger and the thirst
for worldly objects *sham*. The question arises: how can a being who has
attained *samyagdarshan* and serves the *sadhus* have the itch of anger and the
thirst for worldly objects? Then how can we consider Emperor Shrenik and Shri
Krishna, who were seen to have worldly desires and the itch of anger, to have
*sham* as described above? And if they did not have *sham*, how can we consider
them to have *samyaktvam*? The solution is this: it is not that they lacked
*sham* and therefore did not have *samyaktvam*. Just as there is fire covered
with ash without smoke in a blacksmith's furnace. There is no smoke in that
fire. In this regard, according to *nyāyashastra*, the rule (vyapti) is that
wherever there is smoke, there is fire, because where there is a sign (ling),
there is the signified (lingi), provided that the sign has been ascertained by
examination. Therefore, it is said that where there is smoke - a sign (ling),
there is definitely fire (lingi) with the sign. But where there is the signified
with the sign (lingi), it is not necessary for the sign (ling) to be present.
Just as sometimes fire with red embers is also without smoke; there is no rule
for the presence of smoke as a sign (ling) in the signified (lingi). The
relationship between the sign and the signified is in the reverse of the rule.
From this perspective, both Shri Krishna and King Shrenik were definitely
*samyaktvīs*, but the sign of *prasham* was sometimes present and sometimes not.
Compared to the three rounds of infinite *kṣayās*, their *kṣayās* were
*prasham*, but compared to the round of *sanjwalan* *kṣayās*, anger, etc., were
not *prasham*. Therefore, in that respect, even though both of these great souls
were *samyaktvīs*, they had the existence of *sanjwalan* anger, itch, and subtle
worldly desires. It is also clear that sometimes *sanjwalan* *kṣayās* are also
intense and have results similar to infinite *kṣayās*.  2. **Sanveg:** *Sanveg*
means the desire for liberation. A being with *samyagdristi* considers the
worldly pleasures of a king and Indra to be mixed with sorrow and therefore
considers them to be sorrow. They consider the pleasure of liberation to be the
only true pleasure. It is also said that a *samyaktvī* soul considers the
pleasure of a human and Indra to be sorrow in their heart (antar) and does not
pray for anything else without liberation with *sanveg*; (Shra. Pra. 56) that is
the one who has *sanveg*.  3. **Nirved:**  Dispassion from the world is
*nirved*. A soul with *samyagdristi* is deeply disgusted with sorrow and bad
destiny, birth... 1. Even if there is such a muni in the garb of a Jain muni,
they are also invisible. - 79

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 samyaktva ke pAMca lakSaNa yogazAstra dvitIya prakAza zloka 15 meM anurakta ho,
phira bhI pUjanIya mAne jAte hoM to mahAduHkha kI bAta hai| 1 kyoMki yatra-tatra
sarvatra bahaka jAne vAle bhole bhAle loga inakA Azraya lekara patana aura
vinAza ke mArga para bar3he jA rahe haiM  /  / 14 /  /  isa prakAra kudeva,
kuguru aura kudharma kA parityAga kara sudeva, suguru aura sudharma kI pratIti
svarUpa samyaktva kI | suMdara vyAkhyA kI gayI hai| kiMtu nizcayadRSTi se
samyaktva zubha AtmA kA zuddha pariNAma rUpa hai; jo apane Apa meM amUrta hai,
jise hama dekha nahIM sakate, kintu usa (pariNAma) ke 5 cihnoM se hama use
(samyaktva ko ) jAna sakate haiN| ataH aba 5-5 cihnoM kA varNana karate haiM  /
71 /  zama-saMvega-nirvedA'nukampA''stikyalakSaNaiH  /  lakSaNaiH paJcabhiH
samyak samyaktvamupalakSyate  //  15 //  artha :- zama, saMvega, nirveda,
anukaMpA aura Astikya rUpa pAMca lakSaNoM se samyaktva ko bhalIbhAMti pahacAna
sakate haiM  /  /  15  /  /  vyAkhyA : - apanI AtmA meM rahA huA athavA dUsare
kI AtmA meM rahA huA parokSa samyaktva bhI zama, saMvega, nirveda, anukaMpA aura
Astikya rUpI pAMca cihnoM bAhya vyavahAroM se jAnA jA sakatA hai| una pAMcoM kA
svarUpa | kramazaH isa prakAra hai 1. zama - zama kA artha hai- prazama athavA
krUra anaMtAnubaMdhI kaSAyoM kA anudaya; kaSAyoM ko svabhAva se yA |
kaSAyapariNati ke kaTUphala jAna-dekhakara unheM udayAvasthA meM rokanA  /  kahA
hai ki - karmaprakRtiyoM ke azubha vipAka ko ( karmaphala) jAnakara AtmA kA
upazamabhAva kA abhyAsa ho jAne se aparAdhI para bhI kabhI krodha na karanA
prazama hai| kaI AcArya krodha rUpI khujalI aura viSayatRSNA ke upazama ko zama
kahate haiN| savAla yaha hotA hai ki samyagdarzanaprApta aura | sAdhuoM kI sevA
karane vAle jIva ke to krodhakaMDU (khAja) aura viSayatRSNA ho nahIM sktii| taba
phira niraparAdhI aura aparAdhI para krodha karane vAle samrAT zreNika aura
zrIkRSNajI, jinameM viSayatRSNA evaM krodhakaMDU pratyakSa parilakSita hote the,
ataH unameM pUrvokta lakSaNa vAlA zama thA, yaha kaise mAnA jAya? aura zama
nahIM thA to unameM samyaktva kA astitva bhI kaise mAnA jAya ? isakA samAdhAna
yoM karate haiM, aisI bAta nahIM hai ki unameM zama kA abhAva thA, isalie
samyaktva | nahIM thA  /  jaise luhAra kI bhaTTI meM dhu~e se rahita rAkha se
DhakI huI Aga hotI hai| usa Aga meM dhuMA jarA bhI nahIM hotA  /  | usa
saMbaMdha meM nyAyazAstrAnusAra niyama ( vyApti ) aisA hai ki jahAM jahAM dhuMA
hai vahAM-vahAM agni jarUra hotI hai, kyoMki jahAM liMga (cihna) hotA hai, vahAM
liMgI avazya hotA hai, bazarte ki liMga kA parIkSA ke dvArA nizcayakara liyA
gayA ho  /  | isIlie kahate hai ki dhuMA - cihna (liMga) ho, vahAM cihnavAlA
agni (liMgI) avazya hotA hai| paraMtu jahAM-jahAM cihna vAlA liMgI ho vahAM
cihna (liMga) kA honA anivArya nahIM hai| jaise kahIM-kahIM lAla aMgAroM vAlI
agni dhuMe se rahita bhI hotI hai; vahAM (liMgI meM ) dhuMe rUpa liMga (cihna)
ke hone kA niyama nahIM hai| liMga-liMgI kA saMbaMdha niyama ke viparyAsa meM
hotA hai| isI dRSTi se zrIkRSNa aura zreNika rAjA donoM nizcita rUpa se
samyaktvI the, lekina samyaktva ke cihna rUpa | prazama kathaMcit thA, kathaMcit
nahIM  /  anaMtAnubaMdhI Adi kaSAyoM kI tIna caukar3I kI apekSA se unakA kaSAya
prazama thA, | lekina saMjvalana kaSAya kI caukar3I kI apekSA se krodhAdi
prazama nahIM hue the| isalie usa apekSA se ukta donoM | mahAnubhAvoM ke
samyaktvI hote hue bhI usameM saMjvalana krodhakaMDU tathA sUkSma viSayatRSNA kA
astitva thA  /  kabhI-kabhI saMjvalanakaSAya bhI tIvratA se anaMtAnubaMdhI ke
samAna vipAka vAlA hotA hai, yaha bAta bhI spaSTa hai| 2. saMvega - saMvega kA
artha hai - mokSa kI abhilASA  /  samyagdRSTi jIva rAjA aura indra ke vaiSayika
sukha ko bhI duHkhamizrita hone ke kAraNa duHkha rUpa mAnate haiM; ve mokSasukha
ko hI ekamAtra sukha rUpa mAnate haiN| kahA bhI hai| samyaktvI- AtmA manuSya
aura iMdra ke sukha ko bhAva (aMtara) se duHkha mAnatA hai aura saMvega se mokSa
ke binA aura kisI vastu kI prArthanA nahIM karatA; (zrA. pra. 56) vahI
saMvegavAna hotA hai  /  3. nirveda saMsAra se vairAgya honA, nirveda hai|
samyagdRSTi AtmA duHkha aura durgati se gahana bane hue janma1. jaina muni veza
meM bhI aise muni ho to ve bhI adRSTavya hai| - 79

Page #102 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Five Marks of Right Faith (Samyaktv)  **Yoga Shastra, Second Light, Verse
15**  In the prison of death, suffering various tortures inflicted by the
shackles of karma (dandapashak), unable to resist them, accepting the feeling of
ruthlessness, he is overwhelmed with sorrow. It is said:  "Without practicing in
the afterlife in the realms of hell, animal, human, and god, devoid of the
poison of attachment, he experiences sorrow with detachment (vairagya) without
the Vedas."  Many Acharyas have interpreted the meaning of "sanveg" and "nirved"
in the opposite sense - "sanveg" meaning detachment from the world and "nirved"
meaning the desire for liberation.  **4. Compassion (Anukampa)**  The desire to
have mercy on suffering beings is compassion. True compassion is the feeling of
wanting to alleviate the suffering of the distressed without any partiality.
Even tigers, lions, etc., have compassion for their children, but that is
partial compassion. Compassion is of two types: material and emotional. Material
compassion is to alleviate the suffering of the distressed person by
counteracting their suffering to the best of one's ability. Emotional compassion
is to have a tender heart towards the distressed and be filled with mercy. It is
said:  "Seeing beings experiencing suffering in the ocean of the world, to
connect them to righteous conduct with material and emotional compassion without
partiality, according to one's ability, is truly to eradicate their suffering."
(Shra. Pra. 59)  **5. Faith (Astikya)**  The soul is real, and the realms of
heaven, hell, and the afterlife are the fruits received by the soul according to
its good and bad tendencies. Karma is the cause of the diversity of beings in
the world, and there is karma-phala (fruit of karma). One who believes this is a
believer (astik). His feeling (guna) or action (karma) is astikya. Even after
hearing and knowing the nature of other religious principles, one who never
desires to accept another religious principle while abandoning the Jain
principles, and whose firm faith is in the Jain principles, is the true
believer. Such a believer can be identified by his faith even when the dharma
and samyaktv are not directly visible (indirectly). For such a believer with the
mark of astikya, it is said:  "What the Jineshwars have said is true and without
doubt. Such a person, endowed with auspicious results and free from doubts,
desires, and other vices, is considered a samyaktvī."  Some Acharyas have
explained the marks (lingas) of samyaktv, such as "sham," etc., in a different
way. According to them, "sham" means to calm (upasham) the false belief
(mithyabhinivesh) by holding fast to the principles of the Agamas composed by
the well-examined speakers (aps). This is the first mark of right faith
(samyagdarshan). In short, one who abandons the untruth and accepts the truth
(satya) is a samyagdarshi. "Sanveg" means to practice righteous conduct
according to the teachings of the Jinas and to have faith in them, out of fear
of birth and death and suffering in the realms of hell, etc. A samyagdarshi soul
with sanveg contemplates the physical and mental torments, the cold, heat, and
other pains experienced in hell, the torment caused by the interaction with the
wicked and demonic beings of that realm who remind them of their past enmity,
the suffering of being subservient to others in the animal realm, being beaten
with wood, whips, etc., the poverty, misfortune, disease, and anxieties in the
human realm, and fears them, and thus practices righteous conduct to prevent
them and attain peace from those sufferings. Only then is the mark of sanveg
visible. Alternatively, the increasing enthusiasm (vega) in samyagdarshan - its
growth - is the mark of sanveg in samyaktv. "Nirved" means the feeling of non-
attachment to objects. For example, a nirvedavan soul thinks: "The attachment of
beings to worldly pleasures, which are difficult to attain in this world, will
bear many troublesome fruits in this life and will also bear the extremely
bitter fruits of hell, animal, and human births in the afterlife. Therefore,
what is the benefit of such pleasures? They must be abandoned." Thus, the
samyagdarshan of the soul can also be identified by detachment (vairagya).
"Anukampa" means to feel a vibration in the heart in accordance with the
suffering of another when one sees it. Its action is in the form of mercy.
Anukampavan thinks: "The world...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 samyaktva ke pAMca lakSaNa yogazAstra dvitIya prakAza zloka 15 maraNa rUpI
kaidakhAne meM karma rUpI DaMDa (daMDapAzaka) se una-una yAtanAoM ko sahate hue,
unake pratIkAra karane meM asamartha hotA hai; isalie nirmamatvabhAva ko svIkAra
karatA huA duHkha se vyAkula hotA hai, kahA bhI hai 'naraka, tiryaMca, manuSya
aura devabhava meM paraloka kI sAdhanA kiye binA mamatva ke viSa se rahita
hokara vedarahita nirveda (vairAgya) pUrvaka duHkha kA vedana karatA rahatA hai|
kaI AcAryoM ne saMvega aura nirveda kA artha ukta artha se viparIta kiyA hai -
saMvega yAnI saMsAra se vairAgya aura nirveda yAnI mokSa kI abhilASA  /  - 4.
anukaMpA - duHkhI jIvoM para dayA karane kI icchA anukaMpA hai| pakSapAta rahita
hokara duHkhI janoM ke duHkha ko miTAne kI bhAvanA hI vastutaH anukaMpA hai|
pakSapAta pUrNa karuNA to bAgha, siMha Adi kI bhI apane baccoM para hotI hai|
vaha anukaMpA dravya aura bhAva se do prakAra kI hai| dravya se anukaMpA kahate
haiM - apanI zakti ke anusAra duHkhI vyakti | ke duHkha kA pratIkAra karake
usakA duHkha dUra karanA aura bhAva se duHkhI ke prati komala hRdaya rakhakara
dayA se paripUrNa honaa| kahA bhI hai saMsAra samudra meM duHkhAnubhava karate
hue jIvoM ko dekhakara pakSapAta rahita hokara apanI zakti ke anusAra dravya se
aura bhAva se unheM dharmAcaraNa meM jor3anA hI vastutaH unake duHkhoM ko
nirmUla karanA hai| (zrA. pra. 59 ) 5. Astikya AtmA hai, AtmA ko apanI
zubhAzubha pravRttiyoM ke anusAra phala svarUpa milane vAlA devaloka,
narakagati, paraloka Adi hai; saMsAra meM prANiyoM kI vibhinnatA kA kAraNa karma
hai, karmaphala hai, isa prakAra jo mAnatA hai, | vaha Astika hai usakA bhAva
(guNa) yA karma (kriyA) Astikya hai| anyAnya dharmatattvoM kA svarUpa sunane-
jAnane para bhI jo kabhI jinokta dharmatattva ko chor3akara dUsare dharmatattva
ko svIkAra karane kI icchA nahIM karatA, jinokta dharmatattva para hI jisakI
dRr3ha zraddhA hotI hai, vahI saccA Astika hai| aise Astika kI pahicAna dharma
aura samyaktva ke pratyakSa na | dikhAI dene (parokSa hone para bhI Astikya se
kI jA sakatI hai| aise Astikya lakSaNayukta samyaktvI ke lie kahA hai
"jinezvaroM ne jo kahA hai, vahI satya aura zaMkA rahita hai, aise zubha
pariNAmoM se yukta aura zaMkA, kAMkSA Adi doSoM se rahita ho, vaha samyaktvI
mAnA jAtA hai| 'katipaya AcAryoM ne zama Adi samyaktva ke cihnoM (liMgoM) kI
vyAkhyA ora rUpa se kI hai| unake mata se zama | kA artha hai - bhalIbhA~ti
parIkSA kiye hue vaktA (Apsa) ke dvArA racita AgamoM ke tattvoM meM Agraha
rakhakara mithyAbhiniveza | kA upazama (zAMta) krnaa| yaha samyagdarzana kA
(prathama) lakSaNa hai| saMkSepa meM kaheM to, atattva kA tyAga karake tattva
(satya) ko grahaNa karane vAlA hI samyagdarzanI hai| saMvega kA artha hai-
narakAdigatiyoM meM janma-maraNa evaM duHkhoM ke bhaya se jina pravacana ke
anusAra dharmAcaraNa karanA aura unake prati zraddhA rakhanA  /  saMvegavAna
samyagdRSTi AtmA naraka meM prApta | hone vAlI zArIrika, mAnasika yaMtraNAoM,
zIta, uSNa Adi vedanAoM tathA vahAM ke kliSTapariNAmI paramAdhArmika asuroM |
dvArA pUrva vaira kA smaraNa karAkara paraspara asIma kleza kI udIraNA se hone
vAlI pIr3A, tiyaMcagati meM bojha uThAne kI parAdhInatA, lakar3I, cAbuka Adi se
mAra khAte rahane Adi duHkha, manuSya gati meM daridratA, daurbhAgya, roga,
cintA Adi viDaMbanAoM ke viSaya meM ciMtana karake unase Darakara unakA nivAraNa
karane aura ukta duHkhoM se zAMti prApta karane ke upAyabhUta saddharmAcaraNa
karate haiM, tabhI unakA saMvega rUpa cihna dRSTigocara hotA hai| athavA
samyagdarzana meM utsAha kA | vega uttarottara bar3hate jAnA - vardhamAna honA -
samyaktva kA saMvega rUpa cihna hai| nirveda kA artha hai- viSayoM ke prati
anAsakti bhAva  /  jaise nirvedavAna AtmA vicAra karatA hai- 'saMsAra meM
kaThinatA se aMta A sakane vAle kAmabhogoM ke prati | jIvoM kI jo Asakti hai,
vaha isa loka meM aneka upadrava rUpa phala dene vAlI hai, paraloka meM bhI
naraka - niyaca - manuSya| janma rUpa atyaMta kaTuphala dene vAlI hai| isalie
aise kAmabhogoM se kyA lAbha? ye avazya hI tyAjya hai| isa prakAra nirveda
(vairAgya) se bhI AtmA ke samyagdarzana kI avazya pahicAna ho jAtI hai| anukaMpA
kA artha hai-dUsare ke duHkha | ko dekhakara hRdaya meM usake anukUla kaMpana
honaa| usakI kriyA dayA ke rUpa meM hotI hai| anukaMpAvAna socatA hai - saMsAra
80

Page #103 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Five Ornaments of Right Faith  **Chapter 2, Light of Yoga, Verse 16**  All
beings desire happiness and flee from suffering. Therefore, I should not cause
pain to anyone. Just as they experience suffering, so do I. This kind of
compassion, characterized by empathy, identifies a person with Right Faith.
Similarly, the scriptures of the Jinas teach about the transcendental (beyond
the senses) objects - the soul, karma, karmic fruits, the afterlife, merit,
demerit, etc. If one believes in these, it can be understood that they have
faith in the soul. This faith also identifies a person with Right Faith.
**Verse 15**  Thus, the aforementioned five signs can be used to determine if a
soul possesses Right Faith.  Now, we will describe the five ornaments of Right
Faith.  **Verse 16**  **Steadfastness, propagation, devotion, skill in the
teachings of the Jinas, and service to the Tirthankaras - these five are said to
be the ornaments of Right Faith.**  **Explanation:**  The ornaments of Right
Faith are those qualities that enhance its beauty. These five ornaments enhance
the beauty of the teachings of the Jinas (the Dharma Sangha).  1.
**Steadfastness in the teachings of the Jinas (Dharma Sangha):** If someone's
mind is wavering from the Dharma due to adversity, doubt, or other reasons, or
if someone is falling away from the Dharma or becoming corrupt, then to
stabilize them by explaining and advising them, or to inspire them to remain
steadfast in the Dharma, or to not be swayed by the prosperity, pomp, or
miracles of other sects (views) and remain steadfast in the teachings of the
Jinas - this is steadfastness.  2. **Propagation of the Dharma (teachings):** To
influence those who have not attained the teachings of the Jinas by various
means of propagation and dissemination. There are eight types of propagators:
preachers, storytellers, debaters, occasion-based propagators, ascetics,
scholars, those who have attained Siddhi (perfection), and poets. (Vy. Bha.)
* **Preacher:** One who influences people with the profound knowledge of the
twelve-fold scriptures or the Ganipitakas, using a style that is relevant to the
times, and inspires a strong desire for knowledge of the scriptures in people.
They inspire people to live a life of Dharma through their eloquent sermons.
This is a preacher.      * **Storyteller:** One who has the ability to deliver
beautiful Dharma teachings using various techniques, illustrations, etc., and
who influences people with Dharma stories and imparts Dharma knowledge. This is
a storyteller.      * **Debater:** One who is capable of defending their own
position and refuting the arguments of the opposing side in a four-fold assembly
of debaters, respondents, audience, and moderator. They influence people with
their debating skills. This is a debater.      * **Occasion-based propagator:**
One who is knowledgeable about the benefits and drawbacks of the past, present,
and future, and who is a master of the science of auspicious occasions. They
influence people by using their knowledge to impart Dharma knowledge related to
their past, present, and future lives, and inspire them to practice Dharma. This
is an occasion-based propagator.      * **Ascetic:** One who practices various
rigorous austerities like the Atthama, etc., and influences people by
demonstrating the power of the soul and inspiring them to purify themselves
through austerity and manifest the power of the soul. This is an ascetic.      *
**Scholar:** One who uses their knowledge of the scriptures to influence people
and inspire them to practice Dharma. This is a scholar.      * **One who has
attained Siddhi (perfection):** One who has attained perfection and influences
people by their example. This is one who has attained Siddhi.      * **Poet:**
One who uses poetry to influence people and inspire them to practice Dharma.
This is a poet.      * **Note:** One who uses auspicious occasions and mantras
for self-promotion is not a Dharma propagator but a Dharma destroyer.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 samyaktva ke pAMca bhUSaNa yogazAstra dvitIya prakAza zloka 16 meM sabhI jIva
sukha ke abhilASI hai, duHkha se ve dUra bhAgate hai, isalie mujhe kisI ko bhI
pIr3A nahIM denI caahie| usako jaisA duHkha hai, vaisA hI mujhe duHkha hai, isa
prakAra kI sahAnubhUti rUpa anukaMpA se samyaktvI kI pahacAna ho jAtI hai| isI
prakAra jinendra-pravacanoM meM upadiSTa atIndriya (iMdriyaparokSa) vastu-jIva
(AtmA), karma, karmaphala, paraloka, puNya, pApa Adi bhAva avazya hai, isa
prakAra kA pariNAma ho to samajhA jA sakatA hai ki isa AtmA meM Astikya hai| isa
Astikya ke kAraNa bhI samyaktvI kI pahacAna ho sakatI hai  /  / 15 /  /  isa
prakAra pUrvokta pAMca cihnoM se kisI AtmA meM samyagdarzana ke hone kA nizcaya
kiyA jA sakatA hai| aba samyaktva ke 5 bhUSaNa batAte haiN|72| sthairya
prabhAvanA bhaktiH, kauzalaM jinazAsane  /  tIrthasevA ca paJcA'sya, bhUSaNAni
pracakSate  // 16 /  /  artha :- 1. jinazAsana (dharmasaMgha) meM sthiratA, 2.
usakI prabhAvanA (pracAra-prasAra), 3. bhakti, 4. usameM kuzalatA _ aura 5.
tiirthsevaa| ye pAMca ukta samyaktva ke bhUSaNa (zobhAvarddhaka) kahe gaye haiM
/  / 16 /  /  vyAkhyA :- samyaktva ke sAtha jinake jur3ane se usakI zobhA
bar3he, use samyaktvabhUSaNa kahate haiN| ye jina zAsana | (dharmasaMgha) kI
zobhA bar3hAne vAle bhUSaNa pAMca hai 1. jinokta dharma (saMgha) meM sthiratA -
kisI kA mana Apatti, zaMkA Adi kAraNoM se dharma se calAyamAna ho rahA ho, koI
vyakti dharma se Diga rahA ho yA patita ho rahA ho, use samajhA-bujhAkara
upadeza yA preraNA dekara dharma meM sthira karanA athavA anyasaMpradAyIya
(darzanIya) Rddhi-samRddhi, ADaMbara yA camatkAra dekhakara svayaM bhI
jinazAsana ke prati asthira na honA sthiratA hai| 2. dharma (zAsana) prabhAvanA
- jise jinazAsana nahIM prApta huA, use vibhinna prabhAvanAoM pracAra-prasAra ke
vibhinna nimittoM dvArA zAsana kI ora prabhAvita krnaa| prabhAvanA karane vAloM
ke 8 prakAra hai-prAvacanika, dharmakathAkAra, vAdI, naimittika, tapasvI,
vidyAvAna, siddhiprApta aura kvi| (vya. bhA.) 1. prAvacanika yA pravacana-
prabhAvaka - jo dvAdazAMgI rUpI pravacanoM yA gaNipiTakoM ke atizaya jJAna dvArA
yugapradhAna zailI meM janatA ko prabhAvita karatA hai, janatA meM AgamajJAna ke
prati prakarSa bhAvanA paidA karatA hai| apane yagalakSI pravacanoM se
janajIvana ko dharmAcaraNa ke lie prerita karatA hai, vaha pravacana-prabhAvaka
kahalAtA hai| 2. dharmakathA-prabhAvaka - jo vividha yukti, dRSTAMta Adi ke
dvArA janatA ko suMdara dharmopadeza dene kI zakti rakhatA ho aura janatA ko
dharmakathA se prabhAvita karake dharmabodha detA ho, vaha dharmakathA
prabhAvaka kahalAtA hai| 3. vAda-prabhAvaka - jo vAdI, prativAdI, sabhya aura
sabhApati-rUpa caturaMgiNI sabhA meM pratipakSa kI yuktiyoM kA khaMDana karake
svapakSa kI sthApanA karane meM samartha ho| isa prakAra apanI vAda (tarka)
zakti se logoM ko prabhAvita karatA ho, use vAdaprabhAvaka kahate haiN| 4.
nimitta-prabhAvaka - jo bhUta, bhaviSya aura vartamAna tInoM kAla-saMbaMdhI
lAbhAlAbha kA vijJa ho tathA nimittazAstrajJa ho; aura apane ukta jJAna se
janatA ko usake bhUta, bhaviSya evaM vartamAna ke jIvana se dharmabodha dekara
dharmasAdhanA kI ora AkarSita karatA ho, vaha nimitta-prabhAvaka hotA hai| 5.
tapasyA-prabhAvaka (tapasvI) - aTThama Adi vividha kaThora tapasyA karake janatA
ko Atmazakti kA paricaya dene tathA tapasyA karake Atmazuddhi dvArA Atmazakti
prakaTa karane ke lie prabhAvita karane vAlA tapasyA-prabhAvaka hotA hai| | 1.
sva prazaMsA ke lie nimitta evaM maMtra-vidyA kA prayoga karane vAlA dharma
prabhAvaka nahIM paraMtu dharma vidhvaMsaka hai| 81

Page #104 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  The Five Ornaments of Right Faith (Samyaktv)  **1.  Non-Violence (Ahimsa)**
-  The first ornament of right faith is non-violence. It is the foundation of
Jainism and encompasses refraining from harming any living being, both
physically and mentally.  **2.  Influence (Prabhavana)** -  The second ornament
is influence, which manifests in various ways:  * **Knowledge Influencer (Vidya
Prabhavaka)** -  One who has mastered various knowledge disciplines like
Prajnapti, Rohini, etc., and uses this knowledge to guide others. They use their
wisdom to overcome obstacles, hardships, and calamities faced by the community.
* **Power Influencer (Siddhi Prabhavaka)** -  One who possesses various powers
like Vaikriya, Anima, etc., and uses them for the benefit of the community. They
employ techniques like Anjan, Padalepa, etc., for the welfare of the Sangha. *
**Poetry Influencer (Kavya Prabhavaka)** -  One who creates literary works like
prose, poetry, etc., to inspire people towards righteous conduct and strengthen
their faith. They use their writing to influence the community towards Dharma.
These eight types of influencers contribute to the spread of Jainism according
to their abilities and the circumstances of time and place. Therefore, influence
is considered the second ornament of right faith.  **3.  Devotion (Bhakti)** -
The third ornament is devotion, which involves serving the Sangha (community)
with humility and respect. The Sangha consists of four types: Sadhus, Sadhvis,
Shravakas, and Shravikas. The primary members are Sadhus and Sadhvis.  Devotion
manifests in various ways:  * **Respecting Elders** -  Standing up to greet
those who are more knowledgeable and virtuous, welcoming them with folded hands,
offering them a seat, and accepting their seat before taking one's own. *
**Honoring and Worshipping** -  Showing respect and reverence to those who are
more virtuous. * **Following Behind** -  Walking behind those who are more
virtuous.  These eight forms of respectful behavior constitute devotion, which
helps to eliminate the eight karmas.  * **Serving the Sangha** -  Serving the
members of the Sangha, including Acharyas, Upadhyayas, Tapasvis, newly initiated
Sadhus, the sick, the family, the virtuous, the Sangha, the knowledgeable, etc.
* **Providing Support** -  Providing food, water, clothes, utensils, shelter,
bedding, cushions, and seats to those who deserve it. * **Caring for the Sick**
-  Providing medical care and assistance to the sick. * **Helping in Difficult
Situations** -  Assisting those who are facing difficulties. * **Removing
Obstacles** -  Removing obstacles and hardships faced by the Sangha.  All these
acts of service constitute devotion, which enhances the beauty of the Sangha.
Therefore, devotion is considered the third ornament of right faith.  **4.
Skill in Jainism (Kushalata)** -  The fourth ornament is skill in Jainism, which
involves understanding the principles of Dharma and resolving the doubts and
problems faced by the followers. This skill helps to keep people grounded in the
Sangha and motivates them to serve the community.  **5.  Service to the Tirtha
(Tirthaseva)** -  The fifth ornament is service to the Tirtha, which is like a
landing place on the shore of the ocean of life. It helps us to cross the ocean
of Samsara (cycle of birth and death) safely. There are two types of Tirthas:  *
**Dravya Tirtha** -  A place where a Tirthankara was born, initiated, attained
Kevala Jnana (omniscience), and attained Nirvana. These places are considered
sacred and are visited by devotees. * **Bhava Tirtha** -  The Sangha itself,
consisting of Sadhus, Sadhvis, Shravakas, and Shravikas.  The service to the
Tirtha involves serving the Sangha in the ways mentioned earlier. This service
adds to the beauty of right faith.  These five ornaments of right faith are
essential for spiritual progress and liberation. They guide us towards a life of
non-violence, compassion, and devotion, leading us closer to the ultimate goal
of Moksha (liberation).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 hiMsaka niMdanIya yogazAstra dvitIya prakAza zloka 16 6. vidyAprabhAvaka -
prajJapti, rohiNI Adi vividha vidyAdeviyA~ siddha karake tadadhiSThita vidyAe~
prApta karane vAlA vidyAprabhAvaka hotA hai| vidyAprabhAvaka apanI vidyA ke
prayoga dvArA zAsana para Aye hue vividha upasagoM, kaSToM aura AphatoM ko dUra
karatA hai| 7. siddhi-prabhAvaka - vaikriya Adi vividha labdhiyA~ tathA aNimA
Adi vividha siddhiyA~ tathA aMjana, pAdalepa Adi AkarSaka taMtra prayoga jise
prApta ho aura saMgha kI prabhAvanA ke lie hI unakA prayoga karatA ho, vaha
siddhiprabhAvaka kahalAtA hai| 8. kAvya prabhAvaka (kavi) - gadya, padya Adi meM
vividha varNanAtmaka prabaMdha yA kavitA Adi kI racanA karake janatA ko usa
lekha, nibaMdha, kathA yA kavitA Adi ke dvArA dharmAcaraNa meM prerita; dharma
ke prati prabhAvita karane vAlA kAvyaprabhAvaka kahalAtA hai| prAvacanika Adi
AThoM prakAra ke prabhAvaka apanI zakti ke anusAra deza, kAla Adi ke anurUpa
jinazAsana ke ra-prasAra meM yogadAna dekara prabhAvanA karate haiN| isalie
prabhAvanA ko samyagdarzana kA dvitIya bhUSaNa rUpa batAyA 3. bhakti - saMgha kI
sevA (vaiyAvRtya), vinaya karanA bhakti hai| sAdhu, sAdhvI, zrAvaka aura zrAvikA
rUpI caturvidha dharmasaMgha (zAsana) kahalAtA hai| saMgha meM pradhAna IkAI
sAdhu, sAdhvI hai| ataH apane se jJAna aura cAritra se adhika guNa vAle Aye,
taba khar3e hokara, sAmane svAgata ke lie jAkara, mastaka para aMjali karake
athavA unheM Asana dekara unakA satkAra karanA, guNAdhika cAritrAtmA ke Asana
svIkArakara lene para svayaM Asana grahaNa karanA, unakA bahumAna tathA unakI
upAsanA karanA, unako vaMdana karanA, unake pIche-pIche calanA; yoM ATha prakAra
se upacAravinaya karanA bhakti hai, jo ATha karmoM ko naSTa karane vAlI hai| isI
prakAra AcArya, upAdhyAya, tapasvI, navadIkSita sAdhu, rugNa, kula, guNa,
saMgha, sAdhu, jJAnavAna Adi saMghastha vyaktiyoM kI sevA (vaiyAvRtya) krnaa|
vaiyAvRtya ke utkRSTa pAtroM ko AhAra-pAnI, vastra, pAtra, upAzraya, paTTe,
caukI, Asana (saMstAraka) Adi dharma-sAdhana denA, unakI auSadha bhaiSajya Adi
dvArA sevA karanA, kaThina mArga meM unakA sahAyaka bnnaa| caturvidha saMgha
para Aye hue vighnoM yA upasargoM kA nivAraNa karanA; ye saba prakAra sevAbhakti
ke hai| inase zAsana kI zobhA bar3hatI hai, isalie bhakti ko samyaktva kA tIsarA
bhUSaNa batAyA hai| 4. jinazAsana meM kuzalatA - dharma ke siddhAMtoM ko
samajhAne tathA dhArmikoM para AyI huI ulajhanoM ko sulajhAne, samasyA hala
karane kI kuzalatA bhI aneka vyaktiyoM ko dharmasaMgha meM sthira rakhatI hai,
saMghasevA ke lie prerita karatI hai| jaise zreNikaputra abhayakumAra kI
kuzalatA se anAryadezavAsI Ardraka kumAra ko pratibodha milA; vaisI hI kuzalatA
prApta karanI caahie| 5. tIrthasevA - nadI Adi meM sukhapUrvaka utarane ke lie
ghATa (tIrtha) hotA hai, vaise hI saMsAra samudra se sukhapUrvaka pAra utarane
ke lie tIrtha (dharma-saMgha) hotA hai| yaha tIrtha do prakAra kA hotA hai-jisa
bhUmi para tIrthaMkaroM kA janma, dIkSA, kevalajJAna aura nirvANa huA ho, usa
sthAna ko loka pracalita bhASA meM 'tIrtha' kahA jAtA hai; ise jaina paribhASA
meM dravyatIrtha kahate haiN| yaha bhI darzanIya hotA hai| aura bhAvatIrtha to
sAdhu, sAdhvI zrAvaka, zrAvikA rUpI caturvidha zramaNasaMgha hotA hai| isake
mAhAtmya ke saMbaMdha meM bhagavAn mahAvIra aura gaNadhara gautama kA eka
saMvAda milatA hai-gaNadhara gautama ne pUchA-'bhagavAn! tIrthakara tIrtha hai
athavA tIrtha tIrtha hai?' taba bhagavAn ne uttara diyA- 'gautama! tIrthakara to
tIrtha (svarUpa) hai hI, paraMtu cAra varNa (sAdhu-sAdhvI-zrAvaka-zrAvikA) vAlA
zramaNasaMgha bhI tIrtha hai|' isa dRSTi se prathama gaNadhara Adi bhI tIrtha
rUpa hai| [bhaga. 682] aise tIrtha kI sevA (pUrvokta prakAra se) karanA
tIrthasevA hai, jo samyaktva kI zobhA meM cAra cAMda lagAne vAlI hai  /  / 16 /
/  isa prakAra samyaktva ke pAMca bhUSaNa batAkara aba 82

Page #105 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Five Defilements of Rightness  **Yoga Shastra, Second Light, Verse 17, 73**
Doubt, desire, uncertainty, praise of false views, and close association with
them - these five completely defile rightness.  **Explanation:**  Doubt, desire,
uncertainty, praise of false views, and close association with them are called
defilements because they greatly corrupt pure rightness. Here is a description
of each:  **Doubt:**  Doubt is to question. Doubt can be universal (regarding
everything) or specific (regarding a particular aspect). Universal doubt is
like, "I don't know if this is the right religion or not?" Specific doubt is
related to a particular aspect of religion, like, "This being exists, but is it
omnipresent or not? Is it localized or not?" Both types of doubt, being a form
of disbelief in the teachings of the liberated ones, defile rightness, creating
impurities, blemishes, or deep flaws.  Presenting a doubt to someone in the form
of an inquiry is not a fault, but doubting with a desire to win or out of
disbelief is a fault. If doubt arises due to delusion, one should hold onto it
like a burning ember with faith and humility, and reveal it to knowledgeable and
noble individuals when appropriate.  If one cannot understand a profound subject
due to their weak intellect, or due to not finding teachers who can explain it,
or due to the rise of their knowledge-obscuring karma, or because the subject is
too deep to understand, or because examples are not available, then a wise and
faithful person should think: "The liberated, omniscient Lord speaks the truth.
They are free from any desire for reward, selfless and dedicated to the welfare
of others, the greatest renunciants in the world, conquerors of attachment,
aversion, and delusion. They never speak falsely." (Dhyan Shatak 47-48-49)
Therefore, it is not appropriate to doubt the words of such a trustworthy
person. Their words are absolutely true, but I cannot understand them due to my
limited intellect or ignorance. I should accept this truth with patience and
faith. We ordinary people cannot test the truth of things that can be known
through the scriptures. Therefore, we should not be skeptical of the truth
revealed in the scriptures. Skepticism leads to false views. Therefore, the
scriptures spoken by the Jinas are our proof.  **Desire:**  Desire is to accept
a view due to someone's showmanship or allure. This is also of two types:
universal and specific. Universal desire is to desire all views or religious
communities. Specific desire is to desire a particular view, sect, or community.
For example, "Someone might say that the Sugata taught a religion free from
hardship for monks. There, monks have bathing, delicious food, drinks, and fine
clothes, and there is a provision for soft, comfortable beds. They have made the
path of religion easy by providing all kinds of comforts. Their scriptures say,
'Sleeping on a soft bed, drinking sweet beverages upon waking, eating delicious
food at noon, drinking again in the evening, and eating grapes and sugar at
midnight - these are the results that led Shakyasingha to liberation.' This is
appealing to the common people, so they quickly lean towards it. The
Parivajakas, Bhauts, Brahmanas, etc., say in their teachings, 'Those who enjoy
sensual pleasures in this life will enjoy pleasures in the afterlife.'
Therefore, one should also try practicing this view." This kind of desire, being
the source of disbelief in the scriptures revealed by the liberated Lord,
defiles rightness.  **Uncertainty:**  Uncertainty is to doubt the fruits of
religious practice. Due to the instability of the mind, one might think, "The
great austerities, right conduct, right faith, or right knowledge described in
the scriptures are very harsh, tasteless like a grain of sand, and dull. I don't
know if I will get the fruits of all this great hardship. Oh! This austerity is
very..."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 samyaktva ke pAMca dUSaNa yogazAstra dvitIya prakAza zloka 17 73 /  zaMkA
kAMkSA vicikitsA, mithyAdRSTiprazaMsanam  /  tatsaMstavazca paJcApi samyaktvaM
dUSayantyalam  /  / 17 /  /  artha :- zaMkA, kAMkSA, vicikitsA, mithyAdRSTi kI
prazaMsA aura usakA gAr3ha paricaya (saMsarga) ye pAMcoM samyaktva ko atyaMta
dUSita karate haiM  /  / 17 /  /  vyAkhyA :- zaMkA Adi pAMca dUSaNa nirdoSa
samyaktva ko bahuta dUSita karate haiM, isalie inheM dUSaNa kahA hai| kramazaH
inakA lakSaNa yoM hai zaMkA - saMdeha karanA zaMkA hai| zaMkA sarvaviSayaka
(sarvAMza kI) bhI hotI hai, dezaviSayaka (AMzika) bhii| sarvaviSayaka zaMkA
yathA- 'patA nahIM, yaha dharma hogA yA nahIM? dezaviSayaka zaMkA dharma ke kisI
eka aMga ke saMbaMdha meM hotI hai, jaise-yaha jIva to hai, paraMtu sarvagata
hai yA asarvagata? pradeza vAlA hai yA apradezI? ye donoM prakAra kI zaMkAe~
vItarAgakathita pravacana para avizvAsa rUpa hone se samyaktva ko dUSita-malina
banA detI hai; usameM cala, mala yA agADha doSa paidAkara detI hai| jijJAsA ke
rUpa meM kisI ke sAmane koI zaMkA prastuta karanA doSayukta nahIM, kintu
vijigISA yA azraddhA se prerita hokara zaMkA karanA doSa pUrNa hai| kadAcita
mohavaza koI saMzaya paidA ho jAya to zraddhA evaM vinaya ke sAtha argalA ke
samAna use dhAraNa karake rakhe aura yathAvasara jJAnavAna mahAnubhAvoM ke
samakSa prakaTa kre| kisI gaMbhIra viSaya meM apanI durbalamati ke kAraNa athavA
usakA samAdhAna karane vAle AcAryoM kA saMyoga na milane se yA apane
jJAnAvaraNIya karma ke udaya ke kAraNa samajhane yogya viSaya ko atyaMta gahana
hone se yA udAharaNa saMbhava na hone se usakA I samajha meM na Aye to
baddhimAna zraddhAla vyakti yoM vicAra kare ki vItarAga sarvajJa prabhu to
yathArtha kathana karate haiM, ve kisI kI ora se upakAra kI AzA-spRhA se
nirapekSa, niHsvArtha paropakAra parAyaNa, jagat meM sarvazreSTha tyAgI,
rAgadveSa-moha-vijetA hote haiN| ve kadApi viparIta kathana nahIM krte| (dhyAna
zataka 47-48-49) isalie aise Apta (vizvasta) puruSa dvArA kathita hone se
zraddhA rahita zaMkA karanA ucita nahIM hai| unake vacana to sarvathA satya hai,
paraMtu merI buddhimaMdatA yA ajJAnatA ke kAraNa samajha meM nahIM A rahe haiM,
to mujhe dhairya ke sAtha zraddhA pUrvaka usa satya ko mAna lenA chie| kyoMki
Agama se jAne jA sakeM aise padArtha kI hama sarIkhe sAmAnya vyakti parIkSA
nahIM kara skte| isalie Agamokta akSara (satya) ke prati hameM azraddhA nahIM
lAnI cAhie, azraddhA se hI vyakti mithyAdRSTi banatA hai| ataH jinokta zAstra
hamAre liye pramANa hai| kAMkSA - kisI ke ADaMbara yA pralobhana se AkRSTa
hokara usa darzana ko svIkAra karane kI icchA karanA kAMkSA kahalAtI hai| yaha
bhI deza aura sarva ke bheda se do prakAra kI hai| sarvaviSayaka kAMkSA hai-
sabhI matoM yA dharma-samudAyoM kI kAMkSA honaa| dezakAMkSA hai-kisI eka mata,
paMtha yA saMpradAya viSayaka kAMkSA honA; udAharaNa ke taura para-'koI yaha
kahe ki sugata ne bhikSuoM ke lie kaSTa rahita dharma kA upadeza diyA hai| vahAM
to bhikSuoM ke lie snAna hai, priya svAdiSTa bhojana, pAna va bar3hiyA vastra
vihita hai, gudagudI komala zayyA kA vidhAna hai| isa taraha sabhI prakAra kI
sukha-suvidhAoM kA upabhoga batAkara dharmamArga sarva sulabha banA diyA hai|
unake kisI dharmagraMtha meM kahA hai- 'komala zayyA para zayana karanA, subaha
uThate hI madhura peya pInA, madhyAhna meM svAdiSTa bhojana karanA, zAma ko
phira peya pInA aura madhyarAtri meM drAkSA aura zakkara kA AhAra karanA, ina
sabake pariNAma svarUpa zAkyasiMha ne mokSa dekhA hai|' yaha bAta sarva
sAdhAraNa ke anukUla hone se jhaTapaTa usa tarapha jhukAva ho jAtA hai|
parivAjraka, bhauta, brAhmaNa Adi ke mata meM batAyA hai ki 'yahAM viSayasukha
kA AsvAdana karane vAle hI paraloka meM sukhopabhoga karate haiN|' isalie isa
mata kI sAdhanA bhI karake dekhanI caahie| isa prakAra kI kAMkSA vItarAga-prabhu
ke batAye hue AgoM meM avizvAsa kI jananI hone se samyaktva ko dUSita karatI
hai| vicikitsA - dharmAcaraNa ke phala meM saMdeha rakhanA vicikitsA hai| citta
kI asthiratA se, Agamokta mahAtapa, samyak-cAritra, samyagdarzana yA samyagjJAna
kI sAdhanA; to bahuta hI rUkSa, bAlU ke kaura ke samAna svAda rahita aura nIrasa
hai, patA nahIM, itanA saba mahAkaSToM ke sahane ke bAda bhI inakA phala milegA
yA nahIM? opha! yaha tapa to bahuta 1. duSyantyamI iti pAThAntaram 83

Page #106 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Nature of Anuvratas  The second light of Yoga Shastra, verses 17 and 18,
seem to be devoid of any benefit and only cause distress! Just as a farmer, even
without the certainty of rain during the monsoon season, still toils in the
field, so too does the arduous labor undertaken for this austerity and the like
seem futile and successful. It is also said, "The practitioners of the past were
on the right path, so they could receive the appropriate fruits, but how can we,
who are of this degenerate age and devoid of intellect and concentration, attain
such fruits?" This kind of doubt is different, doubt always relates to the
substance-quality relationship of the whole and the part, while doubt is also a
defect of rightness, being a form of disbelief in the words of the Lord. Doubt
and doubt are related to the fruit of action. Or, this is also the meaning of
doubt - to criticize the conduct of virtuous monks. For example, why do these
monks remain so foul-smelling and dirty due to sweat on their bodies, why don't
they bathe properly? What harm is there in bathing with impure water? Thus,
being a form of disbelief in the religion spoken by the Lord, it is essentially
a defect of rightness.  **Praise of False Views** - Praising those with opposite
views - false views - is praise of false views. This is also of two types, local
and universal. Universal praise, for example, someone might say, "The views of
Kapil and others are all reasonable." This kind of praise, which is based on a
middle ground, is a corruption of rightness. We have said in praise, "O Lord! It
is absolutely certain that those who are supremely selfish do not consider your
form to be superior to their own form. They have become examiners by accepting
the middle ground, they cannot see the difference between a piece of glass and a
gem." (Ayog 27) Local praise, for example, "This is the true word of the Sugata,
or the word of the Sankhya, or the word of Kanada." This is clearly a defect of
rightness.  **Close Acquaintance with False Views** - To live in the same place
with such false view holders, to increase interaction with them through mutual
conversation and other activities, and to become overly familiar with them.
Living together in one place or coming into contact with them repeatedly,
hearing and seeing their practices, can lead to a weakening of the vision of
firm rightness; then, what to say about the minds of the newly arrived, those of
weak intellect who accept the religion, being affected by this? From this
perspective, close acquaintance with false views has been described as a
corruption of rightness. - Therefore, it is essential that whoever has obtained
the specific substance-field-time-state form of rightness material, should
receive rightness from the Gurudev in a proper manner in order to sustain it and
follow it truly. It is also said, "The possibility of fault | In such a
situation, the Shraman Upasaka should re-embrace rightness in terms of substance
and state, with a view to withdrawing from falsehood. After that, he should not
perform actions like offering, worship, and puja in the temples of the supreme
deities, nor should he, carried away by the flow of the world, perform rituals
like bathing, charity, Pindadaan, Yajna, Vrata, Tapas, Sankranti, lunar eclipse,
solar eclipse, etc. in worldly pilgrimages (with a reverent mind). [Mula Shuddhi
Pr. 4-5]  When some small amount of the ocean-like quota-koti state of the
false-view-delusive karma remains, the being attains rightness. And when he
completes the state of two to nine palya-like units from the remaining state, he
attains the state of Deshvirati Shravak Guna. It is also said, "After attaining
rightness, the Vrata-dhari Shravak becomes a Shravak when he completes the state
of two to nine palya-like units in the separate state, i.e., as mentioned
above." ||17||  We had previously said, "The five Anuvratas are the foundation
of rightness. After explaining the nature of rightness in detail, we now explain
the nature of the Anuvratas." 174. Viratim sthula hinsade dvividh-trividhadi na
| Ahimsadi ni panchanuvratani jagadurjina: ||18|| Meaning: Shri Jinendradev has
called abstinence from gross violence, etc., in the form of two-fold, three-
fold, etc., i.e., six types, etc., as the five Anuvratas of non-violence, etc.
||18|| Explanation: Among those with false views or gross views, the violence
that is well-known is called gross violence or violence against the sentient
beings. The word sthula (gross) also implies, by implication, the meaning of
intentional violence against innocent sentient beings.  84

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 aNuvrata svarupa yogazAstra dvitIya prakAza zloka 17 se 18 hI klezadAyI aura
nirjarAphala se rahita mAlUma hotA hai! kisAna caumAsA lagate hI varSA kA
nizcaya na hone para bhI jaise jamIna jotane Adi kI mehanata karatA hai, vaise
hI isa tapasyA vagairaha ke lie kiyA gayA kaThora zrama niSphala hI pratIta hotA
hai aura saphala bhii| kahA bhI hai-'pUrvakAlIna sAdhaka puruSa yathocita mArga
para calane vAle the, isalie unako to yogya phala mila sakatA thA, paraMtu hama
isa nikRSTa yuga ke tathA buddhi aura saMghayaNa rahita hamako aise phala kI
prApti kaise ho sakatI hai?' isa prakAra kI vicikitsA meM aMtara hai, zaMkA
hamezA samagra aura asamagra padArtha viSayaka dravya-guNa saMbaMdhI hotI hai
jaba ki vicikitsA bhI bhagavadvacanoM ke prati azraddhA rUpa hone se samyaktva
kA doSa hai| zaMkA aura vicikitsA kriyA ke phala se saMbaMdhita hotI hai| athavA
vicikitsA kA yaha artha bhI hai-sadAcArI muniyoM ke AcAra ke saMbaMdha meM niMdA
krnaa| jaise ye muni zarIra para pasIne ke kAraNa bar3e durgandhita aura malina
kyoM rahate haiM, kyoM nahIM acchI taraha snAna kara lete? acitta pAnI se snAna
karane meM kauna-sA doSa laga jAtA hai? isa prakAra bhagavadukta dharma ke
saMbaMdha meM azraddhA rUpa hone se tattvataH yaha samyaktva kA doSa hai|
mithyAdRSTiprazaMsA - viparIta darzana vAle-mithyAdRSTiyoM kI prazaMsA karanA
mithyAdRSTiprazaMsA hai| yaha bhI dezataH aura sarvataH do prakAra kI hotI hai|
sarvataH prazaMsA, jaise koI kahe ki 'kapila Adi sabake darzana yuktiyukta hai|'
isa prakAra mAdhyasthabhAvavAlI prazaMsA karanA samyaktvadUSaNa hai| hamane
stuti meM kahA hai -he nAtha! vaha bAta atyaMta nizcayavAlI hai ki ve paramatI
matsarI loka kI mudrA-AkRti se ApakI mudrA ko atizayavAn nahIM maante|
mAdhyastha svIkRta kara parIkSaka bane hai unako kAca ke TukaDe aura maNi meM
aMtara dikhAyI nahIM detaa| (ayoga 27) dezataH prazaMsA, yathA-yaha sugatavacana
athavA sAMkhyavacana yA kaNAdavacana hI yathArtha hai| yaha to spaSTataH
samyaktva kA doSa hai| mithyAdRSTi kA gAr3ha paricaya - aise mithyAdRSTiyoM ke
sAtha eka sthAna meM rahanA, paraspara vArtAlApa Adi vyavahAra bar3hAkara unakA
atiparicaya krnaa| eka jagaha sAtha rahane se yA bArabAra unake saMparka meM Ane
se, unakI prakriyA ke sunane-dekhane se dRr3hasamyaktvI kI dRSTi meM bhI
zithilatA AnA saMbhava hai; taba maMdabuddhi vAle, dharma kA svIkAra karane vAle
navAgaMtukoM ke mana meM bhinnatA A jAya, isameM to kahanA hI kyA? isa dRSTi se
mithyAdRSTi ke gAr3ha paricaya ko samyaktva kA dUSaNa batAyA gayA hai| - ataH
yaha Avazyaka hai ki jise viziSTa dravya-kSetra-kAla-bhAva rUpa samyaktva
sAmagrI prApta huI ho, vaha use TikAne aura yathArtha rUpa se pAlana karane hetu
gurudeva se vidhi pUrvaka samyaktva grahaNa kre| kahA bhI hai-doSa kI saMbhAvanA
| kI sthiti meM zramaNopAsaka mithyAtva se vApisa haTane kI dRSTi se pahale
dravya aura bhAva se punaH samyaktva aMgIkAra kre| tatpazcAt use paramatIya
devoM yA devAlayoM meM prabhAvanA, vaMdanA-pUjA Adi kArya nahIM karanA cAhie
aura na hI lokapravAha meM bahakara laukika tIrthoM meM (pUjyabuddhi se) snAna,
dAna, piMDadAna, yajJa, vrata, tapa, saMkrAMti, caMdragrahaNa, sUryagrahaNa Adi
ke anuSThAna ityAdi karanA caahie| mUla zuddhi pra. 4-5]  /  jaba
mithyAtvamohanIya karma kI kucha kama eka sAgaropama koTAkoTi sthiti zeSa raha
jAtI hai, taba jIva samyaktva prApta karatA hai| aura zeSa rahI huI sthiti meM
se do se nau palyopama kI sthiti jaba pUrNa karatA hai, taba
dezaviratizrAvakaguNasthAna prApta karatA hai| kahA bhI hai-'samyaktvaprApti ke
bAda palyopama pRthaktva meM arthAt Upara kahe anusAra do se nau palyopama kI
sthiti aura pUrNa karane para vratadhArI zrAvaka hotA hai  /  / 17 /  /  hamane
pahale kahA thA-'pAMca aNuvrata samyaktvamUlaka hote haiN| inameM se samyaktva
kA svarUpa vistAra se batAkara aba aNuvratoM kA svarUpa batAte haiM 174 /
viratiM sthUlahiMsAdedvividha-trividhAdinA  /  ahiMsAdIni paJcANuvratAni
jagadurjinAH  // 18 //  artha :- sthUla hiMsA Adi se dvividha trividha Adi yAnI
6 prakAra Adi rUpa se virata hone ko zrI jinezvaradevoM ne ahiMsAdi pAMca
aNuvrata kahe haiM  /  / 18|| vyAkhyA :- mithyAdRSTiyoM athavA sthUladRSTi vAloM
meM bhI jo hiMsA rUpa se prasiddha hai, use sthUlahiMsA yA trasa jIvoM kI hiMsA
kahate haiN| sthUlazabda se upalakSaNa se niraparAdhI trasajIvoM kI saMkalpa
pUrvaka hiMsA kA artha bhI gRhIta hotA 84

Page #107 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Nature of Anuvrat  This is verse 18 from the second chapter of the Yoga
Shastra. The word "adi" (etc.) includes gross lying, gross stealing, gross
adultery, and gross non-possession. Grossly abandoning violence, etc., or
abstaining from them is the five Anuvratas, which are popularly known as non-
violence, truth, non-stealing, celibacy, and non-possession. These five
Anuvratas were established by the Tirthankaras.  The question arises: why did
the Tirthankaras not explain these for all (generally) Shramanopasakas (lay
followers)? Why did they explain them only in the two-fold and three-fold forms?
In response, it is said: since a householder lives with his family, and he also
has to accept possessions like wealth and grain, if someone in the family
commits violence, possession, etc., then the approval-sanction of the said
householder who is observing the vow is implied. From this perspective, he
incurs the guilt of sanction. Otherwise, if there were no difference between a
possessor and a non-possessor, then the distinction between a Dikshita (Shraman)
and an Adikshita (Shramanopasaka) would cease to exist. Therefore, the
abandonment of violence, etc., in the two-fold and three-fold forms is the
general rule for the Shravaka (lay follower).  This means: two-fold means to do
and to cause to do, three-fold means three yogas - mind, speech, and body. This
means that I will not commit gross violence with my mind, speech, and body, nor
will I cause it to be done. The third aspect, sanction, is open.  Here, there is
a doubt: in the Bhagavati Sutra and other Agamas, it is prescribed for the
Shravaka to reject (pratyakhyan) in the three-fold form (three aspects with
three yogas). Since it is established in the scriptures, it is undoubtedly
(blameless), then why is it not mentioned here? In response, it is said: this is
prescribed for the Shravaka only in a specific situation; for example, if a
Shravaka desires to take Muni Diksha (monkhood), but he remains with possessions
to support his family, or if a Shravaka rejects gross violence, etc., of fish,
etc., in the oceans like the Svayambhuraman, etc., in a specific situation, he
rejects in the aforementioned two-fold and three-fold forms. In their context,
such a rule is given in the Bhagavati Sutra, etc. And the word "adi" (etc.) is
used after the words "two-fold" and "three-fold" here with the intention of
including it. However, such devoted Shravakas are very rare. Therefore, we have
not mentioned it here. Generally, rejection in the two-fold and three-fold forms
is prescribed for the Shravaka.  In the second part of the verse, the word "adi"
(etc.) is added after "two-fold," therefore, the alternatives (bhang) to the
two-fold and three-fold forms are as follows:  **Two-fold - Two-fold:** Not to
commit gross violence, nor to cause it to be done; with mind and speech; or with
mind and body, or with speech and body. This is the second type. When one
rejects doing and causing to do with mind and speech, then it means not giving
consent with the mind, and also not speaking about violence with speech; and
with the body, one acts like an unconscious person. Not to commit violence, nor
to cause it to be done with mind and body means that one does not have the
intention of violence in the mind, and also abandons the tendency of violence
with the body. But in the state of unawareness (ignorance), one sometimes
commits violence with speech. The meaning of abandoning doing and causing to do
with speech and body is clear, but when abandoning through this type of bhang,
one does not abandon doing and causing to do with the intention of the mind. The
abandonment of sanction is not present in any of the three. In this way, one
should also consider other alternatives.  **Two-fold - One-fold:** To abandon
doing and causing to do only with the mind, or only with speech, or only with
the body. This is the third type.  **One-fold - Three-fold:** To abandon doing
or causing to do violence, etc., with the mind, speech, and body. This is the
fourth type.  **One-fold - Two-fold:** To abandon doing or causing to do
violence, etc., with the mind and speech, or with the mind and body, or with
speech and body. This is the fifth alternative.  **One-fold - One-fold:** To
abandon doing or causing to do violence, etc., only with the mind, or only with
speech, or only with the body. This is the sixth type. [A. Ni. 1558-59]  This
can be summarized in one verse: The first distinction is two-fold and three-
fold, the second distinction is two-fold and two-fold, the third distinction is
two-fold and one-fold, the fourth distinction is one-fold and three-fold, the
fifth distinction is one-fold and two-fold, and the sixth distinction is one-
fold and one-fold.  85

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 aNuvrata svarUpa yogazAstra dvitIya prakAza zloka 18 hai| Adi zabda se sthUla
jhUTha, sthUla corI, sthUla abrahmacarya aura sthUla aparigraha kA bhI samAveza
ho jAtA hai| sthUla | rUpa se hiMsA Adi kA tyAga karanA yA inase nivRtta honA hI
paMcANuvrata hai; jinake ahiMsA, satya, asteya, brahmacarya | aura aparigraha
nAma lokaprasiddha hai| ina pAMca aNuvratoM kA pratipAdana tIrthaMkara
bhagavaMtoM ne kiyA hai| prazna hotA hai ki tIrthaMkaroM ne sarva (sAmAnyataH)
virati (tyAga) zramaNopAsakoM ke lie kyoM nahIM batAyI? dvividha-trividha rUpa
se hI kyoM batAyI ? isake samAdhAna meM kahate haiM - cUMki gRhastha apane
parivAra ke sAtha rahatA hai, sAtha hI isake lie dhana-dhAnya | Adi parigraha kA
bhI use svIkAra karanA par3atA hai, aisI dazA meM parivAra meM se koI vyakti
hiMsA, parigraha Adi kareM to | usameM ukta vratI gRhastha kI anumati -
anumodanA A hI jAtI hai; isa dRSTi se use anumodanA kA doSa lagatA hI hai| |
anyathA parigrahI aura aparigrahI meM koI aMtara na rahane se dIkSita ( zramaNa)
aura adIkSita ( zramaNopAsaka) kA bheda hI samApta ho jAyagA  /  isalie
dvividha-trividha rUpa se hI hiMsA Adi ke tyAga kA zrAvaka ke lie Ama vidhAna
hai| jisakA | artha yoM hai - dvividha yAnI do karaNa karanA aura karAnA,
trividha yAnI tIna yoga-mana, vacana aura kAyA  /  isakA artha yoM huA ki maiM
mana, vacana aura kAyA se sthUla hiMsA nahIM karUMgA, na hI kraauuNgaa| tIsarA
karaNa anumodanA khullA hai| yahAM zaMkA hotI hai ki bhagavatIsUtra Adi AgamoM
meM zrAvaka ke lie trividha trividha (tIna karaNa tIna yoga se) | pratyAkhyAna
karanA vihita hai| zAstra meM pratipAdita hone se vaha anavadya (nirdoSa) hI
hai, taba usakA pratipAdana yahA~ kyoM | nahIM karate? isake samAdhAna meM
kahate haiM - kisI vizeSa paristhiti meM hI zrAvaka ke lie yaha vihita hai;
jaise koI zrAvaka | munidIkSA lene kA abhilASI ho, kintu putrAdi parivAra ke
pAlana karane hetu pratimA dhAraNa karake rahatA hai, vaha athavA | jo zrAvaka
svayaMbhUramaNa Adi samudroM meM rahe hue matsya Adi kI sthUla hiMsA Adi kA
vizeSa paristhiti meM pratyAkhyAna karatA hai, vaha pUrvokta trividha - trividha
rUpa pratyAkhyAna kara letA hai; unakI apekSA se bhagavatIsUtrAdi meM vaisA
vidhAna | kiyA gayA hai| aura usakA samAveza karane kI dRSTi se hI yahAM
dvividha-trividha zabda ke Age 'Adi' zabda kA prayoga | kiyA hai| magara isa
prakAra ke ArAdhaka zrAvaka bahuta hI virale hote haiN| isalie hamane yahAM
nahIM btaayaa| Amataura para zrAvaka ke lie dvividha-trividha rUpa se
pratyAkhyAna vihita hai| zloka ke dUsare caraNa meM dvividha ke Age 'Adi' zabda
par3A hai, ataH dvividha trividha ke alAvA jo vikalpa (bhaMga) hote haiM, ve isa
prakAra hai dvividha-dvividha - sthUlahiMsA na kare, na karAye; mana aura vacana
se; athavA mana aura kAyA se yA vacana aura kAyA | | se| yaha dUsarA prakAra hai
/  jaba mana aura vacana se karane-karAne kA pratyAkhyAna karatA hai, taba mana
se abhiprAya na dekara | vacana se bhI hiMsA ke lie kathana nahIM karatA; kAyA
se bhI asaMjJI kI taraha pApaceSTA karatA hai  /  mana aura kAyA se | hiMsA na
karane na karAne kA artha yaha hai ki mana meM hiMsA kA abhiprAya nahIM rakhatA,
kAyA se bhI hiMsA - pravRtti kA tyAga karatA hai| paraMtu anupayoga (ajJAna)
avasthA meM hI vANI se kabhI hiMsA-pravRtti kara baiThatA hai  /  vacana aura
kAyA se | karane-karAne ke tyAga kA artha to spaSTa hai, lekina isa prakAra ke
bhaMga se tyAga karane para mana se abhiprAya karake hiMsA karane-karAne kA
tyAga nahIM hotaa| anumodana - tyAga to ukta tInoM meM nahIM hai| isa prakAra
anya vikalpoM kA bhI vicArakara lenA caahie| dvividha- ekavidha - karane aura
karAne kA sirpha mana se yA sirpha vacana se yA sirpha kAyA se tyAga karanA  /
yaha tIsarA prakAra hai| ekavidha - trividha - hiMsAdi karane yA karAne kA mana
se vacana se aura kAyA se tyAga karanA  /  yaha cauthA prakAra hai| ekavidha-
dvividha - hiMsAdi karane yA karAne kA mana aura vacana se yA mana aura kAyA se
athavA vacana aura kAyA se tyAga karanA  /  yaha pAMcavAM vikalpa hai| ekavidha
- ekavidha - hiMsAdi karane yA karAne kA sirpha mana se yA sirpha vacana se yA
sirpha kAyA se tyAga karanA | yaha chaThA prakAra hai  /  [A. ni. 1558-59] ise
eka zloka meM yoM saMgRhIta kiyA gayA hai- prathama bheda - dvividhatrividha,
dvitIya bheda - dvividha-dvividha, tRtIya bheda - dvividha- ekavidha, caturtha
bheda - ekavidha - trividha, pAMcavAM bheda- ekavidha - dvividha aura chaThA
bheda-ekavidha-ekavidha hai| 85

Page #108 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Fruits of Violence  **Yoga Shastra, Second Light, Verse 19**  If we
calculate all these alternatives (bhang) with three karans and three yogas, then
there are a total of 49 types. They are as follows:  **1. With respect to not
doing violence (krit), there are 7 alternatives:**  1. By mind, speech, and
body. 2. By mind and speech. 3. By mind and body. 4. By speech and body. 5. By
mind only. 6. By speech only. 7. By body only.  **2. Similarly, with respect to
not causing violence (karit), there are 7 alternatives.**  **3. And with respect
to approval, there are also seven alternatives.**  **4. Do not commit violence,
do not cause violence, by mind, by speech, by body, by mind and speech, by mind
and body, by speech and body, by mind, speech, and body. These are the seven
bhangs caused by karan and karana.**  **5. Similarly, there are seven bhangs
from the approval of karan.**  **6. Seven bhangs from the approval of karana
(karit).**  **7. And seven bhangs from doing, causing, and approving.**  **All
these together make 49 alternative bhangs. And since these are trikala-vishayak,
there are a total of 147 bhangs of pratyakhyan.**  The scriptures say: "He who
has mastered the 147 alternatives (bhang) of pratyakhyan (pacchakkhan) is
considered skilled in pratyakhyan. One who has mastered fewer bhangs is
considered unskilled in pratyakhyan in all bhangs."  **Trikala-vishayak is as
follows:**  * Condemning the sins committed in the past. * Correcting (stopping)
the sins of the present. * Rejecting the sins of the future.  It is also said:
"The Shraman Upasak regrets the sins of the past, restrains the sins of the
present, and rejects the sins of the future."  **These bhangs (alternatives) are
said with respect to the ahimsa anuvrata. Similarly, understand the net of
alternatives (bhang) for other anuvratas.**  **Verse 18**  In this way, having
explained the general form of restraint related to violence, etc., now, with the
desire to explain the nature of each of violence, etc., first, it is explained
what consequences one has to experience from violence.  **Verse 19**  **75.
Seeing the fruit of violence, such as lameness, leprosy, and deformity, the wise
man should abandon the intentional violence of innocent, trembling beings.**
**Meaning:** The fruit of violence is lameness, leprosy, deformity of limbs,
etc. Seeing this, the wise man should abandon the intentional violence of
innocent, trembling beings.  **Explanation:** Until a being sees the fruit of
sin with his own eyes, he does not usually abandon it. Therefore, here, the
fruit of sin is explained, and advice is given to refrain from violence. One who
is unable to walk even though he has legs is called lame, one who has leprosy is
called a leper, one who is without limbs is called crippled. The word "adi"
means that the lower part of the body is damaged or other limbs are affected by
various diseases, or there is a deformity in the upper part of the body. All
these should be understood as the fruit of violence. Seeing this, the wise man,
knowing for sure from the scriptures that this poor creature is experiencing the
fruit of violence, therefore, I now abandon violence. Whose abandonment and what
kind of abandonment? In response to this, it is explained that one should make a
rule not to intentionally [without any reason] commit violence against innocent,
two-sense, etc., beings. Such a rule is not explained for criminal beings. By
saying "abandonment of violence against trembling beings," it is indicated here
that a householder is unable to abandon violence against one-sense beings, and
"sankalpata" is said because he should abandon violence with intention. The
violence that happens unintentionally due to the initial tendency of farming,
etc., is not forbidden for a Shravak. This means that one should abandon
intentional violence against trembling beings. One should abandon violence
against one-sense stationary beings as much as possible, and where abandonment
is impossible, one should always strive. In this regard, some verses are
presented. Their meaning is as follows:  Those who consider the soul and body to
be completely separate, according to their opinion, even if the body is
destroyed, the soul is not destroyed, and the violence caused by it does not
apply. Similarly, if the soul and body are considered to be completely
inseparable, then when the body is destroyed, the soul is also destroyed.
Therefore, in their view, there is no existence of the afterlife. Therefore,
from the perspective of anekanta-drishti, the soul is considered both different
from and inseparable from the body. From this perspective, if the body is harmed
or destroyed,

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 hiMsA ke phala yogazAstra dvitIya prakAza zloka 19 ina saba vikalpoM (bhaMga)
kI tIna karaNa aura tIna yoga ke sAtha gaNanA kI jAya to inake kula 49 bheda
hote haiN| ve isa prakAra hai hiMsA na karane ke kAraNa (kRta) kI apekSA 7
vikalpa 1. mana, vacana, kAyA se, 2. mana aura vacana se, 3. | mana aura kAyA
se, 4. vacana aura kAyA se, 5. sirpha mana se, 6. sirpha vacana se, 7. sirpha
kAyA se  /  (1) isI taraha hiMsA na karAne ( kArita) kI apekSA se 7 vikalpa hote
haiN| (2) tathA anumodana kI apekSA se bhI sAta vikalpa hote haiM  /  (3) hiMsA
na kare, na karAve, mana se, vacana se, kAyA se, mana-vacana se mana- kAyA se,
vacana kAyA se, mana, vacana aura | kAyA se yaha karaNa aura kAraNa se hone vAle
sAta bhaMga hue| (4) isI taraha karaNa ke anumodana se sAta bhaMga, (5) kAraNa |
( kArita) ke anumodana se sAta bhaMga (6) tathA karanA, karAnA aura anumodana se
hone vAle sAta bhNg| (7) ye saba milAkara | 49 vikalpa - bhaMga hote haiN| aura
ye trikAla -viSayaka hone se pratyAkhyAna ke kula 147 bhaMga hote haiN| graMthoM
meM kahA hai| ki- 'jisane pratyAkhyAna (paccakkhAna) ke 147 vikalpa (bhaMga)
hastagata kara liye, vaha pratyAkhyAna - kuzala mAnA jAtA hai| usase kama
bhaMgoM vAlA sarva bhaMgoM se pratyAkhyAna ke rUpa meM akuzala samajhA jAtA hai|
trikAla -viSayaka isa prakAra | se hai - atItakAla meM jo pApa hue hoM, unakI
niMdA karanA, vartamAnakAla ke pApoM kA saMvara karanA ( rokanA) aura
bhaviSyakAla ke pApoM kA pratyAkhyAna karanA  /  kahA bhI hai- 'zramaNopAsaka
bhUtakAla ke pApoM ke lie AtmaniMdA (pazcAttApa) karatA hai, vartamAna ke pApoM
kA nirodha karatA hai aura bhaviSyakAla ke pApoM kA pratyAkhyAna karatA hai|' ye
bhaMga (vikalpa) ahiMsA - aNuvrata kI apekSA se kahe hai| dUsare aNuvratoM ke
lie bhI isI taraha vikalpa (bhaMga) jAla samajha lenA  /  /  18  /  /  isa
taraha sAmAnya rUpa se hiMsAdi se saMbaMdhita virati batAkara aba hiMsA Adi
pratyeka kA svarUpa batAne kI icchA se sarvaprathama hiMsA se kina-kina
pariNAmoM kA anubhava karanA par3atA haiM, yaha batAte haiN|75|pnggu-kusstthi-
kunnitvaadi, dRSTvA hiMsAphalaM sudhIH  /  nirAgastrasajantUnAM hiMsAM
sngklptstyjet||19|| artha :- hiMsA kA phala laMgar3Apana, kor3hIpana, hAtha-
paira Adi aMgoM kI vikalatA Adi milatA hai| ise dekhakara buddhimAna puruSa
niraparAdha trasa jIvoM kI saMkalpa pUrvaka hiMsA kA tyAMga kare  /  /  19  /  /
vyAkhyA :- jaba taka jIva pApa kA phala apanI AMkhoM se nahIM dekha letA, taba
taka pApa 'vaha prAyaH nahIM haTatA  /  isalie yahAM pApa kA phala batAkara
hiMsA se virata hone kA upadeza diyA gayA hai| paira hone para bhI calane meM
asamartha ho use laMgar3A, kuSTa roga vAle ko kor3hiyA, hAtha-paira Adi se
rahita ko lUlA kahate haiN| Adi zabda se zarIra ke nIce kA bhAga kharAba ho
athavA dUsare aMga aneka prakAra ke roga se grasta ho, kAyA ke Upara ke bhAga
meM aMgavikalatA ho, | to ina saba ko hiMsA kA phala samajhanA caahie| aisA
dekhakara buddhimAna puruSa zAstrabala se yaha nizcita jAnakara ki yaha | becArA
hiMsA ke phala bhoga rahA hai, ataH maiM aba hiMsA kA tyAga karatA huuN| tyAga
kisakA aura kisa prakAra kA kare ? | isake uttara meM batAyA gayA hai ki
niraparAdhI dvIndriyAdi jIvoM kI saMkalpa pUrvaka [nirapekSa pane se] hiMsA na
karane kA niyama kre|' aparAdhI jIvoM ke lie aisA niyama nahIM batAyA hai| trasa
- jIvoM kI hiMsA kA tyAga kahakara yahAM sUcita kiyA gayA | hai ki gRhastha
ekendriya-viSayaka hiMsA kA tyAga karane meM asamartha hai aura saMkalpata
isalie kahA hai ki irAde se hiMsA | chodd'e| khetI Adi AraMbhajanaka pravRtti se
lAcArI meM saMkalpa yAnI irAde ke binA jo hiMsA ho jAtI hai, vaha zrAvaka ke lie
varjita nahIM hai| matalaba yaha hai ki trasa jIvoM kI saMkalpa hiMsA kA tyAga
kare  /  ekendriya sthAvara jIvoM kI hiMsA kA jahAM taka ho sake tyAga karanA
cAhie, jahAM tyAga azakya ho, vahAM hamezA yatanA karanI caahie| isa saMbaMdha
meM kucha zloka prastuta hai  /  jinakA artha isa prakAra hai jo AtmA aura
zarIra ko sarvathA pRthak mAnate haiM, unake mata se zarIra kA vinAza hone para
bhI AtmA kA vinAza nahIM hotA va tajjanita hiMsA nahIM lgtii| isI prakAra AtmA
aura zarIra ko sarvathA abhinna mAnane para zarIra ke nAza | hone para AtmA kA
bhI nAza ho jAtA hai| ataH unakI dRSTi meM paraloka kA koI astitva nahIM hai|
isalie anekAMtadRSTi se AtmA ko zarIra se bhinna bhI mAnA jAtA hai, abhinna
bhii| isa dRSTi se zarIra ko kSati pahuMcAne para yA naSTa karane 86

Page #109 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Fruits of Violence  The pain experienced by the body-bearer is the same
pain that the killer experiences. Therefore, a wise person should diligently
avoid violence that causes suffering to the dying being, distress to their mind,
forces them to be reborn in a new womb, and destroys their previous existence.
Those who carelessly destroy other beings are called by the wise as the seed of
the world-tree of violence. Whether the being dies or not, the careless person
will inevitably experience violence. However, if a being's life is lost due to
the actions of a person who is free from carelessness, then no violence is
incurred.  The question arises: If the being (soul) is eternal and unchanging,
how can there be violence against it? And if it is considered completely
transient (completely impermanent), how can violence be incurred by its
destruction in a moment? Because according to their view, the being that was
killed by the killer was already transient, and it was destroyed in that moment.
The one whose life was taken is no longer there. Therefore, by considering the
being as both eternal and transient, and by considering the pain caused by the
separation of any life from the body, the violence that is the cause of sin is
incurred.  Some argue that animals like tigers, lions, and snakes that kill
other creatures should be killed on sight, as killing one such violent creature
will protect many others. This argument is also misleading. If we accept the
view that "all beings live by destroying others," then everyone will start
killing others to survive. The proverb "might is right" will become a reality.
Even if there is a small gain, there is a clear loss of the principal. How can
the virtue that comes from non-violence be achieved through violence? How can a
lotus born in water be born in fire? How can violence, the cause of sin, become
the destroyer of sin? The poison of time, which is the cause of death, can never
be a giver of life.  There is a skeptical view called "Dukhamochana" (Pain-
Remover). It states that many people in the world are suffering from various
ailments. It is desirable to kill these suffering people because their suffering
will surely end by eliminating them; they will be freed from their suffering.
This statement is also not true. Because such beings often become hell-bound
after death. Those who suffer little in this life become recipients of infinite
suffering by dying. Similarly, there is another view that believes that killing
happy beings will prevent them from committing sins. Such statements by the
wicked are also to be rejected.  The skeptic named Charvaka also says, "The soul
is not proven in any way, so who is the victim of violence without a soul? And
who will experience the fruits of that violence? Just as fermented liquor is
prepared from rotten flour, etc., so too consciousness manifests from the coming
together of the five elements, and it is destroyed when the group of five
elements is destroyed. Then they also say that when the soul ends here, there is
no question of its going to the afterlife. And in the absence of an afterlife,
it is pointless to talk about virtue and sin. Therefore, performing various
austerities is just a wonderful way to suffer. Restraint is like being deprived
of the pleasures that are available. In this way, they spread such skeptical
ideas to others.  Therefore, they are refuted by giving a logical answer to
their arguments. "I am happy, I am unhappy," this kind of perception cannot be
in the body, senses, or mind; it can only be in the soul. From this perspective,
the soul is proven. "I know the pot." In this sentence, there is knowledge of
three things: action, activity, and the doer. How can the doer be denied in
these three? If the body is considered the doer, that is also not correct,
because an inanimate object cannot be a doer. If the conscious being produced by
the combination of the five elements and consciousness is considered the doer,
that is also not consistent, because the absence of a single doer in such a
conscious being makes statements like "I saw, I heard, I touched, I smelled, I
tasted, or I remembered" impossible if the five elements and consciousness are
considered inseparable. Just as consciousness is proven in one's own body
through self-experience, so too is the soul proven in the bodies of others.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 hiMsA ke phala yogazAstra dvitIya prakAza zloka 19 para jo pIr3A ukta
zarIradhArI ko hotI hai, usI ke kAraNa vahAM vadha kartA ko hiMsA lagatI hai|
isalie jisa hiMsA se marane vAle jIva ko duHkha ho, usake mana ko kleza ho, use
nayI yoni meM utpanna honA par3e, usakI pUrvaparyAya kA nAza ho, aisI hiMsA kA
paMDita-puruSa prayatna pUrvaka tyAga kre| jo pramAda se dUsare jIvoM kA nAza
karatA hai, use jJAnI puruSoM ne saMsAravRkSa kI bIjabhUta hiMsA kahI hai| jIva
mare yA nA mare to bhI pramAda karane vAle ko avazya hI hiMsA lagatI hai|
paraMtu pramAda se rahita vyakti ke nimitta se yadi kisI jIva kA prANanAza ho
bhI jAtA hai; to bhI hiMsA nahIM lgtii| prazna hotA hai-jIva (AtmA) jaba
sarvathA nitya hai, apariNAmI hai, to aisI dazA meM jIva kI hiMsA ho nahIM
sakatI aura sarvathA kSaNika (ekAMta anitya) mAneM to jIva ke kSaNabhara meM
naSTa hone se usakI bhI hiMsA kaise laga sakatI hai? kyoMki unake mata se, vaha
jIva, jise mArane vAle ne mArA thA, kSaNa-vidhvaMsI thA hI, usa kSaNa meM vaha
dhvasta hotA hI; jisakA prANanAza kiyA hai, vaha to aba rahA hI nhiiN| isalie
jIva nityAnitya aura pariNAmI mAnakara kAyA kA kisI bhI prANa ke viyoga se pIr3A
hone ke kAraNa pApa kI kAraNabhUta hiMsA ho jAtI hai| _kitanoM kA yaha bhI
kahanA hai ki prANiyoM ke ghAta karane vAle bAgha, siMha, sarpa Adi jaMtuoM ko
to dekhate hI mAra DAlanA cAhie, kyoMki aise eka hiMsaka jIva kA ghAtakara dene
se aneka jIvoM kI rakSA ho jaaygii| yaha kathana bhI bhrAMtipUrNa hai| 'sabhI
jIva dUsare kA nAza karake jIte haiM;' isa mata ko mAnA jAya to apane jIne ke
lie sabhI dUsaroM ko mArane lgeNge| 'jisakI lAThI usakI bhaiMsa' vAlI kahAvata
caritArtha ho jaayegii| isameM lAbha bahuta hI thor3A ho to bhI mUladhana kA
spaSTataH vinAza hai| ahiMsA se hone vAlA dharma hiMsA se kaise ho sakatA hai?
jala meM utpanna hone vAlA kamala Aga meM kaise utpanna ho sakatA hai? pApa kI
hetubhUta hiMsA pApa ko miTAne vAlI kaise bana sakatI hai? mRtyu kA kAraNa rUpa
kAlakUTa viSa jIvana dene vAlA kadApi nahIM hotaa| daHkhamocaka nAmaka eka
nAstikamata hai| usakA kahanA hai ki saMsAra meM bahata se AdamI rogAdi vividha
daHkha pA rahe haiN| una duHkhiyoM kA vadha honA hI ISTa hai| kyoMki duHkhiyoM
ko khatma kara dene se unake duHkha avazya miTa jAyeMge; unheM duHkhoM se
chuTakArA mila jaaygaa| yaha kathana bhI yathArtha nahIM hai| kyoMki aise jIva
marane ke bAda prAyaH narakagAmI hote haiN| ve alpaduHkha vAle jIva yoM marakara
anaMta duHkha ke bhAgI banate haiN| isI taraha eka mata aura hai, jo mAnatA hai-
sukhI jIvoM kA ghAtakara dene se ve pApa karane se ruka (baca) jaayeNge|
kudhArmikoM ke aise vacana bhI tyAjya hai| cArvAka nAma kA nAstika bhI kahatA
hai ki 'mUla meM AtmA hI kisI prakAra se siddha nahIM hotI hai, to phira AtmA ke
binA hiMsA kisakI hogI? aura usa hiMsA kA phala kauna bhogegA? sar3e hue ATe Adi
se jaise piSTAdi madya taiyAra ho jAtA hai, vaise hI pAMca bhUtoM ke ekatra hone
se caitanya prakaTa ho jAtA hai aura pAMcabhUtoM ke samUha ke naSTa hone para
usakA nAza ho jAtA hai| phira ve yoM bhI kahate haiM ki AtmA jaba yahIM samApta
ho jAtI hai, to usake paralokagamana kI to bAta hI nahIM rhtii| aura paraloka-
gamana ke abhAva meM puNya-pApa kI carcA karanA vyartha hai| isake lie phira
vividha tapasyAe~ karanA, sirpha kaSTa bhogane kA adbhuta tarIkA hai| saMyama
mile hue bhogavilAsoM se vaMcita hone ke samAna hai| isa prakAra ve nAstikatA ke
aise vicAra dUsaroM ke gale utAra dete haiN| _ ataH unakI bAtoM kA yuktiyukta
uttara dekara unheM niruttara karate haiN| 'maiM sukhI hUM, maiM duHkhI hUM, isa
prakAra kI pratIti zarIra, iMdriyoM yA mana ko nahIM ho sakatI; vaha to AtmA ko
hI ho sakatI hai| isa dRSTi se AtmA siddha hotI hai| maiM ghaTa ko jAnatA huuN|'
isa vAkya meM tIna vastuoM kA jJAna hotA hai; karma, kriyA aura krtaa| ina tInoM
meM kartA kA niSedha kaise hogA? yadi zarIra ko hI kartA mAne to vaha bhI ThIka
nahIM; kyoMki acetana kartA nahIM ho sktaa| agara paMcabhUta evaM caitanya ke
yoga se utpanna cetana ko kartA mAnA jAya to vaha bhI saMgata nahIM hai; kyoMki
aise cetana meM | ekakartRtva kA abhAva hone se-'maiMne dekhA, maiMne sunA,
sparza kiyA, sUMghA, cakhA yA yAda kiyA ityAdi kathana paMcabhUta aura caitanya
ko abhinna mAnane para ghaTita nahIM ho sktaa| isa taraha jaise svAnubhava se
apane zarIra meM bhI cetanA svarUpa siddha huA, vaise dUsaroM ke zarIra meM AtmA
kI siddhi 87

Page #110 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Refutation of Dukkhamochkatā and Cārvāka Philosophy  **Yogaśāstra, Second
Light, Verses 20-22**  It can be inferred from reasoning. And by observing the
actions that occur intelligently in one's own body, one should know the same in
the bodies of others. Who can stop an action that is proven by evidence?
Therefore, when the transmigration of the soul is also proven, then believing in
the afterlife is not incongruous. In the same way, the acceptance of merit and
demerit happens naturally. To call austerity a hardship, etc., is the statement
of an unwise person, like the ravings of a madman. Why would it not be
ridiculous to call the statement of such a conscious person self-created?
Therefore, the soul is free from obstacles and stable, it is the nature of
production and destruction, and it is the knower, the seer, the virtuous, the
enjoyer, the doer, and the evidence of its own body. In this way, after the
realization of the soul, it is not appropriate to commit violence. The avoidance
of violence is called the vow of non-violence, which is the form of
renunciation. || 19 || Now, to explain the rule of non-violence clearly, an
example is given.  **Meaning**  || 76 ||  **Ātmavat sarvabhūteṣu sukhaduḥkhe
priyāpriye | Cintayan nātmano'niṣṭām hiṁsāmanyasya nācaret || 20 ||**  Just as
one finds happiness pleasant and suffering unpleasant, so too, all beings find
happiness pleasant and suffering unpleasant. Considering this, one should not
commit violence, which is undesirable for oneself, towards others. || 20 ||
**Explanation:** Here, the word "happiness" should be understood to include the
means of happiness such as food, water, garlands of flowers, sandalwood, etc.,
and the word "suffering" should be understood to include the means of suffering
such as killing, binding, death, etc. The means of suffering are unpleasant for
others just as they are for oneself; therefore, one should not engage in
violence, etc. (actions that cause suffering). Here, happiness and suffering are
explained as similar experiences through an example: just as one finds the means
of happiness pleasant and suffering unpleasant, so too, all other types of
beings find these things pleasant and unpleasant. Other scriptures also confirm
this: "Listen to the essence of Dharma and hold it in your mind truthfully.
Then, do not do to others what is contrary to your own soul." || 20 ||  Here, a
doubt is raised: "If one commits an act forbidden by scripture, then one incurs
blame. But here, the killing of living beings is forbidden, but the killing of
stationary beings is not forbidden. Therefore, if a householder Śrāvaka
willingly engages in the killing of stationary beings in any way, is there any
blame?" To this, the following is the solution:  || 77 || **Nirarthikām na
kurvīt, jīveṣu sthāvareṣvapi | Hiṁsāhiṁsādharmājñaḥ, kāṅkṣan mokṣamupāsakaḥ ||
21 ||**  A seeker of liberation (mumukṣu), a Śramaṇa devotee who knows the
Dharma of non-violence, should not commit pointless violence even towards
stationary beings. || 21 ||  **Meaning:**  **Explanation:** One should not
commit pointless violence even towards beings (stationary beings) of earth,
water, fire, air, and plants. Here, unnecessary violence for the sake of one's
body and family is forbidden. In reality, a wise Śrāvaka does not commit
pointless violence beyond the purpose of his body and family, etc. One who knows
the Dharma of non-violence knows very well that the Dharma of non-violence is
not limited to forbidden things; rather, there is also the Dharma of non-
violence in the form of effort in things that are not forbidden. Therefore,
understanding this Dharma well, he does not commit pointless violence even
towards stationary beings without purpose. Therefore, to the doubt raised that
why should a Śrāvaka act with such meticulous care regarding forbidden non-
violence, it is said: a seeker of liberation, like a virtuous Śrāvaka, should
never commit pointless violence. Here, another doubt is raised: "A person who is
constantly eager to commit violence, even if he gives up all his wealth and even
his life, still purifies himself from the sin of that violence. Then, what is
the benefit of the suffering of giving up such violence?" || 21 ||  In response
to this, it is said:  || 78 || **Prāṇī prāṇitalobhena, yo rājyamapi muñcati |
Tadvadhotthamagham sarvūrvidāne'pi na śāmyati || 22 ||**  This being, out of
greed for life, even gives up his kingdom. The sin of violence arising from the
killing of that being cannot be pacified (relieved from sin) even by giving away
the entire earth. || 22 ||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 duHkhamocakatA aura cArvAkamata kA khaMDana yogazAstra dvitIya prakAza zloka 20
se 22 anumAna se kI jA sakatI hai| aura apane zarIra meM buddhi pUrvaka hotI huI
kriyA ko dekhakara dUsaroM ke zarIra meM bhI usI | taraha jAna lenI cAhie  /
isa taraha pramANasiddha kriyA ko kauna roka sakatA hai? isalie jIva kA jaba
paralokagamana bhI siddha ho cukA hai; taba paraloka mAnanA asaMgata nahIM hai|
usI taraha puNya-pApa kA svIkAra to apane Apa ho hI jAtA hai| tapasyA ko kaSTa
batAnA ityAdi kathana bhI unmattapralApa kI taraha avivekI kA kathana hai| aise
caitanyayukta puruSa ke | kathana ko sva kalpita batAnA hAsyAspada kyoM nahIM
hogA? isalie AtmA nirAbAdha tathA sthita, utpAda aura vyaya | svarUpa hai aura
jJAtA, dRSTA, guNI, bhoktA, karttA aura apanI-apanI kAyA ke pramANa jitanA hai|
isa taraha AtmA kI siddhi ho jAne para hiMsA karanA yogya nahIM hai| hiMsA kA
parihAra hI tyAga - rUpa ahiMsA - vrata kahalAtA hai  /  /  19  /  /  aba hiMsA
ke niyama ko spaSTatA se samajhAne ke lie dRSTAMta dete haiM artha  /  76  /
Atmavat sarvabhUteSu sukhaduHkhe priyApriye  /  cintayannAtmano'niSTAM
hiMsAmanyasya nAcaret  //  20 //  jaise svayaM ko sukha priya hai aura duHkha
apriya hai, vaise hI, jIvoM ko bhI sukha priya aura duHkha apriya hai, aisA
vicArakara svayaM ke lie aniSTa rUpa hiMsA kA AcaraNa dUsare ke lie bhI na kare
||20|| vyAkhyA :- yahAM sukha-zabda se sukha ke sAdhana anna, jala, puSpamAlA,
caMdana Adi tathA duHkha-zabda se duHkha ke sAdhana - vadha, baMdhana, maraNa
Adi kA grahaNa kara lenA caahie| duHkha ke sAdhana svayaM kI taraha dUsare ko
bhI apriya hai; | isalie hiMsAdi (duHkhotpAdaka kriyA) nahIM karanI caahie|
yahAM sukha aura duHkha ko eka sarIkhI anubhUti ko dRSTAMta | se samajhAne ke
lie kahate haiM- jaise svayaM ko sukha ke sAdhana priya hai aura duHkha apriya
hai, vaise hI dUsare sabhI prakAra ke jIvoM ko ye priya aura apriya hai| anya
dharmagraMthoM meM bhI isI bAta kI puSTi kI hai- 'dharma kA sAra suno aura
sunakara | use mana meM yathArtha rUpa se dhAraNa karo, phira jo bAta apanI AtmA
ke pratikUla ho, use dUsaroM ke lie bhI mata kro|  /  / 20 /  / ' yahAM eka
zaMkA prastuta karate haiM ki- 'zAstra dvArA niSiddha vastu kA AcaraNa kiyA jAye
to doSa lagatA hai, kiMtu yahAM sajIvoM kI hiMsA kA to niSedha kiyA hai, lekina
sthAvarajIvoM kI hiMsA kA to niSedha nahIM kiyA hai; ataH gRhastha | zrAvaka
kisI bhI rUpa meM sthAvarajIvoM kI hiMsA meM svecchA se pravRtti kare to kyA
doSa hai? isI kA samAdhAna dete haiM  / 77 /  nirarthikAM na kurvIta, jIveSu
sthAvareSvapi  /  hiMsAmahiMsAdharmajJaH, kAGkSan mokSamupAsakaH  /  / 21 /  /
ahiMsAdharma ko jAnane vAlA mumukSu zramaNopAsaka sthAvara jIvoM kI bhI
nirarthaka hiMsA na kare ||21|| artha :vyAkhyA :- pRthvI, jala, agni, vAyu aura
vanaspati ke jIvoM (sthAvaroM) kI bhI nirarthaka hiMsA nahIM karanI caahie| |
zarIra aura kuTuMba ke nirvAha ke lie anAvazyaka hiMsA kA yahAM niSedha kiyA
gayA hai| vastutaH vivekI zrAvaka zarIra evaM kuTuMba Adi ke prayojana ke
atirikta vyartha hiMsA nahIM karatA  /  ahiMsA-dharma ko jAnane vAlA yaha bhalI-
bhAMti jAnatA | hai ki niSiddha vastu taka hI ahiMsAdharma sImita nahIM hai;
apitu aniSiddha vastu meM bhI yatanA rUpa ahiMsA - dharma hai| | isalie vaha usa
dharma ko bhalIbhAMti samajhakara, binA prayojana sthAvarajIvoM kI bhI
nirarthaka hiMsA nahIM krtaa| ataH jo | zaMkA uThAI gayI thI ki niSiddha ahiMsA
kA AcaraNa itanI sUkSmadRSTi se zrAvaka kyoM kare? isake samAdhAna ke rUpa meM |
kahA gayA hai - mokSabhilASI zrAvaka sAdhu kI taraha nirarthaka hiMsA kA AcaraNa
kataI na kre| yahAM punaH eka zaMkA uThAyI | jAtI hai ki jo vyakti niraMtara
hiMsA karane meM tatpara rahatA hai, vaha apanA sarvasva dhana aura sarvasva
prANa taka dekara bhI | usa hiMsAjanita pApa kI zuddhi karatA hai to phira aisI
hiMsA ke tyAga karane ke kleza se kyA lAbha?  /  /  21  /  /  isake uttara meM
kahate haiM  / 78  /  prANI prANitalobhena, yo rAjyamapi muJcati  /
tadvadhotthamaghaM sarvorvIdAne'pi na zAmyati  // 22 //  artha :- yaha jIva jIne
ke lobha se rAjya kA bhI tyAgakara detA hai| usa jIva kA vadha karane se utpanna
hiMsA ke pApa kA zamana (pApa se chuTakArA) sArI pRthvI kA dAna karane para bhI
nahIM ho sakatA  /  /  22  /  /  88

Page #111 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Violent and Condemnable  **Yoga Shastra, Second Light, Verses 23-26**
**Explanation:** Even if a dying being is offered mountains of gold or kingdoms,
it will not accept them, considering them undesirable. It only desires to live.
Therefore, the sin of violence arising from killing beings who cherish life
cannot be atoned for even by donating the entire earth. The scriptures also say,
"Among all donations, the donation of safety is the most important." (22)  How
condemnable is the life of those who commit violence? This is explained in the
next four verses.  **Verse 23:**  **Meaning:** In the forest, what is the
difference between a man who kills deer for meat and a dog, when both are
consuming air, water, and grass?  **Explanation:** Can creatures living in the
forest, not on land owned by anyone, ever be criminals? Therefore, it is said
that these forest-dwelling deer are free from crimes like stealing wealth,
breaking into others' homes, killing, and looting. There are further reasons for
their innocence: they consume air, water, and grass. Since these three things do
not belong to anyone else, those who consume them are not criminals. The term
"meat-seeker" here should be understood as "greedy for deer meat" in the
context. The word "deer" should be taken to include all creatures that roam the
forest, eating grass and other vegetation. In this way, how can a man who is
eager to kill innocent deer be considered any less than a dog that is greedy for
meat? In other words, he should be considered even worse than a dog. (23)
**Verse 24:**  **Meaning:** If even a small thorn pricks any part of his body, a
man is distressed. How then can he kill innocent creatures with sharp weapons?
Why doesn't he consider the pain he would experience himself at that time?
**Explanation:** Indeed, one who does not recognize the suffering of others as
equal to his own suffering is considered condemnable in the world. Those
warriors who are addicted to hunting animals have been clearly told, "Your valor
in violence will lead you to hell." How unjust is it for one who is stronger to
kill the helpless, innocent, and extremely weak? What kind of immorality is
this? What injustice is this against innocent beings? It is a great pity that
the whole world has become lawless.  **Verse 25:**  **Meaning:** Those who
commit cruel deeds, seeking only momentary satisfaction for themselves, destroy
all the births of the embodied being.  **Explanation:** Those who commit violent
acts like hunting, etc., for the momentary satisfaction of their tongue, for the
sake of a little desire of the tongue, end the births of other beings. This
means that their momentary satisfaction from the meat of other beings ends the
entire life of that other being. This is a great cruelty. The Smriti-kar also
says, "Consider the difference between the creature whose flesh the cruel man
eats and that cruel man. One is satisfied for a moment, while the other is
completely deprived of life." (25)  **Verse 26:**  **Meaning:** Even just saying
"Die!" makes a being sorrowful. How much pain does a creature experience when it
is being killed with terrible weapons?  **Explanation:** Not only by killing,
but even by simply saying "Die!", a being experiences suffering like death.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 hiMsaka niMdanIya yogazAstra dvitIya prakAza zloka 23 se 26 vyAkhyA :- marate
hue jIva ko cAhe jitane sone ke parvata yA rAjya diye jAya, phira bhI vaha
(jIva) svarNa Adi | vastuoM ko anicchanIya samajhakara unako svIkAra nahIM
krtaa| balki vaha ekamAtra jIne kI hI abhilASA karatA hai| isalie jIvana (jInA)
ko priya mAnane vAle jIvoM kA vadha karane se utpanna hiMsA ke pApa kA zamana
samagra pRthvI kA dAna | kara dene para bhI nahIM hotaa| zruti meM bhI kahA hai-
'samagra dAnoM meM abhayadAna pradhAna hai  /  /  22  /  /  ' hiMsA karane vAloM
kA jIvana kitanA niMdanIya hai? ise aba cAra zlokoM meM batAte haiM ||79  /
vane niraparAdhAnAM vAyu-toya-tRNAzinAm  /  nighnan mRgANAM mAMsArthI, vizeSyeta
kathaM zunaH ? ||23|| artha :- vana meM rahane vAle vAyu, jala aura harI ghAsa
sevana karane vAle niraparAdha, vanacArI hiraNoM ko mArane vAle meM mAMsArthI
kutte se adhika kyA vizeSatA hai?  /  / 23 /  /  vyAkhyA H- vana meM nivAsa
karane vAle na ki kisI ke svAmitva kI bhUmi para rahane vAle vanacArI jIva kyA
kabhI | aparAdhI ho sakate haiM? isIlie kahate haiM ki - ve vanacArI mRga
paradhanaharaNa karane, dUsare ke ghara meM seMdha lagAkara phor3ane, dUsare ko
mArane, lUTane Adi aparAdhoM se rahita hote haiN| unake niraparAdhI hone ke aura
bhI kAraNa batAte haiM ki ve vAyu, | jala aura ghAsa kA sevana karane vAle hote
haiN| aura ye tInoM cIjeM dUsare kI nahIM hone se inakA bhakSaNa karane vAle |
aparAdhI nahIM hote| mAMsArthI kA artha yahAM prasaMgavaza mRga ke mAMsa kA
arthI (lolupa) samajhanA caahie| mRga kahane se yahAM tRNa, ghAsa Adi khAkara
vana meM vicaraNa karane vAle sabhI jIvoM kA grahaNa kara lenA caahie| isa
taraha se niraparAdha | mRgoM kA vadha karane meM tatpara mRgamAMsalolupa
manuSya mAMsa meM lubdha kutte se kisa prakAra kama samajhA jA sakatA hai?
arthAt | use kutte se bhI gayA bItA samajhanA cAhie || 23 /  /  artha :  /  80
/  dIryamANaH kuzenApi yaH svAGge hanta ! dUyate  /  nirmantUn sa kathaM
jantUnantayennizitAyudhaiH ? ||24|| apane zarIra ke kisI bhI aMga meM yadi DAbha
kI jarA-sI noka bhI cubha jAya to usase manuSya duHkhI ho uThatA hai| aphasosa
hai, vaha tIkhe hathiyAroM se niraparAdha jIvoM kA prANAMta kaise kara DAlatA
hai? usa samaya vaha usase khuda ko hone vAlI pIr3A kA vicAra kyoM nahIM karatA?
/  / 24 /  /  vyAkhyA : - vAstava meM, jo apanI pIr3A ke samAna parapIr3A ko
nahIM jAnatA, vaha loka meM niMdanIya samajhA jAtA hai| pazuoM ke zikAra karane
ke durvyasanI kSatriyoM ko kisI ne sApha-sApha sunA diyA rasAtala meM jAya
tumhArA yaha hiMsA meM parAkrama  /  jo adhika balavAna hokara bhI azaraNa,
nirdoSa aura atinirbala kA vadha karatA hai| yaha kaisI durnIti hai, tumhArI ?
kaisA anyAya hai, nirdoSa prANiyoM para ? bahuta aphasosa hai ki yaha sArA jagat
arAjaka bana gayA hai|  / 81 /  nirmAtuM krUrakarmANaH, kSaNikAmAtmano dhRtim  /
samApayanti sakalaM, janmAnyasya zarIriNaH  /  / 25 /  /  krUra karma karane
vAle zikArI apanI kSaNika tRpti ke lie dUsare jIva ke samasta janmoM kA nAza
kara dete haiM  /  /  25  /  /  artha : vyAkhyA : hiMsAdi raudrakarma karane
vAle zikArI Adi apanI jihvA kI kSaNika tRpti ke lie, jarA sI jihvA | lAlasA kI
zAMti ke lie dUsare jIvoM ke janma samApta kara dete haiN| kahane kA artha hai
ki dUsare jIvoM ke mAMsa se hone vAlI apanI kSaNika tRpti ke kAraNa dUsare jIva
kA to sArA jIvana hI samApta ho jAtA hai| yaha bar3I bhArI krUratA hai| |
smRtikAra bhI kahate haiM - vaha prANI, jisakA mAMsa krUra manuSya khAtA hai
aura vaha krUra manuSya, ina donoM ke aMtara para vicAra kareM to eka kI
kSaNabhara ke lie tRpti hotI hai, jabaki dUsare ke prANoM kA sarvathA viyoga ho
jAtA hai  /  /  25  /  /   / 82 /  mriyasvetyuccamAno'pi dehI bhavati duHkhitaH
/  mAryamANaH praharaNairdAruNaiH sa kathaM bhavet ?  // 26 //  artha :- are!
mara jA tUM! itanA kahane mAtra se bhI jaba jIva duHkhI ho jAtA hai to
bhayaMkara hathiyAroM se mAre jAte hue jIva ko kitanA duHkha hotA hai ? || 26  /
/  vyAkhyA :- mAra dene se hI nahIM, apitu sirpha 'mara jA tUM ' itanA kahane se
hI jIva ko mRtyu ke samAna duHkha 89

Page #112 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Jain Terms Preserved:  The Yogashastra, Second Illumination, Verse 27, indicates
that as a result of violence, the Chakravartis Subhuma and Brahmadatta went to
the seventh hell. This is an established fact for all living beings; then how
much suffering must that poor being have experienced when struck by spears,
arrows, etc.? Truly, it suffers greatly. Where even the mention of death causes
sorrow, then who would be so unwise as to kill any creature with sharp weapons?
Now, explaining the fruits of violence through examples:  It is heard in the
scriptures that Subhuma and Brahmadatta, being engrossed in cruel meditation,
went to the seventh hell due to the killing of living beings. The explanation is
that mere violence without cruel meditation does not cause going to hell.
Otherwise, even a ascetic monk who kills a lion would go to hell. Therefore,
Subhuma and Brahmadatta, who were engrossed in cruel meditation associated with
violence, went to the seventh hell. How they went to hell is narrated
sequentially.  The story of Chakravarti Subhuma: In the city of Vasantapura,
there lived a boy named Agnika. As there was no one in his lineage, it seemed as
if he had directly fallen from the sky. One day, he set out to another country
along with a caravan. But one day, getting separated from his caravan, he
reached the ashram of a ascetic. The chief of the clan, named Jamadagni,
accepted Agnika as his son. From then on, he became famous among the people as
Jamadagni. Due to his intense penance, like the fire, he became an unbearable
mass of radiance on the earth. Once, there was a dispute between the great
listener deity Vaishvanara and the ascetic devotee deity Dhanvantari as to whose
religion is authoritative. The listener deity said that the religion of the
Arihanta is authoritative. To this, the ascetic devotee deity said that the
ascetic religion is authoritative. In the end of this dispute, they decided to
test who has more or less qualities between the Jain monk and the ascetic.   At
that time, the newly initiated King Vasupujya was going to Champapuri to take
initiation. On the way, the two deities saw him and with the intention of
testing him, they requested the king for food and water. But even though hungry
and thirsty, the king refused to accept it, as it was not in accordance with the
rules of the monk. The two testing deities then scattered thorns and pebbles
sharp as knives all over the path, causing him immense pain; his feet were
pierced and blood started flowing. Yet, he continued walking the harsh path
considering it as soft as lotus. Then the deities arranged for dance, song, etc.
to disturb the king, but he remained unmoved. As the influence of the divine
discus does not work on one of the same lineage, similarly, their attempt also
failed. Then the deities assumed the form of a perfected being's son and came
before him, saying, "O fortunate one! You are still a young man with a long life
ahead. So enjoy the pleasures according to your desire. How did the idea of
penance occur to you in this youthful age? Even an enterprising person does not
do the work of night in the morning. Therefore, brother! After the youthful age
is over, when the body becomes weak and old age comes, then do penance." To
this, the king said, "If my life is long, I will get a good opportunity to
exhaust my karmas or accumulate merits. Just as the amount of water, so will the
stem of the lotus grow. In youth, the senses are restless. Therefore, to do
penance in this age itself is truly penance. Where fierce weapons and missiles
are being attacked from both sides, the one who remains steadfast and displays
valor, he is truly called a hero." When the king remained unwavering in his
truth, no matter what means the deities used...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 hiMsA ke phalasvarUpa narakagAmI subhUma cakravartI yogazAstra dvitIya prakAza
zloka 27 mahasUsa hotA hai| sabhI jIvoM ke lie yaha bAta anubhavasiddha hai; to
phira bhAle, barDI Adi zastroM se mAre jAte hue usa becAre jIva ko kitanA duHkha
hotA hogA? sacamuca use bar3A duHkha hotA hai| jahAM marane kI bAta kahane se
bhI duHkha hotA hai, to phira kauna samajhadAra aisA hogA jo tIkhe zastroM se
kisI prANI ko mAregA?  /  / 26 /  /  aba dRSTAMtoM dvArA hiMsA ke phala ke
saMbaMdha meM samajhAte haiM 83 /  zrUyate prANighAtena, raudradhyAnaparAyaNau
/  subhUmo brahmadattazca, saptamaM narakaM gatau  /  / 27 /  /  artha :- Agama
meM aisA sunA jAtA hai ki prANiyoM kI hatyA se raudradhyAnaparAyaNa hokara
subhUma aura brahmadatta | cakravartI sAtavIM naraka meM gaye  /  / 27 /  /
vyAkhyA :- raudradhyAna ke binA akelI hiMsA naraka-gamana kA kAraNa nahIM hotii|
anyathA, siMha kA vadha karane vAlA tapasvI sAdhu bhI naraka meM jaataa| isalie
raudradhyAna meM tatpara yAnI hiMsAnubaMdhI raudradhyAna parasta subhUma aura
brahmadatta ye donoM cakravartI sAtavIM naraka meM gye| ve donoM kisa taraha
naraka meM gaye? yaha kathAnaka dvArA kramazaH batAte haiMsubhUma cakravatI kI
kathA : vasaMtapura nAmaka nagara meM agnika nAma kA bAlaka rahatA thaa| usake
vaMza meM koI bhI na rahane ke kAraNa aisA mAluma hotA thA mAno vaha AkAza se hI
sIdhA Tapaka par3A ho| eka dina vaha vahAM Aye hue eka sArtha ke sAtha dUsare
deza kI ora cala pdd'aa| kintu eka dina acAnaka hI apane kAphale meM
bichur3akara vaha akelA ghUmatA-ghUmatA eka tApasa ke Azrama meM A phuNcaa|
jamad nAma ke kulapati ne usa agnika ko putra rUpa meM svIkArakara liyaa| taba
se logoM meM vaha 'jamadagni' nAma se prasiddha huaa| sAkSAt agni ke samAna
pracaMDa tapa karane se vaha bhUtala meM duHsaha tejorAzi se yukta bnaa| eka
bAra vaizvAnara nAma kA mahAzrAvaka deva aura tApasabhakta dhanavaMtari deva
donoM meM vivAda chir3a gayA ki 'kisakA | dharma pramANabhUta hai?' zrAvakadeva
ne kahA-'arihaMta kA dharma pramANabhUta hai|' isa para tApasabhakta deva ne
kahA ki 'tApasadharma pramANa hai|' isa vivAda ke aMta meM donoM ne yaha nirNaya
kiyA ki 'jainasAdhu aura tApasa meM se kisameM adhikatA yA nyUnatA hai? ina
donoM meM guNoM meM agragaNya kauna hai? isakI parIkSA kI jaay| idhara usa
samaya mithilA meM navIna dharma prApta rAjA zrI vAsupUjyasvAmI ke pAsa dIkSA
lene hetu bhAvasAdhu bana (sAdhuveSa dhAraNa) kara vahAM se prasthAna karake
caMpApurI kI ora jA rahA thaa| use jAte hue mArga meM una donoM devoM ne dekhA
aura usakI parIkSA lene kI nIyata se una donoM devoM ne rAjA se AhAra-pAnI
grahaNa karane kI prArthanA kii| kintu kSudhAtRSAtura hote hue bhI rAjA ne sAdhu
ke bhikSAniyamoM ke anukUla AhAra-pAnI na hone ke kAraNa lene se inkAra kara
diyaa| saca hai, vIra puruSa apane satya se kabhI vicalita nahIM hote| taba una
donoM parIkSaka devoM ne manuSyoM meM devasamAna usa rAjA ke komala caraNa-
kamaloM meM cubhe, isa prakAra ke karavata ke samAna painI nauMka vAle kaMkara
aura kAMTe sAre rAste meM bikhera diye| jinase unheM atIva pIr3A huI; paira
chida gaye, unameM se rakta kI dhArA bahane lgii| phira bhI ve usa kaThoramArga
ko kamala ke samAna komala samajhakara calate rhe| phira una devoM ne rAjA ko
vicalita karane ke lie rAste para hI nRtya, gIta Adi kA Ayojana kiyA; paraMtu ve
vahAM ThiThake nhiiN| jaise samAnagotrIya para divyacakra kA prabhAva nahIM
hotA, vaise hI unakA vaha upAya bhI niSphala huaa| ataH devoM ne aba siddhaputra
kA rUpa bnaayaa| aura usake sAmane Akara kahA he mahAbhAgyazAlI! abhI to tUM
bahuta laMbI umra vAlA yuvaka hai| ataH tUM apanI icchAnusAra sukhopbhogkr| isa
yauvanavaya meM tujhe tapa karane kI kaise sUjhI? udyamI puruSa bhI rAta kA kAma
prAtaHkAla nahIM krtaa| isalie he bhAI! yauvana vaya pUrNa hone ke bAda jaba
zarIra durbala ho jAya aura bur3hApA A jAya 'taba tapa krnaa|' isa para rAjA ne
kahA- 'yadi merI Ayu laMbI hogI to mujhe karmakSaya karane yA puNyopArjana
karane kA suMdara avasara milegaa| jitanI mAtrA meM pAnI hogA, usI ke anusAra
utanI mAtrA meM kamala kI nAla bhI bddh'egii| yauvanavaya meM iMdriyA~ caMcala
hotI hai| ataH isI umra meM tapa karanA vAstava meM tapa hai| donoM ora se
bhayaMkara zastrAstroM kA prahAra ho rahA ho, usa yuddha meM jo TikA rahakara
jauhara (parAkrama) dikhAye, vahI vastutaH zUravIra kahalAtA hai|' jaba rAjA
apane satya se kisI bhI upAya se jarA bhI calAyamAna 90

Page #113 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Tale of Subhum Chakri Yoga Shastra, Second Light, Verse 27  The two gods,
having not received the desired response, departed from there, thanking the sage
Jamdagni with the words, "Blessed, blessed." They went to test the sage. Upon
reaching the sage's hermitage, they saw that his long matted hair was as vast as
a banyan tree and touched the ground. His feet were covered with termite mounds.
In the tangled web of his beard, the gods, disguised as a pair of ducks, built
their nest. Then the male duck said to the female duck, "I am going to the
Himalayas." The female duck replied, "If you go there, you will fall in love
with another duck and will not return. Therefore, I will not allow you to go."
The male duck said, "My dear, if I do not return, I will be guilty of cow
slaughter." Thus, the female duck, bound by the oath of the male duck, said, "My
dear, if you swear by the sin of this sage, then I can allow you to go. May your
journey be auspicious." Upon hearing this, the sage, filled with anger, grabbed
both birds with both hands and said, "I perform such arduous austerities that
just as darkness does not remain in the presence of the sun, how can my sins
endure while I am engaged in my austerities?" To this, the male duck said to the
sage, "Do not be angry. The truth is that your austerities are not successful,
because 'Aputraasyagatirnasti' - 'Without a son, there is no good fortune for a
man.' Have you not heard this scriptural saying?" Accepting the words of the
birds as true, the sage thought, "I am without a wife and son, therefore my
austerities have been wasted and have flowed away like water." Seeing the sage
thus disturbed, Dhanvantari thought, "These sages have misled me. Curse them! I
should abandon their company." With this thought, he also became a Shravak.
"When there is realization, who does not have faith? Indeed, everyone does."
After that, the two gods became invisible.  Meanwhile, Jamdagni, the sage,
reached the city called Nemikoṣṭhaka. There, King Jitashatru ruled, the father
of many daughters. Just as Mahadeva had gone to Daksha Prajapati for the sake of
obtaining a daughter, so too did the sage go to the king with the desire to
obtain a daughter. The king, standing up, welcomed him and, with folded hands,
asked, "Lord, why have you come? Whatever your command, please speak, I am ready
to serve you." To this, the sage said, "I have come to you to request a
daughter." The king said, "I have a hundred daughters. Take whichever one you
desire." The sage went into the inner apartments of the daughters and said to
the princesses, "Which of you is willing to become my wife?" Hearing this
unexpected proposal, the princesses looked at the sage and said, "Oh, matted-
haired one! White-haired one! Weak one! Begging mendicant old man! Are you not
ashamed to speak like this to us, young maidens?" Thus saying, the princesses
spat upon him. Therefore, just as fire flares up from the wind, so too did the
fire of anger flare up in Jamdagni. With the power of his austerities, he
twisted the princesses into shapes like bent bows. At that time, seeing a girl
playing on a pile of dust in the courtyard, the sage called her to him and said,
"Oh, Renukā! Do you desire me?" Thus saying, he showed her the fruit of the
Bijore tree. She also extended her hand, indicating acceptance. Just as a poor
man clutches tightly to wealth, so too did the sage clutch the girl to his
chest. Therefore, the king, giving cows as a gift, also gave the girl to him.
Because of the affectionate relationship of a sister-in-law with the remaining
99 daughters of the king, the sage, with the power of his austerities, restored
them to their former beauty. Curse the fools for this kind of waste of
austerities! The princess was still young, innocent, and beautiful. Therefore,
the sage took her to his hermitage. The days of the ascetic passed quickly. The
girl now reached the lion gate of the beautiful youth, like the play-garden of
Kamadeva. Just as Mahadeva had performed the ritual of accepting the hand of
Parvati, so too did Jamdagni, the sage, marry the girl in the presence of fire.
When she became of age, the sage said to her, "My dear, I am preparing a special
food for you, blessed with a mantra. If you eat it, you will be blessed with a
son who will be the best among Brahmins." To this, Renukā said to her husband,
the sage, "My dear, my sister Anantvirya is the wife of the king of Hastinapur.
Please prepare a Kshatriya food, blessed with a mantra, for her as well." The
sage...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 subhuma cakrI kI kathA yogazAstra dvitIya prakAza zloka 27 nahIM huA, to donoM
deva-'dhanya hai-dhanya hai', isa prakAra dhanyavAda dete hue vahAM se tApasa
jamadagni kI parIkSA lene cala pdd'e| tApasa ke Azrama meM pahuMcakara unhoMne
dekhA ki vaTavRkSa kI taraha vistRta aura bhUtala ko chUtI huI usakI laMbI
jaTAe~ haiM, usake paira dImakoM ke TIloM se Dhake hue the| usakI dAr3hI rUpI
latAjAla meM deva-mAyA se una devoM ne ghoMsalA banAkara svayaM cakave ke jor3e
ke rUpa meM usameM ghusa gye| phira cakave ne cakavI se kahA- 'maiM himavAn
parvata para jA rahA huuN|' taba cakavI ne kahA- 'tuma vahAM jAkara dUsarI
cakavI ke prema meM phaMsa jAoge; vApasa nahIM aaoge| isalie maiM tumheM jAne kI
anumati nahIM duuNgii|' taba cakavA bolA-'priye! yadi maiM vApasa na AU~ to
mujhe gohatyA kA pApa lge|' isa taraha zapathabaddha cakave se cakavI ne kahA-
priya! yadi isa RSi ke pApa kI saugaMdha khAo to maiM tumheM jAne kI anumati de
sakatI huuN| tumhArA mArga kalyANakArI bne|' yaha vacana sunate hI krodha se
AgababUlA hokara tApasa ne donoM pakSiyoM ko donoM hAthoM se pakar3a liyA aura
unheM kahA-maiM itanA duSkara tapa karatA hU~ ki sUrya ke hone se jaise
aMdhakAra nahIM rahatA, vaise hI mere tapa ke rahate mere pApa kaise Tika sakate
haiM? isa para cakave ne RSi se kahA-'Apa krodha na kreN| saca bAta yaha hai ki
ApakA tapa saphala nahIM hai; kyoMki 'aputrasya gatirnAsti' 'putra ke binA
manuSya kI sugati nahIM hotI; yaha zrutivAkya kyA Apane nahIM sunA?' pakSiyoM kI
bAta yathArtha mAnakara tApasa ne vicAra kiyA ki 'maiM strI aura putra se rahita
hUM, isa kAraNa merA tapa bhI vyartha hI pAnI meM baha gayA hai| tApasa ko isa
prakAra vicalita dekhakara dhanavaMtarIdeva socane lagA-'are ina tApasoM ne
mujhe bahakA diyA thaa| dhikkAra hai, inako! inakA saMga chor3anA caahie|' yaha
socakara vaha bhI zrAvaka bana gyaa| 'pratIti ho jAne para kise vizvAsa nahIM
hotA? arthAt sabhI ko hotA hai|' usake bAda ve donoM deva adRzya ho gye| iMdhara
janmadagni tApasa vahAM se nemikoSThaka nAmaka nagara meM phuNcaa| vahAM aneka
kanyAoM kA pitA jitazatru rAjA rAjya karatA thaa| mahAdevajI jaise kanyAprApti
ke lie dakSa-prajApati ke pAsa gaye the, vaise hI vaha tApasa eka kanyA kI
prApti kI icchA se rAjA ke pAsa gyaa| rAjA ne khar3e hokara unakA satkAra kiyA
aura hAtha jor3akara pUchA-'bhagavAn! Apa kisa lie padhAre haiM? jo AjJA ho,
pharamAiye, maiM sevA karane ko taiyAra huuN|' isa para tApasa ne kahA-'maiM eka
kanyA kI yAcanA ke lie tumhAre pAsa AyA huuN|' rAjA ne kahA- 'merI ye so kanyAe~
haiM; inameM se jo Apako cAhe, use Apa grahaNa kiijie|' usa tApasa ne kanyAoM ke
aMtaHpura meM jAkara rAjakumAriyoM se kahA- 'tumameM se kauna merI dharmapatnI
banane ko taiyAra hai?' kanyAoM ne isa apratyAzita prastAva ko sunakara tApasa
kI ora dekhate hue kahA-'are jaTAdhArI! sapheda bAla vAle! durbala! bhikSAjIvI
bUr3he! tujhe hama javAna kanyAoM se aisA kahate hue zarma nahIM AtI! yoM kahate
hue rAjakanyAoM ne usa para thuukaa| ataH havA se jaise Aga bhar3aka uThatI hai
vaise hI isa bAta se jamadagni kI krodhAgni bhar3aka utthii| usane apane
tapobala se rAjakanyAoM ko khIMce hue kamAna kI taraha kubar3I banA diyaa| usa
samaya vahIM AMgana meM dhUla ke Dhera para krIr3A karatI huI eka kanyA ko
dekhakara tApasa ne use pAsa bulAkara kahA-'arI reNuke! kyA tUM mujhe cAhatI
hai?' yoM kahakara use bIjore kA phala btaayaa| usane bhI pANigrahaNa-sUcaka
hAtha laMbA kiyaa| daridra jaise dhana ko kasakara pakar3a letA hai vaise hI
tApasa ne ukta bAlikA ko chAtI se pakar3a liyaa| ataH rAjA ne vidhi-pUrvaka
gAyeM dAna meM dekara ukta kanyA ko bhI sAtha meM de dii| rAjA kI zeSa 99
kanyAoM ke sAtha sAlI kA sneha-pUrNa riztA hone se tApasa ne apanI tapaHzakti se
unheM pahale kI taraha punaH suMdara banA diyaa| dhikkAra hai, mUr3hoM ke dvArA
isa prakAra ke tapovyaya ko! rAjakanyA abhI alpavayaska, bholI aura suMdara
thii| ataH tApasa use apane Azrama meM le gyaa| tapasvI ke ye dina zIghra
vyatIta ho gye| kanyA aba kAmadeva ke krIr3Avana ke samAna manohara yauvana ke
siMhadvAra para phuNcii| pArvatI ke sAtha jaise mahAdeva ne vidhivat pANigrahaNa
kiyA thA, vaise hI usa kanyA ke sAtha jamadagni tApasa ne agni kI sAkSI-pUrvaka
vivAha kiyaa| RtumatI hone para RSi ne usase kahA-'priye! maiM tere liye eka
caru maMtrita karake taiyAra kara rahA hUM! yadi tUM usakA bhakSaNa karegI to
usake prabhAva se tujhe brAhmaNoM meM zreSTha putra prAsa hogaa|' isa para
reNukA ne apane pati tApasa se kahA-'priya! hastinApura meM merI bahana
anaMtavIrya rAjA kI patnI hai; usake lie bhI eka maMtra sAdhita kSAtracaru
taiyAra kara diijie| tApasa 91

Page #114 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Jamdagni's marriage to Renuka and the birth of Parashurama, the taking of the
kingdom, Yogashastra Dvitiya Prakash, verse 27. He prepared a Brahmachru for his
wife and a Kshatracharu, imbued with mantras, for his sister-in-law to produce a
Kshatriya son. When both the Charus were ready through mantra-sadhana, the
tapaswi gave them to Renuka. Renuka thought, "I am here in this dense forest,
unprotected like a deer. It would be good if I had a Kshatriya son who could
protect me." Thinking thus, she consumed the Kshatracharu instead of the
Brahmachru and gave the Brahmachru to her sister. In due time, both had sons.
Renuka's son was named 'Rama' and her sister's son was named 'Kritavirya'.
Despite being the son of a Rishi, their son 'Rama', with his Kshatriya prowess,
grew stronger like a blazing fire in water at the hermitage of the tapaswi
Jamdagni. One day, a Vidyadhara came to the ashram. He had lost his celestial
knowledge due to suffering from dysentery. Rama, like a brother, served him with
medicine and other things. In return for his service, the Vidyadhara gave Rama
the Parshavi Vidya, the knowledge of the axe. He went into the forest called
Sharavana and practiced the Parshavi Vidya. Due to this, Rama later became known
as Parashurama.  Once, out of longing to meet her sister, Renuka asked her
husband's permission and went to Hastinapur. For lovers, nothing is far. Seeing
his sister-in-law, the charming Renuka, Anantvirya, showering her with love and
affection, caressed her delicate limbs and engaged in amorous play with her.
Truly, lust is very unruly. Just as Indra had experienced sexual pleasure with
Ahalya, so too did Anantvirya, according to his desire, experience sensual
pleasure with the tapaswi's wife. Just as Brihaspati had a son named Uththy from
his wife Mamata, so too did Anantvirya have a son from Renuka. Rishi Jamdagni
brought Renuka back home with her son. It is true that a man, engrossed in the
allure of a woman, often does not see her faults. Seeing Renuka with her son,
like a vine bearing fruit out of season, Parashurama became enraged. Without
hesitation, he quickly killed the child with his axe. Renuka had this matter
conveyed to Anantvirya through her sister. Hearing this, Anantvirya's anger
flared up like fire from the wind. The extremely powerful and strong Anantvirya,
the king, immediately arrived at Jamdagni's ashram. As soon as he arrived, like
a maddened elephant, he destroyed and corrupted Jamdagni's ashram, uprooting the
trees. He harassed the tapaswis there, taking away their cows, calves, and
everything else. And, like a Kesari lion, Anantvirya, the king, returned to
Hastinapur, dancing with joy. Hearing the lamentations of the distressed
tapaswis, the account of the injustice done to them and the struggle they had
endured, and knowing about the destruction of the ashram, Parashurama, filled
with rage, ran with his axe, like Yama himself. Parashurama, the son of
Jamdagni, eager to witness the battle of many warriors, chopped Anantvirya into
pieces with his terrifying axe, like wood. After the death of Anantvirya, the
leading citizens of the kingdom placed his son on the throne. He was still
young. One day, hearing from his mother about the death of his father and
receiving permission from his mother, he went and killed Jamdagni, like a
serpent, to avenge his father's death. Parashurama's anger became extremely
fierce at the news of his father's murder. He immediately reached Hastinapur and
with a single blow of his axe, he killed Kritavirya. What is impossible for
Yama? After the death of Kritavirya, Parashurama himself ascended the throne.
The kingdom always belongs to the strong; there is no traditional order. Just as
a deer flees in fear from a lion, so too did Kritavirya's pregnant wife, after
Parashurama took control of Hastinapur, reach the ashram of the tapaswis in fear
of Parashurama. The tapaswis kept her safe in a subterranean chamber, like a
treasure.  One day, the queen gave birth to a beautiful and healthy son at an
auspicious time, indicated by fourteen great dreams, in the subterranean
chamber. Because she was kept safe in the subterranean chamber, her mother named
him 'Subhumi'. Wherever there were Kshatriyas, Parashurama's axe became a living
embodiment of fiery anger, burning and killing thousands of Kshatriyas. One day,
Parashurama accidentally came to the ashram where Subhumi was being raised.
Wherever there is smoke, there is fire.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 jamadagni kA reNukA ke sAtha pANigrahaNa aura parazurAma kA janma, rAjya
grahaNa yogazAstra dvitIya prakAza zloka 27 ne apanI patnI ke lie brahmacaru
taiyAra kiyA aura apanI sAlI ke lie kSatriyaputra utpanna karane hetu eka
maMtrasAdhita kSAtracara taiyAra kiyaa| jaba donoM caru maMtrasAdhanA se taiyAra
ho gaye taba tApasa ne reNukA ko de diye| reNukA ne socA ki'maiM yahAM para isa
ghora jaMgala meM hiraNI ke samAna arakSita banI huI huuN| mere koI
kSatriyaputra ho to acchA; jo merI rakSA kara ske| yoM vicArakara usane
brahmacaru ke badale kSAtracarU kA bhakSaNa kara liyaa| aura brahmacaru apanI
bahana ko de diyaa| samaya para donoM ke putra hue| reNukA ke putra kA nAma
'rAma' rakhA aura usakI bahana ke putra kA nAma 'kRtavIrya' rakhA gyaa| pitA RSi
hone para bhI jala meM baDavAnala kI taraha tApasa jamadagni ke yahAM unakA
patra 'rAma' kSAtrateja ke sAtha kramaza: bar3hane lgaa| eka dina Azrama meM eka
vidyAdhara aayaa| vaha atisAra-roga se pIr3ita hone se AkAzagAmI vidyA bhUla
gayA thaa| rAma ne bhAI kI taraha use auSadhi Adi dekara usakI sevA kii| ataH
apanI sevA ke badale meM usane rAma ko parazusaMbaMdhI pArazavI nAmaka vidyA
dii| zaravana nAmaka vana meM aMdara jAkara usane pArazavI vidyA kI sAdhanA kii|
isake kAraNa bAda meM rAma parazurAma ke nAma se prasiddha huaa| eka bAra apanI
bahana se milane kI utkaMThA se reNukA pati se pUchakara hastinApura calI gyii|
premiyoM ke lie koI cIja dUra nahIM hai| apanI sAlI capalanetrA reNukA ko AyI
dekhakara lAr3a-pyAra karate hue anaMtavIrya ne usake komala aMgoM para hAtha
phirAte-phirAte usake sAtha kAmakrIr3A kii| sacamuca, kAma bar3A niraMkuza hai|
ahilyA ke sAtha iMdra ne jaise kAmasukha kA anubhava kiyA thA, vaise hI
anaMtavIrya ne tApasa patnI ke sAtha icchAnusAra viSayasukha-saMpadA kA anubhava
kiyaa| jaise mamatA-patnI se bRhaspati ko utathya nAmaka putra huA vaise hI
anaMtavIrya se reNukA ko putra huaa| RSi reNukA ko usa putra ke sAtha apane
ghara le aayaa| saca hai, strI ke moha meM Asakta manuSya prAyaH doSa nahIM
dekhtaa| akAla meM phalita latA ke samAna putra-sahita reNukA ko dekhakara
parazurAma ekadama kruddha ho utthaa| usane Ava dekhA na tAva, zIghra hI apane
parazu se usa bAlaka ko mAra ddaalaa| reNukA ne yaha bAta apanI bahina ke dvArA
anaMtavIrya ko khlaayii| yaha sunate hI havA se Aga kI taraha anaMtavIrya kA
krodha bhar3aka utthaa| atiparAkramI bAhubalI anaMtavIrya | rAjA phaurana
jamadagni ke Azrama meM A phuNcaa| yahAM Ate hI madonmatta hAthI kI taraha usane
jamadagni ke Azrama ko | per3oM ko ukhAr3akara use naSTa-bhraSTakara ddaalaa|
vahAM ke tApasoM ko parezAna karake unakI gAyeM bachar3e Adi saba chIna liye
aura kesarIsiMha kI taraha mastI se jhUmatA huA anaMtavIryanRpa hastinApura
lauttaa| duHkhita tapasviyoM kA ArtanAda aura unake sAtha huI jyAdatI va
saMgharSa kA kolAhala sunakara evaM Azrama ko ujAr3ane kI bAta jAnakara kruddha
parazurAma sAkSAt yamarAja ke samAna parazu lekara daudd'aa| aneka subhaToM kA
yuddha dekhane ko utsuka jamadagni-putra parazurAma ne bhayaMkara parazu
(kulhAr3e) se kASTha ke samAna anaMtavIrya ke Tukar3e-Tukar3e kara ddaale|
anaMtavIrya kI mRtyu ho jAne para prajA ke agragaNyoM ne usake patra ko
rAjagaddI para bitthaayaa| abhI vaha choTI umra kA hI thaa| apanI mAtA se eka
dina apane pitA kI matya kI bAta sunakara aura mAtA se AjJA prApta karake vaha
calA aura sarpa ke samAna jamadagni ko mArakara badalA liyaa| pitA kI hatyA kI
bAta se parazurAma kA krodha ati ugra ho gyaa| vaha tatkAla hastinApura pahuMcA
aura usane parazu ke eka hI prahAra se kRtavIrya kA khAtmA kara diyaa| yamarAja
ke lie kauna-sI bAta asAdhya hai? kRtavIrya ke marane ke bAda parazurAma svayaM
usakI gaddI para baitthaa| rAjya sadA parAkramAdhIna hotA hai; usameM
paraMparAgata krama nahIM hotaa|' jaise hiranI siMha se Darakara bhAgatI hai,
usI prakAra kRtavIrya kI garbhavatI patnI hastinApura ko apane kAbU meM kara
lene ke bAda parazurAma ke Dara se tApasoM ke eka Azrama meM phuNcii| tApasoM ne
use nidhAna kI taraha bhUmigRha (talaghara) meM rakhI aura krUra parazurAma se
usakI rakSA kii| eka dina rAnI ne talaghara meM caudaha mahAsvapna se sUcita
zubha samaya para eka suMdara svastha putra ko janma diyaa| sukha se bhUmigRha
meM rakhane ke kAraNa usakI mAtA ne usakA nAma 'subhUma' rkhaa| parazurAma kA
parazu jahAM-jahAM kSatriya the, vahAM-vahAM sAkSAt mUrtimAna kopAgni hokara
jalane lagA aura hajAroM kSatriyoM ko mArane lgaa| eka dina anAyAsa hI
parazurAma usa Azrama meM A car3hA, jahAM subhUma kA pAlana-poSaNa ho rahA thaa|
jahAM-jahAM dhuMA hotA hai, vahAM-vahAM agni 92

Page #115 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The attainment of hell by Subhūmachkravarti due to violence  It is definitely
stated in the Yogaśāstra, Second Light, verse 27, that due to violence,
Subhūmachkravarti will attain hell. By this justice, the Kshatriya indicator,
Parashurama's axe, began to burn there. Therefore, he immediately asked the
ascetics, "Is there any Kshatriya here?" They said, "We have become ascetics,
being Kshatriyas." Just as a mountain peak is made grassless by a wildfire, so
after that, Parashurama made the earth Kshatriya-less seven times with his fiery
anger. Therefore, Parashurama filled the shining platter, like the full-fledged
recipient of Yama, with the teeth of the destroyed Kshatriyas, equal to his
fulfilled aspirations. Once, he asked some fortune-tellers, "By whose hands will
I be killed?" The one who harbors enmity and opposition always has a constant
fear of death from his enemies. Those fortune-tellers said, "These teeth will
turn into kheer (rice pudding) upon the gaze of one, and the one who sits on
that throne and eats that kheer, he will be your killer in the future."
Parashurama built a charitable kitchen where anyone could come and receive
charity without any restrictions. He established a throne in front of it and
placed that platter filled with teeth on it.  Meanwhile, in the ashram, Subhūma,
nurtured and raised by the ascetics every day, grew day by day like a tree
planted in the courtyard. One day, a Vidyadhara named Meghnāth asked a fortune-
teller, "My daughter, Padmashri, has become wise. To whom should I give her?"
Then, after calculating, he said, "Make Subhūma, with his well-proportioned
shoulders, her husband." Meghnāth, seeing an auspicious time, performed the
wedding ceremony of his daughter with Subhūma and himself became his attendant.
Subhūma, ignorant of other places like a frog in a well, one day asked his
mother, "Mother! Is this the only world? Is there nothing beyond this?" His
mother said, "Son! The world has no end. Our ashram is in this world, in a space
as small as the space for a fly to land its foot. In this world, there is a
famous city called Hastinapur. There, your father, the mighty King Kritavīrya,
ruled. One day, Parashurama killed your father and took control of his kingdom.
He made this earth Kshatriya-less. It is because of his fear that we are living
here." Hearing this, Subhūma, who was angry at his enemy like Mars, immediately
went to Hastinapur. Truly, Kshatriya valor is invincible. He went straight to
Parashurama's charitable kitchen like a lion and sat on the throne. The teeth
instantly turned into kheer. The mighty Subhūma ate that kheer. Just as a lion
kills deer, so too, Meghnāth, the Vidyadhara, killed all the Brahmins who were
stationed there for protection, eager for war. Parashurama, with his beard and
hair fluttering, biting his lips in anger, came there quickly like the noose of
death, where Subhūma was. As soon as he arrived, he threw his axe at Subhūma.
But it became calm instantly, like fire in water. Seeing no other weapon at that
time, Subhūma also picked up that platter of teeth and started spinning it like
a wheel. It also instantly became a jewel-studded wheel. Truly, if one has
virtuous wealth, then what is impossible? Now, Subhūma had manifested as the
eighth Chakravarti. Therefore, he cut off Parashurama's head with that radiant
wheel, like a lotus. Just as Parashurama had made the earth Kshatriya-less seven
times, so too, Subhūma made the earth Brahmin-less twenty-one times. After that,
Subhūma, with his newly formed army, first conquered the east, liberating the
elephants, horses, chariots, and infantry of the former king, shedding a new
river of blood. After that, Subhūma, who adorned the earth with the severed
heads of many warriors, conquered the south like the lord of the south, and
achieved victory there. After achieving victory, he hoisted the victory flag
everywhere. Then, effortlessly, opening the Vaitalya cave, Subhūma, mighty like
Mount Meru, entered the Uttarakhand region of India to conquer the Mlechchas. In
this way, traveling in all four directions, Subhūma devoured the warriors and
the earth in the same way that two millstones grind grains. Similarly, he
scattered the bones of the warriors on the western coast as a sign of victory in
the west, as if seashells and conch shells were spread all around the coast. In
this way, Subhūma performed the six-fold practice. Continuously killing the
five-sense beings and constantly burning his inner self with the fire of fierce
meditation, Subhūma Chakravarti died and went to the seventh hell. 1. In another
story, there is a description of death while going to the seventh section. 93

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 hiMsA ke kAraNa subhUmacakravartI ko naraka kI prApti yogazAstra dvitIya
prakAza zloka 27 avazya hotI hai; isa nyAya se parazurAma kA kSatriya sUcaka
parazu vahAM jalane lgaa| ataH usane turaMta tApasoM se pUchA'kyA yahAM koI
kSatriya hai? unhoMne kahA-hama kSatriya hI tApasa bane haiN|' dAvAnala jaise
parvata zikharoM ko ghAsa rahita banA detA hai, vaise hI usake pazcAt parazurAma
ne apanI kopAgni se pRthvI ko sAta bAra niSkSatriya banA dii| ataH parazurAma ne
apanI pUrNa huI AzAoM ke samAna yamarAja ke pUrNapAtra ke samAna zobhAyamAna
thAla ko vinaSTa hue kSatriyoM kI dAr3hAoM se pUrNa bhara diyaa| eka bAra usane
kucha nimittajJoM se pUchA-'merA vadha kisake hAthoM se hogA? vaira-virodha
rakhane vAle ko zatruoM se apanI mRtyu kI sadA AzaMkA banI rahatI hai| una
nimittajJoM ne kahA- 'ye dAr3hAe~ jisakI najara girane para khIra ke rUpa meM
pariNata ho jAyeMgI aura usa siMhAsana para baiThakara jo usa khIra ko khAyegA;
vahI bhaviSya meM ApakA vadha kregaa|' parazurAma ne eka aisI dAnazAlA banAyI,
jisameM koI bhI vyakti berokaToka Akara dAna grahaNa kara ske| usake agrabhAga
meM siMhAsana sthApita karake usa para dAr3hAoM se bhare usa thAla ko rkhaa|
idhara Azrama meM pratidina tApasoM se lAlita-pAlita subhUma AMgana meM boye hue
per3a ke samAna dinoMdina bar3hane lgaa| eka dina meghanAda nAma ke vidyAdhara
ne kisI nimittajJa se pachA-'merI yaha kanyA padamazrI sayAnI ho gayI hai. ise
kisako dUM?' taba usane gaNita karake kahA-'suDaula kaMdhoM vAle subhUma ko hI
isakA vara bnaao|' meghanAda ne zubha muhUrta dekhakara |subhUma ke sAtha apanI
kanyA kA pANigrahaNa kara diyA aura svayaM usakA pAripArzvika sevaka banakara
rahane lgaa| kuMe~ ke meMDhaka ke samAna anya sthAnoM se anabhijJa subhUma ne
eka dina apanI mAtA se pUchA-'mAM! kyA loka itanA hI hai? isase Age kucha nahIM
hai?' mAtA ne kahA-'beTA! loka kA to aMta hI nahIM hai? hamArA Azrama to isa
loka ke bIca meM makkhI ke paira TikAne jitane sthAna meM hai| isa loka meM
prasiddha hastinApura nAmakA nagara hai| vahAM tere pitA mahAparAkramI kRtavIrya
rAjA rAjya karate the| eka dina parazurAma tere pitA ko mArakara apane rAjya
para svayaM adhikAra jamAkara baiTha gyaa| usane isa pRthvI ko kSatriya-rahita
banA dI hai| usake bhaya se hI to hama yahAM raha rahe haiN|' yaha sunate hI
maMgalagraha ke samAna vairI para krodha karatA huA subhUma tatkAla hastinApura
phuNcaa| sacamuca, kSatriyateja durddhara hotA hai| vaha siMha ke samAna sIdhA
parazurAma kI dAnazAlA meM pahuMcA aura siMhAsana para jA baitthaa| dAr3hAe~
kSaNa bhara meM khIra rUpa meM pariNata ho gyii| parAkramI subhUma usa khIra ko
khA gyaa| siMha jaise hiraNoM ko mAra DAlatA hai, vaise hI yuddha ke hetu udyata
jo bhI brAhmaNa vahAM rakSA ke lie tainAta the, unheM meghanAda vidyAdhara ne
mAra ddaale| dAr3hI aura keza pharapharA rahA parazurAma dAMtoM se hoTha kATatA
huA krodha se kAlapAza kI taraha drutagati se vahAM AyA; jahAM subhUma thaa| Ate
hI usane subhUma para apanA parazu pheNkaa| paraMtu jala meM agni ke samAna vaha
tatkAla zAMta ho gyaa| usa samaya dUsarA koI zastra na dekhakara subhUma ne bhI|
dAr3hAoM vAlA vaha thAla uThAyA aura use cakra kI taraha ghumAne lgaa| vaha bhI
tatkAla cakraratna bana gyaa| saca hai, puNyasaMpatti ho to kauna-sI cIja
asAdhya hai? aba subhUma AThaveM cakravartI ke rUpa meM prakaTa ho gayA thaa|
ataH usane | usa tejasvI cakra se kamala kI taraha parazurAma kA mastaka kATa
ddaalaa| jaise parazurAma ne pRthvI ko sAta bAra kSatriya rahita banA dI thI;
vaise hI subhUma ne 21 bAra pRthvI ko brAhmaNa rahita bnaayii| tatpazcAt
bhUtapUrva rAjA ke hAthI, ghor3e ratha aura paidala senA ko svAdhIna kara rakta
kI abhinava saritA bahAte hue navIna senA ke sAtha subhUma ne sarvaprathama
pUrva-dizA kA digvijaya kiyaa| tatpazcAt aneka subhaToM ke chinnamastakoM se
pRthvI ko suzobhita karane vAle subhUma ne dakSiNadizA-pati kI taraha
dakSiNadizA meM vijaya-abhiyAna karake vahAM bhI vijaya prApta kii| vijaya
prApta karake usane vahAM sarvatra vijaya patAkA phaharA dii| phira anAyAsa hI
vaitADhya guphA ko ughAr3akara meruparvata ke samAna parAkramI subhUma ne
mlecchoM ko jItane ke lie bhArata ke uttarAkhaMDa meM praveza kiyaa| isa taraha
cAroM dizAoM meM bhramaNa karate hue subhUma ne subhaToM tathA pRthvI kA usI
taraha cara-carakara diyA. jaise cakkI ke do pATa canoM ko kara dete haiN| isI
prakAra usane pazcima dizA kI vijaya cihna svarUpa subhaToM kI haDDiyoM ko
pazcimI samudra taTa para aise bikhera dI, mAno samudrataTa para cAroM ora sIpa
aura zaMkha phaile hoN| isa prakAra subhUma ne chaha khaMDoM kI sAdhanA kii|
niraMtara paMcendriyajIvoM kI hatyA karate hue evaM raudradhyAna rUpI agni se
aMtarAtmA ko satata jalAte hue subhUma cakravartI marakara sAtavIM narakabhUmi
meM gyaa|' 1. anya kathA meM sAtavAM khaMDa jitane jAte hue mRtyu kA varNana
hai| 93

Page #116 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Story of Brahmadutt Chakravarti From the Yogashastra, Second Illumination,
Verse 27:  In ancient times, in the city of Saket, there was a king named
Chandravamsak. He had a son named Munichandra, who had a charming, moon-like
appearance. Detached from the burdens of worldly pleasures, he took initiation
(diksha) from Sagarchandramuni. While following the venerable path of
renunciation, he once went on a journey with his guru to another region. On the
way, he went to a village for alms, but by the time he returned, the caravan had
already left. Separated from the caravan, he began to wander alone in the
forest, like a deer separated from the herd. Afflicted by hunger and thirst, he
fell ill there. Four cowherds then took care of him like kinsmen. To repay their
kindness, the monk gave them spiritual teachings. Indeed, noble people show
compassion even to those who have harmed them, so why not to their benefactors?
Hearing the teachings, the cowherds became detached from the world and took
initiation from the monk. The four of them appeared as if the four types of
dharma had taken embodied form. Two of them diligently practiced the dharma,
while the other two despised it. "Ah, how strange the ways of dharma are!" Those
two monks who criticized dharma also eventually went to the celestial realm
after completing their lifespan. "Indeed, even a single day's penance can surely
take the soul to heaven."  After their celestial sojourn, they were born as twin
sons to a maidservant named Jayavanti, belonging to the Shandilya Brahmin family
in the city of Dashpur. As they grew up, they started taking care of the fields
as per their father's instructions, as is the duty of servant-born sons. One
night, a black snake emerged from a hole in the field where they were sleeping
and bit one of them, just like the brother of Yama (the god of death). When the
other brother woke up and tried to find the snake, the wicked snake suddenly
attacked and bit him as well. There was no one there to remove the poison, so
the poor fellows succumbed to death right there. They departed from this world
just as they had arrived. Cursed is the fruitless birth in this world.  After
death, they were born as a pair of deer in the meadows of the Kalinjara
mountain. One day, while the two deer were grazing together affectionately, a
hunter suddenly shot them both with a single arrow. Dying there, they were then
born as a pair of swans in the womb of a royal swan in the Ganga river. Once, as
the two swans were playing in a lake, a water predator caught them and twisted
their necks, killing them. Indeed, this is the fate of the unrighteous.  After
that, they were born as the two sons, named Chitra and Sambhuti, of the wealthy
Matanga chieftain Bhutadatta in Varanasi. Here too, they were deeply attached to
each other, inseparable like nails and flesh.  At that time, King Shankha was
ruling in Varanasi, and his prime minister was the renowned Namuchi. One day,
the king handed over Namuchi to the Chandala (outcaste) Bhutadatta to be
executed for some grave offense. The king said, "If you secretly educate my two
sons in the underground chamber, I will protect you as my own kinsman." Namuchi
accepted the Matanga's words, for a person seeking livelihood will do anything.
Namuchi then began teaching various disciplines to Chitra and Sambhuti.
Meanwhile, he also developed an inappropriate relationship with the wife of
Matanga chieftain Bhutadatta. When Bhutadatta learned of this, he was enraged
and prepared to kill him. But the Matanga sons secretly helped Namuchi escape to
save his life. Fleeing from there, Namuchi went to Hastinapura and became the
minister of Sanatkumara Chakravarti.  Meanwhile, as Chitra and Sambhuti grew up,
they began to roam the earth freely, like the Ashwini Kumara devas.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 brahmadatta cakravartI kI kathA yogazAstra dvitIya prakAza zloka 27 brahmadatta
cakravatI kI kathA : prAcInakAla meM sAketa nagara meM caMdrAvataMsaka rAjA
rAjya karatA thaa| usake caMdra-samAna manohara AkRti vAlA municaMdra nAma kA
eka putra thaa| bhAravAhI jaise bhAra se ghabarAtA hai, vaise hI kAmabhogoM se
virakta hokara usane sAgaracaMdra muni ke pAsa dIkSA aMgIkAra kii| jagatpUjanIya
pravrajyA kA pAlana karate hue eka bAra usane apane guru ke sAtha dezAMtara meM
vicaraNa karane hetu vihAra kiyaa| mArga meM vaha eka gAMva meM bhikSA ke lie
gyaa| paraMtu vaha lauTakara AyA taba taka sArtha vahAM se cala paDA thaa| vaha
sArtha se alaga ho gyaa| ataH sArthabhraSTa hirana ke samAna vaha akelA hI aTavI
meM bhramaNa karane lgaa| bhUkha-pyAsa se parezAna hokara vaha vahAM bImAra
par3a gyaa| vahIM cAra gvAloM ne bAMdhava kI taraha usakI sevA kii| gvAloM ke
isa upakAra kA badalA cukAne kI dRSTi se muni ne unheM dharmopadeza diyaa| saca
hai, sajjanapuruSa apakAra karane vAle para bhI dayA karate haiM to upakArI para
kyoM na kareMge? upadeza sunakara unheM saMsAra se virakti huI aura muni |se
unhoMne dIkSA aMgIkAra kii| muni bane hue ve cAroM aise pratIta hote the, mAno
cAra prakAra kA dharma hI mUrtimAna ho| unameM se do to samyaka prakAra se
cAritra kI ArAdhanA karate the. paraMta zeSa do dharma se ghaNA karate the| 'jI
bar3I vicitra hotI hai|' dharma kI niMdA karane vAle ve donoM sAdhu bhI eka dina
Ayu pUrNa kara devaloka meM gye| 'saca hai, | eka dina ke tapa se bhI jIva
avazya svarga meM calA jAtA hai|' devaloka se AyuSya pUrNa kara ve donoM
dazapura nagara meM | zAMDilya brAhmaNa kI jayavaMtI nAma kI dAsI ke garbha se
yugala putra rUpa meM paidA hue| dhIre-dhIre bar3e hue| yauvana avasthA prApta
kii| sayAne hone para ve donoM pitA kI AjJAnusAra kheta kI rakhavAlI karane lge|
dAsI-putroM ko to aisA hI kArya | sauMpA jAtA hai| eka dina ve donoM kheta meM
soye hue the ki rAta ko acAnaka eka kAlA sarpa bar3a ke khokhale meM nikalA |
aura yamarAjA ke sahodara ke samAna usane donoM meM se eka ko Dasa liyaa| dUsare
bhAI ko jAgane para patA lagA to vaha usa sarpa ko DhUMDhane ke lie vahIM
idhara-udhara ghUma rahA thA ki acAnaka zatru kI taraha jhapaTakara usa duSTa
sarpa ne tatkAla hI dUsare bhAI ko bhI Dasa liyaa| usa samaya vahAM unake jahara
utArane vAlA koI nahIM thaa| isa kAraNa ve becAre vahIM para kAla-kavalita ho
gye| ve donoM saMsAra meM jaise Aye the, vaise hI cale gye| saMsAra meM aise
niSphala janma vAle ko dhikkAra hai| mRtyu ke bAda ve donoM kAliMjara parvata ke
maidAna meM eka hiraNI ke garbha se jor3e se mRga rUpa meM paidA hue; aura sAtha
hI sAtha bar3hane lge| eka dina donoM hirana prema se sAtha-sAtha cara rahe the
ki acAnaka kisI zikArI ne eka hI bANa se una donoM ko bIMdha ddaalaa| ataH donoM
vahIM marakara gaMgA nadI meM eka rAjahaMsI ke garbha se parva-janmoM kI taraha
yugala haMsa-rUpa meM utpanna hue| eka bAra ve donoM haMsa eka jalAzaya meM
krIr3A kara rahe the ki eka jala pAradhi ne unheM jala meM hI pakar3A aura unakI
gardana maror3akara mAra ddaalaa| vAstava meM dharmahIna kI gati aisI hI hotI
hai| marakara una donoM ne vArANasI meM pracura dhanasamRddha mAtaMgAdhipati
bhUtadatta ke yahAM putra rUpa meM janma liyaa| una donoM kA nAma citra aura
saMbhUti rakhA gyaa| yahAM bhI ve donoM paraspara snehI the| nakha aura mAMsa ke
abhinna saMbaMdha kI taraha ve donoM eka dUsare se kabhI alaga nahIM hote the||
vArANasI meM usa samaya zaMkha rAjA rAjya karatA thaa| usakA pradhAnamaMtrI
lokaprasiddha namuci thaa| eka dina zaMkha rAjA ne namuci ko kisI ghora aparAdha
ke kAraNa vadha karane hetu bhUtadatta cAMDAla ko sauNpaa| usane namuci se
kahA-'yadi tuma mere donoM putroM ko gupta rUpa se bhUmigRha (talaghara) meM
rahakara par3hA doge to maiM tumheM apane baMdhu ke samAna mAnakara tumhArI
rakSA kruuNgaa| namuci ne mAtaMga ke vacana ko svIkAra kiyA, kyoMki jIvitArthI
manuSya ke lie aisI koI bAta nahIM, jise vaha na kre|' aba namuci citra aura
saMbhUti donoM ko aneka prakAra kI vidyAe~ par3hAne lgaa| isI daramyAna
mAtaMgAdhipati kI patnI se usakA anucita saMbadha ho gyaa| vaha usake sAtha
anurakta hokara ratikrIr3A karane lgaa| bhUtadatta ko jaba yaha patA calA to
vaha use mArane ke lie udyata huaa| 'apanI patnI ke sAtha jArakarma durAcAra
kauna sahanakara sakatA hai? mAtaMga-putroM ko yaha mAlUma par3A to unhoMne
namuci ko cupake se vahAM se bhagAyA aura use prANarakSA rUpa dakSiNA dii| vahAM
se bhAgakara namuci hastinApura meM A gyaa| vahAM vaha sanatkumAracakrI kA
maMtrI bana gyaa| idhara yuvAvasthA Ane para citra aura saMbhUti azvinIkumAra
devoM kI taraha bekhaTake bhUmaMDala meM bhramaNa karane lge| ve donoM hA-hA,
hU-hU deva-gaMdhoM 94

Page #117 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Story of Brahmadatta Chakri  The two brothers played music that was sweeter
than the verses of the Yogashastra's second chapter. They outperformed even
Narada in playing the tambura and veena. When they played the veena with the
seven clear notes mentioned in the musical compositions, even the Kinnaras
(celestial musicians) appeared insignificant before them. And when the two with
deep voices played the mridanga, it evoked the memory of Krishna carrying the
bone-cage-like instrument of the demon Mura.  The dramas they enacted were such
that even Mahadeva (Shiva), Urvashi, Rambha, Muni, Keshi, Tilottama and others
were unaware of. It seemed as if these two were the embodiment of the entire
Gandharva-vidya (the art of music) and the second avatars of Vishwakarma.
Indeed, their music, which was so vividly expressed, how could it not captivate
the minds of all?  Once, during a festival of love in the city, the skilled
musical groups of the city passed by the abodes of Chitra and Sambhuti. Many
citizens, men and women, attracted by their songs, gathered around them in herds
like deer. Seeing this, some citizens went to the king and complained, "Two
Matangas (outcasts) have come to the city. By singing and playing beautiful
songs, they are attracting people towards themselves and corrupting everyone."
Hearing this, the king immediately summoned the chief of police and ordered,
"Beware! These two should never be allowed in the city." Due to this royal
decree, the two then started residing in Varanasi.  One day, there was a
festival in the city. On that day, these two restless Matanga brothers violated
the king's order and entered the city, roaming around like elephants in the city
square. Wearing burqas and disguised as thieves, the two Matanga sons were
secretly watching the festival in the city. Just as one jackal calls out on
hearing the voice of another jackal, these two also started singing sweetly on
hearing the voices of the city's musicians.  Hearing their melodious songs that
were pleasing to the ears, the young men of the city started circling around
them like bees around a beehive. People tried to find out who they were and
pulled off their burqas. Seeing them, the people exclaimed, "Ah, these are the
same two Chandala (outcasts)! Villains, stand still!" Saying this, the people
pounced on them. Many beat them with sticks, stones, etc. and severely
humiliated them.  Bowing their heads in shame, the two silently left the city,
just as dogs slink away with their tails between their legs. A large crowd of
people followed them. At that time, they appeared as if the entire army had
pounced on a small rabbit.  Stumbling at every step and running with great
difficulty, they finally reached the garden called Gambhira. There, the two
brothers contemplated, "Just as milk contaminated by a snake becomes impure,
similarly, our skills, beauty, etc. have become accursed due to being tainted by
the Chandala caste. Not only have our merits not been appreciated, but we have
also been subjected to calamity. Therefore, to bear such cowardice would only
lead to further misery. Since art, charm, and beauty are associated with the
body, and the body has now become a home of misfortune, it should be discarded
quickly like a straw."  Resolving thus, the two were prepared to give up their
lives. At that time, they were walking towards the south, as if going to
confront death. As they walked on, they saw a mountain. Climbing up, they looked
down and saw something the size of a baby elephant or boar. Therefore, they
decided to jump off this mountain to commit suicide by falling (Bhrigupath).
However, as they were climbing the mountain, they encountered a great sage who
was like a mobile mountain of virtues. Seeing the sage on the mountain peak,
like clouds in the rainy season, the two were freed from their sorrow and
anguish. Tears of joy gushed from their eyes, as if they were renouncing their
past sorrows.  They fell at the lotus feet of the revered sage. The sage, after
deep contemplation, asked them, "My children, who are you? How and why have you
come here?"  They narrated their entire story. The sage said to them, "My
children, while the destruction of the body can certainly be achieved through
Bhrigupath, the elimination of the inauspicious karmas accumulated over hundreds
of births cannot be accomplished that way. If you wish to renounce this body,
then attain the fruit of the body and worship the great causes of liberation and
heaven, i.e., austerities. That alone will purify you both physically and
spiritually."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 brahmadatta cakrI kI kathA yogazAstra dvitIya prakAza zloka 27 se bhI
bar3hakara madhura gIta gAne lge| aura taMbUrA tathA vINA bajAne meM nArada se
bhI bAjI mArane lge| gIta-prabaMdha meM ullikhita spaSTa sAta svaroM se jaba ve
vINA bajAte the, taba kinnaradeva bhI unake sAmane nagaNya lagate the| aura
dhIraghoSa vAle ve donoM jaba mRdaMga bajAte the, taba muradaitya ke
asthipaMjaramaya vAdya ko lie hue kRSNa kA smaraNa ho AtA thaa| nATaka bhI ve
aisA karate the, jisase mahAdeva (ziva) urvazI, raMbhA, muMja, kezI, tilottamA
Adi bhI anabhijJa the| aisA mAlUma hotA thA, mAno ye donoM gAMdharvavidyA ke
sarvasva aura vizvakarmA ke dUsare avatAra hoN| sacamuca, pratyakSa meM
abhivyakta hone vAlA unakA saMgIta bhalA kisake mana ko haraNa nahIM karatA? eka
bAra usa nagara meM madana-mahotsava ho rahA thaa| taba nagara kI saMgItapravINa
suMdara gItamaMDaliyA~ citra aura saMbhUti ke nikaTa se gujrii| bahuta se
nAgarika nara nArI inake gItoM se AkarSita hokara hiraNoM ke samAna jhuMDa ke
jhuMDa A-Akara inake pAsa jamA hone lge| yaha dekhakara kucha nAgarikoM ne rAjA
se jAkara yaha zikAyata kI, ki 'nagara ke bAhara do mAtaMga Aye hue haiN|
suMdara gIta gA-bajAkara apanI ora AkarSita kara lete hai aura apanI taraha
sabhI ko dUSita kara rahe haiN| 'yaha sunate hI rAjA ne nagara ke bar3e kotavAla
ko ulAhanA dete hue AjJA dI-'khabaradAra! ye donoM nagara meM kadApi na hone
paaye|' isa rAjAjJA ke kAraNa ve donoM tabhI se vArANasI ke bAraha rahane lge|
nagarI meM eka dina kaumadIsava haa| usa dina ina donoM caMcalendriya
mAtaMgapatroM ne rAjAjJA kA ullaMghana kara hAthI ke gaMDasthala meM bhramaNa kI
taraha nagara meM praveza kiyaa| sAre zarIra para burkA DAle hue donoM
mAtaMgaputra veSa badalakara coroM kI bhAMti gupacupa utsava dekhate hue nagara
meM ghUma rahe the| jaise eka siyAra kI AvAja sunakara dUsarA siyAra bola uThatA
hai, vaise hI nagara ke saMgItajJoM kA svara sunakara ye donoM bhI atyaMta
madhurakaMTha se gIta gAne lge| 'bhavitavyatA kA ullaMghana nahIM kiyA jA
sktaa|' unake karNapriya madhura gIta sunakara nagara ke yuvaka isa prakAra
maMDarAne lage, jaise madhumakkhiyAM apane chatte para maMDarAtI hai| logoM ne
yaha jAnane ke lie ki ye kauna hai? unakA burkA khiiNcaa| burkA khIMcate hI
unheM dekhakara loga bola uThe-'are ye to ve hI donoM cAMDAla hai! duSTo! khaDe
raho;' yoM kahakara loga ekadama una para TUTa pdd'e| kaiyoM ne lAThI, Dhele,
pattharoM Adi se unheM mArA-pITA aura unakA bhayaMkara apamAna kiyaa| isase ve
donoM gardana jhukAe zarmindA hokara usI taraha nagarI se bAhara nikala gaye,
jaise kutte gardana nIcI kiye ghara se cale jAte haiN| eka aura janatA kI vizAla
bhIr3a unake pIche lagI thI; dUsarI ora, ve donoM hI the| usa samaya ve aise
lagate the, mAno eka choTe-se kharagoza para sArI senA TUTa par3I ho| kadama-
kadama para Thokara khAte hue bhAgate-daur3ate bar3I kaThinatA se ve gaMbhIra
nAmaka udyAna meM phuNce| vahAM pahuMcakara donoM bhAiyoM ne vicAra kiyA-'sarpa
dvArA sUMghA huA dUdha jaise dUSita ho jAtA hai, vaise hI kharAba | (cAMDAla)
jAti se dUSita hone ke kAraNa aba hamAre kalA-kauzala, rUpa Adi ko dhikkAra hai|
hamAre guNoM se upakRta hokara hamArI kadra karanA to dUra rahA; ulTe hama para
kahara barasAkara hamArA apakAra kiyA jAtA hai| ataH aisI kAyaratA kI zAMti
dhAraNa karane se to viSamatA utpanna hotI hai| kalA, lAvaNya aura rUpa ye saba
zarIra ke sAtha jur3e hue haiM aura jaba zarIra hI anartha kA ghara ho gayA hai,
taba use tinake kI taraha jhaTapaTa chor3a denA caahie| yoM nizcaya karake ve
donoM prANa-tyAga karane ko udyata hue| usa samaya ve donoM dakSiNa-dizA meM usI
taraha cale jA rahe the, mAno mRtyu se sAkSAtkAra karane jA rahe hoN| Age
calate-calate unhoMne eka parvata dekhaa| usa para car3hakara nIce dekhA to
unheM hAthI sUara se bacce jitanA najara AtA thaa| ataH unhoMne isI parvata se
kUdakara AtmahatyA karane kI icchA se bhRgupAta karane kI tthaanii| kintu
parvata para car3hate samaya jaMgama guNaparvata sarIkhe eka mahAmuni mile|
parvata ke zikhara para varSARtu ke bAdaloM ke samAna muni ko dekhakara ve donoM
zoka-saMtApa se mukta hue| unakI AMkhoM se harSAzru umar3a par3e, mAno azrutyAga
ke bahAne ve pUrvaduHkhoM kA tyAga kara rahe the| ve donoM una munivara ke
caraNa-kamaloM meM aise gira par3e, jaise bhauMrA kamala para giratA hai| muni
ne dhyAna pUrNa karake unase pUchA-'vatsa! tuma kauna ho? yahAM kaise aura kyoM
Aye ho?' unhoMne AdyopAMta apanI sArI rAmakahAnI sunaayii| muni ne unase
kahA-'vatsa, bhRgupAta karane se zarIra kA vinAza jarUra kiyA jA sakatA hai;
magara saiMkar3oM janmoM meM upArjita azubha karmoM kA vinAza nhiiN| yadi tumheM
isa zarIra kA tyAga karanA hai to phira zarIra kA phala prApta karo aura mokSa
evaM svarga Adi ke mahAn kAraNa rUpa tapa kI ArAdhanA kro| vahI tumheM zArIrika
aura 95

Page #118 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Story of Brahmadatt Chakra  The second light of Yoga Shastra, verse 27,
says, "It will liberate one from all mental sorrows." Thus, by drinking the
nectar of the teachings, those two pure-hearted youths accepted the path of the
saints from the said sage.  Becoming monks, they studied the scriptures deeply
and gradually became learned. "What cannot be achieved by a wise person who
adopts something with respect?" They performed extremely rigorous austerities
like Shashtha-Ashtama (Bela-Tela), etc., and not only weakened their past karma
but also made their bodies thin. While wandering from village to village and
from city to city, they once arrived in Hastinapur. There, they resided in a
garden called Ruchir and began to perform difficult austerities. "For a peaceful
mind, even a place of enjoyment becomes a place of austerity."  One day,
Sambhutimuni was going through the royal road for the sake of taking food after
the completion of his monthly fast (Masakshapan), when suddenly he was seen by
the minister Namuchi. As soon as he saw him, he recognized him and thought,
"This is the same Matangputra. Maybe he will expose me in front of someone." "A
sinner is always suspicious." "Before he reveals my secret to anyone here, I
will get him out of the city." Thinking this, the minister quietly called a
soldier and entrusted him with this task. Even on his former benefactor who gave
him life, the wicked Namuchi started to wreak havoc. It is true, "A favor done
to a wicked person is like giving milk to a snake." Just as sticks fall on
grains of food, so did sticks fall on Sambhutimuni. Therefore, the muni left
that place far away without taking alms. Although he left the city, those who
were beating him continued to beat him. When the muni sat down in a place with
confidence, smoke of the color of clouds came out of his mouth, which spread all
around, as if clouds had gathered in the sky untimely. Gradually, the smoke
moved rapidly towards the sky and took the form of a blazing fire. Now it seemed
as if a blaze was coming out of the electric sphere. Frightened and curious
citizens, in order to please Muni Sambhutimuni, who was more radiant than Vishnu
Kumar, started coming there in groups.  King Sanatkumar also came there. Because
a wise person tries to extinguish the fire from where it originates. The king
bowed to the muni and said, "O Bhagavan! Is it right for you to do this? Even
after being scorched by the rays of the sun, the Chandrakantamani never produces
fire. All these have offended you. This has made you angry. While churning the
Kshir-Samudra, did not the poison of Kal-Kuta come out of it? The anger of
righteous people is not like the affection of wicked people. Even if it happens,
it does not last long. Even if it lasts for a long time, it does not bear
fruitful results. What can we say to a wise person like you in this matter?
Still, I request you, O Nath! Give up this wicked anger. A great soul like you
has the same vision for both the offender and the benefactor." When Chitramuni
knew this, he also arrived there to pacify Shri Sambhutimuni. As soon as he
heard the scriptural words, sweet like the words of a good elephant, his anger
subsided just as the mountain fire is extinguished by the rain. Freed from the
darkness of great anger, the great sage Sambhutimuni became happy like the full
moon in an instant. Therefore, the crowd bowed to him, apologized, and returned
to their places. Chitramuni and Sambhutimuni reached the garden from there.
There, both the monks started repenting, "Wandering from house to house for food
causes great sorrow, but this body runs only on the nourishment of food. But
what is the need of this body and food for yogis?" Thus, having decided in their
minds, both the monks accepted the four-fold food renunciation (Santhara) in the
form of a fast unto death (Santhara) after performing Sanlekhana.  One day, the
king thought, "I am the protector of the land. Who has insulted the saints in my
kingdom by harassing them in this way? I should find out." From a secret agent,
the king found out that these deeds were done by the minister Namuchi. "He who
does not worship the worshipable is called a sinner, then how much more should
he be called a terrible sinner who kills a worshipable person?" Therefore, at
the command of the Chakravarti, the guards arrested the minister Namuchi and
presented him before the king.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 brahmadatta cakrI kI kathA yogazAstra dvitIya prakAza zloka 27 mAnasika sabhI
duHkhoM se mukta kara skegaa|' isa prakAra upadezAmRta ke pAna se una donoM
nirmalahRdaya yuvakoM ne ukta munivara ke pAsa sAdhudharma aMgIkAra kiyaa| _
muni banakara zAstroM kA gaMbhIra adhyayana kara ke ve kramazaH gItArtha hue|
'caturapuruSa jisa bAta ko Adara pUrvaka apanA lete haiM, usase kyA nahIM prApta
kara skte|' SaSTha-aSThama, (belA-telA) Adi atyaMta kaThora tapasyAe~ karake
unhoMne pUrvakarmoM ko kSINa karane ke sAtha-sAtha zarIra ko bhI kRza kara
ddaalaa| eka gA~va se dUsare gA~va aura eka nagara se dUsare nagara meM vicaraNa
karate hue eka bAra ve donoM hastinApura meM pdhaareN| vahAM ve donoM rucira
nAma ke udyAna meM nivAsa kara duSkara tapa kI ArAdhanA karane lge| 'zAMtacitta
vyakti ke lie bhogabhUmi bhI tapobhUmi bana jAtI hai| eka dina saMbhUtimuni
mAsakSapaNa (mAsika tapa) ke pAraNe hetu bhikSATana karate hue rAjamArga se
hokara jA rahe the, ki acAnaka namucimaMtrI ne unheM dekhaa| aura dekhate hI
pahacAna kara socA-'yaha to vahI mAtaMgaputra hai| zAyada kisI ke sAmane merI
pola na khola de| 'pApI hamezA zaMkAzIla hotA hai|' yaha merI gupta bAta yahAM
kisI ke sAmane prakaTa na kara de, usase pahale hI maiM ise nagara se bAhara
nikAla duuN| yoM vicAra karake maMtrI ne eka sainika ko cupacApa bulAkara yaha
kArya sauNpaa| jIvanadAna dene vAle apane pUrva upakArI para bhI duSTa namuci
kahara barasAne lgaa| saca hai. durjana para kiyA gayA upakAra sarpa ko dUdha
pilAne ke samAna hI hai|' anAja ke dAnoM para jaise DaMDe par3ate jAte haiM,
vaise saMbhUti muni para tar3Atar3a DaMDe par3ane lge| ataH muni bhikSA liye
binA hI usa sthAna se bahuta dUra Age nikala gye| yadyapi ve nagara ke bAhara
nikala gye| phira bhI pITane vAle unheM pITate hI rhe| mani jaba Azvasta hokara
eka jagaha baiThe to unake maMha se bAdala ke raMga kA-sA dhuMA nikalA, jo cAroM
aura phailatA huA aisA lagatA thA, mAno asamaya meM hI AkAza meM bAdala chAye
hoN| dhIre-dhIre dhuMe ne AkAza kI ora tejI se Age bar3hate hue tejolezyA kA
rUpa le liyaa| aba vaha aisA mAlUma hotA thA mAno vidyunmaNDala se jvAlAjAla
nikala rhaa| bhayabhIta aura kutUhalapriya nAgarika, viSNukumAra se bhI adhika
tejolezyAdhArI muni saMbhUti ko prasanna karane ke lie dala ke dala vahAM para
Ane lge| rAjA sanatkumAra bhI vahAM para aayaa| kyoMki samajhadAra vyakti jahAM
se agni prakaTa hotI hai, vahIM se use bujhAne kA prayatna karatA hai| rAjA ne
muni ko namaskAra kara kahA-'bhagavan! kyA aisA karanA Apake lie ucita hai?
sUryakiraNoM se tape hue hone para bhI caMdrakAMtamaNi se kabhI Aga paidA nahIM
hotii| ina sabhI ne ApakA aparAdha kiyA hai| isase Apako krodha utpanna huA hai|
kSIra-samudra kA maMthana karate samaya kyA kAla-kUTa viSa usake aMdara se
prApta nahIM hotaa| sajjanapuruSoM kA krodha bhI durjana ke sneha ke samAna
nahIM hotaa| kadAcit ho bhI jAya, to bhI cirakAla taka nahIM ttiktaa| yadi
cirakAla taka Tika bhI jAye to bhI tathArUpa phaladAyI nahIM bntaa| isa viSaya
meM Apa sarIkhe vicakSaNa se hama kyA kaheM? phira bhI Apase prArthanA karatA
hU~ ki nAtha! Apa isa adhamocita krodha kA tyAga kreN| Apa sarIkhe mahAnubhAva
kI to apakArI aura upakArI para samAnadRSTi hotI hai|' citramuni ne jaba yaha
bAta jAnI to zrIsaMbhUtimuni ko zAMta karane ke lie vaha bhI vahAM A phuNce|
bhadra hAthI kI taraha madhuravacanoM se zAstrAnukUla bAta sunate hI unakA kopa
usI taraha zAMta ho gayA, jisa taraha meghavRSTi se parvatIya dAvAnala zAMta ho
jAtA hai| mahAkopa rUpI aMdhakAra se mukta bane mahAmuni saMbhUti kSaNabhara meM
pUrNimA ke caMdra ke samAna prasanna ho gye| ataH janasamUha unheM vaMdana
karake kSamAyAcanA karatA huA apane sthAna ko lauTa gyaa| citramuni aura
saMbhUtimuni vahAM se udyAna meM phuNce| vahAM ve donoM muni pazcAttApa karane
lage-'AhAra ke lie ghara-ghara ghUmane se mahAduHkha hotA hai, kiMtu yaha zarIra
AhAra ke poSaNa se hI calatA hai| magara yogiyoM ko isa zarIra aura AhAra kI kyA
AvazyakatA hai?' isa prakAra mana meM nizcaya karake donoM muniyoM ne saMlekhanA
pUrvaka caturvidha-AhAratyAga rUpa AmaraNa anazana (saMthArA) svIkAra kiyaa|
_eka dina rAjA ne socA- "maiM bhUmi kA paripAlaka huuN| mere rAjya meM isa
prakAra se sAdhuoM ko parezAna karake kisane apamAnita kiyA? isakA patA lagAnA
caahie|' kisI guptacara se rAjA ko patA lagA ki maMtrI namuci ke ye kAranAme
haiN| jo pUjanIya kI pUjA nahIM karatA, vaha pApI kahalAtA hai, to jo pUjanIya
puruSa ko mAratA hai, use kitanA bhayaMkara pApI kahanA cAhie?' ataH ArakSakoM
ne cakravartI ke Adeza se namuci maMtrI ko giraphtAra karake rAjA ke sAmane peza
kiyaa| 96

Page #119 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Story of Brahmadutta Chakra  Chapter 2 of the Yagshastra, Second Light,
Verse 27:  With pure intentions, the king paraded the offending minister
throughout the city, so that no one else would dare to trouble a Sadhu in such a
manner. Finally, the Chakravarti bowed his head, adorned with a jeweled crown,
at the feet of both Munis. At that moment, it seemed as if the king was
showering the earth with water from the crown jewel on his head. With their
mouths covered by a cloth, the Munis raised their right hands and blessed the
king with Dharma-laabh, praising his virtue.  The king, with humility,
requested, "Munivar! The offender should receive the fruits of his actions
(duष्कर्म)." Pointing towards Namuchi, the emperor, Sanatkumar, requested the
Munis to forgive him. The Munis instructed them to forgive him. Thus, despite
being worthy of death, the king, following the Guru's command, released him.
Just as a serpent cannot stay near a Garuda, similarly, Namuchi, the Chandala
who had committed a heinous act, was banished from the city and the country,
living a life like a dead man, separated from Sanatkumar and the Muni.  Sunanda,
the chief queen of Chakravarti Sanatkumar, inspired by devotion, went to pay her
respects to both Munis, accompanied by her 64,000 co-wives. While paying her
respects to Sambhuti Muni, the noble woman bowed down, touching her hair to his
lotus feet. At that moment, it seemed as if she was making the earth moon-like.
As soon as the touch of her delicate hair reached Sambhuti Muni, he felt a
thrill. Truly, "Kamadeva always seeks an opening." When the queen, seeking their
permission, expressed her desire to visit the inner palace, Sambhuti Muni,
defeated by desire, made a resolution (duष्कल्प) in his mind: "If my arduous
penance bears any fruit, let it be that I become the husband of such a noble
woman in my next birth." At that moment, Chitramuni stopped him, saying,
"Brother! Why do you desire such a base fruit from your penance, which is meant
for liberation? Why are you placing a jewel worthy of being worn on your head on
the ground? Abandon this resolution (नियाणे) born out of attachment. Such a
thought does not seem appropriate for a great Muni like you. Say 'मिच्छा मि
दुक्कडं' (May this wrong deed of mine be false) right now." Even though
Chitramuni tried to stop him, Sambhuti Muni did not abandon his resolution.
Indeed, the desire for worldly pleasures is very strong.  After performing the
Anashan (fasting) with proper rituals, both Munis completed their lifespan and
were born as Devas in a beautiful celestial chariot called Saudharma.  The soul
of Chitramuni, after leaving the first Devaloka, was born as the son of a Seth
in the city of Purimatal. The soul of Sambhuti Muni, after leaving Devaloka, was
born in the womb of Chulnidevi, the wife of the Brahma Raja, in the city of
Kampilya. The mother saw fourteen auspicious dreams. Knowing the auspicious and
prosperous future, Queen Chulni gave birth to her son in the same way that the
east gives birth to the sun. Filled with joy and immersed in Brahma, the Brahma
Raja named his son Brahmadutta, a name famous throughout the universe. He grew
day by day, like a pure moon, bringing joy to the eyes of the world and
absorbing many arts. Just as Brahma has four faces, the Brahma Raja had four
dear friends: Katak, the king of Kashi; Kanerdatta, the king of Hastinapur;
Dirgha, the king of Kosala; and Pushpachulak, the king of Champa. These five
friend-kings, out of love for each other, would stay together in each other's
cities for a year, like Nandanvan and Kalpvriksha. Once, it was the turn of the
five kings to gather in the city of the Brahma Raja. Therefore, the other four
kings came there. They all spent most of their time there, enjoying themselves
and playing. But when Brahmadutta turned twelve years old, suddenly, an
unbearable pain arose in the Brahma Raja's head, and he died from it. After the
Brahma Raja's death rituals, the four kings, Katak and the others, like a
tangible remedy, met and discussed seriously and decisively, "Brahmadutta is
still a child. Until he becomes an adult, one of us should stay here as a
guardian to protect the kingdom." The friend-kings agreed to this and appointed
Dirgha Raja to stay there to protect the kingdom. The other three friend-kings
returned to their respective places. Just as a bull (सांढ) enters a field and
grazes everything when it sees the field unprotected, similarly, Dirgha, with
his foolish mind, also began to plunder the wealth of the kingdom.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 brahmadatta cakrI kI kathA yAgazAstra dvitIya prakAza zlAka 27 bhaviSya meM
aura koI isa taraha sAdhu ko parezAna na kare, isa zuddhabuddhi se rAjA ne
aparAdhI maMtrI ko nagara meM sarvatra ghumaayaa| aMta meM donoM muniyoM ke
caraNoM meM maNimaya mukuTasahita mastaka jhukAkara cakravartI ne vaMdana kiyA
usa samaya ve donoM municaraNa aise lagate the, mAno rAjA mastakastha mukuTamaNi
se pRthvI ko jalamaya banA rahA ho| bAMye hAtha se mukhavastrikA se Dhake muMha
se muniyoM ne dAhinA hAtha UMcA karake rAjA ko dharmalAbha rUpI AzIrvAda dekara
usakI guNagrAhitA kI prazaMsA mA ne namratApUrvaka nivedana kiyA-'munivara!
ApakA jo aparAdhI hai, use apane kRta aparAdha (duSkarma) kA phala milanA hI
caahie|' yoM kahakara samrATa sanatkumAra ne namaci kI ora izArA kiyaa|
manivaroM dvArA kSamA karane kA nirdeza haa| ataH vadha karane yogya hone para
bhI garu-AjJA mAnakara rAjA ne use chor3a diyaa| sarpa garuDa ke pAsa nahIM
TikatA, usI prakAra sanatkumAra aura muni se alaga hokara duSkarma cAMDAla
mRtavat jIvana yApana karane vAle namuci ko nagara aura deza se niSkAsita kara
diyaa| sanatkumAra cakravartI kI mukhya paTarAnI sunaMdA bhAvabhakti se prerita
hokara apanI 64 hajAra sautoM ko sAtha lekara donoM munivaroM ko vaMdana karane
gyii| saMbhUti muni ko vaMdana karate samaya vaha zreSTha nArI unake
caraNakamaloM se apane bAloM ko sparza karAtI huI-sI unake caraNoM meM jhukI,
usa samaya aisA pratIta hotA thA, mAno vaha pRthvI ko caMdramayI banA rahI ho|
usa strIratna ke sukomala bAloM kA sparza hote hI saMbhUtimuni ko romAMca ho
utthaa| saca hai, 'kAmadeva sadA chidra DhUMDhatA rahatA hai|' jaba paTarAnI ne
unakI AjJA lekara, aMtaHpura-sahita jAne kI icchA prakaTa kI, taba rAga se
parAjita saMbhUtimuni ne mana hI mana isa prakAra kA nidAna (duHsaMkalpa) kiyA-
yadi mere duSkaratapa kA koI phala prApta ho to yahI ho ki AgAmI janma meM maiM
aisI strIratna kA pati bnuuN| usa samaya citramuni ne unheM rokate hue
kahA-'bhAI! mokSaphaladAyaka tapa se tuma aise niSkRSTa phala kI icchA kyoM
karate ho? mastaka meM dhAraNa karane yogya ratna ko pAdapITha meM kyoM lagA
rahe ho? mohavaza kiye hue nidAna (niyANe) kA aba bhI tyAgakara do| tuma jaise
mahAmuni ke dvArA aisA vicAra karanA ucita pratIta nahIM hotaa| isI samaya isake
lie 'micchA mi dukkaDaM' (merA yaha duSkRta mithyA ho) kaha do| isa prakAra
citramuni ke rokane para bhI saMbhUtimuni ne niyANe kA tyAga nahIM kiyaa|
sacamuca, viSayecchA atibalavatI hotI hai|' anazana kI bhalI-bhAMti vidhipUrvaka
ArAdhanA karake donoM muni AyuSya pUrNa kara saudharma nAmaka suMdara vimAna meM
deva rUpa meM utpanna hue| citra ke jIva ne prathama devaloka se cyava kara
purimatAla nAmaka nagara meM eka seTha ke yahAM putra rUpa meM janma liyaa|
saMbhUti kA jIva bhI devaloka se cyavakara kAMpilyanagara meM brahmarAjA kI
bhAryA culanIdevI kI kukSi meM aayaa| mAtA ne caudaha mahAsvapna dekhe|
zubhatara vaibhavasUcaka bhaviSya jAnakara cUlanI rAnI ne usI taraha putra ko
janma diyA, jaise pUrvadizA sUrya ko janma detI hai| AnaMda se brahma meM magna
brahmarAjA ne putra kA nAma brahmAMDa meM prasiddha brahmadatta rkhaa| jagat ke
netroM ko AnaMda detA huA evaM aneka kalAoM ko grahaNa karatA huA nirmalacaMdra
ke samAna vaha dinoMdina bar3hane lgaa| brahmA ke cAra mukha ke samAna
brahmarAjA ke cAra priya mitra the, unameM se eka kAzI deza kA rAjA kaTaka thA,
dUsarA hastinApura kA rAjA kaNeradatta thA, tIsarA kauzala kA rAjA dIrgha aura
cauthA caMpA kA rAjA puSpacUlaka thaa| ye pAMcoM mitrarAjA eka dUsare ke sneha-
vaza eka-eka varSa taka bArI-bArI se eka-eka rAjA ke nagara meM naMdanavana aura
kalpavRkSa kI taraha sAthasAtha rahate the| eka bAra brahma rAjA ke nagara meM
pAMcoM rAjAoM ke ekatrita rahane kI bArI aayii| isa kAraNa zeSa cAroM rAjA vahAM
Aye hue the| ve sabhI vahAM mastI se krIr3A karate hue apanA adhikAMza samaya
vyatIta kara cuke the paraMtu idhara jaba brahmadatta bAraha varSa kA huA tabhI
acAnaka brahmarAjA ke mastaka meM apAra vedanA paidA ho par3I aura usI se
pIr3ita hokara vaha mara gyaa| brahmarAjA kI maraNottara kriyA ke bAda mUrta
upAya ke samAna kaTaka Adi cAro rAjAoM ne milakara Thosa aura Avazyaka maMtraNA
kI ki 'brahmadatta abhI bAlaka hai| jaba taka vaha vayaska na ho jAya, taba taka
hamameM se kisI eka ko yahAM paharedAra kI taraha rAjyarakSA ke lie rahanA
caahie|' mitra-rAjAoM ko yaha bAta jaca gayI aura rAjya kI rakSA ke lie
dIrgharAjA ko vahAM para niyukta kiyaa| zeSa tInoM mitra rAjA apane-apane sthAna
lauTa gye| jaise kheta ko arakSita dekhakara baila (sAMDha) kheta meM ghusa jAtA
hai aura sabhI cara jAtA hai| usI prakAra tucchabuddhivAlA dIrgha bhI
rAjyalakSmI ko 97

Page #120 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Tale of Brahmadutta Chakra  Yoga Shastra, Second Light, Verse 27 |
Considering him unprotected, he began to enjoy him at will without any
hesitation. Just as a wicked person finds the flaw of another through long
association, so too did the wicked-minded Dirgha find the secret treasure trove
after a long time. Due to prior acquaintance, he began to roam freely in the
inner apartments of Brahmaraja. Indeed, dominance often makes a man commit evil
deeds. Therefore, Dirgha now began to enjoy himself with Chulani Devi in
solitude, with loving words, jokes, and laughter. This secret conspiracy was
going to pierce him with the arrows of lust. In this way, Dirgha Raja,
disregarding his duty, the kindness of Brahmaraja, and the norms of society,
became deeply attached to Chulani Rani. 'Indeed, it is very difficult to control
the senses.' Chulani Rani also abandoned her devotion to Brahmaraja and her
friendship with Dirgha Raja, as he was her husband's friend. Indeed, 'Kamadeva
is the destroyer of all.'  A long time passed like a moment, as they enjoyed
themselves according to their desires. When Dhanu, the close confidante of
Brahmaraja, came to know about the secret misconduct of Dirgha Raja and Chulani
Rani, he fell into thought. He thought that Chulani Devi was inherently
indulging in misconduct against the virtue of being a wife. Indeed, 'Virtuous
women are rare.' The same Dirgha Raja, to whom Brahmaraja had entrusted the task
of protecting and managing the kingdom, treasury, and inner apartments with
trust, was now betraying that trust and indulging in revelry with Brahmaraja's
queen. Nothing was wrong for him today. It is possible that he might do
something bad to the prince now. A wicked man does not consider even the one who
nourishes him as his own. Thinking thus, he ordered his son Vardhanu, 'Son! You
stay in the service of Brahmadutta Kumar and inform me if there is any wrong
thing or any new news.'  When the minister's son told Brahmadutta Kumar about
the unprecedented incident happening in the inner apartments, Brahmadutta also
became enraged with anger, slowly like a drunken elephant. When the news of his
mother's misconduct became unbearable, one day Brahmadutta went to the inner
apartments with a crow and a cuckoo. Addressing his mother and Dirgha Raja, he
said, 'These two who spread miscegenation, and anyone else like them, deserve to
be killed. I will surely punish such people.' Hearing this, Dirgha Raja said to
Chulani, 'Did you hear your son's words? He is calling me a crow and you a
cuckoo, and if he gets the chance, he will surely imprison us both.' To this,
the queen said, 'You don't need to be afraid of the child's words at all. Once,
taking a boar to the inner apartments with a noble elephant, Dirgha Raja, under
the pretext of inspiring his mother and himself, began to scold both the
animals, as before, with reproachful words. Hearing this, Dirgha Raja's ears
perked up. He again said to the queen, 'Look, again this child is targeting us.'
To this, Chulani Rani said, 'He is still a naive child, whatever he says, we
should not pay attention to his words.' One day, Brahmadutta took a goose and a
heron to the inner apartments and, addressing both of them, said, 'Beware! If
anyone does what this goose does with the heron, I will not tolerate it at all.'
Then Dirgha said to the queen, 'Devi! Look, again your son is spewing words
filled with the fire of anger, like a blazing fire. As he grows older, he will
become as dangerous to us both as a lion is to an elephant and a she-elephant.
Therefore, before he becomes young and powerful, this poisonous tree should be
uprooted. Hearing this, the queen trembled. She said, 'No, no, dear! How can I
do this? Even animals protect their offspring, then I, being a human and his
mother, should protect him. Moreover, he is the heir to the kingdom. My heart
trembles at the thought of his destruction.' To this, Dirgha Raja said, 'The
time for your childbirth is approaching. Why worry in vain? As long as I am
here, it is not difficult for you to have a son.' Hearing this, Chulani, like a
Sakini, became infatuated with sexual pleasure and, blinded by affection,
abandoned her maternal love and agreed with Dirgha Raja. But she was also afraid
of disgrace. Therefore, she said to Dirgha Raja, 'Dear! Devise some conspiracy
so that we are not disgraced and he is also destroyed. I want this work to be
done without any delay. 98

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 brahmadatta cakrI kI kathA yogazAstra dvitIya prakAza zloka 27 | arakSita
samajhakara usakA bekhaTake manamAnA upabhoga karane lagA  /  durjana jaise
dIrghakAla ke sahavAsa se dUsare ke chidra ko DhuMDha nikAlatA hai, vaise hI
durbuddhi dIrgha ne cirakAla se gupta dhanabhaMDAra DhuMDha nikAlA  /
pUrvaparicaya ke kAraNa vaha brahmarAjA ke aMtaHpura meM bhI berokaToka ghUmane
lagA  /  sacamuca, Adhipatya manuSya se prAyaH aMdhakArya karA detA hai| ataH
dIrgha aba culanI devI ke sAtha ekAMta meM akelA aura premabhare vacanoM se
vinoda aura hAsya karane lgaa| yaha guptamaMtraNA kAmabANoM se use bIMdhane vAlI
thI  /  isa prakAra dIrgharAjA apane kartRvya, brahma rAjA ke upakAra aura loka
maryAdA kI avagaNanA karake cUlanIrAnI meM atyaMta Asakta ho gyaa| 'sacamuca,
iMdriyoM ko vaza karanA atikaThina hai| cUlanI rAnI ne bhI brahmarAjA | ke prati
patibhakti kA tathA pati ke mitra hone ke nAte dIrgha rAjA ke prati mitrasneha
kA tyAgakara diyaa| vAstava meM 'kAmadeva sarvavinAzaka hotA hai|' icchAnusAra
sukha - vilAsa karate hue laMbA arsA bhI muhUrta ke samAna bIta gyaa| brahma
rAjA ke abhinna hRdaya maMtrI dhanu ko jaba dIrgharAjA aura cUlanI rAnI ke gupta
durAcAra kA patA lagA to vaha vicAra meM par3a gayA ki culanI devI svabhAva se
hI pativrata dharma ke viruddha durAcAra kA sevanakara rahI hai| vAstava meM
'satI striyAM viralI hI | hotI hai|' jise dIrgharAjA ko rAjya, koSa aura
aMtaHpura kI rakSA karane aura saMbhAlane kA kAma vizvAsa pUrvaka sauMpA thA;
vahI dIrgharAjA Aja vizvAsa ghAta karake brahmarAjA kI rAnI ke sAtha svacchaMda
hokara raMgareliyA~ kara rahA hai| isake lie Aja kucha bhI akArya nahIM rahA  /
saMbhava hai, vaha aba kumAra kA bhI kucha aniSTa kara baitthe| durjana manuSya
bilAva kI taraha | poSaNa karane vAle ko bhI apanA nahIM smjhtaa| yoM vicAra
karake usane apane putra varadhanu ko Adeza diyA - 'beTA! tUM |
brahmadattakumAra kI sevA meM rahanA aura koI galata bAta yA nayA samAcAra ho to
mujhe sUcita karate rhnaa|' maMtrI putra ne jaba brahmadatta kumAra ko aMtaHpura
meM ho rahI aghaTita ghaTanA kI bAta sunAyI to use sunakara brahmadatta bhI
matavAle hAthI kI taraha dhIre-dhIre krodha se jhallAne lgaa| mAtA ke duzcaritra
kI bAta jaba asahya ho uThI to eka | dina brahmadatta eka kaue~ aura koyala ko
sAtha lekara aMtaHpura meM phuNcaa| apanI mAtA aura dIrgharAja ko uddezya karake
vaha | isa prakAra kahane lagA- 'varNasaMkaratA phailAne vAle ina donoM tathA
aura bhI aise koI hoM to ve mAra DAlane ke lAyaka hai| maiM aisoM ko avazya hI
daMDa duuNgaa| yaha bAta sunakara dIrgha rAjA ne cUlanI se kahA- 'suna lI na
tumhAre beTe kI bAta ? vaha mujhe kauA aura tumheM koyala batA rahA hai aura
maukA milate hI vaha hama donoM ko avazya hI kaidI bnaayegaa| isa | para rAnI ne
kahA- 'bAlaka ke kathana para tumheM jarA bhI bhayabhIta hone kI AvazyakatA
nahIM hai| eka bAra bhadra hathinI ke sAtha sUara ko aMtaHpura meM le jAkara
dIrgharAjA aura mAtA ko preraNA dene ke bahAne una donoM pazuoM ko pahale kI |
taraha upAlaMbha dete hue phaTakArane lgaa| yaha sunate hI dIrgha rAjA ke kAna
khar3e ho gye| usane phira rAnI se kahA dekho| na, phira yaha bAlaka hameM
lakSya karake kaha rahA hai, isa para cUlanI rAnI ne usase kahA- abhI vaha,
nAdAna baccA hai, cAhe jo kahe, hameM usake kahane para dhyAna nahIM denA
caahie|' eka dina haMsanI ke sAtha bagule ko bAMdhakara brahmadatta aMtaHpura
meM le gayA aura donoM ko lakSya karake sunAne lagA- 'khabaradAra ! jaise isa
haMsanI ke sAtha bagulA krIr3A karatA hai, vaise kisI ne kiyA to maiM jarA bhI
sahana nahIM kruuNgaa|' taba dIrgha ne rAnI se kahA- 'devI! dekha phira yaha
terA putra dhuMA ugalatI huI Aga kI taraha roSAgni se bharI vANI ugala rahA hai|
yaha jyoM-jyoM umra meM bar3A hotA jAyagA, tyoM-tyoM | hama donoM ke lie usI
taraha khataranAka ho jAyagA, jisa taraha kesarIsiMha hAthI - hathinI ke lie
hotA hai| isalie javAna evaM parAkramI hone se pahale hI isa jaharIle per3a ko
samUla ukhAr3a pheMkanA caahie| rAnI yaha bAta sunate hI sihara | utthii| vaha
bolI- 'na, na priya ! yaha mujhase kaise 'sakegA? tiryaMca pazu-pakSI bhI apane
putroM kI bhI prANa rakSA karate haiM, taba mujhe to mAnava jAti kI aura isakI
mAM hone ke nAte isakI rakSA karanI cAhie  /  phira yaha to rAjya lakSmI kA
adhikArI hai| isakA vinAza karate hue merA dila kAMpa uThatA hai|' isa para
dIrgharAjA ne kahA- 'aba terA putrotpatti kA | samaya to A hI rahA hai| phira
vyartha hI cintA kyoM karatI hai? maiM hUM jaba taka tere liye putra prApti
durlabha nahIM hai|' yaha | sunakara zAkinI ke samAna cUlanI bhI ratikrIr3A
mUr3ha aura sneha-paravaza hokara putra vAtsalya ko tilAMjalI dekara dIrgharAjA
kI bAta se sahamata ho gyii| paraMtu sAtha hI use badanAmI kA bhI bhaya thA  /
isalie usane dIrgharAjA se kahA'priya ! koI aisA SaDyaMtra raco, jisase hamArI
badanAmI bhI na ho aura usakA vinAza bhI ho jaay| mujhe to yaha kAma 98

Page #121 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Tale of Brahmadatt Chakra  The second light of Yoga Shastra, verse 27: It
seems strange, like watering an mango grove on one hand and performing Pitru
Tarpan on the other. Or, let's do this, the Kumar's marriage should be arranged
and a Lakshagriha should be prepared for this under the pretext of a residence,
which should not have any secret entrances or exits. After the marriage, the
prince should be taken to the Lakshagriha with his wife. At night, when they
both fall asleep, set it on fire; so that they will die inside. Neither will we
be defamed nor will there be any danger for us again.' Thus, both of them
conspired secretly. The very next day, the prince's engagement was fixed with
the daughter of King Pushpachul and preparations for the marriage began in full
swing.  Meanwhile, Dhanumantri, knowing the evil intentions of the two, pleaded
with Dirghraja with folded hands, 'Rajan! My son Vardhanu has become proficient
in all arts and is skilled in ethics. Therefore, he, like a young bull, is
capable of lifting your chariot-wheel of command. I, like an old bull, am unable
to go anywhere or bear the burden of royal orders. If you permit, I will go to a
peaceful place and perform Dharma-anushthan in my last days.' Hearing this,
Dirghraja felt apprehensive that this magician might go elsewhere and do
something wrong; or he might expose us.' Dirghraja said to Dhanumantri in
deceitful words, 'Aji! Buddhiniधान Pradhanmantriji! Just as the night does not
shine without the moon; similarly, this kingdom does not shine without you.
Therefore, do not go anywhere else. Build a Dānasālā here and do your Dharma.
What is the need to go far? Just as a garden is adorned with beautiful trees, so
will this kingdom be adorned by you.' Upon this, the wise Dhanumantri built a
holy Dānamṇḍapa, like a great umbrella of Dharma, on the banks of the Bhagirathi
river. He built a Dānasālā there and started an uninterrupted flow of charity
like the flow of the Ganga. In this, food, water, etc. were given to the
travelers. Along with this, Dhanumantri had a two-kos long tunnel dug from the
Dānasālā to the newly built Lakshagriha by men who were made trustworthy through
charity, respect and kindness. On the other hand, he informed Pushpachul of the
entire conspiracy taking place through Dirgh by a secret letter, like water for
watering the Maitreevriksha. The wise Pushpachul, knowing this to be true,
instead of sending his daughter, sent a dasi-putra, like a heron, adorned with
gem-studded ornaments, in her place. That dasi-putra entered the city as the
daughter of Pushpachul. It is true, simple people mistake brass for gold. The
sky echoed with auspicious sweet songs and instruments. The shehnais played.
Brahmadatt's marriage with that girl took place with great pomp and joy. After
sending off all other families, Chulani sent the Kumar to the Lakshagriha with
the new bride as soon as night began. The new bride, the Kumar and Vardhanu,
like his shadow, came there along with the other families. Brahmadatt Kumar
spent half the night talking with the minister's son. 'Where is sleep in the
eyes of the Mahatmas at such a time?' Chulani ordered the trusted servants to
set fire to the Lakshagriha. The servants set fire to the palace made of lac. As
soon as the fire caught, the Lakshagriha was engulfed in flames in a matter of
moments. Gradually, its black smoke spread throughout the sky, as if the infamy
of Chulani's long-standing evil deeds was spreading. Today, the seven-tongued
hungry fire became an all-devouring one with millions of tongues with its
blazing flames. When Brahmadatt asked the minister's son, 'What is this?' in
reply, he revealed the entire story of Chulani's wicked deeds. And finally,
telling him how to escape, he said, 'Like rescuing a beautiful woman from the
trunk of an elephant, a tunnel has been built by my father to get you out of
here to the Dānasālā. Therefore, kick this door hard and open it, and enter the
tunnel just as a yogi enters a hole with yogic strength.' As soon as the Kumar
kicked the door, which was like a clay-made Samputa-vadya-yantra, the door of
the tunnel rattled and opened. Brahmadatt Kumar, along with his friend, escaped
through the tunnel, just as a thread comes out of a hole in a gem. As soon as
they crossed the tunnel, two well-equipped horses, saddled by Dhanumantri, were
standing ready outside. The prince  99

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 brahmadatta cakrI kI kathA yogazAstra dvitIya prakAza zloka 27 eka ora se
Amravana sIMcane aura dUsarI ora se, pitR tarpaNa karane sarIkhA aTapaTA-sA
lagatA hai| athavA yoM kareM, kumAra kA vivAha kara diyA jAya aura vAsagRha ke
bahAne isake lie aisA lAkSAgRha taiyAra karavAyA jAya, jisameM gupta rUpa se
praveza karane aura nikalane ke daravAje na hoN| vivAha ho jAne para rAjakumAra
ko patnI ke sAtha usI lAkSAgRha meM praveza karAyA jaay| rAta meM ve donoM so
jAe~, taba Aga lagA dI jAya; tAki aMdara hI aMdara jalakara mara jaayeNge| na
hamArI badanAmI hogI aura na hamAre liye phira koI khatarA hI rhegaa|' isa
prakAra donoM ne guptamaMtraNA kii| dUsare hI dina rAjakumAra kI sagAI puSpacUla
rAjA kI kanyA ke sAtha taya kara dI gayI aura jora-zora se vivAha kI tamAma
taiyAriyA~ hone lgiiN| idhara dhanumaMtrI ne ina donoM kI badanIyata jAnakara
dIrgharAjA se hAtha jor3akara vinatI kI, 'rAjan! merA putra varadhanu saba
kalAoM meM pAraMgata aura nItikuzala ho gayA hai| ataH vahI javAna baila ke
samAna ApakI AjJA rUpI rathadhurA ko uThAne meM samartha hai| maiM to bUr3he
baila ke samAna kahIM Ane-jAne evaM rAjAjJA ke bhAra ko uThAne meM asamartha
huuN| yadi ApakI anamati ho to maiM kisI zAMta sthala para jAkara aMtima samaya
meM dharmAnaSThAna kruuN|' yaha sanakara dIrgharAjA ko aisI AzaMkA huI ki yaha
mAyAvI kahIM anyatra jAkara kucha anartha karegA; yA hamArA bhaMDAphor3a
kregaa|' dIrgharAjA ne kapaTabhare zabdoM meM dhanumaMtrI se kahA-'ajI!
buddhinidhAna pradhAnamaMtrIjI! jaise caMdra ke binA rAta zobhA nahIM detI;
vaise hI Apake binA yaha rAjya zobhA nahIM detaa| isalie Apa aba anyatra kahIM
bhI na jaaie| yahIM dAnazAlA banAkara dharma kiijie| dUra jAne kI kyA AvazyakatA
hai? suMdara vRkSoM se jaise bAga zobhAyamAna hotA hai, vaise hI Apase yaha
rAjya zobhAyamAna rhegaa|' isa para buddhizAlI dhanumaMtrI ne bhAgIrathI nadI ke
taTa para dharma kA mahAchatra-sA eka pavitra dAnamaMDapa bnaayaa| vahIM
dAnazAlA banAkara gaMgA ke pravAha ke samAna dAna kA akhaMDapravAha jArI kiyaa|
isameM pathikoM ko bhojanapAnI Adi diyA jAtA thaa| sAtha hI dhanumaMtrI ne dAna,
sammAna aura upakAra se upakRta aura vizvasta banAye hue puruSoM se dAnazAlA se
lekara navanirmita lAkSAgRha taka do kosa laMbI suraMga khudvaayii| udhara usane
maitrIvRkSa ko sIMcane ke lie jala ke sadRza eka gupta lekha se hI vahAM dIrgha
dvArA ho rahe SaDyaMtra kA sArA vRttAMta puSpacUla ko avagata kraayaa|
buddhizAlI puSpacUla bhI yaha bAta saccI jAnakara apanI putrI ke badale haMsanI
ke sthAna meM bagulI kI taraha eka dAsIputrI ko ratnamaNi-jaTita AbhUSaNoM se
susajjita karake bhejaa| usa dAsIputrI ne puSpacUla kI putrI ke rUpa meM nagara
meM praveza kiyaa| saca hai, bholebhole loga pItala ko dekhakara use sonA
samajha lete haiN| maMgalamaya madhuragItoM aura vAdyoM se AkAzatala gUMja
utthaa| zahanAiyAM baja utthii| bahuta hI dhUmadhAma se harSapUrvaka usa kanyA
ke sAtha brahmadatta kA vivAha ho gyaa| anya sabhI parivAra ko vidA karake
cUlanI ne navavadhU-sahita kumAra ko rAtri ke prAraMbha hote hI lAkSAgRha meM
bheja diyaa| anya parivAra-sahita navavadhU, kumAra aura usakI chAyA ke samAna
varadhanu sAtha-sAtha vahAM para aaye| brahmadattakumAra ko maMtrIputra ke sAtha
bAteM karate-karate AdhIrAta bIta cukii| 'mahAtmAoM kI AMkhoM meM aise samaya
nIMda kahA~?' cUlanI ne vizvasta sevakoM ko lAkSAgRha jalAne kI AjJA dii|
sevakoM ne usa lAkha ke bane mahala meM Aga lagA dii| Aga lagate hI dhU-dhU
karake kucha hI kSaNoM meM vAsagRha meM agni-jvAlAe~ phaila gyii| dhIre-dhIre
usakA kAlA dhuMA cAroM ora se sAre AkAzamaMDala meM isa taraha phaila gayA, mAno
cUlanI ke cirakAlIna duSkarma kI apakIrti phaila rahI ho| Aja saptajihvA vAlI
bhUkhI agni apanI lapalapAtI huI jvAlAoM se karor3oM jihvA vAlI sarvabhakSiNI
bana gyii| jaba brahmadatta ne maMtrIputra se puchA- 'yaha kyA hai?' to isake
uttara meM cUlanI ke duSTa AcaraNoM kA sArA kaccA ciTThA kholakara rakha diyaa|
aura aMta meM isase bacane kA upAya batAte hue kahA-'hAthI kI sUMDa se suMdarI
ko bacAkara nikAlane kI taraha Apako yahAM se bAhara nikAlane ke lie dAnazAlA
taka eka suraMga mere pitAjI ne banavAyI hai| ataH yahIM para jora se lAta
mArakara isakA daravAjA kholo aura yogI jaise yogabala se chidra meM praveza
kara jAtA hai, usI prakAra suraMga meM praveza kro|' miTTI ke sakore ke-se
banAye hue saMpuTa-vAdyayaMtroM ke samAna daravAje para jora se kumAra ke paira
mArate hI sUraMga kA daravAjA jhanajhanAkara khUla gyaa| apane mitra ke sAtha
brahmadatta kumAra suraMga ke rAste se vaise hI nikala gayA, jaise ratna ke
cheda meM se dhAgA nikala jAtA hai| suraMga pAra karate hI bAhara dhanumaMtrI
dvArA jIna kase hue susajjita do ghor3e taiyAra khar3e the| una para rAjakumAra
99

Page #122 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Tale of Brahmadatt Chakra  Yogashastra Dvitiya Prakash Shloka 27 and the
minister's son both mounted, as if they were two sons of the sun. Both horses
were running so fast at the speed of Panchmadharagati that fifty yojanas were
like one kos for them. But alas! Both horses died of exhaustion in the middle.
Therefore, from there onwards, both of them walked on foot, barely reaching near
Kosthakagran, protecting their lives.  Then Brahmadatt said to his friend Var
Dhanu - 'Friend! Should we still compete with each other? I am very hungry and
thirsty. I am dying from these. The minister's son said something in the
prince's ear and then - 'Stay here for a moment.' Saying this, he went ahead. To
shave the prince's head, the minister's son brought a barber from the village by
force. At the minister's son's behest, Brahmadatt had all his hair cut except
for one braid. Then he wore saffron-colored holy clothes. At that time, he
looked as if the sun was hidden in the colorful clouds of the evening.
Minister's son Var Dhanu put a Brahmasutra around his neck. Now he was truly the
son of Brahmaraja, making his name Brahmputra meaningful. Just as the sun is
covered by the clouds in the rainy season, the minister's son covered
Brahmadatt's chest with the Srivatsa mark with a northern cloth. In this way,
the minister's son, like a sutradhar, changed the appearance of the Brahmputra
and changed his own appearance in the same way. Thus, like the full moon and the
sun, both friends entered the village. There, a Brahmin invited them for food.
He served them food with devotion, like a king. 'Usually, the respect is given
according to the brilliance of the face.' After the meal, the Brahmin's wife,
adorned with a pair of white clothes, appeared like an apsara; who started
putting akshat on the Kumar's head. Seeing this, Var Dhanu said to the Brahmin,
'Confused! Why are you tying this girl around the neck of this artless boy, like
a cow around the neck of a bull?' In reply, the learned Brahmin said - 'This is
my daughter named Bandhumati, who is charming with her qualities. I don't see
anyone else worthy of her except her. The knowledgeable people had told me that
her husband would be the Chakravarti, the ruler of the six continents. And this
is he. They also told me that his Srivatsa mark would be covered with a cloth
and he would eat at your house. Give this girl to him.' At that time, the
Brahmin married the girl to Brahmadatt. 'Fortunate enjoyers get abundant
enjoyment without any thought.' Brahmadatt stayed there that night and, after
assuring Bandhumati, moved on. How can one stay in one place when enemies are
chasing him? From there, both of them reached a village early in the morning,
where they heard that Dirghraja had posted guards on all the routes to catch
Brahmadatt. Therefore, they started walking on a winding path. Running and
fleeing, they came to a dense forest full of ferocious animals like the fierce
soldiers of Dirghraja. There, leaving the thirsty Kumar under a banyan tree, Var
Dhanu went to fetch water with the speed of mind. There, it was recognized that
'this is Var Dhanu, therefore, just as dogs surround a piglet, the angry
soldiers of Dirghraja surrounded him. Then they started shouting loudly - 'Hey.
Catch him. Catch him! Kill him. Kill him.' Thus, speaking in a terrible manner,
they caught him and tied him up. Then they asked him about Brahmadatt. Var Dhanu
gestured to Brahmadatt to run away. Brahmadatt ran away from there. 'The test of
courage comes only when the time comes.' Kumar also crossed one big forest after
another rapidly, without getting tired, and kept moving forward with his fists
clenched. In this way, he reached an ashram. There, he ate tasteless and
unappetizing fruits. From there, on the third day, he saw a tapasvi! He asked
him - 'O Bhagavan! Where is your ashram?' The tapasvi took the Kumar to his
ashram. Because 'tapasvis are fond of guests.' The Kumar, seeing the head of the
ashram, considered him like his father and greeted him with joy. 'The mind is
considered as evidence for an unknown thing.' The head of the ashram asked him -
'Vats! How did you come here, a rough person like a Kalpavriksha in the desert?'
Brahmputra told the Mahatma his whole story till the end. Because such men are
usually not hidden from. On hearing this, the head of the ashram said with a
choked voice, filled with joy - 'Vats! I am your father's younger brother. We
were different in body, but our hearts  100

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 brahmadatta cakrI kI kathA yogazAstra dvitIya prakAza zloka 27 aura maMtrIputra
donoM ArUr3ha hue, mAno do sUryaputra hoN| donoM ghor3e paMcamadhAragati se
itanI tejI se daur3a rahe the ki unake lie pacAsa yojana eka kosa ke samAna
thaa| kitu aphasosa! ve donoM ghor3e bIca meM hI thakakara mara gye| ataH vahAM
se Age ve donoM paidala calakara apane prANoM kI rakSA karate hue muzkila se
koSThakagAMva ke nikaTa phuNce| tabhI brahmadatta ne apane mitra vara dhanu se
kahA-'mitra! kyA aba bhI paraspara pratispardhA karanI hai? mujhe to kar3Ake kI
bhUkha aura tIvra pyAsa lagI hai| inake mAre mere prANa nikale jA rahe hai|'
maMtrIputra ne rAjakumAra ke kAna meM kucha kahA aura phira-'kSaNabhara tuma
yahAM ruka jaao|' yoM kahakara vaha Age cala pdd'aa| rAjakumAra kA mastaka
muMDAne ke hetu maMtrIputra gAMva se eka nAyI ko balA laayaa| maMtrIpatra ke
kahane se brahmadatta ne sirpha eka coTI rakhakara bAkI ke sAre bAla kaTava
|diye| phira usane bhagave raMga ke pavitra vastra dhAraNa kara liye| usa samaya
vaha aisA lagatA thA mAno saMdhyAkAlIna raMgabiraMge bAdaloM meM sUrya chipA ho|
maMtrIputra varadhanu ne usake gale meM eka brahmasUtra DAla diyaa| aba to vaha
brahmarAjA kA putra yathArtha | rUpa meM apane brahmaputra nAma ko sArthaka kara
rahA thaa| varSARtu meM megha se jaise sUrya Dhaka jAtA hai, vaise hI
maMtrIputra ne brahmadatta ke zrIvatsayukta vakSaHsthala ko uttarIya paTa se
Dhaka diyaa| isa taraha sUtradhAra ke samAna brahmaputra kA veza badalAkara
svayaM maMtrIputra ne bhI vaisA hI veza bdlaa| yoM pUrNimA ke caMdramA aura
sUrya ke samAna donoM mitroM ne gA~va meM praveza kiyaa| vahAM kisI brAhmaNa ne
unheM bhojana ke lie AmaMtraNa diyaa| usane rAjA ke anurUpa bhakti se unheM
bhojana kraayaa| 'prAyaH mukha ke teja ke anusAra satkAra huA karatA hai|'
bhojanoparAMta brAhmaNapatnI zvetavastrayugala se susajjita kara apsarA ke
samAna rUpavatI eka kanyA ko lekara upasthita huI; jo kumAra ke mastaka para
akSata DAlane lgii| yaha dekhakara varadhanu ne brAhmaNa se kahA 'vicAramUr3ha!
sAMDa ke gale meM gAya ke samAna kalAhIna isa baTuka ke gale meM isa lar3akI ko
kyoM bAMdha rahI ho?' isake uttara meM vipravara ne kahA-'yaha guNoM se manohara
baMdhumatI nAma kI merI kanyA hai| mujhe isake yogya vara isake sivAya aura koI
najara nahIM aataa| nimittajJoM ne mujhe batAyA thA ki isakA pati chaha khaMDa
pRthvI kA pAlaka cakravartI hogaa| aura yaha vahI hai| unhoMne mujhe yaha bhI
kahA thA ki usakA zrIvatsacihna paTa se DhakA hogA aura vaha tere ghara para hI
bhojana kregaa| use hI yaha kanyA de denaa|' usI samaya brAhmaNa ne brahmadatta
ke sAtha usa kanyA kA vivAha kara diyaa| bhAgyazAlI | bhogiyoM ko binA kisI
prakAra kA ciMtana kiye anAyAsa hI pracura bhoga mila jAte haiN|' brahmadatta
usa rAta ko vahIM rahakara aura baMdhumatI ko AzvAsana dekara anyatra cala
pdd'aa| jisake pIche zatru lage hoM, vaha eka sthAna para DerA jamAkara kaise
raha sakatA hai? vahAM se calakara ve donoM subaha-subaha eka gAMva meM pahuMce,
jahAM unhoMne sunA ki dIrgharAjA ne brahmadatta ko pakar3ane ke lie sabhI mArgoM
para caukI-pahare biThA diye haiN| ataH ve Ter3hemer3he mArga se calane lge|
daur3ate-bhAgate ve dIrgharAjA ke bhayaMkara sainikoM ke sarIkhe hiMsra
jAnavaroM se bhare ghora jaMgala meM aaye| vahAM pyAse kumAra ko eka vaTavRkSa
ke nIce chor3akara varadhanu mana ke samAna phurtI se jala lene gyaa| vahAM para
pahacAna liyA gayA ki 'yaha varadhanu hai, ataH sUara ke bacce ko jaise kutte
ghera lete hai, vaise hI dIrgharAjA ke krUddha sainikoM ne use ghera liyaa|
phira ve jora-jora se cillAne lge-'are| pakaDo. pakaDo ise! mAra DAlo. mAra
ddaalo|' yoM bhayaMkara rUpa se bolate hae una pakar3akara bAMdha diyaa| phira
use brahmadatta ke viSaya meM pchaa| varadhana ne brahmadatta ko bhAga jAne kA
izArA brahmadattakamAra vahAM se nau-do-gyAraha ho gyaa| 'parAkrama kI parIkSA
samaya Ane para hI hotI hai|' kamAra bhI va eka ke bAda dUsarI bar3I aTavI ko
tejI se pAra karatA huA binA thake betahAzA muTThI bAMdhe Age bar3hA jA rahA
thaa| isI taraha vaha eka Azrama meM phuNcaa| vahAM usane besvAda evaM arucikara
phala khaaye| vahAM se calakara tIsare dina usane eka tApasa ko dekhA! usase
pUchA-bhagavan! ApakA Azrama kahAM hai?' tApasa, kumAra ko apane Azrama meM le
gyaa| kyoMki 'tApasoM ko atithi priya hote haiN| kumAra ne Azrama ke kulapati ko
dekhate hI pitAtulya mAnakara unheM harSa se namaskAra kiyaa| ajJAta vastu ke
lie aMtaHkaraNa hI pramANa mAnA jAtA hai|' kulapati ne usase pUchA-'vatsa!
marubhUmi meM kalpavRkSa ke samAna tama saMdara Akati vAle paruSa yahAM kaise
cale Aye?' brahmapatra ne mahAtmA se iti taka apanA sArA vRttAMta kaha sunaayaa|
kyoMki prAyaH aise puruSoM se bAta chipAyI nahIM jaatii| sunate hI harSita
hokara kulapati ne gadgada svara se kahA-'vatsa! maiM tumhAre pitA kA choTA bhAI
hI huuN| hama donoM zarIra se bhinna the, paraMtu hRdaya 100

Page #123 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Tale of Brahmadatt Chakra  "Brahmadatt Chakra was inseparable from the
second light of Yoga Shastra, verse 27. Therefore, consider this ashram your
home and stay here as long as you wish, happily, and increase our penance with
our aspirations."  Delighting the mothers, Sarvallabh Kumar also began to reside
in that ashram. In the meantime, the rainy season arrived. While residing in his
ashram, the headmaster taught the Kumar the scriptures and the arts of weaponry
in the same way that Baldev had taught Shri Krishna. After the rainy season,
filled with the chirping of cranes and as close as brothers, was complete, the
ascetics of the ashram went to the nearby forest to gather fruits. Even though
the headmaster respectfully tried to stop him, Brahmaputr went into the forest
with the ascetics, just as an elephant walks with its young. While wandering in
the forest, Brahmaputr saw fresh dung and urine of an elephant in one place. He
thought, "There must be an elephant nearby." The ascetics strongly dissuaded him
from going further. Still, he followed the elephant's footprints for five
yojanas, where he saw a mountain-like elephant.  With a single loincloth tied
tightly, the Kumar roared like a blacksmith. Just as one wrestler challenges
another, Brahmadatt, like an elephant among humans, challenged the elephant.
Therefore, the red-faced elephant, enraged, trembled with all its limbs,
extended its trunk, held its ears steady, and lunged towards the Kumar. As the
elephant approached the Kumar, he threw a garment in the middle to distract the
elephant, as if to lure a child. As if a piece of the sky had fallen from the
sky, the elephant, in extreme anger, grabbed the garment tightly with its two
tusks in an instant. Just as a charmer makes a snake dance, the Kumar, with
various tricks, made the elephant turn around. At that very moment, like
Brahmadatt's other friend, the clouds roared, and the rain attacked the elephant
with its water stream. Therefore, the elephant roared and fled like a deer. The
Kumar also wandered towards the mountain, reaching a river. He crossed the river
like a calamity. On the bank of the river, he saw an old, ruined city. As he
entered, he saw a sword and shield lying in a pile of bamboo, like a destructive
comet and a protective moon. The Kumar, curious about the art of wielding
weapons, picked them up out of curiosity and first cut down the large pile of
bamboo with the sword, like a banana tree. In the pile of bamboo, he saw a human
head like a lotus on the ground, with its lips fluttering. Looking closely, he
realized that the fresh severed torso of a man smoking with his head upside down
was lying there. Seeing this ghastly sight, he said in a repentant tone, "I have
killed an innocent scholar, damn me!" As the Kumar took a step forward, he saw a
garden like Nandanvan, descended from heaven to earth. As he entered, he saw a
seven-story palace in front of him, as if it had fainted from the beauty of the
seven realms and fallen here. As the Kumar climbed the towering palace, he saw a
woman like a Khechari, sitting with her face in her palm, in a thoughtful
posture. The Kumar moved a little forward and asked her in a clear voice, "Lady!
How are you sitting here alone? Your facial expression suggests that you have
some deep concern. If it is not a problem to tell me, tell me - what is the
reason for your concern?" The terrified woman replied in a choked voice, "Sir!
My story is very long. But first, tell me who you are. Please introduce
yourself." The Kumar introduced himself, saying, "I am Brahmadatt Kumar, son of
the king of Panchal." Hearing this, she jumped with joy, and tears of joy
streamed from her eyes. She fell at his feet, as if washing his feet, and cried,
"Kumar! Like a boat for someone drowning in the sea, I, the helpless woman, have
found your shelter." After the Kumar reassured her and asked, she said, "Sir! I
am the daughter of your mother's brother, Pushpachul, named Pushpavati. My
parents have given me to you. While waiting for the day of marriage, I went to
play in the garden by the well, like a swan. Just as Ravana abducted Sita and
took her to Lanka, in the same way, a wicked Vidyaadhar named Natyonmatt
abducted me and brought me here. Unable to bear my sight, he entered this bamboo
grove for the purpose of Vidya Sadhana, like the son of Shuparnakha. There, he
was smoking, with his feet up,

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 brahmadatta cakrI kI kathA yogazAstra dvitIya prakAza zloka 27 se abhinna the|
isalie tuma Azrama ko apanA ghara samajhakara jitane dina icchA ho, utane dina
khuzI se yahAM raho aura | hamAre manorathoM ke sAtha hamAre tapa meM bhI vRddhi
kro|' jananayanoM ko AnaMdita karatA huA sarvavallabha kumAra bhI usa Azrama meM
rahane lgaa| itane meM varSAkAla A phuNcaa| kulapati ne apane Azrama meM rahate
hue kumAra ko bhI zAstra evaM zastraastra vidyAe~ usI prakAra par3hA dIM, jaise
baladeva ne zrIkRSNa ko par3hAI thii| sArasapakSiyoM ke kalarava se paripUrNa
evaM baMdhusamAna varSAkAla pUrNa hone ke bAda zaradRtu ke Ate hI Azrama ke
tApasa phala tor3akara lAne ke lie nikaTavartI vana meM cle| kulapati ke dvArA
Adara-pUrvaka roke jAne para bhI brahmaputra tApasoM ke sAtha vana meM usI
prakAra calA jisa prakAra hAthI apane baccoM ke sAtha calatA hai| vana meM
idhara-udhara ghUmate hue brahmaputra ne eka jagaha kisI hAthI kA tAjA malamUtra
dekhaa| isa para usane socA-'yahAM se kucha hI dUra koI hAthI honA caahie|'
tApasoM ne use Age jAne se bahuta manA kiyaa| phira bhI vaha hAthI ke pairoM ke
cihna dekhatA huA pAMca yojana taka jA pahuMcA; jahAM usane parvata ke samAna
eka hI laMgoTa kasakara kamAra ne garjanA kii| eka malla jaise dUsare malla ko
lalakAratA hai, vaise hI manuSyoM meM hAthI ke samAna brahmadatta ne hAthI ko
llkaaraa| ataH lAla muMha vAlA hAthI kopAyamAna hokara sabhI aMgoM ko kaMpAtA
huA sUMDa laMbI karake kAna ko sthira karatA huA kumAra kI ora jhpttaa| hAthI
jyoM hI kumAra ke pAsa AyA, tyoM hI bAlaka ko phusalAne kI taraha hAthI ko
bahakAne ke lie usane bIca meM hI eka vastra pheNkaa| mAno AkAza se AkAzakhaMDa
TUTakara par3A ho, isa dRSTi se atiroSavaza hokara hAthI ne usa vastra ko apane
donoM daMtazUloM se kSaNabhara meM kasakara pakar3a liyaa| jisa prakAra madArI
sAMpa ko nacAtA hai, usI prakAra kumAra ne vividha ceSTAoM se hAthI ko cAroM ora
ghumaayaa| ThIka usI samaya brahmadatta ke dUsare mitra kI taraha bAdala garjane
ke sAtha varSA apanI jaladhArA se hAthI para AkramaNa karane lgii| ataH hAthI
ciMghAr3atA huA mRgagati se bhAga gyaa| kumAra bhI parvata kI ora ghUmatA-
ghAmatA eka nadI ke pAsa phuNcaa| usane Apatti kI taraha vaha nadI pAra kii|
nadI ke kinAre usane eka purAnA ujar3A huA nagara dekhaa| usameM praveza karate
hI usane bAMsoM ke Dhera meM par3I huI talavAra aura DhAla ko dekhA; mAno
utpAtakArI ketu aura surakSAkArI caMdramA ho| una donoM ko zastracAlanakautukI
kumAra ne kutuhalavaza uThAye aura sarvaprathama talavAra se usa bAMsa ke bar3e
| Dhera ko kele ke per3a kI taraha kATa ddaalaa| bAMsa ke Dhera meM use pRthvI
meM sthalakamala ke samAna eka mAnava-mastaka dikhAyI diyA, jisake oTha
phar3aphar3A rahe the| gaura se dekhane para use jJAta huA ki ulaTA sira kiye
kisI dhUmrapAna karate hue AdamI kA tAjA kaTA huA dhar3a par3A hai| yaha
bIbhatsadRzya dekhate hI vaha pazcAttApayukta svara meM | maiMne kisI
niraparAdha vidyAsAdhaka ko mAra DAlA hai, dhikkAra hai mujhe!' yoM AtmaniMdA
karate hue kumAra ne jyoM hI kadama Age bar3hAye, tyoM hI svarga se bhUtala para
utare hue naMdanavana ke samAna eka udyAna dekhaa| usameM praveza karate hI
sAmane sAtamaMjalA mahala dekhA, mAno vaha sAta loka kI zobhA se mUrcchita
hokara yahAM par3A ho| usa gaganacuMbI mahala meM car3hate hue kumAra ko
khecarI-sI eka nArI dikhAyI dI; jo hathelI para muMha rakhe ciMtita mudrA meM
baiThI thii| kumAra ne jarA Age | bar3hakara utsukatA pUrvaka spaSTa AvAja meM
usase pUchA-'bhadre! tuma yahAM akelI kaise baiThI ho? tumhArI mukha mudrA se
aisA pratIta hotA hai ki tumheM koI gaharI ciMtA hai| agara mujhe batAne meM koI
harja na ho to, batAo-'tumhArI ciMtA kA kyA kAraNa hai?' usa bhayavihvala nArI
ne gadgadsvara meM uttara diyA-'bhadra! merI rAmakahAnI bahuta laMbI hai|
paraMtu pahale yaha | batAiye ki Apa kauna hai? jarA apanA paricaya dijie|'
kumAra ne apanA paricaya dete hue kahA-'maiM pAMcAladeza ke brahmarAjA kA putra
brahmadatta kumAra huuN|' itanA sunate hI vaha harSa se uchala par3I aura usake
netroM se harSAzru Tapaka pdd'e| usane kumAra ke caraNoM ko pakhAratI huI-sI
usake caraNoM meM gira par3I aura rotI-rotI kahane lagI-'kumAra! samudra meM
DUbate hue ko naukA kI taraha mujha azaraNa abalA ko ApakI zaraNa mila gayI
hai|' kumAra ke dvArA AzvAsana dekara pUche jAne para usane kahA-'bhadra! maiM
ApakI mAtAjI ke bhAI puSpacUla kI putrI puSpavatI nAma kI kanyA huuN| mere mAtA-
pitA dvArA maiM Apako dI huI huuN| vivAha ke dina kI pratIkSA karatI huI maiM
eka dina bAvar3I ke kinAre sthita udyAna meM haMsanI ke sadRza krIr3A karane
gayI thii| jisa prakAra rAvaNa sItA ko balAt apaharaNa karake laMkA le AyA thA
usI bhAMti nATyonmatta nAmaka duSTa vidyAdhara mujhe yahAM apaharaNa karake le
AyA hai| merI dRSTi sahana na hone se zUparNakhA suta kI taraha vidyAsAdhana ke
lie usane isa veNuvana meM praveza kiyA hai| vahAM vaha dhUmrapAna karate hue
paira Upara ko karake 101

Page #124 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Tale of Brahmadatt Chakri The second light of Yoga Shastra, verse 27, is
engaged in the pursuit of knowledge. If today he attains mastery over knowledge,
he will marry me today with proper rituals. I am worried about how to escape
from his clutches!' Hearing this, the prince narrated the entire story of how he
had eliminated the person who was hiding in the pile of bamboo. Pushpavati was
overjoyed at the attainment of her beloved and the destruction of the
unpleasant. This couple, who were traditionalists, performed a Gandharva
marriage right there. Such marriages, performed willingly without mantras, are
considered the best among Kshatriyas. The night passed quickly, like a single
watch, as he engaged in conversation and amorous play with her, using various
sweet words. As dawn broke, Brahmadatt heard a sound in the sky, like the
bleating of a flock of celestial women. With a look of wonder, he asked
Pushpavati, 'Where and how is this sound suddenly occurring in the sky, like
untimely rain without clouds?' She said nervously, 'My love! This sound is of
the arrival of the Vidyaadhar maidens named Visakha, who are mad with drama.
They are coming to marry you, for no reason. Truly, 'A being thinks one thing in
his mind, and destiny brings about something else.' In my opinion, you should
leave from here for a while. I will praise your qualities and see what the
reaction of the Vidyaadharis is. Do they feel affection or aversion towards you?
When I see that they have affection for you, I will show a red flag. Upon seeing
it, you should return. If they have aversion towards you, I will show a white
flag. Seeing that, you should leave.' Hearing this, Brahmadatt said, 'My love!
Don't worry at all. Am I such a coward that I would run away from them? What can
they do to me, whether they are angry or pleased?' Pushpavati said, 'My love! I
am not saying that you are afraid of them. But perhaps the Vidyaadharas
associated with them will become your enemies and create some unnecessary
obstacle. So, what harm is there in knowing their attitude? You hide in a corner
somewhere for a while and watch.' Agreeing to this, the prince hid to one side.
Pushpavati, knowing the Vidyaadharis were favorable to the prince, mistakenly
waved a white flag instead of a red one. Seeing it, the prince, out of devotion
to his beloved, moved on from there. Courageous men fear no one. He saw a lake
there. Just as the Airavata elephant enters the Manasarovar, so too did the
prince enter it. After bathing in it and drinking the nectar-like water as he
wished, Brahmadatt crossed that formidable forest and reached the bank of a
great lake in the evening, just as birds, after flying in the sky all day,
return to their nests in the evening, and the sun, after roaming in the sky all
day, enters the sea in the evening. From there, walking in the morning, the
prince reached the bank of a lake by noon. After bathing and washing properly
there, and drinking the sweet, nectar-like water, he came out of it. Then, on
the edge of the forest in the northwest direction, he saw a beautiful woman,
like a forest goddess herself, picking flowers from the bushes of trees and
vines; as if she were asking, through the sound of the buzzing bees, 'Did you
bathe well in the lake?' Seeing her, the prince thought, 'Brahma must have
practiced creating countless forms from birth till now; only then could he have
manifested such beauty in this woman.' Talking to her maidservant, she looked
with bright eyes, like jasmine flowers, and walked away from there, as if she
had placed a garland around the prince's neck. The prince also looked at her and
was about to depart in the other direction when a maidservant came there,
carrying clothes, ornaments, betel nut, etc. She offered the prince the clothes
and ornaments, saying, 'The one you saw here is our mistress. She sent me to you
on the pretext of fulfilling a desire. And she has ordered me to take you to my
father's minister's house as a guest. The true reality is known only to the
mistress herself.' Hearing this, the prince also went with the maidservant to
the house of the Nagadeva minister. The minister also stood up to welcome the
prince as soon as he arrived, as if he was already attracted to his qualities.
The maidservant said to the minister, 'Princess Shrikant has sent this fortunate
prince to stay at your place.' The maidservant delivered this message and left.
The minister 102

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 brahmadatta cakrI kI kathA yogazAstra dvitIya prakAza zloka 27 vidyAsAdhana
kara rahA hai| yadi Aja use vidyA siddha ho jAyegI to Aja hI vaha mere sAtha
vidhivat vivAha kara legaa| maiM isI ciMtA meM hU~ ki usake caMgula se kaise
chUTakArA pAU~!' yaha sunakara kumAra ne bAMsa ke Dhera meM sthita usa vyakti ko
khatma kara dene kA sArA vRttAMta btaayaa| priya kI prApti aura apriya kA vinAza
hone se puSpavatI ke harSa kA pAra na rhaa| paraMparAnurAgI isa yugala ne vahIM
gAMdharva-vivAha kara liyaa| maMtravidhi ke binA bhI svecchA se kiye hue aise
vivAha ko kSatriyoM meM uttama mAnA jAtA hai| vividha prakAra ke madhura vacanoM
se usake sAtha saMlApa va ratikrIr3A karate hue vaha rAta eka pahara ke samAna
jhaTapaTa bIta gyii| prAtaHkAla hote hI brahmadatta ne AkAza meM khecara-striyoM
kI bher3oM kI-sI AvAja sunii| usane AzcaryamudrA meM puSpavatI se pUchA-'binA
meghoM ke akAlavRSTi ke samAna AkAza meM acAnaka yaha AvAja kahA~ aura kaise ho
rahI hai?' usane ghabarAte hae kahA-'priyatama! yaha AvAja to nATayonmatta kI
vizAkhA nAmaka vidyAdhara-kumAriyoM ke Agamana kI hai| ve vyartha hI usake lie
vivAha-sAmagrI lekara A rahI hai| saca hai, 'prANI mana meM kucha aura hI socatA
hai aura daiva kucha aura hI ghaTanA ghaTita karatA hai|' mere khyAla se Apa
kucha samaya ke lie yahAM se anyatra cale jaaie| maiM Apake guNoM kI prazaMsA
karake yaha jAna lUM ki vidyA dhAriyoM ke mana meM usakI kyA pratikriyA hotI
hai? unheM Apake prati anurAga hotA hai yA virAga? jaba maiM dekhUgI ki unameM
Apake prati anurAga hai to lAlajhaMDI dikhA dUMgI, use dekhate hI Apa vApasa
lauTa aanaa| agara unameM Apake prati virAga hogA to maiM sapheda jhaMDI
btaauuNgii| jise dekhakara Apa anyatra cale jaanaa|' yaha sunakara brahmadatta
ne kahA-'priye! tuma jarA bhI mata ghbraao| kyA maiM itanA kAyara hU~ ki unase
Darakara bhAga jAUM? ve ruSTa yA tuSTa hoMgI to merA kyA kara sakegI?' puSpavatI
ne kahA-'priyatama! Apako unase bhaya hai, yaha maiM| nahIM khtii| paraMtu
zAyada unase saMbaMdhita vidyAdhara Apake virodhI banakara vyartha hI koI vighna
khar3A kara de| ataH unakI manovRtti jAna lene meM harja hI kyA hai? Apa jarA
dera ke lie dUsarI jagaha eka kone meM chipakara dekhate rheN|' isa bAta se
sahamata hokara kumAra eka ora chipa gyaa| puSpavatI ne una vidyAdhAriyoM ko
kumAra ke anukUla jAnakara bhUla se lAla ke badale sapheda jhaMDI hilaayii|
kumAra bhI use dekhakara priyA para bhaktivaza vahAM se Age cala pdd'aa| sAhasI
manuSyoM ko kisI kA bhI bhaya nahIM hotaa| vahAM eka sarovara dekhaa| airAvata
hastI jaise mAnasarovara meM praveza karatA hai, usI prakAra kumAra ne bhI
usameM praveza kiyaa| usameM snAna karake aura icchAnusAra amRtasama jala pIkara
brahmadatta usa vikaTa araNya ko pAra karake zAma ko eka mahAsarovara ke tIra
para usI taraha pahuMcA, jaise dinabhara AkAza meM ghUmakara pakSI zAma ko apane
ghosaloM meM A pahuMcate haiM, sUrya jaise dinabhara AkAza meM ghUmakara zAma ko
samudra meM ghusa jAtA hai| vahAM se prAtaHkAla calakara kumAra dopahara taka
eka sarovara ke taTa para phuNcaa| vahAM acchI taraha nahA-dhokara, pIyUSa-sA
madhura jala pIkara vaha usameM se bAhara niklaa| phira vAyavya dizA meM eka
kinAre khar3I peDoM aura beloM kI jhAr3iyoM meM phUla cunatI huI | sAkSAt
vanadevI ke samAna eka suMdarI ko dekhA; jo mAno, vahAM guMjAra karate hue
bhauMroM kI AvAja ke jariye pUcha rahI thI'Apane sarovara meM acchI taraha snAna
kiyA?' use dekhakara kumAra socane lagA-'brahmAjI ne janma se lekara Aja taka
aneka rUpa banAne kA abhyAsa kiyA hogA; tabhI to isa nArI meM ve itanA rUpa
kauzala prakaTa kara sake haiN| apanI dAsI ke sAtha bAta karatI huI mogare ke
phUla ke samAna ujjvala kanakhiyoM se dekhatI huI, vaha vahAM se isa taraha calI
gayI mAno kumAra ke gale meM varamAlA DAlakara cala par3I ho| kumAra ne bhI use
dekhA aura zIghra hI dUsarI ora prasthAna kara rahA thA ki eka dAsI hAtha meM
vastra, AbhUSaNa, tAMbUla Adi lekara vahAM aayii| usane rAjakumAra ko vastrAdi
arpita karate hue kahA-'Apane yahAM jise dekhA thA, vaha hamArI svAminI hai|
usane mujhe eka svArthasiddhi ke bahAne Apake pAsa bhejA hai| aura mujhe yaha
Adeza diyA hai ki maiM Apako pitAjI ke maMtrI ke yahAM atithi ke rUpa meM le
jaauuN| saccI hakIkata to svAminI hI yathArtha rUpa se jAnatI hai|' yaha
sunakara kumAra bhI usa dAsI ke sAtha nAgadeva maMtrI ke yahAM calA gyaa| maMtrI
bhI kumAra ke Ate hI svAgata ke lie khar3A ho gayA, mAno vaha pahale se hI usake
guNoM se AkarSita ho| dAsI ne maMtrI se kahA-'rAjakumArI zrIkAMtA ne Apake yahAM
rahane ke lie isa bhAgyazAlI kamAra ko Apake pAsa bhejA hai|' dAsI yaha saMdeza
dekara calI gyii| maMtrI 102

Page #125 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Tale of Brahmadatt Chakri  The second light of the Yoga Shastra, verse 28,
welcomed the Kumar like a master. The whole night passed in the blink of an eye.
Then the minister took the Kumar to the royal palace. There the king welcomed
him with offerings like the rising sun. After that, the king gave him his
daughter without asking about the Kumar's lineage. "From the appearance itself,
one can know all the qualities of a man." The Kumar and the princess exchanged
hands, signifying their love and devotion, and got married.  One day, while
playing in private, Brahmadatt asked the princess, "My love! Why did your father
give you to an unknown person like me without knowing my lineage?" Shrikant,
with her beautiful teeth and clean lips, replied, "My love! In the city of
Vasantpur, there was a king named Shabarasen. His son, along with cruel kings,
dethroned my father. Since then, my father has taken refuge in this village with
his army. Like a reed that is quickly broken, my father, living here, has
supported the wild Bhils in robbing villages and sustaining his family. They
have four sons, like the four ways to acquire wealth. After four sons, they had
a very beloved daughter, that is me."  "As soon as I reached the threshold of
youth, my father said to me, 'Daughter! All the kings have become my enemies.
Therefore, you stay here and search for your husband. Tell me about the husband
you like.' Since then, I have been living on the banks of the lake like a Chakri
bird, watching many travelers coming and going on this path. The fulfillment of
a cherished desire is rare even in dreams. But, Aryan son! By the strength of my
destiny, you have arrived here. You know what happened after that."  One day,
the king of the village went to loot a village. The Kumar also went with him,
for this is the way of Kshatriyas. While the village was being looted, Vardhanu
fell at the feet of Brahmadatt like a swan on the bank of the lake. Vardhanu
embraced the Kumar and cried out loud. It is true that when you meet a loved
one, all your sorrow comes out from within. The Kumar comforted him with sweet
words like the nectar of immortality and asked him to tell him the whole story
from beginning to end. Vardhanu began to speak, "Master! At that time, I was
searching for water for you, leaving you under the banyan tree. I had just gone
a little further when I saw a lake like a pool of nectar. I was bringing water
for you in a lotus leaf cup from the lake when suddenly some warriors, dressed
in armor like Yama's messengers, surrounded me and asked, 'Vardhanu! Tell the
truth, where is Brahmadatt?' Understanding their intention, I said, 'I don't
know.' As I said this, they started beating me mercilessly like a thief. I made
up a story and said, 'A lion has already killed Brahmadatt.' They said, 'Then
tell us where the lion killed him?' Then I wandered around, pretending to search
for you, and came in front of you to signal you to escape. I told them that the
lion had killed him right here. Then I put the magical pill given by the
wanderer in my mouth, and under its influence, I became completely motionless
and fainted. Thinking me dead, they left me there. After they left, I took the
pill out of my mouth and started searching for you like someone searching for
lost treasure. After wandering through many villages, I saw a wanderer, a great
sage, who was the embodiment of penance. I bowed to him and sat down. He asked
me, 'Vardhanu! I am Vasubhag, the friend of Dhanu. Tell me, where does
Brahmadatt live on this earth?' Trusting him, I told him everything as it was.
Hearing my sad story, he looked sad, like a face darkened by smoke. He told me
that when the lac house was burnt to ashes, the king had inspected it in the
morning and found one body. But the other two bodies were not found. But a
tunnel was found there, at the end of which were the marks of a horse's feet. It
is possible that they escaped with the help of Dhanu's intelligence. Knowing
this, the king, enraged at the minister, ordered, 'Send the army, which moves
like the rays of the sun, in every direction, so that they can find those
two...'

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 brahmadatta cakrI kI kathA yogazAstra dvitIya prakAza zloka 28 ne mAlika kI
taraha kumAra kI vividha prakAra se Avabhagata kii| vaha sArI rAta palaka mArate
hI bIta gyii| phira maMtrI kumAra ko rAjamahala meM le gyaa| vahAM rAjA ne
bAlasUrya ke samAna ardhya Adi se usakA svAgata-satkAra kiyaa| usake bAda rAjA
ne kumAra kA vaMza Adi pUche binA hI use apanI putrI de dii| 'AkRti se hI puruSa
ke guNa Adi saba jAne jA sakate haiN|' kumAra aura rAjakumArI ne eka dUsare ke
prati anurAga-samarpaNa-sUcaka paraspara hastamilApa karake vivAha kiyaa| eka
bAra ekAMta meM krIr3A karate hue brahmadatta ne rAjakumArI se pUchA-'priye!
tumhAre pitAjI ne vaMza Adi jAne binA hI mujha sarIkhe ajJAta vyakti ko tumheM
kaise de dI? manohara daMtAvalI kI kiraNoM se svaccha oSThadala vAlI zrIkAMtA ne
isake uttara meM kahA-'priyatama! vasaMtapura nagara meM zabarasena nAma kA rAjA
thaa| usake putra ne krUragotra vAle rAjAoM ke sAtha milakara mere pitAjI ko
rAjagaddI se utAra diyaa| taba se mere pitA ne bala-vAhana-sahita isa pallI meM
Azraya liyA hai| jaise baiMta ko jhaTapaTa jhakA diyA jAtA hai. vaise hI yahAM
rahakara mere pitAjI ne vanya bhIloM ko: sahayoga se DAkA DAlakara gA~voM ko
ujAr3ate hue ve apane parivAra kA bharaNa-poSaNa karate haiN| saMpatti milane ke
cAra upAyoM ke samAna inake cAra putra haiN| cAra putroM ke bAda inake yahAM eka
atipriya putrI kA janma huA; vaha maiM huuN|' yauvana kI caukhaTa para paira
rakhate hI pitAjI ne mujha se kahA-'beTI! sabhI rAjA mere zatru bane hue haiN|
ataH tuma yahIM rahakara apane vara kI talAza karate rahanA aura tumheM jo vara
pasaMda ho, usake lie mujhe kaha denaa|' taba se lekara aba taka maiM cakavI ke
samAna sadA sarovara ke taTa para rahakara isa mArga se Ate-jAte aneka yAtriyoM
ko dekhatI rahatI thii| kiye hue manoratha kI prApti to svapna meM bhI durlabha
hotI hai| magara Aryaputra! mere bhAgya kI prabalatA se hI Apa yahAM padhAre
haiN| isake bAda kA hAla to Apa jAnate hI haiN|'  /  eka dina pallIpati rAjA eka
gAMva ko lUTane ke lie gyaa| usake sAtha kumAra bhI gyaa| kyoMki kSatriyoM kA
yahI krama hotA hai| jaba gAMva lUMTA jA rahA thA, tabhI sarovara ke kinAre
varadhanu brahmadatta ke caraNakamaloM meM Akara haMsa kI taraha giraa| kumAra
ke gale se galA lagAkara varadhanu muktakaMTha se rone lgaa| saca hai, priya
vyakti ke milane se sArA duHkha aMdara se ubharakara bAhara A jAtA hai| kumAra
ne use amRta kI dhUMTa ke samAna atimadhura vArtAlApa se AzvAsana dekara aba
taka kA sArA vRtAMta AdyopAMta sunAne ko khaa| varadhanu ne kahanA prAraMbha
kiyA-'svAmin! usa samaya bar3a ke per3a ke nIce Apako chor3akara maiM Apake lie
pAnI kI talAza meM jA rahA thaa| kucha Age bar3hA hI thA ki maiMne amRtakuMDa ke
samAna eka sarovara dekhaa| maiM Apake lie kamalinI-patra ke saMpuTa (done) meM
sarovara se pAnI bharakara lekara A hI rahA thA ki acAnaka yamadUta ke samAna
bakhtara pahane hue kucha subhaToM ne Akara mujhe ghera liyA aura pUchane
lage-'varadhanu! saca-saca batAo brahmadatta kahA~ hai?' maiMne unakA Azaya
bhAMpakara kahA-'mujhe patA nahIM hai|' yaha kahate hI ve mujhe cora kI bhAMti
bekhaTake dhar3Adhar3a mArane lge| maiMne bAta banAte hue kahA-'brahmadatta ko
to kabhI kA siMha mArakara khA gayA hai|' unhoMne kahA-'to usakA sthAna batAo ki
siMha ne use kahAM mArA hai?' taba maiM idhara-udhara ghUmakara Apako DhUMDhane
ke bahAne | se Apake sAmane AyA aura Apako vahAM se bhAgane kA saMketa kiyaa|
unheM batAyA ki siMha ne use yahIM mArA thaa| phira maiMne parivrAjaka dvArA dI
huI jAdUI golI muMha meM rakhI, jisake prabhAva se maiM bilakula nizceSTa aura
mUrcchita ho gyaa| mujhe marA huA samajhakara unhoMne vahIM choDa diyaa| unake
cale jAne ke kAphI dera bAda maiMne muMha meM se vaha golI bAhara nikAlI aura
khoye hue nidhAna ko DhUMDhane kI taraha Apako DhUMDhane cala pdd'aa| kaI gAMvoM
meM bhaTakane ke bAda maiMne sAkSAt mUrtimAna |tapaH puMja-se eka parivrAjaka
mahAtmA ke darzana kiye| unheM namaskAra karake maiM baiThA hI thA ki unhoMne
mujha se pUchA'varadhanu! maiM dhanu kA mitra vasubhAga huuN| yaha to batA ki
brahmadatta isa samaya pRthvI para kahAM rahatA hai?|' maiMne bhI una para
vizvAsa karake unheM sArI bAteM jyoM kI tyoM kaha diiN| merI duHkhakathA
sunakara dhuMe se mlAna hue mukha kI taraha udAsa| mudrA meM unhoMne mujhe
batAyA ki-jaba lAkSAgRha jalakara khAka ho gayA thA, taba dIrgharAjA ne subaha
nirIkSaNa karAyA to vahAM eka zaba milaa| paraMtu bAkI ke do zava nahIM mile|
magara vahAM para suraMga jarUra milI; jisake aMta meM ghor3e ke pairoM kI
nizAnI thii| ho na ho ve dhanumaMtrI kI sujhabUjha se bhAga gaye haiM; yaha
jAnakara dIrgharAjA ne maMtrI para kopAyamAna hokara AjJA dI-'sUrya kI kiraNoM
ke samAna abAdhagati se kUca karane vAlI senA pratyeka dizA meM bhejo, tAki vaha
una donoM 103

Page #126 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Story of Brahmadatta Chakri - We have brought here the verse 27 of the
second chapter of the Yogashastra. The minister of the bow managed to escape
from there secretly. After his departure, your mother has been placed in a house
in the neighborhood of the Chandala, who are like hell. Just as one pain follows
another after a fever, similarly, on hearing this, my mind was filled with
sorrow upon sorrow, and I, being distressed, went from there towards Kausambi. I
disguised myself as a fake Kapaalika ascetic and entered the Chandala
neighborhood. There, like a rabbit, I started searching for my mother by
entering house to house. When the people asked me the reason for roaming in that
neighborhood every day, I said - 'My Maatangi Vidya sadhana is such that I have
to enter house to house in this way.' While wandering in this way, I became
friends with a reliable police officer there. 'What work cannot be done by
Maya?' One day, through that trusted police officer, I had my mother called and
told her that 'Your son's friend, the great vrati Kundindya tapasvi, pays his
respects to you.' My mother understood. The eager mother asked me to meet her to
see her son. So, the next day I went there myself and gave my mother a betel-nut
packet; as soon as she ate it, she became unconscious like a log. Seeing her in
such a condition, the police officer told the king, 'Lord! The wife of the
treasurer has died.' Hearing this, I also reached there immediately. I told the
servants who had come to perform the cremation, 'Brothers! If you cremate her at
this time, it will be a great misfortune for your king.' Hearing this, the royal
servants left her there as she was. Then I told the police officer, 'If you
help, I can accomplish a mantra with this all-characteristic word.' The police
officer agreed to my request. I also took the mother away from the cremation
ground at dusk. There, in a deceptive manner, I wrote a circular yantra and sent
the police officer to offer it to the goddesses of the city. While he went
there, I gave the mother another betel-nut; with which she regained
consciousness and got up, as if waking up from sleep. I introduced myself to
her. Hearing this, she started hiccupping. I comforted her and stopped her from
crying. Then I took her to Kaccha village and left her with my father's friend
Devasharmaa. After leaving her there, I have been wandering here and there to
find you. By my good fortune, I have now had your darshan, which is like a heap
of merit. Swamin! Now tell me, where did you go and where did you stay after
being separated from me? And what happened where? The prince also narrated his
Rama story. From there, the two were walking together when someone came and said
in a low voice, 'The soldiers of King Dirgharaja are roaming around the village,
showing a picture (hooliya) of a person with a similar appearance as you, and
asking if anyone has seen two such people.' Hearing their words, I have come to
inform you both. Now do as you deem appropriate. Saying this, he left. Hearing
this, the two companions fled into the forest like baby elephants and reached
Kaushambi in a day. There, outside the city, in the garden, they saw Sagardatta
and Buddhil making roosters fight for a bet of one lakh rupees. The roosters
were fighting each other with their claws and beaks, like deadly weapons. In the
fight, the strong rooster of superior breed, like Bhadrahasti, was defeated by
the cunning rooster of Buddhil, like a medium-sized elephant. Seeing this,
Vardhanu said, 'Sagar! Why did your superior breed rooster lose? If you want to
know the reason, I will find it out.' With Sagar's consent, Vardhanu closely
examined Buddhil's rooster and found a needle-like iron object stuck in its leg.
Buddhil also realized that Vardhanu had discovered his deception; so he secretly
offered 50,000 rupees in Vardhanu's ear. Vardhanu also told this matter in
private to Brahmakumar. Brahmadatta secretly removed the iron needle stuck in
the leg of Buddhil's rooster and made it fight again with Sagardatta's rooster.
With the removal of the needle, Buddhil's rooster lost the battle in a short
time. 'How can the victory of a deceitful person be possible?' Pleased with
this, Sagardatta took the two princes in his chariot to his house. There, the
two princes were warmly welcomed.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 brahmadatta cakrI kI kathA - yogazAstra dvitIya prakAza zloka 27 ko bAMdhakara
yahAM le aaye|' dhanumaMtrI vahAM se cupake se bhAgane meM saphala ho gye| unake
jAne ke bAda tumhArI mAtA ko | dIrgharAjA ne naraka ke samAna cAMDAloM ke
mohalloM meM eka ghara meM DAla diyA hai| jaise eka phusI ke bAda dUsarI phusI
se pIr3A bar3ha jAtI hai, vaise hI usa bAta ko sunakara mere mana meM duHkha
para duHkha bar3ha jAne se maiM ciMtAtura hokara vahAM se kAMpilyapura kI ora
gyaa| maiMne nakalI kApAlika sAdhu kA veSa banAyA aura cAMDAloM ke mohalle meM
ghusaa| vahAM kharagoza ke samAna ghara-ghara meM ghusakara apanI mAtA kI talAza
karane lgaa| logoM ne mujhe usa mohalle meM roja pherI lagAne kA kAraNa pUchA to
maiMne kahA- 'merI mAtaMgI vidyA kI sAdhanA hI kucha isI prakAra kI hai ki
isameM mujhe ghara-ghara praveza karanA |par3atA hai| isa prakAra bhramaNa
karate hue vahAM eka vizvasanIya kotavAla ke sAtha merI dostI ho gyii| 'mAyA se
kaunasA kAma nahIM banatA?' eka dina usa vizvasta kotavAla ke dvArA maiMne mAtA
ko kahalavAyA ki 'tumhAre putra kA mitra mahAvratI kauNDinya tApasa Apako
vaMdana karatA hai|' merI mAtA samajha gyii| putra milane ke lie Atura mAtA ne
milane ke lie mujha se khlvaayaa| ataH dUsare dina maiM svayaM vahAM gayA aura
mAtA ko guTikA-sahita eka bIjorA diyA, use khAte hI vaha jaDa-sI nizcetana bana
gyii| usakI aisI hAlata dekhakara kotavAla ne rAjA se kahA-'deva! dhanamaMtrI kI
patnI mara gayI hai| rAjA ne apane sevakoM ko usakA agni-saMskAra karane kA
Adeza diyaa| yaha sunakara maiM bhI tatkAla vahAM phuNcaa| maiMne agni saMskAra
karane ke lie Aye hue sevakoM se kahA-bhAI! isa samaya tuma isakA agni-saMskAra
karoge to tumhAre rAjA kA bar3A bhArI aniSTa hogaa|' yaha sunakara ve rAja
sevaka use jyoM kI tyoM vahAM chor3akara cale gye| taba maiMne kotavAla se
kahA-'yadi tuma sahAyatA karo to maiM isa sarva-lakSaNayukta zaba se eka maMtra
siddha kara luuN|' kotavAla ne merI bAta mAna lii| maiM bhI saMdhyA samaya mAtA
ko zamazAna se dUra le gyaa| vahAM para eka jagaha kapaTa se maiMne eka
maMDalAkAra yaMtra likhakara nagara kI deviyoM ko bali dene ke lie kotavAla ko
bhejaa| idhara to vaha gayA aura udhara |maiMne mAtA ko dUsarI guTikA dI; jisase
vaha hoza meM Akara isa prakAra uTha khar3I huI, jaise koI nIMda se jamhAI lete
hue uTha khar3A hotA hai| maiMne use apanA yathArtha paricaya diyaa| sunate hI
usakI to hicakiyAM baMdha gyii| maiMne use DhADhasa baMdhAkara usakA ronA baMda
kraayaa| phira use kaccha gAMva meM apane pitAjI ke mitra devazarmA ke yahAM le
gyaa| unake yahAM use chor3akara maiM tumheM DhUMDhane ke lie idhara-udhara
ghUmatA huA yahAM para AyA huuN| mere ahobhAgya se sAkSAt puNyarAzi ke samAna
abhI mujhe Apake darzana huye| svAmin! aba Apa batalAiye ki mere se bichur3ane
ke bAda Apa kahAM-kahAM gaye? | aura kahAM-kahAM Thahare? kahAM kyA hAla rahA?
kumAra ne bhI apanI rAma kahAnI sunaayii| vahAM se ve donoM sAtha-sAtha jA rahe
the ki kisI ne Akara dhIme se kahA-'gAMva meM dIrgharAjA ke subhaTa tuma-sI
AkRti vAlA citra (hUliyA) batAkara pUchate hue ghUma rahe haiM ki 'kyA aisI
AkRti vAle koI do AdamI yahAM Aye kisI ne dekhe haiM?' unakI bAteM sunakara maiM
Apa donoM ko dekhate hI sUcita karane AyA huuN|' aba Apako jaisA ucita lage
vaisA kreN| yoM kahakara vaha cala diyaa| yaha sunakara ve donoM sAthI usa
jaMgala meM hAthI ke bacce ke samAna bhAgate hue eka dina kauzAMbI phuNce| vahAM
nagarI ke bAhara udyAna meM unhoMne sAgaradatta aura buddhila ko eka lAkha
rupaye kI zarta para murge lar3Ate dekhaa| ve murge ur3a-ur3akara prANa-nAzaka
hathiyAra kI noka ke samAna apane nakhoM aura coMcoM se paraspara lar3a rahe
the| lar3ate-lar3ate una donoM meM se bhadrahastI-sadRza uttamajAti ke sazakta
murge ko madhyama-prakAra ke hAthI ke samAna buddhibala ke mariyala murge ne
harA diyaa| yaha dekhakara varadhanu ne kahA-'sAgara! terA uttama jAti kA murgA
hote hue bhI kyoM hAra gayA? agara tUM isakA kAraNa jAnanA cAhatA hai to maiM
usakA patA lagAU~?' sAgara ke sahamata ho jAne para radhanu ne buddhila ke murge
ko gaura se dekhA to usake paira meM yamadUtI ke samAna lohe kI suI lagI huI
thii| buddhila bhI mana hI mana samajha gayA ki yaha mere kapaTa ko jAna gayA
hai; ataH varadhanu ke kAna meM gupacupa 50 hajAra rupaye dene kI pezakaza kii|
va radhanu ne bhI brahmakumAra se yaha bAta ekAMta meM khii| brahmadatta ne
cupake se buddhila ke marge ke paira meM lgii| huI lohe kI suI nikAla dii| aura
use phira sAgaradatta ke murge ke sAtha ldd'aayaa| suI ke nikAla lene se
buddhila kA murgA pahale hI morce meM jarA-sI dera meM hAra gyaa| 'kapaTa karane
vAle nIca manuSya kI vijaya ho hI kaise sakatI hai?' isase sAgaradatta prasanna
hokara vijaya dilAne vAle donoM kumAroM ko apane ratha meM biThAkara apane ghara
le gyaa| vahAM ve donoM apane 104

Page #127 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Story of Brahmadatta Chakri From the Yogashastra, Second Illumination, Verse
27  Brahmadatta began living like a member of the household. One day, the
servant of Buddhil came to Vardhamana and whispered something in his ear. After
the servant left, Vardhamana told Brahmadatta, "Brother! The other day, Buddhil
had offered to give 50,000 rupees. Today, you should see that matter."
Thereafter, he showed the young prince a garland of large, shining pearls,
radiant like the planet Venus. The prince saw the inscription of his name on the
garland. Just then, a female ascetic named Vatsa appeared, as if the inscription
had come to life. She blessed both of them by placing auspicious rice grains on
their heads. Then, she took Vardhamana aside and whispered something to him. The
minister's son told Brahmadatta that the ascetic was asking for a copy of the
inscription on the garland, which Brahmadatta had given her.  I asked him, "Who
is this Brahmadatta?" He replied, "She is the most excellent daughter of this
city, Ratnawati, who has come in the form of Rati, the goddess of love, to this
world. On the day of the cockfight between her brother Sagardatta and Buddhil,
she saw Brahmadatta. Since then, she has been afflicted by the fever of love.
She is unable to find any peace and is becoming thinner day by day. Day and
night, she keeps repeating, 'I seek refuge in Brahmadatta.'"  One day, she wrote
a letter with her own hand, asking me to send the garland to Brahmadatta. I had
the servant deliver that letter. Saying this, he stood there. In response, I
wrote a letter and instructed her to leave. From that day, Brahmadatta, the
young prince, also began to suffer from the unbearable torment of love, like an
elephant scorched by the intense rays of the midday sun. Indeed, a person
afflicted by the fever of love cannot experience happiness.  On the other hand,
the king's servants, who were sent by the long-lived king, had searched the
entire city of Kaushambi. They were now running here and there, like sharp
thorns embedded in the body, in search of these two. On the order of the king of
Kaushambi, the search for them began in the city. Then, the merchant Sagardatta
hid them in the secret chamber of his house and protected them. At night, when
they wanted to go out, Sagardatta accompanied them in a chariot for some
distance and then returned.  After Sagardatta left, as they proceeded further,
they saw a beautiful woman sitting in a chariot, yoked with horses, in a garden,
like the goddess of the Nandana grove. She politely asked them, "Why did it take
you so long?" They also asked her, "Dear lady, how do you know us? Do you know
who we are?"  She replied, "In this city, there is a very wealthy merchant named
Dhanapravara, who is like the second brother of Kubera. I am his daughter,
Vivekashri, who has the eight qualities of intelligence, like the supreme
discernment. As soon as I attained youth, I performed intense worship of the
Yaksha presiding over this garden, as I desired to obtain an excellent husband.
Most women have no other ambition besides this. Pleased by my devotion, the
chief Yaksha granted the boon, 'Brahmadatta Chakravarti will be your husband.'
He also said that the person with the Shrivatsalakshana, who will come with his
friend in the cockfight between Sagardatta and Buddhil's cocks, you should
consider him as your husband. When Brahmadatta will be in my Yaksha shrine, then
your first meeting with him will occur. So, O beautiful one, I have understood
that you are the one. Therefore, now you may come. Just as water contact brings
peace to a person afflicted by heat, in the same way, your union will bring
peace to me, who has been tormented by the pain of separation for a long time."
"Very well, so be it," said the prince, accepting that devoted woman. At her
request, both of them sat in her chariot. When asked, "Where should we go?" the
beautiful woman said, "To Magadhapur, where my cousin brother Dhanawaha lives.
He will honor us greatly. So it is good to go there."  Saying this, the
minister's son, acting as the charioteer, turned the horses in that direction.
As soon as Brahmadatta crossed Kaushambi and entered a dreadful forest, like the
playground of Yama, he saw two terrible bandit commanders named Sankatakaand
Kantaka in front of him. Just as dogs stop a wild boar, they stopped
Brahmadatta. And those two brothers, like the sons of the Night Goddess, became
suddenly excited and showered arrows on Brahmadatta with his army. The entire
sky was covered with arrows. The prince also took up his bow and arrows, roaring
like a lion, and unleashed a continuous stream of arrows, destroying the bandit
army.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 brahmadatta cakrI kI kathA yogazAstra dvitIya prakAza zloka 27 ghara kI taraha
rahane lge| eka dina varadhanu ke pAsa Akara buddhila ke naukara ne kAna meM
kucha khaa| usake cale jAne ke bAda varadhanu ne brahmadatta se kahA-'bhAI! usa
dina buddhila ne 50 hajAra rupaye dene kI pezakaza kI thii| Aja usa bAta ko Apa
dekhnaa|' usake bAda zukragraha kI taraha zobhAyamAna gola bar3e-bar3e motiyoM
kA eka hAra kumAra ko btaayaa| kumAra ne hAra para baMdhA huA apane nAma kA
lekha dekhaa| itane meM mAno sAkSAt vAcika lekha ho, isa rUpa meM vatsA nAma kI
eka tApasI aayii| usane donoM ke mastaka para akSata DAlakara AzIrvAda diyaa|
phira varadhanu ko eka ora le jAkara usake kAna meM kucha kahakara vaha calI
gyii| maMtrIputra ne vaha bAta brahmadatta se kahI ki vaha tApasI hAra ke sAtha
baMdhe hue lekha kA pratilekha mAMgatI thii| yaha zrIbrahmadatta-nAmAMkita lekha
usane diyA hai|' maiMne usase pUchA-'yaha brahmadatta kauna hai? taba usane
kahA-'isa bhUmaMDala para mAno rati hI kumArikA ke rUpa meM rUpa badalakara AyI
ho, aisI isa nagara kI sarvazreSThiputrI ratnavatI hai| usane apane bhAI
sAgaradatta aura buddhila ke murgoM kI lar3AyI ke dina brahmadatta ko dekhA
thaa| | usI samaya se vaha kAmajvara se pIDita hai| use kisI bhI prakAra se
caina nahIM mila rahA hai| dinoMdina dubalI hotI jA rahI hai| rAta-dina vaha
yahI raTana kiyA karatI hai ki 'mujhe brahmadatta kA zaraNa hai|' eka dina mujhe
apane hAtha se patra likhakara brahmadatta ko hAra arpaNa karane ke sAtha use
pahuMcAne ko khaa| maiMne sevaka dvArA vaha patra bhejA thaa| yoM kahakara vaha
khar3I rhii| maiMne bhI pratyuttara ke rUpa meM patra likhakara use calI jAne kI
AjJA dii| usa dina se brahmadattakumAra bhI madhyAhna ke sUrya kI prakhara
kiraNoM se tape hue hAthI ke samAna durnivArya kAmasaMtopa se tasa rahane lgaa|
sacamuca, kAmajvara ke tApa se tasa manuSya sukhAnubhava nahIM kara sktaa|  /
dUsarI ora dIrgharAjA dvArA bheje hue rAjasevakoM ne sArI kauzAMbI nagarI chAna
ddaalii| zarIra meM jar3e hue tIkhe kAMToM ke samAna ina donoM kI khoja meM ve
aba idhara-udhara bhAga-daur3akara rahe the| kauzAMbInareza kI AjJA se bhI
nagarI meM una donoM kI khoja hone lgii| taba sAgaradatta seTha ne nidhAna ke
samAna apane talaghara meM unheM chipAkara unakI rakSA kii| rAta meM jaba unakI
bAhara jAne kI icchA huI to sAgaraseTha unheM ratha meM biThAkara kucha dUra
taka sAtha gyaa| bAda meM vaha vApisa lauTa aayaa| sAgaraseTha ke jAne ke bAda
jaba ve Age bar3hane lage to eka udyAna meM naMdanavana kI devI ke samAna ghor3e
jute hue ratha meM baiThI huI eka suMdarI ko dekhaa| usIne unheM AdarapUrvaka
pUchA-'Apako itanI dera kyoM lagI?' una donoM ne bhI usase pUchA-'bhadre! tuma
hamase kaise paricita ho? jAnatI ho, hama kauna haiM?' isa para usane uttara
diyA-'isa nagara meM kubera ke dUsare bhAI ke samAna mahAdhanI dhanapravara nAma
kA seTha hai| buddhi ke ATha guNoM para sarvopari viveka ke samAna usa seTha ke
ATha putroM para maiM vivekazrI nAma kI unakI putrI haiN| yuvAvasthA Ate hI
maiMne atyuttama vara prApta hone kI kAmanA se isa udyAna meM adhiSThita yakSa
kI bahuta ArAdhanA kii| adhikAMza striyoM kA isake sivAya aura koI manoratha
nahIM hotaa| bhakti se tuSTa hokara yakSapravara ne varadAna diyA- 'brahmadatta
cakravartI terA pati hogaa|' aura yaha bhI batA diyA ki sAgaradatta aura
buddhila seTha ke murgoM kI lar3AI meM zrI vatsa cihnavAlA tumhAre samAna
rUpavAna jo vyakti apane mitra ke sAtha AyegA, use tuma apanA pati smjhnaa| jisa
samaya brahmadatta mere yakSAyatana meM hogA, tabhI usake sAtha terA prathama
milana hogaa| isalie he suMdara! maiMne jAna liyA hai ki Apa vahI haiN| ataH aba
Apa pdhaaro| jaise tApa se pIr3ita vyakti ko jala saMsparza zAMti detA hai, usI
taraha dIrghakAla se mujha virahatApa se pIr3ita ko Apa saMgama sparza se zAMti
do|' 'acchA, aisA hI hogaa|' yoM kahakara kumAra ne usa anuraktA ko svIkAra
kiyaa| usake Agraha para donoM usake ratha meM baitthe| 'kahAM calanA hai?' yaha
pUchane para usa suMdarI ne batAyA ki-'magadhapura meM, merA cacerA bhAI
dhanAvaha hai| vaha hamArA bahuta satkAra kregaa| isalie vahIM cale to acchA
hai|' isa prakAra ratnavatI ke kahane para maMtrIputra ne sArathI banakara
ghor3oM kI lagAma usI aura modd'ii| brahmadatta kauzAMbI ko pArakara jyoM hI
yamarAja kI krIr3AbhUmi-sI eka bhayaMkara aTavI meM AyA. tyoM hI usane apane
sAmane bhayaMkara sakaMTaka aura kaMTaka nAmaka do bhayaMkara cora senApatiyoM
ko dekhaa| baDe saara ko jaise kutte roka lete haiM, usI prakAra unhoMne
brahmadatta ko roka liyaa| aura kAlarAtri ke putra sarIkhe una donoM bhAiyoM ne
sahasApUrvaka uttejita hokara senA ke sahita brahmadatta para ekadama bANavarSA
kara dii| bANoM se sArA AkAzamaMDala chA gyaa| kumAra ne bhI dhanuSa-bANa
dhAraNa kara siMha-garjanA karate hue bANoM kI akhaMDadhArA se corasenA ko usI
taraha 105

Page #128 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Story of Brahmadutt Chakri The Yogashastra, Second Illumination, Verse 27,
has been paralyzed, just as a cloud paralyzes fire. The shower of arrows
released by the prince has scattered both the enemy commanders and their army.
When a lion is ready to attack, how can a deer stand its ground? The minister's
son said to the prince, "Your Highness, you must be very tired from the battle.
So, rest here on this chariot for a while." Just as an elephant sleeps with a
young female elephant in the valley of a mountain, Brahmadutt too slept on the
chariot with Ratnawati.  After some time, when the prince woke up, he did not
see the charioteer, the minister's son. Thinking he must have gone to fetch
water, the prince called out for a long time, but received no response. Seeing
the front part of the chariot soaked in blood, the prince suddenly cried out,
"Alas, I am killed!" Lamenting thus, he fainted and fell into the chariot. When
he regained consciousness after some time, he stood up. Then, remembering
something, he began to sob like an ordinary person. "Friend Vardhana! Alas!
Where have you gone, leaving me behind!" In this way, he started lamenting.
Ratnawati consoled him, saying, "I don't think your friend has died. Therefore,
my lord, it is not appropriate to speak such inauspicious words for him. He must
have gone somewhere for your work. It is certain that sometimes servants go
without being asked, for the sake of their master's work. My heart says that he
is safe under the influence of your devotion and will surely return. The
influence of devotion to the master is such that it acts as a shield for the
servants. Upon reaching the place, we will have the servants search for him.
Now, it is not right to linger even for a moment in this terrible forest like
Yama."  Reassured by Ratnawati's words, the prince urged the horses forward, and
they reached a village on the border of the Magadha kingdom. The village
headman, sitting in his home, saw them approaching and warmly welcomed them to
his house. When the prince had somewhat recovered, the village headman asked
him, "Your face suggests that you are in sorrow. If there is no objection,
please tell me the reason for your concern." The prince said, "While fighting
with the thieves, my friend has disappeared, and I am unable to find him."
Thereupon, the headman said, "Just as Hanuman found Sita, we too will search and
bring him back." Saying this, the headman, along with the villagers, thoroughly
searched the entire forest, but could not find any trace of him. Returning, the
village leader said, "No one injured by an attack was seen in this great forest;
however, this one arrow was found there. It seems that Vardhana has surely
died."  Hearing this, Brahmadutt sank deeper into the darkness of sorrow. Soon,
the arrival of night made that darkness of sorrow even more palpable. In the
fourth watch of the night, thieves suddenly attacked the place. But on being
challenged by the prince, they all fled in the opposite direction. Then,
following the guidance of the village leader, the prince and Ratnawati reached
Rajgriha. There, the prince left Ratnawati at the hermitage of an ascetic
outside the city and entered the city. As soon as he entered the city, he saw
two young, beautiful women standing at the palace window, as if they were
personifications of Rati and Priti. They said to the prince, "Prince, is it
proper for you to leave the company of those devoted to love?" The prince asked,
"Who are these devoted to love, and when have I abandoned them?" Welcoming him,
they said, "Lord, please come here and rest. Are you not pleased?" Entertaining
him with sweet words, they took Brahmadutt into their home. After bathing him
and feeding him, they began to narrate their true story:  "In the southern range
of the Vaitadhya mountain, which is like the tilaka mark on the earth made of
golden rock and is endowed with the abodes of the Vidyadharas, there is a city
named Shivamandira. In that city, there was a king named Jwalanashikha, who had
a radiant, lightning-like wife named Vidhushikha. After their son Natyonmatta,
we two, Khanda and Vishakha, were born as their beloved daughters. Once, our
father, along with his friend Agnishikha and all of us, had gone to..."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 brahmadatta cakrI kI kathA yogazAstra dvitIya prakAza zloka 27 staMbhita kara
dI, jisa taraha meghadhArA agni ko staMbhita kara detI hai| kumAra dvArA kI gayI
usa bANavRSTi se ubhaya corasenApati aura unakI senA titara-bitara hokara bhAga
gyii| sAmane prahAra karane vAlA siMha ho to vahAM hiraNa kaise Tika sakatA hai?
maMtrI-putra ne kumAra se kahA-'svAmin! yuddha karake Apa bahuta thaka gaye
hoNge| ataH ghar3Ibhara isa ratha para hI so jaaiie| parvata kI talahaTI meM
jaise javAna hathinI ke sAtha hAthI so jAtA hai, vaise hI brahmadatta bhI ratha
meM ratnavatI ke sAtha so gyaa| kucha samaya bAda jaba rAjakumAra jAgA to ratha
ke sArathI ke rUpa meM maMtrIputra ko usane nahIM dekhaa| ataH 'pAnI lene gayA
hogA;' aisA vicArakara bahuta dera taka AvAja dii| paraMtu sAmane se koI uttara
nahIM milA aura ratha ke Age ke bhAga khUna se sanA dekhA to kumAra sahasA cillA
uThA-'hAya maiM mArA gayA!' yoM vilApa karate-karate vaha mUrcchita hokara ratha
meM gira pdd'aa| kucha dera bAda hoza Ane para vaha khar3A huaa| phira kucha
smaraNa kara sAdhAraNa manuSyoM kI taraha sisakiyAM  /  'mitra. varadhana! hAya!
tama kahAM cale gaye. majhe choDakara!' isa prakAra vaha vilApa karane lgaa|
ratnavatI ne DhAr3hasa baMdhAte hue samajhAyA- 'mujhe nahIM lagatA ki Apake
mitra kI mRtyu huI hai| ataH nAtha! usake lie aise amAMgalika zabda bolanA yogya
nahIM hai| Apake kArya ke nimitta se vaha yahIM kahIM para gayA hogaa| yaha
niHsaMdeha bAta hai ki svAmI ke kArya ke lie kabhI-kabhI binA pUche bhI sevaka
jAte haiN| merA mana kahatA hai, vaha ApakI bhakti ke prabhAva se surakSita hI
hai aura avazya hI vApisa aayegaa| svAmIbhakti kA prabhAva hI aisA hai ki vaha
sevakoM ke lie kavaca ke samAna kArya karatI hai| sthAna para pahuMcakara hama
sevakoM ke dvArA usakI khoja kraayeNge| aba yamarAja sarIkhe isa bhayaMkara vana
meM jarA bhI rukanA ThIka nahIM hai| ratnavatI ke kathana se Azvasta hokara
kumAra ne ghor3oM ko Age calAyA aura magadharAjya ke sImAvartI eka gAMva meM
phuNce| 'ghor3e aura vAyu ke lie dUra hI kyA hai?' apane ghara meM baiThe hue
gAMva ke | mukhiyA ne unheM jAte dekhA to svAgatapUrvaka apane ghara le aayaa|
'AkRti ke dekhane mAtra se hI ajJAta mahApuruSoM kI pUjA hotI hai|' jaba kumAra
kucha svastha huA to gAMva ke mukhiyA ne usase pUchA-'Apake cehare se mAlUma
hotA hai, Apa zokAtura haiN| agara koI Apatti na ho to mujhe apanI ciMtA kA
kAraNa btaaie|' kumAra ne kahA-'coroM ke sAtha yuddha karate hue merA mitra
kahIM gAyaba ho gayA hai| usakA patA nahIM cala rahA hai| isalie hama ciMtita
hai|' isa para mukhiyA ne kahA-'jaise hanumAnajI ne sItA kA patA lagAyA thA,
vaise hama bhI usakA patA lagAkara laayeNge|' yaha kahakara gAMva kI janatA ke
sAtha mukhiyA ne sArI aTavI chAna DAlI; magara usakA kahIM patA nahIM claa|
gAMva ke netA ne lauTakara kahA-'isa mahAvana meM to prahAra se ghAyala huA koI
najara nahIM AyA; hAM! yaha eka bANa jarUra vahAM milA hai| mAluma | hotA hai,
varadhanu avazya mara gayA hai|' yaha sunate hI brahmadatta aura adhika
zokAMdhakAra meM DUba gyaa| thor3I hI dera meM usa zokAMdhakAra ko pratyakSa
banAne ke hetu rAtri kA Agamana huaa| rAta ke cauthe prahara meM vahAM acAnaka
cora car3ha aaye| paraMta kamAra ke lalakArane para ve saba ulaTe pairoM bhAga
gye| usake bAda gAMva ke netA ke pathapradarzana meM calate hue kumAra aura
ratnavatI donoM rAjagRha phuNce| vahAM nagara ke bAhara eka tApasa ke Azrama meM
ratnavatI ko ThaharA diyaa| kumAra ke vahAM se calakara nagara meM praviSTa hote
hI usane mahala ke jharokhe meM khar3I huI do navayauvanA kAminiyA~ dekhIM; mAno
ve sAkSAt rati aura prIti ho| una donoM ne kumAra se kahA-'kumAra!
prItiparAyaNajanoM ke prema ko chor3akara cale jAnA kyA Apake lie ucita hai?'
kumAra ne kahA-aise premaparAyaNa kauna hai? aura kaba maiMne unakA tyAga kiyA
hai? yaha to batAo ki tuma kauna ho? yoM pUchate hI unhoMne svAgata karate hue
kahA-'nAtha! pahale Apa yahAM padhAriye aura vizrAma krie| Apa prasanna to haiM
na?' yo madhuravacanoM se satkAra karatI huI ve donoM brahmadatta ko ghara meM
le gyii| use snAna, bhojana Adi karAne ke pazcAt apanI yathArtha kathA isa
prakAra kahane lagIM_ vidyAdharoM ke AvAsa se yukta svarNazilAmayI pRthvI ke
tilaka-samAna vaitADhya-parvata kI dakSiNa zreNI meM zivamaMdira nAmaka nagara
meM alakA parI meM gadyaka kI taraha jvalanazikha nAma kA rAjA rAjya karatA ke
tejasvI mukhakAMti vAlI, vidyutprabhA ke samAna vidhuzikhA nAma kI patnI thii|
usako nATyonmatta nAmaka putra ke bAda khaMDA aura vizAkhA nAma kI hama donoM
prANAdhikA putriyA~ huii| eka bAra pitAjI apane mitra agnizikha aura hama sabako
106

Page #129 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Tale of Brahmadatt Chakri  Taking the second light of Yoga Shastra, verse
27, they set out on a pilgrimage. One should engage loved ones in religious
work. We reached the Ashtapad mountain from there. There we saw the images of
the Tirthankaras, made of precious gems, with their characteristic colors, and
after performing the proper abhisheka, vilepana, and puja, we circumambulated
them and with a focused mind, we offered our devotional obeisance to the
chaitya. As we were leaving from there, we saw two charanmunis under a blood-red
tree; they seemed to be embodiments of penance and tranquility. After paying our
respects to them, we listened with reverence to their dharmadeshana, which was
like the moon's light, dispelling the darkness of our ignorance. After that,
Agnishikha asked the munis, "Who will be the husbands of these two girls?" They
said, "Whoever kills their brother will be their husbands." Hearing this, our
faces turned pale, as if the moon loses its luster in the snow. Then, with words
filled with detachment, we said to our father, "Father! Just today you taught us
about the futility of the world, and today you are so overwhelmed by the poison
of sorrow? What is the benefit of drowning in such worldly pleasures?" From then
on, we all took care to protect our brother. Once, while wandering, our brother
saw your maternal uncle Pushpachala's daughter, Pushpavati. He was captivated by
her extraordinary beauty. Then, in his foolishness, he forcibly abducted her.
"The mind always follows actions." Unable to bear the sight of the girl, he went
to acquire knowledge. You know the rest of the story. At that time, Pushpavati
spoke of dharma to alleviate our brother's grief over his death, and also told
us that your beloved Brahmadatt was here. The words of a muni are never false.
We accepted that. But in our haste, Pushpavati waved a white flag instead of a
red one, causing you to leave us. Due to the adversity of our fate, you did not
come. We searched for you there a lot, but you were nowhere to be seen. Finally,
defeated and exhausted, we returned here. By our good fortune, you have arrived
here. According to Pushpavati's statement, we have already accepted you.
Therefore, you are now the only hope for both of us. Knowing the two women's
devotion, the Kumar performed a Gandharva marriage with them. Just as rivers
love to merge with the ocean, so do women love to be united with their husbands.
Just as Mahadev used to play with Ganga and Parvati, Brahmadatt spent that night
playing with those two beautiful women. In the morning, as the Kumar was
leaving, he lovingly instructed them, "Until I get my kingdom, you two should
stay with Pushpavati." Both of them obeyed the Kumar's command. As soon as the
Kumar left from there, that temple and house, and everything else, became
invisible, like Gandharvanagar. Returning from there, Brahmadatt went to that
tapas-ashram to search for Ratnavati. But not finding her there, he asked a man
standing there, who had a good appearance, "Great one! Have you seen a woman
wearing divine clothes, adorned with jewels, today or yesterday?" He replied,
"Yes, great one! Yesterday I saw a woman crying and lamenting, saying, 'Oh, my
lord!' But her uncle recognized her and took her with him." Brahmadatt found out
about Ratnavati's uncle and called him to his place. For those who are blessed
with great fortune, everything seems new. He spent a lot of time experiencing
worldly pleasures with her. One day, the Kumar began the post-death rituals for
Vardhanu. The next day, the Kumar was feeding the Brahmanas when a man dressed
as a Brahmana, who looked like Vardhanu, came there and said, "If you give me
food, you will be giving it to Vardhanu himself." The Brahmaputra heard these
sweet words, which were like nectar to his ears, and looked at him carefully
from head to toe, embracing him as if he had made his soul his own. Then, with
joy, he bathed him and took him home. When the Kumar asked him about his story
after he recovered, he said, "After you went to sleep, thieves who looked like
soldiers of Dirgharaja surrounded me. A thief hiding among the trees there shot
an arrow with such force that I was wounded and fell to the ground. When I
regained consciousness, I slowly crawled away and hid among the vines.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 brahmadatta cakrI kI kathA yogazAstra dvitIya prakAza zloka 27 sAtha lekara
tIrthayAtrA ke lie cle| snehIjana ko dharmakArya meM lagAnA caahie| hama vahAM
se aSTApada-parvata para phuNce| vahAM maNiratna se nirmita, pramANopeta
varNayukta zrI tIrthaMkara-pratimAoM ke darzana kiye tathA vidhivat abhiSeka,
vilepana evaM pUjA karake, unakI pradakSiNA dekara ekAgra citta se hamane
bhaktiyukta caitya-vaMdana kiyaa| vahAM se bAhara nikalate hI raktavarNIya vRkSa
ke nIce do cAraNamuniyoM ko dekhA; mAno ve mUrtimAna tapa aura zama hoN| unheM
vaMdana karake hamane zraddhApUrvaka apanA ajJAnAMdhakAra dUra karane vAlI
sAkSAt caMdra-jyotsanA ke samAna unakI dharmadezanA sunii| usake bAda agnizikha
ne munivara se pUchA-'ina donoM kanyAoM kA pati kauna hogA?' unhoMne kahA-'ina
donoM ke bhAI ko jo mAregA, vahI inakA pati hogaa|' isa bAta ko sunate hI
himapAta se jaise caMdramA phIkA par3a jAtA hai, vaise hI pitAjI aura hama donoM
kA ceharA phIkA par3a gyaa| phira hamane vairAgyagarbhita vacanoM se unheM
kahA-'pitAjI! Aja hI to Apane munivara se saMsAra kI asAratA kA upadeza sunA hai
aura Aja hI Apa viSAda rUpI niSAda se itane parAbhUta ho rahe haiM? isa prakAra
ke viSayotpanna sukha meM DUbane se kyA lAbha?' taba se hama saba apane bhAI kI
surakSA kA dhyAna rakhate the| eka bAra hamAre bhAI ne bhramaNa karate hae Apake
mAmA puSpacala kI patrI puSpavatI ko dekhaa| usake adabhuta rUpa-lAvaNya ko
dekhakara vaha mohita ho gyaa| phira usa durbuddhi ne usa kanyA kA jabardastI
apaharaNa kiyaa| 'buddhi sadA karmAnusAriNI hotI hai|'knyaa kI daSTi sahana
nahIM hone se vaha svayaM vidyA sAdhana karane gyaa| usake bAda kA sArA hAla Apa
jAnate hI haiN| usa samaya puSpavatI ne hamAre bhAI ke maraNa-saMbaMdhI duHkha
ko dUra karane ke lie dharma kI bAteM kahIM aura yaha bhI batAyA ki tumhArA ISTa
bhartA brahmadatta yahIM para AyA huA hai| muni kI vANI kabhI mithyA nahIM
hotii| hamane usa bAta ko svIkAra kiyaa| paraMtu utAvala meM puSpavatI ne lAla
ke badale sapheda jhaMDI hilA dI, jisase Apa hameM chor3akara cale | gye| hamAre
bhAgya kI pratikUlatA ke kAraNa Apa nahIM pdhaareN| hamane ApakI vahAM bahuta
khoja kii| para Apa kahIM dikhAyI na diye| Akhira hAra-thakakara hama vApisa
yahAM aayiiN| hamAre ahobhAgya se Apa yahAM padhAre haiN| puSpavatI ke kathana
ke | anusAra hama Apako pahale hI svIkRta kara cukI haiN| ataH aba Apa hI hama
donoM kI gati haiN| kumAra ne donoM nAriyoM ko anurakta jAnakara unake sAtha
gAMdharva-vivAha kiyaa| saritAoM ko sAgara kA saMgama priya hotA hai, vaise hI
striyoM ko apane patiyoM kA saMgama priya hotA hai| gaMgA aura pArvatI ke sAtha
jaise mahAdeva krIr3A karate the, vaise una donoM kAminiyoM ke sAtha krIr3A
karate hue brahmadatta ne vaha rAta vahIM para bitaayii| prAtaH kumAra ne
prasthAna karate samaya una donoM ko sasneha AjJA di ki jaba taka mujhe rAjya na
mile, taba taka tuma donoM puSpavatI ke pAsa hI rhnaa| donoM ne kumAra kI AjJA
zirodhArya kii| kumAra ke vahAM se prasthAna karate hI vaha maMdira aura ghara
Adi saba gaMdharvanagara ke samAna adRzya ho gye| vahAM se lauTakara brahmadatta
ratnavatI kI talAza karane ke lie usa tApasa-Azrama meM phuNcaa| paraMtu vahAM
use na pAkara vahAM khar3e eka zubhAkRtimAna puruSa se pUchA-'mahAbhAga! divya
vastra pahanI huI, ratnAbhUSaNoM se suzobhita kisI strI ko Apane Aja yA kala
dekhI hai?' usane uttara diyA-'hAM, mahAnubhAva! kala maiMne 'he nAtha!' isa
prakAra rudana aura vilApa karatI huI eka strI dekhI thii| paraMtu usakA cAcA
use pahacAnakara apane sAtha le gayA hai|' ratnavatI ke cAcA ko brahmadatta kA
patA lagA to use apane yahAM bulA liyaa| mahAna Rddhi vAle bhAgyazAliyoM ko
sabhI vastu nayI mAluma hotI hai| usake | sAtha viSayasukhAnubhava karate hue
kAphI samaya vyatIta ho gyaa| eka dina kumAra ne varadhanu kA maraNottara kArya
prAraMbha kiyaa| dUsare dina kumAra brAhmaNoM ko bhojana de rahA thA ki
varadhanu kI-sI AkRti kA eka brAhmaNa-veSadhArI vyakti vahAM Akara kahane
lagA-'yadi mujhe bhojana doge to sAkSAt varadhanu ko doge|' kAnoM ko amRtarasa
aise priyavacana brahmaputra ne sune aura use sira se paira taka gaura se
dekhakara isa taraha chAtI se lagAyA. mAno apanI AtmA ko usakI AtmA banA liyA
ho| phira harSAtha se use snAna karAkara kamAra ghara meM le gyaa| svastha hone
para kamAra ke dvArA pUchane para usa apanA sArA vRttAMta isa prakAra sunAyA
'Apake so jAne ke bAda dIrgharAjA ke sainika-se lagate coroM ne mujhe ghera
liyaa| vahIM vRkSa ke bIca meM chipe eka cora ne itane jora se bANa mArA ki maiM
Ahata hokara vahIM jamIna para gira pdd'aa| hoza meM Ane para dhIre se
sarakakara latAoM 107

Page #130 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Tale of Brahmadatt Chakra  Yoga Shastra, Second Light, Verse 27  In the
midst of it, I hid myself. After the thieves left, I hid in the hollow of the
tree, like a water bird hides in water. When silence fell all around, I reached
the village with great difficulty, looking here and there. After learning your
news from the headman of the village, I came here searching. Just as the peacock
is delighted to see the clouds, so I am overjoyed to see you. Brahmadatt,
expressing great joy, said to him, "When will we become cowardly and inactive?"
During that time, the spring festival, which bestows dominion upon Kamadeva and
intoxicates young men like wine, arrived. Then, the king, the brother of Yama
Raja, like a drunken elephant, broke the pillar, freed from his chains, and went
out, terrifying everyone. A young woman, staggering under the weight of her
hips, was going on the highway, when the elephant picked her up in its trunk
like a lotus. Helpless, weeping, she began to lament pitifully, "Oh Matanga, oh
Matanga! (meaning your Matanga - (Chandala) name is meaningful) Are you not
ashamed to catch a helpless woman?" Hearing this, the Kumar came forward to
rescue her from the elephant's clutches. The Kumar jumped up and placed his foot
on the elephant's tusk, like placing his foot on a ladder, and easily climbed
onto the elephant's back. And there he sat down comfortably. Just as a yogi
subdues his senses and mind through yogic power, so the Kumar subdued the
elephant with the reins of his voice and the pressure of his feet. The
spectators standing there exclaimed, "Bravo! Bravo! Well done! Well done!" Thus,
everyone began to cheer for the Kumar. The Kumar also took the elephant to the
pillar and tied it like a female elephant. When the king heard this, he
immediately came to the scene and, looking at the Kumar with astonished eyes,
said, "Who is not amazed by his form and prowess? Who is this powerful man in
disguise? Where did he come from? Or is he the sun or Indra?" Hearing this,
Ratnawati told the king the whole story. Attracted by the qualities of the
Kumar, the fortunate king gave him his daughters in a festive manner, just as
Daksha Raja had given them to Chandra. After marrying the princesses, the Kumar
stayed there happily. One day, an old woman, with one end of her garment
trailing behind her, came to the Kumar and said, "In this city, there lives a
wealthy Seth named Vaishramana, who is as wealthy as any other money-lender on
earth. He has a daughter named Shrimati, like the Lakshmi born from the ocean.
On the day you rescued her from the elephant's clutches, like the moon from the
clutches of Rahu, she has accepted you as her husband in her heart. Since then,
she has been restless and thin in your memory. Just as she has taken you into
her heart, so you should take her by the hand." At the old woman's repeated
request, the Kumar agreed. Thereafter, with great pomp and ceremony, with music
and various auspicious events, the Kumar married Shrimati. At the same time,
Vardhanu married Nanda, the daughter of the wise minister. In this way, gaining
fame throughout the country and abroad through their prowess and engaging in
charity, they both continued to progress.  Hearing that Brahmadatt was coming
towards Varanasi, the king of Varanasi, knowing his glory like that of Katik
Brahma, went to meet him and brought him to his place with festivities.
Attracted by Brahmadatt's qualities, the king gave him his daughter, Katikavati,
and as dowry, a four-armed army, like Jayalakshmi herself. In this way, kings
like Karunudatt of Champanagari, Dhanumantri, and Bhagadatt, hearing of his
arrival, came to welcome him. Just as Bharat Chakravarti had made Sushen his
commander-in-chief, so Brahmadatt made Vardhanu his commander-in-chief and
marched with him to make Dirghraja a guest of the other world. During this time,
a messenger of Dirghraja came to Katik Raja and said, "It is not right for you
to abandon the friendship you have had with Dirghraja since childhood." To this,
Katik Raja said, "We five brothers, including Brahmaraja, were like brothers. At
the time of Brahmaraja's death, Dirghraja was entrusted with the responsibility
of protecting his son and kingdom. But he did not consider the future of
Brahmaraja's son with foresight, nor did he consider his kingdom. On the
contrary, he has become corrupt and committed so many sins that one 108

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 brahmadatta cakrI kI kathA yogazAstra dvitIya prakAza zloka 27 ke bIca meM
maiMne apane Apako chipA liyaa| coroM ke cale jAne ke bAda maiM vRkSa ke
khokhale meM isa prakAra chipa gayA; jaise | pAnI meM atipakSI chipa jAtA hai|
jaba cAroM ora sannATA chA gayA, taba idhara-udhara dekhate hue bar3I muzkila se
maiM gAMva meM phuNcaa| gAMva ke mukhiyA se Apake samAcAra jAnakara khojate
khojate maiM yahAM taka AyA huuN| mora ko jaise megha dekhane para harSa hotA
hai, vaise hI mujhe Apako dekhakara atyaMta harSa huA hai| brahmadatta ne
atyaMta prasannatA prakaTa karate hue usase | kahA- 'aba hama kaba
puruSArthahIna hokara kAyara bane baiThe raheMge?" usI daurAna kAmadeva ko
Adhipatya dilAne vAlA, madya ke samAna javAnoM ko madonmatta banAne vAlA
vasaMtotsava | A gyaa| taba yamarAjA kA sahodara - sA rAjA eka matavAlA hAthI
khaMbhA tor3akara zRMkhalAbaMdhanamukta hokara saba logoM ko | trAsa detA huA
bAhara nikalA  /  nitaMbabhAra se lar3akhar3AtI huI eka yuvatI rAjamArga para jA
rahI thI, ki usa hAthI ne | kamalinI kI taraha use sUMDa meM pakar3akara
utthaayii| lAcAra banI huI, AMsU bahAtI vaha kanyA dInatApUrvaka karuNakraMdana
karane lagI- 'are mAtaMga, o mAtaMga ! ( arthAt terA mAtaMga - (cAMDAla) nAma
sArthaka hai) eka abalA ko pakar3ate hue tujhe zarma nahIM AtI?' yaha sunate hI
hAthI ke caMgula se chur3Ane ke lie kumAra usake sAmane AyA  /  kumAra ekadama
uchalakara sIr3hI para paira rakhane ke samAna usake dAMta para paira rakhakara
AsAnI se hAthI kI pITha para car3ha gyaa| aura vahAM Asana | jamAkara baiTha
gayA  /  jaise yogI yogabala se iMdriyoM aura mana ko vaza meM kara letA hai,
vaise hI kumAra ne vANI aura paira ke | dabAva ke aMkuza se hAthI ko vaza meM
kara liyaa| vahAM khar3e hue darzaka loga sahasA bola uThe - 'zAbAza! zAbAza!
vAha ! | vAha ! bahuta acchA kiyaa|' isa prakAra saba loga kumAra kI jaya-
jayakAra karane lage  /  kumAra ne bhI hAthI ko khaMbhe ke | pAsa le jAkara
hathinI ke samAna bAMdha diyaa| jaba rAjA ke kAnoM meM yaha bAta pahuMcI to vaha
turaMta ghaTanAsthala para AyA aura kumAra ko vismita netroM se dekhakara kahane
lagA- 'isakI AkRti aura parAkrama se kauna Azcaryacakita nahIM hotA? yaha
guptaveza meM parAkramI puruSa kauna hai? kahAM se AyA? athavA yaha koI sUrya yA
iMdra hai?' yaha sunakara ratnavatI ne rAjA ko sArA vRttAMta sunAyA  /  kumAra
ke guNoM se AkRSTa hokara bhAgyazAlI rAjA ne utsavapUrvaka brahmadatta ko usI
taraha apanI | kanyAe~ dI; jisa taraha dakSa rAjA ne caMdra ko dI thii|
rAjakanyAoM ke sAtha vivAha ke bAda kumAra vahIM sukhapUrvaka rahane | lgaa| eka
dina vastra kA eka sirA ghUmAtI huI eka bur3hiyA ne Akara kumAra se kahA - 'isa
nagara meM pRthvI para dUsare dhanakubera ke samAna dhanADhya vaizramaNa nAmaka
seTha rahatA hai| samudrotpanna lakSmI kI taraha usake zrImatI nAma kI eka putrI
hai| rAhu ke paMje se caMdrakalA kI taraha Apane jisa dina use hAthI ke paMje se
chur3AyI hai, usI dina se usane Apako | mana se pati rUpa meM svIkAra kara liyA
hai| tabhI se vaha ApakI yAda meM becaina aura dubalI ho rahI hai| Apako jaise
usane hRdaya meM grahaNa kiyA hai, usI taraha Apa use hAtha se grahaNa kreN|'
bur3hiyA ke bahuta anurodha karane para kumAra ne apanI | svIkRti de dii|
tatpazcAt khUba dhUmadhAma se gAje-bAje va vividha maMgaloM ke sAtha kumAra ne
zrImatI ke sAtha zAdI kii| sAtha hI usI samaya subuddhi maMtrI kI naMdA nAma kI
kanyA se varadhanu ne zAdI kii| isa taraha apane parAkrama se deza-videza meM
khyAti prApta karate hue aura paropakAra meM udyama karate hue ve donoM Age se
Age bar3hate jA rahe the| brahmadattako vArANasI kI ora Ate hue sunakara vahAM
ke rAjA kaTaka brahmA ke samAna usakI mahimA jAnakara | agavAnI ke lie usake
sAmane gayA aura utsavasahita use apane yahAM le AyA  /  brahmadatta ke guNoM se
AkarSita hokara | rAjA ne use kaTakavatI nAma kI apanI putrI dI aura daheja meM
sAkSAt jayalakSmIsadRza caturaMgiNI senA dii| isa taraha caMpAnagarI ke
kareNudatta, dhanumaMtrI aura bhAgadatta Adi rAjA usakA AgamAna sunakara
svAgatArtha saMmukha Aye  /  bharatacakravartI ne jaise suSeNa ko senApati
banAyA thA, vaise hI brahmadatta ne varadhanu ko senAdhipati banAkara dIrgharAjA
ko | paraloka kA atithi banAne ke lie usake sAtha yuddha ke lie kUca kiyaa| isI
daurAna dIrgharAjA ke eka dUta ne kaTakarAjA ke pAsa Akara kahA - 'dIrgharAjA ke
sAtha bAlya kAla se baMdhI huI mitratA chor3anA Apake lie ucita nahIM hai|' isa
para | kaTaka rAjA ne kahA- brahmarAjA sahita hama pAMcoM sage bhAIyoM kI taraha
mitra the  /  brahmarAjA ke marate samaya putra aura rAjya kI rakSA karane kI
jimmevArI dIrgharAjA ko sauMpI gayI thii| lekina unhoMne na to brahmarAjA ke
putra 'ke bhaviSya kA dIrghadRSTi | se vicAra kiyA aura na usake rAjya kA hI  /
pratyutara bhraSTa banakara itane adhika pApoM kA AcaraNa kiyA hai, jitane eka
108

Page #131 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Tale of Brahmadatt Chakra  Yoga Shastra, Second Light, Verse 27 | Even a
Chandala would not do this. Therefore, go and tell Dirgharaja that Brahmadatt is
coming, either fight him or flee from here with your black face. Saying this, he
sent the messenger back. Thereafter, Brahmadatt advanced with unimpeded speed.
Reaching Kampilya, he surrounded the entire city, including Dirgharaja, just as
clouds cover the sky along with the sun. Just as a great serpent emerges from a
hole when a stick is struck on it, Dirgharaja emerged from the city with all his
family and war materials. On the other hand, Chulani Rani, having become
extremely detached from the world, took initiation from a Pravartini Sadhvi
named Purnā and gradually became eligible for liberation. Just as aquatic
creatures of a river clash with those of the sea, so too did Dirgharaja's
soldiers clash with Brahmadatt's soldiers. Many of Dirgharaja's soldiers fell
wounded. Then Dirgharaja himself, grinding his teeth in anger, with a terrifying
countenance like a boar, rushed to kill the enemy. But Brahmadatt's infantry,
chariot force, and cavalry spread out rapidly like the swift current of a river.
After that, Brahmadatt also, with red eyes in anger, roared like an elephant and
clashed with Dirgharaja himself. Like the waves of the ocean during the time of
destruction, they both attacked each other with weapons. In the meantime,
knowing that the opportunity had come, a Chakra Ratna, shining like a servant,
all-conquering, appeared in the service of Brahmadatt. Brahmadatt immediately
used that Chakra Ratna to finish off Dirgharaja. What effort does lightning need
to kill a gnat? Does it take time? The gods, praising him like the Magadhas,
showered flowers on him, saying, "Victory to Brahmadatt Chakravarti!" The
citizens began to see Brahmadatt as their father, mother, or deity. Just as
Indra enters Amaravati, so too did he enter Kampilya. Upon ascending the throne,
King Brahmadatt summoned all his wives from all places, with whom he had married
in the past; and among them, he established Pushpavati as the "Strirata." Then,
conquering the six continents with different boundaries of ownership, Brahmadatt
made the earth into one continent. That is, he established a single-umbrella
Chakravarti kingdom. For twelve consecutive years, kings from all directions
came and performed his coronation, just as they had done for Bharata. He married
sixty-four thousand women and kept them in his inner palace. Thus, Brahmadatt
Chakravarti was enjoying all the pleasures of the kingdom as the fruit of the
tree of penance performed in his previous birth. One day, there was a play,
music, dance, and melody in the palace; in the meantime, one of his maidservants
presented Brahmadatt with a wonderful bunch of flowers woven by the celestial
nymphs. Brahmadatt looked at it intently and began to think, "I have seen such a
bunch of flowers somewhere before." Pondering repeatedly in his mind, he
remembered his five previous births. Then he remembered that he had seen such a
bunch in the Saudharma Devaloka. The intense recollection of his brother, who
had been with him in his five previous births, made the king impatient. He
fainted and fell down with a thud. Seeing the Chakravarti in this state, they
sprinkled sandalwood water on him; from which he regained consciousness. Upon
recovering, he began to think, "How and where will I find my brother from my
previous birth? To recognize him, I will give the servant half a verse, the
identifier of my previous birth, 'Aasva Dasau Mrigao Hansi, Matangavamarau
Tatha.' He also had a proclamation made in the city, "Whoever completes this
half-verse of mine, I will give him half my kingdom." Hearing this announcement,
the people of the city became very curious to know this half-verse. Everyone
memorized it almost as if it were their own name. But no one could fulfill the
problem of the meaning of the verse. At that time, Purimatal was born in the
city of Chitrak as the son of a Seth. He had the knowledge of jati-smriti.
Therefore, he took initiation and wandered from village to village. 1. One story
describes Chulani fleeing and taking initiation from a Sadhvi on the way. 109

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 brahmadatta cakrI kI kathA yogazAstra dvitIya prakAza zloka 27 | cAMDAla bhI
nahIM karatA  /  ataH tUM jA aura dIrgharAjA se kahanA ki brahmadatta A rahA
hai, yA to usake sAtha yuddha kara yA apanA kAlA muMha lekara yahAM se bhAga
jaa| yoM kahakara dUta ko vApisa bheja diyA  /  tadanaMtara brahmadatta abAdha
gati se Age | bar3hatA huA kAMpilyapura aayaa| vahAM pahuMcate hI jaise megha
sUrya- sahita AkAza ko ghera letA hai, vaise hI usane dIrgharAjA | sahita sAre
nagara ko cAroM ora se ghera liyaa| bAMbI para DaMDe kI coTa lagAne para jaise
mahAsarpa bAMbI se bAhara nikalatA hai, vaise hI dIrgharAjA apane sAre parivAra
ke sAtha yuddhasAmagrI sahita nagara se bAhara niklaa| idhara cUlanI rAnI ko
saMsAra se atyaMta vairAgya ho jAne se usane pUrNA nAma kI pravartinI sAdhvI se
dIkSA grahaNa karalI aura kramazaH mukti kI adhikAriNI banI  /  nadI ke jalacara
jaise samudra ke jalacaroM se bhir3a jAte haiM, vaise hI udhara dIrgharAjA ke
sainika brahmadatta ke sainikoM se bhir3a gye| dIrgharAjA ke bahuta se sainika
ghAyala hokara gira pdd'e| taba dIrgharAjA svayaM krodha se dAMta pIsatA | huA
sUara ke samAna bhayaMkara mukhAkRti banAkara zatru ko mArane ke lie daudd'aa|
lekina brahmadatta kI paidala senA, rathasenA aura azvArohI senA nadI ke teja
pravAha kI taraha tejI se cAroM ora phaila gyii| usake bAda brahmadatta bhI
krodha se | lAla-lAla A~kheM karake hAthI ke sAtha jaise hAthI bhir3atA hai,
vaise hI garjanA karatA huA dIrgharAjA ke sAtha svayaM bhir3a gyaa| pralayakAla
ke samudra kI taraMgoM ke samAna ve donoM paraspara eka dUsare para astra-
zastroM se prahAra karane lge| isI bIca avasara AyA hai, aisA jAnakara sevaka ke
samAna cAroM ora prakAza pheMkatA huA evaM sarvadigvijayazAlI eka cakraratna
brahmadatta kI sevA meM prakaTa huaa| brahmadatta usa cakraratna se usI samaya
dIrgharAjA kA kAma tamAma kara diyaa| goha ko | mArane meM bijalI ko kauna-sA
parizrama karanA par3atA hai? kyA dera lagatI hai? mAgadhoM ke samAna stuti
karate hue deva 'brahmadatta cakravartI kI jaya ho,' isa prakAra bolate hue usa
para puSpa vRSTi karane lge| nAgarika loga brahmadatta ko pitA, | mAtA yA devatA
ke rUpa meM dekhane lge| iMdra jaise amarAvatI meM praveza karatA hai, vaise hI
usane kAMpilyapura meM praveza kiyaa| rAjyAsIna hote hI brahmadatta rAjA ne
pahale jina-jina ke sAtha vivAha kiyA thA, una patniyoM ko saba jagaha se bulavA
lI; aura una saba meM puSpavatI ko 'strIratna' ke rUpa meM pratiSThita kii|
phira alaga-alaga svAmitva kI rAjyasImAoM | vAle chahoM khaMDoM para vijaya
prApta karake brahmadatta ne pRthvI ko eka khaMDa rUpa banA dI  /  arthAt eka
chatra cakravartI rAjya banA | diyaa| lagAtAra bAraha varSa taka saba dizAoM ke
rAjAoM ne A-Akara bharata ko jaise abhiSikta kiyA thA, vaise hI usakA bhI
abhiSeka kiyaa| causaTha hajAra striyoM se vivAha karake unheM apane aMtaHpura
meM rkhaa| isa prakAra brahmadatta cakravartI pUrvajanma meM kiye hue tapa rUpI
vRkSa ke phala svarUpa samagra rAjyasukha kA upabhoga kara rahA thaa| eka dina
mahala meM nATaka, saMgIta, nRtya evaM rAgaraMga cala rahA thA; isI bIca usakI
eka dAsI ne devAMganAoM dvArA gUMthA huA eka phUloM kA eka | AzcaryakArI gucchA
brahmadatta ke hAtha meM samarpita kiyA  /  brahmadatta use gaura se dekhate-
dekhate vicAra karane lagA- 'aisA phUloM kA gucchA maiMne pahale bhI kahIM para
dekhA hai|' mana meM bAra-bAra UhApoha karane para use isa janma se pahale ke 5
janmoM | kA smaraNa ho aayaa| phira use yAda AyA ki maiMne aisA gucchA saudharma
devaloka meM dekhA thaa| pahale ke 5 janmoM meM sAtha| sAtha rahe apane sahodara
kA tIvra smaraNa hone se rAjA adhIra ho utthaa| vaha behoza hokara dhar3Ama se
gira pdd'aa| cakravartI | kI yaha hAlata dekhakara caMdanajala ke chIMTe diye;
jisase vaha hoza meM aayaa| svastha hone para vaha vicAra karane lagA'mere
pUrvajanma kA sagA bhAI mujhe kaise aura kahAM milegA? use pahacAnane ke lie
'Asva dAsau mRgau haMsI, mAtaMgAvamarau tathA  /  ' isa prakAra kA pUrvajanma
paricAyaka AdhA zloka sevaka ko diyaa| nagara meM DhiMDhorA bhI piTavA diyA | ki
'mere isa Adhe zloka ko jo pUrNa kara degA, use maiM apanA AdhA rAjya de
duuNgaa|' isa ghoSaNA ko sunakara nagara ke logoM meM isa Adhe zloka ko jAnane
kI bar3I utsukatA jAgI  /  sabane apane nAma ke samAna ise prAyaH kaMThastha
kara liyaa| paraMtu zlokArtha likhita samasyA kI pUrti koI bhI nahIM kara skaa|
usa samaya purimatAla nagara meM citra kA jIva seTha ke putra ke rUpa meM janmA
thaa| use jAtismaraNa jJAna ho gayA thA  /  ataH usane dIkSA lekara grAmAnugrAma
vihAra kiyA  /  1. eka kathA meM cUlanI ke bhAgakara jAne kA evaM mArga meM
sAdhvI ke saMsarga se dIkSA lene kA varNana hai| 109

Page #132 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Story of Chakravarti Brahmadatt  Chapter Two, Light of Yoga, Verse 27: One
day, while wandering, Chitramuni arrived at a place. He stayed in a garden, in a
beautiful and peaceful spot. One day, the Muni heard half a verse, which
fulfilled a problem, from the mouth of a person playing a rehat (a type of
musical instrument). Upon hearing it, he spoke the other half of the verse:
"Esha no shashtikajaatiranyo'nyabhyam viyuktayoḥ." The rehat player memorized
the half verse and went straight to the king, reciting it to him. Upon hearing
it, the king asked, "Who is the poet who composed this verse?" He told the king
the Muni's name. The king rewarded him greatly and sent him away. Now, the king
went to see the Muni, who was like a Kalpavriksha (wish-fulfilling tree) growing
in that garden. With tears of joy in his eyes, the king bowed to the Muni and
sat down near him, filled with affection, as in past lives. The Muni, an ocean
of compassion, blessed the king with the gift of Dharma and gave him beneficial
Dharma-upadesha (religious teachings).  "O King! There is nothing substantial in
this impermanent world. If there is anything substantial, it is Dharma, like a
lotus in the mud, in the mud of this world. Body, youth, wealth, ownership,
friends, and relatives - all these are as fickle as a flag fluttering in the
wind. Just as a Chakravarti conquers all external enemies to achieve victory
over the six continents of the earth, so too, conquer your internal enemies to
achieve liberation. Discriminate between external and internal enemies, and
abandon the internal enemies, who are like great enemies. Just as a Rajahansa
(swan) separates milk from water (discrimination), so too, discriminate between
the essential and the non-essential and embrace the path of a Yati (ascetic).
Brahmadatt said, "O Master! Today, I am fortunate to have your darshan (vision).
Take this entire kingdom. Enjoy it as you wish. You have received the fruits of
your austerities; enjoy them. When the fruits of austerity are obtained, why
perform further austerities? Who undertakes another endeavor when the purpose is
fulfilled? The Muni said, "I too had wealth like Kubera (the god of wealth). But
fearing the cycle of birth and death, I abandoned it like a blade of grass. You
have come down to earth from the Saudharma heaven, where your merit has been
exhausted. Therefore, O King! Do not fall into the lower realms of hell from
here. You have been born into a noble family in Aryadesha (land of the Aryans)
and have obtained the human form, which grants liberation. Yet, you are engaged
in the pursuit of worldly pleasures in this life, which is like cleansing the
anus with nectar. We have fallen from heaven and wandered through various lower
births due to our depleted merit. Remembering this, why are you still clinging
to the worldly maze like a foolish child?" In this way, Chitramuni gave much
advice to the Chakravarti, but he could not understand. Indeed, how can one who
is attached to worldly pleasures attain the seed of enlightenment? Finally, when
the Muni realized that the king would never understand, he left for another
place. What power can Garuda (the eagle) have over a snake that has been bitten
by a venomous snake? The Muni, through the practice of austerity and self-
control, destroyed his karmas (actions) and attained the supreme knowledge of
Kevala Jnana (omniscience). He also destroyed the four destructive karmas and
attained liberation.  Brahmadatt, immersed in the enjoyment of worldly
pleasures, had spent seven hundred years. During this time, a familiar Brahmin
came to him. He said to the Chakravarti, "O King! Give me some of the food you
eat." Brahmadatt said, "You do not have the capacity to digest my food. It takes
a long time to digest and is very intoxicating." Then he said, "It seems you are
also miserly in giving food to a Brahmin. Shame on you!" Then the Chakravarti,
along with his family, made the Brahmin eat his food. Due to its influence, a
thousand-branched tree of lust arose in the Brahmin's mind that night. As a
result, he spent the whole night indulging in sexual activity, not even
distinguishing between his mother, sister, daughter, and daughter-in-law,
behaving like an animal. As the night passed, the Brahmin and his family could
not face each other out of shame. The Brahmin thought, "The wicked king has put
me and my family in a terrible situation." Therefore, filled with anger, he left
the city. While wandering in the forest, he saw a shepherd from a distance,
throwing pebbles with a slingshot and piercing peepal leaves. He immediately
realized, "This is the right way to take revenge on that wicked king." The
Brahmin gave him very valuable goods.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 brahmadatta cakrI kI kathA yogazAstra dvitIya prakAza zloka 27 eka dina
bhramaNa karate-karate citramuni vahAM aayaa| vahAM kisI udyAna meM prAsuka evaM
niravadya sthAna meM vaha muni ThaharA huA thaa| eka dina muni ne vahAM reMhaTa
calAte hue kisI vyakti ke muMha se vaha samasyA-pUrti vAlA AdhA zloka sunaa|
sunate hI unhoMne zeSa padoM kA AdhA zloka yoM bolA 'eSA no
SaSThikAjAtiranyo'nyAbhyAM viyuktyoH|' reMhaTa calAne vAle ne vaha AdhA zloka
yAda kara liyA aura sIdhe rAjA ke pAsa jAkara AdhA zloka unheM sunaayaa| use
zravaNa kara rAjA ne pUchA| 'isa pada ko jor3ane vAlA kauna-sA kavi hai?' usane
muni kA nAma btaayaa| rAjA ne use bahuta-sA inAma dekara vidA kiyaa| aba rAjA
usa udyAna meM uge hue kalpavRkSa-svarUpa muni ke darzana karane gyaa|
harSAzrupUrNa netroM se rAjA ne muni ko dekhate hI vaMdana kiyA aura pUrvajanmoM
kI taraha sneha vibhora hokara ukta muni ke pAsa baitthaa| kRpArasa ke samudra
muni ne dharmalAbha ke rUpa meM AzIrvAda dekara rAjA ke lie hitakara
dharmopadeza diyA 'rAjan! isa asAra saMsAra meM kucha bhI sAra nahIM hai| yadi
koI sArabhUta vastu hai to kIcar3a meM kamala kI taraha saMsAra rUpI kIcar3a meM
kamala samAna kevala dharma hI hai| zarIra, yauvana, lakSmI, svAmitva, mitra
aura baMdhuvarga ye sabhI havA se | ur3atI huI dhvajA ke samAna caMcala hai|
jaise cakravartI SaTkhaMDa rUpa pRthvI para digvijaya karane ke lie tamAma bAhya
zatruoM ko jItatA hai, vaise hI mokSasAdhanA ke lie aMtaraMga zatruoM para
vijaya prApta karo, bAhya abhyaMtara zatruoM kA viveka kara mahAzatruoM ke
samAna AbhyaMtara zatruoM kA tyAga kro| rAjahaMsa jaise kSIra aura nIra kA
pRthak karaNa (viveka) karake dUdha ko hI grahaNa karatA hai, vaise hI tuma
sArAsAra kA viveka karake yatidharma ko grahaNa kro| brahmadatta ne
kahA-'baMdho! Aja bar3e hI bhAgya se Apake darzana hae haiN| to lo. yaha sArA
rAjya meM tamheM sauMpatA haiN| apanI icchAnusAra isakA upabhoga kro| tapasyA kA
phala milA hai; to usakA upabhoga kro| tapa kA phala jaba prApta ho gayA hai,
taba aura tapa kisalie | kiyA jAya? prayojana kI siddhi apane Apa hone para
kauna dUsarA udyama karatA hai? muni ne kahA- 'mujhe bhI kubera ke samAna
saMpatiyA~ milI thii| paraMtu bhavabhramaNa ke bhaya se maiMne usakA tRNavat
tyAgakara diyA hai| saudharma devaloka se puNyakSaya hone | para tuma pRthvItala
para Aye ho| ataH he rAjan! aba aisA na ho ki yahAM se hInapuNya vAlI adhogati
meM tumheM jAnA | pdd'e| Aryadeza meM zreSThakula meM aura mokSa dene vAlI
mAnavatA prApta karake bhI tuma isa janma meM bhogoM kI sAdhanA kara rahe ho, jo
ki amRta se maladvAra kI zuddhi karane ke samAna hai| hamane svarga se cyava
kara hInapuNya vAlI vividha kuyoniyoM meM paribhramaNa kiyA hai, use yAda karake
aba bhI tuma nAdAna bAlaka kI taraha kyoM sAMsArika bhUla-bhulaiyA meM Asakta ho
rahe ho?' isa taraha citramuni ne cakravartI ko bahuta pratibodha diyA, phira
bhI vaha samajha na skaa| saca hai, jisane bhogoM kA nidAna kiyA ho, use
bodhibIja kI prApti kaise hogI? aMtatogatvA muni ne jaba yaha jAna liyA ki yaha
rAjA hargija nahIM samajhegA; taba unhoMne vahAM se anyatra vihAra kiyaa|
kAladaSTi jAti ke sarpa ke kATane para gAruDika kA kyA vaza cala sakatA hai?
muni ne tapa-saMyama kI ArAdhanA karake apane ghAtikarmoM kA kSaya kara uttama
kevalajJAna prApta kiyaa| tathA | cAra aghAtI karmoM kA bhI kSaya karake citra
muni ne mukti prApta kii| saMsAra ke viSayasukhAnubhava meM lIna brahmadatta bhI
eka-eka karake sAta sau varSa bitA cukA thaa| isI daurAna eka parvaparicita
brAhmaNa aayaa| usane cakravartI se kahA-'rAjana! Apa jo bhojana karate hai.
vaha mujhe bhI khAne ko diijie|' brahmadatta ne kahA ki-'mere bhojana ko pacAne
kI tuma meM zakti nahIM hai| yaha bhojana bahuta dera meM hajama hotA hai aura
bahuta hI unmAdaka hai|' taba usane kahA-'mAluma hotA hai, Apa eka brAhmaNa ko
annadAna dene meM bhI kRpaNa hai| dhikkAra ho | aapko|' taba cakravartI ne
parivAra sahita usa brAhmaNa ko apanA bhojana krvaayaa| usake prabhAva se rAta
ko brAhmaNa ke mana meM sahasrazAkhI kAmonmAdavRkSa utkRSTa rUpa meM prakaTa
huaa| jisake kAraNa vaha rAta bhara mAtA, bahana, putrI, putravadhU Adi kA bhI
bheda na karake aMdara hI aMdara pazu ke samAna kAmakrIr3A meM pravRtta rhaa|
rAta bItate hI brAhmaNa aura usake ghara ke loga zarma ke mAre eka dUsare ko
muMha nahIM batA ske| brAhmaNa ne yaha vicAra kiyA ki 'duSTa rAjA ne mujhe aura
mere | parivAra ko viDaMbanA meM DAla diyaa|' ataH kruddha hokara vaha nagara se
bAhara calA gyaa| jaMgala meM ghUmate-ghUmate eka jagaha | usane dUra se hI
gulela meM kaMkar3a lagAkara pheMkate hue aura pIpala ke pattoM ko chedate hue
eka gar3ariye ko dekhaa| turaMta use sUjhA-'basa, isa duSTa rAjA se vaira kA
badalA lene kA yahI upAya ThIka rhegaa|' brAhmaNa ne use bahuta kImatI sAmAna
110

Page #133 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Condition of the Violent One  From the 28th and 29th verses of the second
canto of the Yogashastra, and after honoring him with wealth, it was said -
'Now, you must definitely do one task for me. Whoever comes riding an elephant
with a parasol and a chowrie, shoot out both his eyes with a slingshot.' The
shepherd accepted the Brahmin's words. Because animal-keepers do not act
thoughtfully like animals. The shepherd was lying in wait. Just then, the king's
procession arrived. The shepherd stood between two walls, took aim, and fired
two whizzing bullets, which gouged out both the king's eyes. Truly, the command
of the gods is inviolable. Like a hawk catching a crow, the king's soldiers
immediately seized that shepherd. After being severely beaten, he revealed the
name of the Brahmin who had instigated this unpleasant act. Hearing this, the
enraged king said, "Fie on the Brahmin caste! These sinful ones break the very
vessels from which they eat. Even a dog is better, for it shows gratitude and
devotion to its benefactor upon receiving something. It is never appropriate to
give to such ungrateful Brahmins. The cruel, violent, meat-eating Brahmins, who
deceive others, should be punished first."  Saying this, the extremely enraged
king had that Brahmin, along with his son, friend, and kinsmen, killed like
mosquitoes caught in the fist. Thereafter, with eyes blinded and heart blinded
by anger, that emperor eliminated all the innocent Brahmins, including the
priests. Then he ordered the minister, "Kill Brahmins daily and present before
me the plate filled with the eyes of those injured Brahmins."  Knowing the
king's fierce determination, the wise minister would daily fill a plate with the
seeds of the lassora fruit and present it before the king, saying, "This plate
is filled with the eyes of the Brahmins." Hearing this, the king would pounce on
the so-called eyes kept in the plate and knead them repeatedly with both hands.
Now, Brahmadatta did not derive as much pleasure from the touch of the jewel-
like woman Pushpavati as he did from the touch of those so-called eyes in the
plate. Just as a drunkard does not leave the cup of liquor, similarly,
Brahmadatta never kept that plate, the cause of his downfall, away from his
sight. The blind Brahmadatta would daily, like phlegm, crush the large lassora
fruits, thinking them to be the eyes of the Brahmins, as if cultivating the
seedling of the tree of sin facing him. Due to the continuous perpetration of
this cruel act, the intensity of his malevolent meditation increased day by day.
"Whether the karmic bond is auspicious or inauspicious, it only grows larger
with each day's contemplation of it." By this principle, Brahmadatta, the
emperor, trapped in the mire of sin like a pig, spent sixteen years binding
karma through the continuum of his malevolent meditation. Thus, having completed
a total lifespan of seven hundred and sixteen years, in accordance with the
fruit of his violent conduct, Brahmadatta became a guest of the seventh hell.
They criticize the one who commits violence. A lame, crippled, or deformed
person is better, even if he has a complete body, than one who is devoted to
violence.  The violence done even for the sake of removing an obstacle is itself
an obstacle. And the violence done out of family tradition is also destructive
to the family.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 hiMsaka kI sthiti yogazAstra dvitIya prakAza zloka 28 se 29 tathA dhana dekara
satkAra karake kahA-'dekho aba merA eka kAma tumheM avazya karanA hogaa| isa
rAjamArga se jo bhI AdamI | chatra-cAmara sahita hAthI para baiThakara Aye,
usakI donoM A~kheM gulela se phor3a denaa|' gar3ariye ne brAhmaNa kI bAta
maMjUra kii| kyoMki pazu ke samAna pazupAlaka vicArapUrvaka kArya nahIM krte|
gar3ariyA isI tAka meM baiThA thaa| itane meM hI rAjA kI savArI aayii| gar3ariye
ne do dIvAroM ke bIca khar3e hokara nizAnA bAMdhA aura sanasanAtI huI do goliyAM
pheMkI, jinase rAjA kI donoM AMkhe phUTa gyii| devAjJA sacamuca anullaMghanIya
hotI hai| bAja pakSI jaise kaue~ ko pakar3a letA hai, vaise hI rAjA ke sipAhiyoM
ne turaMta usa gar3ariye ko pakar3a liyaa| khUba pITe jAne para usane isa
apriya-kArya preraka brAhmaNa kA nAma btaayaa| yaha sunate hI rAjA ne kruddha
hokara kahA-'dhikkAra hai, brAhmaNa jAti ko! ye pApI jisa bartana meM bhojana
karate haiM, use hI phor3ate haiN| isase to kuttA acchA, jo kucha dene para dAtA
ke prati kRtajJa hokara svAmibhakti dikhAtA hai| aise kRtaghna brAhmaNoM ko denA
kadApi ucita nahIM dusaro ko Thagane vAle krura hiMsra pazu mAMsAhArI brAhmaNoM
ke janakoM ko hI sarvaprathama sajA denI caahie|' yoM kahakara atyaMta kruddha
rAjA ne usa brAhmaNa ko usake putra, mitra aura baMdhu ke sahita muTThI meM Aye
hue macchara kI taraha maravA ddaalaa| usake pazcAt AMkhoM se aMdhe aura
krodhavaza hRdaya se aMdhe usa cakravartI ne purohita Adi sabhI nirdoSa
brAhmaNoM ko bhI khatma kara diyaa| phira pradhAna ko AjJA dI-pratidina
brAhmaNoM ko mArakara una 'ghAyala hue brAhmaNoM kI AMkhe thAla meM bharakara
mere sAmane vaha thAla hAjira kro|' rAjA ke raudra pariNAma (adhyavasAya)
jAnakara buddhimAna maMtrI pratidina lasor3a ke phaloM se (baDaguMdoM ke
bIja)thAla bharakara rAjA ke sAmane prastuta kara detA thaa| 'yaha thAla
brAhmaNoM kI AMkhe se pUrNa bharA huA hai|' yoM kahate hI rAjA usa thAla meM
rakhe tathAkathita netroM para TUTa par3atA aura donoM hAthoM se bAra-bAra unheM
masalatA thaa| aba brahmadatta ko strIratna puSpavatI ke sparza meM itanA AnaMda
nahIM AtA thA, jitanA ki usa thAla meM rakhe hue tathA kathita netroM ke sparza
meM AtA thaa| zarAbI jaise zarAba kA pyAlA nahIM chor3atA, vaise hI brahmadatta
durgati ke kAraNabhUta usa thAla ko kadApi apane sAmane se dUra nahIM chor3atA
thaa| aMdhA brahmadatta pratidina zleSma kI taraha cikane aura netra jitane
bar3e lasor3a ke phaloM ko brAhmaNoM kI AMkheM samajhakara krUratApUrvaka
masalatA thA, mAno phalAbhimukha pApa rUpI vRkSa ke paudhe taiyAra kara rahA ho|
isa krUra kArya ko nitya jArI rakhane ke kAraNa usake raudradhyAna ke pariNAmoM
meM dinAnudina vRddhi hone lgii| 'zubha yA azubha jo koI bhI karmabaMdha ho,
prati dina ke usI ke vicAra se vaha bar3e se bar3A (vizAla) hI hotA hai|' isa
nyAya se pApa rUpI kIcar3a meM phaMse hue sUara ke samAna brahmadatta cakravartI
ko raudradhyAna-paraMparA se karma bAMdhate hue solaha varSa vyatIta ho gye| isa
prakAra kula sAta sau solaha varSa kA AyuSya pUrNakara hiMsAnubaMdhI pariNAma ke
phalAnurUpa brahmadatta sAtavIM naraka kA mehamAna bnaa||27|| hiMsA karane vAle
kI phira niMdA karate haiN|84| kuNirvaraM varaM paGgurazarIrI varaM pumAn  /
api sampUrNasarvAGgo, na tu hiMsA parAyaNaH  // 28 //  artha :- hiMsA nahIM
karane vAle lUle, laMgar3e, apAhija (vikalAMga) aura kor3hiye acche, magara
saMpUrNa aMga vAle hiMsA karane vAle acche nahIM  // 28 //  vyAkhyA :- hAthoM
aura pairoM se rahita lUle, laMgar3e, beDaula, kor3hI aura vikalAMga hokara bhI
jo ahiMsaka hai, vaha jIva acchA hai; lekina sabhI aMgoM se paripUrNa hokara bhI
jo hiMsA karane meM tatpara hai; vaha jIva acchA nhiiN| yahAM yaha prazna hotA
hai ki raudradhyAna-parAyaNa puruSa yadi zAMti ke lie prAyazcita ke rUpa meM
hiMsA kare athavA machue Adi apanI-apanI kulAcAra-paraMparA se pracalita machalI
Adi mArakara hiMsAe~ karate haiM aura unake karate samaya unake pariNAma
raudradhyAna ke nahIM hote to kyA unheM ukta hiMsA se hiMsA kA pApa nahIM
lagegA?  /  / 28 /  /  isake uttara meM kahate haiN|85| hiMsA vighnAya jAyeta,
vighnazAntyai kRtApi hi  /  kulAcAradhiyA'pyeSA, kRtA kulvinaashinii||29|| artha
:- vighna kI zAMti ke lie kI huI hiMsA bhI vighna ke lie hotI hai| kulAcAra kI
buddhi se kI huI hiMsA kula kA vinAza karane vAlI hotI hai  /  / 29 /  /
vyAkhyA :- aviveka yA lobha se vighnazAMti ke nimitta athavA kula-paraMparA se
pracalita hiMsA cAhe raudradhyAna vaza 111

Page #134 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  The Abandonment of Violence Rooted in Family Tradition by Sulas  **Chapter
2: Light of Yoga, Verse 30**  Obstacles that are not overcome become severe
obstacles instead of peace. As narrated in the Samradditya story, Surendradatt,
a being of Yashodhar, created a dough bird and killed it for peace from
obstacles. This act of killing became an obstacle for him in the form of an
increase in the cycle of birth and death. Similarly, violence committed with the
mindset of "This is our family tradition or custom" is also destructive to the
family. ||29||  How does one become praiseworthy by abandoning violence rooted
in family tradition? This is explained in the following verse. ||86||  **Verse
30:**  Even if violence is passed down through generations, one who abandons it
becomes a great man like Sulas, the son of the butcher. ||30||  **Explanation:**
One who abandons violence passed down through generations, becomes great and
praiseworthy like Sulas, the son of the butcher. Sulas was well aware of the
path to liberation. He was willing to die himself, but he would not harm others,
not even in his mind.  **The story of Sulas, accessible to all:**  In those
days, Rajagriha in Magadha was a prosperous city. There, King Shrenik, a devotee
of the Lord Mahavira, ruled. Just as Krishna's father Vasudeva had Devaki and
Rohini as queens, Shrenik had two beloved queens, Nanda and Chelna, adorned with
virtues. Nanda, like the moon, brought joy to her husband, and she had a son, a
gem of the family, named Abhaykumar. Recognizing his son's excellent intellect
and skills, the king bestowed upon him all the rights and responsibilities.
Indeed, virtues are the source of honor.  Once, Lord Mahavira arrived in
Rajagriha. Knowing that the Lord, like a wish-fulfilling tree, had arrived, King
Shrenik, feeling blessed and overjoyed, went to see him. There, in the assembly
filled with gods, humans, and other beings, the king sat in his rightful place.
The world teacher, Mahavira, began to preach the Dharma that destroys sins. At
that very moment, a leper, whose body was oozing pus, entered the assembly. He
bowed to the Lord and sat near him, like a mad dog, and began to smear his pus
on the Lord's feet, as if it were sandalwood paste. Seeing this, King Shrenik,
inwardly agitated, thought to himself, "This sinner, who has dared to defile the
world teacher, deserves to be killed as soon as he gets up." At that moment, the
Lord sneezed, and the leper said, "May you die!" Then Shrenik sneezed, and he
said, "May you live!" Then Abhaykumar sneezed, and the leper said, "May you live
or die." Finally, when the butcher sneezed, the leper said, "May you neither
live nor die."  Angered by the leper's disrespectful words to the Lord, the king
ordered his soldiers to capture him as soon as he got up.  After the sermon was
over, the leper bowed to the Lord and stood up. The king's soldiers immediately
captured him, just as hunters surround a boar. The leper, radiant like the sun,
disappeared into the sky in an instant, before everyone's eyes. The royal
servants informed the king. The king, astonished, asked the Lord, "Lord, who was
that person who disappeared in an instant before our very eyes?" The Lord said,
"This is a god."  Shrenik asked again, "Lord, if he is a god, why did he come in
the form of a leper?" The Lord replied, "King, listen. In the city of Kaushambi
in the country of Vatsa, King Shatanik ruled. In that city lived a poor and
foolish Brahmin named Seduk. One day, his pregnant wife said to him, "There is
only a little time left.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 sulasa ke dvArA kulaparaMparAgata hiMsA kA tyAga yogazAstra dvitIya prakAza
zloka 30 na huI ho, lekina vahI vighnazAMti ke badale ghoravighna rUpa bana jAtI
hai| samarAditya kathA meM batAye anusAra-yazodhara ke jIva surendradatta ne
vighnazAMti ke lie sirpha ATe kA murgA banAkara usakA vadha kiyA thaa| jisake
kAraNa use vaha vadha janma-maraNa kI paraMparA meM vRddhi ke rUpa meM
vighnabhUta ho gayA thaa| isI prakAra 'yaha to hamArA kula paraMparAgata AcAra
hai, yA rivAja hai', isa dRSTi se kI gayI hiMsA bhI kulavinAzinI hI hotI hai  //
29 /  /  kalaparaMparAgata hiMsA kA tyAga karane vAlA paruSa kaise prazaMsanIya
bana jAtA hai? ise aba Age ke zloka dvArA rahe haiN||86| api vaMzakramAyAtA,
yastu hiMsAM parityajet  /  sa zreSThaH sulasa iva, kAlasaukarikAtmajaH  // 30
//  artha :- vaMzaparaMparA se pracalita hiMsA kA bhI jo tyAgakara detA hai|
vaha kAlasaukarika (kasAI) ke putra sulasa ke samAna zreSTha puruSa kahalAne
lagatA hai  // 30 //  vyAkhyA :- vaMza athavA kula kI paraMparA se calI AyI huI
hiMsA kA jo tyAgakara detA hai, vaha kAlasaukarika (kasAI) ke putra sulasa kI
taraha zreSTha evaM prazaMsanIya bana jAtA hai| sulasa sadgati ke mArga ko
bhalI-bhAMti jAnatA thaa| use svayaM maranA maMjUra thA, paraMtu dUsaroM ko
mAranA to dUra rahA, mana se bhI vaha pIr3A nahIM pahuMcAnA cAhatA thaa| sulasa
kI saMpradAyagamya kathA isa prakAra se haikAlasaukarika (kasAI)-putra salasa kA
jIvana-parivartana : una dinoM magadhadeza meM rAjagRha bar3A RddhisaMpanna
nagara thaa| vahAM bhI zramaNa bhagavAn mahAvIra ke caraNakamaloM kA bhramara
evaM paramabhakta zreNika rAjA rAjya karatA thaa| kRSNapitA vAsudeva ke jaise
devakI aura rohiNI rAniyA~ thIM, vaise hI | usake zIlAbhUSaNasaMpanna naMdA aura
celaNA nAma kI do priyatamAe~ vizeSa priya thiiN| naMdArAnI ke kumuda ko AnaMda
dene vAle caMdra ke samAna vizva kA AnaMdadAyaka caMdra evaM kulAbhUSaNa rUpa
eka putra thA, jisakA nAma thA abhykumaar| rAjA ne usakA utkRSTa buddhi-kauzala
jAnakara use yogya sarvAdhikAra pradAna kara diye the| vAstava meM guNa hI
gaurava kA pAtra banatA hai| eka bAra bhagavAn mahAvIra svAmI rAjagRha meM
pdhaareN| 'jaMgamakalpavRkSa' rUpa svAmI padhAre haiM, yaha jAnakara apane ko
kRtArtha mAnatA aura harSita hotA huA rAjA zreNika bhagavAn ke darzanArtha
phuNcaa| vahAM dAnava, mAnava Adi se bharI huI dharmasabhA vasaraNa) meM rAjA
apane yogya sthAna para baiTha gyaa| jagadguru mahAvIra pApanAzinI dharmadezanA
dene lge| ThIka usI samaya eka kor3hiyA, jisake zarIra se mavAda nikalakara baha
rahI thI, usa samavasaraNa meM AyA aura prabhu ko namaskAra kara unake nikaTa
isa prakAra baiTha gayA jaise koI pAgala kuttA ho aura bhagavAna ke donoM
caraNakamaloM para bedhar3aka hokara apane mavAda kA lepa karane lagA, mAno
caMdanarasa kA lepa kara rahA ho| use dekhakara rAjA zreNika mana hI mana
kur3hatA huAsA socane lagA-jagadguru kI isa prakAra AzAtanA karane vAlA yaha
pApI yahAM se khar3A hote hI mArane yogya hai| usa |samaya bhagavAna ko chIMka
AyI, to kor3hiye ne kahA-'mara jAo!' isake bAda zreNika ko chIMka AyI to usane
kahA'jIo!' phira abhayakumAra ko chIMka AyI taba usane kahA-'tuma jIte raho yA
mara jaao|' aura aMta meM jaba kAlasaukarika ko chIMka AyI to usane kahA-'tuma
jIo bhI mata aura maro bhI mt|' isa para prabhu ke lie 'tuma mara jAo' aise
apriya vacana kahane se kruddha hue rAjA ne apane sainika ko AjJA dI ki isa
sthAna se khar3A hote hI kor3hiye ko pakar3a lenaa| dezanA pUrNa hone para
kor3hiyA bhagavAna ko namaskAra karake khar3A huaa| ataH zreNika ke sainikoM ne
usI prakAra pakar3a liyA jaise bhIla sUara ko gherakara pakar3a lete haiN|
sUryabimba ke tulya tejasvI divya rUpadhArI kor3hiyA saba ke dekhate hI
kSaNabhara meM AkAza meM ur3a gyaa| rAjasevakoM ne yaha bAta rAjA ko btaayii|
ataH rAjA ne vismita hokara bhagavAna se pUchA| 'bhagavan! yaha kauna thA jo isa
prakAra dekhate hI dekhate kSaNabhara meM gAyaba ho gyaa| taba prabhu ne
kahA-'yaha eka deva hai|' zreNika ne phira pUchA-'bhagavan! jaba yaha deva hai,
taba yaha kor3hI kA rUpa banAkara kyoM AyA thA?' bhagavAn ne uttara diyA-'rAjan!
suno' vatsadeza meM kauzAMbI nAma kI nagarI meM rAjA zatAnIka rAjya karatA thaa|
usa nagara meM janma daridra aura mahAmUrkha seDuka nAma kA brAhmaNa rahatA
thaa| eka dina usakI garbhavatI patnI ne usase kahA-'kucha hii| 112

Page #135 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Story of Sulas  "The second light of the Yoga Shastra, verse 30 is about to
happen, so please bring me ghee. Otherwise, I will not be able to bear this
labor pain." Upon this, the Brahmin said, "My dear, I do not have any knowledge
or skill; by which I can go anywhere and get ghee. Respected people get
everything through skill." Then the Brahmin woman said, "My lord! You serve the
king. On this earth, the king is the second Kalpavriksha." Just as people serve
the ocean to obtain gems, so too did the Brahmin, following her words, begin to
serve the king with fruits, flowers, etc. Just as the clouds of the rainy season
engulf the sky, one day the king of Champapuri, with a great army, besieged
Kaushambi. Like a snake sitting in a bamboo, waiting for time, so too was
Shatanik, with his army, waiting for time in Kaushambi. When much time had
passed, Shatanik's soldiers, like royal swans, became bored and began to leave
from there. One day, Seduk went to the garden early in the morning to pick
flowers. Then he saw the soldiers and the king's faces, dull like extinguished
stars. At that time, he came to King Shatanik and requested, "O King! Your
enemy, like a snake with broken teeth, has become impotent, so if you fight with
him today, you will be able to capture him effortlessly. No matter how strong a
person is, after being dejected, he cannot fight with the enemy." Accepting his
words, the king, with his vast army and resources, marched out of his camp,
showering arrows. Seeing the sudden attack of the king of Champa, the army of
Champa fled without looking back. Truly, who can look towards lightning when it
strikes suddenly? "In which direction should I go?" With this thought, the king
of Champa, bewildered, fled alone to save his life. Before the king of Champa
fled, his army had already been thrown into disarray. Therefore, seeing the
opportunity, the king of Kaushambi looted a lot of goods, including the king of
Champa's elephants, horses, chariots, and treasury, and took them into his
possession. Later, the victorious Shatanik, filled with joy, entered Kaushambi
with his army.  The victorious king, pleased, said to Seduk Brahmin, "O Vipra!
Tell me, what should I give you?" He said, "I will ask you for sufficient things
after consulting my family members!" A householder cannot think for himself
without his wife. Bhatt, happy, went to Bhattin and told her everything. Upon
this, the wise Brahmin woman thought back and forth, "If I tell him to ask the
king for a village, etc., then if he gets a village, etc., he might get married
again. Because wealth is the generator of ego. Therefore, it would be right if
we were given food from each house in the Chakravarti's kingdom, one after the
other, every day, and a golden coin as Dakshina." Thinking thus, she told her
husband. The Brahmin also made the same request to the king. The king accepted
the Brahmin's request. Even after getting the ocean, one takes water according
to one's need. Similarly, the Brahmin did. Now the Brahmin received food,
Dakshina, and respect every day. Royal favor enhances a person's glory. People,
considering that Brahmin to be a royal favorite, began to invite him. Who does
not serve the king? Now the Brahmin received invitations from many houses, so he
became a glutton, first vomiting what he had eaten and then going to eat at the
houses from which he had received invitations. Because the more houses he ate
in, the more houses he received Dakshina from. Shame on such greed of a Brahmin.
Due to receiving Dakshina repeatedly, the Brahmin became very wealthy. Just as
the banyan tree expands more and more with its roots, branches, and sub-
branches, so too did Seduk become a large family with sons and grandsons. Along
with this, due to daily indigestion, vomiting, and the food not being digested
in his body, the Brahmin developed skin disease. Due to which he looked as if
lac had been applied to a brass tree. Still, Seduk, insatiable like fire, went
to eat as usual, according to the king's order, and took Dakshina. Gradually,
Seduk developed leprosy, his hands, feet, nose, etc., rotted. One day, the
minister requested the king, "O Dev! This Brahmin has leprosy, and it is a
contagious disease, so it is not right to feed him. Instead, let one of his
healthy sons be fed. A broken statue of  113

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 sulasa kI kathA yogazAstra dvitIya prakAza zloka 30 hone vAlA hai, ataH Apa
mere liye ghI le aao| nahIM to, usa samaya mujha se yaha prasava pIr3A sahana
nahIM hogii|' isa para brAhmaNa ne kahA-'priye! mere pAsa vidyA yA kalA to hai
nahIM; jisase maiM kahIM bhI jAkara ghI prApta kara skuuN| zrImAn loga to kalA
se saba cIja prApta kara lete haiN|' taba brAhmaNI ne kahA-'svAmin! Apa rAjA kI
sevA krie| isa dharatI para rAjA dUsarA kalpavRkSa hotA hai|' ratna prApti ke
lie jaise loga sAgara kI sevA karate haiM, vaise hI vaha brAhmaNa usakI bAta
mAnakara phala-phUla Adi se rAjA kI sevA karane lgaa| varSARtu ke bAdala jaise
AkAza ko ghera lete haiM, eka dina vaise hI caMpApurI ke rAjA ne mahAna sainya
ke sAtha kauzAMbI ko ghera liyaa| bAMbI meM baiThA huA sarpa jaise samaya kI
pratikSA karatA rahatA hai, vaise hI sainya sahita zatAnIka kauzAMbI meM baiThA-
baiThA samaya kI pratikSA kara rahA thaa| jaba bahuta samaya ho cukA to zatAnIka
ke sainika rAjahaMsa kI taraha Ubakara vahAM se jAne lge| eka dina seDuka
subaha-subaha phUla lene ke lie udyAna meM phuNcaa| taba usane sainikoM evaM
rAjA ke nistejagrahoM ke samAna phIke cehare dekhe| usI samaya usane zatAnIka
rAjA se Akara nivedana kiyA-'rAjan! TUTe hue dAMta vAle sarpa ke samAna ApakA
zatru nirvIrya ho gayA hai, ataH agara Aja hI usake sAtha yuddha kareMge to
anAyAsa hI use pakar3a skeNge| koI vyakti kitanA hI balavAna ho magara khinna
hone ke bAda zatru se lohA nahIM le sktaa| usake vacana ko mAnakara rAjA apanI
vizAla senA aura sAmagrI lekara bANavRSTi karatA huA apane zivira se bAhara
niklaa| acAnaka caMpAnareza para hamalA dekhakara caMpA kI rAjasenA pIche dekhe
binA hI behatAzA bhAgane lgii| saca hai, acAnaka bijalI girane para usakI ora
kauna dekha sakatA hai?' kisa dizA meM jAU~? isa vicAra se hakkAbakkA hokara
caMpAnareza akelA hI jAna bacAkara bhAga niklaa| caMpAnareza ke bhAgane se
pahale hI usakI senA meM bhagadar3a maca gayI thii| ataH maukA dekhakara
kauzAMbI nareza ne caMpAnareza ke hAthI, ghor3e, ratha evaM khajAnA Adi bahuta-
sA mAla lUTakara apane kabje meM kara liyaa| bAda meM harSayukta vijayI zatAnIka
rAjA ne vahAM se sasainya saharSa kauzAMbI meM praveza kiyaa| vijayonmatta rAjA
ne prasanna hokara seDuka brAhmaNa se kahA-'vipra! bolo tumheM kyA de dUM? usane
kahA-maiM apane kuTuMbiyoM se pUchakara yatheSTa vastu Apa se mAMgUgA!'
gRhasthoM ko gRhiNI ke binA svayaM koI vicAra nahIM suujhtaa| bhaTTa harSita
hotA huA bhaTTinI ke pAsa pahuMcA aura usase sArI bAta khii| isa para usa
buddhimatI brAhmaNI ne Age pIche kA vicAra kiyA- agara ise rAjA se gAMva Adi
mAMgane kA kahaMgI to gAMva Adi milane para yaha zAyada dasarI zAdI kara le|
kyoMki vaibhava ahaMkAra kA janaka hotA hai| ataH yahI ThIka rahegA ki
cakravartI ke rAjya meM hameM pratidina bArI-bArI se pratyeka ghara se bhojana
karAyA jAya aura dakSiNA meM eka svarNamadA dI jaay|' yoM socakara usane apane
dii| brAhmaNa ne bhI rAjA se usI taraha kI mAMga kii| rAjA ne brAhmaNa kI mAMga
svIkAra kii| samadra ke mila jAne para bhI yogyatAnasAra hI jala letA hai| isI
taraha brAhmaNa karatA thaa| aba brAhmaNa ko pratidina bhojana, dakSiNA aura
sAtha-sAtha Adara bhI milatA thaa| rAja-prasAda manuSya ke gaurava ko bar3hA
detA hai| usa brAhmaNa ko bhI rAjamAnya samajhakara loga AmaMtraNa dene lge|
jisa para rAjA prasanna ho. usakI sevA kauna nahIM karatA? aba brAhmaNa ko aneka
gharoM se nyautA milatA thA, isalie vaha peTU banakara pahale khAyA huA
vamanakara detA aura phira punaH AmaMtraNa prApta gharoM meM bhojana karane
jaataa| kyoMki jitane gharoM meM vaha bhojana karatA utane hI gharoM se use
dakSiNA prApta hotii| dhikkAra hai, brAhmaNa ke aise lobha ko| bAra-bAra dakSiNA
milane ke kAraNa brAhmaNa pracUra dhanavAna bana gyaa| jisa prakAra vaTavRkSa
mUlazAkhAoM evaM prazAkhAoM se adhikAdhika vistRta hotA jAtA hai, vaise hI
seDuka bhI putroM aura pautroM se vistRta parivAra vAlA ho gyaa| sAtha hI
pratidina ajIrNa, vamana aura khAye hue kA zarIra meM rasa na banane ke kAraNa
brAhmaNa ko carmaroga ho gyaa| jisase vaha aisA lagatA thA mAno pItala ke per3a
para lAkha lagI ho| phira bhI agni ke samAna atRpta seDuka rAjA ke AdezAnusAra
jAkara usI taraha bhojana karatA aura dakSiNA letA thaa| isa taraha dhIre-dhIre
seDuka ko kor3ha ho gayA, usake hAtha, paira, nAka ityAdi sar3a gye| _eka dina
maMtrI ne rAjA se nivedana kiyA- 'deva! isa brAhmaNa ko kor3ha ho gayA hai aura
yaha cepI roga hai, isalie ise bhojana karAnA ThIka nahIM hai| isake bajAya
isake nirogI putroM meM se kisI ko karavA diyA jaay| khaMDita pratimA ke 113

Page #136 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Story of Sulas  In the second chapter of the Yoga Shastra, verse 30, it is
stated that a second image is established. The king accepted the minister's
suggestion and replaced Seduk with his son. Seduk now stayed at home, surrounded
by flies like bees around a honeycomb. His sons built a hut outside the house
and kept Seduk there. No one listened to him or followed his instructions. He
was even fed in a wooden bowl like a dog. His daughters-in-law despised him,
turning their faces away and wrinkling their noses when feeding him. Seeing
this, the petty Seduk thought, "I made these sons wealthy, but today they have
disregarded me and abandoned me like a traveler leaves his boat after crossing
the sea. They don't even fulfill their promises. Instead, they taunt and mock me
with inappropriate words like 'leper,' 'angry,' 'dissatisfied,' 'unworthy,' etc.
Just as they despise me, they should become objects of hatred too." An idea
suddenly struck him, and he was secretly pleased. He called his sons and said,
"Sons, I am tired of this life. Our family tradition is that when someone wishes
to die, their family brings them a magical animal. So, bring me an animal."
Hearing this, they all agreed, and the sons, who were all wise in animal
matters, brought their father a beast. Seduk, happy, took the pus oozing from
his body and mixed it with the animal's food, feeding it to the beast. The
animal, eating the pus-laced food, also became a leper. Seduk then gave the
animal to his sons for sacrifice (slaughter). Not understanding their father's
intention, the innocent sons killed the animal one day and ate its flesh.
Meanwhile, Seduk told his sons, "I am going to a holy place for self-
improvement. The forest is now my refuge." With a haughty air and a thoughtful
expression, he set off. While walking through the jungle, he became very
thirsty. Searching for water, he saw a lake, a friend-like body of water
surrounded by various trees. The lake's water was tasteless due to fallen
leaves, flowers, and fruits from the trees, and it was as hot as a decoction due
to the midday sun's scorching rays. He drank the hot water. As he drank, his
thirst increased. Every time he drank this hot water, he had diarrhea, and worms
came out of his body. In this way, drinking the lake's water daily and passing
worms with his excrement, Seduk was cured of his illness within a few days. His
entire body became beautiful, like a tree in spring, beautiful in all its parts.
Delighted with his recovery, the Brahmin set off for home. A beautiful body is a
special adornment for all men in their birthplace.  When Seduk entered his city,
the citizens were amazed to see him cured and beautiful, like a snake with a
jeweled hood. They asked, "O learned Brahmin! Seeing your healthy body and
beautiful form, it seems you have been reborn! What caused you to become healthy
and beautiful?" The Brahmin said, "I worshipped the gods, and that is how I was
cured." He then reached his home. Seeing his sons as lepers, he was delighted
and said, "You disobeyed me, and you have received the fruits of your actions."
His sons said, "Father, we trusted you, but why did you act so cruelly towards
us, like an enemy?" Hearing this, Seduk was silent. The boys did not give him
any respect, nor did anyone else. He became despised and without refuge.  After
telling this entire story, Lord Mahavira continued, "O King Shrenik! That
wandering Seduk came to your city and met your palace guards. When the guards
heard that I was in Rajgriha, they were delighted and, to hear my Dharmadeshana,
they left the Brahmin at his post and came to me. Thus, Seduk, like the door to
livelihood, received the shelter of the guards. He sat hungry and thirsty at the
gate. At that moment, seeing the birds eating the offered sacrifice at the gate,
he pounced on it like a hungry wolf. Leprosy...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 sulasa kI kathA yogazAstra dvitIya prakAza zloka 30 sthAna para dUsarI pratimA
sthApita kI jAtI hai|' rAjA ne maMtrI kI bAta svIkAra kii| seDuka ke sthAna para
usake putra ko sthApanna kiyaa| aba seDuka ghara para hI rahane lgaa|
madhumakkhiyoM se ghire hue chattoM ke samAna usake cAroM ora makkhiyA~
bhinabhinAtI rhtii| ataH putroM ne milakara ghara ke bAhara eka jhoMpar3I banavA
dI aura usI meM seDuka ko rkhaa| aba na to koI usakI bAta mAnatA aura sunatA thA
aura na koI usake kahe anusAra kAma karatA thaa| itanA hI nahIM, kutte kI taraha
lakar3I ke pAtra meM use bhojana de diyA jAtA thaa| putravadhue~ bhI usase ghRNA
karatI thii| bhojana dete samaya muMha phera letI thIM aura nAka-muMha sikor3atI
thii| yaha dekhakara kSudrAzaya seDuka ne vicAra kiyA-ina putroM ko maiMne hI to
dhanavAna banAyA hai| lekina Aja merI avajJA karake inhoMne mujhe vaise hI
chor3a diyA hai, jaise samudra pAra karane ke bAda yAtrI naukA ko chor3a detA
hai| itanA hI nahIM, mujhe vacana se bhI saMtuSTa nahIM krte| ulTe ye mujhe
kor3hiyA, krodhI, asaMtoSI, ayogya Adi anucita zabda kahakara cir3hAte va
khijAte haiN| jisa taraha ye putra mujha se ghRNA karate haiM, usI taraha ye bhI
ghRNApAtra bana jAya, aisA koI upAya karanA caahie| sahasA use eka yukti sUjhI
aura mana hI mana prasanna hokara usane aisA vicArakara putroM ko apane pAsa
bulAkara kahA 'putroM! aba maiM isa jIvana se Uba gayA huuN| ataH apanA kulAcAra
aisA hai ki marane kI abhilASA vAle vyakti ko usake parivAra vAle eka maMtrita
pazu lAkara de| ataH tuma mere liye eka pazu lAkara do| | yaha sunakara sabane
isa bAta kA samarthana kiyA aura una saba pazu sama buddhi vAle putroM ne pitA
ko eka para diyaa| seDuka prasanna hotA huA apane aMgoM se bahate hue mavAda ko
hAtha se lekara pazu ke cAre meM milAtA aura use khilaataa| mavAda milA huA cArA
khAne se vaha pazu bhI kor3hiyA ho gyaa| ataH seDuka ne vaha pazu bali (vadha)
ke lie apane putroM ko de diyaa| pitA ke Azaya ko na samajhakara una bholebhAle
putroM ne eka dina usa pazu ko mAra DAlA aura usakA mAMsa khA gye| isI bIca
seDuka apane putroM se yaha kahakara ki-'maiM AtmakalyANa ke lie tIrthabhUmi
para jAtA huuN| aba mere liye araNya hI zaraNa hai|' U~cA muMha kiye kucha
socatA huA-sA vaha cala pdd'aa| jaMgala meM jAte-jAte use bar3I jora se pyAsa
lgii| pAnI kI talAza meM ghumate-ghUmate usane vividha vRkSa kI ghaTAoM se yukta
mitra samAna eka sarovara dekhaa| usa sarovara kA pAnI vRkSoM se gire hue pattoM
va phUla-phaloM se besvAda tathA madhyAhna kI tapatI huI sUryakiraNoM se kvAtha
ke samAna uttapta ho gayA thA, garma-garma hI usa jala ko piyaa| jyoM-jyoM vaha
usa pAnI ko pItA gayA, tyoMtyoM usakI pyAsa aura adhika bar3hatI calI gyii|
jitanI bAra vaha isa uSNa jala ko pItA, utanI bAra hI use patalI dasta ho jAtI;
jisase usake zarIra se kRmiyAM nikalatI thiiN| isa prakAra pratidina usa
sarovara ke jala pIne aura reca ke sAtha kIr3e nikala jAne se seDuka kucha hI
dinoM meM rogamukta ho gyaa| usake sAre aMga isa prakAra suMdara ho uThe, jisa
prakAra vasaMtaRtu meM vRkSa, apane aMgopAMgoM sahita sarvAMgasuMdara bana jAtA
hai| niroga hone se harSita hokara brAhmaNa apane ghara kI ora vApisa cala
pdd'aa| janmabhUmi meM suMdara zarIra sabhI puruSoM ke lie vizeSa zRMgAra rUpa
hotA hI hai| seDUka ne jaba apane nagara meM praveza kiyA to nAgarika loga
kaMcukI yukta sarpa ke samAna use rogamukta aura suMdara AkRtiyukta dekhakara
vismita ho utthe| nAgarikoM ne pUchA-'vipravara! ApakA niroga zarIra aura
suMdara AkRti dekhakara mAlUma hotA hai, Apane punarjanma pAyA ho! ataH Apako
niroga aura suMdara hone kA kyA kAraNa huA?' brAhmaNa ne kahA'maiMne devatAoM kI
ArAdhanA kI; jisase maiM roga mukta ho gayA huuN|' isake bAda vaha apane ghara
para phuNcaa| vahAM apane putroM ko kor3hiye bane dekhakara harSita huA aura
kahane lagA-'tumane merI avajJA kI thI, ThIka usI kA phala tumheM milA hai|'
putroM ne kahA-'pitAjI! hamane Apa para vizvAsa rakhA, paraMtu Apane hamAre
sAtha zatru sarIkhA nirdaya kArya kyoM kiyA?' yaha sunakara seDuka cupa ho gayA,
lar3akoM ne use koI Adara nahIM diyA aura na anya logoM ne| ataH vaha tiraskRta
aura Azrayarahita ho gyaa| yaha sArI kathA sunAkara bhagavAn mahAvIra ne Age
zreNika rAjA se kahA-'rAjan! ghUmatA-ghAmatA vaha seDuka tumhAre nagara meM AyA
aura tumhAre prAsAda ke dvArapAloM se milaa| dvArapAloM ne jaba yaha sunA ki
maiM isa samaya rAjagRha nagara meM AyA hUM to harSita hokara merI dharmadezanA
sunane ke lie apane sthAna para usa brAhmaNa ko biThAkara aaye| isa prakAra
jIvikA ke dvAra ke samAna seDuka ko dvArapAla kA Azraya milaa| vaha dvAra para
bhUkhA-pyAsA baiThA thaa| itane meM hI dvAra para Aye hue pakSiyoM ko DAlI huI
balI ko dekhate hI bhUkhe bheDiye kI bhAMti usa para TUTa pdd'aa| kuSTaroga 114

Page #137 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Story of Sulasa  After being freed from the second light of the Yoga
Shastra, verse 30, Sulasa's hunger increased greatly. Due to this, he ate
greedily, stuffing himself to the brim. Just as a traveler in the desert feels
extreme thirst in the summer, so too did Sulasa feel intense thirst after
overeating. He was writhing in agony from thirst. Yet, out of fear of the
gatekeeper, he did not leave that place to go towards any water source or
reservoir. Instead, he remained there, suffering greatly from thirst, and in his
mind, he began to praise aquatic creatures. Due to unbearable thirst, he cried
out, "Water! Water!" and died right there. After death, he was born as a frog in
the well near the gate of the same city. We were traveling and came to this city
again. Therefore, people began to come very quickly to pay their respects.
Hearing the news of my arrival from the news carriers, the frog began to think,
"I have heard this before." Pondering over this repeatedly, he attained jati-
smriti-jnana (knowledge of past lives) like remembering dreams. In the light of
this knowledge, the frog realized that the same Prabhu whom the gatekeeper had
been appointed to pay respects to in his previous life had arrived here.
Therefore, just as humans go to pay their respects to him, so too should I. The
water of the Ganges River is public. It does not have a single owner." Thinking
this, he was hopping from there to pay his respects to me when he was crushed by
the hoof of your horse's foot on the way and died right there. But at the time
of his death, he had devotion and affection for me in his mind, so he was born
as the Darduraank Dev.  "Even if a feeling is devoid of action, it is still
fruitful." Devendra had said one day in the divine assembly, "In Bharatavarsha,
King Shrenik is the best among the Shravakas and is steadfast in his faith.
Therefore, O King! This Darduraank Dev has come to test you. He worshipped my
feet with Gosirsha Chandan. To create an illusion in your mind, he used his
Vaikriya Shakti to take the form of a leper, etc., and pretended to apply pus to
my feet, and he spoke four different things to each of the four."  Upon this,
King Shrenik asked the Lord again, "O Lord! When you sneezed, why did he speak a
completely inauspicious word, and when others sneezed, why did he speak
auspicious and inauspicious words?" In reply, the Lord said, "For me, his
indication was that why are you still sitting in the world? Quickly depart for
liberation. Therefore, he said to me, 'Die.' And O Narasimha! You have happiness
here, but after death, your fate is hell, where there is immense suffering. As
an indication of this, he said, 'Live.' For Abhayakumar, the difference was,
'Live or die.' He said this from the perspective that if he lives, he will
perform righteous actions, and if he dies, he will go to the Anuttaraviman
Devaloka. And finally, for Kalasaukarak, he said, 'Neither live nor die.' His
intention was that if he lives, he will continue to kill many beings, and if he
dies, he will go to the seventh hell."  Hearing this explanation from the Lord's
mouth, Emperor Shrenik bowed and prayed, "O Lord! Even though you are such a
gracious Lord, I will have to go to hell." The Lord said, "You have already
bound the lifespan of hell for yourself. Therefore, you will definitely have to
go there." "The fruits of past bound good or bad deeds must be experienced. We
are all powerless to change anything in this. But the good news is that you will
become the first Tirthankara named Padma-nabha in the coming twenty-four.
Therefore, do not be sad."  Shrenik then asked, "O Lord! Is there any way for me
to escape the terrible, darkest hell, which is like a blind man in a blind
well?" The Lord replied, "Yes! There are two ways." One is that if you willingly
make a donation to a Sadhu from the hands of your maidservant Kapila (Brahmani),
and the other is that you stop Kalasaukarak (the butcher) from killing beings,
then you can be freed from hell. Otherwise, it is very difficult.  Holding this
righteous advice in his heart like a garland, King Shrenik bowed to Lord
Mahavira and went towards his palace. On the way, to test the king's right
faith, Darduraank Dev, carrying a net on his shoulder like a fisherman, 1. In
other stories, there is mention of three ways along with the Samayik of the
Punia Shravak. 115

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 sulasa kI kathA yogazAstra dvitIya prakAza zloka 30 se mukta hone para bhUkha
atyaMta bar3ha gayI thii| isa kAraNa se usane DaTakara gale taka DhUMsa-
ThUsakara khaayaa| marubhUmi ke yAtrI ko jaise garmI kI mausama meM atyaMta
pyAsa lagatI haiM. vaise hI atibhojana karane se seDaka ko bahata pyAsa lgii|
pyAsa se vaha bahuta chaTapaTA rahA thaa| phira bhI dvArapAla ke bhaya se usa
sthAna ko chor3akara kisI pAnI ke srota yA jalAzaya kI ora nahIM gyaa| pratyuta
vahAM baiThA rahA aura atyaMta tRSApIr3ita hokara mana hI mana jalacara jIvoM ko
dhanya mAnane lgaa| asahya pyAsa ke kAraNa hAya pAnI, hAya pAnI cillAte hue
usane vahIM para dama tor3a diyaa| marakara vaha isI nagarI ke daravAje ke pAsa
vAlI bAvar3I meM maiMDhaka ke rUpa meM paidA huaa| hama vihAra karate hue phira
isa nagara meM aaye| ataH vaMdana karane ke lie loga ati zIghratA se Ane lge|
mere Agamana ke samAcAra panihAriyoM ke muMha se sunakara vaha meMDhaka vicAra
karane lagA-'yaha bAta to maiMne pahale bhI kabhI sunI hai|' usI bAta para bAra-
bAra uhApoha karate hue use svapnoM ke smaraNa karane kI taraha usI kSaNa
jAtismaraNa-jJAna ho gayA; jisake prakAza meM meMDhaka ne jAnA ki pUrvajanma meM
mujhe isI daravAje pAla ke taura para niyukta karake dvArapAla jina prabhavara
ko vaMdana karane gaye the, ve hI yahAM padhAreM haiN| ataH jaise manuSya unheM
vaMdana karane jAte haiM, vaise maiM bhI jAU~, gaMgAnadI kA pAnI to sArvajanika
hai| isakA koI eka mAlika nahIM hotaa|' yoM socakara vaha vahAM se phudakatA huA
mujhe vaMdana karane ke lie A rahA thA ki mArga meM hI tumhAre ghor3e ke paira
ke khura se kucalakara vaha meMDhaka vahI mara gyaa| para marate samaya usake
mana meM mere prati bhakti aura prIti thI, isa kAraNa dardurAMka deva ke rUpa
meM paidA huaa| 'bhAvanA kriyArahita ho to bhI phaladAyinI hotI hai|' devendra
ne eka dina devasabhA meM kahA thA ki-bhAratavarSa meM zreNikanRpa zrAvakoM meM
zreSTha hai aura dRr3ha zraddhAvAna hai; isa kAraNa rAjan! yaha dardurAMka deva
tumhArI parIkSA lene AyA thaa| usane gozIrSacaMdana se mere caraNoM kI pUjA kii|
tuma meM dRSTibhrama paidA karane ke lie isane vaikriyazakti se kor3hiye Adi kA
rUpa banAkara mavAda lepana mere caraNoM para karane kA svAMga dikhAyA aura
cAroM ke lie cAra prakAra kI vibhinna bAteM khiiN| isa para zreNika rAjA ne
bhagavAn! se punaH prazna kiyA-'bhagavan! jaba ApazrI ko chIMka AyI to yaha
sarvathA amAMgalika zabda aura dUsaroM ko chIMka AyI to to mAMgalika aura
amAMgalika zabda kyoM bolA?' uttara meM bhagavAn ne kahA-'mere liye usakA
saMketa yaha thA ki Apa abhI taka saMsAra meM kyoM baiThe hai? zIghra hI mokSa
meM prayANa kreN| isalie usane mere liye kahA thA-'mara jaao|' aura he
narasiMha! tumheM yahAM para sukha hai, marane ke bAda to tumhArI gati naraka
hai, jahAM apAra duHkha hai| isI ke saMketa svarUpa kahA thA- 'jIte rho|' isake
aMtara abhayakumAra ke lie kahA thA, jIte raho yA mara jaao| vaha isa dRSTi se
kahA thA ki jIyegA to dharmAcaraNa karegA aura maregA to anuttaravimAna devaloka
meM jaayegaa|' aura sabase aMta meM kAlasaukarika ke lie kahA thA ki 'na jIo ora
na maro,' vaha isa abhiprAya se thA ki agara vaha jIvita rahegA to aneka jIvoM
kI hatyA karatA rahegA aura maregA to sAtavIM naraka meM jaayegaa|' bhagavAn ke
zrImukha se yaha spaSTIkaraNa sunakara samrAT zreNika ne namaskAra karake
prArthanA kI-'prabho! Apa sarIkhe 'kRpAnAtha ke hote hue bhI mujhe naraka meM
jAnA pdd'egaa|' bhagavAn ne kahA-'tumane pahale se hI naraka kA AyuSya bAMdha
rakhA hai| isa kAraNa vahAM to avazya jAnA pdd'egaa|' 'pahale ke baMdhe hue
zubha yA azubha karmoM kA phala avazya bhoganA par3atA hai, isameM kucha bhI
raddobadala karane meM hama saba asamartha haiN| lekina prasannatA kI bAta yaha
hai ki tuma AgAmI caubIsI meM padmanAbha nAma ke prathama tIrthakara bnoge| ataH
kheda mata kro|' zreNika ne phira pUchA-'nAtha! aMdhe kuMe meM aMdhe ke samAna
ghora aMdhatama naraka se bacane kA mere liye kyA koI upAya bhI hai?' bhagavAn
ne uttara diyA- 'hA~! do upAya hai|' eka to yaha ki agara tumhArI dAsI kapilA
(brAhmaNI) ke hAtha se saharSa sAdhu ko dAna dilA do, dUsarA tuma kAlasaukarika
(kasAI) se jIvoM kI hatyA karanA chur3avA do to naraka se tumhArA chuTakArA ho
sakatA hai| anyathA atyaMta muzkila hai| isa taraha kA samyag upadeza hRdaya meM
hAra ke samAna dhAraNa karake zreNika rAjA zrI mahAvIra prabhu ko vaMdanA karake
apane mahalaM kI ora claa| rAste meM rAjA ke samyaktva kI parIkSA ke lie
dardurAMka deva ne eka machue kI taraha jAla kaMdhe para DAlate hue 1. anya
kathAoM meM puNiyA zrAvaka kI sAmAyika ke sAtha tIna upAya kI bAta hai| 115

Page #138 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Story of Sulas  Chapter Two of the Yoga Shastra, Verse 30: A sadhu (holy
person) pretended to be a sadhu and acted in an unrighteous manner. Seeing this,
Shrenik, out of concern for the reputation of dharma (righteousness), stopped
him and explained the error of his ways. The deva (god) then took the form of a
pregnant sadhvi (holy woman) and claimed to be a sadhvi. Shrenik, out of
devotion to dharma, brought her home and protected her. Seeing this, the deva
thought, "Indra Maharaj praised him in the assembly, and I have found it to be
true. Indeed, the words of such noble souls are not false." Then, the deva
presented Shrenik with a necklace like a constellation of stars shining in the
day, and two orbs. As the deva disappeared like a dream, he said, "Whoever joins
this necklace when it breaks will die soon." The king gave the divine, beautiful
necklace and the two orbs to his queen, Chelna. Jealous, Nandrani thought to
herself, "Am I worthy of such a trivial gift?" In anger, she struck the two orbs
against a pillar, causing them to break. From one orb emerged a pair of pure
earrings like the moon, and from the other, a pair of radiant, divine garments.
Seeing these divine objects, Nandrani was delighted and accepted the gifts.
Great souls receive unimaginable benefits.  Afterwards, Shrenik returned to his
palace and, offering an inducement, said to Kapila, "My dear, if you will feed
the sadhus with devotion even once, I will make you rich and free you from
servitude." Kapila replied, "My lord, even if you were to make me entirely of
gold, or in anger, kill me, I would not do this unrighteous act." The
disappointed king called Kalasaukarik and said, "Give up this business of
killing living beings. If you do this for the sake of wealth, I will give you
enough." He said, "I cannot give up this business of killing living beings,
which has been passed down from my ancestors. Many people in my family depend on
it. How can there be any fault in doing this violence, which sustains humanity?"
The king had him thrown into a blind well. How could he commit violence without
weapons in this blind well? He would be confined for a whole day and night.
Thinking this, Shrenik went to the Lord and pleaded, "Lord, I have stopped
Kalasaukarik from committing violence for a day and a night." The omniscient
Lord said, "King, even in the blind well, he has killed five hundred buffaloes
made of the filth of his body. Go and see for yourself." The king went and found
it to be true. Shrenik was filled with remorse. "Damn my past karma. The Lord's
words are not false."  The butcher, who always killed five hundred buffaloes,
continued to increase his store of great sins. Before he attained hell, he
developed terrible diseases in his body. Finally, at the time of his descent
into hell, due to his great and terrible sins, he died in this world, suffering
from a disease like that of a pig. At that time, he cried out loudly, "Woe is
me! Oh, my father!" He found the pleasures of women, beds, flowers, the sound of
the veena, sandalwood, and other agreeable comforts, as well as his eyes, skin,
nose, ears, and tongue, to be extremely painful, like being pierced with thorns.
Seeing his father's condition, Kalasaukarik's son, Sulas, went to the great and
fearless Shri Abhayakamar, who was a liberated soul, and told him everything
about his father. "The fruits of the terrible deeds of violence and other sins
committed by your father are like this. It is true that the fruits of intense
sinful actions are also intense. No one else can escape the consequences of
these sinful actions. Nevertheless, for his sake, do something that will bring
him peace. The way to do this is to make him consume things that are opposite to
his senses. Water is not the right remedy for the stench of excrement."  Upon
this, Sulas went home and fed his father bitter and pungent substances, gave him
hot water like the juice of heated copper, smeared his body with excrement, made
him sleep on a bed of thorns, made him listen to the harsh sounds of donkeys and
camels, and showed him terrifying forms like those of demons, ghosts, and
skeletons. By consuming these and other such unfavorable things, Kalasaukarik
found relief. He said to Sulas, "Son, after a long time, I have eaten delicious
food, drunk cold water, lain on a soft, ticklish bed, been smeared with fragrant
substances, heard sweet sounds, and seen beautiful forms."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 sulasa kI kathA yogazAstra dvitIya prakAza zloka 30 sAdhu kA svAMga racA aura
khuda ko aisA akArya karane vAlA sAdhu btaayaa| use dekhakara zreNika ne zAsana
(dharma) kI badanAmI na ho isa dRSTi se use samajhAkara akArya se rokA aura Age
bddh'aa| usa deva ne phira garbhiNI sAdhvI kA rUpa banAkara apane ko sAdhvI
batAyI, taba zreNika rAjA zAsanabhakti se use ghara le AyA aura usakI rakSA kii|
deva ne, zreNika rAjA kA yaha ravaiyA dekhakara socA-iMdra mahArAja ne sabhA meM
isakI jaisI prazaMsA kI thI, vaisA hI maiMne pAyA hai| vAstava meM aise paruSoM
ke vacana mithyA nahIM hote| phira isa deva ne dina meM bhI prakAzamAna
nakSatrazreNi ke samAna eka hAra aura do gole zreNika rAjA ko bheMTa kiye| vaha
deva dekhate-dekhate yaha kahakara svapnavat adRzya ho gayA ki isa hAra ko
TUTane para jo jor3a degA, vaha zIghra mara jaayegaa| rAjA ne celaNA rAnI ko
vaha divya manohara hAra diyA aura do gole diye| naMdarAnI ne IrSAlu dRSTi se
mana hI mana vicArA ki 'kyA maiM aise tuccha upahAra ke yogya hN| ataH roSavaza
usane donoM gole khaMbhe ke sAtha ttkraaye| jisase gole TUTa gye| eka gole meM
se caMdrayugala ke samAna nirmala kuMDaloM kA jor3A nikalA aura dUsare meM se
dedIpyamAna divyavastrayugala niklaa| usa divya padArthoM ko dekhakara naMdArAnI
ne harSita hokara una upahAroM ko svIkAra kiyaa| mahAna AtmAoM ko acintya lAbha
ho jAtA hai|  /  tatpazcAt zreNika rAjA apane rAjamahala meM pahuMcA aura
pralobhana dete hue kapilA se kahA-'bhadre! yadi tUM eka bAra | bhI
zraddhApUrvaka sAdhuoM ko AhAra degI to tujhe mAlAmAla kara dUMgA aura dAsatA se
bhI mukta kara duuNgaa| taba kapilA ne uttara diyA- 'deva! yadi Apa mujhe sArI
kI sArI sone kI banA deM athavA nArAja hokara mujhe jAna se bhI mAra DAle to |
bhI maiM yaha akArya nahIM kruuNgii|' nirAza rAjA ne kAlasaukarika ko bulAkara
usase kahA- 'tUM jIvoM ko mArane kA yaha | dhaMdhA chor3a de; agara tUM dhana ke
lobha se yaha kArya karatA hai to maiM tujhe paryApta dhana duuNgaa|' usane
kahA- 'mere bApa-dAdA se cale Aye ina jIvoM ko mArane kA dhaMdhA maiM nahIM
chor3a sktaa| isa para mere parivAra ke aneka AdamI palate haiM, jisase mAnava
jiMdA rahe, usa hiMsA ke karane meM kauna-sA doSa hai?' rAjA ne use aMdhe kue~
meM DalavA diyaa| yahAM isa aMdhe kue~ | meM DAlane para hathiyAra na hone para
taba yaha kaise hiMsA karegA? ataH pUre eka dina aura rAta baMda rhegaa| yaha
socakara zreNika ne bhagavAna se jAkara vinati kI, 'bhagavan! maiMne
kAlasaukarika se eka dina eka rAta kI hiMsA kA kAma to baMda karavA diyA hai|'
sarvajJa prabhu ne kahA-'rAjan! usane aMdhe kuMe~ meM bhI apane zarIra ke maila
ke pAMca sau bhaiMse banAkara mAre haiN| vahAM jAkara dekho to shii|' rAjA ne
dekhA to vaisA hI paayaa| ataH zreNika mana hI mana kheda karane lgaa| 'mere
pUrva karmoM ko dhikkAra hai; bhagavAna kI vANI mithyA nahIM hotii|' hamezA
pAMca sau bhaiMsoM ko mAratA huA kasAI mahApApapuMja meM vRddhi karane lgaa|
naraka kI prApti hone se pahale taka usake zarIra meM bhayaMkara se bhayaMkara
mahAroga paidA hue| Akhira meM narakagati prApti ke samaya mahAdAruNa-pApavaza
vadha karate hue sUara ke samAna vyAdhi kI pIr3A se yAtanA pAte hue isa loka se
vidA huaa| usa samaya vaha hAya mA! are bApa re! isa taraha jora-jora se cillAtA
thaa| use strI, zayyA, puSpa, vINA ke zabda yA caMdana Adi anukUla sukha-
sAmagrI, AMkha, camar3I, nAka, kAna tathA jIbha meM zUla bhauMkane ke samAna
atyaMta kaSTakara lagatI thii| pitA kI yaha dazA dekhakara kAlasaukarika-patra
salasa ne jagata meM Apta aura abhayadAnaparAyaNa zrI abhayakamAra se pitA kI
sArI kahA-'tumhAre pitAjI ne jo hiMsA Adi bhayaMkara kara pApakArya kiye haiM,
unakA phala aisA hI hotA hai| yaha saca hai, tIvra pApakarmoM kA phala bhI tIvra
hotA hai| dUsarA koI bhI vyakti isa pApakarmavipAka se bacA nahIM sktaa| phira
bhI usakI prIti ke lie aisA karo jisase use zAMti mile| isakA tarIkA yaha hai ki
iMdriyoM ke viparIta padArthoM kA sevana kraao| viSTA kI durgaMdha miTAne ke lie
jala usakA sahI upAya nahIM hai|' isa para sulasa ne ghara Akara apane pitA ko
kar3ave aura tIkhe padArtha khilAye, tape hue tAMbe ke rasa ke samAna garmAgarma
pAnI pilAyA, viSThA lAkara usake zarIra para lepa kiyA, kAMToM kI zayyA para use
sulAyA, gadhoM aura U~ToM ke karNakaTu zabda use sunAye; rAkSasa, bhUta vaitAla
aura asthipaMjara manuSya sarIkhe bhayaMkara rUpa btaaeN| ina aura aise hI aneka
pratikUla viSayoM ke sevana karane se kAlasaukarika ko rAhata milii| usane
sulasa se kahA-'beTA! bahuta arse ke bAda Aja svAdiSTa bhojana milA hai, ThaMDA
pAnI pIyA hai, komala gudagudI zayyA para leTA hUM, sugaMdhita padArtha kA lepa
kiyA hai, madhura-madhura zabda sune hai aura suMdara suMdara rUpa dekhe 116

Page #139 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Story of Sulas  Yoga Shastra, Second Light, Verse 30: "What should I say? I
have never experienced such joy as I have today. Why have you kept me deprived
of these pleasures until now?" Hearing his father's words filled with wonder,
Sulas thought to himself, "Oh! If he is experiencing the fruits of so many sins
in this very life, what will his state be in the afterlife in hell, etc.?" As
Sulas was thinking this, Kalasaukarik closed his eyes forever. He died and went
to the seventh hell called Apratisthan.   After performing the death rites of
his father, his relatives said to Sulas, "Son! Now you sit in your father's
place and take charge of his business (work), so that we may remain prosperous
because of you." To this, Sulas replied, "I will never take up this work. I have
seen my father suffer the bitter fruits of these cruel deeds in this very life,
and he will suffer even more bitter fruits in future lives. Just as I cherish my
own life, so too do other beings cherish their own lives. Therefore, to sustain
one's own life by destroying the lives of others is a very bad deed. Shame on
such animal-killers and other murderers. Seeing the bitter fruits of violence
firsthand, who would be willing to engage in a violent livelihood? Who would
knowingly go to the mouth of death by eating the fruit that directly invites
death?"  Hearing this, his relatives began to insist, "Sulas! If you will incur
sin from killing animals, will it only be you who will suffer? Just as family
property is shared among all family members, so too will we share the fruits of
sin. You just kill one buffalo first. After that, we will kill the other
animals. This will cause you very little sin." To experience how much pain it
causes to hurt another being, Sulas struck his thigh with a sharp axe, causing
him to faint and fall immediately. When he regained consciousness, he cried out
in a mournful voice, "Alas, father! I am still very restless from the pain of
this harsh blow of the axe! Oh, brothers! Someone share my pain, so that it may
lessen. Take my sorrow and save me from this pain! Alas, I am dying!"  Seeing
Sulas groaning in pain, his brothers standing nearby said to him, "Brother! Can
anyone take someone else's pain, or help someone in their sorrow?" To this,
Sulas gave them a sharp rebuke, "Brothers! If you all together cannot take away
even this little pain of mine, how will you share the pain of hell? By
committing sinful deeds for the whole family, I alone will have to suffer the
torment of hell in the afterlife, while you all, the family and clan, will
remain here. Therefore, even though violence has been prevalent in my family
from generation to generation, I will not engage in such violence. If someone's
father is blind, should the son also become blind?"  At the very moment when
Sulas was uttering these words filled with pain, Prince Abhayakumar arrived
there to inquire about his well-being and take care of him. Embracing Sulas, he
said, "Well done, Sulas! You have done a very good thing. I have listened
carefully to all your words, that is why I have come to thank you with joy.
Instead of getting caught in the mire of sin from family tradition, you have
abandoned it from afar. Therefore, your life is truly blessed, you are truly
commendable. We are partial to virtues." Thus, the righteous prince Abhayakumar,
with sweet words, congratulated him and returned to his place.  On the other
hand, Sulas, who was afraid of a bad fate, did not heed the words of his
relatives at all, and gradually embraced the 12 vows of a Shravak. Just as Redra
attained wealth, so too did Sulas attain the wealth of Dharma. It is true that
whoever abandons the violence prevalent in their family tradition, like Sulas,
the son of Kalasaukarik, heaven and wealth are not far away for him. In fact, he
becomes worthy of meritorious deeds. ||30||  One who commits violence, no matter
how much he practices restraint of the senses, etc., can neither earn new merit
nor atone for his sins and purify himself. In this regard, it is said:

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 sulasa kI kathA yogazAstra dvitIya prakAza zloka 30 haiN| kyA batAU~, Aja taka
aisA AnaMda nahIM AyA, jitanA Aja AyA hai| aba taka tumane mujhe ina sukhoM se
vaMcita kyoM rakhA?' pitA ke vismayotpAdaka vacana sunakara sulasa ne mana hI
mana vicAra kiyA-'oha! isa janma meM hI jaba yaha itane pApoM kA phala pratyakSa
bhogatA dikhAyI de rahA hai to paraloka meM naraka Adi meM kyA hAla hogA?'
sulasa ke yoM socate-socate hI kAlasaukarika ne sadA ke lie A~kheM mUMda lii|
vaha marakara apratiSThAna nAmaka saptama naraka meM phuNcaa| _pitA kI
maraNottarakriyA karane ke bAda svajanoM ne sulasa se kahA- 'vatsa! aba tUM
apane pitA ke sthAna para baiThakara unake kArobAra (kArya) ko saMbhAla le, tAki
tere kAraNa hama sanAtha bane rhe|' isa para sulasa ne unheM javAba diyA| 'maiM
yaha kArya kadApi nahIM apnaauuNgaa| maiMne pitAjI ko isI janma meM ina
krUrakarmoM kA kaTu phala pAte dekhA hai, agale janmoM meM to unheM aura bhI
ghora kaTuphala milegaa| jaise mujhe apane prANa priya lagate haiM, vaise hI
dUsare prANiyoM ko bhI apane-apane prANa pyAre hai| ataH apane prANa TikAne ke
lie dUsare jIvoM ke prANoM kA nAza karanA bahuta hI burA kAma hai| dhikkAra hai,
aise prANizatraoM aura anya ghAtakoM ko| hiMsA kA aisA kaTaphala pratyakSa
dekhakara hiMsAmaya AjIvikA ko kauna karane ko taiyAra hogA? jisa phala se sIdhe
mauta ko nyotA denA ho, bhalA usa kiMpAkaphala ko khAkara jAnabujhakara kauna
mRtyu ke mukha meM jAnA cAhegA? yaha sunakara ve svajana phira Agraha karane
lage-'sulasa! agara prANivadha se pApa lagegA to tujhe akele ko thor3e hI
lagegA? jaise paitRka dhana sabhI pArivArika jana Apasa meM bAMTa lete haiM,
vaise hI pApa kA phala hama bAMTa leNge| tuma pahale sirpha eka bhaiMse ko
maaro| usake bAda aura pazuoM ko to hama mAra leNge| isase tumheM bahuta hI
thor3A-sA pApa lgegaa|' dUsare ke prANoM ko coTa pahuMcAne se kitanA duHkha hotA
hai, isakA anubhava karane ke lie sulasa ne tIkhA kulhAr3A apanI jAMgha para
mArA, jisase vaha gaza khAkara turaMta gira pdd'aa| hoza meM AyA taba karuNa
vilApa karatA huA sulasa Artasvara meM cillAyA-'hAya bApa re! kulhAr3e kI isa
kaThora coTa se maiM ghAyala hokara abhI taka bahuta becaina hUM isakI pIr3A se!
are baMdhuoM! koI merI isa vedanA ko to bAMTa lo, jisase yaha kama ho jaaye|
merA duHkha lekara koI mujhe isa duHkha se bacAo! hAya maiM marA re!' sulasa ko
pIr3A se ArtanAda karate dekhakara pAsa meM khar3e | hue baMdhuoM ne usase
kahA-'bhAI! kyA koI kisI kI pIr3A le sakatA hai, yA kisI ke duHkha meM hAtha
baMTA sakatA hai?' isa para sulasa ne unheM kharI kharI sunA dI-'baMdhuo! jaba
tuma saba loga milakara merI itanI-sI pIr3A nahIM le sakate |to naraka kI pIr3A
meM kaise hissA baMTA loge? sAre kuTuMba ke lie pApakarma karake ghora naraka kI
vedanA mujhe akele ko | hI paraloka meM bhoganI par3egI, Apa saba kaTaMba kabIle
vAle yahIM raha jaayeNge| isalie cAhe vaMza paraMparA se mere parivAra meM hiMsA
karma pracalita ho, lekina maiM aisI hiMsA kataI nahIM kruuNgaa| agara kisI kA
pitA aMdhA ho to kyA putra ko bhI aMdhA bana jAnA cAhie?' jisa samaya sulasa
pIr3A se bhare ye udgAra nikAla rahA thA, ThIka usI samaya usase sukhazAMti ke
samAcAra pUchane aura usakI saMbhAla lene rAjaputra abhayakumAra vahAM A pahuMce
the| sulasa ko chAtI se lagAte hue usane kahA-'zAbAsa sUlasa! tUM ne bahuta hI
bar3hiyA kAma kiyA hai| maiMne tumhArI sabhI bAteM dhyAnapUrvaka sunI haiM,
tabhI to maiM khuza hokara tumheM dhanyavAda dene ke lie AyA huuN|
vaMzaparaMparA ke pApa-paMka meM phaMsane kI apekSA tUM ne dUra se hI usakA
parityAgakara diyA hai| isalie vAstava meM terA jIvana dhanya ho uThA hai, tUM
vAstava meM prazaMsanIya hai| hama to guNoM ke pakSapAtI hai|' isa prakAra
dharmavatsala rAjakumAra abhayakumAra madhura vacanoM se usakA abhinaMdana
karake apane sthAna ko lauTa gyaa| idhara durgatibhIru sulasa ne baMdhuvarga ke
kathana ko bilakula nahIM mAnakara dhIre-dhIre zrAvaka ke 12 vrata aMgIkAra
redra ko aizvaryaprApti kI taraha sulasa ko bhI dharmadhana kI prApti huii| saca
hai, kAlasIkarika ke putra sulasa kI taraha kulaparaMparA se pracalita hiMsA
karma kA jo tyAga karatA hai, svarga saMpatti usake lie kucha bhI dUra nahIM
hai| vastutaH vaha zreyaHkArya kA adhikArI banatA hai  // 30 //  hiMsA karane
vAlA kitanA hI iMdriyadamana Adi kara le, lekina na to vaha naye sire se
puNyopArjana hI kara sakatA hai; Ara na hI pApa kA prAyazcitta kara Atmazuddhi
kara sakatA hai| isa saMbaMdha meM kahate haiM 117

Page #140 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Condemnation of the Person Who Preaches Violence and the So-Called Preaching
**Yoga Shastra, Second Light, Verses 31 to 35**  **Verse 31:**  **Translation:**
"Control of the senses, worship of gods and gurus, charity, study of scriptures,
and austerity - all these are useless and fruitless unless a person abandons
violence."  **Explanation:**  "As long as violence, whether rooted in peace or
prevalent in family traditions, is not abandoned, even good deeds like control
of the senses, worship of gods and gurus, giving charity to deserving
recipients, studying religious scriptures, and performing rigorous austerities
like Chandrayana, do not yield any good results like gaining merit or reducing
sins. They all become futile. Therefore, violence committed for the sake of
happiness and peace of meat-loving families or for upholding rigid family
customs is prohibited."  **Verse 32:**  **Translation:** "Alas! Cruel and greedy
preachers of the scriptures of violence, they trap these innocent, gullible
believers in their web of words and lead them to the harsh land of hell."
**Explanation:** "Compassionate individuals never preach violence or create
scriptures filled with violence. But it is a great pity that cruel and greedy
preachers of violent scriptures, blinded by their desire for meat like Manu,
lead innocent and devout people (by misleading or confusing them) to the depths
of hell. Why are these preachers called blind to their greed? The answer is that
they lack the pure vision of innate wisdom or the eye of association with wise
individuals. It is said, 'One eye is innate wisdom, the other is association
with wise individuals. In this world, whoever lacks these two eyes is truly
blind, even if they have physical eyes. If such a person is inclined towards the
wrong path, who is to blame? Only themselves!' Intelligent individuals should
not be fooled by the sweet words of these deceivers and should use their wisdom
to discern right from wrong."  **Verse 33:**  **Translation:** "Brahma created
animals for the purpose of sacrifice. The sacrifice itself is for the welfare of
the entire universe. Therefore, the violence that occurs in the sacrifice is not
violence. It does not lead to sin."  **Explanation:** "When asked why there is
no fault in the violence that occurs in a sacrifice, the answer is given: The
death of the creature being sacrificed is a great benefit, or the loss of a son,
wife, or wealth is a great benefit. The violence in a sacrifice is beneficial
for those who die because it is different from the violence that arises from
misfortune, the violence that arises from wrongdoing, and the violence that
leads to the fruits of hell. Those who die from this violence do not experience
the fruits of hell. Therefore, this violence is not harmful but beneficial."
**Verse 34:**  **Translation:** "Medicinal herbs, animals like goats, trees like
the sacrificial post, animals like oxen, horses, and cows, and birds like
sparrows and crows - when they are destroyed for the sake of sacrifice, they are
not destroyed (dead) but attain higher births like gods and Gandharvas, or they
attain long life in places like Uttarakuru."  **Verse 35:**  **Translation:**
"Manu said that animals should be sacrificed only in Madhuparka, a type of
ritual, in the Jyotishtoma sacrifice, and in rituals for the ancestors and gods,
and not elsewhere."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 hiMsopadezaka vyakti aura tathAkathita upadeza kI niMdA yogazAstra dvitIya
prakAza zloka 31 se 35  / 87 /  damo devagurupAstirdAnamadhyayanaM tapaH  /
sarvamapyetadaphalaM, hiMsA cenna parityajet  // 31 //  artha :- jaba taka koI
vyakti hiMsA kA tyAga nahIM kara detA, taba taka usakA iMdriyadamana, deva aura
guru kI upAsanA, dAna zAstrAdhyayana aura tapa Adi saba bekAra hai, niSphala hai
/  / 31 /  /  vyAkhyA :- zAMti kI kAraNabhUta athavA kulaparaMparA se pracalita
hiMsA kA tyAga nahIM kiyA jAtA, taba taka iMdriyadamana, deva aura guru kI
upAsanA, supAtra ko dAna, dharmazAstroM kA adhyayana, cAMdrAyaNa Adi kaThora
tapa ityAdi zubha dharmAnuSThAna bhI puNyopArjana aura pApa kSaya Adi koI
suphala nahIM lAte, sabhI niSphala jAte haiN| isalie mAMsa-lubdha pArivArika
logoM kI sukhazAMti ke lie yA rUr3ha kulAcAra ke pAlana ke lie kI jAne vAlI
hiMsA kA niSedha kiyA hai||31|| aba zAstrajanita hiMsA kA niSedha karane kI
dRSTi se zAstra dvArA usakA khaMDana karate haiN|88| vizvasto mugdhadhIrlokaH,
pAtyate narakAvanau  /  aho nRzaMsairlobhAndhaihiMsAzAstropadezakaiH  // 32 //
artha :- aho! nirdaya aura lobhAMdha hiMsAzAstra ke upadezaka ina becAre mugdha
buddhi vAle bhAle-bhAle vizvAsI logoM ko vAgjAla meM phaMsAkara yA bahakAkara
naraka kI kaThora bhUmi meM DAla dete haiM  /  / 3 /  /  vyAkhyA :- dayAlu
vyakti kabhI hiMsA kA upadeza nahIM dete yA hiMsA ke upadeza se paripUrNa
zAstroM kI racanA nahIM krte| magara bar3A aphasosa hai ki nirdaya aura
lobhAMdha hiMsAparaka zAstroM ke upadeSTA, manu Adi mAMsa khAne ke lobha meM
aMdhe bane hue bholebhAle zraddhAlu bhadrajanoM ko (bahakAkara yA ulaTe-sIdhe
samajhAkara) naraka ke garta meM DAla dete haiN|' yahAM una upadezoM ko lobha
meM aMdhe kyoM kahA gayA? isake uttara meM kahate haiM-ve loga sahaja viveka
rUpI pavitra cakSu yA| vivekI ke saMsarga rUpI netra se rahita haiN| kahA bhI
hai-'eka to, pavitra cakSu sahaja viveka hai, dUsarA cakSu hai-una | vivekavAna
vyaktioM ke sAtha sahavAsa (satsaMga) krnaa| saMsAra meM jisake pAsa ye donoM
cakSu nahIM hai, vaha A~kheM hote hue | bhI vAstava meM aMdhA hai| agara aisA
vyakti viparIta mArga meM pravRtta hotA hai to isameM doSa kisakA? usI kA hI to
hai!' catura buddhizAlI vyaktiyoM ko kAryAkArya ke viveka karane meM aise ThagoM
kI mIThI-mIThI bAtoM ke cakkara meM Akara vizvAsa nahIM kara lenA cAhie  /  / 3
/  /  jisane hiMsAparaka zAstra racA haiM, usakA ullekha karake Age usakI
dhajjiyA~ ur3Ate haiN|89| yajJArthaM pazavaH sRSTAH, svayameva svayambhuvA  /
yajJo'sya bhUtyai sarvasya, tasmAdyajJe vdho'vdhH||33|| artha :- brahmAjI ne
yajJa ke lie svayameva pazuoM ko banAyA hai; yajJa isa sAre carAcara vizva ke
kalyANa ke lie hai| isalie yajJa meM hone vAlI hiMsA hiMsA nahIM hotii| yAnI
vaha hiMsA pApa kA kAraNa nahIM hotii||33|| _vyAkhyA :- yaha pUche jAne para ki
'yajJa meM hone vAlI hiMsA meM koI doSa kyoM nahIM hai? unakI ora se yaha uttara
diyA jAtA hai-jisa jIva kI hiMsA kI jAtI hai, usake prANaviyoga se bar3A upakAra
hotA hai, athavA putra, strI, dhana Adi ke viyoga se mahAn upakAra hotA hai,
yajJIya hiMsA se marane vAloM ke lie vaha hiMsA isalie mahopakAriNI hotI hai ki
anartha se utpanna hiMsA se, duSkRta se hone vAlI hiMsA se tathA narAkAdi
phalavipAka prApta karAne vAlI hiMsA se yaha hiMsA bhinna hai| isa hiMsA se
marane vAle narakAdi phala nahIM paate| isalie yaha hiMsA apakAraka nahIM,
upakAraka hai||33|| isI samarthana meM Age kahate haiN||90| auSadhyaH pazavo,
vRkSAstiryaJcaH pakSiNastathA  /  yajJArthaM nidhanaM prAptAH,
prApnuvantyucchriti punH||34|| _ artha :- DAbha Adi auSadhiyoM, bakarA Adi pazu,
yUpa Adi vRkSa, baila, ghor3A, gAya Adi tiryaMca, kapiMjala, cir3iyA Adi
pakSiyoM kA yajJa ke lie jaba vinAza kiyA jAtA hai, to ve naSTa ho (mara) kara
phira deva, gaMdharva Adi ucca yoniyAM prApta karate haiM athavA uttarakuru Adi
meM dIrghAyuSya prAsa karate haiN||34||  / 91 /  madhuparke ca yajJe ca,
pitRdevatakarmaNi  /  atreva pazavo hiMsyA, nAnyatretyabravInmanuH  // 35 /  /
artha :- madhuparka eka prakAra kA anuSThAna hai, jisameM go vadha kA vidhAna
hai; jyotiSThoma yajJa, jisameM pazuvadha 118

Page #141 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Animal sacrifice performed in a yajna is cruel and bears the fruit of sin. It is
ordained in the Yoga Shastra, Second Light, verses 36 to 38; Pitru Shraddha
Karma, in which Shraddha is performed for parents and other ancestors; and
Daivat Karma, in which Maha Yajna and other rituals are performed for the Devas;
in all these rituals, animal sacrifice should be performed, not in other
activities. That is, the animal sacrifice ordained in these activities is not a
sin; animal sacrifice elsewhere is a sin. || 35 || Thus Manu has said in the
fifth chapter of Manusmriti. || 92 || Eshvarthshu Pashun Hinsan
Vedatattvarthavidh Dwijah. Atmanam Cha Pashunshchaiva Gamayatyanuttamam Gatim ||
36 || Meaning: The learned Brahmin who sacrifices animals for the aforementioned
activities, knowing the true meaning of the Vedas, takes himself and the animals
to the highest state (heaven, liberation, etc.). || 36 || Leaving aside the
matter of performing the sacrifice, how can those who preach violence to others
be justified? This is explained. || 93 || Ye Chakruh Krurakarmaanah Shastram
Hinsopadeshakam. Kva Te Yasyanthi Narake, Nastikhebhyo'pi Nastikaah || 37 ||
Those who have composed scriptures (Manusmriti, etc.) that preach violence
(inspiration) without themselves performing violence, appear to be cruel and
merciless, but they are even greater atheists than atheists. It is not known
which hell they will go to? || 37 || Meaning Further it is said: || 94 || Varam
Varaakashcharvaako, Yo'sau Prakatanastikah. Vedoktitaapasachchhadmachchhannam
Raksho Na Jaiminih || 38 || Meaning: The poor Charvaka, who is known in the
world as an atheist without any hypocrisy, is good; but Jaimini, a demon hidden
in the guise of a tapasvi, who deceives people in the name of the Vedas by
saying, "This is what the Vedas say," is not good. || 38 || Explanation: • The
poor Lokayatika or Charvaka, being free from hypocrisy, can be considered
somewhat better than Jaimini. But Jaimini, who, under the guise of a tapasvi,
openly prescribes the killing of living beings by presenting Vedic verses and
thus deceives the people, is not good. His statement that "Brahma created
animals for the sake of yajna" is mere wordplay; the truth is that all living
beings are born in different auspicious and inauspicious wombs according to
their own karma. Therefore, it is wrong to present the theory of creation by
saying that one is born to give birth to another. "Perform yajna (which involves
animal sacrifice) for the peace and well-being of all beings in the world"; this
statement is also a fallacy or biased. "Vedic or Yajnik violence is not
violence"; this statement is also ridiculous. The statement that the animals,
medicines, etc., killed or destroyed for the sake of yajna attain a higher
state, should be understood by those who have blind faith in it. One cannot
attain a higher state simply by being killed for the sake of yajna without
performing good deeds. And suppose that one attains a higher state simply by
being killed for the sake of yajna, then why not kill one's parents in the yajna
and send them to a higher state, or why not die in the yajna oneself and go to
heaven immediately? Therefore, the poor innocent animal, as it were, pleads with
the Yajnik: "Sir! I have no desire to go to heaven. I am not asking you for
heaven or anything else. I am always content with eating grass and straw.
Therefore, it is not right to kill me by showing me the lure of heaven. If those
who are killed in the yajna really go to heaven, then why don't you kill your
parents or other relatives in the yajna and send them to heaven?" Violence like
Madhuparka, etc., is beneficial, others are not; this is the statement of a
free-willed person. How can there be any difference between violence and
violence, that one violence is beneficial and the other is harmful? Is there any
difference between poison and poison? Therefore, virtuous souls should abandon
all kinds of violence. As it is said in the Dashavaikalika Sutra (Jain Agam):
All living beings want to live, no one wants to die. Therefore, the Nigranthamas
abandon heinous acts like killing living beings. The statement that "yajna
performed with animal sacrifice bestows a higher state on oneself and the
animal" is something that only a very bold person would make. It may be that the
one who is dying 119

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 yajJa meM kI gayI pazuhiMsA krUrapApaphaladAyinI hai yogazAstra dvitIya prakAza
zloka 36 se 38 karanA vihita hai; pitRzrAddhakarma, jisameM mAtA-pitA Adi
pitaroM ke prati zrAddha kiyA jAtA hai; evaM daivatakarma, jisameM devoM ke
prati mahAyajJa Adi anuSThAna kiyA jAtA hai; ina saba anuSThAnoM meM hI
pazuhiMsA karanI cAhie, isake atirikta kAmoM meM nhiiN| arthAt inhIM kAryoM meM
vihita pazuhiMsA pApa nahIM hai; anyatra pazuhiMsA pApa hai  /  /  35  /  /  isa
prakAra manu ne manusmRti ke pAMcaveM adhyAya meM kahA hai  / 92 /  eSvartheSu
pazUn hiMsan vedatattvArthavid dvijaH  /  AtmAnaM ca pazUMzcaiva gamayatyuttamAM
gatim  // 36 //  artha :- uparyukta kAryoM ke lie pazuhiMsA karane vAlA veda ke
tAttvika artha kA jJAtA vipra apane Apako aura pazuoM ko uttama gati (svarga,
mokSa Adi ) meM pahuMcAtA hai  /  /  36  /  /  hiMsA karane kI bAta ko eka ora
rakha deM, to bhI dUsaroM ko hiMsA ke upadeza dene vAle kaise hai? yaha batAte
haiM|  /  93  /  ye cakruH krUrakarmANaH zAstraM hiNsopdeshkm| kva te yAsyanti
narake, nAstikebhyo'pi naastikaaH||37|| svayaM hiMsA na karake jinhoMne hiMsA kA
upadeza (preraNA) dene vAle zAstra (manusmRti Adi) race haiM, ve krUra karma
karane vAle nirdaya dikhane meM Astika dikhAyI dete haiM, lekina ve nAstikoM se
bhI mahAnAstika hai| patA nahIM, ve kauna-se naraka meM jAyeMge ?  /  /  37 /  /
artha Age aura kahate haiM :  /  94  /  varaM varAkazcArvAko, yo'sau
prakaTanAstikaH  /  vedoktitApasacchadmacchannaM rakSo na jaiminiH  //  38  //
artha :- becArA cArvAka, jo binA kisI daMbha ke nAstika ke nAma se jagat meM
prasiddha hai, acchA hai; magara tApasaveSa meM chipA huA jaimini rAkSasa, jo
'veda meM aisA kahA hai, ' isa prakAra vedoM kI duhAI dekara veda ke nAma se
logoM ko bahakAtA hai (hiMsA kI ora prerita karatA hai), acchA nahIM hai ||38||
vyAkhyA : * becArA lokAyatika yA cArvAka daMbharahita hone se jaimini kI apekSA
se to kucha acchA mAnA jA sakatA hai| paraMtu veda - vacanoM ko prastuta karake
tApasaveSa kI oTa meM jIvoM kI hiMsA kA khullamakhullA vidhAna karake janatA ko
| Thagane vAlA rAkSasa- sarIkhA jaimini acchA nahIM  /  usakA yaha kathana ki
'yajJa ke lie brahmA ne pazuoM ko paidA kiyA hai; | kevala vANIvilAsa hai; saca
to yaha hai ki sabhI jIva apane apane karmoM ke anusAra vibhinna zubhAzubha
yoniyoM meM utpanna hote haiN| isalie dUsare ko utpanna karane vAlA batAkara
sRSTivAda kA prarUpaNa karanA galata hai| 'vizva ke sabhI prANiyoM kI sukhazAMti
ke lie (pazuvadhamUlaka) yajJa kareM; yaha kathana bhI arthavAda hai yA
pakSapAtayukta hai| 'vaidikI yA yAjJikI hiMsA hiMsA nahIM hotI', yaha kathana
bhI hAsyAspada hai| yajJa ke lie mAre gaye yA naSTa kiye gaye auSadhi Adi ke
jIvoM ko uttamagati milatI hai, yaha vacana to usa para aMdhazraddhA rakhane
vAloM kA samajhanA caahie| sukRta kiye binA yajJa ke | nimitta vadha kiye jAne
mAtra se uccagati nahIM ho sakatI aura mAna lo, yajJa 'mAre jAne mAtra se hI
kisI ko uccagati mila jAtI ho to apane mAtA-pitA ko yajJa meM mArakara ucca gati
meM kyoM nahIM bheja dete yA svayaM yajJa meM marakara jhaTapaTa | svarga meM
kyoM nahIM cale jAte ? isIlie becArA nirdoSa pazu mAno yAjJika se nivedana
karatA hai - 'mahAzaya ! mujhe svarga meM | jAne kI koI khvAhiza nahIM hai| maiM
Apase svarga yA aura kucha mAMga bhI nahIM rahA huuN| maiM to hamezA ghAsa -
tinakA khAkara hI saMtuSTa rahatA huuN| isalie mujhe svarga kA lAlaca dikhAkara
isa prakAra mAranA ucita nahIM hai| agara yajJa meM mAre hue sacamuca svarga meM
jAte hoM to Apa apane mAtA, pitA yA anya baMdhuoM ko yajJa meM homa karake
svarga meM kyoM nahIM bheja | dete?' madhuparka Adi hiMsA kalyANakAriNI hotI
hai, anya nahIM hotI; yaha kisI svacchaMdAcArI ke vacana hai| hiMsA hiMsA meM
koI aMtara kaise ho sakatA hai ki eka hiMsA to kalyANakAriNI ho aura dUsarI
hiMsA akalyANakAriNI ho  /  viSa viSa meM kyA koI aMtara hotA hai? isalie
puNyAtmAoM ko saba prakAra kI hiMsAoM kA tyAga karanA caahie| jaisA ki
dazavaikAlikasUtra (jainAgama) meM kahA hai- sabhI jIva jInA cAhate haiM, maranA
koI nahIM caahtaa| isalie nigraMthamu | prANivadha- jaise ghora karma kA tyAga
karate haiN|' pahale jo kahA gayA thA ki 'pazuvadhapUrvaka kiyA gayA yajJa khuda
ko tathA | usa pazu ko uttama gati pradAna karatA hai|' yaha kathana bhI
atisAhasika ke sivAya kauna karegA? ho sakatA hai, marane vAle 119

Page #142 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Examples of Violent Scriptures  **Yoga Shastra, Second Light, Verses 39-46**
**38.** A non-violent animal, if it has good intentions, can attain liberation
through non-action and non-attachment. But how can a Brahmin who performs animal
sacrifice or encourages it in a Yajna attain liberation?  **39.** In conclusion,
it is said: "Those who kill beings out of cruelty, under the pretext of offering
to the gods or performing Yajna, go to terrible hell."  **Explanation:** They
kill beings for offering to deities like Bhairava, Chandi, etc., or for
offerings on festivals like Mahanavami, Magha Ashtami, Chaitra Ashtami, Shravan
Shukla Ekadashi, etc. They go to terrible hells like Naraka. Here, the reason
for offering to deities is specifically mentioned. And in conclusion, it is
said, "Under the pretext of Yajna." When there are faultless and independent
means of Dharma practice, then holding on to faulty and dependent means of
Dharma practice is never considered beneficial. Why go to the mountain for a
sage when you can find one in the courtyard of your house?  **40.** It is a
matter of great regret that those with dull intellect have abandoned Dharma,
which is rooted in peace, good conduct, and compassion, and has the welfare of
the world as its goal, and have declared violence as the cause of Dharma.
**Explanation:** Peace, which is victory over passions and senses, good conduct,
which is beautiful nature, and compassion, which is kindness towards beings,
these three are the roots of Dharma. Such Dharma is the cause of progress
(worldly prosperity) and liberation (spiritual liberation or Moksha). This kind
of Dharma is beneficial for the world. But it is regrettable that they abandon
the means of such peaceful Dharma and declare violence as the means of Dharma,
neglecting the real means of Dharma. The dullness of those who present this
distorted view is evident.  **41-46.** Up to this point, we have condemned the
violence motivated by greed, which is done for the sake of peace, the violence
that is traditional, the violence that is done in Yajna, and the violence that
is done for the sake of offerings to deities. Now, the discussion regarding
violence related to ancestor worship remains. We present it in the following six
verses, taking it verbatim from another scripture (the third chapter of
Manusmriti).  **41.** I will explain in detail the offering of Havir (oblation)
to the ancestors, which is prescribed for a long time and for eternity.  **42.**
The ancestors of humans are pleased for one month by the offering of sesame
seeds, rice, barley, black gram, water, roots, and fruits, given according to
the prescribed rituals.  **43.** They are pleased for two months by the offering
of fish meat, for three months by the offering of deer meat, for four months by
the offering of antelope meat, and for five months by the offering of bird meat.
**44.** They are pleased for six months by the offering of goat meat, for seven
months by the offering of sheep meat, for eight months by the offering of ox
meat, and for nine months by the offering of buffalo meat.  **45.** They are
pleased for ten months by the offering of boar and buffalo meat, for eleven
months by the offering of rabbit and hare meat.  **46.** They are pleased for a
year by the offering of cow meat, milk, and milk pudding, and for twelve years
by the offering of the meat of a wild boar.  **(Manusmriti 3/266-271)**
**Explanation:** The ancestors are pleased by the offering of Havir (oblation),
which is prescribed for a long time and for eternity, given to them according to
the prescribed rituals. What is the ritual of ancestor worship? I will explain
it completely.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 hiMsAparaka zAstravacanoM ke namUne yogazAstra dvitIya prakAza zloka 39 se 46
ahiMsaka pazu ko (usakI zubhabhAvanA ho to) akAma-nirjarA se uttamagati prApta
ho jAya, magara yajJa meM pazuvadhakartA yA pazuvadhapreraka yAjJika brAhmaNa ko
uttamagati kaise saMbhava ho sakatI hai?  /  / 38 /  /  isa viSaya kA upasaMhAra
karate hue kahate haiN|95| devopahAravyAjena, yajJavyAjena ye'thavA  /  nanti
jantUn gataghRNA, ghorAM te yAnti durgatim  // 39 //  artha :- devoM ko balidAna
dene (bheMTa car3hAne) ke bahAne athavA yajJa ke bahAne jo nirdaya hokara jIvoM
ko mArate haiM, ve ghora durgati meM jAte hai||39|| vyAkhyA :- bhairava, caMDI
Adi deva-deviyoM ko balidAna dene ke lie athavA mahAnavamI. mAgha-aSTamI.
caitra| aSTamI, zrAvaNa zuklA ekAdazI Adi parvadinoM meM devapUjA ke nimitta se
bheMTa car3hAne ke lie jIvoM kA vadha karate haiM, ve naraka Adi bhayaMkara
gatiyoM meM jAte haiN| yahAM devatA ko bheMTa car3hAne Adi nimitta kA vizeSa
rUpa se kathana kiyA gayA hai| aura upasaMhAra meM kahA gayA hai- 'yajJa ke
bahAne se|' jaba nirdoSa aura svAdhIna dharmasAdhana maujUda hai to phira sadoSa
aura parAdhIna dharmasAdhanoM ko pakar3e rakhanA kathamapi hitAvaha nahIM mAnA
jA sktaa| ghara ke AMgana meM uge hue Aka meM hI sAdhu mila jAya to pahAr3a para
jAne kI phijUla mehanata kyoM kI jAya?  /  / 39 /  /  hiMsAdharmiyoM kA aura bhI
bauddhika divAliyApana sUcita karate haiN|96| zamazIladayAmUlaM, hitvA dharmaM
jagaddhitam  /  aho hiMsA'pi dhAya, jagade mandabuddhibhiH  /  / 40 /  /  artha
:- jisakI jar3a meM zama, zIla aura dayA hai, aise jagatkalyANakArI dharma ko
chor3akara maMdabuddhi logoM ne hiMsA ko dharma kI kAraNabhUta batA dI hai, yaha
bar3e kheda kI bAta hai  /  / 40 /  /  vyAkhyA :- kaSAyoM aura iMdriyoM para
vijaya rUpa zama, suMdara svabhAva rUpa zIla aura jIvoM para anukaMpA rUpa dayA;
ye tInoM jisa dharma ke mUla meM haiM, vaha dharma abhyudaya (ihalaukika unnati)
aura niHzreyasa (pAralaukika kalyANa yA mokSa) kA kAraNa hai| isa prakAra kA
dharma jagat ke lie hitakara hotA hai| paraMtu kheda hai ki aise zamazIlAdimaya
dharma ke sAdhanoM ko chor3akara hiMsAdi ko dharmasAdhana batAte haiM aura
vAstavika dharmasAdhanoM kI upekSA karate haiN| isa prakAra ulaTA pratipAdana
karane vAloM kI buddhimaMdatA spaSTa pratIta hotI hai  /  / 4 /  /  yahAM taka
lobhamUlaka zAMti ke nimitta se kI jAne vAlI lobhamUlaka hiMsA,
kulaparaMparAgata hiMsA, yajJIya hiMsA yA devabali ke nimitta se kI jAne vAlI
hiMsA kA niSedha kiyA; aba pitRpUjAviSayaka hiMsA ke saMbaMdha meM vivecana bAkI
hai, vaha dUsare zAstra (manusmRti ke tIsare adhyAya) se jyoM kA tyoM lekara
nimnokta 6 zlokoM meM prastuta karate haiN|97| haviryaccirarAtrAya,
yaccAnantyAya kalpate  /  pitRbhyo vidhivaddattaM, tatpravakSyAmyazeSataH  // 41
//  .  / 98 /  tilavrIhiyavaiGkiradbhirmUlaphalena vA  /  dattena mAsaM prIyante
vidhivat pitaro nRNAm  // 42 //   / 99 /  dvau mAsau matsyamAMsena, trIn mAsAn
hAriNena tu  /  aurabhreNA'tha caturaH zAkuneneha paJca tu  /  / 43 /  /   / 100
/  SaNmAsAMzchAgamAMsena, pArSateneha sapta vai  /  aSTAveNasya mAMsena,
rauraveNa navaiva tu  // 44 /  /   / 101 /  dazamAsAMstu tRpyanti,
varAhamahiSAmiSaiH  /  zazakurmayomA'sena, mAsAnekAdazaiva tu  // 45 //   / 102
/  saMvatsaraM tu gavyena, payasA pAyasena tu  /  vArdhANasasya mAMsena,
tRptarvAdazavArSikI  // 46 /  /  (manu. 3 / 266-271) artha :- jo havi (bali)
cirakAla taka aura kisI samaya anaMtakAla dI jAne kA vidhAna hai, ina donoM
prakAra kI bali vidhi pUrvaka pitaroM ko dI jAya to unheM (pitA Adi pUrvajoM ko)
tRti hotI hai| pitRtarpaNa kI vidhi kyA hai? yaha saba maiM pUrNa rUpa se
khuuNgaa| tila, cAvala, jau, ur3ada, jala, kaMdamUla aura phala kI havi (bali)
vidhipUrvaka dene se manuSyoM ke pitara (pitA Adi pUrvaja) eka mAsa taka tRsa
hote haiM; machalI ke 120

Page #143 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Glory of Ahimsa (Non-Violence)  From the verses 47 to 49 of the second
chapter of the Yogashastra:  By offering the flesh of a fish, the ancestors are
satisfied for two months, by the flesh of a deer for three months, by the flesh
of a sheep for four months, by the flesh of birds for five months, by the flesh
of the Parshva deer for seven months, by the flesh of the Raurava deer for nine
months, by the flesh of a pig and a buffalo for ten months, and by the flesh of
a hare and a tortoise for eleven months. By the oblation of the milk of a cow
and the pudding made from milk, the ancestors are satisfied for twelve months
(one year). If the weak, old and white-haired goat is sacrificed, then by its
flesh the ancestors and forefathers are satisfied for twelve years.  In the
aforementioned 46th verse, due to the predominance of the Shruti (scriptural
injunction) over the Anumati (permission), the words 'gavyena payasa' and
'payasena' should be interpreted as meaning the milk of a cow and the pudding
made from milk, respectively, and not as the flesh of a cow or the pudding made
from the flesh of a cow. Some commentators interpret the word 'payasa' to mean
the cooked milk and curd, etc. prepared with meat, or the rice cooked in milk,
which is called 'dhudhapaka' or 'kheer'.  Explanation: After citing the
scriptural statements that advocate violence for the sake of satisfying the
ancestors, the text now explains the defects arising from such violence. 47.
According to the Smriti (scriptures), the violence that is performed by the
deluded for the sake of satisfying the ancestors, that too becomes the cause of
their downfall.  48. He who gives fearlessness to all beings, for him there is
no fear from any being. The fruit one obtains is in proportion to the nature of
the gift one makes.  49. Alas! The violent deities who hold the bow, the staff,
the discus, the sword, the spear, and the lance are also worshipped with the
belief that they are deities!

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ahiMsA kI mahimA yogazAstra dvitIya prakAza zloka 47 se 49 mAMsa kI bali dene
se do mAsa taka, hiraNa ke mAMsa se tIna mahIne taka, bher3a ke mAMsa se cAra
mahIne taka, pakSiyoM ke mAMsa se 5 mahIne taka, pArSata nAmaka hiraNa ke mAMsa
se sAta mahIne taka, rauravajAti ke mRga ke mAMsa se nau mahIne taka, sUara aura
bhaiMse ke mAMsa se 10 mahIne taka tathA kharagoza aura kachue ke mAMsa se
gyAraha mahIne taka pitara tRpta hote haiN| gAya ke dUdha aura dUdha kI banI huI
khIra kI havi se bAraha mahIne (eka varSa) taka pitara tRpta ho jAte haiN|
iMdriyabala se kSINa bUr3he sapheda bakare kI bali dI jAya to usake mAMsa se
pitara Adi pUrvajoM ko bAraha varSa taka tRpti ho jAtI hai| pUrvokta 46veM zloka
meM zruti aura anumati ina donoM meM se zruti balavatI hone se 'gavyena payasA'
evaM 'pAyasena' zabda se kramazaH gAya kA mAMsa yA gAya ke mAMsa kI khIra artha
na lagAkara, gAya kA dUdha aura dUdha kI khIra artha grahaNa karanA caahie| kaI
vyAkhyAkAra pAyasa zabda kI vyAkhyA yoM karate haiM ki mAMsa ke sAtha pakA huA
dUdha aura dUdha se banA huA dahI Adi pAyasa kahalAtA hai| athavA dUdha meM pake
hue cAvala, jise dUdhapAka yA khIra kahate haiM; vaha bhI pAyasa kahalAtA hai
// 41-46 /  /  vyAkhyA :- pitRtarpaNa ke nimitta se hiMsA kA upadeza dene vAle
pUrvokta zAstravacana uddhRta karake aba usa hiMsA | se hone vAle doSa batAte
haiM. 103 /  iti smRtyanusAreNa, pitRNAM tarpaNAya yA  /  mUDhaividhIyate hiMsA,
sA'pi durgati hetave  // 47 /  /  . artha :- isa prakAra smRtivAkyAnusAra
pitaroM ke tarpaNa ke lie mUr3ha jo hiMsA karate haiM, vaha bhI unake lie
durgati kA kAraNa banatI hai  /  / 47 /  /  vyAkhyA :- pUrvokta smRti
(dharmasaMhitA) Adi meM ukta-pitA dAdA aura paradAdA ko piMDa arpaNa kare,
ityAdi vacanoM | ke anusAra pitRvaMzajoM ke tarpaNa karane hetu mUr3ha (viveka
vikala) jo hiMsA karate haiM, usake pIche mAMsa lolupatA Adi hI kAraNa nahIM
hai, varan naraka Adi durgati kI prApti bhI kAraNa rUpa hai| 'jarA-sI hiMsA
naraka-janaka nahIM banegI, aisA mata smjhnaa| matalaba yaha hai ki eka to kisI
ko upadeza na dekara svayaM ukta nimitta se hiMsA karatA hai, vaha to thor3IsI
hiMsA se svayaM narakAdi durgati meM jAkara usakA phala bhoga letA hai, lekina
jo pitA Adi pUrvajoM kI tRpti ke lie vistRta rUpa se dUsaroM ko ukta hiMsA ke
lie prerita karatA hai, upadeza detA hai aura aneka bhole jIvoM kI buddhi
bhrAMta kara detA hai, vaha aneka logoM dvArA hiMsA karavAkara bhayaMkara naraka
meM unheM pahuMcAtA hai, khuda bhI ghora naraka ke gaDDhe meM giratA hai| tila,
cAvala yA machalI ke mAMsa se jo pitaroM kI tRpti hone kA vidhAna kiyA gayA hai,
vaha bhI bhrAMti hai| yadi mare hue jIvoM kI ina cIjoM se tRpti ho jAtI ho to
bujhe hue dIpaka meM sirpha tela DAlane se usa dIpaka kI lau bar3ha jAnI |
caahie| hiMsA kevala durgati kA kAraNa hai, itanA hI nahIM, jina jIvoM kI hiMsA
kI jAtI hai, unake sAtha vaira-virodha baMdhane kA bhI kAraNa hai| isIlie
hiMsaka ko isa loka aura paraloka meM sarvatra hiMsA ke kAraNa sabase bhaya
lagatA rahatA hai| magara ahiMsaka to samasta jIvoM ko abhayadAna dene meM
zUravIra hotA hai, isa kAraNa use kisI bhI tarapha se kisI se bhaya nahIM hotA
/  / 47 /  /  isI bAta kI puSTi karate haiN||104| yo bhUteSvabhayaM dadyAt,
bhUtebhyastasya no bhayam  /  yAdRg vitIryate dAnaM, tAdRgAsAdyate phlm||48||
artha :- jo jIvoM ko abhayadAna detA hai, use una prANiyoM kI ora se koI bhaya
nahIM hotA, kyoMki jo jisa prakAra kA dAna detA hai, vaha usI prakAra kA phala
prApta karatA hai  /  / 48 /  /  vyAkhyA :- isa taraha yahAM taka hiMsA meM
tatpara manuSyoM ko unakI hiMsA kA narakAdi durgati rUpa phala btaayaa||8|| aba
nindyacaritra hiMsaka devoM kI mUDhajanoM dvArA kI jAne vAlI loka prasiddha pUjA
kA khaMDana karate haiN|105| kodaNDa-daNDa-cakrAsi-zUla-zaktidharA surAH  /
hiMsakA api hA! kaSTaM, pUjyante devtaadhiyaa||49|| :- ahA! bar3A aphasosa hai
ki dhanuSya, daMDa, cakra, talavAra, zUla aura bhAlA (zakti) rakhane (dhAraNa
karane vAle hiMsaka deva devatva-buddhi (dRSTi) se pUje jAte haiM  /  / 49 /  /
vyAkhyA :- atyaMta kheda kI bAta hai ki rudra Adi hiMsAparAyaNa deva Aja apar3ha
aura sAmAnya logoM dvArA vividha 121

Page #144 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Examples of Violent Scriptures, the Fruit of Non-Violence  **Yoga Shastra,
Second Light, Verses 50-53**  | **Verse** | **English Translation** | |---|---|
| 50 | They are worshipped with flowers, fruits, etc. (and also with liquor,
meat, etc.) and that too with the understanding of divinity. The reason for the
violence of the said gods. The weapons, etc., that reside with them are a sign -
that is, bow, staff, discus, sword, trident, and spear, etc. weapons. They
reveal their violent nature. Even if they are not violent, the symbols like bow,
etc., are speaking signs of violence. If they do not commit violence, then what
is the need to keep weapons? Their possession of weapons is inappropriate. But
it is famous in the world that Rudra is the bow-bearer, Yama is the staff-
bearer, Vishnu is the holder of the discus and sword, Shiva is the trident-
bearer, and Kartikeya is the spear-bearer. From the indication, one should also
understand about other gods who are weapon-bearers. | | 51 | Thus, having
prohibited violence in detail, now in two verses, the glory of non-violence is
described. Non-violence is like a mother, beneficial to all beings. Non-violence
is the river that flows nectar in this world, which is like a desert. Non-
violence is the cloud of the rainy season that quenches the fire of suffering,
and for beings suffering from the disease of the cycle of birth and death, non-
violence is the ultimate medicine. | | 52 | Now the fruit of practicing non-
violence is described. Long life, excellent form, health, praiseworthiness; all
these are the good fruits of non-violence. What else to say? Non-violence, like
the wish-fulfilling cow, gives all desired fruits. | | 53 | Not understanding,
stammering, stuttering, muteness, disease in the mouth, etc., are all the fruits
of falsehood. Knowing this, one should abandon falsehood in matters like
marriage, etc. |  **Explanation:**  * **Verse 50:** This verse discusses the
contradiction between the violent imagery associated with deities and the Jain
principle of non-violence (ahimsa). It argues that even if these deities do not
actively engage in violence, their possession of weapons is a symbol of violence
and therefore inappropriate. * **Verse 51:** This verse highlights the benefits
of non-violence, comparing it to a mother, a life-giving river, a rain-bearing
cloud, and a cure for suffering. * **Verse 52:** This verse emphasizes the
positive consequences of practicing non-violence, including long life, good
health, and fulfillment of desires. * **Verse 53:** This verse warns against the
negative consequences of falsehood, including speech impediments and diseases.
It encourages the abandonment of falsehood, especially in matters like marriage.
**Jain Terms:**  * **Ahimsa:** Non-violence * **Jina:** A liberated soul, a
Tirthankara * **Karma:** The law of action and reaction * **Moksha:** Liberation
from the cycle of birth and death * **Tirthankara:** A spiritual teacher who
establishes a new Jain tradition  **Note:** The translation attempts to preserve
the Jain terms while conveying the meaning accurately.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 hiMsAparaka zAstravacanoM ke namUne, ahiMsA kA phala yogazAstra dvitIya prakAza
zloka 50 se 53 | puSpa, phala Adi ( evaM madya-mAMsa Adi) se pUje jAte haiM aura
vaha bhI devatvabuddhi se  /  ukta devoM kI hiMsakatA kA kAraNa | unake sAtha
rahane vAle zastra-astra Adi cihna hai - yAnI dhanuSya, daMDa, cakra, khaDga,
trizUla evaM bhAlA Adi hathiyAra | | unakI hiMsAkArakatA prakaTa karate haiN| ve
hiMsA karane vAle na bhI hoM, lekina dhanuSa Adi pratIka hiMsA ke bolate cihna
hai| agara ve hiMsA nahIM karate haiM to hathiyAra rakhane kI kyA jarUrata hai?
unakA zastradhAraNa karanA anucita hai| paraMtu loka meM prasiddha hai ki rudra
dhanuSadhArI hai, yamarAjA daMDadhArI hai, cakra aura khaDga ke dhAraka viSNu
hai, trizUladhArI ziva haiM aura zaktidhArI kArtikeya haiN| upalakSaNa se anya
zastrAstradhArI anyAnya devoM ke viSaya meM bhI samajha lenA cAhie  /   /  49  /
/  isa prakAra hiMsA kA vistRta rUpa se niSedha karake aba do zlokoM meM ahiMsA
kI mahimA batAte haiN| 106 /  mAteva sarvabhUtAnAmahiMsA hitakAriNI  /
ahiMsaiva hi saMsAramarAvamRtasAraNiH  // 50 //   / 107 /  ahiMsA
duHkhadAvAgniprAvRSeNyaghanAvalI  /  bhavabhramirugArttAnAmahiMsA paramauSadhiH
//  51  //  artha :- ahiMsA mAtA kI taraha samasta prANiyoM kA hita karane vAlI
hai| ahiMsA hI isa saMsAra rUpI marubhUmi ( registAna) meM amRta bahAne vAlI
saritA hai| ahiMsA duHkha rUpI dAvAgni ko zAMta karane ke lie varSARtu kI
meghaghaTA hai tathA bhavabhramaNa rUpI roga se pIr3ita jIvoM ke lie ahiMsA
parama auSadhi hai  /  / 50-51  /  /  aba ahiMsApAlana karane kA phala batAte
haiM  /  108  /  dIrghamAyuH paraM rUpamArogyaM zlAghanIyatA  /  ahiMsAyAH
phalaM sarvaM kimanyat kAmadaiva sA  //  52  //  dIrgha AyuSya, uttama rUpa,
Arogya, prazaMsanIyatA; Adi saba ahiMsA ke hI suphala hai| adhika kyA kaheM?
ahiMsA kAmadhenu kI taraha samasta manovAMchita phala detI hai  /  /  52 //
artha : vyAkhyA : - ahiMsAvrata ke pAlana meM tatpara vyakti jaba dUsare ke
AyuSya ko bar3hAtA hai to yaha niHsaMdeha kahA jA sakatA hai ki use bhI janma-
janmAMtara meM laMbA AyuSya milatA hai| dUsare ke rUpa kA nAza na karane se vaha
svataH hI uttama rUpa pAtA hai| dUsaroM ko asvastha banA dene vAlI hiMsA kA
tyAga karake jaba ahiMsaka dUsaroM ko svasthatA prApti karAtA hai to vaha svataH
parama svAsthya rUpa nirogatA prApta karatA hai aura samasta jIvoM ko abhayadAna
dene se ve prasanna hote haiN| aura unake dvArA prazaMsA prApta karatA hai ye
sAre ahiMsA ke phala hai  /  isa ahiMsA kA sAdhaka jisa-jisa prakAra kI
manovAMchA karatA hai, use bhI ahiMsA se prApta kara letA hai  /  upalakSaNa se
ahiMsA svarga aura mokSa ke sukha dene vAlI hai  /  /  52  /  /  ahiMsA ke
saMbaMdha meM aura bhI kahate haiM hemAdriH parvatAnAM hariramRtabhujAM
cakravartI narANAm  /  zItAMzurjyotiSAM svastarukhaniruhAM caMDarocigrahANAm  //
sindhustoyAzayAnAM, jinapatirasurAmartyamartyAdhipAnAM yadvat tadvat
vratAnAmadhipatipadavIM yAtyahiMsA kimanyat  // 1 //  jaise parvatoM meM sumeru
parvata, devoM meM iMdra, manuSyoM meM cakravartI, jyotiSiyoM meM caMdra, vRkSoM
meM kalpataru, grahoM meM sUrya, jalAzayoM meM samudra, asuroM, suroM aura
manuSyoM ke adhipati jinapati hai, vaise hI sarvavratoM meM ahiMsA adhipati kA
pada prApta karatI hai| adhika kyA kaheM? isa prakAra vistAra se ahiMsAvrata ke
saMbaMdha meM kaha cuke  /  aba usake Age prasaMgavaza satyavrata (satyANuvrata
) kA | varNana karate haiN| satyavrata kI upalabdhi jhUTha (asatya) ke tyAga ke
binA nahIM ho sktii| isalie asatyavacana kA duSpariNAma (kuphala) batAkara usake
tyAga ke lie prerita karate haiM artha :  / 109 /  manmanatvaM kAhalatvaM,
mUkatvaM mukharogitAm  /  vIkSyAsatyaphalaM kanyAlIkAdyasatyamutsRjet  // 53 //
samajha meM na Aye, isa prakAra ke uccAraNa ke kAraNa spaSTa bolane kI akSamatA,
totalApana, mUkatA ( gUMgApana), muMha meM roga paidA ho jAnA Adi saba asatya ke
phala haiM, yaha jAnakara kanyA Adi ke saMbaMdha meM asatya kA tyAga karanA
cAhie //53// vyAkhyA :- dUsare ko apanI bAta samajha meM na Aye, isa prakAra
hakalAte hue aspaSTa uccAraNa karanA, tutalAte 122

Page #145 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Five Types of Gross Untruth  **Verse 54:** Speaking, becoming mute,
developing a disease in the mouth, or the growth of a second tongue, are all the
results of speaking untruth. Seeing this, and knowing the nature of untruth
through scriptural knowledge, a Shravak should renounce gross untruth. It is
also said: One who speaks untruthful words becomes mute, dull-witted, disabled,
stammering, or has a voice that is unpleasant to hear. Such a person has a foul
smell emanating from their mouth. ||53||  **Verse 54:** This explains the nature
of gross untruth in relation to daughters, cows, and land. ||110||  **Verse
54:** Untruth related to daughters, cows, land, deposited or pledged items, and
false witness, these five are called gross untruths. ||54||  **Explanation:**
1. **Untruth related to daughters:** Speaking untruth about a daughter in terms
of substance, place, time, and feeling. For example, calling a good daughter
bad, or a bad daughter good, or stating that a daughter from one country or
province is from another, or stating that a young daughter is older, or an older
daughter is younger. Similarly, stating that a daughter with certain qualities
and abilities is flawed or incapable, or stating that a daughter with certain
flaws or incapabilities is virtuous and capable. The word "daughter" should be
understood to include all bipedal humans, such as boys, young men, and elders,
through implication.  2. **Untruth related to cows:** Speaking untruth about a
cow in terms of substance, place, time, and feeling. For example, stating that a
thin, weak, and sickly cow is healthy, strong, and well-built, or stating that a
Marwari cow is a Gujarati cow, or that a Gujarati cow is from Marwar. Stating
that an older, aged, or repeatedly bred cow is young, youthful, and has been
bred only once or twice, or stating the opposite. Stating that a cow that gives
little milk gives a lot of milk, or stating the opposite. Stating that a
virtuous or docile cow is flawed or prone to death, or stating that a flawed or
prone-to-death cow is docile and virtuous. The word "cow" should be understood
to include all four-legged animals, through implication.  3. **Untruth related
to land:** Untruth related to land should also be understood as four types, in
terms of substance, place, time, and feeling. For example, calling one's own
land someone else's, or calling someone else's land one's own. Calling fertile
land barren, or barren land fertile. Stating that land from one place is from
another place. Stating that land that has been cultivated for a long time or is
authorized is cultivated for a short time or unauthorized. Calling good land
bad, or bad land good. Hiding the feeling of taking or not taking something
related to land. The word "land" should be understood to include all things that
grow on land, or money, wealth, property, houses, etc., through implication.
Someone might question why, instead of stating that untruth related to all
bipedal or quadrupedal beings, or all inanimate objects, is gross untruth, only
untruth spoken in relation to daughters, cows, or land is mentioned. The answer
is that in common practice, there are very sacred ideas about daughters, cows,
and land. In Indian culture, a daughter (virgin) is considered sacred because
she is considered to be unchanging. Cows and the earth are considered "mothers."
Therefore, speaking untruth about these three, which are accepted by the people,
is considered highly reprehensible. Therefore, bipedal beings;

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 sthUla asatya ke pAMca prakAra yogazAstra dvitIya prakAza zloka 54 hue bolanA,
gUMgA honA, muMha meM koI roga paidA ho jAnA; yA dUsarI jIbha paidA ho jAnA, ye
saba asatya bolane ke phala hai| yaha dekhakara zAstrabala se asatya kA svarUpa
jAnakara zrAvaka ko cAhie ki vaha sthala asatya kA tyAga kre| kahA bhI hai-
asatya vacana bolane vAlA gUMgA, jar3abuddhi, aMgavikala (apAhija), totalA
athavA jisakI bolI kisI ko acchI na lage, isa prakAra kI apriya bolI vAlA hotA
hai, usake muMha se badabU nikalatI rahatI hai  /  / 53 /  /  kanyA Adi ke
saMbaMdha meM jo sthUla asatya hai, usakA svarUpa batAte haiN|110| kanyA-go-
bhUmyalIkAni, nyAsApaharaNaM tathA  /  kUTasAkSyaM ca paJceti,
sthUlAsatyAnyakIrtayan  // 54 //  artha :- kanyAsaMbaMdhI, gosaMbaMdhI,
bhUmisaMbaMdhI, dharohara yA giravI (baMdhaka) rakhI huI vastu ke apalApa
saMbaMdhI aura . kUTasAkSI (jhUThI gavAhI) saMbaMdhI; ye pAMca sthUla asatya
kahe haiM  /  / 54 /  /  vyAkhyA :1. kanyAviSayaka asatya - kanyA ke saMbaMdha
meM dravya, kSetra, kAla aura bhAva se asatya bolnaa| jaise-acchI kanyA ko
kharAba aura kharAba kanyA ko acchI kahanA, yA eka kanyA ke badale dUsarI kanyA
batAnA, eka deza yA prAMta kI kanyA ko dUsare deza yA prAMta kI batAnA, choTI
umra kI kanyA ko baDI umra kI yA bar3I umra kI kanyA ko choTI umra kI btaanaa|
isI taraha amuka guNa va yogyatA vAlI kanyA ko durgaNI yA ayogya batAnA athavA
amuka durguNa yA ayogyatA vAlI kanyA ko guNI va yogya btaanaa| kanyA zabda se
upalakSaNa meM kumAra, yuvaka, vRddha Adi sabhI dvipada manuSyoM kA grahaNakara
lenA caahie| 2. go-viSayaka asatya - gAya ke saMbaMdha meM bhI dravya, kSetra,
kAla aura bhAva se asatya bolnaa| jaise-dubalI, patalI, mariyala gAya ko hRSTa-
puSTa, sabala aura suDaula batAnA, mAravAr3I gAya ko gujarAtI batAnA yA gujarAtI
Adi ko mAravAr3a deza kI batAnA; adhika umra kI, bUr3hI yA adhika bAra vyAhI huI
gAya ko kama umra kI, * javAna va eka-do bAra vyAhI huI batAnA yA isase viparIta
batAnA, kama dUdha dene vAlI ko bahuta dUdha dene vAlI yA isase viparIta batAnA;
guNavAn yA sIdhI gAya ko durgaNI yA marakanI batAnA, yA marakanI evaM durguNI
gAya ko sIdhI va guNI btaanaa| go zabda se upalakSaNa se yahAM samagra caupAye
jAnavaroM skuTara, moTara Adi ke saMbaMdhI asatya samajha lenA caahie| 3. bhUmi-
viSayaka asatya - bhUmi saMbaMdhI jhUTha bhI dravya, kSetra, kAla aura bhAva se
cAra prakAra kA samajha lenA caahie| jaise-apanI| jamIna ko parAyI kahanA yA
parAyI ko apanI kahanA, upajAU jamIna ko baMjara aura baMjara ko upajAU kahanA,
eka jagaha kI jamIna ke badale dUsare jagaha kI jamIna batAnA, adhika kAla kI
jotI huI yA adhikRta jamIna ko kama kAla kI jotI huI yA anadhikRta batAnA,
bar3hiyA jamIna ko kharAba aura kharAba ko bar3hiyA btaanaa| jamIna ke viSaya
meM lene, na lene kI bhAvanA ko chipaanaa| yahAM upalakSaNa se bhUmi zabda se
bhUmi para paidA hone vAle padArtha, yA rupaye, dhana, jAyadAda, makAna Adi
sabhI se saMbaMdhita asatya ke viSaya meM samajha lenA caahie| koI yahAM
zaMkAkara sakatA hai ki yahAM samasta dvipada yA samasta catuSpada athavA
samasta nirjIva padArtha se saMbaMdhita asatya ko sthUla asatya na batAkara
kanyA, go yA bhUmi ke saMbaMdha meM bole jAne vAle asatya kA hI nirdeza kyoM
kiyA? isakA samAdhAna yoM karate haiM ki lokavyavahAra meM kanyA, go yA bhUmi ke
saMbaMdha meM bahuta pavitra kalpanAe~ hai, bhAratIya saMskRti meM kanyA
(kuMArI) nirvikArI hone ke kAraNa pavitra mAnI jAtI hai, gAya aura pRthvI ko
'mAtA' mAnA gayA hai| isalie lokAdaraprApta ina tInoM ke bAre meM asatya bolanA
yA asatya bolane vAlA atyaMta nindya mAnA jAtA hai| isalie dvipada; 123

Page #146 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Yoga Shastra, Second Light, Verses 55-57  **Verses 55-57**  **Verse 55**
**Meaning:** One should not speak falsehood (gross untruth) that is against all
beings, that is treacherous, and that is against virtue, i.e., that supports
sin.  **Explanation:** Falsehood related to a daughter, a cow, and land is
against the whole world and is known to be extremely reprehensible in social
conduct. Therefore, one should not speak such falsehood. Falsehood spoken for
the sake of a deposit is treacherous, so one should abandon it. And one should
not give false testimony by believing in a dharma that is against virtue, i.e.,
a dharma that is sinful and against righteousness.  **Verse 56**  **Meaning:**
By speaking falsehood, a person gains insignificance (disrepute) in this world.
By falsehood, this person is called a liar, and such slander or ill-repute
occurs in the world. By speaking falsehood, a person attains a low state.
Therefore, one should abandon falsehood.  **Explanation:** Although speaking
falsehood with a bad intention (contaminated intention) is prohibited, what is
the harm if one speaks falsehood by mistake? In response to this, it is said:
**Verse 57**  **Meaning:** A wise person should not speak falsehood even by
mistake (due to ignorance, delusion, blind faith, or carelessness). Just as
strong winds break and destroy large trees, so too does falsehood destroy great
virtues.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 yogazAstra dvitIya prakAza zloka 55 se 57 catuSpada yA nirjIva padArthoM ko
mukhya rUpa se nahIM batAyA gayA, gauNa rUpa se to ina tInoM ke aMtargata
dvipada, catuSpada yA samasta nirjIva padArthoM kA samAveza ho jAtA hai| 4.
nyAsApaharaNa-viSayaka asatya asatya niSedha - kisI ko prAmANika yA ImAnadAra
mAnakara surakSA ke lie yA saMkaTa A par3ane para badale meM kucha artharAzi
lekara amAnata ke taura para kisI ke pAsa apanA dhana, makAna yA koI bhI cIja
rakhI jAtI hai, use nyAsa, dharohara, giravI yA baMdhaka kahate haiN| aise nyAsa
ke viSaya meM jhUTha bolanA, yA rakhane vAle ko kamoveza batAnA athavA adhika
dina ho jAne para lobhavaza use har3apa jAnA athavA dharohara rakhane vAlA apanI
cIja mAMgane Aye, taba mukara jAnA, ulaTe use hI jhUThA batAkara badanAma karanA
yA DAMTanA-phaTakAranA nyAsApaharaNa asatya kahalAtA hai| yaha bhI dravya,
kSetra, kAla aura bhAva ke bheda | se cAra prakAra kA ho sakatA hai| 5.
kUTasAkSI - viSayaka asatya kisI jhUThI bAta ko siddha karane ke lie jhUThI
gavAhI denA yA jhUThe gavAha taiyAra karake jhUThI sAkSI dilAnA kUTasAkSI -
viSayaka asatya kahalAtA hai| hiMsA, asatya, daMbha, kapaTa aura kAmottejanA ke
poSaka zAstra, graMtha yA vacanoM ko mithyA jAnate hue bhI unakI prazaMsA
karanA, unakA samarthana karanA athavA kisI kI jhUThI yA pApapUrNa bAta ko bhI
saccI siddha karane ke lie jhUTha bolakara, jhUThI saphAI denA ye saba
kUTasAkSI-viSayaka asatya ke prakAra hai| yaha dravya, kSetra, kAla aura bhAva
se cAra prakAra kA ho sakatA hai  /  /  54  /  /  - dUsare dharmoM meM prasiddha
pApa rUpa lakSaNavizeSa kI apekSA se yaha pUrvokta cAroM asatyoM se alaga batAyA
gayA hai| ye pAMcoM kliSTa Azaya-bure irAde se utpanna hone ke kAraNa rAjya-
daMDanIya aura loka bhaMDanIya - nidya mAne jAte haiM, isalie inheM sthUla
asatya (mRSAvAda) samajhanA caahie| ina pAMcoM sthUla asatyoM kA vizeSa rUpa se
pratipAdanakara inakA niSedha karate haiM | 111  /  sarvalokaviruddhaM yad yad
vizvasitaghAtakam  /  yad vipakSazca puNyasya, na vadet tadasUnRtam  // 55 //
artha :- jo sarvalokaviruddha ho, jo vizvAsaghAta karane vAlA ho aura jo puNya
kA vipakSI ho yAnI pApa kA pakSapAtI ho, aisA asatya (sthUla mRSAvAda) nahIM
bolanA cAhie || 55 | vyAkhyA : - kanyA, gAya aura bhUmi se saMbaMdhita asatya
sAre jagat ke viruddha aura loka vyavahAra meM atyaMta niMdanIya rUpa se
prasiddha hai, ataH aisA asatya nahIM bolanA caahie| dharohara ke lie asatya
bolanA vizvAsaghAta - kAraka hone se | usakA bhI tyAga karanA caahie| tathA
puNya-dharma se viruddha arthAt dharmaviruddha pApakAraka adharma ko pramANa
mAnakara usa | para vizvAsa rakhakara jhUThI sAkSI nahIM denA cAhie  /  /  55  /
/  aba asatya kA duSphala batAte hue asatya ke tyAga kA upadeza dete haiM  / 112
/  asatyato laghIyastvam, asatyAd vacanIyatA  /  adhogatirasatyAcca, tadasatyaM
parityajet  // 56 //  artha :- asatya bolane se vyakti isa loka meM laghutA
(badanAmI) pAtA hai, asatya se yaha manuSya jhUThA hai, isa taraha kI niMdA yA
apakIrti saMsAra meM hotI hai| asatya bolane se vyakti ko nIcagati prApta hotI
hai| isalie asatya kA tyAga karanA cAhie ||56 || vyAkhyA :- bure irAde (kliSTa
Azaya ) se asatya bolane kA cAhe niSedha kiyA ho, paraMtu kadAcit pramAdavaza
asatya bolA jAya to usase kyA hAni hai? isake uttara meM kahate haiM  / 113 /
asatyavacanaM prAjJaH pramAdenA'pi no vadet  /  zreyAMsi yena bhajyante,
vAtyayeva mahAddrumAH  /  / 57|| artha :- samajhadAra vyakti pramAdapUrvaka
(ajJAnatA, moha, aMdhavizvAsa yA gaphalata se) bhI asatya na bole  /  jaise
prabala aMdhar3a se bar3e-bar3e vRkSa TUTakara naSTa ho jAte haiM, vaise hI
asatya mahAzreyoM ko naSTakara detA 114011 124

Page #147 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Four Types of Untruth and Their Consequences  **Explanation of verses 57 to
80 from the Second Light of Yoga Shastra:**  One should not speak untruth even
due to ignorance, doubt, delusion, jest, carelessness, or any other kind of
negligence, let alone due to a distorted intention (wrong motive). Speaking
untruth due to negligence uproots virtuous actions in the same way a violent
storm uproots large trees.  The great sages have said in the Agamas: A seeker
who does not know the truth of past events, present facts, and future
occurrences should not speak with certainty, saying "This is it."  Similarly,
one should not speak with certainty about things that are doubtful in the past,
present, or future, saying "It is like this." Instead, one should speak with
certainty only about things that are certain in the past, present, or future,
saying "It is like this." (Dasha Va. 9/8, 9, 10)  There are four types of
untruth:  1. **Bhutanihnava:** Concealing or misrepresenting something that
exists. For example, saying "There is no soul," "There is no such thing as merit
and demerit, or the afterlife." 2. **Abhutasadbhavana:** Claiming something that
does not exist or is not of a certain kind. For example, saying "Every soul is
omniscient," or "Every soul is omnipresent," or "The soul is the size of a black
gram." 3. **Arthatar:** Representing one thing as another. For example, calling
a cow a bull, or a bull a horse. 4. **Garha:** Speaking something out of
caution, unpleasantness, or anger. There are three types of Garha:      *
**Savdha (sinful) emotion:** Speaking out of a sinful motive. For example, "Kill
him," "Give him a taste of his own medicine."     * **Aapriya (unpleasant)
emotion:** Speaking out of an unpleasant motive. For example, "He is blind," "He
is lame," "He is a thief," "He is dead."     * **Aakrosh (anger):** Speaking out
of anger. For example, "He is the son of a prostitute," "You scoundrel," "You
rogue," "You cheat," "You lowlife," "You bastard!"  Untruthful speech is
completely unacceptable. Now, we will discuss the consequences of untruth in
this world.  **Verse 58:** Untruthful speech leads to enmity, sorrow, regret,
distrust, disrespect, and disgrace in the kingdom, etc. Just as improper diet
leads to various diseases, so too does untruthful speech lead to many evils in
the world.  Now, we will discuss the consequences of untruth in the afterlife.
**Verse 59:** Due to the influence of untruthful speech, a being is born in the
next life in the bodies of endless-bodied Nigoda beings, in the bodies of
animals, or in hell.  Now, we will give the example of Kalikaacharya, who
renounced untruthful speech, and Vasuraja, who spoke untruth, to inspire
renunciation of untruth.  **Verse 60:** Kalikaacharya never spoke untruth, even
out of fear of death or coercion, or out of respect for someone's request. But
whoever speaks untruth due to these reasons goes to hell like Vasuraja.  Here
are the two examples:  **Kalikaacharya, the steadfast one:**  In ancient times,
there was a city called Turamani, the crown jewel of the earth, ruled by King
Jitashatru. In this city lived a Brahmin woman named Rudra. She had a son named
Datta, who was very dissolute, a gambler, and a drunkard. He found pleasure in
indulging in these vices. He lived a life of unrestrained freedom.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 asatya ke cAra bheda evaM asatya ke phala yogazAstra dvitIya prakAza zloka 57
se 80 vyAkhyA :- kliSTa Azaya (galata abhiprAya) se asatya bolane kI bAta to
dUra rahI, ajJAna, saMzaya, bhrAMti, majAka, gaphalata Adi pramAda ke vaza bhI
asatya na bole| pramAda se asatya vacana bolane se vaha usI taraha zreyaskara
kAryoM ko ukhAr3a pheMkatA hai, jisa taraha pracaMDa aMdhar3a bar3e-bar3e per3oM
ko ukhAr3a pheMkatA hai| maharSiyoM ne Agama meM kahA hai-jisa sAdhaka ko
bhUtakAla kI bAta kA vartamAna kAla ke tathya kA aura bhaviSya meM hone vAlI
ghaTanA kA yathArtha rUpa se patA na ho, vaha 'yaha hI hai' isa prakAra kI
nizcayakArI bhASA na bole| bhUta, bhaviSya aura vartamAna kAla meM huI, hone
vAlI yA ho rahI jisa bAta ke bAre meM use zaMkA ho, use bhI yaha isI taraha hai
isa prakAra kI nizcayAtmaka bhASA meM | na kahe; apitu atIta, anAgata aura
vartamAna kAla meM ghaTita hue yA hone vAle, yA ho rahe jisa padArtha ke bAre
meM zaMkA na ho, usake bAre meM yaha aisA hai', isa prakAra khe| (daza vai. 9 /
8,9,10) isa prakAra ke asatya ke cAra bheda hote haiM-1. bhUtanihnava - jo
padArtha vidyamAna hai, usakA chipAnA yA apalApa krnaa| jaise AtmA nahIM hai,
'puNya-pApa, paraloka Adi kucha bhI nahIM hai| 2. abhUtasadbhAvana - jo padArtha
nahIM hai, yA jisa prakAra kA nahIM hai, use vidyamAna yA tathA prakAra kA
btaanaa| jaise yaha kahanA ki pratyeka AtmA sarvajJa hai, yA 'sarvavyApaka' hai
athavA 'AtmA zyAmaka cAvala ke dAne jitanA hai yA vaisA hai| 3. arthAtara - eka
padArtha ko dUsarA padArtha btlaanaa| jaise-gAya ko baila aura baila ko ghor3A
khnaa| 4. garhA - sAvadha, apriya aura Akroza ke vaza koI bAta khnaa| isa dRSTi
se gardA ke tIna bheda hote haiN| sAvadha (pApamaya) bhAvanA se prerita hokara
kathana-jaise ise mAra DAlo, | ise majA cakhA do, apriya-bhAvanA se prerita
hokara kathana-jaise yaha kAnA hai, yaha Dher3ha hai, yaha cora hai, yaha murdA
yA mariyala hai| Akrozavaza bolanA-jaise-'are yaha to kulaTA kA putra hai|'
lucce, badamAza, beImAna, nIca, harAmajAde! Adi saMbodhana bhI Akroza sUcaka hai
/  / 57 /  /  asatya vacana sarvathA tyAjya hai, yaha batAkara aba asatya se
ihaloka meM hone vAle doSoM kA vivaraNa prastuta karate haiN|114| asatyavacanAd
vaira, - viSAdApratyayAdayaH  /  prAduHSanti na ke doSAH kupathyAd vyAdhayo
yathA  /  / 58 /  /  artha :- asatya vacana bolane se vaira, nirodha,
pazcAttApa, avizvAsa rAjya Adi meM avamAnatA, badanAmI Adi doSa paidA hote haiN|
jaise kupathya (badaparahejI) karane se anekoM roga paidA ho jAte haiM, vaise hI
asatya bolane se kauna-se doSa aise haiM, jo paidA nahIM hote? arthAt asatya se
bhI saMsAra meM aneka doSa paidA hote haiM  /  / 58 /  /  aba mRSAvAda se
paraloka meM hone vAlA phala batAte hai|115| nigodeSvatha tiryakSu, tathA
narakavAsiSu  /  utpadyante mRSAvAdaprasAdena zarIriNaH  // 59 //  artha :-
asatya-kathana ke pratApa se prANI dUsare janmoM meM anaMtakAyika nigoda
jIvayoniyoM meM, tiyacayoniyoM meM . athavA narakAvAsoM meM utpanna hote haiM  /
/ 59 /  /  aba asatya vacana kA tyAga karane vAle kAlikAcArya evaM asatya bolane
vAle vasurAjA kA dRSTAMta dekara asatya se virati kI preraNA dete haiN|116|
brUyAd bhiyoparodhAd vA, nAsatyaM kAlikAryavat  /  yastu brUte sa narakaM,
prayAti vasurAjavat  // 60 //  artha :- kAlikAcArya kataI asatya na bole, usI
taraha mRtyu yA jabardastI (dabAva) Adi ke bhaya se athavA kisI ke anurodha yA
lihAja-mulAhije meM Akara kataI asatya na bole| paraMtu uparyukta kAraNoM ke
vazIbhUta hokara jo asatya bolatA hai, vaha vasurAjA kI taraha naraka meM jAtA
hai  /  / 60 //  donoM dRSTAMta kramazaH isa prakAra haisatya para dRr3ha
kAlikAcArya : prAcInakAla meM pRthvIramaNI ke mukuTamaNi ke sAmana turamaNI nAma
kI eka nagarI thI, jahAM jitazatru nAmaka rAjA | rAjya karatA thaa| isI nagarI
meM rudrA nAma kI eka brAhmaNI rahatI thii| usake eka putra thA, jisakA nAma
datta thaa| datta atyaMta ucchRkhala, juArI aura zarAbI thaa| inhIM durvyasanoM
meM masta rahane meM vaha AnaMda mAnatA thaa| svacchaMdatApUrvaka 125

Page #148 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Tale of Kalikaacharya  Chapter Two of the Yoga Shastra, Verse 60: With the
intention of acting freely according to his own desires, he began to serve the
king. The king, too, made him the head of his close associates, who were like
shadows to him. Just as a poisonous vine, when given even a little support from
a tree, continues to grow and spread, so too did Datta. By some means or other,
through cunning tactics, he incited the people and caused the king to be exiled.
And, "Both the sinner and the pigeon uproot their shelter." Having thus exiled
the king, the sinner Datta himself ascended the throne. A lowly person, given
even a little support at the foot, gradually climbs to the head. Now Datta,
devoid of Dharma-buddhi, began to perform a great sacrifice involving animal
slaughter, as if polluting the entire world with the smoke of sin.  Once, Sri
Kalikaacharya, the embodiment of restraint and Datta's maternal uncle, arrived
in that city while wandering. Datta, blinded by falsehood, had absolutely no
desire to go to the Acharya, but under immense pressure from his mother, he
reluctantly went to his maternal uncle (Acharya), who was a householder. As soon
as he arrived, he spoke arrogantly to the Acharya, like a madman intoxicated
with alcohol, "Acharya! If you are a knower, then tell me the fruit of this
sacrifice." Hearing this, Sri Kalikaacharya said, "My dear! If you are asking
about Dharma, then listen. Not to do to others what is unpleasant to oneself,
this is the greatest Dharma." Datta repeated his question, "Sir! I am asking
about the fruit of the sacrifice. You are talking about Dharma." To this, the
Acharya said, "A sacrifice based on violence is not beneficial for life, but
rather it binds one to sinful actions." This should have satisfied him, but with
the intention of provoking the Acharya, Datta, with his wicked mind, asked the
same question again, "These talks of violence and non-violence are like ways to
deceive simple people. Give me a straight answer, what is the fruit of this
sacrifice?" The Acharya replied calmly, "The fruit of such a sacrifice is hell."
Enraged, Datta said, "How can I believe that the fruit of this sacrifice will be
hell?" Then the Acharya, who had the power of foresight, replied with the same
love, "My child! You will believe it when, seven days from now, you are cooked
in the dog-pot of the Chandala." At this, Datta jumped up in anger, his eyes
red, his eyebrows furrowed, and he spoke like a possessed man, "What proof is
there of this?" Kalikaacharya replied gently, "The proof is that before you are
cooked in the Chandala's pot, you will suddenly have excrement in your mouth."
In a fit of rage, Datta arrogantly asked, "Then tell me! How and when will you
die?" The Acharya said, "I will not be killed by anyone. I will die naturally in
my time; and after death, I will go to heaven." Datta, in a fury, ordered his
servants, "Arrest this foolish, wicked Acharya and throw him in prison. Let him
rot there!" Upon receiving the order, the servants seized Kalikaacharya and
threw him in prison.  Meanwhile, the vassals, angered and distressed by the
sinner Datta, decided to call back the former king and hand over the kingdom to
him. Datta, filled with fear, like an elephant hiding in the bushes from the
roar of a lion, remained hidden in his house. By a stroke of fate, Datta, by
mistake, took the eighth day for the seventh day and, out of fear, ordered the
Kotwal and others to arrange for guards and watch on the highway, making
arrangements for his safety. On the seventh day, the wicked Datta, thinking
wickedly, mounted his horse and went out, thinking, "Today I will kill that
wicked muni like an animal and enjoy it." On the other hand, before Datta, a
gardener was entering the city in the morning, carrying a basket of flowers,
when he felt a strong urge to defecate. He did not think it proper to hold it
back, so he sat down to defecate in a small alcove by the side of the road, and
fearing that a soldier might catch him, he covered it with some flowers and went
on. A little later, Datta's horse was running fast when, suddenly, the horse's
hoof kicked up the gardener's excrement and it landed in Datta's mouth. Truly,
the words of a great ascetic are not false. Like a stone struck, Datta, too, was
disheartened and weakened by this unexpected event, and without saying anything
to the vassals, he returned to his place. Seeing Datta return, the people
thought, "He knows nothing of our secret council. Therefore, according to our
pre-determined plan, we will..."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 kalikAcArya kI kathA yogazAstra dvitIya prakAza zloka 60 apanI icchAnusAra
berokaToka pravRtti karane ke uddezya se vaha rAjA kI sevA meM rahane lgaa| rAjA
ne bhI chAyA ke samAna sAtha rahane vAle apane pAripAzvika sahayogiyoM meM use
mukhiyA banA diyaa| bar3hatI huI jaharIlI bela ko jarA-sA per3a kA sahArA mila
jAya to vaha Age se Age bar3hatI yA Upara phailatI hI jAtI hai|' yahI hAla datta
kA huaa| isane kisI na kisI yukti se bhedanIti se prajA ko bhar3akAkara rAjA ko
deza-nikAlA dilavA diyaa| aura 'pApAtmA aura kabUtara donoM apane Azraya ko
ukhAr3ate hI hai| rAjA ko isa prakAra nirvAsita karake vaha pApAtmA datta svayaM
rAjagaddI para baiTha gyaa| nIca vyakti ko paira ke agrabhAga kA jarA-sA sahArA
dene para vaha dhIre-dhIre sira taka car3ha jAtA hai| aba to datta dharmabuddhi
se pazuvadha pUrvaka mahAyajJa karane lagA, mAno pApa rUpI dhuMe~ se sAre vizva
ko malina kara rahA ho| eka bAra mUrtimAna saMyama svarUpa datta ke mAmA
zrIkAlikAcArya vicaraNa karate hue usa nagarI meM pdhaareN| mithyAtva se mUr3ha
bane hue rAjA datta kI AcArya ke pAsa jAne kI kataI IcchA nahIM thI, kintu mAtA
ke atyaMta | dabAva se vaha gRhastha pakSIya mAmA (AcArya) ke pAsa anamane bhAva
se phuNcaa| vahAM jAte hI zarAba ke naze meM cUra unmatta ke samAna uddhatatA-
pUrvaka usane AcArya se pachA-'AcAryajI! yadi Apa jJAtA hoM to yajJa kA phala
btaaie| yaha sunakara zrIkAlikAcArya ne kahA-'bhadra! yadi tuma dharma ke viSaya
meM pUcha rahe ho to suno| jo apane liye apriya hai, vaha vyavahAra dUsaroM ke
prati bhI nahIM karanA, yahI sabase bar3A dharma hai|' datta ne apanI bAta ko
punaH doharAte hue kahA-'ajI! maiM to yajJa kA phala pUcha rahA huuN| Apa batAne
lage dharma kI baat|' isa para AcAryazrI ne kahA-hiMsAdimUlaka yajJa jIvana ke
lie kalyANakArI nahIM hai, pratyuta usase pApakarma kA hI baMdha hotA hai|'
isase usakA samAdhAna ho jAnA cAhie thA, lekina AcArya ko uttejita karane ko
dRSTi se durbuddhi datta ne phira vahI bAta pUchI-'hiMsA-ahiMsA kI bAteM to
bhole logoM ko bahakAne kI-sI hai| mujhe to Apa do TUka uttara dIjie ki 'yajJa
kA phala kyA hai?' AcAryazrI ne sahajabhAva se uttara diyA- 'aise yajJa kA phala
naraka hai|' isa para kruddha hokara datta ne kahA- 'mujhe kaise vizvAsa ho ki
isa yajJa kA phala naraka hI milegA? taba bhaviSyadRSTA AcArya ne use utane hI
prema se uttara diyA-'vatsa! vizvAsa to tumheM taba ho hI jAyegA, jaba Aja se
sAtaveM dina tuma cAMDAla kI zvAna-kuMbhI meM pakAye jaaoge|' isa para datta
krodha se uchalatA aura A~kheM lAla karake bhauheM tAnate hue bhUtAviSTa kI
taraha bolA-isakA kyA pramANa hai? kAlikAcArya ne sajjanatA pUrvaka uttara
diyA-'isakA pramANa yaha hai ki cAMDAla kI kuMbhI meM pakAye jAne se pahale
tumhAre muMha meM ekAeka viSThA par3egI?' roSa meM Akara datta ne uddaNDatA se
pUchA-to batAo! tumhArI mauta kaise aura kaba hogI? AcArya ne kahA| - 'maiM kisI
ke hAtha se nahIM mArA jaauuNgaa| merI mRtyu apane samaya para svAbhAvika rUpa
se hogI; aura marakara maiM svarga meM jaauuNgaa|' datta ne AgababUlA hokara
apane sevakoM ko Adeza diyA-isa durbuddhi nAlAyaka AcArya ko giraphtAra kara lo
aura kaida meM DAla do. tAki vahAM par3A-paDA saDatA rahe!' AjJA milate hI
sevakoM ne kAlikAcArya ko pakar3akara kaida meM DAla diyaa| idhara pApakarmI
datta se kSubdha evaM pIr3ita sAmaMtoM ne bhUtapUrva rAjA ko bulAkara rAjya
sauMpane kA nizcaya kiyaa| AzaMkAgrasta datta bhI siMhagarjanA se Darakara
jhAr3iyoM meM chipe hue hAthI kI taraha apane ghara meM chipakara rhaa|
daivayoga se datta ne sAtaveM dina ko bhUla se AThavAM dina samajhakara kotavAla
Adi ko pahale se hI rAjamArga para caukI-pahare kI vyavasthA kA Adeza dekara
surakSA kA prabaMdha krvaayaa| ThIka sAtaveM dina duSTa datta yaha durvicAra
karake ghor3e para savAra hokara bAhara nikalA ki 'Aja usa duSTa muni ko pazu kI
taraha mArakara majA cakhA duuNgaa|' udhara datta se pahale hI prAtaHkAla eka
mAlI phUloM kA TokarA liye nagara meM praveza kara rahA thA ki rAste meM use
jora se TaTTI kI hAjata huii| usane hAjata ko rokanA ucita na samajhakara
sar3aka ke kinAre hI jarA-sI oTa meM TaTTI baiThakara kahIM sipAhI na pakar3a
le, isa Dara se usa para kucha phUla DAlakara use Dhaka dI aura Age cala diyaa|
kucha hI dera ke bAda datta kA ghor3A tejI se daur3A A rahA thA ki ekAeka
dauDate hue ghor3e ke eka khura se uchalakara mAlI kI vaha viSTA datta ke muMha
meM jA pdd'ii| saca hai, | mahAvratI saMyamI kI vANI mithyA nahIM hotii| zilA se
Ahata kI taraha datta bhI isa apratyAzita ghaTanA se nirAza aura | DhIlA hokara
sAmaMtoM ko kucha kahe-sune binA hI apane sthAna kI ora vApisa lauTa claa| datta
ko vApisa Ate dekha prajAjanoM ne socA-ise apanI gupta maMtraNA kA kucha bhI
patA nahIM hai| ataH apanI pUrva nirdhArita yojanAnusAra datta ko 126

Page #149 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Story of Vasuraja Yoga Shastra, Second Light, Verse 60  Before entering the
house, they surrounded him like bulls and bound him. Just as the sun appears
with its brilliance after the night has passed, so too did the former king
appear at that time. The people had reinstated him on the throne. Seeing the
wicked Datta fleeing like a serpent from the casket, the former king's anger
flared up. He seized Datta and threw him into the furnace of the Chandala, like
a hellish pit, and set fire to it from below. As the furnace heated up, the dogs
of the hunter pounced on the screaming Datta, tearing him apart, just as the
Asuras in hell tear apart the righteous.  Meanwhile, the former king freed the
truthful Kalkaacharya from prison. Just as Kalkaacharya did not lie out of fear
of the king, or at anyone's request or persuasion, but remained steadfast in his
vow of truthfulness, so too should wise men never lie and protect their vow of
truthfulness.  The downfall of Vasuraja due to speaking untruth: ... In the
Chedi country, on the banks of the Shuktimati river, the city of Shuktimati was
situated, like his playmate. There, like a magnificent ruby, the king
Abhichandra ruled, the crown of the earth. Just as the truthful Yudhishthira was
born in the house of Panduraja, so too was the truthful Vasu born in the house
of King Abhichandra. As soon as he reached adolescence, Vasurajakumar was sent
to study under the guru Kshirakadambak. At that time, his son Parvat, the prince
Vasu, and the student Narada, all three studied together under Kshirakadambak
Upadhyaya. Once, all three students, tired from their studies, fell asleep on
the roof of the house. At that time, the Jhangachari Munis, flying through the
sky, saw them and said to each other, "One of these three will go to heaven and
two will go to hell." Kshirakadambak Upadhyaya heard this conversation and was
deeply troubled. He was saddened, "I am their teacher, and my students will go
to hell! What a fate! But I must find out who will go to heaven and who will go
to hell." Therefore, with his intelligence and skill, he made three roosters out
of dough filled with lac. One day, he called all three students to him and gave
each of them a rooster, saying, "Take this and kill it in a place where no one
can see."  Vasu and Parvat, each taking their rooster, went to a secluded place
outside the city, in a direction where there was no human traffic. Therefore,
thinking that no one would see them, they killed their roosters. Mahatma Narada,
taking his rooster, reached a secluded, uninhabited region, but looking around,
he thought, "My guru has commanded that I kill it where no one can see. But this
rooster is seeing me, I am seeing it, the birds in the sky are seeing it, the
Lokapalas are seeing it, and even if no one else is seeing it, the wise men are
surely seeing it. Nothing done secretly, even in the darkest of places, can be
hidden from them. Therefore, I cannot kill this rooster anywhere. Then how will
I obey my guru's command?" Thus, diving into the ocean of contemplation, Narada
suddenly had a flash of insight. "Perhaps, the ever-merciful guru, who is always
inclined towards non-violence, has given us this rooster to test us. If he
wanted to kill it, he could have done it himself. He has given us three roosters
to kill, his intention is to test our non-violent nature. His command means, 'Do
not kill the rooster.' I will not kill it." Thus, deciding not to kill the
rooster, Narada brought it back to his guru without killing it. He explained to
his guru the reason why he could not kill the rooster. The guru decided in his
heart that this one would surely go to heaven and embraced Narada
affectionately, exclaiming, "Good, good, very good, son!"  Soon after, Vasu and
Parvat also arrived. They said, "Here, guru! We have obeyed your command. We
took our roosters to a place where no one could see and killed them." The guru
said in a tone of reproach, 127

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 vasurAjA kI kathA yogazAstra dvitIya prakAza zloka 60 ghara meM praveza karane
se pahale hI baila kI taraha unhoMne ghera liyA aura bAMdhakara pakar3a liyaa|
jaise rAtri vyatIta hone para sUrya apane teja ke sAtha prakaTa hotA hai vaise
hI bhUtapUrva rAjA usI samaya prakaTa huaa| use prajAjanoM ne rAjagaddI para
punaH biThA diyA thaa| piTArI se nikalakara bhAgate hue sarpa ke samAna duSTa
datta ko dekhate hI bhUtapUrva rAjA kI krodhAgni bhar3aka utthii| usane
narakakuMbhI ke samAna cAMDAla kI kuMbhI (bhaTTI) meM datta ko pakar3akara DAlA
aura nIce se usameM Aga lagA dii| kuMbhI garma hone lagI taba rote-cillAte datta
ko zikArI kuttoM ne jhapaTakara phAr3akara usI taraha mAra DAlA, jaise naraka
meM paramAdhArmika asura nArakoM ko phAr3akara mArate hai| idhara bhUtapUrva
rAjA ne kAlakAcArya jaise satyavAdI ko kArAgAra se mukta kiyaa| jisa taraha
kAlakAcArya rAjabhaya se, kisI ke Agraha yA mulAhije meM Akara jhUTha nahIM
bole, na jhUThI cApalusI kI; balki apane satyamahAvrata kI pratijJa para dRr3ha
rahe, isI taraha buddhimAna puruSa kadApi jhUTha na bole aura apane satya
mahAvrata ko surakSita rkhe| asatya bolane se vasurAjA kI durgati :.. cedI deza
meM zuktimatI nadI ke kinAre usakI krIr3AsakhI kI taraha zuktimatI nagarI basI
huI thii| vahAM apane teja se adbhuta mANikya-ratna ke samAna, pRthvI ke mukuTa
ke tulya abhicaMdra rAjA rAjya karatA thaa| pAMDurAjA ke yahAM jaise satyavAdI
yudhiSThira paidA hue the, vaise hI rAjA abhicaMdra ke yahAM satyavAdI vasu kA
janma huaa| kizora-avasthA hote hI vasurAjakumAra ko kSIrakadaMbaka guru ke pAsa
par3hane bhejaa| usa samaya kSIrakadaMbaka upAdhyAya ke pAsa unakA putra
parvata, rAjaputra vasu aura vidyArthI nArada ye tInoM sAtha-sAtha adhyayana
karate the| eka bAra ye tInoM vidyArthI adhyayana ke parizrama ke kAraNa
thakakara makAna kI chata para so gye| usa samaya AkAza meM ur3akara jAte hue
jaMghAcArI muniyoM ne inheM dekhakara paraspara kahA-'ina tInoM meM se eka
svarga meM jAyegA aura do naraka meM jaayeNge|' kSIrakadaMbaka upAdhyAya ne yaha
vArtAlApa sunA aura ve gaharI ciMtA meM DUba gye| unheM kheda huA ki 'maiM inakA
adhyApaka aura mere par3hAye hue vidyArthI naraka meM jAyeM! kaisI bhavitavyatA!
phira bhI mujhe yaha to patA lagA lenA cAhie ki inameM se kauna svarga meM
jAyegA aura kauna naraka meM jAyeMge?' ataH unhoMne apanI sujhabUjha se kucha
vidyA aura yukti se lAkSArasa se paripUrNa ATe ke tIna mUrge bnaaye| eka dina
tInoM vidyArthiyoM ko apane pAsa bulAyA aura pratyeka ko eka-eka mUrgA dete hue
kahA-'ise le jAo aura isakA vadha aisI jagaha le jAkara karanA, jahAM koI na
dekhatA ho|' vasu aura parvata donoM apane-apane murge ko lekara nagarI ke
bAhara alaga-alaga dizA meM aise ekAMta sthAna meM| pahuMce, jahAM manuSyoM kA
AvAgamana bilakula nahIM hotA thaa| ataH unhoMne yaha socakara kahA ki yahAM koI
dekhatA nahIM hai, apane-apane murge ko khatma kara diyaa| mahAtmA nArada apane
murge ko lekara ekAMta janazUnya pradeza meM pahuMcA, lekina | vahAM usane
idhara-udhara dekhakara socA ki gurujI ne AjJA dI hai ki 'jahAM koI na dekhe
vahAM i to yaha murgA mujhe dekha rahA hai, maiM ise dekha rahA hUM; AkAzacArI
pakSI vagairaha dekha rahe haiM, lokapAla dekhate haiM aura koI nahIM dekhatA
hai to bhI jJAnI to dekhate hI hoMge; unase to aMdharI se aMdherI jagaha meM bhI
gupta rUpa se kI huI koI bhI bAta chipI nahIM rhtii| ataH maiM isa murge kA
vadha kisI bhI jagaha nahIM kara sakatA, taba phira gurujI kI AjJA kA pAlana
kaise hogA?' yoM ciMtanasAgara meM gote lagAte-lagAte nArada ko ekAeka jJAna kA
prakAza huA, ho na ho, sadA hiMsAparAMgamukha dayAlu gurujI ne hamArI parIkSA ke
lie murgA diyA hai, mAranA cAhate to ve svayaM mAra sakate the| hama tInoM ko
eka-eka murgA dekara mAra lAne kI AjJA dI hai, usake pIche gurujI kA Azaya
hamArI ahiMsA buddhi kI kI hai| unakI AjJA kA tAtparya yahI hai-'marge kA vadha
na krnaa|' maiM ise nahIM maaruuNgaa|' yoM nizcaya karake nArada marge ko mAre
binA hI lekara gurujI ke pAsa aayaa| aura gurujI se murgA na mAra sakane kA
kAraNa nivedana kiyaa| gurujI ne mana hI mana nizcaya kiyA ki yaha avazya hI
svarga meM jAyegA aura nArada ko snehapUrvaka chAtI se lagAyA evaM ye udgAra
nikAle-acchA, acchA, bahuta acchA kiyA beTe! kucha hI dera bAda vasu aura
parvata bhI A gye| unhoMne-'lIjie gurujI! hamane ApakI AjJA kA pAlana kara
diyaa| jahAM koI nahIM dekhatA thA, usI jagaha le jAkara apane-apane murge ko
mArakara lAye haiN| guru ne upAlaMbha ke svara meM kahA 127

Page #150 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Story of Vasuraja Yoga Shastra, Second Light, Verse 6 | 'Sinful souls! You
did not consider my command properly. When you killed the rooster, did you not
see him at that time? Or was he not seeing you? Did the celestial birds and
other flying creatures not see?' Well, you are unfit. Kshirakadambak decided
that both of them seemed to be destined for hell. And becoming indifferent
towards them, his interest in teaching them ended. He started thinking - the
true guru's teachings for Vasu and Parvat, the disciple, bear fruit according to
the recipient. The water of the clouds, due to the difference in location, falls
into the mouth of the oyster and becomes a pearl, and the same water falls into
the mouth of the snake and becomes poison, or falls on barren land or salty land
or in the sea and becomes salty. Alas, my dear son and my son, more dear than my
son, Vasu, both will go to hell. What is the benefit of staying here? Thinking
this way, Kshirakadambak Upadhyay became detached from the world. He took
initiation from his guru with intense dispassion. Now his place was taken by his
son Parvat, who was wise in interpretation. Blessed by the guru, he became
proficient in all scriptures, and with a pure mind like the clouds of autumn, he
went to his birthplace. King Abhichandra, who was like the moon among kings,
also took monastic initiation at the right time. Vasuraja, who was like
Vasudeva, ascended the throne. Vasuraja became famous in this world as a truth-
speaker. Vasuraja spoke only the truth to protect his fame. One day, a hunter
went to the Vindhya mountain to hunt. He aimed an arrow at a deer; but
unfortunately, the arrow stopped in mid-air and fell. To find out the reason for
the arrow falling in mid-air, he reached the spot. As soon as he touched it with
his hand, he realized that there was a crystal rock as clear as the sky. 'So, I
saw the deer reflected on the other side of this rock, like the shadow of the
earth in the moon.' This rock cannot be known without touching it with the hand.
Therefore, this rock is definitely worthy of Vasuraja. Thinking this, the hunter
silently picked up the rock and went to Vasuraja, presented it to him and told
him the whole story of how he got the rock. King Vasu was very pleased to hear
this and looked at the rock for a moment. He gave the hunter a lot of reward and
sent him away. The king secretly built a platform for the rock in the royal
court, suitable for sitting, and killed the craftsman who built the platform.
'It is true that kings never belong to anyone.' The king had a throne installed
on the platform. People who were unaware of this secret began to understand that
Vasuraja's throne was suspended in the air due to the influence of truth.
Delighted by the truth, the gods also stayed in the service of this king. Thus,
the bright fame of Vasuraja spread in every direction. Frightened by that fame,
other kings became subservient to Vasunrip. 'Fame, whether true or false, always
brings victory to kings.' One day, Narada came to visit Parvat's ashram. Then he
saw the intelligent Parvat teaching his disciples the interpretation of the Rig
Veda. At that time, the sutra 'Ajairayastavyam' came, and while explaining it,
he said the meaning of the word 'Aj' as 'goat'. Hearing this, Narada said to
Parvat, 'Brother! You are making a mistake somewhere in saying this meaning. You
have mistakenly taken the meaning of 'Aj' as a goat. Which does not happen. The
real meaning of 'Aj' is - 'three-year-old grain, which cannot sprout.' Our
gurudev also took the meaning of 'Aj' as grain. Have you forgotten him?' At that
time, Parvat protested and said, 'The meaning you are telling is not what my
father said. He took the meaning of the word 'Aj' as a goat. And the same
meaning is found in the dictionary.' Then Narada said, 'Brother! Every word has
two meanings, secondary and primary. Guruji told us the secondary meaning of the
word 'Aj'. Guruji was a preacher of Dharma. Shruti is also the embodiment of
Dharma. Therefore, friend! Why are you earning sin by speaking contrary to both
the meaning of Shruti and the teachings of the guru? Parvatak now made it a
matter of his prestige and said stubbornly, 'Guruji has explained the meaning of
'Aj' as a goat in the Shruti verse 'Ajanmeshan'. Do you earn Dharma by
contradicting the meaning told by Guruji?' Arrogant false speech does not punish
or frighten a person. Therefore, 128

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 vasurAjA kI kathA yogazAstra dvitIya prakAza zloka 6 | 'pApAtmAo! tumane merI
AjJA para ThIka taraha se vicAra nahIM kiyaa| jisa samaya tumane murge ko mArA,
kyA usa samaya tuma use nahIM dekhate the? yA vaha tumheM nahIM dekha rahA thA?
kyA AkAzacArI pakSI Adi khecara nahIM dekhate the?' khaira, tuma ayogya ho|
kSIrakadaMbaka ne nizcaya kiyA ki ye donoM narakagAmI pratIta hote haiN| tathA
unake prati udAsIna hokara una donoM ko adhyayana karAne kI ruci khatma ho gyii|
vicAra karane lage-vasu aura parvata ko par3hAne kA sacce guru kA upadeza pAtra
ke anusAra phalita hotA hai| bAdaloM kA pAnI sthAnabheda ke kAraNa hI sIpa ke
muMha meM par3akara motI bana jAtA hai aura vahI sAMpa ke muMha meM par3akara
jahara bana jAtA hai, yA USara bhUmi yA khArI jamIna para yA samudra meM
par3akara khArA bana jAtA hai| aphasosa hai, merA priya putra aura putra se
bar3hakara priya ziSya vasu donoM naraka meM jaayeNge| meM rahane se kyA lAbha?
isa prakAra vicAra karate-karate kSIrakadaMbaka upAdhyAya ko saMsAra se virakti
ho gyii| unhoMne tIvra vairAgya pUrvaka guru se dIkSA le lii| aba unakA sthAna
unake vyAkhyAvicakSaNa putra parvata ne le liyaa| guru-kRpA se
sarvazAstravizArada banakara zaradaRtu ke megha ke samAna nirmalabuddhi se yukta
nArada apanI janmabhUmi meM cale gye| rAjAoM meM caMdra samAna abhicaMdra rAjA
ne bhI ucita samaya para munidIkSA grahaNa kara lii| unakI rAjagaddI para
vasudeva ke samAna vasurAjA virAjamAna hue| vasurAjA isa bhUtala para satyavAdI
ke rUpa meM prasiddha ho gyaa| vasurAjA apanI isa prasiddhi kI surakSA ke lie
satya hI bolatA thaa| eka dina koI zikArI zikAra khelane ke lie vindhyaparvata
para gyaa| usane eka hirana ko lakSya karake tIra chor3A; kintu durbhAgya se
vaha tIra bIca meM hI rukakara gira pdd'aa| tIra ke bIca meM hI gira jAne kA
kAraNa DhUMDhane ke lie vaha ghaTanAsthala para phuNcaa| hAtha se sparza karate
hI use mAlUma huA ki AkAza ke samAna svaccha koI sphaTika zilA hai|' ataH usane
socA- 'jaise caMdramA meM bhUmi kI chAyA pratibimi taraha isa zilA ke dUsarI ora
pratibiMbita hiraNa ko maiMne dekhA hai|' hAtha se sparza kiye binA kisI prakAra
isa zIlA ko jAnA nahIM jA sktaa| ataH yaha zilA avazya hI vasu rAjA ke yogya
hai| yoM socakara zikArI ne cupacApa vaha zilA uThAyI aura vasurAjA ke pAsa
pahuMcakara unheM bheMTa dete hue zilA prApta hone kA sArA hAla sunaayaa| rAjA
vasu sunakara aura gaura se zilA ko kSaNa bhara dekhakara bahata khaza haa| usa
zikArI ko usane bahata-sA inAma dekara vidA kiyaa| rAjA ne usa zilA kI gupta
rUpa se rAjasabhA meM baiThane yogya eka vedikA banAyI aura vedikA banAne vAle
kArIgara ko mAra diyaa|' saca hai rAjA kabhI kisI ke nahIM hote| vedikA para
rAjA ne eka siMhAsana sthApita kraayaa| isake rahasya se anabhijJa loga yaha
samajhane lage ki satya ke prabhAva se vasu rAjA kA siMhAsana adhara rahatA hai|
satya se prasanna hokara devatA bhI isa rAjA kI sevA meM rahate haiN| isa
prakAra vasu rAjA kI ujjvala kIrti pratyeka dizA meM phaila gyii| usa prasiddhi
ke kAraNa bhayabhIta bane hue anya rAjA vasunRpa ke adhIna ho gye| 'prasiddhi
saccI ho yA jhUThI, rAjAoM ko vijaya dilAtI hI hai|' _eka dina nArada parvata ke
Azrama meM milane aayaa| taba usane buddhizAlI parvata ko apane ziSyoM ko Rgveda
kI vyAkhyA par3hAte hue dekhaa| usa samaya 'ajairyaSTavyam' sUtra AyA to usakI
vyAkhyA karate hue 'aja' zabda kA artha rA' yaha sunakara nArada ne parvata se
kahA-'baMdhuvara! isa artha ke kahane meM tumhArI kahIM bhUla ho rahI hai|
tamane bhrAMtivaza aja kA bakarA artha kiyA hai. jo nahIM hotA hai| aja kA
vAstavika artha hotA hai-'tIna sAla kA parAnA dhAnya, jo Uga na ske| hamAre
gurudeva ne bhI aja kA artha dhAnya hI kiyA thaa| kyA tuma use bhUla gaye?' usa
samaya prativAda karate hue parvata ne kahA-'tuma jo artha batA rahe ho, vaha
artha pitAjI ne nahIM kiyA thaa| unhoMne 'aja' zabda kA artha bakarA hI kiyA
thaa| aura koSa meM bhI yahI artha milatA hai|' taba nArada ne kahA-'bhAI! kisI
bhI zabda ke gauNa aura mukhya do artha hote haiN| gurujI ne hameM 'aja' zabda
ke viSaya meM gauNa artha kahA thaa| gurujI dharmasammata upadeza dene vAle the|
zruti bhI dharma svarUpA hI hai| isalie mitra! zrutisammata aura gurUpadiSTa
donoM arthoM ke viparIta bolakara tuma kyoM pApa-upArjana kara rahe ho?
parvataka ne aba ise apanI pratiSThA kA prazna banA liyA aura haThAgraha pUrvaka
kahA'gurujI ne ajAnmeSAn zrutivAkya meM aja kA artha bakarA hI batAyA hai|
gurujI ke batAye hue artha kA apalApa karake kyA tuma dharma-upArjana karate
ho?' abhimAnayukta mithyAvANI manuSya ko daMDa yA bhaya dene vAlI nahIM hotii|
ataH 128

Page #151 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Story of Vasuraja  The Second Light of Yoga Shastra, Verse 60: Parvatak
said, "Let us make a wager on this matter. Whoever fails to prove their side as
true shall have their tongue cut off. First, agree to this wager. Then, we will
both go to our classmate Vasuraja, considering him to be authentic, to seek his
judgment on this matter. The decision of that truthful one shall be binding on
both of us." Narada agreed to the wager and to accept the decision given by
Vasuraja in this regard, because "Truth does not fear!" One who speaks the truth
does not fear or feel troubled. When Parvat's mother heard about their dispute
and the wager they had made, she became very worried and took her son Parvatak
aside and said, "Son! When I was doing the household chores, I heard your father
say that the meaning of the word 'Aj' is three-year-old grain. The wager you
have made to cut off your tongue is filled with ego and stubbornness. You have
done this very inappropriately. One who acts without thinking gets entangled in
many troubles." Parvat said, slightly hesitant, "Mother! I have already done
what I did in a fit of passion. Now, tell me, is there any way that the decision
can be in our favor?"  Distressed by the fear of the terrible calamity that
awaited Parvat in the future and with a heart pierced like thorns, his mother
went straight to Vasuraja. What is not done for a son? Seeing the Brahmin woman,
Vasuraja greeted her with a bow and said, "Mother! Come, please come in! Seeing
you is like seeing Guru Shri Kshirakadambak himself today. Tell me, what can I
do for you? What can I give you?" Then the Brahmin woman said, "Earth-King! I
need a son's blessing, only this one thing is needed, son! What is the use of
wealth and grain, etc., when a son is gone?" Vasu said, "Mother! Parvat is
revered by me; I must protect him. The scriptures say, 'One should treat the son
of a Guru like a Guru himself.' In times of calamity, who has Yama, the god of
death, issued a summons for today? Mother! Tell me, who wants to kill my
brother? Why do you worry while I am alive?" Then Parvat's mother said, "There
has been a dispute between Parvat and Narada over the meaning of the word 'Aj'.
My son Parvat has made this wager: if the meaning of 'Aj' is not a goat, then I
will cut off my tongue, and if it is a goat, then you will cut off your tongue.
Both of them have considered you as the judge, the authentic person, in this
dispute. Therefore, I have come to you to request that you make the meaning of
the word 'Aj' as a goat to protect your brother. Great men are those who do good
even at the cost of their lives, then how can you not do this small act of
kindness with your words?"  Hearing this, Vasunrip said, "Mother! This would be
to speak untruth. How can I speak untruth? Even when faced with the possibility
of death, truthful people do not speak untruth. Others may say anything, but a
person who fears sin should never speak untruth, and then how can I speak
against the words of my Guru or give false testimony?" Parvat's mother said in
anger, "Then there are two paths before you: if you want to be a benefactor,
then protect the Guru's son and ensure his well-being, and if you want to be
selfish, then insist on truthfulness." After saying this with great emphasis,
Vasuraja agreed to her request. Kshirakadambak's wife went home happily.  At the
appointed time, the learned Narada and Parvat both came to Vasuraja's royal
court for the judgment. In the court, people of good character, who could
discern the truth and falsehood like milk and water, gathered. Vasuraja, the
president, was seated on a throne placed on a platform made of pure crystal
stone, looking as beautiful as the sun between the earth and the sky. After
that, Narada and Parvat presented their interpretations of the word 'Aj' before
Vasuraja and said, "King! You are the judge between us, tell us the true meaning
of this word. Because the Brahmins and the elders have said, 'Just as the sun is
between heaven and earth, so are you the mediator between us; you are the judge
in our dispute. Now you are the proof. Whatever your decision will be, it will
be binding on both of us. The hot divine pot or the iron ball that is lifted in
the hand for truth or oath actually remains stable because of truth. The earth
is based on truth, even the dust is established on truth."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 vasurAjA kI kathA yogazAstra dvitIya prakAza zloka 60 parvataka ne kahA-'calo,
isa viSaya meM hama zarta lagA leN| apane pakSa ko satya siddha karane meM jo
asaphala hogA, use apanI jIbha kaTAnI hogii| pahale yaha zarta maMjUra kara lo|
taba hama donoM sahapAThI vasurAjA ko prAmANika mAnakara isa viSaya meM usake
pAsa nirNaya lene ke lie cleNge| usa satyavAdI kA nirNaya donoM ko mAnya karanA
hogaa|' nArada ne usa zarta ko aura usa saMbaMdha meM vasurAjA dvArA diye hue
nirNaya ko mAnanA svIkAra kiyA, kyoMki 'sAMca ko AMca nahIM!' satya bolane vAle
ko bhaya aura kSobha nahIM hotaa| parvata kI mAtA ne jaba donoM kA vivAda aura
paraspara zarta lagAne kI bAta sunI to vaha bahuta ciMtita huI aura apane putra
parvataka ko ekAMta meM le jAkara kahA- 'beTA! jaba maiM ghara kA kAryakara rahI
thI, taba tere pitA ke muMha se maiMne 'aja' zabda kA artha tIna sAla purAnA
dhAnya hI sunA thaa| tUne jIbha kaTAne kI jo zarta lagAyI hai, vaha ahaMkAra
aura haTha se yukta hai| yaha kAma tUMne bahuta anucita kiyA hai| binA vicAre
kArya karane vAlA aneka saMkaToM se ghira jAtA hai|' parvata ne jarA sahamate
hue kahA-'mAtAjI! aba to maiM Aveza meM Akara jo kucha kara cukA. vaha kara
cukaa| aba Apa batAiye ki phaisalA hamAre pakSa meM kisI sUrata se ho sake, aisA
koI upAya nahIM? parvata para bhaviSya meM Ane vAle bhayaMkara saMkaTa kI AzaMkA
se pIr3ita va kAMTe cubhane ke samAna vyathita hRdaya se mAtA sIdhI vasarAjA ke
pAsa phNcii| patra ke lie kyA-kyA nahIM kiyA jAtA? garupatnI ko dekhate hI
vasarAjA ne praNAma karate hue kahA-'mAtAjI! Ao, padhAro! Apako dekhane se aisA
lagatA hai, mAno Aja mujhe sAkSAt guruzrI kSIrakadaMbaka ke hI darzana hue hai|
kahie, maiM Apake lie kyA karU~? kyA dU~?' 'taba brAhmaNI ne kahA-'pRthvIpatI!
mujhe putrabhikSA cAhie, kevala isI eka cIja kI jarUrata hai, beTA! putra ke
cale jAne para dhana-dhAnya Adi dUsare padArthoM ke hone se kyA lAbha?' vasu ne
kahA-'mAtAjI! parvata mere liye pUjya hai; usakI surakSA mujhe karanI caahie|
zruti meM kahA hai-'guru ke putra ke sAtha guru ke samAna vartAva karanA
caahie|' akAla meM roSa karane vAle yamarAja ne Aja kisake nAma kI ciTThI nikAlI
hai? mAtAjI! mujhe batAo ki mere baMdhu ko kauna mAranA cAhatA hai? mere rahate
Apa kyoM ciMtA karatI hai?' taba parvata kI mAtA ne kahA-aja-zabda ke artha para
parvata aura nArada donoM meM vivAda chir3a gyaa| isa para mere putra parvata ne
| yaha zarta lagAyI hai ki yadi 'aja' kA artha bakarA na ho to maiM jIbha
kaTAU~gA aura 'bakarA' ho to tuma jIbha kttaanaa| isa vivAda ke nirNaya kartA
pramANa puruSa ke rUpa meM donoM ne tumheM mAnA hai| isalie maiM tumase
prArthanA karane AyI hUM ki apane baMdhu kI rakSA karane hetu 'aja' zabda kA
artha bakarA hI krnaa| mahApuruSa to prANa dekara bhI paropakAra karane vAle
hote haiM, to phira vANI se tuma itanA-sA paropakAra nahIM karoge?' yaha
sunakara vasunRpa ne kahA-'mAtAjI! yaha to asatya bolanA hogaa| maiM asatya-
vacana kaise bola sakatA haiM? prANanAza kA avasara Ane para bhI satyavAdI
asatyaM nahIM bolte| dUsare loga kucha bhI boleM, paraMtu pApabhIru ko to
hargija nahIM bolanA cAhie aura phira guruvacana ke viruddha bolanA yA jhUThI
sAkSI denA, yaha bAta bhI mujhase kaise ho sakatI hai?' parvata kI mAtA ne roSa
meM Akara kahA-'to phira do rAste | | haiM tere sAmane-yadi paropakArI bananA
hai to guruputra kI rakSA karake usakA kalyANa karo aura svArthI hI rahanA hai
to satyavAda kA Agraha rkho|' isa prakAra bahuta jora dekara kahane para
vasurAjA ne usakA vacana mAnya kiyaa| kSIrakadaMbaka kI patnI harSita hokara
ghara calI aayii| ThIka samaya para vidvAna nArada aura parvata donoM nirNaya ke
lie vasarAjA kI rAjasabhA meM aaye| sabhA meM donoM vAdiyoM ke satya-asatya rUpa
kSIra-nIravat bhalIbhAMti viveka karane vAle ujjvala prabhAvAn mAdhyastha guNa
vAle sabhya loga | ekatrita hue| sabhApati vasurAjA eka svaccha sphaTika zilA kI
vedikA para sthApita siMhAsana para baiThA huA aisA suzobhita ho rahA thA, mAno
pRthvI aura AkAza ke bIca meM sUrya ho| usake bAda nArada aura parvata ne
vasurAjA ke sAmane 'aja' zabda para apanI-apanI vyAkhyA prastuta kI aura
kahA-'rAjan! hama donoM ke bIca meM Apa nirNAyaka haiM, Apa isa zabda kA
yathArtha artha khie| kyoMki brAhmaNoM aura vRddhoM ne kahA hai-'svarga aura
pRthvI ina donoM ke bIca meM jaise sUrya hai, vaise hI hama donoM ke bIca meM
Apa madhyastha haiM; donoM ke vivAda meM nirNAyaka hai| aba Apa hI pramANabhUta
haiN| ApakA jo nirNaya hogA, vahI hama donoM ko mAnya hogaa| satya yA zapatha ke
lie hAtha meM uThAyA jAne vAlA garmAgarma divya ghaTa yA lohe kA golA vAstava
meM satya ke kAraNa sthira rahatA hai| satya para hI pRthvI AdhArita hai,
dhuloka bhI satya para pratiSThita 129

Page #152 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Vasuraja's Descent into Hell, Kaushik's Descent into Hell  The second light
of the Yoga Shastra, verse 61 states: Truth sets the wind in motion. Truth
subdues the gods. Truth brings rain. All conduct is based on truth. If you base
others on truth, what can be said about you? Give a decision that is appropriate
for the truthful. Vasuraja, as if not hearing or ignoring the above words about
truth, without considering anything with long-sightedness, said, "The Guruji had
made the meaning of 'Aj' as 'goat' in 'Aj-Meshan' (meaning 'goat-ram')."
Speaking such a false word, the deity presiding over the altar became enraged.
He shattered both the crystal-clear altar like the sky and the throne placed on
it. Vasuraja was immediately thrown to the ground, as if they had undertaken to
throw him into hell. Narada also immediately left from there, scorning him by
saying, "Who would look at your face, you who give false witness like a
Chandala?" Vasuraja, humiliated by the gods for speaking false words, went to
the terrible hell.  Whenever any son of the guilty Vasuraja sat on the throne,
the gods would kill him. In this way, the gods killed eight sons of Vasu.
Therefore, hearing the fruit of Vasuraja's speaking falsely in this way, those
who listen to the Jain teachings, the glorious souls, should not speak falsely
even if they are under pressure, coercion, or consideration, or even if they
fear the loss of their lives. This is the heart of the Narada-Parvat-Katha!
That truthful word, which benefits the virtuous, even if it is true by origin,
is considered to be in the category of falsehood if it causes pain to others.
Therefore, one should not speak even such truth, which causes pain to the hearts
of others.  **Verse 117:**  *Do not speak even truth, which causes pain to
others. For it is heard in the world that Kaushik went to hell for speaking such
words.*  **Explanation:**  Many times, a person's word appears to be true in
worldly conduct; but when considered from the ultimate point of view, it is
found to be harmful to others, then it should be considered as falsehood. One
should not speak such words that cause harm to the heart. Speaking such words
leads to hell. It is heard from the world's traditions and other scriptures that
Kaushik went to hell for speaking hurtful words (which are actually a form of
falsehood) that cause pain to others. The story of Kaushik is as follows in the
tradition of the sect:  **Kaushik's attainment of hell due to false words in the
form of killing living beings:**  Kaushik, a wealthy ascetic, left his village
and lived as a poor man on the banks of the Ganges River. There he ate roots and
fruits. He became famous among the people as a non-possessive, selfless, and
truthful person. Once, the ascetic saw thieves coming from a nearby village to
loot. Just as a serpent enters its hole, those thieves entered the bushes near
the hermitage. According to the footprints of the thieves, the villagers came to
the ascetic's hermitage and asked him, "Great soul! You are truthful, tell us
where those thieves went?" Kaushik, the ascetic, who was ignorant of the secrets
of Dharma, said, "Those thieves have entered these dense bushes." Hearing this,
just as hunters pounce on deer, they pounced on the thieves and killed them.
Therefore, Kaushik, the ascetic, completed his lifespan and went to hell for
speaking falsehood in the form of factual words that caused pain to others.
After forbidding even a little falsehood because it is harmful, now we express
regret for those who speak great falsehood.  **Verse 118:**  *Even a little lie
can lead to Raurava and other hells. What will be the fate of those who speak
against the words of Shri Jinendradev?*  **Explanation:**  In this world, even a
little lie, which is beneficial for a little gain, can cause a person to be born
in Raurava, Maharaurava, and other hells. Oh! What will be the fate of those who
speak against the words of Shri Jinendradev?

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 vasurAjA kA naraka gamana, kauzika kA naraka gamana yogazAstra dvitIya prakAza
zloka 61 hai| satya se havA calatI hai| satya se deva vaza meM ho jAte haiN|
satya se hI vRSTi hotI hai| sArA vyavahAra satya para TikA hai| Apa dUsare logoM
ko satya para TikAte haiM to ApakA to isa viSaya meM kyA kahanA ? satyavrata ke
lie jo ucita ho, | vahI nirNaya do| vasurAjA ne mAno satya ke saMbaMdha meM ukta
bAteM sunI-anasunI karake kisI prakAra kA dIrghadRSTi se vicAra na karate hue
kahA, 'gurujI ne ajAn- meSAn arthAt aja kA artha bakarA kiyA thaa|' isa prakAra
kA asatya vacana bolate | hI vedikAdhiSThita devatA kopAyamAna hue| unhoMne
AkAza jaisI nirmala sphaTikazIlAmayI vedikA evaM usa para sthApita siMhAsana
donoM ko cUra-cUrakara diyA  /  vasurAjA ko tatkAla bhUtala para girA diyA, mAno
unhoMne use naraka meM girAne kA | upakrama kiyA ho| nArada bhI tatkAla yoM
kahakara tiraskAra karatA huA vahAM se cala diyA ki cAMDAla ke samAna jhUThI |
sAkSI dene vAle terA muMha kauna dekhe ? asatya vacana bolane se devatAoM dvArA
apamAnita vasurAjA ghora naraka meM gyaa| aparAdhI vasurAjA kA jo bhI putra
rAjagaddI para baiThatA, devatA use mAra girAte the| isa taraha vasu ke ATha
putroM ko devoM | ne mAra giraaye| ataH vasurAja ke isa prakAra asatya bolane kA
phala sunakara jinavacana-zravaNa karane vAle bhavya AtmAoM | ko kisI ke bhI
Agraha davAba yA lihAja - mulAhije meM Akara athavA prANoM ke cale jAne kI
AzaMkA ho to bhI asatya nahIM bolanA caahie| yaha hai nArada - parvata - kathA
kA hArda! sajjanoM kA hita karane vAlA vaha satyavacana vyutpatti se yathArtha
hone para bhI agara dUsaroM ko pIr3A dene vAlA ho to use bhI asatya kI koTi meM
hI mAnA gayA hai| isalie satya bhI aisA na bole, jisase dUsaroM ke hRdaya ko gha
|pahuMce  /  117 /  na satyamapi bhASeta, parapIDAkaraM vacaH  /  loke'pi
zrUyate yasmAt, kauziko narakaM gataH || 61 || artha :- jisase dUsaroM ko pIr3A
ho, aisA satyavacana bhI na bolo, kyoMki yaha lokazruti hai ki aise vacanaM
bolane se kauzika naraka meM gayA thA  /  /  61  /  vyAkhyA : kaI bAra kisI kA
vacana loka vyavahAra meM satya dikhAyI detA hai; lekina paramArtha se vicAra
karane | para mAlUma hotA hai ki vaha parapIr3AkArI hai to use asatya hI mAnanA
caahie| isa prakAra kA hRdaya ko AghAta pahuMcAne | vAlA vacana nahIM bolanA
caahie| aise vacana bolane se narakagati hotI hai| lokazruti se tathA anya
zAstroM se bhI aisA sunA jAtA hai ki dUsare ko pIr3A dene vAle cubhate vacana
(jo vAstava meM asatya kA hI prakAra hai) bolane se kauzika naraka | meM gyaa|
kauzika kI kathA saMpradAya paraMparA se isa prakAra hai prANighAtaka rUpa
asatyavacanoM se kauzika ko naraka prApti : kauzika nAma kA eka dhanika tApasa
apane gAMva se saMbaMdha tor3akara gaMgAnadI ke kinAre akiMcana hokara rahatA
thaa| vahAM vaha kaMdamUlAdi kA AhAra karatA thaa| logoM meM usakI prasiddhi
(zoharata ) aparigrahI, mamatAmukta va satyavAdI ke rUpa meM ho gyii| eka bAra
usa tApasa ne nikaTavartI gAMva ko lUTakara Ate hue coroM ko dekhA ki sarpa
jaise apanI bAMbI meM ghusatA hai, vaise hI ve cora Azrama ke najadIka vana kI
jhAr3iyoM meM ghusa gye| coroM ke pairoM ke nizAna ke anusAra gAMva ke loga
tApasa ke Azrama meM Aye aura tApasa se pUchA - 'mahAtman ! Apa to satyavAdI
hai, batAiye ve cora kahAM gaye?' dharmatattva ke rahasya se anabhijJa kauzika
tApasa ne kahA- 'ina ghanI jhAr3iyoM meM coroM ne praveza kiyA hai|' yaha sunate
hI zikArI jaise hiraNoM para TUTa par3ate haiM, vaise hI ve coroM para TUTa
par3e aura unheM mAra ddaalaa| isalie dUsare ko pIr3A pahuMcAne vAle tathya -
vacana ke rUpa meM asatya bolane se kauzika tApasa apanA AyuSya pUrNa kara
naraka meM gayA  /   /  61  /   /  thor3A-sA bhI asatyavacana anarthakArI hone
se usakA niSedha karane ke bAda aba bar3A bhArI asatya bolane vAle ke lie kheda
prakaTa karate haiM | | 118  /  alpAdapi mRSAvAdAd rauravAdiSu sambhavaH  /
anyathA vadatAM jainIM vAcaM tvahaha kA gatiH ||62 //  artha :- jarA-sA bhI
jhUTha bolane se jaba narakAdi gatiyoM meM utpanna honA par3atA hai; are re! to
phira zrIjinezvaradeva kI vANI ke viparIta bolane vAloM kI kyA gati hogI?  /  /
62  /  /  vyAkhyA : - isa jagat meM jarA-sA lAbhakAraka thor3A-sA bhI asatya
bolane se manuSya raurava, mahAraurava Adi naraka 130

Page #153 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Flaw of False Speech and the Glory of Truthful Speech  This passage
originates from the second chapter of the Yoga Shastra, verses 62 to 64. The
word "Raurava" is commonly used to refer to hell. Otherwise, it is said - in all
the hells. What will be the fate of those who contradict the teachings of Shri
Jineshwardev and are false speakers, heretics, and those who follow their own
opinions? They will attain a fate even worse than hell! Who can stop them from
attaining this terrible fate? Therefore, it is said - "Oh! Truly, they are
worthy of sorrow and regret." Even a slight deviation from the path of Jina's
teachings, or a different interpretation, is a terrible sin, worse than all
other sins. Due to the sin of even a slight deviation from the path of
Rishabhdev, as established in the Marichi kalpa, even though he was praised by
the gods in the Mahavira kalpa and was a Tirthankara, the Supreme Being, in all
three realms, Prabhu (Mahavira) suffered countless torments inflicted by
cowherds and others. And many great sinners, like those who kill women, cows,
Brahmins, and unborn beings, have attained liberation in the same life. This is
well-known. ||62||  Having explained the consequences of false speech, now the
praise of truthful speech is given. ||119||  "Those who speak only truth, the
root of knowledge and conduct, their feet dust purifies the earth." ||63||
**Meaning:** Truth is the root cause of knowledge and conduct. The commentators
of the Bhagavad Vachana, following their own words, have said - "Naanakiryahim
Mokkho" (Knowledge and conduct lead to liberation). The word "knowledge" also
includes "darshan" (right perception). Because without darshan, knowledge is
considered ignorance. A being with a false perception (mithyadrishti) perceives
the true and false substances in a reversed manner. Their knowledge is based on
their own opinions, leading to worldly wandering, and being a mere speaker of
words without any real meaning, it does not bear the fruit of right knowledge.
It is also said - "Because a being with a false perception does not
differentiate between truth and falsehood, it is the cause of worldly wandering.
Due to their own intellectual imagination, they create their own meanings, and
thus, they are not bound by the scriptures or relative to the scriptures.
Therefore, their (false) knowledge does not lead to detachment. This is why the
knowledge of a being with a false perception is considered ignorance." ||63||
The influence of truthful speakers is also described in this world. ||1.20||
"Those who are wealthy in the great treasure of truth, do not speak falsehood.
Neither ghosts, nor spirits, nor snakes, nor any other beings can harm them."
||64||  **Meaning:** Ghosts, spirits, and other beings harass their relatives.
Snakes and lions are understood by implication. But those souls who are wealthy
in the great treasure of truth, and do not speak falsehood, cannot be harassed
by ghosts and others. In this regard, another verse (with meaning) says - "Truth
is the second vow, like the embankment of a reservoir, protecting the water of
non-violence. If the vow of truth is broken, the reservoir of non-violence will
be unprotected and destroyed. Therefore, virtuous men should speak only truth,
which is beneficial to all beings, or else they should remain silent, which is
beneficial to all. One should not speak words that cause enmity, reveal
someone's secret, create intense doubt, or are doubtful, violent, or gossipy.
But if there is a destruction of dharma, a loss of action, or a loss of the true
meaning of the principles of truth, then a powerful person should speak without
being asked, to rectify it. Charvaka, Nastika, Kaulika, Vipra, Bauddha,
Pancharatra, etc., have filled the world with falsehood and ridiculed it. Truly,
the words that come out of their mouths are like the flow of a city drain, like
foul-smelling water mixed with mud. A tree burnt by fire can become green again,
but a person burnt by the fire of harsh words does not become green again in
this world, by attaining the true path of dharma. Sandalwood, moonlight,
Chandrakant gem, and a pearl necklace do not give as much joy as the true speech
of humans."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 asatyavacana se doSa aura satyavacana kI mahimA yogazAstra dvitIya prakAza
zloka 62 se 64 meM utpanna hotA hai| raurava zabda naraka ke artha meM loka-
pracalita hai| nahIM to, kahA jAtA-samasta narakoM meN| zrI jinezvaradeva ke
kathana se viparIta artha karane vAle aura asatyavAdI kutIrthiyoM aura svamata-
nihvavoM Adi kI kyA gati hogI? ve to naraka se bhI adhika adhama-gati prApta
kareMge! unako prApta hone vAlI isa kugati ko kauna roka sakatA hai? | isalie
kahA-'opha! sacamaca ve zoka aura kheda karane yogya hai|' jinoktamArga se jarA-
sA bhI viparIta bolanA yA pRthaka prarUpaNA karanA, anya saba pApoM se
bar3hakara bhayaMkara pApa hai| marIci ke bhava meM upArjita RSabhadeva-
prarUpita mArga se jarAsI viparIta prarUpaNA karane ke pApa ke kAraNa hI
bhagavAn mahAvIra ke bhava meM devoM dvArA prazaMsita aura tIna lokoM meM samAna
tIrthaMkara paramAtmA hone para bhI prabha ne anekabAra gvAle Adi dvArA pradatta
asIma yAtanAe~ prApta kI thii| aura strI, gAya, brAhmaNa aura garbhastha jIva kI
hatyA karane vAle dRr3haprahArI sarIkhe kitane hI mahApApiyoM ne usI janma meM
mukti prApta kI hai| yaha bAta prasiddha hai  /  / 62 /  /  /  asatyavAda ke
duSpariNAma batAkara aba satyavAda kI prazaMsA karate haiN|119|
jJAnacAritrayormUlaM, satyameva vadanti ye  /  dhAtrI pavitrIkriyate, teSAM
caraNareNubhiH  // 63 //  artha :- jo manuSya jJAna aura cAritra ke mUla kAraNa
rUpa satya hI bolate haiM, una manuSyoM ke caraNoM kI raja se yaha pRthvI
pavitra hotI hai  /  / 63 /  /  _ vyAkhyA :- jJAna aura cAritra (kriyA) kA
mUlakAraNa satya hai| bhagavad vacana ke bhASyakAroM ne unake hI vacanoM kA
anusaraNa karate hue kahA hai- 'nANakiriyAhiM mokkho' jJAna zabda meM darzana kA
bhI samAveza ho jAtA hai| kyoMki darzana ke binA jJAna ajJAna mAnA jAtA hai|
mithyAdRSTi jIva sad-asada-padArthoM ko viparIta rUpa se jAnatA hai| usakA jJAna
saMsAra-paribhramaNa karAne vAlA manamAnA artha karane vAlA tathA nirapekSa
vacana kA vAcaka hone se samyagjJAna ke phala kA dAtA nahIM hotaa| kahA bhI
hai-'mithyAdRSTi ke jJAna meM satya aura jhUTha meM aMtara nahIM hone se vaha
saMsAra-paribhramaNa kA kAraNa rUpa hai| apanI bauddhika kalpanA ke anusAra
managaDhaMta artha karane se zAstrAdhInatA athavA zAstra-sApekSatA na hone se
usa (mithyA) jJAna ke phala svarUpa virati nahIM hotii| isI kAraNa mithyAdRSTi
kA jJAna ajJAna mAnA gayA hai  /  / 63 /  /  satyavAdiyoM kA isa loka meM bhI
prabhAva batAte haiN|1.20| alIkaM ye na bhASante satyavratamahAdhanAH  /
nAparAddhamalaM tebhyo bhUta-pretoragAdayaH  // 64 //  artha :- jo satyavrata ke
mahAdhanI manuSya asatya nahIM bolate, unheM bhUta, preta, sarpa Adi koI bhI
duHkha dene meM| samartha nahIM hote  /  / 64 /  /  vyAkhyA :- bhUta, preta,
vyaMtara Adi apane saMbaMdhiyoM ko hairAna, parezAna karate haiN| upalakSaNa se
sarpa evaM siMhAdi jaannaa| paraMtu satyavrata rUpI mahAdhana vAle jo AtmA
asatya nahIM bolate, unheM bhUtAdi hairAna karane meM asamartha hai| isa
saMbaMdha meM dUsare zloka (arthasahita) kahate haiMjalAzaya kI pAla ke samAna
ahiMsA rUpI jala ke rakSaka ke samAna satya dUsarA vrata hai| satya vrata kA
bhaMga hone jAya to ahiMsA rUpI jalAzaya arakSita hokara naSTa ho jaayegaa| ataH
sajjana puruSoM ko sabhI jIvoM ke lie upakArI satya hI bolanA cAhie yA phira
sarvArthasAdhaka mauna kA AlaMbana lekara rahanA caahie| kisI ke pUchane para
vaira paidA karane kA kAraNabhUta, kisI kI gupta bAta prakaTa karane vAlA,
utkaTa zaMkA paidA karane vAlA yA zaMkAspada, hiMsAkArI yA parapaizunyakArI
(cugalI khAne vAlA) vacana nahIM bolanA caahie| paraMtu dharma kA nAza hotA ho,
kriyA kA lopa hotA ho yA satyasiddhAMta ke sacce artha kA lopa hotA ho to
zaktizAlI puruSa ko usake nirAkaraNa ke lie binA pUche hI bolanA caahie|
cArvAka, nAstika, kaulika, vipra, bauddha, pAMcarAtra Adi ne jagat ko asatya se
AkrAMta karake viDambita kiyA hai| sacamuca, unake muMha se jo udgAra nikalate
haiM; ve nagara ke nAle ke pravAha ke samAna paMkamizrita dugaMdhita jala sadRza
hai| dAvAnala se jhulasA huA vRkSa to phira se harA-bharA ho sakatA hai, magara
durvacana rUpI Aga se jalA huA vyakti isa loka meM yathArtha dharma-mArga ko
pAkara, pallavita nahIM hotaa| caMdana, caMdrikA, caMdrakAMta maNi, motI kI mAlA
utanA AnaMda nahIM detI, jitanA AnaMda manuSyoM kI saccI vANI detI hai|
zikhAdhArI, muMDita mastaka, 131

Page #154 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Description of Adattadan (Theft) and its Consequences  **Chapter 2, Light 2,
Verses 65-69 of Yoga Shastra**  Even a Jati-dhari (one who wears matted hair), a
naked or clothed ascetic, if he speaks falsely, becomes extremely blameworthy.
If you place the sin arising from false speech on one side of a scale and all
other sins on the other side and weigh them, the side of falsehood will be
heavier. There are remedies to free those who commit sinful acts like adultery,
theft, etc., but there is no remedy to free those who speak falsely. This is the
fruit of being truthful: even the gods take his side, kings obey his commands,
and even calamities like fire are pacified. ||64||  Thus, the description of the
second vow of the householder Shramanopasaka is complete.  Now, the third vow is
called Asteya Vrat (vow of non-stealing). Without explaining the bad
consequences of Adattadan (theft), a person will not refrain from stealing.
Therefore, first, we explain its consequences and then prohibit stealing.
||121||  **Durbhagyam preshyatam dasyam angachhedam daridratam | Adattatphalam
jnatwa, sthula steyam vivarjayet ||65||**  Meaning: Bad luck (loss of fortune),
servitude (working as a servant in another's house), slavery, physical
dependence (cutting off limbs like hands, feet, etc.), poverty, etc., are the
fruits of taking something that was not given (Adattadan - theft) in a previous
life. ||65||  Knowing this from the scriptures or from the holy mouth of the
Guru Maharaj, the seeker of happiness should abandon this gross Adattadan, which
is called stealing in worldly affairs.  Further, we are explaining its nature in
detail. ||122||  **Patitam vismrtam nashttam, sthitam sthapitam ahitam | Adattam
na dadiit swam, parakiyam kvacit sudhih ||66||**  Meaning: Taking something that
has fallen while walking or riding, something that has been left behind due to
the owner's forgetfulness, something that has been lost, something that has been
kept in such a way that the owner does not even know about it, or something that
has been entrusted or deposited for safekeeping, or something that has been
buried in the ground, without the owner's consent or permission, is theft. A
wise person should not steal any kind of property, whether it is in danger, in
terms of location, time, or emotion. ||66||  We are explaining how blameworthy
the sin of theft is. ||123||  **Ayam lokah parloko, dharmo dhairya dhrti matih |
Musnata parakiyam swam, mushitam sarvam apyadaha ||67||**  Meaning: One who
steals another's wealth does not only steal his wealth, but also steals his
birth in this world, his rebirth, his lack of Dharma, his patience, his wisdom,
and his understanding of what is right and wrong. ||67||  We are explaining that
there is more blame in theft than in violence. ||124||  **Ekasyaikam kshanam
duhkham, maryamanasya jayate | Saputrapautra sya punar yavaj jivam hrite dhane
||68||**  Meaning: The being who is killed does not suffer for a long time, but
only for a moment. But when someone's wealth is stolen, his son, grandson, and
the whole family suffer for a lifetime. That is, the wound of his suffering does
not heal for his entire life. ||68||  Now, we are explaining the consequences of
theft in detail. ||125||  **Chaurya papadrumasy eha, vadha bandhadhikam phalam |
Jayate paraloke tu, phalam naraka vedana ||69||**  Meaning: The fruit of the
sin-tree of theft is death, imprisonment, etc., in this life, but in the next
life, it bears the terrible fruit of hellish torment. ||69||  Explanation:
Perhaps due to good fortune (good luck) or the carelessness of the king, police,
etc., one may not be caught, but the constant fear of being caught, anxiety, ill
health, bad reputation (disgrace), etc., are the fruits of this life. ||69||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 adattAdAna aura usase hone vAle duSpariNAmoM kA varNana yogazAstra dvitIya
prakAza zloka 65 se 69 jaTAdhArI, nirvastra yA savastra tapasvI bhI yadi asatya
bolatA hai, to vaha atyaMta hI niMdanIya bana jAtA hai| tarAjU ke | eka palar3e
meM asatya kathana se utpanna pApa ko rakhA jAya aura dUsare palar3e meM bAkI ke
sAre pApa rakhe jAya aura tolA jAya to asatya kA palar3A hI bhArI hogaa|
paradArAgamana, corI Adi pApakarma karane vAloM ko chur3Ane ke pratyupAya to
mila jAyeMge; lekina asatyavAdiyoM ko chur3Ane ke lie pratikAraka upAya koI
nahIM hai| yaha saba satyavAdI kA hI phala hai ki deva bhI usakA pakSa lete
haiM; rAjA bhI usakI AjJA mAnate haiN| agni Adi upadrava bhI zAMta ho jAtA hai
/  / 64 /  /  isa taraha gRhastha zramaNopAsaka ke dUsare vrata kA varNana pUrNa
huaa| aba tIsarA asteyavrata kahate haiN| adattAdAna (corI) kA duSphala batAye
binA manuSya corI se nahIM ruktaa| isalie |sarva prathama isakA duSpariNAma
batAkara corI kA niSedha karate haiN|121| daurbhAgyaM preSyatAM
dAsyamaGgacchedaM daridratAm  /  adattAttaphalaM jJAtvA, sthUlasteyaM vivarjayet
// 65 /  /  artha :- durbhAgyatA (bhAgya phUTa jAnA), kiMkaratA (dUsare ke ghara
meM naukara banakara kArya karanA), dAsatA (gulAmI), zArIrika parAdhInatA.
hAtha, paira Adi aMgopAMgoM kA chedana, nirdhanatA Adi pUrvajanma meM binA dI
huI vastu ko grahaNa karane (adattAdAnacorI) kA phala hai  /  / 5 /  /  isa
prakAra zAstra se athavA gurumahArAja ke zrI mukha se jAnakara sukhArthI zrAvaka
loka vyavahAra meM jise corI kahA jAtA ho, usa sthUla adattAdAna kA tyAga kre|
Age vistAra se inakA svarUpa batA rahe haiN|122| patitaM vismRtaM naSTaM,
sthitaM sthApitamAhitam  /  adattaM nAdadIta svaM, parakIyaM kvacitsudhIH  // 66
/  /  artha :- rAste calate hue yA savArI se jAte hue girI huI, usake mAlika ke
bhUla jAne se par3I huI, khoyI huI, mAlika ko usakA patA bhI na ho, isa prakAra
rakhI huI athavA amAnata, dharohara ke surakSita rakhane ke lie rakhI gayI,
jamIna meM gAr3I huI, dUsare kI vastu ko usake mAlika kI icchA yA anumati ke
binA grahaNa karanA corI hai| buddhimAna puruSa ko cAhie ki vaha kisI bhI
prakAra ke saMkaTApanna dravya. kSetra. kAla aura bhAva meM ho, phira bhI corI
na kare  /  / 66 /  /  corI kA dUSaNa kitanA niMdanIya hai, yaha batAte
haiN|123| ayaM lokaH paraloko, dharmo dhairyaM dhRtirmatiH  /  muSNatA parakIyaM
svaM, muSitaM sarvamapyadaH  // 67 /  /  artha :- dUsare ke dhana kI corI karane
vAlA usake dhana ko hI haraNa nahIM karatA, apitu isa loka kA janma, janmAMtara,
dharmahInatA, dhRti, mati kAryAkArya ke viveka rUpa bhAvadhana kA bhI haraNa
kara letA hai  /  / 67 /  /  hiMsA se corI meM adhika doSa hai, ise batAte
haiN|124| ekasyaikaM kSaNaM duHkhaM, mAryamANasya jAyate  /  saputrapautrasya
punaryAvajjIvaM hRte dhane  // 68 /  /  artha :- jisa jIva kI hiMsA kI jAtI hai
use cirakAla taka duHkha nahIM hotA, apitu kSaNabhara ke lie hotA hai| magara
kisI kA dhana-haraNa kiyA jAtA hai; to usake putra, pautra aura sAre parivAra kA
jiMdagI bhara duHkha nahIM jaataa| yAnI pUrI jiMdagI usake duHkha kA ghAva nahIM
miTatA  // 68 /  /  aba corI ke duSpariNAma vistAra se batAte haiN|125| caurya-
pApadrumasyeha, vadhabandhAdikaM phalam  /  jAyate paraloke tu, phalaM naraka-
vedanA  // 69 /  /  artha :- corI-rUpa pApa-vRkSa kA phala isa janma meM to
vadha, baMdhana Adi ke rUpa meM milatA hI hai; kintu agale janmoM meM naraka kI
vedanA ke rUpa meM bhayaMkara phala milatA hai  /  / 69 /  /  vyAkhyA :- kadAcit
takadIra acchI (sadbhAgya) ho, yA rAjA pulisa Adi kI asAvadhAnI se nahIM pakar3A
jAya, | paraMtu mana meM haradama pakar3e jAne kA Dara, udvega, asvasthatA,
apakIrti (badanAmI) Adi isa janma ke phala haiN||69||| 10

Page #155 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Story of the Thief, Mooladeva and Mandlika  **The Yoga Shastra, Second
Light, verses 70 to 72, explain this.**  **Verse 70:**  **Meaning:** Just as a
man cannot experience peace when a sharp thorn or arrow pierces him, so too, a
thief cannot find peace day or night, whether awake or asleep. The thief is not
only deprived of peace, but his family and friends also abandon him.  **Verse
71:**  **Meaning:** Just as no one associates with a Mlechchha (outcaste) even
for a moment, so too, a thief's friends, children, wife, brothers, parents,
etc., do not associate with him even for a moment.  **Explanation:**  The
scriptures of ethics state that associating with those who commit the five great
sins - Brahmahatya (killing a Brahmin), drinking alcohol, stealing, sexual
intercourse with a Guru's wife, and betrayal - is also considered a great sin. A
thief, one who instigates theft, one who advises theft, one who knows the
secrets of the theft, one who buys stolen goods, one who facilitates the
purchase of stolen goods, one who provides shelter to the thief, and one who
feeds the thief - all eight are considered criminals in the eyes of the law.
**Verse 72:**  **Meaning:** Even if a thief is a relative, the king will capture
him like the Mandlika thief. But if a thief abandons theft, he will become
eligible for heavenly bliss like Rohiney.  **Explanation:**  **Mooladeva and the
Mandlika Thief:**  In the Gauda country, there was a city called Pataliputra.
Its central part was invisible, like the water of the ocean. The prince of that
city, Mooladeva, was a source of many arts, the root of courageous intellect. He
was a master of cunning, a friend of the poor and the orphan, skilled in
diplomacy like Chanakya, clever at understanding the inner thoughts of others,
handsome and charming like Kamadeva, a thief with thieves, a saint with saints,
crooked with the crooked, and straight with the straight, a simpleton with
simpletons, a clever one with the clever, a king with kings, a warrior with
warriors, a gambler with gamblers, and a chatterbox with chatterboxes. His heart
was as pure as a crystal gem. Therefore, he quickly understood the true nature
of others. He would amaze people with his astonishing tricks, wandering around
like a great, wise Vidhyadhar, fulfilling his desires. He had a great weakness
for gambling. Because of this, his father humiliated him and banished him from
home. So, he wandered and reached the city of Ujjayini, which shone like
Devapuri. Using a magical pill, he became a hunchback and a dwarf. He would
amaze people with many such tricks. Gradually, he gained fame there through his
skills.  In the city of Ujjayini, there lived a beautiful courtesan named
Devadatta, whose beauty and artistic skills put even the gods to shame. She was
proficient in all the arts. There was no one in that city who could entertain
her as well as she could entertain herself. When Mooladeva heard this, he set up
camp near her house to attract her. He played music like a god, a Gandharva, or
a Tumburu, early in the morning. When the sweet melody reached Devadatta's ears,
she asked, "Whose voice is so sweet?" She was very surprised and sent her maid
to find out. The maid immediately searched and told the courtesan, "Devi! He
looks like a dwarf, but his voice is so good and his nature is so gentle that
there is no one like him in this area."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 mUladeva-maMDika cora kI kathA yogazAstra dvitIya prakAza zloka 70 se 72 ise hI
batAte haiN|126| divase vA rajanyAM vA, svapne ca jAgare'pi vA  /  sazalya iva
cauryeNa, naiti svAsthyaM naraH kvacit  // 70 //  artha :- tIkhA kAMTA yA tIkSNa
tIra cubha jAne para jaise manuSya zAMti kA anubhava nahIM kara pAtA, vaise hI
cora . ko dina-rAta, sote, jAgate kisI bhI samaya zAMti mahasUsa nahIM hotii|
corI karane vAlA kevala zAMti se hI vaMcita nahIM hotA, usakA baMdhu-
bAMdhavavarga bhI use chor3a detA hai  /  / 70 /  /   / 127 /  mitra-putra-
kalatrANi bhrAtaraH pitaro'pi hi  /  saMsRjanti kSaNamapi na mlecchairiva
taskaraiH  // 71 //  artha :- mlecchoM ke sAtha jaise koI eka kSaNabhara bhI
saMsarga nahIM karatA; vaise hI corI karane vAle ke sAtha usake mitra, putra,
patnI, bhAI, mAtA-pitA ityAdi roga-saMbaMdhI bhI kSaNabhara bhI saMsarga nahIM
karate  // 71 /  /  vyAkhyA :- nItizAstra meM kahA gayA hai-brahmahatyA,
madirApAna, corI, gurupatnI ke sAtha sahavAsa aura vizvAsaghAta ina pAMca
pApakarmoM ko karane vAle ke sAtha saMsarga karanA bhI pAMca mahApAtaka batAye
haiN| corI karane vAlA, corI karAne vAlA, corI kI salAha dene vAlA, usakI salAha
va rahasya ke jAnakAra, corI kA mAla kharIda karane vAlA, kharIda karAne vAlA,
cora ko sthAna dene vAlA, use bhojana dene vAlA; ye AThoM rAjadaMDa
(daMDavidhAna zAstra) kI dRSTi se corI ke aparAdhI kahe gaye haiM  /  / 71 /  /
corI karane kI pravRtti meM doSa aura usase nivRtti meM jo guNa hai use dRSTAMta
dvArA samajhAte haiN| ||128 /  saMbandhyapi nigRhyeta cauryAnmaNDikavannRpaiH  /
cauro'pityaktacauryaH syAt svargabhAg rauhiNeyavat  // 72 /  /  artha :- corI
karane vAlA saMbaMdhI ho to bhI maMDika cora kI taraha rAjA use pakar3atA hai
aura cora hone para bhI corI kA tyAga karane se rohiNeya kI taraha svarga-sukha
kA adhikArI ho jAtA hai  /  / 7 /  /  - nIce donoM dRSTAMta kramazaH de rahe
haiMvyAkhyA :mUladeva aura maMDika cora : gaur3adeza meM pATaliputra nAmaka eka
nagara thaa| samudra ke jala ke samAna usakA madhyabhAga dRSTigocara nahIM hotA
thaa| aneka kalAoM kA srota, sAhasika buddhi kA mUla, vahAM kA rAjakumAra
mUladeva thaa| vaha dhUrtavidyA meM ziromaNi, kRpaNa aura anAtha kA baMdhu,
kUTanIti meM cANakyavat pravINa, dUsaroM ke aMtaraMga ko bhAMpane meM cAlAka,
rUpa aura lAvaNya meM kAmadeva ke samAna, cora ke sAtha cora, sAdhu ke sAtha
sAdhu, Ter3he ke sAtha Ter3A aura sIdhe ke sAtha sIdhA, gaMvAroM ke sAtha
gaMvAra, catura ke sAtha catura, jAra ke sAtha jAra, bhaTa ke sAtha bhaTa, juArI
ke sAtha juArI, gappa hAMkane vAloM ke sAtha gappI thaa| usakA hRdaya sphaTika
ratna ke samAna svaccha thaa| isalie jhaTapaTa dUsare kI asaliyata ko jAna jAtA
thaa| vaha Azcaryajanaka kautuka dikhAkara logoM ko vismita karatA huA
mahAbuddhizAlI vidyAdhara ke samAna icchAnusAra ghUmatA thaa| usameM jUA khelane
kA bahuta bar3A aiba (dUSaNa) thaa| isa kAraNa pitA ne use apamAnita karake
ghara se nikAla diyA thaa| ataH vaha ghUmatA-ghAmatA devapurI kI taraha
zobhAyamAna ujjayinI nagarI meM phuNcaa| jAduyI golI ke prayoga se vahAM vaha
kubar3A aura baunA bana gyaa| isa prakAra ke bahuta se karataba dikhAkara vaha
logoM ko Azcarya meM DAla detaa| dhIre-dhIre apanI kalAoM se usane vahAM
prasiddhi prApta kara lii| ujjayinI nagarI meM hI rUpa lAvaNya aura kalAvijJAna
kI kuzalatA ta ko lajjita kara dene vAlI devadattA nAma kI uttama gaNikA rahatI
thii| kalA ke samasta guNoM meM vaha niSNAta ho gayI thii| usa catura gaNikA ko
manoraMjana karane vAlA usakI barAbarI kA vahAM koI nahIM thaa| mUladeva ne jaba
yaha sunA to use AkarSita karane ke lie usake ghara ke pAsa hI apanA DerA
jmaayaa| usase subaha-subaha sAkSAt deva, gaMdharva yA tuMbaru ke samAna saMgIta
kI tAna chedd'ii| devadattA ke kAnoM meM gAyana kI madhura jhaMkAra par3I to
usane pUchA-itanA madhura svara kisakA hai? usane atyaMta vismita hokara apanI
dAsI ko isakA patA lagAne bhejaa| dAsI ne turaMta talAza karake gaNikA se kahA-
'devI! dekhane meM to baunA-sA hai, lekina kaMTha itanA acchA hai aura svabhAva
itanA mRdu hai ki isa kSetra meM to 133

Page #156 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Story of Muladeva Yoga Shastra, Second Light, Verse 72  "There is no singer
of her praise." Then Devadatta sent a hunchbacked maid named Madhavi to call
him. "Most courtesans are lovers of art." Kubja went to him and said, "O Great
One! Treasure of Art! My mistress is calling you with respect." To this,
Muladeva said, "Kubja! I cannot come. Who can enter the house of a courtesan,
who is under the control of a prostitute?" Saying this, Muladeva called Kubja
close, and with a desire for amusement, using his artistic skill, laid her down
on the earth and in a moment, removed her hunchback, making her straight and
beautiful like the stalk of a lotus. When the hunchbacked maid, with her changed
form, arrived happily, Devadatta was also stunned by her form and demeanor. She
was surprised that her maid, who had received the boon of the gods, could become
so beautiful. Therefore, Devadatta said to her, "For such a clever artist and
benefactor, even cutting off your finger and offering it would not be a loss.
Go, bring him here at any cost." The maid went to Muladeva and with sweet and
clever words, brought the cunning king to the courtesan's place, entering
through the designated path. Just as Madhava adorned Radha's place, so Muladeva
adorned Devadatta's place. Seeing the dwarf, adorned with radiance and beauty,
the courtesan considered him to be a secret deity and seated him on a seat with
respect. After asking skillful questions, upon being healthy, a conversation
full of wit, along with a sweet gathering, began, as a unity of their hearts.
At that time, a wise vina player, skilled in playing the vina, arrived.
Devadatta, with great curiosity, had him play the vina. The vina player played
the vina so beautifully, with clear grama and shruti sounds, that Devadatta
began to dance and praise him. At that time, Muladeva, jokingly, said, "The
people of Ujjayini are truly very skilled and discerning of good and bad
qualities." Devadatta, with a questioning look, said, "What doubt is there? In
the praise of the clever, there is a suspicion of mockery." He said, "What
deficiency is there in a vina player like you? It would be surprising to say so.
But I can say that this vina is pregnant, it has a bamboo splinter. How did you
know?" When the people present asked this, Muladeva took the vina from him,
pulled out a piece of stone from its bamboo, and showed it to everyone. Later,
he repaired the vina and played it in such a sweet and melodious tone, as if he
had poured nectar into the ears of the listeners. To this, Devadatta said, "O
Treasure of Art! You seem to be an extraordinary man, in human form, you are the
embodiment of Saraswati." The vina player also fell at the feet of Muladeva and
said, "Blessed be, Master! I will learn to play the vina from you. Please grace
me." Muladeva said, "I do not actually know how to play the vina, but I know
those who know how to play the vina well." Devadatta asked, "What is their name?
Where do they live?" Muladeva said, "In the east, in the city called
Pataliputra, lives the great artist Vikramasen, I am his servant Muladeva, I
always remain in his service." Meanwhile, a drama teacher named Vishvabhuthi
also arrived. Devadatta introduced him, saying, "This is the embodiment of
Bharata himself." Muladeva said, "It must be so. You must have taught him the
arts." After that, they talked about Bharata's plays with Vishvabhuthi. In the
course of the conversation, Muladeva found him arrogant. Only those who know
superficially are like this." Muladeva thought to himself, "He thinks of himself
as a scholar. But like gilding copper, I will give him a glimpse inside."
Therefore, he spoke clearly and eloquently, pointing out the flaws in his
explanation of Bharata's plays. To this, Vishvabhuthi became angry and began to
speak nonsense. It is said that when ignorant teachers hear the questions asked
by the clever or the learned, they become angry and hide their ignorance.
Muladeva smiled and said, "Friend! It seems that you are a drama teacher for
courtesans, not for others." Hearing this, he became speechless. Devadatta, with
a smile in her eyes, said to the teacher, to erase his embarrassment, "You must
be in a hurry to leave now, so later, after thinking peacefully, answer this
expert on this subject." Vishvabhuthi said, "Devadatta! Now 134

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 mUladeva kI kathA yogazAstra dvitIya prakAza zloka 72 | usakI jor3a kA koI
gAyaka nahIM hai|' taba devadattA ne use bulAne ke lie mAdhavI nAma kI kubar3I
dAsI bhejI  /  'adhikAMza vezyAe~ kalApriya hotI hai|' kubjA ne usake pAsa
jAkara kahA - he mahAbhAga ! kalAbhaMDAra ! merI svAminI | Apako Adara pUrvaka
bulA rahI hai| isa para mUladeva ne kahA-kubje ! maiM nahIM A sakatA  /  kuTTinI
ke adhIna rahane vAlI | vezyA ke ghara meM kauna svataMtra jIvI praveza kara
sakatA hai? isa para prakAra kahakara mUladeva ne usa kubjA ko nikaTa bulAkara |
vinoda kI icchA se apanI kalAkuzalatA ke bala para dharatI para liTAyA aura
kSaNabhara meM usakA kubar3Apana miTAkara | kamala ke nAla kI taraha use sIdhI
aura suMdara banA dii| jaba vaha kubjA dAsI badalI huI AkRti meM prasanna hotI
huI pahuMcI to devadattA bhI usakI AkRti aura ceSTA dekhakara ThagI - sI raha
gyii| use Azcarya huA ki devoM ke diye hue varadAna ko pAyI huI-sI merI dAsI bhI
itanI suMdara ho sakatI hai| ataH devadattA ne usase kahA- aise catura kalAkAra
| evaM upakArI ko to apanI aMgulI kATakara arpaNa karake lAne meM bhI koI harja
nahIM, tUM jA kisI bhI mUlya para use yahAM le aa|' dAsI mUladeva ke pAsa
pahuMcI aura madhura evaM caturocita vacanoM se usa dhUrtarAjA ko vezyA ke yahAM
nirdiSTa | mArga se praveza karAkara le aayii| rAdhA ke yahAM jaise mAdhava
suzobhita hote the, vaise hI devadattA ke yahAM mUladeva zobhAyamAna | ho rahA
thaa| kAMti aura lAvaNya se suzobhita usa vAmana ko dekhakara gaNikA ne use
gupta devatA ke samAna mAnakara Adara | pUrvaka Asana para biThAyA  /
kuzalaprazna ke pUchane ke bAda svastha hone para donoM ke hRdaya kI ekatA
svarUpa cAturyapUrNa | vArtAlApa ke sAtha madhura goSThI hone lagI  /  usI
samaya vINA bajAne meM nipuNa eka buddhizAlI vINAvAdaka AyA  /  devadattA ne
usase atikautuka - yukta vINA | bajavAyI  /  vINAvAdaka ne spaSTa grAma aura
zrutisvara se itanI suMdara DhaMga se vINA bajAyI ki devadattA bhI jhUmane aura
| usakI prazaMsA karane lgii| usa samaya mUladeva ne jarA-sA vinoda karate hue
kahA - 'ujjayinI ke loga sacamuca bar3e nipuNa aura guNa-avaguNa ke pArakhI
hai|' devadattA ne zaMkAbharI dRSTi se kahA - isameM kyA zaka hai? caturoM kI
cAturyayukta | prazaMsA meM upahAsa kI zaMkA paidA hotI hai| usane kahA- Apa
sarIkhe vINAvAdaka meM kyA kamI hai ?, yaha kahanA to Azcarya kI bAta hogii|
lekina itanA maiM kaha sakatA hUM ki yaha vINA garbha vAlI hai, isameM bAMsa
zalyayukta hai| Apane kaise jAnA ? | yaha upasthita logoM ke pUchane para
mUladeva ne usase vINA lekara usake bAMsa meM se patthara kA Tukar3A khIMcakara
sabako | btaayaa| bAda meM usa vINA ko durusta karake isa prakAra madhura aura
surIle svara meM bajAne lagA, mAno zrotAoM ke kAnoM meM amRta ghola diyA ho| isa
para devadattA ne kahA- 'kalAnidhe! Apa asAdhAraNa puruSa mAlUma hote haiM, nara
rUpa meM Apa | sAkSAt sarasvatImaya hai  /  vaha vINAvAdaka bhI mUladeva ke
caraNoM meM par3akara kahane lagA- 'dhanya ho, svAmin! maiM Apase | vINA bajAnA
siikhuuNgaa| Apa mujha para kRpA kareM  / ' mUladeva ne kahA- 'maiM yathArtha
rUpa se to vINA bajAnA nahIM jAnatA, paraMtu jo acche DhaMga se vINA bajAnA
jAnate haiM, unheM maiM jAnatA huuN|' devadattA ne pUchA- 'unakA nAma kyA hai?
ve kahA~ rahate haiM?' mUladeva ne kahA - 'pUrva dizA meM pATalIputra nAmaka
nagara meM mahAguNI kalAcArya vikramasena rahate haiM, maiM unhIM kA | sevaka
mUladeva hUM, unakI sevA meM sadA rahatA huuN| isI bIca vahAM vizvabhUti nAma kA
nATyAcArya bhI A gayA  /  devadattA | ne usakA paricaya dete hue kahA - 'yaha
sAkSAt bharata hI hai|' mUladeva ne kahA- 'aisA hI hogaa| tuma jaisI ne ise
kalAoM | kA adhyayana karAyA hogA  / ' usake bAda vizvabhUti se bharata ke
nATakoM ke viSaya meM bAteM cliiN| bAtacIta ke silasile | meM mUladeva ko vaha
ghamaMDI mAlUma par3A  /  kevala Upara Upara se jAnane vAle aise hI hote haiN|'
mUladeva ne mana hI mana socA - -'yaha apane Apako vidvAna samajhatA hai| lekina
tAMbe para sone kA mulammA car3hAne kI taraha, ise jarA aMdara kI jhAMkI | karA
duuN|' ataH usane saphAI se vAkcAturI karate hue usake bharata-saMbaMdhI nATaka
- vyAkhyAna meM pUrvApara doSa batAye  /  isa para vizvabhUti kupita hokara
aMTasaMTa bakane lge| kahAvata hai ki catura yA paMDita dvArA pUche gaye praznoM
ko sunakara | anabhijJa upAdhyAya krodha karake apanI ajJAnatA chipAte haiN|
mUladeva ne muskarAte hue kahA - mitra ! aisA pratIta hotA hai, ki nATaka ke
saMbaMdha meM tuma lalanAoM ke nATyAcArya ho, auroM ke nhiiN| yaha sunakara vaha
niruttara ho gayA  /  devadattA | A~kheM tareratI huI muskAna bharI dRSTi se
upAdhyAyajI kI jheMpa miTAne ke lie bolI- 'abhI to Apa jAne kI jaldI meM hoMge,
ataH bAda meM zAMtipUrvaka vicArakara isa viSaya meM isa vizeSajJa ko uttara
denA  /  vizvabhUti bolA- 'devadattA! aba 134

Page #157 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Story of Muladeva Yoga Shastra, Second Light, Verse 72  "It's time for me to
act, I must go. If you wish, you can also get ready." Saying this, Vishvabhuuti
left.  Afterwards, Devadatta ordered her maid, "We both need to bathe. So, call
a skilled masseur." Hearing this, Dhoortaraj said, "Listen! There's no need to
go far, I can massage myself." She said, "Do you know this art?" He said, "I
don't know, but I know someone who does, in whose service I have been." At
Devadatta's command, Shatpaak oil arrived immediately. Thus, the magical Vaman
began to massage with oil. He massaged the Varaanagana's body with gentle,
medium, and firm hands, appropriate for the location, so that her body
experienced not only vigor and strength but also pleasure. Devadatta was
impressed by his skill and thought to herself, "Oh! He has mastered all the
arts. Not everyone can have such skill. He must be an extraordinary person."
Attracted by his artistry, Devadatta, overwhelmed with emotion, suddenly fell at
his feet. She said, "Swami! We believe that you are a noble man with virtues.
But why do you deceive us and hide your true form? Please reveal yourself
openly, don't deprive us of your true form. Even gods reveal themselves to their
devotees when they insist." Hearing this, Muladeva took a magical pill from his
mouth and revealed his form like a jester. Devadatta, with eyes filled with
wonder, looked at his amazing form, beauty, and charming limbs, like those of
Kamadeva, and said, "Thank you! By revealing yourself in the form of such a
beautiful body, you have done me a great favor." Giving him a towel suitable for
bathing, Devadatta lovingly began to massage oil on his body with her own hands.
Then she rubbed fragrant substances on his forehead. Afterwards, they both
bathed with a stream of hot water. After bathing, Muladeva wore the silk clothes
given by Devadatta, and they both ate together, delicious food mixed with
fragrant substances. Their friendship grew stronger. And they often discussed
the secrets of art in private. Thus, quite some time passed. One day, seeing
Muladeva in a happy mood, Devadatta said, "Nath! You have stolen my heart with
your extraordinary qualities. Therefore, I pray, beautiful! Just as you have
taken residence in my heart, so too, please come and reside in this house
forever." To this, Muladeva said, "It is not appropriate to be attached to a
stranger and a poor man like me. And if a Varaanagana becomes infatuated with a
poor man's virtues alone, her profession will be ruined, and her family will
also suffer." Devadatta said, "Don't make excuses. For a man like you, a lion-
like hero, what is a country and what is a foreign land? For virtuous people,
everywhere is their homeland. Those fools who want to make us their own with
wealth, they are at least outside my heart. Therefore, Temple of Virtues! I tell
you clearly that no one else can enter my heart except you. Therefore, fortunate
one! My body, mind, and wealth are all dedicated to your feet, accept them."
Thus, at Devadatta's insistent request, Muladeva agreed to her request, and they
both began to enjoy themselves lovingly.  At that very moment, the gatekeeper
came and said, "Swamini! It's time for the dance in the royal court." Devadatta
took Muladeva with her to the royal court, disguised. In front of the king,
Devadatta began to dance brilliantly, with gestures like those of Rambha.
Muladeva played the Dundubhi, very beautifully and effectively, like Indra's
Dundubhi player. The king was greatly impressed by Devadatta's classical dance
with gestures and said, "Ask for a boon (prasad)." Devadatta asked for her boon
to be kept safe in the treasury. Afterwards, she performed music and dance with
Muladeva. The king, pleased, gave her beautiful ornaments and fine clothes as a
reward. The gatekeeper of the Pataliputra king, Vimalsingh, said happily to the
king, "Rajan! The intelligent artist Muladeva lives in Pataliputra. He must have
either been given this artistic excellence, or stolen it. No one else can have
such artistic excellence. Therefore, after Muladeva, 135

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 mUladeva kI kathA yogazAstra dvitIya prakAza zloka 72 to mere nATaka karane kA
samaya ho gayA hai, mujhe jAnA hai, agara tuma cAho to tuma bhI taiyAra ho
jaao|' yoM kahakara | vizvabhUti calA gyaa| tatpazcAt devadattA ne apanI dAsI ko
Adeza diyA ki 'hama donoM ko snAna karanA hai| ataH kalApUrvaka aMgamardana |
karane vAle kisI aMgamardaka ko bulA laao|' yaha sunakara dhUrtarAja ne kahA -
sunayane ! dUra jAne kI jarUrata nahIM, maiM svayaM aMgamardana kara sakatA
huuN| vaha bolI- 'kyA isa kalA ko bhI jAnate ho? usane kahA- 'maiM nahIM jAnatA,
para maiM isake jAnakAra ko jAnatA hUM, jinakI sevA meM meM rahA huuN|'
devadattA ke Adeza se turaMta zatapAka tela A gyaa| ataH mAyAvI | vAmana tela
mAliza karane lgaa| usane vArAMganA ke aMga meM sthAna ke upayukta komala,
madhyama aura kaThora hAthoM se aisA | mardana kiyA ki usake zarIra meM sphUrti
aura zakti ke atirikta sukhAnubhava bhI huaa| devadattA usakI kalA se prabhAvita
| hokara mana hI mana socane lagI- oho ! isane to sabhI kalAoM meM nipuNatA
prApta kI hai| itanI kalA hara eka vyakti meM nahIM ho sktii| ho na ho, yaha koI
asAdhAraNa vyakti hai|' usake kalAnaipuNya se AkarSita devadattA bhAvAveza meM
Akara sahasA usake caraNoM meM gira pdd'ii| kahane lagI- 'svAmin! hame vizvAsa
hai ki guNoM se Apa koI uttama puruSa hai| paraMtu Apa hamase bhI kapaTa karake
apane asalI rUpa ko chipAte kyoM hai? kRpA karake Apa apane Apako khullamakhullA
prakaTa kareM, hameM apane asalI rUpa se vaMcita na kreN| deva bhI bhaktajanoM
ke Agraha se pratyakSa darzana dete hai|' yaha sunakara | mUladeva ne muMha se
jAduI golI bAhara nikAlI aura naTa ke sarIkhA apanA rUpa batAyA  /  devadattA
vismayaphArita netroM se | kAmadeva ke samAna usakA adbhuta rUpa, lAvaNya aura
manohara aMgopAMga dekhakara bolI- dhanyavAda ! isa prakAra ke suMdara zarIra ke
rUpa meM darzana dekara Apane mujha para bar3A upakAra kiyaa| snAna ke yogya eka
tauliyA dekara anurakta, devadattA usake aMga para apane hAtha se prItipUrvaka
telamAliza karane lgii| phira usake mastaka para sugaMdhita padArtha malA  /
tadanaMtara | donoM ne garma jala kI dhArA ur3elakara snAna kiyaa| snAna karane
ke pazcAt mUladeva ne devadattA dvArA diye hue rezamIvastra | pahane aura donoM
ne eka sAtha hI supAcya, sugaMdhita padArthamizrita, svAdiSTa bhojana kiyaa|
donoM kI maitrI pragAr3ha hotI gyii| aura ve prAyaH pratidina ekAMta meM kalA ke
rahasyoM kI carcA karate the  /  isa prakAra kAphI arsA bIta gyaa| eka dina
mUladeva ko prasannamudrA meM jAnakara devadattA kahane lagI- 'nAtha ! Apane
apane lokottara guNoM se merA hRdaya haraNa kara liyA hai| ataeva merI prArthanA
hai ki suMdara! jaise Apane mere hRdaya meM nivAsa kara liyA hai, vaise hI isa
ghara meM padhArakara sadA ke lie nivAsa kiijie|' isa para mUladeva bolA- 'mere
sarIkhe paradezI aura nirdhana ke sAtha moha-mamatva karanA ucita nahIM hai|
aura vArAMganA yadi kisI nirdhana ke sirpha guNoM para phidA hokara anurAga
karane lagegI to usakA dhaMdhA hI caupaTa ho jAyegA aura phira usakA parivAra
bhI duHkhI ho jAyegA  / ' devadattA ne kahA- 'Apa bAta na bnaayeN| Apa jaise
siMhasama | parAkramI puruSa ke lie deza aura kyA paradeza ? guNijanoM ke lie
sarvatra svadeza hai| jo mUrkha hameM dhana se apanA banAnA cAhate haiM, ve kama
se kama mere hRdaya se to bAhara hI hai| ataH guNamaMdira! maiM Apako sApha-
sApha sunA detI hUM ki Apake | sivAya aba mere hRdaya meM dUsarA koI praveza
nahIM kara sktaa| isalie saubhAgyazAlI! merA tana, mana aura dhana tInoM Apake
caraNoM meM samarpita hai, inheM svIkAro' isa taraha devadattA ke sAgraha
anurodha para mUladeva ne usakI bAta mAna lI aura | snehapUrvaka donoM Amoda-
pramoda karane lge| ThIka isI samaya dvArapAla ne Akara nivedana kiyA- 'svAminI
! calo aba rAjasabhA meM nRtya kA samaya ho gayA | hai|' devadattA mUladeva ko
bhI pracchannaveza meM apane sAtha rAjasabhA meM le gyii| rAjA ke sAmane
devadattA ne raMbhA ke samAna | hAvabhAva se ujjvalakArI nRtya prAraMbha kiyA  /
mUladeva ne iMdra ke duMdubhivAdaka kI taraha bahuta hI suMdara evaM
prabhAvapUrNa DhaMga | se duMdubhi bajAyI  /  rAjA devadattA ke zAstrIya
hAvabhAvayukta nRtya se atyaMta prabhAvita hokara bolA- 'vara (prasAda) maaNgo|'
| devadattA ne apanA vara bhaMDAra meM amAnata rakhane ko khaa| tatpazcAt usane
mUladeva ke sAtha saMgIta aura nRtya kiye| rAjA ne prasanna hokara use suMdara
AbhUSaNa aura bar3hiyA pozAka InAma meM diye  /  pATaliputranareza ke dvArapAla
vimalasiMha ne khuza | hokara rAjA se kahA- 'rAjan ! pATaliputra meM buddhizAlI
kalAkAra mUladeva rahatA hai  /  ho na ho, yaha kalAprakarSa yA to usakA diyA
huA hai, yA curAyA huA hai| anya kisI meM aisA kalA prakarSa ho nahIM sktaa|
isalie mUladeva ke bAda 135

Page #158 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Story of Muladeva Yoga Shastra, Second Light, Verse 72 | This should be
given as a certificate of artistry. And the best among the dancers should be
given a flag as a certificate. | The king also started giving accordingly. On
this, Devadatta said - 'This is my guru. I will only accept the certificate etc.
| if I have their permission.' The king also said - 'O blessed one! Instead of
taking permission from him, give him permission.' The cunning Muladeva | said -
'Maharaja, as you are ordering, do so.' At that time, the cunning king played
the veena in such an attractive way, as if | he was another celestial musician.
Seeing this, Vimalsingh said - Dev! This must be Muladeva in disguise. Such |
art cannot be in anyone else except Muladeva. Surely this is the same, it
seems.' The king | said to Dhurtaraj, aiming at him - If this is the case, then
he should reveal himself. I am eager to see Muladeva, who is like a gem.
Muladeva immediately took out a magical pill from his mouth. From this, he
appeared in his true form, coming out of the clouds | like the moon, extremely
radiant. 'Now it is known that you are a complete artist.' Saying this |
Vimalsingh embraced Dhurtasingh. Thereafter, Muladeva bowed to the king. The
king also happily | honored him. Devadatta, who was devoted to Muladeva like
Urvashi with Puruvar, was also spending her life with him, experiencing worldly
pleasures. But Muladeva could not live without gambling. Due to destiny, even in
a person of excellent qualities, some defect remains. Devadatta humbly requested
him - 'Praneshwar! You should give up gambling.' But even after much persuasion,
Muladeva could not give up that vice. It is true, it is very difficult to give
up one's nature. In the same city, there lived a wealthy merchant named Achal,
who was like Dhanakuber and in appearance like Kamadeva himself; he loved
Devadatta before Muladeva; and he enjoyed pleasures with her. He was jealous of
Muladeva | and wanted to harass him by finding fault on some pretext or the
other. Muladeva got wind of this. He also used to go to his house on some
pretext or the other. The passion of passionate men does not usually subside
even when they are overpowered by passion. One | day, Devadatta's mother said to
her - 'Daughter! What is left with this poor gambler Muladeva? Stop loving him.
Have a firm affection like Rambha for this wealthy merchant Achal, who gives you
money every day.' Devadatta said - 'Mother! I am not only a lover of wealth, but
I am a lover of qualities.' On this, the mother said angrily - 'Well, can there
be any qualities in this gambler? Think right.' Devadatta said - Why are there
no qualities in him? He is patient, generous, | sweet-tongued. He is an expert
in many arts and sciences, he is a lover of qualities, he is a connoisseur of
qualities himself, so how can I leave his shelter? I will not be able to give
him up.' From then on, the cunning mother, proficient in the art of deception,
started trying various ways to break her daughter's affection for Muladeva. When
Devadatta asked for a garland of flowers for him, she would give her a garland
of withered, stale flowers, when she asked for sherbet, she would pick up a
bottle of colored water and give it to her, when she asked for a piece of
sugarcane | she would give her a dull piece of bamboo; when she asked for
sandalwood, she would give her a piece of kadamba. And on top of that, she would
explain to her - 'Daughter! Don't be offended by what I am doing. As the dev
(yaksha) is, so is the bali (offering) given to him. Just as a vine lives in
great sorrow by taking shelter of a thorny tree, why are you taking shelter of
him? In my | opinion, you should completely abandon the unworthy Muladeva. On
this, Devadatta said angrily - 'Without even examining | who is worthy and who
is unworthy?' The mother also said in an excited voice - 'Then why don't you
test them?' | Devadatta happily ordered her maid to tell Achal - 'Today
Devadatta wants to eat sugarcane, | so send sugarcane.' When the maid went and
told the merchant Achal, he considered himself blessed and sent a cart full of
sugarcane. Seeing the cart, the happy Kuttinini said to her daughter Devadatta -
'Look daughter! Achal is as generous as a Chintamani and gives the desired
fruit. Think about it a little.' The dejected Devadatta said to her mother - Am
I an elephant that a whole cart of sugarcane has been brought here for me to
eat, including the root and leaves. Now you also ask Muladeva to send sugarcane
for eating. Then you will know what the difference is between the two 136

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 mUladeva kI kathA yogazAstra dvitIya prakAza zloka 72 | ise hI kalAvijJa kA
pramANapatra denA caahie| aura nartakiyoM meM zreSTha ko pramANapatra ke rUpa
meM patAkA dI jAnI caahie| | rAjA bhI tadanusAra dene lgaa| isa para devadattA
ne kahA - 'yaha mere guru hai  /  maiM inakI AjJA hone para hI pramANapatrAdi |
svIkAra kruuNgii|' rAjA ne bhI kahA - 'mahAbhAge ! tuma isase anumati lene ke
bajAya, ise anumati do|' dhUrta mUladeva ne | kahA - 'mahArAja jaisI AjJA kara
rahe hai, vaise hI kro|' usa samaya dhUrtarAja ne itane AkarSaka DhaMga se vINA
bajAyI, mAno | yaha koI dUsarA devagaMdharva ho  /  ise dekhakara vimalasiMha ne
kahA- deva! ho na ho, yaha pracchannaveSa meM mUladeva hI hai| aisI | kalA
mUladeva ke sivAya aura kisI meM nahIM ho sakatI  /  nizcaya hI yaha vahI hai,
aisA mAlUma hotA hai|' rAjA ne dhUrtarAja | ko lakSya karake kahA - yadi aisA
hai to vaha prakaTa ho jaaye| maiM to ratna ke samAna mUladeva ke darzana karane
ko Atura huuN| mUladeva ne usI samaya apane muMha se jAdUI golI bAhara nikaalii|
isase vaha apane asalI rUpa meM bAdaloM se bAhara | nikalate hue caMdramA ke
samAna ati tejasvI mAlUma hotA thA  /  'aba mAlUma huA ki tuma pUre kalAvijJa ho
/ ' yoM kahate | hue vimalasiMha ne dhUrtasiMha kA AliMgana kiyaa| tatpazcAt
mUladeva ne rAjA ko namaskAra kiyaa| rAjA ne bhI prasannatA se | usakA satkAra
kiyA  /  puruvara ke sAtha urvazI ke samAna mUladeva para anurakta devadattA bhI
usake sAtha viSayasukhAnubhava karatI huI jIvana vyatIta kara rahI thI  /
paraMtu mUladeva dyUtakrIr3A ke binA raha nahIM sakatA thA  /  bhavitavyatA ke
kAraNa uttama guNa vAle meM bhI koI na koI doSa lagA rahatA hai| devadattA ne
usase savinaya nivedana kiyA- 'prANezvara ! Apa juA khelanA chor3a deN|' kiMtu
bahuterA kahane para bhI mUladeva usa durvyasana ko chor3a na skaa| saca hai,
svabhAva kA tyAga karanA atikaThina hotA hai| usI nagara meM dhanakubera ke
samAna evaM rUpa meM sAkSAt kAmadeva ke samAna acala nAma kA sArthavAha rahatA
thA; vaha mUladeva se pahale devadattA se prema karatA thA; aura usake sAtha
sukhAnubhava karatA thaa| vaha mUladeva ke sAtha IrSyA karatA | thA aura kisI na
kisI bahAne se doSa DhUMDhakara upadrava karanA cAhatA thA  /  mUladeva ke kAnoM
meM isa bAta kI bhanaka pdd'ii| vaha bhI kisI bahAne se isake ghara jAtA rahatA
thA  /  rAgI puruSoM kA rAga paravaza hone para bhI prAyaH nahIM chUTatA  /  eka
| dina devadattA kI mAtA ne usase kahA- 'beTI ! isa nirdhana juArI mUladeva ke
pAsa aba kyA rakhA hai? isase prema karanA chor3a de  /  pratidina dravya dene
vAle isa dhanakubera acala meM hI raMbhA kI taraha dRr3ha anurAga rkh|'
devadattA bolI- 'mAtAjI ! maiM kevala dhana kI anurAginI nahIM hUM, apitu maiM
guNAnurAginI huuN|' isa para krUddha hokara mAtA ne kahA- 'bhalA, isa juArI meM
koI guNa ho sakatA hai? soca to sahI  / ' devadattA ne kahA- isameM guNa kyoM
nahIM hai? yaha dhIra hai, udAra hai, | priyabhASI hai| aneka vidyAoM aura
kalAoM kA vizeSajJa hai, guNAnurAgI hai, svayaM guNajJa hai, isalie isakA Azraya
meM kaise chor3a sakatI hUM? mujhase isakA tyAga nahIM hogA  / ' taba se
kapaTakalA pravINa kuTTinImAtA ne mUladeva ke prati apanI putrI kI prItibhaMga
karane ke vividha upAya ajamAne zurU kiye| jaba devadattA usake lie puSpamAlA
mAMgatI to vaha use | murjhAe hue vAsI phUloM kI mAlA de detI, zarabata mAMgatI
to raMgIna pAnI kI botala uThAkara de detI, Ikha ke Tukar3e mAMgatI | to vaha
bAMsa ke nIrasa Tukar3e de detI; caMdana mAMgatI to kadaMba kA Tukar3A de detI
/  aura Upara se use yoM samajhAtI - 'beTI! maiM jo kucha kara rahI hUM, usase
tuma burA mata mAnanA  /  jaisA deva (yakSa) hotA hai, tadanusAra hI use bali
(bheMTa) dI jAtI hai| jaise kaMTIle per3a kA Azraya lekara bela bar3e duHkha se
rahatI hai, vaise hI tUM isakA Azraya kyoM liye baiThI hai? merI | samajha se
apAtra mUladeva ko tumheM sarvathA chor3a denA caahie| isa para devadattA
jhuMjhalAkara bolI- 'binA hI parIkSA kiye | kise pAtra kahA jAya, kise apAtra ?'
mAtA bhI uttejita svara meM bolI- 'to phira parIkSA kyoM nahIM kara letI inakI
?' | devadattA ne harSita hokara apanI dAsI ko Adeza dekara acala ko kahalavAyA-
'Aja devadattA Ikha khAnA cAhatI hai, | ataH Ikha bhijavA denaa|' dAsI ne jAkara
acala sArthavAha se kahA to usane apane Apa ko dhanya mAnate hue Ikha kA eka
gAr3A bharakara bheja diyaa| gADe ko dekhakara harSita kuTTinI ne apanI putrI
devadattA se kahA- 'dekha beTI! acala ciMtAmaNi kI taraha kitanA udAra aura
vAMchita phala dAyaka hai| jarA isakI ora vicAra kara  / ' khinna devadattA ne
mAtA se kahA- kyA maiM hathinI hUM ki mUla aura patte sahita akhaMDa Ikha mere
khAne ke lie yahAM gAr3I bharakara DAla dI hai|| aba Apa mUladeva ko bhI khAne
ke lie Ikha bhejane ko khlvaao| phira Apako mAlUma ho jAyegA ki donoM meM kyA
136

Page #159 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Story of Mūladeva  Yogaśāstra, Second Canto, Verse 72: What is the
difference? The maidservant also told Mūladeva the same thing. The clever
Mūladeva took 5-6 sugarcanes, cut off their roots and tops, and cleaned them. He
removed the knots of the festival and made small pieces the size of two fingers,
like amṛtakuṇḍikā. Then he perfumed and sanctified them with saffron, cardamom,
camphor, and other fragrant substances, and placed them in bowls, piercing them
on skewers. Devadattā, seeing this, said to her mother, "Mother, look, Mūladeva
is like gold and brass, but there is no difference in the immovable!" The
courtesan thought, "Just as a thirsty deer, deluded by the mirage, rushes
towards it, so this daughter too, thirsty for passion, is rushing towards this
cunning king under the influence of great delusion. Therefore, just as pouring
hot water into the hole of a snake makes it come out immediately, I shall devise
some such means by which this cunning one may leave the city." The courtesan
conspired with Acala to expel Mūladeva from the city. They secretly consulted
and decided, and told Acala, "Merchant! You should make a false excuse to go to
another village and assure Devadattā that you are going to the village. Thinking
you have gone to another village, the cunning Mūladeva will come fearlessly to
Devadattā. At the very moment when he is enjoying carefree play with Devadattā,
you should come here with all the necessary materials as per my signal and
directly enter his chamber and humiliate him in any way, so that he will no
longer be able to indulge in sensual pleasures with Devadattā like a partridge."
Acala agreed to do so.  According to this plan, one day Acala said to Devadattā,
"I am going to such-and-such a village." Saying this, he took the money and
left. As soon as he left, Devadattā fearlessly let Mūladeva in. The courtesan
summoned Acala with the servants. Hearing of Acala's sudden arrival, Devadattā
hid Mūladeva under the bed, just as one hides leaves under a basket. Smiling,
Acala sat on the bed and, making an excuse, said, "Devadattā! Today I am very
tired, so I will bathe sitting right here with hot water. You get ready." The
astonished and perplexed Devadattā, with a forced smile, said, "If you want to
bathe, please go to the bathroom." Saying this, she tried to help him up with
her hand. But Acala sat firmly on the bed. Meanwhile, the cunning king could
neither come out from under the bed nor sit properly there. When the mind is
uneasy, the faculties also tend to diminish. Then Acala said again, "Devadattā!
I had a dream today that I bathed wearing the clothes I had on, right on the
bed. So I have quickly come to fulfill that dream. If I can fulfill this dream,
my auspicious prosperity will increase." Hearing this, the courtesan supported
him, saying, "Dear, do so! Why don't you obey the command of your lord? Haven't
you heard that chaste women act according to their husband's wishes?" Devadattā
said to Acala, "Sir, it does not seem appropriate for a wise person like you to
spoil this costly silken bedding." Acala said, "My dear, it is not right for you
to show such miserliness. When women like you offer their bodies to their
husbands, why do you worry about this bedding? What is lacking for one whose
lord is Acala? What can lack salt for one whose friend is the ocean?" Thereupon,
the Devadattā, who was under the control of wealth, massaged Acala's body with
oil and bathed him right there on the bed. While bathing, Mūladeva became soaked
with the dirty water, just as Canda, the servant of Mahādeva, became drenched
while bathing him. The courtesan signaled the servants of Acala and prompted
Acala to pull the cunning one from under the bed. Just as the Kauravas had
pulled Draupadī by her hair, Acala angrily pulled Mūladeva by the hair and said,
"You scoundrel! You consider yourself a moralist and intelligent, but how did
you get trapped today? Now tell me, what punishment should I give you according
to your deeds? If you want to indulge in sensual pleasures with a courtesan
controlled by wealth, then just as a wealthy landlord buys a village and makes
it his estate by giving money, in the same way, I will buy you and make you my
slave."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 mUladeva kI kathA yogazAstra dvitIya prakAza zloka 72 aMtara hai? dAsI ne
mUladeva se bhI vahI bAta khii| catura mUladeva ne 5-6 Ikha lekara usake mUla
aura agrabhAga kATakara sApha kiye| parva kI gAMTheM nikAla dI aura do-do aMgulI
jitane amRtakuMDikA ke barAbara Tukar3e kara ke gaMDeriyA~ banA lii| phira unheM
kesara, ilAyacI, kapUra Adi sugaMdhita dravyoM se saMskArita va sugaMdhita
karake zUloM meM pirokara kaToroM meM bharakara bhijavA dii| devadattA ne
dekhate hI apanI mAtA se kahA-'mAM! dekha lo sone aura pItala kA-sA mUladeva
aura acala meM aMtara!' kuTTinI ne socA-mRgatRSNA ko pAnI samajhakara jaise
pyAsA hirana mohavaza usa ora daur3atA hai, vaise hI yaha putrI bhI vAsanA kI
pyAsI mahAmohAMdhakAravaza isa dhUrtarAjA kI ora daur3a rahI hai| ataH jaise
sAMpa kI bAMbI meM garmAgama khaulatA huA pAnI DAlane se vaha phaurana bAhara
nikala bhAgatA hai, vaise hI isa dhUrta ke lie bhI koI aisA upAya karUM jisase
yaha nagara se nikalakara bhAga jaay|' kuTinI ne mUladeva ko nagara se nikAlane
ke lie acala se milakara eka SaDayaMtra rcaa| donoM ne gupta rUpa se maMtraNA
karake yaha nizcita kiyA aura acala se kahA-'sArthavAha! tuma dUsare gAMva jAne
kA jhUThA bahAnA karanA aura devadattA ko vizvAsa dilAkara yaha kahate hue cale
jAnA ki maiM gAMva jA huuN|' tumheM dUsare gAMva gayA huA jAnakara dhUrta
mUladeva bedhar3aka hokara devadattA ke pAsa aayegaa| jisa samaya devadattA ke
sAtha nizciMta hokara krIr3A karatA ho, ThIka usI samaya tuma mere saMketa ke
anusAra sarva sAmagrI lekara yahAM cale AnA aura sIdhe usake kakSa meM
pahuMcakara kisI bhI rUpa se use apamAnita karanA; jisase tItara-tItarI ke
samAna devadattA ke sAtha phira vaha viSayasakhAnabhava nahIM kara skegaa|'
acala ne vaisA hI karanA svIkAra kiyaa| isa maMtraNAnasAra eka dina acala ne
devadattA se kahA-'maiM amuka gAMva ko jAtA hN|' yoM kahakara dravya lekara vaha
calA gyaa| usake jAte hI devadattA ne niHzaMka hokara mUladeva ko praveza
kraayaa| kuTTinI ne sevakoM ke sAtha acala ko bulvaayaa| acala kA akasmAt
praveza zravaNa kara devadattA ne mUladeva ko palaMga ke nIce usI taraha chipA
diyA, jaise pattoM ko TokarI ke nIce chipA dete haiN| acala muskarAtA huA
palhathI mArakara palaMga para baiTha gayA aura bahAnA banAte hue
bolA-'devadatte! Aja maiM bahuta thaka gayA hUM, isalie garma pAnI se yahI
baiThA-baiThA snAna kruuNgaa| tuma taiyAra ho jaao|' vismita aura cakita-sI
devadattA kRtrima muskarAtI huI bolI-'snAna karanA hai to Apa snAnagRha meM
pdhaare|' yoM kahakara hAtha ke sahAre se use AdarapUrvaka uThAne kA prayatna
kiyaa| lekina acala to palaMga para hI Asana jamAkara baiTha gyaa| isI bIca
dhUrtarAja na to palaMga ke nIce se nikala sakA aura na hI vahAM ThIka se baiThA
raha skaa| mana jaba asvastha rahatA hai, taba prAyaH zaktiyAM bhI ghaTa jAtI
hai| itane meM phira acala ne kahA-devadattA! Aja mujhe svapna AyA thA ki maiMne
mAliza ke samaya pahane hue vastrasahita palaMga para hI snAna kiyaa| ataH maiM
apane usa svapna ko sArthaka karane ke lie hI jhaTapaTa calA AyA huuN| isa
svapna ko yadi maiM sArthakakara dUMgA to mere pAsa zubha samRddhi bar3ha
jaayegii|' yaha sunate hI kuTTinI ne samarthana karate hue kahA-'beTI! aisA hI
kara! apane prANeza kI AjJA tUM kyoM nahIM mAnatI? kyA tUM ne nahIM sunA ki-
pativratA striyA~ apane svAmI kI icchAnusAra kArya karatI hai|' devadattA ne
acala se kahA-'Arya! aise rezamI devadRSya vastra kI kImatI gaddI ko bigAr3anA
Apa jaise samajhadAra ke lie ucita nahIM mAlUma hotaa|' acala ne kahA-'bhadre!
aisI kaMjUsI dikhAnA tere liye ThIka nahIM hai| tuma sarIkhI striyA~ pati ko
jaba apanA zarIra arpaNakara detA hai, taba isa gaddI kI ciMtA kyoM karatI ho?
jisakA svAmI acala hai, use kisa bAta kI kamI hai? jisakA mitra samudra ho, use
namaka kI kyA kamI ho sakatI hai?' isa para dhana ke adhIna banI huI devadattA
ne palaMga para baiThe hue acala ke zarIra para tela mAliza kiyA aura vahIM
snAna kraayaa| acala ne snAna karAte samaya mUladeva snAna ke maile pAnI Adi se
cAroM ora se usI taraha tarabatara ho gayA, jaise mahAdeva ko snAna karAte
samaya unakA sevaka caMDa ho gayA thaa| kuTTinI |ne acala ke sevakoM ko AMkha ke
izAre se bulAyA aura dhUrta ko palaMga ke nIce se khIMcakara nikAlane kI acala
ko preraNA dii| jaise kaurava ne draupadI ke keza pakar3akara use khIMcA thA,
vaise hI acala ne mUladeva ke keza pakar3akara kopAyamAna hokara khiiNcaa| aura
usase kahA-'nAlAyaka! taM khada ko nItijJa aura baddhimAna samajhatA hai, phira
Aja kaise phaMsa gayA? aba batA tujhe apanI karatUta ke anusAra kyA sajA dUM?'
agara tUM dhana se vaza ho jAne vAlI vezyA ke sAtha krIr3A karanA cAhatA hai to
jisa prakAra dhanADhya jamIMdAra dhana dekara gAMva kharIdakara apanI jAgIrI
banA letA hai, usI prakAra ise 137

Page #160 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Story of Muladeva Yoga Shastra, Second Light, Verse 72 | Why doesn't he buy
it by giving a lot of wealth? Muladeva also stood there with his eyes closed,
speechless; at that time he was feeling his condition like that of a wolf who
had lost his place. Achal suddenly thought that this Mahatma has come into such
a situation due to fate; therefore, it is not appropriate to subdue him (control
him by giving punishment). Therefore, he said to Muladeva - 'Muladeva! I forgive
all the crimes you have committed till today. If you are grateful, then in
return, do me a favor when the time comes.' Saying this, he left Muladeva. Like
an elephant wounded in battle, Muladeva left from there and quickly set off and
in a short time he reached outside the village and took a bath in a great lake.
After bathing, wearing washed white clothes, he was shining like the autumn
season. Muladeva, mounted on the thought-shaped desire of doing good or bad to
Achal, went from there towards Venat. On the way, a forest twelve yojanas long
and full of ferocious animals went by, like a dear companion of misfortune. He
wanted, just as a boat is helpful in crossing the great ocean, so may I get some
help in crossing this long forest. Just at that time, as if it had dripped from
the sky, a Brahmin named Takk suddenly appeared there with a food packet in his
hand. Just as an old man gets support from a stick, so also the helpless
Muladeva was very happy to get the support of this Brahmin. Muladeva said to the
Brahmin - 'Vipra! You have met me by chance, like my shadow, helpless in this
forest. Therefore, now both of us will talk enough and quickly cross this
forest. The story removes the fatigue of the journey.' On this, the Brahmin
asked, 'Mahabag! First tell me how far and where you have to go? And accept my
friendship on the way. I have to go to the city called 'Virnidhan' on the other
side of this jungle. Tell me where you have to go.' Muladeva said - I have to go
to Venatata Nagar. As soon as the Vipra heard, he said - Then it is fine. Our
path is the same for a long distance, so come, let's go. The sun, which scorched
the head with its intense heat, came in the midday, by then both of them reached
the bank of a lake. Muladeva washed his hands and face in it and sat down in a
shady place to relieve his fatigue, where the sun did not reach. The Brahmin
also opened his packet and took out food from it and started eating alone like a
miser, by the water. The cunning one thought - 'This one has sat down to eat
alone without giving me anything first. It seems he is very hungry. It is
possible that after eating, he will give me.' But the Brahmin, contrary to his
hope, immediately tied up his packet and stood up as soon as he finished eating.
Muladeva thought - He will give it today or tomorrow. But the next day also the
Brahmin ate alone in the same way. Three days passed for Muladeva in this hope
only. Hope is life for men. When the time came for both of them to change their
paths, the Brahmin said to the cunning king, 'Look, fortunate one! Now my path
and yours are different. I am going on my way. May you be well.' On this,
Muladeva also said - 'Vipravar! With your help, I have crossed this terrible
forest, twelve yojanas long, like a kos. Now I will go to Venatata. If there is
any work worthy of me, please tell me. My name is Muladeva. So tell me what is
your name?' He said - 'My real name is Sadhdhar Vipra, people call me Nirghrun
Sharma.' Saying this, companion Takk separated from Muladeva. Now Muladeva
walked alone on the way to Venatata. On the way, a village appeared like a
resting place for creatures. Muladeva's intestines were churning with hunger. He
entered the village and while wandering for alms, he got some black gram bakules
from a house. He was taking them out of the village when a monk, who was
observing a monthly fast, like a virtuous person, appeared coming from the
front. Seeing him, Muladeva was very happy. He thought - 'By my own good
fortune, I have met a great ascetic monk, like a vessel that saves from the sea,
who saves from the ocean of the world.' He gave those black gram bakules to the
monk, who was adorned with the three jewels, as alms with this feeling that 'the
fruit of the tree of wisdom, which has been irrigated for a long time, has been
received by me today.' After giving the donation, Muladeva said - 'Truly they
are blessed; 138

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 mUladeva kI kathA yogazAstra dvitIya prakAza zloka 72 | bahuta sA dhana dekara
kharIda kyoM nahIM letA? mUladeva bhI hakkA-bakkA-sA A~kheM mUMde cupacApa
khar3A rahA; vaha usa samaya koI sthAnabhraSTa kisI bher3iye kI-sI apanI hAlata
mahasUsa kara rahA thaa| acala ne ekAeka vicAra kiyA ki yaha | mahAtmA daivavaza
aisI sthiti meM A par3A hai; isalie isakA nigraha ( daMDa dekara kAbU meM)
karanA ucita nahIM hai| ataH usane | mUladeva se kahA - 'mUladeva ! maiM Aja
taka ke tere kiye hue aparAdhoM ko mApha karatA huuN| agara tUM kRtajJa hai to
isake badale | samaya Ane para mere para upakAra karanA  /  ' yoM kahakara usane
mUladeva ko chor3a diyA  /  yuddha meM ghAyala hue hAthI ke samAna mUladeva
vahAM se nikalakara jhaTapaTa cala par3A aura kucha hI dera meM gA~va ke bAhara
| pahu~cakara usane eka mahAsarovara meM snAna kiyaa| snAna ke bAda dhoye hue
zveta vastra pahanane para vaha zarad Rtu - sA | zobhAyamAna ho rahA thaa| acala
para upakAra yA apakAra karane ke vicAra rUpI manoratha para ArUr3ha mUladeva
vahAM se veNAta kI ora claa| rAste meM durdazA kI priya sakhI ke samAna bAraha
yojana laMbI aura hiMsra pazuoM se bharI huI aTavI gyii| vaha cAhatA thA,
mahAsamudra ko pAra karane ke lie jaise naukA sahAyaka hotI hai, vaise hI mujhe
isa laMbI aTavI ko | pAra karane meM koI sahAyaka mila jaay| ThIka usI samaya
mAno AkAza se Tapaka par3A ho, isI taraha Takka nAma kA eka | brAhmaNa bhojana
kI poTalI hAtha meM liye yakAyaka vahAM A nikalA  /  vRddhapuruSa ko lAThI kA
sahArA mila jAne kI taraha | asahAya mUladeva ko bhI isa brAhmaNa kA sahArA mila
jAne se vaha bahuta khuza huaa| mUladeva ne brAhmaNa se kahA - 'vipra ! | isa
aTavI meM asahAya par3e hue merI chAyA ke samAna mujhe Apa bhAgya se mila gaye
haiN| ataH aba hama donoM yatheSTa bAteM karate hue isa aTavI ko zIghra hI
pArakara leNge| kathA rAste kI thakAna ko miTA detI hai| isa para brAhmaNa ne
pUchA'mahAbhAga ! pahale yaha to batAo ki tumheM kitanI dUra aura kisa jagaha
jAnA hai ? aura merI mArga kI maitrI ko svIkAra kro| mujhe to isa jaMgala ke usa
pAra hI 'vIranidhAna' nAmaka nagara meM jAnA hai  /  tumheM kahAM jAnA hai, vaha
kaho  / ' mUladeva ne kahA- mujhe veNAtaTa nagara jAnA hai| vipra ne sunate hI
kahA- taba to ThIka hai| bahuta dUra taka hamArA rAstA eka hI hai, to lo, cleN|
sira ko apane prakhara tApa se tapAne vAlA sUrya madhyAhna meM A gayA, taba taka
ve donoM eka sarovara ke | taTa para phuNce| mUladeva usameM hAthamuMha dhokara
thakAna miTAne ke lie eka aisI chAyAdAra jagaha para baiTha gayA, jahAM dhUpa |
nahIM lagatI thI  /  brAhmaNa ne bhI apanI poTalI kholI aura usameM se bhojana
nikAlakara kRpaNa kI taraha akelA hI pAnI | se lagAkara khAne lgaa| dhUrta ne
socA- 'pahale mujhe diye binA hI yaha akelA khAne baiTha gayA hai| mAlUma hotA
hai, ise bahuta kar3Ake kI bhUkha lagI hai| saMbhava hai, bhojana kara lene ke
bAda yaha mujhe degaa|' paraMtu brAhmaNa to usakI isa AzA | | ke viparIta
bhojana karate hI caTapaTa apanI poTalI bAMdhakara khar3A ho gyaa| mUladeva ne
socA- Aja nahIM to kala degaa| | magara dUsare dina bhI brAhmaNa ne usI taraha
akele hI bhojana kiyaa| isI AzA hI AzA meM mUladeva ke tIna dina bIta gye|
puruSoM ke lie AzA hI to jIvana hotA hai| jaba donoM ke mArga badalane kA
avasara AyA taba brAhmaNa ne dhUrtarAja se kahA 'lo, bhAgyazAlI ! aba merA aura
tumhArA rAstA alaga-alaga hai| maiM apane mArga para jAtA huuN| tumhArA kalyANa
ho|' isa para mUladeva ne bhI kahA- 'vipravara! tumhAre sahayoga se maiMne
bAraha yojana laMbI isa bhayaMkara aTavI ko eka kosa | kI taraha pAra kara lii|
aba maiM veNAtaTa jaauuNgaa| mere yogya koI kAma ho to jarUra kahanA  /  merA
nAma mUladeva hai| yaha | to batAo ki ApakA nAma kyA ?' usane kahA- 'merA asalI
nAma to saddhar3a vipra hai, loga mujhe nirghRNa zarmA ke nAma | se pukArate
haiN|' yoM kahakara sAthI Takka mUladeva se alaga ho gyaa| aba mUladeva akelA hI
veNAtaTa ke rAste para cala pdd'aa| rAste meM prANiyoM ke vizrAmasthala kI
taraha eka gA~va najara | aayaa| bhUkha se vyAkula mUladeva ke peTa se AMteM
laga gayI thiiN| usane gA~va meM praveza kiyA aura bhikSA ke lie ghUmate hue use
eka ghara se ur3ada ke bAkule mile| vaha unheM hI lekara gA~va se bAhara nikala
rahA thA ki sAmane se puNyapuMja ke samAna eka mAsikopavAsI muni Ate hue dikhAyI
diye| unheM dekhakara mUladeva bahuta harSita huA  /  socA- 'mere hI kisI
puNyodaya se Aja samudra se tArane vAle yAnapAtra (jahAja) ke samAna
saMsArasamudra se tArane vAle uttama tapasvI muni rUpI pAtra mile haiN|'
ratnatrayadhArI munivara ko pAtra meM usane ve ur3ada ke bAkule bhikSA ke rUpa
meM isa bhAvanA se diye ki dIrghakAla se siMcita vivekavRkSa kA phala Aja mujhe
mile|' dAna dene ke bAda mUladeva ne kahA - 'sacamuca ve dhanya hai;, 138

Page #161 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Story of Muladeva  Chapter Two of the Yoga Shastra, Verse 72: "Those who use
the Bakula tree for their Parana (fast-breaking) are virtuous." Filled with joy
at Muladeva's devotion, a god spoke from the sky, "O Blessed One! Compose half a
verse and ask for whatever you desire." Muladeva composed the following half-
verse and prayed to the god, "May I have a kingdom with a thousand elephants and
the courtesan Devadatta." The god said, "So be it." Muladeva then bowed to the
muni and went to the village, collected alms, and ate. Continuing his journey,
he reached the banks of the river Vena. He stayed at a Dharmasala (rest house)
there. Due to fatigue, he fell into a deep sleep. In the last watch of the
night, while sleeping in blissful slumber, he had a dream: "The full moon
entered my mouth." The same dream was also experienced by another traveler at
the Dharmasala. He woke up upon seeing the dream and told it to the other
travelers. One of the travelers, after considering the dream according to the
science of dreams, said to him, "You will soon receive kheer (rice pudding) and
ghee-soaked malpuas (sweet pancakes)." Hearing this, the traveler was delighted
and said, "So be it." Indeed, even a jackal rejoices as if it were a festival
when it finds berries. Dhoortaraj had also heard the interpretation of the
dream, so he did not tell anyone about his dream. He thought, "If I tell people
about the jewels in my mouth, they will only call them pebbles and stones." The
traveler received malpuas to eat on the day of the Grihaachhadana festival. The
fruits of dreams often manifest according to one's thoughts. Dhoortaraj also
went to a garden early in the morning. There, he began helping a gardener who
was weaving garlands of flowers. The gardener was pleased by this. Such acts are
always pleasing to people. Taking flowers and fruits from the gardener,
Dhoortaraj purified himself by bathing, etc., and went to the house of the
dream-interpreter Pandit. Muladeva greeted the dream-interpreter Pandit and
offered him flowers and fruits, then told him about his dream. The dream-
interpreter, pleased, said, "My son! I will tell you the fruit of your dream at
an auspicious time. Be my guest today." Saying this, he seated Muladeva with
honor and provided him with food at the appropriate time. Afterward, the Pandit
presented his daughter to Muladeva for marriage. Seeing this, Muladeva said,
"Father! You are not familiar with my lineage, caste, etc., so why don't you
consider these things before giving me your daughter?" The Upadhyaya said, "My
son! Your lineage and qualities are evident from your appearance. Therefore,
accept my daughter without delay." At the insistence of the Upadhyaya, Muladeva
married his daughter. It was as if the main door to future success had opened.
Then the Upadhyaya told him the fruit of his dream, saying, "You will become the
king of this city seven days from today." Delighted, Muladeva stayed there. On
the fifth day, he went outside the city and fell asleep under a champaka tree.
Just as a tree without roots perishes, so too did the king of that city suddenly
die without a son. Therefore, a search began for a new king. For this purpose, a
horse, an elephant, an umbrella, a chamara (fly whisk), and a kalash (pot) were
enchanted and paraded throughout the city by the king's servants, but no one
worthy of being king was found. Truly, individuals possessing royal qualities
are rare. Then, while parading outside the city, they reached the champaka tree
where Muladeva was sleeping. Upon seeing Muladeva, the horse neighed, and the
elephant trumpeted loudly. Understanding the significance, the royal servants
immediately went to Muladeva, woke him up, adorned him with royal garments, and
performed his coronation right there with the kalash. They then seated him on
the back of the Jayakunjara elephant. Two golden fly whisks, like lightning
bolts, were waved over Muladeva, creating a breeze. A brilliant white umbrella,
like the clouds of autumn, adorned his head. The people rejoiced at the arrival
of a new king, shouting cheers. Musical instruments resounded in all ten
directions. Thus, Muladeva entered the city with great pomp and ceremony. As he
dismounted from the elephant, the royal servants took him to the royal palace.
They seated him on the throne kept there. At that moment, a divine voice was
heard from the heavens: "This new king, named Vikram, endowed with divine grace
and a repository of arts, has ascended the throne. Whoever does not obey this
king will be punished as a mountain is shattered by a thunderbolt." Hearing this
divine voice, all the people and ministers were stunned, amazed, and terrified.
Just as the senses of a muni are subdued, so too were all the ministers forever
under his control. Thus, slowly...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 mUladeva kI kathA yogazAstra dvitIya prakAza zloka 72 jinake bAkule sAdhu ke
pAraNe ke kAma Ate haiN|' mUladeva kI bhAvanA se harSita hokara eka deva ne
AkAzavANI se kahA'bhadra! tuma AdhA zloka racakara mAMgo ki maiM tumheM kyA
dUM?' mUladeva ne ukta deva se nimna arddhazloka racakara prArthanA kI gaNikA-
devadattebha-sahasra-rAjyamastu me arthAt devadattA gaNikA aura hajAra hAthiyoM
vAlA rAjya mujhe prApta ho|' deva ne kahA- 'aisA hI hogaa|' mUladeva bhI muni ko
vaMdana karake gAMva meM gayA aura bhikSA lAkara svayaM ne bhojana kiyaa| isa |
taraha rAstA taya karate hue vaha kramazaH veNAtaTa phuNcaa| vahAM eka
dharmazAlA meM tthhraa| thakAna ke kAraNa use gaharI nIMda A gyii| sukhanidrA
meM sote hue rAtri ke aMtima pahara meM usane eka svapna dekhA-
'pUrNamaMDalayukta caMdramA ne mere mukha meM praveza kiyA hai|' yahI svapna usa
dharmazAlA ke kisI anya yAtrI ko bhI AyA thaa| vaha bhI svapna dekhate hI jAga
gayA aura usane anya yAtriyoM ko apanA sapanA kaha sunaayaa| una yAtriyoM meM se
eka ne svapnazAstra ke anusAra vicAra karake usase kahA-tumheM zIghra hI khIra
aura ghI ke mAlapUe mileNge|' ise sunakara prasanna hokara yAtrI ne kahA-'aisA
hI ho|' saca hai, siyAra ko bera bhI mila jAya to vaha mahotsava ke samAna
khuziyAM manAtA hai| dhUrtarAja ne bhI svapna kA phala suna liyA thA, isalie
usane kisI ko apanA svapna nahIM btaayaa| usane socA-'mUkhoM ko ratna batAne se
ve use kaMkar3a-patthara hI btaaeNge|' usa yAtrI ko gRhAcchAdana parva ke dina
mAlapUe khAne ko mile| svapnaphala prAyaH apane vicAra ke anusAra hI milA karatA
hai| dhUrtarAja bhI subaha-subaha eka bagIce meM phuNcaa| vahAM phala bunate hue
eka mAlI ke kAma meM sahAyatA karane lgaa| isase mAlI khuza ho gyaa| aisA kArya
logoM ke lie prItikAraka hotA hI hai| mAlI se phala-phUla lekara snAnAdi se
zuddha hokara vaha svapnazAstrajJa paMDita ke vahAM gyaa| mUladeva ne
svapnazAstrajJa paMDita ko namaskAra kiyA aura unheM phala, phUla bheMTa dekara
apane svapna kA hAla btaayaa| svapnazAstrajJa ne prasanna hokara kahA'vatsa!
maiM tumhAre svapna kA phala zubha muhUrta meM btaauuNgaa| Aja tuma mere atithi
bno|' yoM kahakara mUladeva ko AdarapUrvaka biThAyA, yathAsamaya bhojana
kraayaa| tatpazcAt paMDita ne apanI kanyA vivAha ke lie mUladeva ke sAmane
lAkara prastuta kii| yaha dekhakara mUladeva ne kahA-'pitAjI! Apa mere kula,
jAti Adi se paricita nahIM, phira apanI kanyA dete hue kucha vicAra kyoM nahIM
karate?' upAdhyAya ne kahA-'vatsa! tumhArI AkRti se tumhAre kula aura guNa
najara A rahe haiN| isalie aba zIghra hI merI kanyA svIkAra kro|' upAdhyAya ke
Agraha para mUladeva ne usakI kanyA ke sAtha vivAha kiyaa| mAno bhaviSya meM
hone vAlI kAryasiddhi kA mukhya dvAra khula gayA ho| phira upAdhyAya ne use
svapnaphala batAte hue kahA-'Aja se sAtaveM dina tuma yahAM ke rAjA bnoge|'
prasanna hokara mUladeva vahIM rhaa| pAMcaveM dina nagara ke bAhara jAkara vaha
eka caMpaka vRkSa ke nIce so gyaa| mUla ke binA jaise vRkSa naSTa ho jAtA hai,
vaise hI usa nagara kA rAjA acAnaka hI putra rahita mara gyaa| ataH naye rAjA kI
talAza hone lgii| isake lie ghor3A, hAthI, chatra, cAmara aura kalaza maMtrita
karake rAjA ke sevakoM ne sAre nagara meM ghumAye, paraMtu rAjA ke yogya koI
vyakti nahIM milaa| sacamuca rAja-guNasaMpanna vyakti virale hI milate haiN|
phira nagara ke bAhara unheM ghumAte caMpakavRkSa ke pAsa pahuMce, jahAM
mUladeva soyA huA thaa| mUladeva ko dekhate hI ghor3A hinahinAne lagA, hAthI
jora se ciMghADane lgaa| rAjasevaka mUladeva ke viSaya meM saMketa samajhakara
turaMta usake pAsa pahuMce aura use jagAkara rAjasI vastroM se susajjita karake
kalaza se vahIM usakA rAjyAbhiSeka kara diyA aura jayakuMjara hAthI kI pITha
para bitthaayaa| bijalI ke-se daMDa ke samAna svarNa-daMDamaMDita donoM cAmara
mUladeva para dulAye gaye, jinhoMne havA karane kA kAma kiyA, zaradRtu ke megha
ke samAna ujjvala zveta chatra mastaka para zobhAyamAna hone lgaa| naye rAjA
milane kI khuzI meM prajAjanoM ne jaya jayakAra ke nAre lgaaye| vAdyaninAdoM ne
dazoM dizAoM ko guMjA diyaa| isa prakAra khUba dhUmadhAma se mUladeva ne nagara
meM praveza kiyaa| hAthI se nIce utarate hI mUladeva ko rAjasevaka rAjamahala
meM le gye| vahAM rakhe hue siMhAsana para use bitthaayaa| usI samaya devoM
dvArA AkAzavANI huI-'devaprabhAva se yukta, kalAoM kA bhaMDAra yaha vikrama
nAmaka nayA rAjA rAjagaddI para baiThA hai| jo isa nRpa kI AjJAnusAra nahIM
calegA, usako vaisI sajA milegI, jaise parvata ko vajra cUra-cUrakara detA hai|'
isa divyavANI ko sunakara sArI prajA aura maMtrIgaNa stabdha, vismita evaM
bhayabhIta ho gye| jaise muni ke iMdriyagaNa vaza ho jAte haiM, vaise hI sAre
maMtrIgaNa sadA ke lie usake vazavartI ho gye| isa prakAra dhIre 139

Page #162 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Story of Muladeva Yoga Shastra, Second Light, Verse 72  The kingdom was
being ruled peacefully and systematically. All the clouds of sorrow had
dispersed, and the sun of happiness had risen. Due to his cordial behavior with
the king of Ujjayini, a friendship had developed between them.  Meanwhile,
Devadatta, upon witnessing the mockery of Muladeva by Achal, felt hatred towards
Achal. One day, she found an opportunity and reprimanded Achal, "You foolish,
money-blinded fool! Do you consider me your family woman? You behaved so lowly
with Muladeva in my own house, in front of me. Remember, I will not forgive you
for this. I will destroy you. You are not welcome in my house from today
onwards." Thus, she scornfully banished Achal from her house.  After that,
Devadatta went to the king and said, "Dev! I want to claim the boon that I have
kept with you as a deposit." The king said, "Ask for any boon you desire, I am
bound by my word." Devadatta requested the boon, "From today onwards, do not
allow anyone to enter my house except Muladeva. Especially, impose a ban on
Achal, as he often visits my place." The king said, "Alright, it shall be done.
But tell me, why do you want to impose such a ban?" Upon this, Devadatta
signaled Madhavi with her eyes to tell her everything. Madhavi narrated the
entire incident from beginning to end. Upon hearing this, King Jitashatru's
eyebrows furrowed. He angrily summoned the merchant Achal and said scornfully,
"Fool! Listen carefully! These two are the jewels of my kingdom, my ornaments.
You, blinded by your wealth, have disregarded my jewel like a stone. For this
heinous crime, you are sentenced to death."  Upon hearing this, Achal sank into
the earth out of shame. His face turned pale. He began to beg for his life,
pleading before the king. He also apologized to Devadatta, looking at her with a
timid gaze. Devadatta felt pity for him. She pleaded with the king to pardon his
death sentence. The king ordered him, "Merchant! Your life will be spared only
if you find Muladeva and bring him back here." Achal accepted the king's order,
bowed, and departed from there. On one hand, the insult inflicted by Devadatta
was gnawing at his heart, while on the other hand, like a lost treasure, he was
relentlessly pursuing the search for Muladeva. But days passed, and he couldn't
find any trace of Muladeva. Achal, the merchant, began to feel restless. In this
hurry, he quickly loaded all his goods onto the wagons and set off with his
caravan towards the country of Parasakul.  Meanwhile, Muladeva, now the king,
began to think, "Without Devadatta, enjoying this kingdom's wealth feels bland
to me, like tasteless food." Therefore, he sent a message with his clever envoy
to King Jitashatru of Ujjayini, along with gifts for Devadatta. "Muladeva,
enjoying the wealth of the kingdom, has sent this message to King Jitashatru
through his envoy, 'Rajan! You might have forgotten my current name due to your
familiarity with my previous name. I am the same Muladeva. You know how much
love I have for Devadatta. Therefore, if she wishes, please send her to me.'"
Upon hearing the message, the king of Ujjayini said to the envoy, "Why did he
need to make such a request to me? We have good relations with King Vikram.
There is no difference between us. I didn't even know that this King Vikram is
the former Muladeva. Otherwise, I would have gone to meet him myself and would
have already sent Devadatta." Jitashatru immediately summoned Devadatta and
said, "Mahabaghe! Your fortune has opened up. After a long time, your desire has
been fulfilled. Muladeva, by the grace of God, has become King Vikram of
Venatat. He has sent a message with his envoy specifically to call you.
Therefore, you should go there immediately." Upon hearing this good news,
Devadatta's face lit up with joy. With the king's permission, she departed with
her entourage and necessary supplies and reached Venatat within a few days. She
sent word to King Vikram about her arrival a day before entering the city.
Therefore, King Vikram welcomed Devadatta with great pomp and ceremony,
accompanied by music and drums. 140

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 mUladeva kI kathA yogazAstra dvitIya prakAza zloka 72 dhIre rAjya-saMcAlana
vyavasthita DhaMga se hone lgaa| duHkha ke saba bAdala aba phaTa gaye the, sukha
kA sUryodaya ho gayA thaa| ujjayinI ke rAjA ke sAtha paraspara snehayukta
vyavahAra ke kAraNa usakI maitrI ho gyii| idhara devadattA ne mUladeva kI acala
dvArA jaba viDaMbanA hote dekhI to use bhI acala ke prati ghRNA ho gyii| eka
dina maukA dekhakara usane acala ko phaTakArA-'are dhanamadAMdha mUrkha! kyA
tumane mujhe apanI kulagRhiNI samajha rakhA hai? jo usa dina mere sAmane mere hI
ghara meM tumane mUladeva ke sAtha aisA tuccha vyavahAra kiyaa| yAda rakhanA,
maiM tumheM isake | lie kSamA nahIM kruuNgii| tumheM maTiyAmeTa karake hI
chodduuNgii|' basa, Aja se mere ghara meM paira rakhane kI jarUrata nhiiN| isa
prakAra tiraskAra pUrvaka acala ko usane ghara se nikAla diyaa| usake bAda
devadattA rAjA ke pAsa phuNcii| aura unase kahA'deva! Apake pAsa merA jo
varadAna amAnata rakhA huA hai use maiM Aja lenA cAhatI huuN|' rAjA ne kahA-
'tuma jo cAho so varadAna mAMga lo, maiM vacanabaddha huuN|' devadattA ne
varadAna mAMgA ki-Aja se mUladeva ke sivAya aura kisI ko mere ghara para Ane kI
AjJA mata denaa| khAsataura se acala para to avazya pratibaMdha lagA deM; kyoMki
vaha prAyaH mere yahAM AyA karatA hai| rAjA bolA-'acchA, aisA hI hogaa| paraMtu
yaha to batAo, aisA pratibaMdha lagAne kA kyA kAraNa hai?' isa para devadattA ne
mAdhavI ko A~kha ke izAre se sacita kiyA ki vaha use sArA hAla batA de| mAdhavI
ne atha se iti taka sArI ghaTanA sunaayii| sunate hI jitazatru rAjA kI bhauMheM
tana gyii| usane kruddha hokara sArthavAha acala ko bulAyA aura tiraskAra
pUrvaka kahA-'mUrkha! kAna kholakara suna le! mere rAjya ke ye donoM ratna haiM,
AbhUSaNa hai| tumane apane dhana ke hokara mere ratna kI patthara kI taraha
avahelanA kI hai| isa bhayaMkara aparAdha ke badale tumheM mRtyudaMDa kI sajA dI
jAtI hai|' acala to yaha sunate hI zarma ke mAre dharatI meM gar3a gyaa| usakA
ceharA phIkA par3a gyaa| vaha rAjA ke sAmane giDagiDAkara prANoM kI bhikSA
mAMgane lgaa| devadattA se bhI mAphI mAMgate hae kAtara daSTi se usakI ora
dekhane lgaa| devadattA ko usa para dayA A gyii| usane rAjA se usakI mRtyudaMDa
kI sajA maukUpha karavA dii| rAjA ne use Adeza dete hue kahA-'sArthavAha! terI
prANarakSA tabhI hogI, jaba tUM kahIM se DhUMDhakara mUladeva ko vApisa yahAM le
aayegaa|' acala ne rAjA kI bAta zirodhArya karake vahAM se namana karake
prasthAna kiyaa| eka ora devadattA dvArA kiyA gayA apamAna usake hRdaya ko
kacoTa rahA thA, to dUsarI ora khoye hue dhana kI taraha vaha eka hI dhuna meM
mUladeva kI khoja meM Age se Age tejI se bar3hA calA jA rahA thaa| paraMtu
calate-calate kaI dina ho gaye, magara mUladeva kA kahIM patA na lgaa| acala
sArthavAha ke mana meM bar3I becainI rahane lgii| isI har3abar3I meM vaha
jhaTapaTa apanA sArA mAla vAhanoM meM bharavAkara kAphale ke sAtha pArasakula
deza kI ora ravAnA ho gyaa| idhara rAjA banA huA mUladeva socane lagA-'devadattA
ke binA isa rAjyalakSmI kA upabhoga mujhe lavaNa rahita bhojana ke samAna phIkA
laga rahA hai| ataH usane apane catura dUta ke sAtha ujjayinI-nareza jitazatru
rAjA ke pAsa devadattA ke lie upahAra sahita saMdeza bhijvaayaa| 'devapradatta
rAjyalakSmI kA upabhoga karate hue mUladeva ne jitazatru nRpa ko patra meM yaha
saMdeza kahalavAyA hai ki 'rAjan! Apa zAyada mere vartamAna nAma se paricita
hone ke kAraNa bhUla gaye hoNge| maiM vahI mUladeva huuN| Apa jAnate haiM ki
devadattA ke prati mere hRdaya meM kitanA prema hai? ataH agara usakI icchA ho
to Apa use mere yahAM bheja deN|' saMdeza sunate hI ujjayinInareza ne dUta se
kahA-mujhase unheM itanI prArthanA karane kI kyA AvazyakatA thI? hamAre aura
vikrama rAjA ke to acche saMbaMdha haiM? mere meM aura unameM koI bheda nahIM
hai| mujhe patA hI nahIM calA ki ye vikrama rAjA bhUtapUrva mUladeva haiN| nahIM
to, maiM svayaM unase milane jAtA, devadattA ko bhI pahale hI bheja detaa|'
jitazatru ne phaurana devadattA ko bulavAkara kahA-'mahAbhAge! tumhAre bhAgya
khula gaye haiN| cirakAla ke bAda tumhArA manoratha pUrNa ho gayA hai| mUladeva
deva ke prabhAva se veNAtaTa ke rAjA vikrama bana gaye haiN| tumheM bulAne ke
lie unhoMne khAsataura se apane dUta ke sAtha saMdeza bhijavAyA hai| ataH tumheM
aba avilaMba vahAM jAnA caahie|' yaha khuzakhabarI sunate hI harSa se devadattA
kA mukhamaMDala khila utthaa| jitazatru kI AjJA se vaha vahAM se apanA dalabala
evaM Avazyaka sAmagrI lekara cala par3I aura kucha hI dinoM meM veNAtaTa
phuNcii| usane praveza se eka dina pahale hI vikrama rAjA ko apane Ane kI
khabara pahuMcA dI thii| isalie vikramarAjA ne bahuta hI dhUmadhAma se gAje-bAje
ke sAtha devadattA ko nagara praveza karAyA 140

Page #163 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Story of Muladeva  Chapter Two of the Yoga Shastra, Verse 72: And then, with
the same respect he showed his own mind, he took her to his vast royal palace.
Now Devadatta began to live there. With Devadatta, Muladeva's days passed like
silver and his nights like gold, filled with enjoyment. Meanwhile, the king,
upholding the dharma of wealth and desire, and devoted to the Jinas, ruled his
kingdom happily, caring for his people.   Meanwhile, a steadfast merchant, laden
with goods fit for purchase from the land of Parsakul, was returning, like a
cloud full of water. By chance, he reached the city of Venatat. He set up camp
in the city and, in a tray, filled it with precious diamonds, emeralds, rubies,
pearls, coral, gems, and jewels, to present to King Vikramraja. The king
recognized Achal as soon as he saw him. A clever man, like someone remembering a
past life connection, instantly recognizes another. But Achal could not
recognize Muladeva in his kingly guise. Truly, even a clown, when disguised,
cannot be recognized by the simple-minded.   After skillful questioning, the
king asked the merchant, "Tell me, sir, where do you come from, and why? Who are
you? What goods have you brought with you?" He replied, "O King, we come from
Parsakul. We have brought goods from foreign lands to sell. Please grant me
permission to show them to you." Out of curiosity, the king said, "Very well, I
will come myself to see them." The merchant said, "If you would grace my humble
dwelling, it would be a great honor." Who can understand the anger and joy of
great men? The king went with the merchant to his camp. He opened all his goods,
showing the king the jagat of madder, cloth, thread, and other goods he had
brought. The king, seeing the goods, asked, "Is this all the goods you have?"
"Yes, O compassionate one, this is all. Tell the truth, if there is more, you
will be severely punished." The merchant said, "I speak the truth, this is all
the goods I have." The king, repeating his words, said, "Look, tell me
carefully. In our kingdom, those who cheat on taxes are given severe physical
punishment." Achal said, "O compassionate one, we do not lie in front of others,
so how could we lie in front of you?" Hearing this, the king said to his tax
collector, "Take half the tax from this truthful merchant and search his goods
thoroughly." At the king's command, the tax collectors, kicking the bamboo,
lowered it inside and searched. They suspected some precious goods hidden among
the ordinary goods. Suspecting this, the royal officials quickly searched the
surrounding places where the goods were kept. They suspected both the merchant's
goods and his wealth. Officials always reach the bottom of people's hearts and
cities. Therefore, those officials were angry with the merchant, scolded him,
and arrested him, accusing him of tax evasion. If even the king's vassals are
arrested at the king's command, what could this merchant do? The royal officials
presented him to the king in the royal palace, but the king released him from
his bonds. Then the king took him aside in the palace and asked, "Do you
recognize me? Who am I?" Achal said, "Who would be so foolish as not to
recognize the sun that illuminates the world, and you?" "Stop flattering me,
tell me the truth, do you know me or not?" Thus, at the king's insistence, Achal
said, "O Lord, I do not know you." At this, the king called Devadatta and
pointed her out to Achal. A person considers himself fulfilled when he sees his
beloved ones, for it brings peace of mind to the proud. Seeing Devadatta, Achal
was immediately ashamed and felt great sorrow in his heart, for the pain of
being humiliated in front of a woman is more painful than death. Devadatta said
to Achal, "This is the same Muladeva whom you wronged and who also caused me to
suffer. By the grace of God, you are now in trouble. Your life is in danger.
Yet, O noble son, he will forgive you. Such great men do not pay attention to
trivial matters. They do not stoop to such lowliness as revenge." Hearing this,
the merchant immediately fell at the feet of both the king and Devadatta,
saying, "Please forgive all the offenses I committed at that time. In connection
with that same offense, King Jitashatru of Ujjayini is angry with me. Will he
also allow me to enter Ujjayini at your word?" Muladeva said, "Since Devadatta
has shown you such kindness, I also forgive you.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 mUladeva kI kathA yogazAstra dvitIya prakAza zloka 72 aura phira apane citta ke
samAna satkArapUrvaka vizAla rAjamahala meM use le gyaa| aba devadattA yahIM
rahane lgii| devadattA ke sAtha sukhopabhoga se mUladeva ke cAMdI-se dina aura
sone-sI rAteM kaTane lgiiN| idhara artha aura kAma kA dharmayukta pAlana karate
hue aura jinabhakti karate hue rAjA sukhapUrvaka prajA pAlana karate hue rAjya
karane lgaa| idhara pArasakula deza se kharIdane yogya bahuta-sA mAla lekara
jala paripUrNa megha ke samAna acala sArthavAha vApisa lauTa rahA thaa|
saMyogavaza eka dina veNAtaTa nagara phuNcaa| nagara meM usane apanA par3Ava
DAlA aura eka thAla meM bahumUlya hIre, panne, mANika, motI, mUMgA, maNi, ratna
Adi bharakara vikramarAjA ko bheMTa dene ke lie laayaa| rAjA ne acala ko dekhate
hI pahacAna liyaa| catura puruSa kisI ko dekhate hI pUrvajanma ke saMbaMdha ke
smaraNa kI taraha turaMta use pahicAna letA hai| paraMtu acala mUladeva ko rAjA
ke veza meM nahIM pahacAna skaa| saca hai, veSa parivartana karane para eka naTa
ko bhI alpabuddhi vAle nahIM pahacAna paate| kuzala prazna ke pazcAt rAjA ne
sArthavAha se pUchA- 'kaho jI! Apa kahAM se aura kisalie Aye haiM? kauna haiM?'
apane sAtha kyA-kyA mAla lAye haiM?' usane uttara meM kahA-'rAjan! hama
pArasakula se Aye haiN| kImatI mAla becane ke lie paradeza se lAye haiN| Apa,
use dekhane ke lie AjJA phrmaa|' kautukavaza rAjA ne kahA-'acchA; maiM svayaM
dekhane ke lie aauuNgaa|' sArthavAha bolA-yadi merI kuTiyA pAvana kareMge to
ApakI bar3I meharabAnI hogii| bar3e AdamiyoM ke krodha aura prasannatA ko kauna
samajha sakatA hai? rAjA sArthavAha ke sAtha usake Dere para aayaa| usane bhI
majITha, kapar3A, sUta Adi lAye hue mAla kI jagAta taya karane ke lie sArA mAla
kholakara btaayaa| rAjA ne mAla dekhakara pUchA-kyA itanA hI mAla hai?' hAM,
dInadayAla! itanA hI hai| saca-saca batAo, agara jyAdA mAla nikalA to tumhArI
pUrI khabara lI jaayegii| sArthavAha-maiM saca-saca kahatA hUM ki itanA hI mAla
hai|' rAjA ne apanI bAta doharAte hue kahA- 'dekho, acchI taraha dekhakara
btaao| hamAre rAjya meM karacorI karane vAle ko bhayaMkara zArIrika sajA dI jAtI
hai|' acala bolA-dInAnAtha! hama dUsaroM ke sAmane bhI asatya nahIM bolate to
Apake sAmane kaise bola sakate haiM? yaha sunakara rAjA ne apane karAdhikArI se
kahA-'isa satyavAdI sArthavAha se AdhAkara lenA aura isake mAla kI acchI taraha
talAzI le lenaa| rAjA ke Adeza para karadeya-vastunirIkSaka mahAjanoM ne bAMsa
ko lAta mArakara use aMdara utArakara talAzI lI to mAmUlI mAla ke bIca meM
chipAye hue kucha kImatI mAla kI zaMkA huii| zaMkA hone se vahAM khar3e
rAjapuruSoM ne vahAM cAroM ora rakhe hue kirAne ke sthAnoM ko jhaTapaTa TaTola
liyaa| unheM sArthavAha ke mAla aura dhana donoM para zaka huaa| adhikArI sadA
dUsaroM ke dila aura nagara kI taha taka pahuMca jAte haiN| ataH ve adhikArI
sArthavAha para kupita huye, use phaTakArA aura karacorI kA aparAdha lagAkara
use giraphtAra kara liyaa| rAjA ke Adeza se sAmaMta bhI giraphtAra kara liye
jAte haiM to isa vyApArI kI kyA bisAta thii| rAjapuruSoM ne use rAjamahala meM
rAjA ke sAmane prastuta kiyA to rAjA ne use baMdhanamukta karA diyaa| phira rAjA
ne use mahala meM eka ora le jAkara pUchA'mujhe pahacAnate ho, maiM kauna hU~?'
acala ne kahA-'jagat ko prakAzita karane vAle sUrya ko aura Apako kauna aisA
murkhaziromaNi hogA, jo nahIM pahacAnatA hogA?' cApalasI karanA baMda kara saca-
saca batAo, tuma majhe jAnate ho yA nahIM? isa prakAra rAjA ke kahane para acala
ne kahA-'deva! maiM Apako nahIM jaantaa|' isa para rAjA ne devadattA ko bulAkara
use acala ko btaayaa| apane ISTajanoM ko dekhakara vyakti khuda ko kRtArtha
samajhatA hai kyoMki isase abhimAnI logoM ko mana kI zAMti milatI hai| devadattA
ko dekhate hI acala ekadama zarmA gayA aura mana hI mana atyaMta duHkha mahasUsa
karane lagA ki eka strI ke sAmane apanI tauhIna hone kI pIDA matya se bhI
baDhakara duHkhadAyI hotI hai| devadattA ne acala se kahA-'yaha vahI mUladeva
hai, jinheM tumane saMkaTa meM DAla diyA thA aura mujhe bhI dharmasaMkaTa meM
DAla diyA thaa| devayoga se Aja tuma saMkaTa meM par3e ho| isa samaya tumhAre
prANa saMkaTa meM haiN| phira bhI Aryaputra tumheM mApha kreNge| aise mahApuruSa
tuccha bAtoM para dhyAna nahIM dete| na badalA lene jaisI itanI nIcatA para
utarate haiN| yaha sunakara turaMta hI sArthavAha ne rAjA aura devadattA. donoM
ke caraNoM meM paDakara kahA-'usa samaya mere dvArA kiye gaye tamAma aparAdhoM
ko Apa kSamA kreN| usI aparAdha ke silasile meM ujjayinI nareza jitazatru mujha
para kopAyamAna hai| ve bhI Apake kahane para mujhe ujjayinI meM praveza karane
deMge? mUladeva ne kahA-'jaba devadattA ne tuma para itanI kRpA kI hai to maiM
bhI tumheM kSamA karatA huuN| usake 141

Page #164 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Tale of Muldev Yoga Shastra, Second Light, Verse 72  After that, the king,
taking pity on him, sent one of his messengers with him to Ujjayini and had him
convey the message to the king of Ujjayini to allow Achal to enter. Achal was
ordered to go to Ujjayini with the messenger. The king of Avanti, upon hearing
the message from King Muldev, allowed Achal to enter Ujjayini. For the reason
for his anger had now ceased.  One day, some merchants, distressed by sorrow,
gathered together and prayed to King Muldev, "Dev! You are constantly worried
day and night for the protection of your subjects, but thieves and robbers come
to this city and harass us by stealing, looting, and so on. These thieves are so
arrogant that they come to steal from someone's house every night and break down
walls like rats. Even the Kotwal is helpless in protecting our lives and
property. What can we say, they roam around our houses as if they were their
own, as if they had some magical power." To this, the king said, "People! Don't
worry! I will soon find out who this wicked thief is, have him arrested, and
give him a severe punishment." Thus, assuring them, the king departed. The king
summoned the city magistrate to the royal court and ordered him, "Find out who
all the thieves are in the city and catch them immediately and give them severe
punishment." The city magistrate said, "Swami! Everything else is fine, but
there is one thief who escapes like a demon as soon as he sees us. He cannot be
caught." The king said, "Okay, I will see to it." That very night, the king,
dressed in blue clothes like Baldev, went out into the city to observe the city.
He went to all the places where thieves hid. After wandering around all day, the
king got tired and slept in a ruined temple, just like a lion sleeps in a cave.
At night, the leader of the thieves, named Mandak, a terrifying creature like a
night-walking ghost, came there. Seeing the king asleep, he called out, "Who is
sleeping here?" The thief leader, enraged, kicked the king who was sleeping like
a lion. The king, with the intention of finding out the visitor's intentions,
location, and wealth, replied, "I am a foreign traveler." Such people are
usually not alert face-to-face. The thief said to the king, "Traveler! Come with
me today, I will make you very rich." Alas, the ignorance of the intoxicated!
The king, desiring wealth, followed the thief leader on foot. Even Janardana
massages the feet of a donkey when it roars. The thief leader, taking the king
with him, entered the house of a wealthy man. Like Rahu, who breaks into a house
with a weapon and drinks nectar from a well, he took whatever good things he
found in that house. The thief, ignorant, stole all the wealth and tied it up,
placing it on the king's head. Just as a Shakini shows her belly, so the foolish
thief showed the king all the wealth. The king, with the intention of killing
the thief in his mind, took up the burden as the thief leader had said. For
cunning people become very humble when they need something and become like
demons when their work is done. Therefore, reaching a dilapidated garden, he
entered it. Like a scorpion kept in dung, he took the king inside the cave.
Inside the cave sat a young woman, beautiful, adorned with grace and beauty,
with a well-proportioned body, like a Naga Kumari Devi. She was his sister. The
thief leader ordered his sister, "Wash this guest's feet." She took the king to
a well nearby and seated him on a seat. Taking water from the well, the lotus-
eyed maiden began to wash the king's feet. The touch of the king's soft limbs
gave her pleasure. She looked carefully at all his limbs and thought to herself
in amazement, "This is indeed Kamadeva himself. It is not right to kill him."
She was very attracted to the king. She said to the king, "Great one! Under the
pretext of washing your feet, I have thrown many men into this well. Where is
compassion in the hearts of thieves? I am so attracted and impressed by your
beauty that I will not throw you into this well. The influence of a great man is
wonderful and captivating. Therefore, Swami! I request you to leave this place
immediately, otherwise, neither of us will be safe." The king immediately got up
and went out. Even though they are clever and powerful, they kill their enemies
with intelligence. After the king had gone quite a distance, the girl shouted
loudly, "Brother, he has run away, run, run quickly, he has gone." Intelligent
people save their acquaintances or loved ones.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 mUladeva kI kathA yogazAstra dvitIya prakAza zloka 72 bAda rAjA ne usa para
dayAdRSTi rakhakara apanA eka dUta usake sAtha ujjayinI bhejA aura
ujjayinInareza ko acala ko praveza karane kI AjJA dene kA saMdeza khlvaayaa|
acala ko dUta ke sAtha ujjayinI jAne kI AjJA dii| mUladeva rAjA ke saMdeza se
avaMtipati ne acala ko ujjayinI-praveza kI AjJA dii| kyoMki krodha kA kAraNa aba
samApta ho gayA thaa| eka dina duHkha se becaina kucha vyApAriyoM ne ekatra
hokara rAjA mUladeva se prArthanA kI-deva! Apa prajA kI rakSA ke lie rAtadina
ciMtita rahate haiM, lekina isa nagara meM cora-luTere Akara cAroM ora corI,
lUTamAra Adi karake hameM bahuta hairAna kara rahe haiN| ve cora aise uddaNDa
haiM ki hara rAta ko kisI na kisI ke yahAM corI karane pahuMca jAte haiM tathA
cUhe kI taraha dIvAra tor3ate haiN| kotavAla bhI hamAre jAnamAla kI surakSA kara
sakane meM lAcAra hai| kyA batAe~, apane ghara meM bhramaNa kI taraha hamAre
ghara meM niHzaMka hokara ghUmate haiM, mAno koI aMjanasiddhi hI unake pAsa ho|'
isa para rAjA ne kahA-prajAjanoM! ghabarAo mata! maiM zIghra hI usa apayazakArI
cora kA patA lagAkara use giraphtAra karavAUMgA aura bar3I bhArI sajA duuNgaa|
yoM AzvAsana dekara rAjA ravAnA huye| rAjA ne rAjasabhA meM nagarAdhyakSa ko
bulAkara AjJA dI-'nagara meM jitane | bhI cora haiM, unakA patA lagAkara zIghra
hI pakar3o aura unheM kar3A daMDa do|' nagarAdhikArI ne kahA svAmin! aura to
ThIka hai| para eka cora aisA hai jo hamAre dekhate hI AMkha bacAkara pizAca kI
taraha bhAga jAtA hai| vaha pakar3A bhI nahIM jaataa| rAjA ne kahA-acchA, maiM
dekhaMgA use| usI rAta ko nIlavastradhArI baladeva kI taraha rAjA ne nIle vastra
pahane aura nagaracaryA karane hetu zahara meM niklaa| jahAM-jahAM coroM ke
chipane ke aDDe the, una saba jagahoM para bAhubalazAlI rAjA ghUma liyaa|
dinabhara ghUmate-ghUmate rAjA thaka gayA aura eka TUTe-phUTe khaMDahara bane
devakula meM usI taraha so gyaa| jisa taraha guphA meM kesarIsiMha so jAtA hai|
rAtricara bhUta-preta kI taraha bhayAvanA-sA maMDika nAma kA coroM kA saradAra
rAta ko vahAM aayaa| usane rAjA ko soye dekhakara AvAja dI-yahA~ kauna soyA huA
hai? sote hue siMha ke samAna vahAM soye hue rAjA ke usa corapati ne krodhita
hokara lAta maarii| rAjA ne AgaMtuka kI ceSTA, sthAna aura dhana kA patA lagAne
kI dRSTi se uttara diyA-maiM eka paradezI musAphira huuN| prAyaH aisI vyakti
Amane-sAmane hoziyAra nahIM hote| cora ne rAjA se kahA- 'musAphira! cala Aja
mere sAtha, maiM tumheM bahuta mAlAmAla banA duuNgaa|' dhikkAra hai, madAMdha kI
ajJAnatA ko! | rAjA dhanArthI hokara usa cora senApati ke pIche-pIche paidala
claa| garja par3ane para janArdana bhI gadhe ke pairoM kA mardana karatA hai|
rAjA ko sAtha meM liye hue vaha coranetA eka bar3e dhanADhya ke ghara meM
ghusaa| hathiyAra se ghara meM saiMdha lagAkara kuMDa meM se amRta grahaNa
karane vAle rAhu kI taraha usane usa ghara meM jo bhI acchI-acchI vastu milI,
use le lii| ajJAnI cora dvArA curAyA huA aura gaTharI baMdhA vaha sArA dhanamAla
rAjA ke sira para rakhakara ve cle| zAkinI jaise apanA peTa batAtI phiratI hai,
vaise hI mUDhabuddhi cora ne rAjA ko sArA dhana batA diyaa| rAjA ne mana hI mana
cora ko khatma karane kI maMzA se jaise usa cora senApati ne kahA, vaise hI
bojha uThA liyaa| kyoMki dhUrta loga kAma par3ane para atinamra bana jAte haiM
aura kArya sadha jAne para rAkSasa-se bana jAte haiN| ataH jIrNa udyAna meM
pahuMcakara usane vahAM ka aMdara ghusaa| gobara meM rakhe hue bicchU kI taraha
rAjA ko bhI vaha guphA ke aMdara le gyaa| guphA meM nAga kumArI devI sarIkhI
rUpa yauvanasaMpanna, lAvaNya aura sauMdarya se yukta, suDaula avayavoM se
suzobhita eka kumArI baiThI thI, jo usakI bahana thii| corapati ne bahana ko
Adeza diyA-isa atithi ke donoM paira dho do| vaha rAjA ko nikaTa hI eka kuMe
para le gayI aura use eka Asana para bitthaayaa| kuMe~ se pAnI nikAlakara vaha
kamalanayanI kanyA rAjA ke paira dhone lgii| rAjA ke komala aMgoM kA sparza hone
se use sukhAnubhava huaa| usane gaura se sabhI aMgoM para dRSTipAta kiyA aura
vismita hokara mana hI mana socA-yaha to sAkSAt kAmadeva hI hai| ise mAranA
ThIka nhiiN| rAjA para vaha atyaMta mohita 3 usane rAjA se kahA-mahAbhAga! paira
dhone ke bahAne isa kue~ meM bahuta-se manuSyoM ko girA diye haiN| coroM ke dila
meM dayA kahAM? yaha to maiM Apake rUpa lAvaNya ko dekhakara Apa para mohita
aura prabhAvita ho gayI; isalie Apako maiM isa kuMe~ meM nahIM ddaaluuNgii|
mahApuruSa kA prabhAva adbhuta vazIkaraNa yukta hotA hai| isalie svAmin! merA
anurodha hai ki Apa yahAM se jhaTapaTa cale jAie, nahIM to hama donoM kI khaira
nahIM hai| rAjA tatkAla vahAM se uThakara bAhara nikala gyaa| catura | parAkramI
hote hue bhI zatru ko buddhibala se mArate haiN| rAjA ke kAphI dUra cale jAne ke
bAda vaha lar3akI jora se cillAyIbhAI, vaha to bhAga gayA, daur3o-daur3o jaladI,
vaha calA gyaa| apane paricita yA snehI ko bacAne ke lie buddhizAlI 142

Page #165 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Story of Rohiney ## The Story of Rohiney  The second light of the Yoga
Shastra, verse 72, describes such methods. The Mandic thief, a member of the
Kank tribe, with a sharp sword in his hand, ran swiftly behind the king, his
tongue hanging out like a Vetala. The king, wise like Brihaspati, hid behind a
stone pillar, standing alert, knowing the thief was approaching. With eyes red
with anger, the Mandic thief, without looking or thinking, pierced the pillar
with his Kank sword, mistaking it for a man, and returned to his place. The
king, happy to know the thief's whereabouts, went to his palace. Who wouldn't be
happy to see the one who troubles others caught?  In the morning, the king, the
universal mind-bearer, went out under the pretext of strolling in the garden to
find the thief. The Mandic thief was sitting in a cloth shop, working on
stitching, with pieces of cloth wrapped around his thighs and calves, his mouth
slightly open. Seeing the thief, whose form was deceitfully covered by clothes
like a dung heap covered by Vasala, the king recognized him from the night
before. The king immediately returned to the palace and called some trusted
servants, described the thief's appearance, and said, "Bring the one with cloth
bands tied on him, who is at such and such a place." The servant reached that
place, looked carefully, and went to the thief, saying, "The king respectfully
summons you." As soon as the thief heard this, he thought, "This must be the
same man who escaped from me that time. He wasn't killed. This is the result of
that, that the king is now calling me." Kings often recognize thieves. Thinking
this, the thief went to the royal palace. The king seated him on a large seat
near him. Because wise men who want to kill first offer great food to the
person. Smiling faintly, the king said to him in sweet words, "Give me your
sister. A daughter is meant to be given to others." Now the Mandic thief was
certain that the king had seen his sister before, because no one else had been
there except him. He said to the king, "O Lord! You take my sister in marriage.
She is yours; and whatever I have is also yours." Just as Krishna married the
devoted Rukmini, so the king married the beautiful Mandic sister. Then the king
gave Mandic the position of chief minister. Who can know the depths of kings,
like the depths of the ocean? Now the king would daily have clothes, ornaments,
etc., brought to him from the Mandic thief's sister. "A cunning man is tricked
by a cunning man." Gradually, when the king had collected a lot of wealth, he
asked his wife one day, "My dear! How much wealth does your brother have left?"
Mandic's sister said, "He had only that much wealth. Because there is nothing to
hide from one's beloved." After this, the king, with his harsh orders, had the
thief tortured and killed in many ways. Even though he was related to him, he
had him killed.  Therefore, understanding that the bad fruit of theft is
received in this life as well, in any way, a wise person should always avoid
theft.  ## Rohiney, from Thief to Saint  In the city of Rajgriha, which
surpassed the beauty of Amaravati, King Shrenik ruled, served by many kings.
Like the wise son of Krishna, Pradyumna Kumar, this king had a son who was
valiant in policy and strength. His name was Abhay Kumar. In those days, in the
cave of Vaibhargiri, there lived a famous thief named Lohkhur, who was like a
living embodiment of fierce anger. When the men and women of Rajgriha went to
some festival or other, he would quietly go behind them like a ghost, create
havoc, and steal wealth from there. He considered the city his own storehouse or
home. He would rape any beautiful woman he saw. He was only interested in the
business of theft, and his mind did not settle on any other livelihood. It is
true that a carnivore is not satisfied with any food other than meat. His wife's
name was Rohini. He had a son, like himself in appearance and behavior, whose
name was Rohiney. At the time of his death, the father called him and said,
"Son! I will tell you one thing, promise to do as I say." He said, "Father! I
will certainly do as you say." In this world, there is no transgression of a
father's command.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 rohiNeya kI kathA yogazAstra dvitIya prakAza zloka 72 aise upAya kiyA karate
haiN| maMDika cora kaMkajAti kI tIkhI dhAra vAlI talavAra lekara vetAla ke
samAna bAhara jIbha laTakAye hue phurtI se rAjA ke pIche daudd'aa| bRhaspati ke
samAna buddhimAna rAjA use najadIka AyA jAnakara cauka meM khar3e kiye hue
patthara ke eka khaMbhe ke pIche chipa gyaa| krodha se lAla-lAla A~kheM kiye hue
maMDika cora ne Ava dekhA na tAva, khaMbhe ko hI puruSa samajhakara kaMkajAtIya
talavAra se chedana karake apane sthAna ko lauTa aayaa| cora kA patA laga jAne
se rAjA harSita hokara apane mahala meM calA gyaa| dUsaroM ko parezAna karane
vAlA pakar3A jAya to kise khuzI nahIM hotI? prAtaHkAla vizvamAnasahArI rAjA
upavana meM ghUmane ke bahAne cora kA patA lagAne ke lie niklaa| eka kapar3e kI
dUkAna para silAI kA kAma karatA huA, jAMghoM aura piMDaliyoM para kapar3e ke
Tukar3e lapeTe hue jarA-sA muMha bAe maMDikacora baiThA thaa| vAsalatA se DhakI
huI TaTTI kI taraha kapar3oM se kapaTapUrvaka DhakI huI AkRti banAye hue usa
cora ko dekhakara anumAna se rAjA rAta ko dekhe hue usa cora ko pahacAna gyaa|
rAjA ne turaMta rAjamahala meM Akara kucha vizvasta sevaka bulAye aura hUliyA
batAkara kahA ki-'amuka-amuka sthAna para jisake kapar3e kI paTTiyA~ baMdhI huI
hai, use yahAM bulA le aao| sevaka usa sthAna para phuNcaa| aura gaura se
dekhakara usake pAsa, jAkara sevaka ne kahA-Apako rAjAjI sammAnaparvaka balA
rahe haiN| cora ne sanate hI mana meM socA ho na ho. yaha vahI puruSa hai, jo
usa samaya mere yahAM se bhAgane meM saphala ho gayA thA. mArA nahIM gayA hai|
usI kA hI yaha pariNAma hai ki aba rAjA bulA rahA hai| rAjA-mahArAjA akasara
cora ko pahacAna jAte haiN| yaha socakara vaha cora rAjakula meM gyaa| rAjA ne
use apane pAsa bar3e Asana para bitthaayaa| kyoMki mAranA cAhane vAle nItijJa
puruSa pahale usa para mahAprasAda karate haiN| maMda-maMda muskarAte hue rAjA
ne madhura vacanoM se use kahA-tuma apanI bahana mujhe de do| kanyA to dUsaroM
ko dene yogya hI hotI hai| aba to maMDika ko nizcaya ho gayA ki merI bahana ko
isane pahale dekhA hai, isalie isake sivAya aura koI vahAM nahIM gayA, yaha rAjA
hI gayA hai| usane rAjA se kahA-deva! Apa merI bahana ke sAtha pANigrahaNa kreN|
vaha to ApakI hI hai; aura mere pAsa jo kucha bhI hai, vaha saba bhI ApakA hI
hai| jaise kRSNa ne anuraktA rukmiNI ke sAtha vivAha kiyA thA, vaise hI rAjA ne
rUpavatI maMDika bhaginI ke sAtha vivAha kiyaa| phira rAjA ne maMDika ko
mahApradhAna pada de diyaa| samudra ke aMtastala ke samAna rAjAoM ke aMtastala
ko kauna jAna sakatA hai? aba rAjA maMDika cora kI bahana dvArA rojAnA vastra,
AbhUSaNa Adi usake pAsa se maMgavAtA thaa| 'dhUrta AdamI se hI dhUrta ThagA jAtA
hai|' dhIre-dhIre rAjA ne jaba bahuta-sA dhana maMgavA liyA to eka dina apanI
patnI se pUchA-priye! aba tumhAre bhAI ke pAsa kitanA dhana aura hai?
maMDikabhaginI ne kahA-usake pAsa itanA hI dhana thaa| kyoMki apane priyatama se
chipAne jaisA kucha bhI nahIM hotaa| isake pazcAt kaThora Adeza vAle rAjA ne
aneka prakAra kI yAtanAe~ dekara use maravA ddaalaa| cora saMbaMdhI thA to bhI
use maravA ddaalaa| ataH corI kA burA phala isa janma meM bhI kisI bhI prakAra
se milatA hai; aisA samajhakara samajhadAra vyakti ko corI se sadA bacanA
caahie| rohiNeya cora se saMta banA : amarAvatI kI zobhA ko mAta karane vAle
rAjagRha nagara meM aneka rAjAoM dvArA sevita zreNika rAjA rAjya karatA thaa|
kRSNa ke buddhizAlI putra pradyumnakumAra kI taraha usa rAjA ke nIti
parAkramazAlI eka putra thaa| nAma thaa-abhykumaar| una dinoM vaibhAragiri kI
guphA meM sAkSAt raudrarasa-sA mUrtimAna lohakhura nAmaka eka nAmI cora rahatA
thaa| rAjagRha ke nivAsI naranArI jaba kisI utsava Adi meM cale jAte, taba vaha
pIche se cupacApa pizAca ke samAna jAkara upadrava macAtA aura vahA~ se dhana
curA lAtA; nagara ko to vaha apanA bhaMDAra yA ghara hI samajhatA thaa| kisI bhI
suMdara strI ko dekhate hI usase balAtkAra karatA thaa| use kevala corI ke
vyavasAya kI lagana thI aura kisI bhI AjIvikA meM usakA mana nahIM lagatA thaa|
saca hai, mAMsAhArI ko mAMsa ke sivAya anya kisI bhojana se tRpti nahIM hotii|
usakI patnI kA nAma rohiNi thaa| apane hI rUpa aura vyavahAra ke samAna usake
eka putra huA, jisakA nAma rakhA gyaa-rohinney| mRtyu ke samaya pitA ne use
bulAkara kahA-'beTA! maiM jo kucha kahUMgA, usake anusAra karane kA vacana do to
maiM tumheM eka bAta khuuN|' usane kahA-pitAjI! jaisA Apa kaheMge, tadanusAra
meM avazya kruuNgaa| isa saMsAra meM pitA kI AjJA kA ullaMghana 143

Page #166 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Story of Rohiney Yoga Shastra, Second Light, Verse 72 | "Who will do it?"
Upon hearing his son's words, Lohkhur was overjoyed. He stroked his son's head
and said cruelly, "Look! The Mahavira preaches Dharma in the Samavasarana
created by the Devas. Never listen to his words. You are free to do whatever you
want besides that." Thus, having assured his son, Lohkhur died. After performing
his father's death rites, Rohiney surpassed his father. He too began to steal
day and night, as if he were another Lohkhur. Heeding his father's command,
disregarding his own life, he stole in the city of Rajgriha like a slave's son.
Once, while traveling through villages and cities, the last Tirthankara, Bhagwan
Mahavira Swami, accompanied by 14,000 sadhus, arrived in the city of Rajgriha,
his lotus feet resting on a golden lotus. The Devas and Devis of all four realms
together created the Samavasarana. One day, the Lord was preaching in his
Yojanagamini, nectar-showering voice, which could be understood by all
languages. By divine chance, Rohiney was going towards Rajgriha for some work at
that time. The Lord's Samavasarana was on the way. Therefore, Rohiney thought,
"If I go by this route, I will surely hear Mahavira's words, which will also
violate my father's command. But there is no other way either." Thinking this,
Rohiney covered his ears with both hands and hurried towards Rajgriha. In this
way, while going, one day, he suddenly stepped on a thorn near the Samavasarana.
Due to his haste, the thorn went deep. He felt great pain. He could not move
without removing it. Consequently, he removed his hands from his ears to remove
the thorn and took them down to his feet to pull it out. During this time, the
Lord's words reached his ears - "The Devas remain four fingers above the earth
without touching it. Their eyelids do not blink, their garlands do not wither,
and their bodies do not have dirt or sweat." Hearing this, he began to repent -
"Oh! I have heard so many words, damn me!" Saying this to himself, he quickly
pulled out the thorn, covered his ears with both hands again, and continued
walking. In this way, he, the thief, came and went to Rajgriha every day and
stole. One day, the wealthy people of the city came to King Shrenik and
complained - "Your Majesty! We have no other trouble in your kingdom, which is
ruled by a just king like you, but there is one great hardship, that thieves
steal our wealth and disappear. Even after searching, we cannot find them."
Hearing the suffering of his subjects, King Shrenik, who was grieved like a
brother, angrily said to the Kotwal, "It seems you are neglecting the thieves,
becoming their partners, eating my salary, and doing the work of the thieves. In
this way, the people's wealth is being stolen day by day." The Kotwal said
sorrowfully, "What should I tell you, Dev! There is a thief named Rohiney who is
looting the citizens. He is so cunning that he jumps like a monkey, like the
flash of lightning, from one house to another, and from there he easily crosses
the fort. We reach there, but by then he has disappeared. We take one step, he
takes a hundred steps. We have no control over catching and killing that thief.
It is difficult to even see him, let alone catch him. If you wish, you can take
our authority as Kotwal from us." Hearing this, the King, with a gesture of his
eye, signaled Abhaykumar to catch the thief. He said to the Kotwal, "Kotwalji!
Today, keep the Chaturangini army ready outside the city. When the thief enters
the city, surround him with the army from all sides. He will be caught like a
frightened deer, while being electrocuted inside. Therefore, when he comes, as
soon as his arrival is known from the sound of his feet, let the alert soldiers
catch that great thief." "Your command is on my head." Saying this, the Kotwal
left from there. The intelligent Kotwal secretly prepared the army. By
coincidence, Rohiney had gone to another village that day. Therefore, he did not
know about the army's encampment outside the city, and just as an unaware
elephant falls into a pit, Rohiney fell into the army's encirclement and was
caught. He entered the city along with the encirclement. By this strategy, the
thief was caught and tied up, and the Kotwal... 144

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 rohiNeya kI kathA yogazAstra dvitIya prakAza zloka 72 | bhalA kauna karegA?
putra ke kathana para se lohakhura ko bar3I khuzI huI usake sira para hAtha
phirAte hue lohakhura ne niSThuratA pUrvaka kahA-'dekha! devatAoM ke dvArA
nirmita samavasaraNa meM mahAvIra dharmopadeza dete haiN| unakI vANI kadApi mata
sunnaa| isake sivAya tuma jo kucha bhI karanA cAho, karane meM svataMtra ho|'
yoM apane lar3ake ko pakkA karake lohakhura mara gyaa| pitA kI maraNottara kriyA
karane ke bAda rohiNeya apane pitA se bhI bar3hakara niklaa| vaha bhI dina-rAta
corI karane lagA, mAno dUsarA hI lohakhura ho| apane prANoM kI paravAha na
karake pitA kI AjJA kA pAlana karate hue, dAsIputra kI taraha vaha rAjagRha
nagara meM coriyAM karatA thaa| eka bAra grAmoM aura nagaroM meM kramazaH vihAra
karate hue 14 hajAra sAdhuoM se saMpanna aMtima tIrthaMkara bhagavAn mahAvIra
svAmI svarNakamala para caraNakamaloM ko sthApita karate hae rAjagRha nagara
pdhaareN| cAroM nikAyoM ke deva-deviyoM ne milakara samavasaraNa kI racanA kii|
eka dina prabhu apanI yojanagAminI sarvabhASAoM meM parivartita hone vAlI
pIyUSavarSiNIvANI meM upadeza de rahe the| daivayoga se usI samaya rohiNeya kisI
kAryavaza rAjagRha kI ora jA rahA thaa| rAste meM hI bhagavAn kA samavasaraNa
par3atA thaa| ataH rohiNeya ne socA-are! isa mArga se jAUMgA to avazya hI
mahAvIra ke vacana kAnoM meM par3eMge, isase pitAjI kI AjJA kA bhI bhaMga hogaa|
paraMtu dUsarA koI rAstA bhI to nahIM hai| aisA socakara rohiNeya donoM hAthoM
se apane kAna baMda karake jaldI-jaldI rAjagRha kI ora jAne lgaa| isa taraha
hamezAM jAte-jAte eka dina samavasaraNa ke pAsa hI acAnaka paira meM kAMTA gar3a
gyaa| jaldI calane ke kAraNa kAMTA gaharA gar3a gyaa| bar3I pIr3A hone lgii| use
nikAle binA calA nahIM jA rahA thaa| phalataH kAMTA nikAlane ke lie usane kAnoM
para se hAtha haTAyA aura nIce pairoM ke pAsa le jAkara kAMTA khIMcane lgaa| isI
daurAna prabhu kI vANI usake kAnoM meM par3a gayI-devatA pRthvItala kA sparza
kiye binA cAra aMgula Upara rahate haiN| unakI AMkhoM kI palakeM jhapakatI
nahIM, unakI phUlamAlA muhatI nahIM aura unake zarIra meM maila va pasInA nahIM
hotaa| itanA sunate hI vaha pazcAttApa karane lagA-oha! maiMne to bahuta-se
vAkya suna liye haiM, dhikkAra hai mujhe! yoM mana hI mana kahatA huA jhaTapaTa
kAMTA nikAlakara phira donoM hAthoM se kAna baMda karake Age calane lgaa| isa
taraha vaha cora pratidina rAjagRha meM AtA-jAtA aura corI karatA thaa| eka dina
nagara ke dhanADhya logoM ne Akara zreNika rAjA se zikAyata kI-mahArAja! Apa
sarIkhe nyAyI rAjA ke rAjya meM hameM aura koI takalIpha nahIM, sirpha eka bar3A
bhArI kaSTa hai ki cora hamArA dhana curAkara adRzya ho jAte haiN| DhUMr3hane
para bhI patA nahIM lgtaa| prajA kI pIr3A sunakara baMdhu ke samAna duHkhita
rAjA zreNika ne kruddha hokara kotavAla se kahA-mAlUma hotA hai cora ke
hissedAra banakara tuma coroM kI upekSA karate ho, vetana merA khAte ho, kAma
coroM kA karate ho| isa taraha se janatA kA dhana dinoM dina curAyA jA rahA hai|
kotavAla ne duHkha pUrvaka kahA-kyA batAU~ deva! rohiNeya nAmaka eka cora hai;
jo nAgarikoM ko lUTa rahA hai| vaha itanA cAlAka hai ki baMdara kI taraha,
vidyuta kI camaka ke samAna kUda-kUdakara kramazaH eka ghara se dUsare ghara
aura vahAM se kilA AsAnI se lAMgha letA hai| hama vahAM pahuMcate haiM, taba
taka vaha vahAM se gAyaba ho jAtA hai| hama eka kadama calate haiM, itane meM
vaha sau kadama cala letA hai| usa cora ko pakar3ane aura mArane meM hamArA vaza
nahIM cltaa| use pakar3anA to dUra rahA, dekha pAnA bhI muzkila hai| Apa cAheM
to kotavAla | kA hamArA adhikAra hamase le leN| yaha sunakara rAjA ne AMkha ke
izAre se abhayakumAra ko cora ko pakar3ane kA saMketa kiyaa| usane kotavAla se
kahA-kotavAlajI! Aja nagara ke bAhara caturaMgiNI senA taiyAra karake rkhnaa|
jaba cora nagara meM praveza karane lage, tabhI use senA cAroM aura se ghera le|
aMdara vidyudutkSikaraNa karate hue ghabarAye hue hirana kI taraha vaha pakar3A
jaaygaa| ataH jaba vaha Aye tabhI usake pairoM kI AhaTa se usake Agamana kA patA
lagate hI usa mahAcora ko apramatta sainika pakar3a leN| ApakI AjJA zirodhArya
hai| yoM kahakara kotavAla vahAM se ravAnA huaa| buddhimAna kotavAla ne gupta
rUpa se senA taiyAra kii| saMyogavaza usa dina rohiNeya dUsare gAMva gayA huA
thaa| ataH nagara ke bAhara senA kA par3Ava hai, ise na jAnane ke kAraNa jaise
anajAna hAthI gaDDhe meM gira jAtA hai, vaise hI rohiNeya senA ke ghere meM A
gayA aura pakar3A gyaa| ghere ke sAtha hI usane nagara meM praveza kiyaa| isa
upAya se cora ko pakar3akara aura bAMdhakara kotavAla 144

Page #167 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Tale of Rohiney The second light of Yoga Shastra, verse 72, entrusted the
king with the case. The king commanded, "Just as justice protects the righteous
and punishes the wicked, punish him accordingly." To this, Abhaykumar said,
"Your Majesty! He was caught alone, without having committed any theft.
Therefore, one should think carefully about this before punishing him." Thus,
the king asked Rohiney, "Tell me, where are you from? What is your profession?
What is your purpose in coming here? Are you not a Rohiney?" Hearing his name,
he became suspicious and thought to himself for a moment before telling the
king, "I am a farmer named Durgachand from Shali village. I had come to Rajgriha
for some work, and due to the late hour, I spent the night in a temple out of
curiosity. Before dawn, when I was returning home, a royal demon, like a demon,
surrounded and captured me while crossing the fort. I fear for my life the most.
Just as a fish that has escaped from the hands of a fisherman is caught in a
net, so too have I, who escaped from the clutches of the royal demons patrolling
the city, been caught by the demons outside. Then, even though I am innocent,
they brought me here, considering me a thief. Now, please act as a judge and
give me justice." Hearing his words, the king sent a trusted man to investigate
his village, and ordered Rohiney to be kept in prison until then. The thief had
already sent a signal to his village. Thieves also have some knowledge of the
future. When the royal men went to that village and inquired, the villagers
said, "Yes, a farmer named Durgachand used to live here, but he has gone to
another village." The royal men came back and told the king the whole truth.
Upon this, Abhaykumar thought, "Even the Creator cannot know the truth of the
cunningly crafted arrogance." Therefore, Abhaykumar called a skilled craftsman,
explained the entire plan to him, and secretly had him build a seven-story
palace, like a precious, gem-studded divine aircraft. When it was finished, it
looked as if a piece of Amaravati from Devalok, adorned with Apsara-like
beautiful women, had fallen down here. When the Gandharvas gathered there and
started a musical festival with music, dance, and instruments, the palace took
on the wondrous beauty of Gandharvanagar. After all this, one day, Abhaykumar
made the thief drink Chandras, a white, milk-like liquor, and made him
unconscious. In his unconscious state, he was dressed in divine clothes and
taken to that palace and laid on a flower bed like that of the gods. When he
regained consciousness and sat up, he saw a gathering of divine women and divine
princes around him, heard the sound of sweet music, songs, and dance, and began
to look with wonder-filled eyes. As per Abhaykumar's prior instructions, the
divinely-dressed women present raised their voices in cheers and said, "You have
just been born in this great aircraft in the form of a god. You are our master,
we are your servants. Like Indra, you should play with these divine women to
your heart's content." Thus, they spoke with cunning and affectionate words. The
thief thought, "Am I a god?" At that moment, all the women clapped their hands
and started playing music with rhythm and beat. Then, a man with golden
ornaments came there and said, "What have you started?" They said to the
gatekeeper, "We are showing our master our scientific skills." He said, "It is
good to show your master your scientific skills, but make sure they follow the
customs of Devalok." Then they asked, "What customs?" Hearing this, the man
showed his authority and said, "Wow! Have you forgotten this too? Here, whoever
is born a new god, they are first asked about their good and bad deeds in their
previous birth, and then they are given the freedom to enjoy heavenly pleasures.
Oh! In the joy of the new master's benefit, we forgot to tell them this." Then,
they went to the thief and said, "Master! You are pleased with us, so please
follow the customs of Devalok. Here, whoever is born, it is necessary to first
tell them about their good and bad deeds in their previous birth, and then they
are given the freedom to enjoy heavenly pleasures. This is the custom here." The
thief said, "Is this really Devalok, or is this a web of illusion created by
Abhaykumar to trap me? Is it not possible that this is a trick to find out my
secret? What should I say to them?" At that moment, while removing the thorn, he
heard... 145

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 rohiNeya kI kathA yogazAstra dvitIya prakAza zloka 72 ne rAjA ko supurda kiyaa|
rAjA ne AjJA dI-'jaise nyAya sajjana kI rakSA aura durjana ko sajA detA hai,
vaise hI ise sajA do|' isa para abhayakumAra ne kahA-'mahArAja! abhI taka yaha
binA corI kiye, akelA hI pakar3A gayA thaa| isalie isake bAre meM yathocita
socakara phira ise daMDa denA caahie| ataH rAjA ne rohiNeya se pUchA-bolo jI,
tuma kahAM ke ho? tumhArA pezA kyA hai? yahAM kisa prayojana se Aye ho? tuma
rohiNeya to nahIM ho na? apanA nAma sunate hI sazaMka hokara usane mana hI mana
kucha socakara rAjA se kahA-maiM zAlI gAMva kA durgacaMDa nAmaka kisAna huuN|
kisI kAma se rAjagRha AyA thA, zAma ho jAne ke kAraNa kautukavaza eka maMdira
meM rAta bitAyI thii| subaha hone se pahale hI jaba maiM apane ghara jA rahA
thA, tabhI rAkSasa kI taraha rAja-rAkSasa ne kilA pAra karate hue mujhe
gherakara pakar3a liyaa| mujhe apane prANoM kA sabase adhika bhaya hai| ataH
macchImAra ke hAtha se chuTI huI machalI jaise jAla meM phaMsAkara pakar3a lI
jAtI hai, vaise hI nagara ke aMdara gazta lagA rahe rAja-rAkSasoM ke paMje se
chUTA huA maiM bAhara ke rAja-rAkSasoM dvArA pakar3a liyA gayA huuN| phira
niraparAdha hote hue bhI mujhe cora samajhakara ye yahAM le Aye haiN| aba Apa hI
kRpA karake nyAyAdhIza banakara merA nyAya kreN|' rAjA ne usakI bAta sunakara
usake batAye hue gAMva meM usakI jAMca par3atAla karane ke lie eka vizvasta
AdamI bhejA, taba taka rohiNeya ko kArAgAra meM baMda karake rakhane kA Adeza
diyaa| cora ne bhI usa gAMva meM pahale se saMketa kara diyA thaa| coroM ko bhI
pahale se bhaviSya kA kucha-kucha patA laga jAtA hai| rAjapuruSoM ne usa gAMva
meM jAkara patA lagAyA to gAMva vAle logoM ne kahA-hAM, durgacaMDa nAma kA eka
kisAna pahale yahAM rahatA thA, aba vaha dUsare gAMva gayA hai| rAjapuruSoM ne
Akara rAjA se sArI hakIkata khii| isa para abhayakumAra ne socA-caturAI se kiye
hue daMbha kA patA to vidhAtA ko bhI nahIM laga sktaa| ataH abhayakumAra ne eka
kuzala kArIgara ko bulAkara use sArI yojanA samajhAkara gupta rUpa se eka
ratnajaTita bahumUlya devavimAna ke samAna sAta majalA mahala taiyAra krvaayaa|
taiyAra hone para vaha aisA lagatA thA, mAno apsarAtulya ramaNiyoM se alaMkRta
devaloka se amarAvatI kA eka Tukar3A alaga hokara yahAM gira par3A ho| jaba
gaMdharva loga vahAM ekatrita hokara saMgIta, nRtya aura vAdya se saMgIta
mahotsava karane lage, taba to isa mahala ne gaMdharvanagara kI adbhuta zobhA
dhAraNa kara lii| yaha saba ho jAne para eka dina abhayakumAra ne cora ko dUdha
ke samAna sapheda caMdrahAsa madirA pIlAkara behoza kara diyaa| behozI hAlata
meM hI use devadUSya vastra pahanA diye gaye aura usI mahala meM le jAkara devoM
kI-sI puSpazayyA para liTA diyA gyaa| jaba vaha hoza meM AyA aura baiThA to
usane apane cAroM ora divyAMganAoM aura devakumAroM kA jamaghaTa dekhA,
madhuravAdya gIta aura nRtya kA jhaMkAra sunA to Azcarya-visphArita netroM se
dekhane lgaa| abhayakumAra ke pUrva saMketAnusAra upasthita divyavastradhArI
naranAriyoM ne ucca svara se jaya-jayakAra kiyaa| aura kahane lage-abhI-abhI Apa
isa mahAvimAna meM deva rUpa meM utpanna hue haiN| Apa hamAre svAmI haiM, hama
Apake sevaka haiN| Apa iMdra ke samAna ina devAMganAoM ke sAtha yatheSTa krIr3A
kreN| isa prakAra cAturya aura snehagarbhita vacanoM se unhoMne khaa| cora ne
socA-kyA maiM deva huuN| itane meM hI sabhI naranAriyoM ne tAlI bajAte hue tAla
aura laya se yukta saMgIta chedd'aa| tabhI svarNadhArI eka puruSa ne vahAM Akara
kahA-yaha tumane kyA prAraMbha kiyA hai? unhoMne pratihAra se kahA-hama apane
svAmI ko apanA vijJAnakauzala batA rahe haiN| vaha bolA-apane svAmI ko
vijJAnakauzala batAnA to acchA hai, lekina devaloka ke AcAra kA inase pAlana
kraao| taba unhoMne pUchAkauna-sA AcAra? yaha sunakara usa puruSa ne rauba
dikhAte hue kahA-vAha! yaha bAta bhI bhUla gaye tuma? yahAM jo bhI nayA deva
utpanna hotA hai, usase apane pUrvajanma kA acche-bure kArya kA vivaraNa pahale
pUchA jAtA hai, tatpazcAt svargasukha | bhogane kI khulI chuTa dI jAtI hai| o
ho! naye svAmI ke lAbha kI khuzI meM hama yaha kahanA hI bhUla gaye inse| phira
cora ke pAsa jAkara una sabane kahA-svAmin! Apa hama para prasanna haiM, isalie
Apa devaloka kI AcAramaryAdA kA pAlana krie| yahAM jo janma letA hai, usase
sarvaprathama apane pUrvajanma meM kiye gaye hue zubhAzubha kAryoM kA hAla
batAnA Avazyaka hotA hai, tatpazcAt use svargasukhopabhoga karane kI chUTa dI
jAtI hai| yahI yahAM kA AcAra hai| cora ne kahAyaha sacamuca devaloka hai yA
mujhe phasAne ke lie abhayakumAra kA racA huA mAyAjAla hai? kahIM aisA to nahIM
hai ki mujhase bheda jAnane ke lie yaha prapaMca kiyA ho? kyA kahA jAya inheM?
itane meM use kAMTA nikAlate samaya kAnoM meM par3e hue 145

Page #168 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Story of Rohiney  **Yoga Shastra, Second Light, Verse 72** | The words of
the Lord came to mind. If his form resembles the divine form I heard from Lord
Mahavira, then I will tell the truth. If not, I will fabricate a lie. Thinking
this, the thief observed his feet touching the ground, his eyelids blinking, his
garland of flowers wilted, and sweat and dirt on his body. Seeing all this, he
thought, "This is all an illusion." Therefore, he began to think about his
answer. Then the divine beings spoke to him again, "Dev! Tell us about your past
life, we are eager to hear." Rohiney said, "In my previous birth, I gave worthy
donations. I made many pilgrimages. I served and worshipped the Lord and the
Guru. I performed many other righteous deeds." The guard interrupted, "Now tell
us about your misdeeds." Rohiney said, "Due to constant association with the
virtuous, I have not done anything wrong in my life." The guard said, "A man's
nature does not remain the same throughout his life. Therefore, reveal any wrong
deeds you may have committed in your life, such as theft, adultery, etc."
Rohiney said, "Can someone who commits such evil deeds ever attain heaven? Can a
blind man climb a mountain?" Hearing his words, they all fell silent and went to
Abhaykumar and told him the whole story from beginning to end.  Hearing the
whole account, Abhaykumar pleaded with King Shrenik, "Your Majesty! We have
investigated this matter in many ways, but we cannot prove him to be a thief.
Perhaps he is a thief, but how can we apprehend him according to the law if he
is not caught in the act? Therefore, we should release him while upholding the
principles of justice." As per the King's order, Abhaykumar released Rohiney.
Even the most intelligent people are deceived by those skilled in cunning.  Now
Rohiney began to think, "My father unjustly ordered me not to listen to the
saintly words, depriving me of the nectar of the Lord's words for a long time.
If the Lord's words had not reached my ears, how could I have understood this
web of artificial deities and how could I have escaped from their trap so
cleanly? I would have been finished by now, beaten by them. Even though I heard
them unwillingly, those divine words have become a life-giving medicine for me
today. Shame on me! I have rejected the words of Arhan and accepted the words of
thieves, fallen for their words, and loved them. Just as a crow prefers to sit
on neem trees instead of mango trees, I have preferred my father's words over
the Lord's words for a long time. Then I heard a small part of the Lord's
teachings, and I received such great benefits. If I had listened to all the
teachings with interest, how much benefit would I have received?" Thinking these
auspicious thoughts in his mind, Rohiney went straight to Lord Mahavira and,
after bowing at his lotus feet, prayed, "Lord! In this ocean of the world,
filled with aquatic creatures in the form of terrible calamities, your guiding
words act as a great vessel (ship). My uncivilized father, who considers himself
a righteous man, has forbidden me from listening to your words until now.
Therefore, I, the unfortunate one, have been deprived of the words of the world
teacher. O Lord of the Three Worlds! Truly, those men are blessed who, with
faith, always drink the nectar of your words with their lips. What a sinner I
am, that I blocked my ears with my fingers and crossed this place, not wanting
to hear your words. Once, unwillingly, I heard some of your words. It was due to
the influence of those mantras that I escaped from the clutches of the king's
demon. O Lord! Just as you protected me from death, so now save me from drowning
in the whirlpool of the ocean of the world."  The compassionate Lord, hearing
his humble prayer, preached to him the pure path of the virtuous, the giver of
liberation. Awakened by this, Rohiney the thief bowed and respectfully asked,
"Lord! Am I worthy of the path of a monk?" Please tell me." The Lord said,
"Rohiney! You are worthy!" Hearing this, Rohiney said, "Lord! Then I will surely
accept the great vows." In the middle of this, King Shrenik said, "I have
something to say." Then he said to the thief, "Rohiney! Now you are about to be
initiated into the Lord's feet, so I forgive you for your misdeeds."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 rohiNeya kI kathA yogazAstra dvitIya prakAza zloka 72 | bhagavAn ke ve vacana
yAda aaye| agara bhagavAn mahAvIra se sune hue deva svarUpa se milatA julatA hI
inakA svarUpa hogA, taba to maiM sArI bAte saca-saca kaha dUMgA, agara aisA na
huA to phira kucha banAkara jhUThI bAta kaha duuNgaa| yoM vicArakara cora ne
unake paira jamIna se sparza karate hue dekhe, unake netroM kI palakeM jhapatI
huI dekhI, puSpamAlA bhI muAI huI najara AyI, sAtha hI unake zarIra para pasInA
aura maila bhI dekhaa| yaha saba dekhakara usane socA-yaha saba mAyAjAla hI hai|
ataH vaha uttara ke lie kucha socane lgaa| tabhI divyarUpadhAriyoM ne usase
phira kahA-deva! Apa apanA pUrva jIvana sunAie, hama sunane ke lie utsuka hai|
rohiNeya bolA-maiMne pUrvajanma meM supAtradAna diyA thaa| aneka tIrthayAtrAe~
kI thiiN| bhagavAn aura guru kI sevAbhakti kI thii| aura bhI aneka dharmakArya
kiye| paharedAra ne bIca meM hI bAta kATakara kahAacchA aba apane duSkRtyoM kA
bhI bayAna kiijie| rohiNeya ne kahA-satata sAdhusamAgama hone se maiMne apane
jIvana meM koI galata kAma nahIM kiyaa| pratIhAra ne kahA-jiMdagIbhara manuSya
eka sarIkhe svabhAva vAlA nahIM rahatA; isalie Apane apane jIvana meM corI.
paradArAsevana Adi jo bhI galata kAma kiye hoM. unheM prakaTa kijie| rohiNeya ne
kahA-kyA aisA burA karma karane vAlA kabhI svarga prApta kara sakatA hai? kyA
aMdhA AdamI pahAr3a para car3ha sakatA hai? ve saba usa cora kI bAteM sunakara
cupa ho gaye aura abhayakumAra ke pAsa jAkara AdyopAMta sArA vivaraNa kaha
sunaayaa| sArA vRttAMta sunakara abhayakumAra ne rAjA zreNika se nivedana
kiyA-'mahArAja! kaI upAyoM se hamane isakI jAMca kI, paraMtu isakA cora honA
sAbita nahIM hotaa| kadAcit cora hogA bhI; lekina jaba kAnUna kI giraphta meM na
Aye, taba taka hama ise nyAya kI dRSTi se kaise pakar3a sakate haiM? isalie
nyAyanIti kA pAlana karate hue hameM ise chor3a denA caahie| rAjA kI AjJA ke
anusAra abhayakumAra ne rohiNeya ko chor3a diyaa| dhUrtatA meM dakSa vyakti se
bar3e-bar3e hoziyAra AdamI bhI Thage jAte haiN|' aba rohiNeya vicAra karane
lagA-pitAjI ne nAhaka hI saMtavANI na sunane kI AjJA dekara cirakAla taka mujhe
bhagavAn ke vacanAmRtoM se vaMcita rkhaa| agara prabhu ke vacana mere kAnoM meM
nahIM par3ate to maiM kRtrima devatAoM ke isa jAla ko kaise samajha pAtA aura
kaise inake jAla se itanI saphAI se chuTakArA pA sakatA thA? maiM to aba taka
inakI mAra khAkara khatmakara diyA gayA hotaa| anicchA se bhI sune hue ve
bhagavadvacana rogI ke lie saMjIvanI auSadhi kI taraha mere liye Aja jilAne vAle
bana gye| dhikkAra hai mujhe! maiMne aba taka arhana ke vacanoM ko ThukarAkara
coroM ke vacana hI mAne, unhIM kI bAtoM meM A gayA, unhIM se hI prema kiyaa|
sacamuca Ama ke per3oM ko chor3akara jaise kauA nIma ke per3oM para baiThane meM
AnaMda mAnatA hai, vaise hI maiMne bhagavAn ke vacanoM ko chor3akara pitAjI ke
vacanoM meM cirakAla taka AnaMda maanaa| phira bhagavAn ke upadeza kA maiMne
jarA-sA aMza sunA thA, jisakA bhI itanA suphala milA to agara maiM sArA upadeza
ruci pUrvaka sunatA to kitanA lAbha milatA?' isa prakAra mana hI mana zubha
ciMtana karatA huA rohiNeya sIdhA bhagavAn mahAvIra ke pAsa pahuMcA aura unake
caraNakamaloM meM namaskAra karake usane prArthanA kI-'bhagavAna! bhayaMkara
Apatti rUpI jalacara jaMtuoM se bhare hue isa saMsArasamudra meM ApakI
yojanagAminI vANI mahAyAnapAtra (jahAja)| kA kAma karatI hai| apane Apako
prAmANika puruSa mAnane vAle mere anArya pitA ne mujhe aba taka Apake vacana
sunane kA niSedha kiyA thA, isa kAraNa maiM abhAgA Apa jagadguru kI vANI se
vaMcita rhaa| trilokInAtha! sacamuca ve puruSa dhanya haiM, jo zraddhA pUrvaka
apane kAMjalipuTa se Apake vacanAmRta kA sadA pAna karate haiN| maiM abhAgA
kaisA pApI rahA ki Apake vacana sunane kI icchA na hone ke kAraNa kAnoM meM
aMguliyAM DAlakara baMda karake isa sthAna ko pAra karatA thaa| eka bAra anicchA
se bhI maiMne kucha vacana Apake sune, una maMtrAkSaroM ke prabhAva se hI maiM
rAjarAkSasa ke caMgula se baca skaa| nAtha! jisa prakAra Apane marate hue kI
rakSA kI, usI prakAra Apa aba saMsArasAgara ke bhaMvarajAla meM DUbate hue mujhe
bcaaie|' anukaMpA parAyaNa prabhu ne usakI namra prArthanA sunakara use
nirvANapadadAtA nirmala sAdhudharma kA upadeza diyaa| usase pratibodha pAkara
rohiNeya cora ne namaskAra karake prabha se savinaya pachA-bhagavana! maiM
munidharma ke yogya hai yA nahIM? kRpA karake phrmaaie|' bhagavAna ne
kahA-'rohiNeya! tuma yogya ho!' yaha sunakara rohiNeya ne kahA-prabho! taba to
maiM avazya hI mahAvrata aMgIkAra kruuNgaa|' bIca meM hI rAjA zreNika ne kahA-
majhe ise kacha kahanA hai| yoM kahakara cora se kahArohiNeya! aba to tuma
prabhucaraNoM meM dIkSita hone jA rahe ho, isalie maiM tumheM apane kRta
duSkRtyoM ke lie kSamA karatA 146

Page #169 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Fruit of Abstaining from Theft  **From the second chapter of the Yoga
Shastra, verses 73 to 75:**  "But you should be at ease and without any doubt,
tell your entire life story as it is." Hearing this, Rohiney, the son of
Lohkhur, said, "O King! What you have heard from people about me is true, I am
Rohiney, the thief. I was a thief in this city without any hesitation. Just as a
river is crossed by a boat, I crossed the river of distress, born from the
intellect of Abhaykumarji, with the boat of the Lord's nectar-like words. I have
stolen so much in this city that no other thief can even investigate me. Please
send a trustworthy person with me so that I can tell him about all the stolen
goods and hand them over. After that, I will take initiation and make my birth
successful. I apologize to all of you for my crimes."  By the order of King
Shrenik, Abhaykumar and some prominent citizens went with Rohiney out of
curiosity. He dug up all the places where he had buried wealth, including
mountains, rivers, forests, trees, cremation grounds, etc., and handed it over
to the king. Abhaykumar also returned the wealth to its rightful owners. There
is no other injustice in the ministers who are selfless and righteous. After
that, the devout Rohiney went to his relatives. He enlightened them about
renunciation, detachment, and altruism, and then he himself went to the feet of
the Lord. King Shrenik celebrated Rohiney's initiation ceremony with great pomp.
At the right time, in an auspicious moment, he accepted the Bhagavati initiation
from Lord Mahavira. After taking initiation, Rohiney Muni performed pure
austerities, including fasting for one day to six months, to destroy his karma.
As his body became thin and weak due to austerity, he performed the worship of
Sanlekhana with devotion and, with the permission of Lord Veeraprabhu, performed
the fast called Padupopgaman on Mount Vipulachal. In the end, remembering the
Panchparmeshthi with auspicious meditation, Rohiney Mahamuni left his body
through Samadhi-maran and reached the Devaloka.  In this way, a person who turns
away from the act of theft, like Rohiney, attains heavenly bliss in a short
time. Therefore, wise men should never commit theft, which spoils both lives.
||72||  Now, instructions are given on abandoning the faults arising from theft.
||129||  "It is far from the point to attempt to steal someone's entire wealth.
One should not even take a single blade of grass without giving it." ||73||
Meaning: One should not even think of stealing someone's wealth, let alone
actually doing it. One should not even take a single blade of grass without
giving it. One should not even try to do so. ||73||  Now, the fruit of
abstaining from theft is explained in two verses. ||130||  "Those who, with pure
minds, make it a rule not to take what belongs to others, wealth comes to them
on its own, like a self-choosing bride; it is not obtained through another's
influence or through business and trade." ||74||  Meaning: Those who, with pure
minds, make it a rule not to take what belongs to others, wealth comes to them
on its own, like a self-choosing bride; it is not obtained through another's
influence or through business and trade. ||74||  See also. ||131||  "Misfortunes
go far away from those who practice the vow of non-stealing. They receive praise
from people for their honesty, saying, 'This man is honest.' He is praised in
this world and also attains heavenly bliss in the next world." ||75||  Meaning:
Misfortunes go far away from those who practice the vow of non-stealing. They
receive praise from people for their honesty, saying, 'This man is honest.' He
is praised in this world and also attains heavenly bliss in the next world.
||75||  Explanation: According to the context, the meaning of some verses is
being given here.  Drinking the flame of fire, kissing the mouth of a serpent,
and licking the poison of Halahal is good, but stealing someone else's wealth is
not good. The mind of one who has greed for another's wealth often becomes
cruel. He becomes ready to kill even his brother, father, uncle, wife, friend,
son, and guru. Like a stick raised to kill a cat that wants to drink milk, one
who steals another's wealth cannot escape his own death-bond. A thief is worse
than a hunter, fisherman, cat, etc. Because the king arrests him, but not other
creatures. Therefore, a wise man should consider even the gold, jewels, etc.,
that are lying in front of him, as stones. In this way, 147

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 corI se nivRtta hone kA phala yogazAstra dvitIya prakAza zloka 73 se 75 huuN|
paraMtu tuma nizciMta aura niHzaMka hokara apanI sArI AtmakathA jyoM kI tyoM
kaha do|' yaha sunakara lohakhura-putra | rohiNeya ne kahA-rAjan! mere viSaya
meM logoM se Apane jo sunA hai, vahI maiM rohiNeya cora huuN| maiM niHzaMka
hokara nagara meM corI karatA thaa| jaise naukA ke jariye nadI pAra kI jAtI hai,
vaise hI prabhu ke eka amRta-vacana rUpI naukA se maiMne abhayakumArajI kI
buddhi se utpanna kI huI saMkaTa kI nadI pAra kara lii| isa nagara meM maiMne
itanI coriyAM kI haiM, ki dUsarA koI cora merI chAnabIna bhI nahIM kara sktaa|
Apa mere sAtha kisI vizvasta vyakti ko bhejie, tAki maiM curAI huI sArI vastueM
use batA dUM aura sauMpa duuN| tatpazcAt dIkSA grahaNa karake apanA janma
saphala kruuN| maiM Apa sabase apane aparAdhoM ke lie kSamA cAhatA huuN| zreNika
rAjA kI AjJA se abhayakumAra tathA kucha pratiSThita nAgarika kutUhalavaza
rohiNeya ke sAtha gye| usane parvata, nadI, vana, vRkSa, zmazAna Adi jina
sthAnoM meM dhana gAr3A thA, vaha saba khodakara nikAlA aura mAra ko sauMpa
diyaa| abhayakamAra ne bhI jisa-jisa vyakti kA vaha dhana thA. use de diyaa|
nirlobhI aura nItimAna maMtriyoM kI aura koI durnIti nahIM hotii| usake bAda
zraddhAlu rohiNeya apane saMbaMdhiyoM ke pAsa phuNcaa| saMbaMdhiyoM ko tyAga,
vairAgya aura paramArtha kI bAteM kahakara usane pratibodhita kiyA aura phira
svayaM bhagavAn ke caraNoM meM phuNcaa| zreNika rAjA ne khUba dhUmadhAma se
rohiNeya kA dIkSA-mahotsava kiyaa| ThIka samaya para zubhamuharta meM usane zrI
mahAvIra prabhu se bhAgavatI dIkSA aMgIkAra kii| dIkSA lene ke bAda karmakSaya
karane ke lie eka upavAsa se lekara chaha mahIne taka ke upavAsa Adi nirmala
tapa rohiNeya muni ne kiye| tapasyA karate-karate jaba zarIra kRza aura azakta
ho gayA, taba bhAva se saMlekhanA kI ArAdhanA karake zrI vIraprabhu kI AjJA
lekara vipulAcala parvata para pAdapopagamana nAmaka anazana kiyaa| aMtima
samaya meM zubhadhyAna pUrvaka paMcaparameSThI kA smaraNa karate hue rohiNeya
mahAmuni ne samAdhimaraNa pUrvaka zarIra chor3A aura devaloka meM phuNce| isI
prakAra cauryakarma se vimukha vyakti rohiNeya kI taraha thor3e hI samaya meM
svarga sukha ko prApta kara letA hai| ataH buddhimAna puruSa donoM bhavoM ko
bigAr3ane vAlI corI hargija na kareM  /  / 72 /  /  aba corI se hone vAle doSoM
ke tyAga kA nirdeza karate haiN|129| dUre parasya sarvasvamapahartumupakramaH  /
upAdadIta nAdattaM tRNamAtramapi kvacit  /  / 73 /  /  artha :- dUsare kA dhana
Adi sarvasva haraNa karane kI bAta to dUra rahI, paraMtu diye binA eka tinakA
bhI nahIM lenA | caahie| usake lie prayatna bhI nahIM karanA cAhie  /  / 73 /  /
aba corI se nivRtta hone kA phala do zlokoM meM batAte haiN|130| parArthagrahaNe
yeSAM, niyamaH zuddhacetasAm  /  abhyAyAnti zriyasteSAM svayameva svayaMvarAH
// 74 /  /  artha :- jo zuddhacitta manuSya dUsare kA dhana haraNa na karane kA
niyama le letA hai, unake pAsa saMpattiyAM svayaMvarA kanyA ke samAna svayaM AtI
haiM; na ki dUsare kI preraNA se; athavA vyApAra-dhaMdhe se prApta hotI
haiN||74|| aura bhI dekhie|131| anarthA dUrato yAnti, sAdhuvAdaH pravartate  /
svargasaukhyAni Dhaukante, sphUTamasteyacAriNAm  // 75 //  artha :- asteyavrata
kA AcaraNa karane vAle para vipattiyAM A jAne para bhI dUra calI jAtI haiN|
logoM meM apanI prAmANikatA ke lie dhanyavAda milatA hai ki 'yaha AdamI
prAmANika hai|' isa loka meM usakI prazaMsA hotI hai, paraloka meM bhI vaha
svarga-sukha prApta karatA hai  /  / 5 /  /  vyAkhyA :- prasaMgAnusAra yahAM
kucha zlokoM kA artha diyA jA rahA hai agnizikhA kA pAna karanA, sarpa kA mukha
cUmanA aura halAhala viSa kA cATanA acchA, lekina dUsare kA dhana haraNa karanA
acchA nahIM hai| dUsare ke dhana meM lobhavRtti rakhane vAle kI buddhi prAyaH
nirdayI ho jAtI hai| vaha apane bhAI, pitA, cAcA, strI, mitra, putra aura guru
taka ko mArane ke lie udyata ho jAtA hai| dUdha pInA cAhane vAlI billI ko mArane
ke lie uThAye hue DaMDe ke samAna paradhanaharaNa karane vAlA apanA vadha-
baMdhana TAla nahIM sktaa| zikArI, macchImAra, billI Adi se bhI cora bar3hakara
hai| kyoMki rAjA giraphtAra karatA hai, magara cora-manuSyoM ko hI anya jIvoM ko
nhiiN| | isalie buddhimAna manuSya apane sAmane par3e hue sone, ratna Adi parAye
dhana ko bhI patthara ke samAna smjhe| isa taraha 147

Page #170 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Jain terms preserved in the translation:  Maithunaservana se jivahimsa
Yogashastra dvitiya prakasha sloka 76 se 79 | Santosa rupee sudharasa se tript
grihastha svarga prapat karata hai ||5||  Arthah:- Samajhdara grihastha upasaka
paraloka me napumsakata aura ihaloka me raja ya sarakara adi dvara
indriyadchhedana adi abrahmacaryya ke kadave phala dekhakara ya shastradadi
dvara janakar parastariyon ka tyaga kare aura apani stri me santosa rakhe ||76||
Vyakhya:- Yadyapi angikara kiye hue vrata ka palana karate hue grihastha ko
itana papa samparaka nahim hota, phira bhi sadhudharma ke prati anuragee,
sadhudiksha graha na karne se pahale upasaka grihastha jivana me bhi kamabhoga
se virakta hokar shravakadharma ka niratichara palana karata hai ||6||  Vairagya
ke shikhara para pahuncane ke liye abrahmacaryya se nivritta hona jaruri hai.
Atah ab abrahmacaryya-sevana ke dosa bataate hain ||133||
Rammyamapatamatramatra yat parinameatidaruna | Kimpakaphalasankasham, tat kah
seveta maithuna? ||77||  Arthah:- Maithuna-sevana prathama praarambha-maatra me
bada raman iya aura sundara lagataa hai, kintu uska parinaam
kimpakaphalasadrisya bahuta bhayankara hai. Aisi dasha me kauna usa maithuna ka
sevana karega? ||77||  Vyakhya:- Kimpakavruksha ka phala varna, gandha, rasa
aura sparsha me bada manohara, madhura aura sugandhi lagataa hai, khane me bhi
svadishta hota hai. Mana ko bhi santosa milata hai; magar khane ke baada vaha
vyakti ji bhi nahim sakata; kuchha hi deri me vaha prana le leta hai. Isi
prakaara vishayasukha sevana karate samaya bade manohara hridaya ko shanti dene
vaale hote hain. Kintu baada me unaka parinaam bahuta hi bhayankara aataa hai.
Isaliye kahate hain-anekadoshonam aashraya-bhuta janakar kauna maithuna ka
sevana karega? ||77||  Ab maithuna-sevana ke bhayankara parinaamon ka varnana
karate hain ||134||  Kampah sveda shrama murchha, bhramiglanirbalaaksayah |
Rajayakshmaadi rogash ca, bhaveyur maithunottthitah ||78||  Arthah:- Maithuna
sevana karane vaale ke kampa, pasina, thakana, murchha, cakkara, anga tutana,
bala ka nash, rajayakshma (tapedika=ksaya), bhagandara, dama, svasaroga adi
maharoga paida ho jaate hain ||78||  Sheshavrata bhi jaise ahimsa me samavishta
ho jaate hain, usi tarah yaha brahmacaryya bhi hai. Isaliye maithuna me ahimsa
ka abhava hai, ise kahate hain ||135||  Yoniyantrasamuttpanna, susukshma
janturaashayah | Pidyamana vipadyante, yatra tanmaithuna tyajet ||79||  Arthah:-
Yoni rupee yantra me aneka sukshmatar jantu utpanna hote hain. Maithuna-sevana
karane se ve jantu mar jaate hain. Isaliye maithuna-sevana ka tyaga karna
chahiye ||79||  Vyakhya:- Prani ko janma dene ka marga ya utpattisthana yoni
kahalaata hai. Vaha yantrakara hone se use yoniyantra kahate hain. Usmem
svabhavatah utpanna hone vaale samacchhima jiva itane sukshma hote hain ki
aankho se nahim dikhayee dete. Iska spashtikarana karane ke liye drishtanta dete
hain-ruee se bharii huee nalee me tapee huee lohe ki salaee ruee ko jala detee
hai; usee tarah garam yoni me ruee ke samana rahe hue jeevasamuha purushachihn
ke mardana se maithuna karane par nashta ho jaate hain. Isaliye maithuna-sevana
aneka jeevanam ki himsa ka janakahoneseta tyajya samajhana chahiye. Anya
shastroam me bhi yoni me jantuvom ka hona bataaya gaya hai. Jaise ki Vatsyayana
rachita Kamashastra me bhi yoni me jantuvom ka astitva maana hai. 'Jantusadbhava
iti Vatsyayanoapyaha'-arthaat Kamashastra-rachayi ta Vatsyayana ne bhi kaha hai
ki yoni me jantuvom ka sadbhava hai. Kahane ka tatparya yaha hai ki kama ko
pradhanata dene vaale Vatsyayana ne bhi yoni me jantuvom ka hona sveekarakar
liya hai, chhipaaya nahim; tab dusaroam ka to kahan a hee kya? ||79||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 maithuna sevana se jIvahiMsA yogazAstra dvitIya prakAza zloka 76 se 79 |saMtoSa
rUpI sudhArasa se tRpta gRhastha svarga prApta karatA hai  /  / 5 /  /  _ aba
paraloka aura isa loka meM abrahmacarya kA phala batalAte hue gRhasthayogya
brahmacaryavrata kA nirUpaNa karate haiN|132| SaNDhatvamindriyacchedaM,
vIkSyAbrahmaphalaM sudhIH  /  bhavet svadArasantuSTo'nyadArAn vA vivarjayet  /
/ 76 /  /  artha :- samajhadAra gRhastha upAsaka paraloka meM napuMsakatA aura
ihaloka meM rAjA yA sarakAra Adi dvArA iMdriyacchedana Adi abrahmacarya ke
kar3ave phala dekhakara yA zAstrAdi dvArA jAnakara parastriyoM kA tyAga kareM
aura apanI strI meM saMtoSa rakhe  // 76 /  /  vyAkhyA :- yadyapi aMgIkAra kiye
hue vrata kA pAlana karate hue gRhastha ko itanA pApa saMparka nahIM hotA, phira
bhI sAdhudharma ke prati anurAgI, sAdhudIkSA grahaNa karane se pahale upAsaka
gRhastha jIvana meM bhI kAmabhoga se virakta hokara zrAvakadharma kA niraticAra
pAlana karatA hai  /  / 6 /  /  vairAgya ke zikhara para pahuMcane ke lie
abrahmacarya se nivRtta honA jarUrI hai| ataH aba abrahmacaryasevana ke doSa
batAte haiN|133| ramyamApAtamAtre yatpariNAme'tidAruNam  /
kimpAkaphalasaGkAzaM, tatkaH seveta maithunam?  // 77 /  /  artha :-
maithunasevana prathama prAraMbhamAtra meM bar3A ramaNIya aura suMdara lagatA
hai, lekina usakA pariNAma kipAkaphala ke sadRza bahuta bhayaMkara hai| aisI
dazA meM kauna usa maithuna kA sevana karegA? ||77 /  /  . .. vyAkhyA :-
kiMpAkavRkSa kA phala varNa, gaMdha, rasa aura sparza meM bar3A manohara,
madhura aura sugaMdhita lagatA hai, khAne meM bhI svAdiSTa hotA hai| mana ko bhI
saMtoSa milatA hai; magara khAne ke bAda vaha vyakti jI bhI nahIM sakatA; kucha
hI | dera meM vaha prANa le letA hai| isI prakAra viSayasakha sevana karate
samaya baDe manohara hRdaya ko zAMti dene vAle hote haiM.| lekina bAda meM unakA
pariNAma bahata hI bhayaMkara AtA hai| isIlie kahate haiM-anekadoSoM kA
Azrayabhata jAnakara kauna maithuna kA sevana karegA?  /  / 77 /  /  /  aba
maithunasevana ke bhayaMkara pariNAmoM kA varNana karate haiN||134| kampaH
svedaH zramo mUrchA, bhramiglAnirbalakSayaH  /  rAjayakSmAdi rogAzca,
bhaveyumaithunotthitAH  // 78 /  /  artha :- maithuna sevana karane vAle ke
kaMpa, pasInA, thakAna, mUrchA, cakkara, aMga TUTanA, bala kA nAza, rAjayakSmA
(tapedika=kSaya), bhagaMdara, damA, zvAsaroga Adi mahAroga paidA ho jAte haiM  /
/ 8 /  /  zeSavrata bhI jaise ahiMsA meM samAviSTa ho jAte haiM, usI taraha yaha
brahmacarya bhI hai| isalie maithana meM ahiMsA kA abhAva hai, ise kahate
haiN|135| yoniyantrasamutpannAH, susUkSmA janturAzayaH  /  pIDyamAnA vipadyante,
yatra tanmaithunaM tyajet  // 79 //  artha :- yoni rUpI yaMtra meM aneka
sUkSmatara jaMtu utpanna hote haiN| maithunasevana karane se ve jaMtu mara jAte
haiN| isalie maithunasevana kA tyAga karanA cAhie  /  / 7 /  /  khyA :- prANI ko
janma dene kA mArga yA utpattisthAna yoni kahalAtA hai| vaha yaMtrAkAra hone se
use yoniyaMtra kahate haiN| usameM svabhAvataH utpanna hone vAle samacchima jIva
itane sUkSma hote haiM ki AMkhoM se nahIM dikhAyI dete| isakA spaSTIkaraNa
karane ke lie dRSTAMta dete haiM-rUI se bharI huI nalI meM tapI huI lohe kI
salAI rUI ko jalA detI hai; usI taraha garma yoni meM rUI ke samAna rahe hue
jIvasamUha puruSacihna ke mardana se maithuna karane para naSTa ho jAte haiN|
isalie | maithunasevana aneka jIvoM kI hiMsA kA janaka hone se tyAjya samajhanA
caahie| anya zAstroM meM bhI yoni meM jaMtuoM kA honA batAyA gayA hai| jaise ki
vAtsyAyana racita kAmazAstra meM bhI yoni meM jaMtuoM kA astitva mAnA hai|
'jantusadbhAva iti vAtsyAyano'pyAha'-arthAt kAmazAstraracayitA vAtsyAyana ne bhI
kahA hai ki yoni meM jaMtuoM kA sadbhAva hai| kahane kA tAtparya yaha hai ki
kAma ko pradhAnatA dene vAle vAtsyAyana ne bhI yoni meM jaMtuoM kA honA
svIkArakara liyA hai, chipAyA nahIM; taba dUsaroM kA to kahanA hI kyA  /  / 79 /
/  /  _ aba isa viSaya meM vAtsyAyana dvArA samarthita zloka de rahe haiM 148

Page #171 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Kamuk Stri Ki Dushtatā  Yogaśāstra Dvitīya Prakāśa Śloka 80 se 84 |136| Raktajāḥ
Kṛmayaḥ Sūkṣmā, Mṛdumadhy-ādhiśaktayaḥ | Janmavartmasu Kaṇḍūrti, Janayanti
Tathāvidhām ||80|| Arthaḥ:- Rakta se utpanna sūkṣma, mṛdu, madhyam aur adhik
śakti vāle sūkṣma kṛmi strī ke yoni mārgon mein vaisī khujlī paidā karte haiṃ
||80||  137| Strīsambhogena Yaḥ Kāmajvaram Praticcikīrṣati | Sa Hutāśaṃ
Ghṛtāhutyā, Vidhyāpayitumicchati ||81|| Arthaḥ:- Jo log strīsaṃbhog se kāmajvara
kā pratīkāra (cikitsāśamana yā śānti) karnā cāhate haiṃ, ve jaltī huī āg mein
ghī kī āhuti dekar usē bujhānā cāhate haiṃ ||81||  138| Varam Jvaladayaḥstambha-
Parirambo Vidhīyate | Na Punarnarakadvāra-Rāmājaghan-Sevanam ||82|| Arthaḥ:- Āg
se tape hue jājvalyamān lohe ke khaṃbhe kā āliṃgana karnā acchā hai, magar
narak-dvār ke tulya strī-jaghannya kā sevan karnā acchā nahīṃ ||82||  139|
Satāmapi Hi Vāmabhruḥ Dadānā Hṛdaye Padam | Abhirāmaṃ Guṇagrāmaṃ, Nirvāsayati
Niścitam ||83|| Arthaḥ:- Satpuruṣoṃ ke hṛdaya mein agar strī kā kaṭākṣa sthān
jamā le to vah niścit hī sundar guṇasamudāya ko vahāṃ se nikāl detā hai ||83||
140| Vaṃcakatvaṃ Nṛśaṃsatvaṃ, Caṃcalatvaṃ Kuśīlatā | Iti Naisargikā Doṣā, Yāsāṃ
Tāsu Ramet Kaḥ? ||84|| Arthaḥ:- Svabhāv se (naisargika rūp se) jinmein vaṃcakatā
(ṭhagāī), nirdayatā, caṃcalatā aur kuśīlatā (saṃyamābhāva) ādi doṣ hote haiṃ, un
(tucch striyoṃ) mein kaun samajhdār puruṣ rāgabuddhi se (āsaktipūrvak) ramaṇ kar
sakatā hai? ||84||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 kAmuka strI kI duSTatA yogazAstra dvitIya prakAza zloka 80 se 84  / 136 /
raktajAH kRmayaH sUkSmA, mRdumadhyAdhizaktayaH  /  janmavartmasu kaNDUrti,
janayanti tathAvidhAm  // 80 /  /  _ artha :- rakta se utpanna sUkSma, mRdu,
madhyama aura adhika zakti vAle sUkSma kRmi strI ke yoni mArgoM meM vaisI
khujalI paidA karate haiM  /  / 8 /  /  maithunasevana se jo kAmajvara kI zAMti
mAnate haiM, yA use kAmajvara kI cikitsA yA pratIkAra mAnate haiM, unake bhrama
kA nivAraNa karate haiN|137| strIsambhogena yaH kAmajvaraM praticikIrSati  /  sa
hutAzaM ghRtAhutyA, vidhyApayitumicchati  // 81 /  /  artha :- jo loga
strIsaMbhoga se kAmajvara kA pratIkAra (cikitsAzamana yA zAMti) karanA cAhate
haiM, ve jalatI huI Aga meM ghI kI Ahuti dekara use bujhAnA cAhate haiM  /  / 8
/  /  vyAkhyA :- vAstava meM strIsahavAsa se kAmajvara zAMta nahIM hotA, balki
aura adhika bar3ha jAtA hai| nItizAstra meM bhI batAyA hai-kAmopabhoga se kAma
kadApi zAMta nahIM hotA, apitu ghI kI Ahuti dene para Aga aura jyAdA bhar3aka
uThatI hai, vaise hI kAmasevana se kAma adhika hI uttejita hotA hai| kAmajvara
ko zAMta karane kI koI bhI acUka auSadhiyAM pratIkAraka upAya rUpa haiM to ve
haiM-vairAgyabhAvanA, parasevA, dharmakriyA yA dharmAnuSThAna, dharmazAstra
zravaNa Adi haiN| ataH kAmajvara ko zAMta karane kA uttama sAdhana hone para bhI
bhava-bhramaNa kAraNa rUpa maithunasevana karane se kyA laabh?||81|| isI bAta ko
spaSTa karate haiN138| varaM jvaladayaHstambha-parirambho vidhIyate  /  na
punarnarakadvAra-rAmAjaghana-sevanam  // 82 //  artha :- Aga se tape hue
jAjvalyamAna lohe ke khaMbhe kA AliMgana karanA acchA hai, magara naraka-dvAra
ke tulya strI-jaghanya kA sevana karanA acchA nahIM  /  / 8 /  /  vyAkhyA :- eka
bAra kAmajvara ko zAMta karane ke lie maithuna kadAcit upAya ho jAya; magara
naraka kA kAraNa rUpa hone se vaha kadApi prazaMsanIya nahIM hai| aura strI ke
viSaya meM yA strI kA smaraNa karane para bhI vaha sAre guNagaurava kA avazya
nAzakara detA hai  /  / 8 /  /  isI bAta kI puSTi karate haiN139| satAmapi hi
vAmabhrUrdadAnA hRdaye padam  /  abhirAmaM guNagrAmaM, nirvAsayati nizcitam.  /
/ 83 /  /  artha :- satpuruSoM ke hRdaya meM agara strI kA kaTAkSa sthAna jamA
le to vaha nizcita hI suMdara guNasamudAya ko vahAM se nikAla detA hai  /  / 83
/  /  /  vyAkhyA :- niHsaMdeha, kaTAkSa karane vAlI striyoM kA smaraNamAtra hI
sajjana-puruSoM ke guNasamuha kA bahiSkAra kara detA hai| tAtparya yaha hai ki
jaise kharAba (bhraSTa) rAjyAdhikArI ko kisI sthAna para niyukta kiye jAne para
vaha lobhavRtti se vahAM kA rakSaNa ke bajAya bhakSaNa karane lagatA hai| isI
prakAra hRdaya meM sthAna pAyI huI kAminI bhI pAlana-rakSaNa karane yogya
guNasamUha ko samUla ukhAr3a pheMkatI hai| athavA satpuruSoM ke guNasamUha para
paira rakhakara yA usake hRdaya meM praveza karake nArI puruSa ke uttamaguNoM ko
caupaTa kara detI hai| hRdaya meM sthAna pAyI huI strI aneka doSayukta hone se
guNavRddhi ke badale guNahAni kI hI prAyaH kAraNabhUta banatI hai; phira usake
sAtha ramaNa karane kI to bAta hI dUra rahI!  /  / 83 /  /  isI ke samarthana
meM kahate haiN|140| vaJcakatvaM nRzaMsatvaM, caJcalatvaM kuzIlatA  /  iti
naisargikA doSA, yAsAM tAsu rameta kaH?  // 84 /  /  artha :- svabhAva se
(naisargika rUpa se) jinameM vaMcakatA (ThagAI), nirdayatA, caMcalatA aura
kuzIlatA (saMyamAbhAva) Adi doSa hote haiM, una (tuccha striyoM) meM kauna
samajhadAra puruSa rAgabuddhi se (AsaktipUrvaka) ramaNa kara sakatA hai? ||84 //
striyoM meM sirpha itane hI doSa nahIM hai, apitu aura bhI kaI doSa haiM, unheM
batAte haiM 149

Page #172 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Jain terms preserved in the English translation:  The various harms from
cohabitation with women of bad character Yogashastra, Second Illumination,
Verses 85-88.  [85] The depth of the boundless ocean can be fathomed, but the
character of crooked women cannot be.  [86] The unchaste women, in a moment, can
implicate their husband, son, father, and brother even in criminal acts, putting
their lives in danger.  [87] Woman is the seed of the world, the lamp
illuminating the path to hell, the root of sorrows, the foundation of the Kali
age, and the mine of miseries.  [88] Their mind is one thing, their speech
another, and their actions yet another. How can such common women, like
courtesans, be the source of happiness?  [89] Who would kiss the face of a
courtesan, whose mouth is polluted by the mixture of meat and liquor, and
partake of the leftover as food?

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 duzcaritra striyoM ke sAtha sahavAsa se nAnA prakAra kI hAniyA~ yogazAstra
dvitIya prakAza zloka 85 se 88  / 141 /  prAptuM pAramapArasya, pArAvArasya
pAryate  /  strINAM prakRtivakrANAM, duzcaritrasya no punaH  // 85 /  /  artha
:- artha (apAra) samudra kI to thAha pAyI jA sakatI hai| lekina svabhAva se hI
kuTila kAminiyoM ke duzcaritra kI thAha nahIM pAI jA sakatI  /  / 5 /  /
aMganAoM ke duzcaritra ke saMbaMdha meM kahate haiN|142| nitambinyaH patiM
putraM, pitaraM bhrAtaraM kSaNAt  /  AropayantyakArye'pi, durvRttAH prANasaMzaye
// 86 //  artha :- duzcaritra striyA~ kSaNabhara meM apane pati, putra, pitA
aura bhAI ke prANa saMkaTa meM par3a jAya, aise akArya bhI kara DAlatI hai  /  /
86 /  /  vyAkhyA :- 'strI zabda ke badale yahAM nitambinI zabda kA prayoga kiyA
hai, yaha yauvana ke unmAda kA sUcaka hai| aisI duzcaritra nAriyA~ tuccha kArya
yA akArya kA prasaMga Ane para apane pati, putra, pitA yA bhAI taka ko mArate
dera nahIM lgaatii| jaise sUryakAMtA ne apane pati paradezI rAjA se viSayabhogoM
se tRpti na hone para usako jahara dekara mArate dera nahIM lgaayii| kahA bhI
hai-iMdriyadoSavaza nacAI huI patnI sUryakAMtA rAnI ne jaise paradezI rAjA ko
jahara dekara mAra diyA thA, vaise hI apanA manoratha pUrNa na hone para striyAM
pativadha karane kA pApa taka kara DAlatI hai| isI prakAra apanI manaHkalpita
cAha (murAda) pUrI nahIM hotI, taba jaise mAtA cUlanI ne putra brahmadatta ke
prANa saMkaTa meM DAla diye the, lAkSAgRha banAkara brahmadatta ko usameM nivAsa
karAkara jalA dene kI usakI krUra yojanA thI, magara vaha saphala nahIM huii|
isI taraha anya mAtAe~ bhI putra ko mArane hetu krUra kRtya kara baiThatI hai|
jaise jIvayazA ne preraNA dekara jarAsaMgha ko tathA apanI rAnI padmAvatI kI
preraNA ke kAraNa koNika ne kAlIkumAra Adi bhAIyoM ko apane sAtha jor3akara
bahuta bhayaMkara mahAyuddha kA akArya kiyA thA aura senA va anya sahAyakoM ko
maraNa zaraNa kara diyA thA  /  / 86 /  /  isalie Age kahate haiN|143| bhavasya
bIjaM narakadvAramArgasya dIpikA  /  zucAM kandaH kalermUlaM, duHkhAnAM
khAniraGganA  /  / 87 /  /  artha :- strI saMsAra kA bIja hai, narakadvAra ke
mArga kI dIpikA hai, zokoM kA kaMda hai, kaliyuga kI jar3a hai athavA kAle-
kalaha kI jar3a hai, duHkhoM kI khAna hai  /  / 8 /  /  vyAkhyA :- strI vAstava
meM saMsAra rUpI paudhe kA bIja hai| yaha saMsAra ko bar3hAne-janmamaraNa ke
cakra meM DAlane vAlI hai| vaha naraka ke pravezadvAra kA rAstA batAne vAlI
lAlaTena ke samAna hai| zokotpatti kI kAraNabhUta hai, lar3AI-jhagar3e kA mUla
hai tathA zArIrika aura mAnasika duHkhoM kI khAna hai  /  / 87 /  /  yahAM taka
yatidharmAnurAgI gRhastha ke lie sAmAnyatayA maithuna aura striyoM ke doSa
batAye haiN| aba Age ke 5 zlokoM meM svadArasaMtoSI gRhastha ke lie
sAdhAraNastrIgamana ke doSa batAye haiN|144| manasyanyat vacasyanyat
kriyAyAmanyadeva hi  /  yAsAM sAdhAraNastrINAM, tAH kathaM sukhahetavaH?  // 88
/  /  artha :- jina sAdhAraNa striyoM ke mana meM kucha aura hai, vacana dvArA
kucha ora hI bAta vyakta karatI hai aura zarIra dvArA kArya kucha ora hI hotA
hai| aisI vezyAe~ (harajAiyoM) kaise sukha kI kAraNabhUta ho sakatI hai?||8||
vyAkhyA :- vArAMganAe~ Amataura para mana meM kisI aura puruSa ke prati prIti
rakhatI hai, vacana meM kisI anya puruSa ke sAtha prema batAtI hai aura zarIra
se kisI anya hI vyakti ke sAtha ramaNa karatI hai| aisI bAjArU aurateM bhalA
kaise vizvasanIya ho sakatI haiM aura kaise kisI ke lie sukhadAyinI bana sakatI
haiN| kahA bhI hai-saMketa kisI aura ko karatI hai, yAcanA kisI dUsare se karatI
hai, stuti kisI tIsare kI karatI hai aura citta meM koI aura baiThA hotA hai
aura pAsa (bagala) meM koI anya hI khar3A hotA hai; isa prakAra gaNikAoM kA
caritra sacamuca avizvasanIya aura adbhuta hotA hai||88|| aura bhI dekhie  / 145
/  mAMsamizraM surAnizramanekaviTacumbitam  /  ko vezyAvadanaM
cumbeducchiSTameva bhojanam  /  / 89 /  /  150

Page #173 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Harms of Associating with Unchaste Women  Yogashastra, Second Canto, Verses
89-94:  1. Who would want to kiss the false and dirty mouth of a prostitute,
which is like stale and foul-smelling food, due to meat-eating, drinking
alcohol, and being kissed by many lovers? (89)  2. Even after a lustful man has
given away all his wealth to a courtesan, when he becomes destitute, the
prostitute desires to snatch away even the clothes he is wearing as he departs.
(90)  3. The man addicted to a courtesan neither respects the gods, nor the
gurus, nor his friends and relatives, for he delights only in bad company. (91)
4. The courtesan, driven by the desire for wealth, looks upon even lepers as if
they were Cupid, and displays feigned affection, but the wise should renounce
such a heartless courtesan from a distance. (92)  5. Even the followers of the
ascetic path should not serve their own wives with attachment, let alone the
wives of others, which are the source of all sins. (93)  6. A woman who abandons
her husband and indulges in an illicit relationship with another man, how can
one have trust in the fickleness of her mind? (94)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 duzcaritra striyoM ke sAtha sahavAsa se hAniyA~ yogazAstra dvitIya prakAza
zloka 89 se 94 artha :- mAMsa khAne ke kAraNa badabUdAra, zarAba pIne ke kAraNa
dugaMdhita tathA aneka jAra puruSoM ke dvArA cuMbana kiye hue, ucchiSTa (jhUThe)
bhojana kI taraha jhUThe va gaMde vaizyA ke mukha ko kauna cumanA cAhegA?  /  /
8 /  /   / 146 /  api pradattasarvasvAt kAmukAt kSINasampadaH  /
vAso'pyAcchettumicchanti gacchataH paNyayoSitaH  /  / 90 /  /  artha :- kAmI
puruSa dvArA apanA sarvasva dhana de dene para bhI jaba vaha nirdhana ho jAtA
hai to jAte-jAte vezyA usake pahanane ke kapar3e bhI chIna lenA cAhatI hai  /  /
10 /  /  vyAkhyA :- kisI kAmalaMpaTa ne dhanADhya avasthA meM apanI sarvasva-
saMpatti vaizyA ko lUTA dI ho, lekina puNya kSINa hone para usake pAsa se
saMpatti naSTa ho jAne para use ghara se nikAla detI hai aura jAte jAte pahanane
ke vastra bhI usase jabarana chIna lenA cAhatI hai| itanI kRtaghna hotI hai
vezyA! kahA bhI hai-kisI kAmAMdha ne apanI dharmapatnI se bhI adhika vezyA kI
sArasaMbhAla kI ho, lekina saMpatti kSINa ho jAne para vaha AMkha uThAkara bhI
nahIM dekhatI, balki usakI icchA yahI hotI hai, ki jAte-jAte yaha puruSa use
pahanane ke kapar3e bhI detA jAya  /  / 10 /  /  vezyAgamana ke aura bhI doSa
batAte haiN|147| na devAnna gurunnApi, suhRdo na ca bAndhavAn  /
asatsaGgaratinityaM, vezyAvazyo hi manyate  // 91 /  /  . artha :- vezyA kA
gulAma banA huA kAmI puruSa na to devoM (mahApuruSoM) ko mAnatA hai, na guruoM
ko, na mitroM . kI bhI mAnatA hai aura na bAMdhavoM ko, kyoMki vaha sadA burI
sohabata meM hI AnaMda mAnatA hai| usI meM masta rahatA hai  /  / 11 /  /   /
148 /  kuSThino'pi smarasamAn, pazyantI dhanakAGkSayA  /  tanvatI kRtrimasnehaM,
niHsnehAM gaNikAM tyjet||92|| artha :- vezyA ekamAtra dhana kI AkAMkSA se
kor3hiyoM ko bhI kAmadeva ke samAna dekhatI hai aura banAvaTI sneha dikhAtI hai,
samajhadAra puruSa aisI niHsneha gaNikA kA dUra se hI tyAga kare  /  / 12 /  /
vyAkhyA :- vezyA kI abhilASA sirpha dhana prApta karane kI rahatI hai| agara
kor3hiye bhI haiM aura unake pAsa dhana kI thailI hai to unheM bhI vaha kAmadeva
ke samAna mAnakara kRtrima hAvabhAva aura jhUThe prema kA svAMga racatI hai|
kyoMki Upara se sneha kA nATaka kiye binA unase dhana kI prApti ho nahIM sktii|
isalie kRtrima sneha rakhane vAlI sneha rahita gaNikA kA parityAga karanA
caahie||92|| _ aba parastrIgamana ke doSa batAte haiN|149| nAsaktyA sevanIyA hi
svadArA apyupAsakaiH  /  AkaraH sarvapApAnAM kiM punaH parayoSitaH  /  / 93 /  /
artha :- zramaNopAsakoM ko apanI strI kA sevana bhI Asakti pUrvaka nahIM karanA
cAhie, to phira samasta pApoM kI khAna parAI striyoM kI to bAta hI kyA hai?  /
/ 93 /  /  vyAkhyA :- sAdhudharma ko svIkAra karane ke abhilASI aura dezavirati-
dharma ke pariNAmI gRhastha zramaNopAsaka ko gRhasthajIvana meM bhI prabala
vairAgyabhAvanA se rahanA caahie| apanI patnI meM Asakti nahIM rakhanI cAhie;
aisA vidhAna hai, to phira sarvapApoM kI khAna parastrIsevana ke tyAga ke bAre
meM to kahanA hI kyA? vaha tyAga to pahale se hI honA caahie||93|| parastrI meM
nihita pApoM ke bAre meM kahate haiN|150| svapati yA parityajya, nistrapopapatiM
bhajet  /  tasyAM kSaNikacittAyAM, vizrambhaH ko'nyayoSiti?  /  / 94 /  /  |
artha :- jo strI apane pati ko chor3akara nirlajja hokara dUsare ke sAtha
sahavAsa karatI hai, usa caMcala citta vAlI strI para kauna bharosA kara sakatA
hai? ||94 /  /  vyAkhyA :- zruti meM batAyA hai-bhartRdevatA hi striyaH arthAt-
striyoM ke lie pati hI devatA hote haiN| paraMtu jo apane pati ko deva svarUpa
na mAnakara patibhakti ko tilAMjali dekara bezarma hokara apane yAra (upapati)
ke sAtha bekhaTake sahavAsa karatI hai, aisI kSaNika citta vAlI parastrI kA kyA
vizvAsa? vaha kabhI bhI dhokhA de sakatI hai  /  / 14 /  /  aba paranArI meM
Asakta puruSa ko zikSA dete haiM khAnA 151

Page #174 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Jain terms preserved in the translation:  The Fault of Going to Another's Wife
From the Yogashastra, Second Illumination, Verses 95-98.  95. The one whose mind
is disturbed and in a bad state due to attachment to another's wife, cannot
engage in rati (sensual pleasure) with her, just like a sacrificial animal
(about to be slaughtered). Therefore, the attachment of a virtuous householder
towards another's wife is completely unacceptable.  96. One should renounce
going to another's wife, as it causes doubt about one's life, is the root cause
of enmity, and is opposed to both this world and the next world.  97. The one
who goes to another's wife may sometimes face complete confiscation of his
wealth, binding with ropes, and mutilation of his body parts. And after death,
he attains the terrible hell.  98. The man who constantly strives to protect his
own wife knows the suffering involved in it. How then can he go to another's
wife, knowing all this?

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 parastrI gamana se doSa yogazAstra dvitIya prakAza zloka 95 se 98  / 151 /
bhIrorAkulacittasya duHsthitasya parastriyAm  /  ratirna yujyate kartumupazUnaM
pazoriva  /  / 95 /  /  artha :- parastrI meM rata manuSya sadA bhayabhIta
rahatA hai, usakA citta ghabar3AyA huA-sA rahatA hai aura vaha kharAba sthiti
meM rahatA hai, isalie aise parastrIlaMpaTa kA parastrI ke pAsa rahanA vaisA hI
khataranAka hai, jaisA ki mAre jAne vAle pazu kA zUlI ke pAsa rhnaa| matalaba
yaha ki sadgRhastha kA paranArI se neha karanA jarA bhI ucita nahIM hai  /  / 95
/  /  vyAkhyA :- parastrI se prIti karanA bilakula ucita nahIM hai| kyoMki
parastrIlaMpaTa hamezA usa strI ke pati, rAjA yA samAja ke netA Adi se
bhayabhIta rahatA hai ki kahIM mujhe aisA karate hue koI dekha na le| isI kAraNa
vaha hamezA ghabarAyA huA rahatA hai| usake citta meM hamezA yahI zaka banA
rahatA hai ki kahIM sarakAra yA sarakArI pulisa Adi ko mere isa kukarma kA patA
laga gayA to merI khera nahIM! isalie vaha jagaha-jagaha bhAgatA phiratA hai
aura vIhar3oM, Ubar3akhAbar3a khohoM, khaMDaharoM, ekAMtasthAnoM yA sUne
devAlayoM meM chipatA rahatA hai, jahAM na to use sone ko hI ThIka se bichaunA
milatA hai, na khAne pIne kA hI ThikAnA rahatA hai, aura na nIMda sukha se le
pAtA hai| isalie kahA gayA ki parastrIlaMpaTa zUlI ke pAsa vadha hone ke lie
khar3e kiye gaye abhAge pazu ke samAna hai, jisakA jIva hara samaya muTThI meM
rahatA hai| ataH parastrI se prIti karanA sadgRhastha ke lie sarvathA varjanIya
hai| parastrIgamana se rokane kA kAraNa batAte haiN|152| prANasandehajananaM,
paramaM vairakAraNam  /  lokadvayaviruddhaM ca, parastrIgamanaM tyajet  /  / 96
/  /  artha :- jisameM hara samaya prANoM ke jAne kA saMdeha ho, jo vaira aura
dveSa karane kA kAraNa ho, aise iha loka aura paraloka donoM se viruddha
parastrIgamana kA tyAga karanA cAhie  /  / 16 /  /  vyAkhyA :- parastrI-Asakta
vyakti ke prAyaH prANa jAne kA khatarA banA rahatA hai| hara samaya usakA jI
muTThI meM rahatA hai| dUsare yaha durvyasana vaira kA kAraNa hai| kyoMki jahAM
bhI vaha strI kisI dUsare se prema karane lagegI, vahAM pUrva-puruSa kA usake
prati vaira baMdha jAyegA, vaha use apanA zatru mAnakara usakI jAna lene ko
utArU ho jaaygaa| saMsAra ke itihAsa meM strI ke lie bahuta vairavirodha aura
jhagar3e hue haiN| aura phira isa loka meM yaha nItiviruddha hai, samAja kI
maryAdA ke | khilApha hai, aise vyakti kI ijjata miTTI meM mila jAtI hai|
paraloka meM dharmaviruddha hone se isa pApa kA bhayaMkara phala bhoganA par3atA
hai||96|| parastrIgamana ubhayalokaviruddha kaise hai? ise spaSTa karate
haiN|153| sarvasvaharaNaM bandhaM, zarIrAvayacchidAm  /  mRtazca narakaM ghoraM,
labhate pAradArikaH  // 97 //  artha :- parastrIgAmI kA kabhI-kabhI to sarvasva
haraNa kara liyA jAtA hai, use rassI Adi se bAMdhakara kaida meM DAla diyA jAtA
hai, zarIra ke aMgopAMga puruSacihna Adi kATa diye jAte haiM, ye tIna ihalaukika
kuphala haiN| pAralaukika kuphala yaha hai ki aisA pAradArika marakara ghora
naraka meM jAtA hai, jahAM use bhayaMkara yAtanAe~ milatI hai  // 97 /  /  aba
yuktipUrvaka parastrIgamana kA niSedha karate haiN|154| svadArarakSaNe yatnaM,
vidadhAno niraMtaram  /  jAnannapi jano duHkhaM, paradArAn kathaM vrajet  // 98
/  /  artha :- apanI strI kI rakSA ke lie puruSa niraMtara prayatna karatA hai;
aneka prakAra ke kaSTa usake jatana ke lie uThAtA hai| jaba yaha jAnatA hai,
taba phira parastrIgamana kI Aphata kyoM mola letA hai? svastrIrakSA meM itane
kaSTa jAnatA haA bhI koI parastrIgamana kyoM karegA?  // 98 /  /  vyAkhyA :-
apanI patnI ko koI kudRSTi se dekhatA hai, to usake lie svayaM ko kitanA duHkha
hotA hai, usake jatana ke lie dIvAra, koTa, kile Adi banAtA hai, strI ko parde
yA burke meM rakhatA hai, paharedAroM ko rakhakara yena kena prakAreNa usakI
rakSA karatA hai| apanI strI kI rakSA meM bhI manuSya rAta-dina jaba itanA
parikleza karatA hai aura svayaM usakA duHkha mahasUsa karatA hai, taba isa
AtmAnubhava se parastrI gamana se usake pati yA saMbaMdhI ko kitanA duHkha hogA;
152

Page #175 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The terrible sins of Vaishyaagaman and Parastriigaman, the story of Ravana Yoga
Shastra, Second Light, Verse 99: Knowing this, how can a wise man engage in
Paradaaragaman? Let alone Parastriigaman, even thinking about another woman is a
great sin. ||96|| This is explained. ||155|| Even though he shook the entire
world with his prowess, Ravana, despite having his own wife, abducted Sita Sati
out of lust and looked at her with lustful eyes. This led to the destruction of
his lineage, the end of Lanka, and he went to hell after death. Even such a
great warrior faced the consequences of his actions, so what chance does anyone
else have of not facing the consequences of Parastriigaman? ||99|| Therefore,
one should learn from this. The mere desire for Parastriigaman led Ravana to
hell: In the island called Rakshasa, on the peak of the Trikut mountain, which
is like the crown jewel of the earth, there was a vast city called Lanka, made
of gold. There ruled King Ravana, the jewel of the Polasthya lineage, a great
warrior who shook the world with his prowess, the lord of the Vidyadharas. He
had two brothers, Kumbhakarna and Vibhishana, who were like pillars of strength.
One day, he saw a garland adorned with nine gems, inherited from his ancestors.
As if it were the family goddess, Ravana looked at it with wonder and asked the
elders there, "Where did this garland come from? What is special about it?" They
said, "This garland was obtained by your ancestors as a boon. It is a very
essential and valuable garland of gems. The special thing about this garland is
that whoever wears it will become half-lord. Thus, according to the family
tradition, the king has been wearing this garland. According to this custom,
your ancestors also worshipped it. Hearing the importance of the garland, Ravana
put it on his neck." As soon as he put it on, the reflection of Ravana's face
appeared in the nine gems. Due to this, instead of one face, ten faces appeared.
This is why Ravana became known as Dashmukha. From then on, people greeted
Ravana with the words "Jai Jai". At that time, he seemed to be excited for
conquering the world. Ravana possessed perfect knowledge like Pragyapti, etc.,
which was like a well-trained army acquired through intense practice. Due to
this, he easily conquered the difficult half-Bharat region, as if conquering a
village; yet, his desire for kingdom, like an itch, did not subside. Indra, the
king of the Vidyadharas, who had experienced Indrahood in his previous birth,
was a master of many arts and ruled on the Vaithadya mountain. Due to the excess
of wealth and power in the world and the practice of Indrahood in his previous
birth, he became proud and considered himself as Ahminndra. He named his queen
Shachi, his weapon Vajra, his elephant Airavata, his horse Matali, and his four
great generals Soma, Yama, Varuna, and Kubera. Because he considered himself
Indra, he considered others as insignificant as straw. Being a fierce warrior,
he considered even Ravana as insignificant in front of him. When the powerful
Ravana, who was as strong as Yama, came to know this, he became angry and roared
like the clouds of Shravan, and went to fight the said Indra king. With the
power of knowledge, he crossed the sea with an army of water, land, and sky, and
arrived at Vaithadya like a storm of the apocalypse, the dust from the whirlwind
of his army covering the sky. Seeing Ravana approaching, Indra also came
forward, because it is the first duty of men to face each other in friendship
and enmity. The mighty Ravana sent a messenger to Indra, conveying a message in
sweet words, "There have been many rulers here who are proud of their strength
or are Vidyadharas. All of them have sent gifts and served King Dashkandha
Ravana. Due to being forgotten by Ravana and your simplicity, 1. In other texts,
it is mentioned that the garland was worn around the neck at the time of birth.
153

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 vaizyAgamana va parastrIgamana ke bhayaMkara doSa rAvaNa kI kathA yogazAstra
dvitIya prakAza zloka 99 yaha jAnakara sujJa puruSa paradArAgamana kaise kara
sakatA hai? parastrIgamana kI bAta to dUra rahI, parastrIciMtana karanA bhI
mahAanarthakArI hai||96|| ise hI batAte haiN|155| vikramAkrAntavizvo'pi,
parastrISu riMsayA  /  kRtvA kulakSayaM prApa, narakaM dazakandharaH  // 99 /  /
artha :- apane parAkrama se sAre vizva ko kaMpA dene vAlA rAvaNa apanI strI ke
hote hue bhI sItA satI ko kAmalolupatAvaza ur3Akara le gayA aura usake prati
sirpha kudRSTi kI, jisake kAraNa usake kula kA nAza ho gayA, laMkAnagarI khatma
ho gyii| aura vaha marakara naraka meM gyaa| itanA bar3A parAkramI bhI jaba
apane anartha kA phala pA cukA to dUsare kI to kyA bisAta hai ki use
parastrIgamana kA phala nahIM milegaa?||99|| ataH isase sabaka lenA
cAhieparakhIgamana kI icchAmAtra se rAvaNa kI narakayAtrA : rAkSasa nAmaka dvIpa
meM pRthvI ke mukuTamaNisamAna trikUTa parvatazikhara para svarNamayI laMkA nAma
kI vizAla nagarI thii| vahAM polastyakulakaustubha, mahApratApI, vizva ko apane
parAkrama se hilA dene vAlA, vidyAdharoM kA adhipati rAjA rAvaNa rAjya karatA
thaa| usake do bAhustaMbhoM kI taraha kuMbhakarNa aura vibhISaNa nAmaka do
atibalazAlI bhAI the| _eka dina usane apane pUrvajoM se upArjita nau ratna
piroyI huI eka mAlA dekhii| mAno vaha kuladevI ho, isa prakAra Azcaryajanaka
dRSTi se dekhakara rAvaNa ne vahAM ke bujurgoM se pUchA-yaha mAlA kahAM se AyI?
isameM kyA vizeSatA hai? unhoMne kahA-'yaha mAlA tumhAre pUrvajoM ne varadAna
meM prApta kI hai| yaha bahuta hI sArabhUta aura bahumUlya ratnamAlA hai| isa
mAlA kI khUbI yaha hai ki jo ise gale meM pahanegA, vaha arddhabharatezvara
hogaa| isa prakAra kula paraMparA se isa mAlA ko rAjA apane gale meM DAlatA calA
A rahA hai| isa rivAja ke anusAra tumhAre pUrvaja isakI pUjA bhI karate the|
mAlA kI mahattA sunakara rAvaNa ne vaha mAlA apane gale meM DAla lii|' gale meM
DAlate hI usake nau ratnoM meM rAvaNa ke mukha kA pratibiMba par3ane lgaa| isI
kAraNa eka mukha ke bajAya dasa mukha dikhAyI dene lge| isIse rAvaNa dazamukha
nAma se prasiddha huaa| taba se logoM ne rAvaNa kA jayajaya zabdoM se
abhinaMdana kiyaa| usa samaya vaha aisA pratIta hotA thA, mAno jagadvijaya ke
lie utsAhita ho| rAvaNa ke pAsa asAdhya sAdhanA se siddha kI huI praur3ha senA
ke samAna, prajJapti Adi anavadya vidyAe~ thiiN| isa kAraNa duHsAdhya
ardhabharata kSetra ko usane eka gAMva ko jItane kI taraha AsAnI se jIta liyA;
phira bhI khujalI kI taraha bAhubali ke samAna usakI rAjyalipsA miTI nhiiN|
pUrvajanma meM iMdratva kA anubhava karane vAlA anekavidyAsaMpanna iMdra nAma kA
vidyAdharanRpa vaitADhyaparvata para rAjya karatA thaa| vizva meM aizvaryabala
ke atireka aura pUrvajanma ke iMdratva ke abhyAsa ke kAraNa garvita hokara vaha
apane ko ahamindra samajhatA thaa| usane apanI paTarAnI kA nAma zacI rakhA,
zastra kA nAma vajra, paTTahastI kA nAma airAvaNa, ghor3e kA nAma kA nAma mAtali
aura cAra mahAsabhaToM kA nAma soma, yama, varuNa aura kubera rkhaa| vaha svayaM
ko iMdra mAnane ke kAraNa dUsaroM ko tinake ke samAna mAnatA thaa| bhayaMkara
yoddhA hone se vaha rAvaNa ko bhI apane sAmane tuccha samajhatA thaa| yamarAja
ke samAna balazAlI rAvaNa ko jaba yaha patA calA to vaha usa para kruddha hokara
zrAvaNa ke meghoM kI-sI garjanA karatA huA ukta iMdra rAjA se yuddha karane
claa| vidyA ke prabhAva se jala, sthala aura nabha tInoM prakAra kI senA ko
lekara samudra pAra karake pralayakAla ke tUphAna kI taraha umar3ate hue sainya
rUpI aMdhar3a se ur3I huI dhUla se AkAza ko AcchAdita karate hue ekadama
vaitADhya para phuNcaa| rAvaNa ko Ate dekhakara iMdra bhI sAmane AyA, kyoMki
maitrI aura vaira meM puruSoM kA sammukha AnA prathama kartavya hai|
mahAparAkramI rAvaNa ne iMdra rAjA ke pAsa dUta bhejakara madhura zabdoM meM
saMdeza kahalavAyA-'yahAM kitane hI bhujabala ke abhimAnI athavA vidyAdhara
zAsaka ho gaye haiN| una sabane upahAra bhejakara dazakaMdhara rAjA rAvaNa kI
sevAbhakti kI hai| rAvaNa dvArA vismRta ho jAne aura ApakI saralatA ke kAraNa 1.
anya graMthoM meM janma samaya meM hAra (mAlA) gale meM pahanane kI bAta hai|
153

Page #176 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Tale of Ravana  Yoga Shastra, Second Light, Verse 99:  "So much time has
passed. Now is the time to serve them. Therefore, either show your devotion to
them, or show your strength by fighting them. If you do not show either devotion
or strength, your everything will be destroyed."  The king, hearing this, said
to the messenger, "The poor, weak kings must have served him with devotion. No
powerful ruler has dared to face him. Now, intoxicated with power, he wants me
to serve him and worship him. Until now, Ravana's time has passed peacefully.
Now it seems that the days of his destruction are left. Therefore, go to your
master and tell him that if he wishes well, he should show devotion to me,
otherwise, he should show his strength. If he does not show either devotion or
strength, then understand that his destruction is certain."  The messenger went
and told Ravana the whole truth. Hearing this, Ravana, filled with rage, became
like the turbulent sea of the apocalypse. With his infinite army like surging
waves, he arrived on the battlefield. The armies of both sides began to fight
with great force. The shower of weapons from both sides seemed like the rain of
clouds during the Samvartaka Pushkara Avarta.  After saluting Ravana, Ravana's
son, Meghnad, challenged Indra to battle. "A valiant man does not give way to
anyone in the game of war." To decide who would be victorious, the armies of
both sides were moved away, and Ravana's son and Indra, both valiant warriors,
engaged in a duel. Both crossed the river of war, striking each other with
weapons. They quickly dodged each other, making it difficult to tell whether
Meghnad was above or below, or whether Indra was above or below. Victory,
frightened, went to Indra for a moment, and then to Meghnad in the next. Just as
Indra, puffed up with pride like a musk deer, was about to strike, Meghnad
attacked him with all his might. Immediately, Meghnad knocked Indra down and
bound him. "The first reason for the victory of a man who desires victory is
haste."  With a roar that shook the sky, Meghnad, like a living victory, handed
the bound Indra over to his father, Ravana. Ravana also imprisoned him in a
strong, secure prison. For the strong one does both - he kills and he protects.
At that moment, enraged by the capture of Indra, Yama, Varuna, Soma, and Kubera,
the four Indra Subhats, immediately arrived and surrounded Ravana. Ravana,
desiring victory, became four times more enthusiastic and clashed with the four
Subhats. First, he broke the staff of the staff-bearer (Yama). Then he shattered
Kubera's mace. After that, he broke Varuna's bow of the ocean. Just as a big
elephant overpowers a small elephant, Ravana overpowered the four so much that
they were completely defeated. Then, for the destruction of the enemy, he bound
the four.  Taking Indra with him, along with the seven limbs of the kingdom,
Ravana marched to conquer Patala Lanka. He killed the king of Chandrodya there
and gave his kingdom to Khara, who had three heads and was strong in deceit.
Khara, a strong and powerful man, took possession of all the palaces of
Chandrodya. Only one pregnant queen escaped. After that, Ravana, the king of
Lanka, returned to Lanka from Patala Lanka and made his kingdom, which was like
thorns to the gods, thornless. [In other stories, it is described that Khara
himself conquers the kingdom of Patala Lanka.]  Once, Ravana was going for a
pleasure trip in his Pushpaka Vimana, when he saw the Marut king performing a
great sacrifice. To see his sacrifice, Ravana descended from his Vimana and
reached the sacrificial ground. The Marut king welcomed Ravana with a throne and
other things. In the course of conversation, Ravana said to the Marut king,
"Brother! Why are you performing this violent sacrifice that takes people to
hell? The omniscient, benevolent gods who are well-wishers of the three worlds
have declared non-violence as the dharma. Then how can dharma be achieved
through this sacrifice, which is impure due to the killing of animals?
Therefore, do not perform this sacrifice, which is like an enemy who spoils both
worlds. If you reject my words and perform a sacrifice in the future, then..."
1. In another story, there is a description of Ravana binding Indra. 2. In one
story, there is a description of Narada telling Ravana. 154

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 rAvaNa kI kathA yogazAstra dvitIya prakAza zloka 99 itanA samaya vyatIta ho
gayA hai| aba unakI sevA karane kA samaya A gayA hai| ataH Apa unake prati yA to
bhakti batAiye, yA Apa unake sAtha yuddha karake zakti btaaiye|' yadi bhakti yA
zakti donoM meM se Apa eka bhI nahIM batAyeMge to ApakA sarvasva naSTakara diyA
jaayegaa| rAjA ne sunakara dUta se kahA-'becAre garIba rAjAoM ne usakI
sevAbhakti kara dI hogii| kisI bar3e sattAdhArI se usakA vAstA nahIM par3A
hogaa| aba vaha madonmatta hokara mujhase sevApUjA karAnA cAhatA hai| aba taka
rAvaNa kA samaya kisI prakAra sukha pUrvaka vyatIta huA, aba mAlUma hotA hai
usake nAza hone ke dina bAkI raha gaye haiN| ataH apane svAmI se jAkara kaha
denA ki agara vaha bhalA cAhatA hai to mere prati bhakti batAe~, anyathA zakti
btaaeN| agara bhakti aura zakti donoM meM kisI bhI eka ko nahIM batAyegA to
samajha lo, usakA vinAza nizcita hai|' dUta ne Akara rAvaNa ko sArI hakIkata
sunaayii| sunate hI krodha se pralayakAla ke kSubdha samudra ke samAna |
bhayaMkara banA huA rAvaNa anaMta sainya rUpI uchalatI laharoM ke sAtha yuddha
ke maidAna meM A ddttaa| donoM pakSa kI senA kA bar3e bhArI saMgharSa ke sAtha
yuddha prAraMbha huaa| donoM ora se zastravarSA aisI lagatI thI, mAno
saMvartakapuSkarAvarta meghavRSTi ho rahI ho| rAvaNa ko namaskAra karake
rAvaNaputra meghanAda ne yuddha ke lie iMdra ko llkaaraa| 'vIrapuruSa yuddha
krIr3A meM kisI ko agrapada nahIM dete|' donoM meM se kauna-sA vijayI hogA,
isakA phaisalA karane ke lie ubhayapakSa kI senA ko dUra karake rAvaNaputra aura
iMdra donoM hI vIra paraspara dvandvayuddha karane lge| donoM yuddhanada ko pAra
karane hetu paraspara zastraprahAra karane lge| ve phurtI se eka-dUsare ko
pachAr3a dete the, isa kAraNa yaha patA lagAnA kaThina hotA thA ki meghanAda |
Upara hai yA nIce? athavA iMdra Upara hai yA nIce?' vijayazrI bhayabhIta-sI
hokara kSaNabhara meM iMdra ke pAsa aura dUsare hI kSaNa meghanAda ke pAsa calI
AtI thii| iMdra jaba taba abhimAna se mazaka kI taraha phUlakara zastraprahAra
karane ko udyata hotA, taba taka meghanAda pUrI tAkata se usa para hamalAkara
detaa| aura tatkAla hI meghanAda ne iMdra ko nIce girAkara bAMdha liyaa|
'vijayAkAMkSI manuSya kI jaya meM pahalA kAraNa AzukAritA (phurtI) hotI hai|'
siMhanAda se AkAza ko guMjAte hue meghanAda ne mUrtimAna vijaya kI taraha bAMdhe
hue iMdra ko apane pitA rAvaNa ko supurda kiyaa| rAvaNa ne bhI use prabala |
surakSA se yukta kArAgAra meM DAla diyaa| kyoMki balavAna donoM kArya karatA
hai-vaha mAratA bhI hai to rakSA bhI karatA hai| itane meM hI iMdra ko pakar3ane
se krodhita hokara yamarAja, varuNa, soma aura kubera ina cAroM iMdra subhaToM
ne tatkAla Akara | rAvaNa ko ghera liyaa| vijayAkAMkSI rAvaNa bhI caugunA
utsAhita hokara una cAroM subhaToM se bhir3a gyaa| sarvaprathama daMDadhara
(yamarAjA) ke daMDa ko tor3a diyA, phira kubera kI gadA cUra-cUrakara dii|
tatpazcAt varaNa kA pAzana kA dhanaSa toDa ddaalaa| baDA hAthI jaise choTe hAthI
ko pachADa detA hai, vaise hI rAvaNa ne una cAroM ko aisA pachADA ki ve cAroM
khAne citta ho gye| phira bairI ke vinAzahetu una cAroM ko bAMdha diyaa| iMdra
ko sAtha meM rakhakara rAjya ke sapta aMgoM sahita rAvaNa ne aba pAtAlalaMkA ko
jItane ke lie kUca kiyaa| vahAM ke caMdrodaya rAjA ko mArakara usakA rAjya tIna
mastaka vAle evaM dUSaNa meM balI khara ko sauNpaa| caMdrodaya ke sAre rAjya
aMtaHpura ko kaThora balazAlI khara ne apane | kabje meM kara liyaa| sirpha eka
garbhavatI rAnI bhAgakara kahIM calI gyii| usake bAda laMkApati rAvaNa
pAtAlalaMkA se laMkA pahuMcA aura devatAoM ke lie kAMTeke samAna khaTakane vAle
apane rAjya ko niSkaMTaka banA diyaa| [anya kathAoM meM khara svayaM pAtAla
laMkA kA rAjya jItatA hai aisA varNana hai|] | eka bAra rAvaNa sairasapATA
karane puSkaravimAna meM baiThakara jA rahA thA, tabhI idhara-udhara ghUmate hue
usane maruta | rAjA ko mahAyajJa karate dekhaa| usake yajJa ko dekhane ke lie
rAvaNa vimAna se nIce utarA aura yajJasthala para phuNcaa| maruta rAjA ne rAvaNa
ko siMhAsana Adi dekara usakA satkAra kiyaa| bAtacIta ke silasile meM rAvaNa ne
marutarAjA se kahA-'are bhAI! naraka meM le jAne vAle isa hiMsaka yajJa ko kyoM
kara rahe ho? trilokahitaiSI sarvajJa bhagavaMtoM ne to ahiMsA meM dharma batAyA
hai, phira pazuhiMsA se apavitra isa yajJa se dharma kaise ho sakatA hai? isalie
donoM lokoM ko bigAr3ane vAle zatru ke samAna isa yajJa ko mata kro| merI bAta
ko ThukarAkara yadi tuma bhaviSya meM kabhI yajJa karoge to 1. anya kathA meM
rAvaNa dvArA iMdra ko bAMdhane kA varNana hai| (2. eka kathA meM nArada dvArA
rAvaNa ko kahane kA varNana hai| 154

Page #177 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Exile of Ramachandra  **Yoga Shastra, Second Light, Verse 99**  "In this
world, your dwelling will be in my prison, and in the afterlife, your dwelling
will be in hell." Having understood everything well, Marutraja immediately
stopped the yagna. Because in the world, he had to obey the command of the
powerful and mighty Ravana. After stopping the yagna from Marut, Ravana, swift
as the wind, went on a journey to the holy places of Sumeru, Ashtapada, etc.
After completing his journey to the Chaityas, considered eternal and non-
eternal, he returned to his place.  Meanwhile, in Ayodhya, there was King
Dasharatha, the possessor of immense wealth and a great warrior. He had four
queens, Kaushalya, Sumitra, Kaikeyi, and Suprabha, who were like the Lakshmi of
the four directions. From Queen Kaushalya, Rama was born; from Kaikeyi, Bharata;
from Sumitra, Lakshmana; and from Suprabha, Shatrughna. These four princes,
Rama, Lakshmana, Bharata, and Shatrughna, shone like the four tusks of Indra's
Airavata elephant. Upon reaching adulthood, Ramachandra married Sita, the
daughter of King Janaka and the sister of the earth, after stringing the bow.
One day, King Dasharatha sent consecrated water to his four queens for the
auspicious worship of the Jain Tirthankara. Kaushalya received the water late.
Due to this, she became angry. To appease her, King Dasharatha himself went to
her. At that time, he saw an old, dilapidated servant in the inner palace, whose
teeth were shaking like the pendulum of a clock. His head was trembling, causing
his mouth to move. His entire body was covered with silver-white hair. His eyes
were covered by the eyebrows, as if he was begging for death from Yama. He was
stumbling with every step. Seeing him, the king fell into thought - "May my
condition not be like this. Before that, I should practice the fourth
purushartha - Moksha."  King Dasharatha wanted to embrace the great vow.
Therefore, to establish his eldest son in his place, he called Rama and
Lakshmana. At that time, Bharata's mother, Kaikeyi, came and, with a dignified
voice, asked for two boons from King Dasharatha, who was true to his word.
Immediately, King Dasharatha granted Bharata the throne as one boon. As the
second boon, he granted Rama and Lakshmana, along with Sita, fourteen years of
exile. Upon this, Rama and Lakshmana, along with Sita, immediately left for the
forest and resided in the ashram of Panchavati in Dandakaranya.  At that time,
two Charanmunis were wandering and came there. Rama and Lakshmana respectfully
greeted them. The devout Sita offered pure food to both the munis, taking the
benefit of feeding guests. At that time, the gods rained fragrant water.
Attracted by the fragrance, a vulture king named Jatayu arrived there. Both the
Charanmunis gave a sermon there. This also awakened the bird. He remembered his
past life. Due to some connection from his previous birth, he always stayed near
Sita.  One day, Rama was in the ashram. Lakshmana went out to the forest to
bring fruits. There, Lakshmana saw a sword lying on the ground. Out of
curiosity, he picked it up and, to test its sharpness, he struck it against a
pile of bamboo nearby. After that, he saw the head of a man, cut like a lotus
stalk, lying among the bamboo. Seeing this, Lakshmana felt great remorse -
"Alas! I have killed this unarmed man without any fight!" Reproaching himself
for this deed and feeling self-reproach, Lakshmana went to his elder brother
Ramachandra. He narrated the entire incident to him. Hearing this, Ramachandra
said, "Brother! This is the sword called Suryahas. You have killed the one who
practiced it. There must be someone who will avenge him." Just then, Ravana's
sister, Khar's wife, Chandranakha, arrived there where her son was lying dead.
Seeing her dead son, she cried out loudly, "Alas! My son Shambuka! Where are
you? How did you leave me?" She looked around to find out who had killed her
son, but she couldn't see anyone. Then, her eyes fell on the beautiful line of
Lakshmana's feet. She thought to herself - 1. There is also a story about a boon
in other stories. 155

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 rAmacaMdra kA vanavAsa nirNaya yogazAstra dvitIya prakAza zloka 99 | isa loka
meM to tumhArA nivAsa mere kArAgAra meM hogA aura paraloka meM tumhArA nivAsa
narakAgAra meM hogaa|' marutarAjA ne sArI bAteM bhalIbhAMti samajhakara usI
samaya yajJa baMda kara diyaa| kyoMki vizva meM prabala zaktizAlI rAvaNa kI AjJA
to use mAnanI hI pdd'tii| maruta se yajJa baMda karavA kara havA ke samAna
phurtIlA rAvaNa sumeru aSTApada Adi tIrthoM kI | yAtrA karane calA gyaa| vahAM
zAzvata azAzvata mAne jAne vAle caityoM kI yAtrA pUrNa karake vaha vApisa apane
sthAna ko lauttaa| idhara ayodhyAnagarI meM asIma saMpatti kA sthAna, mahArathI
dazaratha rAjA thaa| usake cAroM dizAoM kI lakSmI ke samAna kauzalyA, sumitrA,
kaikayI aura suprabhA nAmaka cAra rAniyA~ thIM kauzalyA rAnI se rAma, kaikayI se
bharata, sumitrA | se lakSmaNa aura suprabhA se zatrughna nAmaka putroM kA janma
huaa| rAma, lakSmaNa, bharata aura zatrughna ye cAroM rAjaputra iMdra ke |
airAvaNa hAthI ke cAra dAMtoM se zobhA dete the| vayaska hone para rAmacaMdra ne
dhanuSya para bANa car3hAkara janakarAjA kI putrI aura bhAmaMDala kI bahana sItA
ke sAtha vivAha kiyaa| eka dina rAjA dazaratha ne apanI cAroM rAniyoM ko
jinapratimA kA | maMgalamaya abhiSeka jala bhejaa| kauzalyA ko vaha jala vilaMba
se milaa| isa kAraNa vaha nArAja ho gyii| use manAne ke | lie rAjA dazaratha
svayaM pdhaare| usa samaya unhoMne aMtaHpura kA eka jarAjIrNa bUr3hA sevaka
dekhA, jisake dAMta ghaMTe ke lolaka ke samAna hila rahe the; usakA sira kAMpa
rahA thA, jisase muMha bhI calAyamAna ho rahA thA, usake sAre zarIra para
cAMdIse saphela bAla the, usakI AMkheM bhauMhoM kI romarAji se Dhaka gayI thI,
mAno yamarAja se mRtyu kI yAcanA karatA huA| sA vaha bUr3hA kadama-kadama para
lar3akhar3AtA huA calatA thA  /  use dekhakara rAjA vicAra meM par3a gayA - merI
bhI aisI dazA ho, usase pahale-pahale mujhe cauthe puruSArtha - mokSa kI sAdhanA
kara lenI cAhie  /  dazaratha mahArAja mahAvrata aMgIkAra karanA cAhate the,
isalie apane sthAna para apane jyeSThaputra ko sthApita karane ke lie unhoMne
rAma aura lakSmaNa ko bulaayaa| tabhI bharata kI mAtA kaikeyI ne Akara
satyapratijJa rAjA dazaratha se | dhIragaMbhIra vANI se uccAraNa karate hue do
varadAna mAMge  / ' tatkAla rAjA dazaratha ne eka varadAna ke rUpa meM bharata
ko | rAjagaddI sauMpI aura dUsare varadAna ke rUpa meM sItAsahita rAma aura
lakSmaNa ko caudaha varSa ke vanavAsa kI mAMga para unheM | vanavAsa kI AjJA dI,
jisa para sItAsahita rAma aura lakSmaNa ne tatkAla vanaprasthAna kara diyA aura
daMDakAraNya meM jAkara | paMcavaTI ke Azrama meM nivAsa kiyaa| usa samaya do
cAraNamuni vicaraNa karate-karate vahAM aaye| rAma-lakSmaNa ne zraddhApUrvaka
unheM namaskAra kiyaa| zraddhAlu sItA ne atithi rUpa donoM muniyoM ko
zuddhabhikSA dekara AhAradAna kA lAbha | liyaa| usI samaya devoM ne sugaMdhita
jala kI vRSTi kii| usa sugaMdha se vahAM jaTAyu nAma kA eka giddharAja A gyaa|
donoM | cAraNamuniyoM ne vahAM dharmopadeza diyaa| isase usa pakSI ko bhI
pratibodha huA  /  use jAtismaraNajJAna huA, ataH pUrvajanma | ke kisI saMbaMdha
ke kAraNa vaha hamezA sItA ke pAsa hI rahane lgaa| eka dina rAma Azrama para hI
the| lakSmaNa phalAdi lAne ke lie bAhara vana meM gayA, vahAM lakSmaNa ne eka
talavAra | par3I dekhI; kutUhalavaza usane uThA lI aura usakI tIkSNatA kI
parIkSA karane ke lie usane pAsa hI par3e hue bAMsoM | ke Dhera meM prahAra
kiyaa| usake bAda bAMsoM ke Dhera ke bIca meM baiThe hue kisI puruSa kA mastaka
kamalanAla ke samAna kaTara | girA huA dekhaa| dekhate hI lakSmaNa ko bahuta
pazcAttApa huA - 'hAya, maiMne binA hI yuddha kiye Aja akAraNa hI isa |
niHzastra puruSa ko mAra diyA!' isa akArya ke lie apanI AtmA ko dhikkAratA huA
evaM AtmaniMdA karatA huA lakSmaNa apane bar3e bhAI rAmacaMdra ke pAsa aayaa|
usane sArI ghaTita ghaTanA unheM sunaayii| use sunakara rAmacaMdra ne kahA-
'bhaiyA ! yaha sUryahAsa nAmaka talavAra hai| isakI sAdhanA karane vAle ko
tumane mAra diyA hai| isakA koI na koI uttarasAdhaka vahAM para jarUra honA
cAhie, itane meM hI rAvaNa kI bahana, khara kI patnI caMdraNakhA vahAM para
pahuMcI, jahAM usakA putra marA par3A thaa| apane mRta putra ko dekhate hI vaha
jora-jora se cillAkara rone lagI- 'hAya ! mere putra zaMbUka ! tUM kahAM hai?
mujhe chor3akara tUM kaise calA gayA ?' usane apane putra ko mArane vAle kA patA
lagAne ke lie idhara-udhara dRSTi daur3AI, para vahAM koI najara nahIM aayaa|
tabhI usakI najara lakSmaNa ke pairoM kI manohara paMkti para pdd'ii| usane mana
hI mana socA - 1. anya kathAoM meM eka varadAna kI bAta bhI hai| 155

Page #178 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Chandranakha's attempt to attract Ravana towards Sita Yogashastra, Dvitiya
Prakash, Sloka 99 'Whether it is true or not, it is certain that the person
whose footprints these are has killed my son.' Convinced of this, she followed
those footprints. She had not gone far when she saw the captivating Lord Rama
seated before Sita and Lakshmana under a tree. Enchanted by the sight of Sri
Rama, she became inflamed with desire. 'Even in the height of sorrow, the
longing for love in women is quite strange.' She made her appearance extremely
charming and pleaded with Rama to engage in amorous play with her. Smiling at
her ignoble request, Rama said, 'I have only one wife, you should serve
Lakshmana.' So she went to Lakshmana and made a similar plea before him.
Lakshmana replied, 'Such a request does not befit a noble lady like you. I
cannot possibly accept your proposal.'  Enraged by the rejection and the killing
of her son, she went straight to her husband Khara and said, 'Lakshmana has
killed my son. He must be avenged.' Incited by his wife's words, Khara,
accompanied by fourteen thousand Vidyadharas, charged towards Sri Rama like an
elephant. Lakshmana immediately requested Sri Rama, 'Dear elder brother, it is
not proper for you to fight them yourself while I am here. Please grant me
permission to fight them.' After some thought, Sri Rama said, 'Very well, my
child. Since you are so eager, go and achieve victory in the battle. But if you
face any serious danger, roar like a lion to call me.'  Thus instructed,
Lakshmana went to the battlefield with his bow. In the face-to-face battle, he
started felling Khara's soldiers with his sharp arrows, just as Garuda kills
serpents. The battle was raging on, with no clear indication of victory or
defeat. Meanwhile, Chandranakha went to her brother Ravana to increase the
number of soldiers on her husband's side. To incite Ravana, she said, 'Brother,
you should know that there are two men named Rama and Lakshmana in the
Dandakaranya who have disregarded our clan. They have sent your nephew to the
abode of Yama. To avenge this, your brother-in-law has gone to fight Lakshmana
with his younger brother's army. The battle is still ongoing. Filled with pride
in the valor of your younger brother and your own might, Rama is indulging in
amorous play with his wife Sita. Sita's beauty and grace are so captivating that
no goddess, nymph or mortal woman can rival her. Her beauty surpasses even the
celestial damsels of the three worlds. Her description is beyond words. O king!
All the jewels on this earth up to the ocean are under your dominion. Therefore,
brother, if you cannot possess this jewel-like woman whose beauty captivates the
eyes, what use is Ravana?'  Excited by Chandranakha's words, Ravana immediately
boarded the Pushpaka Vimana and commanded, 'O king of the Vimanas! Take me
quickly to where Janaki is.' The Vimana flew swiftly to where Janaki was. Seeing
the effulgent Rama, Ravana stood at a distance, just as a lion stands away from
fire. He thought to himself, 'Conquering Sri Rama and abducting Sita is as
difficult as fighting a lion on one side and crossing a river brimming with
water on the other.' Ravana invoked the power of Avalokanavidy

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 caMdraNakhA dvArA rAvaNa ko sItA ke prati AkarSita karanA yogazAstra dvitIya
prakAza zloka 99 'ho na ho, inhIM padacihnoM vAle puruSa ne mere putra ko mArA
hai|' yaha nizcaya karake vaha una caraNa cihnoM kA anusaraNa karatI huI cala
pdd'ii| thor3I hI dUra gayI hogI ki usane eka per3a ke nIce nayana manohArI rAma
ko sItA aura lakSmaNa ke Age baiThe hue dekhA  /  zrIrAma ko dekhate hI unake
rUpa para mohita hokara vaha kAmakrIr3Atura ho gyii| 'zoka kI adhikatA ke samaya
bhI kAminiyoM meM kAma kI abhilASA kucha ajaba hI hotI hai|' usane apanA rUpa
atyaMta manohara banA liyA | aura rAma se apane sAtha ratikrIr3A karane kI
prArthanA kii|' usakI nikRSTa prArthanA para muskarAte hue rAma ne kahA-' -
'mere to eka patnI hai, tuma lakSmaNa kI sevA kro|' ataH vaha lakSmaNa ke pAsa
gayI aura usake sAmane bhI isI taraha kI | | prArthanA karane lagI  /  lakSmaNa
ne uttara diyA- 'tuma jaisI AryanArI ke lie aisI prArthanA zobhA nahIM detii|
maiM tumhArI bAta ko kadApi svIkAra nahIM kara sktaa|' prArthanAbhaMga aura
putravadha se atyaMta kupita hokara sIdhI apane pati khara ke pAsa pahuMcI; aura
usase kahA- 'mere putra ko lakSmaNa ne mAra DAlA hai| usakA usase avazya badalA
lenA caahie| patnI kI bAta se uttejita hokara khara caudaha | hajAra vidyAdharoM
ko sAtha lekara hAthI kI taraha sadalabala vahAM A phuNcaa| usane zrIrAma para
ekadama dhAvA bola diyA  /  | lakSmaNa ne tatkAla hI zrI rAma se vinati kI -
baDe bhAI ! mere rahate Apa svayaM kA aisoM ke sAtha yuddha karanA ucita nahIM
hai, Apa mujhe inake sAtha yuddha karane kI AjJA diijie| isa para zrIrAma ne
kucha socakara kahA - 'acchA, vatsa! terI prabala | icchA hai to tUM khuzI se jA
aura yuddha meM vijaya prApta kara  /  paraMtu agara tuma para koI vizeSa
saMkaTa A par3e to mujhe bulAne | ke lie siMhanAda kara denA  /  isa prakAra
hitazikSA dekara lakSmaNa ko bhejA  /  lakSmaNa bhI apanA dhanuSya lekara
zrIrAma kI | AjJA se yuddhasthala para A DaTA  /  aura Amane-sAmane kI lar3AI
meM apane paine tIroM se khara ke sainikoM ko usI taraha | mAra girAne lagA,
jaise garur3a sarpoM kA mAra girAtA hai| yuddha bar3hatA jA rahA thaa| jaya-
parAjaya kA koI patA nahIM laga rahA thaa| isI bIca caMdraNakhA apane pati ke
pakSa meM sainikoM kI vRddhi ke lie apane bhAI rAvaNa ke pAsa phuNcii| rAvaNa ko
| uttejita karane ke lie usane kahA- 'bhaiyA ! tumheM patA hai, daMDakAraNya meM
hamArI jAti kI avagaNanA karane vAle rAma aura | lakSmaNa nAma ke do manuSya Aye
hue haiN| unhoMne tumhAre bhAnaje ko yamaloka bheja diyA hai| isa bAta ko
sunakara usakA | badalA lene ke lie tumhAre bahanoI apane choTe bhAI ke sAtha
senA lekara lakSmaNa ke sAtha yuddha karane gaye haiN| yuddha abhI | jArI hai|
apane choTe bhAI ke parAkrama ke garva se aura apanI zakti ke garva se phUlakara
rAma apanI patnI sItA ke sAtha | vilAsa karane ke lie apane sthAna para raha
gayA hai| usa sItA kA rUpa, lAvaNya itanA suMdara hai ki devI, nAgakumArI | yA
koI mAnuSI usakI hor3a nahIM kara sktii| tInoM loka meM usake sarIkhA rUpa
maiMne kisI dUsarI strI kA nahIM dekhA  /  | itanA hI nahIM, sAre devoM aura
asuroM kI devAMganAoM ke rUpa se bhI bar3hakara usakA rUpa hai| vANI se usakA
bayAna karanA bhI azakya hai| rAjan! samudraparyaMta isa pRthvI para jitane bhI
ratna haiM, ve saba tumhAre adhikAra ke haiN| ataH baMdho ! jisakI rUpa saMpadA
apalakanetroM se TakaTakI lagAkara dekhate raheM, aisI manohAriNI AkRti vAle
strIratna ko agara tuma grahaNa nahIM kara sake to rAvaNa hI kyA hue?'
caMdraNakhA kI bAtoM se uttejita hokara rAvaNa tatkAla puSpakavimAna meM baiThA
aura AjJA | dI ki he vimAnarAja ! jahAM jAnakI ho, vahAM mujhe zIghrAtizIghra
pahuMcA de  / ' vimAna bhI manovega ke samAna ur3atA huA bahuta tejI se jahAM
jAnakI thI, vahAM phuNcaa| agni se Darakara jaise siMha dUra khar3A rahatA hai,
vaise hI ugratejasvI rAma | ko dekhakara rAvaNa Darakara dUra khar3A rhaa| vaha
mana hI mana socane lagA- isa prakAra zrI rAma ko jItakara sItA kA haraNa |
karanA utanA hI kaThina hai, jitanA ki eka ora siMha se mukAbalA karanA aura
dUsarI ora pAnI se labAlaba bharI nadI | ko pAra krnaa| rAvaNa ne avalokanavidyA
kA smaraNa kiyaa| usI samaya vaha kiMkarI kI taraha hAtha jor3akara sAmane Akara
khar3I ho gayI  /  rAvaNa ne tatkAla use AjJA dI - sItA kA apaharaNa karane ke
lie Aja tuma mujhe sahAyatA do| | avalokanavidyAdevI ne kahA- sarparAja ke
mastaka kA maNi grahaNa karanA AsAna hai, magara rAma ke sAtha baiThI huI sItA
ko grahaNa karanA kaThina hai, aisI hAlata meM to ise sAkSAt deva yA asura bhI
nahIM grahaNa kara sakate  /  isako grahaNa karane kA | sirpha eka hI upAya hai-
lakSmaNa ke samAna siMhanAda kiyA jAya, jise sunakara rAma lakSmaNa kI sahAyatA
ke lie daur3a 756

Page #179 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Ravana's abduction of Sita and the meeting of Rama with Viradha We will read the
second light of Yoga Shastra, verse 99; because there has been a mutual signal
between the two. Therefore, if I do the same, your work will be done. Saying
this, the goddess of observation knowledge went some distance from there and
made a lion roar like Lakshmana. Hearing it, Rama immediately ran to help
Lakshmana, leaving Sita alone there. Great men also fall into irony due to the
illusion of the illusionist. As soon as Rama left, Ravana immediately descended
from the plane and suddenly caught Sita and said, "I am Ravana, the one who is
going to abduct you." Saying this, he forcibly put her in the Pushpak plane and
flew away. Sita was stunned by this unexpected event. Helpless Sita started
crying - "Oh Lord! Oh Rama! Oh dear Lakshmana! Oh father! Oh brother with great
arms! Your Sita is being abducted in the same way as a crow flies away with a
sacrifice in the sky." Sita cried out loud in this way, as if she had made the
sky cry. In the meantime, Jatayu bird also flew fast, chasing the plane. Coming
near the plane, he said - 'Daughter! Don't be afraid! I have arrived.' Scolding
Ravana, he said - 'Oh demon! Where are you taking this holy woman? Stop.'
Bhamandal's follower, the Vidhyadhar Ratnajaati, also challenged Ravana and said
scornfully - 'Oh thief! Stop! We will take care of you now.' Jatayu bird started
hitting Ravana's chest with the sharp claws of his feet. Ravana said to the
vulture - 'Old vulture! Are you tired of your life, it seems, your death is
near.' Saying this, he cut off his wings with the Chandrahas sword. He writhed
in pain, fell down and his life-wings flew away there. Ravana had taken away the
knowledge of that Vidhyadhar, so he also had his wings cut off. Like a bird, he
fell face down on the ground. Thus, saving himself, Ravana took Sita to Lanka
and kept her in his Ashoka Vatika there. To entice Sita and bring her under his
control, he sent the Rakshasi Trijata. On the other hand, Lakshmana was
returning after killing the enemy when he met Rama coming from the front.
'Lakshmana asked - 'Brother! Why did you come here leaving Sita alone?' Rama
said - 'I heard the ominous lion roar made by you and immediately ran here.'
Lakshmana said - 'Brother! I did not make any lion roar. It seems someone else
has deceived us by making a fake lion roar. Undoubtedly, some cunning person has
planned this trick to abduct Aryasati.' Rama also said - 'Okay, okay' saying
this, he returned to his ashram with Lakshmana. But not seeing Sita there, they
felt like a thunderbolt. 'Oh Sita! Where did you go?' Crying like this, Rama
fainted and fell to the ground. After a while, when he regained consciousness,
Lakshmana said - 'Brother! It is useless to cry when disaster strikes in a
helpless state, now we should strive to overcome the disaster. This is the true
remedy, at that time a man came and greeted both of them. And on asking, he told
his story and said - 'I am the son of Chandrodya, the king of Patala Lanka.
Ravana killed my father and made Khar the king in his place. As if, a donkey has
been given the place of a horse. At that time, my pregnant mother fled from
there and took refuge in a safe place and gave birth to me there. One day, my
mother was told by a sage - 'When Khar etc. will be killed by Dasharatha's son
Rama, then your son will be made the king by giving him the throne of Patala
Lanka. Don't doubt it even for a moment. Therefore, I am searching for you, I
have come here and met you. From today, I am taking your shelter. Consider me a
purchased servant in return for killing the enemy of my father. On this, the
great-armed Shri Rama took him along to give him the kingdom of Patala Lanka.
'Time-knowing masters are automatically successful by their actions.' Rama was
going to give him the throne with Lakshmana. When on the way, a servant of
Bhamandal was seen lying unconscious. He was conscious. Therefore, he narrated
the whole story of Jatayu, Sita and Ravana and his own. Rama assured him. After
that, with Lakshmana 1. In another story, there is a description of Viradha's
arrival and meeting Rama on the battlefield. 2. This description is mentioned in
other stories at the time of meeting Sugriva. 157

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 rAvaNa dvArA sItA kA haraNa aura rAma se virAdha kA milana yogazAstra dvitIya
prakAza zloka 99 par3eMge; kyoMki una donoM meM paraspara aisA saMketa huA hai|
ataH aisA hI karUMgI to tumhArA kAma bana jaayegaa| yoM kahakara
avalokanavidyAdevI ne vahAM se kucha dUra jAkara lakSmaNa kA-sA siMhanAda kiyaa|
use sunate hI sItA ko vahIM akelI chor3akara rAma lakSmaNa ko sahAyatA ke lie
ekadama daur3a pdd'e| mAyAvI kI mAyA se mahAn puruSa bhI viDaMbanA meM par3a
jAte haiN| rAma ke jAte hI rAvaNa jhaTapaTa vimAna se nIce utarA aura sahasA
sItA ko pakar3akara maiM terA haraNa karane vAlA rAvaNa huuN| yoM kahate hue
jabardastI puSpaka vimAna meM biThAkara le udd'aa| isa apratyAzita ghaTanA se
sItA hakkIbakkI ho gyii| asahAya sItA vilApa karane lagI-he nAtha! he rAma! hA
vatsa lakSmaNa! o pitAjI! aya mahAbhujA vAle bhAI bhAmaMDala! tumhArI sItA ko
yaha usI taraha haraNa kiye liye jA rahA hai, jisa taraha kauA bali ko lekara
AkAza meM ur3a jAtA hai| sItA isa prakAra uccasvara se rone lagI, mAnoM
AkAzamaMDala ko rulA diyA ho| itane meM jaTAyupakSI bhI vimAna kA pIchA karatA
huA tejI se udd'aa| vimAna ke nikaTa Akara usane kahA- 'beTI! Dara mata! maiM A
pahuMcA huuN| rAvaNa ko phaTakArate hue vaha bolA-are rAkSasa! tUM kahAM isa
pavitra nArI ko lie jA rahA hai? khar3A rh|' bhAmaMDala kA anugAmI vidyAdhara
ratnajaTI bhI rAvaNa ko lalakAratA huA tiraskArapUrvaka bolA-'are cora! Thahara
jA! abhI terI khabara lete haiN| jaTAyupakSI rAvaNa kI chAtI para apane paira ke
tIkhe nakhoM se mArane lgaa| rAvaNa ne gIdha se kahA-bUDhe gIdha! kyA tUM apanI
jiMdagI se Uba gayA hai, mAlUma hotA hai, terI mauta nikaTa A gayI hai| yoM
kahate hue caMdrahAsa talavAra se usake paMkha kATa ddaale| vaha chaTapaTAtA
huA, nIce gira gayA aura vahIM usake prANapaMkherU ur3a gye| usa vidyAdhara kI
vidyA kA rAvaNa ne haraNa kara liyA, isalie vaha bhI paMkha kaTe | pakSI kI
taraha jamIna para auMdhe muMha gira pdd'aa| isa prakAra apane ko bacAtA huA
rAvaNa sItA ko lekara laMkA pahuMcA aura vahAM apanI azokavATikA meM use rkhaa|
sItA ko pralobhana dekara apane vaza meM karane ke lie usane trijaTA rAkSasI
bhejii| idhara lakSmaNa zatru ko mArakara vApisa lauTa rahA thA ki sAmane se Ate
hue rAma use mile|' lakSmaNa ne pUchA-'bhaiyA! sItA ko akelI chor3akara Apa
yahAM kyoM A gaye?' rAma ne kahA-'maiM tere dvArA kiye hue saMkaTasUcaka
siMhanAda ko sunakara tatkAla daur3A huA A rahA huuN|' lakSmaNa bolA-bhaiyA!
maiMne to koI siMhanAda nahIM kiyaa| mAlUma hotA hai, kisI aura ne nakalI
siMhanAda karake hameM dhokhA diyA hai| niHsaMdeha kisI dhUrta ne AryasatI kA
haraNa karane ke lie hI yaha prapaMca racA hai| rAma bhI-'ThIka hai, ThIka hai'
yoM kahakara lakSmaNa ke sAtha hI apane Azrama para vApisa lauTa aaye| paraMtu
sItA ko vahAM nahIM dekhakara unheM vajrAghAta-sA lgaa| 'he sIte! tUM kahAM
gayI?' yoM vilApa karate hue rAMma dhar3Ama se mUrchita hokara bhUmi para gira
pdd'e| kucha hI dera meM jaba hoza AyA to lakSmaNa ne kahA-'bhaiyA! asahAya
avasthA meM vipatti A par3ane para ronA vyartha hai, aba to hameM vipatti-
nivAraNa kA puruSArtha karanA caahie| yahI saccA upAya hai, usI samaya eka
puruSa ne Akara donoM ko namaskAra kiyaa| aura pUchane para apanI ghaTanA batAte
hue kahane lagA-maiM pAtAlalaMkAdhipati caMdrodaya kA putra hN| mere pitA ko
mArakara rAvaNa ne unake sthAna khara ko rAjA banAyA hai. mAno, ghoDe kA sthAna
gadhe ko diyA gayA hai| usa samaya merI garbhavatI mAtA ne vahAM se bhAgakara
eka surakSita sthAna meM zaraNa lI thI aura vahIM mujhe janma diyaa| eka dina
mAtAjI ko kisI muni ne kahA-'jaba khara Adi ko dazarathaputra rAma mAreMge,
tabhI tumhAre putra ko pAtAlalaMkA kI rAjagaddI sauMpakara rAjA banAyA jaayegaa|
isameM jarA bhI saMzaya mata krnaa| ataH maiM Apako DhUMDhatA huA, | yahAM Akara
Apase milA huuN| Aja se maiM ApakA Azraya le rahA huuN| mujhe Apa mere pitA ke
vairI kA vadha karane ke badale kharIdA huA sevaka smjheN| isa para mahAbhujA
vAle zrIrAma use sAtha lekara pAtAlalaMkA kA rAjya dilAne hetu cle| | 'samayajJa
svAmI apane kAryoM se svataH saphala hote haiN|' lakSmaNa ke sAtha rAma use
lekara rAjagaddI dilAne jA rahe the | ki rAste meM bhAmaMDala kA eka sevaka
vidyA rahita hokara par3A huA dekhaa| vaha hoza meM thaa| isalie usane jaTAyu,
sItA aura rAvaNa kA tathA apanA sArA vRtAMta nivedana kiyaa| rAma ne use
AzvAsana diyaa| usake pazcAt lakSmaNa ke sAtha 1. anya kathA meM virAdha kA Ane
kA aura yuddha maidAna meM rAma ke milane kA varNana hai| 2. yaha varNana anya
kathAnakoM meM sugrIva ko milane ke samaya kahA gayA hai| 157

Page #180 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The False Sugriva  Yogashastra, Second Canto, Verse 99 | The truthful Rama
reached the underworld and installed the said Viradha on his father's throne.
Meanwhile, the leader of the Vidyadharas, named Sahasgati, was roaming in the
sky near the city of Kishkindha. At that time, the king of Kishkindha, Sugriva,
was going out of the city for a stroll with his family. Indeed, such is the
state of mind of kings. Just then, Sahasgati reached Sugriva's inner chambers.
Seeing Sugriva's wife Tara, he became overwhelmed with desire. Like an elephant
suffering from the heat, Sahasgati, tormented by the heat of passion, abandoned
the idea of going elsewhere and decided to indulge in amorous play with Tara, as
if not to violate the command of Kamadeva. But he thought, "This lady will not
readily engage in intimacy with an unfamiliar person." Worried by this concern,
he thought, "I am skilled in changing my form like an actor, so why not assume
Sugriva's guise?" Thinking thus, Sahasgati took on Sugriva's appearance and
entered the palace. The palace guards, mistaking the lustful imposter Sugriva
for the real Sugriva, did not prevent him from entering. But before he could
reach the palace, the real Sugriva returned and tried to enter, only to be
stopped by the guards, who said, "The king has just entered. It seems you are
someone else." This led to a heated argument, and the guards summoned the false
Sugriva. As soon as he arrived, a tumultuous verbal battle like the roar of the
ocean erupted between the two. Seeing the commotion caused by the other Sugriva,
Bali's son quickly came to the palace gate to calm the disturbance. Just as a
mountain blocks the flow of a river, Bali's son prevented the false Sugriva from
entering the inner chambers. The fourteen finest Akshauhini armies of the world
gathered there and took their positions. Unable to comprehend the mystery, half
the soldiers sided with the false Sugriva, and the other half with the real
Sugriva. Thus, the divided army engaged in mutual combat. Spears clashed, and
the sparks emanating from the colliding weapons made the sky appear as if it
were a meteor shower. Cavalry fought cavalry, elephants fought elephants,
infantry fought infantry, and charioteers fought charioteers. Just as a delicate
lady trembles from the touch of her beloved, the earth trembled from the clash
of the two armies. Seeing no resolution, the true Sugriva challenged the false
Sugriva, "You wicked, lustful dog who has intruded into my home! Come, fight
with me, and I'll remind you of the sixth day." The artificial Sugriva, maddened
by this insult like an intoxicated elephant, came roaring to fight the real
Sugriva. Their red eyes blazing with anger, like the siblings of Yama, the two
great warriors were tormenting the minds of the impartial spectators. Cutting
down the armies on both sides like grass with their sharp weapons, they fought
like two buffaloes, causing the celestial beings to flee. Grappling like moving
mountains, their weapons were eventually shattered and destroyed. Enraged beyond
endurance, they seemed to be flying in the sky one moment and crashing to the
ground the next, like two champion roosters. Unable to defeat each other, the
two mighty warriors, exhausted, stepped back and stood apart. The artificial
Sugriva, now distressed in mind, remained outside Kishkindha, as Bali's son did
not allow him to enter the inner chambers at any cost. The true Sugriva, sitting
with his head bowed, began to ponder, "Alas! My lustful enemy is so deceitful
that he has subjugated my own people through his machinations. It is regrettable
that he has trampled upon his own knees with his deception."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 nakalI sugrIva yogazAstra dvitIya prakAza zloka 99 | satyapratijJa rAma
pAtAlalaMkA pahuMce aura ukta virAdha ko apane pitA kI rAjagaddI para
bitthaayaa| idhara sAhasagati nAma kA | vidyAdhara netA AkAza meM bhramaNa
karatA huA kiSkindhA nagarI ke nikaTa AyA  /  usa samaya kiSkindhA nagarI kA
rAjA | sugrIva nagarI ke bAhara saira karane ke lie apane parivAra ke sAtha jA
rahA thaa| sacamuca rAjAoM kI manaHsthiti aisI hI hotI hai| ThIka usI samaya
sAhasagati sugrIva ke aMtaHpura meM pahuMca gyaa| vahAM sugrIva kI patnI
sunayanA tArA ko dekhakara | vaha kAmavihvala ho gyaa| garmI se pIr3ita hAthI ke
samAna, kAma kI garmI se pIr3ita sAhasagati ne tArA ke sAtha ratikrIr3A karane
kI lAlasA se anyatra jAne kA vicAra TAla diyA; mAno kAmadeva kI AjJA kA
ullaMghana na karane kI dRSTi se | hI Age jAne kA vicAra sthagita kara diyA ho
/  paraMtu usane socA- yaha ramaNI mujha aparicita ke sAtha sahasA ramaNa karane
| ko taiyAra nahIM hogii| isa ciMtA se vyagra hokara socate-socate use eka bAta
sUjhI ki maiM strI yA puruSa kA cAhe jaisA | rUpa badalane meM naTa ke samAna
kuzala hUM, ataH kyoM nahIM, sugrIva kA veza banA luuN|1 yoM vicArakara
sAhasagati sugrIva | kA veSa banAkara usake mahala meM ghusane lgaa| mahala ke
aMgarakSakoM ne strIlaMpaTa kRtrima sugrIva ko hI asalI sugrIva | samajhakara
mahala meM jAne se nahIM rokaa| abhI vaha mahala taka pahuMcA nahIM thA ki asalI
sugrIva bAhara se lauTakara jyoM hI aMtaHpura meM ghusane lagA, tyoM hI vahAM ke
paharedAroM ne use aMdara jAne se rokaa| ataH vaha mahala ke dvAra ke pAsa
vApisa | Akara khar3A ho gyaa| paharedAroM se bAra bAra kahane para bhI unhoMne
asalI sugrIva ko yaha kahakara aMdara praveza nahIM karane | diyA ki 'abhI-abhI
to rAjA ne praveza kiyA hai| mAlUma hotA hai, tuma koI ora ho|' isa para se
Apasa meM vAdavivAda chir3a gyaa| ataH paharedAroMne nakalI sugrIva ko bAhara
bulaayaa| usake Ate hI donoM meM samudra ke samAna atula kolAhalamaya vAgyuddha
chir3a gyaa| dUsare sugrIva ke kAraNa upadrava hote dekhakara bAliputra usa
upadrava ko zAMta karane ke lie aMtaHpura ke dvAra ke pAsa zIghra hI A phuNcaa|
nadI ke pUra ko jaise parvata roka detA hai vaise hI nakalI sugrIva ko bAliputra
ne aMtaHpura meM jAne se roka diyaa| caudaha ratnoM ke samAna jagat kI zreSTha
caudaha akSauhiNI senA vahAM Akara | DaTa gyii| una donoM ke rahasya ko na
samajha pAne ke kAraNa pUrI senA meM Adhe sainika banAvaTI sugrIva kI tarapha
aura Adhe | asalI sugrIva kI tarapha ho gye| isa taraha donoM kI tarapha baMTI
huI senA meM hI paraspara yuddha chir3a gyaa| bhAle se bhAle . | ttkraaye| AkAza
meM zastroM ke paraspara TakarAne se nikalatI huI cinagAriyoM se AkAza aisA
dikhAyI dene lagA, mAno | vaha ulkApAta vAlA ho  /  azvArohiyoM ke sAtha
azvArohI, hAthiyoM ke sAtha hAthI, paidala ke sAtha paidala evaM rathikoM ke |
sAtha rathika bhir3a gye| prauDha priya-samAgama se jaise mugdhA ramaNI kAMpa
uThatI hai, vaise hI donoM caturaMgiNI senAoM kI | ApasI Takkara se pRthvI
kAMpane lgii| koI masalA hala na hote dekhakara sacce sugrIva ne nakalI sugrIva
ko lalakArA'are, parAye ghara meM ghusane vAle nIca kAmI kutte ! A mere sAtha
lar3a! abhI tujhe chaThI kI yAda dilA detA huuN|' kRtrima | sugrIva bhI isa
apamAna kI coTa se madonmatta hAthI kI taraha uchalatA aura jora se garjanA
karatA huA asalI sugrIva | se yuddha karane aayaa| krodha se lAla-lAla AMkheM
kiye yamarAja ke sahodara kI taraha ve donoM mahArathI taTastha darzaka prajA ke
mana ko kacoTa rahe the| ve donoM apane tIkhe hathiyAroM se ghAsa kI taraha
donoM tarapha kI senA ko kATate hue lar3a rahe the| jaise do bhaiMsoM kI lar3AI
meM vRkSa-vana kA satyAnAza ho jAtA hai, vaise hI ina donoM mahAyoddhAoM kI
lar3AI se | khecarIgaNa bhAga jAtI thii| jaMgama parvatoM kI taraha mallayuddha
karate-karate una donoM mahAyoddhAoM ke zastra TUTakara naSTa | ho gye| krodha
se paraspara eka dUsare ke lie asahya bane hue ve kSaNabhara meM AkAza meM
ur3ate hue aura dUsare hI kSaNa bhUmi | para girate hue. - se mAlUma hote the,
mAnoM donoM vIra - cUr3AmaNi murge hoN| donoM mahAprANa paraspara eka dUsare ko
nahIM jIta sake, taba thake hue balI kI taraha dUra haTakara khar3e ho gye| ve
donoM aba thakakara itane cUra ho gaye the ki lar3anA aba | unake basa kA na
rhaa| aMtataH kiSkindhAnagarI se bAhara nikalakara donoM eka sthAna para baiTha
gye| vahIM asvastha mana | vAlA banAvaTI sugrIva rhaa| bAliputra ne use
aMtaHpura meM kisI bhI mUlya para praviSTa nahIM hone diyaa| saccA sugrIva vahIM
nIcA sira kiye baiThA-baiThA socane lagA- 'aho ! merA yaha strIlaMpaTa zatru
kitanA kapaTapaTu hai ki isane mere svajanoM ko prapaMca se vaza karake apanA
banA liyA hai| kheda hai, isane apane hI ghuTanoM para kapaTa se chApA 1. anya
kathAnakoM meM yaha varNana dUsare prakAra se batAyA huA hai| 158

Page #181 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The fake Sugriva and the real Sugriva are at war, the death of courage. The
second light of Yoga Shastra, verse 99, has been killed. Now the only worry is
how to kill this illusionary and powerful, cruel, and evil enemy? Damn the name
of Bali, who shames me and makes me fall from my valor? Blessed is the mighty,
unbroken, man-vow keeper Bali, who renounced a kingdom like a straw and attained
the supreme state. My son Chandrarashmi, though powerful, is also confused about
whom to protect and whom not, because he doesn't know our secret. But
Chandrarashmi did a good thing by not letting that evil enter the inner palace.
To kill this staunch enemy, who is stronger than me? Because, "The enemy should
be killed by any means, either by oneself or by another." Should I seek refuge
in the underworld, earth, and heaven, in the mighty Marut or in the Ravana who
breaks the yagna, to kill the enemy? No, no, he is naturally a womanizer and a
thorn in all the three worlds. If he gets his way, he will kill him and me and
take Tara under his control. In such a crisis, there was a strong, courageous,
and tough king named Khar, but Ram killed him. So now the only way is to go to
the powerful, strong-armed Ram and Lakshman and make friends with them? They had
installed Viradha on the throne a few days ago and are still staying in Patal
Lanka at Viradha's request. Similarly, Sugriva, in solitude, deeply pondered and
sent a trusted messenger to Viradha. He went to Patal Lanka, greeted Viradha,
delivered the message given by his master, and finally said, "Our master is in
great trouble. He wants to seek refuge in Raghunandan Ram and Lakshman through
you." Viradha said, "Bring Sugriva here as soon as possible. Everything will be
fine." The meeting of virtuous people is met with great merit. The messenger
came and told Sugriva everything. Sugriva also mounted his excellent horse and
set out, his horse's neigh echoing in all directions, reducing the distance with
the speed of a messenger. He reached Patal Lanka quickly, like a neighbor's
house. There he first met Viradha. Viradha also embraced him lovingly and
introduced him to the selfless protector, Shri Ram. Sugriva greeted them and
narrated his entire tale of woe. Finally, he said, "In this time of crisis, you
are my only refuge. When a sneeze stops, only the sun is sought refuge in." Even
though he was in trouble himself, Shri Ram was ready to solve his problem. Great
men are more eager to do the work of others than to accomplish their own.
Viradha told Sugriva the story of Sita's abduction. Sugriva folded his hands and
humbly requested Shri Ram, "Just as the sun illuminates the whole world, you are
capable of protecting everyone. You don't need anyone's help. Still, O God! I
pray to you that with your grace, I will become your follower with my army to
kill the enemy and bring news of Sita as soon as possible." With Sugriva, Shri
Ram set out towards Kishkindha. Viradha also wanted to come along, but Shri Ram
persuaded him to return. Shri Ram continued with Sugriva. They set up their army
camp near Kishkindha Nagar and challenged the fake Sugriva to battle. The
deceitful Sugriva also roared and thundered and arrived there. The proverb says,
"Brahmins do not become lazy when invited to a meal, similarly, warriors do not
become lazy when invited to battle." There, fighting like a mad elephant in the
jungle, both Sugrivas began to shake the earth with their feet. Because their
appearances were identical, Shri Ram was in doubt, "Which one is my Sugriva and
which one is the fake Sugriva?" He was momentarily sad and thought, "What is
going to happen, will happen." In the next moment, he sounded the bow named
Vajravarta. As soon as he heard that sound, the art of transformation of courage
went away. Now, coming back to his real form, Shri Ram challenged courage,
"Evil! You want to enjoy another man's wife by deceiving everyone with your
changed form, sinner! Prepare your bow." Saying this, Shri Ram ended his life
with a single arrow. Because a lion does not need another paw to kill a deer.
Now, Shri Ram installed Sugriva on the throne of Kishkindha Nagar, just like
Viradha. King Sugriva also became acceptable to the people as before.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 nakalI asalI sugrIva meM yuddha, sAhasagati kI mRtyu yogazAstra dvitIya prakAza
zloka 99 mArA hai| aba to yahI ciMtA hai ki kaise yaha mAyAvI evaM prabala
parAkramI dveSI duSTa mujhase mArA jAyegA? dhikkAra hai bAlI ke nAma ko lajjita
karane aura apane parAkrama se girane vAle mujhe?' mahAbalI akhaMDa puruSa-vrata
pAlaka bAlI ko dhanya hai. jinhoMne tinake ke samAna rAjya kA tyAgakara
paramapada kI prApti kii| merA putra caMdrarazmi bhI yadyapi balavAna hai, phira
| bhI hama donoM kA rahasya na jAnane ke kAraNa vaha bhI kisakI rakSA kare,
kisakI nahIM? isa pazopeza meM par3A hai| paraMtu caMdrarazmi ne itanA acchA
kiyA ki usa duSTa ko aMtaHpura meM nahIM ghusane diyaa| isa kaTTara duzmana ko
mArane ke lie maiM mujha se bar3hakara kisa baliSTha kA Azraya lUM? kyoMki
'zatru ko to kisI bhI sUrata se khuda ke yA dUsare ke dvArA mAra DAlA jAnA
caahie|' kyA maiM pAtAla, dharatI aura svarga ina tInoM meM parAkramI maruta kA
yA yajJa ko bhaMga karane vAle rAvaNa kA zatruvadha ke lie Azraya lUM? nahIM,
nahIM, vaha to svabhAva se strIlaMpaTa aura tInoM lokoM meM kAMTe kI taraha hai|
usakA vaza calegA to vaha use aura mujhe mArakara tArA ko apane adhIna kara
legaa| aise saMkaTa ke samaya dRr3ha sAhasI, kaThora khara zaktizAlI rAjA thA,
lekina rAma ne use mAra diyaa| ataH aba to yahI upAya hai ki zaktizAlI,
bhujabalI rAma aura lakSmaNa ke pAsa jAkara unase maitrI karUM? unhoMne kucha
dinoM pahale virAdha ko rAjagaddI para biThAyA hai aura abhI ve virAdha ke
Agraha se pAtAlalaMkA meM hI ruke hue haiN| isI taraha sugrIva ne ekAMta meM
gaharA maMthana karake apane eka vizvasta dUta ko virAdha ke pAsa bhejaa| usane
pAtAlalaMkA meM jAkara virAdha ko namaskAra karake apane svAmI dvArA kahA gayA
saMdeza unheM diyA aura aMta meM kahA-'hamAre svAmI bar3e saMkaTa meM haiN| ve
Apake jariye raghunaMdana rAma aura lakSmaNa kI zaraNa svIkAra karanA cAhate
haiN|' virAdha ne kahA-'sugrIva ko yahAM jaldI se jaldI le aao| saba kucha ThIka
hogaa|' satpuruSoM kA samAgama prabala puNya se milatA hai| dUta ne Akara sArI
bAta sugrIva se khii| sugrIva ne bhI apane uttama ghor3e para car3hakara
prasthAna kiyA aura ghor3e kI hinahinAhaTa se sabhI dizAoM ko zabdAyamAna karatA
huA, dUtagati se dUrI kama karatA huA vaha calane lgaa| par3osI ke ghara kI
taraha zIghra hI vaha pAtAlalaMkA pahuMca gyaa| vahAM vaha sarvaprathama virAdha
se milaa| virAdha bhI usase gale lagAkara prema se milA aura niHsvArtha
pararakSaka zrIrAma se use milaayaa| sugrIva ne unheM namaskAra kiyA aura apanI
sArI kaSTakathA kaha sunaayii| aMta meM kahA- 'aise saMkaTa ke samaya Apa hI
mere zaraNabhUta hai| jaba chIMka ruka jAya, taba sUrya kA hI ekamAtra zaraNa
liyA jAtA hai|' svayaM saMkaTa meM hote hue bhI zrIrAma usakA saMkaTa miTAne ko
taiyAra hue| mahApuruSa apanA kArya siddha karane kI apekSA parakArya ke lie
adhika prayatnazIla hote haiN| virAdha ne sItAharaNa kA vRtAMta sugrIva se khaa|
sugrIva ne hAtha jor3akara zrI rAma se savinaya nivedana kiyA-'samagra vizva ko
jaise sUrya prakAzita karatA hai, vaise hI Apa saba kI rakSA karane meM samartha
haiN| Apako kisI kI sahAyatA kI apekSA nahIM rhtii| phira bhI he deva! merI
Apase prArthanA hai ki ApakI kRpA se zatru ko mArane meM apanI senAsahita meM
ApakA anugAmI banUMgA aura zIghra se zIghra sItA ke samAcAra laauuNgaa|' sugrIva
ke sAtha zrIrAma ne kiSkindhA kI ora prayANa kiyaa| virAdha bhI sAtha-sAtha AnA
cAhatA thA, lekina zrIrAma ne use samajhA-bujhAkara vApisa lauTA diyaa| zrIrAma
sugrIva ke sAtha Age bar3hate gye| unhoMne kiSkindhAnagarI ke pAsa apanI senA kA
par3Ava DAlA aura yuddha ke lie nakalI sugrIva ko llkaaraa| kapaTI sugrIva bhI
garjana tarjana karatA huA vahAM A dhmkaa| kahAvata hai-bhojana kA nyautA milane
para brAhmaNa Alasya nahIM karate, vaise hI yuddha kA AmaMtraNa milane para
zUravIra Alasya nahIM krte| vahIM jaMgala ke hAthI kI taraha madonmattatApUrvaka
lar3ate hue donoM sugrIva apane pairoM se pRthvI ko kaMpAne lge| donoM kA rUpa
ekasarIkhA hone se zrIrAma saMzaya meM par3a gaye ki merA sugrIva kauna-sA aura
nakalI sugrIva kauna sA hai? isase ve kSaNabhara udAsIna-se hokara yaha socane
lage ki jo hone vAlA hai, vaha to hogA hii| dUsare hI kSaNa unhoMne vajrAvarta
nAmaka dhanuSya kI TaMkAra kii| usa TaMkAra ko sunate hI sAhasagati kI
rUparAvartanI vidyA jAtI rhii| aba apane asalI rUpa meM Ate hI zrIrAma ne
sAhasagati ko lalakArA-duSTa! rUpa badalakara sabakI AMkha meM dhUla jhoMkakara
tUM parastrIramaNa karanA cAhatA hai, pApI! apanA dhanuSya taiyAra kr| yoM
kahakara zrIrAma ne eka hI bANa se usakA kAma tamAma kara diyaa| kyoMki hiraNa
ko mArane meM siMha ko dUsare paMje kI AvazyakatA nahIM pdd'tii| aba zrIrAma ne
virAdha kI taraha sugrIva ko bhI kiSkindhAnagarI kI | rAjagaddI para bitthaayaa|
rAjA sugrIva bhI pahale kI taraha prajA-mAnya bana gyaa| 159

Page #182 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Hanuman's meeting with Sita, entering Lanka for war _ Yogashastra Second Light
Verse 99 Here Viradha also came with an army for Rama's work. It is true that a
grateful person cannot live happily without doing the work of his master.
Bhamandala also arrived there with an army of Vidyadharas. A noble person
considers the work of the master to be greater than a festival. Sugriva sent
word to all sides, calling his famous and powerful vassal kings, Jambavan, Nal,
Neel, etc. Here, when the armies of other Vidyadhara kings also gathered there
from all sides, Sugriva saluted Shri Rama and respectfully requested, 'Dev! This
is Hanuman, the son of Anjanadevi and Pavananjay, who is extremely powerful and
devoted to service. He will go to Lanka to get news of Sita ji at your command.
Bless him and give him your named seal for identification.' Shri Rama explained
everything to Hanuman in brief and blessed him by giving him his signet ring.
The son of the wind, Hanuman, also set off on his way through the sky with great
speed, like the wind. In a short time he reached Lanka. In Lanka, he saw Sita
meditating on Rama like a mantra, under the Shinshapa tree in Ravana's garden.
Hanuman became invisible in the branch of the tree and from above he put the
signet ring in Sita's lap for identification. Seeing the signet ring inscribed
with Rama's name, Sita was overjoyed. Seeing this, the Rakshasi Trijata went to
Ravana and requested, 'Dev! For so long we have seen Sita distressed, but today
she is in a mood of happiness.' Ravana thought, 'Surely Sita has now forgotten
Rama and is happy with the desire to make love with me.' He called Mandodari and
ordered, 'Devi! You go and explain to Sita. This is a good opportunity now.' To
carry out her husband's diplomatic mission, Mandodari reached Sita. Trying to
win over Sita with allurements, she spoke to her in a humble manner, 'Look,
Sita! Ravana is a very great king, adorned with many qualities like unparalleled
wealth, beauty, etc. Ravana's wealth, etc., is also suitable for you. It is
unfortunate that the unknown fate did not bring you two together. But now that
time has come. Therefore, go to Ravana, who is constantly absorbed in your
thoughts. Serve him and spend your life in pleasure. O beautiful one! All the
other queens will obey your orders.' Hearing this, Sita scornfully said to
Mandodari, 'O wicked woman, who carries out the diplomatic mission of her
husband! O evil-faced one! Are you not ashamed to say such things! Your face is
not worth seeing, just like your husband's. Understand that I am with Rama.
Because Lakshmana has come here. He will kill your husband along with his
brothers like Khar, etc. O wicked woman! Get up from here. Don't talk to me
anymore.' Thus humiliated, Mandodari left from there in anger. After Mandodari
left, Hanuman descended from the tree and respectfully saluted Sita, folded his
hands and said, 'Devi! Shri Rama, along with Lakshmana, are well and victorious
by your good fortune. I have come here at the command of Shri Rama to get news
of you. I will return and tell them your news. Then Shri Rama will come here to
destroy the enemy. Seeing Hanuman, the messenger of her husband and the bearer
of his symbol, Sita was overjoyed. She congratulated Hanuman with her infallible
blessings. After that, at Hanuman's request and happy to receive news of Shri
Rama, Sita broke her fast of 19 days. ' The son of the wind, Hanuman, who was as
spirited as the wind, to show the wonder of his strength, broke and destroyed
the trees, leaves, fruits, branches, etc. of the garden, destroying Ravana's
garden. Seeing the garden being destroyed, the gardeners wanted to catch Hanuman
and punish him, but he was not in anyone's grasp. Finally, the gardeners went to
Ravana and complained. Ravana ordered to catch Hanuman and if he could not be
caught, then to kill him. The gardeners came to the garden with some of Ravana's
soldiers, but Hanuman alone killed them all and drove them away. Truly, 'The
speed of victory in battle is strange.' Ravana ordered Shakrajit to bring
Hanuman bound. He threw the weapon of Pashabhandan. Hanuman was bound in it by
himself. Shakrajit took Hanuman bound to Ravana, but what was this? Hanuman
immediately broke the Pashabhandan and raised his foot like a thunderbolt and
shattered Ravana's crown. 1. In the seventh chapter of Trishatti, there is a
mention of breaking the fast of 21 days. And there is a mention of Sita giving
the crown (crown). 160

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 hanumAna kA sItA se milanA, yuddha ke lie laMkA meM praveza _ yogazAstra
dvitIya prakAza zloka 99 idhara virAdha bhI rAma ke kArya ke lie senA lekara
aayaa| saca hai, kRtajJapuruSa apane svAmI kA kArya kiye binA sukha se nahIM
raha sktaa| bhAmaMDala bhI vidyAdharoM kI senA lekara vahAM A phuNcaa|
kulInapuruSa svAmI ke kArya ko utsava se bhI bar3hakara samajhatA hai| sugrIva
ne jAMbavAna, nala, nIla Adi apane prasiddha parAkramI sAmaMta rAjAoM ko cAroM
ora | se khabara bhejakara vahAM bulaaye| idhara anya vidyAdhara rAjAoM kI senA
bhI jaba cAroM ora se A-Akara vahAM jamA ho gayI; taba sugrIva ne zrI rAma ko
praNAma karake savinaya nivedana kiyA-'deva! yaha aMjanAdevI aura pavanaMjaya kA
putra atIva balazAlI sevAparAyaNa hanumAna hai| yaha ApakI AjJA se sItAjI kA
samAcAra lene laMkA jaayegaa| Apa ise |AzIrvAda deM aura pahacAna ke lie apanI
nAmAMkita mudrA deN|' zrIrAma ne hanumAna ko sArI bAteM saMkSepa meM samajhA dI
aura apanI mudrikA dekara AzIrvAda diyaa| pavanaputra hanumAna bhI havA kI
bhAMti atyaMta tIvragati se AkAzamArga se cala pdd'aa| kucha hI samaya meM vaha
laMkA pahuMca gyaa| laMkA meM rAvaNa ke udyAna meM ziMzapAvRkSa ke nIce
maMtrajapa kI taraha rAma kA dhyAna karatI huI sItA ko dekhaa| vRkSa kI zAkhA
meM adRzya hokara hanumAna ne Upara se sItA kI goda meM paricaya ke lie mudrikA
ddaalii| rAmanAmAMkita mudrikA ko dekhate hI sItA atyaMta prasanna huii| ise
dekhakara trijaTA rAkSasI ne rAvaNa ke pAsa jAkara nivedana kiyA-'deva! itane
arse taka hamane sItA ko ciMtAgrasta dekhA thA, lekina Aja to prasannatA kI
mudrA meM hai|' rAvaNa ne socA-avazya hI sItA aba rAma ko bhUlakara mere sAtha
prIti jor3ane kI icchA se prasanna huI hai|' usane maMdodarI ko bulAkara Adeza
diyA-devI! tuma jAkara sItA ko smjhaao| isa samaya acchA maukA hai| pati ke
dautyakArya ko karane ke lie maMdodarI sItA ke pAsa phuNcii| sItA ko pralobhana
dekara vinIta banakara vaha sItA se isa prakAra kahane lagI-dekho, sIte! rAvaNa
bahuta bar3A rAjA hai, apUrva aizvarya, sauMdarya Adi aneka guNoM se suzobhita
hai| rAvaNa kI vaNyAdi saMpadA bhI tere anurUpa hai| duHkha hai, ajJadaiva tuma
donoM kA saMyoga na karA skaa| paraMtu aba vaha yoga AyA hai| ataH tamhAre
dhyAna meM aharniza-lIna rAvaNa ke pAsa jAo. usakI sevA karo aura Amoda-pramoda
meM apanA jIvana bitaao| he sanayane! dasarI saba rAniyA~ tamhArI AjJA kA pAlana
kreNgii|' yaha sanakara sItA ne tiraskAraparvaka maMdodarI se kahA-'arI pati kA
dUtakArya karane vAlI pApinI! durmukhI! zarma nahIM AtI, tumheM aisA kahate!
tere pati ke samAna terA bhI mukha dekhane yogya nahIM hai| yaha samajha le ki
maiM rAma ke pAsa hI huuN| kyoMki lakSmaNa yahAM AyA hai| vaha khara Adi ke
samAna baMdhuoM sahita tumhAre pati ko maaregaa| pApinI! tuma yahAM se khar3I ho
jaao| aba mere sAtha bAta bhI mata kro|' isa prakAra apamAnita hokara maMdodarI
roSa pUrvaka vahAM se cala pdd'ii| maMdodarI ke jAne ke bAda hanumAna per3a se
nIce utarA aura vinaya pUrvaka sItA ko namaskAra karake hAtha jor3akara bolA-
'devi! Apake bhAgya se lakSmaNa sahita zrIrAma kuzalapUrvaka haiM, vijayI hai|
zrIrAma kI AjJA se maiM ApakA samAcAra pAne ke lie yahAM AyA huuN| maiM vApisa
lauTakara unheM Apake samAcAra khuuNgaa| phira zrIrAma zatru kA saMhAra karane
ke lie yahAM aayeNge| pati ke dUta aura unake pratIka ke rUpa meM mudrikA arpita
karane vAle hanumAna ko dekhakara sItA atyaMta prasanna huii| usane hanumAna ko
apane amogha AzIrvAda se abhinaMdita kiyaa| usake pazcAt hanumAna ke Agraha se
aura zrIrAma ke samAcAra milane se prasanna hokara sItA ne 19 upavAsa kA pAraNA
kiyaa|' pavana ke samAna sphUrtimAna pavanaputra hanumAna ne apane bala kA
camatkAra batAne ke lie vahAM ke peDapaudhe, patte, phala, DAliyA~ Adi
tor3a-tor3akara rAvaNa kA udyAna naSTabhraSTa kara ddaalaa| udyAna ko
naSTabhraSTa hote dekha udyAna-pAlakoM ne hanumAna ko pakar3akara sajA denA |
cAhA, paraMtu vaha kisI ke pakar3a meM nahIM A rahA thaa| Akhira udyAnapAlakoM
ne rAvaNa ke pAsa jAkara zikAyata kii| rAvaNa ne hanumAna ko pakar3ane aura
pakar3A na jA sake to mAra DAlane kI AjJA dii| rAvaNa ke kucha sipAhiyoM ko
lekara udyAnapAlaka udyAna meM Aye; paraMtu akele hanumAna ne hI una sabako mAra
bhgaaye| sacamuca, 'yuddha meM vijaya kI gati vicitra hotI hai|' rAvaNa ne
hanumAna ko bAMdhakara lAne ke lie zakrajita ko AjJA dii| usane pAzabaMdhana
astra pheNkaa| hanumAna usameM apane Apa hI baMdha gyaa| hanumAnajI ko
bAMdhakara zakrajita rAvaNa ke pAsa le gayA; lekina yaha kyA? hanumAna ne caTa
se pAzabaMdhana tor3A aura bijalI ke daMDa ke samAna paira Upara uThA kara
rAvaNa kA mukuTa cUra-cUra kara diyaa| 1. triSaSTI ke saptama parva meM 21
upavAsa ke pAraNe kI bAta hai| aura vahAM cUDAmaNi (mukuTa) sItA dvArA dene kA
ullekha hai| 160

Page #183 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The use of Amogh Shakti, Lakshman fainted. Yoga Shastra, Second Light, Verse 99
| Ravana, terrified, shouted loudly, "Hey! Is anyone there? Catch him, kill this
scoundrel." Hanuman immediately leaped from there and in a short time, he roamed
the entire city, destroying it; making it like an orphan. With his foot | he
broke many buildings of the city like breaking a drum. Thus, playing, Hanuman
flew like Garuda | and reached Shri Ram. After saluting, Hanuman narrated the
entire incident from beginning to end. Ram embraced his beloved servant dearly.
Then he ordered Sugriva and others to go to Lanka for the victory march. By
building a bridge (bridge) over the sea that protected Ravana, Shri Ram's army
crossed the sea. Shri Ram, along with Sugriva and others, boarded the plane |
and reached Lanka. There, they camped in Hansadweep and the army surrounded the
city of Lanka like a small path. Vibhishan reached Ravana's court, saluted and
requested Ravana, "Elder brother! Although I am younger than you. It is not
appropriate for me to say anything to you; however, seeing something spread in
the city, I have been compelled to say something as a well-wisher. I hope you
will definitely accept my words. Shri Ram has come to our city, and | they are
only asking you to return their Sita. You consider this with a long view and in
my humble opinion, you should hand over Sita to them with respect, so that there
is no loss of Dharma, and there is no ill-repute in the world." As soon as
Ravana heard this | he said angrily, "Oh Vibhishan! It seems you are afraid of
him; that's why you are giving me advice like a coward!" Then Vibhishan said,
"Elder brother! Let alone Ram and Lakshman, what did their mere soldier |
Hanuman not do? Didn't you see-hear?" Ravana said, "You seem to be siding with
our enemy, that's why you are talking such nonsense. You are a good-for-nothing,
get out of here." Thus, after humiliating | Vibhishan was expelled. Therefore,
Vibhishan went to Shri Ram. Shri Ram promised him the kingdom of Lanka. Because
'great men never hesitate to accept righteousness.' Bronze tal meets bronze tal,
| similarly, coming out of Lanka, Shri Ram's and Ravana's armies openly clashed
with each other. Victory Lakshmi, like the Lakshmi of both the moneylender and
the debtor, sometimes here and sometimes there, both the armies that were about
to be consumed by fire | started coming and going. Later, on receiving orders
from Ram's Bhru-sanjna, one after the other, Hanuman and other warriors, in the
same way | they started diving into the enemy army in the same way as the gods
dived into the ocean during the churning of the ocean. On the other hand, Ram's
valiant and invincible warriors, spreading like ferocious elephants, killed many
demons; many were captured and imprisoned, many soldiers were driven away.
Hearing this bad news, enraged like a burning ember, Kumbhakarna and the
arrogant Meghnad entered the battlefield. Both the warriors jumped into the
battle like a cataclysmic storm and fire. It was unbearable for Ram's army. |
Sugriva, in anger, picked up a mountain like a rock and threw it at Kumbhakarna;
Kumbhakarna also smashed him to pieces with his mace. Then, with the blow of the
mace, he threw Sugriva down and pressed him in his armpit and took him to Lanka
| went. Seeing this, Meghnad, who roared like a cloud, was also delighted. And
with a sharp shower of arrows, he wounded the army of Vanardweep. Shri Ram, with
red eyes, challenged Kumbhakarna and Lakshman challenged Meghnad, "Stop, stop |
now we will make you taste the fun." Sugriva also immediately jumped there in
enthusiasm. 'How long can mercury be kept in the fist?' Therefore, Kumbhakarna
returned from there and clashed with Ram. On the other hand, Meghnad, who
disturbed the world, also quickly clashed with Lakshman. Ram and Kumbhakarna
were playing the tricks of war like the east and west seas, on the other hand,
Ravana's son Meghnad and Lakshman were also playing their own tricks. | started.
In a short time, to control the demons, Shri Ram, the demon, fought Kumbhakarna,
the younger brother of Ravana, and Lakshman 1. In another story, Hanuman is
described as being pressed into the armpit. 161

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 amogha zakti kA prayoga, lakSmaNa mUrcchita yogazAstra dvitIya prakAza zloka 99
| rAvaNa ghabarAkara jora se cillAyA- 'are ! hai koI yahAM ? pakar3o ise, mAro
isa badamAza ko  / ' hanumAna ne tatkAla vahAM se chalAMga lagAyI aura thor3I hI
dera meM sArI nagarI meM ghUma-ghUmakara use ujAr3a dI ; anAtha-kI-sI banA dii|
paira se | Dhola ko tor3ane kI taraha nagarI kI kaI ImArateM tor3a ddaalii| isa
prakAra krIr3A karate hue hanumAna garur3a ke samAna ur3akara | zrIrAma ke pAsa
phuNce| namaskAra karake hanumAna ne AdyopAMta sArA vRttAMta sunaayaa| rAma ne
apane priyasevaka kA chAtI se | gAr3ha AliMgana kiyaa| phira sugrIva Adi ko
vijayayAtrA ke lie laMkA jAne kI AjJA dii| rAvaNa kI rakSA karane vAle samudra
para setubaMdha (pula) bAMdhakara zrIrAma kI senA ne samudra pAra kiyA  /
sugrIva Adi ke sAtha zrIrAma vimAna meM baiThakara | laMkA phuNce| vahAM
haMsadvIpa meM apanI senA kA par3Ava DAlA aura laMkAnagarI ko eka choTe-se mArga
ke samAna senA ne ghera liyaa| vibhISaNa ne rAvaNa kI rAjasabhA meM pahuMcakara
praNAma karake rAvaNa se nivedana kiyA- 'bar3e bhAI ! yadyapi maiM Apase choTA
huuN| Apako kucha kahanA mere liye ucita nahIM hai; tathApi nagarI meM phailI
huI eka bAta dekhakara mujhe hitaiSI ke nAte | kucha kahane ko bAdhya honA par3A
hai| AzA hai, Apa merI bAta avazya maaneNge| hamArI nagarI meM zrIrAma Aye haiM,
aura | ve kevala apanI sItA vApisa lauTA dene kI mAMga Apa se kara rahe haiN|
Apa isa para dIrghadRSTi se vicAre aura merI namra rAya meM to sItA unheM
sasammAna sauMpa de, jisase dharmahAni na ho, loka meM apakIrti bhI na ho  / '
rAvaNa ne sunate hI | roSapUrvaka kahA - 'are vibhISaNa ! mAlUma hotA hai tUM
usase Dara gayA hai; tabhI to kAyara puruSa kI taraha mujhe upadeza de rahA
hai!' taba vibhISaNa ne kahA- 'bar3e bhAI ! rAma aura lakSmaNa kI bAta to eka
ora rahI, unake kevala eka sainika| hanumAna ne kyA nahIM kara diyA ? kyA Apane
nahIM dekhA-sunA?' rAvaNa bolA- tUM hamAre vipakSI zatru meM milA huA dIkhatA
hai, tabhI aisI bahakI-bahakI bAteM karatA hai| tUM nAlAyaka hai, nikala jA
yahAM se|' isa prakAra apamAnita karake | vibhISaNa ko nikAla diyA  /  ataH
vibhISaNa zrIrAma ke pAsa phuNcaa| zrIrAma ne use laMkA kA rAjya dene kA vacana
diyaa| kyoMki 'mahApuruSa aucitya kA svIkAra karane meM kabhI nahIM hickicaate|'
kAMsyatAla ke sAtha kAMsyatAla TakarAtA hai, | vaise hI laMkA se bAhara
nikalakara zrI rAma kI aura rAvaNa kI senA prakaTa rUpa se paraspara TakarAne
lgii| vijayalakSmI bhI sAhUkAra aura karjadAra donoM kI lakSmI ke samAna kabhI
idhara to kabhI udhara donoM pakSa kI prANa homane vAlI senAoM | meM jAne - Ane
lgii| bAda meM rAma kI bhrUsaMjJA se AjJA prApta karake eka ke bAda eka hanumAna
Adi subhaTa usI taraha | mahAsamararUpI samudra meM usI taraha zatrusenA meM
avagAhana karane lage, jaise samudramaMthana ke samaya devoM ne samudra meM
avagAhana kiyA thaa| idhara durdAnta hAthiyoM ke samAna cAroM ora phailate hue
rAma ke parAkramI evaM durdamanIya subhaToM ne kaI rAkSasoM ko mAra girAyA;
kaIyoM ko pakar3akara kaidakara liyA, kitane hI sainikoM ko bhagA diye| yaha
burI khabara sunakara jalate hue aMgAre ke samAna kruddha hokara kuMbhakarNa
aura ahaMkArI meghanAda ne yuddhabhUmi meM praveza kiyaa| pralayakAlIna tUphAna
aura Aga ke samAna donoM subhaTa yuddha meM kUda pdd'e| rAma kI senA ke lie yaha
asahya thaa| | sugrIva ne roSavaza eka parvata ko zilA ke samAna uThAkara
kuMbhakarNa para pheMkA; kuMbhakarNa ne bhI apanI gadA se use cUracUrakara
ddaalaa| phira gadA ke prahAra se sugrIva ko nIce paTakakara apanI kAMkha meM
dabAyA aura use lekara kuMbhakarNa laMkA | kI ora claa| ise dekhakara megha ke
samAna garjanA karane vAlA meghanAda bhI harSita huA  /  aura tIkSNabANavarSA se
vAnaradvIpa kI senA ghAyalakara dii| zrIrAma ne AMkheM lAla karake kuMbhakarNa
ko aura lakSmaNa ne meghanAda ko lalakArA - 'Thaharo, Thaharo | abhI tumheM majA
cakhAte haiN|' sugrIva bhI turaMta joza meM Akara vahAM kUda pdd'aa| 'pArA kaba
taka muTThI meM pakar3e hue rakhA jA sakatA hai|' ataH kuMbhakarNa vahAM se
lauTakara rAma ke sAtha bhir3a pdd'aa| dUsarI ora jagat ko kSubdha karane vAlA
meghanAda bhI phurtI se lakSmaNa ke sAtha bhir3a gyaa| pUrva aura pazcima ke
samudra ke samAna rAma aura kuMbhakarNa paraspara yuddha ke dAMvapeca lagA rahe
the, udhara uttarI aura dakSiNI samudra ke samAna rAvaNaputra meghanAda aura
lakSmaNa bhI apane-apane dAMvapeca lagAne | lge| thor3I hI dera meM rAkSasoM
para kAbU karane ke lie rAkSasasama zrIrAma ne rAvaNa ke choTe bhAI kuMbhakarNa
ko tathA lakSmaNa 1. anya kathA meM hanumAna ko bagala meM dabAne kA varNana
hai| 161

Page #184 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Battle of Rama and Ravana  The second light of Yoga Shastra, verse 99,
describes how Ravana's son, Meghnad, was captured after being knocked down.
Seeing this, Ravana, as vast as Airavata and terrifying to the world, came to
the battlefield, gnashing his teeth in rage, ready to crush the entire monkey
army like elephants. At that moment, Lakshmana said to Shri Rama, "Lord! You
need not go to the battlefield now. I alone will deal with them all." Thus,
stopping Rama, Lakshmana himself, showering arrows, came before the enemy.
Ravana, proficient in the art of weaponry, unleashed countless weapons, which
Lakshmana cut down one by one. Finally, Ravana struck Lakshmana's chest with a
powerful weapon called Amoghshakti. From the impact of this weapon, Lakshmana
fell unconscious on the ground. Grief filled the heart of the powerful Rama.
Eight valiant warriors, including the devoted Sugriva, surrounded Rama and
Lakshmana for protection. Ravana, overjoyed, thought, "Today Lakshmana will die.
Rama will also suffer the same fate in Lakshmana's absence. What is the point of
fighting now?" Thinking this, he turned towards the city. Rama was surrounded by
many soldiers for protection, like a fort. Sugriva and others stood at the four
gates of Rama's residence. At that time, a leader of the Vidyadharas, an old
acquaintance of Bhamandal, the guardian of the south gate, came and said, "There
is a city called Kautukamangal, twelve yojanas from Ayodhya. The king of that
city, Dronadhan, is the brother of Kaikeyi. He has a daughter named Vishalya.
The touch of her bathwater instantly removes the poison of an arrow. If that
water is sprinkled on Lakshmana before sunrise, he will be free of the poison
and live. Otherwise, it will be difficult for him to survive. Therefore, in my
opinion, you should immediately request Shri Rama to send someone trustworthy to
bring her. Act quickly in this matter. Once the morning arrives, no remedy will
work. What can Ganesha do when the cart has overturned?"  Bhamandal immediately
went to Shri Rama and explained everything. Therefore, Hanuman and Bhamandal,
both swift as a storm, boarded a fast-flying aircraft and arrived in Ayodhya. At
that time, Bharata was asleep in his palace, so both of them sang sweet songs to
wake him up. "Kings are also awakened with sweet songs for matters of state."
Bharata, abandoning sleep and stretching, woke up and saw Bhamandal, whom he
greeted. He asked the reason for their arrival, and Bhamandal mentioned the
important task. One does not speak too much to a dear friend about a dear task.
Bharata thought, "This task can only be accomplished if I go myself." So,
boarding the aircraft, he immediately arrived in Kautukamangal. He requested
Vishalya from King Dronadhan for Lakshmana. The king accepted the request,
called Vishalya, and gave her to Bharata along with a thousand other girls.
Bhamandal also left Bharata in Ayodhya and, with Vishalya and her family,
anxiously arrived at the battlefield. In that aircraft, shining like a bright
lamp, Bhamandal was repeatedly mistaken about the sunrise, which filled him with
fear. As soon as he disembarked from the aircraft, Bhamandal took Vishalya
directly to Lakshmana. As soon as he touched Lakshmana's hand, the poison of the
arrow, like a serpent, left him. After that, by Rama's command, Vishalya's
bathwater was sprinkled on the other soldiers, who, free of the poison, rose
like they had been reborn. Then, Shri Rama loudly commanded that Vishalya's
bathwater be sprinkled on Kumbhakarna and others. But the guards said, "Lord!
They themselves took initiation at that time." Hearing this, Rama said, "Then
they are travelers on the path of liberation, worthy of respect. They should be
freed from their bonds." By Rama's command, the guards, after bowing,
immediately freed them. After this, Vishalya and all the girls who came with her
were formally married to Lakshmana.  When Ravana, the embodiment of anger,
received this news, he rushed back to the battlefield. For valiant warriors, the
festival of war is even greater than the festival of marriage. Whenever Ravana
unleashed a weapon, Lakshmana cut it down like a banana leaf. Enraged by the
destruction of his weapons, Ravana threw his discus. The discus struck
Lakshmana's chest like a slap, but its edge did not cut him, not even a hair on
his head was disturbed. Lakshmana returned the same discus to Ravana. 1. In
another story, it is mentioned that Ravana took initiation after his death. 162

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 rAma aura rAvaNa kA yuddha yogazAstra dvitIya prakAza zloka 99 ne rAvaNaputra
meghanAda ko nIce girAkara pakar3a liyaa| yaha dekhate hI airAvaNa ke samAna
vizAlakAya evaM jagat meM bhayaMkara | rAvaNa roSa se dAMta pIsatA huA samagra
vAnarasainya rUpI hAthiyoM ko pIsane ke lie yuddhabhUmi meM aayaa| tabhI
lakSmaNa ne zrIrAma se kahA- 'Arya! Apako yuddhabhUmi meM abhI jAne kI
AvazyakatA nhiiN| maiM akelA hI ina sabase nipaTa luuNgaa|' | isa prakAra rAma
ko rokakara lakSmaNa svayaM bANavarSA karatA huA zatru ke saMmukha AyA  /
astravidyA meM pravINa rAvaNa ne jitane astra chor3e, lakSmaNa unheM kATatA gayA
/  aMtaH meM rAvaNa ne lakSmaNa kI chAtI para amoghazakti nAmaka astra kA jora
se prahAra kiyaa| isa zakti ke prahAra se lakSmaNa pRthvI para mUrcchita hokara
gira pdd'e| balavAna rAma ke hRdaya meM zoka chA gyaa| prANapraNa se hitaiSI
sugrIva Adi 8 subhaToM ne surakSA ke lie rAma aura lakSmaNa ko cAroM ora ghera
liyaa| rAvaNa ne harSita | hokara socA- 'Aja lakSmaNa mara jAyagA  /  lakSmaNa
ke viyoga meM rAma kI bhI vahI dazA hogii| aba bekAra hI mujhe yuddha | karake
kyA karanA hai?" yoM socakara vaha nagara kI ora cala diyA  /  rAma ko kile kI
taraha kaI sainika surakSA ke lie ghire hue the| rAma ke AvAsa ke cAroM
daravAjoM para sugrIva Adi khar3e the| tabhI dakSiNadizA ke dvAra ke rakSaka
bhAmaMDala ke pUrva paricita eka vidyAdhara netA ne Akara kahA - 'ayodhyA nagarI
se 12 yojana para kautukamaMgala nAmaka nagara hai, vahAM ke rAjA droNadhana
kaikayI ke bhAI haiN| usake vizalyA nAmaka eka kanyA hai| usake snAna kiye hue
jala ke sparza se tatkAla zalya (tIra kA viSa) calA jAtA hai| agara sUryodaya se
pahale-pahale vaha jala lAkara lakSmaNa para chIMTA jAye to yaha | zalyarahita
hokara jI jAyegA, nahIM to jInA muzkila hai| isalie merI rAya meM zrIrAma se
zIghra nivedana karake kisI | vizvasta ko use lAne kI AjJA de denI caahie| isa
kArya ke lie zIghratA kro| saberA ho jAne para phira koI upAya | kAma nahIM
aayegaa| gAr3I ulaTa jAne para gaNapati kyA kara sakatA hai? bhAmaMDala ne
turaMta zrIrAma ke pAsa jAkara sArI bAta smjhaaii| ataH hanumAna aura bhAmaMDala
donoM tUphAna ke samAna | zIghragAmI vimAna meM baiThakara ayodhyA aaye| usa
samaya bharata apane mahala meM soye hue the, ataH donoM ne unheM jagAne ke lie
madhura gIta gAye  /  'rAjyakArya ke lie bhI rAjAoM ko madhura gIta se jagAyA
jAtA hai|' bharatajI nidrA chor3akara aMgar3AI lete hue jAga par3e, sAmane
bhAmaMDala ko namaskAra karate hue dekhaa| Ane kA prayojana pUchA to bhAmaMDala
ne usa | mahattvapUrNa kArya kA jikra kiyaa| hitaiSI ISTa vyakti ko bhI iSTa
kArya ke saMbaMdha meM adhika nahIM kahA jaataa| bharata ne | socA - mere svayaM
ke jAne para hI yaha kArya siddha ho skegaa| ataH vimAna meM baiThakara ve
turaMta kautukamaMgala nagara aaye| droNadhana rAjA se unhoMne lakSmaNa ke lie
vizalyA kI mAMga kii| unhoMne mAMga svIkAra karake vizalyA ko bulAkara hajAra |
kanyAoM ke sAtha use dI  /  bhAmaMDala bhI bharata ko ayodhyA meM chor3akara
kanyAoM ke parivAra sahita vizalyA ko lekara utsukatApUrvaka vahAM phuNce|
prakAzamAna dIpaka ke samAna usa vimAna meM bhAmaMDala ko bAra-bAra sUryodaya
hone kI bhrAMti ho jAne se ve bhayabhIta ho jAte the| vimAna se utarate hI
bhAmaMDala vizalyA ko sIdhe hI lakSmaNa ke pAsa le gye| lakSmaNa ko hAtha se
sparza karate hI lAThI se jaise sarpiNI nikalakara calI jAtI hai, vaise hI zakti
(viSabujhe bANa kI mAra ) | nikalakara calI gyii| usake bAda rAma kI AjJA se
vizalyA kA snAnajala anya sainikoM para bhI chIMTA gayA, jisase | ve zalya
rahita hokara naye janma grahaNa kI taraha uTha khar3e hue| phira kuMbhakarNa
Adi ko vizalyA kA snAnajala chIMTane | kA zrIrAma ne ucca svara se khaa| kiMtu
dvArapAloM ne kahA- 'deva ! unhoMne to usI samaya svayaM dIkSA aMgIkArakara lI |
hai| 1 rAma ne yaha sunate hI kahA- 'taba to ve muktimArga ke pathika hai,
vaMdanIya hai, unheM to baMdhanamuktakara denA cAhie  /  ' | rAma kI AjJA se
rakSakoM ne namaskAra karake tatkAla unheM baMdhanamukta kara diye| isake bAda
vizalyA aura usake sAtha aayii| | huI sabhI kanyAoM ko lakSmaNa ke sAtha
vidhivat pANigrahaNa huaa| krodhamUrti rAvaNa ko ye samAcAra milate hI vaha
punaH yuddhabhUmi meM A dhmkaa| kyoMki parAkramI vIra puruSoM ke lie |
vivAhotsava se bhI bar3hakara yuddhotsava hotA hai| rAvaNa jaba-jaba astra
chor3atA thA, lakSmaNa use kele ke patte ke samAna | kATa detA thaa| apane
hathiyAra khaMDita ho jAne se kruddha rAvaNa ne cakra pheNkaa| vaha cakra
lakSmaNa ko chAtI meM tamAce ke | samAna lagA; magara usakI dhAra nahIM lagI,
isase usakA bAla bhI bAMkA na huaa| lakSmaNa ne usI cakra ko vApisa rAvaNa 1.
anya kathA meM rAvaNa kI mRtyu ke bAda dIkSA lene kA varNana hai| 162

Page #185 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Death of Ravana, the Story of Sudarshan  **Yoga Shastra, Second Light,
Verses 100 & 101**  The story of Ravana's death, the story of Sudarshan.
Ravana's head was severed by the Sudarshan Chakra, which was hurled by Lord
Rama.  After Ravana's demise, Lord Rama, with a heart as pure as gold, met Sita
and brought her back to his abode. Vibhishana was crowned the king of Lanka.
Lord Rama, Lakshmana, Sita, their wives, and all their friends and family
returned to Ayodhya. Ravana, due to his desire for another man's wife, was
destroyed and became a resident of hell.   This is the story of Ravana in brief.
This is the essence of the Sita-Ravana story. This example teaches us to
renounce another man's wife. This is what the next verse says:  **Verse 100**
**Meaning:** Even if a woman is beautiful, has auspicious limbs, is a house of
beauty and wealth, and is skilled in various arts, one should renounce her.
**Explanation:**  Why is another man's wife called "Dustyaja" (one who should
not be abandoned)? This verse explains it. Many women are so desirable due to
their beauty and form. Many are beautiful and well-proportioned due to their
past good deeds. They are superior in beauty and wealth. They are proficient in
the 64 arts befitting women. Due to these reasons, a man does not want to
abandon them out of infatuation. Therefore, another man's wife is called
"Dustyaja". Therefore, even if another man's wife is beautiful, skilled in the
arts, clever, and adorned with virtues, she is still another man's, and
therefore should be renounced.  **Verse 101**  **Meaning:**  Even in the
presence of another man's wife, Sudarshan, the great Shravaka, with his pure
mind, whose auspicious sight elevates life, or who elevates Jain Dharma, how
much praise can we give him?  **Explanation:**  Even when in the presence of
another man's wife, and even if he has the power or the qualities to enjoy her,
the mind of Sudarshan, the great Shravaka, remained pure. His mind was not
stained in the least. How much praise can we give to such a Shravaka, who
elevates the Dharma? No matter how much we praise him, it will never be enough.
**The Life of Sudarshan, the Great Shravaka, Strong in his Conduct:**  In
ancient times, in the Anga country, there was a city called Champapuri, which
was even greater than Alkapuri. In this city, King Dadhivahana ruled, who was
richer than Kubera. He had a queen named Abhaya, who was beautiful enough to
surpass even the celestial nymphs, and was skilled in the arts. In the same
city, there lived a merchant named Rishabhadas, who was the leader of all the
merchants and was dedicated to noble deeds. He had a wife named Arhadasi, who
was virtuous, a follower of Jain Dharma, and had qualities matching her name.
They had a servant named Subhag, who looked after their cows and buffaloes. He
would take the animals to the forest to graze and bring them back in the
evening.   One day, it was the month of Magha. As he was returning from the
forest with the animals in the evening, he saw a naked monk meditating under a
tree. He was surprised. "In such a cold night, he is meditating, naked, standing
still like a stump. Truly, these great souls are blessed!" He thought this and
went home. That night, the kind-hearted boy continued to think about the great
monk. "Here I am, sleeping with so many clothes on, and there he is, the great
soul, completely naked in this snowfall. He doesn't even care about the cold."
The next morning, he went to the same place where the monk was meditating,
taking the animals with him, as he had thought about it all night. With
devotion, he bowed to the monk and sat down to serve him. "Simple, kind-hearted
people have natural wisdom."   Soon, the sun rose in the east, as if it had come
to see such great monks with reverence. As the monk opened his eyes from
meditation, he uttered the words "Namo Arihantaanam".

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 rAvaNa kI mRtyu, sudarzana kI kathA yogazAstra dvitIya prakAza zloka 100 101 |
para calAyA, jisase rAvaNa kA mastaka kaTakara gira pdd'aa| kisI samaya apane hI
ghor3e se vyakti gira par3atA hai|' rAvaNa ke nidhana ke bAda svarNazalAkA ke
samAna nirmala zIla se suzobhita sItA se mile aura use lekara apane nivAsa para
Aye  /  vibhISaNa ko laMkA kI rAjagaddI para biThAkara zrIrAma, lakSmaNa, sItA,
baMdhu patnI evaM samasta mitroM, svajanoM ke sAtha ayodhyA lautte|
parastrIgamana kI AkAMkSA ke kAraNa rAvaNa naSTa ho gayA aura use naraka kA
atithi bananA | par3A  /   /  99  /   /  yaha rAvaNa kI kathA saMkSepa meM kahI
hai| yaha sItA-rAvaNa kathA kA hArda hai| isa udAharaNa se dustyajA parastrI kA
tyAga karanA cAhie  /  yahI bAta agale zloka meM kahate haiM  / 156 /
lAvaNyapuNyAvayavAM, padaM saundaryasampadaH  /  kalAkalApakuzalAmapi jahyAt
parastriyam  // 100 //  artha :- parastrI cAhe kitanI hI lAvaNyayukta ho, zubha
aMgopAMgoM se yukta ho, sauMdarya evaM saMpatti kA ghara ho tathA vividha kalAoM
meM kuzala ho, phira bhI usakA tyAga karanA cAhie || 100|| vyAkhyA :- parastrI
ko yahAM 'dustyajA' kahA hai, usakA kyA kAraNa hai? yaha isa zloka meM batAyA
gayA hailAvaNya, rUpa Adi meM kaI striyAM itanI adhika spRhaNIya hotI hai, kaI
pUrvapuNya ke kAraNa suMdara evaM suDaula aMgopAMgoM ke kAraNa darzanIya hotI
hai, sauMdaryasaMpadA meM bar3hakara hotI hai, striyocita 64 kalAoM meM pravINa
hotI hai, ataH ina kAraNoM puruSa mohavaza chor3anA nahIM cAhatA, isalie
parastrI ko 'dustyajA' khaa| ataH parastrI cAhe kitanI suMdara, kalAnipuNa,
catura evaM guNoM se suzobhita ho, vaha parAyI hI hai, isalie tyAjya samajhakara
chor3anI cAhie  /  /  100  /  /  se parastrIgamana ke doSa batAkara aba
parastrItyAga kI prazaMsA karate haiM  / 157 /  akalaGkamanovRtteH parastrI -
sannidhAvapi  /  sudarzanasya kiM brUmaH sudarzanasamunnateH ? || 101 || artha
:- parastrI ke pAsa rahane para bhI niSkalaMka manovRtti vAle sudarzana
mahAzrAvaka, jisake zubhadarzana se hI jIvana kI unnati hotI hai athavA
jainadarzana kI unnati karane vAle kI kitanI prazaMsA kareM?  /  /  101  /  /
vyAkhyA :- apane para Asakta parastrI ke nikaTa rahane para bhI aura sevana
karane kI zakti yA guNa hone para bhI | jisakI cittavRtti niSkalaMka rahI,
arthAt jinakA citta jarA bhI malina nahIM huA, aise zAsana prabhAvaka - zAsana
kI unnati karane vAle, sudarzana mahAzrAvaka kI hama kitanI stuti kareM? jitanI
stuti prazaMsA kareM utanI thor3I hI hai ? zIla meM sudRr3ha sudarzana
mahAzravaka kA jIvana : prAcIna kAla meM aMgadeza meM alakApurI se bhI
bar3hakara caMpApurI thii| vahAM kubera se bar3hakara samRddha dadhivAhana rAjA
rAjya karatA thaa| usake lAvaNya meM devAMganAoM ko bhI mAta karane vAlI,
kalAkuzala, abhayA nAma kI paTarAnI (mahAdevI) thii| usI nagara meM samasta
vyApAriyoM meM agraNI, zreSThakArya-tatpara RSabhadAsa seTha rahatA thaa| usake
yathA nAma tathA guNazAlI, jainadharmopAsikA, zIlavatI arhaddAsI nAma kI
dharmapatnI thii| unake yahAM subhaga nAma kA naukara rahatA thA, jo unakI gAyeM
- bhaiMse carA lAtA thaa| vaha pazuoM ko carAne ke lie jaMgala meM le jAtA aura
zAma ko vApisa le | AtA thaa| eka bAra mAgha kA mahInA thA  /  saMdhyA samaya
jaba vaha pazuoM ko carAkara vana se vApisa A rahA thA ki rAste meM hI eka per3a
ke nIce eka bilakula nirvastra muni ko kAryotsarga (dhyAna) karate hue dekhaa|
use yaha Azcarya huA-aisI ThaMDI rAta meM nirvastra hokara ThUMTha ke samAna
sthira hokara ye kAyotsarga kara rahe haiN| sacamuca, ina mahAtmA ko dhanya hai
! yoM | vicAra karatA huA vaha ghara aayaa| rAta ko phira vaha komala hRdaya
bAlaka una mahAmuni ke viSaya meM ciMtana karane lagA'kahA~ to maiM itane vastra
or3hakara sotA hUM aura kahA~ ve mahAtmA, jo aise himapAta ke samaya bhI
bilakula nirvastra hokara | rahate haiN| ThaMDa kI vedanA kI bhI unheM paravAha
nahIM hai|' subaha bhI rAtri ciMtana ke anusAra pazuoM ko lekara vaha vahIM
pahuMcA, jahAM munirAja kAyotsarga meM khar3e the| bhaktibhAva se otaprota
hokara vaha muni ko namaskAra karake unakI sevA meM vahI baiTha gayA  /
'sAdhAraNa sahRdaya logoM meM sahaja viveka hotA hai|' kucha hI dera meM
pUrvAcala se sUryodaya huA, mAno vaha bhI zraddhApUrvaka aise mahAmuniyoM ke
darzanArtha AyA ho| muni ne kAyotsarga (dhyAna) kholate hI namo arihaMtANaM
zabda kA 163

Page #186 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Story of Sudarshan Chapter Two of Yoga Shastra, Verse 101  He uttered the
words and flew up into the sky like the sun. Hearing this, Subhag thought, "This
is surely the knowledge of the celestial beings." With this thought, he held the
first part of the salutation mantra in his heart. Therefore, whether sleeping,
waking, rising, sitting, walking, moving, day or night, at home or outside, even
with soiled clothes, body, or unclean hands, he began to utter the words "Namo
Arihantanam." It is true that by focusing on something, one becomes absorbed in
it. One day, the Seth heard these words from his mouth and asked, "Bhadral,
where did you get this one part of the five-great-ones mantra, which is so
powerful and excellent in the world?" Subhag told him everything. "Very good!"
said the Seth, explaining to him, "This is not only celestial knowledge, but it
also leads to heaven and liberation (moksha). Whatever is the best, beautiful,
or rare in the three worlds, all of it is obtained effortlessly through its
influence. Just as one cannot measure the quantity of seawater, so too, one
cannot measure the glory of the five-great-ones salutation mantra. You are very
fortunate to have obtained such a rare mantra through your virtuous karma. But
when your clothes or body are dirty, or your mouth and hands are unclean, you
should never utter this guru mantra." To this, Subhag said to the Seth, "Just as
an addict cannot give up his addiction, so too, I cannot give up this mantra."
The Seth said with pleasure, "Good, my son! You learn this entire salutation
mantra, so that you may be blessed in this world and the next." Therefore,
Subhag learned the entire salutation mantra. As if he had found a wonderful
treasure, he began to constantly remember (chant) that mantra with great
devotion. Through the influence of this mantra, the animal herder Subhag no
longer felt any pain from hunger or thirst. In this way, he became addicted to
the five-great-ones mantra. It became a part of his life, that great mantra.
Thus, a considerable amount of time passed. Once, during the rainy season, the
sky was continuously covered with dark clouds. Subhag went out from home with
his animals to graze in the forest. While returning, there was such a torrential
downpour, as if a series of arrows of water had bound the sky and the earth.
While returning home, Subhag had to cross a small river, which was also flooded
today. Seeing the overflowing river, full of water, Subhag stopped for a while
on this bank and thought. His animals had crossed the river and reached the
other side. With firm faith, Subhag chanted the great mantra Navkar, considering
it celestial knowledge, and tried to jump and fly up, but he fell into the
river. Due to the sudden fall, where he stopped in the mud, there was a sharp
stake of wood, as strong as Yama's teeth, which pierced his stomach. He felt
unbearable pain from the piercing of the stake, yet he continued to chant the
five-great-ones mantra. The stake had pierced his vital spot like a sharp nail,
and so he died immediately. Upon dying, he was immediately born in the womb of
the Seth's wife, Arhdasi. It is certain that those who are absorbed in the
salutation mantra attain a good destiny. After three months, the Seth's wife
gave birth to a son. She told her husband, "I have a desire to be bathed with
fragrant water, anointed, and worshipped with flowers in front of the statue of
Jinendra. I also have a desire to donate clothes and other things to the monks,
to worship the holy community, and to give charity to the poor and suffering."
Hearing this, the Seth was very happy and fulfilled his wife's desires as if
they were a wish-fulfilling gem. After that, when nine months and seven and a
half days were completed, the Seth's wife gave birth to a healthy and beautiful
son with auspicious signs. The Seth celebrated the birth of his son with great
joy, seeing the auspicious day, and named him Sudarshan, which is truly
befitting his qualities. With the best wishes of his parents, Sudarshan
gradually grew up. When he reached the appropriate age, he learned all the arts.
When he became an adult, the Seth married him to a beautiful girl named
Manorama, who was as beautiful as Lakshmi herself. Sudarshan's gentle appearance
pleased not only his parents, but also the king and all the other people, as it
was as delightful and pleasing as the moon.  In the same city, there lived a
royal priest named Kapil, who was a scholar of the ocean of knowledge. He also
held a prominent place in the king's heart. Just as there is an inseparable
friendship between Kamadeva and the spring season, so too, there was a permanent
and inseparable friendship between Kapil and Sudarshan.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 sudarzana kI kathA yogazAstra dvitIya prakAza zloka 101 uccAraNa kiyA aura
sUrya kI taraha AkAza meM ur3a gye| yaha sunakara subhaga ne vicAra kiyA nizcaya
hI yaha zabda AkAzagAminI vidyA kA hai| isa dRSTi se usane namaskAramaMtra kA
prathamapada hRdaya meM dhAraNa kara liyaa| ataH sote, jAgate, uThate, baiThate,
calate, phirate dinarAta, ghara meM yA bAhara, malina vastra, zarIra yA jhUThe
hAtha Adi hone para bhI vaha namo arihaMtANaM pada kA uccAraNa karane lgaa| saca
hai, kisI vastu ko ekAgratA pUrvaka grahaNa karane se vaha tadpa ho hI jAtA hai|
eka dina seTha ne usake muMha se yaha zabda sunakara pUchA-'bhadra! jagat meM
utkRSTa prabhAvazAlI isa paMcaparameSThI maMtra kA eka pada tumheM kahAM se
prApta ho gayA?' subhaga ne sArI bAta kholakara khii| 'bahuta acchA! yoM
kahakara seTha ne use samajhAyA ki yaha kevala AkAzagAminI vidyA hI nahIM hai,
apitu yaha svarga evaM apavarga (mokSa) ko prApta karAne vAlI | bhI hai| tInoM
lokoM meM jo bhI sarvazreSTha suMdara yA durlabha vastu hai, vaha saba isake
prabhAva se anAyAsa hI milatI hai| jaise samudrajala kI koI mAtrA nahIM batA
sakatA, vaise hI paMcaparameSThI-namaskAra maMtra ke vaibhava ko koI nApa nahIM
sktaa| tUM bar3A bhAgyazAlI hai ki aise durlabha maMtra ko tUMne puNyayoga se
prApta kiyA hai| paraMtu jaba kapar3e yA zarIra gaMdeM hoM, muMha hAtha jhUThe
hoM, taba isa gurumaMtra kA kadApi uccAraNa nahIM karanA caahie|' isa para
subhaga ne seTha se kahA-'vyasanI jaise vyasana ko nahIM chor3a sakatA, vaise hI
maiM isa maMtra ko kadApi nahIM chor3a sktaa|' seTha ne prasannatApUrvaka
kahA-'acchA, vatsa! tUM yaha namaskAramaMtra pUrA sIkha le, jisase ihaloka va
paraloka meM terA kalyANa ho|' ataH subhaga ne vaha namaskAramaMtra pUrA sIkha
liyaa| mAno use koI adbhuta nidhAna mila gayA ho, isa dRSTi se usa maMtra kA
vaha zubhAzaya subhaga niraMtara smaraNa (japa) karane lgaa| isa maMtra ke
prabhAva se pazupAlaka subhaga ko bhUkha-pyAsa kI koI pIr3A bhI nahIM rhtii| isa
taraha vaha paMcaparameSThI maMtra kA vyasanI bana gyaa| usake jIvana kA aMga
bana gayA, vaha mhaamNtr| yoM karate hue kAphI arsA vyatIta ho gyaa| eka bAra
varSARtu ke dinoM meM niraMtara AkAza meM meghaghaTA chAyI huI thii| subhaga
ghara se apane pazu lekara jaMgala meM carAne gyaa| vApisa lauTate samaya aisI
mUsaladhAra varSA huI, mAno jaladhArA rUpI bANazreNI ne AkAza aura pRthvI ko
bAMdha diyA ho| subhaga ko ghara Ate samaya rAste meM eka choTI-sI nadI par3atI
thI, usameM bhI Aja bhayaMkara bAr3ha A gayI thii| ataH jala se labAlaba bharI
uphanatI nadI ko dekhakara subhaga thor3I dera isa kinAre para hI Thaharakara
kucha socane lgaa| usake pazu to nadI pAra karake parale kinAre pahuMca gaye
the| subhaga ne | dRr3havizvAsa pUrvaka AkAzagAminI vidyA kI dRSTi se vaha
mahAmaMtra navakAra par3hA aura chalAMga mArakara Upara ur3ane kA prayatna |
|kiyA, lekina vaha nadI meM gira pdd'aa| acAnaka Upara se girane ke kAraNa vaha
kIcar3a meM jahAM rukA thA, vahAM yamarAja | ke dAMta ke samAna majabUta eka
lakar3I kA tIkhA khUTA par3A thA, vaha ekadama usake peTa meM ghusa gyaa| kIla
ghusane kIsI asahya vedanA hone lagI, phira bhI vaha paMcaparameSThI-maMtra kA
jApa karatA rhaa| khUTA marmasthAna meM tIkhI kIla kI taraha gar3a gayA thA, isa
kAraNa tatkAla usakI mRtyu ho gyii| marakara tatkAla vaha usa seTha kI patnI
'arhadAsI' kI| kukSi meM utpanna huaa| niHsaMdeha namaskAramaMtra meM tallIna
hone vAle kI sadgati hotI hI hai| tIna mahIne ke bAda | zreSThipatnI ko dohada
paidA huaa| usane apane dohada kA hAla batAyA ki mujhe jinezvara-pratimA kA
sugaMdhita jala se abhiSeka karane, vilepana karane aura puSpoM dvArA arcA
karane kI abhilASA huI hai, sAtha hI munirAjoM ko vastrAdi dAna dekara zrIsaMgha
kI pUjA karane aura dInaduHkhiyoM ko dAna dene Adi kI bhAvanA huI hai|' yaha
sunakara seTha bar3e prasanna hue aura ciMtAmaNi ke samAna seThAnI ke dohada
pUrNa kiye| tatpazcAt nau mahIne sAr3he sAta dina pUrNa hone para seThAnI ne
zubhalakSaNa saMpanna eka svastha evaM suMdara putra ko janma diyA seTha ne
bar3I khuzI ke sAtha zubha dina dekhakara putra mahotsava kiyA, usakA yathArtha
guNa sammata sudarzana nAma rkhaa| mAtA-pitA ke uttama manoratha ke sAtha
sudarzana kramazaH bar3A hone lgaa| yogya umra hone para usane samasta kalAe~
siikhiiN| vayaska hone para seTha ne usakA vivAha sAkSAt lakSmI ke samAna
manohara rUpalAvaNya saMpanna 'manoramA' nAmaka kanyA ke sAtha kara diyaa|
sudarzana kI saumya AkRti kevala mAtA-pitA ko hI nahIM, vahAM ke rAjA evaM anya
sabhI logoM ko caMdramA ke samAna AhlAdaka evaM prIti utpanna karane vAlI thii|
usI nagara meM vidyAsamudrapAragAmI kapila nAma kA rAjapurohita rahatA thA, rAjA
ke hRdaya meM bhI usakA paryApta sthAna | thaa| jaise kAmadeva ke sAtha
vasaMtaRtu kI aTUTa maitrI hotI hai vaise hI kapila ke sAtha sudarzana kI sthAyI
aura aTUTa 164

Page #187 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Steadfast in virtue, Sudarshan was not caught in the web of Kapila's deceit.  In
the second light of Yoga Shastra, verse 101, friendship had blossomed. Just as
Mercury does not leave the company of the Sun, so too did Kapil rarely leave the
company of the magnanimous Sudarshan. One day, Kapila, the priest's wife, asked
her husband, "My lord! Where do you spend so much time, ignoring all the tasks
that need to be done?" The priest replied, "I mostly stay with Sudarshan."
Kapila inquired about Sudarshan's identity, and the priest answered, "My dear!
Do you not know my friend Sudarshan, who is the foremost among gentlemen, unique
in the world, handsome, pleasing to behold?" Come, I will introduce you to him.
Sudarshan is the intelligent son of Rishabhdas Seth, he is like Kamadeva in
form, the moon in radiance, the sun in brilliance, the ocean in gravity,
Uttaramuni in forgiveness, and like the Chintamani jewel in generosity; he is
the Mount Rohana of gems of virtue, he is so sweet-tongued, as if he were a pool
of nectar, he is like the adornment of the earth's face. Who is capable of
describing all his virtues? He is the jewel of virtue, never deviating from his
character."  Hearing the praise of Sudarshan from her husband's mouth, a fire of
desire ignited in Kapila's heart; she became mentally attached to his form.
Brahmin women are often fickle. Just as a yogini practices day and night to
attain union with the Supreme Brahman, so too did Kapila practice day and night
to achieve union with Sudarshan, devising schemes.  One day, by the king's
order, Kapil had gone to another village. Seeing this as a good opportunity,
Kapila went to Sudarshan and said, "Your friend is very ill today, so he
couldn't come to see you. He is not only physically unwell, but he is also
restless in your separation, unable to bear not seeing you. That is why your
friend sent me to call you. I didn't even know about this." Saying this, the
simple-hearted Sudarshan immediately went to the priest's house. Gentle people
are naturally trusting, so they do not suspect deceit in others. As soon as
Sudarshan entered the house, he asked, "Where is my friend Kapil?" Kapila said,
"Come on, your friend is sleeping in the inner room." Walking a little further,
Sudarshan asked again, "Kapil is not here, where did he go?" "He is sleeping in
the empty space due to his illness. Therefore, go inside the bedroom and meet
him." When Kapil was not found in the bedroom, the simple-minded Sudarshan said,
"My dear! Tell me, where is my friend Kapil?" Kapila immediately closed the door
of the bedroom, seated Sudarshan on the bed, and began to uncover her beautiful
limbs, covering them with fine garments. The fickle-eyed Kapila, excited, began
to untie the knot of her lower garment, making gestures and glances, laughing
and smiling, she said, "Kapil is not here, so take care of Kapila. Why do you
differentiate between Kapil and Kapila?" Sudarshan asked, "What should I take
care of Kapila for?" Kapila said, "My dear! Ever since I heard the praise of
your wonderful form and virtues, this fever has been tormenting me. Just as the
arrival of clouds is cooling for the earth scorched by the heat of summer, so
too will your union be cooling for me, who is tormented by the heat of
separation. My fate has opened today, that you have arrived through deceit.
Therefore, accept me. I am yours, I am dedicating my heart to you. From time
immemorial, I have been tormented by lust, please console me with the nectar of
your embrace."  Hearing this unexpected request for love, Sudarshan was stunned.
He thought to himself, "Damn this shameless woman! This strange trick of hers is
as invincible as fate." The quick-witted Sudarshan said aloud, "My dear! Your
request might be appropriate for a young man, but I am impotent. You have been
deceived by my male attire." Hearing this, Kapila's lust subsided. Regretting in
her heart, she immediately opened the door and said, "Okay, okay, then you are
not for me, go." Sudarshan also left quickly, thinking, "Good thing I got out of
this hellhole quickly." He then went straight to his home. Sudarshan was lost in
deep thought, "Truly, such women are more terrible than demons in their art of
deceit, like Sakinis in their tricks, and they surpass lightning in their
fickleness. I fear that such a cunning, deceitful, fickle, and lying woman
might...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zIla meM dRr3ha sudarzana kapilA ke kAmajAla meM nahIM phaMse yogazAstra
dvitIya prakAza zloka 101 maitrI ho gyii| jaise budha sUrya kA sAtha nahIM
chor3atA, vaise hI kapila bhI prAyaH mahAmanA sudarzana kA sAtha nahIM chor3atA
thaa| eka dina purohitapatnI kapila ne apane pati se pUchA - 'svAmin! Apa hamezA
aneka karaNIya kAryoM ko najara aMdAja | karake itanA samaya kahAM bitAte ho?"
purohita ne kahA- 'maiM adhikatara sudarzana ke pAsa rahatA huuN|' kapilA ne
sudarzana kA paricaya pUchA to purohita ne uttara diyA- 'priye ! kyA tuma
sajjanapuruSoM meM agraNI, jagat meM advitIya rUpasaMpanna, | priyadarzanIya
mere mitra sudarzana ko nahIM jAnatI ?' lau, maiM tumheM usakA paricaya karAtA
huuN| sudarzana RSabhadAsa seTha kA buddhizAlI putra hai, vaha rUpa meM
kAmadeva, kAMti meM caMdramA, teja meM sUrya, gaMbhIratA meM samudra, kSamA meM
uttaramuni, dAna meM | ciMtAmaNiratna ke samAna hai; guNa rUpI mANikya kA
rohaNAcala parvata hai, vaha itanA madhurabhASI hai, mAno sudhA kA kuMDa ho,
pRthvI ke mukhAbharaNa ke samAna hai| usake samasta guNoM kA kathana karane meM
kauna samartha hai? vaha guNacUr3AmaNi zIla | se kadApi skhalita (vicalita)
nahIM hotA  / ' pati ke muMha se sudarzana kI rUpa prazaMsA sunakara kapilA ke
hRdaya meM kAmAgni dhadhaka uThI; vaha usake rUpa para mana hI mana Asakta ho
gyii| prAyaH brAhmaNapatniyA~ caMcala hotI haiN| yoginI jaise parabrahma kA
samAgama karane ke lie dina-rAta raTana karatI hai, vaise hI kapilA sudarzana se
samAgama karane ke lie rAtadina raTana karatI aura upAya socA karatI thI  /  eka
dina rAjA kI AjJA se kapila dUsare gAMva ko gayA huA thA  /  kapilA yaha acchA
maukA dekhakara sudarzana ke |yahAM pahuMcI aura usase kahA - 'Aja tumhAre mitra
kA svAsthya atyaMta kharAba hai, isalie ve tumase milane nahIM aaye| | eka to ve
zarIra se bhI svastha nahIM haiM, dUsare ve tumheM na milane ke kAraNa tumhAre
viraha meM baicaina hai  /  isI kAraNa tumheM | bulAne ke lie tumhAre mitra ne
mujhe bhejA hai| 'mujhe to abhI taka yaha patA bhI na thA  / ' yoM kahakara
sarala hRdaya sudarzana tatkAla puMrohita ke yahAM phuNce| sajjana svayaM sarala
hote haiM, isalie dUsare ke prati kapaTa kI AzaMkA nahIM krte| | sudarzana ne
ghara meM praveza karate hI pUchA - 'kahA~ hai, merA mitra sudarzana ? kapilA ne
kahA- 'Age calo, aMdara ke kamare meM tumhAre mitra soye hue haiN|' jarA Age
calakara phira sudarzana ne pUchA- kapila yahAM to hai nahIM, vaha gayA kahAM?'
unakA | svAsthya kharAba hone se nirvAta sthAna meM soye hue haiN| ataH bhItara
zayanagRha meM jAkara unase milo| zayanagRha meM jaba | kapila nahIM milA to
saralAzaya sudarzana ne kahA- 'bhadre ! yaha batAo, merA mitra kapila kahAM
hai?' kapilA ne turaMta | zayanagRha kA dvAra baMda karake sudarzana ko palaMga
para biThAyA aura usake sAmane apane manohara aMgopAMga kholakara bArIka |
vastra se Dhakane kA upakrama karane lgii| vaha caMcalanayanA kapilA romAMcita
hokara apane adhovastra kI gAMTha kholane lagI aura hAvabhAva evaM kaTAkSa
karatI tathA ThahAkA mArakara muskarAtI huI bolI- 'yahA~ kapila nahIM hai,
isalie kapilA kI | saMbhAla lo| kapila aura kapilA meM tuma bheda kyoM karate
ho?' sudarzana ne pUchA- 'kapilA kI mujhe kyA saMbhAla karanI | cAhie?' kapilA
ne kahA- 'priye ! jaba se maiMne tumhAre adbhuta rUpa evaM guNoM kI prazaMsA
sunI hai, taba se yaha kAmajvara | mujhe pIr3ita kara rahA hai| grISma ke tApa
se tapI huI pRthvI ke lie jaise megha kA samAgama zItaladAyaka hotA hai, vaise
hI virahatApapIr3ita mujhe tumhArA samAgama zItalatAdAyaka hogaa| mere Aja
bhAgyakapATa khule haiM ki chala dvArA ApakA Agamana huA hai| ataH Apa mujhe
sviikaareN| maiM Apake adhIna hUM, Apako apanA hRdaya samarpita kara rahI huuN|
cirakAla se kAmonmAda se vyAkula banI huI mujha pIr3itA ko apanI AliMgana rUpI
amRtavRSTi se sAMtvanA de  / ' sudarzana isa | apratyAzita kAmaprArthanA ko
sunakara hakkA-bakkA-sA ho gyaa| mana hI mana socA - 'dhikkAra hai, isa nirlajja
nArI ko ! | isakA yaha vicitra prapaMca daiva ke samAna durdamanIya hai  /  '
pratyutpannamati sudarzana ne prakaTa meM kahA- 'bhadre ! yuvApuruSa ke lie | to
tumhArI prArthanA ucita kahI jA sakatI hai, lekina maiM to napuMsaka huuN| tuma
vyartha hI mere puruSaveSa ko dekhakara ThagI gayI ho  / ' yaha sunate hI kapilA
kA kAma kA nazA utara gayA  /  mana hI mana pachatAte hue phaurana hI usane
dvAra kholakara | kahA- 'acchA, acchA, taba tuma mere kAma ke nahIM ho, jaao|'
sudarzana bhI yoM socatA huA jhaTapaTa bAhara nikala gayA | ki acchA huA,
jhaTapaTa isa naraka dvAra se chuTakArA milaa| aba vaha sIdhA apane ghara
phuNcaa| sudarzana ciMtana kI gaharAI | meM DUba gayA - 'sacamuca aisI striyA~
kapaTa kalA meM rAkSasoM se bhI bar3hakara bhayaMkara, prapaMca meM zAkinI
sarIkhI aura caMcalatA | meM bijalI ko bhI mAta karane vAlI hotI hai| mujhe
bhaya hai, aisI kuTila, kapaTI, capala, mithyAvAdinI nArI se ki kahIM 165

Page #188 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Abhayarani's Decision to Entrap Sudarshana in the Snare of Passion  Yogashastra,
Second Illumination, Verse 101: "He should not sit idle and indulge in
unnecessary activities." Therefore, I make this resolve that "from today, I will
never go alone to anyone's house." Thereafter, the embodiment of virtuous
conduct, Sudarshana, engaged in auspicious religious activities and began to
live his life happily. He was constantly mindful that no wrong conduct should
occur in his life.  One day, the grand Indra festival, a source of joy for the
worthy citizens and the entire world, was taking place in the city. Radiant like
the autumnal moon and Agastya, Sudarshana and the priest Kapila reached the
royal garden together. Meanwhile, Abhayarani, seated like a goddess in a
palanquin, was also going to the garden with Kapila. At that very moment,
Manorama, the wife of Sudarshana, who was the embodiment of chaste virtue, was
also going to the garden in a chariot with her six sons. Seeing her, Kapila
asked Abhayarani, "O mistress! Who is this beautiful woman, like a divine
damsel, seated in the chariot and going ahead?" Abhayarani said, "Learned one!
Don't you know? She is the virtuous wife of Sudarshana, the very embodiment of
the household goddess." Astonished, Kapila said, "She is the wife of Sudarshana?
Then her skill is truly amazing!" The queen said, "In what skill do you consider
her amazing?" Boldly, Kapila said, "She has performed an amazing feat by giving
birth to so many sons." Abhayarani said, "If the husband and wife have mutual,
exclusive love for each other, then for a woman to give birth to so many sons is
no feat. Irritated, Kapila said, "Yes, it is true that if the husband is a man,
then it is possible. But Sudarshana, in the guise of a man, is a eunuch." "How
do you know that he is a eunuch?" Abhayarani asked. Thereupon, Kapila narrated
her own experience with Sudarshana. Abhaya said, "Innocent Kapila! If that is
the case, then you have been cheated! He is a eunuch for other women, but not
for his own wife." Kapila was embarrassed and, out of jealousy, said tauntingly,
"I was a fool and innocent, so I was cheated. You are the most cunning of all. I
will only consider you superior when you bring him under your control." Abhaya
said, "Even hard stones melt with love and generous gifts; then what is the
challenge for me with this living being? Before me?" Irritated, Kapila said,
"Don't boast in vain, O Queen! If you are so proud of your skill, then
demonstrate it by engaging in sexual play with Sudarshana." The arrogant queen
said, "Kapila! Just know that I have already enjoyed intimacy with Sudarshana.
If a woman is clever, then even the most austere forest-dwelling ascetics come
under her control. Then what chance does this tender-hearted householder have?
Bringing him under my control is a mere child's play for me. If I do not engage
in intimacy with him after bringing him under my control, then I will enter the
fire." Thus, the two continued their boastful conversation and reached the
garden. There, they began to play freely, as if the celestial nymphs were
frolicking in Nandana forest. Exhausted from the play, they went to their
respective places.  Abhayarani shared her vow with the wise, learned, and
skilled in statecraft, the nurse-mother named Sarvajna, Pandita, and Kutaniti
Nipuna. Hearing this, she said, "Oh daughter! Your vow is not appropriate. You
are still unaware of the fortitude of great souls. Sudarshana's mind is firmly
established in the service and devotion to the Jinas and the great ascetics. Fie
on your futile vow! Even an ordinary layman considers a woman other than his
wife as his sister. Then what to say about this great being, whose gurus are the
ascetics devoted to brahmacharya (celibacy) and other great vows? How can he,
who always lives in the guru's abode, constantly engaged in meditation and
silence, be brought under your control? It is good to make a vow to seize the
jewel on the head of a snake, but it is never good to make a vow to destroy the
virtue of such a steadfast person." Thereupon, Abhaya said to the nurse-mother,
"Mother! Somehow or the other, you just have to bring him here. I will take care
of whatever needs to be done after that. You don't have to use any deceit; just
bring him here by some means." The Pandita, after a moment's thought, said,
"Daughter! If this is your determination, then there is only one way to bring
him here; on the day of the festival, Sudarshana remains steadfast in
dharmaddhyana (contemplation of the Dharma) in some empty house. In that state,
he can be brought here. Apart from this, it is impossible to bring him here."
The queen, pleased, said, "This is exactly what I wanted."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 abhayArAnI dvArA sudarzana ko kAmajAla meM phaMsAne kA nirNaya yogazAstra
dvitIya prakAza zloka 101 vaha aura prapaMca na kara baitthe| ataH maiM isa
prakAra kA saMkalpa karatA hUM ki 'Aja se maiM kadApi kisI ke ghara para akelA
nahIM jaauuNgaa|' tatpazcAt mUrtimAna sadAcAra sudarzana zubha dharmakArya
karatA huA, apanA jIvana sukha se vyatIta karane lgaa| apane jIvana se koI
galata AcaraNa na ho, isa bAta kA vaha barAbara dhyAna rakhatA thaa| eka dina
nagara meM nagara ke yogya evaM samagra jagata ke lie AnaMda rUpa iMdramahotsava
cala rahA thaa| zaratkAlIna caMdramA aura agasti ke samAna zobhAyamAna sudarzana
aura kapila purohita sAtha-sAtha rAjodyAna meM phuNce| idhara rAjA ke pIchepIche
devI kI taraha vimAna rUpa pAlakhI meM baiThakara abhayarAnI bhI kapilA ke sAtha
jA rahI thii| ThIka isI samaya mUrtimAna satIdharma kI taraha sudarzanapatnI
manoramA bhI apane 6 putroM ke sAtha ratha meM baiThakara udyAna meM jA rahI
thii| use dekhakara kapilA ne abhayarAnI se pUchA-svAminI! rUpa-lAvaNya kI
sarvasvabhaMDAra suMdaravarNA devAMganA-sI yaha kauna strI ratha meM |baiThI
Age-Age jA rahI hai? abhayarAnI bolI-paMDitA! kyA tuma ise nahIM jAnatI? yaha
sAkSAt gRhalakSmI-sI sudarzana kI dharmapatnI hai|' vismita hokara kapilA ne
kahA-'yaha sudarzana kI gRhiNI hai? taba to gajaba kA isakA kauzala hai!'
rAnI-'kisa bAta meM tuma isakA kauzala gajaba kA mAnatI ho?' tapAka se kapilA
bolI-'itane putroM ko janma dekara isane gajaba kA kamAla kara diyA hai|
abhayArAnI ne kahA-'patipatnI donoM kI eka-dUsare ke prati ananyaprIti ho to
strI itane putroM ko janma de, isameM kauna-sA kamAla? isa para jhujhalAte hue
kapilA ne kahA-'hA~, yaha saca hai, ki pati puruSa ho to aisA ho sakatA hai,
lekina isakA pati sudarzana to puruSaveza meM napuMsaka hai|' tumheM kaise patA
lagA ki vaha napuMsaka hai?' abhayArAnI ne puuchaa| isa para kapilA ne sudarzana
ke sAtha apanI Apa bItI sunaayii| abhayA ne kahA'bholI kapilA! yadi aisA hai to
tuma ThagI gayI ho! vaha parastrI ke lie napuMsaka hai, apanI strI ke lie
nhiiN|' kapilA jheMpa gayI aura IrSyA se tAnA mArate hue bolI-maiM to mUrkhA
aura bholI thI, isalie ThagI gayI, Apa to caturaziromaNI hai! maiM to tabhI Apa
meM vizeSatA samajhUgI, jaba Apa use apane vaza meM kara leNgii|' abhayA ne
kahA-prema aura muktahasta dAna se to bar3e-bar3e vaza meM ho jAte haiM, jar3a
patthara bhI pighala jAtA hai; to phira isa sajIva puruSa kI kyA bisAta hai|
mere sAmane? kapilA ne tunakate hue kahA-bekAra kI DIMga mata hAMko, mahArAnIjI!
Apako apane kauzala para itanA garva hai to sudarzana ke sAtha ratikrIr3A karake
btaaie|' haTha para car3hI huI rAnI ne ahaMkAra pUrvaka kahA-'kapile! basa
maiMne sudarzana ke sAtha ramaNa kara liyA, samajha lo! 'ramaNI catura ho to
bar3e-bar3e vanavAsI kaThora tapasvI bhI vaza meM ho jAte haiM to yaha becArA
komalahRdaya gRhastha kisa bisAta meM hai?' ise vaza meM karanA to mere bAyeM
hAtha kA khela hai agara ise vaza meM karake isake sAtha sahavAsa na kara lUM,
to maiM agni meM praveza kara jaauuNgii|' isa prakAra donoM bar3ha-bar3hakara
bAteM karatI huI, udyAna meM phuNcii| vahAM donoM usI prakAra svacchaMdatA se
krIr3A karane lagIM, mAno naMdanavana meM apsarAe~ krIr3A karatI hoN| krIr3A ke
zrama se thakakara donoM apane-apane sthAna para calI gyii| abhayArAnI ne apanI
pratijJA kI bAta sarvavijJAna, paMDitA, kUTanIti nipuNa paMDitA nAma kI
dhAyamAtA se khii| vaha sunakara bolI-'are beTI! terI yaha pratijJA ucita nahIM
hai| tUM mahAtmA puruSoM kI dhairyazakti se abhI taka anabhijJa hai| sudarzana
kA citta jinezvara aura munivara kI sevAbhakti meM dRr3ha hai| dhikkAra hai terI
niSphala pratijJA ko! sAdhAraNa zrAvaka | bhI parastrI ko apanI bahana samajhatA
hai to phira isa mahAsatvaziromaNi ke lie to kahanA hI kyA? brahmacaryatapodhanI
sAdhu jisake guru haiM, vaha mahAzIla Adi vratoM kA upAsaka abrahmacarya kA
sevana kaise karegA? jo sadA gurukulavAsa meM rahatA ho, sarvadA dhyAna-
maunaparAyaNa ho, kisakI tAkAta hai, use apane pAsa le Aye yA bulA le? sarpa ke
mastaka ke maNi ko grahaNa karane kI pratijJA karanA acchA. lekina aise daDha
paruSa kA zIla khaMDita karane kI pratijJA karanA kadApi acchA nhiiN|' isa para
abhayA ne dhAyamAtA se kahA-mAMjI! kisI bhI taraha se eka bAra tama use yaha
bAda jo kucha bhI karanA hogA, vaha saba maiM kara luuNgii| tumheM kucha bhI
chala-bala nahIM karanA hai, sirpha use kisI upAya se le bhara AnA hai| paMDitA
kSaNabhara kucha socakara bolI-beTI! yadi terA yahI nizcaya hai to eka hI upAya
hai, use yahAM lAne kA; parva ke dina sudarzana dharmadhyAna karane hetu kisI
khAlI makAna meM kAyotsarga meM sthira hokara rahatA hai, usa sthiti meM use
yahAM lAyA jA sakatA hai| usake sivAya use yahAM lAnA asaMbhava hai| rAnI
prasanna hokara bolI-'yaha bilakula 166

Page #189 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Abhaya's Efforts to Bring Sudarshana  The appropriate means is the verse 101 of
the second chapter of the Yogashastra, yours! Just start making this effort from
today.' The foster mother also agreed to make efforts according to the means she
had told. After a few days, the joyous Kaumudi festival came. The king, eager to
celebrate the festival with great pomp, ordered his palace guards to announce in
the city that it is the royal command that all the men and women of the city
should come to the garden dressed up to see the Kaumudi festival.  When
Sudarshana heard this royal command, he started thinking with regret - 'After
performing the morning Chaitya-vandana, my mind is eager to spend the whole day
and night in Paushadha, but the king's strong command is to participate in the
festival. So what should I do? Whatever is going to happen, will happen.'
Thinking this, Sudarshana went straight to the king. After offering respects, he
requested the king - 'O king! Tomorrow is the festival day. With your grace, I
will perform Chaitya-vandana and observe Paushadha. Therefore, please grant me
permission not to participate in the festival.' The king accepted his request.
The next day, Sudarshana, after completing the Chaitya-vandana at the right
time, accepted Paushadha and stood in Kayotsarga meditation in some corner of
the city. When the foster mother came to know this through reliable sources, she
happily went to Abhayarani and said - 'Dear! Today is a good opportunity,
perhaps your desire will be fulfilled. But today, do not go to the garden for
the Kaumudi festival. Today I have a severe headache,' and making this excuse,
she stayed in the inner palace.  The Pandita covered the beautiful idol of
Kamadeva with a cloth and placed it on the chariot, and taking it, entered the
royal palace. When the guard asked, 'What is this?', the Pandita, the mine of
deceit, stopped the chariot and replied - 'Since the queen's health is not good
today, she cannot go to the garden, so she will worship the idols of Kamadeva
and other deities in the palace itself, so we are taking this idol of Kamadeva
to the palace.'  In this way, the Pandita made the idols enter the palace three
more times. The truth is, how much cunning and skill a woman has! The fourth
time, instead of the idol, Sudarshana was seated in the chariot and covered with
a cloth so skillfully that the onlooker would think it was the idol itself. This
time, without informing the guard, the Pandita took the chariot straight to the
courtyard of the royal palace and quickly took Sudarshana down from the chariot
and took him to the queen's special room and handed him over. Seeing Sudarshana
after removing the cloth, the fearless queen, filled with passion, started
trying to disturb him by displaying gestures and amorous movements. Shamelessly
showing her breasts and other limbs, the queen said with a sidelong glance -
'Lord! The sharp arrows of Kamadeva have wounded me. Since you are like Kamadeva
himself, I have come to your refuge to find peace from him. O Refuge! Lord! Save
me, the one tormented by desire.' Great souls engage even in improper acts for
the sake of helping others. You should not be angry at all on the Pandita who
has brought you here through deceit.'  Hearing this, Sudarshana, immersed in
high spiritual thoughts, remained motionless in Kayotsarga like a divine statue.
Abhaya pleaded again, 'Lord! Please say something! I have been calling you with
charming gestures for so long and you are just standing completely silent and
motionless. Why are you ignoring me? Why have you taken this vow with so much
difficulty? Leave it! By attaining me, the fruit of your vow has been obtained,
your task has been accomplished, understand. O Honored One! Accept this servant
who is begging you with humility. Why don't you accept the jewel that has fallen
into your lap by divine arrangement? How long will you continue this drama of
pride in your good fortune? Saying this, Abhaya made Sudarshana's hands touch
her full, raised breasts, and embraced him tightly with her soft lotus-like
hands. Seeing such temptations suitable for breaking the vow of celibacy, the
naturally calm Sudarshana remained motionless in his Kayotsarga. Sudarshana
mentally resolved - 'I will complete the Kayotsarga and do Parana only after
getting rid of this temptation, otherwise I will not be able to complete it.'

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 abhayA dvArA sudarzana ko lAnA yogazAstra dvitIya prakAza zloka 101 upayukta
upAya hai, tumhArA! basa, Aja se tumheM yahI prayatna karanA hai|' dhAyamAtA ne
bhI apane batAye hue upAya ke anusAra prayatna karanA svIkAra kiyaa| kucha hI
dinoM bAda jagat ko AnaMda dene vAlA kaumudI-mahotsava A gyaa| utsava ko
dhUmadhAma se manAne ke lie utsuka citta rAjA ne apane rAjyarakSaka puruSoM ko
AjJA dI-nagara meM DhiMDhorA piTavAkara ghoSita kara do ki aisI rAjAjJA hai ki
Aja kaumudI-mahotsava dekhane ke lie nagara ke sabhI strI-puruSa sajadhaja kara
udyAna meM aaye| sudarzana ne jaba yaha rAjAjJA sunI to kheda pUrvaka vicAra
karane lagA-'prAtaH kAla caityavaMdanAdi karane ke bAda | pUrA dina aura rAta
pauSadha meM bitAne ko merA mana utsuka ho rahA hai, kintu rAjA kI pracaMDa AjJA
utsava meM zAmila hone kI hai| ataH kyA upAya kiyA jAya? hogA to vahI, jo hone
vAlA hai|' yo vicArakara sudarzana sIdhA rAja | phNcaa| bheMTa prastata karake
rAjA se vinati kii-'raajn| kala parva kA dina hai| maiM ApakI kapA se
caityavaMdanAdi karake pauSadha kruuNgaa| isalie majhe utsava meM zAmila na hone
kI ijAjata deN|' rAjA ne usakI prArthanA mAnya kara lii| dUsare dina sudarzana
ThIka samaya para caityavaMdanAdi se nivRtta hokara pauSadha aMgIkAra karake
nagara ke kisI cauka meM kAyotsargapUrvaka dhyAnastha khar3A ho gyaa| dhAyamAtA
ko vizvasta sUtroM se patA lagA to vaha atyaMta harSita hotI huI abhayarAnI ke
pAsa pahuMcI aura kahane lagI-beTI! Aja acchA maukA hai, zAyada Aja terA
manoratha pUrNa ho jaay| paraMtu Aja tUM kaumudImahotsava ke lie udyAna meM mata
jaanaa| Aja mere sira meM bahuta darda hai yoM bahAnA banAkara rAjA se kahakara
rAnI aMtaHpura meM hI ruka gyii| 'striyoM ke pAsa aisI hI prapaMca karane kI
vidyA hotI hai|' _paMDitA ne lepamayI kAmadeva kI mUrti Dhakakara ratha meM
rakhavAI aura use lekara rAjamahala meM praveza kiyaa| caukIdAra ne pUchane para
ki 'yaha kyA hai?' kUTakapaTa kI khAna paMDitA ne ratha rokakara use uttara
diyA-rAnIjI kA svAsthya ThIka na hone ke kAraNa Aja vaha udyAna meM nahIM jA
sakI, ataH kAmadeva Adi devoM kI pUjA ve mahala meM hI kara leMgI, isa lihAja se
isa kAmadeva kI mUrti ko hama mahala meM le jA rahe haiN| abhI kucha aura devoM
kA bhI praveza karAyA jaayegaa| dvArapAla ne kahA-'acchA, isa mUrti ke Upara kA
kapar3A haTAkara hameM batAte jaao| ataH paMDitA ne mUrti para kA kapar3A
haTAkara use batA diyA aura mahala meM le gyii| isI prakAra dUsarI aura tIsarI
bAra bhI paMDitA ne mUrtiyoM ko mahala meM praviSTa kraayaa| saca hai, nArI meM
kitanI kapaTakalA aura kuzalatA! cauthI bAra mUrti ke badale sudarzana ko ratha
meM biThAkara Upara se kapar3A isa khUbI se Dhaka diyA ki dekhane vAle ko vaha
sAkSAt mUrti hI mAlUma de| isa bAra caukIdAra kI AMkha |bacAkara binA batAye hI
paMDitA ratha ko sIdhA rAjamahAla ke cauka meM le gayI aura phartI se ratha se
utArakara mahala meM rAnI ke khAsa kamare meM le jAkara use sauNpaa| kapar3A
haTAkara sudarzana ko dekhate hI abhayArAnI kAmAtura hokara hAvabhAva aura
kAmaceSTAe~ pradarzita karatI huI use vicalita karane kA prayatna karane lgii|
stana Adi aMgopAMga dikhAte hue nirlajja hokara rAnI kaTAkSa karatI huI
bolI-'nAtha! kAmadeva ke tIkhe bANoM ne mujhe ghAyala kara diyA hai| Apa sAkSAt
kAmadeva-samAna hone se maiM usase zAMti pAne ke hetu ApakI zaraNa meM AyI huuN|
he zaraNya! svAmin! mujha kAmapIr3itA ko bcaao| mahApuruSa to paropakAra ke lie
akArya meM bhI pravRtta ho jAte haiN| Apako jo paMDitA chala se yahAM taka lAyI
hai, usa para Apa jarA bhI krodha na krnaa|' pIr3ita kI rakSA ke kArya meM
kapaTa kapaTa nahIM khlaataa|' yaha sunakara ucca pAramArthika vicAroM meM lIna
sudarzana bhI devamUrti kI taraha kAyotsarga meM nizcala khar3A rhaa| abhayA ne
phira prArthanA kI'nAtha! Apa kacha to bolie! maiM itanI dera se Apako manohara
hAvabhAvoM se bulA rahI haiM aura Apa haiM ki bilakula mauna | dhAraNa kiye
nizceSTa khar3e haiN| merI upekSA kyoM kara rahe haiM Apa? itanA kaSTa kara
vrata kyoM apanA rakhA hai? chor3o ise! merI prApti hone se Apako apane vrata kA
phala mila gayA hai, ApakI kAryasiddhi ho gayI hai, smjhie| he mAnada! vinamratA
pUrvaka yAcanA karatI huI isa dAsI ko svIkAra kro| daivayoga se goda meM Akara
par3e hue ratna ko Apa kyoM nahIM svIkAra karate? aba kaba taka yaha saubhAgya-
garva kA nATaka karoge? yoM kahatI huI abhayA ne apane puSTa unnata stanoM kA
sudarzana ke hAtha se sparza karAyA, padma kamala ke samAna donoM komalakaroM se
gAr3ha AliMgana kiyaa| isa prakAra ke brahmacaryabhaMga ke anukUla upasarga Aye
dekhakara svabhAva se dhIra sudarzana apane kAyotsarga meM nizcala rhaa|
sudarzana ne mana hI mana saMkalpa kiyA-isa upasarga se kisI bhI taraha se
chuTakArA hogA, tabhI maiM kAyotsarga pUrNa karake pAraNA karUMgA, anyathA maiM
apanA 167

Page #190 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Abhaya's Order for Execution by Accusation of Fault Yogashastra, Second
Illumination, Verse 101 I will continue my fast. Seeing Sudarshana standing
silent and motionless, the cunning-hearted Abhaya, becoming fearless, frowned
and said - "O shameless! Fool! Soulless one! Do you dare to insult me, the
respectable one? Remember, women are capable of punishing or rewarding men.
Don't you know this? Even after my passionate pleas under the influence of
Kamadeva, if you do not come under my control, then without a doubt, I will make
you a guest of Yama (the god of death) in no time." As Abhaya became more and
more agitated and fierce, the magnanimous Sudarshana became more and more
absorbed in the realm of spiritual contemplation. The entire night passed in
this manner. Despite being repeatedly astonished, Sudarshana did not waver even
a bit from his meditation. Just as the great ocean cannot be disturbed by the
beating of a boat's oar, Sudarshana remained unmoved.  Seeing the dawn, Abhaya
tore her clothes and started screaming loudly, "Run, run! Save me, this wicked
one wants to rape me." Hearing the commotion, the guards rushed to the palace.
They saw Sudarshana standing motionless in kayotsarga (a Jain meditation
posture). The guards thought, "This is unbelievable. How can this be possible?"
They went straight to the king and reported the entire incident. The king came
to Abhaya and, seeing her distraught, she said through tears, "O king! I had
stayed here on your order. Suddenly, this demon-like person entered my palace
and, seeing me, became lustful like a hungry wolf. First, this sinful,
lascivious man pleaded with me in sweet words to engage in carnal relations. I
told him, 'A chaste woman can never behave like an unchaste one. Can black
pepper be chewed like chickpeas?' When I did not submit to him, he tried to rape
me, and left me in this terrible state!" Hearing this, the king could not
believe that Sudarshana could do such a thing. The king repeatedly asked
Sudarshana about the truth of the matter, but the compassionate Sudarshana, out
of mercy for the queen, did not respond. Just as sandalwood, even when heavily
rubbed, cools the heat of others, Sudarshana remained completely silent.
Considering his silence as a sign of being an adulterer, the enraged king
ordered his arrest and had his crime announced throughout the city, that
Sudarshana is a heinous sinner, and the king has ordered his execution.  The
king's command is fulfilled by his words, and the gods' by their minds. As soon
as the royal order was given, the king's men seized Sudarshana and made him sit
on a donkey. They blackened his face with ink, applied red sandalwood paste on
his body, placed a garland of coral flowers on his head, and a necklace of
kankola fruits around his neck. Then, beating drums, they paraded Sudarshana
through the city, making announcements at crossroads that this sinner had
committed a terrible crime in the king's inner chambers, and therefore, he is
being executed. The people were shocked to hear this, thinking, "This is simply
unbelievable! It seems there is some conspiracy here." But in the face of the
king's order, they were helpless. There was an uproar among the people.   When
Sudarshana was brought in front of his own house, his chaste wife Manorama was
stunned to see the spectacle. She thought, "My husband is a man of virtue, I
have seen this many times. The king also loved his conduct. But this dreadful
sight makes it seem that fate (destiny) is adverse. Surely, he is reaping the
fruits of some inauspicious deeds from a past life. Now, except for praying to
the Lord, there is no other remedy." Resolving this in her mind, she went into
kayotsarga and became absorbed in devotion to the Jina deities. Finally, she
pleaded with the presiding goddess, "Goddess! There is no possibility of any
moral flaw in my husband. Therefore, please assist this supreme spiritual
aspirant; only then will I complete my fast, otherwise I will continue fasting
in this very state."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 abhayA dvArA doSAropaNa vadha kA Adeza yogazAstra dvitIya prakAza zloka 101
anazana jArI rkhuugaa| sudarzana ke niruttara aura nizceSTa khar3e rahane se
hataprabha va apamAnita banI huI kuTila hRdayA abhayA ne nirbhaya hokara bhakuTi
calAte hue kahA-are nirlajja! mUkhe, jar3AtmA! kyA tUM mujha sammAnanIya kA
apamAna karatA hai? yAda rakhanA, nArI puruSoM ko sajA dene yA puraskAra dene
meM samartha hotI hai| kyA tumheM yaha patA nahIM hai? kAmadeva ke adhIna mujha
kAmAturA dvArA itanI prArthanA karane para bhI agara tuma mere vaza meM nahIM
hooge to niHsaMdeha, maiM tumheM dekhate hI dekhate yamarAja kA mehamAna banA
duuNgii| isa prakAra jyoM-jyoM abhayA Aveza meM Akara ugra hotI gayI, tyoM-tyoM
mahAmanA sudarzana dharmadhyAna kI zreNI para adhikAdhika car3hate gye| yoM
karate-karate sArI rAta bIta gyii| bArabAra hairAna kiye jAne para bhI sudarzana
dhyAna se jarA bhI calAyamAna nahIM hue| naukA ke daMDa se tAr3ana karane para
kyA kabhI mahAsamudra kSubdha hotA hai? saberA hotA dekhakara abhayA ne apane
nakhoM dvArA apane zarIra ko noMca DAlA, apane kapar3e phAr3a liye aura jorajora
se cillAne lagI-re daur3o-daur3o! mujhe bacAo, yaha duSTa mujha para balAtkAra
karanA cAhatA hai| hallA sunakara caukIdAra turaMta mahala meM daur3e aaye|
unhoMne vahAM kAyotsarga meM nizcala khar3e sudarzana ko dekhaa| caukIdAroM ne
socA'hamArI samajha meM nahIM aataa| yaha anahonI bAta kaise ho sakatI hai?'
unhoMne sIdhe rAjAjI ke pAsa jAkara sArA hAla bayAna kiyaa| isa para rAjA abhayA
ke pAsa aaye| usakA behAla dekhakara rAjA ne pUchA to abhayA ne rote-rote
kahAnAtha! maiM ApakI AjJA se kala yahAM ruka gayI thii| acAnaka pizAca ke
samAna yaha mere mahala meM ghusa AyA aura mujhe dekhate hI bhUkhe bher3iye kI
taraha kAmonmatta hokara pahale to isa kAmavyasanI pApI ne madhura vacanoM se
mujha se rati sahavAsa | karane kI prArthanA kii| isa para maiMne isase
kahA-'satI kadApi asatI ke samAna ceSTA nahIM kara sktii| kyA cane kI taraha
kAlImirca cabAI jA sakatI hai? jaba maiM isake vaza meM nahIM huI to isane mujha
para balAtkAra karane kI kozika kI aura merA aisA burA hAla kara diyA! isa para
maiM jora se cillaayii| abalA ke pAsa aura bala hI kauna-sA hai? rAjA ko bhI
sunakara vizvAsa nahIM huA ki sudarzana aisA kara sakatA hai? rAjA ne
vAstavikatA jAnane kI dRSTi se sudarzana se isa viSaya meM bAra-bAra pUchA
ki-'zreSThI! saca saca batAo, bAta kyA hai?' paraMtu rAjA ke dvArA bAra-bAra
pUche jAne para bhI dayAparAyaNa sudarzana ne rAnI para dayA karane kI dRSTi se
kucha bhI jabAva nahIM diyaa| caMdana atyaMta ghise jAne para bhI dUsare kA tApa
zAMta karatA hai| sudarzana kA bilakula mauna rahanA pAradArika cora hone kA
lakSaNa mAnakara rAjA ne kruddha hokara use giraphtAra karavAyA aura sAre nagara
meM usake aparAdha kI ghoSaNA karavAyI ki sudarzana ghora pApI hai, ataH rAjA ne
isakA vadha karane kI AjJA dI hai| rAjAoM kI kAryasiddhi vacana se aura devoM kI
mana se hotI hai| rAjAjJA hote hI rAjapuruSoM ne pakar3akara sudarzana ko gadhe
para bitthaayaa| usake muMha para kAlI zyAhI pota dI, usake zarIra para
lAlacaMdana kA lepa kiyA, mastaka para karavIra ke phUloM kI mAlA aura gale meM
kaMkola kI mAlA DAla dii| phira sUpa kA chatra dhAraNa kiye Dhola bajAte aura
gadhe ko nagara meM ghUmAte hue sudarzana kA julUsa nikAla rahe the| bIca-bIca
meM rAjapuruSa caurAhoM para rukakara jora se Dhola pITakara ghoSaNA karate jAte
the ki-'isa pApAtmA ne rAjA ke aMtaHpura meM bhayaMkara aparAdha kiyA hai,
isalie isakA vadha kiyA jAtA hai| rAjA kA isa saMbaMdha meM koI kasUra nahIM
hai|' logoM ne jaba yaha ghoSaNA sunI to ve bhauMcakke-se raha gye| socane
lage-'yaha bAta to kisI bhI taraha se mAnane meM nahIM A sakatI! lagatA hai,
isameM koI SaDyaMtra ho| paraMtu rAjAjJA ke Age sabhI nirupAya the| vaise logoM
meM hAhAkAra maca gyaa| isa taraha nagara meM ghumAte-ghumAte jaba sudarzana ko
usake ghara ke sAmane lAyA gayA to satI manoramA vaha sArA dRzya dekhakara
stabdha ho gyii| usane socA-mere patideva sadAcArI haiM, yaha bAta maiMne kaI
bAra unameM dekhI hai| rAjA bhI inake AcAra para prema rakhate the| para Aja kA
yaha durdRzya dekhate hue jAna par3atA hai ki daiva (bhAgya) hI pratikUla hai|
avazya hI pUrvajanma ke kinhIM azubhakarmoM | kA phala inheM prApta huA hai|
isake nivAraNa kA aba sivAya prabhu prArthanA ke aura koI upAya nahIM hai|
kRtakoM kA phala | to avazya bhoganA par3atA hai| yoM aMtarmana meM nizcaya
karake kAyotsargastha hokara jinezvara deva kI bhakti meM tallIna ho gyii| aMta
meM zAsanAdhiSThAtrI devI se vinati kI-'bhagavatI! mere pati meM kuzIladoSa kI
saMbhAvanA nahIM hai| isalie isa parama | dharmAtmA zrAvaka kI sahAyatA karogeM,
tabhI maiM kAyotsarga pUrNa karUMgI, anyathA maiM isI sthiti meM anazana
kruuNgii| 168

Page #191 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Throne of Spikes, Initiation Yoga Shastra, Second Light, Verse 101  "How can
noble women live through the loss of dharma and the calamity that befalls their
husbands?" In response to this, the king's guards took Sudarshan to the place of
execution and placed him on the spikes. For servants, the king's orders are
terrible and inviolable. But in the blink of an eye, the spikes were replaced by
a golden lotus throne! Even Yama, the god of death, is humbled in the face of
divine power. Still, the king's men, determined to execute Sudarshan, struck him
with a sharp sword. But as the sword touched his neck, it transformed into a
garland of flowers. Seeing this miraculous event, the king's men rushed to
inform the king. Upon hearing the entire story, the king immediately mounted his
elephant and arrived at the scene. Seeing Sudarshan, the king embraced him and
said with remorse, "I am deeply ashamed that I, a sinner, falsely accused you
and defamed you. 'Shreshthi! Your merit was so powerful that even a hair could
not be harmed. By doing this, I have greatly wronged you. But you have upheld
your righteous dharma. Forgive me.' Trusting a deceitful woman, I ordered your
execution; therefore, there is no sinner in the world except this Dadhivahan.
Another reason for this terrible sin committed by me is that 'I repeatedly asked
you about this, but you did not answer at all. Tell me, what else can I, a
simpleton, decide on this?' Whatever it may be, get on the elephant." The king
placed Sudarshan on the elephant and, while conversing, took him to his palace.
He had him bathed, adorned with clothes and ornaments, and then, taking him
aside, requested him to recount the events of the night in detail. Seth
Sudarshan narrated the entire incident truthfully. Upon hearing this, the king
was enraged at the queen and was ready to punish her. Sudarshan immediately fell
at the king's feet and begged him not to do so. The king then pardoned the
queen. Afterwards, the righteous king, placing Seth Sudarshan on an elephant,
escorted him home with honor, amidst music and fanfare, through the heart of the
city.  The queen, upon realizing the truth, was deeply remorseful. She hanged
herself. "The sinner who commits adultery falls of his own accord." The pandita
also fled from there and reached Pataliputra Nagar, where she stayed with
Devadattaganika. She constantly praised Sudarshan in front of Devadatta; this
aroused a strong desire in Devadatta's heart to see Sudarshan. Sudarshan,
renouncing the world, took monastic initiation. Like the ocean, known as the
Ratnakar, is a treasure trove of jewels, so too, the Gunaratnakar, with the
permission of his guru, became thin-bodied through penance. Sudarshan Muni, a
solitary ascetic, carrying an image, wandered from village to village and
reached Pataliputra. While he was wandering through the city for alms, the
pandita suddenly saw him and requested him to accept alms. The selfless and
detached muni, without considering gain or loss, went to her place for the sake
of pure alms. Devadatta closed the door and, throughout the day, tempted him
with various allurements. But the muni did not waver even slightly from his
great vows. Knowing the muni to be steadfast, Devadatta opened the door in the
evening and dismissed him. The muni went straight to a garden where the queen
had died and become a Vyantari. Upon seeing Sudarshan Muni, she remembered the
events of her previous life and began to torment the equanimous muni in various
ways. Truly, the debt and enmity of beings do not end even after countless
births. Vyantari greatly harassed the great-souled Sudarshan, but he, through
the yoga of auspicious contemplation, attained the state of A-puurvakarana.
Gradually ascending the क्षपकश्रेणि, he attained brilliant Kevalgyan right
there. Immediately, the gods and demons celebrated the Kevalgyan festival there.
Sudarshan Muni, the Kevalgyani, the savior of beings trapped in the ocean of
existence, preached dharma. The rise of great men is for the rise of the people.
Their dharma preaching not only benefited other beings, but also Devadatta, the
pandita, and Vyantari (Abhaya). Sudarshan Muni was one whose soul was not
tainted even when he was near women! By preaching his auspicious dharma, he
enlightened countless beings and gradually attained the supreme abode. For a
person who obtains the Jineendra dharma-shastra and has devotion and love for
it, attaining liberation is not difficult. This is the essence of the story of
Sudarshan Muni. || 101 || 169

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zUlI kA siMhAsana, dIkSA yogazAstra dvitIya prakAza zloka 101 dharmahAni aura
pati para vipatti ke samaya kulIna nAriyAM kaise jI sakatI hai?" isa ora
rAjyarakSaka puruSoM ne sudarzana | ko vadhyasthAna para le jAkara use zUlI para
car3hA diyaa| kyoMki sevakoM ke lie rAjAjJA bhayaMkara aura anullaMghya hotI
hai| paraMtu palaka mArate hI vahAM zUlI ke sthAna para svarNakamalamaya
siMhAsana bana gayA ! devaprabhAva ke Age eka bAra to yamarAja kI dAr3ha bhI
kuMThita ho jAtI hai| phira bhI rAjapuruSoM ne sudarzana kA vadha karane ke lie
tIkhI talavAra se dRr3hatApUrvaka | prahAra kiyaa| magara talavAra gale para
lagate hI puSpamAlA bana gyii| yaha adbhuta camatkAra dekhakara rAjapuruSa
daur3e-daur3e | rAjA ko yaha khabara dene phuNce| unake dvArA sArI ghaTanA
sunAte hI rAjA phaurana hathinI para baiThakara ghaTanAsthala para aaye| |
sudarzana ko dekhate hI rAjA ne AliMgana karake pazcAttApa pUrvaka kahA- maiM
isake lie atyaMta lajjita hUM ki mujha pApI ne Apa para jhUThA doSAropaNa kara
badanAma kiyaa| 'zreSThi ! ApakA puNya bar3A prabala thA, isa kAraNa bAla bhI
bAMkA nahIM | ho skaa| maine aisA karake ApakA bahuta bar3A ahita kiyA  /  para
Apane to apanA sajjana kA dharma nibhaayaa| mujhe kSamA kreN|' mAyAvinI strI
para vizvAsa karake maiMne ApakA vadha karane kA Adeza de diyA thA; isalie isa
dadhivAhana ke sivAya | saMsAra meM aisA koI pApI nahIM hai| dUsarI bAta yaha
hai ki mujhase yaha jo bhayaMkara pApa huA, usakA eka kAraNa yaha bhI | banA ki
'maiMne Apako isa viSaya meM bAra-bAra pUchA, lekina Apane bilakula uttara nahIM
diyaa| batAie, maiM alpajJa isa para se aura kyA nirNaya karatA?' astu, kucha
bhI ho, Apa hAthI para baiThie  / ' rAjA ne sudarzana ko hathinI para biThAyA |
aura vArtAlApa karate-karate apane mahala meM le gyaa| snAna karavAyA, vastra
AbhUSaNa pahanAye aura phira ekAMta meM le | jAkara rAta ko huI ghaTanA
yathArtha rUpa se kahane kA anurodha kiyaa| sudarzana seTha ne sArI ghaTanA
yathAtathya rUpa se sunaayii| | sunate hI rAjA ko abhayArAnI para krodha car3hA
aura vaha use sajA dene ko taiyAra huA  /  sudarzana ne phaurana rAjA ke caraNoM
| meM girakara aisA karane se rokaa| isa para rAjA ne abhayArAnI ko kSamAdAna
diyaa| tatpazcAt nyAyarakSaka rAjA ne sudarzana seTha ko hAthI para biThAkara
nagara ke bIcobIca hote hue sammAnasahita gAje-bAje ke sAtha ghara phuNcaayaa|
abhayArAnI ko satya ghaTanA prakaTa ho jAne se atyaMta kheda huaa| usane gale
meM phaMdA DAlakara AtmahatyA kara lii| 'paradroha karane vAle pApI kA apane Apa
hI patana hotA hai|' paMDitA bhI vahAM se jhaTapaTa bhAgakara pATaliputranagara
meM pahuMcI aura vahAM devadattAgaNikA ke yahAM rhii| bAta-bAta meM vaha
devadattA ke sAmane sudarzana kI prazaMsA karatI thI; isa | kAraNa devadattA ke
mana meM bhI sudarzana ke darzana kI tIvra utkaMThA jAgI  /  sudarzana ne
saMsAra se virakta hokara muni dIkSA aMgIkAra kara lI  /  samudra jaise
ratnAkara kahalAtA hai, vaise hI guNaratnAkara gurudeva se AjJA lekara tapa se
kRzatanu | sudarzanamuni ekalavihArI pratimA dhAraNa karake grAmAnugrAma vihAra
karate hue pATaliputra phuNce| jaba ve bhikSA ke lie nagara meM ghUma rahe the,
tabhI acAnaka paMDitA ne unheM dekhakara bhikSAgrahaNa karane kI prArthanA kii|
niHspRha aura nirlepa muni bhI | lAbhahAni kA vicAra kiye binA nirdoSa bhikSA ke
lie usake yahAM phuNce| devadattA ne dvAra baMda kara diyA aura pUre dina |
unheM vicalita karane ke lie nAnA prakAra ke pralobhana diye  /  paraMtu muni
apane mahAvrata se jarA bhI nahIM ddige| muni ko dRr3ha jAnakara devadattA ne
zAma ko dvAra kholakara unheM vidA kiyaa| muni vahAM se sIdhe eka udyAna meM
pahuMce, jahAM | abhayArAnI marakara vyaMtarI banI huI thii| sudarzanamuni ko
dekhate hI use pUrvajanma kI ghaTanA smaraNa ho AyI aura vaha | usa samabhAvI
muni ko vividha yAtanAe~ dene lgiiN| sacamuca, jIvoM kA RNa aura vaira janma-
janmAMtara taka nahIM miTatA  /  | vyaMtarI ne mahAsatvazAlI sudarzana ko bahuta
hairAna kiyA, lekina vaha to zubhadhyAna ke yoga se apUrvakaraNa kI sthiti meM
pahuMca gye| kramazaH kSapakazreNi para car3hate hue vahIM unheM ujjvala
kevalajJAna prApta ho gyaa| tatkAla devoM aura asuroM | ne vahAM kevalajJAna -
mahotsava mnaayaa| bhavasAgara meM par3e hue jIvoM ke uddhAraka kevalajJAnI
sudarzanamuni ne dharmadezanA dii| mahApuruSoM kA abhyudaya janatA ke abhyudaya
ke lie hotA hai| unakI dharmadezanA se sirpha dUsare jIva hI nahIM, devadattA, |
paMDitA aura vyaMtarI (abhayA) ko bhI pratibodha huA  /  striyoM ke nikaTa
rahane para bhI jinakI AtmA dUSita nahIM huI, aise | the sudarzanamuni ! apanI
zubhadharmadezanA se aneka jIvoM ko pratibodha dekara unhoMne kramazaH
paramapada prApta kiyaa| jinendra | dharmazAsana ko pAkara tadanusAra ArAdhanA
aura zAsana prIti rakhane vAle vyakti ke lie muktipada prApta karanA kaThina
nahIM hai  /  yaha hai sudarzanamuni kI kathA kA hArda !  /  /  101  /  /  169

Page #192 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Vyantari ka upadrav, kevaljnana, moksha Yogashastra dvitiya prakash sloka 102 se
105 .158. Aishvarya-raja-rajopi, rupa-mina-dhvajopi ca | Sitaya ravana iva,
tyajya naryanarah parah ||102||  Artha:- Sampatti mein rajaon ka raja ho, roop
mein kamdeva jaisa ho to bhi Sita ne Ravana ko tyaga vaise anya striyon ko par
purush ka tyag karna chahiye.||102|| Vyakhya:- Dharmakaarya ka adhikari kevala
purush hi nahin hai, striyon ka bhi poora adhikar hai. Kyonki tirthankaraon ke
chaturvarnya shramana-sangha mein sadhvi aur shravika ko bhi sthan hai, ve bhi
sangha ki ang maani gayi hai. Is karan jaise grihasthapur-ush ke liye parastri-
sevan varjit hai, vaise hi grihasthastriyon ke liye bhi parapurush-sevan ka
nishekh hai. Atas jaise Sita ne Ravana ka tyag kiya tha, vaise hi stri ko pati
ke atirikta tamam parapurushon ka tyag karna chahiye. Sita ka charittra poorva
mein kaha hua hai.||102||  Nrpunsakatvam tiryaktvam, daurabhagyam ca bhave-bhave
| Bhavennranam strinam canyakantasakta-cetasam ||103|| Artha:- Jo striyan
parapurush mein asakta hoti hain tatha jo purush parastri mein asakta hote hain,
un striyon ya purushon ko janma-janmantara mein napunsakata, tiryakva
(pashupakshiyoni) aur daurabhagya-tva prapat hote hain.||103||  Pranabhotam
charitrasya, parabrahmaikakaranam | Samacharan brahmacharya pujitairapi pujyate
||104|| Artha:- Deshavirata ya sarvavirata charittra ke pranabhoot aur
parabrahmma (paramatma ki) prapthi (mukti) ke ekamattra (asadharan) karan,
brahmacharya ka palan karne vala manushya sirf samanya manushyon dwara hi nahin,
sura, asura aur rajaon (pujitaon) dwara bhi puja jata hai.||104||  Chirayushah
susamsthana, drdhasanhanana narah | Tejasvinah mahaviriyas bhaveyur brahmacha-
ryatah ||105|| Artha:- Brahmacharya ke pratap se manushya anuttar-aupapattika
devadi sthanon mein utpanna hokar dirgha-ayu, samachaturastra (dilldaul) vale,
majboot haddiyon se yukta-vajra rshabhanara-cha namak sanhanana vale, tejasvi
sharira kantiman deh vale, tirthankar adi chakravarti adi ke roop mein mahaba-
lashali hote hain.||105||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 vyaMtarI kA upadrava, kevalajJAna, mokSa yogazAstra dvitIya prakAza zloka 102
se 105  / 158 /  aizvaryarAjarAjo'pi, rUpamInadhvajo'pi ca  /  sItayA rAvaNa
iva, tyAjya nAryAnaraH paraH  /  / 102 //  _ artha :- saMpatti meM rAjAoM kA
rAjA ho, rUpa meM kAmadeva jaisA ho to bhI sItA ne rAvaNa ko tyAgA vaise anya
striyoM ko para puruSa kA tyAga karanA cAhie  /  / 10 /  /  vyAkhyA :-
dharmakArya kA adhikArI kevala puruSa hI nahIM hai, striyoM kA bhI pUrA adhikAra
hai| kyoMki tIrthaMkaroM ke cAturvarNya zramaNasaMgha meM sAdhvI aura zrAvikA ko
bhI sthAna hai, ve bhI saMgha kI aMga mAnI gayI hai| isa kAraNa jaise
gRhasthapuruSa ke lie parastrI sevana varjita hai, vaise hI gRhastha striyoM ke
lie bhI parapuruSa sevana kA niSedha hai| ataH jaise sItA ne rAvaNa kA tyAga
kiyA thA, vaise hI strI ko pati ke atirikta tamAma parapuruSoM kA tyAga karanA
cAhie sItA kA caritra pUrva meM kahA huA hai||102|| aba strI yA puruSa ke dUsare
puruSa yA dUsarI strI meM Asakta hone kA phala batAte haiN|159| napuMsakatvaM
tiryaktvaM, daurbhAgyaM ca bhave-bhave  /  bhavennarANAM strINAM
cAnyakAntAsaktacetasAm  // 103 /  /  artha :- jo striyA~ parapuruSa meM Asakta
hotI haiM tathA jo puruSa parastrI meM Asakta hote haiM, una striyoM yA puruSoM
ko janma-janmAMtara meM napuMsakatA, tiryaktva (pazupakSIyoni) aura
daurbhAgyatva prApta hote haiM  /  / 103 /  /  abrahmacarya ko nindita batAkara
aba brahmacarya ke ihalaukika guNa batAte haiN|160| prANabhUtaM caritrasya,
parabrahmaikakAraNam  /  samAcaran brahmacaryaM pUjitairapi pUjyate  /  / 104 /
/  artha :- dezavirati yA sarvavirati cAritra ke prANabhUta aura parabrahma
(paramAtmA kI) prApti (mukti) ke ekamAtra | (asAdhAraNa) kAraNa, brahmacarya kA
pAlana karane vAlA manuSya sirpha sAmAnya manuSyoM dvArA hI nahIM, sura, asura
aura rAjAoM (pUjitoM) dvArA bhI pUjA jAtA hai  /  / 104 /  /  aba brahmacarya ke
pAralaukika guNa batAte haiN|161| cirAyuSaH susaMsthAnA, dRDhasaMhananA narAH  /
tejasvino mahAvIryA bhaveyurbrahmacaryataH  // 105 /  /  artha :- brahmacarya ke
pratApa se manuSya anuttaraupapAtika devAdi sthAnoM meM utpanna hone se
dIrghAyu, samacaturasra (DilaDaula) vAle, majabUta haDDiyoM se yukta-vajra
RSabhanArAca nAmaka saMhanana vAle, tejasvI zarIra kAMtimAna deha vAle,
tIrthakara Adi cakravartI Adi ke rUpa meM mahAbalazAlI hote haiM  /  / 105 /  /
aba brahmacarya kI mahimA ke saMbaMdha meM kucha zlokArtha prastuta karate haiM
kAmI manuSya striyoM kI Ter3hImer3hI sarpAkAra kezarAzi ko dekhatA hai, paraMtu
usake moha ke kAraNa hone vAlI duSkarma paraMparA ko nahIM dekhtaa| siMdurI
raMga se bharI huI nAriyoM ke bAla kI mAMga ko dekhatA hai, lekina sImaMtanAmaka
narakapatha hai, usakA use patA nahIM hai| suMdara, raMgarUpa vAlI suMdariyoM kI
bhrU-latA ko mokSamArga para prayANa karane meM bAdhaka sarpiNI kahA hai, kyA
tuma ise nahIM jAnate? manuSya aMganAoM ke manohara netroM ke kuTila kaTAkSoM kA
avalokana karatA hai, magara isase usakA jIvana naSTa hotA hai, yaha nahIM
dekhtaa| vaha striyoM ke sarala aura unnata nAsikAvaMza (nAka rUpI DaMDe) kI
prazaMsA karatA hai, paraMtu moha ke kAraNa apane vaMza ko naSTa hotA huA nahIM
dekhtaa| striyoM ke kapola rUpI darpaNa meM par3e hue apane pratibiMba ko
dekhakara khuza hotA hai, lekina khuda ko usa jar3abharata ke samAna saMsAra
rUpI talaiyA ke kIcar3a meM phaMsA huA nahIM jaantaa| ratikrIr3A ke sabhI sukha
samAna haiM, isa dRSTi se strI ke lAla oTha kA pAna karatA hai, lekina yamarAja
usake AyuSyarasa kA pAna kara rahA hai, ise nahIM smjhtaa| striyoM ke mogare kI
kalI ke samAna ujjvala dAMtoM ko to Adara pUrvaka dekhatA hai, kiMtu bur3hApA
jabardastI usake dAMta tor3a rahA hai, ise nahIM dekhtaa| striyoM ke karNaphUla
(kAnapAza) ko kAmadeva ke hiMDole kI dRSTi se dekhatA hai, lekina apane kaMTha
aura gardana para laTakate hue kAla ke pAza ko nahIM dekhtaa| bhraSTabuddhi
mAnava ramaNiyoM ke mukha ko hara kSaNa dekhatA hai, paraMtu kheda hai ki
yamarAja ke mukha ko dekhane kA use samaya nahIM hai| kAmadeva ke vazIbhUta banA
huA manuSya striyoM ke kaMTha kA Azraya letA hai, lekina Aja yA kala |
derasabera se kaMTha taka Aye hue prANoM ko nahIM jaantaa| durbuddhi mAnava
yuvatiyoM ke bhujalatA ke baMdhana ko to acchA samajhatA | hai, lekina karmoM se
jakar3I huI apanI AtmA ke baMdhanoM ke lie nahIM soctaa| aMganAoM ke karakamala
ke sparza se khuza huA puruSa rAmAca kaM kATa kA tA dhAraNa karatA hai, lokana
naraka ke kUTazAlmAla vRkSa ke takhi kATa ko yAda nahIM krtaa| 170

Page #193 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Useful Moral Teachings for Observing Brahmacharya (Celibacy)  Yoga Shastra,
Second Canto, Verse 105:  The dull-witted human youth embraces the breasts of
young women with delight, but forgets the pain caused by the hell-like torment.
The simple-minded being dwells amidst women who cast sidelong glances at him
moment by moment, but forgets that he is in the midst of the ocean of
transmigration. The lustful man is attracted to the triple-fold (triveni) waves
of the bellies of deluded women, but does not realize that this is the Vaitarani
River that drowns him in the ocean of existence.  The man's lust-afflicted mind
remains submerged in the pool-like navel of the woman, but does not sink into
the tranquil waters of equanimity, the abode of happiness. He knows the ladder
for the Kama-deva (god of love) to climb the creeper-like body hair of women,
but does not know that this is the iron chain that binds him in the prison of
this world.  The wicked man joyfully indulges in the vast hips of the woman, but
does not know that she is the shore of this ocean of existence. The dull-witted
man, like a donkey, considers himself fortunate to enjoy the thighs of young
women, but does not understand that these women are the obstacles to attaining
the right path.  Thinking himself blessed after being kicked by women, he does
not realize that they are pushing him down to a lower state of existence. Wise
men should renounce such women who destroy the virtuous life of a person through
their sight, touch, and embrace, considering them as venomous serpents.  Women
are crooked like the crescent moon, momentary in their passion like the redness
of evening, and downward-going like a river, and therefore, they are to be
abandoned. The lust-blinded women do not see anything - neither dignity,
courtesy, charity, honor, self-interest, nor the interest of others. The harm
caused by an enraged lion, tiger, or snake is less than the unlimited harm
caused by an unrestrained woman.  The women who are the embodiment of lust are
like elephants, capable of striking the whole world. Therefore, they should be
avoided from a distance. Recite any mantra or worship any deity that can protect
you from the demoness-like nature of women that can destroy your life.  It is
universally accepted that women are unchaste and prone to fall into sensual
indulgence. It seems as if the cruel Brahma has created women by combining the
tongue of the serpent Yama and the sprout of poison. While lightning may
sometimes become stable, the wind may stop blowing, but a woman's mind never
remains steady.  Even the most intelligent men are deceived without the use of
mantras and tantras, so where did women learn this illusionary art? Women also
possess the remarkable skill of lying, where they can conceal even the most
obvious misdeeds with such finesse that the listener will believe it to be
completely true.  Just as a person afflicted with jaundice considers a yellow
stone to be gold, or a deluded person considers the pain caused by lust as
pleasure, similarly, a person under the influence of infatuation considers the
suffering caused by the company of women as happiness. Whether it is a matted-
haired ascetic, a topknot-wearing Brahmin, a shaven-headed monk, a silent sage,
a naked ascetic, or even Lord Brahma himself, if he is unchaste, I do not like
him.  Just as a person who is afflicted with an itch considers the pain of
scratching it as pleasure, similarly, a being under the control of the
irresistible Cupid considers the suffering of sexual intercourse as happiness.
Poets have compared women to golden statues, but why are these lustful men not
satisfied by embracing these golden statues?  The despicable and secret parts of
women are the ones that infatuate the deluded human, so what else can detach him
from them? The truly sad thing is that the ignorant and deluded human even
compares the disgusting limbs made of flesh and bones to the moon, lotus, and
jasmine, thereby defiling these beautiful objects.  The foolish lustful man
places the heavy and thick-bodied woman on his chest during sexual play, but
does not realize that this is the stone tied around his neck to drown him in the
ocean of existence. Therefore, O wise disciple! Renounce women, considering them
as the tides of the ocean of existence, the prey of the hunter called lust, the
intoxicating liquor that makes one mad, the mirage of sensual objects in the
desert, the darkness of the new moon night, and the mine of calamities.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 brahmacarya pAlana ke lie upayogI hitazikSA yogazAstra dvitIya prakAza zloka
105 jar3abuddhi mAnava yuvatI ke stanakalazoM ko pakar3akara sukhapUrvaka
gAr3hAliMgana karake sotA hai| kiMtu kuMbhIpAka se hone vAlI | vedanA ko bhUla
jAtA hai| maMdabuddhi jIva kSaNakSaNa meM kaTAkSa karane vAlI striyoM ke bIca
nivAsa karatA hai, lekina svayaM bhavasamudra ke bIca meM par3A hai, isa bAta ko
bhUla jAtA hai| kAmavAsanA lipsa mUDha mAnava striyoM ke udara kI trivalI
(tInarekhA) rUpa triveNI kI taraMgoM se AkarSita hotA hai| magara yaha nahIM
socatA, triveNI ke bahAne bhavajala meM DUbAne | vAlI yaha vaitaraNI nadI hai|
nara kA kAmapIr3ita mana nArI kI nAbhi rUpI vApikA meM DUbA rahatA hai, lekina
vaha mana sukha ke sthAna rUpa sAmyajala meM pramAdavaza nahIM DUbatA  /
striyoM kI romAvalI rUpI latA ko kAmadeva rUpI vRkSa para car3hane kI niHzreNI
jAnatA hai, paraMtu vaha yaha nahIM jAnatA ki yaha saMsAra rUpI kArAgAra meM
jakar3akara rakhanevAlI lohazrRMkhalA | hai  /  adhamanara nArI ke vizAla
jaghana kA saharSa sevana karatA hai, lekina vaha isa saMsArasamudra kA taTa
hai, yaha kadApi nahIM jAnatA  /  maMda buddhi mAnava gadhe ke samAna yuvatiyoM
kI jAMghoM kA sevanakara apane ko dhanya mAnatA hai, lekina yaha nahIM |
samajhatA hai ki ye striyA~ hI to sadgati-prApti meM ror3A aTakAne vAlI hai|
striyoM kI lAta khAkara apane ko bar3A bhAgyazAlI samajhatA hai, magara yaha
nahIM samajhatA ki ve isI bahAne mujhe adhogati meM dhakela rahI hai| jinake
darzana, sparza aura AliMgana se manuSya kA zamamaya jIvana khatma ho jAtA hai,
aisI nAriyoM ko ugraviSamayI nAginI samajhakara vivekI puruSa unakA tyAga kre|
kI dAr3ha, striyA~ caMdrarekhA jaisI kuTila, saMdhyA kI lAlimA ke samAna kSaNa-
jIvI rAga vAlI, nadI ke samAna nimnagA (nIcagati karane vAlI) hai, isalie tyAjya
hai| kAmAMdha banI huI aMganAe~ pratiSThA, saujanya, dAna, gaurava, svahita yA
parahita kucha bhI nahIM dekhtii| kruddha siMha, vAgha yA sarpa Adi jitanI hAni
pahuMcAte haiM, utanI hI, balki inase bhI bar3hakara hAni niraMkuza nArI
pahuMcAtI hai| pratyakSa kAmonmAda - svarUpA striyAM hathinI ke sadRza vizva ko
AghAta pahuMcAne vAlI hone se dUra se hI tyAjya hai| aise kisI bhI maMtra kA
smaraNa karo, kisI bhI deva kI upAsanA karo, jisase strI| pizAcinI zIla- jIvana
ko cUrakara prANAMta na kara ske| zAstroM se jo sUnA jAtA hai yA logoM meM jo
kucha kahA jAtA hai| ki nArI duHzIla hai, kAma-vAsanA se skhalita kara dene vAlI
hai, isa bAta meM sabhI ekamata hai| mAno krUra brahmA ne sarpa yama kI jIbha
aura viSa ke aMkura ko ekatrita karake nArI ko banAyA ho  /  daivayoga se bijalI
kadAcit sthira ho jAya, vAyu calatA huA Thahara jAya, magara nArI kA mana kabhI
sthira nahIM rahatA  /  catura se catura puruSa bhI maMtra-taMtra ke prayoga ke
binA bhI jisase Thage jAte haiM, aisI iMdrajAla vidyA kA bhalA nArI ne kahAM
adhyayana kiyA hai? strI meM jhUTha bolane kI adbhuta kalA bhI hotI hai, ki
pratyakSa (AMkhoM) dekhe hue yA kiye hue apakRtyoM ko bhI aisI siphta se
chipAyegI ki patA hI na cale, bAta ko ghumAphirAkara aise DhaMga se kahegI ki
sunane vAlA use solahoM Ane saca mAna | legaa| jisa taraha pIliyA roga se
pIr3ita yA pAgala vyakti hI pIle Dhele ko sonA mAnatA hai, usI taraha mohAMdha
manuSya | strIsaMga se hone vAle duHkha ko hI sukha rUpa mAnatA hai  /
jaTAdhArI, zikhAdhArI, muMDitamastaka, maunI, nagna, vRkSa kI chAla | pahanane
vAle, tapasvI yA brahmAjI bhI kyoM na ho, yadi vaha abrahmacArI hai to mujhe
vaha acchA nahIM lagatA  /  khAja khujalAne | vAlA khAja utpanna hone ke duHkha
ko bhI jaise sukha rUpa mAnatA hai, vaise hI durnivArya kAmadeva ke paravaza
banA huA jIva duHkha svarUpa maithuna ko bhI sukha rUpa mAnatA hai| kaviyoM ne
nAriyoM kI svarNapratimA Adi ke sAtha tulanA kI hai; to | phira ve kAmalolupa
usI svarNapratimA kA AliMgana karake tRpta kyoM nahIM ho jAte? striyoM ke jo
niMdanIya aura guhya (chipAne ke lie) aMga hai, unhIM para to mohamUr3ha mAnava
phidA hotA hai to phira use dUsare kisa padArtha se virakta ho? | sacamuca
duHkha kI bAta to yaha hai ki ajJAna aura moha se grasta mAnava mAMsa aura
haDDiyoM ke bane hue ghinaune aMgoM kI caMdra, kamala aura mogarA Adi ke sAtha
tulanA karake ina suMdara padArthoM ko bhI dUSita karatA hai| nitaMba ( cUtar3a
), jAMgha, | stana Adi se moTI aura bhArI nArI ko mUr3ha kAmI surata krIr3A ke
samaya vakSaHsthala para Aropita karatA hai, lekina use | vaha yoM nahIM
samajhatA hai ki yaha saMsArasamudra meM DUbane ke lie apane gale meM bAMdhI huI
zilA hai| ataH he buddhizAlI | zrAvaka ! nArI ko bhavasamudra ke jvAra ke
samAna, capala - kAma rUpI zikArI kI lakSya banI huI hiranI ke samAna, madAMdha
| banAne vAlI madirA ke samAna, viSaya rUpI mRgatRSNA ke jala ke lie registAna
ke samAna, mahAmoha rUpI aMdhakArasamUha ke lie amAvasyA kI rAta ke samAna aura
vipadAoM kI khAna ke samAna samajhakara nArI kA jhaTapaTa tyAga karo  /  /  105
/  /  171

Page #194 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Description of the Magnitude of Attachment  **Yoga Shastra, Second Light,
Verse 107**  Now, after explaining the fruit of delusion (attachment), we
present the description of the fifth Anuvrata as an invitation. 162.  **Verse
106**  *Asantoṣam aviśvāsam ārambham duḥkha kāraṇam | Matvā mūrchā phalam
kuryāt, parigraha - niyantranam ||106||*  **Meaning:** Considering
dissatisfaction, distrust, and initiation as the fruits of delusion, one should
control (restrain) attachment. ||106||  **Explanation:** A Shravak should limit
(define the boundaries of) attachment, which is the cause of suffering and the
fruit of delusion. Attachment leads to dissatisfaction. No matter how much one
gets, they are never satisfied, therefore it is the cause of suffering. Even if
someone with delusion gets a lot of wealth, they are not satisfied, but instead
feel restless, constantly hoping for more. Seeing the wealth of others, they
feel dissatisfied with their own, leading to suffering. Therefore, it is said,
"The dissatisfied person is humiliated at every step." On the other hand, the
one who has the wealth of contentment is far from the land of evil.  Distrust is
also a cause of suffering. When the entire environment becomes untrustworthy,
even a man who deserves no suspicion is suspected at every step. One does not
trust anyone to protect their wealth. Therefore, it is said, "To uproot, to dig,
to hoard, to keep, to not sleep at night, to be suspicious even during the day,
to plaster with dung, to always mark, to mark in opposition, to initiate
violence (like killing someone out of suspicion due to delusion), to initiate
violence (like killing someone out of suspicion due to delusion), to give
consent to kill (like a son killing his father, a father killing his son, a
brother killing his brother for wealth), to take or give bribes, to give or get
false testimony, to tell white lies, etc., leads to all kinds of evils." When
powerful, the greedy person seizes and robs travelers, breaks into walls, makes
holes; driven by greed for wealth, they engage in adultery, and work in jobs,
farming, animal husbandry, or trade. The wealth-obsessed person, like a
merchant, endures the pain of entering rivers, etc., to extract wood.  Here, the
question arises: How can one understand the statement that one should renounce
attachment, knowing that it is the cause of suffering, in a logical way? In
response, it is said: Attachment is the cause of delusion, therefore attachment
itself is a form of delusion. Or, according to the sutrakar, "Murchha
parigrahaḥ," delusion itself is attachment. This statement is from the
perspective of certainty. If one has wealth, grain, etc., without delusion, then
it is non-attachment. This statement is also from the perspective of certainty.
It is said, "Even if a person is adorned with clothes, ornaments, etc., without
ego or possessiveness, they are still non-attached. And, even if a person with
ego and possessiveness is naked, they are still attached." Even when entering a
village or house, if one takes action or receives a small amount of something
without attachment or possessiveness, then there is no one more non-attached
than them. Whatever clothes, vessels, blankets, or mats they take, they do so
for the journey of restraint and to avoid shame. The great sage Lord Mahavira,
who crossed the ocean of the world, did not call this attachment.
(Dashavaikalika 6/20-21) All these statements are clear. ||106||  **Now, we
explain the need to renounce attachment in a different way.**  **Verse 107**
*Parigraham ahatvāddhi, majjaty eva bhavāmbudhau | Mahāpota iva prāṇī, tyajet
tasmāt parigraham ||107||*  **Meaning:** Just as a ship sinks in the ocean due
to excessive weight, so too does a being sink in the ocean of the world due to
the burden of attachment. Therefore, one should renounce attachment. ||107||
**Explanation:** Just as a ship filled with excessive goods like unlimited
wealth, grain, etc., sinks in the ocean due to its heavy load, so too does a
being sink into hellish states due to the burden of attachment if they possess
unlimited wealth, grain, houses, buildings, land, property, and fields, i.e.,
more than what is necessary. It is said, "Great initiation, great attachment,
meat-eating, and the killing of five-sense beings, if any one of these four
exists, the being earns hell, and due to excessive initiation and excessive
attachment, they bind themselves to hellish existence." External initiation...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 parigraha parimANa varNana yogazAstra dvitIya prakAza zloka 107 aba mUrcchA
(Asakti) kA phala batAkara usake nimaMtraNa ke rUpa meM paMcama aNuvrata kA
vivaraNa prastuta karate haiN| 162 /  asantoSamavizvAsamArambhaM duHkhakAraNam
/  matvAmUrcchAphalaM kuryAt, parigraha - niyantraNam  // 106 //  artha :-
duHkha ke kAraNa rUpa asaMtoSa, avizvAsa aura AraMbha ko mUrcchA ke phala
mAnakara parigraha para niyaMtraNa (aMkuza ) karanA cAhie  /  /  106  /  /
vyAkhyA : - zrAvaka ko duHkha ke kAraNabhUta evaM mUrcchA ke phala rUpa
parigraha kA parimANa (maryAdA) karanA caahie| | parigraha se asaMtoSa rahatA
hai| kitanA bhI mila jAya, phira bhI tRpti nahIM hotI, isalie vaha duHkha kA
kAraNa hai| mUrcchA | vAle ko atyadhika dhana mila jAya, phira bhI saMtoSa nahIM
hotA, balki vaha uttarottara adhika se adhika dhana milane kI AzA hI AzA meM
becenI mahasUsa karatA hai| use dUsare kI adhika saMpatti dekhakara apanI kama
saMpatti meM asaMtoSa mAnane se duHkha hotA hai| isalie kahA hai- asaMtoSI
manuSya kA kadama-kadama para apamAna hotA hai| jaba ki saMtoSa rUpI |
aizvaryasukha vAle ko durjanabhUmi dUra hotI hai| avizvAsa bhI duHkha kA kAraNa
hai| jaba sArA vAtAvaraNa avizvasanIya ho jAtA hai, taba AzaMkA na karane yogya
puruSa para bhI kadama kadama para AzaMkA kI jAtI hai| apane dhana kI rakSA
karane meM bhI | kisI para vizvAsa nahIM hotaa| isalie kahate haiM- ukhAr3anA,
khodanA, jamAnA, rakhanA, rAta ko na sonA, dina ko bhI sAzaMka sonA, gobara se
lIpanA, sadA nizAna karanA, viparIta nizAna karanA, mUrcchA (Asakti) ke kAraNa
(manuSya yA kisI bhI prANI ko zaMkAvasa mAra DAlanA Adi) prANAtipAta Adi AraMbha
karanA, yA mArane kI svIkRti denA (jaise putra pitA ko, pitA putra ko, bhAI sage
bhAI ko dhana ke lie maravA detA hai), rizvata lenA yA denA, jhUThI sAkSI denA
yA | dilAnA; sapheda jhUTha bolanA ityAdi anarthoM meM pravRtta hotA hai| adhika
balavAna hone para dhanalobhI yAtriyoM ko pakar3akara lUTatA hai, dIvAra meM
seMdha lagAtA hai, sUrAkha karatA hai; dhanalobhavaza parastrIgamana karatA hai
tathA naukarI, khetI, pazupAlana yA vyApAra Adi karatA hai| dhanAsakta manuSya
mammaNa vaNik kI taraha nadI Adi meM praveza karane kA duHkha uThAkara |
lakar3iyA~ bAhara nikAlatA hai| yahAM prazna hotA hai ki duHkha kA kAraNa
mUrcchAphala samajhakara parigraha kA tyAga karanA cAhie; isa vacana ko yukti
|pUrvaka kaise samajhA jAya? isake uttara meM kahate haiM- parigraha mUrcchA kA
kAraNa hone se parigraha bhI eka prakAra se mUrcchA hI hai| athavA 'mUrcchA
parigrahaH ' isa prakAra sUtrakAra ke vacanAnusAra mUrcchA hI parigraha hai  /
yaha kathana nizcayanaya kI dRSTi se hai  /  mUrcchA se rahita dhana-dhAnyAdi ho
to vaha aparigraha hai| yaha kathana bhI nizcayanaya kI dRSTi se hai| kahate
haiM| mamakAra- yA mamatva ke binA agara koI puruSa vastra, AbhUSaNa Adi se
alaMkRta ho to bhI vaha aparigrahI hai| aura | mamakAra - mamatva se yukta
vyakti nagna ho, phira bhI vaha parigrahI hai  /  gA~va yA ghara meM praveza
karate hue karma yA alpa (padArtha) grahaNa karane para bhI agara vaha parigraha
yA mamatva se rahita hai to usake jaisA aparigrahI koI ho nahIM sktaa| vaha jo
bhI vastra, pAtra, kaMbala yA Asana Adi grahaNa karatA hai, vaha saMyamayAtrA ke
lie va lajjAnivAraNa ke lie karatA hai| | saMsArasamudra ke pAragAmI maharSi
bhagavAn mahAvIra ne use parigraha nahIM kahA hai| (dazavai. 6/20-21) yaha saba
kathana spaSTa hai  /  /  106  /  /  aba prakArAMtara se parigraha - tyAga kI
AvazyakatA batAte haiM  / 163 /  parigrahamahatvAddhi, majjatyeva bhavAmbudhau
/  mahApota iva prANI, tyajettasmAt parigraham  // 107 //  artha :- jaise adhika
vajana ho jAne para jahAja samudra meM DUba jAtA hai, vaise hI prANI parigraha
ke bojha ke kAraNa saMsAra rUpI samudra meM DUba jAtA hai| isalie parigraha kA
tyAga karanA cAhie  /  /  107  /  /  vyAkhyA :- jaise amaryAdita dhana, dhAnya
Adi mAla se bharA huA jahAja atyadhika bhAra ho jAne se samudra meM DUba jAtA
hai, vaise hI jIva bhI agara dhana, dhAnya, ghara, makAna, jamIna-jAyadAda va
kheta Adi vastue~ amaryAdita yAnI | AvazyakatA kI sImA se adhika rakhatA hai to
vaha bhI usa parigraha ke bojha se dabakara naraka Adi durgattiyoM meM DUba jAtA
| hai| kahA bhI hai- mahAraMbha, mahAparigraha, mAMsAhAra aura paMcendriyajIvoM
kA vadha ina cAroM meM se kisI bhI eka ke hone para jIva narakAya upArjita
karatA hai aura atiAraMbha evaM atiparigraha ke kAraNa narakAyu kA baMdha karatA
hai| bAhyArambha 172

Page #195 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Renunciation of possessions is essential, possessions are a source of faults.
From the second light of Yoga Shastra, verses 108 to 109: "Possessions are the
life of hell" (Tattvartha 6/16). Therefore, one should renounce possessions in
the form of delusion and attachment to wealth, grain, etc., and also renounce
any excess material possessions as possessions. ||107||  The faults of
possessions are generally described. ||164|| Even a speck of dust here, no
virtue exists. But faults as large as mountains arise from possessions. ||108||
Meaning: In this possession, there is no virtue even as much as a speck of dust;
rather, it gives rise to faults as large as mountains. ||108|| Explanation: Very
fine, unstable dust particles are seen coming in through the window of a house
along with the rays of the sun. There is no benefit from possessions even as
much as those dust particles; nor does any being attain any kind of perfection
or success in the next life by virtue of possessions, nor has it ever happened.
Possessions are certainly used in consumption or enjoyment, etc., but that is
not a virtue, rather, it is the fault of attachment arising from possessions,
and the harm of karma-bondage, etc. The virtue of possessions that is described
in the scriptures in the form of building Jain temples, shelters, etc., is not
that virtue (in the form of karma-destruction), but it is described as the form
of the proper use of possessions (in the form of merit from being the cause of
the dharma-meditation, enlightenment, etc., of many people). In reality, if one
looks, the one who acquires possessions to build Jain temples, etc., does not
have the intention of welfare (in the form of karma-destruction). It is better
not to desire wealth for the sake of religious work than to desire wealth for
the sake of religious work. It is better to avoid touching mud from afar than to
put your foot in mud and then wash it later. Because a person who builds a Jain
temple with golden steps and thousands of pillars, and with a golden floor, even
from that (work in the form of merit-bondage), there is more (fruit in the form
of karma-destruction, purification, and dharma) in penance, restraint, or
observance of vows. Therefore, it is clearly stated in the "Sambohasattari
Vritti" that there is infinite virtue in penance and restraint compared to
(worship of wealth). ||108||  The fact that "great faults like mountains arise
from possessions" is explained in detail in another way. ||165|| From
attachment, even those who are not enemies become enemies, such as anger and
hatred. Even a sage's mind becomes unsteady, because of the one whose self is
agitated by it. ||109|| Meaning: From attachment to possessions, enemies like
anger, hatred, etc., arise which were not there before. Because even the mind of
a sage becomes unsteady and deviates from restraint due to the influence of
possessions. ||109|| Explanation: From attachment to possessions, those enemies
that are opposed to the virtues of the self, such as anger, hatred, etc., which
were not present in the state of arising, also manifest. From attachment to
possessions, attachment (attachment, delusion, ego, delusion, desire, greed,
etc.) arises; hatred (opposition, enmity, hatred, jealousy, strife, fault-
finding, etc.) arises towards the one who obstructs or harms it. And from these
anger, hatred, etc., arise fear, delusion, lust, etc., bondage, bondage, etc.,
and the faults of going to hell, etc. The question arises, where and how do
those anger, hatred, etc., which do not exist, manifest? In answer to this, it
is said - let alone the Shravakas and other householders; even the peaceful mind
of a great vow-taker, a sage, becomes agitated by attachment to possessions.
This means that the mind of a sage also becomes unstable from the collection of
unnecessary things or from being near things. And it becomes afflicted by either
the family of anger or the family of hatred. In this way, a sage also becomes
corrupt from the attachment to possessions. It is also said - from wealth, there
is cutting, piercing (killing), danger, hardship, suffering, fear, bitter fruit,
death, corruption of dharma, and mental unrest (disturbance), etc., all sorrows.
Therefore, the ancient sages have forbidden the root possession of hundreds of
faults. Because wealth is the root of many misfortunes. If one has once vomited
(renounced) wealth, why does he do penance and restraint in vain if he desires
to take it again? (Up. Mala 50-52) Does possession not lead to killing, bondage,
killing, cutting, etc., and to unrighteousness? If the same possession comes
into the dharma of a sage, then it will truly become a worldly affair. ||109||
After describing the faults of possessions in general, it is now connected with
the basic Shravaka dharma. 173

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 parigrahatyAga Avazyaka, parigraha se doSa yogazAstra dvitIya prakAza zloka 108
se 109 parigrahatvaM ca nArakasyAyuSaH (tattvA. 6/16) isalie dhana, dhAnya Adi
para mUrchA-mamatA-rUpa parigraha kA tyAga kare tathA AvazyakatA se adhika
padArthoM ko parigraha rUpa mAnakara usakA bhI tyAga kare  /  / 107 /  /
sAmAnya rUpa se parigraha ke doSa batAte haiN|164| trasareNusamo'pyatra, na
guNaH ko'pi vidyate  /  doSAstu parvatasthUlAH prAduHSanti parigrahe  // 108 /
/  artha :- isa parigraha meM trasareNu (sUkSmarajakaNa) jitanA bhI koI guNa
nahIM hai; pratyuta usase parvata jitane bar3e-bar3e doSa paidA hote haiM  /  /
108 //  vyAkhyA :- makAna kI khir3akI se aMdara chana-chanakara AtI huI
sUryakiraNoM ke sAtha bahuta hI bArIka asthira rajakaNe dikhAyI detI haiM,
parigraha se ukta rajakaNa jitanA bhI koI lAbha nahIM hotA; na parigraha ke bala
para kisI bhI jIva ko parabhava (agale janma) meM kisI prakAra kI siddhi yA
saphalatA prAsa hotI hai, na huI hai| parigrahaparigaNita vastue~ | upabhoga yA
paribhoga Adi karane meM jarUra AtI hai, lekina vaha koI guNa nahIM hai, balki
parigrahajanita Asakti se doSa, va karmabaMdhAdi hAni hI hotI hai| jinamaMdira,
upAzraya Adi banAne ke taura para parigraha kA jo guNa zAstra meM varNita hai,
vaha guNa (karmakSaya rUpa) nahIM hai, paraMtu vaha parigraha sadupayoga rUpa
(aneka logoM ke dharmadhyAna, bodhilAbha Adi meM nimitta hone se puNya rUpa)
batAyA hai| vastuta : dekhA jAya to jo jinamaMdira Adi banavAne meM parigraha
dhAraNa karatA hai, usakA Azaya bhI kalyANakArI (karmakSaya rUpa) nahIM hai|
dharmakArya ke lie dhana kI icchA karane kI apekSA dharmakArya ke lie dhana kI
icchA hI na karanA zreSTha hai| paira ko kIcar3a meM DAlakara bAda meM use dhone
ke bajAya pahale se kIcar3a kA dUra se sparza na karanA hI acchA hai| kyoMki koI
vyakti svarNamaNiratnamaya sopAnoM aura hajAroM khaMbhoM vAlA tathA svarNamaya
bhUmitalayuktaM jinamaMdira banavAtA hai, usase (ukta puNyabaMdha rUpa kArya se)
bhI adhika (karmakSaya-saMvaranirjarAdharma rUpa) phala tapa-saMyama yA
vratAcaraNa meM hai| isalie 'saMbodhasattari vRtti' meM spaSTa batAyA hai ki
usakI (dravya pUjA kI) apekSA tapasaMyama meM anaMtaguNa adhika hai||108||
'parigraha se parvata sarIkhe mahAn doSa paidA hote haiM, isa bAta ko prakArAMta
se vistAra se samajhAte haiN|165| saGgAd bhavantyasanto'pi, rAgadveSAdayo dviSaH
/  munerapi calecceto, yattenAndolitAtmanaH  // 109 /  /  artha :- parigraha ke
saMga Asakti se rAga, dveSa Adi zatru jo pahale nahIM the, ve paidA ho jAte
haiN| kyoMki parigraha ke prabhAva se to muni kA mana bhI DAMvADola hokara
saMyama se cyuta ho jAtA hai  /  / 109 /  / , vyAkhyA :- parigraha ke saMga se
jo rAga-dveSa Adi AtmaguNavirodhI durbhAva udayAvasthA meM avidyamAna the, ve
bhI prakaTa ho jAte haiN| parigraha ke saMga se tatsaMbaMdhita rAga, (Asakti,
moha, mamatva, mUrchA, lAlasA, lobha Adi) paidA hotA hai; usameM vighna DAlane
yA hAni pahuMcAne vAle ke prati dveSa (virodha, vaira, ghRNA, IrSyA, kalaha,
doSAropaNa Adi) paidA hotA hai| tathA inhIM rAgadveSAdi se saMbaMdhita bhaya,
moha, kAma Adi baMdha-baMdhanAdi evaM naraka gamanAdi doSa paidA hote haiN|
prazna hotA hai, jo rAgadveSAdi maujUda nahIM hai, ve kahAM se aura kaise
prakaTa ho jAte haiM? isake uttara meM kahate haiM-zrAvaka Adi anya gRhasthoM kI
bAta to dUra rahI; mahAvratI samabhAvI muni kA prazAMta mana bhI parigraha ke
saMga se calAyamAna ho jAtA hai| matalaba yaha ki anApasanApa vastaoM ke
saMgraha se yA vastaoM ke pAsa meM hone se manikA mana bhI asthira ho jAtA hai|
aura vaha rAga yA dveSa donoM meM se kisI ke bhI parivAra se grasta ho jAtA hai|
isa prakAra parigraha ke saMga se muni bhI munijIvana se bhraSTa ho jAtA hai|
kahA bhI hai-artha se chedana-bhedana (mArakATa) saMkaTa, parizrama, kleza,
bhaya, | kaTuphala, maraNa, dharmabhraSTatA aura mAnasika arati (azAMti) Adi
sabhI duHkha hote haiN| isalie saiMkar3oM doSoM ke mUlaparigraha kA
pUrvamaharSiyoM ne niSedha kiyA hai| kyoMki artha aneka anarthoM kI jar3a hai|
jisane artha kA eka bAra vamana (tyAga) kara diyA hai, vaha agara use phira
grahaNa karane kI vAMchA karatA hai to kisalie vyartha hI vaha tapa, saMyama
karatA hai? (upa. mAlA 50-52) kyA parigraha se vadha, baMdhana, mAraNa, chedana
Adi adharma meM gamana nahIM hotA? vahI parigraha agara yatidharma meM A gayA to
sacamuca vaha prapaMca hI ho jAyegA  /  / 109 /  /  sAmAnya rUpa se parigraha ke
doSa batAkara aba use mUla zrAvakadharma ke sAtha jor3ate haiM 173

Page #196 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Evils of Attachment  **Yoga Shastra, Second Light, Verses 110-112, 166**
**Verse 110:**  The root of the world is the beginning of suffering (pain or
death), and the root cause of these beginnings is attachment. Therefore, the
ascetic or the lay follower should keep their possessions as minimal as
possible. This means they should set a limit on their possessions and not exceed
it.  **Verse 111:**  Those who are bound by attachment to gold, wealth, grain,
etc., are robbed by thieves in the form of worldly desires; they are burned by
the fire of lust; and they are trapped in the web of worldly illusion by the
hunter in the form of women.  **Explanation:**  Just as thieves rob a person
with wealth and gold in the forest, similarly, in the forest of the world,
worldly desires in the form of thieves rob a person of their wealth of self-
control, leaving them as beggars. In the same way, a person with excessive
possessions cannot escape quickly when a fire breaks out, similarly, a person
dwelling in the forest of the world is burning in the fire of lust, which
manifests in ten forms. Alternatively, a person with excessive possessions is
stopped by greedy robbers in the forest, preventing them from moving forward.
Similarly, in the forest of existence, lustful women, greedy for wealth or
bodily pleasures, stop a man attached to possessions from moving forward on the
path of self-control. It is said that no matter how much one possesses, their
desires are never fulfilled, but instead, dissatisfaction grows. The scriptures
state that even if a greedy person were to possess countless mountains of gold
and silver, the size of Mount Kailash and the Himalayas, they would still not be
satisfied. This is because desires are infinite like the sky. (Utt. 9/48) The
Agamas also state that even if someone were to possess the entire earth, filled
with wealth, grain, gold, silver, and animals, it would still not be enough to
satisfy their desires. Knowing this, one should strive for knowledge and
austerity. Poets have also said that the pit of greed is so deep and boundless
that no matter how much is poured into it, it will never be filled. The wonder
is that even if large mountains are thrown into the pit of greed, it remains
empty. Just as miners dig deeper and deeper into a mine, the pit grows larger.
Similarly, the more a person strives for wealth, the deeper the pit of
dissatisfaction becomes. Alternatively, someone who has climbed a great mountain
desires to ascend to the sky. Can they ascend to the sky?  **Verse 112:**
Emperor Sagar was not satisfied even after having sixty thousand sons.
Kuchikarna was not satisfied even after having many herds of cows. Tilakseth was
not satisfied even after having many granaries full of grain. And King Nanda was
not satisfied even after having mountains of gold. Therefore, attachment is the
cause of dissatisfaction.  **Now we will narrate the story of Sagar, etc.**
**Sagar, the Emperor, Greedy for Sons:**  In those days, King Jitashatru ruled
Ayodhya. His younger brother, Sumitra, was the crown prince. Both brothers ruled
the earth. King Jitashatru had a son, Tirthankara Ajitnath, and Crown Prince
Sumitra had a son, Sagar, the Emperor. After both Jitashatru and Sumitra took
initiation, Ajitswami became the king, and Sagar became the crown prince. After
some time, Ajitnath took initiation, and Sagar, like Bharat, became the Emperor.
**Rest in the Shade**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 parigraha se hone vAle doSa yogazAstra dvitIya prakAza zloka 110 se 112  / 166
/  saMsAramUlamArambhAsteSAM hetuH parigrahaH  /  tasmAdupAsakaH
kuryAdalpamalpaM parigraham  // 110 /  /  artha :- prANiyoM ke upamardana (pIr3A
yA vadha) rUpa AraMbha hote haiM, ve hI saMsAra ke mUla haiM, una AraMbhoM kA
mUla kAraNa parigraha hai| isalie zramaNopAsaka yA zrAvaka dhanadhAnyAdi
parigraha alpa se alpa kre| yAnI parigraha kA parimANa nizcitta karake usase
adhika na rakhe  /  / 110 /  /  parigraha ke doSoM para siMhAvalokana karate
haiN||167| muSNanti viSayastenA, dahati smarapAvakaH  /  rundhanti
vanitAvyAdhAH, sagairaGgIkRtaM naram  // 111 /  /  artha :- svarNa, dhana,
dhAnyAdi parigrahoM kI Asakti se jakar3e hue puruSa ko viSaya rUpI cora lUTa
lete haiM; kAma rUpI agni jalA detI hai, strI rUpI zikArI use saMsAra kI
mohamAyA ke jAla meM phaMsA lete haiN||111|| vyAkhyA :- jisa prakAra dhana,
svarNa Adi parigraha vAle vyakti ko jaMgala meM cora lUTa lete haiM, usI prakAra
saMsAra rUpI araNya meM prANI ko zabdAdi-viSaya rUpI luTere saMyama rUpI
sarvasva lUTakara bhikhArI banA dete haiN| isI taraha Aga lagane para adhika
parigraha vAlA bhAgakara jhaTapaTa nikala nahIM sakatA, vaise hI saMsAra rUpI
aTavI meM rahA huA puruSa cittAdi dasa prakAra kI kAmavikAra rUpI Aga meM jala
rahA hai| athavA atyadhika parigrahI ko jaMgala meM jAne para dhana yA zarIra ke
lobhI luTere roka lete haiM, usa parigrahI yAtrI ko Age bar3hane nahIM dete, usI
prakAra bhava rUpI araNya meM dhanalubdha yA zarIra ke kAmabhoga meM lubdha
kAminiyA~ parigrahasaMgI puruSa kI svAtaMtryavRtti roka detI hai; use
saMyamamArga para Age bar3hane nahIM detii| kahA bhI hai, kitanA bhI parigraha
ho, manuSya kI icchA pUrNa nahIM hotI, balki asaMtoSa bar3hatA hI jAtA hai|
zAstra meM batAyA hai-lobhI manuSya ke pAsa kailAza aura himAlaya ke samAna sone
aura cAMdI ke asaMkhya pahAr3a ho jAya aura use mila jAya, kiMtu itane para bhI
usakI jarA bhI tRpti nahIM hogii| kyoMki icchAe~ to AkAza ke samAna anaMta asIma
hai| (utta. 9/48) AgamoM meM aura bhI kahA hai-pazuoM ke sahita dhana, dhAnya,
sonA, cAMdI Adi se paripUrNa sArI pRthvI yadi kisI ko mila jAya to bhI akelI
vaha usakI icchA ko pUrNa karane meM samartha nahIM ho sktii| yaha jAnakara
jJAnArAdhana aura tapazcaraNa karanA caahie| kaviyoM ne bhI kahA hai-tRSNA kA
gaDhDA itanA gaharA aura athAha hai ki use bharane ke lie usameM kitanA hI DAlA
jAya, phira bhI paripUrNa nahIM hotaa| Azcarya to yaha hai ki tRSNA ke gaDDhe ko
pUrA bharane ke lie usameM bar3e-bar3e parvata DAle jAya to bhI khAlI kA khAlI
rahatA hai| jaise khanika loga kisI khAna ko jyoM-jyoM khodate jAte haiM. tyoM-
tyoM vahAM khaDDA bar3hatA jAtA hai. vaise hI mAnava jyoM-jyoM dhana ke lie
mehanata karatA jAtA hai, tyoM-tyoM asaMtoSa kA gaDDhA bar3hatA jAtA hai| athavA
jo mahAparvata para eka bAra car3ha jAtA hai, vaha AkAza meM ArUr3ha hone kI
icchA karatA hai| vaha kyA AkAza para AruDha ho sakatA hai?  /  / 111 /  /  yahI
bAta Age dRSTAMta dvArA samajhAte haiN|168| tRptau na putraiH sagaraH, kucikarNo
na godhanaiH  /  na dhAnyaistilakaH zreSThI, na nandaH knkotkraiH||112|| artha
:- sagara cakravartI ke 60 hajAra putra hue, taba bhI use tRpti nahIM huii|
kucikarNa ke pAsa bahuta-se gAyoM ke gokula the, phira bhI use saMtoSa nahIM
huA, tilakaseTha ke pAsa anAja ke bahuta se koThAra bhare the, phira bhI usakI
tapti na huI aura naMdarAjA ko sone kI pahAr3iyA~ milane para bhI saMtoSa nahIM
huaa| isalie parigraha asaMtoSa kA hI kAraNa hai  // 112 /  /  aba hama kramazaH
sagara Adi kI kathA de rahe haiMputralobhI sagara cakrapatI : una dinoM ayodhyA
meM jitazatru rAjA rAjya karatA thaa| sumitra nAma kA usakA choTA bhAI yuvarAja
thaa| donoM bhAI pRthvI kA pAlana karate the| jitazatru rAjA ke putra hue-
tIrthaMkara ajitanAtha aura sumitra yuvarAja ke putra hue-sagara | ckrvrtii|
jitazatru aura sumitra donoM ke dIkSA grahaNa karane ke bAda ajitasvAmI rAjA hue
aura sagara yuvarAja bne| kucha arsA bIta jAne ke bAda ajitanAtha ne dIkSA le
lI, isase bharata kI taraha sagaracakravartI rAjA bana gyaa| chAyA meM vizrAma |

Page #197 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Tale of Sagarchari The vast Mahavrksha, like thousands of branches, removes
the fatigue of the travelers who take the path of Yoga Shastra, the second
light, verse 112. Sagarchari had 60,000 sons. The eldest of Sagar's sons was
Janhukumar. Once, his father was pleased with his work and gave him a boon.
Once, Janhukumar expressed his desire to his father - 'Father! Today, I want
this as the boon that was kept in trust, that I get the Dandaratan etc. of the
Chakravarti, with which I can tour this Bhu Mandal with my brothers.' Sagar gave
him those gems and gave him permission to tour. Janhu and other Sagarputra,
wearing thousands of umbrellas brighter than the sun, took their father's
blessings and worshipped each Jinbimb with great devotion and great devotion,
and while traveling, one day they came near the Ashtapada mountain. Janhukumar
climbed that mountain, 8 yojan high and 4 yojan wide, with his brothers and
family, and there was a temple, one yojan long, half yojan wide, three kos high,
with four doors, they all entered it. In that temple were the images of the
present twenty-four Tirthankaras, with their respective institutions, dimensions
and colors. They worshipped them in order, then they worshipped the holy stupas
of the 100 brothers built by Bharat. Then, filled with devotion, they thought
for a while and said in a loud voice - In my opinion, there is no place (Tirth)
like Ashtapada anywhere else. I will also build a similar Chaitya. These
Chaityas are the essence of Bharatkhund, the memorials of their Chakravartitva
of Bharatkhund, located on the peak of this mountain since Bharat Chakravarti
attained liberation. No future king should destroy these Chaityas built by them,
so we should make arrangements for their protection. After that, he took the
Dandaratan, presided over by thousands of gods, in his hand and rotated it
around Ashtapada. Due to this, a pit, a thousand yojan deep, like a gourd, was
formed in the ground below. And the buildings of the Nagadevas, the Bhavanpati,
which were built in the Patala Lok below, were broken. From this unexpected
calamity, the gods came to the shelter of their lord Jwalanprabh, terrified. He
knew from his Avadhigyan that this was all Janhukumar's doing. Therefore, he
became angry and went to Janhukumar and rebuked him - Oh, Madommat! Why did you
tear up so much land in such a terrible way without any reason and kill
countless living beings? Nephew of Tirthankar Ajitanath and son of Sagarchari!
Shameless family disgrace! Why did you commit this crime? To this, Janhukumar
said - I did this to protect the stupas (Chaityas) here. The destruction of your
buildings has happened due to my ignorance. Therefore, please forgive me. To
this, Jwalanprabh Dev said - This mistake of yours has happened due to
ignorance, so I forgive you. Don't make such a mistake again in the future.
Saying this, the god returned to his place. Janhukumar then discussed with his
brothers that we have made this ditch with the Dandaratan, but in time this
ditch will be filled with dust. Therefore, let us pull the Ganges river here
with this same Dandaratan and let its flow fall into this ditch. They did the
same. But that water again damaged the buildings of the Nagakumaras. Therefore,
Jwalanprabhdev, angry with the Nagakumaras, came and burnt them all to ashes,
just as a wildfire burns all the trees. Seeing this, the soldiers thought sadly
- Our lord was burnt to ashes before our very eyes, we cowards! Thinking this,
the soldiers, ashamed, left from there and went to live near Ayodhya. They
started to exchange thoughts again and again that how will we tell our lord? And
how will we mention this tragic incident in front of him? One day a Brahmin came
and met them; they told him their whole story and asked for his opinion. The
Brahmin said - Don't worry. I will speak to the king in such a way that the king
will not grieve and his anger will also subside from you. Giving this assurance,
the Brahmin went to the royal court with an orphan dead (corpse) and started to
wail loudly there - Alas! My only son is dead. The king asked him the reason for
his wailing, then he said - My only son has fainted from snakebite. Therefore,
Dev! Please bring him back to life. The king called those who could remove snake
venom and 175

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 sagaracakrI kI kathA yogazAstra dvitIya prakAza zloka 112 lene vAle pathikoM kI
thakAna dUra karane vAle vizAla mahAvRkSa ko hajAroM zAkhAoM kI taraha sagara
cakravartI ke 60 hajAra putra hue| sagara ke putroM meM sabase bar3A janhukumAra
thaa| eka bAra pitA ne usake kisI kArya se prasanna hokara use varadAna diyA
thaa| eka bAra janhukumAra ne pitAjI ke sAmane apanI abhilASA prakaTa
kI-'pitAjI! maiM Aja usa amAnata rakhe varadAna ke rUpa meM yaha cAhatA hUM ki
mujhe cakravartI ke daMDaratna Adi mileM, jinheM lekara maiM apane bhAIyoM ke
sAtha isI | bhUmaMDala meM paryaTana kara aauuN|' sagara ne use ve ratna de diye
aura paryaTana kI AjJA de dii| sUrya se bhI bar3hakara tejasvI hajAroM chatra
dhAraNa kiye hue janhu Adi sagaraputra pitAjI kA AzIrvAda lekara mahARddhi aura
mahAbhaktipUrvaka pratyeka jinabiMba kI pUjA karate aura yAtrA karate hue eka
dina aSTApada parvata ke nikaTa aaye| 8 yojana U~ce aura 4 yojana caur3e usa
parvata para janhukumAra apane baMdhuoM evaM parivAra ke sahita car3he aura
vahAM eka yojana laMbA, AdhA yojana caur3A, tIna kosa U~cA, cAra dvAroM vAlA
maMdira thA, usameM sabane praveza kiyaa| usa maMdira meM vartamAna RSabhAdi
cauvIsa tIrthaMkaroM kI apane-apane saMsthAna, parimANa aura varNavAlI pratimAe~
thiiN| unhoMne unakI kramazaH arcA kI, tatpazcAt bharata dvArA nirmita 100
bhAIyoM ke pavitra stUpoM kI vaMdanA kii| phira zraddhAvibhora hokara kucha
socakara ucca svara se kahA-merI rAya meM aSTApada sarIkhA sthAna (tIrtha)
anyatra kahI bhI nahIM hai| maiM bhI isI ke jaise aura caitya bnvaauuNgaa|
bharata cakravartI ke mukti prApta karane ke bAda se aba taka isa parvata ke
zikhara para sthita bharatakhaMDa ke unake cakravartitva ke smAraka
bharatakhaMDa ke sArabhUta ye caitya haiN| unake banAye hue ina caityoM ko
bhaviSya meM hone vAlA koI rAjA vinaSTa na kare, isake lie hameM inakI sarakSA
kA prabaMdha karanA caahie| usake bAda hajAra devatAoM se adhiSThita daMDaratna
ko hAtha meM lekara aSTApada ke cAroM ora ghumaayaa| isa kAraNa bhUmi meM nIce
kumhar3e ke samAna hajAra yojana gaharA eka gaDDhA bana gyaa| aura nIce
pAtAlaloka meM jo bhavanapati nAgadevoM ke bhavana bane hue the, ve TUTa gye|
isa apratyAzita saMkaTa se deva bhayabhIta hokara apane svAmI jvalanaprabha kI
zaraNa meM aaye| use avadhijJAna se patA lagA ki yaha saba janhukumAra kI
karatUta hai| ataH kruddha hokara janhukumAra ke pAsa Akara use phaTakArA-are
madonmatta! tumane akAraNa hI bhayaMkara rUpa se itanI jamIna phAr3akara kyoM
asaMkhya jIva jaMtuoM kI hatyA kI? tIrthakara ajitanAtha ke bhatIje evaM
sagaracakrI ke putro! nirlajja kulakalaMkiyo! tumane yaha aparAdha kyoM kiyA?
isa para janhukumAra ne kahA-maiMne to yahAM ke stapoM (caityoM kI rakSA ke lie
aisA kiyA thaa| Apake bhavanoM kA nAza haA yaha merI ajJAnatA se huA hai| ataH
Apa loga mujhe kSamA kreN| isa para jvalanprabha deva ne kahA-ajJAnatA se
tumhArI yaha bhUla huI hai, isalie maiM tumheM kSamA karatA huuN| bhaviSya meM
aisI bhUla phira mata krnaa| yoM kahakara deva apane sthAna ko lauTa gyaa|
janhukumAra ne phira apane bhAIyoM ke sAtha vicAravimarza kiyA ki hamane
daMDaratna se yaha khAI to banA dI, lekina samaya pAkara yaha khAI to dhUla se
bhara jaayegii| isalie isI daMDa se khIMcakara gaMgAnadI ko yahAM le Ae~ aura
usakA pravAha isI khAI meM DAla deN| unhoMne vaisA hI kiyaa| kiMta usa jala se
nAgakumAroM ke bhavanoM ko phira kSati phuNcii| ataH nAgakumAroM ke sAtha
kruddha jvalanaprabhadeva ne Akara una sabako vaise hI jalAkara bhasma kara
diyA, jaise dAvAnala sabhI vRkSoM ko bhasma kara DAlatA hai| yaha dekhakara
sainikoM ne duHkhapUrvaka socA-hama kAyara logoM ke dekhate hI dekhate hamAre
svAmI ko jalAkara bhasma kara diyA, dhikkAra hai hameM! yoM vicAra karake zarma
ke mAre sainika vahAM se calakara ayodhyA ke nikaTa |Akara rahane lge| ve bAra-
bAra yaha vicAra-vinimaya karane lage ki hama apane svAmI ko kaise muMha
batAe~ge? aura isa zokajanaka ghaTanA kA jikra bhI unake sAmane kaise kareMge?
eka dina eka brAhmaNa Akara unase milA; usake sAmane unhoMne sArI ApabItI
kahakara usakI rAya maaNgii| brAhmaNa ne kahA-'tuma loga ghabarAo mt| maiM aisI
siphta se rAjA se bAta kahUMgA, jisase rAjA ko zoka bhI nahIM hogA aura tuma
para se unakA roSa bhI utara jaayegaa|' yoM AzvAsana dekara brAhmaNa | eka
anAtha mRtaka (murde) ko lekara rAjadarabAra meM pahuMcA aura vahAM jora-jora se
vilApa karane lagA ki-hAya! merA ikalautA putra mara gyaa| rAjA ne usase vilApa
kA kAraNa pUchA to usane kahA-mere isa ikalaute putra ko sAMpa ke kATane se yaha
mUrcchita ho gayA hai| isalie deva! kRpA karake ise jIvita kara deN| rAjA ne
sarpa kA jahara utArane vAloM ko bulAkara 175

Page #198 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Story of Sagar Chakravarti Yoga Shastra Second Light Verse 112 | He was
ordered to remove the poison. He used his mantra skills to remove the poison in
many ways, but it proved futile like putting ghee in ashes. The dead person
could not be revived. But on the other hand, it was not easy to convince the
grieving | Brahmin. So the king explained with a strategy - Vipravar! You do
this, from whose house no one has died till date, bring a handful of ashes from
there. That's it, when I get the ashes, I will revive your son. As soon as the
king said this, the Brahmin said happily - This is a very easy thing. The
Brahmin left from there and went from village to village | and city to city
searching for ashes. But no such house was found; where no one had died till
date. | The Brahmin returned empty-handed in despair, then the king said -
'Vipravar! Did you bring the ashes? The Brahmin said| Maharaj! No such house was
found where no one died. So now you give me such ashes. The king said| Even in
my family, Lord Rishabhdev, Bharat Chakravarti, Bahubali, Suryayasha, Somayasha
etc. many people have passed away, someone | went to moksha, someone went to
heaven, King Jitashatru went to moksha, King Sumitra went to Devalok. So death
is common to all. When so many died and we endured their separation, then why
can't you bear the separation of your one son? | take it? The Brahmin said -
Maharaj! Your words are true. But I have only one son, so you should save him. |
It is the rule of the righteous to protect the poor and the orphans. The
Chakravarti said - Vipravar! Don't grieve! The only way to be free from the
sorrow of death in the world is to take refuge in the feeling of detachment. The
Brahmin answered him in the same coin | - Prithvinath! If this is the case, then
you should not grieve even for the death of your sixty thousand sons. | should.
The king was startled to hear this and said - What did you say? My 60 thousand
sons died? How did they die? Is there not even one left? | What happened? Tell
me this in detail? On this, the soldiers who had been signaled beforehand came
and narrated the whole story from beginning to end. | Hearing this terrible
news, Sagar Chakravarti suddenly fainted and fell down on the earth with a thud,
just like | as a thunderbolt falls on a mountain. As soon as the fainting spell
ended, the king regained consciousness. For a while, the king cried like
ordinary people. He became disgusted with the world by this incident. He started
thinking - My sons will enhance the glory of my lineage, they will give me
happiness, with this hope, even though I considered the world to be impermanent,
I did not think anything. Damn me! Even with so many sons, I was not satisfied,
then how would it be possible if two or four more sons were born? In my
lifetime, suddenly | This happened to my sons, and they could not give me any
satisfaction! Alas! This is the wicked play of the world. Getting caught in it
is just to lose life in vain. In this way, Sagar Chakravarti, after crowning
Bhagirath, the son of Janhukumara, | took initiation at the feet of Lord
Ajitnath and attained Akshayapad by observing restraint. This is a brief account
of the life of Sagar Chakravarti! Kuchikarna's Attachment to Cows: There was a
village called Sughoosha in Magadhdesh. There lived a famous village headman
named Kuchikarna. He slowly | collected one lakh cows. A lake is filled by drop
by drop. He entrusted those cows to different cowherds to raise them by making
separate herds. But those cowherds started quarreling among themselves, one said
- My cow is beautiful. The other says - Your cow is not beautiful, my cow is
beautiful, seeing them fighting, Kuchikarna separated those cows into different
divisions, giving some white, some black, some yellow, some Kapila names and
established different Gokuls in different forests. He himself also lived in
Gokul and ate milk, curd. Just as a drunkard remains unsatisfied even after
drinking enough liquor, in the same way, Kuchikarna also remained unsatisfied
even after consuming so much milk and curd. | was. Due to excessive consumption
of milk and curd, he developed indigestion with juice spreading up and down in
his body. | His stomach burned so much, as if he was lying in fire. He shouted
loudly - Alas! When will I get my cows, bulls, calves again? In this way,
Kuchikarna, who was unsatisfied with his cattle wealth, died there and was born
in the animal realm. 176

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 sagaracakravartI kI kathA yogazAstra dvitIya prakAza zloka 112 | unheM isakA
jahara utArane kI AjJA dii| unhoMne apane maMtrakauzala se jahara utArane kI
bahuterI kozika kI, magara rAkha meM ghI DAlane ke samAna vaha niSphala siddha
huI  /  vaha marA huA vyakti jIvita na ho sakA  /  paraMtu udhara usa zokagrasta
| brAhmaNa ko bhI samajhAnA Asana na thaa| ataH rAjA ne eka yukti se samajhAyA -
vipravara! tuma aisA karo, jisake yahAM Aja taka koI marA na ho, usake yahAM se
eka muTThI rAkha le aao| basa, rAkha milate maiM tumhAre putra ko jilA duuNgaa|
rAjA ke kahate hI brAhmaNa ne harSita hokara kahA - yaha to bahuta hI AsAna bAta
hai  /  brAhmaNa vahAM se cala par3A aura gAMva-gAMva | aura nagara - nagara meM
ghUmatA phirA rAkha kI talAza meM  /  paraMtu aisA koI ghara na milA; jisake
yahAM Aja taka koI na marA | ho  /  brAhmaNa nirAza hokara khAlI hAtha lauTa AyA
to rAjA ne kahA- 'vipravara ! rAkha le Aye kyA? brAhmaNa ne kahA| mahArAja !
aisA koI ghara na milA, jahAM koI marA na ho  /  ataH aba to Apa hI aisI rAkha
de diijie| rAjA ne kahA| mere kula meM bhI bhagavAn RSabhadeva, bharata
cakravartI, bAhubalI, sUryayazA, somayazA Adi aneka vyakti cala base haiM, koI |
mokSa gayA to koI svarga meM, rAjA jitazatru mokSa meM gaye haiM, sumitra rAjA
devaloka meM gaye haiN| ataH mRtyu to sarvasAdharaNa hai| jaba itane - itane
mara gaye aura unakA viyoga hamane saha liyA to phira tuma apane eka putra kA
viyoga kyoM nahIM sahana | kara lete? brAhmaNa ne kahA - mahArAja ! ApakI bAta
sahI hai| paraMtu mere to eka hI putra hai, isalie Apako ise bacAnA | caahie|
dInoM aura anAthoM kI rakSA karane kA to satpuruSoM kA niyama hotA hai|
cakravartI ne kahA- vipravara! tuma zoka | mata karo! mRtyu ke duHkha se saMsAra
meM mukta hone kA upAya vairAgyabhAvanA kI zaraNa hI hai| brAhmaNa ne unheM usI
sikke |meM javAba diyA- pRthvInAtha ! yadi aisI bAta hai to Apake sATha hajAra
putroM ke marane kA bhI Apako zoka nahIM honA | caahie| rAjA ne sunate hI
cauMkakara kahA- aiM kyA kahA? mere 60 hajAra putra mara gaye? kaise mare ? kyA
eka bhI nahIM bacA ? | kyA huA? yaha vistAra se kahie? isa para pahale se
saMketa kiye hue sainikoM ne Akara AdyopAMta sArI ApabItI sunaaii| | yaha
mahAbhayaMkara samAcAra sunate hI sagaracakrI sahasA mUrcchita hokara dhar3Ama
se usI taraha dharatI para nIce gira gayA, jisa | taraha vajra parvata para gira
par3atA hai| mUrcchA samApta hote hI rAjA hoza meM aaye| kucha dera taka to rAjA
sAdhAraNa AdamiyoM kI taraha rone lge| unheM isa ghaTanA se saMsAra se virakti
ho gyii| vaha vicArane lage- mere putra mere vaMza kI zobhA bar3hAyeMge, mujhe
AnaMda deMge, isI AzA meM saMsAra ko asAra samajhate hue bhI maiMne kucha nahIM
socaa| dhikkAra hai mujhe ! itane putroM ke hote hue bhI mujhe tRpti nahIM huI
to phira do cAra putroM ke aura bar3ha jAne se kaise hotI? mere jIte jI akasmAt
| mere putroM kI yaha gati huI hai, aura ve mere putra mujhe koI saMtoSa na de
sake ! hAya! saMsAra kI aisI adhama lIlA hai| isameM phaMsakara jIvana ko
vyartha hI khonA hai| isa prakAra sagara cakravartI ne janhukumAra ke putra
bhagIratha kA rAjyAbhiSeka karake | bhagavAn ajitanAtha ke caraNoM meM dIkSA
dhAraNa kI aura saMyama pAlanakara akSayapada prApta kiyaa| yaha hai sagara
cakrI kI jIvanI kA saMkSipta hAla! kucikarNa kI govraja para Asakti :
magadhadeza meM sughoSA nAmaka gAMva thaa| vahAM kucikarNa nAma kA eka prasiddha
grAmanAyaka thaa| usane dhIre-dhIre eka | lAkha gAyeM ikaTThI kI  /  bUMda-bUMda
se sarovara bhara jAtA hai| usane una gAyoM kA alaga-alaga Tole banAkara pAlana
karane ke lie ve vibhinna gvAloM ko sauMpa dii| paraMtu ve gvAle Apasa meM tUM
tUM - maiM-maiM karane lage, eka kahatA- merI gAya suMdara hai| dUsarA kahatA
hai - terI gAya suMdara nahIM hai, merI gAya suMdara hai, isa prakAra unheM
lar3ate dekhakara kucikarNa ne una gAyoM ke alaga-alaga vibhAga karake kisI ko
sapheda, kisI ko kAlI, kisI ko pIlI, kisI ko kapilA nAma dekara bhinnabhinna
araNyoM meM gokula sthApita kara diye| svayaM bhI vaha gokula meM rahakara
dUdha, dahI kA bhojana karatA thA  /  madirA kA vyasanI jaise paryApta madirA pI
lene para bhI atRpta rahatA hai, vaise hI kucikarNa bhI itane dUdha-dahI ke
sevana karate hue bhI | atRpta rahatA thaa| dUdha dahI ke atyadhika sevana se
use zarIra meM Upara-nIce phailane vAlA rasa yukta ajIrNa ho gyaa| usake | peTa
meM itanI adhika jalana hotI, mAno vaha Aga meM par3A ho| vaha jora-jora se
cillAtA - hAya! maiM apanI gAyoM, bailoM, bachar3o ko phira kaba prApta karUMgA?
isa prakAra godhana se atRpta kucikarNa vahAM se AyuSya pUrNa kara tiryaMcagati
meM paidA huaa| 176

Page #199 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Story of Gau Sangrahi Kuchikarna, Tilak Seth, and Nand Raja  **Chapter 2 of
Yoga Shastra, Verse 112: The Consequences of Tilak Seth's Attachment to Grain**
In ancient times, there lived a merchant named Tilak Shreshthi in the city of
Achalpur. He collected grain from cities and villages. He would sell his
customers pulses like urad, moong, sesame seeds, rice, wheat, chickpeas, etc. at
a rate of one and a half times the price. After the harvest, he would collect
one and a half times the price from them. How could grain increase from grain,
grain from animals, and grain from wealth? By what means could grain increase?
He would contemplate this day and night, like a deep thinker, and buy grain and
sell it at the aforementioned profit. When a person becomes obsessed with
something, it becomes an addiction, and their attachment to it does not fade.
This was the case with Tilak Seth. He did not care that millions of insects died
due to his grain collection. He did not feel any compassion for the pain that
the five-sense beings and humans suffered from the burden of grain. Once, a wise
man told him, "There will be a famine next year." Upon hearing this, he used all
his wealth to buy grain. Even after buying so much grain, he was not satisfied.
Therefore, he borrowed money from the wealthy at interest and bought and
collected various types of grains. When he ran out of warehouses to store the
grain, he filled his own house with it. What does a greedy man not do? After
doing all this, he became indifferent, considering the enemy of the world,
famine, as a friend, and waited for its arrival. But what happened was contrary
to his anxious thoughts. At the beginning of the rainy season, clouds rose in
the sky, as if tearing through his heart, and began to thunder. Soon, heavy rain
began to fall all around. As a result, the various grains he had collected,
including wheat, moong, rice, and chickpeas, began to rot. Seeing this, the
dissatisfied Tilak Seth began to lament, "Alas! My grain will be destroyed. Now
my grain will be lost." Thus, lamenting, "Alas! Alas!" his heart burst from
being unsatisfied, and he died immediately and went to hell. This is the result
of Tilak Shreshthi's excessive greed!  **The Wealth-Hungry Nand Raja**  In
ancient times, there was a magnificent city called Pataliputra, which followed
the example of Indranagar. There ruled a king named Nand, who was like Indra in
subduing his enemies and was the ruler of three parts of the world. He imposed
taxes on those who were not already taxed. He increased the taxes on those who
were already taxed, and he imposed other taxes on those who paid more. In this
way, he would accuse people of any crime and take money from them as punishment.
He would always say, "The king can deceive, but he cannot be deceived. Just as
the ocean is the container of all waters, so the king is the container of all
wealth, there is no other!" And in this way, he tried to collect wealth from the
people by any means possible. Therefore, in a few years, the people became
impoverished. There was not even grass left on the land for sheep and goats to
graze. He erased the name and form of gold coins for exchange and introduced
leather coins in their place. He would heavily punish hypocrites and prostitutes
and take money from them in return. Since fire consumes everything and leaves no
one, people began to say, seeing his behavior, "After 1900 years of the Nirvana
of Lord Mahavira, the Kalki Raja is going to be born; according to that
prophecy, is this not the Kalki Raja?" Seeing the fierce anger of Nand Raja,
people began to eat in earthenware pots instead of bronze or brass pots. Many
people, out of fearlessness, gave their pots to others, thinking that if they
had pots, they would be afraid of being taken away by the king. In this way, the
extremely greedy Nand Raja built mountains of gold, filled wells with gold, and
filled all his treasuries with gold, yet his desire was not fulfilled.  When a
benevolent king of Ayodhya heard about his behavior, he was very saddened. He
sent a clever messenger to him to try to reason with him. The messenger arrived
there and, to seize all the wealth and fortune,

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 gau saMgrahI kucikarNa, tilaka seTha, naMda rAjA kI kathA yogazAstra dvitIya
prakAza zloka 112 tilakaseTha dvArA dhAnya kI Asakti kA pariNAma : prAcIna kAla
meM acalapura nagara meM tilaka zreSThI nAma kA eka vaNik rahatA thaa| vaha
zaharoM aura gAMvoM meM anna kA saMgraha karatA thaa| apane grAhakoM ko vaha
ur3ada, mUMga, tila, cAvala, gehU, cane Adi anAja Der3hA lene kI dara para detA
thaa| aura phasala Ane ke bAda unase Der3hA vasUla karatA thaa| dhAnya se dhAnya
kI, pazuoM se dhAnya kI aura dhana se dhAnya kI vRddhi kaise ho? kisa upAya se
dhAnya bar3he? 'tattvaciMtana kI taraha isI bAta kA rAtadina ciMtana (dhyAna)
kiyA karatA thA aura dhAnya kharIdatA aura pUrvokta munAphe para beca diyA
krtaa| jaba manuSya ko kisI cIja kI dhana savAra ho jAtI hai to, vaha vyasana kI
taraha usase cipaTa jAtI hai, usakI Asakti chUTatI nhiiN|' yahI hAla tilaka
seTha kA thaa| anAja ke saMgraha se karor3oM kIr3e mara jAte the, isakI vaha
paravAha nahIM karatA thaa| paMcendriya jIvoM aura manuSyoM para anAja kA bojha
lAdane se unheM jo pIr3A hotI thI, usakA vicAra karake use jarA bhI dayA nahIM
AtI thii| eka bAra kisI nimittajJa ne usase kahA-agale sAla duSkAla pdd'egaa|
yaha sunakara usane apanA pUrA dhana lagAkara anAja kharIdA itanA anna kharIda
lene para bhI use saMtoSa nahIM huaa| isalie dhanADhyoM se byAja para dhana
udhAra lekara aneka kisma ke anAjoM ko kharIdakara saMgraha kiyaa| anAja bharane
ke lie godAmoM kI kamI par3I to apane ghara ko bhI anAja se bhara diyaa| lobhI
manuSya kyA nahIM karatA? itanA saba kara lene ke bAda vaha udAsIna-sA hokara
jagat ke zatru duSkAla ko mitra mAnakara daSkAla ke Agamana kI pratIkSA karane
lgaa| paraMta haA usake dazciMtana ke viparIta hii| varSARta ke prAraMbha meM hI
usake hRdaya ko cIrate hae-se bAdala AkAza meM uThe aura garajane lge| kacha hI
dera meM cAroM ora masaladhAra vaSTi hone lgii| isake kAraNa usake dvArA
saMgraha kiye hue gehUM, mUMga, cAvala, cane Adi vibhinna anAja sar3ane lge|
yaha dekhakara asaMtuSTa tilaka seTha vilApa karane lagA-hAya! merA anAja naSTa
ho jaaygaa| aba mere hAtha se anAja calA jaaygaa| yoM hAya-hAya karate-karate
atRpta hone se usakA hRdaya phaTa gayA, jisase tatkAla marakara vaha naraka meM
gyaa| yaha hai tilakazreSThI ke dvArA atilobha kA pariNAma! | dhanalolupa naMda
rAjA : prAcInakAla meM iMdranagara kA anusaraNa karane vAlA, ati manohara
pATaliputra nAmaka zreSTha nagara thaa| vahAM zatruvarga ko vaza karane meM
iMdra ke samAna trikhaMDAdhipati naMda nAma kA rAjA rAjya karatA thaa| jina-jina
para Teksa (kara) nahIM lagA huA thA, una-una para usane kara lagA diyaa| jina-
jina para pahale se kara lagA huA thA, una para adhika kara lagA diyA aura
adhika kara dene vAle para bhI anyAnya kara lagA diye| isa prakAra vaha prajA
meM se kisI para koI sI aparAdha mar3hakara usase daMDa ke rUpa meM dhana le
letA thaa| vaha sadA yahI kahA karatA-'rAjA chala kara sakatA hai, kintu hala
nahIM kara sktaa| jaise samasta jaloM kA pAtra samudra hai, vaise samasta artha
kA pAtra rAjA hai, dUsarA koI nahIM!' aura isa taraha nirdaya hokara yena-kena
upAyena logoM se dhana baTorane kI koziza karatA thaa| ataH kucha hI varSoM meM
loga nirdhana ho gye| | bher3a-bakariyoM ko carAne ke lie bhUmi para ghAsa bhI
nahIM milatA thaa| usane vinimaya ke lie sone kI mudrA kA nAmonizAna ur3A diyA
aura badale meM camar3e ke sikke claaye| vaha pAkhaMDiyoM aura vezyAoM ko bhArI
daMDa dekara badale meM unase dhana grahaNa karatA thaa| agni sarvabhakSI hone
se kisI ko bhI nahIM chor3atI loga usake ravaiye ko dekhakara kahane lage-
bhagavAn mahAvIra ke nirvANa ke 1900 varSa ke bAda kalkI rAjA hone vAlA hai; usa
bhaviSyavANI ke anusAra kyA yahI to kalkI rAjA nahIM hai? naMdarAjA kA pracaMDa
kopa dekhakara kAMse yA pItala ke bartana meM bhojana karane ke badale loga
miTTI ke bartana meM bhojana karane lge| kaI logoM ne to nirbhaya hokara rahane
kI dRSTi se apane bartana dUsaroM ko de diye, yaha socakara ki bartana hoMge to
rAjA ke dvArA chIne jAne kA Dara rhegaa| isa prakAra atilobhI naMda rAjA ne sone
ke parvata banAye, kuMe meM bhI sonA bhara diyA aura apane samasta bhaMDAra sone
se bhara diye, phira bhI usakI icchA pUrI nahIM huii| _ ayodhyA ke eka hitaiSI
rAjA ne jaba ravaiye kI bAteM sunI to use bar3A duHkha huaa| usane naMdarAjA ko
samajhAne ke lie eka vArtAlApa karane meM catura dUta ko usake yahAM bhejaa|
dUta vahAM pahuMcA aura sarvasva lakSmI ko har3apane ke 177

Page #200 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The avaricious Nanda Raja, a king devoid of energy and splendor, was approached
by a messenger. After greeting the king, the messenger sat before him. Seeking
permission from the king, the messenger said, "Do not be angry upon hearing my
master's message. Those who speak sweetly are never well-wishers. I had heard of
your misdeeds from the lineage of my ancestors, but today I have experienced
them firsthand. The words of the people are not entirely baseless. Even a small
portion of wealth acquired through injustice washes away all the glory of a
king. Even a single seed of a gourd destroys the sweetness of jaggery. A king
should consider his subjects as his own soul. It is not right for a king to
destroy his subjects. A carnivore never eats its own flesh. Therefore, nourish
your subjects. Nourished subjects nourish the king. Even a cow, being meek and
submissive, does not give milk without being nourished with fodder and grains.
Greed is the destroyer of all virtues. Therefore, abandon greed. Our beloved
king has sent this message for your benefit."  Just as hot smoke rises when
water falls on land burnt by a forest fire, so too, upon hearing the messenger's
words, Nanda Raja uttered words like hot smoke, "Enough, be quiet, I don't need
your advice. You are unworthy because you are a messenger; leave this place!"
Saying this, Nanda Raja immediately got up and went to his inner chambers like a
patient suffering from a headache. "Just as the Javasā does not accept the flow
of water, so too, this king does not accept my flow of advice, therefore he is
unworthy of advice." Thinking this, the messenger returned to Ayodhya to his
king.  As a result of the sin of injustice, terrible and painful diseases arose
in Nanda Raja's body. These diseases caused him so much pain, as if it were the
torment inflicted by the Asuras in hell. As the king groaned in pain from this
terrible suffering, the people rejoiced. Nanda Raja's body and mind were in such
terrible pain, as if he were being cooked in fire, or roasted like chickpeas in
a pan, or scorched in fire. For a sinner, all this is considered very little.
Alas! On this earth, I have built mountains of gold, piled up heaps of gold
everywhere; who will now be the owner of this? I could not enjoy even a little
bit of this gold. Alas! I was only busy thinking of ways to collect gold, day
and night! What will happen to me now?  Thus, lamenting and in a deep swoon over
his possessions, the insatiable Nanda Raja passed away. He experienced the
boundless suffering of the world. This is the story of Nanda's attachment!  Now
we present the fact that even the vows of yogis who desire to acquire
possessions are harmed. 169. Those yogis who are afflicted by the planet of
attachment abandon the wealth of the kingdom of peace, which is the family of
austerity and knowledge. 113. Meaning: Even yogis, who are afflicted by the
planet of attachment, abandon the wealth of the kingdom of peace, which is the
family of austerity and knowledge. 113. Explanation: Let alone ordinary humans,
even yogis adorned with the three jewels of knowledge, vision, and character, if
they become greedy for even a little pleasure, trapped in the clutches of the
planet of attachment, they abandon the wealth of the kingdom of peace, which is
the family of austerity, renunciation, and scriptural knowledge, like their
subdued ghosts and spirits. That is, they abandon their fundamental virtues and
become subservient to the demon of greed. 113.  Having explained the
consequences of dissatisfaction, we now explain the consequences of
satisfaction. 170. The happiness that is not attained by a dissatisfied person,
whether he be Indra or a Chakravarti, is attained by a satisfied person like the
happiness of the kingdom of peace attained by Abhayakumar. 114. Meaning: The
happiness that is not attained by a dissatisfied person, whether he be Indra or
a Chakravarti, is attained by a satisfied person like the happiness of the
kingdom of peace attained by Abhayakumar. 114. The story of Abhayakumar, which
is understood by the tradition, is as follows. 178

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 artha lolupa naMdarAjA yogazAstra dvitIya prakAza zloka 113 mahatvAkAMkSI
nisteja evaM zobhArahita rAjA ko dekhakara unase milA aura namaskAra karake
unake sAmane baiTha gyaa| rAjA se anujJA lekara dUta bolA-'mere svAmI kA saMdeza
sunakara Apa gussA na kreN| madhura bolane vAle kabhI hitaiSI nahIM hote|
karNaparaMparA se ApakI niMdA sunI thI, lekina Aja to maiMne pratyakSa hI
anubhava kara liyaa| logoM kA kathana sarvathA nirAdhAra nahIM hotaa| anyAya se
prApta kiyA huA dhana kA eka aMza bhI rAjA ke tamAma yaza ko dho DAlatA hai|
tUmbe ke phala kA eka dAnA bhI gur3a kI miThAsa ko naSTakara detA hai| rAjA
prajA ko apanI AtmA ke tulya smjhe| rAjA ke dvArA prajA kA ucchedana karanA
ucita nahIM hotaa| mAMsAhArI kabhI apanA mAMsa nahIM khaataa| isalie apanI prajA
kA poSaNa kiijie| poSita prajA hI rAjA kA poSaNa karatI hai| gAya dIna-hIna aura
adhIna hote hue bhI cAre dAne se poSita kiye binA dUdha nahIM detii| lobha
samasta guNoM kA vinAzaka hai| isalie Apa lobha kA tyAga kiijie| hamAre
janapriya rAjA ne Apake hita kI dRSTi se yaha saMdeza bhijavAyA hai| dAvAgni se
jalI huI bhUmi para pAnI par3ate hI jaise garma dhuauMsA uThatA hai, vaise hI
usa dUta kI bAta naMda ke kAnoM meM par3ate hI naMdarAjA ne uSNavacana rUpI
garma dhuMe ke samAna udgAra nikAle-basa, cupa ho jA, mujhe upadeza dene kI
jarUrata nahIM hai| tUM rAjadUta hone ke kAraNa avadhya hai; bhAga jA yahAM se!
yoM kahakara naMdarAjA turaMta vahAM se uThakara siradarda vAle rogI kI bhAMti
apane garbhagRha meM calA gyaa| 'javAsA jaise jaladhArA ko grahaNa nahIM karatA,
vaise hI yaha rAjA merI upadezadhArA ko grahaNa nahIM karatA, isalie upadeza ke
ayogya hai|' yoM socakara dUta bhI apane rAjA ke pAsa ayodhyA lauTa aayaa|
anyAya ke pApa ke phala svarUpa naMdarAjA ke zarIra meM pIr3A dene vAle
bhayaMkara roga paidA hue| una rogoM ke kAraNa use itanI vedanA hotI thI, mAno
naraka ke paramAdhArmika | asuroM dvArA dI huI vedanA ho| usa bhayaMkara vedanA
se pIr3ita hokara rAjA jyoM-jyoM AkraMda karatA thA, tyoM-tyoM prajAjana usase
AnaMda mahasUsa karatA thaa| naMdarAjA ke zarIra aura mana meM itanI bhayaMkara
vedanA thI, mAno Aga meM paka rahA ho, yA bhAr3a meM cane ke samAna bhuna rahA
ho athavA Aga meM jhulasa rahA ho| pApAtmA ke lie to yaha saba bahuta hI thor3A
mAnA jAtA hai| hAya! isa pRthvI para maiMne sone ke pahAr3a khaDe kiye; jagaha-
jagaha sone ke Dhera lagAye; aba inakA mAlika kauna hogA? maiM to itane sone kA
jarA-sA bhI AnaMda nahIM le skaa| aphasosa! maiM to rAta-dina sonA ikaTThA
karane kI hI tarakIbeM socatA rahA, isI meM lagA rahA! aba merA kyA hogA? yo
ArtanAda karatA huA evaM apane parigraha para gAr3ha mUrchA karatA huA atRpta
naMda rAjA cala bsaa| usane saMsAra ke asIma duHkha prApta kiye| yaha hai naMda
kI parigrahakathA! parigraha grahaNa karane ke abhilASI yogiyoM ke bhI
mUlavratoM ko hAni pahuMcatI hai, isa bAta ko aba prastuta karate haiN|169|
tapaHzrutaparivArAM, zamasAmrAjyasampadam  /
parigrahagrahagrastAstyajeyuryogino'pi hi  // 113 //  . artha :- parigraha rUpI
graha se grasta yogIjana bhI tapa aura jJAna ke parivAra vAlI zamasAmrAjya-
saMpatti ko chor3a baiThate haiM  // 113 /  /  vyAkhyA :- sAmAnya mAnava kI bAta
to dUra rahI, jJAna-darzana-cAritra rUpI ratnatraya se suzobhita yogIjana bhI
parigraha rUpI graha ke caMgula meM phaMsakara jarA-se bhI sukha meM lubdha ho
jAya to apane vazIbhUta bhUta-pretoM ke samAna tapa, tyAga aura zrutajJAna ke
parivAra vAle zama (saMtoSa) rUpI sAmrAjya saMpatti ko bhI tilAMjali de baiThate
hai| arthAt apane mUlaguNoM ko bhI tilAMjali dekara lobha rUpI pizAca ke vaza
meM ho jAte haiM  /  / 113 /  /  asaMtoSa ke phala batAkara aba saMtoSa kA phala
batAte haiN|170|asntossvtH saukhyaM, na zakrasya na cakriNaH  /  jantoH
santoSabhAjo, yadabhayasyeva jaayte||114|| artha :- asaMtoSI manuSya cAhe vaha
iMdramahArAja aura cakravartI hI ho, use jo sukha prApta nahIM hotA, use saMtoSI
manuSya abhayakumAra ko prApta saMtoSa rUpI sAmrAjyasukha kI taraha prApta kara
letA hai  /  / 114 /  /  abhayakumAra kI saMpradAyagamya kathA isa prakAra hai
178

Page #201 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Glory of Contentment and the Wise Abhayakumar Yoga Shastra, Second Light,
Verse 114, The Content Abhayakumar:  In ancient times, India was adorned with a
prosperous region, the city of Rajagriha, which was embellished with a vast
fort. There reigned King Prasenajit, who was as deep as the ocean, attracting
all kings with his virtues. He was a devout Shravak, a follower of the Jain
faith, who practiced Anuvratas, as devoted as a bee to Lord Parshvanath. He had
many sons, including Shrenik, who surpassed even the celestial beings in
strength, brilliance, and radiance. Among all these sons, who was worthy of
taking over the reins of the kingdom? To test them, the king one day had all his
sons seated for a meal and served them kheer (sweet rice pudding). As they began
to eat, the wise king released ferocious hunting dogs with gaping mouths like
tigers. As the dogs approached, all the princes except Shrenik jumped up from
their plates and rushed out. Shrenik, however, continued to feed the dogs small
portions of kheer from his plate, and by the time the dogs had finished licking
it up, he had finished his own kheer. Seeing this, the king thought, "This
prince alone will be able to subdue enemies by any means and enjoy this earth."
King Prasenajit was very pleased with Shrenik.  One day, King Prasenajit again
tested his sons by giving them sealed laddoos (sweet balls) in baskets and water
in clay pots with their mouths sealed, and told them, "Open these baskets
without opening the lids or breaking the seals, and drink water from these pots
without making holes in them." Except for Shrenik, none of the princes could eat
the laddoos or drink the water. No matter how strong a man is, what he can do
with intelligence, he cannot do with strength. Shrenik shook the basket and made
the laddoos crumble through the holes, and ate them. Similarly, water was
dripping from the bottom of the pot, which he collected in a silver cup and
drank. What is impossible for the intelligence of a quick-witted person? Seeing
Shrenik's intellectual skill, the king was very pleased.  One day, a fire broke
out in Prasenajit's palace. He then said to all his princes, "Take whatever you
can from my palace. Whatever you take will be yours." Hearing this, the other
princes took precious jewels and came out, but Shrenik only took a drum for
beating. The king asked Shrenik, "Son! What is this, and why did you bring it?"
Shrenik replied, "This is a drum, the first sign of the victory of kings. The
sound of this drum makes the victory march of kings successful. Therefore, my
lord! This drum, which signifies the victory of kings, should be protected like
its soul."  Seeing Shrenik pass the test, King Prasenajit, acknowledging his
sharp intelligence, affectionately gave him the second name "Bhambasar." King
Prasenajit did not consider the other princes worthy of ruling, as they
considered themselves worthy of the throne. However, King Prasenajit pretended
to ignore Shrenik, wanting to test his intelligence further. He gave the other
princes kingdoms in different countries. But he gave nothing to Shrenik,
thinking that this entire kingdom would eventually be his.  After this, like a
young elephant emerging from the forest, Shrenik, filled with pride, left his
city, seeing his father's attitude, and reached the city of Venatat. As he
entered the city, he sat in the shop of a wealthy merchant, as if he were the
embodiment of prosperity. That day, there was a festival in the city, so there
was a long queue of customers at the merchant's shop, buying fine clothes and
fragrant substances related to angarags (robes). The merchant was overwhelmed by
the large crowd. So, Shrenik quickly helped the customers by tying up bundles
and giving them their purchases. Due to Shrenik's influence, the merchant made a
lot of money that day. Truly, with a virtuous man, wealth follows him even in a
foreign land. Seeing this, the merchant asked with pleasure, "Whose virtuous
guest are you today?" The prince said, "Yours!" The merchant  179

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 saMtoSa kI mahimA aura buddhimAna abhayakumAra yogazAstra dvitIya prakAza zloka
114 saMtoSI abhayakumAra : prAcInakAla meM bhAratavarSa ke samRddhikSetra ke
rUpa meM, vizAla kile se suzobhita rAjagRha nagara thaa| vahAM samudrasama
gaMbhIra, samagra rAjAoM ko apane guNoM se AkarSita karane vAlA prasenajit rAjA
kA zAsana thaa| vaha pArzvanAtha bhagavAna ke zAsanakAla meM bhramara ke samAna,
atyaMta anurAgI samyagdRSTisaMpanna, aNuvratadhArI zrAvaka thaa| usake bala,
teja aura kAMti meM devakumAroM ko bhI mAta karane vAle zreNika Adi aneka putra
the| ina sabhI putroM meM rAjyadhurA ko saMbhAlane ke yogya kauna hai? isakI
parIkSA ke lie rAjA ne eka dina tamAma kumAroM ko bhojana ke lie biThAkara unakI
thAlI meM khIra prosii| sabhI kumAra jaba bhojana karane lage, tabhI buddhimAna
rAjA ne bAgha ke samAna vikarAla muMha phAr3e hue zikArI kutte chor3a diye|
kuttoM ke.Ate hI zreNika ke sivAya sabhI rAjakumAra thAlI para se ekadama uTha
khar3e hue aura jhaTapaTa bAhara nikala aaye| zreNikakumAra dUsare kumAroM ko
parosI huI thAlI meM se thor3I-thor3I khIra kuttoM ko DAlatA gayA aura jaba taka
kutte vaha khIra cATate, taba taka usane apanI sArI khIra khA lii| yaha
dekhakara rAjA ne socA-yaha kumAra hI kisI bhI upAya se zatruoM ko vaza karake
isa pRthvI kA upabhoga kara skegaa| rAjA zreNikakumAra para atyaMta prasanna
huaa| eka dina rAjA prasenajit ne phira apane putroM kI parIkSA karane ke lie
sabako TokaroM meM sIlabaMda laDU tathA miTTI ke ghar3oM meM pAnI bharakara
unakA muMha baMda karake dIye aura unase kahA-ina TokaroM meM se Dhakkana khole
yA sIla tor3e binA tathA ina ghaDoM ke cheda kiye binA pAnI pI lenaa| zreNika ke
sivAya koI bhI rAjakumAra na to laDU khA sakA aura na pAnI hI pI skaa| manuSya
kitanA hI balavAn kyoM na ho, buddhi se jo kAma kara sakatA hai, vaha bala se
nahIM kara sktaa| zreNika ne Tokare ko hilA-hilAkara chidravAlI jagaha se laDU
kA cUrA girAyA aura khAyA; isI prakAra pAnI ke ghar3e ke nIce pAnI kI bUMdeM
Tapaka rahI thIM, unheM cAMdI kI sippI se ikaTThI karake pAnI piiyaa|
pratyutpannabuddhi yukta vyakti kI buddhi ke lie kyA duHsAdhya hai?
zreNikakumAra kI yaha bauddhika kuzalatA dekhakara rAjA atyaMta prasanna huaa|
eka dina prasenajit ke mahala meM Aga laga gayI; taba usane sabhI rAjakumAroM se
kahA-'mere mahala meM se tumheM jo cIja hAtha lage, le jaao| jo cIja jisake
hAtha lagegI, vahI usakA mAlika hogaa|' yaha sunakara aura rAjakumAra to acche-
acche ratna lekara bAhara Aye, lekina zreNika rAjakumAra sirpha DaMkA pITane kA
eka nagAr3A lekara bAhara niklaa| rAjA ne zreNikakumAra se pUchAbeTA! yaha kyA
aura kyoM le Aye ho? zreNika ne uttara diyA-yaha nagAr3A hai, rAjAoM kI vijaya
kA prathama sUcaka cihna to yahI hai| isakI AvAja se rAjAoM kI vijayayAtrA
saphala hotI hai| isalie svAmin! rAjAoM ke jayazabdasUcaka isa nagAr3e kI AtmA
ke samAna rakSA karanI caahie| zreNika ke parIkSA meM uttIrNa hone se zreNika kI
prakhara buddhi kA lohA mAnakara rAjA prasenajit ne pyAra se usakA dUsarA nAma
'bhaMbhAsAra' rkhaa| apane Apako rAjyAdhikAra ke yogya mAnane vAle anya
rAjaputroM ko prasenajit zAsanAdhikAra ke yogya nahIM mAnatA thaa| paraMtu rAjA
prasenajit zreNika ke buddhikauzala ko parakhane kI dRSTi se Upara-Upara se
usake prati upekSAbhAva rakhatA thA, rAjA ne dUsare kumAroM ko alaga-alaga dezoM
kA rAjya de diyaa| lekina zreNika ko yaha socakara kucha bhI nahIM diyA ki
bhaviSya meM yaha sArA rAjya isI ke hAtha meM aayegaa| isake bAda araNya se
jaise javAna hAthI nikalatA hai, vaise hI svAbhimAnI zreNika pitA kA ravaiyA
dekhakara apane nagara se nikala par3A aura veNAtaTa nagara phuNcaa| nagara meM
praviSTa hote hI bhadrazreSThI kI dUkAna para baiThA, mAno sAkSAt lAbhodayakarma
hI ho| nagara meM usa dina koI mahotsava thA, isalie seTha kI dUkAna para uttama
vastra, aMgarAga se saMbaMdhita sugaMdhita padArtha kharIdane vAle grAhakoM kA
tAMtA laga gyaa| grAhakoM kI bhArI bhIr3a hone se seTha ghabarA gyaa| ataH
zreNikakumAra ne phurtI se pur3iyA Adi bAMdhakara grAhakoM ko saudA dene meM
sahAyatA dii| zreNikakumAra ke prabhAva se seTha ne usa dina bahuta hI dhana
kmaayaa| sacamuca, puNyazAlI puruSa ke sAtha paradeza meM bhI saMpattiyoM sAtha-
sAtha calatI hai| yaha dekhakara seTha ne prasannatA pUrvaka pUchA-Aja Apa kisa
puNyazAlI ke yahAM atithi haiM? kumAra bolA-ApakA hI! seTha 179

Page #202 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Story of Abhay Kumar  The second light of the Yoga Shastra, verse 114,
thought to himself - "Last night in my dream I saw a worthy groom for Nanda; it
seems to be him." Therefore, he said openly - "Today you have become my guest, I
am blessed by this. Your arrival is like the arrival of the Ganges at the house
of the devout." Closing his shop, Seth Shrenik Kumar took him to his house.
There he made him bathe, dressed him in new fine clothes and fed him with
respect. Many days passed while Seth stayed there. One day Seth, bringing his
daughter before him, requested Kumar - "Please agree to marry my daughter named
Nanda." Shrenik said to Seth - "How can you give your daughter to me, an unknown
person?" Seth said - "Your qualities have revealed your lineage and character."
Seeing his great insistence, Shrenik married Nanda in the same way that Vishnu
married the daughter of the ocean (Lakshmi). After the marriage, Shrenik lived
there with Nanda, enjoying pleasures, just as an elephant lives happily in a
grove.  King Senajit learned the whole story of Shrenik through his spies.
Because the king could see through the eyes of his spies, he was like one with a
thousand eyes. Suddenly, a terrible illness arose in the body of King
Prasenajit. He tried many treatments, but it wouldn't go away. Therefore,
knowing his end was near, he ordered a swift camel driver to bring his son
Shrenik. The camel driver quickly reached the city of Venatat. He met Shrenik
and said - "Your father is lying on his deathbed, counting his last moments. He
has sent me to bring you quickly." Hearing this, Shrenik was very saddened. He
explained to Nandadevi and gave her the following mantra - "We are the Gopals of
Rajagah, the city with white walls." Then Shrenik bid farewell to his in-laws
and quickly left from there. His father was suffering from an incurable disease.
He was afraid that if he didn't go, his father might pass away in his absence or
suffer more pain. With this in mind, Shrenik quickly reached Rajagah on a she-
camel. When the king saw Shrenik standing before him with folded hands, his joy
overflowed. Then, he performed Shrenik's coronation with the pure water of a
golden pot and declared him the king of Magadh. King Prasenajit, remembering
Lord Parshvanath and chanting the Panchparameshthi mantra, attained death in
samadhi and reached the heavenly realm.  King Shrenik took charge of the entire
kingdom. Meanwhile, in Venatat, Nandadevi, abandoned by King Shrenik, became
pregnant. At that time, she had a dream - "Riding an elephant, I will give
protection to all beings with great pomp and become devoted to the welfare of
others." Nandadevi's father requested the king. Therefore, the king fulfilled
her dream. At the right time, Nandadevi gave birth to a healthy and beautiful
child, just as the eastern direction gives birth to the sun. On the auspicious
day, according to her dream, her grandfather named the child Abhay Kumar. He
grew up gradually. He studied all the arts without fault. By the age of eight,
Abhay Kumar had become proficient in 72 arts. One day, Abhay Kumar was playing
with his friends when a boy tauntingly said to him with anger - "Why are you
boasting so much? You don't even know your father." Abhay Kumar replied - "My
father's name is..." The boy replied - "He is your mother's father." Abhay Kumar
felt those words like arrows piercing him. At that moment, he asked his mother
Nandadevi - "Mother! Who is my father?" "Bhadraseth is your father." Nanda said.
"Bhadraseth is your father. Tell me the name of my father, whoever he may be."
After repeatedly asking with letters, Nandadevi said sadly - "Son! My father
married me to a young man who had come from a foreign land. When you were in my
womb, a camel driver came from somewhere. He spoke to him in private and quickly
took your father away on a camel. After that, there was no trace of him.
Therefore, I don't know the truth - who he was? Where he was from? What was his
name?" Abhay asked - "Mother! Did he say anything while leaving?" Then Nanda
brought the written mantra and showed it to her son, saying - "He gave me these
letters while leaving." Reading the words written in the letter, Abhay Kumar was
very happy... 180

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 abhaya kumAra kI kathA yogazAstra dvitIya prakAza zloka 114 ne mana hI mana
socA-Aja rAta ko svapna meM maiMne naMdA ke yogya vara dekhA thA; vaha yahI
mAlUma hotA hai| ataH prakaTa meM kahA-Aja Apa mere atithi bane haiM, isase maiM
dhanya ho gayA huuN| ApakA samAgama to pramAdI ke yahAM gaMgA ke samAgamasarIkhA
huA hai| dUkAna baMda karake seTha zreNikakumAra ko apane ghara le gyaa| vahAM
use snAna karAyA, naye bar3hiyA kapar3e pahanAye aura sammAnapUrvaka bhojana
krvaayaa| seTha ke yahAM rahate-rahate kaI dina bIta gye| eka dina seTha ne
apanI putrI ko sammukha karate hue kumAra se vinati kI merI isa naMdA nAmaka
putrI ke sAtha Apa vivAha karanA svIkAra kreN| zreNika ne seTha se kahA-Apa
mujha ajJAtakulazIla vyakti ko kaise apanI kanyA de rahe haiM? seTha bolA-Apake
guNoM se Apake kula aura zIla jJAta ho hI gaye haiN| atyadhika Agraha dekhakara
zreNika ne usI taraha naMdA ke sAtha vivAha kara liyA, jaise viSNu ne
samudraputrI (lakSmI) ke sAtha kiyA thaa| vivAha ke bAda zreNika naMdA ke sAtha
sukhopabhoga karate hue vahAM usI taraha rahane lage, jisa taraha vRkSaghaTA meM
hAthI sukha pUrvaka rahatA hai| senajita rAjA ne data dvArA zreNika kA sArA
vattAMta jAna liyaa| kyoMki rAjA datoM kI A~khoM se dekhane ke kAraNa hajAra
A~khoM vAlA hotA hai| acAnaka prasenajit rAjA ke zarIra meM eka bhayaMkara
bimArI khar3I ho gyii| kitane hI ilAja karavAye, lekina vaha jAtI hI nahIM thii|
ataH apanA aMtima samaya najadIka jAnakara apane putra zreNika ko bulA lAne ke
lie eka zIghragAmI UMTa vAle ko Adeza diyaa| UMTa vAlA zIghra veNAtaTa nagara
phNcaa| vaha zreNika se milA aura kahA-Apake pitAjI mRtyuzayyA para par3e aMtima
ghar3iyA~ gina rahe haiN| Apako unhoMne zIghra bulA lAne ke lie mujhe bhejA hai|
sunakara zreNika ko bahuta kheda huaa| usane naMdAdevI ko samajhAyA aura
nimnokta maMtrAkSara likhakara use de diyA-'hama sapheda dIvAla vAle rAjagaha
nagara ke gopAla hai|' phira zreNika ne sasarAla vAloM se sabase vidA lekara
vahAM se jhaTapaTa kaca kiyaa| pitAjI daHsAdhya roga se pIDita hai. kahIM aisA
na ho jAya ki mere jAne hI merI anupasthiti meM ve cala base athavA unheM adhika
pIr3A na ho jaay| isa lihAja se zreNika U~TanI para baiThakara jhaTapaTa
rAjagaha phNcaa| rAjA ne jaba zreNika ko apane sAmane hAtha joDe khaDA dekhA to
usake harSAzra umaDa pdde| phira svarNa-kalaza ke nirmala jala se zreNika kA
rAjyAbhiSeka karake use magadhadeza kA rAjA ghoSita kara diyaa| prasenajita rAjA
bhagavAn pArzvanAtha kA smaraNa evaM paMcaparameSThImaMtra kA jApa karate hue
samAdhipUrvaka mRtyu prApta karake devaloka meM phuNcaa| zreNika rAjA ne sArA
rAjyabhAra sNbhaalaa| udhara veNAtaTa meM rAjA zreNika dvArA tyaktA naMdAdevI ne
garbha dhAraNa kiyaa| usa samaya use eka aisA dohada utpanna huA ki 'hAthI para
car3hakara maiM bahuta hI dhUmadhAma se jIvoM ko abhayadAna dene vAlI aura
paropakAraparAyaNa bnuuN|' naMdAdevI ke pitA ne rAjA se vinati kii| ataH nRpa ne
vaha dohada pUrNa kraayaa| ThIka samaya naMdAdevI ne usI taraha eka svastha
saMdara bAlaka ko janma diyA. jisa taraha parvadizA sarya ko janma detI hai|
zabhadivasa meM usake dohada ke anurUpa mAtAmaha ne bAlaka kA nAma abhayakumAra
rkhaa| kramazaH bar3A huaa| nirdoSa vidyAoM kA adhyayana kiyaa| ATha sAla kA
hote-hote bAlaka abhayakumAra 72 kalAoM meM niSNAta ho gyaa| eka dina
abhayakumAra apane hamajolI lar3akoM ke sAtha khela rahA thA; tabhI kisI bAlaka
ne use roSapUrvaka tAnA mArA-'tUM kyA bar3ha-bar3hakara bola rahA hai; tere pitA
kA to patA nahIM hai|' abhayakamAra ne use javAba diyA-mere pitA kA nAma bhadra
laDake ne pratyuttara meM kahA-vaha to terI mAtA kA pitA hai| abhayakumAra ko
usa lar3ake ke vacana tIra kI taraha cubha gye| usane usI samaya apanI mAM
naMdAdevI se pUchA-'mAM! mere pitA kauna hai?' 'bhadra seTha tere pitA hai|'
naMdA ne khaa| 'bhadra to tumhAre pitA haiM. mere pitA jo hoM unakA nAma majhe
batA do|' isa taraha patra dvArA bAra-bAra Agraha parvaka pachane para naMdAdeva
udAsIna hokara kahA-'beTA! mere pitA ne kisI paradeza se Aye hue yuvaka ke sAtha
vivAhakara diyA thA aura jaba tUM garbha | meM thA, taba eka U~Ta vAlA kahIM se
AyA thA, usane unase ekAMta meM kucha kahA aura jhaTapaTa U~Ta para biThAkara
vaha tere pitA ko le gyaa| usake bAda unakA koI atApatA nhiiN| isalie mujhe
yathArtha patA nahIM ki ve kauna the? kahAM ke the? unakA nAma kyA thA?' abhaya
ne pUchA-mAtAjI! jAte samaya vaha kucha kaha gaye the? taba naMdA ne vaha aMkita
maMtrAkSara lAkara putra ko batAyA ki 'ye akSara likhakara ve mujhe de gaye
haiN| patra meM aMkita zabdoM ko par3hakara abhayakumAra bahuta khuza 180

Page #203 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Becoming the Minister of Abhaya Yoga Shastra Second Light Verse 114 happened and
he said to his mother - 'Mother! My father is the king of Rajgriha. Let's go
there now.' Taking leave from Bhadreseth, mother and son reached Rajgriha city
with their belongings. Leaving his mother with the family in a garden outside
the city, Abhaykumar entered the city with a few people. Meanwhile, King Shrenik
had gathered 499 ministers to deliberate at that time. And to complete the
number 500, a search was being made for such an outstanding man everywhere. To
test that person, King Shrenik had dropped his ring in a dry well and announced
- whoever stands by the edge of the well and catches this ring with his hand, he
will be the intelligent and great leader of all these ministers. Hearing the
announcement, all the ministers were in a dilemma. They started saying to each
other - This task seems impossible for us. Only one who can pluck stars from the
sky and bring them to earth can take this ring out of the well and catch it with
his hand. This is not our job. At that time, Abhaykumar arrived there laughing.
Seeing and hearing the people talking among themselves, he asked - Can't this
ring be taken? Is this a difficult thing? Hearing his argument, the people
thought - This is some influential man of talent. When the time comes, the word
spoken by the person reveals his prowess. The gathered people said to Abhaykumar
- Fortunate! According to the king's condition, take the ring and accept the
leadership of all the ministers. Abhaykumar threw fresh cow dung on the ring
lying in the well while standing on the edge; and at the same time put burning
grass stalks on it; from which that dung dried up. At the same time, Abhaykumar
had a water tank made and filled the well with water. To the astonishment of the
people, the dung immediately floated up with the ring. Therefore, Shrenikputra
Abhay caught the dung with the ring in his hand at that time. If an intelligent
person makes an arrangement with a good trick, then nothing is difficult for
him. The spies etc. who were standing there immediately went to the king and
gave him this news. Amazed and surprised, King Shrenik called Abhaykumar to him
and embraced him with affection, looking at him like a son. 'Even if the
relationship is unknown, the mind is delighted to see the relative.' King
Shrenik asked Abhay - Where have you come from? I have come from Venatat, Abhay
said fearlessly. The king asked him - 'Vats! There is a famous Seth named Bhadar
there, his daughter is Nanda, she is happy, isn't she?' Yes, she is happy, Abhay
said. Nanda was pregnant; who did she give birth to? Abhaykumar, with a charming
row of teeth like rays of light, said - Yes, Dev! She has given birth to a son
named Abhay. The king asked again - What is that Abhay like, what is his
appearance? What qualities have come in him? Abhay said - Consider me to be
Abhay; I am the same. Hearing this, Abhaykumar was embraced and seated on his
lap and kissed on the forehead, and he was delighted to shed tears, as if he was
bathing him with affection. 'Your mother is well, isn't she?' On asking this,
Abhaykumar folded his hands and said humbly - 'Swamin! My long-lived mother,
remembering your lotus feet like a bee, is currently in the garden outside the
city. Hearing this, thrilled with joy, the king, with all his belongings, went
towards Nanda with Abhaykumar in front, eager to bring Nanda, just as the royal
swan goes towards the lotus. At that time, Nanda's body was becoming thin, the
bangles on her hands were becoming loose. Hair was hanging on the skull, there
was no kajal in the eyes, the braid was not braided, she was wearing dirty
clothes. The king saw Nanda, thin like the art of the second moon, sitting
happily in the garden. The king delighted Nanda and took her to his palace. Just
as Raghunandan Ram made Sita his queen, so King Shrenik made Nanda his queen!
Abhaykumar had great devotion to his father and considered himself equal to an
atom in front of him. Due to this humility, he had also brought the difficult
king under his control. 181

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 abhaya kA maMtrI bananA yogazAstra dvitIya prakAza zloka 114 huA aura apanI mAM
se kahA-'mAtAjI! mere pitA to rAjagRha ke rAjA haiN| calo, aba hama vahIM
cleNge|' bhadraseTha se vidA lekara mAM-beTA sAmagrI ke sAtha rAjagRha nagara
meM phuNceN| mAtA ko parivAra sahita nagara ke bAhara eka udyAna meM biThAkara
abhayakumAra ne thor3e-se logoM ko sAtha lekara nagara meM praveza kiyaa| idhara
zreNika rAjA ne usa samaya 499 maMtrI maMtraNA ke karane ke lie ekatrita kiye
the| aura 500 kI saMkhyA pUrNa karane hetu jagaha-jagaha aise 500 ve utkRSTa
puruSa kI khoja ho rahI thii| usa vyakti kI parIkSA hetu rAjA zreNika ne eka
sUkhe kuMe meM apanI aMgUThI DAlakara ghoSaNA karAI-jo vyakti kuMe ke kinAre
khar3A-khar3A isa aMgUThI ko hAtha se pakar3a legA, vahI buddhikuzala mahAnara
ina sabhI maMtriyoM kA aguA bnegaa| ghoSaNA sunakara sabhI maMtrI pezopeza meM
par3a gye| ve paraspara kahane lage-hamAre liye to yaha kArya asaMbhava-sA
lagatA hai| jo AkAza ke tAre hAtha se tor3akara dharatI para lA sakatA hai, vahI
isa aMgUThI ko kuMe~ se nikAlakara hAtha se pakar3a sakatA hai| hamAre basa kI
yaha bAta nahIM hai| usI samaya abhayakumAra haMsatA-haMsatA vahAM A phuNcaa|
usane logoM ko Apasa meM bAteM karate dekha-sunakara pUchA-kyA yaha aMgUThI
nahIM lI jA sakatI? kyA yaha koI kaThina bAta hai? logoM ne usake tarka ko
sunakara vicAra kiyA-yaha koI pratibhA kA dhanI prabhAvazAlI puruSa hai| samaya
Ane para vyakti ke mukha se bolA huA vacana hI usake parAkrama ko prakaTa kara
detA hai| ekatrita vyaktiyoM ne abhayakumAra se kahA-bhAgyazAlI! rAjA kI zarta
ke anusAra tuma aMgUThI le lo aura sabhI maMtriyoM kA netRtva svIkArakara lo|
abhayakumAra ne kuMe~ meM par3I huI aMgUThI para kinAre khar3e-khar3e hI jora se
gAya kA tAjA gobara phaiMkA; aura usI samaya usa para jalate hue ghAsa ke pUle
DAle; jisase vaha gobara sUkha gyaa| usI samaya abhayakumAra ne pAnI kI kyArI
banavAkara kuMe ko pAnI se bhara diyaa| logoM ke Azcarya ke sAtha turaMta hI
gobara aMgUThI ke sAtha tairatA huA Upara A gyaa| ataH zreNikaputra abhaya ne
usI samaya hAtha se aMgUThI vAlA gobara pakar3a liyaa| buddhimAna vyakti acchI
tarakIba se koI Ayojana kare to usake lie koI bAta duSkara nahIM hai| jo vahAM
khar3e the, una | guptacara vagairaha ne tatkAla rAjA ke pAsa jAkara yaha
khabara dii| vismita aura cakita rAjA zreNika ne abhayakamAra ko apane pAsa
bulAyA aura putra sadRza dRSTi se vAtsalyabhAva pUrvaka usakA AliMgana kiyaa|
'saMbaMdha ajJAta hone para bhI saMbaMdhI ko dekhakara mana praphullita ho jAtA
hai|' rAjA zreNika ne abhaya se pUchA-tuma kahAM se Aye ho? maiM veNAtaTa se AyA
hUM, abhaya ne nirbhIka hokara khaa| rAjA ne usase pUchA-'vatsa! vahAM bhadra
nAma kA prasiddha seTha hai, unakI putrI naMdA hai, vaha to AnaMda meM hai na?'
hAM, vaha AnaMda meM haiM, abhaya ne khaa| naMdA to garbhavatI thI; usane kise
janma diyA hai? kiraNoM ke samAna manohara daMtapaMkti yukta abhayakumAra ne
kahA-hAM, deva! usane abhaya nAmaka eka putra ko janma diyA hai| rAjA ne phira
pUchA-vaha abhaya kaisA hai, usakA rUpa kaisA hai? usameM kaise guNa Aye haiM?
abhaya ne kahA-Apa mujhe hI abhaya mAna lo; vahIM maiM huuN| yaha sunate hI
abhayakumAra ko AliMgana karake goda meM biThAyA aura mastaka cUmakara harSita
ho netrajalasiMcana kiyA, mAno sneha se snAna karA rahA ho| 'terI mAtA kuzala to
hai na?' isa prakAra pUchane para abhayakumAra ne donoM hAtha jor3akara
vinayapUrvaka kahA-'svAmin! bhramarI ke samAna Apake caraNakamaloM kA bAra-bAra
smaraNa karatI huI dIrghAyuSI merI mAtAjI isa samaya nagara ke bAhara udyAna meM
hai| yaha sunate hI AnaMda se romAMcita hokara naMdA ko lAne ke lie abhayakumAra
ko Age karake sarvasAmagrI-sahita utsukatA pUrvaka rAjA naMdA ke sammukha usI
taraha cala par3A, jisa taraha rAjahaMsa kamalinI ke saMmukha jAtA hai| usa
samaya naMdA kA zarIra dubalA-sA ho rahA thA, usake hAthoM kI cUr3iyAM DhIlI ho
rahI thIM. kapAla para bAla laTaka rahe the, AMkhoM meM aMjana nahIM thA, coTI
gUMthI huI nahIM thI, vaha mailekucele kapar3e pahanI huI thii| rAjA ne dvitIyA
ke caMdra kI kalA ke samAna kRza naMdA ko AnaMda se udyAna meM baiThI huI
dekhii| rAjA naMdA ko AnaMdita karake apane mahala meM le gyaa| jaise
raghunaMdana rAma ne sItA ko paTarAnI banAyI thI, vaise hI rAjA zreNika ne naMdA
ko paTarAnI banAyI! abhayakumAra kI pitA para atyaMta bhakti thI tathA unake
sAmane apane Apako aNu se aNu ke samAna mAnatA thaa| isa vinItatA ke kAraNa
duHsAdhya rAjA ko bhI usane apane vaza meM kara liyA thaa| 181

Page #204 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Abhayakumar's intelligence caused a rift in Chandapradyota's army.  Yogashastra
Dvitiya Prakash, verse 114: Once, Chandapradyota, the king of Ujjayini, set out
to besiege Rajagriha with all his resources and forces. Fourteen other crowned
kings, all devout followers of their respective religions, accompanied him. The
people saw Chandapradyota approaching. His swift horses galloped as if they
would tear through the earth. Spies immediately informed King Shrenik. Upon
hearing this, Shrenik pondered for a moment, wondering how to weaken
Chandapradyota, who was approaching like a furious planet. In that instant, the
king looked towards Abhayakumar, a repository of intuitive wisdom, with a gaze
as sweet as nectar. True to his name and qualities, Abhayakumar respectfully
requested the king, "Today, the king of Ujjayini has become a guest in our war.
Why worry so much? To speak of weapons in a matter that can be resolved by
intelligence is futile. I will only use my intellect. Intelligence is like a
wish-fulfilling cow in achieving victory."  After that, Abhayakumar had gold
dinars placed in iron boxes and buried outside the city, where the enemy's camp
was located. Just as the water of the ocean surrounds the circular land,
Chandapradyota's army surrounded Rajagriha from all sides. Abhayakumar sent a
letter through eloquent spies, conveying this message:  "King of Avanti! Do not
perceive any difference between Shivadevi and Chillanadavi. Therefore, as
Shivadevi, you are always honorable to me. I advise you with sincere good
intentions that my father, King Shrenik, has sown discord among all your kings.
To subdue them, the king has sent gold coins. By accepting them, they will bind
themselves and surrender to my father. If you do not believe me, you can dig
beneath their residences and find the buried gold coins for yourself. Who would
want to touch fire when there is a burning lamp present?"  Knowing this,
Chandapradyota had the ground dug beneath one king's camp. There, as Abhayakumar
had said, he found gold coins. Disheartened, Chandapradyota secretly fled from
there. With his departure, Shrenik surrounded his entire army, churning it like
the ocean. Shrenik seized the army's essential elephants, horses, and other
resources. Chandapradyota was cornered. Somehow, he managed to escape with his
life, riding a swift horse back to his city. The fourteen kings and other great
warriors fled like crows, for an army without a leader is destroyed.  When those
kings reached Ujjayini, following behind King Chandapradyota, their hair was
disheveled and flying, their faces were gloomy, and none of them had an umbrella
over their heads. All those kings swore to Chandapradyota, "Your Majesty! We
would never betray you like this. It seems this entire scheme was Abhayakumar's
doing." Knowing this, the king of Avanti was filled with rage towards
Abhayakumar.  Once, the king of Avanti said angrily in his court, "Whoever binds
Abhayakumar and brings him here to me will receive whatever wealth they desire
as a reward." A courtesan raised her hand like a flag and volunteered, "Your
Majesty! I can do this perfectly." The king readily granted her permission to
undertake this task.  He said, "If you need anything, wealth or otherwise, for
this task, just ask." The courtesan thought, "Abhayakumar is difficult to
capture by any means, only through religious pretense can I succeed in my
mission." Therefore, the courtesan requested two elderly women to accompany her.
The king, giving her a lot of wealth, arranged for two women to go with the
courtesan. Those two women stayed with the courtesan like shadows. Now, these
three women always served and worshipped the holy women, showing them respect.
Due to their intellectual excellence, they gained a lot of knowledge from the
holy women. These three were like three illusions, deceiving the world. They
wandered from village to village and reached Rajagriha, the city adorned by King
Shrenik. They set up their camp in a garden outside the city. The courtesan,
along with her two companions, entered the city, desiring to perform the rituals
of the caitya. Then, with great devotion, she entered the city three times, as
instructed by the king. After worshipping the image, she began to sing
devotional songs in the Malavakoushiki style, with rhythm and melody, in her
native language.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 abhayakumAra ke buddhibala se caMDapradyota kI senA meM phUTa yogazAstra
dvitIya prakAza zloka 114 eka bAra ujjayinInareza caMDapradyota sabhI sAmagrI
evaM dalabala sAtha meM lekara rAjagRha ko gherakara car3hAI karane ke lie claa|
usake sAtha paramAdhArmika sarIkhe 14 anya mukuTabaddha rAjA the| logoM ne
caMDapradyota ko Ate hue dekhaa| usake tejatarrAra ghor3e aise daur3ate hue A
rahe the, mAno pRthvI ko cIra ddaaleNge| guptacaroM ne Akara rAjA zreNika ko
turaMta khabara dii| zreNika sunakara kSaNa bhara vicAra meM par3a gayA ki
krUragraha ke samAna kruddha hokara saMmukha Ate hue caMDapradyota ko kaise
kamajora kareM?' dUsare hI kSaNa rAjA ne amRta-samAna madhuradRSTi se autpAtika
buddhi ke nidhi abhayakumAra kI ora dekhaa| ataH yathAnAma tathA guNa vAle
abhayakumAra ne rAjA se savinaya nivedana kiyA-Aja ujjayinIpati mere yuddha kA
atithi bne| isameM itanI ciMtA kI kyA bAta hai? buddhisAdhya kArya meM
zastrAstra kI bAta karanA vRthA hai| maiM to buddhibala kA hI prayoga kruuNgaa|
buddhi hI vijaya dilAne meM kAmadhenu sarIkhI hai| usake bAda abhayakumAra ne
nagara ke bAhara jahAM zatru kI | senA kA par3Ava thA, vahIM lohe ke DibboM meM
sone kI dInAreM DAlakara gar3avA diiN| samudra kA jala jaise golAkAra bhUmi ko
|ghera letA hai, vaise hI caMDapradyota kI senA ne rAjagRha ko cAroM ora se
ghera liyaa| abhayakumAra ne miSTabhASI gusacaroM ke mAraphata isa Azaya kA eka
patra likhakara bhejA avaMtinareza! zivAdevI aura cillaNAdevI meM Apa jarA bhI
aMtara mata smjhnaa| isa kAraNa zivAdevI ke nAte Apa mere liye sadA mAnanIya
hai| maiM Apako ekAMta hitabuddhi se salAha detA hUM ki mere pitA zreNika rAjA
ne Apake samasta rAjAoM meM phUTa DAla dI hai| unheM vaza meM karane ke lie rAjA
ne sone kI muhareM bhejI hai| unheM svayaM svIkAra karake ve Apako bAMdhakara
mere pitAjI ke supurda kara deNge| merI bAta para Apako vizvAsa na ho to Apa
unake nivAsasthAna ke nIce khudavAkara gar3I huI sone kI muhareM nikalavAkara
itamInAna kara leN| jalatA huA dIpaka maujuda ho to Aga kauna lenA cAhegA? yaha
jAnakara caMDapradyota ne eka rAjA ke par3Ava ke nIce kI jamIna khudavAyI to
vahAM para abhayakumAra ne jaisA kahA thA, usI rUpa meM svarNamadrAe~ mila gyii|
yaha dekhakara nirAza caMDapradyota vahAM se cupake se bhAga gyaa| usake bhAga
jAne se usakI sArI senA ko samudra ke samAna mathakara zreNika ne cAroM ora se
ghera liyaa| usa senA ke sArabhUta hAthI, ghor3e Adi zreNika ne apane kabje meM
kara liye| caMDapradyota ke nAka meM dama A gyaa| ataH kisI prakAra apanI jAna
bacAkara drutagAmI ghor3e se kisI bhI taraha apanI nagarI meM phuNcaa| ve
caudaha rAjA evaM anya mahArathI bhI kauoM kI taraha bhAga gye| kyoMki nAyaka ke
binA senA naSTa ho jAtI hai| caMDapradyota rAjA ke pIche-pIche jaba ve rAjA
ujjayinI pahuMce to unake bAla bikhare hue aura phUr-phUr ur3a rahe the, cehare
udAsa the, mastaka para chatra to kisI ke bhI nahIM thaa| una sabhI rAjAoM ne
caMDapradyota ko zapatha pUrvaka vizvAsa dilAyA ki 'mahArAja! hama kabhI aisA
vizvAsaghAta karane vAle nahIM hai| yaha sArI cAla abhayakumAra kI mAlUma hotI
hai| yaha jAnakara avaMtinareza ko abhayakumAra para bahuta roSa cddh'aa| eka
bAra avaMtipati ne apanI sabhA meM roSa pUrvaka kahA-'jo abhayakumAra ko bAMdha
karake yahAM lAkara mujhe sopegA, use maiM mana cAhA dhana inAma meM duuNgaa|'
eka vezyA ne patAkA ke samAna hAtha U~ce karake bIr3A uThAyA aura caMDapradyota
se vinati kI-rAjan! maiM isa kAma ko bakhUbIkara sakatI huuN| rAjA ne use usa
kArya ko karane kI saharSa anumati dii| aura kahA-isa kArya meM tumheM dhana Adi
kisI bhI cIja kI jarUrata ho to btaao| vezyA ne socA-abhayakumAra aura kisI
upAya se to pakar3a meM AnA muzkila hai, kevala dharmaprapaMca se hI maiM apanA
kArya siddha kara skuuNgii| ataH gaNikA ne do praur3ha striyoM kI mAMga kI,
apane sAtha le jAne ke lie| rAjA ne bahuta-sA dhana dekara gaNikA ke sAtha jAne
ke lie do striyA~ taiyAra kii| ve donoM striyA~ gaNikA ke sAtha chAyA kI taraha
rahane lgii| aba ye tInoM striyA~ hamezA sAdhviyoM kI sevAbhakti karatI thI,
unake prati Adara bhAva rakhatI thI isa kAraNa sAdhviyoM se bauddhika utkRSTatA
ke kAraNa bahutasA jJAna prApta kara liyaa| ve tInoM jagat ko Thagane ke lie
mAno tIna mAyA mUrtiyAM hoN| ve tInoM eka gAMva se dUsare gAMva ghUmatI huI
zreNika nRpa se alaMkRta rAjagRha nagara meM phuNcii| nagara ke bAhara udyAna
meM unhoMne apanA par3Ava ddaalaa| gaNikA una donoM sAthinoM ko lekara caitya-
paripATI karane kI icchA se nagara meM aayii| phira rAjA ke dvArA nirmi atizaya
bhaktibhAva parvaka tIna bAra naiSidhikI (nisIhi nisIhi karake una tInoM ne
praveza kiyaa| pratimApUjana karake usane mAlavakauzikI tarja meM laya aura
tAlasahita madharabhASA meM devavaMdana karanA prAraMbha kiyA 182

Page #205 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Abhay was handed over to Chandapradyot by the Maya-like Shravaka. Yoga Shastra,
Second Light, Verse 114 Abhaykumar had also come to pay homage to the Chaitya.
He saw these three women paying homage to the deity in front of the image.
Abhaykumar, thinking, 'If I enter, I will disturb them in their worship of the
deity,' did not enter the pavilion but stood at the door. When they stood up,
having made a vow with the Muktasuktimudra, Abhaykumar also came before them.
Seeing their devotion and peaceful attire, Abhaykumar praised them and said
happily, "Blessed are you, sisters! It is a great fortune that I have met such
virtuous sisters today. In this world, there is no other friend or sister
greater than a virtuous person. If you have no objection, tell me who you are,
where you come from, and where your home is. Who are these two women, like
Chandralekha, adorned with the stars Swati and Vishakha, who are with you?" The
fake Shravaka said, "I am the widowed wife of a wealthy merchant from Avanti.
After the death of my two sons, I became like a vine without the shade of a
tree, without support. These two are my widowed daughters-in-law. After becoming
widows, they asked my permission to take the Mahavrat. For widowed women,
initiation is the only refuge. I am now tired. Still, I will observe the vows
according to the householder's life. But I will do it only after I have gone on
a pilgrimage. When one takes the vow of restraint, one can only perform
devotional worship. Material worship can only be done in the householder's life,
not in the life of a Sadhvi. With this in mind, I have set out on a pilgrimage
with these two." Hearing this, Abhaykumar said, "Stay as my guest today. The
hospitality of a virtuous person who is going on a pilgrimage is more sacred
than the pilgrimage itself." The fake Shravaka replied, "You are right. But
because of the pilgrimage, I am fasting today, so how can I be your guest?"
Impressed by her devotion, Abhaykumar said again, "Then come to my place
tomorrow morning." She replied, "In a moment, life ends. In such a situation,
how can any intelligent person say that I will do this tomorrow? Your words are
right, then I accept your invitation for tomorrow." Saying this, he took leave
of them and went home himself, having paid homage to the Chaitya in the temple.
The next day, in the morning, Abhaykumar invited them and paid homage to the
Chaitya in his home temple and performed the devotion of receiving clothes. They
also invited Abhaykumar for a day. Trusting them, Abhaykumar went alone to their
place. What do virtuous people not do for the sake of a virtuous person? They
also fed Abhaykumar various kinds of delicious food. And they gave him
Chandrahās, a drink mixed with alcohol. As soon as he got up from the meal,
Abhaykumar fell asleep. For the first companion of drinking is sleep. According
to the pre-planned arrangement, because of the chariots kept in place, no one
knew about this conspiracy, and in a state of unconsciousness, the cunning
courtesan took Abhaykumar to Ujjayini. Meanwhile, King Shrenik sent servants all
over to search for Abhaykumar. Searching from place to place, the servants also
reached the place where the courtesan was staying. The servants asked her, "Did
Abhaykumar come here?" The courtesan said, "Yes, he did come, but he left at the
same time." Trusting her words, the searchers went elsewhere. Horses were also
kept in place for the prostitute. So she got on a horse and reached Ujjayini.
After that, the cunning courtesan, skilled in the art of deception, handed
Abhaykumar over to King Chandapradyot. When asked how and in what way she
brought him, she told the whole story of her cunning from beginning to end. To
this, Chandapradyot said, "You have deceived a religious person, this is not a
proper act." Then Chandapradyot said to Abhaykumar, "Just as the parrot who says
'save me from the cat' seventeen times is caught by the cat itself, so too, how
did you get caught even though you are a wise man?" Abhaykumar said, "You
yourself are wise, that is why you rule the kingdom with such wisdom." Out of
shame and anger, Chandapradyot imprisoned Abhaykumar in a wooden cage like a
swan. In Chandapradyot's kingdom, there were the Agnibhīru chariot, the
Shivadevi, the Nalagiri elephant, and the Lohjangh scribe. The Lohjangh scribe
used to be sent to Bhrigukachchha again and again. Because of the scribe's
frequent coming and going, the people became distressed and consulted with each
other, saying, "This scribe travels twenty-five yojanas a day, and he bothers us
again and again, so..." 1. This does not appear in other narratives. 183

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 abhaya ko mAyAvinI zrAvikA ne caMDapradyota ko sauMpA yogazAstra dvitIya
prakAza zloka 114 abhayakumAra bhI caityavaMdana karane AyA huA thaa| usane ina
tInoM ko vahIM pratimA ke saMmukha devavaMdana karate hue dekhaa| abhayakumAra
yaha socakara raMgamaMDapa meM praveza na karake dvAra para hI khar3A rahA ki
'agara maiM aMdara praveza karUMgA to inheM | devavaMdana karane meM khalala
phuNcegii| jaba ve muktAzuktimudrA se praNidhAna karake khar3I huI to
abhayakumAra bhI unake sammukha | aayaa| unakI isa prakAra kI bhAvanA aura
zAMtaveza dekhakara abhayakumAra unakI prazaMsA karatA huA prasannatApUrvaka
unase kahane lagA-bhadre ! ahobhAgya se Aja Apa jaisI sAdharmI bahanoM kA
samAgama huA hai| isa saMsAra meM vivekI AtmAoM ke lie sAdharmI se bar3hakara
dUsarA koI baMdhu yA bhaginI nahIM hai| agara Apako batAne meM koI Apatti na to
batAie ki Apa kauna hai? kahAM se AyI hai? ApakA nivAsa sthAna kahAM para hai?
svAti aura vizAkhA nakSatra se suzobhita | caMdralekhA kI bhAMti Apake sAtha meM
ye donoM mahilAe~ kauna hai? usa banAvaTI zrAvikA ne kahA- maiM avaMtivAsI eka
bar3e | seTha kI vidhavA dharmapatnI huuN| mere do putroM kI mRtyu ho jAne se
vRkSa kI chAyA ke binA latA kI taraha se nirAdhAra banI | huI ye donoM merI
vidhavA putravadhue~ haiN| vidhavA hone ke bAda mahAvrata aMgIkAra karane kI
icchA se inhoMne mujha se anumati maaNgii| kyoMki vidhavA nAriyoM ke lie dIkSA
hI zaraNya hai| maiM to aba thaka gayI huuN| phira bhI gRhasthAvasthA ke anurUpa
vrata dhAraNa kruuNgii| paraMtu karUMgI tIrthayAtrAkara lene ke bAda hI  /
saMyamagrahaNa karane para to sirpha bhAvapUjA hI ho sakatI hai  /  dravyapUjA
gRhastha jIvana meM hI ho sakatI hai; sAdhvIjIvana meM ho nahIM sktii| isa dRSTi
se ina donoM ke sAtha maiM | tIrthayAtrA karane ko nikalI huuN| yaha sunakara
abhayakumAra ne kahA- Aja Apa mere yahAM atithi baneM  /  tIrthayAtrA karane
vAle sAdharmika kA satkAra tIrtha se bhI adhika pavitra karane vAlA hotA hai|
nakalI zrAvikA ne uttara diyA- Apa ThIka | kaha rahe haiN| paraMtu tIrtha ke
nimitta se Aja merA upavAsa hone ke kAraNa Aja ApakI atithi kaise bana sakatI
hUM? usakI | dharmabhAvanA se prabhAvita hokara abhayakumAra ne phira kahA- to
phira kala prAtaH kAla mere yahAM jarUra padhAranA  /  usane pratyuttara | diyA
- eka kSaNabhara meM jahAM jIvana samApta ho jAtA hai, aisI sthiti meM koI bhI
buddhizAlI yaha kaise kaha sakatA hai ki maiM subaha yaha karUMgA? ApakI yaha
bAta ThIka hai, to phira kala ke lie nimaMtraNa karatA huuN| aisA kahakara unase
vidA hokara svayaM maMdira meM caityavaMdana karake abhayakumAra ghara calA
gyaa| dUsare dina subaha unheM nimaMtraNa dekara abhayakumAra ne gRhamaMdira meM
caityavaMdana kiyA aura vastra grahaNa karane kI bhakti kii| unhoMne bhI eka
dina abhayakumAra ko nimaMtraNa diyA  /  vizvasta hokara abhayakumAra akelA hI
unake yahAM gyaa| | sAdharmika ke Agraha se sAdharmika kyA nahIM karate? unhoMne
bhI abhayakumAra ko vividha prakAra kA svAdiSTa bhojana kraayaa| | aura
caMdrahAsa madirAmizrita jalapAna kraayaa| bhojana se uThate hI abhayakumAra so
gyaa| kyoMki madyapAna kI prathama sahacarI nidrA hotI hai| pahale se socI huI
vyavasthA ke anusAra sthAna-sthAna para rakhe hue rathoM ke kAraNa koI isa
SaDyaMtra ko | jAna nahIM sakA aura behozI kI hAlata meM hI kapaTagRhasamA
gaNikA ne abhayakumAra ko ujjayinI pahuMcA diyaa| idhara abhayakumAra kI talAza
karane ke lie zreNika rAjA ne cAroM ora sevaka daudd'aae| sthAna-sthAna para
khoja karate hue sevaka vahAM bhI pahuMce, jahAM gaNikA ThaharI huI thii|
sevakoM ne usase pUchA- kyA abhayakumAra yahAM AyA hai? gaNikA ne kahA- hAM, AyA
jarUra thA, magara vaha usI samaya calA gyaa| unake usa vacana para vizvAsa
rakhakara DhUMDhane vAle anyatra | cale gaye  /  vezyA ke lie bhI sthAna-sthAna
para ghor3e rakhe gaye the| ataH vaha ghor3e para baiThakara ujjayinI pahuMca
gyii| usake | bAda pracaMDa kapaTa kalA pravINa vezyA ne abhayakumAra ko
caMDapradyota rAjA ke supurda kiyaa| caMDapradyota rAjA ke dvArA kaise | aura
kisa taraha lAI ? ityAdi vivaraNa pUchane para usane apane cAturya kI sArI
ghaTanA AdyopAMta khii| isa para caMDapradyota | ne kahA - dharmavizvAsI vyakti
ko tUM dharmachala karake lAyI hai, yaha kArya ucita nahIM kiyaa| phira
caMDapradyota ne abhayakumAra | se kahA- jaise 17 bAra billI se bacane kA kahane
vAlA totA svayaM billI se pakar3A jAtA hai, vaise hI nItijJa hokara bhI tuma
kaise pakar3e gaye? abhayakumAra ne kahA- Apa svayaM buddhizAlI hai, tabhI to
isa prakAra kI buddhi se rAjadharma calAte haiN| lajjA aura krodha se
caMDapradyota ne abhayakumAra ko rAjahaMsa ke samAna kASTha ke pIMjare meM baMda
kara diyA  /  1 caMDapradyota ke rAjya meM agnibhIru ratha, zivAdevI, nalagiri
hAthI, lohajaMgha lekhavAhaka ratna the  /  lohajaMgha lekhavAhaka ko bAra| bAra
bhRgukaccha bhejA karatA thA  /  lekhavAhaka ke bhI vahAM bArabAra Ane jAne se
loga vyAkula ho gaye aura unhoMne paraspara | maMtraNA kI ki 'yaha lekhavAhaka
dinabhara meM 25 yojana kI yAtrA karatA hai, aura bAra bAra hameM parezAna
karatA hai, ataH 1. yaha bAta anya kathAnaka meM nahIM aatii| 183

Page #206 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Chandrapradyot was entrusted to Abhaykumar. Thinking, 'By any means, he should
be killed now,' they gave him laddoos mixed with poison in his food on the way.
And they took away all the other things like food (pathya) etc. from him.
Lohjang, after traveling a long distance, sat down to eat by a river. But
knowing that it was an inauspicious time, he went ahead without eating. Being
hungry, he stopped again to eat; the omen told him not to eat this time either.
He went straight to King Chandrapradyot without eating. And he told him all that
had happened. Chandrapradyot called Abhaykumar and asked him what to do. The
intelligent Abhaykumar sniffed the food kept in the bag and said, 'This contains
a poison snake that is born from the combination of such and such substances. If
this leather bag is opened, it will surely burn and be reduced to ashes.' As per
Abhaykumar's instructions, the king sent a servant to throw the bag upside down
in the forest and leave it there. As a result, the trees there were burnt to
ashes and the snake also died. Pleased with Abhaykumar's intelligence,
Chandrapradyot said to him, 'Ask for any boon except release from bondage.'
Abhaykumar said, 'Let my boon remain in your custody for now.' One day,
Chandrapradyot's elephant, Nalgiri, uprooted the pillar to which it was tied and
threw two mahouts to the ground. Then, intoxicated, it roamed freely in the
city, surprising the city dwellers. The king asked Abhaykumar, 'How can the wild
elephant be tamed?' Abhaykumar suggested that if King Udayan played music, the
elephant could be tamed. Udayan, who was imprisoned to teach his daughter
Vasavadatta the Gandharva Vidya, sang there with Vasavadatta. Nalgiri, the
elephant, was attracted by the music and stopped to listen, when he was tied
with strong chains. The king was again pleased and asked Abhaykumar to ask for a
boon. He also kept it in trust with Abhaykumar. Once, a fire broke out in
Avanti, which could not be extinguished. King Chandrapradyot again panicked and
asked Abhaykumar for a way to extinguish the fire. Abhaykumar said, 'Poison
kills poison, similarly fire extinguishes fire. Therefore, you light another
fire in front of that fire, so that it will extinguish itself.' This was done.
As a result, the raging fire was extinguished. Now what, the king asked
Abhaykumar to ask for a third boon. He also kept it in trust. Once, there was an
epidemic in Ujjayini. People started dying one after another. The king asked
Abhaykumar for a remedy to pacify the epidemic, and he said, 'All the queens
should come to you in the inner palace adorned with ornaments, and the queen who
wins you over with her sight, you should tell me. Then I will tell you what to
do next.' The king did the same. In the battle of sight, all the queens lost,
but Shivadevi won over the king. He called Abhaykumar and told him the whole
story. He said, 'Shivadevi should worship the ghosts with cruel offerings at
night. Whatever ghosts rise in the form of jackals and make a sound, the goddess
should put the cruel offering in their mouths herself.' Shivadevi did the same,
as a result, the epidemic subsided. Pleased with this, the king gave Abhaykumar
a fourth boon. At that time, Abhaykumar asked, 'You should be sitting on the
elephant Nalgiri as a mahout, and I should be sitting in Shivadevi's lap, and in
this very state, I should enter the pyre made of wood of the Agnibhīru chariot.'
Unable to give this boon, King Chandrapradyot sadly folded his hands and gave
permission to Shrenikputra Abhaykumar to go to his city. Abhaykumar also
promised while leaving, 'You have deceitfully caught me and brought me here, but
I will take you out of the city shouting loudly in broad daylight.' From there,
Abhaykumar reached Rajgriha. And the intelligent Abhay spent some time
peacefully in Rajgriha. One day, Abhaykumar, dressed as a merchant, arrived in
Avanti with two beautiful courtesan daughters. On the highway 184

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 caMDapradyota ko abhayakumAra supurda kiyA yogazAstra dvitIya prakAza zloka 114
kisI bhI upAya se aba ise mAra diyA jaay|' aisA vicArakara unhoMne usake rAste
ke khAne meM viSamizrita laDDU diye aura usake pAsa se dUsarA bhAtA (pAtheya)
Adi sabhI vastue~ chIna liiN| lohajaMgha calate-calate bahuta-sA mArga tayakara
lene ke bAda eka nadI ke kinAre bhojana karane baitthaa| paraMtu usa samaya
apazakuna huA jAnakara vaha binA khAye hI Age cala pdd'aa| bhUkhA hone se khAne
ke lie phira vaha eka jagaha rukA; zakuna ne use isa bAra bhI na khAne kA
saMketa kiyaa| vaha binA khAye hI sIdhA caMDapradyota rAjA ke pAsa phuNcaa| aura
sArI ApabItI sunaayii| caMDapradyota ne abhayakumAra ko bulAkara pUchA ki kyA
upAya karanA cAhie? buddhizAlI abhayakumAra ne thailI meM rakhA huA bhojana
sUMghakara kahA- 'isameM amuka dravya ke saMyoga se utpanna hone vAlA dRSTiviSa
sarpa hai| agara isa camar3e kI thailI ko khola diyA jAyegA to yaha avazya hI
jalakara bhasma ho jaaygaa|' abhayakumAra ke kahe anusAra sevaka ko bhejakara
rAjA ne vaha thailI jaMgala meM ulaTI karavAkara vahIM chor3a dii| isase vahAM
ke vRkSa jalakara bhasma ho gaye aura vaha sarpa bhI mara gyaa| abhayakumAra kI
buddhikuzalatA se prasanna hokara caMDapradyota ne use kahA-baMdhanamukti ke
sivAya koI bhI varadAna maaNgo| abhayakumAra ne kahA-'merA varadAna abhI Apake
pAsa amAnata rahane diijie|' eka dina caMDapradyota rAjA ke nalagiri hAthI ne,
jisa khaMbhe se baMdhA huA thA, use jar3a se ukhAr3akara do mahAvatoM ko jamIna
para paTaka diyaa| phira matavAlA hokara nagara meM svacchaMda ghumatA huA
nagaravAsiyoM ko hairAna karane lgaa| rAjA ne abhayakumAra se pUchA-'svacchaMda
hAthI ko kaise vaza meM kiyA jAya?' abhayakumAra ne upAya batAyA ki agara
udayana rAjA saMgIta sunAe to hAthI vaza meM ho sakatA hai|' vAsavadattA nAmakI
putrI ko gAMdharva vidyA par3hAne ke lie kaida kiye hue udayana ne vAsavadattA
ke sAtha vahAM gIta gaayaa| nalagiri hAthI saMgIta se AkarSita hokara sunane ke
lie vahAM rukA, tabhI use majabUta sAMkala se bAMdha diyaa| 'rAjA ne phira
prasanna hokara abhayakumAra se varadAna mAMgane ko khaa| use bhI abhayakumAra
ne anAmata ke rUpa meM rakhavA diyaa| eka bAra avaMti meM aisI Aga lagI, jo
bujhAI nahIM jA sakatI thii| rAjA caMDapradyota ne phira ghabarAkara
abhayakumAra se Aga bujhAne kA upAya puuchaa| abhayakumAra ne kahA- 'jahara se
jahara maratA hai, isI taraha Aga se Aga bujhatI hai| isalie Apa usa Aga ke
sAmane dUsarI Aga jalAo, jisase vaha Aga svataH bujha jaayegii|' aisA hI kiyA
gyaa| phalataH vaha pracaMDa Aga bujha gyii| aba kyA thA, rAjA ne abhayakumAra
ko tIsarA varadAna mAMgane ko khaa| vaha bhI usane | amAnata ke rUpa meM rakhavA
diyaa| eka bAra ujjayinI meM mahAmArI kA upadrava huaa| loga TapATapa marane
lge| rAjA ne mahAmArI kI zAMti ke lie |abhayakumAra se upAya pUchA to usane
kahA-sabhI rAniyA~ alaMkAroM se susajjita hokara Apake pAsa aMtaHpura meM Ave,
jo rAnI Apako dRSTi se jIta le, taba use mujhe btaanaa| phira maiM Age kA upAya
btaauuNgaa| rAjA ne usI prakAra kiyaa| dRSTiyuddha meM aura to sabhI rAniyA~
hAra gayI, kintu zivAdevI ne rAjA ko jIta liyaa| abhayakumAra ko bulAkara sArI
hakIkata btaayii| usane kahA-zivAdevI rAta ko svayaM krUrabali se bhUtoM kI pUjA
kre| jo-jo bhUta siyAra kA rUpa banAkara uThe aura AvAja kareM, usake muMha meM
devI svayaM krUrabali ddaale| zivAdevI ne isI taraha kiyA, phalataH mahAmArI kA
upadrava zAMta ho gyaa| isase khuza hokara rAjA ne abhayakumAra ko cauthA
varadAna diyaa| usa samaya abhayakumAra ne mAMga kI-'Apa nalagiri hAthI para
mahAvata banakara baiThe hoM aura maiM zivAdevI kI goda meM baiThA hoUM aura isI
sthiti meM hI agnibhIru ratha kI lakar3I kI banAyI huI citA meM praveza kruuN|'
isa varadAna ko dene meM asamartha caMDapradyota rAjA ne udAsa hokara hAtha
jor3akara zreNikaputra abhayakumAra ko apanI nagarI meM jAne kI AjJA dii|
abhayakumAra ne bhI jAte samaya pratijJA kI-Apane mujhe kapaTa pUrvaka
pakar3avAkara maMgAyA hai, lekina maiM dina-dahAr3e jora-jora se cillAte hue
Apako nagara se le jaauuNgaa| vahAM se abhayakumAra rAjagRha phuNcaa| aura
buddhimAna abhaya ne kucha samaya rAjagRhI meM hI zAMti se bitaayaa| eka dina do
rUpavatI gaNikA-putriyoM ko lekara abhayakumAra eka vyApArI ke veza meM avaMti
phuNcaa| rAjamArga ke 184

Page #207 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Abhayakumar's liberation, binding Chandrapradyot and bringing him back Yoga
Shastra, Second Light, Verse 114. He had rented a house nearby. While passing
that way, Chandrapradyot saw those two courtesans one day. From the point of
view of pleasure, Chandrapradyot looked at them. As a result, Chandrapradyot
became infatuated with them. Upon reaching the palace, Chandrapradyot sent a
messenger to the two courtesans to seek their consent for union. But they
rejected the messenger's proposal. The next day, the messenger again came and
requested the king for union. Even then, the two of them, in anger, showed some
disrespect. On the third day, the messenger pleaded with them again. Then the
two of them said, "Our virtuous brother is our protector. He will go to another
village on the seventh day from today. If the king comes here secretly then,
union can happen." The messenger went and told Chandrapradyot everything. After
the messenger left, Abhayakumar made a man who looked like Chandrapradyot mad
and named him Chandrapradyot too. Then Abhayakumar started telling people, "Hey!
My brother doesn't let me sit peacefully. He makes me wander here and there. I
am responsible for his protection. I don't understand how to protect him."
Abhayakumar used to put him to sleep on a cot every day and take him out, as if
he was suffering from a disease and he was taking him to a physician. Now, when
that madman was taken from the crossroads, he would shout loudly, shed tears and
cry, "Hey, I am Chandrapradyot, these people are kidnapping me!" Exactly on the
seventh day, the lustful Chandrapradyot, the king, came alone, like an elephant.
As per the prior arrangement, Abhayakumar's men bound him. Then, saying, "I am
taking him to the physician," Abhayakumar, with the cot, kidnapped King
Chandrapradyot in broad daylight, while shouting. He placed Chandrapradyot in a
chariot, which was already prepared with swift horses, and the fearless
Abhayakumar took him straight to the royal palace. Then he presented King
Chandrapradyot before King Shrenik. King Shrenik drew his sword and ran to kill
him, but Abhayakumar intervened and stopped him from doing so. Afterwards, he
honored him, gave him clothes and ornaments, and released King Chandrapradyot
with joy. Once, a woodcutter, disgusted with the world, took initiation from the
brilliant Ganadhar Shri Sudharmaswami. But when he wandered in the city, the
city dwellers, remembering his former state, made fun of him everywhere and
criticized him. Disturbed by this, he said to Sudharmaswami, "Gurudev! I am
unable to bear the humiliation by staying here. Therefore, I want to wander
elsewhere." Due to this, Sudharmaswami was also preparing to wander elsewhere.
When Abhayakumar saw this, he asked Ganadhar Maharaj the reason for wandering
elsewhere. He simply told him the reason for his wandering elsewhere.
Abhayakumar bowed to Ganadhar Maharaj and humbly requested, "Lord! Please grace
us by staying here for one more day. After that, do as you deem fit."
Abhayakumar had three heaps of jewels worth one crore each taken out from the
state treasury and placed them in the public market where there was a lot of
traffic, and he had an announcement made in the city, "Citizens! Listen; I
(Abhayakumar) am going to donate these three heaps of jewels. Hearing this, the
city dwellers gathered at the scene. Addressing that crowd, Abhayakumar said,
"People! Whoever among you will renounce water, fire and women for life, will be
given these three heaps of jewels. Speak, is anyone ready to make such a
renunciation?" The people present said, "Minister! It is very difficult for us
to make such a lifelong renunciation. Only a few can make such a transcendental
renunciation." To this, Abhayakumar rebuked them, "If none of you can make such
a renunciation, then should the three crore worth jewels be given to the
woodcutter who has renounced water, fire and women for life and has become a
great sage? Such a renunciant sage is worthy of this donation. But we people are
such that..."  1. This is not mentioned in other stories. 185

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 abhayakumAra kI mukti, caMDapradyota ko bAMdhakara lAnA yogazAstra dvitIya
prakAza zloka 114 pAsa hI usane eka makAna kirAye para le liyaa| usa rAste se
jAte hue caMDapradyota ne eka dina una donoM vezyAoM ko  /  vilAsa kI dRSTi se
caMDapradyota kI ora dekhaa| phalataH caMDapradyota una para mohita ho gyaa|
mahala meM pahaMcakara caMDapradyota ne una donoM gaNikAoM ko samajhAkara
samAgama kI svikRti ke lie datI bhejii| paraMtu unhoMne datI kI bAta ThukarA
dii| dUsare dina phira dUtI ne Akara rAjA se samAgama ke lie prArthanA kii| taba
bhI una donoM ne roSa meM Akara kucha anAdara btaayaa| tIsare dina bhI unase
dUtI ne yAcanA kii| taba ina donoM ne kahA-hamArA sadAcArI bhAI hI hamArA
saMrakSaka hai| Aja se sAtaveM dina vaha dUsare gAMva jAyegA, taba agara gupta
rUpa se rAjA yahAM AyegA to samAgama ho skegaa| dUtikA ne jAkara sArI bAta
caMDapradyota se khii| dUtI ke cale jAne ke bAda abhayakumAra ne caMDapradyota
se milate-julate cehare vAle eka AdamI ko pAgala banAyA aura usakA nAma bhI
caMDapradyota rkhaa| phira abhayakumAra logoM | se kahane lagA-'are! merA bhAI
mujhe caina se nahIM baiThane detA vaha mujhe idhara-udhara ghUmAtA hai| usakI
rakSA kI mujha para jimmevArI hai| samajha meM nahIM AtA, kaise usakI rakSA kI
jAya? abhayakumAra rojAnA use khATa para sulAkara bAhara le jAtA thA, mAno vaha
roga se pIr3ita ho aura use vaidya ke yahAM le jAte hoN| aba usa pAgala ko
caurAhe se le jAyA jAtA, taba vaha jora-jora se cillAtA, A~sU bahAtA aura rotA
huA kahatA-'are, maiM caMDapradyota hUM, merA apaharaNa karake le jA rahe haiM
ye loga!' ThIka sAtaveM dina vahAM gupta rUpa se hAthI kI taraha kAmAMdha
caMDapradyota rAjA akelA hI aayaa| pUrvasaMketa ke anusAra abhayakumAra ke
AdamiyoM ne use bAMdha diyA, taba 'maiM ise vaidya ke pAsa le jA rahA hUM', yoM
kahate hue abhayakumAra ne palaMga ke sAtha nagara meM dina-dahAr3e cillAte hue
rAjA caMDapradyota kA apaharaNa kiyaa| pahale se kosakosa para taiyAra karake
rakhe hue tejatarrAra ghor3oM se jute ratha meM caMDapradyota ko biThAkara
nirbhIka abhayakumAra use sIdhA rAjagRha le aayaa| phira caMDapradyota rAjA ko
usane zreNika rAjA ke sAmane prastuta kiyaa| zreNika rAjA talavAra khIMcakara
use mArane daur3A, magara abhayakumAra ne bIca meM par3akara unheM aisA karane
se rokaa| tatpazcAt sammAna karake vastrAbhUSaNa dekara prasannatA se
caMDapradyota rAjA ko chor3a diyaa| eka bAra tejasvI gaNadhara zrI sudharmAsvAmI
ke pAsa saMsAra se virakta hokara kisI lakar3ahAre ne dIkSA le lii| kintu jaba
vaha nagara meM vicaraNa karatA, taba nagaravAsI usakI pUrvAvasthA ko yAda
karake jagaha-jagaha usakI majAka ur3Ate aura usakI niMdA krte| isase kSubdha
hokara usane sudharmA svAmI se kahA-gurudeva! maiM yahAM rahakara apamAna sahane
meM asamartha huuN| ataH anyatra vihAra karanA cAhatA huuN| isa kAraNa
sudharmAsvAmI bhI anyatra vihAra karane kI taiyArI kara | rahe the| abhayakumAra
ne jaba yaha dekhA to usane gaNadharamahArAja se anyatra vihAra karane kA kAraNa
puuchaa| unhoMne saralatA se apane anyatra vihAra kA kAraNa batA diyaa|
abhayakumAra ne gaNadhara mahArAja ko vaMdanA karake vinaya pUrvaka prArthanA
kIprabho! eka dina aura adhika yahAM virAjane kI kRpA kareM, usake bAda Apako
jaisA ucita lage vaise krnaa| abhayakumAra ne rAjyakoSa se eka-eka karor3a kI
kImata ke ratnoM ke tIna Dhera nikalavAkara Ama bAjAra meM jahAM logoM kA
AvAgamana jyAdA rahatA thA, vahAM lagavA diye aura nagara meM DhiMDhorA
piTavAkara ghoSaNA karavA dI-'nAgariko! suno; mujhe (abhayakumAra ko) ratnoM ke
ye tInoM Dhera dAna karane haiN| yaha sunakara nagaranivAsiyoM kI ghaTanAsthala
para bhIr3a laga gyii| usa bhIr3a ko saMbodhita karate hue abhayakumAra ne kahA-
prajAjano! Apa meM se jo sacitta jala, agni aura strI ina tIna cIjoM kA
jiMdagIbhara ke lie tyAga karegA. use ratnoM ke ye tInoM Dhera diye jaayeNge|
bolo hai. koI taiyAra. aisA tyAga karane ke lie? upasthita loga kahane lage-
maMtrivara! AjIvana aisA tyAga karanA to hamAre liye bahuta kaThIna hai| aisA
lokottara tyAga to virale hI kara sakate haiN| isa para abhayakumAra ne ulAhanA
dete hue kahA-'yadi tumameM se koI bhI aisA tyAga nahIM kara sakatA to phira
tIna karor3a mUlya ke ratna sacitta jala, agni aura strI kA AjIvana tyAga karake
mahAmuni bana jAne vAle lakar3ahAre ko de diye jAya? isa prakAra ke tyAgI sAdhu
hI isa dAna ke lie supAtra hai| lekina hama loga aise 1. yaha bAta anya kathA
meM nahIM hai| 185

Page #208 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The initiation of fearlessness, the praise of contentment, the removal of
disbelief towards the Muni.  Yoga Shastra, Second Light, Verse 115: The
renunciant sadhus are mocked in vain. What right do we have to insult such a
renunciant, when we ourselves are incapable of such renunciation? We should
apologize to them. In the future, we should never despise, disregard, or
ridicule them or any other sadhu. Thus, at the request of Abhaykumar, the people
pledged their word and went to their respective places.  In this way,
Abhaykumar, the ocean of wisdom, devoted to his father, detached, and devoted to
dharma, ruled his father's kingdom in a well-organized manner. Only one who
practices dharma himself can make others practice dharma. The nature of the
people and animals is subject to the leader and the animal keeper. On the one
hand, just as Abhaykumar relieved the king by taking on the burden of state
affairs, on the other hand, he also became a steadfast mind by accepting the
twelve vows of Shravak dharma. Just as he conquered the powerful enemies
outside, he also conquered the internal enemies, obstacles in both worlds.  One
day, King Shrenik said to him, "My son! Now you take care of this kingdom, so
that I can serve the glorious Veer Paramatma with a peaceful mind." Abhaykumar,
fearful of disobeying his father's command and also of worldly wandering, said,
"Father! Your command is beautiful, but please wait a while." At that time, Lord
Mahavira was also returning to Rajgriha from the desert, after initiating King
Udayan. Abhaykumar went to his feet and bowed.  He asked the omniscient
Tirthankara, "Lord! Who will be the last Rajarshi in your presence?" In reply,
the Lord said, "Consider Udayan to be the last Rajarshi." Abhaykumar immediately
went to King Shrenik and said, "Father! If I become king, then I will not be
able to become a Rishi; because Veer Prabhu has declared Udayan to be the last
Rajarshi. And having found a master like Veer Prabhu and a righteous father like
you, if I do not cut off the sorrows of the world, then who else will be more
wicked and insane than me? Therefore, father, I am called Abhay, but I am
extremely afraid of the world. Therefore, please give me permission so that I
can become completely fearless by taking refuge in the glorious Veer Prabhu, who
gives fearlessness to the three worlds. What benefit do I have from this
kingdom, which is a source of pride and attachment to worldly pleasures? Because
the great sages find happiness not in desire, but in contentment."  When
Abhaykumar was not eager to accept the kingdom, even after repeated requests
from King Shrenik, the king, being helpless, readily gave his permission to take
initiation. Abhaykumar, who desired the happiness of contentment, renounced the
kingdom as if it were a straw and, with a spirit of detachment, accepted
initiation at the lotus feet of the supreme Tirthankara Mahavira. The
benevolent, contentment-bearing Shri Abhaykumar Muni, after completing his
lifespan, went to the Devaloka called Sarvarth Siddha. Thus, any other person
who takes refuge in the happiness of contentment also attains increasing
happiness, like Abhaykumar. This is the life story of Abhaykumar, the devotee of
contentment. ||114||  Now, the prevalent topic is the praise of contentment.
||171||  "Sanni dhau nidhayas tasya, kaama gavy anugaamini. Amaraa
kinkaraayante, santosho yasya bhooshanam." ||115||  Meaning: He who has the
ornament of contentment, understand that the nine treasures, including Padma,
are in his hands; the Kamadhenu cow follows him, and the gods serve him as
servants. ||115||  Explanation: The Muni, who is a devotee of contentment, can
drop a heap of jewels from the tip of a straw due to the influence of calmness.
They are capable of giving fruits according to their wishes, and the gods are
eager to serve them in competition. There is no doubt about it.  Here we present
the meaning of some verses related to contentment: 1. Wealth, 2. Grain, 3. Gold,
4. Silver, 5. Other metals, 6. Fields, 7. Houses, 8. Bipeds, 9. Quadrupeds;
these are nine types of external possessions. 1. Attachment, 2. Aversion, 3.
Other stories mention taking initiation without asking.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 muni ke prati azraddhA nivAraNa abhaya kI dIkSA, saMtoSa kI prazaMsA yogazAstra
dvitIya prakAza zloka 115 tyAgI sAdhu kI vyartha hI hAMsI ur3Ate haiN| hameM kyA
adhikAra hai ki isa prakAra kA tyAga karane meM azakta hama loga aise tyAgI kA
apamAna kare? hameM unase kSamA mAMganI caahie| AyaMdA, hameM kabhI inakA yA
kisI bhI sAdhu kA tiraskAra, avagaNanA yA upahAsa nahIM karanA caahie| isa
prakAra abhayakumAra ke nivedana para logoM ne unakA vacana zirodhArya kiyA aura
apane-apane sthAna para cale gye| isa prakAra buddhi kA sAgara, pitRbhakta meM
tatpara, niHspRha, dharmAnurAgI abhayakumAra pitA ke zAsana ko suvyavasthita
rUpa se calAtA thaa| jo svayaM dharmAcaraNa karatA ho, vahI janatA se
dharmAcaraNa karA sakatA hai| janatA aura pazu kI vRtti, netA aura pazupAlaka ke
adhIna hotI hai| eka ora, jaise abhayakumAra ne rAjyakAryabhAra svayaM uThAkara
rAjA ko nizciMtakara diyA, vaise hI dUsarI ora vaha bAraha vratoM vAlA
zrAvakadharma svIkArakara apramattacitta bhI bnaa| jisa taraha usane bAhara ke
durjaya zatruoM ko jItA, vaise hI donoM loka meM bAdhaka aMtaraMga zatruoM ko
bhI jItatA thaa| eka dina rAjA zreNika ne usase kahA-vatsa! aba isa rAjya ko
tuma saMbhAlo, tAki maiM nizciMta hokara zrIvIra paramAtmA kI sevAbhakti kara
skuuN| pitA kI AjJA ke bhaMga se aura saMsAra paribhramaNa se bhIru abhayakumAra
ne kahApitAjI! ApakI AjJA suMdara hai, lekina kucha samaya pratIkSA kiijie|
bhagavAn mahAvIra bhI una dinoM udAyana rAjA ko dIkSA dekara marubhUmi se vihAra
karate hue rAjagRha padhAra gye| abhayakumAra ne unake caraNoM meM pahuMcakara
namaskAra kiyA aura sarvajJa tIrthakara prabhu se pUchA-prabho! ApakI
vidyamAnatA meM aMtima rAjarSi kauna hoMge? isake uttara meM bhagavAn ne kahA-
udAyana ko hI aMtima rAjarSi smjhnaa| abhayakumAra ne usI samaya zreNika rAjA ke
pAsa Akara nivedana kiyApitAjI! yadi maiM rAjA bana gayA to phira RSi nahIM bana
sakU~gA; kyoMki vIraprabhu ne aMtima rAjarSi udAyana ko batAyA hai| aura
vIraprabhu jaise svAmI mile hoM aura Apa jaise dharmiSTha pitA mile hoM, phira
bhI maiM saMsAra ke duHkhoM kA chedana na karUM to mere sarIkhA adhama aura
unmatta aura kauna hogA? isalie pitAjI abhI to maiM nAma se abhaya haM. magara
saMsAra se atyaMta bhayabhIta huuN| isalie mujhe AjJA dIjie, tAki tribhuvana ko
abhayadAna dene vAle zrIvIraprabhu kA Azraya lekara pUrNa abhaya bana jaauuN|
abhimAna-varddhaka evaM vaiSayika sukhAsakti kAraka isa rAjya se mujhe kyA
lAbha? kyoMki maharSi loga tRSNA meM nahIM, apitu saMtoSa meM sukha mAnate haiN|
abhayakumAra se zreNika rAjA ke bArabAra atyaMta Agraha karane para bhI jaba
vaha rAjya grahaNa karane ko tatpara nahIM huA, taba vivaza hokara zreNikarAjA
ne usI dIkSA lene kI saharSa anumati de dii| saMtoSasukhAbhilASI abhayakumAra ne
rAjya ko tinake ke samAna tyAgakara vairAgyabhAva se carama tIrthaMkara mahAvIra
prabhu ke caraNakamaloM meM dIkSA aMgIkAra kii| sukha pradAyaka, saMtoSa ke
dhAraka zrI abhayakumAramuni AyuSya pUrNa karake sarvArthasiddha nAmaka devaloka
meM gye| isa prakAra saMtoSa sukha kA AlaMbana lene vAlA anya vyakti bhI
abhayakumAra ke samAna uttarottara sukha prApta karatA hai| yaha hai|
saMtoSavratI abhayakumAra kI jIvanagAthA  /  / 114 /  /  aba pracalita viSaya-
saMtoSa kI hI prazaMsA karate haiN|171| sannidhau nidhayastasya,
kAmagavyanugAminI  /  amarAH kiGkarAyante, santoSo yasya bhuussnnm||115|| artha
:- jisake pAsa saMtoSa rUpI AbhUSaNa haiM, samajha lo, padma Adi nau nidhiyA~
usake hAtha meM haiM; kAmadhenu gAya to usake pIche-pIche phiratI hai aura
devatA bhI dAsa banakara usakI sevA karate haiM  /  / 115 /  /  vyAkhyA :-
saMtoSavratI muni zama ke prabhAva se tinake kI noka se ratnarAzi ko girA sakate
haiN| ve icchAnusAra phala dene vAle hote haiM, devatA bhI pratispardhA pUrvaka
usakI sevA ke lie udyata rahate haiN| isameM koI saMzaya nahIM hai| saMtoSa ke
hI saMbaMdha meM kucha zlokoM kA artha yahAM prastuta karate haiM-1. dhana, 2.
dhAnya, 3. sonA, 4. cAMdI, 5 anya dhAtue~, 6. kheta, 7. makAna, 8. dvipada, 9.
catuSpada jIva; yaha nau prakAra kA bAhya parigraha hai| 1. rAga, 2. dveSa, 1.
anya kathAoM meM dIkSA binA pUche lene kA kathana hai| 186

Page #209 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Glory of Contentment  **Yoga Shastra, Second Light, Verse 115**  **6.
Four Kashayas, 7. Sorrow, 8. Laughter, 9. Fear, 10. Attraction, 11. Repulsion,
12. Disgust, 13. Three Vedas, and 14. Falsehood - these are the fourteen types
of internal attachments.** Just as during the rainy season, rats and mad dogs
become troublesome due to the influence of poison, similarly, external
attachments often increase internal attachments like Kashayas. The great wind of
attachment, like a powerful storm, can uproot even the strongest tree of
detachment with deep roots. One who desires liberation while riding the chariot
of attachment is truly like someone hoping to cross the ocean in an iron boat.
Just as fire born from fuel destroys wood, external attachments destroy a man's
patience. How can a weak person conquer the army of internal attachments when he
cannot control the external attachments? Attachment alone is the garden where
ignorance plays, the ocean filled with the water of sorrow, and the unique root
of the great vine of craving. It is astonishing that those who are eager to
protect their wealth are suspicious even of the renunciant who has renounced all
relationships. The wealthy man, anxious about the fear of the king (government),
thieves, family, fire, water, etc., cannot sleep at night. Whether in times of
famine or prosperity, in the forest or in the city, the wealthy man, always
filled with doubt and fear, remains perpetually unhappy. The poor man, whether
innocent or guilty, sleeps peacefully, free from all these worries, but the
wealthy man suffers due to the vices born in the world. Whether in earning
wealth, protecting it, spending it, or losing it, wealth always brings sorrow to
man. Like a bear dancing with its ears held, wealth makes man dance. Curse such
wealth! Just as dogs fight with each other for a piece of meat, wealthy people
fight with their own relatives or suffer pain. Even when caught in the jaws of
Yama, the wealthy man does not give up his desires to earn wealth, keep it, and
increase it. Like a demon, this wealth-destroying force shows man various
ironies until he leaves his body. If you desire the kingdom of happiness,
righteousness, and liberation, then renounce all things other than the soul and
control your craving for hope. Hope is a heavy obstacle, impenetrable by
thunderbolts, that blocks entry into the city of heaven and liberation. Hope is
demonic for humans. It is a poisonous mixture, old wine. Curse hope, the
producer of all vices! Blessed are they, virtuous are they, and they alone cross
the ocean of the world who have subdued the serpent of hope that enchants the
world. Only those who have renounced hope-craving, the mine of sorrow like a
poisonous vine, the mother of many vices like a fire that destroys happiness,
can live happily in the world. The glory of the fire of craving is truly
extraordinary, for it immediately extinguishes the state of meditation, like a
cloud of righteousness. A man under the control of the demon of craving speaks
humbly before the wealthy, sings songs, dances, shows off, and feels no shame in
doing any shameful act. In fact, he does such things even more. Where even the
wind cannot reach, where the rays of the sun and moon cannot penetrate, there
the great waves of hope reach unimpeded. A man who falls under the sway of hope
becomes its slave. But he who subdues hope makes hope his servant. Hope does not
decrease or increase with a person's age. As a man grows old, his hope-craving
does not grow old. Craving is so destructive that no one can attain happiness
while it exists. A man's body grows old, his skin shrinks like leather, his
black hair turns white, and the garland he wears becomes loose. Even when the
body's appearance changes, hope is not satisfied. The object that hope has
abandoned becomes greater than the object obtained. The object that a man
desires to obtain with great effort becomes, 1. In other places, Raga-Dvesha
(attachment-aversion) is included in Kashayas, and the three Vedas are counted
as three types of attachments. 187

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 saMtoSa kI mahimA yogazAstra dvitIya prakAza zloka 115 6. cAra kaSAya, 7. zoka,
8. hAsya, 9. bhaya, 10. rati, 11. arati, 12. jugupsA, 13. veda tIna aura 14.
mithyAtva yaha caudaha prakAra ke AbhyaMtara parigraha hai| jaise varSAkAla meM
cUhe aura pAgala kutte viSa ke prabhAva se upadravI bana jAte haiM; vaise hI
bAhya-parigraha se prAyaH AbhyaMtara parigraha-kaSAya Adi bar3hate haiN|
parigraha rUpI mahAvAyu gahanamUla vAle sudRr3hatara vairAgyAdi mahAvRkSa ko bhI
ukhAr3a pheMkatA hai| parigraha ke yAna para baiThakara jo mokSa pAne kI
abhilASA karatA hai vaha sacamuca lohe kI naukA meM baiThakara samudra pAra
karane kI AzA karatA hai| iMdhana se paidA huI Aga jisa prakAra lakar3I ko naSTa
kara DAlatI hai, usI prakAra bAhya parigraha bhI puruSa ke dhairya ko naSTa kara
DAlatA hai, jo nirbala vyakti bAhya parigraha ke saMgoM para niyaMtraNa nahIM
kara sakatA, vaha pAmara AbhyaMtara parigraha rUpI senA ko kaise jIta sakatA
hai? ekamAtra parigraha hI avidyAoM ke krIr3A karane kA udyAna hai; duHkha rUpI
jala se bharA samudra hai, tRSNA rUpI mahAlatA kA advitIya kaMda hai| Azcarya
hai, dhanarakSA meM tatpara dhanArthI sarvasaMbaMdhoM ke tyAgI muni se bhI
sAzaMka rahate haiN| rAjA, (sarakAra), cora, kuTuMbI, Aga, pAnI Adi ke bhaya se
udvigna dhana meM ekAgra banA huA dhanavAna rAta ko so nahIM sktaa| duSkAla ho
yA sukAla, jaMgala ho yA bastI, sarvatra zaMkAgrasta evaM bhayAkula banA huA
dhanika sarvatra sarvadA duHkhI rahatA hai| nirdoSa ho yA sadoSa nirdhana
manuSya uparyukta sabhI ciMtAoM se dUra rahakara sukha se sotA hai, magara
dhanika jagat meM utpanna doSoM ke kAraNa duHkhI rahatA hai| dhana upArjana
karane meM, usakI rakSA karane meM, usakA vyaya karane para yA nAza hone para
sarvatra aura sarvadA manuSya ko duHkha hI detA hai| kAna pakar3akara bhAlU ko
nacAne kI taraha dhana manuSya ko nacAtA hai| dhikkAra hai aise dhana ko! mAMsa
ke Tukar3e ko pAne ke lobha meM kutte jisa prakAra dUsare kuttoM se lar3ate
haiM, usI prakAra dhanavAna loga svajanoM ke sAtha lar3ate haiM athavA pIr3A
pAte haiN| dhana kamAUM, use rakheM, use bar3hAUM, isa prakAra aneka AzAe~
yamarAja ke dAMta rUpI yaMtra meM phaMsA huA bhI dhanika nahIM chodd'taa| pizAcI
kI taraha yaha dhanAzA jaba taka piMDa nahIM chor3atI, taba taka manuSya ko
aneka prakAra kI viDaMbanAe~ dikhalAtI hai| yadi tumheM sukha, dharma aura mukti
ke sAmrAjya ko pAne kI icchA hai to AtmA se bhinna parapadArthoM kA tyAgakara
do, kevala AzAtRSNA ko apane kAbU meM kara lo| AzA svarga aura apavarga (mokSa)
rUpI nagara meM praveza ko rokane vAlI evaM vajradhArAoM se abhedya bar3I bhArI
argalA hai| AzA manuSyoM ke | lie rAkSasI hai| vaha viSamaMjarI hai. purAnI
madirA hai| dhikkAra hai, sarva doSoM kI utpAdaka AzA ko! ve dhanya haiM, ve
puNyavAna hai aura ve hI saMsArasamudra se pAra hote haiM, jinhoMne jagat ko
moha meM DAlane vAlI AzAsarpiNI ko vaza meM kara liyA hai| jagat meM ve hI sukha
se raha sakate haiM, jinhoMne pApalatA ke samAna duHkha kI khAna, sukhanAzinI
agni ke samAna aneka doSoM kI jananI AzA-tRSNA ko nirAza kara diyA hai| tRSNA
rUpI dAvAgni kI mahimA hI kucha alaukika hai ki yaha dharmamegha-rUpI samAdhi ko
tatkAla samApta kara detI hai| tRSNApizAcI ke adhIna banA huA manuSya dhanavAnoM
ke sAmane dIna-hIna vacana bolatA hai gIta gAtA hai, nRtya karatA hai, hAvabhAva
dikhAtA hai, use koI bhI lajjAjanaka kAma karane meM zarma nahIM aatii| balki
aise kAmoM ko vaha adhikAdhika karatA hai| jahAM havA bhI nahIM pahuMca pAtI,
jahAM sUrya-caMdramA kI kiraNeM praveza nahIM kara sakatI, vahAM una puruSoM kI
AzA rUpI mahAtaraMgeM berokaToka pahuMca jAtI hai| jo puruSa AzA ke vaza meM ho
jAtA hai, vaha usakA dAsa bana jAtA hai| kintu jo AzA ko apane vaza meM kara
letA hai, AzA usakI dAsI bana jAtI hai| AzA kisI vyakti kI umra ke sAtha
ghaTane-bar3hane vAlI nahIM hai| kyoMki AdamI jyoM-jyoM bUr3hA hotA jAtA hai,
tyoM-tyoM usakI AzA-tRSNA bUr3hI nahIM hotii| tRSNA itanA utpAta macAne vAlI hai
ki usake maujUda rahate koI bhI vyakti sukha prApta nahIM kara sktaa| manuSya kA
zarIra bUr3hA hotA hai, taba zarIra kI camar3I bhI akar3a ke samAna sikur3a jAtI
hai, kAle keza sapheda ho jAte haiM; dhAraNa kI huI mAlA bhI mujha jAtI hai| isa
prakAra zarIra kA raMgarUpa badala jAne para bhI AzA kRtakRtya nahIM hotii| AzA
ne jisa padArtha ko chor3a diyA, vaha prApta artha se bhI bar3hakara ho jAtA
hai| puruSa jisa padArtha ko bahuta prayatna se prApta karane kI AkAMkSA karatA
hai, vahI padArtha 1. anya sthAna para rAga dveSa kA kaSAya meM samAveza kara
tIna veda ko tIna prakAra ke parigraha meM ginA hai| 187

Page #210 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Glory of Contentment  **Yoga Shastra, Second Light, Verse 115**  He who
renounces hope easily attains liberation. Whether one's punya (merit) awakens or
not, clinging to the demon of hope is futile. He who has abandoned hope and
desire and embraced contentment is truly learned, wise, intelligent,
knowledgeable, virtuous, and a devotee of austerity. The happiness enjoyed by
those who are satiated with the nectar of contentment is not attainable by the
dissatisfied, who are dependent on others and run around in pursuit of wealth.
Those who wear the armor of contentment are unaffected by the arrows of desire.
"How can I stop this desire?" Do not be troubled by such anxieties. In a
nutshell, I can say this in one sentence: "He whose demon of desire has been
pacified has attained the supreme state."  Those who renounce the bondage of
hope, reduce their possessions, engage their intellect in virtuous conduct, and
become devoted to the path of virtue, thereby attaining the state of spiritual
purity, are considered exceptional individuals. And those who, renouncing false
beliefs and embracing right faith, practice the path of the Shravaka (lay
follower) with limited possessions, are even more exceptional. The speed
attained by those who practice other paths with limited possessions is
effortlessly achieved by the devotee of the Shravaka path, like the moon. A non-
Jain who fasts for months and breaks his fast with a morsel of food as small as
a dot on the tip of a blade of grass cannot compare to the sixteenth part of the
excellence of a Shravaka who is content. Even those who perform extraordinary
austerities, like the Tamalita Tapas (austerity of the Tamal tree) or the Purna
Tapas (complete austerity), attain a lower state than the Shravaka who is worthy
of liberation. Therefore, O awakened one, do not let the demon of desire drive
you mad. Reduce your possessions, embrace contentment, and have faith in the
excellence of the path of the Yati (ascetic), so that you may attain liberation
in seven or eight lifetimes.  **Thus ends the Second Light of the Yoga Shastra,
titled Adhyotma Upanishad, composed by Acharya Shri Hemchandrasuri, which was
compiled at the request of King Shri Kumarapala.**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 saMtoSa kI mahimA yogazAstra dvitIya prakAza zloka 115 AzA ko tilAMjalI dene
vAle ko AsAnI se prApta ho jAtA hai| kisI kA puNyodaya jAga jAya yA kisI kA
puNyodaya nahIM hai, to bhI AzA pizAcI kA pallA pakar3anA vyartha hai| jisane
AzA-tRSNA ko chor3akara saMtoSa vRtti dhAraNa kara lI, vahI vAstava meM par3hA-
likhA, paMDita, samajhadAra, jJAnI, pApabhIru aura tapodhana hai| saMtoSa rUpI
amRta se tRpta vyaktiyoM ko jo sukha hai, vaha parAdhIna rahane vAle idhara-
udhara dhana prApti ke lie bhAga-daur3a karane vAle asaMtoSI vyaktiyoM ko kahAM
nasIba hai? saMtoSa rUpI bakhtara (kavaca) ko dhAraNa karane vAle para tRSNA ke
bANa koI asara nahIM krte| usa tRSNA ko kaise rokU~? isa prakAra ke pazopaza meM
par3akara ghabarAo mt| karor3oM bAtoM kI eka bAta jo mujhe eka vAkya meM kahanI
hai, vaha yaha hai-'jisakI tRSNA-pizAcI zAMta ho gayI hai, samajho, usane
paramapada prApta kara liyaa| AzA kI paravazatA chor3akara parigraha kI mAtrA
kama karake apanI buddhi sAdhudharma meM anurakta karake bhAvasAdhutva ke kAraNa
rUpa dravyasAdhutva arthAt zrAvakadharma meM tatpara, mithyAdRSTi ko tyAgakara
samyagdRSTi bane hue manuSya viziSTa vyakti mAne jAte hai| aura unase bhI ve
uttama hote haiN| isase bhI parimita AraMbha-parigraha vAle anyadharmI jisa gati
ko prApta karate haiM, usa gati ko somila ke samAna zrAvakadharma kA ArAdhaka
anAyAsa hI prApta kara sakatA hai| mahIne-mahIne taka upavAsI rahakara kuza ke
agrabhAga para sthita bindu jitane AhAra se pAraNA karane vAlA anyadharmI
bAlatapasvI, saMtoSavRtti vAle zrAvaka kI solahavIM kalA kI tulanA nahIM kara
sktaa| adbhuta tapa karane vAle tAmalitApasa yA pUraNatApasa ne suzrAvaka ke
yogya gati se nIce darje kI gati prAsa kii| isalie ai cetana! tUM, tRSNApizAcI
ke adhIna banakara apane citta ko unmatta mata bnaa| parigraha kI mUrchA
ghaTAkara saMtoSa dhAraNa karake yatidharma kI uttamatA meM zraddhA kara, jisase
tUM sAta-ATha bhavoM (janmoM) meM hI mukti prApta kara sakegA  /  / 115 /  /
//  isa prakAra paramArhata zrIkumArapAla rAjA kI jijJAsA se AcAryazrI
hemacaMdrasUrIzvara racita adhyotmopaniSad nAma se paTTabaddha, aparanAma
yogazAsa kA svopajJa-vivaraNa-sahita dvitIyaprakAza saMpUrNa huA  /  188

Page #211 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
|| Om Arhate Namah || 3. Third Light: Discussion of Gunavratas: After discussing
Anuvratas in detail, now we have the opportunity to explain Gunavratas. First,
we will explain the nature of the first Gunavrata. || 172 || Dasasvapi krta
dikshu, yatra seema na langhyate. Khyatam digviratiriti pratham tat gunavratam
||1|| The vow in which the boundary (limit) set for going and coming in all ten
directions is not violated; that is called the first Gunavrata, known as
Digvirati. ||1|| Meaning: Explanation: East, Southeast, South, Southwest, West,
Northwest, North, Northeast, Upward and Downward are the ten directions. To set
a limit for going and coming in these directions and to accept rules
accordingly; this is the first Gunavrata. It is also called Gunavrata because it
is in the form of Uttaraguna. Or, because it is beneficial (helpful) in
protecting Anuvratas, it is the famous Gunavrata called Digvirati. ||1|| Here
the question arises that Anuvratas are said to be in the form of cessation from
sins like violence, etc.; this is fine; but in Digvirati, from which sin is
there cessation, which makes it a vow? In answer to this, it is said - in this
vow too, there is cessation from sins like violence, etc. This is explained
further. || 173 || Chara charaananam jeevaananam vimardanani vartanaat. Tapta
ayogola kalpasya, sadvratam grihino api adah ||2|| Meaning: By limiting the area
in all four directions, there is cessation from the destruction of movable and
immovable beings in the form of violence, etc. Therefore, this vow is considered
auspicious even for a householder, who is like a heated iron ball. ||2||
Explanation: Char means two-sense beings, etc., and Achar means one-sense
beings, etc., immovable beings. By going and coming outside the limited boundary
in different directions, there is violence towards the movable and immovable
beings living there; but by this Gunavrata, by setting a limit for going and
coming in the said ten directions, one becomes completely free from violence
towards the beings living outside. By cessation from violence, the prohibition
of violence is achieved. For this reason, this is a good vow for a householder.
Cessation from other sins like falsehood, etc., also occurs, similar to the
prohibition of violence. Here there is a doubt that in this way, the need for
setting a limit on directions will also arise for a monk; in answer to this, it
is said; this is not correct. A monk is completely free from initial
possessions, a householder is bound by initial possessions, so he will go, come,
sit, stand, eat, drink, sleep, or do any work; there he will commit violence
towards beings like a heated iron ball. Therefore, it is said - wherever a
heated iron ball goes, it will not remain without burning beings; similarly, a
careless and Gunavrata-less householder can also commit sins everywhere like a
heated iron ball. But a monk is endowed with samiti-gupti and is a Mahavrata-
holder; therefore, he is not affected by this defect of a heated iron ball.
Therefore, he does not need to take the Digvirati vow. ||2|| In addition to
this, this vow is also for cessation from the sin of greed. This is stated in
the next verse. || 174 || Jagda kramanamanasya, prasaral lobha varidheh.
Skhalanam vidadhe tena, yena digvirati krta ||3|| 189

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
  /  /  OM arhate namaH  /  /  3. tRtIya prakAza : guNavratoM kA vivecana :
aNuvratoM para vistAra se vivecana karane ke pazcAt aba guNavratoM kI vyAkhyA kA
avasara prApta hone se prathama guNavata | kA svarUpa batAte haiM | | 172 |
dazasvapi kRtA dikSu, yatra sImA na laGghyate  /  khyAtaM digviratiriti
prathamaM tad guNavratam  // 1 //  jisa vrata meM dazoM dizAoM meM jAne-Ane ke
lie kI gayI sImA ( maryAdA) kA bhaMga na kiyA jAya; vaha digvirati nAmaka pahalA
guNavrata kahalAtA hai ||1|| artha : vyAkhyA :- pUrva, Agneya, dakSiNa, naiRtya,
pazcima, vAyavya, uttara, IzAna, Urdhva aura adho rUpa dasa dizAe~ haiN| ina
dezoM dizAoM meM gamanAgamana kI sImA nizcita karanA aura tadanusAra niyama
aMgIkAra karanA; prathama guNavrata hai| uttaraguNa rUpa hone se bhI yaha
guNavrata kahalAtA hai| athavA aNuvratoM kI rakSA karane meM guNakAraka
(upakArI) hone se | digvirati nAmaka prasiddha guNa - vrata hai  // 1 //  yahAM
prazna hotA hai ki aNuvratoM ko hiMsAdi pApasthAnaka kI virati rUpa kahA; yaha
to ThIka hai; magara divrata meM kauna se pApasthAnaka se nivRtti hotI hai,
jisase use vrata kahA jAya? isake uttara meM kahate haiM - isa vrata meM bhI
hiMsAdi pApasthAnakoM se virati hotI hai| isI bAta ko spaSTa karate haiM  / 173
/  carAcarANAM jIvAnAM vimardananivartanAt  /  taptA'yogolakalpasya, sadvrataM
gRhiNo'pyadaH ||2|| artha :- cAroM dizAoM meM kSetra ko maryAdita karane se
carAcara jIvoM ke hiMsAdi ke rUpa meM vinAza se nivRtti hotI hai| isalie tape
hue lohe ke gole ke samAna gRhastha ke lie bhI yaha vrata zubha batAyA jAtA hai
/  / 2 /  /  vyAkhyA :- cara yAnI dvIndriya Adi trasa - jIva aura acara yAnI
ekendriya Adi sthAvara - jIva  /  vibhinna dizAoM | meM maryAdita sImA se bAhara
gamanAgamana karane se vahAM rahe hue trasa - sthAvara jIvoM kI hiMsA hotI hai;
lekina isa guNavrata ke dvArA ukta dasoM dizAoM meM gamanAgamana kI sImA nizcita
kara lene se vaha bAhara rahe hue jIvoM kI hiMsA se sarvathA nivRtta ho jAtA
hai| hiMsA kI nivRtti se hiMsA kA pratiSedha to ho hI jAtA hai| isa kAraNa
gRhastha ke lie yaha sadvrata hI hai| hiMsA - pratiSedha ke samAna asatya Adi
dUsare pApoM se bhI nivRtti ho jAtI hai| yahAM yaha zaMkA hotI hai ki isa |
taraha to sAdhu ke lie bhI dizAparimANa karane kA prasaMga AyegA; isake uttara
meM kahate haiM; yaha ThIka nahIM hai| sAdhu to | AraMbha - parigraha se
sarvathA mukta hotA hai, gRhastha AraMbha aura parigraha se yukta hone se vaha
jAyegA, calegA, baiThegA, uThegA, khAyegA, pIyegA, soyegA yA koI bhI kArya
karegA; vahAM tape hue gole ke samAna jIva kI virAdhanA (hiMsA) kregaa| | isIlie
kahate haiM - tapA huA loha kA golA jahAM bhI jAyegA, vahAM jIvoM ko jalAye binA
nahIM rahegA; vaise hI pramAdI | aura guNavrata se rahita gRhastha bhI tape hue
gole ke samAna sarvatra pApa kara sakatA hai| paraMtu sAdhu samiti - gupti se
yukta | aura mahAvratadhArI hote haiM; isalie ve tape hue gole ke isa doSa se
sampRkta nahIM hote| isalie unheM digvirativrata grahaNa | karane kI AvazyakatA
nahIM hai ||2|| isake atirikta yaha vrata lobha rUpI pApasthAnaka se nivRtti ke
lie bhI hai| isI bAta ko Age ke zloka meM kahate haiM | 174  /
jagadAkramaNamANasya, prasarallobhavAridheH  /  skhalanaM vidadhe tena, yena
digviratiH kRtA ||3|| 189

Page #212 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Characteristics, Nature, and Types of Bhogopabhoga Parimaan  **Yoga
Shastra, Third Light, Verses 3 to 7:**  **Verse 3:** The person who has accepted
the Digvirati (direction-limitation) vow has stopped the vast ocean of greed
that spreads, attacking the entire world.  **Explanation:** The person who has
accepted the Digvirati vow, meaning the one who has voluntarily restricted
themselves from going beyond a certain limit, naturally does not have much greed
for gold, silver, wealth, grain, etc., that lie outside their limited area.
Otherwise, a person under the influence of greed desires the wealth of the gods
in the upper world, the wealth of the Chakravarti (universal monarch) and others
in the middle world, and the wealth of the Naga Kumaras (serpent princes) and
other gods in the lower world. They keep making plans to acquire wealth from all
three worlds and find false satisfaction in their minds. Therefore, greed is
described as attacking all three worlds. It is compared to the ocean. Just as
the ocean is turbulent and frightening with many waves, the ocean of greed is
also full of many waves of options, and it is very difficult to fathom. Thus,
the Digvirati vow stops the growing greed.  **Internal Verses:**  This vow is
for life for the Anuvrati Sadgrihastha (householder who observes minor vows),
and it is also taken for at least four months. For those who constantly remain
in Samayik (a Jain ritual), who control their minds, who have conquered their
senses, or for Sadhus and Sadhvis (Jain monks and nuns), there is no restriction
or non-restriction in movement in any direction. Charanmuni (a type of Jain
monk) performs actions like walking even on the peak of Mount Meru in the upward
direction and on Mount Ruchik in the diagonal direction. Therefore, the
Digvirati vow does not apply to them. Those who are wise and set limits on their
movement in every direction become the owners of immense wealth in heaven and
other realms.  **Now, regarding the second Gunavrata (vow of conduct):**
**Verse 4:** The second Gunavrata, called Bhogopabhoga Parimaan, is the vow
where one sets a limit on the number of enjoyable and consumable things
according to their physical and mental strength.  **Explanation:** Now, the
nature of Bhoga (enjoyment) and Upabhoga (consumption) is explained.  **Verse
5:** The thing that is enjoyed only once is called Bhoga, such as food, water,
flowers, garlands, betel nut, ointments, body scrubs, incense, chewing, bathing,
etc. And that which can be enjoyed repeatedly is called Upabhoga, such as women,
clothes, ornaments, houses, beds, seats, vehicles, etc. This Bhogopabhoga
Parimaan vow is of two types: the first is by setting a limit on the things that
can be enjoyed, and the second is by abandoning non-edible things.  **This is
presented in the following two verses:**  **Verse 6:** One should avoid alcohol,
meat, butter, honey, five types of Udumbar (fig) fruits, fruits of unknown
origin, and food eaten at night.  **Verse 7:** One should avoid raw buttermilk
mixed with mung beans, chickpeas, black gram, and moth beans, split pulses, rice
cooked with flowers, and curd that has been kept for more than a day, as well as
cooked food.  **Explanation:** Alcohol is of two types: one is in the form of
juice from palm trees, etc., and the other is made by fermenting flour, jaggery,
etc., which is called liquor. Meat is also of three types, based on the
distinction between aquatic, terrestrial, and aerial creatures. Along with meat,
one should also understand the skin, bones, fat, and blood associated with it.
Butter is made from the milk of cows, buffaloes, goats, and sheep, so there are
four types of butter. Honey is of three types: from bees, bumblebees, and wasps.
Udumbar (fig) and five other types of fruits with infinite seeds, fruits of
unknown origin, food eaten at night, raw buttermilk mixed with mung beans,
chickpeas, black gram, and moth beans, split pulses, rice cooked with flowers,
and curd that has been kept for more than a day, as well as cooked food, should
all be avoided.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bhogopabhogaparimANavata kA lakSaNa svarUpa aura prakAra yogazAstra tRtIya
prakAza zloka 3 se 7 artha :- jisa manuSya ne digvirati (dizAparimANa) vrata
aMgIkAra kara liyA, usane sAre saMsAra para hamalA karate hue phaile hue lobha
rUpI mahAsamudra ko roka liyA  /  / 3 /  /  vyAkhyA :- jisa vyakti ne
digvirativrata aMgIkAra kara liyA arthAt jisane amuka sImA se Age jAne para
svecchA se pratibaMdha lagA liyA; taba use svAbhAvika hI apanI maryAdita kSetra
se bAhara sthita sone, cAMdI, dhana, dhAnya Adi meM prAyaH lobha nahIM hotaa|
anyathA lobhAdhIna banA huA manuSya Urdhva-loka meM devasaMpatti kI, madhyaloka
meM cakravartI Adi kI saMpatti kI aura pAtAlaloka meM nAgakumAra Adi devoM kI
saMpatti kI abhilASA karatA rahatA hai| tInoM lokoM ke dhana Adi ko prAsa karane
ke manasUbe bAMdhatA rahatA hai aura mana hI mana jhUThA saMtoSa karatA rahatA
hai| isIlie lobha ko tInoM lokoM para AkramaNa karane vAlA batAyA hai| ise
samudra kI upamA dI hai| samudra jaise aneka vikalpa kalloloM (laharoM) se Akula
aura bhayAvaha hotA hai, vaise hI lobha rUpI samudra bhI aneka vikalpa rUpI
kalloloM se paripUrNa hai| aura usakI thAha pAnA atyaMta kaThina hai| isa
prakAra bar3hate hue lobha ko rokane kA kAma digvirativrata karatA hai  /  / 3 /
/  isa vrata ke saMbaMdha meM kucha AMtarazloka haiM, jinakA artha hama nIce de
rahe haiM aNuvratI sadgRhastha ke lie yaha vrata jIvana paryaMta ke lie hotA
hai, kama se kama cAra mahIne ke lie bhI yaha vrata |liyA jAtA hai| niraMtara
sAmAyika meM rahane vAle, AtmA ko vaza karane vAle jitendriya puruSoM yA sAdhu-
sAdhviyoM ke lie | kisI bhI dizA meM gamanAgamana se virati yA avirati nahIM
hotii| cAraNamuni UrdhvadizA meM meruparvata ke zikhara para bhI, evaM tirachI
dizA meM rucaka parvata para bhI gamanAdi kriyAe~ karate haiN| isalie unake lie
digvirativrata nahIM hotaa| jo subuddhimAna vyakti pratyeka dizA meM jAne-Ane kI
maryAdA kara lete haiM; ve svarga Adi meM apAra saMpatti ke svAmI bana jAte
haiN| aba prasaMgavaza dUsare guNavrata ke saMbaMdha meM kahate haiN|175|
bhogopabhogayoH saGkhyA , zaktyA yatra vidhIyate  /  bhogopabhogamAnaM tad,
dvaitIyIkaM guNavratam  // 4 //  artha :- jisa vrata meM apanI zArIrika,
mAnasika zakti ke anusAra bhogya aura upabhogya vastuoM kI saMkhyA ke rUpa meM
sImA nirdhArita kara lI jAtI hai, use bhogopabhogaparimANa nAmaka dUsarA
guNavrata kahA hai||4|| aba bhoga aura upabhoga kA svarUpa samajhAte haiN|176|
sakRdeva bhujyate yaH, sa bhogo'nnasragAdikaH  /  punaH punaH punarnogya
upabhogo'GganAdikaH  /  / 5 /  /  artha :- jo padArtha eka hI bAra bhogA jAya,
vaha bhoga kahalAtA hai, jaise anna, jala, phUla, mAlA, tAMbUla, vilepana,
udvartana, dhUpa, pAna, snAna aadi| aura jisakA aneka bAra upabhoga kiyA jA
sake, use upabhoga kahate haiN| udAharaNa ke taura para-strI, vastra, AbhUSaNa,
ghara, bichaunA, Asana, vAhana aadi| yaha bhogopabhogaparimANa vrata do prakAra
kA hai-pahale meM, bhogane yogya vastu kI maryAdA kara lene se hotA hai aura
dUsare meM, abhakSya vastuoM kA tyAga karane se hotA hai  /  / 5 /  /  ise hI
nimnalikhita do zlokoM meM prastuta karate haiN|177| madyaM mAsaM navanItaM
madhUdumbarapaJcakam  /  anantakAyamajJAtaphalaM rAtrau ca bhojanam  // 6 /  /
/ 178 /  AmagorasasampRktaM, dvidalaM puSpitaudanam  /  dadhyahatiyAtItaM,
kuthitAnnaM ca varjayet  // 7 //  artha :- madya do prakAra kA hotA hai-eka
tAr3a Adi vRkSoM ke rasa (tAr3I) ke rUpa meM hotA hai, dUsarA ATA, mahur3A Adi
padArthoM ko sar3Akara banAyA jAtA hai, jise zarAba kahate haiN| jalacara,
sthalacara aura khecara jIvoM ke bheda se mAMsa bhI tIna prakAra kA hai| mAMsa
ke sAtha usase saMbaMdhita camar3I, haDDI, carbI, rakta Adi bhI samajha lenaa|
gAya, bhaiMsa, bakarI aura bher3a ina cAroM ke dUdha se makkhana taiyAra hotA
hai, isalie cAra prakAra kA makkhana tathA madhu makkhI, bhramarI aura kuttikA
ina tInoM kA madhu, udUMbara (gullara) Adi pAMca anaMtakAyika phala, ajAne
phala, rAtribhojana, kacce dahI-chAcha ke sAtha mile hue mUMga, cane, ur3ada,
moTha 190

Page #213 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Harm from Alcohol  **Yoga Shastra, Third Light, Verse 817**  **6-7.**  Give
up the consumption of all these:  split lentils (dal), moss (fulan), rice that
has fallen, yogurt that is two days old, stale food.  **179.** Now, the harmful
effects (faults) of alcohol are presented in ten verses.  **8.**  Just as a
clever man, due to misfortune, abandons a woman from afar, so too, a wise man
loses his intelligence upon merely drinking alcohol.  **And hear more:**  **9.**
Due to the mind being overpowered by drinking alcohol, the sinful drunkard,
losing his senses, behaves towards his mother like a wife, and towards his wife
like a mother.  **10.**  A person with a disturbed (restless) mind, due to
drinking alcohol, cannot recognize his own or others.  He, the unfortunate one,
treats his servant as his master and his master as his servant.  He becomes
pitiful due to being unconscious.  **11.**  When a drunkard, like a corpse, lies
on the street, dogs urinate in his open mouth, fearing a pit.  **12.**  Immersed
in the taste of alcohol, the drunkard sleeps naked in the marketplace, and
carelessly reveals his secret thoughts, or treason, etc., which should be kept
secret.  **13.**  Just as applying kajal on beautifully drawn pictures destroys
them, so too, drinking alcohol destroys a person's beauty, fame, intelligence,
talent, and wealth.  **14.**  The drinker of alcohol dances and jumps like a
possessed person, cries loudly like one mourning the dead, and rolls and writhes
like a person suffering from a burning fever.  **15.**  Like the poison
Halahala, alcohol makes the drinker's limbs weak, weakens the senses, and causes
a severe fainting spell.  **16.**  Discrimination, self-control, knowledge,
truthfulness, purity of conduct, compassion, and forgiveness - all these virtues
are destroyed by alcohol, like a large pile of grass being consumed by a single
spark of fire.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 madya se nukazAna yogazAstra tRtIya prakAza zloka 8 17 Adi dvidala (dAleM),
phUlana (kAI) par3e hue cAvala, do dina ke bAda kA dahI, sar3A bAsI anna; ina
sabakA sevana karanA chor3e  /  / 6-7 /  /  aba madya se hone vAle kupariNAmoM
(doSoM) kA vivaraNa dasa zlokoM meM prastuta karate haiN|179| madirApAnamAtreNa,
buddhirnazyati dUrataH  /  vaidagdhIbandhurasyApi daurbhAgyeNava kAminI  // 8 //
artha :- jaise catura se catura puruSa ko bhI durbhAgyavaza kAminI dUra se hI
chor3akara bhAga jAtI hai, vaise hI madirA pIne mAtra se buddhizAlI puruSa ko
bhI buddhi chor3akara palAyana kara jAtI hai ||8|| aura bhI sunie  /  180 /
pApAH kAdambarIpAnavivazIkRtacetasaH  /  jananIM hA priyIyanti, jananIyanti ca
priyAm  // 9 //  madirA pIne se citta kAbU se bAhara ho jAne ke kAraNa pApAtmA
zarAbI bhAna khokara mAtA ke sAtha patnI jaisA aura patnI ke sAtha mAtA-sA
vyavahAra karane lagatA hai  /  / 9 /  /  artha : | | 181  /  na jAnAti paraM
svaM vA, madyAccalitacetanaH  /  svAmIyati varAkaH svaM svAminaM kiGkarIyati  //
10  //  artha :- madirA pIne se avyavasthita ( caMcala) citta vyakti apane
parAye ko bhI nahIM pahacAna sktaa| vaha becArA apane naukara ko mAlika aura
mAlika ko apanA naukara mAnakara vyavahAra karane lagatA hai| besudha hone se
becArA dayanIya bana jAtA hai ||10|  /  182 /  madyapasya zabasyeva, luThitasya
catuSpathe  /  mUtrayanti mukhe zvAno, vyAtte vivarazaGkayA  // 11 //  artha :-
zarAba pIne vAlA zarAba pIkara jaba murde kI taraha sareAma caurAhe para lauTatA
hai to khaDDe kI AzaMkA se usake khule hue muMha meM kutte pezAba kara dete haiM
/  /  11  /  /   /  183  /  madyapAnarase magno nagnaH svapiti catvare  /
gUDhaM ca svamabhiprAyaM, prakAzayati lIlayA  //  12 //  artha :- zarAba pIne
meM masta zarAbI bAjAra meM kapar3e asta-vyasta karake sareAma naMgA so jAtA hai
aura apanI gupta bAta ko yA rAjyadroha Adi gupta rakhe jAne vAle aparAdha ko
binA hI kisI mArapITa yA giraphtArI ke anAyAsa hI prakaTa kara detA hai  /  /
12  /  /   /  184  /  vAruNIpAnato yAnti, kAntikIrtimatizriyaH  /
vicitrAzcitraracanA, viluNThat kajjalAdiva  // 13 //  jaise atisuMdara banAye
hue citroM para kAjala pota dene se ve naSTa ho jAte haiM, vaise hI madirApAna
se manuSya kI kAMti, kIrti, buddhi - pratibhA aura saMpatti naSTa ho jAtI hai  /
/ 13 /  /  artha :  /  185  /  bhUtAttavannarInartti, rAraTIti sazokavat  /
dAhajvarArttavad bhUmau surApo loluThIti ca  // 14 //  artha :- madyapAna karane
vAlA bhUta lage hue kI taraha bAra-bAra nAcatA - kUdatA hai, mRtaka ke pIche
zoka karane vAle kI taraha jora-jora se rotA- cillAtA hai, dAhajvara se pIr3ita
vyakti kI taraha idhara-udhara loTatA hai, chaTapaTAtA hai || 14  /  /  isI
prakAra ||186  /  vidadhatyaGgazaithilyaM, glapayantIndriyANi ca  /
mUrcchAmatucchAM yacchantI, hAlA hAlAhalopamA  //  15  //  artha :- halAhala
jahara kI taraha zarAba pIne vAle ke aMgoM ko zarAba susta kara detI hai,
iMdriyoM kI kAryazakti kSINa kara detI hai, bahuta jora kI behozI paidA kara
detI hai  /  /  15  /  /  || 187 | vivekaH saMyamo jJAnaM, satyaM zaucaM dayA
kSamA  /  madyAtpralIyate sarvaM tRNyA vahnikaNAdiva  //  16  //  artha :jaise
Aga kI eka hI cinagArI se ghAsa kA bar3A bhArI Dhera jalakara bhasma ho jAtA
hai; vaise hI madyapAna se heyopAdeya kA viveka, saMyama, jJAna, satyavANI,
AcArazuddhi rUpa zauca, dayA, kSamA Adi samasta guNa naSTa ho jAte haiM  /  /
16  /  /  191

Page #214 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Evils and Irony of Alcohol and Meat  **Yoga Shastra, Third Light, Verses
17-19**  **Verse 17:**  * **Text:**  "Madyaṁ doṣāṇāṁ kāraṇaṁ, madyaṁ kāraṇam
āpadām | Rogātūra ivāpathyaṁ, tasmān madyaṁ vivarjayet ||17||" * **Meaning:**
Just as it is essential for a sick person to abstain from harmful food, so too
is it essential to completely abandon alcohol, which is harmful to life, as it
is the cause of many vices like theft, adultery, and the source of many
calamities like killing, imprisonment, etc.  **Explanation:** What evil deed
does a person not commit after drinking alcohol? A drunkard can commit all kinds
of misdeeds like theft, adultery, hunting, robbery, murder, etc. There is no
evil deed from which he can refrain. Therefore, it is right to completely
abandon alcohol, the mother of all evils, from afar.  **Verse 18:**  * **Text:**
"Cikhādiṣati yo māṁsaṁ, prāṇi prāṇāpahārataḥ | Unmūlayatyasau mūlaṁ, dayākhyaṁ
dharmaśākhinaḥ ||18||" * **Meaning:** It is not possible to obtain meat without
killing living beings. And the person who desires to eat such meat, uproots the
root of compassion, which is the branch of Dharma.  **Verse 19:**  * **Text:**
"Aśanīyan saṁ sadā māṁsaṁ, dayāṁ yo hi cikiṣati | Jvalati jvalane vallīṁ, sa
ropayitu micchati ||19||" * **Meaning:**  To those who say that even meat-eaters
can be compassionate, we explain: It is like wanting to plant a vine in a
burning fire.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 madyapAna evaM mAMsa se hone vAle anartha aura viDaMbanA yogazAstra tRtIya
prakAza zloka 17 se 19  / 188 /  doSANAM kAraNaM madyaM, madyaM kAraNamApadAm  /
rogAtura ivApathyaM, tasmAnmadyaM vivarjayet  /  / 17 /  /  artha :- rugNa
manuSya ke lie jaise apathya bhojana kA tyAga karanA jarUrI hotA hai; vaise hI
corI, parastrIgamana aneka doSoM kI utpatti ke kAraNa tathA vadha (mArapITa),
baMdhana (giraphtArI) Adi aneka saMkaToM ke kAraNa va jIvana ke lie apathya rUpa
madya kA sarvathA tyAga karanA jarUrI hai  /  / 17 /  /  vyAkhyA :- zarAba pIne
se kauna-sA akArya (kukRtya) nahIM hai, jise AdamI nahIM kara baiThatA? corI,
jArI, zikAra, lUTa, hatyA Adi tamAma kukarma madyapI kara sakatA hai| aisA koI
kukarma nahIM, jisase vaha bacA raha ske| isalie yahI ucita hai ki aisI anartha
kI jananI zarAba ko dUra se hI tilAMjali de de| isa saMbaMdha meM kucha AMtara
zloka bhI hai, jinakA artha yahAM prastuta karate haiM zarAba ke rasa meM aneka
jaMtu paidA ho jAte haiN| isalie hiMsA ke pApa se bhIru loga hiMsA ke isa pApa
se bacane ke lie madyapAna kA tyAga kreN| madya pIne vAle ko rAjya de diyA ho,
phira bhI vaha asatyavAdI kI taraha kahatA hai-nahIM diyA, kisI cIja ko le lI
ho, phira bhI kahatA hai-nahIM lii| isa prakAra galata yA aMTasaMTa bolatA hai|
bevakUpha zarAbI mArapITa yA giraphtArI Adi kI ora se niDara hokara ghara yA
bAhara rAste meM sarvatra parAye dhana ko bedhar3aka jhapaTakara chIna letA hai|
zarAbI naze meM cUra hokara bAlikA ho, yuvatI ho, bUr3hI ho, brAhmaNI ho yA
cAMDAlI; cAhe jisa parastrI ke sAtha tatkAla durAcAra sevana kara baiThatA hai|
vaha kabhI gAtA hai, kabhI leTatA hai, kabhI daur3atA hai, kabhI krodhita hotA
hai, kabhI khuza ho jAtA hai, kabhI haMsatA hai, kabhI rotA hai, kabhI aiMTha
meM Akara akar3a jAtA hai, kabhI caraNoM meM jhuka jAtA hai, kabhI idhara-udhara
Tahalane lagatA hai, kabhI khar3A rahatA hai| isa prakAra madyapI aneka prakAra
ke nATaka karatA hai| sunate haiM-kRSNaputra zAMba ne zarAba ke naze meM aMdhe
hokara yaduvaMza kA nAza kara DAlA aura apane pitA kI basAI huI dvArikAnagarI
jalAkara bhasma karavA dii| prANimAtra ko kavalita karane vAle kAla-yamarAja ke
samAna madya pIne vAle ko bAra-bAra pIne para bhI tRpti nahIM hotii| anya
dharma-saMpradAyoM ke dharmagraMthoM-purANoM evaM laukika graMthoM meM madyapAna
se aneka doSa batAye haiM aura use tyAjya bhI batAyA hai| isI madyaniSedha ke
samarthana meM ajaina graMthoM meM kahA hai- 'eka RSi bahuta tapasyA karatA
thaa| iMdra ne usako ugratapa karate dekha apane iMdrAsana china jAne kI AzaMkA
se bhayabhIta hokara usa RSi ko tapasyA se bhraSTa karane ke lie devAMganAe~
bhejii| devAMganAoM ne RSi ke pAsa Akara use namaskAra, vinaya, mRduvacana,
prazaMsA Adi | se bhalIbhAMti khuzakara diyaa| jaba ve varadAna dene ko taiyAra
huI to RSi ne apane sAtha sahavAsa karane ko khaa| isa para una devAMganAoM ne
zarta rakhI-'agara hamAre sAtha sahavAsa karanA cAhate hoM to pahale madya-mAMsa
kA sevana karanA hogaa|' RSi ne madya-mAMsa-sevana ko naraka kA kAraNa jAnate
hue bhI kAmAtura hokara madya-mAMsa kA sevana karanA svIkAra kiyaa| aba RSi una
devAMganAoM ke sAtha burI taraha bhoga meM lipaTa gyaa| apanI kI-karAI sArI
tapasyA naSTa kara ddaalii| madya pIne se usakI dharma-maryAdA naSTa ho gayI;
arthAt viSayagrastatA aura madAMdhatA se usa RSi ne mAMsa khAne ke lie bakare ko
mArane Adi ke sabhI kukRtya kiye| ataH pApa ke mUla, naraka ke mArga, samasta
ApadAoM ke sthAna, apakIrti karAne vAle, durjanoM ke dvArA sevya evaM sarvaguNI
janoM ke dvArA niMdita madirA kA zrAvaka ko sadaiva tyAga karanA cAhie  // 17 //
_ aba mAMsAhAra se hone vAle doSoM kA varNana karate haiN|189| cikhAdiSati yo
mAMsaM, prANi prANApahArataH  /  unmUlayatyasau mUlaM, dayAkhyaM dharmazAkhinaH
/  / 18 /  /  artha :- prANiyoM ke prANoM kA nAza kiye binA mAMsa milanA
saMbhava nahIM hai| aura jo puruSa aisA mAMsa khAnA cAhatA hai, vaha dharma rUpI
vRkSa ke dayA rUpI mUla ko ukhAr3a DAlatA hai  // 18 //  mAMsa khAne vAle bhI
prANidayA kara sakate haiM; isa prakAra kahane vAle ko samajhAte haiN||190|
azanIyan sadA mAMsaM, dayAM yo hi cikIrSati  /  jvalati jvalane vallIM, sa
ropayitumicchati  // 19 //  192

Page #215 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Evils of Meat-Eating  **Yoga Shastra, Third Light, Verses 20-24**
**Meaning:**  He who desires to be merciful while constantly eating meat, is
like one who wants to plant a vine in a burning fire. It is difficult for such
meat-eaters to have mercy in their hearts. ||19||  **Explanation:** Here, a
doubt is raised: killing a creature is one thing, and eating meat is another.
How can a meat-eater be blamed for the sin of taking a creature's life? In
response, it is said: "The eater is also a killer (violent), this is supported
by... ||191||  **Meaning:** The one who kills with a weapon, the one who sells
meat, the one who cooks meat, the one who eats meat, the one who buys meat, the
one who approves of it, and the one who gives or hosts meat, all these are
directly or indirectly (through tradition) killers (violent) of living beings.
||20||  Manu has said the same thing in the 51st verse of the fifth chapter of
Manusmriti.  **Meaning:** The one who approves of eating meat, the one who kills
the creature, the one who dismembers it, the one who buys and sells meat, the
one who cooks it, the one who serves it, or the one who offers it as a gift and
the one who eats it, all these are of the same category of killers (violent).
||21||  In the 48th verse of the same Smriti, it is said:  **Meaning:** Meat is
not obtained or produced anywhere without killing living beings, and killing
living beings, being a cause of great suffering to them, does not lead to
heaven, but rather to the suffering of hell. Thinking this way, one should
completely abandon meat. ||22||  **Meaning:** Those who nourish their own flesh
by eating the flesh of others are truly violent, for without the eater, there
would be no killer. ||23||  **Explanation:** Without meat-eaters, there would be
no killing of animals, etc. Therefore, the meat-eater is the greater sinner. The
one who nourishes their own flesh (body) by eating the flesh of others, the one
who satisfies their tongue with meat, the one who sustains their momentary life
on meat, takes the lives of many other creatures. It is said: "He who makes
himself alive by killing other creatures destroys his own soul in a short time.
And for his own short life, he becomes a participant in the suffering of many
groups of creatures. Does he understand that his life will be eternal?"
||22-23||  This is said with condemnation:  **Meaning:** Even delicious food,
like rice, mung beans, lentils, and wheat, ultimately become excrement, and even
milk and other nectar-like drinks become urine. Therefore, for this impure
(dirty, disgusting) body, who would be a wise human being who would commit sins
like violence? ||24||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 mAMsAhAra se hone vAle doSa yogazAstra tRtIya prakAza zloka 20 se 24 artha :-
jo sadA mAMsa khAtA huA, dayA karanA cAhatA hai, vaha jalatI huI Aga meM bela
ropanA cAhatA hai| aise mAMsabhakSiyoM ke hRdaya meM dayA kA honA kaThina hai  /
/ 19 /  /  vyAkhyA :- yahAM zaMkA prastuta kI jAtI hai ki prANI kA ghAta alaga
hai, aura mAMsa bhakSaNa alaga cIja hai; phira | mAMsabhakSaka ko prANI ke prANa
haraNa kA pApa kaise laga sakatA hai? isake uttara meM kahate haiM- 'bhakSaka
bhI ghAtaka (hiMsaka ) hI hai, isI bAta kA samarthana karate haiM | | 191  /
hantA palasya vikretA, saMskartA bhakSakastathA  /  kretA'numantA dAtA ca,
ghAtakA eva yanmanuH  //  20 //  artha :- zastrAdi se ghAta karane vAlA, mAMsa
becane vAlA, mAMsa pakAne vAlA, mAMsa khAne vAlA, mAMsa kA kharIdadAra, usakA
anumodana karane vAlA aura mAMsa kA dAtA athavA yajamAna, ye sabhI pratyakSa yA
parokSa rUpa (paraMparA) se jIva ke ghAtaka ( hiMsaka ) hI haiM ||20|| manu ne
manusmRti ke pAMcaveM adhyAya ke 51 ve zloka meM yahI bAta kahI hai artha : |
192  /  anumantA vizasitA nihantA krayavikrayI  /  saMskartA copahartA ca
khAdakazceti ghAtakAH || 21|| mAMsa khAne kA anumodana karane vAlA, prANI kA
vadha karane vAlA, aMga-aMga kATakara vibhAga karane vAlA, mAMsa kA grAhaka aura
vikretA, mAMsa pakAne vAlA, parosane vAlA, yA bheMTa dene vAlA aura khAne vAlA;
ye sabhI eka hI koTi ke ghAtaka ( hiMsaka ) haiM ||21|| isI smRti ke 48 veM
zloka meM kahA hai | | 193  /  nAkRtvA prANinAM hiMsA, mAMsamutpadyate kvacit  /
na ca prANivadhaH svargyastasmAnmAMsaM vivrjyet|| 22 //  artha :- prANiyoM kA
vadha kiye binA mAMsa kahIM prApta yA utpanna nahIM hotA aura na hI prANivadha
jIvoM ko atyaMta duHkha dene vAlA hone ke kAraNa svarga dene vAlA hai; apitu
vaha naraka ke duHkha kA kAraNa rUpa hai| aisA socakara mAMsa kA sarvathA tyAga
karanA cAhie ||22||  / 194 /  ye bhakSayantyanyapalaM, svakIyapalapuSTa ye  /
ta eva ghAtakA yanna vadhako bhakSakaM vinA  // 23 //  artha :- jo pApI sva
mAMsa kI puSTi ke lie dUsaroM ke mAMsa kA AhAra karatA hai| ve hI vAstava meM
hiMsaka hai, kyoMki khAne vAle ke binA vadha karane vAle nahIM hote  /  /  23  /
vyAkhyA :- mAMsa khAne vAloM ke alAvA prANivadha Adi nahIM hotaa| isa kAraNa,
mAMsa khAne vAlA adhika pApI | hai  /  apane jIvana ke lie, jo apane mAMsa
(zarIra) kI puSTi ke lie dUsare kA mAMsa khAtA hai, vahI to ghAtaka hai, khAne |
vAloM ko mAMsa muhaiyA karane ke lie jIvavadha karane vAlA, yA becane vAlA,
pakAne vAlA Adi ghAtaka kaise kahe jA sakate haiM? isa kathana ke uttara meM
yukti pUrvaka kahate haiM-khAne vAloM ke binA vadha karane vAlA vadha nahIM
karatA  /  isa dRSTi se | mAMsabhakSaka ko vadha karane vAle Adi se bar3hakara
bar3A pApI kahA gayA hai| kyoMki mAMsabhojana se apane mAMsa ko puSTa karane
vAlA, apanI jihvA tRpti karane vAlA, mAMsa para kSaNika jIvana calAne vAlA,
dUsare kitane hI prANiyoM ke prANaharaNa karatA | hai| kahA bhI hai- dUsare
jIvoM ko mArakara jo apane ko prANavAna banAtA hai, vaha thor3e hI dinoM meM
apanI AtmA kA vinAza | kara letA hai  /  aura apane eka alpajIvana ke lie bahuta
se jIvasamUha ko mArakara duHkha kA bhAgI banatA hai; kyA vaha | yaha samajhatA
hai ki merA jIvana ajara-amara rahegA ?  /  / 22 - 23  //  isI bAta ko
bhartsanAsahita kahate haiM-- | | 195  /  miSTAnnAnyapi viSThAsAdamRtAnyapi
mUtrasAt  /  syuryasminnaGgakasyA'sya kRte kaH pApamAcaret ||24|| artha :- jisa
zarIra meM cAvala, mUMga, ur3ada, gehUM Adi kA svAdiSTa bhojana; yahAM taka ki
vividha prakAra ke miSTAnna bhI Akhira viSTA rUpa bana jAte haiM aura dUdha Adi
amRtopama suMdara peyapadArtha bhI mUtra rUpa bana jAte haiN| ataH isa azucimaya
(gaMde ghinaune) zarIra ke lie kauna aisA samajhadAra manuSya hogA, jo hiMsA Adi
pApAcaraNa karegA ?  /  / 24 /  /  193

Page #216 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Jain Terms Preserved:  Manusmriti and others describe the faults of meat-eating
and the miserable condition of meat-eaters. The Yogashastra, in verses 25-29 of
the third chapter, refutes those who say that there is no fault in meat-
consumption.  25. Those wicked people who say, "There is no fault in meat-
eating," have probably taken the hunter, vulture, wolf, tiger, and jackal as
their gurus.  26. Manu has also explained the etymology of the word "mansa"
(meat) - "maa" means me, and "sa" means that which will eat me in the next
birth; this is the true nature of meat.  27. The intellect of a person greedy
for the taste of meat turns towards killing other living beings, just like the
intellect of a Shakini (a type of witch).  28. Even though divine eatables are
available, they eat flesh, abandoning the nectar-like substances, and consume
the deadly poison.  29. The merciless one has no dharma, and how can the greedy
one have compassion? The meat-greedy one does not know this, nor should one
teach him.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 manusmRti Adi meM mAMsatyAgavarNana aura mAMsabhojI kI durdazA yogazAstra
tRtIya prakAza zloka 25 se 29 mAMsabhakSaNa meM doSa nahIM hai, aisA kahane
vAloM kA khaMDana karate haiN|196| mAMsAzane na doSo'stItyucyate yairdurAtmabhiH
/  vyAdha-gRdha-vRkavyAghrazRgAlAstairgurukRtAH  // 25 /  /  artha :-
mAMsabhakSaNa meM koI doSa nahIM hai, aisA jo durAtmA kahate haiM, unhoMne
pAradhI (baheliyA), gIdha, bher3iyA, bAgha, siyAra Adi ko guru banAyA hogA!  /
/ 25 /  /  vyAkhyA :- 'jo durAtmA svAbhAvika rUpa se kahate haiM ki' 'mAMsa
khAne meM koI doSa nahIM hai|' jaise ki kahA haimAMsabhakSaNa karane meM, zarAba
pIne meM, maithunasevana meM koI doSa nahIM hai, yaha to jIva kI pravRtti hai,
jo usakI nivRtti karate haiM, ve mahAphalasaMpanna hai| isa prakAra kA kathana
karane vAloM ne sacamuca zikArI, gIdha, jaMgalI kuttA, zrRMgAla Adi ko guru
banAyA hogA; arthAt unase upadeza liyA hogaa| vyAghra Adi guru ke binA aura koI
isa prakAra kI zikSA yA upadeza de nahIM skte| mahAjanoM ke pUjya to aisA
upadeza dete nhiiN| ve to kahate haiM-nivRtti mahAphalA hai, pravRtti to
doSayukta hai| 'pravRtti doSayukta nahIM hotI', isa vacana kA to vaha svayaMmeva
virodha karatA hai| isa viSaya meM adhika kyA kaheM?  /  / 25 /  /  aba Upara
batAye hue (manusmRti adhyAya 5 zloka 55) se bhI mAMsa tyAjya hai, ise batAte
haiN|197| mAM sa bhakSayitAmutra, yasya mAMsamihAdamyaham  /  etanmAMsasya
mAMsatve niruktaM manurabravIt  // 26 /  /  artha :- manu ne bhI mAMsa zabda kI
isI prakAra (nirukta kiyA) vyutpatti kI hai-mAMsa-jisakA mAMsa meM isa janma meM
khAtA hUM, sa arthAt vaha, mAM-mujhe para (agale) janma meM khAyegA; yahI mAMsa
kA mAMsatva hai  /  / 26 /  /  aba mAMsAhAra meM mahAdoSa kA varNana karate
haiN198| mAMsAsvAdanalubdhasya dehinaM dehinaM prati  /  hantuM pravartate
buddhiH zAkinyA iva durdhiyaH  // 27 //  artha :- mAMsa ke AsvAdana meM lolupa
bane hue durbuddhi manuSya kI buddhi zAkinI kI taraha jisa kisI jIva ko dekhA,
use hI mArane meM pravRtta ho jAtI hai  /  / 27 /  /  _ vyAkhyA :- jisa prakAra
zAkinI jisa-jisa puruSa, strI yA anya jIva ko dekhatI hai, usakI buddhi use
mArane kI hotI hai, usI prakAra mAMsa ke svAda meM lubdha banA huA kubuddhi
manuSya machalI Adi jalacara; hirana, sUara, bakarA Adi sthalacara; tItara,
baTera Adi khecara; athavA cUhA, sAMpa Adi uraparisarpa ko bhI mAra DAlane kI
buddhi hotI hai| yAnI usa durbuddhi kI buddhi mArane Adi bure kAma meM hI
daur3atI hai, acche kAryoM meM nahIM daudd'tii| vaha khAne lAyaka uttamottama
padArthoM ko chor3akara mAMsa, rakta, carbI Adi gaMdI raddI cIjoM ko khAne meM
hI lagatI hai  /  / 27 /  /  isI bAta ko kahate haiN|199| ye bhakSayanti
pizitaM, divyabhojyeSu satsvapi  /  sudhArasaM parityajya, bhuJjate te halAhalam
// 28 //  artha :- divya (sAttvika) bhojya padArthoM ke hote hue bhI jo mAMsa
khAte haiM, ve sudhArasa ko chor3akara halAhala jahara khAte haiM  // 28 //
vyAkhyA :- samasta dhAtuoM ko puSTa karane vAlA, sarvendriya-prItikAraka dUdha,
khIra, khoA, barphI, per3A, zrIkhaMDa, dahI, modaka, mAlapUA, ghevara,
tilapaTTI, bar3I pUraNapolI, bar3e pApar3a, Ikha, zakkara, kizamiza, bAdAma,
akharoTa, kAjU, Ama, kelA, dADima, nAraMgI, cIkU, khajUra, khiranI, aMgUra Adi
aneka divya khAdyapadArtha hote hue bhI unheM ThukarAkara jo mUrkha badabUdAra,
ghinaune, dekhane meM kharAba, vamanakAraka, sUara Adi kA mAMsa khAtA hai, vaha
vAstava meM jIvana-rasa varddhaka amRtarasa ko chor3akara jIvana kA aMta karane
vAle halAhala jahara kA pAna karatA hai| choTA-sA bAlaka | bhI itanA vivekI hotA
hai ki vaha patthara ko chor3akara sone ko grahaNa kara letA hai| mAMsabhakSaNa
karane vAle to usa bAlaka se bhI bar3hakara avivekI aura nAdAna hai  /  / 28 /
/  prakArAMtara se mAMsabhakSaNa ke doSa batalAte haiN||200| na dharmo
nirdayasyAsti, palAdayasya kuto dayA  //  palalubdho na tadvetti, vidyAd
vopdishennhi||29|| 194

Page #217 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Jain Terms Preserved:  The worship of devas and pitrs (ancestors) with meat is
also adharma (unrighteousness).  Explanation from Yogashastra, Trutiya Prakash,
Shloka 30-31: A cruel person has no dharma (righteousness). How can a meat-eater
have compassion? Because a person who is greedy for meat does not even know
dharma. And if he knows, he does not preach that kind of dharma.  The root of
dharma is daya (compassion). Therefore, dharma cannot exist without daya. The
jiva (living being) who eats meat commits himsa (violence), hence does not have
daya. Therefore, the defect of adharmatva (unrighteousness) applies to him. The
question arises - how can a conscious person tolerate the absence of dharma in
his atma (soul)? In response, it is said that the meat-loving person has no
awareness of daya or dharma. Even if he has knowledge of this, he cannot give up
meat. He thinks that everyone is like him, a meat-eater, and like an ajinaka
(one who spreads his own habit to others), he cannot preach meat-renunciation to
others.   It is heard that a traveler named Ajinaka was going somewhere when
suddenly a serpent bit him. He thought that it should also bite others like him,
so he did not tell any other traveler about the serpent on the path. As a
result, the other unaware travelers were also bitten by the same serpent.
Similarly, a meat-eater not only goes to hell himself due to the sin of meat-
eating, but also takes others to hell. "The wicked one destroys himself and also
destroys others." From this perspective, he does not stop others from meat-
eating by preaching.  Now, the foolishness of meat-eaters is described. Some
people, out of great delusion, eat meat themselves, and not only that, they also
offer or dedicate meat to devas, pitrs, and guests, because their authoritative
scriptures (Manusmriti, Chapter 5, Verse 32) have declared it as dharma. They
cite this as evidence.  Having purchased meat themselves, or having produced it
by killing a living being, or having received it as a gift from others, and then
worshiping devas and pitrs with that meat, and later consuming that meat, the
person is not tainted by the sin of meat-eating.  This statement is full of
ignorance! We have already refuted and explained that eating meat produced by
the slaughter of animals is improper. Then, how can offering it to the deities
be even more improper? Because the deities have attained a pure, non-material,
vaikriya (transformed) body due to their past merits, they are not flesh-eaters.
So, how can they consume meat? What is the use of offering meat to those who do
not eat it? This is mere ignorance. The ancestors (pitrs) and others attain
their respective destinations according to their own merits or demerits, and
they cannot be uplifted by the merits of their descendants. Just as watering a
mango tree cannot make the coconut tree bear fruit. Offering meat, which is the
cause of taking the honored guests or ancestors to hell, is a great adharma
(unrighteousness) for both them and oneself. Such a tendency is filled with
great delusion.   Someone may argue that since the scriptures (shrutis or
smritis) have prescribed this (meat-eating), one should not doubt it or refute
it. This argument is also invalid.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 mAMsa se devoM aura pitaroM kI pUjA karanA bhI adharma hai yogazAstra tRtIya
prakAza zloka 30 se 31 artha :- nirdaya vyakti ke koI dharma nahIM hotA, mAMsa
khAne vAloM meM dayA kahA~ se ho sakatI hai? kyoMki mAMsalolupa vyakti dharma ko
to jAnatA hI nhiiN| agara jAnatA hai to usa prakAra ke dharma kA upadeza nahIM
detA  /  / 29 vyAkhyA :- dharma kA mUla dayA hai| isalie dayA ke binA dharma ho
nahIM sktaa| mAMsa khAne vAlA jIva hiMsA karatA hai, isa kAraNa usameM dayA
nahIM hotii| ataH usameM adharmatva nAmaka doSa lAgU hotA hai| yahAM prazna hotA
hai-'cetanAyukta puruSa apanI AtmA meM dharma ke abhAva ko kaise sahana kara
sakatA hai? isake uttara meM kahate haiM-mAMsalolupa vyakti ko | dayA yA dharma
kisI bhI bAta kA bhAna nahIM hotaa| kadAcit use isa bAta kA jJAna bhI ho to bhI
vaha mAMsa chor3a nahIM sakatA vaha mana meM socA karatA hai ki sabhI mere
samAna mAMsAhArI ho, ajinaka kI taraha apanI Adata kA cepa dusaroM ko lagAne
vAlA vyakti dusaroM ko mAMsa tyAga kA upadeza de nahIM sakatA hai? sunate hai,
ajinaka nAma kA eka pathika kahIM jA rahA thA ki rAste meM acAnaka eka sarpiNI
ne use Dasa liyaa| usane socA ki yaha merI taraha dUsare ko bhI Dase, | isa
lihAja se usane kisI bhI pathika se nahIM kahA ki isa rAste meM sarpiNI Dasa
jAtI hai| phalataH dUsare anajAna pathika ko usI sarpiNI ne ddsaa| usane bhI
kisI se nahIM khaa| phalataH tIsare, cauthe, pAMcaveM, chaThe aura sAtaveM AdamI
ko | bhI kramazaH usa sarpiNI ne ddsaa| isI taraha mAMsabhojI bhI mAMsAhAra ke
pApa se svayaM to naraka meM jAtA hI hai, dUsaroM ko bhI naraka meM le jAtA hai|
'durAtmA svayaM naSTa hotA hai, dUsare kA bhI nAza karatA hai|' isa dRSTi se
vaha dUsaroM ko | upadeza dekara mAMsAhAra se rokatA nahIM  /  / 29 /  /  aba
mAMsabhakSakoM kI mUrkhatA batAte haiN|201| kecinmAMsaM mahAmohAdaznanti na
paraM svayam  /  devapitratithibhyo'pi kalpayanti yadUcire  // 30 //  artha :-
kitane hI loga mahAmUr3hatA se kevala svayaM hI mAMsa khAte hoM, itanA hI nahIM,
balki deva, pitara Adi pUrvajoM aura atithi ko bhI kalpanA karake (pUjA Adi kI
dRSTi se) mAMsa dete yA car3hAte haiN| kyoMki unake * mAnya zAstroM (manusmRti
adhyAya 5 zloka 32) meM use dharma batA rakhA hai| vahI pramANa uddhRta karate
haiN||30|| ||202 /  krItvA svayaM vA'pyutpAdya, paropahRtameva vA  /  devAn
pitRn samabhyarcya, khAdan mAMsaM na dUSyati  // 31 //  artha :- svayaM mAMsa
kharIdakara athavA kisI jIva ko mArakara svayaM utpanna karake, yA dUsaroM se
(bheMTa meM) prApta karake usa mAMsa se deva aura pitaroM kI pUjA karake (devoM
aura pitaroM ko car3hAkara) bAda meM usa mAMsa ko khAtA hai to vaha vyakti
mAMsAhAra ke doSa se dUSita nahIM hotA  // 31 //  vyAkhyA :- mAMsa kI dUkAna se
kharIde hue mAMsa ko devapUjA kiye binA upayoga meM nahIM le sktaa| isalie kahA
ki zikAra se, jAla se yA pakSI ko pakar3ane vAle behaliye se, mRga yA pakSiyoM
kA mAMsa kharIdakara yA svayaM hiMsAdi karake mAMsa utpannakara athavA brAhmaNa
se mAMgakara yA phira kSatriya dvArA zikAra karake diyA ho athavA dUsare ne
bheMTa diyA ho; usa mAMsa se devoM aura pitaroM kI pUjA kara lene ke bAda meM
khAye to mAMsabhakSaNa kA doSa nahIM lgtaa| yaha kathana kitanA ajJAnatApUrNa
hai! hamane pahale hI isa bAta kA khaMDana karake samajhAyA hai ki prANiyoM ke
ghAta se utpanna hone ke kAraNa mAMsa ko svayaM khAnA anucita hai to phira use
devatA ko car3hAnA to aura bhI anucita hai| kyoMki devatAoM ne to pUrvasukRta
puNya ke yoga se dhAtu rahita vaikriya zarIra dhAraNa kiyA hai, ve grAsAhArI
(kaura lekara AhAra karane vAle) nahIM hote, to phira ve mAMsa kaise khA sakate
haiM? jo mAMsa nahIM khAte haiM, unake sAmane mAMsa car3hAne kI kalpanA karane
se kyA lAbha? yaha to ajJAnatA hI hai| pitara Adi pUrvaja apane-apane sukRta yA
duSkRta ke anusAra gati prApta karate haiM, karmAnusAra phala bhogate haiM, ve
putra Adi ke sukRta se tara nahIM sakate, putra Adi ke dvArA kiye gaye
sukRtapuNya kA phala unheM nahIM mila sktaa| Ama ke per3a ko sIMcane se nAriyala
yA dUsare per3oM meM phala nahIM laga skte| pUjanIya yA AdaraNIya atithi ko
naraka meM le jAne kA kAraNabhUta mAMsa denA unake va apane liye mahAna adharma
kA hetu hotA hai| isa taraha kI pravRtti mahAmUr3hatA se bharI huI hai| kadAcit
koI kahe ki 'zrutiyoM yA smRtiyoM meM aisA vidhAna | (mAMsa khAnA jAyaja) hai,
isalie usameM zaMkA nahIM karanI cAhie aura na usakA khaMDana hI karanA caahie|'
isakA 195

Page #218 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
There is no similarity between meat-eating and non-meat eating, butter is a sin.
The third light of Yoga Shastra, verses 32 to 33, refute this by saying - How
can one have faith in unauthentic scriptures? In which scriptures it is said
that 'touching a cow destroys sin; cutting down trees and worshipping them,
killing goats, birds, etc. animals, leads to heaven. Feeding a Brahmin satisfies
the ancestors; deceitful gods are also liberated, offerings made in fire are
pleasing to the gods. How can a wise man believe in such inconsistent laws or
scriptures? It is also said - touching a cow that eats dung destroys sins, an
ignorant tree is worthy of worship, killing a goat leads to heaven, feeding a
Brahmin satisfies the ancestors, deceitful gods are considered liberated,
offerings made in fire reach the gods; etc. From such statements, what kind of
play is being made of the essence of the scriptures? Therefore, the law in the
so-called scriptures about worshipping gods with meat, etc. is full of
ignorance. Let's understand it briefly. What is the benefit of saying it in
detail? ||31||  One may doubt that fire does not burn or cook after being
consecrated by mantras, and that meat also does not become sinful after being
consecrated by mantras. Manu has said that one who has faith in the eternal
Vedic law should not eat any kind of animal flesh without being consecrated by
mantras, but should eat meat consecrated by mantras. (Manu Smriti 5/23) This is
refuted. 203. Even if it is consecrated by mantras, even a little bit of meat is
not good. Even a drop of Halahala poison destroys life. ||32|| _ Meaning: Even
after being consecrated by mantras, one should not eat even as much meat as a
barley grain. Because even a drop of Halahala poison destroys life. ||33|| _
Explanation: Even if meat is purified by mantras, it is not fit to eat even as
much as a barley grain. Just as mantras cannot stop the power of fire to burn,
similarly meat (even if consecrated by mantras) cannot stop the power of
attaining hell, etc. If this (destruction of sin by mantras) happens, then any
person can commit all kinds of heinous sins and get rid of them by repeatedly
chanting the so-called sin-destroying mantras; he will be fulfilled. If all sins
are destroyed by mantras, then it is useless to prohibit sins. Therefore, just
as a little bit of alcohol makes one drunk, similarly, even a little bit of meat
leads to the bondage of sin. Therefore, it is said - even a few drops of poison
destroy life, similarly, even as much meat as a barley grain leads to hell.
||32||  Now, concluding by telling the great sins caused by meat. 204.
Immediately after killing a living being, countless unconscious living beings
are born in it, and the tradition of their repeated birth continues. The
scriptures say - 'Unconscious living beings of the Nigoda type are constantly
born in raw or cooked meat, or in the muscles while cooking. Therefore, meat
contaminated by so much animal cruelty is the food (food) of the path of hell.
Therefore, what wise person can eat meat? ||33|| Explanation: Some useful verses
related to this are presented - He who talks about eating meat has abandoned the
limits, is ignorant, atheist, a writer of bad scriptures, greedy for meat or
stubborn. There is no one more shameless than him who wants to nourish his body
with the flesh of others, which is the fuel for the fire of hell. The pig of the
house is good, which nourishes its body by eating the dung that humans throw
away, but the man who increases his limbs by eating the flesh of others by
killing animals is not good. I doubt about those who say that the flesh of all
living beings except humans is edible. There is no one more irreligious than the
one who does not see any difference between human flesh and animal flesh. 196

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 mAMsAhAra aura allAhAra meM koI samAnatA nahIM, makkhana meM doSa yogazAstra
tRtIya prakAza zloka 32 se 33 nirAkaraNa karate hue kahate haiM-apramANika
zruti-vacanoM para zraddhA hI kaise kI jA sakatI hai? jisa zruti meM aisA vacana
sunA jAtA hai ki 'gAya kA sparza karane se pApanAza ho jAtA hai; vRkSoM ko
chedana karane se pUjane se, bakare cir3iyA Adi pazupakSiyoM kA vadha karane se
svarga milatA hai| brAhmaNa ko bhojana dene se pitara Adi pUrvajoM kI tRpti hotI
hai; kapaTa karane vAle deva bhI Apta haiM, agni meM homA huA havi devoM ko
prItikAraka hotA hai| isa prakAra ke asaMgata vidhAnoM yA | zrutivacanoM para
yuktikuzala puruSa kaise vizvAsakara sakatA hai? kahA bhI hai-viSThA khAne vAlI
gAya kA sparza karane se pApoM kA nAza ho jAtA hai, ajJAnI vRkSa pUjanIya hai,
bakare ke vadha se svarga milatA hai, brAhmaNa ko bhojana karavAne se pitRja
(pitara) tRpta ho jAte haiM, kapaTa karane vAle deva Apta mAne jAte haiM, agni
meM kiyA huA havana devoM ko pahuMca jAtA hai; ityAdi vacanoM se na jAne, zruti
kI niHsAravANI kI kaisI lIlA hai? isa kAraNa mAMsa se devapUjA Adi kA |
tathAkathita zAstra meM jo vidhAna hai, vaha ajJAnamaya hai| thor3e meM hI
samajha leN| adhika vistAra pUrvaka kahane se kyA lAbha? ||31 /  /  koI yaha
zaMkA kara sakatA hai ki maMtra se saMskArita hone se agni jalAtI yA pakAtI
nahIM hai, tathA vaha mAMsa bhI maMtra-saMskRta hone se doSa kAraka nahIM hotaa|
manu ne kahA hai ki zAzvata vedavidhi meM AsthA rakhane vAle ko maMtra se
saMskArita kiye binA kisI bhI prakAra pazubhakSaNa nahIM karanA cAhie, apitu
maMtroM se saMskArita mAMsa kA bhakSaNa karanA caahie| (manu smRti 5/23) isI
bAta kA khaMDana karate haiN|203| mantrasaMskRtamapyAdyAdyavAlpamapi no palam  /
bhavejjIvitanAzAya hAlAhalalavo'pi hi  // 32 //  _ artha :- maMtroM se
susaMskRta ho jAne para bhI jau ke dAne jitanA bhI mAMsa nahIM khAnA caahie|
kyoMki halAhala viSa kI eka bUMda bhI to jIvana ko samApta hI kara detI hai  /
/ 3 /  /  _ vyAkhyA :- mAMsa bhale hI maMtroM se pavitra kiyA huA ho, kintu jau
ke dAne jitanA jarA-sA bhI khAne lAyaka nahIM hai| jaise agni kI dahana (jalAne
kI) zakti ko maMtra nahIM roka sakatA, vaise hI mAMsa (cAhe maMtra saMskRta ho)
narakAdigati ko prApta karAne vAlI zakti ko roka nahIM sktaa| yadi aisA (maMtroM
se hI pApanAza) ho jAya to phira koI bhI vyakti sabhI prakAra ke ghora pApa
karake tathAkathita pApanAzaka maMtroM kA hI bAra-bAra japa karake pApoM se
chuTakArA pA legA; kRtArtha ho jaayegaa| agara maMtroM se hI samasta pApa naSTa
ho jAya to phira pApoM kA niSedha karanA bhI vyartha hai| isalie jisa prakAra
thoDI-sI madirA pI lene se bhI nazA caDha jAtA hai| vaise hI thoDA-sA bhI mAMsa
khA lene para bhI pApakarma kA baMdhana ho jAtA hai| isalie kahA hai-jahara kI
thor3I sI bUMdeM bhI jIvana ko samApta kara detI hai, vaise hI jI ke dAne jitanA
mAMsa bhI durgati meM le jAtA hai  // 32 //  _ aba mAMsa se hone vAle mahAdoSa
batAkara upasaMhAra karate haiN|204| sadyaH sammUrcchitAnantajantusantAnadUSitam
/  narakAdhvani pAtheyaM, ko'znIyAt pizitaM sudhIH  // 33 //  artha :- jIva kA
vadha karate hI turaMta usameM nigoda rUpI anaMta samUrchima jIva utpanna ho
jAte haiM aura unakI bAra bAra utpanna hone kI paraMparA cAlU hI rahatI hai|
AgamoM meM batAyA hai-'kacce yA pakAye hue mAMsa meM yA pakAte hue mAMsapeziyoM
meM nigoda ke samUrchima jIvoM kI niraMtara utpatti hotI rahatI hai| isalie
itanI jIvahiMsA se dUSita mAMsa naraka ke patha kA pAtheya (bhAtA) hai| isa
kAraNa kauna subuddhizAlI vyakti mAMsa ko khA sakatA hai?  // 33 //  vyAkhyA :-
isase saMbaMdhita kucha upayogI zlokArtha prastuta karate haiM-mAMsabhakSaNa
karane kI bAta vahI karatA hai, jo maryAdAoM ko tilAMjali de baiThA ho, alpajJa
ho, nAstika ho, kuzAstra-racayitA ho, mAMsa lolupa ho yA DhITha ho| vAstava meM
usake samAna koI nirlajja nahIM hai, jo naraka kI Aga ke iMdhana banane vAle
apane mAMsa ko dUsaroM ke mAMsa se puSTa karanA cAhatA hai| ghara kA vaha sUara
acchA, jo manuSya kI pheMkane yogya viSTA ko khAkara apanI kAyA kA poSaNa karatA
hai, magara prANighAta karake dasare ke mAMsa se jo apane aMgoM ko baDhAtA hai,
vaha nirdaya AdamI acchA nahIM hai| jo manuSya ko chor3akara zeSa sabhI jIvoM ke
mAMsa ko bhakSya batAte haiM, unake bAre meM mujhe aisI zaMkA hotI hai ki use
apane vadha kA bhaya lagA hai| jo manuSya-mAMsa aura pazu-mAMsa meM koI aMtara
nahIM mAnatA, usase bar3hakara koI adhArmika nhiiN| 196

Page #219 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Honey produced from violence, i.e., honey collected from beehives, is also to be
discarded, as it is the excreta of bees. According to Yoga Shastra, the third
light, verses 34 to 37, there is no greater sinner than one who eats the flesh
of animals.  Born from the semen of a male and the blood (menstrual fluid) of a
female, nourished by the juice of excrement, who but a worm can eat flesh that
is coagulated blood?  It is astonishing that the twice-born Brahmins preach the
religion of purity, yet they eat flesh, which is born of seven impurities
(tissues) and is unclean.  For those who consider the flesh of grass-eating
animals to be the same as grain, poison that brings death and nectar that gives
life are both equal.  Those who are ignorant and have a dull soul believe that
just as rice is a part of a one-sensed being, so too is flesh a part of a living
being, and therefore, good men should eat flesh like rice.  Then why do they not
drink the urine of a cow, which is like the milk produced by the cow?  Rice,
etc., do not contain flesh, blood, fat, etc., which are inedible substances,
whereas flesh contains all these inedible substances.  Therefore, rice, etc.,
are edible, while flesh, etc., are inedible.  Just as a holy conch shell and the
bone of a living being are not considered the same, so too are rice, etc., not
considered inedible.  The sinner who says that all limbs are the same, and
therefore considers flesh and rice to be the same, why does he not think that
all women are the same, and therefore treat his mother and wife equally?  Just
as it is said that going to hell is the result of killing even one five-sensed
being or eating its flesh, it is not said that going to hell is the result of
eating grain, etc. (one-sensed).  Flesh, which corrupts the juice and blood,
cannot be food.  Therefore, one who does not eat flesh and is a grain eater
cannot be a sinner.  The killing of one-sensed beings occurs in the cooking of
grain, which is not so much of an obstacle in the vow of country-renunciation.
Even householders who are lovers of the high Jain religion, who are content with
grain food, considering the conduct of meat-eaters, obtain high-level divine
wealth.  ||33|| Now, in passing, we will point out the fault in eating ghee
(butter).  ||205||  After the end of the internal muhurta, a multitude of
extremely subtle beings are born in it.  Wise men should not eat ghee where they
faint.  ||34||  Meaning:  Wise men should not eat ghee where a multitude of
extremely subtle beings are born in it after the end of the internal muhurta.
||34||  We consider this point.  ||206||  What is the sin in killing even one
living being?  It is difficult to say.  Then who can consume ghee, which is made
up of the bodies of many beings?  ||35||  Meaning:  What is the sin in killing
even one living being?  It is difficult to say.  Then who can consume ghee,
which is made up of the bodies of many beings?  ||35||  Now, we will point out
the fault in eating honey.  ||207||  Who, being wise, will lick honey, which is
born from the destruction of a multitude of beings, and is as disgusting as
saliva dripping from the mouth?  ||36||  Meaning:  Who, being wise, will lick
honey, which is born from the destruction of a multitude of beings, and is as
disgusting as saliva dripping from the mouth?  By implication, here we should
also understand the honey of bumblebees, etc.  ||36||  Now, we will condemn the
honey-eater.  ||208||  One who eats honey, which is born from the destruction of
millions of tiny beings, is more sinful than a butcher who kills a few animals.
||37||  Meaning:  Beings that do not have bones are called tiny beings, or even
insignificant beings are considered tiny.  One who eats honey, which is born
from the destruction of millions of tiny beings (due to smoking), is more sinful
than a butcher who kills a few animals.  The eater is also deadly like the
producer, this has been said before.  ||37||  False food is to be discarded,
this is also said in worldly scriptures.  From this point of view, honey is also
to be discarded like excrement, as it is the excreta of bees.  This is what is
being said.  ||197||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 madhumakSikA dvArA ucchiSTa, hiMsA se utpanna madhu bhI tyAjya hai yogazAstra
tRtIya prakAza zloka 34 se 37 hai, na usake jaisA koI mahApApI hai, jo pazu kA
mAMsa khAtA hai| nara ke vIrya se aura mAdA ke rudhira (raja) se utpanna, viSThA
ke rasa se saMvardhita, jame hue raktayukta mAMsa ko kRmi ke sivAya aura kauna
khA sakatA hai| Azcarya hai, dvija brAhmaNa zaucamUlaka dharma batAte haiM,
phira bhI ve adharmamUlaka, sapta dhAtuoM se utpanna, (gaMde) mAMsa ko khAte
haiN| jo ghAsa khAne vAle pazuoM ke mAMsa aura anna ko eka sarIkhA mAnate haiM,
unake lie mRtyu dene vAlA viSa aura jIvanadAyI amRta donoM barAbara haiN| jo
jar3AtmA ajJAnI yaha mAnate haiM ki jaise cAvala bhI ekendriya jIva kA aMga hai,
vaise hI mAMsa bhI jIva kA aMga hai, isalie satpuruSoM ko cAvala kI taraha mAMsa
khA lenA cAhie, to phira ve jar3abuddhi ajJa, gAya se utpanna hue dUdha ke
samAna gAya ke matra ko kyoM nahIM pIte? cAvala Adi meM prANiyoM ke aMga ke
samAna mAMsa. rakta carbI Adi abhakSya padArtha nahIM haiM, jaba ki mAMsa meM ye
saba abhakSya padArtha hai| isalie odana Adi bhakSya hai, jaba ki mAMsAdi
abhakSya hai| jaise pavitra zaMkha aura jIva ke aMga kI haDDI Adi eka samAna
nahIM mAne jAte, vaise hI odanAdi abhakSya nahIM mAne jaate| jo pApI aMga aMga
sabhI samAna hai, yaha kahakara mAMsa aura odana ko samAna mAnatA hai, vaha strI
strI sabhI samAna hai, | aisA mAnakara apanI mAtA aura patnI meM samAna
vyavahAra kI kalpanA kyoM nahIM karatA? eka bhI paMcendriya jIva kA vadha karane
se yA usakA mAMsabhakSaNa karane se jaise narakagati batAyI hai, vaise anAja Adi
(ekendriya) ke bhojana karane vAle ko narakagati nahIM batAyI hai| rasa aura
rakta ko vikRta karane vAlA mAMsa anna nahIM ho sktaa| isalie mAMsa nahIM khAne
vAlA annabhojI pApI nahIM ho sktaa| anna pakAne meM ekendriya jIva kA hI vadha
hotA hai, jo dezaviratizrAvaka ke vrata meM itanA bAdhaka nahIM hai| mAMsAhArI
kI gati kA vicAra karate hue annAhAra meM saMtoSa mAnane vAle ucca jainazAsana
premI gRhastha bhI uccakoTi kI divya saMpattiyA~ prApta karate haiM  /  / 33 /
/  aba prasaMgavaza navanIta (makkhana) bhakSaNa meM doSa batAte haiN|205|
antarmuhUrtAt parataH susUkSmAjanturAzayaH  /  yatra mUrcchanti tannAdyaM,
navanItaM vivekibhiH  // 34 //  * artha :- jisameM aMtamuhUrta ke bAda atisUkSma
jantusamUha samUrchima rUpa se utpanna hotA hai, vaha makkhana vivekI puruSoM ko
nahIM khAnA cAhie  /  / 34 /  /  isI bAta para vicAra karate haiN|206| ekasyApi
hi jIvasya, hiMsane kimaghaM bhavet  /  jantujAtamayaM tatko, navanItaM
niSevate?  // 35 /  /  artha :- eka bhI jIva kA vadha karane meM kitanA adhika
pApa lagatA hai? use kahanA duHzakya hai, to phira aneka jaMtuoM ke piMDamaya
navanIta kA sevana kauna vivekI kara sakatA hai?  // 35 /  /  aba kramazaH
madhu-sevana meM doSa batAte haiN||207| anekajantusaGghAta nighAtanasamudbhavam
/  jugupsanIyaM lAlAvat kaH svAdayati mAkSikam?  // 36 //  artha :- aneka jaMtu-
samUha ke vinAza se taiyAra hue aura muMha se Tapakane vAlI lAra ke samAna
ghinaune makkhI ke mukha kI lAra se bane hue zahada ko kauna vivekI puruSa
cATegA? upalakSaNa se yahAM bhaure Adi kA madhu bhI samajha lenA cAhie  // 36 //
aba madhu-bhakSaka ko niMdanIya batAte haiN|208| bhakSayan mAkSikaM
kSudrajantulakSakSayodbhavam  /  stokajantunihantRbhyaH zaunikebhyo'tiricyate
// 37 //  _ artha :- jinake haDDiyoM na hoM, aise jIva kSudrajaMtu kahalAte haiM
athavA tuccha hIna jIva bhI kSudra mAne jAte haiN| aise lAkhoM kSudrajaMtuoM ke
(dhuMA karane se hone vAle) vinAza se utpanna hue madya kA sevana karane vAlA
AdamI thor3e-se pazu ko mArane vAle kasAI se bar3hakara pApAtmA hai| bhakSaNa
karane vAlA bhI utpAdaka kI taraha ghAtaka hai, yaha bAta pahale kaha dI gayI
hai  /  / 7 /  /  jhUThA bhojana tyAjya hai, yaha bAta laukika zAstroM meM bhI
kahI hai| isa dRSTi se madhu bhI makkhiyoM kA ucchiSTa hone se aiMTha ke samAna
tyAjya hai, isa bAta ko kahate haiM 197

Page #220 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Description of Udumbara, Anantakaaya, etc. Yoga Shastra, Third Light, Verses 30
to 43. 209.  Bees, sitting on each flower, drink its nectar and vomit it. The
righteous do not eat that vomited honey. 38. Meaning: Bees sit on each flower,
drink its nectar, and vomit it. The righteous do not eat that vomited honey
(honey). Even in worldly practice, only pure food is considered fit for
consumption by the righteous. 38. Here, a doubt is raised: Honey calms the three
doshas. There is no better medicine than this for disease prevention. Then what
is the fault in its consumption? In response to this, it is said. 210. Even if
taken as medicine, honey is a bond to hell. Even a small particle of poison, if
eaten by mistake or out of a desire to live, is fatal. 39. Meaning: Forget about
the desire for taste, even taking honey as medicine for disease prevention is a
cause of falling into the abyss of hell. Because even a small particle of
poison, if eaten by mistake or out of a desire to live, is fatal. 39. Here,
another question is raised: Like the juice of dates, raisins, etc., honey is
sweet, delicious, and pleasing to all the senses. Why should it be abandoned? In
response to this, it is said. 211. The sweetness of honey is said to be
ignorance. Those who taste it experience hellish torment for a long time. 40.
Meaning: It is true that honey seems sweet in worldly experience. But from the
transcendental point of view, it is extremely bitter because it is the cause of
hellish torment. It is unfortunate that ignorant people, unaware of the
transcendental truth, call bitter honey sweet in the end. Those who taste honey
have to suffer hellish torment for a long time. 40. Those who believe that honey
is pure and therefore useful for the anointing of gods are ridiculed. 212.
Honey, vomited from the mouth of a bee, born from the killing of creatures. Oh!
Those who consider it pure, use it for the anointing of gods like Shankar. 41.
Meaning: Oh! It is amazing that people who consider honey, vomited from the
mouth of a bee and born from the killing of many creatures, to be pure, use it
for the anointing of gods like Shankar. Brother! This is like a donkey becoming
a musician at the wedding of camels and praising the appearance of the camel,
and the camel praising the voice of the donkey! In this way, both praise each
other, just like the above statement. 41. Now, the five faults of consuming
Udumbara are explained in order. 213. The fruits of Udumbara, Vat, Plaksha,
Kakodumbara, and Pipal are full of countless creatures. Therefore, all these
five Udumbara fruits are to be abandoned. 42. Meaning: The word Udumbara should
be understood to refer to all five types of trees: Gulal, Bada, Pipal (Plaksha),
Pars Pipal, Kathumar, Lakshpipal (Lac). The fruits of all these five types of
trees should not be eaten; because there are so many insects in one fruit that
they cannot be counted. Even in worldly scriptures, it is said: 'There are
countless creatures living in the fruit of Udumbara, and it is not known how or
from where they enter? It is also difficult to say whether these creatures die
when the fruit is cut, broken into pieces, crushed, ground, or even filtered or
separated!' Now, those who follow the rule of abandoning all five Udumbara
fruits are praised. 42. 214) Even if a virtuous soul, a devotee of vows, is in a
country and time where there is an abundance of easily available grains and
fruits, he does not eat the fruit of the five Udumbara trees out of virtue. 43.
Meaning: A virtuous soul, a devotee of vows, who is in a country and time where
there is an abundance of easily available grains and fruits, does not eat the
fruit of the five Udumbara trees out of virtue. 43.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 uduMbara, anaMtakAya Adi kA vivaraNa yogazAstra tRtIya prakAza zloka 30 se 43
/ 209 /  ekaika-kusumakror3Ad rasamApIya makSikAH  /  yadvamanti madhUcchiSTaM,
tadaznanti na dhArmikAH  // 38 /  /  artha :- eka-eka phUla para baiThakara
usake makaraMdarasa ko pIkara madhumakkhiyAM usakA vamana karatI haiM, usa
vamana kiye hue ucchiSTa madhu (zahada) kA sevana dhArmika puruSa nahIM krte|
laukika vyavahAra meM bhI pavitra bhojana hI dhArmika puruSa ke lie sevanIya
batAyA hai  // 38 //  yahAM zaMkA prastuta kI jAtI hai-madhu to tridoSa zAMta
karatA hai| roga-nivAraNa ke lie isase bar3hakara aura koI auSadhi nahIM hai|
taba phira isake sevana meM kauna-sA doSa hai? isake uttara meM kahate haiN|210|
apyauSadhakRte jagdhaM, madhu zvabhranibandhanam  /  bhakSitaH prANanAzAya,
kAlakUTakaNo'pi hi  /  / 39 /  /  artha :- rasalolupatA kI bAta to dUra rahI,
auSadha ke rUpa meM bhI roganivAraNArtha madhubhakSaNa patana ke garta meM
DAlane kA kAraNa hai| kyoMki pramAdavaza yA jIne kI icchA se kAlakUTaviSa kA
jarA-sA kaNa bhI khAne para prANanAzaka hotA hai  // 39 /  /  yahAM punaH eka
prazna uThAyA jAtA hai ki-khajUra, kizamiza Adi ke rasa ke samAna madhu madhura,
svAdiSTa aura samasta | iMdriyoM ko AnaMdadAyI hone se usakA kyoM tyAga kiyA
jAya? isake uttara meM kahate haiM  / 211 /  madhuno'pi hi
mAdhuryamabodhairahahocyate  /  AsAdyante yadAsvAdAcciraM narakavedanAH  // 40
//  artha :- yaha saca hai madhu vyavahAra se pratyakSa meM madhura lagatA hai|
paraMtu pAramArthika dRSTi se naraka-sI vedanA kA kAraNa hone se atyaMta kar3avA
hai| kheda hai, paramArtha se anabhijJa abodhajana hI pariNAma meM kaTu madhu ko
madhura kahateM hai| madhu kA AsvAdana karane vAle ko cirakAla taka naraka sama
vedanA bhoganI par3atI hai||40|| madhu pavitra hone se devoM ke abhiSeka ke lie
upayogI hai, aise mAnane vAle kI haMsI ur3AI haiN|212| makSikAmukhaniSThyUtaM,
jantughAtodbhavaM madhu  /  aho! pavitraM manvAnA, devasnAne prayuJjate  // 41 /
/  artha :- aho! Azcarya hai ki madhumakkhI ke muMha se vamana kiye hue aura
aneka jaMtuoM kI hatyA se niSpanna madhu ko pavitra mAnane vAle loga zaMkara Adi
devoM ke abhiSeka meM isakA upayoga karate haiN| bhAI! yaha to aisA hI hai,
UMToM ke vivAha meM koI gadhA saMgItakAra banakara AyA ho aura vaha UMTa ke rUpa
kI prazaMsA karatA ho aura UMTa karatA ho gadhe ke svara kI prazaMsA! isa
prakAra donoM eka dUsare kI prazaMsA karate hoM, vaisA hI ukta kathana hai  //
41 /  /  aba kramAnusAra pAMca uduMbara-sevana ke doSa batalAte haiN|213|
udumbara-vaTa-plakSakAkodumbarazAkhinAm  /  pippalasya ca nAznIyAt, phalaM
kRmikulaakulm||42|| artha :- uduMbara (gullara), bar3a, aMjIra aura kAkoduMbara
(kaThUmara) pIpala; ina pAMcoM vRkSoM ke phala agaNita jIvoM (ke sthAna) se
bhare hue hote haiN| isalie ye pAMcoM hI udUMbaraphala tyAjya haiM  /  / 4 /  /
vyAkhyA :- uduMbara zabda se pAMcoM hI prakAra ke vRkSa samajha lenA cAhie
gullara, bar3a, pIpala (plakSa), pArasa pIpala, kaThUmara, lakSapIpala (lAkha)
ina pAMcoM prakAra ke vRkSoM ke phala nahIM khAne cAhie; kyoMki eka phala meM hI
itane kITa hote haiM, jinakI ginatI nahIM kI jA sktii| laukika zAstra meM bhI
kahA hai-'uduMbara ke phala meM na jAne kitane jIva sthita hote haiM aura patA
nahIM, ve kahAM se kaise praveza kara jAte haiM? yaha bhI kahanA kaThina hai ki
isa phala ko kATane para, Tukar3e-Tukar3e karane para, cUra-cUra karane para, yA
pIsane para athavA channe se bhalI-bhAMti chAna lene para yA alagaalaga kara
lene para bhI usameM rahe hue jIva jAte (mara jAte) haiM yA nahIM! aba pAMcoM
uduMbaraphaloM ke tyAga rUpa meM niyama lene vAle kI prazaMsA karate haiM  /  /
42 /  /  214) aprApnuvannanyabhakSyamapi kSAmo bubhukSayA  /  na bhakSayati
puNyAtmA paJcodumbarajaM phalam  // 43 /  /  artha :- jo puNyAtmA (pavitra
puruSa) vratapAlaka sulabha dhAnya aura phaloM se samRddha dezakAla meM pAMca
uduMbaraphala | 198

Page #221 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Nighttime Meal Doshas  **From Yoga Shastra, Third Light, Verses 44-48**
**Verse 43:** Even in times of famine, when food, fruits, etc. are scarce and
one is extremely hungry, and the body is becoming emaciated, one should not eat
the five-pointed fruit. Those who do so are commendable.  **Verses 44-46:** Now,
regarding the infinite-bodied beings, three verses are spoken:  * **Verse 44:**
All moist tubers, all new shoots, the bark of the *Snuhī* (Euphorbia neriifolia)
and *Lavaṇa* (salt) trees, *Kumārī* (Aloe vera), *Girikaṇṇikā* (a type of
creeper), *Śatāvarī* (Asparagus racemosus), sprouted sprouts, *Guḍūcī*
(Tinospora cordifolia), tender tamarind, *Palyanka* (spinach), *Amṛtavallī* (a
type of creeper), and the hair of the boar. * **Verse 45:** These are mentioned
as infinite-bodied beings in the scriptures. There are others as well, which the
wrong-sighted are unaware of. These should be avoided with effort by the
compassionate devotees. * **Verse 46:** **Meaning:** All types of tubers do not
become infinite-bodied beings because they become lifeless when they dry up. The
usual meaning of tuber is the part of the tree that remains in the ground below
the trunk. All green tubers are infinite-bodied beings. Some names are mentioned
here: *Sūraṇa* (yam), *Adaraka* (ginger), *Haladī* (turmeric), *Vajrakanda* (a
type of tuber), *Lahsun* (garlic), *Naraka-cūra* (a type of tuber),
*Kamalakanda* (lotus root), *Hastikanda* (elephant yam), *Manuṣyakanda* (a type
of tuber), *Gājar* (carrot), *Padminīkanda* (a type of tuber), *Kaserū* (a type
of tuber), *Mogrī* (a type of tuber), *Mūthā* (a type of tuber), *Ālū* (potato),
*Pyāz* (onion), *Ratālu* (sweet potato), etc. By *kiśalaya* (new shoot) is meant
the tender leaves of every plant and the first sprout that emerges from the
seed; all these are infinite-bodied beings. Only the bark of the *Thūhara* or
*Lavaṇa* tree is infinite-bodied; its other parts are not. *Kumārīpāṭhā* (a type
of creeper), *Aparājita* (a type of creeper), the medicinal *Śatāvarī*, sprouted
grains like chickpeas and mung beans, every kind of *Guḍūcī* (Tinospora
cordifolia) that grows on trees like neem and is especially used for medicine,
tender tamarind, spinach, *Amṛtavallī* (a type of creeper), boar hair (a type of
large creeper found in the forest from which *Varahakanda* (a type of tuber)
emerges) (the word *śūkara* is used before *vallī* here so that someone does not
consider *vallī* (creeper) like *rauṅgī* (a type of creeper) as infinite-bodied
when it is used as a vegetable or lentil). All these are famous in the Aryan
country. They are also famous in some parts of the Mleccha country; this is
mentioned in various scriptures like *Jīvābhigaman*. These are to be avoided by
compassionate devotees. The wrong-sighted are unaware of the infinite-bodied
nature of all these; they do not even consider plants to be living beings, let
alone infinite-bodied beings.  **Verse 47:** Now, regarding the avoidance of
unknown fruits:  * **Verse 47:** A wise person should not eat a fruit that is
unknown to oneself or others, that has never been seen, heard of, or known. A
wise person should only eat fruits that are known to them. If a clever person
eats an unknown fruit unknowingly (due to ignorance), then their vow will be
broken by eating a forbidden fruit. Secondly, they may accidentally eat a
poisonous fruit, which could lead to death. Therefore, eating unknown fruits is
prohibited.  **Verse 48:** Now, regarding the prohibition of nighttime meals:  *
**Verse 48:** Food is made impure by the touch of ghosts, *vyantar* (a type of
spirit), *piśāca* (a type of demon), *rākṣasa* (a type of demon), and other low-
caste deities who roam freely at night. Therefore, one should not eat at night.
**Meaning:** It is said that at night, *rākṣasa* (demons) and other beings roam
freely on the earth and make food impure by their touch. They also harass those
who eat at night.  **Further, see:** 199

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 rAtri bhojana meM doSa yogazAstra tRtIya prakAza zloka 44 se 48 khAnA to dUra
rahA; viSama (durbhikSa par3e hue) deza aura kAla meM bhakSya anna, phala Adi
nahIM milate hoM, kar3Ake kI bhUkha lagI ho; bhUkha ke mAre zarIra kRza ho rahA
ho, taba bhI paMcoduMbaraphala nahIM khAte, ve prazaMsanIya hai  /  /  43  /  /
aba krama prApta anaMtakAya ke saMbaMdha meM tIna zlokoM meM kahate haiM | | 215
/  Ardra - kandaH samagro'pi, sarvaH kizalayo'pi ca  /  snuhI lavaNavRkSatvak
kumArI girikarNikA  // 44 //  | | 216  /  zatAvarI virUDhAni, guDUcI komalAmlikA
/  palyaGko'mRtavallI ca, vallaH shuukrsngkssitH||45|| | | 217 | anantakAyA:
sUtroktA apare'pi kRpAparaiH  /  mithyAdRzAmavijJAtA, varjanIyAH prayatnataH  //
46 //  artha :- samasta hare kaMda, sabhI prakAra ke naye pallava (patte),
thUhara, lavaNavRkSa kI chAla, kuMArapAThA, girikarNikA latA, zatAvarI, phUTe
hue aMkura, dvidala vAle anAja, giloya, komala imalI, pAlaka kA sAga, amRtabela,
zUkara jAti ke vAla inheM sUtroM meM anaMtakAya kahA hai| aura bhI anaMtakAya
haiM, jinase mithyAdRSTi anabhijJa haiM, unheM bhI dayAparAyaNa zrAvakoM ko
yatanA pUrvaka chor3a denA cAhie  /   /  44-46  /  /  vyAkhyA : - sabhI jAti ke
kaMda sUkha jAne para nirjIva hone se anaMtakAya nahIM hote| kaMda kA Amataura
para artha hai - vRkSa ke thar3a ke nIce jamIna meM rahA huA bhAga  /  vaha saba
harA kaMda anaMtakAya hotA hai| kucha nAma yahAM ginAye jAte haiM-sUraNa kaMda,
adaraka, haldI, vajrakaMda, lahasuna, narakacUra, kamalakaMda, hastikaMda,
manuSyakaMda, gAjara, padminIkaMda, kaserU, mogarI, mUthA, AlU, pyAja, ratAlu
Adi  /  kizalaya se pratyekavanaspati ke komala patte aura bIja meM se phUTA huA
prathama aMkura; ye sabhI anaMtakAya haiN| thUhara yA lavaNa nAmaka vRkSa kI
sirpha chAla hI anaMtakAya hai, usake dUsare avayava anaMtakAya nahIM hai|
kuMArapAThA, aparAjitA latAvizeSa, zaktivarddhaka zatAvarI nAma kI auSadhi,
aMkura phUTe hue anAja, jaise canA, mUMga Adi; pratyeka kisma kI gaDUcI (giloya)
jo nIma Adi ke per3a para lagI hotI hai aura khAsa kara auSadhi ke kAma meM AtI
hai, komala imalI, pAlaka kA zAka, amarabela, zUkaravAla, (eka prakAra kI bar3I
bela hai, jo jaMgala meM pAyI jAtI hai aura jisameM se varAhakaMda nikalatA hai)
(valla zabda ke pUrva yahAM zUkara isalie lagAyA gayA hai ki koI | sAga yA dAla
(anna) ke rUpa meM vAla- rauMgI Adi ko anaMtakAya meM na mAna le| ye sabhI
Aryadeza meM prasiddha haiM  /  mlecchadeza meM bhI kahIM-kahIM prasiddha hai;
jIvAbhigama Adi vibhinna sUtroM meM yaha batAyA gayA hai| dayAparAyaNa suzrAvaka
ke lie ye | tyAjya hai| mithyAdRSTijana ina saba meM anaMtakAyatva se anabhijJa
hote haiM; ve to vanaspati ko bhI sajIva nahIM mAnate, anaMtakAyika jIvoM ko
mAnane kI bAta to dUra rahI  /  / 44-46 /  /  aba ajJAtaphala kA tyAga karane ke
lie kahate haiM  / 218 /  svayaM pareNa vA jJAtaM phalamadyAd vizAradaH  /
niSiddhe viSaphale vA, mAbhUdasya pravartanam  // 47 // 4/ artha svayaM ko yA
dUsare ko jisa phala kI pahacAna nahIM hai, jise kabhI dekhA, sunA yA jAnA nahIM
hai; usa phala ko na khaaye| buddhizAlI vyakti vahIM phala khAye, jo use jJAta
hai| catura AdamI anajAne meM ( ajJAnatAvaza ) agara ajJAta phala khA legA to,
niSiddhaphala khAne se usakA vratabhaMga hogA, dUsare, kadAcit koI jaharIlA
phala khAne meM A jAya to usase prANanAza ho jaaygaa| isI dRSTi se
ajJAtaphalabhakSaNa meM pravRtta hone kA niSedha kiyA gayA hai  /  / 47|| : aba
rAtribhojana kA niSedha karate haiM  / 219 /  annaM preta-pizAcAdyaiH,
saJcaradbhirniraGkuzaiH  /  ucchiSTaM kriyate yatra tatra nAdyAd dinAtyaye  //
48 /  /  artha :- rAta meM svacchaMda ghUmane vAle preta, vyaMtara, pizAca,
rAkSasa Adi adhamajAtIya deva vagairaha dvArA sparzAdi se bhojana jhUThA kara
diyA jAtA hai, isalie rAta meM bhojana nahIM karanA cAhie ||48 || kahA bhI hai-
rAta ko rAkSasa Adi pRthvI para sarvatra idhara-udhara ghUmA karate haiM aura ve
apane sparza se khAdyapadArthoM ko jhUThe kara dete haiM tathA rAtri meM khAne
vAloM para upadrava bhI karate haiN| aura bhI dekhie - 199

Page #222 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Harms of Nighttime Meals  **From Yoga Shastra, Third Light, Verses
49-53**  **Verse 49:** In the depths of darkness, where eyes are useless, and
creatures fall unseen, who would eat at night, unable to discern what they
consume?  **Explanation:** In the darkness, eyes cannot function.  Ants,
insects, flies, and other living beings may fall into food like oil, ghee,
buttermilk, etc., and remain unseen.  Who would be wise enough to eat at night
under such circumstances?  **Verses 50-52:** Now, we describe the visible harms
of nighttime meals in three verses.  * An ant, if eaten, destroys intelligence.
* A louse, if swallowed, causes dropsy. * A fly, if ingested, leads to vomiting.
* An earwig, if consumed, causes leprosy. * A thorn or piece of wood, if lodged
in the throat, causes pain. * A scorpion, if present in vegetables, can pierce
the palate. * A hair stuck in the throat can cause voice impairment.  These and
other such harms are evident to all who eat at night.  **Explanation:**  Eating
at night can lead to many harms.  If an ant is consumed, it destroys
intelligence.  If a louse is eaten, it causes dropsy.  If a fly is ingested, it
leads to vomiting.  If an earwig is consumed, it causes leprosy.  A thorn or
piece of wood, if lodged in the throat, causes pain.  If a scorpion is present
in vegetables and eaten, it can pierce the palate.  A hair stuck in the throat
can cause voice impairment.  **Question:**  Ants and other small creatures are
invisible, but a scorpion is large and visible.  How could it be swallowed?
**Answer:**  A scorpion might be mistaken for a vegetable like eggplant, which
is similar in size.  If eaten, the consequences would be dire.  **Verse 53:**
Even if the tiny creatures are not visible, and the food is inanimate, like dry
grains, one should not eat at night.  Those who have attained perfect knowledge,
with their knowledge-eyes, have neither accepted nor prescribed nighttime meals.
**Explanation:**  Even if the food is inanimate, like dry grains, and prepared
during the day, one should not eat at night.  Why?  Because even in the
brightest light, tiny creatures like mites and ants are invisible.  Those with
perfect knowledge, using their knowledge-power, have recognized this and
therefore have not prescribed or accepted nighttime meals.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 rAtribhojana se hone vAlI hAniyA~ yogazAstra tRtIya prakAza zloka 49 se 53  /
220 /  ghorAndhakAraruddhAkSaiH patanto yatra jantavaH  /  naiva bhojye
nirIkSyante, tatra bhuJjIta ko nishi?||49|| artha :- ghora aMdhere meM AMkheM
kAma nahIM karatIM; tela, ghI, chAcha Adi bhojya padArthoM meM koI cIMTI, kIr3A,
makkhI Adi jIva par3a jAya to ve AMkhoM se dikhAI nahIM dete| aise meM kauna
samajhadAra AdamI rAta ko bhojana karegA?  // 49 //  aba rAtribhojana se
pratyakSa dikhAyI dene vAle doSoM kA tIna zlokoM dvArA varNana karate haiN|221|
medhAM pipIlikA hanti, yUkA kuryAjjalodaram  /  kurute makSikA vAntiM,
kuSTharogaM ca kolikaH  // 50 //   / 222 /  kaGTako dArukhaNDaM ca, vitanoti
galavyathAm  /  vyaJjanAntarnipatitastAlu vidhyati vRzcikaH  // 51 /  /  223 /
vilagnazca gale vAlaH, svarabhaGgAya jAyate  /  ityAdayo dRSTadoSAH sarveSAM
nizi bhojane  // 52 //  artha :- rAta ko bhojana karate samaya bhojana meM yadi
cIMTI khAyI jAya to vaha buddhi kA nAza kara detI hai| jUM nigalI jAya to vaha
jalodara roga paidA kara detI hai| makkhI khAne meM A jAya to ulaTI hotI hai,
kAnakhajUrA khAne meM A jAya to kor3ha ho jAtA hai| kAMTA yA lakar3I kA Tukar3A
gale meM pIr3A kara detA hai, agara sAgabhAjI meM bicchU par3a jAya to vaha tAlu
ko phAr3a detA hai, gale meM bAla cipaka jAya to usase AvAja kharAba ho jAtI
hai| rAtribhojana karane meM ye aura isa prakAra ke kaI doSa jo sabako pratyakSa
vidita hai||50-52|| vyAkhyA :- rAta ko bhojana karane se kitane nukasAna haiM,
yaha batAte hue kahate haiM-bhojana meM agara cIMTI A jAya to usake khAne.para
buddhinAza ho jAtI hai| jUM khAne meM A jAya to jalodara roga ho jAtA hai|
makkhI bhojana meM par3a jAya to usake khAne se ulaTI ho jAtI hai| kAnakhajUrA
khAne se kuSTaroga ho jAtA hai| babUla Adi kA kAMTA yA lakar3I kA TakaDA A jAya
to gale meM aTakakara pIDA paidA karatA hai| biccha sAga meM paDa jAya to use
khA lene para tAla ko phADa detA hai| yahAM prazna hotA hai ki cIMTI Adi to
bArIka hone se dikhAyI nahIM detI, magara bicchU to bar3A hone se dikhAyI detA
hai; vaha bhojana meM kaise nigalA jA sakatA hai? isake uttara meM kahate haiM-
baiMgana yA isa prakAra ke kisI sAga meM, jo bicchU ke-se AkAra kA hotA hai, to
bicchU ko sAga samajhakara kadAcit khA liyA jAya to usakA natIjA bhayaMkara hotA
hai| gale meM bAla cipaka jAya to AvAja phaTa jAtI hai; sApha nahIM nikltii| ye
aura isa prakAra ke kaI doSa to pratyakSa haiM, jinheM anya dharmasaMpradAya va
darzana vAle bhI mAnate haiN| isake alAvA rAtri meM bhojana banAne meM bhI chaha
jIvanikAya kA vadha hotA hai| rAtri ko bartana sApha karate samaya aura dhote
samaya pAnI meM rahe hue jIvoM kA vinAza hotA hai| usa pAnI ko jamIna para
pheMkane se jamIna para reMgane vAle kuMthuA, cIMTI Adi bArIka jaMtuoM kA nAza
hotA hai| isa kAraNa jIvarakSA kI dRSTi se bhI rAtri meM bhojana nahIM karanA
caahie| kahA bhI hai-rAta ko bartana mAMjaneM, unheM dhone aura usa pAnI ko
pheMkane Adi meM bahuta-se kuMthuA Adi jaMtu mara jAte haiM, unakI hiMsA ho jAtI
hai, isalie aise rAtribhojana ke itane doSa hai ki kahe nahIM jA sakate  /  /
50-52 /  /  yahAM zaMkA hotI hai ki taiyAra kI huI laDDU Adi miThAiyA~ yA sUkhI
cIjeM athavA pake phala yA sukhe meve Adi jinameM rAta ko pakAne, bartana dhone
Adi kI jhaMjhaTa nahIM hai, unheM agara rAta ko sevanakara liyA to kyA doSa hai?
isI ke uttara meM kahate haiN|224| nAprekSya sUkSmajantUni, nizcayAt
prAsukAnyapi  /  apyudyatkevalajJAnairnAdRttaM yannizA'zanam  // 53 /  /  artha
:- rAta ko AMkhoM se dikhAyI na deM, aise sUkSmajaMtu bhojana meM hone se cAhe
vividha prAsuka (nirjIva) bhojana hI ho, rAta ko nahIM karanA caahie| kyoMki
jinheM kevalajJAna prApta ho gayA hai, unhoMne jJAnacakSuoM se jAnate-dekhate
hue bhI rAtribhojana na to svIkAra kiyA hai, na vihita kiyA hai  /  / 53 /  /  .
vyAkhyA :- dina meM taiyAra kiyA haA prAsaka aura upalakSaNa se rAta ko nahIM
pakAyA haA bhojana ho, phira bhI laDDU, phala, sUkhe meve Adi rAta ko nahIM
khAne caahie| prazna hotA hai kyoM? kisa kAraNa se? uttara meM kahate haiM-sUrya
ke prakAza ke atirikta anya kisI bhI teja se teja prakAza meM sUkSma jIva-
panaka, kuMthuA Adi najara nahIM Ate, isa kAraNa se kevalajJAniyoM ne jJAnabala
se yaha jAnakara rAtribhojana kA vidhAna nahIM kiyA aura na svIkAra kiyaa| rAta
meM |

Page #223 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Opinions of Other Dharma Shastras and Ayurveda Shastra Regarding the
Abandonment of Night Meals  **Yoga Shastra, Third Light, Verses 54-59**  Many
microscopic beings enter food, therefore, that food does not remain devoid of
life. In the Nisheeth commentary, it is stated that "Even though sweets and
other dry and cooked substances are prepared during the day and not at night,
still, tiny creatures like Kunthua, Kai-Phulan (Panak) etc. are not visible even
at night, therefore, they should not be eaten."  A Pratyakshagyani (direct
knower), Kevalgyani (omniscient) and Sarvagya (all-knowing) can know or see
those microscopic beings with their knowledge power; yet they do not eat at
night. Although ants and other creatures are visible in the light of lamps etc.,
many times, while eating at night, tiny flying creatures fall into the light of
lamps etc. or into the food and die, therefore, specific knowers have not
accepted or prescribed night meals due to the possibility of violating the
Mulavrat (fundamental vow) of Ahimsa (non-violence). || 53 ||  **In this regard,
it is stated:**  **225.** Dharmavinnaiva Bhunjeet, Kadachan Dinatyaye. Baahya
Api Nisha Bhojya, Yadabhojya Prachakshate. || 54 ||  **Meaning:** Those who do
not follow the Jain teachings, other opinionated people, also call night meals
as inedible. Therefore, a Dharmagyani Shravak should never eat after sunset. ||
54 ||  **Meaning:**  Other opinionated scriptures prohibit night meals after
sunset.  **226.** Trayitejomayo Bhanur iti Vedavido Viduh. Tatkarai:
Puutamkhilam Shubham Karma Samacharet. || 55 ||  **Meaning:** Knowers of the
Vedas consider the Sun to be imbued with the brilliance of the three Vedas - Rig
Veda, Yajur Veda, and Sama Veda. Therefore, one of the names of the Sun is
'Trayitanu'. Hence, one should perform only those auspicious deeds that are
purified by the rays of the Sun. In their absence, one should not perform
auspicious deeds. || 55 ||  **Continuing the same point:**  **227.** Naivahutir
na cha Snaanam na Shraddham Devatarchanam. Danam Vaavihitam Ratrau Bhojanam tu
Visheshatah. || 56 ||  **Meaning:** Offering oblations (ahutis) i.e., putting
firewood etc. into the fire, bathing, cleansing the body, Shraddha Karma -
worship of ancestors and other deities, worship of deities, charity, sacrifices,
etc. auspicious deeds, especially night meals, are not prescribed; they are not
to be done. || 56 ||  **Here, the question arises that it is heard that night
meals are beneficial; and it is not possible without eating at night. In
response to this, this verse is presented:**  **228.** Divasyashtame Bhaage,
Mandibute Diwakare. Naktam tu Tad Vijaniyat, Na Naktam Nishibhojanam. || 57 ||
**Meaning:** When the Sun becomes weak in the eighth part of the day, that
should be known as 'Naktam'. 'Naktam' does not mean night meals. || 57 ||
**Explanation:** The meal taken in the eighth part of the day, i.e., in the last
half of the day, is called 'Naktam'. The meaning of a word can be understood in
two ways - primarily and secondarily. Sometimes, one should act primarily
according to one meaning and sometimes, if there is an obstacle in acting
primarily according to one meaning, then one should act according to the
secondary meaning. Here, there is an obstacle according to the scriptures,
because night meals are prohibited in the scriptures, i.e., the secondary
meaning of 'Naktam' is - a little bit of the day remaining, eating at that time.
Here, the word 'Naktam' is primarily used for night meals, therefore, one should
act according to the secondary meaning of 'Naktam'. One should eat when the Sun
is weak - in the eighth part of the day; that should be understood as 'Naktam'
meals. The conclusion is that due to the prohibition of the primary meaning,
'Naktam' should not mean night meals. Where else are night meals prohibited in
other scriptures? || 57 ||  **This is explained in two verses:**  **229.**
Devaistu Bhuktam Puraahne, Madhyahne Rishibhistatha. Aparaahna cha Pitribhih,
Sayaahne Daitya Danavaih. || 58 ||  **230.** Sandhyaayam Yaksha Rakshobhih Sada
Bhuktam Kulodvah! Sarvavelaam Vyatikramya, Ratrau Bhuktamabhojanam. || 59 ||
**Meaning:** Devas eat in the first watch of the day, Rishis eat at midday
(noon), Pitras eat in the third watch of the day, and Daitya Danavas eat in the
evening (twilight); day and night,

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 rAtribhojanatyAga ke saMbaMdha meM anya dharmazAstroM va AyurvedazAstra ke mata
yogazAstra tRtIya prakAza zloka 54 se 59 bhojana ke aMdara Akara bahuta-se
sUkSma jIva par3a jAte haiM, isalie vaha bhojana jIvarahita nahIM rahatA  /
nizItha - bhASya meM batAyA hai ki 'yadyapi modaka Adi sUkhe aura prAsuka
padArtha rAta meM taiyAra na karake dina meM hI banAye hue hoM, phira bhI
kuMthuA, kAI - phUlaNa (panaka) Adi bArIka jantu rAta meM bhI dikhAyI nahIM
dete, isalie unheM na khAye  /  pratyakSajJAnI | kevalajJAnI sarvajJa apane
jJAnabala se una sUkSmajIvoM ko jAna yA dekha sakate haiM; phira bhI ve
rAtribhojana nahIM krte| | yadyapi dIpaka Adi ke prakAza meM cIMTI Adi jIva
dikhAyI dete haiM; lekina kaI bAra rAtri meM bhojana karate samaya bArIka |
ur3ane vAle jaMtu dIpaka Adi ke prakAza meM par3akara yA bhojana meM girakara
mara jAte haiM, isalie viziSTa jJAniyoM ne mUlavrata| ahiMsA ke bhaMga hone kI
saMbhAvanA se rAtribhojana svIkAra nahIM kiyA aura na hI vihita kiyA  /  /  53
/  /  isI ke saMbaMdha meM batA rahe haiM  /  225  /  dharmavinnaiva bhuJjIta,
kadAcana dinAtyaye  /  bAhyA api nizAbhojyaM, yadabhojyaM pracakSate  // 54 ||
jinazAsana ko na mAnane vAle anyamatIya loga bhI rAtribhojana ko abhojya kahate
haiN| ataH dharmajJa zrAvaka sUrya asta ho jAne ke bAda kadApi bhojana na kare
/  /  54  /  /  artha : sUryAsta ho jAne ke bAda rAtribhojana kA anyamatIya
zAstroM meM isa prakAra niSedha hai|226| trayItejomayo bhAnuriti vedavido viduH
/  tatkaraiH pUtamakhilaM zubhaM karma samAcaret  // 55 //  artha :- veda ke
jJAtA sUrya ko Rgveda, yajurveda aura sAmaveda isa vedatrayI ke teja se ota-
prota mAnate haiN| isalie sUrya kA eka nAma 'trayItanu' bhI hai| ataH usa sUrya
kI kiraNoM se pavitra hue zubhakAryoM ko hI karanA caahie| unake abhAva meM
zubha kArya nahIM kare  // 55 //  isI bAta ko Age kahate haiM | 227 |
naivAhutirna ca snAnaM na zrAddhaM devatArcanam  /  dAnaM vAvihitaM rAtrau
bhojanaM tu vizeSataH  // 56 //  artha :- Ahuti arthAt agni meM kASTha Adi
iMdhana DAlanA, snAna, aMgaprakSAlana, zrAddha karma - pitara Adi devoM kI pUjA,
devapUjA, dAna, yajJa Adi zubhakArya vizeSataH rAtri meM bhojana avihita hai;
akaraNIya hai  /  /  56  /  /  yahAM prazna hotA hai ki aisA sunA jAtA hai ki
naktabhojana kalyANakArI hai; aura vaha rAtri meM bhojana kiye binA nahIM | ho
sakatA; isake uttara meM yaha zloka prastuta hai |  /  228 divasyASTame bhAge,
mandIbhUte divAkare  /  naktaM tu tad vijAnIyAt, na naktaM nizibhojanam  // 57
//  artha :- divasa ke AThaveM bhAga meM jaba sUrya maMda ho gayA ho, use hI
'nakta' jAnanA caahie| 'nakta' kA artha nizA (rAtri) bhojana nahIM hai  /  /
57|| vyAkhyA : - dina ke AThaveM bhAga meM yAnI divasa ke aMtima Adhe pahora meM
jo bhojana kiyA jAya, use nakta kahate haiN| zabda kI artha meM pravRtti do
prakAra se hotI hai - mukhya rUpa se aura gauNa rUpa se| kisI samaya ina donoM
meM se mukhya | rUpa se vyavahAra karanA aura kisI samaya mukhya rUpa se
arthapravRtti karane meM bAdhA Aye to gauNa rUpa se karanA cAhie  /  zAstrokta
bAdhA AtI hai, kyoMki zAstra meM rAtribhojana niSiddha yAnI nakta kA gauNa artha
huA - thor3A sA dina zeSa rahe, usa | yahAM nakta zabda kI rAtribhojana rUpa
mukhya arthapravRtti meM hai, isalie nakta kI gauNa-artha meM pravRtti karanI
caahie| | samaya bhojana karanA  /  isI ko lekara kahA gayA hai ki - sUrya maMda
ho usa samaya - dina ke AThaveM bhAga meM bhojana karanA; nakta bhojana
samajhanA caahie| niSkarSa yaha hai ki mukhya artha kA pratiSedha hone se nakta
kA artha rAtribhojana nahIM karanA | caahie| anya zAstroM meM bhI rAtribhojana
kahAM-kahAM niSiddha hai ?  /  /  57  /  /  ise do zlokoM meM batAte haiM | |
229  /  devaistu bhuktaM purvAhne, madhyAhane RSibhistathA  /  aparAhna ca
pitRbhiH, sAyAhne daitya dAnavaiH  //  58  //  | | 230  /  sandhyAyAM
yakSarakSobhiH sadA bhuktaM kulodvaha!  /  sarvavelAM vyatikramya, rAtrau
bhuktamabhojanam  // 59 //  artha :- dina ke pahale prahara meM deva bhojana
karate haiM, madhyAhna ( dopahara ) meM RSi AhAra karate haiM, aparAhna (tRtIya
prahara) meM pitara bhojana karate haiM aura sAMyakAla ( vikAla ) meM
daityadAnava khAte haiM; dina aura rAta ke 201

Page #224 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Evils of Nighttime Meals and the Benefits of Abstaining  **Chapter 3,
Verses 60-66 of the Yoga Shastra**  In the transitional period, between day and
night, Yakshas and Rakshasas eat. Therefore, O Yudhishthira, the sustainer of
your lineage, it is forbidden to eat at night, violating all these times of
meals for the Devas and others. ||58-59||  Now, in accordance with the
prohibition of nighttime meals mentioned in the Puranas, we will confirm this
statement from the perspective of Ayurveda. ||231||  **Verse 60:**  *
**Meaning:** When the sun sets, the lotus of the heart and the navel lotus
within the body contract, and along with the food, subtle beings are also
consumed. Therefore, one should not eat at night. ||60||  **Verse 61:**  *
**Meaning:** Those who eat at night, consuming a multitude of living beings that
fall into their food, are no better than Rakshasas, if not worse. How can they
be considered wise? ||61||  **Verse 62:**  * **Meaning:** One who eats
continuously, day and night, is truly a beast without horns or a tail. ||62||
**Verse 63:**  * **Meaning:** One who, knowing the evils of nighttime meals,
abstains from eating for two ghatikas (48 minutes) at the beginning of the day
and two ghatikas at the end of the night, is blessed with great merit. ||63||
**Explanation:** One who eats two ghatikas after sunrise and two ghatikas before
sunset (i.e., abstaining from eating for two ghatikas at the beginning of the
day and two ghatikas at the end of the night) is a virtuous soul. This noble
person has understood the evils of nighttime meals. They consider the two
ghatikas near nighttime to be harmful. Therefore, the Agamas prescribe that the
most severe form of pratyakhyana (abstinence) is performed after the nine-fold
namaskara (salutation) and before the end of the day, one muhurta (48 minutes)
before the Shravaka (Jain lay follower) refrains from eating and then performs
pratyakhyana. ||63||  **Verse 64:**  * **Meaning:** One who eats during the day
without observing the rule of abstaining from nighttime meals may receive some
general benefits, but not the specific benefits of pratyakhyana. Just as a
deposit does not accrue interest without a specific agreement, similarly, one
who eats during the day without observing the rule does not receive the specific
benefits of observing the rule. ||64||  **Verse 65:**  * **Meaning:** Those who,
abandoning the sun-lit day, eat only at night, are like fools who abandon a
precious jewel and take a piece of glass. ||65||  **Verse 66:**  * **Meaning:**
Those who, desiring good fortune, eat at night despite the presence of the day,
are like those who sow seeds in barren land, even though they are of the finest
quality. ||66||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 rAtribhojana kA duSphala aura usake tyAga suphala yogazAstra tRtIya prakAza
zloka 60 se 66 saMdhikAla meM yakSa aura rAkSasa khAte haiN| isalie he
kulanirvAhaka yudhiSThira! devAdi ke bhojana ke ina sabhI samayoM kA ullaMghana
karake rAtri ko bhojana karanA niSiddha hai  /  / 58-59 /  /  purANoM meM
kathita rAtribhojana niSedha ke sAtha saMgati biThAkara aba Ayurveda se isa
kathana kI puSTi karate haiN|231| hannAbhipadmasaGkocaH caNDarocirapAyataH  /
ato naktaM na bhoktavyaM, sUkSmajIvAdanAdapi  // 60 /  /  artha :- sUrya ke asta
ho jAne para zarIrasthita hRdayakamala aura nAbhikamala sikur3a jAte haiM aura
usa bhojana ke sAtha sUkSmajIva bhI khAne meM A jAte haiM, isalie bhI
rAtribhojana nahIM karanA cAhie  /  / 6 /  /  dUsare pakSoM ke sAtha samanvaya
karake, aba apane mata kI siddhi karate haiN|232| saMsRjajjIvasaGghAtaM,
bhuJjAnA nizibhojanam  /  rAkSasebhyo viziSyante, mUDhAtmAnaH kathaM nu te?  //
61 /  /  artha :- jisa rAtribhojana ke karane meM aneka jIvasamaha Akara bhojana
meM gira jAte haiM. usa rAtribhojana ko karane vAle mUr3hAtmA rAkSasoM se
bar3hakara nahIM to kyA hai?  /  / 11 /  /  jinadharma ko prApta karake virati
(niyama) svIkAra karanA hI ucita hai, anyathA virati rahita mAnava binA
sIMgapUMcha kA pazu hai, isI bAta ko prakaTa karate haiN|233| vAsare rajanyAM ca
yaH khAdanneva tiSThati  /  zRGgapucchaparibhraSTaH, spaSTaM sa pazureva hi  //
62 /  /  artha :- jo dina aura rAta caratA hI rahatA hai, vaha vAstava meM binA
sIMga-pUMcha kA pazuhI hai  /  / 6 /  /  aba rAtribhojana se bhI adhika tyAga
karane vAle kI mahimA batAte haiN|234| ahno mukhe'vasAne ca, yo dve dve ghaTike
tyajan  /  nizAbhojanadoSajJo'znAtyasau punnybhaajnm||63|| artha :- rAtribhojana
ke doSoM se abhijJa jo manuSya dina ke prAraMbha aura rAtri ke aMta kI do-do
ghar3iyA chor3akara bhojana karatA hai, vaha vizeSa puNyabhAgI hotA hai  /  / 3
/  /  vyAkhyA :- jo sUryodaya se do ghar3I bAda aura sUryAsta se do ghar3I
pahale (yAnI dina ke prAraMbha se aura rAtri Agamana | se pUrva kI do-do
ghar3iyAM chor3akara) bhojana karatA hai, vahI puNyAtmA hai, usI mahAnubhAva ne
rAtri-bhojana ke doSa bhalIbhAMti samajhe haiN| vahI rAtri ke nikaTa kI do
ghar3I ko sadoSa samajhatA hai| isI kAraNa Agama meM vihita hai ki sabase |
jaghanya pratyAkhyAna muhUtekAlaparimita naukArasI (namaskArapUrvikA) ke bAda
aura dina ke Akhira meM eka maharta pahale zrAvaka apane bhojana se nivRtta ho
jAtA hai, usake bAda pratyAkhyAna kara letA hai  /  / 3 /  /  yahAM zaMkA hotI
hai-yaha batAie ki jo rAtribhojana tyAga kA niyama liye binA hI dina meM bhojana
kara letA hai, use kucha phala milatA hai yA nahIM? yA koI viziSTa phala milatA
hai? isakA samAdhAna AgAmI zloka dvArA karate haiN|235| akRtvA niyamaM
doSAbhojanAd dinabhojyapi  /  phalaM bhajenna nirvyAjaM, na vRddhirbhASitaM vinA
// 64 /  artha :- rAtribhojana kA pratyAkhyAna (tyAga) kiye binA hI jo dina meM
bhojana kara letA hai, use pratyAkhyAna vizeSa kA phala nahIM mila sktaa|
sAdhAraNa phala to milatA hI hai, jaise vacana se byAja kI bAta khole binA
amAnata rakhI huI dhanarAzi meM vRddhi nahIM hotI, vaha mUla rUpa meM hI
surakSita rahatI hai| usI taraha niyama liye binA hI dina meM bhojana karane
vAle ko niyamagrahaNa kA vizeSa phala nahIM milatA  /  / 64 /  /  /  pUrvokta
bAta ko prakArAMtara se samajhAte haiN|236| ye vAsaraM parityajya, rajanyAmeva
bhuJjate  /  te parityajya mANikyaM, kAcamAdadate jaDAH  // 65 /  /  artha :- jo
manuSya sUrya se prakAzamAna dina ko chor3akara rAtri ko hI bhojana karate haiM,
ve jar3AtmA mANikyaratna ko chor3akara kAca ko grahaNa karate haiM  /  / 5 /  /
yahAM prazna hotA hai-'niyama to sarvatra sarvadA phala detA hai', isalie agara
koI niyama letA hai ki 'mujhe to rAta meM hI bhojana karanA hai, dina meM nahIM,
to aise niyama vAle kI kauna-sI gati hotI hai? ise hI batAte haiN|237| vAsare
sati ye zreyaskAmyayA nizi bhuJjate  /  te vapantyUSare kSetre, zAlIn satyapi
palvale  /  / 66 /  /  | 202

Page #225 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Description of Night Meals and Bi-Parted (Food)  **Explanation of Verses 67
to 70 from the Third Light of Yoga Shastra:**  Even if the day is favorable, one
who eats at night with the hope of some benefit is like someone who sows rice in
barren land, abandoning fertile land. ||66||  **Explanation:** Even if food is
available during the day, a person who eats at night due to a desire for benefit
- whether it be due to the inspiration of a good scripture or a good teacher, or
due to traditional customs or delusion, or a desire for good fortune - is like a
farmer who, despite having fertile fields, sows rice in barren land instead. The
rule of eating only at night is as pointless as sowing seeds in barren land. A
rule that prevents wrongdoing is fruitful; a rule that only obstructs the path
of righteousness is fruitless or yields adverse results. In reality, such a
contrary insistence cannot be called a rule. ||66||  Now, regarding the
consequences of night meals: ||238||  Owls, crows, cats, vultures, demons, pigs,
snakes, scorpions, and crocodiles are born from those who eat at night. ||67||
**Explanation:** Those who eat at night are born in the next life as owls,
crows, cats, vultures, demons, pigs, snakes, scorpions, and crocodiles, among
other low-caste animals. ||67||  Further, the importance of abandoning night
meals is explained using the example of Vanamala: ||239||  It is heard that
Vanamala made Lakshmana swear an oath regarding the sin of eating at night,
ignoring all other oaths. ||68||  **Explanation:** It is heard in the Ramayana
that Lakshmana, the son of Dasharatha, was going towards the south with Rama and
Sita, following his parents' orders. On the way, he came to Kubera Nagar, where
he married Vanamala, the daughter of King Maheedhar. When Lakshmana was taking
leave of Vanamala to go ahead with Rama, Vanamala, distressed by the separation
from her husband and hoping for his quick return, said to Lakshmana, "My dear
husband! Please swear an oath to me." Lakshmana said, "My dear! If I do not
return to you after taking Rama to his desired land, may my fate be the same as
those who commit acts like killing living beings. But Vanamala was not satisfied
with this oath. She said, "My beloved! I can only allow you to go if you swear
an oath like this: If I do not return, may my fate be the same as those who eat
at night." Therefore, Lakshmana, at Vanamala's request, took such an oath, and
only then did she allow him to depart for another country. This means that
Vanamala disregarded other oaths and made Lakshmana swear an oath regarding
night meals. Writing more would make the text lengthy, so we stop here. ||68||
Apart from the scriptural example, now we explain the consequences of abandoning
night meals as proven by the experiences of ordinary people: ||240||  One who
always abstains from night meals is blessed. Indeed, he remains fasting for half
his lifespan (i.e., every night). ||69||  **Explanation:** A righteous person
who abandons night meals spends half his lifespan in fasting. Even one fast is
highly beneficial as it leads to purification. If someone has a lifespan of a
hundred years, then fifty years are spent in fasting; imagine the benefits! In
short, there are many drawbacks to eating at night, and many virtues in
abandoning it. It is beyond our capacity to describe them all. ||69||  This is
what is said: ||241||  Even if these virtues are mentioned, no one other than
the omniscient can speak of them. ||70||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 rAtribhojana evaM dvidala kA vivaraNa yogazAstra tRtIya prakAza zloka 67 se 70
artha :- dina kI anukUlatA hone para bhI jo kisI kalyANa kI AzA se rAta ko khAtA
hai, vaha aisA hI hai, jaise koI upajAU bhUmi ko chor3akara USarabhUmi meM dhAna
botA hai  // 66 //  vyAkhyA :- dina meM bhojana ho sakane para bhI jo manuSya
kalyANa kI kAmanA se-yAnI kuzAstra yA kuguru kI preraNA se yA paraMparAgata
saMskAravaza athavA mohavaza zreya kI icchA se-rAta ko hI bhojana karatA hai;
vaha manuSya usa kisAna kI taraha hai; jo upajAU kheta hote hue bhI usameM dhAna
na bokara USara bhUmi meM botA hai| rAtri meM hI bhojana karane kA niyama bhI
USarabhUmi meM bIja bone kI taraha nirarthaka hai| jo niyama adharma ko rokatA
hai, vahI phaladAyaka hotA hai; jo niyama dharmamArga meM hI ror3e aTakAtA hai;
vaha niSphala yA viparIta phala vAlA hai| vAstava meM, aise viparIta Agraha ko
niyama nahIM kahA jA sakatA  /  / 66 /  aba rAtribhojana ke phala ke saMbaMdha
meM kahate haiN|238| ulUka-kAka-mArjAra-gRdhra-zambara-zUkarAH  /  ahi-vRzcika-
godhAzca, jAyante rAtribhojanAt  // 67 /  /  artha :- rAtribhojana karane vAle
manuSya agale janma meM ullU, kaue, billI, gIdha, rAkSasa, sUara, sarpa, bicchU
aura goha yA magaramaccha Adi adhamajAtIya tiryaMcayoniyoM meM janma lete haiM
/  / 7 /  /  Age vanamAlA kA udAharaNa dekara rAtribhojanatyAga kA mahattva
samajhAte haiN|239| zruyate hyanyazapathAnanAdRtyaiva lakSmaNaH  /
nizAbhojanazapathaM, kArito vanamAlayA  // 68 //  artha :- sunA jAtA hai,
vanamAlA ne lakSmaNa se dUsare tamAma zapathoM ko svIkAra na karake rAtribhojana
se hone vAle pApa kI zapatha (saugaMdha) karavAyI thI  /  / 68|| vyAkhyA :- sunA
hai, rAmAyaNa meM batAyA gayA hai ki dazarathaputra lakSmaNa mAtA-pitA kI AjJA
se rAma aura sItA ke sAtha jaba dakSiNapatha kI ora jA rahA thA; rAste meM
kuberanagara AyA; vahAM ke rAjA mahIdhara kI putrI vanamAlA ke sAtha usane
vivAha kiyaa| jaba vanamAlA ko apane pIhara meM chor3akara lakSmaNa rAma ke
sAtha Age jAne ke lie vanamAlA se vidA lene lagA, usa samaya lakSmaNa ke viraha
duHkha se duHkhita evaM zIghra Agamana kI saMbhAvanA se vanamAlA ne lakSmaNa se
kahA-'prANanAtha! Apa mere sAmane saugaMdha khAkara pdhaarie|' taba lakSmaNa ne
kahA-priye! yadi maiM rAma ko unake abhISTa deza meM pahuMcAkara vApisa
lauTakara tumheM prasanna na karUM to merI gati bhI vahI ho, jo prANAtipAta Adi
se hotI hai| paraMtu isa saugaMdha (zapatha) se vanamAlA ko saMtoSa na huaa|
usane kahA-'priyatama! maiM Apako tabhI jAne kI anumati de sakatI haM. jaba Apa
isa prakAra kI saugaMdha khAyeMge ki agara maiM na lauTA to rAtribhojana karane
se jo gati hotI hai gati ho|' ataH lakSmaNa ne vanamAlA ke anarodha se aisI
saugaMdha khAyI; tabhI usane dUsare deza kI ora prasthAna karane diyaa| matalaba
yaha hai ki dUsarI zapathoM kI avagaNanA karake vanamAlA ne rAtribhojana
saMbaMdhI zapatha lakSmaNa ko dilaayii| adhika likhane se graMtha vistRta ho
jAyegA, isalie yahAM itanA hI likhakara virAma karate haiM  /  / 68 /  /
zAstrIya udAharaNa ke alAvA aba sarvasAdhAraNa ke anubhavoM se siddha
rAtribhojana tyAga kA phala batAte haiN||240| karoti virati dhanyo, yaH sadA
nizibhojanAt  /  so'rddha puruSAyuSasya, syAdavazyamupoSitaH  /  / 69 /  /
artha :- jo sadA ke lie rAtribhojana kA tyAga (pratyAkhyAna) karatA hai, vaha
puruSa dhanya hai| sacamuca, vaha apanI pUrI Ayu ke Adhe bhAga (yAnI pratyeka
rAtri) meM upavAsI rahatA hai  /  / 9 /  /  yA :- jo dharmAtmA rAtribhojana kA
tyAga karatA hai, usa paruSa kI AdhI Aya to upavAsa meM hI vyatIta hotI hai| eka
upavAsa bhI nirjarA kA kAraNa rUpa hone se mahAphaladAyaka hotA hai, to sau
varSa kI Aya vAle ke pacAsa varSa to upavAsa meM vyatIta hote haiM; usakA kitanA
phala hogA? yaha aMdAjA lagAyA jA sakatA hai| sArAMza yaha hai ki rAtribhojana
karane meM bahuta-se doSa haiM, aura usakA tyAga karane meM bahuta-se guNa haiM,
una sabakA kathana karanA hamArI zakti se bAhara hai  /  / 69 /  /  isI bAta ko
kahate haiN|241| rajanIbhojanatyAge, ye guNAH parito'pi tAn  /  na sarvajJAdRte
kazcidaparo vaktumIzvaraH  // 70 //  203

Page #226 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Food contaminated with minute living beings and four types of wrong conduct
**Yoga Shastra, Third Light, Verses 71-73**  **Meaning:**  Only the omniscient
can fully describe the virtues of abstaining from food at night. ||70||  Now,
the prohibition of eating lentils mixed with raw milk, yogurt, or buttermilk is
explained. ||242||  **Verse 71:**  The omniscient have seen minute living beings
in lentils like mung beans, black gram, etc., mixed with raw yogurt. Therefore,
one should avoid them. ||71||  **Explanation:**  Jainism has a system where some
things are understood through reasoning and some are understood through
scriptures (Agama, Aapta Vachan).  Things that can be known through logic,
reasoning, and experience are explained through reasoning.  Things that cannot
be known or proven through reasoning are explained through scriptures and the
words of the enlightened.  One who follows this is considered a follower of the
teachings.  Conversely, one who explains things that can be understood through
reasoning using scriptures, and tries to explain things that are understood
through scriptures using reasoning, is considered a violator of the teachings.
It is said, "One who accepts the reasoning side through reasoning, and the
scriptural side through scriptures, and presents their own principles
truthfully, is a follower of the teachings.  Conversely, one who speaks against
this is a violator of the teachings, as they are presenting a contradictory
view."  According to this logic, it is not appropriate to prove or know the
existence of living beings in lentils and other grains mixed with raw yogurt
through reasoning (logic, reasoning, or direct observation).  Rather, it is
appropriate to know the existence of these living beings through scriptures and
have faith in those words.  The omniscient have seen living beings in lentils
mixed with yogurt.  The word "etc." implies that they have also seen living
beings in cooked food, yogurt that is more than two days old, and spoiled food.
One should understand this.  Therefore, one should avoid food containing these
living beings, as well as food containing lentils mixed with raw milk, yogurt,
buttermilk, etc.  Otherwise, one incurs the sin of *praṇātipāta*, the first type
of *āśrava*.  The words of the omniscient are infallible, so they should be
considered authoritative and accepted with faith.  Therefore, one should not
think that only things like alcohol and spoiled or rotten food are forbidden,
and everything else is permissible.  Rather, one should avoid any food that
contains living beings, whether it is understood through one's own intellect or
through scriptures. ||71|| (Sanmati 142)  **Verse 72:**  A devotee devoted to
Jainism should avoid fruits (like berries), flowers, leaves, pickles, or other
things that are mixed with or contaminated with living beings. ||72||
**Explanation:**  One should avoid fruits like *madhūk* (mahua) that contain
*tras* living beings, flowers like *arani*, mustard, and *mahua*, leaves like
*chaulai*, and other roots or tubers.  Pickles made from mangoes, lemons, etc.,
should also be avoided if they are contaminated with *nīlaṇa*, *phūlaṇa*, or
other living beings.  Because devotees who practice compassion for living beings
do not eat food that causes harm to them.  Earning wealth for the purpose of
enjoyment and consumption is also considered enjoyment and consumption through
proper means.  Its quantity also falls under this vow.  Therefore, a devotee
should avoid *kharakama* (forbidden, inferior occupations that involve killing
*tras*, excessive killing, increase in carelessness, increase in non-restraint,
being condemned by the world, and being avoided by virtuous people) and earn
their livelihood through honest and blameless occupations.  We will discuss all
of this in the context of *aticāra*.  Thus, the description of the vow of
*bhoga-upabhoga-parimāṇa* is complete. ||72||  Now, the opportunity has arisen
to describe the vow of *anarthadanda-viramaṇa*.  Therefore, the four types of
*anarthadanda* are explained in two verses.  **Verse 73:**  *Ārtta*, *raudrā*,
*apadhyāna*, *pāpakarma-upadeśitā*, *hiṃsrā-upākāri-dāna*, and *pramāda-ācaraṇa*
are the four types of *anarthadanda*. ||73||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 tyAjya sUkSmajIvasaMsakta bhojana evaM cAra prakAra kA anarthadaMDa yogazAstra
tRtIya prakAza zloka 71 se 73 artha :- rAtribhojana tyAga meM jo guNa haiM, una
sabhI prakAra ke guNoM kA pUrNatayA kathana to sarvajJa ke sivAya aura koI nahIM
kara sakatA  // 70 //  aba kacce dUdha, dahI yA chAcha Adi ke sAtha dvidala
milAkara khAne kA niSedha karate haiN|242| AmagorasasampRktadvidalAdiSu jantavaH
/  dRSTAH kevalibhiH sUkSmAstasmAttAni vivarjayet  // 71 //  artha :kacce dahI
ke sAtha mizrita mUMga, ur3ada Adi dvidala vagairaha meM sUkSma jIvoM kI utpatti
kevalajJAniyoM ne dekhI hai; ataH unakA tyAga kare  /  /  71  /  /  vyAkhyA : -
jainazAsana kI aisI nIti hai ki isameM kaI bAteM hetugamya hotI hai aura kaI
bAteM hotI haiM - Agama| Aptavacana) gamya  /  jo bAteM tarka, yukti, anubhava
Adi hetu se jAnI jAtI hai, unakA pratipAdana hetu dvArA karatA hai aura | jo
bAteM hetu dvArA na jAnI jA sakeM yA siddha na ho sakeM, unakA pratipAdana
Agama-AptavacanoM dvArA karatA hai; vahI AjJAArAdhaka hotA hai| isake viparIta
jo hetugamya bAtoM kA Agama dvArA pratipAdana karatA hai aura Agamagamya bAtoM
kA hetu dvArA pratipAdana karane kA prayatna karatA hai, vaha AjJAvirAdhaka hotA
hai| kahA bhI hai- 'hetuvAdapakSa ko jo hetu se mAnatA | hai aura AgamapakSa ko
Agama se mAnatA hai tathA svasiddhAMta kA yathArtha pratipAdana karatA hai, vaha
AjJArAdhaka hai aura isake | viparIta kathana karane vAlA siddhAMta viruddha
prarUpaka hone se AjJAvirAdhaka hai  /  ' isa nyAya ke anusAra kacce gorasa ke
sAtha dvidala anAja Adi meM jIvoM kA astitva hetu (yukti, tarka yA pratyakSa se)
siddha karanA yA jAnanA saMgata nahIM hai; apitu una jIvoM kA astitva Agama ke
dvArA jAnakara ukta vacana para zraddhA karanA ucita haiM  /  kevalI bhagavaMtoM
ne gorasa ke sAtha mizrita dvidala anna meM jIva dekhe haiN| Adi zabda se pakAye
hue vAsI bhojana Adi meM, do dina se adhika dinoM ke dahI meM, sar3e hue khAdya
padArtha meM bhI jIva dekhe haiM, yaha samajha lenA caahie| | isa dRSTi se una
jIvoM sahita bhojana tathA kacce dUdha, dahI, chAcha Adi se gorasa ke sAtha
mizrita dvidala - annayukta bhojana | kA tyAga karanA caahie| anyathA, aise
bhojana se prANAtipAta nAmaka prathama Azrava kA doSa lagatA hai| kevaliyoM ke
vacana nirdoSa hote haiM, isalie ve Asa- prAmANika puruSoM ke vacana hone se
zraddhA yogya mAnakara zirodhArya karane caahie| isalie | yaha nahIM samajhanA
cAhie ki madirA Adi se lekara svAda meM vikRta, bAsI yA sar3e bhojana taka jo
kahA hai, vahI abhakSya hai, zeSa saba bhakSya hai! balki aura bhI koI bhojya
vastu, jo jIvoM se yukta hoM, use apanI buddhi se yA phira Agama abhakSya
jAnakara chor3a denI cAhie  /  / 71 || ( sanmati 142 ) isI bAta ko kahate haiM |
243  /  jantumizraM phalaM puSpaM, patraM cAnyadapi tyajet  /  sandhAnamapi
saMsaktaM, jinadharmaparAyaNaH  //  72  //  artha :- jinadharma meM tatpara
zrAvaka dUsare jIvoM se mizrita yA saMsakta phala (bera Adi), phUla, patte,
AcAra yA aura bhI aise padArtha kA tyAga kare ||72|| vyAkhyA:- trasa jIvoM se
yukta madhUka (mahur3A) Adi phala; araNi, sarasoM, mahuA Adi ke phUla, caulAI
Adi kI bhAjI ke patte tathA dUsare bhI kaMda yA mUla (jar3a) Adi kA tyAga karanA
caahie| Ama, nIMbU Adi kA AcAra (athANA) nIlaNa - phUlaNa yA anya jIvoM se
saMyukta ho to unakA bhI tyAgakara denA caahie| kyoMki jIvadayA pAlana karane
vAle zrAvaka, jisase jIvahiMsA ho, aisA abhakSya bhojana nahIM karate  /
bhogopabhoga kA kAraNa dhanopArjana bhI upacAra se bhogopabhoga kahalAtA hai|
usakA parimANa bhI isI vrata ke aMtargata A jAtA hai| isa dRSTi se zrAvaka ko
kharakama (jisameM trasavadha, ativadha, pramAdavRddhi, asaMyamavRddhi,
lokanindya evaM satpuruSoM dvArA anupasevya hoM, aise niSiddha nikRSTa |
vyavasAyoM) kA tyAga karake nirdoSa evaM anindya vyavasAya dvArA apanI AjIvikA
calAnI caahie| yaha saba bAteM aticAra ke prasaMga meM btaayeNge| isa prakAra
bhogopabhogaparimANavrata kA varNana pUrNa huA  /  /  72  /  /  aba krama se
anarthadaMDaviramaNavrata ke varNana karane kA avasara prApta hai| ataH do
zlokoM meM anartha daMDa ke cAra prakAra batAte haiM | 244 |
ArttaraudramapadhyAnaM, pApakarmopadezitA  /  hiMsropakAri dAnaM ca
pramAdAcaraNaM tathA  //  73 //  204

Page #227 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The nature of *Artt-Roudra-Dhyan* and the *Anarth-Dand* in the form of advice on
sin.  Yoga Shastra, Third Light, Verses 74-75. 245.  The *Anarth-Dand* which is
opposite to the *Arth-Dand* for the body, etc., is the third *Gun-Vrat*. ||74||
Meaning: To engage in *Artt-Roudra-Dhyan*, to advise or encourage sinful acts,
to provide means of violence to others, and to engage in careless conduct; these
are the four types of *Anarth-Dand*. The *Arth-Dand* is the necessary beginning
or tendency towards the body, etc., but the *Anarth-Dand* is that which brings
no benefit except harm to oneself or others, and which causes the soul to be
punished without reason. To abandon it is the third *Gun-Vrat*. ||73-74||
Explanation: To think badly is the first type of *Anarth-Dand*. It has two
divisions: *Artt-Dhyan* and *Roudra-Dhyan*. *Artt-Dhyan* - *Rit*. That which
arises from sorrow is called *Artt* or *Aarti*, meaning pain or torture. The
meditation that arises from it is *Artt-Dhyan*. (Dhyan Shatak 6-10) It has four
types: 1. When one comes into contact with unpleasant words, etc., the polluted
being, due to attachment, worries about their complete separation from them; and
also thinks that they should not come into contact with them again. 2. When
there is pain in the stomach, pain in the head, or pain in any part of the body,
to cry out, to writhe, to think intensely about their separation from it again
and again. To worry that they should not come into contact with it again, and to
become agitated in mind to counteract it. 3. When one obtains favorable objects
of pleasure, such as words, etc., and those that are pleasant to the senses, to
have a strong attachment (attachment) to them, and to think that they should
never be separated from them, and that they should continue to come into contact
with them again and again. 4. To make a request in the form of a remedy for the
wealth, form, or happiness, etc., of Indra, Chakravarti, etc., or to writhe in
agony for the attainment of an unseen, unheard, or unknown object, and to
meditate on it in a wicked way. These four types of *Artt-Dhyan* occur to beings
who are filled with attachment, aversion, delusion, and ignorance. *Artt-Dhyan*
increases the cycle of birth and death, which is like a world, and leads to
*Tiyach-Gati*.  *Roudra-Dhyan* - *Roudra* means terrible. That which is terrible
in nature or which causes others to cry and suffer is called *Roudra-Dhyan*.
*Roudra-Dhyan* is also of four types: 1. *Hinsa-Anubandhi*, 2. *Mrish-
Anubandhi*, 3. *Steya-Anubandhi*, and 4. *Sanrakshan-Anubandhi*. (a) To kill
beings, to bind them, to burn them, to beat them, to break them, to riot, etc.,
or to create a conspiracy in the mind about violence, to make a violent plan in
the mind, to think cruelly about the aforementioned things; this is the first
*Hinsa-Anubandhi* *Roudra-Dhyan*. Such a *Roudra-Dhyani* is extremely cruel,
very angry, heartless, and leads to evil consequences.  (b) To falsely accuse
someone else (to slander them), to deceive someone, to trap them in one's web of
illusion, to deceive them, to lie, to gossip about someone else, to break a
promise, to break a vow, to create a false conspiracy, etc., to be involved in
such scheming or quarreling, to think about it day and night; this is the second
*Roudra-Dhyan* called *Mrish-Anubandhi*. Such a *Roudra-Dhyan* practitioner is
deceitful, a cheat, and a secret sinner.  (c) To be overwhelmed by intense greed
and desire, to seize the wealth of others, to snatch it away, to take possession
of another's land and property, to steal, to rob, to loot, to obtain more money,
to think of such unethical schemes, or to be immersed in the contemplation of
new and innovative ways of stealing; this is the third *Steya-Anubandhi*
*Roudra-Dhyan*. Such a person is also cruel in consequence, extremely greedy,
devoted to the acquisition of wealth, and fearless of the consequences of sin in
the afterlife.  (d) To be constantly suspicious of the loss of words, etc., or
of means and wealth, to worry about how to accumulate wealth, to deceive the
government, partners, or others, to protect wealth or means; to be immersed in
such worries day and night; such a person is a *Sanrakshan-Anubandhi* *Roudra-
Dhyani*. Such a person is cruel enough to kill the person who takes away or
spends their wealth. These four types of *Roudra-Dhyan* occur to beings who are
afflicted by the passions of attachment, aversion, and delusion; they increase
the world and lead to hell. (Dhyan Shatak 18-24) This *Artt-Roudra-Dhyan* in the
form of bad meditation is the first *Anarth-Dand*.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ArttaraudradhyAna kA svarUpa aura pApopadezarUpa anarthadaMDa yogazAstra tRtIya
prakAza zloka 74 se 75  / 245 /  zarIrAdyarthadaNDasya, pratipakSatayA sthitaH
/  yo'narthadaNDastattyAgastRtIyaM tu guNavratam ||74|| artha :Artta-
raudradhyAna rUpa apadhyAna karanA, pApajanaka kArya kA upadeza yA preraNA denA,
hiMsA ke sAdhana dUsaroM ko denA, pramAdAcaraNa karanA; yaha cAra prakAra kA
anarthadaMDa kahalAtA hai| zarIra Adi ke lie jo AraMbha yA sAvadya pravRtti
anivArya rUpa se karanI par3e; vaha arthadaMDa hai; lekina jisameM apanA yA
parAyA kisI kA bhI sivAya hAni ke koI lAbha nahIM, jisa pApa se akAraNa hI AtmA
daMDita ho, vaha anarthadaMDa hai| usakA tyAga karanA hI tIsarA guNavrata
kahalAtA hai  /  / 73-74  /  /  vyAkhyA :- burA dhyAna karanA anarthadaMDa kA
prathama prakAra hai| usake do bheda haiM- ArttadhyAna aura raudra - dhyAna  /
ArttadhyAna - Rt| arthAt duHkha se utpanna hone vAlA Artta kahalAtA hai athavA
Artti yAnI pIr3A yA yAtanA, | usase hone vAlA dhyAna ArttadhyAna hai  /  (dhyAna
zataka 6-10 ) isake 4 prakAra haiM - 1. apriya zabda Adi viSayoM kA saMyoga |
hone para rAga se malina jIva dvArA usake atyaMta viyoga kI ciMtA karanA; sAtha
hI usakA phira saMyoga na ho, isa prakAra kA vicAra krnaa| 2. peTa meM zUla
(pIr3A), mastaka meM vedanA yA zarIra ke kisI aMga meM pIr3A hone para hAyatobA
macAnA, chaTapaTAnA, usake viyoga ke saMbaMdha meM bAra-bAra tIvratA se ciMtana
krnaa| usakA punaH saMyoga na ho, isakI ciMtA karanA tathA usake pratikAra ke
lie citta vyAkula ho jaanaa| 3. ISTa - zabdAdi viSayoM tathA sAtAvedanIya ke
kAraNa anukUla | viSayasukha ke prApta hone para unameM gAr3ha Asakti (rAga)
rakhakara unakA kabhI viyoga na ho, bAra-bAra saMyoga milatA jAya; | isa prakAra
kI abhilASA karanA  /  4. iMdra, cakravartI Adi ke vaibhava, rUpa athavA sukha
Adi kI prArthanA rUpa nidAna karanA athavA adRSTa, azruta yA ajJAta vastu kI
prApti ke lie chaTapaTAnA tathA usakA adhama ciMtana karate hue nidAna karanA  /
| ye cAroM prakAra ke ArttadhyAna rAga, dveSa, moha aura ajJAna se yukta jIvoM
ko hote haiN| ArttadhyAna janma-maraNa ke cakra rUpI | saMsAra ko bar3hAne vAlA
aura tiyaMcagati meM le jAne vAlA hai| raudradhyAna - raudra kA artha bhayaMkara
hai| jo bhayaMkara durbhAva yA bhayaMkara karma dUsaroM ko rulAne aura duHkhI
karane kA | kAraNa hai, use raudradhyAna kahate haiN| raudradhyAna bhI cAra
prakAra kA hai - 1. hiMsAnubaMdhI, 2. mRSAnubaMdhI, 3. steyAnubaMdhI aura 4.
sNrkssnnaanubNdhii| (a) jIvoM kA vadha karane, baMdhana meM DAlane, jalAne,
mArane-pITane tor3a-phor3a, daMge Adi karane kA | yA isI prakAra kA
hiMsAviSayaka SaDyaMtra mana meM racanA, koI aisI hiMsaka yojanA mana meM
banAnA, krUratApUrvaka pUrvokta bAtoM kA ciMtana karanA; prathama hiMsAnubaMdhI
raudradhyAna hai| aisA raudradhyAnI atyaMta krUra, atikrodhI, nirdayacitta evaM
adhamapariNAmI hotA hai| (A) kisI dUsare para jhUThA Aropa ( kalaMka) lagAnA,
kisI ko cakamA dene, apane mAyAjAla meM phaMsAne, dhokhA dene, jhUTha bolane,
dUsare kI cugalI khAne, vAdA bhaMga karane, pratijJA tor3ane, jhUThA prapaMca
racane Adi kI udher3abuna yA | khaTapaTa meM lagA rahanA, isI prakAra kA rAta-
dina ciMtana karanA mRSAnubaMdhI nAmaka dUsarA raudradhyAna hai| aisA
raudradhyAnakartA mAyAvI, dhokhebAja va gupta pApakarmA hotA hai| (i) tIvra
lobha evaM tRSNA se vyAkula hokara dUsaroM kA dhana har3apane, chInane, dUsare
kI jamIna-jAyadAda apane kabje meM karane, corI karane, DAkA DAlane, lUTa
khasoTa karane, adhika paisA prApta ho, isa prakAra kI anaitika tarakIbeM socane
| yA isa prakAra ke naye-naye corI ke nusakhe ajamAne ke ciMtana meM DUbA
rahanA; tIsarA steyAnubaMdhI raudradhyAna hai| aisA vyakti bhI krUrapariNAmI,
atilobhI, dravyaharaNa meM dattacitta evaM paraloka meM pApa ke pariNAma se
niHzaMka hotA hai| (I) zabdAdi viSayoM yA sAdhanoM tathA dhana ke haraNa kI
pratikSaNa zaMkA se grasta hokara dhana kaise jamA rahe; sarakAra, hissedAra yA
anya logoM ko cakamA dekara kaise dhana yA sAdhanoM kI rakSA kI jAya ? isa
prakAra kI ciMtA meM aharniza magna | vyakti saMrakSaNAnubaMdhI raudradhyAnI
hai| aisA vyakti dhana le jAne yA kharcakara dene vAle vyakti ko mAra DAlane
taka krUra | vicArakara letA hai| ye cAroM prakAra ke raudradhyAna, rAga, dveSa
aura moha ke vikAra se grasta jIva ko hote haiM, ye saMsAravRddhi | karane vAle
aura naraka meM le jAne vAle haiN| (dhyAna zataka 18 - 24) yaha
ArttaraudradhyAna rUpI apadhyAna anarthadaMDa kA prathama 205

Page #228 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Description of *Pramadaacharan*  **Chapter 3, Light 75-77 of Yoga Shastra**
**There are four types of *Anarthadanda* (unnecessary punishment):**  1.
***Papokadesha* (Giving advice on sinful acts):**  Giving advice, inspiration,
or orders that promote sinful activities like violence. 2. ***Hinsra Pradhan*
(Giving instruments of violence):** Giving weapons like knives, swords, daggers,
or any other tools of violence to someone, or placing such weapons in the hands
of an unskilled or ignorant person. 3. ***Pramada Sevan* (Indulging in frivolous
activities):** Engaging in activities that stimulate lust and other negative
emotions, such as women's dances, songs, and erotic stories. 4. ***Anarthadanda*
(Unnecessary punishment):**  This is the opposite of *Arthadanda* (necessary
punishment). *Arthadanda* is when a person is punished for a necessary action,
such as performing a duty for their family or body. *Anarthadanda* is when a
person engages in activities that have no purpose and only lead to negative
consequences.  **The third *Gunavrata* (virtuous vow) is *Anarthadanda Viramna
Vrata* (Vow to abstain from unnecessary punishment).** This vow involves
abstaining from all actions that fall under the category of *Anarthadanda*.
**Verses 73-74:** It is said that performing necessary actions for the sake of
one's senses or loved ones is *Arthadanda*. However, engaging in harmful
activities like violence without any purpose is *Anarthadanda*.  **Now, the text
explains the nature and consequences of *Apadhyan* (inattentiveness):**  **Verse
75:** *Apadhyan* is a state of mind where one is consumed by harmful thoughts,
such as:  * Desiring to destroy an enemy. * Engaging in political intrigue or
causing unrest in a city. * Destroying property or setting fires. * Indulging in
thoughts of space travel or exploring unknown realms.  One should abandon such
harmful thoughts immediately.  **Verse 76:** The text now discusses how to avoid
*Papokadesha* (giving advice on sinful acts):  * It is not appropriate for a
Jain to give advice that promotes sinful activities, such as:     * Encouraging
someone to subdue calves, plow fields, or castrate horses.     * Giving advice
that leads to violence or other harmful actions.  * It is acceptable to give
advice to one's own children or family members, but only for the purpose of
guiding them in the right direction. * It is never acceptable to encourage
someone to engage in harmful activities like drinking alcohol, gambling, or
engaging in immoral behavior.  **Verse 77:** The text now prohibits giving
instruments of violence to others:  * A compassionate Jain should not give tools
of violence, such as:     * *Yantra* (a type of mill), *Langal* (plow),
*Shastra* (weapons), *Agni* (fire), *Musala* (pestle), *Ukhala* (mortar),
*Dhanush* (bow), *Dhaunkni* (bellows), *Churi* (knife), etc.  * This prohibition
applies to everyone except one's own children or family members.  **Now, the
text discusses the fourth *Anarthadanda*, which is *Pramadaacharan* (indulging
in frivolous activities):**  **Verse 206:** This verse marks the beginning of
the discussion on *Pramadaacharan*.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pramAdAcaraNa kA varNana yogazAstra tRtIya prakAza zloka 75 se 77 | bheda hai|
pApamaya yA hiMsAdi varddhaka pravRtti kA upadeza, preraNA yA Adeza denA
pApakarmopadeza nAmaka dUsarA anarthadaMDa hai| hiMsA ke upakaraNa cAkU,
talavAra, churA, zastra, astra Adi kisI ko denA athavA kisI anAr3I yA ajJAnI ke
hAtha meM hiMsA ke utpAdaka hathiyAra de denA, hiMsrapradAna nAmaka tIsarA
anarthadaMDa hai| striyoM ke nRtya, gIta, kAmakathA Adi | kAmottejaka rAgAdi
vikAra varddhaka pramAda kA sevana karanA cauthA anarthadaMDa hai| zarIra,
kuTuMba Adi kisI ke lie koI jarUrI sAvadyakArya, AraMbhAdi karanA par3e yA kisI
vizeSakAraNavaza Azravasevana se prANI saprayojana daMDita ho, vahAM arthadaMDa
hai| kintu jisa Azravasevana se koI bhI prayojana siddha na hotA hai; vaha
anarthadaMDa kA pratipakSI rUpI anarthadaMDa hai| usakA tyAga karanA hI
anarthadaMDaviramaNavrata nAmaka tIsarA guNavrata | hai| kahA bhI hai - jo
iMdriyoM yA svajanAdi ke nimitta se sAvadya kArya karanA par3e, vaha arthadaMDa
aura binA hI prayojana ke | bekAra apane yA dUsare ke lie hiMsAdi Azravasevana
karanA vaha anarthadaMDa hai  /  / 73-74 /  /  aba apadhyAna kA svarUpa aura
usakA pariNAma batAte haiM  /  246 /  vairighAto narendratvaM
puraghAtA'gnidIpane  /  khecaratvAdyapadhyAnaM, muhUrtAtparatastyajet  // 75 //
artha : zatru kA nAza karanA, rAjyapada ke lie ukhAr3a - pachAr3a yA khaTapaTa
karanA, vartamAna meM nagara meM tor3aphor3a yA daMge karanA, nAza karanA, Aga
lagAnA athavA aMtarikSayAtrA - ajJAta aMtarikSa meM gamana Adi ke ciMtana rUpI
kudhyAna meM DUbe rahanA, apadhyAna hai| aisA durdhyAna A bhI jAya to muhUrtta
ke bAda to use avazya hI chor3a de| duzmana kI hatyA karane, nagara ko ujAr3ane
yA nagara meM tor3aphor3a, daMge, hatyAkAMDa Adi karane, Aga lagAne yA kisI
vastu ko phUMka dene kA vicAra karanA raudradhyAna rUpa apadhyAna hai|
cakravartI banUM yA AkAzagAminI vidyA kA adhikArI bana jAUM, RddhisaMpanna deva
bana jAUM athavA devAMganAoM yA vidyAdhariyoM ke sAtha sukhabhoga karane vAlA;
unakA svAmI bnuuN| isa prakAra kA duzciMtana ArttadhyAna hai| isa prakAra ke
duzciMtanoM ko muhUrtta ke bAda to avazya chor3a denA cAhie  /  /  75  /  /  aba
pApopadeza rUpa anarthadaMDa se virata hone ke lie kahate haiM  /  247 /
vRSabhAn damaya kSetraM, kRSa SaNDhaya vAjinaH  /  dAkSiNyAviSaye pApopadezo'yaM
na kalpate  // 76 //  artha :- bachar3oM ko vaza meM karo, kheta joto, ghor3oM
ko khassI karo, ityAdi pApajanaka upadeza dAkSiNya (apane putrAdi) ke sivAya
dUsaroM ko pApopadeza denA zrAvaka ke lie kalpanIya ( vihita ) nahIM hai  /  76
/  /  vyAkhyA : - gAya ke bachar3e (javAna baila) ko bAMdhakara kAbU meM kara
lo| varSA kA mausama A gayA hai; ataH anAja bone ke lie kheta jotakara taiyAra
karo  /  varSARtu ke pUrNa ho jAne ke bAda bone kA samaya calA jAyagA  /  ataH
kheta meM | kyArA kara denA cAhie aura jhaTapaTa sAr3he tIna dina meM dhAna bo
denA caahie| aba kucha hI dinoM bAda rAjA ko ghor3e kI jarUrata par3egI, isalie
abhI se ise badhiyA karavA do| grISmaRtu meM kheta meM Aga lagAyI jAtI hai| ye
aura isa prakAra ke upadeza hiMsA Adi ke janaka hone se pApopadeza kahalAte
haiN| zrAvaka ko aisI parAyI paMcAyata meM par3akara pApodeza denA ucita nahIM
hai| apane putra, bhAI Adi ko lokavyavahAra ( dAkSiNya) ke kAraNa preraNA denI
par3e to vaha azakya parihAra hai, paraMtu nirarthaka pApa meM DAlane vAlA -
jaise zarAba pIkara masta ho jA, juA khelane se dhana kI prApti hogI; amuka strI
yA vezyA ke sAtha meM gamana meM bar3A majA AtA hai; phalAM ke sAtha mArapITa
kara yA mukaddamebAjI kara isa prakAra kA | anarthakara pApopadeza apane svajana
ko bhI nahIM denA caahie| mUrkhatA se aMTasaMTa bolakara kisI ko pApa meM
pravRtta karane meM apanA aura usakA donoM kA nukasAna hai  /  /  76  /  /  aba
hiMsA ke sAdhana dUsaroM ko dene kA niSedha karate haiM  / 248 /  yantra-
lAGgala-zastrAgni- musalodUkhalAdikam  /  dAkSiNyAviSaye hiMsraM nArpayet
karuNAparaH  // 77 //  artha :putra Adi svajana ke sivAya anya logoM ko yaMtra
(kolhU ), hala, talavAra Adi hathiyAra, agni, mUsala, UkhalI Adi zabda se
dhanuSya, dhauMkanI, churI Adi hiMsA kI vastueM dayAlu zrAvaka nahIM de  /  /
77  /  /  aba pramAdAcaraNa rUpa cauthe anarthadaMDa ke viSaya meM kahate haiM
206

Page #229 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Preservation of Jain Terms in English Translation:  Renunciation of
Pramadacarana (Careless Conduct) and the Characteristics of the Samayika Vrata
(Introspective Contemplation Vow) From Sloka 78 to 81 of the Third Prakasha
(Illumination) of the Yogashastra.   78. Observing with curiosity the singing,
dancing, and drama; attachment to the Kamashastra (treatise on erotic love);
indulgence in gambling, intoxicants, etc.  79. Enjoyment of water sports,
swinging, etc.; fighting among animals; enmity with the son or other relatives
of the enemy; idle gossip about food, country, and the king.  80. Abandoning the
fatigue of illness or travel, and sleeping throughout the entire night - the
wise person should renounce such Pramadacarana (careless conduct).  81. In the
Jinendra's (Jina's) abode, one should renounce indulgence, laughter, spitting,
sleep, quarrel, and evil speech, as well as the four types of Ahara (intake of
food).  Explanation: The text discusses various forms of Pramadacarana, such as
indulging in sensual pleasures, attachment to erotic literature, gambling,
intoxicants, animal fights, holding grudges against enemies and their family
members, idle gossip about food, country, and the king, and excessive sleep. It
then emphasizes that the wise Shravaka (Jain lay follower) should renounce these
Pramadacarana. Additionally, the text highlights that within the Jinendra's
(Jina's) abode, one should refrain from indulgence, laughter, spitting, sleep,
quarrel, evil speech, and the four types of Ahara (intake of food).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pramAdAcaraNarUpa anarthadaMDa kA tyAga evaM sAmAyikavrata kA lakSaNa
yogazAstra tRtIya prakAza zloka 78 se 81  / 249 /  kutUhalAd gIta-nRtta-
nATakAdinirIkSaNam  /  kAmazAstraprasaktizca, dyUtamadyAdisevanam  // 78 //   /
250 /  jalakrIDAndolanAdi vinodo jantuyodhanam  /  ripoH sutAdinA vairaM,
bhaktastrIdezarATakathA  // 79 //   / 251 /  rogamArgazramau muktvA, svApazca
sakalAM nizAm  /  evamAdi pariharet, pramAdAcaraNaM sudhIH  /  / 80 //  artha :-
kutUhalapUrvaka gIta, nRtya, nATaka Adi dekhanA; kAmazAstra meM Asakta rahanA;
jUA, madirA Adi kA sevana karanA, jalakrIr3A karanA, jhUle Adi kA vinoda karanA,
pazupakSiyoM ko Apasa meM lar3AnA, zatru ke putra Adi ke sAtha bhI vaira-virodha
rakhanA, striyoM kI khAne-pIne kI, deza evaM rAjA kI vyartha kI UlajalUla
vikathA karanA, roga yA pravAsa kI thakAna ko chor3akara sArI rAtabhara sote
rahanA; isa prakAra ke pramAdAcaraNa kA buddhimAna puruSa tyAga kare  /  / 78-80
/  /  vyAkhyA :- kutUhalavaza gIta sunanA, nRtya, nATaka, sinemA, TI. vI. Adi
dekhanA, kutUhalavaza iMdriya-viSaya kA atyadhika upabhoga krnaa| yahAM mUla meM
'kutUhala' zabda hone se jinayAtrA Adi prasaMgoM para prAsaMgika khela-tamAze
dekhe jAya to vaha pramAdAcaraNa nahIM hai| vAtsyAyana Adi ke banAye hue
kAmazAstra yA kokazAstra ko bArabAra par3hanA, usameM adhika Asakti rakhanA
tathA pAsoM Adi se zataraMja yA juA khelanA, madirApAna karanA Adi zabda se
zikAra khelanA; usakA mAMsa-sevana karanA ityAdi, evaM jalakrir3A karanA; yAnI
tAlAba, nadI, kue~ Adi meM DubakI lagAkara snAna karanA, picakArI se jala
chIMTanA Adi tathA vRkSa kI zAkhA se jhUlA bAMdhakara jhUlanA Adi zabda se
vyartha hI patte Adi tor3anA tathA murge Adi hiMsaka prANiyoM ko paraspara
lar3AnA; zatru ke putra-pautrAdi ke sAtha vairabhAva rakhanA; kisI ke sAtha
vaira cala rahA hai to usakA kisI bhI prakAra se tyAga na karanA; balki usake
putra-pautra Adi ke sAtha bhI vaira rakhanA; ye saba pramAdAcaraNa haiN| tathA
bhaktakathA - 'yaha pakAyA huA mAMsa yA ur3ada ke laDDu Adi acche va svAdiSTa
haiM; usako acchA bhojana karAyA; ataH maiM bhI vahI bhojana kruuNgaa|' isa
prakAra bhojana ke bAre meM ghaMToM bAteM karanA bhakta-vikathA hai| strIkathA-
strI ke veza, aMgopAMga kI suMdaratA yA hAva-bhAva kI prazaMsA karanA; jaise-
karNATaka deza kI striyA~ kAmakalA meM kuzala hotI haiM aura lATadeza kI striyA~
catura aura priya hotI hai, ityAdi strIkathA hai| dezakathA - 'dakSiNadeza meM
anna-pAnI bahuta sulabha hotA hai, paraMtu vaha strI-saMbhoga-pradhAna deza hai|
pUrvadeza meM vividha vastra, gur3a, khAMDa, cAvala, madya Adi bahuta milatA
hai, uttarapradeza meM loga bar3e zUravIra haiM, vahAM ghor3e tejatarrAra hote
haiM, gehUM adhika paidA hotA hai, kesara Adi sulabha hai| vahAM kizamiza,
dADima, kaithA Adi phala bahuta madhura hote haiM; pazcima deza ke bane hue
kapar3e komala va suhAvane hote haiM; vahAM Ikha bahuta milatI hai; vahAM kA
pAnI bahuta ThaMDA hotA hai;' ityAdi prakAra ke gapazapa lgaanaa| rAjakathA -
jaise ki 'hamArA rAjA bahAdUra hai| gaur3a deza ke rAjA ke pAsa bahuta dhana
hai| gaur3adeza ke rAjA ke pAsa hAthI bahuta haiM, turkistAna ke rAjA ke pAsa
turkI ghor3e bahuta haiM; vartamAna meM pArTI evaM netA ke viSaya meM bAteM
karanA, ityaadi| isa prakAra duniyAbhara kI gappeM hAMkanA rAjakathA hai| isI
prakAra khAdya padArthoM ke saMbaMdha meM pratikUla kathA karanI bhI sabakI saba
vikathA hai| roga Adi yA mArga ke parizrama ke sivAya sArI rAta sote rahanA
pramAda hai| roga yA mArga kI thakAna ke kAraNa sonA pramAdAcaraNa nahIM
kahalAtA  /  / 78-80 /  /  buddhizAlI zrAvaka pUrvokta pramAdAcaraNoM kA tyAga
kre| pramAdAcaraNa ke aura bhI prakAra batAte haiM-madya, viSaya, kaSAya, niMdA,
vikathA ye pAMca prakAra ke pramAda hai| ye pAMcoM pramAda jIva ko saMsAra meM
bhaTakAte haiN| (utta. ni. 180) isa taraha pAMcoM pramAdoM kA vistAra se varNana
kiyaa| aba sthAna-vizeSa meM pramAda ke tyAga ke saMbaMdha meM kahate haiN|252|
vilAsa-hAsa-niSThyUta-nidrA-kalaha-duSkathAH  /  jinendra-bhavanasyAntarAhAraM
ca caturvidham  // 81 /  /  _artha :- jinAlaya meM vilAsa, hAsya, thUkanA,
nidrA, kalaha, duSkathA aura cAroM prakAra ke AhAra kA tyAga karanA cAhie  /  /
8 /  /  .. vyAkhyA :- jinabhavana meM kAmaceSTA yA bhogavilAsa karane, ThahAke
mArakara haMsane, thUkane, sone, lar3AI-jhagar3A karane, cora, parastrI Adi kI
kathA karane evaM azana-pAna-khAdya-svAdya-rUpa cAra prakAra ke AhAra karane kA
tyAga karanA caahie| ye sabhI kArya pramAdAcaraNa rUpa haiN| zrAvaka inheM
chor3a de| inameM cAvala Adi anna, mUMga, sattU, pIne ke padArtha, 207

Page #230 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Explanation of the Text of Samayik Sutra  **Yoga Shastra, Third Light, Verse
82**  **Food:** Modak, kheer, suran, and other tubers, as well as malpuas and
other types of food are considered **Asan** (food). Rice, sattu, moong, jowar,
cooked food, kheer, suran, and puan are all forms of **Asan** (food).
**Drink:** Sauvir, kanji, barley, and other grains, wine, sherbet, and all types
of beverages, as well as fruit juices are considered **Pan** (drink).
**Edible:** Roasted and baked grains, gudpapri or tilpatti, dates, coconut,
raisins, cucumber, mango, grapes, pomegranate, mosambi, orange, and many other
types of fruits are considered **Khady** (edible).  **Savory:** Datun or
toothpaste, pan (tambool), tulsi, mulathi, ajwain, saunf, piparamal, sonth,
black pepper, cumin, turmeric, baheda, amla, etc. are considered **Swadya**
(savory).  **(Panchashak 5/27. Three types of Gunavrata are complete. ||81||)**
**Now, the four types of Shikshavrata are described. There are four types of
Shikshavrata: Samayik, Deshavakashik, Poushadhopavas, and Atithisanvibhaag. The
first Shikshavrata, called Samayik, describes the nature of Samayik. ||253||**
**Tyaktataroudradhyanasya tyakt-savadyakarmaanah | Muhurttam samata ya tam,
viduh samayaikavratam ||82||**  **Meaning:** Abandoning **Art** and
**Roudradhyan** (intense meditation), and abandoning all types of sinful
activities, maintaining **Samata** (equanimity) for one **Muhurt** (two ghadi
hours) is called **Samayik Vrata** by the great souls. ||8||  **Explanation:**
**Samayik Vrata** is to remain neutral in the causes of **Rag** (attachment) and
**Dvesha** (aversion) for one **Muhurt** (two ghadi hours). The word **Samayik**
is derived from **Sam** (free from attachment and aversion) and **Ay** (benefit
of knowledge, etc.). It means the experience of **Prashmasukh** (peace and
happiness). **Sam + Ay = Samay** is **Samayik**. According to the rules of
grammar, the suffix **Ikan** is added here. Therefore, **Samay + Ikan** becomes
**Samayik**. This **Samayik** cannot be achieved without abandoning the faulty
actions (activities) of the mind, speech, and body. Therefore, the verse refers
to **Samayik** as the abandonment of **Art** and **Roudradhyan**. Abandoning
sinful activities is also **Samayik**, and the equanimity of those who abandon
faulty speech and bodily actions is also called **Samayik**. A householder who
observes **Samayik** is like a **Sadhu** (saint). It is said, "**Samaiyammi u
kae samano iv savao**" - meaning, during **Samayik**, a Shravak (lay devotee)
becomes like a **Sadhu**. Therefore, a Shravak should observe **Samayik** many
times. (**Aav. Ni. 801**) And for this reason, there is no provision for
**Devsnatrapuja** (worship of gods and bathing) in **Samayik**.  **Doubt:**
There is a doubt that **Devpuja** (worship of gods) and **Snatra** (bathing) are
religious activities. What is the fault in doing them during **Samayik**? In
**Samayik**, one abandons faulty activities and accepts faultless activities.
From this perspective, what is the fault in doing **Devpuja** etc. during
**Samayik**, similar to doing **Swadhyay** (self-study) and repeating the text?
**Solution:** It is not right to say that. A Shravak who observes **Samayik**
like a **Sadhu** does not have the right to worship gods. **Dravyapuja**
(material worship) is the cause of **Bhavapuja** (emotional worship). Therefore,
when a Shravak is in **Samayik**, there is no need for **Dravyastav** (material
worship) for the object that is obtained through **Bhavastav** (emotional
worship). It is said, "**Dravy puja and Bhavpuja, among these two, Dravy puja is
very virtuous; this is the word of an ignorant person; this is what Shri
Jinendra Bhagwan, the well-wisher of the six-souled beings, has said.**"
**Types of Samayik:** There are two types of Shravaks who observe **Samayik**:
those with **Riddhi** (spiritual powers) and those without **Riddhi**.  **Places
for Samayik:** **Samayik** is observed in four places: in the **Jin Mandir**
(Jain temple), near a **Sadhu**, in a **Poushadhashala** (medicine dispensary),
and in one's own home in a quiet, secluded place or a place free from business.
**Procedure of Samayik:** If there is no fear from anyone, no dispute or quarrel
with anyone, no debt to anyone, no need to talk, no pulling or pushing, and no
mental distress, then one can observe **Samayik** at home. While observing
**Samayik**, one should purify **Iryasamiti** (the five senses), abandon faulty
speech, and if one needs wood, stones, or any other object, one should take
permission from the owner. One should look carefully with one's eyes, copy it,
and accept it after cleaning it with a **Pramarjanika** (cleaning cloth). One
should carefully abandon saliva, phlegm, nasal mucus, and **Lghuniti** (minor
activities). One should look at the place carefully and clean the ground. In
this way, one should observe **Samayik** with care, following the five
**Samiti** (principles) and three **Gupti** (secrets). If there is a **Sadhu**,
one should go to the **Upashray** (Jain monastery) and offer them **Vandana**
(respectful greetings) and accept **Samayik** with the following text:  **208**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 sAmAyikasUtra ke pATha kA vyAkhyAsahita artha yogazAstra tRtIya prakAza zloka
82 | modaka, khIra, sUraNa Adi kaMda aura mAlapUe~ Adi azana haiN| ise hI kahate
haiM-cAvala, sattU, mUMga, jvAra, pakAyA huA bhojana, khIra, sUraNa aura pUe~ ye
sabhI azana rUpa AhAra haiN| sauvIra, kAMjI, jau Adi dhAnya kI madirA, zarbata
Adi aura sabhI prakAra ke peyapadArtha tathA phaloM kA rasa pAna rUpa AhAra
kahalAtA hai| bhunA huA, sekA huA dhAnya, gur3apApar3I yA tilapaTTI, khajUra,
nAriyala, kizamiza, kakar3I, Ama, aMgUra, anAra, mausaMbI, saMtarA Adi aneka
prakAra ke phala khAdya rUpa AhAra ke aMtargata samajhanA; daMtauna yA
dAMtamaMjana, pAna (tAMbUla) tulasikA, mulahaThI, ajavAina, sauMpha, pIparAmala.
soMTha, kAlImirca, jIrA, haldI, baher3A, AMvalA Adi svAdya rUpa AhAra hai|
(paMcAzaka 5/27. prakAra tIna guNavrata pUrNa hue  /  / 81 /  /  aba cAra
zikSAvratoM kA varNana karate haiN| usake 4 prakAra haiN| sAmAyika,
dezAvakAzika, pauSadhopavAsa aura atithisNvibhaag| usameM prathama sAmAyika
nAmaka zikSAvrata meM sAmAyika ke svarUpa kA varNana karate haiN|253|
tyaktAtaraudradhyAnasyatyakta-sAvadyakarmaNaH  /  muhUtrtaM samatA yA tAM, viduH
sAmAyikavratam  // 82 /  /  artha :- Arta aura raudradhyAna kA tyAga karake
sarva prakAra ke pApa-vyApAroM kA tyAgakara eka maharta taka samata dhAraNa
karane ko mahApuruSoM ne sAmAyikavrata kahA hai  /  / 8 /  /  vyAkhyA :- eka
muhUrta yAnI do ghar3I samaya taka, samatA arthAt rAga-dveSa paidA hone ke
kAraNoM meM madhyastha rahanA, sAmAyikavrata hai| sAmAyika zabda kI vyutpati
karake usakA artha karate haiN| 'sama' arthAt rAgadveSa se rahita honA aura Aya
arthAt jJAnAdi kA laabh| yAnI prazamasukha rUpa anubhv| vahI sama+Aya=samAya hI
sAmAyika hai| vyAkaraNa ke niyama se yahAM ikaN pratyaya lagA hai| ataH
samAya+ikaN pratyaya lagakara sAmAyika rUpa banA hai| vaha sAmAyika mana, vacana
aura kAyA kI sadoSa ceSTA (vyApAra) kA tyAga kiye binA nahIM ho sakatI, isalie
zloka meM ArtaraudradhyAna ke tyAga ko sAmAyika kahA hai| pApakArI vyApAra kA
tyAga bhI sAmAyika hai aura sAvadha vAcika aura kAyika kAryoM kA tyAga karane
vAle kI samatA ko bhI sAmAyika kahate haiN| sAmAyika meM rahA huA gRhastha
zrAvaka bhI sAdhu ke samAna hotA hai| kahA hai-'sAmAiyaMmi u kae samaNo iva
sAvao' arthAt sAmAyika karate samaya zrAvaka sAdhu jaisA bana jAtA hai| isa
kAraNa zrAvaka ko aneka bAra sAmAyika karanA caahie| (Ava. ni. 801) aura isI
kAraNa sAmAyika meM devasnAtrapUjA Adi kA vidhAna nahIM hai| yahAM zaMkA hotI
hai ki devapUjA, snAtra Adi to dharmakArya haiN| inheM sAmAyika meM karane se
kyA doSa lagatA hai? sAmAyika meM to sAvadhavyApAra kA tyAga kiyA jAtA hai aura
niravadya vyApAra kA svIkAra kiyA jAtA hai| isa dRSTi se sAmAyika meM svAdhyAya
karanA. pATha kA doharAnA ityAdi ke samAna deva-pUjA Adi karane meM kauna-sA
doSa hai? isaka samAdhAna karate hae kahate haiM- 'aisA kahanA ThIka nahIM hai|
sAdha ke samAna sAmAyika meM rahe hae zrAvaka ko deva kA adhikAra nahIM hai|
dravyapajA ke lie bhAvapajA kAraNa rUpa hai. isalie zrAvaka sAmAyika meM ho
taba, bhAvastava se prApta ho jAne vAlI vastu ke lie dravyastava kA prayojana
nahIM rhtaa| kahA hai ki 'dravya pUjA aura bhAvapUjA ina donoM meM dravya pUjA
bahuta guNoM vAlI hai; yaha ajJAnI manuSya ke vacana hai; aisA SaDjIvanikAryoM
ke hitaiSI zrIjinezvarabhagavAn ne kahA hai| sAmAyika karane vAle zrAvaka do
prakAra ke hote haiM-Rddhi vAle aura Rddhi rhit| cAra jagahoM para sAmAyika kI
jAtI hai-jinamaMdira meM, sAdhu ke pAsa, pauSadhazAlA meM aura apane ghara meM
zAMta, ekAMta sthAna yA vyApAra-rahita sthAna meN| usakI vidhi yaha hai-agara
kisI se bhaya na ho, kisI ke sAtha vivAda yA kalaha na ho yA kisI kA karjadAra
na ho, kisI nimitta para bolAcAlI, khIMcAtAnI yA citta meM saMkleza na ho; aisI
dazA meM apane ghara para bhI sAmAyika karake IryAsamiti kA zodhana karatA huA,
sAvadya-bhASA kA tyAga karatA huA, lakar3I, DhelA Adi kisI vastu kI jarUrata ho
to usake mAlika kI AjJA letA hai| AMkha se bhalIbhAMti dekhakara pratilekhanA
karake aura pramArjanikA se pramArjana karake grahaNa karatA hai| thUka, kapha,
nAka kA maila va laghunIti Adi kA vaha yatanApUrvaka tyAga karatA hai| sthAna
acchI taraha dekhakara, jamIna kA pramArjana karatA hai| isa taraha
yatanApUrvaka, pAMca samiti tIna gupti kA pAlana karatA hai| yadi sAdhu ho to,
upAzraya meM jAkara vaha unheM vaMdanA karake nimnalikhita pATha se sAmAyika
svIkAra karatA hai 208

Page #231 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Meaning and Method of Samayik Sutra  **Yoga Shastra, Third Light, Verse
82:**  "Karemi Bhanta, Samaiyam Savajan Jogam Pacchakkhami, Jav Sahuu
Pajjuvasami Duvihan Tivhehan, Manen Vayae Kaeyan, Na Karemi Na Karavemi, Tass
Bhanta Padikkamami Nindami Girihami Appaan Vosarami."  Here, the meaning of
Samayik Sutra is explained:  * **Karemi:** I accept. * **Bhanta:** This is an
invitation to the Guru Maharaj, meaning "O Venerable One." The word "Bhad" means
happiness and welfare. The suffix "Ant" is added to it, making it "Bhadant."
This address is an invitation to the direct Guru. Jain scriptures state that in
the absence of a direct Guru, one can imagine a direct Guru in their mind for an
indirect Guru. Just as in the absence of Jineshwardev, one praises, worships,
and addresses the Jin-image, similarly, in the absence of a direct Guru, one can
imagine them in their mind and perform all religious actions with respect.
Therefore, the word "Bhanta" is used in the sense of an invitation. It is said,
"He who resides in the Guru's abode is knowledgeable. He becomes very stable in
his vision and character. Therefore, fortunate and excellent souls never leave
the Guru's abode (the shelter of the Guru) throughout their lives." (Vi. Bha.
34/59) * **Bhanta:** Alternatively, the word "Bhanta" is derived from "Bhavant"
based on the rules of Prakrit grammar. The word "Bhavant" means "one who crosses
over and makes others cross over the cycle of birth and death." * **Samaiyam:**
The meaning of "Samaiyam" has been explained earlier. It means that the
practitioner resolves to keep the soul stable in equanimity. * **Savajan Jogam
Pacchakkhami:** How will the soul become stable in equanimity? The next
resolution is "Savajan Jogam Pacchakkhami." "Savajan" means sinful, and "Jog"
means the activity of mind, speech, and body. "Pacchakkhami" means to abandon.
The practitioner here resolves against sinful activities or decides not to
engage in them with respect. * **Jav Sahuu Pajjuvasami:** How long will this
resolution last? The rule is stated further: "Jav Sahuu Pajjuvasami," meaning
"as long as I serve the Sadhu, I will perform Samayik." * **Jav:** The word
"Jav" has three meanings: 1. Quantity, 2. Limit, and 3. Determination. The
meaning of quantity is to abandon sinful activities for as long as one serves
the Sadhu. The meaning of limit is to abandon sinful behavior before starting to
serve the Sadhu or before taking Samayik. The meaning of determination is to
abandon sinful activities only for as long as one serves the Sadhu, not after
that. Thus, one should understand the three meanings of the word "Jav." However,
nowadays, "Javanayam" is spoken. This means that the duration of Samayik is
considered to be at least one Muhurt (two Ghadi, 48 minutes) in the present
time. Therefore, the implied meaning is to abandon sinful activities from the
beginning to the end of Samayik, not after that. * **Duvihan Tivhehan:** In what
form does the practitioner abandon these sinful activities? The next part of the
text explains this: "Duvihan Tivhehan." This means that the practitioner must
abandon sinful activities in two ways and three ways during Samayik. Where the
abandonment of sinful activities is twofold, it should be understood from two
causes: "Na Karemi, Na Karavemi." This means that I will not engage in sinful
activities myself, nor will I cause others to do so. In this way, the
householder practitioner abandons sinful activities that can occur in both these
ways during Samayik. The prohibition of sinful activities in the form of
approval is not included, as it is impossible for a householder to do so. Even
if one does not do the work themselves, the fault of approval arises if it is
done by a son, servant, etc. * **Tivhehan:** Now, understand the meaning of
"three ways." Here, the third case is used in the cause. This means that there
are three means for sinful activities: mind, speech, and body. These are called
three Yogas in Jain scriptures. Therefore, it is said: "Manen, Vayae, Kaeyan,"
meaning that one abandons sinful activities through these three Yogas: mind,
speech, and body. The phrase "Na Karemi, Na Karavemi" describes both ways: I
will not do it myself, nor will I cause it to be done, through mind, speech, and
body. Then, the cause, i.e., the purpose...  **[The text continues]**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 sAmAyika sUtra kA artha evaM vidhi yogazAstra tRtIya prakAza zloka 82 sAmAyika
sUtra-karemi bhaMte; sAmAiyaM sAvajjaM jogaM paccakkhAmi, jAva sAhU pajjuvAsAmi
duvihaM tiviheNaM, maNeNa vAyAe kAeNaM, na karemi na kAravemi, tassa bhaMte
paDikkamAmi niMdAmi girihAmi appANaM vosirAmi  /  /  yahAM sAmAyika-sUtra kA
artha batAte haiM- 'karemi' arthAt maiM svIkAra karatA hUM 'bhaMte-yaha
gurumahArAja ko AmaMtraNa hai, 'he bhadaMta! bhadaMta kA artha sukha vAle aura
kalyANa vAle hotA hai|' bhadudhAtu sukha aura kalyANa ke artha meM hai, isake
aMta meM 'au dik' sUtra se 'aMta pratyaya lagane se bhadaMta-rUpa banA hai| isa
saMbodhana se pratyakSa-guru kA AmaMtraNa hotA hai| jainAgamoM meM batAyA gayA
hai ki pratyakSaguru ke abhAva meM parokSa-guru ke lie bhI apanI buddhi se apane
sAmane pratyakSavat kalpanA kI jA sakatI hai| jinezvaradeva ke abhAva meM jina-
pratimA meM jinatva kA Aropakara jaise stuti, pUjA, saMbodhana Adi hote haiM,
vaise hI sAkSAt-guru ke abhAva meM mana meM unakI kalpanA karake apane sAmane
mAno pratyakSa virAjamAna hoM, isa taraha kI sthApanA karake sAdhaka sabhI
dharmakriyAe~ Adara-pUrvaka kara sakatA hai| ataH ise batAne ke lie hI bhaMte
zabda kA AmaMtraNa artha meM prayoga kiyA gayA hai| ataH kahA hai ki 'jo
gurukulavAsa meM rahatA hai, vaha jJAnavAna hotA hai| vaha darzana tathA cAritra
meM atyaMta sthira ho jAtA hai| isalie bhAgyazAlI uttama AtmA jIvanabhara
gurukulavAsa (guru kA Azraya-guru-nizrAya) nahIM chodd'te| (vi. bhA. 34/59)
athavA 'bhaMte' pada pUrvamaharSiyoM dvArA ukta hone se prAkRta vyAkaraNa ke
niyamAnusAra ArSam sUtra ke AdhAra para 'bhavAMta' pada ke bIca ke varNa kA lopa
hokara 'ata etso puMsi mAgadhyAm-8/4/287' isa sUtra se ardhamAgadhI ke
niyamAnusAra prathamA vibhakti ke ekavacana meM akAra kA ekAra ho jAtA hai| isa
taraha bhavAMtazabda kA bhI prAkRta meM 'bhaMte' rUpa ho sakatA hai| isa dRSTi
se isakA dUsarA artha huA 'bhaMte' yAnI 'bhavAMta' arthAt saMsAra se pAra
utarane aura utArane vaale| 'sAmAiyaM kA artha pahale kahA jA cukA hai| arthAt
sAdhaka saMkalpa karatA hai ki maiM AtmA ko samabhAva meM sthira karatA huuN|'
AtmA samabhAva meM sthira kaise hogA? isake lie Age kA saMkalpa hai- 'sAvajaM
jogaM paccakkhAmi'-sAvadha arthAt pApayukta jo yoga, mana, vacana aura kAyA kA
pApapravRtti rUpa vyApAra, usakA paccakkhAmi arthAt tyAga karatA huuN| sAdhaka
yahAM sAvadha pravRtti ke viruddha nirNaya karatA hai athavA use nahIM karane kA
AdarapUrvaka nirNaya karatA hai| vaha kaba taka? usakA niyama Age kahate haiM-
'jAva sAhU pajjuvAsAmi' arthAt jaba taka sAdhu kI paryupAsanA karatA hU~, taba
taka sAmAyika kruuNgaa| yahAM jo 'yAvat' zabda hai, usake tIna artha hote
haiM-1. parimANa, 2. maryAdA aura 3. avdhaarnnaa-nishcy| parimANa kA artha hai-
jahAM taka sAdhu kI paryupAsanA (sevA) kare, utane samaya taka pApamaya vyApAra
kA tyAga krnaa| maryAdA kA artha hai-sAdhu kI paryupAsanA (sevA) prAraMbha
karane se pahale athavA sAmAyika lene se pahale se pApa-vyavahAra kA tyAga
karanA aura avadhAraNA kA artha hai-sAdhu kI paryupAsanA kare, vahAM taka ke lie
hI pApavyApAra ko chor3anA; usake bAda nhiiN| isa taraha 'jAva' zabda ke tIna
artha smjhnaa| paraMtu Ajakala 'jAvaniyama' bolA jAtA hai| isase sAmAyika kA
parimANa vartamAnakAla meM kama se kama eka muhUrta (do ghar3I 48 minaTa) kA
mAnA jAtA hai| ataH phalitArtha yaha huA ki sAmAyika ke prAraMbha se lekara
pUrNa hone taka kI sAvadha (sadoSa) vyApAra (pravRtti) kA tyAga karanA, usake
bAda nhiiN| sAdhaka usa pApavyApAra kA kisa rUpa meM tyAga karatA hai? isake lie
Age kA pATha batAte haiM-'duvihaM tivihennN'| isakA artha hai-sAdhaka ko
sAmAyika meM do prakAra se aura tIna prakAra se hone vAle pApavyApAra kA tyAga
karanA hai| jahAM pApavyApAra kA dvividha tyAga kiyA jAtA hai, vahAM do karaNa
se samajhanA caahie| jaise-'na karemi, na kaarvemi|' arthAt maiM svayaM
pApavyApAra nahIM karUMgA aura na dUsare se kraauuNgaa| isa taraha sAmAyika meM
ina donoM prakAroM se ho sakane vAle pApa-vyApAra kA gRhastha sAdhaka tyAga
karatA hai|' anumodana rUpI pApa-vyApAra kA niSedha nahIM hai; kyoMki vaisA
karanA gRhastha ke lie azakya hai| putra, naukara Adi dvArA kiye gaye kArya meM
svayaM nahIM karane para bhI anumodana kA doSa lagatA hai| aba tiviheNaM-'tIna
prakAra se artha smjhiie| yahAM karaNa meM tRtIyA vibhakti hai| yAnI
sAvadhapravRtti ke lie tIna sAdhana hai-mana, vacana aura kaayaa| inheM
jainAgamoM meM tIna yoga kahA hai| isalie kahA hai-'maNeNaM, vAyAe, kAraNaM'
arthAt mana, vacana aura kAyA se ina tInoM yogoM se sAvadha-vyApAra kA tyAga
karatA hai| na karemi, na kAravemi isa sUtra se mana, vacana, kAyA se nahIM
karUMgA aura nahIM karAUMgA ina donoM prakAroM kA vivaraNa hai| phira kAraNa ko
arthAt uddezya | 209

Page #232 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Meaning and Method of Samayik Sutra  The meaning and method of Samayik
Sutra is explained in detail, violating the third light verse 82 of Yoga
Shastra. It is said that Yoga is merely a perception, as it is subject to the
cause. Yoga exists only in the presence of the cause, and in the absence of the
cause, Yoga is absent. 'Tasseti' here refers to the authorized Yoga of 'Tasy'.
Here, the sixth case ending is used in the relationship of the part and the
whole. This Yoga is related to all three times. Therefore, the past deeds that
were done with faults are 'Padikkhamami', meaning I retreat from that sinful
act. 'Nindami Garihami' means I condemn it, and 'Gurda' means I reveal it in the
presence of the Guru. This includes only condemnation done by self-witness, and
'Gurda' is to condemn oneself in the presence of the Guru. In this Sutra, the
word 'Bhanta' appears again, which is to indicate excessive devotion and to
invite the Guru again. Therefore, it is not like the fault of repetition. Or,
the Guru is addressed again for the return of the Samayik action. This proves
that at the end of all actions, devotion should be shown towards the Guru.  The
commentator has also said that the word 'Bhadant' or 'Bhanta' is also indicative
of the return of Samayik, knowing this, one should return at the end of all
actions. (Vi. Bha. 3571) And 'Appaanam', meaning my soul, has done sinful deeds
in the past, I specifically renounce them with 'Vosirami'. In the present
Samayik text, 'Karemi Bhanta Samaiyam' is used for renouncing the present sinful
deeds, 'Tass Bhanta Padikkhamami' is used for renouncing the past sinful deeds,
and 'Pacchakkhami' is used for renouncing the future sinful deeds. In this way,
the seeker has to renounce the sinful deeds of all three times in Samayik.
Therefore, the use of all three sentences does not appear to be a fault of
repetition. It is also said, 'Aiyan Nindami, Paduppannam Sanvaremi Anagayam
Pacchakkhami'. Meaning, I condemn the past sins, I control (stop) them for the
present, and I renounce the sinful deeds for the future. In this way, the seeker
makes a rule.  The Shravak should perform Iriya-vahi Pratikraman in his own
house or at another place, taking Samayik. Later, he should criticize the sinful
deeds done by going and coming, and then respectfully salute the seated Acharya,
Muni Rajas, etc. in order. Then, after saluting the Guru Maharaj, he should sit
down after writing down the posture (Katasan) etc. After that, he should listen
to the Dharma from the Guru Maharaj and study new things. Or, he should ask
where there is doubt. This method should be understood in the local Jain temple
or lecture hall. But if one takes Samayik at home or in a Jain temple, lecture
hall, Upashraya, or dispensary, then he should stay there; he does not need to
go anywhere else. This is the method of a common Shravak.  Now, the method of a
king or a wealthy Shravak is said to be as follows: If a Shravak is a king or
something similar, and he is sitting on an excellent mount like an elephant,
adorned with royal insignia like an umbrella and a fly whisk, and ornaments, and
is coming with an elephant, horse, chariot, and infantry, accompanied by
excellent instruments like a drum, making the sky resonate, creating curiosity
among the local people with the noise of the praises of the bards and charanas,
with the ostentatious competition of many vassals and mandala kings, to see the
Munis, then people will point their fingers at him and say, 'This great soul is
a devout and righteous person.' Seeing the king or the wealthy person eager to
see the Munis, the feeling of Dharma arises in the minds of other people. They
also think, 'When will we do Dharma like this?' Therefore, the fellow Dharma
practitioners should salute the said devout king with folded hands, and throw
Akshat etc. In response to their salutations, the king himself should also
approve of Dharma, 'Blessed is this Dharma, whose great soul serves it.' In this
way, praising Dharma by the general public, the king or the wealthy person
should go to the Jain temple or the Upashraya where the Sadhus and Sadhvis
reside. Upon reaching there, he should remove the royal insignia like the
umbrella, fly whisk, crown, sword, and shoes, and then salute the Jina or the
Sadhus and Sadhvis. If the king goes to the Upashraya or Jain temple after
taking Samayik, then the elephant, horse, etc. will be with him. There will be
weapons or an army. It will not be appropriate to do so in Samayik. Suppose the
king goes on foot after taking Samayik, even then it is inappropriate. If the
Shravak king comes quietly in a simple dress or like a common person, then no
one will stand up to welcome him.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 sAmAyika sUtra kA artha evaM vidhi yogazAstra tRtIya prakAza zloka 82 ko
ullaMghana karake vistAra se kahA gayA hai| kahA jAtA hai ki yoga to karaNa ke
adhIna hone se upadarzana mAtra hai, kyoMki yoga ko karaNAdhIna mAnA gayA hai|
karaNa kI sattA meM hI yoga hotA hai aura karaNa ke abhAva meM yoga kA abhAva
hotA hai| 'tasseti' yahAM para 'tasya' adhikRta yoga se saMbaMdhita hai| yahAM
avayava-avayavIbhAva rUpa saMbaMdha meM SaSThI vibhakti hai| yaha yoga trikAla-
viSayaka hotA hai| ataH isake pahale atIta meM jo sAvadya-vyApAra kiyA thA use
'paDikkamAmi' arthAt usa pApakarma se pIche haTatA huuN| 'niMdAmi garihAmi'
arthAt-usakI niMdA karatA hUM, gardA yAni guru kI sAkSI | se prakaTa karatA
huuN| isameM kevala Atma-sAkSI se kI gayI niMdA hai aura gurusAkSI se apane
Apako dhikkAranA gardA hai| | 'tassa bhaMte' isa sUtra meM 'bhaMte' zabda phira
AyA hai, vaha atizayabhakti ke batAne ke lie va guru kA punaH AmaMtraNa karane
ke lie hai| isalie punarukti doSa jaisA nahIM hai| athavA sAmAyikakriyA ke
pratyarpaNa ke lie punaH guru ko saMbodhita kiyA gayA hai| isase siddha hotA hai
ki samasta kriyAoM ke aMta meM guru ke prati bhakti pradarzita karanI caahie|
bhASyakAra ne aura bhI kahA hai-bhadaMta yA bhaMte zabda sAmAyika ke pratyarpaNa
kA bhI vAcaka hai, yaha jAnakara sabhI kriyAoM ke aMta meM pratyarpaNa karanA
caahie| (vi. bhA. 3571) tathA appANaM arthAt merI AtmA ne bhUtakAla meM jo
pApavyApAra kiyA hai, usakA vosirAmi maiM vizeSa rUpa se tyAga karatA huuN|
prastuta sAmAyika pATha meM vartamAnakAla ke pApavyApAra ko tyAga ne ke lie
karemi bhaMte sAmAiyaM bhUtakAla ke pApa-vyApAra ke tyAga ne ke lie tassa bhaMte
paDikkamAmi, tathA bhaviSyakAla ke pApa-vyApAra ke tyAga ke lie paccakkhAmi
zabda kA prayoga hai| isa taraha sAmAyika meM sAdhaka ko tInoM kAla.ke pApa-
vyApAra kA tyAga karanA hotA hai| isalie tInoM vAkyoM ke prayoga se
punaruktidoSa pratIta nahIM hotaa| kahA bhI hai-aiyaM niMdAmi, paDuppannaM
saMvaremi aNAgayaM pcckkhaami| arthAt-bhUtakAla ke pApa kI niMdA karatA hUM,
vartamAnakAla ke lie usakA saMvara (nirodha) karatA hUM; aura bhaviSyakAla ke
lie pApa-vyApAra kA tyAga karatA huuN| isa prakAra se sAdhaka niyama karatA hai|
apane ghara meM yA anya sthAna para sAmAyika lekara zrAvaka guru ke pAsa
iriyAvahI pratikramaNa kre| bAda meM gamanAgamana se hue pApa-doSa kI AlocanA
karake yathAkrama se virAjamAna AcArya Adi munirAjoM | ko vaMdana kreN| phira
gurumahArAja ko vaMdanakara Asana (kaTAsana) Adi kI pratilekhanA karake baitthe|
tatpazcAt gurumahArAja se dharmazravaNa kare tathA nayA adhyayana kare. yA jahAM
zaMkA ho vahAM puuche| isa prakAra sthAnIya jinamaMdira yA vyAkhyAnasthala ho,
vahAM yaha vidhi smjhnaa| paraMtu apane ghara para yA jinamaMdira,
vyAkhyAnasthala, upAzraya yA pauSadhazAlA meM sAmAyika le to, vaha phira vahI
rahe; phira use anyatra jAne kI jarUrata nahIM hai| yaha sAmAnya zrAvaka kI
vidhi kahI hai| _ aba rAjA Adi maharddhika zrAvaka kI vidhi kahate haiM ki-koI
zrAvaka rAjA Adi ho aura vaha hAthI Adi uttama savArI meM baiThakara, chatra-
cAmara Adi rAjacihnoM se evaM alaMkAroM se susajjita hokara hAthI, ghor3e, ratha
aura paidala senAsahita bherI Adi uttama vAdyoM se AkAzamaMDala ko guMjAtA huA,
bhAToM aura cAraNoM ke prazaMsAgItoM ke kolAhala se sthAnIya janatA meM utsukatA
paidA karatA huA, aneka sAmaMtoM evaM maMDalezvara rAjAoM ke spardhA pUrvaka
ADaMbara ke sAtha munijanoM ke darzanArtha A rahA ho to loga usakI ora aMgulI
uThAkara kaheMge-yaha mahAnubhAva zraddhAlu dharmAtmA hai|' rAjA yA vaibhavazAlI
vyakti ko munidarzana ke lie zraddhAtura dekhakara anya logoM ke mana bhI dharma
kI bhAvanA umar3atI hai| ve bhI socate haiM hama bhI kaba isa taraha dharma
kareMge? ataH sAdharmIjana ukta dharmazraddhAlu rAjA ko hAtha jor3akara praNAma
kareM, akSata Adi uchaale| una logoM ke namaskAra ke pratyuttara meM rAjA svayaM
bhI dharma kI anumodanA kare-'dhanya hai, isa dharma ko; jisakI aisI mahAna AtmA
sevA karate haiN| isa prakAra sarvasAdhAraNa dvArA dharma kI prazaMsA karavAte
hue rAjA yA maharddhika vyakti jinamaMdira yA sAdhusAdhviyoM kA jahAM nivAsa ho,
usa upAzraya meM jaaye| vahAM jAte hI chatra, cAmara, mukuTa, talavAra aura jUte
Adi rAjacihnoM ko utArakara phira jinavaMdana yA sAdhu-sAdhvI ko vaMdana kre|
agara rAjA sAmAyika karake upAzraya yA jinamaMdira meM jAyegA to hAthI-ghor3e
Adi upAdhi sAtha meM hogii| zastra yA senA Adi hoNge| sAmAyika meM | aisA karanA
ucita nahIM hogaa| mAna lo, sAmAyika karake rAjA paidala calakara jAye to bhI
anucita hai| yadi cupacApa | aise hI sAmAnya veSa meM yA sAmAnyajana kI taraha
zrAvaka rAjA AyegA to koI khar3A hokara usakA satkAra bhI nahIM kregaa| 210

Page #233 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Example of Chandravatsanka in Samayik, Deshavakashik Vrat  **Yoga Shastra,
Third Prakash, Verses 83-85**  Therefore, with utmost humility and in a proper
manner, when the king arrives, a seat should be prepared for him beforehand, and
the same respect and worship should be offered. Nothing else should be done. The
Acharya Maharaj should already be up and walking around, so that he doesn't have
to stand up when the king arrives. Because in this regard, there is no fault in
standing or not standing. This is just a matter of conduct. The king or a
Riddhiman Shravak should be respectfully honored in this way during Samayik.
Staying in Samayik leads to Maha Nirjara. || 82 ||  This is explained through an
example:  **254. Samayikvratasthasy, Grihino'pi Sthiratmanah |
Chandravatsakasyaeva, Kshiyate Karma Sanchitam || 83 ||**  **Meaning:** Even
though he is a householder, the accumulated karma of a soul who is steadfast in
Samayik Vrat, like the king Chandravatsanka, is destroyed. || 83 ||  This
example is understood through the Guru Parampara. It is as follows:
Chandravatsanka, the king, was in Samadhi during Samayik.  There was a city
called Sanketapura, which was as bright as the house of Lakshmi, surpassing the
beauty of Indrapuri. There, the king Chandravatsanka, who was like a second moon
adorning the crown of the earth, ruled. The wise king, to protect his country,
wore weapons, and similarly, to protect his inner qualities, he also wore four
strong and strict Shikshavrats. In the month of Magh, once at night, in his own
residence, he embraced Samayik and, with this resolve, stood in Kayotsarga,
saying, "As long as this lamp burns, I will remain in Samayik." When the oil in
the lamp started to run low, his bed-chamber maid, thinking that the master
should not be in darkness, poured more oil into the lamp in the first watch of
the night. Out of devotion, she stayed awake until the second watch and then
went and poured more oil into the lamp. The lamp continued to burn. Therefore,
the king continued his Kayotsarga according to his resolve (Abhigha) until the
third watch. The bed-chamber maid was unaware of the king's resolve, so she
poured more oil into the lamp again. The night was over. Morning arrived, but
the king remained standing in Kayotsarga according to his resolve. Due to the
fatigue of the whole night, his body was shattered and could not bear the pain
any longer, so he fell down with a thud. The king's body left him. But because
he remained in Samadhi until the end, his evil karma was destroyed, and due to
the binding of good karma, the king completed his lifespan and went to heaven.
|| 83 ||  Similarly, other householders, by embracing Samayik Vrat and remaining
steadfast in Samadhi, will surely destroy their evil karma and attain immediate
liberation. This is the essence of the story of Chandravatsanka.  Now, regarding
the second Shiksha Vrat called Deshavakashik:  **255. Digvrate Parimanam Yat,
Tasy Sanksepanam Punah | Dine Ratrau Cha Dishavakashikavratamuchyate || 84 ||**
**Meaning:** The shortening of the limits of travel in Digvrat for a day and
night is called Deshavakashik Vrat. || 84 ||  **Explanation:** In the first
Gunavrat called Digvrat, there are limits set for travel in all ten directions.
Shortening these limits for a whole day and night, or specifically for a watch,
is called Deshavakashik Vrat. Here, along with shortening the first Vrat in
Digvrat, one should also understand the shortening of other Anuvrats, etc., by
implication. If a separate Vrat were to be kept for shortening each Vrat, the
number of Vrats would increase, and this would contradict the scriptural number
of 12 Vrats. || 84 ||  Now, regarding the third Shiksha Vrat, Paushdhavrat:
**256. Chatushparvyam Chaturthadi, Kuvyaparanishedenam |
Brahmacharyakriyasnanadityagah Paushdhavratam || 85 ||**  211

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 sAmAyika meM samAdhistha caMdrAvataMsaka kA udAharaNa, dezAvagAsika vrata
yogazAstra tRtIya prakAza zloka 83 se 85 ataH atyaMta vinItabhAva se
yathAbhadraka hokara rAjA bhI calA Aye to pahale se usake baiThane ke lie Asana
taiyAra karanA aura vahI satkAra - pUjA karanA hai| anya kucha bhI nahIM karanA
hai| AcArya mahArAja to pahale se hI uThakara vahI ghUmane | lage; tAki rAjA ke
Ane para khar3e nahIM honA pdd'e| kyoMki usa saMbaMdha meM uThane, na uThane se
koI doSa nahIM lgtaa| yaha kevala eka vyavahAra hai| rAjA yA RddhimAna zrAvaka
ko isa vidhi se AdarapUrvaka sAmAyika karanI caahie| sAmAyika meM rahane se
mahAnirjarA hotI hai  /  /  82  /  /  ise hI dRSTAMta dvArA samajhAte haiM  /
254 /  sAmAyikavratasthasya, gRhiNo'pi sthirAtmanaH  /  candrAvataMsakasyeva,
kSIyate karma saJcitam ||83 || artha :- gRhastha hone para bhI sAmAyika- vrata
meM sthita AtmA ke caMdrAvataMsaka rAjA kI taraha pUrvasaMcita kRta karma kSINa
ho jAte haiM ||83  /  /  yaha udAharaNa guruparaMparA se gamya hai| vaha isa
prakAra hai sAmAyika meM samAdhistha caMdrAvataMsaka nRpa : lakSmI ke
saMketagRha ke samAna ujjvala, iMdrapurI kI zobhA ko mAta karane vAlA
saMketapura nagara thaa| vahAM pRthvI ke | mukuTasama dUsare caMdramA ke samAna
jananayana AlhAdaka 'caMdrAvataMsaka' rAjA rAjya karatA thA  /  buddhizAlI rAjA
apane deza | kI rakSA ke lie zastra dhAraNa karatA thA, isI prakAra AtmaguNoM kI
rakSA ke lie cAra prakhara evaM kaThora zikSAvrata bhI dhAraNa | kiye hue thA  /
mAgha mahIne meM eka bAra rAta ko apane nivAsasthAna para usane sAmAyika
aMgIkAra kI aura aisA saMkalpa karake kAyotsarga meM khar3A ho gayA ki 'jaba
taka yaha dIpaka jalatA rahegA, taba taka meM sAmAyika meM rhuuNgaa|' dIpaka meM
| tela jaba kama hone lagA to unakI zayyApAlikA dAsI ne rAta ke pahale prahara
meM hI dIpaka meM yaha socakara aura tela | ur3ela diyA ki 'svAmI ko kahIM
aMdherA na ho  / ' svAbhIbhaktivaza vaha dUsare prahara taka jAgatI rahI aura
phira usane jAkara | dIpaka meM punaH tela DAla diyaa| dIpaka lagAtAra jalatA
rhaa| ataH rAjA ne tIsare prahara taka apane saMkalpa (abhigraha) | ke anusAra
kAyotsarga cAlU rkhaa| zayyApAlikA ko rAjA ke saMkalpa kA patA nahIM thA, ataH
usane phira dIpaka meM tela | ur3ela diyaa| rAtri pUrNa huii| prAtaHkAla ho
gayA, para rAjA saMkalpAnusAra kAyotsarga meM khar3A rhaa| rAtabhara kI thakAna
se zarIra cUra-cUra hokara adhika vyathA na saha sakane ke kAraNa dhar3Ama se
gira pdd'aa| rAjA kA zarIra chUTa gyaa| paraMtu aMtima | samaya taka
samAdhibhAva meM rahane ke kAraNa azubha karmoM kA kSaya evaM zubha karma kA
baMdha ho jAne se rAjA AyuSya pUrNa kara svarga meM gayA ||83 //  isI prakAra
anya gRhastha bhI sAmAyikavrata aMgIkAra karake samAdhibhAva meM sthira rahe to
vaha avazya hI azubhakarmoM | kA kSaya karake tatkAla sadgati prApta kara letA
hai| yaha caMdrAvataMsakanRpa kI kathA kA hArda ! aba dezAvakAzika nAmaka
dvitIya zikSAvrata ke saMbaMdha meM kahate haiM  / 255 /  digvrate parimANaM
yat, tasya saGkSepaNaM punaH  /  dine rAtrau ca dizAvakAzikavratamucyate  // 84
//  artha :- divrata meM gamana kI jo maryAdA kI ho, usameM se bhI eka ahorAtra
ke lie saMkSepa karanA dezAvakAzikavrata kahalAtA hai ||84  /   /  vyAkhyA : -
digvrata nAmaka prathama guNavrata meM dazoM dizAoM meM gamana kI jo sImA
(maryAdA) nizcita kI ho, usameM se bhI pUre dina rAtabhara ke lie, upalakSaNa se
pahara Adi ke lie vizeSa rUpa se saMkSepa karanA dezAvakAzika vrata | kahalAtA
hai| yahAM digvrata meM prathamavrata ke saMkSepa karane ke sAtha-sAtha
upalakSaNa se dUsare aNuvrata Adi kA bhI saMkSepa | samajha lenA caahie|
pratyeka vrata ke saMkSepa karane ke lie usakA pratyeka kA eka-eka vrata rakhA
jAtA, to vratoM kI saMkhyA bar3ha jAtI aura vratoM kI zAstrokta 12 saMkhyA ke
sAtha virodha paidA ho jAtA  /  /  84  /  /  aba tIsare zikSAvrata pauSadhavrata
ke viSaya meM kahate haiM  / 256 /  catuSparvyAM caturthAdi, kuvyApAraniSedhanam
/  brahmacaryakriyAsnAnAdityAgaH pauSadhavratam  // 85 //  211

Page #234 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Method of Observing the Paushdha Vrat  **Meaning of Verses 85 and 86 from
the Third Light of Yoga Shastra:**  **Verse 85:**  Observing fasts and
austerities like Chaturthabhakta and Pratyakhyana on the four festival days,
abandoning evil tendencies, practicing celibacy, and abstaining from bathing,
adornment, etc., is called Paushdha Vrat.  **Explanation:** The eight,
fourteenth, full moon, and new moon days are called festival days. It is
prescribed for the Shravak to observe Paushdha Vrat on these days. This Vrat
includes fasting and other austerities, along with abstaining from sinful
tendencies, practicing celibacy, and giving up bodily rituals like bathing. The
word "etc." also implies abstaining from oil massage, applying henna, applying
sandalwood paste, using perfumes and flowers, wearing garlands of fragrant
flowers or flower ornaments on the head, wearing expensive, colorful, and flashy
clothes and ornaments, and adorning and beautifying the body. One should
understand that these things are also to be abandoned. Abandoning these
prohibited things and accepting celibacy and austerities to strengthen one's
Dharma is called Paushdha Vrat.  There are two types of Paushdha: Desha Paushdha
and Sarva Paushdha. Paushdha with food is called Desha Paushdha. However,
Paushdha with food is observed by abstaining from various Vikrigayi (harmful
substances) and by practicing Ayambil, Ekasan, or Biyasan. Paushdha for the
entire day and night is observed with complete abstinence from all four types of
food, including fasting. It includes Pratyakhyana until sunrise the next day.
Abstaining from sinful tendencies partially is called Desha Paushdha. It
involves giving up one or two sinful activities. Abstaining from all work and
activities for one day and night, including farming, employment, business,
animal husbandry, and all household activities and ceremonies, is called Sarva
Vyapar Paushdha. Brahmacharya Paushdha is also of two types: Desha and Sarva.
Abstaining from sexual intercourse more than once is called Desha Brahmacharya
Paushdha, and observing complete celibacy for the entire day and night is called
Sarva Brahmacharya Paushdha. Similarly, Snaanadi Tyaga Paushdha is also of two
types: Desha and Sarva. Abstaining from bodily rituals like bathing more than
once is called Desha Snaanadi Paushdha, and abstaining from bathing for the
entire day and night is called Sarva Paushdha.  Here, when one observes Paushdha
in the form of prohibiting evil activities (sinful tendencies) partially, one
may not observe Samayik, but when one observes Sarva Paushdha, then one must
observe Samayik. If one does not do so, then one will be deprived of the fruits
of Paushdha. Whenever one observes Sarva Paushdha, one should do so in a
secluded place in the Upashraya, Jin Mandir, or at home. Before observing
Paushdha Vrat, one should abandon gold, gold ornaments, flower garlands,
ointments, weapons, etc., and then observe Samayik Vrat. During Paushdha, one
should engage in self-study, study, teaching, reading good literature,
meditating on Dharma, and contemplating on Anupreksha (feelings). One should
also reflect, "Alas! I am so unfortunate that I have not yet been able to
acquire the qualities of a Sadhu."  Here, one should understand this point
specifically: If Paushdha Vrat is observed with food, like abstaining from food,
bodily rituals, and practicing celibacy, in the form of abstaining from evil
activities, i.e., with Aagaras (possessions), then observing Samayik is
meaningful, otherwise not. Because the rules of Paushdha are gross in nature,
with possessions, while the rules of Samayik are subtle. Although it is
necessary to completely abandon sinful activities (tendencies) in Paushdha, one
does not benefit from it without observing Samayik. Therefore, one should
observe Samayik along with Paushdha. If a Shravak Samachari observes Paushdha
like Samayik, with the aforementioned two Karana and three Yoga, then the
function of Samayik is fulfilled by Paushdha itself. Observing Samayik
separately does not yield special benefits. However, if the Shravak intends to
observe both Paushdha and Samayik Vrat, then he receives the benefits of both.
**Verse 86:** Even those who are householders are blessed, who observe the
sacred Paushdha Vrat, which is difficult to observe, like a sieve.  **Meaning:**
1. Currently, Paushdha is observed with food, Desha, and Sarva. The rest of the
Sarva Paushdha is observed only with Sarva. And at least Ekasana is observed.
**Note:** The translation attempts to preserve the Jain terms while conveying
the meaning clearly.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pauSadhavrata paripAlana kI vidhi yogazAstra tRtIya prakAza zloka 85 se 86
artha :- cAra parva-dinoM meM caturthabhakta - pratyAkhyAna Adi upavAsa-tapa,
kupravRtti kA tyAga, brahmacarya - pAlana evaM snAnazrRMgArAdi kA tyAga kiyA
jAya, use pauSadhavrata kahate haiM  //  85 //  vyAkhyA :- aSTamI, caturdazI,
pUrNimA aura amAvasyA ye cAra parvatithiyAM kahalAtI hai| ina parvatithiyoM meM
| pauSadhavrata aMgIkAra karanA zrAvaka ke lie vihita hai| isa vrata meM upavAsa
Adi tapa ke sAtha sAvadya (pApamaya) pravRtti | ko baMda karanA, brahmacarya kA
pAlana karanA, snAnAdi zarIra-saMskAra kA tyAga; Adi zabda se telamAliza,
maheMdI lagAnA, caMdanAdi lepa karanA, itraphUlela Adi lagAnA, sugaMdhita phUloM
kI mAlA athavA mastaka para puSpahAra dhAraNa karanA, bahumUlya raMgabiraMge,
bhar3akIle vastra evaM alaMkAra pahananA, zarIra ko zRMgAra karake susajjita
karanA, suMdara banAnA Adi | bAtoM kA tyAga bhI samajha lenA caahie| ina
niSiddha vastuoM kA tyAga tathA brahmacarya va tapa kA svIkAra karake dharma ko
puSTa karanA, pauSadhavrata kahalAtA hai| vaha pauSadha do prakAra kA hotA hai -
dezapauSadha aura srvpaussdh| AhAra pUrvaka pauSadha | dezapauSadha hotA hai  /
kintu AhAra sahita pauSadha vividha viggaI (vikRti janaka padArtha) ke tyAga
pUrvaka AyaMbila, ekAsana | yA biyAsana se kiyA jAtA hai| pUre dina-rAtabhara kA
pauSadha cAroM hI prakAra ke AhAra ke sarvathA tyAga pUrvaka upavAsa | sahita
hotA hai| isameM dUsare dina sUryodaya hone taka kA pratyAkhyAna hotA hai  /
dezataH (aMzataH) pApa-pravRttiyoM kA tyAga | dezapauSadha kahalAtA hai| isameM
kinhIM eka yA do pApa - vyApAroM ko chor3anA hotA hai| eka ahorAtra ke lie
khetI, nokarI, vyApAra-dhaMdhA, pazupAlana evaM ghara ke AraMbha samAraMbhAdi
yukta sabhI kArya - vyApAroM ko chor3anA sarva - vyApArapauSadha kahalAtA hai|
brahmacaryapauSadha bhI dezataH aura sarvataH donoM prakAra se hotA hai| eka yA
do bAra se adhika strIsevana kA tyAga | karanA dezataH brahmacaryapauSadha aura
pUre dinarAtabhara ke lie pUrNa brahmacarya kA pAlana karanA sarvataH
brahmacaryapauSadha hai| isI prakAra snAnAdityAgapauSadha bhI dezataH aura
sarvataH donoM prakAra se hotA hai| eka yA do bAra se adhika snAnAdi |
zarIrasaMskAra karane kA tyAga dezataH snAnAdipauSadha aura pUre dinarAtabhara
snAnAdi kA tyAga karanA sarvataH pauSadha hai|' yahAM | dezataH kuvyApAra - (
sAvadyapravRtti) niSedha rUpa pauSadha jaba kare, taba cAhe sAmAyika na kare,
paraMtu sarvapauSadha kare taba to avazya hI sAmAyika kre| yadi aisA nahIM
karegA to vaha pauSadha ke phala se vaMcita rhegaa| sarvapauSadha jaba bhI kare
taba upAzraya, jinamaMdira meM yA ghara meM ekAMta sthAna meM kare tathA usa
samaya pauSadhavrata ke lene se pahale hI svarNa, svarNa ke AbhUSaNa, puSpamAlA,
vilepana, zastra Adi kA tyAga karake sAmAyika vrata kA aMgIkAra kare  /
pauSadha meM svAdhyAya, adhyayana, adhyApana, satsAhityavAMcana, dharmadhyAna va
anuprekSAoM ( bhAvanAoM) para ciMtana kre| sAtha hI yaha vicAra bhI kare ki 'aho
! maiM kitanA abhAgA hUM ki abhI taka sAdhutva ke guNoM ko dhAraNa karane meM
samartha nahIM ho sakA  /  ' yahAM itanI bAta khAsataura se samajha lenI cAhie
ki yadi pauSadhavrata bhI AhAratyAga, zarIrasaMskAratyAga aura |
brahmacaryapAlana kI taraha kuvyApAratyAga ke rUpa meM aNNatthaNAbhogeNaM yAnI
AgArasahita svIkAra kiyA ho (AgAra rakhA ho), to usakA sAmAyika karanA sArthaka
hai, varanA nahIM hai| kyoMki pauSadha ke niyama AgArasahita sthUla rUpa haiM,
jabaki | sAmAyika ke niyama sUkSma rUpa hai| yadyapi pauSadha meM sAvadyavyApAra
( pravRtti) kA sarvathA tyAga karanA Avazyaka hai, tathApi | sAmAyika na karane
se usakA lAbha nahIM miltaa| isalie pauSadha ke sAtha sAmAyika avazya karanI
caahie| zrAvaka| samAcArI kI vizeSatA se yadi pauSadha bhI sAmAyika kI taraha
pUrvokta duvihaM tiviheNaM (do karaNa tIna yoga se) svIkAra kiyA gayA hai, taba
to sAmAyika kA kArya pauSadha se ho hI jAtA hai| alaga se sAmAyikagrahaNa vizeSa
phaladAyI nahIM | hotA  /  phira bhI yadi zrAvaka mana meM yaha abhiprAya
rakhatA hai ki maiMne pauSadha aura sAmAyika donoM vrata svIkAra kiye haiM to
use pauSadha aura sAmAyika donoM kA lAbha milatA  /  /  85  /  /  aba pauSavrata
karane vAle kI prazaMsA karate haiM | | 257  //  gRhiNo'pi hi dhanyAste, puNyaM
ye pauSadhavratam  /  duSpAlaM pAlayantyeva, yathA sa culanIpi  // 86 //
gRhastha hote hue bhI ve dhanya haiM, jo culanIpitA ke samAna kaThinatA se pAle
jA sake, aise pavitra pauSadhavrata kA pAlana karate haiM  /  /  86  /  /  artha
: 1. vartamAna meM pauSadha AhAra pauSadha deza evaM sarva se hotA hai zeSa
sarva pauSadha sarva se hI hote haiN| evaM kama se kama ekAsaNA kiyA jAtA hai|
212

Page #235 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
In the Pauṣadhavrat, the steadfast Culanīpītā Śrāvaka Yogaśāstra, Third Light,
Verse 86 The example of the Culanīpītā is as follows: The steadfastness of the
Śrāvaka-vratadharī Culanīpītā in the Pauṣadha: On the banks of the Ganges River,
in the beautiful city of Vārāṇasī, which is like a jewel on the earth, with its
intricate creations, there lived a great merchant named Mahāseṭha, who was like
embodied Dharma among humans. He had a son named Culanīpītā. Just as the dark
night (Śyāma) is the companion of the moon, which brings joy to the world, so
too was his beautiful wife, Śyāma, who was his equal in Dharma. | Culanīpītā had
a total wealth of 24 crore gold coins - eight crore gold coins were kept safe in
the form of treasure in the ground, eight crore coins were invested in interest,
and eight crore coins were used to run his business. | He had eight Gokulas,
each with ten thousand cows. He had many other kinds of wealth in his house. In
this way, he was the owner of a lot of land and property. Once, while wandering
outside Vārāṇasī in the Koṣṭhaka garden, the supreme Tirthankara Śramaṇa
Bhagavān Mahāvīrasvāmī arrived. Indra, along with the gods and goddesses, came
to pay homage to the Lord's lotus feet, and the king of the city, Jitasatru,
also arrived. When Culanīpītā heard this, he was overjoyed and, wearing
appropriate clothes and ornaments for the Dharma assembly, he walked on foot to
pay homage to the Lord of the Three Worlds. After paying homage and bowing to
the Lord, he sat in the Dharma assembly and listened to the Lord's sermon with
great devotion. | When the sermon was over, Culanīpītā bowed respectfully and
requested the Lord, "Swāmin! Just as the sun travels only to illuminate the
world, and has no other purpose, so too do you travel on the earth to enlighten
people like me. In the world, everyone else is begged, and some give, some
don't; but you, without begging, go to them directly and give Dharma-deśanā.
This is due to your selfless grace. I know that I should accept the Anāgāra-
dharma from you; but this unfortunate one does not yet have the ability,
capacity, and strength to bear the burden of such a high character; | Blessed
are those who bear the burden of complete character, who take initiation. I have
a desire to receive the Śrāvakadharma from you. | I beg you to please grant me
the Śrāvakadharma. The ocean is full of water, but a pot can only take as much
water as it can hold. The Lord replied, "Devānupriya! Do as you please. But do
not delay in the work of Dharma." After that, Culanīpītā received twelve vows
from the Lord as follows: He renounced gross violence, gross falsehood, gross
non-giving, | and all women except his wife Śyāma. He made a rule not to keep
more than eight crore gold coins in safe deposit, more than eight crore in
business, and more than eight crore in interest. He kept land for farming that
could be cultivated by 500 ploughs. He kept 500 carts for foreign trade and 500
carts for carrying loads. He renounced anything more than this. He also made a
rule not to keep more than four large ships. In the seventh vow, the vow of
consumption, he limited some of the things in the 26 categories as follows: 1.
Clothing, except for fragrant kāṣāya-vastra (towel) for wiping the body, 2.
Toothbrush, except for a green toothbrush from the mahūḍa tree, 3. Fruit, except
for the āṁvala fruit, 4. Oil, except for sahasrapāka and śatpāka oil, 5.
Applying anything to the body, except for gandhāḍhya, 6. Water for bathing,
except for more than eight uṣṭrikās (large earthen pots), 7. Clothing, except
for two cotton clothes, 8. Applying anything to the body, except for saffron,
agarwood, and sandalwood, 9. Garlands of flowers, except for lotus flowers, 10.
Ornaments, except for working ornaments and a named ring, 11. Incense, except
for Turkish incense, 12. Beverages, except for beverages heated by fuel, 13.
Food, except for khajā and ghévar, 14. Rice, except for kalambashālī (a type of
rice) odana, 15. Soup, except for peas, mung beans, and black gram, 16. Ghee,
except for ghee made from cow's milk in the autumn, 17. Greens, except for
spinach and mandūki greens, 213

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pauSadhavrata meM sudRr3ha culanIpitA zrAvaka yogazAstra tRtIya prakAza zloka
86 calanIpitA kA saMpradAyagamya dRSTAMta isa prakAra hai zrAvakavratadhArI
culanIpitA kI pauSadha meM dRr3hatA : gaMgAnadI ke kinAre vicitra racanAoM se
manohara, pRthvI ke tilaka - samAna zreSTha vArANasI nagarI meM manuSyoM meM
mUrtimAna dharma kI taraha mahAseTha nAmaka zreSThI rahatA thaa| usake yahAM
culanIpitA kA janma huaa| jagadAnaMdadAyI caMdramA kI sahacAriNI jaise zyAmA
(rAtri) hai, vaise hI usake anurUpa zyAmA nAmakI usakI rUpavatI sahadharmiNI
thii| | culanIpitA ke yahAM kula 24 karor3a sonaiyoM kI saMpatti thI - ATha
karor3a svarNamudrAe~ jamIna meM khajAne ke rUpa meM surakSita | rakhI huI thI,
ATha karor3a muhareM byAja ke rUpa meM lagAI huI thI aura ATha karor3a se usakA
vyavasAya calatA thaa| usake | yahAM dasa-dasa hajAra ke pratyeka gokula ke
hisAba se 8 gokula the| usake ghara meM aura bhI aneka prakAra kI saMpatti thii|
isa taraha vaha kAphI jamIna-jAyadAda kA mAlika thaa| eka bAra vArANasI ke
bAhara koSThaka udyAna meM caramatIrthaMkara zramaNa bhagavAn mahAvIrasvAmI
vicaraNa karate hue padhAreM  /  bhagavAn ke caraNakamaloM meM vaMdanArtha
suraasura sahita iMdra bhI Aye aura nagarI kA rAjA jitazatru bhI pahuMcA  /
culanIpitA ne jaba yaha sunA to mana meM AhlAdita hokara dharmasabhA ke lie
ucita vastrAbhUSaNa pahanakara paidala calakara vaha bhI trilokInAtha bhagavAn
ke caraNoM meM vaMdanArtha pahuMcA  /  bhagavAn ko vaMdanA | namaskAra karake
dharmasabhA meM baiThakara paramabhakti pUrvaka kara baddha hokara usane
bhagavAn kA pravacana sunA  /  pravacana samApta hone | para culanIpitA ne
vinayapUrvaka namaskAra karake prabhucaraNoM meM nivedana kiyA- 'svAmin! sUrya
jaise kevala jagat ko prakAza | dene ke lie hI bhramaNa karatA hai, isake sivAya
usakA koI prayojana nahIM hai; vaise hI Apa bhI mujha sarIkhe logoM ko |
pratibodha dene ke lie hI bhUmaMDala para vicaraNa karate haiN| saMsAra meM aura
sabhI ke pAsa to jAkara yAcanA kI jAtI hai, taba koI detA hai, koI nahIM detA;
paraMtu Apa to binA hI yAcanA kiye niHspRhabhAva se sammukha jAkara dharmadezanA
dete haiN| isameM ApakI ahaitukI kRpAdRSTi hI kAraNa hai| maiM jAnatA hUM ki
ApazrI ke pAsa mujhe anagAradharma svIkAra karanA | cAhie; lekina abhI isa
abhAge meM itanI yogyatA, kSamatA aura zakti nahIM ki itanA ucca cAritra kA
bhAra uThA sake; | veM dhanya haiM, jo pUrNa cAritra kA bhAra uThAte haiM, dIkSA
lete haiN| ApazrI se zrAvakadharma grahaNa karane kI merI bhAvanA hai| | Apase
prArthanA hai ki kRpayA mujhe zrAvakadharma pradAna kIjie  /  samudra jala se
paripUrNa hotA hai, lekina ghar3A apanI yogyatAnusAra hI usameM se jala le
sakatA hai| bhagavAn ne uttara meM kahA - 'devAnupriya ! tumheM jaisA sukha ho,
vaisA kro| paraMtu dharmakArya meM jarA bhI vilaMba mata kro|' tatpazcAt
culanIpitA ne bhagavAna se 12 vrata isa prakAra grahaNa kiye| sthUlahiMsA,
sthUla asatya, sthUla adattAdAna | aura apanI patnI zyAmA ke sivAya tamAma
striyoM kA tyAga kiyA, ATha karor3a se adhika svarNamudrAeM sUrakSita nidhi ke
rUpa meM, ATha karor3a se adhika vyApAra-dhaMdhe meM aura ATha karor3a se adhika
byAja ke rUpa meM na rakhane kA niyama liyA  /  500 haloM se ho sake, itanI
khetI ke lie jamIna rakhI  /  500 gAr3iyAM paradeza meM vyApAra ke lie, 500
gAr3iyAM bhAra | Dhone ke lie rakhakara isase adhika kA usa mahAmati ne tyAga
kiyaa| usane 4 bar3e jalayAna se adhika na rakhane kA bhI | niyama liyaa|
sAtaveM upabhogaparimANavrata meM usane 26 boloM meM se kucha boloM kI maryAdA
isa prakAra kI - 1. zarIra poMchane ke lie sugaMdhita kASAyavastra (tauliyA) ke
atirikta vastra kA, 2. mahur3e ke per3a ke hare datauna se atirikta datauna kA,
3. AMvale ke phala ke sivAya phala kA, 4. sahasrapAka aura zatapAka tela ke
sivAya anya tela lagAne kA, 5. gaMdhADhya | ke alAvA anya kisI vastu ko zarIra
para malane kA, 6. ATha uSTrikAoM (miTTI ke bar3e-bar3e ghar3oM) se adhika pAnI
| snAna ke lie istemAla karane kA, 7. do sUtI kapar3oM se adhika vastra kA, 8.
kesara, agara aura caMdana ke alAvA kisI vastu ke vilepana kA, 9. kamalajAtIya
puSpa ke atirikta puSpoM kI mAlA kA, 10. kAma ke AbhUSaNa aura nAmAMkita |
aMgUThI ke sivAya anya AbhUSaNoM kA, 11. turuSka ko chor3akara anya dhUpa kA,
12. iMdhana se garma kiye peyapadArtha ke | atirikta anya peya dravyoM kA, 13.
khAjA aura ghevara ke sivAya anya khAdyadravyoM kA, 14. kalaMbazAlI (eka kisma
ke | cAvala ) odana ke sivAya anya sabhI odanoM kA, 15. maTara, mUMga evaM
ur3ada kI dAla ke alAvA anya sabhI dAloM (sUpa) kA, 16. zaratkAlaniSpanna, gAya
ke ghI ke sivAya anya saba ghRtoM kA, 17. pAlaka aura maMDUkI ke zAka ke sivAya
213

Page #236 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Story of Chulani Pita From the Yogashastra, Third Illumination, Verse 86:
18. Except for tamarind and kokum, the renunciation of all other sour
substances. 19. Except for rainwater, the renunciation of all other drinking
water. 20. The renunciation of all mouth fresheners, except for the five types
of aromatic substances used in paan. After this, he renounced the five types of
harmful activities: Arta-dhyana (sorrowful contemplation), Raudra-dhyana
(wrathful contemplation), providing instruments for violence, indulgence in
carelessness, and teaching or encouraging sinful deeds. He also accepted the
four disciplinary vows. In this way, he properly and completely adopted the
layman's vows, free from all transgressions, along with right faith, from
Bhagavan Mahavira. After paying obeisance to the Bhagavan, he returned to his
home. There, he also informed his religious wife about the layman's vows he had
accepted. Desiring to adopt those layman's vows, his wife Shyama sought
permission from her husband Chulani Pita. Obtaining her husband's permission,
she immediately went to the religious chariot and, after paying reverence to the
Lord, also accepted the vows of the layman's dharma.  After she left, Ganadhara
Gautama Swami respectfully asked Bhagavan Mahavira, "Lord, will this Chulani
Pita accept the ascetic dharma?" Bhagavan replied, "He will not accept the
ascetic dharma. But, remaining devoted to the layman's dharma, upon the
completion of his lifespan, he will die and be born in the Saudharma celestial
realm. There, he will become a deity with a lifespan of four palya-prama. And
from there, after falling, he will attain a human birth in the Mahavideha region
and achieve the state of nirvana."  Towards the end of his life, Chulani Pita
handed over the responsibility of his home and family to his eldest son and,
renouncing everything, became absorbed in spiritual contemplation. Once, while
observing the Poshada vow in the Poshada hall, a deceitful, false-believing
deity came to him at night, with the intention of testing him. Assuming a
terrifying form and holding a naked sword in his hand, the deity began to roar
in a frightening voice, "O inauspicious beggar of a layman! What kind of
pretense of religion have you kept up? I command you to abandon this hypocrisy
of the layman's vows! If you do not give up this, I will cut your eldest son's
head into pieces like a pumpkin with this sword. And right before your eyes, I
will fry the pieces of his flesh in boiling oil and skewer them on a spit, and
then I will drink his blood."  Even after hearing this terrifying challenge from
the deity, Chulani Pita remained unmoved, just as a lion is not shaken by the
rumbling and roaring of clouds. Seeing Chulani Pita's unwavering state, the
cruel-souled deity repeatedly tried to frighten him by making terrifying
gestures, but Chulani Pita did not even look at the deity, as if he were not
even noticing a barking dog. Then, the merciless, cruel-hearted deity, in a
contrived manner, slaughtered Chulani Pita's eldest son like an animal with the
sword, and then cut him into pieces and threw them into a boiling oil pan. He
also started roasting some of the pieces on a griddle. When they were cooked, he
skewered them on sharp spits and began to eat them. The wise Chulani Pita
endured all this torment with equanimity. Indeed, the souls rich in the sense of
otherness do not feel the slightest pain even when their own limbs are cut off.
Seeing that Chulani Pita was not disturbed at all by his attempts, the deity
tried another ploy. Threatening him, the deity said, "Look! If you still do not
give up this hypocrisy of the vow, then I will also destroy your middle son in
the same way as your eldest." Saying this, he slaughtered the middle son as
well, and repeatedly laughed cruelly in front of Chulani Pita. But even this did
not agitate Chulani Pita. Then, grinding his teeth, the deity repeated his words
and also killed Chulani Pita's youngest son. Yet, seeing Chulani Pita's
unwavering state, the deity's anger doubled. Challenging him again, the deity
said, "O hypocrite of religion! If you still do not give up your hypocrisy, then
see! I will do the same to your mother Bhadra as well." Then, he created an
exact replica of Chulani Pita's mother, Bhadra, depicting her as afflicted,
wretched, and tear-stained, like a pitiful doe, and said, "Give up this vow!
This vow has brought the death warrant for your family!"

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 culanI pitA kI kathA yogazAstra tRtIya prakAza zloka 86 anya sAgoM kA, 18.
imalI aura kokama ke sivAya anya sabhI khaTAIyoM kA, 19. varSAjala ke alAvA anya
peyajala kA, 20. pAMca prakAra ke dravyoM se sugaMdhita tAMbUla ke sivAya anya
mukhavAsa kA tyAga kiyaa| isake bAda usane ArtadhyAna raudradhyAna, hiMsA ke
upakaraNapradAna, pramAdAcaraNa, pApakarmopadeza yA preraNA; ina paMcavidha
anarthadaMDoM kA tyAga kiyaa| cAra zikSAvrata bhI aMgIkAra kiye| isa prakAra
bhagavAna mahAvIra se samyaktvasahita samasta-aticAra rahita zrAvakavrata samyak
prakAra se grahaNa kiye aura bhagavAn ko namaskAra karake vaha apane ghara gyaa|
vahAM apanI dharmapatnI se bhI usane khuda ne aMgIkAra kiye hue zrAvakadharma kA
jikra kiyaa| patnI ne bhI una zrAvakavratoM ko grahaNa karane kI icchA se apane
pati culanIpitA se AjJA maaNgii| pati kI AjJA pAkara zyAmA usI samaya
dharmaratha meM baiThakara bhagavAn kI sevA meM pahuMcI aura usane bhI prabhu ko
vaMdanA-namaskAra karake zrAvakadharma ke vrata grahaNa kiye| usake cale jAne ke
bAda gaNadhara gautama svAmI ne bhagavAn mahAvIra se namaskAra karake vinaya
pUrvaka pUchA-'prabho! kyA yaha culanIpitA anagAradharma ko svIkAra karegA?'
bhagavAn ne kahA-'yaha anagAradharma ko aMgIkAra nahIM kregaa| paraMtu
zrAvakadharma meM hI tallIna hokara AyuSya pUrNa hone para marakara saudharma
devaloka meM utpanna hogaa| vahAM aruNAbhavimAna meM cAra palyopama kI sthiti
vAlA deva bnegaa| aura vahAM se cyava karake yaha mahAvidehakSetra meM manuSya
janma pAkara nirvANapada ko prApta kregaa| jIvana ke saMdhyAkAla meM culanIpitA
ne apane jyeSThaputra ko ghara aura parivAra kA sArA bhAra sauMpa diyA aura
svayaM nivRtta hokara dharmadhyAna meM rata rahane lgaa| eka bAra culanIpitA
pauSadhazAlA meM pauSadhavrata lekara AtmaciMtana meM lIna thaa| usa daurAna eka
mAyAvI mithyAtvI deva rAta ke samaya parIkSA kI dRSTi se usake pAsa AyA aura
vikarAla rUpa banAkara hAtha meM naMgI talavAra liye garjatI huI bhayaMkara
AvAja meM kahane lagA-'are! aniSTaka yAcaka zrAvaka! tUne yaha kyA dharma kA
DhoMgakara rakhA hai? maiM Adeza detA hUM-zrAvaka vrata kA yaha daMbha chor3a
de! agara tUM ise nahIM chor3egA, to tere isa talavAra se tere bar3e lar3ake ke
kuMhar3e ke samAna Tukar3e-Tukar3e kara duuNgaa| aura tere dekhate hI dekhate.
uske| mAMsa ke Tukar3e khaulate hue tela meM DAlakara talUMgA aura usI kSaNa
zUla meM bIMdhakara unheM khaauuNgaa| tathA usakA khUna | bhI tere sAmane hI
piiuuNgaa| jise dekhakara taM svayaM apane prANa choDa degaa| 'deva kI isa
prakAra kI bhayaMkara lalakAra sanakara bhI bAdaloM kI gar3agar3AhaTa evaM
garjanatarjana se jaise siMha kaMpAyamAna nahIM hotA, vaise culanIpitA bhI deva
kI siMhagarjanA bhIta nahIM haa| calanIpitA ko aDola dekhakara bAra-bAra
DarAvanI sarata banAkara DarAne ke lie dharmakriyA meM bAdhA detA rahA, magara
culanIpitA ne deva ke sAmane dekhA taka nahIM, jaise bhauMkate hue kutte ke
sAmane thI nahIM dekhtaa| isake bAda nirdaya krUrAtmA deva ne kRtrima rUpa se
banAye hue culanIpitA ke bar3e putra ko usake sAmane pazu kI taraha talavAra se
kATa ddaalaa| aura phira usake Tukar3e-Tukar3e karake dhadhakate hue tela kI
kar3AhI meM DAla diye| kucha Tukar3e tave para sekane lgaa| jaba ve paka gaye to
unheM tIkhe zUla se bIMdhakara vaha deva khAne lgaa| tattvajJa culanIpitA ne
yaha sArA upasarga (kaSTa) samabhAva se sahana kiyaa| saca hai, anyatvabhAvanA
ke dhanI AtmAoM ko apane aMga ko kATa DAlane para jarA bhI vyathA nahIM hotii|
deva ne dekhA ki yaha mere prayoga se jarA bhI vicalita na huA, taba usane
dUsarA dAva pheNkaa| deva ne dhamakI dete hue kahA-'dekha! aba bhI mAna jA merI
bAta aura chor3a de isa dharma ke pAkhaMDa ko! kyA dharA hai isa prakAra vyartha
kaSTa sahane meM? itane para bhI agara taM yaha vrata nahIM chor3egA to phira
maiM tere majhale putra ko bhI tere bar3e putra kI taraha khatma kara duuNgaa|'
yoM kahakara pahale kI taraha majhale putra ko bhI kATA aura bAra-bAra usake |
sammukha krUra aTTahAsya karane lagA, magara isase bhI culanIpitA kSubdha nahIM
huaa| phira dAMta kiTakiTAte hue deva ne apane vAkya doharAe aura usake choTe
putra ko bhI talavAra se ur3A diyaa| kintu phira bhI avicala dekhakara deva kA
krodha dugunA ho gyaa| deva ne phira cunautI dete hue kahA-'are dharma ke
DhoMgI! aba bhI tUM apanA pAkhaMDa nahIM chor3agA to dekha le! tere sAmane hI
terI mAtA kI bhI vahI gati kruuNgaa|' phira usane culanIpitA kI mAtA bhadrA kI-
sI hubahu pratikRti banAkara rugNadazA se pIr3ita, dIna-hIna, malinamukhI rotI
huI karuNa hiranI ke samAna use batAte hue kahA-'isa vrata ko tilAMjali de de!
yaha vrata tere parivAra ke prANanAza kA paravAnA lekara AyA hai! kyA tUM itanA
bhI nahIM samajhatA ki 214

Page #237 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Nature and Method of the Atithisambhaag Vrat  **The Story of Chulani
Pita**  "I have thrown your three sons into the jaws of death right before your
eyes. Even then, if you do not give up your stubbornness, I will kill your
mother, the Devaguru-like foundation of your lineage, and roast and cook her
flesh and eat it. This is my final warning." But even after seeing Chulani Pita
terrified, the Devata dragged Bhadra by her hair and showed her a scene like a
goat trembling and screaming loudly when it sees a butcher with a knife in his
hand in the slaughterhouse. The Devata was standing with a sword in his hand,
ready to kill Bhadra, and she was crying and screaming in heart-wrenching agony.
With this pitiful scene, the Devata again said to Chulani Pita, "Oh, selfish
glutton! Look at the state of your mother! The one who gave birth to you,
carried you in her womb, and bore your weight. That mother is being killed
today, and you are sitting here being selfish!" Chulani Pita thought to himself,
"This is some evil spirit like an Asura who is religiously devoted to evil. He
has already killed and eaten my three sons, and now he is ready to kill my
mother like a butcher. So, it is better to save my mother before he kills her."
With this thought, driven by his vow, Chulani Pita got up to catch the Devata
and roared loudly. Seeing this, the Devata became invisible and flew into the
sky, making a great sound. After the Devata left, there was silence. But hearing
the commotion, Bhadra Mata immediately ran there and asked, "Son! What was that?
Why were you shouting so loudly?" Chulani Pita narrated the whole incident.
Hearing this, Bhadra Mata said, "Son! This was Devmaya! Some Mithyadrishtidev
came to break your vow by showing you false fear. He has succeeded in his
mission. Therefore, you should criticize the breaking of your vow and purify
yourself by performing penance. If the breaking of the vow is not criticized,
the vow becomes impure due to transgression." Then, the pure-minded and non-
greedy Chulani Pita accepted his mother's words and purified himself by
criticizing the fault of breaking the vow. Then, like climbing the steps of the
palace of heaven, he gradually accepted eleven Shravak pratima (images). And
according to the words of the Bhagwan, he worshipped those eleven pratima with
unwavering intensity and strictness for a long time. Afterwards, the wise
Shravak took a lifelong fast with Sanlekhana, which he followed according to the
method of worship and left his body with Samadhi-maran. From there, after death,
Chulani Pita became a Devata named Arunaprab in the first Devalok. Just as
Chulani Pita worshipped the difficult-to-achieve vow of Paushdha, so too, anyone
who performs any other worship or practice will surely become a steadfast
Shravak and be eligible for liberation. This is the example of Chulani Pita's
vow-steadfastness!  **Atithisambhaag Vrat**  Now, regarding the fourth Shiksha
Vrat called Atithisambhaag, it is said:  **Verse 87:**  "Giving four types of
food, clothing, vessels, and houses to the Sadhus and Sadhvis is called the
fourth Shiksha Vrat, Atithisambhaag."  **Explanation:**  Atithi means one whose
arrival has no fixed date, whose festivals or celebrations are not fixed. Such
excellent Atithi are the Sadhus and Sadhvis. To share with them, that is, when
they come for alms during mealtime, to give them from the four types of food
that you have prepared for yourself, such as food, drink, edibles, and
delicacies, to give them vessels made of clay or wood, clothing or blankets to
wear, and a house to live in, and by implication, a mat, a rug, a stool, a bed,
etc., is the Atithisambhaag Vrat. This prohibits giving gold, etc., because
Sadhus are not allowed to keep it. In fact, giving such excellent and deserving
people what they need is called the Atithisambhaag Vrat. According to the
etymology of Atithisambhaag Vrat, it means this: Atithi means one who has no
fixed date, day, festival, or celebration. Such fortunate recipients of charity
are called Atithi - Sadhus and Sadhvis. Sambhaag means Samyak prakar = free from
the 42 faults like Aadhkarma, etc., and Vi means special type.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 atithisaMvibhAgavrata kA svarUpa aura vidhi yogazAstra tRtIya prakAza zloka 87
tere tInoM putroM ko maiMne tere dekhate hI dekhate mauta ke muMha meM jhoMka
diye| itane para bhI tUM apanA haTha nahIM chor3egA to tere | kula kI
AdhArabhUta devagurusamAna terI jananI ko mArakara usakA mAMsa bhunakara aura
pakAkara caTakara jaauuNgaa| yaha merI | aMtima cetAvanI hai|' paraMtu itane
para bhI culanIpitA ko bhayavihvala na dekhakara devatA ne bhadrA ko usakI coTI
pakar3akara ghasITA aura jaise katlakhAne meM kasAI ko churA hAtha meM liye
sAmane dekhakara bakarA kaMpita hokara jora-jora se cillAne lagatA hai, vaise hI
aisA dRzya dikhAyA ki mAtA bhadrA ke sAmane talavAra lekara mArane ko udyata ho
rahA hai, aura mAtA | bhadrA hRdayavidAraka karuNa rudana evaM citkArakara rahI
hai| isa dayanIya dRzya ke sAtha hI deva ne phira culanIpitA se kahAo svArthI
peTU ! apanI mAtA kI hAlata to dekha! jisane tujhe janma diyA hai, apane udara
meM rakhakara terA bhAra sahA hai| vaha mAM, Aja mArI jA rahI hai aura tUM
svArthI banakara baiThA hai! isa para culanIpitA ne mana hI mana socA - yaha |
paramAdhArmika asura ke samAna koI durAtmA hai, jo mere tIna putroM ko to
mArakara caTakara gayA hai aura aba merI mAtA ko | bhI kasAI ke samAna mArane
para tulA hai| ataH acchA to yaha hai ki isake mArane se pahale hI maiM apanI
mAM ko bacA luuN| isa vicAra se pauSadha se calita hokara culanIpitA deva ko
pakar3ane ke lie uThA aura jora se garjanA kii| yaha dekhate | hI deva mahAzabda
karatA huA adRzya hokara AkAza meM ur3a gyaa| usa devatA ke jAte hI vahAM
sannATA thaa| paraMtu usa kolAhala ko sunakara bhadrA mAtA turaMta daur3I huI
vahAM AyI aura pUchane lagI- beTA ! kyA bAta thI ? isa prakAra jora| jora se
kyoM cillA rahe the? culanIpitA ne sArI ghaTanA kaha sunAyI  /  sunakara
bhadramAtA ne kahA- putra ! yaha to devamAyA | thI! koI mithyAdRSTideva
jhUThamUTha bhaya dikhAkara tere pauSadhavrata ko bhaMga karane AyA thaa| vaha
apane kAma meM saphala ho  /  gayA  /  ataH tUM pauSadhavratabhaMga hone kI
AlocanA karake prAyazcitta lekara zuddha ho jA  /  vratabhaMga hone kI AlocanA
nahIM kI jAtI to aticAra se vrata malina ho jAtA hai| taba nirmalamati anAgrahI
culanIpitA ne mAtA ke vacana zirodhArya kiye aura vratabhaMga ke doSa kI AlocanA
karake zuddhi kii| phira svarga ke mahala ke sopAna para car3hane kI taraha
kramazaH gyAraha zrAvakapratimAe~ svIkAra kii| aura bhagavAn ke vacanAnusAra
akhaMDa tIkSNadhArA ke samAna dIrghakAla taka kaThora rUpa se una 11 pratimAoM
kI ArAdhanA kii| tatpazcAt buddhizAlI zrAvaka ne saMlekhanApUrvaka AjIvana
anazana kara liyA, jisakA | usane ArAdhanA vidhi pUrvaka pAlana kiyA aura
samAdhimaraNa sahita apanA zarIra chodd'aa| vahAM se marakara culanIpitA
prathama | devaloka meM aruNaprabha nAmaka deva bnaa| jisa prakAra culanIpitA ne
durArAdhya pauSadhavrata kI ArAdhanA kI thI, usI prakAra aura bhI jo koI
ArAdhanA-sAdhanA karegA, vaha dRDhavratI zrAvaka avazya hI mukti pAne kA
adhikArI bnegaa| yaha hai, | culanIpitA kI vratadRr3hatA kA namUnA !  /  /  86
/  /  aba atithisaMvibhAga nAmaka cauthe zikSAvrata ke saMbaMdha meM kahate haiM
/  258  /  dAnaM caturvidhA''hArapAtrA'cchAdanasadmanAm  /
atithibhyo'tithisaMvibhAgavratamudIritam  // 87 //  artha :- cAra prakAra kA
AhAra, vastra, pAtra, makAna Adi kalpanIya vastue~ sAdhu-sAdhviyoM ko dAna denA,
atithisaMvibhAga nAmaka cauthA zikSAvrata kahA hai ||87|| vyAkhyA :- atithi kA
artha hai--jisake Agamana kI koI niyata tithi na ho, jisake koI parva yA utsava
Adi niyata na hoM, aise utkRSTa atithi sAdhusAdhvI hai| unake lie saMvibhAga
karanA, yAnI jaba ve bhikSA ke lie bhojanakAla meM padhAreM to unheM apane liye
banAye hue azana, pAna, khAdya aura svAdya rUpa cAra prakAra ke AhAra meM se
dAna denA, tUmbe yA lakar3I Adi ke pAtra, oDhane ke lie vastra yA kaMbala aura
rahane ke lie makAna aura upalakSaNa se paTTA, bAjaura, caukI, paTar3A, zayyA
Adi kA dAna denA, atithisaMvibhAgavrata hai| isase svarNa Adi ke dAna kA niSedha
kiyA gayA hai, kyoMki sAdhu ko use rakhane kA vidhAna nahIM hai| vAstava meM
aise utkRSTa supAtra ko unakI AvazyakatAnusAra dAna | dene ko
atithisaMvibhAgavrata kahate haiN| atithisaMvibhAgavrata kI vyutpatti ke anusAra
isa prakAra artha hotA hai- atithi| yAnI jisake koI tithi, vAra, dina, utsava yA
parva nahIM hai aise mahAbhAgyazAlI dAnapAtra ko atithi- sAdhusAdhvI kahate
haiN| saMvibhAga meM sam kA artha hai - samyak prakAra = AdhAkarma Adi 42 doSoM
se rahita, vi-arthAt viziSTa prakAra se 215

Page #238 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Giving and receiving clothes, utensils, and shelter, like food, to sadhus and
sadhvis is important. This is explained in the Yoga Shastra, Third Light, verse
87, and in the section on "post-karma" and other defects. It means giving a
portion of what is due, i.e., the things that should be given, without any
defects. This is the meaning of the entire section on "Atithi-Sanvibhagat" - it
is a vow-rule to give a suitable portion of your food, water, clothes, utensils,
etc., to sadhus and sadhvis as a pure offering, provided that the food, water,
etc., are justly earned, are not "achitt" or "prasook" (not obtained by improper
means), are free from defects, are suitable for the sadhu, and are given with
respect, in the right place and time, with faith, and with the understanding
that it is for the benefit of both oneself and the soul. It is also said:
"Giving food, water, etc., that is justly earned and suitable for the sadhu,
with respect, in the right place and time, with faith, and with the
understanding that it is for the benefit of both oneself and the soul, is
"Atithi-Sanvibhagat." There are four things to consider in giving (Sanvibhagat):
the method, the object, the giver, and the receiver.  The receiver - the sadhu
community is the best receiver, they are those who live by begging, who are
restrained, they are the best receivers.  The giver - 16 of the 42 defects of
giving offerings are related to the giver. A pure giver is one who does not
prepare, cook, or buy anything for the sake of purity, out of sentimentality, or
for any other reason. The giver should not have any worldly or material desire,
name, or self-interest in giving offerings to the sadhu. The giver should not
give out of competition with anyone. The giver should not give out of shame, out
of seeing others give, or out of dislike, but should give with sincere faith and
devotion.  The object - the object that is given is considered pure if it is
"prasook," "achitt," suitable for the sadhu, and "eshniya" (free from defects).
It should be something that is prescribed in the scriptures for the sadhu
community as a means of religious practice, or it should be food that is
acceptable to the sadhu.  The method - the method of giving offerings should
also be free from defects. The offerings should be given to the sadhu community
in accordance with their own rules of conduct, free from the 42 defects of food,
etc. Only then can the offering be conducive to restraint and bring all
prosperity. Otherwise, offerings given or received in the wrong way will destroy
the brilliance of the monk.  Those who are fortunate and blessed are those who
respect the sadhu community and give them food, drink, delicious food, all kinds
of food, clothes that are beneficial for their restraint, utensils, blankets,
mats, places to live, beds, and other means of increasing restraint, with great
joy. Those who follow the teachings of Jinendra Bhagwan should give to sadhus
and sadhvis, according to their ability, even a small amount of what is suitable
for them, free from defects. And they should never use for themselves what they
have not given to them. If they are not very wealthy, they should still give a
small amount of their own living space, mats, beds, food, water, medicine,
clothes, utensils, etc., to sadhus and sadhvis.  The great sage Umaswati
Maharaj, in the "Prashmarati-Prakarana," verses 145-146, says: "Any object, such
as food, bed, clothes, utensils, and medicine, that is pure and suitable, can
become unsuitable due to some reason, and what is unsuitable can become suitable
due to some reason. An object can become suitable or unsuitable depending on the
place, time, person, situation, the giver (consumer), and the pure result. No
object is inherently suitable or unsuitable.  There is a doubt here: the
scriptures mention the name of the food-giver, and it is also heard, but the
name of the giver of clothes, etc., is not mentioned, nor is it heard, so how is
it proper to give clothes, etc.? In response to this, it is said: this is not
true. The giving of clothes, etc., is clearly stated in the Bhagavati Sutra,
etc. The passage is as follows: "The householder, who is a follower of the
Shramanas, lives by giving the Shramanas, who are Nigranthas, pure (prasook),
free from defects (eshniya), food, drink, delicious food, and all kinds of food,
clothes, utensils, blankets, mats, beds, and other things that are beneficial
for their restraint, and thus gains benefit." Therefore, just as food and water
are given, so also should things that are beneficial for restraint be given to
sadhus and sadhvis.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 sAdhusAdhvI ko AhAra kI taraha vastrapAtra-AvAsAdi dene evaM unake dvArA lene
kA mahattva yogazAstra tRtIya prakAza zloka 87 pazcAtkarma Adi doSa rahita,
bhAga-arthAt deya vastu meM se amuka aMza denaa| isa prakAra samagra
atithisaMvibhAgavata pada kA tAtparya yaha huA ki apane AhAra, pAnI, vastra,
pAtra Adi deya padArthoM meM se yathocita aMza sAdhusAdhviyoM ko nirdoSa bhikSA
ke rUpa meM dene kA vrata-niyama atithi-saMvibhAgavata hai, bazarte ki vaha
AhArapAnI Adi deya vastu nyAyopArjita ho, acitta yA prAsuka ho, doSarahita ho,
sAdhu ke lie kalpanIya ho; tathA deza, kAla, zraddhA aura satkArapUrvaka,
svaparaAtmA ke upakAra kI buddhi se sAdhu ko dI jAya! kahA bhI hai-nyAya se
kamAyA huA aura sAdhu ke lie kalpanIya AhAra-pAnI Adi padArtha deza, kAla,
zraddhA aura satkArapUrvaka uttama bhaktibhAvoM (zubha pariNAmoM) se yukta
hokara svaparakalyANa kI buddhi se saMyamI ko dAna karanA atithisaMvibhAgavata
hai| dAna (saMvibhAga) meM vidhi, dravya, dAtA aura pAtra cAra bAteM dekhanI
caahie| pAtra-sAdhuvarga rUpa utkRSTa pAtra ho, bhikSAjIvI ho, saMyamI ho vaha
utkRSTa supAtra hai| dAtA-deya bhikSA ke 42 doSoM meM se 16 utpAdana ke doSa
dAtA se hI lagate haiN| dAtA vahI zuddha ke nimitta se bhAvukatAvaza, koI cIja
AraMbha-samAraMbha pUrvaka taiyAra na karatA ho, na karavAtA ho, na pakAtA ho,
na kharIdakara lAtA ho| sAdhu ko bhikSA dene ke pIche usakI koI laukika yA
bhautika kAmanA, nAmanA yA svArthalipsA na ho; vaha kisI ke sAtha pratispardhA
kI bhAvanA se na detA ho| zarmAzI, dekhAdekhI yA aruci se nahIM, balki utkaTa
zraddhAbhakti pUrvaka dAna detA ho| dravya-deya dravya-padArtha vahI zuddha
kahalAtA hai, jo prAsuka, acita, sAdhu ke lie kalpanIya evaM eSaNIya ho;
sAdhuvarga ke lie jo dharmopakaraNa ke rUpa meM zAstra meM vihita hai yA jo
khAdyapadArtha sAdhu ke lie grAhya hai| . vidhi-bhikSA dene kI vidhi bhI nirdoSa
honI cAhie, sAdhuvarga kI apanI AcAramaryAdA ke anurUpa unheM AhArAdi ke 42
doSoM se rahita bhikSA dI jAye, tabhI saMyamapoSaka aura sarvasaMpatkArI bhikSA
ho sakatI hai| anyathA galata vidhi se dI gayI yA lI gayI bhikSA to bhikSu kI
tejasvitA ko hI samApta kara detI hai| vahI bhAgyazAlI dhanya hai jo sAdhuvarga
kA sammAna karatA hai, azana, pAna, khAdima-svAdima rUpa samagra AhArasAmagrI;
unake saMyama ke lie hitakara vastra, pAtra, kaMbala, Asana, nivAsa ke lie
sthAna, paTTe, caukI Adi saMyamavRddhi ke sAdhana atyaMta prItipUrvaka
sAdhusAdhviyoM ko detA hai| jinendra bhagavAn ke AjJApAlaka suzrAvakoM ko cAhie
ki ve sAdhusAdhviyoM ko unake lie kalpanIya, eSaNIya, nirdoSa vastu apanI zakti
ke anusAra alpa mAtrA meM bhI de| aura unheM na dI huI vastu kadApi apane kArya
meM istamAla na kre| apane rahane ke lie sthAna, Asana, zayyA, AhArapAnI,
auSadha, vastra; pAtra Adi upakaraNa svayaM adhika saMpattivAn na ho, to unameM
se svalpamAtrA meM hI sahI, sAdhusAdhviyoM ko dene caahie| vAcakamukhya zrI
umAsvAtijI mahArAja prazamarati-prakaraNa gAthA 145-146 meM kahate haiM'nirdoSa,
zuddha evaM kalpanIya AhAra, zayyA, vastra, pAtra aura auSadha Adi koI bhI vastu
kAraNavaza akalpanIya bhI ho jAtI hai aura jo akalpanIya hai, vaha kAraNavaza
kalpanIya bhI ho jAtI hai| deza, kAla, puruSa, paristhiti, upadhAtA (upabhoktA)
aura zuddhapariNAma ko lekara koI vastu kalpanIya ho jAtI hai aura koI
akalpanIya ho jAtI hai| ekAMta rUpa se koI bhI vastu kalpya yA akalpya nahIM
hotii| yahAM zaMkA hotI hai ki zAstra meM AhAra-dAtA kA nAma to prasiddha hai,
sunA bhI jAtA hai paraMtu vastrAdi-dAtA kA nAma na prasiddha hai, na sunA hI
jAtA hai, to vastrAdi denA kaise ucita hai? isakA samAdhAna karate hue kahate
haiM-yaha kahanA yathArtha nahIM hai| zrI bhagavatIsUtra Adi meM vastrAdi kA
dAna denA spaSTataH batAyA gayA hai| vaha pATha isa prakAra hai-samaNe NiggaMthe
phAsueNaM esaNijjeNaM asaNa-pANa-khAima-sAimeNaM, vattha-paDiggaha-kaMbala-
pAyapuMchaNeNaM pIDhaphalaga-sejjAsaMthAraeNaM paDilAbhemANe vihri| arthAt-
zramaNopAsaka gRhastha zramaNanigraMthoM ko acitta (prAsuka), eSaNIya (nirdoSa)
azana, pAna, khAdya aura svAdha rUpa cAra prakAra kA AhAra-pAnI, vastra, pAtra,
kaMbala, rajoharaNa, paTTA, caukI, zayyA, saMstAraka (bichaunA) Adi dAna dekara
lAbha letA huA jIvana yApana karatA hai| isalie AhAra-pAnI kI taraha saMyama ke
216

Page #239 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Giving and receiving food, vessels, and shelter to sadhus and sadhvis is
important, as explained in the Yoga Shastra, Third Light, verse 87, the
foundation pillar. Clothes and other things that benefit the body should be
given to sadhus. For the purpose of consuming grass (filling the stomach), to
prevent the consumption of fire (instead of using fire for warmth), for the
practice of Dharma and Shukla meditation, to alleviate the suffering of a sick
sadhu, to dispose of a deceased sadhu, and so on, clothes are helpful and
beneficial in observing restraint. The same is said elsewhere. The learned
scholar, Shri Umaswati, has also said, "Without clothes, a sadhak is disturbed
by cold, wind, sun, dust, mosquitoes, etc., which leads to distractions in their
samyaktva and samyak meditation." For these and similar reasons, vessels are
also considered useful. They are helpful in bringing food as alms, separating
impure food from alms, preventing the killing of living beings by avoiding food
containing them, and safely and easily collecting and disposing of spoiled rice
or water that may accidentally be included in alms. It is also said that
Jinendra Bhagwan instructed the use of vessels to protect the six-bodied beings,
and they should be used to prevent food and water from falling and causing harm
to living beings. The service of food, water, etc., to the sick, children,
elderly, new sadhus, those who wear clothes, the great gurus, those who are
intolerant, those who live alone, and those who are without attainment, can only
be done if they have vessels. (O. Ni. 691-92) Because there is no restraint
involved in bringing food and other things in a vessel.  Here, the question
arises: It is not heard that the Tirthankaras used clothes or vessels, so
shouldn't their followers follow their character? It is also said, "Jarisan
Guruling Sissen Vi Tarisen Hoyavvan," meaning the disciple should follow the
conduct of the guru. In response, it is said that the hands of the Tirthankaras
are free from holes, and not even a drop of water falls from them. Instead,
their hair rises high, reaching the sun and moon. They, with the power of their
four or five knowledges, know perfectly well whether the food is contaminated
with living beings or not, and whether the water contains living beings or not,
and they only consume what is pure. Therefore, it is not beneficial for them to
use vessels. It is said that all Tirthankaras wear clothes during their
initiation. All twenty-four Tirthankaras take initiation with one devadusya,
which does not categorize them as belonging to another linga, the householder
linga, or the kula linga. (A. Ni. 217) The great sages have said that all the
Tirthankaras who have been in the past, who will be in the future, and who are
currently wandering, all preach the Dharma with clothes and vessels, and they
all take initiation wearing one devadusya cloth. I worship all of them who have
taken initiation, who will take initiation, and who have taken initiation. After
taking initiation, they endure all the hardships and afflictions, so they no
longer need clothes. If their clothes are lost somehow, they do not take them
again. The statement that a disciple should follow the conduct of the guru
should be understood in this context. It is like a common elephant imitating the
Airavata elephant. A sadhak who wants to imitate the Tirthankaras cannot live in
a monastery, residence, or shelter, cannot consume food that is partially cooked
due to circumstances, cannot get an oil massage when sick, cannot use a grass
mat or keep grass, cannot keep a kamandal, cannot live with many sadhus, cannot
preach while being a recluse, and cannot initiate sadhus and sadhvis (make
disciples). Because the Tirthankaras stay away from all these things. But those
so-called sadhus who want to imitate the Tirthankaras do all these things.
During the rainy season, if a sadhu goes outside to a field or somewhere else,
and it starts raining, a blanket is necessary to protect aquatic living beings.
If a young, old, or sick sadhu has to go out for alms during the rainy season,
wearing a blanket on their body prevents the killing of aquatic living beings.
If they have to go outside during the rainy season for urination or defecation,
wearing a blanket prevents the killing of aquatic living beings. Here, the
question arises: If they don't wear a blanket and use an umbrella to cover
themselves while walking in the rain, what is the fault? The solution is given
in the Agam scripture, "Chattass Dharanattha" (Das. 3/4), which states that
using an umbrella is inappropriate.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 sAdhusAdhvI ko AhAra kI taraha vasapAtra-AvAsAdi dene evaM unake dvArA lene kA
mahattva yogazAstra tRtIya prakAza zloka 87 mAdhArastaMbha. zarIra ke upakAraka
vastra Adi sAdha ko dene caahie| ghAsa grahaNa karane (bharane) ke lie,
agnisevana ke nivAraNArtha (Aga tApane kI aivaja meM), dharmadhyAnazukladhyAna
kI sAdhanA ke lie, glAna sAdhu kI pIDA-nivAraNArtha, mRta sAdhu ko pariThAne ke
lie; ityAdi saMyamapAlana meM vastra sahAyaka-upakAraka hai| yahI bAta anyatra
bhI kahI hai| vAcakavarya zrI umAsvAti ne bhI kahA hai-'vastra ke binA ThaMDa,
havA, dhUpa, DAMsa, macchara Adi se vyAkula sAdhaka ke samyaktva Adi meM va
samyag dhyAna karane meM vikSepa hotA hai|' ye aura aise hI kAraNoM se vastra kI
taraha pAtra ko bhI upayogI bhI batAyA hai| bhikSA ke rUpa meM AhAra lAne meM,
azuddha AhAra Adi bhikSA meM A jAya to usameM se nikAlakara pariThAne meM jIvoM
se yukta AhAra se hotI jIvavirAdhanA rokane ki lie, asAvadhAnIvaza kadAcit
bhikSA meM koI sar3e gale cAvaloM Adi kA osAmaNa yA pAnI A gayA ho to unheM
sukhapUrvaka (AsAnI se) yatanA se pAtra meM lekara paraThane hetu pAtra kA
rakhanA lAbhadAyaka hai| kahA bhI hai-jinezvara bhagavAna ne SaTkAya ke jIvoM kI
rakSA ke lie pAtra rakhane kI AjJA dI aura AhAra-pAnI Adi nIce girane aura jIva
virAdhanA hone se bacAne ke lAbha kI dRSTi se unheM pAtra grahaNa karanA caahie|
rogI. bAlaka. vaddha. navIna sAdha. pAhane sAdha. garumahArAja. asahiSNa
sAdhavarga. eka hI rahane vAle labdhi rahita sAdhuvarga ityAdi kI AhAra-pAnI Adi
se sevA pAtra rakhane para hI ho sakatI hai| (o. ni. 691-92) kyoMki pAtra meM
AhArAdi vastue~ grahaNa karake lAne meM kisI prakAra kA asaMyama nahIM hotaa| *
yahAM prazna hotA hai ki tIrthakaroM ne vastra-pAtra kA paribhoga kiyA ho, aisA
sunane meM nahIM AtA isalie unake anugAmI ziSyoM ko unake caritra kA anusaraNa
karanA ucita hai! kahA bhI hai-jArisaM guruliMga sisseNa vi tAriseNa hoyavvaM
yAnI jaisA guru kA liGga-AcaraNa ho, vaisA hI AcaraNa usake ziSya kA honA cAhie?
isake uttara meM kahate haiM-zrItIrthakara paramAtmA kA hAtha chidra rahita hotA
hai, usameM se pAnI kI eka bUMda bhI nahIM girtii| apitu usakI zikhA sUrya
caMdra taka UMcI bar3hatI jAtI hai| ve apane cAra yA pAMca jJAna ke bala se jIva
saMsakta yA jIva rahita AhAra tathA trasajIva rahita yA trasajIva sahita pAnI ko
bhalIbhAMti jAnakara jo nirdoSa ho, use hI grahaNa karate haiN| isa kAraNa unake
lie pAtra Adi kA grahaNa karanA (rakhanA) lAbhadAyaka nahIM hai| vastra to sabhI
tIrthaMkaroM ke dIkSAkAla meM grahaNa karane kA kahA hai| caubIsoM tIrthakara
eka devadUSya sahita dIkSA lete haiM, isase ve anyaliMga meM, gRhastha liMga meM
yA kuliMga meM parigaNita nahIM hote| (A. ni. 217) paramamaharSiyoM ne yaha kahA
hai ki bhUtakAla meM jo tIrthakara ho cuke haiM, bhaviSyakAla meM jo hone vAle
haiM aura vartamAnakAla meM jo vicaraNa kara rahe haiM, ve sabhI vastra-pAtra
yukta dharma kA upadeza dene vAle hone se eka devadRSyavastra dhAraNa karake
dIkSA grahaNa karate haiM, dIkSA grahaNa kareMge aura dIkSA grahaNa kI thI, una
sabakI maiM paryupAsanA karatA huuN| dIkSA lene ke bAda samasta pariSahoM aura
upasargo kI pIr3A ko ve sahana karate haiM, isalie phira unheM vastra kI
AvazyakatA nahIM rhtii| kisI prakAra se vaha vastra calA jAtA hai to phira ve
usako grahaNa nahIM krte| ziSya ko guru ke AcaraNa kA anusaraNa karanA cAhie,
aisA jo kahA gayA hai, vaha isI dRSTi se kahA gayA samajhanA caahie| yaha to
vaisA hI hai jaise koI sAmAnya hAthI airAvata hAthI kA anukaraNa kre|
tIrthaMkara kA anukaraNa karane kA icchuka sAdhaka maTha, vasati yA upAzraya meM
nivAsa karanA, kAraNavaza AdhAkarmI AhAra kA sevana karanA, bImArI meM tela kI
mAliza karanA, ghAsa kI caTAI yA ghAsa rakhanA, kamaMDala rakhanA, bahuta-se
sAdhuoM ke sAtha rahanA, chadmastha hote hue bhI upadeza denA, sAdhu-sAdhvI ko
dIkSA denA (ziSya-ziSyA banAnA) Adi sabhI kArya nahIM kara sakatA, kyoMki
tIrthakara to ina sabhI se dUra rahate haiN| paraMtu tIrthaMkara kA anukaraNa
karane vAle ve tathAkathita sAdhu to ina sabakA AcaraNa karate hI hai| varSAkAla
meM sAdhu sthaMDilabhUmi yA anyatra kahIM bAhara gayA ho, usa samaya varSA A
jAya to jala-kAyika jIvoM kI rakSA ke lie kaMbalI Avazyaka hotI hai| bAla,
vRddha yA rugNa sAdhu ke lie varSA ke samaya bhikSArtha jAnA par3e to zarIra
para kaMbalI or3ha lene se jalakAyika jIvoM kI virAdhanA nahIM hotii| laghuzaMkA
yA bar3I zaMkA ke lie barasAta ke samaya bAhara jAnA par3e to kaMbalI or3ha lene
se jala-jIvoM kI virAdhanA ruka jAtI hai| yahAM prazna hotA hai ki kaMbalI na
or3hakara yadi varSA ke samaya chAtA lagA le aura chAte se zarIra ko Dhakakara
cale to kauna-sA doSa lagatA hai? isakA samAdhAna karate haiM-'chattassa
dhAraNaTThAe' (daza. 3/4) isa prakAra ke Agamavacana ke anusAra chatra dhAraNa
karanA anAcIrNa 217

Page #240 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The method of offering food to the श्रमणोपासक The third light of Yoga Shastra,
verse 87, states that it is forbidden. Rajoharan is useful for the direct
protection of life, so there is no dispute about keeping it. Mukhavastrika, or
'muhpatti', is also useful for protecting against flying (sampaatim) creatures,
for protecting external air-bodied creatures from the hot air coming out of the
mouth, and for preventing the entry of dust particles, etc. into the mouth. The
mat and the stool are useful because it is forbidden to sleep on the ground
during the rainy season, which is full of नीलण-फूलण, कुंथुआ, etc. Therefore, it
is useful to sleep or sit on a mat or stool. The bedspreads, etc., are useful
for sleeping in the cold and hot seasons. Residence in a dwelling (house) or
shelter, etc., is also very beneficial for the restraint of the sadhu. "Whoever
gives a house (dwelling), shelter, etc., to the fortunate, multi-virtuous Muni,
understand that he has given everything, food, water, clothes, bedding, seat,
etc. Where all the Munis use that dwelling (house), in that shelter, there is
protection of oneself and one's character, and the practice of knowledge,
meditation, etc., is easy. Therefore, it is believed that the giver of the
dwelling (house) has given everything. He who protects the Munis from cold,
heat, thieves, dance, mosquitoes, rain, etc., attains heavenly bliss. In this
way, there is no fault in the Munis keeping other, more and auxiliary religious
articles. The giver alone benefits. The number-limit of the instruments is
stated: "Twelve types of instruments are allowed for the Jinakalp, fourteen
types for the sthavirakalp Muni, and twenty-five types for the Arya (sadhvi).
Keeping more than this is called an auxiliary. (O. Ni. 671) All this should be
known from the Agamas like Pindaniyukti and Aghananiyukti. Here, for fear of the
text becoming lengthy, we stop the pen by saying so much." Here, the elders
(sthaviras) state the Samachari (the code of conduct for the Shravak): "Before
the Shravaks take the parana (complete) after taking the poshadh, if the sadhu-
sadhvi are present, they should be invited first and then the food should be
offered. The method is that when it is time for your meal, you should be well-
dressed and go to the shelter and request the sadhus to benefit from the food
and water. What is the limit of the sadhu at that time? It is stated: One sadhu
should quickly take the palle (padle), another the mukhavastrika, and the third
should quickly take the vessels; so that the poshadhopavashi Shravak does not
have to delay or obstruct the parana. Or, take care that no establishment fault
is incurred due to the sadhus. If the Shravak requests food in the first watch
(paursi) and the sadhu refuses till the naukarsi, then take the food. If the
sadhu does not refuse till the naukarsi, but does refuse till the paursi, then
do not take it; because that food will have to be kept. If the Shravak requests
very strongly, then take the food, bring it to the place, keep it well, and give
that food to the sadhu who is going to take the parana as soon as the paursi
(one watch) refusal is complete, or give it to another sadhu. Before the sadhu
goes for alms, he should take the vessels, palle, etc. At least two sadhus
should go for alms; it is not proper for a single sadhu to go for alms. On the
way, the Shravak should walk ahead of the sadhu; and he should take the sadhu to
his house. There, he should request the sadhus to take a seat; if they sit, it
is good, if they do not sit, then one should know and practice the conduct of
humility. When the sadhu Muni comes to the house, the Shravak should himself
offer them food and water with his own hands and benefit from it. If someone
else is offering food in the house, then stand with the food vessel until the
Gurudev takes the food. The sadhu should also take care that there is no fault
in the aftermath of the alms, i.e., no fault later, so he should not take all
the food in the householder's vessel; he should leave some behind. After that,
he should bow to the Gurus, walk with them for a few steps, take them to their
destination, and then eat himself. If there is no yoga of the sadhu Muni in that
village, then at the time of eating, look in the direction of the arrival of the
sadhu Muni and think with pure intention that 'If the sadhu Bhagvant were here,
I would be fulfilled by offering them food.' This is the method of taking the
poshadh (complete). Even if the poshadh has not been taken, the knowledgeable
Shravak-Shravika gives something or the other to the sadhu-sadhvi every day and
then eats. Or, they give alms even after eating. There are some verses in this
regard, the meaning of which is presented here. 218

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zramaNopAsaka kI AhAra vahorAne kI vidhi yogazAstra tRtIya prakAza zloka 87
hone se vaha varjita hai| rajoharaNa to pratyakSa jIvarakSA ke lie pratilekhanA
karane meM upayogI hone se usake rakhane meM to koI vivAda hI nahIM kara sktaa|
mukhavastrikA yAnI 'muhapattI' bhI ur3ane vAle (saMpAtima) jIvoM se bacAva ke
lie (rakSArtha) aura muMha se nikalatI huI garma havA se bAhara ke vAyukAyika
jIvoM kI rakSA ke lie tathA mukha meM rajakaNa Adi kA praveza rokane ke lie
upayogI hai| paTTe aura caukI isalie upayogI hai ki varSAkAla meM nIlaNa-
phUlaNa, kuMthuA Adi |saMsakta jIvoM se yukta jamIna para zayana karane kA
niSedha hone se paTTa, caukI Adi para sonA-baiThanA upayogI hai| zItaka aura
grISmakAla meM zayyAsaMstAraka (Asana) Adi zayana ke lie upayogI hote haiN|
vasati (makAna) yA upAzraya Adi meM nivAsasthAna bhI sAdhu ke saMyamapAlana ke
lie atyaMta upakArI hai| 'jo bhAgyazAlI anekaguNadhAraka munivaroM ko Thaharane
ke lie makAna (vasati), upAzraya Adi detA hai, samajha lo, usane anna, pAnI,
vastra, zayana, Asana Adi saba kucha de diyA hai| jahAM rahakara sabhI munigaNa
usa vasati (makAna) kA upayoga karate haiM, usa upAzraya meM apanI evaM apane
cAritra kI bhI surakSA hotI hai, usameM jJAna, dhyAna Adi kI sAdhanA sukara hotI
hai| isa kAraNa se vasati (makAna) dene vAle ne saba kucha de diyA, aisA mAnA
jAtA hai| sardI, garmI, cora, DAMsa, macchara, varSA Adi se muniyoM kI surakSA
karane vAlA svargasukha ko hastagata kara letA hai| isa prakAra dUsare bhI
adhika aura aupagrahika dharmopakaraNoM ke rakhane meM muniyoM ko doSa nahIM
hai| unake dAtA ko ekAMta rUpa se lAbha hI hai| upakaraNoM kI saMkhyA-maryAdA
batAte haiM-'jinakalpI ke lie 12 prakAra ke, sthavirakalpImuni ke lie 14 prakAra
ke aura AryA (sAdhvI) ke lie 25 prakAra ke upakaraNa rakhane kI anujJA dI hai|
isase adhika rakhanA upagraha kahalAtA hai| (o. ni. 671) yaha sArI bAta
piMDaniyukti aura aughaniyukti Adi AgamoM se jAna lenaa| yahAM graMtha vistRta
ho jAne ke bhaya se itanA hI kahakara lekhanI ko virAma dete haiN|' yahAM
vRddhoM (sthaviroM) dvArA ukta sAmAcArI (zrAvaka kI AcArasaMhitA) batAte
haiM-'zrAvakoM ko pauSadha pArita (pUrNa) karake pAraNA karane se pahale sAdhu-
sAdhvI virAjamAna hoM to unheM pahale avazya nimaMtrita kara vahorAnA cAhie,
phira AhAra karanA caahie| usakI vidhi yaha hai ki jaba apane bhojana kA samaya
ho taba vastrAdi se acchI taraha susajjita hokara upAzraya meM jAkara sAdhuoM ko
AhArapAnI kA lAbha dene ke lie vinati kre| usa samaya sAdhu kI kyA maryAdA hai?
yaha batAte haiM-eka sAdhu palle (paDale) kA zIghra pratilekhana kare, dUsarA
mukhavastrikA kA aura tIsarA pAtroM kA jhaTapaTa pratilekhana kare; jisase
pauSadhopavAsI zrAvaka ko pAraNe meM vilaMba yA aMtarAya na ho| athavA sAdhuoM
ke nimitta se | sthApanAdoSa na laga jAya, isakI sAvadhAnI rkhe| yadi zrAvaka
prathama prahara (paurasI) meM AhAra ke lie prArthanA karatA ho aura sAdhu ke
naukArasI taka ke pratyAkhyAna ho to AhAra grahaNa kara le, yadi naukArasI taka
pratyAkhyAna na ho kintu paurasI taka ke ho to grahaNa na kare; kyoMki usa AhAra
ko saMbhAlakara rakhanA pdd'egaa| yadi zrAvaka bahuta jora dekara vinati karatA
hai to AhAra lekara use sthAna para lAkara acchI taraha saMbhAlakara rakha de
aura jo sAdhu paurasI (eka prahara taka) pratyAkhyAna pUrA hote hI pAranA karane
vAlA ho use vaha AhAra de de, athavA dUsare sAdhu ko de de| sAdhu bhikSA ke lie
jAne se pUrva pAtra, palle Adi kA pratilekhana kara le| bhikSA ke lie kama se
kama do sAdhu jAe~, akele sAdhu kA bhikSArtha jAnA ucita nhiiN| mArga meM
zrAvaka sAdhu ke Age-Age cale; aura vaha sAdhu ko apane ghara le jaaeN| vahAM
sAdhuoM ko Asana grahaNa karane kI prArthanA kare; yadi ve baiThe to ThIka hai,
na baiThe to bhI vinaya kA AcaraNa-vyavahAra karanA aura jAnanA caahie| sAdhu
munirAja ke ghara padhAra jAne para zrAvaka svayaM apane hAtha se unheM AhAra
pAnI dekara lAbha le| yadi |ghara meM dUsarA koI AhAra de rahA ho to svayaM
AhAra kA bartana lekara taba taka khar3A rahe; jaba taka gurudeva AhAra na |
leN| sAdhu ko bhI cAhie ki bhikSA meM pazcAtkarma-arthAt bAda meM doSa na lage,
isalie gRhastha ke bartana meM sArI kI sArI vastu na le; kucha zeSa rkhe| usake
bAda guruoM ko vaMdana karake kucha kadama taka unake sAtha calakara unheM
pahuMcAkara Aye, phira svayaM bhojana kre| yadi usa gAMva meM sAdhumunirAja kA
yoga na hoto bhojana ke samaya sAdhumunirAjoM ke Ane kI dizA meM dRSTi kare aura
vizuddhabhAva se ciMtana kare ki 'yadi sAdhu-bhagavaMta hote to maiM unheM AhAra
dekara kRtArtha hotA/ hotii|' yaha pauSadha ko pArita (pUrNa) karane kI vidhi
hai| agara pauSadha na kiyA ho to bhI sujJazrAvaka-zrAvikA pratidina
sAdhusAdhviyoM ko kucha na kucha dAna dekara phira bhojana karate haiN| athavA
bhojana karane ke bAda bhI dAna dete haiN| isa saMbaMdha meM kucha zloka haiM,
jinakA artha yahAM prastuta kiyA jAtA hai 218

Page #241 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Importance of Giving Food and Other Donations to Shramanopasakas (Jain
Ascetics)  Yoga Shastra, Third Light, Verse 87: It is said that for
Shramanopasakas, only those things that are suitable for Sadhus and Sadhvis and
that are helpful for Dharma, restraint, and self-control should be given as
donations, such as food, clothing, and water. Gold, silver, and other things
that are not helpful for Dharma, which increase lust, anger, greed, ego, and
destroy character, should never be given to Sadhus and Sadhvis. Compassionate
people do not praise the donation of land that results in the destruction of
many living beings. Why would a Shravak donate iron in the form of weapons that
cause great violence? Who would be happy with the donation of sesame seeds, in
which countless unconscious and suffering living beings are constantly born and
die? Alas, on the occasion of worldly festivals, those who donate a pregnant cow
that is about to die, seeking to earn merit, are called religious. Those who
consider the cow, whose anus is considered to be a place of pilgrimage and who
eats impure substances from her mouth, to be supremely holy, donate cows for the
sake of religion. What merit will be gained by donating a cow whose calf suffers
greatly when she is milked and who destroys animals with her hooves? What fruit
will be obtained by those who donate golden, silver, sesame, and ghee cows? A
daughter, who is like a fire that burns the tree of brotherly love, which
creates attachment, is like the key to the door of hell, like the bolt on the
door of liberation, who steals religious wealth and brings misfortune, is given
in marriage, and it is said that this daughter donation is for the sake of
welfare. Is this a scripture? At the time of marriage, foolish people give
clothes, ornaments, etc., as donations to the bride and groom, not from the
perspective of worldly love, but from the perspective of Dharma. Should these be
considered to be Dharma-enhancing? In reality, such a donation made with Dharma-
consciousness should be considered like pouring ghee into ashes. Those who, on
the occasion of festivals like Sankranti, Vyatipat, Vaidhriti, Purnima,
Amavasya, etc., fill their stomachs and are greedy, and who extort donations
from their emotional patrons, are simply engaged in a business of cheating
innocent people. Those who, with a dull mind, donate in the name of their
deceased relatives, seeking to satisfy them, are like watering a dry tree with
the hope that new leaves will sprout. If feeding Brahmanas in this world
satisfies the ancestors in the afterlife, then why doesn't eating one person's
food satisfy or nourish another? If the donation given by a son liberates his
deceased father, then the son should perform austerities, and as a result, his
father should also be liberated. If donating to the Ganges River or Gaya and
other pilgrimage sites liberates ancestors, then one should water a withered
tree to make green leaves sprout. In this world, one should not give anything to
a beggar, who is a slave to his past karma, with the idea of Dharma or merit. In
reality, merit or Dharma comes from donating things that are character-enhancing
and conducive to self-control to such a renunciant.  And merit or fortune must
be strong, only then will someone receive something. If there is no merit, then
asking or begging from anyone is in vain. It is a great wonder that by making an
idol of gold or silver and making a vow, that deity will protect you. Because
when the moments of life are complete, no deity can protect anyone. Whether it
is a big bull or a big goat, if you give it to a meat-eating Shrotriya Brahmana,
then both the giver and the receiver will fall into the hellish abyss. A donor
who gives with Dharma-consciousness, not knowing, may not be entangled in that
sin, but the meat-eating receiver, knowing the fault, is certainly entangled in
that sin. He who nourishes the worthy by killing the unworthy is like one who
pleases a serpent by killing many frogs. The Jineshwars say that one should not
give gold, etc., to renunciant men. Therefore, a wise and intelligent person
should give only the appropriate food, etc., as a donation to the worthy.  Those
who are adorned with the three jewels of knowledge, vision, and character, who
are the guardians of the five committees and the three secrets, who are capable
of bearing the burden of the great vow, who have conquered the enemy forces of
the obstacles and the hardships, who are great warriors, Sadhus and Sadhvis, who
do not even have attachment to their own bodies, how can they have attachment to
other things? Renouncing all possessions except those that are helpful for
Dharma, living on alms, free from the 42 faults, taking food only to sustain the
body for the journey of Dharma, practicing celibacy, these are the ones who are
worthy of receiving donations.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zramaNopAsaka ke lie sAdhusAdhviyoM ko AhArAdi dAna dene kA mahattva yogazAstra
tRtIya prakAza zloka 87 'zramaNopAsaka ke lie anna, vastra, jala Adi
sAdhusAdhviyoM ke yogya evaM dharmasahAyaka-saMyamopakAraka vastuoM kA hI dAna
dene ko kahA gayA hai; sonA, cAMdI Adi jo vastueM dharmasahAyaka na hoM, jinake
dene se kAma, krodha, lobha, ahaMkAra Adi bar3he, cAritra kA nAza ho, aisI
vastue~ sAdhusAdhviyoM ko kadApi nahIM denI caahie| jisa jamIna ko khodane se
aneka jIvoM kA saMhAra hotA hai, aisI pRthvI ke dAna kI karuNAparAyaNa loga
prazaMsA nahIM krte| jina zastroM se mahAhiMsA hotI hai, una zastroM ke kAraNa
rUpa lohe kA dAna zrAvaka kyoM karegA? jisameM hamezA aneka samUrchima trasajIva
svataH paidA hote haiM aura marate haiM. aise tila ke dAna kI anamodanA kauna
karegA? aphasosa hai. laukika parvo ke avasara para puNyArjanahetu mauta ke
muMha meM par3I huI ardhaprasUtI gAya jo dAna karatA hai, use dhArmika kahA jAtA
hai| jisakI gudA meM anekoM tIrtha mAne haiM, jo mukha se azucipadArtho kA
bhakSaNa karatI hai, usa gau ko paramapavitra mAnane vAle ajJAnI dharma ke hetu
go dAna karate haiN| jisa gAya ko duhate samaya, sadA usakA bachar3A atyaMta
pIr3ita hotA hai aura jo apane khura Adi se jaMtuoM kA vinAza kara DAlatI hai,
usa gAya kA dAna dene se bhalA kauna-sA puNya hogA? svarNamayI, rajatamayI,
tilamayI aura ghRtamayI vibhinna gAyeM banAkara dAna dene vAle ko bhalA kyA
phala milegA? kAmAsakti paidA karane vAlI, baMdhusneha rUpI vRkSa ko jalAne ke
lie dAvAnala ke samAna, kaliyuga kI kalpalatA, durgati ke dvAra kI kuMjI ke
samAna, mokSadvAra kI argalA ke tulya, dharmadhana kA haraNa karane vAlI, Aphata
paidA karane vAlI kanyA kA dAna diyA jAtA hai; aura kahA jAtA hai ki vaha
kanyAdAna kalyANa kA hetu hotA hai| bhalA yaha bhI koI zAstra hai? vivAha ke
samaya mUr3hamanuSya varakanyA ko laukika prIti kI dRSTi se nahIM, apitu
dharmadRSTi se jo vastrAbhUSaNa Adi dAna rUpa meM dete haiM, kyA ve
dharmavarddhaka hote haiM? vAstava meM dharmabuddhi se kiyA gayA aisA dAna to
rAkha meM ghI DAlane ke samAna samajhanA caahie| saMkrAMti, vyatipAta, vaidhRti,
pUrNimA, amAvasyA Adi parvo para jo udaraMbharI, lobhI, apane bhAvuka yajamAnoM
se dAna dilAte haiM, vaha to sirpha bhole-bhAle logoM ko Thagane kA-sA vyApAra
hai| jo maMdabuddhi loga apane mRta svajana kI tRpti ke lie unake nAma se dAna
karate-karAte haiM, ve bhI mUsala meM naye patte aMkurita karane (phUTane) kI
icchA se use pAnI sIMcate haiN| yahAM brAhmaNoM ko bhojana karAne se yadi
paraloka meM pitaroM kI tRpti ho jAtI ho to phira yahAM eka ke bhojana karane se
dUsare kI tRpti yA puSTi kyoM nahIM ho jAtI? putra ke dvArA diyA huA dAna yadi
usake mRta pitA Adi ko mukti dilAne vAlA ho to phira putra tapasyA kare usake
phala svarUpa usake pitA kI bhI mukti ho jAnI caahie| gaMgAnadI yA gayA Adi
tIrthoM meM dAna karane se pitara tara jAte haiM, to phira jhulase hue per3a meM
hare-bhare patte aMkurita karane ke lie use siMcana karanA caahie| isa loka meM
lakIra kA phakIra (gatAnugatika) banakara koI jo kucha bhI mAMge, use dharma yA
puNya kI buddhi se to nahIM diyA jAnA caahie| vAstava meM puNya yA dharma to
aise tyAgI ko cAritravarddhaka, saMyamopakAraka padArtha ke dAna se hotA hai|
aura puNya yA bhAgya prabala hoM, tabhI kisI ko kucha milatA hai| puNya na ho to
kisI se bhI kucha mAMganA yA yAcanA karanA vRthA hai| sone-cAMdI kI devamUrti
banAkara manautI karane se vaha devabiMba usakI rakSA karegA, yaha mahAn Azcarya
janaka bAta hai| kyoMki AyuSya ke kSaNa pUrNa hone para koI bhI devatA kisI kI
rakSA nahIM kara skte| bar3A baila ho yA bar3A bakarA, yadi use mAMsalolupa
zrotriya brAhmaNa ko doge to usase dAtA (dene vAle) aura lene vAle donoM ko
narakakUpa meM giranA pdd'egaa| dharmabuddhi se dAna dene vAlA anajAna dAtA
kadAcit usa pApa se lipsa na ho, lekina doSa jAnane para | bhI lene vAlA
mAMsalolupa to usa pApa se lipta hotA hI hai|' apAtra jIva ko mArakara jo pAtra
kA poSaNa karatA hai, vaha aneka meMDhakoM ko mArakara sarpa ko khuza karane ke
samAna hai| jinezvaroM kA kathana hai ki tyAgI puruSoM ko svarNAdi kA dAna nahIM
denA caahie| isalie sujJa evaM buddhimAna manuSya ko supAtra ko kalpanIya
AhArAdi hI dAna ke rUpa meM denA caahie| jJAna-darzana-cAritra rUpI ratnatraya
se yukta, pAMca samitiyoM aura tIna gupsiyoM ke pAlaka, mahAvrata ke bhAra ko
uThAne meM samartha pariSahoM evaM upasargoM kI zatrusenA para vijaya pAne vAle
mahAsubhaTa sAdhu-sAdhviyoM ko jaba apane zarIra para bhI mamatA nahIM hotI,
taba anya vastuoM para to mamatA hogI hI kaise? dharmopakaraNoM ke sivAya
sarvaparigrahatyAgI, 42 doSoM se rahita nirdoSa bhikSA-jIvI, zarIra ko kevala
dharmayAtrA meM lagAne ke lie hI AhArAdi lene vAle, brahmacarya kI nau 1.
dadaddharmadhiyA dAtA na tathA'dhena lipyate | jAnannapi yathA doSaM gRhItA
mAMsalolupaH  /  / 21 /  /  yogazAstra peja naM. 263 219

Page #242 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Giving to the worthy and highly worthy, excluding the unworthy and the highly
unworthy, is successful and fruitful. According to Yoga Shastra, Third Light,
Verse 87, those adorned with good qualities, who do not even desire a straw-like
object for cleaning their teeth; who are equanimous in honor and dishonor,
profit and loss, pleasure and pain, censure and praise, joy and sorrow; who are
free from the three types of actions, namely, doing, causing to be done, and
approval, from the very beginning; who are solely desirous of liberation; and
who are restrained, virtuous, and holy, are the most excellent and highly
worthy. Those who possess the twelve vows, including Right Faith, or those who
possess fewer vows, who are free from attachment to the world, and who are
desirous of attaining the virtuous path, are considered to be moderately worthy
householders. And those who possess only Right Faith, who are unable to observe
other vows or to practice celibacy, and who are striving to perform pilgrimages,
are considered to be the least worthy. Those who are devoid of possessions due
to the detachment arising from listening to the scriptures; who are lovers of
celibacy; who are far removed from sins such as theft, falsehood, violence,
etc.; who are keepers of their vows; who are silent; who are eaters of roots,
fruits, and grains; who are beggars; who live by collecting grains that have
fallen on the ground or in the fields; who are eaters of leaves; who wear
saffron-colored clothes or are naked; who have a tuft of hair or matted hair;
who have shaved heads; who carry a single staff or three staffs; who live in
monasteries or forests; who practice the five fires in summer; who consume cold
things in winter; who smear ashes on their bodies; who wear ornaments made of
skulls or bones, etc.; who are protectors of religion according to their
understanding, but who are contaminated by false doctrines, who are haters of
Jainism, who are devoid of wisdom, and who are followers of false religions, are
considered to be unworthy. Those who are eager to kill living beings; who are
liars; who steal the property of others; who are immersed in strong sexual
desires like a donkey; who are constantly engaged in acquiring possessions day
and night; who never possess contentment; who are meat-eaters; who are
drunkards; who are excessively angry; who take pleasure in fighting and causing
others to fight; who are merely readers of scriptures; who are always engrossed
in the thoughts of scholars; and who are atheists in reality, are considered to
be highly unworthy. Thus, excluding the unworthy and the highly unworthy, those
who are desirous of liberation, wise, and discerning, tend to give to the
worthy. Giving to the worthy makes the donation successful, while giving to the
unworthy or highly unworthy does not make the donation successful. Giving to the
worthy is a cause for the increase of virtue, while giving to the unworthy is a
cause for the increase of vice. Just as feeding milk to a snake is like
increasing poison, so too, giving to the unworthy is like increasing rebirth.
Just as sweet milk poured into a bitter gourd becomes contaminated and unfit for
drinking, so too, the donation given to the unworthy or highly unworthy becomes
contaminated. Even if the entire earth is given as a donation to the unworthy or
highly unworthy, it will not be fruitful. On the contrary, even a small amount
of food given with faith to the worthy will be highly fruitful. Therefore, it is
necessary to consider the worthy and the unworthy in the matter of donations
that lead to liberation. However, the knowers of truth have never prohibited
compassion or giving. The worthy and the donation, pure and impure; thus, when
considering these four possibilities, the first possibility (both the worthy and
the donation are pure) is pure. The second possibility (the worthy is pure, but
the donation is impure) is semi-pure. The third possibility (the worthy is
impure, but the donation is pure) is also semi-pure. And the fourth possibility
(both the worthy and the donation are impure) is completely impure. In reality,
except for the first possibility, the remaining three possibilities are, in a
way, thoughtless and fruitless. Giving leads to the attainment of enjoyments;
this possibility is also thoughtless, being a symbol of impure donation.
Although the fruit of a donation given to a worthy person is the attainment of
pure enjoyments, it is pure because it is not a donation given with the desire
to attain enjoyments. And truly, how insignificant and small is the fruit of a
donation in the form of the attainment of enjoyments! The main and great fruit
of a pure donation is the attainment of liberation. Just as the main fruit of
farming is the attainment of grain, and the fruit in the form of the attainment
of grass is incidental and small; so too, the main fruit of a pure donation
given to the worthy is the attainment of liberation, and the fruit in the form
of the attainment of enjoyments is small and incidental. Through this pure act
of giving, the wealthy merchant, in the first birth of the first Tirthankara,
attained Right Faith (the seed of enlightenment) and the great fruit of
liberation in this very life. When the Tirthankara Rishabhadeva was given alms
in the royal palace on the first day of his renunciation, the gods were pleased
and immediately showered flowers and declared, "Oh, what a donation!" We have
already spoken extensively about the division of guests in the
Atithisambhagavat. Therefore, one should give appropriate donations after
discerning what is to be given and what is not to be given, who is worthy and
who is not worthy. || 87 || Although wise and faithful people attain the fruit
of liberation directly or through tradition by giving to the highly worthy,
giving to the worthy is beneficial for all virtuous beings in every way. From
this perspective, we describe the incidental fruit of giving to the worthy.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 kupAtra aura apAtra ko chor3akara pAtra aura supAtra ko dAna denA saphala aura
suphalavAna hai yogazAstra tRtIya prakAza zloka 87 gupsiyoM se vibhUSita, dAMta
kuredane ke lie tinake jaisI paravastu ke prati bhI lAlasA nahIM rakhane vAle;
mAna-apamAna meM, lAbha-hAni meM, sukha-duHkha meM, nindA-prazaMsA meM, harSa-
zoka meM samabhAvI, kRta, kArita (karanA, karAnA) aura anumodana tInoM prakAroM
se AraMbha se rahita, ekamAtra mokSAbhilASI, saMyamI sAdhu-sAdhvI hI utkRSTa
supAtra haiN| samyaktva | sahita bAraha vratoM ke dhAraka yA usase kama vratoM
ke dhAraka dezaviratisaMpanna evaM sAdhudharma kI prApti ke abhilASI sadgRhastha
madhyama pAtra mAne jAte haiM, aura kevala samyaktva-dhAraka, anyavratoM ke
pAlana karane yA brahmacaryavrata dhAraNa karane meM asamartha evaM tIrtha kI
prabhAvanA karane meM pratyanazIla vyakti jaghanya pAtra samajhe jAte haiN|
_kuzAstrazravaNa se utpanna hue vairAgya ke kAraNa parigraha se rahita,
brahmacaryapremI, corI, asatya, hiMsA Adi pApoM se dUra, apanI gRhIta pratijJA
ke pAlaka, maunadhAraka, kaMdamUlaphalAhArI, bhikSAjIvI, jamIna para yA kheta
meM par3e hue dAnoM ko ikaTThA karake unase nirvAha karane vAle, patrabhojI,
gairikavastradhArI yA nirvastra, nagna, zikhAdhArI yA jaTAdhArI, mastakamuMDita,
ekadaMDI yA tridaMDI, maTha yA araNya meM nivAsa karane vAle, garmiyoM meM
paMcAgnitapa ke sAdhaka, zardI meM zIta-sevana karane vAle, zarIra para bhasma
ramAne vAle, khopar3I yA haDDI Adi ke AbhUSaNa-dhAraka, apanI samajha se
dharmapAlaka, kintu mithyAdRSTizAstradUSita, jinadharmadveSI, vivekamUr3ha,
kutIrthI kupAtra mAne jAte haiN| prANiyoM ke prANaharaNa karane meM tatpara,
asatyavAdI, paradhanaharaNakartA, gadhe ke samAna prabala kAmAsakti meM nimagna,
rAta-dina AraMbha parigraha meM mazagUla, kadApi saMtoSa dhAraNa na karane vAle,
mAMsAhArI, zarAbI, atikrodhI, lar3AI-jhagar3e karane-karAne meM AnaMdita rahane
vAle, kevala kuzAstra pAThaka, sadA paMDitamanmaya, tattvataH nAstika vyakti
apAtra mAne gaye haiN| isa prakAra kupAtra aura apAtra ko chor3akara
mokSAbhilASI, subuddhizAlI, vivekI AtmA pAtra ko hI dAna dene kI pravRtti karate
haiN| pAtra ko dAna dene se dAna saphala hotA hai, jabaki apAtra yA kupAtra ko
diyA gayA dAna saphala nahIM hotaa| pAtra ko dAna karanA dharmavRddhi kA kAraNa
hai, jabaki apAtra ko dAna adharmavRddhi kA kAraNa hai| sarpa ko dUdha pilAnA
jaise viSavRddhi karanA hai, vaise hI kupAtra ko dAna denA bhavavRddhi karanA
hai| kar3ave tuMbe meM madhura dUdha bhara dene para vaha dUSita evaM pIne ke
ayogya ho jAtA hai, vaise hI kapAtra yA apAtra ko diyA gayA dAna bhI daSita ho
jAtA hai| kapAtra yA apAtra ko samagra pRthvI kA dAna bhI de diyA jAya to bhI
vaha dAna phaladAyaka nahIM hotA, isake viparIta, pAtra ko zraddhApUrvaka
lezamAtra (eka kaurabhara) AhAra diyA jAya to bhI vaha mahAphaladAyI hotA hai|
ataH mokSaphaladAyI dAna ke viSaya meM pAtra-apAtra kA vicAra karanA Avazyaka
hotA hai| paraMtu tattvajJAniyoM ne dayA, dAna karane kA niSedha kahIM bhI nahIM
kiyaa| pAtra aura dAna, zuddha aura azuddha; yoM cAra vikalpa (bhaMga) karane
para 'pahalA vikalpa (pAtra bhI zuddha aura dAna bhI zuddha) zuddha hai| dUsarA
vikalpa (pAtra zuddha, kintu dAna azuddha) ardhazuddha hai, tIsarA vikalpa
(pAtra azuddha, magara dAna zuddha) bhI ardhazuddha hai, aura cauthA vikalpa
(pAtra aura dAna donoM azuddha) pUrNatayA azuddha hai| vAstava meM dekhA jAya to
prathama vikalpa ke sivAya zeSa tInoM vikalpa eka taraha se, vicArazUnya aura
niSphala hai| dAna dene se bhogoM kI prApti hotI hai; yaha vikalpa bhI azuddha
dAna kA pratIka hone se vicArazUnya hai| yadyapi yogya pAtra ko diye gaye dAna
kA phala zuddha bhoga kI prApti hai, paraMtu vaha dAna bhoga prApti kI kAmanA se
kiyA gayA dAna na hone se zuddha hI hai aura sacamuca dAna kA kevala bhoga
prApti rUpI phala bhI kitanA tuccha aura alpa hai! zuddha dAna kA mukhya aura
mahAphala to mokSa prApti hai| jaise khetI karane kA mukhya phala to dhAnya
prApti hai, ghAsa prApti rUpI phala jo AnuSaMgika aura alpa hai; vaise hI pAtra
ko diye gaye zuddha dAna kA mukhya phala bhI mokSa prApti hai, bhoga prApti rUpa
phala to alpa aura AnuSaMgika hai| pAtra ko zuddha dAnadharma se isI caubIsI meM
prathama tIrthaMkara ke prathama bhava meM dhanya sArthavAha ne samyaktva
(bodhibIja) prApta kara mokSa rUpI mahAphala| prApta kiyaa| tIrthaMkara
RSabhadeva ko prathama pAraNe para jisa rAjabhavana meM bhikSA dI gayI para
prasanna hokara devoM ne tatkAla puSpavRSTi kI aura 'aho dAnaM' kI ghoSaNA kii|
isa prakAra atithisaMvibhAgavata ke saMbaMdha meM kAphI vistAra se | kaha cuke|
ataH deya aura adeya, pAtra aura apAtra kA viveka karake yathocita dAna denA
cAhie  /  / 87 /  /  _ yadyapi vivekI zraddhAluoM ko supAtradAna dene meM sAkSAt
yA paraMparA se mokSaphala prApta hotA hai; tathApi pAtradAna to hara hAlata meM
bhadrikajIvoM ke lie upakAraka hai, isa dRSTi se pAtradAna ke prAsaMgika phala
kA varNana karate haiM 220 - OTT BU

Page #243 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Fruit of Giving to the Deserving - Shalibhadra Yoga Shastra, Third Light,
Verse 88 । 259। Behold, the cowherd named Sangama, by the influence of the Muni-
daan, obtained miraculous wealth. || 88 || Meaning Explanation: - The word
'Behold' is used here to bring the noble ones in front of the donation. Sangama,
the cowherd, by the influence of giving to the Muni, obtained miraculous wealth
that amazed everyone. Although Sangama is traditionally destined for liberation,
the mention of liberation is not made here because the relevant fruit is being
described. Sangama's character is known from the tradition of the sect; it is as
follows: Sangama, the giver of donations to the deserving with faith: In the
Magadha country, in the city of Rajgriha, which was like the ancestral home of
Lakshmi, shining with various jewels, in those days, the reign of Emperor
Shrenik was accepted by various kings, like the reign of Indra. In the Rajgriha
block, in the village of Shali, there lived a wealthy woman named Dhanya, with a
small family. Due to misfortune and the separation from her loved ones, she came
to Rajgriha with her only son, Sangama. While living in Rajgriha, Sangama earned
his living by grazing the calves of some citizens. 'This is the appropriate and
sattvic livelihood for a poor child.' Dhanya earned some money by doing small
household chores for the wealthy people around. Thus, both mother and son were
living happily. Once, on the day of a festival, seeing kheer being made in
everyone's house, the boy Sangama also asked his mother for kheer. The mother
said - Son! We are very poor, where can we get kheer from? But the child did not
understand this and started to fuss about eating kheer. Remembering her old
wealth and the duty of a mother towards her son, Dhanya started sobbing loudly.
Hearing her heart-wrenching, sorrowful cry, the women from the wealthy houses
nearby rushed over and asked her the reason for crying and being so sad. At
first, she did not tell clearly due to shyness, but later, at the insistence of
the noble women, Dhanya told her story and her plight in a choked voice. So that
her self-respect was not hurt, the noble women together respectfully gave her
milk, rice, sugar, etc., all the ingredients for making kheer. Dhanya happily
made kheer and served it in a plate for Sangama and told him to eat it after it
cooled down, and she went out for some work. The boy was cooling the kheer in
the plate, at that time, a Mahamauni, who was a Masik (one who observed a fast
for a month), came to take alms for his parana, like a boat in the ocean of the
world, to cross it. Seeing the Muni, the boy Sangama was greatly impressed. He
thought - Oh! This is a conscious Chintamani jewel, or a moving Kalpavriksha, or
a Kamdhenu devoid of animal instincts? It is by my good fortune that this
supreme Muni has arrived today! Otherwise, how could such a noble soul come to
the house of a poor person like me? It is only due to the fruit of some strong
punya of mine that this confluence of mind, attitude, and worthy person has
happened today? Thinking thus intensely, he quickly picked up the plate of kheer
and poured all of it into the Muni's bowl. The Muni kept saying, 'Enough,
enough', but the boy, with strong emotion, gave all the kheer, which he had
obtained with great difficulty, to the ascetic Muni. The Mahakarunasheel Muni
also accepted it in his alms bowl with a sense of gratitude and left after
eating. Dhanya, after finishing the necessary work in the houses around,
returned home and saw that the plate was empty, so she served more kheer in the
plate, which Sangama quickly ate. Dhanya did not know that Sangama had given
that kheer to the Muni. After eating the hot kheer, Sangama got indigestion and
severe stomach pain at night, and as he remembered giving the donation to the
Muni, his body left him. By the influence of the Muni-daan, Sangama's soul
entered the womb of Bhadra, the wife of Seth Gobhadra, in the city of Rajgriha.
Bhadra Sethani saw a field full of lush green paddy (grain) and ripe vines in
her dream. She told her husband about the dream. When the Seth heard it, he was
overjoyed and said - My dear! This auspicious dream is an indication of you
having a son. After a few days, Bhadra Sethani gave birth to a son. 'May I
perform acts of charity and righteousness many times.' The wise Gobhadra Seth
also fulfilled his wish with joy. When the time was right, Bhadra, with her
radiance, developed the face of a mother, just like that 221

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 supAtra dAna kA suphala - zAlibhadra yogazAstra tRtIya prakAza zloka 88  /  259
/  pazya saGgamako nAma, sampadaM vatsapAlakaH  /  camatkArakarIM prApa,
munidAnaprabhAvataH  // 88 //  dekho, bachar3e carAne vAle (gvAle) saMgama ne
munidAna ke prabhAva se Azcaryajanaka camatkArI saMpatti prApta kara lI  // 88
//  artha vyAkhyA :- 'dekho' zabda yahAM bhadrajanoM ko dAna ke sammukha karane
ke lie prayukta kiyA gayA hai| saMgama nAmaka | pazupAlaka ne muni ko dAna dene
ke prabhAva se camatkRta kara dene vAlI adbhuta saMpatti prApta kara lI thii|
yadyapi saMgama ko | paraMparA se mokSaphala prApta hotA hai, tathApi yahAM
prAsaMgika phala kA varNana hone se mokSaphala kA jikra nahIM kiyaa| saMgama kA
caritra saMpradAya paraMparA se jJAtavya hai; vaha isa prakAra hai zraddhA
pUrvaka supAtradAnadAtA-saMgama : magadhadeza meM anekavidha ratnoM se
dedIpyamAna, lakSmI ke kulagRha - samAna rAjagRha nagara meM una dinoM
iMdrazAsana ke | samAna vibhinna rAjAoM dvArA mAnya samrAT zreNika kA zAsana
thaa| rAjagRha- prakhaMDa meM hI zAli nAmaka gAMva meM choTe-se | parivAra vAlI
dhanyA nAma kI sampanna mahilA rahatI thii| usa para Aphata A par3ane aura
priyajanoM kA viyoga ho jAne se vaha apane ikalaute putra saMgama ko lekara
rAjagRha A gyii| rAjagRha meM rahate hue saMgama kucha nAgarikoM ke bachar3e
carAkara | apanI rojI calAtA thA  /  'garIba bAlaka ke lie yahI anurUpa aura
sAttvika AjIvikA hai|' dhanyA AsapAsa ke dhanikoM | ke yahAM choTA-moTA
gRhakArya karake kucha kamA letI thI  /  yoM mAM-beTA donoM AnaMda se jIvana
bitA rahe the| eka bAra kisI | parvotsava ke dina saba ke yahAM khIra banI
dekhakara bAlaka saMgama ne bhI apanI mAM se khIra maaNgii| mAtA ne kahA- beTA !
| hama atyaMta garIba hai, khIra hamAre yahAM kahAM se ho sakatI hai? para
bAlaka isa bAta ko na samajhakara khIra khAne ke lie | macala par3A  /  dhanyA
apanA purAnA vaibhava aura putra ke prati mAtA ke dAyitva ko yAda karake
sisakiyA~ bharakara jora-jora | se rone lgii| usakA hRdaya vidAraka karuNa
rudana sunakara par3ausa kI saMpanna ghara kI mahilAe~ daur3I huI AyI aura usase
isa prakAra rone aura duHkhita hone kA kAraNa puuchaa| pahale to usane
saMkocavaza spaSTa nahIM batAyA, paraMtu bAda meM | bhadra mahilAoM ke atyAgraha
para dhanyA ne gadgad svara meM apanI ApabItI aura apanA duHkhar3A kaha
sunaayaa| usake | svAbhimAna ko Thesa na pahuMce, isa dRSTi se bhadramahilAoM ne
milakara sammAna pUrvaka use dUdha, cAvala, khAMDa Adi khIra | banAne kI saba
sAmagrI de dii| dhanyA ne harSita hokara khIra banAyI aura eka thAlI meM saMgama
ke lie parosakara aura ThaMDI ho jAne para khA lene kA kahakara kisI kAma se
vaha bAhara calI gyii| bAlaka thAlI meM khIra ThaMDI kara rahA thA, usI | samaya
saMsAra samudra se tarane ke lie naukA ke samAna eka mAsika (eka mahine kA tapa
karane vAle) upavAsI mahAmuni pAraNe ke lie bhikSA lene padhAra gye| muni ko
dekhate hI bAlaka saMgama bar3A prabhAvita huaa| usane socA- aho! yaha to |
sacetana ciMtAmaNiratna hai, yA jaMgama kalpavRkSa hai, athavA pazu-vRtti se
rahita koI kAmadhenu hai? mere hI bhAgya se Aja | yaha sarvazreSTha muni padhAre
haiM! nahIM to mere jaise dIna-hIna ke yahAM aise uttamapAtra kA Agamana bhalA
kaise ho sakatA thA ? | mere kisI prabala puNyodraya ke phala svarUpa hI Aja
yaha citta vRtti aura pAtra rUpa triveNIsaMgama huA hai? yoM utkaTa | vicAra
karake jhaTapaTa khIra kI thAlI uThAkara sArI kI sArI munivara ke pAtra meM
ur3ela dii| munirAja basa, basa karate rahe, | lekina bAlaka ne vaha
atikaThinatA se prApta, durlabha sArI khIra prabala bhAvanA se una tapasvI
munirAja ko de dii| | mahAkaruNAzIla muni ne bhI upakAra buddhi se apane
bhikSApAtra meM le lI aura AhAra lekara cale gye| dhanyA AsapAsa | ke gharoM ke
Avazyaka kAma nipaTAkara jaba ghara lauTI aura usane dekhA ki thAlI sApha hai,
to usane usa thAlI meM aura khIra parosI, jise saMgama jhaTapaTa khA gayA  /
dhanyA ko yaha patA nahIM thA ki saMgama ne vaha khIra muni ko de dI hai|
garmAgarma | khIra khA jAne se saMgama ko rAta meM ajIrNa aura peTa meM jora kA
darda ho gayA, phalataH muni ko dAna dene kA smaraNa karate | karate usakA
zarIra chUTa gyaa| munidAna ke prabhAva se saMgama kA jIva rAjagRha nagara meM
gobhadra seTha kI patnI bhadrA ke garbha meM aayaa| bhadrA seThAnI ne svapna meM
zAli (dhAnya) se lahalahAtA aura pakI huI beleM lagA huA kheta dekhaa| apane
pati se seThAnI ne svapna vRttAMta khaa| seTha ne sunA to harSita hokara kahA
-priye ! yaha zubha svapna tumhAre putra hone kA sUcaka hai  /  bhadrA seThAnI
ko kucha dinoM bAda dohada paidA huA ki 'maiM aneka bAra dAna-dharma ke kArya
karUM  / ' bhadrabuddhi gobhadra seTha ne bhI use saharSa pUrNa kiyaa| bhadrA ne
samaya pUrNa hone para apanI kAMti se mAtR-mukha ko vikasita karane vAle ThIka
vaise 221

Page #244 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
From a worthy donation, the poor assembly of cowherds became the wealthy son of
a merchant, Shalibhadra.  The third light of the Yoga Shastra, verse 88, gave
birth to a son like a mountain range gives birth to a vaidurya gem. In an
auspicious time, the parents named their son Shalibhadra according to their
dream. The child was raised under the care of five nurses. As the moon gradually
grows, when the child was eight years old, his parents sent him to the art
teacher to learn arts and sciences. When he reached the threshold of youth,
Shalibhadra also became a lover of young women. Now Shalibhadra, playing with
his friends, seemed like another Pradyumna Kumar. Many merchants of the city
came and proposed their 32 daughters to Shalibhadra in front of the respected
merchant, Gobhadra, and requested him to accept the proposal, which Gobhadra
accepted with joy. After that, Gobhadra, in an auspicious time, married
Shalibhadra with great pomp and show to those 32 daughters, who were endowed
with all auspicious signs. After the marriage, Shalibhadra, enjoying with those
32 daughters in his beautiful palace, seemed as if Indra was enjoying with
Shachi and others in his beautiful chariot. Immersed in the joy of that
luxurious and alluring environment, Shalibhadra did not know when the sun rose
and when the night passed! His parents themselves provided him with all the
materials for enjoyment. When the time came, Gobhadra left his entire property,
home, family, etc., and took monastic initiation at the feet of Lord Mahavira.
While practicing self-restraint, knowing that his last moments were near, he
took a vow of fasting and completed his life span through Samadhi-death and
reached the heavenly abode. There, knowing Shalibhadra as his son through his
knowledge of the past, attracted by his merit and filled with paternal
affection, Gobhadra daily offered divine clothes, ornaments, etc., to him and
his thirty-two wives. Whatever work was done for humans, was done by Bhadra
Sethani. All this material for enjoyment was obtained due to the effect of his
previous donations. Once, some foreign merchants came to Rajgriha to sell gem-
blankets. They showed these gem-blankets to King Shrenik, but he refused to buy
them because they were very expensive. Disappointed, the merchants were
returning when Shalibhadra's mother, Bhadra Sethani, called them to her place
and bought all the gem-blankets at their asking price. When Queen Chillaana came
to know that the king had not bought a single gem-blanket, she said to King
Shrenik - My dear! Even if it is very expensive, you must buy at least one gem-
blanket for me. Therefore, King Shrenik asked the merchants to give him one gem-
blanket at the price he had previously mentioned. To this, the merchants said -
O King! All the gem-blankets have been bought by Bhadra Sethani alone. We do not
have a single gem-blanket left. King Shrenik sent a skilled servant to Bhadra
Sethani to buy a gem-blanket for him by paying the price. He asked Bhadra
Sethani for a gem-blanket at the price he had bought it for. To this, Bhadra
Sethani said - I have broken the gem-blankets into halves and given them to my
32 daughters-in-law (Shalibhadra's wives). They must have thrown them away after
wiping their feet with them. If the king needs them urgently, he can get the
gem-blankets in the form of two used pieces. Therefore, if you want to take them
after asking the king, you can take them. The servant went and told the whole
story to King Shrenik. Queen Chillaana, who was sitting nearby, also heard this
and said to him - My dear! Look! Isn't there a difference between brass and gold
in us and Shalibhadra the merchant? King Shrenik was embarrassed to hear this.
Out of curiosity, he sent that man to bring Shalibhadra. When the servant told
Bhadra about this, she herself said that she would go to serve the king. Bhadra
Sethani herself went to serve the king and politely requested - O King! My son
is so delicate that he never goes out of the palace. Therefore, please grace us
by coming here and seeing Shalibhadra. The surprised King Shrenik agreed to go
to Shalibhadra's place. Bhadra requested the king to stay for some time. Coming
home, she had the entire road from her house to the royal palace and the shops
in the market decorated with colorful clothes and ruby gems by her servants. The
shops looked as if they had been decorated by the gods themselves. Seeing the
splendor of the highway and the market, King Shrenik reached Shalibhadra's place
and, with eyes wide with wonder, looked at the amazing palace of Bhadra.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 supAtradAna se daridra saMgama gvAlA zreSThiputra zAlibhadra banA yogazAstra
tRtIya prakAza zloka 88 hI eka putraratna ko janma diyA, jaise parvatabhUmi
vaiDUryaratna ko janma detI hai| zubha muhUrta meM mAtA-pitA ne svapna ke
anusAra | putra kA nAma zAlibhadra rkhaa| pAMca dhAyoM ke saMrakSaNa meM bAlaka
kA lAlana-pAlana hone lgaa| caMdramA kI taraha kramazaH bar3hate hue bAlaka jaba
ATha varSa kA huA to mAtA-pitA ne use kalAcArya ke yahAM bhejakara vidyAoM aura
kalAoM kA abhyAsa karAyA  /  yauvana kI dehalI para paira rakhane para
zAlibhadra bhI yuvatIvallabha bnaa| aba zAlibhadra apane hamajolI | mitroM ke
sAtha krIr3A karatA huA aisA pratIta hotA thA, mAno dUsarA hI pradyumnakumAra ho
/  nagara ke kaI seThoM ne Akara bhadrApati zrI gobhadra seTha ke sAmane apanI-
apanI kula 32 kanyAe~ zAlibhadra ko dene kA prastAva rakhA aura svIkAra karane
kI prArthanA kI, jise gobhadraseTha ne saharSa svIkArakara lii| tatpazcAt
gobhadra seTha ne zubhamuhUrta meM khUba dhUmadhAma se una |
sarvalakSaNasampanna 32 kanyAoM ke sAtha zAlibhadra kA vivAha kiyaa| vivAha ke
pazcAt zAlibhadra apane manohara mahala meM | una 32 kanyAoM ke sAtha Amoda-
pramoda karate hue aisA lagatA thA mAno iMdra zacI Adi ke sAtha apane manohara
vimAna meM Amoda-pramoda kara rahA ho| usa vilAsapUrNa mohaka vAtAvaraNa ke
AnaMda meM DUbe hue zAlibhadra ko yaha patA hI nahIM calatA thA, kaba sUryodaya
huA aura kaba rAta bItI ! usake lie bhogavilAsa kI samagra sAmagrI mAtA-pitA
svayaM juTAte the| samaya Ane para gobhadraseTha ne apanI saMpUrNa saMpatti aura
gharabAra, kuTuMba vagairaha chor3akara bhagavAn mahAvIra ke caraNoM meM
munidIkSA le lii| saMyama kI ArAdhanA karate hue aMtima samaya nikaTa jAnakara
unhoMne anazana grahaNa kiyA aura samAdhimaraNa pUrvaka AyuSya pUrNa kara
devaloka meM phuNce| vahAM avadhijJAna se zAlibhadra ko apanA putra jAnakara
usake puNya se AkarSita evaM putra vAtsalya se otaprota hokara gobhadradeva
pratidina usake tathA usakI battIsa patniyoM ke lie | divya vastra AbhUSaNa Adi
arpita karatA thA  /  manuSyocita jo bhI kArya hotA, use bhadrA seThAnI pUrNa
karatI thii| yaha saba bhogasAmagrI pUrvakRta dAna ke prabhAva se milI thii| eka
bAra kucha videzI vyApArI ratnakaMbala lekara rAjagRha meM becane ke lie Aye  /
rAjA zreNika ko unhoMne ve ratnakaMbala dikhAyeM, lekina bahuta kImatI hone se
usane kharIdane se inkAra kara diyA  /  nirAza hokara vyApArI vApisa lauTa |
rahe the ki zAlibhadra kI mAtA bhadrA seThAnI ne unheM apane yahAM bulAyA aura
unheM muMhamAMgI kImata dekara saba ke saba | ratnakaMbala kharIda liye| jaba
cillaNA rAnI ko patA lagA ki rAjA ne eka bhI ratnakaMbala nahIM kharIdA; taba
usane zreNika | rAjA se kahA - prANanAtha! cAhe vaha mahAmUlyavAn ho, phira bhI
eka ratnakaMbala to mere liye avazya hI kharIda lIjie  /  | ataH zreNika rAjA ne
una vyApAriyoM se pahale kahI huI kImata meM hI eka ratnakaMbala de dene ko
khaa| isa para vyApAriyoM ne kahA- rAjan ! ve saba ratnakaMbala akelI bhadrA
seThAnI ne hI kharIda liye haiN| aba hamAre pAsa eka bhI ratnakaMbala nahIM |
hai| zreNikanRpa ne eka kuzala sevaka ko mUlya dekara bhadrA seThAnI se eka
ratnakaMbala kharIdakara le Ane ke lie bhejaa| usane bhadrA seThAnI se kharIde
hue mUlya meM eka ratnakaMbala maaNgaa| isa para bhadrA seThAnI ne kahA- maiMne
to ratnakaMbaloM ke Adhe-Adhe Tukar3e karake apanI 32 putra-vadhuoM (zAlibhadra
kI patniyoM) ko de diye haiN| unhoMne unase paira poMchakara pheMka | diye
hoNge| yadi rAjA ko unakI khAsa jarUrata ho to istemAla kiye hue do Tukar3oM ke
rUpa meM ratnakaMbala to mila jAyeMge  /  | ataH rAjA se pUchakara le jAnA cAho
to le jaao| sevaka ne jAkara sArA vRttAMta rAjA zreNika se kahA  /  pAsa meM
baiThI huI rAnI cillaNA ne bhI yaha bAta sunI to unase kahA - prANanAtha !
dekhiye ! hai na hamAre meM aura zAlibhadra vaNik meM pItala aura sone kA - sA
aMtara? zreNika rAjA sunakara jheMpa gaye  /  unhoMne kutUhalavaza zAlibhadra ko
bulA lAne ke lie usa puruSa ko bhejA  /  sevaka ne bhadrA se jaba yaha bAta kahI
to usane svayaM rAjA kI sevA meM pahuMcane kA kahA  /  bhadrAseThAnI ne svayaM |
rAjA kI sevA meM pahuMcakara savinaya nivedana kiyA - mahInAtha ! merA putra
itanA sukumAra hai ki vaha kabhI mahala se bAhara | kahIM jAtA nahIM hai| isalie
Apa mere yahAM padhArakara zAlibhadra ko darzana dene kI kRpA kreN|
Azcaryacakita rAjA zreNika | ne zAlibhadra ke yahAM jAnA svIkAra kiyaa| bhadrA
ne rAjA se kucha samaya Thaharakara padhArane kI vinatI kii| ghara Akara usane |
apane sevakoM dvArA ghara se lekara rAjamahala taka kA sArA rAstA aura bAjAra kI
dukAneM raMgabiraMge vastroM aura mANikyaratnoM se susajjita karavAyI  /
dUkAnoM kI zobhA aisI lagatI thI, mAno devoM ne hI susajjita kI hoM  /
rAjamArga aura bAjAra kI raunaka dekhate hue rAjA zreNika zAlibhadra ke yahAM
pahuMce aura vismaya pUrvaka AMkheM phAr3e hue bhadrA ke mahala kI adbhuta 222

Page #245 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Immersed in the boundless ocean of pleasures, Shalibhadra, gazing at the
splendor of renunciation, entered the path of Yoga Shastra. The palace was
adorned with pillars of gold and a torana of Indranil gems. Its entrance was
resplendent with a row of pearl swastikas. Its courtyard was intricately paved
with the finest jewels. A canopy of divine fabrics was draped there. The entire
palace was fragrant with the incense of aromatic substances. The palace seemed
like another celestial abode on earth.   Bhadhra, taking the king to his palace
on the fourth floor, seated him on the throne, and then proceeded to
Shalibhadra's palace on the seventh floor. She said to him, "Son! Shrenik has
come to your place. Come down for a while to see him." Shalibhadra replied,
"Mother! You know everything and buy whatever you like. What will I do by going
there? If you like something, buy it, whatever the price, and have it stored."
The mother, moved by affection, said, "Son! This is not something to be bought.
This is the king of Rajgriha, who is the lord of you and me, everyone. He has
come to meet you, so come."   Hearing the word "lord" from his mother's mouth,
an inner turmoil arose in Shalibhadra's emotional heart. "Is there a lord over
my head too? As long as I remain enslaved to worldly objects, palaces, wives,
and other material possessions, there will surely be a lord over my head. Curse
me! Will I remain a slave to all these pleasures? How long will I keep a lord
over my head? Am I not the master of the infinite power that lies within me, or
can I not become one? My father, too, after being initiated into the feet of
Lord Mahavira, awakened his infinite powers. I too, will soon renounce these
terrible pleasures, like the fangs of a serpent, and become initiated into the
feet of Lord Mahavira, becoming my own master, awakening the infinite power that
sleeps within me."   Thus, contemplating with emotion, Shalibhadra, under his
mother's insistence, came to Shrenik with all his wives. He bowed to the king.
Shrenik, upon seeing him, embraced Shalibhadra like a son, affectionately
smelled his head, and seated him on his lap, stroking his head lovingly.
Sitting in the king's lap, Shalibhadra felt the anxiety of a prisoner in a
dungeon. His body began to sweat from the king's touch, and tears streamed from
his eyes. Seeing this, Bhadhra said to the king, "Dev! Leave him now. Because,
though a human, he is extremely delicate. He is so fragile that he cannot bear
even the slightest rough touch, nor even the scent of a human garland."   "His
father, who has gone to the celestial realm, sends divine garments, ornaments,
and perfumes from there for him and his wives every day."   Hearing this, the
king released Shalibhadra. He escaped from there and went straight to his palace
on the seventh floor. Bhadhra requested Shrenik to have dinner at her place.
Impressed by Bhadhra's hospitality and humility, the king accepted her request.
Bhadhra ordered her servants and maids to prepare all kinds of the finest food
immediately. What work of the wealthy is not accomplished by wealth?   She
ordered skilled servants to give him a massage with fragrant, fine oil mixed
with scented powder, and then bathe him. While bathing, the king's ring fell
into the water-playing vessel from his finger. The king began to search for it
here and there. Seeing this situation, Bhadhra immediately ordered the maid to
empty the water from that vessel into another. As the vessel emptied, the king's
black, jet-black ring appeared along with other ornaments. Seeing this, the king
was even more surprised.   Astonished, the king asked the maid, "What is all
this?" The maid replied respectfully, "Dev! Shalibhadra and his wives bathe and
wear new ornaments every day, and they put the old ornaments in this."   The
king, overwhelmed with wonder, thought, "Shalibhadra is truly blessed. I am also
blessed that there is such a fortunate person in my kingdom."   Thereafter, the
king, along with his family, had dinner there. Afterwards, Bhadhra, with great
respect, presented the king with wonderful, shining garments, ornaments, etc.,
and bid him farewell. King Shrenik, deeply impressed, returned to his palace.
1. The mention of the wife accompanying him is not found in other narratives.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bhogoM ke athAhasamudra meM DUbA huA zAlibhadra tyAga kI ora yogazAstra tRtIya
prakAza zloka 88 zobhA ko nihArate hue usameM praviSTa hue| vaha mahala bhI sone
ke khaMbhoM para iMdranIlamaNiyoM ke toraNa se suzobhita thaa| usakA daravAjA
motiyoM ke svastikoM kI katAra se zobhAyamAna thaa| usakA AMgana bhI uttamottama
ratnoM se jaTita thaa| divyavastroM kA caMdovA vahAM baMdhA huA thaa| sArA
mahala sugaMdhita dravyoM kI dhUpa se mahaka rahA thaa| vaha mahala aisA mAlUma
hotA thA, mAno pRthvI para dUsarA devavimAna ho| bhadrA rAjA ko cauthI maMjila
para apane mahala meM siMhAsana para biThAkara sAtavIM maMjila para sthita
zAlibhadra ke mahala meM pahuMcI aura usase kahA-putra! apane yahAM zreNika Aye
haiM, unheM dekhane hetu kucha samaya ke lie tuma nIce clo| zAlibhadra ne kahA-
mAtAjI! Apa saba kucha jAnatI haiM aura jo cIja acchI lagatI hai, kharIdatI hai|
maiM jAkara kyA karUMgA? pasaMda ho to mahaMgA-sastA jaise bhI mile, kharIda lo
aura bhaMDAra meM rakhavA do| mAM ne vAtsalya prerita hokara kahA-beTA! yaha
kharIdane kI vastu nahIM hai| yaha to rAjagRha kA nareza hai, jo tumhArA aura
merA sabakA nAtha hai| cala kara tumase milane AyA hai, to clo| mAtA ke muMha se
'nAtha' zabda sunate hI zAlibhadra ke bhAvuka hRdaya meM aMtarmathana calane
lagA-kyA mere sira para bhI nAtha hai? jaba taka maiM viSaya-bhogoM kI, mahala
evaM patnI Adi sAMsArika padArthoM kI gulAmI karatA rahUMgA, taba taka nizcaya
hI mere sira para nAtha rhegaa| dhikkAra hai mujhe! kyA maiM ina saba bhogoM kA
gulAma banA rahUMgA? maiM kaba taka apane sira para nAtha banAe~ rakhUgA? kyA
maiM apane aMdara kI par3I huI | asIma zakti kA svAmI nahIM hUM yA nahIM bana
sakatA? mere pitAjI ne bhI bhagavAn mahAvIra ke caraNoM meM dIkSita hokara apanI
asIma zaktiyoM ko jagAyA thA, maiM bhI sarpa ke phanoM ke samAna bhayaMkara
bhogoM ko tilAMjali dekara zIghra hI bhagavAn mahAvIra ke caraNoM meM dIkSita
hokara apanA svAmI svayaM banUMgA, apane aMdara soI huI anaMtazakti ko
jgaauuNgaa| yoM saMvegapUrvaka ciMtana karatA huA zAlibhadra mAtA ke atyAgraha
se apanI samasta patniyoM ke sAtha zreNika rAjA ke pAsa aayaa| usane rAjA ko
praNAma kiyaa| zreNika rAjA ne Ate hI zAlibhadra ko putra ke samAna chAtI se
lagAyA, vAtsalyavaza usakA mastaka sUMghA aura apanI goda meM biThAkara pyAra se
usake sira para hAtha phiraayaa| rAjA kI goda meM | baiThA huA zAlibhadra
kArAgAra ke baMdI-sI ghabarAhaTa mahasUsakara rahA thaa| usake zarIra meM rAjA
ke sparza se pasInA chUTane lagA, AMkhoM se AMsU Tapakane lge| yaha dekhakara
bhadrA ne rAjA se kahA-deva! aba ise chor3a diijie| kyoMki manuSya hokara bhI
yaha atyaMta komala hai| yaha itanA nAjuka hai ki jarA-sA bhI khurdarA sparza
tathA manuSya kI puSpamAlA kI gaMdha taka | bhI nahIM saha sktaa| devaloka meM
gaye hue isake pitA pratidina isake aura isakI patniyoM ke lie vahAM se divya
vastra, AbhUSaNa evaM vilepana Adi padArtha bhejate haiN| yaha sunate hI rAjA ne
zAlibhadra ko chor3a diyaa| vaha vahAM se chUTakara sIdhA sAtavIM maMjila para
apane mahala meM pahuMca gyaa| bhadrA ne zreNika rAjA se apane yahAM bhojana
karane kI prArthanA kii| bhadrA ke dAkSiNya evaM vinaya se prabhAvita hokara
rAjA ne usakI prArthanA svIkAra kii| bhadrA ne apane sevaka-sevikAoM ko Adeza
dekara sabhI prakAra kI uttamottama bhojanasAmagrI jhaTapaTa taiyAra krvaayii|
dhanADhyoM kA kauna-sA kAma aisA hai, jo dhana se siddha nahIM hotA? idhara
usane telamAliza evaM snAna karAne meM kuzala sevakoM ko Adeza dekara
sugaMdhacUrNamizrita bar3hiyA tela kI mAliza karavAyI, phira snAna krvaayaa|
snAna karate samaya rAjA kI aMgulI se aMgUThI jalakrir3AvApikA meM gira pdd'ii|
rAjA use idhara-udhara DhUMDhane lge| bhadrA ne yaha sthiti dekhakara phaurana
dAsI ko usa vApikA se dUsarI vApikA meM pAnI khAlI karane kA Adeza diyaa| vApikA
ke khAlI hote hI rAjA kI kAlI zyAha-sI aMgUThI dUsare AbhUSaNoM ke sAtha dikhAyI
dii| rAjA yaha dekhakara aura bhI Azcarya meM par3a gyaa| vismita hokara rAjA ne
dAsI se pUchA-ye saba kyA hai? dAsI ne savinaya uttara diyA-deva! zAlibhadra
aura usakI patniyoM nahA dhokara pratidina naye AbhUSaNa pahanate haiM aura
purAne AbhUSaNoM ko isameM DAla dete haiN| rAjA ne vismaya-vimugdha hokara socA-
zAlibhadra sarvathA dhanya hai, maiM bhI dhanya hUM ki mere rAjya meM aisA
bhAgyazAlI bhI haiN| tatpazcAt rAjA ne saparivAra vahAM bhojana kiyaa| tadaMtara
bhadrAmAtA ne adbhuta camakIle vastrAbhUSaNa Adi bheMTa dekara sasammAna rAjA ko
vidA dii| rAjA zreNika bhI atyaMta prabhAvita hokara vahAM se rAjamahala ko
lauttaa| 1. patnI sahita Ane kA varNana anya kathAnakoM meM nahIM hai| 223

Page #246 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Dhanna-Shalibhadra Munis's Anashan and Mata Bhadra's Khed-Prakashan  **Yoga
Shastra, Third Prakash, Shlok 88**  Shalibhadra, feeling detached, was
contemplating leaving his home and family. During this time, a Dharmamitra
(spiritual friend) came to him and humbly requested, "Surasuravandi, the very
embodiment of Dharma, the possessor of the four knowledges, Dharmaghosh Muni,
has arrived in the garden outside this city." Shalibhadra was overjoyed upon
hearing this and boarded his chariot to go see him. He reached there and paid
his respects to Acharya Dharmaghosh and the other Munis, then sat before them to
listen to their teachings. After the teachings, Shalibhadra politely asked,
"Bhagavan! What is the way to be free from having another master over my head?"
Acharya Shri replied, "Muni Diksha is the only way to gain mastery over the
entire world. Nath! If this is the case, then I will receive Muni Diksha after
seeking permission from my mother." When Shalibhadra said this, Acharya Shri
replied, "Then do not delay in this matter." Shalibhadra went straight home from
there and, after paying his respects to his mother, said, "Mataji! Today, I
heard Dharma, the way to liberation from the sorrows of the world, from the
mouth of Dharmaghosh Acharya!" "Vats! You have purified your ears by listening
to Dharma! You have done well. You are truly the son of such a righteous
father." Thus, his mother praised him. Shalibhadra said to his mother, "Mataji!
If this is true, and I am the son of such a righteous father, then please bless
me so that I can receive Diksha and achieve self-welfare." His mother,
impatient, said, "Putra! It is appropriate for you to follow the Shravak Vrat
right now. Following the Mahavrat is like chewing iron chickpeas. Your body is
still very delicate. You have been nurtured with divine food and resources. Just
as a young calf cannot bear the weight of a chariot, you will not be able to
bear the weight of restraint right now!" Shalibhadra politely replied, "Ma! If a
man who can enjoy the pleasures of life cannot bear the hardship of Mahavrat,
then there is no one more cowardly than him." His mother, affectionately, said,
"Beta! For now, bear the fragrance of the garlands of the mortal world and
practice giving up pleasures. Gradually, as you become strong through practice,
then you can accept Muni Diksha." Shalibhadra, obeying his mother's words, began
to give up one wife and one bed (bedding) every day.  In Rajgriha, Shalibhadra's
younger sister Subhadra's husband, Dhanna, was a Sarthavaha (merchant). He was
as wealthy as he was righteous. One day, Subhadra was bathing Dhanna when hot
tears fell from her eyes onto his back. Dhanna was startled and exclaimed,
"Priye! Why are there tears in your eyes today?" Subhadra, with a choked voice,
said, "Prannath! My brother, with the desire to receive Muni Diksha from Bhagwan
Mahavira, is giving up one wife and one bed every day. In 32 days, he will have
given up all his wives and beds and become a Muni. In my parental home, a
brother is the only support for his sister! Remembering him, my heart filled up
and tears fell." Dhanna, mockingly, said, "Your brother is a coward, a fearful
and weakling like a jackal, who is giving up things slowly like this. If he
wants to accept Mahavrat, why doesn't he do it all in one day?" Subhadra said,
"Priyatam! It is easy to say, but very difficult to do. If accepting Mahavrat is
easy, then why don't you accept it?" Dhanna, in reply, said, "You were the
obstacle in my accepting Mahavrat, that's why I couldn't do it until now. Now,
by the grace of auspicious karma, you have encouraged me and given me
permission. So, from today, you are like my sister, and I will immediately
accept Diksha." Subhadra said, "Nath! I said that in jest. You took it
seriously. Please, do not leave us and your cherished Lakshmi." But Dhanna was
already touched by the color of restraint. He said, "This Lakshmi and woman are
all impermanent. Therefore, I will definitely accept Diksha with the desire to
attain the eternal state by giving them up." Saying this, Dhanna immediately got
up. Subhadra and Dhanna's other wives said, "If that is the case, then we will
also follow you and accept Diksha." The great-souled Dhanna, considering himself
blessed, readily gave them permission. By chance, Shraman Bhagwan Mahavira,
while wandering, arrived at Vaibhargiri in Rajgriha. Therefore, Dhanna's
Dharmamitra gave him this news. Dhanna, donating his immense wealth, sat with
his wives in a Shivika (palanquin) and reached the feet of Shri Mahavira Prabhu.
Dhanna, filled with fear of birth and death, accepted Diksha along with his
wives.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dhannA-zAlibhadra muniyoM dvArA anazana aura mAtA bhadrA dvArA kheda-prakAzana
yogazAstra tRtIya prakAza zloka 88 idhara zAlibhadra virakta hokara gharabAra
choDane kA vicArakara rahA thaa| isI daurAna usakA eka dharmamitra AyA aura |
namra nivedana karane lagA-surAsuravaMdita, sAkSAt dharmamUrti cArajJAna ke
dhanI dharmaghoSa munivara isa nagara ke bAhara udyAna meM padhAre haiN|
zAlibhadra sunakara atyaMta harSita huA aura ratha meM baiThakara unake
darzanArtha phuNcaa| vaha AcArya dharmaghoSa tathA | anya muniyoM ke caraNoM meM
vaMdanA-namaskAra karake upadeza-zravaNa ke lie unake sAmane baitthaa| upadeza
ke bAda zAlibhadra |ne unase savinaya pUchA-bhagavan! kauna-sA aisA upAya hai,
jisase mere sira para dUsarA koI svAmI na rahe? AcArya zrI ne kahA-muni dIkSA hI
aisA upAya hai, jisase sAre jagat kA svAmitva prApta kiyA jA sakatA hai? nAtha!
yadi aisA hI hai to maiM apanI mAtAjI se AjJA prApta karake munidIkSA grahaNa
kruuNgaa| isa prakAra zAlibhadra ne jaba kahA to uttara meM | | AcAryazrI ne
kahA-to basa, isa kArya meM jarA bhI pramAda na kro| zAlibhadra vahAM se sIdhA
ghara AyA aura apanI mAtA | ko namaskAra karake kahA-mAtAjI! Aja maiMne
dharmaghoSa AcArya ke zrImukha se jagat ke duHkhoM se mukti kA upAyabhUta dharma
sunA hai! 'vatsa! dharmazravaNa karake tUMne apane kAna pavitra kiye! bahuta
acchA kiyaa| aise hI dharmAtmA pitA kA tUM putra hai|' isa prakAra mAtA ne
prazaMsAtmaka zabdoM meM dhanyavAda diyaa| zAlibhadra ne mAtA se kahA-mAtAjI!
yadi aisA hI hai aura maiM usa dharmAtmA pitA kA putra hUM to Apa mujha para
prasanna hokara AzIrvAda deM, tAki dIkSA grahaNa karake maiM svaparakalyANa kara
skuu| mAtA ne adhIra hokara kahA-putra! tere lie abhI to zrAvakavrata pAlana
karanA hI ucita hai, mahAvrata pAlana karanA to lohe ke cane cabAne ke samAna
hai| abhI terA zarIra bahuta hI sukumAra hai| terA lAlana-pAlana bhI divya-
bhoga-sAdhanoM dvArA huA hai| choTA bachar3A jaise ratha ke bhAra ko sahana
nahIM kara sktaa| vaise hI abhI tUM saMyama ke bhAra ko sahana nahIM kara
sakegA! zAlibhadra ne savinaya uttara diyA-mAM! jo puruSa bhogasAdhanoM kA
upabhoga kara sakatA hai, vaha agara mahAvratoM ke kaSTa ko nahIM saha sakatA
to, usake samAna kAyara aura koI nahIM hai| mAtA ne dulAra karate hue kahA-beTA!
abhI to tUM martyaloka kI puSpamAlA kI gaMdha ko sahana kara, aura bhogoM ko
chor3ane kA abhyAsa kr| dhIre-dhIre abhyAsa se sudRr3ha ho jAne para phira
munidIkSA aMgIkAra krnaa| zAlibhadra bhI mAtA kA vacana mAnakara pratidina eka
patnI aura eka zayyA (bichaune) kA tyAga karane lgaa| rAjagRha meM hI zAlibhadra
kI choTI bahana subhadrA kA pati dhannA sArthavAha rahatA thaa| vaha jitanA
mahAdhanADhya thA, utanA hI dharmavIra bhI thaa| eka dina subhadrA dhannA ko
snAna karA rahI thI, tabhI usakI AMkhoM se garma azrubindu dhannA kI pITha para
Tapaka pdd'e| dhannA ekadama cauMkakara bola uThe-priye! Aja tumhArI AMkhoM meM
AMsU kyoM? subhadrA ne gadgad svara meM kahA-prANanAtha! merA bhaiyA bhagavAn
mahAvIra ke pAsa munidIkSA lene kI icchA se rojAnA eka patnI aura eka zayyA
chor3akara calA jA rahA hai| 32 dinoM meM vaha sabhI patniyoM aura zayyAoM kA
tyAgakara degA aura muni bana jaaygaa| pIhara meM to bahana ke lie bhAI kA hI
AdhAra hotA hai! use yAda karake mana bhara AyA aura azrubindu gira pdd'e|
dhannA ne upahAsa karate hue kahA- tumhArA bhAI kAyara hai, gIdha ke samAna
Darapoka aura durbala hai, jo isa prakAra dhIre-dhIre tyAgakara rahA hai|
mahAvrata grahaNa karanA hai to eka hI dina meM kyoM nahIM grahaNa kara letA?
subhadrA ne kahA-priyatama! kahanA sarala hai, karanA bar3A kaThina hai| yadi
mahAvrata grahaNa karanA sarala hai to Apa kyoM nahIM grahaNa kara lete? dhannA
ne pratyuttara meM kahA-mere mahAvrata grahaNa karane meM tuma hI bAdhaka thI,
isalie maiM aba taka mahAvrata na le skaa| aba puNyayoga se tumane hI mujhe
protsAhita karake anumati de dI hai| to lo, Aja se tuma merI bahana ke samAna
ho, abhI avilaMba maiM dIkSA grahaNa kruuNgaa| subhadrA ne kahA-nAtha! yaha to
maiMne majAka meM kahA thaa| Apane use saca mAna liyaa| ataH kRpA karake sadA
lAlitapAlita lakSmI aura hameM mata chodd'ie| magara dhannA ko saMyama kA raMga
laga cukA thaa| usane kahA-yaha lakSmI aura strI sabhI anitya haiN| isalie inakA
tyAga karake zAzvatapada prApta karane kI icchA se maiM avazya hI dIkSA grahaNa
kruuNgaa| yoM kahakara dhannA usI samaya uTha khar3A huaa| subhadrA Adi dhannA
kI patniyoM ne kahA-aisI bAta hai, to hama bhI ApakA anusaraNa karake dIkSA
grahaNa kreNgii| apane ko dhanya mAnate hue mahAmanA dhannA ne unheM saharSa
anumati de dii| saMyogavaza zramaNa bhagavAn mahAvIra bhI vicaraNa karate-karate
rAjagRha ke vaibhAragiri para padhAra gye| ataH dhannA ko usake dharmamitra ne
ye samAcAra diye| dhannA bhI apanI apAra saMpatti kA dAna karake apanI patniyoM
ke sAtha zivikA meM baiThakara zrI mahAvIra prabhu ke caraNoM meM pahuMce aura
janmamaraNa ke bhaya se udvigna dhannA ne apanI patniyoM sahita dIkSA
aMgIkArakara 224

Page #247 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Description of the Transgressions  **Yoga Shastra, Third Light, Verses
88-89**  When Shalibhadra heard this, he was left behind, and began to hurry for
initiation. As a result, the mighty Emperor Shrenik also approved of it.
Therefore, Shalibhadra also took initiation at the lotus feet of Shri Veer
Prabhu.  Just as the king of elephants roams with his herd, so too did Shri Veer
Prabhu, the son of Siddhartha, roam from village to village with his disciples.
Both Dhannah and Shalibhadra became learned scholars by studying the scriptures,
and they also began to practice severe austerities. They were free from
attachment to their bodies, and they practiced intense austerities for days,
months, two months, three months, four months, and so on. Due to this intense
austerity, their bodies became devoid of flesh and blood, and they were reduced
to mere skeletons, like a mosquito.  While roaming, both the monks, along with
Lord Mahavira, arrived at their birthplace, Rajgriha. Due to their unwavering
faith in the Lord Mahavira, the Trilokinath, who was seated in the Samavasaran,
many residents of the city flocked to see and worship him. Dhannah and
Shalibhadra also received permission from the Lord to go for alms after breaking
their monthly fast (Masakshapan). Shri Bhagwan said to Shalibhadra, "Today, you
will break your fast with your mother's hand." Both Shalibhadra and Dhannah set
out for food. Both the monks stood at the door of Bhadra's palace, but due to
their emaciated bodies from austerity, no one recognized them. Bhadra was also
eager to go and worship Shri Veer Prabhu, Dhannah, and Shalibhadra, so in her
haste, she did not recognize them. Both the monks stood there for a while and
then moved on. They were going through the street leading to the main gate of
the city when Dhannya, Shalibhadra's mother from a previous birth, met him. As
soon as she saw Shalibhadra, milk flowed from her breasts. She bowed to both the
monks and gave them yogurt with devotion. Taking it, both the monks went to
serve Lord Mahavira.  After bowing and paying respects, they criticized the
Gauchari. Then, with folded hands, Shalibhadra asked, "O Bhagwan! You said that
today I would break my fast with my mother's hand. How did that happen?" The
omniscient Lord said, "O Shalibhadra, the great monk! Dhannya, who gave you
yogurt, was your mother from a previous birth, and indeed from other births as
well."  After breaking his fast with the yogurt given by Dhannya, Shalibhadra,
the monk, received permission from Veer Prabhu to fast, and along with Dhannah,
the monk, went to the Vaibhargiri mountain. There, both Dhannah and Shalibhadra
performed the Prarmazan and Pratilekhan of a rock, and accepted the fast called
Padupopgaman. During that time, Mother Bhadra and King Shrenik, along with
others, arrived with devotion to see and worship Lord Mahavira. Mother Bhadra
asked the Lord, "O Prabhu! Where are Dhannah, the monk, and Shalibhadra, the
monk? Why did they not come to our place for alms?" The omniscient Lord said, "O
Bhadra! Both the monks came to your house today, but you were eager to come
here. Therefore, in your haste, you did not recognize them. Your son was met by
his mother from a previous birth, Dhannya, on his way back. She gave him yogurt
as alms. They both broke their fast with it. And both the great, powerful monks,
following my command, have gone to Vaibhargiri to renounce their bodies in a
state of Samadhi after fasting. They have accepted the fast there."  Hearing
this, Bhadra went to Vaibhargiri with King Shrenik. There, they saw both the
monks on a stone slab, like stone statues, in Kayotsarga meditation. Bhadra
could barely see their bodies, which had become emaciated from austerity.
Remembering their past prosperity, her heart filled with sorrow. With the echo
of her weeping, as if making Vaibhargiri weep, Bhadra said with a choked voice,
"O son! You came to my house today, but I, the unfortunate one, did not
recognize you. Do not be angry with me for my mistake. Although you have
renounced all types of food, it was my wish that you would delight my eyes with
your sight. But, O son! You have begun this fast, which is the cause of the
renunciation of the body, and you are trying to break my wish. I do not object
to the austerity you have begun, but please move away from this extremely hard
stone and come this way."  Seeing the power of Mother Bhadra's attachment, King
Shrenik said to her, "Mother! Why do you weep in vain, instead of rejoicing?
Such virtuous men, who are masters of austerity, 1. In other stories, the
initiation of both is described together. 225

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 aticAroM kA varNana yogazAstra tRtIya prakAza zloka 88 se 89 | lii| zAlibhadra
ne jaba yaha sunA to maiM pIche raha gayA, yoM mAnakara dIkSA ke lie utAvala
karane lgaa| phalataH | mahAparAkramI samrAT zreNika ne bhI usakA anumodana kiyA
/  ataH zAlibhadra ne bhI zrI vIraprabhu ke caraNakamaloM meM dIkSA grahaNakara
lii| 1 jaise gajarAja apane dalasahita vicaraNa karatA hai, vaise
siddhArthanaMdana zrIvIraprabhu bhI apane ziSyaparivAra sahita kramazaH
grAmAnugrAma vicaraNa karate hue anyatra padhAra gye| dhannA aura zAlibhadra
donoM zAstrAdhyayana karake bahuzruta jJAnI bane, usI prakAra ghora tapazcaryA
bhI karane lge| ve donoM zarIra para mamatvabhAva se rahita hokara pakSa,
mahIne, do mahIne, tIna mahIne, cAra mahIne Adi kA ugra tapa karate the| isa
prakAra kI ugratapasyA se donoM kA zarIra mAMsa rudhira rahita kevala |
asthipaMjara - sA evaM mazaka ke samAna ho gyaa| vicaraNa karate-karate eka bAra
bhagavAn mahAvIra ke sAtha ve donoM muni apanI janmabhUmi rAjagRha pdhaare|
samavasaraNastha trilokInAtha bhagavAn mahAvIra ke akhaMDa zraddhAtizaya se
bahuta-se | nagaranivAsI unake darzana vaMdana ke lie umar3ane lge|
dhannAzAlibhadra ne bhI mAsakSapaNa ( mAsika upavAsa) ke pAraNe para | bhagavAna
ko namaskAra karake bhikSA ke lie jAne kI AjJA prApta kii| zrI bhagavAn ne
zAlibhadra se kahA- Aja tumhArA pAraNA apanI mAtA ke hAtha se hogaa| zAlibhadra
aura dhannA donoM AhAra ke lie cala pdd'e| bhadrA ke mahala ke daravAje para
Akara donoM muni khar3e rahe; paraMtu tapasyA ke kAraNa kRzakAya donoM muniyoM
ko kisI ne pahacAnA nahIM  /  bhadrA bhI zrI vIraprabhu, dhannA evaM zAlibhadra
ko vaMdanA karane kI utkaMThA se jAne kI taiyArI meM vyagra thI, isalie utAvala
meM unheM nahIM pahacAna skii| donoM muni kucha dera rukakara phira Age bar3ha
gye| ve nagara ke mukhyadvAra vAlI galI se jA rahe the ki zAlibhadra ke
pUrvajanma kI mAtA dhanyA milii| zAlibhadra ko dekhate hI usake stanoM se dUdha
kI dhArA bahane lgii| donoM muniyoM ko vaMdana karake usane bhaktibhAva pUrvaka
unheM dahI diyA  /  use lekara donoM muni mahAvIra prabhu kI sevA meM Aye  /  |
vaMdanA - namaskAra karake gaucarI kI AlocanA kii| tatpazcAt hAtha jor3akara
zAlibhadra ne pUchA - bhagavan ! Apane pharamAyA thA ki Aja terI mAtA ke hAtha
se pAraNA hogaa| vaha kaise huA? sarvajJa prabhu ne kahA- zAlibhadra mahAmune!
jisane tumheM dahI diyA, vaha dhanyA tumhAre pUrvajanma kI evaM anya janmoM kI
mAtA hI to thI  /  dhanyA mAtA ke hAtha se diye hue dahI se pAraNA karake
zAlibhadramuni vIraprabhu se anazana kI AjJA lekara dhannAmuni ke sAtha
vaibhAragiriparvata para gye| vahAM dhannA - zAlibhadra donoM ne eka zilAkhaMDa
kA prarmAjana evaM pratilekhana kiyA aura pAdapopagamana nAmaka anazana svIkAra
kiyaa| usI daurAna mAtA bhadrA evaM zreNika rAjA Adi bhaktibhAva se mahAvIra
prabhu ke darzana-vaMdanArtha phuNce| mAtA bhadrA ne prabhu se pUchA - prabho !
dhannA muni aura zAlibhadra muni kahAM hai? ve hamAre yahAM bhikSA ke lie kyoM
nahIM padhAre? sarvajJa | prabhu ne kahA - bhadre ! tumhAre ghara para Aja donoM
muni padhAre the, paraMtu tumheM yahAM Ane kI vyagratA thii| ataH utAvala meM
tuma unheM nahIM pahacAna sakI  /  tumhAre putra ko usake pUrvajanma kI mAtA
dhanyA vApisa lauTate hue rAste meM milI; usane unheM bhikSA ke rUpa meM dahI
diyaa| usI se donoM ne pAraNA kiyA hai| aura donoM mahAsattvazAlI muni merI AjJA
lekara | anazana karake samAdhi pUrvaka zarIra kA tyAga karane hetu vaibhAragiri
para gaye haiN| vahAM unhoMne anazana svIkArakara liyA hai| yaha sunakara bhadrA
zreNika rAjA ke sAtha vaibhAragiri para phuNcii| vahAM donoM muniyoM ko
pASANazilA para pASANa ke putale | kI taraha kAyotsarga-dhyAna meM sthira dekhA
/  tapasyA se kRza bane hue zarIra ko bhadrA bar3I muzkila se dekha skii| |
pUrvakAlIna sukhasaMpannatA ko yAda karake usakA mana bhara aayaa| apane rudana
kI pratidhvani se mAno vaibhAragiri ko rulAtI huI bhadrA ruMdhe hue gale se
bolI- vatsa ! Aja tuma mere ghara para Aye, lekina mujha abhAgI ne tumheM
pahacAnA nahIM  /  tuma | donoM mere isa pramAda para gussA mata karanA  /
yadyapi tumane cAroM prakAra ke AhAra kA tyAgakara diyA hai; phira bhI merA
manoratha | thA ki tuma apane darzana se mere netroM ko AnaMdita kraaoge|
paraMtu he putra ! zarIratyAga ke kAraNabhUta isa anazana ko prAraMbha | karake
tuma mere manoratha ko bhaMga karane ko udyata hue ho| tumane jisa prakAra kA
tapa prAraMbha kiyA hai, maiM usameM koI vighna nahIM DAlatI, lekina jarA isa
atyaMta kaThora zilAtala se to haTakara isa ora ho jaao| mAtA bhadrA kA moha -
prAbalya | dekhakara zreNika rAjA ne usase kahA- mAtA! Apa harSa ke sthAna para
vyartha hI rudana kyoM karatI hai? aise dharmavIra tapovIra 1. anya kathAoM meM
donoM kI eka sAtha dIkSA kA varNana AtA hai| 225

Page #248 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Discussion on the Five Transgressions of the First Anuvrata  **Chapter 89-90
of the Third Light of Yoga Shastra**  You are being called the only fortunate
mother with a son in the world, only because of your son. Your mighty son,
understanding the essence of the world, renounced wealth as insignificant as a
straw and attained the feet of the Lord, the embodiment of liberation. Being a
disciple of the Lord of the Three Worlds, he is engaged in penance accordingly.
You are needlessly grieving in your heart due to your feminine nature. Abandon
this attachment and fulfill your duty.   King Shrenik, having awakened the
grieving mother Bhadra, returned home after she paid her respects to both the
monks. Meanwhile, the monks Dhanananda and Shalibhadra, having completed their
lifespan in samadhi, attained the celestial abode called Sarvarthasiddha, which
is like thirty-three oceans, and became excellent gods. Thus, the Sangha
obtained unique wealth that would grow in the future due to the worthy donation.
Therefore, a virtuous person should always strive to follow the Atithisanvibhaga
Vrata properly. || 88 ||  We have discussed the twelve Vratas. Now, to protect
them from possible transgressions (faults), we will discuss the nature of
transgressions and their types.  **Verse 89**  Vratas with transgressions do not
lead to good deeds. Therefore, there are five transgressions for each Vrata,
which should be abandoned. || 89 ||  **Explanation:**  Transgression means
impurity or defect in a Vrata. Vrata practice with impurity (defect) does not
lead to merit. Therefore, it is necessary to abandon the five transgressions of
each Vrata. Here, a doubt is raised: "Transgressions occur only in Sarvavirati;
it is only in Sarvavirati that transgressions arise from the emergence of
Sanjwalana Kshaya!" In response, it is said: "It is true that all transgressions
arise from the emergence of Sanjwalana Kshaya. In it, the first twelve Kshayas
are eradicated from the root by their emergence (A. Ni. 112). And the emergence
of Sanjwalana Kshaya occurs only in those who have the Sarvavirati Gunasthan;
those who have the Deshavirati Gunasthan experience the emergence of
Pratyakhyanavaraneya Kshaya. Therefore, transgressions are not possible in the
Vratas of a Deshavirati Shravak. This is true from the perspective of the
principles. Here, its absence is like the absence of a hole in the body of a
lazy person. It happens in this way: In the first Anuvrata, the intention to
kill gross beings is first abandoned, then the intention to kill the innocent,
then the intention to kill in various ways, such as two ways, three ways, etc.
Therefore, after giving a lot of leeway, when it becomes extremely subtle, due
to the absence of Deshavirati, how can a transgression in the form of
Deshavirati be imposed? Therefore, its complete abandonment is appropriate!
Since Mahavrata is great, there is a possibility of transgressions in it.
Transgressions in Mahavrata are like putting a bandage on a boil on an
elephant's body. In response to this, it is said: "It is not appropriate to say
that transgressions are not possible in the Deshavirati Gunasthan. The
Upasakadasangasutra mentions five transgressions for each Vrata. Its divisions
have also been mentioned. But it should not be said that there are no
transgressions there. In the Agamas, both divisions and transgressions are
considered separately. From this perspective, it is said that 'all
transgressions arise from the emergence of Sanjwalana Kshaya.' This is true, but
it is said in relation to the Sarvaviraticharitra, not in relation to Samyaktva
and Deshaviraticharitra. Since all transgressions arise from the emergence of
Sanjwalana, etc., the verse explains that transgressions occur in
Sarvaviraticharitra due to the emergence of Sanjwalana Kshaya, while the
emergence of the remaining twelve Kshayas leads to the destruction of the
Mulavrata of Sarvavirati. From this perspective, there is no absence of
transgressions in Deshaviraticharitra. || 89 ||  Therefore, the transgressions
mentioned for the first Vrata are:  **Verse 90**  1. Binding a living being out
of anger, 2. Cutting off its limb, 3. Imposing a burden beyond its strength, 4.
Beating it with a whip, etc., without any fault, and 5. Stopping its food and
drink, these five transgressions are mentioned for the Ahimsa Anuvrata. || 90 ||
**226**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prathama aNuvrata ke pAMca aticAroM para vivecana yogazAstra tRtIya prakAza
zloka 89 se 90 putra ke kAraNa hI to Apa saMsAra meM ekamAtra bhAgyazAlinI
putravatI kahalA rahI hai| Apake isa mahAparAkramI putra ne saMsAra kA tattva
samajhakara tinake ke samAna lakSmI kA tyAga karake, sAkSAt mokSamUrti prabhu
caraNoM ko prApta kiyA hai| trilokInAtha | ke ziSya hone ke nAte ye tadanurUpa
hI tapasyA kara rahe haiN| Apa vyartha hI strI svabhAva vaza mana meM duHkhita
ho rahI haiN| chor3o isa moha ko, karttavya kA pAlana kro| rAjA ke dvArA
pratibodhita duHkhita hRdaya bhadrA mAtA donoM muniyoM ko vaMdanA karake apane
ghara pahuMcI  /  zreNika rAjA bhI vApisa lautte| idhara dhannA - zAlibhadra
donoM muni samAdhi pUrvaka AyuSya pUrNa kara | taitIsa sAgaropama kI sthiti vAle
sarvArthasiddha nAmaka vaimAnika devaloka meM phuNce| uttama deva bne| isa
prakAra saMgama ne | supAtradAna se bhaviSya meM bar3hane vAlI advitIya
saMpadAe~ prApta kI thii| isalie puNyArthI manuSya ko atithisaMvibhAgavrata ke
yathAvidhi pAlana meM sadA pratyanazIla rahanA cAhie  /  /  88  /  /  isa
prakAra bAraha vratoM para vivecana kara cuke haiN| aba unake pAlana meM
saMbhavita aticAroM (doSoM) se rakSA karane | hetu aticAroM kA svarUpa aura
unake prakAroM ke viSaya meM kahate haiM  / 260 /  vratAni sAticArANi, sukRtAya
bhavanti na  /  aticArAstato heyAH paJca paJca vrate vrate ||89  /  /  artha :-
aticAroM (doSoM) ke sAtha vratoM kA pAlana sukRta kA hetu nahIM hotaa| isalie
pratyeka vrata ke pAMca-pAMca aticAra haiM, unakA tyAga karanA cAhie ||89 ||
vyAkhyA :- aticAra kA artha vrata meM Ane vAlA mAlinya yA vikAra hai| malinatA
(doSa) se yukta vratAcaraNa | puNyakAraka nahIM hotaa| isI hetu se pratyeka
vrata ke jo pAMca-pAMca aticAra haiM, unakA tyAga karanA Avazyaka hai| yahAM |
eka zaMkA prastuta kI jAtI hai ki 'aticAra to sarvavirati meM hI hote haiM; usI
meM hI to saMjvalana kaSAya ke udaya se hI aticAra paidA hote haiM! isakA
samAdhAna karate hue kahate haiM - yaha ThIka hai ki sabhI aticAra
saMjvalanakaSAya ke udaya se hote haiN| usameM pahale-pahale ke 12 kaSAyoM ke
udaya se mUla se ucchedana ho jAtA hai| ( A. ni. 112 ) aura | saMjvalanakaSAya
kA udaya sarvaviratiguNasthAna vAle ke hI hotA hai; dezaviratiguNasthAna vAle ke
to pratyAkhyAnAvaraNIya kaSAya kA udaya hotA hai| isalie dezavirati zrAvaka ke
vratoM meM aticAra saMbhava nahIM hai| yaha bAta siddhAMta kI dRSTi se ThIka
hai| yahAM usakI nyUnatA hone se kuMthue ke zarIra meM chidra ke abhAva ke
samAna hai| vaha isa prakAra ghaTita hotA | hai - prathama aNuvrata meM pahale
sthUla prANiyoM ke hanana kA saMkalpa se, phira niraparAdha kA, phira dvividha-
trividha Adi vikalpoM ke rUpa meM tyAga kiyA jAtA hai; isalie bahuta avakAza de
dene para atyaMta sUkSma ho jAne para dezavirati kA abhAva hone se
dezavirAdhanArUpa aticAra laga hI kaise sakatA hai? ataH usakA sarvathA tyAga hI
ucita hai! mahAvrata bar3e | hone se unameM aticAra lagane kI saMbhAvanA hai|
mahAvratoM meM aticAra hAthI ke zarIra para hue phor3e para paTTI bAMdhane ke
samAna hai| isake uttara meM kahate haiM - dezavirati guNasthAna meM aticAra
saMbhava nahIM hai, yaha bAta asaMgata hai| zrI | upAsakadazAMgasUtra meM
pratyeka vrata ke pAMca-pAMca aticAra batAye haiN| usake vibhAga bhI kahe haiN|
paraMtu vahAM aticAra na kahe hoM, aisA bhI nahIM kahanA caahie| Agama meM
vibhAga aura aticAra donoM alaga-alaga mAne gaye haiM; isa dRSTi se | kahA hai
ki 'sabhI aticAra saMjvalanakaSAya ke udaya se hote haiN|' yaha bAta yathArtha
hai, paraMtu vaha sarvaviraticAritra kI | apekSA se kahI hai; na ki samyaktva
aura dezaviraticAritra kI apekSA se  /  cUMki sabhI aticAra saMjvalana ke udaya
se hote haiM, ityAdi gAthA meM aisI vyAkhyA hai ki saMjvalana - kaSAya ke udaya
meM sarvaviraticAritra meM aticAra lagate haiM, zeSa 12 kaSAyoM ke udaya meM to
sarvavirati ke mUlavrata kA hI chedana hotA hai  /  isa dRSTi se
dezaviraticAritra meM aticAra kA abhAva nahIM hai  /  /  89  /  /  ataH prathama
vrata ke jo aticAra batAye haiM, unheM kahate haiM  / 261 /  krodhAd bandha-
chavicchedo'tibhArAdhiropaNam  /  prahAro'nnAdirodhazcAhiMsAyAM parikIrtitAH  //
90 //  artha :- 1. krodhapUrvaka kisI jIva ko bAMdhanA, 2. usake aMga kATa denA,
3. usake balabUte se adhika bojha lAda denA, 4. use cAbuka Adi se binA kasUra hI
mAranA pITanA aura 5. usakA khAnA-pInA baMdakara denA, ye pAMca aticAra
ahiMsANuvrata ke batAye gaye haiM  /  /  90  /  /  226

Page #249 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
English Translation (preserving Jain terms):  Description of the Five
Transgressions of the First Anu Vrata Explanation of Verse 90 from the Third
Illumination of the Yogashastra:  These are the five transgressions of the first
Anu Vrata of Ahimsa (non-violence):  1. Tightly binding animals like cows,
buffaloes, etc. with ropes, etc. in a way that they cannot get free, and keeping
them permanently under control. However, if one binds their son, etc. for the
purpose of beneficial instruction or to restrain their unruliness, it is not a
transgression, because the word 'krodhat' (out of anger) in the original verse
indicates that binding done out of the arising of extremely strong passions is
the first transgression.  2. Cutting off the limbs or skin of someone out of
anger or hatred, such as cutting off a person's or animal's hand, foot, head,
etc. or piercing them with a knife, is the second transgression.  3. Loading an
excessive burden on the shoulders, back or head of animals like cows, bulls,
camels, donkeys, or humans, more than they can easily carry or pull, is the
third transgression.  4. Beating or hitting any innocent animal or person with a
stick, rod, whip or any weapon, or sawing with an iron saw, throwing stones,
etc. out of anger or hatred, falls under the fourth transgression.  5.
Withholding food, water or fodder from any animal or person out of anger,
hatred, etc. is the fifth transgression.  The Aavashyaka Churni has described
the rules regarding binding. Binding of two-legged beings (humans) and four-
legged animals can be of two types - meaningful and meaningless. Meaningless
binding is never appropriate. Meaningful binding is also of two types - relative
and absolute. Absolute binding is to be avoided.  Relative binding is when
binding is not done out of passions, but even an innocent one has to be bound
with ropes, etc. However, the knot should not be tied too tightly, but loosely,
so that it can be easily opened or cut when the time comes. Absolute binding is
when the knot is tied extremely tightly and firmly, so that it cannot be opened
even in times of calamity. Sometimes the knot is tied so firmly that the poor
animal cannot break free even if a fire breaks out, and it ends up burning to
death there.  Among two-legged beings (humans), slaves, thieves, lazy students,
etc. may be bound for the purpose of beneficial instruction, so that the binding
can be easily removed when the time comes. But in absolute binding, no such
consideration is made. Therefore, whether it is a two-legged (human) or four-
legged (animal) being, absolute binding is to be avoided in all circumstances,
while relative binding is pardonable.  In fact, we should habituate animals and
humans to live in such places where they can stay without any binding.
Amputation or cutting of skin should also be understood as relative and
absolute. Ruthlessly cutting off someone's limbs, hands, feet, nose, etc. or
gouging out their eyes is absolute amputation, which is not good. But if there
is a boil or abscess on the body, and it needs to be lanced or the affected part
burned for treatment, that is relative amputation.  Overloading is also not
right from the perspective of non-violence. Ideally, the Shravaka (lay follower)
should give up using carts or mounts with two-legged or four-legged beings. If
there is no other livelihood, only as much load should be placed on humans as
they can easily carry themselves. For four-legged animals like oxen, only as
much weight should be loaded in the plow, cart, chariot, etc. as they can easily
carry or pull, and they should also be released on time.  Similarly, there are
two types of beating - relative and absolute. If an uncivil, unruly or criminal
person needs to be punished, it should not be done out of cruelty or hatred, but
by showing them a stick or giving them a mild beating, as appropriate, to put
them back on the right path. In relative beating, if one has to beat their son,
etc. for not obeying or being unruly, they should avoid the vital parts and,
with compassion in the heart, give them a light kick, punch or slap once or
twice. Beating the vital parts out of cruelty, hatred or anger is absolute
beating, which is not appropriate.  Withholding food and water also has four
types - meaningful, meaningless, relative and absolute. Completely cutting off
someone's food and drink can sometimes lead them to die of hunger and thirst,
suffering anguished meditation. Therefore, in the case of an enemy or criminal,
one should not completely deprive them, but provide them with the minimum
necessary.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prathama aNuvrata ke pAMca aticAroM para varNana yogazAstra tRtIya prakAza
zloka 90 vyAkhyA :- ahiMsA rUpa prathama aNuvrata ke ye pAMca aticAra haiM-gAya,
bhaiMsa Adi pazu ko rassI Adi se itanA kasakara bAMdha denA ki khula na sake,
use hamezA ke lie bAMdhakara niyaMtraNa krnaa| paraMtu apane putra Adi ko
hitazikSA kI dRSTi se yA uddaNDatA rokane kI dRSTi se baMdhana Adi meM bAMdhanA
par3e to, vaha aticAra nahIM hai, kyoMki mUla zloka meM 'krodhAt' zabda par3A
hai, vaha yahI sUcita karatA hai ki atyaMta prabala kaSAya ke udaya se jo
baMdhana DAlA jA prathama aticAra hai| putra Adi ke paira meM yA kahIM rasaulI
kI gAMTha yA koI phor3A ho gayA ho aura use kaTavAnA par3e, | naztara lagavAnA
par3e yA camar3I kATanI par3e to use aticAra nahIM kaha sakate; kyoMki usake
pIche darda miTAne kI hitaiSitA hotI hai, krodha-dveSAdi nahIM hotaa| isa kAraNa
'krodhAt' zabda pratyeka aticAra ke sAtha samajha lenA caahie| ataH krodha yA
dveSavaza kisI kA aMga yA camar3I Adi kATa lenA yA sira Adi phor3a denA dvitIya
aticAra hai| gAya, baila, UMTa, gadhA, manuSya Adi kisI ke bhI kaMdhe, pITha yA
sira para athavA gAr3I yA gAr3oM meM DhoyA na jA sake, itanA balabUte se jyAdA
bojha lAda denA, tIsarA aticAra hai| krodha yA dveSavaza lAThI, DaMDA, cAbuka yA
kisI hathiyAra athavA cAkU, churA Adi se kisI bhI niraparAdha jAnavara yA
manuSya ko mAranA-pITanA, lohe kA ArA bhauMka denA, Dhele, patthara Adi se
mAranA ityAdi cauthe aticAra ke aMtargata hai| isI prakAra krodha, dveSa Adi se
kisI pazu yA manuSya ko annapAnI yA ghAsa-cArA na denA pAMcavAM aticAra hai| isa
viSaya meM AvazyakacUrNi meM vidhi batAyI gayI hai-baMdhana do pAye manuSya kA
tathA caupAye pazu kA hotA hai| lekina vaha bhI sArthaka aura nirarthaka do
prakAra kA hai| nirarthaka baMdhana to kathamapi ucita nahIM hai; sArthaka
baMdhana bhI do prakAra kA hai-sApekSa aura nirpekss| nirapekSa baMdhana tyAjya
hai| sAkSepabaMdhana vaha hai, jisake aMtargata kaSAyAdivaza baMdhana nahIM
hotA; kintu niraparAdha ko rassI Adi se bAMdhanA bhI par3e to.gAMTha majabUta na
lagAe, DhIlI-sI gAMTha lagAe; tAki samaya Ane para jhaTapaTa aura AsAnI se kholI
yA kATI jA ske| nirapekSa use kahate haiM jo gAMTha atyaMta kasakara majabUtI se
lagAyI gayI ho, tAki vaha Aphata ke samaya kholI na jA ske| kaI bAra gAMTha
itanI majabUtI se lagA dI jAtI hai ki Aga lagane para bhI becArA pazu use
tor3akara bhAga nahIM sakatA, vahIM jala maratA hai| do paira vAle manuSyoM meM
dAsa-dAsI, cora, par3hane meM AlasI putra Adi ko hitazikSA kI dRSTi se bAMdhA
jAtA hai| tAki samaya Ane para AsAnI se usa baMdhana ko kholA jA ra hai|
nirapekSa baMdhana meM to isa prakAra kA koI vicAra nahIM kiyA jaataa| isalie
cAhe dopAye prANI (manuSya) ho, cAhe caupAye jAnavara, nirapekSa baMdhana hara
hAlata meM tyAjya hai, sApekSa baMdhana kSamya hai| balki pazuoM evaM manuSyoM
ko isa prakAra ke sthAna meM rahane kI Adata DAla deM, jisase ve svataH hI binA
baMdhana ke raha ske| aMgacchedana yA camar3I kA chedana bhI sApekSa-nirapekSa
donoM taraha kA samajha lenA caahie| kisI ke hAtha, paira, nAka Adi avayava
nirdayatApUrvaka kATa lenA yA AMkheM phaur3a denA nirapekSa chedana hai, vaha
acchA nahIM hai| paraMtu zarIra meM phor3A ho gayA ho, usameM se mavAda bahatI
hai yA paka gayA ho to usa aMga ke amuka hisse kA naztara lagavAkara ilAja
karAnA yA usa hisse ko jalA denA sApekSa |aMgacheda hai| atibhAra lAdanA bhI
ahiMsA kI dRSTi se ThIka nhiiN| avvala to zrAvaka ko dopAye yA caupAye prANiyoM
vAlI gAr3I yA savArI dvArA apanI AjIvikA chor3a denI caahie| yadi aura koI
rojagAra na ho to do paira vAle manuSya jitanA bojha apane Apa uThA sakeM, utanA
hI unase uThavAnA caahie| caupAye jAnavaroM ko hala, gAr3I, ratha Adi meM jotane
para utanA hI vajana lAdanA cAhie, jitanA ve AsAnI se Dho sake, yA le jA ske|
aura unheM samaya para chor3a bhI denA caahie| prahAra bhI do prakAra kA hai,
sApekSa aura nirpekss| avinIta aura uddaNDa yA durAcArI athavA cora ko kadAcit
sajA denI par3e to bhI nirdayatA yA dveSa se nahIM, paraMtu yathAyogya mAmUlI
prahAra yA DaMDA Adi dikhAkara bhI use sIdhe rAste para calAyA yA lAyA jA sakatA
hai| sApekSa prahAra meM apane putrAdi ko kahA na mAnane yA uiMDatA karane para
kadAcit mAranA bhI par3e to usake marmasthAna ko chor3akara aMrtahRdaya meM dayA
rakhakara lAta, dhUMse yA thappar3a Adi eka yA do bAra halake-se maare|
nirdayatA se. dveSa yA roSavaza marmasthAna para mAranA nirapekSa prahAra hai,
vaha ucita nahIM hai| AhArapAnI kA nirodha bhI sArthaka-nirarthaka evaM sApekSa-
nirapekSa-rUpa se 4 prakAra kA hai| kisI kA bhojanAdi sarvathA baMda kara dene
se kabhI-kabhI vaha bhUkha-pyAsa se pIr3ita hokara ArtadhyAna karatA huA mara
jAtA hai| isalie zatru yA aparAdhI ke bAre 227

Page #250 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Discussion on the Five Transgressions of the Second Anuvrata  **This section
discusses the five transgressions of the second Anuvrata, which is the vow of
truthfulness (Satya).**  **The text refers to the third light of Yoga Shastra,
verses 91 to 91, which states that one should not engage in meaningless
restrictions like fasting, etc. However, if someone is ill or needs to abstain
from food due to a medical condition, then it is meaningful and relative
restriction for that period only.**  **The text then discusses the concept of
"binding" or "restraining" dependent beings. It states that one should feed the
dependent being first before eating oneself. If someone has committed a
transgression, they should be reprimanded only verbally, saying "You will not
receive food today."**  **The text then discusses the concept of fasting for the
sake of healing or other purposes. It states that a Shravak (Jain lay follower)
can fast for such purposes. The text emphasizes that a Shravak should be mindful
and avoid transgressions against the fundamental principle of non-violence
(Ahimsa).**  **The text then addresses a potential doubt: "Since a Shravak only
has the rule of non-violence (killing), there is no fault in binding or
restraining others."**  **The text clarifies that if someone has taken the vow
of non-violence and then engages in binding or restraining others, it
constitutes a violation of the vow, as it breaks the continuity of non-violence.
Similarly, if someone has renounced the vow of non-violence, then any
transgression against any vow is considered a transgression. However, there is
no transgression in binding or restraining others.**  **The text explains that
while binding or restraining others may not be a direct violation of the vow of
non-violence, it is considered a transgression because it is a means to
violence. It further explains that there are two ways in which a vow can be
violated: internally and externally.**  **The text states that if someone gets
angry or expresses anger without intending to harm another, it is not considered
a violation of the vow of non-violence. Similarly, if someone engages in binding
or restraining others without any malice or intention to harm, it is not
considered violence. However, if the action is motivated by cruelty or a lack of
compassion, it constitutes an internal violation of the vow. Since there is no
violence involved, it is considered an external observance of the vow. However,
the action is still considered a transgression due to the internal violation.**
**The text then quotes a verse: "Who would consider it a transgression to have
taken the vow of 'I will not kill' if no one dies?"**  **The text explains that
if someone kills another being out of anger or cruelty, and does not adhere to
their vow, then it is considered a complete violation of the vow. Even if the
death of the other being does not occur, the vow is still violated due to the
anger or cruelty involved. The text states that the revered ones have termed
this as a partial violation and partial observance of the vow.**  **The text
then refutes the claim that binding or restraining others violates the vow of
non-violence. It states that binding or restraining others is a transgression
against the principle of pure non-violence.**  **The text concludes by stating
that binding or restraining others can also lead to other transgressions, such
as killing, expulsion, enchantment, and other forms of magic.**  **The text then
moves on to discuss the five transgressions of the second vow, which is the vow
of truthfulness (Satya).**  **The five transgressions are:**  1. **Giving false
advice (Mithyopadesh):** Giving advice that is contrary to the principles of
restraint or Dharma (righteousness) and promotes sin. 2. **Accusing someone
without proper consideration (Sahsa Abhyakhyan):** Accusing someone without
proper investigation or evidence. 3. **Revealing someone's secret or private
matters (Guhya Bhashan):** Disclosing someone's confidential information. 4.
**Breaking a trust by revealing a secret entrusted to you (Vishwastha Mantra
Bhed):** Betraying someone's trust by revealing a secret they shared with you.
5. **Creating false documents or records (Kuta Lekh):** Creating false
documents, accounts, or writings.  **The text explains that these five
transgressions are considered violations of the vow of truthfulness.**  **The
text then provides further explanation of each transgression.**  1. **False
advice (Mithyopadesh):** Giving false advice is considered a violation of the
vow of truthfulness because it involves speaking words that are harmful to
others. For example, telling someone to beat an animal or to steal. 2.
**Accusing someone without proper consideration (Sahsa Abhyakhyan):** Accusing
someone without proper investigation or evidence is considered a violation of
the vow of truthfulness because it involves speaking falsely. 3. **Revealing
someone's secret or private matters (Guhya Bhashan):** Revealing someone's
confidential information is considered a violation of the vow of truthfulness
because it involves breaking a trust. 4. **Breaking a trust by revealing a
secret entrusted to you (Vishwastha Mantra Bhed):** Betraying someone's trust by
revealing a secret they shared with you is considered a violation of the vow of
truthfulness because it involves breaking a promise. 5. **Creating false
documents or records (Kuta Lekh):** Creating false documents, accounts, or
writings is considered a violation of the vow of truthfulness because it
involves deception.  **The text concludes by stating that these five
transgressions are considered violations of the vow of truthfulness.**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dvitIya aNuvrata ke pAMca aticAroM para vivecana yogazAstra tRtIya prakAza
zloka 91 se 91 meM bhI aisA na karanA caahie| aisA karanA nirarthaka bhojanAdi-
nirodha hai| kintu kisI ko bukhAra yA anya bImArI meM laMghana | karavAnA paDe
athavA prayakta bhojya padArtha baMda karanA paDe to utane samaya ke lie hI
baMda karanA sArthaka aura sApekSanirodha hai| apane dvArA baMdhana meM DAle hae
yA rokakara rakhe hue Azrita prANI ko pahale AhAra karavA kara phira svayaM
bhojana kre| aparAdhI ko kadAcit daMDa denA par3e to kevala vANI se kahe ki 'Aja
tumheM bhojana Adi nahIM milegaa|' rogazAMti Adi ke lie zrAvaka upavAsa karA
sakatA hai| adhika kyA kaheM! zrAvaka ko svayaM vivekI banakara ahiMsA rUpa
mUlaguNa meM aticAra na lage isa taraha se yatanApUrvaka vyavahAra yA pravRtti
karanI caahie| yahAM zaMkA hotI hai ki zrAvaka ke to hiMsA (vadha) kA hI niyama
hotA hai, isalie baMdhana Adi meM doSa nahIM hai| hiMsA se virati ke akhaMDita
hone se yadi baMdhana Adi kA niyama liyA ho aura usa hAlata meM baMdhana Adi
kare to virati khaMDita ho jAne se vratabhaMga hotA hai| yA baMdhana Adi ke
pratyAkhyAna le lene ke bAda vrata kI maryAdA TUTa jAtI hai to pratyeka vrata
meM aticAra hotA hai, kintu baMdhana Adi kA to koI aticAra hotA nhiiN| isakA
samAdhAna yoM karate haiM-tumhArI bAta ThIka hai, hiMsAdi kA pratyAkhyAna kiyA
hai, lekina baMdhanAdi kiyA ho to kevala usake niyama meM arthApatti se unake
bhI pratyAkhyAna kiye hue smjhnaa| baMdhanAdi hiMsA ke upAyabhUta hai| isalie
unake karane para vratabhaMga to nahIM hotA; lekina aticAra to hotA hai| yaha
kaise? isakA uttara yoM hai-vrata kA pAlana aura bhaMga do prakAra se hotA hai-
aMtarvRtti se aura bahirvRtti se| 'maiM mArUMgA,' isa prakAra ke vikalpa ke
abhAva meM yadi koI kisI para gussA karatA hai yA Aveza prakaTa karatA hai, to
usameM dUsare ke prANa kA vinAza nahIM mAnA jAtA, isI prakAra kisI roSa yA Aveza
ke binA koI |badhana Adi meM pravRtti karatA hai to usase hiMsA nahIM hotii|
nirdayatA yA virati kI nirapekSatA se pravRtti hone se aMtarvatti se vratabhaMga
hotA hai aura hiMsA kA abhAva hone se bahirvRtti ke pAlana dvArA AMzika rUpa se
(dezataH) viratibhaMga hone se pravRtti ke kAraNa aticAra kA vyapadeza hotA hai|
isalie kahA hai-'maiM nahIM mArUMgA', isa prakAra ke niyama jisane liye haiM,
use dUsare kI mRtyu hue binA kauna-sA aticAra lagatA hai? jahAM krodha Adi ke
vazIbhUta hokara koI vadhAdi karatA hai aura apane gRhIta niyama kI apekSA nahIM
rakhatA, vahAM avazya hI nirapekSa kahanA caahie| yadyapi dUsare prANI kI mRtyu
nahIM hotI, isalie usakA niyama to kAyama hai, lekina krodhavaza yA nirdayatA se
pravRtta hone ke kAraNa vratabhaMga to ho hI jAtA hai| isa dRSTi se dezataH
(AMzika rUpa se) bhaMga aura dezataH pAlana hone se pUjyavaroM ne use aticAra
kahA hai| aura jo yaha kahA jAtA hai ki isase bArahavrata kI maryAdA TUTa jAtI
hai, vaha yuktiyukta nahIM hai| vizuddha ahiMsA ke sadbhAva meM baMdhana Adi meM
aticAra hai hii| baMdhanAdi se upalakSaNa se mAraNa, uccATana, mohana Adi
maMtraprayoga vagairaha dUsare aticAra bhI jAna lene cAhie  /  / 9 /  /  aba
dUsare vrata ke aticAra batAte haiN|262| mithyopadezaH sahasA'bhyAkhyAnaM
guhyabhASaNam  /  vizvastamantrabhedazca, kUTalekhazca sUnRte  /  / 91 //  artha
:- 1. mithyA (saMyama yA dharma ke viparIta, pApa kA) upadeza denA, 2. binA
vicAra kiye ekadama kisI para doSAropaNa karanA, 3. kisI kI gupta yA marma
(rahasya) bAta prakaTa kara denA, 4. apane para vizvAsa karake kahI huI gopanIya
maMtraNA dUsare se kaha denA aura 5. jhUThe dastAveja, jhUThe bahIkhAte yA
jhUThe lekha likhanA; ye satyANuvrata ke pAMca aticAra haiM  // 91 /  /  .
vyAkhyA :- 1. mithyA upadeza kA artha hai-asat updesh| asatya ke pratyAkhyAna va
satya ke niyama lene vAle ke lie para-pIDAkArI vacana bolanA asatyavacana
kahalAtA hai| isalie pramAdavaza para-pIr3AkArI upadeza dene meM aticAra (doSa)
lagatA hai| jaise koI kahe-gadhe aura UMToM ko kyoM biThAye rakhA hai? unase
kAma karavAo, bhAra uThavAyo, cora ko mAro ityaadi| athavA yathArtha artha se
viparIta upadeza denA bhI aticAra hai| isakA matalaba yaha huA ki viparIta
upadeza ko ayathArtha-upadeza mAnA gayA hai| jaise koI kisI pApa ko kara le aura
usase pache jAne para usakA ThIka uttara na de, satya bAta na kahe, athavA
vivAda meM par3akara svayaM yA dUsare ke dvArA anya kisI ke sAmane jhUThA
abhiprAya prakaTa kiyA jAya yA ulaTI preraNA dI yA dilAI jAya, vahAM prathama
aticAra lagatA hai| 2. sahasA kisI prakAra kA 228

Page #251 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Transgressions of the Second Vow  **Chapter 3, Light of Yoga, Verse 91**
**Sahsaabhyakhyan** (the second transgression) is to falsely accuse someone or
slander them without thinking, like saying "You are a thief," "You are an
adulterer," etc. Some consider **Rahasyabhyakhyan** to be the transgression
instead. "Rahas" means secret, and a secret is something that happens in
seclusion. False praise or slander, gossip, is also Rahasyabhyakhyan. For
example, someone might tell an old woman in private that her husband is in love
with a young woman, or tell a young woman in private that her husband is skilled
in lovemaking and has a strong desire for middle-aged women. Or someone might
tell a woman that her husband is like a donkey, very lustful, or that he is
impotent. Making fun of someone in this way, or making up false stories about a
woman and telling them to her husband, like "Your wife told me in private that
she is tired of your excessive indulgence in sensual pleasures," or "She said
that she tires out her husband in lovemaking," is Rahasyabhyakhyan. To speak in
a way that increases the attraction or attachment between a husband and wife, or
to engage in secret conversations or jokes in private that cause the husband to
falsely suspect his wife or the wife to falsely suspect her husband, is
Rahasyabhyakhyan. Deliberately lying out of malice breaks the vow. It is said
that deliberately falsely accusing someone breaks the vow, but if someone
slanders or defames someone without purpose, for fun, or without thinking, then
the second transgression, Sahsaabhyakhyan, is committed.  **3. Guhyabhashan**
(the third transgression) is to reveal confidential matters related to
government work (royal affairs) without purpose, unintentionally. Such
confidential matters are not meant to be shared with everyone, and ministers are
sworn to secrecy. Revealing these secrets through gestures, expressions, or by
hinting at them to others, leading to incorrect judgments, is also Guhyabhashan.
For example, someone might say, "So-and-so is working against the state." Or,
gossiping about each other and causing them to fight, or knowing someone's
intentions based on their appearance and behavior and telling someone else in a
way that breaks the bond between them, is also Guhyabhashan.  **4. Revealing the
secrets of a trusted person** (the fourth transgression) is to reveal a secret
that a friend, one's wife, or a trusted person has shared in confidence. Even if
the person repeats the secret exactly as it was told to them, it may not seem
like a lie from an external perspective, but revealing the secrets of a wife,
husband, friend, or trusted person can often lead to shame and even suicide.
Because it causes such great harm, it is ultimately a lie. If someone reveals a
secret unintentionally or because they believe the person is trustworthy, it is
a partial transgression of the vow. Revealing someone's secret, confidential
plans, or secret information, even if one has no right to do so, or revealing
confidential plans oneself and causing a rift between two lovers, is the fourth
transgression.  **5. Kूटलेख** (the fifth transgression) is to write false
documents, create fake documents, write using someone else's signature, or forge
a signature. Although writing false documents does not involve speaking or being
spoken to, it is still a form of falsehood and a partial transgression of the
vow of truthfulness, and therefore a transgression. If someone writes a lie in a
moment of passion, without speaking, it is a transgression because it violates
the boundaries of the vow. Or, if someone believes that they are allowed to lie,
but that writing is different and does not affect their vow, and they write a
lie with this understanding, then this is the fifth transgression. These are the
five transgressions of the second vow.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dUsare vrata ke aticAra yogazAstra tRtIya prakAza zloka 91 Age-pIche soce binA
ekadama kisI para jhUThA doSa yA mithyA kalaMka mar3ha denA, jhUTha-mUTha
aparAdha lagA denA; jaisetUM hI to cora hai, tUM parastrIgAmI hai, ityAdi rUpa
se kahanA sahasAbhyAkhyAna nAmaka dUsarA aticAra hai| koI-koI isake badale yahAM
rahasyAbhyAkhyAna nAmaka aticAra batAte haiN| 'rahaH' avyaya hai, usakA artha
hotA hai-ekaaNt| ekAMta meM hone vAle ko rahasya kahate haiN| jhUThI prazaMsA
karanA yA jhUThI niMdA, cugalI karanA bhI rahasyAbhyAkhyAna hai| jaise koI kisI
bur3hiyA se ekAMta meM kahe ki tumhArA pati to phalAM taruNI se prema karatA hai
aura kisI taruNI se ekAMta meM kahe ki 'tumhArA pati bar3A kAmakalA meM kuzala
aura praur3ha ceSTA vAlA hai, usakA to madhyamavaya kI nAriyoM para anurAga hai|
athavA kisI strI se koI kahe ki terA pati gadhe ke samAna atyaMtaviSayI athavA
kAmuka hai| athavA terA pati to nAmarda hai| isa prakAra kI haMsI-majAka kare
athavA kisI strI ke lie jhUThI bAta banAkara usake pati se kahe ki terI patnI
mujhe ekAMta meM kahatI thI ki 'tere ativiSayasevana se vaha becArI hairAna ho
gayI hai|' athavA yoM kahe ki 'vaha kahatI thI-maiM apane pati ko bhI ratikrIr3A
meM thakA detI huuN|' athavA daMpatiyugala meM se kisI strI yA puruSa ko moha yA
Asakti bar3he, usa prakAra kI bAteM karanA athavA usa sthiti meM ekAMta meM
aneka prakAra kI gupta bAteM yA haMsI majAka kI bAteM karanA, jisase puruSa ko
strI para jhUThA zaka (vahama) ho jAya athavA strI ko puruSa para jhUThA bhrama
paidA ho jAya; isa prakAra kI bhrAMtijanaka bAteM karanA rahasyAbhyAkhyAna
aticAra hai| jAna-bUjhakara durAgrahavaza jhUTha bolane para to vratabhaMga ho
jAtA hai| kahA bhI hai-jAnabUjhakara sahasA jhUThA Aropa Adi lagAyA jAya to
vahAM vratabhaMga ho jAtA hai, aura jahAM binA upayoga ke, haMsI-majAka meM yA
binA soce-samajhe, kisI ko badanAma kiyA jAya yA kisI para lAMchana lagAyA jAya,
vahAM sahasAbhyAkhyAna nAmaka dUsarA aticAra lagatA hai| 3. guhyabhASaNa -
zAsanakArya (rAjakArya) meM kaI aisI gopanIya bAteM hotI haiM, jo sabhI ko
batAne lAyaka nahIM hotI, (maMtriyoM ko usa gopanIyatA kI zapatha bhI dilAyI
jAtI hai) una rAjyAdi kAryasaMbaMdhI gupta bAtoM ko binA upayoga ke, sahasA
anajAne meM prakaTa kara denA guhyabhASaNa nAmaka aticAra hai| athavA iMgita yA
AkRti Adi se jAnakara usake viSaya meM dUsare se kahanA galata nirNaya kara
lenA-bhI guhyabhASaNa hai| jaise koI kisI se kahe ki 'amUka | vyakti
rAjyaviruddha kArya karatA hai|' athavA eka dUsare kI cugalI khAkara paraspara
bhir3A denA-eka kI mukhAkRti aura AcaraNa ke AdhAra para jarA-sA abhiprAya
jAnakara dUsare ko aisI yukti se kahanA jisase ki una donoM kI paraspara prIti
TUTa jAya-yaha bhI guhyabhASaNa nAmaka tRtIya aticAra hai| 4. vizvasta vyakti kI
gupta bAta prakaTa karanA, cauthA aticAra hai| kisI mitra, apanI strI yA kisI
vizvasanIya vyakti ne koI gupta bAta kisI para bharosA rakhakara kahI ho aura
vaha usa gupta bAta ko jahAM-tahAM prakaTa kara detA hai to use yaha aticAra
lagatA hai| hAlAMki jaisI bAta kisI ne kahI hai, usI bAta ko vaha yathArtharUpa
se duharA detA hai, isalie bAhya dRSTi se asatya na hone se aticAra rUpa nahIM
mAlUma detI; lekina strI-puruSa kI yA mitra athavA vizvasta vyakti kI gupta
hakIkata prakaTa ho jAne se kaI daphA vaha lajjAvaza AtmahatyA kara baiThatA
hai| isa prakAra ke ghora anartha kA kAraNa hone se paramArtha se vaha vacana
asatya hI hai| kadAcit anajAne meM yA vizvasta samajhakara kaha dene para vrata
ke AMzika bhaMga hone se aticAra hai| kisI kI gupta bAta, guptamaMtraNA aura
gupta AkAra Adi prakaTa karane kA adhikAra na hone para bhI dUsaroM ke sAmane
prakaTa kara detA hai athavA svayaM maMtraNA karake usa guptamaMtraNA ko prakaTa
kara detA hai aura do premI vyaktiyoM ke bIca phUTa DalavA detA hai, vahAM
cauthA aticAra hotA hai| 5. kUTalekha - jhUThe lekha likhanA, jhUThe dastAveja
banAnA, dUsare ke hastAkSara jaise akSara batAkara likhanA athavA nakalI
hastAkSara kara denA, pAMcavA aticAra hai| yadyapi jhUThe lekha likhane Adi meM
vacana se asatya nahIM bolA jAtA, na bulavAyA jAtA hai| tathApi aisA karanA
asatya kA hI prakAra hai, satyavrata kA AMzika bhaMga hai, isalie aticAra hai|
jahAM sahasA Aveza meM Akara vANI se mauna rakhakara hAtha se jhUThI bAta likhI
jAtI hai, vahAM vrata kI maryAdA ke atikramAdi ke kAraNa aticAra lagatA hai;
athavA yoM samajhakara ki mere to asatya bolane kA niyama hai, yaha to lekhana
hai, isase mere vrata meM koI Apatti nahIM AtI; aisI samajha se koI vyakti
vratapAlana kI bhAvanA pUrvaka asatya likhatA hai, to vahAM yaha pAMcavAM
aticAra hai| isa taraha dUsare vrata ke ye pAMca aticAra hue  /  / 91 /  /  229

Page #252 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Discussion on the Five Transgressions of the Third Anuvrata  **Yoga Shastra,
Third Light, Verse 92**  Now, the five transgressions of the third Anuvrata,
Asteya Anuvrata, are as follows:  **Verse 92:**  * **Stenaanujna,
Tadaneetadaanam, Dwidrajyalanghanam, Pratiroopkriya, Maanaanaytwam cha
Asteyasamshritaha.**  **Meaning:**  1. **Stenaanujna:** Giving permission or
advice to a thief to steal. 2. **Tadaneetadaanam:** Helping a thief to steal or
assisting him after he has stolen. 3. **Dwidrajyalanghanam:** Leaving one's own
kingdom and entering the enemy's kingdom or acting against the state. 4.
**Pratiroopkriya:** Showing a good quality item and then giving a bad quality
item. 5. **Maanaanaytwam:** Keeping false weights and measures or manipulating
them.  These five are the transgressions of the Asteya Anuvrata.
**Explanation:**  The vow of Asteya Anuvrata is taken in the form of "I will not
steal, nor will I cause others to steal; through my mind, speech, and body."
Therefore, giving inspiration, advice, or permission to a thief to steal, even
while thinking "I am not stealing," is the first transgression of the third vow.
Or, giving praise, encouragement, or a pat on the back to a thief for stealing.
Or, giving a thief tools, weapons, a bag, scissors, etc., for free or for a
price. According to the vow of the third vow, this transgression breaks the vow
of the practitioner.  Giving someone the inspiration, "Why are you sitting idle?
If you don't have food, I will give you some. No one will buy your stolen goods,
I will buy them." This kind of inspiration, while thinking "I am not inspiring
him to steal, I am inspiring him to earn a living," is considered the first
transgression due to the relativity of vow-keeping.  **Tadaneetadaanam** means
accepting the goods stolen by a thief. Accepting gold, silver, clothes, etc.,
stolen by a thief at a low price, for free, or secretly, is also considered
stealing because it encourages stealing. The fear of being punished by the
government remains, and the person who takes the stolen goods thinks, "I am
doing business, where am I stealing?" This kind of outcome, being relative to
the vow, does not break the vow of non-stealing, but it is partially kept and
partially broken, resulting in a transgression of the form of "Bhangabhang."
This is the second transgression.  Going to a forbidden kingdom ruled by an
enemy king, violating the established boundaries of the kingdom or the
encampment of the army, entering the forbidden enemy kingdom, violating the
mutual arrangements of travel between kingdoms, the entry of a resident of one
kingdom into another kingdom, and the entry of a resident of another kingdom
into another kingdom are all considered **Swami-Adatta**.  The scriptures
mention four types of Adatta (theft): Swami-Adatta, Jiva-Adatta, Tirthankara-
Adatta, and Guru-Adatta. Here, the fault of Swami-Adatta applies. Even if the
state prohibits it, going to another kingdom is punished like a thief. In
reality, this is a violation of the state, which is considered theft, and
therefore breaks the vow.  Even though the person who goes to another kingdom
without permission thinks, "I am not going for theft or espionage, I am going
for business," this feeling, due to the relativity of the vow, does not neglect
the protection of the vow. However, in social practice, he is considered a
thief, punished by the state, and therefore the third transgression applies
here.  4. **Tattpratiroopkriya:** Mixing bad quality items with good quality
items and selling them at the price of good quality items, adulteration; showing
a good quality item and then giving a different inferior quality item. For
example, mixing low-quality rice with high-quality rice, mixing fat with ghee,
mixing water with milk, mixing sand with medicines, mixing gum or resin with
asafoetida, mixing urine with oil, mixing syrup with honey, mixing other metals
with pure gold or silver, and selling them, etc., are all examples of
**Pratiroopkriya**.  Changing the horns of a stolen cow, etc., by cooking them
in fire, bending them down with steam, or making them thin so that the owner
cannot recognize them. Or, changing the outer structure of something, changing
the sheath of a sword, etc., so that the owner cannot recognize it, and then
keeping it or selling it by twisting it around, is the fourth transgression
called **Tattpratiroopkriya**.  5. **Maanaanaytwam:** Anything used to measure
something is called **Maan**. Keeping weights and measures like ratti, pal,
tola, masha, bhar, man, seer (kilogram today), gaj (meter), etc., less than the
actual weight or measure, or manipulating the weight or measure while giving the
customer the goods. Or, keeping weights and measures more than the actual weight
or measure and taking more from others.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 tRtIya aNuvrata ke pAMca aticAroM para vivecana yogazAstra tRtIya prakAza zloka
92 aba tIsarA asteyANuvrata ke pAMca aticAra kahate haiM | 263  /  stenAnujJA
tadAnItAdAnaM dviDrAjyalaGghanam  /  pratirUpakriyA mAnAnyatvaM cAsteyasaMzritAH
// 92 //  artha :- 1. cora ko corI karane kI anumati yA salAha denA, 2. corI
karane meM use sahAyatA denA athavA corI karane ke bAda usako sahayoga denA, 3.
apane rAjya ko chor3akara zatru ke rAjya meM jAnA athavA rAjyaviruddha kArya
karanA, 4 . acchI vastu batAkara kharAba vastu denA, 5. khoTe bAMTa aura khoTe
gaja ( nApataula) rakhanA yA nApataula meM gar3abar3a karanA, ye pAMca
asteyANuvrata ke pAMca aticAra haiM  /  / 92 /  /  vyAkhyA : asteyANuvrata kI
pratijJA 'svayaM corI nahIM karUMgA, na karAUMgA; mana-vacana-kAyA se', isa rUpa
meM hotI hai| isalie maiM to corI kara nahIM rahA hUM yaha samajhakara cora ko
corI karane kI preraNA, salAha yA anumati denA | athavA corI karane para zAbAzI
denA, protsAhana denA yA pITha ThokanA yaha tRtIyavrata kA prathama aticAra hai|
athavA cora ko corI karane ke lie aujAra, hathiyAra, koza, kaiMcI Adi muphta meM
denA yA kIMmata lekara denaa| yahAM para tIsare vrata kI pratijJA ke anusAra isa
aticAra se vratI kA vratabhaMga hotA hai| kisI ko yaha preraNA denA ki Ajakala
tuma 'bekAra kyoM baiThe ho ? tumhAre pAsa khAnA Adi na ho to maiM duuNgaa|
tumhArA curAyA huA mAla koI nahIM kharIdegA to maiM kharIda | luuNgaa|' isa
prakAra preraNA dekara yaha mAna lenA ki maiM use corI karane kI preraNA thor3e
hI de rahA hUM, maiM to use AjIvikA kI preraNA de rahA huuN| isameM vratapAlana
kI bhAvanA hone se sApekSatA ke kAraNa prathama aticAra lagatA hai  /
tadAnItAdAnaM | kA matalaba hai - cora ke dvArA curAkara lAI huI vastu ko
grahaNa krnaa| cora ke dvArA curAye hue sone, cAMdI, kapar3e Adi ko kama mUlya
meM, muphta meM yA gupta rUpa se le lenA bhI corI kahalAtI hai, kyoMki isase
svayaM corI na karane para bhI | corI ko protsAhana milatA hai, sarakAra dvArA
daMDita hone kA bhaya savAra rahatA hai aura corI kA mAla lene vAlA yaha
samajhatA hai ki 'maiM to vyApAra kara rahA hUM, corI kahAM kara rahA hUM!' isa
prakAra ke pariNAma vrata sApekSa hone se acauryavrata kA bhaMga to nahIM hotA;
kintu aMzataH pAlana aura aMzataH bhaMga hone se bhaMgAbhaMgarUpa aticAra lagatA
hai| yaha dUsarA aticAra huaa| zatrurAjA ke dvArA niSiddha rAjya meM jAnA, rAjya
kI nizcita kI huI sImA yA senA ke par3Ava kA ullaMghana karanA, niSiddha kiye
hue zatrurAjya meM jAnA rAjyoM kI pArasparika gamanAgamana kI vyavasthA kA
atikrama karanA, eka rAjya ke nivAsI kA dUsare rAjya meM praveza tathA dUsare
rAjya ke nivAsI kA anyarAjya meM praveza karanA svAmI - adatta meM zumAra | hai|
zAstra meM svAmI - adatta, jIva-adatta, tIrthaMkara - adatta aura guru- adatta
ye cAra prakAra ke adatta (caurya) batAye haiM; | inameM se yahAM svAmI - adatta
nAmaka doSa lagatA hai| isa taraha rAjya ke dvArA niSedha hone para bhI dUsare
rAjya meM jAne para | cora ke samAna daMDa diyA jAtA hai| vastutaH rAjya kI corI
rUpa doSa hone se yahAM vratabhaMga hotA hai| phira bhI dUsare rAjya meM anumati
ke binA jAne vAle ke mana meM to yahI hotA hai ki maiM corI yA jAsUsI ke lie
nahIM, vyApAra ke lie gayA huuN| isa bhAvanA ke kAraNa vrata sApekSatA hone se
vrata rakSaNa kI upekSA nahIM hotI; tathApi lokavyavahAra meM vaha cora mAnA
jAtA hai, rAjya dvArA daMDita hotA hai, isalie yahAM tIsarA aticAra lagatA hai
/  4. tatpratirUpakakriyA acchI vastu meM kharAba milAkara acchI vastu ke bhAva
meM becanA, milAvaTa karanA; bar3hiyA vastu | dikhAkara dUsarI ghaTiyA vastu de
denA  /  jaise acchI kisma ke cAvaloM meM halkI kisma ke cAvala milA denA, ghI
meM carbI, dUdha meM pAnI, davAIyoM meM khar3iyAmiTTI, hIMga meM goMda yA khaira
Adi kA rasa, tela meM mUtra, zahada meM cAsanI, uttama sone yA cAMdI meM dUsarI
dhAtu milAkara becanA ityAdi vyavahAra pratirUpakakriyA hai| apaharaNa kI huI
gAya Adi ke sIMga ko | badalane ke lie Aga meM pakAe hue tarabUja ke phala aura
bhApa se nIce jhukAnA yA tIcche banAnA jisase mAlika pahacAna | na ske| yA aura
kisI cIja ke UparI DhAMce ko badala denA, talavAra Adi ke myAna badalakara rakha
denA, tAki mAlika na pahacAna sake, isa tarakIba se idhara-udhara Ter3hA karake
svayaM rakha lenA yA beca denA tatpratirUpaka vyavahAra nAmaka cauthA aticAra
hai  /  5. mAnAnyatva - jisase koI cIja nApI jAya, use mAna kahate haiN| rattI,
pala, tolA, mAzA, bhAra, mana | sera ( Ajakala kilo), gaja (mITara) Adi bAMTa yA
gaja Adi sAdhana kama taula nApa ke rakhanA athavA grAhaka ko saudA | dete
samaya taula yA nApa meM gar3abar3I karanA  /  athavA adhika taula yA nApa ke
bAMTa yA gaja Adi rakhakara dUsare se adhika 230

Page #253 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Translation preserving Jain terms:  Discourse on the Five Transgressions of the
Vow of Brahmacharya (Celibacy) Take the verse 93 from the third chapter of the
Yogashastra. This should be done with the understanding that merely picking a
lock or cutting a pocket is not the commonly known theft, but it is the art of
trade. From this perspective, making efforts to protect the vow amounts to the
aforementioned two transgressions. Or, by providing assistance to a thief to
carry out the said five acts; though these are clearly forms of theft, yet they
occur due to negligence. Transgressions, violations, or transgressions that
occur due to ignorance or lack of understanding are called faults in conduct. It
is not the case that these transgressions do not apply to the servants of the
king, etc. The first two transgressions generally apply to the servants of the
king, etc. Entering the prohibited territory of the enemy is the third
transgression, which occurs when a feudal lord, government official, or one
under the service of a master (king) assists the adversary (be it the king or
anyone else) of his master. Alteration in measurement and counterfeiting are two
separate transgressions. Even the king can be subjected to these transgressions
if he causes alteration in the measurement of his treasury or counterfeits
goods. Thus, these are the five transgressions of the vow of non-stealing
(Asteya-Anuvrta).  Now, the five transgressions of the fourth vow (Brahmacharya-
Anuvrta) are being explained. 1. Cohabitation with a kept woman (mistress) or a
prostitute for a short period, 2. Cohabitation with a woman with whom marriage
has not occurred, 3. Marriage with people other than one's own family members or
dissatisfaction with one's own wife and marrying another woman without her
consent driven by intense desire for sensual pleasures, 4. Intense desire for
sexual play, and 5. Engaging in Ananga-krida (erotic play); these are the five
transgressions of the vow of Brahmacharya.  Explanation: The more commonly known
name of the vow of Brahmacharya is the vow of contentment with one's own wife
and abstinence from other women. From this perspective, the five transgressions
of this vow are explained - 1. Ittvarat-tagama - The word 'Ittvari' means one
kept for a short period. Such a woman could be a prostitute or a mistress who
goes to multiple men, or one who is kept on a salary or rent, or one who is kept
as a concubine or a servant (Goli) by taking the responsibility of her
maintenance. Cohabitation with such a woman is called Ittvarat-tagama. The man
who keeps such a woman considers her his wife by his perception or imagination,
so there is no violation of the vow of contentment with one's own wife, but due
to the fact that she is actually another's woman, even if accepted for a short
period, there is a violation of the vow. Thus, Ittvarat-tagama is the first
transgression that is both a violation and non-violation. 2. Anatta-gama -
'Anatta' means one who is not taken in marriage, i.e., one who does not have a
husband. She could be an unmarried girl, a widow, a prostitute, a promiscuous
woman, or an abandoned noblewoman; cohabitation with such an unmarried woman is
the second transgression. This transgression occurs due to lack of
understanding, ignorance, or negligence, but the abstainer from other's wives
does not incur these two transgressions because at that time the prostitute or
girl or widow does not have a husband. Prostitutes or promiscuous women do not
have a husband at all. And then he accepts her as his wife for a short time. The
remaining transgressions apply to both. The five transgressions are worth
knowing for the one observing the vow of contentment with one's own wife, but
not worth practicing. Other Acharyas' view on this matter is that these two
transgressions apply to both the aforementioned types of men; because if the one
content with his own wife keeps a woman (prostitute, etc.) for a short time and
enjoys her, he incurs the transgression, this is clear. But the abstainer from
other's wives also incurs the transgression by cohabiting with a husbandless
woman, because the prostitute, etc. is without a husband, and he keeps her as a
woman for a short time, after which she goes to another, then she becomes the
wife of another, from this perspective, as she is somewhat another's woman,
there is a violation of the vow, and as she is actually not another's woman,
there is no violation of the vow. In this way, the second transgression, which
is both a violation and non-violation, applies to both the one content with his
own wife and the abstainer from other's wives. 3. Parvivaaha - Marrying the
children of others, apart from one's own son-daughter, etc., or out of the
desire to obtain the fruit of giving away a daughter in marriage...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 brahmacaryANuvrata ke pAMca aticAroM para vivecana yogazAstra tRtIya prakAza
zloka 93 le lenaa| yaha isa bhAvanA se karanA ki sirpha seMdha lagAkara yA jeba
kATakara dUsare kI cIja le lenA hI lokaprasiddha corI hai, yaha to vyApAra kI
kalA hai. isa dRSTi se vrata-rakSA karane meM prayatnazIla hone se ukta donoM
aticAra lagate haiN| athavA cora ko sahAyatA Adi dekara ukta pAMcoM kArya
karAnA; vaise to spaSTataH corI ke rUpa haiM, phira bhI ye kArya asAvadhAnI se.
ajJAnatA yA besamajhI se yA anajAne ho jAya to vyavahAra meM atikrama,
vyatikrama yA aticAra rUpa doSa kahalAte haiN| rAjA ke naukara Adi ko ye aticAra
nahIM lagate, aisI bAta nahIM hai| pahale ke do aticAra rAjA ke naukara Adi ko
prAyaH lagate haiM zatru ke (niSiddha) rAjya meM jAnA tIsarA aticAra hai, yaha
taba lagatA hai, jaba koI sAmaMta rAjA Adi yA sarakArI naukara apane svAmI
(rAjA) ke yahAM naukarI karatA huA yA usake mAtahata rahatA huA usake virodhI
(cAhe vaha rAjA ho yA aura koI) kI sahAyatA karatA hai, taba yaha aticAra lagatA
hai| nApa-taula meM parivartana tathA pratirUpakriyA (herApherI), ye do aticAra
pRthak-pRthak hai| rAjA bhI apane khajAne ke nApataula meM parivartana karAve yA
vastu meM herApherI karAve; taba use bhI ye aticAra lagate haiN| isa prakAra
asteya-aNuvrata ke ye pAMca aticAra hue||92|| aba cauthe aNuvrata ke pAMca
aticAra batAte haiN|264| itvarAttAgamo'nAttAgatiranyavivAhanam  /
madanAtyAgraho'naGgakrIr3A ca brahmaNi smRtAH  // 93 /  /  . artha :- 1. kucha
arse ke lie rakhI huI parastrI (rakhaila) yA vezyA se saMgama karanA, 2. jisake
sAtha vivAha nahIM haA hai. aisI strI se sahavAsa karanA. 3. apane patrAdi
kaTaMbIjana ke atirikta logoM ke vivAha karanA athavA apanI strI meM saMtuSTa na
hokara usakI anumati ke binA tIvraviSayAbhilASAvaza dUsarI strI se zAdI kara
lenA, 4. kAmakrIr3A meM tIvra abhilASA rakhanA aura 5. anaMgakrIr3A karanA; ye
cauthe brahmacaryANuvrata _ ke 5 aticAra kahe haiM  /  / 13 /  /  vyAkhyA :-
brahmacaryANuvrata kA svadArasaMtoSa-paradAraviramaNavrata nAma adhika pracalita
hai| isa dRSTi se isa vrata ke | 5 aticAra batAye gaye haiM-1. ittvarAttAgama -
itvarI zabda kA artha hotA hai thor3e samaya ke lie rakhI huii| aisI strI, aneka
puruSoM ke pAsa jAne vAlI kulaTA yA vezyA hotI hai athavA rakhaila hotI hai,
jise vetana yA kirAye-bhAr3e para rakhI jAtI hai, yA phira usake bharaNa-poSaNa
kA jimmA lekara rakhaila yA dAsI (golI) ke rUpa meM rakhI jAtI hai| aisI strI ke
sAtha gamana karanA ittvarAttAgama kahalAtA hai| aisI strI rakhane vAlA paruSa
apanI dRSTi yA kalpanA se use apanI patnI mAnatA hai, isalie vratasApekSatA hone
se svadArasaMtoSavrata kA bhaMga to nahIM hotA, kintu alpakAla ke lie svIkRta
hone para bhI vAstava meM parAI strI hone kI apekSA se vratabhaMga hotA hai| isa
prakAra itvarAttAgama bhaMgAbhaMgarUpa prathama aticAra hai| 2. anAttAgama
-anAttA kA artha hai-aparigrahItA arthAt jisakA kisI puruSa ke sAtha pANigrahaNa
nahIM huA hai, jisakA koI svAmI (pati) nahIM hai, athavA jise khuda ne
pANigrahaNa karake svIkAra nahIM kiyA hai| aisI strI kuMvArI kanyA, vidhavA,
vezyA, svacchaMdAcAriNI (kulaTA) yA pati tyaktA kulavatI Adi meM se koI bhI ho
sakatI hai; ataH aisI aparigRhIta strI ke sAtha saMbhoga karanA dvitIya aticAra
hai| besamajhI se, ajJAnatA yA pramAda se, atikrama Adi hone se yaha aticAra
lagatA hai, paraMtu parAdArAtyAgI ko ye donoM aticAra isalie nahIM lagate ki
vezyA yA kanyA athavA vidhavA ke usa samaya koI pati (svAmI) nahIM hotaa| vezyA
yA kulaTA ke to koI pati hotA hI nhiiN| aura phira thor3e samaya ke lie vaha use
apanI patnI ke rUpa meM svIkArakara letA hai| zeSa aticAra ukta donoM ko lagate
haiN| svadArAsaMtoSavratI ke lie ye pAMcoM aticAra jAnane yogya haiM, AcaraNa
karane yogya nhiiN| isa viSaya meM anya AcAryoM kA mata yaha hai ki ye donoM
aticAra ukta donoM prakAra ke puruSoM ko lagate haiM; kyoMki svadArasaMtoSI kisI
strI (vezyA Adi) ko thor3e samaya ke lie rakhakara use sevana kare to use
aticAra lagatA hai, yaha to spaSTa hai| lekina pativihIna strI ke sAtha saMgama
karane se paradArAtyAgI ko bhI aticAra yoM lagatA hai ki vezyA Adi pati-rahita
hotI hai, aura use thor3e samaya ke lie strI banAkara apane pAsa rakhatA hai|
usake bAda vaha dUsare ke pAsa jAtI hai, taba dUsare kI strI bana jAtI hai, isa
dRSTi se vezyA Adi kathaMcit parastrI hone se vratabhaMga hotA hai aura vastutaH
parastrI na hone se vratabhaMga nahIM hotaa| isa taraha bhaMgAbhaMgarUpa, dUsarA
aticAra svadArasaMtoSI aura paradAratyAgI donoM ko lagatA hai| 3. paravivAha-
apane putra-putrI Adi ke sivAya dUsare ke putra-putrI Adi kA vivAha karane se
athavA kanyAdAna ke phala pAne kI icchA se yA 231

Page #254 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Explanation about the transgressions of the vows of Svadāra-santosa (contentment
with one's own spouse) and Paradārātyāga (abstinence from others' spouses)
Yogaśāstra, Tṛtīya Prakāśa, Śloka 93:  1. Paradāravivahakaraṇa (arranging the
marriage of others' spouses): If one performs the marriage ceremony out of
affection or with the hope that the daughter will also get a match, it is
considered a transgression called Paradāravivahakaraṇa.  2. Paradārasaṃsarga
(sexual intercourse with others' spouses): One who has taken the vow of
Svadārasantosavrata (contentment with one's own spouse) or the vow of not
engaging in sexual activity with anyone other than one's own accepted spouse,
mentally, verbally, or physically, should abstain from arranging the marriages
of others. Facilitating sexual intercourse between others is considered a
transgression of this vow.  3. The desire to obtain the fruit of kanyadāna
(giving away the daughter in marriage) while in an immature state of right
belief (samyagdṛṣṭi) is also a transgression. However, if a person with wrong
belief (mithyādṛṣṭi) performs such an act with a benevolent intention, it is
considered a case of mithyātva (wrong belief).  4. Kāmakrīḍātīvra-āsakti
(excessive attachment to sensual pleasures): When a person neglects all other
activities and is obsessed with indulging in sexual pleasures day and night, or
remains motionless like a log in the mouth, armpits, or vagina of a woman, or
engages in repeated sexual intercourse like male and female birds, and uses
aphrodisiacs or tonics to regain sexual potency, it is considered the
transgression of Kāmakrīḍātīvra-āsakti.  5. Anangakrīḍā (unnatural sexual acts):
The desire of a man to engage in sexual activity with parts of the body other
than the genitals, or the desire of a woman or a eunuch to engage in sexual
activity with parts of the body other than the genitals, or the desire of a
eunuch to engage in sexual activity with a woman, man, or another eunuch, or to
perform manual stimulation, is considered Anangakrīḍā.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 svadAra saMtoSa aura paradArAtyAga nAmaka vrata ke aticAroM ke bAre meM
spaSTIkaraNa yogazAstra tRtIya prakAza zloka 93 | apane putra ko bhI kanyA mila
jAne kI AzA se athavA snehasaMbaMdha se lihAja meM Akara vivAhakriyA karane se
paravivAhakaraNa nAmaka aticAra lagatA hai| jisane apanI pANigRhIta strI ke
sivAya anyastrI ke sAtha maithuna - sevana nahIM karanA, nahIM karAnA; isa rUpa
meM svadArasaMtoSavrata liyA ho, athavA apanI strI yA vivAha kiye binA hI
svIkRta strI ke alAvA anya se mana, vacana, kAyA se maithunasevana na karane, na
karAne kA vrata aMgIkAra kiyA ho, usake dvArA dUsaroM ke vivAha saMbaMdha
jor3anA; vastutaH maithuna meM pravRtta karAnA hai, isa dRSTi se isa bAta kA
tyAga hI honA caahie| isa apekSA se aisI pravRtti se usakA vratabhaMga hone para
bhI vaha apane mana meM samajhatA hai - maiM to kevala vivAha karAtA hUM,
maithuna| sevana nahIM karAtA  /  isalie merA vratabhaMga nahIM hotaa| isa
prakAra apane vrata kI rakSA karane kI bhAvanA hone se aisI hAlata | meM use
aticAra lagatA hai| paravivAha karake kanyAdAna kA phala prApta karane kI icchA
samyagdRSTi ko aparipakva avasthA meM hotI hai| yadi mithyAdRSTi bhadrapariNAmI
vyakti caturthavrata lekara upakArabuddhi se aisA karatA hai to, vahAM use
mithyAtva lagatA hai| yahAM prazna hotA hai ki jaba dUsare ke saMtAnoM kA vivAha
karane meM aticAra lagatA hai to apane putra-putrI Adi | kA vivAha karane meM
aticAra kyoM nahIM lagatA? doSa to donoM hAlata meM samAna hai| isakA samAdhAna
jJAnIpuruSa yoM karate | | haiM ki yaha bAta ThIka hai ki donoM ke vivAha karane
meM eka sarIkhA doSa hai| lekina svadArasaMtoSI yadi apanI putrI kA | vivAha
nahIM karatA hai to usake vyabhicAriNI yA svacchaMdAcAriNI bana jAne kI
saMbhAvanA hai, isase jinazAsana kI evaM | apanI lI huI pratijJA kI apabhrAjanA
hotI hai, kintu usakI zAdI kara dene ke bAda to vaha apane pati ke adhIna ho |
jAtI hai, isalie vaisA nahIM hotaa| yadi hotA hai to bhI apane vrata yA dharma
kI niMdA nahIM hotii| nItizAstra meM bhI | kahA hai - strI kI kaumArya avasthA
meM pitA, yuvAvasthA meM pati aura vRddhAvasthA meM putra rakSA karatA hai|
isalie strI kisI | bhI hAlata meM svataMtratA ke yogya nahIM hai| (manu smRti
9/3) aisA sunA jAtA hai ki dazArha zrIkRSNa tathA ceTaka rAjA ke apane saMtAna
kA vivAha na karane kA niyama thA  /  unake parivAra meM anya loga vivAhAdi
kArya karane vAle the; isalie unhoMne aisA niyama liyA thaa| isa aticAra ke
artha ke viSaya meM anya AcAryoM kA mata hai - apanI strI meM pUrNa saMtoSa na
milatA ho, taba ( usakI anumati ke binA) anya strI se vivAha karane se
paravivAhakaraNa nAmaka aticAra lagatA hai| unake matAnusAra svadAra saMtoSI ko
yaha tIsarA aticAra lagatA hai  /  4. kAma-krIr3A meM tIvra Asakti nAmaka
aticAra taba hotA hai, jaba puruSa anya sabhI kAryoM yA pravRttiyoM ko
chor3akara rAta-dina kevala viSayabhoga kI hI dhuna meM rahatA hai, kAmabhoga ke
viSaya meM hI socatA hai athavA strI ke mukha, kAMkha yA yoni Adi meM
puruSacihna DAlakara kAphI samaya | taka atRtarUpa meM zaba kI taraha nizceSTa
par3A rahatA hai, yA nara aura mAdA cir3iyA kI taraha bAra-bAra saMbhoga karane
meM pravRtta hotA hai, agara kamajora ho jAya to saMbhoga karane kI zakti prApta
karane ke lie bAjIkaraNa kA prayoga karatA hai yA | rasAyana ( bhasma Adi) kA
sevana karatA hai| kyoMki bAjIkaraNa se yA aisI auSadhi Adi kA sevana karane se
puruSa hAthI | ko bhI harA detA hai; ghor3e ko bhI pachAr3a detA hai; isa
prakAra se balavAna banakara puruSa atisaMbhoga meM pravRtta hotA hai| | vaha
socatA hai ki mere to parastrIsevana kA tyAga hai, svastrI ke sAtha cAhe jitanI
bAra saMgama karane meM vratabhaMga to hotA nhiiN| isa apekSA se use cauthA
aticAra lagatA hai  /  5. anaMgakrIr3A- puruSa ko apane kAmAMga se bhinna
puruSa, strI yA napuMsaka ke kAmAMga se sahavAsa karane kI icchA honA athavA
vedodaya se hastakarma Adi karane kI icchA honA tathA strI ko puruSa, strI yA
napuMsaka ke sAtha sahavAsa karane kI icchA honA athavA vedodaya se hastakarma
Adi karane kI icchA honA evaM napuMsaka ko strI, puruSa yA napuMsaka ke sAtha
saMbhoga kI athavA vedodaya se hastakarma Adi karane kI icchA honA; anaMgakrIr3A
hai| anaMgakrIr3A kA tAtparya hai - kAmottejanAvaza maithunasevana ke yogya
aMgoM ke atirikta dUsare aMgoM se duzceSTA karanA, dUsarI iMdriyoM se
saMbhogakrIr3A karanA athavA asaMtuSTa hokara kASTha, patthara yA dhAtu kI yoni
yA liMga sarIkhI | AkRti banAkara athavA kele Adi phaloM se liMgAkRti kalpita
karake yA paravala Adi se yoni-sI AkRti kI kalpanA | karake athavA miTTI,
rabar3a yA camar3e Adi ke bane hue puruSacihna yA yonicihna se kAmakrIr3A
karanA; strI ke yoni pradeza ko bAra-bAra masalanA, usake keza khIMcanA, usake
stanoM ko bAra-bAra pakar3anA, paira se komala lAta mAranA, dAMta yA 232

Page #255 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Atichara of the Fifth Vrata (Vow)  The Yogashastra, in the third prakasha
(chapter), sloka 94, states that cutting the nails, hair, etc., and repeatedly
kissing, etc., due to the rise of the Mohaniya (deluding) karma, are also called
Anangakrida (sensual play). Or, engaging in play with parts of the body other
than the sexual organs, such as the thighs, breasts, face, cheeks, armpits,
buttocks, etc., is also called Anangakrida.  The Shravaka (lay follower), being
extremely afraid of sin, mainly observes the vow of Brahmacharya (celibacy).
However, when due to the rise of Vedodaya (the fruition of Vedaniya karma) or
Mohaniya karma, he becomes utterly incapable of enduring the sexual urge, then
solely for the pacification of the urge, he resorts to the company of his own
wife. But he completely renounces the company of all other women. Even in the
act of sexual intercourse, he conducts himself like threading a needle, not
being overpowered by intense attachment or strong sexual excitement.  It is not
desirable to be so excessively restrained that he remains aloof from the intense
desire for sexual enjoyment and Anangakrida, and considers all the women of the
world, other than his own wife, as his mother, sister, or daughter. The
Dharmishtha (pious) Shravaka should refrain from such acts, which are devoid of
any benefit, but rather cause a waste of time and energy, diminish spiritual
wisdom, impair memory, and sometimes even lead to severe diseases like
consumption, etc. The intentional indulgence in these two prohibited faults
(atichara) leads to the breach of the vow.  There are some Acharyas (spiritual
teachers) who have a different opinion regarding these five atichara. They say
that the renunciation of only sexual intercourse with a courtesan or another's
wife is required, but not the renunciation of embracing, kissing, etc. Believing
this, some who are content with their own wife or have renounced another's wife,
engage in embracing, etc., and in that state, these two atichara apply to them
to some extent, as they are related to the vow. From this perspective, the
content with one's own wife has all five atichara, while the one who has
renounced another's wife has only the last three atichara.  On the contrary,
some other Acharyas propound a different interpretation regarding these
atichara. They say that all five atichara apply to the one who has renounced
another's wife. They believe that keeping a courtesan for a certain period and
cohabiting with her, since the courtesan is another's wife, leads to the breach
of the vow. But in social practice, a courtesan is not considered another's
wife, so the breach of the vow does not occur. In this way, for the one who has
renounced another's wife, the atichara are of a mixed nature. However, for the
one content with his own wife, the breach of the vow does not occur on the
grounds that he considers widows, women whose husbands are abroad for a long
time, fallen women, or those who do not accept their husbands, as his own, and
cohabits with them, but for the one who has renounced another's wife, cohabiting
with such women leads to the atichara, because it is commonly understood that
she is his wife, but in reality, she is not, so the previous atichara apply.
However, the breach of the vow does not occur entirely.  The remaining three
atichara - Paravivahakarana (remarriage), Tivrakamabhilasha (intense desire for
sexual enjoyment), and Anangakrida (sensual play) - apply to both.  All these
atichara are described from the perspective of the male. Regarding the female,
there are no such distinctions as Swapatisamtosha (content with one's own
husband) and Parapurushatyagi (renouncer of another's husband). For her, all men
other than her own husband are considered as Parapurusha (another's husband).
Therefore, she has only the Swapurushasamtosha (contentment with one's own
husband) vow. If she engages in Paravivahakarana, etc., then the three atichara
apply to her. The remaining two atichara may or may not apply to her in relation
to her own husband, like a co-wife whose husband has a fixed day to visit her.
Considering her husband as a Parapurusha on that day, she engages in
cohabitation with him, and in that respect, the atichara applies to her. Until a
woman desires or makes efforts for cohabitation with a Parapurusha, the faults
of Atikrama, Vyatikrama, or Atichara apply to her, but if she indulges in sexual
intercourse with a Parapurusha, then the breach of the vow occurs. For a
Brahmachari (one who is not the husband of any woman) or even one's own husband,
the desire for intense sexual play would lead to all five atichara. The
remaining three atichara should be understood for women in the same way as for
men.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pAMcave vrata ke aticAra yogazAstra tRtIya prakAza zloka 94 nakha Adi se
kATanA, bAra-bAra cuMbana karanA Adi, mohanIya karma ke udaya se prabala
kAmavarddhaka aisI ceSTAe~ karanA bhI anaMgakrIr3A kahalAtI hai| athavA maithuna
ke avayavoM-puruSacihna aura strIyoni ke atirikta aMgoM-jAMgha, stana, mukha,
gAla, kAMkha, nitaMba Adi meM krIr3A karanA bhI anaMga krIr3A kahalAtI hai|
zrAvaka atyaMta pApabhIru hone se mukhyatayA brahmacarya kA hI pAlana karatA
hai| paraMtu jaba kabhI vedodayavaza yA mohanIyakarmodaya ke kAraNa kAma-vikAra
sahane meM atyaMta asamartha hotA hai, taba kevala vikAra kI zAMti ke lie apanI
strI kA sevana karatA hai| anya sabhI striyoM ke sevana kA to usake parityAga
hotA hI hai| maithunakriyA meM bhI vaha sUI meM dhAgA pirone ke nyAya kI taraha
hI pravRtta hotA hai, tIvra Asakti yA prabala kAmottejanA ke vazIbhUta nahIM
hotA hai| na itanA saMyamamaya honA hI cAhie ki kAmabhoga kI tIvra abhilASA
tathA anaMgakrIr3A se dUra rahe evaM svastrI ke atirikta saMsAra kI tamAma
striyoM ko apanI mAtA, bahana yA putrI tulya smjhe| jisa atikAmaceSTA se koI
lAbha nahIM, balki samaya aura zakti kA nAza hotA hai, dharmabuddhi kSINa ho
jAtI hai, smaraNazakti lupta ho jAtI hai, kabhI-kabhI kSaya Adi bhayaMkara
rAjaroga bhI ho jAte haiM, usase dharmiSTha zrAvaka ko to aise kAryoM se dUra hI
rahanA caahie| ina donoM niSiddha doSoM kA jAnabUjhakara sevana karane se
vratabhaMga ho jAtA hai| kitane hI AcAryoM kA ina pAMcoM aticAroM ke viSaya meM
uparyukta kathana se atirikta mata hai| ve kahate haiM-vaizyA yA parastrI ke
sAtha sirpha maithuna-sevana kA tyAga hai, AliMgana, cuMbana Adi kA to tyAga
nahIM hai; yoM mAnakara koI svadArasaMtoSI yA paradArAtyAgI AliMganAdi meM
pravRtta hotA hai to kathaMcit vratasApekSa hone se usa sthiti meM use ye donoM
aticAra lagate haiN| isa dRSTi se svadArasaMtoSI ko ukta pAMcoM aticAra lagate
haiM, paradArAvarjaka ko pichale tIna hI aticAra lagate haiN| isake viparIta
kitane hI AcArya ina aticAroM ke viSaya meM alaga hI pratipAdana karate haiN| ve
kahate haiM-paradArAtyAgI ko ukta pAMcoM hI aticAra lagate haiN| ve yo mAnate
haiM ki amuka samaya ke lie vezyA ko rakhakara usake sAtha sahavAsa karane se
vezyA cUMki parastrI hai, isalie vratabhaMga hotA hai| lekina lokavyavahAra meM
vezyA parastrI nahIM mAnI jAtI; isalie vratabhaMga nahIM bhI hotA; isa taraha
paradArAtyAgI ko bhaMgAbhaMgarUpa se ukta aticAra lagatA hai| kintu
svadArasaMtoSI ko vratabhaMga isa apekSA se nahIM hotA ki vaha kucha arse ke lie
vidhavA, proSitabhartRkA (jisakA pati cirakAla se paradeza meM ho), patityaktA
yA jo apane pati ko nahIM mAnatI ho; aisI striyoM ko apanI mAnakara unake sAtha
sahavAsa karatA hai; paraMtu paradArAtyAgI ko aisI striyoM se sahavAsa karane
para aticAra lagatA hai| kyoMki logoM meM yahI samajhA jAtA hai ki vaha usakI
strI hai; paraMtu vAstava meM usakI strI hai nahIM, isalie pUrvavat aticAra
lagatA hai; sarvathA vratabhaMga nahIM hotaa| bAkI ke-paravivAhakaraNa,
tIvrakAmAbhilASA aura anaMgakrIDA-ye tInoM aticAra to donoM ko lagate haiN| yaha
saba aticAra puruSa kI apekSA se kahe gye| strI ke saMbaMdha meM svapatisaMtoSa,
parapuruSatyAgI isa prakAra ke do bheda nahIM hai| usake lie svapuruSa ke
atirikta sabhI parapuruSa hI hai| isalie use svapuruSasaMtoSavrata hI hotA hai|
paravivAha Adi karane para tIna aticAra svapatisaMtoSI ko lagate haiM, zeSa do
aticAra apane pati ke viSaya meM lagate bhI haiM, nahIM bhI lgte| vaha isa
prakAra-jaise, kisI strI kI sauta ho; aura usake pati kA usake pAsa jAne kA
amuka dina niyata ho. to usa dina usakA apanA pati bhI usake lie paraparuSa hai|
isa daSTi se vaha apane pati ko svapariNIta paruSa mAnakara, sauta kI bArI ke
dina pati ke sAtha sahavAsa karatI hai to usa apekSA se use yaha aticAra lagatA
hai| koI strI parapuruSa ke sAtha sahavAsa kI icchA karatI hai yA upAya karatI
hai, taba taka use atikrama, vyatikrama yA aticAra rUpa doSa lagate haiM. kinta
paraparuSa ke sAtha saMbhoga meM pravatta ho jAya to vratabhaMga ho jAtA hai|
kisI brahmacArI (jo kisI strI kA bhI pati nahIM hai) yA apane pati se sAtha bhI
tIvra kAmakrIr3A kI icchA rUpa atikrama se ukta pAMcoM aticAra lagate haiN| zeSa
tInoM aticAra to pUrvokta prakAra se puruSoM kI taraha hI striyoM ke viSaya meM
samajha lene caahie||13|| _ aba pAMcaveM vrata ke aticAroM ke saMbaMdha meM
kahate haiN|265| dhana-dhAnyasya kupyasya gavAdeH kSetra-vAstunaH  /  hiraNya-
hemnazca saGkhyA'tikramo'tra prigrhe||94|| artha :- dhana aura dhAnya kI,
gRhopayogI sAdhanoM kI, gAya-bhaiMsa, dAsa-dAsI Adi kI, kheta, makAna, jamIna
233

Page #256 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Transgressions of the Fifth (Parigrahaparimaana) Vow and their Causes
**Chapter 3, Light of Yoga, Verse 94 onwards**  To possess more than the
prescribed limit (parimaana) of gold, silver, and other possessions, as defined
in the Yoga Shastra, is a transgression of the fifth vow.  **Explanation:**  The
transgression occurs when a householder, adhering to the principles of Shravak
Dharma, exceeds the quantity or number of possessions they have set for
themselves.  **Types of Possessions:**  * **Dhana (Wealth):** There are four
types of Dhana:     * **Ganima:** Items counted, like nutmeg and betel nuts.
* **Dharim:** Items weighed, like saffron and jaggery.     * **Mey:** Items
measured, like oil, ghee, and cloth.     * **Parikshya:** Items tested, like
gems, jewelry, and pearls. * **Dhannya (Grain):** There are 17 types of Dhannya:
* Rice, Barley, Wheat, Chickpeas, Juar, Urad, Masoor, Arhar, Moong, Moth,
Chaunla (Rajma), Matar (Kulth), Sesame, Kodo, Raagoon (Raungi), and Sun Dhannya.
* Some texts mention 24 types of Dhannya.  **Transgressions:**  1. **Dhannya-
Dhannya Pramaanatikram:** Possessing more than the prescribed limit of Dhannya
and Dhana, either for oneself or for others. 2. **Kupyapramaanatikram:**
Possessing more than the prescribed limit of items made from metals other than
gold and silver, such as bronze, copper, iron, lead, zinc, and alloys. This
includes utensils, beds, chairs, sofas, wardrobes, chariots, carts, vehicles,
plows, tractors, and other household items. 3. **Dwipad-Chatushpad
Pramaanatikram:** Possessing more than the prescribed limit of bipeds (humans,
sons, daughters, servants, maids) and quadrupeds (cows, bulls, buffaloes, goats,
sheep, donkeys, camels, elephants, horses, and other domesticated animals). This
also includes birds like parrots, mynas, swans, peacocks, chickens, and quails.
4. **Kshetravastu Pramaanatikram:** Possessing more than the prescribed limit of
land (Kshetra) and buildings (Vastu).     * **Kshetra:**         * **Setu
Kshetra:** Land irrigated by wells, ponds, waterwheels, or pumps.         *
**Ketuk shetra:** Land irrigated only by rainwater.         * **Ubhay (Setu-
Ketuk) Kshetra:** Land irrigated by both methods.     * **Vastu:**         *
**Khat:** Underground buildings (basements).         * **Uchchrit:** Buildings
above ground (houses, shops, mansions).         * **Khatouchchrit:** Buildings
with both underground and aboveground sections.     * This also includes
gardens, orchards, courtyards, guest houses, offices, shops, villages, and
cities. 5. **Hiranya-Suvarna Pramaanatikram:** Possessing more than the
prescribed limit of silver (Hiranya) and gold (Suvarna), including coins,
jewelry, and other items made from these metals.  **Note:** These five
transgressions are compound words in Sanskrit, indicating a combination of two
elements. Therefore, when taking the vow, one must set a limit for the quantity,
weight, measure, type, or number of possessions for the entire four-month period
or for life.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pAMcaveM (parigrahaparimANa) vrata ke aticAra aura unake lagane ke kAraNa
yogazAstra tRtIya prakAza zloka 94 Adi kI aura sonA-cAMdI Adi parigraha kI jo
maryAdA (parimANa) nizcita kI ho, usase adhika rakhanA, ye pAcaveM vrata ke
kramazaH pAMca aticAra haiM  // 94 /  /  /  vyAkhyA :- zrAvakadharmocita
parigraha-parimANavrata meM sadgRhastha ne jo saMkhyA yA mAtrA niyata kI ho, usa
saMkhyA yA mAtrA kA ullaMghana karane para aticAra lagatA hai| sarvaprathama
yahAM dhana aura dhAnya kA svarUpa batAte haiN| dhana cAra prakAra kA kahA gayA
hai-gaNima, dharima, meya aura priikssy| jAyaphala, supArI Adi jo cIjeM ginakara
dI jAtI haiM, ve gaNima kahalAtI hai; kuMkuma, gur3a Adi jo cIje taulakara dI
jAtI haiM, ve dharima kahalAtI hai aura tela, ghI Adi jo cIjeM nApakara (nApane
ke bartana se) dI jAtI haiM, ve meya kahalAtI hai; kapar3A Adi cIjeM bhI gaja
Adi se nApI jAtI hai, isalie ve bhI meya ke aMtargata hai; aura cauthA dhana
parIkSya hai-ratna, gahane, motI Adi inheM parIkSA karake diyA jAtA hai| ina
cAroM prakAroM meM sabhI vastue~ A jAtI hai, jinakI zrAvaka usI taraha se
maryAdA karatA hai| dhAnya 17 prakAra kA hai-1. cAvala, 2. jau, 3. gehU~, 4.
canA, 5. juAra, 6. ur3ada, 7. masUra, 8. arahara, 9. mUMga, 10. moTha, 11.
cauMlA (rAjamA), 12. maTara (kulatha), 13. tila, 14. kodo, 15. rAgUna (rauMgI)
aura 16. sana dhaany| anya graMthoM meM 24 prakAra ke dhAnya bhI batAye haiN|
dhana aura dhAnya donoM kI jitanI maryAdA nizcita ho; usase adhika svayaM
rakhanA yA dUsare ke yahAM rakhanA, prathama dhanya-dhAnyapramANAtikrama aticAra
hai| bAhya parigraha nau prakAra kA hai| yahAM para do-do prakAra ekatrita
karake pAMca aticAra batAye haiN| dUsarA aticAra kupyapramANAtikrama hai| isakA
artha hai-sonecAMdI ke sivAya halkI kisma kI dhAtue~-kAMsA, tAMbA, lohA, zIzA,
jastA, gilaTa Adi dhAtuoM ke bartana, cArapAI, palaMga, kursI, sophAseTa, |
alamArI, ratha, gAr3I, moTara, hala, TrekTara Adi khetI ke sAdhana aura anya
gRhopayogI sAmAna (pharnIcara) kupya ke aMtargata Ate haiN| ye aura ina jaisI
anya gRhopayogI sAmAna (pharnIcara) kupya ke aMtargata Ate haiN| ye aura ina
jaisI anya gRhopayogI sAmagrI kI jitanI maryAdA nizcita ho, usakA ullaMghana
karanA dUsarA kupyapramANAtikrama aticAra hai| tIsarA hai-dvipd-ctusspd-
prmaannaatikrm| do paira vAle dvipada meM manuSya, putra-strI, dAsa, dAsI,
naukara Adi Ate haiM, catuSpada meM gAya, baila, bhaiMsa, bakarI, bher3a, gadhA,
UMTa, hAthI, ghor3A Adi jitane bhI caupAye pAlatU jAnavara hai, ve Ate haiN| isI
prakAra totA-mainA, haMsa, mayUra, murgA, cakora Adi pakSIbhI isI ke aMtargata
Ate haiN| inake rakhane kI jitanI saMkhyA niyata kI ho, usase adhika rakhanA,
dvipada-catuSpadapramANAtikrama nAmaka tIsarA aticAra hai| cauthA
haikssetrvaastuprmaannaatikrm| kSetra (kheta) tIna prakAra kA hotA hai-setu,
ketu aura ubhaya kssetr| setukSetra use kahate haiM, jo kheta (khetI kI jamIna)
kuMA, bAvar3I Adi jalAzaya, rehaTa, koza yA paMpa Adi dvArA pAnI khIMcakara
sIMcA jAya aura dhAnya ugAyA jaay| ketukSetra vaha hai-jisa kheta (khetI kI
bhUmi) meM kevala barasAta ke pAnI se siMcAI hokara anAja paidA kiyA jaay| aura
ubhaya (setuketu) kSetra use kahate haiM-jisa kRSibhUmi meM pUrvokta donoM
prakAra se siMcAI karake annautpAdana kiyA jaay| vAstu kahate haiM-makAna ko|
isakA tAtparya khAsataura se rahane ke makAna-ghara se hai| vAstu tIna prakAra
kA hotA hai-khAta, ucchrita aura khaatocchrit| jamIna ke aMdara (bhUgarbha meM)
jo makAna ho, vaha talaghara khAta kahalAtA hai| tathA jo ghara, dUkAna, havelI
Adi jamIna ke Upara ho, vaha ucchrita kahalAtA hai, talaghara ke Upara makAna |
banA ho yAnI bhUmigRha aura Upara kA gRha donoM nIce-Upara hoM vaha khAtocchrita
kahalAtA hai| isI taraha bAga, bagIcA, nauharA, atithigRha, kAryAlaya, dUkAna,
rAjA Adi ke gAMva yA nagara; ye saba vAstu ke aMtargata hai| yAnI khulI aura
DhakI huI jamIna tathA jAyadAda saba kSetra-vAstu meM zumAra hai| ina donoM kI
nizcita kI huI saMkhyA kA atikramaNa kSetravAstu pramANAtikrama aticAra hai| 5.
hiraNya-suvarNapramANAtikrama nAmaka aticAra hai| hiraNya kA artha-rajata
(cAMdI) hai| suvarNa kA artha hai-sonaa| cAMdI aura sonA yA cAMdI yA sone ke
bane hue sikke, gahane Adi saba hiraNya-suvarNa ke aMtargata hai| inakI jo mAtrA
nizcita kI hai, usakA atikrama karanA-hiraNya-suvarNapramANAtikrama hai| ina
pAMcoM meM vyAkaraNa kI dRSTi se samAhAra-dvaMdva-samAsa hai| isalie ina pAMcoM
(jor3oM) ke viSaya meM vrata lete samaya caumAsebhara ke | lie yA jiMdagIbhara
ke lie jitanI mAtrA, vajana, nApa, kisma (prakAra) yA saMkhyA (ginatI) nizcita
kI ho, usa parimANa 234

Page #257 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Discussion on the transgressions of the fifth vow  **Violation of the fifth
vow due to transgression of the numerical limit**  **Verse 94:** Transgression
of the numerical limit of the fifth vow occurs due to violation of verse 95 of
the third light of Yoga Shastra. ||94||  **Doubt:** Here, a doubt arises: If
transgression of the accepted limit (number or quantity) in a vow leads to the
breaking of the vow, then how is it called a transgression? We will address this
in the following verse. ||266||  **Verse 95:**  From bondage, from feeling, from
pregnancy, from journey, and from donation, these five transgressions occur for
one who has taken the fifth vow, which are not appropriate for the vow-taker.
||95||  **Explanation:** Even without directly transgressing the limit (number)
of possessions like wealth and grain, if one who is observing the vow holds the
feeling of vow-protection, and with his understanding (good sense or good
intention) believes that he is not breaking the vow, then five transgressions
occur for that vow-taker due to the five reasons mentioned above. The vow is
broken when he does not have any feeling of vow-protection and does not
transgress the limit with the understanding that he is not breaking the vow. In
other words, if he knowingly transgresses the limit without caring about vow-
protection, then the vow is definitely broken. Here, the transgression of the
vow occurs due to the five reasons mentioned above.  For example, a grain
merchant has set a limit on the quantity of wealth and grain. Then, a debtor
comes to pay his debt, or someone comes to give a gift, and the merchant accepts
it, thinking that the quantity increases according to my rule, and my rule is
for a certain month; I will accept it after that; for now, I will keep it safe
in a corner of the house or with another person, or this thing will be sold from
my place, and then I will take it. With this intention, he tells the giver,
"Bring it after such and such month, I will take it." Or, he keeps the thing
well-packed and tied with a rope in the name of the giver as a trust, and then
decides to take it when the time limit of his rule is over. By making such a
bond (condition or decision or tie), he keeps more wealth or grain in the house
than the fixed quantity and believes that "this is his, not mine; etc." From the
perspective of vow-keeping, the vow is not completely broken, but the first
transgression occurs.  Similarly, transgression of the number of utensils occurs
due to feeling. For example, a householder has made a rule that he will not keep
more than a certain number of utensils. Suppose, after making the rule, he
receives the same thing as a gift, a reward, or a present, and the number
doubles. Now, fearing that his vow will be broken, he breaks and repairs it with
the intention of fulfilling the fixed number, combining two into one big thing,
or changing its shape or design to reduce its number; but in reality, the
increase in its value-proof leads to a partial breaking of the vow. Or, due to
the desire to keep the vow, he does not accept the things exceeding the limit at
that time, but tells the giver, "I will definitely take them after such and such
time, until then you keep them in trust in my name; do not give them to anyone
else except me." In this way, he collects them for himself with the desire not
to give them to others, and from this perspective, he incurs transgression.
Similarly, the number of cows, buffaloes, mares, etc. is fixed for a certain
period. But if the number increases due to the birth of calves, buffaloes, etc.
within the fixed time, then he incurs transgression called
"Dwipadchatuष्पदातिक्रम". If someone has made a rule not to keep more than a
certain number of cows, buffaloes, etc. for one or two years, then he thinks
that if the cows, buffaloes, etc. become pregnant during the time of my rule,
then the limit of my fixed number will be broken; therefore, he makes the cows,
buffaloes, etc. pregnant after a long time. By doing so, the number increases
due to the arrival of calves in the womb, and from this perspective, the vow is
partially broken; but since the transgression of the number is not visible from
the outside, he believes that "the number of these animals has not increased
according to my rule; therefore, my rule has not been broken." From this
perspective, the third transgression occurs due to the breaking of the vow.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pAMcave vrata ke aticAroM para vivecana yogazAstra tRtIya prakAza zloka 95 kA
ullaMghana karane se pAMcaveM vrata kA saMkhyAtikrama aticAra lagatA hai  /  /
94 //  yahAM zaMkA hotI hai ki vrata meM svIkRta kI huI maryAdA (saMkhyA yA
parimANa) kA ullaMghana karane para to vrata hI bhaMga ho jAtA hai, taba phira
ise aticAra kaise kahA gayA? isakA samAdhAna Age ke zloka meM karate haiN|266|
bandhanAd bhAvato garbhAdyojanAd dAnatastathA  /  pratipannavratasyaiSa,
paJcadhA'pi na yujyate  // 95 /  /  artha :- pahale kahe anusAra jisane pAMcavAM
vrata aMgIkAra kiyA hai, use baMdhana se, bhAva se, garbha se, yojana se aura
dAna kI apekSA se ye pAMca aticAra lagate haiN| jinheM sevana karanA vratadhArI
ke lie ucita nahIM hai||95|| vyAkhyA :- dhana-dhAnyAdi parigraha kI maryAdA
(saMkhyA) kA pratyakSa ullaMghana na karate hue vratarakSA kI bhAvanA rakhatA
hai, apanI samajha-bUjha (sabuddhi yA sadAzaya) se jo yahI mAnatA hai ki maiM
vratabhaMga nahIM kara rahA hUM, usa vratadhArI ko baMdhana Adi pAMca kAraNoM se
pUrvokta pAMca aticAra lagate hai| vratabhaMga to taba hotA, jaba vaha
vratarakSA kI koI bhAvanA na rakhatA aura na hI vratabhaMga nahIM kara rahA hUM,
aisI samajha-bUjha se maryAdAtikramaNa krtaa| yAnI vratarakSA kI paravAha na
karate hue jAnabUjhakara maryAdA-atikramaNa karatA to vratabhaMga nizcita ho
jaataa| yahAM to baMdhana Adi 5 kAraNoM se vratAtikrama hotA hai| jaise kisI
anAja ke vyApArI ne dhana-dhAnyaparimANa niyata kara liyA usake bAda koI
karjadAra apane RNa cukAne kI dRSTi se anAja yA dhana dene AyA, athavA koI
bheMTa rUpa meM dene AyA ho, aura ukta vyApArI yaha socakara use le letA hai, ki
mere niyama ke anusAra isakA parimANa bar3ha jAtA hai aura merA niyama amuka
mahIne taka kA hai; usake bAda ise svIkArakara lUMgA; abhI ghara ke eka kone meM
yA kisI anya vyakti ke yahAM surakSita rakhavA dUMgA athavA mere yahAM se yaha
cIja kucha bika jAyegI, usake bAda ise le luuNgaa| isa maMzA se dene vAle se
kahe ki 'amuka mahIne ke bAda le AnA, le luuNgaa|' athavA usa cIja ko acchI
taraha paika karake rassI se bAMdhakara dene vAle ke nAma se amAnata ke taura
para rakha le, phira jaba apane niyama kI miyAda (avadhi) pUrI ho jAya taba lene
kA nizcaya kre| isa prakAra kA baMdhana (zarta yA nizcaya athavA bAMdha) karake
nizcita parimANa se adhika dhana yA dhAnya ghara meM rakha le aura yaha mAne ki
'yaha to usakA hai, merA nahIM hai; ityAdi vratapAlana kI apekSA se vrata kA
sarvathA bhaMga nahIM hotA, lekina prathama aticAra lagatA hai| isI prakAra
kupya saMkhyA kA atikrama bhAva se hotA hai; jaise kisI sadgRhastha ne yaha
niyama liyA ki maiM itane se adhika amuka gRhopayogI sAmAna (kupya) nahIM
rkhuugaa| mAna lo, niyama lene ke bAda vahI cIja kisI se najarAne meM, inAma meM
yA upahAra meM mila gayI, isa kAraNa saMkhyA meM dugunI ho gyii| aba vaha apane
vratabhaMga ho jAne ke Dara se isa bhAva se tor3aphor3akara nizcita saMkhyA kI
pUrti ke lie do-do ko milAkara eka bar3I cIja banA yA banavA letA hai, athavA
usakI paryAya AkRti yA DijAina badalakara usakI saMkhyA kama kara letA hai;
paraMtu vAstava meM usake mUlyapramANa meM vRddhi ho jAne se vrata kA AMzika
bhaMga hotA hai| athavA bhAva se vratapAlana kA icchuka hone ke kAraNa ukta
pramANAtirikta cIjeM niyamabhaMga ho jAne ke bhaya se usa samaya to grahaNa
nahIM karatA, lekina dene vAle se kahatA hai-amuka samaya ke bAda maiM inheM
avazya le lUMgA, taba taka tuma mere nAma se amAnata rakha denA; mere sivAya
dUsare kisI ko inheM mata denA; isa prakAra vaha dUsare ko nahIM dene kI icchA
se apane liye saMgraha karAtA hai, isa dRSTi se use aticAra lagatA hai| isI
taraha gAya, bhaiMsa, ghor3I Adi rakhane kI amuka avadhi taka saMkhyA nizcita
kI; lekina niyata samaya ke aMdara hI gAya, bhaiMsa Adi ke prasava ho jAne se
usakI saMkhyA bar3ha gayI, to use isa kAraNa dvipadacatuSpadAtikrama nAmaka
aticAra lagatA hai| kisI ne eka yA do sAla ke lie gAya, bhaiMsa Adi amuka pazu
amuka samaya taka amuka saMkhyA se adhika na rakhane kA niyama kiyA ho, phira
yaha soce ki jitane samaya taka kA mere niyama hai, utane samaya meM agara gAya,
bhaiMsa Adi ke garbha raha gayA to merI niyata saMkhyA kI maryAdA bhaMga ho
jAyagI; ataH una gAya, bhaiMsa Adi ko kAphI arse ke bAda garbhadhAraNa karAve;
aisA karane se garbha meM bachar3oM ke Ane se saMkhyA to bar3ha hI jAtI hai, isa
dRSTi se bhI aMzataH vratabhaMga hotA hai; kintu bAhara se pratyakSa meM
saMkhyAtikramaNa nahIM dikhAI dene se vaha mAnatA hai-mere niyamAnusAra ina
pazuoM kI saMkhyA nahIM bar3hI; isalie merA niyama khaMDita nahIM huaa| isa
apekSA se bhaMgAbhaMga hone se tRtIya aticAra 235

Page #258 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Translation:  **Excesses in Digvirati and Bhogopabhog**  This seems to be
related to the third light of Yoga Shastra, verse 96. Similarly, if the land
beyond the specified limit of yojanas (units of distance) for a field or
building is acquired, then keeping it secured in one's name for the duration of
the rule is an infringement. Alternatively, the meaning of yojana can also be
interpreted as "joining". From this perspective, if the number of houses and
fields increases due to acquiring them from a debtor, as a gift, or by
purchasing a neighbor's house or field, then combining two or more houses or
fields together by breaking down the boundary walls, fences, or pillars in
between and making them into one house or field, with the understanding that the
fixed number has not increased and the vow has not been completely broken,
still, the value of the house and field has increased. This is considered the
fourth infringement, a form of "Bhangabhang" (partial violation).  Similarly,
someone may have taken a vow for four months to not keep more than a certain
amount of gold or silver. During this time, the king, pleased with them, gives
them gold or silver as a reward. Now, seeing that keeping this gold or silver at
home would violate their vow of not keeping more than a certain amount of gold
or silver for those months, they decide to keep it at the place of a friend or
acquaintance, thinking, "I will take it back when my vow period ends." In
reality, even keeping it at another's place constitutes ownership, leading to a
violation of the vow. However, since the intention is to keep the vow intact, it
is considered a form of "Bhangabhang", the fifth infringement.  Therefore, a
Shravak (Jain lay follower) who observes the limits of these five types of
parigraha (attachment) should not violate them. Doing so leads to impurity in
the vow. These infringements can also occur due to lack of understanding,
transgression, etc., apart from the above-mentioned signs.  Thus, the
description of the five infringements for each of the five Anuvratas (minor
vows) is complete.  Now, the topic of infringements in Gunavratas (major vows)
arises. Therefore, the infringements of the first Gunavrata, Digpariman
(Digvirati), are explained.  **Verse 96:**  **Meaning:**  1. Forgetting the
fixed limit. 2. 3. 4. Violation of the rule of movement in all ten directions,
up, down, and sideways. 5. Increase in the area of the field.  These are the
five infringements of the first Gunavrata.  **Explanation:**  The ancient
teachers have explained the five infringements of Digvirati Vrata as follows:
1. **Smritibhramsha (forgetfulness):** This is the first infringement. It occurs
when, while going to or at the time of reaching the fixed limit of movement in a
particular direction, one forgets due to excessive anxiety or carelessness. For
example, someone may have set a limit of 100 yojanas in the east direction, but
they forget or become doubtful whether they have traveled 50 yojanas or 100
yojanas. Even with such doubt, if they go beyond 50 yojanas in that direction,
they commit this infringement. Going beyond 100 yojanas would constitute a
complete violation of the vow. Infringement and violation of the vow occur based
on relativity and absoluteness, respectively. Therefore, one should remember the
vow they have taken, as all religious practices are performed with awareness.
This is the first infringement.  Flying upwards or climbing a mountain or tree
peak is considered upward movement (Urdhvavaman). Going down into a basement,
well, etc., is considered downward movement (Adhodisha). Movement in the east
and other directions is considered sideways movement (Tiryaggaman). Violation of
the fixed limit in these three directions constitutes the three infringements.
Therefore, the sutra states that one should understand that violating the
upward, downward, and sideways directions constitutes three infringements. These
infringements can occur due to non-use (Anabhog) or transgression, etc. However,
if one intentionally violates the limit, it constitutes a complete violation of
the vow. A Shravak observes this vow in the following way: "I will not violate
it myself..."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 digvirati evaM bhogopabhoga ke aticAra yogazAstra tRtIya prakAza zloka 96
lagatA hai| isI prakAra kSetra yA vAstu kI jitane yojana taka kI sImA nizcita kI
ho, usake Age kI jamIna milatI ho, to use niyama kI avadhi taka amAnata ke taura
para apane nAma se surakSita rakhavA denA atikrama hai| athavA yojana kA artha
jor3anA bhI hotA hai| isa dRSTi se karjadAra se yA bheMTa rUpa meM milane athavA
par3osI ke makAna yA kheta ko kharIda lene ke kAraNa makAnoM aura khetoM kI
nizcita kI huI saMkhyA bar3ha jAne se niyama na TUTe isa apekSA se do yA kaI
makAnoM yA khetoM ko Apasa meM milA denA-bIca meM sImAsUcaka dIvAra, bAr3a yA
khaMbhe tor3akara tur3avAkara donoM ko saMyukta karake eka makAna yA kheta banA
denA; aisI samajha se usakI niyata kI huI saMkhyA nahIM bar3hI aura vrata bhI
sarvathA bhaMga nahIM huA; phira bhI ghara aura kheta kI kImata to bar3ha hI
gayI; isa apekSA se bhaMgAbhaMgarUpa yaha cauthA aticAra hai| isI prakAra kisI
ne sonA yA cAMdI amuka pramANa (vajana) se adhika na rakhane kA cAra mahIne kI
avadhi kA niyama liyaa| isI daurAna rAjA ne khuza hokara sonA yA cAMdI kA inAma
diyaa| aba jaba usane dekhA ki yadi maiM isa sone yA cAMdI ko lekara |ghara meM
rakha letA haM to amuka mahIne taka ke itanI mAtrA se adhika cAMdI-sonA na
rakhane kA merA niyama bhaMga ho jAyegA; ataH isa apekSA se ukta sone yA cAMdI
ko apane kisI mitra yA paricita ke yahAM yaha socakara rakha de ki 'mere niyama
kI avadhi samApta hote hI maiM ise le luuNgaa|' vAstava meM isa apekSA se dUsare
ke yahAM rakhane para bhI usa para apanA svAmitva hone se vratabhaMga hotA hai,
kintu vrata ko sahIsalAmata rakhane kI nIyata hone se vratapAlana huA, isa
prakAra bhaMgAbhaMga ke rUpa meM pAMcavAM aticAra lagatA hai, aisA samajhanA
caahie| isa taraha pAMcoM prakAra ke parigraha kI maryAdA karane vAle zrAvaka ko
usakA ullaMghana nahIM karanA cAhie; kyoMki vaisA karane se vrata meM malinatA
AtI hai| upalakSaNa se usake alAvA vicAroM kI besamajhI se athavA atikramaNa Adi
se bhI ye aticAra lagate haiM  /  / 95 /  /  isa prakAra pAMcoM aNuvratoM ke
pratyeka ke pAMca-pAMca aticAroM kA varNana pUrA huaa| isake bAda aba guNavratoM
ke aticAroM kA prasaMga prApta hai| ataH dikparimANa-(digvirati) rUpa prathama
guNavrata ke aticAra batAye haiN|267| smRtyantardhAnamUrdhvAdhastiryagbhAga-
vyatikramaH  /  kSetravRddhizca paJceti, smRtA digvirati-vrate  // 96 /  /
artha :- 1. nizcita kI huI sImA bhUla jAnA, 2.3.4. Upara nIce aura tirache
(tiryak) dazoM dizAoM meM Ane jAne ke niyama kI maryAdA kA ullaMghana karanA, ye
tIna aticAra aura 5. kSetra kI vRddhi karanA, isa taraha prathama guNavrata ke 5
aticAra haiM  /  / 16 /  /  vyAkhyA :- pUrvAcAryoM ne digvirativrata ke 5
aticAra isa prakAra batAye haiM 1. smRtibhraMza - prathama aticAra hai| vaha isa
prakAra hai-svayaM ne gamanAgamana kI jitanI sImA jisa dizA meM nizcita kI ho,
vahAM jAne para yA jAne ke samaya ativyAkulatA yA pramAda ke kAraNa smaraNa na
rahanA, smRti lupta ho jAnA yA | bhUla jaanaa| mAna lo, kisI ne pUrvadizA meM
100 yojana taka jAne kI maryAdA kI ho, lekina se vaha yAda na rahe, athavA
saMzaya meM par3a jAya ki maiMne 50 yojana taka gamanAgamana kA parimANa kiyA
hai yA 100 yojana taka jAne-Ane kA kiyA hai? aisI zaMkA hote hue bhI usa dizA
meM 50 yojana se Age jAye to vahAM use yaha aticAra lagatA hai| sau se adhika
jAne para to vratabhaMga ho jAtA hai| aticAra aura vratabhaMga kramazaH
sApekSatA aura nirapekSatA kI dRSTi se hote haiN| isalie liye hue vrata ko yAda
rakhanA hI cAhie; kyoMki tamAma dharmAnuSThAna smaraNa pUrvaka hote haiN| yaha
prathama aticAra huaa| Upara ur3anA yA parvata yA vRkSa ke zikhara para car3hanA
Urddhavagamana hai; bhUmigRha (talaghara), kuMe Adi meM nIce utaranA adhodizA
meM gamana hai| pUrva Adi dizAoM meM gamana tiryaggamana hai| ina tInoM kI jisa-
jisa dizA meM jitanI maryAdA kI ho, usakA ullaMghana karane se ye tInoM aticAra
lagate haiN| isIlie sUtra meM kahA hai-UrdhvadizA kA atikrama, adhodizA kA
atikrama aura tiryagdizA kA atikrama karane se tInoM aticAra jAna lene caahie|
anAbhoga (upayoga na rahane) se yA atikrama Adi se ye aticAra lagate haiM, kintu
jAnabUjha kara agara maryAdA kA ullaMghana karane meM pravRtta hotA hai to
sarvathA vratabhaMga ho jAtA hai| zrAvaka isa vrata kA niyama isa prakAra letA
hai-maiM svayaM ullaMghana na 236

Page #259 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Discussion on the 5 transgressions of the second vow, Bhogopabhoga Parimaan
I will discuss the 5 transgressions of the second vow, Bhogopabhoga Parimaan, as
described in the third light of Yoga Shastra, verse 97, and I will not ask
anyone else to do it. According to this rule, one should not go beyond the
designated area, but if one asks or sends someone else to bring something from
beyond the designated limit, then it is a transgression.  One who has taken the
vow in such a way that they will not transgress the designated limit for
themselves, will not be considered to have committed a transgression if they ask
or send someone else to bring something from beyond the designated limit. In
this way, the second, third, and fourth transgressions occur.  The fifth
transgression, called Kshetravriddhi, occurs when a Shravak, having a designated
area limit in one direction, reduces it and goes further in another direction
with a smaller designated area. For example, if someone reduces the area limit
in the east and extends it in the west, then they commit this fifth
transgression.  Similarly, if someone has a travel limit of 100 yojanas in each
direction, and they travel more than 100 yojanas in one direction, then if they
reduce the travel limit in another direction by the same amount to maintain a
balance of 100 yojanas on both sides, then this transgression occurs because it
violates the area limit in relation to the vow.  If one transgresses the area
limit unknowingly and without purpose, then they should return, not go further
once they become aware, and not send others forward. If someone has gone
unknowingly or by mistake, then they should renounce what they have obtained
there and repent by saying "Miccha Mi Dukkadam".  ## Now, the transgressions of
the second vow, Bhogopabhoga Parimaan, are as follows:  1. **Sachitt** - meaning
sentient, 2. **Sachitt Sambaddh** - seeds, kernels, etc. that are present in
non-sentient food, 3. **Sammishra Abhishava** - food that is partly sentient and
partly non-sentient, 4. **Dushpakva Aahar** - intoxicating substances made from
multiple ingredients, and 5. **Dushpakva Aahar** - food that is half-cooked,
half-raw, or overcooked.  These five are the transgressions of the second vow,
Bhogopabhoga Parimaan, in order.  ## Explanation:  Sachitt means "with
consciousness". This means that any food that is alive is called Sachitt. Such
food, which is itself a one-sense organism of the plant kingdom, is called
Sachitt Aahar.  Here the question arises: How can a householder renounce Sachitt
food when they have to cook wheat, etc., which are Sachitt substances? In
response, it is said that the word "Aahar" (food) is attached to all five of
these, Sachitt, etc. It is not attached in the original verse, but it is
understood by implication. Therefore, in this vow, the Shravak does not renounce
Sachitt, nor can they, because Sachitt includes all types of grains, such as
soil, water, fire, fruits, flowers, vegetables, leaves, mung beans, chickpeas,
etc. Therefore, they renounce Sachitt Aahar. When they eat, they do not eat it
in its Sachitt form, but they eat it after making it non-sentient.  If someone
who has renounced Sachitt Aahar eats something in its Sachitt form, then they
commit the first transgression, which is a partial violation of the vow,
provided that they have eaten it unknowingly, without purpose, in haste, or with
the desire to eat or the intention to eat.  Sachittpratibandh Aahar means that
the substance is non-sentient, but it contains a sentient substance. For
example, ripe fruits like mangoes or dates, and nuts like dates and prunes, are
non-sentient, but they contain kernels and seeds, which have the power to
germinate, and therefore they are sentient. Therefore, when a renunciant of
Sachitt eats ripe fruits, etc., they remove the kernels or seeds or process them
with fire or spices to make them non-sentient before eating them. If a
renunciant of Sachitt accidentally or without purpose, unknowingly or hastily,
or with the thought "I will eat these after removing the seeds, etc.", eats
dates, mangoes, etc., then they commit the second transgression, called
Sachittpratibandh.  Sammishra Aahar means that a sentient substance is mixed
with a non-sentient substance. For example, if a wheat roti is made, and it
contains whole wheat grains, which are sentient. Or if non-sentient rice or
barley is mixed with sentient sesame seeds, and it is eaten hastily, then the
transgression called Sammishra Aahar is committed. Or if boiled water

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bhogopabhogaparimANa nAmaka dUsare guNavrata ke 5 aticAroM para vivecana
yogazAstra tRtIya prakAza zloka 97 karUMgA aura na kisI dUsara se krvaauuNgaa|
isa niyama ke anusAra niyata kI huI jagaha se Age kI bhUmi meM svayaM to nahIM
jAtA, kintu agara kisI dUsare se nirdhArita sImA se Age koI vastu maMgavAtA yA
bhijavAtA hai to use aticAra jisane kevala apane liye hI-arthAt meM svayaM
nirdhArita sImA kA ullaMghana nahIM karUMgA, isa prakAra se niyama liyA hai, use
dUsaroM se maryAdita bhUmi se Age kI vastu maMgAne, bhijavAne meM doSa nahIM
lgtaa| isa prakAra dUsarA, tIsarA aura cauthA aticAra huaa| kSetravRddhi nAmaka
pAMcavAM aticAra taba lagatA hai, jaba zrAvaka eka dizA meM nirdhArita bhUmi kI
sImA jyAdA ho, use kama karake dUsarI alpabhUminirdhArita dizA meM adhika dUrI
taka jAtA hai| jaise pUrvadizA meM bhUmi kI sImA kama karake koI pazcima dizA
meM bar3hA letA hai, to use yaha pAMcavAM aticAra lagatA hai| isI prakAra mAna
lo, kisI ne pratyeka dizA meM 100 yojana taka gamanamaryAdA kI ho, vaha kisI eka
dizA meM sau yojana se adhika calA gayA, isa kAraNa se agara vaha dUsarI dizA
meM utane yojana gamanamaryAdA meM kamI karake donoM tarapha 100 yojana kA
hisAba kAyama rakhA hai to isa prakAra kSetramaryAdA kA ullaMghana vrata-sApekSa
hone se use yaha aticAra lagatA hai| yadi binA upayoga se, anajAne meM kSetra-
maryAdA kA ullaMghana ho jAya to vaha vApisa lauTa Aye, jJAta hote hI Age na
bar3he, dUsaroM ko bhI Age na bheje| ajJAnatA se koI calA gayA ho yA khuda bhI
bhUla se calA gayA ho to vahAM jo prApta kiyA ho, usakA tyAgakara denA cAhie
aura usake lie micchA mi dukkaDaM dekara pazcAttApa karanA cAhie  /  / 96 /  /
* aba bhogopabhogaparimANa nAmaka dvitIya guNavrata ke aticAroM ko kahate
haiN|268| sacittastena sambaddhaH sammizro'bhiSavastathA  /  duSpakvAhAra
ityete, bhogopabhogamAnagAH  // 97 /  /  artha :- 1. sacitta arthAt sajIva, 2.
sacitta se saMbaddha-acitta AhAra meM rahe hue bIja, guThalI Adi sacitta _ .
padArtha, 3. thor3A sacitta aura thor3A acitta-mizra AhAra, 4. aneka dravyoM se
nirmita mAdaka padArtha evaM 5. duSpakva-AdhA pakA, AdhA kaccA AhAra athavA
adhika pakA huA AhAra; ina pAMcoM kA bhogopabhoga karanA, dUsare guNavrata ke
kramazaH 5 aticAra haiM  /  / 9 /  /  - vyAkhyA :- sacitta kA artha hai-cetanA
shit| yAnI jo khAdyapadArtha sajIva ho, vaha sacitta kahalAtA hai| aise AhAra
ko, jo apane Apa meM vanaspatikAya ke ekendriyajIva se yukta hai, sacitta AhAra
kahA jAtA hai| yahAM prazna hotA hai ki gRhastha ko gehUM Adi sacitta padArtha
lekara hI usako pakAnA par3atA hai, taba vaha sacitta kA tyAga kaise kara
sakegA? isake uttara meM kahate haiM-yahAM sacitta Adi pAMcoM ke sAtha 'AhAra'
zabda jur3A huA hai; mUla zloka meM nahIM jur3A hai to usakA prasaMgavaza
adhyAhAra kara liyA jAtA hai| isalie isa vrata meM zrAvaka sacitta kA tyAga
nahIM karatA aura na vaha kara sakatA hai, kyoMki sacitta to miTTI, pAnI, agni,
phala, phUla, sAga, bhAjI, patte sabhI prakAra ke anAja mUMga, canA Adi dAleM
ityAdi saba ke saba haiN| isalie vaha sacitta AhAra kA tyAga karatA hai| jaba
kabhI vaha AhAra karatA hai to sacitta rUpa meM nahIM karatA, apitu acitta
banAkara khAtA hai| jisane sacitta-AhAra kA tyAga kiyA ho, vaha yadi sacitta
rUpa meM kisI cIja kA bhakSaNa karatA hai to use AMzika vratabhaMga hone se
prathama aticAra lagatA hai; bazarte ki usane anajAne meM, binA upayoga ke,
jaldabAjI meM, sacitta-bhakSaNa kiyA ho athavA khAne kI icchA kI ho yA khAne kA
upAya kiyA ho| sacittapratibaddha AhAra kA matalaba hai-cIja to acitta ho,
lekina usameM sacitta vastu par3I ho; jaise Ama Adi pake phala yA khajUra,
chuhArA Adi meve acitta hote haiM, lekina bIca meM guThalI, bIja Adi par3e hote
haiM, unameM aMkurita hone kI zakti hotI hai, isalie ve sacitta hote haiN| ataH
sacitta kA tyAgI jaba bhI pake phala Adi khAtA hai, taba jinameM guThalI yA bIja
Adi hote haiM, unheM nikAlakara yA agni yA masAloM se saMskArita karake acitta
banAkara khAtA hai| agara sacittatyAgI bhUla se yA upayogazUnyatA se, anajAne
meM yA zIghratA se athavA 'inameM se bIja Adi nikAlakara khAUMgA' aisA vicAra
karake sahasA khajUra, Ama Adi pake phaloM ko muMha meM DAla letA hai to
sacittapratibaddha nAmaka dUsarA aticAra lagatA hai| sammizra AhAra kA matalaba
hai, acitta vastu ke sAtha koI sacitta vastu milI ho, jaise gehUM ke ATe kI roTI
banI hai, usameM gehUM ke akhaMDa dAne par3e haiM; jo sacitta haiN| athavA
acitta jI yA cAvala Adi sacitta tila se mizrita ho, use sahasA khA le to
sammizrAhAra nAmaka aticAra lagatA hai| athavA ubAle hue pAnI 237

Page #260 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The nature of Angarajivica, Vanajivica and Shaktajivica  The third light of Yoga
Shastra, verses 98 to 101, states that if raw water is mixed and consumed
hastily, it is considered an excess. Or if a sentient food item is not
completely non-sentient, consuming it is considered an excess. However, this
excess only applies when a Shravak unknowingly, hastily, or without purpose,
consumes the sentient as non-sentient. This excess is considered due to its
relation to the vow. The fourth excess is Abhishavaahar. Abhishava means a
intoxicating substance made by combining many substances. For example, things
like wine, sauvir, toddy, liquor, and alcohol all fall under Abhishava.
Similarly, substances that increase the potency of semen, such as bhang,
tobacco, zarda, chards, ganja, sulfa, etc., are also included in Abhishava.
Meat, blood, fat, etc., things that are the result of killing a living being,
are also Abhishava. If one intentionally consumes this type of Abhishava-like
food, then the vow is broken. And if one unknowingly or hastily consumes the
above-mentioned substances without purpose, then the fourth excess called
Abhishava-ahar is incurred. The fifth excess is Duspakvaahar. This means
consuming food that is not fully cooked. Or consuming food that is overcooked.
There are many things that, if eaten in an uncooked or overcooked state, can
harm the body. Sometimes, eating them can cause many diseases in the body. To
the extent that it is sentient, to that extent, eating it also spoils the
afterlife. For example, eating barley, rice, wheat, etc., without cooking or
half-cooked, spoils health. If one eats half-cooked or overcooked food
unknowingly, then the fifth excess called Duspakvaahar is incurred. Many
Acharyas consider Apakvaahar to be an excess; however, the meaning of Apakva is
not cooked in fire, so it is included in Sachittaahar. Many Acharyas consider
Tuccaushadhibhakshan to be an excess. Tuccaaushadhis (plants) are those in which
the edible part is very small and the part to be thrown away is more. For
example, plants like Sajna, Sitafal, etc. But if they are sentient, then they
are included in the first excess. And if they have become non-sentient by being
cooked in fire, etc., then what is the fault in consuming them? That is, there
is no fault in it. Similarly, if someone has given up night meals or drinking
alcohol, eating meat, etc., and unknowingly, hastily, or by mistake eats them,
then an excess is incurred. In this way, these five excesses of the Upbhog-
Paribhogpariman vow should be understood.  After describing the excesses that
occur due to food in the seventh vow, now we describe the excesses that occur
due to karma in its second division.  The five excesses mentioned above are to
be abandoned in relation to food. But in relation to karma, there are 15
karmaadans, which are considered to be harsh karma that causes harm to living
beings, and which create impurities in the vow. Therefore, they should be
abandoned properly.  The five excesses mentioned above are related to food,
which are to be abandoned. Now we explain the second explanation of
Bhogopabhogpariman, that the business or profession that is done to procure or
produce the means of Bhogopabhog is also referred to by the word 'Bhogopabhog'.
Here, the action is attributed to the cause; therefore, the livelihood that is
carried out due to the said karma, such as the Kotwal, secret agent, soldier,
jailer, etc., who give harsh punishments. This causes pain to the person, such
harsh (difficult) livelihoods are 15; which are called fifteen karmaadans. These
are the 15 excesses to be abandoned in the second division of
Bhogopabhogpariman. These karmas are the cause of the nature of papkarma,
therefore they are called karmaadans.  Their names are mentioned in the next two
verses.  Angar-Van-Shakat-Bhatak-Sphotjivica, Danta-Laksha-Ras-Kesh-
Vishvaanijyakani cha.  Yantrapeeda-Nirlanchanamasatiposhanam tatha, Davadanam
Sarasshosha, iti panchadasha tyajet.  These 15 excesses are to be abandoned.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 aMgArajIvikA, vanajIvikA aura zakaTajIvikA kA svarupa yogazAstra tRtIya prakAza
zloka 98 se 101 meM kaccA pAnI mizrita ho, use sahasA pI le to yaha aticAra
lagatA hai| athavA koI sacitta khAdya vastu pUrI taraha se acitta na huI ho, use
sevana kare to yaha aticAra lagatA hai| paraMtu aticAra lagatA tabhI hai, jaba
zrAvaka anajAne meM sahasA, utAvalI meM yA binA upayoga ke sacitta ko acitta
mAnakara usakA sevana karatA hai| vratasApekSa hone ke kAraNa hI yaha aticAra
mAnA jAtA hai| cauthA aticAra hai-abhissvaahaar| abhiSava kA artha hai-aneka
dravyoM ko ekatrita karake banAyA huA mAdaka pdaarth| jaise madirA, sauvIra,
tAr3I, zarAba, dArU Adi saba cIjeM abhiSava ke aMtargata hai| isI prakAra
vIryavikAra kI vRddhi karane vAle padArtha jaise-bhAMga, taMbAkU, jardA,
car3asa, gAMjA, sulaphA Adi nazailI cIjeM bhI abhiSava meM zumAra hai| mAMsa,
rakta, carbI Adi jIvaghAtaniSpanna cIjeM bhI abhiSava hai| isa taraha kA
abhiSava rUpa sAvadha AhAra yadi irAde-pUrvaka khAtA hai to vratabhaMga ho jAtA
hai aura yadi binA upayoga ke sahasA uparyukta padArthoM ko khA yA pI letA hai
to vahAM abhiSava-AhAra nAmaka cauthA aticAra lagatA hai| pAMcavAM aticAra
duSpakvAhAra hai| isakA artha hai-jo khAdya padArtha abhI taka pUrI taraha pakA
nahIM hai| athavA jo padArtha adhika paka gayA hai, use khA lenaa| kitanI hI
cIjeM aisI hai, jinheM apakva aura duSpakva hAlata meM khAI jAya to ve zarIra ko
nukasAna pahuMcAtI hai, kaI bAra unake khAne se zarIra meM kaI roga paidA ho
jAte haiM; jitane aMza meM vaha sacitta ho, utane aMza meM khAne para paraloka
ko bhI |bigAr3atA hai| jaise jau cAvala, gehUM Adi anAja binA pake hue yA Adhe
pake hue khAne se svAsthya bigar3atA hai| ardhapakva yA atipakva acetanabuddhi
se khAtA hai, to pAMcavAM duSpakvAhAra nAmaka aticAra lagatA hai| kaI AcArya
apakvAhAra ko aticAra mAnate haiM; paraMtu apakva kA artha agni meM na pakA huA,
hone se sacittAhAra ke aMtargata usakA samAveza ho jAtA hai| kitane hI AcArya
tucchauSadhibhakSaNa nAmaka aticAra mAnate haiN| tuccha auSadhiyA~
(vanaspatiyAM) ve haiM-jinameM khAne kA bhAga bahuta hI kama hotA hai, phaiMkane
kA bhAga jyAdA hotA hai| jaise-sajanA, sItAphala Adi vnsptiyaaN| kintu | yadi ve
sacitta hoM to unakA samAveza prathama aticAra meM ho jAtA hai aura yadi ve agni
Adi se pakakara acitta ho gayI ho to unake sevana meM kyA doSa hai? arthAt
isameM doSa nahIM hotaa| isI prakAra jisane rAtribhojana yA madirApAna,
mAMsAhAra Adi abhakSya padArthoM kA tyAga kiyA ho, vaha ajAne meM, sahasA yA
bhUla se khA letA hai to aticAra lagatA hai| isa taraha upabhoga-
paribhogaparimANa vrata ke ye pAMcoM aticAra samajhane caahie||97|| sAtaveM
vrata ke bhojanataH hone vAle aticAroM ke varNana ke bAda aba usake dUsare
vibhAga ke karmataH hone vAle aticAroM kA varNana karate haiN|269| amI
bhojanatastyAjyAH, karmataH kharakarma tu  /  tasmin paJcadazamalAn, karmAdAnAni
sntyjet||98|| artha :- uparyukta pAMca aticAra bhojana kI apekSA se tyAjya hai|
kintu karma kI apekSA se prANighAtaka kaThorakarma meM parigaNita (parisImita)
15 karmAdAna haiM, jo vrata meM malinatA paidA karane vAle haiM; ataH unakA
bhalIbhAMti tyAga karanA cAhie  /  / 98 //  vyAkhyA :- uparyukta pAMca aticAra
AhAra se saMbaMdhita hai, jo tyAjya hai| aba bhogopabhogaparimANa kI dUsarI
vyAkhyA karate haiM ki bhogopabhoga ke sAdhanoM ko juTAne yA paidA karane ke lie
jo vyApAra-vyavasAya kiyA jAya, use bhI 'bhogopabhoga' zabda se vyavahRta kiyA
jAtA hai| yahAM kAraNa meM kArya kA Aropa kiyA jAtA hai; isalie ukta karma ko
lekara kI jAne vAlI AjIvikA ke lie kotavAla, guptacara, sipAhI, kArAgArarakSaka
Adi kaThora daMDa dete haiN| jisase vyakti ko pIr3A hotI hai, aisI khara
(kaThora) jIvikAe~ 15 hai; jinheM paMdraha karmAdAna kahA jAtA hai| ye hI
bhogopabhogaparimANavata | ke dvitIya vibhAga ke tyAjya 15 aticAra haiN| ye
karma pApakarma-prakRti ke kAraNabhUta hote haiM, isalie inheM karmAdAna kahA
gayA hai||98|| nIce do zlokoM meM unake nAmollekha karate haiN||270| aGgAra-
vana-zakaTa-bhATaka-sphoTajIvikA, danta-lAkSA-rasa-keza-viSavANijyakAni ca  //
19 //  ) 271 /  yantrapIDA-nirlAJchanamasatIpoSaNaM tathA, davadAnaM saraHzoSa,
iti paJcadaza tyajet  // 100 /  /  22.

Page #261 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Nature of the Commerce of Teeth, Lac, Juice, and Hair  **From the Third
Light of Yoga Shastra, Verses 101-105:**  1. **Angarajivica** (Commerce of Fire)
2. **Vanajivica** (Commerce of the Forest) 3. **Shakatjivica** (Commerce of the
Cart) 4. **Bhatakjivica** (Commerce of Hire) 5. **Sphotkajivica** (Commerce of
Explosion) 6. **Dantvaanijya** (Commerce of Teeth) 7. **Laakshavaanijya**
(Commerce of Lac) 8. **Rasavaanijya** (Commerce of Juice) 9. **Keshavaanijya**
(Commerce of Hair) 10. **Vishavaanijya** (Commerce of Poison) 11.
**Yantrapidaakarma** (Commerce of Torture by Machines) 12. **Nilaanchanakarma**
(Commerce of Branding) 13. **Asatiposhan** (Commerce of Nourishing the Unworthy)
14. **Davadaan** (Commerce of Setting Fire) 15. **Sarahsosha** (Commerce of
Drying up Water Bodies)  (The word "Jivica" is used in the first half of the
verse, and "Vaanijya" in the second half, which should be combined with each.)
A Shravak (Jain follower) should renounce these 15 forms of Karmadaan (acts of
violence).  **Explanation of the 15 Forms of Violence:**  **1. Angarajivica
(Commerce of Fire):**  * Making charcoal by burning wood and trading it. * The
work of bakers, potters, blacksmiths, goldsmiths, brick makers, etc.
**Explanation:**  Making charcoal involves the potential for harming many
stationary and mobile beings. Therefore, all forms of violence related to fire
are included in Angarajivica. This is a detailed explanation of one type of
Karmadaan; the other types should be understood in the same way.  **2.
Vanajivica (Commerce of the Forest):**  * Selling leaves, flowers, and fruits
from trees, whether cut or uncut. * Earning a living by grinding or crushing
grains in a mill.  **Explanation:**  Vanajivica primarily involves the potential
for harming plant life.  **3. Shakatjivica (Commerce of the Cart):**  * Making
carts and their parts, such as wheels and axles, either by oneself or by others.
* Selling or buying carts.  **Explanation:**  Shakatjivica is harmful because it
leads to the oppression of all beings and causes the killing and binding of
animals like oxen, horses, and cows.  **4. Bhatakjivica (Commerce of Hire):**  *
Earning a living by transporting goods on carts, oxen, camels, buffaloes,
donkeys, mules, or horses for a fee. * Hiring out these animals or vehicles.
**Explanation:**  Hiring out motor vehicles is also considered Bhatakjivica.
**5. Sphotkajivica (Commerce of Explosion):**  * Earning a living by digging
wells, quarrying stones, or engaging in other activities that involve disturbing
the earth.  **Explanation:**  These activities can harm beings that live in the
earth.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 daMta-lAkSA-rasa-keza-vANijya karma kA svarUpa yogazAstra tRtIya prakAza zloka
101 se 105 artha :- 1. aMgArajIvikA, 2. vanajIvikA, 3. zakaTajIvikA, 4.
bhATakajIvikA, 5. sphoTakajIvikA, (zloka ke pUrvArdha meM ukta 'jIvikA' zabda
hai; isI taraha uttarArddha meM 'vANijyaka' zabda hai, jise pratyeka ke sAtha
joDanA caahie|) 6. daMtavANijya. 7. lAkSAvANijya, 8. rasavANijya, 9.
kezavANijya, 10. viSavANijya, 12. yaMtrapIDAkarma, 13. nilAMchanakarma, 14.
asatIpoSaNa, 15. davadAna, (dAvAgni lagAne kA karma), 16. saraHzoSa-(tAlAba Adi
kA sukhaanaa)| zrAvaka ko ina 15 karmAdAna rUpa aticAroM kA tyAga karanA cAhie
/  / 99-100 /  /  aba kramazaH 15 aticAroM kI vyAkhyA karate haiN| inameM se
sarvaprathama aMgArakarma rUpI AjIvikA kA svarUpa batAte haiN|272| aGgAra-
bhrASTrakaraNaM kumbhAyaHsvarNakAritA  /  ThaThAra-tveSTakApAkAviti
hyayaMgArajIvikA  // 101 /  /  artha :- lakar3I ko jalAkara koyale banAnA aura
usakA vyApAra karanA, bhar3abhUje, kuMbhAra, luhAra, sunAra, ThaThere aura ITeM
pakAne vAle ityAdi ke karma aMgArajIvikA kahalAtI hai  // 101 /  /  vyAkhyA :-
lakar3iyA~ jalAkara aMgAre (koyale) banAnA, unheM becanA, aMgArakarma hai|
koyale banAne se kaI sthAvara evaM trasajIvoM kI virAdhanA kI saMbhAvanA hotI
hai| isalie mukhyatayA agnivirAdhanA rUpa jo-jo AraMbha hotA hai, vaha
aMgArakarma meM samAviSTa ho jAtA hai| yahAM karmAdAna ke eka bheda ko vistAra
se samajhAyA hai bAkI ke bheda bhI isI prakAra samajha lene caahie| tAtparya
yaha hai ki anAja ko sekakara AjIvikA karane vAle bhar3abhUje, kumhAra, luhAra,
sunAra, IMTa yA miTTI ke bartana Adi banAkara AMve meM pakAkara becane vAlA.
miThAI Adi banAne ke lie bhaTTI salagAkara AjIvikA calAne vAlA, aMgArajIvI hai|
ye loga lohA, sonA, cAMdI Adi dhAtuoM ko galAkara, use ghar3akara gahane banAte
hai, ghaDe, bartana Adi banAte haiM, tAMbA, sIsA, pItala Adi dhAtuoM ko galAkara
inake vividha bartana banAte haiM tathA unake vibhinna DijAina banAte haiN| ye
aura isI prakAra kI AjIvikA calAnA-vizeSataH vartamAnayuga meM mukhyarUpa se
kArakhAne Adi jisameM agni kI virAdhanA vizeSa hotI hai, ve sabhI aMgArajIvikA
ke aMtargata mAne jAte haiM  /  / 101 /  /  aba vanajIvikA ke viSaya meM kahate
haiN|273| chinnAchinnavana-patra-prasUna-phalavikrayaH  /  kaNAnAM dalanAt peSAd
vRttizca vanajIvikA  // 102 //  artha :- jaMgala meM kaTe hue yA nahIM kaTe hue
vRkSa ke patte, phUla, phala Adi ko becanA, cakkI meM anAja dalakara yA pIsakara
AjIvikA calAnA ityAdi jIvikA vanajIvikA hai| vanajIvikA meM mukhyataH
vanaspatikAya kA vighAta hone kI saMbhAvanA hai  /  / 102 /  /  skUTara,
sAyakala, moTara banAnA, usake pArTa Adi banAnA aura becanA ye sabhI zakaTa
jIvikA meM hai| aba zakaTajIvikA ke viSaya meM kahate haiN|274| zakaTAnAM
tadaGgAnAM ghaTanaM kheTanaM tathA  /  vikrayazceti zakaTajIvikA parikIrtitA  /
/ 103 /  /  artha :- zakaTa yAnI gAr3I aura usake vividha aMga-pahiye, Are Adi
svayaM banAnA, dUsaroM se banavAnA athavA becanA yA bikavAnA ityAdi vyavasAya ko
zakaTajIvikA kahA hai  /  / 103 /  /  zakaTajIvikA samasta jIvoM ke upamardana
kA hetubhUta evaM baila, ghor3A gAya Adi ke vadha evaM baMdhana kA kAraNa hone
se tyAjya hai  /  / 103 /  /  aba bhATakajIvikA ke bAra meM kahate haiN|275|
zakaTokSalulAyoSTrakharAzvataravAjinAm  /  bhArasya vAhanAd vRttirbhaved
bhATakajIvikA  // 104 //  artha :- gAr3I, baila, UMTa, bhaiMsA, gadhA, khaccara,
ghor3A Adi para bhAra lAdakara kirAyA lenA athavA inheM kirAye para dekara
AjIvikA calAnA, aura moTara Adi vAhana kirAye se denA bhATaka jIvikA kahalAtA
hai ||104 /  /  aba sphoTajIvikA ke viSaya meM kahate haiN|276|
sara:kUpAdikhanana-zilAkuTTanakarmabhiH  /  pRthivyArambhasambhUtairjIvanaM
sphoTajIvikA  // 105 /  /  239

Page #262 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Vishavaniijya and Yantra Pidana Karma  Yogashastra, Trutiya Prakasha, Shloka
106-108:  1. Earning a livelihood by engaging in destructive activities towards
the earth element, such as digging ponds, wells, etc., breaking stones, etc., is
called Sphotajivika (explosive livelihood). (105)  2. Procuring and selling the
body parts (teeth, hair, nails, bones, skin, etc.) of living beings from their
natural habitats for the purpose of trade is called Dantavaniijya (trade in body
parts). (106)   3. The trade of harmful substances like lac, indigo, dhatakyadi
(a tree used for making liquor), and tankana (borax) is called Lakshavaniijya
(trade in harmful substances), as it leads to the destruction of life. (107)  4.
The trade of commodities like ghee, fat, honey, and alcoholic drinks, as well as
the trade of bipeds (humans) and quadrupeds (animals), is called Rasavaniijya
(trade in edibles) and Keshavaniijya (trade in living beings) respectively. All
these trades involve harm to life and are therefore to be avoided. (108)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 viSavANijya aura yaMtra pIDana karma yogazAstra tRtIya prakAza zloka 106 se 108
artha :- tAlAba, kue~ Adi khodane, patthara, phor3ane ityAdi pRthvIkAya ke
ghAtaka karmoM se jIvikA calAnA, sphoTaka-jIvikA hai  /  / 105 /  /  vyAkhyA :-
sarovara, kue~, bAvar3I Adi ke lie jamIna khodanA, halAdi se kheta vagairaha kI
bhUmi ukhAr3anA, khAna khodakara patthara nikAlanA, unheM ghar3anA ityAdi karmoM
se pRthvIkAya kA AraMbha upamardana hotA hai| aise kAryoM se AjIvikA calAnA,
sphoTajIvikA hai  /  / 105 /  /  aba daMtavANijya ke viSaya meM kahate haiN|277|
dantakezanakhAsthitvagromNo grahaNamAkare  /  trasAGgasya vANijyArthaM,
dantavANijyamucyate  // 106 /  /  artha :- dAMta, keza, nakha, haDDI, camar3A,
roma ityAdi jIvoM ke aMgoM ko unake utpatti-sthAnoM para jAkara vyavasAya ke lie
grahaNa karanA aura becanA daMta-vANijya kahalAtA hai  /  / 106 /  /  vyAkhyA :-
hAthI ke dAMta, upalakSaNa se trasajIvoM ke aMga bhI unake utpatti-sthAnoM para
se kharIdanA; camarI Adi gAya ke keza, ullU Adi ke nakha, zaMkha Adi kI haDDI,
bAgha Adi kA camar3A, haMsa Adi ke roma; inake utpAdakoM ko pahale se mUlya Adi
dekara svIkAra karanA yA unake utpattisthAnoM para jAkara ukta trasa-jIvoM ke
avayavoM ko vyApAra ke lie kharIdanA, dAMta Adi lene ke lie bhIla Adi ko pahale
se mUlya denA daMtavANijya hai| isameM dAMta Adi ke nimitta se hAthI Adi jIvoM
kA vadha kiyA jAtA hai| zloka meM 'Akara' zabda hai| isalie anAkara meM yA unake
utpattisthAna ke alAvA kisI sthAna para inheM grahaNa karane yA becane meM doSa
nahIM kahA gayA hai| ataH utpattisthAna meM grahaNa karane se daMtavANijya
kahalAtA hai| usameM aticAra lagatA hai  /  / 106  /  /  aba lAkSAvANijya ke
saMbaMdha meM kahate haiN||278aalaakssaa-mnH zilA-nIlI-dhAtakI-TaGkaNAdinaH  /
vikrayaH pApasadanaM, lAkSAvANijyamucyate  // 107 /  /  /  artha :- lAkha,
menasila, nIla, dhAtakIvRkSa, TaMkaNakhAra Adi pApakArI vastuoM kA vyApAra
karanA, lAkSAvANijya kahalAtA hai  /  / 107 /  /  vyAkhyA :- lAkha kA vyApAra
karanA, upalakSaNa se usake samAna dUsare menasila, nIla, dhAtakIvRkSa (jisakI
chAla, phala aura phUla zarAba banAne meM kAma Ate haiM); ina sabakA vyApAra
karanA lAkSAvANijya hai| ye sAre vyApAra pApa ke kAraNabhUta hone se tyAjya hai|
TaMkaNakhAra, menasila Adi dUsare jIvoM kA nAza karate haiN| nIla jIvoM ke
saMhAra ke binA bana nahIM sktii| dhAtakIvRkSa madya banAne kA kAraNa hone se
pApa kA ghara hai| ataH isakA vyApAra bhI pApa kA ghara hone se tyAjya hai| isa
prakAra ke vyApAra ko lAkSAvANijya kahA jAtA hai  /  / 107 /  /  aba eka hI
zloka meM rasavANijya aura kezavANijya donoM kA svarUpa batAte haiN|279|
navanIta-vasA-kSaudra-madyaprabhRtivikrayaH  /  dvipAccatuSpAdvikrayo vANijyaM
rasakezayoH  // 108 /  /  artha :- makkhana, carbI, zahada, madirA Adi kA
vyApAra rasavANijya aura do paira vAle aura cAra paira vAle jIvoM | kA vyApAra
kezavANijya kahalAtA hai  /  / 108 //  vyAkhyA :- navanIta, carbI, zahada,
zarAba Adi kA vyApAra karanA rasavANijya hai aura do paira vAle manuSya-dAsadAsI
va cAra paira vAle gAya, bher3a, bakarI Adi pazuoM kA vyApAra karanA keza-
vANijya hai| inakA jIva-sahita vyApAra karanA kezavANijya hai aura jIva-rahita
jIva ke aMga-haDDI, dAMta Adi kA vyApAra karanA daMtavANijya hai, yaha aMtara
samajhanA caahie| rasa aura keza zabda meM anukrama se saMbaMdha hotA hai|
makkhana meM saMmUrcchima jIva utpanna hote haiM, carbI aura madhu jIvoM kI
hiMsA se niSpanna hote haiN| madirA se unmAda paidA hotA hai, usameM paidA hue
aneka kRmi-jIvoM kA ghAta hotA hai| do paira vAle manuSya aura cAra paira vAle
pazuoM ke vyApAra se unako parAdhInatA, vadha, baMdhana, bhUkha, pyAsa Adi kI
pIr3A hotI hai| ataH rasavANijya aura kezavANijya donoM tyAjya hai  /  / 108 /
/  , aba viSavANijya ke bAre meM kahate haiM 240

Page #263 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Anarthadanda-viramana-vrata ke 5 aticharon par vivechana  1. Visavaidya-vanikya:
The sale of poisonous substances like snakes, scorpions, weapons like swords,
ploughs, hooks, axes, and also arsenic, which cause harm to living beings, is
called visavaidya-vanikya (poison trade).  2. Yantra-pidana-karma: Activities
like extracting oil from sesame, sugarcane, castor using machines, operating
water-wheels, crushing oil seeds in oil mills, etc. involve the killing of
numerous tiny living beings. Hence, the Shravaka should renounce such yantra-
pidana-karmas.  3. Nirlanchana-karma: Mutilating the limbs or organs of animals
like piercing the nose of bullocks, branding cows and horses, castrating them,
scarring the backs of camels, cutting the ears, neck-cords of cows, etc. is
called nirlanchana-karma, which should be avoided.  4. Asati-poshana:
Maintaining and nurturing unethical beings like parrots, cats, dogs, chickens,
peacocks, etc. for the sake of wealth, and living by prostitution, is called
asati-poshana, which is to be renounced.  5. Dava-dana and Sarah-shoshana:
Burning grass and vegetation out of habit or with the intention of merit, and
drying up lakes, rivers, ponds, etc. causing harm to the water-dwelling
organisms, are called dava-dana and sarah-shoshana respectively, which the
Shravaka should avoid.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 anarthadaMDaviramaNavrata ke 5 aticAroM para vivecana yogazAstra tRtIya prakAza
zloka 109 se 113  / 280 /  viSAstrahalayantrAyoharitAlAdivastunaH  /
vikrayojIvitaghnasya, viSavANijyamucyate  // 109 /  /  artha :- zRMgika, somala
Adi viSa, talavAra Adi zastra, hala, rehaTa, aMkuza, kulhAr3I vartamAna meM
pistola, baMdUka Adi tathA haratAla Adi vastuoM ke vikraya se jIvoM kA ghAta
hotA hai| ise viSa-vANijya kahate haiM  /  / 109 /  /  aba yaMtrapIDanakarma ke
saMbaMdha meM kahate haiN|281| tilekSu-sarSapairaNDajalayantrAdipIDanam  /
dalatailasya kRtiryantrapIDA prakIrtitA  // 110 //  artha :- ghANI meM pIlakara
tela nikAlanA, kolhU meM pIlakara ikSu-rasa nikAlanA, sarasoM, eraMDa Adi kA
tela yaMtra se nikAlanA, jalayaMtra-rehaTa calAnA, tiloM ko dalakara tela
nikAlanA aura becanA, ye saba yaMtrapIr3anakarma haiN| ina yaMtroM dvArA pIlane
meM tila Adi meM rahe hue aneka trasajIvoM kA vadha hotA hai| isalie isa
yaMtrapIr3anakarma kA zrAvaka ko tyAga karanA caahie| mIla, TrekTara se khetI,
presa Adi saba yaMtra karma hai| laukika zAstroM meM bhI kahA hai ki cakrayaMtra
calAne se dasa kasAIgharoM ke jitanA pApa lagatA hai  // 110 /  /  aba
nilAMcchana karma ke bAre meM kahate haiN|282| nAsAvedho'GkanaM muSkacchedanaM
pRSTagAlanam  /  karNa-kambala-vicchedo, nirlaanychnmudiiritm||111|| | artha :-
jIva ke aMgoM yA avayavoM kA chedana karane kA dhaMdhA karanA, usa karma se
apanI AjIvikA calAnA; nilAMchana karma kahalAtA hai| usake bheda batAte haiM-
baila-bhaiMsa kA nAka bIMdhanA, gAya-ghor3e ke nizAna lagAnA, usake aMDakoSa
kATanA, UMTa kI pITha gAlanA, gAya Adi ke kAna, galakaMbala Adi kATa DAlanA,
isake aisA karane se prakaTa rUpa meM jIvoM ko pIr3A hotI hai, ataH vivekIjana
isakA tyAga kre||11|| aba asatIpoSaNa ke saMbaMdha meM kahate haiN|283|
sArikAzukamArjArazva-kurkuTa-kalApinAm  /  poSo dAsyAzca vittArthamasatIpoSaNaM
viduH  // 112 /  /  artha :- asatI arthAt duSTAcAra vAle, totA, mainA, billI,
kuttA, murgA, mora Adi tiryaMca pazu-pakSiyoM kA poSaNa (pAlana) karanA tathA
dhanaprApti ke lie vyabhicAra ke dvArA dAsa-dAsI se AjIvikA calAnA asatIpoSaNa
hai| yaha pApa kA hetu hai| ataH isakA tyAga karanA cAhie  /  / 112 /  /  aba
davadAna aura saraHzoSa rUpa karmAdAna eka zloka meM kahate haiN|284| vyasanAt
puNyabuddhyA vA davadAnaM bhaved dvidhA  /  saraHzoSaH srHsindhu-
hrdaadermbusmplvH||113|| artha :- davadAna do prakAra se hotA hai-Adata
(ajJAnatA) se athavA puNyabuddhi se tathA sarovara, nadI, hRda yA samudra Adi
meM se pAnI nikAlakara sUkhAnA saraHzoSa hai  /  / 113 /  /  vyAkhyA :- ghAsa
Adi ko jalAne ke lie Aga lagAnA, davadAna kahalAtA hai| vaha do prakAra se ho to
vyasana (Adata) se hotA hai-phala kI apekSA binA. jaise bhIla Adi loga binA hI
prayojana ke (Adatana) Aga lagA dete haiM, dUsare koI kisAna puNyabaddhi se
karatA hai| ataH marane ke samaya mere kalyANa ke lie tamako itanA
dharmadIpotsava karanA hai, isa dRSTi se kheta meM Aga lagA denA athavA ghAsa
jalAne se nayA ghAsa hogA to gAya caregI, yA ghAsa kI saMpatti meM vRddhi hogI;
isa kAraNa Aga lagAnA davadAna hai| aise sthAna para Aga lagAne se karor3oM jIva
mara jAte haiN| tathA sarovara, nadI hrada Adi jalAzayoM meM jo pAnI hotA hai,
use kisAna anAja pakAne ke lie kyArI yA nahara se kheta meM le jAtA hai| nahIM
khodA huA sarovara aura khodA huA 'tAlAba, kahalAtA hai| jalAzayoM meM pAnI
sUkhA dene se jala ke aMdara rahe hue trasajIva aura chaha-jIvanikAya kA vadha
hotA hai| isa taraha sarovara sukhAne se doSa lagatA hai| isa taraha paMdraha
karmAdAnoM ke svarUpa kA digdarzana karAyA hai| isI taraha aura bhI aneka
sAvadyakarma haiM; jisakI ginatI nahIM ho sktii| isa prakAra sAtaveM vrata ke
kula bIsa aticAra kahe haiM-dUsare bhI pAMca aticAra kahe haiN| jo aticAra |
jisa vrata ke pariNAma ko kaluSita karane vAlA hai, use usI vrata kA aticAra
smjhnaa| dUsare bhI pApakarma hai, unheM bhI 241

Page #264 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Explanation of the Transgressions of the Samayik Vrat  **From Yoga Shastra,
Third Light, Verses 114-115**  It is believed that there can be more than five
transgressions of the Samayik Vrat. This is because many mistakes can be made
due to ignorance. Therefore, one should understand the appropriate
transgressions for each Vrat.  **Doubt:** Are actions like Angarakarma, etc.,
considered Kharakarma? How are these considered transgressions? Because all
these actions are in the form of Kharakarma and Karmadan.  **Answer:** In
reality, all these are in the form of Kharakarma. Therefore, those who adopt the
Vrat of renouncing these actions consider them transgressions. Those who perform
such actions intentionally, their Vrat is broken. ||113||  Now, we discuss the
transgressions of the Anarthadanda-Virati Vrat. ||285||  **Verse 114:**
**Meaning:**  1. Keeping the means or the object of violence together. 2.
Keeping more than necessary means of enjoyment. 3. Speaking without thinking. 4.
Acting like a clown. 5. Using words that arouse lust.  These five are the
transgressions of Anarthadanda-Virati. ||114||  **Explanation:**  These five
transgressions are mentioned for those who have renounced Anarthadanda. They are
as follows:  * **First Transgression:** The object that makes the soul eligible
for bad destiny is called "Adhikarana". Keeping together or near objects like a
mortar, pestle, plow, cart, dice with a bow, arrow, etc., is the first
transgression. A Shravak should not keep such objects together, but should keep
them separate. If the objects are kept together and someone asks for them, it
cannot be refused. But if they are scattered, it can be easily refused. This is
the first transgression, which is the form of violent giving of Anarthadanda.  *
**Second Transgression:** Excessive use of the objects or means of the five
senses leads to excessive enjoyment. Excessive enjoyment, by its nature, is
excessive enjoyment. This transgression occurs due to careless conduct. Storing
or using excessively items like bath, drink, food, sandalwood, saffron, musk,
clothes, ornaments, etc., for oneself or one's family is the second
transgression called "Pramada". In this regard, the ancient tradition in
"Aavashyakachurni" states that those who consume excessive oil, amla, soap,
etc., and bathe by jumping or entering ponds and other water bodies, and waste
excessive water, cause great harm to aquatic creatures and other beings. It is
not appropriate or desirable for a Shravak to do so. What is the proper conduct
for a Shravak? A Shravak should primarily bathe at home. If that is not
possible, they should apply oil and massage their head, apply amla powder on
their head, and then go to a water body. Upon reaching a pond or other water
body, they should sit on the bank and take water in a vessel and bathe by
pouring water over themselves. However, they should not enter the water body.
They should avoid flowers that may contain insects like "Kunthua" and other
"Trasajivas". Similarly, one should understand the same for other means. This is
the second transgression.  * **Third Transgression:** Speaking foolishly without
thinking, speaking rudely and impolitely, and talking nonsense without being
asked is the third transgression called "Papopadeśa".  * **Fourth
Transgression:** "Kautkuchya" means acting like a clown. "Kut" means "Kutshit"
(bad) and "Kuch" means "Cheshta" (action). Acting like a clown with one's eyes,
lips, nose, hands, feet, and mouth, and contracting one's limbs is called
"Kautkuchya". The meaning is that speaking words or acting in a way that makes
others laugh and reveals one's inferiority is the fourth transgression called
"Kautkuchya".  * **Fifth Transgression:** "Kandarpa" means speaking in a way
that arouses lust or desire, or speaking about things that arouse lust. This is
the fifth transgression called "Kandarpa". In this regard, the Shravak's conduct
is that they should not say or do anything that creates attachment or lust in
themselves or others. Otherwise, they will incur the fifth transgression called
"Kandarpa". These two transgressions occur due to careless conduct.  Thus, the
transgressions of the three Gunavrats are complete. Now, it is time to discuss
the transgressions of the Shikshavrats. The first transgression of the Samayik
Vrat is mentioned. ||286||  **Verse 115:**  **Meaning:**  * Evil intentions of
body, speech, and mind. * Disrespect. * Not remembering the Samayik Vrat.  These
are the transgressions of the Samayik Vrat. ||115||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 sAmAyikavrata ke aticAroM kA spaSTIkaraNa _ yogazAstra tRtIya prakAza zloka 114
se 115 aticAra rUpa mAnanA arthAt pAMca se adhika bhI aticAra ho sakate haiN|
kyoMki ajJAnatA se kaI bhUleM ho sakatI hai| isalie pratyeka vrata meM
yathAyogya aticAra samajha lenA caahie| yahAM zaMkA hotI hai, ki aMgArakarma Adi
karmAdAna kharakarma hai. inheM aticAra kisa apekSA se kahA? kyoMki ye saba
karma kharakarma aura karmAdAna rUpa hI haiN| usakA uttara dete haiM ki vastutaH
ye saba kharakarma rUpa hI hai, isalie inake tyAga rUpa vrata aMgIkAra karane
vAle ko vaha aticAra lagatA hai| jo irAde pUrvaka vaisA kArya karatA hai, usakA
to vrata hI bhaMga ho jAtA hai  /  / 113 /  /  aba anarthadaMDa-virativrata ke
aticAra kahate haiN|285| saMyuktAdhikaraNatvamupabhogAtiriktatA  /
maukharyamatha kautkucyaM, kandarpo'narthadaNDagAH  // 114 /  /  artha :- 1.
hiMsA ke sAdhana yA adhikaraNa saMyukta rakhanA, 2. AvazyakatA se adhika
upabhoga ke sAdhana rakhanA, 3. binA vicAre bolanA, 4. bhAMDa kI taraha ceSTA
karanA, 5. kAmottejaka zabdoM kA prayoga karanA, ye pAMca aticAra
anarthadaMDavirati ke haiM  /  / 114 /  /  vyAkhyA :- anarthadaMDa se virati
vAle ke lie ye pAMca aticAra kahe haiM; jo isa prakAra haiM-jisase AtmA durgati
kA adhikArI bane, vaha adhikaraNa kahalAtA hai| usameM Ukhala, mUsala, hala,
gAr3I ke sAtha juA, dhanuSya ke sAtha | bANa, isa prakAra se aneka adhikaraNa
(aujAra yA upakaraNa) saMyukta rakhanA yA najadIka rakhanA prathama aticAra hai|
zrAvaka ko aise adhikaraNa saMyukta nahIM rakhane cAhie; apitu alaga-alaga
karake rakhane caahie| adhikaraNa saMyukta par3e hoM aura koI mAMga baiThe to
use inkAra nahIM kiyA jA sakatA, aura titara-bitara par3e to anAyAsa hI inkAra
kiyA jA sakatA hai| yaha anarthadaMDa kA hiMsrapradAna rUpa prathama aticAra
hai| tathA pAMcoM iMdriyoM ke viSayoM yA sAdhanoM ke atyadhika upayoga se
upabhoga kI atyadhikatA hotI hai| jo bhoga kI atyadhikatA hai, vahI upalakSaNa
se upabhoga kI atiriktatAM hotI hai| yaha aticAra pramAdapUrvaka AcaraNa se
lagatA hai| snAna, pAna, bhojana, caMdana, kesara, kastUrI vastra, AbhUSaNa Adi
vastuoM ko apane yA kuTuMba kI AvazyakatA se adhika saMgraha karanA athavA
atimAtrA meM inakA istemAla karanA, pramAda nAmaka dUsarA aticAra batAyA hai|
isa saMbaMdha meM AvazyakacUrNi Adi meM vRddhaparaMparA isa prakAra hai-jo
adhika mAtrA meM | tela, AMvalA, sAbuna Adi grahaNa karatA hai, tAlAba Adi
jalAzayoM meM kUda yA ghusakara snAna karatA hai; adhika mAtrA meM jala kharca
karatA hai; usase jala meM paure Adi jIva tathA apakAya kI adhika virAdhanA hotI
hai| zrAvaka ko aisA karanA ucita va kalpanIya nahIM hai| to phira zrAvaka ke
lie kyA vidhi hai? zrAvaka ko mukhyatayA apane ghara para hI snAna karanA
caahie| aisA sAdhana na ho to ghara para hI tela-mAliza karake mastaka para
AMvale kA cUrNa lagAkara jalAzaya para jAye aura tAlAba Adi kisI jalAzaya para
pahuMcakara usake kinAre baiThakara kisI bartana meM pAnI lekara aMjali bhara-
bharakara snAna kre| paraMtu jalAzaya meM ghusa kara snAna na kre| jina puSpoM
meM kuMthuA Adi trasajIvoM kI saMbhAvanA ho, unakA tyAga kre| isI taraha dUsare
sAdhanoM ke bAre meM bhI samajha lenA caahie| yaha dUsarA aticAra huaa| tathA
mUrkhatA se binA socevicAre bolanA, dhRSTatA asabhyatA Adi se aMTasaMTa bolanA
aura binA pUche bakavAsa karanA; pApopadeza nAmaka tIsarA aticAra hai| tathA
kautkucya=kut kA artha hai kutsita-burI taraha se, kuca yAnI ceSTA vidUSika yA
bhAMDa ke samAna netra, hoTha, nAka, hAtha, paira aura mUkha kI ceSTA karanA;
aMgoM ko sikor3ane kI kriyA karanA; kautkucya kahalAtA hai| tAtparya yaha hai ki
jisase dUsare ko haMsI Aye, apanI laghutA prakaTa ho, isa prakAra ke vacana
bolanA yA aisI ceSTAe~ karanA aisa muMha banAnA kautkucya nAmaka cauthA aticAra
hai| tathA kaMdarpa arthAt viSayavAsanA paidA ho isa prakAra ke di bolanA yA
kAmottejanA paidA ho, aisI viSayavarddhaka bAteM karanA, kaMdarpa nAma kA
aticAra hai| isa viSaya meM zrAvaka kI aisI samAcArI hai ki zrAvaka ko koI bhI
aisI bAta nahIM kahanI yA karanI cAhie, jisase apane aura dUsare meM moha yA
viSayarAga utpanna ho; anyathA use pAMcavAM kaMdarpa nAmaka aticAra lgegaa| ye
donoM aticAra pramAdAcaraNa ke yoga se lagate haiN| isa prakAra tInoM guNavratoM
ke aticAra samApta hue| _aba zikSAvratoM ke aticAroM ke nirdeza kA avasara AyA
hai| unameM prathama sAmAyika vrata ke aticAra kahate haiN|286| kAya-vAG-manasAM
duSTapraNidhAnamanAdaraH  /  smRtyanupasthApanaM ca smRtAH sAmAyikavrate  // 115
/  /  242

Page #265 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Explanation of the Transgressions of Samayik Vrat  **Yoga Shastra, Third
Light, Verse 115:**  **Meaning:**  Evil intentions, disrespect, and
forgetfulness of the body, speech, and mind are the five transgressions of
Samayik Vrat. ||115||  **Explanation:**  * **Kayadushpranidhan (Transgression of
the Body):**  Engaging in sinful activities with the body.  Not keeping the
limbs of the body, such as hands and feet, still, and moving them repeatedly up
and down. * **Vagdushpranidhan (Transgression of Speech):** Speaking words that
are meaningless, doubtful, or ambiguous, or words that incite sin. *
**Manodushpranidhan (Transgression of Mind):**  Having thoughts of anger, greed,
hatred, jealousy, pride, etc., distracting the mind from virtuous activities,
and creating confusion in the mind due to attachment to worldly affairs.  These
three types of transgressions occur through the combined actions of the mind,
speech, and body.  It is said, "Even though sitting, standing, etc., on the
ground without seeing or cleaning it does not constitute violence, but due to
carelessness and negligence, the Samayik Vrat is not considered pure." (Shravak
Pragyapti 313-15)  One who performs Samayik should first reflect with their
intellect and then speak blameless words. Otherwise, the Samayik Vrat will be
corrupted.  Those Shravak-Shravika who perform Samayik while worrying about
their household affairs, their minds are immersed in worldly thoughts, and their
Samayik Vrat is futile and meaningless.  **Disrespect:**  Performing Samayik
without enthusiasm or reverence.  One who does not perform Samayik at the
regular time, even when it is convenient, and only does it when forced or when
time permits, or who completes the Samayik time with great negligence, is
considered to have committed the transgression of disrespect.  It is said,
"Completing Samayik immediately after reciting it, or not doing it at the
regular time, performing it at will whenever one desires, such instability,
disorganization, and disrespect do not make the Samayik pure." (Shravak
Pragyapti 317) This is the fourth transgression.  **Forgetfulness:**  Forgetting
the time to perform Samayik, or forgetting whether one has performed it or not,
or whether it is still to be done.  Forgetting such a noble religious practice
due to strong negligence, etc., is considered the transgression of
forgetfulness.  It is said, "One who forgets when to perform Samayik, or whether
they have performed it or not, even if they have performed it, their Samayik
should be considered futile." (Shravak Pragyapti 316) This is the fifth
transgression.  **Doubt:**  There is a doubt that "Samayik is rendered
meaningless by Kayadushpranidhan, etc." It was previously said that this is
actually the absence of Samayik, and transgression is merely a form of Vrat-
malinta (impurity of the vow). If there is no Samayik, how can there be a
transgression of it? Therefore, it should be said that this is not a
transgression of Samayik, but rather a breaking of Samayik!  **Resolution:**
Breaking occurs intentionally, but transgression occurs due to ignorance or non-
use.  **Further Question:**  Samayik is the renunciation of sinful actions in
two and three ways. In this, Kayadushpranidhan, etc., break the aforementioned
rule. This leads to the absence of Samayik, and one should perform atonement for
the sin caused by its breaking. It is impossible to stabilize a restless mind in
Manodushpranidhan, so it is better not to perform Samayik than to perform it. It
is said, "It is better not to do it than to do it improperly."  **Answer:**
Your statement is not true, because Samayik is taken from the "two and three
ways." It is performed in six categories (types) by not doing and not causing
sinful actions with the mind, speech, and body. Even if one of these
renunciations is broken, the rest remain intact. This means that Samayik is not
completely broken, and the transgression can be purified by giving "Miccha Mi
Dukkadam."  When the mind's results are corrupted, the practitioner's intention
is not the same, and giving "Miccha Mi Dukkadam" purifies it. In this way, there
is no complete absence of Samayik.  **Sarva-Virati Samayik**  243

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 sAmAyikavrata ke aticAroM kA spaSTIkaraNa yogazAstra tRtIya prakAza zloka 115
artha :- kAyA, vacana aura mana kA duSTapraNidhAna, anAdara aura smRtibhaMga
honA, ye sAmAyikavrata ke pAMca aticAra haiM  /  / 115 /  /  vyAkhyA :- kAyA kI
pApamaya vyApAra meM pravRtti kAyaduSpraNidhAna hai| zarIra ke vibhinna avayavoM
hAtha, paira Adi ko saMkoca kara nahIM rakhane, bAra-bAra idhara-udhara UMcA-
nIcA karane se kAyaduSpraNidhAna hotA hai| saMskArarahita nirarthaka yA
saMdigdha yA samajha meM na Aye aisA anekArthaka vacana bolanA yA pApa meM
prerita karane vAle vacana bolanA; vAgduSpraNidhAna hai, tathA mana meM krodha,
lobha, droha, IrSyA, abhimAna Adi karanA, sAvadya-pApavyApAra meM citta ko
vicalita karanA tathA mana meM kArya kI Asakti se saMbhrama paidA karanA; mano-
duSpraNidhAna hai| mana, vacana aura kAyA ina tInoM ke yoga se ye tInoM prakAra
ke aticAra lagate haiN| kahA bhI hai 'dekhe binA yA pramArjana kiye binA, jamIna
para baiThanA, khar3A rahanA ityAdi pravRtti karane vAle ko yadyapi hiMsA nahIM
lagatI', paraMtu asAvadhAnI se, pramAda-sevana karane se usakA sAmAyikavrata
zuddha nahIM mAnA jaataa| (zrAvaka prajJapti 313-15) sAmAyika karane vAle ko
pahale apanI vivekabuddhi se vicAra karake phira niravadyavacana bolanA caahie|
anyathA sAmAyikavrata dUSita ho jaayegaa| jo zrAvaka-zrAvikA sAmAyika lekara
ghara kI ciMtA kiyA karate haiM, unakA mana ArtadhyAna meM DUbA hone se, unakA
sAmAyikavrata niSphala va nirarthaka hai| anAdara kA artha hai-jaise-taise
sAmAyika le lenA, kintu koI utsAha yA Adara usake prati nahIM rkhnaa| jo
sAmAyika ke lie anukUlatA hone para bhI niyamita samaya para sAmAyika nahIM
karatA, bahuta kahane-sunane para jaba kabhI samaya milatA hai, taba begAra kI
taraha sAmAyika kA samaya pUrA karatA hai, athavA prabala pramAdAdi doSa se
sAmAyika karake usI samaya use pAra letA hai; to use anAdara nAmaka aticAra
lagatA hai| kahA bhI hai-sAmAyika uccAraNa karake usI samaya pAra le (pUrNa
kare) athavA niyamita samaya para na kare; manamAne DhaMga se svecchA se jaba
icchA ho, taba sAmAyika kara le, isa prakAra anavasthitatA avyavasthitatA evaM
anAdara se sAmAyika zuddha nahIM hotii| (zrAvaka prajJapti 317) yaha cauthA
aticAra hai| tathA smRtyanupasthApana-sAmAyika karane kA samaya bhUla jAnA,
maiMne sAmAyika kiyA hai yA nahIM? athavA karanA hai yA abhI bAkI hai? yAnI
sAmAyika jaise uttama dharmAnuSThAna ko prabala pramAdAdi kAraNa se bhUla jAya
to nAma kA aticAra lagatA hai| kyoMki dharmAnuSThAna ke smaraNa kA upayoga bhUla
jAne se mokSa-sAdhaka ko aticAra lagatA hai| kahA hai ki 'jo pramAdI sAmAyika
kaba karanA cAhie? athavA kiyA hai yA nahIM? ityAdi bAta ko bhUla jAtA hai,
usane sAmAyika kI bhI ho, to bhI usakI sAmAyika niSphala samajhanA caahie|
(zrAvaka prajJapti 316) yaha pAMcavAM aticAra hai| yahAM zaMkA hotI hai ki
'kAya-duSpraNidhAna Adi se sAmAyika nirarthaka hai', aisA pahale kahA gayA hai;
vastutaH isase to sAmAyika kA hI abhAva hai aura aticAra to vrata-malinatA rUpa
hI hotA hai| yadi sAmAyika hI nahIM hai to usakA aticAra kaise kahA jAyagA?
isalie kahanA cAhie, yaha sAmAyika kA aticAra nahIM hai, apitu sAmAyika kA hI
bhaMga hai! isakA samAdhAna karate haiM ki-bhaMga to jAna-bUjha kara hotA hai,
paraMtu ajJAnatA yA anupayoga se hone se aticAra lagatA hai| phira prazna uThatA
hai ki dvividha trividha se pApa-vyApAra-tyAga rUpa sAmAyika hai, usameM
kAyAduSpraNidhAna Adi se to ukta niyama kA bhaMga hotA hai| isase sAmAyika kA
abhAva hotA hai aura usake bhaMga se hone vAle pApa kA prAyazcita karanA cAhie
aura manoduSpraNidhAna meM caMcala mana ko sthira karanA azakya hai, isalie
sAmAyika karane ke bajAye nahIM karanA acchA hai| kahA hai ki 'avidhi se karane
kI apekSA nahIM karanA zreSTha hai|' isake uttara meM kahate haiM tumhArI bAta
yathArtha nahIM hai, kyoMki sAmAyika 'dvividha trividha' se liyA huA hotA hai;
usameM mana-vacana-kAyA se pApa vyApAra nahIM karanA aura nahIM karAnA, isa
taraha chaha koTi (prakAra) se paccakkhANa hotA hai| unameM se eka pratyAkhyAna
bhaMga hone para bhI zeSa to akhaMDita rahatA hai, arthAt sAmAyika kA pUrNa rUpa
se to bhaMga nahIM hotA hai aura usa aticAra kA bhI 'micchA mi dukkaDaM' dekara
usakI zuddhi ho sakatI hai| aura mana ke pariNAma bigar3ane para sAdhaka kA
irAdA vaisA nahIM hone se 'micchA mi dukkaDaM' dene se vaha zuddha ho jAtA hai|
isa taraha sAmAyika kA sarvathA abhAva nahIM hai| sarva-virati sAmAyika 243

Page #266 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Five Transgressions of the Desavakashika Vrat  **Chapter 3, Light of Yoga,
Verse 116**  It should be understood in the same way as mentioned in the third
light of Yoga Shastra, verse 116; because even after the breaking of the vow of
secrecy, the ascetics are only said to have committed 'Mithya Dushkrut' and the
second type of atonement is prescribed. The practice of Samayik with
transgressions, over time, becomes pure. Other religious teachers have also said
- "Skill comes from practice, and the individual progresses." Just as a single
drop of water does not create a hole in a stone, it takes repeated action.
Therefore, it is better not to expect perfection from the beginning; it is not
wise to say so. Such a statement is indicative of neglect and a sign of
disinterest in religious practices. Scholars say that it is better not to expect
perfection from the beginning; this statement is said out of jealousy; because
the one who does not perform the ritual incurs a greater atonement, while the
one who performs it incorrectly incurs a lesser atonement. Because not
performing a religious act is a violation of the Lord's command, a great sin,
and the one who performs the act is only guilty of transgression. ||115||  Many
people say that a Shravak should perform Samayik alone in the Poushadshala, not
with many others. This statement should not be understood as absolute truth
based on the scriptural verse 'Ege Abie'. Because the opposite statement is also
found in the Vyavahar Bhashya. There it is said - "Rajsuyai Panchavi Poshasalae
Sammilia", meaning that the five Poushadshalas, including the Rajpatra, are
gathered together. What more can be said? These five transgressions are said to
be of the Samayik Vrat. Now, we will explain the five transgressions of the
Desavakashika Vrat. ||287||  **Preshya Prayoga, Aayan, Pudgal Kshepan,
Shabdanupat, and Rupanupat are the five transgressions of the Desavakashika
Vrat.** ||116||  **Explanation:**  The Desavakashika Vrat is a special form of
Digparimanavat. It has the distinction that the Digvrat is for life, a year, or
a season, while the Desavakashika Vrat is for a day, a watch, a Muhurta, etc. It
has five transgressions. They are as follows:  1. **Preshya Prayoga:** When
there is a need to work outside the area that has been self-imposed, sending
someone else instead of going oneself. If one goes oneself, it is a violation of
the vow, therefore this is called Preshya Prayoga. The Desavakashika Vrat is
taken with the intention of avoiding the killing of living beings that occurs
due to the business of going and coming. But whether the Desavakashika Vrati
does it himself or has someone else do it, there is no significant difference.
Rather, if one goes with the intention of minimizing harm, one can also avoid
the sin of killing. If someone else is sent, they may not be mindful of the
rules and may incur sins like Ajanna. This is the first transgression.  2.
**Aayan:** Consciously bringing material from outside the area that has been
self-imposed for travel, if one goes oneself, it is a violation of the vow, and
if one has someone else bring it, it is not a violation of the vow, but it is a
transgression. This is the second transgression.  3. **Pudgal Kshepan:**
Throwing pebbles, wood, matches, etc., in such a way that the other person
understands the gross signal and comes closer, but does not do the work himself.
This is the third transgression.  4. **Shabdanupat:** If one has made a rule not
to go outside the house where one is staying, but then work comes from outside,
one thinks, "If I go myself, my rule will be broken." So, one cannot go outside
oneself. To call someone outside by sneezing or coughing, making an inaudible
sound, so that the other person comes closer, this is the fourth transgression
called Shabdanupat.  5. **Rupanupat:** For the same reason, showing one's form
to the person outside, so that they come closer, this is the fifth transgression
called Rupanupat. This means that if one is unable to call a person outside the
boundaries of the vow due to fear of breaking the vow, then the practitioner
should make a sound that the person can hear, or show their form to call them.
This is the fourth and fifth transgression called Shabdanupat and Rupanupat,
respectively, due to the relativity of the vow.  The first two transgressions,
Preshan and Aayan, are committed due to lack of pure understanding, or due to
past habits, while the remaining three transgressions are committed due to
deception. This is the secret.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pauSadhavrata ke pAMca aticAra yogazAstra tRtIya prakAza zloka 116 meM usI
prakAra jAna lenA cAhie; kyoMki gupti-bhaMga hone para bhI sAdhuoM ko sirpha
'mithyA duSkRta' kA uccAraNa rUpa dUsarA prAyazcitta kahA hai| sAmAyika kA
aticAra-sahita anuSThAna (kriyA) bhI abhyAsa karate-karate cirakAla meM jAkara
zuddha bana jAtA hai| dUsare dharmAcAryoM ne kahA bhI hai-abhyAsa se hI kArya-
kuzalatA AtI hai, vyakti Age bar3hatA jAtA hai| kevala eka bAra jala-bindu
girane se patthara meM gaDDhA nahIM par3atA, bAra-bAra yaha kriyA hone para hotA
hai| isalie avidhi se karane kI apekSA nahIM karanA acchA hai; yaha kahanA yukti
saMgata nahIM hai| isa prakAra kA vacana upekSAsUcaka udgAra hai aura
dharmakriyA ke prati arUci kA paricAyaka hai| zAstrajJoM kA kahanA hai ki avidhi
se karane kI apekSA nahIM karanA behatara hai; yaha kathana IrSyAvaza kahA gayA
hai; kyoMki anuSThAna nahIM karane vAle ko bar3A prAyazcitta AtA hai, jaba ki
avidhi se karane vAle ko laghu-prAyazcitta AtA hai| kyoMki dharmakriyA na karanA
to prabhu kI AjJA kA bhaMga rUpa | mahAdoSa hai aura kriyA karane vAle ko to
kevala avidhi kA doSa lagatA hai  /  / 115 /  /  kaI loga kahate haiM ki
pauSadhazAlA meM zrAvaka ko akele hI sAmAyika karanA cAhie, bahutoM ke sAtha
nahIM karanA caahie| 'ege abIe' isa zAstravacana ke pramANa se yaha kathana
ekAMta rUpa se yathArtha nahIM samajhanA caahie| kyoMki isake viparIta vacana
bhI vyavahAra bhASya meM milatA hai| vahAM kahA hai-rAjasuyAI paMcAvi
posahasAlAe saMmiliyA arthAt rAjapatrAdi pAMcoM pauSadhazAlA meM ekatrita he|
adhika kyA kaheM? ye pAMcoM aticAra sAmAyikavrata ke kaha diye hai| aba
dezAvakAzikavrata ke pAMca aticAra batAte haiN|287| preSyaprayogAnayane
pudgalakSepaNaM tathA  /  zabdarUpAnupAtau ca vrate dezAvakAzike  // 116 /  /
artha :- dUsare zikSAvrata dezAvakAzika meM-1. preSya-prayoga, 2. Anayana, 3.
pudgalakSepaNa, 4. zabdAnupAta aura 5. rUpAnupAta ye pAMca aticAra lagate haiM
// 116 /  /  vyAkhyA :- digparimANavata kA vizeSa rUpa hI dezAvakAzika vrata
hai| isameM itanI vizeSatA hai ki digvrata yAvajjIva (AjIvana) yA varSa athavA
caumAse ke lie hotA hai; aura dezAvakAzikavrata to dina, prahara, muhUrta Adi
pramANa vAlA hotA hai| isake pAMca aticAra haiN| ve isa prakAra hai-1. svayaM
niyama kiye hue kSetra ke bAhara kArya karane kI AvazyakatA par3ane para svayaM
na jAkara dUsare ko bhejanA; svayaM jAya to vratabhaMga hotA hai, isalie yaha
preSya-prayoga |aticAra kahalAtA hai| dezAvakAzikavrata isa abhiprAya se grahaNa
kiyA jAtA hai ki jAne-Ane ke vyApAra se hone vAlI | jIvavirAdhanA na ho| paraMtu
dezAvakAzikavratI svayaM karatA hai, yA dUsare se karavAtA hai, usameM koI
vizeSa pharka nahIM | |pdd'taa| balki svayaM IryAsamiti pUrvaka jAye to
virAdhanA ke doSa se bhI baca sakatA hai| dUsare ko samiti kA khyAla nahIM| hone
se ajayaNA Adi ke doSa laga sakate haiN| yaha pahalA aticAra hai| gamanAgamana
ke lie nizcita kiye gaye sthAna ke niyama se bAhara ke kSetra se sacetana dravya
dUsare se maMgavAnA, isa buddhi se svayaM jAtA hai to vratabhaMga hotA hai, aura
dUsare se maMgavAye to vrata-bhaMga nahIM hotA, paraMtu aticAra lagatA hai| isa
prakAra yaha dUsarA aticAra hai| tathA pudgala-saMpAta jahAM kaMkar3a, lakar3I,
salAI Adi pudgaloM ko isa DhaMga se pheMke, jisase usa sthUla saMketa ko dUsarA
samajha jAya aura | pAsa meM Ane para vaha use kArya kahe, paraMtu svayaM vaha
kArya nahIM kare; yaha tIsarA aticAra hai| zabdAnupAta kA artha hai|svayaM jisa
makAna meM ho, usake bAhara nahIM jAne kA niyama le rakhA ho; phira bhI bAhara
kA kArya A jAye taba, 'yadi | maiM svayaM jAUMgA to merA niyama bhaMga hogA. yoM
samajhakara svayaM bAhara nahIM jA sakatA. dasare ko ba svayaM vahAM khaDA
hokara bAhara vAle ko balAne yA koI cIja maMgAne ke uddezya se chIMkanA. yA
khAMsa avyakta zabda karanA, jisase dUsarA najadIka Aye, yaha zabdAnupAta nAma
kA cauthA aticAra hai| isI kAraNa se bAhara vAle ko apanA rUpa batAye, jisase
vaha najadIka Aye, yaha rUpAnupAta nAma kA pAMcavA aticAra hai| isakA tAtparya
yaha hai ki vrata kI maryAdA ke bAhara rahe, kisI manuSya ko apane vratabhaMga
ke bhaya se bulAne meM asamartha ho, taba sAdhaka apanA zabda, vaha sune isa
dRSTi se prakaTa kare; athavA rUpa dikhAkara use bulAe~; to vrata kI sApekSatA
hone se zabdAnupAta aura rUpAnupAta nAma kA cauthA aura pAMcavA aticAra jaannaa|
isa vrata meM prathama do aticAra-preSaNa aura Anayana, vaisI zuddha | buddhi
nahIM hone se sahasA yA pUrvasaMskAra Adi se hote haiM aura zeSa tIna aticAra
mAyAvIpana se lagate haiM; yaha rahasya 244

Page #267 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Five Transgressions of the Atithi-Samvibhaga Vrata  **From Yoga Shastra,
Third Light, Verses 117-118**  It should be understood that just as the five
Anuvratas are summarized in Digvrata, similarly, the five Anuvratas and
Gunavratas etc. are summarized in Deshavakashika Vrata. A question arises: In
Digvrata, only transgressions related to direction are mentioned, not
transgressions related to the summarization of other Vratas. Then how have the
elders considered Deshavakashika Vrata as the summarized form of all Vratas?
The solution is that this Vrata is the summarized form of other Vratas like
Pranatipat etc. In this Vrata, transgressions like killing, binding etc. should
be known. The implication is that the purpose of summarizing Digvrata is to
summarize the boundaries of the area. Separate transgressions like sending,
bringing etc. are possible. Therefore, the summarized form of Digvrata is called
Deshavakashika Vrata.  **Now, the transgressions of the Poushadha Vrata are
mentioned:**  **Verse 117:**  **Meaning:**  In the Poushadha Vrata, to eat
without seeing or cleaning the place, to take or keep things without cleaning
them, to spread a seat without cleaning it, to disrespect the Poushadha or not
remember it; these are the five transgressions of the Poushadha Vrata.
**Explanation:**  In Poushadha, the place where there is a small or large amount
of saliva, phlegm etc. should be carefully looked at and cleaned with the corner
of a cloth or a broom. Then, it should be cleaned properly. This means that the
mentioned impure substances of the body should be discarded with discernment.
Not doing so constitutes the first transgression of the Poushadha Vrata.
"Aadan" means to take. To take or keep useful things like wood, a plank, a bed
etc. without seeing or cleaning them constitutes the second transgression.
Similarly, when spreading a seat made of Darbha, Kusha, blanket, cloth etc., to
spread it without seeing or cleaning it constitutes the third transgression
called "Apratyupekshan" and "Aparamarjan". This transgression occurs due to
carelessness, haste, uselessness, seeing and cleaning without proper attention,
and cleaning carelessly. The "Nan" prefix in the words "Paramarjan" and
"Avekshan" indicates negation. It has the meaning of censure, just as a censured
Brahmin is called a non-Brahmin. This should be understood here. The original
scripture, Shri Upasakadasangasutra, states the same thing: "Apratilit-
Dushtpratilikhit-Shayya-Santhara, Aparamarjit-Dushtparamarjit-Shayya-Santhara;
Apratilit-Dushtpratilikhit-Sthandila (excrement-cleaning)-Bhoomi, Aparamarjit-
Dushtparamarjit-Sthandila (place for excrement)-Bhoomi; this is the third
transgression.  To have disrespect for the Poushadha Vrata and its actions or
rituals, i.e., to perform the Poushadha with a lack of enthusiasm, to complete
the Poushadha ritual in any way, constitutes the fourth transgression called
"Anadar". Similarly, to forget the Poushadha after accepting it, not remembering
whether a particular ritual was performed or not, constitutes the fifth
transgression called "Asmriti". These transgressions apply to those who have
taken the complete Poushadha. Those who have taken the Poushadha partially (from
a particular place) do not incur these transgressions.  **Now, the
transgressions of the Atithi-Samvibhaga Vrata are mentioned:**  **Verse 118:**
**Meaning:**  To place an object on something that is alive, to cover it with
something alive, to delay the time of giving a gift, to be envious, to call
one's own thing as someone else's; these are the five transgressions of the
fourth Shiksha Vrata.  **Explanation:**  To place an object like earth, a water
pot, burning embers from a stove, or grains etc. on something that is alive with
the intention of not giving it to a worthy person. A person with a low mind
thinks that a worthy person will not take anything that is placed on something
alive. Knowing this, a foolish Shravak places the object to be given on
something alive, or keeps it there. He thinks that the worthy person will not be
able to take it, and thus I will benefit. This is the first transgression.
Similarly, as mentioned above, to cover the object to be given with something
alive like a root, a leaf, a flower, a fruit etc. with the intention of not
giving it to worthy people.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 atithi saMvibhAga ke pAMca aticAra yogazAstra tRtIya prakAza zloka 117 se 118 |
samajha lenA caahie| yahAM pUrvAcArya kahate haiM ki jisa taraha digvrata meM
pAMcoM aNuvratoM kA saMkSepIkaraNa hotA hai, usI | taraha dezAvakAzika vrata meM
bhI pAMcoM aNuvratoM tathA guNavratoM Adi kA saMkSepIkaraNa hotA hai; isa para
eka prazna uThatA hai ki digvrata meM tathA isameM aticAra kevala dizAsaMbaMdhI
hI sunA jAtA hai, dUsare vratoM ke saMkSepIkaraNa saMbaMdhI aticAra nahIM sunA
jAtA; to phira sarvavratoM kA saMkSeparUpa dezAvakAzika vrata hai; aisA
vRddhamuniyoM ne kisa taraha mAnA hai? isakA samAdhAna karate haiM ki yaha vrata
prANAtipAta Adi dUsare vratoM kA saMkSepa-rUpa vrata hai| isa vrata meM bhI
vadha, baMdhana Adi aticAra jAnane caahie| tAtparya yaha hai ki divrata ko
saMkSepa karane kA abhiprAya kSetra kI maryAdA ko saMkSipta karane se hai;
preSaNa | Anayana Adi alaga aticAra saMbhava hote haiN| isalie digvrata -
saMkSepa ko hI dezAvakAzika vrata kahA hai  /  /  116  /  /  aba pauSavrata ke
aticAra kahate haiM  / 288 /  utsargAdAnasaMstArAnanavekSyApramRjya ca  /
anAdaraH smRtyanupasthApanaM ceti poSadhe  // 117 //  artha : pauSadhavrata meM
dekhe yA pramArjana kiye binA paraThanA, usI taraha ayatanA se vastu grahaNa
karanA yA rakhanA, atanA se Asana bichAnA, pauSadha kA anAdara karanA yA smaraNa
nahIM rakhanA; ye pauSadhavrata ke pAMca aticAra hai  /  /  117  /  /  vyAkhyA :
pauSadha meM laghunIti, bar3InIti, thUka, kapha Adi jisa sthAna para paraThanA
ho, vaha sthAna AMkhoM se | acchI taraha dekha-bhAla kara vastra ke aMcala se
pUMjanI se pramArjana ( pUMja) karake bAda meM yatanA pUrvaka pariSThApana kare
/  | arthAt viveka se zarIra ke ukta vikRta pudgaloM ko chodd'e| aisA nahIM
karane se pauSadhavrata kA prathama aticAra lagatA hai| AdAna kA artha hai
grahaNa karanA  /  lakar3I, paTTA, takhta Adi upayogI vastu ko binA dekhe,
pramArjana kiye vagaira lene| rakhane se dUsarA aticAra lagatA hai| tathA
darbha, kuza, kaMbala, vastrAdi saMthArA (bichaunA) kare, taba dekhe yA pUMje
binA bichAye, to apratyuprekSaNa aura apramArjana nAma kA tIsarA aticAra lagatA
hai  /  yaha aticAra dekhe binA lAparavAhI se, zIghratA se,
upayogazUnyatApUrvaka dekhane pUMjane se, jaise-taise pramArjana - pratilekhana
karane se lagatA hai  /  pramArjana aura | avekSaNa zabda ke pUrva niSedhArtha
sUcaka 'naJ' samAsa kA akAra par3A hai| vaha kutsA ke artha meM hone se jaise
kutsita brAhmaNa ko abrAhmaNa kahA jAtA hai, vaise hI yahAM samajha lenA caahie|
mUla Agama zrI upAsakadazAMgasUtra meM yahI bAta kahI hai | ki apratilikhita-
duSpratilikhita- zayyA-saMthArA, apramArjita - duSpramArjita - zayyA - saMthArA;
apratilikhita- duSpratilikhita| sthaMDila ( malamUtra - pariSThApana) - bhUmi,
apramArjita - duSpramArjitasthaMDila (malamUtra DAlane kI ) - bhUmi; yaha tIsarA
aticAra hai| pauSadhavrata lene meM aura usakI kriyA yA anuSThAna ke prati
anAdarabhAva rakhanA arthAt utsAha rahita vidhi se pauSadha karanA, kisI taraha
se pauSadhavidhi pUrNa karanA; yaha 'anAdara' nAma kA cauthA aticAra hai| tathA
pauSadha svIkAra karake use bhUla hI jAnA, amuka vidhi kI yA nahIM kI? isakI
smRti na rahanA- asmRti nAma kA pAMcavA aticAra hai| ye aticAra use lagate haiM,
jisane sarvapauSadha liyA ho| jisane deza se (AMzika) pauSadha kiyA ho, use ye
aticAra nahIM lagate haiM  /  /  117  /  /  aba atithi- saMvibhAga- vrata ke
aticAra kahate haiM  / 289 /  sacitte kSepaNaM tena, pidhAnaM kAlalaGghanam  /
matsaro'nyApadezazca turyazikSAvrate smRtAH  // 118 //  artha :- sAdhu ko dene
yogya vastu para sacitta vastu rakha denA, sacitta se Dhaka denA; dAna dene ke
samaya kA ullaMghana karanA, (samaya TAla denA) matsara rakhanA, apanI vastu ko
parAI kahanA, cauthe zikSAvrata ke ye pAMca aticAra hai  /  /  118  /  /
vyAkhyA : - sAdhu ko dene yogya vastu para sacitta-sajIva pRthvIkAya, pAnI kA
bartana, jalate cUlhe ke aMgAre yA | anAja Adi vastue~ unheM na dene kI buddhi
se sthApana karanA  /  ochI buddhi vAlA aisA samajhatA hai ki sacitta ke sAtha
rakhI huI koI bhI vastu sAdhu nahIM lete; aisA jAnakara tucchabuddhi vAlA
zrAvaka dene yogya vastu ko sacitta para rakhe, yA | jamA de| sAdhu nahIM
grahaNa kara sake; aisA vicAra kare, taba yaha mujhe lAbha huA yaha prathama
aticAra hai| tathA Upara kahe anusAra sAdhusAdhviyoM ko na dene kI icchA se dene
yogya vastu suraNa, kaMda, patte, phUla, phala Adi sajIva padArtha Dhaka 245

Page #268 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
In the Jain temple, spending wealth is considered a good deed.  This is the
second transgression.  And if a sadhu (Jain monk) eats food before or after the
appropriate time for begging, that is the third transgression.  And if one feels
envy or anger towards a sadhu, or gets angry when a sadhu asks for something, or
if one does not give anything even when the sadhu asks for food, that is the
fourth transgression.  If someone in a normal situation gives something to a
sadhu as alms, and then out of envy, gives something to the sadhu saying, "He
gave this, so I am not less than him. Take this," then this is giving out of
envy towards another.  Here, giving out of envy for another's progress or wealth
is a transgression because it is not a spontaneous act of faith.  In
Anekārthasangraha (3/621), I have said that to feel anger towards another's
wealth or prosperity is envy.  This is the fourth transgression.  If one does
not want to give food to a sadhu, then one should not make excuses like,
"Guruvar! This jaggery, etc., is another person's."  This is called the
transgression of Anyaapadesha.  The meaning of Vyapadesha is to make an excuse.
In Anekārthasangraha (4/323), three meanings of the word Apadesha are given:
reason, excuse, and goal.  Here, the word Upadesha is taken in the sense of an
excuse.  This is the fifth transgression.  These five transgressions are
mentioned in the Atithisanvibhaga Vrat.  The feeling of transgression should be
understood in this way.  If the aforementioned faults are committed due to
forgetfulness, etc., then it is considered a transgression.  Otherwise, it is
considered a violation of the vow.  In this way, the twelve vows based on
Samyaktva were discussed, and then their transgressions were also described.
Now, describing the special characteristics of the aforementioned vow, the
description of the Mahashravak (great devotee) is presented.  "Thus, being
steadfast in the vows, with devotion, sowing wealth in the seven fields, and
with compassion for the extremely poor, one is called a Mahashravak."  Meaning:
Explanation: - Thus, as mentioned earlier, a Shravak (lay devotee) who is
steadfast in the twelve vows based on Samyaktva, without any transgressions,
should spend the wealth earned justly in the seven fields: Jin-pratima (statue
of the Tirthankara), Jin-agama (Jain scriptures), sadhu (Jain monk), sadhvi
(Jain nun), Shravak (lay devotee), and Shravika (lay female devotee).  The verse
states that a Shravak should sow the seed of wealth in these seven fields.  The
use of the word "vapan" (sowing) indicates that it is appropriate to sow in a
good field.  One should not sow in an unsuitable field.  Therefore, it is said
"Saptaskhetryam" (in the seven fields), meaning that one should spend one's
wealth appropriately and with devotion in the seven fields, which are the most
worthy recipients.  — In 1. Jinpratima - A statue of the Tirthankara made of
precious substances like diamond, sapphire, lapis lazuli, moonstone, sunstone,
ruby, coral, gold, silver, sandalwood, fine stone, and fine clay, which is
adorned with special characteristics and brings joy upon seeing it.  Therefore,
it is said, "He who, according to his means, makes a beautiful statue of Sri
Jinendradev from fine clay, pure stone, silver, wood, gold, gems, jewels,
sandalwood, etc., attains great happiness in both humanity and divinity."
(Samodha Pra. 1/322)  And seeing the statue of Sri Jinendradev, which is
pleasing, adorned with all auspicious characteristics, and decorated with all
ornaments, brings immense joy to the mind, which is even greater than Nirjara (a
state of detachment).  In this way, one should establish the statue made
according to the scriptural method, perform the eight-fold worship, celebrate
the Sanghyatra (pilgrimage), adorn it with special ornaments, and offer various
clothes.  In this way, one should sow the seed of wealth in the Jinpratima,
i.e., spend wealth.  Therefore, it is said, "A householder Shravak who offers
fragrant powder, flowers, Akshata (unhusked rice), incense, lamps filled with
fresh ghee, various types of offerings, self-ripened fruits, and water-filled
vessels, etc., to Sri Jinendradev, and performs the eight-fold worship, attains
the great happiness of liberation in a short time."  Here, one may ask, "The
Jin-pratima is devoid of attachment and aversion. What benefit does Jin Bhagwan
get from its worship? No matter how well one worships it, they neither become
happy nor satisfied. One cannot get any benefit from an unsatisfied or
dissatisfied deity."  To this, one can logically answer that this is not true.
Unsatisfied  246

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 jina maMdira meM dhana vyaya yogazAstra tRtIya prakAza zloka 119 | de; yaha
dUsarA aticAra hai| tathA sAdhu ke bhikSA ke ucita samaya bIta jAne ke bAda yA
usake pahale hI pauSadha-vrata vAlA | bhojana kare, vaha tIsarA aticAra hai,
tathA matsara yAnI IrSyA va krodha kare athavA sAdhu dvArA kisI kalpanIya vastu
kI | yAcanA karane para krodha kare; AhAra hone para bhI yAcanA karane para
nahIM de| kisI sAmAnya sthiti vAle ne sAdhu ko koI | cIja bhikSA meM dI; use
dekha kara IrSyAvaza yaha kahate hue de ki usane yaha cIja dI hai to maiM usase
kama nahIM huuN| lo, | yaha le jaao| isa taraha dUsare ke prati matsara ( IrSA)
karake de| yahAM dUsare kI unnati yA vaibhava kI IrSyA karake dene se | sahaja
zraddhAvaza dAna na hone ke kAraNa aticAra hai  /  anekArthasaMgraha (3/621) meM
maiMne kahA hai-dUsare kI saMpatti yA vaibhava | ko dekhakara usa para krodha
karanA, matsara hai| yaha cauthA aticAra huaa| sAdhu ko AhAra dene kI icchA na
ho to aisA | bahAnA banAkara TarakA denA ki guruvara! yaha gur3a Adi khAdya
padArtha to dUsare vyakti kA hai| yaha anyApadeza aticAra | kahalAtA hai  /
vyapadeza kA artha hai - bahAnA banAnA  /  anekArthasaMgraha (4 / 323) meM
apadeza - zabda ke tIna artha batAye haiM-kAraNa, bahAnA aura lkssy| yahAM
bahAne artha meM upadeza zabda gRhIta hai| yaha pAMcavAM aticAra huaa| ye pAMcoM
aticAra atithisaMvibhAgavrata ke kahe haiM  /  /  118  /  /  aticAra kI bhAvanA
isa taraha samajha lenI cAhie  /  bhUla Adi se pUrvokta doSoM kA sevana huA to
aticAra | jAnanA, anyathA vratabhaMga samajhanA  /  isa taraha samyaktvamUlaka
bAraha vratoM para vivecana kiyA aura usake bAda unake | aticAroM kA bhI varNana
kara diyaa| aba uparyukta vrata kI vizeSatA batAte hue zrAvaka ke mahAzrAvakatva
kA varNana prastuta karate haiM  /  290 /  evaM vratasthito bhaktyA,
saptakSetryAM dhanaM vapan  /  dayayA cAtidIneSu, mahAzrAvaka ucyate  //  119 //
isa taraha bAraha vratoM meM sthira hokara sAta kSetroM meM bhaktipUrvaka tathA
atidInajanoM meM dayA pUrvakaM apane dhana rUpI bIja bone vAlA mahAzrAvaka
kahalAtA hai  /  /  119 /  /  artha : vyAkhyA : - isa prakAra pahale kahe
anusAra samyaktvamUlaka aticAra rahita vizuddha bAraha vratoM meM dattacitta
zrAvaka, | jina - pratimA jinamaMdira, jina-Agama, sAdhu, sAdhvI, zrAvaka aura
zrAvikA rUpa sAta kSetroM meM nyAya se upArjana kiyA huA dhana lagAe~  /  zloka
meM kahA hai ki zrAvaka ko ina sAta kSetroM meM dhana rUpI bIja bonA caahie|
isameM 'vapana' zabda kA prayoga karake yaha sUcita kiyA hai ki vapana
uttamakSetra meM karanA hI ucita hai| ayogyakSetra meM vapana nahIM karanA
caahie| | isalie saptakSetryAM (sAta kSetroM meM) kahA hai tAtparya yaha hai ki
apane dravya ko yogyatama pAtra rUpI sAta kSetroM meM bhaktipUrvaka yathAyogya
kharca karanA caahie| -- meM 1. jinapratimA * viziSTa lakSaNoM se yukta, dekhate
hI AlhAda prApta ho, aisI vajraratna, iMdranIlaratna, aMjanaratna, |
caMdrakAMtamaNi, sUryakAMtamaNi, riSTaratna, karketanaratna, pravAlamaNi,
svarNa, cAMdI, caMdana, uttama pASANa, uttama miTTI Adi sAra dravyoM se zrI
jinapratimA banAnI cAhie  /  isIlie kahA hai- jo uttama miTTI, svaccha pASANa,
cAMdI, lakar3I, suvarNa, ratna, maNi, caMdana ityAdi se apanI haisiyata ke
anusAra zrIjinezvaradeva kI suMdara pratimA banavAtA hai, vaha manuSyatva | aura
devatva meM mahAna sukha ko prApta karatA hai| (saMbodha pra. 1 / 322) tathA
AlhAdakArI, sarvalakSaNoM se yukta, samagra | alaMkAroM se vibhUSita
zrIjinapratimA ke darzana karate hI mana meM atIva AnaMda prApta hotA hai isase
nirjarA bhI adhika hotI hai  /  isa taraha zAstrokta vidhi se banAyI huI pratimA
kI vidhipUrvaka pratiSThA kare, aSTaprakArI pUjA kare, saMghayAtrA kA |
mahotsava karake viziSTa prakAra ke AbhUSaNoM se vibhUSita kare, vividha vastra
arpaNa kare; isa taraha jinapratimA meM dhana rUpI | bIja boye arthAt dhana
kharca kare  /  ataH kahA hai- atisaurabhapUrNa sugaMdhitacUrNa, puSpa, akSata,
dhUpa, tAje ghI ke dIpaka Adi, vibhinna prakAra kA naivedya, svataH pake hue
phala aura jalapUrNa kalazAdi pAtra zrIjinezvaradeva ke Age car3hAkara
aSTaprakArI pUjA karane vAlA gRhastha zrAvaka bhI kucha hI samaya meM mokSa kA
sA mahAsukha prApta karatA hai| yahAM prazna karate haiM ki jina-pratimA rAga-
dveSa-rahita hotI hai, usakI pUjA karane se jina bhagavAn ko kucha bhI lAbha |
nahIM hai| koI unakI kitanI bhI acchI taraha pUjA kare, phira bhI ve na to khuza
hote haiM, na hI tRpta hote haiN| atRpta yA | atuSTa devatA se kucha bhI phala
nahIM mila sktaa| isakA yuktipUrvaka uttara dete haiM ki yaha bAta yathArtha
nahIM hai  /  atRpta 246

Page #269 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
In a Jain temple, spending wealth yields results even greater than those
obtained from the third light of Yoga Shastra, verse 119, or from an unfulfilled
wish-fulfilling gem (Chintamani) and other such things. In the Shri Vitrag-
Stotra 19/3, it is said: "How can one obtain results from something that is not
pleased?" This is illogical. Do inert wish-fulfilling gems and other such things
not yield results? They do. Similarly, the Jain idol also yields results. Even
if there is no benefit from the worshiped ones, they are still beneficial to the
worshiper. Just as remembering a mantra yields results of its form, and
consuming fire yields results like heat, similarly, serving and worshipping the
Jain idol should be understood as a cause of benefit. (Shra. Pu. 348) Here, we
have described the method of creating a self-made idol. Similarly, one should
worship idols created by others. And if no one has created an idol, one should
still worship and pay homage to such an eternal idol according to the proper
method and as appropriate. Jain idols are of three types: 1. Jain idols created
by oneself out of devotion, established in a temple by oneself for the devotion
of others. For example, many devotees create them nowadays. 2. Auspicious idols
or images are established on auspicious mounds (Chaitya) or at the entrance of
houses for auspiciousness. 3. There are eternal mounds (Chaitya) that no one
creates, but eternal idols exist in the upper realms, lower realms, and the
realm of transmigration (tiryagloka) in an eternal form. There is no place in
the three realms that is not purified by the Jain idol. It is appropriate to
worship Jain idols only after attributing the quality of non-attachment
(Vitragabhav) to them.  2. Jain Temple - The second area where one should invest
their wealth (seed) is the Jain abode. One should build a Jain temple by
acquiring stones, wood, etc., naturally obtained from land free from
inauspicious substances like bones, coal, etc., and paying generous wages to
carpenters, masons, blacksmiths, artisans, etc., while carefully protecting the
beings of the six categories of life (Shatjivanikaya). However, one should never
force, cheat, or get this work done for free from the aforementioned
individuals. If one has good wealth, one should build a temple like that of King
Bharat, adorned with gem-studded stones, a golden base, pillars and steps made
of gems, adorned with hundreds of gem-studded arches, a large pavilion with
statues, etc., all adorned with excellent craftsmanship. The smoke from the
burning fragrant incense like camphor, musk, and agarwood should touch the sky,
and the sweet sounds of peacocks dancing joyfully due to the fear of clouds
caused by the smoke should be heard. The sky should resonate with the sounds of
auspicious musical instruments all around. The temple should be adorned with
canopies made of various fabrics like celestial garments, etc., and adorned with
pearls. It should be adorned with clusters of pearls hanging down. The group of
gods should be descending from above and returning after seeing the temple. They
should be singing, dancing, jumping, roaring like lions. The crowd should be
overjoyed by the approval of the gods, seeing this effect. The temple should
have various scenes and strange paintings that make many people feel like they
are drawn by a painter. It should be adorned with whisks, umbrellas, flags,
etc., and a large flag should be flying on its peak. The directions should be
filled with the sounds of small flags with many bells fluttering. The group of
gods, demons, and celestial nymphs should be singing music competitively,
attracted by such wonders. The sweet songs of the singers should have defeated
the sound of the celestial musicians' (Gandharva) musical instruments, and the
celestial dancers should be constantly gathering there, dancing in rhythm and
time, performing, and making gestures. The wealthy people should be amazed by
seeing them. Millions of connoisseurs should gather there, attracted by the
desire to see the plays with acting. Such a Jain temple should be built on the
peak of a high mountain or in a land of blessings where the Jineshwara were
born, initiated, attained omniscience, and attained liberation. Or, like King
Samprati, one should build such a temple in every village, town, and
neighborhood in a good location. This is the duty of a great Shravak.  But if
one does not have such wealth, one should still build a Jain temple, even if it
is like a hut made of grass. It is said: "Whoever builds a Jain temple even like
a hut made of grass for the Jineshwara, and devoutly offers even a single
flower, obtains such merit that cannot be measured. Then, the man who builds a
large temple made of strong stone slabs is truly a man of good intentions. 247

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 jina maMdira meM dhana vyaya yogazAstra tRtIya prakAza zloka 119 yA atuSTa
ciMtAmaNi ratna Adi se bhI phala prApta hotA hai| zrI vItarAga-stotra 19/3 meM
kahA hai-jo prasanna nahIM hotA, usase phala kaise prApta ho sakatA hai? yaha
kahanA asaMgata hai| kyA jar3a ciMtAmaNi ratna Adi phala nahIM detA? arthAt detA
hai| vaise hI jinamUrti bhI phala detI hai| tathA pUjyoM kA koI upakAra na hone
para bhI pUjaka ke lie ve upakArI hote haiN| jaise maMtra Adi kA smaraNa karane
se usakA tadrUpa phala tathA agni Adi kA sevana karane se garmI Adi kA phala
prApta hotA hai| isI taraha jina-pratimA kI sevApUjA bhI lAbha kA kAraNa
samajhanA caahie| (zrA. pU. 348) yahAM hamane svanirmita mUrti kI vidhi batAyI
hai| usI taraha dUsare ke dvArA nirmita bimboM kI pUjA Adi karanI caahie| tathA
kisI ne nahIM banavAyI ho, aisI zAzvata-pratimA kA bhI pUjana-vaMdanAdi
yathAvidhi yathAyogya karanI caahie| jinapratimA tIna prakAra kI hotI hai-1.
svayaM bhakti se banAyI huI jinapratimA, dUsaroM kI bhakti ke lie svayaM dvArA
maMdira meM sthApita kI huii| jaise ki Ajakala kaI zraddhAlubhakta banavAte
haiN| 2. maMgalamaya caitya yA gRhadvAra para maMgala ke lie biMba yA citra
sthApita kiyA jAtA hai| 3. zAzvata caitya hote haiM, koI jinheM banavAtA nahIM
hai, paraMtu zAzvatarUpa Urdhvaloka, adholoka aura tiryagaloka meM zAzvata
pratimA kaI jagaha vidyamAna hotI hai| tIna loka meM aisA koI sthAna nahIM hai
ki jo jina-pratimA se pavitra na banA ho| zrI jinapratimAoM meM vItarAgabhAva kA
AropaNa karake hI unakI pUjAvidhi karanI ucita hai| . 2. jinamaMdira - dUsarA
kSetra jina-bhavana hai, jahAM apanA dhana (bonA) lagAnA caahie| haDDI, koyale
Adi amaMgala zalyoM se rahita bhUmi meM svAbhAvika rUpa se prApta patthara,
lakar3I Adi padArtha grahaNa karake zAstravidhi ke anusAra bar3haI, | salAvaTa,
mistrI, zilpakAra Adi ko adhika vetana dekara SaTjIvanikAya ke jIvoM kI yatanA
pUrvaka rakSA karate hue jinamaMdira banavAnA caahie| kintu uparyukta vyaktiyoM
se jabarana, muphta meM yA dhokhA dekara hargija yaha kAma nahIM karavAnA
caahie| apane pAsa dhana-saMpatti acchI ho to bharata rAjA Adi kI taraha
ratnazilAjaTita, suvarNatalamaya, maNiyoM ke staMbhoM aura sopAnoM se suzobhita,
ratnamaya saikar3oM toraNoM se suzobhita, vizAla maMDapa meM puttalikA yukta
staMbha ityAdi uttama zilpakalA se suzobhita maMdira banavAye, jisameM kapUra,
kasturI, agara Adi prajvalita sugaMdhita dhUpa se utpanna huA dhuMA AkAza ko
chUtA ho, usake kAraNa bAdala kI zaMkA se AnaMda pUrvaka nRtya karate hue mora
Adi ke madhura zabda sune jAte ho aura jahAM cAroM tarapha mAMgalika vAdyoM ke
ninAda se gaganamaMDala gUMja uThatA ho, devadUSya Adi vividha vastroM kA
caMdrovA baMdhA ho aura usameM motI lage hoM; tathA motiyoM se laTakate gucchoM
se zobhAmaya ho rahA ho| jahAM devasamUha Upara se nIce A rahe hoM aura darzana
karake vApisa jA rahe hoN| ve gIta gAte nRtya karate, uchalate, siMhanAda karate
hoM, aisA prabhAva dekhakara devoM dvArA kI huI anumodanA se harSita
janasamudAya jahAM umar3a rahA ho; vividha dRzya, vicitra citra jahAM aneka
logoM ko citralikhita se banA dete hoN| cAmara, chatra, dhvajA Adi alaMkAroM se
jo alaMkRta hoM aura jisake zikhara para mahAdhvajA phaharA rahI ho| aneka
dhuMgharUoM vAlI choTI-choTI patAkAe~ phaharAne se utpanna zabdoM se dizAe~
zabdAyamAna ho rahI hoN| aise kautuka se AkarSita devoM, asuroM aura apsarAoM kA
jhuMDa pratispardhA pUrvaka jahAM saMgIta gAtA ho; gAyakoM ke madhura gItoM kI
dhvani ne jahAM deva-gAMdharvo ke tuMbaru kI AvAja ko bhI mAtakara dI ho aura
vahAM kulAMganAe~ niraMtara | ekatrita hokara tAla aura laya pUrvaka rAsalIlA
Adi nRtya karatI hoM, abhinaya va hAvabhAva karatI hoM, jinheM dekhakara bhavya
loga camatkRta hote hoN| abhinayayukta nATakoM ko dekhane kI icchA se AkarSita
karor3oM rasikajana jahAM ekatrita hote haiN| aisA jinamaMdira ucca parvata ke
zikhara para athavA zrIjinezvaroM kA janma, dIkSA, kevalajJAna aura nirvANa huA
ho, aisI kalyANabhUmi meM banavAnA cAhie athavA mahArAjA samprati ke samAna
pratyeka gAMva, nagara evaM moholle meM uttama sthAna para banavAnA cAhie, yaha
mahAzrImAna zrAvaka kA kartavya hai| paraMta jisake pAsa itanA vaibhava nahIM
ho. use AkhirakAra taNakaTIra ke samAna bhI jina-maMdira banavAnA caahie| kahA
bhI hai-jo jinezvara bhagavAn kA kevala ghAsa kI kuTiyA sarIkhA bhI jinamaMdira
banavAtA hai, tathA bhaktipUrvaka kevala eka phUla car3hAtA hai, usako bhI itanA
puNya prApta hotA hai jisakA koI nApataula nahIM kiyA jA sakatA, taba phira jo
vyakti majabUta pASANazilAoM se racita bar3A maMdira taiyAra karAtA hai, vaha
zubhabhAvanAzIla puruSa vAstava meM 247

Page #270 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The proper use of a Shravak's wealth is described in the Jinagam.  Chapter 3 of
the Yoga Shastra, verse 119, states that it is a great fortune for a king or any
other wealthy person to build a Jin Mandir. Along with the construction, they
should also donate a lot of wealth, land, villages, cities, or cowsheds for its
upkeep and devotion.  In this way, one should invest their wealth in the Jin
Mandir, and if any temple is dilapidated, they should also renovate it. If it is
destroyed or corrupted, they should also restore it.  Here, there is a doubt: Is
it not appropriate for a clever Shravak, a devotee of the pure, sinless Jin
Dharma, to build a Jin Mandir, a Jin statue, or perform Jin Puja, because doing
so would violate the six living beings? Digging the ground, breaking stones,
making bricks, filling the ground, collecting bricks, and wetting them with
water all involve the violation of Earth beings, Water beings, Air beings, Plant
beings, and Animal beings. Therefore, a Jin Mandir cannot be built without
harming living beings!  The answer is: A Shravak who is attached to the initial
acquisition of wealth for themselves or their family, should use their wealth
for the construction of a Jin Mandir, etc., so that their wealth acquisition is
not futile. This is for their own welfare.  In support of this, it is said that
it is not right to earn wealth for the sake of religion. From this perspective,
it is better not to desire wealth for religion than to desire it. Because it is
better to avoid touching mud in the first place than to get your feet dirty in
the mud and then wash them.  Secondly, building a Jin Mandir, etc., is not a
cause of inauspicious karma-bondage, like digging wells, ponds, etc., but rather
a cause of auspicious karma-bondage. There will be frequent visits of the
fourfold Shri Sangh, religious discourses, observance of vows, and other
religious activities. This is a form of auspicious karma, either in the form of
wealth or in the form of liberation.  Even though there is violation of the six
living beings in this place, the compassionate Shravak's efforts result in the
protection of subtle beings, so they do not incur the sin-bondage related to
violation. It is said that even if a diligent Shravak, who has pure
determination and follows the Dharma path according to the scriptures, harms
living beings, their actions will still bear the fruit of liberation.  The
statement of the perfect sages, who have attained the essence of the entire
Ganipatika, i.e., the twelve-fold scriptures, is that "the results are as the
soul is, not according to the external action." This means that behind the
construction of a Jin Mandir, etc., there is no result of violence from the
perspective of determination, but rather the result of devotion.  A great
Shravak who accepts the Shravak-Pratima and does not even acquire wealth for
their family, if they build a Jin Mandir, etc., they do not incur the sin of
karma due to the violation of the six living beings.  And what is said, that
just as the six living beings are killed due to the causes of the body, etc., so
also they are killed in the construction of a Jin Mandir or Jin Puja, (Pancha.
4/45) is a sign of ignorance. What is the benefit of further elaboration?  3.
Jin-Agam - The third field is Jin-Agam. In this field also, the Shravak should
invest their wealth. Because, like a mantra to destroy the poison of wrong
impressions born from false scriptures, it is like a lamp in the dense darkness
of ignorance, like an island for those drowning in the ocean of the world, like
a Kalpavriksha in the desert, the Jinagam is very rare to obtain in this world.
The Agam is the one that gives knowledge of the form of Shri Jinendra Dev, his
principles, and his teachings. In praise, it is said: "We understand that you,
who have attained the supreme state of being a liberated soul, have the power of
your own right conduct. Your rule, which destroys the vices of evil desires, is
worthy of my salutations."  A person who has deep respect for the Jinagam is
honored by gods, gurus, and religion. Not only that, but sometimes they attain
knowledge in the form of Jinagam-proof, which is even greater than knowledge of
the self. For this, the scriptures say that according to the general use of
scriptures, a scripture-knower may mistakenly consider even a faulty (impure)
food to be faultless (pure) and eat it. Even a self-knower would accept it as
food, otherwise, the knowledge of the scriptures would become unproven. (Pi. Ni.
524)  The word of Shri Jinagam is also the destroyer of the existence (world) of
noble beings. Therefore, it is said: "We hear that the Jinagam...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrAvaka ke dhana kA sadupayoga jinAgama meM yogazAstra tRtIya prakAza zloka 119
mahAbhAgyazAlI hai| rAjA Adi koI mahAsaMpanna vyakti jinamaMdira banavAye to
usake sAtha usake nirvAha aura bhakti ke lie | bahuta sA bhaMDAra, dhana, gAMva,
zahara yA gokula Adi kA dAna denA caahie| isa taraha jinamaMdira rUpI kSetra meM
apanA dhana lagAnA cAhie tathA koI maMdira jIrNa-zIrNa ho gayA ho to usakA
jIrNoddhAra bhI karAnA caahie| naSTa yA bhraSTa bhI ho to usakA uddhAra karAnA
caahie| yahAM zaMkA karate haiM ki niravadya=pApa rahita jinadharma ke ArAdhaka
catura zrAvaka ke lie jina maMdira yA jinapratimA, banavAnA yA jinapUjA Adi
karanA ucita nahIM hai, kyoMki aisA karane meM SaDjIvanikAya ke jIvoM kI
virAdhanA hotI hai| jamIna khodanA, patthara phor3anA, IMTa banAnA, khar3e
bharanA, IMTe Adi ikaTThI karanA, jala se unheM gIlI karanA; ina saba kAryoM meM
pRthvIkAya, apakAya, (teukAya - vAyukAya) vanaspatikAya evaM trasakAya Adi jIvoM
kI virAdhanA hogii| ataH jIvahiMsA kiye binA jina-maMdira bana nahIM | sakatA!
isakA uttara dete haiM-jo zrAvaka apane liye yA kuTuMba ke lie AraMbha-parigraha
meM Asakta banakara dhanopArjana karatA hai, usakA dhanopArjana karanA niSphala
na ho, isalie jina-maMdira Adi banavAne meM dhana kA sadupayoga karanA kalyANa
ke lie hotA hai| isIke samarthana meM kahate haiM-dharma ke lie dhana kA
upArjana karanA yakta nahIM hai| isI daSTi se ka dharma ke lie dhana kamAne kI
icchA karane se behatara yahI hai ki usakI icchA nahIM kre| kyoMki kIcar3a meM
paira bigAr3akara phira use dhone kI apekSA pahale se kIcar3a kA sparza nahIM
karanA hI uttama hai| dUsarI bAta, jinamaMdira Adi banavAnA, bAvaDI kue~, tAlAba
Adi khudavAne ke samAna azubhakarma-baMdhana kA kAraNa nahIM hai, balki vahAM
caturvidha zrIsaMgha kA bArabAra Agamana, dharmopadeza-zravaNa, vrataparipAlana
Adi dharmakArya saMpanna hoMge. jo zabha karma-paNya rUpa yA nirjarA rUpa hai|
isa sthAna para chaha jIvanikAya kI virAdhanA hone para bhI yatanA rakhane vAle
zrAvaka ke dayA ke pariNAma hone se sUkSmajIvoM kA rakSaNa hone se use
virAdhanA-saMbaMdhI pApabaMdhana nahIM hotaa| kahA hai ki zuddha adhyavasAya
vAle aura sUtra meM kahI huI vidhi ke anusAra dharmamArga kA AcaraNa karane vAle
yatanAvAn zrAvaka dvArA jIvavirAdhanA ho to bhI vaha kArya nirjarA-rUpa phala
dene vAlA hotA hai| samasta gaNipaTika arthAt dvAdazAMgI kA sAra jinhoMne prApta
kara liyA hai, una nizcayanayAvalaMbI paramarSiyoM kA kathana hai ki 'AtmA ke
jaise pariNAma hote haiM, tadanusAra hI phala milatA hai bAhyakriyA ke anasAra
nhiiN| isakA artha yaha haA ki jinamaMdira-nirmANa Adi kAryoM ke pIche
nizcayanaya kI dRSTi se hiMsA ke pariNAma nahIM hai, apitu bhakti ke pariNAma
hai| zrAvaka-pratimA aMgIkAra karane vAlA mahAzrAvaka, jo apane kuTuMba | ke lie
bhI AraMbha nahIM karatA, vaha bhI yadi jinamaMdira Adi banAtA hai, to usako
chaha jIva-nikAya kI virAdhanA se | pApakarma kA baMdha nahIM hotaa| aura jo
yaha kahA jAtA hai ki jaise zarIra Adi ke kAraNoM se chaha jIvanikAya kA vadha
hotA hai, vaise hI use jinamaMdira nirmANa yA jina-pUjA meM bhI chaha jIva-
nikAya kA vadha hotA hai; (paMcA. 4/45) aisA kathana | ajJatA kA sUcaka hai|
adhika vistAra se kyA lAbha? 3. jina-Agama - tIsarA kSetra jina-Agama hai| isa
kSetra meM bhI zrAvaka ko dhana lagAnA caahie| kyoMki | mithyAzAstra se utpanna
galata saMskAra rUpI viSa kA nAza karane ke lie maMtra ke samAna; dharma-
adharma, kRtya-akRtya, bhakSya abhakSya, peya-apeya, gamya-agamya, tattva-
atattva Adi bAtoM meM heyopAdeya kA viveka karAne vAlA, gADha ajJAnAMdhakAra |
meM dIpaka samAna, saMsArasamudra meM DUbate hue ke lie dvIpa samAna, marubhUmi
meM kalpavRkSa ke samAna jinAgama isa saMsAra meM | prApta honA atidurlabha hai|
zrI jinezvara deva ke svarUpa, unake siddhAMtoM aura upadezoM kA jJAna karAne
vAlA Agama hI hai| stuti meM aisA hI kahA hai ki jisako apane samyaktva-
sAmarthya se Apa jaise vItarAga puruSoM kA parama AptabhAva prApta hai, hama
samajhate haiM, aisA jo kuvAsanA rUpa doSoM kA nAza karane vAlA ApakA zAsana
hai; Apake usa zAsana ko merA namaskAra ho| jinAgama ke prati pragAr3ha sammAna
rakhane vAle vyakti ko deva, guru aura dharma Adi para bahumAna hotA hai; itanA
hI nahIM, balki kisI samaya kevalajJAna se bhI bar3hakara jinAgama-pramANa rUpa
jJAna ho jAtA hai| usake lie zAstra meM kahA hai ki sAmAnya zrutopayoga ke
anusAra zrutajJAnI kadAcit doSayukta (azuddha) AhAra ko bhI nirdoSa (zuddha)
mAnakara le Aye, to use kevalajJAnI bhI AhAra rUpa meM grahaNa kara lete haiM,
nahIM to, zrutajJAna apramANa ho jaay| (pi. ni. 524) zrIjinAgama kA vacana bhI
bhavyajIvoM kA bhava (saMsAra) nAza karane vAlA hai| isalie kahA hai ki sunate
haiM, jinAgama kA 248

Page #271 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Greatness of Giving in the Field of Sadhus and Sadhvis  **Chapter 3,
Light 119 of Yoga Shastra:** Even a single verse can lead to liberation.
Countless beings have attained liberation by simply reciting a single Samayika
verse. (Tattvarth Sutra | 27) Just as a sick person does not find bland food
palatable, similarly, a person with a wrong view does not find the words of the
Jinas palatable. However, there is no one else besides the words of the Jinas
who can show the path to heaven or liberation. Therefore, it is appropriate for
a person with right view to respect and have faith in the Agamas. Because the
person who is destined for future well-being is the one who accepts the words of
the Jinas with devotion. For others, these words are as painful as a thorn in
the ear. Therefore, for those with opposing and faithless views, even nectar
becomes poison. If there were no words of the Jinas in this world, people would
fall into the abyss of ignorance without any order of Dharma and Adharma, and
how would they be rescued from there?  "Whoever wants to cleanse their bowels
should eat haritaki," a physician says. The one who eats haritaki believing in
this statement of the physician experiences diarrhea due to its effect. The
patient develops faith in the physician's words, and not only that, but he also
starts considering Ayurveda as evidence. Similarly, when a person believes in
the direct effects of the movement of the moon, sun, or planets, or in
metallurgy, alchemy, etc., as mentioned in the Astanganimitta Shastra, he also
accepts the statements related to indirect effects mentioned in those scriptures
as authentic. Similarly, even if a person's intellect is dull in understanding
the words of the Jinas, he should still accept the indirect effects mentioned in
them, just like the direct effects, or even those effects that are not
understood by sight or intellect, as true. In this difficult time, the intellect
of people is becoming dull day by day, so that the words of the Jinas will
almost be destroyed. Understanding this, the great men of the past, like Shri
Nagarjuna, Shri Skandil Acharya (Shri Devarddigni Kshamasraman), etc., have
written down the Agamas and made them available in book form. Therefore, a
devout Shravak who respects the words of the Jinas should have these Agamas and
other scriptures written down (published), wrapped in cloth, etc., and worship
them with respect. Therefore, it is said: The person who has the words of Shri
Jineshwaradeva, in the form of Agamas and other scriptures, written down
(published), does not attain misfortune and does not become dumb, dull, or
foolish in the future, and does not become blind or stupid, etc. The fortunate
man who has the Jina Agamas written down (published) can undoubtedly attain
liberation by becoming proficient in all scriptures. The one who studies or
causes others to study the Jina Agamas should be honored with respect, including
clothing, etc. It is also said: The person who reads the Jina Agamas himself,
teaches others, and always gives clothes, food, books, or reading materials to
those who read and teach, becomes knowledgeable about all substances or elements
right here. Written scriptures and texts should be donated to Samvigna and
Gitart Muni with great respect for study or lectures. If one wants to have a
lecture on any Agama or text, one should listen to it with devotion and
reverence every day. The conclusion is that one should use one's wealth to
donate to the Jina Agamas and use it wisely.  **4. The Field of Sadhus:** The
fourth right field is the assembly of Sadhus. According to the command of Shri
Jineshwara Bhagwan, one should dedicate one's wealth to the service and devotion
of the Sadhus, who are the keepers of right conduct, who make the rare human
birth successful, who strive to cross the ocean of the world and help others
cross it, from the Tirthankaras and Ganadharas to the present day, including the
initiated Samayika-Samyami Sadhus. This can be done by providing the benevolent
Sadhu Maharajas with pure, uncontaminated food, etc., as desired; medicines to
cure diseases; clothes to protect from cold, heat, rain, illness, and shame;
materials for copying and cleaning; vessels for eating, etc., and other
auxiliary equipment like a staff, etc.; and houses, etc., for living. There is
no object that is not beneficial for the livelihood of a Sadhu, depending on the
substance, field, time, and feeling. Therefore, one should donate all objects
that are conducive to their restraint. One should also dedicate one's sons and
daughters to the Sadhus and Sadhvis, who are eager to be initiated into the path
of the Sadhus and are detached from the world. What more can be said? One should
provide whatever means are necessary for the Muni to practice their self-
beneficial path to liberation without hindrance (pain).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 sAdhu-sAdhvIkSetra meM dAna dene kA mAhAtmya yogazAstra tRtIya prakAza zloka
119 eka pada bhI mokSapada dene meM samartha hai| kevala eka sAmAyika pada -
mAtra se anaMta jIva siddha hue haiN| (tattvArtha saMbaMdhakArikA | 27) yadyapi
rogI ko pathya AhAra rucikara nahIM hotA, vaise hI mithyAdRSTi ko jinavacana
rucikara nahIM hotaa| phira bhI | svarga yA apavarga kA mArga batAne meM
jinavacana ke sivAya aura koI samartha nahIM hai| isalie samyagdRSTi jIva ko
Agama para Adara pUrvaka zraddhA karanI ucita hai| kyoMki jisakA nikaTa bhaviSya
meM kalyANa hone vAlA ho, vahI bhavyajIva jinavacana ko bhAva pUrvaka svIkAra
karatA hai| dUsare ko to yaha vacana kAna meM zUla bhauMkane ke samAna
duHkhadAyI lagatA hai| isalie viparIta aura azraddhAmayI dRSTi vAle ke lie vaha
amRta bhI viSa rUpa bana jAtA hai| yadi isa jagat meM | jinavacana nahIM hote to
dharma-adharma kI vyavasthA ke binA loga bhava rUpa aMdha- kUpa meM gira jAte
aura girane ke bAda unakA vahAM se uddhAra kaise hotA ? 'jo malAzaya ko sApha
karanA cAhatA hai, use hareM khAnA cAhie' vaidya ke isa vacana para vizvAsa
rakhakara jo harre khA letA hai, use usake prabhAva se julAba lagatA hai| rogI
ko vaidya ke vacana para vizvAsa baiTha jAtA hai, itanA hI nahIM, | balki
AyurvedazAstra ko vaha pramANa mAnane lagatA hai| isI taraha
aSTAMganimittazAstra meM kahe hue caMdra, sUrya yA graha kI cAla yA dhAtuvAda,
rasa- rasAyaNa Adi ke pratyakSa prabhAva para vizvAsa ho jAne se vyakti una-una
zAstroM meM kathita parokSabhAvoM se saMbaMdhita vacanoM ko bhI jaise pramANika
mAna letA hai; vaise hI jinavacana ko samajhane meM jisakI buddhi maMda hai;
usako bhI usameM kahe hue pratyakSabhAvoM kI taraha parokSabhAvoM ko yA jo dRSTi
yA buddhi se bhI samajha meM nahIM Ate, vaise bhAvoM ko bhI satya rUpa meM
nizcaya mAnanA caahie| isa duHSamakAla meM dina-pratidina janatA kI buddhi maMda
hotI jA rahI hai; jisase jinavacana kA lagabhaga uccheda ho jAyagA, aisA
samajhakara zrInAgArjuna, zrIskaMdilaAcArya (zrI devarddhigaNi kSamAzramaNa )
Adi pUrva mahApuruSoM ne AgamoM ko lipibaddha karake pustakArUr3ha kiye haiN|
ataH jinavacana ke prati bahumAna rakhane vAlA zraddhAlu zrAvaka ina AgamAdi
zAstroM ko pustaka rUpa meM likhAye (prakAzita karavAye), vastrAdi | se
lapeTakara Adara pUrvaka jinAgamoM kI pUjAbhakti kare - karavAye  /  isIlie kahA
hai- jo bhAvuka vyakti zrIjinezvaradeva ke | vacana svarUpa AgamAdi zAstroM ko
likhavAtA hai, (prakAzita karavAtA hai), vaha puruSa durgati prApta nahIM karatA
aura bhaviSya meM gUMgA yA jar3a - mUr3ha athavA buddhihIna nahIM hotA aura
aMdhA yA mUrkha Adi nahIM hotA hai| jo bhAgyazAlI puruSa jinAgama | likhavAtA
(prakAzita karavAtA hai, niHsaMdeha vaha sarvazAstroM kA pAragAmI hokara mukti
prApta kara sakatA hai| jinAgama kA | adhyayana karane-karAne vAle kA vastrAdi
se pUjA - bhakti pUrvaka sammAna karanA caahie| aura bhI kahA hai- jo svayaM
jinaAgama par3hatA hai, dUsaroM ko par3hAtA hai aura par3hane-par3hAne vAloM ko
sadA vastra, AhAra, pustaka yA par3hane kI sAmagrI dene | kA anugraha karatA
hai, vaha manuSya yahIM para samasta padArthoM yA tattvoM kA jAnakAra ho jAtA
hai| likhe hue zAstroM evaM graMthoM ko saMvigna evaM gItArtha munivaryoM ko
atisammAna pUrvaka svAdhyAya yA vyAkhyAna karane ke lie dAna denA caahie| kisI
bhI Agama yA graMtha para vyAkhyAna karAnA ho to pratidina usakI pUjAbhakti
pUrvaka zraddhAbhAva se usakA zravaNa karanA | cAhie  /  niSkarSa yaha hai ki
jina-Agama ke lie apanA dhanadAna karake usakA sadupayoga karanA caahie| 4.
sAdhu kSetra cauthA samyak kSetra sAdhugaNa haiN| zrI jinezvara bhagavAna kI
AjJAnusAra samyak cAritra ke pAlaka, durlabha manuSya janma ko saphala karane ke
lie saMsArasamudra se pAra utarane aura dUsare ko bhI pAra utArane ke lie
pratyanazIla; zrItIrthaMkara, gaNadharoM se lekara Aja taka ke dIkSita sAmAyika-
saMyamI sAdhu-bhagavaMtoM kI yathAyogya sevA - | bhakti meM apanA dhana lagAnA
caahie| vaha isa prakAra - upakArI sAdhu-mahArAja ko kalpanIya nirdoSa acitta
AhArAdi, | roganAzaka auSadhAdi; zardI, garmI, varSA, roga evaM lajjA ke
nivAraNArtha vastrAdi aura pratilekhana evaM pramArjana karane ke | lie
rajoharaNa Adi denA; AhAra karane ke lie pAtrAdi anya aupagrahika upakaraNa-
daMDa Adi; tathA rahane ke lie makAna | Adi dAna rUpa meM denA caahie| aisI koI
vastu nahIM hai jo dravya, kSetra, kAla aura bhAva kI apekSA se sAdhu ke
jIvanayApana | ke lie upakAraka na ho| isalie unako saMyamopakArI sabhI vastuoM
kA dAna denA caahie| sAdhu-dharma meM dIkSita hone | ke lie udyata, saMsAra
virakta apane putra-putriyoM ko bhI sAdhusAdhviyoM ko samarpita karanA caahie|
adhika kyA kaheM? | jisa-jisa upAya se munigaNa nirAbAdha (pIDA rahita) vRtti se
apanI svaparakalyANakArI mokSasAdhanA kara sakeM; tadanurUpa 249 --

Page #272 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Glory of the Seventh Shravakakshetra and the Mystery of the
Mahashravakapad  **Yoga Shastra, Third Light, Verse 119:**  One should give all
imaginable resources with effort. However, if a Sadhu is against the words of
the Jinas or if the resources are used to defame the Sadhu Dharma, one should
stop it according to their ability. Therefore, it is said that a capable Shravak
should not neglect a corrupt Sadhu due to the aforementioned reasons. Instead,
they should try to guide them back to the original path by using favorable or
unfavorable methods. (When you see that this Sadhu-Sadhvi is not worthy of
guidance, then neglect them.)  **5. Sadhvi Kshetra:** In the Sadhvi Kshetra,
which is adorned with the three jewels of knowledge, vision, and character, one
should use their wealth by giving appropriate food and other things, just like
for a Sadhu. Here, there is a doubt: "Women are devoid of sattva and have vices
like bad character. Therefore, they do not have the right to attain liberation.
How can the donation given to them be considered equal to the donation given to
a Sadhu?" The solution is given as follows: The statement about women being
devoid of sattva is false. Because many Sadhvis like Brahmi, etc., have left
their homes and families to perform the unparalleled worship of Sadhu Dharma. It
is not appropriate to call such great and powerful Sadhvis devoid of sattva. It
is said that "Arya Brahmi, Sundari, Rajimati, Pravartiini Chandanbala, etc., who
are famous for their character and sattva qualities, have been worshipped by
gods and humans. How can women like Sati Sita, etc., who are famous for their
beautiful sattva and pure character even in the household state, be called
devoid of sattva or characterless? How can women like Satyabhama, etc., who have
abandoned their attachments to the kingdom, wealth, husband, son, brother, and
family, and have taken the burden of initiation, be called devoid of sattva?"
(Stri Nirvana 34-36) Therefore, how can Sadhvis who are the worshippers of the
three jewels, who protect their character even in the face of death, and who are
full of sattva in performing severe austerities, be of bad character? Here, the
question is raised again: "Due to great sins and falsehood, a being attains
womanhood. Therefore, a being with right vision never attains womanhood. Then,
how can the soul residing in a female body attain liberation?" In response, it
is said: "This is not true. At the time of attaining right vision, the state of
all karmas becomes less than a koti-koti sagaropam, and at that time, falsehood,
delusion, etc., also cease to exist. There is no reason for sinful karma to
occur with falsehood. As soon as a woman attains right vision, the rise of
falsehood, etc., ends. Therefore, one cannot say that a woman cannot attain
right vision, and one cannot say that a woman cannot practice liberation." It is
also said: "Arya, meaning Sadhvi, knows the words of the Jinas, has faith in
them, and follows character in its entirety. Therefore, liberation is not
impossible for her." An unseen thing cannot be the cause of opposition. That is,
it is not appropriate to consider liberation impossible for women without seeing
the cause of its impossibility. (Stri Nirvana - 4) This proves that it is
appropriate to invest one's wealth in Sadhvis who are embodiments of liberation
practices, just like in Sadhus. One should understand this special point about
serving Sadhvis: one should protect them from the traps of wicked atheists and
provide them with a house, shelter, or a place to stay that is close to one's
own home, secure on all sides, and has a secret door. Their service should be
done by the women of one's own house. One should keep their daughters in contact
with them, introduce them to them, and if one's daughter has a desire to take
initiation, one should dedicate her without hesitation. If they forget any task
that needs to be done, one should remind them. If a Sadhviji engages in wrong
conduct, one should stop her politely. If one's daughters or the women of the
house forget to serve them, one should warn them. If they do not listen even
after repeated warnings, one should teach them. If they continue to make
mistakes, one should rebuke them with harsh words. One should serve them by
giving them appropriate things.  **6. Shravak Kshetra:** The sixth kshetra is
that of the Shravak. One should invest their wealth in this kshetra. A Shravak
is considered to be a fellow practitioner of the same Dharma. When the gathering
of like-minded men occurs due to great merit, then what to say about serving
them? On the occasions of the birth anniversaries, weddings, etc., of one's
sons, daughters, etc., one should invite fellow practitioners.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 sAtaveM zrAvikAkSetra kI mahimA aura mahAzrAvakapada kA rahasya yogazAstra
tRtIya prakAza zloka 119 | jo bhI kalpanIya sAdhana sAmagrI ho, vaha saba
pratyana pUrvaka unheM denI caahie| paraMtu yadi koI sAdhu jinavacanavirodhI ho
athavA jo sAmagrI sAdhudharma kI niMdA karAne vAlI ho, use apanI zakti-anusAra
rokanA caahie| isalie kahA hai ki- samartha zrAvaka pUrvokta kAraNoM se prabhu-
AjJA se bhraSTa sAdhu kI upekSA na kre| apitu anukUla yA pratikUla upAyoM se use
hitazikSA dekara mUlamArga para ArUr3ha karane kA pratyana kre| (jaba dekheM ki
yaha sAdhu-sAdhvI hita zikSA | ke yogya nahIM hai taba upekSA kareM) 5.
sAdhvIkSetra jJAna-darzana- cAritra rUpI ratnatrayasaMpanna sAdhvIkSetra meM bhI
sAdhu ke samAna yathocita AhAra Adi | kA dAna dekara apane dhana kA sadupayoga
karanA caahie| yahAM zaMkA karate haiM ki 'striyoM meM sattvarahitatA tathA
duHzIlatA | Adi durguNa hote haiM isI kAraNa striyoM ko mokSa pAne kA adhikAra
nahIM hai; to phira unako diyA huA dAna sAdhu ko | diye gaye dAna ke samAna
kaise mAnA jAya?' isakA samAdhAna yoM dete haiM- striyoM meM sattvahInatA kI
bAta mithyA hai; kyoMki | brAhmI Adi kaI sAdhviyAM ghara-bAra chor3akara
sAdhudharma kI anupama ArAdhanA karane vAlI huI hai; aisI mahAsattvazAlI |
sAdhviyoM ko sattvahIna kahanA ucita nahIM hai| kahA hai ki 'zIla-sattva guNoM
se prasiddha AryA brAhmI, suMdarI, rAjImatI, pravartinI caMdanabAlA Adi
mahAsAdhviyAM devoM tathA manuSyoM dvArA pUjanIya huI hai, tathA gRhastha-
avasthA meM bhI isa jagat | meM suMdara sattva aura nirmalazIla se prasiddha
satI sItA Adi striyoM ko sattvahIna yA zIlarahita kaise kahA jA sakatA hai?
rAjya, lakSmI, pati, putra, bhAI, kuTuMba Adi ke snehasaMbaMdhoM kA parityAga
kara dIkSA kA bhAra uThAne vAlI satyabhAmA Adi striyoM ko asattvazAlI kaise kahA
jA sakatA hai? (strI nirvANa 34-36) isa kAraNa se ratnatraya kI ArAdhikA,
prANAMta kaSTa meM bhI zIla ko surakSita rakhane vAlI aura mahAghora tapasyA
karane meM sattva vAlI sAdhviyAM duzcaritra kaise ho sakatI hai? yahAM phira
prazna uThAyA jAtA hai ki mahApApa aura mithyAtva ke kAraNa hI jIva strItva
prApta karatA hai; ataH samyagdRSTi | jIva kadApi strItva prApta nahIM karatA
hai, to phira strItva - zarIra meM rahA huA AtmA mokSa kaise jA sakatA hai?
isake uttara | meM kahate haiM- aisA kahanA yathArtha nahIM hai| samyaktva kI
prApti ke samaya hI sabhI karmoM kI sthiti eka koTAkoTI sAgaropama se kama ho
jAtI hai aura usa samaya mithyAtva mohanIya Adi kA bhI kSayopazama hotA hai|
mithyAtva - sahita pApakarma ke hone kA koI kAraNa nahIM  /  strI ko samyaktva -
prApti hote hI mithyAtva Adi kA udaya samApta ho jAtA hai| ataH strI ko bhI
samyaktvaprApti kI asaMbhAvanA nahIM kaha sakate aura strI mokSasAdhanA nahIM
kara sakatI, aisA bhI nahIM kaha sakate  /  | kahA bhI hai 'AryA arthAt sAdhvI
jinavacana jAnatI hai, usa para zraddhA karatI hai, samagra rUpa se cAritra kA
pAlana bhI krtii| hai| isa kAraNa usake lie mokSaprApti asaMbhava nahIM hai|'
adRSTa (na dekhI huI) cIja virodha kA kAraNa nahIM ho sakatI | arthAt mokSa kI
asaMbhAvyatA kA kAraNa dekhe binA striyoM ke lie mokSa prApti asaMbhava mAnanA
yogya nahIM mAnA jA sktaa| | ( strI nirvANa - 4 ) isase siddha huA ki mukti-
sAdhanAmUrti sAdhviyoM meM sAdhu ke samAna apanA dhana lagAnA yogya hai|
sAdhviyoM kI sevAbhakti meM itanA vizeSa samajhanA cAhie - durAcArI nAstikoM ke
jAla se sAdhviyoM kI surakSA karanI | cAhie tathA unheM nivAsa ke lie apane
ghara ke najadIka, cAroM tarapha se surakSita aura gupta dvAra vAlA; makAna,
upAzraya | yA rahane kA sthAna denA caahie| apane ghara kI striyoM dvArA unakI
sevA karavAnI cAhie; apanI putriyoM ko unake saMparka meM rakhanA cAhie, unase
paricita karAnA cAhie aura apanI kisI kanyA ko dIkSA lene kI bhAvanA ho to use
niHsaMkoca | samarpita karanA caahie| ve koI karane yogya kArya bhUla jAya to
yAda dilA denA caahie| sAdhvIjI galata pravRtti karatI hoM to vinayapUrvaka
rokanA caahie| apanI lar3akiyAM yA ghara kI striyAM agara unakI sevAbhakti
karanA bhUla jAya to unheM | sAvadhAna karanA caahie| bAra-bAra cetAvanI dene
para bhI na mAne to unheM zikSA denI caahie| bAra-bAra bhUla kareM to kaThora |
vacana se upAlaMbha Adi denA caahie| saMyamocita vastue~ dekara unakI sevA
karanI cAhie  /  6. zrAvaka - kSetra - chaTThA kSetra zrAvaka kA hai| isa kSetra
meM apanA dhana lagAnA caahie| zrAvaka zrAvaka kA sAdharmika | mAnA jAtA hai|
samAnadharmI puruSoM kA samAgama jaba mahApuNyodaya se hotA hai, to phira unake
anurUpa sevA karane kI to bAta hI kyA? apane putra-putrI Adi ke janmotsava,
vivAha Adi avasaroM para sAdharmikoM ko nimaMtraNa denA, viziSTa 250

Page #273 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The wealthy should give charity to the wealthy. According to the third light of
Yoga Shastra, verses 119 to 120, one should show devotion to them by giving them
food, betel nut, clothes, ornaments, etc. If they face any calamity, one should
save them by giving them their wealth. If their wealth is lost due to the rise
of Antarayakarma, one should help them by providing them with employment or
business. One should stabilize those who are falling in Dharma. If someone is
negligent in Dharmacharan, one should remind them, stop them from going on the
wrong path, inspire them, inspire them repeatedly, make them practice Dharma,
and solve their doubts; repeat what they have read, discuss with them, engage
them in Dharmakatha, etc. as appropriate, and if there is any special Dharma
Anusthan or collective Dharma Kriya or collective Dharma Aradhana, one should
take them along to every place, build a dispensary, etc. 7. Shravika Kshetra -
The seventh Dharma Kshetra is the Shravika. One should also invest their wealth
for the progress or excellence of the Shravika class, like the Shravak. One
should not consider the Shravika to be any less or more than the Shravak. A
woman, whether a widow or a widow, who is endowed with knowledge, vision,
character, virtue, and contentment, who has affection for the Jain religion,
should be considered a co-religionist sister, mother, or daughter. Here it is
doubted that 'how can women follow virtue? And how can they be endowed with the
three jewels? Because in worldly and transcendental behavior, and from
experience, women are known as sinners. In reality, women are poisonous creepers
born without land, lightning born without clouds, nameless diseases, untimely
death, lionesses without caves, and direct demons. They are liars, courageous,
and destroyers of brotherly love, and the cause of suffering. They are the main
cause of lack of wisdom, so they should be avoided from afar. Then how is it
appropriate to give them charity, honor them, and show affection towards them?
In answer to this, it is said that 'it is not entirely true that women have more
faults. This can also happen in men. There are also many men who are cruel,
atheists, ungrateful, traitors, deceivers of masters, and deceivers of gods and
gurus; seeing them, it is not appropriate to disrespect the great men.
Similarly, it is not appropriate to defame the entire female gender by seeing
such women. There are many women who are very sinful, and there are many women
who are very virtuous. The mother of the Tirthankara is a woman; yet, due to her
virtues and dignity, even Indra praises her, and the Munis also praise her. It
is also said in the world that 'the young woman who carries a noble womb,
attains the position of a guru in the three worlds.' For this reason, learned
people have sung the praises of the mother's lineage without exaggeration. Many
women, by the influence of their virtue, make fire as cool as water, snakes as
ropes, rivers as land, and poison as nectar. The fourth limb of the Chaturvarna
Chaturvidh Sangh is said to be the Grihastha Shravikas. The Tirthankara himself
has praised the virtues of Shravikas like Sulasa, etc. The Indras have also
repeatedly spoken of their characters in the Devalok with great respect, and
even the powerful Mithyadrishti Devas have tried to distract them from
Samyaktva, etc. Yet they did not waver. It is heard in the scriptures that some
of them will attain liberation in the same birth, some will attain liberation
after two or three births. Therefore, one should have affection towards them
like a mother, like a sister, or like one's own daughter. This is the right
behavior. At the end of the fifth are, there will be a Sadhu, a Sadhvi, a
Shravak, and a Shravika. They will be Duppasahasuri, Yakshini Sadhvi, Nagil
Shravak, and Satyshri Shravika respectively. Therefore, why should that Shravika
be defamed by calling her a sinful woman? For this reason, it is not appropriate
to avoid the Shravika (Grihastha Sannaari) from afar, but one should have
affection towards her. What more can be said? One is not called a Mahashravak
just by investing wealth in the seven fields; but the one who spends wealth with
compassion for the poor, the blind, the deaf, the lame, the sick, the poor, the
suffering, etc.; not with devotion; he is the Mahashravak. It is said to give
charity appropriately with devotion in the seven fields. For the extremely poor
and suffering, one should invest their wealth only out of compassion, without
considering the eligible and ineligible, and the conceivable and inconceivable.
251

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dhanavAna ko dhana kA dAna karanA cAhie yogazAstra tRtIya prakAza zloka 119 se
120 prakAra kA bhojana, tAMbUla, vastra-AbhUSaNa Adi dekara unakI bhakti karanI
caahie| yadi una para koI vipatti A par3I| ho to apanA dhana dekara unakA
uddhAra karanA caahie| aMtarAyakarma ke udaya se kadAcit unakA vaibhava calA
gayA ho to sahAyatA dekara yA rojagAra-dhaMdhe meM lagAkara unakI sthiti sadhAra
denI caahie| dharma meM girate hae ko pahale kI taraha sthira kara denA caahie|
dharmAcaraNa meM pramAda karatA to to use yAda dilAnA, aniSTamArga meM jAne se
rokanA, preraNA denA, bArabAra preraNA karanA, dhArmika abhyAsa karAnA va usakI
zaMkA kA samAdhAna karanA; par3he hue ko doharAnA, usake sAtha vicAra-vimarza
karanA, dharmakathA Adi meM yathAyogya lagAnA aura koI viziSTa dharmAnuSThAna yA
sAmUhika dharma-kriyA yA sAmUhika dharmArAdhanA hotI ho to pratyeka sthAna para
use sAtha meM le jAnA pauSadhazAlA Adi banAnA caahie| 7. zrAvikA kSetra -
sAtavAM zrAvikA rUpI dharmakSetra hai| zrAvaka ke samAna zrAvikAvarga kI unnati
yA utkarSa ke lie bhI apanA dhana lagAnA caahie| zrAvaka se zrAvikA ko jarA bhI
kama yA adhika nahIM samajhanA caahie| jJAna-darzanacAritrasaMpanna, zIla aura
saMtoSa guNa ke yukta, mahilA cAhe sadhavA ho athavA vidhavA, jina-zAsana ke
prati anurAga rakhatI ho, use sAdharmika bahana, mAtA yA putrI mAnanI caahie|
yahAM yaha zaMkA kI jAtI hai ki 'striyAM zIla-pAlana kaise kara sakatI hai? aura
kisa taraha ve ratnatraya yukta ho sakatI hai? kyoMki loka aura lokottara
vyavahAra meM tathA anubhava se striyAM doSa bhAjana ke rUpa meM prasiddha hai|
vAstavika meM striyAM bhUmi ke binA utpanna huI viSakaMdalI hai, bAdala ke binA
utpanna huI bijalI hai, binA nAma kI vyAdhi hai, akAraNa mRtyu hai, guphA se
rahita siMhanI aura pratyakSa rAkSasI hai| ve| asatyavAdinI, sAhasI aura baMdhu-
sneha-vighAtinI evaM saMtApa kI hetu hai| ve avivekatA kI mahAkAraNabhUta hone
se dUra | se hI tyAjya hai| phira unheM dAna dekara unakA sammAna karanA, unake
prati vAtsalya karanA kisa taraha ucita hai? isake | uttara meM kahate haiM ki
'striyoM meM adhikAMzataH doSa hote haiM, yaha bAta ekAMtata ThIka nahIM hai|
puruSoM meM bhI yaha bAta ho sakatI hai| unameM bhI krUra Azaya vAle, nAstika,
kRtaghna, svAmIdrohI, deva-guru ke bhI vaMcaka ityAdi puruSa bahuta | doSayukta
pAye jAte haiM; unako dekhakara mahApuruSoM kI avajJA karanA yogya nahIM hai|
isI prakAra vaisI striyoM ko dekhakara | saMpUrNa strIjAti ko badanAma karanA
ucita nahIM hai| kitanI hI striyAM bahuta hI doSa vAlI hotI hai aura kitanI hI
striyAM bahuta guNa vAlI hotI hai| zrI tIrthakara paramAtmA kI mAtA strI hI hotI
hai; phira bhI unakI guNa-garimA ke kAraNa iMdra bhI unakI stuti karate haiM,
aura munivarya bhI unakI prazaMsA karate haiN| loka meM bhI kahA hai ki 'jo
yuvatI kisI uttama | garbha ko dhAraNa karatI hai, vaha tIna jagat meM
gurusthAna prApta karatI hai|' isI kAraNa vidvAna logoM ne bagaira atizayokti ke
mAtRjAti kI mahimA kA guNagAna kiyA hai| kitanI hI striyAM apane zIla ke
prabhAva se Aga ko jala ke samAna zItala, sarpa ko rassI ke samAna, nadI ko
sthala ke samAna aura viSa ko amRta ke samAna kara detI hai|
cAturvarNyacaturvidha saMgha meM cauthA aMga gRhastha-zrAvikAoM kA batAyA hai|
svayaM tIrthaMkara bhagavAna ne sulasA Adi zrAvikAoM ke guNoM kI prazaMsA kI
hai| iMdroM ne bhI devaloka meM bAra-bAra unake caritroM ko atisammAna pUrvaka
kahA hai aura prabala mithyAdRSTi devoM ne bhI samyaktva Adi se unheM vicalita
karane kA prayatna kiyA hai| phira bhI ve vicalita nahIM huii| unameM se zAstroM
meM sunA hai, koI usI bhava meM mokSa jAne vAlI hai, koI do yA tIna bhava karake
mokSa meM jAtI hai| isalie usake prati mAtA ke samAna bahana ke samAna yA apanI
putrI-samAna vAtsalya rakhanA caahie| yahI vyavahAra yuktiyukta hai| pAMcaveM
Are ke aMta meM eka sAdhu, eka sAdhvI, eka zrAvaka aura eka zrAvikA rheNgii|
vaha kramazaH duppasahasUri, yakSiNI sAdhvI, nAgila zrAvaka aura satyazrI
zrAvikA hogii| ataH usa zrAvikA ko pApamayI vanitA ke tulya batAkara kyoM
badanAma kiyA jAya? isI kAraNa zrAvikA (gRhasthasannArI) kA dUra se tyAga karanA
yogya nahIM hai, paraMtu usake prati vAtsalyabhAva rakhanA cAhie adhika kyA
kaheM? sirpha sAta kSetroM meM hI dhana lagAne se mahAzrAvaka nahIM kahalAtA;
paraMtu nirdhana, aMdhA, baharA, laMgar3A, rogI, dIna duHkhI Adi ke lie jo bhI
anukaMpA pUrvaka dhana vyaya karatA hai; bhaktipUrvaka nahIM; vahI mahAzrAvaka
hai| sAta kSetroM meM to bhakti pUrvaka yathocitta dAna dene kA kahA hai|
atidIna-duHkhIjanoM ke lie to pAtra-apAtra kA tathA kalpanIya-akalpanIya kA
vicAra kiye binA, kevala karuNA se hI apanA dhana lagAnA yogya 251

Page #274 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Description of the Daily Routine of a Mahashravak  The daily routine of a
Mahashravak is described in the third light of Yogashastra, verses 120-121. At
the time of initiation, the Tirthankaras, without any discrimination, gave
annual donations out of compassion, regardless of whether the recipient was
worthy or not. Therefore, one who, with devotion, invests their wealth in the
seven fields, and with great compassion for the poor and suffering, should be
called a Mahashravak.  Here, a doubt arises: why is such a person called a
"Mahashravak" instead of just a "Shravak"? What is the purpose of adding the
prefix "Maha"? The solution is that one who has unwavering right faith, or who
observes even a single Anuvrat, or who listens to the words of the Jinas, is
called a Shravak based on the etymological meaning. Therefore, it is said: "One
who has attained right faith, who always listens to the teachings of the
virtuous about the best Shravak dharma, is truly a Shravak." (Shra. Pra. Ga. 2)
And one who, by contemplating the teachings of the Tirthankaras, strengthens
their own faith, who daily sows the seeds of wealth in the field of worthy
recipients, who destroys their sinful karma by serving the virtuous, can
certainly be called a Shravak even today.  From this etymological explanation,
the general meaning of Shravak is clear. However, the Shravak who diligently
observes all the vows, who invests their wealth in the seven fields mentioned
above, who promotes Jainism, who has immense compassion for the suffering
beings, can be called a "Mahashravak" without any fault.  The need to invest
wealth in the seven fields is supported by the following verse:  **Verse 120:**
"He who, even though possessing wealth, does not sow it in the external and
impermanent fields, how can he practice the difficult and virtuous conduct?"
**Explanation:**  Why is the word "Sat" used as an adjective for wealth here?
The answer is that "Sat" means "existing". It is possible to donate existing
wealth; therefore, the word "Sat" is used. The body is an internal thing;
compared to it, wealth is considered an external thing. It is impossible to
abandon an internal thing; therefore, the adjective "external" is used. An
external thing is not always permanent. Therefore, the adjective "impermanent"
is used. Wealth can be stolen by thieves, destroyed by water, fire, family
members, or kings. Therefore, the adjective "impermanent" is used. Even if it is
kept with great effort, it will inevitably be destroyed when the merit
associated with it is exhausted. Our Gurudev also says: "Thieves steal wealth,
family members fight over it, kings take it by force or through taxes, fire
burns it, water washes it away, or due to addiction, a person's wealth goes out
the back door. Even if it is buried in the ground and kept safe, the Vyantar
Devas can steal it, or at the time of death, a person leaves everything behind
and goes to the next world." Therefore, even a small portion of impermanent
wealth should be invested in some worthy field.  Just as oil, even if abundant,
is not applied to a mountain, similarly, wealth, even if abundant, should not be
wasted by giving it to just anyone. Therefore, it should be sown (invested) in
the seven fields. It is said: "By sowing the seeds of wealth in the seven
fields, it multiplies a hundred, a thousand, a lakh, or even a crore times. One
who, even though possessing resources, does not invest their wealth or resources
in the fields, is a poor soul. How can a great soul who has practiced evil
conduct donate wealth in the seven fields? How can a person who has only gained
wealth and is devoid of virtue, practice the conduct of renunciation of all
attachments? The Shravak dharma is a magnificent palace, the fruit of which is
the attainment of the Kalashaaropana."  **Now, we describe the daily routine of
a Mahashravak:**  **Verse 121:**  "The Mahashravak should rise at Brahma
Muhurta, reciting the praise of the Supreme Lord. Then, he should remember:
'What is my dharma? In what family was I born? And what are my vows?'"

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 mahAzrAvaka kI dinacaryA kA varNana yogazAstra tRtIya prakAza zloka 120 se 121
mAnA gayA hai| dIkSA ke samaya meM zrI tIrthakara bhagavaMtoM ne bhI pAtra-
apAtra kI apekSA rakhe binA abhedabhAva se kevala karuNA parAyaNa hokara hI
sAMvatsarika dAna diyA thaa| isa kAraNa jo sAta kSetroM meM bhakti se aura dIna-
duHkhiyoM ke lie atikaruNA se apanA dhana lagAtA hai, use hI mahAzrAvaka kahanA
caahie| yahAM zaMkA hotI hai ki aise vyakti ko kevala zrAvaka na kahakara
'mahAzrAvaka' kyoM kahA gayA? usake pUrva 'mahA' vizeSaNa lagAne kA kyA
prayojana hai? isakA samAdhAna karate haiM ki jo avirati samyagdRSTi hai, yA
ekAdha aNuvrata kA dhAraka hai athavA jinavacana kA zrotA hai, use
vyutpattilabhya artha se zrAvaka kahA jAtA hai| isIlie kahA gayA hai ki 'jise
samyagdarzana prApta ho gayA hai; jo hamezA sAdhu ke mukha se uttama
zrAvakadharma kI samAcArI sunatA hai, vaha yathArtha rUpa meM zrAvaka hai|'
(zrA. pra. gA. 2) tathA prabhukathita padArthoM para ciMtana karake jo
svazraddhA ko sthira karatA hai| pratidina supAtra rUpI kSetra meM dhana rUpI
bIja botA rahatA) hai: uttama sAdhaoM kI sevA karake pApakarma kSaya karatA hai;
use Aja bhI hama avazya zrAvaka kaha sakate haiN| isa niruktavyAkhyA se sAmAnya
zrAvakatva to prasiddha hai hI, kintu jo zrAvaka samagra vratoM kA niraticAra
pAlana karatA hai; pUrvokta sAta kSetroM meM apanA dhana lagAtA hai; jainadharma
kI prabhAvanA karatA hai, dIna-duHkhI jIvoM para atyaMta karuNA karatA hai, use
'mahAzrAvaka' kahane meM koI doSa nahIM hai| sAta kSetroM meM dhana lagAnA
cAhie, isakA vyatireka dvArA samarthana karate haiN|291| yaH sad bAhyamanityaM
ca kSetreSu na dhanaM vapet  /  kathaM varAkazcAritraM duzcaraM sa samAcaret?
// 120 /  /  artha :- jo paruSa apane pAsa hote hae bhI bAhya aura anitya dhana
ko yogya kSetroM meM nahIM lagAtA, (botA); vaha . becArA duSkara cAritra kA
ArAdhana kaise kara sakatA hai?  /  / 120 //  vyAkhyA :- yahAM 'sata' zabda
dhana kA vizeSaNa kyoM banAyA gayA hai? isakA uttara dete haiM ki sata kA artha
hai vidymaan| vidyamAna dhana kA dAna denA saMbhava hai; isalie sat zabda lagAyA
hai| zarIra AbhyAMtara vastu hai; usakI apekSA se dhana bAhyavastu mAnA jAtA
hai| AMtarika vastu kA tyAga karanA azakya hai; isalie bAhya vizeSaNa lagAyA
gayA hai| bAhyavastu sadA sthAyI Tikane vAlI nahIM hai| isalie 'anitya' vizeSaNa
lagAyA gayA hai| dhana ko cora, jala, agni, kuTuMbI, rAjA Adi haraNa kara lete
haiN| isalie 'anitya' vizeSaNa lagAyA gayA hai| ise prayatnapUrvaka rakhane para
bhI puNyakSaya hote hI isakA avazya nAza ho jAtA hai| hamAre gurudeva bhI kahate
haiM-dhana ko cora lUTa le jAte haiM, kuTuMbI loga lar3akara hissA le jAte haiM,
rAjA jabarana athavA kara lagAkara le jAtA hai, agni jalA DAlatI hai,
jalapravAhaM bahA le jAtA hai athavA vyasanAsakti ke kAraNa manuSya kA dhana
pIche ke dvAra se calA jAtA hai| bhUmi meM gAr3akara bhalIbhAMti surakSita rakhA
ho, phira bhI vyaMtaradeva haraNa kara lete haiM athavA marate samaya mAnava
saba kucha chor3akara paraloka calA jAtA hai| isalie anitya dhana kA thor3A-sA
bhI aMza kisI na kisI uttama kSetra meM lagAnA caahie| tela bahuta ho, paraMtu
use parvata para nahIM lagAyA jAtA; vaise hI dhana bahuta ho to aise-vaise ko
dekara khatma nahIM kiyA jaataa| isalie sAta kSetroM meM use bonA (lagAnA)
caahie| isalie kahA hai ki 'sAta kSetroM me apanA dhana rUpI bIja bone se sau,
hajAra, lAkha athavA karor3a gunA ho jAtA hai| pAsa meM sAmagrI hote hue bhI jo
apanA dhana yA sAdhana kSetra meM nahIM lagAtA; vaha becArA sattvahIna hai| jisa
mahAsattva ne duzcaritra kA AcaraNa kiyA hai, vaha kaise saptakSetroM meM
dhanadAna kara sakegA? ekamAtra dhana meM labdha banA haA sattvazanya vyakti
sarvasaMga-tyAga rUpa cAritra kA pAlana kaise kara sakegA? prApti rUpa
kalazAropaNa phala vAlA zrAvakadharma rUpI mahala hai  /  / 120 /  /  _ aba
mahAzrAvaka kI dinacaryA kA varNana karate haiN|292| brAhma muhUrta uttiSThet,
parameSThistutiM paThan  /  kiM dharmA kiMkulazcAsmi, kiM vrato'smIti ca smaran
// 121 //  artha :- brAhmamuhUrta meM nidrA kA parityAga karake mahAzrAvaka
parameSThi-pada kI stuti karatA huA utthe| usake bAda yaha smaraNa kare ki 'merA
dharma kyA hai? maiMne kisa kula meM janma liyA hai? aura mere kauna se vrata
haiN?||121|| 252

Page #275 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Jain Temple Entry, Darshan, Puja Rituals and Doshas, and Stotras with
Defects  **Yoga Shastra, Third Light, Verses 122-123, Explanation:**  There are
fifteen Muhurtas in a night. The fourteenth Muhurta is called Brahmah. In this
Muhurta, one should abandon sleep and, for supreme auspiciousness, silently
remember the five supreme beings (Panch Parameshthi) - Arihant, Siddha, etc. -
with utmost reverence, reciting the Navkar Mantra, "Namo Arihantaṇam," etc., in
a way that is not audible to others. Therefore, it is said that one should
contemplate the Panch Parameshthi Namaskar Mantra in their mind, even while
lying down or sitting. Because, by remembering it in the mind, there is no
disrespect to the mantra. This mantra is extremely powerful and the best.
Reciting this mantra while lying on a bed or sitting on a cot is disrespectful.
Some other Acharyas believe that there is no harm in reciting it aloud. There is
no situation where one does not have the right to recite the Panch Namaskar
Mantra. Not only should one recite the Namaskar Mantra, but one should also be
aware of their own Dharma, their lineage, and the vows they have taken. By
inference, one should contemplate their Guru (from the perspective of
substance), their village or city (from the perspective of location), the time
of day (morning or evening), and their Dharma (from the perspective of feeling).
One should remember their Jain Dharma, their lineage (Ikshvaku), and their vows
(Anuvrata, etc.), and abandon thoughts contrary to Dharma.   **Verse 122:**  *
**Meaning:** After that, one should purify themselves by bathing, etc., and
worship the Lord in their home temple with flowers, offerings, and stotras.
Then, according to their ability, they should perform the Pacchakkhan of the
Navkarsi, etc., and go to the larger Jain temple.  **Explanation:**  The
scriptures do not refer to external purification like going to the toilet,
cleaning one's mouth with a datun, removing dirt from the tongue, rinsing and
washing one's mouth, bathing, etc., as these are common practices. Therefore,
they are only mentioned here. There is no need to preach about common practices.
The success of the scriptures lies in revealing what is not yet attained. There
is no need for scriptures to tell someone with a dirty body to bathe or someone
who is hungry to eat. The scriptures are useful in showing the path of Dharma in
the world. The scriptures are the ultimate eye for those who are deprived of the
light of knowledge in the natural darkness of attachment. In this way, one
should understand that the teachings are successful in revealing what is not yet
attained, and the scriptures cannot be considered as mere approval of common
practices. Therefore, it is also said, "One who does not know the difference
between virtuous (Savadhya) and sinful (Papa) words is not even fit to speak
(about the scriptures), let alone have the right to preach." Therefore, leaving
the matter of purity here, let us now come to the worship of Arihant Bhagwan in
the home temple, which is a place of auspiciousness. Here, the different types
of worship are explained: worship with flowers, offerings, and stotras. The word
"flowers" here refers to all fragrant substances, such as ointments, incense,
perfumes, and, by inference, clothes, ornaments, etc. "Amish" refers to
offerings and drinks, such as cooked food, fruits, akshat, lamps, water, and
vessels filled with ghee. "Stotras" refer to poems in the form of praise of the
virtues of the good beings, such as the Shakrasthava (Namutthunan), etc. After
that, one should recite the Pratyakhyan, such as the Namaskar with or without
the Navkarsi, Porsi, etc., and the Adha form with the Ganthi, etc., according to
their ability. Later, one should go to the Jineshwara temple, which is a place
of devotion and a symbol of the Sangha. There, one should bathe, apply ointment,
and apply tilak. For the wealthy, wearing weapons, ornaments, and decorations,
riding in chariots, etc., are self-evident and do not need to be preached. The
scriptures are meaningful in revealing what is already attained, as mentioned
earlier. The method of entering the temple is as follows: If one is a king, they
should go with all their wealth, all their virtues, all their army and family,
all their power, etc., with great pomp and ceremony. If one is of ordinary
wealth, they should go without false pretense, so as not to become a
laughingstock among people.  **Verse 123:**  * **Meaning:** After entering the
Jain temple according to the proper procedure, one should circumambulate the
Lord three times, worship them with flowers, etc., and praise them with the best
stotras.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 jina maMdira praveza-darzana-pUjana vidhi evaM doSa yukta stotra yogazAstra
tRtIya prakAza zloka 122 se 123 vyAkhyA :- rAtri ke kula paMdraha muhUrta hote
haiN| usameM caudahavA~ muhUrta brAhma kahalAtA hai, usameM nidrA kA tyAgakara,
paramamaMgala ke lie, dUsare ko sunAI na de, isa taraha arihaMta siddha Adi
paMcaparameSThI pada kA 'namo arihaMtANaM' ityAdi navakAra-maMtra ke pATha se
atyaMta AdarapUrvaka mana hI mana smaraNa kre| ataH kahA hai ki 'zayyA meM
par3e-par3e bhI yA baiThebaiThe bhI paMcaparameSThi-namaskAra-maMtra kA mana meM
ciMtana karanA caahie| kyoMki isa prakAra mana meM smaraNa karane se maMtra kA
avinaya nahIM hotaa| yaha maMtra atyaMta prabhAvazAlI aura sarvottama hai|
palaMga para athavA zayyA meM baiThe-baiThe isa maMtra kA uccAraNa karanA
avinaya hai| anya kisI AcArya kA mata hai ki spaSTa uccAraNa karane meM bhI koI
harja nahIM hai| aisI koI avasthA nahIM hai, jisameM paMca namaskAra-rUpa-maMtra
ginane kA adhikAra na ho| kevala namaskAra-maMtra bolanA, itanA hI nahIM,
paraMtu merA kauna-sA dharma hai? maiMne kisa kula meM janma liyA hai? aura
maiMne kauna-kauna se vrata aMgIkAra kiye haiM? ina sabhI bhAvoM ko smaraNa
karate hue jAgrata honA caahie| upalakSaNa se-dravya se mere guru kauna haiM?
kSetra se, maiM kisa gAMva yA nagara kA nivAsI hUM? kAla se, yaha prabhAtakAla
hai yA sAMyakAla hai? bhAva se, jainadharma, ikSvAkukula, aNuvratAdi
vratasmaraNa karatA huA dharma ke viSaya meM vicAra kare aura usake viparIta-
ciMtana kA tyAga kre||121||  / 293 /  zUcipuSpAmiSa-stotrairdevamabhyarcya
vezmani  /  pratyAkhyAnaM yathAzakti kRtvA devagRhaM vrajet  // 122 /  /  *
artha :- usake bAda snAnAdi se pavitra hokara apane gRhamaMdira meM bhagavAn kI
puSpa, naivedya evaM stotra Adi se pUjA kare, phira apanI zakti ke anusAra
naukArasI Adi kA paccakkhAna karake bar3e jinamaMdira meM jaaye||122|| vyAkhyA
:- zauca jAnA, datauna karake mukha zuddhi karanA, jIbha para se maila utAranA,
kullA kara muMha dhonA, snAna Adi se zarIra ko pavitra karanA; yaha pavitra hone
kI bAhyazuddhi kI bAta zAstrakAra nahIM kahate; isalie yaha lokaprasiddha mArga
hone se inakA anuvAda mAtra kiyA hai| lokasiddha bAtoM ke upadeza dene kI
AvazyakatA nahIM rhtii| aprApta padArtha batAne meM hI zAstra kI saphalatA hai|
malina zarIra vAle ko snAna karanA, bhUkhe ko bhojana karanA ityAdi kArya batAne
meM zAstra kI jarUrata nahIM hotii| vizva meM dharmamArga batAne meM hI zAstra
kI upayogitA hai| aprApta durlabha vastue~ prApta karane meM aura svAbhAvika
mohAMdhakAra meM jo jJAna-prakAza se vaMcita hai, una logoM ke lie zAstra hI
paramacakSu hai| isa prakAra Age bhI aprApta viSaya meM upadeza saphala hai,
aisA samajha lenA cAhie aura sAvadyakArya meM zAstravacana anumodana rUpa nahIM
ho skte| ataH kahA bhI hai ki 'sAvadha arthAt sapApa aura pApa-rahita vacanoM ke
aMtara ko jo nahIM jAnatA, use (zAstra ke viSaya meM) bolanA bhI yogya nahIM hai
to phira upadeza dene kA adhikAra to hotA hI kahAM se? isalie zucitva kI bAta
yahIM chor3akara aba gRha-maMdira rUpa maMgalacaitya meM arihaMta bhagavAn kI
pUjA kI bAta para aaie| yahAM pUjA ke bheda batAte haiM-puSpa, naivedya aura
stotra se pUjA kre| yahAM puSpa kahane se samasta sugaMdhita padArtha jaannaa|
jaise vilepana, dhUpa, | gaMdhavAsa aura upalakSaNa se vastra, AbhUSaNa Adi bhI
samajha lenA caahie| AmiSa arthAt naivedya aura peya, jaise pakkAna; phala,
akSata, dIpaka, jala, ghI se bhare hue pAtra Adi rkhe| stotra meM zakrastava
(namutthuNaM) Adi sadbhUtaguNoM ke kIrtana rUpa kAvya bole| usake bAda
pratyAkhyAna kA uccAraNa kre| jaise namaskArasahita athavA naukArasI porasI Adi
tathA addhA rUpa gaMThisahiyaM Adi saMketa-pratyAkhyAna yathAzakti kre| bAda meM
bhakti-caitya rUpa saMgha ke jinezvara-maMdira meM jaaye| vahAM snAna, vilepana
va tilaka kre| RddhimAna ke lie zastra AbhUSaNa alaMkAra Adi dhAraNa karanA,
rathAdi savArI meM baiThanA ityAdi svataHsiddha hone se upadeza dene kI jarUrata
nahIM hai| prAptavastu ke batAne meM hI zAstra kI sArthakatA hai, yaha pahale
kahA jA cukA hai| maMdira meM praveza kI vidhi isa prakAra hai-yadi rAjA ho to
samasta RddhipUrvaka sarva-sAmagrI, sarva-dhRti, sarvasainya-parivAra, sarva-
parAkrama ityAdi prabhAvanA se bar3e vaibhavapUrNa ThATha-bATha ke sAtha jaaye|
yadi sAmAnya vaibhavasaMpanna ho to mithyADaMbara kiye binA logoM meM hAsyapAtra
na ho, isa taraha se jAya  /  / 122 /  /  usake baad|294| pravizya vidhinA
tatra, triH pradakSiNayejjinam  /  puSpAdibhistamabhyarcya, stavanairuttamaiH
stuyaat||123|| _ artha :- jinamaMdira meM vidhi pUrvaka praveza karake prabhu ko
tIna bAra pradakSiNA dekara puSpa Adi se unakI arcanA karake uttama stavanoM se
stuti kare  /  / 123 /  /  253

Page #276 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Explanation of the Iriya Vahiya Text  **Yoga Shastra, Third Light, Verse 123
Explanation:**  One should enter the temple of the Lord with proper procedure
and perform three circumambulations to Shri Jinendra Bhagwan. The entry
procedure for the Shri Jin Mandir is as follows:  - Discard all objects with
consciousness (satchitt) like flowers, betel nut, etc., and objects without
consciousness (achitt) like knives, sandals, weapons, etc. - Wear a single upper
garment (uttarasang) and enter the temple. - Upon seeing the Lord, join your
palms in anjali mudra, place them on your forehead, focus your mind, and enter
the temple while chanting "Nisihi Nisihi" five times.  This is also mentioned
elsewhere:  - Discard objects with consciousness, keep objects without
consciousness, wear a single, unbroken garment (uttarasang), and upon seeing the
Lord with your eyes, join your palms on your forehead, focus your mind, and
enter the temple. (Bhagavati 2)  If one is a king, they should discard their
royal insignia upon entering the temple. (Vichar Saar, Verse 665)  Therefore, it
is said:  - "Discard the five royal insignia - sword, umbrella, footwear
(padtraan), crown, and fly whisk - upon entering the temple."  Here, "flowers"
(pushpa) represents the middle term. Therefore, by the middle term, the
beginning and end are also included.  By this logic, one should perform special
worship with bathing (snatra) on daily and festival days.  During bathing, first
apply fragrant sandalwood tilak to the Jin pratima, then apply musk, camphor,
and sandalwood-mixed fragrant incense. (Arha Abhishek 3/77)  After placing the
incense, put all medicinal herbs and other substances into a water-filled pot.
Then, offer a flower offering (kusumaanjali) and bathe the Lord with water mixed
with all medicinal herbs, camphor, saffron, sandalwood, agarwood, etc., and with
ghee, milk, etc.  After that, grind sandalwood and apply it to the Lord. Then,
worship the Lord with garlands of fragrant champa, satapatra, lotus, mogra,
rose, etc.  After that, adorn the Lord with clothes, etc., decorated with
jewels, gold, and pearls.  Then, draw the eight auspicious symbols (ashtamangal)
in front of the Lord with mustard seeds, rice, and paddy.  Place offerings
(naivedya), auspicious lamps (mangaldeep), yogurt, ghee, etc., in front of the
Lord.  Apply a tilak of goorachan on the Lord's forehead. Then, perform the
aarti.  Therefore, it is also said:  - "Worship the Lord with fragrant incense,
water mixed with all medicinal herbs, fragrant sandalwood paste, excellent
flower garlands, offerings, lamps, mustard seeds (siddharthak), yogurt, akshat,
goorachan, etc., and with excellent substances like gold, pearl, and jewel
necklaces."  Because worship performed with excellent materials manifests
excellent emotions. Without this, Lakshmi cannot be used properly.  In this way,
one should worship Shri Jinendra Bhagwan with devotion, perform the Iriya Vahiya
Pratikraman, and chant the Shakrastava (Namutthunan) and other sutras.  One
should praise the Lord's qualities with hymns composed by excellent poets.  The
characteristics of an excellent hymn are:  - It describes the Lord's body,
actions, and qualities. - It is solemn. - It is woven with various colors. - It
produces pure intentions. - It increases devotion. - It is pure and focused on
confessing one's sins. - It focuses the mind. - It has amazing meaning. - It is
flawless.  Such hymns, composed by great wise poets, should be used to praise
the Lord. (Shodashak 9/67)  However, hymns with the following flaws should not
be recited:  - "One eye is closed due to deep meditation, and the other eye is
fixed on Parvati's large buttocks due to the weight of the erotic sentiment. The
third eye is burning with the fire of anger directed at Kamadeva, like a
stretched bow from afar. In this way, may Shankar's three eyes protect you,
experiencing different sentiments during meditation."  - Parvati asked Shankar,
"Who is sitting on your head, fortunate one?" Shankar hid the truth and replied,
"The moon." Parvati asked, "What is his name?" Shankar said, "His name is the
same." Parvati said again, "Even after knowing so much, why did you forget his
name? I am asking the name of a woman, not the moon!" Shankar said, "If you
don't believe me, ask your friend Vijaya who is sitting on my head." In this
way, Shankar deceitfully tried to hide the name of Ganga. May his deceit protect
you.  - Bow down to Rudra, who, while being worshipped, takes on eleven forms -
ten reflected in the mirror-like form of Parvati's feet, and himself.  -
Kartikeya asked Parvati, "What is on my father's head?" She replied, "A piece of
the moon." "And what is on his forehead?" "The third eye." "What is in his
hand?" "A serpent."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 iriyAvahiyA pATha para vyAkhyA yogazAstra tRtIya prakAza zloka 123 vyAkhyA :-
prabhumaMdira meM vidhi pUrvaka praviSTa hokara zrIjinezvara bhagavAn ko tIna
pradakSiNA karanI caahie| zrIjinamaMdira kI praveza vidhi isa prakAra hai -
puSpa, tAMbUla Adi sacitta dravya tathA churI, pAdukA, zastra Adi cit |
padArthoM kA tyAgakara, uttarAsaMga (dupaTTA) DAlakara maMdira jaaye| vahAM
prabhu ke darzana hote hI aMjali karake usa para mastaka | sthApana kara mana ko
ekAgra karake pAMca abhigama pUrvaka 'nisIhi nisIhi' karate hue maMdira meM
praveza kre| yahI bAta anyatra bhI kahI hai ki - sacitta vastuoM ke tyAga
pUrvaka, acitta vastuoM ko rakhakara akhaMDa vastra kA eka uttarAsaMga dhAraNa
karake AMkhoM se darzana hote hI mastaka para donoM hAtha jor3akara aura mana kI
ekAgratA pUrvaka praveza kre| (bhAgavatI 2 yadi rAjA ho to bhagavAn ke maMdira
meM praveza karate samaya vaha usI samaya rAjacihna kA tyAga karatA hai| (vicAra
sAra gA. 665) ataH kahA hai ki 'talavAra, chatra, padatrANa (jUte ) mukuTa aura
cAmara ina pAMcoM rAjacihnoM kA maMdira meM praveza karate hI tyAga kare  /
'puSpa' Adi se yahAM madhya kA grahaNa kiyA gayA hai| isalie madhya grahaNa se
Adi aura aMta kA bhI grahaNa kara liyA jAtA hai| isa nyAya se nitya aura parva
dinoM meM vizeSa prakAra se snAtra pUrvaka pUjA karanI caahie| snAtra ke samaya
pahale sugaMdhita caMdana se jinapratimA ke tilaka karanA, usake bAda kastUrI,
agara kapUra aura caMdana - mizrita | sArabhUta sugaMdhiyukta uttama dhUpa
prabhu ke Age jlaaye| (arha abhiSeka 3 / 77) dhUpa rakhane ke bAda samasta
auSadhi Adi dravyoM ko jalapUrNa kalaza meM DAla de, bAda meM kusumAMjali
DAlakara sarva auSadhi kapUra, kesara, caMdana, aguru Adi se yukta jala se tathA
ghI, dUdha Adi se prabhu ko snAna karAve  /  usake bAda caMdana ghisakara prabhu
ke vilepana kre| tatpazcAt sugaMdhi caMpaka, zatapatra, kamala, mogarA, gulAba
Adi kI phUlamAlAoM se bhagavAn kI pUjA kre| bAda meM ratna, suvarNa evaM motiyoM
ke AbhUSaNa se alaMkRta vastrAdi se AMgI race  /  usake bAda prabhu ke sammukha
sarasoM, zAli, cAvala Adi se aSTamaMgala kA Alekhana kare  /  tathA unake Age
naivedya, maMgaladIpaka, dahI, ghI Adi rakhe  /  bhagavAn ke bhAlasthala para
gorocana se | tilaka kare  /  usake bAda AratI utAre  /  ataH kahA bhI hai-
zreSThagaMdhayukta dhUpa, sarva - auSadhimizrita jala, sugaMdhita vilepana,
zreSTha puSpamAlA, naivedya, dIpaka, siddhArthaka (sarasoM), dahI, akSata,
gorocana Adi se sone, motI va ratna ke hAra Adi uttama dravyoM se prabhu-pUjA
karanI caahie| kyoMki zreSThasAmagrI se kI huI pUjA se uttama bhAva prakaTa hote
haiN| | isake binA lakSmI kA sadupayoga nahIM ho sktaa| isa taraha zrI jinezvara
bhagavAn kI bhaktipUrvaka pUjA karake airyApathika pratikramaNa sahita
zakrastava ( namutthuNaM) Adi sUtroM se caityavaMdana karake uttama kaviyoM
dvArA racita stavanoM se bhagavAn ke guNoM kA kIrtana karanA caahie| uttama
stotra kA lakSaNa yaha hai - vaha bhagavAn ke zarIra, kriyAoM va guNoM ko batAne
vAlA, gaMbhIra, vividha varNoM se guMphita, nirmala Azaya kA utpAdaka,
saMvegavarddhaka, pavitra evaM apane pApanivedanaparaka, | citta ko ekAgrakara
dene vAlA, AzcaryakArI arthayukta, askhalita Adi guNoM se yukta, mahAbuddhizAlI
kaviyoM dvArA racita stotra ho  /  usase prabhu kI stuti karanI cAhie, (
SoDazaka 9/67) paraMtu nimna prakAra ke doSayukta stotra Adi nahIM bolane
caahie| jaise ki 'dhyAnamagna hone se eka AMkha mUMdI huI hai aura dUsarI AMkha
pArvatI ke vizAla nitaMba - phalaka para zRMgArarasa ke bhAra se sthira banI huI
hai| tIsarA netra dUra se khIMce hue dhanuSa kI taraha kAmadeva para kI huI
krodhAgni se jala rahA hai| | isa prakAra samAdhi ke samaya meM bhinna rasoM kA
anubhava karate hue zaMkara ke tInoM netra tumhArI rakSA kre|' tathA pArvatI ne
zaMkara se pUchA- Apake mastaka para kauna bhAgyazAlI sthita hai? taba zaMkara
ne mUlavastu ko chipAkara uttara diyA| zazikalA  /  phira pArvatI ne pUchA-
usakA nAma kyA hai? zaMkara ne kahA- usakA nAma bhI vahI hai| pArvatI ne punaH
kahAitanA paricaya hone para bhI kisa kAraNa se usakA nAma bhUla gaye? maiM to
strI kA nAma pUchatI huuN| caMdra kA nAma nahIM pUchatI ! | taba zaMkara ne kahA
- yadi tumako yaha caMdra pramANa na ho to apanI sakhI vijayA se pUcha lo ki
mere mastaka para kauna baiThA | hai ? isa taraha kapaTa se gaMgA ke nAma ko
chipAnA cAhate hue zaMkara kA kapaTabhAva tumhArI rakSA ke lie ho| tathA praNAma
karate hue kopayamAna banI pArvatI ke caraNAgra rUpa dazanakha rUpI darpaNa meM
pratibiMbita hote hue dasa aura svayaM milakara gyAraha dehoM ko dhAraNa karane
vAle rUdra namana kro| tathA kArtikeya ne pArvatI se pUchA- mere pitA ke mastaka
para yaha | kyA sthita hai? uttara milA-caMdra kA Tukar3A hai| aura lalATa meM
kyA hai? tIsarA netra hai| hAtha meM kyA hai? sarpa hai| isa

Page #277 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Explanation of the Iriya Vahiya Text  **Yoga Shastra, Third Light, Verse
123**  While asking questions about Shivaji becoming a Digambar, Kartikeya is
stopped by Parvati Devi with her left hand. May the sweet laughter of Parvati
Devi protect you. And see further - at the end of the Suratkrida, standing with
one hand firmly pressed on the Sheshnag, and with the other hand adjusting her
garment, she holds her scattered locks of hair on her shoulders. At that time,
with doubled beauty from her face, embraced by the affectionate Krishna, and
again lying on the bed, the body of Lakshmi, adorned with lazy arms, will purify
you. [Such verses should not be spoken in front of God]  These verses explain
the entire method of worship. Its translation - 1. Three times sitting, 2. Three
times circumambulation, 3. Three times prostration, 4. Three types of worship,
5. Contemplation of the three states of Jineshwar, 6. Not looking in any
direction except Jineshwar, 7. Three times cleaning the feet and the ground, 8.
Taking refuge in the three (varna, etc.), 9. Performing three types of mudras,
and 10. Making three types of pranidhana. These ten are called 'Triks'. In this,
there are three types of Jinpuja mentioned: Angapuja with flowers, Agrapuja with
offerings, and Bhava puja with praise. And at this time, one should contemplate
the three states of Jinenradeva: Chhadmastha, Kevali, and Siddhatva. Reciting
the Chaityavandan Sutras, understanding their meaning, and taking refuge in the
form of the image; this is called taking refuge in the Varna, etc. Trik.
Concentrating the mind, speech, and body is called three types of pranidhana.
While chanting the praise, the Yogamudra, while worshipping the Jinamudra, and
while chanting the Pranidhana (Jay Viray) sutra, the Muktasukti Mudra, these are
the three mudras mentioned. Prostration is done with five limbs: both knees,
both hands, and the fifth, the forehead. Touching the ground with all five limbs
is called Panchaang Pranam. Placing the ten fingers of both hands between each
other, forming a shell-like shape of the palm, placing the elbows of both hands
on the stomach, this is the Yogamudra. Standing with both feet equal, keeping a
distance of four fingers in the front part between the soles of both feet and
slightly less than four fingers in the back, and keeping both hands hanging
down, this is the Jinamudra. And the fingers of both hands should be placed
opposite each other, keeping the palm empty in the middle, and placing both
hands on the forehead or, according to the opinion of other Acharyas, keeping
them slightly away from the forehead, this is the Muktasukti Mudra. (Pancha.
3/17-21)  **Meaning of Iriya Vahiya Sutra**  After this, one should perform
Chaityavandan with Iryapathik-Pratikraman. Here, the Iryapathik Sutra is
explained. In this Sutra, from 'Ichchhami Padikka midam' to 'Tass Miccha Mi
Dukkadam', the entire Sutra is there. In it, 'Ichchhami Padikka mium Iriya
Vahiyae Virahanar', meaning, I desire to be free from the Viradhana (sinful
actions) of living beings in going and coming. Its meaning is that Irya - means
to go, to walk, to roam. The path for that is called Iryapatha, in which
Viradhana in the form of killing living beings, etc., is Iryapatha-Viradhana. I
want to retreat or escape from that sin. According to this explanation,
Iryapathik Pratikraman is performed for the purification of the sin committed
due to Viradhana in going and coming. But the Iriya Vahiya text is also spoken
after waking up from sleep or for other reasons, therefore, it is explained in
another way - Iryapatha means the conduct of a Sadhu. Here it is said that
'Iryapatho Maun Dhyanadhikham Bhikshuvratam'. Meaning, Iryapatha is the conduct
of a Sadhu, such as silence, meditation, etc. From this perspective, the meaning
of Iryapatha Viradhana is - if there has been any Viradhana in the form of
violation of the conduct of a Sadhu, then I want to retreat from that sin or
purify it. The meaning of violating the conduct of a Sadhu is - to separate the
life of living beings, falsehood, theft, adultery, | attachment, etc., any sin
from the eighteen sinful places. Among these, the sin of Pranatipat is the
greatest sin, the rest of the sinful places are included in it. In the text
related to Iryapathik Viradhana, Viradhana related to Pranatipat is mentioned in
detail. What is the reason for Viradhana? It is called - Gamanaagaman, meaning
going out for the purpose of going or coming back, and coming back to one's
place after the purpose is fulfilled, is called Gamanaagaman. How does Viradhana
occur in doing this Gamanaagaman? It is called - Panakkamane, Biyakkamane,
Hariyakkamane, meaning to cause pain to all living beings, from Dwindriya to
Panchendriya, with the feet, to transgress the life. And Bij, meaning all
stationary one-sense living beings,

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 iriyAvahiyA pATha para vyAkhyA yogazAstra tRtIya prakAza zloka 123 taraha
kramazaH pUchate-pUchate zivajI ke digaMbara hone ke saMbaMdha meM pUchane para
kArtikeya ko bAMye hAtha se rokatI huii| | pArvatIdevI kA madhura hAsya tumhArI
rakSA kre| aura bhI dekhie - suratakrIr3A ke aMta meM zeSanAga para eka hAtha ko
jora se | dabAkara khar3I huI aura dUsare hAtha se vastra ko ThIka karake
bikhare hue keza kI laToM ko kaMdhoM para dhAraNa karatI huI usa | samaya
mukhakAMti se dviguNita zobhAdhArI, snehAspada kRSNa dvArA AliMgita evaM punaH
zayyA para avasthita Alasya se | suzobhita bAhu vAlA lakSmI kA zarIra tumheM
pavitra kare  /  [ aise zloka bhagavAna ke sAmane nahIM bolane haiM] ina zlokoM
meM saMpUrNa vaMdanavidhi samajhAI gayI hai| usakA bhASAMtara - 1. tIna sthAna
para nisIhi, 2. tIna bAra | pradakSiNA, 3. tIna bAra namaskAra, 4. tIna prakAra
kI pUjA, 5. jinezvara kI tIna avasthA kI bhAvanA karanA, 6 . jinezvara ko
chor3akara zeSa tInoM dizAoM meM nahIM dekhanA, 7. tIna bAra paira aura jamIna
kA pramArjana karanA, 8. varNAdi tIna kA AlaMbana karanA, 9 tIna prakAra kI
mudrA karanA aura 10. tIna prakAra se praNidhAna krnaa| ye dasa 'trika' kahalAte
haiN| isameM puSpa se aMgapUjA, naivedya se agrapUjA aura stuti se bhAvapUjA;
isa taraha tIna prakAra kI jinapUjA batAyI hai  /  tathA | isa samaya
jinendradeva kI chadmastha, kevalI aura siddhatva inhIM tInoM avasthAoM kA
ciMtana karanA hotA hai| caityavaMdanasUtroM kA pATha, unakA artha aura pratimA
ke rUpa kA AlaMbana lenA; yaha varNAditrika kA AlaMbana kahalAtA hai| mana|
vacana kAyA kI ekAgratA karanA yaha tIna prakAra kA praNidhAna kahalAtA hai|
stavana bolate samaya yogamudrA, vaMdana karate | samaya jinamudrA tathA
praNidhAna - (jaya vIyarAya) sUtra bolate samaya muktAzukti mudrA, ye tIna
mudrAeM kahI hai| namaskAra pAMca aMgoM se hotA hai - donoM ghuTane, donoM hAtha
aura pAMcavAM mastaka ye pAMcoM aMga jamIna taka namAnA, paMcAMga praNAma
kahalAtA hai| donoM hAthoM kI dasoM aMguliyAM eka dUsare ke bIca meM rakhakara
koza jaisI hathelI kA AkAra banAkara, donoM hAthoM kI | kohanI peTa ke Upara
sthApana karane se yogamudrA hotI hai, donoM caraNataloM ke bIca meM Age ke
bhAga meM cAra aMgula aura pIche kucha kama cAra aMgula kA phAsalA rakhakara
donoM paira samAna rakhakara khar3e honA tathA donoM hAtha nIce laMbe laTakate |
rakhanA yaha jinamudrA hai| aura donoM hAthoM kI aMguliyA~ eka dUsare ke Amane-
sAmane rakhanI hotI hai aura bIca meM se | hathelI khAlI rakhakara donoM hAtha
lalATa para lagAnA athavA anya AcArya ke matAnusAra lalATa se thor3e dUra
rakhane se muktAzuktimudrA hotI hai| (paMcA. 3/17-21) iriyAvahiya sUtra kA artha
- isake bAda airyApathika-pratikramaNapUrvaka caityavaMdana karanA caahie| yahAM
airyApathika sUtra | kI vyAkhyA karate haiM - isa sUtra meM 'icchAmi
paDikkamiDaM' se lekara 'tassa micchA mi dukkaDaM' taka saMpUrNa sUtra hai,
isameM 'icchAmi paDikkamiuM iriyAvahiyAe virAhaNAra' arthAt jAne-Ane meM jina
jIvoM kI virAdhanA (pApakriyA) huI ho | usase nivRtta hone kI abhilASA karatA
huuN| isakA bhAvArtha yaha hai ki IryA-arthAt gamana karanA, calanA, phirnaa|
usake lie jo mArga hai, vaha IryApatha kahalAtA hai, usameM jIvahiMsAdi rUpa
virAdhanA IryApatha-virAdhanA hai| usa pApa se pIche haTanA yA bacanA cAhatA
huuN| isa vyAkhyA anusAra gamanAgamana kI virAdhanA se hue pApa kI zuddhi ke lie
IryApathika pratikramaNa kiyA jAtA hai| kintu nidrA se jAgane ke bAda athavA
anya kAraNoM se bhI IriyAvahiya pATha bolA jAtA hai, | isalie usakI vyAkhyA
dUsare prakAra se karate haiM- IryApatha arthAt sAdhu kA aacaar| yahAM para kahA
hai ki 'IryApatho maunadhyAnAdikaM bhikssuvrtm|' arthAt IryApatha mauna,
dhyAnavrata Adi sAdhu kA AcaraNa hai| isa dRSTi se IryApathavirAdhanA kA | artha
huA - sAdhu ke AcaraNa ke ullaMghana rUpa koI virAdhanA huI ho to usa pApa se
pIche haTane athavA usakI zuddhi karanA cAhatA huuN| sAdhu ke AcAra kA
ullaMghana karane kA artha hai - prANiyoM ke prANa kA viyoga karanA, asatya,
corI, abrahmacarya, | parigraha ityAdi aThAraha pApasthAnoM meM se kisI bhI pApa
kA laganA  /  isameM prANAtipAta kA pApa sabase bar3A pApa hai, zeSa |
pApasthAnakoM kA usI meM samAveza ho jAtA hai| IryApathika virAdhanA saMbaMdhI
pATha meM prANAtipAta -saMbaMdhI virAdhanA vistAra se kahI hai| virAdhanA kisa
kAraNa se hotI hai? ise kahate haiM-gamaNAgamaNe arthAt jAne yA vApasa Ane ke
prayojanavaza bAhara jAnA aura prayojana pUrNa hone para apane sthAna para AnA,
gamanAgamana kahalAtA hai| isa gamanAgamana ke karane meM kaise-kaise virAdhanA
hotI hai? use kahate haiM- pANakkamaNe, bIyakkamaNe hariyakkamaNe prANa arthAt
dvIndriya se lekara | paMcendriya taka sarvajIvoM ko paira se pIr3A denA, prANa
kA atikramaNa karanA  /  tathA bIja arthAt sarva-sthAvara ekendriya jIvoM 255

Page #278 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Translation:  **Kayotsarga, its repository**  This is a refutation of the
third light of Yoga Shastra, verse 123. It is a refutation of the killing of all
types of green plants that are alive, Hariyakkamane. And it is a refutation of
the killing of 'Osaunting-Panag-Dag-Matti-Makkada-Santana-Sankamane'. The water
of dew (here the water of dew is taken because it is very subtle in the form of
a point. Even that subtle Apkay should not be killed), 'Utting' means the
donkey-shaped creature that lives in holes in the ground or the city of insects,
Panag means the five-colored moss (Leelan-Pulansewal). Dagmatti means the mud of
a place where people do not come and go, or to take the Apkay with the word Dag
and the Prithvikaay with the word Matti. Makkada means a group of spiders and
Santana means its web, Sankamane means an attack on it. In this way, how far
should we count the beings according to their names? Therefore, it is said - "Je
Me Jiwa Virahiya" - which means, "Which beings have I caused suffering to by
killing them?" "Egindya" means a being with only the sense of touch, it is a
one-sense being, like earth, water, fire, air and plant-bodied beings. "Beindya"
means a being with touch and tongue, it is a two-sense being, like earthworms,
conch shells, etc. "Teindya" means a being with touch, tongue and nose, it is a
three-sense being, like ants, bedbugs, etc. "Chauridiya" means a being with
touch, tongue, nose and eyes, it is a four-sense being, like bumblebees, flies,
etc. "Panchindya" means beings with touch, tongue, nose, eyes and ears, they are
the five-sense beings of Narak, Tithanch, Manushya and Dev, like animals, birds,
rats, etc. It is a refutation of the killing of these Tiryanchjiva beings. The
ten types of that refutation are called - "Abhihaya" means to have kicked them
with the foot while they are coming in front of you or to have picked them up
with the foot and thrown them away, "Vattia" means to collect them or to cover
them with dust from above, "Lesia" means to stick them together, to drag them
along the ground or to mix them with the ground, "Sanghaiya" means to gather
them together, to trap one in another, "Sanghattia" means to touch them or to
collide with each other, "Pariyavia" means to give them pain from all sides,
"Kilamiya" means to be in a state like death, "Uddaviya" means to make them
anxious, fearful and confused, "Thanaao Thanan Sankamiya" means to remove them
from their place and put them in another place, "Jiviyao Vavaroviya" means to
kill them, "Tass" means to have caused suffering to beings in ten ways from
Abhihaya onwards, if my soul has been stained by the sin of that refutation,
then for the purification of that sin, "Miccha Mi Dukkadam" means that my sin is
false, it is nullified or destroyed.  **Explanation of the term "Miccha Mi
Dukkadam" with its inherent meanings**  The preceptor, the former teacher,
separates each word and explains it in this way:  "Mitti Miumaddavathe Chhattiy
Dosan Chayan Hoei. Miti Amerae Thio Dutthi Duguchami Appaanam." (1)  "Katthi
Kudam Me Pavam Datti Devemi Tam Uvasamenam. Eso Miccha-Dukkad-Payakkharattho
Samaasenam." (2)  **Meaning:**  "Mi-chha-mi-du-kk-da-m" - these are six letters.
The first 'Mi' has the inherent meaning of 'Mardava' or humility, in body and
mind. The second letter 'chha' has the inherent meaning of 'cutting off' the
faults that have been committed and the desire not to commit those faults again.
The third letter 'mi' is 'Maryada' - to be steadfast in the moral rules of
conduct. The fourth word 'du' has the inherent meaning of 'Dugucha' - to
criticize one's own sinful soul. The fifth word 'k' means to confess one's own
committed sins. And the sixth word 'd' means 'Dyan' - to pacify. In this way,
the inherent meaning of the term 'Miccha Mi Dukkadam' is summarized.  Thus, by
expounding the two types of atonement, namely criticism and repentance, now the
following sutra is said with the desire for atonement in the form of Kayotsarga.
"Tass Uttarikarane-nam Payachchitt Karanenam Visohikarane-nam Visallikarane-nam
Pavanan Kammanam Nigghayana-tthae Thami Kaussaggam."  "Tass" means the
Iriyaavahhiya sutra from which criticism and repentance have been done, to
purify that sin again,

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 kAyotsarga, usake AgAra yogazAstra tRtIya prakAza zloka 123 kI virAdhanA kI ho,
hariyakkamaNe-sarvaprakAra kI harI vanaspati jo sajIva hotI hai; kI virAdhanA kI
ho| tathA 'osaauttiNg-pnng-dg-mttttii-mkkddaa-sNtaannaa-sNkmnne|' osa kA jala,
(yahAM osa kA jala isalie grahaNa kiyA hai ki vaha bahuta sUkSma biMdu rUpa hotA
hai| usa sUkSma apkAya kI bhI virAdhanA nahIM honI cAhie) 'uttiMga' arthAt
gardabhAkAra jIva, jo jamIna meM chidra banAkara rahate haiM athavA kIDiyoM kA
nagara, paNaga arthAt pAMca raMga kI kAI (liilnn-pulnnsevaal)| dagamaTTI arthAt
jahAM logoM kA AnA-jAnA nahIM huA ho usa sthAna kA kIcar3a athavA daga zabda se
sacitta apkAya kA grahaNa karanA aura maTTI zabda se pRthvIkAya grahaNa krnaa|
makkaDA arthAt makar3I kA samUha aura saMtANa arthAt usakA jAla saMkamaNe arthAt
usa para AkramaNavirAdhanA kI ho| isa prakAra nAmAnusAra jIvoM ko kahAM taka
ginAe~? ataH kahate haiM-je me jIvA virAhiyA arthAt jina kinhIM jIvoM kI
virAdhanA karake maiMne unheM duHkha diyA ho; ve kauna se jIva? egiMdiyA arthAt
jisake sparzendriya kA hI zarIra ho, vaha ekendriya jIva hai, jaise pRthvI,
jala, agni, vAyu aura vanaspatikAya vaale| beiMdiyA arthAt sparza aura jIbha ho
vaha dvIndriya jIva hai| jaise keMcuA zaMkha aadi| teiMdiyA arthAt jisake
sparza, jIbha aura nAsikA ho vaha trIndriya jIva hai; jaise cIMTI, khaTamala Adi
cauridiyA arthAt jisake sparza, jIbha, nAsikA aura AMkheM ho vaha caturindriya
jIva hai; jaise bhauMrA, makkhI Adi, paMciMdiyA arthAt jinake sparza, jIbha,
nAsikA, AMkha aura kAna ho ve nAraka, tithaMca, manuSya aura deva paMcendriya
jIva hai| jaise pazu-pakSI, cUhA Adi tiryaMcajIvoM kI virAdhanA kI ho| usa
virAdhanA ke dasa bheda kahate haiM-abhihayA arthAt sammukha Ate hue paira se
ThukarAyA ho yA paira se uThAkara pheMka diyA ho, vattiyA arthAt ekatrita karanA
athavA Upara dhUla DAlakara Dhaka denA, lesiyA arthAt unheM Apasa meM cipakAnA,
jamIna ke sAtha ghasITanA yA jamIna meM milA denA, saMghAiyA arthAt paraspara
eka dUsare para ikaTThe karanA, eka meM dUsare ko phaMsA denA; saMghaTTiyA
arthAt sparza karanA athavA Apasa meM ttkraanaa| pariyAviyA arthAt cAroM tarapha
se pIr3A dI ho; kilAmiyA arthAt mRtyu ke samAna avasthA kI ho| uddaviyA arthAt
udvigna, bhayabhrAMta kara diyA ho; ThANAo ThANaM saMkAmiyA arthAt apanA sthAna
chur3Akara dUsare sthAna para rakhe ho, jIviyAo vavaroviyA arthAt jAna |se
khatma kara diyA ho, tassa arthAt abhihayA se lekara dasa prakAra se jIvoM ko
duHkhI kiyA ho, usa virAdhanA ke pApa se merA AtmA lisa huA ho to usa pApa kI
zuddhi ke lie micchA mi dukkaDaM arthAt vaha merA pApa mithyA niSphala ho athavA
naSTa ho| _ micchA mi dukkaDaM pada kI usameM garbhita arthoM sahita vyAkhyA
Avazyaka-niyukti kartA pUrvAcArya pratyeka zabda kA | | pRthakkaraNa karate hue
isa prakAra karate haiM mitti miumaddavatthe chattiya dosANa chAyaNe hoI  /
miti amerAe Thio dutti duguMchAmi appANaM  // 1 //  katti kuDaM me pAvaM Datti
Devemi taM uvasameNaM  /  eso micchA-dukkaDa-payakkharattho samAseNaM  // 2 //
artha :- mi-cchA-mi-du-kka-DaM -ye chaha akSara hai| unameM prathama 'mi' meM
garbhita artha hai-mArdava athavA namratA, zarIra aura bhAva se, dUsarA akSara
'cchA' hai, jisakA garbhita artha hai-jo doSa lage haiM, unakA chedana karane ke
lie aura punaH una doSoM ko nahIM karane kI icchA krnaa| tIsarA akSara 'mi' hai,
maryAdA - cAritra kI AcAra maryAdAoM meM sthira banakara, cauthA zabda 'du'
hai|uskaa garbhita artha hai-duguMchA karanA, apanI pApamayI AtmA kI niMdA
karanA, pAMcavAM zabda 'ka' arthAt apane kRta pApoM kI kabUlAta ke sAtha aura
chaTThA zabda 'Da' arthAt Dayana-upazamana karatA huuN| isa taraha 'micchA mi
dukkaDaM' pada ke akSaroM meM garbhita artha saMkSepa meM hotA hai| isa prakAra
AlocanA evaM pratikramaNa rUpa do prakAra ke prAyazcitta kA pratipAdana karake,
aba kAyotsarga rUpa prAyazcitta kI icchA se nimnokta sUtrapATha kahA jAtA hai|
tassa uttarIkaraNeNaM pAyacchitta karaNeNaM visohIkaraNeNaM visallIkaraNeNaM
pAvANaM kammANaM nigghAyaNaTThAe ThAmi kaaussggN|' tassa arthAt jisa iriyAvahiya
sUtra se AlocanA-pratikramaNa kiyA hai, usa pApa kI phira se zuddhi karane ke
lie 256

Page #279 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Types of Chaityavandan  I perform Kausagg according to Yoga Shastra, Third
Light, Verse 123. This is how it should be done. Uttarikarana means - after
purification from sins by Iriya Vahiya, for special purification. The meaning is
that before Viradhana, Alochana-Pratikraman has been done; for the same, then
Kayotsarga form of work is called Uttarikarana, by that Kayotsarga, destruction
of sinful karmas happens. Uttarikarana happens by Prayaschittakarana. Therefore,
it is said further - Payachchittakarana. Meaning, Praya = authorized, which
purifies the mind or the soul, or cuts the sin, is called Prayaschitta. By doing
which, the soul becomes specially pure. And that Kausagg-Prayaschitta is also
the cause of purity, therefore it is said - Visohikarana, meaning by removing
the excess dirt (offense), by making the soul pure and clean. That purity also
happens in the absence of the thorn. Therefore, it is said - Visallikarana,
meaning by being free from Maya-Shalya, Nidana-(Niyana) Shalya and
Mithyadarshan-Shalya, these three thorns. Why? Pavana Kammanam Nigghayana Tthae,
meaning to destroy the sinful karmas like Jnanavaraniya, which are the cause of
the world. Thami Kausagg, Thami means - I do. And Kausagg means - the
abandonment of the activities of the body, bodily tendencies. Do you abandon
everything? Not at all, but some tendencies are kept as exceptions, in the form
of Aagar (permission), I perform Kausagg. They are as follows - Annath
Ussasienam Nissasienam, meaning - except for inhalation and exhalation. The
meaning is that it is impossible to stop breathing, therefore permission is
given to inhale and exhale. Khasienam - from coughing, Chienam - from sneezing,
Jambhaienam - from yawning, Udduenam - from belching, Vayannisaggenam - from the
expulsion of Apana Vayu, from Bhamali - sudden dizziness in the body,
Pittmuchchae = fainting due to the heat of bile; Suhumehi Angsachalaihi - from
the subtle movement of the limbs, from the fine movements of the body, Suhumeham
Khelasanchalaihi - from the subtle movement of phlegm or saliva, Suhumehi
Ditthisanchalaihi - from the subtle movement of the eyes, from the eyelids
falling, etc., meaning - except for these twelve reasons, I abandon the
activities of the body. What kind of Kayotsarga should it be? Evam Aihihim
Aagarehihim Abhaggho Avirhaio Hujj Me Kausagg, meaning my Kayotsarga is
unbroken, without Viradhana, with these and other types of aforementioned Aagars
- exceptions. There are some accidental reasons, they should also be accepted.
Meaning, when a cat is about to catch and eat a mouse, then to protect the
mouse, suddenly lightning strikes, an earthquake happens, or there is a
disturbance of fire, etc., when there is a touch of light, then to cover oneself
with a blanket, if one takes it, then even if one opens the Kayotsarga in the
middle, it does not break. Here the question arises - if one performs Kayotsarga
by saying Namo Arihantaanam, and then performs bodily activities, then how will
it break? Actually, doing so should not break the Kayotsarga. In answer to this,
it is said - every Kausagg is supported by evidence. Although, until Namo
Arihantaanam is not said, then Kausagg happens; however, as much as one has
decided to perform the Kausagg of Logass or Navkar Mantra, it is said aloud only
after completing it, then Kausagg happens in an unbroken and complete form. Even
after Kausagg is complete, if Namo Arihantaanam is not said, then Kausagg
breaks. Therefore, after Kayotsarga is complete, Namo Arihantaanam should be
said. And if a cat is pouncing on a mouse, and one moves to save it, or performs
bodily activities, then Kausagg does not break. And if a thief, a king, or a
cause of fear arises in a secluded place, or if a snake has bitten oneself or
another monk, then if one completes the Kayotsarga by suddenly uttering Namo
Arihantaanam in the middle, then Kausagg does not break. It is said that from
spreading, from burning, from a five-sense being passing through the middle, or
from the disturbance of a thief, a king, etc., or from a snake bite; Kausagg
does not break from these exceptions. The etymological meaning of Aagar is -
Aakriyantae Aagruhyantae Ityakarah Aagarah. That which is done well or that
which is accepted well, is called Aagar. The secret of Aagar is - the exceptions
taken in Kayotsarga. If such Aagars are not there, then even if Kayotsarga is
not completely broken or destroyed, it is broken (destroyed) in the country.
While in Kayotsarga, 257

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 caityavaMdana ke prakAra yogazAstra tRtIya prakAza zloka 123 kAussagga karatA
huuN| isa prakAra anvaya karanA hai| uttarIkaraNeNaM kA artha hai-iriyAvahiya se
pApazuddhi karane ke bAda vizeSazuddhi ke lie| tAtparya yaha hai ki virAdhanA se
pUrva AlocanA-pratikramaNa kiyA hai; usI ke lie phira kAyotsarga rUpa kArya
uttarIkaraNa kahalAtA hai, usa kAyotsarga se pApa-karmoM kA vinAza hotA hai|
uttarIkaraNa prAyazcittakaraNa dvArA hotA hai| ataH Age kahA hai-
paaycchittkrnnennN| arthAt prAyaH=adhikRta, citta ko athavA jIva ko jo zuddha
karatA | hai yA pApa kA chedana karatA hai, use prAyazcitta kahate haiN| jisake
karane se AtmA vizeSa zuddha hotI hai| aura vaha kAussagga-prAyazcitta bhI
vizuddhi kA kAraNa hone se kahate haiM-visohIkaraNeNaM arthAt aticAramalinatA
(aparAdha) ko dUra karake AtmA kI vizuddhi-nirmalatA krke| vaha nirmalatA bhI
zalya ke abhAva meM hotI hai| isalie kahA haivisallIkaraNeNaM arthAt mAyAzalya,
nidAna-(niyANA) zalya aura mithyAdarzanazalya, ina tInoM zalyoM se rahita hokr|
vaha kisalie? pAvANaM kammANaM nigghAyaNaTThAe arthAt saMsAra ke kAraNabhUta
jJAnAvaraNIya Adi pApakarmoM kA nAza karane ke lie, ThAmi kAussaggaM, ThAmi kA
artha hotA hai-karatA huuN| aura kAussaggaM kA artha hotA hai-kAyA ke
vyApArazArIrika pravRttiyoM kA tyaag| kyA sarvathA tyAga karate ho? sarvathA
nahIM, kintu kucha pravRttiyAM apavAdasvarUpa AgAra (chUTa) rUpa meM rakhakara
kAussagga karatA huuN| _. ve isa prakAra-annattha UsasieNaM nIsasieNaM arthAt-
ucchvAsa aura niHzvAsa ko chodd'kr| matalaba yaha hai ki zvAsocchvAsa kA nirodha
karanA azakya hai, isalie zvAsa khIMcane aura nikAlane kI chUTa rakhI gayI hai|
khAsieNaM-khAMsI Ane se, chieNaM chIMka Ane se, jaMbhAieNaM jamuhAI Ane se,
uDDueNaM DakAra Ane se, vAyanisaggeNaM apAnavAyu khArija hone se bhamalIe
akasmAt zarIra meM cakkara A jAne se, pittamucchAe=pitta ke prakopa ke kAraNa
mUrchA A jAne se; suhumehi aMgasaMcAlehi-sUkSma rUpa se aMga kA saMcAra hone se
zarIra kI bArIka halanacalana se, suhumehaM khelasaMcAlehi sUkSma kapha yA thUka
ke saMcAra se, suhumehi diTThisaMcAlehi-sUkSma rUpa se netroM ke saMcAra se,
palaka girane Adi se, arthAt-ucchvAsa Adi bAraha kAraNoM ko chor3akara zarIra kI
kriyA kA tyAga karatA huuN| vaha kAyotsarga kisa prakAra kA ho? evamAiehiM
AgArehiM abhaggo avirAhio hujja me kAussaggo arthAt isa prakAra ye aura ityAdi
prakAra ke pUrvokta AgAroM-apavAdoM se akhaMDita, virAdhanA-rahita merA
kAyotsarga ho| kucha Akasmika kAraNa haiM, unheM bhI grahaNakara lenA caahie|
yAnI jaba koI billI cUhe ko pakar3akara khAne ko udyata ho, taba cUhe kI rakSA
ke lie, akasmAt bijalI girane kI ho, bhUkaMpa ho jAya yA agni-sAdi kA upadrava
ho jAya, jyoti kA sparza ho taba kA~bala or3hane ke lie le-le to bIca meM hI
kAyotsarga khola lene para bhI usakA bhaMga nahIM hotaa| _ yahAM prazna hotA hai
ki-namo arihaMtANaM kahakara kAyotsarga pUrNakara kAya-pravRtti kare to usakA
bhaMga kaise ho jAyagA? vastutaH aisA karane se kAyotsargabhaMga nahIM honA
caahie| isake uttara meM kahate haiM-pratyeka kAussagga pramANayukta hotA hai|
hAlAMki jaba taka namo arihaMtANaM na kahe, taba taka kAussagga hotA hai;
tathApi jitane parimANa meM logassa yA navakAramaMtra kA kAussagga karane kA
nizcaya kiyA ho, vaha pUrNa karake hI ucca-svara se namo arihaMtANaM bolA jAtA
hai, tabhI kAussagga akhaMDita va pUrNa rUpa meM hotA hai| kAussagga pUrNa hone
para bhI namo arihaMtANaM na bole to kAussagga-bhaMga hotA hai| isalie
kAyotsarga pUrNa hone para namo arihaMtANaM bolanA caahie| tathA billI cUhe para
jhapaTa rahI ho use bacAne ke lie khisake yA kAyapravRtti kare to kAussagga-
bhaMga nahIM hotaa| tathA cora, rAjA athavA ekAMta sthAna meM bhaya kA kAraNa
upasthita hone para yA khuda ko athavA anya sAdhu ko sarpa ne kATa khAyA ho to
bIca meM hI namo arihaMtANaM kA sahasA uccAraNa karake kAyotsarga pAra le to
kAussagga-bhaMga nahIM hotaa| kahA bha phailane se, jalane se, paMceMdriya jIva
bIca meM se hokara nikala rahA ho yA cora, rAjA Adi kA upadrava ho athavA sarpa
ke kATane se; ina AgAroM se kAussagga bhaMga nahIM hotaa| - AgAra kA
vyutpattilabhya artha hai-Akriyante AgRhyante ityAkAraH aagaarH| jo acchI taraha
se kiyA jAya yA acchI taraha se grahaNa kiyA jAya, use AgAra kahate haiN| AgAra
kA rahasya hai-kAyotsarga meM gRhIta apvaad| aise AgAra na raheM to kAyotsarga
sarvathA bhagna vinaSTa nahIM ho to bhI dezataH bhagna (naSTa) ho hI jAtA hai|
jabaki kAyotsarga meM 257

Page #280 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Explanation of the terms 'Arihant' and 'Bhagavan'  The Yogashastra, in the 123rd
verse of the third chapter, states that the one who performs Kayotsarga (the
posture of complete renunciation of the body) is not disturbed by any external
factors. How long does this state last? It lasts until the person is able to
recite the words 'Namo Arihantanam Bhagavatanam', i.e., until they can
completely pay obeisance to the Arihants (the enlightened ones) and Bhagavans
(the omniscient lords).   During this time, the practitioner is required to
stabilize their body, maintain silence, and focus their mind in meditation. This
is done to withdraw the self from all impure activities and engage in auspicious
contemplation. Some practitioners do not even utter the word 'Appana' (self)
during this process.   The recitation of 'Namo Arihantanam' after the completion
of Kayotsarga, followed by the chanting of verses composed by great poets,
constitutes the Chaitya-vandana (veneration of the enlightened ones). There are
three types of Chaitya-vandana: the inferior one involves only obeisance, the
medium one includes hymns and verses, and the superior one is performed with
utmost reverence and detachment, accompanied by tears of joy.  The superior
Chaitya-vandana is undertaken by fully renounced monks, lay followers, or non-
returning right-believers, who sit on a well-prepared and purified ground, focus
their eyes and mind on the image of the Tirthankara, and recite the Pranipata-
dandaka-sutra (the scripture of prostration) with unwavering yogic posture,
while remembering the meaning of the text.  The explanation of the 'Namotthuna'
mantra is as follows: 'Namo' is a particle used for expressing reverence,
'Arihantanam' refers to the Arihants who are worthy of worship, and
'Bhagavatanam' refers to the Bhagavans who are omniscient lords. The term
'Asstu' means 'may it be so', indicating that this prayer is the seed of the
tree of dharma. The 'Nam' is used as a figure of speech. The superior Chaitya-
vandana ritual, as described here, is not widely practiced in the present time.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 arihaMta aura bhagavAn zabda para vivecana yogazAstra tRtIya prakAza zloka 123
vidyamAna aise AgAroM se vaha avirAdhita hotA hai| arthAt kAyotsarga kA bhaMga
nahIM hotA hai| vaha kitane samaya taka ? jAva arihaMtANaM bhagavaMtANaM
namokkAreNaM na pAremi arthAt jaba taka arihaMta bhagavAn ko namaskAra bola
karake - namo arihaMtANaM | zabdoM kA uccAraNa karake usako na pAra lUM  /
kAyotsarga pUrNa hone taka kyA karanA hai? ise kahate haiN| tAva kAyaM ThANeNaM
moNeNaM jhANeNaM appANaM vosirAmi arthAt taba taka apanI kAyA ko sthira,
nizcala, mauna aura dhyAna meM ekAgra karake | kAyotsargamudrA meM rakhatA huuN|
bhAvArtha yaha hai ki taba taka apanI kAyA ko sthira karake mauna aura
dhyAnapUrvaka mana meM zubha | ciMtana karane ke lie vosirAmi arthAt apane
zarIra ko azubha vyApAra (kArya) se nivRtta (alaga) karatA huuN| kitane hI |
sAdhaka appANaM pATha nahIM bolte| isakA artha yaha huA ki paccIsa zvAsocchvAsa
- kAla- paryaMta khar3A hokara ghuTane ke donoM aura hAtha nIce laTakAkara,
vANIsaMcAra rokakara zreSThadhyAna kA anusaraNa karatA huA, mauna aura
dhyAnakriyA se | bhinna = anya kriyA ke adhyAsa dvArA tyAga karatA huuN| logassa
ujjoagare se lekara caMdesu nimmalayarA taka 25 ucchvAsa | pUrNa hote haiN|
isake lie pAyasamA UsAsA yaha vacana pramANa hai| kAyotsarga saMpUrNa hone ke
bAda namo arihaMtANaM isa prakAra | bolakara namaskArapUrvaka pArakara pUrA
logassa kA pATha bole  /  yadi gurudeva hoM to unake samakSa prakaTa meM bole;
aura gurudeva na hoM to mana meM guru kI sthApanA karake IryApathapratikramaNa
karake bAda meM utkRSTa caityavaMdana AraMbha kare  /  jaghanya aura | madhyama
caityavaMdana to IryApathika pratikramaNa ke binA bhI ho sakatA hai| yahAM
namaskArapUrvaka Namo arihaMtANaM pada bolanA cAhie aura uttama kaviyoM dvArA
racita kAvya bolakara caityavaMdana karanA caahie| udAharaNArtha -
vItarAgaprabho ! ApakA zarIra hI ApakI vItarAgatA batalA rahA hai; kyoMki jisa
vRkSa ke koTara meM Aga ho, vaha vRkSa harA nahIM dikhAI detA  /  kaI AcArya
kahate haiM - kevala praNAma karanA jaghanya caityavaMdana hai| | praNAma pAMca
prakAra kA hai - 1. kevala mastaka se namaskAra karanA, ekAMga praNAma hai, 2.
do hAtha jor3anA, dvayaMga praNAma hai, 3. do hAtha jor3anA aura mastaka jhukAnA
tryaMga praNAma hai, 4. do hAtha aura do ghuTanoM se namana karanA caturaMga
praNAma hai | aura 5. mastaka, do hAtha aura do ghuTane, ina pAMca aMgoM se
namaskAra karanA pacAMga praNAma hai| madhyama caityavaMdana to bhagavatpratimA
ke Age stava, daMDaka aura stuti ke dvArA hotA hai| isake lie kahA hai- kevala
namaskAra se jaghanya caityavaMdana, daMDaka aura stuti se madhyama
caityavaMdana aura vidhipUrvaka utkRSTa caityavaMdana hai| ye tIna prakAra ke
caityavaMdana hai  /  utkRSTa caityavaMdana ke icchuka sarvavirati sAdhu,
zrAvaka athavA avirati samyagdRSTi yA apunarbandhaka yathAbhadraka bhalIbhAMti
pramArjana aura pratilekhana kI huI bhUmi para baiThate haiM, phira prabhu kI
mUrti para netra aura mana ko ekAgra karake | utkRSTa saMvega aura vairAgya se
utpanna romAMca se yukta hokara AMkhoM se harSAzru bahAte haiN| tathA yoM mAnate
haiM ki vItarAga prabhu ke caraNa-vaMdana prApta honA atidurlabha hai| 1 tathA
yogamudrA se askhalita Adi guNayukta hokara sUtra ke artha kA smaraNa karate hue
praNipAtadaMDakasUtra (namotthuNaM sUtra ) bolate haiN| isameM taiMtIsa AlApaka
pada haiN| ye AlApaka , tIna, cAra; tIna, pAMca, pAMca, do, cAra aura tIna pada
milakara kula nau saMpadAoM ( rukane ke sthAna) meM haiN| ina saMpadAoM ke nAma
tathA pramANa, unakA artha yathA-sthAna kheNge| 'namotthuNaM' pATha kI vyAkhyA -
namotthuNaM arihaMtANaM bhagavaMtANaM - isameM 'namo' pada naipAtika hai| vaha
pUjA artha meM vyavahRta hotA hai| pUjA dravya aura bhAva se saMkoca karake (
nama kara) karanA caahie| jisameM hAtha, sira, paira Adi zarIra ke avayavoM ko
namAnA, dravyasaMkoca hai aura vizuddha mana ko caityavaMdana Adi meM niyukta
karanA, bhAvasaMkoca hai| astu | kA artha hai - 'ho'  /  isa prArthanA kA Azaya
vizuddha hone se yaha dharmavRkSa kA bIja hai| 'NaM' vAkyAlaMkAra meM prayukta
kiyA gayA hai  /  jo atizaya pUjA ke yogya hoM, ve ahaMta kahalAte haiN| kahA
bhI hai-vaMdana - namaskAra karane yogya, pUjA - satkAra karane yogya evaM
siddhagati prApta karane yogya ahaMta kahalAte haiN| (A. ni. 921) aba dUsarI
vyAkhyA karate haiM | siddha haimazabdAnuzAsana ke sudviSArhaH satrizatrustutye
/  / 5 / 2 / 26  /  isa sUtra se vartamAnakAla meM 'atRz' pratyaya lagatA hai|
isa prakAra 'arha pUjAyAm' arha dhAtu pUjA artha meM haiM, usake Age 'at'
pratyaya laga jAne se 'arhat' zabda banA  /  athavA 1. utkRSTa caityavaMdana ke
icchuka ko sIdhA namutthuNaM bolane kA vidhAna kiyA hai ataH utkRSTa
caityavaMdana kI yaha vidhi vartamAna meM pracalita nahIM hai| 258

Page #281 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## A Discussion on the Terms Arihant and Bhagwan  **Chapter 3, Light 123 of the
Yoga Shastra**  Where the term Arihant is used, it means "destroyer of enemies."
The enemies are the karmas like Mithyatva, Mohaniya, etc., which are the cause
of bondage. Arihants are called so because they destroy these karmic enemies,
which cause immense suffering of birth and death in countless lifetimes.
**Third Explanation:** Arihant means "one who destroys the dust." Here, dust
refers to the four ghati karmas. Just as the sun, even when hidden behind
clouds, does not appear bright, similarly, the soul, covered by the dust of the
four ghati karmas, does not reveal its inherent qualities of knowledge,
perception, etc. Therefore, those who destroy the dust of ghati karmas, which
cover the soul's qualities, are called Arihants.  **Fourth Explanation:**
Arihant also means "one who has no secrets." The knowledge and perception
qualities of Bhagwan are dependent on karmas like Jnana Avaraniya, etc. By
completely destroying these karmas, they attain complete, infinite, wondrous,
unparalleled, eternal Keval Jnana and Keval Darshan. Through these, they know
and see the entire universe simultaneously. Therefore, nothing remains hidden
from them, and hence they are called Arihants.  These three explanations are
based on the "Pṛṣodaraadayaḥ Sutra" of grammar, which defines the word "Arhat"
in three ways.  Alternatively, "Raha" means a secluded place, a mountain cave, a
location, a country, or its end or middle. The word "A" signifies the absence of
something. Therefore, those who are omniscient and all-knowing, for whom no
country or place remains secluded or hidden, and from whom nothing remains
concealed, are called Arihants.  Another interpretation is "Arhadbhyah," which
means "one who is free from attachment." It means that due to the weakening of
raga, they have no attachment to any object.  Alternatively, even when they come
in contact with objects of desire or aversion, which are the causes of raga and
dvesha, they do not abandon their nature of being free from raga, etc.
Therefore, they are called Arihants.  Another reading is "Arihantaanam," which
means "one who destroys the enemies in the form of karmas." It is said, "Eight
types of karmas are the enemies of all beings." Those who destroy these karmic
enemies are called Arihants. (A. Ni. 929)  Another reading is "Aruhantaanam
(Arohadbhyah)," which means "one whose sprouts of samsara do not rise again due
to the weakening of karmic seeds." Alternatively, those who are not going to be
born again in samsara are also called Arihants. It is said, "Just as a sprout
does not appear when the seed is completely burnt, similarly, the sprout of
bhava does not appear when the karmic seed is completely burnt," meaning there
is no birth and death. (Tattvarth Karika 8)  Grammarians have considered three
forms of the word "Arhat" in Prakrit language: 1. Arhat, 2. Arihant, and 3.
Aruhant. We have also established these three forms based on the "Uccahati"
Sutra of Siddha Hema Vyākaraṇa. (8.2.11)  "Salutations to those Arihants." It is
important to understand this connection.  "Namotthunanam" - In "Namo'stu," the
word "Namah" takes the fourth case, but according to the Sutra "Chaturthyaah
Shashthi" (8.3.131), the sixth case is used in place of the fourth case in
Prakrit language.  The use of the plural form is to refute those who believe in
only one Supreme Being. It is used to prove that there are many Arihant Supreme
Beings, refuting the monotheistic view of Advaita. It is also used to show that
saluting many Arihants yields more benefits than saluting one.  The term
"Bhagwantaanam" is used to indicate that I am saluting the Arihant Bhagwan, who
are different in their names, establishments, substances, and qualities.  "Bhag"
has fourteen meanings. They are: 1. Sun, 2. Knowledge, 3. Greatness, 4. Fame, 5.
Detachment, 6. Liberation, 7. Form, 8. Strength, 9. Effort, 10. Desire, 11.
Glory, 12. Dharma, 13. Power, and 14. Womb. Of these, all except the meanings of
"Sun" and "Womb" are valid here. One who possesses "Bhag" - knowledge,
detachment, etc. - is called Bhagwan.  ... The text then explains the meanings
of "Bhag" in the life of Bhagwan:  1. **Knowledge:** From the time of conception
until initiation, Bhagwan possesses three types of knowledge: Mati, Shruta, and
Avadhi. After initiation, until the destruction of ghati karmas, the fourth type
of knowledge, Manah Paryavgyan, also remains. After the destruction of ghati
karmas, they attain Keval Jnana, which illuminates all things.  2.
**Greatness:** Greatness means extraordinary influence. During all the
auspicious events of Bhagwan, hell...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 arihaMta aura bhagavAn zabda para vivecana yogazAstra tRtIya prakAza zloka 123
jahAM arihaMta rUpa ho, vahAM ari yAnI zatru, unake hantA (hananakartA) hone se
arihaMta kahalAtA hai| ve zatru haiM-mithyAtva mohanIya Adi sAmparAyika karma jo
baMdhana ke hetubhUta haiN| aneka bhavoM meM janma-maraNa ke mahAduHkha ko
prApta karAne meM kAraNabhUta mithyAtva Adi karmazatruoM ko naSTa karane se ve
arihaMta kahalAte haiN| tIsarI vyAkhyA - raja ko haraNa karane se arhNt| yahAM
raja se matalaba cAra ghAtikarmoM se hai| jaise sUrya bAdala meM chipA hone para
bhI prakaTa rUpa meM prakAza nahIM dikhatA, usI taraha AtmA cAra ghAtIkarma rUpI
raja ke DhakA huA hone se jJAnadarzanAdiguNa rUpa svabhAva hone para bhI nahIM
dikhatA hai| isalie AtmaguNoM ko Dhakane vAle ghAtikarma rUpI dhUla ko nAza
karane se ve arahaMta kahalAte haiN| cauthI vyAkhyA - unase koI bhI rahaH yAnI
gupta nahIM hone se bhI arahaMta kahalAte haiN| isI taraha bhagavAn ke jo
jJAnadarzana guNa haiM, unheM prApta karane meM jJAnAvaraNIya Adi karmoM kI
parAdhInatA hai, unakA sarvathA nAza karake saMpUrNa, anaMta, adbhuta,
apratipAti, zAzvata kevalajJAna-kevaladarzana utpanna huA hai, ina donoM se ve
saMpUrNa jagat ko sadA eka sAtha jAnate aura dekhate haiN| isa kAraNa unase koI
bhI bAta chipI nahIM rahatI, ataH ve arahaMta kahalAte haiN| ina tInoM vyAkhyAoM
meM vyAkaraNa ke "pRSodarAdayaH sUtra' se arhat zabda kI siddhi tIna prakAra se
hotI hai| athavA 'rahaH' kA artha ekAMta rU deza, parvataguphA, sthAna, deza kA
aMta yA madhyabhAga hotA hai| 'a' zabda avidyamAna artha kA dyotaka hai| yAnI
sarvajJa evaM saMpUrNajJa hone se jinake lie koI deza yA sthAnAdi ekAMta yA
gupta nahIM rahe, isa kAraNa koI bAta chipI na rahatI ho ve araho'ntara kahalAte
haiN| athavA arahadabhyaH rUpa bhI hotA hai| jisakA artha hai-rAga kSINa hone se
jisakI kisI bhI padArtha meM Asakti nahIM hai| athavA rAgadveSa kA hetubhUta
icchanIya athavA anicchanIya padArthagata viSayoM kA saMparka hone para bhI
apane vItarAgAdi svabhAva kA tyAga nahIM karate; isa kAraNa ve arahaMta kahalAte
haiN| athavA 'arihaMtANaM' aisA pAThAMtara bhI hai| usakA artha hai-karma rUpI
zatru kA nAza karane vAle, kahA bhI hai ki 'ATha prakAra ke karma sabhI jIvoM ke
zatru rUpa haiN| una karma Adi zatruoM kA hanana karane se arihaMta kahalAte
hai|' (A. ni. 929) arUhaMtANaM (arohadbhyaH ) pAThAMtara bhI hai| jisakA
bhAvArtha hai-karmabIja kSINa hone se jisake saMsAra rUpI aMkura phira ugate
nhiiN| athavA saMsAra meM jinakA phira janma nahIM hone vAlA hai, ve bhI
aruhaMta kahalAte haiN| isalie kahA bhI hai ki bIja sarvathA jala jAne para se
aMkura prakaTa nahIM hotA, vaise hI karmabIja sarvathA jala jAne para bhava rUpI
aMkura prakaTa nahIM hotA, yAnI janma-maraNa nahIM hotaa| (tattvArtha karikA 8)
vaiyAkaraNoM ne 'arhat' zabda ke prAkRta bhASA meM tIna rUpa mAne haiM-1.
arhata, 2. arihaMta aura 3. aruhNt| hamane bhI siddhahaimavyAkaraNa ke uccAhati
/  / 8 / 2 / 11 /  /  sUtra se tIna rUpa siddha kiye haiN| 'una ahaMtoM ko
namaskAra ho|' aisA saMbaMdha jaannaa| 'namotthuNaM' namo'stu meM namaH zabda ke
yoga meM caturthI vibhakti huA karatI hai, lekina caturthyAH SaSThI  /  /  / 8 /
3 /  / 131 /  /  isa sUtra se prAkRtabhASA meM caturthI ke sthAna meM SaSThI
vibhakti kA prayoga hotA hai| tathA jo eka hI paramAtmA ko mAnane vAle haiM;
unakA khaMDana karane ke lie bahuvacana kA prayoga kiyA hai, advaitavAdiyoM ke
eka hI paramAtmA mata vAloM kA khaMDana karake va aneka arihaMta paramAtmA hai,
aisA siddha karane ke lie tathA eka ke badale anekoM ko namaskAra karane se
adhika phala milatA hai; yaha batalAne ke lie bhI bahuvacana kA prayoga kiyA
hai| aura una arihaMta bhagavAn ke nAma, sthApanA, dravya aura bhAva se aneka
bheda haiN| yahAM bhAva-arihaMta ko merA namaskAra ho, aisA batalAne ke lie
'bhagavaMtANaM' vizeSaNa kA prayoga kiyA hai| bhagavaMtANaM meM 'bhaga' zabda ke
caudaha artha hote haiN| ve isa prakAra haiM1. sUrya, 2. jJAna, 3. mAhAtmya, 4.
yaza, 5. vairAgya, 6. mukti, 7. rUpa, 8. vIrya, 9. prayatna, 10. icchA, 11. zrI,
12. dharma, 13. aizvarya aura 14. yoni| inameM se bhaga ke sUrya aura yoni ina
do arthoM ko chor3akara zeSa bAraha artha yahAM mAnya | hai| jisameM bhaga-
jJAna, vairAgya Adi ho, use bhagavAn kahate haiN| ... bhagavAn ke jIvana meM
'bhaga' zabda meM nihita arthoM kI vyAkhyA karate haiM-1. jJAna - garbha meM
Aye, taba se lekara dIkSA taka bhagavAn meM mati, zruta aura avadhi ye tIna
jJAna hote haiM aura dIkSA lene ke bAda se ghAtikarma ke kSaya hone taka cauthA
manaHparyavajJAna bhI rahatA hai| tathA ghAtikarma ke kSaya hone ke bAda
anaMtavastuviSayaka samagrabhAvaprakAzaka kevalajJAna prApta ho jAtA hai| 2.
mAhAtmya kA artha hai - prabhAva atishy| bhagavAn ke sabhI kalyANakoM ke samaya
naraka 259

Page #282 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Namoththuna (Shakrastava) Commentary  **Chapter 3, Verse 123 of the Yoga
Shastra:**  Even for beings, happiness is generated, and even in the deepest
darkness of hell, light shines. When the Lord enters the womb, wealth,
prosperity, etc., increase in the family; even the unyielding feudal kings begin
to bow. And famines, epidemics, etc., are eliminated, resulting in a state free
from enmity, and the country and its people are free from calamities like
excessive rain, drought, etc. Due to their influence, the throne moves, and
gods, asuras, etc., bow down to their lotus feet. Thus, they are extremely
influential.  **3. Fame:** By conquering raga-dvesha, parishaha, upsarga, etc.,
with valor, the Lord gains fame, and their reputation is always permanent. The
celestial nymphs in the heavens and the serpent maidens in the netherworld sing
songs of their fame. Gods and asuras constantly praise that fame.  **4.
Detachment:** Even while enjoying the wealth and prosperity of gods and kings,
the Lord does not have even a trace of attachment. When they accept initiation,
they renounce all enjoyments and wealth and prosperity. What benefit do they
derive from that wealth then? When karmas are exhausted, they are indifferent to
pleasure and pain, to the world and liberation. Thus, the Lord is detached in
all three states. This is what we have also said in the Vitaragastotra: "O Lord!
When you enjoy the wealth of gods and kings, you do not experience even a trace
of joy. Even then, your delight remains in detachment. Being detached from
sensual pleasures, you have abundant detachment, and you remain indifferent to
pleasure and pain, or to the world and liberation. Even then, you remain
detached. In what state are you not detached? You are detached in all states."
**5. Liberation:** Liberation, in the form of the complete destruction of all
afflictions, is always close to you.  **6. Form:** Your form is truly supreme.
It is said that if one gathers the essence of the forms of all the gods into a
single thumb, and compares it to the thumb of the Lord's foot, the form of the
gods appears like coals in a burning ember. Therefore, the Lord's form is the
most excellent.  **7. Vigor:** The Lord has the power to make Mount Meru a staff
and the earth a canopy. It is heard that, soon after birth, Shri Mahavira Prabhu
moved the big toe of his left foot to dispel the fear of Indra. Such is the
vigor (power) and valor of the Lord.  **8. Effort:** The effort born from
supreme vigor, which was so immense in the determination to destroy the karmas
of the great images and the acceptance of the vows in a single night, etc.! And
the yoga-nirodha of mind, speech, and body, and the excellent self-vigor
manifested in that yoga, the unshakeable state like Mount Meru; and the effort
born from the excellent self-vigor in the form of the manifestation of
Shaileshikarana.  **9. Desire:** In the birth cycle, in the state of a god and
in the state of a Tirthankara, there is an intense desire to liberate the world,
which is immersed in the mud of suffering.  **10. Wealth:** You are filled with
the complete knowledge of Kevala Jnana, which is the wealth obtained through
valor by destroying the deadly karmas. This wealth of happiness is also
unparalleled.  **11. Dharma:** You possess the great yoga-like Dharma in the
form of Anasrava. The practice of Dharma in the form of the exhaustion of all
karmas is even more excellent.  **12. Power:** The Samavasarana created by Indra
and other gods due to their extreme devotion to the Lord, and the power in the
form of Ashta-Pratihariya, etc., are possessed by the Tirthankara Lord. Thus,
the praiseworthy qualities, consisting of twelve aspects like knowledge, etc.,
are spoken of by the wise.  In this way, from the two Alapaka (verses), one
should understand the first aspect of the "Namoththuna" sutra, which is the
object of praise, why, and how. We have said enough about this. Now we describe
the second aspect, the reason for praise.  **Aigrana Tithyayarana
Sayansambuddhana:** What is the meaning of Aigrana? It means "the one who
initiates," i.e., the one who gives the first teachings of all kinds of ethics
and Shruta Dharma. From this power, Shruta Dharma is known from them. Although
it is said that the Dvadasanga was never, is not, and will never be, this is not
true. And because the Dvadasanga was, is, and will be, it is called eternal.
However, from the perspective of meaning, it is called eternal, and from the
perspective of words, because the Dvadasanga is created in the reign of each
Tirthankara, there is no contradiction in saying "the one who initiates Shruta
Dharma."  Those who believe that liberation happens immediately upon attaining
Kevala Jnana do not accept the Tirthankara. They say that Kevala Jnana does not
occur until all karmas are exhausted. Due to this statement, the reason for the
existence of the Tirthankara does not remain. Therefore, to refute this, it is
said...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 namotthuNaM (zakrastava) para vyAkhyA yogazAstra tRtIya prakAza zloka 123 ke
jIvoM ko bhI sukha utpanna hotA hai, tathA gAr3ha aMdhakArAcchanna naraka meM
bhI prakAza ho jAtA hai| bhagavAn ke garbha meM Ane para kula meM dhana,
samRddhi Adi kI vRddhi hotI hai; nahIM jhukane vAle sAmaMta rAjA bhI jhukane
lagate haiN| tathA durbhikSa mahAmArI Adi upadrava dUra hokara vairarahita
rAjya-pAlana hotA hai, evaM janapada deza ativRSTi anAvRSTi Adi upadravoM se
rahita hotA hai| unake prabhAva se Asana calAyamAna hone se deva, asura Adi
unake caraNa-kamaloM meM namaskAra karate haiN| isa taraha ve prabhAva atizaya
vAle hote haiN| 3. yaza - rAgadveSa, pariSaha, upasarga Adi ko parAkrama se
jItane se bhagavAn ko yaza milatA hai, unakI pratiSThA sarvadA sthAyI hotI hai|
jisa yaza ke devaloka meM sura-suMdarI aura pAtAla meM nAgakanyA gIta gAtI hai|
usa yaza kI prazaMsA nitya deva aura asura karate haiN| 4. vairAgya - aha~ta
bhagavAn ko deva aura rAjA kI Rddhi kA upabhoga karate hue bhI usa para jarA bhI
rAga nahIM hotaa| jaba dIkSA aMgIkAra karate haiM, taba samasta bhogoM aura
Rddhi-samRddhi kA tyAga karate haiN| phira usa Rddhi se unheM kyA lAbha? jaba
karma kSINa ho jAte haiM, taba sukhaduHkha meM, saMsAra aura mokSa para unakA
udAsInabhAva hotA hai| isa taraha tInoM avasthAoM meM prabhu vai | yaha bAta
hamane vItarAgastotra meM bhI kahI hai-he nAtha! jaba Apa deva aura narendra kI
Rddhi bhogate jarA bhI AnaMda nahIM aataa| usa samaya bhI ApakI rati viraktatA
meM rahatI hai| kAmabhoga se virakta hone se Apa meM pracura vairAgya hotA hai
tathA sukha-duHkha meM yA saMsAra-mokSa meM samAnabhAva se Apa audAsInya rakhate
haiM, usa samaya bhI to Apa vairAgyayukta rahate haiM Apa kauna-sI avasthA meM
virakta nahIM haiM? Apa to sabhI avasthA meM vairAgI rahate haiN| 5. makti -
samagra klezanAza rUpa mukti to Apake sadA najadIka rahatI hai| 6. rUpa - to
ApakA atIva uttama hai hii| kahA hai kisabhI devatAoM kA sArabhUta rUpa grahaNa
karake usa rUpa ko sirpha aMgUThe meM ekatra kare; aura usakI tulanA prabhu ke
caraNa ke aMgUThe se kare to, devoM kA rUpa aisA dikhatA hai; mAno dahakate hue
aMgAre meM koyale hoN| ataH bhagavAna kA rUpa | sarvAdhika zreSTha hai| 7. vIrya
- meruparvata ko daMDa aura pRthvI ko chatra rUpa banAne kA sAmarthya bhagavAn
meM hotA hai| sunate haiM-janma ko abhI kucha hI dera huI thI ki zrI
mahAvIraprabhu ne iMdra kI AzaMkA ko dUra karane ke lie bAMye paira ke aMgUThe
ko hilA diyA thaa| itane vIryavAna (zaktizAlI) parAkramI bhagavAna hote haiN| 8.
prayatna- paramavIrya se utpanna rUpa prayatna, jo eka rAtri Adi kI
mahApratimAoM va abhigraha ke adhyavasAya meM hetabhata una karmoM ko eka sAtha
nAza karane ke lie prayatna kitanA virATa thA! tathA mana, vacana aura kAyA kA
yoga-nirodha aura usake yoga meM prakaTa kiyA huA utkRSTa AtmavIrya, meruparvata
ke samAna aDola avasthA; tathA zailezIkaraNa kI abhivyakti rUpa utkRSTa
AtmavIrya se huA pratyana 9. icchA - janmAMtara meM devabhava meM aura
tIrthaMkarabhava meM duHkha rUpI kIcar3a se lipta jagata ko bAhara nikAlane kI
tIvra icchA hotI hai| 10. zrI - ghAtIkarmoM kA nAza karake parAkrama se prApta
kI huI saMpUrNa kevalajJAna rUpI lakSmI se Apa paripUrNa hote haiN| yaha
sukhasaMpadA bhI anupama hai| 11. dharma - Apa meM anAzrava rUpa mahAyogAtmaka
dharma hai| samagra karmoM kI nirjarA rUpa dharmAcaraNa to aura bhI uttama hai|
12. aizvarya - prabhu ke prati atibhakti se iMdra Adi devoM ke dvArA banAyA huA
samavasaraNa tathA aSTa-prAtihAryAdi rUpa aizvarya tIrthakara bhagavAn ke hote
haiN| isa prakAra buddhimAna logoM dvArA kahI huI jJAnAdi bAraha bheda se yukta
stuti karane yogya hotI hai| isa taraha do AlApaka (pada) se 'namutthuNaM' sUtra
kI prathama stotavya-saMpadA jaannaa| yAnI stutya kauna, kyoM aura kaise hai?
isa para kAphI kaha diyA hai| aba dUsarI hetu-saMpadA kA varNana karate haiM _
AigarANaM titthayarANaM syNsNbuddhaannN| AigarANaM kA artha hai-Adi karane vAle
arthAt saba prakAra kI nIti aura | zrutadharma kA prathama upadeza dene vAle
haiN| isa sAmarthya se zrutadharma unake pAsa se jAnA jAtA hai| yadyapi yaha
dvAdazAMgI na kabhI thI, na kabhI hotI hai aura na kabhI hogI aisA hai nahIM
aura dvAdazAMgI thI, hai aura hogI isase ise zAzvatI kahI hai| phira bhI artha
kI apekSA se ise nitya kahA hai, zabda kI apekSA se apane-apane tIrthakaroM ke
zAsana meM dvAdazAMgI kI racanA hone se 'zrutadharma kI Adi karane vAle aisA
kahane meM koI virodha nahIM AtA hai| 'kevalajJAna hote hI mokSa ho jAtA hai|
aisA mAnane vAle tIrthaMkara ko nahIM maante| ve kahate haiM ki-jaba taka sabhI
karmoM kA kSaya nahIM hotA, taba |taka kevalajJAna nahIM hotaa| isa vacana se
tIrthaMkara ke hone kA kAraNa nahIM rhtaa| ataH isakA khaMDana karane hetu
kahate 260

Page #283 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  An Explanation of Namostuthunam  This is verse 123 from the third chapter of
the Yoga Shastra. It says: "Those who establish the Tirtha are called
Tirthankaras." A Tirtha is that which helps one cross the ocean of Samsara (the
cycle of birth and death). The four-fold Sangha, consisting of Sadhus, Sadhvis,
Shravaks, and Shravikas, is the foundation of the Tirtha, as is the first
Ganadhara.   The Bhagavan Mahavira was asked, "O Bhagavan, who is a Tirtha?" He
replied, "O Tirtha-rupa Gautam, the Tirthankara is the Tirtha. By this rule, the
Arihant is the Tirtha, the four-fold Shri-Sangha is the Tirtha, and the first
Ganadhara is the Tirtha." (Bhagavati 20/8)  Those who establish or create the
Tirtha are called Tirthankaras.  Kevalgyan (omniscience) arises only when all
karmas are destroyed. This is not true, however, as Kevalgyan arises when the
four ghatikarma (destructive karmas) are completely destroyed. The four
aghatikarma (non-destructive karmas) remain in the Kevali, but they do not
hinder his Kevalgyan. Kevalgyan is revealed when the four ghatikarma, including
Gyanavaraniya, are destroyed. Only the Arhat Kevalgyani can establish the
Tirtha.    The liberated Kevalis, or those who have attained liberation by
destroying all eight karmas simultaneously, cannot become Tirthankaras.
Therefore, it is said, "Salutations to the Tirthankaras who establish the
Tirtha."  Many people say that these Tirthankaras attain Bodhi-gyan
(enlightenment) through the grace of Sadashiva. Their scriptures provide
evidence for this: "Maheshanugrahat Bodhi-niyamaviti," meaning, "Through the
grace of Mahesh, Bodhi-gyan and (Shouch, Santosh, Tap, Swadhyay, Dhyan) are
attained." However, this statement is not true. Therefore, it is said,
"Sayansambuddhanam," meaning, "They become self-enlightened (Sambuddha) by
themselves, without the teachings of others, due to the maturity of their
Bhavyatva (potential for liberation) and other qualities. They know the true
nature of reality." Therefore, salutations to those who have attained
enlightenment by themselves.  Although they attain enlightenment through the
teachings of their Gurus in their previous births, in their Tirthankara-bhavas
(lives as Tirthankaras), they are independent of the teachings of others. They
attain enlightenment by themselves. Although in the Tirthankara's bhavas, the
Lokantik Devas (celestial beings) say, "Bhayavan Tittham Pavatteh," meaning, "O
Bhagavan, you should engage in establishing the Tirtha," the Bhagavan accepts
the initiation. However, just as a king acts or departs based on the words of
the Kalgyanpak-Vaitalik (astrologer), the Tirthankaras accept initiation
voluntarily based on the request of the Devas, not their teachings.  Having
explained the general qualities of the one worthy of praise, we now explain the
specific qualities: "Purishuttamanam, Purisisihanam, Purisavarapundariyanam,
Purisavaragandhatthyanam." This means, "Purish" refers to one who resides in the
body, hence called "Purush." Those who reside in a body with an excellent form
due to the rise of specific virtuous karmas, and who are also excellent beings
by nature and superior in Bhavyatva and other qualities, are called
"Purushottama." These Purushottama are as follows:  * They are accustomed to
helping others until the end of their Samsara. * Their worldly pleasures are
secondary to them. * They act appropriately in all situations. * They never
become humble. * They begin only those tasks in which they can succeed. * They
think deeply and resolutely. * They are masters of gratitude. * They have a mind
free from suffering. * They have the utmost respect for Devas and Gurus. * Their
intentions are serious.  A rough and unpolished gem of the highest quality, even
when extracted from the mine, is superior to glass. However, when it is polished
and shaped, it becomes even more beautiful, and then there is no comparison to
glass. Similarly, there is no comparison to the Arihant Paramatma. They are
superior to all.  This refutes the belief of the Buddhists who say, "Nasti ih
kashchidabhajnam sattvah," meaning, "There is no being in this world who is
unworthy." All beings are worthy of all virtues. Therefore, all beings can
become Buddhas. This is refuted because all beings cannot become Arihants; only
Bhavyas can become Arihants.  The disciples of the Sanskrit Acharya, who believe
in the reality of external objects and the unreality of metaphors, say, "Those
who are worthy of praise cannot be compared to anything, because
Heenaadhikaabhyamupma mrishya," meaning, "It is false to compare the worthy of
praise to something inferior or superior." To refute this view, it is said,
"Purishisihanam," meaning, "Like a lion among men." Just as a lion possesses
courage, ferocity, bravery, patience, and other qualities, the Arihant Bhagavan
is also courageous in overcoming enemies in the form of karmas, fierce in
destroying karmas, invincible in not tolerating anger, which is the result of
defeat, a great warrior who is not defeated by attachment, etc., powerful,
energetic, and famous for his bravery in austerity. They disregard the opinions
of others, are not afraid of upsargas (obstacles), do not worry about nourishing
their senses, do not regret walking the path of restraint, and remain steadfast
in good thoughts. Therefore, due to these qualities, the Arihant Bhagavan is
like a lion among men.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 namotthuNaM kI vyAkhyA yogazAstra tRtIya prakAza zloka 123 haiM-titthayarANaM
tIrtha kI sthApanA karane vaale| jisase saMsAra samudra tarA jAye, vaha tIrtha
kahalAtA hai| zAsana ke AdhArabhUta sAdhu-sAdhvI-zrAvaka-zrAvikA rUpa
caturvidhasaMgha athavA prathama gaNadhara tIrthasvarUpa hai| bhagavAn mahAvIra
se pUchA gayA-bhagavan! tIrtha kise kaheM? bhagavAn ne kahA-he tIrtha rUpa
gautama! tIrthakara tIrtha hai, isa niyama se arihaMta tIrtha hai, caturvidha
zrIsaMgha aura prathama gaNadhara tIrtha hai| (bhagavatI 20/8) tIrtha kI
sthApanA yA racanA karane vAle tIrthakara kahalAte haiN| saMpUrNa karmoM kA
kSaya hone para hI kevalajJAna hai, aisA nahIM balki cAra ghAtikarmoM kA
saMpUrNa kSaya hote hI kevalajJAna ho jAtA hai| kevalI meM cAra aghAtikarma zeSa
rahate haiM, ve usake kevalajJAna meM bAdhaka nahIM hote| aura kevalajJAna to
jJAnAvaraNIya Adi 4 ghAtikarmoM ke kSaya hone se prakaTa hotA hai| arhata
kevalajJAnI hI tIrtha kI sthApanA kara sakate haiN| mukta kevaliyoM athavA eka
sAtha AThoM karmoM ko kSaya karake makti prAsa karane vAloM meM tIrthakaratva
nahIM ho sktaa| isalie kahA-tIrtha kI sthApanA karane vAle tIrthakara ko
namaskAra ho| kaI loga kahate haiM-ina tIrthaMkaroM ko | bhI sadAziva kI kRpA se
bodha-jJAna hotA hai, isa viSaya meM unake graMtha kA pramANa hai-mahezAnugrahAt
bodha-niyamAviti arthAt maheza kI kRpA se bodha-jJAna aura (zauca saMtoSa, tapa,
svAdhyAya, dhyAna) hote haiN| paraMtu unakA yaha kathana yathArtha nahIM hai,
isalie kahA-sayaMsaMbuddhANaM arthAt ve dUsare ke upadeza binA bhavyatvAdi
sAmagrI ke paripakva ho jAne se svayaM (apane Apa) hI saMbuddha hote haiM-
yathArtha tattva svarUpa ko jAnate haiN| ataH svayaM bodha prApta kiyA hai,
unheM namaskAra ho| yadyapi dUsare pUrvabhavoM meM bAkAyAdA guru-mahArAja ke
upadeza se ve bodha prApta karate haiM, phira bhI tIrthakara-bhava meM to ve
dasaroM ke upadeza se nirapekSa hI hote haiN| ve svayaM hI bodha-prApta karate
haiN| yadyapi tIrthakara ke bhava meM lokAntika deva 'bhayavaM titthaM
pavatteha' bhagavan! Apa tIrtha (sthApana) meM pravRtta hoM; aise vacana se
bhagavAn dIkSA aMgIkAra karate haiN| tathApi jaise kAlajJApaka-vaitAlika ke
vacana se rAjA pravRtti yA prayANa karatA hai, vaise hI devoM kI vinati se
tIrthakara svataH dIkSA aMgIkAra karate haiM; unake upadeza se nhiiN| stotavya
kI sAmAnya saMpadA batAkara, aba vizeSa saMpadA batAte haiM_ 'purisuttamANaM,
purisasIhANaM, purisavarapuMDarIyANaM purisavaragaMdhahatthINaM'-tAtparya yaha
hai, puri yAnI zarIra meM zayana karatA hai, ataH ise puruSa kahate haiN|
viziSTa puNyakarma ke udaya se uttama AkRti vAle zarIra meM nivAsa karane vAle,
unameM bhI uttama jIva hone se svAbhAvika tathA bhavyatvAdi bhAvoM meM zreSTha
hone se 'puruSottama' kahalAte haiN| ve puruSottama isa prakAra se haiM-apane
saMsAra ke aMta taka paropakAra karane ke AdI hote haiM, apane sAMsArika sukhoM
kA svArtha unake lie gauNa hotA hai, sarvatra ucita kriyA karate haiM, kisI bhI
samaya meM dInatA nahIM lAte; jisameM saphalatA mile, usI kArya ko AraMbha
karate haiM, dRr3hatA se vicAra karate haiM; ve kRtajJatA ke svAmI, kleza rahita
citta vAle hote haiN| deva-guru ke prati atyaMta Adara rakhate haiN| unakA Azaya
gaMbhIra hotA hai| khAna se nikalA huA malina aura anaghar3a zreSTha jAti kA
ratna bhI kAca se uttama hotA hai| kintu jaba use zAna para car3hAkara ghar3a
diyA jAtA hai to vaha aura bhI svaccha ho jAtA hai, taba to kAca se usakI tulanA
hI nahIM ho sktii| vaise hI arihaMta paramAtmA ke sAtha kisI kI tulanA nahIM ho
sktii| ve sabhI se bar3hakara uttama hote haiN| aisA kahakara bauddha jo mAnate
haiM ki nAsti iha kazcidabhAjanaM sattvaH arthAt isa saMsAra meM koI bhI prANI
apAtra nahIM hai| jIva mAtra sarvaguNoM kA bhAjana hotA hai| isalie sabhI jIva
buddha ho sakate haiM; isa bAta kA khaMDana kiyA gayA hai| kyoMki sabhI jIva
kadApi arihaMta nahIM ho sakate; bhavya jIva hI arihaMta ho sakate haiN| bAhya
artha kI sattA ko satya mAnane vAle va upamA ko asatya mAnane vAle saMskRtAcArya
ke ziSya yoM kahate haiM ki 'jo stutya hai, unheM kisI prakAra kI upamA nahIM dI
jA sakatI, kyoMki hInAdhikAbhyAmupamA mRSA yAnI stutya ko hIna yA adhika se
upamA denA, asatya hai| isa mata kA khaMDana karane ke lie kahA hai-
purisasIhANaM puruSoM meM siMha samAna kahA hai| jaise siMha, zaurya, krUratA,
vIratA, dhairya Adi guNa vAlA hotA hai, vaise arihaMta bhagavAn bhI karma rUpI
zatruoM ke nivAraNa ke lie zUra, karmoM kA ucchedana karane meM krUra, parAjita
karane vAle krodha Adi ko sahana nahIM karane vAle, rAgAdi se parAbhUta na hone
vAle mahAparAkramI, vIryavAna aura tapazcaraNa meM vIratA ke lie prabhu
prasiddha haiM hI tathA ve pariSahoM kI avajJA karate haiM, upasargoM se Darate
nahIM, iMdriyoM ke poSaNa kI ciMtA nahIM karate, saMyamamArga para calane meM
unhe kheda nahIM hotA, ve sadA zubhadhyAna meM nizcala rahate haiN| ataH ina
guNoM ke kAraNa arihaMta bhagavAn puruSoM meM siMha 261

Page #284 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Explanation of Namotthu  This is similar to the third light verse 123 of Yoga
Shastra. This statement is not false either; because by giving similes like a
lion, etc., their extraordinary qualities appear. God should be compared to his
own kind, not to a different kind, because "Viruddhopamayogé Taddharmapattyá
Tadavastutvam" - that is, by the use of a contradictory (heterogeneous) simile,
the qualities of the simile are transferred to the object being compared, thus
negating its true nature. By this logic, if the qualities of the simile are
transferred to the object being compared, then God would lack masculinity, etc.
Refuting this view of the Charu disciples, it is said - "Purisa
Varapundariyáṇam" - that is, even though he is a man, salutations to the Arihant
who is like the best lotus.    The Arihant is like the best lotus, as the lotus
is born in mud, grows in water, yet transcends both and remains above them. It
is naturally beautiful, the abode of the Lakshmi of the three worlds, a home of
joy for the eyes, etc. Due to its excellent qualities, even the exceptional
animals, humans, and gods enjoy the lotus; and the lotus is the cause of
happiness. Similarly, the Arihant, the Supreme Being, is born in the mud of
karma, grows with the water of divine enjoyment, yet transcends both and remains
detached from them. Due to their excellences, they are beautiful and the abode
of wealth in the form of qualities; they are the cause of supreme bliss; due to
their qualities like omniscience, etc., even animals, humans, and gods serve
them, and through this, they become the cause of liberation happiness. For these
reasons, the Arihant God is like the lotus. Thus, even when comparing to a
different kind like the lotus, there is no contradiction in meaning. The fault
that the disciples of Sucharu have pointed out by comparing to a different kind,
is not possible here. If by comparing to a different kind, other qualities are
also transferred to the object being compared, in the same way, by comparing to
the same kind like a lion, etc., the qualities of animality, etc., of that lion,
etc., are transferred. But this does not happen with a simile of the same kind;
similarly, that fault does not apply to a simile of a different kind.  The
disciples of Brihaspati believe that qualities should be described in a
progressive order. That is, first, the general qualities should be described,
then the more specific qualities, and then the even more specific qualities, in
a progressive order. If this order is not followed in the explanation, then the
subject matter becomes disordered, and then the qualities increase
progressively. In support of this, they say - "Akramvadassat" - that is, what
does not develop progressively is false (mithya). The qualities of the Arihant,
the Supreme Being, have also developed progressively. To explain this, first, a
general simile should be given, then a specific simile. To refute their view, it
is said - "Purisa Varagandhahatthiṇam" - that is, the Arihant God, even though
he is a man, is like the best gandhahasti (a type of elephant). Just as the mere
smell of the gandhahasti makes the small elephants roaming in that region flee,
in the same way, due to the influence of the Arihant, the attacks of foreign
kingdoms, famine, epidemics, etc., which are like small elephants, flee from the
smell of their walk, which is like the wind. For this reason, the God is like
the best gandhahasti. Here, first, the simile of a lion, then the lotus, and
then the gandhahasti is given. In this, the gandhahasti is stronger than the
lion; while the lotus is ordinary. Therefore, according to their view, the
simile is out of order, yet it is not a fault, because they say that "if there
is no order in the explanation, then the explanation itself is false." This is
not logical. In reality, whether general or specific, all qualities are relative
to each other in the soul. Therefore, whether those qualities or the God
possessing them are praised in order or in reverse order, there is no fault in
it. Thus, the special reason for praising the Arihant God through the four
phrases "Purisa Uttmaṇam" etc. is stated. In this way, this third wealth is
called "Stotavya Vishesh Hetu Sampada."  Now, to explain how the praiseworthy,
passionless Supreme Being is useful in this world in general, the fourth wealth
is described in five phrases - "Loguttmaṇam, Lognahaṇam, Loghiyaṇam,
Logpaivaṇam, Logpajjogaraṇam." According to grammar, the word that is the
denotation of a group of words is also the denotation of many parts (parts or
divisions). The word "Lok" literally denotes the fourteen royal lokas, which are
a group of five astikayas, including Dharmaastikaya. And conversely, where there
is a lack of Dharmaastikaya, etc., substances, only space, is called "Alok."
However, here, the word "Lok" should be understood as the Lok in the form of the
Sarvabhavya Jiva. Here, the God is called "Lokottama"  262

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 namotthu kI vyAkhyA yogazAstra tRtIya prakAza zloka 123 ke samAna haiN| yaha
kathana asatya bhI nahIM hai; kyoMki siMha ke samAna ityAdi upamA dene se unake
asAdhAraNa guNa pratIta hote haiN| bhagavAn ko sajAtIya kI upamA denI cAhie,
vijAtIya kI upamA se to 'viruddhopamAyoge taddharmApattyA tadavastutvam' arthAt
viruddha (vijAtIya) upamA ke yoga se upameya meM upamA kA dharma A jAne se
upameya kI vAstavikatA | nahIM rahatI  /  isa nyAya se upameya meM upamAna ke
samAna dharma A jAne se bhagavAn meM puruSatva Adi kA abhAva ho jAyagA; |
cAruziSyoM ke isa mata kA khaMDana karate hue kahate haiM- purisavarapuMDarIANaM
arthAt puruSa hone para bhI zreSTha puMDarIka ke | samAna arihaMta ko namaskAra
ho  /  saMsAra rUpI jala se nirlipta ityAdi, dharmoM ke kAraNa ve zreSTha
puMDarIka kamala ke samAna | jaise puMDarIka - kamala kIcar3a meM utpanna hotA
hai, jala meM bar3hatA hai, phira bhI donoM kA tyAgakara donoM se Upara rahatA
hai| vaha svAbhAvika rUpa meM suMdara hotA hai, triloka kI lakSmI kA nivAsa-
sthAna hai, cakSu Adi ke lie AnaMda kA ghara hai, usake uttama guNoM ke yoga se
viziSTa tiryaMca, manuSya aura deva bhI kamala kA sevana karate haiM; tathA
kamala sukha kA hetubhUta hai, vaise hI arihaMta paramAtmA bhI karma rUpa
kIcar3a meM janma lete haiM, divyabhoga rUpI jala se unakI vRddhi hotI hai,
phira bhI ve karmoM aura bhogoM kA tyAgakara unase nirlepa rahate haiM, apane
atizayoM se ve suMdara haiM aura guNa rUpI saMpattiyoM ke nivAsa sthAna hai;
paramAnaMda ke hetu rUpa haiM; kevalajJAnAdi guNoM ke kAraNa tiryaMca, manuSya
aura deva bhI unakI sevA karate haiM, aura isase ve mokSasukha ke kAraNa banate
haiN| ina kAraNoM se arihaMta bhagavAn puMDarIkakamala ke samAna hai| isa |
taraha bhinnajAtIya kamala kI upamA dene para bhI artha meM koI virodha nahIM
AtA  /  sucAru ke ziSyoM ne vijAtIya kI upamA | dene se, jo doSa batAyA hai,
vaha doSa yahAM saMbhava nahIM hai| yadi vijAtIya upamA ke dene se upameya meM
usa upamA ke | atirikta anya dharma bhI A jAte haiM, vaise hI siMha Adi kI
sajAtIya upamA se usa siMha Adi kA pazutva Adi dharma | A jAtA hai| kintu
sajAtIya upamA se vaise nahIM banatA; vaise hI vijAtIya upamA se bhI vaha doSa
nahIM lgtaa| bRhaspati ke ziSya aisA mAnate haiM ki yathottarakrama se guNoM kA
varNana karanA caahie| arthAt prathama sAmAnya guNoM kA, bAda meM usase vizeSa
guNoM kA aura usake bAda usase bhI viziSTa guNoM kA yathAkrama se varNana karanA
caahie| yadi isa kramAnusAra vyAkhyA nahIM kI jAtI hai to vaha padArtha krama
rahita ho jAtA hai aura phira guNa to kramazaH hI bar3hate haiN| isI ke
samarthana meM ve kahate haiM - akramavadasat arthAt jisakA vikAsa kramazaH
nahIM hotA, vaha vastu asat ( mithyA) hai| zrI arihaMta | paramAtmA ke guNoM kA
vikAsa bhI kramazaH huA hai| ise batAne ke lie prathama sAmAnya upamA, bAda meM
viziSTa upamA denI | caahie| unake isa mata kA khaMDana karane ke lie kahate
haiM- purisavaragaMdhahatthINaM arthAt zrIarihaMta bhagavAn puruSa hone | para
bhI zreSTha gaMdhahastI ke samAna haiN| jaise gaMdhahastI kI gaMdhamAtra se usa
pradeza meM ghUmane vAle kSudra hAthI bhAga jAte haiM, | vaise hI arihaMta
paramAtmA ke prabhAva se, pararAjya kA AkramaNa, duSkAla, mahAmArI Adi upadrava
rUpI kSudra hAthI unake | vihAra rUpI pavana kI gaMdha se bhAga jAte haiN| isa
kAraNa se bhagavAn zreSThagaMdhahastI ke samAna hai| yahAM pahale siMha kI, bAda
meM kamala kI aura usake bAda gaMdhahastI kI upamA dI hai| isameM gaMdhahastI se
bhI siMha vizeSa balavAna hai; jaba ki kamala sAmAnya hai| ataH unake mata se
upamA kA akrama hai, phira bhI vaha doSa rUpa nahIM hai, kyoMki ve kahate haiM
ki | 'vyAkhyA meM krama na ho to vyAkhyA hI asat hotI hai|' yaha bAta yuktiyukta
nahIM hai| vastutaH sAmAnya ho yA viziSTa, | samasta guNa AtmA meM paraspara
sApekSa rahate haiN| isalie una guNoM yA guNI bhagavAn kI stuti krama se yA
vyutkrama se kisI bhI taraha se kI jAya; usameM koI doSa nahIM lagatA  /  isa
prakAra purisuttamANaM Adi cAra padoM se zrI arihaMta paramAtmA kI stuti kA
vizeSa hetu khaa| isa taraha yaha tIsarI saMpadA kA nAma 'stotavya
vizeSahetusaMpadA hai|' hI stuti karane yogya zrIvItarAga paramAtmA sAmAnya rUpa
se isa saMsAra meM kisa taraha upayogI hai? ise batAne ke lie aba pAMca padoM
dvArA cauthI saMpadA kA varNana karate haiM- loguttamANaM, loganAhANaM,
logahiyANaM, logapaIvANaM, logapajjoagarANaM  /  jo zabda samUha kA vAcaka hotA
hai, vyAkaraNazAstrAnusAra vaha zabda aneka avayavoM (aMzoM yA vibhAga) kA bhI
vAcaka hotA hai| loka zabda tattvataH dharmAstikAyAdi pAMca astikAyoM ke samUha
vAle caudaha rAja loka kA vAcaka hai| aura usake viparIta jahAM dharmAstikAya
Adi dravyoM kA abhAva ho, kevala AkAza hI ho, use aloka | kahate haiM  /  phira
bhI yahAM loka zabda se sarvabhavyajIva rUpa loka samajhanA caahie| yahAM para
bhagavAn ko 'lokottama' kahA 262

Page #285 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Explanation of Namotthuna (Shakrastava)  This is verse 123 from the third
chapter of Yogashastra.  True excellence exists only among those of the same
species. There is no special distinction in excellence between a lower caste and
a higher caste.  While all bhavya jivas are superior to abhavya jivas, there is
no special distinction in pointing out the superiority of the Bhagavan in
comparison to them. Therefore, the statement here is that he is superior among
the bhavya jivas of the same species.  Because the feeling of bhavya-tva, which
is the cause of all well-being, exists only in Bhagavan among all bhavya jivas.
Salutations to the Bhagavan, who is the best in this world.  **Loka-nahan**
means the lord of the world.  The lord who does yoga-kshema.  Yoga is to obtain
what is not obtained, and kshema is to protect what is obtained.  From this
perspective, Bhagavan establishes the seed of dharma in the world, causing the
attainment of the unattained dharma and protecting it from the disturbances of
raga, etc.  Therefore, he is the lord of the bhavya jiva world.    However,
Bhagavan is not called the lord of the world in comparison to all bhavya jivas.
Because Bhagavan cannot be the doer of yoga-kshema for those who are bhavya by
birth (jati).  If that were the case, all beings would attain liberation.
Therefore, Bhagavan can only be the doer of yoga-kshema for those bhavya jivas
who are close to liberation.  Bhagavan does yoga by establishing the seed of
dharma in such bhavya jivas, causing the emergence of the sprout of dharma and
nourishing it.  He does kshema by protecting them from the disturbances of
internal enemies like raga, dvesha, etc.  In other words, salutations to the
lord of that specific world of bhavya jivas.  **Loka-hiyan** means salutations
to the one who benefits the world.  Here, the word "loka" should be understood
as the world of all beings, from the one-sense beings to the five-sense beings,
in the fourteen realms of existence.  Because Bhagavan saves all beings from
falling into suffering by teaching the path of liberation, which includes samyag
darshan, etc., he is the well-wisher of the world.  **Loka-paivahan** means
salutations to Bhagavan, who illuminates the world like a lamp.  Here, the word
"loka" should be understood as the world of the specific five-sense beings,
because Bhagavan illuminates the five-sense beings with the rays of knowledge
from his teachings, removing the darkness of mithyatva and ignorance, and
illuminating the knowledge-object appropriately.  Therefore, he is like a lamp
because he is the illuminator of the world of beings with knowledge.  Just as a
lamp cannot illuminate a blind person, Bhagavan cannot awaken those beings with
knowledge who are immersed in the deep darkness of mithyatva.  Therefore,
Bhagavan is called like a lamp in the world of specific beings with knowledge.
**Loka-pajjogaran** means salutations to Bhagavan, who shines like the sun in
the world.  Here, the word "loka" should be understood as the specific fourteen
previous knowledgeable beings (purva-dharas).  Because only they can have true
brilliance.  And only they can truly know the seven or nine elements of jiva,
etc., which are worthy of illumination.  Only the purva-dharas are endowed with
special qualifications.  However, all purva-dharas are not equal in illuminating
the elements.  Because even the purva-dharas are different in their
qualifications, with more or less of the six stages (shat-sthana).  The meaning
of "pradyot" is the illumination of the complete knowledge of the elements,
specifically through the eyes, etc.  This qualification exists only in the
specific fourteen purva-dharas.  Therefore, Bhagavan is like the sun in the
world of the specific fourteen purva-dharas.  Just as lotuses bloom from the
sun, the specific purva-dharas are illuminated with the knowledge of the
elements of jiva, etc., because of Bhagavan, the sun.  From this perspective,
Bhagavan is the illuminator of the world.  In this way, Bhagavan is a benefactor
in five ways: loka-uttama, etc.  Therefore, the fourth pancha-padi sampada is
described as the general use of the wealth of being worthy of praise.  Now, the
fifth sampada, called hetu-sampada, is described from the perspective of
describing the wealth of specific use: "abhaya-dayan, chakkhu-dayan, magg-dayan,
saran-dayan, bohi-dayan."  The first, "abhaya-dayan," means salutations to
Bhagavan, the giver of fearlessness.  Fear is mainly of seven types: 1. fear of
this world, 2. fear of the next world, 3. fear of attachment, 4. fear of the
unexpected, 5. fear of livelihood, 6. fear of death, and 7. fear of disgrace.
The opposite of fear is fearlessness, which is the absence of fear.  In other
words, the substance that is the cause of the complete well-being of the
specific health of the soul is called fearlessness.  Some call it courage.  It
is Sri Tirthankara Bhagavan who gives this kind of fearlessness, because he is
endowed with inconceivable power due to the excellence of his qualities.  And
because he is solely dedicated to the welfare of others, Bhagavan is also the
giver of fearlessness, the remover of fear.  **Chakkhu-dayan** means salutations
to the giver of eyes.  Bhagavan is the giver of the eye of the specific dharma
of the soul, which is the knowledge of the elements.  Other people call it
faith.  Just as a person without eyes cannot see others,

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 namotthuNaM ( zakrastava) kI vyAkhyA yogazAstra tRtIya prakAza zloka 123 hai  /
samAnajAtIyoM meM uttamatA hI vAstavika hotI hai, nimna-jAtiyoM se uccajAtIya
meM uttamatA hone meM koI khAsa vizeSatA nahIM hotI  /  yoM to abhavya kI apekSA
sabhI bhavyajIva uttama haiM hI, isa apekSA se bhagavAn kI uttamatAM batAne meM
koI vizeSatA nahIM hai| isalie ve sajAtIya bhavyajIvoM meM uttama hai; aisA
kathana yahAM abhISTa hai| kyoMki samasta | bhavyajIvoM meM sakala kalyANa ke
kAraNabhUta bhavyatva nAma ke bhAva kevala bhagavAn meM hI rahate haiN| aise
loka meM uttama bhagavAn ko namaskAra ho  /  loganAhANaM arthAt loka ke naath|
yogakSema karane vAlA nAtha hotA hai| aprApta vastu ko prApta karAnA yoga hai
aura prApta vastu kI rakSA karanA kSema hai| isa dRSTi se bhagavAn loka meM
dharmabIja kI sthApanA dvArA aprApta dharma ko prApta karAte haiM aura dharma kI
rAgAdi upadravoM se rakSA karate-karAte haiM; isalie ve bhavyajIvaloka ke nAtha
haiN| tathA | bhagavAn ko samasta bhavyajIva rUpI loka kI apekSA se yahAM
lokanAtha nahIM kahA gayA hai; kyoMki jo jAti (janmataH ) bhavya hai, unake
yoga-kSemakartA bhagavAn nahIM ho sakate, yadi aisA hotA to samagra jIvoM kA
mokSa ho jaataa| isalie yahAM bhagavAn una bhavyajIvoM ke hI yogakSemakartA ho
sakate haiM, jo mokSa ke nikaTa haiN| aise bhavyajIvoM meM bhagavAn dharmabIja
kI | sthApanA karake, dharmAMkura kA prAdurbhAva aura usakA poSaNa karane se
yoga karate haiM evaM rAgadveSAdi AMtarika zatruoM ke upadrava | se unakA
rakSaNa karake kSema karate haiM  /  arthAt una viziSTa bhavyajIva rUpa loka ke
nAtha ko namaskAra ho  /  logahiyANaM- arthAt loka ke hita karane vAle ko
namaskAra ho| yahAM 'loka' zabda se caudaha rAja loka meM ekendriyajIva se
lekara paMcendriya jIva taka sabhI vyavahArarAzigata jIva rUpa loka smjhnaa|
cUMki bhagavAn samyagdarzana | Adi mokSamArga kA upadeza dekara sabhI jIvoM ko
duHkha meM par3ane se bacAte haiM; isalie ve loka-hitaiSI hai|
logapaIvANaMarthAt loka-saMsAra meM dIpaka ke samAna prakAza karane vAle
bhagavAn ko namaskAra ho  /  yahAM lokazabda se viziSTa saMjJI |
paMcendriyajIMva rUpa loka samajhanA cAhie, kyoMki bhagavAn viziSTa saMjJIjIvoM
ko apane upadeza rUpI jJAnakiraNoM se | mithyAtva - ajJAna rUpI aMdhakAra miTA
karake jJeyabhAva kA yathAyogya prakAza karate haiM, isa kAraNa saMjJIloka ke
prakAzaka | hone se ve pradIpa rUpa hai| jaise dIpaka aMdhe manuSya ko prakAza
nahIM de sakatA, vaise hI bhagavAn bhI aise mahAmithyAtva rUpa ghora aMdhakAra
meM magna saMjJI jIvoM ko pratibodha nahIM de skte| isalie bhagavAn ko viziSTa
saMjJI jIva rUpa loka meM pradIpa ke samAna kahA hai| tathA logapajjoagarANaM
arthAt loka meM sUrya ke samAna pradyota karane vAle bhagavAn ko namaskAra ho  /
| yahAM lokazabda se viziSTa caudaha pUrva ke jJAnavAle jJAnI puruSa hI
samajhanA cAhie; kyoMki unameM hI vAstavika pradyota | ho sakatA hai| aura
prakAza karane yogya sAta athavA nau jIvAdi tattvoM ko ve hI yathArtha rUpa se
jAna sakate haiN| pUrvadhara | hI viziSTa yogyatA saMpanna hote haiM  /  paraMtu
tattvoM ko prakAzita karane meM sabhI pUrvadhara eka sarIkhe nahIM hote| kyoMki
pUrvadhara bhI yogyatA meM paraspara tAratamyayukta - SaTsthAna - nyUnAdhika
hote haiN| pradyota kA artha hai - viziSTa prakAra se nayanikSepAdi se saMpUrNa
tattvajJAna ke anubhava kA prakAza  /  aisI yogyatA viziSTa caturdaza-
pUrvadhArI meM hI hotI hai| ataH yahAM viziSTa | caturdaza pUrvadhara rUpI loka
meM prabhu sUrya ke samAna haiN| jaise sUrya se sUryavikAsI kamala khilate haiM,
vaise hI bhagavatsUrya ke | nimitta se viziSTa pUrvadharoM ko jIvAdi tattvoM kA
prakAza ho jAtA hai  /  isa dRSTi se bhagavAna lokapradyotakara haiN| isa
prakAra lokottama Adi pAMca prakAra se bhagavAn paropakArI haiN| isalie
stotavyasaMpadA kI sAmAnya upayoga ke nAma se cauthI | paMcapadI saMpadA
btaayii| aba viziSTa upayoga saMpadA batAne kI dRSTi se hetusaMpadA nAma kI
pAMcavIM saMpadA batAte haiM'abhayadayANaM, cakkhudayANaM, maggadayANaM,
saraNadayANaM, bohidyaannN|' isameM prathama 'abhayadayANaM' kA artha hai |
abhaya dene vAle bhagavAna ko namaskAra ho  /  bhaya mukhyatayA sAta prakAra kA
hotA hai  /  1. ihalokabhaya, 2. paralokabhaya, 3. AdAna-bhaya, 4. akasmAdbhaya,
5. AjIvikAbhaya, 6. maraNabhaya aura 7. apayazabhaya  /  bhaya kA pratipakSI
abhaya hai| jisameM bhaya kA abhAva hotA hai| arthAt viziSTa Atma svAsthya ke
lie saMpUrNa kalyANakArI dharma kI bhUmikA meM kAraNabhUta padArtha abhaya
kahalAtA hai| koI use dhairya bhI kahate haiN| isa prakAra ke abhaya ko dene
vAle zrI tIrthaMkara bhagavAn hI hai, kyoMki ve apane guNoM ke prakarSayoga se
acintyazaktisaMpanna hote haiM; evaM ekAMta paropakAraparAyaNa hone se bhagavAn
| abhayadAtA = bhayarahitakartA bhI hai| tathA cakkhudayANaM cakSu dene vAle ko
namaskAra  /  bhagavAn tattvabodha ke kAraNa rUpa | viziSTa Atmadharma rUpa
cakSu ke dAtA hai| dUsare loga ise zraddhA kahate haiN| jaise cakSu ke binA
vyakti dUsare ko dekha nahIM 263

Page #286 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Explanation of the Verse  **Verse 123 of the Third Light of Yoga Shastra:**
Just as a person without faith is incapable of seeing the truth of the self,
similarly, a person without faith is incapable of attaining happiness. Only with
true faith (Shraddha) can one attain knowledge and vision of the true nature of
reality. Therefore, faith, like an indestructible seed, is obtained from the
Lord, who is the giver of the tree of Dharma. Hence, salutations to the Lord,
the giver of vision.  **Mārgadāyāṇam:** Salutations to the Lord, the giver of
the path to liberation. Here, the guide refers to one who leads to the specific
and direct series of Gunasthanas (stages of spiritual progress), like the
straight path of a serpent's hood; one who enables the experience of the true
self (Atmasvaroop); one who reveals the nature of the cessation of karma. The
path is that which leads the mind towards liberation, where the mind's
tendencies are conducive to liberation. Without the path to liberation, the
mind's tendencies cannot be pure or conducive. Happiness also arises from
walking on the path to liberation. Without the path to liberation, one cannot
attain the appropriate Gunasthanas, because the unevenness of the path causes
the mind to slip, and this becomes an obstacle in attaining the Gunasthanas.
Such a simple and true path is obtained only from the Lord, therefore, the Lord
is the guide.  **Saraṇadāyāṇam:** Salutations to the Lord, the giver of refuge.
Protecting the one who is suffering from fear is called giving refuge. In this
world, which is like a terrifying forest, the souls of beings afflicted by
intense attachment, aversion, etc., become deluded by the mental afflictions
arising from the cycle of suffering. The Lord gives them the beautiful assurance
of the determination of true contemplation; therefore, they are the refuge.
Other Acharyas say that the desire to know the truth is refuge. This
determination of true contemplation is the cause of the soul attaining the
truth. 1. Desire to hear the truth, 2. Hearing the truth, 3. Accepting the
truth, 4. Holding the truth in the heart, 5. Attaining specific knowledge
(Vijnana) from this, 6. Reasoning and thinking from Vijnana, 7. Deciding on the
truth, and 8. Having firm faith in the truth; these eight qualities of the
intellect are manifested by the determination of true contemplation. If there is
no determination of true contemplation, these qualities do not manifest, but
only their appearance is seen, which does not achieve any purpose for the soul.
Therefore, the refuge of true contemplation, which gives assurance to the soul,
bewildered by many sorrows, and illuminates the qualities of the intellect, is
obtained only from the Lord. Therefore, the Lord is the giver of refuge.
**Bodhidāyāṇam:** Salutations to the Lord, the giver of enlightenment.
Enlightenment means attaining the Dharma as established by Lord Jineshwar.
Enlightenment occurs through the power of three actions: Yathapravrittikaran
(making things happen as they should), Apurvakaran (doing something new), and
Anivrittikaran (stopping something from happening). The first time the knot of
attachment and aversion, which has never been broken before, is broken, the soul
attains Samyagdarshan (right faith) in the form of true faith in the truth.
Other Acharyas have called 'Bodhi' as 'Vijnpti'.  **Abhaya, Chakshu, Marg,
Sharan, and Bodhi:** These five are obtained by the one who is free from
rebirth. When these five are not manifested in their true form due to rebirth,
the Lord gives these five non-rebirth-causing qualities. These five qualities
are the fruits of the previous ones, one after the other. It is like this: the
fruit of giving fearlessness is the attainment of vision, the fruit of vision is
the attainment of the right path, the fruit of the path is the attainment of
refuge, and the fruit of refuge is the attainment of enlightenment
(Samyagdristi). This seed of enlightenment is obtained from the Lord. Therefore,
the Lord is the giver of enlightenment. Thus, the Lord is the giver of
fearlessness, the giver of vision, the giver of the path, the giver of refuge,
and the giver of enlightenment. Therefore, as mentioned earlier, the
accomplishment of the wealth of use has been achieved. Now, we will explain the
wealth of praise, which is a specific use of wealth.  **Dhammadāyāṇam,
Dhammadeśayāṇam, Dhammānāyāgaṇam, Dhammāsārāhīṇam,
Dhammāvarachaurantachakkavattīṇam:** The meaning of 'Dhammadāyāṇam' is -
Salutations to the Lord, the giver of Dharma. Here, Dharma should be understood
as the Dharma in the form of conduct (Virati). And that Dharma is of two types:
Sadhudharma and Shravakdharma. Sadhudharma is the form of abandoning all sinful
actions, while Shravakdharma is the form of partially abandoning sin. The Lord
is the one who reveals both these Dharmas. Dharma can only be obtained from Him.
Even if there are other causes, the Lord is the main cause in attaining Virati
Dharma, therefore, the Lord is called the giver of Dharma. The giver of Dharma
is the one who gives Dharmadeshana, not any other cause, therefore, it is said -
'Dhammadeśayāṇam' = Salutations to the Lord, the preacher of Dharma. As
mentioned earlier, the Lord is the preacher of the two types of Virati Dharma.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 tthu kI vyAkhyA yogazAstra tRtIya prakAza zloka 123 sakatA, vaise hI zraddhA-
rahita vyakti Atma-vastu tattva ke darzana karane meM ayogya hotA hai| yAnI
tattvadarzana nahIM kara sktaa| mArgAnusArI zraddhA ke binA sukha prApta nahIM
kara sakatA hai| kalyANacakSu (zraddhA) hone para hI yathArtha vastutattva kA
jJAna va darzana hotA hai| isa kAraNa dharma rUpI kalpavRkSa ke lie amoghabIja
rUpa zraddhA bhagavAn se prApta hotI hai| ataH | bhagavAna cakSu ko dene vAle
hai| maggadayANaM=arthAt mokSamArga dene vAle ko namaskAra ho| yahAM mArgadAtA
kA artha haisarpa kI bAMbI kI taraha sIdhI viziSTa guNasthAna- zreNI ko prApta
karAne vAle; svarasavAhI yAnI AtmasvarUpa kA anubhava | karAne vAle,
karmakSayopazama kA svarUpa batAne vAle  /  jisa para citta kA avakragamana ho,
jisameM mokSa ke anukUla cittapravRtti ho, use mArga kahate haiM  /  mokSamArga
ke binA citta kI pravRtti zuddha yA anukUla nahIM hotI  /  sukha bhI mokSamArga
para | calane se hotA hai| mokSamArga ke abhAva meM yathAyogya guNasthAna kI
prApti nahIM ho sakatI; kyoMki mArga kI viSamatA se citta kI skhalanA hotI hai
aura isase guNa kI prApti meM vaha citta vighna rUpa hotA hai| aisA sarala
satyamArga bhagavAn se hI prApta hotA hai, isalie bhagavAn mArgadAtA hai|
'saraNadayANaM' arthAt zaraNa ko dene vAle bhagavAn ko namaskAra ho, bhaya se
pIr3ita kA rakSaNa karanA zaraNa denA | kahalAtA hai| isa saMsAra rUpI
bhayaMkara aTavI meM atiprabala rAgadveSAdi se pIr3ita jIvoM kI AtmAe~ duHkha-
paraMparA se hone | vAle cittasaMkleza se mUr3ha ho jAtI hai| una AtmAoM ko
bhagavAn tattvaciMtana rUpa adhyavasAya kA suMdara AzvAsana dete haiM; isalie ve
zaraNa - AdhAra rUpa hai| dUsare AcArya kahate haiM- vizeSa prakAra se tattva
jAnane kI icchA hI zaraNa hai| isa | tattvaciMtana kA adhyavasAya hI jIva ko
tattva kI prApti hone meM kAraNa rUpa hai| 1. tattvazravaNa kI icchA, 2. tattva
kA | zravaNa, 3. tattva kA grahaNa, 4. tattva kA hRdaya meM dhAraNa, 5. isase
viziSTa jJAna (vijJAna) kI prApti, 6. vijJAna se vicAra-tarka karanA 7. tattva
kA nirNaya karanA aura 8. tattva ke prati dRr3ha AsthA rakhanA; ye buddhi ke
AThaguNa tattvaciMtana ke adhyavasAya se prakaTa hote haiM  /  yadi
tattvaciMtana kA adhyavasAya na ho to ye guNa prakaTa nahIM hote, apitu guNoM kA
AbhAsa hotA hai; jisase AtmA kA koI prayojana siddha nahIM hotA  /  ataH aneka
duHkhoM se kiMkartavyavimUr3ha bane hue jIva | ko AzvAsana dene vAlI aura buddhi
ke guNoM ko prakAzita karane vAlI tattvaciMtA rUpI zaraNa bhagavAn se hI prApta
hotI hai| isalie bhagavAn zaraNadAtA hai| tathA bohidayANaM arthAt bodhidAtA
bhagavAn ko namaskAra ho  /  bodhi kA artha hai| - zrI jinezvara -praNIta dharma
kI prApti honA  /  bodhi yathApravRttikaraNa, apUrvakaraNa aura anivRttikaraNa
ina tIna vyApAroM ke sAmarthyayoga se hotI hai| pahale kabhI bhedana nahIM huI
rAgadveSa kI graMthI (gAMTha) ke bhedana karane se; prathama, saMvega, nirveda,
anukaMpA aura Astikya rUpa pAMca lakSaNoM ke prakaTa hone se jIva ko tattvArtha-
zraddhA rUpa samyagdarzana prApta hotA hai| anya AcAryoM ne 'bodhi' ko
'vijJapti' kahA hai| abhaya, cakSu, mArga, zaraNa aura bodhi ye pAMcoM
apunarbandhaka ko prApta hote haiN| | jaba punarbandhana ke kAraNa pAMcoM apane
yathArtha rUpa meM prakaTa nahIM hote, taba bhagavAn ina pAMcoM apunarbandhaka
bhAvoM kA dAna | dete hai| ye pAMcoM bhAva uttarottara pUrva-pUrva ke phala rUpa
hai| vaha isa prakAra se hai - abhayadAna kA phala cakSu kI prApti, | cakSu kA
phala samyagmArga kI prApti, mArga kA phala zaraNa kI prApti aura zaraNa kA
phala bodhi- (samyagdRSTi) kI prApti hai| yaha bodhibIja bhagavAn se prApta hotA
hai| ataH bhagavAn bodhidAtA hai| isa prakAra bhagavAn abhayadAtA, cakSudAtA, |
mArgadAtA, zaraNadAtA aura bodhidAtA hai| ataH pUrvakathanAnusAra upayogasaMpadA
kI siddhi huI  /  aba 'stotavyasaMpadA' kI hI viziSTa upayoga rUpa saMpadA
batAte haiM 'dhammadayANaM, dhammadesayANaM, dhammanAyagANaM, dhammasArahINaM,
dhmmvrcaaurNtckkvttttiinnN'| 'dhammadayANaM' kA artha | hai - dharma ke dAtA
bhagavAn ko namaskAra ho  /  yahAM dharma kA artha cAritra - (virati ) rUpa
dharma lenA caahie| aura vaha dharma sAdhudharma aura zrAvakadharma ke bheda se
do prakAra kA hai| sAdhudharma sarvasAvadya (pApakArI) vyApAra ke tyAga rUpa
hai, pApa kA AMzika rUpa se tyAga rUpa dezaviratizrAvakadharma hai| ina donoM
dharmoM ko batAne vAle bhagavAn hI hai| unhIM se hI dharma mila sakatA hai| anya
hetu hone para bhI viratidharma kI prApti meM pradhAnahetu bhagavAn hI haiM, isa
kAraNa bhagavAn ko dharmadAtA kahA hai| dharmadAtA dharmadezanA ke dene se hotA
hai, anya kAraNa se nahIM, isalie kahate haiM- 'dhammadesayANaM' = yAnI dharma
kA upadeza dene vAle bhagavAn ko namaskAra ho| pahale kahe anusAra do prakAra ke
viratidharma ke upadeSTA bhagavAn kA upadeza 264

Page #287 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  An Explanation of Namostuthunam  This is an explanation of the
Namostuthunam, a hymn of praise to the Jinas. It is found in the third chapter
of the Yoga Shastra, verse 123.  **The hymn states that the teachings of the
Jinas are never fruitless, but always bear fruit.** This is because the Jinas
teach according to the capacity of the individual. Therefore, the Jinas are true
teachers of Dharma.  **The hymn then salutes the Jinas as the "Dhammanayaga" -
the leaders of Dharma.** This is because they have fully realized Dharma, lived
it perfectly, and are experiencing its ultimate fruits. They are free from any
obstacles or hindrances to Dharma, making them the true leaders of Dharma.
**The hymn also salutes the Jinas as the "Dhammsarhi" - the charioteers of
Dharma.** This is because they themselves practice and guide others in the
practice of Dharma, and they control their senses and help others to do the
same. They are the true charioteers of the chariot of Dharma.  **The hymn
further salutes the Jinas as the "Dhammvarachaurantchakkavatti" - the supreme,
four-cornered Dharmachakravartin (wheel-turner).** Here, Dharma refers to the
practice of right conduct (charitra dharma). This Dharma is pure, free from any
impurities, defilements, or suffering. It is superior to the Dharmachakra
described by the Buddhists, as the Dharmachakra of the Jinas benefits both this
world and the next, while the Buddhist Dharmachakra only benefits this world.
This Dharmachakra is also supreme because it is four-cornered, meaning it ends
the cycle of birth and death in the four realms of existence: hell, animal,
human, and god. It is also like a wheel because it destroys the enemies of the
soul, such as anger, delusion, and false belief. Thus, the Jinas are the supreme
Dharmachakravartins, the founders of the supreme, four-cornered Dharmachakra.
**The hymn then explains that this sixth attribute of the Jinas, their "special
name," is a testament to their special usefulness, which is further demonstrated
by their five other attributes: "Dharmadata" (giver of Dharma), etc.**  **The
hymn then refutes the Buddhist belief that the omniscient (kevala) being does
not know everything, but only knows the "desired" things.** The Buddhists argue
that knowing only the "desired" things is enough for an omniscient being, and
that knowing the number of insects, for example, is irrelevant. The hymn refutes
this by saluting the Jinas as the "Appdihi-varnana-dasan-dharana" - the holders
of unhindered (unbroken) knowledge and vision.  **The hymn explains that the
Jinas are called "unhindered" because their knowledge and vision are not limited
by any substance, space, time, or state of being.** They are permanent and
unlimited. They are also called "unhindered" because they have shed all the
karmic coverings, revealing their true nature, which is characterized by perfect
knowledge and vision. The Jinas are free from all coverings of knowledge and
vision, and they have knowledge and vision of all things.  **The hymn then
addresses the argument of some philosophers who believe that the Jinas are
"chhadmastha" (worldly) even though they are omniscient.** These philosophers
argue that the Jinas, after attaining liberation, return to the world to protect
the Dharma. They say that the Jinas, whose karmic fuel has been burnt and who
have destroyed the cycle of birth and death, return to the world out of fear
that someone might destroy the Dharma they established. This, they argue, makes
the Jinas' liberation unstable, as they are both liberated and worldly.  **The
hymn refutes this argument by saluting the Jinas as the "Viattchhaumanam" -
those who have shed the "chhadma" (worldly) state.** The hymn explains that the
Jinas have shed the karmic coverings that obscure their true nature, and they
have also shed the "chhadma" state, which is the state of being bound by karma
and the impure, worldly state. The Jinas have no reason to return to the world
after liberation, as they have destroyed the cycle of birth and death.  **The
hymn then addresses the argument that the Jinas return to the world to defeat
those who destroy or insult the Dharma they established.** The hymn argues that
this is a foolish and ignorant argument, as the Jinas are free from attachment
and aversion, and they would not be attached to the Dharma or averse to its
destruction.  **The hymn concludes by stating that the Jinas are free from
attachment and aversion, and they are not motivated by any desire to protect the
Dharma.** They are simply liberated beings who have attained perfect knowledge
and vision.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 namotthuNaM kI vyAkhyA yogazAstra tRtIya prakAza zloka 123 kadApi niSphala
nahIM jAtA; pratyuta bhalIbhAMti saphala hotA hai; kyoMki bhagavAn jIva kI
yogyatAnusAra upadeza dete haiN| ataH bhagavAn sacce dharmopadezaka hai| tathA
'dhammanAyagANaM' arthAt dharma ke nAyaka (svAmI) bhagavAn ko namaskAra ho|
pahale kahe anusAra cAritradharma ke svAmI bhagavAn hI haiM; kyoMki unhoMne
dharma ko AtmasAt kiyA hai| unhoMne usa dharma kA pUrNa rUpa se utkRSTa pAlana
kiyA hai, evaM usakA uttama phala bhoga rahe hai| unake jIvana meM dharma kA
vighAta yA viraha | kabhI nahIM hotA; isa kAraNa ve hI dharma ke nAyaka hai|
tathA dhammasArahINaM arthAt dharma ke sArathI bhagavAn ko namaskAra ho|
bhagavAn cAritradharma meM samyakpravRtti aura usakA pAlana svayaM karate haiM
aura dUsaroM se karavAte haiM tathA iMdriyoM kA svayaM damana karate haiM aura
dUsaroM se karAte haiM, isalie ve dharma rUpI ratha ke vAstavika sArathI hai|
tathA 'dhammavaracAuraMtacakkavaTTINaM' arthAt zreSTha cAturaMta
dharmacakravartI zrI arihaMta bhagavAn ko namaskAra ho| yahAM dharma kA artha
cAritradharma smjhnaa| vaha dharma kaSa, chedana aura tApa se atyaMta zuddha
hotA hai| bauddha Adi dvArA kathita dharma cakra kI apekSA se ThIka hai,
cakravartI kA cakra kevala isa loka kA hI hitakArI hai, jaba ki yaha virati rUpa
dharmacakra to donoM loka meM hitakArI hai| isa kAraNa se yaha dharmacakra
sarvazreSTha hai tathA naraka, tithaMca, manuSya aura deva rUpa cAra gati rUpa
saMsAra kA aMta karane vAlA hone se vaha cAturaMta hai| phira yaha viratidharma
raudradhyAna, mithyAtva Adi bhAvazatruoM kA nAza karane vAlA hone se cakra ke
samAna hai| isa taraha bhagavAn zreSTha cAturaMta dharmacakra ke pravartaka
dharmacakravartI haiN| isa prakAra 'dharmadAtA' Adi pAMca prakAra se bhagavAn kI
vizeSa upayogitA batAkara stotavya-saMpadA kI vizeSa upayogI nAma kI unakI yaha
chaTThI saMpadA khii| aba bauddhoM kI isa mAnyatA kA khaMDana karate haiM ki
sarvajJa sabhI padArthoM kA jJAtA nahIM hotA, kevala ISTa tattvoM kA hI jJAtA
hotA hai| ve kahate haiM-jagat kI sabhI vastuoM ko athavA usake bhAvoM yA
paryAyoM ko jAne yA na jAne, sirpha iSTatattvoM ko jAna lenA hI sarvajJa ke lie
basa hai| aise sarvajJa ko kIr3oM kI saMkhyA ke parijJAna se kyA matalaba hai?
unakA khaMDana karane kI dRSTi se kahate haiM. 'appaDihaya-
varanANadasaNadharANaM' arthAt apratihata (khaMDita na hone vAle) jJAna-darzana
ke dhAraka bhagavAn ko namaskAra ho| yahAM para kisI bhI dravya, kSetra, kAla
aura bhAva meM khaMDita na hokara sarvadA sthAyI evaM apratibandhita hone se,
inheM 'apratihata' kahA hai| tathA samasta karmoM ke AvaraNoM kA kSaya ho jAne
se kSAyika bhAva prakaTa huA; usase pratyeka sarvazreSTha vizeSa-bodha rUpa
kevalajJAna aura sAmAnya bodha rUpa kevaladarzana ko dhAraNa karate haiM, ve
apratihatajJAnadarzanadhAraka kahalAte haiN| bhagavAn jJAnadarzana ke AvaraNoM
se sarvathA mukta hote haiM aura unase sabhI viSayoM kA jJAna aura darzana unheM
hotA hai| isameM bhI pahale jJAna aura phira darzana hotA hai; isa kathana kA
kAraNa yaha hai ki jIva ko samasta labdhiyAM jaba sAkAra (jJAna) kA upayoga hotA
hai| tabhI prakaTa hotI haiM. isalie jJAna ko prArthI dI hai| aise jJAna-
darzanayukta Izvara ko bhI kaI dArzanika 'chadmastha' (saMsArI) mAnate haiN|
unakA kahanA hai-dharmatIrtha ke racayitA jJAnI-puruSa paramapada mokSa ko
prApta ho jAne para tIrtha-(dharma) rakSA ke lie phira saMsAra meM lauTa Ate
haiN| 'jinakA karma rUpI iMdhana jala gayA hai tathA jo saMsAra kA nAza kara
cuke haiM; ve punaH saMsAra meM janma lete haiM aura svayaM dvArA sthApita
dharma-tIrtha kA koI nAza kara degA, isa bhaya se mokSa meM gaye hue bhI ve
vApisa lauTa Ate haiN|' isa dRSTi se to unakA | mokSa bhI asthira hai aura
svayaM mukta bhI hai aura saMsArI bhI hai| phira bhI dUsaroM ko mokSa dene meM
zUravIra hai| aho bhagavan! Apake zAsana se bhraSTa logoM para aisA visaMvAda
rUpa moharAjya kA cakkara cala rahA hai! isa mAnyatA kA khaMDana karane ke |
hetu kahA-'viaTTachaumANaM' arthAt AtmA ke jJAnAdi guNoM ko Dhakane vAle
jJAnAvaraNIya Adi karma tathA usa karmabaMdhana ke yogya jo azuddha saMsArI
avasthA-chadma avasthA hai, vaha chadma-avasthA unakI khatma ho gayI hai, ataH
unheM 'viaTTachaumANaM' kahate haiN| jinakI chadmAvasthA calI gayI; una
bhagavaMtoM ko namaskAra ho| jaba taka saMsAra (chadmAvasthA) | naSTa na ho,
taba taka mokSa nahIM hotA aura mokSa hone ke bAda unheM punaH janma lene kA koI
kAraNa nahIM rhtaa| koI kahate haiM ki jaba apane dvArA sthApita dharmatIrtha ko
koI naSTa karatA ho, usakI tauhIna karatA ho, taba usakA parAbhava karane ke lie
ve punaH janma lete haiM; aisA lUlAlaMgar3A bacAva karanA bhI ajJAna rUpa hai;
kyoMki moha-mamatA ke binA tIrtha para moha (Asakti) tathA usake parAbhava ko
sahana nahIM karane se dveSa evaM usake rakSaNa Adi ke vikalpa rAga-dveSa 265

Page #288 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Explanation of Namostuthunam  **Verse 123 of the Third Light of Yoga
Shastra:**  It is impossible to be without delusion. Therefore, these
alternatives are born of delusion. Even if there is delusion, there is
liberation, or even if there is liberation, there is delusion. To praise such
deluded knowers is pure, ignorant, false talk. In this way, by proving the Lord,
who is the holder of uninterrupted supreme knowledge and vision, and who is free
from karma and the world, to be worthy of praise, the seventh wealth, called the
wealth of embodied form, has been explained as consisting of two parts.  Now,
the statement "Bhrāntimātramasadvidyā," meaning "the world is only delusion,
therefore it is unreal and ignorance," considers even the Jina, who considers
all things to be only delusion, as unreal and imaginary in the ultimate sense.
Refuting this, it is said, "Jināṇam jāvayāṇam," meaning "Salutations to the
Jina, who conquers and makes others conquer the enemies like attachment,
aversion, etc." Since attachment, aversion, etc., are experienced by all beings,
they are not delusion, unreal, or imaginary. If someone says that the experience
of attachment, etc., is delusion, then the experience of happiness, sorrow,
etc., of the soul would also be delusion, and the fundamental principle would be
destroyed. Therefore, attachment, aversion, etc., are real, and the Jina, who
conquers them, is also real, not imaginary. "Jāvayāṇam," meaning "Salutations to
the Lord who conquers attachment, etc." The Jina, through his good teachings,
etc., also helps other souls to conquer the enemies like attachment, aversion,
etc.  Those who consider time to be the cause of every action, and who are the
followers of the infinite, do not consider the Lord to be truly liberated from
the ocean of the world. They say, "Kāla eva kṛtsnam jagadāvartayati," meaning
"Time alone causes the whole world to change in all ways." Refuting this, it is
said, "Tināṇam tārayāṇam," meaning "Salutations to the Lord who liberates
himself from the world and liberates others from the ocean of the world." The
Lord has crossed the ocean of the world by the boat of right faith, knowledge,
and conduct. Therefore, he is himself liberated. Because of this, it is not
possible for him to return to the world after liberation. If he returns to the
world, liberation would be invalid. Therefore, the liberated soul never becomes
worldly again. Just as he liberates himself from the world, he also liberates
others. In this way, the Lord is also a liberator.  Those who consider knowledge
to be indirect, not direct, do not consider the Tirthankara to be enlightened or
a giver of enlightenment. They say, "Apratyakshā hi no buddhiḥ pratyakṣo'rthaḥ,"
meaning "We see the object directly, but we do not see the intellect directly."
Therefore, the intellect is indirect to the soul. If it were direct, it should
be seen like an object. Refuting this, it is said, "Buddhāṇam bohayāṇam,"
meaning "Salutations to the Lord who is himself enlightened and who makes others
enlightened." In this world, which is asleep in the sleep of ignorance, the
knowledge of the soul, non-soul, etc., that the Tirthankara has, is self-
realized without the teachings of others. Therefore, he is "Buddha." Knowledge
that does not know itself cannot know the object. Just as a lamp cannot
illuminate itself and another object, knowledge also illuminates itself and
others, i.e., the self and the other. Just as the senses do not see, but still
make the object known, knowledge can also make the object known even if it is
indirect. Because the senses, which make the object known, are in the form of
feelings, and feelings are in the form of sense knowledge, they are direct to
the soul. It is said, "Apratyakshōpalabdhasya nārthadṛṣṭiḥ prasiddhayati,"
meaning "Knowledge that is not directly perceived does not make the object
known." In this way, the Buddhahood of the Lord is also proved, as well as the
ability to enlighten others. Therefore, the Lord is also an enlightener.  Those
who believe that liberation is to become absorbed in the creator Brahma, and who
are the followers of Santapana, do not consider the Tirthankara to be truly
liberated. They say, "Brahmavad brahma-sangatanam sthitiḥ," meaning "The state
of those who merge with Brahma is like the state of Brahma." Refuting their
opinion, it is said, "Muttāṇam moyagāṇam," meaning "Salutations to the Lord who
is himself liberated from the bondage of karma and who liberates others." The
fruit of karma is the wandering in the four states of existence, which is the
world.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 namotthuNaM kI vyAkhyA yogazAstra tRtIya prakAza zloka 123 moha ke binA nahIM
ho skte| ataH ye vikalpa mohajanya hI haiM aura aisA moha hone para bhI unakA
mokSa hai athavA mokSa hone para bhI aisA moha hai; balihArI hai aise mohI
jJAniyoM kI! aisA kahanA ajJAnajanya korA mithyApralApa hai| isa taraha
apratihata zreSThajJAnadarzana ke dhAraka, evaM karma aura saMsAra se mukta
svarUpa vAle bhagavAn ko stotavya siddha karake stotavya saMpadA ke aMtargata
sAkAra svarUpa saMpadA nAmakI do pada kI sAtavIM saMpadA batA dI hai| aba
'bhrAntimAtramasadvidyA' arthAt jagat kevala bhrAMti rUpa hai, isa kAraNa asat
hai aura avidyA rUpa hai; isa kathana se sabhI bhAvoM ko kevala bhrAMti rUpa
mAnane vAle avidyAvAdI zrIarihaMtadeva ko bhI paramArtha se kAlpanika asat
svarUpa mAnate haiM, unakA khaMDana karate hue kahate haiM-'jiNANaM jAvayANaM'
arthAt rAgAdi zatruoM ko jItane evaM jitAne vAle jinezvara bhagavAn ko namaskAra
ho| jIvamAtra meM rAgadveSa Adi anubhavasiddha hone se ve bhrAMti rUpa, asat yA
kAlpanika nahIM hai| yadi koI kahe ki rAga Adi kA anubhava hotA hai, paraMtu
vaha hai bhrama rUpa hI; ra hai; kyoMki svAnubhava bhI kalpanA rUpa mAnA jAya,
to jIva kA jo sukha-duHkha Adi kA anubhava hotA hai; vaha bhI bhrama | rUpa ho
jAyagA; aura isase mUla siddhAMta hI khatma ho jaaygaa| ataH rAga-dveSa Adi sat
hai aura unako jItane vAle | jina hai, ve bhI sat hai, kalpanA rUpa nahIM hai|
'jAvayANaM' arthAt rAgAdi ko jitAne vAle bhagavAn ko namaskAra ho| |jinezvara
bhagavAn sadupadeza Adi ke dvArA dUsarI AtmAoM ko bhI rAga-dveSa Adi zatruoM
para vijaya prApta karavAte haiN| pratyeka kArya meM kAla ko kAraNa mAnane vAle
anaMta ke ziSya bhagavAn ko bhI vastutaH saMsAra-samudra se tire hue nahIM
mAnate; ve kahate haiM-'kAla eva kRtsnaM jagadAvartayati' arthAt kAla hI sAre
jagat ko sarvabhAvoM meM parivartita kiyA karatA hai; isakA khaMDana karate hue
kahate haiM-'tinANaM tArayANaM' arthAt svayaM saMsAra se tarate (pAra utarate)
haiM aura dUsare ko saMsAra-samudra se tArate pAra utArate haiM; aise bhagavAn
ko namaskAra ho| bhagavAn samyagdarzana-jJAna-cAritra-rUpI naukA ke dvArA
saMsAra-samudra se pAra utara cuke; isalie svayaM tIrNa hai| isa kAraNa saMsAra
se pAra hone ke bAda phira unakA saMsAra meM AnA saMbhava nahIM hai yadi ve
vApisa saMsAra meM Ate haiM to mukti asiddha ho jaaygii| ataH muktAtmA phira
kabhI saMsArI nahIM banate ve jisa taraha saMsAra se pAra utarate haiM, vaise hI
dUsare ko bhI pAra utArate haiM, isa taraha bhagavAn tArane vAle bhI hai| jo
mImAMsaka jJAna ko pratyakSa nahIM, apitu parokSa mAnate haiM, ve tIrthaMkara ko
bodha-(jJAna) vAna yA bodhadAtA nahIM maante| ve kahate haiM-apratyakSA hi no
buddhiH pratyakSo'rthaH' arthAt-hamako vastu to pratyakSa dikhatI hai, paraMtu
buddhi to pratyakSa nahIM dikhatI hai| isalie buddhi AtmA se parokSa hai, yadi
vaha pratyakSa hotI to padArtha ke samAna vaha bhI dIkhanI |caahie| isakA
khaMDana karane kI dRSTi se kahate haiM-'buddhANaM bohayANaM' arthAta svayaM
bodha-(jJAna) prApta karane vAle aura | dUsaroM ko jJAna karAne vAle bhagavAn ko
namaskAra ho| ajJAna-nidrA meM soye hue isa jagat meM tIrthaMkara ko jo jIva-
ajIva Adi tattvoM kA jJAna hotA hai, vaha dUsaroM ke upadeza binA hI
svasaMvidita hotA hai; isase ve 'buddha' hai| jisa jJAna se usa jJAna kA jJAna
na ho, usa jJAna se padArtha kA jJAna bhI nahIM ho sktaa| jaise dIpaka svayaM
adRSTa rahe aura dUsare padArtha ko batAye, aisA ho nahIM sktaa| vastutaH dIpaka
jaise apanA aura dUsare padArtha kA, donoM kA jJAna karAtA hai; vaise jJAna bhI
svayaM kA aura anya kA yAnI sva aura para kA jJAna karAtA hai| jaise iMdriyAM
dekhatI nahIM hai, phira bhI padArtha kA jJAna | karAtI hai, usI taraha jJAna
parokSa hone para bhI padArtha kA jJAna karA sakatA hai; kyoMki padArthajJAna
karAne vAlI, jo iMdriyAM haiM, ve to bhAva rUpa haiM aura bhAvendriya jJAna rUpa
hone se AtmA ko pratyakSa hai| kahA hai ki-'apratyakSopalabdhasya nArthadRSTiH
prasiddhayati' arthAt jisa jJAna kI pratyakSa prApti nahIM hotI, usase padArtha
kA jJAna bhI nahIM hotA hai| isa taraha bhagavAn meM buddhatva bhI siddha hotA
hai aura parabodhakartRtva (dUsare ko bodha karAnA) bhii| ataH bhagavAn bodhaka
bhI hai| jagat-kartA brahma meM lIna ho jAnA hI mukti hai; aisA mAnane vAle
saMtapana ke ziSya tIrthakara ko bhI vAstava meM mukta nahIM mAnate; ve kahate
haiM ki 'brahmavad brahmasaMgatAnAM sthitiH' arthAt jaisI brahma kI sthiti hai,
vaisI hI brahma meM milane vAloM kI sthiti ho jAtI hai| unake mata kA khaMDana
karate hue kahate haiM muttANaM moyagANaM arthAt karmabaMdhana se svayaM mukta
hue aura dUsare ko mukta karAne vAle bhagavAn ko namaskAra ho| jisa karma kA
phala cAra gati rUpa saMsAra-paribhramaNa rUpa hai, 266

Page #289 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## A Praiseworthy Description of the State of a Tirthankara After Liberation
**Yoga Shastra, Third Light, Verse 123**  The Lord is free from that strange
bondage of karma, He is accomplished, His work is completely perfected. But to
consider the merging of the world-creator into Brahman as perfection does not
constitute the perfection of the liberated soul. Because, according to their
view, Brahman again creates the world, therefore the work of the soul's
perfection remains incomplete. Not only that, but in the creation of the world,
making one inferior and another superior, attachment and aversion are also
established in Brahman; because how can the state of beings with happiness and
sorrow be created without attachment and aversion? The idea that someone merges
(unites) with someone else is also illogical; because if that happens, then the
existence of that soul is extinguished, it is completely absent. For this
reason, the idea of merging with the world-creator is based on ignorance.
Therefore, it is proven that the soul of a Tirthankara is itself free from
karma, in the same way, it also liberates other souls (by inspiring them) from
the bondage of karma. Therefore, the Lord is himself liberated and liberates
others. In this way, the Lord, being the conqueror and the one who makes others
conquer attachment and aversion, the liberator and the one who makes others
liberate, the knower and the one who gives knowledge, the liberated and the one
who liberates others, is like himself, a giver of happiness to others. In this
way, from these four aspects, the eighth wealth is called 'the one who gives
fruit to others like himself'.  Now, those who believe that 'knowledge arises
from the yoga of intellect', the Sankhya philosophers do not consider the Lord
to be omniscient and all-seeing. They say that 'Buddhyadhwavasitam artha
purushashchetayate', meaning that the soul knows only the meaning that is
considered by the intellect. This means that the soul itself cannot be a knower
and seer; but only through the determination that takes place through the
intellect can it know the object. Refuting their belief, it is said -
'Savvannunam Savvadarisinam', meaning that He knows all things, He is
omniscient, and He sees all, He is all-seeing. Salutations to such an omniscient
and all-seeing Lord.  The nature of the soul is to know and see itself, but due
to the veil of karma, it cannot use its own nature. When the veil of karma is
removed, the soul, through its own nature of knowledge and vision, knows and
sees all things. It is also said that the soul is itself naturally pure like the
moon, the knowledge of the soul is like the moonbeams. Just as clouds cover the
moon, so too do karmic clouds cover the living being. And it is not the case
that knowledge does not arise without the cause of the soul's intellect. In
reality, the cause is useful only until the effect is achieved, after that, it
is not needed. The karmic veil of the living being, as long as it does not
break, as long as the cause of the intellect is needed, but after the complete
breaking of the veil, the knowledge of the soul naturally manifests itself; the
intellect is of no use to it. For one who does not have the power to swim, a
boat etc. is useful; but for one who has manifested the power to swim, a boat
etc. is not needed. Similarly, the Lord's innate qualities of knowledge and
vision are fully manifested, so He does not need intellect, He can know and see
everything without it. Therefore, He is omniscient and all-seeing without the
cause of intellect.  Others also say that knowledge tells the specific qualities
of all things and vision tells the general qualities. Therefore, since they are
not the subject of each other, it is not appropriate to say 'He knows everything
and He sees everything'. Perhaps it is reasonable to say that knowledge and
vision together can know or see everything. The statement that knowledge cannot
know or see independently is also not reasonable, because in reality, there is
no difference between the general and the specific. The object that has the
general quality also has the specific quality. That is, the object that has the
general and specific qualities, its object-like quality is the basis (dharmi) of
both, and from this, the living being knows and sees the same quality through
the nature of knowledge in the form of a relationship and through the nature of
vision in the form of a general form. Because all things become the subject of
knowledge and vision.  Here again, there is doubt that knowledge shows the
specific relational quality of all things, but it does not show the general
quality inherent in them, and vision shows the general quality in all things,
but it does not show the specific relational quality inherent in them. Each of
these two does not know both qualities; rather, it knows only one quality from
both qualities. But those who believe that the knower of one quality is the
omniscient knower, and the seer of one quality is the all-seeing seer, this is
inappropriate. The answer to this is given as follows: 'It is not true to say
this;

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 tIrthaMkara ke mukta hone ke bAda kI sthiti kA stutimUlaka varNana yogazAstra
tRtIya prakAza zloka 123 usa vicitra karmabaMdhana se bhagavAn mukta haiM, ve
kRtakRtya hai, unakA kArya pUrNa rUpa se siddha ho cukA hai| kintu jagatkartA ke
brahma meM lIna ho jAne ko pUrNatA mAnane se siddha AtmA kI pUrNatA nahIM hotii|
kyoMki unake matAnusAra brahmA punaH jagat kI racanA karate haiM, isalie AtmA kI
pUrNatA kA kArya adhUrA hI hai| itanA hI nahIM, paraMtu jagat kI racanA meM eka
ko hIna dUsare ko uttama banAne se brahmA meM rAgadveSa kI bhI siddhi hotI hai;
kyoMki rAgadveSa ke binA jIvoM kI sukhaduHkha yukta avasthA kaise banAyI jA
sakatI hai? koI kisI meM vilIna ho (mila) jAya, vaha bAta bhI asaMgata hai;
kyoMki aisA hone para to usa AtmA kA astitva hI khatma ho gayA, usakA to
sarvathA abhAva ho gyaa| isa kAraNa jagatkartA meM milane kI bAta ajJAnamUlaka
hai| ataH yaha siddha ho jAtA hai ki tIrthakara kI AtmA svayaM karma se mukta
hotI hai, usI taraha vaha dUsarI AtmAoM ko (preraNA dekara) karma-baMdhana se
mukta bhI karatI hai| ataH bhagavAn svayaM mukta hai aura dUsaroM ko mukta
karAte haiN| isa taraha bhagavAn rAgadveSa ko jItane-jItAne vAle, tarane-tarAne
vAle, jJAnavAna eva jJAnadAtA, mukta aura mukta karAne vAle hone se ve apanI
taraha dUsaroM ko bhI sukhaphala dene vAle haiN| isa taraha cAra pada se 'apane
samAna dUsare ko phala dene vAle' nAma kI AThavIM saMpadA khii| aba 'buddhi ke
yoga se jJAna hotA hai', aisA mAnane vAle sAMkhyadarzanakAra bhagavAn ko
sarvajJa aura sarvadarzI nahIM mAnate haiN| ve kahate haiM ki
'buddhyadhvavasitamartha puruSazcetayate' arthAt buddhi se vicAre hue artha ko
hI AtmA jAnatA hai| isakA artha yaha huA ki AtmA svayaM jJAnadarzana vAlA nahIM
ho sakatA; paraMtu buddhi ke dvArA hone vAle adhyavasAya se hI vaha padArtha ko
jAna sakatA hai| unakI isa mAnyatA kA khaMDana karate hue kahate
haiM-'savvannUNaM savvadarisINaM' arthAt samasta padArthoM ko jAne, vaha
sarvajJa aura saba ko dekhe, vaha sarvadarzI hai| aise sarvajJAtA sarvadRSTA
bhagavAn ko namaskAra ho| AtmA kA svabhAva svayaM jAnanA aura dekhanA hai,
paraMtu karma rUpI AvaraNa se vaha apane svabhAva kA upayoga nahIM kara sakatA
hai, jaba karma-AvaraNa haTa jAtA hai, taba jJAna-darzana-rUpa sva-svabhAva se
AtmA sarva padArthoM ko jAnatA dekhatA hai| kahA bhI hai ki AtmA svayaM
svabhAvataH nirmala caMdra-samAna hai, caMdrakiraNoM ke samAna AtmA kA jJAna
hai| caMdra para jaise bAdala ke AvaraNa A jAte haiM, vaise hI jIva para karma
rUpI bAdala chA jAte haiN| aura aisA ekAMta bhI nahIM hai ki AtmA kI buddhi rUpI
kAraNa ke binA buddhi kA phala rUpa vijJAna nahIM hotaa| vAstava meM kAraNa,
kArya kI siddhi taka hI upayogI hotA hai, usake bAda usakI AvazyakatA nahIM hai|
jIva ke karma rUpa AvaraNa, jaba taka TUTate nahIM, jaba taka buddhi rUpa kAraNa
kI AvazyakatA rahatI hai, paraMtu saMpUrNa AvaraNa TUTane ke bAda AtmA kA jJAna
svabhAvataH svataH prakaTa ho jAtA hai; buddhi usake lie koI upayogI nahIM
rhtii| jisameM tairane kI zakti na ho, usake lie naukA Adi upayogI hotI hai;
paraMtu jisameM tairane kI zakti prakaTa ho gayI ho use naukA Adi kI AvazyakatA
nahIM hai| isI taraha bhagavAn meM sahaja jJAnadarzana guNa pUrNatayA prakaTa ho
cuke haiM, phira unheM buddhi kI AvazyakatA nahIM hai, ve usake binA saba kucha
jAna sakate haiM aura dekha sakate haiN| ataH buddhi rUpa kAraNa ke binA hI ve
sarvajJa aura sarvadarzI hai| dUsare bhI aisA kahate haiM ki jJAna sabhI
padArthoM ke |vizeSadharma ko batAtA hai aura darzana sAmAnyadharma ko| isalie
eka dUsare kA viSaya nahIM hone se 'sarva jAnate haiM aura save dekhate haiM;
aisA kahanA ayukta hai| kadAcit jJAna aura darzana donoM milakara saba kucha
jAna yA dekha sakate haiM, yaha kahanA yuktiyukta hai| jJAna svataMtratA se na
to jAna sakatA hai aura na dekha sakatA hai, yaha kathana bhI yukta nahIM hai,
kyoMki vastutaH sAmAnya aura vizeSa ina donoM meM bhinnatA nahIM hai| jisa
padArtha meM sAmAnyadharma hai, usa padArtha meM vizeSa kA bhI dharma hotA hai|
arthAt sAmAnya aura vizeSa dharma jisa padArtha kA hai, usakA padArtha-rUpa
dharma kA AdhAra (dharmI) eka hI hai aura isase usake usI bhAva ko jIva
jJAnasvabhAva se tAratamya rUpa meM aura darzanasvabhAva se sAmAnya-rUpa meM
jAnatA hai aura dekhatA hai| kyoMki sarvapadArtha jJAna-darzana ke viSaya rUpa
banate hai| yahAM phira zaMkA karate haiM ki jJAna se samasta padArthoM kA
vizeSa tAratamya-rUpa dharma dikhatA hai, paraMtu unameM nihita sAmAnya dharma
nahIM dikhatA aura darzana se sarvapadArthoM meM sAmAnya dharma dikhatA hai;
paraMtu unameM nihita tAratamya rUpa vizeSadharma nahIM dikhtaa| ina donoM meM
se pratyeka donoM dharmoM ko nahIM jAnatA; apita. donoM dharmoM se kevala eka
dharma ko jAnatA hai| kintu jo yaha mAnate haiM ki eka dharma kA jJAtA jJAna
sarvajJAtA hai| tathA eka hI dharma kA dRSTA darzana sarvadarzI hai, yaha
anucita hai| isakA uttara yoM dete haiM 'yaha kahanA yathArtha nahIM hai; 267

Page #290 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## A Praiseworthy Description of the State of a Tirthankara After Liberation
**Yoga Shastra, Third Light, Verse 129**  Because the general and specific forms
of Dharma and its fundamental substance form of Dharma are not different, it is
not so. Therefore, the soul, in its secondary form, knows all substances that
have the same general existence in a specific way, and in its secondary form, it
sees all substances that have a specific characteristic in a general way. In
this way, knowledge is the knower of all substances, and vision is the seer of
all substances. In this way, the Lord is endowed with the qualities of complete
knowledge, vision, and virtue. Therefore, they are omniscient and all-seeing.
Even though the soul is considered to be all-pervasive (extensive), those who
believe in the soul's all-pervasiveness after liberation also believe that the
soul is all-pervasive. They do not believe that the liberated soul resides in a
fixed place. They say, "Mukta: Sarvatra Tishthanti Vyomvatta Apavarjita:"
meaning, liberated souls reside pervasively everywhere, like the sky, free from
heat.  To refute that view, they say,
"Sivamyalamaruyamanantmakkhayamvvaabahampunaraavitti- Siddhigai-namadheyam
Thanam Sampattanam." The first word is "Shivam," meaning free from all
disturbances. "Ayalam" means immovable, either by its nature or by any use.
"Aruyam" means free from disease, because there is no body or mind, which are
the causes of disease and pain. "Anantm" means the souls residing there are
endowed with the infinite fourfold of knowledge, etc. "Akkhayam" means this
eternal place is never destroyed. "Avvaah" means a place free from obstacles and
pain due to the absence of karma. "Apunaraavitti" means a place from which there
is no return to this world or taking an avatar. "Siddhigai Namadheyam" means the
place of those whose entire work is complete, who have achieved their purpose,
whose purpose has been fulfilled. That place is called Siddhigat, located in the
fourteenth Raj Lok, in the infinite part, on the front part of the Lok. Due to
the liberated souls going to that place, the excellent "Thanam" called
Siddhigat, meaning the place where pure souls reside, is called "Siddhikshetra"
in the practical sense. As it is said, "Ih Bordi Chaittanam Taththa Gantun |
Sijjhai," meaning by abandoning the last body of this human world, they become
eternally established in the Siddhikshetra.  In the definitive sense, the soul
remains in its original form and enjoys bliss in its own form. They remain in
the state of self-consciousness. No substance leaves its original form. As
mentioned earlier, the adjectives "Shivam," "Achalm," etc., are for liberated
souls. However, due to the non-duality of place and the resident, the
characteristics of the resident residing there are also attributed to the place.
"Sampattanam" means those who attain this place, i.e., those who are completely
free from the karmic state of the world, and whose natural self-nature is
revealed, attain their pure form. If that soul is considered to be all-
pervasive, then, as mentioned above, it cannot attain the Siddhi-place in the
practical and definitive sense. Because, by believing in the all-pervasiveness,
they remain in the same state everywhere, always, and do not change their place.
And their essence is not destroyed by that. They are eternal. This will not
happen exclusively for the all-pervasive soul.  Therefore, their worldly state
is destroyed, and they remain in their own form. There is no change in them.
This confirms that those who are not all-pervasive from the field can attain the
place called liberation or Siddhigat, which is the state of abandoning the
worldly state. Therefore, what is said, "Kayapramanamatma," meaning the soul is
measured by its body, is a true statement. Salutations to such a Lord.
Intelligent souls should salute such Lords.  In this sutra, salutations are
offered at the beginning and end. Therefore, the salutations should be connected
to all the words in the middle. And concluding by stating that only the Arihant
Lords are those who conquer fear, "Namo Jinanam | Jiabhayam," meaning
salutations to Lord Jinendra and salutations to the Arihant Lords who have
conquered all fears. In this way, from "Savvannunam Savvadarisinam" to "Namo
Jinanam Jiabhayam," these three sentences are the ninth wealth, which is the
attainment of the main qualities of knowledge, vision, etc., which are never
destroyed, and the main fruit of liberation. Here, there is a doubt that whether
repeated praise with the same adjectives does not lead to the fault of
repetition? The answer is...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 tIrthaMkara ke mukta hone ke bAda kI sthiti kA stutimUlaka varNana yogazAstra
tRtIya prakAza zloka 129 | kyoMki sAmAnya aura vizeSa rUpa dharma aura usake
AdhArabhUta padArtha rUpa dharma ekAMtaH bhinna hI haiM, aisA nahIM hai| isa
kAraNa | gauNa rUpa meM jinameM sAmAnyasattA samAna hai, aise sabhI padArthoM ko
AtmA jJAna se vizeSa rUpa meM jAnatA hai aura gauNa rUpa | meM jinameM vizeSatA
hai, aise sabhI padArthoM ko vahI AtmA darzana se sAmAnya rUpa meM dekhatA hai;
isa taraha jJAna bhI sarvapadArtha kA jJAyaka hai aura darzana bhI sarvapadArtha
kA darzaka hai| isa taraha bhagavAn saMpUrNa- jJAna - darzana - guNayukta haiN|
isa kAraNa ve sarvajJa aura sarvadarzI hai| aisA hone para bhI AtmA ko sarvagata
(vyApaka) mAnane vAle mukta hone ke bAda bhI AtmA ko sarvagata mAnate haiM; ve
yaha nahIM mAnate ki muktAtmA kisI niyata sthAna para rahatA hai| unakA kahanA
hai- 'muktAH sarvatra tiSThanti vyomavattApavarjitAH' arthAt mukta AtmAe~ AkAza
ke samAna tApa rahita hokara sarvatra vyApaka rUpa meM rahatI hai| usa ma | kA
khaMDana karane hetu kahate haiM-
sivamayalamaruyamaNaMtamakkhayamavvAbAhamapuNarAvitti- siddhigai-nAmadheyaM
ThANaM saMpattANaM | isameM prathama zabda hai 'zivaM' arthAt sarva upadrava
rahita, 'ayalaM' yAnI apane svabhAva se athavA kisI bhI prayoga se jo calAyamAna
na ho, aisA acala hai| 'aruyaM' arthAt rogarahita hai, kyoMki vyAdhi aura vedanA
ke kAraNabhUta zarIra aura mana kA vahAM abhAva hai| 'anaMtaM' arthAt vahAM rahI
huI AtmAe~ jJAnAdi anaMtacatuSTaya se yukta hai| 'akkhayaM' arthAt kabhI nAza
nahIM hone vAlA yaha zAzvata sthAna hai, 'avvAha' arthAt karma nahIM hone se
bAdhA - pIr3A se rahita sthAna hai| 'apuNarAvitti' arthAt jisa sthAna se phira
isa saMsAra meM AnA athavA avatAra lenA nahIM hotaa| 'siddhigaI nAmadheyaM' |
arthAt jinakA saMpUrNa kArya siddha ho gayA hai, jo kRtakRtya ho cuke haiM, jina
jIvoM kA prayojana samApta ho gayA hai, unakA | vaha sthAna caudahaveM rAja loka
ke Upara anaMtaveM bhAga meM loka ke agrabhAga para sthita siddhigati nAma se
pukArA jAtA hai, | karma se mukta AtmAoM kA usa sthAna para gamana hone se
siddhigati, nAma vAlA uttama 'ThANaM' arthAt zuddhAtmAoM ke sthira rahane kA
sthAna, vyavahAranaya se 'siddhikSetra' kahA jAtA hai| jaisA ki kahA hai- iha
bordi caittANaM tattha gaMtUNa | sijjhai arthAt isa manuSyaloka ke aMtima zarIra
kA tyAga karake, siddhakSetra meM jAkara sadA ke lie siddha sthira ho jaate| |
haiN| nizcayanaya se to AtmA apane mUla svarUpa meM hI rahatA hai aura apane
svarUpa meM hI AnaMda mAnatA hai, sarvabhAva | AtmabhAva meM rahate haiM, koI
dravya apane mUla svarUpa ko nahIM chor3atA hai| pahale kahe anusAra zivaM,
acalaM Adi vizeSaNa | muktAtmAoM ke lie hai, phira bhI sthAna aura sthAnI ke
abheda se upacAra dvArA vahAM rahane vAle sthAnI kA lakSaNa sthAna meM bhI ghaTA
dete haiN| saMpattANaM isa prakAra ke sthAna ko prApta karane vAle arthAt
saMpUrNa rUpa se karmakSaya rUpa saMsArI avasthA se rahita hone se svAbhAvika
Atma-svarUpa prakaTa hone se siddha AtmA apanA zuddha svarUpa prApta karatA hai|
usa AtmA | ko vibhu-vyApaka mAneM to Upara kahe anusAra vyavahAra aura
nizcayanaya se use siddhi-sthAna prApta nahIM ho sakatA, kyoMki | sarvagata-
vyApaka mAnane se sadA sarvatra eka-svarUpa meM eka sarIkhI sthiti meM rahate
haiM koI bhI sthAna nahIM badalate haiM aura | usase unakA bhAva svarUpa naSTa
nahIM hotA hai, ve nitya haiN| vyApaka AtmA ke lie aisA ekAMtaH ghaTita nahIM
hogaa| | isalie unakI saMsArI avasthA naSTa ho gayI aura ve apane svarUpa meM
rahate haiM unase heraphera nahIM hotA hai, isase yaha | nizcaya huA ki jo
kSetra se sarvavyApaka nahIM hai, ve hI saMsArI avasthA - tyAga rUpa mokSa
athavA siddhigati nAmaka sthAna ko prApta kara sakate haiN| isalie hI
kAyApramANamAtmA arthAt - AtmA apane zarIra - pramANa nApa vAlA hotA hai; aisA
jo | kahA hai vaha yathArtha vacana hai| aise bhagavAn ko namaskAra ho  /
buddhimAn AtmAoM ko aise bhagavaMtoM ko namaskAra karane | caahie| isa sUtra meM
Adi aura aMta meM namaskAra kiyA hai| isase madhya meM rahe sabhI padoM meM
namaskAra kA saMbaMdha jor3anA | caahie| aura bhaya ko jitane vAle bhI arihaMta
bhagavAn hI haiM aisA pratipAdana karate hue upasaMhAra karate haiM namo jiNANaM
|jiabhayANaM arthAt zrI jinezvara bhagavAn ko namaskAra ho tathA jinhoMne
samasta bhayoM ko jIta liyA hai, una arihaMta bhagavAn ko namaskAra ho| isa
taraha savvannUNaM savvadarisINaM se lekara namo jiNANaM jiabhayANaM taka ina
tInoM vAkyoM | se jJAnadarzanAdi mukhya guNa jo kabhI kSaya na hoMge, aise mokSa
rUpa pradhAnaphala kI prApti nAma kI nauMvIM saMpadA jaannaa| yahAM | zaMkA
karate haiM ki kyA eka hI prakAra ke vizeSaNoM se bAra-bAra stuti karane se
punaruktidoSa nahIM lagatA? isakA uttara 268

Page #291 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Meaning of "Arihant Cheiyaṇam"  **Yogaśāstra, Third Light, Verse 123**
states that "even repeated praise does not constitute a fault of redundancy." It
is also said that self-study, meditation, austerity, medicine, advice, praise,
charity, and the recitation of existing virtues, even when repeated, are not
considered redundant. Similarly, there is no fault of redundancy in this sūtra.
This sūtra is called **"Namutthuṇam"** - meaning "one who causes prostration" -
and also **"Praṇipātadanda-ka Sūtra"** because it leads to the attainment of
nine virtues.   **Śrī Jineśvara Bhagavān** establishes the tīrtha. Before that,
during the time of his birth and auspicious events, **Śakra-Indra Mahārāja**,
seated in his celestial chariot, praises the Tīrthaṅkara-Prabhu with this
Namutthuṇam Sūtra. Therefore, it is also called **"Śakrastava Sūtra"**.   This
sūtra primarily focuses on praising the **Arihant**. However, even if this sūtra
is recited in front of a **Tīrthaṅkaradeva**'s image, with the **Arihant**'s
essence being attributed to the image, there is no fault.   After the
**Praṇipātadanda-ka Sūtra**, many people recite the following verse to pay
homage to the past, future, and present **Jineśvara Bhagavān**:  **"Je a aiyā
siddhā, je a bhavisanti nāgae kāle | Sampada a vatṭamāṇā, savye tiviheṇa vandāmi
||1||"**  **Meaning:** I pay homage with my mind, speech, and body to all the
**Arihant Bhagavān** who have attained liberation in the past, who will attain
liberation in the future, and who are currently dwelling in the world.  After
this, one should recite the **"Arihant Cheiyaṇam"** etc. sūtras while standing
in front of the **Jinapratimā** and performing the **Jinamudra**. One should
understand the **Arihant Cheitya** as the image of the **Arihant**. **Cheitya**
means image. **Chitta** means the inner mind. The state of the mind or its
function is called **Cheitya**. According to the **"Siddhāhaṁśabda-anuśāsan"**,
the word **"Chitta"** takes the **"ṭyaṇ"** suffix, resulting in the word
**"Cheitya"** (7.1.59). In the plural, it becomes **"Cheityāni"**
(**"Cheiyaṇam"**). The images of **Śrī Arihant Bhagavān** evoke a state of
supreme meditative absorption in the mind, hence they are called **"Cheitya"**.
**"Arihant Cheiyaṇam karemi kaussaggam"** means "I perform **kaussagga** to pay
homage to those **Arihant Cheitya"**. Now, we will reveal the secret meaning of
the word **"kaussagga"**:  As long as I perform **kaussagga** with my body, I
remain motionless, and with my speech, I form the **Jinamudra** posture, and
with my silent mind, I contemplate the meaning of the sūtra. I meditate on the
essence of the sūtra. I abandon all other actions.   Why is this **kaussagga**
performed? We will explain:  **"Vandanavattiaē"** - for the purpose of paying
homage, meaning for the sake of the noble inclination of mind, speech, and body.
**"Kaussagga** leads to homage." The clear meaning is: I perform **kaussagga**
with the intention of paying homage, so that I may receive the benefit of
homage.  **"Puṇavattiaē"** - offering incense, perfume, flowers, etc. is called
**pūjā** (worship). I perform **kaussagga** for the sake of this **pūjā**.
**"Sakkāravattiaē"** - offering precious items, clothes, ornaments, etc. is
called **sattkāra** (respect). I perform **kaussagga** for the sake of such
respect.  Here, a doubt arises: A **Muni** is not entitled to perform **dravya-
pūjā** (worship with material offerings). And this offering of incense, perfume,
clothes, ornaments, etc. is **dravya-pūjā**. How can they perform such **dravya-
pūjā**? And **śrāvakas** (lay devotees) perform worship and respect with various
material offerings. So, for them, requesting worship and respect through the
**kaussagga** recitation is futile. Why should it be done then?  We will answer:
It is forbidden for a **sādhu** (holy person) to perform **dravya-pūjā**
themselves, but there is no prohibition against having it done by others or
approving it. There is also no prohibition against giving advice on it or
feeling joy and approval upon witnessing the **pūjā** or **sattkāra** (respect)
offered to **Śrī Jineśvara Bhagavān** by others. It is said:  **"Suvyai a
yairirsiṇā kāravaṇam pi a aṇuṭṭhiyamimassa | Vayagaganṭhesu taha āgayā desaṇā
ceva ||1||"**  **Mahāvratadhārī Vajrasvāmi** himself performed the act of having
**dravya-stava** (praise with material offerings) done, and **Pū. Vācakavarya
Śrī Umāsvātiji Mahārāja** has given teachings on this subject in his writings.
Thus, **sādhu** have the right to have **dravya-stava** performed and to approve
it, but they are forbidden from doing it themselves. And for **śrāvakas**,
performing such **dravya-pūjā** is appropriate for breaking the bonds of the
world. When a **śrāvaka** performs worship and respect themselves, their
devotion increases. Therefore, for greater benefit, they request worship and
respect through **kaussagga**. From this perspective, it is not futile.
Therefore, there is no fault in **sādhu** and **śrāvaka** performing
**kaussagga**.  **"Sammāṇavattiaē"** - **kaussagga** is performed for the sake
of honor. Praise, hymns, etc.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 arihaMta ceiyANaM ke artha yogazAstra tRtIya prakAza zloka 123 | dete haiM ki
'stuti Adi bAra-bAra kahane para bhI punaruktidoSa nahIM hotaa|' kahA bhI hai ki
svAdhyAya, dhyAna, tapa, auSadha, upadeza, stuti, dAna aura vidyamAna guNoM kA
kIrtana bAra-bAra karane para bhI punarukti doSa nahIM mAnA jaataa| isI |
prakAra isa sUtra meM punarukti doSa nahIM hai| yaha namutthuNaM - namaskAra
karAne vAlA hone se nau saMpadAoM vAlA hone se isakA dUsarA nAma
praNipAtadaMDaka sUtra bhI hai| zrI jinezvara bhagavAn tIrtha sthApanA karate
haiM, usase pahale janmAdi - kalyANaka ke | samaya meM apane vimAna meM baiThe
hue zakra - iMdra mahArAja isa namutthuNaM sUtra se tIrthaMkara - prabhu kI
stuti karate haiM; isa kAraNa | ise zakrastava - sUtra bhI kahate haiN| isa
sUtra meM adhikatara bhAva - arihaMta ko lekara stuti kI gayI hai; phira bhI
sthApanA| arihaMta rUpa tIrthaMkaradeva kI pratimA meM bhAva-arihaMta kA AropaNa
karake pratimA ke sammukha yaha sUtra bolA jAya to koI | | doSa nahIM hai  /
praNipAtadaMDakasUtra ke bAda atIta, anAgata aura vartamAna jinezvara bhagavAn
ko vaMdana karane ke lie kitane hI loga nimnokta pATha bhI bolate haiM je a aiyA
siddhA, je a bhavissaMti NAgae kAle  /  saMpar3a a vaTTamANA, savye tiviheNa
vaMdAmi  // 1 //  arthAt :- jo bhUtakAla meM siddha ho gaye haiM, jo
bhaviSyakAla meM siddha hone vAle haiM aura vartamAnakAla meM jo vicaraNa karate
haiM, una sabhI arihaMta bhagavaMtoM ko mana, vacana aura kAyA se vaMdana karatA
huuN| isake bAda jinapratimA ke sammukha khar3e hokara vaMdana karane ke lie
jinamudrA se arihaMta ceiyANaM Adi sUtra bolanA | caahie| una bhAva - arihaMtoM
kI pratimA rUpa caitya ko arihaMta caitya samajhanA  /  caitya kA artha pratimA
hai  /  citta kA artha | hai - aMtaHkaraNa  /  citta ke bhAva ko athavA citta ke
kArya ko caitya kahate haiN| siddhahaimazabdAnuzAsana ke anusAra varNAd
dRr3hAditvAt TyaNi  //  7  /  1  /  59  /  sUtra se citta zabda ke TyaNa
pratyaya lagane se caitya zabda banA hai  /  bahuvacana meM caityAni | (ceiyAiM)
hotA hai| zrIarihaMta bhagavAn kI pratimAe~ citta meM uttama samAdhibhAva
utpanna karatI haiM, isalie inheM caitya kahA gayA hai| arihaMta ceiANaM karemi
kAussaggaM arthAt una arihaMta ke caityoM ko vaMdana karane ke lie kAussagga
karatA huuN| aba kAussagga zabda kA rahasyArtha prakaTa karate haiM- jaba taka
zarIra se kAussagga karatA hUM, taba taka kAyA se nizceSTa | hokara jinamudrA kI
AkRti kA vacana se aura maunapUrvaka mana se ciMtana karatA huuN| sUtra ke artha
kA AlaMbana-rUpa dhyAna karatA huuN| aura isase bhinna kriyAoM kA maiM tyAga
karatA huuN| yaha kAussagga kisalie kiyA jAtA hai? ise batAte haiM| -
vaMdaNavattiyAe = vaMdana-pratyayArtha arthAt mana, vacana aura kAyA kI prazasta
pravRtti rUpa vaMdana ke lie  /  'kAussagga dvArA vaMdana ho  /  spaSTArtha huA
- vaMdana karane kI bhAvanA se kAussagga karatA hUM, tAki mujhe vaMdana kA lAbha
mile| tathA | puaNavattiyAe= gaMdha, vAsa puSpa Adi se arcanA karanA pUjA hai;
usa pUjA ke nimitta se kAussagga karatA huuN| tathA sakkAravattiyAe arthAt
zreSTha, vastra, AbhUSaNa Adi se arcanA karanA satkAra kahalAtA hai  /
tathArUpa satkAra ke lie kAussagga karatA huuN| yahAM zaMkA hotI hai ki muni ke
lie to dravyapUjA kA adhikAra nahIM hai  /  aura yaha gaMdhavAsa, vastra, |
AbhUSaNa Adi dravyapUjA hai| phira ve isa prakAra kI dravyapUjA kaise kara
sakate hai? aura zrAvaka to vividha dravyoM se pUjana| satkAra karate hI haiM,
to phira kAussaggapATha se pUjana- satkAra kI prArthanA karanA, unake lie
niSphala hai| taba phira vaha kyoM kI jAya ? isakA uttara dete haiM- sAdhu ke
lie svayaM dravyapUjA karanA niSiddha hai, paraMtu dUsare ke dvArA karAne athavA
| anumodana karane kA niSedha nahIM hai| usakA upadeza dene evaM dUsare ke dvArA
zrI jinezvara bhagavAn kI kI huI pUjA yA | satkAra - (AMgI) ke darzana karane se
va harSa se anumodanA hotI hai; isakA bhI niSedha nahIM hai| kahA hai ki suvyai
a yairarisiNA kAravaNaM pi a aNuTThiyamimassa  /  vAyagagaMthesu tahA AgayA
desaNA ceva  // 1 //  mahAvratadhArI vajrasvAmI ne dravyastava karAne kA kArya
svayaM ne kiyA hai tathA pU. vAcakavarya zrI umAsvAtijI mahArAja ke graMthoM meM
isa viSaya para dezanA kI gayI hai| isa taraha sAdhu ko dravyastava karAne kA
tathA anumodanA kA adhikAra hai; paraMtu svayaM ko karane kA niSedha hai| tathA
zrAvaka ke lie saMsAra baMdhana tor3ane hetu isa prakAra kI dravyapUjA karanA
ucita | hai| zrAvaka jaba svayaM pUjA - satkAra karatA hai, to usake bhAvoM meM
vRddhi hotI hai| isa kAraNa adhika phala prApti ke lie | kAussagga dvArA vaha
pUjA - satkAra kI prArthanA karatA hai  /  isa dRSTi se yaha niSphala nahIM hai|
ataH sAdhu-zrAvaka ko isakA | kAussagga karane meM doSa nahIM hai| tathA
sammANavattiyAe= sammAna ke lie kAussagga kiyA jAtA hai| stuti-stavana Adi 269

Page #292 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Twenty-four Tava (people's) Sutra text and its commentary The third light of
Yoga Shastra, verse 123, is called respect. Other Acharyas call mental pleasure
respect. Why is this veneration-worship-respect-honor done? This is explained by
Bohillabhavattiaye, that is, for the sake of Bodhilabha, the form of Dharma
obtained by the Arihant Bhagwan, it is called Kaussagg. Why is this Bodhilabha
also? It is said - Niruvassagavattiaye, that is, for the sake of attaining
liberation free from birth etc. upsargas, the benefit of Bodhi. Here there is a
doubt that the Sadhu and Shravak already have Bodhilabha; then why pray for it?
And the fruit of Bodhilabha is liberation; which (liberation) is going to happen
from it; then why pray for it? In answer to this, it is said that the Bodhi
obtained due to a terrible karma-udaya can also be destroyed. Therefore, it is
beneficial to pray for Bodhilabha so that it is not destroyed, and it is also
beneficial to pray for liberation in the next birth. And it is appropriate to do
Kaussagg for this. Even if such Kayotsarga is done, if there is no increase in
qualities like faith etc. with it, then the success of the desired work cannot
be achieved. Therefore, it is said - Saddhae, Mehae, Dhiie, Dharanae, Anupehae,
Vaddamaanie Thami Kaussagg, that is, I do Kaussagg with faith, with
intelligence, with patience, with concentration, with contemplation, for the
increase of all these. The analysis is as follows: Saddhae = with faith. That
is, I do Kaussagg with faith, which manifests in the soul due to the destruction
and pacification of Mithyatva-Mohaniya karma etc., and which purifies the mind
like the Jalakant Mani which purifies water. I do not do it forcibly or for
other reasons; but Mehae with skillful intelligence. Meha means - skillful in
understanding the best scriptures, abandoning the scriptures of sin, and the
intelligence manifested due to the destruction and pacification of Gnanavarania
karma - the power to explain to others. I do Kaussagg with that Meha-
intelligence; not with dullness or with propriety, not without propriety, and
Dhiie with patience. That is, I do Kaussagg with the patience of the mind's
samadhi; not by becoming agitated by attachment-aversion etc., and Dharanae,
that is, I do it with concentration (remembering the qualities) without
forgetting the qualities of Sri Arihant Bhagwan; not with a blank mind, and
Anuppehae, that is, I do it while constantly contemplating the qualities of
Arihant Bhagwan, not without contemplation. And Vaddamaanie, that is, I do
Kaussagg for the increase of this kind. Here, all five of faith etc. are
interconnected and beneficial. If there is faith, there is intelligence, if
there is intelligence, there is patience, with patience there is concentration,
and with concentration there is contemplation; in this way, there is gradual
increase, and Thami Kaussagg, that is, I do Kaussagg. Here again the question
arises that - in the beginning of the Sutra, Karemi Kaussagg was said, then why
was it necessary to say Thami Kaussagg? In answer to this, it is said - your
saying is true, but according to the logic of word-science, what is to be done
in the near (immediate) future, I do it now. This is how the present tense is
used. Satsamipe Sadvad. 5.4.1. According to this Sutra of
Siddhahemashabdanushasan, if the present tense is in the near future, then it is
considered to be the form of the present tense. According to this logic, Karemi
Kaussagg was said in the beginning. By saying this, first there, Bante! Give
permission, now I do Kayotsarga; in this way, permission to do Kaussagg was
sought. That permission is the form of the verb tense, and the text at the end
is, I do Kaussagg now. This is the time of the completion of the action. Since
there is some similarity in both, to tell the beginning of it in the present, it
is said, I do Kaussagg. Here the question arises, is the body completely (in all
ways) abandoned in Kaussagg? The answer to this is - that is not the case.
Earlier, in the Annatha Sutra, it was said that I abandon the activities of the
body other than the causes (agaras) like breathing, coughing etc.; to tell this,
Annatha Ussasienam etc. Sutra is spoken, and in the same way, Kaussagg is done.
Kaussagg is only for eight breaths, and in it, only the Navkar Mantra should be
counted, this is not a strict rule; but this is the goal. If the one who is
doing Chaitya-Vandan is alone, then at the end of Kaussagg, he says 'Namo
Arihantaanam' and completes Kaussagg, and then he praises the Jina Tirthankar
Prabhu in front of whom he has done Chaitya-Vandan. If there are many people
doing Chaitya-Vandan, then one person completes Kaussagg and praises, the rest
of the people do Kaussagg. 27D

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 caturviMzatistava (logassa) sUtrapATha aura usa para vivecana yogazAstra tRtIya
prakAza zloka 123 karanA sammAna kahalAtA hai| anya AcArya mAnasika prIti ko
sanmAna kahate haiN| yaha vaMdana-pUjana-satkAra-sammAna kisalie kiyA jAtA hai?
ise batAte haiM bohilAbhavattiyAe arthAt arihaMta bhagavAn dvArA kathita dharma
kI prApti rUpa bodhilAbha ke lie kAussagga karatA hai| yaha bodhilAbha bhI
kisalie? ise kahate haiM-niruvassagavattiAe arthAt janmAdi-upasarga se rahita
mokSa kI prApti ke lie bodhi kA lAbha ho| yahAM zaMkA hotI hai ki sAdhu aura
zrAvaka ko to bodhilAbha pahale se prApta hotA hI hai; phira usakI prArthanA
kisalie? aura bodhilAbha kA phala mokSa hai; jo (mokSa) usase hone hI vAlA hai;
phira usakI prArthanA kisalie kI jAya? isake uttara meM kahate haiM kisI
bhayaMkara karmodaya ke kAraNa prApta huI bodhi kA nAza bhI ho sakatA hai|
isalie usakA nAza na ho, isa hetu se bodhilAbha kI prArthanA karanA lAbhadAyaka
hai aura janmAMtara meM mokSa prApti ho, isake lie bhI prArthanA karanA hitakArI
hai| aura isake lie kAussagga karanA ucita hai| isa prakAra kAyotsarga karane
para bhI unake sAtha zraddhA Adi guNoM kI vRddhi na ho to ISTakArya kI siddhi
nahIM ho sktii| isalie kahate haiM-saddhAe, mehAe, dhiie, dhAraNAe, aNupehAe,
vaDDamANIe ThAmi kAussaggaM arthAt zraddhA se, meghA se, dhRti se, dhAraNA se,
anuprekSA se, ina sabakI vRddhi ke lie kAyotsarga karatA huuN| kramazaH
vizleSaNa isa prakAra hai-saddhAe=zraddhA se| arthAt mithyAtva-mohanIyakarma ke
kSayopazama Adi se AtmA meM prakaTa hone vAlI aura jala ko nirmala karane vAle
jalakAMta maNi ke samAna citta ko nirmala karane vAlI zraddhA se yA zraddhA ke
hetu se kAussagga karatA huuN| jabarana athavA anya kAraNoM se nahIM karatA;
paraMtu mehAe kuzala buddhi se| meghA kA artha hai-uttamazAstra samajhane meM
kuzala, pApazAstroM ko chor3ane vAlI aura jJAnAvaraNIya karma ke kSayopazama se
prakaTa huI buddhi-dUsaroM ko samajhAne kI shkti| usa meghA-buddhipUrvaka
kAussagga karatA hUM; na ki jar3atA se athavA maryAdA pUrvaka na ki maryAdA
rahita aura dhiie dhRtti se| arthAt mana kI samAdhi rUpa dhIratA se kAussagga
karatA hUM; na ki rAgadveSAdi se vyAkula banakara tathA dhAraNAe arthAt zrI
arihaMta bhagavAn ke guNoM ko vismaraNa kiye binA dhAraNA pUrvaka (guNa smaraNa
pUrvaka) karatA hUM; na ki zUnya mana se tathA aNuppehAe arthAt arihaMta
bhagavAn ke guNoM kA bAra-bAra ciMtana karate hue karatA hUM, na ki anuprekSA se
rhit| tathA vaDDamANIe arthAt isa prakAra kI vRddhi ke lie kAussagga karatA
huuN| yahAM zraddhA Adi pAMcoM paraspara saMbaMdhita hokara lAbhadAyaka hai|
zraddhA ho to meghA hotI hai, meghA ho to dhIratA hotI hai, dhIratA se dhAraNA
aura dhAraNA se anuprekSA hotI hai; isa taraha kramazaH vRddhi hotI hai tathA
ThAmi kAussaggaM arthAt kAussagga karatA huuN| yahAM phira prazna hotA hai ki-
sUtra ke prAraMbha meM karemi kAussaggaM kahA thA, to phira ThAmi kAussaggaM
kahane kI kyA AvazyakatA thI? isakA uttara dete haiM-ApakA kahanA satya hai,
paraMtu zabdazAstra ke nyAya se jo nikaTa (Asanna) bhaviSya meM karanA ho, usake
lie abhI karatA huuN| isa prakAra kA vartamAnakAla kA prayoga kiyA jAtA hai|
satsAmIpye sadvad  /  / 5 / 4 / 1 /  /  siddhahaimazabdAnuzAsana ke isa sUtra ke
anusAra vartamAnakAla samIpa meM ho to vaha vartamAnakAla kA rUpa ginA jAtA hai|
isa nyAya se prAraMbha meM karemi kAussaggaM kahA gayA hai| aisA kahakara pahale
vahAM bhaMte! AjJA dIjie, aba kAyotsarga karatA hUM; isa prakAra kAussagga
karane kI AjJA mAMgI gayI hai| vaha AjJA rUpa kriyAkAla hai aura aMta meM jo
pATha hai, vaha abhI kAussagga karatA huuN| isa prakAra kriyA kI samApti kA kAla
hai| ina donoM meM kathaMcit eka rUpatA hone se vartamAna meM usakA prAraMbha
batAne ke lie kAussagga karatA hUM; aisA kahA hai yahAM savAla uThatA hai ki kyA
kAussagga meM zarIra kA sarvathA (saba prakAra se) tyAga kiyA jAtA hai? isakA
uttara yaha hai-aisI bAta nahIM hai| pahale annattha sUtra meM batAye gaye
zvAsocchvAsa, khAMsI Adi kAraNoM (AgAroM) ke sivAya anya kAyA ke vyApAroM kA
tyAga karatA hUM; yaha batAne ke lie annattha UsasieNaM Adi sUtra bolakara usI
taraha kAussagga krnaa| kAussagga ATha zvAsocchvAsa kA hI hotA hai tathA usameM
navakAramaMtra hI ginanA cAhie, aisA ekAMta niyama nahIM hai; apitu yaha lakSya
rUpa hai| caitya-vaMdana karane vAlA akelA hI ho to vaha kAussagga ke aMta meM
'namo arihaMtANaM' kahakara kAussagga pUrNa karake jina tIrthaMkaraprabhu ke
sammukha usane caityavaMdana kiyA hai, unakI stuti bole| yadi caityavaMdana
karane vAle bahuta se loga hoM to eka vyakti kAussagga pArakara stuti bole, zeSa
vyakti kAussagga 27D

Page #293 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Meaning of the Synonymous Name of the Tirthankaras  In the third light of
Yoga Shastra, verse 123 (meditation), remain steadfast and upon completion of
the praise, complete the Kausagg by saying "Namo Arihantanam" to all. After
that, praise the twenty-four Tirthankaras of the Bharat Kshetra in this present
Avasarpini Kal. Since these twenty-four Tirthankaras have occurred in the same
region and in the same time period of the present Avasarpini, it is absolutely
essential to praise them because they are near and beneficial. From this
perspective, to praise them (Chaturvishati-stava), people recite the Logass. The
meaning of the Logass Sutra, along with its meaning:  Logass Ujjoagare,
Dhammatiththayare Jine | Arihate Kittaissan, Chauchisapi Kevali ||1||  I will
praise the twenty-four Sri Arihants (Tirthankaras) who are the illuminators of
the world, the founders of the Dharma Tirtha, the conquerors of enemies like
raga, dvesha, etc., and the omniscient Kevalis. ||1||  In this verse, the word
"Arihant" is the special noun. Understand its meaning according to the meaning
stated in the Namotthunan Sutra. I will praise those twenty-four Arihants in
"Kittaissan". That is, I will praise them by chanting their names. In the state
of a king, etc., they are called Dravya-Arihants, but here we are to praise the
Bhava-Arihants, so I will praise those who have attained Kevalgyan. By saying
this, the extraordinary knowledge of the Tirthankaras is revealed. To indicate
their number, the use of the words "Chauchisampi" - twenty-four and "api" -
indicates that I will also praise the other Arihant Tirthankaras besides the
twenty-four. How are those Arihants? This is explained - "Logass Ujjoagare",
that is, they are the ones who illuminate the world, which is in the form of
five Astikayas, Dharma Astikaya, etc., with Kevalgyan. Here there is a doubt,
"Does the statement 'omniscient' itself include the concept of being the
illuminator of the world?' Then, why was it necessary to say 'illuminators of
the world' separately?" In response to this, it is said, "Your statement is
true, but the Vijnanadvaitavadis believe that the world is in the form of
knowledge. Without knowledge, no other entity is true. Whatever is seen is in
the form of illusion." Here, refuting this, it is said, "The illuminator and the
illuminated are two different things. That is, the world is the illuminated and
knowledge is the illuminator. Thus, there is the one who illuminates and the one
who is illuminated." To explain this, it is said, "They are the illuminators of
the world." And the devotee who praises the illuminator of the world also
benefits from it. That is, because they are the benefactors of the world due to
being the illuminators of the world, and because the world is benefited by them,
they are worthy of praise. No one praises the one who is not beneficial, so to
explain their beneficial nature, it is said, "Dhammatiththayare", that is, the
ones who establish the Dharma-predominant Tirtha. The meaning of the word
"Dharma" has been explained earlier. Tirtha is that by which one crosses over.
Therefore, the Tirtha that is predominantly Dharma is called Dharma Tirtha,
Dharmamaya, or Dharma-form Tirtha. Where rivers gather, it is called Dravya
Tirtha. To negate such a place and the Dharma-predominant Tirtha established by
Shakyas, etc., the word "Dharma" is used here. That is, Dharma itself is the
holy Tirtha for crossing over the ocean of Samsara. The founders of such Dharma
Tirtha are called Dharma Tirthakaras. Such Arihant Bhagavans, sitting in the
Parshada (Dharma-assembly) filled with Devas, humans, and Asuras, explain Dharma
with their speech, which is endowed with thirty-five qualities, so that everyone
can understand it in their own language. By explaining Dharma in this way, they
establish the Dharma Tirtha. This Dharma Tirthakara epithet reveals the
extraordinary worship and extraordinary speech of the Arihants. Now, their
extraordinary transcendence of suffering and liberation is explained - "Jine",
that is, I will praise the one who has conquered the internal enemies like raga,
dvesha, etc. Revealing the form of that praise, it is said:  Usabhamjiam Cha
Vande Sambhavam Abhinandanam Cha Sumain Cha | Paumppahham Supaasam, Jinam Cha
Chandapphahham Yande ||2||  Suvihim Cha Pushpadantam, Siyal-Sijjans-Vasupujjam
Cha | Vimalamantan Cha Jinam, Dhamm Santim Cha Bandami ||3||  Kunthu Aram Cha
Mallim Vande Munisuvayam Namijinam Cha | Vandami Ritthanemim Paasam Tah
Vaddhmanam Cha ||4||  I bow to Sri Rishabhdev and Ajitnath Jin, and I bow to
Sambhavnath, Abhinandan Swami, Padma Prabhu, Suparshvanath, and Chandra Prabh
Swami. ||3|| I bow to Suvidhinath or Pushpadant, Sheetalnath, Shreyansnath,
Vasupujya,  271

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 tIrthaMkaroM ke anvayArthaka nAma kA tAtparya yogazAstra tRtIya prakAza zloka
123 (dhyAna) meM sthira rahe aura stuti pUrNa hone para bhI sabhI namo
arihaMtANaM kahakara kAussagga pUrNa kreN| usake bAda isa avasarpiNIkAla ke
bharatakSetra meM caubIsa tIrthaMkaroM kI stuti kre| cUMki ye caubIsoM
tIrthakara eka hI kSetra meM aura vartamAna avasarpiNI rUpI eka kAla meM hue
haiN| ataH Asanna (nikaTa) upakArI hone se unakI stuti karanA parama Avazyaka
hai| isa dRSTi se unakI stuti (caturvizati-stava) karane ke lie logassa kA pATha
kahate haiMlogassa sUtra artha sahita : logassa ujjoagare, dhammatitthayare jiNe
/  arihate kittaissaM, caucIsapi kevalI  // 1 //  loka ke udyota kartA,
dharmatIrtha ke saMsthApaka, rAgadveSa Adi zatruoM ke vijetA kevalajJAnI caubIsa
zrIarihaMtoM (tIrthaMkaroM) kI stuti karUMgA  /  / 1 /  /  isa gAthA meM
'arihaMta' zabda vizeSya hai| isakI vyAkhyA namotthuNaM sUtra meM kahe gaye
artha ke anusAra samajha lenaa| una caubIsa arihaMtoM kA 'kittaissaM' meM
kIrtana kruuNgaa| yAnI nAmoccAraNaparvaka stati kruuNgaa| rAjA Adi avasthA meM
dravya-arihaMta kahalAte haiM, lekina yahAM para bhAva-arihaMta kI stuti karanI
hai, isalie jinheM kevalajJAna utpanna huA ho. aise bhAva-arihaMtoM kI stati
karUMgA. aisA kahakara tIrthaMkaroM kA jJAnAtizaya prakaTa kiyA gayA hai| unakI
saMkhyA batAne ke lie cauvIsaMpi-cauvIsa aura api zabda ke prayoga se cauvIsa ke
alAvA aura bhI jo arihaMta tIrthakara hai, unakI bhI stuti kruuNgaa| ve arihaMta
kaise hai? ise batAte haiM-logassa ujjoagare arthAt dharmAstikAya Adi pAMca
astikAya rUpa loka ko kevalajJAna se prakAzita-udyotita karane vAle haiN| yahAM
zaMkA hotI hai ki kevalajJAnI kahane se hI loka-prakAzakatva kA samAveza ho jAtA
hai', phira 'loka kA udyota karane vAle, isa prakAra alaga se kahane kI kyA
AvazyakatA thI? isake uttara meM kahate haiM-tumhArA kathana satya hai, phira
bhI vijJAnAdvaitavAdI aisA mAnate haiM kijagat jJAna rUpa hai? jJAna ke binA
aura koI bhI tattva satya nahIM hai| jo dikhatA hai, vaha saba bhrAMti rUpa hai|
yahAM isakA | khaMDana karate hue kahate haiM-prakAzaka aura prakAzya donoM
alaga-alaga hai| yAnI jagat prakAzya hai aura jJAna prakAzaka hai| isa taraha
prakAza karane vAlA aura prakAzita kI jAne vAlI vasa ka haiN| ise batAne ke lie
hI loka ko prakAzita karane vAle aisA kahA hai| aura loka ke udyotakartA kI
stuti karane vAle bhaktajana kA isase upakAra bhI hotA hai| arthAt loka-
prakAzaka ke kAraNa ve lokopakArI hone se tathA loka unake dvArA upakRta hone se
ve stuti karane yogya haiN| anupakArI kI stuti koI nahIM karatA, isalie unakA
upakAritva batAne ke lie kahate haiM-dhammatitthayare arthAt dharmapradhAna
tIrtha ko karane (racane) vaale|' isameM dharma zabda kI vyAkhyA pahale kara
cuke haiN| tIrtha use kahate haiM, jisake dvArA tarA jaay| ataH dharma kI
pradhAnatA vAlA jo tIrtha hotA hai, vaha dharmatIrtha, dharmamaya yA dharma rUpa
tIrtha kahalAtA hai| jahAM nadiyAM ikaTThI hotI haiM, vaha dravyatIrtha kahalAtA
hai, aise sthAna kA tathA zAkya Adi dvArA sthApita adharmapradhAna tIrtha kA
nirAkaraNa karane ke lie yahAM dharma zabda kA prayoga kiyA hai| arthAt dharma
hI saMsArasamudra se tarane ke lie pavitra tIrtha hai| aise dharmatIrtha ke
saMsthApaka dharmatIrthakara kahalAte haiN| aise arihaMta bhagavAn devoM,
manuSyoM aura asuroM se bharI huI parSadA (dharma-sabhA) meM baiThakara apanI-
apanI bhASA meM sabhI samajha sakeM, isa prakAra kI paiMtIsa guNoM se yukta vANI
se dharma samajhAkara dharmatIrtha kI sthApanA karate haiN| isa dharmatIrthakara
vizeSaNa se arihaMtoM kA pUjAtizaya aura vacanAtizaya prakaTa | kiyA gayA hai|
aba unakA apAyApagamAtizaya batAte haiM-jiNe arthAt rAgadveSa Adi AbhyaMtara
zatruoM ko jItane vAle kI stuti kruuNgaa| usa stuti kA rUpa prakaTa karate hue
kahate haiM usabhamajiaM ca vaMde saMbhavamabhiNaMdaNaM ca sumaiM ca  /
paumappahaM supAsaM, jiNaM ca caMdappahaM yaMde  // 2 //  suvihiM ca
puSpadaMtaM, sIala-sijjaMsa-vAsupujjaM ca  /  vimalamaNaMtaM ca jiNaM, dhamma
saMtiM ca baMdAmi  // 3 //  kuMthu araM ca malliM vaMde muNisuvyayaM namijiNaM
ca  /  vaMdAmi riTThanemiM pAsaM taha vaddhamANaM ca  // 4 //  zrI RSabhadeva
aura ajitanAtha jina ko vaMdana karatA hUM tathA saMbhavanAtha,
abhinaMdanasvAmI, padmaprabhu, supArzvanAtha aura caMdraprabhasvAmI ko maiM
vaMdana karatA hUM  /  / 3 /  /  suvidhinAtha athavA puSpadaMta, zItalanAtha,
zreyAMsanAtha, vAsupUjya, 271

Page #294 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Meaning of the Symbolic Names of the Twenty-Four Tirthankaras  Yoga Shastra,
Third Light, Verse 123: I bow to Vimalnath, Anantnath, Dharmanath, and
Shantijin. ||4|| I bow to Kunthunath, Aranath, Mallinath, Munisuvrat Swami, and
Namijin. ||5|| I bow to Arishtanemi, Parshvanath, and Vardhaman (Mahavira)
Swami. ||5||  The meaning of the above three verses is explained together, and
then the same meaning is explained in detail, i.e., in general and specific
terms, which can happen to the Tirthankara Bhagwan. In this, 1. Rishabhdev =
Ushabh = The general meaning of Rishabh is one who attains the supreme state of
liberation; he is Rishabh. The word Rishabh in Prakrit language is formed from
the sutra "Udd Ritvadau". ||8.1.131|| The other form of Rishabh is Vrishabh. Its
meaning is - "Varshati iti Vrishabhah" i.e., one who showers the world burning
with the fire of sorrow with the rain of teachings; he is Vrishabh. "Vrishabhe
va va". ||8.1.133|| From the Siddhaheim Sutra, by changing "Vr" to "Us", the
form "Ushabh" is formed, and this is its Ushabh form. The specific meaning is -
Bhagwan had the mark (sign) of a Vrishabh on his thigh, and his mother Marudevi
had first seen a Vrishabh in her dream, therefore Bhagwan was named Vrishabh or
Rishabh. 2. Ajitnath - One who cannot be conquered by Parishah etc., therefore
he is Ajit, this is the general meaning. The specific meaning is as follows -
When Bhagwan was in the womb, his mother was playing Chaupad (dice) with the
king. Because the king could not win, the Lord was named Ajit. 2. Sambhavnath -
In whom the thirty-four Atishaya qualities are possible in a special way, or by
praising whom "Shan" i.e., happiness is obtained. In this, according to the
Prakrit rule, "Shan" becomes "Sambhav" from the sutra "Shashosah Sah".
||8.1.260|| This is the general meaning, and the specific meaning is - When
Bhagwan came into the womb, it became possible for more food than expected to be
produced in the country, therefore he was named Sambhav. 3. Abhinandan Swami -
Those who were praised by the Devas, and when the Lord came into the womb, Indra
etc. repeatedly praised the mother, therefore he was named Abhinandan. 5.
Sumatinath - Sumati means - one who has a beautiful intellect. When Bhagwan was
in his mother's womb, the mother had a beautiful intellect that made her decide,
therefore he was named Sumati. 6. Padma Prabh - "Padma Prabh" because of the
radiance like a lotus due to the quality of "Nishpankta", and when Bhagwan was
in the womb, the mother had a dream of sleeping on a lotus bed, which was
fulfilled by the Devas, and the radiance of the Lord's body was red like a
lotus, therefore he was named Padma Prabh. 7. Suparshvanath - One whose side of
the body is beautiful is called Suparshva (Nath). And when he was in the womb,
the mother also had a beautiful body, therefore he was named Suparshva. 8.
Chandra Prabh - One whose radiance is as calm as the rays of the moon is Chandra
Prabh; and at the time of conception, the mother had a dream of drinking moon
water, and the radiance of the Lord's body was as bright as the moon, therefore
the Lord was named Chandra Prabh. 9. Suvidhinath - Suvidhinath Bhagwan was
beautiful and skilled in all matters. When the Lord came into the womb, the
mother became skilled in all matters, therefore the Lord was named Suvidhinath,
and because his teeth were like flower buds, his other name was Pushpadant. 10.
Sheetalnath - One who cools all beings by removing their suffering is
Sheetalnath, and when the Lord was in the womb, the father was suffering from
jaundice, which could not be cured by any means; but due to the influence of the
womb, it was cured by the touch of the mother's hand, therefore he was named
Sheetalnath. 11. Shreyansnath - One who has excellent or auspicious arms etc. in
the whole world is called Shreyans. And when the Lord was in the womb, the
divine bed was used for the first time, and the credit for its use went to the
mother, therefore he was named Shreyans. 12. Vasupujya Swami - Dhar, Dhruv, Som,
Ah, Anil, Pratyay, and Prabhas are eight Vasu-jati Devas, and because they are
worshiped, they are Vasupujya. "Prajnadibhyo'na" - according to this grammar
sutra, Vasupujya, and when Bhagwan was in the womb, Indra worshiped the royal
family with Hiranya (gold), i.e., Vasu, therefore he was called Vasupujya or
Vasupujya because he was the son of the king. 13. Vimalnath - One whose dirt is
gone is called Vimal. Or knowledge 272

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 caubIsa tIrthaMkaroM ke anvayArthaka nAma rakhane kA tAtparya yogazAstra tRtIya
prakAza zloka 123 vimalanAtha, anaMtanAtha, dharmanAtha aura zAMtijina ko maiM
vaMdana karatA hUM  /  / 4 /  /  kuMthunAtha, aranAtha, mallinAtha,
munisuvratasvAmI aura namijina ko maiM vaMdana karatA hUM aura ariSTanemi,
pArzvanAtha tathA vardhamAna (mahAvIra) svAmI ko maiM vaMdana karatA hUM  /  / 5
/  /   /  uparyukta tInoM gAthAoM kA artha eka sAtha kahakara aba usI artha ko
vibhAgapUrvaka. yAnI sAmAnya aura vizeSa rUpa se kahate haiM, jo tIrthaMkara
bhagavAn meM ghaTita ho sakatA hai| usameM 1. RSabhadeva = usabha=RSabha kA
sAmAnya artha haijo paramapada-mokSa ko prApta karatA hai; vaha RSabha hai|
RSabha zabda kA prAkRtabhASA meM ud RtvAdau  /  / 8 / 1 / 131 /  /  sUtra |se
usaho rUpa banatA hai| RSabha kA dUsarA rUpa vRSabha bhI milatA hai| usakA artha
hai-varSatIti vRSabhaH arthAt jo duHkha | rUpI agni se jalate hue jagat ko zAMta
karane hetu upadeza rUpI varSA karatA hai; vaha vRSabha hai| vRSabhe vA
vaa||8|1|133|| siddhahaima-sUtra se vR ko u karane se usaho rUpa hotA hai, usI
kA yaha usabha rUpa hai| vizeSa artha yoM| hai-bhagavAn kI jaMghA para vRSabha
kA lAMchana (cihna) hone se aura mAtA marudevI ne svapna meM sarvaprathama
vRSabha dekhA thA, isalie bhagavAn kA nAma vRSabha athavA RSabha rakhA gayA
thaa| 2. ajitanAtha - pariSaha Adi se nahIM jItA jA sakA, isase vaha ajita hai,
yaha sAmAnya artha hai| vizeSa artha isa prakAra hai-jaba bhagavAn garbha meM
the, taba unakI mAtAjI rAjA ke sAtha caupar3a (pAsA) khela rahI thii| rAjA se
nahIM jItane ke kAraNa prabhu kA nAma ajita rkhaa| 2. saMbhavanAtha- jinameM
cautIsa atizaya rUpI guNa vizeSa prakAra se saMbhava hai, athavA jinakI stuti
karane se 'zaM' arthAt sukha prApta hotA hai| isameM 'zaSoH saH  /  / 8 / 1 /
260  /  /  sUtra se prAkRta-niyama ke anusAra zaMbhava ke badale saMbhava rUpa
hotA hai| yaha sAmAnya artha hai aura vizeSa artha yaha hai-bhagavAn jaba garbha
meM Aye the, taba deza meM AzA se adhika anna paidA honA saMbhava huA, isalie
unakA nAma saMbhava rkhaa| 3. abhinaMdanasvAmI - devendroM ne jinakA abhinaMdana
kiyA hai tathA prabhu jaba garbha meM Aye the, taba iMdra Adi ne bAra-bAra mAtA
ko abhinaMdana diyA thA, isa kAraNa unakA nAma abhinaMdana rkhaa| 5.
sumatinAtha- sumati kA artha hai-jisakI suMdara buddhi ho| bhagavAn jaba mAtA ke
garbha meM the, taba mAtA ko suMdara nizcaya karane vAlI mati-buddhi prakaTa huI
thI, ataH unakA nAma sumati rkhaa| 6. padmaprabha - 'niSpaMkatA-guNa kI apekSA
se padma ke samAna kAMti vAle hone se padmaprabha aura bhagavAn jaba garbha meM
the, taba mAtA ko padma (kamala) kI zayyA meM . sone kA dohada utpanna huA thA,
jise devatA ne pUrNa kiyA thA tathA prabhu ke zarIra kI kAMti padma-(kamala) ke
samAna lAla hone se padmaprabha nAma rkhaa| 7. supArzvanAtha- zarIra kA
pArzvabhAga jisakA suMdara hai, use supArzva (nAtha) kahate haiN| tathA garbha
meM the, taba mAtA ke bhI pAsa meM suMdara zarIra thA isalie unakA nAma supArzva
rkhaa| 8. caMdraprabha-caMdra kI kiraNoM ke samAna zAMta lezyA vAlI jisakI
prabhA hai, vaha caMdraprabha hai; tathA garbha ke samaya mAtA ko caMdrapAna
karane kA dohada utpanna huA thA aura bhagavAn ke zarIra kI prabhA caMdra-samAna
ujjvala thI isalie bhagavAn kA nAma caMdraprabha rakhA thaa| 9. suvidhinAthasu
arthAt suMdara aura vidhi arthAt saba viSayoM meM kuzalatA vAle suvidhinAtha
bhagavAn the| prabhu jaba garbha meM Aye, taba se mAtA ko sabhI viSayoM meM
kuzalatA prApta huI thI, isase prabhu kA nAma suvidhinAtha rakhA tathA inake
dAMta phUla kI kaliyoM ke samAna hone se dUsarA nAma puSpadaMta bhI thaa| 10.
zItalanAtha - sabhI jIvoM ke saMtApa ko haraNa karake zItalatA pradAna karane
vAle hone se zItalanAtha tathA prabhu garbha meM the, taba pitA ko pahale se
pittadAha ho rahA thA, jo kisI bhI upAya se zAMta na hotA thA; paraMtu garbha ke
prabhAva se mAtA ke hastasparza se vaha zAMta ho gayA, isalie unakA nAma
zItalanAtha rakhA gayA thaa| 11. zreyAMsanAtha - sAre jagat meM prazasta athavA
zreyaskara bhujAe~ Adi hone se zreyAMsa khaa| tathA prabhu garbha meM the, taba
kisI ke bhI upayoga meM na AyI, devAdhiSThita zayyA ke sarvaprathama upayoga kA
zreya mAtA ko prApta huA thA, isase unakA nAma zreyAMsa rkhaa| 12.
vAsupUjyasvAmI - dhara, dhruva, soma, aha, anila, pratyaya aura prabhAsa aise
ATha vasu jAti ke deva haiM, unake pUjya hone se vasupUjya 'prajJAdibhyo'Na'
aise vyAkaraNa sUtra se vAsupUjya tathA bhagavAn garbha meM the, taba se vasu
yAnI hiraNya (sone) se iMdra ne rAjakula kI pUjA kI thI, isa kAraNa vAsupUjya
athavA vasupUjya rAjA ke putra hone se vAsupUjya khlaae| 13. vimalanAtha -
jisakA mala calA gayA hai, use vimala kahate haiN| athavA jJAna 272

Page #295 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Praise of Tirthankaras and Siddhas with Respect to Their Fruits and Their
Meaning  **Yoga Shastra, Third Light, Verse 123**  **123.**  He who is pure by
virtue of his vision, knowledge, and other qualities is called "Vimala" (pure).
When the Lord entered the womb, his influence purified the mother's mind and
body, hence the Lord was named "Vimala."  **14.** **Anantnath** - He who
conquers infinite karmas or is victorious by virtue of infinite knowledge,
vision, and other qualities is called "Anantjit." When the Lord was in the womb,
the mother saw an infinite garland of jewels or an infinite, limitless
Mahachakra (great wheel) in the sky, which makes one victorious in all three
worlds. Therefore, the abbreviated name of Anantjit is Anant. Just as Bhima is
called Bhima, similarly Anantjit is called Anant.  **15.** **Dharmanath** - He
who sustains beings who are falling into hell is called "Dharma." When the Lord
was in the womb, the mother became devoted to Dharma (righteousness) like
charity, etc. Therefore, his name was Dharmanath.  **16.** **Shantinath** - He
who is the embodiment of peace, who has the yoga of peace, and who is the giver
of peace to others is called Shantinath. When the Lord was in the womb, his
influence brought peace to the epidemics and other disturbances that had arisen
in the country. Therefore, the son was named Shanti.  **17.** **Kunthunath** -
The word "Kunthu" means "earth" and "one who resides in it." When the Lord was
in the womb, his influence caused the mother to see a heap of jewels, a "Kunthu"
of jewels. Therefore, his name was Kunthunath.  **18.** **Aranath** - He who is
the best, the most sattvic, and born for the prosperity of the family is called
"Ar." The elders named him "Ar." When the Lord was in the womb, his influence
caused the mother to see a heap of jewels, an "Ar" (a heap of jewels), in a
dream. Therefore, his name was "Ar."  **19.** **Mallinath** - He who conquers
the Mallas (warriors) and others. According to the Nirukta (etymology), the
meaning of "Malli" is given as "conqueror." When the Lord was in the womb, the
mother had a dream of sleeping on a bed of fragrant garlands of flowers of the
six seasons, which was completed by the gods. Therefore, his name was "Malli."
**20.** **Munisuvrat Swami** - He who knows or contemplates the three-time state
of the world is called a "Muni." According to the grammar rule "Mne-ru-deti cha-
asya va Unaadi 612," the word "Muni" is formed by adding the suffix "i" to the
root "man" and changing the penultimate "a" to "u." He who has a beautiful vow
is called "Suvrat." Thus, the word "Munisuvrat" is formed. When the Lord was in
the womb, his influence caused the mother to desire to follow the vow of a Muni.
Therefore, his name was "Munisuvrat."  **21.** **Naminath** - He who subdues
(conquers) the enemies and the opposing forces is called "Nami." According to
the grammar rule "Nami-stu va Unaadi 613," the word "Nami" is formed by changing
the penultimate "a" to "i" by an alternative. When the Lord was in the womb, his
influence caused the enemy king who had attacked the city to bow down.
Therefore, his name was "Nami."  **22.** **Neminath** - He who rotates the
Dharmachakra (wheel of righteousness) like the circular "nemi" (rim) of a wheel.
When the Lord was in the womb, his influence caused the mother to see a great
"nemi" (circular wheel) of precious stones in a dream. Therefore, his name was
"Rishtanemi." Just as the word "Apastam" is used for the west, similarly, the
negative prefix "a" is used to negate the word "Rishtanemi," making it
"Arishtanemi."  **23.** **Parshvanath** - He who sees all emotions is called
"Parshva." This is the Nirukta meaning. When the Lord was in the womb, his
influence caused the mother to see a snake in the darkness. Knowing that this
was the influence of the womb, the mother thought, "He who sees is Parshva." He
is also called "Parshva" because he is the lord of the Yaksha who serves him.
Just as Bhima is called Bhima, similarly, Parshvanath is also called Parshva.
**24.** **Vardhaman Swami** - He whose knowledge and other qualities increase
from the time of his birth. When the Lord was in the womb, his influence caused
the prosperity of his family, clan, wealth, and grain to increase. Therefore,
the son was named "Vardhaman." Later, seeing his unparalleled prowess, the gods
named him "Mahavira."  The twelve verses from "Sri Bhadrabahu Swami" (circa
1093-1104) that explain the meaning of the names are mentioned here. Their
meaning is already explained above, so they are not repeated here.  Thus, by
praising the twenty-four Tirthankara Lords by name, we now pray for the
purification of our minds.  **5.** "May the twenty-four Jina Tirthankaras, who
are free from the dirt of karma, old age, and death, be pleased with me, as I
have praised them by name."  **Meaning:**  May the Jina Tirthankara Lords, whom
I have praised by name, who are free from the dirt of karma, old age, and death,
be pleased with me.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 tIrthaMkara aura siddhoMkI phalApekSI stuti aura usakA artha yogazAstra tRtIya
prakAza zloka 123 darzana Adi guNoM se jo nirmala hai, vaha vimala hotA hai
tathA prabhu garbha meM Aye taba unake prabhAva se mAtA kI mati aura | zarIra
nirmala hone se bhagavAn kA nAma vimala rakhA  /  14. anaMtanAtha - anaMta
karmoM para vijaya pAne vAle athavA anaMta | jJAna-darzana Adi guNoM se
vijayavAna hone se anaMtajit kahalAte haiM; tathA jaba prabhu garbha meM the,
taba mAtA ne anaMta | ratnamAlA dekhI thI athavA AkAza meM anaMtarahita
mahAcakra dekhA thA, jo tInoM jagat meM vijayI banAtA haiM, isa kAraNa anaMtajit
kA saMkSipta nAma anaMta rkhaa| bhImasena ko jaise bhIma kahA jAtA hai, vaise hI
anaMtajit ko anaMta kahA jAne | lgaa| 15. dharmanAtha - durgati meM par3ate hue
jIvoM ko jo dhAraNa karatA hai, vaha dharma hai aura bhagavAn jaba garbha meM
Aye the, taba se mAtA dAnAdi dharma meM tatpara banI, isase unakA nAma
dharmanAtha rakhA  /  16. zAMtinAtha zAMti kA yoga hone se, svayaM zAMti -
svarUpa hone se aura dUsaroM ke lie zAMtidAtA hone se zAMtinAtha nAma huA  /
aura prabhu garbha meM the taba | unake prabhAva se deza meM utpanna huI
mahAmArI Adi upadrava kI zAMti hone se putra kA nAma zAMti rkhaa| 17.
kuMthunAthaku arthAt pRthvI, usameM rahane vAle hone se nirukta artha kunthu huA
/  prabhu jaba garbha meM Aye the, taba unake prabhAva se mAtA ne ratnoM ke
kunthu yAnI Dhera ko dekhA thA, isase unakA nAma kuMthunAtha rakhA  /  18.
aranAtha - sarvottama mahA sAttvika, kula kI samRddhi ke lie utpanna hue, ataH
unakA nAma vRddha puruSoM ne 'ara' rkhaa| aura garbha ke prabhAva se mAtA ne
svapna meM ratnoM kA ara arthAt ArA dekhA thA, isase unakA nAma 'ara' rkhaa| 19.
mallinAtha pariSaha Adi malloM ko jItane | vAle; nirukta ke anusAra malli kA
yaha artha kiyA gayA tathA bhagavAn jaba garbha meM the taba mAtA ko chaha RtuoM
ke phUloM kI sugaMdhamaya mAlAoM kI zayyA meM sone kA dohada utpanna huA thaa|
jise devatA ne pUrNa kiyaa| isase unakA nAma | malli rakhA  /  20.
munisuvratasvAmI - jagat kI trikAla avasthA ko jAne athavA usa para manana kare
use muni kahate haiM; manerudetI cAsya vA uNAdi 612, vyAkaraNa ke isa
sUtrAnusAra man dhAtu ke i pratyaya lagakara upAntya a ko u hone se muni zabda
banA tathA suMdara vrata vAle hone se suvrata huA  /  isa taraha munisuvrata
zabda niSpanna huaa| tathA bhagavAn jaba garbha meM Aye taba unake prabhAva se
mAtA ko muni ke samAna suvrata pAlana kI icchA huI, isase unakA nAma munisuvrata
rkhaa| | 21. naminAtha- pariSaha aura upasarga ko namAne (harAne vAle hone se
nami kahalAye, namestu vA uNAdi 613 sUtra ke dvArA vikalpa se upAntya meM ikAra
karane se nami rUpa banatA hai| jaba garbha meM the, taba unake prabhAva se
nagara para caDhakara AyA | huA zatrurAjA bhI nama ( jhuka gayA isa kAraNa unakA
nAma 'nami' rkhaa| 22. neminAtha cakra kI vartulAkAra nemi ke | samAna
dharmacakra ko calAne vAle aura garbha ke prabhAva se mAtA ne riSTaratnoM kA
mahAnemi (golAkAra cakra) svapna meM dekhA thA, isase riSTanemi tathA pUrvadizA
ke lie jaise apazcima zabda kA prayoga kiyA jAtA hai, vaise hI vahAM
niSedhavAcaka 'a' | lagAne se ariSTanemi nAma rkhaa| 23. pArzvanAtha jo sabhI
bhAvoM ko dekhatA hai, vaha pArzva hai, yaha nirukta artha hai, tathA | prabhu
jaba garbha meM the, taba unake prabhAva se mAtA ne aMdhakAra meM sarpa dekhA
thA, yaha garbha kA prabhAva hai, aisA jAnakara pazyati | arthAt dikhAyI de vaha
pArzva hai, tathA pArzva nAma ke vaiyAvRtya (sevA) karane vAle yakSa ke nAtha
hone | bhImasena ko bhIma kahA jAtA hai, vaise pArzvanAtha ko pArzva bhI kahA
jAtA hai| 24. vardhamAnasvAmI se pArzvanAtha nAma pdd'aa| - - jaba se utpanna
hue taba se jJAna Adi guNoM meM vRddhi kI athavA bhagavAn jaba mAtA ke garbha
meM Aye the taba unake jJAti, kula, dhana, dhAnya | Adi samRddhi meM vRddhi hone
lagI, isase putra kA nAma vardhamAna rkhaa| Age calakara inakA atula parAkrama
dekhakara devoM ne 'mahAvIra' nAma rakhA  /  nAmoM ke artha vAlI zrI
bhadrabAhusvAmI - racita yahAM (A. vi. 1093 se 1104) bAraha gAthAe~ aMkita haiM,
jinakA artha Upara kahe hue artha meM AjAne se yahAM para dubArA nahIM likhate
/  isa taraha caubIsa tIrthaMkara bhagavAn ke nAmapUrvaka kIrtana karake aba
citta kI zuddhi ke lie prArthanA karate haiMevaM mae abhitthuA, vihuarayamalA
pahINajaramaraNA  /  cauvIsaM pi jiNayarA, titthayarA me pasIyaMtu  // 5 //
artha :- isa prakAra mere dvArA nAmapUrvaka stuti kiye gaye, karma rUpI mala se
rahita aura jarA aura maraNa se mukta cauvIsa jinavara zrI tIrthaMkara mujha
para prasanna ho ||5|| evaM=isa taraha mayA=mere dvArA, abhitthuA= nAmollekha
pUrvaka maiMne jinakI stuti kI hai, ve jinezvara tIrthaMkaradeva mujha 273 - --

Page #296 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Hymn to the Agamas (Praise of the Pukkhavāri-davvaḍḍe)  Be pleased with the
third light of the Yogaśāstra, verse 123.  I request a special explanation of
the words used in this verse - those who have removed the karma-like actions in
the form of vihuaraya-mala, raj, and mala.  Karma that binds is called raj, and
karma that was bound before is called mala.  Or, bound karma is called raj, and
released karma is called mala.  Or, understand that karma that binds in the
state of being free from attachment (vītarāga) due to actions like coming and
going is called raj, and karma that binds in the state of attachment (sarāga)
due to the arising of passions is called mala.  Therefore, those who have
destroyed karma in the form of raj and mala, and because of this, their jara-
maraṇa (aging and death) etc., which are the suffering caused by the absence of
the cause in the form of karma (pahiṇa-jaramana), have been destroyed.  May the
twenty-four (cauvīsampi) - that is, the twenty-four Tirthankaras starting with
Rishabha, and the word "api" (also) indicates other Jina-varas (Jina-swamis) -
that is, the Jinas like Śruta-kevali, who are the most excellent omniscient
ones, and the Tīrthayaras (Tirthankaras) who established the pilgrimage sites,
be pleased with me.  Although the Tirthankara Bhagavans are free from attachment
and aversion, they are not pleased by praise or displeased by criticism.
However, the one who praises will definitely receive the fruit of praise, and
the one who criticizes will definitely receive the fruit of criticism.  Just as
there is no attachment or aversion in the Cintamani gem, mantras, etc., but
still, one receives the fruit of worship in the form of benefit and the fruit of
non-worship in the form of harm.  The same should be understood for the Śrī-
vītarāga Kevali Bhagavans, etc.  We have said in the Śrī-vītarāga Stotra: "How
can fruit be obtained from those who are not pleased?"  It is not appropriate to
imagine this.  Do not the inert Cintamani, etc., give fruit?  Then, there is
doubt here: if the Tirthankaras are not pleased by praise, then it is pointless
to pray for their pleasure.  Why should such pointless talk be uttered?  In
response to this, it is said: "This is not the case, because there is no fault
in saying this out of devotion."  It is also said: "Even though the Vītarāga
Bhagavans, who have weak passions, may not be pleased, praising them is not
fruitless, because praising purifies the emotions and also destroys karma.
Therefore, the purpose of the praiser is fulfilled."  And:  > "Kittīya-vandiya-
mahiya, je a loggas uttama siddha.  Āruggabohilābhaṁ samāhivaramuttamaṁ dintu."
|| 6 ||  > "I praise those who have become the most excellent Siddhas in the
world, with my mind, speech, and body.  May they grant me health, knowledge, and
the highest samadhi through praise, worship, and adoration." || 6 ||  >
"Kittīya" means praising by name, "vandiya" means praising properly with all
three yogas (mind, speech, and body), "mahiya" means worshipping with flowers,
etc.  There is also a variant reading "maīya" in some places.  Its Sanskrit form
is "mayaka" - "maya" (by me), "kīrtita" (praised), "vandita" (worshipped), and
"stuta" (praised).  Who is that?  It is said: "Je a loggas uttama" - those who
are the best in the world of living beings because their karma-mala has been
destroyed, and "siddha" - those who have become Siddhas, who have achieved their
goal.  May they give me "ārugg-bohilābhaṁ" - health in the form of liberation
and the knowledge that is the cause of it, the right faith (samyag-dharma)
taught by the Arhats.  Such dharma is practiced only for the attainment of
liberation, without any desire for worldly, material happiness.  This is truly
considered dharma.  Therefore, it is appropriate to pray for knowledge for
liberation and for "samāhivara" - the state of perfect mental health, the
samadhi of equanimity of the soul, "uttamaṁ" - the highest samadhi, which is
free from all distinctions and differences, "dintu" - may they grant it.  Even
though the Vītarāga Prabhus are not pleased, it is appropriate to pray like this
out of devotion.  It is also said: "The Śrī-vītarāga, who have weak attachment
and aversion, do not give samadhi or the seed of enlightenment.  However,
praying like this out of devotion is a form of "asatyāmṛṣā" - a polite way of
speaking.  In the world, polite language is spoken in all interactions.
Therefore, this prayer, being a form of devotion, is beneficial."  And:  >
"Candesu nimmalayara, āicchesu ahiyaṁ pāyasayara.  Sāgaravaragambhīra, siddha
siddhiṁ mama disantu." || 7 ||  > "May the Siddha Bhagavans, who are more pure
than the moons, more radiant than the suns, and deeper than the vast ocean,
grant me the state of Siddhi." || 7 ||  > "Candesu" - in the moons.  From the
sūtra "pañcamyāstṛtīyā" || 8 || 3 || 136 ||, the seventh case is used in the
sense of the fifth case in the Prakrit language.  Therefore, in Sanskrit,
"Candrebhyaḥ" should be understood in place of "Candesu."  "Nimmalayara" -
extremely pure, that is, more pure than many moons because all karma-mala has
been destroyed.  There is also a variant reading "Candesu" in some places.
"Āicchesu ahiyaṁ pāyasayara" - more radiant than many suns.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama stuti (pukkhavarIdavaDDe kI stuti) yogazAstra tRtIya prakAza zloka 123
para prasanna ho| isa gAthA meM prayukta zabdoM ke vizeSa varNana karane ke lie
kahate haiM - vihuarayamalA raja aura mala rUpI karmoM ko jinhoMne dUra kiyA
hai| baMdhate hue karmoM ko raja aura pahale baMdhe hue karmoM ko mala kahate
haiN| athavA baddhakama ko raja aura nikAcita karmoM ko mala kahate haiN| athavA
gamanAgamana Adi kriyA se vItarAgadazA meM baMdhate hue karmoM ko raja aura
sarAga avasthA meM kaSAya ke udaya se baMdhate hue karmoM ko mala samajhanA  /
ataH raja aura mala rUpa karmoM ko jinhoMne naSTa kara diyA hai aura isase hI
pahINa - jaramaNA arthAt karma rUpI kAraNa ke abhAva meM jinake jarA-maraNa Adi
| duHkha naSTa gaye haiN| ve cauvIsaMpi arthAt RSabha Adi cauvIsa aura api zabda
se anya bhI jiNavarA arthAt jinezvara | bhgvaan| yAnI zrutakevalI Adi jinoM meM
utkRSTa kevalajJAnI hone se mukhya aura titthayarA arthAt tIrtha kI sthApanA
karane vAle tIrthaMkara deva 'me' arthAt mujha para pasIyaMtu prasanna ho  /
yadyapi tIrthaMkara bhagavAn rAga-dveSa se rahita haiM, isalie unakI stuti
karane se ve tuSTa athavA niMdA karane se ruSTa nahIM hote phira bhI stuti
karane vAle ko stuti kA phala aura niMdA karane vAle ko niMdA kA phala avazya
milatA hai| jaise ciMtAmaNi ratna, maMtra Adi meM rAga-dveSa nahIM hone para bhI
unakI ArAdhanA karane se lAbha aura virAdhanA karane se hAni ke rUpa meM phala
avazya milatA hai| aisA hI zrIvItarAga | kevalI bhagavAn Adi ke lie samajhanA
caahie| hamane zrI vItarAga stotra meM kahA hai- jo prasanna nahIM hote unakI
ora | se phala kisa taraha se mila sakatA hai? yaha kalpanA karanA ucita nahIM
/  kyA jar3a ciMtAmaNi Adi phala nahIM dete? to yahAM phira zaMkA kI jAtI hai ki
yadi stuti karane se tIrthaMkara prasanna nahIM hote to phira prasanna ho aisI
prArthanA karanA vyartha hai; aisA vyartha pralApa kyoM kiyA jAya? isake uttara
meM kahate haiM- aisI bAta nahIM hai, kyoMki bhaktivaza aisA kahane meM doSa
nahIM hai| kahA bhI hai- kSINakleza vAle vItarAga bhagavAn cAhe prasanna na hote
hoM, phira bhI unakI stuti karanA niSphala nahIM hai, kyoMki stuti karane se
bhAvoM kI zuddhi to hotI hI hai, karmoM kI nirjarA bhI hotI hai| ataH stotA kA
apanA prayojana saphala hotA hai  /  tathA kittiya-vaMdiya-mahiyA, je e logassa
uttamA siddhA  /  AruggabohilAbhaM samAhivaramuttamaM diMtu  // 6 //  jo loka
meM sarvottama siddha ho gaye haiM, una tIrthaMkara bhagavAn kI maiM mana,
vacana aura kAyA se stuti karatA huuN| kIrtana-vaMdana - stavana se ve mujhe
Arogya, bodhilAbha aura uttama samAdhi pradAna kareM  /  /  6  /  /  kittiya
arthAt pratyeka kA nAma pUrvaka kIrtana karane se, vaMdiya arthAt tInoM yoga
(mana, vacana aura kAyA) se samyak prakAra se stuti karane se mahiyA arthAt
puSpAdi se pUjA karane se, kisI sthAna para maiyA aisA pAThAMtara hai, usakA
saMskRta meM rUpa hotA hai - mayakA - mayA arthAt mere dvArA, kIrtita, vaMdita
aura stuta (stuti kiye hue) aise kauna? use kahate haiM - je e logassa uttamA
arthAt jo karmamala naSTa ho jAne se sarva jIva loka meM uttama haiM aura siddhA
arthAt siddha ho cuke haiM, kRtakRtya ho gaye haiN| ve ArUgga-bohilAbhaM arthAt
Arogya svarUpa mokSa aura isakA kAraNabhUta bodhilAbha arihaMta-praNIta
samyagdharma prApti mujhe deN| aisA dharma kisI bhI sAMsArika paudgalika sukha
kI abhilASA ke binA kevala mokSa prApti ke lie hI kiyA jAtA hai| vahI vAstava
meM dharma mAnA jAtA hai| ataH mokSa ke lie bodhilAbha kI prArthanA karanA aura
usake lie 'samAhivara' arthAt parama svastha citta rUpa bhAvasamAdhi arthAt AtmA
kA samabhAva, uttamaM vaha bhI aneka bheda vAle tAratamyabhAva se rahita
sarvotkRSTa samAdhi diMtu arthAt pradAna kareM; aisI vItarAga prabhu ke prasanna
na hone para bhI bhakti se prerita hokara aisI prArthanA karanA yuktiyukta hai|
kahA bhI hai- kSINarAgadveSa vAle zrIvItarAga samAdhi | athavA bodhibIja nahIM
dete; phira bhI bhakti se isa taraha kI prArthanA karanA; asatyAmRSA rUpa
vyavahArabhASA hai| jagat meM sabhI vyavahAroM meM vyavahArabhASA bolI jAtI hai|
isalie yaha prArthanA bhakti rUpa hone lAbhadAyaka hai| tathA caMdesu
nimmalayarA, Aiccesu ahiyaM payAsayarA  /  sAgaravaragaMbhIrA, siddhA siddhiM
mama disaMtu  // 7 //  artha :caMdroM se bhI adhika nirmala, sUryo se bhI adhika
prakAza karttA svayaMbhUramaNa samudra se bhI adhika gaMbhIra siddha bhagavAn
mujhe siddhipada deM  /  / 7 /  /  caMde meM paJcamyAstRtIyA  /   /  8  /   /  3
/  136  /   /  isa sUtra se prAkRtabhASA meM paMcamI vibhakti ke artha meM
saptamI prayukta huI | hai| isalie caMdesu ke sthAna para saMskRta meM
caMdrebhyaH jAnanA  /  nimmalayarA = atinirmala arthAt sAre karmamala nAza ho
jAne se aneka caMdroM se bhI atinirmala  /  kahIM caMdehiM aisA pAThAMtara bhI
hai| Aiccesu ahiyaM payAsayarA arthAt aneka sUryo 274

Page #297 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Praise of the Agamas  **Yoga Shastra, Third Light, Verse 123**  The one who
illuminates more than light itself. The sun illuminates limited areas; while the
Arihant, like the sun of pure knowledge, illuminates all substances in the Lok
and Alok with his light. It is also said: The radiance of the moon, sun, and
planets illuminates a finite area; but the radiance of pure knowledge
illuminates the Lok and Alok completely. (A. Ni. 112) And like the deep ocean,
unperturbed by the waves, the upsurges, etc., profound like the self-existent
ocean of mind, the Siddha, free from karma, having achieved their goal, may the
Siddha Bhagavan grant me Siddhi, the supreme state of liberation.  In this way,
after praising the twenty-four Jineshwara Bhagavans, to perform the act of
bowing down to the Tirthankara images present in the entire world, and to
perform Kayotsarga, the recitation from Savvaloe Arihant-Cheiaanam Karemi
Kaussaggham to Appaanam Vosirami is done. Its meaning has been explained earlier
in Arihant Cheiaanam and Annatha Sutra. Only the meaning of the word Savvaloe
was not explained. The meaning of Savvaloe is: the upper world, the lower world,
and the intermediate world. Of these three worlds, the lower world contains the
abodes of Chamendra, etc., the intermediate world contains islands, mountains,
and celestial vehicles, and the upper world contains the Saudharma Devalok,
etc., where the eternal Jina images are located. In every temple, the original
image is the cause of Samadhi, therefore, first, praise the original deity, and
then, since the qualities of all Arihants are the same, embrace all the
Tirthankara images of the entire world and perform Kaussaggham. After that, say
Namo Arihantaanam, and offer general praise to all the Tirthankaras. Because, if
Kaussaggham is performed for someone else and praise is offered to someone else,
it is a fault of excessive connection, which is not considered appropriate.
Therefore, one should offer general praise to all the Tirthankara Bhagavans.
Now, one should praise the Samyak Shruta, like a lamp, which enables one to
clearly understand those Arihants and the meanings conveyed by them. The speaker
of that Shruta, the omniscient Arihant Bhagavan, is praised first:  **Pukkhara
Varadivede Dhayi Sande A Jambuddiye A. Bharahera Vay-Videhe Dhamma Gare Namasami
||1||**  **Meaning:**  I bow down to the Sri Tirthankaras who established the
Shruta Dharma in the Bharat, Airavat, and Mahavideha realms of karma, present in
the half-continent of the Pushkaravar, the Dhataki Khand, and the Jambudvipa.
||1||  **Explanation:**  * Bharahera Vay-Videhe - meaning, the Bharat region,
the Airavat region, and the Mahavideha region. Here, by combining the words
Bharat, Airavat, and Videha, the word Bharatairavatavideha is formed. Dhamma
means Shruta Dharma, Aigare means the one who established it in the sutras. The
Tirthankara Bhagavan who established the Shruta Dharma in the sutras, I bow down
to him. Where are these regions located? It is said: * Pukkhara Varadivede - It
is called Pushkaravar because it is superior to the lotus flower. It is the
third island from the Jambudvipa. Inside it, there is the Manushottara mountain
in the half-continent, therefore, it is called Pushkaravar-ardha. There are two
Bharat, two Airavat, and two Mahavideha regions, making a total of six regions.
* Dhayi Sande - meaning, the section of the Dhataki trees. It is called Dhataki
Khand because it is abundant in Dhataki trees. There are two Bharat, two
Airavat, and two Mahavideha regions, making a total of six regions. * Jambuddive
- meaning, the Jambudvipa, where Jambudvipa trees are predominant. There is one
Bharat, one Airavat, and one Mahavideha region, making a total of three regions.
* All together, there are 6 + 6 + 3 = 15 realms of karma; the rest is the realm
of non-karma. Therefore, it is said: Bharatairavatavideha: karmabhumyo'nyatra
devakuruttara kurubhyah (Tattvarth Sutra 3-16) meaning, except for Devakuru and
Uttarakuru, the Bharat, Airavat, and Mahavideha regions are realms of karma.
Here, the Pushkaravar is mentioned first, then the Dhataki region, and then the
Jambudvipa, in reverse order. This is done to indicate the vastness and
importance of those regions. The word Dhammaigare (establisher of Dharma)
refutes the opinion of those who consider the words of the Bhagavan to be non-
human and eternal. We have already discussed this argument, so understand it
from there. * Question: How can you say that the Tirthankaras established
Dharma? Because, the Arihants become Arihants only after the words of that
Shruta knowledge, which proves that Shruta knowledge was eternal, before the
Arihant Bhagavan. * Answer: It is not like that; Shruta knowledge and the
Tirthankara Bhagavan are related as cause and effect, like a seed and a sprout.
Just as a seed produces a sprout and a sprout produces a seed, similarly, the
Bhagavan also attained Tirthankaratva in the third bhava (birth) by practicing
Shruta Dharma, and from Tirthankaratva, they became the establishers of Shruta
Dharma. There is no objection in saying this. It is not a rule that one becomes
an Arihant only after Shruta knowledge, because even in the absence of Shruta
Dharma for Marudevi, etc.,  275

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama kI stuti yogazAstra tRtIya prakAza zloka 123 ke prakAza se bhI adhika
prakAzakarttA  /  sUrya sImita kSetroM meM prakAza karate haiM; jabaki arihaMta
kevalajJAna rUpI sUrya ke | prakAza se lokAloka ke sabhI padArthoM ko prakAzita
karate haiN| kahA bhI hai- caMdramA, sUrya aura grahoM kI prabhA parimitakSetra
meM prakAza karatI hai; kintu kevalajJAna kI prabhA to loka- aloka ko sarvathA
prakAzita karatI hai| ( A. ni. 112) tathA sAgaravaragaMbhIrA arthAt pariSahoM,
upasargoM Adi se kSubdha na hone vAle, svayaMbhUramaNasamudra ke samAna
gaMbhIra, siddhA arthAt | karmarahita hone se kRtakRtya hue siddhabhagavAn
siddhiM mama disaMtu arthAt paramapada - mokSa mujhe deN| isa taraha caubIsa
jinezvara bhagavaMtoM kI stuti karake sAre jagat meM vidyamAna tIrthaMkara
pratimAoM ko vaMdana Adi karane ke lie, kAyotsarga karane ke hetu savvaloe
arihaMta-ceiANaM karemi kAussaggaM se lekara appANaM vosirAmi taka kA pATha
bole, isakA artha, arihaMta ceiANaM aura annatthasUtra meM pahale kaha Aye haiN|
kevala savvaloe zabda kA artha nahIM kahA gayA thA  /  savvaloe kA artha hai-
Urdhvaloka, adholoka aura tiryak-loka  /  ina tInoM lokoM meM se adholoka meM
camarendra Adi ke bhavana haiM, tiryakloka meM dvIpa, parvata aura jyotiSka
vimAna haiM aura Urdhvaloka meM saudharma devaloka | Adi ke vimAna hai, jahAM
zAzvata jinapratimAe~ haiN| pratyeka maMdira meM mUla pratimA samAdhi kA kAraNa
rUpa hone se, sarvaprathama | mUlanAyaka kI stuti karake, tatpazcAt sabhI
arihaMtoM ke guNa eka sarIkhe hone se, samagra loka ke samasta tIrthaMkaroM kI
sarvapratimAoM kA grahaNa karake kAussagga krnaa| usake bAda namo arihaMtANaM
kahakara sarvatIrthaMkaroM kI sAdhAraNa stuti | bolnaa| kyoMki kAussagga kisI
aura kA kiyA jAya aura stuti kisI anya kI bolI jAya to atiprasaMga doSa hotA
hai; jo ucita nahIM mAnA jaataa| isalie sabhI tIrthaMkara bhagavaMtoM kI
sAdhAraNa (Common) stuti karanI caahie| aba jisase una arihaMtoM aura unake
dvArA kahe hue bhAvoM ko spaSTa rUpa se jAna sakeM, aise dIpaka ke samAna |
samyak zruta kI stuti karanI caahie| usa zruta ke vaktA AptapuruSa arihaMta
bhagavAn kI sarvaprathama stuti karate haiMpukkharavaradIvaDhe dhAyaisaMDe a
jaMbUdIye a  /  bharaheravaya - videhe dhammA gare nama'sAmi  // 1 //  artha :
puSkaravadvIpa ke ardhadvIpa meM, dhAtakIkhaMDa aura jaMbUdvIpa meM vidyamAna
bharata, airAvata aura mahAvideha rUpa karmabhUmiyoM meM zruta dharma kI Adi
karane vAle zrI tIrthaMkaroM ko namaskAra karatA hUM  // 1 //  vyAkhyA :- *
bharaheravayavidehe - arthAt, bharatakSetra, airAvatakSetra aura mahAvideha
kSetra meM yahAM samAhAradvaMdva samAsa karane aura bhImasena kA bhIma kI taraha
saMkSipta rUpa karane se bharatairAvatavideha zabda banA hai| dhammA yAnI zruta
dharma ke Aigare | arthAt sUtra meM Adi karane vAle tIrthaMkara bhagavAn ko
nama'sAmi=namaskAra karatA huuN| ukta kSetra kahAM-kahAM hai? ise khte| | haiM -
pukkharavaradIvaDDhe = use puSkaravara isalie kahA hai ki vaha padmakamala se
bhI zreSTha hai| yaha jaMbUdvIpa se tIsarA dvIpa hai| | usake aMdara AdhebhAga
meM mAnuSottara parvata hai, isalie use puSkaravaradvIpArdha kahA hai, usameM do
bharata, do airAvata aura | do mahAvideha kSetra, yoM chaha kSetra haiN|
dhAyaIsaMDe arthAt dhAtakI nAma ke vRkSoM kA khaMDa  /  usa vana meM
dhAtakIvRkSoM kA bAhulya | hone se usakA nAma dhAtakIkhaMDa hai| usameM do
bharata, do airAvata, do mahAvideha aise chaha kSetra hai tathA jaMbUdIve=jaMbU
nAma ke vRkSoM kI pradhAnatA hone se isakA nAma jaMbUdvIpa hai| eka bharata, eka
airAvata aura eka mahAvideha aise tIna kSetra hai| sabhI | milAkara 6+6 + 3 = 15
karmabhUmiyAM haiM; zeSa akarmabhUmi hai| isalie kahA hai- bharaterAvatavidehAH
karmabhUmayo'nyatra devakurUttarakurubhyaH (tattvArtha sUtra 3-16) arthAt
devakuru aura uttarakuru ke sivAya bharata, airAvata aura mahAvideha - kSetra
karmabhUmiyAM haiN| yahAM para pahale puSkaravara bAda meM dhAtakIkSetra aura
usake bAda jaMbUdvIpa isa taraha vyUtkrama se jo kahA hai; vaha una kSetroM kI
vizAlatA va mukhyatA batAne kI dRSTi se kahA hai| bhagavadvacanoM ko jo
apauruSeya va anAdi mAnate haiM; unake mata kA khaMDana dhammAigare (dharma ke
AdikartA ) zabda se kiyA gayA hai, usa para tarka-vitarka hama pahale kara cuke
haiM, vahIM se samajha lenA  /  prazna hai - tIrthaMkara dharma kI Adi karane
vAle haiM; yaha kaise kaha sakate haiM? kyoMki tappuvviA arahayA arthAt usa
zrutajJAna ke vacana pUrvaka hI arihaMta hote haiM, isase siddha huA ki
zrutajJAna arihaMta bhagavAn ke | pahale se anAdi se thaa| isakA uttara dete
haiM aisA nahIM hai; zrutajJAna aura tIrthaMkara bhagavAn kAraNakAryasaMbaMdha
se bIja aura aMkura ke samAna hai| jaise bIja se aMkura aura aMkura se bIja hotA
hai; vaise hI bhagavAn bhI pahale tIsare bhava (janma) meM zrutadharma ke
abhyAsa se tIrthaMkaratvaprApti aura tIrthaMkaratva se zrutadharma ke Adi karane
vAle haiN| aisA kahane meM koI Apatti nahIM hai| zrutajJAnapUrvaka hI arhanta
hote haiM, aisA niyama nahIM hai, kyoMki marudevI Adi ke zrutadharma ke abhAva
meM bhI 275

Page #298 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Salutations to the Shruta-Charitra Dharma**  **Yoga Shastra, Third Light,
Verse 123**  It is heard that Kevala Jnana (Omniscience) was attained. By
hearing the words of Kevala Jnana and knowing the meaning of Shruta Dharma, they
attain Omniscience. Now, the praise of Shruta Dharma is being said:  **Verse
2:**  I bow to the Shruta Jnana, which destroys the veil of ignorance, is
worshipped by the assembly of gods, kings, and Chakravartis, upholds the
boundaries, and completely destroys the web of delusion.  **Meaning:**  Tam-
Ajnana (ignorance) and Timir-Andhakar (darkness) refer to the darkness of
ignorance or the ignorance-obscuring karma that is touched, bound, and hidden.
Nikachit Jnana-Avaraniya Karma is Timir-Andhakar. The group of these is called
Padal. The one who destroys this is called Viddhansanas, meaning the destroyer
of ignorance and binding karma. Suragananarind-Mahiass means worshipped by the
gods of the four realms, including Bhavanapati, and by Chakravartis, kings, etc.
The gods and Asuras praise the glory of the Agamas. Seemadharas means the Shruta
Jnana that upholds the boundaries. The meaning of boundaries is the order
(Maryada) of all things, including right and wrong actions, edible and inedible,
worthy and unworthy, Dharma and Adharma, which resides only in Shruta Jnana.
**Verse 3:**  Who, knowing the essence of Dharma (Shruta Charitra form), which
destroys birth, old age, death, and sorrow, bestows abundant and vast happiness,
and is worshipped by the assembly of gods, demons, and kings, will be negligent
in the worship of Dharma?  **Meaning:**  Ko - who, a wise person, Dhammas - of
Shruta Dharma, Saram - the essence, Uvalabbha - having obtained, knowing,
Dharmacharan - in the practice of Dharma, Kare Pamayam - will be negligent? That
is, no wise person will be negligent in it. What is the power of this Dharma? It
is said: Jai - birth, Jara - old age, Maran - death, Sog - sorrow, Panasanass -
completely destroying, meaning it completely destroys birth, old age, death, and
mental sorrow. According to the Shruta (scriptures), the practice of Dharma
certainly destroys birth and old age. Based on Shruta Jnana, there is the power
to destroy all evils in the practice of Dharma. And, Kallan - Kalpa, meaning
health and Anati-Lata, that Kallan = Moksha. Pukhhal - Pushkal = abundant, not
even a little old age; but, Vishal - vast, Suhavahas - bestowing happiness,
meaning the one who practices Dharma according to the Shruta attains the
happiness of Apavarga = Moksha. And, Dev-Danav-Narindaganacchiass - that Dharma
(Shruta Charitra form) is worshipped by the assembly of gods, demons, and
Chakravartis. Therefore, the wise should not be negligent in its worship.
**Verse 4:**  O wise ones! I respectfully bow to the Jina Mat (Dharma), which is
always the promoter of the Dharma of restraint, which is worshipped with true
feelings by the assembly of gods, Nagas, Suvarna, Kinnaras, and Asuras. This
world is established on the basis of that Dharma. And, in which Dharma-Astikaya,
etc., all substances and the three realms of humans, gods, and Asuras remain in
their respective places. May the eternal Dharma grow with such a restrained,
Shruta Jnana-rich, and insightful nature, and may the Charitra Dharma grow
continuously with the tradition of victory.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zruta-cAritradharma kI namaskArapUrvaka stuti yogazAstra tRtIya prakAza zloka
123 kevalajJAna huA thA, aisA sunA jAtA hai| kevalajJAna ke zabda-zravaNa karane
se aura zrutadharma ke artha ko jAnane se unako | sarvajJatva prApta hotA hai|
aba zrutadharma kI stuti kahate haiM ki tamatimirapaDala-viddhaMsaNassa
suragaNanariMdamahiassa  /  sImAdharassa yaMde, papphoDia-mohajAlassa  // 2 //
artha :- ajJAna rUpI aMdhakAra ke paTala ko naSTa karane vAle, devasamUha, rAjA,
cakravartI Adi se pUjita, maryAdA ko dhAraNa karane vAle aura mohajAla ke
sarvathA nAzaka zrutajJAna ko vaMdana karatA huuN| tama-ajJAna aura timira-
aMdhakAra arthAt ajJAna rUpI aMdhakAra athavA spRSTa, baddha aura nidhatta
jJAnAvaraNIyakarma ajJAna-tama hai; aura nikAcita jJAnAvaraNIyakarma timira-
aMdhakAra hai, unakA paDala-samUha; usakA viddhaMsaNassa-nAza karane vAlA arthAt
ajJAna aura baddhakarma kA nAzaka aura suragaNanariMda-mahiassa arthAt
bhavanapati Adi cAra nikAyoM ke devoM tathA cakravartI, rAjA Adi dvArA se
puujit| surAsura Adi Agama kI mahimA karate haiN| sImAdharassa kA artha hai-
maryAdA ko dhAraNa karane vAle zrutajJAna ko| maryAdA kA matalaba hai-kArya-
akArya, bhakSya-abhakSya, heya-upAdeya, dharmaadharma Adi saba kI vyavasthA
(maryAdA) zrutajJAna meM hI rahatI hai| kvacit dvitIyAdeH  /  / 8 / 3 / 134 /  /
isa sUtra se karma ke artha meM dvitIyA ke sthAna para prAkata meM SaSThI
vibhakti hotI hai| papphoDiyamohajAlassa arthAta mithyAtva Adi rUpa mohajAla ko
jisane tor3a diyA hai, vaMde usa zrutajJAna ko maiM vaMdana karatA hUM, athavA
usake mAhAtmya ko namaskAra karatA huuN| samyakazrutajJAna kI prApti hone ke
bAda vivekI AtmA meM rAga-dveSa-kaSAyAdi kI mar3hatA nahIM rahatI. usakA vinAza
ho jAtA hai| isa prakAra zrutajJAna kI stuti karake usI hI ke guNa batAkara
apramAda-viSayaka preraNA karate hue kahate haiM jAi-jarA-maraNa-soga-
paNAsaNassa, kallANa-pukkhala-visAla-suhAvahassa  /  ko deva-dANava-nariMda-
gaNacciassa, dhammassa sAramuvalabha kare pamAyaM?  // 3 //  artha :- janma,
jarA, mRtyu tathA zoka kA sarvathA nAza karane vAle, kalyANa aura prabhUta
vizAla sukha ko dene vAle, aneka deva-dAnava-narendragaNa Adi dvArA pUjita
dharma (zrutacAritra rUpa) ke sAra-prabhAva ko jAnakara kauna buddhimAna manuSya
dharma kI ArAdhanA meM pramAda karegA? ko-kauna buddhimAna, dhammassa-
zrutadharma ke sAraM sAmarthya ko uvalabbha prApta kara-jAnakara, dharmAcaraNa
meM, kare pamAyaM-pramAda karegA? arthAt koI bhI samajhadAra manuSya usameM
pramAda nahIM kregaa| isa dharma kA sAmarthya kaisA hai? use kahate haiM-jAi-
jarA-maraNa-soga-paNAsaNassa arthAt janma, bur3hApA, mRtyu aura mana ke zoka Adi
duHkhoM ko mUla se | sarvathA naSTa karane vaale| zruta (zAstra) meM kahe
anusAra dharma kA anuSThAna karane se janma, jarA kA nizcaya hI nAza hotA hai|
zrutajJAna ke AdhAra para dharmAcaraNa meM sabhI anarthoM ke nAza karane kA
sAmarthya hai; tathA kallANa-pukkhala-visAlasuhAvahassa - kallANa kalpa yAnI
Arogya aura aNati-lAtA hai, vaha kalyANa=mokSa hai| pukkhala puSkala=bahuta,
jarA bhI kama nahIM; paraMtu vizAla vistRta suhAvahassa-sukha kI prApti karAne
vAlA arthAt zruta ke anusAra dharma kA | anuSThAna karane vAle ko apavarga=mokSa
sukha prApta hotA hai, tathA deva-dANava-nariMdagaNacciassa-vaha dharma (zruta
cAritra rUpa) deva, dAnava aura cakravartI Adi ke samUha se pUjita hai| ataH
buddhizAlI usakI ArAdhanA meM pramAda na kre| Upara kahe anusAra dharma ke
rahasya ko prakaTa karane vAle zrutajJAna meM aciMtya sAmarthya hai, use kahate
haiM siddhe bho! payao Namo jiNamae, naMdIsayA saMjame  /  devaM-nAga-suvaNNa-
kinnara-gaNassabhUabhAvaccie  //  logo jattha paiTThio jagamiNaM
telukkamaccAsuraM  /  dhammo vaDDau sAsao vijayao, dhammuttaraM vaDDau  // 4 //
artha :- sujJajano! siddha evaM sadA saMyamadharma ke abhivarddhaka jinamata
(dharma) ko prayatna (Adara) pUrvaka namaskAra karatA hUM, jo sura, nAgakumAra,
suparNakumAra, kinnaragaNa Adi asuroM dvArA sacce bhAvoM se pUjita hai| jisa
dharma ke AdhAra para yaha loka TikA huA (pratiSThita) hai| tathA jisameM
dharmAstikAya Adi sAre dravya evaM tInoM loka ke manuSya va sura-asura Adi
apane-apane sthAna para rahe hue hai| aise saMyama-poSaka tathA zrutajJAna-
samRddha evaM darzanayukta pravRtti se zAzvatadharma kI vRddhi ho aura vijaya kI
paraMparA se cAritradharma kI nitya vRddhi ho| 276

Page #299 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Translation:  **The Meaning of "Siddha"**  **Commentary on the Third Light of
Yoga Shastra, Verse 123:**  The meaning of "Siddha" is "successful" (meaning
that Jain Dharma is undoubtedly fruitful) or "Siddha" means "perfect" because
Dharma is pervasive in all Naya (principles) or all Naya are included in it,
therefore it is perfect. Or, it is perfect because it is pure, having been
tested by the three-fold nature of Kshaya (destruction), Chheda (separation),
and Taap (suffering). Or, this "Siddha" is a special epithet for Shruta-Agam
(scriptural knowledge).  Oh! Look, you all are invited with respect and are
told, "Aji" (Oh friend), see for yourself that for so long, I have happily
strived with all my might to worship this Jain Dharma, which always increases
restraint.  Salutations to that Jain doctrine - Namo Jinam. In this way, I, the
striving one, offer salutations with the witness of others. Here, according to
the Prakrit language, the seventh case (Saptami Vibhakti) is used in the sense
of the fourth case (Chaturthi Vibhakti).  In the yoga of this Shruta-Jnana
(scriptural knowledge) form of Dharma, there is always joy in character and
increase in restraint, meaning Nandi Saya Sanjame. In the Shri Dasha Vaikalik
Sutra, it is said that "Padham Naan, Tao Daya" - first comes knowledge and then
compassion (restraint). What kind of restraint-Dharma is that? It is called
"Devam-Nag-Suvannakinnaraganassa Bhavacchie" - meaning that the Vaimanik Devas
(celestial beings), Dharanendra (king of the earth), Nagadevas (snake gods),
Suparna Kumar (bird princes), Kinnaras (mythical beings), Vyantar Devas
(intermediate gods), and all other gods, including astrologers, worship that
restraint-Dharma with the feeling of a pure heart. Here, the anusvara (nasal
sound) on "Dev" should be understood according to the rules of Chanda Shastra
(prosody) for the completion of the foot. And, the restrained ones are always
worshipped by the Devas and others.  And, the description of Jain Dharma is
given as "Logo Jath Paidio Jagaminam" - meaning that in this Jain Dharma, the
visible world (Sristi) or the world of knowledge (Jnana Lok) from which the
entire universe is seen, this world is established by that knowledge, because
all pure knowledge is under the authority of Jina Agam. This world is in the
form of the knowable. The implication is that knowledge is revealed from the
Agam, which is in the form of Jain Darshan (philosophy), and knowledge is in
Jina Agam, and the entire world is also seen or understood through Agam.
Therefore, this world is also contained within Jina Agam. Many people consider
this visible world (Sristi) to be the world, which is not correct. Therefore,
the adjective "Telukkamatchasuram" is given here, meaning that humans, Devas,
and by implication, all other beings, that is, the upper world (Urdhva Lok), the
lower world (Adho Lok), and the intermediate world (Tiryag Lok) in the form of
the base world (Adhar Jagat), and all the beings living in it, including the
living and non-living (Ajivadi Bhav) in the form of the object world (Adhey
Jagat). In this way, the entire world, in the form of the base and the object,
is established in Jain Darshan.  Thus, this Dharma (Shruta Charitra form) in the
form of Jain doctrine is a Dharma that is never destroyed, an indestructible
Dharma; it increases (Vaddav). How does it increase? "Vijayao Dhammuttaram" -
meaning that it conquers the false doctrines and after worshipping Shruta
Dharma, there is an increase (Vaddav) in character Dharma. By worshipping Shruta
Dharma, there is an increase in the qualities of character, therefore it is said
that the seeker of liberation should always increase knowledge. And, one of the
reasons for the Tithankar-Nama Karma (karma that leads to becoming a Tithankar)
is also mentioned as "Apuvvananagahane" - meaning that by acquiring new and
unprecedented knowledge, Tithankar-Nama Karma is bound.  This prayer, being like
the seed of liberation, is truly free from fear. Therefore, by making this vow-
prayer, one should recite the text from "Suassa Bhagavao Karemi Kaussagg" to
"Appaan Vosirami" for the purpose of Kayotsarg (liberation of the body). Its
meaning has been explained earlier. Only the meaning of "Suassa Bhagavao"
remains. The meaning of Shruta Bhagavan is - from the first Samayik Sutra
(Karemi Bhanta Sutra) to the last study of the Dristivad of Bindu Sar, meaning
the entire "Shruta" in the form of the twelve-fold scripture (Dwadashangi), is
full of glory, influence, and other divine qualities, therefore I perform
Kayotsarg to worship the Shruta in the form of Bhagavan. After that, one should
recite the third praise of Shruta, passing through the Kayotsarg as before.
After that, to offer salutations to the Siddha Bhagavan, who is the fruit of the
rituals mentioned in the Shruta, one should recite the following verse:
**Siddhanam Buddhanam, Paragayanam Paramparagayanam. Loaggamu Vagayanam, Namo
Saya Savvasiddhanam. ||1||**  **Meaning:**  Salutations to all the Siddhas, who
are perfect, enlightened, have crossed over the cycle of birth and death, have
become perfect through tradition, and are situated at the forefront of the
world. ||1||  **Siddhanam:** Meaning Siddha, that is, those who have achieved
their goal, who are perfect in qualities, who are complete, who have no desire
for material objects. Cooked rice is not cooked again, in the same way, those
who have become Siddhas do not have any desire of any kind.   ...  **Note:**
This is a partial translation of the text. The full translation would be very
long and detailed.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 siddhANaM buddhANaM ke artha yogazAstra tRtIya prakAza zloka 123 vyAkhyA :-
siddhe kA artha hai-saphala (yAnI yaha jinadharma niHsaMdeha phalayukta hai)
athavA siddha kA artha hai-sabhI nayoM meM dharma vyApaka hone ke kAraNa athavA
sarvanaya isameM samAviSTa ho jAte haiM, isa kAraNa yaha siddha hai| athavA
kaSa, cheda aura tApa rUpa trikoTi se parIkSita hone ke kAraNa zuddha rUpa meM
hone se siddha hai| athavA yaha siddha vizeSaNa zrutaAgama rUpa hai| bho!
pazyantu bhavantaH AdarapUrvaka AmaMtraNa karate hue kahate haiM-'ajI' Apa
dekhie to sahI ki itane arse taka maiMne yathAzakti sadA saMyamAbhivarddhaka
jisa jinadharma kI ArAdhanA meM prasannatA pUrvaka pratyana kiyA hai, usa
jinamata ko namaskAra ho-Namo jinnme| isa prakAra pratyanazIla maiM dUsaroM kI
sAkSI se namaskAra karatA huuN| yahAM prAkRta bhASA ke anusAra caturthI vibhakti
ke artha meM saptamI vibhakti huI hai| isa zrutajJAna rUpa dharma ke yoga meM
naMdI sayA saMjame arthAt hamezA cAritra meM AnaMda aura saMyama meM vRddhi hotI
hai| zrIdazavaikAlika sUtra meM kahA hai ki paDhamaM nANaM tao dayA arthAt
pahale jJAna aura bAda meM dayA (saMyama) hotI hai| vaha saMyamadharma kaisA
hai! use kahate haiM devaM-nAga-suvaNNakinnaragaNassabbhUa bhAvaccie arthAt
vaimAnika deva, dharaNendra, nAgadeva, suparNakumAra, kinnara, vyaMtaradeva
upalakSaNa se jyotiSI Adi sabhI deva usa saMyamadharma kA zuddha aMtaHkaraNa ke
bhAva se pUjana karate haiN| yahAM deva para anusvAra hai, vaha chaMdazAstra ke
niyamAnusAra pAdapUrti ke lie samajhanA caahie| tathA devatA Adi se hamezA
saMyamI pUjita haiM hii| aura jinadharma kA varNana karate haiM-logo jattha
paiDio jagamiNaM arthAt jisa jinamaya dharma meM loka-dRzyamAna loka yA jisa
(jJAnaloka) se sArA jagat dekhA jAya, usa jJAna se yaha saMsAra pratiSThita hai,
kyoMki jitanA bhI zuddha jJAna hai vaha |jinAgama ke adhIna hai: yaha jagata to
jJeya rUpa meM haiN| tAtparya yaha hai ki jinadarzana rUpa Agama kI se jJAna
prakaTa hotA hai aura jJAna jinAgama meM hai tathA samasta jagata bhI Agama se
dekhA yA samajhA jAtA hai| isalie yaha jagat bhI jinAgama meM hI nihita hai|
kitane hI manuSya isa dRzyamAna loka (sRSTi) ko jagat mAnate haiM, vaha ThIka
nhiiN| isalie yahAM jagat kA vizeSaNa diyA hai-telukkamaccAsuraM arthAt manuSya,
deva va upalakSaNa se zeSa sabhI jIva yAnI Urdhvaloka, adholoka aura tiryagloka
rUpa AdhArajagat aura usameM rahe hue sabhI jIva-ajIvAdibhAva rUpa Adheyajagat
hai| isa taraha AdhAra rUpa Adheya rUpa sArA jagat jinadarzana meM pratiSThita
hai| isa prakAra jinamata rUpa yaha dhamma (zrutacAritra rUpa) dharma sAsao
kabhI nAza na hone vAlA avinAzI dharma; vaDvau bddh'e| vaha kisa taraha se?
vijayao dhammuttaraM arthAt mithyAvAdiyoM para vijaya pAtA huA tathA zrutadharma
kI ArAdhanA ke bAda cAritradharma meM vaDDau-vRddhi ho| zrutadharma kI ArAdhanA
se cAritraguNa meM vRddhi hotI hai, isalie kahA-mokSArthI ko hamezA jJAnavRddhi
karanI cAhie aura tIrthaMkaranAmakarma ke kAraNoM meM eka kAraNa yaha bhI batAyA
hai-apuvvanANagahaNe arthAt apUrva-abhinava, jJAna-grahaNa karane se tIrthakara-
nAmakarma baMdhana hotA hai| yaha prArthanA mokSabIja ke samAna hone se vAstava
meM AzaMsA rahita hai| isalie yaha praNidhAna prArthanA karake; zruta ko hI
vaMdana karane ke lie kAyotsarga ke nimitta suassa bhagavao karemi kAussagga kA
pATha-vaMdaNa vattiyAe se lekara appANaM vosirAmi taka bolanA caahie| isakA
artha pahale kaha Aye haiN| kevala suassa bhagavao kA artha bAkI hai|
zrutabhagavAn kA artha hai-prathama sAmAyika sUtra (karemi bhaMte sUtra) se
lekara bindusAra nAma ke dRSTivAda ke aMtima adhyayana taka arthAt dvAdazAMgI
rUpa samagra 'zrutaH' yaza, prabhAva Adi bhagoM se aizvaryoM se yukta hone se
bhagavatsvarUpa zra kI ArAdhanA karane ke lie kAussagga karatA huuN| isake bAda
pahale kI taraha kA kAussagga pArakara zruta kI tIsarI stuti bolanI caahie|
tatpazcAt zruta meM kahI huI anuSThAna-paraMparA ke phala rUpa siddha bhagavAn
ko namaskAra karane ke lie nimnokta gAthA bole siddhANaM baddhANaM, pAragayANaM
paraMparagayANaM  /  loaggamuvagayANaM, namo sayA savvasiddhANaM  // 1 //  artha
:- siddha. buddha. saMsAra-pAraMgata evaM paraMparA se siddha bane hue, loka ke
agrabhAga para sthita sarvAsaddhoM ko merA namaskAra ho  // 1 //  siddhANaM -
arthAt siddha yAnI kRtakRtya bane hue, jo guNoM se siddha hai, pUrNa ho gaye
haiM, bhautika viSayoM kI jinheM koI bhI IcchA nahIM hai| pakAye hue cAvala
phira se nahIM pakAye jAte, usI taraha siddha hue, phira kisI bhI prakAra kI 277

Page #300 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
'Siddhaanam Buddhaanam' Gatha Par Vivechan Yoga Shastra Triteeya Prakash Shlok
123  I bow to those Siddha-Bhagavants who do not desire any sadhana. This is how
the sentence should be connected. Even in that, generally, karma, Siddha, etc.,
are achieved in many ways. As it is said in the commentary of the scriptures: 1.
Karma, 2. Shilpa, 3. Vidya, 4. Mantra, 5. Yoga, 6. Agam, 7. Artha, 8. Yatra, 9.
Abhipray, 10. Tap, and 11. Karmakshaya. Thus, they are achieved in these 11
ways. 1. Karma Siddha - If someone, without the teachings of any Acharya,
repeatedly performs any karma like lifting weights, farming, trading, etc., and
becomes proficient in that karma like Sahya Giri Siddha, then he is called Karma
Siddha. 2. Shilpa Siddha - If someone, through the teachings of an Acharya,
practices any art like blacksmithing, carpentry, painting, etc., and becomes
proficient like Kokas Suthar, then he is called Shilpa Siddha. 3-4. Vidya
Siddha, Mantra Siddha - Vidya is called the knowledge that gives results through
homa, japa, etc., and Mantra is that which is achieved only by chanting the
mantra without japa, etc. Vidya has a presiding deity, while Mantra has a
presiding deity. If someone achieves Siddhi by practicing any Vidya, then he is
called Vidya Siddha like Arya Khaputacharaya. And if someone achieves Siddhi in
any Mantra, then he becomes Mantra Siddha like Stambhaakarsha. 5. Yoga Siddha -
If someone is proficient in preparing lepa, anjan, etc., by collecting many
herbs, then he is called Yoga Siddha like Arya Samitaacharya. 6. Agam Siddha -
Agam means the twelve (twelve) angas and upangas, and the principles,
nayanikshepas, etc., discourses and their extraordinary meanings. One who knows
them like Gautam Swami is called Agam Siddha. 7. Artha Siddha - Artha means
wealth. One who is skilled in acquiring more wealth than others, like Mamman, is
called Artha Siddha. 8. Yatra Siddha - One who has completed his journey without
any obstacles, like Tundik, on the water route or the land route, is called
Yatra Siddha. 9. Abhipray Siddha - One who achieves the task in the way he
intended to do it, like Abhaykumar, is called Abhipray Siddha. 10. Tap Siddha -
One who has manifested the ability to perform the most excellent tapasya, like
Dridha Prahari, is called Tap Siddha. And 11. Karmakshaya Siddha - One who has
destroyed the eight karmas, like Jnanavaraniya, from the root, like Marudevi
Mata, is called Karmakshaya Siddha. Out of the eleven types of Siddhas mentioned
above, one should accept the eleventh, Karmakshaya Siddha, leaving out the ten.
By bowing to such Karmakshaya Siddha, the seeker becomes Siddha. Buddhaanam -
meaning enlightened. In the world that is asleep in the ignorance-like sleep,
those who have become enlightened by knowing the nature of the jiva, etc.,
without the teachings of others. That is, those who have become enlightened
(knowing) and have completely destroyed their karmas, I bow to them. Some
philosophers say that Siddhas live in the state of Siddha, renouncing the world
and nirvana. They do not stay in the world or nirvana for the welfare of the
world, and the world cannot know their nature. They are greater than even the
Chintamani Ratna. To refute their opinion, it is said: Paragayanam, I bow to the
Siddhas, who have crossed the world, that is, who have ended the purpose of the
world. In this regard, the Yadrcchavadis say that just as a poor man suddenly
becomes a king, so too a jiva suddenly becomes a Siddha. There is no such thing
as order in this. Refuting this, it is said: Parampragayanam, meaning, Siddha
who have become by tradition. The meaning is that those who have achieved the
full development of the soul through the fourteen gunasthana, through tradition,
or those who have achieved the moksha sthana through the yoga of karmakshaya,
etc., in some way, I bow to them. Many philosophers consider the place of
moksha, which is fixed, to be uncertain. They say that when the world of the
soul or the ignorance-like affliction is destroyed, their knowledge remains
stable, and since there is a complete absence of affliction, they are never
hindered or afflicted in this world. To refute this belief, it is said:
Loaggamuvagayanam, in the front part of the world, on the fourteen Raj Lokas, in
the end part, there is a Siddha Shila earth called 'Ishat Praagbhara'. Near it,
not in another place, all the Siddhas are situated, having destroyed their
karmas. It is also said that where there is one soul of a Siddha, there are
infinite other Siddha souls who have been liberated from birth and death, having
destroyed their karmas, without hindering each other.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 'siddhANaM buddhANaM' gAthA para vivecana yogazAstra tRtIya prakAza zloka 123
sAdhanA kI IcchA nahIM rkhte| aise siddha-bhagavaMtoM ko namaskAra karatA huuN|
isa prakAra vAkyasaMbaMdha jor3a lenA caahie| usameM bhI sAmAnyatA se karma
siddhaAdi aneka prakAra se siddha hote haiN| jaise ki zAstroM kI TIkA meM kahA
hai-1. karma, | 2. zilpa, 3. vidyA, 4. maMtra, 5. yoga, 6. Agama, 7. artha, 8.
yAtrA, 9. abhiprAya, 10. tapa aura 11. karmakSaya isa prakAra ina 11 bAtoM meM
siddha hote haiN| 1. karmasiddha-kisI AcArya ke upadeza ke binA hI kisI ne bhAra
uThAne, khetI karane, vyApAra karane ityAdi kAryoM meM se koI karma bArabAra
kiyA aura usa karma meM vaha sahyagiri-siddha ke samAna niSNAta ho gayA, taba
use karmasiddha kahate haiN| 2. zilpasiddha - kisI AcArya ke upadeza se koI
luhAra, suthAra, citrakalA Adi zilpakalAoM meM se kisI kalA kA abhyAsa karake
kokAsa suthAra ke samAna pAraMgata ho jAtA hai; vaha zilpasiddha hotA hai| 3.-4.
vidyAsiddha, maMtrasiddha-homa, jApa Adi se phala dene vAlI vidyA kahalAtI hai
aura japa Adi se rahita kevala maMtra bolane se siddha ho, vaha maMtra hai|
vidyA kI adhiSThAyikA devI hotI hai, jabaki maMtra kA adhiSTAyaka deva ho kisI
vidyA kA abhyAsa karate-karate kisI ne siddhi prApta kara lI ho, vaha Arya
khapuTAcArya ke samAna vidyAsiddha kahalAtA hai| aura kisI maMtra ko siddhakara
le, vaha staMbhAkarSa ke samAna maMtrasiddha ho jAtA hai| 5. yogasiddha- aneka
auSadhiyoM ko ekatrita karake lepa, aMjana Adi taiyAra karane meM niSNAta ho,
vaha Arya samitAcArya ke samAna yogasiddha kahalAtA hai| 6. Agamasiddha - Agama
arthAt dvAdaza (bAraha) aMgoM evaM upAMgoM tathA siddhAMtoM, nayanikSepoM Adi
pravacanoM va usake asAdhAraNa arthoM kA gautamasvAmI ke samAna vijJAtA
Agamasiddha hotA hai| 7. arthasiddha-artha arthAt dhn| mammana ke samAna dUsaroM
kI apekSA jo atyadhika dhana prApta karane meM kuzala ho, vaha arthasiddha hotA
hai| 8.yAtrAsiddhajalamArga athavA sthalamArga meM jo nirvighna rUpa se tuMDika
ke samAna yAtrA pUrNa kara cukA hai, vaha yAtrAsiddha hotA hai| 9. |
abhiprAyasiddha-jisa kArya ko jisa taraha karane kA abhiprAya (irAdA) kiyA ho,
use abhayakumAra ke samAna usI taraha siddha kara le, vaha abhiprAyasiddha
kahalAtA hai| 10. tapaHsiddha-dRr3haprahArI ke samAna jisameM sarvotkRSTa tapa
karane kA sAmarthya prakaTa ho gayA ho, vaha tapaHsiddha hai aura 11.
karmakSayasiddha-marudevI mAtA ke samAna jJAnAvaraNIya Adi ATha karmoM ko mUla
se naSTa karane se jo siddha ho jAtA hai, yA huA ho; vaha karmasiddha kahalAtA
hai| upara kahe hue 11 prakAra ke siddhoM meM se dasa ko chor3akara yahAM
gyArahaveM karmakSayasiddha ko grahaNa karanA caahie| aise karmakSayasiddha ko
namaskAra karane ke kAraNa sAdhaka siddha ho jAtA hai| | buddhANaM - arthAt
bodhit| ajJAna rUpI nidrA meM soye hae jagata meM dUsaroM ke upadeza binA jIvAdi
tattvoM ke svarUpa ko jAnakara bodhita he| arthAta bodha-(jJAna) hone ke bAda
karmoM kA sarvathA nAza karake jo siddha hae haiM. unako merA namaskAra ho| koI
dArzanika yaha kahate haiM ki-siddha siddhAvasthA meM saMsAra aura nirvANa kA
tyAga karake rahate haiM, jagat ke kalyANa ke lie ve saMsAra yA nirvANa meM
nahIM rahate aura jagat unakA svarUpa nahIM jAna sktaa| ve ciMtAmaNiratna se bhI
bar3hakara aura mahAn hai| unake mata kA khaMDana karane hetu kahate haiM-
pAragayANaM saMsAra kA pAra pAne vAle yAnI saMsAra ke prayojana kA aMta pAne
vAle, siddhoM ko namaskAra ho| isa viSaya meM yadRcchAvAdiyoM kA kahanA hai-
jaise koI daridra sahasA rAjA ho jAtA hai, vaise jIva bhI sahasA siddha ho jAtA
hai; isameM krama jaisI koI vastu nahIM hai; isa bAta kA khaMDana karate hue
kahate haiM-paraMparagayANaM isakA artha hai-paraMparA se bane hue siddh|
tAtparya yaha hai-paraMparA se caudaha guNasthAnaka ke | krama se jinhoMne AtmA
kA pUrNa vikAsa kara liyA hai. ve athavA kisI prakAra karma ke kSayopazama Adi
ke yoga se prathama | samyagdarzana phira samyagjJAna aura usake bAda
samyakcAritra; isa krama se guNoM kA vikAsa karate hue paraMparA se siddha rUpa
mokSasthAna jinhoMne prApta kiyA hai, unheM namaskAra karatA huuN| kitane hI
dArzanika mokSa kA sthAna, jo niyata hai, use | | aniyata mAnate haiN| unakA
kahanA hai-jaba AtmA ke saMsAra kA athavA ajJAna rUpI kleza nAza hotA hai vahAM
unakA vijJAna sthira rahatA hai aura kleza kA sarvathA abhAva ho jAne se isa
saMsAra meM use kadApi lezamAtra bhI bAdhA athavA duHkha nahIM hotA hai, unakI
isa mAnyatA kA khaMDana karane ke lie kahate haiM-loaggamuvagayANaM loka ke
agrabhAga meM caudaha rAja loka para aMta bhAga meM 'iSatprAgbhArA' nAma kI
siddhazilA pRthvI hai, usake upa yAnI samIpa meM; na ki anya sthAna meN| sabhI
siddha karmoM kA kSaya karake usI sthAna para sthita hai| kahA bhI hai-jahAM
siddha kI eka AtmA hai, vahI para karmoM kA kSaya karake janma-maraNa se mukta
huI anaMta dUsarI siddha AtmAe~ eka dUsare ko bAdhA pahuMcAe binA, 278

Page #301 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Fifteen types of Siddhas  Yoga Shastra, Third Light, Verse 123:  "Those who
dwell in eternal bliss, I bow to them." (A. Ni. 975)  Here, there is a doubt:
"When all karmas are destroyed, how does the soul move to the end of the
universe?"  The answer is that the Siddha souls move due to the power of past
actions (karma) and other yogas.  It is said that due to the power of past
actions, just as an arrow released from a bow moves forward due to its own
momentum, similarly, the soul, freed from karma, moves upward on its own.  Then
there is a doubt: "Why does the soul not move further, higher, lower, or
diagonally from the Siddha realm?"  The solution is that due to the absence of
gravity, i.e., the weight of karma, and no other reason to go down, the
liberated soul does not go down.  A clay pot goes down because of the clay, but
when the clay is removed, it rises upward.  Similarly, the soul remains down as
long as it is bound by karma, but when it is free from karma, it rises upward.
Just as a boat cannot rise in height on the surface of water without the help of
water, similarly, the soul does not go above the end of the universe because
there is no supporting dharma-astika (righteousness) to help it move.  Instead,
it goes up and stops at the end of the universe.  And because there is no yoga
or its activity (tendency) as a cause for diagonal movement, it does not move
diagonally either.  Therefore, the Siddha's upward movement is only to the end
of the universe.  Namo Saya Savvasiddhanam:  I always bow to all the Siddhas,
those whose all-achieving (sarvasadhya) has been accomplished, or who have
become Siddhas in different forms like Tirtha-Siddha, etc.  These are the 15
types of Siddhas (Supreme Souls): 1. Tirtha-Siddha, 2. Atirtha-Siddha, 3.
Tirthankara-Siddha, 4. Atirthankara-Siddha, 5. Swayambuddha-Siddha, 6.
Pratyekabuddha-Siddha, 7. Buddhabodhita-Siddha, 8. Strilinga-Siddha, 9.
Purushalinga-Siddha, 10. Napumsakalinga-Siddha, 11. Swalinga-Siddha, 12.
Anyalinga-Siddha, 13. Grihasthalinga-Siddha, 14. Ekasiddha, and 15. Anekasiddha.
1. Tirtha-Siddha:  One who becomes a Siddha while living in the Tirtha (fourfold
assembly of Shramanas (ascetics)) is a Tirtha-Siddha.  2. Atirtha-Siddha:  One
who becomes liberated through practice based on knowledge like jati-smarana
(recollection of birth), etc., when the Tirtha is broken or there is an interval
between Tirthas, when the assembly of ascetics is broken, or who becomes a
Siddha before the establishment of the Tirtha, like Marudevi Mata, or who
becomes liberated in another Tirtha by practicing the three jewels of knowledge,
etc., is called an Atirtha-Siddha.  3. Tirthankara-Siddha:  The Tirthankaras who
become Siddhas after attaining the Tirthankara-pad (position) are called
Tirthankara-Siddhas.  4. Atirthankara-Siddha:  All those who become Siddhas by
being ordinary Kevalis (liberated souls) are Atirthankara-Siddhas.  5.
Swayambuddha-Siddha:  Those who become Siddhas by attaining enlightenment
(knowledge) on their own are Swayambuddha-Siddhas.  6. Pratyekabuddha-Siddha:
Those who become Siddhas by being Pratyekabuddhas are Pratyekabuddha-Siddhas.
There is a difference between Swayambuddha and Pratyekabuddha in the attainment
of enlightenment (knowledge), in the upadhi (condition), in the knowledge of
scriptures, and in the attire.  Swayambuddha becomes enlightened without any
external cause or instruction, while Pratyekabuddha becomes enlightened due to
some external cause, like King Karkandu who became enlightened after seeing the
old age of a bull.  Swayambuddha has twelve types of upadhi (dharma-upkaran),
while Pratyekabuddha has nine types of upadhi, leaving out three types of
clothes.  Swayambuddha does not necessarily retain the knowledge of his past
lives in the present life, while Pratyekabuddha does retain that knowledge.
Swayambuddha receives initiation in the presence of the Guru-Maharaja after
attaining the ascetic attire, while Pratyekabuddha receives the ascetic attire
from the gods as a rule.  There is a difference in this aspect.  7.
Buddhabodhita-Siddha:  Those who attain enlightenment and become liberated
through the teachings of a knowledgeable Acharya (teacher), etc., are
Buddhabodhita-Siddhas.  8. Strilinga-Siddha:  Many women become Siddhas in all
these types.  They are called Strilinga-Siddhas.  9. Purushalinga-Siddha:  Those
who become liberated in the male form are Purushalinga-Siddhas.  10.
Napumsakalinga-Siddha:  Those who attain liberation in the neuter form are
Napumsakalinga-Siddhas.  Here, there is a doubt: "Can Tirthankaras also become
Siddhas in the female form?"  The answer is "Yes, they can."  It is mentioned in
Siddha-Pahuḍ (Siddha-Prabhrit) that the fewest Tirthankaras become Siddhas in
the female form.  In the reign of a female Tirthankara, there are countless
Atirthankara-Siddhas, and there are countless Atirthankara-Siddhas in the female
form in the Tirtha of a female Tirthankara, and there are countless
Atirthankara-Siddhas in the Tirtha of a male Tirthankara.  This means that
Tirthankaras also become Siddhas in the female form, and in their Tirtha, there
are also ordinary Kevalis, Atirthankaras, and Atirthankaras in the female form,
etc., who become Siddhas.  However, the number of Atirthankara-Siddhas in the
female form is greater, i.e., countless times more.  Tirthankara-Siddhas do not
become Siddhas in the neuter form.  And Pratyekabuddha-Siddhas...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paMdraha bhede siddha yogazAstra tRtIya prakAza zloka 123 anaMtasukha-yukta
sukha se rahatI hai, (A. ni. 975) unheM merA namaskAra ho| yahAM zaMkA karate
haiM ki 'jaba sabhI kmoN| kA kSaya ho jAtA taba jIva kI lokAgra taka gati kisa
taraha hotI hai? isakA uttara dete haiM ki pUrva-prayoga Adi ke yoga se ve
siddha jIva gati karate haiN|' kahA hai ki-pUrvaprayoga kI siddhi se arthAt
jaise dhanuSya se chUTA huA bANa pUrvaprayoga se svayaM apane Apa Age jAtA hai;
usI taraha jIva karma se mukta hone para apane Apa Urdhvagati karatA hai| phira
zaMkA hotI hai ki jIva siddhikSetra se Age, U~ce, nIce yA tirache kyoM nahIM
jAtA? isakA samAdhAna karate haiM ki gurutva arthAt karma kA vajana samApta ho
jAne se aura nIce jAne kA aura koI kAraNa na hone se mukta jIva nIce nahIM jAtA
hai, miTTI se lipsa tuMbA nIce jAtA hai, paraMtu miTTI dUra hote hI vaha
Urdhvagamana karatA hai; vaise hI jIva karma se lipta ho, vahAM taka nIce rahatA
hai, karmarahita hote hI vaha Urdhvagamana karatA hai| jaise pAnI kI sahAyatA ke
binA pAnI kI sataha para UMcAI meM naukA nahIM jAtI hai vaise hI jIva bhI gati
meM sahAyaka dharmAstikAya ke na hone se lokAMta se Upara nahIM jAtA hai; apitu
Upara jAkara loka ke aMta-bhAga meM ruka jAtA hai| aura tirachIgati meM kAraNa
rUpa yoga athavA usakA vyApAra (pravRtti) nahIM hone se, tirachI gati bhI nahIM
karatA hai| ataH siddha kI loka ke agrabhAga taka hI Urdhvagati hotI hai| namo
sayA savvasiddhANaM arthAt jinake sarvasAdhya siddha ho gaye haiM athavA jo
tIrthasiddha Adi alaga-alaga rUpa meM siddha hue haiM, una sarvasiddhoM ko maiM
sadaiva namaskAra karatA huuN| siddha (paramAtmA) ke 15 prakAra ye haiM-1.
tIrthasiddha, :. atIrthasiddha, 3. tIrthaMkarasiddha, 4. atIrthakara-siddha, 5.
svayaMbuddhasiddha, 6. pratyekabuddhasiddha, 7. buddhabodhitasiddha, 8.
strIliMgasiddha, 9. puruSaliMgasiddha, 10. napuMsakaliMgasiddha, 11. svaliMga-
siddha, 12. anyaliMga-siddha, 13. gRhasthaliMgasiddha, 14. ekasiddha aura 15.
aneksiddh| _1. tIrthasiddha - tIrtha-caturvidha zramaNa (sAdhu) saMgha meM
rahate hue jo siddha huA ho, vaha tIrthasiddha hai| 2. tIrtha kA viccheda ho
gayA ho athavA tIrtha ke bIca kA aMtarakAla ho, jaba sAdhusaMsthA kA viccheda ho
gayA ho, taba jAtismaraNa Adi jJAna ke yoga se sAdhanA karake mukta huA ho,
athavA marudevI mAtA kI taraha tIrtha-sthApanA hone se pahale hI siddha ho jAye
athavA anya tIrtha meM bhI jJAnAdi ratnatraya kI sAdhanA karake makta ho jAya.
vaha atIrthasiddha kahalAtA hai| 3. tIrthaMkara-pada prApta karake siddha hue
bhagavAn tIrthaMkarasiddha kahalAte haiN| 4. zeSa sAmAnya kevalI hokara jo
siddha hue hoM, ve sabhI atIrthaMkarasiddha haiN| 5. apane Apa bodha (jJAna)
prApta karake siddha hue hoM, ve svayaMbuddhasiddha hai| 6. jo pratyekabuddha
hokara siddha hue hoM, ve pratyekabuddhasiddha hai| svayaMbuddha aura
pratyekabuddha meM bodha-(jJAna) kI prApti meM, upadhi meM, zrutajJAna meM aura
veSa meM paraspara aMtara hotA hai| svayaMbuddha kisI bAhya nimitta yA upadeza
ke binA hI bodhita hotA hai, aura pratyekabuddha jaise karakaMDu rAjA ko baila
kI vRddhAvasthA dekhakara bodha huA thA, vaise kisI na kisI bAhya nimitta se
virakti | janaka bodha hotA hai| svayaMbuddha pAtra Adi bAraha prakAra kI upadhi
(dharmopakaraNa) rakhatA hai, jabaki pratyekabuddha tIna prakAra ke vastra
chor3akara zeSa nau prakAra kI upadhi rakhatA hai| svayaMbuddha ko pUrvajanma
meM par3he hue pUrvo kA jJAna vartamAnakAla meM | rahe hI, aisA niyama nhiiN|
jabaki pratyekabuddha ko vaha jJAna avazya rahatA hai| svayaMbuddha sAdhuveza ko
prApta kara gurumahArA ke sAnidhya meM bhI dIkSA grahaNa karatA hai, jabaki
pratyekabaddha ko niyama se devatA sAdhaveza detA hai. isa praka meM aMtara hai|
7. jJAnI AcArya Adi ke upadeza se bodha prApta kareM aura makta hoM. ve
baddhabodhitasiddha ina sabhI prakAra se kitanI hI strI-rUpa meM siddha hotI
haiM. ve strIliMgasiddha kahalAte haiN| 9. puruSa rUpa meM jo makta hote haiM,
ve puruSaliMgasiddha hote haiN| 10. napuMsaka rUpa meM jo mokSa prApta karate
haiM, ve napuMsakaliMgasiddha hote haiN| yahAM zaMkA hotI hai ki 'kyA tIrthakara
bhI strIliMga meM siddha ho sakate haiM?' isakA uttara dete haiM ki 'hAM, ho
sakate haiM;' siddhapAhuDa | (siddhaprAbhRta) meM batAyA hai ki sabase kama
strIliMga tIrthakara siddha hote haiM, strItIrthakara ke zAsana meM
atIrthakarasiddha | asaMkhyAtagune hote haiM, unase strI-tIrthaMkara ke tIrtha
meM atIrthakara strItva rUpa meM siddha asaMkhyAtagune haiM aura inase
tIrthaMkara ke tIrtha meM atIrthakarasiddha saMkhyAtagune hote haiM arthAt
tIrthakara bhI striyoM meM siddha hote haiM aura unake tIrtha meM sAmAnya kevalI
atIrthaMkara aura strI rUpa meM atIrthakara Adi bhI siddha hote haiN| paraMtu
una donoM meM atIrthakara strI siddhoM kI saMkhyA | adhika hotI hai, yAnI
asaMkhyAtagunI jyAdA hotI hai| tIrthakarasiddha napuMsakaliMga meM nahI hote
haiN| tathA pratyeka buddha siddha 279

Page #302 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Attainment of Female Siddhas  **Chapter 3 of the Yoga Shastra, Verse
123**  **Male**  11. The **dravyalinga** forms like **rajoharan** (**ogha**) are
attained in their own **linga** (gender). They are called **swalingsiddha**.
12. **Parivrajaka** and others attain **mukti** in other **linga** (gender)
(**vesha**). They are called **anyalingsiddha**.  13. **Marudevi** and others
attained **mukti** in the **grihasthalinga** (householder gender). They are
called **grihasthalingsiddha**.  14. When only one person attains **mukti** at a
time, it is called **ekasiddha**.  15. When 108 **siddhas** attain **mukti** at
the same time, it is called **anekasiddha**.  In this way, there are 15
different types of attaining **mukti** (**siddha**). It is also said that:  -
From one to thirty-two **siddhas** attaining **mukti** together takes eight
**utkrista** (excellent) times. - From thirty-three to forty-eight **siddhas**
attaining **mukti** together takes seven **utkrista** times. - From forty-nine
to sixty **siddhas** attaining **mukti** together takes six **utkrista** times.
- From sixty-one to seventy-two **siddhas** attaining **mukti** together takes
five **utkrista** times. - From seventy-three to eighty-four **siddhas**
attaining **mukti** together takes four **utkrista** times. - From eighty-five
to ninety-six **siddhas** attaining **mukti** together takes three **utkrista**
times. - From ninety-seven to one hundred and two **siddhas** attaining
**mukti** together takes two **utkrista** times. - From one hundred and three to
one hundred and eight **siddhas** attaining **mukti** together takes one
**utkrista** time.  After this, there is definitely a difference.  **The 15
types of Siddhas**  The first is **tirthasiddha** and the second is
**atirthasiddha**. All other types can be included in these two. Because
**tirthankarasiddha** etc. can be included in **tirthasiddha** or
**atirthasiddha**. Then what is the need for other types?  The answer is, your
argument is valid. However, by mentioning only two types, ordinary people may
not know about other types. Therefore, it is necessary to explain other types,
but they can be called **uttarabheda** (secondary types).  In this way, after
praising all the **siddhas** in general, we praise the present
**shasanaadhipati** (ruler of the religion), **Shree Mahaviraswami**, who is a
benefactor:  **Verse 2**  **"Jo devaan vi devo, jan deva panjali namansanti. Tan
devdevamhiyam, sirasa vade mahaviram."**  **Meaning:**  "He who is the God of
Gods, whom even Gods bow down to with folded hands, and who is worshipped by
Indras, I bow down to that **Shree Mahaviraswami** with my head."
**Explanation:**  - **Devaan vi devo** means **Shree Mahaviraswami** is the God
of all Gods, including **bhavanapati** (householder) and others. - **Jan deva
panjali namansanti** means Gods bow down to him with folded hands in humility. -
**Tan devdevamhiyam** means he is the God of Gods, worshipped by **Indra** and
others. - **Sirasa vade mahaviram** means I bow down to **Shree Mahaviraswami**
with my head.  This statement is made to show great respect and honour. Now, how
is **Mahavira**? This is explained by adjectives:  - Those who completely
destroy their **karmas** or who attain **mukti** with great valour are called
**veer** (heroes). And among those **veer**, **Mahavira** is the greatest
**veer**. Gods have given him this name. I bow down to him with my head.  In
this way, after praising him, we speak a verse that tells the benefits of praise
for the sake of **paropkar** (benefitting others) and for the growth of our own
**atmabhav** (spiritual feelings).  **Verse 3**  **"Ikko vi namukkaro,
jinavaravasahass vadhmaanass. Sansarasaraao, tareid naram va naari va."**
**Meaning:**  "Even a single bow to **Shree Vardhaman Swami**, the best among
**jinavars**, saves a man or a woman from the ocean of **samsara** (cycle of
birth and death)."  **Explanation:**  - **Ikko vi namukkaro** means even a
single bow, not to mention many bows. - **Jinavaravasahass vadhmaanass** means
**Shree Vardhaman Swami**, the best among **jinavars**. Here, **jin** refers to
**shrutajin**, **avadhijin**, and others. But **kevali jin** is even greater
than them, and among them, **veer** (hero) is the best. Therefore, he is called
**jinavar**. Even among ordinary **kevalis**, **tirthankaras** are the best
because they have the **namakarma** of **tirthankara**. Therefore, **jinavars**
are like **Vrishabha** (bull). All **tirthankaras** like **Rishabhdeva** are as
great as **Vrishabha**. Therefore, here, a specific name is mentioned,
**vadhmaanass**, which means **Shree Vardhaman Swami**. Even a single bow to him
with respect. - **Sansarasaraao tareid** means the cycle of birth and death of
**tiryanch**, **narak**, **manushya**, and **deva** beings is **samsara**.
Because there are many types of states in this **samsara**, like **bhavasthiti**
(state of existence) and **kayasthiti** (state of body), it is very difficult to
cross it, like an ocean. Therefore, **samsara** is like an ocean. This bow saves
one from the ocean of **samsara**. - **Naram va naari va** means it saves a man
or a woman.  280

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 strI siddhi kI siddhi yogazAstra tRtIya prakAza zloka 123 | puruSaliMga meM hI
hote hai  /  11. rajoharaNa (oghA) Adi dravyaliMga rUpa svaliMga meM siddha hote
haiM, ve svaliMgasiddha kahalAte haiM  /  12. parivrAjaka Adi anyaliMga - (veza)
meM siddha = mukta hote haiM; ve anyaliMgasiddha hai  /  13. marudevI Adi
gRhasthaliMga meM siddha hue haiM, ve gRhasthaliMga siddha hote haiM  /  14. eka
samaya meM eka hI siddha ho, vahAM ekasiddha aura 15. eka samaya meM utkRSTa 108
siddha hue hoM, vahAM anekasiddha kahalAte haiN| isa taraha siddha - (mukta)
hone ke vibhinna 15 prakAra hai| isalie kahA bhI hai ki- eka se lekara battIsa
taka sAtha meM siddha to utkRSTa ATha samaya lagatA hai| taiMtIsa | se
ar3atAlIsa taka sAtha meM siddha hone para utkRSTa sAta samaya meM, unacAsa se
sATha taka sAtha meM siddha hone vAle utkRSTa chaH samaya meM, ikasaTha se
bahattara taka siddha hone vAle utkRSTa pAMca samaya meM, tihattara se caurAsI
taka siddha hone vAle ko utkRSTa cAra samaya meM, paMcAsI se chiyAnave taka
siddha hone vAle utkRSTa tIna samaya meM, satAnave se eka sau do taka sAtha
siddha hone vAle utkRSTa do samaya meM aura ekasau tIna se eka sau ATha taka
sAtha meM siddha hone vAle utkRSTa eka samaya meM mokSa jAte haiN| usake bAda
nizcaya hI aMtara par3atA hai| siddha ke jo 15 bheda kahe haiM, unameM prathama
tIrthasiddha aura bAda meM atIrthasiddha kahA hai, ina donoM meM zeSa bheda
samAviSTa ho sakate haiM; kyoMki tIrthaMkarasiddha Adi kA tIrthasiddha meM
athavA atIrthasiddha meM samAveza ho sakatA hai| phira anya bheda kI kyA
AvazyakatA hai? isakA uttara dete haiM, ApakA tarka ucita hai, phira bhI do hI
bheda kahane se | sarvasAdhAraNa ko anya bhedoM kA jJAna nahIM ho sakatA; isalie
dUsare bhedoM ko batAnA jarUrI hai, magara unheM uttarabheda kahA | jA sakatA
hai| isa taraha sAmAnya rUpa se sarvasiddhoM kI stuti karake nikaTa upakArI
vartamAna zAsanAdhipati zrImahAvIrasvAmI kI stuti karate haiM jo devANa vi devo,
jaM devA paMjalI namaMsaMti  /  taM devadevamahiaM, sirasA vade mahAvIraM  // 2
//  artha jo devoM ke bhI deva haiM, jinako deva donoM hAtha jor3akara namaskAra
karate haiM tathA jo iMdroM se pUjita haiM, una zrI mahAvIra svAmI ko mastaka
jhukAkara vaMdana karatA hUM ||2|| : - bhagavAn mahAvIra svAmI devANa vi arthAt
bhavanapati Adi sabhI devoM ke bhI pUjya hone se devo = deva haiN| jaM devA
paMjalI nama'sati arthAt jinako deva bhI vinaya pUrvaka hAthoM kI aMjalI kara
hAtha jor3akara namaskAra karate haiN| taM | deva-deva mahiyaM ve devoM ke bhI
deva iMdrAdi se pUjita mahAvIraM = bhagavAn mahAvIra svAmI ko sirasA vaMde
arthAt mastaka se | vaMdana karatA huuN| yaha kathana atyaMta AdarapUrvaka
satkAra batAne ke lie kiyA hai| aba mahAvIra kaise haiM? ise vizeSaNa dvArA |
batAte haiM - sarvathA karmoM kA nAza karane vAle athavA jo vizeSa parAkrama se
mokSa meM jAte haiM, unheM vIra kahate haiM aura una vIroM meM bhI mahAn vIra
bhagavAn mahAvIra hai, aisA devatAoM ne nAma diyA; unako mastaka jhukAkara
namaskAra karatA huuN| | isa prakAra se stuti karake phira paropakAra ke lie
aura apane AtmabhAvoM kI vRddhi ke lie stuti kA phala batAne vAlI | gAthA kahate
haiM ikko vi namukkAro, jiNavaravasahassa vaddhamANassa  /  saMsArasArAo,
tArer3a naraM va nArIM vA  // 3 //  artha :- jinavaroM meM uttama zrI vardhamAna
svAmI ko kiyA huA eka bAra bhI namaskAra, nara yA nArI ko saMsAra sAgara se tAra
detA hai| ikko vi namukkAro arthAt bahuta bAra namaskAra karane kI bAta to dUra
rahI, kevala eka bAra hI namaskAra jo dravya | se mastakAdi jhukAne ke rUpa meM
zarIra ko saMkoca karane se aura bhAva se mana kI ekAgratA rUpa namana (
saMkocalakSaNa) se |jiNavaravasahassa= yahAM 'jina' kahane se zrutajina,
avadhijina Adi jinoM se bhI bar3hakara kevalI jina aura unameM bhI | vIra=
zreSTha hone se jinavara haiM, sAmAnya kevaliyoM meM bhI tIrthaMkara nAmakarma
ke udaya vAle bhagavAn uttama hote haiN| ataH jinavaroM meM vRssbhsmaan| yoM to
RSabhadeva Adi sabhI tIrthaMkara vRSabha ke samAna uttama haiM, isalie yahAM
para vizeSa nAma kahate haiM, vaddhamANassa arthAt zrI vardhamAna svAmI ko Adara
pUrvaka kiyA huA eka bAra bhI nmskaar| isa namaskAra se | kyA hotA hai? saMsAra
sAgarAo tArei arthAt tiryaMca, nAraka, manuSya aura deva rUpa jIvoM kA
paribhramaNa saMsaraNa hI saMsAra hai, isa saMsAra meM bhavasthiti evaM kAya-
sthiti Adi aneka prakAra kI avasthA hone se samudra ke samAna usakA pAra karanA
bar3A kaThina hotA hai| ataH saMsAra hI sAgara hai, isa saMsAra sAgara se tAra
detA hai - pAra utAra detA hai  /  kisako ? nara | 280

Page #303 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The meaning of "Siddhaanam Buddhaanam"  Yoga Shastra, Third Light, Verse 123:
"Nariin va" means either a man or a woman. In Jainism, to emphasize the
importance of men, the word "purusha" (man) is used first. However, the word
"nariin va" (or woman) is used to indicate that women can also attain liberation
in the same existence, or by destroying their karma, they can cross the ocean of
existence and attain liberation.  In the Digambara Jain sect, there is a sub-
sect called "Yaapaniya Tantra" (Sangha) which believes in the liberation of
women. There are questions raised:  * Is a woman self-existent? * No, she is
not. * Is she then ineligible for liberation? * No, she is not. * Can she not
attain right faith? * No, she can. * Is she not a human being? * No, she is. *
Is she born only in an uncivilized form? * No, she is not. * Is she only a
"Yugalini" with an immeasurable lifespan? * No, she is not. * Is she only of a
cruel mind? * No, she is not. * Is she only of an impure body? * Absolutely not.
* Is she not a follower of the "Vajra-Rishabhanaraach Sangha"? * No, she is.  A
woman is not devoid of religious inclination, she is not an opponent of the
"Apoovarnakaran Gunasthanak" (the state of being free from the cycle of birth
and death), meaning she herself is capable of achieving "Apoovarnakaran". A
woman possesses the sixth to fourteenth "Gunasthanak" (stages of spiritual
progress), but she remains only up to the ninth "Gunasthanak"? * No, she is not.
Is she incapable of attaining the qualities of knowledge, etc.? * No, she is
not.  Is she only a follower of the path of unrighteousness? * No, she is not.
Then why is it said that women cannot practice the highest Dharma (liberation)?
This means that women can also practice the path of liberation and attain
liberation in this very existence. The meaning is that after attaining right
faith, a single act of salutation performed with utmost devotion is enough to
cross the ocean of existence. Any woman or man who exhibits such a noble resolve
will attain the "Kshapak" category (a category of liberated souls) and cross the
ocean of existence. In this way, salutation is the cause of the resolve that
leads to liberation. However, for the sake of explanation, the cause is
considered as the effect, and salutation is said to be the means of crossing the
ocean of existence.  Here, the question arises: If liberation is attained
through salutation alone, then what is the fruit of observing good conduct? The
answer is: It is not appropriate to say that, because the resolve that leads to
liberation, which is attained through salutation, is itself the essence of good
conduct.  The three verses of the "Siddhaanam Buddhaanam Sutra" are recited
regularly because they were composed by Ganadhar. Many devotees recite two more
verses after these three. They are as follows:  204

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 siddhANaM buddhANaM ke artha yogazAstra tRtIya prakAza zloka 123 va nArIM vA
arthAt puruSa athavA strI ko  /  jainadharma meM puruSa kI pradhAnatA batAne ke
lie pahale puruSa ke lie kahA hai aura | striyoM ko bhI usI bhava meM tArate
haiM athavA karmakSaya karake saMsArasamudra ko pAra karake ve sabhI mokSa meM
jA sakatI haiM, yaha batAne ke lie 'nArIM vA' zabda grahaNa kiyA hai|
digaMbarajaina saMpradAya meM yApanIya taMtra (saMgha) nAmaka eka upasaMpradAya
hai, jo strI ko mukti mAnatA hai| vahAM prazna uThAye gaye haiM, kyA strI svayaM
ajIva hai? aisA nahIM hai| to phira kyA vaha abhavya hai? aisA bhI nahIM hai|
usako samyagdarzana nahIM ho sakatA? aisA bhI nahIM hai| manuSya nahIM hai? aisA
bhI nahIM hai| kyA anArya rUpa meM hI utpanna hotI hai? aisA bhI ekAMta nahIM
hai| asaMkhyAta varSa kI AyuSya vAlI yugalinI hI hai? ekAMta aisA bhI nahIM hai|
kyA atikrUrabuddhi vAlI hI hai? aisA bhI nahIM hai| azuddha zarIra vAlI hI hai?
sarvathA aisA bhI nahIM hai| kyA vajraRSabhanArAca saMghayaNa vAlI nahIM hotI?
aisA bhI pUrNatayA nahIM hai| strI. dharmapravRtti se rahita nahIM hai,
apUrvakaraNa guNasthAnaka kI virodhinI nahIM hai, arthAt vaha svayaM
apUrvakaraNa vAlI hI hotI hai, strI meM sarvavirati rUpa chaTThe guNasthAnaka se
caudahaveM guNasthAnaka taka hotA hai, nauveM guNasthAna taka hI rahatI hai?
aisA bhI nahIM hai vaha jJAnAdilabdhiguNa prApta karane meM ayogya hai? aisA bhI
nahIM hai| tathA ekAMtaH akalyANapathagAminI hai ? aisA bhI nahIM hai, to phira
striyAM uttamadharma (mokSa) kI sAdhanA nahIM kara sakatI; aisA kyoM kara kahA
jA sakatA hai? matalaba yaha hai ki striyAM bhI mokSamArga kI sAdhanA kara
sakatI hai, aura isI bhava meM mokSa prApta kara sakatI haiN| kahane kA tAtparya
yaha | hai ki samyagdarzana prApta karane ke bAda uttamabhAva se kiyA huA eka
bAra kA namaskAra hI saMsArasAgara se pAra utArane vAlA hai| jo bhI strI yA
puruSa aisA uttama adhyavasAya prakaTa karatA hai; vaha usa adhyavasAya se
kSapaka zreNI prApta kara saMsArasamudra | se pAra ho jAtA hai| isa taraha mokSa
prApta karAne vAle adhyavasAya meM namaskAra kAraNa rUpa hai| phira bhI upacAra
se kAraNa ko kArya rUpa meM mAnakara namaskAra hI saMsAra se pAra utArane vAlA
kahA hai| yahAM prazna hotA hai ki namaskAra se hI mokSa mila jAtA hai to phira
cAritrapAlana kA kyA koI phala nahIM hai? uttara meM kahate haiM - aisA kahanA
ucita nahIM hai, kyoMki namaskAra se prApta hone vAlA mokSaprApaka adhyavasAya
hI | nizcaya cAritra hai| siddhANaM buddhANaM sUtra kI tIna gAthA gaNadharakRta
hone se niyamita rUpa se bolI jAtI hai, kitane hI sAdhaka isake atirikta isake
bAda do gAthAe~ aura bolate haiN| ve isa prakAra hai 204

Page #304 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Prayer and its Discussion by a Devout Seeker  **Yoga Shastra, Third Light, Verse
123**  I bow to Lord Arishtanemi, the Dharma Chakravarti, who attained his
initiation, omniscience, and liberation on the peak of Mount Girnar
(Revatakgiri). ||4||  May the twenty-four Jinas, who have attained their goal
(liberation) through supreme effort, grant me their blessings. ||5||
**Meaning:**  After saying this, one should recite the following text to
indicate that they are engaged in appropriate actions with accumulated merit:
"I offer my obeisance to the Gomukha Yaksha, the A-pratichakras, the Chakreśvari
Devi, the Yakshas and Yakshinis, and all those who bring peace to the world, who
help the right-seeing beings attain samadhi, for the sake of all the right-
seeing and the protectors of the Dharma."  Here, the sixth case ending is used
in the sense of the seventh case ending. After this, one should not recite
"Vandan-Vattia" etc., but should recite the "Annatha Sutra" because the gods are
tireless and it is not appropriate to offer them worship or veneration. By doing
this, their feelings are enhanced and they become benefactors to the one who
remembers them. The explanation of the "Annatha Sutra" has been given earlier.
One should understand it from there. Here, one should only praise the gods who
perform "Veyavachcha." Later, sitting down in the same way, one should recite
the "Pranipat-Dandak" (Namutthuna) Sutra and then, with the Mukta Shakti Mudra,
recite the "Pranidhana-Prarthana Sutra." It is as follows:  **Victory to the
Victorious! Victory to the World Teacher! May I have such a state of mind, O
Lord! May I be detached from the world, follow the path, and attain the desired
fruits! ||1||**  **May I not be involved in any action that is against the
people, may I have complete respect for the teachers and elders, and may I be
eager to do good to others! May I have the blessing of a good teacher and the
strength to follow their instructions! May all this be mine, as long as I have
to wander in this world! ||2||**  **Meaning:**  "Victory to the Victorious!
Victory to the World Teacher!" - This is how one invites Lord Trilokanath to
reside in their mind. "May I have such a state of mind, O Lord!" - This is how
one expresses their devotion to the Lord. "May I be detached from the world,
follow the path, and attain the desired fruits!" - This is how one seeks
liberation from the cycle of birth and death. "May I not be involved in any
action that is against the people, may I have complete respect for the teachers
and elders, and may I be eager to do good to others!" - This is how one seeks to
live a virtuous life. "May I have the blessing of a good teacher and the
strength to follow their instructions!" - This is how one seeks guidance and
strength on the path to liberation. "May all this be mine, as long as I have to
wander in this world!" - This is how one seeks to maintain their devotion and
practice throughout their life.  "Victory to the Victorious! Victory to the
World Teacher!" - This is how one invites Lord Trilokanath to reside in their
mind. "May I have such a state of mind, O Lord!" - This is how one expresses
their devotion to the Lord. "May I be detached from the world, follow the path,
and attain the desired fruits!" - This is how one seeks liberation from the
cycle of birth and death. "May I not be involved in any action that is against
the people, may I have complete respect for the teachers and elders, and may I
be eager to do good to others!" - This is how one seeks to live a virtuous life.
"May I have the blessing of a good teacher and the strength to follow their
instructions!" - This is how one seeks guidance and strength on the path to
liberation. "May all this be mine, as long as I have to wander in this world!" -
This is how one seeks to maintain their devotion and practice throughout their
life.  **Notes:**  1. This is a composition that follows the beginning of the
fourth praise. This is why this description is given. 2. There is no discussion
on the last two verses and "Veyavachchagaranam." This is also something to
consider.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dharmArthI sAdhaka dvArA kI jAne vAlI prArthanA evaM usa para vivecana
yogazAstra tRtIya prakAza zloka 123 ujjiMtaselasihare, dikhA nANaM nisIhiyA
jassa  /  taM dhammacakkayaTiM, ariTThanemiM namasAmi  // 4 //  cattAri aTTha
dasa doa vaMdiyA jiNavarA cauvIsaM  /  paramaTThaniTTiaTThA, siddhA siddhiM mama
disaMtu  // 5 //  artha :- ujjayaMta zaila arthAt giranAra (raivatakagiri)
parvata ke zikhara para jinake dIkSA, kevalajJAna aura nirvANa kalyANaka hue
haiM, una dharma-cakravartI zrI ariSTanemi-neminAtha bhagavAn ko maiM namaskAra
karatA hUM  /  / 4 /  /  cAra, ATha, dasa aura do isa prakAra cauvIsa jinavara,
jinhoMne paramArtha se apanA lakSya (mokSasukha) siddha (prApta) kara liyA hai,
ve siddha bhagavaMta mujhe siddhi pradAna kareM  /  / 5 /  /  aisA kahane ke
bAda saMcita-puNya-puMja vAle ucita kAryoM meM ucita pravRtti karate haiM, yaha
batAne ke lie nimnokta pATha bolanA cAhie-veyAvaccagarANaM, saMtigarANaM
sammadidvisamAhigarANaM karemi kAussaggaM arthAt zrIjainazAsana kI sevA-rakSA
rUpa vaiyAvRtya karane meM tatpara gomukhayakSa, apraticakrA, cakrezvarI devI,
yakSa-yakSiNI Adi sarvaloka meM zAMti karane vAle, samyagdRSTi jIvoM ko samAdhi
meM sahAyatA karane vAle, samasta samyagdRSTi-zAsanadevoM ke nimitta se
kAussagga karatA huuN| yahAM saptamI vibhakti ke artha meM SaSThI vibhakti kA
prayoga huA hai| isake bAda vaMdaNa-vattiAe Adi | nahIM bolakara annattha sUtra
bolanA cAhie; kyoMki deva avirati hote haiM, unako vaMdana-pUjana Adi karanA
yogya nahIM | hai|' isa prakAra karane se hI unake bhAvoM meM vRddhi ho jAtI hai
aura ve smaraNakartA ke lie upakAra-darzaka banate haiN| annattha sUtra kI
vyAkhyA pahale kI jA cukI hai| vahIM se samajha lenaa| yahAM kevala veyAvacca
karane vAle devoM kI stuti krnaa| bAda meM usI vidhi se nIce baiThakara pUrvavat
praNipAtadaMDaka-(namutthuNaM) sUtra kahakara muktAzaktimudrA pUrvaka
praNidhAnaprArthanAsUtra bole| vaha isa prakAra hai jaya vIyarAya! jagaguru! hou
mamaM taha pabhAvao bhayavaM! bhavanivyeo, maggANusAriA iTThaphalasiddhI  // 1
//  logaviruddhaccAo, gurujaNapUA patthakaraNaM ca  /  suhagurujogo
tabbayaNasevaNA AbhavamavaMDA  // 2 //  artha :- he vItarAga! he jagadguru!
ApakI jaya ho! bhagavan! Apake pratApa se mujhe saMsAra ke prati vairAgya
utpanna ho, mokSamArga para calane kI zakti prApta ho aura iSTaphala kI siddhi
ho  /  / 1 /  /  prabho! niMdAjanaka, lokaviruddha kisI bhI kArya meM merI
pravRtti na ho, dharmAcArya tathA meM mAtA-pitA Adi bar3oM ke prati paripUrNa
rUpa se AdarabhAva aura dUsaroM kA bhalA karane meM tatpara banUM aura prabho!
mujhe sadguru kA yoga mile tathA unakI AjJAnusAra calane kI zakti prAsa ho| yaha
saba jahAM taka mujhe saMsAra meM paribhramaNa karanA par3e, vahAM taka akhaMDa
rUpa se prApta ho  /  / 2 /  /  jaya vIyarAga! jagaguru! arthAt he vItarAga! he
jagadguro! ApakI jaya ho, isa prakAra bhagavAn zrI trilokanAtha ko buddhi meM
sthApita karane ke lie AmaMtraNa kiyA hai, hou mama mujhe mile, tuha pabhAvao
Apa ke prabhAva se-sAmarthya se, bhayavaM-bhagavAn! dUsarI bAra yaha saMbodhana
dekara apanI bhakti kA atizaya prakaTa kiyA gayA hai| kyA mile? usake lie kahate
haiM-bhavanivveo arthAt janma-maraNa Adi duHkha rUpa saMsAra se nirveda-virakti
(vairaagy)| bhava se Dare binA koI bhI mokSa ke lie prayatna nahIM krtaa|
saMsAra meM rAga rakhakara mokSamArga kA prayatna kare, to vaha vAstavika
prayatna nahIM samajhA jAtA; kyoMki vaha kriyA jar3a ke samAna hai| tathA
maggANusAriA arthAt durAgraha kA tyAgakara tattvabhUta satya mArga ke anusAra
tathA iTThaphalasiddhI iissttphlsiddhi| isa bhava ke iSTa prayojana kI prApti
hone se citta meM svasthatA hotI hai | aura vaha vyakti AtmakalyANa ke kAryoM
meM pravRtti kara sakatA hai| isa Azaya se isa loka ke iSTaphala kI siddhi ke
lie prArthanA karanA anucita nahIM hai| logaviruddhaccAo sabhI logoM meM niMdA
Adi ho; aise lokaviruddha kArya kA tyAga karanA; paMcAzaka meM kahA hai-kisI kI
bhI niMdA nahIM karanI cAhie, vizeSataH guNavAn kI to kadApi nahIM karanI cAhie,
| kyoMki vaha lokaviruddha hai tathA dharma-ArAdhanA meM sarala manuSya kI kahIM
bhUla ho jAya to usakA hAsya karanA, logoM| meM mAnanIya-pUjanIya kA apamAna
karanA, jisake bahuta virodhI hoM, unakI sohabata (saMgata-maitrI) karanA, deza
kAla aura 1. caturtha stuti kA prAraMbha ho jAne ke bAda kI yaha racanA hone se
yaha varNana diyA hai| aura yahAM saMcita-puNya-puMja vAle ucita kAryoM meM
ucita pravRtti karate haiN| yaha likha kara zrAvakoM ko bolane kA likhA hai|
yaha bhI vicAraNIya to hai hii| 2. aMtima do gAthA para evaM vaiyAvaccagarANaM
para koI vivecana nahIM kiyA yaha bhI vicAraNIya to hai hii| 282

Page #305 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Description of a Shravak's Daily Routine After Devavandan  **After paying
homage to the Gods, the daily routine of a Shravak is described as follows:**
**Violation of Kulacharya:**   *  Acting against the rules of conduct, *
Wearing ostentatious attire, *  Boasting about one's own donations, austerities,
journeys, etc. *  Many Acharyas consider these actions to be against the
community. *  Being happy when a Sadhu-Purusha is in trouble and not trying to
save them even when capable. These are also considered against the community. *
"O Lord! I will abandon such actions!" (Pancha. 2/8-10)  **Serving the Guru:** *
Properly serving the Guru, which is a form of worship. *  Although
Dharmacharayas are called Gurus, one should also consider parents, art teachers,
etc. as Gurus (elders). *  Yogabindu (verse 110) states: "Parents, art teachers,
knowledge gurus, their relatives, elders, and Dharma preachers, all these are
considered as Satpurusha Gurus."  **Parothkaranam:** *  Working for the welfare
of other living beings in the mortal world. *  This is truly a sign of Dharma-
Purushartha.  **Acquiring the Qualities:** *  By acquiring the aforementioned
qualities, the seeker gains worldly beauty in life and becomes eligible for the
transcendental Dharma. *  Therefore, it is said: "Suhaguru-Jogo Vishisht
Charitravan, Pavitra Shubhaguruon Sadhu-Sadhviyon Evam Dharmacharayon Ka
Sangyog-Nishra Mile, Tavvayana-Sevna." *  "May we get the association of pure,
auspicious Gurus, Sadhus, Sadhvis, and Dharmacharayas, who are of exceptional
character. May we follow their teachings." *  Such noble Gurus never give
harmful advice. Therefore, their teachings should be served completely, as long
as one has to wander in the world.  **Note:** *  This prayer is specifically for
the desire of renunciation (Niaana) and not for the cause (Nidana). *  This
happens before the seventh Gunasthanak, called "Aparamat-Samyam." *  Beyond the
Aparamat Gunasthanak, the being has no desire for the world or liberation. All
emotions, good or bad, are equal for them.  **Knowing the Ritual of
Chaityavandan:** *  This way of knowing the excellent ritual of Chaityavandan,
which is in the form of a prayer for auspicious results, is up to the two verses
of Jay Viyaray.  **Further Duties:** *  "Tato Gurunam Abhyarne, Pratipatti-
Purasaram. Vidhidhit Vishuddhatma, Pratyakhyan-Prakashanam." (Verse 124) *
**Meaning:** After paying homage to the Gods, if the Guru or Dharmacharaya has
come to pay homage to the Gods, or to witness a festival like bathing, or to
give a Dharma discourse, or to wander, then go to them, stand three and a half
steps away, and respectfully pay homage. Listen to their discourse. Later,
reveal the Pratyakhyan done in front of the Gods to the Guru, without arrogance
and with a pure mind. *  The ritual of Pratyakhyan is witnessed by three: 1.
Atma-Sakshi (self-witness), 2. Deva-Sakshi (God-witness), and 3. Guru-Sakshi
(Guru-witness).  **Guru-Pratipatti (Respect for the Guru):** *  The previous
verse mentions "Pratipatti-Purvak." Therefore, Guru-Pratipatti (respect) is
described in two verses. *  "Abhyuththanam Tada Loke Abhyanam Cha Tadagame.
Shirasyanjali-Samsleshah Swayamaasanadhaukanam." (Verse 125) *  "Asanabhigraho
Bhaktya, Vandana Paryupasanam. Tadyane Anugamashcheti, Pratipattiriyam Guroh."
(Verse 126) *  **Meaning:** Upon seeing the Guru Maharaj, immediately leave your
seat and stand up respectfully. Go in front of them. If they have arrived, fold
your hands on your head and say "Namo Khamasamanam Vachan." Do this yourself,
don't ask someone else to do it. Offer them a seat yourself. After the Guru
Maharaj sits on their seat, sit on another seat yourself. Later, respectfully
perform the twenty-five essential purifications with devotion. If the Gurudev
doesn't have to go anywhere and is not busy with any work, serve them with
Paryupasana. When they leave, follow them for a short distance. This is how to
understand Guru-Pratipatti (the treatment and respect for the Dharmacharaya).
**After Listening to the Dharma Discourse:** *  "Tatah Pratinivrittah San,
Sthanam Gatva Yathochitam. Sudhidharma-Virodhena, Vidhidhit Arthachintanam."
(Verse 127) *  **Meaning:** After returning from the temple, go to your
respective place (if you are a king, go to the royal court, if you are a
minister, go to the court, if you are a merchant, go to your shop), and think
about earning wealth in a way that doesn't harm Dharma.  **Note:** *  The three-
fold Pranidhan is not mentioned here. *  The ritual of Chaityavandan described
here, up to the two verses of Jay Viyaray, is not practiced today.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 devavaMdana ke bAda zrAvaka kI dinacaryA kA varNana yogazAstra tRtIya prakAza
zloka 124 se 127 kula ke AcAra kA ullaMghana karanA; arthAt vyavahAra ke
viruddha calanA, uddhata veza dhAraNa karanA tathA svayaM dvArA kiye | hue dAna,
tapa, yAtrA Adi kI apane muMha se bar3AI karanA; ise bhI kitane hI AcArya
lokaviruddha mAnate haiM tathA sAdhupuruSoM para saMkaTa AyA ho to use dekhakara
khuza honA evaM sAmarthya hone para bhI saMkaTa se bacAne kA prayatna na karanA,
ityAdi bAteM bhI lokaviruddha samajhI jAtI haiN| prabho! aise kAryoM kA maiM
tyAga karUM! (paMcA. 2/8-10) tathA gurujaNapUA gurujanoM kI ucita sevA rUpa pUjA
krnaa| yadyapi dharmAcArya hI guru kahalAte haiM; tathApi yahAM mAtA-pitA,
kalAcArya Adi ko bhI gurujana (bar3e) samajha lenA caahie| yogabindu (gAthA 110)
meM kahA hai-mAtA-pitA, kalAcArya, vidyAguru, unake saMbaMdhI, vRddha tathA
dharmopadezaka ina sabhI ko satpuruSa guru-tulya mAnate haiN| paratthakaraNaM
ca=martyaloka | meM sArabhUta dUsare jIvoM kI bhalAI kA kArya paropakAra krnaa|
vAstava meM yaha dharmapuruSArtha kA cihna hai| isa prakAra se pUrvokta guNoM kI
prAsi se sAdhaka jIvana meM laukika suMdaratA prApta karatA hai aura vahI
lokottara dharma kA adhikArI banatA hai| isalie kahate haiM-suhagurujogo viziSTa
cAritravAn, pavitra zubhaguruoM sAdhu-sAdhviyoM evaM dharmAcAryoM kA saMyoga-
nizrA mile, tavvayaNasevaNA=una sadguruoM ke vacanAnusAra AcaraNa krnaa| aise
sadguru bhagavaMta kabhI ahitakara upadeza nahIM dete| isalie unake vacanoM kI
sevA AbhavamakhaMDA arthAt jaba taka saMsAra meM paribhramaNa karanA par3e,
vahAM taka saMpUrNa rUpa meM prApta ho| yaha prArthanA khAsa kara tyAga kI
abhilASA rUpa hone se (niyANA) nidAna rUpa nahIM hai; aura vaha bhI
apramattasaMyama nAmaka sAtaveM guNasthAnaka ke pahale hI hotA hai| apramatta
guNasthAnaka se Age jIva ko saMsAra yA mokSa kI abhilASA nahIM rahatI, unake lie
zubha-azubha sabhI bhAva samAna hote haiN| isa taraha zubhaphala kI prArthanA
rUpa jaya vIyarAya kI do gAthA taka utkRSTa caityavaMdana kI vidhi jAnanA  /  /
123 /  /  aba isake Age ke kartavya ke saMbaMdha meM kahate haiN|295| tato
gurUNAmabhyarNe, pratipattipurassaram  /  vidadhIta vizuddhAtmA,
pratyAkhyAnaprakAzanam  /  / 124 /  /  artha :- deva-vaMdana karane ke bAda guru
yA dharmAcArya devavaMdana karane padhAre hue hoM athavA snAtrAdi-mahotsava ke
darzana karane yA dharmopadeza dene padhAre hoM athavA vihAra karate hue padhAre
hoM, to unake pAsa jAkara sAr3he tIna hAtha dUra khar3e hokara vinayapUrvaka
vaMdana kare, unakA vyAkhyAna sune| bAda meM devasamakSa kiyA huA pratyAkhyAna
daMbharahita va nirmalacitta hokara guru-samakSa prakaTa kre| kyoMki
pratyAkhyAna kI vidhi tIna kI sAkSI se hotI hai-1. AtmasAkSI, 2. devasAkSI aura
3. gurusAkSI se  /  / 124 /  /  pUrvokta zloka meM-pratipattipUrvaka kahA hai|
ataH gurupratipatti (vinaya) ko do zlokoM meM kahate haiN|296| abhyutthAnaM tadA
loke'bhiyAnaM ca tadAgame  /  zirasyaJjalisaMzleSaH svayamAsanaDhaukanam  // 125
/  /   / 297 /  AsanAbhigraho bhaktyA, vandanA paryupAsanam  /
tadyAne'nugamazceti, pratipattiriyaM guroH  // 126 /  /  artha :- guru mahArAja
ko dekhate hI Asana chor3akara Adara pUrvaka khar3e ho jAnA, unake sAmane jAnA,
ve A gaye ho to mastaka para aMjali karake hAtha jor3akara 'namo khamAsamaNANaM
vacana bolanA, yaha kArya svayaM karanA, dUsare se nahIM karAnA aura svayaM
Asana pradAna karanA, guru-mahArAja ke Asana para baiTha jAne ke bAda, svayaM
dUsare Asana para baiThanA, bAda meM bhakti pUrvaka paccIsa Avazyaka kI vizuddhi
pUrvaka vaMdana krnaa| gurudeva ko kahIM jAnA na ho aura kisI kArya meM ruke na
ho to paryupAsanA-sevA karanA, unake jAne para kucha dUra taka anugamana karanA,
isa prakAra guru kI pratipatti (dharmAcArya kA upacAra-vinaya) jAnanA  /  /
125-126  /  /  usake bAda gurumahArAja se dharmadezanA sunkr|298| tataH
pratinivRttaH san, sthAnaM gatvA yathocitam  /  sudhIdharmAvirodhena,
vidadhItArthacintanam  // 127 /  /  _ artha :- maMdira se vApisa Akara apane-
apane ucita sthAna para (arthAt rAjA ho to rAjasabhA meM, maMtrI Adi ho to
nyAyAlaya meM, vyApArI ho to dUkAna meM) jAkara jisase dharma ko AMca na Aye,
isa prakAra buddhizAlI zrAvaka dhanopArjana kA ciMtana kare  /  / 127 /  /  1.
yahAM praNidhAna trika kA vidhAna nahIM diyaa| evaM jayavIyarAya kI do gAthA
taka utkRSTa caityavaMdana kahA Aja yaha vidhi pracalita nahIM hai| 283

Page #306 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The evening program, Guru Vandana method Yoga Shastra, Third Light, Verses
128-129 Explanation: - The concern for earning a livelihood mentioned here
should be understood as a mere translation; because this is self-evident without
inspiration. It should be understood in this way that the concern for wealth of
a good householder is not contradictory to Dharma. Dharma's non-contradiction
should be understood in this way - if one is a king, then one should do justice
without partiality towards anyone, whether he is poor or rich, respected or
disrespected, noble or low. And the king's servant should serve the state and
the people with sincerity and truthfulness. And the merchant should give up
false weights and measures (baant-jag) and engage in business in the form of
fifteen karmas, without thinking about wealth. ||127|| ||299|| Then, after
midday, one should perform the worship of the Lord and then take food. This is
the meaning of half the verse, There is no rule that food should be taken only
at midday, when one is very hungry, that time is called mealtime. If one takes
food after performing the worship of the gods after crossing the paccchkhana
before midday, there is no fault. Its method is as follows - worship of the
Jinas, proper charity, taking care of the family, performing the proper duties
of those who are worthy, explaining or giving advice if there is a mistake, and
remembering the paccchkhana done by oneself. After eating, one should perform
any paccchkhana, including ganthasi, vedhasi, and mutthasi, as much as possible.
The soul aspiring to abandon negligence should not remain without renunciation
for even a moment. After renunciation, one should have the company of scholars
or religious teachers to discuss the meaning and import of the scriptures, and
after listening to the secrets of that scripture from the mouth of the guru, one
should not stop until one has thoroughly studied it, pondered over it, and
contemplated it sufficiently. ||128|| ||300|| Then, at the time of Sandhya,
after performing the worship of the gods again, one should perform the six
necessary actions, such as Pratikramana, etc., and then perform the excellent
study of the scriptures. ||129|| Explanation: - Then, if one eats twice, one
should eat two gharis before evening, i.e., in the evening. Later, for the third
time, one should perform the worship of the gods in the form of Agra Puja. After
that, if there are Sadhus and Muni Rajas, one should have their darshan,
Samayik, Chaturvinshati Stava, Vandana, Pratikramana, Kayotsarga, and
Pratiakhyana - the six necessary actions. Samayik means to abandon the
meditation of Artha-Roudra and to take refuge in Dharma meditation, maintaining
equanimity in enemy-friend, grass-gold, etc. Its nature has been described
earlier. Later, one should recite the virtues of the twenty-four Tirthankara
Bhagavants by name. Then, in Kayotsarga, one should meditate in the mind and
after completing Kayotsarga, one should speak that text clearly in clear letters
in the manifest form. We have already spoken about this. After that, one should
perform the Vandana, which is the twenty-five necessary-pure, thirty-two
faultless salutations, to the venerable Dharmacharaya. In this, the twenty-five
necessary should be known as follows (A. Ni. 1216) - In Vandana, there are two
prostrations; one Yathajat, twelve Avarta, four from the head, three from the
Guti, two entrances and one exit; these twenty-five are necessary to be done.
There are two prostrations in this - the desire to salute oneself and the
manifest request to the Guru Maharaj - Icchami Khamasamano! Vandiun Javanijjaae
Nisihiaae, i.e., 'O Kshamasraman! I want to salute you without sin, according to
my ability.' When saying this, bowing the head and the upper part of the body
slightly; it is called Avanta or Avantaman. 1. Then, after revolving, when one
comes back again, one should also say the mantra Icchami, etc., and then tell
the desire, then 2. the second Yathajat, i.e., like birth, birth is counted in
two ways - one is taking birth from the mother's womb and the other is taking
initiation. Just as in the posture of childbirth, one should keep both hands
joined on the head, in the same way, at the time of initiation, one should keep
both hands joined with the Rajoharan Mukhavastrika, in the same position as one
is born, that posture (position) should be maintained while saluting the Guru
Maharaj. 284

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 saMdhyA kA kAryakrama, guruvaMdana vidhi yogazAstra tRtIya prakAza zloka 128 se
129 vyAkhyA :- yahAM jo arthopArjana kI ciMtA kahI hai, vaha anuvAdamAtra
samajhanA; kyoMki yaha bAta preraNA ke binA svataHsiddha hai| usakA vidhAna isa
prakAra se samajhanA sadgRhastha kI arthacintA dharma se avirodhI rUpa meM ho|'
dharma kA avirodha isa prakAra samajhanA-yadi rAjA ho to use daridra yA zrImAn,
mAnya ho yA amAnya, uttama ho athavA nIca, kisI ke prati pakSapAta rakhe binA
nyAya karanA caahie| aura rAjasevaka ko rAjya aura prajA kI niSThApUrvaka
yathArthasevA karanI caahie| tathA vyApArI ko cAhie ki vaha jhUThe nApa-taula
(bAMTa-jaga) chor3akara paMdraha-karmAdAna rUpa vyavasAya | rahita artha kA
ciMtana kare  /  / 127 /  /  /   / 299 /  tato mAdhyAhnikI pUjA, kuryAt kRtvA'
ca bhojanam  /  tadvidbhiH saha zAstrArthaM rahasyAni vicArayet  // 128|| artha
:- tatpazcAt dina kI madhyakAlinI prabhu-pUjA karake phira bhojana kre| yaha
Adhe zloka kA bhAvArtha hai, madhyAhna ko hI bhojana ho, aisA koI niyama nahIM
hai, jaba tIvra bhUkha lagI ho, usI samaya ko bhojanakAla kahA hai| yadi
madhyAhnakAla ke pahale bhI paccakkhANa pArakara devapUjA karake bhojana kare to
doSa nahIM hai| usakI vidhi isa prakAra hai-jinapUjA, ucita dAna, kuTuMba
parivAra kI sArasaMbhAla lenA, unake yogya ucita karttavya kA pAlana karanA,
bhUla ho to samajhAnA athavA upadeza denA tathA svayaM dvArA kiye hue
paccakkhANa kA smaraNa krnaa| bhojana karane ke bAda yathAzakti gaMThasI,
veDhasI, muTThasI sahita koI bhI paccakkhANa kara lenA caahie| pramAda-tyAga ke
abhilASI AtmA ko eka kSaNa bhI pratyAkhyAna ke binA | nahIM rahanA caahie|
pratyAkhyAna karane ke bAda zAstroM ke artha aura tAtparya para vicAravimarza
karane hetu zAstravijJoM yA dharmaguruoM kA satsaMga karanA cAhie aura guru-
mukha se usa zAstra ke rahasyoM ko sunane ke bAda bAra-bAra usa para parizIlana,
paryApta cintana-manana Adi na kiyA jAya, taba taka vaha padArtha bhalIbhAMti
hRdayaMgama nahIM ho sakatA  /  / 128 /  /  ||300 /  tatazca sandhyAsamaye,
kRtvA devArcanaM punaH  /  kRtAvazyakakarmA ca, kuryAt svaadhyaaymuttmm||129||
artha :- usake bAda bhojana karake saMdhyA-samaya phira deva-pUjA karake
pratikramaNa Adi SaT Avazyaka kriyA kare, phira uttama svAdhyAya kare  // 129 /
/  vyAkhyA :- tatpazcAt yadi do bAra bhojana karatA ho to vikAla arthAt zAma ke
samaya do ghar3I pahale bhojana kre| bAda meM tIsarI bAra agrapUjA rUpa
devArcana kre| usake bAda sAdhu-munirAja hoM to unake darzana kare sAmAyika,
caturviMzatistava, vaMdanaka, pratikramaNa, kAyotsarga aura pratyAkhyAna-lakSaNa
chaha Avazyaka kre| sAmAyika kA artha haiArtta-raudradhyAna kA tyAga karake
dharmadhyAna kA AlaMbana lekara zatru-mitra, tRNa-svarNa Adi meM samabhAva
rkhnaa| isakA svarUpa pahale kaha cuke haiN| bAda meM cauvIsa tIrthaMkara
bhagavaMtoM ke nAmollekhapUrvaka guNoM kA utkIrtana krnaa| phira kAyotsarga meM
mana meM dhyAna karanA aura kAyotsarga pUrNa kara prakaTa rUpa meM spaSTa
akSaroM meM usa pATha ko bolnaa| isake |saMbaMdha meM bhI pahale kaha Aye haiN|
tatpazcAt vaMdanIya dharmAcArya ko paccIsa Avazyaka-vizuddha; battIsa doSa-
rahita namaskAra rUpa vaMdana krnaa| isameM paccIsa Avazyaka isa prakAra se
jAnanA (A. ni. 1216) - vaMdana meM do avanamana; eka yathAjAta, bAraha Avarta,
cAra mastaka se, tIna gupti se, do praveza aura eka niSkramaNa; ye paccIsa
avazya karane yogya Avazyaka hai| isameM do avanamana haiM-svayaM ko vaMdana
karane kI icchA aura gurumahArAja ko prakaTa rUpa meM nivedana-icchAmi
khamAsamaNo! vaMdiuM jAvaNijjAe nisIhiAe arthAt 'he kSamAzramaNa! maiM apanI
zakti-anusAra niSpApa rUpa se Apako vaMdana karanA cAhatA huuN| aisA kahate
samaya mastaka aura zarIra ke uccabhAga ko kucha namAnA; avanata yA avanamana
kahalAtA hai| 1. phira Avarta karake punaH vApisa Aye, taba bhI icchAmi ityAdi
sUtra bolakara phira icchA batAye, taba 2. dUsarA yathAjAta arthAt janma ke
samAna, janma do prakAra kA ginA jAtA hai-eka to mAtA ke udara se janmagrahaNa
aura dUsarA dIkSA-grahaNa karate smy| prasavakAlika mudrA ke samAna do hAtha
jor3akara mastaka para rakhe hoM, usI taraha dIkSA-grahaNa ke samaya bhI
rajoharaNa mukhavastrikA vAle do hAtha jor3akara jisa sthiti meM janma hotA hai,
vahI mudrA (sthiti) gurumahArAja ko vaMdana karate samaya 284

Page #307 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Explanation of the 32 Defects in Vandana (Veneration)  1. Anadrita Dosha -
Performing vandana without reverence or respect. 2. Stabdha Dosha - Performing
vandana under the influence of eight types of pride. 3. Apaviddha Dosha -
Leaving abruptly after an incomplete vandana. 4. Paripandita Dosha - Performing
a single vandana for a group or doing vandana with both hands on the abdomen and
both feet together, or reciting the sutras without pausing at the appropriate
places. 5. Tolagati Dosha - Performing vandana with unsteadiness, like a
grasshopper. 6. Ankusha Dosha - Holding or pulling the guru's cloth, hair, or
other belongings, or forcibly seating the guru on the seat or making them stand
up, which is disrespectful. 7. Kacchapariṅgita Dosha - Reciting the sutras while
standing or sitting, or crawling back and forth during vandana without reason,
like a tortoise. 8. Matsyodvartana Dosha - Suddenly diving down and then
springing up to perform vandana, or jumping up during vandana as if falling, and
then quickly sitting down, or changing positions rapidly like a fish. 9.
Manaḥpraduṣṭa Dosha - Performing vandana with resentment or contempt towards the
guru due to their reprimand, or thinking "How can I venerate this person of
inferior qualities?" 10. Vedikābaddha Dosha - Keeping the hands between or
outside the knees, or on one knee, instead of keeping them on both knees during
the circular movements of vandana. 11. Bhaya Dosha - Performing vandana out of
fear of being expelled from the sangha, community, or region. 12. Bhajanta Dosha
- Performing vandana or service with the expectation of receiving favors or
service in return.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 vaMdana ke 32 doSoM para vivecana yogazAstra tRtIya prakAza zloka 129 honI
caahie| yaha vaMdana yathAjAta kahalAtA hai  /  3. tathA bAraha - Avarta -
gurumahArAja ko dvAdazAvarta vaMdana karate samaya | gurucaraNoM meM tathA apane
mastaka para hAtha se sparza karake prathama praveza kara aho kAyaM ityAdi sUtra
uccAraNa karate hue | chaha Arvata karanA; phira dUsarI bAra praveza kare, taba
bhI dUsarI bAra chaha Avartta karanA, ina donoM ke milAkara bAraha Avarta | hote
haiM  /  15. caussira - jisameM cAra bAra mastaka namAnA par3atA hai, prathama
vaMdana meM ziSya dvArA icchAmi khamAsamaNo bolate | mastaka namAnA, bAda meM
guru bhI 'ahamavi khAmemi' aisA uttara dete hue kucha sira namAte haiM, isa
taraha guru-ziSya donoM kA mastaka namAnA, isI prakAra dUsarI bAra vaMdana
milakara kula cAra bAra mastaka namAnA  /  19. trigupta- mana, vacana aura |
kAyA ke yoga se ekAgratA pUrvaka vaMdana karanA; isa taraha tIna vaMdana 22.
duppavesa - gurumahArAja ke Asana se pratyeka dizA meM sAr3e tIna hAtha taka ke
sthAna kA guru- avagraha hotA hai| ataH dUra rahakara guru kA vinaya karanA,
phira zArIrika sevA| vaMdanAdi ke lie unakI AjJA lekara usa avagraha meM praveza
karanA, yaha prathama AjJA lekara praveza hai aura bAda meM phira | nikalakara
dUsarI bAra praveza kare, yaha eka niSkramaNa (avagraha se bAhara nikalanA) hai|
dusare vaMdana meM AvassiAe kahakara | bAhara niSkramaNa nahIM hotaa| isa taraha
do bAra praveza aura eka niSkramaNa milAkara kula paccIsa Avazyaka vaMdana |
jAnanA  /  ( A. ni. 1221 - 1225 ) vaMdana ke 32 doSa - 1. anAdRta, 2. stabdha,
3. apaviddha, 4. paripaMDita, 5. Tolagati, 6. aMkuza, 7. kacchaparigita, 8.
matsyodvartana, 9. manaHpraduSTa, 10. vedikAbaddha, 11. bhaya, 12. bhajaMta, 13.
maitrI, 14. gaurava, 15. karaNa, 16. stena, 17. pratyanIka, 18. ruSTa, 19.
tarjanA, 20. zaTha, 21. hIlita, 22. viparikuMcita, 23. dRSTAdRSTa, 24. zRMga, |
25. kara, 26. mukta, 27. AzliSTAnAzliSTa, 28. nyUna, 29. uttaracUDA, 30. mUka,
31. DhaDDhara aura 32. cUDalidoSa; | ye vaMdana ke battIsa doSa haiM, jinheM
tyAgakara vidhi pUrvaka vaMdana karanA cAhie  /  vyAkhyA - 1. anAdRtadoSa -
Adara-satkAra ke binA zUnyacitta se vaMdana karanA, 2. stabdhadoSa - ATha
prakAra ke mada ke vaza hokara vaMdana karanA, 3. apaviddhadoSa-adhUre - apUrNa
vaMdana karake bhAga jAnA, 4. paripaMDitadoSa - eka sAtha sabhI | ko ikaTThA eka
hI vaMdana karanA athavA do hAtha peTa para tathA donoM paira ikaTThe karake
vaMdana karanA yA sUtra - uccAraNa karane meM akSara-saMpadAoM ke yathAyogya
sthAna para ruke binA eka sAtha hI aspaSTa uccAraNa karanA, 5 . Tolagati - TiDDI
kI | taraha phudaka-phudakakara asthiratA se vaMdana karanA, 6. aMkuza -
gurumahArAja khar3e ho yA soye hoM athavA anya kArya meM | lage hoM; usI samaya
unakA rajoharaNa, colapaTTA, vastra Adi hAtha se pakar3akara athavA avajJA se
hAthI para aMkuza lagAne kI taraha khar3e hue guru ko Asana para biThAnA aura
prayojana pUrNa hone para yA vaMdana karane ke bAda Asana se utthaanaa| |
pUjyapuruSoM ke sAtha isa prakAra kI khIMcAtAnI karanA yogya nahIM hai; aisA
karane se unakA avinaya hotA hai athavA rajoharaNa para aMkuza ke samAna hAtha
rakhakara vaMdana karanA athavA aMkuza se pIr3ita hAthI ke samAna vaMdana karate
hue sira | hilAnA  /  7. kacchapariMgita - khar3e-khar3e hI tittisaNayarAe
ityAdi sUtra bolanA athavA baiThe-baiThe hI ahokAyaM kAryaM |ityAdi pATha
bolanA, vaMdana karate samaya binA kAraNa kachue ke samAna Age pIche reMga kara
vaMdana karanA  /  8. matsyodvartana| machalI jaise jala meM ekadama nIce jAkara
phira Upara uchala AtI hai, vaise hI karavaTa badalakara ekadama recakAvarta
karake | uchalakara vaMdana kare athavA vaMdana karate samaya uchalakara khar3A
honA, mAno gira rahA ho, isa taraha se baiTha jAnA, ekadama | vaMdana karake
machalI ke samAna karavaTa badalakara dUsare sAdhu ke pAsa vaMdana karanA  /  9.
manaH praduSTa- guru mahArAja ne ziSya ko koI upAlaMbha diyA ho, isase ruSTa
hokara unake prati mana meM dveSa rakhakara vaMdana karanA athavA apane se hIna
guNa vAle ko maiM kaise vaMdana karUM? 'yA' aise guNahIna ko kyoM vaMdana kiyA
jAya ? aisA vicAra karate hue vaMdana krnaa| 10. | vedikAbaddha - vaMdana meM
Avartta dete samaya donoM hAtha donoM ghuTanoM ke bIca meM rahanA cAhie, usake
badale donoM hAtha ghuTanoM para rakhe athavA ghuTanoM ke nIce hAtha rakhe, yA
goda meM hAtha rakhe, donoM ghuTanoM ke bAhara athavA bIca meM hAtha rakhe yA
eka ghuTane para hAtha rakhe aura vaMdana kare, isa taraha isake pAMca bheda hai
/  11. bhaya - inheM vaMdana nahIM karUMgA to saMgha, samudAya, gaccha yA kSetra
se bAhara yA dUra kara deMge; isa bhaya se vaMdana karanA  /  12. bhajaMta -
maiM vaMdana Adi se inheM khuza karatA huuN| yA sevA karatA hUM, isalie guru Adi
bhI merI sevA kareMge; mere dvArA sevA karane se bhaviSya meM merI sevA hogI;
aisA 285

Page #308 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Guru Vandana: Text, Method and Discussion  **Yoga Shastra, Third Light, Verse
129**  **12. Thinking:** To perform Vandana with the same thought as keeping a
trust.  **13. Maitri (Friendship):** I have friendship with these Acharyas,
etc., therefore if I perform Vandana to them, my friendship with them will
remain forever. With this thought, I perform Vandana.  **14. Gaurav (Pride):** I
am skilled in the method of Guru Vandana, etc., thinking this way, I perform
Vandana with pride, giving it a beautiful form to tell others about it.  **15.
Karan (Reason):** To perform Vandana with the desire to obtain clothes, vessels,
etc., without any reason like knowledge, etc., or to perform Vandana with the
desire to become revered in the world due to knowledge, etc., or to perform
Vandana with the thought that the Guru Maharaj, who is subdued by the value of
Vandana, will not reject my request.  **16. Sten (Thief):** If I perform Vandana
to others, I will be considered small; therefore, I perform Vandana secretly
like a thief, i.e., like a thief, no one should see, I perform Vandana quickly.
**17. Pratyanik (Busy):** To perform Vandana when the Guru Maharaj is busy with
food, etc., it is also said that - Guru Maharaj should not be Vandanaed when
they are busy, distracted, or asleep, or when they are eating or have a desire
to eat. (A. Ni. 1212)  **18. Rusht (Angry):** To perform Vandana when the Guru
Maharaj is angry, or to perform Vandana when you are angry or furious.  **19.
Tarjana (Taunt):** Gurudev! You are neither angry by not performing Vandana nor
happy by performing Vandana, or you do not know the difference between those who
perform Vandana and those who do not. Saying this, to perform Vandana with a
taunt, or to perform Vandana with humiliation by taunting with a finger or head,
saying that you make me look small by making me perform Vandana in front of many
people, but when you are alone, you will know.  **20. Shath (Deceitful):** To
show the Guru or ordinary people with deceit that this person is a humble
devotee or disciple. To influence them in this way, or to pretend to be sick,
etc., and not perform Vandana properly.  **21. Hilita (Humiliated):** Guruji!
Vachakvary! What benefit will I get by performing Vandana to you? Saying this,
to perform Vandana with humiliation.  **22. Viparikunchit (Contracted):** To
perform half Vandana and then talk about other things like stories, etc., in
between.  **23. Drisht-Adrisht (Seen-Unseen):** To perform Vandana when not
visible in the crowd, or to perform Vandana when it is dark, to sit during that
time and perform Vandana when the Guru sees.  **24. Shring (Horn):** To perform
Vandana by saying Ahokayam-Kay, etc., and touching the right and left horn parts
of the head instead of touching the middle part of the forehead.  **25. Kar
(Tax):** To perform Vandana thinking that this Vandana has to be given to Shri
Arihant Bhagwan like giving tax to the king.  **26. Mukt (Free):** To perform
Vandana without heart, thinking that I have become free from the worldly tax of
the king, etc., after taking initiation, but I have not become free from this
tax of Vandana.  **27. Ashlista-Nashlista (Touched-Untouched):** While
performing Ahokayam Kay, etc., to touch the Rajoharan, forehead, both hands, and
palm; to touch the Rajoharan but not the forehead; or to touch the forehead but
not the Rajoharan; or to not touch both. The first of the four is free from
fault, and the remaining three have this fault.  **28. Nyun (Less):** To not
pronounce the letters of the Sutra completely, to not perform the twenty-five
necessary things completely while performing Vandana.  **29. Uttar-Chuda (Head-
Up):** To say "Matthaena Vandami" in a loud voice after performing Vandana.
**30. Muk (Mute):** To perform Vandana by pronouncing the Sutra in a way that is
not understood, like a mute, to perform Vandana by speaking in the mind.  **31.
Dhadhdhar (Loud):** To perform Vandana by speaking in a very loud voice.  **32.
Chudali Dosha (Fault of the Top):** To perform Vandana by holding the end of the
Rajoharan and rotating it like a child rotates a burning piece of wood, or to
perform Vandana by extending the hand and saying "I am performing Vandana," or
to perform Vandana by rotating the hand to everyone.  In this way, while
performing Vandana to the Guru Maharaj, one should abandon these thirty-two
faults and perform pure Vandana according to the method.  **Six Desires in
Vandana:**  The disciple has six desires in the form of questions from the Guru
in Vandana:  1. **Iccha (Desire)** 2. **Anugya (Permission)** 3. **Avyabadh
(Obstruction)** 4. **Samyama Yatra (Journey of Restraint)** 5. **Samadhi
(Concentration)** 6. **Apradh Ki Kshamayaachana (Apology for Offense)**  These
six desires are also mentioned in other places. The disciple asks questions
using the text that is prescribed for each of these six desires. (A. Ni. 1232)
**Guru's Answers:**  The Guru Maharaj answers these six questions through the
disciple's six-place Guru Vandana in this way:  1. **As you desire, I give
permission.** 2. **It is like that.** 3. **It is the same for you too.** 4. **It
is like this.** 5. **It is like this.** 6. **I also seek forgiveness from you.**
It is also said that - "I give permission according to your desire, it is like
that, it is the same for you too, it is like this, and I also forgive you." In
this way, the Guru Maharaj gives six answers. (A. Ni. 1238)  We will explain
both of these in the context of the explanation of the Sutra.  **The Guru
Vandana Sutra is as follows:**  **2.**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 guruvaMdana : pATha, vidhi aura vivecana yogazAstra tRtIya prakAza zloka 129 |
socakara amAnata rakhane ke samAna vaMdana karanA  /  13. maitrI - ina AcArya
Adi ke sAtha merI mitratA hai, ataH yadi maiM inheM vaMdana karUMgA to unake
sAtha sadA mitratA banI rahegI, isa lihAja se vaMdana karanA  /  14. gaurava -
guruvaMdana Adi vidhi meM maiM kuzala hUM, aisA socakara Avartta Adi dUsare ko
batAne ke lie suMdara rUpa meM dekara abhimAna pUrvaka vaMdana karatA  /  15. |
kAraNa - jJAnAdi ke kAraNa binA hI vastra - pAtra Adi prApti ke lobha se vaMdana
karanA athavA jJAnAdi-guNa se jagat meM pUjya banUM, isa Azaya se jJAna prApti
ke lie vaMdana karanA yA vaMdana rUpa mUlya se vazIbhUta guru mahArAja merI
prArthanA nahIM ThukarAyeMge; isa abhiprAya se vaMdana karanA  /  16. stena meM
dUsare ko vaMdana karUMgA to choTA kahalAUMgA ; isalie cora ke | samAna
chipakara vaMdana karanA arthAt cora ke samAna koI na dekhe, isa prakAra jaldI-
jaldI vaMdana karanA  /  17. pratyanIkaguru mahArAja AhAra Adi kArya meM vyagra
hoM, taba vaMdana karanA, kahA bhI hai ki - gurumahArAja vyagracitta hoM,
pramAda yA nindrA meM ho, AhAra- nIhAra karate hoM yA karane kI icchA ho, taba
unheM vaMdana nahIM karanA caahie| ( A. ni. 1212 ) 18. ruSTa - guru mahArAja
kopAyamAna hoM, taba vaMdana karanA athavA svayaM ruSTa hokara yA kruddha ho,
usa samaya vaMdana karanA  /  19. tarjanA - gurudeva ! Apa vaMdana na karane se
na to gusse hote haiM aura na vaMdana karane se prasanna hI hote haiM athavA
vaMdana karane vAle aura na karane vAle kA aMtara Apa nahIM jAnate, yoM bolakara
tarjanA karanA athavA Apa bahuta se logoM ke | bIca mujhase vaMdana karavAkara
mujhe nIcA dikhAte haiM, magara jaba Apa akele hoMge, taba Apako khabara
par3egI, yoM aMgulI yA mastaka se tAnA mAra (tarjanA) karake apamAna pUrvaka
vaMdana krnaa| 20. zaTha-kapaTa se guru ko athavA Ama logoM ko dikhAnA ki yaha
vinayavAna bhakta yA ziSya hai| isa prakAra kA una para prabhAva DAlanA athavA
bImArI Adi kA bahAnA | banAkara acchI taraha vaMdana nahIM karanA  /  21. hIlita
- gurujI ! vAcakavarya ! Apako vaMdana karane se mujhe kyA lAbha hogA? yoM
apamAna karate hue vaMdana karanA  /  22. viparikuMcita- - AdhA vaMdanakara bIca
meM dezakathAdi dUsarI bAteM karanA Adi  /  23. | dRSTAdRSTa - bahutoM kI Ar3a
meM na dikhAyI de; athavA aMdherA ho, taba vaMdana na kare, usa samaya baiThA
rahe aura jaba guru | dekheM, taba vaMdana kre| 24. zRMga - ahokAyaM-kAya ityAdi
Avartta bolakara lalATa ke madhyabhAga meM sparza na karake mastaka ke dAMye
bAMye zRMgabhAga meM sparza karate hue vaMdana karanA  /  25. kara - rAjA ko
kara dene ke samAna zrI arihaMta bhagavAn ko | bhI kara dene ke rUpa meM yaha
vaMdana karanA par3atA hai, aisA mAnakara vaMdana karanA  /  26. mukta - dIkSA
lekara maiM rAjAdi ke laukika kara se to chUTa gayA, magara isa vaMdana rUpa
kara se nahIM chUTa pAyA, aisA mAnakara binA mana se vaMdana karanA  /  27. |
AzliSTAnAzliSTa - ahokAyaM kAya ityAdi bolakara Avartta karate samaya
rajoharaNa, lalATa, do hAtha evaM hathelI kA | sparza kare; rajoharaNa kA sparza
kare paraMtu lalATa kA sparza na kare; yA lalATa kA sparza kare paraMtu
rajoharaNa kA sparza na | kare athavA donoM kA sparza na kre| cAroM meM prathama
bhaMga nirdoSa hai aura zeSa tIna bhaMgoM se yaha doSa lagatA hai  /  28. nyUna|
sUtra ke akSaroM kA pUrA uccAraNa na karanA, paccIsa Avazyaka pUrNa na karake
vaMdana krnaa| 29. uttaracUDA - vaMdana karane | ke bAda ucce svara se matthaeNa
vaMdAmi bolanA  /  30. mUka - gUMge ke samAna samajha meM na Aye, isa taraha
sUtra kA uccAraNa karake vaMdana karanA, mana meM hI bolakara vaMdana karanA  /
31. DhaDDhara - bahuta hI ucca svara se bolakara vaMdana krnaa| 32. cUDalI doSa
- jaise jalatI huI lakar3I ko lekara bAlaka ghumAtA hai, vaise hI rajoharaNa ke
sire ko pakar3akara ghumAte hue | vaMdana kare athavA hAtha laMbA karake maiM
vaMdana karatA hUM, yoM bolate hue vaMdana kare athavA hAtha ghumAte hue sabhI
ko vaMdana | karanA  /  isa prakAra guru mahArAja ko vaMdana karate samaya
battIsa doSoM kA tyAgakara vidhi pUrvaka zuddha vaMdana karanA caahie| vaMdana
meM ziSya ko guru se prazna rUpa chaha abhilASAeM hotI hai - 1. icchA, 2.
anujJA, 3. avyAbAdha, 4. saMyamayAtrA, 5. samAdhi, 6. aparAdha kI kSamAyAcanA  /
anya sthAnoM para bhI aisI hI chaha abhilASAe~ kahI hai| ina chahoM ke lie jo-jo
pATha niyata hai, usa usa pATha se ziSya prazna karatA hai| (A. ni. 1232) vaha
ziSya ke SaT sthAna rUpa | guru- vaMdanA ke dvArA jAnanA ukta chahoM praznoM kA
uttara guru mahArAja isa taraha se dete haiM - 1. jaisI tumhArI icchA, anujJA
detA hUM, 3. vaise hI hai, 4. tumheM bhI isI prakAra se hai ? 5. isI taraha se
hai aura 6. maiM bhI tuma se kSamA cAhatA huuN| kahA bhI hai- tumhArI
icchAnusAra AjJA detA hUM, vaise hI hai, tumheM bhI vaise hI ho, isI taraha se
hai aura maiM bhI tumheM khamAtA hUM, isa taraha guru mahArAja chaha uttara dete
haiN| (A. ni. 1238) ina donoM kI vyAkhyA upayukta prasaMgavaza sUtra kI vyAkhyA
ke samaya kreNge| vaha guruvaMdanasUtra isa prakAra hai 2.

Page #309 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Meaning of Guru Vandana Sutra  **Yoga Shastra, Third Light, Verse 129**  I
desire, O Shramans of Forgiveness! To offer you my obeisance with a strong body,
free from the five great sins. Please permit me to enter your presence, O
Shramans! Oh, what a great joy it is to be forgiven! I am truly fortunate to be
in the presence of the pure and virtuous! Is the day auspicious? Is it a day of
victory? I seek forgiveness, O Shramans of Forgiveness! I prostrate myself
before the divine beings, the protectors of the Dharma, the thirty-two
principles of conduct. For any wrong thoughts, words, or actions, for any anger,
pride, deceit, or greed, for any transgression of the Dharma, for any offense I
may have committed against the protectors of the Dharma, I seek forgiveness, O
Shramans of Forgiveness! I condemn myself, I reproach myself, I purify myself.
**Sutra - Explanation:**  Here, with the desire to perform the twelve-fold
obeisance, the disciple, after performing a light obeisance in the form of
seeking forgiveness, cleanses the ground and sits down. Then, as mentioned
earlier, he performs the purification of the mouth with twenty-five syllables
and the purification of the body with twenty-five syllables. After that, with
utmost humility, having purified himself in mind, speech, and body, he stands
outside the three and a half hand-span area of the Guru's seat (which is the
ground area equivalent to his own body), and bowing slightly from the waist
upwards, like a bow, he takes the Oghā (a type of garland) and the Muhpaṭṭī (a
type of cloth) in his hand and says:  "I desire" - meaning, I want to. I do not
offer this obeisance under any pressure or coercion, but out of my own free
will.  "Khmaasamano" - O Shramans of Forgiveness! Here, the suffix "ā" is added
to the feminine form of the root "Ksham" (to forgive), forming the word "Kshamā"
(forgiveness). Its meaning is to bear, to endure. And the suffix "an" is added
to the root "Shram" (to toil) in the sense of the doer, forming the word
"Shraman" (one who toils). Its meaning is one who, being indifferent to worldly
matters, practices austerities, or one who strives in the pursuit of knowledge,
vision, and character, or in self-realization. In the Prakrit language, it
becomes "Khmaasamano" in the form of an address. By accepting forgiveness, one
also accepts the qualities of gentleness, honesty, etc. Its meaning is - Shraman
endowed with the primary qualities of forgiveness, etc. = Shramans of
Forgiveness. Here it is indicated that - being endowed with such qualities of
forgiveness, etc., they are truly worthy of obeisance; now what is the desire?
"Vandiun" - meaning, to offer you obeisance. How?  "Javanijjaae Nisihiaae" -
Here, "Nisihiaae" is the noun and "Javanijjaae" is the adjective. "Nisihiaae"
means in which there is no violence, etc., such "Javanijjaae" = with a strong
body. The meaning of this entire sentence is - O Shramans of Forgiveness!
endowed with the qualities of forgiveness, etc.! I desire to offer you obeisance
with a strong body, free from violence, etc.  Here, one should pause for a
moment. At the time of this obeisance, if the Guru is engaged in some other work
or if there is some obstacle, then the Guru Maharaj may say that it should be
done later, or that it should be left for now. If there is a reason to say so,
then he should say it, and if there is no reason to say so, then he should not
say it either. This is the opinion of the Churnikara. The commentator's opinion
is that at such a time, it is forbidden to offer obeisance with mind, speech,
and body, therefore the disciple should offer a brief obeisance. And if the Guru
is not engaged in any other work and gives permission to offer obeisance and
says - "Chhanden = Abhipraayen = If you wish, offer me obeisance. I have no
objection; offer obeisance with joy." Then, to offer obeisance, he should stand
three and a half hand-spans away and say - "Anujaanah Me Miuggham" - Please
grant me permission to enter your presence. Here, the three and a half hand-
spans of land in all four directions, equivalent to his own body, is the Guru
Maharaj's "Avgraha" (area of presence), and he cannot enter it without his
permission. It is also said - the area equivalent to the Guru's body in all four
directions is the Guru's "Avgraha", and it is never permissible to enter it
without the Guru's permission. After that, the Guru Maharaj says - "Anujaanami"
- meaning, "I grant you permission to enter", then the disciple cleanses the
ground, says "Nisihi" and enters the "Avgraha". When going to the Guru Maharaj,
the meaning of "Nisihi" is - I renounce all evil deeds. Later, after cleansing
the ground, he sits down and places the Oghā on the ground near the Guru
Maharaj's feet, and imagining the Guru's feet to be placed in the middle of the
Oghā's flowers, he takes the Muhpaṭṭī in his right hand, and with his right
hand, he cleanses his forehead from his right ear to his left ear and his right
knee three times, and places the Muhpaṭṭī on his left knee. Then, as soon as he
utters the sound "A", he touches the Rajoharan (a type of cloth), and utters the
sound "Ho", at that time he touches his forehead. Then, while uttering the
letter "Ka", he touches the Oghā's flowers with his hand in the same way, and
while saying "Ya", he touches the middle of his forehead for the second time.
Then, while saying "Ka" again, he touches the Oghā and "Ya"

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 guru vaMdana sutra ke artha yogazAstra tRtIya prakAza zloka 129 icchAmi
khamAsamaNo! vaMdiuM jAvaNijjAe nisIhiAe aNujANaha me miuggahaM, nisIhi, aho
kAya kAya saMphAsaM khamaNijjo bhe  /  kilAmo, appakilaMtANaM bahusubheNa bhe!
divaso yar3akaMto? jattA bhe! jayaNijjaM ca bhe! khAmemi khamAsamaNo! devasiyaM
var3akkamaM, AvassiyAe, paDikkamAmi khamAsamaNANaM devasiAe, AsAyaNAe,
tittIsannayarAe jaM kiMci micchAe maNadukkaDAe, vayadukkaDAe, kAyadukkaDAe,
kohAe, mANAe, mAyAe, lobhAe, savvakAliAe, savyamicchovayArAeM
savyadhammAikkamaNAe AsAyaNAe jo me aiAro kao, tassa khamAsamaNo paDikkamAmi,
niMdAmi, garihAmi appANaM vosirAmi  /  sUtra - vyAkhyA : - yahAM para
dvAdazAvarta vaMdana kI icchA se ziSya khamAsamaNa rUpa laghuvaMdana pUrvaka
saMDAsA pramArjana | karake baiThe-baiThe pahale kahe anusAra paccIsa bola se
muhapattI aura paccIsa bola se zarIra kA paDilehaNa kare, usake | bAda parama
vinaya pUrvaka svayaM mana-vacana-kAyA se zuddha hokara gurumahArAja ke Asana se
(apane zarIrapramANabhUmi rUpa) sAr3e tIna hAtha avagraha ke bAhara khar3e
hokara kamara se Upara ke bhAga ko dhanuSya kI taraha jarA namAkara oghA -
muhapatti | hAtha meM lekara vaMdana karane ke lie isa prakAra se bole - icchAmi
arthAt maiM cAhatA huuN| kisI ke dabAva yA balAtkAra se vaMdana nahIM karatA,
apitu apanI icchA se vaMdana karatA huuN| khamAsamaNo = he zramAzramaNa ! isameM
kSam dhAtu ke strIliMga kA A pratyaya lagane se kSamA zabda banatA hai| isakA
artha sahana karanA hotA hai| tathA zram dhAtu ke karttA ke artha meM an
pratyaya lagane se zramaNa rUpa banatA hai| isakA artha hotA hai-saMsAra ke
viSaya meM udAsIna hokara jo tapa karatA hai athavA | jJAna- darzana - cAritra
ke bAre meM yA Atma sAdhanA meM jo svayaM zrama (puruSArtha) karatA hai, use
zramaNa kahate haiN| isakA prAkRta | bhASA ke saMbodhana meM khamAsamaNo banatA
hai| kSamA grahaNa karane se mArdava, Arjava Adi guNoM kA bhI grahaNa ho jAtA
hai| | isakA artha hai-kSamA Adi pradhAna guNoM se yukta zramaNa = kssmaashrmnn|
yahAM sUcita kiyA gayA hai ki - aise kSamAdi guNoM se 'yukta hone se vAstava meM
ve vaMdanIya hai; aba kyA karane kI icchA hai? vaMdiuM arthAt Apako vaMdana
karanA hai| vaha kisa taraha? jAvaNijjAe nisIhiAe isameM nisIhiAe vizeSya aura
jAvaNijjAe vizeSaNa hai, nisIhiAe arthAt jisameM | prANAtipAta Adi pApa nahIM
hai, aisI jAvaNijjAe = sazakta kAyA se  /  isa saMpUrNa vAkya kA artha isa
prakAra hai - he kSamAdi | guNoM se yukta zramaNa ! vaMdana karane meM hiMsA Adi
na ho, isa taraha sazakta kAyA se maiM Apako vaMdana karanA cAhatA huuN| yahAM
para thor3A-sA rukanA caahie| isa vaMdana ke samaya guru Adi dUsare kArya meM
lage ho athavA koI vighnavAlA kArya ho to guru mahArAja kaha de ki thor3e samaya
ke bAda karanA, abhI rahane de kAraNa kahane yogya ho to kaheM, nahIM kahane
yogya ho to na bhI kaheM, aisA cUrNikAra kA mata hai| TIkAkAra kA mata hai ki
aise samaya meM mana, vacana aura kAyA tInoM | se vaMdana karane kA niSedha hai,
ataH ziSya saMkSipta vaMdana kara le| aura yadi guru dUsare kArya meM ruke na ho
aura vaMdana karane kI AjJA de deM aura kaheM ki -chaMdena=abhiprAyeNa= tumhArI
icchA ho to mujhe vaMdana kro| mujhe Apatti nahIM; khuzI se vaMdana kro| taba
vaMdana karane hetu sAr3he tIna hAtha dUra khar3e hokara kahe - aNujANaha me
miuggahaM Apa mujhe avagraha meM praveza karane | kI AjJA diijie| yahAM para
cAroM dizA meM apane zarIra ke pramANa meM sAr3he tIna hAtha bhUmi kA AcArya
mahArAja kA avagraha hotA hai, usameM unakI anumati binA praveza nahIM kara
sakatA; kahA bhI hai-cAroM dizA meM apane zarIra ke pramANAnusAra | sthAna guru
kA avagraha hotA hai, guru kI AjJA binA usameM praveza karanA kadApi kalpanIya
nahIM hai| tatpazcAt guru mahArAja | kaheM - aNujANAmi yAnI 'maiM praveza karane
kI anujJA detA hUM', taba ziSya bhUmi kA pramArjana kara nisIhi kahakara
avagraha meM praveza kre| guru mahArAja ke pAsa jAne ke samaya nisIhi kA artha
hai - sarva azubha vyApAroM kA tyAga karatA huuN| bAda meM saMDAsA ke pramArjana
pUrvaka nIce baiThe aura gurumahArAja ke caraNoM ke pAsa jamIna para oghA
rakhakara usa oghe kI daziyoM (phaliyoM) ke madhya bhAga meM kalpanA se guru
caraNa-yugala kI sthApanA karake dAhine hAtha se muhapatti pakar3akara, dAhine
kAna se bAMye kAna taka lalATa ko tathA dAhine ghuTane ko tIna bAra pramArjana
kara muhapattI bAe~ ghuTane para sthApita kre| usake bAda akAra uccAraNa karate
hI rajoharaNa ko sparza karake, hokAra kA uccAraNa kare, usa samaya lalATa kA |
sparza kare, usake bAda 'kA' akSara ke uccAraNa karate samaya phira usI taraha
hAtha se oghe kI daziyoM kA sparza karanA aura 'yaM' bolate samaya dUsarI bAra
lalATa ke madhya meM sparza karanA, usake bAda phira 'kA' bolate vakta oghe aura
'ya' 287

Page #310 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Discussion on the Remaining Text of the Guru Vandan Sutra  **Yoga Shastra,
Third Light, Verse 129**  **Touching the forehead while speaking, then touching
the Rajoharan with both hands and head while saying "Samphasan", then placing
both hands in Anjali mudra in front of the Guru, looking at the Guru, and
reciting the Sutra from "Khamanijjo Bhe Kilamo" to "Divaso Vaikkanto".**  The
meaning of these words is as follows:  **Aho Kayam = Guru's body - Charanas
(feet) are Kayam = my body in the form of hands and head.**  **Samphasan = I
touch with my body.** Here, by implication, it means that I bow to your feet,
give your command, and this is connected to the previous command. Without
permission, there is no right to touch the Guru's body.  **Khamanijjo Bhe = You
are worthy of forgiveness, O Bhagavan! Kilamo = My touch caused you pain.**
**Rupa and Appakilantanam = A small amount of pain.**  **Bahusubhen = Very happy
form, Bhe = Your Divaso Vaikkanto = Day is complete?** Here, the word "day"
should be understood as night, fortnight, four months, and year, according to
the context.  Similarly, with both hands joined, the disciple desires to hear
the Guru's reply, and the Guru says, "Tahatti = It is so; that is, my day has
been fulfilled with happiness." In this way, the disciple inquires about the
Guru's well-being.  Now, the disciple inquires about the well-being of the
Guru's tapasya (austerity): **"Jatta Bhe"**. While pronouncing "J" with an
anudatta tone, touch the Rajoharan with both hands. Then, raise the hands,
spread them wide between the Rajoharan and the forehead, and pronounce "tta"
with a svarita tone, keeping your gaze fixed on the Guru's face. Then, while
touching the forehead with those hands, pronounce "Bhe" with an udatta tone.
Here, **Jatta = Journey and Bhe = Your** meaning - O Bhagavan! Is your journey
of tapasya, including Kshayika, Kshayopa-shamic, and Aupa-shamic, increasing?
The Guru replies, **"Tubbhe Vattai"**. The meaning is - My journey of tapasya
and restraint is increasing, and yours too will increase in that journey.  Now,
regarding the object of restraint, the disciple again inquires about well-being:
**"Javanijjan Cha Bhe"**. While pronouncing "J" with an anudatta tone, touch the
Oghe with both hands. Then, raise both hands, bring them towards the forehead,
spread them wide in the middle, and pronounce "V" with a svarita tone. As the
hands reach the forehead, pronounce "ni" with an udatta tone. While pronouncing
these three letters, even though the question is incomplete, the disciple waits
for the answer without looking away. Then, while pronouncing "jjan" with an
anudatta tone, touch the Rajoharan with both hands. Then, bring both hands
towards the forehead, spread them wide in the middle, and pronounce "cha" with a
svarita tone. Then, while touching the forehead with the hands, pronounce "Bhe"
with an udatta tone. After that, the disciple waits for the Guru's reply and
remains seated in the same position.  **Javanijjan Cha "Bhe"** means - Are your
senses and mind, which are subject to control, free from the consumption of
Upshamadi (things that cause harm)? The implication is that your body, senses,
and mind are free from pain? In this way, the disciple respectfully inquired
about the Guru's well-being.  Then, the Guru replies, **"Evam = Yes"**, in the
same way, I am free from the senses, etc.  Then, the disciple places both hands
and head on the Oghe and says the following to seek forgiveness for his
offenses: **"Khamem Khamasamano! Devasian Vaikkaman"**. O Shrama-guna-yukt
Shraman! There may have been offenses committed by me in the form of violations
of the rituals that are to be performed throughout the day. I seek forgiveness
from you for them. Then, the Guru also says, **"Ahamvi Khamem = I also forgive
you"**. That is, if there were any offenses committed by you against me
throughout the day due to negligence or violation of the law in matters of
beneficial teachings, etc., I seek forgiveness for them.  Then, the disciple,
after bowing and seeking forgiveness, cleanses the ground behind his feet, comes
out of the Avgraha, and recites the Sutra from **"Avassiae"** to **"Jo Me Aiaro
Kao"**. This text contains a Sutra that indicates the atonement called Alokchana
(self-confession) for confessing one's transgressions. Then, the text **"Tass
Khamasamano Padikkamami"**, etc., indicates the method of atonement for
Pratikraman. The practitioner should recite this with the understanding that "I
will not commit such an offense again and will purify my soul." While coming out
of the Avgraha, the practitioner should recite this.  **Avassiae** means - It
indicates the observance of Charanasattari and Karanasattari, which are the
duties that must be performed, and the transgression that occurs due to their
non-observance. **Padikkamami = I repent**. That is, I withdraw from it. After
stating this general meaning, the practitioner says specifically -
**"Khamasamanaanam Devasiaae Asayanaae"**, that is, towards the Kshamasraman
Guru Maharaj.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 guru vaMdana sUtra ke avaziSTa pATha para vivecana yogazAstra tRtIya prakAza
zloka 129 | bolate vakta lalATa kA sparza karanA, usake bAda saMphAsaM bolate
hue do hAtha aura mastaka se rajoharaNa kA sparza kare usake bAda mastaka para
do hAtha kI aMjali kara gurusammukha dRSTi rakhakara khamaNijjo bhe kilAmo se
lekara divaso vaikkaMto taka | sUtra bolanA  /  ina padoM kA artha isa prakAra
hai - aho kAyaM = guru kI kAyA - caraNoM ko kAya = hAtha aura mastaka rUpI merI
| kAyA se saMphAsaM= sparza karatA huuN| yahAM adhyAhAra se arthAt ApazrIjI ke
caraNoM meM maiM namaskAra karatA hUM, usakI AjJA de, pahale mAMgI huI AjJA ke
sAtha isakA saMbaMdha hai| anumati binA guru kA aMga - sparza karane kA adhikAra
nahIM hai| | bAda meM khamaNijjo bhe Apa kSamA karane yogya hai, he bhagavan!
Apako kilAmo arthAt mere sparza se Apake zarIra meM duHkha | rUpa tathA
appakilaMtANaM = alpamAtrA meM pIr3A huii| bahusubheNa = bahuta sukha rUpa, bhe=
ApakA divaso vaikkaMto = dina pUrNa | huA hai? yahAM dina zabda se rAtri, pakSa,
caumAsI aura saMvatsarI bhI prasaMgAnusAra samajha lenA caahie| isI taraha do
hAtha | jor3akara guru mahArAja kA pratyuttara sunane kI icchA se ziSya ko guru
kahe ki tahatti = vaise hI huA hai; yAnI merA dina sukha rUpa se pUrNa huA hai,
isa prakAra guru ke zarIra ke kuzala- samAcAra pUche  /  aba tapa saMbaMdhI
kuzalatA pUchate haiM- 'jattA bhe' 'ja' isa anudAttasvara se uccAraNa karate
samaya donoM hAthoM se rajoharaNa kI daziyoM kA sparza kare, bAda meM hAtha ko
uThAte hue rajoharaNa aura lalATa ke madhya meM caur3A karate hue 'ttA' svarita
svara se uccAraNa kare aura apanI dRSTi guru| mukha ke sAmane rakhe, phira una
hAthoM se lalATa kA sparza karate samaya udAttasvara se 'bhe' akSara kA uccAraNa
kre| yahAM | jattA = yAtrA aura bhe= ApazrI ke artha meM hai - arthAt bhagavan!
Apa kI kSAyika, kSAyopazamika aura aupazamika bhAva | vAlI saMyamayAtrA tapa
aura niyama rUpa yAtrA - vRddhiyukta hai ? gurudeva uttara deM ki tubbhe vaTTai
= bhAvArtha yaha hai- merI tapa, saMyama kI yAtrA meM to vRddhi ho rahI hai,
tumhArI bhI usa yAtrA meM Age vRddhi hotI hogI ? aba nigraha karane yogya
padArtha ke viSaya meM ziSya phira se kuzala maMgala pUchatA hai - javaNijjaM ca
bhe usameM 'ja' anudAtta svara se uccAraNa karate hue | pUrvavat hAtha oghe se
sparza kare, bAda meM donoM hAtha uThAkara lalATa kI ora le jAte hue bIca meM
caur3A karake svarita svara se 'va' kA uccAraNa kare aura lalATa para Ate hI
udAtta svara se 'Ni' kA uccAraNa kare, yaha tIna akSara bolane | para prazna
adhUrA hone para bhI uttara kI rAha dekhe binA hI phira anudAtta svara se 'jjaM'
bolate hue donoM hAthoM se rajoharaNa kA sparza kare, bAda meM donoM hAthoM ko
lalATa kI ora le jAte hue madhya meM hAtha caur3ekara svarita svara se 'ca' kA
uccAraNa kare, phira hAtha se lalATa kA sparza karate hue udAtta svara se 'bhe'
zabda kA uccAraNa kare  /  usake bAda guru | mahArAja ke pratyuttara kI rAha
dekhe aura usI avasthA meM baiThA rhe| javaNijjaM ca 'bhe' kA artha hai-
niyaMtraNa karane yogya ApakI iMdriyA~ aura mana upazamAdi ke sevana se abAdhita
hai ? tAtparya yaha hai ki Apa kA zarIra, iMdriyA~ tathA mana pIr3A | se rahita
hai? isa taraha bhakti pUrvaka pUchakara ziSya ne guru kA vinaya kiyaa| isake
bAda gurudeva ne uttara diyA ki evaM = hAM, | isI taraha iMdriya Adi se maiM
abAdhita huuN| isake bAda ziSya oghe para do hAtha aura mastaka lagAkara apane
aparAdha kI | kSamAyAcanA ke lie isa prakAra kahatA hai - khAmemi khamAsamaNo!
devasiyaM vaikkamaM arthAt he zramAguNayukta zramaNa ! Aja saMpUrNa dina meM
avazya karane yogya anuSThAna meM virAdhanA rUpa mujha se aparAdha hue hoM,
unake lie Apase kSamA mAMgatA hUM, usake bAda guru bhI kahe ki ahamavi khAmemi =
maiM bhI tumheM khamAtA huuN| arthAt pUre dina bhara meM tumhAre prati hitazikSA
Adi meM pramAda se avidhi se koI aparAdha hue hoM to unake lie maiM kSamA cAhatA
huuN| isake bAda ziSya namaskAra pUrvaka kSamAyAcanA karake apane paira ke pIche
kI bhUmi kA pramArjana kara avagraha se bAhara | Akara AvassiAe se lekara jo me
aiAro kao taka kA sUtra pATha kA uccAraNa kre| isa pATha meM apane aticAroM ko
nivedana karane hetu AlocanA (Atma nivedana) nAmaka prAyazcitta kA sUcaka sUtra
hai| usake bAda tassa khamAsamaNo | paDikkamAmi ityAdi pATha meM pratikramaNa ke
yogya prAyazcitta vidhi kI sUcanA hai| aura ise sAdhaka - 'phira maiM aisA
aparAdha nahIM karUMgA aura AtmA ko zuddha karUMgA' isa taraha kI buddhi se
avagraha se bAhara nikalate hue bole  /  AvassiAe| isakA artha hai -
caraNasattarI - karaNasattarI rUpa avazya karane yogya kAryoM ke Asevana sUcita
karate hue usake nimitta se ayogya sevana huA ho, usakA paDikkamAmi=
pratikramaNa karatA huuN| arthAt usase pIche haTatA hUM, yaha sAmAnya artha
kahakara aba vizeSa rUpa se kahate haiM-khamAsamaNANaM devasiAe AsAyaNAe arthAt
kSamAzramaNa guru mahArAja ke prati 288

Page #311 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Meaning of the Verses on the Method of Vandan (Salutation)  **Yoga
Shastra, Third Light, Verse 129**  I repent for the offenses committed due to
the expectation of gaining knowledge and other benefits throughout the day. How
many expectations are there? They are called **Titi-sannaya-raaye**, meaning the
thirty-three expectations of the Guru Maharaj. Two, three, or more of these
expectations may arise. Since there is a possibility of many expectations
arising throughout the day, all of them are mentioned here. We will discuss
these expectations further.  In this regard, some special points are mentioned:
**Jan kin chi micchaaye**, meaning those done with **mithya-bhava** (falsehood)
or due to its cause, with opposite emotions, **man-dukkadaaye, vaya-dukkadaaye,
kaya-dukkadaaye**, meaning with a wicked mind or due to hatred, by speaking
wicked, uncultured, harsh words, by the wickedness of the body or by sitting
very close or by the misconduct of the body while walking. Among these,
**kohaaye, maanaaye, maayaaye, lobhaaye**, meaning with anger, pride, delusion,
or greed. This means expectations arising from anger, etc., or from any kind of
disrespect, etc., during the day.  Similarly, those that occurred during
**pakkhi, chaumasi, sanvatsari** (seasonal periods), or those that occurred in
previous births, in the past, or in the future, the seeker accepts all of them
and states: **Savva-kaaliyaaye**, meaning expectations related to all time. How
does the expectation of the future arise? The answer is that by thinking,
"Tomorrow I will do this harm or damage to the Guru," in the same way, it is
possible to plan the killing, etc., of the Guru in future births or in the past.
Thus, with expectations related to all three times, **Savva-miccho-vaya-raaye**,
meaning expectations of all false actions, full of pride, deceit, or delusion,
and **Savva-dhamma-ikkamannaaye asayannaaye**, meaning expectations of the Guru
related to all the eight teachings, the observance of the eight teachings, the
transgression of all the rules of conduct, the violation of all the rules of
conduct, etc., **me ai-aron kao**, meaning any transgression or offense that I
have committed, **tassa khama-samano! Padikkamami**, O **Kshama-shraman**
(forgiving one)! I repent for those transgressions in your presence, meaning I
resolve not to do them again and withdraw my soul from the offenses. And
**nindami, garihami, appaan-vosirami**, meaning I condemn my past sinful soul
with a peaceful mind, with the pure resolutions of the present, in your
presence, I despise my soul that has done evil deeds, and I renounce the
approval of the impure tendencies of my soul.  In this way, by reciting the
**Guru-vandan-sutra**, then standing outside the **avgraha** (sacred space)
again, the seeker recites the entire text from **icchami khama-samano** to
**vosirami** a second time. However, it is important to understand that in the
second recitation of the **Guru-vandan**, the seeker recites the entire text
except for the word **avvassi-aaye**, without leaving the **avgraha**.  **Now,
the meaning of the verse from the Agam that describes the method of Vandan is
presented here.**  The foundation of good conduct is humility. It arises from
serving the virtuous. And it arises from saluting the Guru according to the
proper method. And the method of this twelve-fold Vandan is to be known in this
way. ||1||  The seeker who desires to perform **Guru-vandan** should stand in
the **yath-ajat-avastha** (the posture of birth), outside the **avgraha**,
cleanse the **sandasa** (toilet), sit in the **utkat-ikasana** (a specific
posture), write the **mukha-vastrika** (a specific symbol), and cleanse the
upper half of the body. ||2||  Then, standing up, press the **chol-patta** (a
specific garment) against the waist with the elbow (in the past, the **chol-
patta** was not tied with a rope), bow the body, and cover the back in a way
that does not disrespect Dharma. ||3||  Holding the **muh-patti** (a specific
cloth) with the fingers of the right hand and the **rajo-haran** (a specific
cloth) in both hands, the seeker should stand in front of the Guru Maharaj and
recite the following words, free from the aforementioned thirty-two faults, for
a faultless Vandan. ||4||  Recite from **icchami khama-samano** to **me nisihi-
aaye**, then listen to the Guru's response in verse, and request to enter the
**avgraha**. ||5||  Say **anu-janah me mi-uggham**, and when the Guru says
**anu-janami**, enter the **avgraha**, cleanse the **sandasa**, and sit down.
||6||  After this, cleanse the **rajo-haran** with the ten fingers, touch it to
the forehead, and place it on the ground, considering it to be beneficial. Then,
first, ||7||  With the left hand, hold the **muh-patti** from one side and
cleanse the left ear, the right ear, and the forehead. ||8||  Then, cleanse the
bent left knee and place the **muh-patti** on it. And in the middle of the
**oghe** (a specific space), visualize (establish) the Guru's feet. ||9||  Then,
extend both arms and visualize the Guru's feet on both thighs.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 vaMdanavidhi kI Agamokta gAthAoM kA artha yogazAstra tRtIya prakAza zloka 129
pUre dina meM kI huI jJAnAdi lAbha kI hone vAlI AzAtanA kI ho, una aparAdhoM kA
maiM pratikramaNa karatA huuN| kitanI AzAtanAe~? use kahate hai-tittIsannayarAe
arthAt guru mahArAja kI taiMtIsa AzAtanAe~ hotI hai, unameM se do, tIna yA isase
adhika AzAtanAe~ lagatI hai| saMpUrNa dina meM aneka AzAtanAe~ lagane kI
saMbhAvanA hone se yahAM para sabhI AzAtanAoM kA ullekha kiyA hai| ina AzAtanAoM
para Age vivecana kreNge| isa saMbaMdha meM kucha vizeSa kahate haiM-jaM kiM ci
micchAe arthAt jo koI mithyAbhAva se yAnI usake nimitta se viparIta bhAvoM se
kiyA ho, maNadukkaDAe, vayadukkaDAe, kAyadukkaDAe arthAt duSTa mana se yA
pradveSa ke kAraNa, duSTa asabhya kaThora vacana bolakara, kAyA kI duSTatA
athavA atyaMta saTakara baiThakara yA sAtha calate zarIra kI kuceSTA dvArA
AzAtanA kI ho| unameM bhI kohAe. mANAe. mAyAe, lobhAe krodha-sahita, mAna-
sahita, mAyA-sahita yA lobh-shit| arthAt krodhAdi karane se yA kisI prakAra ke
vinayabhaMga Adi se hone vAlI AzAtanAe~ dina meM kI hoN| isI prakAra pakkhI,
caumAsI, saMvatsarI-saMbaMdhI kAla meM huI ho tathA isa janma se pUrva janmoM
meM athavA bhUtakAla yA bhaviSyakAla meM jo AzAtanA huI hoM, sAdhaka una sabakA
grahaNa karake nivedana karatA hai-savvakAliyAe-arthAt sarvakAlaviSayaka
aashaatnaa| bhaviSyakAla kI AzAtanA kisa taraha se hotI hai? isakA uttara dete
haiM ki 'kala guru kA isa taraha aniSTa yA nukasAna karUMgA' isa prakAra vicAra
karane se, isI taraha AgAmI janmoM yA bhUtakAla meM bhI unake vadha Adi kA
nidAna karanA saMbhava ho sakatA hai, isa prakAra tInoM kAla-saMbaMdhI AzAtanAoM
se savvamicchovayArAe arthAt sarva daMbha-kapaTa yA mAyA se pUrNa galata
pravRtti rUpa asatkriyA kI AzAtanAoM se tathA savvadhammAikkamaNAe AsAyaNAe
aSTa-pravacanamAtA kA pAlana, sAmAnya rUpa se saMyama meM karane yogya
sarvakArya rUpa sarvadharmoM meM jo atikramaNa-virAdhanA rUpa sarvadharmoM kI
ityAdi guru kI AzAtanAoM se, jo me aiAroM kao=maiMne jo koI aticAra aparAdha
kiyA ho, tassa khamAsamaNo! paDikkamAmi he kSamAzramaNa! maiM una aticAroM kA
ApakI sAkSI se pratikramaNa karatA hUM, arthAt phira nahIM karane kA saMkalpa
karake apanI AtmA ko aparAdhoM se pIche haTAtA huuN| tathA niMdAmi, garihAmi,
appANaM vosirAmi arthAt saMsAra se virakta meM bhUtakAla kI apanI pApayukta AtmA
kI prazAMtacitta se vartamAnakAla ke zuddha adhyavasAyoM se niMdA karatA hUM,
ApakI sAkSI se duSTakArya karane vAlI merI AtmA kI gardA karatA hUM aura AtmA kI
azuddha pravRtti ke anumodana kA tyAga karatA huuN| isa prakAra guruvaMdana-
sUtra bolakara phira usI prakAra avagraha ke bAhara khar3A hokara icchAmi
khamAsamaNo se lekara vosirAmi taka dUsarI bAra saMpUrNa pATha bole| paraMtu
isameM itanA vizeSa samajhe ki dUsarI bAra ke guruvaMdana meM avagraha se bAraha
nikale binA hI AvassiyAe pada chor3akara zeSa sArA sUtrapATha bole| _ aba
vaMdanaka-vidhi batAne vAlI Agamokta gAthA kA bhAvArtha yahAM prastutakara rahe
haiM_ AcAra kA mUla vinaya hai| vaha guNavAna kI sevA karane se hotA hai| tathA
vidhipUrvaka guru ko vaMdana karane se hotA hai, aura usa dvAdazAvarta vaMdana
kI vidhi isa taraha jAnanA  /  / 1 /  /  guruvaMdana karane kA icchuka sAdhaka
yathAjAta avasthA (janma samaya kI mudrA) meM sthita hokara avagraha ke bAhara
saMDAsA kA pramArjana kara utkaTikAsana meM baiThakara mukhavastrikA kA
pratilekhana karake zarIra ke Upara ke Adhe bhAga kA pramArjana kare  /  / 2 /
/  bAda meM khar3A hokara kamara para kuhanI se colapaTTe ko dabAkara (pahale
colapaTTa para DorI nahIM bAMdhate the) zarIra ko namAkara yuktipUrvaka pIche kA
bhAga dharma kI niMdA na ho, isa prakAra se Dhaka le  /  / 3 /  /  dAhine hAtha
kI aMguliyoM se muhapattI aura donoM hAthoM meM rajoharaNa pakar3akara pUrvokta
battIsa doSoM se rahita nirdoSa vaMdana ke lie gurumahArAja ke sAmane isa
prakAra uccAraNapUrvaka bole||4|| icchAmi khamAsamaNo me nisIhiAe taka bolakara
bAda meM guru kA chaMdeNa uttara sunakara avagraha kI yAcanA karane ke lie  /  /
5 /  /  aNujANaha me miuggahaM bole aura guru aNujANAmi kahe, taba avagrahabhUmi
meM praveza karake saMDAsA pramArjanakara nIce baiThe  /  / 6 /  /  isake bAda
rajoharaNa kI daziyoM kA pramArjana kara mastaka se sparza karAnA upayogI hogA,
aisA mAnakara bhUmi para sthApana kare usake bAda prathama  /  / 7 /  /  bAMye
hAtha se eka ora se pakar3I huI muhapattI se bAMye kAna se lekara dAhine kAna
taka kA aura lalATa kA pramArjana kare  /  / 8 /  /  aura sikor3e hue bAMye
ghuTane para pramArjana karake usa para muhapattI rakhe tathA oghe ke
madhyabhAga meM guru ke caraNa-yugaloM kI kalpanA (sthApanA) kare  /  / 9 /  /
tadanaMtara donoM hAtha laMbe karake donoM jAMghoM 289

Page #312 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Discussion on Guru's Expectations  **Chapter 3 of Yoga Shastra, Verse 129**
**10.** Touch the Oghas with both hands and pronounce the sound "A" while doing
so.  **11.** Then, turn both hands towards the face and touch the forehead while
pronouncing the sound "O".  **12.** After that, touch the Oghas with both hands
and pronounce "Ka", then touch the forehead while pronouncing "Ya".  **13.**
Again, touch the Oghas while pronouncing "Ka" for the third time and touch the
forehead while pronouncing "Ya".  **14.** Then, pronounce "Samphasan" and offer
salutations to the Rajoharan with both hands and the head. Raise the head, join
both hands and ask "Sukhsata" (well-being).  **15.** Say "Khamanijjo bhe kilamo
appa kilantanam bahusu bhen bhe divaso (divaso, pakkho, variso wa) vaikkantto
yon" and remain silent for a moment.  **16.** When the Guru Maharaj says
"Tatti", then ask about "Sanayamaatra" and "Yapanika" (freedom from the control
of senses and mind). At that time, repeat the three cycles as before and
incorporate the sounds.  **17.** A question arises: How should this sound yoga
be established for a slow-witted disciple to show grace and favor? The answer
is: Establish it by pronouncing with skill using the low, high, and medium
sounds (voices).  **18.** Establish the low (Anudatta) sound on the Rajoharan,
the high (Udatta) sound on the forehead, and the medium (Svarita) sound in
between.  **19.** Pronounce the letter "Ja" with the Anudatta sound, "Tta" with
the Svarita sound, and "Bhe" with the Udatta sound. Similarly, pronounce the
three letters "Ja-Va-Ni" with the Anudatta, etc. sounds.  **20.** For the third
time, pronounce "Jj" with the Anudatta sound, "Ch" with the Svarita sound, and
"Bhe" with the Udatta sound. Similarly, pronounce with the appropriate sound
while touching the Rajoharan in the middle and the forehead.  **21.** The first
three cycles have two letters each, and the subsequent three cycles have three
letters each.  **22.** Knowing the nature of the cycles, when the other disciple
tells you, touch the Rajoharan with both hands and pronounce "Ja" in the middle,
"Tta" and "Bhe" on the forehead, and then listen to the Guru's words.  **23.**
When the Guru says "Tubbhan pi vattae", then complete the remaining two cycles
together and remain silent until the Guru says "Evan".  **24.** After the Guru
says "Evan", the disciple should make anjali mudra with both hands on the
Rajoharan and say "Khamem, Khamasamano Devasian Vaikkaman" etc. with humility.
**25.** Later, when the Guru says "Ahamvi Khamem Tum" and grants forgiveness,
the disciple should say "Avassiae" and leave the Avgraha.  **26.** Then, bend
the body and seek forgiveness for all offenses, condemn, criticize, and abandon
all faults. Perform the Pratikraman-Prayashchitta in this way.  **27.**
Similarly, with humility, perform the three Gupti and seek forgiveness for the
first time. Then, perform the second Vandana in the same way. In this, also seek
Avgraha, entry, etc., all as before. There are two Vandanas, two Avanta, and two
Praveshas.  **28.** In the first Pravesha, there are six cycles, and in the
second Pravesha, there are six cycles. Understand that there are twelve cycles
from pronouncing the letters "A" etc. separately.  **29.** In the first
Pravesha, bow the head twice, and in the second, also bow the head twice. This
makes four head bows and one Nishkraman.  **30.** There is one Yathajat and
three Gus, making a total of four. Combining these four with the rest, there are
a total of twenty-five essentials.  **The thirty-three expectations of the Guru
- Tittisannayarae - Vandanasutra - have already been discussed earlier. Here, we
explain those thirty-three expectations related to the Guru in detail:**  **1.**
If the disciple walks ahead of the Guru without any purpose, it is considered an
expectation violation called "Vinayabhang". If it is to show the way or to help
an elderly person, blind person, etc., then it is not a fault.  **2.** Walking
on the right or left side of the Guru.  **3.** Walking directly behind the Guru.
This is considered an expectation violation because it is possible for
exhalation, sneezing, phlegm, etc., to fall on the Guru's body.  **4-5-6.**
Similarly, standing too close in front, behind, or at the same level is
considered three expectation violations.  **7-8-9.** Similarly, sitting too
close in front, behind, or at the same level, together, or directly next to the
Guru is also considered three expectation violations.  **10.** If the disciple
goes to a place with the Guru or Acharya, and goes there first and purifies the
body first, it is considered an expectation violation called "Achman".  **11.**
If the disciple talks to someone while the Guru is talking, it is considered an
expectation violation called "Puralapan".  **12.** If the disciple goes out with
the Acharya but returns early and criticizes the journey, it is considered an
expectation violation called "Gamana-Gaman Ki Alochana".

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 guru AzAtanA para vivecana yogazAstra tRtIya prakAza zloka 129 ke madhyabhAga
kA sparza na ho, isa prakAra donoM hAthoM se oghe kI daziyoM kA sparza karate
akAra kA uccAraNa kare  /  / 10 /  /  | usake bAda donoM hAthoM ko mukha kI ora
ghumAkara lalATa kA sparza karate hue hokAra kA uccAraNa kare  /  / 11 /  /
phira donoM hAthoM se oghe kA sparza karate hue 'kA' bole aura 'yaM-kAra' bolate
hue phira lalATa kA sparza kare  /  / 12 /  /  kira 'kA ke uccAraNa karate
samaya tIsarI bAra oghe kA sparza kare aura ya-kAra bolate hue phira lalATa kA
sparza kare  /  / 13 /  /  bAda 'saMphAsaM pada bolate hue rajoharaNa ko do
hAtha aura mastaka se namaskAra kara mastaka U~cA karake donoM hAtha jor3akara
sukhasAtA (kuzalamaMgala) pUchane ke lie  /  / 14 /  /  khamaNijjo bhe kilAmo
appakilaMtANaM bahusubheNa bhe divaso (divaso, pakkho, variso vA) vaikkaMto yoM
bolakara kSaNabhara mauna rahe  /  / 15 /  /  jaba gurumahArAja 'tahatti' kahe,
taba phira saMyamayAtrA aura yApanikA (iMdriya aura mana kI nirAbAdhatA) pUche;
usa samaya bhI pUrvavat dUsarI bAra tIna Avarta karanA aura usameM svara kA yoga
karanA  /  / 16 /  /  yahAM prazna uThatA hai ki maMdabuddhi ziSya para
anugrahaupakAra karane ke lie usa svarayoga ko kisa taraha sthApana karanA
cAhie? isakA uttara dete haiM ki 'jaghanya, utkRSTa aura madhyama svara (AvAja)
se yukti se uccAraNa karake sthApana karanA  /  / 17 /  /  usameM jaghanya
(anudAtta) svara se rajoharaNa para, utkRSTa (udAtta) svara se lalATa para aura
madhyama (svarita) svara se donoM ke bIca meM sthApana krnaa||18|| anudAtta
svara se 'jakAra', svarita svara se 'ttA' aura udAtta svara se 'bhe' akSara bole
aura 'ja-va-Ni' ye tInoM akSara bhI isI taraha anudAtta Adi svara se bole||19||
tIsarI bAra 'jja' anudAtta se 'ca' svarita svara se aura 'bhe' udAtta svara se
bolnaa| isI taraha rajoharaNa para madhya meM tathA lalATa para sparza karate
hue yathAyogya svara se bolanA cAhie  /  / 20 /  /  prathama ke tIna Avarta
kramazaH do-do akSara aura bAda ke tIna Avarta kramazaH tIna-tIna akSaroM ke
kahe haiM  /  / 21 /  /  isa taraha Avarta kA svarUpa jAnakara jaba dUsare dhi
batAte haiM-do hAthoM se rajoharaNa kA sparza karate hae 'jakAra' madhya meM
'ttA aura lalATa meM 'bhekAra' kahakara bAda meM guru ke vacana sunanA  /  / 22
/  /  guru jaba tubbhaM pi vaTTae kaheM, taba zeSa do Avarta sAtha meM karake
jaba taka guru evaM' na bole taba taka mauna rahe  /  / 23 /  /  guru ke evaM
kahane ke bAda ziSya rajoharaNa para do hAthoM se aMjali banAkara kara vinaya
pUrvaka khAmemi khamAsamaNo devasiyaM vaikkama Adi bole  /  / 24 /  /  bAda meM
jaba guru 'ahamavi khAmemi tumaM' yoM kahakara kSamAyAcanA kI sammati de, taba
ziSya AvassiAe kahakara avagraha meM se nikala jAye  /  / 25 /  /  bAda meM
zarIra jhukAkara sabhI aparAdhoM kI kSamAyAcanA karake sarva doSoM kI niMdA,
garhA aura tyAga kre| isa taraha se pratikramaNa-prAyazcitta kare  /  / 26 /  /
isI prakAra vinayapUrvaka tIna gupti se gusa (rakSita) hokara prathama
kSamAyAcanA kare, phira usI taraha dUsarI bAra vaMdana kare, usameM bhI avagraha
kI yAcanA, praveza Adi saba pahale kI taraha kare, inameM do vaMdana, do avanata
aura do praveza hote haiM  /  / 27 /  /  vaMdana ke prathama praveza meM chaha
Avarta aura dUsare praveza meM chaha Avarta hote haiN| vahAM a ho Adi akSara
alaga-alaga bolane se bAraha Avarta samajhanA  /  / 28 /  /  prathama praveza
meM do bAra sira jhukAnA aura dUsare meM bhI usI taraha do bAra sira jhukAnA
hotA hai| isase cAra sira kahA hai aura eka niSkramaNa kahA hai||29|| tathA eka
yathAjAta aura tIna gusa sahita cAra hote haiN| ina cAroM ko zeSa meM milAne se
kula paccIsa Avazyaka hote haiN||30|| guru kI taitIsa AzAtanAe~-tittIsannayarAe-
vaMdanasUtra meM pahale A cukA hai| gurusaMbaMdhI una taiMtIsa AzAtanAoM ko
vistAra se samajhAte haiM-1. ziSya guru ke Age-Age niSprayojana cale to
vinayabhaMga rUpa AzAtanA lagatI hai| yadi mArga batAnA ho yA kisI vRddha, aMdha
Adi kI sahAyatA karane ke lie Age cale to yaha doSa nahIM lgtaa||2|| gurujI ke
sAtha dAhine yA bAMye calane se| 3. tathA guru ke ekadama pIche calane se| isase
niHzvAsa, chIMka, zleSma Adi guru ke zarIra para par3anA saMbhava hone se
AzAtanA lagatI hai| 4-5-6. isI taraha Age, pIche, barAbara bahuta pAsa meM
saTakara khar3e rahane se ye tIna AzAtanAe~ lagatI haiN| 7-8-9. isI prakAra Age,
pIche, barAbara, sAtha meM, ekadama saTakara pAsa meM baiThane se bhI aisI tIna
AzAtanAe~ lagatI haiN| 10. guru yA AcArya ke sAtha ziSya sthaMDilabhUmi gayA ho,
vahAM pahale svayaM jAve aura prathama deha zuddha kare to Acamana nAma kI
AzAtanA lagatI hai| 11. guru ke sAtha koI bAta karatA ho, usase guru se pahale
ziSya hI bAteM kare; vaha pUrvAlApana AzAtanA hai| 12. AcArya ke sAtha bAhara
gayA ho, kintu vApi pesa AcArya ke pahale jaldI lauTakara gamanAgamana kI
AlocanA kare to gamanAgamana kI AlocanA nAmaka 290

Page #313 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Criticism of the Text: Meaning of Ashatanas  **Yoga Shastra, Third Light,
Verse 129**  13. Bringing food, first approach a junior monk for criticism, then
approach the Guru. 14. Similarly, bringing food, first show it to a junior monk,
then show it to the Guru. 15. Bringing food, without asking the Guru, give
sufficient food as per the junior monk's wish. 16. Bringing alms, first invite a
junior monk, then invite the Guru. 17. Bringing alms yourself, give a small
portion to the Guru and eat the rest, which is delicious, fragrant, and pleasing
to the senses. 18. At night, when the Guru Maharaj says, "Arya! Who is awake?
Who is asleep?" Even upon hearing this and waking up, do not respond. 19.
Similarly, during the day or at any time, do not respond when called by the Guru
Maharaj. 20. When called by the Guru, respond from where you are sitting or
sleeping, or get up from your seat or bed, go near, say "Matthaen Vandami," and
listen to the Guru's words. If you do not do this, it is considered an Ashatana.
21. When called by the Guru, not saying "Matthaen Vandami," but speaking rudely.
22. Addressing the Guru Maharaj with disrespectful words like "Re, Tu, etc." 23.
When the Guru Maharaj commands you to serve the sick, the weak, etc., saying,
"Why don't you do it yourself?" When the Guru says, "You are negligent,"
arrogantly replying, "You are negligent." This is called the Ashatana of
"Tajjatavachan." 24. Speaking harshly to the Guru Maharaj or speaking to them in
a loud voice. 25. When the Guru Maharaj is giving instructions, interrupting
without asking, saying, "This is how it is." 26. When the Guru is narrating a
religious story, saying, "You don't remember this," or "You don't understand
this." 27. When the Guru is narrating a religious story, not having reverence
for them, not being happy in your mind, not approving of the Guru's words, not
praising them by saying, "You have spoken very well." This is called the
Ashatana of "Upahatamanastva." 28. When the Guru is narrating a religious story,
saying, "It's time for alms," or "It's time for sutra reading or eating," etc.,
and disrupting the gathering. This is called the Ashatana of "Sabhabhedan." 29.
When the Guru is giving a lecture, saying, "I will give a lecture," and
interrupting the Guru's gathering and lecture. This is called the Ashatana of
"Katha-Chhedan." 30. When the Acharya is giving religious instructions, before
the gathering rises, the disciple starts explaining to show off their
intelligence. This is considered an Ashatana. 31. Sitting on a higher or equal
seat than the Guru. This is considered an Ashatana. 32. Touching the Guru's bed
or seat, touching them with your hand without their permission. Not seeking
forgiveness for these offenses is an Ashatana. It is said, "If you touch the
Guru or their clothes or other belongings with your body, or touch them without
permission, seek forgiveness by saying, 'Forgive my offense, I will not do it
again.'" 33. Standing, sitting, or sleeping on the Guru's bed, Santhara, seat,
etc., or using their clothes, utensils, or any other belongings without
permission. This is considered an Ashatana.  Thus, these thirty-three Ashatanas
are complete. Now, the six verses starting with "Puropakhasanne," etc., are
mentioned in the scriptures, which contain the rules of these thirty-three
Ashatanas. Their meaning is included in the above discussion, so we will not
write it again. Although these Ashatanas are mentioned for monks, they can also
apply to the Shravak community, as most of the Shravak's actions and tendencies
are based on the monk's actions. It is said that Krishna Vasudeva offered
salutations to eighteen thousand monks through the Dwadashavart Vandana.
Therefore, these Ashatanas should be understood by the Shravak community as
well, as far as possible.  Thus, a disciple who is eager to criticize
transgressions while standing in Avagraha, should bow slightly to the Guru and
request them in this way: "Ichchakarena Sandisaha (Bhagavan) Devasayam Aloomi,"
meaning, "If you wish, please give me permission to reveal the transgressions
that have occurred during the day in your presence." Here, "Dinasambandhi" and
by implication, "Ratrik," "Paakshik," "Chaturmasik," and "Saavatsarik"
transgressions are also included in "Aloomi." This means, "according to the
rules" or "in all ways."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 AlocanA pATha ke artha yogazAstra tRtIya prakAza zloka 129 AzAtanA hotI hai|
13. AhAra lAkara guru se pahale kisI choTe sAdhu ke pAsa AlocanA kare, bAda meM
guru ke pAsa AlocanA kre| 14. isI prakAra AhAra lAkara guru se pahale choTe
sAdhu ko dikhAkara bAda meM guru ko dikhaae| 15. AhAra lAkara guru ko pUche binA
hI choTe sAdhu kI icchAnusAra yatheSTa paryApta AhAra de denaa| 16. bhikSA
lAkara pahale kisI choTe sAdhu ko nimaMtraNa denA, bAda meM guru ko nimaMtraNa
denaa| 17. svayaM bhikSA lAkara usameM se thor3A-sA guru ko dekara bAkI kA
bar3hiyA manojJa varNa-rasa-gaMdha-sparza vAlA snigdha svAdiSTa AhAra, vyaMjana
Adi svayaM khaaye| 18. rAtri ke | samaya gurumahArAja jaba AvAja deM ki 'Arya!
kauna jAgatA hai? kauna sotA hai? taba yaha sunane para bhI aura jAgane para bhI
uttara nahIM de to|' 19. isI prakAra dina ko yA kisI samaya gurumahArAja ke
bulAne para bhI uttara nahIM denaa| 20. guru ke bulAne para bhI jahAM para
baiThA hoM, soyA ho, vahIM se uttara denA athavA guru bulAe~, taba Asana yA
zayana se uThakara pAsa meM jAkara 'matthaeNa vaMdAmi' kahakara guru kI bAta
sunanI cAhie; kintu aisA nahIM kare to AzAtanA lagatI hai| 21. guru ke bulAne
para 'matthaeNa vaMdAmi' na kahakara, kyA hai? isa prakAra tunakakara bolnaa|
62. gurumahArAja ko ziSya avinaya pUrvaka re tUM ityAdi tuccha zabdoM se
saMbodhita kre| 23. rogI, glAna Adi kI vaiyAvRtya (sevA) ke lie gurumahArAja
AjJA deM, ki tuma yaha kAma karo; taba ziSya ulaTe guru ko kahe-tuma svayaM kyoM
nahIM kara lete?' guru kahe'tuma pramAdI ho|' taba uddaNDatA se sAmane bole
ki-'pramAdI Apa haiN|' isa taraha sAmane uttara denA, tajjAtavacana nAma kI
AzAtanA hai| 24. gurumahArAja ko kaThora vacana kahe athavA unase ucca svara se
bole| 25. gurumahArAja upadeza dete hoM, taba bIca meM binA pUche hI yaha to
aisA hai, isa prakAra ttoknaa| 26. gurujI dharmakathA karate hoM, taba 'yaha
bAta | Apako yAda nahIM hai, 'isakA artha Apa nahIM samajhate; isa prakAra ziSya
bIca meM bole| 27. gurudeva dharmakathA sunAte hoM, taba unake prati mana meM
pUjyabhAva nahIM hone se ziSya citta meM prasanna nahIM hotA, guru ke vacana kI
anumodanA nahIM karatA, 'Apane bahuta suMdara kahA' aisI prazaMsA nahIM karatA;
isase use 'upahatamanastva' nAma kI AzAtanA lagatI hai| | 28. jaba guru
dharmakathA sunAte hoM, taba ziSya kahe-abhI to bhikSA kA samaya huA hai, yA aba
sUtra par3hAne yA AhAra karane kA samaya hai, ityAdi kahakara sabhAbhedana
(bhaMga) karane kI AzAtanA kre| 29. gurujI vyAkhyAna karate hoM, taba 'maiM
vyAkhyAna karUMgA' aisA kahakara gurujI kI sabhA aura vyAkhyAna ko bIca meM hI
tor3anA (bhaMga karanA) kathA-chedana AzAtanA hai| 30. AcArya dharmopadeza dete
hoM, usa samaya sabhA uThane se pahale hI sabhA meM apanA cAturya batAne ke lie
ziSya vyAkhyA karane lage to AzAtanA lagatI hai| 31. gurujI se Age, UMce athavA
samAna Asana para ziSya baiThe to AzAtanA hotI hai| 32. guru kI zayyA yA Asana
ke paira lagAnA, unakI AjJA ke binA hAtha se sparza karanA; ina aparAdhoM ke ho
jAne para bhI kSamA na mAMganA, AzAtanA hai| kahA bhI hai ki 'guru athavA unake
kapar3e Adi vastuoM kA zarIra se sparza ho jAya athavA AjJA binA sparza kara le
to mere aparAdha kSamA kareM, kahakara ziSya kSamA mAMge aura AyaMdA karUMgA'
yoM khe| (dazavai. 9/2-1) 33. garu kI zayyA. saMthArA, Asana Adi para khaDe
hone, baiThane yA sone se, upalakSaNa se unake vastra-pAtra Adi kisI bhI vastu
kA svayaM upayoga kare to AzAtanA lagatI hai| isa prakAra ye taiMtIsa AzAtanAe~
pUrNa huii| aba puraopakkhAsanne ityAdi chaha gAthAe~ zAstra meM kahI hai,
usameM taiMtIsa | AzAtanAoM kA vidhAna hai, usakA artha uparyukta vivecana meM A
gayA hai, isalie punaH nahIM likhte| yadyapi ye AzAtanAe~ sAdhu ke lie kahI hai
phira bhI zrAvakavarga ko bhI ye AzAtanAe~ laganI saMbhava hai; kyoMki prAyaH
sAdhu kI kriyA ke anusAra hI zrAvaka kI adhikAMza pravRttiyA~-kriyAe~ hotI hai|
sunA jAtA hai ki kRSNa vAsudeva ne dvAdazAvarta vaMdana se aThAraha hajAra
sAdhuoM ko vaMdana kiyA thaa| isa kAraNa sAdhu kI taraha zrAvaka ke lie bhI ye
AzAtanAe~ | yathAsaMbhava samajha lenI caahie| . isa prakAra vaMdana kara
avagraha meM sthita hokara aticAra kI AlocanA karane kA icchuka ziSya zarIra ko
kucha namAkara guru se isa prakAra nivedana kare-icchAkAreNa saMdisaha
(bhagavan) devasiyaM Aloemi arthAt ApakI icchA ho to AjJA dIjie ki maiM dina meM
lage hue aticAroM ko Apake sAmane prakaTa kruuN| yahAM dinasaMbaMdhI aura
upalakSaNa se rAtrika, pAkSika, cAturmAsika aura sAMvatsarika aticAra bhI
Aloemi-A arthAt maryAdA=vidhipUrvaka athavA saba prakAra 291

Page #314 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Alochana Patha ke Artha  Yogashastra Tritiya Prakasha Sloka 129 se aur Loemi
apke samne kholkar sunata hoon. Yahan din adi ki alochana mein kaal-maryada is
prakar hai - din ke madhya-bhaga se lekar ratri ke madhya-bhaga tak daivika aur
ratri ke madhya-bhaga se lekar din ke madhya-bhaga tak raatrika aticharonki
alochana ho sakti hai. Arthat din ya ratri ka pratikarama isi tarah ho sakta
hai. Aur pakshika, chaturmasika tatha saamvatsarika alochana-pratikarama to
pandrah din ka, chaturmas ka aur poore varshabhar ka hota hai.  Isake baad Aloeh
alochana karo yon guru ke dwara kathit vachan ka swikarakar shishya icchann
aloemi kahe arthat aapki aadnya swikar karta hoon aur alochana-kriya dwara
prakata mein karta hoon, is tarah prathamic kathana kahkar shishya saakshaat
alochana ke liye yah patha bolata hai.  Jo me devasio aiaaro ko, kaio, vaio,
manasio, ussutto, ummaggo, akappao, akaranijjo, dujjhao, duvichintio anayaaro
anichchiavvo asavagapauggao, nane taha damsane, charittacharite, sue, samaie,
tinnham, guttinham, chaunham kasayanam, panchanham anuvvayanam, tinnham,
gunavvayanam, chaunham sikkhayyanam, barasavihassa savagadhammasya jam khadiyam
jam viradhiyam tassa miccha mi dukkadam.  Sutra ki Vyakhya - 'Jo me' arthat
maine jo koi, 'devasio aiaaro'=divas sambandhi vidhi ka ullanghan karne ke roop
mein atichar, 'kao' kiya ho, vah atichar bhi sadhana bheda se aneka prakar ke
hote hain. Ato kaha hai 'kaio, vaio, manasio' arthat sharira se, vaani se aur
man se maryada viruddha galat pravritta karne se atichar lage hon,
'ussutto'-sutraviruddha vachan bolane se, 'ummaggo' =kshaayopashamik roop
bhavamarga ka ullanghan karna unmarga hai athava atma swaroop (kshaayopashamik
bhava) ka tyagakar mohaniya adi audayik bhava mein parinaman hona unmarga hai;
usse laga hua atichar tatha 'akappao' =kalpa yanee nyayavidhi, aachar tatha
charana-karana-roop vyapara (pravritta), isskse jo vipareeta ho, vah akalpya
kahalaata hai. Taatparya yah hai ki samyam ka kaarya yathartha swaroop mein
nahin hone se lage hue atichar mein 'akaranijjo' =saamaanya roop se nahin karne
yogya kaarya ko karne se laga atichar. Upar kahe anusaar utsootra adi shabda
kaarya-karana roop se paraspara sambanddhit hai. Utsootra ho to vyakti unmarga
mein jaata hai, unmarga par jane se kalpya-akalpya ka viveka nahin rahata.
Akalpya se vyakti akaraniya kaarya karta hai. Is prakar kaayika aur vaachika
atichar ka vishesh swaroop bataane ke liye utsootra se unmarga tak ke shabdon ka
prayog kiya hai. Ab visheshataH maanasik atichar ke liye kahate hain-'dujjhao'
arthat ekaagra-chitta hokar dushta dhyana karne se utpanna aarti-raudra-dhyana
roopi atichar tatha 'duvichintio' arthat chanchal-chitta se dushta-chintana roop
atichar kaha bhi hai ki 'jam thiramadhyavasanam tam dhyanam, jam jalam tayan
chittam' arthat man ka sthira adhyavasaay hi dhyana kahalaata hai aur chanchal
adhyavasaay chitta kahalaata hai. Yahan par sthira aur chanchal ke bheda kahate
hain-'anayaaro' arthat yah shravaka ke liye aacharana karne yogya nahin hai ataH
anaacharniya hai aur bhi anaacharniya hai-'anichchiavvo' =icchha karne yogya hi
nahin hai. Isliye 'asavagapauggao' arthat jis grihasttha ne samyaktva swikar
kiya ho, anuvrata adi vrataniyam angeekar kiye hon, sadaa saadhu ke paas jaata
ho, saadhu-shravkaon ki samachaaree ya aacharamaryada-kartavya-kalpana sunta ho,
aise shravaka ke liye karne yogya nahin hai. Is prakar kahkar ab atichar bataane
ke liye kahate hain-'nane taha damsane, charittacharitte' arthat jnana tatha
darshana ke vishaya mein tatha sthool roop se aashrava tyaag yanee savadha yoga
se viratavirati (yanee sthool roop se savadha yoga tyaag ke kaarana charitra aur
sookshma roop se savadha yoga ke tyaag ke abhava ke kaarana acharitra; is prakar
'charittaacharitra') jaanana. Ye deshaviratiaradhana ke vishaya mein lage hue
atichar hue. Ab jnanaadi-vishayak atichar prithak-prithak roop se batalatae
hain-'sue' shrutajnana ke vishaya mein (upalakshana se shesh matiajnanaadi chaar
jnana ka grahan karna) jnana ke vipareeta-utsootra praroopana karna ya kaal mein
swadhyaaya karna aadi jnanaachaar ke aath aacharaon ka palan nahin karna,
atichar hai, uske sambandh mein tatha 'samaie' arthat samayika ke vishaya mein,
yahan samayika grahan karne se samyaktva-samayika va deshaviratia-samayika
jaanana, samyaktva-samayika mein shanka, kanksha adi atichar hai. Deshaviratia-
samayika ke atichar ke...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 AlocanA pATha ke artha yogazAstra tRtIya prakAza zloka 129 se aura loemi Apake
sAmane kholakara sunAtA huuN| yahAM dina Adi kI AlocanA meM kAla-maryAdA isa
prakAra hai-dina ke madhyabhAga se lekara rAtri ke madhyabhAga taka daivasika
aura rAtri ke madhyabhAga se lekara dina ke madhya bhAga taka rAtrika aticAroM
kI AlocanA ho sakatI hai| arthAt dina yA rAta kA pratikramaNa isI taraha ho
sakatA hai| aura pAkSika, cAturmAsika tathA sAMvatsarika AlocanA-pratikramaNa to
paMdraha dina kA, cAturmAsa kA aura pUre varSabhara kA hotA hai| isake bAda
Aloeha AlocanA karo yoM guru ke dvArA kathita vacana kA svIkArakara ziSya icchaM
Aloemi kahe arthAt Apa kI AjJA svIkAra karatA hUM aura AlocanA-kriyA dvArA
prakaTa meM karatA hUM, isa taraha prAthamika kathana kahakara ziSya sAkSAt
AlocanA ke lie yaha pATha bolatA hai jo me devasio aiAro kao, kAio, vAio,
mANasio, ussutto, ummaggo, akappo, akaraNijjo, dujjhAo, duviciMtio aNAyAro
aNicchiavyo asAyaga-pAuggo, nANe taha daMsaNe, carittAcarite, sue, sAmAie,
tiNhaM, guttINaM, cauNhaM kasAyANaM, paMcaNhamaNuvvayANaM tiNhaM, guNavbayANaM,
cauNhaM sikkhAyayANaM, bArasavihassa sAvagadhammassa jaM khaDiyaM jaM virAhiyaM
tassa micchA mi dukkddN| sUtra kI vyAkhyA - 'jo meM' arthAt maiMne jo koI,
'devasio aiAro'=divasa saMbaMdhI vidhi kA ullaMghana karane ke rUpa meM aticAra,
'kao' kiyA ho, vaha aticAra bhI sAdhana bheda se aneka prakAra ke hote haiN|
ataH kahA hai'kAio, vAio, mANasio' arthAt zarIra se, vANI se aura mana se
maryAdA viruddha galata pravRtti karane se aticAra lage hoM,
'ussutto'-sUtraviruddha vacana bolane se, 'ummaggo' =kSAyopazamika rUpa
bhAvamArga kA ullaMghana karanA unmArga hai athavA Atma svarUpa (kSAyopazamika
bhAva) kA tyAgakara mohanIya Adi audayika bhAva meM pariNamana honA unmArga hai;
usase lagA huA aticAra tathA 'akappo' =kalpa yAnI nyAyavidhi, AcAra tathA
caraNa-karaNa-rUpa vyApAra (pravRtti), isase jo viparIta ho, vaha akalpya
kahalAtA hai| tAtparya yaha hai ki saMyama kA kArya yathArtha svarUpa meM nahIM
hone se lage hue aticAra meM 'akaraNijjo' =sAmAnya rUpa se nahIM karane yogya
kArya ko karane se lagA aticaar| Upara kahe anusAra utsUtra Adi zabda kArya-
kAraNa rUpa se paraspara saMbaMdhita hai| utsUtra ho to vyakti unmArga meM jAtA
hai, unmArga para jAne se kalpyaakalpya kA viveka nahIM rhtaa| akalpya se vyakti
akaraNIya kArya karatA hai| isa prakAra kAyika aura vAcika aticAra kA vizeSa
svarUpa batAne ke lie utsUtra se unmArga taka ke zabdoM kA prayoga kiyA hai| aba
vizeSataH mAnasika aticAra ke lie kahate hai-'dujjhAo' arthAt ekAgracitta hokara
duSTa dhyAna karane se utpanna Artta-raudra-dhyAna rUpI aticAra tathA
'duviciMtio' arthAt caMcalacitta se duSTaciMtana rUpa aticAra kahA bhI hai ki
'jaM thiramajjhavasANaM taM jhANaM, jaM jalaM tayaM cittaM' arthAt mana kA
sthira adhyavasAya hI dhyAna kahalAtA hai aura caMcala adhyavasAya citta
kahalAtA hai| yahAM para sthira aura caMcala ke bheda kahate haiM-'aNAyAro'
arthAt yaha zrAvaka ke lie AcaraNa karane yogya nahIM hai ataH anAcaraNIya hai
aura bhI anAcaraNIya hai-'aNicchiavvo' =icchA karane yogya hI nahIM hai| isalie
'asAvagapAuggo' arthAt jisa gRhastha ne samyaktva svIkAra kiyA ho, aNuvrata Adi
vrataniyama aMgIkAra kiye hoM, sadA sAdhu ke pAsa jAtA ho, sAdhu-zrAvakoM kI
samAcArI yA AcAramaryAdA-kartavyakalpa sunatA ho, aise zrAvaka ke lie karane
yogya nahIM hai| isa prakAra kahakara aba aticAra batAne ke lie kahate
haiM-'NANe taha daMsaNe,carittAcaritte' arthAt jJAna tathA darzana ke viSaya meM
tathA sthUla rUpa se Azrava tyAga yAnI sAvadha yoga se viratAvirata (yAnI sthUla
rUpa se sAvadha yoga tyAga ke kAraNa cAritra aura sUkSma rUpa se sAvadha yoga ke
tyAga ke abhAva ke kAraNa acAritra; isa prakAra 'cAritrAcaritra') jaannaa| ye|
dezavirati-ArAdhanA ke viSaya meM lage hue aticAra hue| aMba jJAnAdi-viSayaka
aticAra pRthak-pRthak rUpa se batalAte haiM-'sue' zrutajJAna ke viSaya meM
(upalakSaNa se zeSa matijJAnAdi cAra jJAna kA grahaNa karanA) jJAna ke viparIta-
utsUtra prarUpaNA karanA yA kAla meM svAdhyAya karanA Adi jJAnAcAra ke ATha
AcAroM kA pAlana nahIM karanA, aticAra hai, usake saMbaMdha meM tathA 'sAmAie'
arthAt sAmAyika ke viSaya meM, yahAM sAmAyika grahaNa karane se samyaktva-
sAmAyika va dezavirati-sAmAyika jAnanA, samyaktvasAmAyika meM zaMkA, kAMkSA Adi
aticAra hai| dezaviratisAmAyika ke aticAra ke 292

Page #315 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Alochana Patha ke Artha evam Abhyudaya Sutra ke Artha  Yogashastra Tritiya
Prakasha Sloka 129 Bheda kahate hain - 'Tinnham Guttinnam' arthaat, teen gupti
se khandita kiya ho, vah atichara, yahan mana, vachana aur kaya ke yogon ke
niroddha mein teen gupti par shraddhaa na karne se tathaa vipareeta prarupana
karne se, khandana viraadhanaa karne se 'Chaunham Kasayanam' krodha, maana, maya
aur lobha rupee chaar kashayon se jin aprashastha kashayon ka karne ka nisheddha
hai, unhen karne se tathaa kashaya-vijaya par ashraddhaa hone ke kaarana unake
vipareeta prarupana karne se tathaa 'Panchanham Anuvvayaanam, Tinnham
Gunavvayaanam, Chaunham Sikkhavvayaanam' arthaat, shravaka ke panch anuvvrata,
teen gunavvrata aur chaar shikshavvrata mein (inaka svarupa pahale kaha aaye
hain), 'Baarasavihassa Savakadhammassa jam khandiyam jam viraahiyam' arthaat,
anuvvrata aadi saba milaakar shravakadharma ke kul baara vrata hote hain, unaka
deshatah bhanga kiya ho, adhika bhanga kiya ho, mula se bhanga nahin hone se
vrata ki viraadhanaa hui ho to 'Tassa Micchaa Mi Dukkadam' =usi dina sambandhi
jnanaadi vishaya mein tathaa gupti, chaar kashaya baara prakaara ke
shravakadharma rupa charittra ke vishaya mein khandana-viraadhanaa rupa atichara
lagaa ho to vah meraa paapa mithya ho. Is prakaara paapa ka pratikaramana kartaa
hoon. Mere liye vaha karane yogya nahin hai, kyonki dushkarttavya hai.  Uske
baada shishya aadhaa shareera ko namaakar uttarrottara badhhe hue vairagya se
sampanna hokar maaya, abhimaana aadi se rahita hokar apane sabhee atichaaraon ki
vishuddhhi ke liye is prakaara ka sutra bole-Savvasavi Devasiya Ducchintiiya,
Dubbhaasiya, Ducchitthiya Icchaakaarenam Sandisaha. Iska artha is tarah se hai-
Savvasavi Devasiya saare dina mein anuvvrata aadi sabhee ke vishaya mein nahin
karne yogya ke karne se aur karne yogya ke nahin karne se jo atichara lage hon,
ve kis prakaara se? Use kahate hain-Ducchintiiya aarta-raudradhyaana rupa
dushtachintan karne se, maaanasika atichara, Dubbhaasiya=paapakaaree
durbhaashana karne se vachana-vishayaka atichara tathaa Ducchitthiya-nishiddha
ya dushta cheshtaaen (daurna, kudnaa ityaadi kaayika kriyaaen karne se lage hue
kaayika atichara. Un atichaaraon ka pratikaramana karne ke hetu kahate hain-
Icchaakaarenam Sandisaha=(Bhagavan) arthaat, he Bhagavan! kisiike dabhaava ya
jorjabardasti se nahin, kintu apanee icchaa se mujhe pratikaramana karnaa-(dosha
se peechhe hatanaa) hai, uske liye anumatee den, yon kahkar shishya maunapurvaka
guru ke sammukha khada rahkar uttara ki prateekshaa kare. Jab guru
Padikkameh=pratikaramana karo, kahen tab shishya bole Iccham=mujhe aapakee
aajnaa pramana hai. Tassa Micchaa Mi Dukkadam-uparyyukta samasta atichara rupa
meraa paapa mithya ho. Arthaat, main in doshaon ya aparaadhon se jugupasaa
kartaa hoon. Isakee baada Vanditthu Sutra bolaa jaataa hai, usmein atichara ka
vistaar se pratikaramana hai.  Isakee baada guru-sambandhi jo daivasika atichara
lage hon, un aparaadhon kee kshamaayyaachanaa ke liye do baar vandana paatha
bole. Tadanantara avaggraha mein khade-khade aadhaa shareera namaakar shishya
apane aparaadhon kee kshamaayyaachanaa ke liye guru se is prakaara nivedana
kare-Icchaakaarenam Sandisaha Bhagavan! Meri apanee icchaa hai, mujhe aajnaa
den. Kis baat kee aajnaa? Use hain-Abbhutthi'oham Abhintara-Devasiyam Khaamemi
arthaat, aapake prati dina mein mere dvaaraa aparaadha hue hon, unakee kshamaa
maangane ke liye, anya icchaon ko chhodakar kshamaayyaachanaa karne ke liye
tatpara banaa hoon. Kisaki kshamaayyaachanaa karaneee hai? Use kahate hain-
Annbhintara-Devasiya dina mein jo atichara lagne kee sambhaavana hui ho; unake
liye Khaamemi=main kshamaayyaachanaa kartaa hoon. Yahan par atichara ka
adhyaahaar jaannaa. Anya aacharya is sthaan par dusaraa paatha bolate hain-
Icchhaami Khamaasamano! Abbhutthi'oomi Abhintara-Devasiyam Khaameu Yahan
Icchhaami aadi ka artha hai-kshamaayyaachanaa kee icchaa kartaa hoon. He
kshamaa-shramana! Kevala kshamaayyaachanaa kee icchaa hee nahin kartaa; parantu
main kshamaa maangane ke liye aapake samiipa upasthita huaa hoon, aisaa kahkar
mauna purvaka guru ke aadesa kee prateekshaa kare. Jab guru kahen-Khaameh
kshamaa maango; tab gurumahaaraja ke vachan ko aadar purvaka shirodhaarya
karante hue kahen ki-Iccham Khaamemi aapakee aajnaa sveekaara kar apane
aparaadha ko maata hoon. Yahan se kshamaayyaachanaa kee kriyaa praarambha
karante hain, isakee baada vidhipurvaka do haath, do ghutane aur mastaka ko
jameena par lagaakar aur muhapatee ko mukha ke paas rakhkar is prakaara paatha
bole-  Jam kinci Apatti Parapattiyam, Bhatte, Paane, Vinaye Veyaavacce, Aalave,
Sanlaye, Ucchaasane, Samaasane, Antarabhaasaae Uvaribhaasaae, Jam kinci Majjha
Vinaya Pariheenam Suhumam yaa Baayaram vaa, Tubbhe Jaanaha, Aham Na Jaanaami,
Tassa Micchaa Mi Dukkadam.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 AlocanA pATha ke artha evaM abbhuDio sUtra ke artha yogazAstra tRtIya prakAza
zloka 129 bheda kahate hai-'tiNhaM guttINaM' arthAt tIna gupti se khaMDita kiyA
ho, vaha aticAra, yahAM mana, vacana aura kAyA ke yogoM ke nirodha meM tIna
gupti para zraddhA na karane se tathA viparIta prarUpaNA karane se, khaMDana
virAdhanA karane se 'cauNhaM kasAyANaM krodha, mAna, mAyA aura lobha rUpI cAra
kaSAyoM se jina aprazasta kaSAyoM kA karane kA niSedha hai, unheM karane se
tathA kaSAya-vijaya para azraddhA hone ke kAraNa unake viparIta prarUpaNA karane
se tathA 'paMcaNhamaNuvvayANaM, tiNhaM guNavvayANaM, cauNhaM sikkhAvayANaM'
arthAt zrAvaka ke pAMca aNuvratoM, tIna guNavratoM aura cAra zikSAvratoM meM
(inakA svarUpa pahale kaha Aye haiM), 'bArasavihassa sAvagadhammassa jaM
khaMDiyaM jaM virAhiyaM' arthAt aNuvrata Adi saba milAkara zrAvakadharma ke kula
bAraha vrata hote haiM, unakA dezataH bhaMga kiyA ho, adhika bhaMga kiyA ho,
mUla se bhaMga nahIM hone se vrata kI virAdhanA huI ho to 'tassa micchA mi
dukkaDaM' =usa dina saMbaMdhI jJAnAdi viSaya meM tathA gupti, cAra kaSAya bAraha
prakAra ke zrAvakadharma rUpa cAritra ke viSaya meM khaMDana-virAdhanA rUpa
aticAra lagA ho to vaha merA pApa mithyA ho| isa prakAra pApa kA pratikramaNa
karatA huuN| mere lie vaha karane yogya nahIM hai, kyoMki duSkartavya hai| usake
bAda ziSya Adhe zarIra ko namAkara uttarottara bar3he hue vairAgya se saMpanna
hokara mAyA, abhimAna Adi se rahita hokara apane sabhI aticAroM kI vizuddhi ke
lie isa prakAra kA sUtra bole-savvassavi devasia ducciMtiya, dubbhAsiya,
ducciTThiya icchAkAreNa sNdish| isakA artha isa taraha se hai-savvassavi devasia
sAre dina meM aNuvrata Adi sabhI ke viSaya meM nahIM karane yogya ke karane se
aura karane yogya ke nahIM karane se jo aticAra lage hoM, ve kisa prakAra se?
use kahate haiM-ducciMtiya ArttaraudradhyAna rUpa duSTaciMtana karane se,
mAnasika aticAra, dubbhAsiya=pApakArI durbhASaNa karane se vacana-viSayaka
aticAra tathA duciTThiya-niSiddha yA duSTa ceSTAe~ (daur3anA, kUdanA ityAdi
kAyika kriyAe~ karane se lage hue kAyika aticaar| una aticAroM kA pratikramaNa
karane ke hetu kahate haiM-icchAkAreNa saMdisaha=(bhagavaM) arthAt he bhagavan!
kisIke dabAva yA jorajabardastI se nahIM, kintu apanI icchA se mujhe
pratikramaNa karanA-(doSa se pIche haTanA) hai, usake lie anumati deM, yoM
kahakara ziSya maunapUrvaka guru ke sammukha khar3A rahakara uttara kI pratIkSA
kre| jaba guru paDikkameha=pratikramaNa karo, kaheM taba ziSya bole icchaM=mujhe
ApakI AjJA pramANa hai| tassa micchA mi dukkaDaM-uparyukta samasta aticAra rUpa
merA pApa mithyA ho| arthAt maiM ina doSoM yA aparAdhoM se jugupsA karatA huuN|
isake bAda vaMdittu sUtra bolA jAtA hai, usameM aticAra kA vistAra se
pratikramaNa hai| isake bAda guru-saMbaMdhI jo daivasika aticAra lage hoM, una
aparAdhoM kI kSamAyAcanA ke lie do bAra vaMdana pATha bole| tadanaMtara avagraha
meM khar3e-khar3e AdhA zarIra namAkara ziSya apane aparAdhoM kI kSamAyAcanA ke
lie guru se isa prakAra nivedana kare-icchAkAreNa saMdisaha bhagavan! merI apanI
icchA hai, mujhe AjJA deN| kisa bAta kI AjJA? use haiM-abbhuTThio'haM abhiMtara-
devasiaM khAmemi arthAt Apake prati dina meM mere dvArA aparAdha hue hoM, unakI
kSamA mAMgane ke lie, anya icchAoM ko chor3akara kSamAyAcanA karane ke lie
tatpara banA huuN| kisakI kSamAyAcanA karanI hai? use kahate haiM-
anbhiMtaradevasiya dina meM jo aticAra lagane kI saMbhAvanA huI ho; unake lie
khAmemi=maiM kSamAyAcanA karatA huuN| yahAM para aticAra kA adhyAhAra jaannaa|
anya AcArya isa sthAna para dUsarA pATha bolate haiM-icchAmi khamAsamaNo!
abbhuTTiomi abhiMtara-devasiaM khAmeu yahAM icchAmi Adi kA artha hai-kSamAyAcanA
kI icchA karatA huuN| he kSamAzramaNa! kevala kSamAyAcanA kI icchA hI nahIM
karatA; paraMtu maiM kSamA mAMgane ke lie Apake samIpa upasthita huA hUM, aisA
kahakara mauna pUrvaka guru ke Adeza kI pratIkSA kre| jaba guru kahe-khAmeha
kSamA mAMgo; taba gurumahArAja ke vacana ko Adara pUrvaka zirodhArya karate hue
kahe ki-icchaM khAmemi ApakI AjJA svIkArakara apane aparAdha ko mAtA huuN| yahAM
se kSamAyAcanA kI kriyA prAraMbha karate haiM, isake bAda vidhipUrvaka do hAtha,
do ghuTane aura mastaka ko jamIna para lagAkara aura muhapattI ko muMha ke pAsa
rakhakara isa prakAra pATha bole - jaM kiMci apatti parapattiaM, bhatte, pANe,
viNae veyAvacce, AlAve, saMlAye, uccAsaNe, samAsaNe, aMtarabhAsAe uvaribhAsAe,
jaM kiMci majjha viNaya parihINaM suhumaM yA bAyaraM vA, tubbhe jANaha, ahaM na
jANAmi, tassa micchA mi dukkddN| 293

Page #316 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The meaning of the word Pratikraman, discussion and benefits of Vandana  Yoga
Shastra, Third Light, Verse 129, Sutra-Vyakhya - Jankinch - If any ordinary,
natural offense, a slight displeasure in the form of appearance or a special
displeasure in the form of another's appearance, or due to any other cause, and
by implication, due to my cause, there has been any such offense against you by
me or against me by you, it is false; thus, to connect with the last word. In
what matters did the offense occur? In Bhatte Bhojan (food), in Pane-Pani
(water), in Vinae Vinay Vyavahar (conduct), in standing, etc., in Veyavache
(medicine, diet, suitable food, etc.), in Alave (speaking once), in Salave
(mutual conversation), in Uchaasane (sitting on a high seat in front of you), in
Samasane (sitting on a seat equal to yours), and in Antar Bhasae (when the
Gurudev is talking to someone, then speaking in between), in Uvari Bhasae
(exaggerating what the Guru has said), Jan Kinch = any natural or in all ways,
Majjh = from me, Vinay Parihinam (without respect), Avinay (without respect),
Suhumm Va Bayerm Va (subtle or gross), Alp-Prayashchit (purified by minor
atonement) or Vishishta-Prayashchit (purified by special atonement), here the
second time Va is used for both, to give Mithya Dushkrut (false misconduct).
Tubbhe Janah, Aham Na Janami (you know all the things, I don't know). Due to
being foolish, I don't even know my own offenses, and those offenses that I may
have committed secretly, I don't tell you, I know them. And you don't know the
offenses committed by others; and I may not know many offenses; and you know the
offenses committed in front of you. Thus, four options of offense are made;
understand them all here. Tass - for that offense related to displeasure and
disrespect, Miccha Mi Dukkadam (my sin is false), I do Pratikraman (repentance
or acceptance of my wrong conduct); (this is a technical term in Jainism),
Prayacchami (meaning I forgive); this word should be understood as Adhyaharya
(to be accepted). Tass Miccha Mi Dukkadam, the second meaning of this word is
like this - Tass (meaning that offense due to displeasure and disrespect), Mi
(meaning me), Dukkadam (that sin), Miccha (meaning false), Moksha-Sadhan (means
of liberation), Virodh Karne Wala Hai (is opposed to). In this way, know
Pratikraman as acceptance of one's faults or apology for the offense.  In the
first Vandana, the provision has been made to do Vandana for criticism and
apology, after that, know the explanation of Devsian Aaloum and Abbudio Sutra.
Otherwise, the opportunity for Pratikraman comes in the necessary way, in this
way, the Dwadashavart Vandana Vidhi (twelve-fold Vandana method) is complete. By
doing Vandana, there is Moksha (liberation) in the form of Karma Nirjara
(destruction of karma). It is also said:  Shri Gautam Swami asked Lord Mahavira
Bhagwan, "Bhagavan! What is the benefit to the being by doing Vandana?" The Lord
said, "Gautam! The eight karmas, including Gnanavaraneya, which are bound in a
thick form, those karmas become loose by doing Vandana. They do not remain
stable for a long time, those karmas which have intense rasa (taste) become
those with mild rasa, and those karmas which are bound in a large area become
those in a small area. Due to this, one does not have to wander in the forest of
the endless world for a long time." Then he asked another question, "Bhagvant!
What fruit does a being get by doing Guru-Vandana?" The Lord said, "Gautam! By
doing Guru-Vandana, the being destroys the karma of the lower caste and binds
the karma of the higher caste, and earns the karma called Saubhagya (good
fortune), which is the fruit of unhindered obedience, i.e., the one who does not
break the Guru's command." (Utt. 30/10) The service and worship of the Guru who
is worthy of Vinayopchar (respectful behavior), the command of the Tirthankara,
the worship of Shruth Dharma (scriptural dharma), and the nature of action have
been explained. (A. Ni. 1229)  Now, the meaning of Pratikraman is said - in it,
there is the prefix 'Prati', which means 'opposite' or 'adverse'. And 'Kram' is
the root word; its meaning is 'Padaviksep' - to place the foot. With the prefix
'Prati' and the root word 'Kram', the word 'Pratikraman' is formed by adding the
suffix 'Anat' in the sense of 'भाव' (state of being). The meaning of Pratikraman
is - the soul that has gone from auspicious yoga to inauspicious yoga, returning
to auspicious yoga again. It is also said - the soul that has gone from its
place to another place due to carelessness, i.e., from its nature to the state
of 'विभाव' (opposite state), its return to its own place is called Pratikraman.
By taking the opposite meaning of 'Prati',  294

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pratikramaNa zabda kA artha, vivecana vaMdana se lAbha yogazAstra tRtIya
prakAza zloka 129 sUtra-vyAkhyA -jaMkiMci-jo koI sAmAnya-sahaja apattiaM alpa
aprIti rUpa aura parapatti vizeSa aprIti rUpa athavA kisI dUsare nimitta se
tathA upalakSaNa se mere nimitta se Apake prati merA yA mere prati ApakA aisA
koI aparAdha huA ho, vaha mithyA ho; isa prakAra aMtima pada ke sAtha jodd'naa|
aparAdha kina-kina viSayoM meM huA? bhatte bhojana meM, pANe-pAnI meM, viNae
vinayavyavahAra, meM khar3e Adi hone meM, veyAvacce auSadha, pathya, anukUla
AhAra Adi ke sahAyaka hone meM, AlAve eka bAra bolane meM AlApa se, saMlAve
paraspara adhika vArtAlApa karane meM, uccAsaNe Apake sAmane UMce Asana se
baiThane se, samAsaNe Apake barAbara Asana lagAkara baiThane se tathA
antarabhAsAe gurudeva kisI se bAta karate hoM, taba bIca meM bolane se,
uvaribhAsAe guru ne jo bAta kahI ho, use adhika bar3hA-car3hAkara kahane se, jaM
kiMci=jo koI sahajabhAva athavA sarva prakAra se majjha=mere se viNaya parihINaM
avinaya se-vinayabhAva ke rahita pane se huA ho| suhumaM vA bAyaraM vA alpa-
prAyazcita se zuddha hone vAle sUkSma yA vizeSa-prAyazcita se zuddha hone vAle
bAdara, (sthUla), yahAM dUsarI bAra vA kA prayoga donoM ke viSaya meM mithyA
duSkRta dene ke lie haiN| tubbhe jANaha, ahaM na jANAmi Apa sakalabhAva ko yA
una mere aparAdhoM ko jAnate haiM, maiM nahIM jaantaa| mUr3ha hone se maiM apane
aparAdha ko bhI nahIM jAnatA aura maiMne jo apane aparAdha gupta rUpa se kiye
hoM ve Apako nahIM batAye hoM, unheM (mere una aparAdhoM ko) maiM jAnatA huuN|
aura Apa dUsaroM ke kiye hue aparAdha nahIM jAnate; aura maiM kAraNa kaI
aparAdhoM ko nahIM jAnatA houMgAH tathA Apake sAmane pratyakSa kiye hae aparAdha
meM aura Apa jAnate haiN| isa prakAra aparAdha ke cAra vikalpa kiye; ve sabhI
yahAM para samajha lenaa| tassa-usa aprIti-viSayaka aura avinaya-viSayaka
aparAdha ke lie micchA mi dukkaDaM merA pApa mithyA ho, apane galata AcaraNa kA
pazcAttApa yA svIkAra rUpa pratikramaNa karatA hUM; (aisA jainazAsana meM
pAribhASika vAkya hai) prayacchAmi arthAt kSamA detA hUM; yaha pada adhyAhArya
smjhnaa| tassa micchA mi dukkaDaM isa pada kA dUsarA artha isa taraha hai-tassa
arthAt aprIti aura avinaya se huA vaha merA aparAdha micchA mokSa-sAdhana meM
virodha karane vAlA hai mi=mujhako dukkaDaM-vaha pApa rUpa hai| isa taraha apane
doSoM kI svIkRti rUpa pratikramaNa athavA aparAdha kI kSamAyAcanA jaannaa|
pahale vaMdana meM AlocanA aura kSamApanA ke lie vaMdana karane kA vidhAna kiyA
hai, isake bAda devasiaM AlouM aura abbhuDio sUtra kI vyAkhyA jaannaa| nahIM to
usakA avasara pratikramaNa Avazyaka meM AtA hai isa taraha
dvAdazAvartavaMdanavidhi pUrNa huii| vaMdana karane se karmanirjarA rUpa mokSa
hotA hai| kahA bhI hai zrI gautama svAmI ne prabhu mahAvIra bhagavAn ko pUchA ki
'bhagavan! vaMdana karane se jIva ko kyA lAbha hotA hai?' bhagavAna ne
kahA-'gautama! jJAnAvaraNIya Adi ATha karma jo gAr3ha rUpa meM bAMdhe hoM, ve
karma, vaMdana karane se zithila ho jAte haiN| laMbe kAla taka sthira nahIM
rahate, tIvra rasa vAle hoM ve karma maMda rasa vAle ho jAte haiM aura
bahutapradeza vAle karmabaMdhana kiye hoM, ve alpapradeza vAle ho jAte haiN|
isase anAdi-anaMta saMsAra rUpI aTavI meM dIrghakAla taka bhramaNa nahIM karanA
pdd'taa|' dUsarA prazna phira pUchA-bhagavaMta! guru-vaMdana karane se jIva ko
kyA phala milatA hai? bhagavAn ne kahA-gautama! guruvaMdana karane se jIva
nIcagotrakarma kA kSaya karake uccagotrakarma kA baMdhana karatA hai aura
apratihataAjJAphala arthAt jo guru kI AjJA ko khaMDita nahIM karatA, vaha
saubhAgyanAmakarma upArjana karatA hai| (utta. 30/10) vinayopacAra karane yogya
guruvarga kI sevA aura pUjA tIrthakara kI AjJA, zrutadharma kI ArAdhanA aura
kriyA kA svarUpa smjhaayaa| (A. ni. 1229) aba pratikramaNa kA artha kahate haiM-
isameM prati upasarga hai jisakA artha hai-viparIta athavA prtikuul| aura krama
dhAtu hai; isakA artha hai-pAdavikSepa-paira-sthApana krnaa| prati upasarga
pUrvaka krama dhAtu ke sAtha bhAva artha meM anaTa pratyaya lagane se
pratikramaNa zabda banA hai| pratikramaNa kA bhAvArtha hai-zubhayoga se
azubhayoga meM gaye hue AtmA kA phira se zubhayoga meM vApisa lauTa aanaa| kahA
bhI hai-pramAdavaza huA AtmA apane sthAna se parasthAna meM arthAt svabhAva se
vibhAvadazA meM gayA ho, usakA phira lauTakara svasthAna meM A janA pratikramaNa
kahalAtA hai| prati kA viparIta artha karake 294

Page #317 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## General Pratikraman Form  **Yoga Shastra, Third Light, Verse 129 explains:**
When the soul, under the influence of the Audayik Bhav (state of being) from the
Kshayopa-shamic Bhav (state of being), again goes against the right path, i.e.,
returns to the Kshayopa-shamic Bhav, it is also called Pratikraman. This is the
same meaning as above. Another meaning could be: "Prati-Prati-Kramanam
Pratikramanam," meaning, the movement (Kraman) towards the auspicious Yoga
(Shubh Yoga) that leads to Moksha (liberation) is Pratikraman. It is said:
Pratikraman is that which frees the Sadhu (saint) from all afflictions like
Maya-shalya (affliction of Maya) and leads him towards auspicious Yoga (Shubh
Yoga) (makes him behave accordingly). This Pratikraman is related to the sinful
actions of the past, present, and future.  **Here, there is a doubt:**
Pratikraman is only related to the past. It is said: "I do Pratikraman for the
sins committed in the past. I control (stop) the sins of the present and I do
Pacchakkhan (repentance) for the sins of the future." Here, only Pratikraman of
the past is mentioned, then how is it related to all three times?  **The answer
is:** The meaning of the word "Pratikraman" should be understood as "to stop
(refrain) from inauspicious Yoga (Ashubh Yoga)." It is also said: "Just as there
is Pratikraman of Mithyatva (false belief), similarly, there is Pratikraman of
Asanayam (lack of self-control), Kshaya (passions), Pramad (carelessness), and
Aprashast (bad) Yoga." The conclusion is that refraining from these five is
called Pratikraman. In this, the Pratikraman related to the past is the
cessation of inauspicious Yoga through Ninda (condemnation), the Pratikraman
related to the present is the cessation of present inauspicious Yoga through
Sanvar (control), and the Pratikraman related to the future is the cessation of
future inauspicious Yoga through Pacchakkhan (repentance). In this way, there is
no objection to the cessation of inauspicious Yoga related to all three times
being called Trikal-Pratikraman (Pratikraman of three times).  **Further, this
Pratikraman is of five types:** Daivsik (daily), Ratrik (nightly), Paakshik
(fortnightly), Chaturmasik (quarterly), and Saavatsarik (annual). The one done
at the end of the day is called Daivsik, the one done at the end of the night is
called Ratrik, the one done at the end of the fortnight is called Paakshik, the
one done at the end of four months is called Chaturmasik, and the one done at
the end of the year is called Saavatsarik Pratikraman.  **Again, this
Pratikraman is of two types:** Dhruv (fixed) and Adhruv (unfixed). In the Bharat
and Airavat Kshetras (regions) and in the Tirth (pilgrimage) of the first and
last Tirthankaras (liberated souls), it is Dhruv. Whether there are daily
offenses or not, it is necessary to do Pratikraman twice a day, morning and
evening. And in the Tirth of the 22 Tirthankaras in between and in the
Mahavideha Kshetra, Pratikraman is done only when there is a reason, i.e., when
there is a fault, therefore it is Adhruv.  **This is also said:** The Dharma
(religion) of the first and last Jineshwara (liberated souls) is with
Pratikraman, i.e., in their reign, it is necessary for Sadhus and Sadhvis
(saints) to do Pratikraman twice a day. And in the Tirth of the 22 Tirthankaras
in between, Pratikraman is done only when there is a reason (when there is a
fault).  **The method of Pratikraman has been explained by the ancient Acharyas
(teachers):** It should be known according to the Gathas (verses). (A. Ni. 1258)
We are only giving their meaning here.  **For the purification of the five types
of conduct, Sadhus and Shravaks (lay followers) should also do Pratikraman with
the Guru (teacher), and in the absence of the Guru Maharaj, the Shravak should
do it alone.**  **1.** First of all, start by doing Devavandan (salutation to
the Gods) and then give four Khamasamana (apologies) at the beginning, saying
"Bhagwan Hum..." etc., and touch the ground with your forehead and say "Savvas
Vi."  **2.** After that, give Miccha Mi Dukkadam (apology for all
transgressions).  **3.** Then, say the Samayik Satar, "Yakt Ichchhami Thami
Kaussagg..." etc., and keep both hands hanging down, pressing the Chola Patta
(sacred cloth) above the waist with your elbows.  **4.** And do Kaussagg
(confession) free from the 19 faults like Ghotak (pride). In this, keep the
Chola Patta four fingers below the navel and four fingers above the knee
(Shravaks should also keep their dhoti in this way).  **5.** In Kaussagg,
remember the transgressions committed during the day one by one in your heart
and complete the Kaussagg by saying the Namokkar Mantra. Then, say "Logass"
openly.  **6.** After that, do Sandasa Pramardjan (purification of the body) and
sit down, keeping both hands long so that they don't touch each other, and do
the Pratilekhan (reflection) of the mouth with 25 words and the body with 25
words.  **7.** Then, stand up and do the 25 necessary-pure Vandans (salutations)
with Vinay (humility) and according to the method, free from the 32 faults.
**8.** After that, bow down to the upper part of the body properly, hold the
Muhpatti (mouth cloth) and Rajoharan (purification cloth) in both hands, and
confess the transgressions you thought about in Kaussagg in front of the Guru,
openly, according to the Gyanadhikram (knowledge and conduct).  **9.** After
that, sit down in Jayana (meditation posture) and with effort, become Apramat
(attentive) and say "Karemi Bhanta..." etc., and say the Vandittu Sutra
(salutation formula). In this, say the remaining Sutra, "Abbudhio Mi
Arahanae..." etc.  **Note:** It is not clear here which Devavandan to do.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 sAmAnya pratikramaNa svarupa yogazAstra tRtIya prakAza zloka 129 vyAkhyA karate
haiM-kSAyopazamika bhAva meM se audayika bhAva ke vaza huA AtmA, phira pratikUla
gamana kare, arthAt kSayopazamika bhAva meM vApisa lauTa Aye, to use bhI
pratikramaNa kahate haiN| yaha to Upara kI taraha hI artha huaa| eka artha yaha
bhI ho sakatA hai-prati prati kramaNaM pratikramaNam yAnI mokSaphaladAyaka,
zubhayoga ke prati (zubhayoga kI ora) kramaNa gamana pratikramaNa hai| kahA hai-
mAyAzalya Adi sarvazalyoM se rahita sAdhu ko mokSaphala dene vAlA aura zubhayoga
kI ora le jAne (vyavahAra karAne) vAlA pratikramaNa kahalAtA hai| yaha
pratikramaNa bhUta, bhaviSya aura vartamAna ina tInoM kAloM ke pApakarmoM ke
saMbaMdha meM hotA hai| yahAM zaMkA karate haiM ki pratikramaNa to
bhUtakAlaviSayaka hI hotA hai| kahA hai ki-bhUtakAla ke kiye hue pApoM kA
pratikramaNa karatA huuN| vartamAna kAla ke pApoM kA saMvara karatA (rokatA) hUM
aura bhaviSyakAla ke pApoM kA paccakkhANa karatA huuN| isameM bhUtakAla kA
pratikramaNa hI kahA hai, to phira tInoM kAloM kA pratikramaNa kaise hotA hai?
isakA uttara dete haiM-pratikramaNa zabda kA artha 'azubhayoga se nivRtta ho
(ruka) jAnA, itanA hI samajhanA caahie| yaha bhI to kahA hai-jaise mithyAtva kA
pratikramaNa hai. vaise asaMyama kA pratikramaNa, kaSAya kA pratikramaNa,
pramAda kA pratikramaNa aura aprazasta (kharAba) yoga kA pratikramaNa bhI hai|
niSkarSa yaha hai ki ina pAMcoM se rukanA pratikramaNa kahalAtA hai| isameM
niMdA dvArA azubhayoga se nivRtti rUpa bhUtakAla-saMbaMdhI pratikramaNa, saMvara
dvArA vartamAna azubhayoga se nivRtti rUpa vartamAnakAla kA pratikramaNa aura
paccakkhANa se bhaviSyakAla-saMbaMdhI azubhayoga se nivRtti rUpa pratikramaNa
hai| isa taraha tInoM kAla-saMbaMdhI azubhayoga se nivRtti rUpa trikAla-
pratikramaNa hone meM koI Apatti nahIM hai| phira yaha pratikramaNa daivasika
Adi bheda se pAMca prakAra kA hai| jo dina ke aMta meM kiyA jAya, vaha
daivasika; rAta ke aMta meM kiyA jAya, vaha rAtrika, pakSa ke aMta meM kiyA jAya
vaha pAkSika, jo cAra mAsa ke aMta meM kiyA | jAya vaha cAturmAsika aura
saMvatsara-(varSa) ke aMta meM kiyA jAya vaha sAMvatsarika pratikramaNa kahalAtA
hai| punaH yaha pratikramaNa do prakAra kA hai-dhruva aura adhruv| bharata aura
airAvata kSetroM meM prathama aura aMtima tIrthaMkaroM ke tIrtha meM dhruva rUpa
hai; nitya-aparAdha hue hoM cAhe na hue hoM, phira bhI subaha-zAma ubhayakAla
pratikramaNa karanA Avazyaka hotA hai| aura bIca ke 22 tIrthaMkaroM ke tIrtha
meM evaM mahAvidehakSetra meM kAraNavaza arthAt doSa lage hoM tabhI,
pratikramaNa kiyA jAtA hai, ataH vaha adhruva hai| isI bAta ko kahA hai-prathama
aura aMtima jinezvara kA dharma sapratikramaNa hai; arthAt unake zAsana meM
sAdhusAdhviyoM ke lie donoM samaya pratikramaNa karanA Avazyaka hai aura bIca ke
22 tIrthaMkaroM ke tIrtha meM kAraNavaza (doSa lage tabhI) pratikramaNa karanA
hotA hai| pratikramaNa kI vidhi pUrvAcAryoM ne batAyI hai; vaha gAthAoM ke
anusAra jaannaa| (A. ni. 1258) hama yahAM sirpha unakA artha de rahe haiM pAMca
prakAra ke AcAra kI vizuddhi ke lie sAdhu aura zrAvaka bhI guru ke sAtha
pratikramaNa kare aura gurumahArAja ke abhAva meM zrAvaka akelA bhI kare  /  / 1
/  /  sarva-prathama devavaMdana' karake prAraMbha meM cAra khamAsamaNA dekara
bhagavAna haM!... Adi kahakara bhUmitala para mastaka lagAkara savvassa vi bole|
usake bAda sAre aticAroM kA micchA mi dukkaDaM de  /  / 2 /  /  usake bAda
sAmAyikasatra yakta icchAmi ThAmi kAussaggaM Adi satra bolakara donoM hAtha nIce
laTakAkara kohanI se colapaTTe ko kamara ke upara dabAkara rakhe  /  / 3 /  /
aura ghoTaka Adi 19 doSoM se rahita kAussagga kre| usameM colapaTTA nAbhi se
cAra aMgula nIce aura ghuTane se cAra aMgula Upara rakhe, (zrAvaka bhI isa
taraha dhotI rakhe)  // 4 /  /  kAussagga meM dina meM lage hue aticAra ko
kramazaH hRdaya meM dhAraNa-(smaraNa) kare aura NamokkAramaMtra bolakara
kAussagga pUrNa kre| phira prakaTa rUpa meM pUrA logassa kahe  /  / 5 /  /
tadanaMtara saMDAsA pramArjana kara nIce baiThakara, donoM hArthoM ko, sparza na
ho isa taraha laMbe karake paccIsa bola se muhapattI aura paccIsa bola se zarIra
kA pratilekhana kare  /  / 6 /  /  usake bAda khar3e hokara vinaya-sahita
vidhipUrvaka battIsa doSoM se rahita paccIsa Avazyaka-vizuddha vaMdana kare  /
/ 7 /  /  tadanaMtara kamara ke Upara ke bhAga ko acchI taraha namAkara donoM
hAthoM meM muhapattI aura rajoharaNa pakar3akara, kAussagga meM vicAra kiye hue
aticAroM ko jJAnAdikramAnusAra guru ke sAmane prakaTa meM nivedana kare  /  / 8
/  /  usake bAda jayaNA aura vidhipUrvaka baiThakara yatanA se| apramatta
banakara karemi bhaMte Adi kahakara vaMdittu sUtra bole, usameM abbhuDhio mi
ArAhaNAe Adi kA zeSa sUtra bolate 1. yahAM kauna sA devavaMdana karanA yaha
spaSTa nahIM kiyaa| 295

Page #318 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Method of Daily, Nightly and Fortnightly Pratikraman  **Yoga Shastra,
Third Light, Verse 129**  **9.**  Timely, both in terms of substance and
feeling, stand up.   **10.**  Then, after offering two Vandanas, if there are
five or more Sadhus in the assembly, say "Abbhuttiyo" and seek forgiveness from
three. Afterwards, offer two Vandanas and recite the three Gathas of Ayariya
Uvvajhaye, etc.  **11.**  After that, recite the Kaussagg Sutra, "Karemi Bhanta,
Ichchhami Thami", etc., and, while dwelling in Kaussagg (meditation),
contemplate the two Logass for the purification of transgressions of conduct.
**12.**  Then, after completing the Kaussagg according to the method, recite the
Logass in a manifest form for the purification of Samyaktva. For the
purification of the same, recite "Savvaloae Arihant - Cheiyaṇam" and perform
Kaussagg for the worship of those Chaityas.  **13.**  In that, contemplate one
Logass. After crossing that Kaussagg, which purifies Darshan, recite the
"Pukkharavar - Diivaddhe" Sutra for the purification of Shruta-Jnana.  **14.**
Then, perform Kaussagg with one Logass, which is twenty-five breaths long, from
"Chandesu Nimmalayara" to the end, and complete it according to the method.
After that, recite "Siddhaṇam Buddhaṇam Siddastav" as a result of the auspicious
ritual.  **15.**  Then, perform Kaussagg for the Shruta-Devatas, who are the
cause of Shruta and Smriti. In that, contemplate the Navkar Mantra completely
and recite or listen to the praise of the Shruta-Devatas.  **16.**  Similarly,
perform Kaussagg for the Kshetra-Devatas, recite or listen to their praise.
Afterwards, recite the Navkar Mantra in a manifest form. Then, after performing
Sandasa-Pramarjan, sit down.  **17.**  Then, according to the aforementioned
method, perform Muhpatti-Pratilekhan, offer two Vandanas, say "Ichchamo
Anusatthi" and sit down with support from the knees.  **18.**  Then, recite one
praise of "Gurumaharaj Namo'astu". After that, recite three praises with
increasing letters and increasing voice. Then, recite "Shakrastavnamotthunan"
and praise, and perform Kaussagg for the daily Pratikraman.  **19.**  Thus, the
sequence of daily Pratikraman is complete. The method of nightly Pratikraman is
also the same. In that, first, perform Pratikraman with "Savvassa Vi" and
"Micchami Dukkadam", establishing Kaussagg.  **20.**  Then, according to the
method, contemplate one Logass in Kaussagg for the purification of conduct and
character. Then, perform the second Kaussagg for the purification of Darshan,
also contemplating one Logass in that.  **21.**  In the third Kaussagg,
contemplate the transgressions committed during the night, complete the
Kaussagg, and, after reciting "Siddhaṇam Buddhaṇam", perform Sandasa-Pramarjan
and sit down with knees bent and feet on the ground.  **22.**  As mentioned
before, perform Muhpatti-Padhilehan, offer two Vandanas, recite the criticism of
the transgressions of the night, and recite the Vandittu Sutra. Then, offer two
Vandanas, seek forgiveness with the Abbhuttiyo Sutra, offer two more Vandanas,
and recite the three Gathas of Ayariya Uvvajhaye, etc., and perform Kaussagg for
the contemplation of Tapas.  **23.**  In that Kaussagg, resolve in your mind
that you will perform six months of Tapas so that your journey of restraint is
not harmed. If you do not have the strength to perform six months of excellent
Tapas,  **24.**  then contemplate one day, two days, three days, and so on,
reducing by one day each time, until you reach five months. If you do not have
that strength, then, again, reduce by one day each time, until you reach four
months, then three months, then two months. If you do not have that strength,
then, reducing further, contemplate one month of Tapas.  **25.**  If you do not
even have that strength, then, reducing by thirteen days, contemplate thirty-
four Bhakt (sixteen fasts) of Tapas. If you do not even have that strength,
then, reducing by two Bhakt each time, finally contemplate Chaturthabhakta (one
fast) of Tapas. In the absence of that strength, contemplate from Ayambil, etc.,
to Porsi-Namukkarasi.  **26.**  While contemplating in this way, resolve in your
heart the Tapas that you can perform, and complete the Kaussagg. Then, recite
the Logass in a manifest form. Afterwards, perform Muhpatti-Padhilehan. Offer
two Vandanas and, with a sincere heart, receive Pacchakkhan from the Guru for
the Tapas that you have resolved to perform in your mind.  **27.**  Then, say
"Ichchamo Anusatthi", sit down, and recite the three praises of Vishal-Lochan-
Dal in a soft voice. Afterwards, perform Deva-Vandana with Shakrastav, etc.
**28.**  Fortnightly Pratikraman should be performed on the fourteenth day. In
that, perform daily Pratikraman with the Vandittu Sutra as before. After that,
perform fortnightly Pratikraman in this sequence, in a Samyag form.  **29.**
First, perform Pakkhi Muhpatti-Padhilehan, offer two Vandanas, and then,  **1.**
These two came into practice after the fourth praise of Kayotsarga, hence their
mention here.  **2.** At the time of its composition, Sajjhaye, Kayotsarga, and
Laghu Shanti or Brihad Shanti had not been introduced.  **3.** Here too, it is
not explicitly stated which Deva-Vandana to perform, excellent, medium, or
inferior.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 daivasika, rAtrika evaM pAkSika pratikramaNa kI vidhi yogazAstra tRtIya prakAza
zloka 129 | samaya vidhipUrvaka dravya-bhAva donoM prakAra se khar3A ho jAya  /
/ 9 /  /  tatpazcAt do bAra vAMdaNA dekara maMDalI meM pAMca athavA isase adhika
sAdhu hoM to abbhuTThio bolakara tIna se kSamAyAcanA kare aura bAda meM do
vAMdaNA dekara Ayariya uvajjhAya Adi tIna gAthA bole  /  / 10 /  /  usake bAda
karemi bhaMte, icchAmi ThAmi ityAdi kAussagga sUtra kahakara kAussagga (dhyAna)
meM sthita hokara cAritra ke aticAroM kI zuddhi ke lie do logassa kA ciMtana
kare  /  /  11  /  /  usake bAda vidhipUrvaka kAussagga pUrNa kara samyaktva kI
zuddhi ke lie prakaTa rUpa meM logassa bole tathA usI kI zuddhi ke lie savvaloe
arihaMta - ceiyANaM kahakara, una caityoM kI ArAdhanA ke lie kAussagga kare  /
/  12  /  /  usameM eka logassa kA dhyAna kare, | darzanazuddhi vAle usa
kAussagga ko pArakara phira zrutajJAna kI zuddhi ke lie pukkharavara - dIvaDDhe
sUtra bole  /  /  13  /  /  phira | caMdesu nimmalayarA taka paccIsa
zvAsocchvAsa pramANa vAlA logassa kA kAussagga kare aura vidhi pUrvaka pUrNa
kre| usake | bAda zubha anuSThAna ke phala svarUpa siddhANaM buddhANaM
siddhastava bole  /  /  14  /  /  tadanaMtara zruta-smRti ke kAraNabhUta
zrutadevatA | kA kAussagga kare; usameM navakAra maMtra kA dhyAna pUrNa karake
zrutadevatA kI stuti bole athavA sune  /  /  15  /  /  isa prakAra | kSetra
devatA kA bhI kAussagga kare, usakI stuti bole yA sune| bAda meM prakaTa meM
navakAra maMtra bole  /  1 phira saMDAsA | pramArjanakara nIce baiThe  /   /  16
/  /  usake bAda pUrvokta vidhi ke anusAra muhapattI - pratilekhana karake do
vaMdanA dekara icchAmo aNusaTThi kahakara ghuTane ke sahAre nIce baiThe  /  /
17  /   /  phira gurumahArAja namo'stu kI eka stuti kaheM, usake bAda bar3hate |
akSara aura bar3hate svara se tIna-stuti pUrNa kahe; tadanaMtara
zakrastavanamotthuNaM aura stavana bolakara daivasika prAyazcitta kA | kAussagga
kare || 18 ||2 isa prakAra daivasika pratikramaNa kA krama pUrNa huA  /  rAtrika
pratikramaNa kI vidhi bhI isI prakAra hai| isameM pahale savvassa vi kahakara
micchAmi dukkaDaM se pratikramaNa kii| | sthApanA karake kAussagga kare  /  /
19  /  /  usake bAda vidhipUrvaka cAritrAcAra kI zuddhi ke lie kAussagga meM eka
logassa kA ciMtana kare; phira dUsarA kAussagga darzanazuddhi ke lie kare,
usameM bhI eka logassa kA dhyAna kare  /  /  20  /  /  tIsare | kAussagga meM
kramazaH rAta meM lage hue aticAroM kA ciMtana karake kAussagga pUrNa kare aura
siddhANaM buddhANaM bolakara saMDAsA - pramArjanakara ghuTanoM ke bala khar3e
pairoM se nIce baiThe  /  /  21  /  /  pahale kahe anusAra muhapattI paDilehaNa
kare, do vaMdanA | dekara rAtri ke aticAra kI AlocanA kahakara vaMdittasUtra
khe| usake bAda do vAMdaNA dekara abbhuTTio sUtra se kSamAyAcanA kare, phira do
vaMdanA de aura Ayaria uvajjhAe kI tIna gAthA Adi sUtra kahakara tapa - ciMtana
kA kAussagga kare  /  /  22  /  /  usa kAussagga meM mana meM nizcaya kare ki
apanI saMyamayAtrA meM hAni na pahuMce isa taraha se maiM chaha mahIne kA tapa
karUM  /  utkRSTa chaha mahIne tapa karane kI svayaM kI zakti na ho ||23|| to
eka dina, do dina, tIna dina isa | prakAra eka-eka dina kama karate-karate pAMca
mahIne kA ciMtana kre| itanA sAmarthya na ho to usameM bhI eka-eka dina kama
karate-karate cAra mahIne, phira tIna mahIne, do mahIne taka kA soce| usakA bhI
sAmarthya na ho, to kama karate-karate eka mahIne ke tapa kA ciMtana kare  /  /
24  /  /  itanA bhI sAmArthya na ho to usameM bhI teraha dina kama karate hue
cauMtIsa bhakta | ( solaha upavAsa rUpa) tapa kA ciMtana karanA; vaise bhI zakti
na ho to do-do bhakta kama karate-karate Akhira caturthabhakta (eka upavAsa)
taka ke tapa kA ciMtana karanA  /  usa zakti ke abhAva meM AyaMbila Adi se
lekara porasI -namukkArasI taka | kA ciMtana kare  /  /  25  /  /  isa taraha
ciMtana karate hue jisa tapa ko kara sakatA hai; usa tapa kA hRdaya meM nizcaya
karake | kAussagga pUrNa kre| phira prakaTa meM logassa kahe  /  tadanaMtara
muhapatti - paDilehaNa kre| do vaMdanA dekara niSkapaTa bhAva se | mana meM
dhAraNa kiyA ho, usa tapa kA guru se paccakkhANa grahaNa kare  /  /  26  /  /
bAda meM icchAmo aNusaTThi bolakara nIce | baiThakara vizAla - locana - dala kI
tIna stuti maMdasvara se bole, bAda zakrastava Adi se devavaMdana kare  /  /  27
/  /  pAkSika pratikramaNa cartudazI ke dina karanA cAhie, usameM pUrvavat
vaMdittu sUtra daivasika pratikramaNa kare, usake bAda | samyag rUpa se pAkSika
pratikramaNa isa krama se kare  /  /  28  /  /  prathama pakkhI muhapattI
paDilehaNakara do vAMdaNA de, bAda meM 1. ye donoM kAyotsarga caturtha stuti ke
pracalana ke bAda A gaye the, isalie yahAM usakA bhI varNana AyA hai| 2. isake
racanA kAla taka sajjhAya, kAyotsarga evaM laghuzAMti yA bRhada zAMti kA praveza
nahIM huA thA  /  3. yahAM para bhI utkRSTa, madhyama, jaghanya kauna sA
devavaMdana kare yaha spaSTa nahIM khaa| 296

Page #319 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Defects of Kayotsarga  **Chapter 3 of the Yoga Shastra, Verse 129:**
Criticize the excessive conduct of the Paakshik Kshamana Kar. Then, after
offering two Vandanas, seek forgiveness for each Kshamana Kar. After that, offer
two Vandanas and recite the Paakshik Sutra. ||29||  After that, recite the
Vandittu Sutra. While standing and reciting the words "Abbhudhi Omi
Aarahaanaae", complete the Vandittu Sutra and then perform the Kaussagg. After
that, perform the Muhpatti Padhilehan, offer two Vandanas, and complete the
Samatt-Samaapt Kshamana and four Thobh Vandanas. ||30||  After that, complete
the remaining Daivsik Pratikraman according to the previous method. However,
instead of the Shrutadevaata, perform the Kaussagg for the Bhuvandevaata, and
instead of the Stavan, recite the Ajit Shantistav. Understand this difference.
||31||  In this way, learn the Chaaturmaasik and Saavatsarik Pratikraman methods
according to the Paakshik method. Just mention the name of the type of
Pratikraman being performed. ||32||  Also, perform the Kaussagg in sequence,
with twelve, twenty, and forty Logass with the Navkar Mantra, and perform the
Abbhutthi Omi Kshamana for three, five, and Sadhus respectively in the Sambuddha
Kshamana, etc. ||33||  We are not discussing the Vandittu Sutra in detail in the
Pratikraman due to the fear of the text becoming too lengthy.  **Kayotsarga
(Kaussagg) means the abandonment of the body.** Its method is to stand in the
Jinmudra posture or, in exceptional cases, sit still with focused concentration
due to old age, weakness, etc. Maintain silence with words and focus on
auspicious thoughts with the mind. Abandoning all activities of the mind,
speech, and body, except for essential bodily functions like breathing, is
called Kayotsarga. For every breath, contemplate the Navkar or Logass. Upon
completion, pronounce "Namo Arihantaanam".  There are two types of Kayotsarga:
one for activity (pravritti) and the other for overcoming obstacles (parabhaav).
The Kaussagg performed during the Pratikraman of Iriyaavhi, etc., is for
activity, and the one performed for overcoming obstacles is for overcoming. It
is said that there are two types of Kayotsarga from the perspective of activity
and overcoming. The activities performed for begging fall under activity-
Kayotsarga, and overcoming obstacles fall under overcoming.  Activity-Kayotsarga
ranges from eight to twenty-five, twenty-seven, three hundred, five hundred, and
up to one thousand and eight breaths. The Kayotsarga performed for overcoming
obstacles, etc., ranges from one Muhurt to one year, like that of Bhahubali.
Kaussagg is performed in three postures: standing, sitting, and lying down. Each
of these has four variations. The first type is Ucchrito Uchchrit, meaning
standing in both substance and feeling. This means standing with the body in
substance and standing (stable) in Dharma or Shukladhyaan in feeling. The second
is Ucchritonuchchrit, meaning Ucchrit for standing in substance and Anuchchrit
for feeling due to the presence of Krishnaadi Ashubhleshyaa (results). The third
is Anuchchrito Uchchrit, meaning sitting down in substance and being
enthusiastic in Dharmadyaan or Shukladhyaan in feeling. The fourth is
Anuchchritanuchchrit, meaning sitting down with the body in substance and
sitting down in results due to the declining unfavorable results of Krishnaadi
Leshya.  Understand these four variations for sitting, standing, and lying down.
Kayotsarga should be performed while avoiding defects. The Acharyas have
mentioned twenty-one defects of Kayotsarga.  **Defects of Kayotsarga:**  1.
**Ghotak Dosha:** Performing Kaussagg while standing on one leg like a horse. 2.
**Lata Dosha:** Shaking the body like a vine trembling in a strong wind. 3.
**Stambh Dosha:** Performing Kaussagg while leaning on a pillar. 4. **Kudya
Dosha:** Performing Kaussagg while leaning on a wall. 5. **Maal Dosha:**
Performing Kaussagg with the head resting against the ceiling. 6. **Shabari
Dosha:** Performing Kaussagg with both hands on the private area like a tribal
woman. 7. **Vadhu Dosha:** Performing Kaussagg with the head bowed like a bride.
8. **Nigad Dosha:** Standing in Kayotsarga with both legs stretched out or bent
like someone in shackles. 9. **Lambottar Dosha:** Performing Kaussagg with a
loincloth tied from the navel to below the knees. 10. **Stan Dosha:** Covering
the breasts or chest area in Kayotsarga to prevent flies or mosquitoes, like a
woman covering her breasts with clothes, or like a wet nurse breastfeeding a
child.  ... (The text continues with further details about the defects of
Kayotsarga)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 kAyotsarga ke doSa yogazAstra tRtIya prakAza zloka 129 saMbaddhA kSAmaNA kara
pAkSika aticAra kI AlocanA kare; phira do vAMdaNA dekara pratyeka kSAmaNA kara
kSamAyAcanA karanA, bAda meM do vAMdaNA dekara pAkSika sUtra kahe  /  / 29 /  /
usake bAda vaMdittu sUtra bole; usameM abbhuDhiomi ArAhaNAe pada bolate hue
khar3e hokara vaMdittu sUtra pUrNa karake bAda meM kAussagga kre| usake bAda
muhapattI paDilehaNa kara do vAMdaNA dekara samatta-samApta kSAmaNA aura cAra
thobha vaMdanA kare  // 30 /  /  usake bAda pUrva-vidhi-anusAra zeSa rahA
daivasika pratikramaNa pUrNa kre| paraMtu zrutadevatA ke sthAna para
bhuvanadevatA kA kAussagga kare aura stavana ke sthAna para ajita zAMtistava
kahe, itanA-sA aMtara samajha lenA cAhie  /  / 31 /  /  isa taraha pAkSika vidhi
ke anusAra kramazaH cAturmAsika aura sAMvatsarika pratikramaNa-vidhi jaannaa|
kevala usameM jisa-jisa prakAra kA pratikramaNa ho, usakA nAma kahanA  /  / 32 /
/  tathA unake kAussagga anukrama se bAraha, bIsa aura navakAramaMtra-sahita
dravya se cAlIsa logassa karanA aura saMbuddhAkSamaNA Adi meM tIna, pAMca aura
sAdhuoM ko yathAkrama se abbhuTThiomi kA khAmaNA karanA  /  / 33 /  /
pratikramaNa meM vaMdittu sUtra kA vivecana graMtha vistRta ho jAne ke bhaya se
yahAM nahIM kara rahe haiN| kAyotsarga - (kAussagga) kA artha hai-zarIra kA
tyAga krnaa| usakA vidhAna yaha hai ki zarIra se jinamudrA meM khar3e hokara
athavA apavAda rUpa vRddhatA-glAnatva Adi kAraNavaza ekAgratApUrvaka sthira
hokara baitthnaa| zabda se mauna dhAraNa karanA aura mana se zubhadhyAna krnaa|
zvAsocchvAsAdi anivArya zArIrika ceSTAoM ke sivAya-mana-vacana-kAyA kI samagra
pravRttiyoM kA tyAga karanA kAyotsarga kahalAtA hai| vaha kAussagga jitane
zvAsocchAvAsa kA ho, utane pramANa meM navakAra yA logassa kA ciMtana kre| usake
pUrNa hone para namo arihaMtANaM kA uccAraNa krnaa| vaha kAyotsarga do prakAra
kA hai-eka ceSTA (pravRtti) vAlA aura dUsarA upasarga (parAbhava) ke samaya meM;
jAne-Ane Adi kI pravRtti ke lie| iriyAvahi Adi kA pratikramaNa karate samaya jo
kAussagga kiyA jAtA hai, vaha ceSTA (pravRtti) ke lie jAnanA aura jo upasarga-
vijaya ke lie kiyA jAtA hai, vaha parAbhava ke lie jaannaa| kahA hai ki ceSTA
aura parAbhava kI dRSTi se kAyotsarga ke do bheda haiN| bhikSA ke lie jo
pravRttiyAM kI jAtI hai, ve ceSTA-kAyotsarga ke aMtargata AtI hai evaM upasarga
vaha parAbhava ke aMtargata AtA hai| ceSTA-kAyotsarga jaghanya ATha se lekara
paccIsa, sattAIsa, tIna sau, pAMca sau aura jyAdA se jyAdA eka hajAra ATha
zvAsocchvAsa pramANa vAlA hotA hai| aura upasarga Adi parAbhava ke lie jo
kAyotsarga kiyA jAtA hai vaha eka muhUrta se lekara bAhubali ke samAna eka varSa
taka kA bhI hotA hai| vaha kAussagga tIna prakAra kI mudrA se hotA hai-
khar3e-khar3e, baiThe-baiThe aura soye-soye bhI hotA hai| ina tInoM ke pratyeka
ke cAra-cAra bheda haiN| usameM se pahalA prakAra hai-ucchritocchrita hai|
arthAt dravya aura bhAva donoM prakAra se khar3e honA arthAt dravya se zarIra se
khar3e honA aura bhAva se dharma yA zukladhyAna meM khar3e (sthira) honaa|
dUsarA-ucchritonucchrita hai| arthAt dravya se khar3e rahane ke lie ucchrita
aura bhAva se kRSNAdi azubhalezyA (pariNAma) ke hone se anucchrit| tIsarA-
anucchritocchrita hai| arthAt dravya se nIce baiThakara aura bhAva se
dharmadhyAna yA zukladhyAna meM udyata hokara tathA cauthA anucchritAnucchrita
arthAt dravya se zarIra se nIce baiThanA aura bhAva se kRSNAdi lezyA ke utarate
azubhapariNAmoM ke kAraNa pariNAmoM se nIce baitthnaa| isa prakAra baiThate,
uThate aura sote hue ke cAra cAra bheda jaannaa| kAyotsarga doSoM se bacakara
karanA caahie| kAyotsarga ke ikkIsa doSa AcAryoM ne batAye haiM kAyotsarga ke
doSa - 1. ghor3e ke samAna eka paira se khar3e hokara kAussagga karanA, ghoTaka
doSa hai| 2. joradAra havA se kAMpatI huI bela ke samAna zarIra ko kaMpAnA,
latAdoSa hai| 3. khaMbhe kA sahArA lekara kAussagga karanA stNbhdoss| 4. dIvAra
kA sahArA lekara kAussagga karanA kuDyadoSa hai| Upara chata se mastaka ar3Akara
kAussagga karanA mAladoSa hai| 6. bhIlanI ke samAna donoM hAtha guhya-pradeza
para rakhakara kAussagga karanA zabarIdoSa hai| 7. kulavadhU ke samAna mastaka
nIce jhukAkara kAussagga karanA vadhUdoSa hai| 8. beDI meM jakar3e hue ke samAna
donoM paira laMbe karake athavA ikaDe karake kAyotsarga meM khar3A honA
nigaDadoSa hai| 9. nAbhi ke Upara aura ghuTane se nIce taka colapaTTA bAMdhakara
kAussagga karanA laMbottaradoSa hai| 10. jaise strI vastrAdi se stana ko DhakatI
hai, vaise hI DAMsa-macchara ke nivAraNa ke lie ajJAnatAvaza kAussagga meM stana
yA hRdayapradeza DhakanA stanadoSa hai; athavA dhAyamAtA jaise bAlaka ko
stanapAna karAne 297

Page #320 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Explanation of Pratyakhyana  This text refers to the third light of
Yogashastra, verse 129.  **Defects in Kausagg:**  11. **Shakatolka:**  Standing
with the heels together or apart, like the rear wheels of a bullock cart, is a
defect called Shakatolka. 12. **Sanyati:** Covering the entire body except the
head with a cloth during Kausagg, like a Sadhvi, is a defect called Sanyati. 13.
**Khalin:** Holding the reins of a horse, like a charwale or a bunch of oge,
while standing in Kausagg, is a defect called Khalin. Other Acharyas say that
repeatedly shaking the head or moving it up and down during Kausagg, like a
horse suffering from the reins, is a defect called Khalin. 14. **Vayas:** Moving
the eyes around or looking in different directions during Kausagg, like a crow,
is a defect called Vayas. 15. **Kapittha:** Gathering the cholapatte in fear of
a jū and holding it in a fist like a kapitth fruit during Kausagg, is a defect
called Kapittha. Similarly, holding the fist closed during Kausagg is also
considered the same defect. 16. **Shirshothkampit:** Repeatedly shaking the head
during Kausagg, like a possessed person, is a defect called Shirshothkampit. 17.
**Mook:** Speaking in an unclear and unintelligible way during Kausagg, like a
mute, is a defect called Mook. 18. **Anguli:** Counting the number of people by
running a finger on the toes during Kausagg, is a defect called Anguli. 19.
**Bhru:** Moving the eyebrows up and down during Kausagg, to look in another
direction, is a defect called Bhru. 20. **Varuni:** Making a gurgling sound
during Kausagg, like the sound of boiling liquor, is a defect called Varuni.
Other Acharyas say that swaying around during Kausagg, like a drunkard after
drinking alcohol, is a defect called Varuni. 21. **Anupreksha:** Moving the lips
during Kausagg, like when studying, is a defect called Anupreksha.  **Summary of
Defects in Kausagg:**  1. Ghotak 2. Lata 3. Stambh 4. Kadya 5. Mal 6. Shab 8.
Nigad 9. Lambottar 10. Stan 11. Urvi 12. Sanyati 13. Khalin 14. Vayas 15.
Kapittha 16. Shirshothkampit 17. Mook 18. Anguli 19. Bhru 20. Varuni 21. Preksha
Many Acharyas mention other defects besides these, such as spitting during
Kausagg, touching or scratching body parts, being restless, not following the
prescribed methods, neglecting age limits, violating time limits, having an
attached and anxious mind, making the mind restless due to greed, engaging in
sinful acts, becoming confused in actions, standing on a mat or a stool during
Kausagg, etc.  **The fruit of Kausagg is also Nirjara.**  Therefore, it is said:
"As the limbs of the body break and hurt during Kausagg, so the eight types of
karma groups of the liberated soul break." (A. Ni. 1648)  We have already
explained the meaning and interpretation of the sutras of Kausagg.
**Pratyakhyana:**  Pratyakhyana is formed from the three words: "Prati," "A,"
and "Khyan." "Prati" means "opposite tendency," "A" means "according to the
rules," and "Khyan" means "to say." Therefore, Pratyakhyana or Pacchakkhana is
the acceptance of favorable rules by the soul, which has been in the Vibhava
state since time immemorial, by abandoning unfavorable rules according to its
present nature.  There are two types of Pratyakhyana: **Mulaguna** and
**Uttaraguna**.  For Sadhus, the five Mahavratas are Mulaguna, and for
Shravakas, the five Anuvratas are Mulaguna. For Sadhus, Pindavishuddhi, etc.,
are Uttaraguna, and for Shravakas, Gunavrata and Shikshavrata are Uttaraguna.
In Mulaguna, there is Pratyakhyana (rule) in the form of complete and universal
abandonment of the five sins, namely violence, etc., while in Uttaraguna, for
Sadhus, there are rules like Pindavishuddhi, etc., and for Shravakas, there are
rules like Digvatadi, etc., in the form of abandonment of opposing tendencies.
A Shravaka who has previously accepted Pratyakhyana (rules) at the appropriate
time, knowing the nature of Pratyakhyana, goes to a knowledgeable Guru, who is
an expert in Pratyakhyana, with humility and respect, with a focused mind, for
Pratyakhyana. He should accept the Pratyakhyana that the Guru recites,
contemplating its meaning.  In this regard, the fourfold truth of Pratyakhyana
should be considered:  1. **Shuddha Bhang:** Both the giver and the receiver of
Pratyakhyana know its meaning. 2. **Shuddhashuddha Bhang:** The Guru who gives
Pratyakhyana knows its meaning, but the receiver does not. If the Guru explains
the meaning of Pratyakhyana to the receiver in brief while giving it, then this
is considered as...  1. The Chaityavandan Bhashya mentions 16 defects. 298

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pratyAkhyAna kI vyAkhyA yogazAstra tRtIya prakAza zloka 129 ko namAtI hai|
vaise stana athavA chAtI ko namAkara kAussagga karanA bhI stanadoSa hai| 11.
bailagADI jaise pIche ke donoM pahiyoM ke sahAre adhara khar3I rahatI hai, vaise
hI pIche kI donoM er3iyA~ yA Age ke donoM aMgUThe ikaTThe karake athavA donoM
alaga-alaga rakhakara avidhi se kAussagga karanA vaha zakaTolikA nAmaka doSa
hai| 12. sAdhvI ke samAna mastaka ke sivAya bAkI ke pUre zarIra ko kAyotsarga
meM vastra se Dhaka lenA, saMyatIdoSa hai| 13. ghor3e kI lagAma ke samAna
caravale yA oghe ke gucche ko pakar3akara kAyotsarga meM khar3e rahanA
khalInadoSa hai| anya AcArya kahate haiM ki lagAma se pIr3ita ghor3e ke samAna
kAyotsarga meM bAra-bAra sira hilAnA yA sira ko Upara-nIce karanA, khalInadoSa
hai| 14. kAyotsarga meM kaue~ ke samAna AMkhoM ko idhara-udhara nacAnA yA alaga-
alaga dizAoM meM dekhanA, vAyasadoSa hai| 15. jU hone ke bhaya se colapaTTe ko
ikaTThA karake kapitthaphala kI taraha muTThI meM pakar3akara kAussagga karanA
kapittha-doSa hai; | isI taraha muTThI baMda karake kAussagga karane se bhI vahI
doSa lagatA hai| 16. bhUtagrasta kI taraha kAussagga meM bAra-bAra sira dhunanA,
zIrSotkaMpita doSa hai| 17. gUMge ke samAna samajha meM na Aye, aise avyakta
aspaSTa zabda kAyotsarga meM bolanA mUkadoSa hai| 18. logassa kI saMkhyA ginane
ke lie pauroM para aMguli calAte hue kAussagga karanA aMgulIdoSa hai| 19. dUsarI
ora AMkheM phirAne ke lie AMkhoM kI bhauhoM ko nacAte-ghumAte hue kAussaga
karanA bhrUdoSa hai| 20. madirA ubAlate samaya hone vAle bur3abur3a zabda kI
taraha budabudAte hue kAussagga karanA vAruNIdoSa hai; dUsare AcArya kA kahanA
hai, zarAba pIkara matavAle bane hue ke samAna idhara-udhara jhUmate hue
kAussagga karanA vAruNIdoSa hai aura 21. jaise svAdhyAya karate samaya donoM
hoTha hilate haiM, vaise hI hoTha hilAte hue kAussagga karanA, anuprekSAdoSa
kahalAtA hai| 'saMkSepa meM kAyotsarga ke doSoM ke nAma isa prakAra hai-1.
ghoTaka. 2. latA. 3. staMbha. 4. kaDaya. 5. mAla. 6. zaba 8. nigaDa. 9.
laMbottara. 10. stana, 11. UrvI, 12. saMyatI, 13. khalIna, 14. vAyasa, 15.
kapittha, 16. zIrSotkaMpita, 17. mUka, 18. aMgali, 19. bhra. 20. vAruNI aura 21.
prekssaa| kaI AcArya inake alAvA kacha doSa aura batAte haiMjaise kAyotsarga ke
samaya thUkanA, zarIra ke aMgoM ko chUnA, khujalAnA, prAyaH caMcalatA rakhanA,
sUtrokta vidhi ke pAlana meM kamI rakhanA, vayasImA kI upekSA karanA, kAla-
maryAdA kA ullaMghana karanA, Asaktimaya vyagra citta rakhanA, lobhavaza citta
ko caMcala karanA, pApakArya meM udyama karanA, kAryAkArya meM vimUr3ha bana
jAnA, paTTe yA caukI para khar3e hokara kAussagga karanA; ityAdi doSa hai|
kAussagga kA phala bhI nirjarA hI hai| ataH kahA hai-kAyotsarga meM vidhipUrvaka
khar3e rahane se zarIra ke aMgopAMga jyoM-jyoM TUTate-dukhate haiM, tyoM-tyoM
suvihita AtmA ke ATha prakAra ke karmasamUha TUTate jAte haiN| (A. ni. 1648)
kAyotsarga ke sUtroM kA artha aura vyAkhyA hama pahale kara cuke haiN|
pratyAkhyAna - prati+A+khyAna, ina tIna zabdoM se pratyAkhyAna zabda banA hai|
prati kA artha hai-pratikUla pravRtti, |A maryAdApUrvaka aura khyAna-kathana
karanA; arthAt anAdikAla se vibhAvadazA meM rahe hue AtmA ke dvArA vartamAna
|svabhAva se pratikUla maryAdAoM kA tyAga karake anukUla maryAdAoM kA svIkAra
karanA, pratyAkhyAna athavA paccakkhANa kahalAtA hai| isake do bheda haiM-
mUlaguNa rUpa aura uttaraguNa ruup| sAdhuoM ke lie pAMca mahAvrata aura zrAvakoM
ke lie 5 aNuvrata mUlaguNa hai| sAdhuoM ke lie piMDavizuddhi Adi uttaraguNa haiM
aura zrAvakoM ke lie guNavrata aura zikSAvrata uttaraguNa hai| mUlaguNa meM
hiMsA Adi pAMca pApoM ke sarvataH aura dezataH tyAga rUpa pratyAkhyAna (niyama)
hote haiM, jabaki uttaraguNa meM sAdhuoM ke lie piMDavizuddhi Adi zrAvakoM ke
lie digvatAdi ke niyama pratipakSabhAva ke tyAga ke rUpa meM hote haiN| jisane
pahale ucita samaya para apane Apa pratyAkhyAna (niyama) grahaNa kiye hoM, aise
pratyAkhyAna ke svarUpa kA jAnakAra zrAvaka pratyAkhyAna ke pUrva vizeSajJa guru
ke samakSa savinaya upayoga pUrvaka citta kI ekAgratA ke sAtha pratyAkhyAna ke
lie jAtA hai aura ve jisa pratyAkhyAna kA pATha bolate haiM, tadanusAra svayaM
bhI usake artha para ciMtana karate hue usa pratyAkhyAna kA svIkAra kre| isa
saMbaMdha meM pratyAkhyAna kI catubhaMgI dRSTavya hai-1. svayaM bhI pratyAkhyAna
kA artha jAne aura karAne vAlA guru bhI jAne, pahalA zuddha bhaMga hai| 2.
pratyAkhyAnadAtA guru jAne, paraMtu lene vAlA na jAne, yaha dUsarA zuddhAzuddha
bhaMga hai| yadi pratyAkhyAna karAte samaya guru lene vAle ko saMkSepa meM
samajhAkara pratyAkhyAna karAye to yaha aMga 1. caityavaMdana bhASya meM 16 doSa
batAye haiN| 298

Page #321 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Explanation of the Repository of 'Namukkarsahitya' (Naukarasi) Pacchakkhan
**Yoga Shastra, Third Light, Verse 129** may also be pure. 3. This is the third
impure-pure bhang where the guru is unaware of the pratyakhyan vidhi, but the
shishya is aware. This bhang is also considered pure if, in the absence of the
yog of the knowledgeable guru, the shishya shows respect to the guru and
performs pratyakhyan by considering the father, uncle, maternal uncle, elder
brother, etc., as witnesses instead of the guru. 4. However, where both the guru
and the shishya are unaware of the pratyakhyan vidhi and the shishya is also
unwise, then both are impure, making the fourth bhang impure.  The pratyakhyan
of the moolguna is usually for life, while the pratyakhyan of the uttaraguna is
usually used daily. There are two types of uttaraguna pratyakhyan - sanketa
pratyakhyan and addha pratyakhyan. Sanketa pratyakhyan is where the shravak
performs pratyakhyan of porasi, etc., and goes out to the field, etc., or stays
at home, but does not remain without performing pratyakhyan until the meal is
served. From this perspective, he completes his pratyakhyan with a signal of
opening the fist, knot, or thumb, etc. In other words, he performs pratyakhyan
in the following symbolic form: "Until I open my thumb, fist, or knot, or enter
the house, until the drops of sweat dry, until so many breaths are completed,
until the bed soaked in water dries, or until the drops stop dripping from it,
or until the lamp goes out, I will not eat." It is also said that the
pratyakhyan performed with the signal of the thumb, fist, knot, house, sweat,
breath, drop, lamp, etc., is called sanketa pratyakhyan by the infinite-knowing,
patient men. Addha pacchakkhan is that which has a time limit. It is of ten
types. These ten types are: 1. Navkar-sahit naukarasi, 2. Porasi, 3. Purimadd
(Purvardha), 4. Ekasan, 5. Ekalthana, 6. Ayambil, 7. Upavas, 8. Divascharim or
Bhavcharim, 9. Abhiggrah, and 10. Niviggai or Viggai (Vikritik) - related. These
ten are time-based pratyakhyan. (A. Ni. 1611)  Here, there is a doubt that in
the pratyakhyan of ekasan, etc., no time limit is clearly known, then why is it
called time-based pratyakhyan? The solution is that it is true that there is no
need for a time limit with ekasan, but the ancient teachers have also set a time
limit for it, and pratyakhyan like ekasan are performed with addha pratyakhyan,
therefore it is also called addha pratyakhyan.  Pratyakhyan should be performed
with the repository, otherwise it becomes bhang. And the bhang of pratyakhyan or
doing it is a very big fault. Therefore, the great sages have said, "There is a
great fault in the bhang of the vow-pratyakhyan, while there is virtue in
following even a little bit of the pratyakhyan (rule). It is very important to
be wise about the profit and loss in religious work. For this, some repositories
are mentioned along with the pratyakhyan. (Pancha. 5-12) The meaning of
repository is - the limit, concession, (concession or exception) kept with the
vow, rule, or pratyakhyan so that the pratyakhyan does not become bhang.  How
many and which repositories are there in which pratyakhyan? For this, they
explain in order - the auspicious time - proof that can be passed with the
pronunciation of the salutation. There are two repositories in the naukarasi
pratyakhyan, which we will discuss further as the occasion arises. Here, there
is a doubt that in the naukarasi pacchakkhan, the time limit is not clearly
known, so why not call it sanketa pratyakhyan? The solution is that this is not
true. Here, in the word 'namukkarsahitya', the word 'sahitya' is attached to the
word 'namukkar'. The meaning of 'sahitya' is - with. Therefore, the word
'sahitya' is indicative of 'with auspicious time'. Then the word 'sahitya' is an
adjective. And the adjective indicates the noun. Therefore, the word 'sahitya'
means 'with auspicious time'. Here, the question is raised again that the word
'muhurt' is not there, then how can it be a noun? The answer is that the
scriptures have counted it in the time-based pacchakkhan, and we will discuss
the porasi, etc., pacchakkhan with the time of prahar, etc., separately later,
therefore, this pacchakkhan is considered to be auspicious time-proof before
that, therefore, there is auspicious time - and - time in the namukkar-sahit
pacchakkhan, one should understand this. Then it is doubted that why its time
was not kept for two muhurts instead of one muhurt? The solution is that only
two concessions are kept in naukarasi, while six repositories are kept in
porasi. Keeping two repositories in namukkarsahitya gives its less fruit,
because one muhurt 299

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 'namukkArasahiya' (naukArasI) porasI paccakkhANa ke AgAroM kI vyAkhyA
yogazAstra tRtIya prakAza zloka 129 bhI zuddha ho sakatA hai| 3. guru
pratyAkhyAnavidhi se anabhijJa ho; kintu ziSya abhijJa ho, yaha tIsarA azuddha-
zuddha bhaMga hai yaha bhaMga bhI vijJa guru ke yoga ke abhAva meM guru ke prati
bahumAna hone se guru ke badale sAkSI rUpa meM pitA, cAcA, mAmA, bar3e bhAI Adi
ko mAnakara pratyAkhyAna kare to pUrvavat zuddha mAnA jA sakatA hai  /  4. kintu
jahAM guru bhI | pratyAkhyAna vidhi se anabhijJa ho aura ziSya bhI vivekahIna
ho, vahAM donoM azuddha hone se cauthA bhaMga azuddha hI hai| mUlaguNa kA
pratyAkhyAna prAyaH jIvanaparyaMta kA hotA hai; jaba ki uttaraguNa kA
pratyAkhyAna prAyaH pratidina upayogI | rahatA hai  /  uttaraguNapratyAkhyAna ke
bhI do prakAra hai - saMketapratyAkhyAna aura addhApratyAkhyAna  /  saMketa -
pratyAkhyAna vaha hai, | jisameM zrAvaka porasI Adi kA pratyAkhyAna karake
bAhara kheta Adi para gayA ho yA ghara para rahA ho, paraMtu bhojana milane | se
pahale taka vaha pratyAkhyAna kiye binA na rahe; isa dRSTi se muTThI, gAMTha yA
aMgUThe Adi kholane ke saMketa se hI apanA | pratyAkhyAna pUrNa kara letA hai|
yAnI vaha nimnokta saMketa rUpa meM pratyAkhyAna isa prakAra karatA hai ki jaba
taka maiM aMgUThe, muTThI yA gAMTha ko na kholUM athavA ghara meM praveza na
karUM, jaba taka pasIne kI bUMde na sUkha jAMya, taba taka itane zvAsocchvAsa
pUre na ho, pAnI se bhIgI cArapAI jaba taka sUkha na jAya athavA jaba taka
isameM se bUMde TapakanI baMda na ho jAya athavA jaba taka dIpaka na bujha jAya,
taba taka meM bhojana nahIM kruuNgaa| kahA bhI hai- aMgUThA, muTThI, gAMTha,
ghara, pasInA, zvAsocchvAsa, bindu, dIpaka Adi ke saMketa kI apekSA se kiye jAne
vAle pratyAkhyAna ko anaMtajJAnI dhIrapuruSoM ne saMketa - pratyAkhyAna kahA
hai| addhApaccakkhANa use kahate haiM jisameM kAla kI maryAdA -sImA ho  /  vaha
dasa prakAra kA hai| ve dasa prakAra ye haiM - 1. navakAra - sahita naukArasI,
2. porasI, 3. purimaDDa (pUrvArddha), 4. ekAsaNa, 5. ekalaThANA, 6. AyaMbila, 7.
upavAsa, 8. divasacarima athavA bhavacarima, 9. abhigraha aura 10. niviggaI yA
viggaiya (vikRtika) - sNbNdhii| ye dasa kAlapratyAkhyAna hai| (A. ni. 1611 )
yahAM zaMkA hotI hai ki ekAsaNa Adi pratyAkhyAna meM to spaSTa rUpa se kAla kI
koI maryAdA nahIM mAlUma hotI, | phira use kAlapratyAkhyAna kyoM kahA gayA ?
isakA samAdhAna yoM dete haiM ki yaha ThIka hai ki ekAsana ke sAtha kAlamaryAdA
kI AvazyakatA nahIM hai, paraMtu pUrvAcAryoM dvArA isakI bhI kAlamaryAdA (sImA)
bAMdhI hai aura ekAsana jaise pratyAkhyAna addhApratyAkhyAna ke sAtha kiye jAte
haiM, isalie vaha bhI addhA pratyAkhyAna kahalAtA hai| pratyAkhyAna AgArasahita
karAnA cAhie, anyathA vaha bhaMga ho jAtA hai  /  aura pratyAkhyAna kA bhaMga
honA yA karanA bahuta bar3A doSa hai  /  isalie maharSiyoM ne kahA hai 'vrata -
pratyAkhyAnabhaMga ho jAne se bahuta bar3A doSa lagatA hai, jabaki jarA se bhI
pratyAkhyAna (niyama) kA pAlana karane meM guNa hai| dharmakArya meM lAbha-hAni
kA viveka karanA bahuta Avazyaka hai| isake lie pratyAkhyAna ke sAtha kucha
AgAra batAye jAte haiN| (paMcA. 5- 12) AgAra kA artha hai - pratyAkhyAna bhaMga
na ho, isalie vrata, niyama yA pratyAkhyAna | lete samaya usake sAtha rakhI huI
maryAdA, chUTa, ( riyAyata yA apavAda )  /  ' kisa-kisa pratyAkhyAna meM kitane-
kitane aura kauna-kauna se AgAra hai? isake lie ve kramazaH batAte haiM-
namaskAra - uccAraNapUrvaka pArane yogya muhUrtakAla - pramANa | naukArasI
pratyAkhyAna meM do AgAra hote haiM, jinake bAre meM hama yathAvasara Age
kheNge| yahAM eka zaMkA hotI hai ki naukArasI paccakkhANa meM nizcita rUpa se
kAlamaryAdA mAlUma nahIM hotI, isalie ise saMketapratyAkhyAna kyoM na kahA |
jAya? isakA samAdhAna yoM karate haiM ki yaha bAta yathArtha nahIM hai| yahAM
namukkArasahiyaM zabda meM namukkAra zabda ke sAtha sahiyaM zabda jur3A huA hai,
sahiyaM kA artha hai - sahita  /  ataH sahiyaM zabda muhUrtakAlasahita kA
dyotaka hai  /  phira sahiyaM zabda vizeSaNa hai  /  aura vizeSaNa se vizeSya kA
bodha hotA hai| ataH 'sahiyaM' zabda se muhUrtakAlasahita artha nikalatA hai|
yahAM phira prazna uThAyA jAtA hai ki yahAM muhUrta zabda to hai nahIM, phira
vaha vizeSya kaise ho sakatA hai? isakA uttara dete haiM ki zAstra meM ise kAla-
paccakkhANa meM ginA hai aura prahara Adi kAla vAle porasI Adi paccakkhANa to
Age alaga se hama kaheMge, isalie usake pahale yaha paccakkhANa muhUrta -pramANa
kA mAnA jAtA hai, isalie namukkAra sahita | paccakkhANa meM muhUrta-va - kAla
hai, yaha samajha lenA caahie| phira zaMkA kI jAtI hai ki isakA kAla eka muhUrta
ke badale do muhUrta kA kyoM nahIM rakhA gayA? isakA samAdhAna yaha hai ki
naukArasI meM kevala do hI AgAroM kI chUTa rakhI hai, jabaki | porasI meM chaha
AgAra rakhe haiN| namukkArasahiyaM meM do AgAra rakhane se usakA alpa-phala
milatA hai, kyoMki eka muhUrta 299

Page #322 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Porisi and 'Purimadd' - The Text of Pacchakkhan and its Explanation  This is
a commentary on the text of Pacchakkhan, a Jain practice of abstaining from food
and drink, in relation to the third light of Yogashastra, verse 129.    The
rejection of Namukkarasi (with salutations) is to be understood as a single
Muhurta (48 minutes) in duration. Even a short Pacchakkhan is accompanied by the
Namaskar mantra.  This means that after sunrise, when one Muhurta is complete,
the Pacchakkhan is not complete until the Navkar mantra is uttered. However, if
one were to complete the Pacchakkhan by uttering the Navkar mantra before two
Ghadi (24 minutes), then according to the rules of the time limit for rejection,
the time would be incomplete, and the rejection would be broken. This proves
that Namukkarasi Pacchakkhan takes place from sunrise to the time of one
Muhurta, and includes the utterance of the Navkar mantra.  Now, how does one
take the first Muhurta?  According to the Sutra, the rule is the same as for
Porisi. The Sutra is as follows:  **Uggaye Sure Namo-kkara - Sahiyam
Pacchakkhai, Chauvviham Pi Aharam Asanam, Panam, Khaim, Saim, Annatthanabhogena
Sahasagarenam Yosir.**  **Explanation of the Sutra:**  * **Uggaye Sure** - means
from sunrise. * **Namo-kkara - Sahiyam** - means with the Panchaparameshthi-
Namaskar-Mahamantra (the great mantra of salutation to the five supreme beings).
* **Pacchakkhai** - means to reject with salutations. * **Chauvviham Pi Aharam**
- means to reject all four types of food. * **Asanam, Panam, Khaim, Saim** -
these are the four types of food: solid food, liquid food, food that is chewed,
and food that is sucked. * **Annatthanabhogena Sahasagarenam** - means that the
rejection is not broken by forgetting or by accidentally taking food. *
**Yosir** - means to abandon.  The meaning of this Sutra is that from sunrise,
one should reject all four types of food with the Panchaparameshthi-Namaskar-
Mahamantra. The disciple who accepts the words of the Guru Maharaj, who is the
one who gives the Pacchakkhan, says "Pacchakkhami" (I reject). Similarly, in the
place of "Vosri" (abandons), the disciple says "Vosrami" (I abandon) in
acceptance of the words of the Guru Maharaj. What is being abandoned? This is
explained by the phrase "Chauvviham Pi Aharam" - I abandon all four types of
food. The traditional meaning of this in the community is that one should
abstain from all four types of food from the night before the rejection. Or, one
should complete the fast of abstaining from food at night by crossing its
boundary and reaching the point where the sun rises, and then after one Muhurta
(48 minutes) has passed, one should complete the Namukkarasi Pacchakkhan by
uttering the Namaskar mantra. The explanation of the four types of food has
already been given. Here, the reason why the rejection is not broken is
explained by the phrase "Annatthanabhogena Sahasagarenam". Here, the third case
ending is used in the sense of the fifth case. The two reasons why the rejection
is not broken are "Anabhoga" and "Sahasakar". "Anabhoga" means forgetting the
Pacchakkhan that one has taken. "Sahasakar" means an action done in haste or
hurry, or an action that is done suddenly and unexpectedly, such as accidentally
putting something in one's mouth. For example, if while milking a cow, milk
accidentally splashes into one's mouth, or if while bathing, one accidentally
splashes water into one's mouth, this is Sahasakar. If this happens, the
Pacchakkhan is not broken. The meaning of "Vosri" has already been explained.
Now, the text of the Porisi Pacchakkhan is given:  **Uggaye Sure, Porisi
Pacchakkhai Chauvviham Pi Aharam Asanam, Panam, Khaim, Saim, Annatthanabhogena
Sahasagarenam, Pacchann-kalena Disamohena Sahuvayanena Savvasamahivittiagarenam
Yosir.**  **Porisi (Paurushi)** means the time after sunrise when the shadow of
a man's body is equal to the length of his body. This time is also called a
Prahar (hour). To abstain from all four types of food for this duration is
called Porisi or Paurushi Pacchakkhan. What form does this Pacchakkhan take? It
is the rejection of all four types of food: solid food, liquid food, food that
is chewed, and food that is sucked. This sentence should be connected to the
verb "Vosri". There are six Agars (conditions) in this rejection. The first two
Agars should be understood in the same way as the Namukkarasi Pacchakkhan. The
remaining four Agars are "Pacchannkalena Disamohena Sahuvayanena
Savvasamahivittiagarenam". Therefore, by keeping these six Agars in mind, one
should reject all four types of food from sunrise to one Prahar.  *
**Pacchannkalena** - means that if the sun is hidden by clouds, dust in the sky,
or a mountain, and the shadow is not visible, then the time of the rejection is
not known, and even if one completes the Pacchakkhan before Porisi arrives, it
is not broken. However, if one is eating at the time, and someone tells them the
correct time, or if one

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 porisI aura 'purimaDDa' - paccakkhANa ke pATha aura una para vivecana
yogazAstra tRtIya prakAza zloka 129 ke anupAta meM hI to usakA phala milegA!
ataH yaha namukkArasI (namaskArasahita) kA pratyAkhyAna eka muhUrta pramANa kA
hI samajhanA  /  vaha alpakAla kA paccakkhANa bhI namaskAramaMtra ke sAtha hai|
arthAt sUryodaya hone ke bAda eka muhUrta pUrNa | hone ke bAda bhI jaba taka
navakAra maMtra kA uccAraNa na kare, taba taka vaha paccakkhANa pUrNa nahIM hotA
/  kintu do ghar3I | se pahale hI yadi navakAra maMtra bolakara paccakkhANa pAra
le to, pratyAkhyAnakAlamaryAdA ke anusAra usakA kAla apUrNa | hone se
pratyAkhyAna bhaMga ho jAtA hai| isase siddha huA ki namukkArasI paccakkhANa
sUryodaya se muhUrtapramANakAla aura | navakAramaMtra ke uccAraNasahita hotA
hai| aba prathama muhUrta kisa taraha lenA ? sUtra pramANa se porasI ke samAna
vaha sUtra isa prakAra hai uggae sUre namokkAra - sahiyaM paccakkhAi, cauvihaM
pi AhAraM asaNaM, pANaM, khAimaM sAimaM aNNatthaNAbhogeNaM sahasAgAreNaM yosira
/  sUtra vyAkhyArtha . - uggae sUre arthAt sUrya udaya se lekara namokkAra-
sahiaM arthAt paMcaparameSThi- namaskAra - mahAmaMtra | sahita aura samasta
dhAtu karanA artha meM vyApta hote haiM, isa nyAya se paccakkhAi arthAt
namaskAra sahita pratyAkhyAna | karatA hai| isameM paccakkhANa dene vAle
gurumahArAja ke anuvAda - rUpa kahe jAne vAle vacana haiM, usakA svIkAra karane
vAlA | ziSya paccakkhAmi arthAt - maiM paccakkhANa karatA hUM aisA bole, isI
taraha vosirai ( vyutsRjati) ke sthAna meM bhI guru| mahArAja ke kathita vacana
kA svIkAra karane ke lie ziSya anuvAda ke rUpa meM vosirAmi= (tyAga karatA hUM)
bole  /  vyutsarga (tyAga) kisakA kiyA jAya ? ise batAte haiM - cauvvihaM pi
AhAraM =cAra prakAra ke AhAra kA tyAga karatA huuN| isa viSaya | meM saMpradAya-
paraMparAgata artha isa prakAra hai - pratyAkhyAna karane ke pUrva rAtri se
lekara cAroM AhAra kA tyAga karanA naukArI | hai athavA rAtribhojana - tyAga
vrata ko usakI taTIya sImA taka pahuMcakara pAra utarate hue sUryodaya se eka
muhUrta (48= minaTa) kAla pUrNa hone para namaskAramaMtra ke uccAraNapUrvaka
pAraNA karane se naukArasI paccakkhANa pUrNa hotA hai| azana-pAna Adi cAra
prakAra ke AhAra kI vyAkhyA pahale kI jA cukI hai| yahAM pratyAkhyAna bhaMga na
hone ke kAraNa batAte haiM - aNNatthaNAbhogeNaM shsaagaarennN| yahAM paMcamI ke
artha meM tRtIyA vibhakti kA prayoga kiyA gayA hai| anAbhoga | aura sahasAkAra,
ina do kAraNoM se pratyAkhyAna khaMDita nahIM hotA  /  anAbhoga kA artha hai -
atyaMta vismRti ke kAraNa se | liye hue paccakkhANa ko bhUla jAnA aura
sahasAkAra kA artha hai - utAvalI yA har3abar3I meM kI gayI pravRtti athavA |
akasmAt = haThAt (ekAeka) muMha meM cIja DAla lene yA par3a jAne kI kriyA huii|
jaise gAya duhate samaya acAnaka dUdha ke chITe yA snAna karate samaya sahasA
uchalakara pAnI ke chITe muMha meM par3a jAnA sahasAkAra hai  /  aisA ho jAne
para | paccakkhANa bhaMga nahIM hotA  /  vosirai kA artha pahale kaha cuke hai|
aba porasI ke paccakkhANa kA pATha kahate haiM uggae sUre, porisI paccakkhAi
caubvihaM pi AhAraM asaNaM, pANaM, khAimaM sAimaM, aNNatthaNAbhogeNaM
sahasAgAreNaM, pacchanna-kAleNaM disAmoheNaM sAhuyayaNeNaM
savvasamAhivittiAgAreNaM yosira  /  porisI (pauruSI) kA artha hai - sUryodaya ke
bAda puruSa ke zarIra pramANa chAyA A jAya, utane samaya ko pauruSI (porasI)
kahate haiN| use prahara (pahara ) bhI kahate haiN| itane kAla pramANa taka
cAroM prakAra ke AhAra kA tyAga (paccakkhANa) karanA pauruSI yA paurasI
paccakkhANa kahalAtA hai| vaha paccakkhANa kisa rUpa meM hotA hai - azana, pAna,
| khAdya aura svAdya rUpa cAroM prakAra ke AhAra kA tyAga karatA huuN| 'vosirai'
kriyApada ke sAtha isa vAkya kA saMbaMdha | jor3anA  /  isa pratyAkhyAna meM 6
AgAra hai; pahalA aura dUsarA donoM AgAra namukkArasI ke paccakkhANa ke samAna
hI samajha | lene caahie| bAkI ke pacchannakAleNaM disAmoheNaM sAhuvayaNeNaM
savvasamAhivattiAgAreNaM ye 4 AgAra haiN| ataH ye 6 | AgAra rakhakara
porasIpaccakkhANa (sUryodaya se lekara eka prahara taka) meM cAroM AhAra kA
tyAga karatA huuN| pacchannakAleNaM | kA artha hai - bAdaloM ke kAraNa, AkAza
meM raja ur3ane se yA parvata kI Ar3a meM sUrya ke Dhaka jAne se, parachAI ke na
dikhane ke kAraNa pratyAkhyAna pUrNa hone ke samaya kA mAlUma na hone ke kAraNa
kadAcit porasI Ane se pahale paccakkhANa pAra | lene para bhI usakA bhaMga nahIM
hotA  /  paraMtu jisa samaya vaha khA rahA ho, usa samaya koI ThIka samaya batA
de, yA ThIka 300

Page #323 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Discussion on Ekāsan-Ekalṭhāṇā  **Yogaśāstra Tṛtīya Prakāśa Śloka 129**  If
the time is known, half the food should be consumed and then stopped. The
remaining food should be consumed only when the full time has arrived. If one
consumes food even after knowing the incomplete time, then their *paccākṣāṇa* is
broken. If one mistakenly believes the west direction to be the east direction
due to confusion about directions and consumes food during incomplete time, then
their *paccākṣāṇa* is not broken due to this *āgāra*. If the confusion is
cleared and the correct time is known, then one should stop eating as before. If
one continues to eat, then their *paccākṣāṇa* is broken.  **Sāhuvayeṇam-Ugghaḍā
Pauraṣī**  If a *sādhu* instructs one to complete the *porasī* before the time
arrives, then the *paccākṣāṇa* is not broken due to the aforementioned *āgāra*.
This means that if a *sādhu* instructs one to complete the *porasī* before the
*porasī-paccākṣāṇa* is fully completed, and at that time, the *bahupadīpuṇṇā
porasī* is requested in a loud voice, and the *śrāvaka* thinks that the time to
complete the *porasī-paccākṣāṇa* has arrived and consumes food due to this
confusion, then their *paccākṣāṇa* is not broken. However, if they know the
truth and continue to eat, then they will be guilty of breaking the
*paccākṣāṇa*.  **Savyasamāhivattiāgāreṇam**  If after completing the *porasī-
paccākṣāṇa*, one experiences intense pain like a sharp pain, and they cannot
remain patient until the *paccākṣāṇa* is fully completed, and they experience
*ārtadhyāna-raudradhyāna* (disturbed meditation), leading to loss of
concentration, then according to the *āgāra* called *savyasamāhivattiāgāreṇam*,
one can consume medicine, *pathya* (wholesome food), etc., even before the
*paccākṣāṇa* is fully completed, and their *paccākṣāṇa* will not be broken.
Similarly, if a doctor advises one to eat before the *porasī* arrives to
alleviate a severe illness, then the *paccākṣāṇa* is not broken. If one feels
some relief from the illness after eating a little, then after regaining
concentration (peace), they should stop eating after knowing the reason.
**Sāḍḍaporisī**  The *paccākṣāṇa* for *sāḍḍaporisī* (one and a half *porasī*) is
similar to the *porasī-paccākṣāṇa*, the only difference being that *sāḍḍaporisī*
is mentioned instead of *porisī*.  **Now, the *purimaḍḍa-paccākṣāṇa* is
discussed:**  **Sūtrapāṭha:**  *Sūre uggaye purimai paccākṣāi, cauvvihampī
āhāraṁ asanaṁ, pāṇaṁ, khāimaṁ, sāimaṁ, aṇatthanābhōgeṇam, sahasāgāreṇam,
pacchannākāleṇam, disāmōheṇam, sāhuvayeṇam, mahattarāgāreṇam,
savyasamāhivattiāgāreṇam yōsirah.*  **Meaning:**  *Purimal* (Purimārddha) means
the first half of the day (two *prahara*). In Prakrit, it becomes *purimaḍḍa*.
It has seven *āgāra*. Six *āgāra* have already been discussed. The seventh
*āgāra* is *mahattarāgāreṇam*, which means that if there is a reason for greater
benefit in the form of *karmanirjarā* (destruction of karma) than the
*paccākṣāṇa* that one has undertaken, then the *paccākṣāṇa* can be completed
before the time arrives, and the *āhāra-paccākṣāṇa* will not be broken. For
example, if a *sādhu* is ill or there is a crisis for them or the *saṅgha*, or
there is a special task for the *caitya*, temple, or *saṅgha*, which cannot be
done by someone else or at another time, then due to these important (greater)
reasons, the *paccākṣāṇa* can be completed before the time is up according to
the *āgāra* called *mahattarāgāreṇam*. This *āgāra* is not mentioned in
*naukārāsī*, *porasī*, etc., because these *paccākṣāṇa* are for a very short
time, while this one is for a longer time.  **Now, the *ekāsan* (Ekāsan)
*paccākṣāṇa* is described:**  **Sūtrapāṭha:**  *Ekāsaṇaṁ paccākṣāi, cauvbihāmpī,
tivihāmpī vā āhāraṁ asanaṁ, pāṇaṁ khāimaṁ sāimaṁ, aṇṇatthanāgābhōgeṇam,
sahasāgāreṇam, sāgāriāgāreṇam, āuṇṭaṇapasāreṇam, guru-abbhuṭṭhāṇeṇam,
pāriṭṭhāvaṇiāgāreṇam, mahattarāgāreṇam, savyasamāhiyattiāgāreṇam yōsirah.*
**Meaning:**  *Ekāsan* (Ekāsan) means eating at the same time or sitting in the
same position with the anus not moving from the seat. This means eating while
sitting in the same position. If *ekāsan* is *trivihāra*, then water can be
consumed after eating, but if it is *cauvvihāra*, then water can only be
consumed during the meal, not afterwards. In this, the meaning of the first two
and last two *āgāra* out of the eight mentioned *āgāra* has already been
explained. The nature of the four *āgāra* in the middle is explained:
*sāgāriāgāreṇam* means that which is with the *āgāra* is called *sāgārik*.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ekAzana-ekalaThANA para vivecana yogazAstra tRtIya prakAza zloka 129 samaya
jJAta ho jAya to AdhA.khA liyA ho, vahI ruka jAya; zeSa bhojana pUrNa samaya
hone para hI kre| yadi apUrNa samaya jAnane ke bAda bhI bhojana karatA hai to
usakA vaha paccakkhANa bhaMga ho jAtA hai| disAmoheNaM dizAoM kA bhrama ho jAne
se pUrva ko pazcimadizA samajhakara apUrNa samaya meM bhI bhojana kara letA hai
to isa AgAra ke hone se paccakkhANa bhaMga nahIM hotaa| yadi bhrAMti miTa jAya
aura sahI samaya mAlUma ho jAya to pahale kI taraha vahIM ruka jaay| yadi vaha
bhojana karatA hI calA jAtA hai to usakA paccakkhANa khaMDita ho jAtA hai|
sAhuvayeNaM-ugghAr3A pauruSI isa prakAra ke sAdhu ke kathana ke AdhAra para
samaya Ane se pUrva hI porasI pAra le to ukta AgAra ke kAraNa pratyAkhyAnabhaMga
nahIM hotaa| yAnI sAdhu porasI-paccakkhANa ke pUrNa hone se kucha pUrva hI
porasI par3hAve, usa samaya bahupaDipuNNA porasI yoM uccasvara se Adeza mAMge,
use sunakara zrAvaka vicAra kare ki porasI paccakkhANa pArane kA samaya ho cukA
hai; isa bhrama se bhojana kara le to usakA paccakkhANa bhaMga nahIM hotaa|
magara patA laga jAne ke bAda vahIM bhojana karatA ruka jAya, taba to ThIka hai,
agara na ruke to avazya hI pratyAkhyAnabhaMga kA doSa lagatA hai| porasI kA
paccakkhANa karane ke bAda tIvra zUla Adi pIr3A utpanna ho jAya, paccakkhANa
pUrNa hone taka dhairya na rahe aura ArttadhyAnaraudradhyAna hotA ho, asamAdhi
paidA hotI ho to savvasamAhivattiAgAreNaM nAmaka AgAra (chUTa) ke anusAra
pratyAkhyAna pUrNa hone ke samaya se pahale hI auSadha, pathyAdi grahaNa kara
lene para bhI usakA paccakkhANa bhaMga nahIM hotA athavA kisI bhayaMkara vyAdhi
kI zAMti ke lie vaidya Adi porasI Ane se pahale hI bhojana karane ke lie jora
deM to pratyAkhyAnabhaMga nahIM hotaa| thor3A khAne ke bAda usa bImArI meM kucha
rAhata mAlUma de to samAdhi (zAMti) hone para usakA kAraNa jAnane ke bAda
bhojana karatA huA ruka jaay| sADDhaporisI arthAt Der3haporasI kA paccakkhANa ke
pATha bhI porasI paccakkhANa ke samAna hai, pharka sirpha itanA hI hai ki porisI
ke sthAna meM sADDaporisI bole| aba purimaDDa paccakkhANa kA pATha kahate haiM
sUre uggae purimaI paccakkhAi, cauvvihaMpi AhAraM asaNaM, pANaM, khAima, sAima,
aNatthaNAbhogeNaM, sahasAgAreNaM, | pacchannakAleNaM, disAmoheNaM,
sAhuvayaNeNaM, mahattarAgAreNaM savyasamAhivattiAgAreNaM yosirdd'| purimala
(purimArddha) kA artha hai-pUrva ca tadadhaM ca pUrvArddham yAnI dina ke pahale
Adhe bhAga (do prahara) taka kA pratyAkhyAna (niym)| prAkRta meM isakA rUpa
purimaDDa banatA hai| isameM sAta AgAra haiM-chaha AgA jA cukA hai| sAtavAM
AgAra mahattarAgAreNaM hai, jisakA artha hai-jo paccakkhANa aMgIkAra kiyA hai,
usase adhika karmanirjarA rUpa mahAlAbha kA koI kAraNa A jAya to paccakkhANa kA
samaya Ane se pUrva bhI AhA pratyAkhyAna bhaMga nahIM hotaa| jaise koI sAdhu
bImAra ho athavA usa para yA saMgha para koI saMkaTa A gayA ho, athavA caitya,
maMdira yA saMgha Adi kA koI khAsa kAma ho, jo dUsare se yA dUsare samaya meM
nahIM ho sakatA ho, ityAdi mahattvapUrNa (mahattara) kAraNoM ko lekara
mahattarAgAreNaM AgAra ke anusAra samaya pUrA hone se pahale bhI paccakkhANa
pArA (pUrNa kiyA) jA sakatA hai| yaha AgAra naukArasI, porasI Adi pratyAkhyAnoM
meM isalie nahIM batAyA gayA hai ki ye pratyAkhyAna to bahuta thor3e samaya taka
ke haiM, jabaki isakA samaya laMbA hai| aba ekAsana (ekAzana) paccakkhANa kA
varNana karate haiN| isameM bhI ATha AgAra hai| isakA sUtrapATha isa prakAra hai
ekAsaNaM paccakkhAi, caubihaMpi, tivihaMpi vA AhAraM asaNaM, pANaM khAimaM
sAimaM, aNNatthaNAgAbhogeNaM, sahasAgAreNaM, sAgAriAgAreNaM, AuMTaNapasAreNaM,
guru-abbhuTThANeNaM, pAriTThAvaNiyAgAreNaM mahattarAgAreNaM,
savyasamAhiyattiAgAreNaM yosirh| _ maiM ekAsana kA paccakkhANa karatA huuN|
ekAsana (ekAzana) kA artha hai-eka hI samaya AhAra karanA athavA eka hI samaya
Asana para yA Asana se gudA kA bhAga calAyamAna na ho, isa taraha baiThe-baiThe
AhAra krnaa| ekAzana tivihAra hotA hai to AhAra karane ke bAda bhI pAnI liyA jA
sakatA hai, kintu cauvihAra ho to AhAra ke samaya hI pAnI liyA jA sakatA hai,
bAda meM nhiiN| isameM ukta ATha AgAroM meM se pahale ke do aura aMtima do
AgAroM kA artha pahale batAyA jA cukA hai| bIca ke cAra AgAroM kA svarUpa batAte
haiM-sAgAriAgAreNaM jo AgAra ke sahita ho, use sAgArika kahate 301

Page #324 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Text and Explanation of the Ayambil and Abhattattha (Fasting) Pacchakkhan
**Verse 129 of the Yoga Shastra, Third Light, or as it is also called, the
Sagari Grihastha, refers to the Sagarikagar, the abode associated with it.**
This abode signifies that a Sadhu (monk) should not eat in the presence of a
Grihastha (householder). This is because doing so brings disrepute (criticism)
to the Jinashastra (Jain teachings). Therefore, the Maharshis (great sages) have
said that a Sadhu or Sadhvi (nun) who shows compassion to the Shatjivanikaya
(all living beings) should not eat or defecate in front of a Grihastha.
Similarly, taking food or water from a despised or condemned family also brings
disrepute to the Shastra (religious community). Doing so makes it difficult to
attain Samyaktva (enlightenment).  **Therefore, the Sadhu's conduct is such that
if a Grihastha (brother or sister) comes to the place where the Sadhu is eating
and leaves immediately, the Sadhu should remain seated for the meal.** However,
if the Grihastha stays for a long time, the Sadhu should not remain seated
there. This is because staying in the same position for a long time (while
delaying the meal) will hinder other daily routines like Swadhyaya (self-study)
and Seva (service). Therefore, if the Sadhu (or Sadhvi) gets up and eats in
another place, their Ekasan Pacchakkhan is not broken due to this abode. This
rule is made with respect to the Sadhu.  **Now, with respect to the Grihastha,
this abode signifies that if a Grihastha is sitting down to eat for Ekasan, and
they change their position due to the fear of someone seeing them or casting an
evil eye, their Ekasan Pacchakkhan is not broken due to the Sagarikagar.**
**And Aountanapasaarenam = contracting and expanding, meaning contracting or
expanding the knees, thighs, feet, etc.** This means that many people cannot sit
still in one position for a long time while eating. Due to illness, weakness, or
old age, their limbs cannot bear sitting in the same position for long. Such
individuals, while performing Ekasan, if they contract or expand their limbs,
making them longer or wider, and their posture shifts slightly, their Ekasan
Pacchakkhan is not broken due to this abode.  **And Guru-Abhutthanenam = this
means that if the Gurudev (spiritual teacher) arrives while eating in Ekasan,
standing up to show respect to them does not break the Pacchakkhan due to this
abode.** Showing respect to the Guru is done by standing up, which is necessary.
Therefore, even while eating, if someone stands up to show respect to elders,
their Ekasan is not broken.  **Paritthavanigarenan = discarding the excess food
brought in a proper place, giving it away or giving it to a renunciant Sadhu or
Sadhvi, is called Paristthapan.** This means that if the Sadhu receives more
food than they can eat in their alms, it is not appropriate to keep it for the
next day. In such a situation, there is no other option but to discard it. If
the Pacchakkhan (Ekasan, etc.) eater consumes this food at that time, their
Pacchakkhan is not broken due to the Paristthapanikagar. This is because
discarding the said food would lead to many sins like Jivaviradhana (killing of
living beings), while according to the Shastra (scripture) and tradition, there
are many benefits in consuming the Paristthapan-worthy food by the Pacchakkhan
eater (Sadhu or Sadhvi). Therefore, if the Sadhu consumes the excess food with
the Guru's permission, their Pacchakkhan is not broken.  **Vosirai = apart from
these abodes, I renounce any other posture or food besides the one posture and
one food.**  **Now, we will explain the nature of the Ekalthana Pacchakkhan. It
has seven abodes. Its text is the same as that of Ekasan. Only instead of
Egasanan, Egalthanan should be said, and all the abodes except the Aountan
Pasaarenam abode should be mentioned.** This is because the rule in Ekalthana is
that the body parts should be kept in the same position until the end of the
meal. That is, keeping the limbs in the same position is Ekalthana. One cannot
eat without moving the mouth and hands, so there is no prohibition on moving
these two. The rule of leaving out the Aountan-Pasaarenam abode is made to
differentiate between Ekasan and Ekalthana Pacchakkhan. Otherwise, both these
Pacchakkhan are similar.  **This abode is only until standing up, one cannot
move back and forth from the place. If the food is nearby, one can take it, but
one cannot go to another place to take food.**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 AyaMbila aura abbhattaTTha (upavAsa) paccakkhANa ke pATha aura vivecana
yogazAstra tRtIya prakAza zloka 129 haiM athavA sAgArI gRhastha ko bhI kahate
haiM, usameM saMbaMdhita jo AgAra ho, use bhI sAgArikAgAra kahate haiN| isa
AgAra | kA tAtparya yaha hai - sAdhu kA AcAra hai ki gRhastha kI dRSTi par3e,
vahAM baiThakara sAdhu sAdhvI ko AhAra nahIM karanA | cAhie; kyoMki aisA karane
se jinazAsana kI badanAmI ( niMdA) hotI hai| isIlie maharSiyoM ne kahA -
SaTjIvanikAya (prANImAtra) para dayA karane vAle sAdhusAdhvI AhAra yA nihAra
(malamUtra - nivAraNa) gRhastha ke sammukha kareM athavA jugupsita (ghRNita ) yA
niMdita kuloM se AhAra- pAnI grahaNa kare to isase zAsana (dharmasaMgha) kI
apabhrAjanA ( badanAmI) | hotI hai| aisA karane se use samyaktva (bodhi ) prApti
durlabha ho jAtI hai| isI kAraNa sAdhu kA aisA AcAra hai ki sAdhu | jahAM
baiThakara AhAra kara rahA ho, vahAM yadi usa samaya koI gRhastha (bhAI-bahana)
A jAya aura usI samaya calA jAya, taba to sAdhu bhojana ke lie vahIM baiThA
rahe; lekina vaha (gRhastha ) vahAM kAphI dera taka rukA rahe to sAdhu ko vahAM
nahIM baiThe rahanA caahie| kyoMki adhika samaya taka eka hI Asana para (bhojana
sthagita kiye) baiThe rahane se svAdhyAya, sevA | Adi anya dainika caryAoM meM
vighna par3egA; isa kAraNa sAdhu (yA sAdhvI) vahAM se uThakara yadi dUsare
sthAna para baiThakara AhAra karate haiM to isa AgAra ke kAraNa unakA ekAsana
paccakkhANa bhaMga nahIM hotA  /  yaha vidhAna sAdhu kI apekSA se | kiyA gyaa|
aba gRhastha kI apekSA se isa AgAra kA tAtparya yaha hai ki koI gRhastha ekAsana
ke lie AhAra karane baiThA ho, usa samaya kisI ke dekhane yA najara lagane se
hajama na hone kI AzaMkA se yadi vaha sthAna badalatA hai to | sAgarikAgAra ke
kAraNa usakA ekAsana paccakkhANa khaMDita nahIM hotA  /  tathA AuMTaNapasAreNaM
= AkuMcana-prasAraNa karane se yAnI ghuTane, jaMghA, paira Adi ko sikor3ane yA
pasArane ( phailAne-laMbe, caur3e karane) se  /  matalaba yaha hai ki kaI vyakti
| bhojana karate samaya adhika dera taka eka Asana se sthiratApUrvaka baiTha
nahIM sakate; bImArI, azakti yA bur3hApe Adi ke kAraNa unake aMgopAMga jyAdA
dera taka eka hI Asana se baiThanA sahana nahIM kara sakate, aise vyakti ekAsana
karate samaya | yadi zarIra ke aMgopAMga sikor3ate yA pasArate haiM, laMbA-
caur3A karate haiM, usameM jarA-sA Asana calAyamAna ho jAya to isa AgAra (chUTa)
ke kAraNa unakA ekAsana - pratyAkhyAna khaMDita nahIM hotA  /  tathA guru-
abbhuTThANeNaM - isakA artha hai ekAsana meM bhojana karate samaya yadi gurudeva
padhAreM to unake vinaya ke lie Asana para khar3e ho jAne para bhI isa AgAra ke
kAraNa paccakkhANa bhaMga nahIM hotA  /  guruvinaya khar3e hokara kiyA jAtA hai,
jise karanA Avazyaka hai| ataH bhojana karate samaya bhI koI khar3e hokara
bar3oM kA vinaya karatA hai, to usase usakA ekAsana bhaMga nahIM hotA  /  1 |
pAriTThAvaNiAgAreNaM=bhuktaziSTa atimAtrA meM AnIta vastu ko niravadya sthAna
meM DAlanA - tyAgakara denA yA kisI tapasvI sAdhusAdhvI ko de denA, pAriSThApana
kahalAtA hai| tAtparya yaha hai ki sAdhu kI bhikSA meM AhAra mAtrA se adhika Ane
se | baca gayA ho; dUsare dina ke lie use rakhanA to kalpanIya nahIM hai, aisI
dazA meM use pariThAne (DAlane) ke sivAya koI cArA na ho, usa samaya usa AhAra
ko paccakkhANa (ekAsana Adi) vAlA khA le to pAriSThApanikAgAra ke kAraNa usakA |
paccakkhANa bhaMga nahIM hotaa| kyoMki ukta AhAra ko pariThAne pheMkane para to
jIvavirAdhanA Adi kaI doSa lagate haiM, | jabaki zAstra - maryAdAnusAra usa
pariSThApana - yogya AhAra ko paccakkhANa vAlA sAdhu (sAdhvI) khA le to usameM
adhika guNa haiN| isa kAraNa bar3hA huA AhAra guru AjJA se paccakkhANa vAlA khA
le to usakA paccakkhANa bhaMga nahIM hotA  /  | vosirai-arthAt ina AgAroM ke
alAvA eka hI Asana aura AhAra ke atirikta Asana yA AhAra kA tyAga karatA huuN|
aba ekalaThANA ke paccakkhANa kA svarUpa batAte haiN| isameM sAta AgAra hai|
isakA pATha bhI ekAsana ke samAna hI hai| sirpha egAsaNaM ke badale egalaThANaM
bolanA aura AuMTaNa pasAraNeNaM kA AgAra chor3akara sabhI AgAroM ko bolanA |
caahie| kyoMki egalaThANA meM yaha niyama hai ki zarIra ke aMga jisa taraha
rakhe hoM, usI taraha aMta taka rakhakara bhojana karanA caahie| arthAt eka hI
sthiti meM agopAMga rakhanA ekalaThANA hai| muMha aura hAtha ko hilAye binA to
bhojana kiyA hI nahIM jA sakatA, ataH ina donoM ko hilAne kA isameM niSedha
nahIM hai  /  AuMTaNa-pasAreNaM AgAra ko chor3ane kA vidhAna ekAsana aura
ekalaThANA paccakkhANa meM aMtara batAne ke lie kiyA gayA hai| anyathA, ye donoM
paccakkhANa eka sarIkhe 1. yaha AgAra khar3e hone taka kA hI, sthAna se Age-
pIche nahIM ho sktaa| pAsa meM AhAra ho to vahorA sakatA hai, para svayaM dUsare
sthAna para jAkara AhAra nahIM vahorA sktaa| 302

Page #325 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Text and Explanation of the Ayambil and Abhattah (Fasting) Pacchakkhan
This is a discussion of the third light verse 129 of the Yoga Shastra. Now, the
nature of Ayambil Pacchakkhan is explained. It has eight agars (exceptions). The
sutra text of Ayambil Pacchakkhan is as follows:  **Ayambilam Pacchakkhai,
Annatthanabhogena, Sahasagarena, Levalevenam, Gihatthasansattenam,
Ukkhitaviegena, Paritthayanaiagarena, Mahattaragarena, Savyasamahiyattiaagarena
Yosirai.**  Ayambil is a technical term in Jainism. Literally, it means "Aayam"
(dimension) "Osaman" (moisture) and "Aml" (sour) - the fourth "Khatta Pani"
(sour water) or sourness. By implication, it means to adopt the rule of not
consuming all kinds of Vigai (condiments), spices, etc., which enhance taste or
are oily. In this, one should generally subsist on bland (tasteless), dry food
items - rice, wheat, chickpeas, black gram, etc. (once a day), which is called
Ayambil or Achaaml Tap in Jainism. The implication is that in Ayambil-
Pacchakkhan, one has to eat bland, dry food, devoid of nutritious, delicious,
tasty, spicy, heavy, etc. items to conquer taste. The explanation of the first
two agars and the last three agars has already been given. The explanation of
the three middle agars is as follows:  **Levalevenam:** Lep (application) and
Alap (non-application). This means that for someone observing Ayambil, if there
is an application of ghee, oil, jaggery (sweet), milk, yogurt, spices, green
vegetables, dry fruits, ripe fruits, etc., which are not allowed, on the dry
food or utensils that are suitable for Ayambil, then it is the agar of Lep. Or,
if there is no application on the food or utensils, but the food is eaten from a
utensil that has been cleaned or wiped with hands or cloth that are smeared with
oil, etc., which are not allowed, then it is the agar of Alap. This means that
the agars of Lep and Alap do not break the Pacchakkhan.
**Gihatthasansattenam:** The householder who gives food, if there is any Vigai
or spices, etc., which are not allowed, on the spoon or ladle, etc., with which
he gives food to the Sadhu's bowl, or if even a small amount of that unallowed
substance from the ladle, etc., is mixed in the food suitable for Ayambil, and
the taste of that substance is clearly perceptible in the food suitable for
Ayambil, even then, eating such an applied substance does not break the Ayambil
Pacchakkhan due to this agar.  **Ukkhitaviegena:** In Ayambil, if there is dry
Vigai (jaggery, sweets, etc.) which is not allowed in Ayambil, on the dry roti,
chickpeas, rice, etc., which are allowed to be eaten, and even after lifting it
properly, its residue or application remains on the roti, rice, etc., then
eating it in Ayambil does not break the Pacchakkhan due to this agar. This means
that if there is a touch of an unallowed substance on an allowed substance in
Ayambil, then Ayambil is not broken. However, one cannot lift halwa, greens,
etc., completely; therefore, it (Vigai, etc.) remains attached to the allowed
food; this breaks the fast if one eats dry roti, rice, etc.  In this way, apart
from these agars (exceptions), I renounce the other four foods that are not
allowed to be eaten in Ayambil. The meaning of the remaining terms has already
been explained.  Now, the description of the Pacchakkhan of fasting is given. It
has five agars. Here, the sutra text of the first Upvas-Pacchakkhan is given:
**Sure Uggae Abmattu Pacchakkhai Chavyihamphi, Tivihamphi Ya Aharam Asanam,
Panam, Khaim, Khaim Annatthanabhogena Sahasagarena Paritthavaniagarena,
Mahattaragarena Savyasamahiyattiaagarena Yosirah.**  **Sure Uggae:** From
sunrise. This means that fasting cannot be observed during the rest of the day
after eating food.  **Abmatthatt:** The Pratyakhyan (renunciation) in which
there is no purpose of eating food is called Abhattharth (fasting). Its agars
are the same as before. In this, the Paritthavaniagar is special. If one has
observed a Tivihar fast, then due to the permission to drink water, he can eat
increased food with the Guru's permission and drink water, but the one who has
observed a Chauvvihar fast cannot eat anything.  **Note:** 1. Nowadays, many
spicy items are being made for taste in Ayambil, which is reducing the effect of
Ayambil.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 AyaMbila aura abhattaha (upavAsa) paccakkhANa ke pATha aura vivecana yogazAstra
tRtIya prakAza zloka 129 ho jaate| aba AyaMbila paccakkhANa kA svarUpa batAte
haiN| isameM ATha AgAra hai| AyaMbila paccakkhANa kA sUtra pATha isa prakAra hai
AyaMbilaM paccakkhAi, aNNatthaNAbhogeNaM, sahasAgareNaM, levAleveNaM,
gihatthasaMsaTTeNaM, ukkhitaviyegeNaM, pAriTThAyaNiyAgAreNaM, mahattarAgAreNaM,
savyasamAhiyattiAgAreNaM yosiri| AyaMbila jaina dharma kA pAribhASika zabda hai|
zabdazaH isakA artha hotA hai-AyaM yAnI AyAma osAmaNa aura amla-cauthA khaTTA
pAnI yA khaTAI; upalakSaNa se tamAma vigaI, mirca-masAle Adi svAdavarddhaka yA
snigdha vastuoM ke asevana kA niyama grahaNa kara lenA caahie| jisameM prAyaH
nIrasa (svAda rahita), rUkhI-sUkhI khAdyavastuoM-cAvala, gehUM, cane, ur3ada Adi
kA bhojana (eka bAra) karake nirvAha kiyA jAya, use jainazAsana meM AyaMbila yA
AcAmla tapa kahate haiN| tAtparya yaha hai ki AyaMbila-paccakkhANa meM svAda
jItane ke lie pauSTika, sarasa, svAdiSTa, caTapaTI gariSTha Adi vastuoM se
rahita rUkhA-sUkhA, nIrasa bhojana karanA hotA hai| isameM prathama do AgAroM
aura aMtima tIna AgAroM kI vyAkhyA pahale kI jA cukI hai| bIca ke tIna AgAroM kI
vyAkhyA isa prakAra hailevAleveNaM-lepa aura alepa se| arthAt AyaMbila karane
vAle ke lie akalpanIya (asevanIya) ghI, tela, gur3a (mIThA), dUdha, dahI, mirca-
masAle, hare sAga, sUkhe meve, pake phala Adi vastuoM kA lepa AyaMbila ke yogya
rUkhe-sUkhe bhojana yA bartana ke sAtha pahale se lagA ho to usakA AgAra hai;
athavA bhojana va bartana ke lepa to na lagA ho, lekina tela Adi akalpanIya
vastuoM se lipta hAtha yA kapar3e se sApha kiye hue yA poMche hue bartana meM
bhojana kiyA gayA ho, to vaha alepa kA AgAra hai| matalaba yaha ki lepa aura
alepa ke AgAra ke kAraNa paccakkhANa bhaMga nahIM hotaa| tathA
gihatthasaMsaTeNaM AhAra dene vAlA gRhastha jisa camace yA kur3achI Adi se sAdhu
ke pAtra meM bhojana detA hai, usake sAtha pratyAkhyAna meM akalpa koI vigaI yA
mirca-masAle Adi vastu lagI ho athavA AyaMbila karate samaya kur3achI Adi meM
lagI usa akalpya vastu kA aMzamAtra milA ho, AyaMbilayogya AhAra meM usa vastu
kA svAda bhI spaSTa rUpa se mAlUma hotA ho, phira bhI aisI lepAyamAna vastu ke
khAne para isa AgAra ke kAraNa AyaMbila paccakkhANa kA bhaMga nahIM hotaa| tathA
ukkhitavivegeNaM AyaMbila meM khAne yogya rUkhI roTI, cane, cAvala Adi vastu
para AyaMbila meM nahIM khAne yogya sUkhI vigaI (gur3a, miThAI Adi) rakhI ho,
use acchI taraha uThA lene ke bAda bhI usakA aMza athavA lepa roTI, cAvala Adi
para lagA ho to AyaMbila meM khAne se isa AgAra ke kAraNa paccakkhANa bhaMga
nahIM hotA hai| arthAt AyaMbila meM kalpya (khAne yogya vastu) meM akalpya vastu
kA sparza ho gayA ho to AyaMbila bhaMga nahIM hotaa| paraMtu halavA, sAga Adi
vastu ko pUrNarUpa se uThA nahIM sakate; ataH vaha (vigaI Adi) kalpya khAdya ke
rUpa lagI raha jAtI hai; isase rUkhI roTI cAvala Adi khAne para vratabhaMga hotA
hai| isa taraha ina AgAroM (chUToM) ke atirikta AyaMbila meM nahIM khA sakane
yogya anya cAroM AhAroM kA tyAga karatA huuN| zeSa padoM kA artha pahale A cukA
hai| aba upavAsa ke paccakkhANa kA varNana karate haiN| isake pAMca AgAra hai|
yahAM prathama upavAsa-paccakkhANa kA sUtra pATha kahate haiM sUre uggae
abmattaTuM paccakkhAi cavyihaMpi, tivihaMpi yA AhAraM asaNaM, pANaM, khAimaM,
khAimaM aNNatthaNAbhogeNaM sahasAgAreNaM pAriTThAvaNiAgAreNaM, mahattarAgAreNaM
savyasamAhiyattiAgAreNaM yosirh| sUre uggae sUryodaya se lekr| isakA yaha artha
huA ki bhojana karane ke bAda zeSa dina ke samaya meM upavAsa nahIM ho sakatA
hai| tathA abbhattaTTha arthAt jisa pratyAkhyAna meM bhojana karane kA prayojana
nahIM ho, use abhaktArtha (upavAsa) kahate haiN| isake AgAra pUrvavat hai|
isameM pAriTThavaNiAgAra vizeSa rUpa meM hai| yadi tivihAra upavAsa kiyA ho to
use pAnI pIne kI chUTa hone se bar3hA huA AhAra guru kI AjJA se khAkara pAnI pI
sakatA hai, paraMtu jisane cauvvihAra 1. vartamAna meM AyaMbila meM kaI caTapaTI
vastue~ svAda ke lie banAne lagI hai| jo AyaMbila ke phala ko ghaTA rahI hai|
303

Page #326 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Nature of Water, Extreme and Abstinence Vows  **Yoga Shastra, Third Light,
Verse 129**  One who has observed a fast can only eat after both food and water
have increased. If water has not increased, one cannot eat food alone.  Besides
the above-mentioned food items, one who observes a vow renounces all four or
three of the non-food items.  Now, the vow related to water is called *Paanass
Paachchakkhaan*. In this, it is appropriate to observe the *Chauvvihaar
Paachchakkhaan* in the excretory system during *Porsi*, *Purimadd*, *Ekaasana*,
*Ekalthaana*, *Aayambil*, and fasting vows. However, if one observes the
*Trivihaar Paachchakkhaan* and allows water, then six *aagaar* (exceptions) are
mentioned for that. They are as follows:  * *Paanass Leyen Ya*, *Aleven Ya*,
*Achchen Wa*, *Bahulevan Wa*, *Sasitthen Wa*, *Asitthen Wa* - *Yosirah*.  In the
*aagaar* of *Porsi* etc., one should understand the third case as the fifth
case, connecting it with the *aagaar* of *Annatthanaabhogenam*.  * *Leyen Wa* -
I renounce the three types of food except water with a coating, such as
*Osaaman* or *Khajar*, tamarind, etc., or water in a vessel with a coating.
This means that even if one drinks water with a coating after eating during a
fast or *Ekaasana* etc., the vow is not broken. The word *Wa* (invariable) is
present with each word or in the meaning. One should understand that all types
of water, with or without a coating, etc., are specifically mentioned in the
*Paanass* vow as unavoidable.  * *Aleven Wa* - Water that does not have a
coating, but is filtered water from buttermilk, etc., in a vessel, etc., does
not break the vow due to this *aagaar*.  * *Achchen Wa* - Water boiled three
times, pure and clean water.  * *Bahulevan Wa* - Water used for washing sesame
seeds or raw rice, called *Bahul Jal* or *Gudal Jal*.  * *Sasitthen Wa* - Water
from cooked rice or *Maand*, grains, or *Osaaman*, filtered through a cloth.  *
*Asitthen Wa* - Water filtered from flour particles, should be understood as
similar to the *aagaar* of this type of water.  Now, regarding the extreme
renunciation, it is said that *Charam* means the final vow. It has two
divisions: one is for the final part of a day, and the other is for the final
part of life. These two vows are called *Divascharim* and *Bhavarchim*,
respectively. *Bhavarchim* renunciation is for as long as life lasts. Both have
four *aagaar* each, which are mentioned in the following sutra:  *
*Divascharim*, *Bhavarchim* Ya *Paachchakkwai*; *Chauvvihan Pi Aahaaram Asanam
Paanam Khaaim* *Saim* *Annatthanaabhogenam* *Sahasaagaaren* *Mahattaraagaaren*
*Savyasamaahiyattiaagaaren* *Yosirah*.  Here, there is a doubt that if
*Ekaasana* etc., vows are also observed in the same way, then what is the need
for *Divascharim* vow? Therefore, the *Divascharim* vow is useless. The solution
is that this is not true. *Ekaasana* etc., have eight *aagaar*, including
*Annatthanaabhogenam*, etc., while *Divascharim* has only four *aagaar*.
Therefore, this vow is successful because it has fewer *aagaar* (exceptions).
Although the renunciation of the evening meal by monks and nuns is lifelong, and
the *Ekaasana* etc., vows of householders are also until sunrise the next day
(because the word *Divas* means day, and it also means "day and night" or *Aho-
raatra*. The word *Aho-raatra* is also a synonym for *Divas*), still, the
*Divascharim* renunciation in the form of renunciation of the evening meal
reminds those monks and lay followers of that vow again, and therefore it is
successful.  *Bhavarchim* vow has only two *aagaar*. In this, the *aagaar* of
*Sarvasamadhi-pratyaya* and *Mahattaraagaar* are not needed. Only the two
*aagaar* of *Anaabhog* and *Sahasaakaar* are sufficient for *Bhavarchim* vow.
These two *aagaar* are included in this vow because it is possible to use
something useless or to put a finger, etc., in the mouth. This is because the
one who observes the extreme renunciation cannot completely renounce these two
*aagaar*.  Now, the nature of the abstinence vow is explained. To make a
resolution or rule in accordance with the renunciation of austerity in some form
is called *Abhigraha*. It is in the form of various rules, such as cleaning and
writing the punishment, allowing to get up, etc.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pAnI, carama evaM abhigraha paccakkhANa kA svarUpa yogazAstra tRtIya prakAza
zloka 129 upavAsa kiyA ho, vaha to AhAra-pAnI donoM bar3ha gaye hoM, tabhI khA
sakatA hai pAnI na bar3hA ho to akelA AhAra nahIM khA sktaa| vosirai uparyukta
AgAroM ke atirikta azanAdi cAroM yA tInoM azanAdi AhAra kA tyAga karatA hai| _
aba pAnI-saMbaMdhI paccakkhANa kahate haiM, usameM porasI, purimaDDa, ekAsanA,
ekalaThANA, AyaMbila tathA upavAsa ke paccakkhANa meM utsargamArga meM cauvihAra
paccakkhAna karanA yukta hai, phira bhI tivihAra paccakkhANa kiyA jAya aura pAnI
kI chUTa rakhI jAya, to usake lie chaha AgAra batAye haiN| ve isa prakAra hai
pANassa leyeNa yA, aleveNa yA accheNa vA bahulevaNa vA sasittheNa vA asittheNa
vA yosirh| porasI Adi ke AgAroM meM aNNatthaNAbhogeNaM AgAra ke sAtha ise
jor3anA aura jo tRtIyA vibhakti hai use paMcamI smjhnaa| tathA leveNa vA osAmaNa
athavA khajara. imalI Adi ke pAnI se yA jisa bartana Adi meM usake lepasahita
pAnI ho, usake sivAya trividha AhAra kA maiM tyAga karatA huuN| arthAt jisa
lepakRta pAnI upavAsa athavA ekAsana Adi meM bhojana ke bAda pIye to bhI
paccakkhANa kA bhaMga nahIM hotA hai| pratyeka zabda ke sAtha athavA artha meM
vA zabda (avyaya) hai| vaha lepakRta-alepakRta Adi sarva prakAra ke pAnI
pANassa=pAnI ke paccakkhANa meM avarjanIya rUpa meM vizeSa prakAra se batAne ke
lie samajhanA, vaha isa prakAra se aleveNa vA jisa bartana Adi meM lepa na ho,
paraMtu chAcha Adi kA nitArA huA pAnI ho, use alepayukta pAnI ke pIne se bhI isa
AgAra ke kAraNa paccakkhANa bhaMga nahIM hotA hai| tathA accheNa vA tIna bAra
ubAle hue pAnI zuddha svaccha jala se bahuleNa vA tila yA kacce cAvala kA
dhovana, bahula jala athavA guDala jala kahalAtA hai| usase tathA sasittheNa vA
pakAye hue cAvala yA mAMDa, dAnA athavA osAmana vAle pAnI ko kapar3e se
chAnakara pIye to, isa AgAra se paccakkhANa kA bhaMga nahIM hotA hai, tathA
asittheNa vA=ATe ke kaNa kA nitArA huA pAnI bhI isI prakAra ke pAnI ke AgAra ke
samAna smjhnaa| aba carama pratyAkhyAna ke saMbaMdha meM kahate haiM-carama
arthAt aMtima pcckkhaann| isake do bheda haiM-eka dina ke | aMtima bhAga kA aura
dUsarA bhava-jIvana ke aMtima bhAga taka kA hotA hai, ina donoM paccakkhANo ko
kramazaH divasacarima aura bhavacarima kahate haiN| bhavacarima pratyAkhyANa
yAvajjIva-jaba taka prANa rahe, taba taka kA hotA hai| donoM ke cAracAra AgAra
hai; jinheM nimnokta sUtrapATha meM batAye haiMdivasacarimaM, bhavacarimaM yA
paccakvAi; cauvvihaM pi AhAraM asaNaM pANaM khAimaM sAimaM aNNatthaNAbhogeNaM
sahasAgAreNaM mahattarAgAreNaM savyasamAhiyattiAgAreNaM yosirh| yahAM zaMkA
karate haiM ki ekAsana Adi paccakkhANa bhI isI taraha se hotA hai, phira
divasacarima paccakkhANa kI kyA AvazyakatA hai? ataH divasacarima paccakkhANa
niSphala hai| isakA samAdhAna karate haiM ki yaha kahanA yathArtha nahIM hai|
ekAsana Adi meM aNNatthaNAbhogeNaM ityAdi ATha AgAra hai, jabaki divasacarima
meM kevala cAra hI AgAra hai| ataH isameM AgAra (apavAda chUTa) kama hone se
yaha paccakkhANa saphala hI hai| yadyapi sAdhusAdhviyoM ke rAtribhojana kA
trividha-trividha (tInakaraNa tIna yoga) se AjIvana tyAga hotA hai aura gRhastha
ke ekAsana Adi kA paccakkhANa bhI dUsare dina sUryodaya taka kA hotA hai;
(kyoMki divasa-zabda kA artha dina hotA hai, vaise hI pUrI rAtrisahita dina yAnI
'ahorAtra' bhI hotA hai| arthAt ahorAtra zabda bhI divasa kA paryAyavAcI
(samAnArthaka) hotA hai|) tathApi jinake rAtribhojana kA tyAga ho, una sAdhu-
zrAvakoM ko phira se rAtribhojanatyAga rUpa divasacarama pratyAkhyAna punaH usa
paccakkhANa kA smaraNa (yAda) karA detA hai, isalie saphala hai|
bhavacarimapaccakhANa meM sirpha do AgAra hI hote haiN| isameM sarvasamAdhi-
pratyaya rUpa AgAra aura mahattarAgAra kI jarUrata nahIM rahatI; sirpha anAbhoga
aura sahasAkAra ina do AgAroM se bhavacarima-paccakkhANa ho jAtA hai|
upayogazUnyatA athavA sahasA aMgulI Adi muMha meM DAlanA saMbhava hone se isa
pratyAkhyAna meM ye do AgAra hI rakhe gaye haiN| kyoMki carama-pratyAkhyAnakartA
ina donoM AgAroM kA sarvathA tyAga nahIM kara sktaa| aba abhigraha pratyAkhyAna
kA svarUpa batAte hai| kisI na kisI rUpa meM tapa tyAga ke anurUpa koI saMkalpa
yA niyama karanA, abhigraha kahalAtA hai| vaha daMDa kA pramArjana-pratilekhana
karane. uThane dene Adi vividha niyamoM ke rUpa meM hotA 304

Page #327 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The text discusses the concepts of *Abhiggah* and *Viggai* *Paccakkhan* and
their interpretations.  **Abhiggah Paccakkhan**  * It refers to the renunciation
of *Abhiggah* (attachment). * It involves four *Agars* (stages). * The sutra
states: "Abhiggaham Paccckkhaai, Annatthanaabhogenaam, Sahaasaagaarenaam,
Mahattaraagaarenaam, Savvasamaahivattiaagaarenaam Vosirai." * The meaning of
these terms has been explained previously. * If a monk renounces clothes as part
of *Abhiggah* *Paccakkhan*, a fifth *Agar* called *Cholapattaagaarenaam* is
added. * This *Agar* allows the monk to wear a *Cholapatta* (a type of cloth) in
case of necessity without breaking the *Paccakkhan*.  **Viggai Paccakkhan**  *
It involves eight or nine *Agars*. * The sutra states: "Viggaio Paccckkhaai,
Annatthanaabhogenaam, Sahaasaagaarenaam, Levaalevenaam, Gihatthasansatenaam,
Ukhittvivegaenaam, Paducchammakkhienaam, Paritthavaaniyagaarenaam,
Mahattaraagaarenaam, Savyasamaahiyattiaagaarenaam Vosirah." * *Viggai* refers to
substances that cause mental disturbances. * There are ten types of *Viggai*:
1. Milk     2. Yogurt     3. Ghee     4. Butter     5. Oil     6. Jaggery     7.
Alcohol     8. Honey     9. Meat     10. Fried foods  **Details of each type of
Viggai:**  * **Milk:** Milk from cows, buffaloes, goats, camels, and sheep is
considered *Viggai*. * **Yogurt:** Yogurt from all except camels is *Viggai*. *
**Ghee and Butter:** Ghee and butter from the same animals as milk are *Viggai*.
* **Oil:** Oils from sesame, flaxseed, coconut, and mustard (including *Laha*)
are *Viggai*. Other oils are considered *Lepkrut* (not *Viggai* but allowed for
external use). * **Jaggery:** Both soft and hard jaggery made from sugarcane or
palm juice is *Viggai*. This includes sugar, brown sugar, *Mishri*, and sweets
made from them. * **Alcohol:** Both *Kasthajan* (made from sugarcane, palm,
etc.) and *Pishtajan* (made from fermented flour) alcohol are *Viggai* and
should be completely avoided. * **Honey:** Honey from bees, *Kunta* (a flying
insect), and *Bhramari* (a type of bee) is *Viggai*. * **Meat:** Meat from
aquatic, terrestrial, and aerial animals is *Viggai*. This includes skin, fat,
blood, marrow, and bones. * **Fried Foods:** All fried foods like *Jalebi*,
*Bade*, *Pakode*, etc., are *Viggai*.  **The concept of *Aavgaah* and *Neevi*
(Non-Viggai):**  * *Aavgaah* refers to the process of frying food in oil or
ghee. * *Neevi* refers to food that is not *Viggai*. * According to some
scholars, food fried four times is considered *Neevi*. * Monks who are
practicing *Yogodvahan* (intense spiritual practice) can consume *Neevi* food
that has been fried three times, provided no additional oil or ghee is added. *
Some scholars also believe that if a large *Pooa* (a type of fried food) is
fried in a pan so that it completely covers the oil or ghee, then the second
frying of other foods in the same oil is considered *Neevi* for monks practicing
*Yogodvahan*. * However, all such foods are considered *Lepkrut*.
**Conclusion:**  * Out of the ten types of *Viggai*, meat and alcohol are
completely forbidden. * Honey and *Navneet* (fresh butter) are also generally
forbidden. * The remaining six types of *Viggai* are allowed for consumption. *
Monks practicing *Yogodvahan* can consume *Neevi* food under certain conditions.
**Note:** This translation preserves the Jain terms and provides a detailed
explanation of the concepts discussed in the text.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 abhiggaha aura viggaI paccakkhANa ke pATha aura unakI vyAkhyA yogazAstra tRtIya
prakAza zloka 129 hai| aisA koI bhI abhigrahayukta paccakkhANa karanA abhigraha
pratyAkhyAna kahalAtA hai| isameM cAra AgAra hai| isakA sUtrapATha isa prakAra
hai abhiggahaM paccakkhAi, aNNatthaNAbhogeNaM, sahasAgAreNaM, mahattarAgAreNaM,
savvasamAhivattiAgAreNaM vosiri| ina padoM kI vyAkhyA pahale kI jA cukI hai|
itanA jarUra samajha lenA hai ki yadi koI sAdhu vastra tyAga rUpa abhigraha
pratyAkhyAna karatA hai, to usake sAtha colapaTTAgAreNaM nAmaka paMcama AgAra
avazya bole isa AgAra ke kAraNa yadi kisI gAr3hakAraNavaza vaha colapaTTA
dhAraNa kara letA hai to bhI usake isa paccakkhANa kA bhaMga nahIM hotaa| aba
viggaipaccakkhANa kA svarUpa batAte haiN| isameM ATha yA nau AgAra batAye gaye
haiN| isakA sUtrapATha isa prakAra hai viggaio paccakkhAi, aNNatthaNAbhogeNaM,
sahasAgAreNaM, levAleveNaM, gihatthasaMsaTeNaM, ukhittavivegeNaM,
paDuccamakkhieNaM, pariTThAvaNiyAgAreNaM, mahattarAgAreNaM,
savyasamAhiyattiAgAreNaM vosirh| _ amuka khAdya padArtha jo prAyaH mana meM
vikAra paidA karane meM kAraNabhUta hote haiM, unheM jaina-paribhASA meM viggaI|
(vikRtika) kahA jAtA hai| isake dasa bheda haiN| ve isa prakAra hai-1. dUdha, 2.
dahI, 3. ghI, 4. makkhana, 5. tela, 6. guDa, 7. madya, 8. madhu, 9. mAMsa aura
10. talI huI vstueN| 1. dUdha-gAya, bhaiMsa, bakarI, UMTanI aura bher3a ina
pAMcoM kA dUdha viggaI hai| 2.UMTanI ke dUdha kA dahI nahIM banatA; ataH ise
chor3akara zeSa cAroM kA dahI viggaI hai| 3.-4. isI prakAra ina cAroM kA
makkhana aura ghI viggaI hai| 5. tila, alasI, nAriyala tathA sarasoM (isameM
'lAhA' bhI zAmila hai), ina cAroM ke tela viggaI meM mAne jAte haiM, anya tela
viggaI meM nahIM mAne jAte; ve kevala lepakRta mAne jAte hai| 6. ikSurasa yA
tAr3arasa ko ubAlakara banA huA narama va sakhta donoM prakAra kA gur3a viggaI
hai| (gar3a ke aMtargata khAMDa. cInI, burA zakkara, mizrI tathA inase banI huI
miThAiyAM bhI viggaI meM mAnI jAtI hai| 7. madya-zarAba (madirA) do prakAra kI
hai| eka to mahar3A, gannA, tAr3I Adi ke rasa se banatI hai, use kASThajanya
madya kahate haiM; dUsarA ATe Adi ko sar3AgalAkara use banAyA jAtA hai; use
piSTajanya kahate haiN| donoM prakAra kA madya (zarAba) mahAvikRtikAraka hone se
sarvathA tyAjya hai|) 8. madhu - zahada tIna kisma kA hotA hai| eka madhumakkhI
se, dUsarA kuMtA nAmaka ur3ane vAle jIvoM se aura tIsarA bhramarI ke dvArA
taiyAra kiyA huA hotA hai| (ye tInoM prakAra ke zahada utsarga rUpa se varjita
hai) 9. mAMsa bhI tIna prakAra kA hotA hai-jalacara kA, sthalacara kA aura
khecara jIvoM kaa| jIvoM kI camar3I, carbI, rakta, majjA, haDDI Adi bhI mAMsa ke
aMtargata hai| 10. talI haI cIjeM - ghI yA tela meM tale hae pae jalebI Adi
miThAiyAM. caTapaTe mircamasAledAra bar3e, pakaur3e Adi saba bhojya padArthoM kI
gaNanA avagAhima (talI huI) meM hotI hai| ye saba vastue~ viggai  /  avagAha
zabda ke bhAva-artha meM 'ima' pratyaya lagane se avagAhima zabda banA hai|
isakA artha hotA hai-tela, ghI Adi | se bharI kar3AhI meM avagAhana karake-
Dubakara jo khAdyavastu, jaba vaha ubala jAya taba bAhara nikAlI jaay| yAnI
tela, ghI Adi meM talane ke lie khAdyapadArtha DAlA jAya aura tIna bAra ubala
jAne ke bAda use nikAlA jAya; aisI vastu miThAI, bar3e, pakaur3e yA anya talI
huI cIjeM bhI ho sakatI hai aura ve zAstrIya paribhASA meM viggaI kahalAtI hai|
vRddha AcAryoM kI dhAraNA hai ki agara cauthI bAra kI talI huI koI vastu ho to
vaha nIvI (niviggaI) ke yogya mAnI jAtI | hai| aisI nIvI (niviggaI viggaI
rahita) vastu yogodvAhaka sAdhu ke lie nIvI (nirvikRtika) paccakkhANa meM
kalpanIya hai| arthAt-talI huI vastu (viggaI) ke tyAga meM bhI yogodvahana
karane vAle sAdhu-sAdhvI nIvI paccakkhANa meM bhI tIna ghAna (bAra) ke bAda kI
talI huI miThAI yA viggaI le sakate haiM, bazarte ki bIca meM usameM tela yA ghI
na DAlA ho| vRddhAcAryoM kI aisI bhI dhAraNA hai ki jisa kar3AhI meM ye cIjeM
talI jA rahI hoM, usa samaya usameM eka hI pUA itanA bar3A talA jA rahA ho,
jisase kar3AhI kA tela yA ghI pUrA kA pUrA Dhaka jAya to dUsarI bAra kI usameM
talI huI miThAI Adi cIjeM yogodvAhaka sAdhu-sAdhvI ke lie nIvI paccakkhANa meM
bhI kalpanIya ho sakatI hai| paraMtu ve saba cIjeM lepakRta samajhI jaaeNgii|
uparyukta dasa prakAra kI viggaiyoM meM mAMsa evaM madirA to sarvathA abhakSya
hai, madhu aura | navanIta kathaMcit abhakSya hai| zeSa 6 viggaiyAM bhakSya
haiN| ina bhakSya viggaiyoM meM se eka viggaI se lekara 6 viggaiyoM 1. yaha
kathana bAhya prayoga ke lie saMbhavita hogaa| 305

Page #328 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Method of Counting and Purification of the Repositories of All Pacchakkhanas
The Pacchakkhana of the Yoga Shastra, Third Light, up to verse 129, can be taken
individually or all the Viggais can be taken together with the Nivi
Pacchakkhana. The meaning of the repositories should be understood as before.
These are the specific repositories:  **Gihatth-Sansadvenam:** If a householder
has mixed rice in milk for themselves, and after adding the rice, the milk is
four fingers high (in the vessel), then they are not considered a Viggai. It is
a Sansrushtdravya and is acceptable in Nivi Pacchakkhana, but if the milk is
more than four fingers high, then it is counted as a Viggai. Similarly, the
repository of Sansrushtdravya in other Viggais should be known from the Agamas.
This means that if a householder consumes Sansrushtdravya in Nivi, their
Pacchakkhana is not broken due to this repository.  **Uktittviveganam:** Even
though there is a renunciation of hard substances like sugar, etc., as mentioned
in the repositories from Ayambil, if a particle of a hard substance like
jaggery, etc., remains and is consumed, the Pacchakkhana is not broken. However,
this repository (exception) is only for hard Viggais, not for liquid Viggais.
**Paducchamkkhiyenam:** If a householder applies a small amount of ghee to a dry
roti, etc., to make it soft, and it is consumed, this Pacchakkhana is not broken
due to the repository called "Pratiitya-prakshit", provided that the taste of
ghee is not perceived at all. If a small amount of oil, ghee, etc., that is on
the finger gets on the roti, etc., and is consumed, this Pacchakkhana is not
broken. However, eating with ghee, etc., specifically added is not permissible
for those who have the Pacchakkhana of the Dharaviggai.  In this way, by taking
care of the repositories mentioned for Nivi Pacchakkhana through Viggai-tyaga
and Upalakshana, I renounce the rest of the Voshir-tyaga. If a piece of jaggery
is kept in a Viggai that has been renounced, it can be picked up and the Viggai
can be taken. From this perspective, there are nine repositories for the Jaggery
Viggai and eight repositories for the milk, etc., liquid Viggais.  Here we
present the meaning of the Agama-gatha that supports this point, which reveals
the repositories:  There are two repositories for the Namukkarasahya (Naukarasi)
Pacchakkhana, six for the Porasi, seven for the Purimat (Purvardha)
Pacchakkhana, eight for the Ekasan, five for the Upvas, six for the Upvasadi
with water, four for the Divascharam and Bhavcharam Pratyakhyana, four for the
Abhigha, or four others, and eight or nine for the Nivi. Among these, there are
five repositories in the A-pravarana Abhigha and four in the remaining Abhigha
Pacchakkhana. (A. Ni. 1612-1614)  Here there is a doubt: If the repositories
mentioned for Nivi are mentioned under the Viggai-tyaga form of Pacchakkhana,
then someone does not renounce all Viggais, but keeps some Viggais, or renounces
only some Viggais; how should the repositories be understood in such Viggai-
Pacchakkhana? The solution is that the Parimit-Viggai-Pacchakkhana should also
be taken along with the Nivi Pacchakkhana. The same repositories should be
understood in that as well. That is, the repositories mentioned in Nivi are also
the repositories in the (Parimit) Viggai Pacchakkhana. Similarly, the
Pacchakkhana of Biyasana should be understood along with Ekasan, Sadhporasi
along with Porasi, and Avadd along with Purimadd. It is not inappropriate to
speak of these Pacchakkhanas along with the increase in A-pramatata. Since the
repositories related to Ekasan, etc., are the same, they should be understood in
Porasi, Sadhporasi, etc. Because the repositories in Chauvvihar are the same as
the repositories in Trivihar, Duvihar Pacchakkhana, similarly, the repositories
of Biyasana, etc., and Ekasan, etc., are similar due to the similarity of the
word Asanadi.  Here there is a doubt: If the Biyasana, etc., Pacchakkhana is of
the Abhigha form, then there should be four repositories, why more? The solution
is that it has similarity with them due to its acceptance, observance, and
protection, just like Ekasan, etc. Therefore, there should be the same number of
repositories in Biyasana as well. Other Acharyas believe that the Pacchakkhanas
of Biyasana, etc., are not counted in the original Pacchakkhanas. The original
ten Pacchakkhanas are Ekasan, etc., so that is correct. If someone is unable to
perform the Ekasan, etc., Pacchakkhana, then they can perform the Porasi, etc.,
mentioned Pacchakkhana according to their feeling and ability. For those who
desire even greater benefit, it is appropriate to perform the Pratyakhyana with
Ganthisahit, Muththisahit, etc., along with that (Porasi, etc.). Because the
Ganthisahit, etc., Pacchakkhana also increases the A-pramattadash and is
fruitful. These...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 samasta paccakkhANoM ke AgAroM kI gaNanA evaM pratyAkhyAnazuddhi kI vidhi
yogazAstra tRtIya prakAza zloka 129 taka kA paccakkhANa alaga-alaga bhI liyA jA
sakatA hai aura eka sAtha sabhI viggaiyoM kA paccakkhANa bhI nIvI paccakkhANa ke
sAtha liyA jA sakatA hai| isameM jo AgAra hai, unakA artha pUrvavat samajha lenA
caahie| vizeSa AgAra ye haiM-gihattha-saMsadveNaM-arthAt gRhastha ne apane liye
dUdha meM cAvala milAye hoM, usa dUdha meM cAvala DAlane ke bAda agara vaha
dUdha (usa bartana meM) cAra aMgula Upara ho to vaha viggaI nahIM mAnA jaaygaa|
vaha saMsRSTadravya hai aura nIvI paccakkhANa meM grAhya hai, kintu yadi dUdha
cAra aMgula se jyAdA Upara ho to vaha viggaI meM zumAra hai| isI taraha dUsarI |
viggaiyoM meM bhI saMsRSTadravya kA AgAra AgamoM se jAna lenaa| matalaba yaha
hai ki gRhastha dvArA saMsRSTa dravya sAdhu-sAdhvI nIvI meM khA le to unakA
paccakkhANa isa AgAra ke kAraNa bhaMga nahIM hotaa| uktittavivegeNaM-arthAt |
AyaMbila se AgAroM meM kahe anusAra sakhta dravya Adi kA tyAga hote hue bhI
kadAcit gur3a Adi kisI kaThina dravya | kA kaNa raha jAya aura vaha khAne meM A
jAya to bhI ukta paccakkhANa kA bhaMga nahIM hotaa| kintu yaha AgAra (chUTa) |
sirpha kaThora (sakhta) viggaI ke lie hai, tarala viggaI ke lie nhiiN|
paDuccamakkhieNaM-rUkhI roTI Adi narama rakhane ke lie alpamAtrA meM gahastha
dvArA use capaDa dI jAtI ho. use khA lene para bhI 'pratItyaprakSita' nAmaka
AgAra ke yaha paccakkhANa bhaMga nahIM hotA; bazarte ki use khAne para ghI kA
svAda jarA bhI mAlUma na ho| aMgulI meM lage hue mAmUlI tela, ghI Adi roTI Adi
ke laga jAya, use khAne para bhI yaha paccakkhANa bhaMga nahIM hotaa| paraMtu
vizeSa rUpa se ghI Adi DAlakara khAnA ukta dhAraviggaI ke paccakkhANa vAle ke
lie kalpanIya nahIM hai| isa prakAra viggaI-tyAga aura upalakSaNa se nIvI-
paccakkhANa ke jo AgAra batAye haiM, unakI yatanA rakhakara, bAkI kA vosirai-
tyAga karatA huuN| tyAga kI huI kisI viggaI meM gur3a kA Tukar3A rakhA ho to use
uThAkara vaha viggaI lI jA sakatI hai| isa dRSTi se gur3a viggaI ke nau aura
dUdha Adi tarala viggaI ke ATha-ATha AgAra samajha lene caahie| AgAroM kA
digdarzana karAne vAlI isI bAta kI poSaka AgamagAthAoM kA artha yahAM prastuta
karate haiMnamukkArasahiya (naukArasI) paccakkhANa ke do, porasI ke 6, purimata
(pUrvArddha) paccakkhANa ke sAta, ekAsana ke 8, upavAsa ke 5, pAnI sahita
upavAsAdi ke 6, divasacarama aura bhavacarama pratyAkhyAna ke 4, abhigraha ke 4
athavA anya cAra tathA nIvI ke 8 yA 9 AgAra hote haiN| inameM bhI aprAvaraNa
abhigraha meM pAMca aura zeSa abhigraha paccakkhANa meM cAra AgAra hote haiN|
(A. ni. 1612-1614) yahAM zaMkA hotI hai ki nIvI ke lie kahe hue AgAra viggaI-
tyAga rUpa paccakkhANa ke aMtargata batAye hai to koI tamAma viggaiyoM kA tyAga
na karake kucha viggaiyoM kI chuTa rakhatA hai, kisI yA kinhIM viggaiyoM kA hI
tyAga karatA hai; aise viggaI-paccakkhANa meM AgAra kisa taraha samajhane cAhie?
isakA samAdhAna yaha hai ki nIvIpaccakkhANa ke sAtha hI upalakSaNa se parimita-
viggaI-paccakkhANa kA bhI grahaNa kara lenA caahie| usameM bhI ve hI AgAra
samajhane caahie| arthAt nIvI meM jo AgAra batAye hai, ve hI AgAra (parimita)
viggaIpaccakkhANa meM bhI hai| isI prakAra ekAsana ke sAtha biyAsaNA tathA
porasI ke sAtha sADhaporasI aura purimaDDa ke sAtha avaDDa kA paccakkhANa
samajha lenA caahie| apramattatA kI vRddhi hone se usa paccakkhANa ke sAtha
bolanA anucita nahIM hai| ekAsanAdi-saMbaMdhI AgAra eka sarIkhe hone se biyAsanA
meM porasI, sADDhaporasI Adi meM samajha lenaa| kyoMki cauvvihAra meM jo AgAra
hai, ve hI tivihAra, duvihAra paccakkhANa ke AgAra hai, usI taraha biAsaNA Adi
va ekAsana | Adi ke AgAra AsanAdi zabda kI samAnatA se yukta hai| yahAM zaMkA
hotI hai ki biyAsaNA Adi paccakkhANa yadi abhigraha rUpa hai, to usake cAra
AgAra hone cAhie, adhika kyoM? isakA samAdhAna yoM karate haiM ki ekAsana Adi ke
samAna hI usakA grahaNa, pAlana, rakSaNa Adi hone se unake sAtha samAnatA hai|
isalie biyAsana meM bhI utane hI AgAra jAnane caahie| anya AcAryoM kI mAnyatA
hai ki biyAsana Adi ke paccakkhANa mUla paccakkhANoM meM nahIM ginAye gaye haiN|
mUla meM ekAsanA Adi dasa paccakkhANa hI mAne gaye haiM, ataH itane hI ThIka
hai| yadi koI ekAsana Adi paccakkhANa karane meM asamartha ho, to vaha apanI
bhAvanA aura zakti ke anusAra porasI Adi uktapaccakkhANa kara sakatA hai| isase
bhI adhika lAbha-prApti ke abhilASI ko usa (porasI Adi) ke sAtha gaMThisahita,
muTThisahita Adi pratyAkhyAna karanA ucita hai| kyoMki gaMThisahita Adi
paccakkhANa bhI apramattadazA ko bar3hAne vAle aura phaladAyI hai| ye 306

Page #329 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Conduct of a Shravak Before and After Sleep  **Chapter 3, Light 3, Verse
130**  The **Paccakkhanna** are those with qualities like touch, etc., and are
called **Supratyakhyana**. In support of this, it is said that for the sake of
the right understanding of all **Pratyakhyanas**, there are six types:
**Fasiyam**, **Paliyam**, **Sohiyam**, **Tiriyam**, **Kittiyam**, **Arahiyam**.
In this way, the purification of **Pratyakhyana** occurs in the aforementioned
six ways.  1. **Fasiyam (Touched)** - At the time of **Pratyakhyana**, obtaining
its touch according to the method. 2. **Paliyam (Protected)** - Repeatedly
remembering the accepted **Pratyakhyana** through use, keeping it well-
protected, preventing it from being broken, or nurturing it. 3. **Sohiyam
(Adorned)** - From the received food, first giving to the Guru, ascetic, child,
sick, elderly, etc., and then consuming the remaining food oneself. 4. **Tiriyam
(Passed)** - After the duration of **Pratyakhyana** is complete, remaining
stable for a short time and then eating. 5. **Kittiyam (Celebrated)** - While
performing according to **Pratyakhyana**, remembering that "I have accepted this
particular **Pratyakhyana** today," eating, or praising the importance of the
**Pratyakhyana** that has been accepted - this is also called **Kittiyam**. 6.
**Arahiyam (Worshiped)** - With all these types of purification, keeping the
**Agara** in mind, putting the accepted **Pratyakhyana** into practice.  After
the explanation, two types of fruits are mentioned. By performing
**Paccakkhanna**, the doors of future karmas are closed; this leads to the
destruction of desire and thirst. With the cessation of thirst, unparalleled
peace arises; due to this, **Pratyakhyana** becomes pure. Through pure
**Pratyakhyana**, the seeker attains the true nature of **Charitra Dharma**.
This leads to the depletion of old karmas, through which the seeker gradually
attains **Ganasthana** and one day attains **Kevalgyan**. And from
**Kevalgyan**, the seeker attains **Moksha**, the eternal state of happiness. In
this way, **Pratyakhyana** is the giver of **Moksha** through tradition.  Thus,
the description of the nature of **Pratyakhyana** and the six essentials is
complete. For a **Shravak**, only **Chaityavandan** etc. are necessary to do, he
does not need to perform these six essentials; this should never be stated.
Therefore, it is said that for a **Shraman** or **Shravak**, these (six) are the
necessary actions to be performed at the end of the night or day, therefore they
are called **Aavashyak** (**Pratikraman**). Similarly, in the **Agam**, the
**Shravak** is also told to perform **Pratikraman** etc. It is not appropriate
to mention **Aavashyak** like **Chaityavandan** etc. here. Because the rule of
**Pratikraman** etc. **Aavashyak** is stated as **Anto Aho-Nississ**, meaning
both at the end of the day and night; whereas the rule of **Chaityavandan** is
for all three times. In the **Anuyogadwar Sutra**, while describing the
characteristics of **Lokottar Aavashyak**, it is said regarding its importance:
"Those **Sadhu-Sadhvi** or **Shravak-Shravika** who are focused on the
**Aavashyak Sutra** and its meaning, become absorbed in it, are engrossed in
that **Leshya**, use it in its meaning, dedicate all three **Karana** to it, and
are imbued with its feeling, perform **Aavashyak** (**Pratikraman** etc.) at
both times; their **Aavashyak** should be understood as **Lokottar Bhava-
Aavashyak**." According to this **Agam** statement, there is a rule for
**Shravaks** to perform **Aavashyak** (**Pratikraman** etc.).  After performing
the six **Aavashyak**, the **Shravak** should study, contemplate the **Anuvrat**
method, or recite the **Panchparameshthinamaskaramantra** garland, or use the
time by performing five types of study. These five types of study are: 1.
**Vachanashastra** or reading scriptures, 2. **Pricchana** - asking questions
about the subject, 3. **Paryatana** - repeatedly reviewing the learned knowledge
so that it is not forgotten, 4. **Anupreksha** - discussing with each other
about subtle matters and becoming free from doubt, or thinking and meditating
accordingly, 5. **Dharmakatha** - giving or listening to a **Dharmakatha** or
lecture on scriptural subjects.  If the **Sadhu-Sadhvi** do not have the ability
to go and listen to lectures and teachings, or if there is a king or a great
**Shravak**, or if there is an obstacle or difficulty in going out, then they
should perform **Aavashyak**, study, etc. at home. This is
**Uttamanirjarahethum** - the cause of the best depletion. It is also said that
"**Shrijineshwar** has described twelve types of **Tap** externally and
internally, there is no **Tap** like study, nor will there be, nor has there
been." (**Panch. V. 562**) It is also said that "Through study, there is
meditation, and through study, the ultimate truth can also be known; the soul,
absorbed in study, attains detachment every moment." (**Upadesh Mala 338**) ||
129 ||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 nidrA lene ke pahale aura nidrAtyAga ke bAda zrAvaka kI caryA yogazAstra tRtIya
prakAza zloka 130 paccakkhANa sparzanAdi guNa vAle hote hai aura supratyAkhyAna
kahalAte haiN| isI ke samarthana meM sabhI pratyAkhyAnoM kI samyakzuddhi ke hetu
kahA hai-phAsiyaM, pAliyaM, sohiyaM, tIriyaM, kITTiyaM, aaraahiyN| isa taraha
pratyAkhyAna kI zuddhi pUrvokta 6 prakAra se hotI hai| 1. phAsiyaM
(sparzita)-pratyAkhyAna ke samaya vidhi pUrvaka usakA sparza prApta honA; 2.
pAliyaM (pAlita)=grahaNa kiye hue pratyAkhyAna kA bAra-bAra upayoga pUrvaka
smaraNa rakhakara use bhalIbhAMti surakSita rakhanA-bhaMga hone se bacAnA yA
pAlanA; 3. sohiyaM (zobhita) Aye hue AhAra meM se guru, tapasvI, bAla, glAna,
vRddha Adi ko | pahale dekara bace hue AhAra kA svayaM sevana karanA; 3. tIriyaM
(tIrita)-pratyAkhyAna kI avadhi pUrNa ho jAne ke bAda thor3e samaya taka
sthiratA karake bAda meM AhAra krnaa| 5. kITTiyaM (kIrtita)-pratyAkhyAna ke
anurUpa karate samaya yaha yAda karake ki maiMne Aja amuka pratyAkhyAna aMgIkAra
kiyA hai; bhojana kare athavA jo pratyAkhyAna grahaNa kiyA hai, usakI mahattA kA
bakhAna karanA-kIrtana karanA bhI kIrtita kahalAtA hai| 6. ArAhiyaM
(ArAdhita)=ina sabhI prakAra kI zuddhi ke sAtha AgAroM ko bhalI bhAMti madde
najara rakhate hue liye hue pratyAkhyAna ko amala meM laanaa| yAkhyAna ke
anaMtara aura paraspara do prakAra ke phala batAte haiN| paccakkhANa karane se
Ane vAle karmoM ke dvAra baMda ho jAte haiM; isase icchA-tRSNA kA uccheda hotA
hai| tRSNA zAMta hone se anupama upazamabhAva prakaTa hotA hai; isa kAraNa se
pratyAkhyAna zuddha hotA hai| zuddha pratyAkhyAna se sAdhaka cAritradharma kA
yathArtha svarUpa prApta karatA hai| isase parvakata (parAne) karmoM kI nirjarA
hotI hai. jisase uttarottara gaNasthAna kI prApti karate-karate sAdhaka eka dina
kevalajJAna prApta kara letA hai; aura kevalajJAna se zAzvatasukha-sthAna rUpa
mokSaphala prApta hotA hai| isa taraha pratyAkhyAna paraMparA se mokSaphala dAtA
hai| isa prakAra pratyAkhyAna-Avazyaka-sahita chaha AvazyakoM ke svarUpa kA
varNana pUrNa huaa| zrAvaka ke lie kevala caityavaMdana Adi hI Avazyaka karaNIya
hai, use ina SaT-AvazyakoM ko karane kI AvazyakatA nahIM; aisA kadApi
pratipAdana nahIM karanA caahie| isIlie kahA hai-zramaNa yA zrAvaka ke lie rAta
yA dina ke aMta meM ye (chaha) avazya karane yogya kArya haiM, isIlie inakA nAma
Avazyaka (pratikramaNa) kahA hai| isI taraha Agama meM bhI zrAvaka ko
pratikramaNAdi avazya karane kA kahA hai| yahAM caityavaMdana Adi ke samAna
Avazyaka ko batAnA ucita nahIM hai| kyoMki pratikramaNAdi Avazyaka kA vidhAna to
aMto aho-nisissa kahakara dina aura rAta ke aMta meM ubhayakAla kiyA gayA hai;
jabaki caityavaMdana kA vidhAna trikAla hai| anuyogadvArasUtra meM bhI lokottara
Avazyaka kA lakSaNa batAte hue isake mahattva ke saMbaMdha meM kahA hai-jo
sAdhu-sAdhvI yA zrAvaka-zrAvikA AvazyakasUtra aura usake artha meM ekAgracita
rahate haiM, usameM tanmaya ho jAte haiM, usI lezyA meM tallIna va usIke artha
meM upayoga vAle hokara usI meM hI tInoM karaNoM ko arpitakara dete haiM evaM
kevala usI kI bhAvanA meM ota-prota hokara dono samaya Avazyaka (pratikramaNAdi)
karate haiM; unake usa Avazyaka ko lokottara bhAva-Avazyaka smjhnaa| isa Agama-
vacana ke anusAra zrAvakoM ke lie bhI Avazyaka (pratikramaNAdi) karane kA
vidhAna hai| chaha Avazyaka karane ke bAda zrAvaka svAdhyAya kare aNuvrata-vidhi
para vicAra kare athavA paMcaparameSThInamaskAramaMtra kI mAlA phere athavA
pAMca prakAra kA svAdhyAya karake samaya kA sadupayoga kre| svAdhyAya ke pAMca
prakAra ye haiM-1. vAcanAzAstra yA graMtha par3hanA, 2. pRcchanA-usake viSaya
meM prazna pUchanA, 3. paryaTanA par3hA huA jJAna vismRta na ho jAya, isa dRSTi
se bAra-bAra use doharAnA-AvRtti karanA, 4. anuprekSA sUkSmapadArthoM ke
saMbaMdha meM paraspara carcA karake niHzaMka bananA athavA tadanukUla cintana-
manana karanA, 5. dharmakathA zAstrIya viSayoM para dharma-kathA yA vyAkhyAna
athavA pravacana karanA, sunnaa| yadi sAdhu-sAdhviyoM ke upAzraya meM vyAkhyAna-
upadeza sunane jAne kI zakti na ho athavA koI rAjA yA mahARddhimAna zrAvaka ho,
yA bAhara jAne meM ar3acana yA kaThinAI ho to vaha apane ghara meM hI Avazyaka,
svAdhyAya Adi kre| yaha uttamanirjarAhetum - uttama nirjarA kA kAraNa rUpa hai|
kahA bhI hai ki 'zrIjinezvara' ne bAhya aura AbhyaMtara rUpa se bAraha prakAra
ke tapa batAye haiM, unameM svAdhyAya ke samAna koI tapa nahIM hai, na hogA, na
huA hai| (paMca. va. 562) aura bhI kahA ki 'svAdhyAya se dhyAna hotA hai aura
svAdhyAya se paramArtha bhI jAnA jA sakatA hai; svAdhyAya meM tanmaya banA huA
AtmA kSaNa-kSaNa meM vairAgya prApta karatA hai (upadeza mAlA 338)  /  / 129 /
/  307

Page #330 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Example of Sthulabhadra Muni  **Yoga Shastra, Third Light, Verses
130-131**  Thus, the meaning of the 129th verse is complete.  **130.**  After
the proper time, purified by the remembrance of the Devas and the Guru, the
Shravak should engage in minimal sleep, mostly abstaining from Brahma-violation.
**Meaning:** After engaging in Swadhyay (self-study) and other practices, how
should the Shravak engage in minimal sleep? This is explained: The soul,
purified by remembering the Bhattarak Shri Arihanta, the Devas, the
Dharmacharayas, and the Guru Maharaj, should, by implication, accept the four
refuges, condemn sinful actions, and approve virtuous actions, remembering the
five Supreme Beings. Without remembering all of these, the soul cannot be
purified. Therefore, one should remember Shri Vitaragdeva in this way: "Namo
Viyaraagaanam Savvannuunam Tilokkapuijiaanam Jahdwiyavathu Vaainam," meaning,
"Salutations to Shri Vitarag, the omniscient, the revered of the three worlds,
the true expounder of the essence of things." After this, one should remember
the Gurudev in this way: "Dhannyaaste Graam-Nagar-Janapadaadayo Yeshu Madiyya
Dharmaachaarya Viharanti," meaning, "Blessed are those villages, cities,
countries, and provinces where my Dharmacharaya Gurudev resides." One should
contemplate in this way before going to sleep and after waking up. In minimal
sleep, "sleep" is the thing being described, and "minimal" is the description.
Here, "minimal" is prescribed, not "sleep." Because in a sentence where there is
a prescription or prohibition with a description, the prescription is directed
towards the description, not the thing being described. By this logic, "taking
sleep" is not prescribed here. Sleep arises on its own due to the arising of the
Darshanavaraniya Karma. It is considered successful when the scriptures explain
something that is not already known. Therefore, here, the prescription is for
the "minimal" aspect of sleep.  **130.** And the householder mostly abandons
Brahma-violation, which is sexual indulgence.  **131.** When one wakes up from
sleep, one should contemplate the true nature of the body parts of women, as
Sthulabhadra and other saints did, remembering their renunciation of women.
**Meaning:** When one wakes up at night, one should contemplate the impurity,
repulsiveness, and emptiness of the body parts of women, as Sthulabhadra and
other saints did, and remembering their renunciation of women, one should
contemplate the true nature of one's own body.  **The Story of Sthulabhadra
Muni**  The tradition of Sthulabhadra Muni is passed down through generations.
**The Great Muni Sthulabhadra, Conqueror of Desire:**  On the banks of the
beautiful Ganges River, in the city of Pataliputra, which was illuminated by the
moonlight of the night sky and whose splendor surpassed the brilliance of the
lotus pond, ruled King Nanda, who was like the Lord of Welfare, the ruler of the
three regions, and the destroyer of the enemy's army. His chief minister was
Shakatala, who was like a protector in times of trouble, a repository of wisdom
free from trouble. His elder son, Sthulabhadra, was sharp-witted, adorned with
virtues like humility, handsome, well-proportioned, and a source of joy like the
moon. And his younger son, Shriyak, was a source of joy to King Nanda's heart,
devoted like sandalwood paste. In the same city lived a courtesan named Kosha,
who was as beautiful and radiant as Urvashi, captivating the hearts of the
people. Sthulabhadra spent his days and nights immersed in various pleasures and
amusements with her. Twelve years passed by in this way. Shriyak, the son of
Shakatala, was like a second heart to King Nanda, a trusted confidant and
bodyguard. In the same city lived a Brahmin named Vararuchi, who was a leader
among poets, orators, and grammarians. He was so intelligent that he composed
108 new verses every day in praise of the king. But because Vararuchi the poet
had a wrong view, Shakatala the minister never praised him. Therefore, King
Nanda was pleased with him but did not give him any gifts. Knowing the reason
for not receiving gifts, Vararuchi began to serve Shakatala's wife. Pleased with
Vararuchi's service, one day the minister's wife asked him, "Brother, is there
anything you need?"

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 sthUlabhadramuni kA dRSTAMta yogazAstra tRtIya prakAza zloka 130 se 131 isa
prakAra 129 ve zloka kA bhAvArtha pUrNa huA  / 301 /  nyAyye kAle tato, deva -
guru- smRti - pavitritaH  /  nidrAmalpAmupAsIta, prAyeNAbrahmavarjakaH  // 130
//  artha :- svAdhyAya Adi karane ke bAda ucita samaya taka deva evaM guru ke
smaraNa se pavitra banA huA evaM prAyaH abrahmacarya kA tyAgI yA niyamita jIvana
bitAne vAlA zrAvaka alpanidrA le  /  / 130  /  /  vyAkhyA :- * rAtri ke prathama
prahara taka yA AdhI rAta taka athavA zarIra svasthatA ke anusAra, svAdhyAyAdi
karane | ke bAda zrAvaka alpanidrA kA sevana kisa prakAra kare ? ise batAte
haiM- bhaTTAraka zrI arihaMtAdi deva, dharmAcArya, gurumahArAja kA mana meM
smaraNa kara pavitra banA huA AtmA, upalakSaNa se cAra zaraNa aMgIkAra karake,
pApamaya kRtyoM kI niMdA aura | sukRtyoM kI anumodanA kara paMca parameSThI
bhagavaMtoM kA smaraNa ityAdi kre| ina sabhI ke smaraNa kiye binA AtmA pavitra |
nahIM bana sktaa| isalie zrI vItarAgadeva kA smaraNa isa prakAra kare - namo
vIyarAgANaM savvaNNUNaM tilokkapUiANaM jahadviavatthu vAINaM arthAt namaskAra ho
zrI vitarAga sarvajJa triloka pUjya yathArtha rUpa se vastu tattva ke
pratipAdaka zrI | arihaMta paramAtmA ko  /  isake bAda gurudevo kA smaraNa isa
prakAra kare-dhanyAste grAma-nagara- janapadAdayo yeSu madIyA | dharmAcAryA
viharanti arthAt usa gAMva, nagara, deza, prAMta Adi ko dhanya hai, jahAM mere
dharmAcArya gurudeva vicaraNa kara rahe haiN| zayana se pUrva aura nidrA tyAga
ke pazcAt isa prakAra se ciMtana kare  /  alpanidrA meM nidrA vizeSya hai aura
alpa vizeSaNa hai| yahAM para alpa kA vidhAna kiyA hai; nidrA kA nhiiN| kyoMki
jisa vAkya meM vizeSaNa sahita vidhi-niSedha hotA hai, | usakA vidhAna. vizeSaNa
paraka hotA hai, vizeSyakAraka nahIM, isa nyAya se yahAM 'nidrA lenA' vidhAna
nahIM hai  /  nidrA to | darzanAvaraNIya karma ke udaya se apane Apa AtI hai|
nahIM batAye hue padArtha meM hI zAstra kI saphalatA mAnI jAtI hai; yaha bAta
pahale kahI jA cukI hai| isalie yahAM nidrA meM alpatva kA vidhAna kiyA gayA  /
/ 130  /  /  aura gRhastha prAyaH abrahmacarya = maithunasevana kA tyAga karatA
hI hai| aura bhI dekhie -  /  302  /  nidrAcchede yoSidaGgasatattvaM
paricintayet  /  sthUlabhadrAdisAdhUnAM tannivRttiM parAmRzan  // 131 //  artha
:- rAta ko jaba nIMda khula jAya, taba sthUlabhadrAdi muniyoM ne jisa prakAra
striyoM ke aMga kI malinatA, jugupsanIyatA aura niHsAratA kA vicAra kiyA thA,
usI prakAra aMganAoM ke aMgoM ke yathArtha tattva kA ciMtana kare aura unakI
taraha striyoM se nivRtti kA smaraNa karate hue apane zarIra ke vAstavika
svarUpa para vicAra kare || 131  /   /  zrI sthUlabhadramuni kA
saMpradAyaparaMparAgamya caritra isa prakAra hai | kAmavijetA mahAmuni
sthUlabhadra : caMdramA kI cAMdanI se prakAzita rAtri kI AkAzagaMgA se
pratispardhA karane vAlI kamalasaMgama se usake teja ko parAjita kara dene vAlI
gaMgA nadI ke taTa para manohara pATalIputra nagara thaa| vahAM kalyANa ke svAmI
ke tulya, | trikhaMDAdhipati, zatruskandhanAzaka naMda nAma kA rAjA rAjya karatA
thA  /  saMkaTa meM zrI kA rakSaka, saMkaTa-rahita buddhinidhAna zakaTAla nAma
kA usakA sarvazreSTha maMtrI thA  /  usakA bar3A putra prakhara- buddhi-
saMpanna, vinayAdi-guNAgAra, suMdara, suDaula evaM | caMdravat AnaMdadAyaka
sthUlabhadra thaa| tathA naMdarAjA ke hRdaya ko AnaMdadAyaka, gozIrSacaMdana ke
samAna bhaktimAna zrIyaka | nAma kA usakA choTA putra thaa| usI nagara meM rUpa
aura kAMti meM urvazI ke samAna lokamanohAriNI kozAnAma kI vezyA | rahatI thI  /
sthUlabhadra usake sAtha dinarAta vividha bhogavilAsoM aura Amoda pramodoM meM
tanmaya rahatA thA  /  use vahAM rahate | eka - eka karate hue bAraha varSa bIta
gaye  /  zakaTAla- maMtrI kA putra zrIyaka naMdarAjA ke dUsare hRdaya ke samAna,
atyaMta | vizvAsapAtra aura aMgarakSaka banA huA thA  /  usI nagara meM kaviyoM,
vAdiyoM aura vaiyAkaraNoM meM ziromaNi vararuci nAmaka brAhmaNoM kA aguA rahatA
thaa| vaha itanA buddhizAlI thA ki pratidina 108 naye zloka banAkara rAjA kI
stuti karatA thaa| | kintu vararuci kavi ke mithyAdRSTi hone ke kAraNa zakaTAla
maMtrI kabhI usakI prazaMsA nahIM karatA thaa| isa kAraNa naMdarAjA usa para
prasanna to thA, magara use tuSTidAna nahIM detA thA  /  dAna na milane kA
kAraNa jAnakara vararuci zakaTAlamaMtrI kI patnI kI sevA karane lagA  /
vararuci kI sevA se prasanna hokara eka dina maMtrI patnI ne usase pUchA- bhAI !
koI kArya ho 308

Page #331 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Mutual Rivalry of Shakatal Minister and Vararuchi Pandit  Yoga Shastra,
Third Light, Verse 131: Tell me! Vararuchi said, "Enough, sister! The only thing
is that your husband should praise my poems in front of the king." On this
request, the minister's wife, seeing an opportunity one day, mentioned this to
the minister. He said, "How can I praise that one with false vision?" Still, due
to his wife's insistent pleas, the minister agreed. It is true, "The
stubbornness of a child, a woman, and a fool is strong." One day, Vararuchi was
presenting his composed poetry in front of King Nandraja, when the chief
minister praised him, saying, "Oh, beautiful and well-spoken!" On this, the king
gave him one hundred and eight gold coins as a reward. Indeed, words spoken in
favor of a kingly man are life-giving. Now, Vararuchi began to receive one
hundred and eight gold coins daily from the king.  One day, Shakatal Minister
asked the king, "Why do you give donations to Vararuchi?" The king said,
"Minister, you praised him, so I give him. If I had to give, wouldn't I have
given before? But from the day you praised him, I started giving him donations."
The minister said, "Lord, I did not praise him; I praised other poems at that
time. He presents poems made by others as his own in front of you." The king
asked, "Is this true?" The minister said, "Of course! My daughter can also speak
these poems." I will give you direct proof tomorrow. Shakatal had seven
daughters: Yaksha, Yakshadutta, Bhuta, Bhootdutta, Sena, Vena, and Rena. All
seven were intelligent. The first (Yaksha) could remember after hearing once,
the second after hearing twice, the third after hearing thrice, and so on, the
seventh daughter could remember after hearing seven times. The next day, the
minister seated his seven daughters in front of the king behind a curtain so
that no one could see them. As usual, Pandit Vararuchi presented 108 new verses.
Immediately after, the minister's Yaksha and the other seven daughters repeated
those verses exactly as they were. Hearing Vararuchi-composed verses from the
mouths of the girls seven times, the king was extremely disgusted. He stopped
giving donations to Vararuchi. It is true, ministers have means for both harm
and benefit.  Vararuchi also came up with a plan. He went to the banks of the
Ganges and installed a device in the water of the Ganges. Along with the device,
he would tie one hundred and eight gold coins in a cloth bag beforehand. Then,
in the morning, he would praise the Ganges, and at that time, he would press the
device with his foot, causing all the coins to jump into his hand. He did this
every day. His fame spread throughout the city. Great curiosity arose among the
citizens. They came to see him, amazed and bewildered. Slowly, this matter
reached the king's ears. Therefore, the king called the minister and praised
Vararuchi in front of him. The minister said, "If this is true, then you should
come and see it yourself in the morning." After this, the minister instructed a
trusted person to secretly find out the truth. He went there and hid in the
hollow of a tree like a bird and watched what Vararuchi did. Meanwhile,
Vararuchi silently placed the bag of one hundred and eight gold coins in the
device installed in the Ganges water and went home. After he left, the secret
man stealthily took the bag of gold coins, his life's wealth, and went straight
to Shakatal Minister. He called him aside and silently handed him the bag and
told him the whole secret. As the night passed, the minister went to the Ganges
River with the king, carrying the bag with him. As soon as Vararuchi saw that
the king himself had come to see this wonder, he became arrogant and, like a
fool, began to praise the Ganges loudly and excessively. As soon as the praise
was complete, he pressed the device with his foot, but the bag of gold coins did
not jump out. Therefore, he was stunned and began to search for the money by
putting his hand in the water, but he could not find the bag of money.
Therefore, Vararuchi's face fell. He sat there speechless. Then the chief
minister teased him, saying, "Is the Ganges not giving back the money you put in
earlier, which you are searching for again and again? Here, take your money!
Recognize it!" Saying this, the minister placed the bag of gold coins in
Vararuchi's hand. Seeing this, Vararuchi's heart sank. That bag of gold coins
destroyed all of Vararuchi's reputation. Therefore, he was experiencing a state
more unbearable than death. Shakatal Minister said to the king, "Lord, look at
his wicked deeds! To deceive people, he  309

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zakaTAla maMtrI aura vararuci paMDita kI paraspara tanAtanI yogazAstra tRtIya
prakAza zloka 131 to batalAo! isa para vararuci ne kahA-basa, bahana! kAma yahI
hai ki tumhArA pati rAjA ke sAmane mere kAvyoM kI prazaMsA kara de| usake isa
anurodha para maMtrI-patnI ne eka dina avasara dekhakara maMtrI ke sAmane isa
bAta kA jikra kiyA to usane kahA 'maiM usa mithyAdRSTi kI prazaMsA kaise kara
sakatA huuN|' phira bhI patnI ke atyaMta Agrahavaza maMtrI ne usa bAta ko
maMjUra kiyaa| saca hai, 'bAlaka, strI aura mUrkha kI haTha prabala hotI hai|
eka dina vararuci naMdarAjA ke sAmane apane banAye hue kAvya prastuta kara rahA
thA, tabhI mahAmaMtrI ne 'aho suMdara-subhASitam' kahakara prazaMsA kii| isa
para rAjA ne use eka sau ATha svarNamudrAe~ InAma dii| vastutaH rAjamAnya puruSa
ke anukUla vacana bhI jIvanadAtA hote haiN| aba to pratidina rAjA se eka sau
ATha svarNamudrAe~ vararuci ko milane lgii| ekadina zakaTAlamaMtrI ne rAjA se
pUchA-Apa vararuci ko kyoM dAna dete haiM? rAjA ne kahA-amAtyavara! tumane isakI
prazaMsA kI thI, isa kAraNa maiM detA huuN| yadi mujhe denA hotA to maiM pahale
se hI na detA? kintu jisa dina se tumane usakI prazaMsA kI, usI dina se maiMne
use dAna denA prAraMbha kiyA hai| isa para maMtrI ne kahA-deva! maiMne usakI
prazaMsA nahIM kI thI; maiMne to usa samaya dUsare kAvyoM kI prazaMsA kI thii|
vaha to dUsaroM ke banAye hue kAvyoM ko apane banAye hue batAkara Apake sAmane
prastuta karatA hai| rAjA ne pUchA-kyA yaha bAta saca hai? maMtrI ne kahA-
bezaka! ina kAvyoM ko merI putrI bhI bola sakatI hai| isakA pratyakSa pramANa
maiM kala hI Apako batA duuNgaa| zakaTAla ke 7 putriyAM thIM-yakSA, yakSadattA,
bhUtA, bhUtadattA, seNA, veNA aura rennaa| ve sAtoM buddhimatI thii| unameM se
pahalI (yakSA) eka bAra sunakara, dUsarI do bAra, tIsarI tIna bAra yoM kramazaH
sAtavIM putrI sAta bAra sunakara yAda kara letI thii| dUsare dina maMtrI ne
apanI sAtoM putriyoM ko rAjA ke sAmane eka parde ke pIche koI na dekhe, isa
taraha biThA dii| sadA kI bhAMti paMDita vararuci ne 108 naye zloka banAkara
prastuta kiye| usake turaMta bAda maMtrI kI yakSA Adi sAtoM putriyoM ne kramazaH
ve zloka jyoM ke tyoM punaH bolakara sunA diye| isa taraha rAjA lar3akiyoM ke
muMha se sAta bAra vararuci-nirmita zlokoM ko sunakara atiruSTa ho gyaa| usane
aba vararuci ko dAna denA baMda kara diyaa| saca hai, maMtriyoM ke pAsa apakAra
aura upakAra donoM ke upAya hote haiN| vararuci ko bhI eka upAya suujhaa| vaha
gaMgAtaTa para pahuMcA aura gaMgA ke pAnI meM eka yaMtra sthApita kiyaa| yaMtra
ke sAtha vaha pahale se 108 svarNamudrAe~ kapar3e kI eka puTalI meM bAMdha
detaa| phira subaha gaMgA kI stuti karatA, usa samaya paira se yaMtra ko dabAtA,
jisase sArI muhareM uchalakara usake hAtha meM A jAtI thii| isa taraha vaha
pratidina karatA thaa| nagara meM sarvatra isakI zoharata (khyAti) ho gyii|
nAgarikoM meM bar3A kutUhala paidA huaa| ve vismaya vimugdha hokara use dekhane
Ane lge| dhIre-dhIre yaha bAta rAjA ke kAnoM meM phuNcii| ataH rAjA ne maMtrI ko
bulAkara usake sAmane vararuci kI prazaMsA kii| isa para maMtrI bolA-yadi yaha
bAta saca hai to prAtaHkAla Apa svayaM vahAM dekhane pdhaareN| isake bAda maMtrI
ne apane eka vizvasta vyakti ko samajhAkara gupta rUpa se usakA bheda lene ke
lie bhejaa| vaha vahAM jAkara pakSI ke samAna vRkSa ke eka khokhale meM
chipakara baiTha gayA aura dekhatA rahA ki vararuci kyA karatA hai? idhara
vararuci gaMgAjala meM sthApita yaMtra meM cupacApa 108 svarNamudrAoM kI poTalI
rakhakara ghara calA gyaa| usake jAne ke bAda usa gupta puruSa ne cupake se
svarNamudrAoM kI vaha jIvana sarvasva poTalI uThAyI aura use lekara vaha sIdhA
zakaTAlamaMtrI ke pAsa pahuMcA aura unheM | ekAMta meM bulAkara cupacApa vaha
poTalI sauMpa dI tathA usakA sArA bheda maMtrI ko batA diyaa| rAta bItate hI
subaha maMtrI usa poTalI ko apane sAtha lekara rAjA ke sAtha gaMgA nadI para
phuNcaa| jyoM hI vararuci ne dekhA ki Aja rAjA svayaM yaha kautuka dekhane
padhAre haiM, tyoM hI abhimAnI banakara mUr3ha vararuci jora-jora se adhikAdhika
stuti karane lgaa| stuti pUrNa hote hI usane paira se usa yaMtra ko dabAyA,
lekina svarNamudrAoM kI poTalI uchalakara bAhara nahIM AI ataH vaha bhauMcakkA
hokara pAnI meM hAtha DAlakara dravya ko TaTolane lagA, magara dhana kI poTalI
nahIM milii| ataH vararuci kA ceharA utara gyaa| vaha avAk hokara baiTha gyaa|
tabhI mahAmaMtrI ne use cher3ate hue kahA-kyA pahale rakhA huA dhana gaMgA nahIM
de rahI hai, jise tUM bAra-bAra DhUMr3ha rahA hai? yaha le, terA dhana! pahacAna
kara le le ise! yoM kahate hue maMtrI ne vararuci ke hAtha meM vaha
svarNamudrAoM kI poTalI thamA dii| yaha dekhakara vararuci ke hRdaya meM
tahalakA maca gyaa| svarNamudrAoM kI usa poTalI ne vararuci kI sArI pratiSThA
miTTI meM milA dii| isalie vaha mauta se bhI bar3hakara asahya dazA kA anubhava
kara rahA thaa| zakaTAmaMtrI ne rAjA se kahA-deva! dekhie isakI pApalIlA ko!
logoM ko Thagane ke lie yaha zAma ko isa yaMtra 309

Page #332 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Sthulabhadra, through detachment from the world and the hypocrisy of upakośa,
becomes entangled in the scriptures of yoga for the impure death of Varuci. He
then performs a morning recitation and accepts this. The king said, "You have
very well exposed the deception of this person in my presence." Saying this, the
king, with astonished eyes, reached his palace while looking at Varuci.  Varuci
became extremely enraged in his mind due to the behavior of the minister
Śakaṭāla and decided to take revenge for this insult. One day, Varuci tempted
one of the minister's maids and inquired about all the happenings in the
minister's house. The maid told him that preparations were being made for the
marriage of the minister's son Śrīyaka, and the king had also been invited for
the feast. Weapons were also being prepared as gifts for the king, who was fond
of weapons. Knowing the minister's weakness, Varuci gathered the children and,
after giving them chickpeas to eat, taught them to say in public places, "The
king does not know that the minister Śakaṭāla wants to kill the king and install
Śrīyaka on the throne." The children started saying this everywhere. Gradually,
the people informed the king about this. The king thought, "What children say,
what noble women say, and what is spoken in an ominous language is never false."
Therefore, the king sent a trusted person to investigate the matter at the
minister's house. He found everything as it was and reported it to the king.
When the minister presented himself before the king during service, the king
turned his face away. The minister immediately understood the king's mood. He
came home and told Śrīyaka, "It seems that some enemy has misled the king
against us. That is why the king is angry with us. Therefore, my son, if you
accept my command, our family will be saved." The command was that when the
minister bows down to greet the king, Śrīyaka should immediately cut off the
minister's head with a sword, saying that even if he is the father, if he is not
loyal to the lord, it is appropriate to kill him. Hearing this, Śrīyaka, with a
choked voice, said, "Father, even a Cāṇḍāla does not commit such a heinous act;
how can I do it?" Then the minister said, "If you think this way, you will only
fulfill the desires of the enemies, and the angry king, like Yama, will kill our
entire family. Therefore, if the destruction of one can save the entire family,
I will have no regret about it. As for the protection of your dharma, I will
keep poison in my mouth while greeting the king, so you can cut off my head, so
that you will not incur the sin of patricide." After much persuasion, Śrīyaka
reluctantly accepted the proposal, because "wise people make the present time
terrible for the auspicious future." Obeying his father's command, Śrīyaka cut
off the minister's head in the royal court in front of the king. The king,
astonished, asked Śrīyaka, "My child, why did you commit such a heinous act?"
Śrīyaka said, "You saw that my father was a traitor to the king, so I killed
him. Servants always behave according to the wishes of their master. If a fault
is seen in oneself, it is worth considering, but if a fault is seen in a servant
by the master, it is appropriate to immediately remedy it, and there is no need
for further consideration."  After the last rites of the deceased minister
Śakaṭāla, King Nandarāja called Śrīyaka and said, "You take charge of the entire
administration of the kingdom, and here is the minister's seal." Śrīyaka, after
paying obeisance to the king, said, "O lord! My elder brother Sthulabhadra, who,
by the grace of my father, is happily enjoying life with the courtesan Upakośā,
is the first entitled to the office of the minister. " Hearing this, the king
summoned Sthulabhadra and asked him to accept the minister's seal. Then
Sthulabhadra said, "I will first carefully consider this."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 sthUlabhadra ko saMsAra se virakti aura upakozA dvArA dharmabhraSTa vararuci
mRtyu ke lie badhya yogazAstra tRtIya prakAza zloka 131 ke aMdara dravya DAla
detA hai aura subaha stuti kA DhoMga racakara ise grahaNa karatA hai| rAjA ne
kahA-tumane isake isa prapaMca kA mere sAmane bhaMDAphor3akara bahuta acchA
kiyaa| yoM kahakara rAjA vismita netroM se vararuci ko dekhatA huA apane mahala
meM pahuMca gyaa| zakaTAla maMtrI ke isa ravaiye se vararuci mana hI mana bahuta
kraddha ho gayA aura isa apamAna kA badalA lene kI tthaanii| eka dina vararuci
ne maMtrI ke ghara kI kisI dAsI ko pralobhana dekara usase usake ghara kI sArI
bAteM puuchii| maMtrI kI dAsI ne batAyA ki maMtrI putra zrIyaka ke vivAha kI
taiyArI ho rahI hai| usameM rAjA ko bhI bhojana kA AmaMtraNa diyA gayA hai|
naMdarAjA ko usa samaya najarAnA dene ke lie zastra bhI taiyAra kiye jA rahe
haiN| kyoMki zastrapriya rAjA ko zastra hI bheMTa diye jAte haiN| maMtrI ke
chidra ko jAnakara vararuci ne bAlakoM ko ikaTThe kiye aura khAne ko cane
dekara, yaha sikhAyA ki 'dekho, tuma loga jagaha-jagaha logoM ke sAmane isa
taraha kaho-rAjA ko isa bAta kA patA nahIM hai ki zakaTAla maMtrI rAjA ko
mArakara zrIyaka ko rAjagaddI para biThAnA cAhatA hai| bacce rojAnA jagaha-
jagaha yaha bAta logoM ke sAmane kahane lge| dhIre-dhIre logoM ne yaha bAta rAjA
se jAkara khii| rAjA ne socA-bAlaka jo bolate haiM, zreSTha nAriyAM jo kahatI
hai tathA autpAtika bhASA meM jo bolA jAtA hai, vaha kabhI mithyA (niSphala)
nahIM hotaa| ataH rAjA ne isa bAta kA nirNaya karane ke lie apane eka vizvasta
puruSa ko zakaTAla maMtrI ke yahAM patA lagAne bhejaa| usane maMtrI ke ghara meM
sArI khojabIna karake patA lagAyA aura vahAM jo kucha dekhA thA, hUbahU Akara
rAjA se kaha sunaayaa| sevA (rAjakArya) ke samaya jaba maMtrI ne rAjA ke sAmane
upasthita hokara namaskAra kiyA, to rAjA apanA muMha phirAkara baitthaa| maMtrI
rAjA ke bhAva ko phaurana tAr3a gyaa| usane ghara Akara zrIyaka se kahA-mAlUma
hotA hai, kisI dveSI ne apane lie rAjA ko ulaTA samajhAkara bhar3akA diyA hai|
isI kAraNa rAjA hama para kupita ho gayA hai| ataH aba vaha avazya hI apane kula
ko nestanAbUda kregaa| isalie vatsa! yadi tUM merI AjJA ke anusAra karanA
svIkArakara legA to hamAre kula kI rakSA ho jaaygii| vaha AjJA yaha hai ki jaba
maiM rAjA ko namaskAra karane ke lie sira jhukAUM, taba phaurana hI talavAra se
tuma merA sira ur3A denaa| aura yoM kahanA ki cAhe pitA hI kyoM na ho, agara
vaha svAmibhakta nahIM hai to usakA vadhakara DAlanA hI ucita hai| beTA! maiM
bur3hA ho calA hUM, do-cAra sAla jIyA; na jIyA isa taraha se marUMgA to kulagRha
ke staMbha-samAna tUM to kama se kama cirakAla taka mauja kregaa| yaha sunakara
zrIyaka gadgad kaMTha se rotA huA bolA-tAta! aisA ghora-pApa-karma to cAMDAla
bhI nahIM karatA; mujha se yaha kaise hogA? taba maMtrIzvara ne kahA-agara tUM
aisA vicAra karegA to kevala duzmanoM kA hI manoratha pUrNa karegA aura
yamarAja-sA kopAyamAna rAjA hameM kuTuMba sahita mAra ddaalegaa| ataH mere eka
ke nAza se agara sAre kuTuMba kI rakSA hotI ho to mujhe isakA jarA bhI raMja
nahIM hogaa| rahI tere dharma kI rakSA kI bAta; so maiM| pahale se hI apane
muMha meM tAlapuTa viSa rakhakara rAjA ko namaskAra karUMgA; ataH tUM mujha taM
mujha mata ke mastaka ko kATa denA. jisase tujhe pitRhatyA kA pApa nahIM lgegaa|
isa taraha bahuterA samajhAne para bar3I muzkila se zrIyaka ne bAta svIkAra kI;
kyoMki 'buddhizAlI vyakti bhaviSya ke zubha ke lie vartamAna samaya ko
bhayaMkara banA dete hai|' pitA kI AjJA mAnakara |zrIyaka ne rAjasabhA meM rAjA
ke sAmane hI pitA kA mastaka kATa ddaalaa| rAjA yaha dekhakara hakkA-bakkA-sA
hokara zrIyaka | se pUchane lagA 'vatsa! aisA duSkara akArya tumane kyoM kiyA?
zrIyaka ne kahA-Apane dekhA ki mere pitA rAjadrohI hai; ataH maiMne use mArA
hai| sevaka sadA svAmI ke mano'nukUla hI vyavahAra karate haiN| yadi svayaM ko
doSa dIkhe to vicAraNIya hotA hai; paraMtu svAmI ko agara kisI sevaka meM doSa
dikhAyI de to usakA turaMta pratikAra karanA hI ucita hai; vahAM koI vicAra
karanA ucita nhiiN| mahAmaMtrI zakaTAla kI maraNottara kriyA karane ke bAda
naMdarAjA ne zrIyaka ko bulAkara kahA-yaha samasta rAjyavyavasthA kAryabhAra
tuma saMbhAlo aura yaha lo mNtrii-mudraa| isa para zrIyaka ne rAjA ko praNAma
karake kahA-deva! pitA ke samAna merA bar3A bhAI sthUlabhadra maujUda hai, jo
mere pitA kI kRpA se AnaMdapUrvaka kozA-gaNikA ke yahAM bAraha varSa se
sukhabhoga pUrvaka jIvana bitA rahA hai| vahI isa rAjya ke maMtritva kA prathama
adhikArI hai| yaha bAta sunakara rAjA ne sthUlabhadra ko bulAyA aura use maMtrI-
mudrA svIkAra karane ko khaa| taba sthUlabhadra ne kahA-maiM pahale isa para
bhalIbhAMti 310

Page #333 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Death of Varruchi - The Chaturmas at Kosha's Place  Thinking deeply, I can
only obey your command. The king said, "Think about it today." Upon hearing
this, Sthulabhadra went to Ashoka Vana and thought, "A royal servant is like a
poor man, he cannot enjoy the comforts of sleep, food, bath, etc. at the right
time. Just as there is no room for more water in a full pot, similarly, the mind
of a royal servant, who is engrossed in the worries of the kingdom, has no room
for even a little bit of space for his beloved life. He dedicates all his
personal interests to the service of the king, yet, just as crows peck at a tied
animal, wicked people harass him. He, the wise man, exerts himself to the utmost
in serving the king by squeezing out his body and wealth, can he not exert
himself equally for his soul? Thinking thus, Sthulabhadra became detached from
the world. He himself performed the Panchmusti Kesha-Loch and, wearing the robes
of a sage, made a Rajoharan of the ten Ratnakambals. He immediately entered the
mighty royal court. He requested the king, "I have decided to live in this
state, and you will benefit from Dharma." Saying these words of blessing, he
left the mighty royal court in the same way a lion emerges from a cave. The
king, sitting by the window, saw Sthulabhadra leaving and thought, "Is he
pretending to be detached and going to a prostitute's place?" But when the king
learned that he was leaving the brothel in the same way a man would wrinkle his
nose and walk away from a foul-smelling corpse, he shook his head and thought,
"Surely, the Lord has become a renunciate. I made a wrong assumption about him."
Thus, he praised Sthulabhadra while self-reproaching. Shri Sthulabhadra also
went to Acharya Shri Sambhutivijay and, after reciting the Samayik-path,
accepted initiation. After this, Nandraja, with great honor, gave the minister's
seal, the responsibility of the entire state administration, into the hands of
Shriyak and entrusted him with all the powers of the minister. Shriyak also
always maintained the state administration with excellent justice and skill, as
if he were Sakatal himself. He went to Kosha's place with humility. Due to the
affectionate bond of brotherhood, his beloved also treated him with respect.
Kosha, saddened by the separation from Sthulabhadra, cried loudly upon seeing
Shriyak. A man who is grieving for his beloved becomes impatient with sorrow. He
cannot bear the sorrow in his heart for long. After this, Shriyak said to Kosha,
"Arye! Tell me, what can we do about this? The sinner Varruchi had my father
murdered. He also caused the untimely separation of Sthulabhadra, like a
thunderbolt born in a drought. Therefore, Manasvin! As long as Varruchi has an
attachment to your sister Upkosha, think of a way to counter him. Secretly
explain to Upkosha and, under any pretext, make Varruchi addicted to drinking
alcohol." To avenge the separation of his beloved, he agreed to do this with the
cunning of his brother-in-law and quietly explained everything to Upkosha.
Following Kosha's advice, her younger sister Upkosha did the same. She forced
Varruchi to drink alcohol. What can a woman not make her enslaved man do? After
making Varruchi drink alcohol according to her wishes, Upkosha went to her
sister Kosha in the morning and told her everything. Kosha informed Shriyak of
everything. Hearing this, Shriyak thought, "Today, I have taken revenge for my
father's death well." After the death of the great minister Sakatal, Varruchi
was eager to serve the king. He was always present in every activity of the
royal family. Therefore, the king and the people respected him. Once,
remembering the qualities of the minister Sakatal, Nandraja, with a choked
voice, said to Shriyak in the gloomy royal court, "Just as Brihaspati is in
Indra's court, so was the powerful, wise, and great minister Sakatal in my
service. But by the will of fate, he passed away. Truly, without him, this royal
court seems empty to me." Shriyak also said, "Dev! Your words are absolutely
true. But what can we do about this? All this is the work of the drunken sinner
Varruchi Bhatta." The king asked, "Does he also drink alcohol?" Shriyak said,
"Dev! I will show you directly tomorrow." To witness this curiosity, all the men
came to the royal court the next day. A beautiful lotus was offered to all the
members of the assembly, including the king. 311

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 vararuci kI mRtyu - sthUlabhadra kozA ke vahAM cAturmAsa yogazAstra tRtIya
prakAza zloka 131 socavicAra karake hI ApakI AjJA kA pAlana kara skuuNgaa| rAjA
ne kahA-Aja hI vicArakara lo| isa prakAra kahane para sthUlabhadra ne azokavana
meM jAkara socA-rAjasevaka daridra ke samAna samaya para zayana, bhojana, snAna
Adi sukhasAdhanoM kA upabhoga nahIM kara sktaa| bhare hue ghar3e meM jaise aura
pAnI kI guMjAiza nahIM rahatI, vaise hI svarASTra kI ciMtA meM vyagra rAjasevaka
ke citta meM prANavallabha ke lie bhI jarA bhI guMjAiza nahIM rhtii| apane
tamAma nijI svArthoM ko tilAMjali dekara vaha ekamAtra rAjA kI sevA karatA hai,
phira bhI bAMdhe hue pazu ko jaise kaue~ noMca-noMcakara hairAna karate haiM,
vaise hI duSTa loga use herAna karate rahate haiN| vaha buddhimAna jitanA apane
zarIra aura dhana ko nicor3akara rAjA kI sevA ke lie jI tor3a puruSArtha karatA
hai, kyA utanA hI puruSArtha apanI AtmA ke lie nahIM kara sakatA? yoM vicAra
karate-karate sthUlabhadra ko saMsAra se virakti ho gyii| unhoMne svayaM
paMcamuSTi keza-loca kiyA aura ratnakaMbala kI daziyoM kA rajoharaNa banAkara
sAdhuveSa pahanakara tatkAla vaha mahAsattvazAlI rAjasabhA meM praviSTa huaa|
rAjA se unhoMne nivedana kiyA-maine isa sthiti meM rahane kA vicArakara liyA hai
aura Apako dharmalAbha ho| yo AzIrvAda sUcaka vacana kahakara vaha
mahAsattvazAlI rAjyasabhA se isI prakAra bAhara nikala gaye, jisa prakAra
kesarIsiMha guphA se bAhara nikalatA hai| rAjA ne gavAkSa meM baiThe-baiThe
sthUlabhadra ko jAte hue dekhA ki kahIM yaha vairAgya hone kA bahAnA kara vezyA
ke yahAM to nahIM jAtA? paraMtu jaba rAjA ne yaha jAna liyA ki vaha vezyAgRha ko
usI taraha chor3akara jA rahA hai, jaise durgandhapUrNa lAza ko dekhate hI AdamI
nAka-bhauM sikor3akara calA jAtA hai| rAjA ne sira hilAyA aura vicAra kiyA ki
nizcaya hI bhagavAn vairAgI bane haiN| maiMne inake viSaya meM galata anumAna
lgaayaa| isa taraha apanI Atma-nindA karate hue sthUlabhadra kA abhinaMdana
kiyaa| zrIsthUlabhadra ne bhI AcArya zrIsaMbhUtivijaya ke pAsa jAkara sAmAyika-
pATha kA uccAraNa karake dIkSA aMgIkAra kii| isake bAda naMdarAjA ne zrIyaka ke
hAtha meM gaurava-pUrvaka samagra rAjya-vyavasthA ke kAryabhAra kI maMtrI-mudrA
dI aura maMtrI ke sAre adhikAra use sauMpa diye| zrIyaka bhI sadA zreSTha nyAya
aura kuzalatA se rAjya-vyavasthA meM sAvadhAnI rakhatA thA, mAno sAkSAt zakaTAla
hI ho| vaha vinayapUrvaka kozA ke yahAM jAtA thaa| bhAI ke sneha-saMbaMdhavaza
usakI priyA kA bhI kalIna puruSa satkAra karate haiN| sthalabhadra ke viyoga se
daHkhita kozA bhI zrIyaka ko dekhakara jora-jora se rone lgii| ISTa ko dekhakara
duHkhI puruSa duHkha se adhIra ho jAte haiN| ve apane hRdaya meM duHkha ko
adhika dera taka TikAe nahIM rakha skte| isake bAda zrIyaka ne kozA se kahA-
Arye! batAo hama isameM kyA kara sakate haiM? pApI vararuci ne hI mere pitA kI
hatyA krvaayii| akAla meM utpanna vajrAgni ke samAna sthUlabhadra kA akAraNa
viyoga bhI usane hI karAyA hai| ataH manasvina! jaba taka vararuci kI tumhArI
bahana upakozA meM Asakti hai; taba taka usakA pratikAra karane kA koI
vicArakara lo| upakozA ko gupta rUpa se samajhAkara kisI bhI bahAne se vararuci
meM zarAba pIne kI Adata DAla do| apane snehI ke viyoga meM vaira kA badalA lene
ke lie devara ke cAturya se usane aisA karanA maMjUra kiyA aura dhIre-dhIre
upakozA ko sArI bAteM cupacApa samajhA dii| kozA kI salAha se usakI choTI bahana
upakozA ne usI taraha kiyaa| vararuci ko jabarana zarAba pIne ko bAdhya kara
diyaa| strI apane gulAma bane hue puruSa se kyA nahIM karA sakatI hai? vararuci
brAhmaNa ko apanI icchAnusAra madirApAna karavAkara prAtaHkAla upakozA ne apanI
bahana kozA ke pAsa jAkara sArI bAteM khii| kozA ne zrIyaka ko sArI bAteM batalA
dii| use sunakara zrIyaka ne socA ki 'Aja pitA ke vaira kA badalA maiMne acchI
taraha le liyaa|' mahAmaMtrI zakaTAla kI mRtyu ke bAda vararuci rAjA kI sevA meM
tatpara rahatA thaa| vaha sadA rAjakula ke pratyeka kArya meM upasthita rahatA
thaa| ataH rAjA aura prajAjana use sammAna pUrvaka dekhate the| eka samaya
naMdarAjA ne zakaTAla maMtrI ke guNoM kA smaraNa karate hue udAsIna-se bane hue
rAjasabhA meM gad-gad svara se zrIyaka se kahA-iMdra kI sabhA meM jaise
bRhaspati hai, vaise hI merI sevA meM zakti-zaktimAna mahAbuddhizAlI mahAmaMtrI
zakaTAla thaa| paraMtu daivayoga se vaha isa prakAra cala bsaa| sacamuca, usake
binA mujhe yaha rAjasabhA sUnI-sUnI-sI lagatI hai| zrIyaka ne bhI kahA-deva!
ApakI bAta bilakula satya hai| paraMtu isa viSaya meM hama kyA kara sakate haiM?
yaha saba karatUta madyapAnarata pApI vararuci bhaTTa kI hai| rAjA ne pUchA-kyA
yaha madirApAna bhI karatA hai? zrIyaka ne kahA-deva! kala hI maiM Apako
pratyakSa batA duuNgaa| isa kautuka ko dekhane ke lie dUsare dina rAjasabhA meM
sabhI puruSa aaye| rAjA sahita sabhI sabhAsadoM ko suMdara padma kamala arpaNa
kiyaa| 311

Page #334 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Successful Chaturmas of Sthulabhadra Muni at the House of Koshaveshya
**Yoga Shastra, Third Light, Verse 131** | A trusted person, who had explained
it earlier, first gave Madanphal juice to the wicked Vararuchi. | A beautiful
lotus was presented. Such an amazing fragrance and such beauty is in this lotus;
where could it be from? Thus | praising the lotus, the king and everyone else
put their lotus to their noses. Vararuchi Bhatta also kept his lotus near his
nose out of curiosity to smell it. As soon as he smelled the lotus, he vomited
(Vaman) the Chandrahas-madhira he had drunk at night. Shame on this wicked man
who is worthy of the death penalty in the Brahmin caste for drinking alcohol!
Thus, | rejected by everyone, Vararuchi ran out of the assembly. Later, for his
purification, he sought atonement from the Brahmin-pandits. | They said - the
sin of drinking alcohol can only be purified by the atonement of drinking
boiling hot glass juice. Vararuchi also drank the heated glass according to the
atonement arrangement given by the Brahmins. | His internal body melted in a
short time from drinking the hot glass and his life-birds flew away. Meanwhile,
Sthulabhadra Muni also became proficient in the ocean of scriptures while
worshipping knowledge, vision, and character in the presence of Acharya
Shrisambhutivijay. As the rainy season approached, a Muni bowed to Guru Maharaj
Shrisambhutivijay and presented his | Abhigraha (resolution) before him -
Gurudev! I will spend the rainy season by fasting for four months and standing
in Kaussagg (meditation) at the door of the lion's cave. Another Muni requested
that I would spend four months fasting and doing Kaussagg near the nest of the
Dristivisha serpent. The third Muni requested to spend four months fasting and
doing Kaussagg from Mandukasana on the threshold of the well. Knowing all three
sadhus to be worthy of Abhigraha, Guru Maharaj gave his permission. At that
time, Sthulabhadra Muni bowed in service to Guru Maharaj and requested - Prabhu!
I have made such an Abhigraha | that I will spend the four months of the rainy
season eating food with six tastes, without performing penance in the picture
gallery of Koshaveshya, which is full of strange Karana, Asana, etc., as
mentioned in the Kama Shastra, and stimulating pictures of Shringar Rasa. Guru
Maharaj looked at it with the use of Shrutagyan and knowing Sthulabhadra to be
worthy of the said Abhigraha, gave his permission. Therefore, all four sadhus
reached their designated places to fulfill their designated Abhigraha.
Sthulabhadra Muni also reached the | door of Koshaveshya's house. As soon as
Kosha got to know, she came out and stood there with folded hands to welcome
him. Kosha | thought after seeing the Muni - by nature, he is delicate, unable
to lift the burden of the great vow with thighs like a banana stem, | Munishri
has come to my place. Therefore, immediately Kosha said - Swamin! Welcome!
Please come in and give me Amba's command | what should I do? This body, mind,
wealth, family is all yours. Sthulabhadra Muni said - Bhadre! Give me your
picture gallery to stay in during the Chaturmas. In reply, Kosha said - Swamin!
Please accept it with pleasure. And she | cleaned and dusted her picture gallery
and prepared it for their stay. Therefore, Muni Sthulabhadra entered that
picture gallery, which was like a place of work for Dharma, with his self-
strength. After that, she would give him food with six tastes every day.
Thereafter | from time to time, she would sit in front of the Muni, adorned with
sixteen ornaments, to distract him from his vow; at that | time she looked like
a beautiful Apsara. In this way, she started dancing, singing, gestures,
glances, etc. skillfully to attract the Muni. She also started reminding him
again and again of Karana, Asana, previously enjoyed Shringar-Krida, strong
Suratkrida, etc. This means that Kosha tried all the aphrodisiac measures that
could be used to distract the great Muni. But all those measures were futile
like scratching a nail on a diamond. In this way, she tried to disturb the Muni
every day. But he | did not get disturbed at all. Rather, the more Kosha, who
was attacking the great Muni with upsarga, made favorable upsargas, the more the
fire of meditation of the great Muni became more and more ignited; just as
lightning becomes particularly bright from the rain clouds. Finally, Koshaveshya
lost. She admitted her mistake and bowing down said - Swamin! | I used to expect
Kamakrida with you like before because of my foolishness; but you remained firm
like a rock. Shame on me! Thus, repenting, she bowed at the feet of the Muni.
Impressed by the peak of the Muni's victory over the senses, Kosha accepted the
Shravak Dharma and made such an Abhigraha that - if by chance

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 sthUlabhadra muni kA kozAvezyA ke yahAM saphala cAturmAsa yogazAstra tRtIya
prakAza zloka 131 | unameM se eka vizvasta vyakti ne jo pahale se samajhAyA huA
thA, sarvaprathama durAtmA vararuci ko madanaphala kA rasa lagAkara | suMdara
padma kamala bheMTa kiyaa| aisI adbhuta sugaMdhi aura itanI suMdaratA isa kamala
meM hai; bhalA yaha kahAM kA hogA? yoM | kamala kA bakhAna karate hue rAjA Adi
sabhI ne apanA-apanA kamala nAka se lagAyA  /  vararuci bhaTTa ne bhI sUMghane
kI utsukatA meM apanA kamala nAka ke pAsa rkhaa| kamala ko sUMghate hI rAta ko
pI huI caMdrahAsa-madirA kI use ulTI (vamana) huii| dhikkAra hai! brAhmaNa jAti
meM mRtyudaMDa ke yogya madirApAna karane vAle isa narAdhama ko ! isa prakAra
sabake dvArA | tiraskRta hokara vararuci sabhA se bAhara nikala bhaagaa| bAda
meM apanI zuddhi ke lie usane brAhmaNa-paMDitoM se prAyazcitta | maaNgaa| isa
para unhoMne kahA - madirApAna ke pApa kI zuddhi ubalate hue garmAgarma zIze kA
rasa pIne ke prAyazcitta se hI ho sakatI hai| vararuci bhI brAhmaNoM dvArA dI
gayI prAyazcitta-vyavasthAnusAra zIze ko eka iMDiyA meM garma karake use pI
gyaa| | usake zarIra kA AMtarika bhAga garmAgarma zIze ke pIne se kucha hI dera
meM gala gayA aura usake prANapaMkherU ur3a gye| idhara sthUlabhadra muni bhI
AcArya zrIsaMbhUtivijaya ke pAsa jJAna darzana - cAritra kI ArAdhanA karate hue
zrutasamudra meM pAraMgata hue| varSAvAsa nikaTa Ate hI eka muni ne gurumahArAja
zrI saMbhUtivijaya ko vaMdanA karake unake sAmane apane | abhigraha (saMkalpa)
kA nivedana kiyA - gurudeva ! maiM cAra mahIne upavAsa karake siMha kI guphA ke
dvAra para kAussagga (dhyAna) meM khar3A rahakara varSAvAsa bitaauuNgaa| dUsare
muni ne nivedana kiyA ki maiM cAra mahIne upavAsa karake dRSTiviSa sarpa | kI
bAMbI ke pAsa kAussagga karake rhuuNgaa| tIsare muni ne cAra mahIne upavAsa
karake ku~e kI caukhaTa para maMDUkAsana se kAussagga karake rahane kA abhigraha
nivedita kiyaa| tInoM sAdhuoM ko abhigraha ke yogya jAnakara guru mahArAja ne
AjJA | de dii| usa samaya sthUlabhadramuni ne gurumahArAja kI sevA meM vaMdana
karake nivedana kiyA- prabho ! maiMne aisA abhigraha kiyA | hai ki maiM
kAmazAstra meM kathita vicitra karaNa, Asana Adi zRMgArarasa - uttejaka citroM
se paripUrNa kozA vezyA kI citrazAlA | meM tapazcaraNa kiye binA SaDrasayukta
bhojana karate hue caumAse ke cAra mahIne vyatIta karUM, gurumahArAja ne
zrutajJAna meM | upayoga lagAkara dekhA aura sthUlabhadra ko ukta abhigraha ke
yogya jAnakara anumati de dii| ataH cAroM sAdhu apanA-apanA | manonIta abhigraha
pUrNa karane ke lie apane-apane manonIta sthala para pahuMca gaye  /
sthUlabhadra muni bhI kozA vezyA ke | | gRhadvAra para phuNce| kozA ko patA
lagate hI bAhara nikalakara vaha hAtha jor3akara svAgata ke lie upasthita huI  /
kozA | ne muni ko dekhakara socA - svabhAva se hI sukumAratana, kele ke staMbha
ke samAna jaMghA se mahAvratabhAra uThAne meM asamartha, | munizrI mere yahAM
padhAre haiN| ataH turaMta hI kozA ne kahA- svAmin! svAgat hai ApakA ! padhAriye
aura mujhe aMba AjJA |dIjie ki maiM kyA karUM? yaha tana, mana, dhana, parivAra
saba ApakA hI hai| sthUlabhadra muni ne kahA- bhadre ! mujhe cAturmAsa | meM
nivAsa ke lie apanI citrazAlA do  /  uttara meM kozA ne kahA- svAmin! Apa
saharSa grahaNa kIjie ise  /  aura usane | apanI citrazAlA jhAr3a - poMchakara
unake rahane ke lie taiyAra kara dii| ataH muni sthUlabhadra ne apanI
AtmabalavattA se | dharma ke samAna kAmasthalI rUpI usa citrazAlA meM praveza
kiyaa| isake bAda pratidina vaha SaTrarasayukta AhAra detI  /  tadanaMtara |
jaba-taba muni ko apane vrata se vicalita karane ke lie solaha zRMgAra se
sajadhajakara vaha muni ke sAmane baiThatI; usa | samaya vaha aisI lagatI thI,
mAno utkRSTa apsarA ho| isa taraha muni ko AkRSTa karane ke lie vaha bAra-bAra
kuzalatApUrvaka nRtya, gIta, hAvabhAva, kaTAkSa Adi karane lagI  /  karaNa,
Asana pUrvopabhukta zRMgAra-krIr3A, prabala surata| krIr3A Adi kA bhI bAra-bAra
smaraNa karAne lagI  /  matalaba yaha hai ki mahAmuni ko vicalita karane ke lie
eka se eka bar3hakara, jitane bhI kAmottejaka upAya ho sakate the, kozA ne ve
sabhI aajmaaeN| lekina ve sabhI upAya vajra para nakha se vilekhana ke samAna
niSphala hue| isa taraha pratidina muni ko vikSubdha karane ke lie vaha prayatna
karatI thI  /  paraMtu ve | jarA bhI vicalita na hue| balki mahAmuni para
upasarga-prahAra karane vAlI kozA ne jyoM-jyoM anukUla upasarga kiye, tyoM-tyoM
mahAmuni kI dhyAnAgni adhikAdhika prajjvalita hone lagI; jaise meghajala se
bijalI vizeSa pradIpta ho uThatI | hai| AkhirakAra kozA vezyA hAra gyii| usane
apanI bhUla svIkAra kI aura natamastaka hokara kahane lagI- svAmin! meM | apanI
nAsamajhI ke kAraNa pahale kI taraha Apake sAtha kAmakrIr3A kI apekSA rakhatI
thI; lekina Apa to caTTAna kI | taraha aDola rahe  /  dhikkAra hai mujhe ! isa
prakAra pazcAttApa karatI huI vaha muni ke caraNoM meM jhuka gyii| muni ke
iMdriya - vijaya kI parAkASThA se prabhAvita hokara kozA ne zrAvakadharma
grahaNa kiyA aura isa prakAra kA abhigraha kiyA ki - yadi kadAcit 312

Page #335 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  The Successful Chaturmas of Sthulabhadra Muni at the House of Koshaveshya
**Yoga Shastra, Third Light, Verse 131:**  The king is pleased and even if he
has to offer his body, I would abandon all other men except that one man. In
this way, Sthulabhadra Muni completed the Chaturmas happily.   The three Munis
completed their Chaturmas according to their respective vows and reached the
feet of their Guru. The Sadhu who resided in the lion's cave arrived, and the
Guru, standing up, said to him, "Dushkarakar, Vats! I welcome you." Similarly,
two other Sadhus also arrived, and the Guru Maharaj welcomed them both by
calling them "Dushkarakar." The Swami also gives equal respect to those who make
similar vows.   After this, the fully vowed Sthulabhadra also came to serve the
Gurudev. Then, the Guru Maharaj stood up and said, "Dushkar-Dushkarakar!
Mahatman, I welcome you." Hearing this, the first Muni who had arrived became
envious and burned with jealousy. He thought to himself, "The Guruji has taken
the side of Sthulabhadra Muni because he is the son of a minister and has
addressed him with the best words. If the work of the one who eats six meals is
Dushkar-Dushkar, then I will also make the same vow next year." He decided this
in his mind.   The Muni, having practiced restraint for eight months, completed
it. As the rainy season approached, the Sadhu who resided in the lion's cave,
like a debtor, happily reached the Guru Maharaj and repeated his vow. "Bhagavan!
This year, I will spend the Chaturmas staying at the house of Kosha-Veshhya,
always eating food with six tastes." The Gurudev, using his knowledge, observed
and thought that this vow was taken only out of envy for Sthulabhadra.
Therefore, he said, "Vats! This vow is Dushkarati-Dushkar. You are not capable
of fulfilling it! Therefore, do not make such a vow. Only Sthulabhadra, who is
as steady as Mount Meru, is capable of fully passing this vow."   Upon this, the
Muni protested and said to the Guru, "For me, this is not difficult at all, so
where is the question of Dushkar-Dushkar?" Therefore, I will surely succeed in
this vow." The Guru said, "This vow will corrupt you for the future and also
destroy your past tapasya and restraint. Because carrying more weight than your
strength can handle destroys your limbs." But the Muni, who considered himself
powerful, rejected the Guru's words and set out towards the house of
Koshaganika, which was like the abode of Kamadeva.   Seeing the Muni approaching
from afar, Kosha thought, "It seems that this Muni is coming to me only out of
envy for Sthulabhadra Muni. Still, as a Shravika, I should save him from
falling." Thinking this, the Veshhya stood up and bowed to the Muni. The Muni
asked the virtuous Kosha for her painting gallery for four months. She readily
opened the painting gallery and allowed him to stay there. The Muni entered and
stayed there.   After eating food with six tastes, at midday, Kosha, the
repository of beauty and grace, came to test the Muni. As soon as the Muni saw
Kosha's lotus-like eyes, he became immediately filled with desire. With such a
beautiful woman and such delicious food with various flavors, how could desire
not arise? The Muni, afflicted by lust, requested sexual intercourse from Kosha.
In response, Kosha said, "Bhagavan! We are Veshhyas! We can only be controlled
by giving money." The Muni said, "Mrigalochane! Be pleased with me; but if oil
can be obtained from sand, then wealth can be obtained from us. This is
impossible, my dear!"   Kosha, to awaken the Muni, said to him, "Why is it
impossible? The king of Nepal, if he meets someone for the first time, whom he
has never seen before, gives him a jeweled blanket. Therefore, go there and
bring a jeweled blanket." Kosha had said this to make the Muni become detached,
but the Muni completely believed her words and, rejecting his Sadhu-maryada,
even though the rainy season was full of obstacles, like a child, he mixed his
vows with the mud of sin and set out from there during the Chaturmas.   Reaching
Nepal, the Muni returned with a jeweled blanket from the king, but on the way,
he saw a group of thieves, where many thieves lived. They had a parrot as a pet.
Seeing the Muni, he said, "One worth a lakh is coming." Hearing this, the king
of the thieves, sitting on a tree, asked another thief, "Who is coming?" He
said, "A Bhikshu is coming, and he doesn't seem to have anything with him." When
the Sadhu came near, the thieves caught him and searched him thoroughly. But
they found nothing on him. Therefore, the thieves, knowing him to be penniless,
let him go. But as he was leaving,

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 sthUlabhadra muni kA kozAvezyA ke yahAM saphala cAturmAsa yogazAstra tRtIya
prakAza zloka 131 prasanna hokara rAjA cAhe aura use yaha tana arpaNa karanA
par3e to usa eka puruSa ko chor3akara anya sabhI puruSoM kA maiM tyAga karatI
haiN| isa taraha sthUlabhadramuni ne sukhapUrvaka caumAsA pUrNa kiyaa| _ tInoM
muni apane-apane abhigraha ke anusAra caumAsA pUrNa karake kramazaH guru-caraNoM
meM phuNce| siMhaguphAvAsI sAdhu AyA, taba guru ne kucha khar3e hokara use kahA-
duSkarakAraka, vatsa! tumhArA svAgata karatA huuN| isI taraha aura do sAdhu bhI
Aye unakA bhI gurumahArAja ne duSkarakAraka kahakara svAgata kiyaa| ekasarIkhI
pratijJA karane vAle ko svAmI bhI samAna satkAra dete haiN| isake bAda pUrNa-
pratijJa sthUlabhadra bhI gurudeva kI sevA meM Aye; taba gurumahArAja ne khar3e
hokara kahA-duSkara-duSkarakAraka! mahAtman tumhArA svAgata karatA huuN| yaha
sunakara pahale AyA huA eka muni IrSyA se jala bhuna gyaa| vaha mana hI mana
socane lgaa| gurujI ne maMtrIputra hone ke kAraNa sthUlabhadra muni kA pakSa
liyA hai aura uttama zabdoM se saMbodhita kiyA hai| yadi SaTrasabhojana karane
vAle kA kArya duSkara-duSkara hai to maiM bhI agale varSa vaisI hI pratijJA
kruuNgaa| isa prakAra mana meM nizcita kara liyaa| ATha mahIne saMyama kI
ArAdhanA karate hue ukta muni ne pUrNa kiye| varSAkAla Ate hI karjadAra ke
samAna siMhaguphAvAsI sAdhu harSita hokara gurumahArAja ke pAsa pahuMcA aura
unake sAmane apanI pratijJA dohraayii| bhagavan! isa varSa meM kozA-vezyA ke
yahAM rahakara sadA SaTrasayukta bhojana karate hue caumAsA bitaauuNgaa|
gurudeva ne jJAna meM upayoga lagAkara dekhA aura vicAra kiyA ki kevala
sthUlabhadra ke prati ISyA se isane yaha abhigraha aMgIkAra kiyA hai| ataH use
kahA-vatsa! yaha abhigraha duSkarAtiduSkara hai| tuma isake pAlana meM samartha
nahIM ho! isalie aisA abhigraha mata kro| usameM pUrNatayA uttIrNa hone meM to
meru samAna sthira sthUlabhadra hI samartha hai| isa para usa muni ne prativAda
karate hue guru se kahA-mere liye to yaha kucha bhI duSkara nahIM hai, to phira
duSkara-duSkara kI bAta hI kahAM rahI? ataH maiM isa abhigraha meM avazya hI
saphala bnuuNgaa| guru ne kahA-isa abhigraha se tuma bhaviSya ke lie bhI bhraSTa
aura pUrvakRta tapa-saMyama se bhI naSTa ho jAoge; kyoMki balabUte se adhika
bojha uThAne se aMgopAMgoM kA nAza hotA hai| kintu apane Apako parAkramI
samajhane vAle usa muni ne guru-vacana ko ThukarAkara kAmadeva ke nivAsagRha ke
samAna kozAgaNikA ke bhavana kI ora prasthAna kiyaa| dUra se Ate muni ko
dekhakara kozA ne vicAra kiyA ki mAlUma hotA hai ki yaha muni sthUlabhadramuni
ke prati IrSyA ke kAraNa hI mere yahAM A rahA hai| phira bhI mujhe zrAvikA hone
ke nAte ise patita hone se bacAnA caahie| yoM socakara vezyA ne khar3e hokara
muni ko vaMdana kiyaa| muni ne satI kozA se unakI citrazAlA cAra mAha rahane ke
lie maaNgii| ne saharSa citrazAlA khola dI aura usameM Thaharane kI anumati de
dii| muni ne usameM praveza kiyA aura rahane lgaa| SaTrasayukta bhojana ke bAda
madhyAhna meM muni kI parIkSA ke lie rUpa-lAvaNya-bhaMDAra kozA unake pAsa
aayii| kozA kI kamala-sI AMkheM dekhate hI muni ekadama vikAra yukta ho gye|
jisa prakAra kI rUpavatI strI thI, usI prakAra kA svAdiSTa vividharasayukta
bhojana mila jAya to vikAra paidA hone meM kyA kamI raha sakatI hai? kAmajvara
se pIr3ita muni ne kozA se sahavAsa kI prArthanA kii| usake uttara meM kozA ne
kahA-bhagavan! hama ThaharI vezyA! hama to dhana dene se hI vaza meM | ho sakatI
hai| muni ne kahA-mRgalocane! tuma mujha para prasanna ho; magara bAlU meM se
tela prApta ho to hamAre pAsa se dhana prApta ho sakatA hai| yaha to asaMbhava
hai, priye! kozA ne pratibodha dene ke lihAja se muni se kahA-asaMbhava kyoM
hai? nepAladeza ke rAjA se koI pahalI bAra hI mile, jise usane pahale kabhI
dekhA na ho, to usa sAdhu ko vaha ratnakaMbala bheMTa detA hai| ataH Apa vahAM
jAkara ratnakaMbala le aaie| kozA ne to muni ko virakti ho jAne kI dRSTi se kahA
thA lekina usa bAta ko vaha muni bilakula saccI mAna baiThA aura apanI
sAdhumaryAdA ko ThukarAkara aneka vighna vAlA varSAkAla hone para bhI bAlaka kI
taraha apane vratoM ko pApapaMka se lipsa miTTI meM milAte hue vaha caumAse meM
hI vahAM se cala pdd'aa| naipAla pahuMcakara rAjA se ratnakaMbala lekara muni
vApisa A rahA thA ki rAste meM eka corapallI dikhAyI dI; jahAM bahuta se cora
rahate the| unhoMne eka totA pAla rakhA thaa| usane muni ko dekhakara kahA-lAkha
mUlya vAlA A rahA hai| yaha sunakara per3a para baiThe coroM ke rAjA ne dUsare
cora se pUchA-yaha kauna A rahA hai? usane kahA-koI bhikSu A rahA hai aura usake
pAsa kucha dikhatA to hai nhiiN| sAdhu jaba pAsa meM AyA, taba coroM ne
pakar3akara usakI acchI taraha talAzI lii| magara usake pAsa kucha bhI na milaa|
ataH coroM ne use nirdravya jAnakara chor3a diyaa| kintu usake jAne 313

Page #336 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Koshā, the courtesan, awakens the Muni (ascetic) and the Rathakāra (charioteer)
residing in the lion cave.  After the 131st verse of the third chapter of the
Yogaśāstra, the parrot spoke again - "This is worth a hundred thousand (coins)
and is being taken away." Therefore, the chief of the thieves asked him again,
"O Bhikkhu! Tell the truth! What do you have?" Then the Muni said to him, "What
can I hide from you? I had obtained a precious Nepal-nara ratnakaṃbala (a
valuable blanket) to give to the courtesan. I have hidden it in a bamboo tube.
If you want, I can give it to you." The thieves, thinking the Muni was a
Bhikkhu, let him go.  The Muni then directly reached the place of Koshā, the
courtesan, and offered her the ratnakaṃbala. Seeing the Muni, Koshā immediately
and fearlessly threw him into a dirty drain. The Muni said, "O Bhadre! You have
thrown this extremely valuable and hard-earned ratnakaṃbala into the dirty
drain. O Śaṃkhagrivā! Did you not consider anything while throwing it?" To this,
Koshā sharply said, "O deluded Muni! You are concerned about this ratnakaṃbala,
but you are throwing the gem-like Muni-life, which is full of virtuous conduct,
into the dirty pit of passions; do you have any concern for that?"  Hearing
this, the Muni was suddenly awakened. Shaken by Koshā's strong rebuke, he turned
towards renunciation. Composing himself, he said to the courtesan, "Sister! You
have truly awakened me from sleep. You have given me a beautiful awakening and
saved me from drowning in the ocean of the world. You have indeed done a great
deed. Now I am healthy and am going to the feet of my Gurumaharāja to eradicate
the transgressions (sins-faults) in my life of restraint." Koshā also said to
the Muni, "Due to you, I became a sinner, for which I say 'Micchāmi Dukkaḍaṃ' (I
seek forgiveness). While being absorbed in the vow of celibacy, I tried to
disturb you, and I had this hope of you going to Nepal and awakening you; for
that, I seek your forgiveness, please forgive me. I wish that you now reach the
service of your Gurujī soon."  The Muni also reached his Guru and, with self-
surrender, began to perform severe austerities as repentance.  One day, pleased,
King Nanda sent a charioteer to the courtesan Koshā. But since the courtesan was
not under the king's control, she engaged in intercourse with him without
affection. In front of the charioteer, she always said that there is no greater
person than Sthūlabhadra. The charioteer thought, "Let me show her some miracle,
so that she develops affection towards me." Thinking so, one day he went to the
garden and sat on a couch, and to entertain Koshā, he demonstrated his
scientific skill, piercing a cluster of mangoes with an arrow, then threading
other arrows through the previous ones up to his hand, and finally cutting the
mango cluster with an arrow in the shape of a weapon. He then offered the mango
cluster to the courtesan Koshā.  Seeing this, the courtesan said, "Now see my
dance art." Saying this, she had a heap of mustard seeds placed, with a needle
standing upright in the middle. She then covered the entire heap with flower
petals. Thereafter, she danced on that needle in such a way that neither did the
needle hurt her, nor did a single petal move. Pleased by seeing her difficult
feat, the charioteer said to Koshā, "Seeing your difficult deed, I am very
pleased. Therefore, ask for whatever I have, and I will surely give it to you."
To this, the courtesan said, "I have not done any difficult deed that has
impressed you so much. In fact, one who practices can do even more difficult
deeds. Piercing the mango cluster or dancing on the needle is not difficult, as
it can be accomplished through practice. But the deed that Sthūlabhadra has
done, without any practice, is truly difficult. He, who continuously enjoyed new
sensual pleasures with me for twelve years in the same painting hall, remained
unshaken and unwavering in the vows of brahmacarya (celibacy) and other vows for
four months in that same place. Just as milk cannot remain pure where crows come
and go, similarly, it is difficult for a man to remain untainted in the abode of
a woman. Many yogis have been corrupted. Who is capable of remaining unshaken
even for a single day in solitude with a woman? Yet, Sthūlabhadra Muni remained
celibate for four months. Although his food was delicious, rich in six tastes,
his dwelling was in the painting hall, a woman was with him, and there was
solitude - still, Sthūlabhadra Muni..."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 kozA dvArA siMhaguphAvAsI muni evaM rathakAra ko pratibodha yogazAstra tRtIya
prakAza zloka 131 ke bAda phira totA bolA-yaha lAkha mUlya vAlA jA rahA hai|
ataH cora-senApati ne use phira pUchA-bhikSo! saca saca batA de! tere pAsa kyA
hai? taba muni ne usase kahA-maiM tumase kyA chipAUM, vezyA ko dene ke lie
nepAla-nare ratnakaMbala prApta kiyA thaa| use maiMne bAMsa kI nalI meM chipA
rakhA hai| kaho to de duuN| coroM ne muni ko bhikSu samajhakara chor3a diyaa|
muni vahAM se sIdhe kozAvezyA ke yahAM pahuMcA aura use vaha ratnakaMbala bheMTa
kara diyaa| kozA ne muni ke dekhate hI dekhate tatkAla niHzaMka hokara use gaMdI
nAlI meM pheMka diyaa| muni ne kahA-bhadre! itane mahAmUlyavAn aura
|atiparizrama se prApta ratnakaMbala ko tumane gaMde nAle meM pheMka diyA?
zaMkhagrIve! tumane use pheMkate samaya jarA bhI vicAra nahIM kiyA? isa para
kozA ne tapAka se kahA-vicAramUr3ha mune! tuma isa ratnakaMbala kI ciMtA kara
rahe ho, lekina svayaM cAritraratnamaya munijIvana ko vAsanA rUpI naraka ke
gaMde gaDDhe meM pheMka rahe ho; usakI bhI koI ciMtA hai tumheM? yaha sunate hI
muni ekadama cauMka utthe| kozA kI isa prabala phaTakAra se ve sahasA vairAgya
kI ora mudd'e| apane ko saMbhAlate hue unhoMne vezyA se kahA-bahana! vAstava meM
tumane mujhe Aja sote se jagAyA hai| suMdara pratibodha diyA hai aura saMsAra-
samudra se girate hue mujhe bacAyA hai| vAstava meM tumane mahAn kArya kiyA hai|
aba maiM svastha hUM aura saMyamI jIvana meM lage hue aticAroM (pApoM-doSoM) ke
unmUlana ke lie gurumahArAja ke caraNoM meM jA rahA huuN| bhAgyazAlinI! tumheM
dharmalAbha ho| kozA ne bhI muni se kahA-Apake nimitta se maiM bhI aparAdhinI
banI, usake lie 'micchA mi dukkaDaM' detI huuN| brahmacaryavrata meM tanmaya
hote hae bhI Apako maiMne vicalita karane kA prayatna kiyA aura nepAla jAne va
Apako pratibodha dene ke lie maiMne ApakI isa prakAra AzAtanA kI; usake lie maiM
Apase kSamA cAhatI hUM; kSamA kreN| maiM cAhatI hUM ki aba Apa zIghra hI gurujI
kI sevA meM pahuMca jaay| muni bhI guru ke pAsa pahuMce aura unake sAmane
Atmanivedana pUrvaka AlocanA karake prAyazcitta ke rUpa meM ghora tapazcaraNa
karane lge| eka dina khuza hokara naMdarAjA ne eka rathakAra ko kozA vezyA ke
yahAM bhejaa| paraMtu vezyA rAjA ke adhIna hone se anurAga rahita hokara usake
sAtha sahavAsa karatI thii| rathakAra ke samakSa vaha sadA yahI kahA karatI thI
ki-sthUlabhadra | se bar3hakara koI mahApuruSa nahIM hai| rathakAra ne mana meM
socA-ise aisA koI camatkAra batAU~, jisase yaha mere prati anurAga karane lge|
aisA socakara eka dina vaha gRhodyAna meM jAkara palaMga para baiTha gayA aura
kozA ke manoraMjana ke lie apanA vijJAna-cAturya batalAyA ki AmoM ke eka gucche
ko nizAnA tAkakara eka bANa se bIMdha diyaa| phira usa bANa ko dUsare bANa se,
dUsare ko tIsare se isa taraha bANoM kI katAra apane hAtha taka lagA dii| bAda
meM Ama ke gucchoM kI DAlI ko astrAkAra bANa se kATa ddaalii| ora to ora eka-eka
bANa mAno apane hAtha se pAsa ho, isa taraha khIMcakara AmoM kA gucchA vahIM
baiThe-baiThe hI kozA vezyA ko samarpitakara diyaa| yaha dekhakara vezyA ne
kahA-aba merI bhI nRtya-kalA dekhiie| yaha kahakara usane sarasoM kA eka Dhera
lgvaayaa| usa para bIca meM eka suI khar3I kara dii| phira sAre Dhera ko phUla
kI paMkhur3iyoM se Dhaka diyaa| tatpazcAt usane usa suI para isa DhaMga se nRtya
kiyA ki na to suI se use jarA bhI coTa lagI aura na usase eka bhI paMkhur3I Age-
pIche huii| yaha dekhakara rathakAra ne khuza hokara kozA se kahA-tumhAre
duSkara kArya ko dekhakara maiM bahuta prasanna huuN| ataH mere pAsa jo bhI
vastu hai, use mAMgo, maiM tumheM avazya duuNgaa| isa para vezyA ne kahAmaiMne
aisA koI duSkara kArya nahIM kiyA; jisase Apa itane prabhAvita hue haiM, balki
abhyAsa karane vAlA isase bhI adhika duSkara kArya kara sakatA hai| yaha Ama kA
gucchA bIMdha DAlanA yA suI para nRtya karanA, duSkara nahIM hai, kyoMki abhyAsa
ke bala para yaha kArya siddha ho sakatA hai| paraMtu binA hI abhyAsa ke
sthUlabhadra ne jo kArya kiyA hai; vaha to sacamuca hI atiduSkara hai| jisane
mere sAtha lagAtAra bAraha varSa taka rahakara nitya-naye viSayasukhoM kA
upabhoga kiyA; usI citrazAlA meM cAra mAsa rahakara sthUlabhadra brahmacarya Adi
vratoM meM akhaMDita aura aDola rhe| jahAM nevale kA AvAgamana hotA hai, vahAM
dUdha dUSita hone se baca nahIM sakatA; vaise hI strI ke nivAsa vAle sthAna meM
puruSa kA dUSita hone se bacanA duSkara hai| sthUlabhadramuni ke sivAya aneka
yogI dUSita hue haiN| strI ke pAsa ekAMta meM sirpha eka dina bhI avicalita
rahane meM kauna samartha hai? jabaki sthalabhadramani cAra mahIne taka
akhaMDabrahmacaryavratI rhe| yadyapi unakA AhAra SaTrasoM se yukta svAdiSTa thA;
unakA nivAsa citrazAlA meM thA; strI bhI unake pAsa thI aura ekAMta sthAna bhI
thaa| phira bhI sthUlabhadra muni 314

Page #337 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The third light of the Yoga Shastra, verse 131, did not move from the presence
of the great sage, Shthulbhadra Muni, and the other sadhus, to the presence of
Shri Bhadrabahu Swami. Just as even a man with a heart as hard as metal melts in
the presence of fire, so too do we see Shthulbhadra Muni as being made of vajra
(diamond). After describing the great, powerful, and difficult-to-achieve deeds
of Shri Shthulbhadra Muni, my mouth does not open to describe another. It is
necessary to put a lock on it. Hearing this, the charioteer asked the Kośa, "Who
is this great, jewel-crowned Shthulbhadra, whose praise you are singing so
highly?" She replied, "The one whose character I have described to you is
Shthulbhadra, the son of Shakatal, the minister of King Nanda." Hearing this,
the charioteer, with a look of wonder, clasped his hands and said, "Consider me
a servant of Shthulbhadra Muni from this day forward." Seeing the charioteer
detached from the world, the Kośa gave him knowledge of Dharma, destroying the
remaining traces of his slumbering attachment. He was now awakened. Therefore,
knowing the opportune moment, the Kośa revealed her own graha (resolve and
rules) to him. Hearing this, the charioteer, with eyes wide with wonder, said,
"Bhadra! You have awakened me by praising Shthulbhadra Muni. From this day
forward, I will walk the path you have shown me. You, with unwavering
determination, walk your accepted path with ease and joy. I am leaving now. May
you be well." Saying this, the charioteer went directly to the feet of
Shthulbhadra Muni and received the Muni-diksha (initiation) from him.   The
venerable Muni Shthulbhadra was also spending his time in the worship of severe
vows. Suddenly, a terrible famine lasting twelve years struck. At that time, the
entire assembly of sadhus went to the seashore. There too, the shadow of the
terrible famine, like the night of Kali, fell. Even the sadhus did not have easy
access to food and water. Due to this, there was no study of the scriptures, and
the repetition of the Shruta-gyan (scriptural knowledge) was not possible. As a
result, the knowledge that was memorized was also forgotten. Without practice
and repetition, even the memorized Shruta-gyan of the most intelligent people is
lost. Therefore, to save the remaining Shruta-gyan from being lost, the Shri-
Sangha (assembly of monks) gathered the Shraman-Sangha (assembly of ascetics) in
Pataliputra at that time. They collected all the Angas (parts of the Jain
scriptures), their study, and their purpose, from those who remembered them. The
twelfth Anga, Drishtivad, was not found. While thinking about it, the Sangha
remembered that Shri Bhadrabahu Swami was the knower of Drishtivad. They decided
to obtain it from him. Therefore, the Sangha sent two sadhus to call him. The
two sadhus reached the service of Muni Bhadrabahu. After paying their respects,
they humbly requested him, "Bhagavan! The Shri-Sangha has invited you to
Pataliputra." He replied, "I have begun the Maha-pran-dhyan (meditation on the
great soul), so I cannot go there." With this disappointing answer, the two
sadhus returned to the Shraman-Sangha and told them what Bhadrabahu Swami had
said. The Shri-Sangha, angered by this, ordered two other sadhus to go and bring
him, saying, "Go to the Acharya (leader) and ask him, 'What punishment should be
given to one who does not obey the orders of the Shri-Sangha?'" When they say,
"He should be expelled from the Sangha," then you both, together, loudly say to
the Acharya, "Then, Bhagavan, you are also subject to that punishment!" The two
sadhus went there and said the same to the Acharya. Therefore, Acharya
Bhadrabahu said, "The Shri-Sangha should not do this to me. But please send
intelligent disciples here. I will give them seven recitations daily while
staying here. I will give the first recitation upon returning from begging for
alms, the second during the time of study, the third upon returning from outside
the city, the fourth at the time of Vikal (a specific time of the day), and the
remaining three recitations at the necessary times. In this way, I will give
seven recitations daily, so that the work of the Sangha will be done well and my
sadhana (spiritual practice) will also be accomplished without obstacles."
Hearing this, the two sadhus returned to Pataliputra and presented to the Shri-
Sangha what Shri Bhadrabahu had said. The Shri-Sangha was pleased and considered
themselves fortunate. The Shri-Sangha, after considering this, sent five hundred
monks, including Shthulbhadra, to Pataliputra. Bhadrabahu Swami began to give
seven recitations daily to the five hundred monks. However, due to the very
short recitations, all the other monks, feeling anxious, returned to their
respective places. Only Shthulbhadra Muni remained there. One day, Acharya
Bhadrabahu Swami asked Shthulbhadra Muni, "Muni! Are you not troubled by the
constant recitations?"

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 sthUlabhadra muni Adi sAdhu zrI bhadrabAhu svAmi ke pAsa yogazAstra tRtIya
prakAza zloka 131 calAyamAna nahIM hue| jahAM agni ke samAna strI ke pAsa rahane
se dhAtu ke samAna kaThora hRdaya puruSa bhI pighala jAte haiM; vahAM hama usa
mahAmuni sthUlabhadra ko vajramaya hI dekhate haiN| duSkarAtiduSkara kArya
karane vAle mahAsattvazAlI zrI sthUlabhadramuni kA varNana karane ke bAda aba
dUsare kA varNana karane ko muMha nahIM khultaa| usa para tAlA hI lagAnA jarUrI
hai| yaha sunate hI rathakAra ne kozA se pUchA-tuma jisakI itanI prazaMsA kara
rahI ho; vaha mahAsatvaziromaNi sthUlabhadra kauna hai? taba usane kahA-jisakA
caritra-citraNa maiMne tumhAre sAmane kiyA hai; vaha naMdarAjA ke maMtrI sva
zakaTAla kA putra sthUlabhadra hai| yaha sunakara AzcaryamudrA se rathI hAtha
jor3akara kahane lagA to samajha lo! Aja se maiM bhI una sthUlabhadra mahAmuni
kA eka sevaka huuN| rathakAra ko saMsAra virakta dekhakara kozA ne use dharma kA
jJAna dekara usakI bacI-khucI mohanidrA bhI naSTa kara dii| aba vaha
pratibodhita ho cukA thaa| ataH kozA ne upayukta avasara jAnakara use apanA
graha (saMkalpa-niyama) btaayaa| jise sunakara vismaya se visphArita netroM se
rathI ne kahA-bhadre! sthUlabhadramuni ke rate hue tumane mujhe pratibodhita
kiyA hai| ataH Aja se meM tumhAre batAye hue mArga para hI cluuNgaa| tuma apane
svIkRta abhigraha para sukhapUrvaka bekhaTake dRr3hatApUrvaka clo| lo maiM jAtA
hUM; tumhArA kalyANa ho| yoM kahakara rathakAra sIdhA sthUlabhadramuni ke
caraNoM meM pahuMcA aura unase usane munidIkSA aMgIkAra kara lii| . munivareNya
sthUlabhadra bhI kaThora vratoM kI ArAdhanA karate hue kAlayApanakara rahe the|
akasmAt lagAtAra bAraha varSa kA bhISaNa duSkAla pdd'aa| usa samaya sArA sAdhu-
saMgha samudrataTa para calA gyaa| vahAM para bhI kAlarAtri ke samAna bhayaMkara
duSkAla kI chAyA par3I huI thii| sAdhuoM ko bhI AhArapAnI sulabha nahIM thaa|
isa kAraNa zAstra-svAdhyAya na hone se zrutajJAna kI AvRtti na hone ke kAraNa jo
kucha zAstra (zruta) kaMThastha thA, vaha bhI vismRta hone lgaa| abhyAsa aura
AvRtti ke binA bar3e-bar3e buddhimAnoM kA par3hA huA kaMThastha zrutajJAna bhI
naSTa ho jAtA hai| ataH aba zeSa zrutajJAna ko naSTa hone se bacAne ke lie
zrIsaMgha ne usa samaya pATalIputra meM zramaNasaMgha ko ekatrita kiyA aura
jina-jina ko jitane-jitane aMga. adhyayana. uddezya Adi kaMThastha yAda the. una
sabako sanakara evaM avadhAraNakara zrI aMgoM ko saMgRhIta kiyaa| bArahavAM aMga
dRSTivAda nahIM mila rahA thA, vicAra karate-karate saMgha ko yAda AyA ki
zrIbhadrabAhu svAmI dRSTivAda ke jJAtA hai| unase ise upalabdha kiyA jaay| ataH
unheM bulAne ke lie saMgha ne do sAdhuoM ko bhejaa| ve donoM muni bhadrabAhu kI
sevA meM phuNce| vaMdana karake karabaddha hokara unheM nivedana kiyA-bhagavan!
zrI saMgha ne Apako pATalIputra padhArane ke lie AmaMtrita kiyA hai| isa para
unhoMne kahA-maiMne mahAprANa-dhyAna prAraMbha kiyA hai, ataH merA vahAM AnA
nahIM ho sktaa| yaha nirAzAjanaka uttara lekara donoM muni zramaNasaMgha ke pAsa
lauTa Aye aura bhadrabAhusvAmI ne jo kahA thA, use kaha sunaayaa| zrI (zramaNa)
saMgha ne isa para kSubdha hokara anya do muniyoM ko unheM bulA lAne kI AjJA dI
ki 'tuma AcAryazrI ke pAsa jAkara kahanA-jo AcArya zrIsaMgha kI AjJA na mAne,
use kyA daMDa diyA jAnA cAhie?' jaba ve yaha kaheM ki 'use saMgha se bahiSkRta
kara denA caahie|' taba tuma donoM eka sAtha uccasvara se AcAryazrI se kahanA-to
bhagavan! Apa bhI usa daMDa ke bhAgI haiM! donoM muni vahAM pahuMce aura unhoMne
AcAryazrI ko usI taraha khaa| ataH AcArya bhadrabAhu ne kahA-zrIsaMgha bhagavAn
mere prati aisA na kre| paraMtu mujha para kRpA karake buddhimAna ziSyoM ko
yahAM bheje| maiM yahAM rahate hue hI unheM pratidina sAta vAcanA duuNgaa|
pahalI vAcanA bhikSAcaryA karake lauTate hI dUMgA; dUsarI svAdhyAyakAla meM,
tIsarI bahirbhUmi se vApisa Ane para aura cauthI vikAla ke samaya tathA zeSa
tIna vAcanAe~ Avazyaka samaya para duuNgaa| isa taraha pratidina sAta vAcanA
dUMgA; jisase saMgha kA kArya bhI suMdara ho jAyagA aura merI sAdhanA bhI
nirvighna siddha ho jaaygii| yaha sunakara ve donoM muni vApisa pATalIputra
lauTe aura zrI bhadrabAhu ne jaisA kahA thA, vaha unhoMne zrIsaMgha ke sAmane
prastuta kara diyaa| isase zrIsaMgha prasanna hokara apane ko bhAgyazAlI mAnane
lgaa| zrIsaMgha ne isa para vicAra karake sthUlabhadra Adi pAMca-sau muniyoM ko
vahAM bhejaa| bhadrabAhusvAmI pAMcasau muniyoM ko pratidina sAta vAcanA dene
lge| paraMtu ati alpa vAcanA hone ke kAraNa udvigna hokara anya sabhI munivara
to apaneapane sthAna para lauTa gye| kevala eka sthUlabhadramuni hI vahAM rhe|
_eka dina AcAryazrI bhadrabAhu-svAmI ne sthUlabhadramuni se pUchA-mune! tumheM
satata vAcanA se udvega to nahIM hotA? 315

Page #338 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Study of the Twelfth Anga by Sthulabhadra Muni from Acharya Bhadrabahu Swami
Yoga Shastra Third Light Verse 131 Then Sthulabhadra said - Bhagavan! I do not
have any anxiety; but the recitation is very little. Acharya Shri said | Now my
meditation practice is about to be completed. As soon as it is completed, I will
be able to give you recitation as you wish. Meditation The Acharya Shri started
giving Sthulabhadra recitation as per his wish. Almost ten years ago, the study
of two Vasts had been completed, after which Shri Bhadrabahu Swami went to
Pataliputra and stayed in the garden outside the city. At that time,
Sthulabhadra's seven sisters (Sadhvis) who were wandering from village to
village also arrived in the same city. When they heard the arrival of Acharya
Shri, they came there to pay their respects. After paying their respects to the
Guru Maharaj, they asked - Bhagavan! Where is Sthulabhadra Muni? Acharya Shri
said - He is on the upper floor of this house. The sisters went to the upper
floor to pay their respects to their brother (Sadhu), at that time, seeing the
sisters coming, Sthulabhadra Muni took the form of a lion to show some wonder
(miracle). Seeing the form of a lion instead of their brother, all the Sadhvis
were immediately frightened and ran back and requested the Guru Maharaj -
Gurudev! It seems that the elder brother has been eaten by a lion; because there
is only a lion sitting there. Acharya Shriji saw in his knowledge and knowing,
ordered - Go there and pay your respects to your elder brother. He is there,
there is no lion there. So the Sadhvis went back, then they were in their real
form. The Sadhvis paid their respects to Sthulabhadra Muni and told their story
- Muni! When Shriyak renounced and took initiation, we also took initiation. But
he was so hungry every day that he was not able to do even one Ekasan for a
single day. During Paryushana, the Sanvatsari Mahaparva came, so I, being the
elder sister, said to Shriyak Muni - Brother! Today is the day of the Mahaparva.
Therefore, instead of Naukarsi, do Porsi's Pacchakkhan. At my request, he did
the same Pacchakkhan. After the Pacchakkhan was completed, I said - Brother!
Stay a little longer. And while doing the Dharma Yatra of Chaitya Paripati, you
will see Bhagavad, in the meantime, Purimaddha Pacchakkhan will come. He also
accepted this. Thereafter, he was asked to do Avadva-Pacchakkhan till the third
watch; he also completed it. Then again | I said - Now, after a while, the time
for Pratikraman will come; then it will be night. It can be spent comfortably by
sleeping. Therefore, now take the Pacchakkhan of fasting. At my insistence, he
accepted the Pacchakkhan of fasting. But at night, he was very distressed by
hunger, unbearable pain arose in his stomach and in the same, remembering
Devadhidev, Gurudev and Namaskaramantra, he died. After dying, he reached
Devalok. But by doing so, I have committed the sin of Rishihatya. Therefore, I
was sad and asked for atonement from the Shraman Sangh. On this, the Sangh said
- You had made him do penance with pure intention. You had no intention of
killing him at all. Therefore, you do not have to do any atonement for this.
Then I said - If the present Tirthankara Bhagwan says this directly, then my
mind can be satisfied; | Only then can I get peace. Otherwise, this thorn will
not go away from my heart. On this, the entire Sangh did Kayotsarga, | due to
whose effect, Shasan Devi appeared and said - Tell me, what work of yours should
I do? The Sangh said - Take these Sadhviji to the present Tirthankara Simandhar
Swami. The Devi said - For their unimpeded journey, all of you stay in Kaussagg
itself. The Sangh also did the same. Then, in the blink of an eye, the Devi took
me to Shri Simandhar Swami. There I paid my respects to the Lord. Knowing the
purpose of my coming, Bhagwan said - The Sadhvi who has come from Bharat Kshetra
is innocent. Thereafter, 'gracing me, he gave me two Chulikas to reassure me.'
With the Devi, I returned to my place here. From there, without any doubt, I
offered those two Chulikas to Shri Sangh. Taking permission from this Muni
Sthulabhadra, they all came to their shelter. After the Sadhvis left, when
Sthulabhadra Muni came to Acharya Shri for recitation, he refused to give
recitation and said - Muni! You are unfit for recitation. Sthulabhadra started
remembering that from the time of initiation till today, what crime have I
committed. Even after much thought, when he could not remember any mistake of
his own; then he 1. There is also a mention of being in a cave. 316

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 AcArya bhadrabAhusvAmI se sthUlabhadramuni dvArA bArahaveM aMga kA adhyayana
yogazAstra tRtIya prakAza zloka 131 taba sthUlabhadra ne kahA-bhagavan! mujhe
udvega to nahIM hotA; paraMtu vAcanA bahuta hI alpa milatI hai| AcAryazrI ne
kahA|aba merI dhyAna-sAdhanA lagabhaga pUrNa hone vAlI hai| usake pUrNa hote hI
maiM tumheM yatheccha vAcanA de skuuNgaa| dhyAna da AcAryazrI ne sthalabhadra ko
unakI icchAnasAra vAcanA denI zarU kii| lagabhaga dasa pUrva meM do vasta kama
taka kA adhyayana haA thA ki usake bAda zrIbhadrabAha-svAmI vihAra karake
kramazaH pATalIputra padhAreM aura nagara ke bAhara udyAna meM tthhreN| usa
samaya grAmAnugrAma vihAra karatI huI sthUlabhadra kI sAta bahaneM (sAdhviyoM)
bhI usI nagara meM padhArI huI thii| unhoMne AcAryazrI kA padArpaNa sunA to
vaMdana ke lie vahAM aayii| gurumahArAja ko vaMdana karake unhoMne pUchA-
bhagavan! sthUlabhadramuni kahA~ hai? AcAryazrI ne kahA-isI makAna kI UparI
maMjila para ve hai|' bahaneM bhAI (sAdhu) ko vaMdanArtha Upara kI maMjila para
jAne lagIM, usa samaya bahanoM ko Ate dekhakara kucha kautuka (camatkAra) batAne
ke | lihAja se sthUlabhadramuni ne siMha kA rUpa banA liyaa| bhAI ke badale
siMha kA rUpa dekhakara sabhI sAdhviyoM ekadama ghabarAkara ulTe pairoM lauTa
AyI aura gurumahArAja se nivedana kiyA-gurudeva! mAlUma hotA hai, bar3e bhAI ko
siMha khA gayA; kyoMki vahAM to kevala eka siMha baiThA hai| AcAryazrIjI ne
apane jJAna meM dekhA aura jAnakara AjJA dI-vahIM jAo aura bar3e bhAI ko vaMdana
kro| vaha vahIM para hai, vahAM siMha nahIM hai| ataH sAdhviyoM vApisa gayI,
taba ve apane asalI rUpa meM the| sAdhviyoM ne sthUlabhadramuni ko vaMdana kiyA
aura apanI Apa bItI sunAyI-munivarya! jaba zrIyaka ne virakta hokara dIkSA lI to
hamane bhI dIkSA le lii| paraMtu use pratidina itanI adhika bhUkha lagatI thI ki
vaha eka dina bhI eka ekAsana karane meM samartha nahIM thaa| paryuSaNa meM
saMvatsarI mahAparva AyA to maiMne bar3I bahana ke nAte zrIyaka muni se kahA-
bhAI! Aja to mahAparva kA dina hai| ataH naukArasI ke sthAna para porasI kA
paccakkhANa kara lo| mere kahane se unhoMne vahI paccakkhANa kiyaa| paccakkhANa
pUrNa hone para maiMne kahA-bhAI! thor3I dera aura ruka jaao| aura
caityaparipATI kI dharmayAtrA karate hue bhagavad darzana karoge, itane meM
purimaDDha paccakkhANa A jaaygaa| yaha bAta bhI unhoMne svIkArakara lii|
tadanaMtara tIsare prahara taka ke avaDva-paccakkhANa karane ke lie kahA; use
bhI pUrNa kara liyaa| taba phira | maiMne kahA-aba to thor3I dera bAda hI
pratikramaNa kA samaya ho jAyagA; phira rAta ho jaaygii| use sokara sukha
pUrvaka kATI jA skegii| isalie aba upavAsa kA paccakkhANa le lo| mere Agraha se
usane upavAsa kA paccakkhANa aMgIkAra kara liyaa| kintu rAta ko kSudhA se
atyaMta pIr3ita ho gaye, peTa meM asahya darda uThA aura usI meM devAdhideva,
gurudeva va namaskAramaMtra kA smaraNa karate hue unakA dehAMta ho gyaa| mara
karake ve devaloka meM phuNce| lekina aisA karane meM mujhe RSihatyA kA pApa
lagA hai| ataH maiMne khinna hokara zramaNasaMgha se isakA prAyazcitta maaNgaa|
isa para saMgha ne kahA-tumane |to zuddhabhAva se tapa karavAyA thaa| tumhArI
bhAvanA unako mArane kI kataI nahIM thii| isalie tumheM isakA koI prAyazcitta
nahIM aataa| taba maiMne kahA-isa bAta ko vartamAna tIrthaMkara bhagavAn sAkSAt
kaheM to mere mana kA samAdhAna ho sakatA hai; | tabhI mujhe zAMti mila sakatI
hai| anyathA mere dila se yaha zalya nahIM jaaygaa| isa para samagra saMgha ne
kAyotsarga kiyA, | jisake prabhAva se zAsanadevI upasthita huI aura kahane lagI-
batAIe, maiM ApakA kauna-sA kArya karUM? saMgha ne kahA-ina sAdhvIjI ko
vartamAna tIrthakara sImaMdhara-svAmIjI ke pAsa le jaao| devI ne kahA-inakI
nirvighnagati ke lie Apa saba kAussagga meM hI rhnaa| saMgha ne bhI vaise hI
kiyaa| taba dekhate hI dekhate devI ne mujhe zrI sImaMdhara-svAmI ke pAsa
phuNcaayaa| vahAM maiMne prabhu ko vaMdanA kii| bhagavAn ne mere Ane kA
prayojana jAnakara kahA-bharatakSetra se AyI huI sAdhvI nirdoSa hai| tatpazcAt
'mere para kRpA karake unhoMne mujhe Azvasta karane ke lie do cUlikAe~ dii|'
devI ke sAtha vApasa maiM yahAM apane sthAna para lauttii| vahAM se niHzaMka
hokara maiMne ve donoM cUlikAe~ zrI saMgha ko arpaNa kii| isa muni sthUlabhadra
se AjJA lekara ve saba apane upAzraya meM aayii| sAdhviyoM ke jAne ke bAda
sthUlabhadramuni jaba vAcanA ke lie AcAryazrI ke pAsa Aye to unhoMne vAcanA dene
se inkAra karate hue kahA-muni! tuma vAcanA ke ayogya ho| sthUlabhadra smaraNa
karane lage ki dIkSA se lekara Aja taka maiMne kauna-sA aparAdha kiyA hai|
bahuta vicAra karane para bhI jaba unheM apanI eka bhI bhUla yAda nahIM AyI;
taba unhoMne 1. kahIM guphA meM hai aisA ullekha bhI hai| 316

Page #339 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The True Form of a Woman's Body and Its Gross Body  **Chapter 3, Verse 132-134**
"O Gurudev! What is my offense that you have refused to give me the reading? I
don't remember any offense."  The Guru said, "Silence! Sin! What a thing! You
don't even remember the offense after committing it?"  As soon as he said this,
Sthulabhadra Muni remembered his mistake. At that moment, he fell at the feet of
the Guru and began to apologize, saying, "Gurudev! I will never make such a
mistake in the future. Please forgive me this time."  "You will not make such a
mistake in the future, but you have committed the offense now. Therefore, you
should not be given the reading," said Acharya Shri Bhadrabahu Swami.  After
that, at the request of Muni Sthulabhadraji, the entire Sangha together prayed
to the Guru Maharaj. Even in the face of great anger, only a great soul is
capable of being pleased.  Acharya Shri said to the Sangha, "He has done this
now, so in the future, the low-minded souls will also use it in the same way.
Therefore, let the rest of the Purvas remain with me, let him receive the
punishment for this mistake, and the punishment should also be given to the one
who reads the Purvas to others."  Later, at the insistence of the Sangha, he
examined the situation using his knowledge and realized that the remaining
Purvas would not be separated from him, but there was a possibility of
separation from other great Munis in the future. "Now, you are not to teach the
rest of the Purvas to anyone else."  After this condition was agreed upon,
Bhadrabahu Swami gave the reading to Sthulabhadra Muni. In this way,
Sthulabhadra Mahamuni became the holder of all the Purvas. Later, he attained
the position of Acharya and enlightened beings for the welfare of the future.
Having attained detachment from the relationship with women, Shri Sthulabhadra
Muni, immersed in the state of Samadhi, gradually went to the Devaloka.  In this
way, the noble Sadhu class and the intelligent Bhavyatmas should contemplate the
feelings of renunciation, which is the abandonment of all worldly pleasures.
Thus, the brief life story of Sthulabhadra Muni is complete.  **Now, we present
the true form of the limbs of women.**  **Verse 132**  "The body of a woman is
filled with pieces of liver, excrement, teeth, nose, ear, and tongue, mucus,
marrow, semen, blood, bones, etc., and is sewn together with leather strings. It
appears beautiful from the outside, but inside it is filled with liver, flesh,
excrement, feces, mucus, phlegm, marrow, fat, blood, and bones, etc., with only
skin covering it."  **Verse 133**  "If the body of a woman were to be turned
inside out, that is, the inner part were to be made the outer and the outer part
were to be made the inner, then a lustful man would have to keep watch day and
night to protect her from vultures, jackals, etc. Vultures would come to eat
during the day, and jackals would come to eat at night, seeing the food, meat,
etc. The lustful man would be constantly busy driving them away. He would not
get the opportunity to have intercourse with that disgusting body."  **Verse
134**  "If the foolish Kamadeva wants to conquer the entire world with the
filthy weapon of a woman's body, then why doesn't he take the insignificant
weapon of feathers?  **Explanation:**  If Kamadeva wants to conquer the three
worlds with the disgusting weapon of a woman's body, then why doesn't the
foolish one take the insignificant weapon of the feathers of crows, etc.?  The
point is that if Kamadeva desires to conquer the entire world by bowing down to
the worthless and filled with mucus, phlegm, etc., and the juices, blood, flesh,
fat, bones, marrow, semen, etc., filthy substances, and the difficult-to-obtain
womanly weapon, then why doesn't he take the easily available and unpolluted
feathers of crows, etc., and make them his weapon?  He must be foolish to forget
this.  **Note:**  In another story, it is mentioned that the original teaching
is the same.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 strI ke aMga kA vAstavika svarupa tathA usakA ghaNita zarIra yogazAstra tRtIya
prakAza zloka 132 se 134 hA-gurudeva! merA aisA kauna-sA aparAdha hai. jisase
Apane mujhe vAcanA dene se inkAra kara diyA? mujhe to aparAdha yAda nahIM aataa|
ataH guru ne kahA-zAMtam! pApam! gajaba kI bAta hai! aparAdha karake bhI tumheM
vaha yAda nahIM AtA? yaha kahate hI sthUlabhadramuni ko apanI bhUla kA khayAla
aayaa| usI samaya ve gurujI ke caraNoM meM par3akara mAphI mAMgane lage aura
bole 'gurudeva! bhaviSya meM aisI galatI kadApi nahIM kruuNgaa| isa bAra to
mujhe mApha kara diijie| bhaviSya meM tuma aisI galatI nahIM karoge, paraMtu
abhI to tumane aparAdha kiyA hai| isalie aba tumako vAcanA nahIM dI jAnI cAhie
aisA AcArya zrI bhadrabAhu svAmI ne khaa| usake bAda muni sthUlabhadrajI ke
kahane se sakala saMgha ne milakara gurumahArAja se prArthanA kii| mahAkopa hone
para bhI usa para prasanna hone meM mahApuruSa hI samartha hote haiN| AcAryazrI
ne saMgha se kahA-isa samaya isane aisA kiyA hai, to isake bAda maMdasatva
AtmAe~ bhI isI prakAra isakA upayoga kreNge| isalie bAkI ke pUrva mere pAsa hI
rahane do, isa bhUla kA daMDa use hI mile aura dUsare ko pUrva par3hAne vAle ko
bhI milanA caahie| bAda meM saMgha ke atiAgraha para unhone jJAna se upayoga
lagAkara dekhA to mAlUma huA ki zeSa pUrva mere se to vicchinna nahIM hone vAle
hai; paraMtu bhaviSya meM anya mahAmuni se viccheda hone kI saMbhAvanA hai; aba
bAkI ke pUrva tumheM kisI dUsare ko nahIM par3hAne hai| isa prakAra zarta taya
hone ke bAda bhadrabAhusvAmI ne sthUlabhadra muni ko vAcanA dii| isa prakAra
sthUlabhadra mahAmuni samasta pUrvo ko dhAraNa karane vAle hue| bAda meM
AcAryapada prApta kara unhoMne bhaviSya ke kalyANa ke lie jIvoM ko pratibodha
diyaa| strI-saMbaMdha se nivRtti prApta kara samAdhibhAva meM lIna bane
zrIsthUlabhadramuni kramazaH devaloka meM gye| isa prakAra uttama sAdhuvarga
evaM buddhimAna bhavya-AtmAe~ sarvaprakAra se sAMsArika sukhoM ke tyAga rUpa
virati kI bhAvanAoM kA ciMtana kre| isa prakAra sthUlabhadra muni kA saMkSipta
jIvana vRttAMta pUrNa huA  /  / 131  /  /  aba striyoM ke aMgoM kA vAstavika
svarUpa prastuta karate haiN|303| yakRcchakRnmala-zleSma-majjA'sthiparipUritAH
/  snAyusyUtA bahiramyAH, striyshcrmprsevikaaH||132|| artha :- jaise jigara kA
Tukar3A, viSThA, dAMta, nAka, kAna va jIbha kA maila, zleSma, majjA, vIrya,
rudhira, hAr3a Adi ke Tukar3e bharakara camar3e ke tAra se silI haI mazaka
bAhara se saMdara dikhAyI detI hai, vaise hI striyoM kA zarIra sirpha bAhara se
ramaNIya lagatA hai, usake aMdara to jigara, mAMsa, viSThA, mala, zleSma, kapha,
majjA, _ carbI, khUna aura haDDiyA~ Adi bhare haiM, kevala Upara camar3A mar3hA
huA hai  /  / 132 /  /  |1304 /  bahirantarviparyAsaH, strIzarIrasya ced bhavet
/  tasyaiva kAmukaH kuryAd, gRddh-gomaayu-gopnm||133|| artha :- yadi strI ke
zarIra ko ulaTa-palaTa diyA jAya arthAt bhItarI bhAga ko bAhara aura bAhara ke
bhAga ko bhItara kara diyA jAya; to kAmI puruSa ko dina-rAta giddhoM, siyAroM
Adi se usakI rakSA ke lie paharA biThAnA pdd'e| khAne ke padArtha mAMsa Adi
dekhakara dina meM giddha aura rAta ko siyAra khAne ke lie Ate haiN| kAmuka
AdamI unheM haTAte-haTAte hI hairAna ho jaayegaa| usa ghinaune zarIra ke sAtha
saMbhoga karane kA avasara nahIM milegA  /  / 133 /  /  ||305 /  strI zastreNApi
cetkAmo, jagadetajjigISati  /  tucchapicchamayaM zastraM, kiM nAdatte sa
muuddhdhiiH?||134|| artha :- yadi mUr3hamati kAmadeva strI-zarIra rUpI gaMde
zastra se sAre jagata ko jItanA cAhatA hai to phira vaha piccha rUpa tuccha
zastra ko kyoM nahIM grahaNa karatA?  // 134 /  /  vyAkhyA :- yadi kAmadeva
ghinaune strI-zarIra rUpI zastra se tIna jagat ko jItanA cAhatA hai to phira
mUr3habuddhi vAle kaue Adi ke paMkha ke rUpa meM tuccha zastra kyoM nahIM
grahaNa kara letA? kahane kA tAtparya yaha hai ki 'yadi kAmadeva asAra evaM
zleSma, kapha Adi tathA rasa, rakta, mAMsa, carbI, haDDI, majjA, zukra Adi gaMde
padArthoM se bhare hue aura kaThinAI se prApta hone vAle strI rUpI zastra se
sAre saMsAra ko namAkara jItane kI abhilASA karatA hai to phira anAyAsa sulabha
aura apavitratA se rahita kaue~ Adi ke paMkha ko lekara apanA hathiyAra banA
letaa|' ho na ho, vaha mUrkha isa bAta ko bhUla 1. anya kathA meM mUla hI
sikhAyA aisA ullekha hai| 317

Page #340 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Yoga Shastra, Third Light, verses 135 to 137, contemplate steadfastness in
the midst of various movements, painful situations, and adversities. A common
saying goes, "If honey is found in the Aak tree growing in one's own courtyard,
who would be foolish enough to climb a mountain?" If the desired object is
easily attained, no scholar makes any effort. || 134 || And upon waking up,
contemplate in this way: Meaning: || 306. This Kamadeva, born of Sankalpa, alas!
has made the whole world a mockery. Therefore, I will uproot this Sankalpa, the
root of this, and contemplate. || 135 || Oh! This Kamadeva, born of Sankalpa,
has made the whole world a mockery. Therefore, I will uproot this Sankalpa, the
root of this, and contemplate. || 135 || Explanation: - The mere thought or
imagination of desire is not considered the actual cause of its origin; yet
Sankalpa is its Yoni, i.e., the cause of its origin; this is experienced in the
whole world. This Kamadeva has troubled the whole world. 'The whole world' is
said because even Brahma, Indra, Mahadeva, etc., who are considered to be worthy
individuals, have not escaped its mockery due to the sight, embrace,
remembrance, etc., of women. It is heard, in the Puranas, that Brahmaji became
the priest in the marriage of Mahadeva and Gauri, Mahadeva had requested love
from Parvati, Shri Pati Vishnu had pleaded with the Gopis, Indra was the one who
played with the wife of Gautam Rishi, Chandra was attached to Tara, the wife of
Brihaspati, and Surya was fascinated by Ashwa. For this reason, Kamadeva has
bewildered the world by standing up for such a trivial purpose. This is
inappropriate. Therefore, now I will uproot the root of Sankalpa, the root of
Kama, which mocks the world; thus, contemplate and meditate on the impurity and
insignificance of the female body and the eradication of Sankalpa Yoni (Kama),
etc. || 135 || And upon waking up, contemplate in this way: || 307 || Whatever
defect there may be, contemplate its reaction, going to the delight of those who
are free from defects. || 136 || Meaning: - Contemplate the remedy (means) to be
free from the defects that appear in oneself, keeping in mind the delight of the
sages who are free from defects. || 136 || Explanation: - The defects that
hinder the peaceful mind are raga, dvesha, krodha, mana, maya, moha, lobha,
kama, irsya, matsara, etc. Therefore, one should contemplate and meditate to
counteract them. The implication is that if there is raga, then contemplate its
opposite, vairagya, similarly, in the time of dvesha, contemplate maitri, in the
time of krodha, contemplate kshama, in the time of mana, contemplate namrata, in
the time of maya, contemplate saralata, in the time of lobha, contemplate
santosha, in the time of moha, contemplate viveka, in the time of the origin of
kama vikar, contemplate the impurity of the female body, in the time of irsya,
contemplate helping the object of irsya in his work or by keeping goodwill
towards him, in the time of matsara, contemplate the expression of delight (not
feeling sorrow in the mind) = happiness, seeing the progress of others, in this
way, one should contemplate the reaction of each defect in the mind. One should
never think that it is impossible. Because in this world, many sages and
virtuous people are seen; who have renounced even the most stubborn defects and
made the soul virtuous. Therefore, it is said - a good householder should
contemplate being free from the defects, keeping in mind the delight of the
sages who are free from defects. The example of a sage free from defects (ideal
life) awakens delight in the soul and makes it easier to abandon the defects
that have taken root in the soul. || 136 || || 308. Contemplating the miserable
state of existence, steadfastly, in all beings, one should guide them towards
the natural bliss of liberation. || 137 || Meaning: - Steadfastly, contemplate
that the cycle of birth and death is awkward and painful for all beings.
Therefore, contemplate in this way, how can all beings in the world attain
eternal and natural liberation bliss? || 137 || Explanation: - The state of
existence of all beings is very unbearable and difficult. A being sometimes goes
to the Tiyanga, sometimes to the Naraka, sometimes to the Manushya, and
sometimes to the Deva, where he suffers various kinds of tortures. In the
Tiyanga, one has to endure the pain of killing, binding, beating, being
subservient, hunger, thirst, being burdened with excessive weight, cutting of
limbs, etc. In the Naraka, one 318

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 vividha gatiyoM kI duHkhamaya sthiti evaM upasargoM meM dRr3hatA kA ciMtana
kare yogazAstra tRtIya prakAza zloka 135 se 137 hI gayA hai| lokapracalita
kahAvata hai ki apane ghara ke AMgana meM paidA hue Aka ke per3a meM madhu mila
jAya to kauna aisA mUrkha hogA jo pahAr3a para car3hane kA parizrama karegA?
anAyAsa hI iSTa padArtha kI siddhi jAya to koI bhI vidvAna prayatna nahIM karatA
/  /  134  /  /  tathA nIMda khula jAne para isa prakAra ciMtana kare artha :
||306 /  saGkalpayoninA'nena, hahA ! vizvaM viDambitam  /  tadutkhanAbhi
saGkalpaM, mUlamasyeti cintyet||135|| oho! saMkalpa se utpanna hone vAle isa
kAmadeva ne to sAre saMsAra ko viDaMbanA meM DAla rakhA hai| ataH maiM viSaya-
vikAra kI jar3a isa saMkalpa vikalpa ko hI ukhAr3a pheMkU~gA  /  isa prakAra kA
ciMtana kare  /   /  135  /   /  vyAkhyA : - kAma kI kalpanA yA kevala vicAra
karanA usakI utpatti kA vAstavika kAraNa nahIM mAnA jAtA; phira bhI saMkalpa
usakI yoni arthAt utpatti-kAraNa hai; yaha sAre vizva meM anubhavasiddha hai|
isa kAmadeva ne sAre jagat ko | parezAna kara rakhA hai| 'samagra vizva' isalie
kahA gayA hai ki brahmA, iMdra, mahAdeva Adi mAnya vyakti bhI strI ke darzana,
AliMgana, smaraNa Adi kAraNoM se isakI viDaMbanA se nahIM bace  /  sunA hai,
purANoM meM ullekha hai ki mahAdeva aura gaurI ke vivAha meM brahmAjI purohita
bane the, pArvatI se mahAdeva ne praNaya-prArthanA kI thI, gopiyoM kI anunaya-
vinaya zrIpati viSNu ne kI thI, gautamaRSi kI patnI ke sAtha krIr3A karane vAlA
iMdra thA, bRhaspati kI bhAryA tArA para caMdra Asakta thA aura azvA para sUrya
mohita thA  /  isa kAraNa aise niHsAra hetu khar3e karake kAmadeva ne jagat ko
hairAna kara DAlA hai| yaha anucita hai| ataH aba maiM jagat ko viDaMbita karane
vAle kAma ke mUla saMkalpa ko hI jar3amUla se ukhAr3a pheMkU~gA; isa prakAra
strIzarIra ke azucitva evaM asAratva para tathA saMkalpayoni (kAma) ke unmUlana
ityAdi para ciMtana-manana | kare  /   /  135  /  /  tathA nidrAbhaMga hone para
aisA bhI vicAra kare | | 307 | yo yaH syAd bAdhako doSastasya tasya pratikriyAm
/  cintayed doSamukteSu, pramodaM yatiSu vrajan  // 136 //  artha :- doSa se
mukta muniyoM para pramodabhAva rakhakara apane meM jo-jo bAdhaka doSa dikhAyI
detA ho, usase mukta hone ke pratikAra ( upAya ) kA vicAra kare  /  /  136  /  /
vyAkhyA :- prazAMtacitta ke bAdhaka doSa rAga, dveSa, krodha, mAna, mAyA, moha,
lobha, kAma, ISyA, matsarAdi dikhAyI | dete haiN| ataH unakA pratikAra karane ke
lie ciMtana-manana karanA caahie| tAtparya yaha hai ki rAga ho to usake
pratipakSI | vairAgya kA vicAra kare, isI prakAra dveSa ke samaya maitrIbhAva,
krodha ke samaya kSamA, mAna ke samaya namratA, mAyAM ke samaya saralatA, lobha
ke samaya saMtoSa, moha ke samaya viveka, kAmavikAra kI utpatti ke samaya strI-
zarIra ke viSaya meM azauca bhAvanA, IrSyA ke samaya IrSyApAtra vyakti ko kArya
meM sahAyatA dekara yA usake prati sadbhAva rakhakara, matsara ke | samaya
dUsare kI tarakkI dekhakara pramodabhAva (citta meM duHkha na mAnakara ) =
prasannatA kI abhivyakti, isa prakAra pratyeka doSa kI pratikriyA kA mana meM
vicAra karanA caahie| aisA kabhI nahIM socanA cAhie ki aisA karanA asaMbhava
hai| kyoMki isa | vizva meM aneka munivara evaM guNijana saphala dikhAyI dete
haiM; jinhoMne jar3a jamAye hue kaThoratama doSoM kA bhI tyAga karake | AtmA ko
guNasaMpanna banAyI hai| isalie kahA hai - sadgRhastha ko doSoM se rahita
muniyoM para pramodabhAva rakhate hue bAdhaka | doSoM se mukta hone kA vicAra
karanA caahie| doSamukta muni ke dRSTAMta se (Adarza jIvana se) AtmA meM
pramodabhAva jAgRta hotA hai aura AtmA meM jar3a jamAye hue doSoM ko chor3ane
meM AsAnI rahatI hai  /  /  136  /  /   /  308 /  dusthAM bhavasthitiM sthemnA,
sarvajIveSu cintayan  /  nisargasukhasargaM teSvapavargaM vimArgayet  //  137||
artha :- sthira hokara, vaha ciMtana kare ki saMsAra - paribhramaNa sabhI jIvoM
ke lie aTapaTA va duHkhamaya hai| ataH isa prakAra kA yuktipUrvaka vicAra kare
ki saMsAra ke sabhI jIva kaise zAzvata va svAbhAvika mokSasukha prApta kareM?  /
/ 137 /  /  vyAkhyA : - sabhI jIvoM kI bhavasthiti bar3I duHsaha va ber3haba
hai| jIva kabhI tiyaMcagati meM, kabhI narakagati meM kabhI | manuSyagati meM
aura kabhI devagati meM jAtA hai; jahAM use taraha-taraha kI yAtanAe~ milatI hai
/  tiyaMcagati meM vadha-baMdhana, mAra, parAdhInatA, bhUkha, pyAsa, atibhAra
lAdanA, aMgoM-avayavoM kA chedana Adi duHkha sahane par3ate haiN| narakagati meM
eka 318

Page #341 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Thus it is. The Story of Kamadeva Yoga Shastra, Third Light, Verse 138 Due to
the provocation of enmity, opposition, and distress from others, and due to the
influence of the field, one naturally has to suffer various kinds of torments.
Cutting the body with a saw, cooking in a cauldron, embracing a Śalmali tree
with sharp thorns, swimming in the Vaitaraṇī river, etc., are great sufferings.
Even in human life, there are many sufferings such as poverty, disease, illness,
dependence, killing, bondage, etc. Even in the state of gods, there are
sufferings such as envy, sorrow, burning with jealousy upon seeing the wealth of
others, death, six months of suffering, etc. Thus, the cycle of worldly
existence is full of suffering; contemplate on this sorrowful situation and
consider how all the beings entangled in the illusions of the world can attain
liberation by being free from all sufferings such as birth and death. After
waking up, contemplate in this way. 309. Even in contact with obstacles, those
who are steadfast in their vows are blessed. Such are Kamadeva and others,
praised even by the Tirthankaras. ||138|| Meaning: Even when confronted with
obstacles created by gods, humans, and animals, etc., those who are steadfast in
the protection and observance of their vows, such as Śrīkamadeva and others, are
blessed. The Tirthankara Bhagwan Mahāvīra himself praised them; contemplate in
this way. ||138|| The traditional story of the Śrāvaka Kamadeva is as follows:
Steadfast in the face of obstacles: The Śrāvaka Kamadeva On the banks of the
Ganges River, there was a beautiful city named Campa, adorned with rows of bent
bamboos and auspicious flags. In this city, King Jitasatru, with arms as long as
a serpent's body, ruled, his kingdom as prosperous as the house of Lakshmi. In
this same city, there lived a householder named Kamadeva, a wise man who
provided shelter to many people, like a large shady tree standing on the road.
His wife, named Bhadra, was beautiful and graceful, adorned with beauty and
charm, like Lakshmi herself. Kamadeva had six crore gold coins buried safely in
the ground; the same amount was invested in trade, and the same amount was
invested in household goods and other things. He had six cowherds, each with a
family of ten thousand cows. Once, while wandering through various regions,
Bhagwan Mahāvīra arrived there. He sat in the garden called Pūrṇabhadra, which
was a beautiful adornment to the earth, outside the city. When Kamadeva heard
this, he also went to the feet of the Lord and listened to his sweet and
auspicious Dharma teachings. After that, Kamadeva, with a pure mind, accepted
the householder Dharma with its twelve vows from the universally revered Bhagwan
Mahāvīra. Kamadeva renounced all other women except Bhadra. He renounced all the
other cowherds besides the six, and all the other treasures, trade, and
household arrangements, keeping only six crore gold coins for each. He kept five
hundred fields in the land for farming, with five hundred ploughs. He kept the
same number of carts and wagons for bringing goods from foreign lands, and kept
four carriages for travel, keeping them within the limits of the vows. He
renounced all other carriages. He kept one fragrant saffron cloth for wiping his
body, and renounced all others. He kept a tooth-brush made of green licorice
root, and renounced all other kinds of tooth-brushes. He renounced all fruits
except milk and amalaka. He renounced the use of oils except for massage with
sahasrapāka or śatpāka. He renounced all other ubtans except for the fragrant
clay ubtan to be applied to the body. He renounced the use of more than eight
pitchers of water for bathing. He renounced all other pastes except for the
paste of sandalwood and agarwood, and all other flowers except for garlands of
flowers and lotuses. He renounced all ornaments except for earrings and a ring
with his name on it. He renounced all other incense except for dasāng and
agarbatti incense. He kept ghevar and khaja, and renounced all other sweets. He
kept kaṣṭhapeya (guḍrab) prepared by boiling with pipparamūla, etc., and
renounced all other drinks. He kept kalmi rice, and renounced all other rice. He
kept uḍad, mung, and matar, and renounced all other dals (soups). He kept ghee
made from cows that had calved in the autumn, and renounced all other oily
substances. He kept swastika, mandaka, and palak vegetables, and renounced all
other vegetables. He renounced all water except for rainwater, and all tambūl
except for fragrant tambūl. In this way, taking vows, Kamadeva bowed to the Lord
and returned home. When his wife Bhadra also heard about the  319

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 thA: esA  /  kAmadeva kA kathAnaka yogazAstra tRtIya prakAza zloka 138 dUsare
ke vaira-virodha va kleza kI udIraNA (preraNA) se paramAdhAmiyoM se aura kSetra
ke kAraNa nAnA prakAra kI yAtanAe~ svAbhAvika hI bhoganI par3atI hai| karauta se
zarIra kATanA, kuMbhI meM pakAnA, kharAba nokadAra kArTo vAle zAlmalI vRkSa se
AliMgana karAnA, vaitaraNI nadI meM tairanA ityAdi mahAduHkha hai| manuSyabhava
meM bhI daridratA, vyAdhi, roga, parAdhInatA, vadha, baMdhana Adi kaI duHkha
hai| devagati meM bhI IrSyA, viSAda, dUsaroM kI saMpatti dekhakara jalanA,
cyavana (maraNa), 6 mahInoM kA saMtApa ityAdi duHkha hai| isa prakAra saMsAra-
paribhramaNa duHkha rUpa hai; aisI duHkhada sthiti para ciMtana kare ki saMsAra
ke sabhI mohamAyAlisa jIva janma-maraNa Adi sabhI duHkhoM se mukta hokara mokSa
ko kaise prApta kareM? jAgane ke bAda isa prakAra ciMtana kre|309|
saMsarge'pyupasargANAM dRDhavrataparAyaNAH  /  dhanyAste kAmadevAdyAH,
zlAghyAstIrthakRtAmapi  // 138 /  /  artha :- deva, manuSya aura tiryaca Adi ke
dvArA kRta upasargoM kA saMparka ho jAne para bhI apane vrata ke rakSaNa aura
pAlana meM dRr3ha zrIkAmadeva Adi zrAvakoM ko dhanya hai| jinakI prazaMsA
tIrthakara bhagavAn mahAvIra ne bhI kI thI; aisA ciMtana kare  /  / 138 //
kAmadeva zrAvaka kI saMpradAyaparaMparAgata kathA isa prakAra haiupasarga ke
samaya prata meM dRr3ha : kAmadeya zrAyaka : gaMgAnadI ke kinAre jhuke hue
bAMsoM kI katAra ke samAna manohara evaM caitya-dhvajAoM se suzobhita caMpAnAma
kI mahAnagarI thii| vahAM para sarpa ke zarIra ke samAna laMbI bhujAoM vAlA,
lakSmI ke kulagRhasadRza jitazatru rAjA rAjya karatA | thaa| isI nagarI meM
mArga para sthita vizAla chAyAdAra vRkSa ke samAna aneka logoM kA AzrayadAtA
evaM buddhizAlI kAmadeva gRhastha rahatA thaa| sAkSAt lakSmI kI taraha, rUpa-
lAvaNya se suzobhita uttama-AkRtisaMpanna bhadrA nAma kI usakI dharmapatnI thii|
kAmadeva ke pAsa chaha karor3a svarNamudrAe~ jamIna meM gAr3I huI surakSita thI;
itanI hI mudrAe~ vyApAra meM lagI huI thI aura itanA hI dhana ghara kI sAdhana-
sAmagrI vagairaha meM lagA huA thaa| usake yahAM 6 gokula the, pratyeka meM 10
hajAra gAyoM kA parivAra thaa| eka bAra vibhinna janapadoM meM vicaraNa karate
hue bhagavAn mahAvIra vahAM pdhaareN| ve nagarI ke bAhara pRthvI ke mukhamaMDana
pUrNabhadra nAmaka udyAna meM biraaje| kAmadeva ne sunA to vaha bhI prabhu-
caraNoM meM pahu~cA aura unakI karNapriya sudhAmayI dharmadezanA sunii| usake
bAda vizvavandya bhagavAn mahAvIra se nirmalabuddhi kAmadeva ne bAraha vratoM
vAlA gRhasthadharma aMgIkAra kiyaa| kAmadeva ne bhadrA ke sivAya anya samasta
strIsevana kA tyAga kiyaa| chaha gokula ke alAvA anya sabhI gokuloM kA aura
nidhAna, vyApAra gRhavyavasthA ke lie kramazaH chaha-chaha karor3a svarNamudrAoM
ke uparAMta dhana kA tyAga kiyaa| khetI ke lie 500 haloM kI jamIna meM pAMca-sau
khetoM kA parimANa kiyaa| itane hI chakar3e, gAr3iyA~ paradeza se mAla lAne
usake uparAMta kA tyAga kiyA aura paradeza lAne-pahaMcAne vAlI cAra savArI
gADiyA~ maryAdA meM rkhiiN| bAkI gAr3iyoM kA tyAga kiyaa| eka sugaMdhita
kASAyavastra (tauliyA) aMga poMchane ke lie rakhakara, anya saba kA tyAga kiyaa|
harI mulahaThI kA dAMtuna rakhakara anya kisma ke dAMtunoM kA tathA kSIra-
Amalaka ke sivAya anya phaloM kA tyAga kiyA, telamardana karane ke lie
sahasrapAka athavA zatapAka ke alAvA teloM ke istemAla kA tyAga kiyaa| zarIra
para lagAne vAlI khuzabUdAra miTTI kI ubaTana ke alAvA tamAma ubaTanoM kA tyAga
kiyaa| tathA snAna ke lie ATha ghar3oM se adhika pAnI istemAla karane kA tyAga
kiyA; caMdana va agara ke ghise hue lepa ke sivAya anya lepa tathA puSpa-mAlA
aura kamala ke atirikta phUloM kA tyAga kiyaa| kAnoM ke gahane tathA apane nAma
vAlI aMgUThI ke alAvA AbhUSaNoM kA tyAga kiyaa| dazAMga aura agarabattI kI dhUpa
ke sivAya aura dhUpoM kA tyAga kiyaa| ghevara aura khAjA rakhakara anya sabhI
miThAIyoM kA tyAga kiyaa| pIparAmUla Adi se ubAlakara taiyAra kiye hue
kASThapeya (gur3arAba) ke alAvA peya, kalamI cAvala ke sivAya anya cAvala tathA
ur3ada, mUMga aura maTara ke atirikta dAloM (sUpoM) kA tyAga kiyA; zaradaRtu meM
niSpanna gAya ke ghI ke sivAya anya snigdha vastuoM kA svastika.maMDaka aura
pAlaka kI bhAjI ke sivAya anya bhAjI kA tyAga kiyaa| varSAjala ke atirikta jala
kA evaM sugaMdhita tAMbUla ke sivAya tAMbUla kA tyAga kiyaa| isa prakAra niyama
lekara bhagavAna ko vaMdana kara kAmadeva apane ghara aayaa| usakI dharmapatnI
bhadrA ne bhI jaba apane 319

Page #342 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The devotee Kamadeva, who had passed the rigorous test by the gods,  Yoga
Shastra, Third Light, Verse 138 | When he heard about his husband's vow taking,
he also went to the Tirthankara Mahavira and accepted the twelve vows of a
Shravak. | After that, handing over the burden of the family to his eldest son,
Kamadeva himself started to observe the vows diligently in the dispensary. | One
day Kamadeva was absorbed in Kaussagg (meditation). Then, at night, to distract
him, a Mithyadrishti deva | came there in the form of a terrifying Pisach. The
hair on his head appeared yellow and like ripe paddy in the field | they were.
His skull was like a skull, his eyebrows like a mongoose's tail, and his ears
were shaped like a ladle. His nose and both lips looked like a camel's, and his
teeth were exactly like a plough tail. His two eyes were like two hot yellow
pots | they were. His tongue was like a snake's and his mustache was like a
horse's | was shining. The lower part of his lips was like a lion's. His chin
was like the mouth of a plough. Neck | long like a camel's and chest wide like
the gate of a city. His deep belly was like the netherworld and his navel was
like a well | was. His male organ was like a python. His two testicles were like
leather bottles. He had two long thighs like a palm tree, two feet like a
mountain rock. Suddenly, his voice was like the thunder of lightning, terrifying
and harsh. He had a mongoose in his ears instead of ornaments; he had a rat's |
garlands on his head and turtle garlands around his neck. He was wearing a
serpent in place of an armband. He suddenly became angry, drew his sword from
its sheath, and raised his terrifying forefinger like a whip, roaring at
Kamadeva | and said thus - Oh, you rogue! Desiring an unwanted thing! What kind
of pretense have you made? Poor fellow like you | a proud man wants heaven or
liberation? Give it up, this work. Otherwise, like fruits fall from a tree; so I
will cut off your head with this sharp | sword and drop it on the ground.
Hearing the terrifying, laughter-filled, threatening | roar, Kamadeva did not
move even a little from his samadhi. Has the octopus ever been disturbed by the
sound of the buffalo? When the Shravak Kamadeva did not move even a little from
his auspicious meditation, the Adhamdeva repeated the same things two or three
times. | He threatened again and again, but when he did not get distracted, he
played another trick, | taking the form of a drunken elephant. It is true that
wicked people do not refrain from doing evil deeds without weighing their
strength. | come. He assumed such a huge and terrifying elephant body that it
was very | high, like a black, moist cloud; as if the heap of falsehood had
shrunk and gathered in one place. His terrifying, long, two tusks looked like
Yama's mace. Raising his trunk high like a noose of death, he said to Kamadeva |
Oh, you magician! Give up this illusion and come to my shelter! Live happily in
my command. Some hypocritical guru has misled you into this delusion. If you
still don't give up this pretense of religion, then watch, I will pick you up
with this trunk-shaped club and throw you high in the sky, and when you start
falling back from the sky, I will pierce you on this tusk, so that your body
will pierce through the tusk. Then I will tear you apart like wood; like a
potter kneads clay, I will trample your body with my feet; so that your tragic
death | will happen. Even then, if you don't die, I will grind you in a sesame-
sized mill and make your body into one lump in a moment. The mad | deva spoke
such terrifying words, but the meditating Shravak Kamadeva did not give any
reply. Seeing Kamadeva steadfast in meditation, the wicked deva repeated the
same things two or three times again in the same way, | but when he did not
move, he picked him up with his trunk and threw him high in the sky, then caught
him like a blade of grass as he fell back and pierced him with his tusk. After
that, he crushed him with his feet. What evil deeds do not the enemies of
religious deeds do? But the great being Kamadeva endured all this patiently. He
was like a mountain | unmoved. He did not lose his steadiness even a little.
Even when such calamities befell him, he did not get distracted from his
meditation, then the arrogant Adhamdeva took the form of a snake. And as before,
he tried to frighten Kamadeva again. But the patient man was absorbed in his
meditation. He did not get scared, he did not waver. His words were ineffective
and futile he 320

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 deva dvArA kaThora parIkSA meM uttIrNa kAmadeva zrAvaka yogazAstra tRtIya
prakAza zloka 138 | pati ke vrata grahaNa kI bAta sunI to usane bhI tIrthaMkara
mahAvIra ke pAsa jAkara zrAvaka ke bAraha vrata aMgIkAra kiye| | isake bAda
kuTuMba kA bhAra bar3e putra ko sauMpakara svayaM kAmadeva pauSadhazAlA meM
apramattabhAva se vratoM kA pAlana karane lgaa| | eka dina kAmadeva kAussagga
(dhyAna) meM lIna thaa| tabhI rAta ke samaya use vicalita karane ke lie koI
mithyAdRSTi deva | vikarAla pizAca kA rUpa dhAraNa karake vahAM aayaa| usake
sira ke bAla pIle aura kyArI meM pake hue dhAna ke samAna pratIta | hote the|
usakA kapAla khappara ke samAna, bhauMhe nevale kI pUMcha-sI aura kAna sUpa -
sarIkhe AkAra ke the| isake nAka donoM oTha UMTa ke-se mAlUma hote the aura
dAMta ekadama hala pUMcha sarIkhI thii| usakI do AMkheM tapI huI pIlI patIlI kI
ke donoM nathUne aise lagate the mAno jur3A huA cUlhA ho| | jaise the| usakI
jIbha sAMpa kI - sI aura mUMcha ghor3e kI | nAMI (taraha) camaka rahI thI  /
usake hoTha kA nicalA bhAga zera kA - sA thaa| usakI ThuDDI hala ke muMha ke
samAna thI  /  gardana | UMTa ke samAna laMbI aura chAtI nagara ke daravAje
sarIkhI caur3I thI  /  pAtAla sarIkhA usakA gaharA peTa thA aura kue~ ke |
samAna nAbhi thI  /  usakA puruSacihna ajagara ke samAna thaa| usake donoM
aMDakoSa camar3e kI kuppI ke samAna the  /  tAr3avRkSa kI taraha laMbI laMbI
usakI do jAMgheM thIM, parvata kI zilA ke samAna usake do paira the| acAnaka
bijalI ke kar3Ake kIsI bhayaMkara karkaza usakI AvAja thii| vaha kAnoM meM
AbhUSaNa ke badale nevalA DAle hue thA; usake sira para cUhe kI | mAlAe~ DAlI
huI thI aura gale meM kachue kI mAlAe~ par3I thii| bAjUbaMda ke sthAna para vaha
sarpa dhAraNa kiye hue thA  /  usane sahasA kruddha hokara myAna se talavAra
nikAlI aura cAbuka sarIkhI bhayaMkara tarjanI aMgulI uThAkara garjatA huA
kAmadeva | se isa prakAra kahane lagA- are dhUrta! anacAhI vastu ke abhilASI !
yaha tUMne kyA DhoMga kara rakhA hai? becArA tere jaisA | daMbhI AdamI svarga yA
mokSa cAhatA hai? chor3a de, isa kArya ko  /  varanA, per3a se jaise phala
girate haiM; vaise hI isa tIkhI | talavAra se tere mastaka ko kATakara jamIna
para girA duuNgaa| isa prakAra se pizAca kI bhayaMkara aTTahAsa pUrNa dhamakI
bharI | garjanA sunakara bhI kAmadeva apanI samAdhi se jarA bhI calAyamAna nahIM
huaa| kyA aSTApada kabhI bhaiMse kI AvAja se kSubdha huA hai? jaba kAmadeva
zrAvaka apane zubhadhyAna se lezamAtra bhI calAyamAna na huA, to adhamadeva ne
do-tIna bAra | unhIM bAtoM ko dohraayaa| bAra-bAra dhamakiyA~ dI, isa para bhI
jaba vaha vicalita na huA to usane dUsarA dAMva pheMkA, | matavAle hAthI kA rUpa
bnaakr| saca hai, duSTajana apanI zakti ko tole binA hI adharma kArya karane se
bAja nahIM | aate| usane aisA vizAla aura vikarAla hAthI kA zarIra dhAraNa kiyA
jo kAle-kajarAre sajala megha ke samAna atyaMta | UMcA thA; mAno cAroM ora se
simaTakara eka hI jagaha mithyAtva kA Dhera laga gayA ho| usake bhayaMkara
laMbe-laMbe do daMtazUla yamarAja ke bhujadaMDa ke samAna lagate the| kAlapAza
kI-sI apanI sUMDa UMcI karake usane kAmadeva se kahA| are mAyAvI ! chor3a de,
isa mAyAjAla ko aura A jA merI zaraNa meM! merI AjJA meM sukhapUrvaka raha  /
kisI pAkhaMDI guru ne tujhe bahakAkara isa mohadazA meM DAlA hai| agara tUM aba
bhI isa dharma ke DhoMga ko nahIM chor3egA, to dekha le, isI sUMDa rUpI DaMr3e
se uThAkara AkAza meM tujhe bahuta UMcA uchAla pheMkUMgA aura jaba tUM vApisa
AkAza se nIce girane lagegA, taba maiM tujhe isa daMtazUla para aise jhelUMgA,
jisase terA zarIra daMtazUla se ArapAra viMdha jaayegaa| phira lakar3a kI taraha
tujhe | cIra DAlUMgA; kumhAra jaise miTTI ko rauMdatA hai, vaise hI apane pairoM
se tere zarIra rauMda DAlUMgA; jisase terI karuNamRtyu | ho jaaygii| itane para
bhI na marA to tila ke samAna kolhU meM pIsakara kSaNabhara meM tere zarIra kA
ekapiMDa banA dUMgA  /  unmatta | bane hue deva ne isa taraha bhayaMkara se
bhayaMkara vacana kahe, magara dhyAna meM magna kAmadeva zrAvaka ne koI bhI
pratyuttara na diyA  /  dRr3hacitta kAmadeva ko dhyAna meM aDola dekhakara
duSTAzaya deva ne isI prakAra do-tIna bAra phira ve hI bAteM doharAI, | phira
bhI jaba vaha calita nahIM huA, taba sUMDadaMDa se uThAkara AkAza meM U~cA
uchAlA, phira vApisa girate hue ko ghAsa ke pUle kI taraha jhela liyA aura
daMtazUla se bIMdha ddaalaa| tatpazcAt use pairoM se kucalA  /  dharmakAryoM ke
virodhI durAtmA kauna-sA akArya nahIM kara baiThate ? lekina mahAsatva kAmadeva
ne yaha saba dhaiyapUrvaka sahana kiyaa| vaha parvata ke samAna | aDola rhaa|
usane jarA bhI sthiratA nahIM chodd'ii| aise upasarga (vipatti) A par3ane para
bhI vaha dhyAna se vicalita nahIM huA, taba ahaMkArI adhamadeva ne sAMpa kA rUpa
bnaayaa| aura pUrvavat phira usane kAmadeva ko DarAne kI ceSTAe~ kIM  /  paraMtu
dhIra puruSa apane dhyAna meM ekAgra thA  /  vaha jarA bhI DarA nahIM, DigA
nhiiN| apane vacana niSprabhAva aura niSphala hote vaha 320

Page #343 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Description of the 6 Aspirations of a Shravak  Seeing the description of the
6 aspirations of a Shravak in the third light of Yogashastra, verses 139 to 141,
and seeing Kamadeva as even more fearless and strong, the serpentine, low-born
deva, like leather being stretched on a drum, wrapped himself around Kamadeva's
entire body in the form of a serpent and bit him mercilessly with sharp teeth,
very forcefully. Yet, Kamadeva, absorbed in his meditation nectar, did not care
for this pain. Afterwards, defeated and exhausted from all sides, the deva
assumed his true divine form. Then, illuminating all four directions, he entered
the dispensary and, with folded hands, humbly said to Kamadeva: "Blessings upon
you, Kamadeva. When Indra praised you in the assembly of the devas, I could not
bear it. Therefore, I came here to test you. Because sometimes, even masters, in
their pride of ownership, present the truth in a distorted way. For this reason,
I had taken various forms and tested you in various ways. But I must say that
you are as patient, brave, fearless, and steadfast in Dharma as Indra Maharaj
had praised you to be. I troubled you greatly while testing you; for that, I
seek forgiveness for my offenses." Thus, after repeatedly pleading with
Kamadeva, the deva returned to his place. The unwavering Kamadeva also completed
his Kayotsarga.  The Srivirprabu, overflowing with natural affection for
virtues, praised Kamadeva Shravak in his Samvasaran (Dharma Sabha) for his
equanimity in facing the obstacles and his steadfastness in his vows. The next
day, Shravak Kamadeva came to pay homage at the lotus feet of Tribhvan-Swami
Srivirprabu, then the Lord said to Gautam and other munis: "Ayushman Shramanos!
If Kamadeva, while engaged in the duties of a householder, faced such terrible
obstacles with equanimity and fearlessness, then you, the renunciants, who are
devoted to the path of Sadhudharma and have renounced all attachments, should
especially endure such obstacles. In the declining years of his life, Kamadeva
Shravak, in order to purify his karmas, worshipped the eleven images of a
Shravak, which are the means to achieve this. In his final moments, he performed
Sanlekhana, embraced the vow of Anashan, and attained death with supreme
Samadhi. He became a deva in the Arunabha Vimana, with a lifespan of four
Palyopama. From there, after completing his lifespan, he will be born in the
Mahavidehakshetra and attain Siddhahood. Just as Kamadeva Shravak, even in the
face of the crisis of obstacles, remained steadfast in his vow-keeping and
exhibited natural patience, which was praised by the Tirthankara Bhagwan, so too
should noble souls remain steadfast in their vow-keeping with patience. This was
the life of Kamadeva, a steadfast follower of Dharma! ||138||  After abandoning
sleep, a Dharma-atma Shravak should think in this way. 310. "Jino Devaha Kripa
Dharmo, Guruvo Yatra Sadhavaha. Shravakatvaya Kastasmai, Na Shlaghyayet
Vimudhadhi?" ||139|| Meaning: In which Shravak Dharma are the Devas, the ideal
conquerors of enemies like raga, etc., the Dharma-preaching, restrained Sadhu
Gurus, who are devoted to the five great vows, and the compassionate Dharma,
which desires to remove the suffering of the suffering, then who would be so
foolish as to not praise this Shravakatva (Shravak Dharma)? He will surely
praise it. Special Meaning: But Devas who are attached to raga, etc., are not
worthy of worship for a Shravak; Dharma in the form of violent yajnas, etc., is
not Dharma; and Sadhu Gurus who are engrossed in arnabha-parigraha, etc., are
not true Gurus. ||139|| Now, after abandoning sleep, the aspirations of a
Shravak, in the form of thoughts, are presented in seven verses. 311.
"Jindharmavinirmukto, Ma Bhuvam Chakravartyapi. Syam Cheto'pi Daridro'pi,
Jindharmaadhivasitaha." ||140|| Meaning: I do not desire to become a Chakravarti
even, being devoid of (deprived of) Jain Dharma, in the form of knowledge,
darshan, and charitra; because without Dharma, that position leads to hell. But
I accept being poor or a slave in a family that is well-cultured in Jain Dharma,
because there, attaining Dharma is easy. ||140|| ||312. "Tyaktasango Jirnavasa,
Malaklinnakalevaraha. Bhajan Madhukari Vrutti, Munichaan Kada Shraye?" ||141||
Meaning: When will that auspicious, auspicious day come for me, when I, having
renounced attachment to all external objects, with worn-out clothes, and a body
soiled with impurities, will embrace the life of a Madhukari (bee), and when
will I take refuge in the Munis? ||141||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrAvaka ke 6 manorathoM kA varNana yogazAstra tRtIya prakAza zloka 139 se 141
dekhakara tathA kAmadeva ko aura jyAdA nirbhIka va majabUta dekhakara vaha
sarpAkAra adhama deva tabale para jaise camar3A mar3hA jAtA hai; vaise hI sarpa
ke rUpa meM usake sAre zarIra para lipaTa gayA aura kAmadeva ko nirdayatApUrvaka
tIkSNa dAMtoM se atyaMta jora se ddsaa| phira bhI apane dhyAnAmRta meM masta
bane kAmadeva ne isa vedanA kI kucha bhI paravAha nahIM kii| tadanaMtara saba
ora se hAra-thakakara usa deva ne apanA asalI divya rUpa bnaayaa| phira cAroM
dizAoM ko prakAzita karate hue usane pauSadhazAlA meM praveza kiyA aura
namratApUrvaka hAtha jor3akara kAmadeva se kahane lagA-dhanya ho kAmadeva, Apako
vAstava meM iMdra ne devasabhA meM jaba ApakI prazaMsA kI, taba maiM use sahana
na kara skaa| isalie maiM yahAM Apako calAyamAna karane ke lie AyA thaa| kyoMki
kabhI-kabhI svAmI bhI apane svAmitva ke abhimAna meM Akara vAstavika se viparIta
tathya ko galata rUpa meM bhI prastuta kara dete haiN| isa kAraNa maiMne vividha
rUpa banAkara taraha-taraha se ApakI kaThora parIkSA lI thii| paraMtu mujhe
kahanA hogA ki iMdramahArAja ne jaisI ApakI prazaMsA kI thI; vaise hI Apa dhIra,
vIra, niHzaMka evaM dharma meM dRr3ha hai| parIkSA karate samaya maiMne Apako
bahuta parezAna kiyA; usake lie maiM apane una aparAdhoM kI kSamA cAhatA huuN|
isa prakAra kAmadeva se bArabAra anunaya-vinaya karake deva apane sthAna ko
vApisa calA gyaa| akhaMDavratI kAmadeva ne bhI apanA kAyotsarga pUrNa kiyaa|
guNoM ke prati sahajabhAva se vAtsalya se ota-prota zrIvIraprabhu ne apane
samavasaraNa (dharmasabhA) meM upasargo ko samabhAva se sahakara vrata meM
dRr3ha rahane vAle kAmadeva zrAvaka kI prazaMsA kii| dUsare dina zrAvaka
kAmadeva tribhuvana-svAmI zrIvIraprabhu ke caraNakamaloM meM vaMdana karane AyA,
taba bhagavAn ne gautama Adi muniyoM se isa prakAra kahA-AyuSyamAna zramaNo!
gRhasthadharma meM bhI kAmadeva ne aise bhayaMkara upasargoM kA samabhAva evaM
nirbhayatA se sAmanA kiyA to phira sAdhudharmatatpara sarva-saMga-parityAgI tuma
sarIkhe tyAgiyoM ko to aise upasarga vizeSa rUpa se sahana karane caahie| apane
jIvana kI DhalatI umra meM kAmadeva zrAvaka ne karmoM ko nirmala karane ke
upAyabhUta zrAvaka kI gyAraha pratimAoM kI kramazaH ArAdhanA kii| aMtima samaya
meM saMlekhanA karake anazanavrata aMgIkAra kiyA aura uttama samAdhipUrvaka
mRtyu prApta kara vaha aruNAbha nAmaka vimAna meM cAra palyopama kI AyuSya vAlA
deva bnaa| vahAM se AyuSya pUrNa kara mahAvidehakSetra meM janma lekara
siddhapada prApta kregaa| jisa taraha kAmadeva zrAvaka ne upasarga ke
saMkaTakAlIna avasara para bhI apane vrata-pAlana meM aDiga rahakara svAbhAvika
dhairya dhAraNa kiyA thA, jisakI prazaMsA tIrthaMkara bhagavAn ne bhI kI thI;
usI taraha uttama AtmAoM ko bhI vratapAlana meM dhairyapUrvaka aDiga rahanA
caahie| yaha thA kAmadeva kA dRr3hadharmiSTha jIvana!  /  / 138 /  /  nidrAtyAga
ke bAda dharmAtmA zrAvaka ko isa prakAra vicAra karanA caahie|310|jino devaH
kRpA dharmo, guravo yatra sAdhavaH  /  zrAvakatvAya kastasmai, na zlAghayet
vimuuddh'dhiiH?||139|| artha :- jisa zrAvakadharma meM rAgAdi zatruoM ke Adarza
vijetA deva haiM, paMcamahAvrata meM tatpara dharmopadezaka saMyamI sAdhu guru
hai; duHkhiyoM ke duHkhoM ko dUra karane kI abhilASA rUpa dayAmaya dharma hai,
phira kauna aisA mUr3habuddhi hogA, jo isa zrAvakatva (zrAvakadharma) kI
sarAhanA nahIM karegA? avazya hI tArIpha kregaa| vizeSArtha :- magara rAgAdi-
yukta deva zrAvaka ke lie pUjanIya nahIM hote; hiMsAmaya yajJAdi rUpa dharma,
dharma nahIM hotA aura AraMbha-parigraha Adi meM race-pace sAdhu guru nahIM hote
/  / 139 /  /  aba nidrAtyAga ke bAda zrAvaka ke manoratha rUpa bhAvanAe~ sAta
zlokoM meM prastuta karate haiN|311| jinadharmavinirmukto, mA bhuvaM
cakravartyapi  /  syAM ceTo'pi daridro'pi, jinadharmAdhivAsitaH  // 140 //
artha :- jJAna, darzana aura cAritra rUpa jainadharma se rahita (vaMcita) hokara
maiM cakravartI bananA bhI nahIM cAhatA; kyoMki dharma ke binA vaha pada naraka
meM le jAtA hai| kintu jainadharma se susaMskRta parivAra meM daridra yA dAsa
honA mujhe svIkAra hai, kyoMki vahAM dharmaprApti sulabha hai  /  / 140 /  /
||312 /  tyaktasaGgo jIrNavAsA, malaklinnakalevaraH  /  bhajan mAdhukarI vRttiM,
municA~ kadA zraye?  // 141 /  /  _ artha :- mere liye kaba vaha maMgalamaya
zubha dina AyegA, jaba maiM sabhI parapadArthoM ke prati Asakti kA tyAgI, 321

Page #344 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Aspirations of a Shravak  **Verse 142-145 from the Third Light of Yoga
Shastra**  **Verse 141:**  When will I, clothed in worn-out garments, with a
soiled body, embrace the path of a Muni, taking refuge in Madhukari (begging for
alms)?  **Explanation:**  Madhukari refers to the way a bee collects nectar from
flowers planted by others, without causing any harm to the flowers, and thus
satisfies its own needs. Similarly, a monk, without causing any harm, accepts
food prepared by householders, with a sense of gratitude and devotion, and thus
satisfies his needs. In this world, one who is free from external and internal
possessions is called a Shraman. Just as a bee naturally collects pollen from
blooming flowers, a Sadhu naturally accepts a small amount of food to sustain
his body and continue his journey of self-control. The comparison to a bee
highlights that the alms received by a Muni do not cause any harm to other
beings. This is called Madhukari Vriti.  **Conclusion:**  A Shravak should
aspire to live a life of Madhukari Vriti and thus partake in the Muni-charya,
which is the path of the Muni, characterized by the fundamental and advanced
virtues.  **Verse 142:**  Abandoning the company of those with bad character,
touching the dust of the Guru's feet, when will I, practicing the three yogas,
become capable of ending the cycle of birth and death?  **Meaning:**  The
company of those with bad character includes those who are immoral in the
worldly sense, such as adulterers, actors, singers, and prostitutes, as well as
those who are immoral in the spiritual sense, such as those who are arrogant,
lazy, deceitful, attached, and self-indulgent. By abandoning the company of such
people and touching the dust of the Guru's feet, one should practice the three
yogas of knowledge, vision, and conduct, and thus become capable of ending the
cycle of birth and death.  **Verse 143:**  When will I, in the dead of night,
outside the city, in a beautiful natural place, be absorbed in Kayotsarga, and
when will bulls mistake me for a pillar and rub their shoulders against me?
**Meaning:**  A Shravak who practices Kayotsarga should aspire to be absorbed in
it, outside the city, in a beautiful natural place, in the dead of night, to the
extent that bulls mistake him for a pillar and rub their shoulders against him.
**Implication:**  A Sadhu who practices Kayotsarga is always absorbed in it. A
Shravak should aspire to achieve such absorption.  **Verse 144:**  When will I,
sitting in Padmasana in the forest, with a fawn nestled in my lap, be able to
have the old leaders of the herd of deer sniff my face with trust?  **Meaning:**
When will I, sitting in Padmasana in the forest, with a fawn nestled in my lap,
be able to have the old leaders of the herd of deer sniff my face with trust?
**Implication:**  Old deer are not easily trusting of humans. But when they see
the unwavering stillness of a person in deep Samadhi, they become so trusting
that they can lick or sniff their face without fear.  **Verse 145:**  When will
I be able to have the same attitude towards enemies and friends, grass and
women, gold and stone, gems and dirt, liberation and the world?  **Meaning:**
When will I be able to have the same attitude towards enemies and friends, grass
and women, gold and stone, gems and dirt, liberation and the world?
**Explanation:**  One may find people who have the same attitude towards enemies
and friends, grass and women, gold and stone, gems and dirt, but a truly
detached soul is one who sees no difference between liberation, which is the
state of being free from karma, and the world, which is the state of being bound
by karma.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrAvaka ke manoratha yogazAstra tRtIya prakAza zloka 142 se 145 jIrNazIrNa
vastradhArI hokara malina-zarIra kI paravAha na karate hue mAdhukarI
(bhikSAvRtti) kA Azraya lekara municaryA ko grahaNa karUMgA?  // 141 /  /
vyAkhyA :- mAdhukarI vRtti kA tAtparya yaha hai ki jaise bhauMrA dUsaroM ke
dvArA boye hue paudhoM ke phUloM se thor3A-thor3A rasa lekara pAna karatA hai,
balki phUloM ko tanika bhI pIr3A nahIM pahuMcAte hue vaha apanI AtmA ko tRpta
kara letA hai; vaise hI bhikSu bhI gRhasthoM ke dvArA apane liye taiyAra kiye
hue AhAra meM se thor3A-thor3A AhAra kisI ko pIr3A pahu~cAe binA isa prakAra kI
dAnaiSaNA aura bhaktaiSaNA pUrvaka grahaNa karake apanI tRpti kara lete haiN|
isa jagat meM bAhya aura AbhyaMtara parigraha se mukta ho, use zramaNa kahate
haiN| jisa taraha bhauMrA svAbhAvika rUpa se taiyAra hue puSpoM se parAga letA
hai, usI taraha sAdhu bhI svataH svAbhAvika rUpa se niSpanna hue AhAra se zarIra
aura saMyamayAtrA calAne ke lie thor3A-sA AhAra letA hai| bhaure kI upamA dekara
batAyA hai ki muni dvArA gRhIta bhikSA se dUsare jIvoM ko jarA bhI AghAta na
phuNce| isI kA nAma mAdhukarIvRtti hai  /  / 141 /  /  niSkarSa yaha hai ki
zrAvaka aisA manoratha kare ki kaba maiM mAdhukarIvRtti se jIkara mUlaguNa aura
uttaraguNa rUpI municaryA kA sevana karUMgA? tthaa|313| tyajan duHzIlasaMsarga,
gurupAdarajaH spRzan  /  kadA'haM yogamabhyasyan, prabhaveyaM bhavacchide!  //
142 /  /  artha :- vyabhicAriyoM, bhAMDoM, bhavaiyoM, vezyAoM Adi laukika
duHzIlAcAriyoM tathA pAsatthA, osanna, kuzIla, saMsakta, yathAcchandaka
(svacchaMdAcArI); ina lokottara duHzIlAcAriyoM kI saMgati karanA duHzIlasaMsarga
kahalAtA hai| unakA tyAgakara gurumahArAja ke caraNaraja kA sparza karatA huA
jJAnadarzanacAritra rUpI tInoM yogoM kA bAra-bAra abhyAsa karake bhava-janma-
maraNa ke cakra ko samApta karane meM kaba samartha bnuuNgaa?||142|| ||314 /
mahAnizAyAM prakRte, kAyotsarge purAd bhiH| stambhavat skandhakarSaNaM, vRSAH
kuryuHkadA myi?||143|| artha :- kaba maiM mahAghora rAtri ke samaya nagara ke
bAhara prakRti ke ramyapradeza meM kAyotsarga meM lIna banUMgA aura kaba baila
mujhe khaMbhA samajhakara apanA kaMdhA ghiseMge?  /  / 143 /  /  bhAvArtha :-
pratimAdhAraNa karane vAlA zrAvaka nagara ke bAhara ekAgratA se kAyotsarga kare,
taba baila usake zarIra ko khaMbhe kI bhrAMti se apanA kaMdhA yA gardana ghiseM;
yaha bAta sAdhu hone kI abhilASA kI apekSA se samajhanA caahie| jinakalpI sAdhu
to hamezA kAyotsarga (dhyAna) meM lIna rahate haiN| pratimAdhArI zrAvaka soce ki
kaba mujhe aisI tallInatA prApta hogI?  /  / 143 /  /  isI prkaar|315| vane
padmAsanAsInaM kroDasthita-mRgArbhakam  /  kadA''ghrAsyanti vaktre mAM, jaranto
mRgyuuthpaaH||144|| artha :- vana meM maiM padmAsana lagAkara baiThA hoU; usa
samaya hirana ke bacce vizvAsa pUrvaka merI goda meM Akara baiTha jAye aura
krIr3A kre| isa prakAra mere zarIra kI paravAha kiye binA mRgoM kI TolI ke
bUr3he mukhiyA kaba vizvAsa-pUrvaka mere muMha ko sUMghege?  /  / 144 /  /  /
bhAvArtha :- yahAM 'vRddhamRga' kahane kA abhiprAya yaha hai ki ve manuSya para
sahasA vizvAsa nahIM krte| paraMtu paramasamAdhi kI nizcalatA dekhakara ve
vRddhamRga bhI aise vizvAsI bana jAyeM ki nirbhayatA se mukha cATe athavA sUMghe
/  / 144 /  /  tthaa|316| zatrau mitre tRNe straiNe, svarNe'zmani maNau mRdi  /
mokSe bhave bhaviSyAmi, nirvizeSamatiH kadA?  // 145 /  /  artha :- kaba maiM
zatru aura mitra para tRNa aura strI-samUha para; svarNa aura pASANa para, maNi
aura miTTI para tathA mokSa aura saMsAra para samabuddhi rakha sakU~gA? ||145 /
/  vyAkhyA :- zatrumitrAdi se lekara maNi-miTTI taka para samAna-buddhi rakhane
vAle mila sakate haiM kintu parama vairAgyasaMpanna AtmA to vaha hai, jise
karma-viyoga rUpa mokSa aura karmasaMbaMdha rUpa saMsAra meM bhI koI aMtara
nahIM dikhtaa| 322

Page #345 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Eleven Images of a Shravak  **Yoga Shastra, Third Light, Verses 146-147**
It is said, "In liberation and in existence, the best Muni is devoid of
attachment everywhere."  This means that the best Muni is one who is completely
detached from liberation and existence. In this way, the aspirations of a
Shravak gradually increase.   The first verse describes the aspiration for
attachment to Jain Dharma, the second verse describes the aspiration to accept
the conduct of the Sadhus, the third verse describes the aspiration to attain
excellent character along with the practice of Sadhu Dharma, the fourth verse
describes the aspiration to attain the state of non-attachment, including
Kayotsarga, the fifth verse describes the aspiration to become trustworthy to
all beings, and the sixth verse describes the aspiration to reach the state of
Paramasamayik.   **Verse 146**  **Meaning:** To ascend the ladder of qualities
(Gunasthanas) leading to the palace of liberation, one should aspire for the
above-mentioned aspirations, which are like the roots of a vine of supreme
bliss.  **Meaning:** Just as a vine grows from its roots, so too does the
supreme bliss of Paramasamayik manifest from these aspirations. Therefore, one
should contemplate these seven verses and their aspirations.  **Verse 147**
**Meaning:** A Shravak who diligently follows the Shravak conduct throughout the
day and night, and who practices the eleven images of a Shravak as described in
the scriptures, even while being a householder, becomes purified by the
destruction of his sins.  **What are these images?**  The practice of these
images purifies even a householder Shravak. These are called the Eleven Images
of a Shravak:  **Image** refers to a specific vow of practice, in which the
Shravak, with determination, diligently follows the Yamas and Niyamas that they
have accepted. There are eleven images for a Shravak:  1. **Darshan-Pratima:**
For one month, continuously and without deviation, one should practice pure
Samyagdarshan, free from doubts and other defects, adorned with qualities like
calmness, and embellished with virtues like stability. This should be done
without fear, greed, shame, or other obstacles.  2. **Vrat-Pratima:** For two
months, continuously and without deviation, one should practice the twelve vows,
along with the practice of the previous image.  3. **Samayik-Pratima:** For
three months, continuously and without deviation, one should practice pure
Samayik, free from the 32 defects, twice a day, with diligence, along with the
practice of the previous images.  4. **Paushdha-Pratima:** For four months,
continuously and without deviation, one should practice Paushdha on every
Chaturmashi, along with the practice of the previous images.  5. **Kayotsarga-
Pratima:** For five months, on every Chaturmashi, one should practice
Kayotsarga, remaining immobile throughout the night, either inside the house, at
the doorstep, or in the courtyard, while practicing the previous four images.
6. **Brahmacharya-Pratima:** For six months, continuously and without deviation,
one should practice Brahmacharya with Trikaran-Yoga, along with the practice of
the previous images.  7. **Sachittavarjan-Pratima:** For seven months, one
should abstain from consuming food that has been touched by the mind.  8.
**Aranbhavarjan-Pratima:** For eight months, one should abstain from initiating
any action.  9. **Preshya-Varjan-Pratima:** For nine months, one should abstain
from causing others to initiate any action.  10. **Udishtvarjan-Pratima:** For
ten months, one should abstain from consuming food that has been prepared for
oneself.  11. **Shramanabhoot-Pratima:** For eleven months, one should leave
behind the company of family and friends, wear the robes of a Sadhu, including a
Rajoharan and a Patra, and practice like a Sadhu. One should shave their hair or
cut it short. One should live in a secluded place, such as a Gokul or Upashraya,
and practice by begging for food. When begging, one should say, "Give alms to
the Shramanopasaka who is practicing the images," and then accept the food. One
should give the giver of alms...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrAvaka kI gyAraha pratimAe~ yogazAstra tRtIya prakAza zloka 146 se 147 kahA
bhI hai-mokSe bhave ca sarvatra niHspRho munisattamaH arthAt - vahI muni uttama
hai, jo mokSa athavA bhava (saMsAra) ke prati sarvatra niHspRha (niSkAMkSa)
rahatA hai| isa prakAra zrAvaka ke manoratha kramazaH uttarottara bar3hakara
hote jAte haiN| isa prakAra prathama zloka meM jinadharma ke prati anurAga kA
manoratha, dUsare zloka meM sAdhu-dharma svIkAra karane kA manoratha, tIsare
zloka meM sAdhudharma kI caryA ke sAtha utkRSTa cAritra kI prApti kA manoratha,
cauthe zloka meM kAyotsarga Adi niSkaMpabhAva kI prApti kA manoratha, pAMcaveM
zloka meM sarvaprANivizvasanIya banane kA manoratha aura chaTe meM parama-
sAmAyika taka pahuMcane kA manoratha batAyA hai  /  / 145 /  /  aba upasaMhAra
karate hue kahate haiN|317| adhiroDhuM guNazreNiM, nizreNiM muktivezmanaH  /
parAnandalatAkandAn, kuryAditi manorathAn  // 146 /  /  artha :- mokSa rUpI
mahala meM praveza ke hetu guNa (guNasthAna) -zreNI rUpI niHzreNI para bar3hane
ke lie utkRSTa AnaMda rUpI latAkaMda ke samAna uparyukta manoratha kare  /  /
146 /  /  | bhAvArtha :- jaise kaMdoM se latA utpanna hotI hai, vaise hI ina
manorathoM se paramasAmAyika rUpa paramAnaMda prakaTa hotA hai| isalie ina sAtoM
zlokoM ke anusAra manorathoM kA ciMtana karanA cAhie  /  / 146 /  /  . aba
upasaMhAra karate haiN|318| ityahorAtrikI caryAmapramattaH samAcaran  /
yathAvaduktavRttastho, gRhastho'pi vizudhyati  // 147 /  /  artha :- isa prakAra
pUre eka dina aura rAta kI zrAvakacaryA kA apramattabhAva se pAlana karatA huA
bhI jo zrAvaka, zrAvaka kI zAstrokta gyAraha pratimA rUpa savrata kI savidhi
ArAdhanA karatA hai, vaha gRhastha (sAdhu na) hone para bhI pApoM kA kSaya
karake vizuddha ho jAtA hai  /  / 147 /  /  ve pratimA kauna-sI haiM; jisakI
sAdhanA karane para gRhastha zrAvaka bhI vizuddha ho jAtA hai? ise kahate
haiMzrAvaka kI gyAraha pratimAe~ : pratimA kA artha hai-viziSTa sAdhanA kI
pratijJA, jisameM zrAvaka saMkalpa pUrvaka apane svIkRta yama-niyamoM kA
dRr3hatA se pAlana karatA hai| ye pratimAe~ zrAvaka ke lie gyAraha hai| 1.
darzana-pratimA - zaMkAdi doSarahita, prazamAdi lakSaNoM se yukta, sthairyAdi
bhUSaNoM se bhUSita, mokSamArga ke mahala kI nIMva ke samAna samyagdarzana kA;
bhaya, lobha, lajjAdi, vighnoM se rahita niraticAra vizuddha rUpa se lagAtAra
eka mAsa taka pAlana krnaa| 2. vrata-pratimA - pUrvapratimA ke pAlana ke sahita
bAraha vratoM kA do mAsa taka lagAtAra niraticAra evaM avirAdhita rUpa se pAlana
krnaa| 3. sAmAyika-pratimA - pUrvapratimAoM kI sAdhanA sahita donoM samaya
apramatta rUpa se 32 doSoM se rahita zuddha sAmAyika lagAtAra tIna mahIne taka
krnaa| 4. pauSadha-pratimA-pUrvapratimAoM ke anuSThAna sahita niraticAra rUpa se
4 mahIne taka pratyeka catuSparvI para pauSadha kA pAlana krnaa| 5. kAyotsarga-
pratimA - pUrvokta cAra pratimAoM kA pAlana karate hue pAMca mahIne taka
pratyeka catuSparvI meM ghara ke aMdara, ghara ke dvAra para athavA cauka meM
pariSaha upasarga meM sArI rAtabhara calAyamAna hue binA kAyA ke vyutsarga rUpa
meM kAyotsarga krnaa| isa prakAra uttara-uttara kI pratimA meM pUrva-pUrva
pratimAoM kA anuSThAna niraticAra pAlana karanA aura pratimA ke anusAra
kAlamaryAdA utane hI mahIne smjhnaa| 6. brahmacarya-pratimA - pUrva pratimAoM ke
anuSThAna sahita chaha mahIne taka trikaraNa-yoga se niraticAra brahmacarya kA
pAlana krnaa| 7. sacittavarjana-pratimA - sAta mahIne taka sacittapadArthasevana
kA tyAga krnaa| 8. AraMbhavarjanapratimA - ATha mahIne taka svayaM AraMbha
karane kA tyAga krnaa| 9. preSya-varjanapratimA - nau mahIne taka dUsare se bhI
AraMbha karAne kA tyAga krnaa| 10. udiSTavarjanapratimA - dasa mahIne taka apane
liye taiyAra kiyA huA AhAra bhI khAne kA tyAga krnaa| 11. zramaNabhUta pratimA -
gyAraha mahIne taka svajana Adi kA saMga chor3akara rajoharaNa, pAtra Adi
sAdhuveza lekara sAdhu kI taraha caryA kre| bAloM kA loca kare yA khuramuMDana
kre| apane gokula, upAzraya Adi svataMtra sthAna meM rahakara bhikSAcarI karate
hue sAdhanA kre| bhikSA ke lie gharoM meM jAkara pratimApratipannAya
zramaNopAsakAya bhikSAM dehi arthAta pratimAdhArI zramaNopAsaka ko bhikSA do;
isa prakAra bolakara AhAra grahaNa kre| AhAradAtA ko 323

Page #346 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Sanlekhana: Characteristics, Location, Method and Excesses  **From Yoga
Shastra, Third Light, Verses 148-149**  **Verse 148:**  * **Meaning:** When a
Shravak sees that their body is becoming incapable of performing the necessary
practices of restraint (religious activities) or when the time of death is
approaching, they should first accept restraint and then perform Sanlekhana. *
**Explanation:** Sanlekhana means to renounce food and anger, etc., to make the
body and the passions thin. First, one must perform **Sharira Sanlekhana**,
which means gradually reducing food intake to make the body thin. If one does
not perform Sharira Sanlekhana, then the body will naturally become agitated,
and the soul will experience a painful death. (Pancha Vastu 1507) * **Second,
there is **Kshaya Sanlekhana**, which means to reduce the passions of anger,
pride, deceit, greed, delusion, envy, hatred, lust, etc., along with the body.
If one does not do this, then they will be like the Sanlekhana-performing Sadhu
who was told by his Guru, "I do not praise your austerities that have made your
body thin. I am concerned about how your finger has broken. Think about that."
Therefore, one should perform **Bhaava Sanlekhana**. Do not be in a hurry to
perform Anashan (Santhara). * **The Shravak performing Sanlekhana should also
accept restraint as appropriate. Their conduct should be understood as
follows:** A Shravak who knows all the duties of a Shravak should accept
restraint in the end. Such a Shravak should also accept the remaining **Dharma
Swaroop Sanlekhana** in the Dharma of restraint. It is said, "**Sanlehana u ante
na nioa jen pavvaai koi.**" One who accepts restraint in the end should perform
Sanlekhana after accepting restraint and then accept death with joy and peace.
One who does not accept restraint after Sanlekhana will attain a peaceful death
like an Anand Shravak. (Verse 148)  **Verse 149:**  * **Meaning:** To perform
Sanlekhana, one should go to the holy pilgrimage sites where the Arihant
Bhagavants were born, initiated, attained Kevalgyan, or attained Nirvana. If the
Kalyanak Bhoomi is not nearby, then one should perform Sanlekhana in a secluded
house, home, forest, or a quiet, peaceful place free from living beings. *
**Explanation:** The Kalyanak Bhoomi are the places where the Arihant
Tirthankara Prabhus were born, initiated, attained Kevalgyan, and attained
Nirvana.   **Note:** The text continues with further explanation and details
about Sanlekhana.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 saMlekhanA : lakSaNa, sthAna, vidhi aura aticAra yogazAstra tRtIya prakAza
zloka 148 se 149 dharmalAbha-zabda kA uccAraNa kiye binA susAdhu ke sadRza
suMdara AcAroM kA pAlana kre| inhIM 11 pratimAoM kA lakSaNa | saMkSepa meM isa
prakAra batAyA gayA hai- darzanapratimA - vaha hai jisameM samyaktvadhArI AtmA
kA citta mithyAtva kA kSayopazama hone se zAstravizuddha va durAgraha rUpI
kalaMka se rahita hotA hai| (paMcA. 10/4) niraticAra aNuvrata Adi bAraha vratoM
kA pAlana karanA, dUsarI vrata-pratimA hai| sAmAyika kA zuddha rUpa se pAlana
karanA, tIsarI sAmAyika-pratimA hai| aSTamI, caturdazI, pUrNimA aura amAvasyA ye
cAroM tithiyAM milakara catuSparvI kahalAtI hai| ina parvo ke dina samyag rUpa
se pauSadha karanA, cauthI pauSadha-pratimA hai| pUrvakathita samasta anuSThAnoM
se yukta hokara cAroM parvadinoM meM rAtri ko ghara ke aMdara yA ghara ke bAhara
dvAra para athavA cauka meM pariSaha-upasarga Ane para bhI nizceSTa kAyotsarga
dhAraNa karake rahanA, pAMcavI kAyotsarga-pratimA hai| brahmacarya-pratimA meM
brahmacarya kA dRr3hatApUrvaka pAlana karanA hotA hai| sAtavIM sacittavarjana-
pratimA meM acitta AhAra kA hI upayoga karanA hotA hai| AThavIM
AraMbhavarjanapratimA meM sAvadyAraMbha kA tyAga krnaa| nauvIM
preSyavarjanapratimA meM dUsaroM se bhI AraMbha nahIM karAnA; dasavIM
uddiSTavarjana pratimA meM apane lie banAye hue AhAra kA bhI tyAga karanA,
gyArahavI zramaNabhUta-pratimA meM niHsaMga banakara sAdhuveza evaM kASThapAtra,
rajoharaNa vagairaha lekara sAdhuvat caryA krnaa| sira ke bAloM kA loca yA
muMDana karanA tathA anya kriyAeM bhI susAdhu ke samAna krnaa| tathA pUrvokta
zramaNaguNoM ke prati Adara-zIla bane  /  / 147 /  /  aba pAMca zlokoM dvArA
zrAvaka ke lie saMlekhanA kI vizeSavidhi kahate haiN|319| so'thAvazyakayogAnAM,
bhane mRtyorathAgame  /  kRtvA saMlekhanAmAdau, pratipadya ca saMyamam  // 148 /
/  artha :-zrAvaka jaba yaha dekhe ki Avazyaka saMyama-pravRttiyoM (dhArmika
kriyAoM) ke karane meM zarIra aba azakta va asamartha ho gayA hai athavA mRtyu
kA samaya sannikaTa A gayA hai to sarvaprathama saMyama aMgIkAra karake
saMlekhanA kare  /  / 148 /  /  vyAkhyA :- saMlekhanA kA artha hai-zarIra aura
kaSAyoM ko patale karane ke lie AhAra aura krodhAdi kA tyAga krnaa| isameM
pahale zarIra-saMlekhanA karanI hotI hai yAnI kramazaH bhojana kA tyAga karake
zarIra ko kRza karanA, zarIra kI saMlekhanA na kare to anAyAsa hI saba dhAtuoM
kA kSobha ho jAne se, aMtima samaya meM zarIradhArI jIva ko ArttadhyAna hogaa|
(paMcavastu 1507) aura dUsarI kaSAya-saMlekhanA hai, isakA kAraNa yaha samajhanA
ki (vyavahAra bhASya 10/463) isameM zarIra kRza hone ke sAtha sAtha krodha,
mAna, mAyA, lobha, moha, matsara, dveSa, kAma Adi kaSAya bhI kRza hone caahie|
nahIM to, usa saMlekhanAdhArI sAdhu kI taraha hogA, jise usake guru ne kahA thA-
maiM tUMne tapazcaryA kara zarIra kRza kiyA usakI prazaMsA nahIM karatA ki terI
yaha aMgulI kisa taraha TUTa gayI? usa para vicaarkr| isalie bhaavsNlekhnaakr|
anazana (saMthArA) karane kI utAvala na kr| ityAdi vistAra se batAyA gayA hai|
saMlekhanAdhAraka zrAvaka yathocitta rUpa se saMyama bhI aMgIkAra kre| usakI
samAcArI isa prakAra samajhanI cAhie-zrAvaka samasta-zrAvakadharmaudyApana ko hI
jAnatA ho to aMta meM saMyama svIkAra kre| aise zrAvaka ko aMta meM
saMyamadharma meM bhI zeSa rahI dharmasvarUpasaMlekhanA aMgIkAra karanI caahie|
isI dRSTi se kahA hai ki-saMlehaNA u aMte na nioA jeNa pavvaai koii| jo aMtima
samaya meM bhI saMyama aMgIkAra karatA hai, vaha saMyama lene ke pazcAt samaya
meM saMlekhanA karake samAdhipUrvaka prasannatA se mRtyu kA svIkAra kare aura
saMlekhanA ke bAda jo saMyama aMgIkAra nahIM karatA, vaha AnaMda zrAvaka kI
bhAMti samAdhimaraNa prApta kare  /  / 148 /  /  AnaMda zrAvaka kI kathA kA
prasaMga Age aayegaa|  / 320 /  janma-dIkSA-jJAna-mokSa-sthAneSu zrImadarhatAm
/  tadabhAve gRhe'raNye, sthaNDile jntuvrjite||149|| artha :- saMlekhanA karane
ke lie arihaMta-bhagavaMtoM ke janma, dIkSA, kevalajJAna athavA nirvANa-
kalyANaka ke pavitra tIrthasthaloM para pahuMca jaaye| yadi kalyANakabhUmi
nikaTa meM na ho to, kisI ekAMtagRha (makAna), ghara, vana yA jIvajaMtu se
rahita ekAMta, zAMta, bhUmi meM saMlekhanA kare  /  / 149 /  /  vyAkhyA :- jahAM
zrI ahaMta tIrthaMkara-prabhuoM ke janma, dIkSA, kevalajJAna aura nirvANa hue
haiM, ve kalyANakabhUmiyA~ 324

Page #347 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Sanlekhana, in the form of Pariṣaha, is described in the third light of
Yogaśāstra, verses 150 to 152. If a Sanlekhanadharak reaches such a place of
auspiciousness, then one should know where the birthplaces of the Tirthankaras
are. The birth-kalyaṇaka-bhūmis of the 24 Tirthankaras, starting with Ṛṣabhadev,
are as follows: 1. Ikṣvākubhūmi, 2. Ayodhyā, 3. Śrāvastī, 4. Vinītā, 5.
Kauśalapur, 6. Kauśāmbī, 7. Vārāṇasī, 8. Candrānana (Candrapurī), 9. Kākandi,
10. Bhaḍilpur, 11. Siṃhapur, 12. Campapūrī, 13. Kampilā, 14. Ayodhyā, 15.
Ratnapūr, 16-17-18. Gajapur-Hastināpur, 19. Mithilā, 20. Rājagṛha, 21. Mithilā,
22. Śorīpur, 23. Vārāṇasī, 24. Kuṇḍapur (Ā. Ni. 382-384). Their dīkṣā-kalyaṇaka-
bhūmis are as follows: Śrī Bhagavān Ṛṣabhadev's dīkṣā was in Vinītā nagarī,
Bhagavān Ariṣṭanemi's in Dvāravati-Dvārīkā, and the remaining twenty-two
Tirthankaras received their dīkṣā in their respective birthplaces. Śrī Ṛṣabhadev
Bhagavān received dīkṣā in Siddārthavan, Vāsupūjya Bhagavān in Bihāragṛha,
Dharmanāth Bhagavān in Vaprāgā, Muniśuvratasvāmī in Nīl Gufā, Pārśvanāth
Bhagavān in Āśramapad, Mahāvīra Prabhu in Jñātrikhaṇḍa, and the remaining
Tirthankaras in Sahasāmravan Udyān. (Ā. Ni. 229 to 231). The places of
attainment of Kevalajñāna-kalyaṇaka-bhūmis are as follows: Śrī Ṛṣabhadev
Bhagavān attained Kevalajñāna in Purimatāl, Śrī Mahāvīra Bhagavān on the banks
of the Ṛijubālukā river, and the remaining Tirthankaras attained Kevalajñāna
near the same place where they had received dīkṣā. (Ā. Ni. 254). The places of
Nirvāṇa-kalyaṇaka-bhūmis are as follows: Śrī Ṛṣabhadev Bhagavān attained Nirvāṇa
on Aṣṭāpad Parvat, Vāsupūjya Bhagavān in Campapūrī, Nemināth Bhagavān on
Śrīraivatagiri, and Bhagavān Mahāvīra in Pāvāpurī. The remaining twenty
Tirthankaras attained Nirvāṇa on Sammedśikhar. (Ā. Ni. 307). One should accept
the final rite of death in the form of marana in one of these kalyaṇaka-bhūmis.
If the place of kalyaṇaka, such as birth, dīkṣā, Kevalajñāna, and Nirvāṇa, is
not found or is not nearby, or if it is not possible to reach there at the time
of death, then one should perform Sanlekhanā in a quiet and secluded place,
after cleaning and marking the ground in one's home, in the place of the sadhus
- upāśraya, in the forest, or in a Siddha-kṣetra like Śajaya, etc., by looking
at a place free from living beings. One should also clean and mark a place free
from living beings in the kalyaṇaka-bhūmis, etc. ||149|| ||321||   Having
abandoned the four types of food, one should be devoted to namaskāra. Having
performed the worship of the four refuges, one should take refuge in them.
||150|| Meaning: First of all, one should abandon the four types of food -
aśana, pāna, khādima, and svādima - and be devoted to the remembrance of the
great mantra of Paramesṭhi-namaskāra. Then, one should worship knowledge, etc.,
without any transgression, and take refuge in the four refuges - Arihant,
Siddha, Sadhu, and Dharma. Or, one should dedicate one's soul to the four
revered principles and say in a loud voice: "Arihante saraṇam pavajjāmī, Sidde
saraṇam pavajjāmī, Sāhu saraṇam pavajjāmī, Kevalipannatam Dhammam saraṇam
pavajjāmī." That is, I take refuge in Arihant Bhagavān, I take refuge in Siddha
Paramātmā, I take refuge in Sadhu Bhagavants, and I take refuge in the Dharma
spoken by the Kevalajñānī Tirthankaras. ||150|| ||322|| In this world and the
next, in life and death, one should abandon the five transgressions and be
immersed in the nectar of samadhi. ||151|| Meaning: One should abandon the five
transgressions of Sanlekhanā, which are motivated by: 1. worldly desires, 2.
desires for the next world, 3. desire for life, 4. desire for death, and 5.
desire for sensual pleasures. ||151|| Explanation: One should accept lifelong
fasting with the five transgressions. The five transgressions are: 1. After
fasting, having desires for this world, such as attachment to form, wealth,
worship, and fame, etc., 2. After performing Sanlekhanā (fasting), having
desires for the next world, such as wealth and prosperity in the devlok, etc.,
and for devanganas, etc., 3. Having a desire to live longer. Seeing that one's
worship and praise are increasing, or seeing many people coming and going to see
one, or hearing praise from everyone, the fasting sadhak may think, "It would be
good if I lived longer!" 4. After abandoning the four types of food, having a
desire for pomp and show, like that of a certain celestial sadhak, etc.  325

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 saMlekhanA, pariSaha svarupa yogazAstra tRtIya prakAza zloka 150 se 152
kahalAtI hai| aisI kisI eka kalyANakabhUmi meM saMlekhanAdhAraka pahuMca jaaye|
tIrthaMkaroM ke janmAdisthala kahAM-kahAM hai| ise batAte haiM-RSabhadevAdi 24
tIrthaMkaroM kI janma-kalyANaka bhUmiyAM kramazaH isa prakAra samajhanA-1.
ikSvAkubhUmi, | 2. ayodhyA, 3. zrAvastI, 4. vinItA, 5. kauzalapura, 6. kauzAMbI,
7. vArANasI, 8. caMdrAnanA (caMdrapurI), 9. kAkaMdI, 10. bhadilapura, 11.
siMhapura, 12. caMpApurI, 13. kaMpilA, 14. ayodhyA, 15. ratnapura, 16-17-18.
gajapura-hastinApura, 19. mithilA, 20. rAjagRha, 21. mithilA, 22. zoripura, 23.
vArANasI, 24. kuMDapura (A. ni. 382-384) /  unakI dIkSA-kalyANaka-bhUmiyA~ isa
prakAra hai-zrI bhagavAn RSabhadeva kI dIkSA vinItA nagarI meM, bhagavAna
ariSTanemi kI dvArAvatI-dvArikA meM aura zeSa bAIsa tIrthaMkaroM ne apanI-apanI
janmabhUmi meM hI dIkSA grahaNa kI thii| zrI RSabhadeva bhagavAn ne
siddhArthavana meM, vAsupUjya bhagavAna ne bihAragRha meM, dharmanAtha bhagavAn
ne vapragA meM, munisuvratasvAmI ne nIla guphA meM, pArzvanAtha bhagavAn ne
Azramapada meM, mahAvIra prabhu ne jJAtRkhaMDa meM aura zeSa tIrthaMkaroM ne
sahasAmravana udyAna meM dIkSA-grahaNa kI thii| (A. ni. 229 se 231) |
kevalajJAnakalyANakabhUmiyA~-zrI RSabhadeva bhagavAna ko purimatAla meM, zrI
mahAvIra bhagavAn ko RjubAlukA nadI ke taTa para aura zeSa tIrthaMkaroM ko,
unhoMne jisa udyAna meM dIkSA lI thI, usI sthAna ke pAsa kevalajJAna huA thaa|
(A. ni. 254) nirvANakalyANakabhUmiyAM-zrI RSabhadeva bhagavAn aSTApada parvata
para, vAsupUjya bhagavaMta caMpApurI meM neminAtha | | bhagavaMta zrIraivatagiri
para aura bhagavAn mahAvIra pAvApurI meM zeSa bIsa tIrthakara sammedazikhara
para nirvANa prApta hue| (A. ni. 307) ina kalyANaka-bhUmiyoM meM se kisI eka
sthala para maraNa rUpa aMtimakriyA svIkAra kre| yadi janma, dIkSA, kevalajJAna
aura nirvANa kA kalyANaka-sthAna nahIM mile yA nikaTavartI na ho yA mRtyu ke
samaya pahuMcane kI sthiti na ho to, ghara meM, sAdhuoM ke sthAna meM-upAzraya
meM, jaMgala meM athavA zajaya Adi siddhakSetra meM jAkara bhUmi kA
pratilekhana-pramArjana karake yAnI jIvajaMtu se rahita bhUmi dekhakara tathA
kalyANaka-bhUmi Adi meM bhI jIva jaMturahita jagaha kA pramArjana-pratilekhana
karake zAMta ekAMta sthAna meM saMlekhanA kare  /  / 149 /  /   / 321 /  tyaktvA
caturvidhAhAraM, namaskAra-parAyaNaH  /  ArAdhanAM
vidhAyoccaizcatuHzaraNamAzritaH  // 150 /  /  artha :- sarva prathama azana-
pAna-khAdima-svAdima rUpa cAra prakAra ke AhAra kA tyAgakara parameSThi-
namaskAra mahAmaMtra kA smaraNa karane meM tatpara ho jaay| tadanaMtara
niraticAra rUpa se jJAnAdi kI ArAdhanA kare aura arihaMta, siddha, sAdhu aura
dharma rUpI cAra zaraNoM kA Azraya svIkAra kre| athavA apanI AtmA ko ukta cAroM
zraddheya tattvoM ko samarpita karate hue uccasvara se bole-arihaMte saraNaM
pavajjAmi, siddhe saraNaM pavajjAmi, sAhU saraNaM pavajjAmi, kevalipannataM
dhammaM saraNaM pavajjAmi arthAt maiM arihaMta bhagavAn kA zaraNa svIkAra karatA
hUM, siddha paramAtmA kA zaraNa svIkAra karatA hUM, sAdhu bhagavaMtoM kA zaraNa
svIkAra karatA hUM aura vItarAga kevalajJAnI tIrthaMkaroM dvArA kathita dharma
kA zaraNa svIkAra karatA hUM  /  / 150 /  /  ||322 /  ihaloke paraloke, jIvite
maraNe tathA  /  tyaktvA''zaMsAM nidAnaM ca, samAdhisudhayokSitaH  // 151 /  /
artha :- 1. ihalaukika AkAMkSA, 2. pAralaukika AkAMkSA, 3. jIvitAkAMkSA, 4.
maraNAkAMkSA aura 5. kAmabhogAkAMkSA se prerita hokara nidAna karanA, saMlekhanA
ke ina 5 aticAroM kA tyAgakara samAdhisudhAsikta ho jAya  /  / 151 /  /  vyAkhyA
:- pAMca prakAra ke aticAra-sahita yAvajjIva anazana kA svIkAra karanA caahie|
ve pAMca aticAra ye haiM-1. anazana karane ke bAda isa loka meM moha evaM rUpa,
dhana, pUjA, kIrti Adi kI AkAMkSA rakhanA, 2. saMlekhanA (anazana) karake
paraloka meM devaloka Adi kI Rddhi-samRddhi, devAMganA Adi ko pAne kI icchA
rakhanA, 3. adhika samaya taka jIvita rahane kI icchA krnaa| apanI pUjA,
prazaMsA adhika hote dekhakara athavA bahuta se darzanArthI logoM ko apane
darzanArtha Ate-jAte dekhakara. sabhI logoM se prazaMsA sunakara anazana-
parAyaNa sAdhaka yoM soce ki jyAdA dina jIU~ to acchA rahe!, 4. cAroM AhAra kA
tyAga hone para amuka svargIya sAdhaka kI taraha kA ThAThabATha yA ADaMbara bhI
hogA, 325

Page #348 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Discussion on Twenty-Two Pariṣahas  **Yogaśāstra, Third Light, Verse 152**
To desire death (prāṇatyāga) with the thought, "I will perform Sanlekhanā"; or,
if someone has undertaken a fast but their body becomes severely ill, or they
experience intense pain, or they are subjected to disrespect (lack of honor,
worship, praise, etc.), and they desire to die quickly, this is called
maraṇāśaṁsā. And 5. The meaning of nidāna is: "I have performed difficult tapas
or observed some vow-rule, and in return for the fruits of those tapas, etc., I
will be born in the next life as a Cakravartī, Vāsudeva, king, emperor,
fortunate or beautiful human being, or god." One should abandon such nidāna
(duṣaṁkalpa). Again, how? It is said: "He should be irrigated by the nectar of
samādhi, the supreme state of well-being," i.e., he should be absorbed in
samādhi. ||151|| ||323||  **Pariṣahopasargebhyo, nirbhīko jinabhaktibhāk |**
**Pratipadyet maraṇānandaḥ śrāvako yathā ||152||**  **Meaning:** Even if
Pariṣahas and upsargas arise, one should not be afraid, but remain absorbed in
the devotion of Jineśvara Bhagavān, and attain samādhi-death like a joyful
śrāvaka. ||152||  **Explanation:** One should endure Pariṣahas (endurable for
the protection of one's dharma) and upsargas for the purification of karma.
||152||  One should not be frightened or disturbed by the Pariṣahas
(difficulties) that arise while observing dharma. There are twenty-two
Pariṣahas. They are as follows: 1. Kṣudhāpariṣaha, 2. Tṛṣṇā, 3. Śīta, 4. Uṣṇa,
5. Daṁśa-maśaka, 6. Acelakatva, 7. Arati, 8. Strī, 9. Carya, 10. Niṣadyā, 11.
Śayyā, 12. Ākrośa, 13. Vadh, 14. Yācanā, 15. Alābha, 16. Roga, 17. Tṛṇa-sparśa,
18. Mala, 19. Satkāra, 20. Prajñā, 21. Ajñāna, and 22. Darśana-pariṣaha. It is
essential for Sanlekhanāvrati and Mahāvratī sādhakas to conquer these twenty-two
Pariṣahas.  **Twenty-Two Pariṣahas:**  1. **Kṣudhāpariṣaha:** When afflicted by
hunger, a powerful, discerning sādhū should not violate the injunction of going
for alms without being compelled by need (without fear), but should go for alms
only for the sustenance of their journey of self-control. A Sanlekhanādhārī
sādhaka should endure hunger with equanimity.  2. **Tṛṣā-pariṣaha:** When
thirsty, a Tattvajñamuni should not desire to drink the water they see in
rivers, ponds, wells, etc., along the way, but should abandon humility and seek
water without attachment. A Sanlekhanādhārī should also endure thirst with
equanimity.  3. **Śīta-pariṣaha:** When afflicted by cold, even if there are no
clothes or blankets nearby, one should not accept imagined clothes, etc., nor
should they light a fire or warm themselves by the fire to alleviate the cold.
4. **Uṣṇapariṣaha:** Even if the earth is hot, one should not criticize the
heat, nor should they desire a fan or bath, etc.  5. **Daṁśamaśakapariṣaha:**
When bitten or stung by insects, mosquitoes, bedbugs, etc., one should not harm
them, nor should they harbor hatred towards them, but should maintain a sense of
impartiality, because every living being is fond of food.  6. **Acelaka-
pariṣaha:** If one does not have clothes, or if they have bad clothes, one
should not think, "This garment is good, this is bad." One should only consider
the difference between gain and loss. But one should not grieve over the lack of
clothes.  7. **Araṁti-pariṣaha:** While enjoying the garden of dharma, a sādhū
or sādhaka should not experience disinterest or indifference while walking,
sitting, standing, or performing acts of self-control, or while observing
dharma, but should keep their mind always healthy and cheerful.  8. **Strī-
pariṣaha:** A woman who causes distraction, who is beautiful in form, who is
stained with karmic impurities, and who is like the threshold of the door to
liberation, destroys dharma merely by being remembered. Therefore, one should
not even remember her.  9. **Carya-pariṣaha:** A sādhū who lives in villages,
cities, towns, etc., in an irregular manner, should perform their daily
activities, such as walking, etc., according to the rules, without attachment to
any place, even if they are alone, and should acquire various possessions.  10.
**Niṣadyā-pariṣaha:** To live in a place like a cremation ground is called
niṣadyā-sthāna. In such a place, one should live fearlessly, enduring favorable
or unfavorable upsargas, in a place devoid of women, animals, or eunuchs.  11.
**Śayyā-pariṣaha:** When one receives a good or bad bed, or experiences pleasure
or pain, one should not harbor attachment or aversion in their mind. One should
think, "I will have to leave this bed in the morning anyway," and should not
experience joy or sorrow.  12. **Ākrośapariṣaha:** One should not become angry
with someone who is angry, but should be forgiving and endure with equanimity.
For one who is forgiving or who forgives is called a śramaṇa. And one should
view the angry person with a benevolent mind.  13. **Vadha-pariṣaha**  ...
**Note:** This is a partial translation of the text. The full translation would
be quite lengthy.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bAisa pariSahoM para vivecana yogazAstra tRtIya prakAza zloka 152 yaha socakara
mRtyu (prANatyAga) kI AkAMkSA se saMlekhanA karanA; athavA kisI ne anazana kiyA
ho paraMtu zarIra meM | bImArI jyAdA bar3ha jAya, koI utkRSTa pIr3A ho yA
anAdara (satkAra-pUjA-prazaMsA Adi) hone ke kAraNa jaldI marane kI icchA karanA
maraNAzaMsA hai| tathA 5. nidAna kA artha hai- svayaM ne duSkara tapa yA kisI
vrata-niyama kA pAlana kiyA ho, usake badale meM una tapa Adi ke phalasvarUpa
'janmAMtara meM maiM cakravartI, vAsudeva, rAjA, mahArAjA, saubhAgyazAlI athavA
rUpavAna manuSya yA deva bnuuN|' isa prakAra ke nidAna (dusaMkalpa) kA tyAga
karanA caahie| punaH vaha kisa prakAra se? use kahate haiM-samAdhi
paramasvasthatA rUpI sudhA se siMcita rahe arthAt samAdhibhAva meM lIna rahe  /
/ 151 /  /   / 323 /  parISahopasargebhyo, nirbhIko jinabhaktibhAk  /
pratipadyeta maraNamAnandaH zrAvako yathA  // 152 //  artha :- tathA pariSaha
aura upasarga bhI A jAeM, phira bhI bhayabhIta na ho tathA jinezvara bhagavAn kI
bhakti meM tanmaya rahe tathA svayaM AnaMda zrAvaka ke samAna samAdhimaraNa ko
prApta kare  // 152 /  /  vyAkhyA :- karma nirjarA ke lie pariSaha (apane dharma
kI surakSA ke lie sahane yogya) aura upasargoM ko sahana karanA cAhie  /  / 152
//  dharmapAlana karate samaya Ane vAle pariSahoM (kaSToM) se jarA bhI ghabarAnA
yA vicalita nahIM honA caahie| pariSaha bAIsa haiN| ve isa prakAra se haiM-1.
kSudhApariSaha, 2. tRSNA, 3. zIta, 4. uSNa, 5. daMza-mazaka, 6. acelakatva, 7.
arati, 8. strI, 9. caryA, 10. niSadyA, 11. zayyA, 12. Akroza, 13. vadha, 14.
yAcanA, 15. alAbha, 16. roga, 17. tRNa-sparza, 18. mala, 19. satkAra, 20.
prajJA, 21. ajJAna aura 22. drshn-prissh| ina 22 pariSahoM para vijaya prApta
karanA saMlekhanAMvratI tathA mahAvratI sAdhaka ke lie Avazyaka hai|
bAisapariSaha-1. kSudhApariSaha - kSudhA se pIr3ita, zaktizAlI vivekI sAdhu
gocarI kI eSaNA kA ullaMghana kiye | binA adInavRtti se (ghabarAye binA) kevala
apanI saMyamayAtrA ke nirvAha ke lie bhikSArtha jaaye| saMlekhanadhArI sAdhaka |
bhUkha lagane para samabhAva se sahana kre| 2. tRSA-pariSaha - tattvajJamuni
pyAsA hone para mArga meM par3ane vAle nadI, tAlAba, ku~e~ Adi kA sacitta pAnI
dekhakara use pIne kI icchA na kare, paraMtu dInatA chor3akara acitta jala kI
gaveSaNA kre| : saMlekhanAdhArI bhI pyAsa lagane para use samabhAva se she| 3.
zIta-pariSaha - ThaMDa se pIr3ita hone para pAsa meM vastra yA kaMbala na ho to
bhI akalpanIya vastrAdi grahaNa nahIM kare, na ThaMDa miTAne ke lie Aga jalAe~
yA Aga taape| 4. uSNapariSaha - dharatI tapI ho, phira bhI garmI kI niMdA na
kare aura na hI paMkhe yA snAna Adi kI abhilASA kre| 5. daMzamazakapariSaha -
DAMsa-macchara, khaTamala Adi jIvoM dvArA Dasane yA kATane kA upadrava hone para
bhI unheM trAsa na denA, una para dveSa na karanA, kintu mAdhyasthyabhAva
rakhanA, kyoMki pratyeka jIva AhAra-priya hotA hai| 6. acelaka-pariSahavastra na
ho, azubha vastra ho taba 'yaha vastra acchA hai, yaha kharAba hai;' aisA vicAra
na kre| kevala lAbhAlAbha kI vicitratA kA vicAra kre| paraMtu vastra ke abhAva
meM duHkha na maane| 7. araMti-pariSaha - dharma rUpI udyAna meM AnaMda karate
hae sAdha yA sAdhaka vihAra karate-baiThate-uThate athavA saMyama-anaSThAna
karate yA dharmapAlana aruci yA udAsInatA na lAye, balki mana ko sadA svastha
aura mastI meM rkheN| 8. strI-pariSaha - durdhyAna karAne vAlI, saMga rUpa,
karmapaMka meM malina karane vAlI, mokSa dvAra kI argalA ke samAna strI ko
smaraNa karane mAtra se dharma kA nAza hotA hai| isalie ise yAda hI na karanA
caahie| 9. caryA-pariSaha - gAMva, nagara, kasbe Adi meM aniyata rUpa meM rahane
vAlA sAdhu kisI bhI sthAna meM mamatva rakhe binA vividha abhigraha dhAraNa
karate hue akelA bhI ho, phira bhI niyamAnusAra vihAra Adi kI caryA kare;
vicaraNa kre| 10. niSadyA-pariSaha - smazAnAdika sthAna meM rahanA niSadyA-
sthAna kahalAtA hai| usameM strI, pazu yA napuMsaka ke nivAsa se rahita sthAna
meM anukUla yA pratikUla upasarga sahana karate hue nirbhayatA se rhnaa| 11.
zayyA-pariSaha - zubha athavA azubha zayyA milane para athavA sukha yA duHkha
prApta hone para mana meM rAgadveSa nahIM karanA caahie| ise subaha to chor3anI
hI hai| aisA vicArakara harSa-zoka nahIM karanA caahie| 12. AkrozapariSaha -
Akroza karane vAle para krodha nahIM karanA. apitu kSamA rakhanA, samabhAva se
shnaa| kyoMki kSamA rakhane yA kSamA dene vAlA zramaNa kahalAtA hai| aura Akroza
karane vAle ko upakArI-buddhi se dekhanA caahie| 13. vadha-pariSaha 326

Page #349 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Final Religious Act of an Ananda Shravak Yoga Shastra, Third Light, Verse
152: If a Muni is killed or beaten, at that time he should consider that the
soul is never destroyed. Due to the wickedness of anger, karma-bandha (bondage
of karma) occurs, and through forgiveness, virtue is acquired; therefore, one
should not kill him, but rather endure the killing. 14. Yachana-parishah - A
mendicant who lives by begging lives on the things given by others. Therefore, a
sadhu-sadhvi should not feel shame or sorrow in begging. He should not desire to
accept the life of a householder out of fear of begging. 15. Alaabh-parishah -
He should not feel sorrow if food, etc., is not received from others for himself
or for others, and he should not feel pride if it is received. If someone has
not given food, etc., he should not slander that person or village. 16. Rog-
parishah - If he is sick, he should not be afraid. He should not desire to be
treated, but should endure the disease with a submissive mind, understanding the
difference between the body and the soul. 17. Trina-sparsha-parishah - If a bed
of straw, grass, etc., is spread, or if the cloth is very fine, and its points
prick and cause pain, he should endure it; but he should not desire a soft,
ticklish bed. 18. Mal-parishah - If dirt has accumulated all over the body due
to sun or sweat, and there is a bad smell, the Muni should not be disturbed. He
should not desire to bathe by immersing himself in water or by swimming, nor
should he desire to rub away the dirt. 19. Satkar-parishah - A sadhu should not
expect respect, worship, charity, honor, prestige, or applause from anyone. If
he does not receive respect, he should not feel humility, inferiority, or anger
in his mind. If he receives respect, he should not feel joy or pride. 20.
Prajna-parishah - If he sees another as more intelligent and knows his own
limited intelligence, he should not feel regret in his mind, and if he has more
intelligence himself, he should not be proud of it; nor should he be unhappy in
giving knowledge to others. 21. Agyan-parishah - Even though he is knowledgeable
and virtuous, he should endure the ignorance that "I am a chham-sth (one who is
in the state of being bound by karma)", and he should think in his mind that
knowledge is acquired gradually through the gradual destruction of karma. 22.
Darshan-parishah - Even after attaining samyaktva (right faith), he should not
feel sorrow if he does not understand the true nature of things in their true
form. He should not be proud of having attained samyag-darshan (right vision)
and should believe that the Jineshwara Bhagwan-stated jiva, ajav, dharma,
adharma, rebirth, etc., are true even though they are indirect. In this way, the
Muni, who is fearless, a conqueror of the senses, and who has control over his
mind, speech, and body, should endure physical, mental, or natural parishahs
with equanimity. Pariṣahs occur due to the arising of jnana-avareniya, vedaniya,
mohaniya, and antaraya karmas. Due to vedaniya karma, 1. hunger, 2. thirst, 3.
cold, 4. heat, 5. bite, 6. movement, 7. killing, 8. excrement, 9. bed, 10.
disease, 11. trina-sparsha can happen even to a Jin-kevali. Even when upsarga
comes, they remain fearless. Up means near, the one who causes suffering is
called upsarga, or the one who is troubled is called upsarga. It is of four
types: 1. Devakrit, 2. Due to hatred, 3. For the purpose of examination, and 4.
Each of these four has four divisions: 1. Due to laughter, 2. Manukrit, 3.
Tithanch-krit, and 4. Swatah-krit. Due to the combination of all these, it is
mixed. This (fourth type of) upsarga is caused by the gods. Human-related
upsarga occurs due to laughter, hatred, examination, and bad character.
Tithanch-related upsarga occurs due to fear, anger, food, or protection of the
family. He kills, throws down, or stops due to these reasons. Pain in the body
or due to vata-pitta, kapha, and sannipat also cause upsarga. In this way, the
devotee who endures parishahs and upsargas with equanimity is devoted to
Jineshwara Bhagwan. It is said that - Shri Jineshwara Deva, who has crossed the
ocean of the world, has also performed the final sanlekhana arādhana (samadhi-
maran-sadhana). Knowing this, everyone should worship him with respect and
devotion. It is also said - The first Tirthankara Shri Rishabhdeva accepted the
final act of the body in the form of nirvana as a six-day fast. In this way, the
devotee should accept samadhi-maran like the Ananda Shravak. The story of the
Ananda Shravak, as it is passed down in the tradition of the sect, is as
follows: The Final Religious Act of an Ananda Shravak: In those days, Vanijyak
was a famous city, prosperous and rich, surpassing other cities in trade. There,
the people lived according to the law. 327

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 AnaMdazrAvaka kI aMtima dharmakriyA yogazAstra tRtIya prakAza zloka 152 muni ko
koI mAre, pITe, usa samaya yaha vicAre ki AtmA kA nAza to kabhI nahIM hotaa|
krodha kI duSTatA se karmabaMdha aura kSamA ke dvArA guNa-upArjana hotA hai;
ataH use mArane na jAye, apitu vadha-pariSaha sahana kre| 14. yAcanApariSaha-
bhikSAjIvI sAdhu dUsaroM ke dvArA diye hue padArtha se apanI jIvikA calAte haiN|
ataH yAcanA karane meM sAdhu-| sAdhvI na to zarma rakhe aura na duHkha hI maane|
yAcanA se ghabarAkara gRhastha-jIvana svIkAra ne kI icchA na kre| 15. alAbha-
pariSaha- apane liye yA dUsare ke lie dUsaroM se AhArAdi na milane para duHkha
aura milane para lAbha kA abhimAna na kre| kisI ne AhArAdi nahIM diyA to usa
vyakti yA gAMva kI niMdA na kre| 16. roga-pariSaha - roga hone para ghabarAe
nhiiN| usakI cikitsA karane kI abhilASA na rakhe, balki adIna mana se zarIra
aura AtmA kI bhinnatA samajhakara usa roga ko sahana kre| 17. tRNa-
sparzapariSaha - tinake, ghAsa Adi kA bichaunA bichAyA ho, kapar3A bahuta bArIka
ho; isa kAraNa usakI nokeM cubhatI ho, darda hotA ho to sahana kare; paraMtu
komala gudagudI zayyA kI icchA na kre| 18. mala-pariSaha - dhUpa yA pasIne se
sAre zarIra para maila jama gayA ho, badabU A rahI ho, usase muni udvigna na ho|
pAnI meM DubakI lagAkara yA tairakara snAna karane kI icchA na rakhe aura na
maila ghisakara dUra karane kI icchA rkhe| 19. satkAra-pariSaha - kisI kI ora se
vinaya, pUjA, dAna, sammAna, pratiSThA yA vAhavAha kI apekSA sAdhu ko nahIM
rakhanI caahie| satkAra na mile to usase mana meM dInatA, hInatA yA kSobha na
laaye| yadi satkAra mile to harSa yA abhimAna na kre| 20. prajJA-pariSaha -
dUsare ko adhika buddhizAlI dekhakara aura apanI alpabuddhi jAnakara mana meM
kheda na kare aura svayaM meM adhika buddhi ho to usakA abhimAna na kare; na hI
dUsaroM ko jJAna dene meM khinna ho; 21. ajJAnapariSaha - jJAna aura cAritra
yukta hone para bhI maiM chamastha hUM, aisA ajJAna sahana kare aura mana meM
vicAra kare ki jJAna kramAnusAraM kSayopazama se hI prApta hotA hai| 22.
darzana-pariSaha - samyaktva prAsa hone para bhI vastutattva ko yathArtha rUpa
se na samajhane para duHkha na kre| samyagdarzana prApta hone kA abhimAna na
kare aura mAne ki jinezvara bhagavAn-kathita jIva, ajAva, dharma, adharma,
punarjanma Adi parokSa hone para bhI satya hai| isa taraha karmoM kI nirjarA
(aMzataH kSaya) ke lie nirbhaya, iMdriya-vijetA aura mana, vacana, kAyA para
niyaMtraNa karane vAle muni zArIrika, mAnasika yA prAkRtika pariSahoM ko
samabhAva se sahana kreN| jJAnAvaraNIya, vedanIya, mohanIya aura aMtarAya.karmoM
ke udaya se parISaha hote haiN| vedanIya karma se 1. kSudhA, 2. tRSA, 3. zIta,
4. uSNa 5. daMza, 6. caryA, 7. vadha, 8. mala, 9. zayyA, 10. roga, 11.
tRNasparza jina-kevalI ko bhI ho sakate haiN| upasarga Ane para bhI ve nirbhaya
rahate haiN| upa arthAt samIpa meM, kaSToM kA jisase sarjana ho, use upasarga
kahate haiM athavA jisase parezAna kiyA jAya use upasarga kahate haiN| vaha cAra
prakAra kA hai| 1. devakRta, 2. dveSa se, 3. vimarza-parIkSA karane ke lie aura
ina cAroM ke pratyeka ke cAra-cAra bheda hai-1. hAsya se, 2. manuSyakRta, 3.
tithaMcakRta aura 4. svtHkRt| ina sabake ikaTThe hone | se mizra rUpa se| yaha
(cauthe prakAra kA) upasarga devatA dvArA hotA hai| manuSyasaMbaMdhI upasarga,
hAsya, dveSa, vimarza aura daHzIlasaMga se hote haiN| tiyaMca-viSayaka upasarga
bhaya, krodha, AhAra athavA parivAra ke rakSaNa ke lie hotA hai| vaha ina
kAraNoM se prerita hokara mAratA hai, girAtA hai yA rokatA hai| zarIra meM
vedanA kare athavA vAta-pitta, kapha aura sannipAta hone se bhI upasarga hotA
hai| isa taraha parISahoM aura upasoM ko samabhAva se sahana karane vAlA
ArAdhaka jinezvarabhagavAn ke prati bhaktimAna hotA hai| kahA hai ki-saMsAra-
samudra se pAraMgata zrIjinezvara devoM ne bhI aMtima saMlekhanA ArAdhanA
(samAdhimaraNa-sAdhanA) kA anuSThAna kiyA hai; aisA jAnakara sabhI ko Adara-
bhakti pUrvaka usakI ArAdhanA karanI caahie| kahA bhI hai-prathama tIrthaMkara
zrI RSabhadeva ne nirvANa ke rUpa meM zarIra kI aMtakriyA chaha upavAsa ke
anazana rUpa aMtakriyA svIkAra kI thii| isa prakAra ArAdhanA karatA haA
AnaMdazrAvaka kI bhAMti samAdhimaraNa svIkAra kre| . AnaMdazrAvaka kI
saMpradAyaparaMparAgamya kathA isa prakAra haiAnaMdazrAvaka kI aMtima
dharmakriyA : una dinoM vANijyaka anya nagaroM se bar3ha-car3hakara Rddhi-
samRddhiyukta prasiddha nagara thaa| vahAM prajA kA vidhi pUrvaka 327

Page #350 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Story of Anand Shravak  In the third light of the Yoga Shastra, verse 152,
there was a famous king named Jitashatru, who was like a father to his people.
In that city, there lived a householder named Anand, whose very presence brought
joy to the eyes of others, as if another moon had come to earth. Just as Rohini
is considered the wife of the moon, so too was his wife, Shivananda, beautiful
in form and grace. He possessed four crore gold coins, buried in the ground as
treasure and invested in trade and household goods. He also had four large herds
of cows. In the northwest corner of the city, in a suburb called Kollak, Anand
had many relatives. At that time, Siddhartha Nandan, Shri Vardhaman Swami, was
wandering the earth and arrived in the city's Dyutipalash garden. When King
Jitashatru heard of the Lord's arrival, he too went with his family to pay his
respects to the Lord. Anand also walked, taking many people with him, and
reached the Lord's lotus feet. He purified his ears by listening to the Lord's
nectar-like Dharmadeshana. Then, bowing at the Lord's feet, the great Anand
accepted the twelve vows of householder Dharma from the Lord. He renounced all
other women except his wife Shivananda. He renounced all other wealth, including
the four crore gold coins buried as treasure, invested in trade, and used in
household goods. He renounced all other land, including the four herds of cows
and the land cultivated by five hundred ploughs. He renounced all other vehicles
except the four chariots used for trade in all directions (Digyatra). He
renounced all other clothes except the fragrant saffron cloth (towel) used for
wiping his body. He renounced all other toothpastes except the green licorice
root and all other fruits except the sour amla. He renounced all other oil
massages except the Sahasrapak and Shatapak oils. He renounced all other
fragrant ointments except the fragrant ointment suitable for application. He
renounced using more than eight pots of water for bathing. He renounced wearing
more than one pair of cotton clothes. He renounced all other ointments except
the application of sandalwood, agarwood, and saffron. He renounced all other
flowers except the garland of Malati flowers and the lotus. He renounced all
other ornaments except the ear ornaments and the ring. He renounced all other
incense except the Dashaang incense and the agarwood incense. He renounced all
other sweets except Ghevar and Pua. He renounced all other drinks except the
drink made from wood (Rab) and the rice cooked in a pot (Kalmi Chawal). He
renounced all other soups (Dals) except the soups made from black gram, green
gram, and peas. He renounced all other ghee except the ghee made from cow's milk
in the autumn season. He renounced all other vegetables except the Swastik,
Manduki, and other vegetables. He renounced all other dals except the sour dal
(Kadhi) prepared with ghee and oil. He renounced all other water except
rainwater. He renounced all other mouth fresheners except the five fragrant
tambools.  After this, Anand bowed to the Lord and returned home. He happily
told Shivananda about the method of the accepted householder Dharma. Hearing
this, Shivananda, who desired to accept householder Dharma for her own well-
being, also got into a chariot and went to the Lord's feet at that very moment.
She bowed to the Guru of the three worlds and, understanding well, accepted
Shravak Dharma. She was delighted to hear the Lord's nectar-like words and
returned home in a Dharma chariot as bright as a plane. At that time, Shri
Gautam Swami asked the omniscient Lord, "Will this great soul, Anand Shravak,
accept the Sadhu Dharma?" The omniscient Lord, who sees all three times, said,
"Anand will follow the vows of a Shravak for a long time. After that, he will
complete his lifespan and become a great god in the Arun Prabha Vimana of the
first heaven, Saudharma Kalpa, with a state of four Palyopama."  Fourteen years
passed as Anand Shravak diligently followed the twelve vows. One night, in the
last watch, the pure, wise Anand thought, "I am the foundation of many people in
this city. If I fall while worrying about them, then the Dharma accepted by me,
as declared by the omniscient, will be tainted with the faults of transgression,
etc." Thinking in this way, with good intentions in his mind, Anand Shravak got
up in the morning. As per his resolve, he had a very large dispensary built in
the Kollak settlement. There, he invited his friends, relatives, and kin...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 AnaMdazrAvaka kI kathA yogazAstra tRtIya prakAza zloka 152 pAlaka, pitAtulya
jitazatru nAmaka vikhyAta rAjA thaa| usa nagara meM apane darzana se dUsaroM kI
AMkhoM ko AnaMda dene vAlA, dharatI para mAno dUsarA caMdra AyA ho, aisA AnaMda
nAma kA gRhapati rahatA thaa| jaise rohiNI caMdra kI patnI mAnI jAtI hai, vaise
hI rUpa lAvaNya se manohara zivAnaMdA nAma kI usakI dharmapatnI thii| usake pAsa
jamIna meM nidhAna rUpa meM gAr3I huI aura gRhasAmagrI meM lagI huI vyApAra meM
lagI huI cAra-cAra karor3a svarNamudrAe~ thiiN| tathA gAyoM ke cAra bar3e gokula
the| usa nagara ke vAyavya koNa meM kollAka nAmaka upanagara meM AnaMda ke
bahuta sage-saMbaMdhI rahate the| usa samaya | bhUmaMDala para vicaraNa karate
hue siddhArthanaMdana, zrIvardhamAnasvAmI usa nagara ke dyutipalAza nAmaka
udyAna meM pdhaareN| jitazatru | rAjA ne prabhu kA Agamana sunA to vaha bhI
parivAra sahita zIghra prabhu-vaMdanArtha gyaa| AnaMda bhI paidala calakara
aneka manuSyoM ko sAtha lekara prabhu ke caraNa-kamaloM meM pahuMcA aura unakI
amRtavarSiNI dharmadezanA sunakara apane kAna pavitra kiye| phira prabhu ke
caraNoM meM namaskAra kara mahAmanA AnaMda ne prabhu se bAraha vrata rUpa
gRhasthadharma aMgIkAra kiyaa| apanI |zivAnaMdA strI ko chor3akara anya saba
striyoM kA tyAga kiyaa| nidhAna, pravistara aura vyApAra meM lagI huI cAra-cAra
karor3a svarNamudrAoM ko chor3akara anya saMpatti kA tyAga kiyaa| cAra gokula ke
uparAMta gokula kA tathA pAMca sau hala se jitanI | khetI ho, usase adhika khetI
kA tyAga kiyaa| digyAtrA arthAt pratyeka dizAoM meM vyApArArtha jAne ke lie cAra
savArI gAr3iyoM ke alAvA anya yAnoM kA tyAga kiyaa| aMga poMchane ke lie
sugaMdhita kASAya vastra (tauliyA) ke alAvA anya vastroM kA bhI tyAga kiyaa|
harI mulahaThI ke daMtauna ke sivAya anya daMtaunoM kA tathA kSIra Amalaka ke
sivAya anya phaloM kA tyAga kiyaa| sahastrapAka aura zatapAka ke atirikta teloM
kI mAliza kA tyAga kiyA, sugaMdhita vilepana-yogya padArtha se atirikta vilepana
kA tyAga kiyaa| snAna karane ke lie ATha ghar3e pAnI se adhika istemAla karane
kA tyAga kiyaa| pahanane ke lie eka sUtI vastra ke jor3e se adhika vastra kA
tyAga kiyA; caMdana, aguru aura kesara ke lepa ke sivAya anya lepoM kA tyAga
kiyaa| mAlatIpuSpa kI mAlA aura kamala ke sivAya phUloM kA tyAga kiyaa| karNa-
AbhUSaNa tathA mudrikA ke alAvA samasta AbhUSaNoM kA tyAga kiyaa| dazAMga dhUpa
va agara ke dhUpa ke alAvA anya dhUpoM kA bhI tyAga kiyaa| ghevara aura pUe ke
alAvA anya miThAiyoM kA tyAga, kASTha se taiyAra kI huI peya (rAba) evaM kalamI
cAvala ke alAvA odana kA tyAga kiyaa| ur3ada, mUMga, maTara ke alAvA, sUpoM
(dAloM) kA tyAga, zaradRtu meM taiyAra hue, gAya ke ghI ke alAvA anya ghI kA
tyAga, svastika, maMDUkI, ke sivAya aura bhAjI kA tyAga, ghI-tela se choMkakara
taiyAra kI huI khaTTI dAla (kar3hI) ke sivAya dAla kA tathA varSA ke jala ke
sivAya anya jala kA aura pAMca sugaMdhita tAMbUla ke atirikta mukhavAsa kA tyAga
kiyaa| isake bAda AnaMda bhagavAn ko vaMdanA karake ghara aayaa| usane svIkRta
gRhastha-dharma kI vidhi zivAnaMdA ko saharSa | sunaayii| use sunakara
svakalyANArtha gRhasthadharma svIkAra karane kI abhilASiNI zivAnaMdA bhI ratha
meM baiThakara usI samaya bhagavAn ke caraNoM meM pahuMcI aura tIna jagat ke
guru ko vaMdana kara usane bhI bhalIbhAMti samajhakara zrAvakadharma aMgIkAra
kiyaa| bhagavAn kI amRtamayI vANI zravaNa kara vaha harSita huI aura vimAnatulya
tejasvI dharmaratha meM baiThakara vaha apane |ghara lauttii| usa samaya
zrIgautama svAmI ne sarvajJa bhagavAn se pUchA-yaha mahAtmA AnaMda zrAvaka
sAdhudharma svIkAra karegA yA nahIM? trikAladarzI sarvajJa bhagavAn ne kahA-
AnaMda dIrghakAla taka zrAvaka ke vratoM kA pAlana kregaa| usake bAda AyuSya
pUrNa kara saudharmakalpa nAmaka prathama devaloka ke aruNaprabha vimAna meM
cAra palyopama kI sthiti vAlA zreSTha deva hogaa| idhara AnaMda zrAvaka ko
bAraha vratoM kA satata sAvadhAnI ke sAtha pAlana karate hue caudaha varSa bIta
gye| zuddha sthitaprajJa AnaMda ne eka bAra rAta ke aMtima prahara meM vicAra
kiyA ki maiM isa nagara meM bahuta se logoM kA AdhArabhUta hUM; unakI ciMtA
karate-karate hI kahIM merA patana na ho jaaye| yadi aisA huA to mere dvArA
svIkRta sarvajJa-kathita dharma meM| aticArAdi doSa laga jaayeNge| ityAdi
prakAra se mana meM zubha bhAva-pUrvaka ciMtana karate hue AnaMda zrAvaka
prAtaHkAla utthaa| usane apane saMkalpAnusAra kollAka sanniveza meM ativizAla
pauSadhazAlA bnvaayii| vahAM usane apane mitra, saMbaMdhI, baMdhu 328

Page #351 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
A householder, a protector of the Shravak Dharma, invited the author of the Yoga
Shastra, the Third Light, to his home and offered him food. Then, in front of
everyone, he entrusted all the responsibilities of his family to his eldest son.
After paying respects to his friends, relatives, and family members and seeking
their permission, he went to the dispensary with the desire to engage in
religious activities. There, following the teachings of the great soul, Anand
Bhagwan, he began to practice Dharma with the same dedication as he would for
his own soul, striving to overcome the karmas arising from passions and to
nourish his body. He ascended the eleven stages of a Shravak, like a person
climbing a mountain, aiming for heaven and liberation. This great soul, through
intense austerities, dried up his blood and flesh, leaving his body looking like
a piece of wood wrapped in leather. One night, Anand, the Shravak, was awake,
engaged in Dharma and finding joy in his constant austerities. He thought to
himself, "As long as I have the strength to stand, as long as I am able to call
others, and as long as my Dharma teachers are here, I will accept both types of
fatal Sanlekhanas, renounce all four types of food, and fast until death."
Having made this decision, Anand the Shravak carried it out. The thoughts and
actions of great souls never waver. Anand, with equanimity and detachment
towards life and death, attained Avadhi knowledge through the destruction of the
Avadhijnana Avaraniya karma.  Meanwhile, the glorious Lord Vira, while
traveling, arrived at the Dyutipalash garden. After his Dharma discourse was
completed, Shri Gautam Ganadhar entered the city to beg for alms. While begging,
he came across Anand, the Shravak, adorned in a beautiful Kollarak garment, and
accepted food and water from him. The people were astonished at the arrival of
Gautam Swami. They gathered on the road and told Gautam Swami, "Anand, the
virtuous Shravak disciple of the glorious Lord Vira, has undertaken a fast unto
death. He has no desire for any worldly pleasures." Hearing this, Gautam Swami
thought, "I should go and see this Shravak." With this thought, he went to his
dispensary. Anand, the Shravak, was overjoyed at the unexpected sight of Gautam
Swami, like a shower of precious jewels. He bowed down and said, "O Bhagwan! I
am unable to stand due to the difficult fast I am undertaking. Please come
closer so that I can touch your lotus feet." The great sage Gautam stood near
Anand, the Shravak, who then bowed his head at his feet and offered a pure
threefold salutation. Then, with confidence, he asked, "O Bhagwan! Can a
householder attain Avadhi knowledge?" In response, Gautam Swami said, "Yes, they
can." Anand then said, "O Bhagwan! By the grace of my Gurudev, I, a householder,
have attained Avadhi knowledge. I can see for a hundred yojanas in all three
directions - east, south, and west - and the waters of the oceans, and in the
north, I can see the Himalayas. Similarly, O Lord, I can see up to the Saudharma
heaven and down to the Loluyachchuy Pathde (a division of hell) in the
Ratnaprabaha earth." Hearing this, Gautam Swami said, "Anand! A householder can
indeed attain Avadhi knowledge, but not knowledge of such vast subjects.
Therefore, you must perform atonement." Anand said, "O Bhagwan! I have this
Avadhi knowledge. So, is it atonement to speak the truth about existing things?
If it is atonement, O Bhagwan! You should take it upon yourself." When Anand
spoke to Gautam Swami in this way, he also had some doubts. He went directly to
the glorious Lord Vira, informed him about the food and water, and expressed his
doubts about Anand's Avadhi knowledge. He asked the Lord directly, "O Lord! In
this matter, is Anand the one who should perform atonement, or am I? Should I be
criticized, or should Anand?" The Lord said, "Gautam! You should give him the
Miccha Mi Dukkadam and go to Anand and ask for forgiveness." Following the
Lord's command, Gautam Swami, the repository of forgiveness, apologized to
Anand, the Shravak. In this way, Anand, the Shravak, lived for twenty years,
observing the Shravak Dharma, and completed his lifespan through fasting. He
became a deva in the celestial vehicle called Arunavar. From there, after
completing his lifespan, he will be born in Mahavideha and attain the supreme
liberation, Moksha. This is the account of Anand, the Shravak's, death in
Samadhi and his successful journey through life.  The future destiny of the
Shravak is described in two verses, as follows:  "He attained Indrahood in
kalpas, or some other superior position. He rejoices, being endowed with the
merit of an unsurpassed kingdom." (153)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrAvakadharma pAlaka gRhastha kI bhAvI sadgati yogazAstra tRtIya prakAza zloka
153 Adi ko nimaMtraNa dekara unheM bhojana krvaayaa| phira unake sAmane apane
parivAra kA sArA bhAra apane bar3e putra ko sauMpA aura mitra - jJAti - svajana
Adi kA sammAna kara unakI anumati lekara dharmakArya kI abhilASA se vaha
pauSadhazAlA meM | gyaa| vahAM kaSAyajanita karmoM aura zarIra ko kRza karatA
huA mahAtmA AnaMda bhagavAn ke kathanAnusAra AtmA ke samAna dharma kA pAlana
karane lgaa| svarga aura mokSa meM car3hane ke lie niHzreNI ke samAna zrAvaka kI
gyAraha pratimAoM meM vaha | uttarottara car3hane lgaa| tIvra tapazcaryA karate
hue usa mahAsatva ne zarIra kA rakta aura mAMsa sUkhA diyaa| camar3A lapeTI huI
| lakar3I ke samAna usakA zarIra dikhAI dene lgaa| eka dina rAta ko AnaMda -
zrAvaka dharma- jAgaraNa karatA huA va satata | tapasyA meM AnaMda mAnatA huA,
isa prakAra vicAra karane lagA ki 'jaba taka mujha meM khar3e hone kI zakti hai,
jaba taka maiM dUsaroM ko bulAne meM samartha hUM tathA mere dharmAcArya yahAM
vicarate haiM, taba taka donoM prakAra kI mAraNAMtika saMlekhanA | svIkAra
karake cAroM AhAra kA tyAgakara luuN| aisA vicArakara AnaMda zrAvaka ne use
kriyAnvita kiyaa| mahAtmA logoM ke vicAra aura vyavahAra meM kabhI bhinnatA
nahIM hotii| jIvana aura maraNa ke viSaya meM niHspRha aura samabhAva ke
adhyavasAyI | AnaMda ko avadhijJAnAvaraNIya karma ke kSayopazama se avadhijJAna
prApta huaa| idhara vihAra karate hue zrIvIra paramAtmA phira dyutipalAza udyAna
meM padhAreM aura unakA dharmopadeza pUrNa hone ke bAda zrIgautama gaNadhara ne
nagara meM bhikSArtha praveza kiyaa| bhikSATana karate hue ve AnaMda zrAvaka se
vibhUSita kollAka sanniveza meM AhAra- pAnI lene pdhaareN| gautamasvAmI ke
Agamana se logoM ko Azcarya huA  /  Ama rAste para khar3e loga ekatrita hokara |
gautama svAmI se kahane lage- zrI vIra paramAtmA ke puNyazAlI zrAvaka ziSya
AnaMda ne anazanavrata aMgIkAra kiyA hai, | use kisI bhI prakAra ke sAMsArika
sukhoM kI abhilASA nahIM hai| use sunakara gautamasvAmI ne vicAra kiyA ki -
calUM, | usa zrAvaka ko darzana de duuN| isa vicAra se ve usakI pauSadhazAlA meM
phuNce| akasmAt aciMtita ratnavRSTi ke samAna unake darzana hone se AnaMda
zrAvaka atyaMta harSita huA aura vaMdana karate hue usane kahA ki 'bhagavan !
kliSTa anazana tapa karane se mujha meM khar3e hone kI zakti nahIM hai| ataH Apa
nikaTa padhAreM; jisase Apake caraNakamala sparza kruuN|' isa para | mahAmuni
gautama AnaMdazrAvaka ke nikaTa Akara khar3e rahe, taba caraNoM meM mastaka
rakhakara AnaMda ne trikaraNazuddha vaMdana kiyaa| phira Azvasta hokara unase
pUchA-bhagavan ! gRhastha ko avadhijJAna prApta hotA hai yA nahIM? usake uttara
meM gautamasvAmI ne kahA- hAM, hotA hai| taba AnaMda ne kahA- bhagavan !
gurudeva kI kRpA se mujha gRhastha ko avadhijJAna utpanna huA hai| pUrva,
dakSiNa aura pazcima ina tInoM dizAoM meM sau-sau yojana taka aura Una Una
samudroM kA jala, uttara dizA meM himavAn parvata taka mujhe dikhatA hai| isI
taraha prabho! Upara saudharma devaloka taka aura nIce ratnaprabhApRthvI ke |
loluyaccuya pAthar3e taka (naraka kA vibhAga) taka mujhe dikhAyI detA hai| yaha
sunakara gautamasvAmI ne kahA - AnaMda ! | gRhastha ko avadhijJAna jarUra hotA
hai, paraMtu itane viSayoM kA jJAna nahIM hotaa| ataH isakA prAyazcitta kro|
AnaMda ne | kahA- bhagavan ! mujhe itanA avadhijJAna hai ataH kyA vidyamAna
padArtha ke satya ko kahane meM prAyazcitta AtA hai? yadi prAyazcitta AtA bhI ho
to bhagavan! isa viSaya meM Apako lenA cAhie; gautamasvAmI se jaba AnaMda ne isa
prakAra kahA to unheM bhI kucha-kucha zaMkA huii| aura ve sIdhe zrIvIraprabhu ke
pAsa phuNce| unheM AhAra- pAnI batAyA aura AnaMda ke avadhijJAna ke viSaya meM
jo AzaMkA thI, use nivedana kara gautamasvAmI ne prakaTa rUpa meM pUchA - prabho
! isa viSaya meM AnaMda prAyazcitta kA bhAgI hai yA meM? AlocanA mujhe karanI
cAhie yA AnaMda ko ? prabhu ne kahA- gautama ! micchA mi dukkaDaM tumheM | denA
cAhie aura AnaMda se jAkara kSamA mAMganI cAhie? prabhu kI AjJA mAnakara
kSamAbhaMDAra gautamasvAmI ne AnaMdazrAvaka | se kSamAyAcanA kii| isa taraha
AnaMdazrAvaka bIsa varSa taka zrAvaka-dharma kA pAlana karake anazana pUrvaka
AyuSya pUrNa kara | aruNavara nAmaka vimAna meM deva huaa| vahAM se AyuSya pUrNa
kara mahAvideha meM janma lekara paramapada mokSa prApta kregaa| yaha hai AnaMda
zrAvaka ke samAdhi maraNa kA evaM saphala jIvana-yAtrA kA vRttAMta  /  / 152 /
/  uparyukta kathAnusAra zrAvaka kI bhAvIgati kA do zlokoM dvArA varNana karate
haiM  / 324 /  prAptaH sa kalpeSvindratvamanyadvA sthAnamuttamam  /
modate'nuttaraprAjyapuNyasambhArabhAk tataH ||153 /  /  329

Page #352 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Future Good Fortune of a Householder Who Upholds the Shravaka Dharma  **Yoga
Shastra, Third Light, Verses 154-155**  **Verse 154:**  **Meaning:** According
to the scriptures, a householder who upholds the Shravaka Dharma attains the
Indra position or other excellent positions in the Saudharma and other heavenly
realms. Due to his excellent store of merit, he remains happy. From there, he is
born into human realms, enjoys various rare pleasures, and then, becoming
detached from them, destroys his karma, becomes a pure soul, and attains
liberation within the eight existences.  **Explanation:** A householder who
truly follows the Shravaka Dharma is born in the Saudharma and other heavenly
realms. A person with right faith is not born in the other three heavenly
realms. Even in the heavenly realms, he attains the position of Indra, Samanika,
Trayastrimsa Parishadya, Lokapala, etc. The word "excellent" means that he is
not a slave, a Kilvishika, or a member of any other inferior caste of gods.
Wherever he is born, he enjoys the highest happiness and great merit. He has a
chariot made of precious jewels, vast gardens, beautiful pools for bathing,
exquisite jewels, ornaments, clothes, female attendants, celestial nymphs, and
millions of gods who compete with each other to serve him, filling the sky with
their shouts of victory. There, he obtains all worldly pleasures simply by
wishing for them. He experiences great joy from traveling to various Siddha
places. He experiences all these unique and extraordinary pleasures due to the
power of his past merit. After completing his lifespan in the Vaimanika heavenly
realm, he is born into the human realm, obtaining a distinguished country,
caste, wealth, beauty, etc., and takes birth in a noble body. There, he enjoys
unparalleled pleasures of sound, form, taste, smell, and touch. In the meantime,
he finds an opportunity for detachment and develops a strong aversion to worldly
pleasures. He accepts complete renunciation and, in that very life, ascends the
ladder of stages, gradually attaining perfect knowledge, eradicating all karma,
becoming a pure soul, and attaining liberation. If he does not attain liberation
in that life, how many existences does the being take to attain liberation? This
is called attaining liberation within the eight existences.  **Verse 155:**
**Meaning and Explanation:** Thus, the nature of yoga, which is the three jewels
of knowledge, faith, and conduct, has been described in three lights. How has it
been described? It has been described concisely, without contradicting the Jina
scriptures. It is difficult to explain in detail for those who are not truly
seeking liberation. Therefore, it has been described concisely. Can liberation
be attained through any other means besides the three jewels? To resolve this
doubt, it is said that liberation cannot be attained if even one of these three
is lacking. It is said that even by chance, no one can attain liberation without
obtaining the three jewels. One who does not know the principles of the soul and
other entities, does not have faith in them, creates new karma, and does not
destroy old karma through the power of righteous conduct and meditation, cannot
escape the bonds of the world and attain liberation. Therefore, by saying "all,"
it is affirmed that only through the combined worship of knowledge, faith, and
conduct can the soul attain liberation; otherwise, not.  **Thus, the third light
of the Adhyatma Upanishad, composed by Acharya Shri Hemchandrasuri, which is
also known as Yoga Shastra, is complete, along with its own explanation, in
response to the curiosity of King Kumarapala.**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrAvakadharma pAlaka gRhastha kI bhAvI sadgati yogazAstra tRtIya prakAza zloka
154 se 155  / 325 /  cyutvotpadya manuSyeSu, bhuktvA bhogAn sudurlabhAn  /
virakto, muktimApnoti, zuddhAtmA'ntarbhavASTakam  // 154 //  artha :- isa
prakAra zAstrAnusAra zrAvakadharmapAlaka gRhastha saudharma Adi devaloka meM
iMdrapada yA anya uttama sthAna prApta kara letA hai| apane utkRSTa puNyapuMja
ke kAraNa vaha sukhI rahatA hai| vahAM se cyavakara vaha manuSya yoniyoM meM
utpanna hokara vividha durlabha sukhoM kA upabhoga karatA hai| phira unase
virakta hokara karmakSaya karake zuddhAtmA hokara ATha bhavoM ke aMdara-aMdara
mukti pA letA hai  // 153-154 /  /  vyAkhyA :- zrAvaka dharma kA yathArtha rUpa
se pAlana karane vAlA gRhastha saudharma Adi devanikAya meM utpanna hotA hai|
samyagdRSTi anya tIna devanikAyoM meM utpanna nahIM hotaa| aura devaloka meM bhI
vaha iMdrapada, sAmAnika, trAyastriMza pAriSadya aura lokapAla Adi kA sthAna
prApta karatA hai| 'uttama' kahane kA matalaba yaha hai ki dAsa, kilviSika yA
anya hIna jAti kA deva vaha nahIM hotaa| jahAM utpanna hotA hai, vahAM
sarvotkRSTa aura mahApuNya kA upabhoga karatA huA AnaMda meM rahatA hai| uttama
ratnoM se banA huA vimAna, bar3e-bar3e udyAna, snAna karane ke lie saMdara
vApikAe~, vicitra ratna, AbhUSaNa, vastra, aMgasevikA, devAMganAe~, kalpavRkSoM
kI puSpamAlA para maMDarAte hue bhauroM kI taraha karor3oM devatA sevA ke | lie
paraspara pratispardhA karate hue jaya-jayakAra ke nAroM se AkAza gUMjA dete
hai| vahAM mana meM icchAmAtra se samagra viSayasukha kI prApti hotI hai|
vividha prakAra se siddhAyatanoM kI yAtrA karane se atyaMta harSa hotA hai| ina
saba ananya asAdhAraNa sukhoM kA anubhava pUrvapuNya-prakarSa se hotA hai|
vaimAnika devaloka se Ayu pUrNa karake manuSyabhava meM vaha viziSTa deza, jAti,
aizvarya, rUpa Adi prApta karake audArika zarIra meM janma letA hai aura vahAM
zabda-rUpa-rasa-gaMdha-sparza-viSayaka anupama bhogoM kA upabhoga karatA hai|
isI bIca vairAgya kA nimitta pAkara sAMsArikasukha se utkRSTa viraktibhAva
prApta karake vaha sarvavirati svIkAra karatA hai aura usI janma meM
kSapakazreNi para ArUr3ha hokara kramazaH kevalajJAna prApta karake samasta
karmoM ko nirmUla kara zuddhAtmA banakara mukti prApta karatA hai| yadi usI
janma meM mukti prApta na kara sakA to vaha jIva kitane bhavoM meM mukti prApta
karatA hai? ise kahate haiM-vaha jIva ATha bhavoM ke aMdara-aMdara mukti prApta
kara letA hai  /  / 153-154 /  /  pUrvokta tIna prakAzoM meM kahe hue viSayoM kA
upasaMhAra karate hue kahate haiN|326|| iti saGkSaptaH samyagratnatrayImudIritam
/  sarvo'pi yadanAsAdya, nAsAdayati nirvRtim  // 155 /  /  artha evaM vyAkhyA :-
isa prakAra tIna prakAzoM dvArA jJAna-darzana-cAritrAtmaka ratnatraya rUpa yoga
kA svarUpa kahA hai| vaha kisa prakAra kahA hai? samyag yAnI jinAgamoM ke sAtha
virodha na Aye isa taraha saMkSepa meM kahA hai| chadmastha ke lie vistAra se
kahanA duHzakya hai| isIlie saMkSepa meM varNana kiyA gayA hai| ratnatraya ke
binA anya kisI kAraNa se nirvANaprAti ho sakatI hai yA nahIM? isa zaMkA kA
samAdhAna karate hue kahate haiM ina sabhI (tInoM) meM se eka bhI nyUna ho to
mukti nahIM ho sktii| kahA hai ki kAkatAlIya nyAya se bhI triratnaprApti kiye
binA koI mukti nahIM pA sktaa| jo jIvAdi tattvoM ko nahIM jAnatA; jIvAdi
padArthoM para zraddhA nahIM karatA, naye karma bAMdhatA hai aura purAne karmoM
kA dharmazukla-dhyAna ke bala se kSaya nahIM karatA; vaha saMsAra ke baMdhana se
chUTakara mukti nahIM pA sktaa| isIlie sarvo'pi kahakara yaha puSTi kara dI hai
ki jJAna, darzana aura cAritra kI saMyukta ArAdhanA se hI AtmA mukti prApta kara
sakatI hai; anyathA nahIM  /  / 155 /  /   //  isa prakAra paramAIta zrI
kumArapAla rAjA kI jijJAsA se AcAryazrI hemacaMdrasUrIzvara racita
adhyAtmopaniSad nAmaka paTTabaddha, aparanAma yogazAsa kA svopajJAvivaraNa
sahita tRtIya prakAza saMpUrNa huA  /  330

Page #353 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
|| Om Arhate Namah || 4. Light  In the first three lights, the three jewels of
knowledge, faith, and conduct have been described as the cause of the soul's
liberation, in relation to the distinction between dharma and the righteous.
Now, in relation to the non-distinction, the oneness of the three jewels of
knowledge, faith, and conduct with the soul is being described.  327. The soul
itself is vision, knowledge, and conduct, or so it is said of the ascetic. That
which is identical with the soul, resides in the body. ||1||  Meaning: Or, the
soul of the ascetic (saint) is itself vision, knowledge, and conduct; because
the soul, which is the essence of vision, etc., resides in the body. ||1||
Explanation: The word "or" in the original verse is used to indicate a second
alternative in relation to the non-distinction. The soul itself is the essence
of vision, knowledge, and conduct; vision, etc., are not different from the
soul. Connecting the ascetic (muni) with the soul, the soul, which is the
essence of vision, knowledge, and conduct, resides in the body of the ascetic.
Vision, etc., are not separate from the soul, they are the essence of the soul.
From this, it becomes the cause of liberation. If it were different from the
soul, it could not be the cause of liberation. Devadatta's knowledge, etc.,
cannot liberate Yajnadutta. ||1|| They support the non-distinction.  328. The
soul knows the soul by itself, this knowledge is not for the ignorant, therefore
it is said that by abandoning delusion, the soul knows its own soul by its own
soul, that is its conduct, that is its knowledge, and that is its faith-like
vision. ||2||  Now they praise self-knowledge.  329. The suffering that arises
from ignorance of the soul is destroyed by self-knowledge. Those who are devoid
of self-knowledge cannot destroy suffering even by austerity. ||3||  Meaning:
The soul suffers due to ignorance of the soul, and that suffering is destroyed
only by self-knowledge. Those who are devoid of self-knowledge, even those
humans cannot destroy suffering by austerity, etc. ||3||  Explanation: In this
world, all kinds of suffering are obtained without self-knowledge. Just as
darkness is destroyed by light, so too is suffering destroyed by self-knowledge,
which is its opposite. Many people raise doubts about this, saying, "The main
cause of the destruction of karma is austerity, not knowledge, therefore it is
also said that those who have bound themselves by karma through opposite
conduct, who have not performed atonement for such karma, cannot be liberated
without experiencing them, or liberation can be attained by destroying karma
through austerity." The solution to this is that the ignorant soul cannot cut
off suffering by austerity or any other ritual. The soul can only cut off
suffering by pure knowledge, austerity without knowledge is of little fruit. It
is also said, "An ignorant person destroys as much karma in a hundred years of
austerity as a three-fold knowledge-holder destroys in a single breath."
(Brihatkalpa Bhashya, verse 1170) From this, it is concluded that one should
strive for the soul, which is the essence of the three jewels, by abandoning
external objects or objects of the senses. Others say, "The soul is to be heard,
contemplated, and meditated upon." (Brihadaranyaka 4/5/6) Self-knowledge is not
even slightly different from the soul. But the soul, which is the essence of
knowledge, can know itself through its own experience. There is no other self-
knowledge than this. Similarly, vision and conduct are not different from the
soul. Such a soul, which is the essence of consciousness, is also called by the
names of knowledge, etc. Here there is a doubt, "Why is this called self-
knowledge, leaving aside other subjects? Knowledge of other subjects is also a
form of ignorance, suffering.  331

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
  /  /  OM arhate namaH  /  /  4. prakAza pahale ke tIna prakAzoM meM dharma
aura dharmI ke bhedanaya kI apekSA se jJAnAdi ratnatraya ko AtmA kI mukti kA
kAraNa rUpa nirUpaNa kiyA hai| aba abhedanaya kI apekSA se AtmA ke sAtha jJAnAdi
ratnatraya ke ekatvabhAva kA nirUpaNa karate  / 327 /  Atmaiva darzana-jJAna-
cAritrANyathavA yateH  /  yat tadAtmaka evaiSa, zarIramadhitiSThati  // 1 //
artha :- athavA yati-(sAdhu) kA AtmA hI darzana, jJAna aura cAritra rUpa hai;
kyoMki darzanAdiratnatrayAtmaka AtmA zarIra meM rahatA hai  // 1 //  vyAkhyA :-
mUla zloka meM 'athavA' zabda kA prayoga abhedanaya kI apekSA se dUsarA vikalpa
batAne ke lie kiyA hai| AtmA hI darzana-jJAna-cAritra-svarUpa hai; darzanAdi
AtmA se bhinna nahIM hai| yati (muni) kA AtmA ke sAtha saMbaMdha jor3anA,
darzana-jJAna-cAritra svarUpa AtmA hI yati ke zarIra meM sthita hai| darzanAdi
AtmA se alaga nahIM hai, AtmasvarUpa hai| isIse vaha (ratnatraya) mukti kA
kAraNa rUpa banatA hai| AtmA se bhinna ho, vaha mukti kA kAraNa nahIM bana
sktaa| devadatta ke jJAnAdi se, yajJadatta ko mukti nahIM mila sakatI  /  / 1 /
/  abheda kA samarthana karate haiN|328| AtmAnamAtmanA vetti, mohatyAgAdya
Atmani  /  tadeva tasya cAritraM, tajjJAnaM tacca darzanam  /  / 2 /  /  artha
:- AtmA ko AtmA svayaM jAnatA hai; aisA jJAna mUr3ha-vyakti ko nahIM hotA, ataH
kahA hai ki moha kA tyAga karane se AtmA apanI AtmA ke dvArA apanI AtmA ko
jAnatA hai, vahI usakA cAritra hai, vahI jJAna hai aura vahI zraddhA rUpI
darzana hai  /  / 2 /  /  aba AtmajJAna kI stuti karate hai|329|
AtmA'jJAnabhavaM duHkhamAtmajJAnena hanyate  /
tapasA'pyAtmavijJAnahInaizchettuM na zakyate  // 3 //  artha :- AtmA ko ajJAna
ke kAraNa duHkha hotA hai aura vaha duHkha AtmajJAna se hI naSTa kiyA jAtA hai|
jo | AtmajJAna se rahita hai, ve manuSya tapasyA Adi se bhI duHkha kA chedana
nahIM kara sakate  /  / 3 /  /  vyAkhyA :- isa saMsAra meM AtmajJAna ke binA
sabhI prakAra ke duHkha prApta hote hai| jaise prakAza se aMdhakAra kA nAza hotA
hai, vaise hI pratipakSabhUta AtmajJAna ke dvArA duHkha kA nAza hotA hai| isa
viSaya meM kaI loga zaMkA uThAte haiM ki 'karmakSaya karane kA mukhya kAraNa to
tapa hai, jJAna nahIM hai, isalie kahA bhI hai ki pahale viparIta AcaraNa se
karmabaMdha kiyA ho usakA pratikramaNa nahIM kiyA ho aise karmoM ko bhoge binA
chuTakArA nahIM hotA, athavA tapasyA karake karmoM kA kSaya kara mukti prApta kI
jA sakatI hai| isakA samAdhAna yoM karate haiM ki-ajJAnI AtmA duHkha ko tapasyA
yA anya kisI anuSThAna se kATa nahIM sktaa| AtmA vizuddhajJAna se hI duHkha kA
chedana kara sakatA hai, jJAna ke binA tapa alpaphaladAyI hotA hai| kahA bhI
hai-karor3a varSa taka tapa karake ajJAnI jitane karmoM kA kSaya karatA hai,
utane karmoM ko tIna guptidhAraka jJAnI eka zvAsocchvAsa mAtra meM kSaya kara
letA hai| (bRhatkalpa bhASya gAthA 1170) isase yaha phalita huA ki
bAhyapadArthoM yA iMdriyaviSayoM kA tyAgakara ratnatraya ke sarvasvabhUta AtmA
meM prayatna karanA caahie| anyadarzanI kahate haiM-AtmA vAre zrotavyo maMtavyo
nididhyAsitavyazca arthAt 'are! yaha AtmA zravaNa karane yogya manana karane
yogya aura dhyAna karane yogya hai|' (bRhadAraNya 4/5/6) AtmajJAna, AtmA se jarA
bhI bhinna nahIM hai| paraMtu jJAna svarUpa AtmA ko AtmA apane anubhava se jAna
sakatA hai| isase bhinna koI AtmajJAna nahIM hai| isI taraha darzana aura
cAritra bhI AtmA se bhinna nahIM hai| isa prakAra kA cidarUpa AtmA jJAnAdi ke
nAma se bhI pukArA jAtA hai| yahAM zaMkA hotI hai ki 'anya viSayoM ko chor3akara
ise AtmajJAna hI kyoM kahA jAtA hai? anya viSayoM kA jJAna bhI to ajJAna rUpa
duHkha 331

Page #354 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Kashayas: Characteristics, Divisions, and Discussion  This section delves
into verses 4 to 7 of the fourth chapter of Yoga Shastra. It addresses the
question of whether there is anything other than the soul that is of primary
importance. The answer is that the soul is the primary entity in all matters.
Due to karma, the soul experiences suffering while inhabiting a body. When karma
is destroyed, the soul attains its true nature and becomes blissful.  **Verse
4:**  The soul is truly the essence of consciousness and knowledge, as the
characteristic of a living being is its ability to use. The body is formed due
to the combination of karma, but this is not the case with other objects.
Therefore, there is no need to gain knowledge of other objects. When the soul,
through the fire of pure meditation, burns away all the fuel of karma and
becomes free from the body, it becomes the liberated, pure, and unblemished
Siddhatma.  **Verse 5:**  This soul, bound by kashayas and senses, is the cycle
of birth and death, encompassing hell, animal life, human life, and heavenly
realms. When this same soul conquers kashayas and senses, wise men call it
liberation.  **Explanation:**  There is no liberation other than attaining one's
true nature. The soul, which is the essence of bliss, attains its own nature.
Therefore, one should practice self-knowledge. Right perception and conduct are
also attained through this. In this verse, the soul is described as the
conqueror of kashayas and senses.  **Verse 6:**  Anger, pride, deceit, and greed
are the four kashayas that reside in the embodied soul. Each of these kashayas
has four sub-categories, such as Sanjwalana (intense), Pratyakhyanavaran
(hindering), Apratyakhyanavaran (partially hindering), and Anantanubandhi
(infinitely binding).  **Explanation:**  Anger, pride, deceit, and greed are
called kashayas. Alternatively, anything that causes harm to living beings is
called a kashayas. "Kash" means "samsara" (cycle of birth and death) or "karma,"
and "ay" means "to be present." Kashayas cause repeated cycles of birth and
death. Kashayas are present only in embodied, worldly beings, not in liberated
souls. The four types of kashayas, anger, pride, deceit, and greed, are further
divided into four sub-categories based on their intensity and duration. For
example, anger has four sub-categories: Sanjwalana (intense), Pratyakhyanavaran
(hindering), Apratyakhyanavaran (partially hindering), and Anantanubandhi
(infinitely binding). Similarly, there are four sub-categories for pride,
deceit, and greed.  **Verse 7:**  Sanjwalana (intense) anger, pride, deceit, and
greed last for fifteen days. Sanjwalana kashayas burn like a grass fire, for a
short time. Or, they burn due to the presence of factors like anger, pride,
deceit, and greed. Pratyakhyanavaran (hindering) kashayas last for four months.
It is called "Pratyakhyan" for brevity. Pratyakhyanavaran kashayas hinder the
practice of all restraints (niyamas). Apratyakhyanavaran (partially hindering)
kashayas last for a year. The word "nab" in this term signifies "less," so it
means "that which partially hinders the practice of restraints." Anantanubandhi
(infinitely binding) kashayas, which are associated with false belief, bind the
soul for countless lifetimes. Anantanubandhi anger, pride, deceit, and greed
last until death. Even a momentary state of anger, pride, deceit, or greed, like
that of King Prasannacandra, is considered Anantanubandhi, otherwise, there
would be no opportunity to accumulate karma leading to hell.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 kaSAya : lakSaNa, bheda-prabheda evaM vivecana yogazAstra caturtha prakAza
zloka 4 se 7 ko kATane vAlA hai! samAdhAna karate haiM ki 'aisI bAta nahIM hai,
sabhI viSayoM meM AtmA kI hI mukhyatA hai| karma ke kAraNabhUta, zarIra dhAraNa
karane meM AtmA hI duHkhI hotI hai aura karma ke kSaya hone se vahI AtmA siddha
svarUpa hone para sukhI hotI hai  /  / 3 /  /  isI bAta ko Age kahate haiN|330|
ayamAtmaiva cidrUpaH zarIrI karmayogataH  /  dhyAnAgnidagdhakarmA, tu siddhAtmA
syAnniraJjanaH  /  / 4 /  /  artha :- samasta pramANoM se siddha AtmA vAstava
meM cetana-jJAnasvarUpa hai; kyoMki 'jIva kA lakSaNa upayoga hai| zarIrI to vaha
karma ke saMyoga se banatA hai| kintu anya viSayoM meM aisA nahIM banatA, isase
anya viSayoM kA jJAna prApta karane kI AvazyakatA nahIM hai| jaba yaha AtmA hI
zukladhyAna rUpI agni se samasta karma rUpI iMdhana ko bhasma kara zarIra rahita
ho jAtI hai, taba mukta svarUpa siddhAtmA niraMjana nirmala bana jAtI hai  /  /
4 /  /   / 331 /  ayamAtmaiva saMsAraH kaSAyendriyanirjitaH  /  tameva
tadvijetAraM, mokSamAhurmanISiNaH  /  / 5 /  /  artha :- kaSAya aura iMdriyoM ke
vazIbhUta yaha AtmA hI naraka-tiryaca-manuSya-devagati-paribhramaNa rUpa saMsAra
hai _ aura jaba yahI AtmA kaSAyoM aura iMdriyoM ko jIta letI hai, to usI ko
buddhizAlI puruSoM ne mokSa kahA hai  /  / 5 /  /  vyAkhyA :- sva svarUpa kI
prApti ke atirikta koI mokSa nahIM hai, jo AnaMda-svarUpa hai, usameM bhI AtmA
apanA svarUpa hI prApta karatI hai| isa kAraNa se Atma-jJAna kI upAsanA karanI
caahie| darzana aura cAritra bhI usImeM gItArtha hokara prApta ho jAte haiN|
AtmA ko isa zloka meM kaSAyoM aura iMdriyoM kA vijetA kahA hai  /  / 5 /  /
ataH sarvaprathama kaSAyoM kA vistAra se nirUpaNa karate haiN|332| syuH kaSAyAH
krodha-mAna-mAyA-lobhAH zarIriNAm  /  caturvidhAste pratyekaM, bhedaiH
sjvlnaadibhiH||6|| artha :- krodha, mAna, mAyA aura lobha ye cAra kaSAya haiM,
jo zarIradhArI AtmA meM hote haiN| saMjvalana Adi ke bheda | . se krodhAdi
pratyeka kaSAya ke cAra-cAra bheda haiM  /  / 6 /  /  vyAkhyA :- krodha, mAna,
mAyA aura lobha ko kaSAya kahA jAtA hai| athavA jisase jIvoM kI hiMsA ho, use
kaSAya kahate haiN| 'kaS' kA artha hai-saMsAra athavA karma aura usakA 'Aya'
arthAt prAsa honA kaSAya hai| isake kAraNa bArabAra saMsAra meM AvAgamana karanA
par3atA hai| kaSAya zarIradhArI saMsArI jIvoM ko hI hotA hai, muktAtmA ko nahIM
hotaa| krodhAdi cAra prakAra kA kaSAya saMjvalanAdi ke bheda se pratyeka cAra-
cAra prakAra kA hai| jaise-krodha ke cAra bheda haiMsaMjvalanakrodha,
pratyAkhyAnAvaraNakrodha, apratyAkhyAnAvaraNakrodha aura anaMtAnubaMdhI krodh|
isI taraha mAna, mAyA aura lobha ke bhI cAra-cAra bheda samajha lenA  /  / 6 /
/  aba saMjvalanAdi kaSAyoM ke lakSaNa kahate haiN|333| pakSaM sajvalanaH
pratyAkhyAno mAsacatuSTayam  /  apratyAkhyAnako varSa, janmAnantAnubandhakaH  //
7 //  artha evaM vyAkhyA :- saMjvalana krodha, mAna, mAyA aura lobha kI
kAlamaryAdA paMdraha dina taka kI rahatI hai| saMjvalanakaSAya ghAsa kI agni ke
samAna alpasamaya taka jalAte haiN| athavA pariSaha Adi ke Ane se jalane kA
svabhAva | ho jAtA hai| pratyAkhyAna-jaise bhImasena ko bhIma kahA jAtA hai,
vaise hI yahAM pratyAkhyAnAvaraNa zabda ko saMkSepa meM | |'pratyAkhyAna' kahA
hai| pratyAkhyAnAvaraNa-kaSAya sarvavirati pratyAkhyAna (niyama) ko rokane vAlA
hai| yaha cAra mahIne taka | rahatA hai| apratyAkhyAnAvaraNa kaSAya meM 'naba'
samAsa alpArthaka hai. isalie artha haA-jo dezavirati pratyAkhyAna ko rokatA
hai| isake cAroM kaSAya eka varSa taka rahate haiN| anaMtAnubaMdhI karma
bAMdhane vAlA kaSAya mithyAtva-sahita hone se | anaMtabhavoM taka usakI
paraMparA calatI hai| anaMtAnubaMdhI krodhAdi-kaSAya janmaparyaMta taka rahatA
hai| prasannacaMdra rAjarSi Adi| ke kSaNamAtra kI sthiti hone para bhI vaha
anaMtAnubaMdhI kaSAya hai, anyathA naraka-yogya karmoM ke upArjana kA avasara
nahIM aataa||7|| 332

Page #355 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Kshaya-Swaroop  **Chapter 4, Verse 8-10 of Yoga Shastra**  Even after
controlling time, there is still incompleteness in the characteristics like
Sanjwalan, etc. Therefore, other characteristics are explained further.  **Verse
8:**  > **Vitaraga-Yati-Shraddha-Samyagdristi-tvaghatakaha | Te Devattva-
Manushyattva-Tiryaktva-Narakapradaha ||8||**  **Meaning:**  > These four Kshayas
(Sanjwalan, etc.) destroy Vitaragattva, Sadhutva, Shravaktva, and Samyaktva
respectively. They also lead to Devatva, Manushyattva, Tiryaktva, and Narakattva
respectively. ||8||  **Explanation:**  > By adding the suffix 'tv' to all, the
meaning becomes - the four Kshayas destroy Vitaragattva, Sadhutva, Shravaktva,
and Samyaktva respectively. In this way, when Sanjwalan-Krodha, etc. Kshayas
arise, Sadhutva is present, but Vitaragattva is not. When Pratyakhyana-Avaraniya
Kshaya arises, Shravaktva is present, but Sadhutva is not. When Apratyakhyana-
Avaraniya arises, Samyagdristitva is present, but Desh-Virati-Shravaktva is not.
And when Ananta-Anubandhi Kshaya arises, even Samyagdristitva is not present. In
this way, Sanjwalan destroys Vitaragattva, Pratyakhyana-Avaraniya destroys
Sadhutva, Apratyakhyana-Avaraniya destroys Shravaktva, and Ananta-Anubandhi
destroys Samyaktva. This is how the clear characteristics are explained. Now,
the latter part of the verse describes the fruits of Kshayas - when Sanjwalan,
Krodha, Mana, Maya, and Lobha are present, the fruit of Devagati is obtained.
When Pratyakhyana-Avarana, Krodha, etc. are present, Manushyagati is obtained.
When Apratyakhyana-Avarana Kshaya is present, Tiryanchgati is obtained. And when
Ananta-Anubandhi Kshaya is present, Narakagati is obtained. Now, the nature of
these four Kshayas (Sanjwalan, etc.) is explained using similes - Sanjwalan,
etc. four types of Krodha are like a line in water, a line in sand, a line on
earth, and a line on a mountain respectively. And the four types of Mana are
like a bamboo stick, a wooden stick, a bone, and a stone pillar respectively.
The four types of Maya are like bamboo bark, wooden bark, a goat's horn, and a
bamboo root respectively. And the four types of Lobha are like turmeric color,
dirt on a pot, an insect on a cart wheel, and chili color respectively. ||8||
**Verse 9:**  > **Tatropatapakaha Krodhaha Krodho Vairasya Karanam |
Durgatervartani Krodhaha Krodhaha Shamasukhargalah ||9||**  **Meaning:**  >
Among these four, the first Kshaya, Krodha, causes suffering to both the body
and mind. Krodha is the cause of enmity. Krodha is the path to hell. And Krodha
is like an obstacle to peace and happiness. ||9||  **Explanation:**  > The word
'Krodha' is used repeatedly in this verse because Krodha is extremely evil and
harmful to the soul. It burns itself and those around it with suffering, like
fire. Enmity grows from Krodha, just like Subhumi and Parashurama became enemies
and killed each other. Krodha leads to hell. ||9||  **Verse 10:**  >
**Utpadyamaanaha Prathama, Dahaty-eva Swa-Ashrayam | Krodhaha Krishanuvath
Paschad-anyam Dahati Va Na Va ||10||**  **Meaning:**  > When Krodha arises due
to any cause, it first burns its own abode (where it arises), like fire. Later,
it may or may not burn others, like fire. If the person in front is forgiving,
he will not be burned, like a wet tree. ||10||  **Explanation:**  > Here, the
meaning of the inner verses regarding Krodha is presented. A seeker may practice
virtue for eight years or less than a koti years, but that much tapasya is burnt
to ashes in a moment by the fire of Krodha, like a pile of grass. The water of
equanimity, accumulated in a pot filled with great merit, becomes undrinkable in
a moment by the mere contact of the poison of Krodha. The smoke of the fire of
Krodha spreads and spreads, making the picture of virtue, which is the holder of
wonderful qualities, extremely dark, like a kitchen. The tree of detachment

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 kaSAya-svarupa yogazAstra caturtha prakAza zloka 8 se 10 isa taraha kAla kA
niyama karane para bhI saMjvalana Adi lakSaNa meM abhI apUrNatA hone se dUsare
lakSaNa Age batAte  / 334 /  vItarAga-yati-zrAddha-samyagdRSTitvaghAtakAH  /  te
devatva-manuSyatva-tiryaktva-narakapradAH  // 8 //  artha :- ve saMjvalanAdi
cAra kaSAya kramazaH vItarAgatva, sAdhutva, zrAvakatva aura samyaktva kA ghAta
karate haiM tathA ye kramazaH devatva, manuSyatva, tiryaktva aura narakatva
prApta karAte haiM  /  / 8 /  /  vyAkhyA :- 'tva' pratyaya sabhI ke sAtha
jor3ane se artha huA - kaSAya catuSTa vItarAgatva, sAdhutva, zrAvakatva aura
samyaktva kA kramazaH ghAta karatA hai| vaha isa prakAra saMjvalana-krodhAdi
kaSAya ke udaya meM sAdhutva to hotA hai, paraMtu vItarAgatva nahIM rahatA,
pratyAkhyAnAvaraNIya kaSAya ke udaya meM zrAvakatva to rahatA hai, kintu
sAdhutva nahIM rahatA, apratyAkhyAnAvaraNIya ke udaya meM samyagdRSTitva to
rahegA, paraMtu dezaviratizrAvakatva nahIM rahegA aura anaMtAnubaMdhI kaSAya ke
udaya meM samyagdRSTitva bhI nahIM rahatA hai| isa taraha saMjvalana vItarAgatva
kA ghAta, pratyAkhyAnAvaraNIya sAdhutva kA ghAta, apratyAkhyAnAvaraNIya
zrAvakatva kA ghAta aura anaMtAnubaMdhI samyaktva kA ghAta karatA hai| isa
taraha spaSTa lakSaNa btaayaa| aba zloka ke uttarArdha meM kaSAyoM kA phala
kahate haiM-saMjvalana krodha, mAna, mAyA aura lobha ke rahate devagati kA phala
milatA hai, pratyAkhyAnAvaraNa krodhAdi ke rahate manuSyagati,
apratyAkhyanAvaraNa kaSAya ke hone se tiryaMcagati aura anaMtAnubaMdhI kaSAya se
narakagati milatI hai| aba ina saMjvalanAdi cAra kaSAyoM kA svarUpa upamA dekara
samajhAte haiM-saMjvalana Adi cAra prakAra kA krodha kramazaH jala meM rekhA,
reta meM rekhA, pRthvI para rekhA aura parvata kI rekhA ke samAna hotA hai|
tathA cAra prakAra kA mAna beMta kI char3I ke samAna, kASTha kI lakar3I ke
samAna, haDDI ke samAna aura patthara ke staMbha ke samAna hotA hai| cAra
prakAra kI mAyA bAMsa kI chAla ke samAna lakar3I kI chAla ke samAna, meMDhe ke
sIMga ke samAna aura bAMsa kI jar3a ke samAna hai aura cAra prakAra kA lobha
haldI ke raMga ke samAna, sakore meM lage maila ke samAna, gAr3I ke pahiye ke
kITa ke samAna tathA kiramicI raMga ke samAna hotA hai  /  / 8 /  /  aba cAroM
kaSAyoM ke adhIna hone se hone vAle doSa batalAte haiN|335| tatropatApakaH
krodhaH krodho vairasya kAraNam  /  durgatervartanI krodhaH krodhaH
zamasukhArgalA  // 9 //  artha :- ina cAroM meM prathama kaSAya krodha zarIra
aura mana donoM ko saMtApa detA hai; krodha vaira kA kAraNa hai, krodha durgati
kI pagaDaMDI hai aura krodha prazamasukha ko rokane ke lie argalA ke samAna hai
/  / 9 /  /  vyAkhyA :- isa zloka meM krodhazabda kA bAra-bAra prayoga isalie
kiyA gayA hai ki krodha atyaMta duSTa aura hAnikAraka hai, AtmA ke lie| yaha
agni kI taraha apane Apako aura pAsa meM rahe hue ko saMtApa se jalA DAlatA hai|
krodha se vaira paraMparA isI taraha bar3hatI jAtI hai, jaise subhUma aura
parazurAma vairI banakara paraspara eka dUsare ke ghAtaka ho gaye the| krodha
durgati yAnI narakagati meM le jAne vAlA hai  /  / 9 /  /  krodha svayaM ko
kaise jalAtA hai, isakA samarthana AgAmI zloka meM karate haiN|336| utpadyamAnaH
prathama, dahatyeva svamAzrayam  /  krodhaHkRzAnuvat pazcAdanyaM dahati vA na vA
// 10 //  artha :- kisI prakAra kA nimitta pAkara krodha utpanna hote hI sarva
prathama Aga kI taraha apane Azraya sthAna (jisameM vaha utpanna hotA hai, usI)
ko hI jalAtA hai| bAda meM agni kI taraha dUsare ko jalAe, cAhe na bhI jlaae|
yadi sAmane vAlA vyakti kSamAzIla hogA to gIle vRkSa ke samAna use jalA nahIM
skegaa||10|| vyAkhyA :- yahAM para krodha ke viSaya meM AMtara-zlokoM kA
bhAvArtha prastuta karate haiM.. koI sAdhaka ATha varSa kama pUrvakoTi varSa
taka cAritra kI ArAdhanA kare, utane hI varSa ke tapa ko krodha rUpI Aga
kSaNabhara meM ghAsa ke Dhera ke samAna jalAkara bhasma kara detI hai| atizaya
puNyapuMja se pUrNa ghaTa meM saMcita kiyA huA, samatA | rUpI jala krodha rUpI
viSa ke saMparka mAtra se palabhara meM apeya bana jAtA hai| krodhAgni kA dhuMA
phailatA-phailatA rasoIghara kI taraha AzcaryakArI guNoM ke dhAraka cAritra rUpI
citra kI racanA ko atyaMta zyAma kara detA hai| vairAgya rUpI zamIvRkSa 333

Page #356 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The nature of anger, its ill effects and the means to conquer it  Anger, like a
large leaf of Palasha, casts down the harmony obtained from the small leaves of
the fourth light of Yoga Shastra, verse 11, or the nectar of peace acquired in
the soul over time. The sage Dvaipayana, due to the fire of anger, burnt the
Yadava clan and the city of Dwarika along with its people to ashes. The success
that sometimes seems to be achieved by getting angry is not due to anger, but
should be understood as the fruit of strong virtuous deeds acquired in a
previous birth. One who harbors the water of anger in his body, which spoils
both his births and destroys his and others' wealth, is to be condemned. See for
yourself, blinded by anger, the soul becomes merciless and destroys his father,
mother, guru, friend, brother, wife and himself. ||10||  Giving the nature of
anger, he advises on conquering it. ||337|| For one with a noble soul, the only
refuge to immediately extinguish the fire of anger is forgiveness. Forgiveness
alone can extinguish the fire of anger. Forgiveness is the bed in the garden of
restraint, making it lush. ||11||  **Explanation:** If anger is not stopped at
the beginning, it becomes impossible to stop it like a wildfire after it has
grown. It is said that one should not trust even a little debt, a small wound, a
little fire, and a little bit of attachment. Because it doesn't take long for
even a little to become huge (grow). (A. Ni. Ga. 120) Therefore, one should take
refuge in forgiveness as soon as anger arises. In this world, there is no other
way to pacify anger except forgiveness. The fruit of anger is the cause of
enmity, which in turn increases anger and cannot bring peace. Therefore,
forgiveness alone is the one that pacifies anger. What kind of forgiveness is
it? In answer to this, it is said that forgiveness is like a bed in the garden
of restraint. New places of restraint and determination are planted and grown
through forgiveness. Many types of trees are planted in the garden, and by
making water beds in it, the flowers, fruits, and leaves of the trees grow.
Forgiveness is the culmination of a peaceful mind. By giving it the form of a
bed, new results of peace are produced.  The meaning of the verses on this
subject is presented:  It is generally impossible to control anger towards
harmful people, but it can be controlled by the influence of one's own endurance
or by some kind of feeling. He who wants to give me pain by accepting his sin;
he is killed by his own actions, who would be foolish enough to be angry with
that man? No one! If such results arise in your mind, 'I will be angry with the
wrongdoer', then why don't you get angry at your own actions, which are the
cause of suffering? A dog does not bite the one who throws the stone, but goes
to bite the stone, while a lion, without looking at the arrow, goes to catch the
one who threw the arrow. A self-interested person does not get angry at the
cruel deeds of a cruel person; rather, he gets angry at his own actions, while
an ordinary person gets angry at the other (cause) rather than getting angry at
his actions. What is the benefit of barking or speaking to others like a dog?
Curse your actions, scold them. It is heard that the Shraman Bhagwan Mahavira
went to the Mlechchha country with the desire to destroy the disease, then why
don't you want to accept the forgiveness that came effortlessly? If the Lord,
who is capable of destroying or protecting the three worlds, had forgiveness,
then why can't you, a person like you, who is as weak as a banana, have
forgiveness? Why not earn this effortless virtue so that no one can hurt you?
Now, while blaming your negligence, accept forgiveness. There is no difference
between a sage who is blind in anger and a Chandala who is angry. Therefore, one
should abandon anger and consume the land of bright intellect, forgiveness. On
the one hand, there was a great ascetic who was angry, and on the other hand,
there was a Kurugaddduk Muni who only chanted Navkarasi; a Muni free from anger.
But the gods worshipped Kurugaddduk Muni, leaving the great sage. Hearing the
polluted, heart-touching words from the point of view of the scriptures,

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 krodha kA svarUpa, duSpariNAma evaM use jItane kA upAya yogazAstra caturtha
prakAza zloka 11 ke choTe-choTe pattoM se prApta samarasa ko athavA cirakAla se
AtmA meM upArjita zamAmRta ko palAza ke bar3e patto ke samAna krodha nIce girA
detA hai| dvaipAyanaRSi ne krodhAgni paidA hone se yAdavakula ko aura prajA
sahita dvArikA nagarI ko jalAkara bhasma kara diyA thaa| krodha karane se kabhI-
kabhI jo kArya kI siddhi hotI mAlUma hotI hai, vaha krodha ke kAraNa se nahIM
hotI, use pUrvajanma meM upArjita prabala puNyakarma kA phala samajhanA caahie|
apane donoM janmoM ko bigAr3ane vAle, apane aura dasare ke artha kA nAza karane
vAle krodha rUpI jala ko jo apane zarIra meM dhAraNa karatA hai use dhikkAra
hai| pratyakSa dekha lo, krodhAndhatA se nirdaya banA AtmA pitA, mAtA, guru,
mitra, sage bhAI, patnI aura apanA vinAza kara DAlatA hai  /  / 10 /  /  krodha
kA svarUpa batAkara usa para vijaya prApta karane ke lie upadeza dete haiN|337|
krodhavatestadahrAya, zamanAya zubhAtmabhiH  /  zrayaNIyA kSamaikaiva,
saMyamArAmasAraNiH  // 11 /  /  artha :- uttama AtmA ko krodha rUpI agni ko
tatkAla zAMta karane ke lie ekamAtra kSamA kA hI Azraya lenA caahie| kSamA hI
krodhAgni ko zAMta kara sakatI hai| kSamA saMyama rUpI udyAna ko harAbharA
banAne ke lie kyArI hai  /  / 11 /  /  vyAkhyA :- prAraMbha meM hI krodha ko na
rokA jAye to bar3hane ke bAda dAvAnala kI taraha use rokanA azakya hai| kahA hai
ki-thor3A-sA RNa, jarA-sA bhI ghAva, thor3I-sI agni aura thor3e-se bhI kaSAyoM
kA jarA bhI vizvAsa nahIM karanA caahie| kyoMki thor3e ko bhI virAT banate
(bar3hate) dera nahIM lgtii| (A. ni. gA. 120) isalie krodha Ate hI tatkAla kSamA
kA Azraya lenA caahie| isa jagat meM krodha ko upazAMta karane ke lie kSamA ke
sivAya aura koI upAya nahIM hai| krodha kA phala vaira kA nimitta hone se ulaTe
vaha krodha ko bar3hAtA hai, zAMti nahIM de sktaa| isalie kSamA hI krodha ko |
zAMta karane vAlI hai| vaha kSamA kaisI hai? isake uttara meM kahate haiM-kSamA
saMyama rUpI udyAna kI kyArI ke samAna hai| kSamA se naye-naye saMyama-sthAna
aura adhyavasAya-sthAna rUpa vRkSoM ko ropA jAtA hai, usakI vRddhi kI jAtI hai|
udyAna meM aneka prakAra ke vRkSa boye jAte haiM, usameM pAnI kI kyArI banAne se
vRkSoM ke puSpa, phala, patte Adi bar3hate haiN| kSamA prazAMta-vAditA rUpa
citta kI pariNati hai| use kyArI kA rUpa dene se naye-naye prazama-pariNAma
utpanna hote haiN| isa viSaya ke zlokoM kA bhAvArtha prastuta karate haiM
Amataura para apakArI manuSyoM para krodha kA rokanA azakya hai, isake viparIta
apanI sahanazakti ke prabhAva se athavA kisI prakAra kI bhAvanA se krodha rokA
jA sakatA hai| jo apane pApa ko svIkAra karake mujhe pIr3A denA cAhatA hai; vaha
becArA apane karmoM se hI mArA gayA hai, kauna aisA mUrkha hogA jo usa manuSya
para krodha karegA? koI nahIM! 'maiM | apakArI para krodha karUM' isa prakAra ke
pariNAma yadi tere mana meM jAgRta hote haiM, to phira tUM duHkha ke kAraNa rUpa
apane karmoM para krodha kyoM nahIM karatA? kuttA DhelA pheMkane vAle ko na
kATakara Dhele ko kATane jAtA hai, jaba ki siMha bANa kI ora dRSTi kiye binA hI
bANa pheMkane vAle ko pakar3ane jAtA hai| AtmArthI krUrakarmoM se prerita vyakti
para krodha nahIM karatA; apitu apane karmoM para hI krodha karatA hai, jaba ki
sAdhAraNa manuSya karmoM para krodha karane kI apekSA dUsare (nimitta) para
krodha karatA hai| kutte ke samAna dUsaroM ko bhauMkane yA bolane se kyA lAbha?
apane karmoM ko kosa, unheM hI ddaaNtt| sunate haiM ki-zramaNa bhagavAn mahAvIra
svAmI koM ko kSaya karane kI icchA se calakara mlecchadeza meM gaye the, to
phira anAyAsa prApta huI kSamA kyoM nahIM dhAraNa karanA cAhate? tIna jagat kA
pralaya athavA rakSaNa karane meM samartha prabhu ne yadi kSamA rakhI thI to
phira kele ke samAna alpasatva vAle tere sarIkhe vyakti kSamA kyoM nahIM rakha
sakate? isa prakAra anAyAsa prApta puNya kyoM nahIM kamA lete, tAki koI bhI
tumheM pIr3A na de ske| aba to apane pramAda kI niMdA karate hue kSamA ko
svIkAra kro| krodha meM aMdhe bane hue muni meM aura krodha karane vAle cAMDAla
meM koI aMtara nahIM hai| isa kAraNa krodha kA tyAgakara ujjvala buddhi kI
sthalI rUpI kSamA kA sevana karanA caahie| eka ora krodha karane vAle
mahAtapasvI mahAmuni the, dUsarI ora kevala navakArasI kA paccakkhANa karate
the; krodharahita kUragaDDuka muni| paraMtu devatAoM ne mahAmuni ko chor3akara
kUragaDDU muni ko vaMdana kiyA thaa| zAstradRSTi se kaluSita marmasparzI vacanoM
ko sunakara 334

Page #357 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Standard Aversion and its Consequences  **Verse 12-13 from the Fourth Light
of Yoga Shastra**  Instead of being distressed, consider this: If the speaker is
telling me the truth, why should I be angry? If he is lying, then consider his
words as those of a madman! If someone comes to kill me, look at him with a
smile, knowing that my death is due to my own actions, and this fool is merely
dancing in vain. If someone comes to kill me, think in your mind that my death
will occur only when my lifespan is complete. Or think, if I had no sins, why
would this poor fellow come to kill me? Anger is not directed at those who take
away all our efforts, so why be so angry at someone who commits a minor offense?
Therefore, shame on you. To conquer anger, which advances like a fierce serpent,
paralyzing all the senses, constantly embrace blameless forgiveness, like the
wisdom of a skilled snake charmer.  **Now the nature of Standard Aversion is
explained.**  Standard Aversion is destructive to humility, scripture, and good
character, and it is also destructive to the three goals of life: Dharma, Artha,
and Kama. Standard Aversion destroys the vision of discernment in humans, making
them blind.  **Explanation:**  Standard Aversion is destructive to humility,
which is the proper way to treat elders and superiors, to scripture, and to good
character.  A person who is arrogant due to their caste or other factors becomes
like a demon, and does not show humility to elders.  Because they do not serve
their elders, they cannot acquire knowledge.  As a result, they exhibit their
bad character by disrespecting everyone.  Standard Aversion is not only
destructive to humility, scripture, and good character, but also to the three
goals of life: Dharma, Artha, and Kama.  An arrogant person cannot control their
senses, so how can they achieve Dharma?  An arrogant person, due to their
stubbornness, cannot serve kings and others, so how can they achieve Artha?  A
person can only achieve Kama if they are gentle.  How can a person who is
arrogant like a thief achieve Kama?  Standard Aversion blinds a person, making
them unable to discern right from wrong.  This is the natural consequence of not
serving those who are knowledgeable and wise.  Therefore, Standard Aversion
leads to blindness, which is easily understood.  **Now the different types of
Standard Aversion are explained, along with their consequences.**  A person who
becomes proud of their caste, wealth, family, power, beauty, austerity, or
knowledge, will experience the opposite in their next life.  **Explanation:**  A
wise person never becomes proud of their caste, knowing that there are many
different types of castes, including the highest, the middle, and the lowest.  A
person who is born into a high caste due to good karma will be born into a lower
caste due to bad karma.  Therefore, no one should be proud of their caste, as it
is impermanent.  A person who gains wealth due to the destruction of obstacles
to their karma will not be proud of their wealth, knowing that it is not
permanent.  A person who is born into a noble family due to the good qualities
of their family will not be proud of their family, knowing that there is no
connection between the qualities of a family and the qualities of its members.
A person who has power due to the power of Indra, who holds the thunderbolt and
rules over the three worlds, will not be proud of their power, knowing that it
is not permanent.  A person who is beautiful due to the grace of others will not
be proud of their beauty, knowing that it is not permanent.  A person who is
austere due to the grace of others will not be proud of their austerity, knowing
that it is not permanent.  A person who is knowledgeable due to the grace of
others will not be proud of their knowledge, knowing that it is not permanent.
Therefore, a wise person will not be proud of any of these things, knowing that
they are all impermanent.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 mAnakaSAya aura usake kuphala yogazAstra caturtha prakAza zloka 12 se 13 duHkhI
hone ke bajAya yaha vicAra karo ki-kahane vAlA yadi mujhe satya kahatA hai, to
usa para kopa kyoM kiyA jAya? yadi vaha jhUTha bolatA hai to unheM
unmatta-(pAgala) ke vacana mAna liye jAya! yadi koI vadha karane ke lie AtA hai
to muskarAkara usakI ora dekhe ki vadha to mere kamoM se hone vAlA hai, yaha
mUrkha vRthA hI nRtya karatA hai| yadi mArane Aye to apane mana meM aisA vicAra
kare ki merA AyaSyakarma pUrNa hone para hI merI matya hogii| yA aisA vicAra
kare kiyadi mere pApa nahIM hote to yaha becArA mujhe kyoM mArane AtA? sabhI
puruSArthoM ke haraNakartA krodha para to taM krodha nhiiN| karatA. to phira
alpa aparAdha karane vAle dasare para taM itanA krodhita kyoM hotA hai? isalie
dhikkAra hai tjhe| sabhI iMdriyoM ko zithila karane vAle ugra sarpa ke samAna
Age bar3hate hue krodha ko jItane ke lie buddhimAna sapere kI vidyA ke samAna
lagAtAra nirdoSa kSamA dhAraNa karo  /  / 11 /  /  aba mAna-kaSAya kA svarUpa
kahate haiN|338|viny-shrut-shiilaanaaN, trivargasya ca ghAtakaH  /  viveka-
locanaM lumpan, mAno'ndhakaraNo nRNAm  /  / 12 /  /  artha :- mAna vinaya kA,
zruta kA aura zIla-sadAcAra kA ghAtaka hai tathA dharma, artha aura kAma tInoM
kA ghAtaka hai| mAna manuSyoM ke viveka rUpI cakSu ko naSTa karake aMdhA banA
detA hai  /  / 12 /  /  vyAkhyA :- mAna gurujana Adi bar3e logoM ke prati
upacAra rUpa vinaya, zruta arthAt vidyA, zIla arthAt suMdara svabhAva kA ghAtaka
hai| jAti Adi ke mada meM pizAca-sama abhimAnI banakara vyakti guru Adi kA
vinaya nahIM krtaa| garu kI sevA nahIM karane se avinayI vidyA prApta nahIM kara
sakatA. isake kAraNa sabhI logoM kI avajJA karane vAlA apanA duHsvabhAva prakaTa
karatA hai| mAna kevala vinayAdi kA hI ghAtaka nahIM hai, balki dharma, artha
aura kAma rUpI trivarga kA bhI ghAtaka hai| abhimAnI vyakti iMdriyoM ko vaza
nahIM kara sakatA; isase usameM dharma kaise ho sakatA hai? mAnI manuSya
akkar3apana ke kAraNa rAjAdi kI sevA meM parAyaNa nahIM hone se artha kI prApti
kaise kara sakatA hai| kAma kI prApti bhI vyakti mRdutA hone para hI kara sakatA
hai| lUMTha ke samAna abhimAna meM akkar3a banA huA kAmapuruSArtha kaise siddha
kara sakatA hai? | jo vyakti pahale dekhatA thA; aura use bAda meM mAnakaSAya
aMdhA banA detA hai| vaha kisako? manuSya ko| kyA karatA hai? kRtya-akRtya
ciMtana rUpa viveka-locana kA lopa kara detA hai| eka to nirmala cakSu vaha
sahaja viveka hotA hai| isa vacana se viveka hI netra kahalAtA hai| jJAna-
vRddhoM kI sevA nahIM karane vAlA mAnI apane viveka-locana kA avazya lopa (nAza)
karatA hai| ataH mAna aMdhatva paidA karatA hai; yaha sahaja hI samajhI jAne
jaisI bAta hai  /  / 12 /  /  _ aba mAna ke bheda batAkara usake phala kahate
haiN||339| jAti-lAbha-kulaizvarya-bala-rUpa-tapaH zrutaiH  /  kurvan madaM
punastAni, hInAni labhate janaH  // 13 //  artha :- jo vyakti jAti, lAbha, kula,
aizvarya, bala, rUpa, tapa aura jJAna; ina mada ke ATha sthAnoM (kAraNoM) meM
jisa kisI kA mada karatA hai; vaha janmAMtara meM usI kI hInatA prApta karatA
hai  /  / 13 /  /  vyAkhyA :- isa viSaya para AMtarazlokoM kA bhAvArtha kahate
haiM-uttama, madhyama aura adhama Adi aneka prakAra jAti bheda dekhakara
samajhadAra manuSya kabhI jAtimada nahIM krtaa| zabhakarma ke yoga se uttamajAti
milane ke bAda phira azubhakarma ke yoga se hInajAti meM janma letA hai, isa
prakAra azAzvata jAti prApta kara kauna manuSya jAti kA abhimAna karegA?
aMtarAyakarma ke kSaya hone se lAbha (koI padArtha prApta) hotA hai, usake binA
nhiiN| ataH vastutattva ko jAnane vAlA lAbhamada nahIM krtaa| dUsare kI kRpA se
athavA dUsare ke prayatna Adi se mahAn lAbha hone para bhI mahApuruSa kisI bhI
prakAra se lAbhamada nahIM krte| akulIna kI buddhi, lakSmI aura zIlasaMpannatA
dekhakara mahAkula meM janma lene vAlA kulamada na kre| 'kula kA kuzIlatA aura
suzIlatA se kyA saMbaMdha hai? isa prakAra jAnakara vicakSaNa puruSa kulamada
nahIM krte| vajra ko dhAraNa karane vAle iMdra ke tIna loka ke aizvarya
(vaibhava) ko jAna-sunakara kauna aisA vyakti hogA, jo kisI zahara, gAMva,
dhana, dhAnya Adi ke aizvarya kA abhimAna karegA? duHzIlA (badacalana) strI ke
samAna nirmalaguNa vAle ke pAsa se bhI aizvarya calA jAtA hai aura doSoM kA
sahArA karatA hai; isalie vivekI puruSa ko aizvarya kA ahaMkAra nahIM karanA
caahie| bar3e-bar3e mahAbalI bhI roga Adi ke kAraNa kSaNa meM nirbala ho jAte
haiN| isalie puruSa meM bala anitya hone se 335 ka

Page #358 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Mardava and the nature of maya, and their consequences  Yogashastra, Caturtha
Prakasha, Sloka 14:  It is not appropriate to be proud even of one's own
strength. Even the strong are seen to become weak at the time of old age or the
rise of other karmas. Therefore, pride in one's strength is futile. This body,
made of seven dhatus, keeps increasing and decreasing, and in old age becomes
afflicted with diseases; so who will be proud of the form of such a perishable
body? How beautiful was the form of Sanatkumara Chakravarti? But in a short
time, the beauty of his form was destroyed. Considering this, who will be the
person who will be proud of his form even in a dream? Hearing about the pinnacle
of the tapas of Bhagavan Rishabhadeva and Bhagavan Mahavira, who will have pride
in their own extremely little tapas? The pride in that tapas, by which the
entire cluster of karmas can be destroyed at once, only increases the cluster of
karmas. The one who, by practicing the scriptures composed by others, with the
effort of his own limited intellect, composes treatises and takes pride in his
own omniscience, is actually consuming his own limbs. Bhagavan Ganadhara had the
power to compose and recollect the Dvadashangi; knowing this, which wise person
will have pride in his own scriptural knowledge? No one will.  Many acharyas
speak of pride in wealth and pride in tapas, instead of pride in devotion and
pride in intellect. They give this instruction regarding them: A poor person,
burdened by the weight of favors, commits bad deeds to obtain the affection of
other people; well, how can he be proud of that? The one who, having obtained
the affection granted by the grace of others, takes pride in it, drowns in the
ocean of sorrow when that affection departs. Seeing the various aspects of the
intellect, the methods of its enhancement, its alternatives, and the inequality
and subtlety of its infinite modes, the great men of ancient times, who were
endowed with intellect infinitely superior to the six-situated, were like lions
in comprehending and imparting the meaning of the sutras, creating new
compositions, contemplating on the meanings and ascertaining them; knowing this,
how can the man of limited intellect of this era take pride in his own
intellect?  In this way, the nature of pride and its divisions have been
expounded. Now, they teach the instruction of mardava (which is the means of
conquering pride).  Sloka 14: Utsarpayan doshashakhah, gunamulanyabho nayan |
Unmulaniyo manadus tanmardava-sarit-plavai ||  Meaning: The tree of pride, whose
branches are the faults and whose roots are the virtues, should be uprooted with
the force of the river of mardava (humility).  Explanation: The proud person's
faults are like the spreading branches of the tree of pride, while the virtues
are like the roots that go downward. As the tree of pride grows, the cluster of
faults increases, and the cluster of virtues decreases. How can such a tree of
pride be uprooted? In this regard, it is said that the tree of pride should be
uprooted by the swift current of the river of mardava (humility). The more the
tree of pride grows, the more the roots of virtues get hidden, and the branches
of faults keep increasing, which cannot be uprooted by axes and the like; it can
only be uprooted by the swift flow of the river of humility.  The meaning of the
internal slokas on the same topic is as follows:  Mardava means softness,
gentleness, and the abandonment of arrogance. Arrogance is the natural, inherent
nature of pride. In whatever subject - caste, etc. - pride arises, one should
take refuge in humility to counter it. One should practice gentleness, humility,
and reverence in every situation, and especially show reverence to venerable
persons, because the worship of venerable persons purifies one's sins, and the
individual becomes free from sins. Bahubali Muni was enveloped by the creepers
of sins due to the sway of pride, and when he contemplated humility in his mind,
he immediately became free from sins and attained Kevala-jnana. Even the former
Chakravarti, renouncing his connection with the world, goes for alms even to the
house of an enemy. In reality, abandoning pride and adopting mardava is
extremely difficult. Even after initiation, the former Chakravarti immediately
pays obeisance to the former poor ascetic.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 mArdava evaM mAyA kA svarUpa aura usake pariNAma yogazAstra caturtha prakAza
zloka 14 . usakA bhI mada karanA ucita nhiiN| balavAna bhI vRddhAvasthA meM
mRtyu ke samaya athavA anya karma ke udaya ke samaya nirbala hote dekhe jAte
haiN| isalie balamada karanA nirarthaka hai| sAta dhAtuoM se banA huA yaha
zarIra bhI bar3hatA-ghaTatA rahatA hai, vRddhAvasthA meM rogoM se vyApta ho jAtA
hai; ataH kauna aise kSaNabhaMgura zarIra ke rUpa kA mada karegA? sanatkumAra
cakravartI kA rUpa kitanA suMdara thA? thor3e hI samaya meM usake rUpa kI
suMdaratA naSTa ho gyii| aisA vicAra karake kauna aisA puruSa hogA; jo svapna
meM bhI rUpa kA mada karegA? zrI RSabhadeva bhagavAn aura zrI mahAvIrasvAmI ke
tapa kI parAkASThA sunakara apane atyaMta alpatapa kA kauna abhimAna karegA?
jisa tapasyA se ekasAtha karma-samUha TUTa sakate hai, usakA abhimAna karane se
to ulaTe karma-samUha bar3ha jAte haiN| dUsaroM ke dvArA racita zAstroM kA
abhyAsa karake apanI alpabuddhi ke prayAsa se graMtha taiyAra karake apane meM
usako lekara sarvajJatA kA abhimAna karane vAlA to apane hI aMgoM kA bhakSaNa
karatA hai| zrI gaNadhara bhagavAn meM dvAdazAMgI ke nirmANa karane aura smaraNa
karane kI zakti thI; use jAnakara kauna buddhimAna puruSa zruta kA abhimAna
karegA? koI nahIM kregaa| kitane hI AcArya aizvaryamada aura tapomada ke sthAna
para vallabhatAmada aura buddhimada kahate haiN| ve unake saMbaMdha meM isa
prakAra upadeza dete haiM daridra puruSa upakAra ke bhAra ke nIce dabakara bure
kAma karake dUsare manuSyoM kI vallabhatA (priyatA) prApta karatA hai; bhalA,
vaha usakA mada kaise kara sakatA hai? jo dUsare kI kRpA se milI huI vallabhatA
ko pAkara garva karatA hai, vaha vallabhatA ke calI jAne para zokasamudra meM
DUba jAtA hai| buddhi ke vividha aMga, usake bar3hAne kI vidhi, usake vikalpa
tathA usake anaMtaparyAyoM kI nyUnAdhikatA evaM taramatA dekhate hue
SaTsthAnapatita ke bheda se anaMtagunI buddhi ke dhanI dvArA sUtra kA artha
grahaNa karane-karAne, navIna racanA karane, artha para ciMtana evaM usakA
avadhAraNa karane Adi viSayoM meM prAcInakAlika mahApuruSa siMhavat
anaMtavijJAnAtizayayukta hote the; yaha jAnakara isa kAla kA alpabuddhi puruSa
apanI buddhi kA ahaMkAra kaise kara sakatA hai?  /  / 13 /  /  /  isa prakAra
mAna kA svarUpa evaM usake bhedoM kA pratipAdana kiyaa| aba mAna ke
pratipakSabhUta mArdava (jo mAna para | vijaya prApta karane kA upAya hai|) kA
upadeza dete haiN|340| utsarpayan doSazAkhA, guNamUlAnyadho nayan  /  unmUlanIyo
mAnadustanmArdava-saritplavaiH  // 14 //  artha :- doSa rUpI zAkhAoM ko vistRta
karane vAle aura guNa rUpI mUla ko nIce le jAne vAle mAna rUpI vRkSa ko mArdava-
namratA rUpI nadI ke vega se jar3a sahita ukhAr3a pheMkanA cAhie  /  / 14 /  /
vyAkhyA :- mAna ko vRkSa kI upamA dekara donoM kI yahAM tulanA kI gayI hai| mAnI
puruSa ke doSa vRkSazAkhA ke samAna UMcAI meM phailate haiN| ve doSa zAkhAe~ hai
aura guNa mUla hai, jo Upara phailane ke bajAya nIce jAtA hai| arthAt doSoM kA
samUha bar3hatA jAtA hai, aura guNoM kA samUha ghaTatA jAtA hai| aise mAnavRkSa
ko kaise ukhAr3A jAya? isa saMbaMdha meM kahate haiM-mArdava namratA rUpI
lagAtAra bahane vAlI nadI kI teja dhArA (vega) ke dvArA mAnavRkSa ko ukhAr3anA
caahie| jyoMjyoM madavRkSa bar3hatA jAtA hai, tyoM-tyoM guNa rUpI mUla chupa
jAte haiM aura doSa rUpI zAkhAe~ bar3hatI jAtI hai; jinheM kulhAr3e Adi se
ukhAr3anA azakya hai; use to namratA-bhAvanA rUpI nadI ke tIvra jala-pravAha se
hI samUla ukhAr3I jA sakatI hai| usase hI ukhAr3anA caahie| yahAM isI viSaya ke
AMtarazloko kA bhAvArtha kahate haiM mArdava kA artha hai-mRdutA-komalatA,
uddhatatA kA tyaag| uddhatatA mAna kA svAbhAvika upAdhi-rahita svarUpa hai| |
jAti Adi jisa-jisa viSaya meM abhimAna paidA ho, usakA pratikAra karane ke lie
namratA kA Azraya lenA caahie| pratyeka sthAna para komalatA, namratA aura
vinaya karanA aura pUjya puruSoM kA to vizeSa prakAra se vinaya karanA caahie|
kyoMki pUjya puruSoM kI pUjA karane se pApa sApha ho jAte haiM, vyakti pApa se
mukta ho jAtA hai| bAhubalI muni abhimAna ke vaza hokara pApa rUpI latAoM se
ghire the aura jaba mana meM namratA kA ciMtana kiyA to, usI samaya pApa se
mukta hokara kevalajJAna prApta kara liyA thaa| cakravartI saMsAra kA saMbaMdha
chor3akara vairI ke ghara bhI bhikSArtha jAte haiN| vAstava meM mAna chor3akara
mArdava grahaNa karanA atikaThina hai| dIkSA lekara cakravartI bhUtapUrva raMka
sAdhu ko bhI tatkAla vaMdana karatA hai|

Page #359 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Nature of Maya and Simplicity  **Chapter Four, Light of Yoga, Verses
15-16**  Abandoning one's pride, one serves for a long time. Thus, by
considering the mental defects, practicing humility gives rise to many virtues.
Knowing this, one should abandon pride and, being absorbed in the unique virtue
of *mardava* (gentleness) of the righteous path, immediately take refuge in it.
||14||  Now, the nature of the *maya* (illusion) *kṣaya* (passion) is explained.
||341||  The mother of untruth, the axe to the tree of good character, the
birthplace of ignorance, *maya* is the cause of misery. ||15||  **Meaning:**
*Maya* is the mother of falsehood, it is the axe that cuts down the tree of good
character, it is the birthplace of ignorance (falsehood and lack of knowledge),
and it is the cause of misery. ||15||  **Implication:** In reality, without
*maya*, falsehood cannot stand. The meaning of *maya* is the result of deceiving
others. One who practices *maya* to deceive others, deceives himself in the
ultimate sense. ||15||  Therefore, the fruit of *maya* is indicated. ||342||
Cunning and deceitful, like a heron, they deceive the world with *maya*, but in
reality, they deceive themselves. ||16||  **Meaning:** Skilled in cunning, the
sinful, like herons, with hypocritical behavior, deceive the world with *maya*,
but in reality, they deceive themselves. ||16||  **Explanation:** The third
*kṣaya* is *maya*; one who deceives the world with it, deceives his own soul. He
practices the sinful act of *maya*, like a heron, with the intention of hiding
his sinful deeds. Just as a heron slowly maneuvers to deceive fish, so too does
a deceiver maneuver like a heron to deceive the world. Here, the question
arises: if a deceiver deceives the world and hides his *maya*, how does he bear
the burden of accumulated *maya*? In response, it is said: without skill in
deception, one can never deceive another, nor can one hide his *maya*. One who
is adept in cunning is able to deceive others and keep it hidden.  Here, the
implication of some inner verses is presented: Kings, through cunning
strategies, conspiracies, espionage, and secret operations, deceitfully kill
trustworthy individuals for the sake of wealth, deceiving others. Brahmins, with
tilak on their foreheads, displaying various hand gestures, chanting mantras,
and taking advantage of others' weaknesses, deceive people with their outward
show while being devoid of heart. Merchants, by creating false weights and
measures, deceive innocent people through deceitful actions. Many people, by
wearing matted hair, shaving their heads, or keeping long braids, applying
ashes, wearing saffron robes, or remaining naked, while being atheists in their
hearts and outwardly pretending to be devout, deceive good and faithful patrons.
Emotionless courtesans, through their gestures, luxury, and seductive gait, or
by casting glances, or through various dances, songs, and other forms of
entertainment, attract lustful men in an instant and deceive them. Gamblers, by
taking false oaths, creating false coins and dice, extort money from the
wealthy. Husbands, wives, parents, siblings, friends, relatives, employers,
employees, and others do not hesitate to deceive each other. A greedy man is
always wary of a flattering thief, but he is deceived by the careless. Craftsmen
and Chandals, through their ancestral trades, make a living, but they deceive
good people by taking false oaths. Cruel *Vyantardev* and other *kuyoni* (low
caste) ghosts, spirits, *pishachas*, and demons, knowing that humans and animals
are careless, often harass them in various ways. Fish and other aquatic
creatures, through trickery, swallow their own young. Fishermen, through deceit,
catch them with nets. Skilled hunters, through various means, trap and bind
foolish land animals, and then kill them. Cruel hunters, for the sake of a
little meat, cruelly bind innocent birds, parrots, mynas, partridges, quails,
and other aerial creatures. Thus, in the whole world, self-deceivers are engaged
in deceiving each other, neglecting their own dharma and...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 mAyA evaM saralatA kA svarUpa yogazAstra caturtha prakAza zloka 15 se 16 apanA
pUrvAbhimAna chor3akara cirakAla taka usakI sevA karatA hai| isa prakAra
mAnasaMbaMdhI doSoM kA vicAra karake namratA kA AcaraNa karane se aneka guNa
paidA hote haiN| yaha jAnakara abhimAna kA tyAga karake sAdhudharma ke viziSTa
guNa-mArdava meM tanmaya hokara tatkSaNa usakA Azraya lenA cAhie  /  / 14 /  /
aba mAyAkaSAya kA svarUpa batAte haiN|341| asUnRtasya jananI, parazuH
zIlazAkhinaH  /  janmabhUmiravidyAnAM, mAyA durgatikAraNam  /  / 15 /  /  artha
:- mAyA asatya kI jananI hai, vaha zIla arthAt suMdara svabhAva rUpa vRkSa ko
kATane ke lie kulhAr3I hai, avidyA arthAt mithyAtva evaM ajJAna kI janmabhUmi
hai aura durgati kA kAraNa hai  /  / 15 /  /  bhAvArtha :- vAstava meM dekhA
jAya to mAyA ke binA jhUTha Thahara nahIM sktaa| mAyA kA artha hI hai, dUsaroM
ko Thagane kA prinnaam| dUsaroM ko Thagane ke lie jo mAyA karatA hai, vaha
paramArtha se apane Apako hI ThagatA hai  /  / 15 /  /  ataH mAyA ke phala kA
nirdeza karate haiN|342| kauTilyapaTavaH pApAH, mAyayA bakavRttayaH  /  bhuvanaM
vaJcayamAnA, vaJcayante svameva hi  // 16 /  /  artha :- kuTilatA karane meM
kuzala pApI bagule ke samAna daMbhI vRtti vAle mAyA se jagat ko Thagate hue
vAstava meM apane Apa ko hI Thagate haiM  /  / 16 /  /  vyAkhyA :- tRtIya kaSAya
mAyA hai; usase jo jagata ko ThagatA hai, vaha apanI AtmA ko hI ThagatA hai|
apane pApakAryoM ko chipAne kI vRttivAlA bagule ke samAna mAyA rUpI pApakarma
karatA hai| jaise bagulA machalI Adi ko dhokhA dene ke lie dhIre-dhIre ceSTA
karatA hai, usI taraha kapaTa karane vAlA bhI jagat ko Thagane ke lie bagule ke
sadRza ceSTA karatA hai| yahAM zaMkA hotI hai ki mAyAvI jagat ko ThagatA hai
aura vaha apanI mAyA ko chipAtA phiratA hai to vaha saMcitamAyA kA itanA bojha
kaise uThA letA hai? isake uttara meM kahate haiM-Thagane kI kuzalatA ke binA
koI dUsare ko kadApi nahIM Thaga sakatA aura na apanI mAyA ko hI chipA sakatA
hai| jo kuTilatA meM paTu hotA hai, vahI dUsaroM ko Thagane aura use chipAye
rakhane meM samartha ho sakatA hai| yahAM isa saMbaMdha meM kacha AMtara zlokoM
kA bhAvArtha prastata karate haiM-rAjA loga kaTanIti. SaDayaMtra. jAsasI aura
gupta prayogoM dvArA kapaTa pUrvaka vizvasta vyakti kA ghAta karake dhana ke
lobha se dUsaroM ko Thagate haiN| brAhmaNa mastaka para tilaka lagAkara, hAtha
Adi kI vividha mudrAoM kA pradarzana karake, maMtra japakara tathA dUsaroM kI
kamajorI kA lAbha uThAkara hRdayazUnya hokara bAhya dikhAvA karake logoM ko
Thaga lete haiN| vaNika jana nApataula ke jhUThe bAMTa banAkara kapaTa kriyA
karake bholebhAle logoM ko Thagate haiN| kaI loga sira para jaTA dhAraNakara,
mastaka muMDAkara yA laMbI laMbI zikhA-coTI rakhavAkara, bhasma lagAkara,
bhagave vastra pahanakara yA naMge rahakara; hRdaya meM paramAtmA aura dharma ke
prati nAstikatA aura Upara se pAkhaMDa dikhAkara bhadra zradrAlu yajamAnoM ko
Thaga lete haiN| sneha rahita vezyAe~ apanA hAvabhAva, vilAsa, mastAnI cAla
dikhAkara athavA kaTAkSa pheMkakara yA anya kaI taraha ke nRtya, gIta Adi
vilAsoM se kAmI puruSoM ko kSaNabhara meM AkarSita karake Thaga letI hai| jUgArI
jhUThI saugaMdhe khAkara, jhUThe kaur3I aura pAse banAkara dhanavAnoM se rupaye
aiMTha lete haiM; daMpatI, mAtApitA, sage bhAI, mitra, svajana, seTha, naukara
tathA anya loga paraspara eka dUsare ko Thagane meM nahIM cuukte| dhanalolupa
puruSa nirlajja hokara khuzAmada karane vAle cora se to hamezA sAvadhAna rahatA
hai, kintu pramAdI ko Thaga letA hai| kArIgara aura cAMDAla apane purakhoM se
pracalita vyApAra-dhaMdhe se apanI AjIvikA calAte hai, magara chala se zapatha
khAkara acche-acche sajjanoM ko Thaga lete haiN| krUra vyaMtaradeva Adi kuyoni
(nIcajAti) ke bhUta, preta, pizAca, rAkSasa Adi manuSyoM aura pazuoM ko pramAdI
jAnakara prAyaH aneka prakAra se hairAna karate haiN| machalI Adi jalacara jaMtu
prapaMca pUrvaka apane hI baccoM ko nigala jA machae unheM bhI kapaTa pUrvaka
jAla Adi bichAkara pakaDa lete haiN| Thagane meM catara zikArI vibhinna upAyoM
se mUrkha sthalacara jIvoM ko apane jAla meM phaMsA lete haiM, bAMdha lete haiM
aura phira mAra DAlate haiN| hiMsaka bahelie thor3e se mAMsa khAne ke lobha meM
becAre cir3iyA, totA, mainA, tItara, baTera Adi AkAzacArI pakSiyoM ko atikrUra
banakara nirdayatA se bAMdha lete haiN| isa prakAra sAre saMsAra meM AtmavaMcaka
loga eka dUsare ko Thagane meM rata hokara apane dharma aura 337

Page #360 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Glory of Simplicity and the Nature of Greed Chapter 4 of Yoga Shastra,
Verses 17-18  They destroy the path to liberation. Therefore, a wise person
should abandon the illusion, which is like a fire to the tree of faith, like the
root of the city of liberation, and like the seed of birth in the animal realm.
In a previous life, the soul of Shri Mallinath had a small amount of illusion.
Because he did not remove that illusion, that is, he did not purify himself
through introspection and atonement, he received the female form as a result of
the power of illusion, becoming the world-ruler, a Tirthankara. ||16||  Now, to
conquer illusion, they inspire the virtue of simplicity. ||343||  Tad-arjva-
mahaushadhya, Jagadananda-hetu-na. Jayej-jagadrohakari, Mayaam vishadhari-miv.
||17|| Meaning: Therefore, one should conquer the serpent-like illusion, which
harms the world, with the medicine of righteousness, simplicity, which brings
joy to the beings of the world. ||17|| Explanation: For the people of the world,
the special joy of righteousness (arjva) is a health-giving medicine, which, by
conquering the illusion-passion, without giving up deceit, becomes the cause of
liberation. _ In this regard, the inner verses present the meaning: Even in
other religious scriptures, it is said in principle that if there is a straight
path to the city of liberation, it is the path of simplicity; the rest of the
paths are just an expansion of conduct. In short, understand that deceit is the
cause of death, while simplicity is the cause of immortality. This knowledge
alone is true knowledge; the rest is nonsense. In the world, a person who is
rich in simplicity becomes an object of love, while a person full of deceit
becomes anxious like a serpent. A person with a simple mind, even while living
in the world, experiences the natural and effortless joy of liberation. How can
a person with a troubled mind, bound by the nail of deceit, and skilled in
deception like a hunter, experience that joy even in a dream? Even if a person
is clever in all arts, proficient in all knowledge, but the simplicity of a
child is only bestowed upon a fortunate one. The simplicity of an ignorant child
makes him an object of love. If a person is well-versed in the meaning of all
scriptures and also has simplicity, what can be said! Simplicity is natural,
deceit is artificial. Therefore, who will hold on to the artificial and illusory
dharma, leaving aside the natural dharma? It is rare that those who are skilled
in deceit, trickery, fraud, lies, gossip, and speaking one thing on the face and
having another feeling in the heart, can remain unaffected like a golden statue.
Ganadhara Shri Gautam Swami was proficient in the ocean of scriptures, yet it is
surprising that he listened to the words of the Lord with the simplicity of a
newly initiated disciple. No matter how many evil deeds one has done, but the
one who criticizes his own evil deeds with simplicity, destroys all his actions.
But if one criticizes with pride, hiding deceit like Lakshmana's wife, then even
a small amount of sin will become the cause of worldly increase. Liberation is
attained only by one whose soul is full of all kinds of simplicity. One whose
mind, speech, and actions (body) are full of deceit, will never be liberated.
Therefore, the character of seekers who are simple in their results is described
as blameless, and seekers who are deceitful in their results become participants
in the fierce bondage of karma. By comparing these two with the intellect, the
seeker with pure intellect should take refuge in the unparalleled simplicity.
||17||  Now, the nature of greed is explained. ||344|| Aakaraha sarvado-
shaanaam, gunagra-sanrakshasah. Kando vyasanavalli-naam, lobhah sarvarth-
badhakah. ||18|| Meaning: Just as the mine is the source of all metals like
iron, so greed is the source of all vices like violence. It is a demon that
swallows up virtues like knowledge, and it is the root of the vines of
misfortune (suffering). In fact, greed is an obstacle to all purposes, dharma,
artha, kama, and moksha. ||18|| Explanation: Greed-passion is the source of all
vices, the destroyer of all virtues, the cause of suffering, and the destroyer
of all purposes. Therefore, greed is invincible. ||18||  The next three verses
describe the nature of greed. 338

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 saralatA kI mahimA aura lobhakaSAya kA svarUpa yogazAstra caturtha prakAza
zloka 17 se 18 sadgati kA nAza kara baiThate haiN| ataH buddhimAna vyakti ko
tiryacajAti meM utpatti kI bIja rUpa, apavarganagarI kI argalA ke samAna,
vizvAsavRkSa ke lie dAvAgnitulya mAyA kA to tyAgakara denA caahie| pUrvabhava
meM zrI mallinAtha ahaMta ke jIva ne alpamAyA kI thI, usa mAyAzalya ko dUra na
karane ke kAraNa arthAt AlocanA aura prAyazcitta dvArA Atmazuddhi na karane ke
kAraNa unheM mAyA ke yoga se jagatpati tIrthaMkara ke rUpa meM strItva milA thA
/  / 16 /  /  aba mAyA ko jItane ke lie usakI pratipakSI saralatA kI preraNA
karate haiN||343| tadArjavamahauSadhyA, jagadAnandahetunA  /
jayejjagadrohakarI, mAyAM viSadharImiva  // 17 //  artha :- isalie jagat kA
apakAra-droha karane vAlI mAyA rUpI sarpiNI ko jagat ke jIvoM ko AnaMda dene
vAlI RjutA saralatA rUpI mahauSadhi se jItanA cAhie  /  / 17 /  /  vyAkhyA :-
jagat ke logoM ke lie ArogyadAyinI prItivizeSa RjutA (Arjava) hai, jo kapaTa
bhAva ke tyAga pUrvaka mAyA-kaSAya para vijaya prApta karAkara makti kA kAraNa
banatI hai| _ isa viSaya meM AMtarazlokoM kA bhAvArtha prastuta karate haiM-
anyadharmIya zAstroM meM bhI siddhAMta rUpa meM batAyA hai ki muktinagarI kA
agara koI sIdhA rAstA hai to vaha saralatA kA hai; zeSa jo mArga hai, vaha to
AcAra kA hI vistAra hai| thor3e meM yaha samajha lo ki kapaTa sarvathA mRtyu kA
kAraNa hai, jabaki saralatA ajara-amara hone kA kAraNa hai| itanA jJAna hI
vAstavika jJAna hai; bAkI kA saba bakavAsa hai| jagat meM saralatA kA dhanI
mAnava prItibhAjana banatA hai, jabaki kuTilatA se bharA manuSya sarpa kI taraha
udvignatA prApta karatA hai| saralacitta vyakti saMsAravAsa meM rahatA huA bhI
anubhava karane yogya sahaja svAbhAvika mukti sukha kA anubhava karatA hai|
kuTilatA kI kIla se jakar3A huA kliSTacitta evaM Thagane meM zikArI ke samAna
dakSa manuSya svapna meM bhI usa sukha ko kaise prApta kara sakatA hai? bhale hI
manuSya samagra kalAoM meM catura ho, samasta vidyAoM meM pAraMgata ho, lekina
bAlaka kI-sI saralatA to kisI bhAgyazAlI ko hI nasIba hotI hai| ajJAnI bAlaka kI
saralatA hI use prItibhAjana banA detI hai| yadi koI manuSya sarvazAstroM ke
artha meM pariniSTha ho aura sAtha hI usameM saralatA ho to kahanA hI kyA!
saralatA svAbhAvika hai, kuTilatA banAvaTI hai| ataH svAbhAvika | dharma ko
chor3akara kRtrima aura adharma rUpI mAyA ko kauna pakar3egA? chalaprapaMca,
dhokhAghar3I, jhUTha phareba karane, cugalI khAne aura muMha para kucha ora
bolane aura hRdaya meM kucha ora bhAva rakhane Adi bAtoM meM nipuNa logoM ke
saMparka meM Akara virale hI bhAgyazAlI svarNapratimA ke samAna nirvikArI bane
raha sakate haiN| gaNadhara zrI gautama svAmI zrutasamudra meM pAraMgata the,
phira bhI Azcarya hai ki ve navadIkSita ke samAna saralatA ke dhanI banakara
bhagavadvacana sunate the| kitane hI duSkarma kiye hoM; lekina saralatA se jo
apane kRta duSkarmoM kI AlocanA kara letA hai, vaha samasta karmoM kA kSaya kara
detA hai| paraMtu yadi lakSmaNA sAdhvI kI taraha kapaTa rakhakara daMbha pUrvaka
AlocanA kI to usakA pApa alpamAtra hote hue bhI vaha saMsAravRddhi kA kAraNa
bnegaa| mokSa use hI milatA hai, jisakI AtmA meM saba prakAra kI saralatA ho|
jisake mana, vANI aura karma (kAyA) meM kuTilatA bharI hai, usakI mukti kisI
prakAra bhI nahIM hotii| ataH saralapariNAmI sAdhakoM kA caritra nirdoSa batAyA
hai aura kuTila pariNAmI sAdhaka ugra karmabaMdhana ke bhAgI banate haiN|
vivekabuddhi se ina donoM kI tulanA karake zuddha buddhi vAle mumukSu ko anupama
saralabhAva kA Azraya lenA cAhie  /  / 17 /  /  aba lobhakaSAya kA svarUpa
batAte haiN|344| AkaraH sarvadoSANAM, guNagrasanarAkSasaH  /  kando
vyasanavallInAM, lobhaH sarvArthabAdhakaH  // 18 //  artha :- jaise lohA Adi
saba dhAtuoM kA utpattisthAna khAna hai, vaise hI prANAtipAta Adi samasta doSoM
kI khAna lobha hai| yaha jJAnAdi guNoM ko nigala jAne vAlA rAkSasa hai, Aphata
(duHkha) rUpI beloM kA kaMda (mUla) hai| vastutaH lobha dharma-artha-kAma-mokSa
rUpI samasta arthoM-puruSArthoM meM bAdhaka hai  // 18 //  vyAkhyA :- lobha-
kaSAya sarvadoSoM kI khAna, samasta guNoM kA ghAtaka, duHkha kA hetu aura
sarvapuruSArthaghAtaka hai| ataH lobha durjeya hai  /  / 18 /  /  Age tIna
zlokoM meM lobha kA svarUpa batAte haiN| 338

Page #361 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The main remedy to conquer greed is contentment.  **Yoga Shastra, Fourth Light,
Verses 19-22**  **Verse 19:** The poor man desires one hundred, the one who has
one hundred desires a thousand, the owner of a thousand desires a lakh, the
lakhpati desires a crore, and the crorepati desires to become a king.  **Verse
20:** The king desires to become an emperor, the emperor desires to become a
god, and even the god desires to become Indra.  **Verse 21:** Even after
attaining the position of Indra, if the desire does not cease, then the initial
small greed grows like an arrow.  **Meaning:** A poor man desires one hundred
rupees, the one who has one hundred desires a thousand, the owner of a thousand
desires a lakh, the lakhpati desires a crore, and the crorepati desires to
become a king. The king desires to become an emperor, the emperor desires to
become a god, and even the god desires to become Indra. But even after attaining
the position of Indra, if the desire does not cease, then the initial small
greed grows like an arrow.  **Explanation:**  The meaning of these verses in
relation to greed is that just as violence is the greatest sin among all sins,
falsehood is the greatest among all actions, and consumption is the greatest
among all diseases, so too is greed the greatest vice among all vices. Alas!
Greed reigns supreme on this earth. Due to greed, even the one-sensed trees and
plants, when they find treasure, cover it up and hold it tight in their roots.
Due to greed for wealth, the five-sensed beings also make a place for themselves
near buried treasure and stay there in a state of unconsciousness. Serpents,
earthworms, mongooses, rats, etc., all five-sensed beings also stay near places
of treasure due to greed and attachment. Ghosts, Mudgalas, spirits, pretas, and
yakshas also reside on their own or others' wealth due to greed and
unconsciousness. Deities also fall from their position and are born in the womb
of earth, etc., due to unconsciousness over ornaments, gardens, wells, etc. Even
a sadhu, after reaching the state of tranquility and conquering anger, etc.,
falls back into lower states due to the fault of just a little greed. Just as
dogs fight over a piece of meat, so too do brothers born from the same mother
fight over a little wealth. A greedy man, in order to claim ownership of a
village, mountain, or forest, abandons compassion and creates discord among the
villagers, rulers, and kings, making them enemies of each other. Even if a
person does not have an excess of laughter, sorrow, hatred, or attachment, he
dances like a clown in front of his master due to greed, pretending to be his
beloved. The more you try to fill the pit of greed, the deeper it becomes. It is
amazing that the ocean can perhaps be filled with water, but even after
obtaining the kingdom of the three worlds, the ocean of greed does not fill up.
Man has consumed an infinite amount of food, clothing, objects, and wealth, but
still, the greed in his mind does not diminish. If greed is abandoned, then what
is the use of austerity? And if greed is not abandoned, then what is the use of
fruitless austerity? After churning the essence of all scriptures, I have come
to the conclusion that the great-minded seeker should strive only to destroy
greed.  **Verse 22:** The ocean of greed is very turbulent and difficult to
cross. It is difficult to stop its rising tide. Therefore, the wise man should
build a bridge of contentment and stop it from advancing.  **Meaning:**
Contentment is the opposite mental quality of greed. Just as a dam is built to
stop water, so too should a dam of contentment be built to stop the poison of
greed and conquer it.  **Explanation:**  Just as the emperor is considered the
best among men and Indra is considered the best among gods, so too is
contentment considered the best among all qualities. If we compare the happiness
and sorrow of a contented sadhu and an unsatisfied emperor, the sadhu will
appear to be more joyful and the emperor more sorrowful. The emperor, who is
free from attachment due to the desire to drink the nectar of contentment, can
abandon his kingdom of six continents in an instant and attain freedom from
attachment.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 lobha para vijaya pAne kA mukhya upAya- saMtoSadhAraNa yogazAstra caturtha
prakAza zloka 19 se 22 | | 345 | dhanahInaH zatamekaM sahastraM zatavAnapi  /
sahasrAdhipatirlakSaM, koTiM lakSezvaro'pi ca  // 19 //  | | 346 | koTIzvaro
narendratvaM, narendrazcakravarttitAm  /  cakravartI ca devatvaM,
devo'pIndratvamicchati  // 20 //  | | 347 | indratve'pi hi samprApte, yadIcchA
na nivarttate  /  mUle laghIyAMstallobhaH zarAva iva vardhate  // 21 //  artha
:- nirdhana manuSya sau rupaye kI abhilASA karatA hai, sau pAne vAlA hajAra kI
icchA karatA hai aura hajAra rupayoM kA svAmI lAkha rupaye pAnA cAhatA hai,
lakSAdhipati karor3a kI lAlasA karatA hai aura koTIpati rAjA banane kA svapna
dekhatA hai, rAjA ko cakravartI banane kI dhuna savAra hotI hai aura cakravartI
ko deva banane kI lAlasA jagatI hai| deva bhI iMdrapada prApta karanA cAhatA
hai| magara iMdrapada prApta hone para bhI to icchA kA aMta nahIM AtA hai| ataH
prAraMbha meM thor3A-sA (choTA-sA ) lobha hotA hai, vahI bAda meM zaitAna kI
taraha bar3hatA jAtA hai  /  / 19 - 21  /  /  vyAkhyA : lobha ke saMbaMdha meM
prastuta AMtarazlokoM kA bhAvArtha kahate haiM- jaise sabhI pApoM meM hiMsA
bar3A pApa hai, | sabhI karmoM meM mithyAtva mahAn hai aura samasta rogoM meM
kSayaroga mahAn hai, vaise hI saba avaguNoM meM lobha mahAn avaguNa hai  /  ahA
! isa bhUmaMDala para lobha kA ekachatra sAmrAjya hai| lobha ke kAraNa hI
ekendriya per3apaudhe bhI nidhAna milane para use apanI jar3a meM dabAkara
pakar3akara Dhaka rakhate haiM, dhana ke lobha se vikalendriya jIva bhI gAr3e
hue nidhAna para | mUrcchApUrvaka jagaha banAkara rahate haiN| sarpa, goha,
nevale, cUhe Adi paMcendriya jIva bhI dhana ke lobha se nidhAna vAlI jagaha |
para Asakti vaza baiThe rahate haiM  /  pizAca, mudgala, bhUta, preta, yakSa Adi
apane yA dUsare ke dhana para lobha va mUrcchAvaza nivAsa karate haiN| AbhUSaNa,
udyAna, bAvar3I Adi para mUrcchAgrasta hokara devatA bhI cyavakara pRthvIkAyAdi
yoni meM utpanna hote haiN| sAdhu upazAMtamoha-guNasthAna taka pahuMcakara
krodhAdi para vijaya prApta kara lene para bhI ekamAtra alpalobha ke doSa ke
kAraNa nIce ke guNasthAnoM meM A giratA hai| mAMsa ke Tukar3e ke lie jaise kutte
Apasa meM lar3ate haiM, vaise hI eka mAtA ke udara meM janme hue sage bhAI bhI
thor3e se dhana ke lie paraspara lar3ate haiN| lobhAviSTa manuSya gAMva, parvata
evaM vana kI | sImA para adhikAra jamAne ke lie sahRdayatA ko tilAMjali dekara
grAmavAsI rAjyAdhikArI, dezavAsI aura zAsakoM meM | paraspara phUTa DAlakara
virodha paidA karake unheM eka dUsare kA duzmana banA detA hai| apane meM hAsya,
zoka, dveSa yA rAga kI atimAtrA na hone para bhI manuSya lobha ke kAraNa mAlika
ke Age naTa kI taraha nAcatA hai, usakA premabhAjana banane kA nATaka karatA hai
lobha rUpI gaDDhe ko bharane kA jyoM-jyoM prayatna kiyA jAtA hai, tyoM-tyoM vaha
adhikAdhika gaharA hotA (bar3hatA jAtA hai| Azcarya hai, samudra to kadAcit jala
se pUrA bhara sakatA hai, paraMtu tInoM lokoM kA rAjya milane para bhI | lobha-
samudra nahIM bharatA  /  manuSya ne anaMtavAra bhojana, vastra, viSaya evaM
dravyapuMja kA upabhoga kiyA hai, magara taba bhI unake mana meM lobha kA aMza
kama nahIM hotaa| yadi lobha chor3a diyA hai to tapa se kyA prayojana aura agara
lobha nahIM chor3A hai, to bhI niSphala tapa se kyA prayojana ? samasta zAstroM
ke paramArtha kA maMthana kara maiM isa nirNaya para pahuMcA hUM ki |
mahAmatimAna sAdhaka ko sirpha ekamAtra lobha ko naSTa karane kA puruSArtha
karanA cAhie  /  / 19 - 21  /  /  aba lobha - vijaya kA upAya batAte haiM  / 348
/  lobhasAgaramudvelamativelaM mahAmatiH  /  santoSasetubandhena, prasarantaM
nivArayet  // 22 //  artha :- lobha rUpI samudra ko pAra karanA = lAMghanA
atyaMta kaThina hai| usake bar3hate hue jvAra ko rokanA duSkara hai| ataH
mahAbuddhimAna puruSa ko cAhie ki saMtoSa rUpI pula bAMdhakara use Age bar3hane
se roka le  /  /  22  /  /  vyAkhyA :- saMtoSa lobha kA pratipakSI manodharma
hai| jaise jala ko rokane ke lie bAMdha bAMdhA jAtA hai, vaise hI lobhakaSAya ko
rokane aura usa para vijaya pAne ke lie saMtoSa rUpI bAMdha bAMdhA jAnA caahie|
isa viSaya meM kucha AMtarazloka hai, jinakA bhAvArtha yahAM prastuta karate
haiM- jaise manuSyoM meM cakravartI aura devoM meM | iMdra sarvottama mAnA jAtA
hai, vaise hI saba guNoM meM saMtoSa sarvottama guNa mAnA jAtA hai| saMtuSTa
sAdhu aura asaMtuSTa cakravartI | ina donoM ke sukhaduHkha kI tulanA kI jAye to
sAdhu adhika sukha se yukta mAlUma hogA aura cakravartI adhika duHkha se yukta
/  saMtoSAmRta-pAna kI icchA se svAdhIna banA huA cakravartI kSaNabhara meM
chaha khaMDa ke rAjya ko chor3akara niHsaMgatA 339

Page #362 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Conquering the Four Kṣayās and Indriyas: A Description  **Chapter Four,
Light of Yoga, Verses 23-25**  **Verse 23:**  * **Content:**  This verse
summarizes the conquest of the four Kṣayās (poisons): anger, pride, deceit, and
greed. It states that anger is conquered by patience, pride by humility, deceit
by simplicity, and greed by non-attachment (santosha).  * **Explanation:**
While both conquering the Kṣayās and the Indriyas (senses) are considered causes
of liberation, conquering the Kṣayās is considered more important, with
conquering the Indriyas being a prerequisite.  **Verse 24:**  * **Content:**
This verse emphasizes the importance of conquering the Indriyas for achieving
victory over the Kṣayās. It states that one cannot conquer the Kṣayās without
first conquering the Indriyas.  * **Explanation:**  The verse uses the analogy
of the cold of winter (Hemant) and fire. Just as the cold of winter cannot be
overcome without fire, the Kṣayās cannot be conquered without conquering the
Indriyas.  **Verse 25:**  * **Content:**  This verse warns about the dangers of
uncontrolled Indriyas. It states that uncontrolled Indriyas, like wild horses,
can drag a person to the forest of hell (Naraka). * **Explanation:**  The verse
highlights the importance of controlling the Indriyas to avoid falling into the
clutches of the Kṣayās and their consequences.   **Summary:**  These verses
emphasize the importance of conquering both the Kṣayās and the Indriyas for
achieving liberation. Conquering the Indriyas is essential for conquering the
Kṣayās, and both are crucial for attaining liberation.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 cAroM kaSAyoM para vijaya evaM iMdriya vijaya varNana yogazAstra caturtha
prakAza zloka 23 se 25 | niHspRhatA apanA letA hai| jisake jIvana meM dhana kI
tRSNA khatma ho gayI hai, usake sAmane saMpadAe~ hAtha jor3e khar3I rahatI hai|
aMgulI se kAna ko baMdakara lene para kAna meM zabdoM ke advaita meM vRddhi ho
jAtI hai; jo zabda kAna se dUra thA, vaha apane Apa kAna meM gUMjane lagatA hai|
saMtoSa prApta hone para pratyeka vastu se vairAgya ho jAtA hai| donoM AMkheM
mUMda lene | para niHsaMdeha sArA carAcara vizva bhI Dhaka jAyagA  /  jisane
kevala eka saMtoSa guNa ko hAsila nahIM kiyaa| usake kevala iMdriyoM ke damana
karane se aura sirpha kAyA ko kaSTa dene se kyA lAbha? saMtoSa se nizcaya hI
muktilakSmI ke mukha kA darzana | hotA hai| jo zarIradhArI isa sAMsArika jiMdagI
meM rahate hue bhI lobha se dUra rahatA hai, vaha yahIM muktisukha kA anubhava
karatA hai| kyA mukti ke sira para koI sIMga lage hote haiM ? rAga-dveSa se
mizrita athavA viSayajanita sukha kisa kAma kA ? kyA saMtoSa se utpanna sukha
mokSasukha se kama hai? dUsaroM ko vizvAsa dilAne vAle zAstra ke subhASitoM ke
kore uccAraNa se kauna-sA sukha mila jAyegA? AMkheM baMda karake jarA saMtoSa ke
AsvAda se hone vAle sukha kA mana meM vicAra karo ! | yadi tuma yaha svIkAra
karate ho ki 'kAraNa ke anurUpa kArya hotA hai; to saMtoSajanita AnaMda se
mokSAnaMda kI pratIti | karo  /  yaha ThIka hai ki tuma karmoM ko nirmUla karane
ke lie tIvra tapa karate ho; kintu vaha tapa bhI saMtoSavihIna huA to | use
niSphala samajhanA  /  sukhArthI manuSya kevala khetI, naukarI, pazupAlana yA
koI vyApAra karake kauna - sA sukha prApta kara | sakatA hai? kyA saMtoSAmRta kA
pAna karane se AtmanivRtti rUpI sukha kA parama lAbha prApta nahIM kara sakatA ?
avazya kara | sakatA hai| ghAsa ke bichaune para sone vAle saMtoSI ko jo sukha
mila sakatA hai, vaha palaMga para yA gaddetakiyoM para sone vAloM ko kaise
nasIba ho sakatA hai? asaMtoSI dhanika bhI apane svAmI ke sAmane tinake ke
samAna hai; jabaki saMtoSI ke sAmane vaha svAmI bhI tinake ke samAna hai;
cakravartI aura iMdra kA vaibhava parizrama se milatA hai lekina aMta meM to
vaha bhI nAzavAna hai, jabaki saMtoSa se milane vAlA sukha binA hI parizrama se
prApta hotA hai aura vaha zAzvata bhI rahatA hai  /  /  22  /  /  isa prakAra
lobha kA sArA pratipakSa rUpa paramasukha - sAmrAjyasvarUpa saMtoSa meM jAnanA
caahie| isalie lobhAgni se | phailate hue paritApa ko zAMta karane ke lie
saMtoSAmRtarasa pIkara AtmagRha meM rati kro| isI bAta ko samuccaya rUpa meM |
eka zloka meM kahate haiM artha : | | 349  /  kSAntyA krodho mRdutvena, mAno
mAyA''rjavena ca  /  lobhazcAnIhayA jeyAH, kaSAyAH iti saGgrahaH ||23|| krodha
ko kSamA se, mAna ko namratA se, mAyA ko saralatA se aura lobha ko niHspRhatA =
saMtoSa se jiite| isa prakAra cAroM kaSAyoM para vijaya prApta karanA cAhie;
yaha samuccaya rUpa meM nicor3a hai| yadyapi kaSAyajaya aura iMdriyajaya donoM
ko samAna rUpa se mokSa kA kAraNa batAyA hai, phira bhI eka apekSA se kaSAyajaya
mukhya hai aura iMdriyajaya usakA kAraNa hai  /  /  23  /  /  vyAkhyA :- isI
bAta ko spaSTa karate haiM  / 350 /  vinendriyajayaM naiva kaSAyAn jetumIzvaraH
/  hanyate haimanaM jADyaM na vinA jvalitAnalam  // 24 //  :- iMdriyoM ko jIte
binA koI bhI sAdhaka kaSAyoM ko jItane meM samartha nahIM ho sktaa| hemaMtaRtu
kA bhayaMkara zIta prajvalita agni ke binA miTa nahIM sakatA ||24|| artha
bhAvArtha :- iMdriyavijaya ko kaSAyavijaya kA hetu (kAraNa) batAyA gayA hai|
yadyapi kaSAyajaya aura iMdriyajaya donoM eka hI samaya meM hote haiM; phira bhI
unameM pradIpa aura prakAza ke samAna kAryakAraNa bhAva hotA hai| iMdriyavijaya
kAraNa hai | aura kaSAyavijaya kArya hai| hemaMtaRtu kI ThaMDa kI jar3atA ke
samAna kaSAya hai aura jalatI huI Aga ke samAna iMdriyavijaya | hai| jisane
iMdriyAM nahIM jItI, samajha lo, usane kaSAyoM ko nahIM jiitaa| iMdriyavijaya ke
binA kevala kaSAyavijaya kA | puruSArtha Age calakara apAya (Apatti) kA kAraNa
banatA hai  /  /  24  /  /  ise hI AgAmI zlokoM meM batA rahe hai  / 351 /
adAntairindriyahayaizcalairapathagAmibhiH  /  AkRSya narakAraNye, jantuH sapadi
nIyate  //  25  //  artha iMdriya rUpI ghor3oM ko kAbU meM na karane para ve
caMcala aura unmArgagAmI banakara prANI ko jabarana khIMcakara zIghra naraka
rUpI araNya meM le jAte haiM  /  /  25  /  /  340 :

Page #363 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Story of King Sudama Yoga Shastra, Fourth Light, Verses 26-27  Meaning:
Here, the senses are compared to horses. A horse is naturally restless, and if
the rider does not control it, it will quickly run away into the desolate,
rugged jungle. Similarly, those who do not control their senses are forced by
them onto the wrong path, leading them to hell. This means that if one does not
conquer their senses, they will be destined for hell. || 25 ||  How does a slave
to the senses go to hell? This is explained: || 352 || Indriyai:rvijit: jantu:
kshayair abhibhuyate. Viraih krishteishtaka: purvam vaprah kai: kai:n
khandhyate? || 26 ||  A being who is defeated by the senses is overcome by
kshayas (negative emotions). When brave warriors pull out a brick from a fort,
who then cannot break it? Even a weak man can then destroy it. || 26 ||
Meaning:  Explanation: • A soul that cannot conquer its senses is also subdued
by kshayas; they take over. Therefore, the first advice given is to conquer the
senses in order to conquer kshayas. Conversely, one who does not strive for
victory over the senses becomes subject to kshayas through the senses and
becomes destined for hell. Here, there is a doubt: if someone is unable to
conquer their senses, they may face obstacles in conquering them, but how can
there be an opportunity for obstacles to arise in conquering kshayas? This is
explained through an example: a brave warrior pulls out a brick from a fort, and
then his weaker companions easily pull out one brick after another, collapsing
the fort. Similarly, a person defeated by the senses is immediately defeated by
kshayas, like an ordinary man. Because kshayas usually follow the senses.
Therefore, one who has not subdued the senses is defeated by kshayas and goes to
hell, losing both in this world and in this life. || 26 ||  This is also said:
|| 353 || Kulaghatay paatay, bandhay cha vadhay cha. Anirjitan: jayante,
karanani sharirirnam || 27 ||  Meaning: Unconquered (uncontrolled) senses are
destructive to the family of embodied beings, causing downfall, bondage, and
death. || 27 ||  Explanation: • If the senses are not suppressed, these
unrestrained senses invite the destruction of the lineage in this life,
corruption of the kingdom, bondage in prison (jail), and death. Ravana could not
control his senses, he desired to have sexual relations with another man's wife;
because of this, Rama and Lakshmana destroyed his lineage. This example has been
mentioned before. If the senses are not controlled, a ruler like King Sudama
becomes dethroned or degraded.  The Story of King Sudama: In a city, King Sudama
ruled. He was very fond of eating different kinds of meat. He ate meat with
great passion and was very happy. One day, his cook had cooked meat and kept it
aside, but a cat snatched it while he was momentarily distracted. The devout
followers of the city had made a proclamation of Amaripattah (non-violence) to
please the king that day; therefore, no living being was to be killed that day,
so no meat of any kind could be found. Therefore, fearing the king's anger, the
cook brought a child and cooked its meat and fed it to the king, satisfying him.
The king found the meat very delicious, so he took the cook aside, made him
swear an oath, and asked him. The cook told him the whole truth. The king now
developed a craving for human flesh. He deployed servants everywhere in the city
to catch all the children. When the city dwellers found out about this, they
united, persuaded the minister, the chief administrator, and everyone else to
their side, and got the king drunk until he fainted. Later, they tied him up and
left him in the jungle. King Sudama, under the control of his tongue, was
dethroned from his kingdom, separated from his family and lineage, and lay in
the jungle, groaning like a dog. 211

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 sudAma rAjA kI kathA yogazAstra caturtha prakAza zloka 26 se 27 bhAvArtha :-
iMdriyoM ko yahAM ghor3e kI upamA dI hai| ghor3e kA svabhAva caMcala hotA hai
agara savAra usa para kAbU na rakhe to vaha jhaTapaTa ujar3a bIhar3a jaMgala meM
bhagA le jAtA hai; iMdriyoM ko vaza meM nahIM rakhane vAle ko ve jabarana
unmArga para car3hA detI haiM aura jIva ko naraka meM le jAtI hai| matalaba yaha
hai ki iMdriyoM ko nahIM jItane para jIva narakagAmI hotA hai  /  /  25  /  /
iMdriyoM kA gulAma kaise naraka meM jAtA hai? ise kahate haiM | | 352  /
indriyairvijito jantuH kaSAyairabhibhUyate  /  vIraiH kRSTeSTakaH pUrvaM vapraH
kaiH kairna khaNDyate ? ||26|| jo jIva iMdriyoM se parAjita ho jAtA hai, usa
para kaSAya hAvI ho jAtA hai| vIra loga jaba kile kI eka IMTa khIMcakara khisakA
dete haiM to usake bAda kauna use khaMDita nahIM kara dete? phira to kamajora
AdamI bhI use naSTabhraSTa kara dete haiM  /  /  26  /  /  artha : vyAkhyA : *
jo AtmA iMdriyoM para vijaya prApta nahIM kara sakatA, use kaSAya bhI dabA dete
haiM; ve usa para car3ha baiThate haiN| isalie kaSAyoM ko jItane ke lie iMdriyoM
para vijaya pAne kA pahale upadeza diyA hai| isake viparIta jo iMdriyavijaya kA
parAkrama nahIM karatA; vaha iMdriyoM ke dvArA kaSAyoM ke adhIna hokara
narakagAmI banatA hai| yahAM zaMkA hotI hai ki koI | vyakti iMdriyoM para vijaya
prApta karane meM asamartha ho to use iMdriyavijaya meM rukAvaTa A sakatI hai,
kaSAyavijaya meM rukAvaTa Ane kA to avasara hI kaise A sakatA hai? isIkA
samAdhAna eka dRSTAMta dvArA karate haiM- eka bahAdura yoddhA kile kI | eka iMTa
khIMca letA hai to usake durbala sAthI bhI TapATapa eka-eka iMTa khIMcakara usa
kile ko DhahA dete haiM, isI prakAra | iMdriyoM se parAjita vyakti sAdhAraNa
manuSya ke samAna kaSAyoM se turaMta parAjita ho jAtA hai| kyoMki kaSAya prAyaH
iMdriyoM kA hI anusaraNa karate haiN| isalie jisane iMdriyA~ vaza meM nahIM kI;
vaha kaSAyoM se parAbhUta hokara naraka meM jAtA hai, tathA | isa loka va isa
janma meM apanA nukasAna kara baiThatA hai  /  /  26  /  /  ise hI kahate haiM
/  353 /  kulaghAtAya pAtAya, bandhAya ca vadhAya ca  /  anirjitAni jAyante,
karaNAni zarIriNAm ||27|| artha :- avijita (kAbU meM nahIM kI huI) iMdriyA~
zarIradhAriyoM ke kula ko naSTa karAne vAlI, patana, baMdhana aura vadha karAne
vAlI hotI haiM ||27|| vyAkhyA : * iMdriyoM kA damana na karane se ve ucchRMkhala
iMdriyA~ isI janma meM vaMza kA vinAza, rAjyabhraSTatA kaidakhAne (jela) ke
baMdhana aura prANanAza ko nyautA de detI hai| rAvaNa iMdriyoM ko vaza na kara
sakA, usane parastrI ke sAtha ramaNa | karane kI icchA kI; isa kAraNa rAma-
lakSmaNa ne usake kula kA vinAza kara diyA thaa| yaha dRSTAMta pahale batA cuke
haiN| iMdriyA~ vaza meM na hone se sudAmarAjA ke samAna zAsaka rAjyacyuta yA
patita ho jAtA hai| | sudAma rAjA kI kathA : eka nagara meM sudAmarAjA rAjya
karatA thA  /  use alaga-alaga kisma kA mAMsa khAne kA bahuta zauka thaa| vaha
atyaMta | AsaktipUrvaka mAMsa khAtA aura apane Apa meM bahuta khuza rahatA thaa|
eka dina usake rasoie ne mAMsa pakAkara rakhA thA ki jarA se idhara-udhara hote
hI use billI caTa kara gyii| nagara ke zraddhAlu zrAvakoM ne rAjA ko prasanna
karake usa dina amAripaTaha kI ghoSaNA karavAyI thI; isalie usa dina kisI jIva
kA vadha na hone se kahIM kisI prakAra kA mAMsa na | milaa| ataH rAjA kI
nArAjagI ke Dara se rasoiye ne kisI bAlaka ko lAkara usakA mAMsa pakAyA aura
rAjA ko khilAkara | saMtuSTa kiyaa| rAjA ko vaha mAMsa bahuta svAdiSTa lagA,
ataH usane ekAMta meM le jAkara rasoIe ko zapatha dilAkara pUchA | to rasoIye ne
sArI bAta saca-saca kaha dii| rAjA ko aba manuSya ke mAMsa khAne kI cATa laga
gyii| usane nagarabhara meM | jitane bAlaka the, unheM pakar3a lAne ke lie
jagaha-jagaha sevakoM ko tainAta kara diyA  /  nagaranivAsiyoM ko isa bAta kA
patA lagA to unhoMne maMtrI, rAjyAdhikArI Adi saba ko apane pakSa meM karake
ekamata hokara rAjA ko khUba zarAba pilAkara mUrcchita kara diyaa| bAda meM use
bAMdhakara jaMgala meM chor3a Aye  /  jihvendriya ke vaza hokara sudAmarAjA
apane rAjya se cyuta huA, parivAra aura kula se alaga huA aura jaMgala meM par3A
par3A kutte kI taraha karAhatA rhaa| 211

Page #364 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Defects of the Senses and Victory Over Them  **Chapter Four, Light Four,
Verses 28-33**  The senses, when not under control, bind a person like the king
Chandapradyota. Those who are under the control of their senses become guests of
death, like Ravana. This story has been told before.   Here are some internal
verses on this topic, whose meaning is presented:  What living being does not
experience irony by being attached to the objects of the senses? Even those who
are masters of the scriptures, who know the ultimate purpose of the scriptures,
act like children.   Bharata Chakra threw his chakra weapon at Bahubali, yet
Bahubali was victorious and Bharata was defeated. This was all a play of the
senses! They were destined to go to liberation in that very birth, yet they
fought with weapons.   Indeed, householders are repeatedly punished by their
unruly senses; this is understandable. But that peaceful, former-holder, the
seeker, is punished by the senses. This is astonishing. It is a pity.   Devas,
Danavas, and humans have been defeated more by the senses. Even though they are
great ascetics, they do not shy away from doing evil deeds.   Under the
influence of the senses, humans eat inedible things, drink undrinkable things,
and use unusable things. A man, helpless under the control of his senses,
abandons his family's honor and shamelessly engages in low acts and slavery at a
prostitute's place.   Understand that the tendency towards another's wealth and
another's wife in a man blinded by delusion is a play of uncontrolled senses.
The hands, feet, senses, and limbs of living beings are cut off, and they are
even killed. The cause of all this is the slavery of the senses. Therefore,
salutations from afar to such senses!   Those who preach humility to others and
themselves lose to their senses are laughed at by wise men, who cover their
mouths with their hands.   In this world, from the ant to Indra, all beings,
except the liberated soul, are defeated by the senses.   Thus, the defects of
the senses have been explained in general. Now, the defects of each sense, such
as touch, etc., are explained in five verses.   **Verse 28:** The elephant,
extending its trunk to taste the pleasure of touching the female elephant,
immediately gets into trouble by being bound to a pillar.  **Verse 29:** The
fish, living in the depths of water, comes to eat a piece of meat on the iron
hook of a net, and without a doubt, it falls into the hands of the fisherman.
**Verse 30:** The bumblebee, attracted to the scent, sits on the temple of a
maddened elephant, but it becomes a victim of death by the clap of its ears.
**Verse 31:** The moth, fascinated by the light of the lamp, which shines like
the brilliance of gold, falls upon the lamp and meets its death.  **Verse 32:**
The deer, engrossed in listening to the song of the doe, is pierced by the
hunter's arrow, which is drawn to the ear. It meets its death.  **Verse 33:**
Thus, each of these five senses, touch, taste, smell, sight, and hearing, leads
to death when indulged in individually. How then can the indulgence of all five
senses together not lead to death? It will certainly happen.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 iMdriyoM ke doSa evaM una para vijaya yogazAstra caturtha prakAza zloka 28 se
33 iMdriyA~ jisake vaza meM nahIM, use caMDapradyota rAjA kI taraha baMdhana meM
DAla detI hai| iMdriyoM ke vazavartI manuSya rAvaNa ke samAna mauta ke mehamAna
banate haiN| isakI kathA pahale A cukI hai| _ yahAM isa viSaya ke kucha AMtara
zloka haiM, jinakA bhAvArtha prastuta kara rahe haiM-iMdriyoM ke viSayoM meM
Asakta hokara kauna-sA jIva viDaMbanA nahIM pAtA? aura to aura zAstra ke
paramArtha ko jAnane vAle zAstrArthamahArathI bhI bAlakavat ceSTA karate haiN|
bAhubali para bharatacakrI ne cakra-mahAstra pheMkA thA, phira bhI bAhubali kI
vijaya huI aura bharata kI praajy| yaha saba iMdriyoM kA hI nATaka thA! ve to
usI bhava meM mokSa jAne vAle the, phira bhI unhoMne zastrAstroM se saMgrAma
kiyA thaa| vastutaH gRhastha to duraMta iMdriyoM se bAra-bAra daMDita hote haiM;
yaha bAta to samajha meM AtI hai; magara prazAMtamohI pUrvadhara sAdhaka
iMdriyoM se daMDita hote haiM. yaha bAta Azcaryajanaka hai| kheda hai. deva,
dAnava aura mAnava iMdriyoM se adhika parAjita hue haiN| becAre kitane bar3e
tapasvI hote hue bhI kutsita kArya karane meM pIche nahIM rhte| iMdriyoM ke
vazIbhUta hokara manuSya abhakSyabhakSaNa kara jAte haiM; apeya padArtha bhI pI
jAte haiM, asevya kA bhI sevana karate haiN| iMdriyAdhIna lAcAra banA huA
manuSya apane kulazIla kA tyAga karake nirlajja hokara vezyA ke yahAM nIca kArya
evaM gulAmI bhI karatA hai| mohAMdha puruSa paradravya aura parastrI meM jo
pravRtti karatA hai, use asvAdhIna iMdriyoM kA nATaka smjhnaa| jIvoM ke hAtha,
paira, iMdriyoM aura aMgoM ko kATa liyA jAtA hai, yahAM taka ki unheM mAra DAlA
jAtA hai, una saba meM iMdriyoM kI gulAmI hI kAraNa hai| isalie dUra se hI
praNAma ho, aisI iMdriyoM ko! jo dUsaroM ko vinaya kA upadeza dete haiM aura
svayaM iMdriyoM ke Age hAra khA jAte haiM, unheM dekhakara vivekI puruSa muMha
para hAtha Dhakakara haMsate haiN| isa jagata meM cIMTI se lekara iMdra taka
jitane | bhI jIva hai, inameM kevala vItarAga ko chor3akara sabhI iMdriyoM se
parAjita hote haiM  /  / 27 /  /  isa prakAra sAmAnya rUpa se iMdriyoM ke doSa
btaaye| aba sparzana Adi pratyeka iMdriya ke pRthak-pRthak doSa pAMca zlokoM meM
batAte haiN|354| vazAsparzasukhAsvAdaprasAritakaraH karI  /
AlAnabandhanaklezamAsAdayati tatkSaNAt  // 28 //   / 355 /  payasyagAdhe vicaran
gilan galagatAmiSam  /  mainikasya kare dIno, mInaH patati nizcitam  // 29 /  /
/ 356 /  nipatanmattamAtaGgakapole gandhalolUpaH  /  karNatAlatalAghAtAd,
mRtyumApnoti SaTpadaH  // 30 //   / 357 /  kanakacchedasaGkAzazikhAlokavimohitaH
/  rabhasena patan dIpe, zalabho labhate mRtim  // 31 //   / 358 /  hariNo
hAriNI gItamAkarNayitumuddharaH  /  AkarNAkRSTacApasya yAti vyAdhasya vedhyatAm
// 32 //  artha :- hathinI ke sparza-sukha kA svAda lene ke lie sUMDa phailAtA
huA hAthI kSaNabhara khaMbhe ke baMdhana meM par3akara | kleza pAtA hai  // 28
//  agAdha jala meM rahane vAlI machalI jAla meM lage hue lohe ke kAMTe para
mAMsa kA Tukar3A khAne ke lie jyoM hI AtI hai, tyoM hI niHsaMdeha vaha becArI
macchImAra ke hAtha meM A jAtI hai  /  / 29 /  /  madonmatta hAthI ke
gaMDasthala para gaMdha meM Asakta hokara bhauMrA baiThatA hai, paraMtu usake
kAna kI phaTakAra se mRtyu kA zikAra ho jAtA hai  // 30 //  sone ke teja ke
samAna camakatI huI dIpaka kI lau ke prakAza ko dekhakara pataMgA mugdha ho jAtA
hai aura dIpaka para TUTa par3atA hai| jisase vaha mauta ke muMha meM calA jAtA
hai  /  / 31 /  /  manohara gIta sunane meM tanmaya banA huA hirana kAna taka
khIMce hue zikArI ke bANa se biMdha jAtA hai| mRtyu ko prApta karatA hai  /  / 3
/  /  isakA upasaMhAra karate hue kahate haiN||359| evaM viSama ekaikaH,
paJcatvAya niSevitaH  /  kathaM hi yugapat paJca, paJcatvAya bhavanti na?  // 33
/  /  | artha :- isa prakAra sparzana, rasanA, nAsikA, cakSu aura karNa ina
pAMcoM iMdriyoM meM se eka-eka iMdriya kA viSaya | bhI sevana karane para mRtyu
kA kAraNa ho jAtA hai to eka sAtha pAMcoM iMdriyoM ke viSayoM kA sevana karane
se mRtyu kA kAraNa kyoM nahIM hogA? avazyameva hogA  /  / 33 /  /  342

Page #365 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Defects of the Senses and Victory Over Them  **Fourth Light of Yoga
Shastra, Verse 34, Meaning:**  It is said that "attachment to one thing destroys
all five senses, then one who is deluded and attached to the objects of all five
senses together, is burnt to ashes after death." (33)  Now, giving advice on how
to achieve victory over the senses, it is said: "Therefore, the wise seeker
should conquer the senses through the purification of the mind. Because without
conquering the senses, the practice of Yama and Niyama is a futile bodily
exertion for humans." (34)  **Explanation:**  The senses are of two types:
material and mental. Skin, tongue, nose, eyes, and ears, which are formed from
the material substance of pudgala, are material senses. And the desire for
objects like touch, taste, smell, sight, and sound is the mental sense. One
should renounce attachment to them and conquer them.  In this regard, the
meaning of the inner verses is presented: A being defeated by the senses is
troubled by many sorrows. Therefore, to be free from all sorrows, one should
control the senses. Completely stopping the flow of the senses is not victory
over them, but rather, the flow should be free from attachment and aversion;
only then is it called victory over the senses. It is impossible to remove the
contact of the senses with their objects; therefore, wise people renounce
attachment and aversion that arise from those objects. The senses of a
restrained yogi are always controlled in both ways. In beneficial restraint-
yoga, the senses remain uncontrolled, and in harmful yogas like carelessness,
they are controlled. That is, in the practice of Yama and Niyama, the senses
remain engaged in the practice of restraint without being controlled (killed),
but in objects, passions, carelessness, etc., the senses are controlled
(killed). This is the secret of conquering the senses. Victory over the senses
leads to liberation, and defeat by the senses leads to wandering in the world!
Knowing the difference between the two, follow what seems beneficial. The entire
foundation of karma-bondage lies in the pleasure and displeasure experienced
from the soft touch of a cotton mattress, etc., and the hard touch of a stone,
etc. Therefore, renounce pleasure and displeasure towards touch and become a
conqueror of the sense of touch. Renounce the liking for delicious and palatable
food and the dislike for tasteless food, and become a conqueror of the sense of
taste. Renounce attachment and aversion towards fragrant substances and foul
odors, knowing their nature and consequences, and conquer the sense of smell.
Renounce joy and disgust towards beautiful forms that please the mind and eyes,
and ugly forms that are the opposite, and become a conqueror of the sense of
sight. Renounce attachment towards the sweet, ear-pleasing melodies of the veena
and other instruments, and aversion towards the ugly, repulsive, ear-piercing,
harsh, and insulting sounds of donkeys, camels, etc., and conquer the sense of
hearing. There is no object in this world that is completely beautiful or
completely ugly, which the senses have not experienced in all previous births.
Why then do you not remain neutral towards it? You imagine ugliness in good
things and goodness in bad things; then how will you free your senses from
attachment and make them full of detachment? The same reason for which you say
that there should be liking (attachment) towards something, the same reason can
lead to disgust and aversion towards it! In reality, objects are neither good
nor bad in themselves; it is the human perspective that makes them good or bad.
Therefore, with a detached mind, renounce the attachment and aversion that are
the flow of the objects of the senses, and desire to become a conqueror of the
senses.  What is the way to conquer these invincible senses? It is explained:
First, purity of mind is essential, and the practice of Yama and Niyama is also
necessary. Serving the elderly and studying scriptures are also causes of
victory over the senses. The extraordinary cause among all these is the purity
of the mind. The other causes are not absolute and ultimate. Without purity of
mind, even if Yama and Niyama, etc., are practiced, they cannot be causes of
victory over the senses. This is stated in the same verse: "Without them, Yama
and Niyama, etc." Yama refers to the five great vows, which are the root
virtues, and Niyama refers to the purification of the body, the secrecy of the
community, etc., which are the subsequent virtues. Serving the elderly, etc., is
a bodily exertion, but without purity of mind, all this effort is futile. Like
Marudevi, etc., many...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 iMdriyoM ke doSa evaM una para vijaya yogazAstra caturtha prakAza zloka 34
bhAvArtha :- kahA hai ki 'eka meM Asakta hone se pAMcoM iMdriyoM kA nAza karAtA
hai to eka sAtha jo pAMcoM iMdriyoM ke viSayoM meM mUr3ha banakara Asakta hotA
hai, vaha to marakara bhasmIbhUta hI ho jAtA hai  /  / 33 /  /  iMdriyoM ke doSa
kahakara aba una para vijaya prApta karane kA upadeza dete haiN||360|
tadindriyajayaM kuryAt, manaH zuddhyA mahAmatiH  /  yAM vinA yama-niyamaiH,
kAyaklezo vRthA nRNAm  // 34 //  artha :- isalie mahAbuddhimAna sAdhaka mana kI
zuddhi dvArA iMdriyoM para vijaya prApta kre| kyoMki iMdriyoM para vijaya prApta
kiye binA yama-niyamoM kA pAlana karanA manuSyoM ke lie vyartha hI kAyakleza
(zarIra ko kaSTa denA) hai  // 34 //  vyAkhyA :- iMdriyA~ dravya aura bhAva se
do prakAra kI hai| camar3I, jIbha, nAsikA, AMkha aura kAna yaha AkArarUpa
pariNata jo pudgaladravya rUpa hai, ve dravya-iMdriya hai aura sparza, rasa,
gaMdha, darzana tathA zravaNa rUpa viSayoM kI abhilASA karanA bhAvendriya hai|
usakI Asakti kA tyAga karanA tathA usa para vijaya prApta karanA caahie| isa
saMbaMdha meM AMtara zlokoM kA bhAvArtha prastuta karate haiM-iMdriyasamUha se
parAjita jIva aneka duHkhoM se parezAna rahatA hai| isalie sabhI duHkhoM se
mukta hone hetu iMdriyoM para niyaMtraNa rakhanA caahie| isa viSaya meM sarvathA
pravRtti baMda kara denA, iMdriyavijaya nahIM hai, apitu pravRtti rAga-dveSa se
rahita ho; tabhI iMdriyavijaya kahalAtA hai| iMdriyoM ke nikaTastha viSayoM ke
saMyoga ko haTAnA asaMbhava hai; isalie buddhimAna vyakti ukta viSaya ke nimitta
se hone vAle rAga-dveSa kA tyAga karate haiN| saMyama-yogI kI iMdriyAM sadA mArI
haI donoM prakAra kI hotI hai| hitakara saMyama-yoga meM iMdriyA~ binA mArI haI
rahatI hai aura pramAda Adi ahitakara yogoM meM mArI huI rahatI hai| arthAt
yamaniyamoM ke pAlana meM iMdriyoM ko mAre (hanana kiye) binA hI ve
saMyamArAdhanA meM tatpara rahatI hai, lekina viSaya, kaSAya, pramAda Adi meM
iMdriyA~ mArI (hanana kI) jAtI hai| iMdriyoM ko jItane kA rahasya yahI hai|
iMdriyavijaya se mokSa hotA hai aura iMdriyoM se parAjita hone para saMsAra meM
paribhramaNa! donoM kA aMtara jAnakara jo hitakara (acchA) lage usI para clo|
rUIbhare gadde Adi ke mulAyama patthara Adi ke kaThora sparza para hone vAlI
rati-arati para karmabaMdha kA sArA dAromadAra (AdhAra) hai| ataH sparza ke
prati hone vAlI rati-arati kA tyAga karake sparzendriyavijetA bn| sevana karane
yogya svAdiSTa evaM sarasa vastu para prIti aura nIrasa padArthoM para aprIti ko
chor3akara bhalIbhAMti jihvendriya-vijayI bn| sugaMdhita padArtha mile yA
durgadhi paryAya aura pariNAma jAnakara rAga-dveSa kiye binA taM ghrANendriya
para vijaya prApta kr| mana aura AMkhoM ko AnaMda dene vAle manohara rUpa
dekhakara aura usake viparIta kurUpa dekhakara harSa yA ghRNA kiye binA
netrendriya para vijayI bn| vINA aura anya vAdyoM ke madhura karNapriya
svaralaharI ke prati rAga aura bhadde, bIbhatsa, karNakaTu karkaza aura
apamAnita karane vAle gadhe, UMTa Adi ke zabda sunakara dveSa yA roSa kiye binA
karNendriya para vijaya prApta kr| isa jagat meM koI bhI padArtha | aisA nahIM
hai, jo ekAMta manohara ho yA sarvathA amanohara; jisakA iMdriyoM ne Aja taka
sabhI janmoM meM anubhava nahIM kiyA ho| phira tUM usameM mAdhyasthabhAva kyoM
nahIM rakhatA? tUM zubhaviSayoM ke prati azubhatva aura azubhavastu ke prati
zubhatva kI kalpanA karatA hai; phira apanI iMdriyoM ko kaise rAga se mukta aura
virAga se yukta banAegA? tUM jisa kAraNa se kisI vastu ke lie kahatA hai ki
isake prati prIti (moha) honI cAhie, usI para ghRNA aura dveSa ho sakatA hai!
vastutaH padArtha apane Apa meM na zubha hai, na azubha; manuSya kI apanI dRSTi
hI zubha yA azubha hotI hai| ataH viraktacitta hokara iMdriyaviSayoM ke Azrava
rUpa rAga-dveSa kA tyAga aura iMdriyavijetA banane kA manoratha karanA caahie|
ina durjeya iMdriyoM para vijaya prApta karane kA kyA upAya hai? use batAte
haiM-prathama to mana kI nirmalatA Avazyaka hai, sAtha hI yamaniyama kA pAlana
bhI jarUrI hai| vRddhasevA tathA zAstrAbhyAsa Adi bhI iMdriyavijaya ke kAraNa
hai| ina saba meM asAdhAraNa kAraNa to mana kI zuddhi hai| dUsare kAraNa
aikAMtika aura AtyaMtika nahIM hai| mana kI nirmalatA ke binA yama-niyamAdi hone
para bhI ve iMdriyavijaya ke kAraNa nahIM ho skte| isI zloka meM kahA hai-tAM
vinA yamaniyamau ityaadi| yama yAnI paMcamahAvrata rUpa mUlaguNa aura niyama
yAnI piMDavizuddhi-samitigupti rUpa uttaraguNa, upalakSaNa se vRddhasevA Adi
kaayprishrm| kintu manaHzuddhi ke binA yaha sArA puruSArtha niSphala hai|
marudevI Adi kI taraha kaI 343

Page #366 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Uncontrolled Mind and its Restraint Measures  **Yoga Shastra, Fourth Light,
Verses 35 to 39**  For some, mental purity is natural, while others need to
control their minds through means like Yama and Niyama. (34)  What does an
uncontrolled mind do? The following verse explains. (361)  The uncontrolled
mind, like a demon, roams freely and without fear, throwing the beings of the
three worlds into the abyss of the whirlpool of Samsara. (35)  **Explanation:**
There are two types of mind: Dravya-mana and Bhava-mana. Dravya-mana is the
Pudgala transformed into a specific form, while Bhava-mana is the Atma-parinam,
in the form of Sankalpa, arising from the Pudgala-dravya. The mind itself is the
demon in the form of Sankalpa, whose nature is to incline towards evil objects.
Therefore, it does not seek stability in any particular object. How does the
mind roam? The answer is: without fear. The mind, emerging from the realm of its
own nature, roams freely and falls into the abyss of the cycle of Samsara,
making it difficult to escape. There is no being in the three worlds who has not
been thrown into the abyss of Samsara by the uncontrolled mind. (35)  The flaws
of the uncontrolled mind are further explained. (362)  The restless mind, like a
storm, throws those who desire liberation and those who practice severe
austerities, away from their path. (36)  Further flaws of the uncontrolled mind
are revealed. (363)  One who has faith in Yoga without restraining the mind, is
like a lame person desiring to go to another village, and becomes an object of
ridicule for the wise. (37)  Not only is faith in Yoga futile without
restraining the mind, but such a restless mind invites many evil deeds. This is
explained in the latter part of the next verse, while the former part describes
the fruit of restraining the mind. (364)  By restraining the mind from objects,
the influx of karma ceases from all sides. For one who does not restrain the
mind, karma increases from all sides. (38)  **Explanation:** By restraining the
mind, karma like Jnanavaraniya, etc., ceases to flow, because the influx of
karma is under the control of the mind. One who does not restrain the mind,
increases karma, because the bondage of karma is under the control of the
uncontrolled mind. Therefore, one should strive to control the mind. (38)  This
is further explained. (365)  The mind is like a monkey, a monkey that loves to
roam the entire world. Therefore, one who desires liberation should strive to
control their monkey-like mind. (39)  **Explanation:** The mind is restless like
a monkey, this is a universally experienced truth. The similarity between the
mind and the monkey is explained: just as a monkey roams freely in the forest,
without any control over its movement, so too does the mind roam freely in the
forest of the world. Therefore, it is said: the mind loves to roam, grabbing
different objects and being restless. One should free oneself from the
restlessness of such an uncontrolled mind and engage it in appropriate objects.
How can this be done? Through the effort of practice. Who should do this? One
who desires liberation of the soul. The meaning is that only one who can
restrain the restlessness of the mind can be successful in the pursuit of
liberation. (39)  344

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 aniyaMtrita mana aura usake nirodha ke upAya yogazAstra caturtha prakAza zloka
35 se 39 vyaktiyoM ko to manaHzuddhi svAbhAvika hotI hai aura kaI logoM ko yama-
niyama Adi upAyoM se mana ko niyaMtrita karane | para hotI hai  // 34 //
aniyaMtrita mana kyA karatA hai? isake bAre meM AgAmI zloka meM kahate haiN|361|
manaH kSapAcaro bhrAmyannapazakaM niraGkuzaH  /  prapAtayati saMsArA''vartagarte
jagat trayIm  /  / 35 /  /  artha :- niraMkuza mana rAkSasa kI taraha niHzaMka
hokara bhAga-daur3a karatA hai aura tInoM jagat ke jIvoM ko saMsAra rUpI
bha~varajAla ke gaDDhe meM girA detA hai  /  / 35 /  vyAkhyA :- mana do prakAra
kA hai-dravyamana aura bhaavmn| viziSTa AkAra meM pariNata pudgala, dravyamana
hai; jabaki una pudgaladravyoM kI upAdhi se utpanna hone vAle saMkalpa rUpa
AtmapariNAma bhAvamana hai| mana hI saMkalpa rUpa rAkSasa hai, jisakA svabhAva
durviSayoM meM pravRtti karAne kA hai| isa kAraNa yaha usa-usa viSaya meM
sthiratA kA avalaMbana nahIM letaa| mana kaise bhramaNa karatA hai? isake uttara
meM kahate haiM-niHzaMkatA se| svarUpa bhAvanA ke pradeza se nirgata mana
niraMkuza hokara | saMsAra rUpI Avarta ke gaDDhe meM aisA giratA hai ki usase
bAhara nikalanA bhI kaThina ho jAtA hai| tInoM lokoM meM aisA koI bhI jIva na
hogA, jise niraMkuza mana ne saMsAra rUpI garta meM na girAyA ho  /  / 35 /  /
punaH aniyaMtrita mana ke doSa batAte haiN||362| tapyamAnAMstapo muktau,
gantukAmAn zarIriNaH  /  vAtyeva taralaM cetaH kSipantyanyatra kutracit  // 36 /
/  artha :- mukti prApta karane ke icchukoM aura kaThora tapazcaryA karane vAle
zarIradhAriyoM ko bhI asthira (caMcala) mana yAnI bhAvamana AMdhI kI taraha
kahIM kA kahIM phaiMka detA hai  /  / 6 /  /  aniyaMtrita mana ke aura bhI doSa
prakaTa karate haiN||363| aniruddhamanaskaH san, yogazraddhAM dadhAti yaH  /
padbhyAM jigamiSurgAmaM sa paGguriva hasyate  // 37 //  artha :- mana kA nirodha
kiye binA hI jo manuSya yoga prApta hone kA vizvAsa kara letA hai| usakI vaha
yogazraddhA laMgar3e AdamI dvArA dUsare gAMva jAne kI icchA kI taraha vivekI
logoM meM haMsI kA pAtra banatI hai||37|| manonirodha na karane se kevala
yogazraddhA hI niSphala hai, itanA hI nahIM, aisA caMcala mana aneka
azubhakarmoM ko Ane kA nyautA de detA hai| isa bAta ko AgAmI zloka ke
uttarArddha se batAkara pUrvArddha se manonirodha kA phala batAte haiN|364|
manorodhe nirudhyante, karmANyapi samantataH  /  aniruddhamanaskasya, prasaranti
hi tAnyapi  // 38 //  artha :- viSayoM se mana ko roka lene se cAroM ora se
karmoM ke Agamana (Asrava) ruka jAte haiN| jo manuSya mana kA nirodha nahIM
karatA, usake karma cAroM ora se bar3hate jAte haiM  // 38 //  :- manonirodha se
jJAnAvaraNIya Adi karma Ane se ruka jAte haiM, kyoMki karmoM kA Agamana (Asrava)
mana ke adhIna hai| jo mana kA nirodha nahIM karatA, vaha karmoM ko bar3hAtA
hai; kyoMki karmabaMdhana niraMkuza mana ke adhIna hai| isalie mana para
niyaMtraNa karane kA prayatna avazya karanA cAhie  /  / 38 /  /  isI bAta ko
kahate haiN|365| manaH kapirayaM vizvaparibhramaNalampaTa:  /  niyantraNIyo
yatnena, muktimicchubhirAtmanaH  // 39 //  artha :- mana baMdara hai, aisA
baMdara, jo sAre vizva meM bhaTakane kA zaukIna hai| ataH mokSAbhilASI puruSa ko
apane | mana-markaTa ko prayatnapUrvaka vaza meM karanA cAhie  /  / 39 /  /
vyAkhyA :- mana baMdara kI taraha caMcala hai; yaha bAta sarvatra anubhavasiddha
hai| mana aura baMdara kI samAnatA batAte haiM-baMdara jaise jaMgala meM
svacchaMda bhaTakatA hai, usake bhramaNa para koI aMkuza nahIM hotA; vaise hI
mana bhI vizva rUpI araNya meM berokaToka bhaTakatA hai| isIlie kahA hai-mana
bhinna-bhinna viSayoM ko pakar3akara caMcalatA pUrvaka bhramaNa karane kA
zaukIna hai| aise aniyaMtrita mana kI capalatA ko chur3Akara use ucita viSayoM
meM lagA denA caahie| vaha kaise lagAyA jAya? abhyAsa rUpI prayatna se| aisA
kauna kare? AtmA kI mukti kA icchuk| Azaya yaha hai ki mana kI capalatA ko
rokane vAlA hI mukti kI sAdhanA meM samartha ho sakatA hai  /  / 39 /  /  344

Page #367 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Mind Conquest  **Chapter Four of Yoga Shastra, Verses 40-44**  Now, we
praise the purity of mind, which is the cause of conquering the senses. (366)
**Verse 40:**  > The purity of mind is the only lamp, declared by the wise, that
never extinguishes and always shows the path to liberation.  **Meaning:**  > The
ancient teachers have accepted that even without Yama, Niyama, etc., the purity
of mind alone is such a lamp that never extinguishes and always shows the path
to liberation.  **Explanation:**  > It is also said that if someone makes a
great effort in auspicious yogas like knowledge, meditation, charity, honor,
silence, etc., but their mind is not pure (clean), then their effort should be
considered like pouring ghee into ashes. (4)  Now, we give advice with the view
of explaining the benefits of purity of mind through analogy and contrast. (367)
**Verse 41:**  > If the mind is pure, even if other qualities are absent, they
still exist due to the goodness of their fruits. Conversely, if the mind is not
pure, even if other qualities are present, qualities like forgiveness, etc., do
not exist because their fruits are absent. Therefore, wise men should definitely
cultivate the fruitful purity of mind.  **Meaning:**  > If there is purity of
mind and other qualities are not present, then also the qualities like
forgiveness, etc., remain due to the goodness of their fruits. On the contrary,
if there is no purity of mind, then even if other qualities are present,
qualities like forgiveness, etc., are not present because their fruits are
absent. Therefore, wise men should definitely cultivate the fruitful purity of
mind.  **Explanation:**  > To those who say, "What is the need for purity of
mind? We will attain liberation through the power of austerity," we give this
reply. (368)  **Verse 42:**  > Those who strive for liberation through austerity
without purity of mind are like those who want to cross the great ocean by
abandoning the boat and using their arms.  **Meaning:**  > Those who strive for
liberation through austerity without purity of mind are like those who want to
cross the great ocean by abandoning the boat and using their arms.
**Explanation:**  > Those who neglect purity of mind, saying, "Austerity
combined with meditation is liberating," and who declare, "Meditation is the
cause of the destruction of karma," we give this reply. (369)  **Verse 43:**  >
Just as a mirror is useless for the blind, so too is meditation for a pure
ascetic without purity of mind.  **Meaning:**  > Just as a mirror is useless for
the blind, so too is meditation for a pure ascetic without purity of mind.
**Explanation:**  > Although it is heard that a person can reach the ninth stage
of liberation through the power of austerity and meditation without purity of
mind, this statement should be understood as a general rule. And attaining the
ninth stage of liberation is a worldly fruit, which is not considered in the
calculation of fruits. The fruit that leads to liberation is considered the
fruit here. Therefore, it is useless to expect the fruit of liberation from mere
meditation without purity of mind. Although a mirror is a means of seeing form,
it is useless for someone who is blind. Similarly, meditation without purity of
mind is useless.  Now, we conclude. (370)  **Verse 44:**  > Therefore, a seeker
who desires liberation must definitely cultivate purity of mind. What is the
benefit of fasting, study of scriptures, the great vow of Yama, and other rules
of conduct, except for bodily punishment?  **Meaning:**  > Therefore, a seeker
who desires liberation must definitely cultivate purity of mind. What is the
benefit of fasting, study of scriptures, the great vow of Yama, and other rules
of conduct, except for bodily punishment?  **Explanation:**  > Here, it should
also be added that "How does purity of mind occur?" Purity of mind occurs
through the purity of the leshyas. Therefore, we explain the leshyas in this
context.  **Description of Leshyas:**  > There are six leshyas: black, blue,
dove-colored, radiant, lotus-colored, and white. The appearance of corresponding
results in the soul with the help of colored matter according to the karma-varna
is called leshya. Although the soul is pure and clear like crystal, due to the
influence of karma, it becomes colored by the leshyas.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 mano vijaya yogazAstra caturtha prakAza zloka 40 se 44 aba iMdriyavijaya meM
kAraNabhUta manaHzuddhi kI prazaMsA karate haiN|366| dIpikA khalvanirvANA,
nirvANapathadarzinI  /  ekaiva manasaH zuddhiH, samAmnAtA manISibhiH  // 40 //
artha :- pUrbAcAryoM ne mAnA hai ki-yama-niyama Adi ke binA akelI manaHzuddhi
bhI aisI dIpikA hai, jo kabhI bujhatI nahIM aura sadA nirvANapatha dikhAne vAlI
hai  // 40 //  bhAvArtha :- kahA bhI hai-jJAna, dhyAna, dAna, mAna, mauna Adi
zubhayoga meM koI atyaMta udyama karatA ho, lekina usakA mana sApha (nirmala) na
ho to usakA vaha udyama rAkha meM ghI DAlane jaisA samajhanA cAhie  /  / 4 /  /
aba anvaya-vyatireka se manaHzuddhi se anyAnya lAbha batAne kI dRSTi se upadeza
dete haiN367| satyAM hi manasaH zuddhau, santyasanto'pi yad guNAH  /
santo'pyasatyAM no santi, saiva kAryA budhaistataH  // 41 //  artha :- yadi mana
kI zuddhi ho aura dUsare guNa na hoM, to bhI unake phala kA sadbhAva hone se
kSamA Adi guNa rahate hI haiN| isake viparIta, yadi mana kI zuddhi na ho to
dUsare guNa hone para bhI kSamA Adi guNa nahIM hai, kyoMki usake phala kA abhAva
hai| isa kAraNa vivekI puruSoM ko avazya hI phaladAyinI manaHzuddhi karanI cAhie
// 41 /  /  .. jo aisA kahate haiM ki 'manaHzuddhi kI kyA AvazyakatA hai? hama
to tapobala se mukti prApta kara leNge| unheM pratyuttara dete haiN|368| manaH
zuddhimabibhrANA, ye tapasyanti muktaye  /  tyaktvA nAvaM bhujAbhyAM te,
titIrSanti mahArNavam  // 42 //  artha :- jo manuSya manaHzuddhi kiye binA mukti
ke lie tapasyA kA parizrama karate haiM; ve naukA ko chor3akara bhujAoM se
mahAsAgara ko pAra karanA cAhate haiM  // 42 /  /  'tapa-sahita dhyAna mukti
dene vAlA hai' yoM kahakara jo manaHzuddhi kI upekSA karate haiM aura 'dhyAna hI
karmakSaya kA kAraNa hai' aisA pratipAdana karate haiM, unheM uttara dete
haiN|369| tapasvino manaHzuddhiM, vinAbhUtasya sarvathA  /  dhyAnaM khalu mudhA,
cakSurvikalasyeva darpaNaH  // 43 /  /  artha :- aMdhe ke lie jaise darpaNa
vyartha hai, usI prakAra manaHzuddhi ke binA kore tapasvI kA dhyAna karanA
sarvathA - nirarthaka hai  /  / 43 /  /  bhAvArtha :- yadyapi manaHzuddhi ke
binA tapa aura dhyAna ke bala se nau graiveyaka taka vyakti calA jAtA hai| aisA
sunA jAtA hai| paraMtu vaha kathana prAyika samajhanA caahie| aura graiveyaka
prApti to saMsAraphala hai; jise phala kI gaNanA meM nahIM mAnA gayA hai| jisakA
phala mokSa ho, use hI yahAM phala mAnA gayA hai| isalie manaHzuddhi ke binA
kore dhyAna se mokSaphala kI apekSA rakhanA vyartha hai| yadyapi darpaNa rUpa
dekhane kA sAdhana hai| paraMtu jisake AMkheM nahIM hai, usake lie darpaNa
bekAra hai| isI taraha manaHzaddhi ke binA dhyAna vyartha hai  /  / 43 /  /  aba
upasaMhAra karate haiN||370| tadavazyaM manaHzuddhiH kartavyA siddhimicchatA  /
tapaHzruta-yamaprAyaiH kimanyaiH kAyadaNDanaiH?  // 44 //  artha :- ataH siddhi
(mukti) cAhane vAle sAdhaka ko mana kI zuddhi avazya karanI caahie| anazana rUpa
tapa, zruta (zAstra) kA svAdhyAya, mahAvrata rUpa yama aura bhI dUsare niyama
rUpa anuSThAna karane se sivAya kAyakleza (zarIra ko daMDa dene) se aura kyA
lAbha milegA?  // 44 //  vyAkhyA :- yahAM yaha bAta bhI jor3anI cAhie ki 'mana
kI zuddhi kaise hotI hai? lezyA kI vizuddhi se mana kI nirmalatA hotI hai|
isalie prasaMgavaza yaha batAte haiM ki lezyAe~ kauna-kauna sI haiM? leNyAoM kA
varNana :_lezyAe~ chaha haiM-kRSNa, nIla, kApota, tejo, padma aura shukl|
karmavargaNA ke anurUpa varNadravya kI sahAyatA se AtmA meM tadanurUpa pariNAmoM
kA AnA lezyA hai| yadyapi AtmA to sphaTika ke samAna nirmala-svaccha hai| kintu
kRSNa 345

Page #368 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Importance of Purity of Mind and the Description of Leshyas  **Yoga
Shastra, Fourth Light, Verse 44**  The term "Leshya" is used in relation to the
soul because of the influence of the Leshya-dravya (Leshya-substance). Due to
the accumulation of black-colored, inauspicious pudgals (particles), the soul's
results are the most impure. Therefore, that soul is considered to be a
possessor of Krishna-leshya. Due to the proximity of blue-colored substances,
the soul's results are more impure, hence that soul is considered to be a
possessor of Neel-leshya. Due to the presence of Kapotavर्ण (pigeon-colored)
substances, the soul's results are impure, therefore that soul is called
Kapotavर्ण-leshya. Due to the presence of yellow-colored substances, the soul's
results are pure accordingly, hence the soul is called Tejo-leshya. Due to the
proximity of Padma-colored substances, the soul's results are purer accordingly,
therefore that soul is considered to be possessed by Padma-leshya. And due to
the proximity of white-colored substances, the soul's results are the purest
(completely pure), therefore that soul is possessed by Shukla-leshya.  Krishna,
Neel, etc., all the dravya-karma-prakritis (substance-action-natures) have their
essence (extract) as the Bhava-leshya (emotional Leshya) that arises from their
respective attributes. This is the cause of the state of karma-bandha (bondage
of karma). In the 38th verse of the Prashmarati-prakaran (chapter on
pacification and joy), it is said: "There are six Leshyas named Krishna, Neel,
Kapotavर्ण, Tejas, Padma, and Shukla; they solidify the state of karma-bandha in
the same way that a stable and permanent color is created in painting."  In this
way, the aforementioned six Leshyas are called the most impure, more impure,
impure, pure, purer, and purest, due to their being the results of the soul. To
explain the nature of Leshyas, the example of the Jamun tree and the village-
destroyer is given in detail.  Therefore, the meaning of the verses from the
Agamas (scriptural texts) that explain this topic are presented here:  In a
forest, six men saw a Jamun tree. It was laden with ripe fruits, and its
branches were bent down with the weight. Seeing the tree in this state, everyone
expressed their desire to eat the Jamuns and said, "How shall we eat the
Jamuns?" One of them said, "It is very difficult to climb this tree, it is
dangerous for life. Therefore, let it be cut down from the root, so that we can
eat the Jamuns without worry." Another said, "Oh! What is the use of cutting
down such a big tree? We only want to eat the fruits, so let us just cut down
the big branches of this tree and drop them down, and then eat them." The third
said, "Our work will be done by just cutting down the small branches, what is
the point of cutting down the big branches?" The fourth said, "Oh! Our work will
be done by just breaking off the bunches of fruits." The fifth said, "We should
only break off the ripe fruits that are fit to eat." Finally, the sixth said,
"Why do we need to break off the fruits from the tree? There are as many fruits
lying under the tree as we want to eat, let us just pick them up and eat them."
Explaining this example, it is said: The one who said to cut down the tree from
the root is possessed by Krishna-leshya; the one who said to cut down the big
branches is possessed by Neel-leshya; the one who said to cut down the small
branches is possessed by Kapotavर्ण-leshya; the one who said to break off the
bunches of fruits is possessed by Tejo-leshya; the one who said to break off
only the ripe fruits is possessed by Padma-leshya; and the one who said to pick
up the fruits that had fallen from the tree on their own is possessed by Shukla-
leshya.  This is explained by another example: Once, six robbers went to loot a
village. One of the robbers said, "Kill all the creatures in the village,
whether they have two legs or four legs." The second said, "Why kill the four-
legged animals, only the two-legged humans should be killed." The third said,
"Oh! Why kill the women? Only the men should be killed." The fourth said,
"Instead of killing all the men, only those who have weapons should be killed."
The fifth said, "Oh! We should only kill those who come forward to fight us."
Then the sixth robber said, "Leave the killing, we should only take the wealth."
The conclusion is this: The one who said to kill everyone was possessed by the
results of Krishna-leshya; the one who said to kill humans was possessed by
Neel-leshya; the one who said to kill only men was possessed by
Kapotavर्ण-leshya; the one who said to kill only those with weapons was
possessed by Tejo-leshya; the one who said to kill those who come forward to
fight was possessed by Padma-leshya; and the one who said to only take the
wealth was possessed by the results of Shukla-leshya.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 mana kI zuddhi kA mahattva aura lezyA kA varNana yogazAstra caturtha prakAza
zloka 44 |Adi lezyAdravya ko lekara hI AtmA meM lezyA-zabda kA vyavahAra hotA
hai| kAle raMga ke azubhapudgaloM ke sannipAta se AtmA ke pariNAma azuddhatama
hote haiN| isa kAraNa vaha AtmA kRSNalezyAdhikArI mAnA jAtA hai| nIle raMga ke
dravyoM ke sannikarSa se AtmA ke pariNAma azuddhatara hote haiM, isalie vaha
AtmA nIlalezyAdhikArI mAnA jAtA hai| kApotavarNa vAle dravya ke sannidhAna se
AtmA ke pariNAma azuddha hote haiM, isa kAraNa vaha AtmA kApotalezyAvAn kahalAtA
hai| pItavarNa vAle dravya ke sannidhAna se AtmA ke pariNAma tadanurUpa zuddha
hote haiM, isase AtmA tejolezyA vAlA kahalAtA hai| padmavarNa vAle dravyoM ke
sannikaTa hone se AtmA ke pariNAma tadanurUpa zuddhatara hote haiM, isalie vaha
AtmA | padmalezyAyukta mAnA jAtA hai| aura zuklavarNa vAle dravyoM ke sAnidhya
se AtmA ke pariNAma zuddhatama (bilakula zuddha) hote haiM, isalie vaha AtmA
zuklalezyAvAn hotA hai| kRSNa, nIla Adi samasta dravyakarmaprakRtiyoM kA
niHsyaMda (nicor3a) usa-usakI upAdhi se niSpanna hone vAlI bhAvalezyA hai| vahI
karma ke sthitibaMdha meM kAraNabhUta hai| prazamaratiprakaraNa kI 38vIM gAthA
meM kahA hai-kRSNa, nIla, kApota, taijasa, padma aura zukla nAma kI ye 6 lezyAe~
hai; jo karmabaMdha kI sthiti ko usI taraha sudRr3ha kara detI hai, jisa taraha
citrakarma meM sarasa raMga ko sthAyI va pakkA banA detA hai| isa taraha
pUrvokta chaha lezyAe~ AtmA ke pariNAma rUpa hone se azuddhatamA, azuddhatarA,
azuddhA, zuddhA, zuddhatarA aura zuddhatamA kahalAtI hai| lezyAoM kA svarUpa
samajhAne ke lie jAmuna ke per3a kA tathA grAmaghAtaka kA dRSTAMta vistRta rUpa
se diyA jAtA hai| ataH isa viSaya ko samajhAne vAlI Agamokta gAthAoM kA
bhAvArtha yahAM prastata kara rahe haiM eka jaMgala meM chaha puruSoM ne eka
jAmana kA peDa dekhA. jo pake hae phaloM se pariparNa thA aura usakI DAliyA~
bhAra se namI haI thii| peDa sI hAlata meM dekhakara sabhI ne jAmuna khAne kI
apanI-apanI icchA prakaTa kI aura kahane lage-jAmana kaise khAe~? unameM se eka
ne kahA-isa per3a para car3hanA to bahuta muzkila hai, jAna kA khatarA hai|
isalie ise jar3a se hI kATa diyA jAya, tAki nizcinta hokara jAmuna khA skeN|
dUsare ne kahA-ajI! itane bar3e per3a ko kATane se kyA phAyadA hogA? hameM phala
hI khAne haiM, to sirpha isa per3a kI bar3I-bar3I DAliyA~ kATakara nIce girA
leM, aura phira khaaeN| tIsare ne kahAhamArA kAma to choTI DAliyA~ kATa lene se
hI cala jAyagA, phira bar3I DAliyA~ kATane se kyA matalaba? cauthe ne kahAajI!
phala ke gucche-gucche tor3a lene se hI hamArA kAma bana jaayegaa| pAMcave ne
kahA-hameM to sirpha pake hue khAne lAyaka phaloM ko hI tor3a lenA caahie|
sabase aMta meM chaTe ne kahA-hameM per3a se phala tor3ane kI kyA AvazyakatA
hai? jitane phala khAne haiM, utane to per3a ke nIce gire par3e haiM, unheM hI
lekara khA leN| isa dRSTAMta kA upanaya karate hue kahate haiM-jisane per3a ko
jar3a se kATane kA kahA thA, vaha kRSNalezyAvAlA hai; jisane bar3I zAkhAe~
kATane kA kahA thA, vaha nIlalezyA vAlA hai; jisane choTI TahaniyA~ kATane kA
kahA thA, vaha kApotalezyA vAlA hai; jisane gucche-gucche tor3a lene kA kahA
thA, vaha tejolezyA vAlA hai; jisane sirpha pake phala | tor3ane kA kahA thA,
vaha padmalezyAvAn hai aura jisane per3a se TUTakara apane Apa dharatI para
par3e hue phaloM ko lene kA kahA thA; vaha zuklalezyAvAlA hai| ise eka dUsare
dRSTAMta dvArA samajhAte haiM eka bAra chaha luTere kisI gAMva ko lUTane ke lie
cle| unameM se eka luTere ne kahA-gAMva meM do paira vAle yA cAra paira vAle jo
bhI prANI mileM, sabako mAra ddaalo| dUsare ne kahA-cAra paira vAle pazuoM ko
kyoM mArA jAya, sirpha do paira vAle manuSyoM ko mAranA caahie| tIsare ne kahA-
ajI! striyoM ko kyoM mArA jAya! sirpha puruSoM ko hI mAra DAlA jAya! cauthe ne
kahA-sabhI puruSoM ko na mArakara jinake pAsa hathiyAra hoM, unheM| hI mAra DAlA
jAya! pAMcaveM ne kahA-ajI! hameM to unako mAranA cAhie: jo hamAre sAmane Akara
laDAI kre| taba chadre ne kahA-chor3o mArane kI bAta ko! hameM to kevala dhana
le lenA cAhie isakA upasaMhAra yoM hai-jo sabhI ko mArane kA kahatA thA, vaha
kRSNalezyA ke pariNAma vAlA thA; jo manuSyoM ko mArane kA kahatA thA, vaha
nIlalezyAvAn, jo kevala puruSoM ko mArane kA kahatA thA, vaha kApotalezyAyukta,
jo kevala | zastra-astravAloM ko mArane kA kahatA thA, vaha tejolezyAvAn, jo
sAmane Akara lar3ane vAle ko mArane kA kahatA thA, vaha padmalezyAvAn evaM jo
kevala dhana le lene kI bAta kahatA thA, vaha zuklalezyA ke pariNAmoM se yukta
thaa| 346

Page #369 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Description of Mind Purification  **Chapter Four, Light of Yoga, Verses
45-48**  In these six Leshyas, the first three are considered unfavorable
(A-prashasta) and the last three are favorable (Prashasta). As the soul becomes
purer and purer, the Leshyas change. The soul attains a state of existence based
on the Leshya it experiences at the time of death. Therefore, the Lord said,
"Jalle se marai, talle se uvvjai." This means that the soul is born into the
same Leshya in which it dies. Similarly, the Bhagavad Gita and other scriptures
say, "Ante cha Bharat Shreshtha! Ya matih, sa gatir nrunam." This means that the
state of existence of humans is determined by their final thoughts. The word
"mati" used here refers to consciousness. How can the statement "As the thought,
so the state of existence" be consistent? If the meaning of "mati" is taken as
the result of the most impure state, then the statement of the great sage
becomes logical.   Of the six Leshyas, a soul in the Krishna Leshya goes to
hell, a soul in the Neel Leshya goes to the state of stationary beings, a soul
in the Kapoth Leshya goes to the state of Tyancha, a soul in the Peet Leshya
goes to the state of humans, a soul in the Padm Leshya goes to the state of
gods, and a soul in the Shukla Leshya attains liberation. What more can be said?
By abandoning the impure Leshyas and accepting the pure Leshyas, the mind can be
purified progressively.  **Some scattered methods of mind purification are
described as follows:**  **Verse 45:**  **Meaning:** To purify the mind, one
should control attachment and aversion, which are the forms of liking and
disliking. If attachment and aversion arise, they should be rendered
ineffective. By doing so, the soul, free from impurities, resides in its true
nature.  **The difficulty of controlling attachment and aversion is explained in
three verses:**  **Verse 46:**  **Meaning:** Even those who strive to control
their minds, like yogis, are overcome by attachment, aversion, and delusion,
which make them foolish and hateful, and bring them under the control of these
vices.  **Verse 47:**  **Meaning:** Even while protecting their minds from vices
through Yama, Niyama, and other practices, yogis are constantly deceived by
attachment, aversion, and other vices, like demons. Just as demons, despite
being controlled by mantras and other practices, deceive practitioners when they
get an opportunity, similarly, attachment, aversion, and other vices deceive the
minds of yogis.  **Verse 48:**  **Meaning:** The mind of a yogi whose knowledge
and vision are destroyed by the darkness of attachment, aversion, and other
vices is dragged into the well of hell, just as a blind person drags another
blind person into a well.  **Meaning:** Darkness covers the light of the eye;
similarly, attachment, aversion, and other vices cover the light of the soul's
true knowledge and vision. When the knowledge and vision (faith in the truth) of
a practitioner are destroyed, the mind, corrupted by vision and knowledge,
brings him under its control and throws him into the well of hell. Just as a
blind person throws another blind person into a well, similarly, the mind
blinded by attachment, aversion, and other vices throws a mentally blind person
into the well of hell. This means that a person who is blind to his mind falls
into the well of hell.  **Here is the meaning of some internal verses written on
this topic:**  Desire, liking, delusion, or attachment to material things is
called attachment, and aversion, dislike, hatred, or jealousy towards the same
is called aversion. Both attachment and aversion are great bonds for all living
beings. They are considered the root and trunk of the tree of all suffering. If
there were no attachment and aversion in the world, who would be surprised and
delighted to see happiness? Suffering...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 manaH zuddhi varNana yogazAstra caturtha prakAza zloka 45 se 48 ina chahoM
lezyAoM meM prathama tIna lezyAe~ aprazasta ( kharAba) hai aura aMtima tIna
lezyAe~ prazasta (acchI ) hai  /  jaba jaba AtmA vizuddha, vizuddhatara hotA
jAtA hai, taba taba lezyAe~ badalatI rahatI hai  /  mRtyu ke samaya jisa lezyA
ke pariNAma hote haiM, tadanusAra hI jIva ko gati prApta hotI hai| isIlie
bhagavAn ne kahA- jallese marai tallese uvavajjaI; | arthAt jIva jisa lezyA meM
maratA hai, usI lezyAvAlI gati meM paidA hotA hai; bhagavadgItA Adi anya
dharmagraMthoM meM bhI | kahA hai- aMte ca bharatazreSTha ! yA matiH, sA
gatirnRNAm arthAt aMtima samaya meM jaisI mati hotI hai, tadanusAra hI manuSyoM
kI gati hotI hai; yahAM jo 'mati' zabda kA prayoga kiyA gayA hai, vaha cetanA
rUpa hai; taba phira 'jaisI mati vaisI gati' yaha bAta kisake sAtha saMgata ho
sakatI hai? mati kA artha azuddhatama Adi pariNAma kiyA jAya, taba paramarSi kA
yaha | kathana yuktisaMgata hotA hai| chaha lezyAoM meM se kRSNalezyAvAlA jIva
narakagati meM, nIlalezyAvAlA jIva sthAvara yoni meM kApota lezyAvAlA jIva
tiyaMcagati meM, pItalezyA vAlA jIva manuSyagati meM, padmalezyA vAlA devagati
meM aura zuklalezyA vAlA jIva mokSa meM jAtA hai| adhika kyA kaheM,
azuddhalezyAoM ko chor3akara zuddha lezyAoM ko svIkAra karane se hI mana kI
uttarottara zuddhi ho sakatI hai  /  /  44  /  /  isI prakAra manaH zuddhi ke
kucha chuTapuTa upAya batAte haiM | | 371 | manaH zuddhayaiva karttavyo, rAga-
dveSa - vinirjayaH  /  kAluSyaM yena hitvA''tmA svasvarUpe'vatiSThati (te)  //
45 //  artha :- Atma-svarUpa bhAvamana kI zuddhi ke lie prIti- aprIti svarUpa
rAga-dveSa kA nirodha karanA caahie| agara rAga-dveSa udaya meM A jAe~ to unheM
niSphala kara dene caahie| aisA karane se AtmA malinatA (kAluSya) kA tyAga
karake apane svarUpa meM avasthita ho jAtA hai  /  /  45  /  /  rAga-dveSa kI
durjayatA tIna zlokoM dvArA samajhAte haiM artha : | | 372 | AtmAyattamapi
svAntaM kurvatAmapi yoginAm  /  rAgAdibhiH samAkramya, parAyattaM vidhIyate  //
46  //  | | 373 | rakSyamANamapi svAntaM samAdAya manAg miSam  /  pizAcA iva
rAgAdyAzchalayanti muhurmuhuH ||47 ||  /  374 | rAgAditimiradhvastajJAnena
manasA janaH  /  andhenAndhaivAkRSTaH, pAtyate narakAvaTe  // 48 //  yogiyoM ke
samAna apane mana ko vazIbhUta karane kA prayatna karate-karate bIca meM hI
rAga-dveSa-moha Adi vikAra hamalA karake kSaNabhara meM mUr3ha aura dveSI
banAkara rAgAdi ke adhIna kara dete haiM  /  /  46  /  /  yama-niyama Adi se
bhAvamana kI vikAroM se rakSA karate hue bhI yogiyoM ke mana ko rAgAdi pizAca
koI na koI pramAda rUpI bahAnA DhUMDhakara bAra-bAra chalate rahate hai| jaise
maMtrataMtrAdi dvArA pizAcoM se rakSA karane para bhI maukA pAkara chala se ve
sAdhaka ko parAdhIna kara dete haiM, vaise hI rAgAdi pizAca yogiyoM ke mana ko
chalate rahate haiM  /  /  47  /  /  rAgAdi rUpI aMdhakAra se jisake samyagjJAna
aura samyagdarzana naSTa ho jAte haiM, usa yogI kA mana usI taraha khIMcakara
naraka ke kue~ meM girA detA hai, jisa taraha eka aMdhA dUsare aMdhe ko
khIMcakara kuMe meM girA detA hai  /  / 48  /  /  bhAvArtha :aMdhakAra AMkha ke
prakAza ko Dhaka detA hai; isI prakAra rAgAdi bhI AtmA ke samyagjJAna-
samyagdarzana rUpI prakAza ko Dhaka dete haiN| isa kAraNa jaba sAdhaka ke jJAna
aura darzana (tattvazraddhA) naSTa ho jAte haiM to darzanajJAna | se bhraSTa
mana use apane vaza meM karake naraka ke kue~ meM girA detA hai| jaise eka aMdhA
dUsare ko kue~ meM girA detA hai, vaise hI rAgAdi se aMdhA mAnasa, mAnasika
aMdha manuSya ko bhI naraka ke kue~ meM girA detA hai| matalaba yaha hai ki mana
se aMdhA | hokara manuSya naraka ke kue~ meM giratA hai| isI viSaya meM likhita
kucha AMtarazlokoM kA bhAvArtha yahAM prastuta karate haiM dravyAdika para rati,
prIti, moha yA Asakti ko rAga kahate haiM aura unhIM para arati, aruci, ghRNA yA
IrSyA ko dveSa kahate haiN| rAga aura dveSa, ye donoM sabhI jIvoM ke lie
mahAbaMdhana hai| inheM hI samasta duHkha rUpI vRkSa ke mUla aura | skandha kahA
hai| yadi jagat meM rAga aura dveSa ye donoM na hote to sukha ko dekhakara kauna
vismita aura harSita hotA? duHkha 347

Page #370 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Mind Purity and Means to Protect the Mind from Strong Attachment and Aversion
- Means to Destroy Karma  **From the Fourth Light of the Yoga Shastra, verses 49
to 52:**  Who becomes lowly and who does not attain liberation? Everyone attains
it. Aversion alone cannot exist without attachment, and attachment alone cannot
exist without aversion. By abandoning one, both are abandoned.   Actions like
lust are servants of attachment, and false pride, etc., are the family of
aversion. The father, leader, seed, and supreme lord of attachment and aversion,
inseparable from both and protected and nurtured by both, is delusion, the
grandfather of all vices. Thus, these three vices are the main ones. There is no
other vice that cannot be included in these. These three cause all beings in the
world to wander in the forest of samsara.   The soul (jiva) is naturally pure
like a crystal, but due to these attachments, it is called the embodiment of
attachment. Alas! These thieves of attachment steal the soul's spiritual wealth
in the blink of an eye. Due to them, the world is chaotic; or, the soul,
situated in its own nature, is robbed of all knowledge by these robbers of
attachment in front of its own eyes.   All the beings in the world and those who
are about to attain liberation in a short time are under the control of this
ruthless army of delusion. Oh! Vices of attachment! Do you have enmity with
liberation or with those seeking liberation that you obstruct their union
(ratnatrayamaya)? Only the Arihants are capable of destroying you (vices of
attachment). There is no one else as capable. They have extinguished the fire of
vices that burns the world. Just as a muni does not fear a tiger, snake, water,
or fire when they are nearby, similarly, the muni does not fear the harmful
attachment, etc., in both worlds, in this life and in future lives. In fact, a
lion of attachment and a tiger of aversion sit with them, because these yogis
have chosen the path of great hardship.   Now, the means to conquer attachment
and aversion are explained:  **Verse 49:**  **Meaning:** Therefore, yogi men who
desire the state of nirvana should conquer the enemies of attachment and
aversion through equanimity, abandoning drowsiness (inattentiveness) and being
vigilant.  **Verse 50:**  **Meaning:** Just as bathing in water removes dirt, so
too, the dirt of attachment and aversion is quickly removed from men who bathe
in the water of equanimity, which is extremely joyful.  **Verse 51:**
**Meaning:** Equanimity destroys in a moment those karmas that a man cannot
destroy even by intense austerities for countless births.  **Verse 52:**
**Meaning:** Karma and the soul are intertwined; the virtuous one who has
attained certainty about the nature of the soul separates them with the stick of
Samayika.  **Explanation:** Karma and the soul are connected; they are separate;
they are not one. Thus, the muni who has known this with certainty separates the
soul and karma with the stick of Samayika. Just as a stick is used to separate
vessels stuck together by adhesive substances, similarly, the soul and karma,
which are connected by the bond of association, can be separated by Samayika.
This is called the destruction of karma; it is the attainment of the state of
nirvana. The complete and total destruction of pudgalas never happens, because
substance is eternal. The separation of karma-pudgalas from the soul is called
the destruction of karma.   Here, there is a doubt: "The statement that the
virtuous ones separate karmas with the stick of Samayika is only..."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 manaHzuddhi evaM prabala rAgadvaSAdi sa mana rakSA ke upAya-rAgadvaSanivAraNa
eva kamakSaya kA upAya samatva yogazAstra caturtha prakAza zloka 49 se 52 se
kauna dIna-hIna banatA? aura kauna mokSa nahIM prApta kara letA? saba hI prApta
kara lete| rAga ke binA akelA dveSa nahIM hotA aura dveSa ke binA akelA rAga
nahIM hotaa| donoM meM se kisI eka ko chor3a dene para donoM hI chUTa jAte haiN|
kAma Adi doSa rAga ke sevaka haiM aura mithyAbhimAna Adi dveSa kA parivAra haiN|
rAga aura dveSa kA pitA, nAyaka, bIja aura paramasvAmI, ina donoM se abhinna
aura donoM se rakSita-pAlita, samasta doSoM kA pitAmaha moha hai| isa prakAra ye
tInoM doSa mukhya hai| inake sivAya aisA koI doSa nahIM hai, jisakA samAveza
inameM na ho ske| ye hI tIna jagat ke samasta jIvoM ko saMsAra rUpI araNya meM
paribhramaNa karAte haiN| jIva (AtmA) svabhAvataH sphaTikaratna ke samAna
sarvathA nirmala hai, paraMtu ina rAgAdi upAdhiyoM ke kAraNa yaha rAgAdi svarUpa
kahalAtA hai| aphasosa! ye rAgAdi cora dekhate hI dekhate jIva kI Atmika
saMpatti kA haraNa kara lete haiN| inake kAraNa vizva arAjaka banA huA hai;
athavA apane svarUpa meM sthita jIva kA apane sAmane hI ina rAgAdi luTeroM se
sarva jJAna luTA jAtA hai| nigoda meM jitane jIva haiM aura jo jIva kucha hI
samaya meM mukti meM jAne vAle haiM, ve sabhI ina niSkaruNa mohAdi senA ke
adhIna ho jAte haiN| are! rAgAdi-doSoM! kyA tumheM mukti ke sAtha yA mumukSu ke
sAtha vaira hai ki ina donoM ke yoga (ratnatrayamaya) ko rokate ho? tumheM
(rAgAdi doSoM ko) kSaya karane meM samartha to arihaMta hI haiN| unake samAna
aura koI samartha nahIM hai| unhoMne jagat ko jalA dene vAlI doSAgni zAMta kara
dI hai| jisa prakAra vyAghra, sarpa, jala aura agni pAsa meM ho to muni Darate
nahIM hai, isI prakAra donoM lokoM meM, isa janma aura AgAmI janmoM meM
apakArakartA rAgAdi se bhI muni nahIM ddrte| vAstava meM unake pAsa rAga rUpI
siMha aura dveSa rUpI vAgha baiThe rahate haiM, kyoMki una yogiyoM ne mArga hI
mahAsaMkaTa kA cunA hai  /  / 46-48 /  /  aba rAga-dveSa para vijaya pAne kA
upAya batAte haiN|375| astatandrairataH pumbhinirvANapadakAGkSibhiH  /
vidhAtavyaH samatvena, rAgadveSadviSajjayaH  // 49 /  /  artha :- ataH
nirvANapada pAne ke abhilASI yogI puruSoM ko taMdrA (pramAda) chor3akara
sAvadhAnI ke sAtha samattva ke dvArA rAgadveSa rUpI zatruoM para vijaya prApta
karanA cAhie  /  / 49 /  /  rAgadveSa ko jItane ke lie samatA kA upAya kaisA
hai? ise batAte haiN|376| amandAnandajanane, sAmyavAriNi majatAm  /  jAyate
sahasA puMsAM, rAgadveSamalakSayaH  // 50 //  artha :- jaise jala meM snAna
karane se maila dUra ho jAtA hai, usI taraha atIva AnaMdajanaka samabhAva rUpI
jala meM | snAna karane vAle puruSoM kA bhI rAgadveSa rUpI maila sahasA dUra ho
jAtA hai| samatva kevala eka rAgadveSa ko hI nahIM miTAtA; apitu samasta karmoM
kA bhI kSaya karatA hai| use hI kahate haiN|377| praNihanti kSaNArdhena,
sAmyamAlambya karma tat  /  yanna hanyAnarastIvratapasA janmakoTibhiH  /  / 51 /
/  artha :- karor3oM janmoM taka tIvra tapasyA karake jina jJAnAvaraNIya Adi
karmoM ko manuSya naSTa nahIM kara sakatA; unhIM kamoM ko samatA kA Azraya
lekara manuSya Adhe kSaNa meM naSTa kara sakatA hai  /  / 5 /  /  sAdhaka
samabhAva se aMtarmuhUrta meM kisa taraha samasta karmoM ko naSTakara detA hai,
ise kahate haiN|378| karma jIvaM ca saMzliSTaM parijJAtAtmanizcayaH  /
vibhinnIkurute sAdhuH, sAmAyikazalAkayA  // 52 //  artha :- karma aura jIva
paraspara saMzliSTa (jur3e-cipake hue) haiM; jise AtmasvarUpa kA nizcita jJAna
ho gayA hai, vaha sAdhu samabhAva sAmAyika rUpI salAI se inheM pRthak kara letA
hai  /  / 5 /  /  vyAkhyA :- jIva aura karma kA saMyoga huA hai; ye donoM alaga-
alaga hai; eka nahIM haiN| isa prakAra jisane Atma | nizcaya se jAnA hai, vaha
muni sAmAyika rUpI zalAkA se jIva aura karma ko pRthak-pRthak kara letA hai|
jaise zleSadravya se Apasa meM cipake hue pAtrAdi ko salAI se alaga kara diyA
jAtA hai, usI taraha saMyoga-saMbaMdha se saMbaddha jIva aura sAmAyika se
pRthaka kiyA jA sakatA hai| isI kA nAma karmakSaya hai; nirvANapada kI prApti
hai| pudgaloM kA Atyantika-sarvathA kSaya kadApi nahIM hotA. kyoMki dravya nitya
hai| AtmA se karma-padagaloM ke pathaka ho jAne ko hI karmakSaya kahate haiN|
yahAM zaMkA hotI hai ki 'sAdhu sAmAyika rUpI salAI se karmoM ko alaga kara dete
haiM, yaha kathana kevala 348 snAna

Page #371 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Description of Equality  **Yoga Shastra, Fourth Light, Verses 53-54**  "It is
a verbal delight." This solves the problem that when one practices self-
knowledge, with the destruction of the karma that obscures knowledge, one who
has thoroughly decided on the nature of the self, who has experienced it, can
separate the self, the living being, and karma with the Samayik rod. He
repeatedly confirms the self through self-awareness - self-experience - that the
karma that covers the nature of the self is different from the self. The same
seeker, by the power of the Paramasamayik, separates the living being and karma.
|| 52 ||  By the power of self-certainty, the seeker not only separates karma,
but also shows the self the nature of the Supreme Self. This is called:  || 379.
Ragadi-dhvanta-vidhvanse, krte samayaikamsuna | Svasmin swarupam pasyanti,
yoginah paramaatmanah || 53 ||  **Meaning:** When the darkness of attachment,
aversion, and delusion is destroyed by the sun of Samayik, yogis see the nature
of the Supreme Self in their own self. || 53 ||  **Explanation:** Since they
obstruct the nature of the self, attachment, aversion, and delusion are
darkness. Their destruction is by the sun of Samayik. Therefore, the nature of
the Supreme Self is inherently present in every self; yogis begin to see that
nature. In reality, if we consider it, all selves are the nature of the Supreme
Self. In every self, only a part of knowledge is present. In the Agamas, the
great sages have said: "Savvajivaanam pi anan akkharassaanantbhaago
nicchugghhaadio cheva." That is, in all living beings, an infinite part of the
letter is always uncovered. (Nandi Sutra 77) It is only because of being
contaminated by the defects of attachment, aversion, and delusion that the
nature of the Supreme Self does not manifest in the self. When the light of the
sun of Samayik shines, the darkness of attachment, aversion, and delusion is
removed, and the nature of the Supreme Self manifests in the self. || 53 ||  Now
we describe the effect of equality:  || 380. Snihyanti jantavo nityam vairino'pi
parasparam | Api swarthakrte samyabhajah sadhoh prabhavatha || 54 ||
**Meaning:** Although the virtuous practice equality for their own sake, the
glory of equality is so wonderful that its effect causes even creatures like
snakes and mongooses, who are always enemies, to hold mutual love. || 54 ||
**Explanation:**  The point is that equality has such an effect that even if the
virtuous practice equality for their own sake, eternal enemies begin to have
mutual friendship. Therefore, learned people praise: "O God! The elephant
scratches its cheek with its trunk, pulling the foot of the lion. The snake
stands blocking the path of the mongoose. The lion stands ready with its mouth
open like a vast cave; but the deer repeatedly sniffs it with trust. Where even
such cruel animals become calm, I praise the place of equality - the place of
sameness. The scriptures also praise the yogi who is united with equality in
this way. Going to yogis removes enmity."  The inner meaning of the verses on
this topic is: Equality is that which does not waver in mind between conscious
and unconscious matter, between what is desirable and what is undesirable. If
someone comes and applies sandalwood paste to the body, or someone pierces the
arms with a weapon, yet the mind remains free from attachment and aversion, that
is called supreme equality. If someone praises, there is no delight in it, and
if someone curses - insults, there is no aversion to it, but the mind remains
equal towards both, then that seeker is immersed in equality. There is no need
to perform any kind of fire sacrifice, austerity, or charity in this. In fact,
this liberation comes only from equality, which is bought without price. What is
the benefit of worshipping attachment, aversion, etc., which are difficult to
achieve through great effort? Because this beautiful happiness, which is
obtained without effort, is given by equality itself. Take refuge in this. The
atheist who does not believe in the indirect, will not believe in heaven and
liberation; but he will not be able to deny the happiness of equality, which is
born of self-experience. Why are you foolish, being engrossed in the talk of
poets, in that imagined nectar? O fool! Drink the nectar of equality, which is
the taste of self-awareness. The virtuous, who are averse to the tastes that are
fit to be eaten, licked, drunk, and sucked,  349

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 samatva kA vivaraNa yogazAstra caturtha prakAza zloka 53 se 54 | vANIvilAsa
hai|' isakA samAdhAna karate haiM ki AtmajJAna kA abhyAsa karate-karate jaba
jJAnAvaraNakarma ke kSayopazama se | jo AtmasvarUpa kA nirNaya bhalIbhAMti kara
letA hai; anubhava kara letA hai, vaha AtmA jIva aura karma ko sAmAyika| zalAkA
se alaga kara sakatA hai| vaha bAra-bAra svasaMvedana - AtmAnubhava se AtmA kA
dRr3ha nizcaya karatA hai ki Atma | svarUpa ko AvRta karane - Dhakane vAle karma
AtmA se bhinna svarUpa vAle haiN| vahI sAdhaka paramasAmAyika ke bala se jIva
aura karma ko alaga-alaga karatA hai  /  /  52  /  /  Atma-nizcaya ke bala se
sAdhaka kevala karma ko hI alaga karatA hai; itanA hI nahIM, kintu AtmA ko
paramAtmasvarUpa kA darzana bhI karAtA hai| ise hI kahate haiM ||379 /
rAgAdidhvAntavidhvaMse, kRte sAmAyikAMzunA  /  svasmin svarUpaM pazyanti,
yoginaH paramAtmanaH  // 53 //  artha :- sAmAyika rUpI sUrya ke dvArA rAga,
dveSa aura moha kA aMdhakAra naSTa kara dene para yogI puruSa apanI AtmA meM
paramAtma-svarUpa kA darzana kara lete haiM  /  / 53|| vyAkhyA :- Atma svarUpa
kA nirodha karane vAle hone se rAgAdi hI aMdhakAra hai| unakA nAza sAmAyika rUpI
sUrya se hotA hai| ataH pratyeka AtmA meM svAbhAvika rUpa se paramAtma svarUpa
nihita hai; usa svarUpa ko taba yogIpuruSa dekhane lagate haiN| vAstava meM
vicAra kareM to sabhI AtmA paramAtma svarUpa hI hai| pratyeka AtmA meM
kevalajJAna kA aMza nihita hai| Agama meM paramamaharSiyoM ne kahA hai-
savvajIvANaM pi a NaM akkharassANaMtabhAgo niccugghADio ceva  /  arthAt sabhI |
jIvoM meM akSara kA anaMtavAM bhAga nitya anAvRta = khulA rahatA hai| (naMdI
sUtra 77) sirpha rAgAdi doSoM se kaluSita hone | ke kAraNa hI AtmA meM sAkSAt
paramAtma svarUpa prakaTa nahIM hotA  /  sAmAyika rUpI sUrya kA prakAza hone se
rAgAdi| aMdhakAra dUra ho jAtA hai aura AtmA meM paramAtma-svarUpa prakaTa ho
jAtA hai  /  /  53  /  /  aba samatA ke prabhAva kA varNana karate haiM || 380
/  snihyanti jantavo nityaM vairiNo'pi parasparam  /  api svArthakRte
sAmyabhAjaH sAdhoH prabhAvataH ||54 || artha :- yadyapi sAdhu apane svArtha ke
lie samatva kA sevana karate haiM; phira bhI samabhAva kI mahimA aisI adbhuta
hai ki usake prabhAva se nitya vaira rakhane vAle sarpa-nakula jaise jIva bhI
paraspara prema-bhAva dhAraNa kara lete haiM ||54  //  vyAkhyA : kahane kA
tAtparya yaha hai ki samabhAva kA aisA prabhAva hai ki cAhe sAdhaka ne apane
liye samabhAva kiyA; | magara nityazatru bhI paraspara maitrIbhAva rakhane
lagate haiN| isalie paMDitajana stuti karate haiM ki 'deva! hAthI kesarIsiMha ke
paira ko sUMDa se khIMcakara apane kapola - sthala ke sAtha khujalAtA hai, sarpa
nevale ke mArga ko rokakara khar3A rahatA hai, siMha | vizAla guphA ke samAna
muMha phAr3e taiyAra rahatA hai; kintu mRga bAra-bAra vizvAsa se use sUMghatA
hai| jahAM aise krUra pazu bhI zAMtacitta ho jAte haiM, aise sabhI ke
sAmyasthAna = samavasaraNabhUmi kI maiM prArthanA = stuti karatA huuN| zAstroM
ne bhI sAmyayukta | yogI kI stuti isa prakAra kI hai| yogiyoM ke pAsa jAne se
vaira chUTa jAtA hai| isa viSaya ke AMtarazlokoM kA bhAvArtha kahate haiM -
cetana aura acetana padArtha meM, iSTa aura aniSTa meM jisakA mana | nahIM
murjhAtA use sAmya kahate haiN| koI Akara gozIrSa - caMdana se zarIra para lepa
kare athavA koI zastra se bhujAoM kA chedana | kare; phira bhI cittavRtti
rAgadveSa se rahita rahe, use anuttara sAmya kahate haiN| koI stuti kare, to usa
para prIti na ho | aura koI zrApa de - niMdA kare to usa para dveSa na ho,
paraMtu donoM ke prati jisakA citta samAna rahe, vahI sAdhaka sAmya kA avagAhana
karatA hai| isameM kisI prakAra kA havana, tapa athavA dAna karanA nahIM par3atA
/  vastutaH binA mola ke kharIde hue sAmyamAtra se hI yaha nirvRtti hotI hai  /
utkRSTa aura kliSTa prayatnasAdhya rAgAdi kI upAsanA karane se kyA lAbha? kyoMki
binA prayatna se milane vAlA yaha manohara sukha to sAmya hI detA hai| tUM isI
kA Azraya le  /  parokSa padArtha ko | nahIM mAnane vAlA nAstika svarga aura
mokSa ko nahIM mAnegA; paraMtu vaha svAnubhavajanya sAmyasukha kA to apalApa
nahIM | kara skegaa| kaviyoM ke pralApa meM masta banakara usa kalpita amRta meM
kyoM mUr3ha banA hai? are mUr3ha ! Atma-saMvedyarasa rUpI | sAmyAmRta ke
rasAyana kA pAna kr| khAne yogya, cATane yogya, pIne yogya aura cUsane yogya
rasoM se vimukha bane hue sAdhu 349

Page #372 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Glory of Samata (Equanimity) - 'The Nature of Emotion' Yoga Shastra, Fourth
Light, Verses 55 to 59 | They repeatedly drink the nectar of samata (equanimity)
at will. Whether a serpent is wrapped around their neck or a garland of
Kalpavriksha flowers is worn; even then, the one who does not experience dislike
or liking is the possessor of equanimity. Samata is not some esoteric substance
or a fist-shaped instruction given by an Acharya or anything else. For both the
child and the scholar, samata is the thirty-first medicine to eradicate the
disease of attachment. It is the extremely cruel act of the peaceful yogis that
they destroy the family of attachment, etc., with the weapon of samata. This is
a sarcastic statement. You too attain this supreme effect of equanimity! Which
grants even sinners the highest abode in an instant. The success of the Ratna
Tray (three jewels) is in the presence of equanimity, but its absence leads to
failure. Salutations to that mighty equanimity! After understanding all the
scriptures and their meanings, we shout at the top of our voices and tell you
that in this world or the next, there is no one else who can give happiness to
oneself or others without equanimity. There is no other remedy for peace than
this timely equanimity in the face of adversity or at the time of death. Many
beings, skilled in destroying enemies like attachment and aversion, have enjoyed
the wealth of the kingdom of samata and attained eternal auspiciousness and the
highest position. Therefore, the seeker who desires to make this human birth
successful should not be negligent in attaining this samata-equanimity, which is
filled with an infinite group of happiness. ||54|| Here there is a doubt that
'equanimity is the cause of the removal of all faults, knowing this we are
happy, but if there is any remedy that opposes that equanimity and there is
another remedy for the removal of that remedy, and we can do it naturally, then
we will be able to experience joy without any desire.' This is solved by
thinking in the mind in two verses. ||381|| Samyam syan nirmatven, tatkrite
bhavanaah shrayet | Anityatam asharan, bhavam ekattvam anyatam ||55|| ||382||
Ashochamasravavidhim, sanvaram karmanirjaram | Dharmasvakhyatatam lokam,
dwadashee bodhibhavanaam ||56|| Meaning: Equanimity is attained through non-
attachment, and to attain non-attachment, one should take refuge in twelve
emotions. Those emotions are as follows. ||55-56|| Explanation: The
aforementioned equanimity arises from being free from attachment. The question
arises, what is the difference between equanimity and non-attachment? The answer
is: Equanimity is the opposite of both attachment and aversion; while non-
attachment is only the opposite of attachment. Therefore, equanimity is said to
be the remedy for both. Therefore, non-attachment, which destroys the powerful
attachment, is also included in equanimity. Just as there is a powerful army, if
a powerful person is destroyed in it, then it is not difficult to destroy
others; similarly, non-attachment is the main reason for the suppression of
attachment, which can be used to destroy aversion, etc., for the weak. What more
can be said! The remedy for non-attachment is explained. To awaken the feeling
of non-attachment, the yogi should take refuge in the emotions of non-
attachment. The names of those twelve emotions are as follows: 1. Anitya-bhavana
(impermanence), 2. Asharan-bhavana (helplessness), 3. Sansar-bhavana
(worldliness), 4. Ekatva-bhavana (oneness), 5. Anyatva-bhavana (otherness), 6.
Ashocha-bhavana (impurity), 7. Ashrava-bhavana (influx), 8. Sanvar-bhavana
(restriction), 9. Nirjara-bhavana (cessation), 10. Dharmasvakhyata-bhavana
(self-knowledge), 11. Lok-bhavana (worldliness), and 12. Bodhidurlabha-bhavana
(rarity of enlightenment). These are the twelve emotions. The nature of these 12
emotions will be explained in turn. ||55-56|| Among them, the nature of Anitya-
bhavana (impermanence) is explained first. ||383|| Yatpratastan madhyahne,
yanmadhyahne na tanishi | Nireekshyate bhave'smin hi!, padarthanaamanityata
||57|| ||384|| Shariram dehinam sarva-purusharth-nibandhanam | Prachand-
pavnodbhut-ghanaghan-vinashvaram ||58|| ||385|| Kallol-chapla lakshmee,
sangamaah swapnasannibhaah | Vatyavyatikarotokshiptatul-tulyam cha yauvanam
||59|| Meaning: What is seen in the morning is not seen at noon, and what is
seen at noon is not seen at night. Therefore, it is a pity that all things in
this world are impermanent. ||57|| This body of embodied beings is the basis of
all human endeavors. But it too is perishable like clouds driven away by a
strong wind. ||58|| 350

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 samabhAva kI mahimA 'bhAvanA kA svarUpa' yogazAstra caturtha prakAza zloka 55
se 59 | bhI bAra-bAra svecchA se sAmyAmRta rasa kA pAna karate haiN| gale meM
sarpa lipaTA ho yA kalpavRkSa ke puSpoM kI mAlA par3I | ho; phira bhI jise
aprIti yA prIti nahIM hotI, vahI samatA kA dhanI hai| sAmya koI gUr3ha padArtha
yA kisI AcArya dvArA deya muSTi rUpa upadeza athavA aura kucha bhI nahIM hai|
bAlaka ho yA paMDita; donoM ke bhavaroga miTAne ke lie sAmya ekatIsarI auSadhi
hai| zAMta yogI janoM kA yaha atyaMta krUra karma haiM, ki ve sAmya-zastra se
rAgAdi-parivAra ko naSTa karate haiM yaha vyaMgAtmaka vAkya hai| samabhAva kA
yaha parama prabhAva tuma bhI prApta karo! jo pApiyoM ko bhI kSaNabhara meM
paramasthAna prApta karAtA hai| usI samabhAva kI upasthiti meM ratnatraya kI
saphalatA hai, kintu usake abhAva meM niSphalatA hai| aise mahAbalavAna usa
samabhAva ko namaskAra ho! samasta zAstroM aura unake arthoM kA avagAhana karane
ke bAda uccasvara se cillA-cillAkara hama tumheM kahate haiM ki isa loka meM
athavA paraloka meM apane ko yA dUsaroM ko sAmya ke binA aura koI sukha dene
vAlA nahIM hai| upasarga ke avasara para yA mRtyu ke samaya isa kAlocita sAmya
ke binA aura koI upAya nahIM hai, zAMti kaa| rAga-dveSa Adi zatruoM kA nAza
karane meM nipuNa aneka prANiyoM ne sAmma-sAmrAjya-lakSmI kA upabhoga karake
zAzvata zubhagati aura uttama padavI prApta kI hai| isa kAraNa isa manuSyajanma
ko saphala karane kA icchuka sAdhaka niHsIma sukhasamUha se paripUrNa isa sAmya-
samabhAva ko prApta karane meM pramAda na kareM  /  / 54 /  /  yahAM zaMkA hotI
hai ki 'sabhI doSoM ke nivAraNa kA kAraNa samatva hai, ise jAnakara to hameM
prasannatA hai, kintu yadi usa sAmya kA pratirodhI koI upAya ho aura usa upAya
ke nivAraNa kA bhI dUsarA upAya ho, evaM use hama sahajabhAva se kara sakeM, to
hama nirAkAMkSa hokara AnaMda kA anubhava kara skeNge|' isakA samAdhAna mana meM
socakara do zlokoM meM karate haiM  / 381 /  sAmyaM syAnnirmamatvena, tatkRte
bhAvanAH zrayet  /  anityatAmazaraNaM, bhavamekatvamanyatAm  /  / 55 /  /   /
382 /  azaucamAzravavidhiM, saMvaraM karmanirjarAm  /  dharmasvAkhyAtatAM lokaM,
dvAdazI bodhibhAvanAm  // 56 //  artha :- samatA kI prApti nirmamatva se hotI
hai, aura nirmamatva ko pAne ke lie bAraha bhAvanAoM kA Azraya krnaa| ve bhAvanA
isa prakAra hai  /  / 55-56 /  /  vyAkhyA :- pUrvokta sAmya mamatvarahita hone
se hotA hai| prazna hotA hai ki sAmya aura nirmamatva meM kyA aMtara hai? uttara
dete haiM-sAmya rAga aura dveSa ina donoM kA virodhI-pratipakSabhUta hai; jabaki
nirmamatva sirpha rAga kA virodhI hai| isalie donoM ko rokane ke lie sAmya kahA
hai| ataH zaktizAlI rAga kA vinAza karane vAlA nirmamatva upAya bhI sAmya meM
samAviSTa ho jAtA hai| jaise balavAn sainya ho usameM kisI balavAn kA vinAza ho
gayA ho to, dUsaroM kA bhI vinAza karane meM kaThinatA nahIM hotI; isI taraha
saMga ke nigraha kA pradhAna hetu nirmamatva hai, vahI hInabala vAle dveSAdi ke
vinAza ke lie ho sakatA hai| adhika kyA kaheM! nirmamatva kA upAya batAte haiN|
nirmamatvabhAva jAgRta karane ke lie yogI ko anuprekSAoM bhAvanAoM kA AlaMbana
lenA caahie| una bAraha bhAvanAoM ke nAma isa prakAra hai-1. anityabhAvanA, 2.
azaraNabhAvanA, 3. saMsArabhAvanA, 4. ekatvabhAvanA, 5. anyatvabhAvanA, 6.
azaucabhAvanA, 7. AzravabhAvanA, 8. saMvara bhAvanA, 9. nirjarAbhAvanA, 10.
dharmasvAkhyAta-bhAvanA, 11. loka-bhAvanA aura 12. bodhidurlbhbhaavnaa| ye
bAraha bhAvanAe~ hai| ina 12 bhAvanAoM kA svarUpa kramazaH batAyA jAyegA  /  /
55-56 /  /  inameM sarvaprathama anitya-bhAvanA kA svarUpa kahate haiN|383|
yatprAtastana madhyAhne, yanmadhyAhne na tanizi  /  nirIkSyate bhave'smin hI!,
padArthAnAmanityatA  // 57 /  /   / 384 /  zarIraM dehinAM sarva-puruSArtha-
nibandhanam  /  pracaNDa-pavanodbhUta-ghanAghana-vinazvaram  /  / 58 //   / 385
/  kallola-capalA lakSmIH, saGgamAH svapnasannibhAH  /  vAtyA-
vyatikarotkSiptatUla-tulyaM ca yauvnm||59|| artha :- prAtaHkAla jo dikhAI detA
hai, vaha madhyAhna meM nahIM dikhAyI detA aura madhyAhna meM jo dRSTigocara
hotA hai; vaha rAta meM najara nahIM aataa| isalie aphasosa hai isa saMsAra meM
samasta padArtha anitya hai  // 57 /  /  dehadhAriyoM kA yaha zarIra samasta
puruSArthoM kA AdhAra hai| paraMtu vaha bhI pracaMDavAyu se ur3Aye gaye bAdaloM
ke samAna vinazvara hai  // 58 /  /  350

Page #373 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Nature of Impermanence  **Verse 59:**   Wealth is as fleeting as the
waves of the ocean; the company of loved ones is as ephemeral as a dream; and
youth is as unstable as the cotton wool of the silk-cotton tree blown away by a
whirlwind.  **Explanation:**   There are some inner verses related to this.
Their meaning is presented here:   - Afflictions come from all directions, both
to oneself and to others.   - The living being is suffering, trapped in the
teeth-like mechanism of Yama (the god of death).   - The body of a Chakravarti
(universal monarch), Indra (king of the gods), etc., is like a thunderbolt. But
even they are subject to impermanence. What then can be said of those who have a
body as empty as the core of a banana?   - One who desires to dwell in a body
that is empty, is like one who desires to dwell in a body made of dry, withered
leaves.   - No mantra, tantra, or medicine can save the body-bearer who is
situated in the mouth of the death-like disease.   - As lifespan increases, the
living being is first overtaken by old age, and then Yama quickly makes him his
food.   - Shame on those living beings who are born! Knowing full well that they
are subject to Yama, how can they even take a single morsel of food? What then
can be said of their actions?   - Just as a bubble arises in water and is
immediately destroyed, so too the body of a living being is born and destroyed
in an instant.   - Whether rich or poor, king or pauper, learned or ignorant,
virtuous or wicked, Yama is the equal destroyer of all. He has no partiality for
virtues, nor hatred for vices.   - Just as a forest fire burns and consumes the
entire forest, so too Yama destroys all beings.   - Even when fascinated by the
power of weapons, one cannot doubt that this body can be made safe by any means.
- Even he who is capable of making Mount Meru his staff and the earth his
umbrella, is unable to save himself or others from the jaws of death.   - No
intelligent human being, from an ant to Indra, will ever say, "I will cheat
death, who is under the rule of Yama."   - And O wise one! Understand that youth
is also impermanent, for old age, which steals strength and beauty, makes it
decrepit.   - Those women who desired your company in your youth, will spit on
you in your old age and will not even come near you.   - The wealth that the
rich have earned with great effort and kept safe without spending, is also
destroyed in an instant.   - The wise have compared wealth to a water bubble or
the light of lightning! Just as these things are destroyed in the blink of an
eye, so too is wealth destroyed.   - Separation is always associated with the
company of friends, relatives, and loved ones.   - Thus, one who constantly
contemplates impermanence does not grieve at the death of a son.   - Only the
foolish man, who is possessed by the ghost of permanence, weeps when an earthen
pot breaks.   - Therefore, in this world, not only the body, wealth, youth, or
relatives of the body-bearers are impermanent, but the entire universe, both
conscious and unconscious, is impermanent.   - The saints say: Only Dharma
(righteousness) is permanent.  **Verse 60:**   Thus, with a steady mind, one
should contemplate the impermanent nature of the world every moment, to awaken
the feeling of detachment, which is like a mantra to subdue the serpent of
desire.  **Verse 61:**   Alas! When even Indra, Upendra (Vishnu), Vasudeva
(Krishna), Chakravarti, and other humans become subject to death, who then is
the refuge of living beings in the face of death's terror? Even Indra cannot
protect himself at the time of death.  **Verse 62:**   Even in the presence of
father, mother, sister, brother, and son, karma takes the living being, devoid
of refuge, to the abode of Yama, the four-gated realm. No one can protect him at
that time. In reality, the living being goes to various realms and births in the
cycle of existence, according to his karma.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 anitya bhAvanA kA svarUpa yogazAstra caturtha prakAza zloka 59 se 62 lakSmI
samudra kI taraMgoM ke samAna capala hai; priyajanoM ke saMyoga svapna ke samAna
kSaNika hai aura yauvana vAtyAcakra (AMdhI) se ur3AI gayI Aka kI ruI ke samAna
asthira hai  /  / 59 /  /  vyAkhyA :- isake saMbaMdha meM kucha AMtarazloka hai|
unakA bhAvArtha prastuta karate haiM-apane para athavA dUsaroM para sabhI dizAoM
se ApattiyA~ AyA hI karatI hai| jIva yamarAja ke dAMta rUpI yaMtra meM par3A huA
kaSTa se jI rahA hai| cakravartI, iMdra Adi kA zarIra vajra ke samAna hai|
paraMtu usake sAtha bhI anityatA lagI hai to phira kele ke garbha ke samAna
niHsAra zarIra vAloM kA kyA kahanA? jo niHsAra zarIra meM rahanA cAhatA hai|
mAno vaha jIrNa sUkhe pattoM se bane hue puruSa ke zarIra meM rahanA cAhatA hai|
mRtyu rUpI vyAdha ke mukha-koTara meM sthita zarIradhArI ko bacAne meM koI bhI
mantra, taMtra yA auSadhi samartha nahIM hai| AyuSya kI vRddhi hone ke sAtha
jIva ko pahale vRddhAvasthA aura bAda meM yamarAja apanA grAsa banAne kI jaldI
karatA hai| dhikkAra ho, janmadhArI jIvoM ko; jo yaha bhalIbhAMti jAnate haiM ki
yaha jIva yamarAja ke adhIna hai, phira ve AhAra kA eka bhI kaura kaise le
sakate haiM! phira Ayukarma kI to bAta hI kyA kaheM? jaise pAnI meM bulabulA
paidA hokara turaMta hI naSTa ho jAtA hai, usI prakAra jIva kA zarIra utpanna
hokara kSaNabhara meM vinaSTa ho jAtA hai| dhanavAna ho yA daridra, rAjA ho yA
raMka, paMDita ho yA mUrkha sajjana ho yA durjana, yamarAja saba ko eka samAna
haraNa karane vAlA hai| usameM guNoM ke prati udAratA nahIM hai; doSoM ke prati
dveSa nahIM hai| jaise dAvAgni sAre jaMgala ko jalAkara bhasma kara detI hai|
vaise hI yamarAja saba prANiyoM ko naSTa kara detA hai| kuzAstra para mohita
hone para bhI koI aisI zaMkA nahIM kara sakatA ki kisI bhI upAya se yaha kAyA
nirApada raha ske| jo meruparvata ko daMDa aura pRthvI ko chatra rUpa banAne meM
samartha hai, vaha bhI apane ko yA dUsaroM ko mRtyu ke mukha se bacAne meM
asamartha hai| cIMTI se lekara devendra taka koI bhI samajhadAra manuSya kabhI
aisA nahIM kahegA ki 'maiM yamarAja ke zAsana meM kAla ko Thaga lUMgA aura he
buddhizAlI! yauvana ko bhI anitya hI samajho; kyoMki bala aura rUpa kA haraNa
karane vAlA bur3hApA use jarjarita kara detA hai| yauvanavaya meM jo kAminiyA~
kAma kI icchA se tumhArI abhilASA karatI thI, ve vRddhAvasthA meM tuma para
thUkatI hai, tumhAre pAsa bhI nahIM phttktii| jina dhanavAnoM ne bahuta hI
klezapUrvaka dhana kamAyA, use binA kharca kiye surakSita rakhA, unakA vaha
dhana bhI kSaNabhara meM hI naSTa ho jAtA hai| vidvAnoM ne dhana ko pAnI ke
bulabule kI athavA bijalI ke prakAza kI upamA dI hai! jaise ye cIjeM dekhate hI
dekhate naSTa ho jAtI hai, vaise hI dhana naSTa ho jAtA hai| mitroM, baMdhuoM
aura sagesaMbaMdhiyoM ke saMyoga ke sAtha bhI viyoga jur3A huA hai| isa prakAra
sadA anityatA kA vicAra karane vAlA putra kI mRtyu ke samaya zoka nahIM krtaa|
nityatA ke graha-bhUta se grasta mUr3ha manuSya hI miTTI kA bartana TUTane para
rotA hai| isalie isa jagat meM kevala | dehadhAriyoM kA zarIra, dhana, yauvana
yA baMdhu-bAMdhava hI anitya nahIM hai, apitu sacetana-acetana sArA hI vizva
anitya hai| saMtapuruSa kahate haiM-ekamAtra dharma hI nitya hai||57-59|| aba
isa anityabhAvanA kA upasaMhAra karate hue kahate haiN|386| ityanityaM
jagadvRttaM, sthiracittaH pratikSaNam  /  tRSNAkRSNAhimantrAya, nirmamatvAya
cintayet  // 60 //  artha :- isa prakAra sthiracitta se pratikSaNa tRSNA rUpI
kAle bhujaMga ko vaza karane meM maMtra ke samAna nirmamatvabhAva ko jagAne ke
lie jagat ke anitya svarUpa kA ciMtana karanA cAhie  /  / 6 /  /  aba
azaraNabhAvanA ke saMbaMdha meM kahate haiN|387| indropendrAdayo'pyete,
yanmRtyoryAnti gocaram  /  aho tadantakAtake, kaH zaraNya shriirinnaam?||61||
artha :- aho! jaba iMdra, upendra Adi deva, vAsudeva, cakravartI Adi manuSya bhI
mRtyu kA viSaya bana jAte haiM; taba mRtyu ke AtaMka ke samaya jIvoM ko zaraNa
dene vAlA kauna hai? mRtyu ke samaya iMdra kI bhI koI rakSA nahIM kara sakatA
// 61 /   / 388 /  piturmAtuH svasurdhAtustanayAnAM ca pazyatAm  /  atrANo
nIyate jantuH, karmabhiryamasadmani  // 62 //  _ artha :- pitA, mAtA, bahana,
bhAI aura putra Adi svajanoM ke dekhate hI dekhate karma atrANa-zaraNavihIna
prANI ko cAragati rUpa yamarAja ke sadana meM le jAte haiN| usa samaya koI bhI
usakI rakSA nahIM kara sktaa| vAstava meM jIva apane karmAnusAra cartugati rUpa
saMsAra meM vividha gatiyoM va yoniyoM meM jAtA hai  /  / 2 /  /  351

Page #374 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  The Feeling of Helplessness and the Nature of the World  **Fourth Light of
Yoga Shastra, Verses 63 to 65**  **Meaning:**  **389.** Those with foolish minds
grieve for their loved ones, being led to the door of death by their own
actions. But they do not grieve for themselves, thinking foolishly, "We too will
one day become victims of death." || 63 ||  Now we conclude the feeling of
helplessness.  **390.** In this world, burning with the blazing flames of the
fire of sorrow, there is no refuge for the embodied being, like a fawn in the
forest. || 64 ||  **Meaning:** When a lion attacks in the forest, no one can
save the fawn; similarly, in this world, burning with the blazing, fierce flames
of the fire of sorrow, there is no one to save the being. || 64 ||
**Explanation:** This is the nature of the feeling of helplessness! In this
regard, the meaning of some inner verses is presented - Experts in Ashtanga
Ayurveda, medicines, or the Mrityunjaya mantra, none can save from death. There
is a cage of naked swords all around, and the king is sitting safely surrounded
by the four-armed army, yet the servants of Yama forcibly drag him away like a
pauper. In the middle of a reservoir, there was a cage built on top of a pillar,
in which a king had kept his beloved son safe from death, but even from there,
death dragged him away. Then what to say of others? Sagar Chakravarti had sixty
thousand sons; but those helpless sons were burnt to ashes like straw in an
instant by the blazing Dev. In front of Skanda Acharya's eyes, his five hundred
disciples were being ground to death by the Yama-like guardian priest in a mill,
and there was no one to give them refuge. Just as an animal does not know how to
counteract death, so too does a scholar not know how to counteract death. Shame
on such foolishness! There have been such powerful men in the world who have
made the whole world free from thorns with the strength of their swords, but
those very warriors would tremble with fear and bite their tongues when they saw
Yama's furrowed brow. Indra, who lovingly embraced him and seated him on half
his throne, even the king Shrenik became helpless in the end. Such a plight
befell him that he could not even be heard. The holy monks who walked on the
edge of a sword, who followed the great vows, who had not committed any sin in
their lives, were also unable to counteract death. In reality, this world is
helpless, chaotic, orphaned, leaderless, no one can counteract death in it. It
is becoming Yama's morsel. Dharma Kriya is considered to be a form of
counteraction, but even that is not a counteraction to death. It is considered
to be the giver of good fortune or the doer of good fortune. Thus, in all three
worlds, the terrible Yama, without fear, does not tire of devouring the entire
world, filled with all beings from Brahma to ants. It is a pity that the whole
world is troubled by this. Therefore, take refuge in Dharma. Thus, the feeling
of helplessness is described. || 64 ||  Now the nature of the world is explained
in three verses.  **391.** The Vedic scholar, the scavenger, the master, the
creator Brahma, and the worm, all are the same. In this world, like a play, the
worldly being acts like an actor! || 65 ||  **Meaning:** Alas, in this world,
which is like a playhouse, the worldly being acts like an actor, performing
various acts. Sometimes he becomes a Vedic scholar, sometimes a scavenger,
sometimes a servant, sometimes the creator Brahma, and sometimes a worm. || 65
||  **Meaning:** Just as a playwright comes on stage in different costumes, so
too does the worldly being, due to the different karmic titles, takes on various
bodies and comes on the stage of the world and acts out his part. The one who
was a Vedic Brahmin, becomes a scavenger according to his karma, and the one who
was a master, is born as a servant after death.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 azaraNa evaM saMsAra bhAvanA yogazAstra caturtha prakAza zloka 63 se 65 artha :
| | 389  /  zocanti svajanAnantaM, nIyamAnAn svakarmabhiH  /  neSyamANa tu
zocanti, nAtmAnaM mUDhabuddhayaH  // 63 //  mUr3habuddhi loga apane karmoM ke
dvArA mRtyu ke dvAra para le jAye jAte hue svajanoM ke lie zoka karate haiM;
paraMtu ve mUrkha yoM socakara apane liye zoka nahIM karate ki hama bhI bhaviSya
meM eka dina mauta kA zikAra bana jAyeMge || 63|| aba azaraNabhAvanA kA
upasaMhAra karate haiM  /  390 /  saMsAre duHkhadAvAgni- jvalajjvAlAkarAlite  /
vane mRgArbhakasyeva, zaraNaM nAsti dehinaH ||64|| artha :- vana meM siMha kA
AkramaNa hone para hirane ke bacce ko koI bhI bacA nahIM sakatA; isI prakAra
duHkha rUpI dAvAgni kI jAjvalyamAna bhISaNa jvAlAoM se jalate hue saMsAra meM
jIva ko bacAne vAlA koI nahIM hai  /  /  64  /  /  vyAkhyA :- yaha hai azaraNa
bhAvanA kA svarUpa! isa saMbaMdha meM kucha AMtarazloko kA bhAvArtha prastuta
hai - aSTAMga Ayurveda ke vizeSajJa, auSadha yA mRtyuMjaya Adi maMtra koI bhI
mRtyu se bacA nahIM skte| cAroM ora se naMgI talavAroM kA pIMjarA ho aura usameM
cAro aura caturaMginI senA se ghirA huA rAjA surakSita baiThA ho, phira bhI yama
ke sevaka use | raMka ke samAna jabarana khIMca le jAte hai jalAzaya ke bIcobIca
banAye hue staMbha ke uparI bhAga meM eka pIMjarA thA, usameM | eka rAjA ne
apane priya putra ko mRtyu se bacAne ke lie surakSita rakhA thA, kintu vahAM se
bhI mRtyu khIMcakara le gayI to phira dUsaroM kA to kahanA hI kyA ? sagara
cakravartI ke sATha hajAra putra the; lekina una zaraNa rahita putroM ko
jvalanaprabha | deva ne kSaNabhara meM tinake kI taraha ekadama jalAkara bhasma
kara diyA  /  skandAcArya kI AMkhoM ke sAmane hI unake pAMcasau | ziSyoM ko
yamarAja tulya pAlaka purohita kolhU meM pIsakara mAra rahA thA, taba unakA
zaraNadAtA koI bhI nahIM huaa| jaise | pazu mRtyu ke pratIkAra kA upAya nahIM
jAnatA, usI prakAra paMDita bhI mRtyu ke pratIkAra kA upAya nahIM jAnatA  /
dhikkAra hai, aisI mUr3hatA ko ! duniyA meM aise-aise parAkramI puruSa hue haiM,
jinhoMne apanI talavAra ke bala para sArI duniyA~ ko | niSkaMTaka banA diyA thA,
lekina ve hI zUravIra yamarAja kI tanI huI bhrakuTi dekhakara bhaya se dAMtoM
tale aMgulI dabA lete | the| iMdra bhI jise sneha pUrvaka AliMgana karake apane
Adhe Asana para biThAte the, vaha zreNika rAjA bhI aMtima samaya meM | zaraNa
rahita ho gayA thaa| aisI durdazA ho gayI ki sunI bhI na jA ske| talavAra kI
dhAra para calane ke samAna mahAvratoM | kA pAlana karane vAle pavitra muni;
jinhoMne apane jIvana meM jarA bhI pApakarma nahIM kiyA; ve bhI mRtyu kA
pratIkAra karane meM asamartha rhe| vAstava meM yaha saMsAra azaraNa rUpa hai,
arAjaka hai, anAtha hai, anAyaka hai, isameM mRtyu kA koI bhI pratIkAra nahIM
kara sktaa| yaha yamarAja kA kaura bana rahA hai dharma kriyA to pratIkAra rUpa
mAnI jAtI hai magara vaha bhI | mRtyu kA pratIkAra nahIM hai vaha zubhagati kI
dAtA yA zubhagati kI kartA mAnI jAtI hai| isa prakAra tInoM lokoM meM bhayaMkara
| yamarAja bedhar3aka hokara brahmA se lekara cIMTI taka ke tamAma jIvoM se
paripUrNa samagra jagat ko kavalita karane se nahIM | thakatA  /  kheda hai ki
sArA jagat isase parezAna ho rahA hai| ataH dharma kI zaraNa svIkAra kro| isa
prakAra azaraNabhAvanA kA varNana kiyA || 64 //  aba tIna zlokoM meM saMsAra
bhAvanA kA svarUpa batAte haiM | | 391  /  zrotiyaH zvapacaH svAmI, pattirbrahmA
kRmizca saH  /  saMsAre nATye naTavat, saMsArI hanta ! ceSTate ||65|| artha :-
aphasosa hai, isa saMsAra rUpI nATyazAlA meM naTa kI taraha saMsArI jIva
vibhinna ceSTAe~ karatA hai| kabhI vedapAThI zrotriya banatA hai, kabhI cAMDAla,
kabhI sevaka, kabhI prajApati (brahmA) banatA aura kabhI kIr3A banatA hai ||65||
bhAvArtha :jaise nATakakAra bhinna-bhinna veSa badalakara nATyamaMca para AtA
hai, vaise hI saMsArI jIva bhI vicitra karma |rUpI upAdhi ke kAraNa vividha
zarIroM ko dhAraNa karake saMsAra ke raMgamaMca para AtA hai aura nATaka kA
pArTa adA karatA | hai| jo vedagAmI brAhmaNa thA, vahI karmAnusAra cAMDAla
banatA hai aura jo svAmI thA, vaha marakara sevaka ke rUpa meM paidA hotA 352

Page #375 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The world is a strange place, full of suffering and the cycle of rebirth.  The
fourth chapter of the Yoga Shastra, verses 66 and 67, tell us that even
Prajapati, the creator, was born as an insect.  This is a testament to the
strange nature of the world.  But from the perspective of the soul, this is not
its true form. ||65||  392.  The soul, bound by karma, wanders through all the
realms of existence, like a tenant in a rented house.  It enters and leaves each
realm, never staying in one place for long. ||66||  Meaning:  The soul is born
and dies in all realms of existence.  From the one-sense beings to the five-
sense beings, there is no realm in the 84 lakh yonis of this world that the soul
has not experienced.  Just as a householder rents a hut and leaves it when he no
longer needs it, so too does the soul, bound by karma, take on a body for a
time, but then leaves it after experiencing its karma and takes on another.  In
time, it leaves that realm as well, never staying in one place for long. ||66||
392.  There is not a single speck of space in the entire universe that has not
been touched by the soul, in its various forms, as it is born and dies, driven
by its karma. ||67||  Explanation:  There are two types of space:  loka-akasha
and a-loka-akasha.  Loka-akasha is the space where the six substances of dharma-
stikaya, adharma-stikaya, akasha, kala, pudgala, and jiva are present.  A-loka-
akasha is the space where these substances are not present.  It is said that the
realm where the substances of dharma-stikaya, etc., are present is called loka,
and the realm where they are not present is called a-loka.  The soul, in its
various forms, from the one-sense beings to the five-sense beings, is born and
dies according to its karma.  There is no intervention from God or any other
force.  Other philosophers have said that the ignorant soul is unable to
experience the fruits of its karma, which are happiness and suffering, and
therefore it is guided by God to heaven or hell.  But if we accept the
intervention of God and the independence of karma, then the diverse forms of the
universe would not exist.  And if we accept that these forms are dependent on
karma, then God would be powerless and ineffective.  Therefore, karma is the
driving force behind the soul's journey to heaven, hell, and other realms.
There is no need to bring God into the equation.  As we have said in the
Vitaragastotra, if we accept God as the one who makes us experience the fruits
of our karma, then he would not be independent, like us.  And if we accept that
the diversity of the world is due to karma, then what is the purpose of bringing
in a powerless (impotent) God?  Here are some of the inner meanings of these
verses:  The suffering of hell:  The soul, bound by karma, suffers in the realms
of hell, animal life, human life, and the gods.  Of these, the realm of hell is
where the soul experiences the most suffering.  There are four types of hell:
the first three are characterized by heat, the fourth by both heat and cold, and
the last three by cold.  The suffering of hell is determined by the location of
the hell.  In the hells where there is both heat and cold, if a mountain of iron
were to fall, it would melt before it reached the ground, or it would freeze or
shatter.  The beings in hell constantly torment each other, remembering their
past hatreds, or they are tormented by the righteous gods.  The beings in hell
experience all three types of suffering, and they dwell on the earth of hell.
The beings in hell are born in the womb of a pot, and then the righteous asuras
pull them out through a small hole, like a needle through a hole.  Just as a
washerman twists clothes on a stone, so too do the righteous asuras twist the
limbs of the beings in hell on a stone with sharp thorns.  Just as a piece of
wood is split with an axe, so too are the beings in hell split with a terrible
axe.  Just as sesame seeds are ground in a mill, so too are the beings in hell
ground in a mill.  353

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 saMsAra bhAvanA, narakagati ke duHkha yogazAstra caturtha prakAza zloka 66 se
67 hai, jo prajApati thA, vaha kITa ke rUpa janma letA hai| Azcarya hai saMsAra
kI isa vicitratA ko dekhakara ! paramArthadRSTi | se to usakA AtmA kA rUpa isa
prakAra kA nahIM hai  /  / 65  /  /   /  392 /  na yAti katamAM yoniM katamAM vA
na muJcati  /  saMsArI karmasambandhAdavakrayakuTImiva  // 66 || artha :-
saMsAra meM paribhramaNa karatA huA jIva karma ke saMyoga se kirAye kI kuTiyA ke
samAna kisa yoni meM nahIM jAtA aura kisa yoni ko nahIM chor3atA ? ||66  /  /
bhAvArtha :- matalaba yaha hai ki jIva samasta yoniyoM meM janma letA hai aura
maratA hai| isa saMsAra meM ekendriya se | paMcendriya taka kI 84 lAkha
jIvayoniyoM meM se aisI koI yoni nahIM, jahAM saMsArI jIva na gayA ho athavA
jisa yoni ko na chor3A ho| jaise gRhastha kirAye para koI jhoMpar3I letA hai
aura jarUrata na hone para use chor3a detA hai, vaise hI saMsArIjIva ko karmoM
ke saMbaMdha se zarIra bhI kucha arse taka milatA hai, kintu karma bhogane ke
bAda usa yoni ko chor3a | detA hai aura dUsarI yoni grahaNa kara letA hai|
samaya pAkara usa yoni ko bhI chor3a detA hai  /  kintu kisI eka niyata yoni |
ko pakar3e nahIM rakhatA  /   /  66  /  /  | | 392  /  samastalokAkAze'pi,
nAnArUpaiH svakarmataH  /  vAlAgramapi tannAsti, yanna spRSTaM zarIribhiH  // 67
//  artha :- samagra lokAkAza meM bAla kI noka para Aye, itanA sthAna bhI nahIM
bacA hai; jise zarIradhAriyoM ne apane vividha karmoM ke udaya se nAnA rUpa meM
janma-maraNa pAkara sparza na kiyA ho ||67|| vyAkhyA : - AkAza do prakAra kA
hai-lokAkAza aura alokaakaash| jisameM dharmAstikAya, adharmAstikAya, AkAza
kAla, pudgala aura jIva ye 6 dravya vidyamAna ho, use lokAkAza aura jisameM ye
na hoM, use alokAkAza kahate haiN| kahA bhI hai- dharmAstikAya Adi dravyoM kI
pravRtti jisa kSetra meM ho, usa dravyasahita kSetra ko loka aura isase viparIta
ho, use aloka kahate haiN| sUkSma, bAdara, sAdhAraNa aura pratyeka rUpa
ekendriya, dvIndriya, trIndriya, caturindriya evaM | paMcendriya Adi bhinna-
bhinna iMdriyoM vAle jIvoM meM saMsArIjIva apane-apane karmAnusAra svataH janma-
maraNa karate rahate haiM; | isameM Izvara Adi kI koI preraNA nahIM hai| anya
dArzanikoM ne kahA- yaha ajJAnI jIva apane sukha-duHkha rUpa karma-phala ko
svayaM bhogane meM asamartha hotA hai, isalie vaha Izvara se prerita hokara
svarga yA naraka meM jAtA hai| isameM Izvara kI preraNA | aura karmoM kI
phalanirapekSatA mAne to vizva ke ina vividha rUpoM kA svataMtra astitva hI
nahIM rhtaa| agara inheM karmasApekSa mAne to Izvara kI asvataMtratA tathA
niSphalatA siddha hotI hai| isalie svarganarakAdigamana meM preraka karma hI
hai; isake lie | Izvara ko bIca meM DAlane kI kyA AvazyakatA hai? jaisA ki
vItarAgastotra meM hamane kahA hai- karmaphala bhugavAne kI apekSA | se yadi
Izvara ko mAnA jAya to vaha hamAre samAna svataMtra siddha nahIM hogA aura karma
ke kAraNa se hI jagat kI vicitratA | mAne to phira niSkriya (napuMsaka) Izvara
ko bIca meM rakhane se kyA prayojana ? isa saMbaMdha meM yahAM kucha
AMtarazlokoM kA bhAvArtha prastuta karate haiM narakagati ke duHkha - karmoM ke
kAraNa pIr3ita saMsArI jIvoM ke lstai kA sthAna naraka, tiryaMca, manuSya aura
deva cAra | gati rUpa hai| inameM se jisameM sabase adhika prakaTa rUpa meM
duHkha bhoganA par3atA haiM, use narakagati kahate haiN| narakAta hai| pahale ke
tIna narakoM meM uSNavedanA hotI hai| cauthe naraka meM zItoSNa vedanA aura zeSa
tIna narakoM meM zItavedanA hotI | hai| isa prakAra narakajIvoM ko kSetra ke
anusAra vedanA (duHkha) hotI hai| jahAM uSNa aura zIta vedanA hotI hai, una
narakoM meM yadi lohe kA parvata TUTakara par3e to nIce dharatI taka pahuMcane
se pahale hI vaha pighala jAtA hai, athavA jama jAtA hai yA bikhara jAtA hai|
naraka ke jIva paraspara pichale vairabhAva ko kureda- kuredakara eka dUsare ko
duHkhI karate rahate haiM athavA | paramAdhArmika devoM dvArA unheM duHkha
milatA hai| nArakajIva tInoM prakAra ke duHkhoM ko bArabAra bhogatA huA nArakIya
pRthvI | para nivAsa karatA hai| nArakajIva kuMbhIpAka meM utpanna hotA hai,
phira paramAdhArmika asura choTe-se surAkha ke samAna dvAra meM se lohe kI salAI
kI taraha jabardastI khIMcakara use bAhara nikAlate haiN| jaise dhobI zilA para
kapar3e ko pachAr3atA hai, vaise hI paramAdhArmika nArakIyajIvoM ke hAthapaira
Adi pakar3akara vajrayukta kAMToM vAlI zilA para use pachAr3ate haiN| jaise
karauta sI lakar3I cIrI jAtI hai, vaise hI nArakoM ko asura bhayaMkara karauta
se cIrate haiN| jaise kolhU meM tila pIse jAte 353

Page #376 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Sufferings of the Tiryanchagati  **The Sufferings of the Narakas:**  Just
as described in the Yoga Shastra, Chapter 4, verse 67, the Narakas are ground in
a mill. When they are thirsty, they are thrown into the Vaitarani River, which
is filled with boiling hot molten glass or copper. When they want to escape the
sun, they are taken to the shade of the Asivan tree, where leaves as sharp as
swords fall on them, cutting their bodies into hundreds of pieces, each as small
as a sesame seed. They are reminded of their past lives, where they engaged in
sexual misconduct with other people's wives, and are forced to embrace the
branches of the Salmali tree, which are covered in sharp thorns like vajras, and
hot iron dolls. They are reminded of the meat they ate in their past lives, and
are fed with their own flesh, cut piece by piece. They are reminded of their
past lives where they drank alcohol, and are forced to drink boiling hot molten
glass. They are roasted over fire, thrown like clubs, pierced with sharp spears,
cooked in a pot, fried in boiling oil, roasted like chickpeas on hot sand, and
subjected to thousands of other tortures. These sinful Narakas suffer endlessly
in hell, crying and lamenting. Cruel and violent birds like herons and crows
tear their bodies apart with their beaks. Their eyes and other senses are pulled
out. Their limbs, separated from their bodies, rejoin. In this way, the Narakas
suffer great pain and are deprived of even a shred of happiness. They remain in
hell for a long time, ranging from ten thousand years to thirty-three Sagaropama
years.  **The Sufferings of the Tiryanchagati:**  When a being is born into the
Tiryanchagati, many of them take the form of a one-sense being, with a body made
of earth. They are dug up with tools like ploughs, crushed under the feet of
elephants and horses, drenched in water, burned by fire, tormented by salt,
alkali, urine, and other corrosive substances, destroyed in boiling water, baked
in the ovens of potters, cooked into pots, bricks, and other objects, turned
into mud, and baked into mud bricks. They are heated in fire when gold is
melted, and they are struck by hard stones. They are cut by the swift currents
of rivers, and they fall apart as mountains. When they are born as an Apkayik,
they are scorched by the sun's rays, frozen into ice, dried in the dust, and die
when they are mixed with various types of water, boiled in pots, or drunk by
thirsty beings. The Agnicayik beings are killed by water and other substances,
injured by thunderbolts, and burned by fuel and other things. They suffer pain
in the form of being burned, injured, and killed. The Vayukayik beings are
killed by fans and other things, and they die constantly due to the combination
of cold and hot substances. They are tormented by winds from all directions,
including the winds from the mouth, nose, and other parts of the body. They are
eaten by snakes and other creatures. The Vanaspatikayik beings are killed by ten
types of things: piercing, digestion by fire, friction, being cut, beaten, being
sprinkled with alkali, being burned with fire, being fried in boiling oil and
water, being burned to ashes by fire, being uprooted by the swift currents of
rivers, being broken by storms, and being eaten by other beings. All types of
plants are food for all beings. They are constantly tormented by all types of
weapons. The two-sense beings suffer from cold, heat, rain, fire, and other
things. They are crushed underfoot, eaten by chickens and other birds, swallowed
with water, killed by shells, squeezed by leeches, and killed by medicines that
are given to kill worms in the stomach. The three-sense beings, such as lice,
bedbugs, and fleas, are crushed, pressed, and killed by ants, brooms, and other
things. They are trapped in mud, burned by the sun or hot water, and crushed by
mats and other things. The four-sense beings, such as flies, mosquitoes, and
other creatures, are destroyed by many causes. People who collect honey from
bees and wasps throw stones and other things at them. They are killed by fans
and other things. Flies, spiders, and other creatures are eaten by lizards.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 tiryaMcagati ke duHkha yogazAstra caturtha prakAza zloka 67 haiM, vaise hI
nArakoM ko kolhU meM pIsA jAtA hai| jaba vaha pyAsa se pIr3ita hotA hai to
becAre ko garmAgarma ubalate hue zIze yA tAMbe ke rasa vAlI vaitaraNI nadI meM
bahAte haiN| jaba dhUpa se nAraka chAyA meM jAnA cAhatA hai to use asivana kI
chAyA meM pahuMcAyA jAtA hai; jisase usakI chAyA meM khar3e rahane para usa para
talavAra kI dhAra ke samAna patte girate haiM, jinase tila ke samAna usake
zarIra ke saiMkar3oM Tukar3e ho jAte haiN| pUrvajanma meM parastrI ke sAtha kI
huI ramaNakrIr3A yAda dilAkara asura use vajra ke samAna tIkhe kAMToM vAle
zAlmalivRkSa kI DAlI ke sAtha tathA tapAI huI lohe kI putalI ke sAtha AliMgana
karAte haiN| pUrvajanma meM khAye hue mAMsa kI bAta yAda dilAkara usake hI aMgoM
se mAMsa kATa-kATakara use khilAte haiM tathA madirApAna kA smaraNa karA kara
garmAgarma zIse kA rasa pilAte haiN| Aga para sekanA, DaMDe kI taraha uchAlanA,
teja zUlI se bIMdhanA, kuMbhIpAka meM pakAnA, ubalate hue tela meM talanA, garma
reta para cane ke samAna bhunanA ityAdi hajAroM kisma kI yAtanAe~ pApAtmA
nArakIya jIva paravaza hokara naraka meM satata vilApa karate hue sahate haiM;
rorokara duHkha bhogate haiN| bagule, kaMka Adi krUra hiMsaka pakSI coMcoM se
unake zarIra ko chinnabhinna kara dete haiN| AMkha Adi iMdriyA~ khIMcakara
nikAla lete haiN| zarIra se pRthak hue unake avayava punaH jur3a jAte haiN| isa
prakAra nArakIya jIva mahAduHkha se pIr3ita aura sukha ke lezamAtra anubhava se
vaMcita hokara lagAtAra daza hajAra varSa se lekara taitIsa sAgaropama ke laMbe
samaya taka naraka meM rahate haiN| tiryaMcagati ke duHkha - tiryaMcagati milane
para kitane hI jIva ekendriya meM pRthvIkAya kA rUpa prApta karate haiM, jisameM
hala Adi zastra se use khodA jAtA hai| hAthI-ghor3e Adi ke pairoM dvArA use
kucalA jAtA hai, jalapravAha se bhIganA par3atA hai, dAvAgni se jalanA par3atA
hai, namaka, khAra, mUtrAdi kSAra jala vagairaha se vyathita honA, ubalate pAnI
meM naSTa honA, kumhAra Adi ke A~va meM pakanA, ghar3e, iMTa Adi ke rUpa meM
pakanA, kIcar3a bananA evaM miTTI kI kuMDI ke rUpa meM pakanA, sonA Adi galAte
samaya Aga meM tapanA paDatA hai tathA kaThora patthara kI coTa sahanI par3atI
hai. nadI ke teja dhAra se kaTa jAnA evaM parvatoM ke rUpa meM TUTakara giranA
par3atA hai| apakAyatva prApta karake sUraja kI garma kiraNoM meM tapanA, hima
banakara jama jAnA, dhUla meM sUkhanA, khAre, khaTTe Adi vividha jalajAti ke
paraspara ikaTThe hone para, bartana meM ubAlane para yA pyAse jIvoM dvArA jala
pI jAne para apakAyika jIvoM ko mRtyu kA sAmanA karanA par3atA hai| agnikAyika
jIvoM kA jala Adi se ghAta hotA hai; ghana Adi se coTa khAnA. Idhana Adi se
jalanA ityAdi rUpa meM agnikAya ko vedanA sahanI par3atI hai| vAyukAyika jIvoM
kA hanana paMkhe Adi se hotA hai, zIta, uSNa Adi dravyoM ke saMyoga se unakI
kSaNa-kSaNa meM mRtyu hotI hai, pUrva Adi vibhinna dizAoM kI sabhI havAe~
ikaTThI hone se vAyukAyika jIvoM kI virAdhanA hotI hai| muMha, nAka Adi kI havA
se bhI virAdhanA hotI hai. sarpa Adi dvArA vAya kA pAna kiyA jAtA hai| kaMda.
mala. phala. phala tvacA. gulma, gucchA, nIlaNa-phUlaNa Adi dasa prakAra ke
bhedana, agni meM pacana-pAcana, paraspara gharSaNa Adi se hotA hai| isI prakAra
sakhAne, pIlane, ghisane, kaTane, pITane, kSAra Adi DAlane bhar3abhUje Adi se
pUMjane, ubalate hue tela, pAnI Adi meM talane, dAvAnala se jalakara rAkha
banane, nadI kI teja dhArA se jar3a se ukhar3a jAne, AMdhI Adi se TUTa par3ane,
khAne vAle ke AhAra rUpa banane ityAdi rUpa meM bhI vanaspatikAyika jIvoM kA
ghAta hotA hai| sabhI prakAra kI vanaspati sabhI jIvoM kA bhojana rUpa banatI
hai| ise saba prakAra ke zastroM dvArA lagAtAra kleza hotA rahatA hai| dvIndriya
vAle jIvoM ko sardI, garmI, varSA, agni Adi kA kleza sahanA par3atA hai, kaiMcuA
pairoM se daba jAtA hai, murge Adi bhI khA jAte haiM, pore pAnI ke sAtha nigale
jAte haiM, zaMkha Adi mAre jAte haiM, jauMka nicor3I jAtI hai, peTa meM par3e
hue keMcue~ Adi ko auSadha se girAkara mArA jAtA hai| trindriya jIva jUM,
khaTamala, pissU Adi ko masala diyA jAtA hai, kaI zarIra se daba jAte hai, cIMTI
paira se daba jAtI hai yA jhADU Adi se saphAI karate samaya mara jAtI hai|
kIcar3a meM phaMsa jAtI hai| dhUpa yA garma pAnI meM jalanA par3atA hai| kuMthuA
Adi bArIka jIva Asana | Adi se dabakara mara jAte haiM, isa prakAra kI aneka
vedanAe~ aura mRtyu ke duHkha bhogane par3ate hai| caturindriya jIva makkhI,
macchara Adi aneka kAraNoM se naSTa ho jAte haiN| madhumakkhI, bhaure Adi kA
zahada grahaNa karane vAle loga DhelA Adi pheMkakara virAdhanA karate haiN|
paMkhe Adi se DAMsa, macchara vagairaha kA tAr3ana hotA hai| makkhI, makaur3oM
Adi ko chipakalI 354

Page #377 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Sorrows of Human and Divine Existence  **Chapter 4, Verse 67 of the Yoga
Shastra**  **The Sorrows of the Animal Realm:**  Goats and other animals are
eaten. Aquatic creatures with five senses often swallow each other. The saying
"fish swallowing fish" is well-known. In the ocean, large fish swallow small
fish. Fishermen catch fish in the water with nets, herons eat them, some skin
them, cook their flesh and eat it, others kill them for their fat. On land, weak
deer and other animals are eaten by strong, flesh-hungry lions, cheetahs,
wolves, etc. Hunters, poachers, those who enjoy hunting or are flesh-hungry or
fond of sport, inflict violence on many creatures. Poor land animals have to
endure hunger, thirst, cold, heat, carrying excessive loads, being beaten, and
being scolded with whips, goads, etc. They have to endure such pain. Birds that
fly in the sky, like parrots, pigeons, eagles, sparrows, partridges, etc., are
eaten by birds of prey, vultures, cats, etc. Flesh-hungry butchers, hunters,
etc., catch them using various methods, inflicting various kinds of torture, and
kill them. Poor animals are always afraid of water, fire, weapons, etc. They
often die bound and enslaved. How can we describe the many sorrows they
experience due to their own karmic bonds?  **The Sorrows of the Human Realm:**
In the human realm, a human born in an uncivilized land commits so many sins
that it is impossible to even describe them. Even those born in civilized lands,
many become Chandala, Mlechchha, Bhangi, butcher, prostitute, etc., and earn
many sins and experience sorrow. Even those born in the Aryan lineage, by acting
like uncivilized people, experience sorrow, poverty, and burn in the flames of
misfortune. Seeing others with more wealth and themselves with less, or feeling
resentment in their hearts due to being enslaved by others or working for them,
humans live in sorrow. Surrounded by sorrows like disease, old age, death, loss
of loved ones, or becoming infamous due to low deeds, humans live in a pitiful
and sorrowful state. Old age, disease, death, or slavery are not as painful as
hell or the womb. The pain experienced by a being when it exits the womb is
truly infinite times greater than the pain of being in the womb. In childhood,
humans are covered in feces and urine, they play in it. In youth, they engage in
sexual activity, and in old age, they are afflicted with respiratory diseases,
asthma, cough, etc. They are not ashamed, even though they are like pigs eating
excrement in childhood, like lustful donkeys in youth, and like old bulls in old
age, not remaining in human form. Humans see their mother's face in childhood, a
young woman's face in youth, and their children's faces in old age, but they do
not see their inner self, their true self. Driven by the desire for wealth,
humans are engrossed in farming, jobs, business, animal husbandry, etc., and
waste their lives. Sometimes they steal, sometimes they gamble, sometimes they
engage in evil with the wicked. In this way, humans adopt the causes for
repeated transmigration in the world. Blinded by delusion, humans end their
lives indulging in sensual pleasures when happy, and in misery and weeping when
unhappy, but they do not understand the path of righteousness. This means that
the soul, capable of destroying an infinite number of karmic aggregates, even
after attaining humanhood, becomes sinful by committing sins. Having obtained
the human body, the foundation of the three jewels of knowledge, vision, and
character, they fill it with sin, like filling a golden vessel with wine. Like a
crow throwing away a gem to chase after a bird, they lose their precious human
life, even though they have received it, like a rare gem, more valuable than the
Chintamani, a wish-fulfilling gem, in the ocean of existence. Even after
attaining humanhood, an extraordinary cause for attaining heaven and liberation,
humans engage in actions that lead to hell. Even the gods of the Uttara-Vimana,
who strive with great effort to obtain humanhood, use this human life for sin
when they obtain it. The sorrows of hell are indirect, but the sorrows of birth
and death are direct. How can we describe them in detail?  **The Sorrows of the
Divine Realm:**  Even among intelligent gods, who are under the sway of sorrow,
anger, despair, envy, and misery, sorrow reigns supreme. Seeing the great
prosperity of another, knowing their own meager good deeds earned in past lives,
gods grieve for a long time. If another powerful god is after them and they are
unable to retaliate, they experience sorrow.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 manuSya evaM devagati ke duHkha yogazAstra caturtha prakAza zloka 67 | yA goha
Adi khA jAte haiN| paMcendriya jalacara jIva prAyaH eka dUsare ko nigala jAte
haiN| matsyagalAgala nyAya prasiddha hai| samudra meM bar3I machalI choTI
machalI ko nigala jAtI hai| jala meM machue jAla DAlakara pakar3a lete haiM,
bagule khA jAte haiM, kaI camar3I udher3akara usake mAMsa ko pakAkara khA jAte
haiM, kaI carbI ke lie prANI ko mArakara usakI carbI nikAla lete haiM;
sthalacara meM utpanna hone vAle nirbala hirana Adi ko balavAna mAMsalolupa
siMha, cItA, bher3iyA Adi khA jAte haiM; zikArI, bahelie, zikAra ke zaukIna yA
mAMsalolupa yA krIr3Arasika loga kaI jIvoM kI hiMsA karate haiN| becAre
sthalacara pazuoM ko bhUkha, pyAsa, ThaMDa, garmI, atibhAravahana, mAra sahanA,
cAbuka, aMkuza Adi kI phaTakAra sahanA ye | aura isa prakAra kI vedanAe~ sahanI
paDatI hai| AkAza meM ur3ane vAle pakSI totA, kabUtara, cIla, cir3iyA, tItara
Adi ko bAja,, gidha, billI Adi mAMsabhakSI prANI khA jAte haiN| mAMsalolupa
kasAI, zikArI Adi vividha upAyoM se aneka prakAra kI yAtanAe~ dekara unheM
pakar3ate haiM aura mAra DAlate haiN| becAre tiryaMcoM ko pAnI, Aga, zastra Adi
kA bhaya to | hamezA banA rahatA hai| kaI bAra baMdhe hue va parAdhIna hone se
vivaza hokara mara jAte haiN| unake apane-apane karma - baMdhanoM ke kAraNa hone
vAle kitane duHkhoM kA varNana kareM? manuSya gati ke duHkha - manuSyajIvana meM
anAryadeza meM janma lekara manuSya itane pApakarma karatA hai, jinakA kathana
bhI azakya hai  /  Aryadeza meM janma lekara bhI bahuta-se cAMDAla mleccha,
bhaMgI, kasAI, vezyA Adi banakara aneka pApoM kA upArjana karate haiM aura
duHkhAnubhava karate haiN| AryavaMza meM janma lene vAle bhI anAryoM kI-sI ceSTA
karake duHkha, | dAridya aura daurbhAgya kI jvAlA meM jalakara duHkha bhogate
haiN| dUsaroM ke pAsa adhika saMpatti aura apane pAsa kama saMpatti | dekha-
dekhakara yA dUsaroM kI gulAmI, naukarI Adi karake mana meM kur3hatA huA AdamI
duHkhI hokara jItA hai| roga, bur3hApA, mRtyu, priyajanaviyoga Adi duHkhoM se
ghirA rahakara athavA nIcakarma karane se badanAma hokara manuSya dayanIya aura
duHkhI | hAlata meM jItA hai| bur3hApA, roga, mRtyu yA gulAmI meM utanA duHkha
nahIM hai, jitanA narakAvAsa yA garbhAvAsa meM hai| yoniyaMtra meM se jaba jIva
bAhara nikalatA hai, usa samaya jo duHkhAnubhava hotA hai, vaha vastutaH
garbhavAsa ke duHkha se bhI anaMtanA jyAdA hotA hai| bacapana meM manuSya mala-
mUtra meM lipaTA rahatA hai, usI meM khelatA rahatA hai, javAnI meM
maithunaceSTA karatA hai aura bur3hApe meM zvAsaroga, dama, khAMsI Adi rogoM se
grasta rahatA hai-ise zarma nahIM AtI; jaba ki puruSa bAlyakAla | meM viSThA
khAne vAle sUara - sA, javAnI meM madana ke gadhe-sA aura bur3hApe meM bUr3he
baila-sA banakara puruSa rUpa meM nahIM rhtaa| manuSya bacapana meM mAtA kA,
yauvana meM yuvatI kA aura bur3hApe meM putrAdi kA mukha dekhatA hai, magara
aMtarmukha - Atmasammukha | nahIM dekhatA  /  dhana kI AzA meM vyAkula manuSya
khetI, naukarI, vyApAra, pazupAlana Adi kAryoM meM racA-pacA rahakara apane |
jIvana ko vyartha kho detA hai| kabhI corI karatA hai, kabhI juA khelatA hai,
kisI samaya nIca ke sAtha duSTatA karatA hai| | isa prakAra manuSya bAra-bAra
saMsAra meM paribhramaNa ke kAraNoM ko apanAtA hai| mohAMdha manuSya sukhI
hAlata meM kAmabhogoM meM aura duHkhI hAlata meM dainya aura rudana karane meM
hI apanA jIvana samApta kara detA hai paraMtu use dharmakArya nahIM sUjhatA  /
| matalaba yaha hai ki anaMta karmasamUha ko kSaya karane meM samartha AtmA
manuSyatva prApta karake bhI pApakarma karake pApI banatA | hai| jJAna - darzana
- cAritra rUpI ratnatraya kA AdhArabhUta mAnava zarIra prApta karake sone ke
bartana meM zarAba bharane kI taraha ise | pApakarma se paripUrNa karatA hai|
saMsAra samudra meM sthita jIva ko kisI taraha bar3I muzkila se
maNikAMcanasaMyoga kI taraha | ciMtAmaNi ratna se bhI bar3hakara bahumUlya
mAnava jIvana milA hai, lekina vaha kauA ur3Ane ke lie ratna ko pheMkane ke
samAna | apane kIMmatI jIvana ko kho detA hai| svarga aura mokSa kI prApti kA
asAdhAraNa kAraNa rUpa yaha manuSyatva prApta hone para bhI manuSya naraka-
prApti ke upAyabhUta kAryoM ko karane meM juTA rahatA hai| anuttaravimAnavAsI
devatA bhI jisa manuSyagati ko pAne ke lie prayatna pUrvaka lAlAyita rahate
haiM, usa mAnavajIvana ko pAkara bhI pApI manuSya usakA pApa meM upayoga karatA
hai| naraka ke duHkha to parokSa hai, paraMtu janmamaraNa ke duHkha to pratyakSa
hai, unakA vistRta varNana kahA~ taka kareM ! devagati ke duHkha - zoka, krodha,
viSAda, IrSyA, dainya Adi ke vazIbhUta buddhizAlI devoM meM bhI duHkha kA
sAmrAjya | cala rahA hai| dUsare kI mahAna samRddhi dekhakara apane dvArA
pUrvajanma meM upArjita alpa sukRta ko jAnakara deva cirakAla | taka usake lie
zoka karatA hai| dUsarA balavAna deva usake pIche par3A ho aura vaha pratIkAra
karane meM asamartha ho gayA 355

Page #378 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  The Feeling of Oneness  **Verse 68 of the Fourth Light of Yoga Shastra:**
When a deva, under the influence of intense anger, constantly suffers in his
mind, thinking, "I did not perform any good deeds in my previous birth, which is
why I have become a servant of others here, a deva who obeys others." Seeing the
increasing prosperity of others, the deva burns with envy throughout his life.
When he is robbed of his wealth, loses all his prosperity, he adopts a humble
attitude and cries out in a choked voice, "Oh Lord of life! Oh Master! Oh Deva!
Be pleased with me!" Even though the devas like Kandarpa attained heaven through
virtuous deeds, they are still afflicted by lust, anger, and fear there. They do
not find their true place. Seeing the signs of being expelled from the heavenly
realm, the deva laments, "I don't know where I will be born after being expelled
from here." In this way, the deva's face wilts like the never-ending garland of
flowers on the Kalpavriksha tree when it withers. His entire body structure
becomes weak, and even the Kalpavriksha, which does not tremble even from the
strongest force, begins to shake. It is as if beauty and shame have committed a
crime together in the midst of a famine, with the accepted beloved. In this way,
knowing the deva to be guilty, the goddess leaves him. The pure beauty of his
clothes also fades in an instant. Just as the sky turns dark due to the sudden
appearance of clouds, the deva's face becomes black and dull due to sin. Those
who were previously devoid of humility become humble, those who were sleepless
become drowsy. Just as ants get wings at the time of death, similarly, humility
and drowsiness engulf the devas at the time of their expulsion. By transgressing
the law of justice, he becomes excessively attached to worldly pleasures and
desires to indulge in evil deeds. Knowing that he will face a terrible fate in
the future, his body starts to break down at the joints, even though he is
healthy, due to the pain he experiences. His sharp intellect, which was adept at
understanding things quickly, suddenly disappears. Now he is unable to even see
the prosperity of others. The fear of the suffering of being born in the womb,
which is about to befall him in the near future, makes him shiver. He frightens
others by trembling his limbs. Knowing for sure that his expulsion is imminent,
he loses interest in his celestial chariot, Nandana garden, or well. They all
seem like an embrace of fire to him. He constantly laments day and night, "Oh my
beloved! Alas! My chariot! Oh! My well! Oh! Kalpavriksha! When will I see you
again after my divinity ends? Ah! Your laughter, like nectar! Oh! Your lips, red
like nectar! Oh! Your voice, flowing like nectar! Ha! My beloved, like nectar!
Alas! The pillars adorned with jewels! Alas! The touch of jewels! Oh! The
platform made of jewels! Who will you shelter now? Alas! This well, adorned with
lotuses and water lilies, with its steps made of jewels, who will it benefit? Oh
Parijat! Oh Mandara! Oh offspring! Oh Harichandan! Oh Kalpavriksha! Will you all
leave me? Oh! Will I have to live in the hell of a woman's womb, in servitude?
Alas! Will I have to taste the foul taste of food there again and again? Will I
have to suffer the pain of roasting myself in the fire of my stomach, according
to my deeds? Where are those celestial women, like repositories of love, and
where are those foul, human women, dripping with impurities?" In this way, the
deva keeps remembering the things of the heavenly realm and keeps lamenting. And
as he keeps lamenting, his life's lamp suddenly goes out in an instant. ||67||
In this way, worldly beings in all four realms do not have even a little
happiness in this world. Not only that, but there is also a lot of physical and
mental suffering. Understanding this, if you want to be free forever from the
fear of wandering in the cycle of birth and death, then abandon attachment and
constantly meditate on the feeling of the world with pure intentions. In this
way, the feeling of the world is complete.  Now, the feeling of oneness is
explained in two verses. ||394||  One is born alone, one dies alone. One
experiences the karmas accumulated in previous births. ||68||  **Meaning:** This
being is born alone and helpless, and it dies alone, leaving its body. And it
alone experiences the karmas accumulated in birth after birth. ||8||  Shri
Bhagwan has said, "The karmas performed in the afterlife have to be experienced
in this world; similarly, the karmas performed in this world are also
experienced in this world." ||356||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ekatva bhAvanA yogazAstra caturtha prakAza zloka 68 ho, taba tIkSNa krodha-
zalya ke adhIna hokara niraMtara mana meM duHkhI hotA rahatA hai ki maiMne
pUrvajanma meM koI sukRta nahIM kiyA, jisase yahAM maiM dUsaroM kA AjJApAlaka
sevaka deva banA huuN| dUsaroM kI adhikAdhika samRddhi dekhakara sArI
jiMdagIbhara deva IrSyA kI Aga meM jalatA rahatA hai| dUsare se luTa gayA ho,
sArI samRddhi kho dI ho, taba dInavRtti dhAraNa karake 'he prANeza! he prabho!
he deva! mujha para prasanna ho; isa para gadgada svara se pukAratA hai|
kAndarpika Adi devoM ko puNyayoga se bhale hI svarga prApta huA ho, lekina vahAM
bhI ve kAma, krodha aura bhaya se pIr3ita rahate haiM, ve apanA asalI sthAna
nahIM paate| devaloka se cyuta hone kA cihna dekhakara deva vilApa karatA hai ki
patA nahIM, aba yahAM se cyuta hone ke bAda kisake garbha meM sthAna milegA? isa
taraha kalpavRkSa kI kabhI na mujhAne vAlI puSpamAlA ke muAne ke sAtha hI devoM
kA mukhakamala murhA jAtA hai| hRdaya ke sAtha-sAtha sArA zarIra kA DhAMcA
zithila ho jAtA hai aura mahAbalI se bhI kaMpita na hone vAlA kalpavRkSa bhI
kAMpane lagatA hai| svIkRta priyA ke sAtha mAno akAla meM zobhA aura lajjA ne
sAtha-sAtha aparAdha kiyA ho. isa taraha devI deva ko aparAdhI jAnakara
choDakara calI jAtI hai| vastroM kI nirmala zobhA bhI kSaNabhara meM phIkI par3a
jAtI hai| AkAza meM akasmAt meghADaMbara hone se jaise vaha zyAma ho jAtA hai,
vaise deva kA ceharA pApa se zyAha aura nisteja ho jAtA hai| jo aba taka dInatA
rahita the, ve dIna bana jAte haiM, nidrA hIna the, ve nidrita ho gaye ho vaise
lagate haiN| mauta ke samaya jaise cIMTiyoM ke paMkha A jAte haiM, vaise hI
cyavana ke samaya devoM ko bhI dInatA aura nidrA Akara ghera letI hai;
nyAyadharma kA atikramaNa karake viSayoM meM vaha atyadhika Asakta ho jAtA hai
aura yata se kupathya-sevana bhI karanA cAhatA hai| bhaviSya meM durgati hogI,
yaha jAnakara usakI vedanA se vivaza hone se niroga hone para bhI usake sabhI
aMga-pratyaMgoM ke jor3a TUTane lagate haiN| padArtha ko jhaTapaTa samajhane meM
paTu buddhi bhI sahasA calI jAtI hai| aba to vaha dUsare ke vaibhava kA utkarSa
dekhane meM bhI asamartha ho jAtA hai| nikaTa bhaviSya meM hI garbhAvAsa kA
duHkha A par3ane vAlA hai, isa bhaya se vaha sihara uThatA hai, apane aMgoM ko
kaMpAkara dUsaroM ko DarAtA hai| apane cyavana ke |nizcita AsAra jAnakara
vimAna, naMdanavana yA bAvar3I Adi meM kisI meM bhI ruci nahIM rkhtaa| ve use
Aga ke AliMgana | ke samAna lagane lagate haiN| vaha rAta-dina yahI vilApa
karatA rahatA hai-arI priye! hAya! mere vimAna! are! merI bAvar3I!, oha!
kalpavRkSa! merA devatva samApta hone ke bAda phira kaba maiM tumheM dekhUgA?
ahA! amRtarasa ke samAna tumhArA hAsya!, oha! amRtatulya lAla-lAla hoTha! aho!
amRtasama jharane vAlI vANI! hA! amRtavallabhA, hAya! ratnajaTita staMbha! hAya!
maNimaya sparza, opha! ratnamayavedikA! aba tuma kisakA Azraya loge? hAya!
ratnamaya sopAnoM vAlI kamaloM aura utpaloM se suzobhita yaha bAvar3I kisake
kAma AyegI? he pArijAta! he maMdAra! he saMtAna! he haricaMdana! he kalpavRkSa!
kyA tuma saba mujhe chor3a doge? are re! kyA mujhe aba strI ke garbhAvAsa rUpa
naraka meM parAdhInatA meM vAsa karanA hogA? hAya! vahAM bhI kyA bAra-bAra
azucirasa kA AsvAdana karanA par3egA? kyA mujhe apane kiye karmoM ke anusAra
jaTharAgni ke cUlhe meM apane ko sekane kA duHkha uThAnA par3egA? kahAM ye
ratinidhAna-sI devAMganAe~ aura kahAM ve azuci jharatI huI bIbhatsa mAnuSI strI?
isa prakAra vaha deva devaloka kI vastuoM ko yAda kara-karake jhUratA rahatA hai
aura yoM vilApa karate-karate hI acAnaka kSaNabhara meM usakA jIvanadIpa bujha
jAtA hai  /  / 67 /  /  isa prakAra cAroM gatiyoM meM sthita saMsArI prANiyoM ko
isa saMsAra meM jarA bhI sukha nahIM hai; itanA hI nahIM, sirpha zArIrika aura
mAnasika duHkha bhI bahuta adhika hai| aisA samajhakara yadi tuma bhavabhramaNa
ke bhaya se sadA ke lie mukta honA cAhate ho to mamatA ko dUrakara satata
zuddhAzayapUrvaka saMsAra bhAvanA kA dhyAna kro| isa prakAra saMsArabhAvanA
pUrNa huii| aba do zlokoM dvArA ekatvabhAvanA kA pratipAdana karate haiN|394|
eka utpadyate jantureka eva vipadyate  /  karmANyanubhavatyekaH, pracitAni
bhavAntare  // 68 //  artha :- yaha jIva akelA asahAya hI utpanna hotA hai aura
akelA hI zarIra chor3akara mara jAtA hai tathA janma janmAMtara meM saMcitta
karmoM ko bhI yaha akelA hI bhogatA hai  /  / 8 /  /  zrI bhagavAn ne kahA hai-
paraloka meM kiye hue karma isa loka meM bhogane par3ate haiM; vaise hI isa loka
meM kiye hue karma isa loka meM bhI bhoge jAte haiN| 356

Page #379 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Otherness Meditation  **• Yoga Shastra, Fourth Light, Verses 69-71. 395.**
**Wealth earned by others is enjoyed by many, but the one who earned it suffers
alone in the depths of hell due to his own actions.** 69.  **Meaning:** The
wealth earned by someone through great efforts and accumulation is enjoyed by
others - relatives, family, servants, etc. But the one who earned that wealth
suffers alone in the depths of hell due to his own bad deeds. 69.
**Explanation:** The meaning of the inner verses related to this is presented
here: This soul, bound by karma, wanders alone in the vast forest of the world,
which is engulfed by the fire of suffering. No relative, friend, or loved one
can help or share in the journey. The question arises: Is this body, which
experiences pleasure and pain, a helper? The answer is no; this body did not
come with the soul from a previous life, nor will it go with it in the next
life. How can it be a helper then? Your belief that dharma and adharma are the
only helpers is also not true. Because there is no help from dharma or adharma
in liberation. Therefore, the soul, performing good and bad deeds, wanders alone
in the world; and experiences the fruits of those deeds accordingly. It also
attains the supreme liberation alone. There is no connection or help from any
relative there. Therefore, the soul experiences the suffering in the world and
the happiness attained in liberation alone, without any help or share from
anyone. Even a lone swimmer can cross the vast ocean quickly, but if his chest,
arms, and legs are tied together, or if he carries any other possessions, he
cannot cross. Therefore, only by being detached from wealth, body, etc. (from
attachment), can the solitary, healthy soul cross the ocean of the world. By
committing sins, the soul goes to hell alone; similarly, by performing virtuous
deeds, it goes to heaven alone, and by destroying both sin and virtue, it
attains liberation alone. Understanding this, one should meditate on the oneness
of the soul for a long time to attain detachment. Thus ends the meditation on
oneness. 69.  **Now we explain the nature of otherness meditation.** 396.
**Where the body is different from the soul, due to its difference in form, and
wealth, relatives, and helpers are also different, then it is not wrong to say
that there is otherness.** 70.  **Meaning:** Where the soul and body are
different - the supported and the supporter, the formless and the formed, the
conscious and the unconscious (inert), the eternal and the non-eternal; and the
body does not go with the soul in the next life, while the soul remains even in
the next life. From this, the difference - the dissimilarity - between the body
and the soul is clearly evident. Then it is not wrong to say that wealth,
relatives, parents, friends, servants, wife, children, etc., and so-called
helpers are different (from the soul). 70.  **Meaning:** When the body is
accepted as different from the soul, then what is the objection in considering
material things (which are mostly related to the body) as different?  **The
fruit of otherness meditation is only detachment, but there are other fruits as
well; we will explain them.** 397.  **One who sees his soul as different from
the body, wealth, relatives, and friends, how can he be terrified or afflicted
by the nail of sorrow born from separation from the soul?** 71.  **Meaning:**
How can one whose soul sees itself as different from the body, wealth,
relatives, and friends be terrified or afflicted by the nail of sorrow born from
separation from the soul? 71.  **Explanation:** The meaning of the inner verses
used in this context is being presented: Otherness means difference. That
difference is clearly evident between the soul and the body, wealth, relatives,
etc. There is a doubt here: Material things can be known through the senses,
while the soul is the subject of experience. How can there be oneness between
them? Thus, when the difference between the soul and the body, etc., is clear,
why does the soul feel pain when the body is struck? The solution is this: The
person who does not have the understanding of the difference between the soul
and the body, etc., who considers them both as one, will surely feel pain in the
soul when the body is struck. But the one who has understood the difference
between the body and the soul, etc., will not feel pain in the soul when the
body is struck.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 anyatva bhAvanA * yogazAstra caturtha prakAza zloka 69 se 71  / 395 /
anyaistenArjitaM vittaM, bhUyaH sambhUyaH bhujyate  /  sa tveko narakakroDe,
klizyate nijkrmbhiH||69|| artha :- usake dvArA mahAraMbha aura mahAparigraha Adi
upAyoM se arjita dhana kA upabhoga dUsare - baMdhu-bAMdhava, kuTuMba parivAra,
naukara Adi milakara karate haiN| paraMtu vaha dhana kA upArjana karane vAlA to
akelA hI apane duSkarmoM se naraka kI goda meM jAkara mahAduHkha bhogatA hai  /
/ 9 /  /  vyAkhyA :- isake saMbaMdha meM ukta AMtarazlokoM kA bhAvArtha prastuta
karate haiM-duHkha rUpI dAvAnala se bhayaMkara vizAlasaMsAra rUpI araNya meM
karmAdhIna hokara yaha AtmA akelA hI paribhramaNa karatA hai| baMdhu, bAMdhava,
svajana Adi koI bhI jIva ke sahAyaka yA hissedAra nahIM hote| prazna hotA hai-
sukha-duHkha kA anubhava karane vAlI yaha kAyA to | sahAyaka hogI na? isake
uttara meM kahate haiM-nahIM; yaha kAyA pUrvabhava se hI sAtha nahIM AyI aura na
janmAMtara meM sAtha | jAyegI; phira vaha kaise sahAyaka ho sakatI hai? tumhArI
yaha mAnyatA bhI yathArtha nahIM hai ki jIva ke dharma aura adharma ye do hI
sahAyaka haiN| kyoMki mokSa meM dharma yA adharma kI sahAyatA nahIM hai| isalie
zubhAzubhakarma karatA huA jIva akelA hI saMsAra meM paribhramaNa karatA hai;
aura una karmoM ke anarUpa zabhAzabha phala bhogatA hai tathA anattara
mokSalakSmI ko bhI akelA hI prApta karatA hai| vahAM kisI bhI prakAra ke
saMbaMdhI kA saMbaMdha nahIM hotA aura na kAma AtA hai| ataH saMsAra | meM hone
vAle duHkhoM ko tathA mokSa meM prApta hone vAle sukhoM ko vaha akelA hI bhogatA
hai, usameM kisI kI sahAyatA yA hissedArI nahIM hotii| tairAka akelA ho to bhI
vaha bar3e se bar3e samudra ko zIghra pAra kara sakatA hai, paraMtu chAtI,
hAtha, paira Adi ikaTThe bAMdha le yA anya koI parigraha sAtha meM rakhe to vaha
pAra nahIM ho sktaa| isalie dhana, zarIra Adi se (mamatva se) vimukha hokara hI
ekAkI svastha AtmA saMsArasamudra se pAra ho sakatA hai| pApa karane se jIva
akelA hI naraka meM jAtA hai, isI prakAra puNya karane se bhI akelA svarga meM
jAtA hai aura pApa-puNya donoM kA kSaya karake akelA hI mokSa meM jAtA hai| aisA
samajhakara nirmamatva prApti ke lie dIrghakAla taka ekatvabhAvanA kA dhyAna
karanA caahie| iti ekatvabhAvanA  /  / 69 /  /  aba anyatvabhAvanA kA svarUpa
batAte haiN||396| yatrA'nyatvaM zarIrasya, vaisAdRzyAccharIriNaH  /  dhana-
bandhu-sahAyAnAM, tatrA'nyatvaM na durvacam  // 70 /  /  artha :- jahAM AtmA
aura zarIra AdhAra-Adheya, arUpI-rUpI, cetana-acetana (jar3a), nitya-anitya hai;
tathA zarIra janmAMtara meM sAtha nahIM jAtA hai, jabaki AtmA janmAMtara meM bhI
sAtha rahatA hai| isase zarIra aura zarIrI (AtmA) kI bhinnatA-visadRzatA spaSTa
pratIta hotI hai, taba phira vahAM yaha kahanA asatya nahIM hai ki dhana,
baMdhu, mAtA-pitA, mitra, sevaka, patnI-putra Adi tathAkathita sahAyaka (AtmA
se) bhinna haiN|67|| bhAvArtha :- jaba AtmA se zarIra ko bhinna svIkArakara liyA
hai to dhanAdi padArthoM ko, (jo prAyaH zarIra se | saMbaMdhita haiM) bhinna
mAnane meM kauna-sI Apatti hai? anyatvabhAvanA kA phala sirpha nirmamatva hai,
itanA hI nahIM aura bhI phala hai; use batAte haiN||397| yo deha-dhana-
bandhubhyo, bhinnmaatmaanmiiksste| kva zokazaGkunA, tasya hantAtaGkaH
prtnyte?||71|| artha :- jo apanI AtmA ko zarIra, dhana, svajana, baMdhu Adi se
bhinna svarUpa meM dekhatA hai, usakA AtmA viyoga | janita zoka rUpI kIla se
bhalA kaise AtaMkita-pIr3ita ho sakatA hai?  // 71 /  /  vyAkhyA :- isa viSaya
meM prayukta AMtarazlokoM kA bhAvArtha de rahe haiM-anyatva kA artha hai
bhinntaa| vaha bhinnatA AtmA aura zarIra, dhana, svajana Adi ke bIca meM spaSTa
pratIta hotI hai| yahAM zaMkA hotI hai ki dehAdi padArtha iMdriyoM se jAne jA
sakate haiM, jabaki AtmA to anubhava kA viSaya hai, taba phira inakA ekatva ho
hI kaise sakatA hai? isa prakAra jaba AtmA aura zarIra Adi padArthoM kA
bhinnatva spaSTa hai, taba zarIra para prahAra karane para AtmA ko usakI pIr3A
kyoM mahasUsa hotI hai? isakA samAdhAna yoM hai-jisa vyakti ko AtmA aura
zarIrAdi meM bhedabuddhi nahIM hai; jo ina donoM ko eka hI mAnatA hai, usake
zarIra para prahAra karane se AtmA ko avazya pIr3A hotI hai, lekina jisane
zarIra aura AtmA 357

Page #380 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Impure Thoughts and Influx of Karma  **Chapter 4, Verses 72-74 of the Yoga
Shastra**  He who has fully understood the difference between impure thoughts
and the influx of karma, does not experience pain in his soul even when his body
is struck. The Tirthankara, the Supreme Being, Lord Mahavira, endured many
hardships for 12 years. Sangamdev threw the Kalchakra at him, and the cowherds
poured cooked rice on his feet. Yet, the Lord, who experienced the body as
distinct from the soul, did not experience sorrow in his soul.  Namiraja, the
knower of the distinction between body and soul, was in Mithila when the city
was burning. Devendra said to him, "Your Mithila is burning." Namiraja replied,
"Nothing of mine is burning." He who understands this distinction, even if he
experiences sorrow related to his father, does not become sorrowful. However, if
sorrow befalls his servant, he experiences sorrow because of his attachment and
possessiveness. Knowing that "even a son is not his own, but another," he
accepts the servant as his own, and thus feels greater affection for him than
for his son.  Just as a royal treasurer keeps another's wealth separate, so too,
you, the blessed soul, should understand this and abandon false thoughts.
Continuously embrace the feeling of otherness, which cuts away attachment. Thus,
the feeling of otherness is perfected. 71.  Now, we speak about impure thoughts.
**Verse 72:**  **Meaning:** After eating, it becomes rasa (juice), from rasa
comes blood, from blood comes flesh, from flesh comes fat, from fat comes
marrow, from marrow comes semen, from semen comes intestines, and from
intestines comes excrement. Thus, this body is a receptacle of impure
substances. How then can this body be considered pure?  **Verse 73:**
**Meaning:** To those who consider the body pure, we say: Two eyes, two ears,
two nostrils, a mouth, an anus, and a penis - these are the nine openings in a
man's body, and twelve in a woman's. From these, constantly flows filth (foul,
disgusting matter), which clings to the body. To imagine purity in such a foul
body is the very irony of great delusion.  **Inner Verses:**  The body, born
from semen and menstrual blood, nourished by the essence of excrement, and
covered in the womb by a thin membrane, how can it be pure? Nourished by the
rasa (juice) that flows through the nerves, produced from the food, water, and
drinks consumed by the mother, who would consider this body pure? Filled with
impurities and the waste of the elements, a place for worms, earthworms, and
other creatures, with disease-ridden serpents coiled around it, who would call
this body pure? Even if fragrant substances like sandalwood, camphor, musk, and
cardamom are ground and applied to cleanse it, they too become soiled after a
while. How then can this body be pure? If you chew fragrant betel and sleep at
night, and smell your mouth in the morning, you will find a foul odor. How then
can this body be considered pure? Even naturally fragrant scents, incense, and
garlands of flowers become foul when they come into contact with the body. How
then can this body be called pure? Like a dirty wine jar, this body cannot be
purified even by hundreds of oil massages or by washing it with millions of jars
of water. Those who say that the body is purified by earth, water, air, or
sunlight should be considered fools. This is like saying that a physician can be
made by drawing lines on the ground. Only by cultivating detachment towards the
body through the feeling of impurity can a seeker overcome the great burden of
lust, pride, and attachment. What more can be said? This is the feeling of
impurity. 73.  **Verse 74:**  **Meaning:** The activities of the mind, speech,
and body are called yoga (actions). Through these yogas, the influx of karma
occurs in beings, and thus they are called asravas (influxes).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 azuci bhAvanA evaM Azrava bhAvanA yogazAstra caturtha prakAza zloka 72 se 74 |
kA bheda bhalIbhAMti hRdayaMgama kara liyA hai, use apane zarIra para prahAra
hone para bhI AtmA meM pIr3A nahIM hotI aMtima | tIrthaMkara paramAtmA zrI
mahAvIra prabhu para 12 varSa taka bahuta upasarga hue; saMgamadeva ne una para
kAlacakra pheMkA thA, gvAle | ne unake pairoM para khIra pakAyI thI; phira bhI
deha ko AtmA se bhinna anubhava karane vAle prabhu kI AtmA meM duHkha na huaa| |
deha aura AtmA kI bhinnatA kA jJAtA namirAja thaa| jaba usakI mithilA nagarI
jala rahI thI, taba devendra ne usase kahA| yaha tumhArI mithilA jala rahI hai|
taba namirAjA ne uttara diyA- isameM merA kucha bhI nahIM jala rahA hai|
bhedavijJAna kara | lene vAle AtmA para yadi pitA-saMbaMdhI duHkha A par3e to
bhI vaha duHkhI nahIM hotaa| jabaki naukara para duHkha A par3e | to usa para
AtmIyatA - mamatA hone se apanA mAna lene ke kAraNa duHkha hotA hai| 'putra bhI
apanA nahIM parAyA hai' yaha | jAnakara sevaka ko svakIya rUpa meM svIkAra
karatA hai, taba usa para putrAdi se adhika prIti hotI hai| rAjabhaMDArI parAye
| dhana ko alaga bAMdhakara rakhatA hai, usI taraha 'parapadArtha meM
mamattvabuddhi rakhane vAle bhavyAtmana! tuma isa bAta kA viveka karo aura
mithyAbhAvanA kA parityAgakara mamattvachedinI anyatvabhAvanA kA lagAtAra
avalaMbana lo| isa prakAra anyatvabhAvanA pUrNa huI  /  71  /  /  aba
azucibhAvanA ke saMbaMdha meM kahate haiM | | 398 /
rasAsRgmAMsamedo'sthimajjAzukrAntavarcasAm  /  azucInAM padaM kAyaH, zucitvaM
tasya tat kuta: ?  /  /  72  /  /  artha :- AhAra karane ke bAda usakA rasa
banatA hai, rasa se rakta, rakta se mAMsa, mAMsa se carbI, carbI se meda aura
meda se haDDI, haDDI se majjA, majjA se vIrya aura vIrya se AMteM aura AMtoM se
viSThA banatI hai| isa prakAra yaha zarIra azuci (gaMde) padArthoM kA bhAjana
hai, taba phira yaha kAyA pavitra kahAM se ho sakatI hai?  /  /  72  /  /  jo
kAyA ko pavitra mAnate haiM, unheM upAlaMbha dete hue kahate haiM artha :  / 399
/  navasrotaH zravadavisrarasaniH syandapicchile  /  dehe'pi zaucasaGkalpo
mahanmohavijRmbhitam  // 73|| do netra, do kAna, do nAka ke nathune, mukha, gudA
aura liMga; ye puruSa ke zarIra meM nau dvAra evaM strI ke bAraha dvAra hai,
inameM se niraMtara jharatI rahatI gaMdagI (badabUdAra ghinaunI cIja) se deha
lipaTA rahatA hai| aise ghinaune zarIra ke bAre meM bhI pavitratA kI kalpanA
karanA, mahAmoha kI hI viDaMbanA hai  /  /  73  /  /  isake saMbaMdha meM aMkita
AMtarazlokoM kA bhAvArtha prastuta kara rahe haiM - vIrya aura raja se utpanna
hone vAlA; mala ke | rasa se bar3hane vAlA aura garbha meM jarAyu (patalI
camar3I kI jhillI) se DhakA huA yaha zarIra kaise pavitra ho sakatA hai ? | mAtA
ke khAye hue anna, jala, peyapadArtha se utpanna, rasanAr3I dvArA bahakara Aye
hue usa rasa ko pI-pIkara saMvardhita; | isa zarIra ko kauna pavitra mAnegA ?
azucidoSa evaM dhAtuoM ke mala se vyApta, kRmi, keMcuA Adi ke sthAna rUpa se
roga | rUpI sarpa jisake cAroM ora lipaTe hue haiM, aise zarIra ko kauna pavitra
kaha sakatA hai? vilepana karane ke lie aMgara, kapUra, caMdana, kakkola,
kastUrI Adi sugaMdhita padArtha ghisakara lagAye hoM, ve bhI kucha dera bAda
malina ho jAte haiM, taba isa zarIra meM zuddhatA kaise ho sakatI hai?
sugaMdhita tAMbUla (pAna) muMha meM dabAkara rAta ko so jAye aura prAtaHkAla
jAgane ke bAda | sUMghe to muMha meM se badabU nikalatI hai, to phira isa zarIra
ko kaise zuddha mAnA jAye ? svabhAva se sugaMdhita gaMdha, dhUpa, phUloM kI mAlA
Adi cIjeM bhI zarIra ke saMparka se durgaMdhamaya bana jAtI hai; taba isa zarIra
ko pavitra kaise kahA jAya? zarAba ke gaMde ghar3e ke samAna isa zarIra para
saikar3oM bAra telamAliza karane yA vilepana karane para athavA karor3oM ghar3oM
se ise dhone | para bhI yaha pavitra nahIM ho sktaa| jo loga kahate haiM ki
miTTI, pAnI, havA, sUrya kiraNa Adi se zarIra kI zuddhi ho | jAtI hai, unheM
lakIra ke phakIra samajhane caahie| yaha bAta to Thoka-pITakara vaidyarAja
banAne ke samAna hai| mada, abhimAna | aura kAma ke doSoM ko dUra karane vAlA
sAdhaka zarIra ke prati azucibhAvanA dvArA hI nirmamatva ke mahAbhAra ko uThAne
meM samartha ho sakatA hai| adhika kyA likheM? basa, yahI azucibhAvanA hai  /  /
73 /  /  aba AsravabhAvanA kA svarUpa batAte haiM  / 400 /  manovAkkAyakarmANi,
yogAH karmazubhAzubham  /  yadAzravanti jantUnAmAzravAstena kIrtitAH  // 74 //
mana, vacana aura kAyA ke vyApAra ( pravRtti yA kriyA) yoga kahalAte haiN| ina
yogoM ke dvArA hI jIvoM meM artha : 358

Page #381 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Nature of Asrava (Inflow)  **Chapter 4, Light 74-78 of the Yoga Shastra**
**Verse 74:**  Auspicious and inauspicious karmas are attracted from all sides.
Therefore, these (yogas) are called 'Asrava'.  **Explanation:** The embodied
soul, through all its self-regions, receives auspicious and inauspicious karmas
for mental contemplation. It also develops a sense of dependence. In this
regard, the soul has to exert special effort, which is called manoyoga (mental
yoga). It is for the five-sense being. The embodied soul, through verbal yoga,
receives and releases karmas. The soul acquires the ability to act through this
verbality. Through this verbal action, the soul gains the power of speech, which
is called vachanayoga (verbal yoga). It is for the two-sense being. The meaning
of 'kaya' (body) is the dwelling place of the soul. Through kaya yoga, the being
experiences the results of its actions, which is called kayayoga (physical
yoga). Through the combination of mind, speech, and body, the soul experiences
yoga in the form of karma, just as fire turns bricks red. It is also said that
'viriya' (energy), 'sthama' (steadiness), 'utsaha' (enthusiasm), 'parakrama'
(effort), 'cheshta' (activity), 'shakti' (power), and 'samartha' (ability) are
all synonyms for yoga. This yoga is a helpful aid to the being, like a stick for
a weak or old person. The transformation of karmas suitable for the mind into
the self-region is manoyoga; the transformation of karmas suitable for speech
into the form of verbality and eloquence is vachanayoga; and the transformation
of karmas suitable for the body into the form of actions like walking is
kayayoga. This yoga is of two types: auspicious and inauspicious. It gives rise
to saataavedaniya (perceptible) and asaataavedaniya (imperceptible) karmas.
Therefore, it is called asrava. That which causes the inflow of karmas into the
soul is called asrava. That which causes the inflow of auspicious and
inauspicious karmas is called yoga, because it leads to corresponding actions.
**Verse 75:** Therefore, with discernment, these are considered the causes of
auspicious and inauspicious karmas. The mind, imbued with the four emotions of
friendliness, joy, compassion, and equanimity, generates auspicious karmas. This
leads to saataavedaniya, right faith, laughter, pleasure, knowledge of men,
auspicious lifespan, auspicious name, and auspicious lineage. However, the same
mind, when overwhelmed by passions like anger and sense objects, generates
inauspicious karmas. This leads to asaataavedaniya and other such karmas.
**Verse 76:** For the generation of auspicious karmas, one should speak words
that are in accordance with the twelve-limbed Ganipitaka, the form of scriptural
knowledge. Conversely, for the generation of inauspicious karmas, one should
know words that are contrary to scriptural knowledge.  **Verse 77:** The
embodied being, with a body protected from vices and wrong actions, accumulates
auspicious karmas. However, the same being, with a body that is constantly
engaged in harmful actions or killing beings, accumulates inauspicious karmas.
**Explanation:** The activity of the body, protected from wrong tendencies, or
the state of kayotsarga (body release), is kayayoga. Through such kayayoga, the
being accumulates saataavedaniya and other auspicious (virtuous) karmas.
However, the being with a body that is constantly engaged in harmful actions or
killing beings accumulates asaataavedaniya and other inauspicious (sinful)
karmas. The conclusion is that auspicious and inauspicious yogas give rise to
auspicious and inauspicious karmas. This explanation does not contradict the
cause-and-effect relationship. The statement, "auspicious yoga makes the body
the cause of auspicious results," is mentioned here in passing. In the section
on emotions, the cause of inauspicious results through inauspicious yoga should
also be explained to generate detachment. Even without mentioning it, the
accumulation of inauspicious causes is understood.  **Verse 78:** Passions,
sense objects, yoga, carelessness, lack of restraint, false belief, suffering,
and anger are the causes of inauspicious karmas.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Azrava bhAvanA svarUpa yogazAstra caturtha prakAza zloka 74 se 78 zubhAzubha
karma cAroM ora se khiMcakara Ate haiN| isalie inako (yogoM ko) hI 'Azrava' kahA
gyaa||74|| vyAkhyA :- zarIradhArI AtmA apane samasta AtmapradezoM se manoyogya
zubhAzubha pudgala manana karane ke lie grahaNa karatA hai| tathA usameM
avalaMbana karaNabhAva kA letA hai| isakI apekSA se AtmA ko vizeSa parAkrama
karanA par3atA hai, use manoyoga kahate haiN| vaha mana paMcendriya ko hotA hai
tathA dehadhArI AtmA vacanayoga se pudagala grahaNa kara chor3a detA hai| AtmA
usa vacanatva se karaNatA prApta karatA hai| ukta vacanakaraNa ke saMbaMdha se
AtmA meM bolane kI zakti prApta hotI hai, use hI vacanayoga kahate haiN| vaha
dvIndriyajIva ko hotA hai| kAyA kA artha hai, AtmA kA nivaassthaan| kAyA ke yoga
se hI jIva meM vIrya-pariNAma utpanna hote haiM, ise hI kAyayoga kahate haiN|
mana, vacana aura kAyA ina tInoM ke saMyoga se AtmA meM vIrya rUpa meM yoga
vaise hI pariNata hotA hai, jaise agni ke saMyoga se iMTa Adi lAla raMga vAlI
bana jAtI hai| kahA bhI hai-vIrya, sthAma, utsAha, parAkrama, ceSTA, zakti aura
sAmarthya ye saba zabda yoga ke paryAyavAcI hai| yaha yoga durbala yA vRddha
manuSya ko laTThI ke sahAre kI taraha jIva kA upakArI sahAyaka hai| mana ke
yogya pudgaloM kA Atmapradeza meM pariNamana honA manoyoga hai; bhASAyogya
pudgaloM kA vacanatva-vaktRtva rUpa meM pariNamana honA vacanayoga hai aura
kAyayogya pudgaloM kA gamanAdi yogya kriyA ke hetu rUpa meM pariNamana honA,
kAyayoga hai| yaha yoga zubha aura azubha do prakAra kA hai| isase sAtAvedanIya
aura asAtAvedanIya karma utpanna hote haiN| isa kAraNa ise Azrava kahA hai|
jisase AtmA meM karmoM kA Agamana hotA rahe, use Azrava kahate haiN| jisase
zubhAzubha karmoM kA Agamana-Azrava ho, use yoga kahA hai; kyoMki isase
tadanurUpa kArya hotA hai  /  / 74 /  /  isalie viveka se inheM zubha aura
azubhakarma ke hetu batAte haiN|401| maitryAdivAsitaM cetaH, karma sUte
zubhAtmakam  /  kaSAya-viSayAkrAntaM, vitanotyazubhaM punaH  // 75 /  /  . artha
:- maitrI, pramoda, karuNA aura upekSA (mAdhyasthya) lakSaNa se yukta cAra
bhAvanAoM se bhAvita mana puNya rUpa zubhakarma upArjita karatA hai| isase
sAtAvedanIya, samyaktva, hAsya, rati, puruSaveda, zubhAyu, zubhanAma aura
zubhagotra prApta karatA hai, jabaki vahI mana krodhAdikaSAyoM aura
iMdriyaviSayoM se AkrAMta (abhibhUta) hone para azubhakarma upArjita karatA hai|
isase asAtAvedanIya Adi prApta karatA hai||75||  / 402 /  zubhArjanAya
nirmathyaM, zrutajJAnAzritaM vacaH  /  viparItaM punayiM azubhArjanahetave  //
76 //  artha :- zabhakarma ke upArjana ke lie dvAdazAMgI gaNipiTaka rUpa
zratajJAna ke anakala vacana bolane caahie| isake viparIta azubhakarma ke
upArjana ke lie zrutajJAnavirodhI vacana jAnane cAhie  // 76 /  /   / 403 /
zarIreNa suguptena, zarIrI cinute zubham  /  satatArambhiNA
jantughAtakenA'zubhaM punaH  // 77 //  artha :- sAvadya-kuceSTaoM se sugusa
zarIra se zarIrI (jIva) zubhakarmoM kA saMcaya karatA hai, jabaki satata AraMbha
meM pravRtta rahane vAle yA prANiyoM kI hiMsA karane vAle zarIra se vahI azubha
karmoM kA saMgraha karatA hai||77|| vyAkhyA :- samyag rUpa se kupravRttiyoM se
rakSita kAyA kI pravRtti athavA kAyotsarga Adi kI sthiti meM nizceSTA pUrvaka
kAyA kI pravRtti karanA kAyayoga hai| aise kAyayoga se jIva sAtAvedanIya Adi
zubha (puNya) karmoM kA upArjana karatA hai; jabaki mahAraMbha yA lagAtAra
AraMbha meM pravRtta athavA jIvoM ke ghAtaka zarIra se jIva asAtAvedanIya Adi
azubha (pApa) karmoM kA upArjana karatA hai niSkarSa yaha hai ki mUla meM
zubhAzubha yoga se zubhAzubha karma utpanna hote haiN| isa prakAra pratipAdana
karane se kArya-kAraNa-bhAva meM virodha nahIM aataa| 'zubhayoga se zarIra
zubhaphala kA hetu banatA hai', yaha bAta yahAM prasaMgavaza kahI gayI hai|
bhAvanA-prakaraNa meM to azubhayoga se azubha phala kA hetu bhI vairAgya utpanna
karane ke lie pratipAdana karanA caahie| isako kahe binA bhI azubhahetuoM kA
saMgraha kahate haiM  /  / 7 /  /   / 404 /  kaSAyA viSayA yogAH, pramAdA'viratI
tathA  /  mithyAtvamArttaraudre, cetyazubhapratihetavaH  // 78 /  /  359

Page #382 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Asrava Bhavana Swaroop - Eight Karma's Asrava Hetu  **Yoga Shastra Chaturth
Prakash Shlok 78 Meaning:**  Kshaya, five senses' objects, ashubha yoga, pramad,
aviriti, mithyatva and aarta-raudradhyan; all these are the causes of ashubha
karma bandhan. ||78||  **Explanation:**  Four kshayas - krodh, maan, maya,
lobha; nine nokshayas - hasya, rati, arati, bhay, shok, jugupsa, purushved,
strived and napunsakved related to kshayas; desire for 23 objects of five
senses; three yogas - man-vachan; eight types of pramad - agyan, sanshay-vipaye,
rag-dvesh, smritibhramsh, disrespect towards dharma, bad tendencies in yogas;
aviriti - non-rejection of sin; mithyadarshan; aartadhyan and raudradhyan. All
these are the causes of ashubha karma's arrival (asrava).  Here, the question
arises that all these (above mentioned) are said to be the causes of bandhan.
As, Vaachakmukhya Shri Umaswati has said in Tattvarth Sutra 8/1 -
Mithyadarshanaaviritipramadakshayayoga bandhetava: i.e. mithyatva, aviriti,
pramad, kshaya and ashubha yoga are the causes of karma bandhan. Then why are
these bandhetu called asrava hetu in asrava bhavana, not as bandhetu?  In
response, it can be said that your question is valid. Mahapurushas have
mentioned these in asrava bhavana only, not as bandha bhavana. Asrava bhavana
can only be understood; because karma pudgal, which is received by asrava, is
called bandhan when it gets connected with the soul. Therefore, it is further
said in Tattvarth Sutra 8/2-3 - Sakshayatvaajjeevah karmaano yogyaan
pudgalanaadatte sa bandhah: i.e. the soul with kshaya receives karma-worthy
pudgals, it is called bandhan. Therefore, there is no intention to differentiate
between bandhan and asrava here.  Then, this doubt arises that the merging of
karma pudgals with the soul like milk and water is called bandhan; then why is
asrava not called bandhan? The solution is - although your point is valid, how
can karma pudgals, which are not received by asrava, be included in bandhan?
Therefore, there is no fault in making asrava, which is the cause of receiving
karma pudgals, the cause of bandhan.  Then, the question arises that then the
above mentioned five should be called asrava hetu, calling them bandhetu is
useless! In response, it is said that it is not so. Here, bandhan and asrava are
mentioned from the perspective of unity. In reality, this text is about asrava
hetu; therefore, everyone should understand it in its true form.  Here, the
meaning of antaralokas is presented - it is called asrava due to the reception
of karma pudgals. There are 8 types of karma - jnanaavaraneya, etc.  These are
the asrava hetu of jnanaavaraneya and darshanavaraneya karma - to obstruct
(hinder) the attainment of knowledge and vision in the form of qualities and
qualities possessing these qualities, to eliminate them, to criticize and
discourage them, to kill them, to be envious or jealous of them.  These are the
asrava hetu of sataavedaniya (punya) karma - devpuja, guru-seva, supatra daan,
daya, kshama, sanayamaasanyam, deshaviriti, not being stained by karma, balatap
etc.  These are the asrava hetu of asataavedaniya (paap) karma - to be unhappy
oneself, to make others unhappy, to grieve - to make others grieve, to kill, to
torture, to lament (cry) and to regret - to make others regret good deeds.
These are the asrava hetu of darshanamohaniya karma - to criticize vitrag,
shrutigyan, sangh, dharma and all gods, to speak ill of sarvagya, siddha
paramatma and ahantdev or gods due to the result of intense mithyatva, to deny
them, to deny their existence, to accuse righteous men, to preach or speak of
the wrong path, to insist on evil, to worship - to honor the unrestrained, to
act without prior consideration and to insult guru etc. It is very difficult for
such people to attain samyagdarshan.  Kshaya hetu of charitra mohaniya karma -
due to the rise of kshaya, there is intense result (passion) of krodh etc. in
the soul, due to which the soul does not attain charitraratna.  Hasya mohaniya
nokshaya asrava hetu - to make fun, to make obscene jokes, to have a habit of
making fun, to talk too much, to speak in a humble tone etc.  Ratinokashaya -
asrava hetu - eagerness to see new villages, countries, cities etc., fondness
for seeing obscene pictures etc.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Azrava bhAvanA svarUpa - ATha karma ke Azrava hetu yogazAstra caturtha prakAza
zloka 78 artha :- kaSAya, pAMcoM iMdriyoM ke viSaya, azubhayoga, pramAda,
avirati, mithyAtva aura Arta-raudradhyAna; ye sabhI azubhakarmabaMdhana ke hetu
haiM  /  / 78|| vyAkhyA :- krodha, mAna, mAyA, lobha rUpI cAra kaSAya, kaSAyoM
se saMbaMdhita hAsya, rati, arati, bhaya, zoka, jugupsA, puruSaveda, strIveda
aura napuMsakaveda ye milAkara nau nokaSAya, pAMcoM iMdriyoM ke 23 viSayoM kI
kAmanA, mana-vacana tIna yoga; ajJAna, saMzaya-vipayeya, rAga-dveSa,
smRtibhraMza, dharma ke prati anAdara,yogoM meM duSpravRtti isa taraha ATha
prakAra kA pramAda. pApa kA apratyAkhyAna rUpI avirati. mithyAdarzana.
ArtadhyAna aura raudradhyAna kA sevana | ye saba azubhakarmoM ke Agamana
(Azrava) ke kAraNa hai| yahAM prazna hotA hai ki ina (uparyukta) sabako to
baMdhana ke hetu kahe haiN| jaise ki vAcakamukhyazrI umAsvAti ne tattvArtha
sUtra 8/1 meM kahA hai-mithyAdarzanAviratipramAdakaSAyayogA baMdhahetavaH arthAt
mithyAtva, avirati, pramAda, kaSAya aura azubhayoga ye karmabaMdha ke hetu hai|
taba phira Azrava bhAvanA meM Azrava ke hetu na kahakara ina baMdhahetuoM ko
kyoM kahA gayA? isake uttara meM kahanA hai ki tumhArA prazna yathArtha hai,
mahApuruSoM ne inheM AzravabhAvanA meM hI kahA hai, baMdha ko bhAvanA ke rUpa
meM nahIM btaayaa| AzravabhAvanA hI use samajhA jA sakatA hai; kyoMki Azrava se
grahaNa kiyA huA karmapudgala AtmA ke sAtha saMbaddha hone para baMdha kahalAtA
hai| isIlie tattvArtha sUtra 8/2-3 meM Age kahA hai-sakaSAyatvAjjIvaH karmaNo
yogyAn pudgalAnAdatte sa bandhaH arthAt kaSAyasahita jIva karma ke yogya
pudgaloM ko grahaNa karatA hai, use baMdha kahate haiN| isalIe baMdha aura
Azrava donoM ke aMtara kI yahAM | vivakSA nahIM kii| phira yaha zaMkA uThAI jAtI
hai ki AtmA ke sAtha karmapudgaloM kA kSIra-nIra kI taraha ekameka ho jAnA
baMdha kahalAtA hai; taba phira Azrava ko baMdha kyoM nahIM kahA jAtA? isakA
samAdhAna yaha hai-yadyapi tumhArI bAta yuktiyukta hai, tathApi Azrava dvArA
nahIM grahaNa kiye hue karmapudgala baMdha ke aMtargata kaise ho sakate haiM?
isa kAraNa karmapudgaloM ke | grahaNa ke lie kAraNa rUpa Azrava ko baMdha kA
hetu banAne meM koI doSa nahIM hai| phira yaha savAla uThatA hai ki to phira |
uparyukta pAMcoM ko Azravahetu kahanA cAhie, baMdhahetu kahanA vyartha hai!
uttara meM kahate haiM aisI bAta nahIM hai| yahAM baMdha aura Azrava ko ekatA
rUpa kI dRSTi se kahA hai, vastutaH yaha pATha Azravahetu kA hai; isalie sabako
apanI-apanI jagaha | yathArtha rUpa meM samajha lenaa| yahAM AMtaralokoM kA
bhAvArtha prastuta karate haiM-karmapudgaloM ko grahaNa karane ke kAraNa yaha
Azrava kahalAtA hai| karma ke jJAnAvaraNIya Adi 8 bheda haiN| jJAnAvaraNIya aura
darzanAvaraNIya karma ke Azravahetu ye haiM-jJAna-darzana rUpa guNa aura ina
guNoM se yukta guNiyoM ke jJAnadarzana prApta karane meM aMtarAya (vighna)
DAlanA, unheM khatma karanA, unakI niMdA va AzAtanA karanA, unakI hatyA karanA,
unake sAtha DAha yA IrSyA krnaa| sAtAvedanIya (puNya) karma ke Azravahetu ye
haiM-devapUjA, guru-sevA, supAtra dAna, dayA, kSamA, saMyamAsaMyama, dezavirati,
karma se malina na honA, bAlatapa aadi| asAtAvedanIya (pApa) karma ke Azravahetu
ye haiM-svayaM duHkhI honA, dUsaroM ko duHkhI karanA, zoka karanA-karAnA, vadha,
upatApa, AkraMdana (vilApa) evaM sat kAryoM kA pazcAttApa krnaakraanaa|
darzanamohanIya karma ke Azrava ke hetu ye haiM-vItarAga, zrutajJAna, saMgha,
dharma aura saba devoM kI niMdA karanA, tIvra mithyAtva ke pariNAmavaza
sarvajJa, siddha paramAtmA evaM ahaMtadeva yA devoM ke lie apalApa karanA, inheM
jhuThalAnA, inake astitva se inkAra karanA, dharmAtmA puruSoM para doSAropaNa
karanA, unmArga kA upadeza yA kathana karanA, anartha kA Agraha rakhanA,
asaMyamI kI pUjA-pratiSThA karanA, pUrvAparavicAra kiye binA kArya karanA aura
guru Adi kA apamAna vagairaha karanA ityaadi| aise akArya karane vAloM ko
samyagdarzana prApta honA atikaThina hotA hai| cAritra mohanIya karma ke kaSAya
hetu- kaSAya ke udaya se AtmA meM krodhAdi ke tIvra pariNAma (Aveza) kA honA,
isase jIva ko cAritraratna prApta nahIM hotaa| hAsyamohanIyanokaSAya Azrava ke
heta- hAsya karane se utteja kAmottejaka majAka karanA, haMsI majAka ur3Ane kA
svabhAva, adhika bolate rahanA, dInatAbhare vacana bolanA aadi| ratinokaSAya-
Azravahetu - naye-naye grAma, deza, nagarAdi dekhane kI utkaMThA, azlIla citrAdi
dekhane kA zauka, 360

Page #383 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Ashrava Bhavana Swaroop - Eight Karma's Ashrava Hetu  **Yoga Shastra
Chaturth Prakash Shlok 78**  **Amod-Promod Ka Swabhav:**  The nature of
amusement and enjoyment, the habit of watching games and entertainment, enticing
another's mind, attracting others, etc.  **Aratinokashaya-Ashrava Hetu:**  To
break another's love (rati), to encourage bad (akushala) deeds, etc.
**Bhayanokshaya-Ashrava Hetu:**  To be afraid oneself, to frighten and
intimidate others, to create terror, to become cruel (nirday), to harass, to
torment, etc.  **Shoknokshaya-Ashrava Hetu:**  To grieve oneself, to make others
grieve, to cry and lament being overwhelmed by sorrow, to be distressed, etc.
**Jugupsanokshaya-Ashrava Hetu:**  To criticize the fourfold sangha, to use
abusive language (avarnavad), to defame the sangha and sadhus, to insult, to
have disgust and hatred for good conduct, dharma, and the virtuous, to spread
hatred for them among others, to shake the faith of others, etc.
**Striveedanokashaya-Ashrava Hetu:**  These are: jealousy, attachment to sensual
pleasures, fainting, falsehood, excessive crookedness, to be pretentious (maya),
to be attached to another's spouse, etc.  **Purushveedanokashaya-Ashrava Hetu:**
To be content with one's own wife, a non-jealous attitude, mild kshaya, good
conduct, etc.  **Napunsakveedanokashaya-Ashrava Hetu:**  Desire for sexual
intercourse with both men and women, intense kshaya, strong desire for sex, to
be pretentious in observing vows, to break a woman's vow, etc.
**Charitramoneeniyakarma's General Ashrava Hetu:**  To criticize sadhus, to
become an opponent of dharma, to obstruct the practice of dharma, to be
engrossed in alcohol and meat, to praise aviriti, to obstruct the observance of
Shravak dharma, to praise those who are not virtuous, to point out flaws in
character, to arouse (udirana) kshaya, nokshaya, or other passions, etc.
**Ayushyakarma's Ashrava Hetu:**  To kill panchendriya beings, to have excessive
beginnings (arambh), to possess great possessions (mahaparigrah), to eat meat,
to repay kindness with unkindness, to always harbor animosity, to have a fierce
mind (raudradhyan), to have kshaya associated with falsehood
(mithyatvanubandhi), to have black, blue, and gray leshya, to lie, to steal
another's property, to engage in sexual intercourse repeatedly, to keep the
senses unrestrained, etc. are the causes of narakayu-ashrava. To preach the
wrong path, to destroy the right path, to have foolishness in the mind, to have
a sorrowful mind (artdhyan), to be full of pain (shalya), to be pretentious
(maya), to be engrossed in beginnings and possessions (arambh-parigrah), to
observe vows and conduct with excessive transgression, to have blue and gray
leshya, to have the kshaya of non-rejection (apratyakhyanavaraneya), etc. are
the causes of tiryanchay-ashrava.  **Alparambh, Alpaparigrah, Natural Gentleness
(Namrata) Simplicity, Gray and Radiant Leshya, Attachment to Dharma Dhyan,
Pratyakhyanikshaya, Moderate Results, Respectful, Worship of Devas and Gurus,
Welcoming Guests with Sweet Words, Pleasant Speech, Moderate Behavior in the
Journey of Life that can be understood easily, etc. are the causes of
manushyayu-ashrava. And the causes of devayu-ashrava are:**  Sragasanyam,
Deshasanyam, Akamanirjara, to maintain contact with a benevolent friend, the
nature of listening to and causing others to listen to dharma, to give charity
to worthy recipients, tapas-shraddha, not to oppose the three jewels, the result
of padmapitalleshya at the time of death, to perform tapas in childhood, the
attitude of giving up life through means like fire, water, etc., to perform
samayik silently (avyakt), etc.  **Namakarma's Ashrava Hetu:**  Crookedness of
mind, speech, and body, deception, use of maya, falsehood, gossip, a restless
mind, to create fake gold, etc., to give false testimony, to speak otherwise
(viprit) about the relationship of color, smell, taste, touch, etc., to cut off
someone's limbs, to perform yantra-karma or to confine birds in cages, to keep
false weights and measures (gaz and bant), to criticize others and praise
oneself, to engage in violence, falsehood, theft, adultery, excessive
beginnings, excessive possessions, to speak harsh and rude words, to be proud of
wearing fine clothes, to speak nonsense, to be angry, to destroy good fortune
(suhag), to use maran-mohan-ucchatan, etc., to cause trouble to others or to do
it oneself, to play games and entertainment, to act like a clown, to humiliate
or defame someone, to give ornaments to a prostitute, to set a house on fire, to
steal incense (padarth) for devas, etc., to have intense kshaya, to destroy or
desolate temples, shelters, or gardens, to be involved in the business of making
or selling coal, etc. are the causes of ashubhnama karma-ashrava. The opposite
of these (above mentioned) and detachment from the world, to abandon
carelessness, to show goodwill, to adopt the virtues of forgiveness, etc., to be
happy at the sight of virtuous people, to welcome them, etc. are the causes of
shubhnama karma-ashrava. Devotion to Arihant, Siddha, Guru, Stavir, Bahushruta,
Gachchha, Shrutagyan, Tapasvi, etc.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Azrava bhAvanA svarUpa - ATha karma ke Azrava hetu yogazAstra caturtha prakAza
zloka 78 Amoda-pramoda kA svabhAva, khela tamAse dekhane kI Adata, dUsare kA
mana lalacAnA, dUsare ko AkarSita karanA aadi| aratinokaSAya-Azravahetu - dUsare
kI rati (prema) kA bhaMga karanA, bure (akuzala) kAryoM ko protsAhana denA aadi|
bhayanokaSAya-Azravahetu - svayaM bhayabhIta honA, dUsaroM ko DarAnA-dhamakAnA,
AtaMka paidA karanA, krUra (nirdaya) bananA, hairAna karanA, pIr3ita karanA
aadi| zokanokaSAya-Azravahetu- svayaM zoka (ciMtA) karanA, dUsare ko zokamagna
karanA, zoka ke vazIbhUta (aticiMtita) hokara ronA, vilApa karanA, duHkhita honA
aadi| jugupsAnokaSAya-Azrava ke hetu - caturvidhasaMgha kI niMdA karanA,
avarNavAda (apazabda) kahanA, saMgha evaM sAdhuoM kI badanAmI karanA, gAlI denA
sadAcAra dharma evaM sadAcArI se jugupsA, ghRNA karanA, dUsaroM meM unake prati
napharata phailAnA, dUsaroM kI zraddhA DAMvADola karanA aadi| strIvedanokaSAya -
Azrava ke hetu ye haiM-IrSyA, viSayAsakti, mUrchA, asatyavAditA, ativakratA,
daMbha (mAyA) karanA, paradArasevana meM Asakti rakhanA aadi|
puruSavedanokaSAya-Azravahetu - apanI strI meM hI saMtoSa rakhanA, IrSyArahita
vRtti, kaSAyamaMdatA, suMdara AcArasevana aadi| napuMsakavedanokaSAya-Azravahetu
- strIpuruSa donoM ke sAtha maithunasevana kI lAlasA, ugra kaSAya, tIvra
kAmAbhilASA, vratAcaraNa meM daMbha karanA, strI kA vrata-bhaMga karanA aadi|
cAritramohanIyakarma ke sAmAnya rUpa meM Azravahetu - sAdhuoM kI niMdA karanA,
dharma kA virodhI bananA, dharmAcaraNa meM vighna DAlanA, madyamAMsa meM rata
rahanA, avirati kI prazaMsA karanA, zrAvakadharma-pAlana meM vighna DAlanA,
acAritrIjanoM ke guNagAna karanA, cAritra meM doSa batAnA, kaSAya, nokaSAya yA
anya Aveza kI udIraNA (uttejanA) paidA karanA aadi| AyuSyakarma ke Azrava hetu -
paMceMdriya jIvoM kA vadha karanA, bahuta hI AraMbha karanA, mahAparigraha
rakhanA, mAMsAhAra karanA. upakArI kA upakAra bhala jAnA. balki anapakAra
karanA, sadA vairabhAva rakhanA. raudradhyAna karanA, mithyAtvAnubaMdhI kaSAya,
kRSNa-nIla-kApotalezyA rakhanA, jhUTha bolanA, paradravya kA apaharaNa
karanA,bAra-bAra maithuna-sevana karanA, iMdriyoM ko niraMkuza rakhanA Adi
narakAyu-Azrava ke hetu hai; unmArga kA upadeza denA, sanmArga kA lopa karanA,
citta meM mUr3hatA rakhanA, ArtadhyAna karanA, zalya se yukta rahanA, mAyA
karanA, AraMbha-parigraha meM rata rahanA, aticArasahita vrata evaM zIla kA
pAlana, nIla aura kApota lezyA rakhanA, apratyAkhyAnAvaraNIya kaSAyasevana ye
tiryaMcAyu-Azrava ke hetu haiN| alpAraMbha, alpaparigraha, svabhAvika mRdutA
(namratA) saralatA, kApota aura tejolezyA vAlA, dharmadhyAna meM anurAga,
pratyAkhyAnIkaSAya, madhyamapariNAmI, satkAra karane vAlA, deva-guru kA pUjana,
AgaMtuka kA madhuravacanoM se satkAra, priyabhASaNaM, sukhapUrvaka samajhI jA
sakane vAlI lokayAtrA meM mAdhyasthabhAva ye saba manuSyAyu-Azrava ke hetu haiM
aura devAyu-Azrava ke hetu ye haiM - sarAgasaMyama, dezasaMyama, akAmanirjarA,
kalyANakAraka mitra se saMparka rakhanA, dharmazravaNa karane, karAne kA
svabhAva, yogyapAtra ko dAna denA, tapaHzraddhA, ratnatraya kI virAdhanA na
karanA, mRtyu ke samaya padmapItalezyA ke pariNAma, bAlatapa karanA, agni, jala
Adi sAdhanoM se prANatyAga karane kI vRtti, avyakta sAmAyika karanA aadi|
nAmakarma ke Azrava hetu - mana, vacana, kAyA kI vakratA, paravaMcana, mAyA ke
prayoga karanA, mithyAtva, cugalI, caMcalacitta rakhanA, nakalI banAvaTI sonA
Adi banAnA, jhUThI sAkSI denA; varNa-gaMdha-rasa-sparza Adi ke saMbaMdha meM
anyathA (viparIta) kathana karanA, kisI ke aMgopAMga kATa denA, yaMtra-karma
karanA athavA pakSiyoM ko pIMjare meM baMda karanA, jhUThe nApa-tola (gaja va
bAMTa) rakhanA, dUsare kI niMdA evaM svaprazaMsA karanA; hiMsA-asatya-corI-
abrahmacarya-mahAraMbhamahAparigraha-sevana karanA, kaThora asabhyavacana
bolanA, acchA veSa dhAraNa karane kA abhimAna karanA, uTapaTAMga yadvAtadvA
bolanA. Akroza karanA, saubhAgya (suhAga) naSTa karanA, kAmaNa-TumaNa (mAraNa-
mohana-uccATana Adi) kA prayoga karanA, dUsare se upadrava karAnA yA svayaM
karanA, kautuka (khela tamAze) karanA-karAnA, bhAMDa-vidUSaka kI-sI ceSTA
karanA, kisI kI phajIhata yA badanAmI karanA, vezyA ko AbhUSaNa denA, dAvAgni
lagAnA, devAdi ke lie gaMdha (padArtha) kI corI karanA; tIvra kaSAya karanA,
maMdira, upAzraya yA udyAna naSTa karanA yA ujAr3anA, koyale banAne yA becane kA
dhaMdhA karanA, ye saba azubhanAmakarma-Azrava ke hetu haiN| ina (pUrvokta) se
viparIta tathA saMsArabhIrutA, pramAda tyAga karanA, sadabhAva darzAnA. kSamAdi
gaNa dhAraNa karanA. dharmAtmA paruSoM ke darzana se AnaMda mAnanA. unakA
svAgata karanA ityAdi; zubhanAmakarma-Azrava ke hetu hai| arihaMta, siddha,
guru, sthavira, bahuzruta, gaccha, zrutajJAna, tapasvI Adi kI bhakti 361

Page #384 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Nature of Sanvara-Bhavana  **The twenty stages (tapas) of worship of the
Tirthankara-namakarma asrava are:**  * **Samvara-bhavana:** The nature of
Samvara-bhavana * **Yoga-shastra:** The fourth light, verses 79 to 83 *
**Essential vows and conduct:** Maintaining vigilance in essential vows and
conduct * **Vinya:** Humility * **Jnana-abhyasa:** Practice of knowledge *
**Tap:** Austerity * **Tyaga:** Renunciation * **Dhyana:** Meditation repeatedly
* **Tirtha-pravahana:** Pilgrimage * **Sangha-samadhi:** Concentration in the
Sangha * **Sadhu-seva (Vyayavritti):** Service to the holy ones * **Apuurva-
naveen-gyan-grahan:** Acquiring new and unique knowledge * **Darshan-
vishuddhi:** Purity of vision  **The first Tirthankara, Shri Rishabhdev Bhagwan,
and the last Tirthankara, Bhagwan Mahavira Swami, practiced all twenty stages of
tapas. The remaining Tirthankaras practiced one, two, three, or all of these
stages.**  **The asrava of Gotra-karma:**  * **Causes:** Slandering others,
making fun of them, showing disrespect, neglecting their virtues, pointing out
their faults (whether they exist or not), praising oneself (whether one has
virtues or not), hiding one's own faults, and taking pride in one's caste or
lineage. * **These are the causes of the asrava of the low Gotra-namakarma.** *
**The opposite of these, such as being free from pride, being humble in thought,
word, and deed, are the causes of the asrava of the high Gotra.**  **The asrava
of Antarayakarma:**  * **Causes:** Obstructing others in their efforts to gain
wealth, power, strength, enjoyment, and consumption, whether with reason or
without. * **This asrava can sometimes be auspicious, but otherwise, it prevents
beings from attaining dispassion.** * **Therefore, knowing the asrava to be
inauspicious, the bhavya-jiva should contemplate the asrava-bhavana to cultivate
detachment.**  **Now, we will explain the nature of Samvara-bhavana:**  **Verse
79:**  * **"Sarvesham asravaanam tu, nirodhah sanvarah smritah. Sa punar
bhidyate dvedha, dravya-bhaava-vibhedatah."** * **Meaning:** Restraining all the
asravas is called Samvara. This happens only in the ayogee kevalis. This
statement is in relation to Sarva-samvara. Restraining one, two, three, or more
asravas is called Desha-samvara. Sarva-samvara occurs in the fourteenth
gunasthanaka, called Ayogee-kevali. Both Sarva-samvara and Desha-samvara have
two divisions each, based on dravya and bhaava.  **Verse 80:**  * **"Yah karma-
pudgaladaan-chhedah, sa dravya-sanvarah. Bhava-hetu-kriya-tyagah, sa punar
bhaava-sanvarah."** * **Meaning:** Preventing the inflow of karma-pudgalas
through the asrava-door is called dravya-samvara. Renouncing the actions that
are the cause of existence is called bhaava-sanvara.  **Verse 81:**  * **"Yena
yena hyupaayena, rudhyate yo yo asravaah. Tasya tasya nirodhaaya sa sa yojyo
manishibhih."** * **Meaning:** Wise men should employ those means by which each
asrava can be restrained.  **Verse 82:**  * **"Kshamaya mrudubhaavena,
rijutvenaapyaneeyaya. Krodham maanam tatha maaya, lobham rundhyad
yathakramam."** * **Meaning:** The yogi who strives to attain self-control
should restrain anger with forgiveness, pride with humility, deceit with
honesty, and greed with contentment.  **Verse 83:**  * **"Asanyama-krtotshekaan,
vishayan visha-sannibhaan. Nirakuryaad akhandena, sanaymena mahaamatih."** *
**Meaning:** The great wise one should restrain the objects of sense, which are
like poison, with unbroken self-control, as they are intensified by lack of
self-control.  **Meaning:**  * The enjoyment of sensual pleasures seems sweet at
the time, but in the end, it is like poison. * Therefore, the power of the
senses, which are intoxicated by touch and other objects, can only be restrained
by unbroken self-control.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 saMvarabhAvanA kA svarUpa yogazAstra caturtha prakAza zloka 79 se 83 karanA,
Avazyaka vrata aura zIla meM apramAda rakhanA, vinaya, jJAnAbhyAsa, tapa, tyAga,
bAra-bAra dhyAna karanA, tIrthaprabhAvanA, saMgha meM samAdhi karanA, sAdhuoM kI
sevA (vaiyAvRtya), apUrva navIna jJAna grahaNa karanA aura darzanavizuddhi ina
bIsa sthAnakoM (tapa) kI ArAdhanA tIrthaMkaranAmakarma Azrava kA hetu hai|
prathama tIrthaMkara zrIRSabhadeva bhagavAn aura | aMtima tIrthaMkara bhagavAn
mahAvIra svAmI ne ina bIsa sthAnaka - tapa kI ArAdhanA kI thI, zeSa tIrthaMkaroM
ne inameM se eka, do, tIna yA sabakI ArAdhanA kI thii| gotrakarma ke Azrava hetu
- dUsare kI niMdA, majAka, avajJA, anAdara karanA sadguNoM kA lopa karanA, kisI
meM doSa | ho yA na ho phira bhI doSoM kA kathana karanA, Atma prazaMsA karanA,
apane meM guNa ho yA na ho, lekina guNoM kA hI kathana | karanA, apane doSoM ko
chipAnA, jAti Adi kA abhimAna karanA; ye saba nIcagotra - nAmakarma ke
Azravahetu haiM aura inase | viparIta abhimAna rahita rahanA, mana, vacana, kAyA
se vinaya karanA Adi uccagotra ke Azrava hetu haiN| aMtarAyakarma ke Azrava hetu
- dAna, lAbha, parAkrama (vIrya), bhoga aura upabhoga inameM kAraNavaza yA
akAraNa hI vighna DAlanA, aMtarAya karma ke Azrava kA hetu hai| prasaMgavaza
yaha Azrava zubha bhI ho jAtA hai, anyathA jIvoM ko vairAgya | kA koI nimitta
nahIM rahatA  /  isa prakAra Azrava ko azubha jAnakara bhavyajIvoM ko nirmamatva
ke saMpAdana hetu AzravabhAvanA kA ciMtana karanA cAhie  /  / 78  /  /  aba
saMvarabhAvanA kA nirUpaNa karate haiM  / 405 /  sarveSAmAzravANAM tu, nirodhaH
saMvaraH smRtaH  /  sa punarbhidyate dvedhA, dravyabhAvavibhedataH  // 79 //
artha :- pUrvokta sabhI AzravoM ko rokanA saMvara kahalAtA hai| yaha to ayogI
kevaliyoM meM hI hotA hai| yaha kathana sarvasaMvara kI apekSA se hai| eka, do,
tIna Adi AzravoM ko rokanA dezasaMvara kahalAtA hai| sarvasaMvara ayogakevalI
nAmaka caudahaveM guNasthAnaka meM hotA hai| sarvasaMvara aura dezasaMvara donoM
ke dravya aura bhAva kI apekSA se do-do bheda hote haiM  /  /  79  /  /  aba una
do bhedoM ke saMbaMdha meM kahate haiM  / 406 /  ya: karma pudgalAdAnacchedaH sa
dravyasaMvaraH  /  bhavahetukriyA - tyAgaH, sa punarbhAvasaMvaraH  // 80 //
artha :- AzravadvAra se karmapudgaloM ke Agamana kA nirodha karanA,
dravyasaMvara hai aura saMsAra kI kAraNabhUta kriyAoM kA tyAga karanA,
bhAvasaMvara hai  // 80 //  aba kaSAya, viSaya, yoga Adi se azubhakarma hetu ke
pratipakSabhUta arthAt virodhI upAya kI mahattA batAte haiM | | 407 | yena yena
hyupAyena, rudhyate yo ya AzravaH  /  tasya tasya nirodhAya sa sa yojyo
mniissibhiH||81|| jo-jo Asrava jisa-jisa upAya se rokA jA sakatA hai, use rokane
ke lie vivekI puruSa usa-usa upAya ko kAma meM lAye  //  81  //  | artha :
Azrava ke nirodhopAya batAte haiM | 408 | kSamayA mRdubhAvena,
RjutvenA'pyanIhayA  /  krodhaM mAnaM tathA mAyA, lobhaM rundhyAd ythaakrmm||82||
saMyama prApti ke lie prayatna karane vAlA yogI kSamA se krodha ko, namratA se
mAna ko, saralatA se mAyA ko aura saMtoSa se lobha ko roke  //  82  //  artha :
kaSAyoM ke pratipakSI bhAvoM se kSaya batAkara aba viSayoM kA saMvara kahate
haiM  / 409 /  asaMyamakRtotsekAn, viSayAn viSasannibhAn  /
nirAkuryAdakhaNDena, saMyamena mahAmatiH  // 83 //  artha :- iMdriyoM para
asaMyama se prabala bane hue, viSatulya viSayoM ko mahAbuddhimAna muni akhaMDa -
saMyama se roke  //  83  //  bhAvArtha :- viSayasukha bhogate samaya madhura
lagatA hai, lekina pariNAma meM viSa ke samAna hotA hai| ataH sparzAdiviSayoM
meM unmatta banI huI iMdriyoM ke sAmarthya ko akhaMDa saMyama se hI rokA jA
sakatA hai  /  /  83  /  /  362

Page #385 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Sanvara Bhavana and Nirjara Bhavana  **Now, the opposite of Yoga, Pramada
and Aviriti is explained.**  **Verse 84:**  > **Meaning:**  By the three types
of secrecy (guarding the mind, speech and body), one should establish the
opposite of Pramada, which is Apramada (non-negligence), in relation to the five
types of Pramada (intoxication, indulgence in sense objects, passions, sleep,
and idle talk) or the eight types of Pramada (ignorance, doubt, wrong
perception, attachment, aversion, forgetfulness, disrespect for Dharma, and
wrong tendencies in Yoga). And by abandoning Yoga that involves sinful actions,
one should establish Aviriti (non-restlessness) through Viriti (restlessness).
**Now, the opposite of Mithyatva and Artha-Roudra Dhyana is explained.**  **Yoga
Shastra, Fourth Light, Verses 84 to 86**  **Verse 85:**  > **Meaning:** One
should conquer Mithyatva (false belief) through Samyag Darshan (right faith) and
conquer Artha-Roudra Dhyana (meditation with worldly desires) through the
stability of the mind in the form of Dharma Dhyana (meditation on Dharma) and
Shukla Dhyana (meditation on purity). Who should do this? The Yogi who strives
for Sanvara (purification) should do this.  **The meaning of the inner verses
related to this is explained.**  **Explanation:**  > Just as dust enters a house
with many doors and windows that are not closed, and if the inner walls,
windows, or doors are oiled and smooth, the dust sticks to them and becomes one
with them. But if the doors are closed, the dust cannot enter and cannot stick
to the oil. Or, imagine a pond. If all the ways for water to enter are open, the
water enters quickly. But if the entrances are closed, no water can enter. Just
as a boat with a hole in it fills with water, but if the hole is closed, no
water can enter, similarly, if the three types of Yoga, which are like the doors
of Asrava (influx of karma), are stopped from all sides, then the Karmic matter
cannot enter the soul, which is in the form of Sanvara (purification). This
means that Sanvara stops the doors of Asrava. And Sanvara is of many types, such
as Kshama (forgiveness), etc. The one who has achieved Sanvara is called by the
name of that Sanvara. Then, the Sanvara that occurs in that Gunasthan (stage of
spiritual development) is called by the same name. For example, if Mithyatva
arises, then the Gunasthan is called Mithyatva Sanvara. Similarly, in Desh
Viriti (non-attachment to place), etc., and in the Gunasthan of Prasanta
(tranquility) and Kshina Moha (diminished attachment), etc., there is Kshaya
Sanvara. In this way, the Bhavyajiva (soul destined for liberation) should
contemplate Sanvara Bhavana, which is the form of Sanvara due to the stoppage of
Asrava.  **Aviriti Sanvara is considered to be Pramada Sanvara in the context of
Apramatta Samyata (non-negligent restraint), etc.**  **In the A Yogik Kevali
Gunasthan (stage of the liberated soul), there is Sanvara of all Yoga.**  **The
detailed explanation is given. Therefore, Sanvara Bhavana is the crown jewel in
the community of Bhavanas (contemplations).**  **Now, Nirjara Bhavana is
explained.**  **Verse 86:**  > **Meaning:** The shedding or separation of
Karmas, which are the seeds of worldly existence, from the soul's domain is
called Nirjara. It is of two types: Sakama Nirjara and Akarama Nirjara.
**Explanation:**  > In the scriptures, the shedding or separation of Karmas,
which are the cause of worldly existence in the form of wandering in the four
states of existence, from the soul's domain, with the experience of their
essence, is called Nirjara. This Nirjara is of two types: 'May my Karmas be
shed' - this is Sakama Nirjara, which is done with desire or with a pure
purpose, such as performing austerities. To desire the fruits of this world or
the next world is not Nirjara, because it is forbidden for the seeker. It is
said, "One should not perform austerities for the sake of worldly happiness, nor
for the sake of attaining desired happiness in the next world. One should not
perform austerities for the sake of fame, praise, and applause. One should not
perform austerities for any purpose other than the benefit of Nirjara
(purification of the soul)." (Dasha Va. 9/4) This is the nature of Sakama
Nirjara. In contrast, Akarama Nirjara is devoid of the aforementioned desires.
It is devoid of the desire, 'May my sinful Karmas be destroyed.'

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 saMvarabhAvanA evaM nirjarA bhAvanA aba yoga, pramAda aura avirati ke
pratipakSa ko kahate haiM  /  410  /  tisRbhiguptibhiryogAn, pramAdaM
cApramAdataH  /  sAvadyayogahAnenAviratiM cApi sAdhayet  // 84 //  artha :-
mana, vacana aura kAyA ke yoga (vyApAra) ko mana, vacana aura kAyA kI rakSA rUpa
tIna guptiyoM dvArA, madyapAna, viSaya- sevana, kaSAya, nidrA, vikathA rUpa
pAMca prakAra ke athavA ajJAna, saMzaya, viparyaya, rAga, dveSa, smRtibhraMza,
dharma meM anAdara, yogoM kI duSpravRtti rUpa ATha prakAra ke pramAda ke
pratipakSI apramAda ko siddha kare aura sAvadya (pApa) vyApAra vAle yoga ko
tyAgakara avirati ko virati se siddha kare  //  84  //  aba mithyAtva evaM Artta
- raudradhyAna ke pratipakSI kahate haiM yogazAstra caturtha prakAza zloka 84 se
86 artha : | 411 | saddarzanena mithyAtvaM, zubhasthairyeNa cetasaH  /
vijayetAta - raudre ca saMvarArtha kRtodyamaH ||85 || samyagdarzana se mithyAtva
para vijaya prApta kare, dharmadhyAna- zukladhyAna rUpa citta kI sthiratA se
ArttaraudradhyAna para vijaya prApta kre| kauna kare? saMvara ke lie udyama
karane vAlA yogI kare  /  /  85  /  /  isa saMbaMdhI AMtarazlokoM kA bhAvArtha
kahate haiM vyAkhyA : - jisa ghara ke cAroM tarapha rAjamArga hoM aura bahuta
daravAje ho aura ve baMda nahIM kiye gaye ho to unameM dhUla avazya ghusatI hai|
aura yadi aMdara kI dIvAra khir3akI yA daravAje para tela lagA ho, ve cikane hoM
to dhUla usa | para acchI taraha cipaka kara unake sAtha eka rUpa ho jAtI hai|
paraMtu daravAje baMda kiye gaye hoM to dhUla aMdara praveza nahIM kara sakatI
aura na tela ke sAtha eka rUpa banakara cipaka bhI sakatI hai| athavA mAna lo,
eka tAlAba hai, usameM pAnI | Ane ke sabhI rAste khola diye jAya to pAnI usameM
tejI se ghusa jAtA hai aura agara pAnI Ane ke dvAra baMda kara diye | jAya to
jarA bhI pAnI usameM nahIM A sktaa| jaise naukA meM chidra ho jAye to usameM
pAnI bhara jAtA hai, kintu chidra baMda kara diyA jAya to usameM jarA bhI pAnI
praveza nahIM kara sakatA; vaise hI AsravadvAra rUpI triyogoM ko cAroM tarapha
se roka diyA jAya to saMvara svarUpa AtmA meM karmadravya kA praveza nahIM ho
sktaa| matalaba yaha hai ki saMvara karane se AsravadvAra kA nirodha hotA hai|
aura kSamA Adi bheda se saMvara aneka prakAra kA hai| jisa jisakA saMvara kiyA
ho, use usa saMvara | ke nAma se pratipAdana kiyA jAtA hai, phira usa
guNasthAnaka meM jo-jo saMvara hotA hai, use usI saMvara ke nAma se pukArA |
jAtA hai| jaise mithyAtva kA anudaya ho to usa guNasthAnaka meM mithyAtvasaMvara
kahalAtA hai| tathA dezavirati Adi meM, prazAMta aura kSINamohAdika guNasthAna
meM kaSAyasaMvara isa taraha Asravanirodha ke kAraNa rUpa saMvara kA
saMvarabhAvanA kA bhavyajIva ciMtana kare  /  iti | avirati kA saMvara aura
apramattasaMyatAdi meM pramAdasaMvara mAnA gayA hai| | hotA hai;
ayogikevaliguNasthAna meM saMpUrNa yoga kA saMvara hotA | vistRta varNana kiyaa|
ataH bhAvanAgaNa - samudAya meM ziromaNi saMvarabhAvanA  /  /  85  /  /  aba
nirjarAbhAvanA kahate haiM  / 412 /  saMsArabIjabhUtAnAM karmaNAM jaraNAdiha  /
nirjarA sA smRtA dvedhA, sakAmAkAmavarjitA  // 86 //  saMsAra - bhramaNa ke
bIjabhUta karmoM kA Atmapradeza se jhar3a jAnA yA pRthaka ho jAnA nirjarA hai|
vaha do prakAra kI hai - sakAmanirjarA aura akAmanirjarA  /  /  86  /  /  artha
: vyAkhyA :- cAra gati meM bhramaNa svarUpa saMsAra ke kAraNabhUta karmoM kA
Atmapradeza se rasAnubhavapUrvaka karmapudgaloM ke khira jAne, alaga ho jAne ko
zAstroM meM nirjarA kahA hai| vaha nirjarA do prakAra kI hai- 'mere karmoM kI
nirjarA ho' aisI icchApUrvaka yA vizuddha uddezyapUrvaka tapa Adi karanA; sakAma
- nirjarA hai| isa loka aura paraloka ke phala kI icchA karanA | nirjarA nahIM
hai, kyoMki sAdhaka ke lie aisI icchA karanA niSiddha hai| kahA bhI hai ki 'isa
loka ke sukha kI abhilASA se tapasyA nahIM karanI cAhie, paraloka meM
ISTasukhaprApti ke lie bhI tapa nahIM karanA cAhie; kIrti, prazaMsA evaM
vAhavAhI | Adi ke lie bhI tapazcaryA nahIM karanI cAhie; nirjarA ( Atmazuddhi)
ke lAbha ke sivAya anya prayojana se tapa nahIM karanA | caahie| (daza vai. 9/4)
yaha hai sakAmanirjarA kA svruup| isake viparIta akAma-nirjarA hai, jo pUrvokta
abhilASA se | rahita hai| vaha mere pApakarmoM kA nAza ho' isa abhilASA se
rahita hai  /  /  86  /  /  262

Page #386 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Nature of Nirjara  **Chapter 4, Light 4 of Yoga Shastra, Verses 87-89**
**Explanation of both types of Nirjara**  **Meaning:**  || 413 || The Nirjara of
those who are restrained (Samyami) should be understood as Sakama (desire-
driven), and the Nirjara of all other beings, from those with one sense to those
with five senses, is Akam (desireless). Just as fruit ripens in two ways, one
through means and the other naturally on the tree, so too, Nirjara is of two
types: Sakama Nirjara, where karmas are quickly destroyed through means like
tapasya (austerity), and Akam Nirjara, where karmas ripen naturally in due time
and are experienced involuntarily. || 87 ||  **Explanation:**  Those restrained
individuals who practice tapasya to destroy their karmas, with the intention of
"Let my karmas be destroyed," do not desire worldly or otherworldly pleasures
from that tapasya. This is Sakama Nirjara. The Nirjara of beings other than the
restrained, which is independent of the fruit of karma destruction, is Akam
Nirjara. It occurs in this way:  Beings with one sense, from earth-bodied to
plant-bodied, experience unbearable karmas (Asatavedaniya) due to cold, heat,
rain, water, fire, wounds from weapons, cutting, piercing, etc. This causes the
subtle karmas to detach from their own region (Atma Pradesh). Beings with
impaired senses experience unbearable karmas in the form of hunger, thirst,
cold, heat, etc., while five-sensed animals experience them in the form of
cutting, piercing, fire, weapons, etc. In hell, there are three types of
terrible pain: hunger, thirst, disease, poverty, etc., which are experienced as
unbearable karmas. The same is true for unrestrained humans. This means that
unrestrained beings involuntarily experience the pain that has come upon them,
and are forced to endure it. This detachment of karmas from their own region is
Akam Nirjara.  **Doubt:**  There seems to be no distinct nature of both Sakama
and Akam Nirjara.  **Resolution:**  To resolve this, an example is given: The
experience of the fruit of unbearable karmas occurs in two ways: naturally and
through means. Just as the fruits of a tree fall naturally when ripe, and others
are ripened through means, like mangoes being ripened by covering them with
grass in a vacuum, or ripening naturally on the tree in due time, similarly, the
destruction of karmas also occurs in two ways: one through means like tapasya,
which leads to quick destruction (Sakama Nirjara), and the other through the
natural ripening of karmas, where they are experienced involuntarily without any
means (Akam Nirjara). This is why there are two types of Nirjara.  **Further
Doubt:**  The example of fruit ripening has no connection to the destruction of
karmas.  **Resolution:**  There is a connection. Just as fruit ripens in two
ways, so too, the destruction of karmas occurs in two ways. Here, ripening is
the form of Nirjara. In Nirjara, the fruit of karma ripens. || 87 ||  **Now, the
cause of Sakama Nirjara is explained clearly through an example:**  || 414 ||
Just as gold, even with impurities, becomes pure when heated in a blazing fire,
so too, a being filled with the impurities of evil karmas becomes pure when
heated in the fire of tapasya. || 88 ||  **Meaning:**  **Explanation:**  Tapasya
is that which heats the rasa (essence), other bodily elements, and karmas. It is
said that tapasya is that which burns the rasa, blood, flesh, fat, bones,
marrow, semen, and other elements, as well as evil karmas, to ashes. This is the
cause of Nirjara. It is said that "If, even while being nourished, impurities
are diligently eliminated, then the impurities are destroyed. Similarly, the
soul burns the accumulated karmas through tapasya." || 88 ||  **Tapasya is of
two types: external and internal. First, the types of external tapasya are
explained:**  || 415 || Fasting (Anashan), Unoonadri (eating less), reducing
one's activities (Vritti Sanksepan), giving up desires (Rasa Tyag), bodily
hardship (Tanuklesh), and merging (Linata) - these are the six types of external
tapasya. || 89 ||  **Meaning:**  **End of Chapter 4, Light 4**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 nirjarAbhAvanA kA svarUpa yogazAstra caturtha prakAza zloka 87 se 89 punaH
donoM prakAra kI nirjarA kI vyAkhyA karate haiM artha || 413  /  jJeyA sakAmA
yaminAkAmA tvanyadehinAm  /  karmaNAM phalavatpAko, yadupAyAt svavato'pi hi
||87|| saMyamI puruSoM kI nirjarA sakAma samajhanI cAhie aura unase atirikta
jitane bhI ekendriya se lekara paMcendriya taka ke jIva haiM, unakI nirjarA
akAma hai| jaise phala do prakAra se pakatA hai, eka to upAya se, dUsare svataH
hI per3a para; vaise hI jisameM karmoM ko tapa Adi upAyoM se zIghra bhogakara
kSaya kiyA jAtA hai, vaha sakAmanirjarA hai aura jisameM samaya para karma
svataH udaya meM Akara anicchA se jabarana bhoge jAte haiM, taba kSaya hote
haiM, vaha akAma nirjarA hai  /  /  87  /  /  vyAkhyA :- 'mere karmoM kI nirjarA
ho', isa abhiprAya se jo saMyamI puruSa karmakSaya karane ke lie tapasyA karate
haiM, unheM usa tapasyA se ihalaukika yA pAralaukika sukha kI icchA nahIM hotI;
vahI sakAmanirjarA hai| saMyamI ke atirikta | ekendriya Adi jIvoM kI karmakSaya
rUpa phala se nirapekSa jo nirjarA hai, vaha akAmanirjarA hai| vaha isa prakAra
hotI hai| pRthvIkAya se vanaspatikAya taka ekendriya jIva zardI, garmI, varSA,
jala, agni, zastra Adi ke ghAva, chedana - bhedana Adi | ke kAraNa asAtAvedanIya
karma kA anubhava karate haiM, isase nIrasakarma apane Atmapradeza se alaga ho
jAte haiN| vikalendriya jIva bhUkha, pyAsa, ThaMDa, garmI Adi ke rUpa meM tathA
paMcendriya tiryaMca chedana - bhedana, agni, zastra Adi ke rUpa meM |
asAtAvedanIya (duHkha) karma bhogate haiN| naraka meM tIna prakAra kI bhayaMkara
vedanA hotI hai- bhUkha, pyAsa, vyAdhi, daridratA | Adi duHkhoM ke rUpa meM
vahAM asAtAvedanIya karma bhogate haiN| yahI hAla asaMyamI manuSyoM kA hai|
matalaba yaha ki asaMyamI | jIva binA icchA ke A par3e hue duHkhoM ko lAcArI se
paravaza hokara bhogate haiM aura isa prakAra karmoM kA Atmapradeza se | pRthak
ho jAnA akAmanirjarA hai| yahAM zaMkA hotI hai ki sakAma aura akAmanirjarA ke
donoM bhedoM kA pRthak svarUpa to koI nahIM dikhAI detA? isake samAdhAna ke lie
dRSTAMta dete haiM- asAtAvedanIya karma kA phalabhoga do prakAra se hotA | hai -
apane Apa aura upAya se  /  jaise vRkSa ke phala eka to per3a para svataH
pakakara nIce gira jAte haiM, dUsare upAya se pakAye | jAte haiN| Ama Adi phaloM
ko nirvAtasthAna meM ghAsa se r3hakakara pakAyA jAtA hai, yA phira ve kAla
(samaya) hone para svataH per3a para hI paka jAte haiM jisa prakAra phaloM kA
pakAnA do taraha se hotA hai, usI prakAra karmoM kI nirjarA bhI do taraha se
hotI hai; eka to tapasyA Adi upAya se zIghra nirjarA ho jAtI hai, vaha
sakAmanirjarA hai aura karmodaya se karma nirupAya hokara bhoge jAya, vahAM
akAmanirjarA hai| isa kAraNa nirjarA ke do bheda kahe haiN| phira zaMkA uThAI
jAtI hai ki phala do prakAra se pakatA hai, isase karmanirjarA kA kyA vAstA?
bezaka saMbaMdha hai, phala pakane ke prakAroM kI taraha, karmanirjarA bhI | do
prakAra se hotI hai| yahAM pakanA nirjarA rUpa hai| nirjarA meM karmaphala kA
pakanA hotA hai  /  /  87  /  /  aba sakAmanirjarA ke hetu dRSTAMta dvArA
spaSTataH samajhAte haiM | 414 /  sadoSamapi dIptena, suvarNaM vahninA yathA  /
tapo'gninA tapyamAnastathA jIvo vizudhyati  // 88 //  jaise sadoSa (mailasahita)
sonA pradIpta Aga meM tapAne para zuddha ho jAtA hai, vaise azubhakarma rUpa
doSa se yukta jIva bhI tapa rUpI agni meM tapane para vizuddha ho jAtA hai ||88
//  artha : vyAkhyA : * jisase rasa Adi dhAtu evaM karma tapeM, use tapa kahate
haiN| kahA bhI hai- jisase rasa, rudhira, mAMsa, carbI, haDDI, majjA aura zukra
Adi dhAtue~ evaM azubhakarma tapakara bhasma ho jAya, use nirukti (vyutpatti) ke
anusAra tapa kahate haiN| vahI nirjarA kA hetu hai| kahA hai ki 'yadi puSTa hote
hue bhI doSoM kA prayatna pUrvaka zoSaNa kiyA jAya to doSakSaya hote haiM, isI
prakAra saMvara se roke hue saMcita karmoM ko AtmA tapasyA se jalA detA hai  /
/  88  /  /  tapa bAhya aura AbhyaMtara do prakAra kA hai| sarvaprathama
brAhyatapa ke bheda kahate haiM  / 415 /  anazanamaunodaryaM, vRtteH saGkSepaNaM
tathA  /  rasatyAgastanuklezo, lInateti bahistapaH ||89|| artha :- AhAratyAga
rUpI anazana, UnodarI, vRttisaMkSepa, rasaparityAga, kAyakleza evaM saMlInatA;
isa prakAra bAhyatapa 6 prakAra kA hai  /  /  89  /  /  364

Page #387 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Nature of Nirjara Bhavana Tapa  **Fourth Prakash of Yoga Shastra, Verse
89 Commentary:**  1. **Anashan (Fasting):** There are two types of fasting: one
for a limited time and the other for life.   * **Limited Time Anashan:** This
type of fasting ranges from a simple Namaskara (prayer) to a six-month
continuous fast, as per the teachings of Bhagwan Mahavir. In the time of Shri
Rishabhdev, it could be for a year, and for the 22 Tirthankaras in between, it
could be for eight months.  * **Lifelong Anashan:** This has three types:
Padpogamana, Ingini, and Bhaktapratyakhyan.      * **Padpogamana:** This has two
sub-types: with and without suffering. When a sadhak (practitioner) is suffering
from a disease at the end of their life, they can choose to fast and die, which
is considered Padpogamana with suffering. The other type, without suffering, is
when a sadhak, having taught their disciple about the principles of acceptance
and service, having followed the Gachch (spiritual lineage) diligently, and
having practiced Ugravihar (intense spiritual practice), feels ready for
Samadhi-maran (death in meditation) due to their advanced age. They then choose
a place free from living beings and remain still like a tree, their mind focused
on meditation until their life force departs.      * **Ingini:** This is a
specific type of fasting, as described in the scriptures, involving specific
actions. The sadhak, knowing their remaining lifespan, chooses a secluded place
and renounces all four types of food. They move from shade to sunlight and
sunlight to shade, remaining mindful and focused on meditation until they attain
Samadhi.     * **Bhaktapratyakhyan:** In this type, the sadhak remains within
the Gachch-Sampradaya (spiritual community), lays down a soft Santhara (bed),
renounces attachment to their body and possessions, and rejects all four types
of food. They may receive Namaskara mantra (prayer) from other sadhus or offer
service. They may change positions as needed and accept death in Samadhi.  2.
**Unodari:** This is a type of tapa where one consumes less than what is
required for the stomach, meaning the stomach is kept "un-full". The action or
feeling associated with this is "Aunaadarya" (lack of desire for food). There
are four types:     * **Alpahar-Unodari:** Consuming only eight kaur (mouthfuls)
of food.     * **Aparadh-Unodari:** Consuming around twelve kaur.     * **Ardh-
Unodari:** Consuming sixteen kaur.     * **Prapt-Aahar-Se-Kuch-Kam-Unodari:**
Consuming slightly less than the usual amount of food, which is considered to be
thirty-two kaur for men.      * **Note:** The kaur should be of medium size,
excluding the very large and very small ones. One should consume food according
to the size of their mouth, avoiding any distortion.      * **Variations:** Each
of these types can have further variations by reducing the kaur by one each
time.     * **Women:** The usual amount of food for women is considered to be
twenty-eight kaur. The same principles of Unodari apply to women, with the
appropriate adjustments.  3. **Vrittisankshep:** This refers to reducing one's
livelihood to a minimum. It involves limiting one's possessions to a specific
amount, such as one, two, or three houses, or limiting one's activities to a
specific area, such as a neighborhood, village, or half a village. This
limitation can also be applied to material possessions, territory, time, and
emotions.  4. **Rasparityaag:** This refers to renouncing substances that
nourish the body and tissues. These substances are considered "Viggai" or
"Vikritik" in the scriptures, as they can lead to imbalances. This includes
alcohol, meat, honey, butter, ghee, milk, yogurt, oil, jaggery, sweets, and
other delicacies.  5. **Kayaklesh:** This refers to enduring physical hardship
for the sake of Dharma (righteousness), as described in the Agamas (ancient
scriptures). Some may question how the body, being inanimate, can experience
hardship. The answer is that the body and the soul are inseparable, like milk
and water. Therefore, the soul's suffering can be considered as the body's
suffering.   **Note:** These four types of tapa are considered "Mahaviggai"
(major austerities) and should be completely renounced.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 nirjarA bhAvanA tapa kA svarUpa yogazAstra caturtha prakAza zloka 89 vyAkhyA :-
1. anazana - tapa do prakAra kA hai| eka parimita samaya ke lie, dUsarA
jIvanaparyaMta taka kaa| itvarika | anazana - jo namaskArasahita (naukArasI) se
lekara bhagavAn mahAvIra ke zAsana meM 6 mahIne (lagAtAra) nirAhAra taka hotA
hai| zrI RSabhadeva ke zAsana meM eka varSa taka aura bIca ke 22 tIrthakaroM ke
zAsana meM 8 mAsa taka kA anazana ho sakatA thaa| jIvanaparyaMta kA anazana tIna
prakAra kA hai-pAdapogamana, iMginI aura bhktprtyaakhyaan| pAdapogamana ke do
bheda haiM-vyAghAtasahita, vyaaghaatrhit| AyuSya zeSa hone para kisI vyAdhi ke
utpanna hone se sAdhaka mahAvedanA bhoga rahA ho, usa samaya isa prakAra kA
anazana karake prANatyAga kiyA jAya, vaha savyAghAta hotA hai; dUsarA
nirvyAghAta anazana isa prakAra kA hotA hai ki koI mahAbhAgyazAlI yaha socakara
ki 'maiMne apane ziSya ko grahaNa va Asevana zikSA dekara | taiyAra kiyA, gaccha
kA bhalIbhAMti pAlana kiyA, ugravihAra bhI kiyA, aba umra paka jAne ke kAraNa
samAdhimaraNa ke lie taiyAra huA hUM' isa prakAra umra paripakva ho jAne para
trasasthAvarajaMturahita sthAna para vRkSa kI taraha nizceSTa hokara sthira
rahe, citta prANa chUTane taka prazasta dhyAna meM sthira rkhe| isa kAraNa
pAdapogamana anazana do prakAra kA khaa| iMginImaraNazAstrokta kriyAvizeSa se
yukta jo anazana hotA hai, vaha iMginI hai| isa maraNa ko svIkAra karane vAlA
usI krama se | AyuSya kI sthiti jAnakara, tathAprakAra kI sthaMDilabhUmi meM
akelA cAra prakAra ke AhAra kA tyAga karake chAyA se dhUpa meM aura dhUpa se
chAyA meM Ate-jAte, sthAnaparivartana karate samaya zubhadhyAnaparAyaNa rahakara
samAdhi pUrvaka pra hai| tIsarA yAvajjIva anazana bhaktapratyAkhyAna hai| isameM
sAdhaka gaccha-saMpradAya meM rahatA huA komala saMthArA bichAkara, zarIra aura
upakaraNoM kI mamatA kA tyAga karake cAroM AhAra kA pratyAkhyAna kre| svayaM
namaskAramaM athavA sevA meM rahe hue sAdhu namaskAramaMtra sunaaeN| karavaTa
badalanA ho, taba karavaTa badale aura samAdhi pUrvaka mRtyu svIkAra kare, use
bhaktaMpratyAkhyAna anazana kahate haiN| 2. UnodarI - jisameM udara ke lie
paryApta AhAra se kama kiyA jAya, yAnI udara Unakama khAyA jAya, vaha UnodarI
tapa kahalAtA hai| usakI kriyA yA bhAva aunAdarya hai| isake cAra bheda haiM-
alpAhAra-UnodarI, Adhe se kama UnodarI, ardha-UnodarI aura prApta AhAra se kucha
kama uunodrii| puruSa kA AhAra 32 kaura kA mAnA jAtA hai| yahAM utkRSTa aura
jaghanya chor3akara madhyama kavala kA grahaNa krnaa| apane mukha-vivara ke
anusAra kavala lenA cAhie; jisase mukha vikRtimaya na dikhAyI de| ATha kaura kA
AhAra karanA alpAhAra UnodarI hai, jisameM Adhe ke karIba (nikaTa) yAnI 12 kaura
liye jAya. vaha apArdha-UnodarI hotI hai: solaha kara liye jAya to ardha-UnodarI
hotI hai| battIsa kaura kA AhArapramANa mAnA jAtA hai, unameM eka, do Adi krama
se kama karate-karate caubIsa kaura taka lene se kucha nyUna UnodarI kahalAtA
hai| cAroM prakAroM vAlI UnodarI meM bhI eka-eka kaura kama karane se aneka
bheda vAlI UnodarI ho sakatI hai| yaha saba UnodarI-vizeSa tapa hai| strI kA
AhAra 28 kaura kA mAnA jAtA hai| kahA bhI hai-puruSa kI kukSi battIsa kaura
(grAsa) AhAra se pUrNa ho jAtI hai, jabaki strI kA AhAra 28 kaura kA smjhnaa|
(pi. ni. 642) pUrvokta bhedoM ke anusAra strI ke lie bhI nyUna AhArAdi UnodarI
tapa samajha lenA caahie| 3. vRttisaMkSepa - jisase jIvana Tika sake, use vRtti
kahate haiN| usa vRtti kA saMkSepa karake datti-parimANa karanA yA eka-do-tIna
Adi ghara kA abhigraha (niyama) karanA athavA mohallA, gAMva yA Adhe gAMva kA
niyama krnaa| abhigraha ke aMtargata dravya, kSetra, kAla aura bhAva rUpa se bhI
niyama liyA jAtA hai| 4. rasaparityAga - jo zarIra aura dhAtu ko puSTa kare, use
rasa kahate haiM; yaha rasa vikAra kA kAraNa hone se zAstrIya | bhASA meM ise
'viggaI' athavA 'vikRtika' kahate haiN| isameM madya, mAMsa, madhu, makkhana',
ghI, dUdha, dahI, tela, gur3a, pakavAna miThAI ityAdi viggaI kA tyAga karanA
rasa-tyAga hai| 5. kAyakleza- Agamokta-vidhi ke anusAra dharmapAlana ke lie kAyA
se kaSTa shnaa| yahAM zaMkA hotI hai ki 'zarIra to acetana rUpa hai, phira use
kAyakleza kaise ho sakatA hai?' isake uttara meM kahate haiM-zarIra aura
zarIradhArI jIva kA kSIra-nIra-nyAyena abheda-saMbaMdha hai| isa kAraNa AtmA ke
kleza ko kAyakleza kahA jA sakatA hai| 1. ina cAra ko mahAvigaI kahA hai ataH
usakA sarvathA tyAga karane kA vidhAna hai| 365

Page #388 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Ten Types of Penitential Austerities, Their Characteristics and Fruits
**Chapter 4, Light 90 of Yoga Shastra**  According to tradition, **Kayaklesha**
(physical austerity) is achieved through specific postures, etc. It also
includes refraining from adornment, embellishment, and care of the body, as well
as activities like hair removal.  **Doubt:** What is the difference between
**Parishha** (endurance) and **Kayaklesha**?  **Solution:** **Kayaklesha** is
the voluntary endurance of hardship, while **Parishha** is the involuntary
experience of suffering or pain inflicted by others. Thus, there is a difference
between the two.  **Sanleena (Immersion) Austerity:**  Residing in a secluded,
peaceful, and solitary place like a deserted house, temple, assembly hall,
mountain cave, etc., free from women, men, and eunuchs; contracting one's senses
and limbs; guarding oneself from objects of sense; and restraining the mind,
speech, body, senses, and passions - this is **Sanleena** austerity. || 89 ||
These six types are **external austerities**. They require external resources,
are visible to others, and are suitable for both non-Jain and householders.
Hence, they are called **external austerities**. These six types of external
austerities lead to detachment, lightness of the body, control of the senses,
preservation of restraint, and the destruction of karmas.  Now, we will discuss
the types of **internal austerities**. || 416 ||  **Praayashchitta (Penitence),
Vaayaavrutya (Reversion), Swaadhyaaya (Self-Study), Vinaya (Humility), Vyutsarga
(Renunciation), and Shubha Dhyaan (Auspicious Meditation) - these are the six
types of internal austerities.** || 90 ||  **Explanation:**  1. **Praayashchitta
(Penitence):** Even a slight transgression in the primary and secondary virtues
pollutes them. To purify them, **Praayashchitta** is performed. It is a special
practice of contemplation and remembrance for the purification of those who have
deviated from the path of righteous conduct. It is also called
**Praayashchitta** when the transgression (in vows) occurs mainly in the mind
(consciousness), but not in speech or body. Or, **Praayashchitta** is that which
purifies sins and the mind. The word **chiti** is used in the sense of knowledge
and purification. (Tattvarth Bhashya 8-22)  **Praayashchitta** is of ten types:
1. **Aalochana** (Confession), 2. **Pratikramna** (Reversion), 3. **Tadubhaya**
(Mixed), 4. **Viveka** (Discernment), 5. **Vyutsarga** (Renunciation), 6.
**Tap** (Austerity), 7. **Chheda** (Separation), 8. **Mool** (Root), 9.
**Anvastaapy** (Irreversible), and 10. **Paaraanchik** (Transitory).  1.
**Aalochana (Confession):** **Aalochana** means revealing one's transgressions
to the Guru. The transgressions should be revealed in the same order as they
were committed. The transgression that carries the most severe penance should be
confessed first, followed by the others in descending order. Revealing the
faults to the Guru in the same order as they were committed is **Aalochana**.
**Praayashchitta** is **anuloomya** (sequential). The **Geetarth** (a
commentary) states for the disciple: "Knowing the five, ten, and fifteen,
according to the Guru, the minor, and the transgression, if the transgression is
major, it should be revealed first, followed by the smaller ones, and then the
smallest, in this order."  2. **Pratikramna (Reversion):** Returning to one's
true nature after abandoning the transgression is **Pratikramna**. It involves
sincere repentance for the sin with a commitment to not repeat it.  3.
**Tadubhaya (Mixed):** This involves both **Aalochana** and **Pratikramna**.
First, confess to the Guru, and then perform **Pratikramna** as instructed by
the Guru.  4. **Viveka (Discernment):** This involves the renunciation of food,
water, tools, bedding, etc., that are associated with the mind or soul.  5.
**Vyutsarga (Renunciation):** **Kayotsarga** (Renunciation of the Body): This
involves renouncing non-essential, faulty, etc., substances; going and coming;
sinful (bad) dreams; traveling by boat to the opposite shore; going and coming
for bodily functions; cleansing oneself of excrement and urine; and renouncing
the activities of the mind, speech, and body with a specific intention. This is
**Praayashchitta** in the form of **Kayotsarga** to eliminate those faults.  6.
**Tap (Austerity):** According to the **Chheda Granth** (a text) or the **Jita
Kalpa Sutra** (a text), if an austerity leads to purification, then it should be
performed and practiced.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prAyazcitta tapa ke dasa bheda, unakA lakSaNa aura phala yogazAstra caturtha
prakAza zloka 90 paraMparAnusAra kAyakleza viziSTa Asana Adi karane se hotA hai|
zarIra kI zrRMgAra-vibhUSA, sAjasajjA aura zuzrUSA na | karanA, kezaloca ityAdi
karanA bhI kAyakleza hai| zaMkA hotI hai-parISaha aura kAyakleza meM kyA aMtara
hai? isakA samAdhAna yaha hai-svecchA se kleza sahana karanA kAyakleza hai aura
anicchA se yA dUsare dvArA diye hue klezoM-duHkhoM kA anubhava karanA pariSaha
hai| isa prakAra ina donoM meM aMtara hai| saMlInatA - vivikta Asana, strI-
puruSa-napuMsaka se rahita zUnya ghara, devakula, sabhA, parvata-guphA Adi kisI
ekAMta, zAMta, vivikta sthAna meM rahanA, apanI iMdriyoM yA aMgopAMgoM ko
sikor3akara rakhanA, viSayoM se gopana-(rakSaNa) karanA, mana, vacana, kAyA,
iMdriyoM tathA kaSAyoM ko rokanA saMlInatA tapa hai  /  / 89 /  /  ye chaha
prakAra ke bAhya tapa hue| ye tapa bAhyadravyoM kI apekSA rakhate haiM, dUsaroM
ko bhI pratyakSa dikhAyI dete haiM, kutIrthiyoM evaM gRhasthoM ke lie bhI
AcaraNIya hai; ataH inheM bAhyatapa kahA gayA hai| ina chaha prakAra ke
bAhyatapoM se AsaktityAga, zarIra kA lAghava, iMdriyavijaya karane se saMyama kI
rakSA aura karmoM kI nirjarA hotI hai| aba AbhyaMtara tapa ke bheda batAte
haiN||416| prAyazcittaM, vaiyAvRttyaM, svAdhyAyo vinayo'pi ca  /  vyutsargo'tha
zubhaM dhyAnaM, SoDhetyAbhyantaraM tapaH  // 90 /  /  artha :- prAyazcitta,
vaiyAvRtya, svAdhyAya, vinaya, vyutsarga aura zubhadhyAna ye 6 prakAra ke
AbhyaMtara tapa hai||10|| vyAkhyA :- 1. prAyazcitta - mUlaguNa aura uttaraguNa
meM thor3e-se bhI aticAra lage hoM, to ve guNoM ko malina kara dete haiN| unakI
zuddhi ke lie prAyazcitta athavA pracura pramANa meM jina AtmAoM meM se AcAra
dharma calA jAya, ve adhikatara sAdhusAdhviyoM hI hotI hai, unake dvArA vizuddha
rahane ke lie jo vicAra kiyA jAtA hai, smaraNa kiyA jAtA hai, vaha prAyazcitta
rUpa anuSThAna vizeSa kahalAtA hai, athavA prAyazcitta vaha kahalAtA hai, jahAM
aticAra (vratoM meM) prAyaH yAnI adhikatara mana (citta) meM hI lage hoM, vacana
aura kAyA se phira vaha sevana nahIM karatA ho| athavA prAyaH yAnI pApa aura
citta arthAt usakA vizodhana arthAt-jisase pApoM kI zuddhi hotI ho, vaha
prAyazcitta hai| citi dhAtu saMjJAna aura vizuddhi artha meM prayukta hotI hai|
(tattvArtha bhASya 8-22) prAyazcitta 10 prakAra kA hai-1. AlocanA, 2.
pratikramaNa, 3. tadubhaya (mizra), 4. viveka, 5. vyutsarga, 6. tapa, 7. cheda,
8. mUla, 9. anavasthApya aura 10. paaraaNcik| 1. AlocanA - AlocanA kA artha hai-
guru ke sammukha apane aparAdha prakaTa krnaa| aparAdha jisa prakAra sevana kiyA
ho, usI krama se unake sAmane vyakta karanA caahie| jisa aparAdha meM adhika
prAyazcitta AtA ho, usakI pahale AlocanA kare, bAda meM kramazaH aMta taka
AlocanA kre| jisa prakAra se doSoM kA Asevana kiyA ho, usI prakAra kramAnusAra
doSoM ko guru ke sAmane prakaTa karanA AlocanA hai| prAyazcitta aanulomy|
gItArtha ziSya ke lie hai 'vaha paMcaka, dazaka, paMcadazaka krama se guru,
laghu, aparAdha ke anurUpa jAnakara yadi bar3A aparAdha ho to prathama prakaTa
kare, tadanaMtara usase choTA, phira usase bhI choTA isa krama se AlocanA karanI
caahie|' 2. pratikramaNa - aticAra ke parihAra pUrvaka vApisa sva-svarUpa meM
lauTa AnA pratikramaNa hai| vaha mithyA duSkRtayukta sacce hRdaya se pApa ke
prAyazcitta ke sahita hotA hai| usameM aisA nizcaya kiyA jAtA hai ki phira aisA
pApa nahIM kruuNgaa| 3. tadubhaya (mizra) - jisameM AlocanA aura pratikramaNa
donoM sAtha hoN| pahale guru ke sAmane AlocanA karanA; bAda meM guru kI
AjJAnusAra pratikramaNa krnaa| 4. viveka - sacitta yA jIvayukta AhAra, pAnI,
upakaraNa, zayyA Adi padArthoM kA tyAga krnaa| 5. vyutsarga-kAyotsarga -
anaiSaNIya, doSayukta Adi padArthoM kA tyAga karane meM, jAne-Ane meM, pApayukta
(bure) svapna-darzana meM, naukA meM baiThakara sAmane vAle kinAre para jAne
meM, zaucAdi ke lie sthaMDila jAne-Ane meM, mala-mUtrapariSThApana meM, viziSTa
praNidhAna pUrvaka, mana-vacana-kAyA ke vyApAra kA tyAga karane ke rUpa meM
arthAt una doSoM ko miTAne ke lie kAyotsarga rUpa meM prAyazcitta krnaa| 6. tapa
- chedagraMtha athavA jItakalpasUtra ke anusAra yadi kisI tapa se vizuddhi hotI
ho to usa tapa ko karanA tathA usakA sevana krnaa| 366

Page #389 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Explanation of Internal Penance  **Yoga Shastra, Fourth Light, Verse 90**  7.
**Chhed:** If a disciple, who is not under control by penance, is not able to
control his passions, then cutting off his initiation for 5 days and nights is
called Chhed Prayashchitta.  8. **Mool:** Returning to the original vows.  9.
**Anvasthapy:** If a very wicked Sadhu does not perform any special penance,
then he should be given vows again, and made to perform such penance that he
becomes unable to even stand or sit. After making him perform such penance, when
he requests another Sadhu, "Aarya! I want to stand up," then that Sadhu should
silently perform his task without speaking to the penitent Sadhu. It is also
said, "Make me stand up, sit down, bring alms, do the writing of the bowl."
Thus, the other Sadhu, like a brother of the penitent, should silently perform
his task (without speaking). (Vyavahar Bhashya 1/368) After performing such
penance, he should be given the great initiation.  10. **Paranchik:** If penance
does not work, or if there is no penance greater than the last penance, or if
the offense has reached its final stage, then that penance is called Paranchik.
Such a person who commits a great offense should be expelled from the dress,
family, group, or community. The ancient teachers have said that among these 10
penances, penances up to Chhed are like the treatment of a wound. In this, very
small surgical instruments, small thorns can be taken out, which have not
reached the blood in the body, only attached to the skin; similarly, many small
offenses (like thorns) can be quickly removed (erased) by penance. If there is a
hole there, then there is no need to massage it, because the surgical instrument
is small, so the hole is also small. The second surgical instrument is such that
(thorn) when taken out, the hole needs to be massaged, but there is no need to
fill the hole with earwax. The third type of surgical instrument is more deep,
then after taking it out, the surgical site is massaged and earwax is filled in
it. The fourth type of surgical instrument is such that it is pulled out,
massaged, and blood is also squeezed out to relieve pain. The fifth type of
surgical instrument is such that it has gone very deep, to remove it, the action
of coming and going, walking etc. is stopped; the sixth surgical instrument is
such that after pulling it out, only beneficial, moderate, and digestible food
is eaten, or one has to remain without food. The seventh type of surgical
instrument is such that after pulling it out, 1. Flesh etc. have been corrupted:
There, its incision is made - it is given. If a snake, a mole, etc. poisonous
animal has bitten, or if there is a disease like ringworm, scabies, etc., and
even after the previously mentioned remedy, the pain does not subside, but is
increasing further, then for the protection of the remaining limbs, the limb
along with the bone is cut off. Thus, from the example of Dravyavrana (external
wound), the wound or hole in the form of offense in the body of character, which
is in the form of Moolguna-Uttarguna, should be treated with the penance method
from purification, criticism to Chhed. Pujya Acharya Shri Bhadrabahu Swami has
said - the first surgical instrument is such that it is not so sharp, it has not
reached the blood, it is only attached to the skin, then it is pulled out, the
wound is not so deep that it needs to be massaged. The second surgical
instrument is pulled out and massaged; if the thorn (surgical instrument) has
gone deeper, then such a surgical instrument is taken out and that place is
massaged and earwax is filled in the hole. After pulling out the fourth type of
surgical instrument, so that there is no pain, that place is pressed and blood
is taken out. The fifth type of surgical instrument is such that it goes very
deep, then if it has to be removed, the action of movement is stopped. After
removing the sixth surgical instrument, to heal the wound, beneficial, moderate,
and digestible food is eaten or food is stopped. The seventh type of surgical
instrument is such that after it is applied, as much part of the limb rots or
deteriorates, the flesh there is cut off. But even then, if the pain or disease
does not stop increasing, or if a snake, etc. poisonous animal has bitten, or if
there is a disease of itching or decay, then for the protection of the remaining
limb, that limb along with the bone has to be cut off. In the body, like these
eight types of surgical instruments, the supreme character man in the form of
Moolguna-Uttarguna 367

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 abhyaMtara tapa kI vyAkhyA yogazAstra caturtha prakAza zloka 90 7. cheda -
tapasyA se kAbU meM na A sake, aise uiMDa ziSya kA dIkSAparyAya 5 dinarAta ke
krama se kATa denA chedaprAyazcitta hai| 8. mUla - mahAvratoM ko mUla se vApisa
denaa| 9. anavasthApya - atiduSTapariNAmI sAdhu vizeSa tapa nahIM karatA ho,
taba use punaH vrata dene, usase itanA tapa karAnA ki vaha svayaM uThane-
baiThane meM bhI azakta bana jaay| use vahAM taka tapa karAne ke bAda jaba vaha
dUsare sAdhu se prArthanA kare-Arya! mujhe khar3A honA hai, taba vaha sAdhu usa
prAyazcittI sAdhu se bAta kiye binA cupacApa usakA kArya kara de| kahA bhI hai-
majhe khaDA karo. biThA do. bhikSA lA do| pAtra-pratilekhana kara do; yoM vaha
prAyazcittI ka bAMdhava ke samAna dUsarA sAdhu maunapUrvaka (binA bole) usakA
kAryakara de| (vyavahAra bhASya 1/368) itanA tapa kara le, taba use bar3I dIkSA
denI caahie| 10. pArAMcika - prAyazcitta se kAma na ho athavA usa AkhirI
prAyazcitta se bar3hakara-Age prAyazcitta na ho athavA aparAdha kA aMtima sthAna
prApta kara liyA ho, usa prAyazcitta ko pArAMcika kahate haiN| aise bar3e
aparAdha karane vAle kA veSa se, kula se, gaNa se athavA saMgha se bahiSkAra
krnaa| pUrvAcAryoM ne isa 10 prAyazcittoM meM se cheda taka ke prAyazcitta ko
ghAva kI cikitsA ke samAna kahA hai| isameM bahuta hI choTe zalya-choTe phAMsa
bAhara nikAle jA sakate haiM, jo zarIra meM rakta taka na pahuMce ho, kevala
camar3I ke sAtha lage hoM; vaise hI.kaI choTe-aparAdha (phAMsa kI taraha)
prAyazcitta ke dvArA jhaTapaTa nikAle (miTAye) jA sakate haiN| yadi vahAM chidra
par3a gayA ho to mardana karane kI AvazyakatA nahIM, kyoMki zalya alpa hone se
chidra bhI alpa hotA hai| dUsarA zalya aisA hai ki (phAMsa) bAhara nikAla de to
chidra kA mardana karanA hotA hai, paraMtu kAna ke maila se chidra bharane kI
jarUrata nahIM hai| tIsare prakAra kA zalya adhika gaharA ho gayA ho to use
bAhara nikAla dene ke bAda zalya-sthAna kA mardanakara usameM kAna kA maila
bhara diyA jAtA hai| cauthe prakAra kA zalya aisA hai, jise khiMcakara bAhara
nikAlA jAtA hai, mardana kiyA jAtA hai aura vedanA dUra karane ke lie khUna bhI
dabAkara bAhara nikAla diyA jAtA hai| pA~caveM prakAra kA zalya aisA hai,jo
atyaMta gaharA ghusa gayA hai, use nikAlane ke lie Ane jAne, calane Adi kI kriyA
baMda kI jAtI hai; chaTThA zalya aisA hai, jise khIMcakara nikAlane ke bAda
kevala hita, mita, pathyakara bhojana kiyA jAtA hai, yA nirAhAra rahanA par3atA
hai| sAtaveM prakAra kA zalya aisA hai, jisake khIMcakara nikAlane ke bAda usa
1. mAMsa Adi daSita ho gaye hoM: vahAM taka usakA chedana kara diyA-goda diyA
jAtA hai| yadi sarpa, goha Adi jaharIle jAnavara ne kATa khAyA ho athavA dAda,
khAja Adi roga ho gayA ho tathA pahale batAye hue upAya se bhI pIr3A na miTatI
ho, balki aura adhika bar3ha rahI ho to, zeSa aMgoM kI rakSA ke lie haDDI sahita
aMga ko kATa DAlA jAtA hai| isa prakAra dravyavraNa (bAhya ghAva) ke dRSTAMta se
mUlaguNa-uttaraguNa rUpa cAritra-zarIra meM hue aparAdha rUpI ghAva yA chidra
hone para usakI cikitsA zuddhi AlocanA se lekara cheda taka kI prAyazcittavidhi
se karanI caahie| pUjya AcArya zrI bhadrabAhu svAmI ne kahA hai-pahalA zalya
aisA hai, jo itanA nokadAra nahIM hai, khUna taka nahIM pahuMcA hai, kevala
camar3I taka hI lagA hai, to use khIMcakara nikAla diyA jAtA hai, ghAva itanA
gaharA nahIM hotA ki usa para mardana karanA pdd'e| dUsarA zalya khIMcakara
mardana kiyA jAtA hai; kAMTA (zalya) agara aura adhika gaharA calA gayA ho to
aise zalya ko bAhara nikAlakara usa jagaha ko mardanakara de aura chidra meM
kAna kA maila bhara de| cauthe prakAra ke zalya ko khIMcane ke bAda pIr3A na ho,
isake lie usa jagaha ko dabAkara khUna nikAla diyA jAtA hai| pAMcaveM prakAra kA
zalya aisA hai, jo atyaMta gaharA calA jAtA hai, to use nikAlanA ho to
halanacalana kI kriyA baMda kI jAtI hai| chaThe zalya ko nikAlane ke bAda ghAva
ko milAne ke lie hita, mita, pathyakara bhojana kiyA jAtA hai athavA bhojana
karanA baMda kara diyA jAtA hai| sAtaveM prakAra kA zalya aisA hotA hai ki use
lagane ke bAda aMga kA jitanA bhAga sar3a jAtA hai yA bigar3a jAtA hai, vahAM ke
mAMsa ko kATa diyA jAtA hai| paraMtu itane para bhI pIr3A yA bImArI Age bar3hatI
huI na ruke yA sarpa Adi | jaharIle jaMtu ne kATA ho yA khujalI yA sar3Ana vAlA
roga ho gayA ho to zeSa aMga kI rakSA ke lie haDDIsahita usa aMga ko kATanA
par3atA hai| zarIra meM ina ATha prakAra ke zalyoM kI taraha mUlaguNa-uttaraguNa
rUpa parama cAritra puruSa ke 367

Page #390 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Explanation of Internal Austerity  **Chapter Four, Light of Yoga, Verse 90**
To protect the body, one should treat the wound of emotions caused by the
surgical instrument of transgression. The first type of wound, caused by
transgression in activities like begging for alms, is purified simply by
revealing and criticizing it to the Guru. The second type of wound, caused by
transgression due to sudden circumstances or lack of secrecy, is purified by
repentance. The third type of wound, caused by attachment and aversion towards
objects like words, is purified by both criticism and repentance. The fourth
type of wound, caused by knowingly consuming non-permissible food, is purified
by reflection (parathna). The fifth type of wound is purified by bodily
exertion, the sixth by austerity, and the seventh by a specific type of
piercing. (Necessary Notes 1434-1442)  The fruits of repentance are: abandoning
the fault of carelessness, removing the state of surgical instrument through joy
in emotions, not abandoning the limits, and firmly practicing self-control.
**2. Vyayavritti**  Vyayavritti is the inclination or feeling towards performing
actions mentioned in the teachings of the Nirgranthas or the Agamas. It also
includes offering resistance to afflictions like disease, hardship, and
falsehood, and serving, treating, or attending to venerable persons, sick
ascetics, or the Sangha with one's own body in the absence of external
resources.  The ten best recipients of Vyayavritti are: 1. Acharya, 2.
Upadhyaya, 3. Sthavir, 4. Tapasvi, 5. Navadhikṣita, 6. Rugna-Sadhu, 7. Saman
Dharmi, 8. Kula, 9. Gana, and 10. Sangha.  Their explanations are as follows:  *
**Acharya:** One who strictly follows the five codes of conduct themselves and
makes others follow them, or one who is served by the Acharya, is an Acharya.
There are five types of Acharyas: 1. Pravrajaka Acharya, 2. Diga Acharya, 3.
Uddeshaka Acharya, 4. Samuddeshaka Acharya, and 5. Vachana Acharya.     *
**Pravrajaka Acharya:** Those who impose Samayika, Vrata, etc.     * **Diga
Acharya:** Those who give knowledge about the nature of things, whether they are
sentient, insentient, or mixed.     * **Uddeshaka Acharya:** Those who make one
perform Yoga and other practices and initiate them into the knowledge of
scriptures.     * **Samuddeshaka Acharya:** In the absence of the initiating
Guru, those who explain the same scriptures and give permission according to the
rules.     * **Vachana Acharya:** Those who explain the meaning of traditional
pronouncements and exceptions, explain the meaning of sermons, give permission
for things like Upka and Nishadya, explain the meaning of the scriptures, and
speak about conduct or self-study.  * **Upadhyaya:** One who studies scriptures
under the guidance of these Acharyas with humility. * **Sthavir:** Generally
means an elderly ascetic. There are three types: 1. Shruta Sthavir, 2. Diksha
Sthavir, and 3. Vaya Sthavir.     * **Shruta Sthavir:** One who has studied the
Samavayanga Sutra.     * **Diksha Sthavir:** One who has been a monk for 20
years.     * **Vaya Sthavir:** One who is 60 years old or older. * **Tapasvi:**
One who performs austerities ranging from four fasts to six months. *
**Navadhikṣita:** A newly initiated ascetic who is capable of teaching. *
**Glana Sadhu:** A monk who is weak and afflicted due to illness. * **Saman
Dharmi:** One who engages in twelve types of sexual behavior. * **Kula:** A
group of ascetics of the same caste or with similar codes of conduct. *
**Gana:** A group of ascetics under the guidance of one Acharya. * **Sangha:**
The fourfold community of ascetics, lay men, and lay women.  Vyayavritti
includes serving these individuals, from Acharya to Sangha, by providing them
with food, water, clothes, utensils, shelter, mats, stools, blankets, beds, and
other religious necessities, or by offering them medicine, alms, etc. It also
includes helping them during times of illness or other difficulties, assisting
them in crossing forests, taking care of them during calamities, etc.  **3.
Swadhyaya**  Swadhyaya is the study of scriptures in a disciplined manner during
the time allocated for it, avoiding other activities. It involves studying the
Sutras, etc., in relation to Porsi, etc. There are five types of Swadhyaya: 1.
Vachana, 2. Prichchhana, 3. Paravartan (Paryatana), 4. Anupreksha, and 5.
Dharmakatha.     * **Vachana:** Teaching the Sutras, etc., to students.     *
**Prichchhana:** Asking questions to clarify doubts or determine the meaning of
the Sutras.     * **Paravartan (Paryatana):** Reflecting on the Sutras and their
meaning in the mind.     * **Anupreksha:** Examining the Sutras and their
meaning.     * **Dharmakatha:** Narrating religious stories.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 abhyaMtara tapa kI vyAkhyA yogazAstra caturtha prakAza zloka 90 zarIra kI rakSA
karane ke lie aparAdha rUpI zalya se hone vAle bhAva rUpI ghAva kI cikitsA
karanI caahie| bhikSAcaryA Adi meM lage hue aticAra rUpa pahale prakAra ke ghAva
kI zuddhi guru ke pAsa jAkara AlocanA karane-prakaTa karane mAtra se ho jAtI
hai| akasmAt samiti yA gupti se rahita hone ke aticAra rUpI dUsare prakAra ke
ghAva kI zuddhi pratikramaNa se hotI hai, zabdAdi viSayoM ke prati jarA rAga-
dveSa rUpI tRtIya aticAra (vraNa) lagA ho to AlocanA va pratikramaNa donoM se
zuddhi hotI hai| cauthe meM anaiSaNIya AhArAdi-grahaNa rUpI aticAra jAnakara
usakA viveka karane (paraThane) se zuddhi hotI hai| pAMcavAM aticAra-vraNa
kAyotsarga se, chaTThA aticAra-vraNa tapa se aura sAtavAM aticAra-vraNa cheda
vizeSa se zuddha hotA hai| (Avazyaka ni. 1434-1442) pramAdadoSa kA tyAga karanA,
bhAva kI prasannatA se zalya-anavasthA dUra karanA, maryAdA kA tyAga na karanA,
saMyama kI ArAdhanA dRr3hatA pUrvaka karanA ityAdi prAyazcitta ke phala haiN| 2.
vaiyAvRtya - nigraMtha-pravacana yA Agama meM kathita kriyAoM ke anuSThAna meM
pravRtti karanA yA usakA bhAva vaiyAvRtya hai| vyAdhi, pariSaha, mithyAtva Adi
kA upadrava hone para usakA pratIkAra karanA tathA bAhyadravya ke abhAva meM
apanI kAyA se apane pUjya puruSoM yA rugNa Adi sAdhuoM yA saMgha Adi kI anurUpa
paricaryA, upacAra yA sevAzuzrUSA karanA bhI vaiyAvRtya hai| 1. AcArya, 2.
upAdhyAya, 3. sthavira, 4. tapasvI, 5. navadIkSita, 6. rugNa-sAdhu, 7. samAna
dharmI, 8. kula, 9. gaNa aura 10. saMgha ye 10 vaiyAvRtya ke uttama pAtra hai|
inakI vyAkhyA isa prakAra hai-AcArya-jo svayaM pAMca AcAroM kA vizuddha pAlana
kare evaM dUsaroM se pAlana karAve; athavA jinakI AcaryA-sevA kI jAye, vaha
AcArya hai| isake pAMca prakAra hai-1. pravrAjakAcArya, 2. digAcArya, 3.
uddezakAcArya, 4. samuddezakAcArya aura 5. vaacnaacaary| sAmAyika, vratAdi kA
AropaNa karane vAle pravrAjakAcArya kahalAte haiN| sacitta, acitta, mizra vastu
kI amujJA dene vAle digAcArya hote haiN| yogAdi kriyA karAne vAle tathA
zrutajJAna kA prathama uddeza karane vAle uddezaMkAcArya hote haiN| uddeza
karane vAle guru ke abhAva meM usI zruta kA samuddeza aura anujJA kI vidhi
karane vAle samuddezakAnujJAcArya hote haiN| paraMparAgata utsarga-apavAda rUpa
artha kI jo vyAkhyA kareM, pravacana kA artha batAkara jo upakA niSadyA Adi kI
jo anujJA deM, AmnAya ke artha ko batAveM, AcAraviSayaka yA svAdhyAyaviSayaka
kathana kareM; ve vAcanAcArya kahalAte haiN| isa taraha pAMca prakAra ke AcArya
hote haiN| ina AcAryoM kI anujJA se sAdhusAdhvI vinaya pUrvaka jisake pAsa
zAstroM kA adhyayana-svAdhyAya kareM, vaha upAdhyAya hai| sthavira kA artha
sAmAnyatayA vRddha sAdhu hotA hai| inake tIna bheda haiM-zrutasthavira, dIkSA
sthavira aura vyHsthvir| samavAyAMgasUtra taka kA adhyayana jisane kara liyA ho,
vaha | zrutasthavira, jinakI munidIkSA ko 20 varSa ho gaye hoM, vaha
dIkSAsthavira aura jo sATha varSa yA isase adhika umra kA ho gayA ho, vaha
vayaHsthavira kahalAtA hai| cAra upavAsa se lekara kucha samaya 6 mAsa taka kI
tapasyA karane vAlA tapasvI kahalAtA hai| naI dIkSA lene vAlA, zikSA dene ke
yogya sAdhu zaikSya yA navadIkSita kahalAtA hai| rogAdi se nirbala kliSTa zarIra
vAlA muni glAnasAdhu hotA hai| bAraha prakAra ke saMbhoga (vyavahAra) ke lene-
dene vAle, vyavahAra vAle samAnadharmI yA sAdharmika kahalAte haiN| eka hI jAti
yA samAna samAcArI (AcArasaMhitA) vAle sAdhusAdhviyoM ke gacchoM ke samUha ko
samudAya tathA caMdrAdi nAma vAle samUha ko kula, eka AcArya kI nizrAya meM
rahane vAle sAdhu-samudAya ko gaccha evaM kula ke samUha ko gaNa (jaise koTika
Adi gaNa) tathA sAdhu-sAdhvI-zrAvaka-zrAvikAoM kA caturvidha samudAya saMgha
kahalAtA| hai| ina AcArya se lekara saMgha Adi kI, AhAra, pAnI, vastra, pAtra,
upAzraya, pATa, caukI, pATale, zayyA, saMstAraka Adi dharma-sAdhana dekara yA
auSadha bhikSA Adi dekara sevAbhakti karanA, roga Adi saMkaTa yA koI upadrava
Ane para unakA vaiyAvRtya karanA, aTavI pAra karane meM sahayoga denA, upasarga
Adi ke mauke para unakI sArasaMbhAla karanA ityAdi vaiyAvRtya ke rUpa hai| 3.
svAdhyAya - akAla ke samaya ko TAlakara, svAdhyAyakAla meM maryAdApUrvaka
svAdhyAya karanA, yAnI porasI Adi kI apekSA se sUtrAdi kA adhyayana karanA
svAdhyAya hai| svAdhyAya pAMca prakAra kA hai-vAcanA, pRcchanA, parAvartana
(paryaTanA), anuprekSA aura dhrmkthaa| ziSyoM ko sUtrAdi par3hAnA-vAcanA hai;
sUtra ke artha meM saMdeha hone para usake nivAraNArtha yA arthanizcaya karane
ke lie pUchanA-pRcchanA hai; sUtra aura artha kA mana meM ciMtana-anuprekSA hai;
zuddha 368

Page #391 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Cause of Karma Reduction (Nirjara)  **Chapter 4, Light 4, Verse 91 of the
Yoga Shastra**  **Tapping and Repeating:**  Repetition and reflection with
pronunciation is called **Paravartan**.  **Religious Discourse:** Giving
religious discourses, explaining, and describing in detail according to the
**Anuyog** is called **Dharmakatha**.  **4. Vinaya:**  **Vinaya** is that which
removes the eight types of karma. It has four divisions: **Jnana Vinaya**,
**Darshan Vinaya**, **Charitra Vinaya**, and **Upchar Vinaya**.  * **Jnana
Vinaya:**  Receiving knowledge with utmost respect. * **Darshan Vinaya:**  Being
unshakeable and full of faith, believing that the teachings of the
**Tirthankara** from **Samayik** to **Lokabindu Saar** are true. * **Charitra
Vinaya:**  Having good feelings towards **Charitra** and **Charitravan**, going
to greet them, joining hands, etc. * **Upchar Vinaya:**  Offering mental,
verbal, and physical salutations to them even indirectly, praising their
qualities, remembering them, etc.  **5. Vyutsarga:**  **Vyutsarga** is the
abandonment of things that should be abandoned. It also has two divisions:
**Bahya** and **Abhyantara**.  * **Bahya Vyutsarga:**  Abandoning more than
twelve types of **Upadhi** or abandoning food, water, etc., that are
**Ashaishniya** or contain living beings. * **Abhyantara Vyutsarga:**
Abandoning **Kashaya** within or abandoning the body at the time of death or
abandoning attachment to the body when faced with adversity.  **Question:**  Why
is **Vyutsarga** mentioned again here in the divisions of **Tap** when it was
already mentioned in the divisions of **Prayashchitta**?  **Answer:**  There, it
was mentioned for the purification of repeated transgressions. Here, **Vyutsarga
Tap** is mentioned for general **Nirjara**, so there is no repetition error.
**6. Shubh Dhyan:**  Abandoning **Aarta** and **Roudra Dhyan** and practicing
**Dharma** and **Shukla** - these two are **Shubh Dhyan**. The explanation of
**Aarta-Roudra Dhyan** has been given earlier. The explanation of **Dharma
Dhyan** and **Shukla Dhyan** will be given later [on page 444].  In this way,
there are six types of **Abhyantara Tap**. This **Tap** is called **Abhyantara**
because it burns and destroys internal karma or because it can only be known by
the **Kevali Bhagwan** due to the inward focus of the soul.  **Dhyan** is placed
at the highest position among the twelve **Tapas** because it is the most
important in the practice of **Moksha**. It is also said:  > Although
**Samvara** and **Nirjara** are the paths to **Moksha**, **Tap** is superior
among them, and among **Tapas**, **Dhyan** should be considered the main part of
**Moksha**. (Dhyan Shatak, Verse 96)  Now, **Tap** is explicitly stated as the
cause of **Nirjara**.  **Verse 91:**  > When the fire of **Tap** burns brightly,
both externally and internally, then the restrained person quickly burns to
ashes the difficult-to-reduce karma like **Jnana Avaraniya** (or the forest of
bad deeds).  **Explanation:**  The main reason for burning karma through
**Tapasya** with restraint is that **Nirjara** occurs through **Tap**. But
**Tap** is the cause of **Nirjara**, this is said by implication, but it is also
the cause of **Samvara**. **Umaswati**, the main commentator, said:  > **Tap**
leads to both **Samvara** and **Nirjara**. Because **Tap** is the cause of
**Samvara**, it stops the influx of new karma. And it also reduces old karma and
leads to the attainment of **Nirvana**.  The meaning of the **Antar Shlokas**
used in this context is presented here:  > Just as the doors of a lake are
closed with effort from all sides, so that new water flow is stopped from
entering the lake, similarly, by stopping the **Ashravas**, the soul enveloped
in **Samvara** does not get filled with new karma. Just as the water collected
in a lake dries up due to the intense heat of the sun, similarly, all the
accumulated karma bound to the soul is dried up by **Tap** and becomes reduced
in an instant. **Abhyantara Tap** is a stronger cause of **Nirjara** than
**Bahya Tap**. Among them, **Dhyan Tap** reigns supreme in the lives of
**Munis**. **Dhyan Yogis** quickly reduce even very strong karma accumulated
over a long time. Just as indigestion and other disorders (doshas) arising in
the body dry up due to fasting, similarly, the karma accumulated in the soul
dries up due to **Tap**. Just as a cloud mass is shattered or dissolved by a
strong wind, similarly, **Tapasya** also...  **260**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 tapa nirjarA kA kAraNa yogazAstra caturtha prakAza zloka 91 uccAraNasahita
bAra-bAra doharAnA-parAvartana hai; dharmopadeza denA, vyAkhyA karanA, anuyoga
pUrvaka varNana karanAdharmakathA hai| 4. vinaya - jisase ATha prakAra ke karma
dUra ho jAya, vaha vinaya hai| usake cAra bheda haiM-jJAnavinaya, darzanavinaya,
cAritravinaya aura upcaarviny| atyaMta sammAna parvaka jJAna grahaNa karanA.
abhyAsa yA smaraNa karana sAmAyika se lekara lokabindusAra taka ke zrutajJAna
meM tIrthakaraprabhu ne jo padArtha kahe haiM, ve satya hI haiM, isa prakAra
niHzaMka va zraddhAvAna honA-darzanavinaya hai| cAritra aura cAritravAna para
sadbhAva rakhanA, unake saMmukha svAgatArtha jAnA, hAtha jor3anA Adi
cAritravinaya hai| parokSa meM bhI unake lie mana-vacana-kAyA se aMjali karanA,
unake guNotkIrtana karanA unakA smaraNa Adi karanA upacAravinaya hai| 5.
vyutsarga - tyAjya padArthoM kA tyAga karanA, vyutsarga hai| isake bhI do bheda
haiM-bAhya aura aabhyNtr| bAraha prakAra se adhika kisma kI upAdhi kA tyAga
karanA-bAhyavyutsarga hai athavA anaiSaNIya yA jIvajaMtu se yukta sacitta anna
jala Adi padArthoM kA tyAga karanA bhI bAhya vyutsarga hai| aMtara meM kaSAyoM
kA tathA mRtyu ke samaya zarIra kA tyAga karanA athavA upasarga Ane para zarIra
para se mamatva kA tyAga karanA AbhyaMtara vyutsarga hai| prazna hotA hai ki
prAyazcitta ke bhedoM meM pahale vyutsarga kahA hai; phira yahAM tapa ke bhedoM
meM ise dubArA kyoM kahA gayA? isake uttara meM kahate haiM-vahAM to bAra-bAra
aticAroM kI zuddhi ke lie kahA gayA hai| yahAM sAmAnya rUpa se nirjarA ke lie
vyutsargatapa batAyA gayA hai, isalie isameM punaruktidoSa nahIM hai| 6.
zubhadhyAna - Arta aura raudradhyAna kA tyAgakara dharma aura zukla ye do
zubhadhyAna krnaa| Artta-raudradhyAna kI vyAkhyA pahale kI jA cukI hai;
dharmadhyAna tathA zukladhyAna kI vyAkhyA Age [peja naM. 444 para] kreNge| isa
taraha chaha prakAra kA abhyaMtara tapa huaa| yaha tapa AbhyaMtara isalie kahA
gayA hai ki yaha abhyaMtara karmoM ko tapAne-jalAne vAlA hai athavA AtmA ke
aMtarmukhI hone se kevalI bhagavAn dvArA jJAta ho sakatA hai| dvAdaza tapoM meM
sabase aMta meM dhyAna ko isalie sarvopari sthAna diyA gayA ki mokSasAdhanA meM
dhyAna kI mukhyatA hai| kahA bhI hai-yadyapi saMvara aura nirjarA mokSa kA mArga
hai, lekina ina donoM meM tapa zreSTha hai aura tapoM meM bhI dhyAna ko mokSa kA
mukhya aMga samajhanA caahie| (dhyAnazataka gAthA 96)  /  / 9 /  /  aba tapa ko
prakaTa rUpa se nirjarA kA kAraNa batAte haiN|417| dIpyamAne tapovahnau, bAhye
cAbhyantare'pi ca  /  yamI jarati karmANi, durjarANyapi tatkSaNAt  // 91 //
artha :- bAhya aura AbhyaMtara tapa rUpI agni jaba prajvalita hotI hai, taba
saMyamI puruSa muzkila se kSINa hone vAle jJAnAvaraNIyAdi kamoM ko (athavA
duSkarma vana ko) zIghra jalAkara bhasma kara detA hai  /  / 11 /  /  /  vyAkhyA
:- saMyama dvArA tapasyA ke karmoM ko jalA dene kA kAraNa to mukhyatayA yaha hai
ki tapa se nirjarA hotI hai| paraMtu tapa nirjarA kA hetu hai, yaha to
upalakSaNa se kahA, paraMtu vaha saMvara kA bhI hetu hai| vAcakamukhya umAsvAti
ne kahA hai-tapa se saMvara aura nirjarA donoM hotI hai| tapa saMvara karane
vAlA hone se vaha Ate hue naye karmapuMja ko roka detA hai| aura purAne karmoM
kI nirjarA bhI karatA hai tathA nirvANapada prApta karAtA hai| isa viSaya meM
prayukta AMtarazlokoM kA bhAvArtha yahAM prastuta kara rahe haiM jaise cAroM ora
se sarovara ke dvAra prayatna pUrvaka baMda kara diye jAya to nayA jala pravAha
sarovara meM Ane se ruka jAtA hai; vaise hI AzravoM kA nirodha karane se saMvara
se samAvRta AtmA naye-naye karmadravyoM se nahIM bhrtaa| jisa taraha sarovara
meM ikaTThA kiyA huA jala sUrya ke pracaMDatApa se sUkha jAtA hai; usI taraha
jIva ke pahale bAMdhe hue saMcita samasta karma tapa se sukhAe jAya to
kSaNabhara meM sUkha kara kSINa ho jAte haiN| bAhyatapa kI apekSA AbhyaMtaratapa
nirjarA kA prabala kAraNa hai| usameM bhI dhyAnatapa kA to muniyoM ke jIvana meM
ekachatra rAjya hotA hai| dIrghakAla se upArjita bahuta-se prabalakarmoM ko
dhyAnayogI tatkAla kSINa kara detA hai| jaise zarIra meM utpanna huA ajIrNa Adi
vikAra (doSa) laMghana karane se sUkha jAtA hai, vaise hI AtmA meM pUrvasaMcita
vikAra | rUpI karma tapa se sUkha jAte haiN| jaise pracaMDavAyu se meghasamUha
chinna-bhinna yA vilIna ho jAte haiM; vaise hI tapasyA se bhI 260

Page #392 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Nature of Dharma-Svakhyata-Bhavana and the 10 Divisions of Samyak Dharma
**From Yoga Shastra, Fourth Light, Verses 92-93**  The group of karmas are
shattered. If the work of destroying karmas from both sides by both Samvara and
Nirjara continues, then the soul, attaining the state of perfection, obtains
liberation from the stability (Dhruvata) of these two. By performing both types
of austerities, the soul with pure intellect attains liberation, which is the
destruction of all karmas, one day. Thus, one should contemplate the Nirjara
Bhavana, which strengthens the austerity, destroys all karmas, is like a bridge
to cross the ocean of the world, and is the cause of the destruction of
attachment. ||91||  Now, regarding Dharma-Svakhyata-Bhavana, it is said: 418.
This Dharma is truly Svakhyata, declared by the supreme Jinas. The being who
takes refuge in it does not drown in the ocean of existence. ||92||
**Meaning:** The supreme Jinas have well-explained this Dharma. The being who
takes refuge in it does not drown in the ocean of existence. ||12||
**Meaning:** Here, the special meaning of Dharma is Su+A+Khyata, Svakhyata,
which means: Dharma that is superior to the Kutirthika Dharma, prohibits wrong
conduct, is defined by boundaries, and is declared by the Vitaraga-Sarvagnas.
||12||  Now, the ten divisions of this Samyak Dharma are stated: 419. Samyama,
Sunruta, Saucha, Brahma, Akinchanata, Tapa, Shanti, Divam, Mrjruta, and Mukti
are the ten divisions of it. ||93||  **Meaning:** It is of ten types: 1.
Samyama, 2. Satya, 3. Saucha, 4. Brahmacharya, 5. Akinchanata, 6. Tapa, 7.
Kshama, 8. Mrduta, 9. Saralata, and 10. Nirlobhata. ||13|| [This is also called
Shraman Dharma].  **Explanation:**  1. **Samyama:** Means compassion for living
beings. It is of 17 types. Samyama on earth-bodied, water-bodied, fire-bodied,
air-bodied, and plant-bodied beings; Samyama in the form of abandoning the
initiation, continuation, and commencement of actions done, caused, and approved
by the mind, speech, and body of beings with two, three, four, and five senses -
this is of nine types. Samyama in the form of non-living things like books,
etc., is the tenth division. Keeping books, etc., with careful copying and
cleaning, due to the influence of the Dosha of the unfavorable time, due to the
lack of intellectual strength, and for the benefit of the disciples, is Ajiva
Samyama. Similarly, there is Preksha Samyama, which is to see with the eyes a
piece of land free from seeds, animals, and green plants, and to see while
sleeping, sitting, etc. Not inspiring a householder who is engaged in harmful
activities; ignoring harmful actions is Upeksha Samyama. Seeing with the eyes,
cleaning the ground with dust removal, etc., for sleeping and sitting, and while
walking from one place to another, if there is dust from the earth on the feet,
whether consciously, unconsciously, or mixed, then cleaning it is Pramardhana
Samyama. If food and water are defective, unsuitable, or clothes, utensils,
etc., are in contact with living beings, then carefully placing such food,
water, clothes, etc., in a defect-free, inanimate place is Paristhapana Samyama.
To be free from the mind that is filled with harm, pride, jealousy, etc., and to
engage it in Dharma-Dhyana, etc., is Mana Samyama. To refrain from harsh, cruel,
bitter, etc., cautious words, and to engage in speech with good language is
Vachana Samyama. To abandon cautious activities like running, fleeing, jumping,
aimless wandering, etc., and to engage in good actions is Kaya Samyama. In this
way, Samyama in the form of refraining from violence is of 17 types: Earth,
water, fire, air, plants, beings with two, three, four, and five senses, non-
living things, Preksha, Upeksha, Pramardhana, Pratilekhana, Paristhapana, mind,
speech, and body Samyama. (Aavashyak Sutra)  2. **Sunruta:** Means speaking
truthful and pleasant words. Avoiding harshness, gossip, rudeness, fickleness,
or speaking with a suppressed tongue, hesitantly, stammering, quickly,
doubtfully, vulgarly, with attachment and aversion, with deceit and sin, with
slander, etc., and speaking with sweetness, generosity, clarity, revealing
excellent things, according to the words of Shri Arihant Prabhu, meaningful,
prevalent in social conduct, understanding the meaning, according to the time
and place, with restraint, with limited words, beneficial, full of virtues,
while speaking and asking questions, answering when asked, speaking without
falsehood is Sunruta (Satya).  370

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dharmasvAkhyAta-bhAvanA kA svarUpa aura samyagdharma ke 10 bheda yogazAstra
caturtha prakAza zloka 92 se 93 karmasamUha chinna-bhinna ho jAte haiN| yadi
saMvara aura nirjarA ina donoM se donoM ora se karmoM ko kSaya karane kA kArya
jArI rahe to AtmA prakarSasthiti prApta karake inhIM donoM kI sthiratA
(dhruvatA) se mokSa prApta kara letA hai| donoM prakAra ke tapazcaraNa se
nirjarA karatA huA nirmalabuddhi AtmA eka dina sarvakarmakSaya rUpI mokSa prApta
karatA hai| isa prakAra kI nirbhayatA se tapa ko puSTa karane vAlI, samagra
karmoM kI vighAtaka, saMsArasamudra pAra karane ke lie setubaMdha ke samAna,
mamatAghAta meM kAraNabhUta nirjarAbhAvanA kA ciMtana karanA cAhie  /  / 91 /  /
aba dharma-svAkhyAta-bhAvanA ke saMbaMdha meM kahate haiN|418| svAkhyAtaH khalu
dharmo'yaM, bhagavadbhirjinottamaiH  /  yaM samAlambamAno hi, na majjed
bhavasAgare  // 92 //  artha :- jinottama bhagavaMtoM ne isa dharma kA
bhalIbhAMti pratipAdana kiyA hai| jisakA AlaMbana lene vAlA jIva saMsArasAgara
meM nahIM DUbatA  /  / 12 /  /  bhAvArtha :- dharma kA vizeSa yahAM su+A+khyAta
svAkhyAta hai, jisakA artha hai-kutIrthika dharma kI apekSA pradhAnatva se
yukta, avidhi kA niSedha karane vAlA tathA maryAdAoM se nizcita kiyA huA evaM
vItarAga-sarvajJoM dvArA kathita dharma  /  / 12 /  /  aba isa samyagdharma ke
dasa bheda kahate haiN|419| saMyamaH sUnRtaM zaucaM, brahmA'kiJcanatA tapaH  /
zAntirdivamRjutA, muktizca dazadhA sa tu  // 93 /  /  artha :- vaha dasa prakAra
kA hai-1. saMyama, 2. satya, 3. zauca, 4. brahmacarya, 5. akiMcanatA, 6. tapa,
7. kSamA, 8. mRdutA, 9. saralatA aura 10. nirlobhatA  /  / 13 /  /  [ise zramaNa
dharma bhI kahA hai] . _ vyAkhyA :- 1. saMyama - kA artha jIvadayA hai| vaha 17
prakAra kA hai| pRthvIkAya, apkAya, agnikAya, vAyukAya aura vanaspatikAya para
saMyama; do-tIna-cAra aura pAMca iMdriyoM vAle jIvoM kA mana-vacana-kAyA dvArA
kRta, kArita aura anumodana se saMraMbha, samAraMbha aura AraMbha ke tyAga rUpa
saMyama 9 prakAra kA hai| ajIva rUpa pustakAdi kA saMyama yaha dazavA~ | bheda
hai| duHSamakAladoSa ke prabhAva se, buddhibala-kama hone se ziSyoM ke
upakArArtha yatanApUrvaka pratilekhana-pramArjana sahita pustakAdi rakhanA
ajIvasaMyama hai| isI prakAra prekSA-saMyama hai, bIja, jaMtu, harI vanaspati
Adi se rahita sthaMDilabhUmi AMkha se dekhakara tathA zayana, Asana Adi
dekhakara krnaa| sAvadyavyApArayukta gRhastha ko preraNA na karanA; sAvadyakama
ke prati upekSA karanA upekSA-saMyama hai| AMkha se dRSTi-pratilekhana karanA,
rajoharaNAdi se bhUmi para zayana-AsanAdi kA pramArjana karanA tathA eka sthAna
se dUsare sthAna para jAte samaya pRthvI para calate hue sacitta, acitta yA
mizra pRthvI kI dhUla pairoM ke lagI ho to usakA pramArjana karanA-
pramArjanasaMyama hai| doSayukta, anaiSaNIya AhArapAnI ho yA anupakAraka vastra-
pAtra Adi jIvoM se saMsakta hoM to aise anna-jala-vastrAdi ko niravadya nirjIva
sthAna para vivekapUrvaka paraThanA pariSThApanasaMyama hai| kisI kI hAni,
abhimAna, IrSyA Adi se yukta mana se nivRtta hokara use dharmadhyAna Adi meM
pravRtta karanA manaHsaMyama hai| hiMsAkArI, kaThora, kaTu Adi sAvadha vacanoM
se nivRtta hokara zubhabhASA meM vacana kI pravRtti karanA vacanasaMyama hai|
kAyA se daur3anA, bhAganA, kUdanA, nirarthaka bhaTakanA Adi sAvadha pravRttiyoM
kA tyAgakara zubha kriyA meM pravRtti karanA kAyasaMyama hai| isa taraha
prANAtipAta nivRtti rUpI saMyama 17 prakAra kA hai-pRthvI, jala, agni, vAyu,
vanaspati, do, tIna, cAra aura pAMca iMdriyoM vAle jIva, ajIva, prekSA, upekSA,
pramArjanA, pratilekhanA, pariSThApanA, mana, vacana aura kAyA kA sNym|
(Avazyaka sUtra.) 2. sUnRta - arthAt priya satyavacana bolnaa| kaThoratA,
paizunya (cugalI), asabhyatA, capalatA yA jIbha dabAkara, ruka-rukakara,
hakalAte hue, zIghratA se, saMdehayukta, grAmya, rAga-dveSa yukta, kapaTa-pApa
sahita, niMdA Adi vacanoM se bacakara mAdhurya, udAra, spaSTa, uttama padArtha
prakaTa karane vAlA, zrIarihaMtaprabhu ke kathanAnusAra, sArthaka, lokavyavahAra
pracalita, bhAvArthagrAhma, dezakAlAnurUpa, saMyamayukta, parimitAkSarayukta,
hitakArI, guNoM se pUrNa, vAcanA-pRcchA Adi ke samaya pUchane para uttara dene
ke lie, mRSAvAda rahita vacana bolanA sUnRta (satya) hai| 370

Page #393 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Ten Aspects of Right Conduct (Samyak Dharma)  **3. Purity (Shouch)**: Purity
is not allowing the stain of sinful actions to touch one's restraint. For a lay
person, the main form of purity is **Artha Shouch**, which means giving up
taking what is not given and giving up the desire to take another's wealth due
to greed. Even worldly scriptures say that **Artha Shouch** is the greatest of
all purities. One who is pure in matters of wealth is pure. Purity achieved
through dirt or water is not true purity. (Manusmriti 5.106) Such an impure
being accumulates karmas in the form of **Bhavamala** in this world and the
next. Even if he is advised, he does not heed the advice for his own good.
Therefore, one should understand **Shouch Dharma** as giving up taking what is
not given.  **4. Celibacy (Brahmacharya)**: Celibacy is restraint of the senses,
both in the presence of the object of desire and in the absence of it, with nine
types of celibacy. Just as 'Bhima' is called 'Bheem' in short, similarly
'Brahmacharya' is called 'Brahm' here. Since celibacy is great, even staying in
a Guru's house for self-realization is celibacy. Celibacy is also the form of
renunciation of the non-Brahman.  **5. Non-Possession (Akinchanya)**: One who
has no possessions is **Akinchan**, and his state of mind is **Akinchanya**. A
Muni who practices **Akinchanya Dharma** is detached from his body, religious
paraphernalia, and worldly possessions. They are non-possessive and take food,
water, etc., only for the sustenance of their journey of restraint. Just as oil
is applied to the axle of a cart to keep it moving smoothly, they take food and
water without attachment to keep the body, which is like a cart, moving
smoothly. They wear clothes and other equipment for restraint and protection of
the body, but not out of greed or attachment. This is the secret of
**Akinchanya** in the form of renunciation of possessions.  **6. Austerity
(Tap)**: Austerity is the cause of **Sanvar** and **Nirjara**, which have been
described earlier. It is of twelve types as mentioned before, but also exists in
many other forms. These include **Yavamdhya**, **Vajramdhya**, **Chandrayan**,
**Kankaavali**, **Ratnaavali**, **Sarvato Bhadra**, **Bhadrouttar**, **Vardhaman
Ayambilatap**, etc. The twelve types of **Bhikshu Pratimas** are also austerity,
which include seven **Pratimas** from one month to seven months, followed by
three **Pratimas** of seven nights each, then one **Pratima** of three days and
nights, and finally one **Pratima** of one day and night.  **7. Patience
(Kshaanti)**: Patience is the ability to bear both the bearable and the
unbearable. Patience arises from contemplating the good and bad thoughts in the
mind when faced with anger, from contemplating the faults arising from anger,
from contemplating the nature of a child, from contemplating the consequences of
one's actions, and from contemplating the benefits of possessing patience. If
others are angry with me because of my faults, they are actually pointing out
the existence of my faults (good intentions). If I do not have those faults,
then they are speaking falsely, so I should forgive them. It is said that if
someone is angry, a wise person should contemplate the truth: if their anger is
true, what is the benefit of getting angry, and if it is false, what is the
benefit of getting angry at an ignorant person? Thus, one should practice
patience by contemplating the faults of anger. An angry person is surely bound
by sinful actions; it awakens the desire to kill another, thus destroying non-
violence. In a fit of anger, a seeker destroys his own vows of truthfulness. He
forgets the principles of initiation and steals what is not given. In hatred, he
breaks the fourth vow by engaging in non-celibacy (mentally) with a deceitful
woman. A very angry yogi becomes attached to worldly people and seeks their
help, thus destroying the fifth vow. What to speak of the destruction of the
other virtues, they are also destroyed. An angry soul insults the Guru and
becomes attached to desires. Thus, one should practice patience even towards
those who are foolish (naive). One should contemplate their nature: a child
(ignorant) being sometimes indirectly and sometimes directly angry, sometimes
beating and punishing in anger, sometimes trying to corrupt dharma. At that
time, one should think that it is my good fortune that this is happening to me.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 samyagdharma ke 10 bheda yogazAstra caturtha prakAza zloka 93 3. zauca - apane
saMyama para pApakarma rUpI lepa na lagane denA, zauca hai| usameM bhI zrAvaka
ke lie adattAdAnatyAga rUpa yA lobhAviSTa hokara paradhanagrahaNecchAtyAga rUpa
arthazauca mukhya hai| laukika graMthoM meM bhI kahA hai-sabhI zaucoM meM
arthazauca mahAn hai| jisakA jIvana artha ke mAmale meM zuci (pavitra) hai, vaha
zuci hai| miTTI yA jala se huI zuci (zuddhi) vAstavika zuci nahIM hai|
(manusmRti 5 / 106) isa prakAra kA azucimAna jIva isa loka yA paraloka meM
bhAvamala rUpI karmoM kA saMcaya karatA hai| use upadeza diyA jAya, phira bhI
vaha apane kalyANa kI bAta nahIM maantaa| isalie yahAM adattAdAnatyAga rUpa
zaucadharma samajhanA caahie| 4. brahmacarya - nau prakAra kI brahmacaryagupti
se yukta upastha-saMyama, guptendriya-viSayaka saMyama brahmacarya hai|
'bhImasena' ko saMkSepa meM 'bhIma' nAma se pukArA jAtA hai, vaise hI yahAM
'brahmacarya' ko 'brahma' kahA hai| brahmacarya mahAn hone se AtmaramaNatA ke
lie gurukulavAsa kA sevana karanA bhI brahmacarya hai| brahmacarya abrahma kI
nivRtti rUpa bhI hai| 5. AkiMcanya - jisake pAsa kucha bhI dravya na ho, vaha
akiMcana hotA hai, usakA bhAva AkiMcanya hai| AkiMcanyadharma vAle zarIradhArI
muni upalakSaNa se zarIra, dharmopakaraNa Adi ke prati yA sAMsArika padArthoM ke
prati nirmamatva hote haiN| ve niSparigrahI hokara apane liye bhojana-pAnI Adi
bhI saMyamayAtrA ke nirvAha ke lie hI lete haiN| jaise gAr3I ke pahie kI gati
ThIka rakhane ke lie usakI dhurI meM tela DAlA jAtA hai, vaise hI zarIra rUpI
gAr3I kI gati ThIka rakhane ke lie ve mUrchA rahita hokara AhAra-pAnI lete haiN|
rajoharaNa aura vastrapAtrAdi anya upakaraNa bhI saMyama evaM zarIra kI | rakSA
ke lie dhAraNa karate haiM; kintu lobha yA mamatA se dhAraNa nahIM krte| yahI
parigrahatyAga rUpa AkiMcanya kA rahasya hai| 6. tapa - yaha saMvara aura
nirjarA kA hetu rUpa hotA hai, jisakA varNana pahale kara Aye haiN| vaha
pUrvokta bAraha prakAra kA hotA hai, kiMtu prakIrNa rUpa meM aneka prakAra kA
bhI hai| vaha isa prakAra hai-yavamadhya, vajramadhya, cAMdrAyaNa, kanakAvalI,
ratnAvalI, sarvatobhadra, bhadrottara, vardhamAna AyaMbilatapa ityaadi| bAraha
prakAra kI bhikSupratimA bhI tapa hai, jisameM eka mahIne se lekara kramazaH
sAta mahIne taka sAta pratimAe~ hai, usake bAda sAta-sAta rAtri kI tIna
pratimAe~ haiM, phira tIna | dina-rAtri kI eka aura eka dina-rAtri kI eka
pratimA hotI hai| 7. kSAMti - zakya ho yA azakya use sahana karane ke pariNAma
bar3hAnA kSamA hai| krodha kA nimitta milane para AtmA meM sadabhAva evaM
durbhAva kA vicAra karane se krodha karane se utpanna hone vAle doSoM para
vicAra karane se. bAlasvabhAva kA ciMtana karane se, apane kRtakoM ke udaya meM
Ane kA ciMtana karane se evaM kSamAguNa dhAraNa karane se hone vAle lAbha kA
vicAra karane se kSamA utpanna hotI hai| yadi dUsare loga mujha meM doSa ke
kAraNa mere para Akroza karate haiM, vaha to mere hI doSoM ke astitva (sadbhAva)
ko kahate haiN| yadi mujha meM vaha doSa nahIM hai, to ve asatya bolate haiM,
ataH mujhe una para | kSamA karanI caahie| kahA bhI hai-yadi koI Akroza karatA
hai to buddhimAna samajhadAra AdamI ko vastutattva para vicAra karanA cAhie ki-
yadi usakA Akroza satya hai to usa para kopa karane se kyA lAbha aura yadi
asatya hai to ajJAnI ke prati krodha karane se bhI kyA phaaydaa| yoM krodha ke
doSoM kA ciMtana karake kSamA rakhanI caahie| krodha vAlA to avazya hI pApakarma
kA baMdhana karatA hai; usase dUsare ko mArane kI bhAvanA jAgatI hai, ahiMsAvata
hI khatma ho jAtA hai| krodha ke Aveza meM Akara sAdhaka apane satyavrata ko bhI
naSTa kara detA hai| krodhAveza meM dIkSA-avasthA kI bAta ko bhUla jAtA hai|
aura adattAdAna-corI karatA hai| dveSa meM Akara para-pAkhaMDinI strI ke sAtha
(mAnasika rUpa se) abrahmasevana karake cauthe vrata kA bhI khaMDana karatA hai|
atyaMta krodhI banA huA yogI avirati gRhasthoM se sahAyatA kI apekSA rakhakara
una para mamatA-mUrchA bhI karatA hai, isase pAMcavA~ vrata bhI naSTa ho jAtA
hai; phira uttaraguNoM ke bhaMga kI to bAta hI kahAM rahI? ve bhI khatma ho jAte
haiN| krodhI AtmA guru kA apamAna karake AzAtanA kara baiThatA hai| isa prakAra
krodha ke doSoM para svabhAva (besamajhI vAle) para bhI kSamA rkhe| usake
svabhAva para yoM ciMtana kare ki bAla (ajJAnI) jIva kisI samaya parokSa to
kabhI pratyakSa Akroza karatA hai. kabhI to Akroza karate hae tADana kara pITane
lagatA hai, kabhI dharma bhraSTa karanA cAhatA hai| usa samaya yaha soce ki merA
itanA sadbhAgya hai ki yaha mere pITha 371

Page #394 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Ten Aspects of Right Conduct (Samyak Dharma)  **Chapter Four, Light of
Yoga, Verse 93**  The text *Yoga Shastra* (Chapter Four, Light of Yoga, Verse
93) criticizes anger in indirect ways, but doesn't speak about it directly. This
is good. If someone is angry directly, one should say, "This person is so good
that they only express their anger through words and don't physically harm me."
If they hit, one should say, "This good person only hits and doesn't take my
life." If someone is about to kill, one should say, "They are only taking my
life, they are not corrupting me from my Dharma." In this way, one should find
benefit in the absence of harm and consider the nature of a child. When the
karmas one has committed come to fruition, such contemplation leads to
forgiveness. This is how the fruits of past karmas manifest. The karmas cannot
be destroyed without experiencing their fruits or performing austerities. In the
inevitable experience of karmic fruits, others are merely instruments. It is
said, "All beings experience the fruits of their past karmas, others are merely
instruments in committing offenses or doing good deeds." One should contemplate
this way during the time of experiencing the fruits of one's own karmas.
Contemplating the qualities of forgiveness brings forth the virtue of
forgiveness. By cultivating forgiveness, even when provoked, anger does not
arise. There is a firm resolve for good thoughts, supreme samadhi arises, there
is permanent joy within, one does not try to find weapons to kill, there is no
outburst, the face radiates joy, the eyes do not turn red with anger, but the
face remains bright, there is no sweating, no trembling, and no desire to harm
others. These and other such qualities are obtained by cultivating forgiveness.
Forgiveness is the opposite of anger.  **8. Gentleness (Mardava)**  Gentleness
means softness, tenderness, humility, and freedom from pride. Gentleness arises
from the suppression of ego. Ego manifests in eight forms, such as pride in
one's caste, etc., which we have discussed earlier. Therefore, a man blinded by
pride in his caste, lineage, strength, beauty, wealth, austerity, beloved, (or
wealth) and intelligence (or knowledge) is incapable of seeing what is
beneficial for him in this world and the next. (Prashmarati 80) Gentleness is
the opposite of pride, which is the root cause of these vices.  **9. Simplicity
(Saralata)**  Simplicity means righteousness, unity of mind, speech, and body,
or straightforwardness. Simplicity is the absence of crookedness, cunning, and
deceitful behavior. A deceitful person does not act according to their words.
Therefore, they are a source of doubt for everyone. They are untrustworthy. It
is said, "Even though a deceitful person does not commit any offense, due to the
fault of their deceitful nature, they are untrustworthy like a serpent to
everyone." (Prashmarati 28) Thus, simplicity is the opposite of deceit.  **10.
Liberation (Mukti)**  Liberation means freedom from greed, i.e., the severance
of both external and internal desires. It is the absence of greed and hope for
expectations. A greedy person is strengthened by the group of vices: anger,
pride, deceit, violence, falsehood, theft, non-brahma, and attachment. It is
said, "Greed is the refuge of destruction and the only highway to all
suffering." A greedy person trapped in the clutches of greed experiences new
sorrows every moment. (Prashmarati 29) Therefore, liberation is the form of
renunciation of greed. It is characterized by selflessness, self-motivation,
absence of possessiveness, detachment, not harming others, remaining unaffected
by the instruments of restraint like control of the senses, etc.  **Conclusion**
Thus, there are ten aspects of Dharma. There is a doubt here: Truth, restraint,
purity, Brahma, non-possession, etc., are included in the great vows, and
forgiveness, gentleness, simplicity, and liberation are included in the section
on *Sanvara*. Austerity is said to be the cause of *Sanvara* and *Nirjara*.
Then, what is the purpose of mentioning these ten Dharmas again in the context
of explaining Dharma? This would be a repetition! We resolve this by saying that
although there was no need to mention restraint, etc., again here, the ten types
of Dharma are explained in a different way because this is the Dharma declared
by the Arihant Bhagwan. Therefore, it was necessary to mention it. This is true
because it explains the qualities of Dharma and praises the Bhagwan for the sake
of comparison. || 93 || Now, we will discuss the effects of Dharma.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 samyag dharma ke 10 bheda yogazAstra caturtha prakAza zloka 93 pIche Akroza
karatA hai sAmane yA pratyakSa meM to kucha nahIM bolatA; itanA to bhalA hai|
kadAcit pratyakSa meM Akroza karatA ho, taba yoM kahe ki-yaha AdamI kitanA bhalA
hai ki mukha se Akroza ke zabda bolakara hI raha jAtA hai, mujhe mAratA nahIM
hai| yadi mAratA ho to yaha kahe ki yaha bhalA AdamI kevala mAratA-pITatA hI
hai, mere prANoM kA nAza to nahIM krtaa| yadi koI jAna lene para utArU ho to
yaha kahe ki yaha prANanAza hI to karatA hai, mujhe dharma se bhraSTa to nahIM
krtaa| isa prakAra Age se Age abhAva meM apanA lAbha mAne aura bAlasvabhAva para
vicAra kre| svayaM kiye hue karma udaya meM Aye taba aisA vicAra karane para
kSamAbhAva AtA hai| pUrvakRtakarmoM kA phala isa prakAra se hotA hai| karma kA
phala bhoge binA yA tapa kiye binA nikAcitakarmoM kA kSaya nahIM hotaa| avazya
bhogane yogya karmaphala meM dUsarA to nimittamAtra hotA hai| kahA hai-sabhI
jIva apane-apane pUrvakRtakarmoM kA phala prApta karate haiM, aparAdha karane
meM yA upakAra (guNa) karane meM dUsarA to sirpha nimittamAtra hI hotA hai| isa
taraha svayaMkRta karma ke udayakAla meM vicAra karanA caahie| kSamA ke
guNadharma kA vicAra karane se kSamAguNa prakaTa hotA hai| kSamA dhAraNa karane
se anAyAsa hI krodha kA nimitta milane para bhI krodha nahIM hotA, zubhadhyAna
kA adhyavasAya rahatA hai paramasamAdhi utpanna hotI hai, aMtarAtmA meM sthAyI
prasannatA hotI hai, kisI ko mArane ke lie zastra DhUMDhane kA prayatna nahIM
hotA Aveza nahIM AtA, cehare para prasannatA jhalakatI hai, krodha se AMkheM
|lAla nahIM hotI, paraMtu ceharA ujjvala rahatA hai, pasInA nahIM hotA, kaMpana
nahIM hotA tathA dUsaroM ko mArane kI bhAvanA nahIM hotii| ye aura isa prakAra
ke guNa kSamA rakhane se prApta hote haiN| kSamAdharma krodha kA pratipakSI hai|
8. mArdava - kA artha hai-mRdutaa-komltaa-nmrtaa-abhimaanrhittaa| mArdava
ahaMkAra kA nigraha karane se hotA hai| ahaMkAra jAtimada Adi ke rUpa meM 8
prakAra kA hotA hai, jisakI carcA hama pahale kara Aye haiN| isalie jAti, kula,
bala, rUpa, lAbha, tapa, vallabhatA, (yA aizvarya) aura buddhi (yA zruta) ke
mada meM aMdhA banA huA-puruSArthahIna puruSa ihaloka aura paraloka ke lie
hitakara bAta ko bhI dekha nahIM pAtA; (prazamarati 80) ityAdi madadoSa-parihAra
kA kAraNabhUta mAna kA pratipakSI mArdavadharma hai| 9. saralatA - kA artha hai-
RjutA, mana-vacana-kAyA kI ekarUpatA yA tadpa saralatA-avakratA, kuTilatArahita
vyavahAra mAyArahita jiivn| mAyAvI apane vacana ke anusAra kArya nahIM krtaa|
isalie haraeka ke lie vaha zaMkA kA sthAna banA rahatA hai. avizvAsapAtra hotA
hai| kahA bhI hai-mAyAvI puruSa yadyapi aparAdha nahIM karatA, tathApi vaha
apane mAyAvI svabhAva ke doSa ke kAraNa sarpa ke samAna pratyeka ke lie
avizvasanIya hotA hai| (prazamarati 28) isa prakAra mAyA kA pratipakSI
saralatAdharma hai| 10. mukti - nirlobhatA-arthAt bAhya tathA AbhyaMtara-
viSayaka tRSNA kA viccheda honaa| lobha aura AzA-apekSA kA abhAva honaa|
lobhAviSTa puruSa krodha, mAna, mAyA, hiMsA, asatya, corI, abrahma, parigraha
rUpa doSa samUha se puSTa hotA hai| kahA bhI hai-sarvanAza kA AzrayasthAna aura
samasta duHkhoM kA ekamAtra rAjamArga lobha hai| lobha ke caMgula meM phaMsA huA
lobhI vyakti kSaNa-kSaNa meM naye naye duHkha pAtA rahatA hai| (prazamarati 29)
isalie lobha kA tyAga rUpa nirlobhatA hai| svaparahita, Atma-pravRtti, mamatva
kA abhAva, niHsaMgatA, paradroha na karanA, rajoharaNa Adi saMyamapAlana ke
upakaraNoM para bhI mUrchA rahita rahanA ityAdi lakSaNa vAlA muktidharma hai|
isa prakAra dharma ke dasa bheda haiN| yahAM zaMkA hotI hai ki satya, saMyama,
zauca, brahma, akiMcanatA Adi kA samAveza to mahAvratoM meM ho jAtA hai aura
kSamA, mArdava, Arjava aura mukti inakA samAveza saMvara prakaraNa meM ho jAtA
hai; tapa ko saMvara aura nirjarA kA kAraNa rUpa batAyA hI hai, taba phira
dharma-pratipAdana ke prasaMga meM punaH ina dasa dharmoM ko kahane kA kyA
prayojana hai? isase to punaruktidoSa huA! isakA samAdhAna karate haiM ki
yadyapi yahAM saMyama Adi kA phira se kahane kA koI prasaMga nahIM thA; paraMtu
saMyama Adi dasa prakAra ke dharma kA prakArAMtara se pratipAdana isalie kiyA
gayA hai ki yaha zrI arihaMta bhagavAn dvArA svAkhyAta (acchI taraha se kahA
huA) dharma hai| isalie kahanA Avazyaka thaa| dharmaguNa ke saMbaMdha meM
vyAkhyA karane vAlA hone se tathA anuprekSA ke nimitta se bhagavAn kI stuti
karane vAlA hone se yaha jo kucha kahA hai, vaha vAstavika hai  /  / 93 /  /
aba prasaMgavaza dharma kA prabhAva batAte haiM 372

Page #395 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Dharma 'Phal' and Dharma 'Vichar'  **Yoga Shastra, Fourth Prakash, Verses 94
to 102**  **Verse 94:**  * **Translation:** Due to the influence of Dharma, even
in the *Sushama Kala* (a time of prosperity), when they are in the form of
plants and stones, *Kalpavriksha* (wish-fulfilling tree), *Chintamani Ratna* (a
precious gem), etc., give desired results to *Dharma Atma* (souls who are
righteous). Even in the *Dushsama Kala* (a time of adversity), they are not even
visible, yet they provide desired results (in the form of wealth).  **Verse
95:**  * **Translation:** Dharma saves a human being who is falling into the
vast ocean of misery. It is the only friend who is always close by; it is
extremely affectionate.  **Verse 96:**  * **Translation:** The ocean does not
drown the earth, and the clouds benefit the earth. This is undoubtedly the
effect of Dharma alone.  **Verse 97:**  * **Translation:** If the flames of fire
were to go sideways, the world would be burnt, and if the wind were to move
upwards, it would be difficult for living beings to survive. But this does not
happen. The reason for this is the inconceivable influence of Dharma.  **Verse
98:**  * **Translation:** Without any support, without any base, the earth,
which is the base of the entire universe, stands firm. There is no other reason
for this except Dharma.  **Verse 99:**  * **Translation:** The sun and the moon
rise in this world every day for the benefit of the world. This is undoubtedly
the effect of the rule of Dharma.  **Verse 100:**  * **Translation:** Dharma is
the friend of the friendless, the companion of the companionless, and the
protector of the orphan. Dharma is the only one who is affectionate towards the
entire world.  **Verse 101:**  * **Translation:** Those who have taken refuge in
Dharma cannot be harmed by demons, yakshas, snakes, tigers, lions, fire, or
poison.  **Verse 102:**  * **Translation:** Dharma saves a human being from
falling into hell and the abyss. Dharma bestows unparalleled wealth, even the
wealth of omniscience.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dharma 'phala' evaM dharma 'vicAra' yogazAstra caturtha prakAza zloka 94 se 102
/ 420 /  dharmaprabhAvataH kalpadrumAdyA dadatIpsitam  /  gocare'pi na te
yatsyuradharmAdhiSThitAtmanAm  /  / 94 /  /  artha :- dharma ke prabhAva se
kalpavRkSa, ciMtAmaNiratna Adi (suSamakAla meM vanaspati aura pASANa rUpa hone
para bhii)| dharmAtmA jIvoM ko abhISTa phala dete haiN| ve hI kalpavRkSa Adi
duHSamakAla Adi meM dRSTigocara bhI nahIM hote, phira bhI ISTa (arthaprApti
rUpa) phala pradAna karate haiM  /  / 14 /  /  aura bhI kahA hai|421| apAre
vyasanAmbhodhau, patantaM pAti dehinam  /  sadA savidhava]ka-
bandhurdharmo'tivatsalaH  // 95 /  /  artha :- dharma apAra duHkha-samudra meM
girate hue manuSya ko bacAtA hai tathA sadaiva nikaTa rahane vAlA ekamAtra
baMdhu hai; vahI ativatsala hai  // 95 /  /  yahAM anartha-parihAra rUpa phala
batalAyA hai| tthaa|422| AplAvayati nAmbhodhirAzvAsayaticAmbudaH  /  yanmahIM
tatprabhAvo'yaM, dhruvaM dharmasya kevalaH  // 96 //  - artha :- samudra isa
pRthvI ko DUbA nahIM detA tathA bAdala pRthvI para jo upakAra karatA hai; vaha
niHsaMdeha ekamAtra dharma kA hI prabhAva hai| isameM anartha kA parihAra aura
artha prApti phala kahA hai  // 96 /  /  aba sAdhAraNadharma kA sAdhAraNa phala
kahate haiN|423| na jvalatyanalastiryag, yadUrdhvaM vAti nAnilaH  /
acintyamahimA tatra, dharma eva nibandhanam  // 97 //  artha :- jagat meM agni
kI jvAlAe~ yadi tirachI jAtI to vaha bhasma ho jAtA aura vAyu Urdhvagati karatA
to jIvoM kA jInA kaThina ho jaataa| kintu aisA nahIM hotA, isakA kAraNa dharma
kA acintya prabhAva hI hai||97|| mithyAdRSTi bhI kahate haiM ki 'agni kI jvAlA
Upara ko uThakara jalAtI hai aura vAyu tirachI gati karatA hai, usameM koI
adRSTa hI kAraNa hai|' tathA*  / 424 /  nirAlambA nirAdhArA, vizvAdhArA
vasundharA  /  yaccAvatiSThate tatra, dharmAdanyanna kAraNam  // 98 //  artha :-
kisI avalaMbana ke binA, zeSanAga, kachuA, varAha, hAthI Adi AdhAra ke binA isa
carAcara vizva kA AdhAra rUpa pRthvI jo ThaharI huI hai, isameM dharma ke
zatirikta anya koI bhI kAraNa nahIM hai||18||  / 425 /  sUryAcandramasAvetau
vizvopakRtihetave  /  udayete jagatyasmin nUnaM dharmasya zAsanAt  // 99 //
artha :- yaha sUrya aura caMdramA jagat ke paropakAra ke lie isa loka meM
pratidina udita hote rahate haiM, isameM nizcaya hI dharma ke zAsana kA prabhAva
hai  /  / 19 /  /   / 426 /  abandhUnAmasau bandhurasakhInAmasau sakhA  /
anAthAnAmasau nAtho, dharmo vizvaikaMvatsalaH  // 100 //  artha :- jisakA isa
saMsAra meM koI baMdhu nahIM hai usakA dharma hI baMdhu hai; kyoMki vipatti meM
sahAyatA karane vAlA, usase pAra utArane vAlA dharma baMdhu hI hai| jisakA koI
mitra nahIM hai usase prema karane vAlA dharma hI mitra hai| jisakA koI nAtha
nahIM hai, usakA yoga aura kSema karane vAlA dharma hI nAtha hai| kahA hai ki
'jo yoga aura kSema karane vAlA ho, vahI nAtha kahalAtA hai| isalie jagat meM
advitIya vatsala yadi koI hai to vaha dharma hI hai| gAya ke dvArA bachar3e ko
sneha se jo sahalAyA jAtA hai, use vAtsalya kahate haiM; usake samAna sAre jagat
ke lie prIti (vatsalatA) kA kAraNa hone se dharma bhI vatsala hai  // 10 //  .
aba anarthaphala kI nivRtti hone se sAmAnya vyakti bhI dharma karanA cAhate
haiN| ataH dharma kA phala kahate haiN|427| rakSo-yakSoraga-vyAghra-
vyAlAnalagarAdayaH  /  nApakartumalaM teSAM yairdharmaH zaraNaM zritaH  // 101 /
/  /  artha :- jinhoMne dharma kA zaraNa svIkAra kiyA hai, unakA rAkSasa, yakSa,
sarpa, vyAghra, siMha, agni aura viSa Adi apakAra (nukasAna) nahIM kara sakate
// 101 /  /  aba mukhya anartha rokane ke lie aura uttama padArtha kI prApti
rUpa dharma kA phala kahate haiN|428| dharmo narakapAtAla-pAtAdavati dehinaH  /
dharmo nirupamaM yacchatyapi sarvajJavaibhavam  // 102 /  /  373

Page #396 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The term "Dharmasvākhyātabhāvanā" used in this context is not found in other
religious texts.  **Yogaśāstra, Fourth Light, Verse 102:** Dharma protects
beings from falling into the hellish abyss. Dharma also enables one to attain
the glory of the unparalleled omniscient.  **Explanation:** The remaining fruits
of Dharma should be understood as incidental. In this regard, the meaning of the
inner verses is presented: The ten types of Yati Dharma mentioned earlier were
not seen (accepted) by the wrong view. And if anyone has ever said it, they did
not say it by practicing it. The meaning of any truth is through the speech of
each person. It is also in someone's mind, but if they implement it in practice,
understand that they are a devotee of Jina Dharma. Those who are enslaved by the
intellect in the Vedic scriptures and those who memorize their sutras do not
know Dharma even in the slightest. How can there be Dharma in a Yajnika who
performs various animal-killing sacrifices like Go-medha, Ashvamedha, etc., and
who kills or causes animals to be killed? How can this be the Dharma of the
Puranas and their creators, the Puranic, who speak of things that are unworthy
of faith, false, and contradictory to each other? How can there be Dharma in the
life of the Smarta, etc., who take away the property of others through wrong
systems and who call only earth and water as cleanliness? How can this be called
the poverty of a Brahmin who wants to take everything from a Yajamana who does
not want to give, and who takes life for money? Where is the austerity of the
Buddhists who clean their mouths day and night, but are devoid of the
discrimination between edible and inedible? "Sleeping on a soft bed, drinking
sweet juice in the morning, eating lunch, drinking cold water in the evening,
and eating raisins and sugar at midnight. Thus, the Shakyas (Buddhists) have
described a beautiful Dharma in eating and drinking as they please." There is
not even a trace of the Dharma of forgiveness in the worldly Rishis who curse in
a moment for a small offense. "Our Brahmin caste is the best; how can there be
the Dharma of gentleness in Brahmins who are intoxicated with this kind of caste
pride, who are ill-behaved, and who have this kind of mind, living in the four
Ashramas? How can there be even a trace of simplicity in hypocrites who have the
results of pride in their hearts and who outwardly wear the garb of
renunciation? How can there be the Dharma of liberation (non-attachment) in the
Kula-griha-Brahmin who is always entangled in family, wife, house, children,
etc., and in attachment?  Thus, one should contemplate this Dharma-
svākhyātabhāvanā of the omniscient Arihant Bhagwan, who is free from attachment,
aversion, or delusion. False words come out due to attachment, aversion, or
delusion-ignorance. Since these defects are absent in the non-attached, how can
the Arihant be a false speaker? It is not possible for those who have a mind
contaminated by attachment, aversion, etc., to speak the truth. They perform
sacrifices, perform homa, etc., and by performing many acts of fulfilling
desires, such as building wells, ponds, lakes, etc., they cause the death of
animals and tell them about the pleasures of heaven. They want to satisfy their
ancestors by feeding Brahmins, they perform rituals like ghee yoni, etc., and
make them perform atonement for their sins. They justify the remarriage of women
due to the five calamities. They say that a woman who does not have a son should
have a Kshetraja offspring (born through Niyoga with another man). They say that
impure women are purified by their menstruation. They earn a living by killing
goats, etc., in sacrifices with a benevolent mind. They make people drink
alcohol for seven generations in the Sautrāmaṇi sacrifice. They believe that
touching a cow that eats dung is purifying. They say that bathing in water,
etc., purifies sins. They worship trees like banyan, peepal, amla, etc. They
believe that the offering of ghee, etc., in fire pleases the gods and goddesses.
They believe that milking a cow on earth pacifies misfortune. They preach the
same kind of vows and Dharma for women, as if they are inferior. They wear
matted hair, pierce their ears, apply ashes on their bodies, wear loincloths,
worship gods with ak, dhatura, bilva leaves, tulsi, etc. They deceive the Muni
Devas and people by playing on their buttocks, dancing, singing, etc.,
repeatedly, making a sound like a musical instrument from their mouths, and
speaking falsely. They repeatedly take and abandon the Pashupata vow, desiring
slavery and servitude by breaking their vows. They kill lice in the use of
medicines, etc., and they use the bones of humans.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dharmasvAkhyAtabhAvanA meM prayukta dharma anyamatIya graMthoM meM nahIM
yogazAstra caturtha prakAza zloka 102 artha : dharma jIvoM ko naraka rUpI pAtAla
meM girane se bacAtA hai| dharma anupama sarvajJa kA vaibhava bhI prApta karAtA
. hai  // 102 /  /  vyAkhyA :- dharma ke zeSa phala to AnuSaMgika samajhane
caahie| isake saMbaMdha meM AMtarazlokoM kA bhAvArtha prastuta karate haiM-
pUrvokta dasa prakAra ke yatidharma ko mithyAdRSTi ne nahIM dekhA (mAnA); aura
yadi kisI ne kabhI kahA hai to ve caraNa se Acarita karake nahIM khaa| kisI bhI
tattva kA artha pratyeka vyakti kI vANI se hotA hai. kisI ke mana meM bhI hotA
hai, paraMtu use AcaraNa meM lAkara kriyAnvita karatA ho, use samajhanA ki vaha
jinadharma kA ArAdhaka hai| vedazAstra meM paravaza buddhi vAle aura unake
sUtroM ko kaMThastha karane vAle tattva se dharma ko lezamAtra bhI nahIM jaante|
gomedha, azvamedha Adi vibhinna prANivadhamUlaka yajJa karane vAle evaM
prANighAta karane-karAne vAle yAjJika meM dharma kaise ho sakatA hai?
azraddheya. asatya evaM paraspara virodhI vastu kA pralApa karane vAle purANa
aura usake racayitA paurANika kA yaha kauna-sA dharma hai? galata vyavasthA se
dUsare ke dravya ko haraNa kara lene vAle, miTTI aura jala Adi ko hI zaucadharma
kahane vAle smArta Adi ke jIvana meM dharma kaise ho sakatA hai? nahIM denA
cAhane vAle yajamAna se bhI sarvasva lenA cAhane vAle, dhana ke lie prANaharaNa
karane vAle brAhmaNa kI yaha akiMcanatA kaise kahI jA sakatI hai? rAtadina muMha
sApha karake khAne vAle, kintu bhakSya-abhakSya ke viveka se rahita
bauddhadharmiyoM kA tapadharma hI kahAM rahA? 'komala zayyA para sonA,
prAtaHkAla madhurarasa kA pAna karanA, dopahara ko bhojana karanA, zAma ko
ThaMDA pAnI pInA aura AdhI rAta ko kizamiza aura zakkara khAnA caahie| isa
prakAra icchAnusAra khAne-pIne meM hI zAkya (bauddha) ne suMdara dharma batAyA
hai| jarA-se aparAdha para kSaNabhara meM zApa dene vAle laukika RSiyoM meM
kSamAdharma kA jarA bhI aMza nahIM hotaa| 'hamArI brAhmaNajAti hI sarvottama
hai; isa prakAra ke jAtimada meM matta, durvyavahAra vAle evaM isI prakAra ke
citta vAle cAra AzramoM meM rahane vAle brAhmaNoM meM mArdavadharma kahAM se ho
sakatA hai? hRdaya meM daMbha ke pariNAma cala rahe ho aura bAhara se bakavRtti
dhAraNa karane vAle pAkhaMDavratadhArakoM meM saralatA kA aMzamAtra bhI kahAM se
ho sakatA hai? patnI, ghara, putrAdi parivAra aura sadaiva parigraha meM
racepace lobha ke ekamAtra kulagRha-brAhmaNa meM mukti (nirlobhatA) dharma bhI
kaise ho sakatA hai? isa prakAra rAga, dveSa yA moha se rahita kevalajJAnI
arihaMta bhagavAn kI isa dharmasvAkhyAtabhAvanA kA ciMtana karanA caahie|
mithyAvacana rAga, dveSa yA moha-ajJAna ke kAraNa hI nikalate haiN| ina doSoM kA
vItarAga meM abhAva hone se arihaMta mithyAvAdI kaise ho sakate haiM? jo
rAgadveSAdi se kaluSita citta vAle haiM, unake mukha se satya vacana kA nikalanA
saMbhava nahIM hai| ve isa taraha yajJa karAnA, havana karAnA ityAdi tathA aneka
bAvar3I, kuMe, tAlAba, sarovara Adi iSTApUrta kArya karake pazuoM kA ghAta
karAkara svargaloka ke sukha batAne vAle, brAhmaNoM ko bhojana karAne se pitaroM
kI tRsi karAne kI icchA vAle, ghI kI yoni Adi karavAkara tadpa prAyazcitta
karAne vAle, pAMca ApattiyoM ke kAraNa striyoM kA punarvivAha jAyaja batAne
vAle, jinake putra na hotA ho, aisI striyoM ke lie kSetraja apatya (dUsare
puruSa ke sAtha niyoga se utpanna) kA kathana karane vAle, dUSita striyoM kI
raja se zuddhi batAne vAle, kalyANabuddhi se yajJa meM mAre hue bakare Adi se
AjIvikA calAne vAle, sautrAmaNi yajJa meM sAta pIr3hI taka madirApAna karAne
vAle, viSThAbhakSaNa karane vAlI gAya ke sparza se pavitratA mAnane vAle, jalAdi
se snAna karane mAtra se pApazuddhi batAne vAle, bar3a, pIpala, A~vale Adi
vRkSoM kI pUjA karane-karAne vAle, agni meM ghI Adi ke homane se devadeviyoM kI
prasannatA mAnane vAle dharatI para gAya dUhane se amaMgala kI zAMti mAnane
vAle; striyoM ko nIcA dikhAne kI taraha, unake lie vaise hI vrata aura dharma kA
upadeza dene vAle tathA jaTAdhAraNa karane, kAna chidAne, zarIra para bhasma
ramAne, laMgoTa lagAne, Aka, dhatUrA, bilvapatra, tulasI Adi se devapUjA karane
vAle; nitaMba bajAte hue, nRtya, gIta Adi bAra-bAra karate hue, muMha se bAje
kI-sI AvAja nikAlate hue aura asatyabhASA bolate hue muni devoM aura logoM ko
chalate hue, vratabhaMga kara dAsatva aura dAsItva kI icchA karake bAra-bAra
pAzupatavrata grahaNa karane aura tyAgane vAle haiM; auSadhi Adi prayoga meM jUM
ko mArate haiM, manuSya kI haDDI ke 1. eka jaina muni ne bhI Apatti meM
punarvivAha ke vicAra para vicAra karane kA likha diyA hai| 2. jainoM ke
anuSThAnoM meM bhI homa-havana A gayA hai| 374

Page #397 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## A Detailed Description of the World View  This section, from verses 103 and
104 of the fourth chapter of the Yoga Shastra, describes the Jain concept of the
world. It begins by discussing the characteristics of those who are not truly
religious, and then moves on to explain the nature of the world itself.  **The
Characteristics of Non-Religious People**  The text states that those who wear
ornaments, carry tridents and axes, eat from broken pots, wear bells and
anklets, and indulge in alcohol, meat, and women, cannot be considered truly
religious. Similarly, those who follow the teachings of the Kulacharya, who eat
roots, fruits, and leaves, and live in the forest with their wives and children,
but do not understand the true meaning of the Jina's teachings, cannot be
considered truly religious.  **The True Nature of Religion**  The text then
explains that the true fruit of religion is liberation (moksha), not worldly
gains. Just as a farmer plants seeds with the desire for grain, but also gets
weeds and other unwanted plants, so too does a person who follows religion
receive worldly benefits, but these are secondary to the ultimate goal of
liberation.  **The World View**  The text then describes the world view of
Jainism. It states that the world is made up of three realms: the lower realm
(adho-lok), the middle realm (tiryak-lok), and the upper realm (urdhva-lok). The
lower realm is further divided into seven hells, each with its own name and
characteristics. These hells are surrounded by a vast ocean of solidified water
(ghano-dhadhi), followed by a powerful wind (ghana-vat), and finally a weaker
wind (tanu-vat).   The text emphasizes that the world is constantly changing,
with everything being in a state of flux. It is made up of substances that are
constantly being created and destroyed.   This description of the world view is
meant to help the practitioner understand the nature of reality and to motivate
them to strive for liberation from the cycle of birth and death.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 loka bhAvanA kA vistRta varNana yogazAstra caturtha prakAza zloka 103 se 104
AbhUSaNa dhAraNa karate haiM, trizUla aura khATe ke pAye ko Dhoe phirate haiM,
khappara meM bhojana karate haiM; ghaMTA, nupUra dhAraNa karate haiN| madirA,
mAMsa aura striyoM ke bhoga meM Asakta bane hue niraMtara nitaMba para ghaMTA
bAMdhe bAra-bAra nRtya-gIta karane vAloM meM bhalA dharma kaise ho sakatA hai?
tathA anaMtakAya, kaMdamUla, phala aura pattoM kA bhojana karane vAle tathA
strI-putra ke sAtha vanavAsa svIkAra karane vAle tathA bhakSyAbhakSya, peyApeya
yA AcaraNIya-anAcaraNIya saba para samabhAva rakhane vAle yogI ke nAma se
prasiddhI pAne vAle kaulAcArya ke aMtevAsI ziSya tathA dUsare athavA jinhoMne
jinendrazAsana ke | rahasya ko jAnA nahIM hai, unameM dharma kahAM se ho sakatA
hai? usa dharma kA phala kyA hai? usakI suMdara (zuddha) maryAdAoM kA kathana
kisa prakAra kA hai? ise ve kahAM se jAna sakate haiM? zrI jinezvara bhagavAn ke
dharma kA isa loka aura paraloka meM jo phala hai, vaha to gauNaphala hai, usakA
mukhyaphala to mokSa batAyA hai| kisAna khetI karatA hai yA anAja botA haianAja
prApta hone kI icchA se; lekina ghAsa, pAta Adi bIca meM mila jAte haiM, ve to
AnuSaMgika phala hai| isI taraha dharma kA yathArtha phala to apavarga-mokSa
hai, sAMsArika phala to AnuSaMgika hai| zrI jinendrakathita dharma ke Azrita
svAkhyAtatAbhAvanA para bAra-bAra dhyAna dene se mamatva rUpa viSaya vikAroM ke
doSoM se mukta banakara sAdhaka paramaprakarSa vAlA sAmyapada prApta karatA hai|
isa prakAra dharmasvAkhyAtatAbhAvanA pUrNa huii| aba lokabhAvanA kA nirUpaNa
karate haiN|429| kaTisthakaravaizAkha-sthAnakastha-narAkRtim  /  dravyaiH pUrNaM
smarellokaM, sthityutptti-vyyaatmkaiH||103|| artha :- kamara para donoM hAtha
rakhakara aura pairoM ko phailAkara khar3e hue manuSya kI AkRti ke samAna AkRti
vAle | aura utpAda, vyaya aura dhrauvya dharma vAle dravyoM se pUrNa loka kA
ciMtana kare  /  / 103 /  /  vyAkhyA :- donoM hAtha kamara para rakhe hoM aura
vaizAkha-saMsthAna se donoM paira phailAe hue hoM, isa prakAra khar3e hue puruSa
kI AkRti ke samAna caudaha rAjapramANa lokAkAza-kSetra kI AkRti kA ciMtana
karanA caahie| lokAkAza kSetra kaisA hai? isake uttara meM kahate haiM-sthiti,
utpatti aura vyaya rUpa dravyoM se paripUrNa kSetra hai| sthiti kA artha hai-
dhruvatA, sthAyI rUpa se Tike rahanA; kAyama rhnaa| utpatti kA artha hai-utpanna
honA aura vyaya kA artha hai naSTa honaa| jagata ke sabhI padArtha sthiti-
utpAda-vyaya svarUpa haiN| zrI umAsvAti ne tattvArthasUtra meM kahA hai-utpAda-
vyaya dhauvyayuktaM st| (tattvArtha 5-29) AkAza Adi nityAnitya rUpa se prasiddha
hai| pratyeka padArtha pratikSaNa usa-usa paryAya se utpanna hotA hai, phira
naSTa hotA hai| dIpaka Adi ke bhI utpAda aura vinAza donoM yoga banate rahate
haiN| paraMtu ekAMta sthitiyoga athavA ekAMta utpAda yA vinAzayoga vAlA koI
padArtha nahIM hotA hai| hamane anyayogavyavacchedadvAtriMzikA meM kahA hai-
dIpaka se lekara AkAza taka sabhI vastue~ samasvabhAva vAlI haiM, ve koI bhI
syAdvAda kI mudrA kA ullaMghana nahIM krtii| usameM se eka vastu sarvathA nitya
hI hai aura dUsarI vastu ekAMta anitya hai, aisA pralApa ApakI AjJA ke vidveSI
hI karate haiN||103|| aba lokasvarUpabhAvanA kA svarUpa batAte haiN|430| loko
jagat-trayAkIrNo, bhuvaH saptA'tra veSTitAH  /  ghnaambhodhi-mhaavaat-
tnuvaatairmhaablaiH||104|| artha :- yaha loka tIna jagat se vyApta hai| use
Urdhvaloka, madhyaloka aura adholoka ke nAma se pukArA jAtA hai| adholoka meM
sAta narakabhUmiyA~ haiM, jo mahAsamartha ghanodadhi, ghanavAta aura tanuvAta se
kramazaH veSTita hai  /  / 104 /  /  vyAkhyA :- pUrvokta AkRti aura svarUpavAlA
loka adho, tiryak aura Urdhva tIna loka se vyApta hai| adholoka meM ratnaprabhA,
zarkarAprabhA, vAlukAprabhA, paMkaprabhA, dhUmaprabhA, tamaHprabhA aura
mahAtamaH prabhA; ye yathArtha nAma vAlI sAta narakabhUmiyAM hai| tathA
anAdikAla se prasiddha niranvarthaka nAma vAlI hai| vaha isa prakAra-gharmA,
vaMzA, zailA, aMjanA, riSTA, maghA aura maaghvtii| ve ratnaprabhA Adi pratyeka
ke nIce uttarottara adhikAdhika caur3I hai| inameM kramazaH 30 lAkha, 25 lAkha,
15 lAkha, 10 lAkha, 3 lAkha, pAMca kama eka lAkha aura pAMca nArakAvAsa hai|
unake nIce aura AsapAsa cAroM ora golAkAra veSTita (ghirA huA) mahAbalazAlI
ghanodadhi (jamA huA Thosaghanasamudra) hai, phira ghanavAta (jamI 375

Page #398 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Nature of the Universe  **This section discusses the structure of the
universe according to Jain cosmology.**  **The Earth and its Surroundings:**  *
The Earth is surrounded by three concentric rings: **Ghano-dhadhi** (dense air),
**Ghanavat** (thick air), and **Tanuvat** (thin air). * The **Ghano-dhadhi** is
20,000 yojanas thick, the **Ghanavat** is countless yojanas thick, and the
**Tanuvat** is countless yojanas thicker than the **Ghanavat**. * Beyond the
**Tanuvat** lies the **Aakash** (space), which is countless thousands of yojanas
thick. * The thickness of these rings decreases gradually towards the outer
edges, like the rings of a tree. * The **Ghano-dhadhi** ring of the **Ratna-
prabha** (a hell) is 6 yojanas wide, the **Ghanavat** ring is 4 yojanas wide,
and the **Tanuvat** ring is 1 yojana wide. * The **Ghano-dhadhi** ring of the
**Ratna-prabha** has a thickness of one-third of a yojana, the **Ghanavat** ring
has a thickness of one kos, and the **Tanuvat** ring has a thickness of one-
third of a kos. * The **Sharka-prabha** (another hell) has a similar structure,
with the rings decreasing in size as they move upwards. * The same pattern
continues for the seven hells, with the rings decreasing in size as they move
upwards. * The first ring of the **Ghamma** (a hell) is one-third of a kos long,
the second ring is one gao-kos long, and the last ring is one-third of a kos
long. * The rings of the **Vansha** (a hell) are 6 1/3 yojanas wide, 4 1/3
yojanas wide, and 10 1/3 yojanas wide respectively. * The **Vansha** (a hell) is
122 1/3 yojanas wide, and beyond that lies the **Alok** (a region of darkness).
* The **Shaila** (a hell) is 6 yojanas wide, 52 1/3 yojanas wide, and 12 1/3
yojanas wide respectively. * The **Shaila** (a hell) is 13 1/3 yojanas wide, and
beyond that lies the **Alok** (a region of darkness). * The **Pank-prabha** (a
hell) is 7 yojanas wide, 52 1/3 yojanas wide, and 1 1/3 yojanas wide
respectively. * The **Pank-prabha** (a hell) is 14 yojanas wide, and beyond that
lies the **Alok** (a region of darkness). * The **Dhum-prabha** (a hell) is 7
1/3 yojanas wide, 52 1/3 yojanas wide, and 15 1/3 yojanas wide respectively. *
The **Dhum-prabha** (a hell) is 142 1/3 yojanas wide, and beyond that lies the
**Alok** (a region of darkness). * The **Tama-prabha** (a hell) is 72 1/3
yojanas wide, 52 1/3 yojanas wide, and 19 1/3 yojanas wide respectively. * The
**Maha-tama-prabha** (a hell) is 8 yojanas wide, 6 yojanas wide, and 2 yojanas
wide respectively. * The **Maha-tama-prabha** (a hell) is 16 yojanas wide, and
beyond that lies the **Alok** (a region of darkness). * The height of the Earth
is equal to the width of the three rings (**Ghano-dhadhi**, **Ghanavat**, and
**Tanuvat**) that surround it.  **The Shape of the Universe:**  * The universe
is shaped like a **Vetrasana** (a type of seat) at the bottom, with a wider base
and a narrower top. * The middle part of the universe is shaped like a
**Jhallari** (a type of musical instrument), and the top part is shaped like a
**Mridanga** (a type of drum). * The universe is made up of three parts: **Adho-
lok** (lower world), **Tirya-g-lok** (intermediate world), and **Urddhva-lok**
(upper world). * The **Adho-lok** is shaped like an inverted **Sakora** (a type
of vessel), the **Tirya-g-lok** is shaped like a **Thali** (a type of plate),
and the **Urddhva-lok** is shaped like an upright **Mridanga** (a type of drum).
**Note:** The terms **yojana** and **kos** are units of measurement in ancient
India.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 loka svarUpa bhAvanA yogazAstra caturtha prakAza zloka 104 se 105 huI Thosa
vAyu) hai, tadanaMtara hai-tanuvAta (patalI hvaa)| mahAbalazAlI se yahAM 'pRthvI
ko dhAraNa karane meM samartha' se tAtparya hai| isameM pratyeka pRthvI ke nIce
ghanodadhi hai, jo madhyabhAga meM bIsa hajAra yojana moTA hai, ghanavAta
(mahAvAyu) kI moTAI ghanodadhi se madhyabhAga meM asaMkhyAtayojana hai aura
tanuvAta ghanavAta se asaMkhyAtayojana sthUla hai| usake bAda asaMkhyAta
yojanasahasra AkAza hai| yaha bIca kI moTAI kA nApa hai| usake bAda kramazaH
donoM tarapha ghaTate-ghaTate AkhirI valaya ke sadRza nApa vAlA hotA hai|
ratnaprabhA ke ghanodadhi valaya kI caur3AI sirpha 6 yojana hai, ghanavAtavalaya
kI caur3AI 4 /  /  yojana aura tanuvAtavalaya kI caur3AI 1 /  /  yojana hai|
ratnaprabhA ke valayamAna para ghanodadhi meM yojana kA tIsarA bhAga hotA hai,
ghanavAta meM eka kosa aura tanuvAta meM kosa kA tIsarA bhAga hotA hai| isa
taraha zarkarAprabhA meM valayamAna smjhnaa| zarkarAprabhA ke valayamAna ke
Upara bhI isI prakAra prakSepa karanA (milaanaa)| isI taraha pUrva-pUrva
valayamAna para Upara kahe anusAra sAta pRthvI taka milAte hue Age bar3hate
jaanaa| kahA bhI hai-ghammA ke prathama valaya kI laMbAI kosa kA tIsarA bhAga
hai, dUsare valaya kI laMbAI eka gAU-kosa aura aMtima valaya kI laMbAI kosa kA
tIsarA hissA; ityAdi prakAra se dhruva meM milAte jaanaa| isI taraha sAta pRthvI
taka milaanaa| prakSepa karane ke bAda valaya kI caur3AI kA nApa isa prakAra
jAnanA-dUsarI vaMzA nAma kI pRthvI meM prathama valaya kA viSkaMbha (caur3AI) 6
yojana aura eka tihAI (6/) yojana, dUsare valaya meM 4/, yojana aura tIsare
valaya meM 10/, yojana hotA hai| isa taraha saba milAkara ikaTThe karane se
vaMzA (zarkarAprabhA) nAmaka dvitIya narakabhUmi kI sImA se 122/, yojana ke aMta
meM aloka hai| zailA (bAlukAprabhA) nAma kI tRtIya narakabhUmi ke prathama
valaya kA viSkaMbhaka 6 yojana hai, dUsarA valaya 52/, yojana hai aura tIsarA
hai 12/, yojn| kula milAkara 13/ yojana meM vAlukAprabhA kI sImA pUrNa hotI hai|
isake Age aloka hai| cauthI paMkaprabhA (aMjanA) nAmaka narakapRthvI ke valayoM
meM prathama kA viSkaMbha 7 yojana, dUsare kA 52/, yojana aura tIsare kA 1/,
yojana, isa prakAra kula 14 yojana ke bAda aloka AtA hai| dhUmaprabhA (riSTA)
nAma kI paMcama narakabhUmi meM tInavalaya kramazaH 71, 52, 15/, yojana
viSkaMbha hai| usake bAda yAnI 142/ yojana ke bAda aloka hai| tamaHprabhA
(maghA) nAmaka chaTThI naraka ke tIna valaya haiM, uname prathama
ghanodadhivalaya kA vistAra 72/, dUsare| kA 52/, aura tIsare kA 19/,, yojana
caur3AI hai| mahAtamaHprabhA (mAghavatI) nAmaka sasamanarakabhUmi kA prathama
valaya |8 yojana, dUsarA valaya 6 yojana aura tIsarA valaya 2 yojana laMbA
caur3A hai, arthAt kucha 16 yojana ke bAda aloka smjhnaa| (bRhatsaMgrahaNI
245-251) pRthvI ke AdhArabhUta ghanodadhi, ghanavAta aura tanuvAta ina tInoM
valayoM kI pRthvI ke cAroM ora valayAkAra se aMtima bhAga taka jitanI caur3AI
hotI hai, utanI hI pRthvI kI UMcAI kA nApa hotA hai  /  / 104 /  /  punaH loka
kA svarUpa batAte haiN|431| vetrAsanasamo'dhastAt, madhyato jhallarInibhaH  /
agre murajasaGkAzo, lokaH syaadevmaakRtiH||105|| artha :- yaha loka nIce ke
bhAga meM vetrAsana ke AkAra kA hai yAnI nIce kA bhAga vistRta hai aura Upara kA
bhAga kramazaH saMkucita (sikur3A huA) hai; madhyabhAga jhAlara ke AkAra kA hai
aura Upara kA bhAga mRdaMga kese AkAra kA hai| tInoM lokoM kI isa prakAra kI
AkRti milAne se pUre loka kA AkAra bana jAtA hai||105|| vyAkhyA :- loka kA
adhobhAga vetrAsana ke samAna, nIce kA bhAga vistRta aura Upara se uttarottara
kramazaH saMkucita hotA calA jAtA hai| loka kA madhyabhAga jhAlara (bAje) ke
samAna tathA Upara kA bhAga mRdaMga ke samAna-yAnI Upara aura nIce kA bhAga
sikur3A huA aura bIca meM vistRta hotA hai| isa taraha tIna AkAra vAlA loka hai|
pUjya umAsvAti ne prazamarati-prakaraNa gAthA 251 meM kahA hai-isa loka meM
adholoka nIce muMha kiye hue auMdhe rakhe hue sakore ke AkAra kA hai, tirchA
loka thAlI-sarIkhe AkAra kA hai aura Urdhvaloka khar3e kiye hue mRdaMga ke AkAra
kA hai| yahAM para adholoka, tiryagloka aura Urdhvaloka ke madhyabhAga meM
rucakapradeza kI apekSA se meruparvata ke 376

Page #399 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Description of Vyantaradevas and Jyotishkadevas  **Chapter 4, Light 105 of
Yoga Shastra**  There are four celestial regions shaped like a sphere. Below
them, in the upper part, there are four similar celestial regions called
Ruchakpradeshas. Similarly, there are eight Ruchakpradeshas below the higher
celestial regions. It is said that "There are eight Ruchakpradeshas in the
middle part, similar to the Tirch Lok. From these, the directions and sub-
directions have originated." (A. Ni. 42)  Below and above these Ruchakpradeshas,
there is the Trilok, extending for nine hundred yojanas in each direction. Its
thickness is eighteen hundred yojanas. After leaving nine hundred yojanas below
the Trilok, there is the final part of the Lok. It is the Adholok, seven Rajas
in length, containing seven Earths with the aforementioned characteristics.  The
first Earth, Ratnaprabha, is one lakh eighty thousand yojanas high or thick.
Leaving one thousand yojanas above and below it, there are the abodes of the
Bhavanapatidevas within the remaining one lakh seventy-eight thousand yojanas.
These Bhavanapatidevas are named Asura, Naga, Vidyut, Suparna, Agni, Vayu,
Stanit, Udhi, Dvip, and Dikkumar, respectively. They are marked with the symbols
of Chudamani, Serpent, Vajra, Garuda, Pot, Horse, Vardhaman, Crocodile, Lion,
and Elephant, respectively.  To the south and north of these Bhavanapatidevas,
there are two Indras each, arranged systematically. The Asurakumar Devas have
two Indras named Chamendra and Balindra. The Nagakumar Devas have two Indras
named Dharanendra and Bhutananda. The Vidyutkumar Devas have two Indras named
Hari and Harisah. The Suparnakumar Devas have two Indras named Venudeva and
Venudali. The Agnikumar Devas have two Indras named Agnishikha and Agnimaanav.
The Vayukumar Devas have two Indras named Velamb and Prabhanjan. The Stanitkumar
Devas have two Indras named Saghoṣa and Mahaghosa. The Udhikumar Devas have two
Indras named Jalakant and Jalaprabha. The Dvipkumar Devas have two Indras named
Purna and Vashishtha. The Dikkumar Devas have two Indras named Amit and
Amitvahan.  Above this Ratnaprabha Earth, at a height of one thousand yojanas,
leaving one hundred yojanas above and below, there are eight types of
Vyantaradevas residing in the remaining eight hundred yojanas. These are
Pishacha, Bhut, Yaksha, Rakshasa, Kinnara, Kimpurusha, Mahoraga, and Gandharva,
respectively. They are marked with the symbols of Kadambavriksha, Sulasavriksha,
Vatavriksha, Khatwang-Tapas instrument, Ashokvriksha, Champakvriksha,
Nagavriksha, and Tumbaruvriksha, respectively. These Vyantaradevas reside in the
Trilok, and they also have their own cities. They also have two Indras each,
arranged in the south and north directions. They are as follows:  * Pishachas:
Kal and Mahakal * Bhuts: Surup and Pratirup * Yakshas: Purnabhadra and
Manibhadra * Rakshasas: Bhim and Mahabhim * Kinnaras: Kinnara and Kimpurusha *
Kimpurushas: Satpurusha and Mahapurusha * Mahoragas: Atikaya and Mahakaya *
Gandharvas: Giterati and Giteyasha  In the same Ratnaprabha, leaving ten yojanas
above and below the first hundred yojanas, there are eight types of
Vyantaranikayadevas, including Anapni, Panapni, etc., residing in the remaining
eighty yojanas, arranged in the south and north directions. Each of them also
has two Indras.  Above the flat surface of the Ratnaprabha Earth, at a height of
seven hundred ninety yojanas, is the lower region of the Jyotishkadevas. Above
it, at a height of ten yojanas, is the Sun. Further ahead, at a distance of
eighty yojanas, is the Moon. Above it, at a height of twenty yojanas, are the
stars and planets. Thus, the total thickness of the Jyotirlok is one hundred and
ten yojanas. It revolves in a circular manner in all directions, excluding the
Pole Star, without touching the Meru of Jambudvipa at a distance of eleven
hundred twenty-one yojanas and without touching the end of the Lok at a distance
of eleven hundred eleven yojanas.  It is said that "The Jyotishchakra revolves
outside both the Meru mountain and the Alok, at a distance of eleven hundred
twenty-one and eleven hundred eleven yojanas, respectively." The Swati Nakshatra
is at the top, and the Bharani Nakshatra is at the bottom. The Mula Nakshatra is
to the south of all, and the Abhijit Nakshatra is to the north of all.  In this
Jambudvipa, there are two Moons and two Suns. In the Lavanasamudra, there are
four Moons and four Suns. In the Dhaatki Khand, there are twelve Moons and
twelve Suns. In the Kalodhi Samudra, there are forty-two Moons and forty-two
Suns. In the Pushkaravarardha Dvipa, there are seventy-two Moons and seventy-two
Suns. Thus, there are a total of one hundred thirty-two Moons and one hundred
thirty-two Suns in the Martyalok. There are eighty-eight planets, twenty-eight
Nakshatras, more than sixty-six thousand nine hundred seventy-five stars, and
countless families of each Moon.  The Moon's chariot is fifty-six by sixty-one
yojanas in length and width. The Sun's chariot is forty-eight by sixty-one
yojanas in length and width. The planet's chariot is half a yojana. The
Nakshatra's chariot is one Kos. The star's chariot is half a Kos for those with
the longest lifespan and five hundred Dhanushya for those with the shortest
lifespan. The thickness of all chariots is half their width. These chariots are
located in the Manushya Kshetra, which is forty-five lakh yojanas in size. The
Moon...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 vyaMtaradevoM aura jyotiSkadevoM kA varNana yogazAstra caturtha prakAza zloka
105 samAna gostanAkAra cAra AkAzapradeza haiN| nIce ke bhAga meM usI ke
UparibhAga meM usI taraha dUsare cAra rucakapradeza hai; isI taraha ATha
rucakapradeza ke nIce ucca AkAza pradeza haiN| kahA hai ki 'tircha loka ke
samAna madhyabhAga meM ATha rucakapradeza haiM, inase hI dizA aura vidizA kI
utpatti huI hai| (A. ni. 42) una rucakapradezoM se nIce aura Upara nau-nauso
yojana taka ti loka hai| isakI moTAI aThAraha-sau yojanapramANa hai| ti loka ke
nIce nau-sau yojana chor3ane ke bAda loka kA aMtima bhAga hai| vaha sAta rAja-
pramANa adholoka hai, usameM pUrvokta svarUpavAlI sAta pRthviyAM hai| usameM
prathama ratnaprabhA pRthvI kI eka lAkha assI hajAra yojana UMcAI athavA moTAI
hai| usake Upara aura nIce eka-eka hajAra yojana chor3akara bIca meM eka lAkha
78 hajAra yojana ke aMdara bhavanapati devoM ke bhavana-(makAna) hai| ve
bhavanapatideva kramazaH asura, nAga, vidyut, suparNa, agni, vAyu, stanita,
udadhi, dvIpa aura dikkumAra nAma ke haiN| ve cur3AmaNi, sarpa, vajra, garur3a,
ghaTa, azva, vardhamAna, magara, siMha aura hAthI ke cihna vAle hote haiN| una
bhavanapatidevoM ke dakSiNadizA aura uttaradizA meM vyavasthita rUpa se do-do
iMdra hote haiN| asurakumAra devoM ke camarendra aura balIndra nAmaka do iMdra
hote haiM, nAgakumAra devoM ke dharaNendra aura bhUtAnaMda iMdra hote haiN|
vidyutkumAra devoM ke hari aura harisaha nAmaka do iMdra hote haiN|
suparNakumAra devoM ke veNudeva aura veNudAli nAmaka do iMdra hai| agnikumAra
devoM ke agnizikha aura agnimANava nAmaka iMdra hai| vAyukumAra devoM ke iMdra
velaMba aura prabhaMjana hai| stanitakamAra devoM ke iMdra saghoSa aura
mahAghoSa hai| udadhikamAra devoM ke iMdra jalakAMta aura jalaprabha hai|
dvIpakamAra devoM ke iMdra pUrNa aura vaziSTha hai| dikkamAra devoM ke iMdra
amita aura amitavAhana hai| isI ratnaprabhA pathvI ke Upara eka hajAra yojana
meM Upara-nIce ke sau-sau yojana chor3akara, bIca ke ATha-sau yojana meM ATha
prakAra ke pizAca, bhUta, yakSa, rAkSasa, | kinnara, kiMpuruSa mahoraga aura
gaMdharva; ye vyaMtaradeva rahate haiM, jo kramazaH kadaMbavRkSa, sulasavRkSa,
vaTavRkSa, khaTavAMga-tApasa | upakaraNaM, azokavRkSa, caMpakavRkSa, nAgavRkSa,
tuMbarUvRkSa ke cihna vAle haiN| ye vyaMtara ti loka meM vAsa karate haiM, ina
vyaMtaradevoM ke nagara bhI haiN| inameM bhI dakSiNa aura uttara dizA meM do do
iMdroM kI vyavasthA hai| ve isa prakAra hai-pizAcoM ke kAla aura mahAkAla,
bhUtoM ke surUpa aura pratirUpa, yakSoM ke pUrNabhadra aura maNibhadra, rAkSasoM
ke bhIma aura mahAbhIma, | kinnaroM ke kinnara aura kiMpuruSa, kiMpuruSoM ke
satpuruSa aura mahApuruSa, mahoragoM ke atikAya aura mahAkAya aura gaMrdhavoM ke
gItarati aura gItayazA nAmaka iMdra hai| usI ratnaprabhA meM prathama sau yojana
ke nIce aura Upara ke dasa yojana ko chor3akara bIca meM assI yojana meM
aNapanI, paNapanI Adi utane hI dakSiNa aura uttara dizA meM vyavasthita bane hue
AThavANa vyaMtaranikAyadeva haiM aura unake bhI pratyeka ke do do iMdra haiN|
tathA ratnaprabhA pRthvI ke samatala pradeza se 790 yojana Upara jyotiSkadevoM
kA nimna pradeza hai, usake Upara dasa | yojana meM sUrya hai, isase Age assI
yojana para caMdra hai; usake Upara bIsa yojana meM tArA aura graha hai| isa
taraha kula jyotirloka eka sau dasa yojana moTAI vAlA hai gyAraha sau ikkIsa
yojana jaMbUdvIpa ke meru ko sparza kiye binA aura loka ke Akhira se gyAraha sau
gyAraha yojana sparza kiye binA sarva dizA meM maMDalAkAra vyavasthita rUpa se
dhruvatAre ko chor3akara jyotizcakra bhramaNa karatA hai| kahA hai ki-gyAraha
sau ikkIsa aura gyAraha sau gyAraha isa taraha meruparvata aura aloka ina donoM
ke bAhara ke bhAga meM jyotizcakra ghUmatA rahatA hai| yahAM saba se Upara
svAtinakSatra aura sabase nIce bharaNinakSatra hai, sabake dakSiNa meM
mUlanakSatra aura saba ke uttara meM abhIcinakSatra hai| isa jaMbUdvIpa meM do
caMdra aura do sUrya hai, lavaNasamudra meM cAra caMdra aura cAra sUrya hai,
dhAtakIkhaMDa meM bAraha caMdra aura bAraha sUrya hai, kAlodadhisamudra meM 42
caMdra aura 42 sUrya hai, puSkaravarArdha dvIpa meM 72 caMdra aura 72 sUrya hai|
isa taraha mRtyuloka meM kula 132 caMdra aura 132 sUrya hote haiN| 88 graha, 28
nakSatra, 66975 se adhika tAre tathA usake koTAkoTipramANa eka eka caMdra kA
parivAra hai| caMdra kA vimAna 56/61 yojana laMbA caur3A hai, sUrya kA vimAna
48/61 yojana laMbA caur3A hai, AdhA yojana graha kA vimAna hai, nakSatra kA
vimAna eka kosa kA hai, tArA kA sarvotkRSTa AyuSyavAlA Adhe kosa kA vimAna hai
aura sabase jaghanya AyuSyavAle kA vimAna pAMca-sau dhanuSya-pramANa kA hotA
hai| saba vimAnoM kI moTAI caur3AI meM AdhI hotI hai| ye vimAna 45 lAkha yojana
pramANavAle manuSyakSetra meM hote haiN| caMdra 377

Page #400 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Vyantara Devas and Jyotishka Devas  According to the Yogashastra, in front of
the Vimana of the fourth Prakasha, there are a lion in the south, an elephant in
the west, and a horse in the north. The Sun and Moon have sixteen thousand
Ajnapaalaka Abhiyogika Devas. The planets have eight thousand, the nakshatras
have four thousand, and the stars have two thousand Abhiyogika families. Even
though they have divine status and divine merit, due to their Karmic
associations with the Moon and other planets, they manifest in those forms.
Beyond the Manushottara mountain, the number of auspicious-hued planets,
nakshatras, and stars with the shape of a bell increases immensely, numbering
countless. They reside in rows a hundred thousand Yojanas apart from the self-
arisen Ramansamudra.  In the middle of Jambudvipa are the beautiful, ever-
expanding concentric islands and oceans, and finally the self-arisen
Ramansamudra. In the center of Jambudvipa is the Meru mountain, hidden a
thousand Yojanas below the earth, like a golden platter. It is 99,000 Yojanas
high, 1,009,000 Yojanas wide at the base. In the underworld, it extends 100
Yojanas, in the middle world 1,800 Yojanas, and in the upper world 98,100
Yojanas, thus dividing the three worlds. It has four forests - Bhadrashaala,
Nandana, Saumanas, and Paanduka. The first section is filled with pure earth,
rock, diamond, and stones for a thousand Yojanas. The second section of 63,000
Yojanas is abundant in silver, gold, gems, and crystal. The third section of
36,000 Yojanas is rich in gold. Its pinnacle of 40 Yojanas is made of Vaidurya
gems, 12 Yojanas at the base, 8 Yojanas in the middle, and 4 Yojanas at the top.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 vyaMtara devoM aura jyotiSkadevoM kA varNana yogazAstra caturtha prakAza zloka
105 Adi ke vimAna ke Age siMha dakSiNa meM hAthI, pazcima meM vRSabha aura
uttara meM azva hote haiN| sUrya aura caMdra ke solaha hajAra AjJApAlaka
Abhiyogika deva hote haiN| graha ke ATha hajAra, nakSatra ke cAra hajAra, tArA
ke do hajAra Abhiyogika parivAra hotA hai| apanI devagati aura devapuNya hone
para bhI caMdrAdi Abhiyogyakarma ke kAraNa usI rUpa meM upasthita hote haiN|
mAnuSottara parvata ke bAda pacAsa hajAra yojana kSetra-paridhi kI vRddhi se
saMkhyA meM bar3he hue zubhalezyA vAle graha, nakSatra, tArA ke parivAra ghaMTA
kI AkRti ke samAna asaMkhyAta hai| ve svayaMbhUramaNasamudra se lAkha yojana
aMtara vAlI zreNiyoM meM | rahate haiN| madhyabhAga meM jaMbUdvIpa aura
lavaNAdisamudra suMdara suMdara nAma vAle, Age se Age dugunI-dugunI paridhi
(vyAsagolAI) vAle asaMkhyAta valayAkAra dvIpa aura samudra hai aura Akhira meM
svayaMbhUramaNa samudra hai| jaMbUdvIpa ke madhyabhAga meM meruparvata sone kI
thAlI ke samAna eka hajAra yojana nIce pRthvI ke aMdara chupA huA hai| yaha 99
hajAra yojana UMcA hai, mUla meM 100900/, vistRta hai| dharatItala meM dasa
hajAra yojana vistAra vAlA, upara hajAra yojana caur3A, tIna kAMDa vibhAga vAlA
hai| yaha adholoka meM 100 yojana, ticheloka meM 1800 yojana aura Urdhvaloka meM
98100 yojana hai| isa taraha meruparvata tInoM loka ko vibhakta karatA hai|
isameM bhadrazAla, naMdana, saumanasa aura pAMDuka nAma ke cAra vana hai;
jinameM prAyaH zuddha pRthvI, pASANa, vajra, pattharoM se paripUrNa eka hajAra
yojana-pramANa vAlA prathama kAMDa hai| cAMdI, sonA aMkaratna aura sphaTikaratna
kI pracuratA se yukta 63 hajAra yojana vAlA dUsarA kAMDa hai, chattIsa hajAra
yojana vAlA svarNabAhulya tIsarA kAMDa hai| vaiDUryaratna kI adhikatA se yukta
cAlIsa yojana U~cI usakI cUlikA hai, vaha mUla meM bAraha yojana laMbI, madhya
meM ATha yojana aura Upara cAra yojana laMbI hai| meruparvata ke prAraMbha meM
tahalaTI meM valayAkAra bhadrazAla vana hai, bhadrazAla vana se pAMca sau yojana
Upara jAne ke bAda pAMcaso yojana vistRta prathama mekhalA meM valayAkAra
naMdanavana hai| usake bAda sAr3he bAsaTha hajAra yojana Upara jAne ke bAda
dUsarI mekhalA meM pAMca sau yojana vistRta valayAkAra saumanasavana hai| usake
bAda chattIsa hajAra yojana jAne para tIsarI mekhalA meruparvata ke zikhara para
494 | yojana vistRta valayAkRti-yukta pAMDukavana hai| _isa jaMbUdvIpa meM sAta
kSetra hai| usameM dakSiNa kI aura bharatakSetra hai, uttara meM haimavata
kSetra hai, usake bAda harivarSakSetra hai| bAda meM mahAvideha hai, usake bAda
ramyakkSetra hai, usake bAda hairaNyavatakSetra hai, bAda meM airAvatakSetra
hai| pratyeka kSetra ko pRthak karane vAle himavAna, mahAhimavAna, niSadha,
nIla, rukmI aura zikharI nAma ke parvata hai| ve kramazaH hema, arjuna,
tapanIya, svarNa, vaiDUrya, cAMdI aura tapanIya maya vicitra maNiratnoM se
suzobhita, mUla aura Upara ke bhAga meM samAna vistAra vAle hai| himavAn parvata
pacIsa yojana jamIna meM aura sau yojana UMcA hai, mahAhimavAn usase dugunA
arthAt do sau yojana UMcA hai| niSedhaparvata cArasau yojana UMcA hai,
nIlaparvata utanA hI cAra sau yojana UMcA, rukmI mahAhimavAn | jitanA aura
zikharI himavAn ke jitanA UMcA hai| ina parvatoM para padma, mahApadma,
tigiccha, kezarI, mahApuMDarIka aura puMDarIka nAma ke kramazaH sAta sarovara
haiN| prathama sarovara eka hajAra yojana laMbA aura pAMca sau yojana caur3A
hai| dUsarA isase dugunA aura tIsarA isase bhI dugunA hai| uttara meM puMDarIka
Adi sarovara dakSiNa ke sarovaroM ke samAna hai| pratyeka sarovara meM dasa
yojana kI avagAhanA vAlA padmakamala hai aura jisa para kramazaH zrIdevI,
hrIdevI, dhRtidevI, kIrtidevI, buddhidevI aura lakSmIdevI nivAsa karatI hai|
unakA AyuSya eka palyopama kA hotA hai tathA ve sAmAnika devaparSadA ke devatA
tathA | AtmarakSaka devoM se yukta hotI haiN| isa bharatakSetra meM gaMgA aura
siMdhu nAma kI do bar3I nadiyAM hai, haimavaMtakSetra meM rohitAzA aura rohitA,
harivarSakSetra meM harikAMtA aura haritA, mahAvideha meM zItA aura zItodA;
ramyakkSetra meM nArI aura narakAMtA, hairaNyavata meM sUvarNakUlA aura
rUpyakUlA aura airavatakSetra meM raktA aura raktodA nAma kI nadiyAM haiN|
isameM prathama nadI pUrva meM aura dUsarI nadI pazcima meM bahatI hai| gaMgA
aura sindhu nadI ke sAtha kula caudaha hajAra nadiyoM kA parivAra hai| arthAt
donoM meM caudaha-caudaha hajAra nadiyoM kA parivAra hai| arthAt donoM meM
caudaha caudaha hajAra nadiyA~ milatI hai| rohitAzA aura rohitA meM aTThAIsa 378

Page #401 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Description of Jambudvipa and Other Continents  **Chapter 4, Verse 105 of the
Yoga Shastra**  There are 28,000 rivers in Jambudvipa, 56,000 each in Haritaka
and Haritaki, and 500,000 in Shita and Shitota. These 32,000 rivers merge
together. Understand that the rivers of the north are similar to the rivers
flowing south. The total length of Bharat Kshetra is 526/9 yojanas. After that,
the mountains and regions in Mahavideha are double in length, and so on. Each
region and mountain in the north is similar to the south.  **19**  In
Mahavideha, north of Nishdha mountain and south, west, and east of Meru, there
are two Nishdha mountains called Vidyut Prabha and Saumanas. They are surrounded
by elephant-shaped mountains and are separated by the Shitota river. There are
five ponds each, close to each other, and ten Kanchan mountains adorning them.
On the east and west banks of the Shitota river, there is Devakuru, adorned with
Vichitrakuta and Chitrakuta, extending a thousand yojanas upwards and downwards,
and half that distance upwards. It is 11842 2/9 yojanas in size. North and south
of Meru mountain are Gandhamadana and Malaya mountains, shaped like elephants.
They are separated by the Shita river, which flows between Meru and Neel
mountains, and there are five ponds close to each other. Adorned with
Vichitrakuta and Chitrakuta, golden Yamaka mountains, and with a hundred Kanchan
mountains on both banks of the Shita river, is Uttarakuru. East of Devakuru and
Uttarakuru is Purva Mahavideha, and west of them is Paschim Mahavideha. In Purva
Videha, there are sixteen victories, separated by rivers and mountains suitable
for a Chakravarti, which do not allow entry to each other. Similarly, there are
sixteen victories in Paschim Videha.  In the middle of Bharat Kshetra, touching
the sea on both the east and west sides, dividing Bharat into two parts, south
and north, is the Vaitalya mountain, adorned with two caves called Tamisra and
Khandrapata. It is one and a quarter yojanas underground, fifty yojanas wide,
and twenty-five yojanas high. Near this mountain, on the south and north sides,
are rows of Vidhadharas, ten yojanas high and ten yojanas wide. There are fifty
cities in the south, including the region, and sixty cities in the north. Above
the rows of Vidhadharas, on both sides, after ten yojanas, are rows of
Tiryanjrimbhrik Vyantar Devas. They have their abodes in these rows. Above the
Vyantar rows, at a height of five yojanas, are nine peaks. Understand that the
same description applies to the Airavata Kshetra, which is similar to the
Vaitalya mountain.  Around Jambudvipa, there is a vajra-like Jagati, eight
yojanas high, like a wall. It is twelve yojanas long at the base. It is eight
yojanas wide in the middle and four yojanas high above. Above that is a place
called Jalakataka, two gao high, where the Vidhyadharas play. Above that is a
place called Padmavaravedika, the land of enjoyment for the Devas. In each
direction of this Jagati, there are four gates called Vijay, Vaijayanta,
Jayanta, and Aparajit. Between the Himavan and Mahahimavan mountains is the
Vaitalya mountain, called Shabdapata. Between Rukmi and Shikhari is Vikatapata.
Between Mahahimavan and Nishdha is Gandhapata. Between Neel and Rukmi is Malya
mountain. All these mountains are a thousand yojanas high and shaped like a
Pali.  Jambudvipa is surrounded by a salt ocean, twice its size, two lakh
yojanas wide (ten thousand yojanas wide in the middle), a thousand yojanas deep,
and forty-nine thousand yojanas wide on both sides. Due to the increase in the
middle, the water extends sixteen thousand yojanas high. Above that, the water
rises and falls two gao during the day and night. In the middle of this ocean,
in all four directions, are four vajra-like Patala Kalash, a thousand yojanas
thick, ten thousand yojanas wide at the mouth and base, called Vadvamukha in the
east, Keyupa in the south, Yupa in the west, and Ishvara in the north. They are
the abodes of the Kal, Mahakal, Velamb, and Prabhanjan Devas. They are deep,
like pits, and hold air. They have three parts of water. There are other smaller
Kalash, a thousand yojanas below, with a mouth of a hundred yojanas and a
thickness of ten yojanas. They have 333/1 water in the upper part, air and water
in the middle, and air in the lower part. To stop the tide of water entering
Jambudvipa, there are 7884 Devas. To stop the inner tide, there are 42,000 Naga
Kumar Devas. To stop the outer tide, there are 72,000 Devas. To stop the tide
peak, there are 60,000 Devas.   **Gostupa, Udakabhas, Shankha, and Daksim**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 jaMbudvIpa Adi dvipoM kA varNana yogazAstra caturtha prakAza zloka 105 aTThAIsa
hajAra nadiyAM, harikAMtA aura haritA meM chappana chappana hajAra nadiyAM, zItA
aura zItodA meM pAMca lAkha | battIsahajAra nadiyAM milatI hai| uttara kI
nadiyoM kA parivAra bhI dakSiNapravAhinI nadiyoM ke samAna jAna lenA  /
bharatakSetra kI kula laMbAI 526/9 yojana hai| usake bAda mahAvideha taka
kramazaH laMbAI meM dugune - dugune parvata aura kSetra haiM aura | uttara ke
pratyeka kSetra aura parvata bhI dakSiNa ke samAna hai| 19 mahAvideha meM
niSadhaparvata ke uttara meM aura meru ke dakSiNa, pazcima aura pUrva meM
vidyutprabha aura saumanasa nAmaka niSadha | ke aMtargata gajadaMtAkAra parvatoM
se ghire hue, zItodA nadI se vibhakta pAsa-pAsa pAMca pAMca kuMDa aura dasa-dasa
kAMcanaparvatoM se suzobhita hai  /  zItodA nadI ke pUrva aura pazcima kinAre
para eka hajAra yojana Upara utanA hI nIce vistAra vAle aura | isase AdhA Upara
meM vistAra vAle vicitrakUTa aura citrakUTa se zobhita devakuru 11842 2 / yojana
pramANa vAlA hai| | meruparvata ke uttara aura dakSiNa meM gandhamAdana aura
mAlya parvata hai, jisakI AkRti hAthI ke samAna hai, meru nIlaparvata ke bIca
meM sthita zItAnadI se vibhakta hokara bane hue pAsa meM pAMca kuMDa hai| sau
kAMcanaparvatoM se yukta zItAnadI ke donoM | kinAroM para vicitrakUTa aura
citrakUTa nAma vAle suvarNa yamakaparvatoM se zobhita uttarakuru hai  /
devakuru aura uttarakuru se pUrva kI ora pUrva mahAvideha aura pazcima kI ora
pazcimamahAvideha hai| pUrvavideha meM cakravartI ke lie yogya nadiyoM aura |
parvatoM se vibhAjita paraspara eka dUsare meM praveza na kara sake; isa prakAra
ke solaha vijaya hai  /  usI prakAra pazcimavideha meM bhI solaha vijaya haiN|
bharatakSetra ke madhyabhAga meM pUrva aura pazcima donoM tarapha samudra ko
sparza karatA huA, bharata ke dakSiNa aura uttara do vibhAga karane vAlA,
tamisrA aura khaMDaprapAtA nAma kI do guphAoM se zobhita vaitADhyaparvata hai|
yaha savA chaha yojana jamIna ke aMdara hai, pacAsa yojana vistRta hai aura
paccIsa yojana UMcA hai| isa parvata ke dakSiNa aura uttara kI nikaTavartI bhUmi
se dasa yojana UMcI evaM dasa yojana vistRta vidhAdharoM kI zreNiyAM hai| jahAM
dakSiNadizA meM pradezasahita pacAsa nagara hai aura uttaradizA meM sATha nagara
hai| vidhAdharoM kI zreNiyoM se Upara donoM tarapha dasa yojana ke bAda
tiryagjRMbhRka vyaMtaradevoM kI zreNiyA~ hai  /  unameM vyaMtaradevoM ke AvAsa
hai| vyaMtara zreNiyoM se Upara pAMca yojana para nau kUTa haiN| vaitADhya
parvata kI | vaktavyatA samAna airAvatakSetra meM bhI isI prakAra samAnatA jAna
lenA  /  jaMbUdvIpa ke cAroM tarapha koTa ke samAna vajramaya ATha yojana UMcI
jagatI hai| vaha mUla meM bAraha yojana laMbI hai| | bIca meM ATha yojana aura
Upara cAra yojana hai| usake Upara do gAU UMcA jAlakaTaka nAma kA vidyAdharoM ke
krIr3A karane kA sthala hai| usake Upara ke bhAga meM padmavaravedikA nAma kI
devoM kI bhogabhUmi hai| isa jagatI ke pUrvAdi pratyeka dizA meM vijaya,
vaijayaMta, jayaMta aura aparAjita nAma ke cAra dvAra haiN| himavAna aura
mahAhimavAna ina donoM parvatoM ke bIca meM | zabdApAtI nAma kA vRtta vaitADhya
parvata hai, rUkmI aura zikharI ke bIca meM - vikaTApAtI, mahAhimavAna aura
niSadha ke bIca meM gaMdhApAtI, nIla aura rUkmI ke bIca meM mAlyavAnaparvata
hai| ye sabhI eka-eka hajAra yojana UMce aura pAlI kI AkRti vAle haiN| tathA
jaMbUdvIpa ke cAroM tarapha ghirA huA usase dugunA arthAt do lAkha yojana
vistAra vAlA (madhya meM dasa hajAra | yojana vistAra vAlA) eka hajAra yojana
gaharA aura donoM ora paMcAnave hajAra yojana tathA madhya meM vRddhi hone ke
kAraNa | jala kA vistAra solaha hajAra yojana UMcA tathA usase Upara rAta aura
dina meM do gAU taka jala ghaTatA-bar3hatA rahane vAlA lavaNa samudra hai| isake
madhyabhAga meM cAroM dizA meM lakSapramANa vAle pUrva meM vaDavAmukha, dakSiNa
meM keyUpa, pazcima meM yUpa aura uttara meM Izvara nAmaka hajAra yojana
vajramaya moTAI vAlA tathA dasa hajAra yojana ke mukha tathA tala yukta; kAla,
mahAkAla, velaMba aura prabhaMjana devoM ke AvAsa vAlA, mahAna gaharA, khaDDe ke
samAna, vAyu dhAraNa karane vAlA tIna | bhAga jala vAlA pAtAlakalaza hai, dUsare
choTe kalaza hajAra yojana ke nIce aura mukha sau yojana, dasa yojana moTAI
vAle; | jinameM 333 /, Upara ke bhAga meM jala, madhya meM vAyu aura jala aura
nIce vAyu hotA hai| jaMbUdvIpa meM praveza karate hue jala ke jvAra ko rokane ke
lie 7884 deva tathA aMrtajvAra rokane ke lie 42000 nAgakumAra deva aura
bAhyajvAra rokane ke | lie 72000 deva aura jvArazikhA ko rokane ke lie 60000
deva hote haiN| gostUpa, udakAbhAsa, zaMkha aura dakasIma 379

Page #402 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Description of Jambudvipa and other islands and regions  The fourth light of
Yoga Shastra, verse 105, mentions four Velandhar Devas who reside on four
mountains: Suvarna, Ankaratna, Chandi and Sphatik. These mountains are the
abodes of the four guardian deities: Shivak, Shankh, Manahshil and Gostup. Their
heights are 1721 yojanas, with a base diameter of 1022 yojanas and a top
diameter of 424 yojanas. Above them are their respective palaces. Their
guardians are Karkotak, Kardam, Kailash and Arunaprabha. Karkotak, Vudyujjihva,
Kailash and Arunaprabha are the names of the abodes of these guardians, which
are located on small, tide-resistant, all-gem-studded mountains. In the
Vidishas, there is a Chandradvipa, 12,000 yojanas long and wide, and a
Suryadvipa of the same size. Gautamdvipa and Susthitaavasa are also of the same
size. There are also Chandra and Surya-related islands in the inner and outer
salt seas. All these regions have palaces, and the salt sea is filled with salt
water.  Surrounding the salt sea is a circular Dhaatki-khand, twice its size,
measuring four lakh yojanas. The Meru and other Varshadhar mountains and regions
are described in Jambudvipa. It is important to know that the Dhaatki-khand is
larger than these. Due to the presence of two long, sloping mountains in the
south and north, the Dhaatki-khand is divided into two parts. The names and
numbers of the mountains and other features of Jambudvipa, as well as the
eastern and western parts of the Dhaatki-khand, are arranged like the spokes of
a wheel. The region between the sloping mountains, including the Kalodadhi and
the salt sea, which touch the peaks of the Nishdhadi mountains of Jambudvipa, is
located in the middle of the wheel. Surrounding the Dhaatki-khand is a circular
Kalodadhi sea, eight lakh yojanas in diameter.  Surrounding the Kalodadhi sea is
a circular Pushkaravaradvipa, twice its size. Half of this island is the
Manushya-kshetra. The number of regions, mountains, etc. in the
Pushkaravaradvipa is the same as the number of Meru and sloping mountains in the
Dhaatki-khand. The area of the Pushkaravaradvipa is twice the size of the
Dhaatki-khand. There are four smaller Merus in the Dhaatki-khand and
Pushkaravaradvipa, each 15,000 yojanas shorter than the Mahameru, measuring
85,000 yojanas in height. Their diameter at the base is 600 yojanas less than
the Mahameru. This is the first kand. The second kand is the same size as the
large Meru. The third kand is 7,000 yojanas shorter, measuring 56,000 yojanas.
The fourth kand is 8,000 yojanas shorter, measuring 28,000 yojanas. The
Bhadrashilvana is the same size as the large Meru mountain. The Nandana vana is
55,500 yojanas high and has a diameter of 500 yojanas. Above it, at a height of
28,000 yojanas, is the Padunkavana, with a diameter of 494 yojanas. The diameter
at the base and the depth of the Padunkavana are the same as the large Meru, and
its peak is also similar. This entire region, consisting of two and a half
islands and seas, is called the Manushya-kshetra. It contains five Merus, 35
regions, 30 Varshadhar mountains, five Devakurus, five Uttarakurus and 160
Vijayas.  Just as a fort surrounds a city for its protection, the Manushya-
kshetra is surrounded by a golden Manushottara mountain. This mountain is 1721
yojanas high, 430 yojanas and one kos deep in the ground, 1022 yojanas wide at
the base, 723 yojanas wide in the middle and 424 yojanas wide at the top. No
human being is ever born or dies in the region beyond this mountain. Even if a
liberated Charan or Vidyadhar crosses this mountain, they do not die there.
Therefore, it is called the Manushottara mountain. Beyond this mountain, there
is no rain, fire, clouds, lightning, rivers, time, or environment. Humans are
born in the 35 regions of the Manushya-kshetra, including the five Devakurus,
five Uttarakurus and the inner islands. Through the knowledge of Sanharanavidya
and the practice of Riddhiyoga, all humans reach the peak of Meru and both seas
in the two and a half islands. These are the people of the Bharat-kshetra, these
are the people of the Himavat-kshetra, these are the people of Jambudvipa, these
are the people of the salt sea, and these are the people of the inner islands.
Humans are identified based on the division of islands and seas. There are two
types of humans: Aryas and Mlechchas. Aryas are born in 25 and a half countries.
Countries are identified by their specific cities. They are as follows:  1.
Magadhadesh, identified by the city of Rajagriha. 2. Angadesh, identified by the
city of Champa. 3. Bangadesh, identified by the city of Tamralipti. 4.
Kalingadesh, identified by the city of Kanchanpur. 5. Kashi, identified by the
city of Varanasi. 6. Kosala, identified by the city of Saketa. 7. Kurudesha,
identified by the city of Hastinapur. 8. Kushad, identified by the city of
Shouryapur. 9. Panchaladesh, identified by the city of Kampilya. 10.
Jangaladesh, identified by the city of Ahikshetra. 11. Saurashtra, identified by
the city of Dwaraka. 12. Videha, identified by the city of Mithila. 13.
Vatsadesh, identified by the city of Kaushambi. 14. Shandilyadesh, identified by
the city of Nandipur. 15. Malaya, identified by the city of Bhadilapur. 16.
Matsyadesh, identified by the city of Viratnagar. 17. ...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 jaMbuddhIpa Adi dvIpa-kSetra kA varNana yogazAstra caturtha prakAza zloka 105
nAmaka cAra velaMdhara deva ke AvAsaparvata hai, suvarNa, aMkaratna, cAMdI aura
sphaTikamaya gostUpa zivaka, zaMkha tathA manaHzila nAma ke AvAsa adhipatideva
ke haiM, inakI UMcAI 1721 yojana nIce, 1022 yojana vistAra vAlA, Upara 424
yojana vistAra vAlA hai| unake Upara prAsAda hai| karkoTaka, kardama, kailAza
aura arUNaprabha nAma ke unake adhipati haiN| karkoTaka, vudyujihvA kailAsa aura
arUNaprabha nAmaka AvAsa vAle alpa jvAra rokane vAle sarvaratnamayaparvata haiM
tathA vidizAoM meM bAraha hajAra yojana laMbA caur3A caMdradvIpa hai aura utanA
hI laMbA caur3A sUryadvIpa hai tathA gautamadvIpa aura susthitaAvAsa bhI utane
hI pramANa vAlA hai aura aMtara evaM bAhya lavaNasamudra ke caMdra aura sUrya-
saMbaMdhI dvIpa hai aura | sarvakSetra meM prAsAda hai tathA lavaNasamudra meM
lavaNa rasa hai| lavaNasamudra ke cAroM tarapha golAkAra aura isase dugunA
arthAt cAra lAkha yojana pramANa vAlA dhAtakIkhaMDa hai| meru aura dUsare
varSadharaparvata tathA kSetra jaMbadvIpa meM kahe haiM, unase dagane
dhAtakIkhaMDa meM jAnanA. dakSiNa aura uttara meM do laMbe | ISakAra parvata
hone se dhAtakIkhaMDa ke do bhAga ho gaye haiN| jaMbadIpa ke parvatAdi ke nAma
aura saMkhyA. parvArddha aura pazcimArdha | cakra ke Are ke samAna hI
dhAtakIkhaMDa meM sthita hai| jaMbUdvIpa ke niSadhAdi parvata kI UMcAI vAle
kAlodadhi aura lavaNasamada ke jala ko sparza karane vAle ISakAra parvata sahita
kSetra Are ke madhyabhAga meM rahe haiN| dhAtakAkhaMDa ke tarapha golAkAra ATha
lAkha laMbA kAlodadhisamudra hai| _kAlodadhisamudra ke cAroM tarapha golAkAra,
isase dugunA vistRta puSkaravaradvIpa hai| usake Adhe vibhAga meM manuSyakSetra
hai, dhAtakIkhaMDa meM meru tathA ISukAra parvata Adi kI jitanI saMkhyA hai,
puSkaravarArdha meM utanI hI kSetra, parvata Adi kI jaannaa| dhAtakIkhaMDa ke
kSetrAdi se dugunA kSetrAdi hai| dhAtakIkhaMDa aura puSkarAdha ke cAra choTe
meru haiM, ve mahAmeru se paMdraha hajAra yojana kama UMcAI vAle arthAt 85000
yojana ke haiM tathA pRthvItala meM chahasau yojana kama viSkaMbha vAlA hai|
yaha prathama kAMDa hai| dUsarA kAMDa bar3e meru ke samAna hai| tIsarA kAMDa
sAta hajAra yojana kama arthAt 56 hajAra yojana hai| ATha hajAra yojana kama
arthAt 28 hajAra bhadrazIlavana hai, naMdanavana bar3e meruparvata ke samAna
hai, sAr3he pacapana hajAra Upara pAMcasau yojana vistAra vAlA saumanasavana
hai, usake bAda 28 hajAra yojana Upara 494 yojana vistAra vAlA pADuMkavana hai|
Upara-nIce kA viSkaMbha aura avagAha bar3e meru ke samAna tathA cUlikA bhI usI
taraha hai| isa taraha DhAI dvIpa aura samudroM se yukta vaha manuSyakSetra
kahalAtA hai, isameM pAMca meru, paiMtIsa kSetra, tIsa varSadharaparvata, pAMca
devakuru, pAMca uttarakuru |aura ekasau sATha vijaya hai| jaise mahAnagara kI
surakSA ke lie usake cAroM ora kilA hotA hai, usI taraha puSkaradvIpArdha ke
cAroM tarapha manuSyaloka se ghirA huA suvarNamaya mAnuSottara parvata hai, vaha
parvata 1721 yojana UMcA, 430 yojana aura eka kosa nIce jamIna meM, 1022 yojana
mUla meM vistRta, 723 yojana madhya meM aura 424 yojana Upara ke bhAga meM
vistRta hai| isa parvata ke Age ke kSetra meM manuSya kadApi janma letA yA
maratA nahIM hai| yadi koI labdhidhAraka cAraNa yA vidyAdhara manuSya usa
parvata ko lAMghakara Age gayA ho to bhI vaha vahAM maratA nahIM hai, isa kAraNa
se ise mAnuSottara parvata kahate haiN| usa parvata se Age bAdara agnikAya,
megha, bijalI, nadI, kAla, pariveSa Adi nahIM hai| manuSyakSetra ke aMtargata
paiMtIsa kSetroM meM pAMca devakuru pAMca uttarakuru tathA aMtaradvIpa meM janma
se manuSya hote haiN| saMharaNavidyA aura Rddhiyoga se sabhI manuSya DhAIdvIpa
meM meru ke zikhara para aura donoM samudroM meM jAte haiN| ye bharatakSetra ke
haiM, ye haimavatakSetra ke haiM, ye jaMbUdvIpa ke haiM, ye| lavaNasamudra ke
haiM aura ye aMtaradvIpa ke manuSya haiM, isa prakAra kI pahicAna dvIpoM aura
samudroM ke vibhAga se manuSyoM kI hotI hai| Arya aura mleccha do prakAra ke
manuSya hai| Arya sAr3he paccIsa deza meM utpanna hote haiN| deza viziSTa nagara
se | | pahicAnA jAtA hai, vaha isa prakAra 1. magadhadeza rAjagRhanagara se, 2.
aMgadeza caMpAnagarI se, 3. baMgadeza tAmralipti se, 4. kaliMga kAMcanapura se,
5. kAzIdeza vArANasI nagarI se, 6. kozala sAketanagara se, 7. kurudeza
hastinApura se, 8. kuzAdeza zauryapura se, 9. paMcAladeza kAMpilyapura se, 10.
jaMgaladeza ahicchatrA se, 11. saurASTra dvArIkAnagarI se, 12. videha mithilA
se, 13. | vatsadeza kauzAMbI se, 14. zAMDilyadeza naMdIpura se, 15. malaya
bhadilapura se, 16. matsyadeza virATanagara se, 17.| 380

Page #403 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Description of the Inter-Continents  **Chapter Four, Light of Yoga, Verse
105**  The following twenty-six countries are known as **Aaryadesh**:  1.
**Aachchhadesh** from **Varunanagari** 2. **Dashaarnadesh** from **Mruttikavati
Nagari** 3. **Chedi** from **Shuktimati Nagari** 4. **Sindhusauvir** from
**Vitabhay** 5. **Shurasen** from **Mathura** 6. **Bhang** from **Papa** 7.
**Varta** from **Mashapuri** 8. **Kunal** from **Shravasti** 9. **Latdesh** from
**Kotivarsh** 10. **Kaikey** from **Shwetaambika Nagari** (half the country)
These twenty-six countries are called **Aaryadesh** because **Jineshwaradev**,
**Chakravarti**, **Baldev**, and **Vasudeva** are born in these lands.
Countries like **Shak**, **Yavan**, etc. are called **Anaryadesh**. These are:
* **Shak**, **Yavan**, **Shabar**, **Kayamrund**, **Udd**, **Gon**, **Pakvan**,
**Aakhyanak**, **Hoon**, **Romash**, **Paras**, **Khan**, **Kaushik**,
**Dubali**, **Lakush**, **Bukkas**, **Andhra**, **Pulind**, **Kraunch**,
**Bhramara**, **Ruchi**, **Kapot**, **Chin**, **Chanchuk**, **Malav**,
**Dravid**, **Kulath**, **Kaikey**, **Kirat**, **Hayamukha**, **Swaramukha**,
**Gajamukha**, **Turagamukha**, **Mendhamukha**, **Hayakarna**, **Gajakarna**,
etc. and many other **Anarya** people. These people are **sinful**, **fierce**,
**cruel**, **lacking remorse**, and have never even heard the word **Dharma** in
their dreams.  In addition to these, **Yauglik** people born in the
**Antaradweep** are also considered **Anarya**.  There are **fifty-six
Antaradweep** as follows:  * **Uruuk**: The first **Antaradweep** is called
**Uruuk**, located in the **Eeshankon** of the **Lavanasamudra** (salt sea),
three hundred yojanas deep and three hundred yojanas wide, situated in front of
and behind the **Himalaya Mountains** in the four **Vidisha** (directions) -
**Eeshana**, etc. The inhabitants of this **Antaradweep** are called **Uruuk**.
* **Aabhashik**: The first **Antaradweep** in the **Agnikon** (south-east) is
called **Aabhashik**, located three hundred yojanas deep in the
**Lavanasamudra**, three hundred yojanas wide, inhabited by **Aabhashik**
people. * **Laangoolik**: The first **Antaradweep** in the **Nairityakon**
(south-west) is called **Laangoolik**, located three hundred yojanas deep in the
**Lavanasamudra**, three hundred yojanas wide, inhabited by **Laangoolik**
people. * **Vaishaanik**: The first **Antaradweep** in the **Vayavyakon**
(north-west) is called **Vaishaanik**, located three hundred yojanas deep in the
**Lavanasamudra**, three hundred yojanas wide, inhabited by **Vaishaanik**
people.  After these, there are four more **Antaradweep** called **Hayakarna**,
**Gajakarna**, **Gokarna**, and **Shashkulikaarna**, located four hundred
yojanas further, each four hundred yojanas wide.  Then, there are four more
**Antaradweep** called **Aadarshamukha**, **Meshamukha**, **Hayamukha**, and
**Gajamukha**, located five hundred yojanas further, each five hundred yojanas
wide.  After these, there are four more **Antaradweep** called **Ashvamukha**,
**Hastimukha**, **Singhamukha**, and **Vyaghramukha**, located six hundred
yojanas further, each six hundred yojanas wide.  Then, there are four more
**Antaradweep** called **Ashvakarna**, **Singhakarn**, **Hastikarn**, and
**Karnpravaran**, located seven hundred yojanas further in the
**Lavanasamudra**, each seven hundred yojanas wide.  After these, there are four
more **Antaradweep** called **Ulkamukha**, **Vidhyutjihm**, **Meshamukha**, and
**Vidhyuint**, located eight hundred yojanas further, each eight hundred yojanas
wide.  Then, there are four more **Antaradweep** called **Ghandant**,
**Goodhdant**, **Shreshthdant**, and **Shuddhdant**, located nine hundred
yojanas further in the **Lavanasamudra**, each nine hundred yojanas wide.
**Yauglik** people are born in these **Antaradweep**. Their lifespan is a
fraction of a **Palyaopam**, and their bodies are eight hundred dhanushya (bows)
tall.  Similarly, the **Shikhari Parvat**, which divides the **Airavat
Kshetra**, also has twenty-eight **Antaradweep** in the same order of
**Vidisha** and names.  Combining all these, there are **fifty-six
Antaradweep**.  After the **Manushottar Parvat**, there is the
**Pushkaravaradweep**, surrounded by the **Pushkarod Samudra**, which is twice
the size of the **Pushkaravaradweep**. After this, there is the
**Ksheeravaradweep** and its surrounding sea, followed by the
**Ghritavaradweep** and its surrounding sea, and then the **Ikshuvaradweep** and
its surrounding sea.  After these, there is the eighth **Nandiswaradweep**,
which is 1638400000 yojanas wide. This **Antaradweep** has beautiful gardens
that rival the **Devalok**, filled with various types of flowers and trees.
These gardens are adorned by the arrival of **Devas** who are focused on
worshipping the image of **Jineshwaradev**, and are made even more beautiful by
the gathering of **Devas** who engage in various games according to their
desires.  In the middle of this **Antaradweep**, there are four **Anjangiri**
mountains, each 84000 yojanas tall, resembling small **Meru** mountains with the
color of **Anjan** (collyrium). These mountains are more than ten thousand
yojanas wide at the base and one thousand yojanas wide at the top. Their names
are **Devaraman**, **Nityodyot**, **Swayamprabha**, and **Ramaneya**.  On top of
these mountains, there is a **Jinamandir** (Jain temple), one hundred yojanas
long, fifty yojanas wide, and seventy-two yojanas tall. This temple has four
entrances, each sixteen yojanas tall, eight yojanas wide, and eight yojanas
deep, named after and inhabited by **Devas**, **Asuras**, **Nagas**, and
**Suparnas**. Inside the temple, there is a platform sixteen yojanas long,
sixteen yojanas wide, and eight yojanas tall. On top of this platform, there is
a **Devachhandak**, slightly larger than the platform. In each direction of the
**Devachhandak**, there are images of **Rishabha**,

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 aMtaraddhIpa varNana yogazAstra caturtha prakAza zloka 105 acchadeza
varuNAnagarI se, 18. dazArNadeza mRttikAvatI nagarI se, 19. cedI zuktimatI
nagarI se, 20. siMdhusauvIra vItabhaya se, 21. zUrasena mathurA se, 22. bhaMgA
pApA se, 23. vartA mASapurI se, 24. kuNAla zrAvastI se, 25. lATadeza koTivarSa
se aura 26. kaikeya kA AdhA deza zvetAMbikA nagarI se pahacAnA jAtA hai| yaha
sAr3he paccIsa deza Aryadeza kahalAte haiM, jahAM jinezvaradeva, cakravartI,
baladeva aura vAsudeva kA janma hotA hai| zaka, yavana Adi deza anAryadeza
kahalAte haiN| ve isa prakAra-zaka, yavana, zabara, kAyamaruMDa, uDDa, goNa,
pakavaNa, AkhyAnaka, hUNa, romaza, pArasa, khana, kauzika, dubali, lakuza,
bukkasa, AMdhra, pulinda, krauMca, bhramara, ruci, kApota, cIna, caMcuka,
mAlava, draviDa, kulattha, kaikeya, kirAta, hayamukha, svaramukha, gajamukha,
turagamukha, meMDhamukha, hayakarNa, gajakarNa ityAdi aura aneka anArya manuSya
haiM, jo pApakarmI, pracaMDa-svabhAvI, nirdaya, pazcAttApa rahita hai, dharma
zabda to unhoMne svapna meM bhI nahIM sunaa| isake atirikta aMtaradvIpa meM
utpanna hue yaugalika manuSya bhI anArya smjhnaa| 56 aMtaradvIpa isa prakAra
hai-himavAna parvata ke agale aura pichale bhAga meM IzAna Adi cAra vidizAoM meM
lavaNasamudra ke aMdara IzAnakoNa meM tInasau yojana avagAhana karake tInasau
yojana laMbAcaur3A eka Uruk nAma kA prathama aMtaradvIpa hai; vahAM ekoruka
puruSoM kA nivAsa hai| dvIpoM ke nAma anusAra puruSoM ke nAma haiN| puruSa to
sabhI aMgoMpAMgoM se suMdara hote haiM, magara eka urUka vAlA sthAna nahIM hotA,
isI prakAra anya ke lie bhI smjhnaa| agnikoNa meM tInasau yojana lavaNasamudra
ke aMdara jAne ke bAda tInasau yojana laMbAI caur3AI vAlA aura AbhiSika puruSoM
ke rahane kA sthAna prathama AbhASika nAma kA aMtaradvIpa hai| tathA naiRtya-
koNa meM usI taraha lavaNasamudra meM jAne ke bAda tInasau yojana laMbA caur3A
lAMgUlika manuSyoM ke rahane yogya lAMgUlika nAma kA prathama aMtaradvIpa hai
tathA vAyavya koNa meM tInasau yojana lavaNasamudra meM jAne ke bAda 300 yojana
laMbA-caur3A vaiSANika manuSyoM ke rahane yogya vaiSANika nAmaka prathama
aMtaradvIpa hai| isake bAda 400 yojana Age jAne para 400 yojana laMbe caur3e
vaise hI hayakarNa, gajakarNa, gokarNa, zaSkulIkarNa nAma ke dUsare cAra
aMtaradvIpa hai| usake bAda 500 yojana jAne para 500 yojana laMbe-caur3e
Adarzamukha, meSamukha, hayamukha, | gajamukha nAma ke tisare cAra aMtara dvIpa
hai| usake bAda 600 yojana Age jAne para utanI hI laMbAI-caur3AI vAle azvamukha,
hastimukha, siMhamukha, vyAghramukha nAma ke cauthe cAra aMtaradvIpa hai| usake
bAda lavaNasamudra meM 700 yojana Age jAne para sAtasau yojana laMbAI, caur3AI
vAle azvakarNa, siMhakarNa, hastikarNa, karNaprAvaraNa nAma ke pAMcaveM cAra
aMtaradvIpa hai| usake bAda isI taraha ATha sau yojana jAne para AThasau yojana
laMbe-caur3e ulkAmukha, vidyutjihma, meSamukha, vidyuiMta ke nAma ke chaDhe cAra
aMtaradvIpa hai, usake bAda nauso yojana lavaNasamudra meM jAne ke bAda nauso
yojana laMbe-caur3e ghanadaMta, gUDhadaMta, zreSThadaMta, zuddhadaMta nAmake
sAtaveM cAra aMtaradvIpa hai| isa aMtaradvIpoM meM yaugalika manuSya janma lete
haiN| inakI AyuSya palyopama ke asaMkhyAtaveM bhAga kI hotI hai, zarIra AThasau
dhanuSya kA UMcA hotA hai| isI taraha airAvata kSetra kA vibhAga karane vAlA
zikharI parvata bhI IzAnAdi vidizAoM ke isI krama se nAma-samudAya se aThAIsa
aMtaradvIpa hai| yaha saba milAne se chappanna aMtaradvIpa hote haiN|
mAnuSottara parvata ke bAda puSkaravaradvIpa ke cAroM tarapha isa dvIpa se
dugune vistAra vAlA golAkAra puSkaroda samudra hai, usake bAda kSIravaradvIpa
aura samudra hai, usake bAda ghRtavaradvIpa aura samudra hai, bAda meM ikSuvara
dvIpa aura samudra hai| isake bAda AThavAM naMdIzvaradvIpa hai, vaha 1638400000
yojana kA hai, isameM devaloka kI spardhA karane vAle vividha prakAra se suMdara
bAga hai, jo jinezvara deva kI pratimA kI pUjA meM ekAgra devoM ke Agamana se
manohara tathA icchAnusAra vividha krIr3A karane ke lie ekatrita devoM se
ramaNIya hai| usake madhyabhAga meM cAroM dizA meM aMjana ke samAna varNa vAle
choTe meru ke samAna arthAt 84000 yojana UMcAI vAle, nIce dasa hajAra yojana se
adhika aura upara eka hajAra yojana vistRta cAra aMjanagiri hai| unake nAma
kramazaH devaramaNa, nityodyota, svayaMprabha aura ramaNIya hai| una para sau
yojana laMbA, pacAsa yojana caur3A aura bahattara yojana UMcA jinamaMdira hai,
vahAM solaha yojana UMcA, ATha yojana vistRta, ATha yojana praveza karane yogya
deva, asura, nAga aura suparNa devatAoM ke nAma vAle aura rahane vAle cAra dvAra
hai, usake aMdara solaha yojana laMbI-caur3I ATha yojana UMcI pIThikA hai| usa
para kucha adhika laMbA-caur3A devacchaMdaka hai, vahAM pratyeka dizA meM
RSabha, 381

Page #404 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Description of the Nandidharadvipa, a Non-Aryan Land  The fourth light of the
Yoga Shastra, verse 105, describes the Nandidharadvipa. It states that there are
four images of Vardhamana, named Varisena and Chandranana, seated in the
Paryankasana posture. Each image is accompanied by 108 other images, two Yaksha
images, two Bhut images, two Kalashdhar images, and two images of gods holding
Chamaras. These images are adorned with garlands of flowers, bells, pots,
incense burners, Ashtamangal, toranas, flags, flowers, Angerikas, mirrors,
curtains, umbrellas, and seats. The floor of the Jinalaya is covered with
beautiful, fine, golden sand. The front mandapa of the Jinamandir, the size of
the temple itself, is adorned with sixteen full Kalashas. It also has a
Prekshamandapa, Akshavata-Gavaksha, Manipeethika, Stupa, Chaityavriksha, Indra-
dhvaja, and a well, all arranged in a specific order.  There are four wells in
each of the four directions of the Anjanagiri mountain. Their names are: 1.
Nandishena, 2. Amogha, 3. Gostupa, 4. Sudarshana; 1. Nandottra, 2. Nanda, 3.
Sunanda, 4. Nandivardhana; 1. Bhadra, 2. Vishala, 3. Kumuda, 4. Pundarikin; 1.
Vijaya, 2. Vaijayanti, 3. Jayanti, 4. Aparajita. After five hundred yojanas from
each well, there is a garden, a lakh yojanas long and five hundred yojanas wide,
named Ashoka, Saptachanda, Champaka, Amra, etc. In the middle of the wells,
there is a Dhadhimukh mountain made of crystal. It is sixty-four thousand
yojanas high, a thousand yojanas deep, ten thousand yojanas wide at the base,
and the same width at the top. It is shaped like a Palyanka. Some say there are
two mountains in the middle of each well, making a total of thirty-two. The
Dhadhimukh and Ratikara mountains are similar to the Anjanagiri mountain in
terms of temples. There are four Ratikara mountains in the Vidisha of the
island. They are ten thousand yojanas long and wide, a thousand yojanas high,
made of all jewels, and shaped like a Jhallari. There are eight Mahadevi images
of Ishaneendra on the two mountains in the north, and eight Mahadevi images of
Shakrendra in the south. There are eight capitals in each direction, a lakh
yojanas in size, each adorned with a Jinamandir. Their names are: Sujata,
Saumansa, Archi, Mali, Prabhakara, Padma, Shiva, Shuchi; Anjana, Bhutavantasa,
Gostupa, Sudarshana, Amala, Apsara, Rohini, Navami; Ratna, Ratnocchaya,
Sarvaratna, Ratnasamchaya; Vasu, Vasumitra, Vasubhaga, Vasundhara; Nandottra,
Nanda, Uttarakuru, Devakuru, Krishna, Krishna Raji, Rama, Ramarakshita. The
capital of Agni-kona is also to be understood in the same way. On auspicious
days, the all-wealthy gods, along with their families, come to the Jinamandir,
worshipped by gods, Asuras, and Vidhyadharas, and celebrate the Ashtahnika
Mahotsava with joy.  We praise the twenty Jinalayasa on the Anjanagiri mountain
and the sixteen on the Dhadhimukh mountain, making a total of thirty-six. There
are also thirty-two Jinalayasa on the Ratikara mountain, making a total of
sixty-eight on the peak of the mountain. We also praise the thirty-two
Jinalayasa in the capital of Indrani. Some believe there are sixteen Jinalayasa.
We praise them as well. The meaning of the verses of the ancient teachers, which
support this meaning, is as follows:  The eighth island, called Nandidhvara, is
1638400000 yojanas in size. It is a place where the community of gods always
enjoys pleasure and devotion to the Lord. There are four mountains in each of
the four directions, shaped like buffalo horns, black in color, 94000 yojanas
high, a thousand yojanas at the base, ten thousand yojanas at the ground level,
9400 yojanas in the upper part, and a thousand yojanas wide at the top. The four
mountains are: Devaramana in the east, Nityodyota in the south, Swayamprabha in
the west, and Ramaniya in the north. These mountains are a lakh yojanas away
from the Anjan mountains. There are wells in each of the four directions, a
thousand yojanas deep, filled with pure water without fish. The names of the
four wells in each direction are: 1. Nandishena, 2. Amogha, 3. Gostupa, 4.
Sudarshana; 5. Nandottra, 6. Nanda, 7. Sunanda, 8. Nandivardhana; 9. Bhadra, 10.
Vishala, 11. Kumuda, 12. Pundarikin; 13. Vijaya, 14. Vaijayanti, 15. Jayanti,
16. Aparajita. After five hundred yojanas from the wells, there is a forest, a
lakh yojanas long and five hundred yojanas wide. The names of the forests are:
Ashoka in the east, Saptaparna in the south, Champaka in the west, and Amra in
the north. In the middle of the wells, there are sixteen Dhadhimukh mountains,
shaped like bowls, made of crystal, ten thousand yojanas wide, a thousand
yojanas at the base, and sixty-four thousand yojanas high. On the Anjanagiri and
Dhadhimukh mountains, there are Jinamandirs, a hundred yojanas wide, seventy-two
yojanas high, beautifully decorated, with various types of decorations, dances,
songs, music, and hundreds of types of devotion, along with toranas, flags, and
Mangalas. There are forts and gates in the buildings named after gods, Asuras,
Naga-kumars, and Suparna-kumars. The height of the gates is sixteen yojanas, and
the width is eight yojanas. There are Kalashas and other things on each gate.
There are also mandapas, Prekshamandapas, Gavakshas, Manipeethas, Stupas,
Pratima-ashtakas, Chaitya-vrikshas, etc.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 anArya deza aMtaradvIpa, naMdIdharaddhIpa varNana yogazAstra caturtha prakAza
zloka 105 vardhamAna, vAriSeNa aura caMdrAnana nAma kI cAra pratimA paryakAsana
se virAjamAna hai tathA pratyeka meM ekasau ATha pratimA, do yakSapratimA, do
bhUtapratimA, do kalazadhara pratimA, do cAmara dhAraNa karane vAle devoM kI
pratimA hotI hai| ve pratimAe~ puSpamAlA, ghaMTA, kuMbha, dhUpaghaTikA,
aSTamaMgala, toraNa, dhvajA, puSpa, aMgerikA, darpaNa, paTala, chatra aura Asana
se yukta hotI hai| jinAlaya kI bhUmi para manohara bArIka svarNabAlakA bichI haI
hotI hai tathA jinamaMdira ke nApa kA Age kA maMDapa solaha pUrNakalazoM se
suzobhita prekSAmaMDapa, akSavATaka-gavAkSa, maNipIThikA, stUpa, caityavRkSa,
iMdradhvaja, vAvar3I Adi kramazaH racanAoM se pUrNa hotA hai| aMjanagiri parvata
ke pUrvAdi pratyeka cAra dizAoM meM cAra-cAra bAvar3I hotI hai, usake nAma
kramazaH - 1. naMdiSeNA, 2. amoghA, 3. gostUpA, 4. sudarzanA, 1. naMdottarA, 2.
naMdA, 3. sunaMdA, 4. naMdivardhanA, 1. bhadrA, 2. vizAlA, 3. kumudA, 4.
puMDarIkiNI; 1. vijayA, 2. vaijayaMtI, 3. jayaMtI 4. aparAjitA hai| inameM
pratyeka bAvar3I ke Age pAMca sau yojana ke bAda lAkha yojana laMbA, pAMca sau
yojana cauDA, azoka, saptachaMda caMpaka, Amra Adi nAma se udyAna hai,
bAvar3iyoM ke madhyabhAga meM sphaTikaratnamaya dadhimukhaparvata hai, vaha
suMdara vedikA, udyAna Adi se yukta cauMsaTha hajAra yojana UMcA, eka hajAra
yojana gaharA, dasa hajAra yojana nIce vistRta tathA utanA hI Upara vistRta aura
palyaMkAkRti vAlA parvata hai| kisI kA aisA kahanA hai ki bAvar3I ke bIca meM
do-do parvata hai jo saMkhyA meM battIsa hai| dadhimukha aura ratikara parvata
para aMjanagiri ke samAna maMdira smjhnaa| dvIpa kI vidizA meM cAra ratikara
parvata hai| ve dasa hajAra yojana laMbe-caur3e, hajAra yojana UMce
sarvaratnamaya aura jhallarI ke samAna Akati vAle haiN| vahAM dakSiNa meM
zakrendra kI aura uttara ke do parvatoM meM| izAnendra kI ATha agra-mahAdeviyoM
kI: cAroM dizA meM lAkha yojana pramANa vAlI, pratyeka dizA meM jinamaMdira se
vibhUSita ATha-ATha rAjadhAniyAM hai, usake nAma isa prakAra-sujAtA, saumanasA,
arci, mAlI, prabhAkarA, padmA, zivA, shuci| aMjanA, bhUtAvataMsA, gostUpA,
sudarzanA, amalA, apsarA, rohiNI, nvmii| ratnA, ratnoccayA tathA sarvaratnA,
rtnsNcyaa| vasu, vasumitrA, vasubhAgA, vsuNdhraa| naMdottarA, naMdA, uttarakuru,
devakuru, kRSNA, kRSNArAjI, rAmA, raamrkssitaa| agnikoNa kI rAjadhAnI bhI isI
krama se jaannaa| vahAM sarvasaMpattivAna devatA apane apane parivAra ke sAtha
puNya-parva ke dinoM meM Akara deva, asura aura vidhAdharAdi ke pUjanIya
jinamaMdira meM harSita mana se aSTAhnikA-mahotsava karate haiN| yahAM para
aMjanagiri meM cAra aura dadhimukhaparvata meM solaha milAkara bIsa jinamaMdira
tathA ratikaraparvata para battIsa isa taraha giri ke zikhara para bAvana
jinAlayoM kI hama stuti karate haiM aura iMdrANI kI rAjadhAnI meM battIsa hai|
kaI solaha jinAlaya mAnate haiN| unakI hama stuti karate haiN| isa artha ko
puSTa karane vAlI pUrvAcArya kI gAthAoM kA artha kahate haiM 'jahAM devasamudAya
hamezA vilAsa aura prabhubhakti meM AnaMda magna rahate haiM, vaha naMdIzvara
nAma kA AThavAM dvIpa 1638400000 yojana pramANa kA hai, vahAM pUrvAdi cAra dizA
meM bhaiMsa ke sIMga ke samAna zyAmavarNavAle 94000 yojana UMce, eka hajAra
yojana mUla meM, bhUmitala para dasa hajAra aura usake Upara ke bhAga meM 9400
aura Akhira meM hajAra yojana caur3e parvata hai| , kSaya-vRddhi-adhikatA vAle
pUrvadizA meM devaramaNa, dakSiNa meM nityodyota, pazcima meM svayaMprabha aura
uttara dizA meM ramaNIya isa prakAra cAra parvata hai| aMjana parvatoM se eka
lAkha yojana dUra, cAroM dizA meM hajAra yojana gaharI matsya rahita nirmala-
jalayukta bAvar3I hai, pUrvAdi pratyeka dizA meM cAra-cAra bAvar3I ke nAma
anukrama se isa prakAra haiM1. naMdiSeNA, 2. amoghA, 3. gostUpA, 4. sudarzanA,
5. naMdottarA, 6. naMdA, 7. sunaMdA, 8. naMdivardhanA, 9. bhadrA, 10. vizAlA,
11. kumudA, 12. puMDarIkiNI, 13. vijayA, 14. vaijayaMtI, 15. jayaMtI, 16.
apraajitaa| usase Age pAMca sau yojana jAne ke bAda lAkha yojana laMbA aura
pAMcasau yojana caur3A vanakhaMDa hai; jahAM pUrva meM azokavana, dakSiNa meM
saptaparNavana, pazcima meM caMpakavana aura uttara meM Amravana nAmaka vana
hai| bAvar3iyoM ke madhyabhAga meM pyAle ke AkAra ke samAna sphaTikaratnamaya
dasa hajAra yojana cauDe, hajAra yojana jamIna se mUla meM, causaTha hajAra
yojana UMce solaha dadhimukhaparvata hai| aMjanagiri aura dadhimukhaparvata para
sau yojana caur3e, bahattara yojana UMce, vividha prakAra se zobhita suMdara,
nRtyagIta, saMgIta Adi saikaDoM prakAra kI bhakti se yukta toraNa-dhvajA,
maMgalAdisahita jinamaMdira hai, deva, asura, nAgakumAra aura suparNakumAra ke
nAma vAle bhavana meM kile aura dvAra hai, jinakI UMcAI solaha yojana aura
caur3AI ATha yojana hai| pratyeka dvAra para kalaza Adi haiN| Age maMDapa,
prekSAmaMDapa, gavAkSa, maNipITha, stUpa pratimASTaka caitya vRkSa, 382

Page #405 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Description of Nandishwar Island and Devalok  **Chapter 4, Verse 105 of Yoga
Shastra**  Adorned with flags and wells, the Jain temple's sanctum sanctorum
houses a **Manipithika** (jewel pedestal) 8 yojanas high, 16 yojanas long, and 8
yojanas wide.  Above this is a **Devachhand** (divine canopy) made of jewels,
even larger in size.  Within it reside 108 eternal **Paryakasan** (seated)
images of the **Jineshwara** (Jain Tirthankaras):  1. **Rishabha** 2.
**Vardhaman** 3. **Chandrasan** 4. **Varishen**  Each image is accompanied by
two **Nagakumar** (snake princes), two **Yaksha** (guardian deities), two
**Bhoot** (spirits), and two **Kundadhar** (water-bearers).  On either side are
two figures holding **chamar** (fly whisks), and behind each image is a figure
holding a **chhatra** (umbrella).  Also present are **Bhadrasan** (auspicious
seat), **Mangalpushp** (auspicious flower), **Angeri** (incense burner),
**Patlak** (cloth), and **Chhatraasan** (umbrella seat), along with a **ghanta**
(bell), **chandan ghanta** (sandalwood bell), **gar** (incense), and **darpan**
(mirror).  As mentioned in the scriptures, there are two **Ratikara** mountains
for every two wells.  On these 32 mountains, there are 32 Jain temples, as
previously described.  On auspicious days, **Vidhyadhar** (celestial beings) and
**Devatas** (deities) celebrate festivals here, offering **vandana**
(salutations), **namaskaar** (prostrations), **stuti** (praises), and **puja**
(worship).  Such **Jinpratima** (Jain images) reside within these temples.  A
**Ratikara** mountain, resembling a **jhallari** (a type of ornament) and made
of jewels, stands 1,000 yojanas high and 10,000 yojanas wide.  It adorns the
**Vidisha** (central region) of the island.  In each of the four directions of
this mountain, extending for a lakh yojanas, are eight capitals of **Shakra**
(Indra) and **Ishan** (Indra), the chief queens of **Jambudweep**.  Around each
capital is a fort made of pure **mani** (jewel) and within it is a Jain temple
adorned with exquisite and beautiful jewel-encrusted images.  We praise these
temples, located on 20 and 52 **girishikhar** (mountain peaks).  I bow to the 32
or 16 Jain temples that reside in the capitals of the **Indraani** (Indra's
queens).  Surrounding Nandishwar Island is the **Nandishwar Samudra** (ocean), a
circular ring.  Beyond it lies **Arunadweep** (Arun Island) and **Arunasamudra**
(Arun Ocean).  Further out are **Arunavaradweep** (Arunavar Island) and
**Arunavarsamudra** (Arunavar Ocean), followed by **Arunaabhasadweep**
(Arunaabhas Island) and **Arunaabhasasamudra** (Arunaabhas Ocean).  Next come
**Kundaladweep** (Kundala Island) and **Kundalasamudra** (Kundala Ocean),
followed by **Ruchkadweep** (Ruchka Island) and **Ruchkasamudra** (Ruchka
Ocean).  In this manner, there are countless islands and oceans, each twice as
large as the previous one, with names like **Prashasht** (wide).  Finally, there
is the **Swayambhurmanasamudra** (Self-born Ocean).  Of these islands and
oceans, only **Bharat**, **Airavat**, and **Mahavideh** are **karmabhoomi**
(lands of karma), excluding **Devakuru** and **Uttarakuru** (two of the seven
continents).  The water of **Kalodadhi** (Black Ocean), **Pushkarasamudra**
(Lotus Ocean), and **Swayambhurmanasamudra** (Self-born Ocean) tastes like
ordinary water.  The water of **Lavanasamudra** (Salt Ocean) tastes like salt.
The water of **Varunodhadhisamudra** (Varuna Ocean) tastes like various types of
wine.  The water of **Kshirasamudra** (Milk Ocean) tastes like cow's milk mixed
with one-fourth part of sugar and ghee.  The water of **Ghritasamudra** (Ghee
Ocean) tastes like freshly cooked ghee.  The water of the remaining oceans
tastes like a mixture of one-third part of freshly squeezed sugarcane juice with
cinnamon, **tamalpatra** (bay leaf), cardamom, and **nagakeasar** (mesua
ferrea).  **Lavanasamudra** (Salt Ocean), **Kalodadhi** (Black Ocean), and
**Swayambhurmanasamudra** (Self-born Ocean) are abundant with fish, turtles,
etc., but the other oceans are not.  In **Jambudweep** (Jambudvipa), there are
always four **Jighnya** (inferior) Tirthankaras, **Chakravarti** (universal
monarchs) **Baldev** and **Vasudeva**.  There are also 34 **Utkrisht**
(superior) Tirthankaras and 30 **Chakravarti**.  In **Dhatukikhand** and
**Pushkarardhakhand**, there are twice as many.  Above the **Tiryaglok** (world
of transmigration), there are 12 **Devalok** (heavenly realms) extending for 200
yojanas and seven **Raj-praman** (royal measures).  These are:  1. **Soudharm**
2. **Ishan** 3. **Sanatkumar** 4. **Mahendra** 5. **Brahmalok** 6. **Lantk** 7.
**Mahashukra** 8. **Sahasrar** 9. **Anat** 10. **Pranat** 11. **Aran** 12.
**Achyut**  Above these are nine **Graiveyak** (heavenly realms), followed by
**Vijay**, **Vaijayant**, **Jayant**, and **Aparajit**, in the order of east,
south, west, and north.  In the center is **Sarvarth Siddha** (the realm of
perfect beings).  Above this is **Ishtapraagbhar** (slightly inclined towards
the east), a land 12 yojanas high and 45 lakh yojanas wide.  This is the
**Siddhashila** (stone of the liberated).  Above this, in the fourth part of the
third **gau** (region) and the sixth part of the fourth **gau**, up to the end
of the **lok** (universe), reside the **Siddha** (liberated souls).  From the
**Samabhootal** (level ground), **Soudharm** and **Ishan** are one and a half
**Raj Lok** (royal realms) away.  **Sanatkumar** and **Mahendra** are two and a
half **Raj Lok** away.  **Sahasrar** is five **Raj Lok** away.  **Achyut** is
six **Raj Lok** away.  The end of the universe is seven **Raj Lok** away.  The
**Viman** (aerial chariot) of **Soudharm** and **Ishan** is round like the
**Chandramandal** (lunar orb).  **Shakra** (Indra) rules the southern half and
**Ishan** (Indra) rules the northern half.  The same applies to **Sanatkumar**
and **Mahendra**.  **Sanatkumar** (Indra) rules the southern half and
**Mahendra** (Indra) rules the northern half.  Above these, in the middle of the
**Urdhvalok** (upper world), in the region resembling the elbow of a
**Lokapurush** (cosmic being), is **Brahmalok**.  Its Indra is **Brahmendra**.
In one part of this realm reside the **Lokantik** (heavenly beings) named
**Saraswat**, **Aditya**, **Vahni**, **Arun**, **Gardatoy**, **Tushit**,
**Avyabadh**, **Marut**, and **Arishta**.  Above this is **Lantk** and its
Indra, **Lantkendr**.  Above this, **Sudharm** and **Ishan**...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 naMdIdhara dvIpa evaM devaloka kA varNana yogazAstra caturtha prakAza zloka 105
| dhvajAoM aura bAvar3iyoM se suzobhita hai| jinamaMdira ke garbhagRha meM 8
yojana UMcI 16 yojana laMbI, ATha yojana cauDI maNipIThikA hai aura isase adhika
pramANa vAlA ratnamaya devacchaMda hai, usameM 1. RSabha, 2. vardhamAna, 3.
caMdrAsana, aura 4. vAriSeNa nAmaka jinezvaradeva kI paryakAsanastha 108 zAzvata
pratimAe~ hai| pratyeka pratimA ke Age do do nAgakumAra, yakSa, bhUta,
kuMDadhara kI pratimAe~ haiN| donoM tarapha do cAmara dhAraNa karane vAlI aura
pIche eka chatra dhAraNa karane vAlI pratimAe~| haiM; tathA ghaMTA, caMdana
ghaMTa, gAra, darpaNa Adi bhadrAsana, maMgalapuSpa, aMgerI, paTalaka, chatra
Asana bhI sAtha meM hotA hai| yahAM sUtra meM kahe anusAra do do bAvar3iyoM ke
aMtara para do do ratikara nAma se parvata hai, usa battIsa parvatoM para pahale
kahe anusAra 32 jinamaMdira hai| mahAparva ke pavitra dinoM meM vaMdana-
namaskAra karane, stuti-pUjA karane, Ate jAte vidyAdhara tathA devatA vahAM
mahotsava karate haiN| aisI jinapratimA usameM virAjamAna hai| tathA hajAra
yojana UMcA dasa hajAra yojana laMbA-cauDA. jhallarI ke samAna ratnamaya
ratikara nAmaka parvata. dvIpa kI vidizA meM, zobhita hai. usa parvata ke cAroM
dizAoM meM jaMbUdvIpa ke samAna lAkha yojana meM zakra aura IzAna iMdra kI
agramahAdeviyoM kI ATha-ATha rAjadhAniyA~ hai| usa rAjadhAniyoM ke cAroM tarapha
nirmala maNiratna kA koTa banA hai; usameM anupama atyaMta ramaNIya aura
ratnamaya pratimAoM se pratiSThita jinamaMdira hai| isa taraha bIsa aura bAvana
girizikhara para jinamaMdira hai, unakI hama stuti karate haiM athavA iMdrANiyoM
kI rAjadhAnI meM rahe battIsa athavA solaha jinamaMdiroM ko maiM namaskAra
karatA huuN| naMdIzvara dvIpa ke cAroM tarapha valayAkAra-golAkAra
naMdIzvarasamudra hai, bAda meM aruNadvIpa aura aruNasamudra hai| isake bAda
aruNAvaradvIpa aura aruNAvarasamudra hai, bAda meM aruNAbhAsadvIpa aura
aruNAbhAsasamudra hai, isake bAda kuMDaladvIpa aura kuMDalasamudra hai, bAda meM
rucakadvIpa aura rucakasamudra hai, isa prakAra prazasta nAma vAle dugune dugune
vistRta asaMkhyAta dvIpasamudra hai Akhira meM svayaMbhUramaNasamudra hai| ina
dvIpasamudroM meM DhAI dvIpa meM devakuru aura uttarakuru ko chor3akara bharata,
airAvata aura mahAvideha hI karmabhUmiyAM hai| kAlodadhi, puSkarasamudra aura
svayaMbhUramaNasamudra ke jala kA svAda jala ke jaisA hai, lavaNasamudra ke jala
kA svAda lavaNarasa ke samAna hai, vAruNodadhisamudra kA svAda vividha prakAra
kI madirA ke samAna hai, kSIrasamudra ke jala kA svAda khAMDa aura ghI Adi ke
sAtha caturthabhAga mizrita gAya ke dUdha samAna hotA hai| ghRtasamudra ke jala
kA svAda acchI taraha se tapAye hue tAje ghI ke samAna hotA hai aura zeSa
samudra kA jala svAda meM dAlacInI, tamAlapatra, ilAyacI aura nAgakesara ke
sAtha tAje pIle hue IkSurasa ke tRtIyAMza mizrita rasa kA-sA hotA hai|
lavaNasamudra, kAlodadhi aura svayaMbhUraNasamudra meM bahuta machalI, kachue
Adi hote haiM; paraMtu dUsare samudroM meM nahIM hote| tathA jaMbUdvIpa meM
jaghanya cAra tIrthakara, cakravartI baladeva aura vAsudeva hamezA hote haiM;
utkRSTa cauMtIsa tIrthakara aura tIsa cakravartI hote haiM? dhAtakIkhaMDa aura
puSpakarArdhakhaMDa meM isase dugune hote haiN| tiryagloka se Upara dauso yojana
sAta rAja-pramANa Urdhvaloka hai, usameM saudharma, IzAna, sanatkumAra,
mAhendra, brahmaloka, lAMtaka mahAzukra, sahasrAra, Anata, prANata, AraNa aura
acyuta nAma ke bAraha devaloka hai| unake Upara nau graiveyaka, unake Upara
vijaya, vaijayaMta, jayaMta aura aparAjita pUrvAdi dizA ke krama se haiM aura
bIca meM sarvArthasiddha hai| usake Upara bAraha yojana paitAlIsa lAkha laMbI-
caur3I ISatprAgabhAra nAma kI pRthvI hai aura vahI siddhazilA hai| usake bhI
Upara ke bhAga meM tIna gAU ke Age cauthe gAU ke chaTTe hisse meM loka ke aMta
taka siddha jIva rahe hue haiN| usameM samabhUtala se saudharma aura IzAna yaha
do devaloka taka Der3ha rAja loka, sanatkumAra aura mAhendra taka DhAI rAja
loka, sahasrAra devaloka taka pAMca rAja loka, acyuta devaloka taka chaha rAja
loka aura lokAMta taka sAta rAja loka hai| saudharma aura IzAna ke vimAna kA
AkAra caMdramaMDala ke samAna gola hai, usameM dakSiNArdha kA iMdra zakra aura
uttarArdha kA iMdra IzAna hai| sanatkumAra aura mAhendra bhI usI prakAra hai|
usameM dakSiNArdha kA iMdra sanatkumAra aura uttarArdha kA iMdra mAhendra hai|
usake bAda Urdhvaloka ke madhyabhAga meM lokapuruSa kI kohanI ke samAna sthAna
meM brahmaloka hai usakA iMdra brahmendra hai usake eka pradeza meM vAsa karane
vAle sArasvata, Aditya, vahni, arUNa, gardatoya, tuSita, avyAbAdha, maruta aura
ariSTa nAma ke lokAMtika deva haiN| usake Upara lAMtaka aura usI nAma kA
lAMtakendra hai, usake bhI Upara sudharma aura IzAna ke 383

Page #406 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Description of Devaloka  **Chapter Four, Light of Yoga, Verse 105:**  The
Devaloka of Anata and Pranata is crescent-shaped and has a Pranata-kalpa. It has
one Indra for both kalpas of the same name. Above it, there is a similar
crescent-shaped, round Aran and Achyuta. There, the Achyuta-kalpa residents have
one Indra for both kalpas of the same name. All the Devas in the Devalokas above
are Ahindra. The first two kalpas are based on Ghanodadhi. The next kalpa is
based on Vayu. The following three kalpas are based on Ghanodadhi and Ghanavat.
The kalpas above are based on Akash.  These kalpa-born Devas are divided into
ten categories: Indra, Samanika, Trayastrimsa, Parishadya, Atma-rakshaka,
Lokapala, Sainik, Prakirnaka, Abhiyogi, and Kilbishika. Indra is the master of
the first nine categories. Samanika Devas are like the head, father, guru, and
Upadhyaya, but they lack the Indra position. Trayastrimsa Devas are like
ministers and priests. Parishadya Devas are like friends. Atma-rakshaka Devas
are like bodyguards. Lokapala Devas are like Kotwal (police officers) or
messengers. Anik Devas are like soldiers. Their leader is like a general. They
should also be considered Anik Devas. Prakirnaka Devas are like city, people,
and country residents. Abhiyogi Devas are like servants who obey orders.
Kilbishika Devas are like outcasts.  In Vyantar and Jyotishka Devalokas, there
are no Trayastrimsa and Lokapala Devas. All other Devas are present there.
There are 3.2 million Vimanas in Saudharma Devaloka, 2.8 million in Ishana, 1.2
million in Sanatkumar, 800,000 in Mahendra, 400,000 in Brahmaloka, 50,000 in
Lantaka, 40,000 in Shukra, 6,000 in Sahasrar, 400 in Anata and Pranata, 300 in
Aran and Achyuta, 111 in the first three Graveyaka, 107 in the middle three
Graveyaka, 100 in the upper three Graveyaka, and only 5 in Anuttar. In total,
there are 8,497,023 Vimanas.  The four Anuttar Vimanas residents, including
Vijaya, have two births remaining. The Sarvarthasiddha Devas have only one birth
remaining.  From Saudharma Devaloka to Sarvarthasiddha, the Devas' lifespan,
position, influence, happiness, radiance, Leshya, purity, sense objects, and
Avadhijnana increase progressively. Their speed, body attachments, and pride
decrease progressively. Breathing is the same for all, with a low frequency. The
Bhavanapati and other Devas eat after seven stokas and fast for one upavasa. The
Palyopama-sthiti Devas breathe once a day and eat every two to nine days. Devas
with a lifespan of one Sagaropama breathe once every Pakshika and eat every
thousand years. Devas generally have seven Vedaniya Karmas. If they have Asata
Vedaniya Karma, it lasts only for a short time, not longer.  Devis are born only
up to the second Ishana Devaloka. However, they can go up to the twelfth Achyuta
Devaloka. Other intoxicated tapaswis and Jyotishka Devas can go up to the
Jyotishka Devaloka. Panchendriya Tiryanchas can go up to the eighth Sahasrar
kalpa. Human Shravakas can go up to the twelfth Achyuta Devaloka. Those who
accept the character-mark of Shri Jinendra Bhagavan, those who are
Mithyadrishti, those who follow the true path, can go up to the ninth Graveyaka.
The fourteen Purvadhars can go from Brahmaloka to Sarvarthasiddha. Sadhus and
Shravakas with unbroken vows can be born in the lowest Saudharma Devaloka.
Devas from Bhavanavasi to the second Ishana Devaloka enjoy sexual pleasure
through their bodies. These Devas are like humans with entangled Karmas, deeply
attached to sexual pleasure, immersed in it with intensity, and enjoy the touch
of their bodies, finding pleasure in it. Devas in the third and fourth kalpas
enjoy only touch pleasure. Devas in the fifth and sixth kalpas are satisfied by
seeing the form of Devis. Devas in the seventh and eighth Devalokas are
satisfied by hearing the voice of Devis. Devas in the ninth to twelfth Devalokas
are satisfied by mentally thinking about Devis. Devas above that are not
satisfied by any of these.  **Notes:**  1. There are different opinions on this
topic. 2. There are also differences of opinion on this topic. The limit is up
to the eighth Devaloka. 3. Mental thinking about Devis is considered the same as
their arrival.  **384**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 devaloka kA varNana yogazAstra caturtha prakAza zloka 105 samAna caMdrAkAra
Anata aura prANatakalpa hai| usameM prANatavAsI usI nAma ke do kalpa ke eka hI
iMdra hai, usake Upara usI taraha caMdrAkArasamAna gola AraNa aura acyuta hai|
vahAM acyutakalpavAsI usI nAma se do kalpa ke eka iMdra hai| | usake bAda ke
devaloka ke sabhI deva ahamindra hai| isameM prathama do kalpa ghanodadhi ke
AdhAra para rhe| kalpa vAyu ke AdhAra para rahe haiM, usake bAda tIna kalpa
ghanodadhi aura ghanavAta ke AdhAra para rahe haiM, unake Upara ke kalpa AkAza
ke AdhAra para Tike hue haiN| ina kalpopapanna devoM meM iMdra, sAmAnika
trAyastriMza, pAriSadya, Atma-rakSaka, lokapAla, sainika, prakIrNaka,
Abhiyogika, kilbiSika isa prakAra devatAoM ke dasa vibhAga hai, usameM iMdra
sAmAnika Adi nau ke svAmI hai| sAmAnikadeva, pradhAna, pitA, guru, upAdhyAya
bar3oM ke samAna hai, kevala iMdra pada se rahita hai| trAyastriMza mantrI aura
purohita ke sthAna ke samAna hai| pAriSadya deva mitra ke samAna,
AtmarakSakadeva aMgarakSakadeva ke samAna hai, lokapAladeva kotavAla athavA
dUtakArya karane vAle hote haiM, anIka deva sainika kA kArya karane vAle, unake
adhipati senAdhipati kA kArya karane vAle hote haiN| unheM bhI anIka devoM meM
samajhanA caahie| prakIrNakadeva nagara, jana aura dezavAsI ke samAna deva hai,
abhiyogika deva dAsa-sevaka ke samAna AjJApAlana karane vAle deva haiM,
kilbiSika deva antyajasamAna hai| vyaMtara aura jyotiSka devaloka meM
trAyastriMza aura lokapAla deva nahIM hote, inake alAvA sabhI deva vahAM hote
haiN| saudharmadevaloka meM battIsa lAkha vimAna hote haiM, IzAna meM 28 lAkha,
sanatkumAra meM 12 lAkha, mAhendra meM 8 lAkha, brahmaloka meM 4 lAkha, lAMtaka
meM 50 hajAra, zukra meM 40 hajAra, sahasrAra meM 6 hajAra, Anata aura prANata
meM cAra sau, AraNa aura acyuta meM tIna sau vimAna hai, pahale tIna graiveyaka
meM eka sau gyAraha, bIca ke tIna graiveyaka meM eka sau sAta, Upara ke tIna
graiveyaka meM eka sau vimAna hai, anuttara ke pAMca hI vimAna hai| isa taraha
kula 8497023 vimAna hai| vijayAdi cAra anuttaravimAnavAsI devoM ke Akhira do
bhava zeSa rahate haiN| aura sarvArthasiddha devoM kA to eka janma zeSa rahatA
hai| saudharma devaloka se lekara sarvArthasiddha taka devoM kI Ayu, sthiti
prabhAva, sukha, kAMti, lezyA, vizuddhi iMdriyoM ke viSaya, avadhijJAna Age se
Age uttarottara bar3hakara hote haiN| gati, zarIra parigraha aura abhimAna se ve
uttarottara hInatara hote haiN| zvAsocchvAsa to sarvatra jaghanyasthiti vAlA
hotA hai, bhavanapati Adi devoM kA sAta stoka ke bAda aura AhAra eka upavAsa
jitane samaye ke bAda hotA hai| palyopamasthiti ke devoM kA ucchvAsa eka dina ke
aMdara aura do se nau dina meM AhAragrahaNa kA samaya hotA hai| jina devoM kA
jitane sAgaropama kA AyuSya hotA hai ve utane pAkSika ke bAda ucchvAsa lete haiM
aura utane hajAra varSa meM AhAra lete haiN| devatAoM ko prAyaH sAtAvedanIya
karma hote haiM, kabhI asAtAvedanIya hotA bhI hai to vaha kevala aMtamuhUrta
samaya taka kA hotA hai; adhika nhiiN| deviyoM kI utpatti dUsare IzAna devaloka
taka hI hotI hai| kiMtu deviyoM ko jAnA ho to bArahaveM acyuta devaloka taka jA
sakatI hai| anya matavAle tApasa Adi jyotiSadevaloka taka, paMcendriya tiryaca
AThaveM sahasrArakalpa taka, manuSya zrAvaka bArahaveM acyutadevaloka taka, zrI
jinezvarabhagavAna kA cAritra-cihna aMgIkAra karane vAlA, mithyAdRSTi, yathArtha
samAcArI pAlana karane vAlA nauve graiveyaka taka, caudaha pUrvadhara brahmaloka
se sarvArthasiddha taka, avirAdhita vrata vAle sAdhu aura zrAvaka jaghanya
saudharmadevaloka taka utpanna ho sakate haiN| bhavanavAsI deva Adi se dUsare
IzAna devaloka taka ke devatA zarIra se saMbhogasukha bhogate haiM, ye deva
saMkliSTa karma vAle manuSyoM ke samAna maithunasukha meM gAr3ha Asakta banakara
usameM tIvratA se tallIna rahate haiM aura kAyA ke parizrama se sarva | aMgoM kA
sparzasukha prApta karake prIti karate haiN| Age tIsare-cauthe kalpavAsI deva
kevala sparzasukha ke upabhoktA hote haiM, pAMcaveM, chaDhe kalpa ke deva
deviyoM kA rUpa dekhakara, sAtaveM-AThaveM devaloka ke deva deviyoM kA zabda
sunakara, nauve se bArahaveM taka cAra devaloka ke deva mana se devI kA ciMtana
karane se tRpta ho jAte haiN| usake bAda ke devoM meM kisI 1. isa viSaya meM
matAMtara hai| 2. isa viSaya meM bhI matabheda hai| AThave devaloka taka hI
gamana hai| | 3. mana se ciMtana kA artha devI kA Agamana mAnA hogaa| 384

Page #407 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The special nature of the world, the rare feeling of enlightenment.  From verse
106 to 107 of the fourth light of Yoga Shastra, it is not possible to have
sexual intercourse in any way, but the gods who do not preach are infinitely
more blissful than the gods who preach. In this way, there are three divisions
of the world - Adholka, Tiryanka and Urdhvaloka. In the middle part of this
world, there is a Trisanadi, which is fourteen Raj Lok Praman long and wide, up
and down, in which Tris and stationary beings live, and outside the Trisanadi,
there are only stationary beings. ||105||  Now the special nature of the world
is being told. 432. It is not created by anyone, nor is it held by anyone. It is
self-existent, without a base, but situated in the sky. ||106|| Meaning: This
world has not been created by anyone, nor has it been held by anyone. It is
self-existent from time immemorial and is situated in the sky without a base.
||106|| Explanation: None of the nature, God, Vishnu, Brahma, Purusha, etc. have
created this world (universe). Nature cannot be an agent because it is
inanimate. God, etc. do not have any purpose, so they are not agents either. If
someone says - they created the world for play, then this statement is also not
true, because play happens in the passionate or in childhood. If you say that
'they have eternal pleasure in playing', then it will have to be assumed that
there was also dissatisfaction before, because of the pleasure of playing. If
they have created the world out of compassion, then the whole world should be
happy, no one should be unhappy. 'Happiness and sorrow are subject to karma'
they say, then karma is the cause and believing this destroys their
independence. In the world, there is someone unhappy, someone happy, someone
king, someone pauper, someone healthy-sick, someone connected-separated, someone
rich-poor, etc. The diversity of feelings is due to karma, then the need for
God, etc. does not seem to be there. Now someone may say that 'they created the
world without purpose, then that statement is also incorrect. Even a child does
not act without purpose.' From this it is proved that this world has not been
created by anyone, nor has it been held by anyone. Many Puranas say 'Sheshnag,
Kurma, Varaha, etc. have held this world; then it should be asked from them who
has held Sheshnag, etc.? The answer is that the sky has. Then who has held the
sky? It is self-established.' On getting such an answer, they say that 'the
world is also stable in the sky without a base in the same way.' Thus it is
proved that this world has not been created by anyone, it is self-existent; it
has not been held by anyone. They doubt that 'where will the world stay without
a base? They answer - in the sky.' But this world remains established in the sky
in the form of the existing sky.  The meaning of the inner verses in this regard
is being told - they doubt that 'why is the contemplation of the world called
feeling?' They answer that 'it results in detachment; listen; if happiness
causes fainting in the mind again and again in any feeling, then this feeling of
the world can remove it completely.' We have said in 'Dhyan Shatak' that 'earth,
island, sea, etc. are the subject of Dharma Dhyan.' Without this, the seeker
cannot contemplate the feeling of the world. According to Shri Jineshwara's
statement, after the unshakeable certainty of the substances in the form of the
world, the beings should have faith in the transcendental path of liberation.
Thus the feeling of the world. ||106||  Now the feeling of enlightenment is
being told from three verses. 433. From the form of desireless flow, it arises
for the virtuous. From the state of being stationary, it becomes a Tris, or it
becomes a Tiryanch. ||107|| Meaning: From the virtue in the form of desireless
flow, the being gets the Tris state from the stationary state or it gets the
Tiryanch state. ||107|| Explanation: A stone flowing in the river flow of a
mountain becomes round on its own by hitting obstacles, in the same way,
enduring unexpected sorrow without desire is desireless flow. That is, many
karmas attached to the soul are destroyed. This is not the nature of virtue, but
the soul becoming lighter from the burden of karma.  385

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 loka kA vizeSa svarupa, bodhi durlabha bhAvanA yogazAstra caturtha prakAza
zloka 106 se 107 bhI prakAra se maithuna-sevana nahIM hotA, paraMtu pravIcAra
karane vAle devoM se pravIcAra nahIM karane vAle deva anaMtagunA sukha bhogane
vAle hote haiN| isa taraha loka ke tIna bheda haiM-adholoka, tiryagloka aura
uurdhvlok| isa loka ke madhya bhAga meM eka rAja-pramANa laMbI-caur3I Upara nIce
milAkara caudaha rAja loka pramANa vAlI trasanADI hai, jisameM trasa aura
sthAvara jIva rahate haiM aura trasanADI ke bAhara kevala sthAvara jIva hI hote
haiM  // 105 /  /  _ aba loka kA vizeSa svarUpa kahate haiN|432| niSpAdito na
kenApi, na dhRtaH kenacicca saH  /  svayaMsiddho nirAdhAro, gagane
kintvavasthitaH  // 106 /  /  artha :- isa loka ko na kisI ne banAyA hai aura na
kisI ne dhAraNa kara rakhA hai| yaha anAdikAla se svayaMsiddha hai aura AdhAra
ke binA AkAza para sthita hai  /  / 106 /  /  vyAkhyA :- prakRti. Izvara. viSNa,
brahmA, puruSa Adi meM se kisI ne bhI isa loka (jagat) ko banAyA nahIM hai|
prakRti acetana hone se usameM kartRtva nahIM ho sktaa| Izvara Adi ko prayojana
nahIM hone se unakA bhI kartRtva nahIM hai| yadi koI kahe-unhoMne loka krIr3A ke
lie banAyA hai to yaha kathana bhI yathArtha nahIM hai, kyoMki krIr3A to rAgI
meM athavA bacapana meM hotI hai| yadi yaha kaho ki 'unameM to krIr3AsAdhya
prIti zAzvata hai;' taba to krIr3A ke nimitta se unako prIti mAnane para to
pahale atRpti bhI thI aisA mAnanA hogaa| yadi unhoMne dayA se loka ko utpanna
kiyA hai to sArA jagat hI sukhI honA cAhie, koI bhI duHkhI nahIM honA caahie|
'sukha-duHkha karma ke adhIna hai' aisA kahate haiM to phira karma hI kAraNa hai
aura aisA mAnane se unakI svataMtratA kA nAza hotA hai| jagata meM koI duHkhI,
koI sukhI, koI rAjA, koI raMka. koI nirogI-rogI. saMyogI-viyogI. dhanavAna-
darida Adi bhAvoM kI vicitratA karma ke kAraNa hai, taba to IzvarAdi kI
AvazyakatA pratIta nahIM hotii| aba koI yaha kaheM ki 'unhoMne prayojana binA
jagat kA nirmANa kiyA hai, to vaha kathana bhI ayakta hai. prayojana binA bAlaka
bhI koI pravatti nahIM krtaa|' isase siddha haA ki isa loka ko kisI ne banAyA
nahIM hai aura na kisI ne dhAraNa kiyA hai| kitane hI paurANika aisA kahate haiM
'zeSanAga, kUrma, varAha Adi ne isa loka ko dhAraNa kara rakhA hai; to unase
pachA jAye ki zeSanAga Adi ko kisane dhAraNa kara rakhA hai? uttara milatA hai
ki AkAza ne| to phira AkAza ko kisane dhAraNa kiyA hai? vaha svayaM hI
pratiSThita hai|' aisA uttara milane para unheM kahanA ki 'loka bhI isI taraha
AdhAra ke binA AkAza meM sthira hai|' isa prakAra yaha siddha huA ki yaha jagat
kisI ne bhI utpanna nahIM kiyA, svayaMsiddha hai; kisI ne dhAraNa nahIM kara
rakhA hai| zaMkA karate haiM ki 'AdhAra ke binA loka rahegA kahAM? uttara dete
haiM-AkAza meN|' paraMtu avasthita AkAza rUpa meM hI yaha loka AkAza meM
pratiSThita rahatA hai| isa saMbaMdhI AMtarazlokoM kA bhAvArtha kahate haiM-
zaMkA karate haiM ki 'loka-vicAraNA ko bhAvanA kyoM kahI gayI?' uttara dete haiM
ki 'isase nirmamatva pariNAma hote haiM; suno; sukha ke kAraNa kisI bhAva meM
bAra-bAra mana meM mUrchA paidA hotI hai to isa lokabhAvanA se use atyaMta dUra
kara sakate haiN|' hamane 'dhyAnazataka' meM kahA hai ki 'pRthvI, dvIpa, samudra
Adi dharmadhyAna kA viSayabhUta hai|' isake binA sAdhaka lokabhAvanA kA ciMtana
nahIM kara sktaa| zrI jinezvara-kathanAnusAra loka-rUpI padArthoM kA niHzaMka
nizcaya hone ke bAda atIndriya mokSamArga meM jIvoM ko zraddhA rakhanI caahie|
iti lokbhaavnaa||106|| aba tIna zlokoM se bodhidurlabhabhAvanA kahate haiN|433|
akAmanirjarArUpAt, puNyAjantoH prjaayte| sthAvaratvAt trasatvaM vA, tiryaktvaM
vA kthnycn||107|| artha :- akAmanirjarA rUpI puNya se jIva ko sthAvara paryAya
se trasa paryAya prApta hotA hai athavA vaha tiryaMcagati prApta karatA hai  /
/ 107 /  /  vyAkhyA :- parvata ke nadI-pravAha meM bahatA huA patthara ThokareM
khAtA-khAtA apane Apa golamaTola bana jAtA hai, usI prakAra Aye hue apratyAzita
duHkha ko binA icchA ke sahana karane se akAmanirjarA hotI hai| arthAt AtmA ke
sAtha lage hue bahuta-se karma naSTa ho jAte haiN| yaha puNyaprakRti kA svarUpa
nahIM hai, apitu AtmA kA karma ke bojha se halakA 385

Page #408 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Bodhi, a Rare Sentiment  **Verse 108-109 from the Fourth Light of Yoga
Shastra**  **Verse 107:**  From the state of being a one-sensed stationary
being, the soul transcends to the state of a three-sensed being, or becomes a
five-sensed animal. ||107||  **Verse 108:**  Human birth, in an Aryan land, with
a noble lineage, and the perfection of all five senses, along with a long
lifespan, are attained due to the lightness of karma. ||108||  **Meaning:**
After the karma becomes extremely light due to the accumulation of good deeds,
the soul attains human birth, in an Aryan land, with a noble lineage, and the
perfection of all five senses, along with a long lifespan. ||108||
**Explanation:**  Due to the lightness of karma, the soul attains human birth,
similar to how a nail finds its way into a crack in the ocean of self-created
existence. After attaining human birth, the soul is born in an Aryan land like
Magadha, excluding non-Aryan lands like Shaka and Yavana. Even after attaining
an Aryan land, the soul is born in a noble lineage, excluding the lower castes
like Antyaja. Even after attaining a noble lineage, the soul attains the
perfection of all five senses and a long lifespan only when the negative karma
has reduced, and the auspicious signs of merit have increased. Only then can all
these be attained. A person with a short lifespan cannot perform the duties of
this world or the next. Shri Vitrag Bhagwan, while addressing Gautam, has
emphasized the importance of a long lifespan along with other qualities. ||108||
**Verse 109:**  Even after attaining faith, listening to the teachings of the
Guru, and hearing the scriptures, the attainment of the true knowledge, the
jewel of Bodhi, is extremely rare. ||109||  **Meaning:**  Due to the lightness
of karma and the rise of merit, the soul attains faith, the desire for Dharma,
the Guru, and the opportunity to listen to their teachings. However, even after
all this, the attainment of true knowledge, the unwavering devotion to God,
Guru, and Dharma, the jewel of Bodhi (the jewel of right faith), is extremely
difficult. ||109||  **Explanation:**  The transition from a stationary being to
a three-sensed being is extremely rare, and from there, the attainment of the
jewel of Bodhi is even rarer. The word "su" before "durlabham" emphasizes the
extreme rarity of the jewel of Bodhi. Even those with wrong views, after
countless births, reach the stage of listening to the scriptures, but they
cannot attain the jewel of Bodhi. The seed of the tree of liberation is right
faith. The inner meaning of the verses in this context is that attaining a
kingdom or becoming a Chakravarti is not rare in this Jain Dharma, but the
attainment of the jewel of Bodhi is extremely rare. All beings have experienced
all the states of the world countless times before, but they have never attained
the jewel of Bodhi, because their cycle of birth and death continues. After
countless cycles of the transformation of matter, when half of the cycle of
transformation of matter remains, the karma of all beings in the world reaches
its peak, and then a being attains the jewel of Bodhi by breaking the knots.
Many beings come close to breaking the knots by following their natural
tendencies, but they return without attaining the jewel of Bodhi. Many beings
attain the jewel of Bodhi but fall back and continue to wander in the cycle of
birth and death. Listening to the scriptures of the wicked, associating with
those with wrong views, indulging in bad habits, and negligence destroy the
jewel of Bodhi. Although the attainment of conduct is considered rare, it is
successful only when the jewel of Bodhi is attained. Without it, the attainment
of the jewel of conduct is useless. Even an unliberated being can attain conduct
and reach the Graiveyak Devaloka, but without the jewel of Bodhi, they cannot
attain the bliss of liberation. A Chakravarti who does not attain the jewel of
Bodhi is like a pauper, and a pauper who attains the jewel of Bodhi is greater
than a Chakravarti. A being who attains right faith never becomes attached to
the world. Being free from attachment, they worship liberation without any
obstacles. The one who has attained this state of liberation before, the one who
will attain it in the future, and the one who is attaining it now, all are the
effects of the jewel of Bodhi, which is unparalleled in its influence and glory.
Therefore, worship this jewel of Bodhi, praise it, listen to it, what is the use
of anything else? Thus, the sentiment of Bodhi is complete. ||109||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bodhi durlabha bhAvanA yogazAstra caturtha prakAza zloka 108 se 109 honA hai|
isase jIva ekendriyajAtiya sthAvara-paryAya ko chor3akara trasa-paryAya pA letA
hai, yA paMcendriya-tiryaca ho jAtA hai  /  / 107 /  /   / 434 /
mAnuSyamAryadezazca, jAtiH sarvAkSapATavam  /  Ayuzca prApyate tatra,
kathaJcitkarmalAghavAt  // 108 /  /  artha :- usake bAda adhika karmoM se
atyadhika halake (laghu) hone para jIva ko manuSya-paryAya, Aryadeza tathA
uttama jAti meM janma, pAMcoM iMdriyoM kI paripUrNatA aura dIrgha AyuSya kI
prApti hotI hai  /  / 108 //  vyAkhyA :- vizeSa prakAra se karmoM ke lAghava
(halakepana) ke kAraNa kisI prakAra svayaMbhUramaNa samudra meM yugachidra meM
kIla A jAne (ke nyAya) kI taraha manuSyatva prApti ke bAda zaka, yavana Adi
anAryadeza ke atirikta magadhAdi Aryadeza meM janma hotA hai, Aryadeza milane
para bhI antyaja Adi nIca jAti se rahita uttamajAti-kula meM usakA janma hotA
hai| uttamajAti-kula milane para bhI samasta iMdriyoM kI paripUrNatA tathA
sarvendriyapaTutA ke sAtha laMbA AyuSya tabhI milatA hai, jaba azubhakarma kama
hue hoM, upalakSaNa se puNya kI vRddhi huI ho| itanA hone para hI ina sabhI kI
prApti ho sakatI hai| kama AyuSya vAlA isaloka yA paraloka ke kArya karane meM
samartha nahIM ho sakatA, zrI vItarAga bhagavAn ne bhI AyuSyamAn gautama!
saMbodhana karake dUsare guNoM ke sAtha laMbI Ayu ko mukhyatA dI hai  /  / 108 /
/   / 435 /  prApteSu puNyataH zraddhA-kathakazravaNeSvapi  /
tattvanizcayarUpaM tad, bodhiratnaM sudurlabham  // 109 /  /  artha. :- karmoM
ke lAghava (halakApana) se aura puNya arthAt zubhakarma ke udaya se
dharmAbhilASA rUpI zraddhA, dharmopadezaka gurumahArAja aura unake vacana-
zravaNa karane kI prApti hotI hai| paraMtu yaha saba hone para bhI tattva-
nizcaya rUpa (athavA tattva rUpa) deva, guru aura dharma ke prati dRr3ha
anurAga, tad rUpa bodhi (samyaktvaratna kI prApti) honA atyaMta kaThina hai  /
/ 109 /  /  "vyAkhyA :- sthAvara se trasatva atidurlabha hai, isase bodhiratna
atidurlabha hai| yahAM durlabham ke pUrva 'su' zabda bodhiratna kI atyaMta
durlabhatA batAne hetu prayukta hai| mithyAdRSTi bhI trasatva Adi se
dharmazravaNa kI bhUmikA taka anaMta bAra pahuMca jAtA hai; paraMtu vaha
bodhiratna kI prApti nahIM kara sktaa| mokSavRkSa kA bIja samyaktva hai| isa
viSaya ke AMtarazlokoM kA bhAvArtha kahate haiM-isa jainadharmazAsana meM rAjya
milanA, cakravartI honA durlabha nahIM| kahA, kintu bodhiratna kI prApti honA
atyaMta durlabha batAyA hai| sabhI jIvoM ne jagat ke sabhI bhAva pahale anaMta
bAra prApta kiye haiM, paraMtu bodhiratna kabhI prApta nahIM kiyA, kyoMki unakA
bhava-bhramaNa cAlU rahA; aura anaMtAnaMta pudgalaparAvartanakAla bIta jAne ke
bAda jaba ardhapudgalaparAvartanakAla zeSa rahatA hai, saMsAra ke sabhI
zarIradhArI jIvoM ke sarvakarmoM kI aMtaH koTAkoTI sthiti raha jAtI hai, taba
koI jIva graMthi kA bhedana kara uttama bodhiratna kI prApti karatA| hai| kitane
hI jIva yathApravRttikaraNa karake graMthi ke nikaTa-pradeza meM Ate haiM,
paraMtu bodhiratna kI prApti kiye binA vApisa cale jAte haiN| kitane hI jIva
bodhi-ratna kI prApti karate hue vApisa gira jAte haiM aura phira bhavacakra meM
bhramaNa karate rahate haiN| kuzAstroM kA zravaNa, mithyAdRSTiyoM ke sAtha
saMga, kuvAsanA, pramAda kA sevana ityAdi kArya bodhiratna kA nAza karate haiN|
yadyapi cAritra kI prApti ko durlabha kahA hai, paraMtu vaha bodhiprApti hone
para hI saphala hai, usake binA korI cAritraratna prApti niSphala hai| abhavya
jIva bhI cAritra prApta kara graiveyaka devaloka taka jAtA hai; paraMtu bodhi ke
binA vaha nirvRtisukha nahIM prApta kara sktaa| bodhiratna nahIM prApta karane
vAlA cakravartI bhI raMka ke samAna hai aura bodhiratna prApta karane vAlA raMka
bhI cakravartI se bar3hakara hai| samyaktva-prApti karane vAlA jIva saMsAra meM
kadApi anurAga nahIM karatA; vaha mamatArahita hone se mukti kI ArAdhanA argalA
ke binA (nirAbAdha) karatA hai| jisa kisI ne pahale isa muktipada ko prApta kiyA
hai, aura jo Age prApta kareMge aura vartamAnakAla meM jo bhI prApta kara rahe
haiM, vaha saba anupama prabhAva aura vaibhava svarUpa bodhiratna kA prabhAva
hai| isalie isa bodhiratna kI upAsanA karo, isI kI stuti karo, isI kA zravaNa
karo; dUsare padArtha se kyA prayojana hai? isa prakAra bodhibhAvanA pUrNa huI
/  / 109 /  /  386

Page #409 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Equality as the Essence  **Chapter Four of Yoga Shastra, Verses 110-114**
This section concludes the discussion on the causes of non-attachment (nirmama)
and connects it to the concept of equality (samata).  **Verse 110:**
**Meaning:** The mind that is constantly influenced by these twelve emotions
(referring to the twelve emotions discussed previously) becomes free from
attachment to all things and embraces equality.  **Verse 111:**  **Meaning:**
For those who are detached from worldly objects and whose minds are filled with
equality, the fire of passions (kṣayāgni) is extinguished, and the lamp of right
conduct (bodhidīpa) shines brightly.  **Explanation:** This verse explains how
conquering the senses leads to conquering passions, purifying the mind leads to
conquering the senses, overcoming attachment and aversion leads to mental
purity, and equality leads to overcoming attachment and aversion. It emphasizes
that non-attachment, the essence of these emotions, leads to the attainment of
equality.  **Verse 112:**  **Meaning:** After establishing equality, the yogi
should take refuge in meditation. Without achieving equality, meditation becomes
a mockery of the self. This is because true meditation cannot be achieved
without equality.  **Explanation:** The yogi firmly establishes equality in
their mind and then enters meditation. The importance of meditation will be
discussed later. Although meditation and equality are essentially the same, a
specific type of equality is called meditation. This type of equality is
achieved through constant practice. If meditation is attempted without the
equality achieved through practices like contemplation, the self is mocked.
Therefore, a person who has not controlled their senses, purified their mind,
overcome attachment and aversion, developed non-attachment, or practiced
equality, and who engages in meditation based on tradition alone, will fall from
the path of both worlds. Therefore, proper meditation avoids mocking the self
and is beneficial for the soul.  **Verse 113:**  **Meaning:** Liberation (mokṣa)
arises from the destruction of karma, which in turn arises from self-knowledge.
There is no doubt about this. Self-knowledge is achieved through meditation.
Renunciation of worldly pursuits and immersion in the true nature of the self,
both are achieved through meditation. Therefore, meditation is considered
beneficial for the soul.  **Explanation:** This verse addresses the question of
whether equality or meditation is more important. It clarifies that both are
equally important and inseparable.  **Verse 114:**  **Meaning and Explanation:**
Meditation cannot exist without equality, and equality cannot be achieved
without meditation. Therefore, both are mutually dependent and essential for
achieving a state of freedom from suffering.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 samatAdhikAra svarupa yogazAstra caturtha prakAza zloka 110 se 114 nirmamatva
kI kAraNabhUta bhAvanAoM kA upasaMhAra karate hue prastuta samatAdhikAra se
usakA saMbaMdha jor3ate haiN|436| bhAvanAbhiravizrAntamiti, bhAvitamAnasaH  /
nirmamaH sarvabhAveSu, samatvamavalambate  // 110 //  artha :- ina bAraha
bhAvanAoM se jisakA mana niraMtara bhAvita rahatA hai; vaha sabhI bhAvoM para
mamatA-rahita hokara samabhAva kA AlaMbana letA hai  // 110 /  /  samabhAva kA
phala kahate hai|437| viSayebhyo viraktAnAM, sAmyavAsitacetasAm  /  upazAmyet
kaSAyAgnirbodhidIpaH samunmiSet  /  / 111 /  /  artha :- viSayoM se virakta aura
samabhAva se yukta citta vAle yogI puruSoM kI kaSAya rUpI agni zAMta ho jAtI hai
aura samyaktva rUpI dIpaka prakaTa ho jAtA hai  /  / 111 /  /  bhAvArtha :- isa
prakAra iMdriyoM para vijaya se kaSAyoM para vijaya hotI hai, mana kI zuddhi se
iMdriyoM para vijaya prApta hotI hai, rAgadveSa para jaya se manaHzuddhi hotI
hai, samatA se rAgadveSa para vijaya hotI hai aura bhAvanA ke hetusvarUpa
nirmamatva se samatA-prApti kA pratipAdana kiyA hai  /  / 111  /  /  aba Age kA
prakaraNa kahate haiN||438| samatvamavalambyAtha, dhyAnaM yogI samAzrayet  /
vinA samatvamArabdhe, dhyAne svAtmA viDambyate  /  / 112 /  /  artha :- samatva
kA avalaMbana lene ke bAda yogI ko dhyAna kA Azraya lenA caahie| samabhAva kI
prApti ke binA dhyAna ke prAraMbha karane para apanI AtmA viDambita hotI hai|
kyoMki binA samatva ke dhyAna meM bhalIbhAMti - praveza nahIM ho sakatA  /  /
112 /  /  vyAkhyA :- usake bAda yogI-muni apane citta meM dRr3hatApUrvaka samatA
kA avalaMbana lekara dhyAna meM praveza karatA hai| dhyAna kA adhikAra Age
kheNge| yadyapi dhyAna aura samatA donoM eka hI haiM, phira bhI vizeSa prakAra
kI samatA ko dhyAna kahate haiN| _jisa samatA kA bAra-bAra abhyAsa kiyA jAya,
aisI samatA dhyAna-svarUpa hai| isI bAta ko vyatireka se kahate haiN| anuprekSA
Adi ke bala se prApta karane yogya samatA ke binA dhyAna prAraMbha kiyA jAya to
AtmA viDaMbanA prApta karatA hai| isalie jisane iMdriyoM para kAbU nahIM kiyA,
jisane mana kI zuddhi nahIM kI, rAgadveSa ko nahIM jItA; nirmamatva prakaTa
nahIM kiyA tathA samatA kA abhyAsa nahIM kiyA aura vaha mUr3ha manuSya
gatAnugatika-paraMparA se dhyAna karatA hai, vaha donoM loka ke mArga se patita
hotA hai| isalie yathAvidhi dhyAna kiyA jAya to AtmA kI viDaMbanA nahIM hogI
aura vaha dhyAna AtmA ke lie hitakArI hotA hai  /  / 112 /  /  isI bAta ko
kahate haiN||439| mokSaH karmakSayAdeva, sa cAtmajJAnato bhavet  /
dhyAnasAdhyaM mataM tacca, taddhyAnaM hitamAtmanaH  // 113 /  /  artha :- karmoM
ke kSaya se mokSa hotA hai, karmakSaya AtmajJAna se hotA hai| isa bAta meM
vivAda nahIM hai| AtmajJAna dhyAna se siddha hotA hai| parapadArtha ke yoga kA
tyAga aura AtmasvarUpa yoga meM ramaNa, yaha donoM dhyAna se siddha ho sakate
haiN| isalie dhyAna AtmA ke lie hitakArI mAnA jAtA hai  /  / 113 /  /  yahAM
zaMkA karate haiM ki pahale to artha kI prAti ke lie aura anarthaparihAra ke lie
sAmya ko batAyA, aba dhyAna ko Apane Atmahita karane vAlA kahA, to ina donoM
bAtoM meM mukhyatA kisakI mAnI jAya? uttara dete haiM ki donoM kI pradhAnatA
hai; ina donoM meM aMtara nahIM hai  /  / 103 /  /  usI ko kahate haiN1440| na
sAmyena vinA dhyAnaM, na dhyAnena vinA ca tat  /  niSkampaM jAyate tasmAd,
dvayamanyo'nyakAraNam  // 114 /  /  artha aura vyAkhyA :- sAmya ke binA dhyAna
nahIM hotA aura dhyAna ke binA sAmya siddha nahIM hotaa| donoM ke hone 387

Page #410 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Meditation Nature  **The essence of non-attachment comes from the fourth
light of Yoga Shastra, verses 114 to 117. Therefore, these two are not
independent of each other, as there are no mutual flaws. It is not that
meditation cannot happen without equanimity, but it cannot be stable without it.
Therefore, they are interdependent.**  **The explanation of equanimity has
already been given. (114)**  **Now we explain the nature of meditation. (441)**
**The stability of the mind for a moment is meditation for the pseudo-yogis.
That meditation is of two types, first Dharma meditation and second Shukla
meditation. For the non-yogis, there is only suppression of yoga. (115)**
**Explanation:** There are two types of meditators - Sayogi and Ayogi. Sayogi
meditators are also of two types, pseudo-yogis and Kevalis. The pseudo-yogis can
only achieve stability of mind (concentration) in one object for a maximum of an
antarmuhurta (48 minutes). That meditation is of two types for the pseudo-yogis
- Dharma meditation and Shukla meditation. Dharma meditation is associated with
the ten Dharmas or is attainable through the ten Dharmas. Shukla meditation is
pure and bright, as it destroys all karmic impurities. Another meaning of Shukla
is "Shugam duhkham klamayati - nashati iti shuklam". That is, Shukla meditation
destroys the eight types of karmas that are the cause of suffering. The Sayogi
Kevali has to suppress the yoga of mind, speech, and body. That is, he knows the
suppression of yogas as meditation. The Sayogi Kevali has meditation during the
suppression of yogas, there is no other meditation. The Sayogi Kevali, for a
short period, practices with the yoga (activity) of mind, speech, and body. At
the time of Nirvana, they suppress yoga. Here, there is a doubt that "what
happens to the pseudo-yogis after they have achieved concentration in meditation
for an antarmuhurta?" (115)**  **It is said that (442)**  **After the muhurta,
there will be contemplation, or there will be another meditation with a
different object. But it cannot remain stable in one object for more than a
muhurta, because that is its nature. In this way, it takes the object of another
meaning, and then takes the object of a third and meditates. Then it takes the
fourth, and in this way, a long tradition of meditation continues. After the
muhurta, the first meditation is summarized, and then it takes the object of
another meaning. In this way, one should cultivate the feeling to increase
meditation. (116)**  **The same thing is said (443)**  **One should engage in
Maitri, Pramoda, Karuna, and Madhyastha bhavana. This is the elixir for Dharma
meditation. (117)**  **Explanation:** Maitri is the feeling of affection from
both sides. Therefore, having affection for all beings in the world is Maitri
bhavana. Feeling joy towards those who are more virtuous than oneself, having a
cheerful face when seeing them, and expressing devotion (affection) in one's
heart towards them is Pramoda bhavana. Karuna bhavana or compassion is the
feeling of compassion towards the poor, the suffering, the orphans, the
disabled, and the helpless beings. Madhyastha bhavana is to remain in the middle
of attachment and aversion. That is, Madhyastha or indifference is the feeling
free from attachment and aversion. Why should these four bhavanas be connected
with different souls? In response to this, it is said that if Dharma meditation
breaks, then to connect it, just as an elixir is beneficial for a weak body in
old age, similarly, Maitri etc. bhavanas are the nourishing elixir for Dharma
meditation. (117)**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dhyAna svarUpa yogazAstra caturtha prakAza zloka 114 se 117 para hI niSkapatA
AtI hai, isIlie inameM parasparAzraya-doSoM kA abhAva hone se ye donoM aisA
nahIM hai ki sAmya ke binA dhyAna nahIM ho sakatA, dhyAna to sAmya ke binA ho
sakatA hai, magara sthiratA yukta nahIM hotA, isalie eka dUsare ke kAraNa rUpa
hai| sAmya kI vyAkhyA pahale kara cuke haiM  /  / 114 /  /  aba dhyAna ke
svarUpa kI vyAkhyA karate haiN|441| muhUrtAntarmanaHsthairya, dhyAnaM
chadmasthayoginAm  /  dhayaM zuklaM ca tad dvedhA, yogrodhstvyoginaam||115||
artha :- chadmastha-yogiyoM kA aMtaHmuhUrtakAla taka hI mana kA sthira rahanA
dhyAna hai| vaha dhyAna do prakAra kA hai, prathama dharmadhyAna aura dUsarA
shukldhyaan| ayogiyoM ke to yoga kA nirodha hotA hI hai  // 115 /  /  vyAkhyA :-
dhyAna karane vAle do prakAra ke hote haiM-sayogI aura ayogii| sayogIdhyAtA bhI
do prakAra ke haiM, chadmastha aura kevlii| inameM chadmastha yogI kA dhyAna eka
AlaMbana meM jyAdA se jyAdA aMtarmuhUrta-(48 miniTa paryata) taka mana kI
sthiratA-(ekAgratA) pUrvaka ho sakatA hai| vaha dhyAna chadmastha yogI ko do
prakAra kA hotA hai-dharmadhyAna aura shukldhyaan| vaha dharmadhyAna dasa
prakAra ke dharmoM se yukta athavA dazavidha dharmoM se prApta karane yogya hai
aura zukladhyAna samagra karma-mala ko kSaya karane vAlA hone se zukla-ujjvala
pavitra nirmala hai athavA zukla kA dUsarA artha hotA hai-zugaM duHkhaM
klamayati-nazyatIti shuklm| arthAt zuga yAnI duHkha ke kAraNabhUta ATha prakAra
ke karmoM kA jo nAza karatA hai, vaha zukladhyAna hai| sayogI kevalI ko to mana,
vacana aura kAyA ke yoga kA nirodha karanA-nigraha karanA hotA hai| yAnI vaha
yogoM ke nirodha ko hI dhyAna rUpa jAnatA hai| sayogI kevalI ko yoga ke nirodha
samaya meM dhyAna hotA hai, isase alaga dhyAna nahIM hotaa| sayogI kevalI kucha
kama pUrvakoTI taka mana, vacana aura kAyA ke yoga-(vyApAra) yukta hI vicarate
haiN| nirvANa ke samaya meM yoga kA nirodha karate haiN| yahAM zaMkA karate haiM
ki 'chadmastha yogI ko yadi aMtarmuhUrtakAla taka dhyAna kI ekAgratA rahe to
usake bAda kyA sthiti hotI hai?'  /  / 115 /  /  use kahate haiN|442| muhUrtAt
paratazcintA, yadvA dhyAnAntaraM bhvet|bhvrthsngkrme tu syAd dIrghA'pi dhyAna-
santatiH  // 116 /  /  - artha :- eka padArtha meM muhUrtakAla taka dhyAna
vyatIta hone ke bAda vaha dhyAna sthira nahIM rahatA, phira vaha ciMtana karegA
athavA AlaMbana kI bhinnatA se dUsarA dhyAna karegA, paraMtu eka padArtha meM
eka muhUrta se adhika sthira nahIM raha sakatA, kyoMki usakA aisA hI svabhAva
hai| isa taraha eka artha se dUsare artha kA AlaMbana karatA hai aura tIsare kA
AlaMbana lekara dhyAna karatA hai, phira cauthe ko isa taraha laMbe samaya taka
dhyAna kI paraMparA cAlU rahatI hai| muhUrtakAla ke bAda prathama dhyAna samAsa
hotA hai, bAda meM dUsare artha kA AlaMbana | karatA hai isa taraha dhyAna kI
vRddhi karane ke lie bhAvanA karanI caahie||116|| usI bAta ko kahate haiN||443|
maitrI-pramoda-kAruNya-mAdhyasthyAni niyojayet  /  dharmyadhyAnamupaskartuM,
taddhi tasya rsaaynm||117|| artha :- dharmadhyAna TUTa jAtA ho to maitrI,
pramoda, kAruNya aura mAdhyasthabhAvanA meM mana ko jor3a denA caahie| kyoMki
jarA se jarjarita zarIra vAle ke lie jaise rasAyana upakArI hotA hai, vaise hI
dharmadhyAna ke lie maitrI Adi bhAvanA puSTa rUpa rasAyana hai  /  / 117 /  /
/  vyAkhyA :- donoM ora se snehabhAva ko maitrI kahate haiN| ataH jagat ke sAre
jIvoM para sneha rakhanA maitrIbhAvanA hai, apane se adhika guNIjanoM para
prasannatA rakhanA, unheM dekhakara ceharA praphulli ho jAnA; unake prati hRdaya
meM bhakti | (anurAga) prakaTa karanA pramodabhAvanA hai| dIna, duHkhI, anAtha,
vikalAMga evaM azaraNa jIvoM ke prati karuNAbhAvanA athavA anukaMpAbhAvanA hai|
rAga aura dveSa donoM ke madhya meM rahanA mAdhyasthya-bhAvanA hai| arthAt rAga-
dveSa|rahita bhAvanA mAdhyasthya yA upekSAbhAvanA hai| ina cAra bhAvanAoM ko
vibhinna AtmAoM ke sAtha kisalie joDeM? isake uttara meM kahate haiM yadi
dharmadhyAna TaTa jAtA ho to use jor3ane ke lie jaise vaddhAvasthA meM nirbala
zarIra ko rasAyana-zakti 388

Page #411 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Maitri-adi Bhavana Svarupa  Yogashastra Chaturtha Prakasha, Shloka 118-120:
Maitri and the other four bhavanas (compassion, joy, and equanimity) also
strengthen the broken dharma-dhyana (contemplation of the true nature of the
self).  118. Maitri-bhavana: The thought that no being in the world should
commit any sin, and that no being should be afflicted with sorrow; that all
beings should be liberated from suffering and attain happiness - this is called
maitri (friendliness).  119. Pramoda-bhavana: The affection and praise towards
the virtues of those ascetics who have abandoned all flaws and contemplate the
true nature of reality - this is called pramoda (joy).  120. Karuna-bhavana: The
intention to alleviate the suffering of the distressed, the afflicted, the
fearful, and those begging for their lives - this is called karuna (compassion).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 maitryAdi bhAvanA svarUpa yogazAstra caturtha prakAza zloka 118 se 120 |
pradAna karatI hai vaise hI maitrI Adi cAra bhAvanAe~ bhI TUTe hue dharmadhyAna
ko puSTa karatI hai  /  / 117 /  /  ina cAra bhAvanAoM meM se prathama maitrI kA
svarUpa kahate haiN||444|maa kArSIt ko'pi pApAni, mA ca bhUt ko'pi
duHkhitH|mucytaaN jagadapyeSA, matimaitrI nigdyte||118|| artha :- jagat kA koI
bhI jIva pApa na kare tathA koI bhI jIva duHkhI na ho, samasta jIva duHkha se
mukta hokara sukhI hoM, ina prakAra kA ciMtana karanA; maitrIbhAvanA hai  //
118|| vyAkhyA :- upakArI athavA apakArI koI bhI jIva duHkha ke kAraNabhUta pApa
kA sevana na kre| pApa se rahita hone para koI bhI jIva duHkhI na bne| deva.
manaSya. tithaMca aura naraka cAra gati ke paryAya ko pAne vAle jagata ke
samasta jIva saMsAra-duHkha se sadA mukta banakara mokSa-sukha prAsa kareM; isa
prakAra ke svarUpa vAlI mati maitrI-bhAvanA hai| kisI eka kA mitra ho, vaha
vAstava meM mitra nahIM hai| yoM to hiMsaka vyAghra, siMha Adi kI bhI apane
baccoM para maitrI hotI hai| kintu vaha maitrI maitrI nahIM hai| isalie merI
samasta jIvoM ke prati mitratA hai| ataH mana, vacana aura kAyA se una para
maiMne apakAra kiyA ho, una sabhI ko maiM khamAtA hUM; yahI maitrI bhAvanA hai
/  / 118 /  /  aba pramoda-bhAvanA kA svarUpa kahate haiN||445|
apAstAzeSadoSANAM, vastutattvAvalokinAm  /  guNeSu pakSapAto yaH, sa pramodaH
prakIrtitaH  // 119 /  /  artha :- jinhoMne sabhI doSoM kA tyAga kiyA hai aura
jo vastu ke yathArtha svarUpa ko dekhate haiM, una sAdhupuruSoM ke guNoM ke
prati AdarabhAva honA, unakI prazaMsA karanA. 'pramoda bhAvanA' hai  /  / 119 /
/  vyAkhyA:- prANI-vadhAdi sabhI doSoM kA jinhoMne tyAgakara diyA hai aura
jinakA svabhAva padArtha ke yathArtha svarUpa ko jAnane kA hai| isa prakAra
yahAM donoM vizeSatAoM se jJAna aura kriyA donoM ke saMyukta rUpa se mokSahetu
hone kA kathana kiyA hai| bhagavAn bhASyakAra ne kahA hai-nANa-kiriyAhiM mokkho
arthAt jJAna aura kriyA donoM se mokSa hotA hai| isa prakAra ke guNavAn muniyoM
ke kSayopazamikAdi Atmika guNa tathA zama, iMdriyoM kA damana, aucitya,
gAMbhIrya, dhairyAdi guNoM ke prati anurAga karanA, guNoM kA pakSa lenA, unake
prati vinaya, vaMdana, stuti, guNAnuvAda, vaiyAvRtya Adi krnaa| isa taraha
svayaM aura dUsaroM ke dvArA kI huI pUjA se utpanna, sabhI iMdriyoM se prakaTa
hone vAlA mana kA ullAsa, pramoda-bhAvanA hai  /  / 119 /  /  aba kAruNyabhAvanA
kA svarUpa kahate haiN|446| dIneSvArteSu bhIteSu, yAcamAneSu jIvitam  /
pratikAraparA buddhiH, kAruNyamabhidhIyate  // 120 //  artha :- dIna, pIr3ita,
bhayabhIta aura jIvana kI yAcanA karane vAle prANiyoM ke duHkha ko dUra karane
kI buddhi 'karuNA-bhAvanA' kahalAtI hai  /  / 120 /  /  vyAkhyA :- mati-zruta-
ajJAna evaM vibhaMgajJAna ke bala se hiMsApradhAna zAstroM kI racanA karake jo
svayaM saMsAra meM DUbate haiM aura apane anuyAyiyoM ko bhI DUbote haiM, ve
becAre dayA ke pAtra hone se dIna haiN| jo naye-naye viSayoM ko upArjana karate
haiM; pUrvopAjita viSayoM kI bhogatRSNA rUpI agni meM jalane se duHkhI hai; jo
hita kI prApti aura ahita kA tyAga karane ke bajAya ulaTA AcaraNa karate haiM;
pahale dhanopArjana karate haiM, phira usakI rakSA karate haiM, phira use bhoga
meM kharca karate haiM athavA dhananAza ho jAne para pIr3ita yA duHkhI hote
haiN| isa prakAra jo vividha duHkhoM se pIr3ita hai athavA jo sabase bhayabhIta
rahane vAle anAtha, raMka, bAlaka, bUr3he, sevaka Adi haiM, vairiyoM se
parAjita, roga se grasta athavA mRtyumukha meM pahuMce hue jo jIne kI prArthanA
aura prANoM kI yAcanA karate hue prANa-rakSA cAhate haiN| isa prakAra ke dInAdi,
jinhoMne kuzAstra kI racanA kI hai, ve becAre asatyadharma kI sthApanA karake
kisa taraha duHkha se vimukta ho sakate haiM? bhagavAn mahAvIra ko marIci ke
bhava meM unmArga kA upadeza dene se koTAkoTI sAgaropama kAla taka bhavabhramaNa
karanA par3A, to phira apane pApoM kI pratikArazakti se rahita dUsaroM kI kyA
gati hogI? viSayoM ko utpanna karane, unakA upabhoga karane, unameM 389

Page #412 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Where and who should meditate? What should the posture be?  From the fourth
light of Yoga Shastra, verses 121 to 123: How can those souls who are attached
to the world and whose minds are not satisfied with the subjects experienced in
countless births, be satisfied with the nectar of peace and attain the state of
being free from attachment? How can those who are afraid of various fears, such
as children, old people, etc., be made completely free from fear? And how can
the nectar of the words of the great Lord Jinendra, who is free from all fear,
be sprinkled on those beings who are facing death and are experiencing the pain
of separation from their wealth, friends, wife, children, etc., and who are
experiencing the pain of death? And how can they be made to attain a state of
fearlessness from birth, old age, death, etc.? To do such a mind that
counteracts suffering, to do direct counteraction, is not so; because the power
to counteraction is not in every person; therefore, the awakening of such a
counteraction mind is called compassion. If there is compassion for the
impossible counteraction, then "After freeing all beings from the world, I will
go to liberation"; saying this is not real compassion, but only a play of words.
It is impossible for all worldly beings to do so. And it is also impossible to
achieve liberation for oneself. One is the destruction of one's own world and
then the liberation of all worldly beings is impossible. Therefore, this is to
deceive the innocent. This is the compassion of the bound. Therefore, to give
advice to do the above compassion, to give food, water, shelter, clothing,
medicine, etc., according to the time and place, and to do good to the suffering
is also compassion. ||120||  Now the nature of the intermediate feeling is told
||447||.  Cruel deeds without hesitation, gods, gurus, and those who criticize,
those who are self-praising, indifference towards them is called intermediate
feeling. ||121|| Meaning: Indifference towards beings who do cruel deeds without
hesitation, who criticize gods and gurus, and who are self-praising is called
intermediate feeling. ||121|| Explanation: Those who eat inedible food, those
who drink alcohol, etc., those who engage in sexual intercourse with another's
wife, etc., those who commit cruel deeds such as killing a sage, killing a
child, killing a woman, killing a fetus, etc., and those who are not afraid of
sin are worthy of indifference. Many people, after committing sin many times,
have attained remorse and emotion; they are not worthy of indifference.
Therefore, it is said that those who follow the rituals according to the words
of the great Tirthankaras who have thirty-four perfections, and those who give
advice, and who criticize the guru Maharaj due to attachment, hatred, or
ignorance, or due to being misled by someone else; even if they have such
faults, if they have attained the state of detachment and see their faults; they
are not worthy of indifference. Therefore, it is said that those who are faulty,
who praise their own soul - who consider their own soul to be good, and just as
the mudga-shaila stone cannot be melted even by the pushkaravarta cloud, so
those who commit cruel deeds, who criticize gods and gurus, and who praise
themselves are impossible to bring to the right path by giving advice,
therefore, indifference towards them is called intermediate feeling. ||121||
The same is discussed which was said that four feelings help in religious
meditation. ||448|| The great wise yogi, by meditating on his own soul with the
four feelings, reconnects the broken chain of pure meditation. ||122|| Meaning:
The great wise yogi, by meditating on his own soul with the four feelings,
reconnects the broken chain of pure meditation. ||122|| The type of place needed
for meditation is told. ||449|| The yogi who has mastered the postures should go
to the birthplace, initiation, liberation, or nirvana land of the Tirthankaras
for the perfection of meditation. If it is not possible to go there, then he
should take refuge in a secluded place. ||123|| Meaning: One should meditate in
the birthplace, initiation, perfect knowledge, and nirvana land of the great
Tirthankara. ||123|| Explanation: One should meditate in the birthplace,
initiation, perfect knowledge, and nirvana land of the great Tirthankara.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dhyAna kahA~ aura kauna kare? Asana kesA ho? yogazAstra caturtha prakAza zloka
121 se 123 hI dattacitta rahane aura anaMtabhavoM meM anubhUta viSayoM meM aba
taka atRpta mana vAle una bhavAbhinaMdI AtmAoM ko prazamAmRta se tRpti hokara
vItarAgadazA kaise prApta ho sakatI hai? bAla-vRddhAdi, jina kA citta
vividhabhaya ke kAraNa bhayabhIta banA huA hai, unheM bhaya se ekAMtika
AtyaMtika mukta kaise banAyA jA sakatA hai? tathA mRtyumukha prApta tathA apane
dhana, mitra, strIputrAdi ke viyoga ko sammukha dekhate hue evaM maraNAMtika
kaSTAnubhava karate hue jIvoM para sakalabhayarahita zrI jinezvaraprabhu ke
vacanAmRtoM ko kaise chir3akA jAya? aura kaise unheM janma-jarA-mRtyu Adi se
nirbhayasthAna prApta karAyA jAya? isa prakAra duHkha kA pratikAra karane vAlI
buddhi karanI, sAkSAt pratIkAra karanA aisA nahIM; kyoMki pratIkAra karane kI
zakti pratyeka vyakti meM nahIM hotI; isa kAraNa yahAM vaisI pratIkArabuddhi kA
jAganA hI karuNAbhAvanA batAyI hai| _yadi azakyapratIkAra kI karuNA buddhi ho,
taba to 'sabhI jIvoM ko saMsAra se mukta karane ke bAda maiM mokSa meM jAUMgA;'
isa prakAra kahanA vAstavika karuNA nahIM, apitu kevala vANIvilAsa hai| samasta
saMsArI jIvoM ke lie aisA honA azakya hai| tathA apane liye mukti meM pahuMcane
kA kArya bhI asaMbhava hai| eka to svayaM ke saMsAra kA uccheda honA aura phira
samasta |saMsArI jIvoM ko mukti prAsa honA asaMbhava hai| isalie yaha to bhole
logoM ko ThaganA hai| yaha baddha kI karuNA hai| ataH uparyukta karuNA karane
hetu hitopadeza denA, dezakAla kI apekSA se anna, jala, Azraya, vastra, auSadha
Adi dekara duHkhitoM para upakAra karanA bhI karuNAbhAvanA hai  /  / 120 /  /
aba mAdhyastha-bhAvanA kA svarUpa kahate haiN||447| krUrakarmasu niHzaGka,
devatA-guru-nindiSu  /  AtmazaMsiSu yopekSA, tanmAdhyasthyamudIritam  // 121 /
/  artha :- niHzaMkatA se krUra kArya karane vAle, deva-guru kI niMdA karane
vAle aura AtmaprazaMsA karane vAle jIvoM para upekSA rakhanA mAdhyasthyabhAvanA
hai  // 121 /  /  vyAkhyA :- abhakSya padArthoM kA bhakSaNa karane vAle, madirA
Adi kA pAna karane vAle, parastrI sevana Adi karane vAle, RSihatyA, bAla-hatyA,
strIhatyA, garbhahatyA Adi krUrakarma karane vAle aura pApa se bhaya nahIM khAne
vAle upekSA ke yogya hai| kaI vyakti kitanI hI daphA pApa karane ke bAda
pazcAttApa karake saMvega prApta hai; ve upekSA karane ke yogya nahIM hai|
isalie kahA hai ki cautIsa atizaya vAle zrI vItarAga deva tathA unake kahe
anusAra anuSThAnoM kA pAlana karane vAle aura upadeza dene vAle guru mahArAja kI
rAga, dveSa yA ajJAna ke vaza athavA pahale kisI ke bahakAne se niMdA karane
vAle; isa prakAra ke doSa hone para bhI kisI prakAra se vairAgyadazA prApta kara
apane doSa dekhane vAle hoM; ve upekSA karane yogya nahIM hai| isalie kahA hai
ki sadoSa, apanI AtmA kI prazaMsA karane vAle-apanI AtmA ko acchI mAnane vAle
tathA jaise mudgazailika patthara ko puSkarAvarta megha bhI pighalA nahIM
sakatA, vaise krUra karma karane vAle, devaguru kI niMdA karane vAle aura apanI
AtmaprazaMsA karane vAle ko upadeza dekara sanmArga meM lAnA azakya hai, isalie
usake prati upekSA rakhanA mAdhyasthyabhAvanA hai  // 121 /  /  jo yaha kahA
gayA thA ki cAra bhAvanAe~ dharmadhyAna ko madada dene vAlI hai, usI kA vivecana
karate haiN|448| AtmAnaM bhAvayannAbhirbhAvanAbhirmahAmatiH  /  truTitAmapi
sandhatte, vizuddhadhyAnasantatim  // 122 /  /  artha :- maitrI Adi cAra
bhAvanAoM se apanI AtmA ko bhAvita karane vAlA mahAbuddhizAlI yogI TUTI huI
vizuddha dhyAna-zreNI ko phira se jor3a letA hai  // 122 /  /  dhyAna karane ke
lie kisa prakAra ke sthAna kI jarUrata hai, use kahate haiN||449| tIrthaM vA
svasthatAhetu, yattad vAM dhyAnasiddhaye  /  kRtAsanajayo yogI, viviktaM
sthAnamAzrayet  /  / 123 /  /  artha :- AsanoM kA abhyAsa kara lene vAlA yogI
dhyAna kI siddhi ke lie tIrthaMkaroM kI janma, dIkSA, kaivalya athavA
nirvANabhUmi meM jaaye| yadi vahAM jAne kI suvidhA na ho to kisI ekAMta-sthAna
kA Azraya le||123|| vyAkhyA :- zrI tIrthakara bhagavAn kI janma, dIkSA,
kevalajJAna evaM nirvANakalyANaka-bhUmi meM dhyAna karanA cAhie, 390

Page #413 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Various Asanas and Their Characteristics  **Yoga Shastra, Fourth Light,
Verses 123-128**  In the absence of a suitable place, one should choose a place
like a cave in a mountain, or a place suitable for meditation, free from women,
animals, and eunuchs, for peace of mind. It is also said, "Sadhus should always
take refuge in a secluded place, free from the company of young women, eunuchs,
cunning people, etc., and especially during meditation, such a place should be
chosen."   For those who have stabilized their yoga and whose mind is steady in
meditation, there is no difference between a village inhabited by ascetics or a
desolate forest. Therefore, the meditator should meditate in a place where there
is samadhi in the mind, concentration of the yoga of mind, speech, and body, and
which is free from the disturbance of ghosts and beings.  The word "place" here
also refers to time by implication. It is said that the time when the highest
yoga-samadhi is attained is the best time for meditation. There is no fixed time
of day or night for the meditator.   The conclusion is that for the attainment
of meditation, the yogi who practices specific asanas should take refuge in a
secluded, peaceful, and solitary place. What kind of yogi is he? His
characteristics will be described later. || 123 ||  **Now the instructions for
the asanas are given:**  || 450. Paryanka - Vira - Vajrabja - Bhadra -
Dandasanani cha. Utkathika - Godohika - Kayotsargastathaasanam || 124 ||
**Meaning:** 1. Paryankasana, 2. Virasana, 3. Vajrasana, 4. Padmasana, 5.
Bhadrasana, 6. Dandasana, 7. Utkatikasana, 8. Godohikasana, 9. Kayotsargasana,
etc. are the names of the asanas. || 124 ||  **Now the nature of each asana is
described in order:**  || 451. Syajjanghayordhobhaage, padopari krte sati.
Paryanko nabhigottaan - dakshinoत्तर - paanikaha || 125 ||  **Meaning:** When
the lower part of both thighs is placed on the feet, and the right and left
hands are placed above the navel, facing south and north respectively, it is
called 'Paryankasana'. || 125 ||  **Meaning:**  The eternal Jina-images and Sri
Mahavira Bhagwan were in this Paryankasana at the time of their Nirvana.
Patanjali has described the state of falling asleep with the arms stretched out
as Paryankasana. || 125 ||  **Now the nature of Virasana is described:**  ||
452. Vamo'hrirdakshinoorudva - vamorupari dakshinaha. Kriyate yatra
tadvirochitam virasanam smritam || 126 ||  **Meaning:** The asana in which the
left foot is placed on the right thigh and the right foot on the left thigh is
called Virasana, the asana suitable for heroes. || 126 ||  This asana is
suitable for Tirthankaras and other heroic men, not for cowards. Some people
also call Virasana Padmasana, describing it as a similar posture with both hands
placed forward. Placing one foot on one thigh is called Ardhapadmasana. || 126
||  **Now the characteristics of Vajrasana are described:**  **Meaning:**  ||
453. Prushte vajraakritibhute dorbhyam virasane sati. Grihniyat
padayoryatraangusthau vajrasanam tu tat || 127 ||  After performing the
previously mentioned Virasana, when both hands are placed behind, forming a
diamond shape, and the thumbs of both feet are grasped with both hands, the
posture that is formed is called Vajrasana. || 127 ||  Many Acharyas also call
it Vaitalasana. According to another opinion, the characteristics of Virasana
are described:  || 454. Simhasanaadhirudhasyasanaapanayena sati.
Tathaivaavasthitiryataamanye virasanam viduh || 128 ||  **Meaning:**  If a man
is sitting on a throne with his feet on the ground, and the throne is removed
from behind, the posture that is formed is called 'Virasana'. The Siddhantakars
have described this asana in the context of Kayakleshatapa. || 128 ||  1. Those
who talk about meditation collectively should think about this. How can
meditation happen in a group? 391

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 vividha Asana aura unake lakSaNa yogazAstra caturtha prakAza zloka 123 se 128 |
aise sthAna ke abhAva meM mana kI zAMti ke lie parvata kI guphA Adi yA dhyAna
karane yogya strI-pazu-napuMsaka rahita sthAna | pasaMda karanA caahie| kahA bhI
hai ki 'sAdhuoM ko hameMzA yuvati, napuMsaka, kuzIla manuSya Adi ke saMsarga se
rahita ekAMta | sthAna kA Azraya lenA cAhie aura vizeSa rUpa se dhyAnakAla meM
to aisA hI sthAna cunanA caahie| 1 jinhoMne apanA yoga | sthira kara liyA ho
aura jinakA mana dhyAna meM nizcala hai aise muniyoM ke lie vasati vAle gAMva
meM yA zUnya araNya meM koI aMtara nahIM hai| isalie dhyAnakartA ko aise sthAna
meM dhyAna karanA cAhie; jahAM citta meM samAdhi rahe, mana, vacana aura kAyA ke
yoga kI ekAgratA rahe tathA jo sthAna bhUtoM aura jIvoM ke upadrava se rahita
ho|' 'sthAna' zabda se yahAM upalakSaNa se kAla bhI jAnanA  /  kahA hai ki jisa
kAla meM uttama yoga-samAdhi prApta hotI ho, vaha kAla dhyAna ke lie | uttama
hai| dhyAna karane vAle ke lie dina yA rAtri kA koI niyamita kAla nahIM mAnA
gayA hai| niSkarSa yaha hai ki dhyAna | kI siddhi ke lie viziSTa AsanoM kA
abhyAsI yogI yogya vivikta, zAMta va ekAMta sthAna kA Azraya le  /  yogI kisa
prakAra kA hotA hai? isakA lakSaNa Age batAyeMge  /  /  123  /  /  aba AsanoM kA
nirdeza karate haiM ||450 /  paryaGka - vIra-vajrAbja - bhadra - daNDAsanAni ca
/  utkaTikA - godohikA - kaayotsrgstthaa''snm|| 124 //  artha :- 1.
paryaMkAsana, 2. vIrAsana, 3. vajrAsana, 4. padmAsana, 5. bhadrAsana, 6.
daMDAsana, 7. utkaTikAsana, 8. godohikAsana, 9. kAyotsargAsana Adi AsanoM ke
nAma haiM  /  /  124  /  /  aba kramazaH pratyeka Asana kA svarUpa kahate haiM
/ 451 /  syAjjaGghayoradhobhAge, pAdopari kRte sati  /  paryaGko nAbhigottAna -
dakSiNottara - pANikaH  // 125 //  donoM jaMghAoM ke nIcale bhAga pairoM ke
Upara rakhane para dAhinA aura bAMyA hAtha nAbhi ke pAsa Upara dakSiNa aura
uttara meM rakhane se 'paryaGkAsana' hotA hai  /  /  125  /  /  artha : zAzvata
jina - pratimAoM kA aura zrI mahAvIra bhagavAn ke nirvANa - samaya meM isI
prakAra paryaMkAsana thaa| pataMjali ne aura hAtha laMbe karake so jAne kI
sthiti ko paryakAsana batAyA hai  /  /  125  /  /  jAnu aba vIrAsana kA svarUpa
kahate haiM  / 452 /  vAmoM'hrirdakSiNorUrdhva - vAmorUpari dakSiNaH  /  kriyate
yatra tadvIrocitaM vIrAsanaM smRtam  //  126  //  artha :- bAMyA paira dAhinI
jAMgha para aura dAhinA paira bAMyI jAMgha para jisa Asana meM rakhA jAtA hai,
vaha vIrocita Asana, vIrAsana kahalAtA hai  /  /  126  /  /  yaha Asana
tIrthaMkara Adi vIrapuruSoM ke lie upayukta hai, kAyaroM ke lie yaha Asana nahIM
hai| kucha loga vIrAsana | ko paryakAsana ke samAna do hAtha Age sthApana karane
kI sthiti-sA batAkara padmAsana bhI kahate haiN| eka jAMgha para eka paira rakhA
jAya use ardhapadmAsana kahate haiM  /  /  126  /  /  aba vajrAsana kA lakSaNa
kahate haiM artha :  /  453 /  pRSThe vajrAkRtIbhUte dorbhyAM vIrAsane sati  /
gRhNIyAt pAdayoryatrAGguSThau vajrAsanaM tu tt||127|| pUrva kathita vIrAsana
karane ke bAda vajra kI AkRti ke samAna donoM hAtha pIche rakhakara, donoM
hAthoM se paira ke aMgUThe pakar3ane para jo AkRti banatI hai; vaha vajrAsana
kahalAtA hai  /  /  127  /  /  kitane hI AcArya ise vaitAlAsana bhI kahate haiN|
matAMtara se vIrAsana kA lakSaNa kahate haiN|454|
siMhAsanAdhirUDhasyAsanApanayena sati  /  tathaivAvasthitiryA tAmanye vIrAsanaM
viduH  //  128 //  artha : koI puruSa jamIna para paira rakhakara siMhAsana para
baiThA ho aura pIche se usakA siMhAsana haTA diyA jAye; usase usakI jo AkRti
banatI hai, vaha 'vIrAsana' hai| siddhAMtakAroM ne kAyaklezatapa ke prasaMga meM
isa Asana ko batAyA hai  /  /  128  /  /  1. jo loga sAmUhika rUpa se dhyAna kI
bAta karate haiM, ve isa para soceN| samUha meM dhyAna kaise ho sakatA hai ? 391

Page #414 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Description of Various Asanas  **Chapter 4, Light of Yoga, Verses 129-133**
Patanjali describes **Viraasana** as standing on one leg with the other leg bent
and the body upright. Now, the characteristics of **Padmaasana** are described.
455.  **Verse 129:** * **Meaning:** Experts in Asanas have named the posture
where one thigh is placed on top of the other thigh in the middle as
**Padmaasana**.  Now, **Bhadraasana** is described. 456.  **Verse 130:** *
**Meaning:** Bringing the soles of both feet together in the region of the
testicles (scrotum) and placing the fingers of both hands interlocked on top of
them is called **Bhadraasana**.  Patanjali describes the characteristics of
**Bhadraasana** as follows: bringing the soles of the feet together near the
testicles and placing the fingers of both hands interlocked on top of them.
Now, **Dandaasana** is described. 457.  **Verse 131:** * **Meaning:** Sitting
with the toes together, the ankles together, the thighs touching the ground, and
the legs extended is called **Dandaasana**.  Patanjali describes it as follows:
sitting on the ground with the toes together, the ankles together, the thighs
touching the ground, and the legs extended. One should practice this.  Now,
**Utkatakaasana** and **Godohikaasana** are described. 458.  **Verse 132:** *
**Meaning:** When both buttocks meet with the heels touching the ground, it is
**Utkatakaasana**. This is the posture in which Lord Mahavira attained Kevala
Jnana. It is said that on the tenth day of the bright fortnight of Vaisakha, in
the third watch of the day, during the sixth tapasya, under a Sal tree, on the
bank of the river Rijuvalika, outside the Jumbhika, the Veeraprabhu was in
**Utkatakaasana** when he attained Kevala Jnana. When the ground is left behind
by both heels from this posture, and the posture used while milking a cow, it is
called **Godohikaasana**.  The Muni who is like a statue (Pratima Kalpi Muni)
adopts this posture. Now, **Kayotsargaasana** is described. 459.  **Verse 133:**
* **Meaning:** Remaining still with both arms hanging down, standing or sitting
(and lying down in a state of physical weakness), abandoning attachment to the
body, is **Kayotsargaasana**.  **Explanation:** Remaining still with both arms
hanging down, standing, sitting, or lying down, abandoning attachment to the
body, is **Kayotsargaasana**. This is the posture of Jina Kalpi and Chhadmastha
Tirthankaras. They practice **Kayotsarga** while standing. The Sthavira Kalpi
practices **Kayotsarga** while standing, sitting, and, by implication, lying
down, as long as they can maintain their Samadhi. Thus, abandoning the body with
posture, meditation, and silence is called **Kayotsarga**.  The Asanas described
here are just a glimpse. There are many other Asanas. They are as follows:
remaining in a posture like the shape of a mango tree is **Amra Kubjaasana**.
For example, Lord Mahavira adopted such a posture for one night, at which time
the wicked Asura Sangamadeva...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 vividha AsanoM kA varNana yogazAstra caturtha prakAza zloka 129 se 133
pataMjali ne eka paira se khar3e rahakara dUsarA paira Ter3hA rakhakara adhara
khar3e rahane ko vIrAsana batAyA hai| aba padmAsana kA lakSaNa kahate haiN|455|
jaGghAyA madhyabhAge tu, saMzleSo yatra jaGghayA  /  padmAsanamiti proktaM,
tdaasn-vickssnnaiH||129|| artha :- AsanavizeSajJoM ne eka jAMgha ke sAtha dUsarI
jAMgha ko madhyabhAga meM milAkara rakhane ko padmAsana kahA hai||129|| aba
bhadrAsana kahate haiN|456| sampuTIkRtya muSkAgre, talapAdau tathopari  /
pANikacchapikAM kuryAd yatra bhadrAsanaM tu tat  // 130 //  artha :- donoM
pairoM se talabhAga vRSaNa-pradeza meM (aMDakoSoM kI jagaha) ekatra kara Usake
Upara donoM hAthoM kI aMgaliyA~ eka dUsarI aMgalI meM DAlakara rakhanA
'bhadrAsana' kahalAtA hai  // 130 /  /  pataMjali ne bhadrAsana kA lakSaNa isa
prakAra kahA hai-pairoM ke talabhAga ko vRSaNa ke samIpa meM saMpuTa rUpa
banAkara usake Upara donoM hAthoM kI aMguliyA~ paraspara eka dUsare meM rakhanA
/  / 130 /  /  aba daMDAsana kahate haiN||457| zliSTAGgulI zliSTagulphau,
bhUzliSTorU prasArayet  /  yatropavizya pAdau tad, dnnddaasnmudiiritm||131||
artha :- pairoM kI aMguliyoM sameTakara er3I ke Upara vAlI gAMTha (TakhanA)
ekatra karake nitaMba ko bhUmi se sparza karake baiThe; paira laMbe kare, use
daMDAsana kahA hai  /  / 131 /  /  /  pataMjali ne isa prakAra kahA hai ki
jamIna para baiThakara aMguliyoM ko milAkara, er3I bhI ekatra karake jaMghA
bhUmi se | sparza karAI jAye aura paira laMbe kiye jAye, vaha daMDAsana hotA
hai| usakA abhyAsa karanA cAhie  /  / 131 /  /  aba utkaTikAsana aura
godohikAsana kahate haiN||458| putapAOisamAyoge, prAharutkaTikAsanam  /
pANibhyAM tu bhuvastyAge, tatsyAd godohikAsanam  // 132 //  artha :- jamIna se
lagI huI er3iyoM ke sAtha jaba donoM nitaMba milate haiM, taba utkaTikAsana hotA
hai| isI Asana meM bhagavAn mahAvIra ko kevalajJAna utpanna huA thaa| kahA hai
ki 'jUMbhikA ke bAhara RjubAlikA nadI ke kinAre vaizAkha sudI dasamI ke dina
tIsare prahara chaTTha tapa meM zAlavRkSa ke nIce vIraprabhu utkaTikAsana meM
tha, usa samaya unheM kevalajJAna huA thaa|' usI Asana se baiThakara donoM
er3iyoM se jaba bhUmi kA tyAga kiyA jAtA hai aura gAya dUhane ke samaya jisa
Asana se baiThA jAtA hai, use godohikAsana kahate haiN||132|| pratimA kalpI muni
isI Asana ko dhAraNa karate haiN| aba kAyotsargAsana kahate haiN||459|
pralambitabhujadvandvamUrdhvasthasyAsitasya vA  /  sthAnaM kAyAnapekSaM yat,
kAyotsargaH sa kIrtitaH  // 133 /  /  | artha :- donoM bhujAoM ko nIce
laTakAkara khar3e hokara athavA baiThakara (aura zArIrika kamajorI kI avasthA
meM leTakara) zarIra kA mamatva tyAgakara sthira rahanA kAyotsargAsana hai  /  /
133 /  /  vyAkhyA :- khar3e, baiThe yA soye hue donoM hAtha laMbe karake kAyA se
nirapekSa hokara sthira rahanA kAyotsargAsana hai| jinakalpI aura chadmastha
tIrthaMkaroM ke yahI Asana hotA hai| ve khar3e-khar3e hI kAyotsarga karate haiN|
sthavirakalpI to khar3e aura baiThe tathA upalakSaNa se leTe-leTe bhI jisa
taraha samAdhi Tika sake, vaise yathAzakti kAyotsarga karate haiN| isa prakAra
se sthAna,dhyAna va maunakriyA ke sAtha kAyA kA tyAga kAyotsarga kahalAtA hai|
yahAM jo Asana batAye haiM ve to digdarzanamAtra hai| inake alAvA aura bhI aneka
Asana haiN| ve isa prakAra haiM-Amra kI AkRti ke samAna sthiti meM rahanA,
AmrakubjAsana hai| jaise bhagavAn mahAvIra ne eka rAta aisI pratimA dhAraNa kI
thI, usa samaya adhama asura saMgamadeva ne 392

Page #415 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Stability of Mind Remains Such an Asana  Yoga Shastra, Fourth Light, Verses
134-135 | Twenty prefixes were done on them. The Lord had borne them with
equanimity. And lying on one side, upward-facing, downward-facing or sideways-
facing is an asana. And lying down long like a staff, straightening the body and
both thighs and legs | It is to remain stable by lengthening or widening. And
Lagudshayitv is called that, in which the head and both ankles touch the ground,
but the body remains suspended from the ground and Samasansthan - in which the
part in front of the heel and the foot both | Bending and pressing against each
other and Duryodhasana is called that, in which the head is placed on the ground
and the feet are kept high, it is also called Kapalikaranasana. In the same way,
if you do Padmasana with two thighs, it is called Dandapadmasana. In which the
left foot is rotated and placed in the middle of the right thigh and the right
foot is rotated and placed in the middle of the left foot, | It is called
Swastikasana. What happens by the yoga of Yogapattak is Sopashrayasana. And
Kaunch - Nishadana, Hans - Nishadana, | Garuda - Nishadana etc. asanas are from
sitting in a position similar to the sitting position of those birds (those
shaped). Thus, the method of asana is not systematic. This means that the
methods of asana are of many kinds. || 133 || | 460. Jayate Yena Yeneha Vihiten
Sthiran Manah. Tattadeva Vidhatavyam, Asanam Dhyana-Sadhanam || 134 || Meaning:
- Whatever asana is used to make the mind steady, that asana should be used as a
means of meditation. In this, one should only do such an asana, there is no such
restriction. || 134 || Explanation: - Those who have calmed the sins, such
karma-free sages have attained the supreme knowledge of the self in all kinds of
countries, times and efforts. Therefore, the scriptures do not mention any rules
for countries, times and efforts, i.e., asanas. Just as there is samadhi in
yoga, one should try in the same way. | This statement of asanas, which has been
made, is not meaningless. Because for the image-makers, there is a provision for
doing asana according to the rules, and in the eighth image out of the twelve
bhikshu-images, the rule of asana is also mentioned. It is like this - lying
down with the face upwards or lying down by turning sideways or sitting or lying
down straight. While sleeping, sitting or standing in this way, the gods, humans
and animals should bear the severe afflictions with the mind and body without
moving, with stillness, the ninth | image in this way - there are seven days and
nights, in this, on the day of the parana of the fourth-part penance, one should
do Ayambil and stay outside the village etc., and do everything else like the
eighth, especially in this, there is so much that in this image, Utkat, i.e.,
only the thigh remains suspended in the middle on the basis of the head and
ankles, or Lagud, i.e., like a crooked stick, only the back is the basis, the
head and feet do not touch the ground in this way, or lying down with long legs
like a staff | etc. to bear the afflictions. The tenth image is like this - the
third, i.e., the tenth image is also the same as both of them, only in it there
is Goduhasana (like when a cow is milked, both feet are placed on the ground and
sit, in the same way) or | from Virasana, i.e., sitting on a throne, the feet
are placed on the ground and later the throne is removed, the shape that is
formed at that time, from that asana or sitting with the body curved like a
mango tree. In any of these asanas, this | image can be adopted. || 134. Asanas
can be means of meditation, this is now explained by two verses. | 461.
Sukhasanasamaseenah, Sushlistaadharapallavah. Nasagranyastadrigdvando,
Dantairdantanasansprusan || 135 || | | 462. Prasannavadanah Poorvaabhimukho
Va'pyudanmukhah. Apramattaha Susansthano, Dhyata Dhyanodyato Bhavet || 136 ||
Meaning: - Remain seated in Sukhasana, both his lips should be joined, both eyes
should be fixed on the tip of the nose, the teeth should not touch the teeth,
the face should be pleasant, the face should be towards the east or north,
without negligence 393

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 mana kI sthiratA rahe vaisA Asana yogazAstra caturtha prakAza zloka 134 se 135
| una para bIsa upasarga kiye the| unheM prabhu ne samatA se sahana kiye the  /
tathA eka tarapha soye rahanA, UrdhvamukhI, adhomukhI yA tiryagmukhI Asana hotA
hai| tathA daMDa ke samAna laMbA leTa jAnA, zarIra sIdhA karanA aura donoM
jaMghAe~ aura jAMgheM | laMbI karake yA caur3I karake sthira rahanA hotA hai|
tathA laguDazAyitva use kahate haiM, jisameM mastaka aura donoM er3iyA~ jamIna
ko sparza kare, kintu zarIra jamIna se adhara rahe aura samasaMsthAna - jisameM
eDI ke Age kA bhAga aura paira donoM | moDakara paraspara dabAnA aura
duryodhAsana use kahate haiM, jisameM bhUmi para mastaka rakhakara paira UMce
rakhanA hotA hai, ise kapAlIkaraNa Asana bhI kahate haiN| isI prakAra rahakara
yadi do jaMghAoM se padmAsana kare to daMDapadmAsana kahalAtA hai| jisameM bAMyA
paira ghumAkara dAhinI jaMghA ke bIca meM rakhA jAya aura dAhinA paira ghumAkara
bAMye paira ke bIca meM rakhA jAya, | use svastikAsana kahate haiN| yogapaTTaka
ke yoga se jo hotA hai vaha sopAzrayAsana hai| tathA kauMca - niSadana, haMsa-
niSadana, | garur3a-niSadana Adi Asana una pakSiyoM ke baiThane kI sthiti ke
samAna sthiti meM baiThane (aisI AkRti vAle) se hote haiN| isa prakAra Asana kI
vidhi vyavasthita nahIM hai| isakA artha hai Asana kI vidhiyA~ aneka prakAra kI
hai  /   /  133  /  /  | 460  /  jAyate yena yeneha vihitena sthiraM manaH  /
tattadeva vidhAtavyam, AsanaM dhyAna-sAdhanam  // 134|| artha :- jisa-jisa Asana
kA prayoga karane se mana sthira hotA ho, usa-usa Asana kA dhyAna ke sAdhana
rUpa meM prayoga karanA caahie| isameM aisA Asana hI karanA cAhie, aisA koI
pratibaMdha nahIM hai  /  /  134 || vyAkhyA :- mAMsa yA carbI vAle athavA
baliSTha manuSyoM ko jisa Asana ke karane se mana kI sthiratA rahe, vahI | Asana
karanA caahie| isalie kahA hai ki 'jinhoMne pApoM ko zAMta kara diyA, aise
karma-rahita muniyoM ne sabhI prakAra ke deza meM, kAla meM aura ceSTA meM
rahakara, uttama kevalajJAna prApta kiyA hai|' isalie zAstra meM deza, kAla aura
ceSTA arthAt AsanoM kA koI niyama nahIM batAyA hai| jisa taraha se yoga meM
samAdhi rahe, usI taraha kA prayatna karanA cAhie  /  | yaha kahakara AsanoM kA
jo kathana kiyA gayA hai, nirarthaka nahIM hai| kyoMki pratimA - kalpiyoM ke lie
niyama se Asana | karane kA vidhAna hai, tathA bAraha bhikSu - pratimAoM meM se
AThavIM pratimA meM bhI Asana kA niyama batAyA hai| vaha isa | prakAra - Urdhva
mukha rakhakara soye athavA pArzva phirAkara soye athavA sIdhA baiThe yA soye  /
isa prakAra sote, baiThate yA khar3e rahate deva, manuSya aura tiryaMca ke ghora
upasargoM ko mana aura zarIra se calAyamAna hue binA, nizcalatA se sahana kare,
nauvIM | pratimA meM isa prakAra - sAta ahorAtri hotI hai, isameM cautthabhakta
tapa ke pAraNe para AyaMbila kare aura gAMva Adi ke bAhara rahe, ityAdi aura
saba AThavIM ke samAna kare, vizeSatA isameM itanI hai ki isa pratimA meM utkaTa
arthAt mastaka aura er3iyoM ke AdhAra para kevala bIca meM jaMghA se adhara
rahakara athavA laguDa arthAt Ter3hI lakar3I ke samAna kevala pITha ke AdhAra
para mastaka aura paira jamIna ko sparza na kare isa taraha athavA daMDa ke
samAna paira laMbe kara soye hue upasarga | Adi sahana krnaa| dasavIM pratimA
meM isa taraha hai - tIsarI arthAt dasavIM pratimA bhI una donoM ke samAna hI
hai, kevala usameM goduhAsana (gAya dUhane ke samaya jaise donoM paira kI
aMguliyA~ jamIna para TikAkara baiThate haiM, usI taraha) hai athavA | vIrAsana
se arthAt siMhAsana para baiThe hoM, paira jamIna rakhe hoM aura bAda meM
siMhAsana haTA diyA ho, usa samaya jo AkRti banatI hai, usa Asana se athavA Amra
ke samAna zarIra se vakra hokara baiThanA hotA hai| isameM se kisI bhI Asana meM
yaha | pratimA dhAraNa kI jA sakatI hai  /  /  134  /  Asana dhyAna ke sAdhana
ho sakate haiM, ise aba do zlokoM dvArA batAte haiM  / 461 /
sukhAsanasamAsInaH, suzliSTAdharapallavaH  /  nAsAgranyastadRgdvandvo,
dantairdantAnasaMspRzan  // 135 //  | | 462  /  prasannavadanaH pUrvAbhimukho
vA'pyudaGmukhaH  /  apramattaH susaMsthAno, dhyAtA dhyAnodyato bhavet  //  136
//  artha :sukhAsana se sthita rahe, usake donoM oSTha mile hue hoM, donoM
netra, nAka ke agrabhAga para sthira ho, dAMtoM ke sAtha dAMtoM kA sparza na ho,
mukhamaMDala prasanna ho, pUrva yA uttara dizA meM mukha ho, pramAda 393

Page #416 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Meditation-worthy Asanas, their Method and Utility  From the fourth light of
Yoga Shastra, verses 135 and 136, the meditator should strive to meditate with
the spine straight. ||135-136|| Explanation: The meditator should sit in such a
Sukhasana (comfortable posture) that Samadhi (meditation) is not disturbed even
after sitting for a long time; both lips should be kept together, both eyes
should be fixed on the tip of the nose; the teeth should be kept in such a way
that the lower teeth do not touch the upper teeth, free from Rajoguna (passion)
and Tamoguna (inertia), keep the face cheerful without blinking. Sit facing east
or north, or in front of the image of the Lord, without being distracted. By
saying 'Aparamatta' (undistracted), the main authority of meditation is being
pointed out here. It is also said that - 'Aparamatta' and 'Samyata' (controlled)
have Dharma-Dhyana (meditation on Dharma). The meditator should strive to
meditate with the body straight or as steady as the spine. Thus, the three
jewels of knowledge, vision, and conduct, which are the means of achieving
meditation for the virtuous and the lay devotees, have been stated. The other
aspects of meditation, such as its divisions, are explained in the eighth light.
||135-136|| || Thus, the fourth light of the Pattabaddha (bound) Upanishad named
Adhyatmo Upanishad, composed by Acharya Shri Hemchandracharya Suri Shwar, with
its own explanation, is complete, due to the curiosity of the king, Paramartha
Shri Kumarapal.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dhyAna ke yogya Asana, unakI vidhi evaM upayogitA yogazAstra caturtha prakAza
zloka 135 se 136 se rahita ho, isa prakAra merudaMDa ko sIdhA rakhakara dhyAtA
ko dhyAna ke lie udyata honA caahie||135-136|| vyAkhyA :- jisa Asana se laMbe
samaya taka baiThane para bhI samAdhi vicalita na ho; isa taraha ke sukhAsana se
dhyAtA ko baiThanA cAhie, donoM oTha milAkara rakhe, nAsikA ke agrabhAga para
donoM AMkheM TikA de; dAMta isa prakAra rakhe ki Upara ke dAMtoM ke sAtha nIce
ke dAMtoM kA sparza na ho, rajoguNa aura tamoguNa se rahita ho, palaka jhapakAe
binA ceharA prasanna rkhe| pUrva yA uttara dizA meM mukha rakhakara athavA
prabhupratimA ke sanmukha apramatta hokara baitthe| 'apramatta' kahakara yahAM
dhyAna kA mukhya adhikArI batalA rahe haiN| kahA bhI hai ki-apramattasaMyata kA
dharmadhyAna hotA hai| zarIra ko sIdhA athavA merudaMDa ke samAna nizcala
banAkara dhyAtA ko dhyAna karane ke lie udyama karanA caahie| isa prakAra sAdhu
aura zrAvaka-viSayaka dhyAnasiddhi ke sAdhanabhUta jJAna-darzana-cAritra rUpa
ratnatraya kA kathana kiyA hai, dUsare samagra dhyAna ke bheda Adi Age aSTama
prakAza meM batalAye haiM  /  / 135-136 /  /   //  isa prakAra paramArhat
zrIkumArapAla rAjA kI jijJAsA se AcAryazrI hemacaMdrAcAryasUrIzvara-racita
adhyAtmopaniSad nAmaka paTTabaddha aparanAma yogazAma kA svopajJavivaraNasahita
caturtha prakAza saMpUrNa huaa|

Page #417 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 5. The Fifth Light  **The Nature of Pranayama** -  Salutations to the
omniscient Supreme Soul, Lord Jinendra.  Patanjali and other yoga masters have
considered Yama, Niyama, Asana, Pranayama, Pratyahara, Dharana, Dhyana, and
Samadhi as the eight limbs of yoga, which are the limbs of liberation. However,
Jain thinkers have not accepted Pranayama as a true means of liberation, as it
leads to non-meditation without practice. It is said, "Even one who is attached
cannot stop breathing, then how can one who is striving for something else stop
breathing?" (Without the practice of Hatha Yoga, one cannot stop breathing).
Otherwise, immediate death is possible. Even subtle breathing should be known
with effort according to the scriptures. Nevertheless, Pranayama is useful for
the health of the body and for the knowledge of time. Therefore, it is described
here.  **463.**  *Pranayamastatah kaischit, aashrito dhyanasiddhaye | Shakya
netartha karthum, manah-pavan-nirjayah ||1||*  **Meaning:** After perfecting the
posture, Patanjali and other yoga masters have taken recourse to Pranayama for
the perfection of meditation. The air that circulates inside the mouth and nose
is called 'Pran', and the control of its circulation is 'Pranayama'. Without
Pranayama, the mind and the wind cannot be conquered.  **Here, the question
arises, "Pranayama can conquer the wind, but how can it conquer the mind?" The
answer is:**  **464.** *Mano yatra marut tatra, marud yatra manastatah |
Astatulya-kriyavaite, samvitau ksheeraneeravat ||2||*  **Meaning:** Where the
mind is, there is the wind, and where the wind is, there is the mind. Therefore,
the mind and the wind, with their similar actions, are intertwined like milk and
water.  **The similar action of both is explained:**  **465.** *Ekasya nashe
anyasya syannaasho vruttau cha vartanam | Dhvastayorindriyamati-
dhvamsanmokshascha jayate ||3||*  **Meaning:** If one of these two, the mind or
the wind, is destroyed, the other is also destroyed, and if one is active, the
other is also active. When both are destroyed, the activity of the senses and
intellect is destroyed, and from the destruction of the senses and intellect,
liberation arises.  **Now, the characteristics of Pranayama and its divisions
are explained:**  **466.** *Pranayamao gati-chhedah, shwasaprashwasayormatah |
Rechakah purakaschaiva, kumbhakascheti sa tridha ||4||*  **Meaning:** Inhaling
the external air is called 'shwas'. Exhaling the air that remains in the abdomen
is called 'nishwas' or 'prashwas', and stopping the movement of both is called
'Pranayama'. It is of three types: Rechaka, Puraka, and Kumbhaka.  **According
to other masters, there are seven divisions of Pranayama, which are explained:**
**467.** *Pratyaharastatha shanta, uttarashchadhara tatha |
Ebhirbhedhaischaturbhistu, saptadha kirtyate parai ||5||*  **Meaning:** Along
with the aforementioned three, there are four more divisions: Pratyahara,
Shanta, Uttara, and Adhara. Combining these four with the previous three,
Pranayama becomes seven types, according to other masters.  **Now, the
characteristics of each are explained:**  **468.** *Yat kosthadatyanena,
nasabrahma-purananai | Bahih prakshepanam vaioh, sa rechak iti smruta ||6||*

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 5. paMcama prakAza prANAyAma kA svarUpa - OM sarvajJa paramAtmA zrI jinendra
bhagavAn ko namaskAra ho| pataMjali Adi anyamata ke yogAcAryoM ne yoga ke yama,
niyama, Asana, prANAyAma, pratyAhAra, dhAraNA, dhyAna aura samAdhi; ye ATha aMga
mokSa ke aMga rUpa mAne haiM; paraMtu jainadarzanakAroM ne prANAyAma ko mukti ke
vAstavika sAdhana rUpa dhyAna meM svIkAra nahIM kiyA hai| kyoMki abhyAsa ke binA
vaha asamAdhi paidA karatA hai| kahA bhI hai ki 'abhigraha karane vAlA bhI
zvAsocchvAsa roka nahIM sakatA; to phira dUsarI ceSTA karane vAlA zvAsocchvAsa
kaise roka sakatA hai? (haThayoga ke abhyAsa ke binA vaha nahIM roka sakatA hai)
anyathA tatkAla mRtyu ho jAnA saMbhava hai| sUkSma ucchvAsa bhI zAstravidhi ke
anusAra yatanApUrvaka jAnanA caahie| phira bhI prANAyAma kI upayogitA zarIra kI
nirogatA aura kAlajJAna ke lie hai| isa kAraNa yahAM usakA varNana kiyA jAtA
hai|463| prANAyAmastataH kaizcid, Azrito dhyAnasiddhaye  /  zakyo netarathA
kartuM, manaH-pavana-nirjayaH  // 1 //  artha :- Asana ko siddha karane ke bAda
dhyAna kI siddhi ke lie pataMjali Adi yogAcAryoM ne prANAyAma kA Azraya liyA
hai| mukha aura nAsikA ke aMdara saMcAra karane vAlA vAyu 'prANa' kahalAtA hai,
usake saMcAra kA nirodha karanA 'prANAyAma' hai| prANAyAma ke binA mana aura
pavana jItA nahIM jA sktaa||1|| yahAM prazna karate haiM ki 'prANAyAma se pavana
para vijaya prApta kara sakate haiM, paraMtu mana para vijaya kaise ho sakatA
hai? isakA samAdhAna karate haiM ki|464| mano yatra marut tatra, marud yatra
manastataH  /  atastulyakriyAvaitau, saMvItau kSIranIravat  /  / 2 /  /  artha
:- jahAM mana hai, vahIM pavana hai aura jahAM pavana hai, vahAM mana hai| isa
kAraNa samAna kriyA vAle mana aura pavana, dUdha aura jala kI bhAMti Apasa meM
mile hue haiM  /  / 2 /  /  donoM kI samAna kriyA samajhAte haiN|465| ekasya
nAze'nyasya syAnnAzo vRttau ca vartanam  /
dhvastayorindriyamatidhvaMsAnmokSazca jAyate  // 3 //  artha :- mana aura pavana
ina donoM meM se kisI eka kA nAza hone para dUsare kA nAza ho jAtA hai aura eka
kI pravRtti hone para dUsare kI pravRtti hotI hai| jaba ina donoM kA vinAza hotA
hai, taba iMdriya aura buddhi ke vyApAra kA nAza hotA hai aura iMdriya aura
buddhi ke nAza se mokSa hotA hai  // 3 //  aba prANAyAma ke lakSaNa aura usake
bheda batAte haiN|466| prANAyAmo gaticchedaH, zvAsaprazvAsayormataH  /  recakaH
pUrakazcaiva, kumbhakazceti sa tridhA  // 4 //  artha :- bAhara kI vAyu ko
grahaNa karanA, zvAsa hai| udara ke koSTha meM rahe hue vAyu ko bAhara nikAlanA,
nizvAsa athavA prazvAsa kahalAtA hai tathA ina donoM kI gati ko rokanA,
prANAyAma hai| vaha recaka, pUraka aura kuMbhaka ke bheda se tIna prakAra kA hai
/  / 4 /  /  anya AcAryoM ke mata se isake sAta bheda haiM, use batAte haiN|467|
pratyAhArastathA zAMtaH, uttarazcAdharastathA  /  ebhirbhedaizcaturbhistu,
saptadhA kIrtyate paraiH  // 5 //  artha :- pUrvokta tIna ke sAtha meM
pratyAhAra, zAMta, uttara aura adhara yaha cAra bheda milAne se prANAyAma sAta
prakAra kA hotA hai; aisA anya AcArya mAnate haiM  /  / 5 /  /  aba kramazaH
pratyeka ke lakSaNa kahate haiN|468| yat koSThAdatiyatnena, nAsAbrahma-
purAnanaiH  /  bahiH prakSepaNaM vAyoH, sa recaka iti smRtaH  // 6 /  /  395

Page #418 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Nature of Pranayama and Other Techniques  **Yoga Shastra, Fifth Light,
Verses 6-13, Meaning:**  **Verse 6:** Exhaling air from the abdomen through the
nostrils, the Brahmarandhra (the opening at the top of the head), and the mouth
with great effort is called Rechaka Pranayama.  **Verse 7:** Drawing in external
air and filling the abdomen up to the Apana (anus) is called Puraka Pranayama.
Holding it steady like a Kumbha (pot) in the Nabhi Kamal (navel lotus) is called
Kumbhaka Pranayama.  **Verse 8:** Moving the air from the Nabhi (navel) and
other locations to the Hridaya (heart) and other locations, i.e., drawing the
air from one location to another is called Pratyahara. Holding the air with the
Taloo (palate), Nasika (nose), and Mukha (mouth) is called Shanta Pranayama. The
difference between Shanta and Kumbhaka is that in Kumbhaka, the air is held in
the Nabhi Kamal, while in Shanta Pranayama, there is no such rule, and the air
is held at the exit points like the Nasika, etc.  **Verse 9:** Drinking in
external air and drawing it upwards to the Hridaya (heart) and other locations
is called Uttara Pranayama. Conversely, drawing the air downwards from above is
called Adhara Pranayama.  **Explanation:** There is a doubt here: How can
Rechaka, etc., be Pranayama? Because Pranayama involves stopping the flow of
inhalation and exhalation. The answer is that in Rechaka, the air in the abdomen
is drawn up and held at the nostrils, not allowing it to enter. From this
perspective, it is called Pranayama because it is a form of stopping the flow of
inhalation and exhalation. Similarly, in Puraka, external air is slowly inhaled
and held in the abdomen. Here too, there is no stopping or taking of breath,
i.e., it is a form of Pranayama that stops the flow. The same applies to
Kumbhaka, etc.  **Verse 10:** Rechaka Pranayama destroys diseases of the abdomen
and Kapha (phlegm). Puraka Pranayama strengthens the body and destroys all
diseases.  **Verse 11:** Kumbhaka Pranayama immediately causes the Hridaya Padma
(heart lotus) to bloom and breaks the internal glands, increases strength, and
stabilizes the air.  **Verse 12:** Pratyahara Pranayama generates strength and
radiance in the body. Shanta Pranayama pacifies the three Doshas (Vata, Pitta,
Kapha) or Sannipat (fever). The practice of Uttara and Adhara Pranayama
stabilizes Kumbhaka.  **Verse 13:** Pran, Apana, Samana, Udana, and Vyan are the
five types of Pavan Vayu (air). Knowing the location, color, action, meaning,
and seed of each Pavan, the Yogi conquers them through Pranayama.
**Explanation:** 1. The process of inhalation and exhalation is Pran Vayu. 2.
Apana Vayu is responsible for expelling waste, urine, and the fetus. 3. Samana
Vayu is responsible for digesting food and water and distributing the resulting
Rasa (nutrients) to different parts of the body. 4. Udana Vayu carries Rasa and
other substances upwards. 5. Vyan Vayu spreads throughout the body.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prANAyAma Adi kA svarUpa yogazAstra paMcama prakAza zloka 6 se 13 artha :-
nAsikA aura brahmarandhra tathA mukha ke dvArA koSTha (udara) meM se atyaMta
prayatnapUrvaka vAyu bAhara nikAlanA, recaka prANAyAma kahalAtA hai  /  / 6 /  /
/ 469 /  samAkRSya yadApAnAt, pUraNaM sa tu pUrakaH  /  nAbhipadme sthirIkRtya,
rodhanaM sa tu kumbhakaH  /  / 7 /  /  /  artha :- bAhara ke vAyu ko khIMcakara
apAna (gudA) dvAra paryaMta koSTha meM bhara denA 'pUraka prANAyAma' hai aura
use nAbhikamala meM kuMbha ke samAna sthira karake rokanA 'kuMbhaka prANAyAma'
kahalAtA hai||7|| tthaa|470| sthAnAt sthAnAntarotkarSaH, pratyAhAraH prakIrtitaH
/  tAlunAsA''nanadvAraiH, nirodhaH zAnta ucyate  // 8 //  artha :- nAbhi Adi
sthAna se hRdaya Adi sthAna meM vAyu ko le jAnA; arthAt pavana ko khIMcakara eka
sthAna se dUsare sthAna para le jAnA 'pratyAhAra' kahalAtA hai| tAlu, nAsikA
aura mukha ke dvAroM se vAyu kA nirodha karanA 'zAMta' nAma kA prANAyAma hai|
zAMta aura kuMbhaka meM itanA aMtara hai ki kuMbhaka meM pavana nAbhikamala meM
rokA jAtA hai aura zAMtaprANAyAma meM aisA niyama nahIM hai, balki nAsikA Adi
nikalane ke dvAroM se isameM pavana rokA jAtA hai  /  / 8 /  /   / 471 /
ApIyordhva yadutkRSya hRdayAdiSu dhAraNam  /  uttaraH sa samAkhyAto,
viparItastato'dharaH  // 9 //  artha :- bAhara ke vAyu kA pAna karake aura use
Upara khIMcakara hRdaya Adi meM sthApita karanA, 'uttara-prANAyAma' kahalAtA
hai| isake viparIta vAyu upara se nIce kI ora le jAnA 'adhara-prANAyAma'
kahalAtA hai  /  / 9 /  /  vyAkhyA : - yahAM zaMkA karate haiM ki recaka Adi meM
prANAyAma kaise ho sakatA hai? kyoMki prANAyAma meM to zvAsaprazvAsa kI gati ko
rokanA hotA hai. isakA uttara dete haiM ki recaka meM udara ke vAyu ko
khIMcakara nAsikA ke dvAra para rokanA hotA hai; aMdara jAne nahIM diyA jaataa|
isa dRSTi se yaha zvAsa-prazvAsa kI gati viccheda rUpa prANAyAma kahalAtA | hai
tathA pUraka meM bAhara ke vAyu ko dhIre-dhIre grahaNa karake udara meM dhAraNa
karanA hotA hai| isameM bhI zvAsa-prazvAsa rokanA yA lenA nahIM hotA hai; arthAt
gati-viccheda rUpa prANAyAma hotA hai, isI taraha kuMbhaka Adi meM bhI jAna
lenA'  /  / 9 /  /  recaka Adi ke phala kahate haiN|472| recanAdudaravyAdheH,
kaphasya ca parikSayaH  /  puSTiH pUrakayogena, vyAdhighAtazca jAyate  // 10 //
/ 473 /  vikasatyAzu hRtpadmaM grnthirntrvibhidyte| balasthairyavivRddhizca,
kumbhakAd bhavati sphuTam  // 11 //   / 474 /  pratyAhArAd balaM kAntiH,
doSazAntizca zAntataH  /  uttarAdharasevAtaH, sthiratA kumbhakasya tu  /  / 12 /
/  artha :- recaka-prANAyAma se udara kI vyAdhi kA aura kapha kA vinAza hotA
hai| pUraka prANAyAma se zarIra puSTa hotA hai tathA sarvavyAdhiyoM naSTa hotI
hai| kuMbhaka prANAyAma karane se tatkAla hRdaya-kamala vikasita hota hai aura
aMdara kI graMthiyoM kA bhedana hotA hai, bala kI vRddhi hotI hai aura vAyu kI
sthiratA hotI hai| pratyAhAra-prANAyAma se zarIra meM zakti aura kAMti utpanna
hotI hai, zAMta nAmaka prANAyAma se vAta-pittakapha rUpa tridoSa yA sannipAta
(jvara) kI zAMti hotI hai, uttara aura adhara prANAyAma ke sevana se kuMbhaka kI
sthiratA hotI hai  /  / 10-12 /  /  ina prANAyAmoM se kevala prANa para vijaya
hotA hai, itanA hI nahIM hai, balki paMcavAyuoM para vijaya karane meM bhI | ye
kAraNabhUta hai| isI bAta ko kahate haiN|475| prANamapAna-samAnAvudAnaM
vyAnameva ca  /  prANAyAmairjayet sthAna-varNa-kriyA'rthabIjavit  // 13 //
artha :- prANa, apAna, samAna, udAna aura vyAna yaha pAMca prakAra kA pavana-
vAyu hai, pratyeka pavana kA sthAna, varNa, kriyA artha aura bIja ko jAnakara
yogI prANAyAma ke dvArA ina para vijaya prApta kare  /  / 13 /  /  vyAkhyA :- 1.
zvAsa-nizvAsa kA vyApAra prANavAyu hai, 2. malamUtra aura garbhAdi ko bAhara
lAne vAlA apAnavAyu hai, 3. bhojana-pAnI Adi ko paripakva kara usameM se utpanna
hue rasa ko zarIra ke bhinna-bhinna pradezoM meM pahuMcAne vAlA vAyu samAnavAyu
hai, 4. rasAdi ko Upara le jAne vAlA udAnavAyu hai aura 5. saMpUrNa zarIra meM
vyAsa rahane vAlA vyAnavAyu 396

Page #419 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Nature of Pranayama  The fifth chapter of Yoga Shastra, verses 14 to 20,
describe the location, color, action, meaning, and seed of the five vital airs.
By knowing these, yogis conquer them through practices like Rechaka (exhalation)
and other Pranayamas. ||13||  **Location, Color, and Conquering Pranavaayu**
||476|| Pranavaayu resides in the tip of the nose, the heart, the navel, and
extends to the big toe. Its color is green. It should be conquered through the
practice of Gamagama (exhalation and inhalation) and Dharana (concentration).
||14||  **Gamagama and Dharana**  ||477|| Gamagama is achieved by repeatedly
filling and emptying the air in the nasal cavity and other locations. Dharana is
achieved by holding the breath (Kumbhaka). ||15||  **Location, Color, and
Conquering Apana Vaayu**  ||478|| Apana Vaayu is black in color. It resides in
the nape of the neck, the back, the anus, and the heel. It should be conquered
by repeatedly exhaling and inhaling in these locations. ||16||  **Location,
Color, and Conquering Samana Vaayu**  ||479|| Samana Vaayu is white in color. It
resides in the heart, the navel, and all the joints. It should be conquered by
repeatedly exhaling, inhaling, and holding the breath in its respective
locations. ||17||  **Location, Color, and Conquering Udana Vaayu**  ||480||
Udana Vaayu is red in color. It resides in the heart, throat, palate, the middle
of the eyebrows, and the head. It should be controlled through the practice of
movement and stillness. ||18||  **Movement and Stillness**  ||481|| Udana Vaayu
should be drawn from the outside through the nose and placed in the heart and
other locations. If it moves to another location, it should be forcefully
restrained and held there repeatedly. This means holding the breath (Kumbhaka)
for a while and then exhaling. In other words, the air should be slowly exhaled
through one nostril, then inhaled through the same nostril and held. This will
subdue the air. ||19||  **Location, Color, and Conquering Vyanavaayu**  ||482||
Vyanavaayu is multi-colored like a rainbow. It resides in all parts of the skin.
It should be conquered through the practice of Kumbhaka, contraction, and
expansion (inhalation and exhalation). ||20||  **Seed Mantras for the Five
Vayus**  397

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prANAyAma kA svarUpa yogazAstra paMcama prakAza zloka 14 se 20 hai| ina pAMcoM
vAyu ke sthAna, varNa, kriyA, artha aura bIja ko jAnakara yogI recakAdi
prANAyAmoM se ina para vijaya prApta karate haiM  /  / 13 /  /  usase prANa ke
sthAnAdi kahate haiM  / 476 /  prANo nAsAgrahannAbhipAdAGguSThAntago harit  /
gamAgamaprayogeNa, tajjayo dhAraNena vA  //  14 //  artha :- prANavAyu nAsikA ke
agrabhAga meM, hRdaya meM, nAbhi meM aura paira ke aMgUThe taka phailA huA hai|
yaha usakA sthAna hai, unakA varNa harA hai, gamAgama ke prayoga arthAt recaka
aura pUraka ke prayoga se aura dhAraNA ke dvArA use jItanA cAhie ||14|| artha
aura bIja kA varNana bAda meM kareMge, aba gamAgama- prayoga aura dhAraNA ko
kahate haiM  / 477 /  nAsAdisthAnayogena pUraNAd recanAnmuhuH  /
gamAgamaprayogaH syAd dhAraNaM kumbhanAt punaH || 15 || artha nAsikA Adi sthAnoM
meM bAra-bAra vAyu kA pUraNa aura recana karane se gamAgama- prayoga hotA hai
aura usa vAyu kA avarodha - (kumbhaka) karane se dhAraNA nAma kA prayoga hotA
hai  /  /  15  /  /  apAnavAyu kA varNa sthAnAdi kahate haiM artha :  / 478 /
apAnaH kRSNarugmanyA-pRSThapRSThAntapANigaH  /  jeyaH svasthAnayogena recanAt
pUraNAnmuhuH ||16|| apAnavAyu kA varNa kAlA hai| gardana ke pIche kI nAr3I,
pITha, gudA aura er3I meM usakA sthAna hai, ina sthAnoM meM bAra-bAra recaka
aura pUraka karake ise jItanA cAhie  /  / 16 /  /  samAnavAyu ke varNAdi batAte
haiM , artha :  /  479  /  zuklaH samAno hannAbhisarvasandhiSvavasthitaH  /
jeyaH svasthAnayogenAsakRd recana - pUraNAt  // 17 //  samAnavAyu kA varNa zukla
hai| hRdaya, nAbhi aura sarvasaMdhiyo meM usakA nivAsa hai| apane-apane sthAnoM
meM bAra-bAra recaka aura pUraka- kuMbhaka karake use jItanA cAhie ||17||
udAnavAyu ke varNa-sthAnAdi kahate haiM--  / 480 /  rakto hRtkaNTha-tAlu - bhrU-
madhyamUrdhani saMsthitaH  /  udAno vazyatAM neyo, gatyAgatiniyogataH ||18||
udAnavAyu kA varNa lAla hai| hRdaya, kaMTha, tAlu, bhrukuTi kA madhyabhAga aura
mastaka meM usakA sthAna hai| ise bhI gati - agati ke prayoga se vaza meM karanA
cAhie ||18|| artha : aba gati - agati ke prayoga kahate haiM artha : |  /  481
/  nAsAkarSaNayogena, sthApayet taM hRdAdiSu  /  balAdutkRSyamANaM ca ruddhvA
ruddhvA vazaM nayet  //  19  //  nAsikA ke dvArA bAhara se vAyu ko khIMcakara
udAnavAyu ko hRdayAdi sthAnoM meM sthApita karanA cAhie  /  yadi vaha vAyu
dUsare sthAna meM jAtA ho to use jabaradastI rokakara usI sthAna para bAra-bAra
nirodha karanA caahie| arthAt kuMbhaka prANAyAma karake kucha samaya roke, bAda
meM recaka kre| matalaba yaha hai - nAsikA ke eka chidra se vAyu dhIre-dhIre
bAhara nikAla denA cAhie, phira usI chidra dvArA use aMdara khIMcakara kuMbhaka
prANAyAma karanA caahie| aisA karane se vAyu vazIbhUta ho jAtA hai  /  / 19 /  /
aba vyAna kA varNa - sthAnAdi kahate haiM ||482  /  sarvatvagvRttiko vyAnaH,
zakrakArmukasannibhaH  /  jetavyaH kumbhakAbhyAsAt, saGkoca - prsRtikrmaat||20||
artha :- vyAna - vAyu kA varNa iMdradhanuSa ke samAna vividha raMgavAlA hai|
tvacA ke saba bhAgoM meM usakA nivAsa-sthAna hai| saMkoca aura prasAra arthAt
pUraka aura recaka prANAyAma ke krama se tathA kuMbhaka ke abhyAsa se use jItanA
cAhie ||20|| pAMcoM vAyuoM ke dhyAna karane yogya bIjAkSara batAte haiM 397

Page #420 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Nature of Pranayama and Others  **Yoga Shastra, Seventh Light, Verses
21-31**  **483.** In the five vital airs, Prana, Apana, Samana, Udana, and
Vyana, the seeds 'M', 'M', 'V', 'R', and 'L' respectively should be meditated
upon during the stages of Puraka, Kumbhaka, and Rechaka Pranayama. **21.**
**Meaning:** While conquering Prana Vayu, meditate on the seed 'M', while
conquering Apana Vayu, meditate on the seed 'M', while conquering Samana,
meditate on the seed 'V', while conquering Udana, meditate on the seed 'R', and
while conquering Vyana, meditate on the seed 'L'. In other words, visualize the
form of these letters and chant them during Puraka, Kumbhaka, and Rechaka.
**21.**  Now, the benefits of conquering Prana and other vital airs are
explained in three verses.  **484.** By conquering Prana Vayu, the digestive
fire becomes strong, breathing becomes continuous, there is no asthma, and the
other vital airs also come under control, as all vital airs depend on Prana
Vayu. This makes the body light and agile. **22.**  **485.** By conquering
Samana and Apana Vayu, wounds and fractures heal quickly, the digestive fire
becomes strong, excretions become minimal, and diseases are destroyed. **23.**
**486.** By conquering Udana Vayu, the yogi can achieve Uttkranti (i.e., leaving
the body at the time of death through the ten doors). He can walk on water and
mud without being touched, and he can walk on thorns or fire without any harm,
like walking on a straight path. By conquering Vyana Vayu, the body is not
affected by cold or heat, the body's radiance increases, and one attains perfect
health. **24.**  Thus, the benefits of conquering each vital air are explained
separately. Now, the collective benefit of conquering all vital airs is
explained.  **487.** Wherever a disease afflicts a living being, one should
always hold the Prana and other vital airs in that place to alleviate the
suffering. This destroys the disease. **25.**  Concluding the above points, a
connection is made with what follows.  **488.** Having practiced conquering the
Prana and other vital airs repeatedly, one should always practice Dharana and
other techniques for mental stability. **26.**  Now, the method of Dharana and
other techniques is explained in five verses.  **489.** Sitting in the
previously mentioned posture, slowly exhale the air. Then, fill the body with
air from the toes to the thumb, through the left channel. **27.**  **490.**
First, fix the mind on the thumb, then on the sole of the foot, then on the
ankle, then on the shin, then on the knee, then on the buttocks. **28.**
**491.** Then, on the genitals, the navel, the chest, the throat, the tongue,
the palate, the tip of the nose, the eyes, the eyebrows, the forehead, and the
head. **29.**  **492.** Thus, holding the vital airs along with the mind, move
from one point to another, until you reach the Brahma Pura (the crown of the
head). **30.**  **493.** Then, gradually bring the mind back to the thumb,
passing through the lotus of the navel, and then exhale the air. **31.**
**Meaning:** Sitting in any of the postures mentioned at the end of the Fourth
Light, slowly exhale the air.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prANAyAma Adi kA svarUpa yogazAstra saptama prakAza zloka 21-31
|483|praannaapaan-smaanodaan-vyaanessvessu vAyuSu  /  ya~ maiM maiM rauM lau~
bIjAni, dhyAtavyAni yathAkramam  // 21 //  artha :- prANa, apAna, samAna, udAna
aura vyAna vAyu ko usa sthAna se jItane ke lie pUraka, kuMbhaka aura
recakaprANAyAma karate samaya kramazaH 'maiM Adi bIjAkSaroM kA dhyAna karanA
caahie| arthAt prANavAyu ko jItane ke samaya 'maiM' bIja kA, apAnavAyu ko jItane
ke samaya 'maiM kA, samAna ko jItane ke samaya 'va' kA, udAna ko jItane ke
samaya 'rauM' kA aura vyAna ko jItane ke samaya 'lauM' bIjAkSara kA dhyAna
karanA caahie| arthAt 'ya' Adi akSaroM kI AkRti kI kalpanA kara usakA jApa
pUraka, kuMbhaka aura recaka karate samaya karanA cAhie  /  / 21 /  /  aba tIna
zlokoM se prANAdi-jaya karane kA lAbha batAte haiN|484| prAbalyaM jaTharasyAgne,
dIrghazvAsamarujjayau  /  lAghavaM ca zarIrasya, prANasya vijaye bhavet  /  / 22
/  /  artha :- prANavAyu ko jItane se jaTharAgni prabala hotI hai, avicchinna
rUpa se zvAsa kI pravRtti calatI hai, dama (zvAsaroga) nahIM hotA aura zeSa vAyu
bhI vaza meM ho jAtI hai, kyoMki prANavAyu para sabhI vAyu Azrita hai| isase
zarIra halakA aura phurtIlA ho jAtA hai  /  / 22 /  /  tthaa|485| rohaNaM
kSatabhaGgAdeH udarAgneH pradIpanam  /  va!'lpatvaM vyAdhighAtaH
samAnApAnayorjaye  // 23 //  artha :- samAnavAyu aura apAnavAyu ko jItane se
ghAva Adi jaldI bhara jAtA hai, TUTI huI haDDI jur3a jAtI hai| Adi zabda kahane
se usa prakAra ke sabhI zArIrika duHkha naSTa ho jAte haiM, jaTharAgni teja ho
jAtI hai, mala mUtrAdi alpa ho jAte haiM aura vyAdhiyA~ vinaSTa ho jAtI hai  /
/ 23 /  /  tthaa|486| utkrAntirvAripaGkAdyaizcAbAdhodAna-nirjaye  /  jaye
vyAnasya zItoSNAsaMgaH kAntirarogitA  // 24 //  artha :- udAnavAyu vaza meM
karane se yogI utkrAMti (arthAt mRtyu ke samaya daza dvAra se prANa tyAga) kara
sakatA hai| pAnI aura kIcar3a Adi para calane se usakA sparza nahIM hotA; kAMToM
yA agni Adi para nirupadrava rUpa meM vaha sIdhe mArga ke samAna cala sakatA
hai| tathA vyAnavAyu vaza karane se zarIra meM sardI-garmI kA asara nahIM hotA;
zarIra kI kAMti bar3ha jAtI hai aura nirogatA prApta hotI hai  // 24 //  - isa
prakAra pratyeka prANa ko jItane kA alaga-alaga phala btlaayaa| aba saba prANoM
ko jItane kA sAmUhika phala batAte haiN|487| yatra-yatra bhavet sthAne, janto
rogaH prapIDakaH  /  tacchAntyai dhArayet tatra prANAdimarutaH sdaa||25|| artha
:- jIva ke zarIra meM jisa jisa bhAga meM pIr3A karane vAlA roga utpanna huA ho,
usakI zAMti ke lie usa sthAna meM prANAdi vAyu ko hamezA roke rakhanA caahie|
aisA karane se roga kA nAza hotA hai||25|| pUrvokta bAtoM kA upasaMhAra karake
aba Age ke sAtha saMbaMdha jor3ate haiN|  / 488 /  evaM prANAdi-vijaye,
kRtAbhyAsaH pratikSaNam  /  dhAraNAdikamabhyasyet, manaHsthairyakRte sadA  // 26
//  artha :- isa prakAra prANAdivAyu ko jItane kA bAra-bAra abhyAsa karake mana
kI sthiratA ke lie hamezA dhAraNA Adi kA abhyAsa karanA cAhie  /  / 26 /  /  aba
dhAraNA Adi kI vidhi pAMca zlokoM dvArA kahate haiN||489| uktAsana-samAsIno,
recayitvA'nilaM zanaiH  /  ApAdAGguSThaparyantaM, vAmamArgeNa pUrayet  // 27 //
||490 /  pAdAGguSThe manaH pUrvaM ruddhvA pAdatale tataH  /  pA} gulphe ca
jaGghAyAM, jAnunyUrau gude tataH  /  / 28 /  /   / 491 /  liGge nAbhau ca tunde
ca hRtkaNTha-rasane'pi ca  /  tAlu nAsAgra-netreSu ca bhruvorbhAle zirasyatha  /
/ 29 /  /   / 492 /  evaM razmikrameNaiva, dhArayanmarutA saha  /  sthAnAt
sthAnAntaraM nItvA yAvad brahmapuraM nayet  // 30 //  ||493 /  tataH krameNa
tenaiva, pAdAGguSThAntamAnayet  /  nAbhipadmAntaraM nItvA, tato vAyuM virecayet
// 31 /  /  | artha :- pUrvokta (cauthe prakAza ke aMta meM batalAye hue kisI
bhI Asana se baiThakara dhIre-dhIre pavana bAhara nikAla | 398

Page #421 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Dharana and its Fruits  **Yoga Shastra, Pancham Prakash, Shlokas 32 to 39**
**Translation:**  **Dharana**  Draw the mind inwards through the left nostril
and bring it to the big toe, restraining it there. Then, gradually move the mind
along with the breath to the sole of the foot, the heel, the ankle, the shin,
the knee, the thigh, the anus, the penis, the navel, the stomach, the heart, the
throat, the tongue, the palate, the tip of the nose, the brow, the skull, and
finally to the Brahmarandhra. After that, return in the same order, finally
bringing the breath to the big toe along with the mind, then to the navel, and
then exhale. || 27-31 ||  Now, four shlokas describe the fruits of Dharana.
**Fruits of Dharana:**  * **Shloka 32:** Holding the breath in the big toe,
heel, ankle, shin, knee, thigh, anus, and penis, respectively, leads to
swiftness and strength. * **Shloka 33:** Holding the breath in the navel removes
fever, holding it in the stomach purifies the body, holding it in the heart
increases knowledge, and holding it in the Kourma Nadi destroys disease and old
age, maintaining youthful vigor even in old age. * **Shloka 34:** Holding the
breath in the throat eliminates hunger and thirst, holding it at the tip of the
tongue grants knowledge of all tastes, holding it at the tip of the nose grants
knowledge of smell, and holding it in the eyes grants knowledge of form. *
**Shloka 35:** Holding the breath in the skull and brain destroys brain-related
diseases, pacifies anger, and holding it in the Brahmarandhra grants direct
vision of the Siddhas. || 32-35 ||  **Concluding Dharana and Describing the
Movement of Prana:**  * **Shloka 36:** Dharana is the ultimate cause of Siddhis.
By practicing it in this way, one should strive to understand the movement of
Prana without any doubt. || 36 ||  **General Siddhis:**  * **Shloka 37:** The
outward movement of Prana from the navel is called "Char," bringing it to the
center of the heart is called "Gati," and its dwelling in the Brahmarandhra
should be understood as its "Sthana." || 37 ||  **Fruits of the Knowledge of
Char, Gati, and Sthana:**  * **Shloka 38:** By practicing the knowledge of Char,
Gati, and Sthana, one can understand time (death), lifespan, and the rise of
auspicious and inauspicious fruits. || 38 ||  **Further Instructions:**  *
**Shloka 39:** Then, gradually, the Yogi should draw the mind along with the
breath and place it within the lotus of the heart, controlling it. || 39 ||
**Fruits of this Practice:**  ...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dhAraNA aura usakA phala yogazAstra paMcama prakAza zloka 32 se 39 karake use
nAsikA ke bAMe~ chidra se aMdara khIMce aura paira ke aMgUThe taka le jAkara usa
mana ko niruddha kre| phira mana ko kramazaH vAyu ke sAtha paira ke talave meM,
er3I meM, Takhane meM, jAMgha meM, ghuTane meM, UrU meM, gudA meM, liMga meM,
nAbhi meM, peTa meM, hRdaya meM, kaMTha meM, jIbha meM, tAlu meM, nAsikA ke
agrabhAga meM, bhrukuTi meM, kapAla meM aura mastaka meM isa taraha eka ke bAda
dUsare sthAna meM Age bar3hate bar3hate aMta meM brahmarandhra- paryaMta le jAnA
caahie| usake bAda usI krama se vApisa lauTAte hue aMta meM mana ke sAtha
aMgUThe meM vAyu ko lAkara phira nAbhikamala meM le jAkara taba vAyu kA recana
karanA cAhie  /   /  27 - 31  /  /  aba cAra zlokoM dvArA dhAraNA kA phala
batAte haiM artha : |  /  494  /  pAdAGguSThAdau jaGghAyAM, jAnuru-guda - mehane
/  dhAritaH kramazo vAyuH zIghragatyai balAya ca ||32||  /  495  /  nAbhau
jvarAdighAtAya, jaThare kAyazuddhaye  /  jJAnAya hRdaye, kUrmanADyAM roga-
jarAcchide  // 33 //  ||496  /  kaNThe kSuttRrSAnAzAya, jihvAgre rasasaMvide  /
gandhajJAnAya nAsAgre rUpajJAnAya cakSuSoH ||34|| || 497  /  bhAle
tadroganAzAya, krodhasyopazamAya ca  /  brahmarandhre ca siddhAnAM sAkSAd
darzanahetave  //  35|| paira ke aMgUThe meM, er3I meM, Takhane meM, jaMghA meM,
ghuTane meM, UrU meM, gudA meM, liMga meM kramazaH vAyu ko dhAraNa karake
rakhane se zIghra gati aura bala kI prApti hotI hai| nAbhi meM vAyu ko dhAraNa
karane se jvara dUra ho jAtA hai, jaThara meM dhAraNa karane se malazuddhi hone
se zarIra zuddha ho jAtA hai, hRdaya meM dhAraNa karane se jJAna kI vRddhi hotI
hai, kUrmanAr3I meM vAyu dhAraNa karane se roga aura vRddhAvasthA kA nAza hotA
hai, vRddhAvasthA meM bhI zarIra meM yuvaka ke samAna sphUrti rahatI hai| kaMTha
meM vAyu dhAraNa karane se bhUkha-pyAsa nahIM lagatI aura yadi kSudhApipAsA lagI
ho to zAMta ho jAtI hai| jIbha ke agrabhAga meM vAyu dhAraNa karane se sarva
prakAra kA rasajJAna hotA hai, nAsikA ke agrabhAga meM vAyu ko dhAraNa karane se
gaMdha kA jJAna hotA hai aura cakSu meM dhAraNa karane se rUpa jJAna hotA hai  /
kapAla-mastiSka meM vAyu ko dhAraNa karane se mastiSka-saMbaMdhI rogoM kA nAza
hotA hai tathA krodha kA upazamana hotA hai aura brahmarandhra meM vAyu ko
rokane se sAkSAt siddhoM ke darzana hote haiM  /  /  32-35  /  /  dhAraNA kA
upasaMhAra karake pavana kI ceSTA kA varNana karate haiM  /  498  /  abhyasya
dhAraNAmevaM siddhInAM kAraNaM param  /  ceSTitaM pavamAnasya jAnIyAd
gatasaMzayaH || 36 || artha :- dhAraNA siddhiyoM kA parama kAraNa rUpa hai|
usakA isa prakAra abhyAsa karake niHzaMka hokara pavana kI ceSTA ko jAnane kA
prayatna kareM  /  /  36  /  /  isase bahuta-sI sAmAnya siddhiyA~ prApta hotI
hai| vaha isa prakAra hai  / 499 /  nAbherniSkrAmatazcAraM hRnmadhye nayato
gatim  /  tiSThato dvAdazAnte tu vidyAtsthAnaM nabhastavaH ||37|| artha :- nAbhi
se pavana kA nikalanA, 'cAra' kahalAtA hai| hRdaya ke madhya meM le jAne se
'gati' hotI hai aura brahmarandhra meM rahanA vAyu kA 'sthAna' samajhanA cAhie
||37|| aba cAra Adi jJAna kA phala kahate haiM ,  / 500 /  taccAra-gamana-sthAna
- jJAnAdabhyAsayogataH  /  jAnIyAt kAlamAyuzca zubhAzubhaphalodayam ||38|| artha
:- usa vAyu ke cAra, gamana aura sthAna ke jJAna kA abhyAsa karane se kAla
(maraNa), Ayu-jIvana aura zubhAzubha phalodaya ko jAnA jA sakatA hai ||38|| ise
yathAsthAna Age kheNge| isake bAda karane yogya kahate haiM  /  501  /  tataH
zanaiH samAkRSya, pavanena samaM manaH  /  yogI hRdayapadmAntarvinivezya
niyantrayet  //  39  //  artha :- usake bAda yogI dhIre-dhIre pavana ke sAtha
mana ko khIMcakara use hRdaya - kamala ke aMdara praveza karAke usakA nirodha
kare  /  /  39  /  /  isakA phala kahate haiM 399

Page #422 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Nature of the Mandalas  **Yoga Shastra, Panchama Prakash, Sloka 40-47,
502.**  * **Sloka 40:** _"Tato'vidya viliyante, vishayeccha vinishyati. Vikalpa
vinivartante, jnanamantarvijrumbhate."_ * **Meaning:** By restraining the mind
in the heart lotus, ignorance (avidya) is destroyed; the desire for sense
objects is also destroyed, thoughts and doubts disappear, and knowledge grows
within the soul.  **503.** By stabilizing the mind and breath in the heart, the
knowledge of one's true nature is revealed.  * **Sloka 41:** _"Kva mandale
gatirvaayoḥ sankramaḥ kva kva vishramah? Ka cha naditi janiyat, tatra chitte
sthirikrte."_ * **Meaning:** When the mind is stabilized in the heart lotus, in
which mandala does the breath move? In which element does it enter? Where does
it rest? And which nadi is active at that time? This can be known.  **504.**
Now, the Mandalas are described.  * **Sloka 42:** _"Mandalanicha chatvari,
nasikavivare viduh. Bhaumavarunavaayavyaagneyaakhyani yathottaram."_ *
**Meaning:** In the nostrils, there are four Mandalas: 1. Bhauma (Parthiva)
Mandala, 2. Varuna Mandala, 3. Vayavya Mandala, and 4. Agneya Mandala.  **505.**
The nature of the Parthiva Mandala is described.  * **Sloka 43:**
_"Prithvibijasampoornam, vajralanchanasamyutam. Chaturasram taptasvarnaprabham
syad bhaumamandalam."_ * **Meaning:** The Parthiva Mandala is filled with the
seed of earth, marked with the symbol of a thunderbolt, square in shape, and the
color of heated gold.  **506.** Now, the nature of the Varuna Mandala is
described.  * **Sloka 44:** _"Syadardhachandra samsthanam,
varunaaksharalanchhitam. Chandraabhamamaritasandram sandram varunamandalam."_ *
**Meaning:** The Varuna Mandala is shaped like the half-moon of the eighth lunar
day, marked with the symbol of the Varuna letter 'gha', moon-like, radiant, and
filled with the flow of nectar.  **507.** Now, the nature of the Vayavya Mandala
is described.  * **Sloka 45:** _"Snigdhaanjanghanachchhayam, suvruttam
bindusankulam. Durlakshyam pavanaakrantam, chanchalam vayumandalam."_ *
**Meaning:** The Vayavya Mandala is dark, like a mixture of collyrium and
clouds, round, marked with the symbol of a dot, difficult to perceive,
surrounded by wind, and marked with the seed of wind, the letter 'ya'.  **508.**
Now, the nature of the Agneya Mandala is described.  * **Sloka 46:**
_"Urdhvajvalanchitam bheem, trikonam swastikaanvitam. Sphulingapingam tadbijam,
jneyamagneya mandalam."_ * **Meaning:** The Agneya Mandala is filled with flames
rising upwards, terrifying, triangular, marked with the symbol of a swastika,
the color of fire sparks, and marked with the seed of fire, the letter 'reph'.
**509.** Now, to enlighten the unbelievers, it is said:  * **Sloka 47:**
_"Abhyasen swasanvedyam, syanmandalachatushtayam. Kramena sancharannatra,
vayurjeyaschaturvidhah."_ * **Meaning:** By practicing, one can experience the
four Mandalas. The breath, which moves through these four Mandalas, is also of
four types. This will be described in order.  **400**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 " maMDaloM kA svarUpa _ yogazAstra paMcama prakAza zloka 40-47  / 502 /
tato'vidyA vilIyante, viSayecchA vinizyati  /  vikalpA vinivartante,
jJAnamantarvijRmbhate  // 40 //  _ artha :- hRdayakamala meM mana ko rokane se
avidyA (ajJAna yA mithyAtva) kA vinAza ho jAtA hai; iMdriya-viSayoM kI abhilASA
bhI naSTa ho jAtI hai, saMkalpa-vikalpa cale jAte haiM aura AtmA meM jJAna kI
vRddhi hotI hai  // 40 //  mana aura pavana ko hRdaya meM sthira karane se
svarUpa jJAna prakaTa hotA hai|503|kv maNDale gatirvAyoH saMkramaH kva kva
vizramaH?  /  kA ca nADIti jAnIyAt, tatra citte sthirIkRte  // 41 //  artha :-
hRdaya-kamala meM mana ko sthira karane para vAyu kI gati kisa maMDala meM hai?
usakA kisa tattva meM saMkrama (praveza) hotA hai? vaha kahAM jAkara vizrAma
pAtA hai? aura isa samaya kauna-sI nAr3I cala rahI hai? yaha jAnA jA sakatA hai?
// 41 //  aba maMDaloM kA nirdeza karate haiN|504| maNDalAni ca catvAri,
nAsikAvivare viduH  /  bhaumavAruNavAyavyAgneyAkhyAni yathottaram  // 42 //
artha :- nAsikA ke vivara meM cAra maMDala hote haiM-1. bhauma (pArthiva)
maMDala, 2. vAruNa maMDala, 3. vAyavya maMDala aura 4. Agneya maMDala jAnanA  /
/ 42 /  /  pArthiva maMDala kA svarUpa kahate haiN1505| .pRthivIbIjasaMpUrNaM,
vajralAJchanasaMyutam  /  caturasraM taptasvarNaprabhaM syAd bhaumamaNDalam  //
43 //  artha :- pArthiva maMDala pRthvI ke bIja se paripUrNa, vajra ke cihna se
yukta, caurasa aura tapAye hue sone ke raMgavAlA kSitilakSaNayukta hotA hai  //
43 //  yahAM pArthivabIja 'a' akSara hai| kitane hI AcAryoM ne 'la' aura 'kSa'
bhI mAnA hai| aba vAruNamaMDala kA svarUpa kahate haiN1506|
syAdardhacandrasaMsthAnaM, vAruNAkSaralAJchitam  /  candrAbhamamRtasyandaM
sAndraM vAruNamaNDalam  // 44 //  artha :- aSTamI ke ardha-caMdra ke samAna
AkAra vAlA, vAruNa akSara 'gha' kAra ke cihna se yukta, caMdrasadRza . ujjvala
aura amRta ke jharane se vyAsa vAruNamaMDala hotA hai||44|| aba vAyavya maNDala
kA svarUpa kahate haiN||507| snigdhAJjanaghanacchAyaM, suvRttaM bindusaGkulam  /
durlakSyaM pavanAkrAntaM, caJcalaM vaayumnnddlm||45|| artha :- snigdhamizrita
aMjana aura megha ke samAna gAr3ha, zyAma kAntivAlA, golAkAra, bindu ke cihna se
vyAsa, - muzkila se mAlUma hone vAlA, cAroM ora pavana se veSTita, pavanabIja
'ya' kAra se ghirA huA caMcala vAyumaMDala hotA hai  // 45 //  aba Agneya
maMDala kA svarUpa kahate haiN|508| UrdhvajvAlAJcitaM bhImaM, trikoNaM
svastikA'nvitam  /  sphulliGgapiGgaM tadbIjaM, jnyeymaagneymnnddlm||46|| artha
:- Upara kI ora phailatI huI jvAlAoM se yukta, bhayAnaka trikoNa vAlI, svastika
ke cihna se yukta, agni kI cinagArI ke samAna piMgalavarNa vAlA aura agni ke
bIja repha' se yukta Agneya maMDala jAnanA cAhie  // 46 //  aba azraddhAlu ko
bodha dene ke lie kahate haiN|509| abhyAsena svasaMvedyaM, syAnmaNDalacatuSTayam
/  krameNa saJcarannatra, vAyurjeyazcaturvidhaH  // 47 //  artha :- isa viSaya
kA abhyAsa karane se anubhava dvArA cAroM maMDaloM ko jAnA jA sakatA hai| ina
cAroM maMDaloM meM saMcAra karane vAlA vAya bhI cAra prakAra kA hotA hai| isakA
kramazaH varNana karate haiM 400

Page #423 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Auspicious and Inauspicious Effects of Air  The fifth chapter of Yoga
Shastra, verses 48 to 57, describe the effects of different types of air in
detail.  **Verse 48:** The air named Purandar, belonging to the earth element,
is yellow in color, slightly warm and slightly cool, and pure. It flows slowly,
filling the nostrils and extending outwards for eight angulas (finger widths).
**Verse 49:** The air named Varuna, belonging to the water element, is white,
cool, and flows rapidly downwards for twelve angulas.  **Verse 50:** The air
named Pavana, belonging to the air element, is warm and cool, black in color,
and flows diagonally for six angulas.  **Verse 51:** The air named Dahan,
belonging to the fire element, is red like the rising sun, extremely hot, and
flows upwards in a whirlwind for four angulas.  **Verse 52:** When Purandar air
is flowing, one should perform actions like meditation. When Varuna air is
flowing, one should perform auspicious actions. When Pavana air is flowing, one
should perform actions related to impurities and fickleness. When Dahan air is
flowing, one should perform actions like subjugation.  **Verse 53:** When
Purandar air is flowing at the beginning or during the questioning of an action,
it indicates the attainment of desired results like an umbrella, a fly whisk, an
elephant, a horse, a woman, and a kingdom.  **Verse 54:** When Varuna air is
flowing at the beginning or during the questioning of an action, it indicates
the immediate attainment of a complete kingdom, sons, relatives, friends, and
all essential things.  **Verse 55:** When Pavana air is flowing at the beginning
or during the questioning of an action, it indicates that all actions like
agriculture and service will be fruitless, leading to loss, fear of death,
conflict, hatred, and fear.  **Verse 56:** When Dahan air is flowing at the
beginning or during the questioning of an action, it indicates fear, sorrow,
illness, suffering, a series of obstacles, and the destruction of wealth and
grain.  **Verse 57:** All four types of air, Purandar, Varuna, Pavana, and
Dahan, are auspicious when they enter the body through the left or right
nostril, following the path of the moon or the sun, respectively. They are
inauspicious when they exit the body.  This explains the auspicious and
inauspicious effects of the four types of air based on their entry and exit from
the body.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 vAyu ke zubhAzubha phala yogazAstra paMcama prakAza zloka 48 se 57 isakA
kramazaH varNana karate haiN|510|naasikaarndhrmaapuury, pItavarNaH zanairvahan
/  kavoSNo'STAGgulaH svaccho, bhaved vAyuH purandaraH  // 48 /  /  artha :-
pRthvItattva kA puraMdara nAmaka vAyu pIle raMga kA hai, usakA sparza kucha uSNa
aura kucha zIta hai| vaha svaccha _ hai| dhIre-dhIre bahatA huA nAsikA ke chidra
ko pUrNa karake vaha ATha aMgula bAhara taka bahatA hai  /  / 4 /  /   / 511 /
dhavalaH zItalo'dhastAt, tvaritatvaritaM vahan  /  dvAdazAMgulamAnazca,
vAyurvaruNa ucyate  // 49 /  /  artha :- jisakA sapheda varNa hai, zIta sparza
hai aura nIce kI ora bAraha aMgula taka jaldI-jaldI bahane vAlA hai, use
jalatattva kA varuNa vAyu kahate haiM  /  / 49 /  /   / 512 /  uSNaH zItazca,
kRSNazca, vahan tiryaganAratam  /  SaDagulapramANazca vAyuH pavanasaJjitaH  //
50 //  artha :- pavana nAma kA vAyutattva kucha uSNa aura kucha zIta hotA hai,
usakA varNa kAlA hai aura vaha hamezA chaha aMgula pramANa tirachA bahatA rahatA
hai  /  / 50 //  1513 /  bAlAdityasamajyotiratyuSNazcaturagulaH  /  AvarttavAn
vahannUvaM, pavano dahanaH smRtaH  /  / 51 /  /  . artha :- agnitattva kA dahana
nAmaka vAyu udIyamAna bAlasUrya ke samAna lAla varNa vAlA hai, ati-uSNasparza |
vAlA hai aura bavaMDara (ghUmatI huI AMdhI) kI taraha cAra aMgula U~cA bahatA
hai  // 51 //  kauna-se vAyu meM kauna-sA kArya karanA cAhie? ise kahate
haiN|514| indraM stambhAdikAryeSu, varuNaM zastakarmasu  /  vAyuM malinaloleSu,
vazyAdau vahnimAdizet  // 52 //  artha :- jaba purandaravAyu bahatA ho, taba
staMbhanAdi kArya karane caahie| varuNavAyu ke bahate samaya prazasta kArya
karanA, pavanavAyu ke bahate samaya malina aura capala kArya karanA tathA
dahanavAyu. calatA ho, usa samaya vazIkaraNa Adi kArya karanA cAhie  /  / 52 /
/  kArya ke prAraMbha meM, kArya ke prazna-samaya meM jo vAyu calatA ho, usakA
phala cAra zlokoM dvArA kahate haiN|1515| chatra-cAmara-hastyazvArAmA-
rAjyAdisampadam  /  manISitaM phalaM vAyuH, samAcaSTe puraMdaraH  // 53 /  /
||516 /  rAmArAjyAdisampUrNeH, putrasvajanabandhubhiH  /  sAreNa vastunA cApi,
yojayed varuNaH kSaNAt  // 54 //  ||517 /  kRSisevAdikaM sarvamapi siddhaM
vinazyati  /  mRtyubhI kalaho vairaM, trAsazca pavane bhavet  // 55 /  /  ||518
/  bhayaM zokaM rujaM duHkhaM, vighnavyUhaparamparAm  /  saMsUcayed vinAzaM ca,
dahano dahanAtmakaH  // 56 //  artha :- puraMdara nAma kA vAyu jisa samaya
bahatA ho, usa samaya chatra, cAmara, hAthI, ghor3A, strI evaM rAjya Adi
saMpatti ke viSaya meM koI prazna kare athavA svayaM kArya AraMbha kare to
manovAMchita phala milatA hai| varuNavAyu (jalatattva) bahatA ho, taba prazna
kare athavA kArya AraMbha kare to usI samaya use saMpUrNa rAjya, putra, svajana-
baMdhu aura sArabhUta uttama vastu kI prApti hotI hai| prazna yA kAryAraMbha ke
samaya pavana nAma kA vAyu bahatA ho to khetI sevA-naukarI Adi saba kArya
phaladAyI hoM to bhI ve niSphala ho jAte haiM; mehanata vyartha naSTa ho jAtI
hai aura mRtyu kA bhaya, kleza, vaira tathA trAsa utpanna hotA hai| dahana
svabhAva vAlA agni nAma kA vAyu calatA ho, usa samaya prazna yA kAryAraMbha kare
to vaha bhaya, zoka, roga, duHkha aura vighna-samUha kI paraMparA aura dhana-
dhAnyAdi ke vinAza kA saMsUcaka hai  // 53-56 //  aba cAroM vAyu kA atisUkSma
phala kahate haiN519| zazAGka-ravi-mArgeNa, vAyavo maNDaleSvamI  /  vizantaH
zubhadAH sarve, niSkrAmanto'nyathA smRtaaH||57|| artha :- puraMdara Adi cAroM
prakAra ke vAyu caMdramArga yA sUryamArga arthAt bAMyI aura dAhinI nAr3I meM
hokara praveza karate hoM, to zubhadAyaka hote haiM aura bAhara nikalate hoM, to
azubhadAyaka hote haiM  /  / 57 /  /  praveza aura nirgama meM zubha-azubha hone
ke kAraNa batAte haiM 401

Page #424 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Auspicious and Inauspicious Effects of Air  **Yoga Shastra, Fifth Light,
Verses 58 to 64**  **Verse 58:**  * **Meaning:** When air enters the body, it is
called *Jiva* (life), and when it exits, it is called *Mrityu* (death).
Therefore, wise ones say that the effect of entering air is auspicious, and the
effect of exiting air is inauspicious. This means that if the *Purvak*
(inhaling) air enters the nostrils and someone asks a question, that task will
be successful. But if the *Rechak* (exhaling) air exits the body and someone
asks a question, that task will not be successful.  **Verse 59:**  *
**Meaning:** The *Purandar* and *Varun* air, entering through the left nostril
(Moon), grants all success. But when these two exit through the right nostril
(Sun), they bring destruction. And when these two enter and exit through the
right nostril, they bring moderate results.  **Verse 60:**  * **Meaning:** The
*Purandar* and *Varun* air, exiting through the right nostril, bring
destruction. But when these two enter and exit through the left nostril, they
bring moderate results.  **Verse 61:**  * **Meaning:** The left nostril is
called *Ida*, and the Moon resides there. The right nostril is called *Pingala*,
and the Sun resides there. The *Sushumna* nadi, located in the middle, is
considered the path to liberation.  **Verse 62:**  * **Meaning:** The left
nostril is considered to be filled with nectar, showering the entire body with
it constantly. It is also considered to be a sign of fulfilling desires.
**Verse 63:**  * **Meaning:** The right nostril carries the signs of
inauspiciousness and hinders tasks. The *Sushumna* nadi is the cause of the
eight great powers (Animadi) and liberation.  **Verse 64:**  * **Meaning:** The
left nostril is auspicious for starting auspicious tasks like journeys,
donations, weddings, wearing new clothes and ornaments, entering villages,
cities, and homes, meeting loved ones, peace rituals, nourishing activities,
yoga practice, meeting royalty, healing, friendship, and sowing seeds. The right
nostril is auspicious for activities like eating, conflict, sensual pleasures,
war, mantra practice, initiation, service, business, medicine, dealing with
ghosts and spirits, and other fierce activities.  **Explanation:**  The meaning
is that focusing on the *Sushumna* nadi leads to quick concentration in
meditation and a long-lasting practice. This helps in destroying karma quickly,
making it the path to liberation. Additionally, the air flow in the *Sushumna*
nadi is very slow, allowing the mind to easily become still. The stillness of
mind and breath makes it easier to practice self-control. Holding *Dharana*,
*Dhyana*, and *Samadhi* in one place is self-control, and this kind of self-
control leads to powers. Therefore, the *Sushumna* nadi is considered the cause
of liberation and powers.  **Conclusion:**  This passage explains the auspicious
and inauspicious effects of air based on its direction of flow through the
nostrils. It also highlights the importance of the *Sushumna* nadi in achieving
liberation and powers.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 vAyu ke zubhAzubha phala yogazAstra paMcama prakAza zloka 58 se 64  / 520 /
praveza-samaye vAyurjIvo mRtyustu nirgame  /  ucyate
jJAnibhistAdRkphalamapyanayostataH  /  / 58 /  /  artha :- vAyu jaba maMDala meM
praveza karatA hai, taba use jIva kahate haiM aura jaba vaha maMDala se bAhara
nikalatA hai, taba use mRtyu kahate haiN| isI kAraNa jJAniyoM ne praveza karate
samaya kA phala zubha aura nikalate samaya kA phala azubha btaayaa| arthAt-
pUraka vAyu nAsikA ke aMdara praveza karatA ho aura koI prazna kare to vaha
kArya siddha hogA aura recaka vAyu maMDala se bAhara nikalatA ho aura koI prazna
kare to vaha kArya siddha nahIM hogA  /  / 58 //  aba nAr3I ke bheda se vAyu kA
zubha, azubha aura madhyama phala do zlokoM se kahate haiN|521|
pathendorindravaruNau, vizantau sarvasiddhidau  /  ravimArgeNa niryAntau,
pravizantau ca madhyamo  // 59 //   / 522 /  dakSiNena viniryAntau,
vinAzAyAnilAnalau  /  niHsarantau vizantau ca, madhyamA vitareNa tu  // 60 /  /
artha :- caMdra arthAt bAMyI nAsikA se praveza karate hue puraMdara aura varuNa
vAyu sarvasiddhiyA~ pradAna karate haiM, jabaki | ye hI donoM dAhinI ora se
nikalate hue vinAza kara hote haiN| aura sUrya arthAt dAhinI nAr3I se bAhara
nikalate aura praveza karate hue ye donoM vAyu madhyamaphala dete haiM  /  /
59-60 //  aba nAr3iyoM ke lakSaNa kahate haiN|523|iddaa ca piGgalA caiva,
suSumNA ceti nADikAH  /  zazi-sUrya-zivasthAnaM, vaam-dkssinn-mdhygaaH||61||
artha :- bAMyI ora kI nAr3I ir3A kahalAtI hai aura usameM caMdra kA sthAna hai,
dAhinI ora kI nAr3I piMgalA hai; usameM sUrya kA sthAna hai aura donoM ke madhya
meM sthita nAr3I suSumNA hai, isameM mokSa-sthAna mAnA hai  /  / 61 /  /  ina
tInoM meM vAya-saMcAra kA phala do zlokoM dvArA kahate haiN|524| pIyUSamiva
varSantI, sarvagAtreSu sarvadA  /  vAmA'mRtamayI nADI sammatA'bhISTasUcikA  //
62 /  /   / 525 /  vahantyaniSTazaMsitrI, saMha: dakSiNA punaH  /  suSumNA tu
bhavet siddhi-nirvANaphalakAraNam  // 63 /  /  - artha :- zarIra ke samasta
bhAgoM meM niraMtara amRta varSA karane vAlI aura sabhI manorathoM ko sUcita
karane vAlI bAMyI nAr3I mAnI gayI hai tathA dAhinI nAr3I aniSTa ko sUcita karane
vAlI aura kArya kA vighAta karane vAlI hotI hai evaM suSumNA nAr3I aNimAdi aSTa
mahAsiddhiyoM kA aura mokSaphala kA kAraNa rUpa hotI hai  /  / 62 63 /  /
bhAvArtha :- kahane kA tAtparya yaha hai ki suSumNAnAr3I meM dhyAna karane se
thor3e samaya meM dhyAna meM ekAgratA ho jAtI hai aura laMbe samaya taka dhyAna
kI paraMparA cAlU rahatI hai| isa kAraNa isase thor3e samaya meM adhika karmoM
kA nAza hotA hai| ataH isameM mokSa kA sthAna rahA huA hai| isake atirikta
suSumNA nAr3I meM vAyu kI gati bahuta maMda hotI hai| ataH mana saralatA se
sthira ho jAtA hai| mana aura pavana kI sthiratA hone para saMyama kI sAdhanA
meM bhI saralatA hotI hai| dhAraNA, dhyAna aura samAdhi ko eka hI sthala para
karanA saMyama hai aura aisA saMyama hI siddhiyoM kA kAraNa hai| isa kAraNa
suSumNAnAr3I ko mokSa aura siddhiyoM kA kAraNa batAyA hai  /  / 62-63 /  /
bAMyI aura dAhinI nAr3I calatI ho, taba kauna-sA kArya karanA cAhie, use aba
batAte haiN1526| vAmaivAbhyudayAdISTazastakAryeSu sammatA  /  dakSiNA tu
ratAhAra-yuddhAdau dIptakarmaNi  // 64 //  artha :- yAtrA, dAna, vivAha, navIna
vastrAbhUSaNa dhAraNa karate samaya gA~va. nagara va ghara meM praveza karate
samaya, svajana-milana, zAntikarma, pauSTika karma, yogAbhyAsa, rAjadarzana,
cikitsA, maitrI, bIja-vapana ityAdi abhyudaya aura ISTakAryoM ke prAraMbha meM
bAMyI nAr3I zubha hotI hai aura bhojana, vigraha, viSaya-prasaMga, yuddha,
maMtra-sAdhanA, dIkSA, sevAkarma, vyApAra, auSadha, bhUtapretAdi-sAdhanoM Adi
tathA anya raudra kAryoM meM sUryanADI dAhinI nADI zubha mAnI gayI hai  /  / 64
/  /  402

Page #425 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Auspicious and Inauspicious Effects of Air  **Chapter 5, Light 5 of Yoga
Shastra, Verses 65-73**  Now we discuss the unequal division of the left and
right nadis. (527)  **Verse 65:** * **Vama Shasthodaye Pakshe, Site Krishna Tu
Dakshina | Trini Trini Dinani Indu-Surya Yorudayah Shubhah ||** * **Meaning:**
In the Shukla Paksha (bright fortnight), the rising of the left nadi at sunrise
is considered auspicious, and in the Krishna Paksha (dark fortnight), the rising
of the right nadi at sunrise is considered auspicious. The rising of both these
nadis is considered auspicious for three days. (5)  Further clarification will
be provided in this regard. Having stated the rule of rising, we now state the
rule of setting. (528)  **Verse 66:** * **Shashakenodayo Vayoh, Suryena Astam
Shubhavaham | Udaye Ravin Tvasya, Shashina Astam Shivamatam ||** * **Meaning:**
The day on which the air rises in the Chandra Swar (lunar influence) at sunrise
and sets in the Surya Swar (solar influence) is auspicious. If on that day it
rises in the Surya Swar and sets in the Chandra Swar, it is also considered
auspicious. (66)  We explain this point further through three verses. (529)
**Verse 67:** * **Sitapaskhe Dinarambe, Yatnata Pratipaddi Ne | Vayorvikshet
Sancharam, Prashastamitram Tatha ||** * **Meaning:** On the Pratipada (first
day) of the Shukla Paksha, one should carefully observe the movement of the air
at the beginning of sunrise, whether it is auspicious or inauspicious.  **Verse
68:** * **Udeti Pavana Purvam, Shashinyesha Tryaham Tatah | Sankramathi Tryaham
Suryee, Shashinyeva Punastryaham ||** * **Meaning:** The Chandra Nadi flows for
the first three days (1, 2, 3) at sunrise. After that, the Surya Nadi flows for
the next three days (4, 5, 6). Then, the Chandra Nadi flows again for the next
three days (7, 8, 9), followed by the Surya Nadi for the next three days (10,
11, 12), and finally the Chandra Nadi flows for the last three days (13, 14,
15).  **Verse 69:** * **Vahed Yavad Brihanpurvakramenena Marutah | Krishna
Pakshe Punah Suryodayapurvam Ayam Kramah ||** * **Meaning:** The air flows in
this order for the entire Shukla Paksha. In the Krishna Paksha, the Surya Nadi
flows for the first three days (1, 2, 3), followed by the Chandra Nadi for the
next three days (4, 5, 6), and so on, in this order of three days each, until
the Amavasya (new moon). This order of the air is not for the entire day, but
only for the time of sunrise. After that, the Chandra Nadi and Surya Nadi change
every two and a half hours.  If there is a change in this order, its result is
inauspicious or indicative of suffering. (67-69)  If there is a disturbance in
this order, its result is explained in two verses. (532)  **Verse 70:** * **Trin
Pakshananyathavetasya, Masashatkena Panchata | Pakshadvayam Vipariyase Abhisht-
Bandhuvipad Bhavet ||** * **Meaning:** If the air flows contrary to the
aforementioned order of Chandra or Surya Nadi for three Pakshas, then death
occurs within six months. If the contrary order persists for two Pakshas, then
calamity befalls loved ones and relatives.  **Verse 71:** * **Bhavet Tu Daruna,
Vyadhirekpakasam Vipariyaye | Dvivyadya Harvipariyase, Kalahaadikamudvishet ||**
* **Meaning:** If the contrary air flows for one Paksha, then a severe disease
arises. If the contrary air flows for two or three days, then strife and other
inauspicious results arise. (70-71)  **Verse 72:** * **Ekam Dve Trini
Ahoratraanyarka Eva Marud Vahan | Varshetribhirvabhyamekenantayeindau Ruje Punah
||** * **Meaning:** If the air flows only in the Surya Nadi for the entire day
and night, then death occurs in three years. Similarly, if the air flows for two
days and nights, then death occurs in two years, and if it flows for three days
and nights, then death occurs in one year. If the Chandra Nadi flows for that
many days, then disease arises. (72)  **Verse 73:** * **Masamekam Ravaveva,
Vahan Vayurvinirdishit | Ahoratravadhirmrityum Shashanke Tu Dhanakshayam ||** *
**Meaning:** If the air flows continuously in the Surya Nadi for one month, then
death occurs within one day and night. If the Chandra Nadi flows for that long,
then loss of wealth occurs. (73)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 vAyu ke zubhAzubha phala yogazAstra paMcama prakAza zloka 65 se 73 aba phira
bAMyI aura dAhinI nAr3I kA viSama vibhAga kahate haiN|527| vAmA zastodaye pakSe,
site kRSNe tu dakSiNA  /  trINi trINi dinAnIndu-sUryayorudayaH zubhaH  // 65 /
/  artha :- zuklapakSa meM sUryodaya ke samaya bAMyI nAr3I kA udaya zreSTha mAnA
gayA hai aura kRSNapakSa meM sUryodaya ke . samaya dAhinI nAr3I kA udaya zubha
mAnA gayA hai| ina donoM nAr3iyoM kA udaya tIna dina taka zubha mAnA | jAtA hai
/  / 5 /  /  Age isa saMbaMdha meM adhika spaSTatA kI jaayegii| udaya kA niyama
kahakara aba asta kA niyama kahate haiN||528|shshaakenodyo vAyoH, sUryeNAstaM
zubhAvaham  /  udaye raviNa tvasya, zazinA'staM zivamatam  // 66 /  /  artha :-
jisa dina sUryodaya ke samaya vAyu kA udaya caMdrasvara meM huA ho aura sUrya
svara meM asta hotA ho to vaha - dina zubha hai| yadi usa dina sUryasvara meM
udaya aura caMdrasvara meM asta ho, taba bhI kalyANakArI mAnA jAtA - hai  // 66
//  isI bAta kA spaSTIkaraNa tIna zlokoM dvArA karate haiN529| sitapakSe
dinArambhe, yatnataH pratipaddine  /  vAyorvIkSeta saMcAraM, prazastamitaraM
tathA  // 67 /  /  1530 /  udeti pavanaH pUrvaM, zazinyeSa tryahaM tataH  /
saGkrAmati tryahaM sUrye, zazinyeva punastryaham  // 68 /  /  1531 /  vahed
yAvad bRhanpUrvakrameNAnena mArutaH  /  kRSNapakSe punaH sUryodayapUrvamayaM
kramaH  // 69 /  /  artha :- zuklapakSa kI pratipadA ke dina sUryodaya ke
prAraMbha meM vAyu ke saMcAra ko yatnapUrvaka dekha lenA cAhie ki vaha prazasta
hai yA aprazasta? prathama tIna dina (1, 2, 3 ke dina) sUryodaya ke samaya
caMdranAr3I calatI hai| usake bAda 4, 5, 6 tIna dina sUryodaya ke samaya sUrya
nADI bahatI hai, tadanantara phira 7-8-9 ke dina caMdranAr3I, 10, 11, 12 ke dina
sUryanAr3I aura 13, 14, 15 ke dina caMdranAr3I meM pavana bahatA hai aura
kRSNapakSa meM prathama tIna dina (1, 2, 3) sUryanAr3I, phira 4, 5, 6 ke dina
caMdranAr3I meM, isI krama se tIna tIna dina ke krama se amAvasyA taka bhegaa|
vAyu kA yaha krama sAre dina ke lie nahIM hai paraMtu kevala sUrya-udaya ke
samaya ke lie hai| usake bAda DhAI DhAI ghaMTe meM caMdranAr3I aura sUryanAr3I
badalatI rahatI hai| isa niyama meM raddobadala hone para usakA phala azubha yA
duHkhaphalasUcaka hai  /  / 67-69 /  /  . - isa krama meM gar3abar3I ho to,
usakA phala do zlokoM dvArA batAte haiN532| trIn pakSAnanyathAtve'sya,
mAsaSaTkena paJcatA  /  pakSadvayaM viparyAse'bhISTa-bandhuvipad bhavet  // 70 /
/  533 /  bhavet tu dAruNA, vyAdhirekapakSaM viparyaye  /
dvivyAdyaharviparyAse, kalahAdikamudvizet  //  71 /  /  artha :- pUrvakathita
caMdra yA sUryanAr3I ke krama se viparyAsa-viparIta tIna pakSa taka pavana
bahatA ho to chaha mahIne meM mRtyu ho jAtI hai| yadi pakSa taka viparIta krama
hotA rahe to snehI-baMdhu para vipatti AtI hai; eka pakSa taka viparIta pavana
cale to bhayaMkara vyAdhi utpanna hotI hai aura yadi do-tIna-dina viparIta vAyu
cale to kalaha Adi aniSTa phala khar3A hotA hai  /  / 70-71 /  /  tthaa|534|
ekaM dve trINyahorAtrANyarka eva marud vahan  /
varSetribhirvAbhyAmekenAntAyendau ruje punaH  /  / 72 //  artha :- yadi pUre
dina-rAta bhara sUryanAr3I meM hI pavana calatA rahe to tIna varSa meM mRtyu
hotI hai, isI taraha do dina-rAta taka vAyu cale to do varSa meM mRtyu hotI hai
aura tIna dina-rAta calatA rahe to eka varSa meM mRtyu ho jAtI hai| aura yadi
caMdranAr3I utane dina calatI rahe to roga utpanna hotA hai  /  / 72 /  /
tthaa|535| mAsamekaM ravAveva, vahan vAyurvinirdizet  /  ahorotrAvadhirmRtyuM
zazAGke tu dhanakSayam  // 73 /  /  artha :- yadi kisI manuSya ke eka mahIne
taka lagAtAra sUryanAr3I meM hI vAyu calatA rahe to usakI eka dinarAta An2

Page #426 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 5, Verses 74-84 of Yoga Shastra:  **Verse 73:** If the wind continues
to flow through the Chandra Nadi for a month, the person's wealth will be
destroyed.  **Verse 74:**  * **Meaning:** If the wind flows through all three
Nadis (Ida, Pingala, and Sushumna) simultaneously, death will occur after two
Praharas. If the wind flows through Ida and Pingala together, death will occur
in ten days. If the wind flows only through Sushumna for a long time, death will
occur quickly.  **Verse 75:** * **Meaning:** If the wind continuously flows
through the Chandra Nadi for ten days, it will cause anxiety and illness. If the
wind alternates between the Surya and Chandra Nadis, flowing through one for
half a Prahara and the other for half a Prahara, it will bring benefits,
worship, and prestige.  **Verse 76:** * **Meaning:** When the day and night are
equal, with twelve hours each, it is called Vishuvat Kala. This occurs twice a
year. If someone's eyes flicker during this Vishuvat Kala, they will surely die
within a day and night. This flickering is also a sign of wind imbalance, so it
does not contradict the current context.  **Verse 77:** * **Meaning:** The
transition of the wind from one Nadi to another is called "Sankranti." If five
Sankrantis occur consecutively during the day, and on the sixth Sankranti the
wind flows through the mouth, it indicates loss of friends, wealth, energy, and
all other misfortunes, except death.  **Verse 78:** * **Meaning:** If thirteen
Sankrantis occur consecutively, and the wind flows through the left nostril, it
indicates the onset of illness, anxiety, and other problems.  **Verse 79:** *
**Meaning:** If the wind flows through the same Nadi for five consecutive days
starting from the first day of Margashirsha month, death will occur in the
eighteenth year from that day.  **Verse 80:** * **Meaning:** If the wind flows
through the same Nadi for five consecutive days starting from the beginning of
Sharad Ritu (Ashoj month), death will occur at the end of the fifteenth year
from that day.  **Verse 81:** * **Meaning:** If the wind flows through the same
Nadi for five consecutive days starting from the beginning of Shravan month, it
indicates death in the twelfth year.  **Verse 82:** * **Meaning:** If the wind
flows through the same Nadi for ten consecutive days starting from the first day
of Jyeshtha month, death will surely occur at the end of the ninth year.
**Verse 83:** * **Meaning:** If the wind flows through the same Nadi for five
consecutive days starting from the first day of Chaitra month, death will surely
occur at the end of the sixth year.  **Verse 84:** * **Meaning:** If the wind
flows through the same Nadi for five consecutive days starting from the
beginning of Magha month, it indicates death at the end of the third year.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 yogazAstra paMcama prakAza zloka 74 se 84 meM hI mRtyu ho jAtI hai, yadi eka
mAsa taka caMdranAr3I meM pavana calatA rahe to usake dhana kA nAza hotA hai  /
/  73  /  /  tathA - vAyu se mRtyu kA kA jJAna | | 536  /  vAyustrimArgagaH
zaMset madhyAhnAt parato mRtim  /  dazAhaM tu dvimArgasthaH, saMkrAntau maraNaM
dizet  // 74 //  artha :- ir3A, piMgalA aura suSumNA ina tInoM nAr3iyoM meM yadi
ekasAtha pavana calatA rahe to do prahara ke pazcAt maraNa hotA hai| ir3A aura
piMgalA donoM nAr3iyoM meM sAtha meM vAyu cale to dasa dina meM mRtyu hotI hai
aura . kevala suSumNA meM hI laMbe samaya taka vAyu cale to zIghra maraNa hotA
hai  /  /  74  /  /   / 537 /  dazAhaM tu vahannindAvevodvegaruje marut  /
itazcetazca yAmArdhaM, vahan lAbhArcanAdikRt  // 75 //  artha :- yadi niraMtara
dasa dina taka caMdranAr3I meM hI pavana calatA rahe to udvega aura roga utpanna
hotA hai aura sUrya tathA caMdranAr3I meM vAyu bAra-bAra badalatA rahe arthAt
Adhe prahara sUryanAr3I meM aura Adhe prahara caMdranAr3I meM vAyu calatA rahe
to lAbha, pUjA, pratiSThA Adi kI prApti hotI hai  /  / 75 /  /  tathA  / 538 /
viSuvat samayaprAptau spandete yasya cakSuSI  /  ahorAtreNa jInIyAt tasya
nAzamasaMzayam  // 76 //  artha :- jaba dina rAta samAna ho, bAraha-bAraha
ghaMTe kA dina-rAta samAna ho, jarA bhI kama jyAdA na ho use viSavata kAla
kahate haiM, aise dina varSa meM do hI Ate haiN| aise viSuvat kAla meM jisakI
AMkhe pharakatI hai, usakI eka dina rAta meM avazya hI mRtyu ho jAtI hai,
pharakanA bhI vAyu kA vikAra hai, isalie prastuta prasaMga kA bhaMga nahIM hotA
/  /  76  /  /  tathA |  /  539  /  paJcAtikramya saMkrAntIrmukhe vAyurvahan
dizet  /  mitrArthahAnI nistejo'narthAn sarvAnmRtiM vinA  /  / 77|4/ artha :-
pavana kA eka nAr3I meM se dUsarI nAr3I meM jAnA, 'saMkrAMti' kahalAtA hai| dina
meM lagAtAra yadi aisI pAMca saMkrAMtiyA~ bIta jAne ke bAda chaTThI saMkrAMti ke
samaya mukha se vAyu cale to vaha mRtyu ko chor3akara mitrahAni, dhana hAni,
nisteja honA, udvega, roga, dezAMtara -gamana Adi sabhI anartha sUcita karatA
hai  /  /  77  /  /   / 540 /  saMkrAntIH samatikramya, trayodaza samIraNaH  /
pravahan vAmanAsAyAM, rogodvegAdi sUcayet  // 78 //  artha :- yadi pahale kahe
anusAra teraha saMkrAntiyoM taka ullaMghana ho jAne para vAyu vAma nAsikA se
bahe to vaha roga, udvega Adi kI utpatti ko sUcita karatA  / 541 /
mArgazIrSasya saMkrAnti - kAlAdArabhya mArutaH  /  vahan paJcAhamAcaSTe
vatsare'STAdaze mRtim  // 79 //  artha :mArgazIrSa mAsa ke prathama dina se
lekara lagAtAra pAMca dina taka eka hI nAr3I meM pavana calatA rahe to usa dina
se aThArahaveM varSa meM mRtyu hogI  /  /  79  /  /  tathA 1178|| tathA  / 542 /
zaratsaMkrAntikAlAcca, paJcAhaM mAruto vahan  /  tataH paJcadazAbdAnAm ante
maraNamAdizet ||80|| yadi zaradaRtu kI saMkrAMti se arthAt Asoja mAsa ke
prAraMbha se pAMca dina taka eka hI nAr3I meM pavana calatA rahe to usa dina se
paMdrahaveM varSa ke aMta meM usakI mRtyu hogI ||80|| artha : |  /  543 |
zrAvaNAdeH samArabhya paJcAhamanilo vahan  /  ante dvAdaza-varSANAM maraNaM
parisUcayet  // 81 //  || 544  /  vahan jyeSThAdidivasAd, dazAhAni samIraNaH  /
dizennavamavarSasya paryante maraNaM dhruvam  // 82 //  ||545 /  Arabhya
caitrAdyadinAt paJcAhaM pavano vahan  /  paryante varSaSaTkasya, mRtyuM
niyatamAdizet  //  83|| ||546 | Arabhya mAghamAsAdeH, paJcAhAni marud vahan  /
saMvatsaratrayasyAnte, saMsUcayati paJcatAm  // 84 //  artha :- zrAvaNa mahIne
ke prAraMbha se pAMca dina taka eka hI nAr3I meM pavana cale to vaha bArahaveM
varSa meM maraNa kA sUcaka hai| jyeSTha mahIne ke prathama dina se dasa dina
taka eka hI nAr3I meM vAyu calatA rahe to nau varSa ke aMta meM nizcaya hI usakI
mRtyu honI caahie| caitra mahIne ke prathama dina se pAMca dina taka eka hI
nAr3a 404

Page #427 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Yogashastra, Fifth Light, Verses 85-92:  **If the wind blows continuously in
one nadi for six years, death is certain.** If the wind blows in one nadi for
five days starting from the first day of the month of Magh, it indicates death
within three years. ||81-84||  **Knowledge of Death Through Wind**  ||547|| If
the wind blows for two, three, or four days in one nadi, then the lifespan
should be reduced by that many divisions of the year. For example, if the wind
blows in one nadi for five days at the beginning of the month of Margashirsha,
death is predicted in eighteen years. If the wind blows for four days instead of
five, then the lifespan should be reduced by one-fifth of eighteen years, which
is three years, seven months, and six days. This results in a lifespan of
fourteen years, four months, and twenty-four days. Similarly, if the wind blows
for three or two days, the lifespan should be calculated accordingly. The same
rule applies to the months of Sharad and others. ||85||  **Another Method for
Determining Lifespan Through Wind**  ||548|| Now, I will explain another method
for determining lifespan. This method is based on the path of the Sun and is
known as the "Paushnakal." ||86||  **The Nature of Paushnakal**  ||549|| When
the Moon is in the birth nakshatra and the Sun is in the seventh house from its
own sign, and the Moon has traversed the same number of birth signs as the Sun
has traversed the seventh house, then this period is called "Paushnakal." Death
can be determined during this period. ||87||  **Determining Lifespan Through
Wind in Paushnakal**  ||550|| If the wind blows in the Surya nadi for half a day
during Paushnakal, death will occur in the fourteenth year. If the wind blows
for a full day, death will occur in the twelfth year. ||88||  ||551|| Similarly,
if the wind blows for one day and night, two days, or three days in the Surya
nadi during Paushnakal, death will occur in the tenth year, eighth year, and
sixth year respectively. ||89||  ||552|| If the wind blows for four days, death
will occur in the fourth year. If it blows for five days, death will occur in
the third year, or after one thousand eighty days. ||90||  ||553|| If the wind
blows continuously for six, seven, eight, nine, or ten days in the Surya nadi,
the lifespan will be reduced by one, two, three, four, or five twenty-fours from
the total of 1080 days. ||91||  **Explanation of the Above**  ||554|| If the
wind blows for six days, the lifespan will be one thousand sixty-five days.
||92||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 yogazAstra paMcama prakAza zloka 85 se 92 meM pavana calatA rahe to chaha varSa
ke aMta meM avazya maraNa hogaa| mAgha mahIne ke prathama dina se pAMca dina
taka eka hI nAr3I meM vAyu calatA rahe to tIna varSa ke aMta meM maraNa hone kA
sUcita karatA hai  /  / 81-84  /  /  tathA vAyu se mRtyu kA kAla jJAna || 547 |
sarvatra dvi- tri- caturo, vAyuzced divasAn vahet  /  abdabhAgaistu te zodhyA:,
yathAvadanupUrvazaH ||85 || artha :- kisI mahIne meM pAMca dina taka eka hI
nAr3I meM vAyu cale to utane hI varSoM meM maraNa batalAyA hai, usa mahIne meM
do tIna yA cAra dina taka yadi eka hI nAr3I meM vAyu calatA rahe to usa varSa ke
utane hI vibhAga karake dinoM ke anusAra varSa ke utane hI vibhAga kama kara
dene caahie| jaise ki mArgazIrSa mahIne ke prAraMbha meM pAMca dina taka eka hI
nAr3I meM vAyu cale to aThAraha varSoM meM maraNa kahA hai, yadi usa mAsa meM
pAMca ke badale cAra dina taka eka hI nAr3I meM pavana calatA rahe to aThAraha
varSa ke pAMcaveM bhAga ke arthAt tIna varSa sAta mahIne aura chaha dina ke kama
karane para caudaha varSa cAra mAsa aura cauvIsa dina meM mRtyu honA phalita
hotA hai| isI prakAra tIna, do dina vAyu calatA rahe isI hisAba se samajha lenA
aura zarad Adi ke mahIne meM bhI yahI niyama samajhanA cAhie  /  /  85  /  /
aba dUsare upAya se vAyu ke nimitta se hone vAlA kAlajJAna batAte haiM | | 548
/  athedAnIM pravakSyAmi, kaJcit kAlasya nirNayam  /  sUryamArgaM samAzritya sa
ca paussnne'vgmyte||86|| artha :- aba maiM kucha kAlajJAna kA nirNaya batAUMgA,
vaha kAla - jJAna sUryamArga ko Azrita karake pauSNakAla meM jAnA jAtA hai  /  /
86  /  /  aba pauSNakAla kA svarUpa kahate haiM  / 549 /  janmaRkSagate candre,
samasaptagate ravau  /  pauSNanAmA bhavet kAlo, mRtyu - nirNaya-kAraNam  // 87
//  artha :- janma nakSatra meM caMdramA ho aura apanI rAzi se sAtavIM rAzi meM
sUrya ho tathA caMdramA ne jitanI janma rAzi bhogI ho, utanI hI sUrya ne sAtavIM
rAzi bhogI ho, taba 'pauSNa' nAmaka kAla kahalAtA hai| isa pauSNakAla meM mRtyu
kA nirNaya kiyA jA sakatA hai  /  /  87  /  /  pauSNakAla meM sUryanAr3I meM
vAyu cale to usake dvArA kAlajJAna batAte haiM ||550 dinArdhaM dinamekaM ca yadA
sUrye marud vahan  /  caturdaze dvAdaze'bde, mRtyave bhavati kramAt  // 88 //
artha :- usa pauSNakAla meM yadi Adhe dina taka sUryanAr3I meM pavana calatA
rahe to caudahaveM varSa meM mRtyu hogI, yadi pUre dina pavana cale to bArahaveM
varSa meM mRtyu hotI hai  /  /  88  /  /   / 551 /  tathaiva ca vahan vAyuH
ahorAtraM dvayahaM tryaham  /  dazamASTamaSaSThAbdesvantAya bhavati kramAt  //
89 //  usI taraha pauSNakAla meM eka ahorAtri, do yA tIna dina taka sUryanAr3I
meM pavana calatA rahe to kramazaH dasaveM varSa, AThaveM varSa aura chaTThe
varSa mRtyu hotI hai  /  /  89  /  /  artha : ||552 | vahan dinAdi catvAri,
turye'bde mRtyave marut  /  sAzItyahaH sahasre tu paJcAhAni vahan punaH  //  90
//  artha :- usI prakAra se pauSNakAla meM cAra dina taka sUryanAr3I meM vAyu
calatA rahe to cauthe varSa meM aura pAMca dina taka calatA rahe to tIna varSa
meM arthAt eka hajAra assI dina meM mRtyu hotI hai  /  /  90  /  /  1553 /  eka-
dvi-tri- catuH - paJca- - caturvizatyahaH kssyaat| SaDAdIn divasAn paJja
zodhayediha tadyathA  //  91  //  artha :- sUryanAr3I meM lagAtAra chaha, sAta,
ATha, nau yA dasa dina taka usI taraha vAyu calatA rahe to vaha 1080 dinoM meM
se kramazaH eka, do, tIna, cAra aura pAMca cauvIsI dina kama taka jIvita rahatA
hai  /  /  11  /  /  Age ise hI cAra zlokoM se spaSTa karate haiM  /  554 /
SaTkaM dinAnAmadhyarkaM, vahamAne samIraNe  /  jIvatyahnAM sahasraM SaT
paJcAzaddivasAdhikam  // 92 //  405

Page #428 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Knowledge of the Time of Death from Air  **Yoga Shastra, Fifth Light, Verses
93-102**  **Meaning:** If the wind flows in the Surya Nadi for six days, then
the person will live for 1056 days, which is 24 less than one Chaubis (1080 - 24
= 1056). || 92 ||  **555. If the wind flows in the Surya Nadi for seven days,
then the person will live for 1008 days, which is two Chaubis less than 1056
(1056 - 48 = 1008). If the wind flows in the Surya Nadi for eight days, then the
person will live for 936 days. || 93 ||**  **Meaning:** If the wind flows
continuously in the Surya Nadi for seven days, then the person will live for
1008 days, which is two Chaubis less than 1056 (1056 - 48 = 1008). And if the
wind flows continuously in the Surya Nadi for eight days, then the person will
live for 936 days. || 93 ||  **556. If the wind flows continuously for nine
days, then the person will live for 840 days, which is four Chaubis less than
936 (936 - 96 = 840). || 94 ||**  **Meaning:** In the same way, if the wind
flows continuously for nine days, then the person will live for 840 days, which
is four Chaubis less than 936 (936 - 96 = 840). || 94 ||  **557. If the wind
flows continuously for ten days, then the person will live for 720 days, which
is five Chaubis less than 840 (840 - 120 = 720). || 95 ||**  **Meaning:** In the
same way, if the wind flows continuously in the Surya Nadi for ten days during
the Paushna Kala, then the person will live for 720 days, which is five Chaubis
less than 840 (840 - 120 = 720). || 95 ||  **558. If the wind flows in the Surya
Nadi for eleven to fifteen days, then subtract one, two, three, four, and five
Chaubis respectively from 720 days. || 96 ||**  **Meaning:** If the wind flows
in the same Surya Nadi for eleven to fifteen days, then subtract one, two,
three, four, and five Chaubis respectively from seven hundred twenty days. || 96
||  **The author himself explains:**  **559. If the wind flows in the Surya Nadi
for eleven days, then the person will live for 696 days, which is one Chaubis
less than 720 (720 - 24 = 696). || 97 ||**  **Meaning:** If the wind flows in
the Surya Nadi for eleven days during the Paushna Kala, then the person will
live for 696 days, which is one Chaubis less than 720 (720 - 24 = 696). || 97 ||
**560. If the wind flows in the Surya Nadi for twelve days, then the person will
live for 648 days, which is two Chaubis less than 696 (696 - 48 = 648). || 98
||**  **Meaning:** In the same way, if the wind flows in the Surya Nadi for
twelve days, then the person will live for 648 days, which is two Chaubis less
than 696 (696 - 48 = 648). || 98 ||  **561. If the wind flows in the Surya Nadi
for thirteen days, then the person will live for 576 days, which is three
Chaubis less than 648 (648 - 72 = 576). || 99 ||**  **Meaning:** In the same
way, if the wind flows continuously in the Surya Nadi for thirteen days, then
the person will live for 576 days, which is three Chaubis less than 648 (648 -
72 = 576). || 99 ||  **562. If the wind flows in the Surya Nadi for fourteen
days, then the person will live for 480 days, which is four Chaubis less than
576 (576 - 96 = 480). || 100 ||**  **Meaning:** In the same way, if the wind
flows in the Surya Nadi for fourteen days, then the person will live for 480
days, which is four Chaubis less than 576 (576 - 96 = 480). || 100 ||  **563. If
the wind flows in the Surya Nadi for fifteen days, then the person will live for
360 days, which is five Chaubis less than 480 (480 - 120 = 360). || 101 ||**
**Meaning:** In the same way, if the wind flows in the Surya Nadi for fifteen
days, then the person will live for 360 days, which is five Chaubis less than
480 (480 - 120 = 360). || 101 ||  **564. If the wind flows in the Surya Nadi for
sixteen to twenty days, then subtract five, four, three, two, and one Chaubis
respectively from 360 days. || 102 ||**  **Meaning:** If the wind flows in the
same Surya Nadi for sixteen, seventeen, eighteen, nineteen, and twenty days,
then subtract five, four, three, two, and one Chaubis respectively from 360
days. || 102 ||  **Meaning:** 406

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 vAyu se mRtyu kA kAla jJAna yogazAstra paMcama prakAza zloka 93 se 102 artha :-
yadi sUryanAr3I meM chaha dina taka pavana calatA rahe to vaha eka cauvIsI kama
1080 - 24 = 1056 dina taka jIvita rahatA hai  /  /  92  /  /  tathA  / 555 /
sahasra sASTakaM jIved, vAyau saptAhavAhini  /  saSaTtriMzannavazatIM,
jIvedaSTAhavAhini  // 93 //  artha :- sAta dina taka lagAtAra vAyu sUryanAr3I
meM calatA rahe to vaha 1056 dina meM do cauvIsI kama 105648=1008 dina taka
jIvita rahatA hai| tathA ATha dina taka lagAtAra sUryanAr3I cale to 936 dina
jIvita rahatA hai ||13||  / 556 /  ekatraiva navAhAni, tathA vahati mArute  /
ahnAmaSTazataM jIveccatvAriMzaddinAdhikam  // 94 //  artha :- usI taraha yadi
nau dina satata vAyu calatA rahe to 936 dinoM meM cAra cauvIsI arthAt 936 - 96 =
840 dina jIvita rahatA hai  /  /  94  /  /   / 557 /  tathaiva vAyau
pravahatyekatra daza vAsarAn  /  viMzatyabhyadhikAmahnAM, jIvet saptazatIM
dhruvam  // 95 /  /  artha :- usI taraha pauSNakAla meM niraMtara dasa dina taka
sUryanAr3I meM vAyu cale to pUrvokta 840 dinoM meM se pAMca cauvIsI kama arthAt
840 - 120 = 720 dina taka hI jIvita rahatA hai  /  /  95  /  /  1558 /  eka-dvi-
tri- catuH - paJca- - caturviMzatyahaH kSayAt  /  ekAdazAdipaJcAhAnyatra
zodhyAni tad yathA  // 96 //  artha :- yadi gyAraha dina se lekara paMdraha dina
taka eka hI sUryanAr3I meM pavana calatA rahe to sAtasau bIsa dina meM se
kramazaH eka, do, tIna, cAra aura pAMca cauvIsI dina kama karate jAnA  /  /  96
/  /  graMthakAra svayaM spaSTIkaraNa karate haiM  /  559 /
ekAdazadinAnyarkanADyAM vahati mArute  /  SaNNavatyadhikAnyahnAM SaTzatAnyeva
jIvati  // 97 //  artha :- pauSNakAla meM sUryanAr3I meM gyAraha dinoM taka vAyu
calatA rahe to 720 dinoM meM se eka cauvIsI kama arthAt 720-24=696 dina taka
manuSya jIvita rahatA hai  /  /  97  /  /   / 560 /  tathaiva dvAdazAhAni vAyau
vahati jIvati  /  dinAnAM SaTzatImaSTacatvAriMzatsamanvitAm  // 98 //  artha
:usI taraha bAraha dina taka vAyu sUryanAr3I meM calatA rahe to vaha do cauvIsI
kama arthAt 696 - 48=648 dina taka jIvita rahatA hai  /  / 18 /  /  tathA  / 561
/  trayodazadinAnyarkanADIcAriNi mArute  /  jIvetpaJcazatImahnAM,
SaTsaptatidinAdhikAm  // 99 //  artha :usI taraha teraha dina taka sUryanAr3I
meM lagAtAra pavana cale to 648 dinoM meM se tIna cauvIsI kama arthAt 648-72 =
576 dina taka vaha jIvita rahatA hai  /  / 99  /  /  tathA  / 562  /
caturdazadinAnyeva, pravAhiNi samIraNe  /  azItyabhyadhikaM jIved, ahnAM
zatacatuSTayam  // 100 //  artha :usI prakAra caudaha dina taka sUryanAr3I meM
pavana calatA rahe to 576 dinoM meM se cAra cauvIsI kama arthAt 576-96=480 dinoM
taka vaha jIvita rahatA hai  /  /  100  /  /   / 563 /  tathA paJcadazAhAni
yAvad vahati mArute  /  jIvet SaSTidinopetaM, divasAnAM zatatrayam  // 101 //
artha :usI taraha paMdraha dina taka sUryanAr3I meM pavana calatA rahe to 480
dinoM meM se pAMca cauvIsI kama arthAt 480 - 120 = 360 dina jIvita rahatA hai  /
/  101 || ||564 |ek-dvi- tri- catuH - paJca- dvAdazAhakramakSayAt  /
SoDazAdyAni paJcAhAnyatra zodhyAni tad yathA  //  102  //  solaha, satraha,
aThAra, unnIsa aura bIsa dina taka eka hI sUrya nAr3I meM aura pAMca bAraha dina
kama kara dene para utane dina taka jIvita rahatA hai  /  /  102  /  /  artha :
406

Page #429 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Knowledge of the Time of Death from Air  The fifth light of Yoga Shastra, verses
103 to 112, further explain this.565. If the wind flows continuously through one
nostril for sixteen days, then out of 360 days, one twelve less, i.e.,
360-12=348 days, he will live. ||103|| Meaning: If the wind flows continuously
through one nostril for sixteen days, then out of 360 days, one twelve less,
i.e., 360-12=348 days, he will live. ||103|| 566. If the wind flows through one
nostril for seventeen days, then death will occur in 348 days minus two twelves,
i.e., 348-24=324 days. ||104|| Meaning: If the wind flows through one nostril
for seventeen days, then death will occur in 348 days minus two twelves, i.e.,
348-24=324 days. ||104|| Thus 1567. If the wind flows for eighteen days, then
death will occur in 324 days minus three twelves, i.e., 324-36=288 days. ||105||
Meaning: If the wind flows for eighteen days, then death will occur in 324 days
minus three twelves, i.e., 324-36=288 days. ||105|| Thus 1568. If the wind flows
for nineteen days, then death will occur in 288 days minus four twelves, i.e.,
288-48=240 days. ||106|| Meaning: If the wind flows for nineteen days, then
death will occur in 288 days minus four twelves, i.e., 288-48=240 days. ||106||
1569. If the wind flows through one nostril for twenty days, then death will
occur in 240 days minus five twelves, i.e., 240-60=180 days, without a doubt.
||107|| Meaning: If the wind flows through one nostril for twenty days, then
death will occur in 240 days minus five twelves, i.e., 240-60=180 days, without
a doubt. ||107|| ||570. From one, two, three, four, five, six days, the decrease
should be in the order of one, two, three, four, and five sixes. From twenty-one
to twenty-five days, these should be subtracted accordingly. ||108|| Meaning: If
the wind flows through the Surya Nadi for twenty-one to twenty-five days, then
from the aforementioned 180 days, one, two, three, four, and five sixes should
be subtracted accordingly. ||108|| This is explained 1571. If the wind flows
through the Surya Nadi for twenty-one days, then death will occur in 180 days
minus one six, i.e., 180-6=174 days. ||109|| Meaning: If the wind flows through
the Surya Nadi for twenty-one days, then death will occur in 180 days minus one
six, i.e., 180-6=174 days. ||109|| 572. If the wind flows for twenty-two days,
then he will live for 174 days minus two sixes, i.e., 162 days. If the wind
flows for twenty-three days, then death will occur in 162 days minus three
sixes, i.e., 162-18=144 days, which is six days less than five months. ||110||
Meaning: If the wind flows for twenty-two days, then he will live for 174 days
minus two sixes, i.e., 162 days. If the wind flows for twenty-three days, then
death will occur in 162 days minus three sixes, i.e., 162-18=144 days, which is
six days less than five months. ||110|| Thus 573. If the wind flows for twenty-
four days, then death will occur in 144 days minus four sixes, i.e., 144-24=120
days. ||111|| Meaning: If the wind flows for twenty-four days, then death will
occur in 144 days minus four sixes, i.e., 144-24=120 days. ||111|| 574. If the
wind flows for twenty-five days, then death will occur in 120 days minus five
sixes, i.e., 120-30=90 days (three months). If the wind flows for twenty-six
days, then death will occur in two months. ||112|| Meaning: If the wind flows
for twenty-five days, then death will occur in 120 days minus five sixes, i.e.,
120-30=90 days (three months). If the wind flows for twenty-six days, then death
will occur in two months. ||112|| Thus 407

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 vAyu se mRtyu kA kAla jJAna yogazAstra paMcama prakAza zloka 103 se 112 isakA
vivaraNa Age svayaM spaSTa karate haiN|565| pravahatyekanAsAyAM, SoDazAhAni
mArute  /  jIvetsahASTacatvAriMzataM dinazatatrayIm  /  / 103 //  artha :-
lagAtAra solaha dina taka piMgalA yA kisI eka nAsikA meM pavana calatA rahe to
360 dinoM meM se eka ... bAraha kama arthAt 360-12=348 dina taka vaha jIvita
rahatA hai  /  / 103 /  /  566 /  vahamAne tayA saptadazAhAni samIraNe  /  ahrAM
zatatraye mRtyuzcaturviMzatisaJyute  // 104 /  /  artha :- usI taraha 17 dina
taka eka hI nAr3I meM vAyu calatA rahe to 348 dinoM meM do bAraha-24 kama 348
24=324 dina meM mRtyu hotI hai  /  / 104 /  /  tthaa1567| pavane
vicaratyaSTAdazAhAni tathaiva ca  /  nAzo'STAzItisaMyukte, gate dinazatadvaye
// 105 /  /  artha :- isI prakAra aThAraha dina taka pavana calatA rahe to 324
dinoM meM se tIna bAraha 36 kama 324-36288 _dina meM mRtyu hotI hai  /  / 105 /
/  tthaa1568| vicaratyanile tadvad dinAnyekonaviMzatim  /  catvAriMzadyute yAte,
mRtyudinazatadvaye  // 106 /  /  artha :- pUrvavat unnIsa dina vAyu calatA rahe
to 288 dinoM meM se cAra bAraha=48 kama 288-48=240 dina meM | usakI mRtyu hotI
hai  // 106 /  /  1569 /  viMzati-divasAnekanAsAcAriNi mArute  /  sAzItau
vAsarazate, gate mRtyurna saMzayaH  // 107 //  artha :- yadi bIsa dina taka eka
hI nAr3I meM pavana calatA rahe to 240 dinoM meM se pAMca bAraha-60 kama arthAt
240-60=180 dina meM nizcita rUpa se mRtyu hotI hai  /  / 107 /  /   /  / 570 /
eka-dvi-tri-catuH-paJca-dina-SaTka-kramakSayAt  /  ekaviMzAdipaJcAhAnyatra
zodhyAni tad ythaa||108|| artha :- ikkIsa se lekara paccIsa dina taka sUryanAr3I
meM hI pavana bahatA rahe to pUrvokta 180 dinoM meM hI se kramazaH eka, do,
tIna, cAra aura pAMca SaTka kama karate jAnA cAhie  // 108 /  /  isakA
spaSTIkaraNa karate haiN1571| ekaviMzatyahaM tvarkanADIvAhini mArute  /
catuHsaptatisaMyukte, mRtyudinazate bhavet  // 109 /  /  artha :- pUrvokta
pauSNakAla meM yadi ikkIsa dina taka sUryanAr3I meM pavana calatA rahe to 180
dinoM meM se eka SaTka kama yAnI 180-6=174 dina meM usakI mRtyu hotI hai|  / 572
/  dvAviMzatidinAnyevaM, sa dviSaSThAvahaHzate  /  SaDdinonaiH
paJcamAsaistrayoviMzatyahAnuge  // 110 //  artha :- isI prakAra bAIsa dina taka
pUrvavat pavana cale to 174 dinoM meM se do SaTka=12 dina kama yAnI 162 dina
taka jIvita rahegA aura teIsa dina taka usI prakAra pavana cale to 162 dinoM meM
se tIna SaTka arthAt aThAraha dina kama karane se chaha dina kama pAMca mahine
meM arthAt 162-18144 dinoM meM mRtyu hotI hai  // 110 /  /  tthaa|573| tathaiva
vAyau vahati, caturviMzativAsarIm  /  viMzatyabhyadhike mRtyubhaved dinazate
gate  // 111 /  /  artha :- yadi caubIsa dina taka vAyu eka hI nAr3I meM bahatA
rahe to 144 dinoM meM se cAra SaTka kama arthAt 144 24=120 dina bItane para
mRtyu ho jAtI hai  /  / 111 /  /  574 /  paJcaviMzatyahaM caivaM, vAyau
mAsatraye mRtiH  /  mAsadvaye punarmRtyuH, SaDviMzatidinAnuge  // 112 //  artha
:- paccIsa dina taka vAyu calatA rahe to 120 dinoM meM se pAMca SaTka-30 dina
kama=90 dina-(tIna mahIne) meM aura chabbIsa dina taka vAyu calatA rahe to do
mahIne meM mRtyu hotI hai||112|| tathA 407

Page #430 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Yoga Shastra, Fifth Light, Verses 113-122: Description of External Time Signs
**Verse 113:** If the wind blows for twenty-seven days, death occurs in one
month. If it blows for twenty-eight days, death occurs in fifteen days.  **Verse
114:** If the wind blows in one nadi for twenty-nine days, death occurs in ten
days. If it blows for thirty days, death occurs on the fifth day.  **Verse
115:** If the wind blows for thirty-one days, death occurs in three days. If it
blows for thirty-two days, death occurs in two days.  **Verse 116:** Thus, after
concluding the four types of Surya Nadi, we describe the four types of Chandra
Nadi. If the wind blows in the Surya Nadi for thirty-three days, death occurs in
one day. If the wind blows in the Chandra Nadi, it does not result in death, but
instead indicates illness, loss of friends, great fear, leaving one's homeland,
loss of wealth and children, destruction of the kingdom, famine, etc.  **Verse
117:** By practicing and observing the wind within the body, dependent on the
Surya and Chandra Nadi, one should know the determination of time.  **Verse
118:** Due to illness, the internal wind can become reversed. To determine the
time accurately, we describe the external signs of time.  **Verse 119:** The
signs of time are three-fold: through the eyes, ears, and head. These are
observed in relation to the sun, and other external signs can be observed as
desired.  **Verse 120:** In the left eye, one should know the presence of a
sixteen-petaled lotus, blooming with the moon's light. In the right eye, one
should know the presence of a twelve-petaled lotus, blooming with the sun's
light.  **Verse 121:** Four petals of each lotus, resembling the glow of
fireflies, should be visible in each eye when pressed with one's finger, as
instructed by the Guru.  **Verse 122:** In the Chandra-related lotus, if the
four lower petals are not visible, death occurs in six months. If the petals are
lost in the eyebrow, forehead, and near the nose, death occurs in six months,
three months, and one month respectively.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 yogazAstra paMcama prakAza zloka 113 se 122 bAhya kAla lakSaNa kA varNana  /
575 /  saptaviMzatyaha vahet nAzo mAsena jAyate  /  mAsArdhena
punarmRtyuraSTAviMzatyahAnuge  //  113  //  isI taraha sattAIsa dina taka vAyu
calatA rahe to eka mahIne meM aura aThAIsa dina taka calatA rahe to paMdraha
dina meM hI mRtyu hotI hai  /  /  113  /  /  tathA artha :  / 576 /
ekonatriMzadahage, mRtiH syAddazema'hani  /  trizaddinacare tu syAt, paJcatvaM
paJcame dine  // 114 //  artha :- yadi untIna dina taka eka hI nADI meM vAyu
calatA rahe to dasa dina meM aura tIsa dina taka calatA rahe to pAMcaveM dina
mRtyu hotI hai  /  /  114  /  /  tathA  / 577 /  ekatriMzadahacare, vAyau
mRtyurdinatraye  /  dvitIyadivase nAzo dvAtriMzadahavAhini  // 115 //  artha :
isI prakAra ikattIsa dina taka vAyu cale to tIna dina meM aura battIsa dina taka
cale to do dina meM mRtyu hotI hai  /  /  115  /  /  isa prakAra sUryanAr3I ke
cAra kA upasaMhAra karake caMdranAr3I ke cAra ko kahate haiM artha :  / 578 /
trayastriMzadahacare, tvekAhenApi paJcatA  /  evaM yadIndunADyAM syAttadA
vyAdhyAdikaM dizet  //  116 //  isI prakAra taitIsa dina taka sUryanAr3I meM
pavana calatA rahe to eka hi dina meM mRtyu ho jAtI hai| usI prakAra yadi
caMdranAr3I meM pavana calatA rahe to usakA phala mRtyu nahIM hai, paraMtu utane
hI kAla meM vyAdhi, mitranAza, mahAn bhaya, svadeza kA tyAga, dhanaputrAdi kA
nAza, rAjya kA vinAza, duSkAla Adi hotA hai  /  /  116  /  /  upasaMhAra karate
haiM--  /  579  /  adhyAtmaM vAyumAzritya pratyekaM sUryasomayoH  /
evamabhyAsayogena, jAnIyAt, kaalnirnnym|| 117 /  /  :- isa prakAra zarIra ke
aMdara rahe hue vAyu ke Azrita sUrya aura caMdranAr3I kA abhyAsa karake kAla kA
nirNaya jAnanA cAhie | | 117  /  /  artha bAhya kAla-lakSaNa kahate haiM artha :
/  580  /  adhyAtmaviparyAsaH sambhaved vyAdhito'pi hi  /  tannizcayAya
badhnAbhiH, bAhyaM kAlasya lakSaNam  // 118 //  kisI samaya vyAdhi - (roga)
utpanna hone ke kAraNa bhI zarIra saMbaMdhI vAyu (ulaTa-pulaTa - viparIta) ho
jAtA hai| isalie kAla - jJAna kA nizcaya karane ke lie kAla ke bAhya lakSaNoM kA
varNana kiyA jAtA hai  /  /  118  /  /  |581| netra - zrotra - zirobhedAt, sa ca
trividhalakSaNaH  /  nirIkSyaH sUryamAzritya yatheSTamaparaH punaH  //  119  //
artha netra, kAna aura mastaka ke bheda se kAla tIna prakAra kA mAnA gayA hai|
yaha sUrya kI apekSA se bAhyakAla kA lakSaNa hai aura isase atirikta
bAhyalakSaNa apanI icchA se dekhe jAte haiM  /  /  119  /  /  isameM sUrya kA
avalaMbana lene kI AvazyakatA nahIM hai| aba isameM netra- lakSaNa kahate haiM
/  582 /  vAme tatrekSaNe padmaM, SoDazacchadamaindavam  /  jAnIyAd bhAnavIyaM
tu dakSiNe dvAdazacchadam  // 120 //  artha :- bA netra meM solaha paMkhur3I
vAlA caMdravikAsI kamala hai aura dAhine netra meM bAraha paMkhur3I vAlA
sUryavikAsI kamala hai| aisA sarvaprathama parijJAna prApta karanA cAhie || 120
//   / 583  /  khadyotadyutivarNAni catvAricchadanAni tu  /  pratyekaM tatra
dRzyAni, svAGgulIvinipIDanAt  // 121 //  artha :- guru ke upadeza ke anusAra
apanI aMgulI se AMkha ke viziSTa bhAga ko dabAne para usameM pratyeka kamala kI
cAra paMkhur3iyA~ jugunU kI taraha camakatI huI dikhAI detI haiM  /  /  121  /
/  ||584 | | somAdho artha : bhrUlatA'pAGga - ghrANAntikadaleSu tu  /  dale
naSTe kramAnmRtyuH SaT - tri-yugmaikamAsataH  //  122  //  caMdra - saMbaMdhI
kamala meM nIce kI cAra paMkhur3iyAM dikhAyI na de to chaha mahIne meM mRtyu
hotI hai, bhrukuTi ke 408

Page #431 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Knowledge of Time through Eyes, Ears, Head and Other Means  **From Yoga
Shastra, Pancham Prakash, Verses 123-131**  **Verse 122:** If the petal near the
eye is not visible, death occurs in three months; if the petal at the corner of
the eye is not visible, death occurs in two months; and if the petal near the
nose is not visible, death occurs in one month.  **Verse 123:** This is the same
order for the lotus related to the sun. When the petals are not visible, death
occurs in ten, five, three, and two days respectively.  **Verse 124:** If the
petals of both lotuses are not visible without pressing the eye with a finger,
death occurs in one hundred days.  **Verses 125-126:** Now, the knowledge of
lifespan through the ears is explained in two verses. Contemplating the lotus
with eight petals in the heart, if the sound of fire (agni-nirghosh) is not
heard in both ears when pressed with the index fingers of both hands, death
occurs in five years if it is not heard for five days, in four years if it is
not heard for ten days, in three years if it is not heard for fifteen days, in
two years if it is not heard for twenty days, and in one year if it is not heard
for twenty-five days.  **Verse 127:** If the sound of fire is not heard in the
ear even after pressing with a finger for six to sixteen days, then death occurs
in five years, subtracting one, two, three, four, etc., sixteen twenty-fours.
For example, if the sound is not heard for five days, death occurs in five
years. After that, if the sound of fire is not heard for six days, then subtract
twenty-four days from five years, i.e., death occurs in 1776 days (1800 days -
24 days). If it is not heard for seven days, then subtract two twenty-fours (48
days) from 1776 days, i.e., death occurs in 1728 days. If it is not heard on the
eighth day, then subtract five twenty-fours (120 days) from the previous number,
i.e., death occurs in 1440 days, which is four years. Similarly, the time of
death should be determined by subtracting the above twenty-fours for eleven to
sixteen days and twenty-one days.  **Verse 128:** Now, the determination of time
of death through the head is explained. If the smoke line (dhumrarekha)
spreading from the Brahma-randhra (the opening at the top of the head) is not
visible for five days, then death occurs in three years.  **Verses 129-131:**
The knowledge of time through other means is explained in six verses. On the
first day of the bright fortnight (Shukla Paksha), one should purify oneself and
imagine one's right hand as the bright fortnight for knowing the time cycle. The
lower, middle, and upper joints of the little finger should be considered as the
first, sixth, and eleventh tithis (lunar days) respectively. The remaining
joints of the fingers should be considered as the remaining tithis. The fifth,
tenth, and full moon (raka) should be considered as the joints of the thumb.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 AMkha, kAna, mastaka tathA anya prakAra se hone vAlA kAlajJAna yogazAstra
paMcama prakAza zloka 123 se 131 samIpa kI paMkhur3I dikhAyI na de to tIna
mahIne meM, AMkha ke kone kI paMkhur3I na dikhAyI de to do mahIne meM aura nAka
ke pAsa kI paMkhur3I dikhAyI nahIM de to eka mahIne meM mRtyu hotI hai  /  / 122
/  /   / 585 /  ayameva kramaH padme, bhAnavIye yadA bhvet| daza-paJca-tri-
dvidinaiH, kramAnmRtyustadA bhvet||123|| artha :- isI kramAnusAra sUryasaMbaMdhI
kamala kI paMkhuDiyAM dikhAI nahIM dene para kramazaH dasa, pAMca, tIna aura do
| dina meM mRtyu hotI hai  // 123 /  /  tthaa1586| etAnyapIDyamAnAni, dvayorapi
hi padmayoH  /  dalAni yadi vIkSeta mRtyudinazatAt tadA  // 124 /  /  artha :-
yadi AMkha ko aMgulI se dabAye binA donoM kamaloM kI paMkhur3iyA~ dikhAyI na de
to so dinoM meM mRtyu hotI hai  // 124 //  aba do zloka dvArA kAna se hone vAlA
AyuSyajJAna kahate haiN|587| dhyAtvA hRdyaSTapatrAbjaM zrotre hastAgra-pIr3ite
/  na zrUyetAgninirghoSo, yadi svaH paJcavAsarAn  // 125 /  /  1588 /  daza vA
paJcadaza vA, viMzati paJcaviMzatim  /  tadA paJca-catustridvayekavarSe maraNaM
kramAt  // 126 /  /  . artha:- hRdaya meM ATha paMkhur3I vAle kamala kA ciMtana
karake donoM hAthoM kI tarjanI aMguliyoM ko donoM kAnoM meM DAlane para yadi
apanA agni-nirghoSa (zabda) pAMca dina taka sunAyI na de to pAMca varSa, dasa
dina taka . sunAyI na de to cAra varSa, paMdraha dina taka sunAyI na de to tIna
varSa, vIsa dina taka sunAyI na de to do varSa aura paccIsa dina taka nahIM
sunAyI de to eka varSa meM mRtyu hotI hai||125-126|| tthaa|589| eka-dvi-tri-
catuH-paJca-caturvizatyahaHkSayAt  /  SaDAdi SoDazadinAnyAntarANyapi zodhayet
// 127 /  /  artha :- yadi chaha dina se lekara solaha dina taka aMgulI se
dabAne para bhI kAna meM agni kA zabda na sunAyI de to pAMca varSa ke dinoM meM
se kramazaH eka, do, tIna, cAra Adi solaha cauvIsiyA~ kama karate hue mRtyu hotI
hai| vaha isa prakAra-pAMca dina taka kAna meM zabda sunAyI na de to pAMca varSa
meM mRtyu hotI hai, yaha bAta pahale kaha gaye haiN| usake bAda chaha dina taka
agni kA zabda sunAyI na de to pAMca varSa meM 24 dina kama karanA arthAt 1800
dinoM meM se 24 dina kama yAnI 1776 dinoM meM mRtyu hotI hai| sAta dina taka
sunAyI na dene para 1776 dinoM meM se do cauvIsa arthAt 48 dina kama karane se
1728 dina meM mRtyu hotI hai| AThaveM dina bhI nahIM sunAyI na de to pUrvokta
meM se pAMca cauvIsa-120 dina kama karane se 1440 dina arthAt cAra varSa meM
mRtyu hotI hai| isI taraha gyAraha dina se solaha dina aura ikkIsa dina taka
uparyukta cauvIsI kama karake maraNakAla kA nizcaya karanA caahie| aba mastaka
se kAlajJAna kA nirNaya batAte haiN1590| brahmadvAre prasarpantI, paJcAhaM
dhUmamAlikAm  /  na cet pazyet tadA jJeyo, mRtyuH saMvatsaraistribhiH  /  / 128
/  /  artha :- brahmarandhra meM phailatI huI (guru mahArAja ke upadeza se
darzanIya) dhUmarekhA yadi pAMca dina taka dRSTigocara na ho to tIna varSa meM
mRtyu hotI hai  /  / 128 //  . anya prakAra se kAlajJAna chaha zlokoM dvArA
batAte haiN|591| pratipaddivase kAla-cakrajJAnAya zaucavAn  /  Atmano dakSiNaM
pANiM zuklapakSaM prakalpayet  /  / 129 /  /  artha :- zuklapakSa kI pratipadA
ke dina pavitra hokara kAlacakra ko jAnane ke lie apane dAhine hAtha kI
zuklapakSa ke rUpa meM kalpanA karanI cAhie  // 128||
tthaa592|adhomdhyordhvprvaanni, kaniSThAGguligAni tu  /  krameNa
pratipatSaSThyekAdazIH kalpayet tithIH  // 130 //  |593|avshessaanggulii-
prvaannyvshess-tithiistthaa  /  paJcamI-dazamI-rAkAH, parvANyaGguSThagAni tu  //
131 //  | artha :- apanI kaniSThA aMgulI ke nIce ke paura meM pratipadA,
madhyama paura meM SaSThI tithi aura Upara ke paura meM 409

Page #432 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Means of Knowing Time  **Yoga Shastra, Fifth Light, Verses 132-139**  Imagine
the eleventh lunar day (Ekadashi). On the thumb, imagine the fifth, tenth, and
full moon days in the lower, middle, and upper phalanges respectively. On the
ring finger, imagine the second, third, and fourth lunar days in the three
phalanges. On the middle finger, imagine the seventh, eighth, and ninth lunar
days in the three phalanges. On the index finger, imagine the twelfth,
thirteenth, and fourteenth lunar days in the three phalanges. ||130-131||
||594||  Imagine the dark fortnight (Krishna Paksha) in the left hand, with the
lunar days in the same way as in the right hand. Then, in a secluded place, the
wise seeker should sit in the lotus posture (Padmasana), with a joyful mind and
bright contemplation. He should join both hands in the shape of a lotus bud and
contemplate a black point within the hands. ||132-133||  **Meaning:** On the
first day of the dark fortnight, imagine the lunar days of the dark fortnight in
the left hand, in the same way as in the right hand. Then, the wise seeker
should go to a secluded place, sit in the lotus posture, and with a joyful mind
and bright contemplation, join both hands in the shape of a lotus bud and
contemplate a black point within the hands. ||132-133||  Then, when the lotus of
the hands is opened, the black or white point of time that is seen within the
finger corresponding to the lunar day, is considered to be the day of death.
||134||  **Meaning:** Then, when the lotus of the hands is opened, the black or
white point of time that is seen within the finger corresponding to the lunar
day, is considered to be the day of death. ||134||  Other means of knowing time
are also mentioned. ||597||  If sneezing, defecation, ejaculation, and urination
happen simultaneously, then death will occur in that month and on that lunar
day, within a year. ||135||  **Meaning:** If a person experiences sneezing,
defecation, ejaculation, and urination simultaneously, then death will occur in
that month and on that lunar day, within a year. ||135||  Also, ||598||  If one
cannot see the Rohini constellation, the moon sign, the path of the sun
(Mahapath), Arundhati star, and Dhruva star, then death will occur within a
year. ||136||  **Meaning:** If one cannot see the Rohini constellation, the moon
sign, the path of the sun (Mahapath), Arundhati star, and Dhruva star, then
death will occur within a year. ||136||  In this regard, the commentary quotes
the opinion of other teachers in two verses, as follows:  Those whose lifespan
is waning cannot see Arundhati, Dhruva, the three steps of Vishnu, and the
maternal circle.  Arundhati is the tongue, Dhruva is the tip of the nose, the
star is called Vishnu's step, and the maternal circle is the eyebrow. ||599||
If one sees oneself being eaten in a dream by dogs, vultures, crows, or other
nocturnal creatures, or if one sees oneself riding on a donkey, camel, or dog,
or being dragged by them, then death will occur within a year. ||137||
**Meaning:** If one sees oneself being eaten in a dream by dogs, vultures,
crows, or other nocturnal creatures, or if one sees oneself riding on a donkey,
camel, or dog, or being dragged by them, then death will occur within a year.
||137||  Also, ||600||  If one sees the sun without rays and fire with rays,
then death will occur within eleven months. ||138||  **Meaning:** If one sees
the sun without rays and fire with rays, then death will occur within eleven
months. ||138||  ||601||  If one sees a Gandharva city on a tree, or sees ghosts
or demons in their true form, then death will occur in the tenth month. ||139||
**Meaning:** If one sees a Gandharva city on a tree, or sees ghosts or demons in
their true form, then death will occur in the tenth month. ||139||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 kAla jJAna ke upAya yogazAstra paMcama prakAza zloka 132 se 139 ekAdazI tithi
kI kalpanA kre| aMgUThe ke nicale, madhya ke aura Upara ke paura meM paMcamI,
dazamI aura pUrNimA kI kalpanA karanI caahie| anAmikA aMgulI ke tInoM pauroM meM
dUja, tIja aura cautha kI; madhyamA ke tInoM pauroM meM saptamI, aSTamI aura
navamI kI tathA tarjanI ke tInoM pauroM meM dvAdazI, trayodazI aura caturdazI kI
kalpanA karanI cAhie  /  / 130-131 /  /   /  / 594 /  vAmapANiM kRSNapakSaM,
tithIstadvacca kalpayet  /  tatazca nirjane deze, baddhapadmAsanaH sudhI  // 132
//   / 595 /  prasannaH sitasaMvyAnaH, kozIkRtya karadvayam  /
tatastadantaHzUnyaM tu, kRSNaM varNaM vicintayet  // 133 /  /  artha :- kRSNa
pakSa kI pratipadA ke dina bAe~ hAtha meM dAhine hAtha ke samAna kRSNa pakSa kI
tithiyoM kI kalpanA kare, usake bAda buddhizAlI manuSya sAdhaka nirjana meM
jAkara padmAsana lagAkara baiThe aura prasannatApUrvaka ujjvala dhyAna karake,
donoM hAthoM ko kamala-koza ke AkAra meM jor3a le aura hAtha meM kAle varNa ke
eka bindu kA ciMtana kare  // 132-133 /  /  tthaa1596| udghATitakarAmbhojastato
yatrAGgulItithau  /  vIkSyate kAlabinduH sa, kAla ityeva kIrtyate  // 134 //
artha :- usake bAda hastakamala kholane para jisa-jisa aMgulI ke aMdara kalpita
aMdherI yA ujalI tithi meM kAlA bindu dikhAyI de, usI aMdherI yA ujalI tithi ke
dina mRtyu hogI, aisA samajha lenA caahie||134|| kAlanirNaya ke lie anya upAya
bhI batAte haiN|597| AMtaviNmedamUtrANi, bhavanti yugapada yadi  /  mAse tatra
tithau tatra, varSAnte maraNaM tadA  // 135 /  /  artha :- jisa manuSya ko
chIMka, viSThA, vIryapAta aura pezAba; ye cAroM eka sAtha ho jAye, usakI eka
varSa ke aMta | meM usI mAsa aura usI tithi meM mRtyu hogI  /  / 135 /  /
tthaa1598| rohiNIM zazabhRllakSma, mahApathamarundhatIm  /  dhruvaM ca na yadA
pazyed, varSeNa syAt tadA mRtiH  // 136 /  /  artha :- rohiNI nakSatra, caMdramA
cihna, chAyApatha-AkAzamArga, arUMdhatI tArA aura dhruva yaha pAMca yA inameM se
eka bhI dikhAyI na de to usakI eka varSa meM mRtyu hotI hai  // 136 /  /  isa
viSaya meM TIkA meM anya AcArya kA mata do zlokoM dvArA uddhRta kiyA gayA hai,
vaha isa prakAra haiarundhatIM dhruvaM caiva, viSNotrINi padAni ca  /  kSINAyuSo
na pazyaMti, caturtha mAtRmaNDalam  /  arundhatI bhavet jihvA, dhUyo
nAsAgramucyate  /  tArA viSNupadaM proktaM, dhUvau syAnmAtRmaNDalam  //  jinakI
Ayu kSINa ho calI hai, ve arUMdhatI, dhruva, viSNupada aura mAtRmaMDala ko nahIM
dekha skte| yahAM arundhatI kA artha jihvA, dhruva kA artha nAsikA kA agrabhAga,
viSNupada kA artha dUsare ke netra kI putalI dekhane para dikhAI dene vAlI apanI
putalI aura mAtRmaMDala kA artha bhRkuTI jAnanA caahie|  / 599 /  svapne svaM
bhakSyamANaM zva-gRdhra-kAka-nizAcaraiH  /  uhyamAnaM kharoSTrAdhairyadA pazyet
tadA mRtiH||137|| artha :- yadi koI manuSya svapna meM kutte, giddha, kaue~ yA
anya nizAcara Adi jIva dvArA apane zarIra ko bhakSaNa karate dekhe yA gadhA,
UMTa, saara, kutte Adi para savArI karatA dekhe yA unake dvArA apane ko
ghasITakara le jAte dekhe to usakI eka varSa meM mRtyu hogI  /  / 137 /  /
tthaa|600| razminirmuktAdityaM, razmiyuktaM havirbhujam  /  yadA pazyed
vipadyeta, tadaikAdazamAsataH  // 138 //  artha :- yadi koI puruSa sUrya ko
kiraNa rahita dekhe aura agni ko kiraNa-yukta dekhe to vaha gyAraha mAsa meM
mara jAtA hai  /  / 138 /  /   / 601 //  vRkSAgre kutracit pazyed,
gandharvanagaraM yadi  /  pazyetpretAn pizAcAn vA, dazame mAsi tanmRtiH  // 139
/  /  artha :- yadi kisI manuSya ko kisI sthAna para gaMdharvanagara kA
pratibimba vRkSa para dikhAyI de athavA preta yA pizAca pratyakSa rUpa meM
dikhAyI de to usakI dasaveM mahIne meM mRtyu hotI hai  // 139 /  /  410

Page #433 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Various Means of Knowing Death **Yoga Shastra Pancham Prakash Sloka 140 to
151**  **602.** If one sees vomit, urine, feces, or gold or silver in a dream,
then he will live for nine months. || 140 ||  **603.** If a person suddenly
becomes fat or suddenly becomes thin, or suddenly becomes angry or cowardly,
then he will live for only eight months. || 141 ||  **604.** If one's foot
appears incomplete when placed on dust or mud, then he will die in seven months.
|| 142 ||  **605.** If one sees a black star, and his palate dries up, and he
cannot fit three fingers between his upper and lower teeth, then he will die in
six months. || 143 ||  **606.** If a vulture, crow, pigeon, or any other
carnivorous bird sits on one's head, then he will die in six months. || 144 ||
**607.** If one sees a rainbow in the water he throws up in the sky on a
cloudless day, then he will live. || 145 ||  **608.** If one does not see the
rainbow in the water he throws up in the sky on a cloudless day, then he will
die in six months. If one cannot see his own body in the pupil of another's eye,
then he will die in six months. || 146 ||  **609.** If one places his elbows on
his knees and his hands on his head, and sees a shadow like a lotus bud between
his hands, then he should observe it carefully. || 147 ||  **610.** If one sees
a single petal blooming in that shadow, then he will die on that day, in six
months. || 148 ||  **611.** If one sees, in the daytime, in the sky, serpents
with the radiance of an indigo gem, crooked in shape, adorned with thousands of
pearls, and with subtle forms, coming towards him, then he will live. || 149 ||
**612.** If one does not see those serpents, then he will die in six months. ||
150 ||  **613.** If one sees in a dream a person with a shaved head, anointed
with oil, wearing a garland of red flowers, and going towards him, then he will
live. || 151 ||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 mRtyujJAna ke vividha upAya yogazAstra paMcama prakAza zloka 140 se 151  / 602
/  chardirmUtraM purISaM vA, suvarNa rajatAni vA  /  svapne pazyed yadi tadA,
mAsAnnavaiva jIvati  //  140 //  artha :- yadi koI vyakti svapna meM ulaTI,
mUtra, viSThA athavA sonA yA cAMdI dekhatA hai to vaha nau mahIne taka jIvita
rahatA hai  /  /  140  /  /  603 | sthUlo'kasmAt kRzo'kasmAdakasmAdatikopanaH  /
akasmAdatibhIrurvA, mAsAnaSTaiva jiivti||141|| artha :- jo manuSya binA kAraNa
akasmAt hI moTA ho jAye yA akasmAt hI dubalA ho jAye athavA akasmAt hI krodhI
svabhAva kA ho jAye yA Darapoka ho jAye to vaha ATha mahIne taka hI jIvita
rahatA hai  /   /  141  /  /  | | 604 | samagramapi vinyastaM, pAMzau vA
kardame'pi vA  /  syAccetyakhaNDaM padaM saptamAsyante mriyate tadA  //  142  //
yadi dhUla para yA kIcar3a meM purA paira rakhane para bhI jise vaha adhUrA
par3A huA dikhAyI de, usakI sAta mahIne meM mRtyu hotI hai  /  /  142  /  /
tathA artha : ||605  /  tArAM zyAmAM yadA pazyet, zuSyedadharatAlu ca  /  na
svAGgulitrayaM mAyAd, raajdntdvyaantre||143||  / 606 /  gRdhraH kAkaH kapoto vA,
kravyAdo'nyo'pi vA khgH| nilIyeta yadA mUrdhni, SaNmAsyante mRtistadA  //  144
//  artha :- yadi apanI AMkha kI pulatI ekadama kAlI dikhAyI de, kisI bImArI ke
binA hI oTha aura tAlu sUkhane lageM, muMha caur3A karane para Upara aura nIce
ke madhyavartI dAMtoM ke bIca apanI tIna aMguliyA~ nahIM samAe~ tathA giddha,
kAka, kabUtara yA koI bhI mAMsabhakSI pakSI mastaka para baiTha jAye to usakI
chaha mahIne ke aMta meM mRtyu hotI hai  /  /  143 - 144  /  /  | | 607  /
pratyahaM pazyatA'nabhre'hanyApUryajalairmukham  /  vihite pUtkRte zakradhanvA
tu tatra dRzyate  //  145  //  ||608  /  yadA na dRzyate tattu mAsaiH
SaDbhirmRtistadA  /  paranetre svadehaM cet na pazyenmaraNaM tadA  // 146 //
artha :- hamezA megharahita dina ke samaya muMha meM pAnI bharakara AkAza meM
phurar karate hue Upara uchAlane para aura kucha dina taka aisA karane para usa
pAnI meM iMdradhanuSa-sA dikhAyI detA hai| paraMtu jaba vaha iMdradhanuSya na
dikhAyI de to usa vyakti kI chaha mahIne meM mRtyu hotI hai| isake atirikta yadi
dUsare kI AMkha kI putalI meM apanA zarIra dikhAyI na de to bhI samajha lenA ki
chaha mAsa meM mRtyu hogI  /  /  145 - 146  /  /  | | 609 | kUrparau nyasya
jAnvormUdhnyekIkRtya karau sadA  /  rambhAkozanibhAM chAyAM,
lakSayedantarodbhavAm  // 147 //  artha : | | 610 | vikAsi ca dalaM tatra,
yadaikaM parilakSyate  /  tasyAmeva tithau mRtyuH SaNmAsyante bhavet tadA  //
148 //  donoM ghuTanoM para donoM hAthoM kI kohaniyoM ko Teka karake apane hAtha
ke donoM paMje mastaka para rakhe aura aisA karane para nabha meM bAdala na hone
para bhI donoM hAthoM ke bIca meM DoDe ke samAna chAyA utpanna hotI hai, to use
hamezA dekhate rahanA caahie| usa chAyA meM eka patra jisa dina vikasita hotA
huA dikhAyI de to samajha lenA ki usI dina usI tithi ko chaha mahIne ke aMta meM
mRtyu hogI  /  /  147- 148  /  /  || 611 | indranIlasamacchAyA, vakrIbhUtA
sahasrazaH  /  muktAphalAlaGkaraNAH pannagAH sUkSmamUrtayaH  //  149  //  ||612
/  divA sammukhamAyAnto, dRzyante vyomni sannidhau  /  na dRzyante yadA te tu,
SaNmAsyante mRtistadA  //  150  //  artha :- jaba AkAza bAdaloM se rahita ho,
usa samaya manuSya dhUpa meM sthira rahe, taba use iMdranIla - maNi kI kAMti ke
samAna Ter3he-mer3he hajAroM motiyoM ke alaMkAra vAle tathA sUkSma AkRti ke
sarpa sanmukha Ate hue dikhAyI dete haiM, kiMtu jaba ve sarpa na dikhAI deM to
samajhanA ki chaha mahIne ke aMta meM usakI mRtyu hogI  /   /  149 - 150  //
||613 | svapne muNDitamabhyaktaM, rktgndhsrgmbrm| pazyed yAbhyAM khare yAntaM,
svaM yo'bdArthaM sa jIvati  // 151 //  artha :- jo manuSya svapna meM apanA
mastaka muMDA huA, taila kI mAliza kiye hue lAla raMga kA padArtha zarIra para
411

Page #434 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Knowledge of Time Yoga Shastra, Fifth Light, Verses 152-163  If one sees a
person wearing a red garland around their neck, dressed in red clothes, riding a
donkey, and heading south, knowing that they have smeared themselves with lep,
then they will die in six months. ||151||  If one hears the sound of a bell
suddenly in their body after consuming something, then their death is certain
within five months. ||152||  If a chameleon climbs quickly onto someone's head
and changes color three times while leaving, then that person will die within
five months. ||153||  If someone's nose becomes crooked, their eyes become
round, and their ears or other limbs become loose or displaced from their
position, then they will die within four months. ||154||  If one sees a black
man with a black family and a iron rod in their dream, then they will die within
three months. ||155||  If one sees the moon as hot, the sun as cold, a hole in
the earth and the sun, their tongue as black, and their face like a red lotus;
and if their palate trembles, they have inexplicable sorrow in their mind, their
body develops various colors, and they have sudden hiccups from their navel,
then they will die within two months. ||156-157||  If someone's tongue cannot
taste, their speech stumbles repeatedly, they cannot hear sounds, and their nose
cannot smell; if their eyes constantly twitch, they experience confusion even
when looking at objects, they see a rainbow at night and a meteor shower during
the day; if they cannot see their own reflection in a mirror or water, they see
lightning without thunder, and their head suddenly burns; if they see a flock of
swans, crows, and peacocks somewhere, and they cannot feel the touch of cold,
hot, rough, or soft; then if any one of these signs appears, that person will
undoubtedly die within a month. ||158-162||  If someone's breath is cold when
they open their mouth and pronounce the letter 'ha', their breath is cold when
they blow, their memory and mental faculties decline, and their five limbs
become cold, then they will die within ten days. ||163||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 kAla jJAna kA vijJAna yogazAstra paMcama prakAza zloka 152 se 163 lepa kiyA
huA, gale meM lAla raMga kI mAlA pahane hue aura lAla raMga ke vastra pahanakara
gadhe para car3hakara dakSiNadizA kI ora jAtA huA dekhatA hai, usakI chaha
mahIne meM mRtyu hotI hai  /  / 151 /  /   / 614 /  ghaNTAnAdo ratAnte ced,
akasmAdanubhUyate  /  paJcatA paJcamAsyante tadA bhavati nizcitam  // 152 //
artha :- jisako viSaya sevana karane ke bAda akasmAt hI zarIra meM ghaMTe kI
AvAja sunAyI de to nizcaya hI usakI pAMca mAsa ke aMta meM mRtyu hogI  /  / 152
/  /  tthaa|615| zirovegAt samArUhya, kRkalAso vrajan yadi  /  dadhyAd
varNatrayaM paJcamAsyante maraNaM tadA  // 153 /  /  artha :- jisa vyakti ke
sira para kadAcita koI giragiTa tejI se caDha jAye aura jAte samaya tIna bAra
raMga badale to, usa vyakti kI mRtyu pAMca mAsa ke aMta meM hotI hai|
|616|vkriibhvti nAsA ced, vartulIbhavatI dRzau  /  sva-sthAnAd bhrazyataH karNo,
cAturmAsyAM tadA mRti||154|| artha :- yadi kisI manuSya kI nAka Ter3hI ho jAya,
AMkheM gola ho jAye aura kAna Adi anya aMga apane sthAna se bhraSTa yA zithila
ho jAye to usakI cAra mahIne meM mRtyu hotI hai  /  / 154 /  /   / 617 /  kRSNaM
kRSNaparIvAraM lohadaNDadharaM naram  /  yadA svapne nirIkSeta,
mRtyurmAsaistribhistadA  // 155 /  /  _ artha :- yadi svapna meM kAle raMga kA
kAle parivAra vAlA aura lohadaMDadhArI manuSya dikhAyI de to usakI mRtyu tIna -
mahIne meM hotI hai  // 155 /  /   / 618 /  indumuSNaM raviM zItaM, chidraM
bhUmau ravAvapi  /  jihvAM zyAmAM mukhaM kokanadAbhaM ca yadekSate  // 156 //
/ 619 /  tAlukampo manaHzoko, varNo'Gge'nekadhA ydaa| nAbhezcAkasmikI hikkA
mRtyurmAsadvayAt tdaa||157|| artha :- yadi kisI ko caMdramA uSNa, sUrya ThaMDA,
pRthvI aura sUryamaNDala meM chidra dikhAyI de, apanI jIbha kAlI, mukha
lAlakamala ke samAna dikhAyI de; aura jisake tAlu meM kaMpana ho, niSkAraNa mana
meM zoka ho, zarIra meM aneka prakAra ke raMga paidA hone lage aura nAbhikamala
se akasmAt hicakI uThe to usakI mRtyu do mAsa meM ho jAtI hai  // 156-157 //   /
620 /  jihvA nAsvAdamAdatte muhuH skhalati bhaassnne| zrote na zRNutaH zabdaM,
gandhaM vetti na nAsikA  // 158 /  /  621 /  spandete nayane nityaM,
dRSTavastunyapi bhramaH  /  naktamindradhanuH pazyet, tatholkApatanaM divA  //
159 //   / 622 /  na cchAyAmAtmanaH pazyed darpaNe salile'pi vaa| anabdAM
vidyutaM pazyet ziro'kasmAdapi jvalet  // 160 //   / 623 /  haMsa-kAka-
mayUrANAM, pazyecca kvApi saMhatim  /  zItoSNakharamRdvAderapi, sparza na vetti
ca  // 161 /  /  624 /  amISAM lakSmaNAM madhyAd, yadaikamapi dRzyate  /
jantorbhavati mAsena, tadA mRtyurna saMzayaH  // 162 /  /  artha :- yadi kisI kI
jIbha svAda ko na pahacAna sakatI ho, bolate samaya bAra-bAra lar3akhar3AtI ho,
kAnoM se zabda na sunAyI detA ho aura nAsikA gaMdha ko na jAna pAtI ho, netra
hamezA phar3akate raheM, dekhI huI vastu meM bhI bhrama utpanna hone lage, rAta
meM iMdradhanuSa dekhe, dina meM ulkApAta dikhAyI de; darpaNa meM athavA pAnI
meM apanI AkRti dikhAI na de, bAdala na hone para bhI bijalI dikhAyI de aura
akasmAt mastaka meM jalana ho jAye; haMsoM, kauoM aura mayUroM kA jhuMDa kahIM
bhI dikhAyI de, vAyu ke ThaMDe, garma, kaThora yA komala sparza kA jJAna bhI
naSTa ho jaaye| ina sabhI lakSaNoM meM se koI bhI eka lakSaNa dikhAyI de to usa
manuSya kI niHsaMdeha eka mahIne meM mRtyu ho jAtI hai  /  / 158-162 /  /  ||625
/  zIte hakAre phutkAre, coSNe smRtigatikSaye  /  aGgapaJcakazaitye ca, syAd
dazAhena paJcatA  // 163 //  artha :- apanA mukha phAr3akara 'ha' akSara kA
uccAraNa karate samaya zvAsa ThaMDA nikale, phUMka ke sAtha zvAsa bAhara 412

Page #435 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Death Knowledge from One's Limbs  **Verse 163:** If one feels hot while
taking out the fifth light of Yoga Shastra, loses memory, loses the ability to
walk, and all five senses become cold, then death occurs within ten days.
**Verse 164:** If one's body becomes half hot and half cold, and suddenly flames
start burning in the body, then death occurs within a week.  **Verse 165:** If
one's chest and feet become dry immediately after bathing, then death occurs on
the sixth day without a doubt.  **Verse 166:** If one grinds their teeth, has a
foul odor like a corpse, changes color frequently, or has a distorted shadow,
then death occurs within three days.  **Verse 167:** If one cannot see their
nose, tongue, planets in the sky, stars, clear directions, or the seven sages,
then death occurs within two days.  **Verse 168-172:** If one stands in the
morning, evening, or on a bright night, hangs their arms down like the
Kayotsarga mudra, and looks at their shadow for a while, then slowly raises
their eyes from the shadow and looks up at the sky, they will see a human
figure. If they cannot see their head in that figure, then they will die. If
they cannot see their left arm, then their son or wife will die. If they cannot
see their right arm, then their brother will die. If they cannot see their
heart, then they will die. If they cannot see their stomach, then their wealth
will be lost. If they cannot see their genitals, then their father or other
respected elders will die. If they cannot see their thighs, then they will
suffer from illness. If they cannot see their feet, then they will have to
travel abroad. If they cannot see their entire body, then they will die soon.
**Other ways to know the time of death:**  **Verse 173:** By learning, one can
know the time of death by looking at the mirror, thumb, or the reflection in
water.  **Verse 174-176:** If one chants the name of the deity ten thousand and
eight times during a solar or lunar eclipse, the deity will reveal the time of
death. After chanting ten thousand and eight times, the deity will merge into
the devotee, and then the devotee's daughter will reveal the time of death. The
deity, attracted by the good qualities of the devotee, will reveal the time of
death in all three times (past, present, and future) without any doubt.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 apane aMgopAMgoM se mRtyu jJAna yogazAstra paMcama prakAza zloka 164 se 176
nikAlate samaya garma pratIta ho, smaraNazakti lupta ho jAye, calane phirane kI
zakti khatma ho jAye, zarIra ke pAMcoM aMga ThaMDe par3a jAye to usakI mRtyu
dasa dina meM hotI hai  /  /  163  /  /  tathA | | 626  /  ardhoSNamardhazItaM
ca zarIraM jAyate yadA  /  jvAlA kasmAjjvalevAGge, saptAhena tadA mRtiH||164||
yadi kisI kA AdhA zarIra uSNa aura AdhA ThaMDA ho jAye aura akasmAt hI zarIra
meM jvAlAeM jalane lageM to usakI eka saptAha meM mRtyu hotI hai  /  /  164  /
/  tathA artha : | | 627  /  snAtamAtrasya hRtpAdaM tatkSaNAd yadi zuSyati  /
divase jAyate SaSThe, tadA mRtyurasaMzayam  // 165 //  yadi snAna karane ke bAda
tatkAla hI chAtI aura paira sUkha jAye to niHsaMdeha chaThe dina usakI mRtyu ho
jAtI hai  /  /  165  /  /  tathA artha : artha :  / 628 /  jAyate
dantagharSazcet, zavagandhazca duHsahaH  /  vikRtA bhavati cchAyA, tryahena
mriyate tadA  // 166 //  jo manuSya dAMtoM ko kaTAkaTa pIsatA - ghisatA rahe,
jisake zarIra meM se murde ke samAna durgandha nikalatI rahe yA jisake zarIra kA
raMga bAra-bAra badalatA rahe, yA jisakI chAyA bigar3atI rahe usakI tIna dina
meM mRtyu hotI hai  /  /  166  /  /  ||629  /  na svanAsAM svajihvAM na, na
grahAn nAmalA dizaH  /  nApi saptaRSIn yarhi, pazyati mriyate tadA  //  167 //
artha :- jo manuSya apanI nAka ko, apanI jIbha ko, AkAza meM grahoM ko, nakSatra
ko, tAroM ko, nirmala dizAoM ko, saptarSi tArAzreNi ko nahIM dekhatA; vaha do
dina meM mara jAtA hai  /  / 167  /  /  artha :  / 630  /  prabhAte yadi vA
sAyaM, jyotsnAvatyAmatho nizi  /  pravitatya nijau bAhU, nijacchAyAM vilokya ca
//  168 //  | | 631  /  zanairutkSipya netre svacchAyAM pazyeta tato'mbare  /
na ziro dRzyate tasyAM yadA syAnmaraNaM tadA  // 169 /  /  ||632 | nekSyate
vAmabAhuzcet, putradArakSayastadA  /  yadi dakSiNabAhurnekSyate bhrAtRkSayastadA
// 170 //  | | 633 | adRSTe hRdaye mRtyuH udare ca dhanakSayaH  /  hye
pitRvinAzastu vyAdhirUruyuge bhavet  //  171  //  ||634 | adarzane pAdayozca
videzagamanaM bhavet  /  adRzyamAne sarvAGge, sadyo maraNamAdizet  // 172  /  /
koI manuSya prAtaHkAla yA sAMyakAla athavA zuklapakSa kI rAtri meM prakAza meM
khar3A hokara apane donoM hAtha kAyotsargamudrA kI taraha nIce laTakAkara kucha
samaya taka apanI chAyA dekhatA rahe, usake bAda netroM ko dhIre-dhIre chAyA se
haTAkara Upara AkAza meM dekhane para use puruSa kI AkRti dikhAyI degii| yadi
usa AkRti meM use apanA mastaka na dikhAyI de to samajha lenA ki merI mRtyu hone
vAlI hai, yadi use apanI bAMI bhujA na dikhAI de to putra yA strI kI mRtyu hotI
hai aura dAhinI bhujA na dikhAyI de to bhAI kI mRtyu hotI hai| yadi apanA hRdaya
na dikhAyI de to apanI mRtyu hotI hai; aura peTa na dikhAyI de to usake dhana kA
nAza hotA hai| yadi apanA guhyasthAna na dikhAyI de to apane pitA Adi pUjyajana
kI mRtyu hotI hai aura donoM jAMghe nahIM dikhAyI de to zarIra meM vyAdhi
utpanna hotI hai| yadi paira na dIkhe to use videzayAtrA karanI par3atI hai aura
apanA saMpUrNa zarIra dikhAyI na de to usakI zIghra hI mRtyu hotI hai  /  /  168
- 172  /  /  kAla jJAna ke anya upAya kahate haiM ||635  /  vidyayA
darpaNAGguSTha - kuDyAsi (di) SvavatAritA  /  vidhinA devatA pRSTA, brUte
kAlasya nirNayam  // 173 //  ||636  /  sUryendugrahaNe vidyau, naravIre ! Tha
Thetyasau  /  sAdhyA dazasahastrayA'STottarayA japakarmataH  // 174 /  /  ||637
/  aSTottarasahastrasya, japAt kAryakSaNe punaH  /  devatA lIyate'syAdau, tataH
kanyA''ha nirNayam  // 175 //  ||638 | satsAdhakaguNAkRSTA, svayamevAtha devatA
/  trikAla - viSayaM brUte, nirNayaM gatasaMzayam  // 176 //  413

Page #436 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Knowledge of Time through Omens  **From Yoga Shastra, Fifth Light, Verses 177
to 185:**  **Meaning:** According to the method described by the Guru Maharaj,
by using the Vidya (knowledge), the image of a deity, etc., can be invoked on a
mirror, thumb, wall, or sword, etc., through proper rituals. By asking
questions, the time (death) can be determined. (173) During a solar or lunar
eclipse, one should chant the Vidya "Om Naravire Thah Thah Swaha" 10,800 times
to make it potent. (174) When using this Vidya, one should chant it 1,080 times
to invoke it on the mirror, sword, etc. (175) Then, a young, innocent girl
should be shown the mirror, etc. When the girl sees the form of the deity in it,
one should ask her about the lifespan and determine the outcome. Alternatively,
the deity, attracted by the qualities of a virtuous seeker, will reveal the
lifespan related to the three times (past, present, and future) without any
doubt. (173-176)  Now, five verses describe the knowledge of time through omens:
**Or, one should know from omens whether a person is healthy or sick, whether it
is from oneself or from another, whether it is inside the house or outside.**
(177)  **Snakes, scorpions, worms, rats, lizards, ants, lice, bedbugs, spiders,
termites, and honey-colored ants, when they appear in large numbers, indicate
anxiety, distress, illness, or death.** (178-179)  **When a crow pecks at shoes,
an elephant, a horse, or any other mount, or at an umbrella, weapon, shadow,
body, or hair, then death is near.** (180)  **If cows with tear-filled eyes dig
the earth deeply with their feet, then illness or death will befall their
owner.** (181)  **Other ways to know the time:**  **This omen has been described
for a healthy person. Now, the omen for a sick person is described.** (182)
**Omens related to dogs for a sick person:**  **If a dog, while the sick person
is observing omens related to his lifespan, turns to the south and licks its
anus, then the person will die in one day. If it licks the heart, then in two
days, and if it licks the tail, then in three days.** (183)  **If, at the time
of the omen, the dog lies down, contracting its entire body, or flaps its ears,
or twists and shakes its body, then the sick person will die.** (184)  **If the
dog lies down with its mouth open, drooling, with closed eyes, and contracting
its body, then there is no doubt that the sick person will die.** (185)  **Now,
two verses describe the omens of crows:**  (414)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zukuna dvArA kAla jJAna _yogazAstra paMcama prakAza zloka 177 se 185 artha :-
guru mahArAja ke dvArA kathita vidhi ke anusAra vidyA ke dvArA darpaNa, aMgUThe,
dIvAra yA talavAra Adi para vidhi pUrvaka utArI huI devatA Adi kI AkRti prazna
karane para kAla (mRtyu) kA nirNaya batA detI hai||173|| sUryagrahaNa yA
caMdragrahaNa kA samaya ho, taba 'OM naravIre ThaH ThaH svAhA' isa vidyA kA dasa
hajAra ATha bAra jApa karake ise siddha kara lenA caahie||174|| jaba isa vidyA
se kArya lenA ho to eka hajAra ATha bAra jApa karane se vaha darpaNa, talavAra
Adi para avatarita ho jAtI hai  /  / 175 /  /  usake bAda darpaNa Adi meM eka
kumArI (nirdoSa) kanyA ko dikhalAnA caahie| jaba kanyA ko usameM devatA kA rUpa
dikhAyI| de, taba usase Ayu kA prazna karake nirNaya karanA caahie| athavA
uttama prakAra ke sAdhaka ke guNoM se AkRSTa hokara devatA apane Apa hI
niHsaMdeha trikAla-saMbaMdhI Ayu kA nirNaya batA degaa||173-176|| aba pAMca
zlokoM dvArA zakuna dvArA kAlajJAna batAte haiN639|athvaa zakunAd vidyAt, sajjo
vA yadi vaa''turH| svato vA parato vA'pi, gRhe vA yadi vA bahiH  // 177 //   /
640 /  ahi-vRzcika-kRmyAkhu-gRhagodhA-pipIlikAH  /  yUkA-matkuNa-lUtAzca,
valmIko'thopadehikAH  // 178||  / 641 /  kITikA ghRtavarNAzca, bhramaryazca
yadA'dhikAH  /  udvega-kalaha-vyAdhi-maraNAni tadA dizet  // 179 /  /  artha :-
athavA koI puruSa nIrogI ho yA rogI ho apane Apa se aura dUsare ghara se, ghara
ke bhItara ho yA ghara ke bAhara, zakuna ke dvArA kAlanirNaya kre| jaise-sarpa,
bicchU, kIDe, cUhe, chipakalI, ciTiyA~, cUM, khaTamala, makaDI, dImaka,
ghRtavarNa kI cITiyoM, bhaure Adi bahuta adhika parimANa meM nikalate dIkheM to
udvega, kleza, vyAdhi yA mRtyu hotI hai  /  / 177-179 /  /  ||642 /  upAnad-
vAhanacchatra-zastracchAyAGga-kuntalAn  /  caJcvA cumbed yadA
kAkastadA''sannaiva pnyctaa||180||  / 643 /  azrupUrNadRzo gAvo, gADhaM
pAdairvasundharAm  /  khananti cet tadAnIM syAd, rogo mRtyuzca tatprabhoH  /  /
181 /  /  artha :- jUte, hAthI, ghor3e Adi kisI savArI ko athavA chatra, zastra,
parachAI, zarIra yA keza ko kauA cuMbana kara le to matya najadIka samajho, yadi
AMkhoM se AMsa bahAtI huI gAyeM apane pairoM se jora se pRthvI ke khodane lage
to usake svAmI ko bImArI yA mRtyu hogI  // 180-181 /  /  anya prakAra se
kAlajJAna kahate haiN|644| anAturakRte hyetat, zakunaM parikIrtitam  /
adhunA''turamuddizya, zakunaM parikIrtyate  // 182 /  /  artha :- pUrva zlokoM
meM svastha puruSa ke kAlanirNaya ke lie zakuna batAyA gayA hai| aba rogI
manuSya ko lakSya karake zakuna kahate haiM  /  / 182 /  /  rogI ke zakuna meM
zvAna-saMbaMdhI zakuna kahate haiN645| dakSiNasyAM valitvA cet zvA gudaM
leDhyuro'thavA  /  lAGgulaM vA tadA mRtyuH, eka-dvi-tridinaiH kramAt  // 183 /
/   / 646 /  zete nimittakAle cet, zvA saGkocyAkhilaM vapuH  /  dhUtvA karNo
valitvA'Gga, dhunotyatha tato mRtiH  // 184||  / 647 /  yadi vyAttamukho lAlAM,
muJcan saGkocitekSaNaH  /  aGga saGkocya zete zvA, tadA mRtyurna saMzayaH  //
185 //  artha :- rogI manuSya jaba apane AyuSya-saMbaMdhI zakuna dekha rahA ho,
usa samaya yadi kuttA dakSiNadizA meM mur3akara apanI gudA ko cATe to usakI eka
dina meM mRtyu hotI hai, yadi hRdaya ko cATe to do dina meM aura pUMcha | cATe
to tIna dina meM mRtyu hotI hai| yadi rogI nimitta dekha rahA ho usa samaya
kuttA apane pUre zarIra ko | sikor3akara soyA ho athavA kAnoM ko paTapaTA rahA
ho yA zarIra ko mor3akara hilA rahA ho to rogI kI mRtyu hogii| yadi kuttA muMha
phAr3akara lAra TapakAtA huA AMkha baMdakara aura zarIra ko sikor3akara sotA huA
dikhAyI de to rogI kI nizcita hI mRtyu hogI  /  / 183-185 /  /  aba do zlokoM ke
dvArA kaue kA zakuna hote haiM 414

Page #437 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Determining Time from Auspicious Sounds (Dwividha-Upashruti)  **Yoga Shastra,
Fifth Light, Verses 186-197**  **648.** If a flock of crows gathers and makes a
noise at the house of a sick person, at all three sandhyas (dawn, noon, and
dusk), then death is near. **186.**  **649.** If crows drop skin, bones, rope,
or hair in the dining room or bedroom of a sick person, then death is imminent.
**187.**  **Explanation:** Now, through nine verses, we will explain how to
determine time through auspicious sounds (Upashruti).  **650.** A wise person
should know the determination of time through auspicious sounds. On a favorable
day, during the time of sleep, after one prahar (three hours) of the night has
passed, while lying down, one should travel in the north, east, or west
direction. **188.**  **651.** After performing five namaskaras (salutations) and
reciting the Acharya mantra or the Shruti, one should leave the house with ears
covered so that no sound can be heard. One should then travel towards the houses
of artisans (Shilpis) and towards the market square or the main road in the
aforementioned directions. **189.**  **652.** After performing an archanā
(worship) of the earth with sandalwood and offering fragrant powder, akshata
(unhusked rice), etc., one should carefully open their ears and listen to the
sounds. **190.**  **653.** These sounds are of two types: 1. Arthanantara-
Upadeshya (sounds with hidden meaning) and 2. Swarupa-Upashruti (sounds with
direct meaning). The first type of sound requires contemplation (Vimarśa) to
understand its intended meaning, while the second type directly conveys its
meaning. **191.**  **654.** For example, "This pillar of the house will break in
five or six days, five or six fortnights, five or six months, or five or six
years, or it will not break at all." **192.**  **655.** "This pillar is very
beautiful, but it is small and will be destroyed soon." This type of Upashruti
is called Arthanantara-Upadeshya. **193.**  **656.** "This woman will not leave
this place, this man will not leave here, or we will not let him go, and he does
not want to go." **194.**  **657.** "This person wants to go, and I am eager to
send him. Therefore, he will leave soon." This is called Swarupa-Upashruti.
**195.**  **658.** Those who are skilled in this knowledge can determine the
proximity of death or food by listening to the sounds that arise from the
opening of the ears. **196.**  **Explanation:** A wise person should know the
determination of time through auspicious sounds. On a favorable day, during the
time of sleep, after one prahar (three hours) of the night has passed, while
lying down, one should travel in the north, east, or west direction. After
performing five namaskaras (salutations) and reciting the Acharya mantra or the
Shruti, one should leave the house with ears covered so that no sound can be
heard. One should then travel towards the houses of artisans (Shilpis) and
towards the market square or the main road in the aforementioned directions.
After performing an archanā (worship) of the earth with sandalwood and offering
fragrant powder, akshata (unhusked rice), etc., one should carefully open their
ears and listen to the sounds. These sounds are of two types: 1. Arthanantara-
Upadeshya (sounds with hidden meaning) and 2. Swarupa-Upashruti (sounds with
direct meaning). The first type of sound requires contemplation (Vimarśa) to
understand its intended meaning, while the second type directly conveys its
meaning. For example, "This pillar of the house will break in five or six days,
five or six fortnights, five or six months, or five or six years, or it will not
break at all." "This pillar is very beautiful, but it is small and will be
destroyed soon." This type of Upashruti is called Arthanantara-Upadeshya. "This
woman will not leave this place, this man will not leave here, or we will not
let him go, and he does not want to go." "This person wants to go, and I am
eager to send him. Therefore, he will leave soon." This is called Swarupa-
Upashruti. Those who are skilled in this knowledge can determine the proximity
of death or food by listening to the sounds that arise from the opening of the
ears. **188-196.**  **659.** Now, we will explain the method of knowing time
through the Shani (Saturn) person in four verses. In which constellation Shani
is located, one should place four fingers on the right hand and three fingers on
each foot. **197.**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dvividha-upazruti se kAlanirNaya yogazAstra paMcama prakAza zloka 186 se 197
||648 /  yadyAturagRhasyovaM, kAkapakSigaNo milan  /  trisandhyaM dRzyate nUnaM,
tadA mRtyurupasthitaH  // 186 //  |649|mhaanse'thvaa zayyAgAre kAkAH kSipanti
cet| carmAsthirajju kezAn vA, tadA''sannaiva paJcatA  /  / 187 /  /  artha :-
yadi rogI manuSya ke ghara para prabhAta, madhyAhna aura zAma ke samaya arthAt
tInoM saMdhyAoM ke samaya meM kauoM kA jhuMDa milakara kolAhala kare to samajha
lenA ki mRtyu nikaTa hai| tathA rogI ke bhojanagRha yA zayanagRha para kaue
camar3A, haDDI, rassI yA keza DAla deM to samajhanA cAhie ki rogI kI mRtyu
samIpa hI hai| aba nau zlokoM dvArA upazruti se kAla-nirNaya batAte haiN||650|
athavopazrutervidyAd vidvAn kAlasya nirNayam  /  prazaste divase svapnakAle
zastAM dizaM shritH||188||  / 651 /  pUtvA paJca namaskRtyA''cAryamantreNa vA
zrutI  /  gehAcchannazrutirgacchet zilpicatvarabhUmiSu  // 189 /  /   / 652 /
candanenArcayitvA kSmAM, kSiptvA gandhAkSatAdi ca  /
sAvadhAnastatastatropazruteH zRNuyAd dhvanim  // 190 //   / 653 /
arthAntarApadezyazca, sarUpazceti sa dvidhA  /  vimarzagamyastatrAdyaH
sphuToktArtho'paraH punaH  // 191 /  /   / 654 /  yathaiSa bhavanastambha,
paJca-SaDbhireva dinaiH  /  pakSairmAsairatho varSerbhakSyate yadi vA na vA  //
192 /  /   / 655 /  manoharatarazcAsIt, kiM tvayaM laghu bhakSyate  /
arthAntarApadezyA syAd, evamAdirupazrutiH  // 193 /  /  656 /  eSA strIH puruSo
vA'sau, sthAnAdasmAnna yAsyati  /  dAsyAmo na vayaM gantuM gantukAmo na cApyayam
// 194 //  ||657 /  vidyate gantukAmo'yam ahaM ca preSaNotsukaH  /  tena
yasyAtyasau zIghraM, syAt sarUpetyupazrutiH  // 195 //  ||658 /  karNodghATana-
saJjAtopazrutyantaramAtmanaH  /  kuzalAH kAlamAsannam, annAsannaM ca jAnate  //
196 /  /  artha :- athavA vidvAnapuruSoM ko upazruti se AyuSya-kAla jAna lenA
caahie| usakI vidhi isa prakAra hai-jisa dina bhadrA Adi apayoga na ho, aise
zabhadina meM sone ke samaya arthAt eka prahara rAtri vyatIta ho jAne ke bAda
zayana-kAla meM uttara, pUrva yA pazcima dizA meM prayANa krnaa| jAte samaya
pAMca navakAramaMtra se yA sUrimaMtra se apane donoM kAna pavitra karake kisI kA
zabda kAna meM sunAyI na de isa prakAra baMda karake ghara se bAhara nikle| aura
zilpiyoM (kArIgaroM) ke gharoM kI aura cauka athavA bAjAra kI ora pUrvokta
dizAoM meM gamana kre| vahAM jAkara bhUmi kI caMdana se arcanA karake sugaMdhita
cUrNa, akSata Adi DAlakara sAvadhAna hokara kAna kholakara logoM ke zabdoM ko
sune| ve zabda do prakAra ke hote haiM-1. arthAntarApadezya aura 2. svruup-
upshruti| prathama prakAra kA zabda sunA jAye to usakA abhISTa artha prakaTa na
kare, aura dUsarA svarUpa upazruti arthAt jaisA zabda ho, usI artha ko prakaTa
krnaa| arthAntarApadezya-upazruti kA artha vicAra (tarka) karane para hI jAnA jA
sakatA hai, jaise ki 'isa makAna kA staMbha pAMca-chaha dinoM meM, pAMca-chaha
pakhavADoM meM, pAMca-chaha mahInoM meM yA pAMca-chaha varSoM meM TUTa jAyegA
athavA nahIM TUTegA, yaha staMbha atimanohara hai, paraMtu yaha choTA hai, jaldI
hI naSTa ho jaayegaa|' isa prakAra kI upazruti 'arthAtarApadezya' kahalAtI hai|
yaha sunakara apanI AyuSya kA anumAna lagA denA caahie| jitane dina, pakSa,
mahIne, varSa meM staMbha TUTane kI dhvani sunAyI dI ho, utane hI dina Adi meM
Ayu kI samApti samajhanA caahie| dUsarI svarUpa-upazruti isa prakAra hotI hai-
yaha strI isa sthAna se nahIM jAyegI, yaha puruSa yahAM se jAne vAlA nahIM hai
athavA hama use jAne nahIM deMge aura vaha jAnA bhI nahIM cAhatA yA amuka yahAM
se jAnA cAhatA hai, maiM use bhejanA cAhatA hUM, ataH aba vaha zIghra hI calA
jAyegA, yaha svarUpa upazruti kahalAtI hai| isakA abhiprAya yaha hai ki yadi
jAne kI bAta sunAyI de to Ayu kA aMta nikaTa hai aura rahane kI bAta sune to
mRtyu abhI najadIka nahIM hai| isa prakAra kAna kholakara svayaM sunI huI
upazruti ke anusAra catura puruSa apanI mRtyu nikaTa yA dUra hai, ise jAna lete
haiN||188-196|| aba zanaizcara-puruSa se kAlajJAna kA upAya cAra zlokoM ke dvArA
kahate haiN||659| zaniH syAd yatra nakSatre, tad dAtavyaM mukhe tataH  /
catvAri dakSiNe pANau, trINi trINi ca pAdayoH  /  / 197 //  415

Page #438 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Saturn Yantra and Vidya for Time Determination Yoga Shastra Pancham Prakash
Sloka 119 to 210. 660. Four in the left hand, five in the chest in order. Three
on the head, two in the eyes, one in the secret place, one in the man. ||119||.
661. At the time of the event, the birth star or the name star should be placed
in the secret place, according to the order of the installation. ||199||. 662.
If it is seen or joined by evil planets, and not seen or joined by auspicious
planets, then even a healthy person will die; what to say of a sick person?
||200|| Meaning: - After making a figure similar to the Saturn man, then at the
time of seeing the event, the star in which Saturn is, should be placed in his
mouth. After that, the next four stars should be placed in the right hand,
three-three in both feet, four in the left hand, five in the chest, three in the
head, two-two in the eyes and one in the secret place. Later, at the time of
seeing the event, if the birth star or the name star is in the secret place, and
it is seen by an evil planet or is joined with it, and there is no sight or
joining of an auspicious planet, then even a healthy person dies; what to say of
a sick person? ||197-200|| Now we will tell you about the knowledge of time
according to the ascendant. 663. If the ascendant is in the fourth, seventh or
tenth, and the moon is in the sixth or eighth, then the person will die. ||201||
Meaning: - At the time of asking a question about longevity, if the ascendant is
in the fourth, seventh or tenth, and the moon is in the sixth or eighth, then
the person will die. ||201|| And ||664. If the lord of the ascendant is a
planet, then death will occur. ||202|| Meaning: - At the time of asking a
question about longevity, if the lord of the ascendant is Jupiter, Mars and
Venus in Aries etc. or if the lord of the current ascendant is set, then even a
healthy person will die. ||20|| And. 665. If the moon is in the ascendant,
Saturn in the twelfth, Mars in the ninth, the sun in the eighth, and Jupiter is
not strong, then death will occur. ||203|| Meaning: - If at the time of asking a
question, the moon is in the ascendant, Saturn in the twelfth, Mars in the
ninth, the sun in the eighth, and Jupiter is not strong, then death will occur.
||203|| And ||666. If the sun is in the third or sixth, and the moon is in the
tenth, then death will occur on the third day. ||204||. 667. If the evil planets
are in the fourth or twelfth from the rising, then the knowers of time say that
death will occur on the third day. ||205|| Meaning: - Similarly, if the sun is
in the third or sixth, and the moon is in the tenth, then it should be
understood; his death will occur on the third day. If the evil planets are in
the fourth or twelfth from the rising, then the knowers of time say that death
will occur on the third day. ||204-205|| And. 668. If the evil planet is in the
fifth from the rising, then death will occur in eight or ten days. ||206||. 669.
If the inauspicious planets are in the seventh house of Sagittarius and Gemini,
then there will be disease or death. This is the decision of the astrologers.
||207|| Meaning: - If the current ascendant or the evil planet is in the fifth
house at the time of asking a question, then death occurs in eight or ten days.
And if the inauspicious planets are in the seventh house of Sagittarius and
Gemini, then there will be disease or death. This is the decision of the
astrologers. Now we will tell you about the knowledge of time through the yantra
in eight verses. 1670. The yantra is the abode of the inner beings, the seed of
the Pranava, the corner is the Refa, the Agnipur is full of flames. ||20||
||671. The circle is surrounded by six sounds, starting with A with anusvara.
The swastika mark is on the outer corner, and the letter is inside. ||209||
||672. The yantra is surrounded by the wind city, with the guru in the four
corners. After making it, it should be placed on the joints of the feet, head
and chest. ||210|| 416

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zanezvara yaMtra evaM vidyA se kAla nirNaya yogazAstra paMcama prakAza zloka
119 se 210  / 660 /  catvAri vAmahaste tu, kramazaH paJca vakSasi  /  trINi
zIrSe dRzoddhe, dve guhya eka zanau nare  // 119 //   / 661 /  nimittasamaye
tatra, patitaM sthApanA-kramAt  /  janmakSaM nAmaRkSaM vA, guhyadeze bhaved yadi
// 199 /  /   / 662 /  dRSTaM zliSTaM grahairduSTaiH, saumyairaprekSitAyutam  /
sajjasyApi tadA mRtyu, kA kathA rogiNaH punaH?  // 200 //  artha :-
zanaizcarapuruSa ke samAna AkRti banAkara phira nimitta dekhate samaya jisa
nakSatra meM zani ho, usake mukha meM vaha nakSatra sthApita karanA caahie|
usake bAda kramazaH Ane vAle cAra nakSatra dAhine hAtha meM sthApita karanA,
tIna-tIna donoM pairoM meM cAra bAe~ hAtha meM, pAMca vakSasthala meM, tIna
mastaka meM, do-do netroM meM aura eka guhyasthAna meM sthApita karanA caahie|
bAda meM nimitta dekhane ke samaya meM sthApita kiye hue krama se janmanakSatra
athavA nAma-nakSatra yadi guhyasthAna meM AyA ho aura usa para duSTagraha kI
dRSTi par3atI ho athavA usake sAtha milApa ho tathA saumya graha kI dRSTi yA
milApa na hotA ho to nirogI hone para bhI vaha manuSya mara jAtA hai; rogI
puruSa kI to bAta hI kyA? ||197-200 /  /  aba lagna ke anusAra kAlajJAna batAte
haiN|663| pRcchAyAmatha lagnAste, caturthadazamasthitaH  /  grahAH krUrAH zazI
SaSThASTamazcet syAt tadA mRtiH||201|| artha :- AyuSya-viSayaka prazna pUchane
ke samaya jo lagna cala rahA ho, vaha usI samaya asta ho jAye aura krUragraha
cauthe, sAtaveM yA dasaveM meM rahe aura caMdramA chaThA yA AThavA~ ho to usa
puruSa kI mRtyu ho jAtI hai -  // 201 /  /  tthaa||664| pRcchAyAH samaye
lagnAdhipatirbhavati grahaH  /  yadi cAstamito mRtyuH, sajjasyApi tadA bhavet  /
/ 202 //  artha :- Ayu-saMbaMdhI prazna pUchate samaya yadi lagnAdhipati meSAdi
rAzi meM guru, maMgala aura zukrAdi ho athavA cAlU lagna kA adhipati graha asta
ho gayA ho to nIrogI manuSya kI bhI mRtyu ho jAtI hai||20|| tthaa|665|
lagnasthazcecchazI sauriH, dvAdazo navamaH kujaH  /  aSTamo'rkastadA mRtyuH syAt
cet na balavAn guruH||203| | artha :- yadi prazna karate samaya lagna meM
caMdramA sthita ho, bArahaveM meM zani ho, nauveM meM maMgala ho, AThaveM meM
sUrya ho aura guru balavAna na ho to usakI mRtyu hotI hai  /  / 203 /  /
tthaa||666| raviH SaSThastRtIyo vA, zazI ca dazamasthitaH  /  yadA bhavati
mRtyuH syAt, tRtIye divase tdaa||204|  / 667 /  pApagrahAzcedudayAt, turye vA
dvAdaze'thavA  /  dizanti tadvido mRtyu tRtIye divase tadA  // 205 /  /  artha
:- usI taraha prazna karane para sUrya tIsare yA chaThe meM ho aura caMdramA
dasarve meM ho to samajhanA cAhie; usakI tIsare dina mRtyu hogii| yadi pApagraha
lagna ke udaya se cauthe yA bArahaveM meM hoM to kahate haiM kAlajJAna ke
jAnakAra puruSa kI tIsare dina mRtyu ho jAyagI  /  / 204-205 /  /  tthaa|668|
udaye paJcame vA'pi yadi pApagraho bhavet  /  aSTabhirdazabhirvA syAdivasaiH
paJcatA tataH  // 206 /  /   / 669 /  dhanurmithunayoH saptamayoryadyazubhA
grahAH  /  tadA vyAdhima'tirvA syAt, jyotiSAmiti nirNayaH  // 207 /  /  artha :-
prazna karate samaya cAlU lagna athavA pApagraha pAMcaveM sthAna meM ho to ATha
yA dasa dina meM mRtyu hotI hai _ tathA sAtaveM dhanurAzi aura mithunarAzi meM
azubhagraha Aye hoM to vyAdhi yA mRtyu hotI hai| aisA jyotiSakAroM kA nirNaya
hai| aba yaMtra ke dvArA kAlajJAna ATha zlokoM dvArA batAte haiN1670|
antaHsthAdhikRtaprANinAma praNavagarbhitam  /  koNastha rephamAgneyapuraM
jvAlAzatAkulam  // 20 //  ||671 /  sAnusvArairakArAdyaiH, SaTsvaraH pArzvato
vRttam  /  svastikAGka bahiHkoNaM, svA'kSarAntaH prtisstthitm||209|| ||672 /
catuH-pArzvastha-guruyaM, yantraM vAyupurA vRtam  /  kalpayitvA parinyasyet,
pAda-hacchIrSasandhiSu  // 210 //  416

Page #439 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Knowledge of Victory and Defeat Time  **Yoga Shastra, Fifth Light, Verses
211 to 223**  **673 |**  One who wishes to determine their lifespan should face
the sun with their back towards it at sunrise and observe their shadow.   **674
|** If they see a full shadow, then they will not die for five years.   **675
|** If they cannot see their hand, fingers, shoulder, hair, side, or nose, they
will die in six months, one year, three years, five years, seven years, eight
years, ten years, respectively.   **676 |** If they cannot see their ear, they
will die in twelve years.   **677 |** If they cannot see their head or chin,
they will die in six months. If they cannot see their neck, they will die in
eleven days. If they see a hole in their heart, they will die in seven days. If
they see two shadows, they should know that death is near.   **212 |** If they
cannot see their ear, they will die in twelve years.   **213 |** If they cannot
see their hand, fingers, shoulder, hair, side, or nose, they will die in ten,
eight, seven, five, three, and one year, respectively.   **214 |** If they
cannot see their neck, they will die in eleven days.   **215 |** If they see a
hole in their heart, they will die in seven days. If they see two shadows, they
should know that death is near.   **678 |** This is how to determine lifespan
using the yantra. Alternatively, one can use the knowledge described below.
**679 |** First, place the word "Swa" on the crown of the head and the letter
"A" on the forehead. Place "Kshi" on the eyes, "Pa" on the heart, and "Ha" on
the navel.   **680 |** Using this knowledge, chant the mantra 108 times while
looking at your shadow. Face the sun with your back towards it at sunrise.
**681 |** Chant the mantra for another person's shadow if you are determining
their lifespan, and for your own shadow if you are determining your own
lifespan. After performing the puja properly, observe the shadow.   **682 |** If
you see a full shadow, then you will not die for one year. If you cannot see
your thigh, knee, or ankle, you will die in three, two, and one year,
respectively.   **683 |** If you cannot see your hip, you will die in ten
months. If you cannot see your waist, you will die in eight or nine months. If
you cannot see your chin, you will die in five months.   **684 |** If you cannot
see your neck, you will die in four, three, or two months. If you cannot see
your armpit, you will die in ten days. If you cannot see your arm, you will die
in ten days.   **685 |** If you cannot see your shoulder, you will die in eight
days. If you cannot see your heart, you will die in four days. If you cannot see
your head, you will die in two hours. If you cannot see anything, you will die
immediately.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 jaya parAjaya kAla jJAna yogazAstra paMcama prakAza zloka 211 se 223 ||673 |
sUryodayakSaNe sUryaM pRSThe kRtvA tataH sudhIH  /  sva-parAyurvinizcetuM
nijacchAyAM vilokayet  //  211 //  | 674 | pUrNAM chAyAM yadIkSeta, tadA varSa
na paJcatA  /  ||675  /  hastAGguliskandhakezapArzvanAsAkSaye kramAt  /  | | 676
/  SaNmAsyAM mriyate nAze, zirasazcibukasya vA  /  artha : karNAbhAve tu
paJcatvaM varSerdvAdazabhirbhavet  //  212  //  dazASTa- sapta-paJca-
tryekavarSairmaraNaM dizet  // 213 //  grIvAnAze tu mAsenaikAdazAhena dRkkSaye
//  214 || ||677 /  sacchidre hRdaye mRtyuH, divasaiH saptabhirbhavet  /  yadi
cchAyAdvayaM pazyed, yamapArzvaM tadA vrajet  // 215 //  jisako apane AyuSya kA
nirNaya karanA ho, use apanA nAma OM kAra sahita SaTkoNa-yaMtra ke madhya meM
likhanA caahie| yaMtra ke cAroM koNoM meM mAno agni kI saikar3oM jvAlAoM se
yukta 'rakAra' kI sthApanA karanI caahie| usake bAda anusvAra sahita akAra Adi
'aM, AM, iM, I, uM, UM chaha svaroM se koNoM ke bAhya bhAgoM ko ghera lenA
caahie| phira chahoM koNoM ke bAharI bhAga meM chaha svastika likhanA caahie|
bAda meM svastika aura svaroM ke bIca-bIca meM chaha 'svA' akSara likhe| phira
cAroM ora visarga sahita 'yakAra' kI sthApanA karanA aura usa yakAra ke cAroM
tarapha vAyu ke pUra se AvRta saMlagna cAra rekhAe~ khiiNcnaa| isa prakAra kA
yaMtra banAkara paira, hRdaya, mastaka aura saMdhiyoM meM sthApita krnaa| usake
bAda sUryodaya ke samaya sUrya kI ora pITha karake aura pazcima meM mukha karake
baiThanA aura apanI athavA dUsare kI Ayu kA nirNaya karane ke lie apanI chAyA kA
avalokana karanA caahie| yadi pUrNa chAyA dikhAyI to eka varSa taka mRtyu nahIM
hogI, yadi kAna dikhAyI na de to bAraha varSa meM mRtyu hogI, hAtha na dIkhe to
dasa varSa meM, aMguliyAM na dIkhe to ATha varSa meM, kaMdhA na dIkhe to sAta
varSa meM, keza na dIkhe to pAMca varSa meM, pArzvabhAga na dIkhe to tIna varSa
meM, nAka na dIkhe to eka varSa meM, mastaka yA ThuDDI na dIkhe to chaha mahIne
meM, gardana na dIkhe to eka mahIne meM, netra na dIkhe to gyAraha dina meM aura
hRdaya meM chidra dikhAyI 'de to sAta dina meM mRtyu hogii| aura yadi do chAyAeM
dikhAyI de to samajha lenA ki mRtyu aba nikaTa hI hai  /  /  208 - 215  /  /
yaMtraprayoga kA upasaMhAra karake vidyA se kAlajJAna karane kI vidhi batAte
haiM | | 678  /  iti yantra - prayogeNa, jAnIyAt kAlanirNayam  /  yadi vA
vidyayA vidyAd, vakSyamANaprakArayA  //  216  //  :- isa prakAra yaMtra prayoga
se AyuSya kA nirNaya karanA cAhie yA athavA Age kahI jAne vAlI vidyA se kAla
jAnanA cAhie  /  /  216  /  /  artha sAta zlokoM dvArA aba usa vidyA ko kahate
haiM | 679  /  prathamaM nyasya cUDAyAM, 'svA' zabdam 'a' ca mastake  /  'kSiM'
netre hRdaye 'paM' ca, nAbhyabje hA'kSaraM tataH  //  217|| ||680  /  anayA
vidyayASTAgrazatavAraM vilocane  /  svacchAyAM cAbhimantryArkaM pRSThe
kRtvA'ruNodaye  //  218 ||  / 681  /  paracchAyAM parakRte, svacchAyAM svakRte
punaH  /  samyaktatkRtapUjaH sannupayakto vilokayet  //  219  //  :- 'OM ju~ saH
OM mRtyuM jayAya OM vajrapANine zUlapANine hara hara daha daha svarUpaM darzaya
hUM phaT phaT' isa vidyA se 108 bAra apane donoM netroM aura chAyA ko maMtrita
karake sUryodaya ke samaya sUrya kI aura pITha karake pazcima meM mukha
rakhakara acchI taraha pUjA karake upayogapUrvaka, dUsare ke lie dUsare kI chAyA
aura apane liye apanI chAyA dekhanI cAhie  /  /  217 - 219  /  /  artha ||682  /
sampUrNAM yadi pazyet tAmAvarSaM na mRtistadA  /  krama- jaMghA - jAnvabhAve,
tri-dvayekAbdairmRtiH punaH  //  220 //  ||683 | UrorabhAve dazabhiH,
mAsairnazyet kaTeH punaH  /  aSTAbhirnavabhirvA'pi, tundAbhAve tu paJcaSaiH ||
221|| | 684 | grIvA'bhAve catustrikamAsaimriyate punaH  /  kakSAbhAve tu
pakSeNa, dazAhena bhujakSaye  // 222 //  ||685  /  dinaiH skandhakSaye'STAbhiH
caturyAbhyAM tu hRtkSaye  /  zIrSAbhAve tu yAmAbhyAM sarvAbhAve tu tatkSaNAt  //
223 //  417

Page #440 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Knowledge of Victory and Defeat, Profit and Loss at the Time of Asking
Questions  **Yoga Shastra, Fifth Light, Verses 224-230 Meaning:**  If the entire
shadow is visible, then death will not occur for one year. If the feet, shanks,
and knees are not visible, then death occurs in three, two, and one year
respectively. If the thighs (calves) are not visible, then death occurs in ten
months. If the waist is not visible, then death occurs in eight to nine months.
If the stomach is not visible, then death occurs in five to six months. If the
neck is not visible, then death occurs in four, three, two, or one month. If the
armpit is not visible, then death occurs in fifteen days. If the arm is not
visible, then death occurs in ten days. If the shoulder is not visible, then
death occurs in eight days. If the heart is not visible, then death occurs in
four praharas. If the head is not visible, then death occurs in two praharas. If
the entire body is not visible, then death occurs immediately. ||220-223||  Now,
the conclusion of the methods of knowing time is given. ||1686||  **Thus, the
spiritual time is to be determined by the method of pranayama practice.
Incidentally, the determination of external time is also explained. ||224||**
Now, the method of knowing victory and defeat is explained. ||687||  **Who will
win in the battle of these two? When this question is asked, if the nadi is
naturally full, i.e., the breath is being drawn inwards, then the one whose name
is taken first will win. And if the nadi is empty, i.e., the air is going out,
then the other will win. ||225||**  The characteristics of empty and full nadi
are explained. ||1688||  **The place where the moving air goes out is called
'empty'. And where the air enters the nasal passage, that is called 'full' by
the wise. ||226||**  Now, another method of knowing time is explained. ||689||
**If the questioner first takes the name of the knower and then the name of the
patient, then the desired result will be achieved. If the opposite happens, then
the result will be opposite. For example, 'Vaidyaraj! This patient will be
healthy?' Then the patient will be healthy. And 'Will the patient be well or
not, Vaidyaraj?' If the names are spoken in the opposite way, then the opposite
result will be known, i.e., the patient will not be healthy. ||227||**  **And.
||690||**  **If the messenger stands on the left side and the name of the
warrior has an even number of letters, then he will win. If the questioner
stands on the right side and the warrior's name has an odd number of letters,
then he will win in the battle. ||228||**  **And. ||1691||**  **If someone is
possessed by a ghost or bitten by a snake, then the same method should be
understood by the mantrikas when asking questions for them. ||229||**
**||692||**  **If the left side is full and the right side is empty, then the
work started will be successful without a doubt. ||230||**  **418**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 jaya parAjaya kA jJAna, prazna karane ke samaya se lAbha-hAni yogazAstra
paMcama prakAza zloka 224 se 230 artha :- yadi pUrI chAyA dikhAyI de to eka
varSa taka mRtyu nahIM hogI, paira jaMghA aura ghuTanA na dikhAyI dene para
kramazaH tIna, do aura eka varSa meM mRtyu hotI hai| UrU-(piMDalI) na dikhAyI de
to dasa mahIne meM, kamara na dikhAyI de to ATha-nau mahIne meM aura peTa na
dikhAyI de to pAMca-chaha mahIne meM mRtyu hotI hai| yadi gardana na dikhAyI de
to cAra, tIna, do yA eka mahIne meM mRtyu hotI hai| yadi bagala na dikhAyI de to
paMdraha dina meM aura bhujA na dikhAyI de to dasa dina meM mRtyu hotI hai| yadi
kaMdhA na dikhAyI de to ATha dina meM, hRdaya na dikhAyI de to cAra prahara meM
mastaka na dikhAyI de to do prahara meM aura zarIra sarvathA dikhAyI na de to
tatkAla hI mRtyu hotI hai  /  / 220-223 /  /  aba kAlajJAna ke upAyoM kA
upasaMhAra karate haiN1686| evamAdhyAtmikaM kAlaM, vinizcetuM prasaGgataH  /
bAhyasyApi hi kAlasya nirNayaH paribhASitaH  // 224|| artha :- isa prakAra
prANAyAma ke abhyAsa rUpa upAya se AdhyAtmika kAla jJAna kA nirNaya batAte hue
prasaMgavaza bAhya nimittoM se bhI kAla kA nirNaya batAyA gayA hai  /  / 224 /
/  aba jaya-parAjaya ke jJAna kA upAya kahate haiN687| ko jeSyati dvayoyuddhe?
iti pRcchatyavasthitaH  /  jayaH pUrvasya pUrNe syAd riktasyAditarasya tu  //
225 /  /  artha :- ina donoM ke yuddha meM kisakI vijaya hogI? isa prakAra kA
prazna karane para yadi svAbhAvika rUpa se puraka | . ho rahA ho arthAt zvAsa
bhItara kI ora khiMca rahA ho, to jisakA nAma pahale liyA gayA hai usakI vijaya
hotI hai aura yadi nAr3I rikta ho rahI ho arthAt vAyu bAhara nikala rahA ho to
dUsare kI vijaya hotI hai||225|| rikta aura pUrNa nAr3I kA lakSaNa kahate
haiN1688| yat tyajet saJcaran vAyustadriktamabhidhIyate  /  saGkramedyatra tu
sthAne tatpUrNaM kathitaM budhaiH  // 226 /  / . artha :- calate hue vAyu kA
bAhara nikAlanA 'rikta' kahalAtA hai aura nAsikA ke sthAna meM pavana aMdara
praveza karatA ho to, use paMDitoM ne 'pUrNa' kahA hai  /  / 226  /  /  aba
dUsare prakAra se kAlajJAna kahate haiN|689| praSTA''dau nAma cejjJAtuH
gRhNAtyanvAturasya  /  syAdiSTasya tadA siddhiH, viparyAse viparyayaH  // 227 /
/  /  artha :- prazna karate samaya pahale jAnane vAle kA aura bAda meM rogI kA
nAma liyA jAya to iSTasiddhi hotI hai, isake viparIta yadi pahale rogI kA aura
phira jAnane vAle kA nAma liyA jAya to pariNAma viparIta hotA hai| jaise ki
'vaidyarAja! yaha rogI svastha ho jAyegA?' to rogI svastha ho jaayegaa| aura
'rogI acchA ho jAegA yA nahIM, vaidyarAja?' isa prakAra viparIta nAma bolA jAye
to viparIta phala jAnanA arthAta rogI svastha nahIM hogA  // 227 /  /
tthaa|690| vAmabAhusthite dUte, samanAmAkSaro jayet  /  dakSiNabAhugetyAjau,
viSamAkSaranAmakaH  // 228 /  /  artha :- yuddha meM kisakI vijaya hogI? isa
prakAra prazna karate vAlA dUta yadi bAMI aura khar3A ho aura yuddha karane vAle
kA nAma do, cAra, chaha Adi sama akSara kA ho to usakI vijaya hogI aura
praznakartA dAhinI ora khar3A ho tathA yoddhA kA nAma viSama akSaroM vAlA ho to
yuddha meM usakI vijaya hotI hai  // 228 /  /  tthaa|1691| bhUtAdibhirgRhItAnAM,
daSTAnAM vA bhujaGgamaiH  /  vidhiH pUrvokta evAsau, vijJeyaH khalu mAntrikaiH
// 229 //  artha :- bhUta Adi se AviSTa ho athavA sarpa Adi se Dasa liye gaye
hoM, yadi unake lie bhI maMtravettAoM se prazna karate samaya pUrvokta vidhi hI
samajhanI cAhie  /  / 229 /  /  ||692 /  pUrNA saJjAyate vAmA, vizatA varuNena
cet  /  kAryANyArabhyamANAni, tadA sidhyantyasaMzayam  /  / 230 /  /  418

Page #441 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Answers to questions related to success of actions, non-success, and children
Meaning: According to the 44th verse in the fifth light of Yoga Shastra, if the
Varuṇamandala is flowing fully from the left nostril, then the actions started
at that time are sure to be successful. || 230 || And || 693 | Victory, life,
profit, and all other actions are all futile if the wind is in the right
nostril. || 231 || And Meaning: || 694 | A wise man, knowing the wind well,
should drop a flower from his hand. He should then decide about life and death.
|| 232 || Meaning: - To gain special knowledge of life and death, a wise man,
knowing the wind well, drops a flower from his hand and makes his decision. This
is the method of that decision. || 232 || || 695 | If the Varuṇamandala is
rising, there will be immediate profit, if the Purandara (Earth Mandala) is
rising, there will be profit after a long time, if the wind is blowing, there
will be little profit, and if the Agni Mandala is blowing, even a successful
work will be destroyed. || 233 || And Meaning: || 696 | If the Varuṇamandala is
active when a question is asked about a person who has gone to a village or
country, he will return soon, if the question is asked in the Purandaramandala,
he is happy where he has gone, if the question is asked in the wind mandala, he
has gone elsewhere, and if the question is asked in the Agni Mandala, say that
he has died. || 234 || And || 697 | If a question about war is asked in the Agni
Mandala, there will be a terrible war and defeat. If the question is asked in
the wind mandala, the person for whom the question was asked will die and the
army will be destroyed. || 235 || Meaning: || 698 | If the question is asked in
the Mahendra Mandala, i.e., the earth element, there will be victory in the war,
if the question is asked in the Varuṇamandala, there will be more than desired
profit, and there will be a treaty with the defeat of the enemy, indicating
one's own success. || 236 || And || 699 | If the question about rain is asked in
the Bhūma Mandala, there will be rain, if the question is asked in the
Varuṇamandala, there will be more rain than expected, if the question is asked
in the wind mandala, there will be bad days and clouds, but no rain, and if the
question is asked in the Agni Mandala, there will be little rain. || 237 || ||
700 | If the question about the production of crops is asked in the
Varuṇamandala, there will be production of crops, if the question is asked in
the Purandaramandala, there will be a lot of production of crops, if the
question is asked in the wind mandala, there will be medium production of crops;
it will be in some places and not in others, and if the question is asked in the
Agni Mandala, there will be no production of crops at all. || 238 || || 701 |
Mahendra and Varuṇamandala are good for questions about pregnancy, they give
birth to a son. The wind and fire are good for women, and the void destroys the
fetus. || 239 || Meaning: - In questions related to pregnancy, Mahendra and
Varuṇamandala are superior, if the question is asked in them, a son is obtained,
the wind and 419

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 kAryasiddhi-asiddhi - putra-putrI-viSayaka praznoM ke uttara artha : yogazAstra
paMcama prakAza zloka 231 se 239 pahale 44 veM zloka meM kahe anusAra yadi
vAruNamaMDala se vAmanADI pUrNa baha rahI ho to usa samaya prAraMbha kiye gaye
kArya avazyameva saphala hote haiM  /  /  230  /  /  tathA || 693 | jaya -
jIvita - lAbhAdi kAryANi nikhilAnyapi  /  niSphalAnyeva jAyante pavane
dakSiNAsthite  // 231 //  yadi vAruNamaNDala ke udaya meM pavana dAhinI nAsikA
meM cala rahA ho to vijaya, jIvana, lAbha Adi samagra kArya niSphala hI hote
haiM  /  /  231  /  /  tathA artha : | | 694 |jJAnI budhvA nilaM samyak, puSpaM
hastAt prapAtayet  /  mRta jIvitavijJAne, tataH kurvIta nishcym||232|| artha :-
jIvana aura mRtyu ke vizeSa jJAna kI prApti ke lie jJAnI puruSa vAyu ko bhalI-
bhAMti jAnakara apane hAtha se puSpa nIce girAkara usakA nirNaya karate haiN|
usI nirNaya kA tarIkA batAte haiM  /  /  232  /  /  |  /  695  /  tvarito varuNe
lAbha:, cireNa tu purandare  /  jAyate pavane svalpaH, siddho'pyagnau vinazyati
//  233  //  artha :- prazna ke uttaradAtA ke yadi varuNamaMDala kA udaya ho to
usakA tatkAla lAbha hotA hai, puraMdara ( pRthvImaMDala) kA udaya hone para se
lAbha hotA hai, pavanamaMDala calatA ho to sAdhAraNa lAbha hotA hai aura
agnimaMDala `calatA ho to siddha huA kArya bhI naSTa ho jAtA hai  /  /  233  /
/  tathA artha :  / 696 /  AyAti varuNe yAtaH, tatraivAste sukhaM kSitau  /
prayAti pavane'nyatra, mRta ityanale vadet ||234|| kisI gAMva yA deza gaye hue
manuSya ke lie jisa samaya prazna kiyA jAya, usa samaya varuNamaMDala cAlU ho to
vaha zIghra hI lauTakara Ane vAlA hai, puraMdaramaMDala meM prazna kare to vaha
jahAM gayA hai, vahAM sukhI hai, pavana maMDala meM prazna kare to vahAM se
anyatra calA gayA hai aura agnimaMDala meM prazna kare to kahe ki usakI mRtyu ho
gayI hai  /  /  234  /   /  tathA  / 697 /  dahane yuddhapRcchAyAM yuddhaM
bhaGgazca dAruNaH  /  mRtyuH sainyavinAzo vA, pavane jAyate punaH || 235 ||
artha :- yadi agnimaMDala meM yuddhaviSayaka prazna kare to mahAbhayaMkara
yuddha hogA aura parAjaya hogI, pavanamaNDala meM prazna kare to jisake lie
prazna kiyA gayA ho, usakI mRtyu hogI aura senA kA vinAza hogA  /   /  235  /
/  artha : | 698  /  mahendre vijayo yuddhe, varuNe vAJchitAdhikaH  /
ripubhaGgena sandhirvA svasiddhiparisUcakaH  //  236  //  mahendramaMDala arthAt
pRthvItattva ke calate prazna kare to yuddha meM vijaya hogI, varuNamaMDala meM
prazna kare to manoratha se adhika lAbha hotA hai tathA zatru kA mAnabhaMga
hokara apanI siddhi ko sUcita karane vAlI saMdhi hogI  /  /  236  /  /  tathA
||699  /  bhaume varSati parjanyo, varuNe tu manomatam  /  pavane
durdinAmbhodau, vahnau vRSTiH kiyatyapi  //  237 //  artha :- yadi pRthvImaMDala
meM varSA - saMbaMdhI prazna kiyA jAya to varSA hogI, varuNamaMDala meM prazna
kare to AzA se adhika varSA hogI, pavanamaMDala meM prazna kare to durdina va
bAdala hoMge, paraMtu varSA nahIM hogI aura agnimaMDala meM prazna kare to
mAmUlI varSA hogI  /  /  237 || ||700 | varuNe sasyaniSpattiH, atizlAghyA
purandare  /  madhyasthA pavane ca syAt, na svalA'pi hutAzane  /   /  238 ||
artha :- dhAnya- utpatti ke viSaya meM varuNamaMDala meM prazna kare to dhAnya
kI utpatti hogI, puraMdaramaMDala meM prazna kare to bahuta adhika dhAnyotpattI
hogI pavana maMDala meM prazna kare to - madhyama DhaMga kI dhAnyotpatti hogI;
kahIM hogI aura kahIM nahIM hogI aura agnimaMDala meM prazna kare to dhAnya
thor3A sA bhI utpanna nahIM hogA  /   /  238  /   /   / 701  /  mahendravaruNau
zastau, garbhaprazre sutapradau  /  samIradahanau strIdau, zUnyaM garbhasya
nAzakam  // 239|| artha :- garbhasaMbaMdhI prazna meM mahendra aura
varuNamaMDala zreSTha hai, inameM prazna kare to putra kI prApti hotI hai, vAyu
aura 419

Page #442 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 5, Verses 240-258 of Yoga Shastra:  **Verse 239:** If a question is
asked while the Agni Mandala is active, a daughter will be born. If the question
is asked while the Sushumna Nadi is active, the fetus will be destroyed.
**Verse 240:** When entering or leaving a house, a royal palace, or any other
place, one should place the foot on the side of the nostril from which the air
is flowing forward. This will ensure the success of the desired task.  **Verse
241:** When desiring the success of a task, one should approach a guru, a
friend, a king, a minister, or any other person from whom one desires something,
with the foot on the side of the nostril from which the air is flowing forward.
This will ensure the success of the desired task.  **Verse 242:** When sitting
or sleeping, one should place women on the side of the nostril from which the
air is flowing. This will make them submissive. There is no other magic or spell
more powerful than this.  **Verse 243:** Those who desire victory, wealth, and
happiness should place enemies, thieves, debtors, and other sources of trouble
and conflict on the side of the nostril from which the air is not flowing. This
will prevent them from causing harm.  **Verse 244:** Those who protect
themselves with their Purnaanga (the side of the nostril from which the air is
flowing) from the attacks of enemies will not be harmed even by the strongest
enemies.  **Verse 245-246:** If the question is asked while the left or right
nostril of the respondent is active, a son will be born. If the question is
asked while the nostril is inactive, a daughter will be born. If the question is
asked while the air is flowing through the Sushumna Nadi, twins will be born. If
the question is asked while the air is flowing through the empty space, a eunuch
will be born. If the question is asked while the air is transitioning between
the two nostrils, the fetus will be destroyed. If the question is asked while
all the elements are balanced, there will be peace and well-being.  **Verse
247:** Some teachers say that if the question is asked while the Chandra Svar
(lunar breath) is active, a daughter will be born. If the question is asked
while the Surya Svar (solar breath) is active, a son will be born. If the
question is asked while the Sushumna Nadi is active, a eunuch will be born.
**Verse 248:** If the flow of the Purandara (air) is not clear, one should
determine its direction using the color of the bindu (dots): yellow, white, red,
and black.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 yogazAstra paMcama prakAza zloka 240 se 258 agnimaMDala meM prazna karane para
putrI kA janma hotA hai aura suSumNAnAr3I meM prazna kare to garbha kA nAza hotA
hai  /  /  239  /  /  tathA bindu jJAna se kAla nirNaya  / 702 /  gRhe
rAjakulAdau ca praveze nirgame'thavA  /  pUrNAGgapAdaM purataH kurvataH
syAdabhIpsitam  /  / 240|| yA rAjakula Adi meM praveza karate yA bAhara nikalate
samaya jisa ora kI nAsikA ke chidra se vAyu calatA ho; usa tarapha ke paira ko
prathama Age rakhakara calane se iSTa kArya kI siddhi hotI hai  /  /  240  //
artha :- ghara tathA artha : ||703  /  guru-bandhu - nRpAmAtyAH,
anye'pIpsitadAyinaH  /  pUrNAGge khalu kartavyAH, kAryasiddhimabhIpsatA  //  249
//  kArya-siddhi ke abhilASI ko guru, baMdhu, rAjA, pradhAna yA anya logoM ko,
jinase iSTa vastu prApta karanI hai, apane pUrNAMga kI ora arthAt nAsikA ke jisa
chidra meM vAyu calatA ho; usa tarapha ke paira ko prathama Age rakha kara
calane se iSTa kArya kI siddhi hotI hai  /  /  241  /   /  tathA ||704  /  Asane
zayane vA'pi, pUrNAGge vinivezitAH  /  vazIbhavanti kAminyo, na kArmaNamataH
param  // 242 //  artha :- Asana (baiThane) aura zayana (sone) ke samaya meM bhI
jisa ora kI nAsikA se pavana calatA ho, usI ora striyoM ko biThAne para ve vaza
meM hotI hai| isake atirikta aura koI kAmaNa-jAdU-TonA nahIM hai  /  /  242  /
/  ||705  /  ari- caurA'dhamarNAdyAH, anye'pyutpAta - vigrahAH  /  kartavyAH
khalu riktAMge, jaya-lAbha - sukhaarthibhiH||243|| :- jo vijaya, lAbha aura
sukha ke abhilASI hai, unheM cAhie ki ve zatru, cora, karjadAra tathA anya
upadrava, vigraha Adi se duHkha pahuMcAne vAloM ko apane riktAMga kI ora arthAt
jisa ora kI nAsikAM se pavana na cale, usI tarapha bitthaaeN| aisA karane se ve
duHkha nahIM de sakate  /  /  243  /  /  tathA artha  / 706 /  pratipakSa -
prahArebhyaH pUrNAGge yo'bhirakSati  /  na tasya ripubhiH zaktiH, baliSThairapi
hanyate  //  244 //  zatruoM ke prahAroM se jo apane pUrNAMga (pUraka vAyu vAle
aMga) se rakSA karatA hai, usakI zakti kA vinAza karane meM balavAna zatru bhI
samartha nahIM ho sakatA  /  /  243  /  /  tathA artha : ||707  /  vahantIM
nAsikAM vAmAM, dakSiNAM vA'bhisaMsthitaH  /  pRcched yadi tadA putro, riktAyAM
tu sutA bhavet  //  245 //  ||708  /  suSumNA - vAyu bhAge dvau, zizU, rikte
napuMsakam  /  saGkrAntau garbhahAniH syAt, same kSemamasaMzayam  //  246 //
artha :- uttaradAtA kI bAMI yA dAhinI nAsikA cala rahI ho, usa samaya sammukha
khar3A hokara garbha-saMbaMdhI prazna kare to putra hogA aura vaha rikta nAsikA
kI ora khar3A hokara prazna kare to putrI kA janma hogA, aisA kahanA caahie|
yadi prazna karate samaya suSumNAnAr3I meM pavana calatA ho to do bAlakoM kA
janma hogA, zUnya AkAzamaMDala meM pavana cale, taba prazna kare to napuMsaka kA
janma hogaa| dUsarI nAr3I meM saMkramaNa karate samaya prazna kare to garbha kA
nAza hotA hai aura saMpUrNa tattva kA udaya hone para prazna kare to niHsaMdeha
kSemakuzala hotA hai  /  /  245 - 246  /  /  garbhajJAna ke viSaya meM matAMtara
kahate haiM  /  709 candre strI: puruSa sUrye, madhyabhAge napuMsakam  /
praznakAle tu vijJeyamiti kaizcit nigadyate  //  247 //  artha :- kaI AcAryoM kA
kahanA hai ki caMdrasvara cale taba sanmukha rahakara prazna kare to putrI,
sUryasvara meM putra aura suSumNAnAr3I meM napuMsaka kA janma hotA hai  /  /
247 || vAyu ke nizcaya kA upAya batAte haiM  / 710 /  yadA na jJAyate samyak,
pavanaH saJcarannapi  /  pItazvetAruNazyAmairnizcetavyaH sa bindubhiH || 248||
artha :- yadi eka maMDala se dUsare maMDala meM jAtA huA puraMdarAdi pavana jaba
bhalIbhAMti jJAta na ho, taba pIle, zveta, lAla aura kAle binduoM se usakA
nizcaya karanA cAhie || 248  /  /  420

Page #443 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The fruit of Nadi Sanchar Gyan, the method of observation  Yoga Shastra Pancham
Prakash Slokas 249 to 259 describe the method of seeing the bindu in two slokas.
711. With both thumbs, cover both ear holes, with the middle fingers, cover both
nostrils, with the ring and little fingers, cover the mouth, and with the index
fingers, press both corners of the eyes. Then, holding the breath, observe with
a calm mind what color bindu appears in the brow. 249. 712. By pressing the
corners diagonally with the fingers, holding the breath, observe the bindu with
a calm mind. 250. _Meaning: By pressing both ear holes with both thumbs, both
nostrils with the middle fingers, the mouth with the ring and little fingers,
and both corners of the eyes with the index fingers, holding the breath, observe
with a calm mind what color bindu appears in the brow. 249-250. _  Knowing the
bindu helps determine the pavan. 713. If a yellow bindu appears, it is Purandar
Vayu, if a white bindu appears, it is Varun Vayu, if a black bindu appears, it
is Pavan Vayu, and if a red bindu appears, it is Agni Vayu. 251. _Meaning: If a
yellow bindu appears, it is Purandar Vayu, if a white bindu appears, it is Varun
Vayu, if a black bindu appears, it is Pavan Vayu, and if a red bindu appears, it
is Agni Vayu. 251. _  Methods are given to stop the unwanted nadi and start the
desired nadi. 714. If the left or right nadi is flowing unwanted, immediately
press that side of the body so that the other nadi flows. 252. _Meaning: If the
left or right nadi is flowing unwanted, immediately press that side of the body
so that the other nadi flows. 252. _  The area in front of the left side of the
body is called the Chandra Kshetra, and the area behind the right side of the
body is called the Surya Kshetra. 715. 716. Only those who know the flow of Vayu
can truly understand profit and loss, happiness and sorrow, life and death. 254.
_Meaning: The area in front of the left side of the body is called the Chandra
Kshetra, and the area behind the right side of the body is called the Surya
Kshetra. 715. 716. Only those who know the flow of Vayu can truly understand
profit and loss, happiness and sorrow, life and death. 254. _  Now, the method
of knowing the purity of the nadi through the flow of pavan is described. 717.
All this is born of Vayu, and from it comes the power to purify the nadi. The
wise man who truly knows this is free from delusion. 255. _Meaning: All this is
born of Vayu, and from it comes the power to purify the nadi. The wise man who
truly knows this is free from delusion. 255. _  Now, the method of nadi shuddhi
is described in four slokas. 718. Contemplate the 'ha' sound, which is situated
in the karnika of the navel lotus, purified by kala and bindu, surrounded by the
refa, and radiating light. 256. 719. Then, let it flow through the Surya Nadi,
like lightning, filled with hundreds of sparks and flames, reaching the sky.
257. 720. Then, bring it down slowly, bathing it in nectar, and let it enter the
navel lotus, shining like the moon, through the Chandra Nadi. 258. 721. By
constantly practicing this way of entering and exiting, the practitioner attains
nadi shuddhi. 259. _Meaning: Contemplate the 'ha' sound, which is situated in
the karnika of the navel lotus, purified by kala and bindu, surrounded by the
refa, and radiating light. 256. 719. Then, let it flow through the Surya Nadi,
like lightning, filled with hundreds of sparks and flames, reaching the sky.
257. 720. Then, bring it down slowly, bathing it in nectar, and let it enter the
navel lotus, shining like the moon, through the Chandra Nadi. 258. 721. By
constantly practicing this way of entering and exiting, the practitioner attains
nadi shuddhi. 256-259. _

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 nAr3I saMcArajJAna kA phala, vedha vidhi yogazAstra paMcama prakAza zloka 249
se 259 bindu dekhane kI vidhi do zlokoM dvArA kahate haiN|711| aGguSThAbhyAM
zrutI madhyAMgulIbhyAM nAsikApuTe  /  antyopAntyAGgulIbhizca pidhAya
vdnaambujm||249||| 712 /  koNAvakSNonipIDyAdyAgulIbhyAM zvAsarodhataH  /
yathAvarNaM nirIkSeta bindumavyagramAnasaH  // 250 //  _artha :- donoM aMgUThoM
se kAna ke donoM chidroM ko, bIca kI aMguliyoM se nAsikA ke donoM chidroM ko,
anAmikA aura kaniSThA aMguliyoM se mukha ko aura tarjanI aMguliyoM se AMkha ke
donoM konoM ko dabAkara zvAsocchvAsa ko rokakara zAMtacitta se dekhe ki bhrakuTi
meM kisa varNa ke bindu dikhAyI dete haiN?||249-250|| bindujJAna se pavana-
nirNaya karate haiN713| pItena bindunA bhauma, sitena varuNaM punaH  /  kRSNena
pavanaM vidyAd, aruNena hutAzanam  // 251 //  artha :- pIlI bindu dikhAyI de to
puraMdaravAyu, zvetabindu dikhAyI de to varuNavAyu, kRSNabindu dIkhe to
pavanavAyu aura lAla bindu dikhAyI de to agnivAyu samajhanA cAhie  // 25 //
anabhIpsita nAr3I calatI rokakara dUsarI iSTa nAr3I calAne ke upAya batAte
haiN1714| nirurutsed vahantIM yA, vAmAM vA dakSiNAmatha  /  tadaGgaM pIDayet
sadyo, yathA nADItarA vahet  /  / 252 /  /  artha :- calatI huI bAMyI yA dAhinI
nAr3I ko rokane kI abhilASA ho to usa ora ke pArzva-(bagala) bhAga ko dabAnA
caahie| aisA karane se dUsarI nAr3I cAlU ho jAtI hai aura cAlU nAr3I baMda ho
jAtI hai|  / 715 /  agre vAmavibhAge hi, zazikSetraM pracakSate  /  pRSThau
dakSiNabhAge tu, ravi-kSetraM manISiNaH  // 253 /  /   / 716 /  lAbhAlAbhau
sukhaM dukhaM, jIvitaM maraNaM tathA  /  vidanti viralAH samyaga,
vAyusaJcAravedinaH  // 254 /  /  artha :- vidvajjanoM kA kathana hai ki zarIra
ke bAMye bhAga meM Age kI ora caMdra kA kSetra hai aura dAhine bhAga meM pIche
kI ora sUrya kA kSetra hai| acchI taraha se vAyu ke saMcAra ko jAnane vAle
puruSa lAbha-alAbha, sukha duHkha, jIvana-maraNa bhalIbhAMti jAna sakate haiM  /
/ 253-254 /  /  aba nAr3I kI zuddhi pavana ke saMcAra se jAna sakane kI vidhi
kahate haiN717| akhilaM vAyujanmedaM, sAmarthya tasya jAyate  /  kartuM nADI-
vizuddhiM ya, samyag jaanaatymuuddhdhiiH||255|| artha :- jo prakharabuddhi
puruSa nAr3I kI vizuddhi bhalIbhAMti karanA jAnatA hai, use vAyu se utpanna hone
vAlA sarvasAmarthya prApta ho jAtA hai  /  / 255 /  /  aba nAr3Izuddhi kI vidhi
cAra zlokoM se kahate haiN1718| nAbhyabjakarNikArUDhaM, kalA-bindu-pavitritam  /
rephAkrAntaM sphuradbhAsaM, hakAraM paricintayet  // 256 /  /   / 719 /  taM
tatazca taDidvegaM sphuliGgagArciHzatAJcitam  /  recayet sUryamArgeNa,
prApayecca nabhastalam  // 257 /  /  ||720 /  amRtaiH plAvayantaM tamavatArya
zanaistataH  /  candrAbhaM candramArgeNa, nAbhipadme nivezayet  // 258 /  /
||721 /  niSkramaM ca pravezaM ca, yathAmArgamanAratam  /  kurvannevaM
mahAbhyAso, nADIzuddhimavApyunAt  // 259 /  /  artha :- nAbhikamala kI karNikA
se ArUr3ha hue kalA aura bindu se pavitra repha se AkrAMta prakAza chor3ate hue
hakAra (hai) kA ciMtana krnaa| usake bAda vidyut kI taraha vegavAna aura
saikar3oM cinagAriyoM aura jvAlAoM se yukta haiM' kA sUryanAr3I ke mArga se
recana (bAhara nikAla) karake AkAzatala taka Upara phuNcaanaa| isa taraha AkAza
meM pahuMcAkara amRta se bhigokara dhIre-dhIre utArakara, caMdramA ke samAna
ujjvala aura zAMta bane hue 'ha~' ko candranAr3I ke mArga se praveza karavAkara
nAbhikamala meM praviSTa karAnA caahie| isa prakAra ukta mArga se praveza aura
nigamana kA satata mahAbhyAsa karate-karate sAdhaka nADIzuddhi ko prApta kara
letA hai  /  / 256-259 /  /  421

Page #444 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Vedha-Vidhi, Parakaya Pravesha Vidhi - and Conclusion  **Yoga Shastra
Pancham Prakash Shloka 260 to 271**  **Shloka 260:**  **Meaning:**  A wise
person skilled in the practice of Nadi-Shuddhi can, at will, transfer the air
from one nostril (Nadi) to the other instantly.  **Shloka 261:**  **Meaning:**
The air remains in one nostril for two and a half ghatikas (one hour) and then
moves to the other nostril. This is how the change occurs. In a healthy person,
there are 21,600 breaths (Pranavayu) in a day and night.  **Shloka 262:**
**Meaning:**  Those who do not understand the flow of air are not qualified to
make judgments about the truth.  **Shloka 263:**  **Meaning:**  How can a person
with a dull mind, who doesn't even understand the flow of air, talk about the
truth? Knowing the flow of air is essential for understanding the truth.
**Shloka 264:**  **Meaning:**  When the air is inhaled through the Puraka Kriya,
the heart lotus (Hridya Padma) turns downwards and contracts. When Kumbhaka is
performed in the same heart lotus, it expands and turns upwards.  **Shloka
265:**  **Meaning:**  Then, through the Rechaka Kriya, draw the air from the
heart lotus. Do not exhale this air; instead, make it flow upwards, breaking
through the knot in the path, and bring it to the Brahma Randhra.  **Shloka
266:**  **Meaning:**  With curiosity, the yogi should exhale this air from the
Brahma Randhra and, with focus, slowly direct it towards the cotton wool of the
Ak plant.  **Shloka 267:**  **Meaning:**  Practice this repeatedly on the cotton
wool of the Ak plant. When you become proficient in bringing the air to the
Brahma Randhra and then to the cotton wool, you should, with steady focus,
direct the air towards the flowers of the Malati and Chameli plants.  **Shloka
268:**  **Meaning:**  When your practice becomes strong and the Varuna Vayu is
flowing, you should direct the air towards fragrant substances like camphor,
agarwood, and kustha.  **Shloka 269:**  **Meaning:**  When you have mastered
directing the air towards these substances, you should, with skill in
controlling the air, direct it towards the bodies of small birds.  **Shloka
270:**  **Meaning:**  With practice, you should direct the air towards the
bodies of butterflies, bees, and animals, with a focused mind and controlled
senses.  **Shloka 271:**  **Meaning:**  You should practice directing the air
towards the bodies of humans, horses, and birds, and then towards objects like
books and stones, in a gradual manner.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 vedha-vidhi parakAya praveza vidhi - evaM upasaMhAra yogazAstra paMcama prakAza
zloka 260 se 271 nAr3I-saMcAra ke jJAna kA phala kahate haiN722| nADI zuddhAviti
prAjJaH, sampannAbhyAsakauzalaH  /  svecchayA ghaTayed vAyuM,
puTayostatkSaNAdapi  // 260 //  artha :- isa prakAra nADI-zuddhi ke abhyAsa meM
kuzalatA-prAsa vicakSaNa puruSa apanI icchAnusAra vAyu ko eka nAsApuTa (nADI) se
dusare nAsApuTa (nADI) meM tatkAla adala badala kara sakatA hai  // 260 /  isa
prakAra bAMyI-dAhinInAr3I meM rahe hue vAyu kA kAlamAna kahate haiN723| dve eva
ghaTike sArdhe, ekasyAmavatiSThate  /  tAmutsRjyAparAM nAr3ImadhitiSThati
mArutaH  /  / 261 //  724 /  SaTzatAbhyadhikAnyAhuH sahasrANyekaviMzatim  /
ahorAtre nari svasthe, prANavAyorgamAgamam  // 262 //  artha :- eka nAr3I meM
vAyu DhAI ghar3I-(eka ghaMTA) taka bahatI hai, usake bAda usa nAr3I ko
chor3akara dUsarI nAr3I meM bahane lagatI hai| isa prakAra parivartana hotA hai|
eka svastha puruSa meM eka rAta-dina meM 21600 prANavAyu kA gamAgama
(zvAsocchvAsa) hotA hai  /  / 261-262 /  /  vAyu-saMcAra ko nahIM jAnane vAle
tattva nirNaya ke adhikArI nahIM hote| ise kahate haiN|725| mugdhadhIryaH
samIrasya, saGkrAntimapi vetti na  /  tattvanirNayavA sa kathaM kartuM
prvrtte?||263|| artha :- mugdha yA alpa buddhi vAlA jo puruSa vAyu ke saMcAra ko
bhI nahIM jAnatA, vaha tattvanirNaya kI bAta karane meM kaise pravRtta ho sakatA
hai? tattvanirNaya ke lie vAyu-saMkramaNa ko jAnanA atyaMta Avazyaka hai  // 263
/  /  aba ATha zlokoM se vedha-vidhi kahate haiN|726| pUritaM pUrakeNAdhomukhaM
hRtpadmamunmiSet  /  Urdhvasroto bhavet, tacca, kumbhakena prabodhitam  // 264 /
/   / 727 /  AkSipta recakenA'tha, karSed vAyuM hRdambujAt  /  UrdhvasrotaH
pathagrathiM, bhittvA brahmapuraM nayet  /  / 265 /  /  |1728 /  brahmarandhrAt
niSkramayya, yogI kRtakutUhalaH  /  samAdhito'rkatUleSu, vedhaM kuryAcchanaiH
zanaiH  // 266 /  /  1729 /  muhustatra kRtAbhyAso, mAlatImukulAdiSu  /  sthira-
lakSyatayA vedhaM, sadA kuryAdatandritaH  // 267 /  /   / 730 /
dRr3hAbhyAsastata kuryAd vedhaM varUNavAyunA  /
karpUrAgurukuSThAdigandhadravyeSu, sarvataH  // 268 /  /   / 731 /  eteSu
labdhalakSyo'tha, vAyusaMyojane paTuH  /  pakSikAyeSu sUkSmeSu, vidadhyAd
vedhamudyataH  // 269 /  /  1732 /  pataGga-bhRGga-kAyeSu, jAtAbhyAso mRgeSvapi
/  ananyamAnaso dhIraH saJcared vijitendriyaH  // 270 //  |733 /
narAzvakarikAyeSu, pravizan niHsaraniti  /  kurvIta saGkramaM pustopalarUpeSvapi
kramAt  // 271 //  artha :- pUrakakriyA ke dvArA jaba vAyu bhItara grahaNa kI
jAtI hai, taba hRdayakamala adhomukha hotA hai aura saMkucita ho jAtA hai| usI
hRdayakamala meM kuMbhaka karane se vaha vikasita aura Urdhvamukha ho jAtA hai,
usake bAda hRdaya-kamala kI vAyu ko recaka kriyA dvArA khiiNce| isa recakakriyA
dvArA vAyu ko bAhara na nikAle; apitu Urdhvastrota banAkara mArga meM graMthi ko
bhedakara brahmarandha meM le jaaye| yahAM samAdhi prApta ho sakatI hai|
kautuka-(camatkAra) karane yA dekhane kI icchA ho to yogiyoM ko usa pavana ko
brahmarandhra se bAhara nikAlakara, samAdhi ke sAtha Aka kI rUI meM dhIre-dhIre
vedha karanA cAhie arthAt pavana ko usa rUI | para chor3anA caahie| Aka kI rUI
para bAra-bAra abhyAsa karane se arthAt pavana ko bAra-bAra brahmarandhra para
aura bAra-bAra rUI para lAne kA abhyAsa jaba paripUrNa ho jAye, taba yogI ko
sthiratA ke sAtha mAlatI. camelI Adi paSyoM ko lakSya banAkara sAvadhAnI se usa
para pavana ko choDanA caahie| isa taraha hamezA abhyAsa karate-karate jaba
abhyAsa dRr3ha ho jAye aura varuNavAyu cala rahA ho taba kapUra, agara aura
kuSTha Adi sugaMdhita dravyoM meM pavana ko vedha karanA-(chor3anA) caahie| isa
prakAra sabameM vedha karane 422

Page #445 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Conclusion  In the fifth light of the Yoga Shastra, verses 272 and 273, when
success is achieved and proficiency in releasing air in all the aforementioned
combinations is attained, one should attempt to penetrate the dead bodies of
small birds. After practicing penetration in the dead bodies of moths,
bumblebees, etc., one should also begin practicing with deer, etc. Then, with a
focused mind, patience, and controlled senses, the yogi should enter and exit
the dead bodies of humans, horses, elephants, etc., in sequence. They should
also enter stone statues, puppets, and divine images. || 264 - 271 ||
Concluding, the remaining points worth mentioning are:  || 734 || One should
enter the dead bodies through the left nostril. Entering a living body is not
mentioned due to the fear of sin arising from the possibility of causing
another's death. || 272 ||  **Meaning:** Entering a living body is akin to using
weapons and causing harm, and is therefore not something that should be
discussed. One cannot enter another's body without causing their death. It is
essentially a form of violence. The commentary provides insight into this, which
is as follows:  Exiting through the Brahma-randhra, one should enter through the
Apana (anus) path. After entering, one should take refuge in the navel lotus and
reach the heart lotus through the Sushumna nadi. There, one should block the
flow of the other's life force with their own air, and hold it until the body
becomes motionless and falls. Within a moment, the soul will be liberated from
that body. Then, with the senses functioning on their own, the yogi should
engage in all activities using that body as if it were their own. The wise
person should play in another's body for half a day or a full day, and then
enter their own body using this method. This is the fruit of entering another's
body.  || 735 || Through this gradual practice of entering another's body, the
wise yogi, empowered by this practice, becomes free from attachment, like a
liberated soul, and can move about at will. || 273 ||  || Thus, the fifth light
of the Yoga Shastra, known as the Adhyatma Upanishad, composed by Acharya Shri
Hemchandracharya Suri, with its explanation of the Khop, is complete, fulfilling
the curiosity of King Shri Kumarapala. ||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 upasaMhAra yogazAstra paMcama prakAza zloka 272 se 273 meM jaba saphalatA
prApta ho jAye aura Upara kahe hue sarva-saMyojanoM meM vAyu chor3ane meM
kuzalatA prApta ho jAye; taba choTe-choTe pakSiyoM ke mRta zarIra meM vedha
karane kA pratyana karanA caahie| pataMgA, bhauMrA Adi ke mRta zarIra meM vedha
karane kA abhyAsa karane ke bAda hirana Adi ke viSaya meM bhI abhyAsa AraMbha
karanA caahie| phira ekAgracitta dhIra evaM jitendriya hokara yogI ko manuSya,
ghor3A, hAthI Adi ke mRtazarIroM meM praveza aura nirgama karate hue anukrama se
pASANamUrti, putalI, devapratimA Adi meM bhI praveza karanA cAhie  /  /  264 -
271  /  /  upasaMhAra karate hue zeSa kahane yogya bAta kahate haiM -  / 734 /
evaM parAsu-deheSu, pravized vAmanAsayA  /  jIvadehapravezastu nocyate
pApazaGkayA  //  272 //  artha :- isa prakAra mRta- jIvoM ke zarIra meM bAyIM
nAsikA se praveza karanA caahie| dUsare ke prANanAza hone ke bhaya se pApa kI
zaMkA se jIvita deha meM praveza karane kA kathana nahIM kara rahe hai  /  /
272  /  /  bhAvArtha :- jIvita zarIra meM praveza zastra - ghAtAdi ke samAna
pApasvarUpa hone se kathana karane yogya nahIM hai| dUsare ke prANoM kA nAza
kiye binA usake zarIra meM praveza nahIM kiyA jA sakatA hai| vaha vastutaH hiMsA
rUpa hai| TIkA meM usakA digdarzana kiyA gayA hai, vaha isa prakAra hai
brahmarandhreNa nirgatya pravizyApAnavartmanA  /  zrityA nAbhyambujaM yAyAt
hRdambhojaM suSumNayA  // 1 //  tatra tatprANa-saJcAraM nirudhyAnnijavAyunA  /
yAvaddehAttato dehI, gataceSTo viniSpatet  // 2 //  tena dehe vinirmukte
prAdubhUtendriyakriyaH  /  varteta sarvakAryeSu svadeha iva yogavit  // 3 //
dinArthaM vA dinaM ceti krIDet parapure sudhIH  /  anena vidhinA bhUyaH
pravizedAtmanaH puram  // 4 //  artha : brahmarandhre bAhara nikalakara dUsare
ke zarIra meM apAna - (gudA) mArga se praveza karanA caahie| praveza karane ke
bAda nAbhi-kamala kA Azraya lekara suSumNAnAr3I ke dvArA hRdayakamala meM jAnA
caahie| vahAM jAkara apanI vAyu ke dvArA usake prANasaMcAra ko roka denA cAhie
aura taba taka roka rakhe ki jaba taka vaha nizceSTa hokara gira na pdd'e|
aMtarmuhUrta meM vaha Atmadeha mukta ho jaayegaa| taba apanI ora se iMdriyoM kI
kriyA prakaTa hone para yogI usa zarIra se apane zarIra kI taraha sarva kriyAoM
meM pravRtti kare  /  buddhimAna puruSa AdhA dina yA eka dina taka dUsare ke
zarIra meM krIr3A karake isI vidhi se phira apane zarIra meM praveza kre|
parakAyApraveza kA phala kahate haiM  / 735 /  krameNaivaM
parapurapravezAbhyAsazaktitaH  /  vimukta iva nirlepaH svecchayA saJcaretsudhIH
//  273 /  /  artha :- isa prakAra buddhimAna yogI dUsare ke zarIra meM praviSTa
karane kI abhyAsazakti utpanna hone ke kAraNa muktapuruSa ke samAna nirlepa
hokara apanI icchAnusAra vicaraNa kara sakate haiM  /  / 273  /  /   /  /  isa
prakAra paramArhata zrIkumArapAla rAjA kI jijJAsA se AcAryazrI
hemacaMdrAcAryasUrIzvara racita adhyAtmopaniSad nAmaka paTTabaddha aparanAma
yogazAstra kA khopajJavivaraNasahita paMcama prakAza saMpUrNa huA  /  Dhing 423

Page #446 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
|| Om Arhate Namah || 6. Sixth Light "Parakaya-Pravesh is not Paramarthika"
|736| This Parapur-Pravesh is only a matter of wonder, it does not have even a
fraction of Paramarth in it and its Siddhi also happens only after great effort
for a very long time and maybe not even then. Therefore, it is not appropriate
for a seeker of liberation to make such an effort. Even after conquering the
wind with various postures, which are the causes of suffering, even after
controlling the flow of the Nadis within the body, and even after achieving
Siddhi in Parakaya-Pravesh, which no one else can believe in, the one who
remains attached to the knowledge that is full of sin, cannot achieve the path
of liberation. ||1-3|| Many Acharyas believe that Pranayama leads to the Siddhi
of meditation, this pre-stated point is refuted by two shlokas. |739| The mind
does not become healthy by Pranayama, which is full of suffering; because the
suppression of the Pranas causes pain in the body. There is effort in Puran,
Kumbhan and Rechan kriyas. Due to the effort, there is Sanklesh in the mind.
Therefore, Pranayama is an obstacle to liberation because it causes Sanklesh in
the mind. ||4-5|| Explanation: Here there is a doubt that if Pranayama causes
pain in the body and restlessness in the mind, then what other path is there,
which does not cause pain in the body and restlessness in the mind? The answer
to this is that "after Pranayama, many Acharyas tell about Pratyahar; it is not
contaminated." ||4-5|| It is called |741| With the senses, the mind is withdrawn
from the objects, the mind becomes calm. Therefore, for the sake of Dharma-
Dhyan, the mind should be made steady. ||6|| Explanation: Withdrawing the mind
from external objects along with the senses is called Pratyahar. We have
explained in Abhidhan Chintamani Kosha - Pratyaharastvindriyanam vishebhyah
samaahriti. That is, withdrawing the eyes and other senses from the objects like
form etc. is called Pratyahar. The point of making the mind steady is said to
initiate the explanation of Dharana after Pratyahar. ||6|| Now the places of
Dharana are explained. 424

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
  /  /  OM arhate namaH  /  /  6. SaSThama prakAza "parakAya-praveza
pAramArthika nahIM"  / 736 /  iha cAyaM parapura-pravezazcitramAtrakRt  /
siddhyenna vA prayAsena, kAlena mahatA'pi hi  // 1 //  737 /  jitvA'pi pavanaM
nAnAkaraNaiH klezakAraNaiH  /  nADI-pracAramAyattaM, vidhAyA'pi vapurgatam  /  /
2 /  /   / 738 /  azraddheyaM parapure, sAdhayitvA'pi sngkrmm|
vijJAnaikaprasaktasya, mokSamArgo na sidhyati  // 3 //  artha :- yahAM para
parakAyA meM praveza karane kI jo vidhi kahI hai, vaha kevala Azcarya-(kutUhala)
janaka hI hai, usameM aMzamAtra bhI paramArtha nahIM hai aura usakI siddhi bhI
bahuta laMbe kAla taka mahAn prayAsa karane se hotI hai aura kadAcit nahIM bhI
hotii| isalie mukti ke abhilASI ko aisA prayAsa karanA ucita nahIM hai| kleza ke
kAraNabhUta aneka prakAra ke AsanoM Adi se zarIra meM rahe hue vAyu ko jItakara
bhI, zarIra ke aMtargata nAr3I-saMcAra ko apane adhIna karake bhI aura jisa para
dUsare zraddhA bhI nahIM kara sakate haiM, usa parakAyA-praveza meM siddhi
prApta karane kI kAryasiddhi karake jo pApayukta-vijJAna meM Asakta rahatA hai,
vaha mokSamArga siddha nahIM kara sakatA hai  // 1-3 /  /  kitane hI AcArya
prANAyAma se dhyAna kI siddhi mAnate haiM, aisI pUrvakathita bAta ko do zlokoM
dvArA khaMDana karate haiN1739| tannApnoti manaH-svAsthyaM, prANAyAmaiH
kdrthitm| prANasyAyamane pIr3A, tasyAM syAt cittviplvH||4|| |740 /  pUraNe
kumbhane caiva, recane ca parizramaH  /  cita-saGkleza karaNAt, mukteH
pratyUhakAraNam  /  / 5 /  /  artha :- prANAyAma se pIr3ita mana svastha nahIM
ho sakatA; kyoMki prANa kA nigraha karane se zarIra meM pIr3A hotI hai| pUraka,
kuMbhaka aura recaka-kriyA karane meM parizrama karanA par3atA hai| parizrama
karane se mana meM saGkleza hotA hai| ataH citta meM saGkleza kAraka hone se
prANAyAma mukti meM vighnakAraka hai||4-5|| vyAkhyA :- yahAM zaMkA hotI hai ki-
prANAyAma karane se zarIra meM pIr3A aura mana meM capalatA utpanna hotI hai to
dUsarA kauna-sA mArga hai, jisase zarIra meM pIr3A aura mana meM capalatA na ho?
isakA uttara dete haiM ki 'prANAyAma ke pazcAt kitane hI AcArya pratyAhAra
batalAte haiM; vaha dUSita nahIM hai  /  / 4-5 /  /  use kahate haiN1741|
indriyaiH samamAkRSya, viSayebhyaH prazAntadhIH  /  dharmadhyAnakRte tasmAt
manaH kurvIta nizcalam  // 6 //  artha :- prazAMta-buddhi sAdhaka zabda, rUpa,
gaMdha, rasa aura sparza rUpa pAMcoM viSayoM se iMdriyoM ke sAtha mana ko
haTAkara dharmadhyAna ke lie apane mana ko nizcala kare  /  / 6 /  /  vyAkhyA :-
bAhya viSayoM se iMdriyoM ke sAtha mana ko haTA lenA pratyAhAra kahalAtA hai|
abhidhAna ciMtAmaNikoza meM hamane batAyA hai-pratyAhArastvindriyANAM
viSayebhyaH smaahRtiH| arthAt netrAdi iMdriyoM ko rUpa Adi viSayoM se haTAnA
pratyAhAra kahalAtA hai| mana ko nizcala banAne kI bAta pratyAhAra ke bAda
dhAraNA batAne kA upakrama karane hetu kahI hai||6|| aba dhAraNA ke sthAna
batAte haiM 424

Page #447 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Dharana's Locations Yoga Shastra Pancham Prakash Sloka 7 to 8. 742. Nabhi-
Hridaya-Nasagra-Bhal-Bhru-Taloo-Drishtiyah. Mukham Kanau Shirashcheti, Dhyana-
Sthananyakeertayann. ||7|| Meaning: - Nabhi, Hridaya, the front part of the
nose, skull, eyebrow, palate, eyes, mouth, ears and head; all these are
mentioned as locations for Dharana for meditation. ||7|| These should be
understood as the locations of Dharana, which are the means for meditation. Now
the fruit of Dharana is mentioned. 1743. Esham Ektra Kutrap, Sthane Sthaphayato
Manah. Utpadyanta Swa-Samvitteh, Bahavah Pratyayah Kil. ||8|| Meaning: - By
establishing the mind in any one of the above-mentioned locations for a long
time, many perceptions of self-awareness are definitely produced. ||8|| We will
discuss the relationship of perceptions further. || Thus, the sixth Prakash of
the Pattabaddha Aparanama Yoga Shakha, named Adhyatmo Upanishad, written by
Acharya Shri Hemchandracharya Suri Shwar, is complete, with the explanation of
the Khopa, due to the curiosity of the King Paramarth Shri Kumarapal. || 425

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dhAraNA ke sthAna yogazAstra paMcama prakAza zloka 7 se 8  / 742 /  nAbhi-
hRdaya-nAsAgrabhAla-bhrU-tAlu-dRSTayaH  /  mukhaM kaNau zirazceti, dhyAna-
sthAnAnyakIrtayan  /  / 7 /  /  artha :- nAbhi, hRdaya, nAsikA kA agrabhAga,
kapAla, bhrUkuTi, tAlu, netra, mukha, kAna aura mastaka; ye saba _ dhyAna karane
ke lie dhAraNA ke sthAna batAye haiM  // 7 //  inheM dhyAna ke nimittabhUta
dhAraNA ke sthAna samajhane caahie| aba dhAraNA kA phala kahate haiN| 1743 /
eSAmekatra kutrApi, sthAne sthApayato manaH  /  utpadyante svasaMvitteH, bahavaH
pratyayAH kila  /  / 8 /  /  artha :- Upara kahe hue sthAnoM meM se kisI bhI eka
sthAna para adhika samaya taka mana ko sthApita karane se nizcaya hI
svAnubhavajJAna ke aneka pratyaya utpanna hote haiM  // 8 //  pratyayoM ke
saMbaMdha meM Age btaayeNge|  //  isa prakAra paramArhat zrIkumArapAla rAjA kI
jijJAsA se AcAryazrI hemacaMdrAcAryasUrIzvara racita adhyAtmopaniSad nAmaka
paTTabaddha aparanAma yogazAkha kA khopajJavivaraNasahita SaSThama prakAza
saMpUrNa huA  /  /  425

Page #448 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
|| Om Arhate Namah || 7. Seventh Light . Instructions for the aspirant of
meditation practice || 744 | The meditator, the object of meditation, and the
fruit should be known by one who desires to meditate. For without the materials,
the work is never accomplished. || 1 || Meaning: One who desires to meditate
should know the meditator, the object of meditation, and the fruit. Because
without the materials, the work is never accomplished. || 1 || First, we
describe the characteristics of meditation in six verses - | 745 | Even at the
time of the destruction of the life force, he does not abandon the burden of the
yoke of restraint; seeing others as himself, he never deviates from his own
nature. || 2 || | 746 | He is not afflicted by heat, cold, wind, or fire; he is
thirsty for the nectar of yoga, the elixir of immortality. || 3 || | 747 | He is
not overcome by attachment, aversion, or delusion; he is not tainted by anger,
etc.; he makes his mind blissful in the Self, and he is detached in all actions.
|| 4 || | 748 | He is detached from sensual pleasures, even in his own body; he
is free from desire; he is immersed in the ocean of compassion; he abides in
equanimity everywhere. || 5 || | 749 | He has the same desire for the welfare of
both the king and the pauper; he is worthy of boundless compassion; he is averse
to worldly happiness. || 6 || | 750 | He is steady like Mount Meru, joyful like
the moon, and detached like the wind; such a wise and enlightened meditator is
considered fit for meditation. || 7 || Meaning: He who does not abandon the
burden of the yoke of restraint even at the time of the destruction of the life
force; who sees other beings as himself, he never deviates from his own nature;
he remains steadfast in his goal. || 2 || He who is not afflicted by cold, heat,
wind, or fire; who is thirsty for the nectar of yoga, the elixir of immortality.
|| 3 || He who is not overcome by attachment, aversion, or delusion; who is not
tainted by anger, etc.; who makes his mind blissful in the Self, and who is
detached in all actions. || 4 || He who is detached from sensual pleasures, even
in his own body; who is free from desire; who is immersed in the ocean of
compassion; who abides in equanimity everywhere. || 5 || He who has the same
desire for the welfare of both the king and the pauper; who is compassionate
towards all beings; who is averse to worldly happiness. || 6 || He who remains
steady like Mount Meru even when faced with trials and tribulations; who is
joyful like the moon, and detached like the wind; such a wise and enlightened
meditator is considered fit for meditation. || 7 || Now we describe the nature
of the object of meditation, with its distinctions || 751 | The wise have
declared the object of meditation to be of four kinds: 1. Pindastha, 2.
Padastha, 3. Rupa-stha, and 4. Rupa-atita. || 8 || Meaning: Here, the word
"pinda" refers to the body. Meditation that is anchored in the body is called
Pindastha meditation. The object of meditation is called Dharana, according to
its distinction 426

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
  /  /  OM arhate namaH  /  /  7. saptama prakAza . dhyAna-sAdhanA ke abhilASI
ke lie krama batAte haiM || 744 | dhyAnaM vidhitsatA jJeyaM, dhyAtA dhyeyaM
tathA phalam  /  sidhyanti na hi sAmagrIM vinA kAryANi karhicit  //  1 //  artha
:- dhyAna karanA cAhane vAle ko dhyAtA, dhyeya tathA phala jAnanA caahie| kyoMki
sAmagrI ke binA kArya kI siddhi kadApi nahIM hotI  // 1 //  pahale dhyAna kA
lakSaNa chaha zlokoM dvArA batAte haiM -  / 745 /  amuJcan prANanAze'pi,
saMyamaikadhurINatAm  /  paramapyAtmavat pazyan, svasvarUpAparicyutaH  //  2 //
|746  /  upatApamasamprAptaH, zItavAtAtapAdibhiH  /  pipAsuramarIkAri
yogAmRtarasAyanam  // 3 //   / 747 /  rAgAdibhiranAkrAntaM krodhAdibhiradUSitam
/  AtmArAmaM manaH kurvan, nirlepaH sarvakarmasu  // 4 //   / 748 /  virataH
kAmabhogebhyaH, svazarIre'pi niHspRhaH  /  saMvegahRdanirmagnaH sarvatra samatAM
zrayan  // 5 //   / 749 /  narendre vA daridre vA, tulyakalyANakAmanaH  /
amAtrakaruNApAtraM, bhava - saukhya- parAGmukhaH ||6||  / 750 /  sumeruriva
niSprakampaH, zazIvAnandadAyakaH  /  samIra iva niHsaGgaH sudhIrdhyAtA
prazasyate  // 7 //  artha :jo prANoM ke nAza kA samaya upasthita hone para bhI
saMyama dhurA ke bhAra kA tyAga nahIM karatA; dUsare jIvoM ko Atmavat dekhatA
hai, vaha apane svarUpa se kabhI cyuta nahIM hotA; apane lakSya para aTala
rahatA hai  /  / 2 /  /  jo sardI, garmI aura vAyu meM khinna nahIM hotA; ajara-
amara karane vAle, yogAmRta - rasAyana kA pipAsu hai ||3|| rAga-dveSa-moha Adi
doSa jisa para hAvI nahIM hai, krodha Adi kaSAyoM se jo adUSita hai, mana ko jo
AtmArAma meM ramaNa karAtA hai, aura samasta kAryoM meM alipta rahatA hai ||4||
kAmabhogoM se virakta rahatA hai, apane zarIra ke prati bhI niHspRha rahatA hai,
saMvega rUpI sarovara meM bhalIbhAMti DUbA rahatA hai, zatru aura mitra meM,
sone aura pASANa meM, niMdA aura stuti meM, mAna evaM apamAna Adi meM sarvatra
samabhAva rakhatA hai ||5 //  rAjA aura raMka donoM para ekasarIkhI kalyANa-
kAmanA rakhatA hai| sarvajIvoM ke prati jo karuNA-zIla hai, sAMsArika sukhoM se
vimukha hai ||6|| parISaha aura upasarga Ane para bhI sumeru kI taraha niSkampa
rahatA hai, jo caMdramA ke samAna AnaMdadAyI hai aura vAyu kI bhAMti niHsaMga -
(anAsakta, apratibaddhavihArI) hai; vahI prazasta buddhi vAlA prabuddha dhyAtA
dhyAna karane yogya ho sakatA hai ||7| aba bhedasahita dhyeya kA svarUpa batAte
haiM | | 751  /  piNDasthaM ca padasthaM ca rUpasthaM, rUpavarjitam  /  caturdhA
dhyeyamAmnAtaM dhyAnasyAlambanaM budhaiH  // 8 //  buddhimAna puruSoM ne dhyAna
kA AlaMbana svarUpa dhyeya cAra prakAra kA mAnA hai - 1. piNDastha, 2. padastha,
3. rUpastha aura 4. rUpAtIta  // 8 //  artha : yahAM piMDa kA artha zarIra hai|
usakA AlaMbana lekara TikAyA jAne vAlA dhyAna piMDastha dhyAna hai| dhyeya ko
dhAraNA ke bheda se kahate haiM 426

Page #449 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Order of Meditation Practice, the Nature of the Pindastha  **Yoga
Shastra, Seventh Light, Verses 10 to 19**  **752.** There are five Dharanas in
the Pindastha Dhyeya: 1. Parthivī, 2. Āgneya, 3. Māruti, 4. Vārunī, and 5.
Tattvabhū. ||9||  **753.** The Parthivī Dharana is described in three verses.
||753||  **754.** Contemplate the Tiryanchloka, which is the size of a rope, and
a vast ocean of milk, as wide and long as the Tiryanchloka. In that ocean,
contemplate a lotus with a thousand petals, the size of Jambudvipa, and shining
like gold. ||10||  **755.** Contemplate the golden filaments within the lotus,
radiating a brilliant yellow light, and the Karnika (pedicel) as tall as Mount
Sumeru, a hundred thousand yojanas high. ||11||  **756.** Contemplate your own
peaceful self, seated on a white lion throne, ready to eradicate karma, within
the Karnika. This is called the Parthivī Dharana. ||12||  **757.** Now, the
Āgneya Dharana is described in six verses. ||756||  **758.** Contemplate a lotus
with sixteen petals within your navel. Place the Maha Mantra "Aham" in the
Karnika, and on each petal, place the sixteen vowels in order: "A, Ā, I, Ī, U,
Ū, Ṛ, Ṛ, Lu, Lu, E, Ai, O, Au, An, Ah". ||13||  **759.** Contemplate the "Ha"
letter of the Maha Mantra, which is composed of Refa, Bindu, and Kala. From the
Refa, contemplate a smoke-like flame rising slowly. ||14||  **760.** Contemplate
a stream of sparks emanating from the flame, followed by a continuous chain of
flames. Then, contemplate these flames burning the lotus with eight petals,
situated in the heart. ||15||  **761.** On each petal of this lotus, place the
eight karmas in order: 1. Jñānāvaraṇa, 2. Darśanāvaraṇa, 3. Vedaniya, 4.
Mohaniya, 5. Āyu, 6. Nāma, 7. Gotra, and 8. Antarāya. This lotus should be
facing downwards. ||16||  **762.** Contemplate the powerful fire, born from the
meditation on the Maha Mantra "Aham", burning the eight-karma lotus, which is
facing downwards. ||17||  **763.** Then, contemplate a triangular fire pit
outside the body, marked with a Swastika symbol, and containing the fire seed
"Ra". ||18||  **764.** Contemplate the fire flame born from the meditation on
the Maha Mantra within the body, and the fire pit flame outside the body,
burning the body and the eight-karma lotus. Immediately, contemplate the fire
extinguishing itself, leaving only ashes. This is the Āgneya Dharana. ||19||
**765.** Know the "Aham" seed, situated in the Siddha Chakra, as the Maha
Mantra. ||13-18||  **766.** Now, the Vāyavī Dharana is described in two verses.
||762||  **767.** Contemplate the wind, filling the three worlds, moving
mountains and oceans, and causing disturbances. ||19||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dhyAna sAdhanA kA krama, piNDastha kA svarUpa yogazAstra saptama prakAza zloka
10 se 19  / 752 /  pArthivI syAdathAgneyI, mArutI vAruNI tathA  /  tattvabhUH
paJcamI ceti, piMDasthe paJca dhAraNA  // 9 //  | artha :- piMDastha dhyeya meM
pAMca dhAraNAeM hotI hai, 1. pArthivI, 2. AgneyI, 3. mArutI, 4. vAruNI aura 5.
tttvbhuu||9|| usameM pArthivI dhAraNA ko tIna zlokoM se kahate haiN|753|
tiryaglokasamaM dhyAyet, kSIrAbdhiM tatra cAmbujam  /  sahasrapatraM svarNAbhaM,
jambUdvIpasamaM smaret  // 10 //   / 754 /  tatkesarataterantaH,
sphurapiMgaprabhAJcitAm  /  svarNAcalapramANAM ca, karNikAM paricintayet  // 11
//  1755 /  zvetasiMhAsanAsInaM, karmanirmUlanodyatam  /  AtmAnaM cintayet
tatra, pArthivIdhAraNetyasau  // 12 //  artha :- eka rajju-pramANa vistRta
tiryagloka hai| isake barAbara laMbe-caur3e kSIra-samudra kA ciMtana karanA,
usameM eka lAkha yojana jambUdvIpa ke samAna svarNa-kAnti-yukta eka hajAra
paMkhur3iyoM vAle kamala kA ciMtana karanA caahie| usa kamala ke madhyabhAga meM
kesarAe~ haiM aura usake aMdara dedIpyamAna pIlI prabhA se yukta aura
sumeruparvata ke samAna eka lAkha yojana U~cI karNikA-(pIThikA) kA ciMtana
krnaa| usa karNikA para eka ujjvala siMhAsana hai, jisa para baiThakara karmoM
kA samUla unmUlana karane meM udyata apane zAMta AtmA kA ciMtana karanA caahie|
isa prakriyA ko 'pArthivI-dhAraNA' kahate haiM  // 10-12 /  /  aba chaha zlokoM
dvArA AgneyI dhAraNA kahate haiN|756| vicintayettathA nAbhau, kamalaM
SoDazacchadam  /  karNikAyAM mahAmantraM, pratipatraM svarAvalIm  // 13 //   /
757 /  rephabindukalAkrAntaM, mahAmantre yadakSaram  /  tasya rephAd viniryAntI,
zanai--mazikhAM smaret  // 14 //   / 758 /  sphuliMgasantatiM dhyAyet,
jvAlAmAlAmanantaram  /  tato jvAlAkalApena, dahat padmaM hadi sthitam  // 15 /
/   / 759 /  tadaSTakarmanirmANamaSTapatramadhomukham  /  dahatyeva
mahAmantradhyAnotthaH prabalAnalaH  // 16 /  /   / 760 /  tato dehAd bahiAyet
tryasaM vahnipuraM jvalat  /  lAJchitaM svastikenAnte, vahnibIjasamanvitam  //
17 //   / 761 /  dehapadmaM ca mantrArcirantarvahnipuraM bahiH  /  kRtvA''zu
bhasmasAcchAmyet, syAdAgneyIti dhAraNA  // 18 //  artha :- tathA nAbhi ke aMdara
solaha paMkhUDI vAle kamala kA ciMtana krnaa| usakI karNikA meM mahAmaMtra
'ahaM' kI sthApanA karanA aura usakI pratyeka paMkhuDI para kramazaH 'a, A, i,
I, u, U, R, R, lu, lu, e, ai, o, au, aM, aH' ina solaha svaroM kI sthApanA
karanI caahie| usake bAda repha, bindu aura kalA se yukta, mahAmaMtra ke 'ha'
akSara hai, usa repha meM se dhIre-dhIre nikalane vAlI dhUma-zikhA kA ciMtana
karanA cAhie, phira usameM se agni kI cinagAriyoM ke nikalane kA ciMtana krnaa|
bAda meM nikalatI huI aneka agni-jvAlAoM kA ciMtana krnaa| usake bAda ina
jvAlAoM se hRdaya meM sthita ATha paMkhur3I-(dala) vAle kamala kA ciMtana
karanA, usakI pratyeka paMkhur3I para anukrama se 1. jJAnAvaraNa, 2.
darzanAvaraNa, 3. vedanIya, 4. mohanIya, 5. Ayu, 6. nAma, 7. gotra aura 8.
aMtarAya, ina ATha kamoM kI sthApanA karanI caahie| yaha kamala adhomukha honA
caahie| 'ahaM' mahAmaMtra ke dhyAna se utpanna huI mahAprabandha rUpa agni aSTa-
karma rUpI adhomukhI kamala ko jalA detI hai, aisA ciMtana krnaa| usake bAda
zarIra ke bAhara trikoNa (tikona) agnikuMDa aura svastika ke cihna-yukta
agnibIja 'rakAra' sahita ciMtana krnaa| tatpazcAt zarIra ke bhItara mahAmaMtra
ke dhyAna se utpanna huI agnijvAlA aura bAhara kI agnikuMDa kI jvAlA se deha
aura ATha karmoM kA ciMtanakara kamala ko tatkAla bhasma karake apane Apa agni
ko zAMta kara denA caahie| yaha AgneyI dhAraNA hai| mahAmaMtra siddhacakra meM
sthita bIja rUpa 'aha" jaannaa||13-18|| aba do zlokoM se vAyavI dhAraNA kahate
haiN762| tatastribhuvanAbhogaM, pUrayantaM samIraNam  /  cAlayantaM girInabdhIn,
kSobhayanta vicintayet  // 19 //  427

Page #450 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
|| Om Arhate Namah || 8. Eighth Light  Now the characteristic of Padastah Dhyana
is stated. 1772. That which is performed by taking hold of the pure words, is
called Padastah Dhyana by those who are proficient in the principles. ||1||
Meaning: The meditation that is performed by taking hold of the pure words, such
as powerful mantras and letters, is called Padastah Dhyana by those who are
proficient in the principles. ||1|| Its characteristics are described in three
verses. 773. In the first lotus with sixteen petals, situated in the Nabhikanda,
one should contemplate the series of sixteen vowels, 'a, aa, i, ee, u, oo, ri,
ri, lu, lu, e, ai, o, au, an, ah', revolving on each petal. ||2|| 1774. In the
lotus of the heart, with twenty-four petals and a karnika, one should
contemplate the twenty-five consonants, 'k, kh, g, gh, ng, ch, chh, j, jh, n, t,
th, d, dh, n, t, th, d, dh, n, p, ph, b, bh, m', in their respective order.
||3|| 1775. In the lotus of the mouth, with eight petals, one should contemplate
the remaining eight consonants, 'y, r, l, v, sh, sh, s, h'. ||4|| Meaning: In
this meditation, one should contemplate the series of sixteen vowels, 'a, aa, i,
ee, u, oo, ri, ri, lu, lu, e, ai, o, au, an, ah', revolving on each petal of the
first lotus with sixteen petals, situated in the Nabhikanda. Then, one should
contemplate the twenty-five consonants, 'k, kh, g, gh, ng, ch, chh, j, jh, n, t,
th, d, dh, n, t, th, d, dh, n, p, ph, b, bh, m', in their respective order on
the twenty-four petals (dalas) of the lotus of the heart, with a karnika (in
which the 'm' is placed). And in the third lotus with eight petals, imagined in
the mouth, one should contemplate the remaining eight consonants, 'y, r, l, v,
sh, sh, s, h'. The yogi who meditates on the Matrika (alphabet) in this way
becomes proficient in Shruta Jnana. ||2-4|| Now the fruit of Matrika Dhyana is
stated. 776. The meditator who meditates on these naturally perfected letters in
accordance with the rules, acquires knowledge of lost, forgotten, hidden, and
lost objects, past, present, and future, in an instant. ||5|| Special Meaning:
It is said that by chanting, one can overcome consumption, loss of appetite,
slow digestion, leprosy, stomach ailments, cough, asthma, etc., and acquire an
extraordinary voice. He also receives worship and respect from the great ones,
attains a higher state in the afterlife, and obtains a superior position. ||5||
In another way, the form of the Padmayi-Mantrayi Devata is described as the
object of meditation in twelve verses. 1777. Alternatively, one should
contemplate a lotus with eight petals below the Nabhikanda, with a beautiful
series of vowels as its filaments, and eight groups of letters as its petals.
||6|| 1778. On all the junctions of the petals, there is the brilliance of the
praise of the Siddhas. ||7|| 1779. On the tips of all the petals, there is the
purification of Maya and Pranava. ||8|| 1780. The syllable 'Arham' is purifying,
touching the end of the breath. ||9|| 1. The following verse is given in the
commentary: By chanting, one overcomes consumption, loss of appetite, slow
digestion, leprosy, stomach ailments, cough, asthma, etc., and acquires an
extraordinary voice. He also receives worship and respect from the great ones,
attains a higher state in the afterlife, and obtains a superior position. ||1||
429

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
  /  /  OM arhate namaH  /  /  8. aSTama prakAza aba padastha dhyAna kA lakSaNa
kahate haiN1772| yatpadAni pavitrANi samAlambya vidhIyate  /  tatpadasthaM
samAkhyAtaM, dhyAnaM siddhAntapAragaiH  // 1 //  artha :- prabhAvazAlI
mantrAkSara Adi pavitra padoM kA avalaMbana lekara jo dhyAna kiyA jAtA hai, use
siddhAMta ke pAragAmI puruSoM ne padasthadhyAna kahA hai  // 1 //  tIna zlokoM
dvArA isakI vizeSatA batAte haiN773| tatra SoDazapatrADhye nAbhikandagate'mbuje
/  svaramAlAM yathApatraM, bhramantIM paricintayet  // 2 //  1774 /
caturviMzatipatraM ca, hRdi padmaM sakarNikam  /  varNAn yathAkrama tatra,
cintayet paJcaviMzatim  /  / 3 /  /  1775 /  vaktrebje'STadale varNASTakamanyat
tataH smaret  /  saMsmaran mAtRkAmevaM, syAt zrutajJAnapAragaH  // 4 //  artha
:- isa dhyAna meM nAbhikaMda para sthita solaha paMkhur3iyoM vAle prathama
kamala meM pratyeka patra para kramazaH solaha svaroM 'a, A, i, I, u, U, R, R,
lu, lu, e, ai, o, au, aM, aH' kI bhramaNa karatI huI paMkti - kA ciMtana karanA
caahie| phira hRdaya meM sthita karNikAsahita kamala kI caubIsa paMkhur3iyoM
(daloM) para 'ka, kha, ga, gha, Ga, ca, cha, ja, jha, Ja, Ta, Tha, Da, Dha, Na,
ta, tha, da, dha, na, pa, pha, ba, bha, ma' ina paccIsa vyaMjanoM kA ciMtana
karanA caahie| (inameM se caubIsa vyaMjanoM ko caubIsa paMkhur3iyoM meM aura
'makAra' ko karNikA meM rakhakara ciMtana krnaa|) tathA tIsare ATha paMkhur3I
vAle kamala kI mukha meM kalpanA karanI, usameM zeSa ATha vyaMjanoM-ya, ra, la,
va, za, Sa, sa, ha kA ciMtana krnaa| isa prakAra mAtRkA (varNamAlA) kA ciMtana-
dhyAna karane vAlA yogI zrutajJAna kA pAragAmI hotA hai  // 2-4 /  /  aba
mAtRkA-dhyAna kA phala kahate haiN776| dhyAyato'nAdisaMsiddhAn, varNAnetAn
yathAvidhi  /  naSTAdiviSaye jJAnaM, dhyAturutpadyate kSaNAt  // 5 //  artha :-
anAdikAla se svataHsiddha ina vargoM kA vidhipUrvaka dhyAna karane vAle dhyAtA
ko thor3e hI samaya meM naSTa hue, vismRta hue, guma hue va khoye hue padArthoM
ke viSaya meM bhUta, vartamAna aura bhaviSyakAlIna jJAna kSaNabhara meM utpanna
ho jAtA hai  // 5 //  vizeSArtha :- kahA hai ki-jApa karane se kSayaroga,
bhojana meM aruci, agni-mandatA, kuSTaroga, peTa meM roga, khAMsI, dama Adi para
sAdhaka vijaya prAsa kara sakatA hai aura adbhuta vANI bolane lagatA hai| tathA
mukhyajanoM dvArA pUjA, satkAra, paraloka meM uttamagati aura zreSThapada prApta
karatA hai  /  / 5 /  /  * prakArAMtara se bAraha zlokoM dvArA padamayI-
maMtramayI devatA kA svarUpa dhyeya rUpa se kahate haiN1777| athavA
nAbhikandAdhaH, padmamaSTadalaM smaret  /  svarAlIkesaraM ramyaM,
vargASTakayutairdalaiH  // 6 //  1778 /  dalasandhiSu sarveSu,
siddhahastutivirAjitam  /  dalAgreSu samagreSu, mAyApraNavapAvitam  // 7 //
1779 /  tasyAntarantimaM varNam, AdyavarNapuraskRtam  /  rephAkrAntaM
kalAvinduramyaM praliya nirmalam  // 8 //   / 780 /  arhamityakSaraM prANa-
prAntasaMsparzipAvanam  /  hrasva-dIrgha-plutaM sUkSmamatisUkSmaM tataH param
// 9 //  1. TIkA meM nimna zloka diyA hai - jApAjjayetkSayamarocakamagnimAndyaM,
kuSThodarAsmakasanavasanAdirogAn  /  prApnoti cApratimavAgmahatIM mahadamyaM,
pUjAM paratra gatiM puruSottamAptAm ||1|| 429

Page #451 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Nature of Padmasth Dhyana  **Yoga Shastra, Eighth Prakash, Verses 10-22**
1781.  **Verse 10:**  One should remember the *naad* (sound) as it travels
through the middle path, breaking through the knots of the *naabhi* (navel),
*kanth* (throat), *hrid* (heart), and *ghantika* (bell) etc., with a very subtle
sound.  1782.  **Verse 11:**  Then one should contemplate the *antaratma* (inner
self) being bathed in the waves of nectar, white like milk, emanating from the
*kala* (time) heated by the *bindu* (point).  1783.  **Verse 12:**  Then one
should place the self within the sixteen-petaled lotus of the *sudharasa* (sweet
nectar) *suta* (son) and contemplate the sixteen *vidya devi* (goddesses of
knowledge) on its petals.  1784.  **Verse 13:**  One should contemplate for a
long time in the mind, the self being bathed in the nectar, white like milk,
flowing from the brilliant crystal *bhṛngāra* (bee).  1785.  **Verse 14:**  Then
one should meditate on the *Arhat* (the worthy one), the first *abhidheya*
(name) of the *mantra raja* (king of mantras), the supreme being, in the head,
pure and clear like a crystal.  1786.  **Verse 15:**  Due to the intensity of
this meditation, one should repeatedly utter "So'ham, So'ham" (I am that, I am
that) and without any doubt, know the oneness of the self with the supreme self.
1787.  **Verse 16:**  Then one should meditate on the supreme self, free from
attachment and aversion, free from delusion, all-knowing, all-seeing, worshipped
by the gods, residing in the *samavasarana* (assembly hall), delivering the
teachings of Dharma.  1788.  **Verse 17:**  By meditating on the self in this
way, as inseparable from the supreme self, the meditator, cleansed of all
impurities, attains the supreme selfhood.  **Meaning:**  Alternatively, one
should contemplate a lotus with eight petals below the navel. On the first petal
of this lotus, one should contemplate the sixteen *swaravali* (musical notes) in
the form of beautiful *kesara* (stamens). On the remaining seven petals, one
should establish the seven *varga* (classes) in order. This is as follows: 1.
*ka*, *kha*, *ga*, *gha*, *nga*, 2. *cha*, *chha*, *ja*, *jha*, *nya*, 3. *ta*,
*tha*, *da*, *dha*, *na*, 4. *ta*, *tha*, *da*, *dha*, *na*, 5. *pa*, *pha*,
*ba*, *bha*, *ma*, 6. *ya*, *ra*, *la*, *va*, 7. *sha*, *sha*, *sa*, *ha*. At
the junctions of these eight petals, one should establish the *siddha*
(perfected being) *stuti* (praise) in the form of *hrim* sound. And at the front
of all the petals, one should establish "Om Hrim". In the middle of that lotus,
one should establish the first letter "a" and the last letter "ha" along with
the *ref* (sound) and *bindu* (dot), bright like snow, as the "Aham" (I).
Remembering this "Aham" in the mind purifies the soul. The pronunciation of the
word "Aham" should be done first in the mind with a *hasvanad* (short sound).
Later, it should be pronounced with a *dirgha* (long sound), then *plut* (very
long sound), then *sukshma* (subtle sound), and then *atisukshma* (very subtle
sound). After that, that *naad* (sound) breaks through the knots of the *naabhi*
(navel), *hrid* (heart), and *kanth* (throat) etc., and moves forward through
the middle of them all. One should contemplate this. Then one should contemplate
that the *antaratma* (inner self) is being bathed in the waves of nectar, white
like milk, emanating from the *kala* (time) heated by the *bindu* (point). Then
one should imagine a lake of nectar and contemplate a lotus with sixteen petals
arising from that lake. One should establish oneself within it and contemplate
the sixteen *vidya devi* (goddesses of knowledge) on those petals in order.
Later, one should contemplate in the mind, for a long time, the self being
irrigated by the nectar, white like milk, flowing from the brilliant crystal
*bhṛngāra* (bee). Then one should meditate on the *Arhat* (the worthy one), the
first *abhidheya* (name) of the *mantra raja* (king of mantras), the supreme
being, in the head, pure and clear like a crystal. This meditation should be so
powerful and profound that due to its contemplation, the meditator, repeatedly
uttering "So'ham, So'ham" (I am that, I am that) in the inner voice, should
experience the oneness of the self with the supreme self without any doubt. Then
one should meditate on the supreme self, free from attachment and aversion, free
from delusion, all-knowing, all-seeing, worshipped by the gods, residing in the
*samavasarana* (assembly hall), delivering the teachings of Dharma. By
meditating on the self in this way, as inseparable from the supreme self, the
meditator, cleansed of all impurities, attains the supreme selfhood.  **Verses
6-17**  There are also other methods of meditating on the *padmasth* (lotus-
seated) deity, described in five verses.  1789.  **Verse 18:**  Alternatively,
the wise meditator should contemplate the *mantra adhip* (master of mantras),
combined with the upward and downward *ref* (sound), encompassed by the *kala*
(time) and *bindu* (point), and also with the *anahata* (unstruck sound).  1790.
**Verse 19:**  One should contemplate it residing in the heart of a golden
lotus, pure like the dense rays of the moon, moving in the sky, and pervading
all directions.  1791.  **Verse 20:**  Then one should contemplate it entering
the lotus of the mouth, moving in the dust particles, shining in the eyes, and
residing in the forehead.  1792.  **Verse 21:**  One should contemplate it
exiting through the hole in the ear, flowing as sweet nectar, competing with the
moon, and shining in the light.  1793.  **Verse 22:**  One should contemplate it
moving in the sky, uniting with the auspiciousness of Shiva, complete in all its
parts, with *kumbhaka* (breath retention).  **Meaning:**  Alternatively, the
wise meditator should contemplate the *mantra adhip* (master of mantras),
combined with the upward and downward *ref* (sound), encompassed by the *kala*
(time) and *bindu* (point), and also with the *anahata* (unstruck sound),
residing in the heart of a golden lotus, pure like the dense rays of the moon,
moving in the sky, and pervading all directions. Then one should contemplate it
entering the lotus of the mouth, moving in the dust particles, shining in the
eyes, and residing in the forehead. One should contemplate it exiting through
the hole in the ear, flowing as sweet nectar, competing with the moon, and
shining in the light. One should contemplate it moving in the sky, uniting with
the auspiciousness of Shiva, complete in all its parts, with *kumbhaka* (breath
retention).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 padastha dhyAna kA svarUpa yogazAstra aSTama prakAza zloka 10 se 22 | 1781 /
granthIn vidArayan, nAbhi-kaNTha-hRda-ghaNTikAdikAn  /  susUkSmadhvaninA madhya-
mArgayAyi smaret tataH  // 10 //  1782 /  atha tasyAntarAtmAnaM, plAvyamAnaM
vicintayet  /  bindutaptakalAniryatkSIra-gaurAmatormibhiH  // 11 /  /   / 783 /
tataH sudhArasaH-sUta-SoDazAbjadalodare  /  AtmAnaM nyasya patreSu,
vidyAdevIMzca SoDaza  // 12 //   / 784 /  sphuratsphaTikabhRGgAra-kSarat-
kSIrasitAmRtaiH  /  AbhirAplAvyamAnaM svaM ciraM citte vicintayet  // 13 //  |
1785 /  athAsya mantrarAjasyAbhidheyaM parameSThinam  /  arhantaM mUrdhani
dhyAyet, zuddhasphaTikanirmalam  // 14 //   / 786 /  taddhyAnAvezataH 'so'haM',
'so'ham' ityAlapan muhuH  /  niHzaGkamekatAM vidyAd, AtmanaH paramAtmanA  // 15
//  | 1787 /  tato nIrAgamadveSam, amohaM sarvadarzinam  /  surAz2a samavasRtau,
kurvANaM dharmadezanAm  // 16 //  1788 /  dhyAyannAtmAnamevettham, abhinnaM
paramAtmanA  /  labhate paramAtmatvaM, dhyAnI nirdhUta-kalmaSaH  // 17 //  artha
:- athavA nAbhikaMda ke nIce ATha paMkhur3I vAle eka kamala kA ciMtana krnaa|
isa kamala kI ATha paMkhur3iyoM meM se prathama paMkhur3I para manohara kesarAoM
rUpa solaha svarAvalI kA ciMtana karanA, zeSa sAta paMkhur3iyoM meM kramazaH
sAta vargoM kI sthApanA krnaa| yaha isa prakAra-1. ka, kha, ga, gha, Ga, 2. ca,
cha, ja, jha, Ja, 3. Ta, Tha, Da, Dha, Na, 4. ta, tha, da, dha, na, 5. pa, pha,
ba, bha, ma, 6. ya, ra, la, va, 7. za, Sa, sa, h| ina AThoM paMkhur3iyoM kI
saMdhiyoM meM hrIM-kAra-rUpa siddhastuti kI sthApanA karanA aura sabhI
paMkhur3iyoM ke agrabhAga meM 'OM hrIM sthApita krnaa| usa kamala ke madhyabhAga
meM prathama varNa 'a' aura aMtima varNa 'ha' repha kalA aura bindu sahita hima
ke samAna ujjvala ahaM kI sthApanA karanI caahie| isa 'ahaM' kA mana meM smaraNa
AtmA ko pavitra karatA hai| ahaM zabda kA uccAraNa prathama mana meM hasvanAda
se karanA caahie| bAda meM dIrgha, phira pluta, phira sUkSma aura atisUkSmanAda
se uccAraNa karanA caahie| tadanaMtara vaha nAda nAbhi, hRdaya aura kaMTha kI
ghaMTikAdi gAMThoM ko bhedatA huA una saba ke bIca meM se hokara Age calA jA
rahA hai| aisA ciMtana kre| usake bAda yaha ciMtana kare ki usa nAdabindu se
tapI huI kalA meM se nikalane vAle dUdha ke samAna ujjvala amRta kI taraMgoM se
aMtarAtmA plAvita ho rahI hai| phira amRta ke eka sarovara kI kalpanA kare aura
usa sarovara se utpanna hue solaha paMkhur3I vAle kamala kA ciMtana kre| usake
aMdara apane Apa ko sthApita karake una paMkhur3iyoM para kramazaH solaha
vidyAdeviyoM kA ciMtana kre| bAda meM dedIpyamAna sphaTikaratna kI jhArI meM se
jharate hue dUdha ke sadRza ujjvala amRta se apane ko dIrghakAla taka siMcita
hote hue mana meM ciMtana kre| usake bAda zuddha sphaTikaratna ke samAna
nirmala, maMtrarAja ke prathama abhidheya pada 'arhat' parameSThI kA mastaka meM
dhyAna kre| yaha dhyAna itanA prabala aura pragAr3ha honA cAhie ki isake ciMtana
ke kAraNa bAra-bAra so'haM so'haM (arthAt jo vItarAga hai, vahI maiM hUM) isa
prakAra kI antardhvani karatA huA dhyAtA niHzaMkabhAva se AtmA aura paramAtmA kI
ekarUpatA kA anubhava kre| tadanaMtara vaha vItarAga, vItadveSa, nirmoha,
sarvajJa-sarvadarzI, devoM se pUjya, samavasaraNa meM sthita hokara dharmadezanA
karate hue paramAtmA ke sAtha apanA abhinna rUpa mAnakara dhyAna kre| isa taraha
kA dhyAna karane vAlA dhyAtA samasta pApakarmoM kA nAza karake paramAtmatva ko
prApta kara letA hai  // 6-17|| aura bhI dUsare prakAra se padamayI devatA kI
dhyAnavidhi pAMca zlokoM dvArA batAte haiN|789| yadvA mantrAdhipaM dhImAn,
UrdhvAdho-rephasaMyutam  /  kalAbindusamAkrAntam, anAhatayuta tathA  // 18 //
1790 /  kanakAmbhojagarbhasthaM, sAndracandrAMzunirmalam  /  gagane saJcarantaM
ca, vyApnuvantaM dizaH smaret  /  / 19 /  /  1791 /  tato vizantaM vaktrAbje,
bhramantaM dhUlatAntare  /  sphurantaM netrapatreSu, tiSThantaM bhAlamaNDale  //
20 //   / 792 /  niryAntaM tAlurandhreNa, sravantaM ca sudhArasam  /
spardhamAnaM zazAGkena, sphurantaM jyotirantare  // 21 //   / 793 /  saJcarantaM
nabhobhAge, yojayantaM zivazriyA  /  sarvAvayavasampUrNaM, kumbhakena vicintayet
// 22 //  artha :- athavA buddhimAna dhyAtA svarNakamala ke garbha meM sthita,
caMdramA kI saghana kiraNoM ke samAna nirmala AkAza meM saMcaraNa karate hae
aura samasta dizAoM meM phailate hae repha se yukta, kalA aura binda se ghire
430

Page #452 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Nature of Padasthan Dhyana  **From verses 23 to 28 of the eighth chapter
of Yoga Shastra, contemplate the "Aham" (I) mantra, which is the lord of mantras
and resides in the Anahata chakra.**  Then, entering the lotus of the mouth,
wandering in the "Bhoolata" (forgetfulness), shining in the eyes, residing in
the forehead, exiting through the hole in the palate, showering nectar,
competing with the moon in brilliance, shining brightly in the celestial sphere,
moving through the sky, and uniting with the Lakshmi of liberation, the wise
yogi should contemplate the "Aham" mantra, the king of mantras, which is filled
with all the elements, through Kumbhaka (breath control). ||18-22||  It is said
that "Akar" is at its beginning, "Hakar" is at its end, and "Ref" with a dot is
in the middle. This is the supreme truth. He who knows this is truly a knower of
the truth. ||1||  **Meaning:** The "Aham" is the supreme truth, whose beginning
is "Akar", whose end is "Hakar", and whose middle is "Ref" with a dot. He who
knows this is truly a knower of the truth. Now, the fruit of meditating on the
king of mantras is described. ||1||  **This great truth, when the yogi meditates
on it steadily, then the Lakshmi of liberation, like a land of bliss, appears
before him.** ||23||  **Then, the method is explained:**  **After that, meditate
on the bright "H" letter, devoid of "Ref", dot, and "Kala". Then, consider it as
if it has become a non-letter, and contemplate it without uttering it.** ||24||
**Meaning:** After that, meditate on the bright "H" letter, devoid of "Ref",
dot, and "Kala". Then, consider it as if it has become a non-letter, and
contemplate it without uttering it. ||24||  **Then, contemplate the Anahata
deity, which is subtle, like the crescent moon, and radiant like the sun, as if
it has attained the form of a non-letter, without uttering it.** ||25||
**Meaning:** Then, contemplate the Anahata deity, which is subtle, like the
crescent moon, and radiant like the sun, as if it has attained the form of a
non-letter, without uttering it. ||25||  **Then, gradually meditate on the same
Anahata "H" in its subtle form, like the tip of a hair. Then, for a moment, see
the world as formless and luminous.** ||26||  **Meaning:** Then, gradually
meditate on the same Anahata "H" in its subtle form, like the tip of a hair.
Then, for a moment, see the world as formless and luminous. ||26||  **Then,
gradually withdrawing the mind from the object, and establishing it in the non-
object, a light arises within, which is imperishable and beyond the senses. It
gradually opens the inner space.** ||27||  **Meaning:** Then, gradually
withdrawing the mind from the object, and establishing it in the non-object, a
light arises within, which is imperishable and beyond the senses. It gradually
opens the inner space. ||27||  **Thus, by taking the object as a support, the
non-object is illuminated. The sage, whose mind is established in the non-
object, achieves his desired goal.** ||28||  **Meaning:** Thus, by taking the
object as a support, the non-object is illuminated. The sage, whose mind is
established in the non-object, achieves his desired goal. ||28||  **Meaning:**
In this way, the Anahata-Avyakt (unmanifest) mantra-king is described. Following
the aforementioned method, one should take the object as a support and progress,
gradually abandoning the support and becoming steady in the state of non-
support. This reveals the true nature of the self. Therefore, one should first
meditate with support and then without support. ||28||  **Now, the method of
meditation on the mantra-deity, which represents the Supreme Being, is explained
in two verses through another method.** ||431||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 padastha dhyAna kA svarUpa yogazAstra aSTama prakAza zloka 23 se 28 hue
anAhata-sahita maMtrAdhipa ahaM kA ciMtana kre| usake bAda mukhakamala meM
praveza karate hue, bhUlatA | meM bhramaNa karate hue, netrapatroM meM
sphurAyamAna hote hue, bhAlamaMDala meM sthita, tAlu ke randhra se bAhara
nikalate hue, amRta-rasa barasAte hue, ujjvalatA meM caMdramA ke pratispardhI,
jyotimaMDala meM vizeSa prakAra | se camakate hue, AkAza-pradeza meM saMcAra
karate hue aura mokSalakSmI ke sAtha milApa karAte hue samasta avayavoM se
paripUrNa 'ahaM' maMtrAdhirAja kA buddhimAna yogI ko kuMbhaka ke dvArA ciMtana
karanA caahie||18-22|| kahA hai kiakArAdi-hakArAntaM, rephamadhyaM sabindukam  /
tadeva paramaM tattvaM, yo jAnAti sa tattvavit  // 1 //  artha :- akAra jisake
Adi meM hai, hakAra jisake aMta meM hai aura bindusahita repha jisake madhya meM
hai, vahI 'ahaM' parama tattva hai| use jo jAna letA hai, vahI vAstava meM
tattvajJa hai| aba maMtrarAja ke dhyAna kA phala kahate haiN|794|
mahAtattvamidaM yogI, yadaiva dhyAyati sthiraH  /  tadaivAnandasampadbhUH,
muktizrIrupatiSThate  // 23 /  /  /  artha :- jo yogI citta ko sthira karake isa
mahAtattva-svarUpa 'aha" kA dhyAna karatA hai, usake pAsa usI samaya | . AnaMda
rUpI saMpabhUmi ke samAna mokSa-lakSmI hAjira ho jAtI hai  /  / 23 /  /  usake
bAda kI vidhi batAte haiN1795| repha-bindu-kalAhInaM zubhraM, dhyAyet
tato'kSaram  /  tato'narakSaratAM prAptam, anuccArya vicintayet  /  / 24 /  /
artha. :- usake bAda repha, bindu aura kalA se rahita ujjvala 'ha' varNa kA
dhyAna kre| usake bAda vaha 'ha' akSara mAno anakSara bana gayA ho, isa rUpa meM
mukha se uccAraNa kiye binA hI ciMtana kare  /  / 24 /  /  usake baad1796|
nizAkara-kalAkAraM, sUkSmaM bhAskarabhAsvaram  /  anAhatAbhidhaM devaM,
visphurantaM vicintayet  // 25 /  /  artha :- dUja ke caMdramA kI kalA ke AkAra
sadRza sUkSma evaM sUrya ke samAna dedIpyamAna anAhata nAmaka deva ko anuccArya
mAnakara anakSara kI AkRti ko prApta usa sphurAyamAna 'ha' varNa kA ciMtana
karanA . caahie||25|| 1797 /  tadeva ca kramAt sUkSmaM, dhyAyed bAlAgrasannibham
/  kSaNamavyaktamIkSeta, jagajjyotirmayaM tataH  // 26 //  artha :- usake bAda
usI anAhata 'ha' kA bAla ke agrabhAga ke samAna sUkSma rUpa meM ciMtana kare,
phira thor3I dera taka jagata ko avyakta, nirAkAra aura jyotirmaya svarUpa meM
dekhe  // 26 /  /  vaha isa prkaar798| pracyAvyamAnasaGlakSyAd, alakSye dadhataH
sthiram  /  jyotirakSayamatyakSam, antarunmIlati kramAt  /  / 27 /  /  artha :-
phira lakSya se mana ko dhIre-dhIre haTAkara alakSya meM sthira karane para
aMdara eka aisI jyoti utpanna hotI hai, jo akSaya aura iMdriyoM se agocara hotI
hai| vaha kramazaH aMtara ko khola detI hai  // 27 //  isa viSaya kA upasaMhAra
karate haiN1799| iti lakSyaM samAlambya lakSyAbhAvaH prakAzitaH  /
niSaNNamanasastatra, sidhyatyabhimataM muneH  // 28 //  artha :- isa prakAra
lakSya kA AlaMbana lekara nirAlaMba-svarUpa lakSyAbhAva ko prakAzita kiyA hai|
alakSya meM mana ko sthApita karane vAle muni kA manovAMchita phala siddha ho
jAtA hai|||28|| bhAvArtha :- isa taraha anAhata-avyakta maMtrarAja kahA hai|
pUrvokta vidhi ke anusAra lakSya kA AlaMbana grahaNa karake usameM Age bar3hate
hue kramazaH AlaMbana kA tyAgakara nirAlaMbana-sthiti meM nizcala honA caahie|
isase Atma |svarUpa prakaTa hotA hai| isalie prathama sAlaMbana dhyAna aura bAda
meM nirAlaMbana dhyAna karanA cAhie  /  / 28 //  _aba dUsare upAya se
parameSThi-vAcaka maMtramayI devatA kI dhyAna-vidhi ko do zlokoM dvArA batAte
haiN| 431

Page #453 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Nature of Padmastha Dhyana  **Yoga Shastra, Eighth Prakash, Verses
29-37**  **Meaning:**  **800.**  One should meditate on the **Shabda Brahma**,
the sole cause of creation, residing in the center of the heart lotus, composed
of vowels and consonants, the speaker of the Pancha Parameshthis. ||29||
**801.**  One should meditate on the **Pranava** (Om), the great mantra,
emanating from the moon-like brilliance residing on the head, drenched in the
nectar of the divine arts, using **Kumbhaka** (breath retention). ||30||
**802.**  One should meditate on the **Om** of yellow color for **Sthambhana**
(immobilization), red for **Vashya** (subjugation), coral-colored for
**Kshobhana** (agitation), black for **Vidveshana** (hatred), and white like the
moon for **Karmaghnata** (destruction of karma). ||31||  **Meaning:**  Although
it is appropriate for those seeking the destruction of karma to meditate on the
**Om** that shines like the moon, in various situations involving substances,
fields, time, and emotions, meditating on other colors like yellow can also be
beneficial. Therefore, the practice of meditating on **Om** is prescribed here.
||31||  **Another method of meditating on the Padmaya Devata:**  **803.**  The
yogi should especially meditate on the **Pancha Parameshthi Namaskara Mantra**,
the great, most auspicious mantra that purifies the three worlds. ||32||  **This
can be done as follows:**  **804.**  One should contemplate a white lotus with
eight petals, and in its center, the seven-syllabled, pure mantra **"Namo
Arihantaṇam"**. ||33||  **805.**  Then, one should contemplate the four mantra-
words **"Siddhādik"** in the petals of the four directions, and the four words
of the **"Chūlā-Pāda"** in the petals of the intercardinal directions. ||34||
**Meaning:**  One should contemplate **"Namo Siddhāṇam"** in the east, **"Namo
Āryāṇam"** in the south, **"Namo Uvvajjhāyāṇam"** in the west, and **"Namo Loe
Savvasāhūṇam"** in the north. In the intercardinal directions, one should
contemplate **"Eso Panca Namukkāro"** in the southeast, **"Savvapāvappaṇāsano"**
in the southwest, **"Mangalāṇam ca Savveṛsi"** in the northwest, and **"Padhamaṁ
Havvai Mangalaṁ"** in the northeast. In this way, one should meditate on the
**Pancha Parameshthi Namaskara Mantra**. ||34||  **Now, the fruits of
contemplating the mantra are described:**  **806.**  A muni who contemplates
this mantra with purity of mind, speech, and body, even while eating, receives
the fruit of four days of fasting by chanting it one hundred and eight times.
||35||  **807.**  By properly worshipping this great mantra, yogis become highly
respected in the three worlds and attain supreme prosperity. ||36||  **808.**
Even those who have committed thousands of sins and killed hundreds of beings,
by worshipping this mantra, attain heaven even if they are born as animals.
||37||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 padastha dhyAna kA svarUpa yogazAstra aSTama prakAza zloka 29 se 37 artha  /
800 /  tathA hRtpadmamadhyasthaM, zabdabrahmaikakAraNam  /
svaravyaJjanasaMvItaM vAcakaM parameSThinaH  //  29  //   / 801  /
mUrdhasaMsthita-zItAMzu - kalAmRtarasaplutam  /  kumbhakena mahAmantraM,
praNavaM paricintayet ||30|| :- tathA hRdayakamala ke madhya meM sthita (vacana
- vilAsa svarUpa) zabda - brahma kI utpatti ke ekamAtra kAraNa, svara aura
vyaMjanoM se yukta paMcaparameSThI ke vAcaka evaM mastaka meM sthita caMdrakalA
se nikalate hue amRtarasa se tarabatara mahAmaMtra OMkAra (praNava) kA kuMbhaka
( zvAsocchvAsa ko roka) karake dhyAna karanA cAhie  /  /  29-30 /  dhyeyatattva
ke dUsare bheda kahate haiM artha : | | 802  /  pIta stambhe'ruNaM vazye,
kSobhaNe vidrumaprabham  /  kRSNa vidveSaNe dhyAyet, karmaghAte zaziprabham
||31|| staMbhana kArya karane meM pIle OMkAra kA, vazIkaraNa meM lAla varNa kA,
kSobhaNakArya meM mUMge ke raMga kA, vidveSaNa-kArya meM kAle varNa kA aura
karmoM kA nAza karane ke lie caMdramA ke samAna ujjvala zveta-varNa ke OMkAra kA
dhyAna karanA cAhie ||31  /  /  bhAvArtha :- yadyapi karmakSaya ke abhilASI ko
caMdrakAMti ke samAna ujjvala OM (praNava) kA dhyAna karanA hI yogya hai,
tathApi kisI dravya, kSetra, kAla, bhAva rUpa vibhinna paristhitiyoM meM pIta
Adi kA dhyAna bhI upakArI ho sakatA hai| isalie yahAM 'OM' ke dhyAna kA vidhAna
kiyA hai  /  /  31  /  /  anya prakAra se padamayI devatA kI dhyAnavidhi kahate
haiM  / 803 /  tathA puNyatamaM mantraM jagat tritayapAvanam  /  yogI
paJcaparameSThi- namaskAraM vicintayet  // 32 //  artha :- tathA tIna jagat ko
pavitra karane vAle mahAn puNyatama paMcaparameSThi- namaskAra maMtra kA dhyAna
hI vizeSa rUpa se yogI ko karanA cAhie ||32|| vaha isa prakAra kiyA jA sakatA
hai ||804 aSTapatre sitAmbhoje, karNikAyAM kRtasthitim  /  AdyaM saptAkSaraM
mantraM pavitraM cintayet ttH||33|| artha :- ATha paMkhuDI vAle sapheda kamala
kA ciMtana karake usakI karNikA meM sthita sAta akSara vAle pavitra 'namo
arihaMtANaM' maMtra kA ciMtana karanA cAhie ||33|| ||805 | siddhAdikacatuSkaM
ca, dikpatreSu yathAkramam  /  cUlA - pAdacatuSkaM ca vidikpatreSu cintayet
||34|| artha :- phira siddhAdika cAra maMtrapadoM kA anukrama se cAra dizAoM kI
paMkhuDiyoM meM aura cUlikAoM ke cAra padoM kA vidizA kI paMkhur3iyoM meM
ciMtana karanA cAhie ||34|| bhAvArtha :- pUrvadizA meM namo siddhANaM, dakSiNa
dizA meM namo AyariyANaM, pazcima dizA meM namo uvajjhAyANaM aura | uttaradizA
meM namo loe savvasAhUNaM kA ciMtana karanA cAhie tathA vidizA kI cAra
paMkhuDiyoM meM agnikoNa meM eso paMca namukkAro, naiRtyakoNa meM
savvapAvappaNAsaNo, vAyavyakoNa meM maMgalANaM ca savversi aura IzAnakoNa meM
paDhamaM havai maMgalaM; | isa prakAra paMcaparameSThinamaskAramaMtra kA dhyAna
karanA cAhie ||34 /  /  aba maMtra ke ciMtana kA phala batAte haiM artha :  /
806 /  trizuddhyA cintayaMstasya, zatamaSTottaraM muniH  /  bhuJjAno'pi
labhetaiva, caturthatapasaH phalam ||35|| mana, vacana aura kAyA kI
zuddhipUrvaka ekAgratA se ekasau ATha bAra isa mahAmaMtra namaskAra kA jApa
karane vAlA muni AhAra karatA huA bhI eka upavAsa kA phala prApta karatA hai  /
/  35  /  /  |807 /  enameva mahAmantraM, samArAdhyeha yoginaH  /  trilokye'pi
mahIyante'dhigatAH paramAM zriyam  // 36 //   / 808 /  kRtvA pApasahasrANi hatvA
jantuzatAni ca  /  amuM mantraM samArAdhya, tiryaJco'pi divaM gatAH ||37|| artha
:- yogIpuruSa isI mahAmaMtra kI yahAM acchI taraha ArAdhanA karake zreSTha
AtmalakSmI ke adhikArI banakara 432

Page #454 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Nature of Padasthan Dhyana  **Yoga Shastra, Eighth Prakash, Verses
38-44**  Even those who have committed thousands of sins and killed hundreds of
beings, like the creature called Tithanch, have attained heaven by properly
worshipping this mantra. (36-37) The creatures like the bull, the blanket and
the shawl, the Chandakoushik serpent, the Nandan frog, etc., have gone to the
Devaloka. (809)  **The Vidya of Panchaparmesthi**  The Vidya is sixteen
lettered, arising from the names of the Guru Panchaka. By chanting it two
hundred times, one attains the fruit of one fast. (38)  **Meaning:** The word
"Namah" arising from the names of the Panchaparmesthi, and their names without
declensions, "Arihant Siddha Ayariy Uvvajhay Saahu", thus making a sixteen
lettered Vidya, by chanting it two hundred times, one attains the fruit of one
fast. (38)  **The Vidya of Arihant and Siddha**  By chanting the six lettered
Vidya "Arihant Siddha" three hundred times, the four lettered Vidya "Arihant"
four hundred times, and the "A" mantra five hundred times, the Yogi attains the
fruit of one fast. (39)  **Meaning:** By chanting the six lettered Vidya
"Arihant Siddha" three hundred times, the four lettered Vidya "Arihant" four
hundred times, and the "A" mantra five hundred times, the Yogi attains the fruit
of one fast. (39)  This is the fruit of a general fast for the Bhadra souls. The
main fruit is heaven and liberation. This is explained further. (811)  **The
True Fruit of the Mantras**  The fruit of chanting these mantras, which is
described as one fast, is said for the sake of inducing the young souls to
chant. In reality, the wise men say that the fruit is heaven and liberation.
(40)  **Meaning:** The fruit of chanting these mantras, which is described as
one fast, is said for the sake of inducing the young souls to chant. In reality,
the wise men say that the fruit is heaven and liberation. (40)  **The Padmayi
Devata Dhyana**  The five lettered, five tattva Vidya, derived from the Vidya
Pravad, when practiced continuously, destroys worldly sorrows. (41)
**Meaning:** The five lettered, five tattva Vidya, derived from the Vidya
Pravad, when practiced continuously, destroys worldly sorrows. (41)  **The
Mantra of Mangala, Uttama and Sharan**  The meditator who remembers the three
words Mangala, Uttama and Sharan, along with Arihant, Siddha, Sadhu and Dharma,
with a focused mind, attains liberation. (42)  **Meaning:** The meditator who
remembers the three words Mangala, Uttama and Sharan, along with Arihant,
Siddha, Sadhu and Dharma, with a focused mind, attains liberation. (42)
**Explanation:** The four Mangalas are: Arihant Mangala, Siddha Mangala, Saahu
Mangala, and Kevali Pannaatto Dhammmo Mangala. The four Uttamas are: Arihanta
Uttama, Siddha Uttama, Saahu Uttama, and Kevali Pannaatto Dhammmo Uttama. The
four Sharans are: Arihanta Saranam Pavajjami, Siddha Saranam Pavajjami, Saahu
Saranam Pavajjami, and Kevali Pannaatto Dhammmo Saranam Pavajjami. This means
that the three words Mangala, Uttama and Sharan should be combined with the
above four words. (42)  **The Vidya and the Mantra**  Half the verse describes
the Vidya, and half the verse describes the mantra. (814)  **The Vidya and the
Mantra of Liberation**  One should meditate on the fifteen lettered Vidya "Om
Arihant-Siddha Sayogikevali Swaha", which grants liberation and happiness. One
should remember the mantra "Om Shrim Hrim Aham Namah", which is equal to the
Sarvagya, and illuminates all knowledge. (43)  **Meaning:** One should meditate
on the fifteen lettered Vidya "Om Arihant-Siddha Sayogikevali Swaha", which
grants liberation and happiness. One should remember the mantra "Om Shrim Hrim
Aham Namah", which is equal to the Sarvagya, and illuminates all knowledge. (43)
This is called the Sarvagya-like mantra. Its glory is described. (815)  **The
Power of the Mantra**  No one is capable of fully describing the power of this
mantra. It is equal to the Sarvagya Bhagavan. (44)  **Meaning:** This mantra is
equal to the Sarvagya Bhagavan. No one is capable of fully describing the power
of this mantra and Vidya. (44)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 padastha dhyAna kA svarUpa yogazAstra aSTama prakAza zloka 38 se 44 tIna jagat
ke pUjanIya bana jAte haiN| hajAroM pApa kiye hue aura saikar3oM jIvoM kA hanana
karake tithaMca jaise jIva bhI isa maMtra kI samyag ArAdhanA karake svarga meM
pahuMca gaye haiM  // 36-37 /  /  baila ke jIva kaMbala aura zaMbala,
caMDakauzika sarpa, naMdana meMDhaka Adi devaloka meM gaye hai| anya prakAra se
paMcaparameSThI-vidyA kahate haiN|809| gurupaJcaka-nAmotthA, vidyA syAt
SoDazAkSarA  /  japan zatadvayaM tasyAzcaturthasyApnuyAtphalam  /  / 38 /  /  _
artha :- gurupaMcaka arthAt paMcaparameSThI ke nAma se utpanna huA 'namaH' pada
aura vibhaktirahita unake nAma 'arihaMta siddha Ayariya uvajjhAya sAhU' isa
taraha solaha akSara kI vidyA kA do sau bAra jApa karane se eka upavAsa kA phala
prApta hotA hai  // 38 /  /   / 810 /  zatAni trINi SaTvarNaM, catvAri
caturakSaram  /  paJcAvaNaM japan yogI, caturthaphalamaznute  // 39 /  /  artha
:- 'arihaMta siddha' ina chaha akSara vAlI vidyA kA tIna sau bAra, 'arihaMta'
ina cAra akSaroM kI vidyA kA . cArasau bAra, akAra maMtra kA pAMca sau bAra japa
karane vAle yogI ko eka eka upavAsa kA phala milatA hai  // 39 //  yaha sAmAnya
upavAsa kA phala bhadrika AtmAoM ke lie kahA hai, mukhyaphala to svarga aura
mokSa hai| ise hI Age batAte haiN|811| pravRttiheturevaitad, amISAM kathitaM
phalam  /  phalaM svargApavargoM tu, vadanti paramArthataH  // 40 //  artha :-
ina saba maMtroM ke jApa kA phala jo eka upavAsa batalAyA hai, vaha bAlajIvoM ko
jApa meM pravRtta karane ke - lie kahA hai| paramArtha rUpa se to jJAnI puruSa
isakA phala svarga aura apavarga rUpa batAte haiN||40|| dUsare prakAra se
padamayI devatA kA dhyAna kahate haiN|812| paJcavarNamayI paJcatattvA
vidyoddhRtA zrutAt  /  abhyasyamAnA satataM bhavaklezaM nirasyati  // 41 //
artha :- vidyApravAda nAma ke pUrva se uddhRta kI huI paMcavarNa vAlI
paMcatattva rUpa 'hA~, hrIM, hU~, hA~, hUM: a si A u sA namaH' vidyA ke jApa kA
niraMtara abhyAsa kiyA jAya to vaha saMsAra ke kleza ko miTAtI hai||4||  / 813 /
maGgalottamazaraNa-padAnyavyagramAnasaH  /  catuHsamAzrayANyeva, smaran mokSaM
prapadyate  // 42 /  /  artha :- maMgala, uttama aura zaraNa ina tInoM padoM ko
arihaMta, siddha, sAdhu aura dharma ke sAtha jor3akara ekAgracitta smaraNa se
karane vAlA dhyAtA mokSa ko prApta karatA hai  // 42 //  bhAvArtha :- vaha isa
prakAra hai-cattAri maMgalaM-arihaMtA maMgalaM, siddhA maMgalaM, sAhU maMgalaM,
kevalipannatto dhammo mNglN| cattAri loguttamA, arihaMtA loguttamA, siddhA
loguttamA, sAhU loguttamA, kevalipannato dhammo loguttmo| cattAri saraNaM
pavajjAmi, arihaMte saraNaM pavajjAmi, siddhe saraNaM pavajjAmi, sAhU saraNaM
pavajjAmi kevali pannatta dhammaM saraNaM pvjjaami| matalaba yaha hai ki
maMgala, uttama aura zaraNa ina tIna padoM ko ukta cAroM padoM ke sAtha jor3anA
caahie||42|| _aba Adhe zloka se vidyA aura Adhe zloka se maMtra kahate haiN|814|
mukti-saukhyapradAM dhyAyed, vidyAM paJcadazAkSarAm  /  sarvajJAbha
smarenmantraM, sarvajJAna-prakAzakam  // 43 //  artha :- mukti-sukhadAyinI
paMdraha akSaroM kI vidyA 'OM arihaMta-siddhasayogikevalI svAhA' kA dhyAna
karanA caahie| tathA saMpUrNa jJAna ko prakAzita karane vAle sarvajJa-tulya 'OM
zrIM hrIM ahaM namaH' nAmaka maMtra kA smaraNa karanA cAhie  // 43 //  ise
sarvajJa-tulya maMtra kahA hai, usakI mahimA batAte haiN|815| vaktuM na
kazcidapyasya, prabhAvaM sarvataH kSamaH  /  samaM bhagavatA sAmyaM, sarvajJena
bibharti yaH  // 44 //  artha :- yaha maMtra sarvajJa bhagavAn kI samAnatA ko
dhAraNa karatA hai| isa maMtra aura vidyA ke prabhAva ko pUrI taraha kahane meM
koI bhI samartha nahIM hai  // 44 //  433

Page #455 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Nature of Padasthan Dhyana Yoga Shastra Ashtama Prakash Sloka 45 to 56
||816. If you wish to extinguish the fire of your worldly existence even for a
moment, then you should remember the first mantra, the first seven letters 'Namo
Arihantaanam'. ||45|| Meaning They prescribe two other mantras. ||817. Remember
the five-letter mantra 'Namo Siddhaanam' which destroys karma, and meditate on
the mantra adorned with alphabets 'Om Namo Arhate Kevaline Paramyoginie
Visphuraduru Shukladhyanaagninirdagdhakarmabeejaya Prasaanant Chaturshtaya
Soumyaya Shantaya Mangalavaradaya Ashtaadashadosha-rahitaya Swaha' which grants
all kinds of protection. ||46|| Meaning: To destroy the eight karmas, one should
meditate on the five-letter mantra 'Namo Siddhaanam', and to obtain all kinds of
protection, one should meditate on the mantra adorned with alphabets 'Om Namo
Arhate Kevaline Paramyoginie Visphuraduru Shukladhyanaagninirdagdhakarmabeejaya
Prasaanant Chaturshtaya Soumyaya Shantaya Mangalavaradaya Ashtaadashadosha-
rahitaya Swaha'. ||46|| They describe the Kar mantra with its fruits in ten
slokas. ||818. Meditate on a white lotus with eight petals inside the mouth, and
place the letters 'Om Namo Arihantaanam' on them in order. ||47|| ||819. Adorn
it with saffron-colored, melodious, nectar-like drops, and let the nectar fall
from the moon-like center of the lotus. ||48|| ||820. Contemplate the 'Hrim'
Mayabeeja, which is moving in the mouth, in the middle of the halo of light, and
is as bright as nectar. ||49|| ||821. Then contemplate it moving on the petals,
moving in the sky, destroying the darkness of the mind, and flowing with nectar.
||50|| ||822. Contemplate it going through the hole in the palate, shining in
the space between the eyebrows, with unimaginable greatness in the three worlds,
like a wonderful light. ||51|| ||823. By meditating on this mantra with a pure
and focused mind, the impurities of speech and mind are removed, and Shruta
Jnana is revealed. ||52|| ||824. After practicing for six months, the mind
becomes steady, and one sees the smoke rising from the lotus of the mouth.
||53|| ||825. After practicing for a year, one sees the flame, and then, with a
special feeling, one sees the lotus face of the omniscient. ||54|| ||826. Then,
one sees the omniscient directly, shining with the greatness of auspiciousness,
full of all perfections, and residing in the halo of light. ||55|| ||827. Then,
with the mind fixed on the self, one becomes certain, and crossing the
wilderness of the world, one resides in the temple of Siddhi. ||56|| Meaning:
Meditate on a white lotus with eight petals inside the mouth, and place the
letters 'Om Namo Arihantaanam' on them in order. The eight groups of letters
are: 1. A, Aa, I, Ii, U, Uu, Ri, Ri, Lri, Lri, E, Ai, O, Au, An, Ah, 2. K, Kh,
G, Gh, N, 3. Ch, Chh, J, Jh, N, 4. T, Th, D, Dh, N, 5. T, Th, D, Dh, N, 6. P,
Ph, B, Bh, M, 7. Y, R, L, V, 8. Sh, Shh, S, H. Adorn the lotus with saffron-
colored, melodious, nectar-like drops, and let the nectar fall from the moon-
like center of the lotus. Then contemplate the 'Hrim' Mayabeeja, which is moving
in the mouth, in the middle of the halo of light, and is as bright as nectar.
Then contemplate it moving on the petals, moving in the sky, destroying the
darkness of the mind, and flowing with nectar. Contemplate it going through the
hole in the palate, shining in the space between the eyebrows, with unimaginable
greatness in the three worlds, like a wonderful light. By meditating on this
mantra with a pure and focused mind, the impurities of speech and mind are
removed, and Shruta Jnana is revealed. After practicing for six months, the mind
becomes steady, and one sees the smoke rising from the lotus of the mouth. After
practicing for a year, one sees the flame, and then, with a special feeling, one
sees the lotus face of the omniscient. Then, one sees the omniscient directly,
shining with the greatness of auspiciousness, full of all perfections, and
residing in the halo of light. Then, with the mind fixed on the self, one
becomes certain, and crossing the wilderness of the world, one resides in the
temple of Siddhi. ||47-56|| Up to this point, they have described the meditation
on the Mayabeeja. Now they speak about the Vijnana Vidya. 434

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 padastha dhyAna kA svarUpa yogazAstra aSTama prakAza zloka 45 se 56 ||816  /
yadIcched bhavadAvAgneH samucchedaM kSaNAdapi  /  smaret tadA''dimantrastya,
varNasaptakamAdimam  // 45 //  yadi saMsAra rUpI dAvAnala ko kSaNabhara meM
zAMta karanA cAhate ho to, tumheM prathama maMtra ke prathama sAta akSara 'namo
arihaMtANaM' kA smaraNa karanA cAhie ||45 || artha anya do maMtroM kA vidhAna
karate haiM  / 817 /  paJcavarNaM smarenmantraM karmanirghAtakaM tathA  /
varNamAlAJcitaM mantraM dhyAyet sarvAbhayapradam  // 46 //  artha :- ATha karmoM
kA nAza karane ke lie pAMca akSaroM vAle 'namo siddhANaM' maMtra kA tathA
samasta prakAra kA abhaya prApta karane ke lie varNamAlAoM se yukta 'OM namo
arhate kevaline paramayogine visphuradUru zukladhyAnAgninirdagdhakarmabIjAya
prAsAnantacatuSTayAya saumyAya zAntAya maGgalavaradAya aSTAdazadoSa-rahitAya
svAhA' maMtra kA dhyAna karanA cAhie  /  /  46  /  /  phala-sahita hI~ kAra
maMtra ko dasa zloka se kahate haiM ||818  /  dhyAyet sitAbjaM
vaktrAntaraSTavargI dalASTake  /  OM namo arihaMtANaM iti varNAnapi kramAt  //
47 //   / 819  /  kesarAlI - svaramayIM sudhAbindu - vibhUSitAm  /  kArNikAM
karNikAyAM ca candrabimbAt samApatat  // 48 //  ||820 | saJcaramANaM vaktreNa,
prabhAmaNDalamadhyagam  /  sudhAdIdhiti-saGkAzaM, mAyAbIjaM vicintayet  //  49
//  821  /  tato bhramataM patreSu, saJcarantaM nabhastale  /  dhvaMsayantaM
manodhvAntaM sravantaM ca sudhArasam ||50|| 822  /  tAlurandhreNa gacchantaM
lasantaM bhrUlatAntare  /  trailokyAcintyamAhAtmyaM, jyotirmayamivAdbhutam  //
51  //  ||823  /  ityamuM dhyAyato mantraM puNyamekAgracetasaH  /
vAgmanomalamuktasya, zrutajJAnaM prakAzate  //  52  //  824  /  mAsaiH SaDbhiH
kRtAbhyAsaH, sthirIbhUtamanAstataH  /  niHsarantIM mukhAmbhojAt, zikhAM dhUmasya
pazyati  // 53 //  825  /  saMvatsaraM kRtAbhyAsaH, tato jvAlAM vilokate  /
tataH saJjAtasaMvegaH, sarvajJamukhapaGkajam  // 54 //  826  /
sphuratkalyANamAhAtmyaM sampannAtizayaM tataH  /  bhAmaNDalagataM sAkSAdiva
sarvajJamIkSate  // 55 //  827 /  tataH sthirIkRtasvAntaH, tatra saJjAtanizcayaH
/  muktvA saMsArakAntAram, adhyAste siddhimandiram ||56 || | artha :- mukha ke
aMdara ATha paMkhuDiyoM vAle zveta-kamala kA ciMtana kare aura una paMkhuDiyoM
meM ATha varga- 1. a, A, i, I, u, U, R, R, lR, lR, e, ai, o, au, aM, aH, 2. ka,
kha, ga, gha, Ga, 3. ca, cha, ja, jha, Ja, 4. Ta, Tha, Da, Dha, Na, 5. ta, tha,
da, dha, na, 6. pa, pha, ba, bha, ma, 7. ya, ra, la, va, 8. za, Sa, sa, ha kI
kramazaH sthApanA karanA tathA OM namo arihaMtANaM ina ATha akSaroM meM se eka-
eka akSara ko eka-eka paMkhuDI para sthApita karanA  /  usa kamala kI kesarA ke
cAroM tarapha ke bhAgoM meM a, A Adi solaha svara sthApita karanA aura madhya kI
karNikA ko caMdrabimba se girate hue amRta ke binduoM vibhUSita krnaa| usake
bAda karNikA meM mukha se saMcAra karate hue prabhAmaMDala meM sthita aura
caMdramA ke samAna ujjvala 'hrIM' mAyAbIja kA ciMtana karanA  /  tadanaMtara
pratyeka paMkhuDI para bhramaNa karate hue, AkAzatala meM vicaraNa karate hue,
mana kI malinatA ko naSTa karate hue, amRtarasa bahAte hue, tAlurandhra se jAte
hue, bhrakuTi ke madhya meM suzobhita; tIna lokoM meM acintya mahimAsaMpanna,
mAno adbhuta jyotirmaya isa pavitra maMtra kA ekAgracitta se dhyAna karane se
mana aura vacana kI malInatA naSTa ho jAtI hai aura zrutajJAna prakaTa hotA hai|
isa taraha niraMtara chaha mahIne taka abhyAsa karane se sAdhaka kA mana jaba
sthira ho jAtA hai, taba vaha apane mukhakamala se nikalatI huI dhUma - zikhA
dekhatA hai| eka varSa taka dhyAna karane vAlA sAdhaka jvAlA dekhatA hai aura
usake bAda vizeSa saMvega kI vRddhi hone para sarvajJa kA mukhakamala dekhane
meM samartha hotA hai| isase Age bar3hakara kalyANamaya mAhAtmya se dedIpyamAna,
samasta atizaya se saMpanna aura prabhAmaMDala meM sthita sarvajJa ko pratyakSa-
sA dekhane lagatA hai| bAda meM sarva ke svarUpa meM mana sthira karake vaha
AtmA saMsAra aTavI ko pArakara siddhi maMdira meM virAjamAna ho jAtA hai  /  /
47-56  //  yahAM taka mAyAbIja hI kA dhyAna btlaayaa| aba vIM vidyA ke saMbaMdha
meM kahate haiM 434

Page #456 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Nature of Padasthan Dhyana  **Yoga Shastra Ashtama Prakash Shloka 57 to
65**  ||828.  **Shashinibimbadoodbhutaam, sravantīm amṛtam sada.** **Vidyaam
'kshvi' iti bhaalastam, dhyaayet kalyanakaranam.** ||57.||  **Meaning:** The
practitioner should meditate on the 'Kshvi' Vidya, which is born from the disc
of the moon and eternally showers nectar, establishing it on their forehead for
the sake of their welfare. ||57.||  **Tatha** ||829. **Kshiraambhodher
viniryanti, plavayanți sudhaambhubhih.** **Bhale shashikalaam dhyaayet,
siddhisopanapadhatim.** ||58.||  **Meaning:** One should meditate on the moon's
crescent on their forehead, which emerges from the ocean of milk and floats all
beings with nectar-like water, like a series of steps leading to the palace of
Siddhis. ||58.||  **The fruit of this meditation is described:** ||830. **Asyaah
smaranamatren, trutyadbhavanibandhanah.** **Prayati paramānanda-karanam padam
avyayam.** ||59.||  **Meaning:** By merely remembering this moon's crescent, the
practitioner's bondage of birth and death, the cause of worldly existence, is
destroyed, and they attain the imperishable state of liberation, the cause of
supreme bliss. ||59.||  ||831. **Nasagre pranavah shunyam anahatamiti trayam.**
**Dhyayan gunashtakam labdhva jnanam apnoti nirmalam.** ||60.||  **Meaning:**
The one who meditates on the three (Om, 0, and Ha) - Pranava 'Om', Shunya '0',
and Anahata 'Ha' - on the tip of their nose, attains eight Siddhis (powers) and
pure knowledge. ||60.||  ||832. **Shankha-kunda-shashankabhan, trinamoon
dhyaayatah sada.** **Samagravishayajnan-pragalbhyam jayate nrinaam.** ||61.||
**Meaning:** The person who constantly meditates on these three - Pranava,
Shunya, and Anahata - which are as radiant as a conch shell, jasmine, and the
moon, becomes proficient in the knowledge of all subjects. ||61.||  **Tatha**
||833. **Dwipaashvapranavadvandam prantayormāyayāvṛtam.** **'So'ham' madhye
vimurdhānam 'amli'mkaram vicintayet.** ||62.||  **Meaning:** One should meditate
on this mantra: 'Hrim Om Om So Amli Om Om Hrim', where there are two Om's on
either side, Hrim on both ends (edges), So'ham in the middle, and Amli in the
middle of So'ham. ||62.||  ||834. **Kamadhenumivācinty-phal-sampadan-kshamām.**
**Anavadyaam japeedvidyaam ganabhrud-vadanod-gatām.** ||63.||  **Meaning:** One
should chant the flawless Vidya that emerged from the mouth of Lord Ganadhara,
which is capable of granting unimaginable fruits like the Kamadhenu. This Vidya
is: 'Om Jogge Magge Tacche Bhue Bhavve Bhavisse Ante Pakkhe Jinpase Swaha'.
||63.||  ||835. **Shatkone'pratichakre, phat iti pratyekam aksharam.** **Savye
nyased 'vichakray svaha' baahye'pasavyatah.** ||64.||  ||836. **Bhutaantam
bindusamyuktam, tanmadhye nyasya chintayet.** **'Namo jinaanam' ityādyaiḥ, 'Om'
pūrve'shtayed bahiḥ.** ||65.||  **Meaning:** First, contemplate the six-angled
Yantra. Write one of the six letters 'Apratichakre Phat' in each compartment of
this Yantra. Outside this Yantra, write one letter of 'Vichakray Swaha' in
reverse order near the corners. Then, place 'Om Namo Jinaanam' and the following
mantras in the outer circle: 'Om Namo Ohijinaanam, Om Namo Paramohijinaanam, Om
Namo Savvosahjinaanam, Om Namo Anatohibijanam, Om Namo Kottbuddhinaam, Om Namo
Biybuddhinaam, Om Namo Payanusarinaam, Om Namo Sambhinnsoanaam, Om Namo
Ujjumainaam, Om Namo Viulamainaam, Om Namo Daspuvinaam, Om Namo Chaudaspuvinaam,
Om Namo Attungmahaanimitta-kusalaanam, Om Namo Viuvvaniddhipattanam, Om Namo
Vijjahaaranaam, Om Namo Charanaanam, Om Namo Pannaasamanaanam, Om Namo
Aagasgaaminaam, Om Jsoum Jsoum Shrim Hrim Dhriti-Kirti-Buddhi-Lakshmi Swaha'.
This completes the outer circle. Then, by placing the five parts of the Pancha-
Parameshthi-Mahamantra on the five fingers, one achieves complete activation.
'Om Namo Arihantaanam Haam Swaha' on the thumb, 'Om Namo Siddhaanam Hrim Swaha'
on the index finger, 'Om Namo Ayariyaanam Ham Swaha' on the middle finger, ...
||65.||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 padastha dhyAna kA svarUpa yogazAstra aSTama prakAza zloka 57 se 65 ||828 /
zazibimbAdivodbhUtAM, sravantImamRtaM sadA  /  vidyAM 'kSvI' iti bhAlasthAM,
dhyaayetklyaannkaarnnm||57|| artha :- mAno caMdra ke bimba se samutpanna huI ho,
aisI sadA ujjvala amRtavarSiNI 'kSvI nAma kI vidyA ko apane lalATa meM sthApana
karake sAdhaka ko kalyANa ke lie usakA dhyAna karanA cAhie  /  / 57 /  /
tthaa||829| kSIrAmbhodherviniryAntI, plAvayantI sudhAmbubhiH  /  bhAle zazikalAM
dhyAyet, siddhisopaanpddhtim||58|| artha :- kSIrasamudra se nikalatI huI evaM
sudhA-samAna jala se sAre loka ko plAvita karatI huI siddhi rUpI mahala ke
sopAnoM kI paMkti ke samAna caMdrakalA kA lalATa meM dhyAna karanA cAhie  // 58
//  isa dhyAna kA phala kahate haiN|830| asyAH smaraNamAtreNa,
truTyadbhavanibandhanaH  /  prayAti paramAnanda-kAraNaM padamavyayam  // 59 /  /
artha :- isa caMdrakalA kA smaraNa karane mAtra se sAdhaka ke saMsAra kA kAraNa
rUpa janma-maraNa kA baMdhana khatma ho jAtA hai aura vaha paramAnaMda ke kAraNa
rUpa avyayapada-mokSa ko prApta karatA hai  /  / 59 /  /  ||831 /  nAsAgre
praNavaH zUnyam anAhatamiti trayam  /  dhyAyan guNASTakaM labdhvA jJAnamApnoti
nirmalam  /  / 60 //  artha :- nAsikA ke agrabhAga para praNava 'OM' zUnya '0'
aura anAhata 'ha' ina tIna (OM, . aura ha) kA dhyAna karane vAlA aNimAdi ATha
siddhiyoM ko prApta karake nirmalajJAna prApta kara letA hai  /  / 6 /  /  ||832
/  zaGkha-kunda-zazAGkAbhAn, trInamUn dhyAyataH sadA  /  samagraviSayajJAna-
prAgalbhyaM jAyate nRNAm  // 61 //  artha :- zaMkha, kuMda aura caMdra ke samAna
ujjvala praNava, zUnya aura anAhata ina tInoM kA sadA dhyAna karane vAle puruSa
samasta viSayoM ke jJAna meM pAraMgata ho jAtA hai  /  / 61 /  /  tthaa|833|
dvipAzvapraNavadvandvaM prAntayormAyayAvRtam  /  'so'haM' madhye vimUrdhAnaM
'ahamlIMkAraM' vicintayet  // 62 //  artha :- jisake donoM ora do-do OMkAra hai,
Adi aura aMta meM (kinAre para) hrIMkAra hai, madhya meM so'haM hai, usa so'haM
ke madhya meM amlI hai| arthAt 'hrIM OM OM so amlIM haiM OMOMhIM' isa rUpa meM
isa maMtra kA dhyAna karanA cAhie  // 2 //  | 1834 /  kAmadhenumivAcintya-phala-
sampAdana-kSamAm  /  anavadyAM japedvidyAM gaNabhRd-vadanod-gatAm  // 63 /  /  _
artha :- kAmadhenu ke samAna acintya phala dene meM samartha zrIgaNadhara-
bhagavAn ke mukha se nirgata nirdoSa vidyA kA jApa karanA caahie| vaha vidyA isa
prakAra hai- 'OM jogge magge tacce bhUe bhavve bhavisse ante pakkhe jiNapAse
svAhA'  // 3 //   / 835 /  SaTkoNe'praticakre, phaT iti pratyekamakSaram  /
savye nyased 'vicakrAya svAhA' bAhye'pasavyataH  // 64 /  /   / 836 /  bhUtAntaM
bindusaMyuktaM, tanmadhye nyasya cintayet  /  'namo jiNANaM' ityAdyaiH, 'OM'
pUrveSTayed bhiH||65|| artha :- pahale SaTkoNa yaMtra kA ciMtana kre| usake
pratyeka khAne meM 'apraticakre phaT' ina chaha akSaroM meM se eka eka akSara
likhe| isa yaMtra ke bAhara ulaTe krama se 'vicakrAya svAhA' ina chaha akSaroM
meM se eka-eka akSara konoM ke pAsa likhanA, bAda meM 'OM namo jiNANaM', OM namo
ohijiNANaM, OM namo paramohijiNANaM, OM namo savvosahijiNANaM, OM namo
aNatohibijANaM, OM namo koTThabuddhINaM, OM namo bIyabuddhINaM, OM namo
payANusArINaM, OM namo saMbhinnasoANaM, OM namo ujjumaINaM, OM namo viulamaINaM,
OM namo dasapuvvINaM, OM namo caudasapuvvINaM, OM namo aTuMgamahAnimitta-
kusalANaM, OM namo viuvvaNaiDDhipattANaM, OM namo vijjAharANaM, OM namo
cAraNANaM, OM namo paNNAsamaNANaM, OM namo AgAsagAmINaM, OM jsauM jsauM zrIM
hrIM dhRti-kIrti-buddhi-lakSmI svaahaa| ina padoM se pichale valaya kI pUrti
kre| phira paMca-parameSThI-mahAmaMtra ke pAMca padoM kA pAMca aMguliyoM meM
sthApana karane se sakalIkaraNa hotA hai| 'OM namo arihaMtANaM hA~ svAhA'
aMgUThe meM, OM namo siddhANaM hrIM svAhA' tarjanI meM, 'OM namo AyariyANaM haM
svAhA' madhyamA meM, 435

Page #457 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Yoga Shastra, Eighth Light, Verses 66-75  **Verse 66:** Meditate on the soul,
radiant with light, within an eight-petaled lotus. Place the syllables of the
mantra, beginning with Om (Om Namo Arihantaanam), on the petals in order.
**Verse 67:** Facing east, begin with the first petal. Recite the eight-syllable
mantra (Om Namo Arihantaanam) eleven hundred times.  **Verse 68:** Following the
order of the directions, place the mantra on each petal. The yogi should recite
this eight-syllable mantra for eight nights to pacify all obstacles.  **Verse
69:** After eight nights have passed, the yogi will see the eight syllables of
the mantra on the petals within the lotus.  **Verse 70:**  Fearsome lions,
elephants, demons, ghosts, and other obstacles will be pacified by the power of
this meditation.  **Verse 71:** Those seeking worldly benefits should meditate
on the mantra with Om (Om Namo Arihantaanam). Those seeking liberation should
meditate on the mantra without Om (Namo Arihantaanam).  **Verse 72:** Meditate
on this mantra (Om Arhanmukha Kamalvasini! Papaatmakshayamkari! Shrutagyan
Jwalasahasrajvalite! Saraswati! Matpaapam Han Han Dah Dah Ksham Ksheem Kshu
Kshakshah Ksheeradhavale! Amrit Sambhave! Vam Vam Hum Hum Swaha) to pacify the
karmic currents. Remember this knowledge, which consumes sin, for the benefit of
all beings.  **Verse 73:** This knowledge instantly calms the mind, removes the
stain of sin, and illuminates the lamp of knowledge.  **Verse 74:** This
knowledge, clearly explained by the wise, such as Vajraswami, is the seed of
auspiciousness, extracted from the Vidya Pravad.  **Verse 75:** Having learned
this from the guru, meditate on the Siddha Chakra, the calming water that
extinguishes the fire of birth and death.  **Meaning:**  * **Saraswati:**  The
Jinvani, residing in the lotus of the Arhant's mouth.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 yogazAstra aSTama prakAza zloka 66 se 75 'OM namo uvajjhAyANaM haiM svAhA'
anAmikA meM, 'OM namo loe savvasAhUNaM hrI svAhA' kaniSThA aMguli meM sthApanA
karake yaMtra ke madhya meM bindusahita OM kAra kI sthApanA kre| isa taraha tIna
bAra aMguliyoM meM vinyAsa karake yaMtra ko mastaka para pUrva, dakSiNa, pazcima
aura uttaradizA ke aMtara- bhAga meM sthApita karake jApa - ciMtana kare  /  /
64-65  /  /  tathA padastha dhyAna kA svarUpa  / 837 /  aSTapatre'mbuje dhyAyed,
AtmAnaM dIptatejasam  /  praNavAdyasya mantrasya, varNAn patreSu ca kramAt  //
66||  / 838  /  pUrvAzAbhimukhaH pUrvam adhikRtyA''dimaNDalam  /
ekAdazazatAnyaSTAkSaraM mantraM japet tataH  // 67 //   /  839  /
pUrvAzA'nukramAdevam uddizyAnayadalAnyapi  /  aSTarAtraM japed yogI,
sarvapratyUhazAntaye  // 68 //  1840 /  aSTarAtre vyatikrAnte, kamalasyAsya
vartinaH  /  nirUpayati patreSu varNAnetAnanukramam  // 69 //   /  841  /
bhISaNAH siMha- mAtaMgarakSaH prabhRtayaH kSaNAt  /  zAmyanti vyantarAzcAnye,
dhyAnapratyUhahetavaH  // 70 //   /  842  /  mantraH praNavapUrvo'yaM
phalamaihikamicchubhiH  /  dhyeyaH praNavahInastu nirvANapadakAGkSibhiH  // 71
//  artha :- ATha paMkhuDI vAle kamala meM jhilamila teja se yukta AtmA kA
ciMtana karanA aura OMkArapUrvaka prathama maMtra ke (OM namo arihaMtANaM) ina
ATha varNoM ko kramazaH AThoM patroM para sthApana karanA  /  prathama paMkhuDI
kI gaNanA pUrvadizA se AraMbha karanA; usameM OMsthApita karanA, bAda meM
yathAkrama se zeSa sAta akSara sthApita krnaa| isa aSTAkSarI maMtra kA kamala ke
patroM para gyAraha sau jApa karanA  /  isa anukrama se zeSa dizAvidizAoM meM
sthApanA karake samasta upadrava kI zAMti ke lie yogI ko ATha dina taka isa
aSTAkSarI vidyA kA jApa karanA cAhie  /  jApa karate hue ATha rAtri vyatIta ho
jAne para kamala ke aMdara patroM para sthita aSTAkSarI vidyA ke ina AThoM
varNoM ke kramazaH darzana hoNge| yogI jaba ina 8 varNoM kA sAkSAtkArakara letA
hai to usameM aisA sAmarthya prakaTa ho jAtA hai ki dhyAna meM upadrava karane
vAle bhayAnaka siMha, hAthI, rAkSasa aura bhUta, vyaMtara, preta Adi usake
prabhAva se zAMta ho jAte haiN| ihalaukika phala ke abhilASiyoM ko 'namo
arihaMtANaM' isa maMtra kA OMkAra sahita dhyAna karanA cAhie, paraMtu
nirvANapada ke icchuka ko praNava OM - rahita maMtra kA dhyAna karanA caahie| OM
namo arihaMtANaM' praNavayukta maMtra hai  /  / 66-71 /  /  aba maMtra aura
vidyA kA pratipAdana karate haiM artha :  / 843 /  cintayedanyamapyenaM mantraM
karmoMghazAntaye  /  smaret sattvopakArAya, vidyAM tAM pApabhakSiNIm  // 72 //
zrImad-RSabhAdi-vardhamAnAntebhyo namaH isa maMtra kA bhI karmoM ke samUha ko
zAMta karane ke lie dhyAna karanA cAhie aura samasta jIvoM ke upakAra ke lie
pApabhakSiNI vidyA kA bhI smaraNa karanA caahie| vaha isa prakAra hai--OM
arhanmukhakamalavAsini ! pApAtmakSayaMkari ! zrutajJAnajvAlAsahasrajvalite!
'sarasvati! matpApaM hana hana daha daha kSaoNM kSIM kSU kSakSaH kSIradhavale!
amRtasaMbhave ! vaM vaM hUM hUM svaahaa||72|| isakA phala kahate haiM  / 844 /
prasIdati manaH sadyaH, pApakAluSyamujjhati  /  prabhAvAtizayAdasyAH, jJAnadIpaH
prakAzate ||73|| artha :- isa vidyA ke prabhAva se mana tatkAla prasanna ho jAtA
hai, pApa kI malinatA naSTa ho jAtI hai aura jJAna kA dIpaka prakAzita ho jAtA
hai  /  /  73  /  /  | | 845  /  jJAnavadbhiH samAmnAtaM, vajrasvAmyAdibhiH
sphuTam  /  vidyAvAdAt samuddhRtya, bIjabhUtaM zivazriyaH ||74|| ||846  /
janmadAvahutAzasya, prazAntinavavAridam  /  gurUpadezAd vijJAya, siddhacakraM
vicintayet  // 75 //  vajrasvAmI Adi pUrva- zrutajJAnI puruSoM ne vidyApravAda
nAmaka pUrva meM se jise uddhRta kiyA hai aura jise artha :1. arihaMta ke mukha
kamala meM rahane vAlI sarasvati arthAt jinavANI hI hai| 426

Page #458 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Eighth Light of Yoga Shastra:  **Verses 76-81**  **Verses 73-75:** The
seed of Moksha Lakshmi is considered to be the Siddha Chakra, which is like a
new cloud that quenches the fire of birth and death. One should meditate on it
for the destruction of karma, knowing it through the teachings of the Guru
Maharaj.  **Verse 76:** Meditate on the all-pervading 'A' sound in the navel
lotus, the 'Si' sound in the head lotus, the 'A' sound in the mouth lotus, the
'U' sound in the heart lotus, and the 'Sa' sound in the throat lotus.  **Verse
77:** Remember other seed letters that are auspicious in all ways. That other
seed letter is 'Namah Sarvasiddhebyah'.  **Verse 78:** One can also meditate on
other letters, words, etc., born from the ocean of scriptures, for the
attainment of Nirvana.  **Verse 79:** The yogi who is free from attachment and
aversion, whatever he contemplates, that is considered meditation. All other
elaborate explanations are just that, elaborate.  **Verse 80:** One should
analyze the letters and words of mantras and knowledge, step by step, for the
attainment of Moksha Lakshmi.  **Verse 81:** Thus, these jewels of truth have
been extracted from the ocean of teachings revealed by the great Ganadharas. May
they shine brightly in the mirror of the heart of wise men, for the destruction
of the accumulated karma and suffering of countless births.  **Conclusion:**
Thus, the Eighth Light of Yoga Shastra, known as the Adhyatma Upanishad,
composed by Acharya Shri Hemchandrasuri, with its own explanation, is complete,
fulfilling the curiosity of King Shri Kumarapala.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 yogazAstra aSTama prakAza zloka 76 se 81 mokSalakSmI kA bIja mAnA hai, jo
janmamaraNa ke dAvAnala ko zAMta karane ke lie naye megha ke samAna hai, usa
siddhacakra ko guru mahArAja ke upadeza se jAnakara karmakSaya ke lie usakA
dhyAna karanA cAhie  /  / 73-75 /  /  tathA artha : || 847 | nAbhipadme sthitaM
dhyAyedakAraM vizvatomukham  /  'si'varNaM mastakAmbhoje, 'A'kAraM vadanAmbuje
//  76  //  ||848  /  'u' kAraM hRdayAmbhoje, 'sA'kAraM kaNThapaGkaje  /
sarvakalyANakArINi bIjAnyanyAnyapi smaret  // 77 //  nAbhi-kamala meM sarvavyApI
akAra kA, mastaka - kamala meM 'si' varNa kA, mukha kamala meM 'A, kA, hRdaya
kamala meM ukAra kA aura kaMThakamala meM 'sA' kA dhyAna karanA tathA sarva
prakAra ke kalyANa karane vAle anya bIjAkSaroM kA bhI smaraNa karanA caahie|
vaha anya bIjAkSara 'namaH sarvasiddhebhyaH ' hai  /  / 77-76  /  /  jisa maMtra
yA vidyA ke dhyAna se yogI rAgadveSa rahita ho vahI padastha dhyAna hai| aba
upasaMhAra karate haiM  / 849 /  zrutasindhusamudbhUtaM, anyadapyakSaraM padma
/  azeSaM dhyAyamAnaM syAt nirvANapadasiddhaye  // 78 //  artha zruta rUpI
samudra se utpanna hue anya akSaroM, padoM Adi kA dhyAna bhI nirvANapada kI
prApti ke lie kiyA jA sakatA hai  /  / 78 /  /  padastha dhyAna kA svarUpa -
artha ||850 /  vItarAgo bhaved yogI, yat kiJcidapi cintayet  /  tadeva
dhyAnamAmnAtam, ato'nye grantha-vistarAH  // 79 //  ||851  /  evaM ca
mantravidyAnAM varNeSu ca padeSu ca  /  vizleSaM kramazaH kuryAt, lakSmI (kSyI)
bhAvopapattaye  //  80  //  jisa kisI bhI akSara, pada, vAkya, zabda, maMtra
evaM vidyA kA dhyAna karane se yogI rAga-dveSa se rahita hotA hai, usI kA dhyAna
dhyAna mAnA gayA hai; usake atirikta saba graMthavistAra hai| graMtha vistRta ho
jAne ke bhaya se hamane yahAM unheM nahIM batAyA, jijJAsu anya graMthoM se unheM
jAna leN| mokSalakSmI (lakSya) kI prApti ke lie isa taraha mantroM aura vidyAoM
ke varNoM aura padoM meM kramazaH vibhAga (vizleSaNa) kara lenA cAhie  /  /
79-80  /  /  aba AzIrvAda dete haiM :  / 852 /  iti
gaNadharadhuryAviSkRtAduddhRtAni, pravacanajalarAzestattvaratnAnyamUni  /
hRdayamukuramadhye dhImatAmullasantu, pracitabhavazatotthaklezanirnAzahetoH  //
81 //  artha : isa prakAra mukhya gaNadhara - bhagavaMtoM dvArA prakaTa kiye hue
pravacana rUpa samudra meM se ye tattvaratna uddhRta kiye haiN| ye tattvaratna
aneka bhavoM ke saMcita karma-klezoM kA nAza karane ke lie buddhimAna puruSoM ke
hRdayarUpI darpaNa meM ullasita hoM  // 81 //   /  /  isa prakAra paramArhat
zrIkumArapAla rAjA kI jijJAsA se AcAryazrI hemacandrAcAryasUrIzvara racita
adhyAtmopaniSad nAmaka paTTabaddha aparanAma yogazAstra kA
svopajJavivaraNasahita aSTama prakAza saMpUrNa huA || 437

Page #459 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
|| Om Arhate Namah || 9. Ninth Light  Now the nature of Rupa-Dhyana is described
in seven verses. 853. The one who is facing the Lakshmi of Moksha, who has
destroyed all karmas, who is four-faced, who gives fearlessness to all beings in
all worlds ||1||. 854. The one who is adorned with three shining umbrellas like
the moon, whose radiant body outshines the sun ||2||. 855. The one who has the
wealth of the kingdom of divine drums, songs, and music, who is adorned with the
Asoka tree, which resounds with the buzzing of bees ||3||. 856. The one who is
seated on a throne, who is fanned by chamaras, whose toenails shine with the
brilliance of the jewels of the crowns of the gods and demons ||4||. 857. The
one whose assembly is filled with the abundance of divine flowers, whose sweet
teachings are drunk by the herds of deer with their necks raised ||5||. 858. The
one who is worshipped by lions, elephants, snakes, and weasels, who have
forgotten their natural enmity, who is situated in such an assembly, the one who
is full of all perfections, who is illuminated by Kevala Jnana, the Supreme
Arhat ||6||. 859. By taking refuge in the form of such an Arhat, the meditation
is called Rupa-Dhyana ||7||.  Meaning: The yogi who has reached the face of
Moksha Lakshmi, who has destroyed all karmas, who is four-faced, who gives
fearlessness to all beings in all worlds, and who is adorned with three shining
umbrellas like the moon, whose radiant body outshines the sun, where divine
drums are resounding, there is the wealth of the kingdom of songs and music, who
is adorned with the Asoka tree, which resounds with the buzzing of bees, who is
seated on a throne, who is fanned by chamaras, whose toenails shine with the
brilliance of the jewels of the crowns of the gods and demons, whose assembly is
filled with the abundance of divine flowers, whose sweet teachings are drunk by
the herds of deer with their necks raised, lions, elephants, snakes, and
weasels, who have forgotten their natural enmity, who are seated in such an
assembly, the one who is full of all perfections, who is illuminated by Kevala
Jnana, the Supreme Arhat, by taking refuge in the form of such an Arhat, the
meditation is called Rupa-Dhyana. ||1-7||.  Another aspect of Rupa-Dhyana is
described in three verses. 860. The one who is free from the stains of
attachment, aversion, and great delusion, who is peaceful, beautiful, and
charming, who is marked by all auspicious signs ||8||. 861. The one who is
adorned with the Yoga Mudra, which is unknown to the Tirthankaras, which is
delightful, which pours forth a wonderful, gentle, and blissful stream from the
eyes ||9||. 862. The one who meditates on the form of the Jina, with a pure
mind, with steady eyes, without blinking, is called a Rupa-Dhyani ||10||.
Meaning: The one who is free from the stains of attachment, aversion, and great
delusion, who is peaceful, beautiful, and charming, who is marked by all
auspicious signs, who is adorned with the Yoga Mudra, which is unknown to the
Tirthankaras, which is delightful, which pours forth a wonderful, gentle, and
blissful stream from the eyes, the one who meditates on the form of the Jina,
with a pure mind, with steady eyes, without blinking, is called a Rupa-Dhyani.
||8-10||.  Then ||863. The yogi, through the practice of Yoga, has attained the
state of being one with the object of meditation, and clearly sees himself as
the omniscient being ||11||. ||864. This omniscient Lord is indeed myself, I am
He, thus having attained the state of being one with the object of meditation,
he considers himself to be the knower of all ||12||.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
  /  /  OM arhate namaH  /  /  9. navama prakAza aba sAta zlokoM dvArA
rUpasthadhyAna kA svarUpa kahate haiN|853| mokSa-zrIsammukhInasya,
vidhvastAkhilakarmaNaH  /  caturmukhasya niHzeSa-bhuvanAbhayadAyinaH  // 1 //
/ 854 /  indumaNDalasaGkAzacchatra-tritayazAlinaH  /
lasadbhAmaNDalAbhogaviDambitavivasvataH  // 2 //   / 855 /  divya-
dundubhinirghoSa-gIta-sAmrAjya-saMpadaH  /  raNavirephajhaGkAra-
mukharAzokazobhinaH  // 3 //   / 856 /  siMhAsana-niSaNNasya, vIjyamAnasya
cAmaraiH  /  surAsuraziroratnadIprapAdanakhadyuteH  // 4 //   / 857 /
divyapuSpotkarAkIrNAsaGkIrNapariSadbhuvaH  /  utkandharairmRgakulaiH,
pIyamAnakaladhvaneH  // 5 //   / 858 /  zAntavairebhasiMhAdi-samupAsitasannidheH
/  prabhoH samavasaraNasthitasya parameSThinaH  // 6 //   / 859 /
sarvAtizayayuktasya, kevalajJAnabhAsvataH  /  arhato rUpamAlambya, dhyAnaM
rUpasthamucyate  // 7 //  artha :- jo yogI mokSalakSmI ke saMmukha pahuMca cuke
haiM, jinhoMne samagra karmoM kA vinAza kara diyA hai, upadeza dete samaya
caumukhI haiM; samagra loka ke prANimAtra ko jo abhayadAna dete haiM aura
caMdramaMDala ke samAna tIna ujjvala chatroM se suzobhita haiM, sUryamaMDala kI
prabhA ko mAta karane vAlA bhAmaMDala jinake cAroM aura dedIpyamAna hai, jahA~
divyaduMdubhi ke AghoSa ho rahe haiM; gItagAna kI sAmrAjya-saMpadA haiN| guMjAra
karate hue bhramaroM kI jhaMkAra se gUMjita azokavRkSa se suzobhita haiM,
siMhAsana para virAjamAna haiM, jinake donoM aura cAmara dulAye jA rahe haiM,
vaMdana karate hue suroM aura asuroM ke mukaTa ke ratnoM kI kAMti se jinake
caraNoM ke nakha kI yuti camaka rahI haiM, divyapuSyoM ke samUha se samavasaraNa
kI vizAlabhami bhI khacAkhaca bharI huI hai, gardana Upara uThAkara mRgAdi
pazuoM ke jhuMDa jinakA madhura upadeza pAna kare rahe haiM; siMha, hAthI,
sarpa, nakula Adi janma se vaira vAle jIva apanA vaira bhUlakara jinake pAsa
baiTha gaye haiM, aise samavasaraNa meM sthita sarva-atizayoM se yukta,
kevalajJAna se suzobhita parameSThI arihaMta bhagavAn ke svarUpa kA avalaMbana
lekara jo dhyAna kiyA jAtA hai; vaha rUpasthadhyAna kahalAtA hai||1-7||
rUpasthadhyAna kA dUsarA bheda tIna zlokoM dvArA kahate haiN1860| rAga-dveSa-
mahAmoha-vikArairakalaGkitam  /  zAntaM kAntaM manohAri, sarvalakSaNalakSitam
// 8 //   / 861 /  tIrthikairaparijJAta-yogamudrAmanoramam  /
akSNoramandamAnandaniHsyandaM dadadadbhutam  // 9 //   / 862 /
jinendrapratimArUpam, api nirmalamAnasaH  /  ninimeSadRzAM dhyAyan,
rUpasthadhyAnavAn bhavet  // 10 //  artha :- rAga-dveSa-mahAmoha-ajJAna Adi
vikAroM se rahita, zAMta, kAMta, manohara Adi samasta prazAMta lakSaNoM se
yukta, anya dharmAvalaMbiyoM dvArA ajJAta yoga-dhyAnamudrA ko dhAraNa karane se
manorama tathA AMkhoM se prabala adbhuta AnaMda jhara rahA hai, aisI sthiratA se
yukta zrIjinezvaradeva kI pratimA ke rUpa kA nirmala citta se AMkha baMda kiye
binA sthira nigAha se dhyAna karane vAlA yogI rUpasthadhyAnI kahalAtA
hai||8-10|| phir||863| yogI cAbhyAsayogena, tanmayatvamupAgataH  /
sarvajJIbhUtamAtmAnam, avalokayati sphuTam  // 11 //  ||864 /  sarvajJo bhagavAn
yo'yam, ahamevAsti sa dhruvam  /  evaM tanmayatAM yAtaH, sarvavedIti manyate  //
12 //  438

Page #460 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Nature of Rupa-Sthāna Dhyāna  **Yogaśāstra, Eighth Prakāśa, Verses
13-16:**  **Meaning:** By practicing Rupa-Sthāna Dhyāna, the Yogi who attains
Tanmayatā (absorption) sees himself clearly as the omniscient. "That omniscient
God is undoubtedly me." Thus, by becoming absorbed in the omniscient God, that
Yogi is considered omniscient. ||12-13|| How is that? It is said ||865||
"Vītarāga is liberated by contemplating Vītarāga. But by contemplating a Rāgī
(passionate), one becomes Rāgī, causing agitation, etc." ||13||  **Meaning:**
One who meditates on Śrī Vītarāgadeva becomes Vītarāga himself and is liberated
from karmas or desires. But one who contemplates or meditates on kāma (lust),
krodha (anger), harṣa (joy), viṣāda (sorrow), raga-dveṣa (attachment-aversion),
etc., acquires these faults and becomes Rāgī himself. ||14||  It is also said
||866|| "Whatever the nature of the object with which the instrument-bearer is
associated, he attains Tanmayatā in that, just like a crystal." ||14||
**Meaning:** A crystal gem appears to be the color of whatever object is placed
near it. Similarly, one's pure soul, like a crystal, becomes absorbed in the
nature of whatever object it contemplates. ||15||  Thus, having explained
Sadhyāna (right meditation), we now speak of abandoning Asad-Dhyāna (wrong
meditation) ||1867|| "One should not practice Asad-Dhyāna, even out of
curiosity, because practicing it leads to the destruction of one's soul." ||15||
**Meaning:** Even out of curiosity, one should not practice Asad-Dhyāna if one
does not desire it, because practicing it leads to the destruction of one's
soul. How is that? ||16|| ||1868|| "All Siddhis (powers) are naturally attained
by those who are devoted to liberation. For others, Siddhi is doubtful, but
their loss of self-interest is certain." ||16||  **Meaning:** Yogis who are
devoted to liberation naturally attain all eight Mahāsiddhis (great powers) and
liberation itself. But for those who desire worldly pleasures, the attainment of
Siddhi is doubtful, because even if they gain their desired benefit, they will
certainly lose their self-interest (by being distracted from the true goal).
Thus, the Naya-Prakāśa, a commentary on the Adhyātmopaṇiṣad, composed by Ācārya
Śrī Hemacandrācārya Sūriśvara, in response to the inquiry of the great king Śrī
Kumārapāla, is complete.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 rupastha dhyAna kA svarUpa yogazAstra aSTama prakAza zloka 13 se 16 artha :-
rUpasthadhyAna kA abhyAsa karane se tanmayatA-prApta yogI apane Apa ko spaSTa
rUpa se sarvajJa ke samAna dekhane lagatA hai| jo sarvajJa bhagavAna hai,
nissandeha vahI maiM huuN|' isa prakAra sarvajJa-bhagavAn meM tanmayatA ho jAne
se, vaha yogI sarvajJa mAnA jAtA hai  // 12-13 /  /  vaha kisa taraha? use
kahate haiN||865| vItarAgo vimucyeta, vItarAgaM vicintayan  /  rAgiNaM tu
samAlambya, rAgI syAt kSobhaNAdikRt  /  / 13 /  /  artha :- zrI vItarAgadeva kA
dhyAna karane vAlA svayaM vItarAga hokara karmoM yA vAsanAoM se mukta ho jAtA
hai| isake AlaMbana lene vAlA yA dhyAna karane vAlA kAma, krodha, harSa, viSAda,
rAga-dveSAdi doSa prApta karake svayaM sarAgI bana jAtA hai  /  / 14 /  /  kahA
bhI hai|866| yena yena hi bhAvena, yujyate yantravAhakaH  /  tena tanmayatAM
yAti, vizvarUpo maNiryathA  // 14 //  - artha :- sphaTikaratna ke pAsa jisa
raMga kI vastu rakha dI jAtI vaha ratna usI raMga kA dikhAyI dene lagatA hai|
isI prakAra sphaTika ke samAna apanA nirmala AtmA, jisa-jisa bhAva kA Alambana
grahaNa karatA hai, usa usa . bhAva kI tanmayatA vAlA bana jAtA hai  // 15 //  _
isa prakAra sadhyAna kA pratipAdana karake aba asad-dhyAna chor3ane ke lie
kahate haiN|1867| nAsadhyAnAni sevyAni, kautukenApi kintviha  /  svanAzAyaiva
jAyante, sevyamAnAni tAni yat  /  / 15 /  /  artha :- apanI icchA na ho to
kutUhala se bhI asaddhyAna kA sevana nahIM karanA cAhie, kyoMki usakA sevana
karane se apanI AtmA kA vinAza hI hotA hai| vaha kisa taraha?  // 16 //  |1868 /
sidhyanti siddhayaH sarvAH, svayaM mokSAvalambinAm  /  sandigdhA siddhiranyeSAM
svArthabhraMzastu nishcitH||16|| artha :- mokSAvalaMbI yogiyoM ko svataH hI
sabhI (aSTa) mahAsiddhiyA~ siddha upalabdha ho jAtI hai aura paraMparA se svataH
siddhi (mukti) prApta ho jAtI hai| kintu saMsArasukha ke abhilASiyoM ko siddhi
kI prApti saMdigdha hai, kyoMki iSTa lAbha mile yA na mile, paraMtu (Atmahita
se) svArthabhraSTatA to avazya hotI hai|  /  isa prakAra paramArhat
zrIkumArapAla rAjA kI jijJAsA se AcAryazrI hemacandrAcAryasUrIzvara racita
adhyAtmopaniSad nAmaka paTTabaddha aparanAma yogazAkha kA khopajJAyivaraNasahita
nayama prakAza saMpUrNa huA  /  439

Page #461 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
|| Om Arhate Namah || | 10. Dasham Prakash  Now the nature of Rupaatit Dhyana is
being explained. 869. Of the formless, pure consciousness-blissful form, the
Supreme Soul. Of the immaculate, the perfected, the meditation is without form.
||1|| _ Meaning: The meditation of the formless (without body), shapeless, pure
consciousness-blissful (knowledge-bliss) form, immaculate, perfected Supreme
Soul, is called Rupaatit Dhyana. ||1||. 870. Thus constantly remembering, the
yogi, with the support of that form. He attains oneness with it, devoid of the
object and the perceiver. ||2|| _ Meaning: The yogi who constantly meditates on
the form of such an immaculate, shapeless, perfected Supreme Soul, with the
support of that form, attains oneness with it, devoid of the object and the
perceiver, i.e., the state of being the object and the perceiver. ||2||. 871.
Becoming completely surrendered to him, he merges in him thus. In the absence of
both the meditator and the meditation, he attains unity with the object of
meditation. ||3|| _ Meaning: When the yogi, completely surrendered to that
perfected Supreme Soul, becomes absorbed in him; then, in the absence of any
support, he becomes one with the soul of the perfected Supreme Soul, and in the
absence of both the meditator and the meditation, he becomes one with the object
of meditation, the perfected Supreme Soul. ||3||.  The meaning is being
explained. 872. This state of being one with the object of meditation, is
considered to be unification with it. The soul, in its indivisible form, merges
in the Supreme Soul. ||4|| _ Meaning: The unification (oneness) of the mind of
the yogi who practices Rupaatit Dhyana with the perfected Supreme Soul, is
called Samarasibhava. This is truly considered to be oneness, by which the soul
merges in the Supreme Soul in its indivisible form. ||4||. The essence is being
explained. 873. From the relationship of the unperceivable and the perceivable,
one should contemplate from the gross to the subtle. From the supported to the
unsupported, the knower of the truth knows the truth with clarity. ||5|| _
Meaning: One should first enter into the unsupported Rupaatit Dhyana through the
meditation with an object, such as the body, the feet, etc. One should
contemplate the subtle, subtler objects, such as the Anahata Kala, etc., by
grasping the gross objects. And one should go from the supported objects, such
as the form, etc., to the unsupported object, the perfected Supreme Soul. If one
practices meditation in this order, the yogi who knows the truth attains the
truth in a short time. ||5||. The conclusion of the four types of meditation,
Pindastha, etc., is being explained. 874. Thus, the mind of the muni, immersed
in the nectar of these four types of meditation, Pindastha, Padastha, Rupastha,
and Rupaatit. Having realized the truth of the world, he purifies his soul.
||6|| _ Meaning: Thus, the mind of the muni, immersed in the nectar of these
four types of meditation, Pindastha, Padastha, Rupastha, and Rupaatit, realizes
the truth of the world through experiential knowledge and purifies his soul.
||6||. Having explained the four types of meditation, Pindastha, etc., in order,
the difference is being explained through the variations of the same type of
meditation.  The types of Dharma Dhyana - 1875. From the contemplation of the
command, the result, and the consequences, and the establishment. Thus, Dharma
Dhyana is of four types, according to the difference in the object of
meditation. ||7|| 440

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 || OM arhate namaH  /  /  | 10. dazama prakAza aba rUpAtIta dhyAna kA svarUpa
kahate haiN|869| amUrtasya cidAnanda-rUpasya paramAtmanaH  /  niraJjanasya
siddhasya, dhyAnaM syAd rUpavarjitam  /  / 1 //  _ artha :- amUrta (zarIra
rahita), nirAkAra, cidAnaMda-(jJAnAnaMda)-svarUpa, niraMjana, siddha paramAtmA
kA dhyAna, rUpAtItadhyAna kahalAtA hai  /  / 1 /  /   / 870 /  ityajasraM smaran
yogI, tatsvarUpAvalambanaH  /  tanmayatvamavApnoti, grAhyagrAhaka-varjitam  /  /
2 /  /  artha :- aise niraMjana nirAkAra siddha paramAtmA ke svarUpa kA Alambana
lekara unakA satata dhyAna karane vAlA yogI grAhya-grAhyakabhAva arthAt dhyeya
aura dhyAtA ke bhAva se rahita tanmayatA-(siddha svarUpatA) prApta kara letA hai
/  / 2 /  /   / 871 /  ananyazaraNIbhUya, sa tasmin lIyate tathA  /  dhyAtR-
dhyAnobhayAbhAve, dhyeyenaikyaM yathA vrajet  // 3 //  artha :- una siddha
paramAtmA kI ananya zaraNa lekara jaba yogI unameM tallIna ho jAtA hai; taba koI
bhI Alambana nahIM rahane se vaha yogI siddha paramAtmA kI AtmA meM tanmaya bana
jAtA hai, aura dhyAtA aura dhyAna ina donoM ke abhAva meM dhyeya-rUpa siddha
paramAtmA ke sAtha usakI ekarUpatA ho jAtI hai  /  / 3 /  /  tAtparya kahate
haiN|872| so'yaM samarasIbhAvaH, tadekIkaraNaM matam  /  AtmA yadapRthaktvena,
lIyate paramAtmani  // 4 //  artha :- rUpAtIta dhyAna karanevAle yogIpuruSa ke
mana kA siddha paramAtmA ke sAtha ekIkaraNa-(tanmaya) ho jAnA, samarasIbhAva
kahalAtA hai| vahI vAstava meM ekarUpatA mAnI gayI hai jisase AtmA abheda rUpa
se paramAtmA meM lIna ho jAtI hai||4|| isakA nicor3a kahate haiN|873|alkssy-
lkssy-smbndhaat, sthUlAt sUkSmaM vicintayet  /  sAlambAcca nirAlambaM, tattvavit
tttvmnyjsaa||5|| artha :- prathama piNDastha, padastha Adi lakSya vAle dhyAna
dvArA nirAlambana rUpa alakSya dhyAna meM praveza karanA caahie| sthUla dhyeyoM
kA grahaNa kara kramazaH anAhata kalA Adi sUkSma, sUkSmatara dhyeyoM kA ciMtana
karanA cAhie aura rUpastha Adi sAlambana dhyeyoM se siddha paramAtma-svarUpa
nirAlambana dhyeya meM jAnA caahie| isa krama se dhyAna kA abhyAsa kiyA jAye to
tattvajJa yogI alpa samaya meM hI tattva kI prAsi kara letA hai  // 5 //
piMDastha Adi cAroM dhyAnoM kA upasaMhAra karate haiN|874| evaM caturvidha-
dhyAnAmRtamagnaM munermanaH  /  sAkSAtkRtajagattattvaM, vidhatte zuddhimAtmanaH
// 6 //  . artha :- isa prakAra piNDastha, padastha, rUpastha, aura rUpAtIta ina
cAroM prakAra ke dhyAnAmRta meM nimagna muni kA mana jagat ke tattvoM kA
sAkSAtkAra karake anubhavajJAna prApta kara AtmA kI vizuddhi kara letA hai  /  /
6 /  /  piMDastha Adi krama se cAroM dhyAna batAkara usI dhyAna ke prakArAMtara
se bheda batAte haiM dharmadhyAna ke bheda - 1875 /  AjJA'pAyavipAkAnAM,
saMsthAnasya ca cintanAt  /  itthaM vA dhyeyabhedena, dharmadhyAnaM caturvidham
// 7 //  440

Page #462 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Nature of Rupaatit Dhyana and the Types of Dharma Dhyana  **Yoga Shastra
Dasham Prakash Shloka 8 to 11 Meaning:**  1. **Aagna-Vichay:** Contemplation on
the Aagna (command) 2. **Apaya-Vichay:** Contemplation on the Apaya (negative
consequences) 3. **Vipaak-Vichay:** Contemplation on the Vipaak (results) 4.
**Sansthan-Vichay:** Contemplation on the Sansthan (establishment)  These four
types of Dharma Dhyana arise from the different aspects of the Dhyeya (object of
meditation). || 7 ||  **First, regarding Aagna-Vichay Dhyana, it is said:**
1876.  Where the Aagna (command) of the Sarvjna (omniscient) is considered
(relied upon), unhindered by any logic, consistent in its words, unassailable by
any other philosophy, that contemplation on the Aagna, which is the twelve-
limbed discourse as formulated by the Sarvjna, is called Aagna Dhyana. || 8 ||
**How is the Aagna unhindered?** Let us consider that. 877. The words of the
Sarvjna are so subtle that they cannot be refuted by any reason or logic.
Therefore, one should accept the Aagna (command) in the form of the words of the
Sarvjna. Because the Sarvjna never speaks falsehood. || 9 ||  **Explanation:**
The meaning of the inner verses related to this topic is as follows: The words
of an Aapta (reliable) person, free from bias, are called Aapta Vachan. They are
of two types: First, Aagam Vachan, and second, Hetu-Yukti-Vaad Vachan. Accepting
the meaning of words and their meanings from the words themselves is Aagam
Vachan. And accepting the truth of things through the similarity or assistance
of other proofs, reasons, and logic is called Hetu-Vaad. Both of these are
considered to be flawless (equal) because that which has a flawless cause and
effect is considered to be proof. Raga (attachment), Dvesha (aversion), Moha
(delusion), etc. are called Dosha (faults), and these faults are not present in
the Arihant (liberated soul). Therefore, the words of the Arihant are considered
to be proof because they are the words of a flawless person.  The Aagam, which
is proven by Nay (principles) and Pramaan (proof), free from contradictions,
unhindered by any logic, not opposed by any other philosophies or powerful
rulers, is like the ocean, the confluence of many rivers in the form of various
types of Aagam, Anga, Upanga, Prakirnak, Mool, Chhed, etc. It is adorned with
the great wealth of the Maha-Samrajya (great empire) in the form of Ati-Shay-
Gyaan (infinite knowledge). It is extremely rare for a Bhavy (soul destined for
liberation) to attain it. But it is very easy for the Bhavy soul. It is the
Ganipitaka (collection of scriptures) that is always praised and lauded by
humans and gods. That Aagam is eternal in its substance and impermanent in its
modifications. It reveals the nature of Sat (real) and Asat (unreal) things.
Contemplating on the substance based on it, taking the Aagna as the basis, using
the Syadvaad-Naya-Yoga (logic of conditionalism), is called Aagna-Vichay Dharma
Dhyana. || 9 ||  **Now, regarding Apaya-Vichay Dhyana, it is said:** 878. One
should contemplate on the Kshaya (passions) like Raga (attachment), Dvesha
(aversion), Krodha (anger), etc., and the negative consequences arising from
them, the vices, the suffering, the pain, the bad destinies, etc. This
contemplation is called Apaya-Vichay Dharma Dhyana. || 10 ||  **Its fruit is
said to be:** 879. The meditator becomes dedicated to avoiding the Apaya
(negative consequences) in this world and the next. And from this, he becomes
free from all kinds of evil deeds. || 11 ||  **Explanation:** The meaning of the
inner verses used in this context is as follows: The one who has not touched the
path of Shri-Vitaraag (liberated soul), who has not known the nature of the
Supreme Soul, who has not served the Sadhu-Marg (path of the virtuous), the
ultimate cause of the path of liberation, that soul faces thousands of kinds of
calamities. In the illusion and darkness of this world, whose mind is enslaved,
what sin does he not commit? What suffering does he not endure? That is, he
commits all sins and endures all kinds of suffering.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 rUpAtIta dhyAna kA svarUpa, dharmadhyAna ke bheda yogazAstra dazama prakAza
zloka 8 se 11 artha :- 1. AjJA-vicaya, 2. apAya-vicaya, 3. vipAka-vicaya, aura
4. saMsthAna-vicaya kA ciMtana karane se dhyeya ke bheda se dharmadhyAna ke cAra
bheda hote haiM  // 7 //  prathama AjJA-vicaya dhyAna ke saMbaMdha meM kahate
haiN1876| AjJAM yatra puraskRtya (samAzritya), sarvajJAnAmabAdhitAm  /
tattvatazcintayedarthAn, tadAjJA-dhyAnamucyate  // 8 //  artha - sarvajJoM =
prAmANika Apta puruSoM kI, kisI bhI tarka se abAdhita, pUrvApara vacanoM meM
paraspara aviruddha, anya kisI bhI darzana se akATya, AjJA arthAt-sarvajJa-
prarUpita dvAdazAMgI rUpI pravacana, ko sAmane rakhakara jIvAdi padArthoM kA
tattvataH (yathArtha) ciMtana karanA, AjJAdhyAna kahalAtA hai  /  / 8 /  /  AjJA
kA abAdhitva kisa taraha hai? usakA vicAra karate haiN|877| sarvajJa vacanaM
sUkSmaM, hanyate yatra hetubhiH  /  tadAjJArUpamAdeyaM, na mRSAbhASiNo jinAH  //
9 //  artha :- sarvajJa bhagavAn ke vacana aise sUkSmatA sparzI hote haiM ki ve
kisI hetu yA yukti se khaMDita nahIM ho skte| ataH sarvajJa bhagavAn ke AjJA
rUpI vacana svIkAra karane caahie| kyoMki sarvajJabhagavAn kabhI asatya vacana
nahIM kahate  /  / 9 /  /  vyAkhyA :- isa viSaya se saMbaMdhita AMtara-zlokoM kA
bhAvArtha kahate haiM-Apta arthAt pakSapAta-rahita prAmANika puruSa ke vacana
Aptavacana kahalAte haiN| ve do prakAra ke haiM-prathama Agamavacana, dUsarA
hetu-yuktivaad-vcn| zabdoM se hI padoM aura usake artho kA svIkAra karanA
Agamavacana hai. aura dUsare pramANoM, hetuoM, aura yuktiyoM kI samAnatA yA
sahAyatA se padArthoM kI satyatA svIkAra karanA hetuvAda kahalAtA hai| ye donoM
nirdoSa (eka samAna) hoM, ve hI pra pramANabhUta mAne jAte haiN| kyoMki jisakA
kAraNa aura pariNAma nirdoSa ho, vahI pramANa mAnA gayA hai| rAga-dveSa, moha
Adi doSa kahalAte haiM aura arihaMta paramAtmA meM ve doSa nahIM hote| isalie
nirdoSa puruSa se utpanna vacana hone se arihaMta paramAtmA ke vacana
pramANabhUta gine jAte hai| naya aura pramANa se siddha, pUrvApara virodha se
rahita, kisI bhI tarka se abAdhita anya darzanoM yA balavAna zAsakoM dvArA
jisakA pratikAra na kiyA jA sake, aisA Agama aMga, upAMga, prakIrNaka, mUla,
cheda Adi aneka bheda rUpI nadiyoM kA samAgama-sthAna rUpa samudra-samAna hai
tathA atizayajJAna rUpI mahAsAmrAjya-lakSmI se vibhUSita hai, dUra bhavya ke lie
isakI upalabdhi atyaMta durlabha hai| paraMtu bhavya AtmA ke lie atyaMta sulabha
hai| manuSyoM aura devatAoM dvArA sadA prazaMsita stuti kRta gaNipiTaka rUpa
haiN| vaha Agama dravya se nitya aura paryAya se anitya hai, sva svarUpa meM sat
aura para svarUpa meM asat padArtho kI pratIti karAne vAlA hai| usake AdhAra
para syAdvAda-nyAya yoga se AjJA kA Alamvana lekara padArtha kA ciMtana karanA,
AjJAvicaya nAmaka dharmadhyAna kahalAtA hai  /  / 9 /  /  aba apAyavicaya dhyAna
ke bAre meM kahate haiN|878| rAgadveSa-kaSAyAdyaiH, jAyamAnAn vicintyet|
yatrApAyAMstadapAyavicaya-dhyAnamiSyate  // 10 //  artha :- dhyAna meM utpanna
hone vAle rAga, dveSa, krodhAdi kaSAya, viSayavikAra Adi pApasthAnoM aura
tajjanita duHkha, kleza, durgati Adi kA ciMtana karanA, 'apAya-vicaya' dharma-
dhyAna kahalAtA hai  // 10 //  isakA phala kahate haiN|879| aihikAmuSmikApAya-
parihAraparAyaNaH  /  tataH pratinivarteta, samantAt pApakarmaNaH  // 11 //
artha :- rAga, dveSAdi se utpanna hone vAle cAra gati-saMbaMdhI duHkhoM kA
vicAra karane se dhyAtA isa loka aura paraloka ke duHkhadAyI kaSToM kA parihAra
karane ke lie tatpara ho jAtA hai, aura isase vaha saba prakAra ke - pApakarmo
se nivRtta ho jAtA hai  /  / 11 /  /  vyAkhyA :- isa saMbaMdha meM prayukta
AMtarazlokoM kA bhAvArtha kahate haiM-jisane zrIvItarAga paramAtmA ke mArga ko
sparza nahIM kiyA, paramAtmA kA svarUpa nahIM jAnA, nirvRtti-mArga ke
paramakAraNa rUpI sAdhumArga kA sevana nahIM kiyA, usa jIva ko hajAroM prakAra
kI ApattiyA~ AtI haiN| isa duniyAM kI mAyA aura mohAMdhakAra meM jisakA mana
parAdhIna banA huA hai, vaha kauna-sA pApa nahIM karatA? kauna-sA kaSTa sahana
nahIM karatA? arthAt sabhI pApa karatA hai aura sabhI prakAra ke duHkha 441

Page #463 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Nature of Dharma-Dhyana  **Yoga Shastra, Dasham Prakash, Slokas 12-13**
This is the nature of Dharma-Dhyana:  **11.** To contemplate the four states of
existence (Deva, Manushya, Tiryanch, Naraka) and their inherent suffering, and
to be vigilant against them. This is called Dharma-Dhyana, which is related to
the concept of "Apay-Vishaya" (the dangers of the world).  **12.** Contemplating
the arising of the fruits of karma, which are constantly emerging, is called
"Vipaka-Vishaya" Dharma-Dhyana.  **13.** The same contemplation reveals that the
supreme wealth of the Arihant Bhagwan and the extreme misfortunes of the beings
in Naraka are both solely due to the power of punya (merit) and papa (demerit)
karma. In other words, the strength of punya and papa is the cause of happiness
and suffering.  **Explanation:**  The essence of these slokas is this: "Vipaka"
refers to the fruits of good and bad karma. These fruits are experienced in
various ways, depending on the material and spatial conditions. For example,
enjoying sensual pleasures like embracing a woman, tasting delicious food,
wearing garlands of flowers, and applying sandalwood are the fruits of good
punya karma. On the other hand, experiencing snakes, weapons, fire, and poison
are the fruits of bad papa karma. This is the material aspect.  Obtaining
heavenly abodes like Saudharma, gardens, forests, palaces, and mansions are the
fruits of good punya karma, while experiencing cremation grounds, jungles,
emptiness, battlefields, etc., are the fruits of bad papa karma. Experiencing
pleasant seasons like spring and autumn, without extreme cold or heat, is the
fruit of good punya karma, while experiencing extreme heat, extreme cold,
summer, and winter are the fruits of bad papa karma.  A pure mind, contentment,
simplicity, and humble behavior are the fruits of good punya karma, while anger,
pride, deceit, greed, and violent thoughts are the fruits of bad papa karma.
Being born as a high-ranking deva, in a land of sensual pleasures, or as a human
being are the fruits of good punya karma, while being born as a Mlechchha
(barbarian) like a Bhil, or as a Tiryanch (animal), or in Naraka (hell) are the
fruits of bad papa karma.  In this way, karma associated with material, spatial,
temporal, mental, and existential conditions undergoes destruction, suppression,
or reduction. Thus, karma bound to the material and other aspects of the soul
naturally bears its fruits. There are eight types of karma: Jnanavaraniya,
Darshanavaraniya, Vedaniya, Mohaniya, Aayushya, Nama, Gotra, and Antaray.  Just
as a person with eyes cannot see if a bandage is placed over them, similarly,
the soul's all-knowing knowledge is covered by the Jnanavaraniya karma, which
acts like a bandage. The five types of knowledge - Mati, Shruta, Avadhi,
Manahparyaya, and Kevalgyan - are obstructed by this karma. Darshanavaraniya
karma obstructs the five types of sleep and the four types of vision. Just as a
gatekeeper prevents someone from seeing their master, similarly,
Darshanavaraniya karma prevents the soul from seeing itself. Vedaniya karma is
like a honey-coated sword, causing the experience of pleasure and pain. The
taste of honey is sweet, but licking it can cut the tongue with the blade,
causing pain. Mohaniya karma is like intoxication, which makes the soul confused
about right and wrong. It is of two types: Darshanamohiya and Charitramohiya,
which suppress right vision and right conduct. Aayushya karma is like a prison,
with four types of lifespans: Deva, Manushya, Tiryanch, and Naraka. It is like a
chain that keeps each soul in its place. The soul cannot escape from these
realms until its lifespan is complete.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dharmadhyAna kA svarUpa yogazAstra dazama prakAza zloka 12 se 13 | bhI bhogatA
hai| naraka, tithaMca aura manuSya gati meM jo duHkha bhogA hai usameM merA
apanA hI pramAda aura merA apanA hI duSTa mana kAraNa hai| 'prabho! ApakA
zreSTha samyaktva prApta hone para bhI mana vacana aura kAyA se duSTa ceSTA
karake maiM apane hAthoM apane jIvana ko mohAgnise jalAkara duHkhI huA huuN|
Atman! mokSamArga svAdhIna hone para bhI usa mArga ko chor3akara tUMne svayaM hI
kumArga ko DhUMDhakara apanI AtmA ko kaSTa meM DAlA hai| jaise svataMtra rAjya
milane para bhI koI mUrkhaziromaNi galI-galI meM bhIkha mAMgatA phiratA hai,
vaise hI mokSa kA sukha svAdhIna hone para bhI mujha sA mUr3ha jIva pudgaloM se
bhIkha mAMgatA huA saMsAra meM bhaTakatA phira rahA hai| isa prakAra apane lie
aura dUsaroM ke lie cAra gati ke duHkhoM kA paraMparAviSayaka vicAra karanA aura
unase sAvadhAna honA, apAya-viSaya nAmaka dharmadhyAna hai  /  / 11 /  /  _aba
vipAkaviSayaka dharmadhyAna kahate haiM  / 880 /  pratikSaNasamudbhUto, yatra
krmphlodyH| cintyate citrarUpaH sa, vipAkavicayo mataH  // 12 //   / 881 /  yA
sampadA'rhato yA ca, vipadA nArakAtmanaH  /  ekAtapatratA tatra, puNyApuNyasya
karmaNaH  // 13 //  artha :- kSaNa-kSaNa meM utpanna hone vAle vibhinna prakAra
ke karmaphala ke udaya kA ciMtana karanA, vipAka-viSayaka dharmadhyAna kahalAtA
hai| usI bAta kA vicAra karate hue digdarzana karAte haiM ki zrIarihaMta
bhagavAn ko jo zreSThatama saMpattiyAM aura nArakIya jIvoM ko jo ghoratama
vipattiyA~ hotI hai, ina donoM meM puNyakarma aura pApakarma kI ekachatra
prabhutA hai| arthAt puNya-pApa kI prabalatA hI sukha-duHkha kA kAraNa
hai||12-13|| vyAkhyA :- isa viSaya ke AMtarazlokoM kA bhAvArtha kahate haiM-
vipAka arthAt zubhAzubha karmo kA phl| isa phala kA anubhava dravya-kSetrAdi
sAmagrI ke anusAra aneka prakAra se hotA hai| isameM strI-AliMgana, svAdiSTa
khAdya Adi bhoga, puSpamAlA, caMdana Adi aMgoM ke upabhoga zubha puNyakarma haiM
aura sarpa, zastra, agni viSa Adi kA anubhava azubha pApakarma ke phala haiN|
yaha dravya-sAmagrI hai| saudharma Adi deva-vimAna, upavana, bAga, mahala,
bhavana Adi kSetra-prApti zubhapuNyodaya kA phala hai aura zmazAna, jaMgala,
zUnya, raNa, Adi kSetra kI prApti azubha-pApa kA phala hai| na atyaMta ThaMDa,
na atyaMta garmI, basaMta aura zaradRtu Adi AnaMdadAyaka kAla kA anubhava
zubhapuNya-phala hai aura bahuta garmI, bahuta ThaMDa, grISma aura hemaMtaRtu
Adi duHkhadakAla kA anubhava azubha-pApaphala hai| mana kI nirmalatA, saMtoSa,
saralatA, namrabhAvasahita vyavahAra Adi zubhabhAva puNya ke phala haiM aura
krodha, abhimAna, kapaTa, lobha, raudradhyAna Adi azubha bhAva pApa ke phala
haiN| uttama devatva, yugaliyoM kI bhogabhUmi meM, manuSyoM meM janma;
bhavaviSayaka zubha puNyodaya hai; bhIla Adi mleccha-jAti ke manuSyoM meM janma,
tiryaca, naraka Adi meM janma grahaNa karanA azubha pApodaya hai| isa prakAra
dravya, kSetra, kAla, bhAva, aura bhava ke Azrita karmoM kA kSayopazama, upazama
yA kSaya hotA hai| isa prakAra jIvoM ke dravyAdi sAmagrI ke yoga se baMdhe hue
karma apane Apa phala dete haiN| una karmoM ke ATha bheda haiM; ve isa prakAra
haiM-jJAnAvaraNIya, darzanAvaraNIya, vedanIya, mohanIya, AyuSya, nAma, gotra,
aura aNtraay|| jaise kisI AMkha vAle manuSya ke A~khoM para paTTI bAMdha dI gaI
ho to use A~kheM hote hue bhI nahI dIkhatA; isI taraha jIva kA sarvajJa ke
sadaza jJAna, jJAnAvaraNIyakarma rUpI paTTI se Dhaka jAtA hai| mati, zrata,
avadhi, manaHparyAya, aura kevalajJAna; ye pAMcoM jJAna jisase ruka jAyeM, vaha
jJAnAvaraNIya karma kahalAtA hai| pAMca prakAra kI nidrA evaM cAra prakAra ke
darzana ko rokane vAlA darzanAvaraNIya karma kA udaya hai| jaise svAmI ke
darzana cAhane vAle ko dvArapAla roka detA hai| isa kAraNa vaha darzana nahIM
kara sktaa| vaise hI darzanAvaraNIya karma ke udaya se jIva apane Apa ko nahIM
dekha sktaa| vedanIya karma kA svabhAva zahada lapeTI huI talavAra kI dhAra ke
samAna hai, sukha-duHkha kA anubhava karAne vAlA vedanIya | karma hai| zahada kA
svAda madhura lagatA hai; paraMtu use cATane para dhAra se jIbha kaTa jAtI hai,
taba duHkha kA anubhava hotA hai| madirApAna ke samAna mohanIya karma hai| isase
maDha banA haA AtmA kAryAkArya ke viveka ko bhala jAtA do prakAra kA hai-
darzanamohanIya aura cAritramohanIya, isase samyagdarzana aura samyak cAritra
daba jAte haiN| AyuSyakarma | kArAgAra ke samAna hai, deva, manuSya, tithaMca
aura naraka rUpa cAra prakAra kA AyuSya hai, vaha ber3I ke samAna hai| yaha
pratyeka jIva ko apane sthAna meM roke rakhatA hai| AyuSya pUrNa kiye binA una
una yoniyoM se jIva chUTa nahI sktaa| citrakAra 442

Page #464 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Nature of Dharma-Dhyana  Dharma-Dhyana is like a picture created by
various types of images, as described in the tenth chapter of Yoga Shastra,
verses 14 to 19. It gives the being various peculiarities in the body, such as
movement, caste, institution, and association. It is like a potter who makes
pots to fill with ghee and honey, creating high and low castes. This leads to
birth in high and low families. Antarayakarma is like a wicked storekeeper, who
prevents the attainment of donations, profits, enjoyment, consumption, semen,
etc. Thus, contemplating the various consequences of the eight fundamental
natures of karma is called Vipaka-Vichaya Dharma-Dhyana. ||12-13||  Now, the
nature of Sansthana-Vichaya Dharma-Dhyana is described. ||882||  The one who
contemplates the form of the world, which is beginningless and endless, but has
the nature of production, destruction, and sustenance, in terms of substance,
field, time, and state, is called Sansthana-Vichaya Dharma-Dhyana. ||14||  Now,
the fruit of Lok-Dhyana is described. ||883||  The mind is never attached, and
does not become agitated by attachment, aversion, etc., due to the constant
change of countless permutations of various substances in the world. ||15||
Explanation: The meaning of the presented inner verses in this context is as
follows: We have already described the topic of Sansthana-Vichaya in great
detail in the context of the impermanence, etc., contemplation and the
contemplation of the world. Therefore, due to the fear of repetition, we do not
consider it necessary to describe it in detail here. The question arises: What
is the difference between Lok-Bhavana and Sansthana-Vichaya, which makes them
distinct? The answer is that Lok-Bhavana is only for contemplation, while in
Sansthana-Vichaya, the mind remains stable in the world, etc. This is why it is
called Sansthana-Vichaya Dharma-Dhyana. ||15||  Now, the nature and
characteristics of Dharma-Dhyana are described. ||884||  In Dharma-Dhyana, there
are feelings of destruction, pacification, etc. The word "etc." indicates that
there are feelings of pacification and destruction, but not the material form of
the auspicious feeling. It is said that "Dharma-Dhyana occurs in those who are
unmindful, restrained, pacified in their passions, and have the qualities of a
diminished passion." During Dharma-Dhyana, there are three progressively
purified Leshyas. They are: Peeta-Leshya (Tejo Leshya), Padma-Leshya, which is
more pure than Peeta-Leshya, and Shukla-Leshya, which is even more pure than
Padma-Leshya. ||16||  The fruit of the four Dharma-Dhyanas is described. ||885||
When the soul becomes absorbed in Dharma-Dhyana, which is filled with the
essence of complete detachment, the being experiences a spiritual bliss that is
beyond the senses. It is said that "There is a lack of attachment to objects,
health, non-cruelty, gentleness, compassion, good fragrance, and a decrease in
urine and feces. The radiance of the body, the cheerfulness of the face, and the
gentleness of the voice are signs of the initial fruit of the yogi's practice."
||17||  Now, the otherworldly fruit is described in four verses. ||886||  Those
who have renounced attachment, having abandoned their bodies, become the best of
the gods in the heavens of Graiveya, etc., through Dharma-Dhyana. ||18||  They
attain a body there, adorned with garlands, ornaments, and clothes, which is
full of great glory and beauty, and shines like the autumn moon. ||19||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dharmadhyAna kA svarUpa yogazAstra dazama prakAza zloka 14 se 19 dvArA nirmita
vividha prakAra ke citra ke samAna nAmakarma hai| yaha jIva ko zarIra meM gati,
jAti, saMsthAna-saMghayaNa Adi | aneka vicitratAe~ prApta karAtA hai| ghI aura
madhu bharane ke lie ghar3e banAne vAle kuMbhAra ke samAna uccagotra aura
nIcagotra hai| isase uccakula aura nIcakula meM janma lenA par3atA hai|
aMtarAyakarma duSTa bhaMDArI ke sadRza hai, vaha dAna, lAbha, bhoga, upabhoga,
vIrya Adi labdhiyoM ko roka detA hai| isa prakAra karma kI mUla ATha prakRtiyoM
ke aneka vipAkoM kA ciMtana karanA vipAka-vicaya dharmadhyAna kahalAtA hai  /  /
12-13 /  /  . aba saMsthAna-vicaya dharmadhyAna kA svarUpa kahate haiN|882|
anAdyantasya lokasya sthityutpatti-vyayAtmanaH  /  AkRti ciMtayed yatra
saMsthAna-vicayaH sa tu||14|| artha :- anAdi-anaMta paraMtu utpAda, vyaya aura
dhrauvya svarUpa dravya-kSetra-kAla-bhAva-svarUpa loka kI AkRti kA vicAra
karanA, saMsthAna-vicaya dharmadhyAna kahalAtA hai  // 14 //  aba loka-dhyAna kA
phala kahate haiN|883| nAnAdravyagatAnanta-paryAyaparivartanAt  /  sadA saktaM
mano naiva, rAgAdyAkulatAM vrajet  // 15 //  artha :- loka meM aneka dravya
haiM, aura eka-eka dravya ke anaMta-anaMta paryAya haiM, unakA parivartana hotA
rahatA hai| isa prakAra dravyoM kA bAra-bAra ciMtana karane se mana meM AkulatA
nahIM hotI tathA rAgadveSa Adi nahIM hote||15|| vyAkhyA :- isa saMbaMdha meM
prastuta AMtarazlokoM kA bhAvArtha kahate haiM-pahale anityAdi-bhAvanA ke
prasaMga meM tathA lokabhAvanA meM saMsthAna-vicaya' ke viSaya kA varNana bahuta
vistAra se kaha cuke haiM, isalie punaruktidoSa ke bhaya se yahAM para vizeSa
varNana karane kI AvazyakatA nahIM smjhte| yahAM prazna hotA hai ki loka-bhAvanA
aura saMsthAnavicaya meM kyA aMtara hai; jisase donoM ko alaga batalAyA hai?
isakA uttara dete hai ki lokabhAvanA to kevala vicAra karane ke lie hai, jabaki
saMsthAnavicaya meM lokAdi meM mati sthira-svarUpa rahatI hai| isI kAraNa use
'saMsthAnavicaya' dharmadhyAna kahA hai||15|| aba dharmadhyAna kA svarUpa aura
vizeSatA batAte haiM1884dharmadhyAne bhaved bhAvaH, kSAyopazamikAdikaH  /
lezyAH kramavizuddhAH syuH, pIta-padma-sitAH punH||16|| artha :- jaba
dharmadhyAna meM pravRtti hotI hai, taba Atma svarUpa kSAyopazamika Adi bhAva
hote haiN| Adi zabda kahane se aupazamika aura kSAyika bhAva hote haiM, kintu
paudgalika rUpa audayika bhAva nahIM hotaa| kahA hai ki 'apramatta saMyata,
upazAMtakaSAya aura kSINakaSAya guNasthAna vAloM ko dharmadhyAna hotA hai|'
dharmadhyAna ke samaya meM kramazaH vizuddha tIna lezyAeM hotI haiN| vaha isa
prakAra-pItalezyA, (tejo lezyA) isase adhika nirmala padmalezyA aura isase bhI
atyaMta vizuddha zuklalezyA  /  / 16 /  /  cAroM dharmadhyAnoM kA phala kahate
haiN|885| asmin nitAnta-vairAgya-vyatiSaGgataraGgite  /  jAyate dehinAM
saukhyaM, svasaMvedyamatIndriyam  // 17 /  /  artha :- atyaMta vairAgyarasa se
paripUrNa dharmadhyAna meM jaba AtmA ekAgra ho jAtA hai, taba jIva ko indriyoM
se agamya Atmika sukha kA anubhava hotA hai| kahA hai ki 'viSayoM meM anAsakti,
Arogya, aniSThuratA, komalatA, karuNA, zubhagaMdha, tathA mUtra aura purISa kI
alpatA ho jAtI hai| zarIra kI kAMti, mukha kI prasannatA, svara meM saumyatA
ityAdi vizeSatAe~ yogI kI pravRtti ke prAraMbhika phala kA cihna samajhanA
caahie||17|| aba cAra zlokoM se pAralaukika phala kahate haiN|886|
tyaktasaGgAstanuM tyaktvA, dharmadhyAnena yoginaH  /  graiveyakAdi svargeSu,
bhavanti tridazottamAH  // 18 /  /   / 887 /  mahAmahimasaubhAgyaM,
zaraccandranibhaprabham  /  prApnuvanti vapustatra, sragbhUSAmbara-bhUSitam  //
19 /  /  443

Page #465 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Nature of Dharma-Dhyana  **Yoga Shastra, Dasham Prakash, Verses 20-24**
**1888.** Possessing unique vigor (body strength, pure awareness, and the three
knowledges), free from the fever of lust, they continuously enjoy unparalleled
and lasting happiness. **20.**  **1889.** They enjoy, without hindrance, the
nectar of happiness, which is the fulfillment of all desires and captivating to
the mind. They are so absorbed in the enjoyment of this unhindered nectar of
happiness that they do not know how many births have passed or how much time has
elapsed. **21.**  **Meaning:** Yogis who have renounced attachment to all
external objects, due to the influence of Dharma-Dhyana, leave their bodies and
are born in the celestial realms, such as Graiveyak and other Vaimanik
Devalokas, as superior deities. There, they obtain a divine body, radiant like
the pure moon of the autumn season, adorned with divine garlands, ornaments, and
garments. They are endowed with unique vigor (body strength, pure awareness, and
the three knowledges), free from the fever of lust, and continuously enjoy
unparalleled and lasting happiness. They receive all kinds of captivating
objects as soon as they desire them, and they are so absorbed in the enjoyment
of this unhindered nectar of happiness that they do not know how many births
have passed or how much time has elapsed. **18-21.**  **890.** After the
exhaustion of divine enjoyments, they fall from the celestial realms and are
born on earth with a superior body. **22.**  **891.** Born in a divine lineage,
they enjoy various pleasures in a continuous and captivating festival. **23.**
**892.** Then, taking refuge in discrimination, they renounce all worldly
enjoyments and, through meditation, destroy all karmas and attain the eternal
state (Nirvana). **24.**  **Meaning:** After the exhaustion of divine
enjoyments, they fall from the celestial realms and are born on earth with a
superior body. They are born in a divine lineage, where there are continuous and
captivating festivals, and they enjoy various pleasures without attachment.
Then, taking refuge in discrimination, they renounce all worldly enjoyments and,
through meditation, destroy all karmas and attain the eternal state (Nirvana).
**22-24.**  **Thus, the Dasham Prakash, containing the explanation of the Yoga
Shastra, along with the commentary of the Khopa-Gnya, written by Acharya Shri
Hemchandracharya Suri Shwar, is complete, fulfilling the curiosity of King Shri
Kumarapala.**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dharmadhyAna kA svarUpa yogazAstra dazama prakAza zloka 20 se 24 1888 /
viziSTa-vIrya-bodhADhyaM, kAmArtijvaravarjitam  /  nirantarAyaM sevante, sukhaM
cAnupamaM ciram  /  / 20 /  /   / 889 /  icchA-sampanna-sarvArtha-manohAri-
sukhAmRtam  /  nirvighnamupabhuJjAnAH gataM janmaM na jAnate  // 21 //  artha :-
samasta-para-padArtho kI Asakti kA tyAga karane vAle yogI puruSa dharmadhyAna ke
prabhAva se zarIra ko chor3akara graiveyaka Adi vaimAnika devaloka meM uttama
deva rUpa meM utpanna hote haiN| vahA~ mahAmahimA (prabhAva), mahAn saubhAgya,
zaradRtu ke nirmala caMdramA ke samAna kAMti se yukta, divya puSpamAlAoM,
AbhUSaNoM aura vastroM se vibhUSita zarIra prApta hotA hai| ve viziSTa prakAra
ke vIrya (zarIrabala, nirmala bodha va tIna jJAna) se saMpanna kAmapIr3A rUpI
jvara se rahita, vighna-bAdhA-rahita anupama sukha kA cirakAla taka sevana
karate haiN| icchA karate hI unheM saba prakAra ke manohara padArtha prApta hote
haiM aura nirvighna sukhAmRta ke upabhoga meM ve itane tanmaya rahate haiM ki
unheM isa bAta kA patA nahIM lagatA ki kitane janma bIte yA kitanI Ayu vyatIta
huI?  /  / 18-21 /  /  usake baad|890| divyA bhogAvasAne ca, cyutvA
tridivatastataH  /  uttamena zarIreNAvataranti mahItale  // 22 /  /   / 891 /
divyavaMze samutpannAH, nityotsavamanoramAt  /  bhuJjate vividhAn
bhogAnakhaNDita manorathAH  // 23 //   / 892 /  tato. vivekamAzritya, virajyA
zeSa bhogataH  /  dhyAnena dhvasta karmANaH, prayAnti padamavyatham  // 24 //
artha :- deva-saMbaMdhI divyabhoga pUrNa hone para devaloka se cyuta hokara ve
bhUtala para avatarita hote hai, aura yahA~ para bhI unheM saubhAgya yukta
uttama zarIra prApta hotA hai| jahA~ niraMtara manohara utsava hote hoM, aise
divyavaMza meM ve janma lete haiM, aura akhaMDita-manoratha vAle vyakti vividha
prakAra ke bhogoM ko anAsakti pUrvaka bhogate haiN| usake bAda viveka kA Azraya
lekara ve saMsAra ke samasta bhogoM se virakta hokara uttama dhyAna dvArA
samasta karmoM kA vinAza karake zAzvatapada arthAt nirvANapada ko prApta karate
haiM  /  / 22-24 /  /   //  isa prakAra paramAIta zrIkumArapAla rAjA kI jijJAsA
se AcAryazrI hemacaMdrAcAryasUrIzvara racita adhyAtmopaniSad nAmaka paTTabaddha
aparanAma yogazAla kA khopajJavivaraNasahita dazama prakAza pUrNa huaa| 444

Page #466 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
|| Om Arhate Namah || 11. Ekadasham Prakash  Now, after concluding the
discussion on Dharma Dhyana, we will describe the nature of Shukla Dhyana.
||893||  Dharma Dhyana is said to be the cause of heaven and traditionally the
cause of liberation. Now, Shukla Dhyana, the sole cause of liberation, is being
described. ||1||  Meaning: We have already described Dharma Dhyana, which is the
cause of heaven and traditionally the cause of liberation. Now, we describe the
nature of Shukla Dhyana, which is the sole cause of liberation. ||1||
Explanation: There are four types of Shukla Dhyana. Compared to the last two
types of Shukla Dhyana, this is an extraordinary cause of liberation, and
compared to the first two types, it is the cause of being taken to the Anuttar
Vimana. It is said that "one should understand auspicious Astava, Samvara,
Nirjara, Vipula Deva Sukha, etc. as the auspicious results of the superior
Dharma Dhyana. The result of the first two types of Shukla Dhyana is to
experience extraordinary brilliance and radiance, extraordinary happiness, and
the pleasure of being an Anuttar Deva, while the result of the last two types is
Nirvana-Moksha." ||1||  Now, we will describe the qualifications of the one who
is eligible for Shukla Dhyana. ||894||  Only those who have the first Samhanana
(Vajra Rishabha Naracha) and are previous scripture holders (Purva Vedins) are
capable of doing Shukla Dhyana. The mind of those with low sattva (less virtue)
who lack these qualities will not attain stability in Shukla Dhyana in any way.
||2||  Meaning: Only those who have the first Samhanana (Vajra Rishabha Naracha)
and are previous scripture holders (Purva Vedins) are capable of doing Shukla
Dhyana. The mind of those with low sattva (less virtue) who lack these qualities
will not attain stability in Shukla Dhyana in any way. ||2||  Explanation: One
who is born first is called Purva, and those who hold or know it are called
Purva Vedins. This statement should be understood as a general rule, because
even though Mashatush, Marudevi, etc. were not previous scripture holders, their
meditation is considered Shukla Dhyana. Due to Sanghayan, etc., there can be
lasting stability in meditation, therefore, this is called the main cause. ||2||
Considering this, it is said: ||895||  The mind of those with bodies that are
agitated and disturbed by sense objects is not healthy, calm, and stable.
Therefore, those with low sattva are not eligible for Shukla Dhyana. ||3||
Meaning: The mind of those with bodies that are agitated and disturbed by sense
objects is not healthy, calm, and stable. Therefore, those with low sattva are
not eligible for Shukla Dhyana. ||3||  Explanation: It is said that even if
someone pierces, cuts, kills, or burns the body of a practitioner of Shukla
Dhyana, they will still observe it like a distant spectator. They will not be
impatient with the suffering caused by rain, wind, cold, heat, etc. When the
soul becomes absorbed in Shukla Dhyana, it does not see anything with its eyes,
hear anything with its ears, and does not experience any sensory knowledge like
a stone statue. Thus, only those who can maintain stability in their meditation
are eligible for Shukla Dhyana, not those with low sattva. Here, there is a
doubt: It is said that only those with the first Samhanana are eligible for
Shukla Dhyana. In this difficult time, there are only those with the last Sewart
Samhanana. In this situation, what is the need to preach Shukla Dhyana now?
||3||  We will address this question here: ||896||  We say that the
uninterrupted tradition (Anvashchhitta Amnaya) has come to this point. Even
though it is very difficult for modern practitioners to do Shukla Dhyana
according to the scriptures, we are describing its nature so that the tradition
does not break. ||4||  Meaning: Even though it is very difficult for modern
practitioners to do Shukla Dhyana according to the scriptures, we are describing
its nature so that the uninterrupted tradition (Anvashchhitta Amnaya) does not
break. ||4||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 || OM arhate namaH  /  /  11. ekAdazama prakAza aba dharmadhyAna kA upasaMhAra
karake zukladhyAna kA svarUpa batAte haiN|  / 893 /
svargApavargaheturdharmadhyAnamiti kIrtitaM tAvat  /  apavargakanidAnaM,
zuklamataH kIrtyate dhyAnam  // 1 //  artha :- svarga ke kAraNabhUta aura
paraMparA se mokSa ke kAraNabhUta dharmadhyAna kA varNana kara cuke| aba mokSa
ke ekamAtra kAraNabhUta zukladhyAna ke svarUpa kA varNana karate haiM  // 1 //
vyAkhyA :- zukladhyAna ke cAra bheda haiN| zukladhyAna ke aMtima do bhedoM kI
apekSA se yaha mokSa kA asAdhAraNa kAraNa hai aura prathama do bhedoM kI apekSA
se yaha anuttara vimAna meM le jAne kA kAraNabhUta hai| kahA hai ki 'zubha
Astrava, saMvara, nirjarA, vipula devasukha Adi ko uttama dharmadhyAna kA
zubhAnubaMdhI phala samajhanA caahie| zukladhyAna ke prathama do bhedoM kA phala
apUrva teja-kAMti, apUrva sukhAnubhava, tathA anuttaradevatva kA sukha bhoganA
hai, aura aMtima do bhedoM kA phala nirvANa-mokSa hotA hai'  /  / 1 /  /  aba
zukladhyAna ke adhikArI kA nirUpaNa karate haiN1894| idamAdimasaMhananA evAlaM
pUrvavedinaH krtum| sthiratAM na yAti cittaM kathamapi yatsvalpa-sattvAnAm  /  /
2 /  /  artha :- vajraRSabhanArAca (prathama) saMhanana vAle aura
pUrvazrutadhArI muni hI zukladhyAna karane meM samartha ho sakate haiN| inase
rahita alpasattva vAle sAdhaka ke citta meM kisI bhI taraha zukladhyAna kI
sthiratA prApta nahIM hotI  /  / 2 /  /  _ vyAkhyA :- pahale racita hone se
pUrva kahalAtA hai, usako dhAraNa karane vAle yA jAnane vAle pUrvavedI kahalAte
haiN| yaha vacana prAyika samajhanA, kyoMki mASatuSa, marudevI Adi pUrvadhara na
hone para bhI, unake dhyAna ko zukladhyAna mAnA hai, saMghayaNa Adi se dhyAna
meM cirasthiratA raha sakatI hai, isalie ise mukhyahetu kahA hai  /  / 2 /  /
isI bAta kA vicAra karake kahate hai|895| dhatte na khalu svAsthya, vyAkulitaM
tanumatAM mano viSayaiH  /  zukladhyAne tasmAd,
naastydhikaaro'lpsaaraannaam||3|| artha :- indriya-viSayoM se Akula-vyAkula bane
hue zarIradhAriyoM kA mana svastha; zAMta evaM sthira nahIM ho sktaa| isI kAraNa
alpasattva vAle jIva zukladhyAna ke adhikArI nahIM ho sakate  /  / 3 /  /
vyAkhyA :- kahate haiM, zukladhyAnI sAdhaka ke zarIra ko koI kisI zastra se
chedana-bhedana kare, mAre, jalA de; phira | bhI vaha dUra khar3e hue prekSaka
kI taraha dekhA karatA hai, tathA varSA, vAyu, ThaMDa, garmI Adi duHkhoM se vaha
adhIra nahIM hotA, zukladhyAna meM jaba AtmA tanmaya bana jAtA hai, taba A~khoM
se kucha bhI nahIM dekhatA hai, kAnoM se kucha bhI sunatA nahIM hai; tathA
pASANa kI mUrti ke samAna indriya-saMbaMdhI koI bhI jJAna vaha nahIM krtaa| isa
prakAra jo apane dhyAna meM sthiratA rakhatA hai, vahI zukladhyAna kA adhikArI
ho sakatA hai; alpasattva vAlA nahIM ho sktaa| yahA~ zaMkA karate haiM ki
prathama |saMhanana vAle hI zukladhyAna ke adhikArI ho sakate haiM, aisA kahA
hai, to isa duHSamakAla meM to aMtima sevArta-saMhanana vAle puruSa haiM; aisI
sthiti meM zukladhyAna ke upadeza dene kI isa samaya kyA AvazyakatA hai?  /  / 3
/  /  - isa prazna kA yahA~ samAdhAna karate haiN|896| anavacchittyAmnAyaH
samAgato'syeti kIrtyate'smAbhiH  /  duSkaramapyAdhunikaiH zukladhyAnaM
ythaashaastrm||4|| artha :- yadyapi zAstrAnusAra vartamAnakAla ke sAdhakoM ke
lie zukladhyAna karanA atiduSkara hai, phira bhI zukladhyAna ke saMbaMdha meM
anavacchinna AmnAya-(paraMparA) calI A rahI hai, vaha TUTa na jAya, isalie usakA
svarUpa batA rahe haiM  // 4 //  445

Page #467 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Nature of Shukla Dhyana  The eleventh chapter of Yoga Shastra, verses 5
to 7, describe the different types of Shukla Dhyana. 897. There are four types
of Shukla Dhyana: 1.  Pruthaktva Vitarka Savichara, 2. Ekatva Vitarka Avichara,
3. Sukshma Kriya Pratipati, and 4. Vyuparat Kriya Nivritti. ||5||  **Meaning:**
One should know the four types of Shukla Dhyana: 1.  Thinking about different
subjects, 2. Thinking about oneness, 3.  Focusing on subtle actions, and 4.
Stopping gross actions. ||5||  **Explanation:** Here, "Nanaatva" means thinking
about various subjects. What subjects? Vitarka, meaning thinking about the
twelve angas and fourteen purvas. "Vichara" means moving from one state to
another, specifically in four ways: movement of atoms, yanas, etc., sounds, and
the three yogas (mind, speech, and body).  ||5||  Now, we will explain the first
type in detail. 898.  Thinking about the different aspects of a substance, such
as its creation, destruction, and state, according to various nayas, based on
previous scriptures. This thinking is connected to one of the three yogas: artha
(meaning), vyanjana (sound), or yoga (mind, speech, and body). ||6||
**Explanation:** This is the first type of Shukla Dhyana. For example, while
thinking about a substance, one may think about its sound, then return to
thinking about the substance, then move from mental yoga to physical yoga or
verbal yoga, and vice versa. This type of thinking is the first type of Shukla
Dhyana. It is said that "thinking about the different aspects of a substance,
such as its creation, state, and destruction, according to various nayas, based
on previous scriptures, is Vitarka. And Vichara means moving from one yoga to
another, whether it be substance, sound, or one of the three yogas. This is how
a Vitraag Muni experiences the first type of Shukla Dhyana, known as Pruthaktva
Vitarka Savichara." The question arises: how can the mind remain stable when
moving between substance, sound, and the three yogas? And how can this be called
Dhyana without mental stability? The answer is: "There is no objection to
accepting this as Dhyana because the mind is stable on the subject of the
substance." ||6||  Now, we will explain the second type of Shukla Dhyana. 899.
Thinking about a single aspect, according to previous scriptures. This means
that the object of meditation is a single aspect, such as an atom, a jiva, a
guna like knowledge, or creation, or a single sound, meaning, or one of the
three yogas. However, it is not separate. Since there is only one object of
meditation, there is no transition. Therefore, this is the second type of Shukla
Dhyana, known as Ekatva Vitarka Avichara. ||7||  **Explanation:** It is said
that this Dhyana is like a lamp placed in a vacuum, steady and unwavering. Since
there is only one object of meditation, there is no transition to other sounds,
meanings, aspects, or yogas of the same category. However, the meditation is on
a single aspect, such as creation, state, or destruction. There is no transition
to other objects of meditation. The meditation is on a single sound, meaning,
aspect, or yoga, based on previous scriptures. However, this Dhyana is free from
doubt and unwavering. This Dhyana lasts until the end of the twelfth guna
sthana. It is characterized by Yathakyata Charitra. ||7||  Now, we will explain
the third type of Shukla Dhyana.  446

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zukladhyAna kA svarUpa yogazAstra ekAdazama prakAza zloka 5 se 7 zukladhyAna ke
bheda batAte haiN|897| jJeyaM nAnAttvazrutavicAramaikyaM zrutAvicAraM ca  /
sUkSmakriyamutsannakriyamiti bhedaizcaturdhA tat  /  / 5 /  /  artha :-
zukladhyAna ke cAra bheda jAnane cAhie-1, pRthaktva vitarkasavicAra, 2. ekatva-
vitarka-avicAra, 3. sUkSmakriyApratipAti aura 4. vyuparatakriyA nivRtti  /  / 5
/  /  vyAkhyA :- yahA~ nAnAtva kA artha vividha viSayoM kA vicAra karanA hai|
kinakA? vitarka arthAt zruta-dvAdazAMgIcaudaha pUrva kA vicAra krnaa| vicAra kA
artha hai-vizeSa rUpa meM cAra arthAt calanA-eka sthiti meM se dUsarI sthiti meM
gati krnaa| tAtparya yaha hai ki paramANu, yaNuka Adi padArtha, vyajana-zabda,
yoga=mana vacana kAyA kI pravRtti meM, |saMkrAMti karanA vicAra hai| eka se yAni
eka vicAra se dUsare meM jAnA aura nikalanA  /  / 5 /  /  aba prathama bheda kI
vizeSa vyAkhyA karate hai898|ektr paryAyANAM vividhanayAnusaraNaM zrutAd drvye|
artha-vyaJjana-yogAntareSu saGkramaNayuktamAdyaM tat  // 6 //  artha :- eka
paramANu Adi kisI dravya ke utpAda, vilaya, sthiti, mUrtatva, amUrtatva Adi
paryAyoM kA, dravyArthika paryAyArthika Adi vividha nayoM ke anusAra pUrvagata-
zrutAnusAra ciMtana krnaa| tathA vaha ciMtana artha, vyaMjana (zabda) evaM mana-
vacana-kAyA ke yoga meM se kisI eka yoga meM saMkramaNa se yukta hotA hai  /  /
6 /  /  vyAkhyA :- yahI zukladhyAna kA prathama bheda hai| jaise ki - eka
padArtha kA ciMtana karate hue usake zabda kA ciMtana karanA, zabda-ciMtana se
dravya para AnA, manoyoga se kAyayoga meM yA vacanayoga meM AnA, isI taraha kAyA
ke yoga se manoyoga yA vacanayoga meM saMkramaNa karanA, isa prakAra kA ciMtana
zukladhyAna ke prathama bheda meM hotA hai| kahA hai-'pUrvagatazrutAnusAra eka
dravya meM utpAda-sthiti-vilaya Adi paryAyoM kA vividha nayAnusAra ciMtana
karanA vitarka hai aura vicAra kA artha hai-padArtha, zabda yA tIna yogoM meM se
kisI eka yoga se kisI dUsare yoga meM praveza karanA aura nikalanA; isa tarIke
se usakA vicAra krnaa| isa prakAra vItarAga muni ko pRthaktva-vitarka-savicAra
zukladhyAna hotA hai| yahA~ prazna hotA hai ki padArtha, zabda yA tInoM yogoM
meM saMkramaNa hone para mana kI sthiratA kaise raha sakatI hai? aura mana kI
sthiratA ke binA ise dhyAna kaise kaha sakate haiM? isakA uttara dete haiM ki
'eka dravya-viSayaka mana kI sthiratA hone se dhyAnatva kA svIkAra karane meM
Apatti nahIM hai  /  / 6 /  /  _ aba zukladhyAna kA dUsare bheda kA svarUpa
batAte haiN|899| evaM zrutAnusArAd ekatvavitarkamekaparyAye  /  artha-vyaJjana-
yogAntareSvasaGkramaNamanyattu  // 7 //  artha :- zukladhyAna ke dvitIya bheda
meM pUrvazrutAnusAra koI bhI eka hI paryAya dhyeya hotA hai| arthAt paramANu,
jIva, jJAnAdi guNa, utpAda Adi koI eka paryAya, zabda yA artha, tIna yogoM meM
se koI eka yoga dhyeya rUpa meM hotA hai; kintu alaga-alaga nahIM hotaa| eka hI
dhyeya hone se isameM saMkramaNa nahIM hotA hai; isalie yaha 'ekatva-vitarka-
avicAra' nAmaka dUsarA zukladhyAna hai  // 7 //  vyAkhyA :- kahA hai-yaha dhyAna
nirvAtasthAna meM bhalIbhAMti rakhe hue dIpaka ke samAna niSkaMpa hotA hai| isa
dhyAna | meM eka hI dhyeya hone se apanI hI jAti ke dUsare zabda, artha, paryAya
yA anya yoga kA dhyeya meM saMkramaNa nahIM hotA hai| paraMtu utpAda, sthiti,
vinAza Adi meM se kisI eka hI paryAya meM dhyAna hotA hai| dhyeyAMtara meM
saMkramaNa nahIM hotA hai| pUrvagatazruta kA AlaMbana lekara kisI eka hI zabda,
artha, paryAya yA yoga kA dhyAna hotA hai| paraMtu yaha dhyAna | nirvikalpaka-
nizcala hotA hai| yaha dhyAna bArahaveM guNasthAnaka ke aMta taka rahatA hai|
isameM yathAkhyAtacAritra hotA hai||7|| _aba zukladhyAna ke tIsare bheda kA
svarUpa batAte haiM 446

Page #468 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Nature of Shukla Dhyana  **Yoga Shastra, Eleventh Prakash, Verses 8-12**
**900.** At the time of attaining Nirvana, the Kevali (omniscient) stops the
gross yogas of mind, speech, and body. Only the subtle actions like breathing
remain. This subtle action never becomes gross; therefore, it is called
"Sukhsma-Kriya-A-Pratipati" or Shukla Dhyana. **8.**  **Meaning:** When the time
of liberation is very near, the Kevali Bhagwan stops the gross yogas of mind,
speech, and body; only the subtle actions like breathing remain. In this, the
subtle action never becomes gross; therefore, it is called "Sukhsma-Kriya-A-
Pratipati" or Shukla Dhyana. **8.**  In this Dhyana, the soul becomes devoid of
Leshya and Yoga, and the soul separates from the body's tendencies. Now, the
fourth type called "Vyuparat Kriya Nivarti" is explained. **901.**  **901.** The
Kevali Bhagwan, who is as steady as Mount Meru, when in the state of
Shaileshikarana, experiences the fourth Shukla Dhyana called "Utsanna Kriya
A-Pratipati." This is also called "Vyuparat Kriya A-Nivriti." **9.**
**Meaning:** When the Kevali Bhagwan, who is as steady as Mount Meru, is in the
state of Shaileshikarana, the fourth Shukla Dhyana called "Utsanna Kriya
A-Pratipati" occurs. This is also called "Vyuparat Kriya A-Nivriti." **9.**
Now, the amount of Yoga in these four types is explained. **902.**  **902.** The
first Shukla Dhyana is for the monks who have one Yoga or all three Yogas. The
second Dhyana is for the monks who have one Yoga. The third Dhyana is for the
Kevalis who have subtle body Yoga, and the fourth Dhyana is only for the A-Yogi
Kevalis. **10.**  **Meaning:** The first Shukla Dhyana, called "Prithaktva-
Vitarka-Savichara," is for the monks who have studied the Bhaangik Shruta and
have one or all three Yogas of mind, speech, and body. The second Dhyana, called
"Ekatva-Vitarka-A-Vichara," is for the monks who have one Yoga of mind, speech,
or body. This Yoga lacks transition (entry and exit). The third Dhyana, called
"Sukhsma Kriya A-Nivriti," involves subtle body Yoga, but not the other Yogas of
speech and mind. The fourth Dhyana, called "Vyutsanna Kriya A-Pratipati," occurs
in the state of Shaileshikarana for the A-Yogi Kevali who is devoid of Yoga.
**10.**  **Explanation:** There are three types of Yoga based on the divisions
of mind, speech, and body. In this, the living being with Audarik, Vaikriya,
Aharak, Taijas, and Karman bodies has a specific type of Kaya Yoga called
"Veerya Parinati-Vishesh." The living being's actions through speech, called
"Vachan Yoga," are aided by the Pudgal-Dravya-Samuh (group of matter) acquired
through the actions of the Audarik, Vaikriya, and Aharak bodies. Similarly, the
living being's actions through mind, called "Mano Yoga," are aided by the Dravya
(matter) of the Manovargna acquired through the actions of the Audarik,
Vaikriya, and Aharak bodies.  Here, the question arises: "In the last two types
of Shukla Dhyana, there is no mind. Since the Kevali Bhagwan is devoid of Mano
Yoga, and Dhyana is the stability of the mind, how can it be called Dhyana?"
**10.**  This is explained as follows: **903.**  **903.** Just as the stability
of the mind of a pseudo-stable seeker is called Dhyana by the knowledgeable,
similarly, the stability of the body of the Kevali is also called Dhyana. Just
as there is Mano Yoga, similarly, Kaya (body) is also a Yoga. The meaning of
Kaya Yoga is also implied by the word "Dhyana." **11.**  **Meaning:** Just as
the knowledgeable call the stability of the mind of a pseudo-stable seeker as
Dhyana, similarly, they also call the stability of the body of the Kevali as
Dhyana. Just as there is Mano Yoga, similarly, Kaya (body) is also a Yoga. The
meaning of Kaya Yoga is also implied by the word "Dhyana." **11.**  Here,
another question arises: "In the fourth Shukla Dhyana, Kaya Yoga is stopped, so
there is no Kaya Yoga in it. Then, how can it be called Dhyana?" This is
answered as follows: **904.**  **904.** Due to previous practice, the use of the
living being, or the destruction of Karma, or due to the multiplicity of the
meaning of the word, or due to the words of the Jina, even the A-Yogi can
experience Dhyana. **12.**  **Meaning:** Due to previous practice, the use of
the living being, or the destruction of Karma, or due to the multiplicity of the
meaning of the word, or due to the words of the Jina, even the A-Yogi can
experience Dhyana. **12.**  **Explanation:** Just as the potter's wheel
continues to spin due to previous practice even in the absence of the stick and
other tools, similarly, even after the cessation of all Yogas of mind, speech,
and body, the A-Yogi experiences Dhyana due to previous practice. Although they
do not have these Yogas in terms of matter, they still have a good state of mind
in the form of the use of the living being. Therefore, it is called the Dhyana
of the Yogis. Or, the result of the Dhyana action is the destruction of Karma,
and the cause of this is Dhyana. Just as a boy who does not have a son still
behaves like a son, similarly, even though the A-Yogi does not have the Yogas of
mind, speech, and body, they still experience Dhyana due to previous practice.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zukladhyAna kA svarUpa yogazAstra ekAdazama prakAza zloka 8 se 12 ||900 /
nirvANagamanasamaye, kevalino daraniruddhayogasya  /  sUkSmakriyApratipAti,
tRtIyaM kIrtitaM zuklam  // 8 //  artha :- mokSa jAne kA samaya atyaMta nikaTa A
jAne para kevalI bhagavAn mana, vacana, aura kAyA ke sthUlayogoM kA nirodha kara
lete haiM; kevala zvAsocchvAsa Adi kI sUkSmakriyA rahatI hai| isameM sUkSmakriyA
miTakara kabhI sthUla nahIM hotI; isalie isakA nAma 'sUkSma-kriyA-apratipAti'
zukladhyAna kahalAtA hai||8|| isa dhyAna meM AtmA lezyA aura yoga se rahita bana
jAtA hai, AtmA zarIra-pravRtti se alaga ho jAtA hai| aba vyuparatakriyAnivarti
nAma kA cauthA bheda batAte haiN|901| kevalinaH zailezIgatasya
zailavadakampanIyasya  /  utsannakriyamapratipAti, turIyaM paramazuklam  // 9 //
artha :- meruparvata ke samAna nizcala kevalI bhagavAn jaba zailezIkaraNa meM
rahate haiM, taba utpannakriyA'pratipAti nAmaka cauthA zukladhyAna hotA hai, isI
kA dUsarA nAma vyuparatakriyA-anivRtti hai  // 9 //  aba ina cAroM bhedoM meM
yoga kI mAtrA batAte haiN|902| eka-triyogabhAjAmAdyaM, syAdaparamekayogAnAm  /
tanuyoginAM tRtIyaM, niryogANAM caturthaM tu  // 10 //  artha :- prathama
zukladhyAna eka yoga yA tInoM yoga vAle muniyoM ko hotA hai, dUsarA dhyAna eka
yoga vAle ko hotA hai, tIsarA sUkSmakAyayoga vAle kevaliyoM ko aura cauthA ayogI
kevaliyoM ko hI hotA hai|||10|| vyAkhyA :- pahalA pRthaktva-vitarka-savicAra
nAmaka zukladhyAna bhAMgika zruta par3he hue aura mana Adi eka yoga athavA tInoM
yoga vAle muniyoM ko hotA hai| dUsarA ekatva-vitarka-avicAra dhyAna mana Adi
yogoM meM se kisI bhI eka yoga vAle muni ko hotA hai, isa yoga meM saMkramaNa
(praveza-niSkramaNa) kA abhAva hotA hai| tIsare sUkSmakriyA-anivRtti dhyAna meM
sUkSmakAyA kA yoga hotA hai, paraMtu zeSa vacanayoga aura manoyoga nahIM hotA
hai| aura cauthA vyutsannakriyA'pratipAti dhyAna yoga-rahita ayogI kevalI ko
zailezIkaraNa avasthA meM hotA hai| mana, vacana, kAyA ke bheda se yoga tIna
prakAra kA hotA hai| usameM audArika, vaikriya, AhAraka, taijasa aura kArmaNa
zarIra vAle jIva ko vIrya pariNati-vizeSa kAyayoga hotA hai| audArika, vaikriya,
AhAraka zarIra kI vyApAra-kriyA se grahaNa kiye huebhASAvargaNA pudgala-dravya-
samUha kI sahAyatA se jIva kA vyApAra, vacanayoga hotA hai| vahI audArika,
vaikriya aura AhAraka zarIra kI vyApArakriyA se grahaNa kiye hue manovargaNA ke
dravyoM kI madada se jIva kA vyApAra, manoyoga hotA hai|' yahA~ prazna hotA hai
ki 'zukladhyAna ke aMtima do bhedoM meM mana nahIM hotA hai| kyoMki kevalI
bhagavAn manoyogarahita hote haiM, aura dhyAna to mana kI sthiratA se hotA hai,
to ise dhyAna kaise kahA jA sakatA hai?  // 10 /  /  isakA samAdhAna karate
haiN|903| chadmasthitasya yadvanmanaH sthiraM dhyAnamucyate tajjJaiH
|nishclmnggN tadvat kevalinAM kIrtitaM dhyAnam  // 11 //  artha :- jJAniyoM ne
jaise chadmastha sAdhaka ke mana kI sthiratA ko dhyAna kahA hai, usI prakAra
kevaliyoM ke kAyA kI sthiratA ko bhI ve dhyAna kahate haiN| jaise manoyoga hai,
usI prakAra kAyA bhI eka yoga hai| kAyAyogatva kA artha dhyAnazabda se bhI hotA
hai  // 11 //  yahA~ phira prazna hotA hai ki 'cauthe zukladhyAna meM to
kAyayoga kA nirodha kiyA jAtA hai isalie usameM to kAyayoga bhI nahIM hotA to
phira dhyAnazabda se usakA nirdeza kaise kara sakate haiM? isakA uttara dete
haiN|904| pUrvAbhyAsAt, jIvopayogataH karmajaraNahetorvA  /  zabdArthabahutvAdvA
jinavacanAdvA'pyayogino dhyaanm||12|| artha :- pUrvakAlika abhyAsa se jIva ke
upayoga se karmanirjarA hotI hai, isa kAraNa se; athavA zabdArtha kI bahulatA yA
zrI jinezvara ke vacana se ise ayogiyoM kA dhyAna kaha sakate haiM  // 12 //
vyAkhyA : jaise kuMbhAra kA cAka DaMDe Adi ke abhAva meM bhI pUrvAbhyAsa se
ghUmatA rahatA hai, usI prakAra mana Adi samasta yogoM ke baMda hone para bhI
ayogiyoM ke pUrva-abhyAsa se dhyAna hotA hai| yadyapi dravya se unake yoga nahIM
hote haiM, phira bhI jIva ke upayoga rUpa bhAvamana kA sadbhAva hotA hai, ataH
ise yogiyoM kA dhyAna kahA hai athavA dhyAnakArya kA phala karma-nirjarA hai
aura usakA hetu dhyAna hai| jaise ki putra na hone para bhI jo lar3akA putra ke
yogya vyavahAra karatA 447

Page #469 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Nature of Shukla Dhyana  The eleventh chapter of Yoga Shastra, verses 13
to 21, describes the nature of Shukla Dhyana. It is said to be the son of Yoga
Shastra, as it leads to the eradication of Bhavopagrahi Karmas, which remain
until the end of Bhava (existence).   Just as the word 'Hari' has multiple
meanings, like Sun, Monkey, Horse, Lion, Indra, Krishna, etc., the word 'Dhyana'
also has various meanings. It is used to denote contemplation, thought, the
cessation of Kaya Yoga, and even the state of being devoid of Yoga. According to
grammarians and lexicographers, the combination of Nipata and Upasarga with a
root verb can lead to multiple meanings. This is evident in this text.
Furthermore, the Jinagam also refers to the state of A-yogi, Kevali, and Avastha
as Dhyana. It is stated that "Agam-Yukti, with complete faith, is the proof for
accepting the existence of A-ti-indriya substances."  Having said this, the four
types of Shukla Dhyana are explained in detail:  **13.** The first two types of
Shukla Dhyana are primarily related to the meaning of previously heard
scriptures, and are practiced by Purva-Dharas and Chhadma-sth-Yogis, who rely on
Shruta-gyan (scriptural knowledge). It is important to note that even A-purva-
Dharas like Mashatush Muni and Marudevi are considered Shukla Dhyanis.  **14.**
The last two types of Shukla Dhyana are devoid of any reliance on external
objects. They are practiced by Yogis who have eradicated all their Doshas
(faults) and possess pure Kevala-gyan (omniscience) and Kevala-darshan
(omniscient vision).  **15-20.** In the first type of Shukla Dhyana, one should
start by grasping a particular object from Shruta-gyan, then move on to
contemplating its meaning, and then to contemplating the word associated with
it. Similarly, one should move from one Yoga to another. The Dhyani (meditator)
should transition between meaning, word, and Yoga with great speed, and return
to the starting point with the same speed. When the Yogi becomes adept at
practicing this intricate process, the qualities of the Atma (soul) manifest,
making him eligible for achieving oneness with Shukla Dhyana. When a Yogi, who
has mastered one Yoga, meditates on one particular aspect of the cycle of
creation, sustenance, and destruction, it is called Ekattva-Avichaar Shukla
Dhyana. Just as a Mantrik (one who knows mantras) can use the power of mantras
to concentrate the poison present in the entire body at one point, similarly, a
Yogi can use the power of Dhyana to focus the mind, which is influenced by the
three worlds, on a single atom. Just as a fire with little fuel gets
extinguished when the fuel is removed or taken away, similarly, when the mind is
deprived of its fuel, which is the object of contemplation, it becomes calm.
**21.** The fruit of the second type of Dhyana is described as follows: When the
fire of Dhyana burns intensely, all the Ghatikarma (destructive karmas) of the
Yogi are burnt to ashes in an instant.  **Note:** The names of the Ghatikarma
are mentioned in the text.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zukladhyAna kA svarUpa yogazAstra ekAdazama prakAza zloka 13 se 21 hai, vaha
putra kahalAtA hai| bhava ke aMta taka rahane vAle bhavopagrAhI karmoM kI
nirjarA isI dhyAna se hotI hai| athavA eka zabda ke aneka artha hote haiM, jaise
ki 'hari' zabda ke aneka artha hote haiN| hari zabda ke sUrya, baMdara, ghor3A,
siMha, iMdra, kRSNa Adi aneka artha haiN| isI prakAra dhyAna zabda ke bhI aneka
artha hote haiN| jaise ki 'dhyai ciMtAyAm' 'dhyaikAyayoganirodhe' 'dhyai
ayogitve'pi' arthAt dhyai dhAtu ciMtana meM, vicAra yA dhyAna meM, kAyayoga ke
nirodha artha meM aura ayogitva artha meM bhI kahA gayA hai| vyAkaraNakAroM aura
koSakAroM ke matAnusAra nipAta tathA upasarga ke yoga se dhAtu ke aneka artha
hote haiN| isakA udAharaNa yahI pATha hai| athavA jinAgama meM bhI ayogI-kevalI-
avasthA ko bhI dhyAna kahA hai| kahA bhI hai ki 'Agama-yukti saMpUrNa zraddhA se
atIndriya padArthoM kI sattA svIkAra karane ke lie pramANabhUta hai  /  / 1:
itanA kahane ke bAda bhI zukladhyAna ke cAra bhedoM ko vizeSa rUpa se samajhAte
haiN|905| Adye zrutAvalambana-pUrve pUrvazrutArtha-sambandhAt  /  pUrvadharANAM
chadmasthayoginAM prAyazo dhyAne  // 13 //  artha :- zukladhyAna ke cAra bhedoM
meM se prathama ke do dhyAna pUrvadharoM evaM chadmasthayogiyoM ko zrutajJAna ke
avalambana se prAyaH pUrva zruta ke artha se saMbaMdhita hote haiN| prAyazaH
kahane kA Azaya yaha hai ki apUrvadhara mASatuSa muni aura marudevI bhI
zukladhyAniyoM meM mAne jAte haiM  // 13 /  /  tthaa|906| sakalAlambana-viraha-
prathite dve tvantime samuddiSTe  /  nirmala-kevaladRSTi-jJAnAnAM kSINadoSANAm
// 14 //  artha :- zukladhyAna ke aMtima do dhyAna samasta Alambana se rahita
hote haiM; ve samasta doSoM kA kSaya karane vAle . nirmala kevalajJAna aura
kevaladarzana vAle yogiyoM ko hote haiM  // 14 //   / 907 /  tatra zrutAd
gRhItvaikam, arthamarthAd vrajecchabdam  /  zabdAt punarapyarthaM yogAd
yogAntaraM ca sudhIH  // 15 //   / 908 /  saGkrAmatyavilambitam, arthaprabhRtiSu
yathA kila dhyAnI  /  vyAvartate svayamasau, punarapi tena prkaarenn||16||  /
909 /  iti nAnAtve nizitAbhyAsaH saJjAyate yadA yogI  /  AvirbhUtAtmaguNaH,
tadaikatAyA bhaved yogyaH  // 17 //   / 910 /  utpAda-sthiti-bhaGgAdi-paryAyANAM
yadekayogaH san  /  dhyAyati paryAyamekaM, tat syaadektvmvicaarm||18||  / 911 /
trijagadviSayaM dhyAnAdaNusaMsthaM dhArayet krameNa manaH  /  viSamiva
sarvAGgagataM, mantrabalAnmAntriko daMze  // 19 //   / 912 /
apasAritandhanabharaH zeSaH stokendhano'nalo jvalitaH  /  tasmAdapanIto vA
nirvAti yathA manastadvat  // 20 //  artha :- usa zukladhyAna ke prathama bheda
meM zrutajJAna meM se kisI eka padArtha ko grahaNa karake usake vicAra meM se
zabda kA vicAra karanA, aura zabda se padArtha ke vicAra meM AnA caahie| isI
prakAra eka yoga se dUsare yoga meM AnA-jAnA hotA hai| dhyAnI puruSa jisa
zIghratA se artha, zabda aura yoga meM saMkramaNa karatA hai usI zIghratA se
usameM se vApisa lauTa AtA hai| isa prakAra jaba yogI aneka prakAra ke
tIkSNa-(sUkSmaviSayaka) abhyAsa vAlA ho jAtA hai, taba apane meM AtmaguNa
prakaTa karake zukladhyAna se ekatva ke yogya hotA hai| phira eka yogavAlA
banakara padArthoM kI utpatti, sthiti aura nAza Adi paryAyoM meM se kisI eka
paryAya kA dhyAna karatA hai, taba ekatva, avicAra zukla dhyAna kahalAtA hai|
jaise maMtra jAnane vAlA maMtra ke bala se sampUrNa zarIra meM vyApta viSa ko
eka sthAna meM lAkara keMdrita kara letA hai, usI prakAra yogI dhyAna ke bala se
trijagataviSayaka mana ko eka paramANu para keMdrita kara letA hai| jalatI huI
agni meM se IMdhana ko khIMca lene para yA bilakula haTA dene para thor3e
IMdhana vAlI agni bujha jAtI hai, isI prakAra jaba mana ko bhI viSaya-rUpI
iMdhana nahIM milatA, taba vaha apane Apa hI zAMta ho jAtA hai||15-20|| aba
dUsare dhyAna kA phala kahate haiN|913|jvlti tatazca dhyAna-jvalane
bhRzamujjvale yatIndrasya  /  nikhilAni vilIyante kSaNamAtrAd
ghaatikrmaanni||21|| artha :- usake bAda jaba dhyAna rUpI agni atyaMta pracaNDa
rUpa se jalakara ujjvala ho jAtI hai, taba usameM yogIndra ke samagra ghAtikarma
kSaNabhara meM bhasma ho jAte haiM  /  / 21 /  /  ghAtikoM ke nAma kahate haiM
448

Page #470 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Nature of Shukla Dhyana  **Yoga Shastra, Eleventh Prakash, Verses 22-37**
**914.** The knowledge-obscuring, sight-obscuring, and delusion-causing karmas,
along with the hindering karmas, are all destroyed simultaneously. **22.**
**Meaning:** The effect of Shukla Dhyana is the simultaneous destruction of the
four karmas: knowledge-obscuring, sight-obscuring, delusion-causing, and
hindering karmas. **22.**  **915.** This is called the fruit of the destruction
of the destructive karmas. **915.**  **23.** Having attained the rare Kevala
Jnana and Kevala Darshan, the yogi knows and sees the entire Lok and Alok as it
is. **23.**  **Meaning:** After the destruction of the destructive karmas, the
yogi, through Dhyana, attains the rare Kevala Jnana and Kevala Darshan, and thus
knows and sees the entire Lok and Alok in their true form. **23.**  **916.**
After the emergence of Kevala Jnana, the Tirthankara, the Supreme Being, speaks
through the extraordinary twenty-four verses. **916.**  **24.** Then that
Bhagavan, the omniscient, the all-seeing, the possessor of infinite qualities,
wanders the earth, worshipped by gods, demons, humans, and serpents. **24.**
**917.** With the radiance of his speech, he awakens the lotus of the Bhavyas
(those destined for liberation). He instantly eradicates the false nature of
both substance and state. **25.**  **918.** Just by uttering his name, the
suffering born from the endless cycle of existence, which has been going on
since time immemorial, is completely destroyed for all Bhavyas. **26.**
**919.** Even crores of gods, humans, and others who come to worship him, are
contained within a space of just one yojana due to his influence. **27.**
**920.** Gods, humans, animals, and others understand his words, which convey
the teachings of Dharma, in their own respective languages. **28.**  **921.**
Hundreds of severe diseases are pacified by his influence, just as the heat of
the earth is calmed by the rising moon. **29.**  **922.** Epidemics, famine,
excessive rain, drought, war, and enmity do not exist where he resides, just as
darkness disappears with the thousand rays of the sun. **30.**  **Meaning:**
After attaining Kevala Jnana, the Arhant Bhagavan, the supreme among gods,
omniscient, all-seeing, and a repository of infinite qualities, wanders the
earth, worshipped by numerous gods, demons, serpent-kings, and others. While
wandering, Bhagavan, through his speech, which is like the moonlight, awakens
the Bhavyas, who are like blooming lotuses. He instantly eradicates the darkness
of their false nature, both in substance and state. Just by uttering his name,
the suffering of all Bhavyas, born from the endless cycle of existence since
time immemorial, is destroyed forever. And those who come to worship him, crores
of gods, humans, and animals, are contained within a space of just one yojana
due to his influence. They understand his words, which convey the teachings of
Dharma, in their own respective languages. They understand it as if he is
speaking in their own language. Wherever Bhagavan wanders, in that area, for
hundreds of yojanas in all directions, his influence pacifies all major
diseases, just as the heat of the earth is calmed by the rising moon. Just as
darkness disappears with the rising sun, similarly, wherever Bhagavan resides,
there are no epidemics, famine, excessive rain, drought, war, or enmity.
**24-30.**  **923.** Around him, a radiant sphere, like the sun, appears,
illuminating all directions. **31.**  **924.** The gods, who are devoted to the
auspicious, cause the blooming lotuses to dance, swaying them with their hands.
**32.**  **925.** The wind blows favorably, birds circle him, trees bow down,
and even thorns turn their heads downwards. **33.**  **926.** The Ashoka tree,
with its red leaves and fragrant flowers, seems to be praising him with the
buzzing of bees, like a natural hymn. **34.**  **927.** All six seasons
simultaneously attend upon him, as if to perform penance, with the help of
Cupid. **35.**  **928.** A thunderous drum resounds in the sky before him,
announcing, as it were, the auspicious journey to Nirvana. **36.**  **929.** All
five senses become instantly delightful in his presence. Who does not attain the
highest excellence of qualities, when they are in the presence of such great
beings? **37.**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zukladhyAna kA svarUpa yogazAstra ekAdazama prakAza zloka 22 se 37  / 914 /
jJAnAvaraNIyaM dRSTyAvaraNIyaM ca mohanIyaM ca  /  vilayaM prayAnti sahasA,
sahAntarAyeNa karmANi  // 22 //  artha :- zukladhyAna ke prabhAva se
aMtarAyakarma ke sahita jJAnAvaraNIya, darzanAvaraNIya aura mohanIya yaha cAroM
karma eka sAtha vinaSTa ho jAte haiM  /  / 22 /  /  ghAtikarma ke kSaya kA phala
kahate haiN||915| samprApya kevalajJAna-darzane durlabhe tato yogI  /  jAnAti
pazyati tathA lokAlokaM yathAvastham  /  / 23 /  /  artha :- ghAtikarmoM kA
kSaya hone para dhyAnAMtara yogI durlabha kevalajJAna aura kevala darzana prApta
karake yathAvasthita rUpa meM samasta loka aura aloka ko jAnane tathA dekhane
lagatA hai  // 23 //  kevalajJAna utpanna hone ke bAda tIrthaMkara paramAtmA ke
atizaya cauvIsa zlokoM ke dvArA kahate haiN||916| devastadA sa bhagavAn
sarvajJaH sarvadarzvanantaguNaH  /  viharatyavanIvalayaM, surAsuranaroragaiH
praNataH  // 24 //   / 917 /  vAgjyotsnayA'khilAnyapi, vibodhayati
bhavyajantukumudAni  /  unmUlayati kSaNato, mithyAtvaM drvy-bhaavgtm||25||  /
918 /  tannAmagrahamAtrAd, anAdi-saMsAra-sambhavaM duHkham  /  bhavyAtmanAmazeSa
parikSayaM yAti sahasaiva  // 26 /  /  1919 /  api koTIzatasaGkhyAH
samupAsitumAgatAH suranarAdyAH  /  kSetre yojanamAtre, mAnti tadA'sya prabhAveNa
// 27 //  1920 /  tridivaukaso manuSyAH tiryaJco'nye'pyamuSya budhyante  /
nijanijabhASAnugataM, vacana dharmAvabodhakaram  // 28 //   / 921 /
AyojanazatamugrAH rogAH zAmyanti tatprabhAveNa  /  udayini zItamarIcAviva
tAparujaH kSiteH paritaH  // 29 //  ||922 /  mArIti-durbhikSAtivRSTyanAvRSTi-
Damara-vairANi  /  na bhavantyasmin viharati, sahasrarazmau tmaaNsiiv||30||
artha :- kevalajJAna hone ke bAda sarvajJa, sarvadarzI, anaMta guNoM ke nidhAna
devAdhideva arhanta bhagavAn aneka sura, asura aura nAgakumAra Adi se vaMdanIya
hokara pRthvImaMDala para vicarate haiN| aura vicarate hue bhagavAn apanI vANI
rUpI caMdrajyotsnA (cAMdanI) dvArA bhavyajIva rUpI caMdravikAsI kamala (kumuda)
ko pratibodhita karate haiM aura unake dravya-mithyAtva aura bhAva-mithyAtva
rUpI aMdhakAra ko kSaNabhara meM samUlataH naSTa kara dete haiN| unakA nAma
uccAraNa karane mAtra se anAdikAla se saMsAra meM utpanna hone vAle bhavyajIvoM
ke samagra duHkha sadA ke lie naSTa ho jAte haiN| tathA una bhagavAn kI upAsanA
ke lie Aye hue zatakoTi deva, manuSya,aura tiryaMca Adi eka yojanamAtra kSetra-
sthAna meM hI samA jAte haiN| unake dharmabodhaka vacanoM ko deva, manuSya, pazu
tathA anya jIva apanI-apanI bhASA meM samajha lete haiN| ve aisA samajhate haiM
ki bhagavAn hamArI hI bhASA meM bola rahe haiN| bhagavAn jisa-jisa kSetra meM
vicarate haiM, usa-usa sthala se cAroM ora sau-sau yojana-pramANa kSetra meM
unake prabhAva se mahAroga vaise hI zAMta ho jAte haiM, jaise caMdra ke udaya se
garmI zAMta ho jAtI hai| jaise sUrya ke udaya hote hI aMdhakAra nahIM rahatA
hai| vaise hI bhagavAn jahA~ vicarate haiM, vahA~ mahAmArI, durbhikSa, ativRSTi,
anAvRSTi, yuddha, vaira Adi upadrava nahIM rahate  /  / 24-30 /  /  tthaa|923|
mArtaNDamaNDalazrIviDambibhAmaNDalaM vibhoH paritaH  /  AvirbhavatyanuvapuH
prakAzayat sarvato'pi dizaH  // 31 //   / 924 /  saJcArayanti
vikacAnyanupAdanyAsamAzu kamalAni  /  bhagavati viharati tasmin kalyANI-bhaktayo
devAH  // 32 //   / 925 /  anukUlo vAti marut, pradakSiNaM yAntyamuSya zakunAzca
/  taravo'pi namanti bhavantyadhomukhAH kaNTakAzca tdaa||33||  / 926 /
Araktapallavo'zokapAdapaH smerakusumagandhADhyaH  /  prakRtastutiriva
madhukaravirutairvilasatyupari tasya  // 34 //   /  / 927 /  SaDapi
samakAlamRtavo, bhagavantaM taM tadopatiSThante  /  smarasAhAyyakakaraNe,
prAyazcittaM grahItumiva  // 35 //   / 928 /  asya purastAt ninadan, vijRmbhate
dundubhirnabhasi tAram  /  kurvANo nirvANaprayANa-kalyANamiva sadyaH  // 36 //
||929 /  paJcApi cendriyArthAH, kSaNAnmanojJI bhavanti tadupAnte  /  ko vA na
guNotkarSa, savidhe mahatAmavApnoti?  // 37 //  | 449

Page #471 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Form of the White Meditation  **Yoga Shastra, Eleventh Light, Verses
30-47**  ||930. Even though their nails and hair naturally grow, they do not
grow, having seen the destruction of karma accumulated over hundreds of births,
they are afraid. ||38||  ||931. The gods pacify the dust with showers of
fragrant water, and they make the earth fragrant with showers of blooming
flowers. ||39||  ||932. The three umbrellas, purified by the devotion of the
gods, are held in a circular manner above the Lord, like the three sources of
the Ganges River. ||40||  **Meaning:** A radiant halo, surpassing even the
brilliance of the sun, appears around the body of the Tirthankara Bhagwan,
illuminating all directions. When Bhagwan walks on earth, the benevolent,
devotional gods immediately establish golden lotuses at each place where his
feet touch the ground. The wind blows favorably. Birds circle Bhagwan from the
right. Trees bend down, and the thorns on them point downwards. The fragrant
Ashok tree, adorned with red leaves and blooming flowers, seems to naturally
praise Bhagwan with the buzzing of bees, and it stands majestically, casting its
shade upon him. As if atoning for their sins in aiding Kamadeva, all six seasons
appear together near the Lord. At that time, the divine drums resound in the
sky, announcing the auspicious journey of Bhagwan's imminent Nirvana. In
Bhagwan's presence, even the objects of the five senses become pleasing in an
instant, for whose qualities do not increase in the company of great souls?
Everyone's qualities increase. Hair, nails, etc., have the nature to grow, but
seeing the destruction of karma accumulated over hundreds of births, they are
afraid and do not dare to grow. The gods pacify the dust with showers of
fragrant water, and they make the earth fragrant with showers of blooming
flowers. The Indra, with devotion, hold three umbrellas in a circular manner
above the Lord, as if they were holding the three circular sources of the Ganges
River. ||31-40||  ||933. To declare, "This is our only Lord," Indra raises his
finger high, and a jeweled banner adorns the front of Bhagwan. ||41||  ||934.
Beautiful, white fly whisks, like the radiance of the autumn moon, are waved
over him. When they reach his lotus face, they create an illusion like that of
royal swans. ||42||  ||935. Three high walls surround him, shining brightly, as
if the right knowledge, vision, and conduct have taken three forms. ||43||
||936. Wishing to bestow grace upon the people of the four directions
simultaneously, Bhagwan has four bodies and four faces, as if he has taken four
forms in the four directions to benefit everyone. ||44||  ||937. When the gods,
demons, humans, and serpent gods bow down at his feet, Bhagwan, seated on his
throne, appears like the sun shining on the peak of the eastern mountain. ||45||
||938. At that time, the Dharmachakra, the symbol of the universal sovereignty
of the three worlds, stands before him, illuminated by the radiance of his
effulgent form, which spreads light in all directions. ||46||  ||939. The lords
of the worlds, the lords of the celestial chariots, the lords of the lights, and
the lords of the forests, all stand in the assembly, their number exceeding a
hundred million. ||47||  **Meaning:** To declare, "This is our only Lord," Indra
raises his finger high, and a jeweled banner adorns the front of Bhagwan.
Beautiful, white fly whisks, like the radiance of the autumn moon, are waved
over him. When they reach his lotus face, they create an illusion like that of
royal swans. The three high walls surrounding him, shining brightly, appear as
if the right knowledge, vision, and conduct have taken three forms. When Bhagwan
sits in the assembly to preach Dharma to the people of the four directions, he
has four bodies and four faces, as if he has taken four forms in the four
directions to benefit everyone. When the gods, demons, humans, and serpent gods
bow down at his feet, Bhagwan, seated on his throne, appears like the sun
shining on the peak of the eastern mountain. At that time, the Dharmachakra, the
symbol of the universal sovereignty of the three worlds, stands before him,
illuminated by the radiance of his effulgent form, which spreads light in all
directions. The lords of the worlds, the lords of the celestial chariots, the
lords of the lights, and the lords of the forests, all stand in the assembly,
their number exceeding a hundred million.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zukladhyAna kA svarUpa yogazAstra ekAdazama prakAza zloka 30 se 47 ||930 /
asya nakhA romANi ca, vardhiSNUnyapi na hi pravardhante  /
bhavazatasaJcitakarmacchedaM dRSTveva bhItAni  // 38 //  ||931 /  zamayanti
tadabhyarNe, rajAMsi gandhajalavRSTibhirdevAH  /  unnidrakusumavRSTibhirazeSataH
surabhayanti bhuvam  // 39 //  ||932 //  chatratrayI pavitrA vibhorupari
bhaktitastridazarAjaiH  /  gaGgAsrotastritayIva, dhAryate maNDalIkRtya  // 40 //
artha :- zrI tIrthakara bhagavAn ke zarIra ke anurUpa cAroM aura sUryamaMDala kI
prabhA ko bhI mAta karane vAlA aura sarvadizAoM ko prakAzita karane vAlA
bhAmaMDala prakaTa hotA hai| bhagavAn jaba pRthvItala para vihAra karate haiM,
taba kalyANakAriNI bhakti vAle deva tatkAla prabhu ke pratyeka caraNa rakhane ke
sthAna para svarNamaya kamala sthApita karate haiN| tathA vAyu anukUla calatA
hai| pakSI bhagavAn kI pradakSiNA dAhinI ora se dete haiM, vRkSa bhI jhuka jAte
haiM, usa samaya kAMToM ke mukha nIce kI ora ho jAte haiN| lAlimAyukta patte
tathA khile hue phUloM kI sugaMdha se vyAsa azokavRkSa, jo bhauMroM ke guMjana
se mAno svAbhAvika stuti karatA hai evaM bhagavAn para chAyA karatA huA
suzobhita hotA hai| kAmadeva kI sahAyatA karane ke apane pApa kA mAno
prAyazcitta grahaNa karane ke lie eka hI sAtha chahoM Rtue~ usa samaya prabhu ke
samIpa upasthita hotI haiN| usa samaya devaduMdubhi bhI unake sAmane AkAza meM
jora se ghoSaNA karatI huI prakaTa hotI hai, mAno vaha bhagavAn ke zIghra
nirvANa ke hetu prayANa kalyANaka manA rahI ho| bhagavAn ke pAsa pAMcoM iMdriyoM
ke pratikUla viSaya bhI kSaNabhara meM manohara banakara anukUla bana jAte haiM,
kyoMki mahApuruSoM ke saMparka se kisake guNoM meM vRddhi nahIM hotI? sabhI kI
hotI hai| keza, nakha Adi kA svabhAva bar3hane kA hai, kintu saikar3oM bhavoM ke
saMcita karmoM kA chedana dekhakara ve bhayabhIta hokara bar3hane kA sAhasa
nahIM krte| bhagavAn ke AsapAsa sugaMdhita jala kI vRSTi karake deva dhUla ko
zAMta kara dete haiM aura khile hue puSpoM kI varSA se samagra bhUmi ko
surabhita kara dete haiN| iMdra bhakti se maMDalAkAra karake tIna chatra
bhagavAn para dhAraNa karate haiM; mAno ve gaMgAnadI ke maMDalAkAra tIna srota
kiye hue dhAraNa hoM  // 31-40 //   /  / 933 /  ayameka eva naH
prabhurityAkhyAtu viDojasonnamitaH  /  aGgulidaNDa ivoccaizcakAsti
rtndhvjstsy||41||  / 934 /  asya zaradindudIdhiticArUNi ca cAmarANi dhUyante  /
vadanAravindasampAti-rAjahaMsabhramaM dadhati  // 42 /  /   / 935 /
prAkArAstraya uccaiH, vibhAnti samavasaraNasthitasyAsya  /  kRtavigrahANi smyk-
caaritrjnyaandrshnaaniiv||43|| ||936 /  caturAzAvartijanAn,
yugapadivAnugrahItukAmasya  /  catvAri bhavanti mukhAnyaGgAni ca
dharmamupadizataH  // 44 //   /  / 937 /  abhivandhamAnapAdaH
surAsuranaroragaistadA bhagavAn  /  siMhAsanamadhitiSThati, bhAsvAniva
puurvgirishrRnggm||45|| ||938 /  tejaHpuJjaprasaraprakAzitAzeSadikkramasya tadA
/  trailokyacakravartitva-cihnamagre bhavati cakram  // 46 //   / 939 /
bhuvanapati-vimAnapati-jyotiHpati-vAnamantarAH savidhe  /  tiSThanti
samavasaraNe, jaghanyataH kottiprimaannaaH||47|| artha :- yahI ekamAtra hamAre
svAmI haiM ise kahane ke lie mAno iMdra ne apanI aMgulI U~cI kara rakhI ho, aisA
ratnajaTita iMdradhvaja bhagavAn ke Age suzobhita hotA hai| bhagavAn para
zaradaRtu kI caMdra-kiraNoM ke samAna ujjvala cAmara dulAye jAte haiM, jaba ve
cAmara mukhakamala para Ate haiM to rAjahasoM kI-sI bhrAMti hotI | hai|
samavasaraNa meM sthita bhagavAn ke cAroM tarapha sthita U~ce tIna gar3ha
(prAkAra) aise mAlUma par3ate haiM; mAnoM samyagjJAna, darzana aura cAritra ne
tIna zarIra dhAraNa kiye haiN| jaba bhagavAn samavasaraNa meM cAroM dizAoM meM
sthita logoM ko dharmopadeza dene ke lie virAjamAna hote haiM, taba bhagavAna ke
cAra zarIra aura cAra mukha ho jAte haiM; mAno logoM para eka sAtha upakAra
karane kI icchA se unhoMne cAroM dizAoM meM| cAra zarIra dhAraNa kiye hoN| unake
caraNoM meM jisa samaya sura, asura, manuSya aura bhavanapati deva Adi namaskAra
karate haiM, usa samaya siMhAsana para virAjamAna bhagavAn aise mAlUma hote
haiM; mAno udayAcala ke zikhara para sUrya suzobhita ho| usa samaya apane
tejaHpuMja se samasta dizAoM ke prakAzaka bhagavAn ke Age trailokya dharma-
cakravartitva kA cihna rUpa dharmacakra rahatA hai| bhavanapati, vaimAnika,
jyotiSka aura 450

Page #472 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Nature of Shukla Dhyana  **Chapter 11, Verses 40-51 of the Yoga
Shastra:**  In the Samavasarana of the four Nikayas, there are a crore of Jivas,
from the most insignificant to the most exalted, who reside near the
Tirthankara. ||41-47||  Thus, the nature of the extraordinary qualities of the
Kevala Jnani Tirthankara has been explained. Now, the nature of ordinary Kevalis
will be explained. ||40||  Those who do not have the Tirthankara Nama Karma,
they too attain Kevala Jnana through the power of Yoga. ||48||  **Meaning:**
Those who do not have the Tirthankara Nama Karma, they too attain Kevala Jnana
through the power of Yoga. If their Ayu Karma remains, they preach Dharma to the
beings of the world. If their Ayu Karma does not remain, they attain Nirvana.
||4||  After this, the Uttar Kriya is described. ||41||  Having attained Kevala
Jnana and Kevala Darshan, when a Yogi has only a few Muhurtas of life remaining,
he quickly begins the third Shukla Dhyana, called Sukshma Kriya Apratipati.
||49||  **Meaning:** Having attained Kevala Jnana and Kevala Darshan, when a
Yogi has only a few Muhurtas of life remaining, he quickly begins the third
Shukla Dhyana, called Sukshma Kriya Apratipati. ||49||  The word "Hurt" means
the time within a Muhurta. Do all Yogis begin the third Dhyana in the same way,
or is there some difference? This is explained. ||42||  If the other Karmas,
such as Nama, Gotra, and Vedaniya Karmas, are more than the Ayu Karma, then the
Yogi performs a Samudghata to equalize them. ||50||  **Meaning:** If the other
Karmas, such as Nama, Gotra, and Vedaniya Karmas, are more than the Ayu Karma,
then the Yogi performs a Samudghata to equalize them. ||50||  **Explanation:**
If the amount of Ayu Karma is equal to the amount of remaining Karma, then the
third Dhyana is begun. But if the amount of other Karmas is more than the Ayu
Karma, then a special effort called Samudghata is made to equalize the
situation, such as through Sthitighata, Rasaghata, etc. It is said, "If the
other Karmas of the Kevali Bhagwan are more than the Ayu Karma, then they
perform an effort called Kevali Samudghata with the desire to equalize them."
Samudghata means to strike with such force that the desired result is achieved
in one go, and it does not happen again. It means to expel the Atma Pradesh from
the body. ||50||  The method of Samudghata is explained further. ||43||  The
Yogi creates a Danda, Kapata, and Manthani in three periods of time, and in the
fourth period, he fills the entire Lok with his Atma Pradesh. ||51||
**Meaning:** The Yogi creates a Danda, Kapata, and Manthani in three periods of
time, and in the fourth period, he fills the entire Lok with his Atma Pradesh.
||51||  **Explanation:** The Dhyana-sth Kevali Bhagwan, through the power of
Dhyana, expels his Atma Pradesh from his body. In the first period, he expels
his Atma Pradesh from his body and extends them upwards and downwards to the
Lokanta, making them the size of the Lok. In the second period, he creates a
Kapata-like shape from that Danda-shaped form. This means that he extends his
Atma Pradesh forward and backward in the Lok, so that they become like a Kapata
in the East-West or North-South direction. In the third period, he extends that
Kapata into the shape of a Manthani. This fills most of the Lok. In the fourth
period, the Yogi fills the gaps (empty spaces) and becomes pervasive in all
fourteen Rajulokas. In this way, as he moves towards the Anushreni, his Atma
Pradesh also fills the corners of the Lok. This means that in four periods, he
fills the entire Lokakasha with his Atma Pradesh. As many Atma Pradesh there
are, so many Lokakasha Pradesh become. Therefore, one Atma Pradesh becomes
pervasive in each Lokakasha Pradesh. This is called "Lokpurna." Hearing this, it
becomes consistent with the views of other philosophers who believe that the
Atma is Vibhu, i.e., all-pervasive. This means...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zukladhyAna kA svarUpa yogazAstra ekAdazama prakAza zloka 40 se 51
vANavyaMtara; ye cAroM nikAyoM ke deva samavasaraNa meM bhagavAn ke pAsa
jaghanya-se eka karor3a kI saMkhyA | meM rahate haiM  /  / 41-47 /  /  isa
prakAra kevalajJAnI tIrthakara bhagavAn ke atizayoM kA svarUpa btaayaa| aba
sAmAnya kevaliyoM kA svarUpa batAte haiN|940| tIrthakaranAmasajhaM, na yasya
karmAsti so'pi yogabalAt  /  utpanna-kevalaH san satyAyuSi bodhayatyurvIm  /  /
48 /  /  artha :- jinake tIrthakara nAmakarma kA udaya nahIM hai, ve kevalajJAnI
bhI yoga ke bala se kevalajJAna prApta karate haiM, aura Ayukarma zeSa rahatA
hai, to jagata ke jIvoM ko dharmopadeza bhI dete haiM; aura Ayukarma zeSa na ho
to nirvANapada prApta karate haiM  /  / 4 /  /  isake bAda uttarakriyA kA
varNana karate haiN1941| sampannakevalajJAna-darzano'ntarmuhUrta-zeSAyuH  /
arhati yogI dhyAnaM, tRtIyamapi kartumacireNa  // 49 /  /  artha :- kevalajJAna
aura kevaladarzana prApta hone ke bAda jaba yogI kA AyuSya aMta muhUrta zeSa
rahatA hai, taba ve zIghra hI sUkSma-kriyA-apratipAti nAmaka tIsarA zukladhyAna
prAraMbha karate haiM  // 49 /  /  hUrta kA artha hai-muharta ke aMdara kA smy|
kyA sabhI yogI eka samAna tIsarA dhyAna AraMbha karate haiM yA unameM kucha
vizeSatA hai? ise batAte haiN|942| AyuHkarmasakAzAd, adhikAni
syuryadA'nyakarmANi  /  tatsAmyAya tadopakrameta yogI samudghAtam  // 50 //  _
artha :- yadi AyuSya-karma kI apekSA anya nAma, gotra aura vedanIya karmoM kI
sthiti adhika raha jAtI hai to use barAbara karane ke lie yogI kevalI-samudghAta
karate haiM  // 50 //  vyAkhyA :- jitanA AyuSyakarma ho, utanI hI zeSa karma kI
sthiti ho to tIsarA dhyAna prAraMbha karate haiM, paraMtu AyuSyakarma se dUsare
karmoM kI sthiti adhika ho, taba sthitighAta, rasaghAta Adi ke lie samudaghAta
nAma kA prayatnavizeSa karate haiN| kahA bhI haiM-'yadi kevalI bhagavAn ke
dUsare karma AyuSyakarma se adhika zeSa hoM to ve unheM samAna karane kI icchA
se kevalI-samudghAta nAmaka prayatna karate haiN|' samudghAta kA artha hai-jisa
kriyA se eka hI bAra meM samyak prakAra se prAdurbhAva ho, dUsarI bAra na ho,
isa prakAra prabalatA se ghAta karanA=Atma-pradeza ko zarIra se bAhara
nikaalnaa||50|| samudghAta kI vidhi Age batAte haiN|943| daNDa-kapATe
maMthAnakaM ca samayatrayeNa nirmAya  /  turye samaye lokaM, niHzeSaM purayed
yogI  // 51 /  /  artha :- yogI tIna samaya meM daMDa, kapATa aura maMthAnI
banAkara apane AtmapradezoM ko phailA detA hai, aura cauthe samaya meM bIca ke
aMtaroM ko pUrita kara samagra loka meM vyApta ho jAtA hai  // 51 /  /  vyAkhyA
:- dhyAnastha kevalI bhagavAn dhyAna ke bala se apane AtmapradezoM ko zarIra ke
bAhara nikAlate haiN| arthAt prathama samaya meM AtmapradezoM ko zarIra se
bAhara nikAlakara Upara-nIce lokAMta taka unheM loka pramANa daMDAkAra kara lete
haiN| dUsare samaya meM usa daMDAkAra meM se kapATa ke samAna AkAra banA lete
haiN| arthAt Atma-pradezoM ko Age-pIche loka meM isa prakAra phailAte hai ki
jisase pUrva-pazcima athavA uttara-dakSiNa dizA meM kapATa ke samAna bana jAte
hai| tIsare samaya meM usa kapATa ko mathAnI ke AkAra kA banAkara phailAte haiM.
isase adhikatara loka pariparita ho jAtA hai| cauthe samaya meM yogI bIca ke
aMtaroM (khAlI-sthAnoM) ko pUrita kara caudaha rAjUloka meM vyApta ho jAtA hai|
isa taraha loka ko paripUrita karate hue anuzreNI taka gamana hone se loka ke
koNoM meM bhI Atmapradeza pUrita ho jAte haiN| arthAt cAra samayoM meM samagra
lokAkAza ko apane AtmapradezoM se pUrNa kara dete haiN| jitane Atmapradeza hote
haiM, utane hI lokAkAza ke pradeza ho jAte haiN| ataH pratyeka AkAzapradeza meM
eka-eka Atmapradeza vyApta ho jAtA hai| ise 'lokapUraka' kahA aisA sunakara
dUsare dArzanika jo AtmA ko vibhu arthAt sarvavyApI mAnate haiM, unake mata ke
sAtha bhI saMgati ho jAtI hai| isakA matalaba 451

Page #473 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Nature of Shukla Dhyana  **Yoga Shastra, Eleventh Prakash, Verses 52-55**
| Other philosophies have considered the soul to be all-seeing, all-faced, all-
armed, and all-footed, pervading all the realms. || 51 ||  Now, what do they do
in the fifth and subsequent times? It is said:  | 944.  **Samayaistataścaturbhiḥ
nivartate lokapūraṇād asmāt | Vihitāyuḥ samakarmā, dhyānī pratileṇamārgeṇa || 52
||**  **Meaning:** By pervading the realms with the soul's regions in four
times, making other karmas equal to āyus karma, the meditating muni gathers the
work of filling the realms in reverse order. || 52 ||  **Explanation:** In this
way, by making āyus karma equal to the state of other karmas in four times, in
the fifth time, they gather and shrink the soul's regions filled with karma in
the realms. In the sixth time, they gather the form of the manthani, in the
seventh time, they shrink the form of the kapāta, and in the eighth time, they
gather the form of the danda, and become situated in their original body as
before. At the time of samudghāta, there is no activity of the yoga of mind and
speech. At that time, there is no purpose of these two yogas, only the activity
of kāya-yoga. In it, in the first and eighth times, there is predominance of
audārika kāya, so there is audārika kāya yoga. In the second, sixth, and seventh
times, due to the soul's movement outside the audārika body, there is excessive
vibration of kārmāṇa-vīrya, so there is audārika-kārmāṇa-miśra yoga. In the
third, fourth, and fifth times, the soul's regions are without the activity of
the audārika body and outside that body, so there is only kārmāṇa kāya yoga
without the help of that body. The learned scholar, Shri Umāsvāti, has said in
the 275th and 276th verses of Praśamarati: "In the time of samudghāta, in the
first and eighth, there is yoga of the audārika body, in the seventh, sixth, and
second, there is mixed audārika yoga, and in the fourth, fifth, and third, there
is kārmāṇa body-yoga, and in these three times, they are regularly anāhārakas."
After abandoning samudghāta, if necessary, they engage in the activity of all
three yogas. For example, if someone asks a question with an unanswerable mind,
they engage in the tendency of satya or asatyāmṛṣā manoyoga. Similarly, in
addressing someone, etc., they engage in the activity of vachanayoga. They do
not engage in the activity of the other two types of yoga. Both also engage in
the activity of returning the fruits of audārika kāya yoga, etc. After that,
they begin yoga-nirodha in the time of antarmūhūrta. There are two divisions of
these three yogas: sūkshma and bādara. After becoming only-knowing, the after-
time of these two types of yogas is negligible antarmūhūrta, and the excellent
one is up to a little less than the previous time. The sayogi-kevali wanders and
awakens many bhavya jivas. When their lifespan is only antarmūhūrta remaining,
they first stop bādara vachanayoga and manoyoga with bādara kāya yoga, then they
stop bādara kāya yoga with sūkshma kāya yoga. When bādara kāya yoga is
happening, it is impossible to stop sūkshma yoga. A running man cannot suddenly
stop his speed, he can only stop gradually. Similarly, after stopping all bādara
yoga, they stop sūkshma vachan and manoyoga with sūkshma kāya yoga, then they
stop sūkshma kāya yoga with their own soul, doing sūkshma kriyā anivarti shukla
dhyāna. || 52 || This same thing is said in three verses.  | 945. **Śrīmān
cintyavīryaḥ śarīrayoge 'tha bādare sthitvā | Acirad eva hi nirunadḍhi, bādaro
vāṅmanaḥ - sayogau || 53 ||**  | 946. **Sūkṣmeṇa kāyayogena, kāyayogam sa
bādaraṁ rūṇḍhyāt | Tasmin aniruddhe sati śakyo roddhum na sūkṣmatanu yogaḥ || 54
||**  | 947. **Vachan - manoyoga - yugaṁ sūkṣmaṁ nirunadḍhi sūkṣmāt tanuyogāt |
Vidadhāti tato dhyānaṁ sūkṣmakriyām asūkṣmatanu yogaṁ || 55 ||**  **Meaning:**
Possessing the wealth of kevalajnāna, etc., and inconceivable power, that yogi,
taking hold of bādara kāya yoga, quickly stops bādara vachanayoga and manoyoga,
then stops bādara kāya yoga with sūkshma kāya yoga; because without stopping
bādara kāya yoga, sūkshma kāya yoga cannot be stopped. After that, they stop
sūkshma vachan and sūkshma manoyoga with sūkshma kāya yoga. After that, they do
sūkshma kriyā asūkṣmatanu yoga, meditating. || 55 ||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zukladhyAna kA svarUpa yogazAstra ekAdazama prakAza zloka 52 se 55 | yaha huA
ki anya darzanoM ne AtmA ko sarvatra cakSuvAlA, sarvatramukhavAlA, sarvatra bAhu
vAlA va sarvatra paira vAlA sAre loka meM vyApaka mAnA hai  /  /  51  /  /  aba
pAMcaveM Adi samaya meM ve kyA karate haiM? use kahate haiM  /  944 /
samayaistatazcatubhirnivartate lokapUraNAdasmAt  /  vihitAyuH samakarmA, dhyAnI
pratilomamArgeNa  // 52 //  artha :- cAra samaya meM samagra loka meM
AtmapradezoM ko vyApta karake anya karmoM ko Ayukarma ke samAna karake dhyAnI
muni pratiloma - krama se lokapUrita kArya ko sameTate haiM  /  /  52 //
vyAkhyA : - isa prakAra cAra samaya meM anya karmoM kI sthiti ke samAna AyuSya
karma ko banAkara pAMcave samaya meM | loka meM phaile hue karma vAle
AtmapradezoM kA saMharaNa kara sikor3ate haiN| chaThe samaya meM maMthAnI ke
AkAra ko sameTa lete| haiM, sAtave samaya meM kapATa ke AkAra ko sikor3ate haiM
aura AThave samaya meM daMDAkAra ko sameTakara pUrvavat apane mUla zarIra | meM
hI sthita ho jAte haiN| samudghAta ke samaya mana aura vacana ke yoga kA vyApAra
nahIM hotaa| usa samaya ina donoM yogoM kA koI prayojana nahI hotA hai, kevala
eka kAya-yoga kA hI vyApAra hotA hai| usameM pahale aura AThaveM samaya meM
audArika kAya kI pradhAnatA hone se audArika kAyayoga hotA hai| dUsare, chaThe,
aura sAtaveM samaya meM audArika zarIra se | bAhara AtmA kA gamana hone se
kArmaNa-vIrya kA parispaMda - atyadhika kaMpana hone se audArika- kArmaNamizra
yoga hotA hai, | tIsare cauthe aura pAMcave samaya meM Atmapradeza audArika
zarIra ke vyApAra-rahita aura usa zarIra se bAhara hone se usa zarIra kI
sahAyatA ke binA akelA kArmaNa kAyayoga hotA hai| vAcakavarya zrI umAsvAti ne
prazamarati ke 275 aura 276 veM zloka meM kahA hai- "samudghAtakAla meM pahale
aura AThaveM meM audArika zarIra kA yoga hotA hai, sAtaveM, chaThe aura dUsare |
samaya meM mizra audArika yoga hotA hai tathA cauthe, pAMcave aura tIsare samaya
meM kArmaNa zarIra-yoga hotA hai, aura ina tInoM | samayoM meM niyama se ve
anAhAraka hote haiN|" samudghAta kA tyAga karane ke bAda yadi AvazyakatA ho to
ve tInoM yogoM kA vyApAra karate haiN| jaise ki koI anuttaradeva mana se prazna
pUche to satya yA asatyAmRSA manoyoga kI pravRtti kare, isI | prakAra kisI ko
saMbodhana Adi karane meM, usI prakAra vacanayoga ke vyApAra karate haiN| anya
do prakAra ke yoga se vyApAra nahIM krte| donoM bhI audArika kAyayoga-phala
vApisa arpaNa karane Adi meM vyApAra karate haiN| usake bAda aMtarmuhUrtamAtra |
samaya meM yoga-nirodha prAraMbha karate haiN| ina tInoM yogoM ke do bheda haiM-
sUkSma aura bAdara  /  kevalajJAna hone ke bAda ina donoM | prakAra ke yogoM kA
uttarakAla jaghanya aMtarmuhUrta kA hai aura utkRSTa kucha kama pUrvakoTi kAla
taka sayogIkevalI vicaraNa kara aneka bhavya jIvoM ko pratibodha karate haiN|
jaba unakA AyuSya kevala aMtarmuhUrta zeSa rahatA hai, taba ve prathama bAdara |
kAyayoga se bAdara vacanayoga aura manoyoga ko rokate haiM, usake bAda sUkSma
kAyayoga se bAdarakAyayoga ko rokate haiN| bAdara kAyayoga hotA hai, taba
sUkSmayoga ko rokanA azakya hai, daur3atA huA manuSya akasmAt apanI gati ko nahI
roka sakatA, | dhIre-dhIre hI roka sakatA hai| usI taraha sarva bAdara yoga kA
nirodha karane ke bAda sUkSma kAyayoga se sUkSmavacana aura | manoyoga kA
nirodha karate haiM, usake bAda sUkSmakriyA anivarti zukladhyAna karate hue
apanI AtmA se hI sUkSma kAyayoga kA nirodha karate haiM  /  /  52  /  /  isI
bAta ko tIna zlokoM dvArA kahate haiN|945|shriimaancintyviiryH zarIrayoge'tha
bAdare sthitvA  /  acirAdeva hi niruNaddhi, bAdaro vAGmanaH - sayogau  //  53
//   / 946  /  sUkSmeNa kAyayogena, kAyayogaM sa bAdaraM rUndhyAt  /  tasmin
aniruddhe sati zakyo roddhuM na sUkSmatanuyogaH  //  54  //  | | 947  //  vacana
- manoyoga - yugaM sUkSmaM niruNaddhi sUkSmAttanuyogAt  /  vidadhAti tato
dhyAnaM sUkSmakriyamasUkSmatanuyogam  // 55 //  artha : kevalajJAnAdika lakSmI
tathA aciMtanIya zakti se yukta vaha yogI bAdara kAyayoga kA avalambana lekara
bAdara vacanayoga aura manoyoga ko zIghra hI roka letA hai, phira sUkSma
kAyayoga se bAdara kAyayoga ko rokatA hai; kyoMki bAdara kAyayoga kA nirodha
kiye binA sUkSma kAyayoga kA nirodha nahIM ho sakatA hai| tadanaMtara sUkSma
kAyayoga se sUkSma vacana aura sUkSma manoyoga kA nirodha karate haiN| usake
bAda 452

Page #474 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Nature of Shukla Dhyana  **Yoga Shastra, Eleventh Prakash, Verses 56-61**
The meditation called "Sookshma Kriya Nivarti" is devoid of Sookshma Kaya Yoga.
This is also known as "Samuccchinn Kriya." ||53-55|| ||948||  After this, the
fourth Shukla Dhyana, called "Samuccchinn Kriya," manifests for the A-yogi who
becomes a Kevali. This stops all actions. At the end of this, the four
Aghatikarma are destroyed. ||56|| ||949||  After that, attaining the state of
"Shaileshi" (immovable like Mount Meru) for the time it takes to pronounce the
five short vowels "a, i, u, ri, lu," the soul simultaneously destroys the
Vedaniya, Ayu, Nama, and Gotra Karmas from their roots. ||57|| ||950||  Then,
abandoning the Audarik, Taijas, and Karman bodies, which are the root causes of
the cycle of birth and death, the soul, devoid of any physical form, reaches the
end of the universe (Lokant) in the Siddha Kshetra in a single moment, without
touching any other space. ||58||  It is said, "After abandoning the final body
on this earth, the soul goes there and attains Siddhi." Here, the question
arises, "Why doesn't the soul go beyond Lokant while ascending? Or, after
abandoning the body, why doesn't it go down or sideways?" The answer is: ||951||
The Siddha soul does not go above Lokant into the Aloka Akash, because just as
water is the medium for the movement of fish, similarly, Dharma Astikaya Dravya
is the medium for the movement of the soul. Since it is not present above
Lokant, the soul cannot go further. Also, the soul does not go down, because it
has no gravity. And due to the absence of Kayadi Yoga and its influence, it does
not go sideways either. ||59||  Here, the question arises, "Since the soul is
bound by the limits of space for its upward journey after being liberated from
Karma, shouldn't it be immobile?" The answer is: ||952||  Due to the lightness
(Laghava Yoga) of the Siddha soul, it ascends like smoke, and due to the absence
of attachment, it goes only upwards. Just as a gourd with eight layers of mud
attached to it sinks in water due to its weight, but as the mud layers are
gradually removed by the water, the gourd becomes lighter and naturally floats
to the surface; similarly, the soul, freed from the layers of Karma, naturally
reaches Lokant. Just as a castor seed, freed from its shell, goes upwards,
similarly, the Siddha soul, freed from the bondage of Karma, ascends. ||60||
||953||  Attaining the infinite, unparalleled, uninterrupted, and naturally
arising bliss of the soul, which is full of joy, the liberated soul, endowed
with Kevala Jnana and Kevala Darshan, rejoices in it. ||61||  **Explanation:**
"Sadik" means "with beginning." This bliss has never been experienced before in
the cycle of birth and death.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zukladhyAna kA svarUpa yogazAstra ekAdazama prakAza zloka 56 se 61
sUkSmakAyayoga se rahita sUkSmakriyAnivarti nAma kA dhyAna karate haiM, isI kA
dUsarA nAma 'samucchinnakriya' | hai  /  / 53-55 /  /   / 948 /  tadanantaraM
smutsnnkriymaavirbhvedyogsy| asyAnte kSIyante tvaghAtikarmANi catvAri  // 56 //
artha :- usake bAda ayogI kevalI banakara ve samuchinnakriyA nAmaka cauthA
zukladhyAna prakaTa karate haiN| isase | samasta kriyAe~ baMda ho jAtI haiN|
isake aMta meM cAra aghAtikarmoM kA kSaya ho jAtA hai  /  / 6 /  /  |949 /
laghuvarNapaJcakogiraNatulyakAlamavApya zailezIm  /  kSapayati yugapat parito,
vedyAyurnAmagotrANi  // 57 /  /  artha :- tadanaMtara 'a, i, u, R, lu' ina pAMca
hrasva-svaroM ko bolane meM jitanA samaya lagatA hai, utane samaya taka meM
zailezI avasthA arthAt meruparvata ke samAna nizcala dazA prApta karake eka
sAtha ve vedanIya, Ayu, nAma aura gotra karma ko mUla se kSaya kara dete haiM  /
/ 57 /  /  usake baad|950| audArika-taijasa-kArmaNAni sNsaarmuulkaarnnaani|
hitveha RjuzreNyA samayenaikena yAti lokaantm||58|| artha :- saMsAra ke
mUlakAraNabhUta audArika, taijasa, aura kArmaNa rUpa zarIroM kA tyAga karake
vigraha-rahita - RjuzreNI se dUsare AkAzapradeza ko sparza kiye binA eka samaya
meM (dUsare samaya kA sparza kiye binA) loka ke aMtabhAga meM siddhakSetra meM
sAkAra-upayogasahita AtmA pahuMca jAtI hai  /  / 58 /  /  kahA bhI hai-'isa
pRthvItala para aMtima zarIra kA tyAga karake vahA~ jAkara AtmA siddhi prApta
karatA hai|' yahAM prazna hotA hai ki. 'jIva Upara jAte samaya lokAMta se Age
kyoM nahIM jAtA? athavA zarIra kA tyAgakara dharatI ke nIce yA tirachA kyoM
nahIM jAtA hai? isakA uttara dete haiN||951|nordhvmupgrhvirhaaddho'pi vA naiva
gauravAbhAvAt  /  yoga-prayoga-vigamAt na tiryagapi tasya gtirsti||59|| artha :-
siddhAtmA loka se Upara alokAkAza meM nahIM jAtA, kyoMki jaise machalI kI gati
meM sahAyaka jala hai, vaise hI jIva kI gati meM sahAyaka dharmAstikAya dravya
hai, vaha lokAMta ke Upara nahIM hone se jIva Age nahIM jA sakatA; tathA vaha
AtmA nIce bhI nahIM jAtI; kyoMki usameM gurutA nahIM hai aura kAyAdi yoga aura
usakI preraNA, ina donoM kA abhAva hone se tirachA bhI nahIM jAtA hai  // 59 //
. yahA~ karma se mukta hone para AtmA ko Upara jAne ke lie pradeza to maryAdita
hai, isalie usakI gati nahIM honI cAhie? isa prazna kA samAdhAna isa prakAra
karate haiN||952| lAghavayogAd dhUmavadalAbuphalavacca saGgaviraheNa  /
bandhanavirahAderaNDavacca siddhasya gtiruurdhvm||60|| artha :- siddha paramAtmA
ke jIva (AtmA) kI laghutAdharma ke kAraNa dhuMe ke samAna Urdhvagati hotI hai
tathA saMga rahita hone se tathAvidha pariNAma se Upara hI jAtA hai| jaise tuMbe
para saMyoga rUpa miTTI ke ATha lepa kiye hoM to usake vajanadAra ho jAne se
miTTI ke saMga se vaha jala meM DUba jAtA hai, paraMtu pAnI ke saMyoga se
kramazaH lepa dUra ho jAtA hai, taba vaha tuMbA halakA ho jAne para pAnI ke
Upara svAbhAvika rUpa se apane Apa A jAtA hai; usI prakAra karmalepa se mukta
jIva bhI apane Apa lokAMta taka pahuMca jAtA hai| koza se mukta eraMDa kA bIja
Upara kI ora jAtA hai, vaise hI karmabaMdha se mukta siddha kI Urdhvagati hotI
hai||6|| |953|saadikmnntmnupmm, avyAbAdhaM svabhAvajaM saukhyam  /  prApya
sakevalajJAnadarzano modate muktaH  /  / 61 /  /  artha :- kevalajJAna aura
kevaladarzana se yukta siddhAtmA sarvakarmo se mukta hokara sAdi-anaMta anupama,
avyAbAdha aura svAbhAvika paidA hone vAle Atmika sukha ko prApta kara usI meM
magna rahate haiM  /  / 1 /  /  vyAkhyA :- Adi-sahita ho vaha sAdika kahalAtA
hai| saMsAra meM pahale kabhI bhI aise sukha kA anubhava nahI kiyA, 453

Page #475 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Nature of Pure Awareness  **Yoga Shastra, Eleventh Light, Verse 61**
Therefore, that bliss is eternal. Since this perfected bliss never ends, it is
infinite bliss. How can the eternal be infinite? Because by seeing the
destruction of pots, etc., we know that pots, etc., have a beginning. We see
that they are destroyed by the actions of hammers, etc. Therefore, since a pot
is produced from its destruction, it is not called infinite. But since the soul
never perishes, that bliss is imperishable and infinite.   Unparalleled, meaning
devoid of any comparison, bliss. Even if you gather together all the worldly
bliss of all living beings in the past, present, and future, that bliss is still
an infinitesimal part of the bliss of a perfected being. There is no obstruction
of any kind in their bliss. It is free from the pain of body and mind, so it is
unobstructed. The bliss of a perfected being, which arises naturally, is the
bliss that arises only from the nature of the soul.   Thus, liberated souls, who
are endowed with perfect knowledge and perfect vision, are the possessors of
infinite, unparalleled, unobstructed, and natural bliss. By saying this, the
author has refuted the views of many philosophers who say that "liberated souls
are devoid of bliss and other qualities, and are devoid of knowledge and
vision."   The Vaisheshika philosophers say that "the complete destruction of
the nine special qualities of the soul, such as intellect, is liberation," or
those who consider liberation to be merely the absence of existence, like the
extinction of a lamp, their views have also been refuted! It is not appropriate
to desire liberation as the destruction of qualities, or as the destruction of
the soul. What wise and intelligent person would desire liberation as the
destruction of their qualities, or as the destruction of the soul? Therefore,
liberation, which is proven by all evidence, and which is of the nature of
infinite knowledge, vision, bliss, and energy, is the only appropriate path.
**61**  Thus, the Eleventh Light of the Yoga Shastra, a bound manuscript named
Adhyatma Upanishad, composed by Acharya Shri Hemchandrasuri, is complete, along
with its detailed explanation, in response to the curiosity of King Kumarapala.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zukladhyAna kA svarUpa yogazAstra ekAdazama prakAza zloka 61 isalie vaha sukha
sAdika hai  /  isa siddha-sukha kA kabhI aMta nahIM hone se vaha anaMta sukha
hai| sAdi kA anaMtatva kaise | ho sakatA hai? kyoMki ghaTAdi kA nAza dekhane se
ghaTAdi kI Adi hotI hai, ghana, hathaur3e Adi ke vyApAra se usakA nAza | hotA
dekhA jAtA hai| isalie kSaya hone para usameM se ghaTa utpanna hone se vaha
anaMta nahIM kahalAtA hai| paraMtu AtmA kA kabhI kSaya na hone se vaha sukha
akSaya anaMta hai| anupama arthAt kisI bhI upamAna ke abhAva vAlA sukha,
pratyeka jIvoM ke atItakAla, vartamAnakAla aura bhaviSyakAla ke sAMsArika sukha
ekatrita kareM, to bhI vaha sukha eka siddha ke sukha kA anaMtavA~ bhAga hai|
unake sukha meM kisI bhI prakAra kI rukAvaTa nahIM hotI hai, zarIra aura mana kI
pIr3AoM kA abhAva | hone se vaha sukha avyAbAdha hai| svAbhAvika rUpa utpanna
hone vAlA siddha kA sukha sirpha Atma svarUpa se hI hone vAlA sukha hai| isa
prakAra sAdi-anaMta, anupama, avyAbAdha aura svAbhAvika sukha se yukta
kevalajJAna - kevaladarzana| saMpanna mukta - AtmA paramAnaMda ke adhikArI hote
haiN| aisA kahakara kitane hI dArzanika jo kahate haiM ki 'muktAtmA sukha Adi
guNoM se rahita ora jJAna-darzana rahita hote haiM; unake mata kA khaMDana kara
diyA hai| vaizeSika darzanakAra kahate haiM ki 'buddhi Adi nau AtmA ke vizeSa
guNoM kA atyaMta chedana ho jAnA mokSa hai', athavA jo pradIpa kA nirvANa hone
(bujhane) ke samAna mokSa ko kevala abhAva svarUpa mAnate haiM, unake mata kA
bhI nirAkaraNa kara diyA hai ! buddhi Adi guNoM ke uccheda | rUpa yA AtmA ke
uccheda-rUpa mokSa kI icchA karanA yogya nahIM hai; kauna vivekI buddhizAlI
puruSa apane guNoM ke ucchedana se yukta yA AtmA ke ucchedana rUpa mokSa ko
cAhegA? isalie anaMtajJAna- darzana - sukha - vIryamaya svarUpa vAlA
sarvapramANoM se siddha mokSa hI yukti yukta hai  /  61  /  /   /  /  isa
prakAra paramArhata zrIkumArapAla rAjA kI jijJAsA se AcAryazrI
hemacaMdrAcAryasUrIzvara racita adhyAtmopaniSad nAmaka paTTabaddha aparanAma
yogazAstra kA khopajJavivaraNasahita ekAdazama prakAza saMpUrNa huA  /  454

Page #476 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
| ॐ Arhate Namah || |12. Dvaṭaṇam Prakāśa The scripture begins by saying, "I
will also speak from my own experience." To explain this in detail, we offer the
following introduction: 1954. Śrutisiṁdhoḥ guru mukhato, yadadhigatam tadiha
darśitam samyak. Anubhavasiiddhamidaani, prakāśyate tattvamidam amalām. ||1||
Meaning: - I have explained correctly what I have learned from the ocean of
scriptural knowledge and from the mouth of the guru. - Now I will reveal the
pure truth of yoga, which is proven by my own experience. ||1|| Now, to ascend
to the highest state, we will describe the four types of mind. 955. Iha
vikṣiptam yaatayaatam śliṣṭam tatha suliinam ca. Cetasca tuḥprakaaram tajjña-
camatkaarakari bhavet ||2|| Meaning: - There are four types of mind in the realm
of yoga practice: 1. Vikṣipta mind, 2. Yaatayaata mind, 3. Śliṣṭa mind, and 4.
Suliina mind. These four types of mind are wondrous for those who know this
subject. We will explain them in order. 956. Vikṣiptam calam iṣṭam, yaatayaatam
ca kim api saananadam. Prathamaabhyaase dvayam api, vikalpa viṣayagraham tat
syāt ||3|| Meaning: - The vikṣipta mind is restless, it wanders here and there.
The yaatayaata mind is somewhat pleasurable; it sometimes goes out and sometimes
remains inside. These two states of mind are found in those who are practicing
for the first time. That is, at first the mind is restless, then with practice,
stability gradually begins to come along with the restlessness. Both types of
these minds are also receptive to external objects with choice. ||3|| ||957.
Śliṣṭam sthira saananadam, suliinam ati niścalam paraananadam. Tanmaatraka
viṣayagraham ubhayam api budhaistadaamnatam ||4|| Meaning: - The third mind,
called śliṣṭa, is stable and joyful, and when that same mind becomes extremely
stable, it becomes supremely joyful; that is the fourth mind, called suliina.
Both of these minds only receive their own appropriate objects. But they do not
receive external objects. Therefore, the wise have considered their qualities
according to their names. ||4|| ||958. Evam kramaśo'bhyaasaaveshaad dhyaanaṁ
bhajet niraalamBam. Samarasabhaavam yaatah paramaanandam tato'nubhavet. ||5||
Meaning: - In this way, one should practice gradually, from the vikṣipta to the
yaatayaata mind, from the yaatayaata to the śliṣṭa, and from the śliṣṭa to the
suliina mind. By practicing repeatedly in this way, the meditator reaches
niraalamBa dhyaan. This leads to samarasabhaava, and then the yogi experiences
supreme bliss. ||5|| How is samarasabhaava attained? It is said: 959.
Baahyaatmaanam apaasya, prasattibhaaja'antaraatmana yogi. Satatam paramaatmaanam
vicintayet tanmayatvaaya. ||6|| Meaning: - The yogi who desires the bliss of the
Self should abandon the external self, the state of being external to the Self,
and constantly meditate on the Supreme Self in order to become one with it. Two
verses describe the nature of the external self, etc. 455

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 | OM arhate namaH  /  /  |12. dvATaNama prakAza zAstra AraMbha meM kahA thA ki
'apane anubhava se bhI kahU~gA' use vistRta rUpa se batAne ke lie prastAvanA
karate 1954|shrutisindhorguru mukhato, yadadhigataM tadiha darzitaM samyak  /
anubhavasiddhamidAnI, prakAzyate tttvmidmmlm||1|| artha :- zrutajJAna rUpI
samudra se tathA gurumukha se maiMne jo kucha jAnA yA sunA hai, vaha samyak
prakAra se batalA diyaa| - aba maiM apane nijI anubhava se siddha yoga-viSayaka
nirmala tattva ko prakAzita karU~gA  // 1 //  aba uttamapada para ArUr3ha hone
ke lie cAra prakAra ke citta kA nirUpaNa karate haiN|955| iha vikSiptaM
yAtAyAtaM zliSTaM tathA sulInaM c| cetazcatuHprakAraM tajjJa-camatkArakAri
bhavet  // 2 //  artha :- yogAbhyAsa ke adhikAra meM citta cAra prakAra kA
hai-1. vikSisa mana, 2. yAtAyAta mana, 3. zliSTa mana . aura 4. sulInamana, ye
citta ke cAra prakAra haiM; jo isa viSaya ke jAnakAra ke lie camatkAra janaka
hote isakI kramazaH vyAkhyA karate haiN|956| vikSiptaM calamiSTaM, yAtAyAtaM ca
kimapi sAnandam  /  prathamAbhyAse dvayamapi, vikalpa viSayagrahaM tat syAt  //
3 //  artha :- vikSisa citta caMcala rahatA hai, vaha idhara-udhara bhaTakatA
rahatA hai| yAtAyAta citta kucha AnaMdadAyaka hai; vaha kabhI bAhara calA jAtA
hai kabhI aMdara sthita rahatA hai| prAthamika abhyAsa karane vAloM ke citta kI
ye donoM sthitiyA~ hotI haiN| arthAt pahale citta meM caMcalatA rahatI hai,
phira abhyAsa karane se dhIre-dhIre caMcalatA ke sAtha sthiratA Ane lagatI hai|
donoM prakAra ke ye citta vikalpa ke sAtha bAhya padArthoM ke grAhaka bhI hote
haiM  // 3 //   /  / 957 /  zliSTaM sthirasAnandaM, sulInamatinizcalaM
parAnandam  /  tanmAtrakaviSayagraham ubhayamapi budhaistdaamnaatm||4|| artha :-
zliSTa nAmaka tIsarA mana sthiratAyukta aura AnaMdamaya hotA hai aura jaba vahI
mana atyaMta sthira ho jAtA hai, taba paramAnaMdamaya hotA hai; vahI cauthA
sulIna mana kahalAtA hai| ye donoM mana apane-apane yogya viSaya ko hI grahaNa
karate haiN| paraMtu ye bAhya-padArtha ko grahaNa nahIM krte| isalie paDitoM ne
nAma ke anusAra hI unake guNa mAne haiM  // 4 //   / 958 /  evaM
kramazo'bhyAsAvezAd dhyAnaM bhajet nirAlambam  /  samarasabhAvaM yAtaH
paramAnandaM tto'nubhvet||5|| artha :- isa prakAra kramazaH abhyAsa karate hue
arthAt vikSipta se yAtAyAta citta kA, yAtAyAta se zliSTa kA aura zliSTa se
sulIna citta kA abhyAsa karanA caahie| isa prakAra bAra-bAra abhyAsa karane se
dhyAtA nirAlamba dhyAna taka pahuMca jAtA hai| isase samarasabhAva kI prApti
hotI hai, usake bAda yogI paramAnaMda kA| anubhava karatA hai  // 5 //
samarasabhAva kI prApti kisa taraha hotI hai? use kahate haiN|959|
bAhyAtmAnamapAsya, prasattibhAjA'ntarAtmanA yogI  /  satataM paramAtmAnaM
vicintayet tnmytvaay||6|| artha :- AtmasukhAbhilASI yogI ko cAhie ki aMtarAtmA
bAhyapadArtha rUpa bahirAtmabhAva kA tyAga karake paramAtma svarUpa meM tanmaya
hone ke lie niraMtara paramAtmA kA dhyAna kre| ' do zlokoM se AtmA ke bahirAdi
kA svarUpa kahate haiM 455

Page #477 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Description of Experienced Yoga  **Yoga Shastra, Twelfth Light, Verses 7 to
14**  **960.** The one who perceives the body, wealth, family, wife, children,
etc., with the perspective of "mine" is called the **Bhiratma** (external self).
But the body is just a place for me to reside (a house), I am the resident
owner. This body is just a rented house for living. Thus, the **AntarAtma**
(internal self) is one who does not experience joy or sorrow in the association
and disassociation of **Pudgala** (matter) in the form of pleasure and pain.
**961.** The **Atma** (soul) is of the nature of **Chidananda** (blissful
consciousness), devoid of all external limitations, pure like crystal,
imperceptible to the senses, and possessing infinite qualities. The wise call it
**Paramatma** (Supreme Soul).  **Meaning:** The body, wealth, family, wife,
children, etc., are perceived with the perspective of "mine" by the
**Bhiratma**. However, the body is merely a dwelling place, and I am the
resident. This body is like a rented house. Thus, the **AntarAtma** remains
unaffected by the association and disassociation of **Pudgala** in the form of
pleasure and pain. The **Atma** is of the nature of **Chidananda**, free from
all external limitations, pure like crystal, imperceptible to the senses, and
possesses infinite qualities. The wise call it **Paramatma**.  **962.** One
should always know the **Atma** as distinct from the body and the body as always
distinct from the **Atma**. The **Yogin** who knows the difference between the
two will not be confused in the realization of the **Atma**.  **Meaning:** The
**Atma** should be known as distinct from the body, and the body should always
be known as distinct from the **Atma**. The **Yogin** who understands this
difference will not be confused in the realization of the **Atma**.  **963.**
The **Muda** (ignorant) whose inner light is covered by karma finds satisfaction
in things other than the **Atma**. But the **Jnani** (knowledgeable) who has
overcome the delusion of happiness in external objects finds satisfaction only
in the **Atma**.  **Meaning:** The **Muda** whose inner light is covered by
karma finds satisfaction in things other than the **Atma**. But the **Jnani**
who has overcome the delusion of happiness in external objects finds
satisfaction only in the **Atma**.  **964.** The state of **Nirvana** is
certainly attainable without effort for those who are knowledgeable and seek
only the knowledge of the **Atma** within themselves.  **Meaning:** The state of
**Nirvana** is certainly attainable without effort for those who are
knowledgeable and seek only the knowledge of the **Atma** within themselves.
**965.** Just as iron becomes gold by the touch of the **Siddh Rasa** (the
essence of perfection), so too the **Atma** becomes **Paramatma** by the
contemplation of the **Atma**.  **Meaning:** Just as iron becomes gold by the
touch of the **Siddh Rasa**, so too the **Atma** becomes **Paramatma** by the
contemplation of the **Atma**.  **966.** The truth shines forth spontaneously
due to the impressions of past lives, just as a person who wakes up from sleep
remembers past experiences without anyone telling them.  **Meaning:** The truth
shines forth spontaneously due to the impressions of past lives, just as a
person who wakes up from sleep remembers past experiences without anyone telling
them.  **967.** Or, the truth shines forth in this very life due to the grace of
the **Guru**. This happens to the pure-minded devotee who is devoted to the
**Guru's** feet and is filled with the essence of peace.  **Meaning:** Or, the
truth shines forth in this very life due to the grace of the **Guru**. This
happens to the pure-minded devotee who is devoted to the **Guru's** feet and is
filled with the essence of peace.  **Both births emphasize the need for the
**Guru's** guidance.**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 anubhavita yoga kA varNana yogazAstra dvAdazama prakAza zloka 7 se 14 ||960 /
AtmadhiyA samupAttaH kAyAdiH kIrtyate'tra bahirAtmA  /  kAyAdeH samAdhiSThAyako,
bhavatyantarAtmA tu||7||  / 961 /  cid rUpAnandamayo, niHzeSopAdhivarjitaH
zuddhaH  /  atyakSo'nantaguNaH, paramAtmA kIrtitastajjJaiH  // 8 //  artha :-
zarIra.dhana, parivAra, strI-patrAdi ko Atmabaddhi (mamatA kI daSTi) se grahaNa
karane vAlA bahirAtmA kahalAtA hai| paraMtu, zarIra to mere rahane kA sthAna
(ghara) hai, maiM usameM rahane vAlA svAmI huuN| yaha zarIra to rahane ke lie
kirAye kA ghara hai| isa prakAra pudgala-svarUpa sukha duHkha ke saMyoga-viyoga
meM harSazoka nahIM karane vAlA aMtarAtmA kahalAtA hai| sattA se cidAnaMdamaya
(kevalajJAna svarUpa AnaMdamaya) samagra bAhya upAdhi se rahita, sphaTika ke
sadRza nirmala, iMdriya Adi se agocara aura anaMtaguNoM se yukta AtmA ko
jJAniyoM ne paramAtmA kahA hai  // 7-8|| bahirAtmA aura aMtarAtmA ke bhedajJAna
se jo lAbha hotA hai, use kahate haiN|962| pRthagAtmAnaM kAyAt pRthak ca vidyAt
sadAtmanaH kAyam  /  ubhayorbhedajJAtA''tmanizcaye na skhaled yogI  // 9 //
artha :- AtmA ko zarIra se bhinna tathA zarIra ko sadA AtmA se bhinna jAnanA
cAhie ||9||in donoM ke bheda kA jJAtA yogI Atma svarUpa ke nizcaya karane meM
vicalita nahIM hotAvaha isa prakAra hai|1963| antaHpihitajyotiH,
saMtuSyatyAtmano'nyato mUDhaH  /  tuSyatyAtmanyeva hi bahirnivRttabhramo jJAnI
// 10 //  artha :- jisakI Atmajyoti karmoM se Dhaka gaI hai, vaha mUr3ha jIva
AtmA se bhinna pudgaloM (padArthoM) meM saMtoSa mAnatA hai| paraMtu bAhya
padArthoM meM sukha kI bhrAMti se nivRtta jJAnI (yogI) apane Atma svarUpa meM hI
AnaMda mAnatA hai  // 10 //  usI ko kahate haiN|964| puMsAmayatnalabhyaM
jJAnavatAmavyayaM padaM nUnam  /  yadyAtmanyAtmajJAnamAtramete samIhante  // 11
//  artha :- yadi ve AtmA meM sirpha AtmajJAna kI hI ceSTA karate haiM aura kisI
anya padArthoM kA vicAra bhI nahIM karate haiM to maiM nizcayapUrvaka kahatA hUM
ki una jJAnI puruSoM ko anAyAsa hI nirvANapada prApta ho sakatA | hai||11|| isI
bAta ko spaSTa rUpa se kahate haiN|965| zrUyate suvarNabhAvaM,
siddharasasparzato yathA loham  /  AtmadhyAnAdAtmA, paramAtmatvaM tathA''pnoti
// 12 //  artha :- sunate hai ki - jaise siddha rasa ke sparza se lohA sonA bana
jAtA hai; usI taraha AtmA kA dhyAna karane | se AtmA paramAtmA bana jAtA hai  //
12 //   / 966 /  janmAntarasaMskArAt svayameva kila prakAzate tattvam  /
suptotthitasya pUrvapratyayavat nirupdeshmpi||13|| artha :- jaise nidrA se
jAgata hae manuSya ko pahale anabhava kiyA haA kArya dasare ke kahe binA.
svayameva yAda A jAtA hai| vaise hI yogI puruSa ko pUrva janma-janmAMtara ke
saMskAroM se upadeza ke binA svataH hI tattva prakAzita ho jAtA hai  // 13 //
jisa yogI ne pUrva janma meM AtmajJAna kA abhyAsa kiyA ho, use nidrA se jAge hue
vyakti ke samAna svayameva | AtmajJAna ho jAtA hai| isameM paropadeza kI
AvazyakatA nahIM rhtii| |967|athvaa guruprasAdAda, ihaiva tattvaM samunmiSati
nUnam  /  gurucaraNopAstikRtaH, prazamajuSaH shuddhcittsy||14|| artha :- athavA
pUrva janma ke saMskAra ke binA hI guru-caraNoM ke upAsaka prazama-rasa saMpanna
nirmalacitta sAdhaka ko guru-kRpA se avazya hI AtmajJAna sphurita ho jAtA hai  /
/ 14 /  /  donoM janmoM meM gurumukhadarzana kI AvazyakatA batAte haiM 456

Page #478 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Description of Experienced Yoga  **Yoga Shastra, Twelfth Light, Verses
15-25**  **Meaning:**  **15.** The Guru is the teacher of the first knowledge of
the Truth in the previous birth, and in the next birth, the Guru is the one who
reveals the knowledge of the Truth. Therefore, one should always serve and
attend to the Guru Maharaj.  **16.** Just as the sun illuminates an object
situated in dense darkness, so too, the Guru illuminates the soul, lost in the
darkness of ignorance, with the light of knowledge in this world (by giving the
true teachings).  **17.** Therefore, having abandoned the afflictions like
Pranayama, etc., the Yogi, having received the teachings of the Guru, should be
devoted to the practice of the Self.  **18.** The Yogi should diligently abandon
the restlessness of speech, mind, and body, and should always keep the Self
steady and calm like a vessel filled with nectar.  **19.** The Yogi, who is
devoted to indifference, should not think about anything at all, so that the
mind does not become agitated by thoughts and desires and does not attain
stability.  **20.** As long as there is even a little effort, as long as there
is any thought or imagination, there will be no attainment of absorption
(Tन्मयता); what to speak of the attainment of the Truth?  **21.** Even the Guru
cannot directly say, "This is that Supreme Truth." For the Yogi who is absorbed
in indifference, that Supreme Truth shines forth by itself.  **22-25.** When the
body becomes absorbed in the Supreme Truth due to indifference, a state of
ecstasy (उन्मनीभाव) manifests. This is explained in four verses:  **22.**
Sitting comfortably in a secluded, extremely pure, and beautiful place, with all
the limbs relaxed from the tip of the toes to the top of the head,  **23.** Even
while seeing a beautiful form, hearing a sweet and pleasing voice, smelling
fragrant substances, and enjoying delicious flavors,  **24.** Even while
touching soft objects and restraining the activities of the mind, the Yogi, who
is absorbed in calculated indifference, is always free from the delusion of
objects.  **25.** The Yogi, who is free from thoughts and actions both inside
and outside, attains absorption in the Supreme Truth and experiences a great
state of ecstasy.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 anubhavita yoga kA varNana yogazAstra dvAdazama prakAza zloka 15 se 25 artha :
|  /  968  /  tatra prathame tattvajJAne, saMvAdako gururbhavati  /  darzayitA
tvaparasmin, gurumeva sadA bhajettasmAt  // 15 //  pUrvajanma meM prathama
tattvajJAna kA upadeSTA guru hI hotA hai aura dUsare janma meM bhI tattvajJAna
batAne vAlA bhI guru hI hotA hai| isalie sadA guru mahArAja kI sevA-zuzrUSA
karanI cAhie  /  /  15  /  /  aba guru mahArAja kI stuti karate haiM  /  /  969
/  yadvat sahasrakiraNaH prakAzako nicitatimiramagnasya  /  tadvad gururatra
bhavedajJAna - dhvAnta - ptitsy||16|| artha :- jaise atigAr3ha aMdhakAra meM
sthita padArtha ko sUrya prakAzita kara detA hai; vaise hI ajJAna rUpI aMdhakAra
meM bhaTakate hue AtmA ko isa saMsAra meM (tattvopadeza dekara ) guru jJAna
jyoti prakAzita kara detA hai  /  /  16  /  /  isalie  /  970  /  prANAyAma-
-prabhRti-klezaparityAgatastato yogI  /  upadezaM prApya guroH, AtmAbhyAse ratiM
kuryAt  // 17 //  :- ataH prANAyAma Adi kleza kara upAyoM kA tyAga karake yogI
guru kA upadeza prApta kara Atma svarUpa ke abhyAsa meM hI magna rahe ||17||
isake bAda artha ||971  /  vacana- manaH kAyAnAM, kSobhaM yatnena varjayet
zAntaH  /  rasabhANDamivAtmAnaM sunizcalaM dhArayet nitym|| 18 //  mana, vacana
aura kAyA kI caMcalatA kA prayatna pUrvaka tyAga karake yogI ko rasa se bhare
bartana kI taraha AtmA ko sthira aura zAMta banAkara sadA atinizcala rakhanA
cAhie ||18|| artha :  / 972  /  audAsInyaparAyaNa - vRttiH kiJcidapi
cintayennaiva  /  yat saGkalpAkulitaM cittaM nAsAdayet sthairym||19|| artha :-
bAhyapadArtho ke prati udAsInabhAva rakhane vAle yogI ko isa prakAra kA kiMcit
bhI ciMtana nahIM karanA cAhie, jisase mana saMkalpa-vikalpoM se Akula-vyAkula
hokara sthiratA prApta na kare  /  / 19 /  /  aba vyatireka bhAva ko kahate haiM
|| 973  /  yAvat prayatnalezo, yAvat saGkalpakalpanA kA'pi  /  tAvanna layasyApi
prAptistattvasya kA tu kathA ? | 20|| artha :- jaba taka mana-vacana-kAya - yoga
se saMbaMdhita kucha bhI prayatna vidyamAna hai aura jaba taka saMkalpa yukta
kucha bhI kalpanA maujUda hai, taba taka laya (tanmayatA) kI prApti nahIM hogI;
tattvaprApti kI to bAta hI kyA hai ?  /  / 20 /  /  aba udAsInatA kA phala
kahate haiM |  /  974|ydidN taditi na vaktuM sAkSAd guruNA'pi hanta ! zakyeta  /
audAsInyaparasya, prakAzate tat svayaM tattvam  // 21 //  artha :- 'yaha vaha
paramAtmatattva hai' yoM to sAkSAt guru bhI kahane meM samartha nahIM hai|
udAsInabhAva meM tallIna bane hue yogI ko vaha paramAtmatattva svayameva
prakAzita hotA hai  /  /  21  /   /  udAsInatA meM rahane para kAyA paramatattva
meM tanmaya ho jAtI hai aura usameM unmanIbhAva prakaTa ho jAtA hai; yaha bAta |
cAra zlokoM dvArA spaSTa karate haiM  /  975  /  ekAnte'tipavitre ramye deze
sadA sukhAsInaH  /  AcaraNAgrazikhAgrataH zithilIbhUtAkhilAvayavaH ||22|| |  /
976  /  rUpaM kAntaM pazyannapi zRNvannapi giraM kalamanojJAm  /  jighrannapi ca
sugandhInyapi, bhuJjAno rasAn svAdUn ||23|| |  /  977|bhAvAn spRzannapi
mRdUnavArayannapi ca cetaso vRttim| parikalitaudAsInyaH, praNaSTaviSayabhramo
nityam ||24|| || 978  /  bahirantazca samantAt, cintA - ceSTAparicyuto yogo  /
tanmayabhAvaM prAptaH kalayati bhRshmunmniibhaavm||25|| atipavitra, ekAMta aura
ramaNIya sthala meM sadA paira ke aMgUThe se lekara coTI ke agrabhAgaparyaMta
samasta avayavoM ko zithila karake lambe samaya taka baiTha sake, aise dhyAna ke
anurUpa kisI bhI sukhAsana se baitthe| aisI dazA meM manohara rUpa ko dekhatA
huA bhI, madhura manojJa vANI ko sunatA huA bhI, sugaMdhita padArthoM ko
sUMghatA huA bhI, svAdiSTa rasa kA AsvAda karatA huA bhI, komala padArthoM kA
sparza karatA huA artha : 457

Page #479 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Description of Experienced Yoga  **Chapter 12, Verses 26-35**  Even without
stopping the activities of the mind, the yogi, filled with indifference
(nirmamtavabhav), devoid of constant attachment to objects, and free from all
external and internal anxieties and efforts, becomes absorbed in the object of
meditation and attains a state of extreme bliss. ||22-25||  Now, the purpose of
not restraining the senses is explained. ||979||  The senses receive their
respective objects. Do not restrain them, nor should you make them engage in
objects. By doing so, the knowledge of the truth is revealed in a short time.
||26||  In the Vitaragastotra, we have said, "O Lord! You have not restrained
the senses, nor have you left them free; but you have conquered the senses with
indifference." ||26||  The following two verses explain how to conquer the mind.
||980||  Wherever the mind wanders, do not forcibly restrain it from there. For,
the restrained mind becomes more agitated, while the unrestrained mind attains
peace. ||27||  Just as a maddened elephant, when forcibly restrained, becomes
more frenzied, but when left unrestrained, becomes calm after obtaining its
desired objects, so too, the mind becomes calm by obtaining its desired objects.
||28||  The following two verses explain how to stabilize the mind. ||982||
Just as the yogi's restless mind becomes steady in a particular place and by a
particular means, so too, it should not be moved in the least from that place
and by that means. By practicing this method of mind control, even the most
restless mind becomes steady, like a stick placed on the tip of a finger.
||29-30||  Now, the following two verses explain the means of conquering the
senses. ||984||  First, the sight goes out and merges into some place. Then,
having attained stability there, it gradually dissolves, i.e., retreats. Thus,
the sight, spread everywhere and gradually withdrawn from there, becomes steady
in the pure mirror of the supreme truth and sees the Self with the Self.
||31-32||  Now, the following three verses explain the method of conquering the
mind. ||986||  The yogi, constantly immersed in indifference, free from all
effort, and cultivating the feeling of supreme bliss, does not engage the mind
anywhere. When the Self neglects the mind, it does not take refuge in the
senses. That is, the mind does not then impel the senses towards objects. The
senses also do not engage in their respective objects. ||33-34||  Neither the
Self impels the mind, nor does the mind impel the senses. When both are
abandoned, they automatically perish. ||35||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 anubhavita yoga kA varNana yogazAstra dvAdazama prakAza zloka 26 se 35 bhI aura
mana kI vRtti na rokatA huA bhI udAsInatA (nirmamatvabhAva) se yukta, nitya
viSayAsakti-rahita tathA bAhya aura AMtarika samasta ciMtAoM evaM ceSTAoM se
rahita yogI tanmayabhAva banakara atyaMta unmanIbhAva ko prApta karatA hai  /  /
22-25 /  /  aba iMdriyoM ko nahIM rokane kA prayojana batAte haiN||979| gRhNanti
grAhyANi svAni svAnIndriyANi no rudhyAt  /  na khalu pravartayed vA, prakAzate
tattvamacireNa  // 26 /  /  artha :- iMdriyA~ apane-apane grAhya viSayoM ko
grahaNa karatI haiN| unheM na to roke aura na unheM viSaya meM pravRtta kre|
aisA karane se alpakAla meM hI tattvajJAna prakAzita ho jAtA hai  // 26 //
hamane vItarAgastotra meM kahA hai-'prabho! Apane iMdriyoM ko rokI nahIM hai
aura na hI unheM svacchaMda chor3I haiM; paraMtu |Apane udAsInabhAva se iMdriyoM
para vijaya pAI hai'  /  / 26 /  /  mana para vijaya kisa prakAra pA sakate
haiM, yaha do zlokoM dvArA kahate haiN||980| ceto'pi yatra yatra, pravartate no
tatastato vAryam  /  adhikIbhavati hi vAritam, avAritaM zAntimupayAti  // 27 //
/ 981 /  matto hastI yatnAt nivAryamANo'dhikIbhavati yadvat  /  anivAritastu
kAmAn, labdhvA zAmyati manastadvat  /  / 28 /  /  artha :- mana bhI jisa-jisa
viSaya meM pravRtti karatA ho, usase use balAt nahIM rokanA cAhie; kyoMki balAt
rokA gayA mana usa aura adhika daur3ane lagatA hai, aura nahIM rokane se vaha
zAMta ho jAtA hai| jaise madonmata . hAthI ko prayatnapUrvaka rokane se vaha
adhika unmatta ho jAtA hai aura use na rokA jAya to vaha apane iSTa viSayoM ko
prApta kara zAMta ho jAtA hai| isa prakAra mana bhI usI taraha kI viSaya-prApti
se zAMta ho jAtA hai  // 27-28 //  mana ke sthira hone kA upAya do zlokoM dvArA
kahate haiN1982| yahi yathA yatra yataH, sthirIbhavati yoginazcalaMcetaH  /
tarhi tathA tatra tataH, kathaJcidapi caalyennaiv||29||  / 983 /  anayA
yuktayA'bhyAsaM vidadhAnasyAtilolamapi cetaH  /  agulyagrasthApitadaNDa iva
sthairymaashryti||30|| artha :- jaba, jisa prakAra, jisa sthAna meM aura jisase
yogI kA caMcala citta nizcala rahe; taba, usI prakAra, usI jagaha aura nimitta
se use tanika bhI calAyamAna nahIM karanA caahie| isa yukti se manonirodha kA
abhyAsa karane se aticaMcala mana bhI aMgulI ke agrabhAga para sthApita kiye hue
daMDa ke samAna sthira ho jAtA hai  // 29-30 //  aba do zlokoM se iMdriyajaya ke
upAya batAte haiN|984| niHsRtyAdau dRSTiH saGlInA yatra kutracit sthAne  /
tatrAsAdya sthairya zanaiH zanairvilayamApnoti  // 31 //   / 985 /  sarvatrApi
prasRtA, pratyagbhUtA zanaiH zanaidRSTiH  /  paratattvAmalamukure, nirIkSate
hyAtmanA''tmAnam  /  / 32 /  /  artha :- sarvaprathama dRSTi bAhara nikalakara
kisI bhI sthAna meM saMlIna ho jAtI hai; phira vahA~ sthiratA prApta karake
dhIre-dhIre vahA~ se vilayana ho jAtI hai| arthAt pIche haTa jAtI hai| isa
prakAra sarvatra phailI huI aura vahA~ se dhIre-dhIre haTI huI dRSTi
paramatattva rUpa svaccha darpaNa meM sthira hokara AtmA ko dekhatI hai||31-32||
aba tIna zlokoM dvArA manovijaya kI vidhi kahate haiN|986|audaasiinynimgnH,
prayatnaparivarjitaH satatamAtmA  /  bhAvitaparamAnandaH, kvacidapi na mano
niyojyti||33|| |987|krnnaani nAdhitiSThantyupekSitaM cittamAtmanA jAtu  /
grAhye tato nija-nije, karaNAnyapi na pravartante  // 34 //   / 988 /  nAtmA
prerayati mano, na manaH prerayati yahi karaNAni  /  ubhayabhraSTaM tarhi,
svayameva vinAzamApnoti  // 35 //  artha :- niraMtara udAsInabhAva meM tallIna
banA huA sarvaprakAra ke prayatna se rahita aura paramAnaMdadazA kI bhAvanA
karane vAlA yogI mana ko kahIM bhI nahIM lgaataa| isa prakAra AtmA jaba mana kI
upekSA kara detA hai, taba vaha iMdriyoM kA Azraya nahIM krtaa| arthAt taba mana
iMdriyoM ko viSayoM meM prerita nahIM krtaa| iMdriyA~ bhI 458

Page #480 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Yoga Shastra, Twelfth Light, Verses 36-42  **The Description of Experienced
Yoga**  **Verse 36:** When the cause-and-effect relationship of the mind is
destroyed on all sides, meaning when it becomes calm like fire covered in ash,
and all its activities like worry, memory, etc., are destroyed like the flow of
water, then the soul, like a lamp placed in a windless place, reveals its true
nature free from the impurities of karma.  **Verse 37:** **The Identification of
True Knowledge** When true knowledge manifests, the body becomes soft even
without sweating or massage, and it becomes oily without any oil application.
This is a sign of the manifestation of true knowledge.  **Verse 38:** **The
Second Sign** When the mental affliction is destroyed by the arising of a mind-
free state, the body of the true knower becomes relaxed like an umbrella that
has lost its stiffness.  **Verse 39:** The only medicine to remove the
affliction of the inner being, which constantly causes suffering, is the mind-
free state.  **Verse 40:** **The Fruit of the Mind-Free State** Ignorance is
like a banana plant, the fickle senses are its leaves, and the mind is its root.
Just as the banana plant is destroyed when its fruit appears, because it will
not bear fruit again, so too, when the fruit of the mind-free state appears,
ignorance is completely destroyed, and no further karma is accumulated.  **Verse
41:** **The Mind-Free State is the Key to Conquering the Mind** The mind is
extremely fickle, subtle, and fast, making it very difficult to control.
Therefore, without giving the mind rest, one should pierce it with the arrow of
the mind-free state, without any negligence.  **Verse 42:** **The Fruit of the
Mind-Free State for Yogis** When the mind-free state arises, the yogi
experiences his body as if it were dissolved, like mercury, like a lump of
butter, like a piece of cloth, or like water. He then recognizes the false
nature of his thoughts.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 yogazAstra dvAdazama prakAza zloka 36 se 42 mana kI madada ke binA apane-apane
viSaya meM pravRtta nahIM hotii| jaba AtmA mana ko prerita nahIM karatA aura
mana iMdriyoM ko prerita nahIM karatA; taba donoM tarapha se bhraSTa banA huA
mana apane Apa hI vinaSTa ho jAtA hai  /  / 33-35  /  /  anubhavita yoga kA
varNana manovijaya kA phala kahate haiM artha  /  989  /  naSTe manasi samantAt,
sakale vilayaM ca sarvato yAte  /  niSkalamudeti tattvaM, nirvAtasthAyidIpa iva
//  36  //  :- isa prakAra mana kA kArya-kAraNabhAva yA preraka-preryabhAva
cAroM ora se naSTa hone para, arthAt rAkha se DhakI huI agni ke samAna zAMta ho
jAne para aura ciMtA, smRti Adi usake sabhI vyApAra jalapravAha meM bahate hue
agrika ke samAna vilaya (kSaya) ho jAne para vAyu-rahita sthAna meM rakhe hue
dIpaka ke samAna AtmA meM karmamala se rahita niSkalaMka tattvajJAna prakaTa
hotA hai  /  /  36  /  /  tattvajJAna hone kI pahacAna batAte haiM -  /  990  /
aGgamRdutva - nidAnaM, svedana - mardana - vivarjanenApi  /
snigdhIkaraNamatailaM, prakAzamAnaM hi tattvamidam ||37|| artha :- pahale kahe
anusAra jaba tattvajJAna prakaTa ho jAtA hai, taba pasInA na hone para aura
aMga-mardana na karane para bhI zarIra komala ho jAtA hai, tela kI mAliza ke
binA hI zarIra cikanA ho jAtA hai, yaha tattvajJAna prakaTa hone kI nizAnI hai
||37|| dUsarA lakSaNa batAte haiM  /  991 | amanaskatayA saJjAyamAnayA nAzite
manaHzalye  /  zithilIbhavati zarIraM, chatramiva stabdhatAM tyaktvA  //  38  //
artha :- mana kA zalya naSTa ho jAne se, manorahita unmanIbhAva utpanna hone
para tattvajJAnI kA zarIra chAte ke samAna stabdhatA ( akar3AI) chor3akara
zithila ho jAtA ||38|| |  /  992  /  zalyIbhUtasyAntaHkaraNasya klezadAyinaH
satatam  /  amanaskatAM vinA'nyad, vizalyakaraNauSadhaM nAsti  //  39  //  artha
:- niraMtara kleza dene vAle zalyIbhUta (kAMTe kI taraha bane hue) aMtakaraNa ko
niHzalya karane vAlI auSadha amanaskatA (unmanIbhAva ) ke sivAya aura koI nahIM
hai ||39|| unmanIbhAva kA phala kahate haiM |  /  993  /  kadalIvaccAvidyA,
lolendriyapatralA manaH kandA  /  amanaskaphale dRSTe, nazyati sarvaprakAreNa
// 40 //  artha :- avidyA kele ke paudhe ke samAna hai, caMcala iMdriyA~ usake
patte haiM, mana rUpI usakA kaMda hai| jaise usameM phala dikhAyI dene para kele
ke per3a ko naSTa kara diyA jAtA hai, kyoMki usameM punaH phala nahIM Ate, usI
prakAra unmanIbhAva rUpI phala dikhAI dene para avidyA bhI pUrNa rUpa se naSTa
ho jAtI hai, isake bAda dUsare karma lagate nahIM haiM ||40  //  mana ko jItane
meM amanaskatA hI mukhya kAraNa hai; use kahate haiM |  /  994  //
aticaJcalamatisUkSmaM, durlakSyaM vegavattayA cetaH  /  azrAntamapramAdAd,
amanaskazalAkayA bhindyAt  // 41 //  artha :- mana aticaMcala, atisUkSma aura
tIvra vegavAlA hone ke kAraNa use rokakara rakhanA atikaThina hai, ataHmana ko
vizrAma diye binA pramAdarahita hokara anamaskatA rUpI zalAkA se usakA bhedana
karanA cAhie ||41|| mana ko mArane ke lie amanaskatA hI zalAkA rUpa zastra hai|
amanaskatA ke udaya hone para yogiyoM ko kyA phala | milatA hai, ise batalAte
haiM |  /  995  /  vizliSTamiva pluSTamivoDDInamiva pralInamiva kAyam  /
amanaskodaya - samaye, yogI jaanaatystklpm||42|| artha :- amanaskatA udaya ho
jAne ke samaya yogI yaha anubhava karane lagatA hai ki merA zarIra pAre ke
samAna 459

Page #481 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Description of Experienced Yoga  **Yoga Shastra, Twelfth Light, Verses
43-52**  **42.** Scattered, burnt to ashes, flown away, melted, and the body is
not one's own (Asatkalapa).  **43.** Freed from the serpents of intoxicated
senses, the yogi, immersed in the new nectar-pond of unmanliness, experiences
the unparalleled and excellent taste of the nectar of truth.  **44.** When
unmanliness is attained, even without the practice sequence of exhalation,
inhalation, retention, and postures, the wind naturally disappears by itself
with sincere effort.  **45.** The wind that cannot be held even with long and
repeated efforts, is immediately stabilized by the yogi when unmanliness is
attained.  **46.** When there is stability in the practice of this unmanliness,
and when the pure (free from the web of karma) undivided knowledge of truth
arises, the yogi appears like a liberated person, with the complete eradication
of breath.  **47.** In the waking state, the yogi, established in his own nature
(Atma-swaroop), remains steady like a sleeping person in the state of absorption
(laya). Being devoid of breath in the state of absorption, he is not at all
inferior to the liberated soul; rather, he is like a Siddha.  **48.** People
dwelling on this earth always experience the states of waking and dreaming, but
the knower of truth, immersed in absorption, neither wakes nor sleeps.  **49.**
In the dream state, there is certainly emptiness, and in the waking state, the
yogi perceives the objects of the senses. But after attaining the truth, he
transcends both these states and remains established in the blissful state of
absorption (laya).  **50.** Actions are for sorrow, that is, the cause of sorrow
is the actions performed by oneself, and being actionless is for happiness. If
you know this truth, why don't you strive to attain actionlessness for the easy
path of liberation?  **51.** Whether there is liberation or not, the supreme
bliss is experienced here directly through meditation. When this supreme bliss
is attained, all the pleasures of the world appear as insignificant as grass.
**52.** Honey is not sweet, nor are these pleasures, but the frost-like nectar
is truly sweet. The name of nectar is given to this, but its fruit is false
nectar. Therefore, give up this striving and be happy, friend! This fruit of the
mind, without any defect, is yours when you attain grace.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 anubhavita yoga kA varNana yogazAstra dvAdazama prakAza zloka 43 se 52 bikharA
huA hai, jalakara bhasma ho gayA hai, ur3a gayA hai pighala gayA hai aura apanA
zarIra apanA nahIM (asatkalpa ) hai ||42  //   /  996  /
samadairindriyabhujagai rahite vimanaska - navasudhAkuNDe  /  magno'nubhavati
yogI praamRtaasvaadmsmaanm||43|| artha :- madonmatta iMdriya rUpI sarpoM se
mukta hokara yogI unmanabhAva rUpa navIna amRtakuNDa meM magna hokara anupama
aura utkRSTa tattvAmRta ke svAda kA anubhava karatA hai ||43|| ||997 recaka -
pUraka- kuMbhaka - karaNAbhyAsakramaM vinA'pi khalu  /  svayameva nazyati marud,
vimanaske satyayatnena||44|| artha :- amanaskatA kI prApti ho jAne para recaka,
pUraka, kuMbhaka aura AsanoM ke abhyAsa krama ke binA bhI anAyAsa hI vAyu
svayameva naSTa ho jAtI hai  /  /  44  /  /  |  /  998  /
ciramAhitaprayatnairapi dhartuM yo hi zakyate naiva  /  satyamanaske tiSThati,
sa samIrastatkSaNAdeva ||45|| jisa vAyu ko cirakAla taka aneka prayatnoM se bhI
dhAraNa nahIM kiyA jA sakatA; usI ko amanaska hone para yogI tatkAla eka jagaha
sthira kara detA hai  /  /  45  /  /  artha : ||999| jAte'bhyAse sthiratAm,
udayati vimale ca niSkale tattve  /  mukta iva bhAti yogI samUlamunmUlitazvAsaH
// 46 //  artha :- isa unmanIbhAva ke abhyAsa meM sthiratA hone para tathA
nirmala (karmajAla-rahita) akhaMDa tattvajJAna ke udaya hone para zvAsocchvAsa
kA samUla unmUlana karake yogI mukta puruSa ke samAna pratIta hotA hai  /  /  46
/  /  tathA||1000| yo jAgradavasthAyAM, svasthaH supta iva tiSThati layastha:  /
zvAsocchvAsa - vihInaH sa hIyate na khalu muktijuSaH || 47|| artha :- jAgrata
avasthA meM sva-svarUpa (Atma-svarUpa) meM sthita (svastha ) yogI laya nAmaka
dhyAna meM soye hue vyakti ke samAna sthira rahatA hai| zvAsocchvAsa-rahita
layAvasthA meM vaha yogI mukta AtmA se jarA bhI hIna nahIM hotA; balki siddha ke
samAna hI hotA hai  /  /  47  /  /  |  /  1001 | jAgaraNasvapnajuSo,
jagatItalavartinaH sadA lokAH  /  tattvavido layamagnA, no jAgrati zerate nApi
// 48 //  artha :- isa pRthvItala para rahane vAle jIva sadA jAgaraNa aura
svapnadazA kA anubhava karate haiM, paraMtu laya meM magna tattvajJAnI na jAgate
haiM, aura na sote haiM  /  / 48  /  /  |  /  1002 | bhavati khalu zUnyabhAvaH,
svapne viSayagrahazca jAgaraNe  /  etad dvitayamatItyAnandamayamavasthitaM
tttvm|| 49  //  artha :- tathA svapnadazA meM nizcaya hI zUnyabhAva hotA hai
aura jAgRta avasthA meM yogI iMdriyoM ke viSayoM ko grahaNa karatA hai, kintu
tattva kI prApti hone ke bAda ina donoM avasthAoM se pare hokara vaha AnaMdamaya
tattva=laya meM sthita rahatA hai  /  /  49  /  /  upAlambha dete hue samasta
upadezoM kA sAra batAte haiM | | 2003 | karmANyapi duHkhakRte niSkarmatvaM
sukhAya viditaM tu  /  na tataH prayateta kathaM, niSkarmatve sulabhamokSe?  //
50 //  artha :- karma duHkha ke lie haiM, arthAt duHkha kA kAraNa apane Apa kiye
hue karma haiM aura karmarahita honA sukha ke lie hai; yadi tuma isa tattva ko
jAnate ho to sulabha mokSamArga ke lie niSkarmatva-prApti kA prayatna kyoM nahIM
karate?  // 50 //  ||1004  /  mokSo'stu mA'stu yadi vA paramAnandastu vedyate sa
khalu  /  yasmin nikhilasukhAni, pratibhAsante na kinycidiv||51|| mokSa ho yA na
ho; paraMtu dhyAna se prApta hone vAlA paramAnaMda to yahA~ pratyakSa anubhUta
hotA hai| isa paramAnaMda prApta hone para jagat ke sabhI sukha tRNa ke samAna
tuccha pratIta hote haiM  /  /  51|| artha : isI bAta kA spaSTIkaraNa karate hue
batAte haiM  /  1005 /  madhu na madhuraM naitAH zotAstviSastuhinadyute  /
amRtamamRtaM nAmaivAsyAH phale tu mudhA sudhA  /  tadalamamunA saMrambheNa
prasIda sakhe! manaH phalamavikalaM tvayyevaitat prasAdamupeyuSi  // 52 //  460

Page #482 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Description of Experienced Yoga - Conclusion  **Verse 53-55 of the Twelfth
Chapter of Yoga Shastra:**  **Meaning:** In the face of the fruit of Uन्मनीभाव
(state of being free from the mind), honey does not seem sweet, the moon's
radiance does not appear cool, nectar remains only in name, and the fruit of
nectar becomes fruitless. Therefore, O friend of the mind! Stop striving for
efforts that bring pain in the end. Now be happy with me, because the attainment
of the unbroken fruit of supreme bliss depends on your happiness. ||52||  The
Guru, who teaches about Uन्मनीभाव through self-experience, is praised through
the expression of Vyatireka-bhava (contrasting feeling). 1006.  **Meaning:** As
long as the state of mind exists, objects like tigers, which cause aversion, and
objects like women, which cause attraction, are perceived by the mind as causing
pain and pleasure, even when they are far away. But when the mind does not
exist, i.e., when Uन्मनीभाव is attained, even if objects that cause aversion or
attraction are near, they do not cause pain or pleasure. Pleasure and pain are
based on mental tendencies; they are not caused by the attainment of objects or
by the enjoyment of objects. Therefore, why would those who know this truth not
have a strong desire to worship the Sadguru, who is the cause of Uन्मनीभाव? It
is certain that they will. ||53||  Now, for the sake of self-joy, which is the
means to overcome the mind, it is said: 1007.  **Meaning:** O foolish one! O
Lord of the Self! You are seeking to attain the Supreme Self. Why do you trouble
yourself by going to other gods, offering them gifts, making vows, and seeking
to obtain desired objects like wealth, fame, prosperity, kingdom, heaven, etc.,
through their service, worship, devotion, etc., with the desire to get rid of
diseases, poverty, and other misfortunes? Alas! Why don't you please your own
Self-God, so that the wealth of unreal things may be abandoned, and your vast
kingdom of pure knowledge may manifest in the light of supreme brilliance?
||54||  **Explanation:** Here, "O Lord of the Self!" is said because he will be
worthy of worship in the future. Until now, he has been trying to please other
gods, or those who are called gods, by considering them as the Supreme Lord. In
this, he has been deceived by being foolish. Therefore, by removing Rajoguna
(passion) and Tamoguna (inertia), i.e., by removing the desire for worldly
pleasures in this world or the next, O Lord of eternal happiness! Please your
own Self-God. By doing so, you will surely obtain other worldly wealth or
prosperity in the form of the removal of misfortunes; but you will also manifest
the ownership of the vast kingdom of pure knowledge, which is the form of
supreme light (knowledge). The meaning is that by abandoning the effort to
please the whole world, please only your own soul, so that the wealth and power
of Godhood can be easily obtained. Without it, all efforts are in vain. In such
a kingdom, Uन्मनीभाव becomes easy. ||54||  We had previously stated that we had
learned this from the ocean of principles, from the tradition of Sadgurus, and
from self-experience. Now, we have fulfilled that statement by composing the
Yoga Shastra text. Now, we conclude it. 1008.  **Meaning:** This Shastra, which
is full of wonder, is a collection of the Upanishads and the teachings of the
wise, which has been learned from the Shastra, from the mouth of the Sadguru,
and from experience. It has been presented by the Acharya, Shri Hemachandra, at
the request of the great King Shri Chaulukya Kumarapala. ||55||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 anubhavita yoga kA varNana - upasaMhAra yogazAstra dvAdazama prakAza zloka 53
se 55 artha :- isa unmanIbhAva ke phala ke sAmane madhu madhura nahIM lagatA,
caMdramA kI kAMti bhI zItala nahIM pratIta hotI, amRta kevala nAmamAtra kA amRta
raha jAtA hai aura sudhA kA phala bhI niSphala hI ho jAtA hai| isalie he
manamitra! tUM pariNAma meM duHkha dene vAle prayAsa ko basa kr| aba tUM mujha
para prasanna ho, kyoMki akhaMDa paramAnaMda-phala kI prApti tere prasanna hone
para hI nirbhara hai  // 52 //  svAnubhava se unmanIbhAva-saMbaMdhI upadeza dene
vAle guru kI stuti vyatirekabhAva se batAte haiN|1006| satyetasminnarati-ratidaM
guhyate vastu dUrAdapyAsanna'pyasati tu manasyApyate nava kiJcit  /  /
puMsAmityapyavagatavatAmunmanIbhAvahetAvicchA bADhaM na bhavati kathaM
sadgurupAsanAyAm  // 53 //  artha :- jaba taka mana kI sthiti vidyamAna hai,
taba taka arati ke kAraNa rUpa vyAghra Adi aura rati ke kAraNa rUpa strI Adi
vastueM dUra hone para bhI mana ke dvArA duHkha-sukha grahaNa kiye jAte haiM
aura mana vidyamAna na ho, arthAt unmanIbhAva ho jAne para arati yA rati dene
vAlI vastu pAsa meM ho, to bhI vaha duHkhasukha grahaNa nahIM krtaa| sukha-
duHkha to manasaMbaMdhI vRttiyoM para AdhArita hai; viSayoM kI prApti se yA
viSaya-bhoga-se utpanna hone vAle nhiiN| ataH isa tattva ke jJAtA puruSoM kA
unmanIbhAva ke kAraNabhUta sadguru kI upAsanA karane kI prabala abhilASA kyoM
nahIM hogI? avazyameva hogI  // 53 //  aba amanaskatA kI upAyabhUta Atma-
prasannatA ke lie batAte hai  / 1007 /  tAMstAnAparamezvarAdapi parAn bhAvaiH
prasAdaM nayan, taistaistattadupAyamUDha! bhagavannAtman! kimaayaasysi?|
hantAtmanamapi prasAdaya manAg yenAsatAM sampadaH, sAmrAjyaM parame'pi tajasi
tava prAjyaM smujjRmbhte||54|| artha :- paramAnaMda prApta karane ke yathArtha
upAyoM se anabhijJa mUr3ha! bhagavan Atman! tUM isa paramAtmA ko prApta kr|
aparamezvara-rUpa dUsare kisI bhI deva ke pAsa jAkara iSTa padArtha bheMTa
dekara, manautI karake unakI sevApUjA-bhakti Adi upAyoM se dhana, yaza, vidhA,
rAjya, svarga Adi iSTa padArthoM kI prArthanA karake roga, daridratA, tuccha
upadrava Adi anarthoM se chuTakArA pAne kI cAha se prerita hokara are
Atmabhagavan! apane Apako kyoM parezAna karate ho? aphasosa hai, apane Atmadeva
ko bhI to jarA prasanna kara, jisase asat padArthoM kI saMpadAe~ chUTakara
kevalajJAna rUpa paramateja ke prakAza meM terA vizAla sAmrAjya prakaTa ho  //
54 //  vyAkhyA :- yahA~ 'Atmabhagavan! bhaviSya meM pUjya hone ke kAraNa se kahA
gayA hai| abhI taka to dUsare upAyoM se athavA dUsare tathAkathita devoM ko
paramezvara mAnakara unheM khuza karatA rhaa| isameM tUM mUr3ha banakara ThagA
gayA hai| isalie rajoguNa aura tamoguNa dUra kara, arthAt isa loka yA paraloka
kI sAMsArika sukhAbhilASA dUra karake zAzvata sukha ke svAmI Atman! tUM apane
Atmadeva ko hI jarA prasanna kara; isase dUsarI laukika saMpatti athavA anartha-
parihAra rUpa samRddhi to milane vAlI hI hai; paraMtu parama-jyoti (jJAna)
svarUpa kevalajJAna ke vizAla sAmrAjya kA svAmitva tujha meM prakaTa hogaa|
kahane kA tAtparya yaha hai ki 'sAre jagat ko prasanna karane kA prayAsa
chor3akara kevala eka apanI AtmA ko prasanna kara, jisase paramezvaratva kI
saMpadAe~ aura aizvarya AsAnI se prApta hotA hai| usake binA saba prayatna
vyartha smjhnaa| isa prakAra ke sAmrAjya meM unmanIbhAva sulabha banatA hai  /
/ 54 /  /  hamane pahale 'siddhAMta rUpa samudra se sadguru-paraMparA se aura
svAnubhava se jAnakara, ityAdi kathana kiyA thA, use |nibhAkara yAnI yogazAstra
graMtha kI racanA pUrNa kara dii| aba usakA upasaMhAra karate haiM  / 1008 /  yA
zAstrAt suguromukhAdanubhavAccAjJAyi kiJcit kvacit  /  yogasyopaniSad-
vivekipariSaccetazcamatkAriNI  /  zrIcaulukya-kumArapAla-
nRpateratyarthamabhyarthanAd  /  AcAryeNa nivezitA pathi girAM zrIhemacandreNa
sA  // 55 /  /  461

Page #483 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Description of Experienced Yoga - Conclusion  **Verse 55-52 of the Twelfth
Light of Yoga Shastra:**  Meaning: From the Agamas and other scriptures, and
from the mouth of the melodious Guru who beautifully explains them, and from my
own experience, the little secret of Yoga that I have come to know, is so
amazing that it would captivate the minds of learned scholars interested in
Yoga. Therefore, at the earnest request of King Kumarapala of the Chalukya
dynasty, Acharya Shri Hemchandra presented this treatise called Yoga Shastra
through the medium of speech. ||5||  **Explanation:** Maharaja Shri Kumarapala
was very fond of the practice of Yoga. He had also seen other scriptures on
Yoga, so he had a desire to hear a unique (wonderful) Yoga Shastra. Even though
he was unable to fulfill his promise, Acharya Shrimad Hemchandrasuri Shwaraji
composed this treatise called "Adhyatma Upanishad", which is the essence of
Yoga, and presented it through the medium of speech. ||5||  **Thus, it is
auspicious.**  Now, at the end of this commentary (explanation), two verses are
presented in the form of praise:  **Verse 1:**  Meaning: Concluding this self-
composed commentary, I say that, inspired by the prayer of Kumarapala, born in
the Chalukya dynasty, I have composed this commentary (detailed explanation) of
Yoga Shastra, which is like an ocean of nectar for those who know the truth.
This commentary is unique and will remain as long as the three worlds, heaven,
earth, and hell, are filled with the Jain teachings.  **Verse 2:**  Meaning:
Whatever good deeds (merit) I have earned by composing this Yoga Shastra and its
commentary, may it make the worthy beings become lovers of the knowledge of the
Jinas.  **Thus, this commentary on the twelve lights of Yoga Shastra, composed
by Acharya Shri Hemchandra, at the service of the great King Kumarapala, is
complete.**  **Thus, the Yoga Shastra is complete.**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 anubhavita yoga kA varNana - upasaMhAra yogazAstra dvAdazama prakAza zloka 55
se 52 artha :- AgamoM aura anya zAstroM se tathA inakI yathArtha suMdara vyAkhyA
karane vAle gItArtha suguru ke mukhAraviMda se tathA mere apane anubhava se yoga
kA jo alpa rahasya jAnane meM AyA, vaha yogaruci vAle paMDitoM kI pariSad
(sabhA) ke citta ko camatkRta karane vAlA hone se zrI caulukyavaMzIya kumArapAla
rAjA kI atyaMta prArthanA se AcAryazrI hemacaMdra ne yogazAstra nAmaka graMtha
vANI ke mArga se prastuta kiyA hai||5|| vyAkhyA :- zrIkumArapAla mahArAjA ko
yoga kI upAsanA atipriya thii| unhoMne yogaviSayaka anya zAstra bhI dekhe the,
isalie pUrvaracita yogazAstra se vilakSaNa (adbhuta) yogazAstra sunane kI unheM
abhilASA thI aura prArthanA karane para vacana ke agocara hone para bhI yoga kA
sArabhUta 'adhyAtma-upaniSad' nAmaka yaha graMtha racakara AcArya
zrImadhemacaMdrasUrIzvarajI ne vANI ke mArga se lipibaddha karake isa yogazAstra
ko prastuta kiyA hai  /  / 5 /  /  iti shubhm| aba isa vRtti (vyAkhyA) ke aMta
meM prazasti rUpa meM do zloka prastuta karate haiM zrI caulukyakSitipatikRta-
prArthanAprerito'haM, tattvajJAnAmRtajalanidheryogazAstrasya vRttim  /
svopajJasya vyaracayamimAM tAvadeSA ca nanyAd, yAvajjainapravacanavatI
bhUrbhuvaHsvasrayIyam  // 1 //  artha :- svopajJa vyAkhyA kA upasaMhAra karate
hue kahate haiM ki- 'caulukya vaMza meM janma lene vAle kumArapAla rAjA kI
prArthanA se prerita hokara maiMne tattvajJAnAmRta ke samudra samAna svayaM
racita vivaraNa sahita yogazAstra kI isa vRtti (vivecanayukta TIkA) kI racanA kI
hai, jaba taka svarga, mRtyu aura pAtAla rUpa tInoM lokoM meM jaina-
pravacanamaya Agama raheM, taba taka isa vRttisahita yaha graMtha sadA samRddha
rhe| sampApi yogazAstrAt, tadvivRtezcApi yanmayA sukRtam  /  tena jina-
bodhilAbha-praNayI bhavyo jano bhavatAt  // 2 //  _ artha :- isa yogazAstra aura
isakI vivRti (vyAkhyA) kI racanA se maiMne jo koI bhI sukRta (puNya) upArjita
kiyA ho; usase bhavya jIva jina-bodhilAbha ke praNayI-premI baneM, yahI
zubhabhAvanA hai|  /  /  iti zrI paramArhata zrI kumArapAlabhUpAlazuzrUSite
AcArya zrIhemacandraviracite'dhyAtmopaniSallAmni saMjAtapaTTabandhe zrIyogazAce
svopazaM dvAdazaprakAza vivaraNam  //  .  //  isa prakAra paramArhat
zrIkumArapAla rAjA kI jijJAsA se AcAryazrI hemacaMdrAcAryasUrIzvara racita
adhyAtmopaniSad nAmaka paTTabaddha aparanAma yogazAsa kA khopajJAyiyaraNasahita
dvAdazana prakAza saMpUrNa huaa|  //  iti yogazAlAm sampUrNam  /  /  462

Page #484 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Verse Verse Index (Appendix) No. Verse Oh, the greatness of yoga, the
fourfold category of phlegm, urine, and excrement, liberation, the killing of a
disciple, poison, and execution Brahma-woman-fetus-cow-killing Even greater sins
Yoga is the eye of all calamities, yoga destroys sins, First Light One who gives
up food when indigestion, Or the five-member assembly In the case of the not-
very-clearly-hidden, not accepting what is not given In the wrong place and
time, the one who speaks falsely, Non-violence - truthfulness - non-stealing Oh,
the greatness of yoga, considering the posture, etc., after examining the
criticism and understanding, even in the case of the urge to speak, eat, and
take, these are the limbs of conduct, These are the unpleasant ones, the sixfold
category of internal enemies Phlegm-urine-excrement, phlegm, urine, and
excrement, One who is always attached to good conduct Even in the case of a
person who has committed a crime, the fourfold category of liberation, the
killing of a disciple, poison, and execution, the evil deed done at that time,
may he not be born, the desires of the divine magnanimous, forty-two alms - A
long-sighted expert Salutation to the insurmountable passion, etc., not that
which is due to carelessness, a just and prosperous being 118011 ||8|| ।।15।।
।।9।। ।।12।। ||6|| 11411 ।।7।। 114211 ।।34।। ।।49।। ।।22।। ।।54।। ।।37।। ।।19।।
।।10।। ।।28।। ।।39।। ।।35।। ।।43।। ।।45।। ।।33।। ।।56।। 118011 ।।8।। 114011
।।3।। ।।15।। ।।9।। ।।13।। ।।14।। ।।23।। ||38|| ।।55।। ।।1।। ।।20।। ।।47।। ##
Verse In the serpent and in the king of the gods, it is well-known by sins,
Beloved, wholesome, truthful speech, even though one has not attained dharma
before, Thoughts of Brahma-woman-fetus-cow-killing, Even greater sins, the
desire to keep the mind secret, the acceptance of what is not given, the proper
guest, the virtuous, the true nature of things as they are Yoga is the eye of
all calamities, Interest in the truth spoken by the Jina, the path that is
highly praised by the world, spending what is appropriate, the web of
liberation, the bed, seat, and deposit Having learned from the ocean of
scriptures, By means of the removal of consciousness, etc., woman-eunuch-animal-
house-woman-beautiful-limb-looking-self-limb-touching-taste-and-smell, from
those of the same religion, in all states, fainting-fatigue-all-blameworthy-
yogas, With all one's being, the great ascetics, laughter-greed-fear-anger-yoga
destroys sins, Second Light From the spotless mind, not a god, the mind of a
god, evils go far away, even if one gives up all one's possessions, even if one
comes from a lineage, this world is the other world, From even a little
falsehood, those who do not speak falsely, falsehood is lighter than you, xvii
No. ।।2।। ।।48।। ।।21।। ।।11।। ।।12।। ।।25।। ||6|| ।।26।। 114311 ।।16।। 11411
।।17।। ।।36।। ।।51।। ।।41।। 118811 ।।4।। ।।42।। ||30|| ।।31।। ।।32।। ।।29।।
।।24।। ।।18।। ।।46।। ।।27।। ।।7।। ।।101।। ॥3॥ ।।75।। 118011 ||30|| ।।12।। ।।67।।
।।62।। ।।64।। ।।56।। From false speech, hatred, A wise man speaks falsely
Dissatisfaction, disbelief, the happiness of the dissatisfied, non-violence, the
fire of suffering, all beings are like oneself, according to the memory, one
moment of suffering for one, even the king of wealth, In these things, killing
animals, medicines are animals, girl-cow-land-falsehoods, trembling, sweating,
fatigue, fainting, a hunchback is better than a cripple, even a leper,
remembering the same, bow-staff-wheel-sword, long-lived, well-formed, theft-sin-
tree, here, Austerity, scripture, and family, sesame, rice, barley, beans, dust-
like, even here, one is not satisfied with sons, the ocean, restraint, god,
guru, fasting, ten months, they are satisfied, in the day or in the night, long
life, excellent form, being praised, even with a blade of grass, a creature
falling into hell, far away, giving up all one's possessions, under the pretext
of a gift, misfortune, let it be sent, slavery, two months, with fish meat, this
should be meditated upon, this should be worshipped, not gods, not gurus,
Impotence, animalhood, one does not speak the truth even if one is beaten,
Drama, jest, music, should not be enjoyed out of attachment No. 114211 114011
।।106।। ।।114।। ।।51।। ।।20।। ।।47।। ।।68।। ।।102।। ।।36।। ।।34।। 114811 119211
।।28।। ।।92।। ।।49।। ।।105।। ।।69।। ।।113।। ।।42।। 1180611 ।।112।। ।।31।। ।।45।।
।।70।। ।।52।। ।।24।। ।।11।। ।।73।। ।।39।। ।।65।। ।।43।। 11411 ।।91।। ।।103।।
।।61।। ।।7।। ।।93।।

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zloka zloka kI anukramaNikA (pariziSTa ) naM. zloka aho yogasya mAhAtmyaM,
kaphavipuNmalAmarzacaturvarge'graNIrmokSo, cAraNAzIviSAvadhi brahma-strI-bhrUNa
- goghAta bhUyAMso'pi hi pApmAnaH yogaH sarvavipadvallIkSiNoti yogaH pApAni,
prathama prakAza ajIrNe bhojanatyAgI, athavA paJcasamiti anativyaktagupte ca
anAdAnamadattasyA adezAkAlayozcayA~, avadyatyAgataH sArva ahiMsA - sUnRtAsteya
aho yogasya mAhAtmyaM, AlocyAvagrahayAJcA AsanAdIni saMvIkSya, IryA
bhASaiSaNAdAnaupasarga-prasaGge'pi, etAzcAritragAtrasya, eteSvevAmanojJeSu,
aMtaraGgAriSaDvarga kapha-mUtra - malaprAyaM, kaphavipruNmalAmarza, kRtasaGgaH
sadAcArai kRtAparAdhe'pi jane, caturvarge'graNIrmokSo
cAraNAzIviSAvadhitatkAlakRtaduSkarma tasyAjananirevAstu, divyaudArikakAmAnAM,
dvicatvAriMzad-bhikSA - dIrghadarzI vizeSajJaH namo durvArarAgAdi, na yat
pramAdayogena, nyAyasampannavibhavaH 118011 ||8||  /  / 15 /  /   /  / 9 /  /
/  / 12 /  /  ||6|| 11411  /  / 7 /  /  114211  /  /  34  /  /   /  / 49 /  /
/  / 22 /  /   /  / 54 /  /   /  /  37  /  /   /  / 19 /  /   /  / 10 /  /   /
/ 28 /  /   /  / 39 /  /   /  / 35 /  /   /  / 43 /  /   /  /  45  /  /   /  /
33 /  /   /  / 56 /  /  118011  /  / 8 /  /  114011  /  / 3 /  /   /  / 15 /  /
/  / 9 /  /   /  / 13 /  /   /  /  14  /  /   /  / 23 /  /  ||38||  /  / 55  /
/   /  / 1 /  /   /  / 20 /  /   /  /  47  /  /  zloka pannage ca surendre ca,
pApabhiruH prasiddhaM ca, priyaM pathyaM vacastathyaM, pUrvamaprAptadharmA'pi,
brahma- strI bhrUNa - go-ghAtabhAvanAbhirbhAvitAni, bhUyAMso'pi hi pApmAnaH,
manoguptyeSaNAdAneyathAvadatithau sAdhau, yathAvasthitatattvAnAM yogaH
sarvavipadvallI rucirjinoktatattveSu, lokAtivAhite mArge, vyayamAyocitaM kurvan,
vimuktakalpanAjAlaM, zayanAsana- nikSepA zrutAmbhodheradhigamya, saJjJAdi -
parihAreNa, strI - SaNDha - pazumadvezmAstrIramyAGgekSaNa-svAGgasparze rase ca
gandhe ca, samAnadhArmikebhyazca, sarvabhAveSu mUrcchAyAsarva - sAvadya -
yogAnAM, sarvAtmanA yatIndrANAhAsya- lobha-bhaya-krodhakSiNoti yogaH pApAni,
dvitIya prakAza akalaGkamanovRtteH adeve devabuddhiryA, anarthA dUrato yAnti,
api pradattasarvasvAt api vaMzakramAyAtAM, apauruSeyaM vacanamaayaM lokaH
paroloko, alpAdapi mRSAvAdAd alIkaM ye na bhASante asatyato laghIyastvam, xvii
naM.  /  / 2 /  /   /  / 48  /  /   /  / 21 /  /   /  / 11 /  /   /  / 12 /  /
/  / 25 /  /  ||6||  /  / 26 /  /  114311  /  / 16 /  /  11411  /  / 17 /  /   /
/ 36  /  /   /  / 51 /  /   /  / 41 /  /  118811  /  / 4 /  /   /  / 42 /  /
||30||  /  / 31 /  /   /  / 32 /  /   /  / 29 /  /   /  /  24  /  /   /  / 18 /
/   /  / 46  /  /   /  / 27 /  /   /  / 7 /  /   /  /  101  /  /   // 3 //   /
/ 75  /  /  118011 ||30||  /  / 12 /  /   /  / 67 /  /   /  / 62 /  /   /  / 64
/  /   /  / 56 /  /  asatyavacanAd vaira, asatyavacanaM prAjJaH
asantoSamavizvAsaasantoSavataH saukhyaM, ahiMsA duHkhadAvAgniAtmavat
sarvabhUteSu iti smRtyanusAreNa, ekasyaikaM kSaNaM duHkhaM, aizvaryarAjarAjo'pi,
eSvartheSu pazUn hiMsan, auSadhyaH pazavo, kanyA - go-bhUmyalIkAni, kampaH
svedaH zramo mUrcchA, kuNirvaraM varaM paGgukuSTino'pi smarasamAn, kodaNDa -
daNDa- cakrAsi cirAyuSaH susaMsthAnA, cauryya-pApadrumasyeha,
tapaHzrutaparivArAM, tilavrIhiyavairmASai trasareNusamo'pyatra, tRptau na
putraiH sagaraH, damo devagurupAstidazamAsAMstu tRpyanti, divase vA rajanyAM vA,
dIrghamAyuH paraM rUpamAdIryamANaH kuzenApi, durgatiprapatatprANidUre parasya
sarvasvadevopahAravyAjena, daurbhAgyaM preSyatAM dAsyadvau mAsau matsyamAMsena,
dhyAtavyo'yamupAsyo'yana devAnna gurunnApi, napuMsakatvaM tiryaktvaM, na
satyamapibhASeta, nATyATTahAsasaGgItA nAsaktyA sevanIyA naM. 114211 114011  /  /
106  /  /   /  /  114  /  /   /  / 51 /  /   /  / 20 /  /   /  /  47  /  /   /
/ 68 /  /   /  /  102  /  /   /  / 36  /  /   /  /  34  /  /  114811 119211  /
/ 28 /  /   /  / 92 /  /   /  /  49  /  /   /  / 105  /  /   /  / 69 /  /   /  /
113  /  /   /  / 42 /  /  1180611  /  /  112  /  /   /  / 31 /  /   /  /  45  /
/   /  / 70  /  /   /  / 52 /  /   /  /  24  /  /   /  / 11 /  /   /  / 73 /  /
/  / 39 /  /   /  / 65  /  /   /  / 43 /  /  11411  /  / 91 /  /   /  /  103  /
/   /  / 61 /  /   /  / 7 /  /   /  / 93 /  /

Page #485 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
In the Nigodas and the Tiryanchas, the women with buttocks, cruel in their
actions, should not create a husband or a son. They should not perform useless
acts like scratching, itching, bending, etc. They should not desire to take what
belongs to others. Because of the importance of possessions, they are immersed
in the beginning of possessions, the life-force of conduct, the cause of doubt
about life. The living being, due to its greed for other living beings, has
fallen, forgotten, lost. To cross the boundless ocean, one should say, "I am
afraid of the obstruction of the world," or "This is the seed of the world." The
fearful, with a troubled mind, in the presence of honey and in the sacrifice,
should not be attached to the mind, nor should they be attached to time. The
mind is one thing, the speech is another. The wise, who are the bearers of the
great vows, should be like a mother to all beings, mixing their flesh.  - - -
Friends, sons, and wives are instructed by false vision. Even though they say,
"Die," they are consumed by the objects of the senses. Animals are created for
the sake of sacrifice. Those who have the idea of God and Goddess, those who
have done cruel deeds, those who are born from the womb of women, weapons,
threads, etc., those who give fearlessness to beings, those who are born of
blood, subtle worms, beautiful in appearance, with a beautiful body, virtuous,
deceitful, cruel, harmless in the forest,  Better is a burning fire,  Better is
a heretic, a Charvaka, even though the world is conquered by his strength,
Better is restraint from gross violence,  The world is trusting, foolish,
peaceful, compassionate,  Peace, emotion, detachment,  ||59|| ||86|| ||25||
||21|| ||19|| ||74|| ||107|| ||10|| ||104|| ||96|| ||22|| ||66|| ||85|| ||60||
||29|| ||95|| ||35|| ||53|| ||8|| ||21|| ||40|| ||89|| ||71|| ||13|| ||26||
||111|| ||33|| ||2|| ||37|| ||6|| ||79|| ||48|| ||20|| ||77|| ||100|| ||84||
||23|| ||82|| ||38|| ||99|| ||18|| ||32|| ||80|| ||15||  It is heard that by
killing a living being, doubt, desire, and uncertainty arise. Castration,
cutting off the senses, six months of eating flesh, even of the virtuous,  He
who has sexual intercourse with a woman,  From attachment, there arises
instability, influence, devotion, the roots of right conduct,  There are three
kinds of treasures for him,  Even if he is attached, if he is a god,  He makes
an effort to protect his wife,  She who abandons her husband,  Whatever is
against all the worlds, whatever is the taking away of all possessions, bondage,
The omniscient, who has conquered attachment, etc.,  All those who desire
everything,  Even if they are related, they should be restrained,  For a year,
with a cow,  The root of the world, the beginning of the sacrifice, which lasts
for a long time, day and night,  Violence arises to obstruct the wife,  The root
of knowledge and conduct,  The third illumination, without making a rule,  To
put on the chain of virtues,  Burning with charcoal,  From the moment after the
charcoal, the forest, the cart,  The thread-spoken of the infinite body,  Food
for ghosts, demons, etc.,  He who allows, he who is cruel,  A multitude of
animals, even if eaten for medicine,  Not obtaining other food,  Arise, then,
these should be abandoned from eating,  Always eating meat, at the end of the
day,  Arttaraudra meditation,  Moist root, even if it is whole,  Mixed with raw
milk,  Taking a seat with devotion,  - xviii ||27|| ||17|| ||76|| ||88|| ||83||
||81|| ||109|| ||16|| ||1|| ||115|| ||14|| ||98|| ||94|| ||55|| ||97|| ||81||
||81|| ||72|| ||46|| ||110|| ||41|| ||29|| ||63|| ||64|| ||146|| ||101|| ||99||
||34|| ||46|| ||48|| ||21|| ||36|| ||39|| ||43|| ||125|| ||98|| ||19|| ||63||
||73|| ||88|| ||71|| ||91|| ||126||  Thus, the daily routine, the coming and
going of the non-self, the non-self, is summarized here in this world and in the
next world.  Giving up, taking,  Udumbar, Vat,  Owl, crow, cat,  Even for one
living being,  One crore of flowers, thus, with devotion, standing in the vow,
A bracelet, a piece of wood,  He who performs restraint is blessed,  Body,
speech, mind,  Out of curiosity, singing, playing, oneself,  Some eat meat out
of great delusion, anger, bondage,  Even householders are blessed,  With eyes
closed by terrible darkness,  Four-footed, fourth, etc.,  Fallen, born among
humans,  Of moving and non-moving beings,  He who eats flesh, etc.,  The world
of painted and unpainted trees, leaves, etc., attacking,  Fruit, flower, mixed
with animals,  Born, initiated, knowledgeable, freed from the Jain religion,
The Jina, the god, grace, religion,  Playing in water, swinging, etc.,  Then, at
the time of twilight,  Then, having returned,  Then, in the anointing of the
teachers,  Then, the midday offering,  Abandoning the company of bad habits,
Abandoning the four kinds of food,  Abandoning attachment, old clothes,
Abandoning Arttaraudra meditation, abandoning the three kinds of light, the
radiant sun,  In sesame seeds, mustard seeds, lentils, water, teeth, nails,
hair, ten kinds of things,  Giving, four kinds of food,  A bad state of
existence,  ||147|| ||93|| ||155|| ||151|| ||117|| ||42|| ||67|| ||35|| ||38||
||119|| ||51|| ||69|| ||115|| ||92|| ||31|| ||30|| ||80|| ||86|| ||49|| ||85||
||154|| ||2|| ||18|| ||102|| ||3|| -||72|| ||149|| ||140|| ||139|| ||79||
||129|| ||127|| ||124|| ||128|| ||142|| ||150|| ||141|| ||82|| ||44|| ||110||
||106|| ||1|| ||29|| ||137||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 nigodeSvatha tiryakSu, nitambinyaH patiM putraM, nirmAtuM krUrakarmANaH,
nirarthikAM na kurvIta, pagu-kuSTi kuNitvAdi, parArthagrahaNe yerSA,
parigrahamahatvAddhi, parigrahA'rambhamagnA prANabhUtaM caritrasya,
prANasandehajananaM, prANI prANitalobhena, patitaM vismRtaM naSTaM, prAtuM
pAramapArasya, brUyAd bhiyoparodhAd vA, bhavasya bIjaM bhIrorAkulacittasya
madhuparke ca yajJe ca manmanatvaM kAlatvaM, manasyanyat vacasyanyat
mahAvratadharA dhIrA, mAteva sarvabhUtAnA mAMsamizraM - - - mitra putra
kalatrANi midhyAdRSTibhirAmnAto, mriyasvetyuccamAno'pi, muSNanti viSayastenA,
yajJArthaM pazavaH sRSTAH, yA deve devatAbuddhi ye cakruH krUrakarmANaH ye strI-
zastrAkSasUtrAdi yoniyantrasamutpannAH, yo bhUteSvabhayaM dadyAt, raktajAH
kRmayaH sUkSmA, ramyamApAtamAtre lAvaNyapuNyAvayava, vaJcakatvaM nRzaMsatvaM
vane niraparAdhAnAM, varaM jvaladayaH varaM varAkacArvAko,
vikramAkrAntavizvo'pi, viratiH sthUla hiMsAde vizvasto mugdhadhIrlokaH,
zamazIladayAmUrla, zama-saMvega - nirvedA'  /  / 59 /  /   /  / 86  /  /   /  /
25 /  /   /  / 21 /  /   /  / 19 /  /   /  / 74  /  /   /  /  107  /  /   /  /
10 /  /   /  /  104  /  /   /  / 96 /  /   /  / 22 /  /  ||66  /  /   /  /  85
/  /   /  / 60 /  /  112911  /  /  95  /  /   /  / 35 /  /   /  / 53 /  /   /  /
8 /  /  11211 114011  /  /  89  /  /   /  /  71  /  /   /  / 13 /  /   /  / 26 /
/   /  /  111  /  /   /  / 33 /  /   /  / 2 /  /   /  / 37 /  /   /  / 6 /  /
/  / 79 /  /   /  / 48  /  /  112011  /  / 77 /  /   /  /  100  /  /   /  /  84
/   /   /  / 23 /  /   /  / 82 /  /  ||38||  /  / 99  /  /   /  / 18 /  /   /  /
32 /  /  118011  /  / 15 /  /  zrUyate prANighAtena, zaMkA kAMkSA vicikitsA,
SaNDhatvamindriyacchedaM, SaNmAsAMzcAgamAMsana, satAmapi hi strIsambhogena yaH
saGgAd bhavantyasantosthairyaM prabhAvanA bhaktiH, samyaktvamUlAni, satridhI
nidhayastasya, sarAgo'pi hi devazcet, svadArarakSaNe yatnaM, svapati yA
parityajya, sarvalokaviruddhaM yad sarvasvaharaNaM bandhaM, sarvajJo jitarAgAdi
sarvAbhilASiNaH sarva saMbandhyapi nigRhyeta saMvatsaraM tu gavyena,
saMsAramUlamArambhAhaviryaccirarAtrAya, hiMsA vighnAya jAyeta,
jJAnacAritrayormUlaM, tRtIya prakAza akRtvA niyamaM doSAadhiroDhuM guNazreNiM,
aGgArabhrASTrakaraNaM aGgAra-vana zakaTaantarmuhUrtAt parataH anantakAyAH
sUtroktA annaM preta-pizAcAdyaiH, anumantA vizasitA, anekajantusaGghAta
apyauSadhakRte jagdhaM, aprApnuvannanyabhakSyamapi abhyutthAnaM tadA amI
bhojanatastyAjyAH, aznIyan sadA mAMsaM ahno mukhe'vasAne ca,
ArttaraudramapadhyAnaM, Ardra-kandaH samagro'pi,
AmagorasasampRktadviAmagorasasampRktaM, AsanAbhigraho bhaktyA, - xviii  /  / 27
/  /   /  / 17 /  /   /  / 76 /  /  118811  /  / 83  /  /   /  /  81  /  /   /
/  109  /  /   /  / 16 /  /   /  / 1 /  /   /  /  115  /  /   /  /  14  /  /   /
/  98  /  /   /  /  94  /  /   /  / 55 /  /   /  / 97  /  /  11811 11811  /  /
72 /  /   /  / 46  /  /   /  /  110  /  /   /  / 41 /  /   /  /  29  /  /   /  /
63 /  /   /  / 64 /  /   /  / 146 /  /   /  /  101  /  /   /  / 99  /  /   /  /
34 /  /   /  / 46  /  /   /  / 48  /  /   /  / 21 /  /   /  / 36  /  /   /  / 39
/  /   /  / 43 /  /   /  /  125  /  /   /  /  98  /  /   /  / 19 /  /   /  / 63
/  /   /  /  73  /  /  118811  /  /  71  /  /  11911  /  / 126  /  /
ityahorAtrikIM caryAmaitvarAttAgamo'nAttAiti saGkSeptaH ihaloke paraloke,
utsargAdAnasaMstA udumbara- vaTa ulUka- kAka- mArjAraekasyApi hi jIvasya,
ekaika-kusumakror3Ad evaM vratasthito bhaktyA, kaTako dArukhaNDaM ca, karoti
viratiM dhanyo, kAya vAGmanasAM kutUhalAd gItakrItvA svayaM - kecinmAMsaM
mahAmohAdakrodhAd bandha gRhiNo'pi hi dhanyAste, ghorAndhakAraruddhAkSaiH
catuSpavya caturthAdi, cyutvotpadya manuSyeSu, carAcarANAM jIvAnAM, cikhAdiSati
yo mAMsa, citrAchitravana-patrajagadAkramaNamANasya, jantumizraM phalaM puSpaM,
janma-dIkSA-jJAnajinadharmavinirmukto, jino devaH kRpA dharmo,
jalakrIDAndolanAdi tatazca sandhyAsamaye, tataH pratinivRttaH san, tato
gurUNAmabhyarNe, tato mAdhyAhnikI pUrjA, tyajan duHzIlasaMsarga, tyaktvA
caturvidhAhAraM, tyaktasaGgo jIrNavAsA,
tyaktArttaraudradhyAnasyatyaktatrayItejomayo bhAnuriti tilekSu-
sarSapairaNDajaladantakezanakhAsthitvadazasvapi kRtA dikSu, dAnaM
caturvidhA''hAra dusthAM bhavasthitiM  /  / 147 /  /   /  / 93 /  /   /  /  155
/  /   /  /  151  /  /   /  /  117  /  /   /  / 42 /  /   /  / 67 /  /   /  / 35
/  /   /  / 38  /  /   /  /  119  /  /   /  / 51 /  /   /  / 69 /  /   /  /  115
/  /  119211  /  / 31 /  /  ||30|| 118011  /  / 86  /  /   /  /  49  /  /   /  /
85  /  /   /  /  154  /  /   /  / 2 /  /   /  / 18 /  /   /  /  102  /  /  ||3||
- /  / 72 /  /   /  /  149  /  /   /  /  140  /  /   /  / 139  /  /   /  / 79 /
/   /  /  129  /  /   /  /  127  /  /   /  /  124  /  /   /  /  128  /   /   /
/  142  /  /   /  /  150  /  /   /  /  141  /  /   /  / 82  /  /  114411  /  /
110  /  /   /  /  106  /  /   /  / 1 /  /  112911  /  /  137  /  /

Page #486 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
||20|| ||6|| ||107|| ||25|| ||69|| ||89|| ||37|| ||95|| ||119|| ||100|| ||5||
||4|| ||5|| The extent of Digvrat, in the eighth part of the day, is consumed by
the gods in the morning, the cause of the faults is liquor, one should not eat
wealth and grain, he does not know the other or himself, there is no dharma for
the cruel, at the right time, the killing of animals without making ghee and
fat, not looking at microscopic creatures, that is not a mark of a mark, sleep,
the mark of a woman, there is no offering, nor bathing, see the name of
Sangamako, entering there according to the law, he has attained the Indra-sent
experiments in the kalpas, the examination of the upsurges, the sins are from
the drinking of Kadambari, the bondage, the Brahma Muhurta should rise from the
feeling, the external and internal reversal, eating honey, from the creature,
not bowing down to the woman, the number of enjoyment and enjoyment, only by
drinking liquor, the mind of the drunkard is like a corpse, the mind is liquor,
the month is ghee, even the sweetness of honey, the mantra-chanted, the first in
the great night, in nature, the honey-mouthed, the flesh-eater here, there is no
fault in eating flesh, the false teaching of the non-flesh-tasting, non-greedy,
the ant kills the unwanted food, the liver, stool, phlegm, machine pain,
defamatory machine, plow ||84|| ||57|| ||58|| ||17|| ||94|| ||54|| ||10|| ||29||
||130|| ||108|| ||22|| ||53|| ||111|| ||13|| ||56|| ||88|| ||123|| ||153||
||116|| ||152|| ||9|| ||95|| ||121|| ||133|| ||37|| ||14|| ||4|| ||8|| ||11||
||12|| ||6|| ||40|| ||32|| ||143|| ||41|| ||26|| ||25|| ||27|| He who is good,
external, impermanent, those who eat flesh, those who abandon the day, whoever
is an obstacle, the abandonment of night food, leaving the path of disease and
fatigue, lac, mind, stone forest, lotus-seated, from addiction, with virtuous
mind, vows with spies, go from drinking Varuni, in the day and night, he who is
in the day, those who tame the bulls, the field, they make the body weak, the
hair is stuck in the throat, the pleasure, laughter, and the steadfastness of
the mind, restraint, knowledge, poison, weapon, trap, enemy killing, kingship,
the wheels, their parts, the wheel-shaking, camel, hundred-year-old, the
opposite, the enemy, the friend, the grass, the woman, the body, the wealth, the
punishment, it is heard that others swear, needle, flower, flesh, praise, he who
eats only once, with the mind, he is bound by it, throwing with the mind, by
this, the mind-born, by this, the woman, even with a weapon, if she is lustful,
the thief, permission, at that time, the present, the fainted, at the end of the
endless evening, by the Yakshas and Rakshasas, the memory, disappearance, the
head, the day, the digging of a well, by oneself or by another, it is known, the
Samayika vow-holder, the crow, the parrot, the cat, the dog, and the necessary
yogas, the group of living beings, the joint jurisdiction, the upsurges, even in
the upsurges ||120|| ||28|| ||65|| ||136|| ||7|| ||80|| ||107|| ||144|| ||113||
||89|| ||13|| ||62|| ||66|| ||76|| ||15|| ||52|| ||81|| ||16|| ||109|| ||75||
||103|| ||104|| ||45|| ||145|| ||74|| ||68|| ||122|| ||5|| ||97|| ||118||
||135|| ||134|| ||12|| ||33|| ||59|| ||96|| ||105|| ||47|| ||83|| ||112||
||148|| ||6|| ||114|| ||138|| The killer, the seller of the pal, the contraction
of the heart, the lotus, the fourth light, from the form of the desireless, the
unbridled, the senses, the horses, the unsteady, the wealth earned by others,
the non-eating, the silence, the dawn, the unobstructed mind, the boundless
ocean of addiction, the removal of all faults, the non-relative, the relative,
the cause of the gentle joy, this self is the essence of consciousness, this
self is the cycle of existence, the impurity, the flow of the law, the non-
sleepy, the eager, the man, the mother of untruth, the unrestrained, the cause
of the outburst, the source of all faults, the self, the ignorance-born
suffering, the self knows the self, the self, nurturing the self, the self-
dependent, even the inner self, the self, the vision, the knowledge, the flood,
the impermanent, the world, the cycle, even in Indrahood, the creature conquered
by the senses, Indra, Upendra, etc., these, the first to be born, the branch of
faults, one creature is born, one, thus, the uneven, one by one, the waist, the
hand, the Vaisakha, the gold, the cut, the similar karma, the living being, and
the attached, the wave, the unsteady, the Lakshmi, the passions, the objects,
the yogas, the cruel, the deeds, the fearless, the anger, the fire, the burning,
the destruction of the family, the killing, the king of crores, the kingship,
the cunning, the skilled, the sinners, the middle part of the thigh ||56||
||49|| ||15|| ||83|| ||18|| ||3|| ||2|| ||122|| ||46|| ||1|| ||96|| ||6|| ||21||
||26|| ||61|| ||10|| ||14|| ||68|| ||33|| ||103|| ||31|| ||52|| ||59|| ||78||
||121|| ||11|| ||27|| ||20|| ||16|| ||129|| ||9|| ||24|| ||5|| ||132|| ||100||
||77|| xix

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 | // 20 //   /  / 6 /  /  ||107 //  ||25||  /  / 69 /  /   /  / 89 /  /   /  /
37 /  /   /  / 95 /  /   /  / 119 /  /  ||100 /  ||5|| ||4|| ||5|| digvrate
parimANaM yat, divasyASTame bhAge, devaistu bhuktaM purvAhne, doSANAM kAraNaM
madyaM, dhana-dhAnyasya dharmavinnaiva bhuJjIta, na jAnAti paraM svaM vA, na
dharmo nirdayasyAsti, nyAyye kAle tato, navanIta-vasAnAkRtvA prANinAM hiMsA,
nAprekSya sUkSmajantUni, nAsAvedho'GkanaM nidrAcchede yoSidaGganaivAhutirna ca
snAnaM, pazya saGgamako nAma, pravizya vidhinA tatra, prAptaH sa
kalpeSvindrapreSyaprayogAnayane parISahopasargebhyo, pApAH
kAdambarIpAnabandhanAd bhAvato brAhma muhUrte uttiSThet, bahirantarviparyAsaH,
bhakSayan mAkSikaM bhUtAttavannarInati, bhogopabhogayoH saGkhyA,
madirApAnamAtreNa, buddhimadyapasya zabasyeva, madyapAnarase mano madyaM mAsaM
navanIta madhuno'pi hi mAdhuryamantrasaMskRtamapyAdyaM mahAnizAyAM prakRte,
makSikAmukhaniSThyUtaM, mAMsa bhakSayitAmutra, mAMsAzane na
doSo'mAMsAsvAdanalubdhasya mithyopadezaH sahasA'miSTAnnAnyapi viSTAsAmedhAM
pipIlikA hanti, yakRcchakRnmala-zleSma yantrapIDA-nirlAJchanayantra-lAGgala
||84|| ||57|| ||58|| ||17||  /  / 94 /  /   /  / 54 /  /  ||10||  /  / 29 /  /
||130 /  /  ||108 /  /  ||22|| ||53 /  /  ||111 /  /   /  / 13 /  /  ||56 /  /
/  / 88 /  /  ||123 /  /  ||153 /  /  ||116 /  /   // 152 /  /   // 9 //  ||95 /
/   /  / 121 /  /  ||133 /  /  ||37|| ||14|| ||4|| ||8||  /  / 11 /  /   /  / 12
/  /   /  / 6 /  /  ||40 /  /   /  / 32 /  /   /  / 143 /  /  ||41|| ||26||  /
/ 25 /  /  ||27|| yaH sad bAhyamanityaM ye bhakSayanti pizitaM, ye vAsaraM
parityajya, yo yaH syAd bAdhako rajanIbhojanatyAge, rogamArgazramau muktvA,
lAkSA-manaH zilAvane padmAsanAsInaM vyasanAt puNyabuddhyA vratAni sAticArANi,
vAruNIpAnato yAnti, vAsare rajanyAM ca yaH vAsare sati ye vRSabhAn damaya
kSetraM, vidadhatyaGgazaithilyaM, vilagnazca gale vAlaH, vilAsa-hAsa-
niSThavivekaH saMyamau jJAnaM, viSAstrahalayantrAyAvairighAto narendratvaM,
zakaTAnAM tadaGgAnAM zakaTokSalulAyoSTrazatAvarI virUDhAni, zatrau mitre tRNe
straiNe, zarIrAdyarthadaNDasya, zruyate hyanyazapathAn zUcipuSpAmiSa-
stotraisakRdeva bhujyate yaH, sacittastena sambaddhaH sacitte kSepaNaM tena,
saGkalpayoninA'nena, strI zastreNApi cetkAmo, stenAnujJA tadAnItAsadyaH
sammUrcchitAnantasandhyAyAM yakSarakSobhiH,
smRtyantardhAnamUrdhvAsaraHkUpAdikhananasvayaM pareNa vA jJAtaM,
sAmAyikavratasthasya, sArikAzukamArjArazvaso'thAvazyakayogAnAM,
saMsRjajjIvasaGghAtaM, saMyuktAdhikaraNatvamupasaMsarge'pyupasargANAM  /  / 120
/  /  ||28 /  /  ||65||  /  / 136 /  /  ||7|| ||80 /  /   /  / 107 /  /  ||144 /
/  ||113|| ||89 /  /   /  / 13 /  /  ||62 /  /   /  / 66 /  /  ||76 /  /   /  /
15 /  /  ||52 /  /  ||81 /  /  | // 16 //  ||109 /  /   /  / 75 /  /   /  / 103
/  /   /  / 104 /  /   /  / 45 /  /  ||145 /  /   /  / 74 /  /  ||68 //  ||122 /
/  ||5||  // 97||  /  / 118 /  /   /  / 135 /  /  ||134 /  /   /  / 12 /  /
||33 /  /  ||59 /  /  ||96 /  /   /  / 105 /  /  ||47|| ||83 /  /   /  / 112 /
/  ||148 /  /   /  / 6 /  /  ||114 /  /  ||138 /  /  hantA palasya vikretA,
hRnnAbhipadmasaGkocaH catRrtha prakAza akAmanirjarArUpAt,
adAntairindriyahayaizcalairaanyaistenArjitaM vittaM, anazanamaunodaya,
aniruddhamanaskaH san, apAre vyasanAmbhodhI, apAstAzeSadoSANAM, abandhUnAmasau
bandhuamandAnandajanane, ayamAtmaiva cidUpaH ayamAtmaiva saMsAraH
azaucamAzravavidhi, astatandrarataH pumbhiasUnRtasya jananI, asaMyamakRtotsekAn,
AkaraH sarvadoSANAM, AtmA'jJAnabhavaM duHkhaAtmAnamAtmanA vetti, AtmAnaM
bhAvayannAbhiAtmAyattamapi svAntaM, Atmaiva darzana-jJAnaAplAvayati
nAmbhoityanityaM jagadvRttaM, indratve'pi hi samprApte, . indriyairvijito jantuH
indropendrAdayo'pyete, utpadyamAnaH prathama, utsarpayan doSazAkhA, eka
utpadyate jantureka evaM viSama ekaikaH,
kaTisthakaravaizAkhakanakacchedasaGkAzakarma jIvaM ca saMzliSTaM kallola-capalA
lakSmIH, kaSAyA viSayA yogAH, krUrakarmasu niHzaGka, krodhavahvestadahnAya,
kulaghAtAya pAtAya, koTIzvaro narendratvaM, kauTilyapaTavaH pApAH, jaGghAyA
madhyabhAge  /  / 56 /  /  ||49 /  /  ||15|| ||83||  /  / 18 /  /  ||3||  /  / 2
/  /   /  / 122 /  /   /  / 46 /  /  ||1|| ||96 /  /   /  / 6 /  /   /  / 21 /
/  ||26||  // 61 /  /   /  / 10 /  /  ||14||  /  / 68||  /  / 33 /  /  ||103 /
/  ||31|| | // 52 //   // 59 /  /   / 78||  /  / 121 /  /   /  / 11 /  /   // 27
//  ||20||  // 16 //   // 129 /  /   /  / 9 /  /  ||24|| ||5 ||  // 132 /  /
||100 /  /  ||77 //  xix

Page #487 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
||93|| 1186. ||64|| ||32|| ||82|| ||23|| 87. ||255|| ||253|| ||249|| ||177||
||188|| ||86|| ||172|| ||171|| By which one attains caste, wealth, family
prosperity, there anger is the tormentor, therefore, purity of mind, honesty is
the great medicine, one should conquer the senses, penance for those who are
penitent, purity of mind for the penitent, by three protections, yoga,
pilgrimage or health is the cause, in the poor, the afflicted, the fearful, in
the burning fire of penance, the lamp is indeed extinction, the poor man has a
hundred, by the influence of Dharma, the fire burns in the sky, Dharma does not
go to hell, to the womb of a beast, the nine streams of the ear, without
equality, falling like a mad elephant, without support, without support, not
produced by anyone, wandering in the deep of milk, the hero-lotus-vajra kills in
a moment, with arms hanging down, with a happy face, in the past, by virtue,
atonement, repentance, a wing with a broken bone, the father, mother, sister,
brother, the union of hands, on the back, in the form of a vajra, the mind,
which is not tired by contemplation, this monkey should be done for the
purification of the mind of the world, not bearing the purity of mind, the mind
is the follower of the night, in the restraint of the mind, the mind, speech,
and body actions are restrained, let no one be ashamed, the land of the Aryans,
after a moment, worry, ||13|| ||134|| ||9|| ||44|| ||17|| ||34|| ||36|| ||43||
||84|| ||123|| ||120|| ||91|| ||40|| ||19|| ||94|| ||97|| ||102|| ||66|| ||73||
||114|| ||30|| ||98|| ||106|| ||29|| ||124|| ||51|| ||133|| ||136|| ||109||
||9|| ||7|| ||2|| ||132|| ||127|| ||110|| ||39|| ||45|| ||42|| ||35|| ||38||
||74|| ||118|| ||108|| ||116|| steadiness of mind after a moment, the mind
filled with friendship, etc., friendship, joy, compassion, liberation is from
the destruction of karma, what is in the morning is not in the afternoon, where
there is otherness of the body, who is the karma, by the giving of pudgala, by
which means, who is the body, wealth, relatives, the taste, blood, flesh, fat,
even though not protected, one's own, demon, yaksha, snake, tiger, by the
knowledge destroyed by the darkness of attachment, etc., by the destruction of
the darkness of attachment, etc., the world, the world, the ocean of greed, the
deluded mind, the very long, the taste of the touch of pleasure, the left thigh,
the right thigh, the humility, the scripture, the character of, without the
conquest of the senses, not, those who are detached from the objects, free from
attachment, the ascetic, the offering of food, the staff, the seat, below, with
the body well protected, the body, for the embodied, all fingers joined, joined
for good fortune, churned, they grieve for their relatives forever, the ears,
the dog, the master, in truth, in the purity of the mind, by true vision,
falsehood, even with faults, they are seen, creatures love, in the whole world,
even in the sky, by embracing equality, by putting together, on the tip of the
fist, it should be in the lower part of the thighs, there are passions, anger,
etc., it is said, of all the flows, equality is, by the cause, sitting on the
throne, sitting on an uncomfortable seat, the sun and the moon, these two
||115|| ||75|| ||117|| ||113|| ||57|| ||70|| ||80|| ||81|| ||71|| ||72|| ||47||
||101|| ||48|| ||53|| ||104|| ||22|| ||28|| ||126|| ||12|| ||24|| ||111|| ||8||
||105|| ||77|| 1158. ||131|| ||76|| ||63|| ||65|| ||41|| ||85|| ||88|| ||54||
||67|| ||112|| ||130|| ||125|| ||6|| ||12|| ||79|| ||55|| ||128|| ||135|| ||99||
restraint, truthfulness, purity, the seeds of the world, in the world, the fire
of suffering, the deer, the deer, by forgiveness, by gentleness, by patience,
anger, by gentleness, it should be known, those who are desirous, by the yogis,
the fifth, light, the whole, born of air, in front, in the left division, the
thumbs, the ears, or from the bird, or from the promise, one should know, now I
will tell, in the absence of the feet, in the unseen, in the heart, death, the
inversion of the spiritual, the spiritual, relying on the air, the lower,
middle, upper joints, the inner, the authorized creature, by this knowledge,
eight, not sick, for this, apana, black, red, neck, practicing holding, thus, by
practice, one's own perception, with nectar, flooding, of these, the marks, this
is the order, in the lotus, the meaning, the meaning, hot, half-cold, enemy,
thief, low, etc., the remaining fingers, joints, eyes full of tears, cows, eight
thousand and one hundred, snake, scorpion, worm, insect, the upper, the upper,
when it rises, it goes to Varuna, having gone, starting from the day of Chaitra,
starting from the month of Magha, in the seat, in the bed, or, thrown, by the
excretor, then, Ida and Pingala, by this machine, the use, the color of indigo,
||118|| ||117|| ||130|| ||208|| ||218|| ||182|| ||16|| ||36|| ||47|| H258||
||162|| ||123|| ||191|| ||164|| ||243|| ||131|| ||181|| 175|| ||178|| ||9||
||234|| ||83|| ||84|| ||242|| ||265|| ||61|| ||216|| ||149|| XX

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
  /  / 93|| 1186 /  /  ||64||  // 32 /  /  ||82|| ||23|| 87 /  /  ||255 /  /
||253|| ||249 /  /  ||177 //  ||188 //  ||86 /  /   // 172 /  /  ||171 /  /
jAti-lAbha-kulaizvaryajAyate yena yeneha, tatropatApakaH krodhaH tadavazyaM
manaHzuddhiH tadArjavamahauSadhyA, tadindriyajayaM kuryAt, tapamAnAMstapo muktI,
tapasvino manaHzuddhiM, tisRbhiguptibhiryogAna, tIrthaM vA svasthatAhetu,
dIneSvArteSu bhIteSu, dIpyamAne tapovahnau, dIpikA khalvanirvANA, dhanahInaH
zatamekaM, dharmaprabhAvataH kalpana jvalatyanalastiryaga, dharmo narakapAtAlana
yAti kamAM yoniM, navasrotaH zravadavina sAmyena vinA
nipatanmattamAtaGganirAlambA nirAdhArA, niSpAdito na kenApi, payasyagAdhe
vicaran paryaka-vIra-vajrAbja praNihanti kSaNArdhana,
pralambitabhujadvandvaprasannavadanaH pUrvAprApteSu puNyataH prAyazcittaM,
vaiyAvRttyaM, pakSaM savalanaH piturmAtuH svasurdhAtuputapANisamAyoge, pRSThe
vajrAkRtIbhUte bhAvanAbhiravizrAntamanaH kapirayaM vizvamanaHzuddhayaiva
karttavyo, manaH zuddhimabibhrANA, manaH kSapAcaro. manorodhe nirudhyante,
manovAkkAyakarmANi, mA kArSIt ko'pi mAnuSyamAryadezazca, muhUrtAt paratazcintA,
/  / 13 /  /  ||134|| ||9||  // 44||  // 17 //  ||34||  // 36 //   /  / 43||
||84||  /  / 123 /  /   // 120 /  /  ||91||  /  // 40 //  ||19|| ||94|| ||97||
||102 /  /   /  / 66 /  /  ||73||  /  / 114 /  /  ||30||  /  / 98 /  /  ||106 /
/   /  / 29 /  /  ||124 //  ||51 /  /   /  / 133 /  /   // 136 /  /  /   /  /
109 /  /   /  / 9 /  /  ||7||  /  / 2 /  /  ||132 /  /   /  / 127 //  ||110 /  /
/  / 39 /  /  ||45|| ||42 /  /  ||35||  /  / 38||  / 74 /  /  ||118 //  ||108 //
/  / 116 /  /  muhUrtAntarmanaHsthairya, maitryAdivAsitaM cetaH, maitrI-pramoda-
kAruNya mokSaH karmakSayAdeva, yatprAtastanna madhyAhne, yatrA'nyatvaM
zarIrasya, yaH karma pudgalAdAnayena yena hyupAyena, yo deha-dhana-bandhubhyo,
rasAsRGmAMsamedo'rakSyamANamapi svAntaM, rakSo-yakSoraga-vyAghra
rAgAditimiradhvastajJAnena rAgAdidhvAntavidhvaMse, loko
jagatlobhasAgaramuDhelamativelaM vazAsparzasukhAsvAdavAmoM'hrirdakSiNorUrU
vinaya-zruta-zIlAnAM, vinendriyajayaM naiva, viSayebhyo viraktAnAM, vItarAga-
yati-zrAddhavetrAsanasamo'dhastAt, zarIreNa suguptena, zarIraM dehinAM
sarvazliSTAGgulI zliSTazubhArjanAya nirmathyaM, zocanti svajanAnantaM, zrotiyaH
zvapacaH svAmI, satyAM hi manasaH zuddhau, saddarzanena mithyAtvaM, sadoSamapi
dIsena, snihyanti jantavo samagralokAkAze'pi, samatvamavalambyAtha, sampuTIkRtya
muSkAgre, syAjjanghayoradhobhAge, syuH kaSAyAH krodhasvAkhyAtaH khalu
sarveSAmAsravANAM tu, sAmyaM syAnimitvena,
siMhAsanAdhirUDhasyAsukhAsanasamAsInaH, sUryAcandramasAvetau  /  / 115 /  /   /
75||  /  / 117 /  /   /  / 113 /  /  ||57|| ||70 /  /  ||80 //   /  / 81 /  /
/ 71 /  /  ||72 /  /  ||47|| ||101 /  /   // 48 /  /   /  / 53 /  /   /  / 104 /
/  ||22 /  /   /  / 28 /  /  ||126 /  /   /  / 12 /  /  ||24|| ||111 //  ||8||
/  / 105 /  /  ||77|| 1158 /  /   /  / 131 /  /  ||76 /  /   /  / 63||  // 65 //
/  / 41 /  /  ||85 /  /   /  / 88 /  /  ||54||  /  / 67|| ||112 /  /   // 130 /
/   /  / 125 /  /   /  / 6 /  /   /  / 12 /  /   / 79|  /  / 55 /  /  ||128 /  /
/  / 135 /  /   /  / 99 /  /  saMyamaH sUnRtaM zaucaM, saMsArabIjabhUtAnAM,
saMsAre duHkhadAvAgnihariNo hAriNI kSamayA mRdubhAvena, kSAntyA krodho
mRdutvena, jJeyA sakAmA yaminAm, paMcam prakAza akhilaM vAyujanmedaM, agre
vAmavibhAge hi, aGguSThAbhyAM zrutI athavA zakunAd athavopazrutervidyAd athedAnI
pravakSyAmi, adarzane pAdayozca, adRSTe hRdaye mRtyuH adhyAtmaviparyAsaH
adhyAtmaM vAyumAzritya, adhomadhyordhvaparvANi, antaHsthAdhikRtaprANi anayA
vidyayASTA anAturakRte hyetat, apAnaH kRSNarUgmanyA abhyasya dhAraNAmevaM
abhyAsena svasaMvedyaM, amRtaiH plAvayantaM amISAM lakSmaNAM ayameva kramaH
padme, arthAntarApadezyazca, arthoSNamardhazItaM ca, ari-caurAdhamarNAdyAH,
avazeSAGgulI-parvANya azrupUrNadRzo gAvo, aSTottarasahasrasya, ahi-vRzcika-
kRmyAkhu ApIyordhva yadutkRSya AyAti varuNe yAtaH, Arabhya caitrAdyadinAt,
Arabhya mAghamAsAdeH, Asane zayane vA'pi, AkSipta recakenA'tha, iDA ca piMgalA
caiva, iti yantra-prayogeNa, indranIlasamacchAyA, ||118 /  /  ||117 //  ||130 //
||208|| ||218|| ||182 /  /  ||16|| ||36|| ||47|| H258||  // 162 /  /  ||123 /  /
||191 /  /  ||164|| ||243 /  /   // 131 //  ||181 /  /  175|| ||178 //  ||9||
||234 /  /  ||83|| ||84|| ||242 /  /  ||265|| ||61 /  /   // 216 //   /  / 149 /
/  XX

Page #488 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
In Indra's pillar and other works, the moon is hot, the sun is cold, seated in
the Uktasana posture, the exit is opened by the water, the lotus rises on the
fifth day, or even The wind rises in the east, The vehicle, umbrella, heat, and
cold of the Upana, the fierce, upward-flaming, In the absence of hands, with
ten, thirty-one days, nine days in one place, one, two, three, four One, two,
three, four One, two, three, four One, two, three, four, one, two, three, four,
five, in the destruction of one, twenty-one days for the other, eleven days for
the sun Twenty-nine days, one, two, three days, these are oppressed, in these,
the goal is achieved, thus, the spiritual time, thus, the victory over the
breath, etc., thus, in the other bodies, thus, by the same order of rays, this
woman, man, in the throat, for the destruction of hunger and thirst, the opening
of the ear, the awakening, thus, the entry into another's house, where is the
circle of motion, the age, the insects, the ghee-colored, the black, the black
entourage, the service of agriculture, etc., all, the Kurpari, placing the knee
Who will win in the battle of the two? The corner, the diagonal, the oppressed,
the light of the fire, the color, in the absence of the neck, four, the vulture,
the crow, the pigeon, the teacher, the friend, the king, the ministers, - ।।५२।।
।। १५६ ।। ।।२७।। ।।२४।। ।। १३४ ।। ।।२०६ ।। ।।६८।। ।।१८० ।। ।।५०।। ।।४६।। ।।२२१।।
।। ११५ ।। ।।९४।। ।।९१।। ।।९६।। ।। १०२ ।। ।। १०८ ।। ।। १२७ ।। ॥३॥ ।। १०९ ।।
।।९७।। ।। ११४ ।। ।। ७२ ।। ।। १२४ ।। ।। २६९ ।। ।।२२४ ।। ।।२६।। ।।२७२ ।। ।। ३० ।।
।। १९४ ।। ।।३४।। ।।१९६ ।। ।। २७३ ।। ।।४१।। ।।१७९ ।। ।। १५५ ।। 114411 ।।१४७।। ।।
२२५ ।। ।। २५० ।। ।।१२१ ।। ।।२२२।। । । १४४ । । ।। २४१ ।। In the house, the royal
family, etc., the sound of the bell, at the end, if so, four in the left hand,
four on the side, the teacher, Umbrella, fly whisk, elephant, Fourteen days,
worshiping with sandalwood, the earth, In the moon, woman, man, in the sun,
vomiting, urine, feces, or, in the birth star, in the moon, victory, life, gain,
etc., is born, the grinding of teeth, the tongue does not take taste, from that
place of going, walking, standing, in order, by the same, then slowly, becoming
black, then ignorance is destroyed, thus, fifteen days, Thus, carrying, thus,
twelve days, Thus, in the wind, Thus, in the wind, it carries, thirty-three
days, thirteen days, the sun Three fortnights, otherwise, there is, quick gain
in Varuna, The dark one, when the palate trembles, the mind is sorrow, then,
then, the lightning speed, twenty-two days, thus, two ghatikas, I should make,
ten or fifteen, ten days, carrying, the moon, in the killing of the day, in the
question of war, in the south, bending, going out to the south, half a day, one
day, with days, in the destruction of the shoulder, in the daytime, coming face
to face, firm practice, then, one should do, seen, stuck, by evil planets, the
seventh of the bow and Gemini, white, cold, having studied, the heart, eight-
petaled lotus, xxi ।।२४० ।। ।। १५२ ।। ।। ११९ ।। ।।२१० ।। ।।५३।। ।।१०० ।। ।।१९०
।। ।। २४७ ।। ।। १४० ।। ।।८७।। ।।२३१ ।। ।।१६६।। ।। १५८ ।। ।।३८।। ।।३१।। ।।३९।।
118011 ।। १०१ ।। ।।८९।। ।।९८।। ।।९५।। ।। १११ ।। ।।११६ ।। ।।९९ ।। ।।७० ।। ।।२३३।।
।। १४३ ।। ।। १५७ ।। ।। २५७।। ।। ११० ।। ।।२६१ ।। ।। १२६ ।। ।। ७५ ।। ।।२३५ ।। ।।
१८३ ।। ।।६०।। 112611 ।।२२३ ।। ।। १५० ।। ।।२६८।। ।।२०० ।। ।।२०७।। ।। ४९ ।। ।। १२५
।। Not the shadow of oneself, In men, horses, and dogs, not one's own nose,
one's own tongue, the vein is pure, says the wise, on the lotus of the navel,
the ear, mounted, from the navel, the going out, in the navel, for fever, etc.,
by the power of nose attraction, by the power of the place of the nose, etc.,
Filling the nostril, at the time of the sign, there, Carrying the one who is not
rooted, The going out and the going in, From the eye, ear, and head splitting,
one will not see, in the left arm, twenty-five days, thus, crossing five, the
moving sun, the bee, in the body, the path, the moon, Indra, Varuna, the other's
shadow, for the other's sake, seeing every day, in the cloudless, Withdrawal,
thus, peaceful, from withdrawal, strength, radiance, on the first day, time, the
opposite, from the blows, first, placing on the head, in the morning, or in the
evening, carrying in one nostril, at the time of entry, the questioner, etc.,
the name, Happy, white, with meditation, breath, apana, samana, udana, breath,
apana, samana, udana, pranayama, then, by some, pranayama, the cutting off of
motion, breath, not the tip of the nose, the strength of the navel, the fire of
the stomach, in the wind, it wanders, eight feet, thumb, etc., in the shin, in
the big toe, the mind, the grasping of sin, if it rises, with a yellow dot, the
earth, like nectar, it rains, in the question, then, they are joined, ।। १६० ।।
।।२७१ ।। ।।१६७।। ।।२६० ।। ।। २५६ ।। ।।३७।। ।।३३।। ।।१९।। ।।१५।। ।।४८ ।। ।।१९९ ।।
।। २५२ ।। ।। २५९ ।। ।। ११९ ।। ।।१७० ।। ।। ११२ ।। ।। ७७ ।। ।।२७० ।। ।।५९।। ।।२१९
।। ।। १४५ ।। 11411 ।।१२।। ।। १२९ ।। ।।२४४ ।। ।। २१७ ।। ।।१६८ ।। ।। १०३ ।। 114611
।। २२७ ।। ।। १३३ ।। ।।२१।। ।।१३।। ।।१।। ।।४।। ।।१४।। ।।२२।। ।। १०५ ।। ।।३२।।
।।२८।। ।।२०५ ।। ।। २५१ ।। ।।६२।। ।।२०१ ।।

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 indra stambhAdikAryeSu, indumuSNaM raviM zItaM, uktAsana - samAsIno,
utkrAntirvAripakAudghATitakarAmbhojaudaye paJcame vA'pi udeti pavanaH pUrva,
upAnad- vAhanacchatrauSNaH zItazca, UrdhvajvAlAJcitaM bhImaM, karorabhAve
dazabhiH, ekatriMzadahacare, ekatraiva navAhAni, eka-dvi-tri- catuH eka dvi-
tri- catu: eka dvi-tri- catuH eka dvi-tri- catuHeka dvi- tri- catuHpaJca ekasya
nAze'nyasya ekaviMzatyahaM tvarkanAekAdazadinAnyarka ekonatriMzadahage, eka dve
trINyahorAetAnyapIDyamAnAni, eteSu labdhalakSyo'tha evamAdhyAtmikaM kAlaM, evaM
prANAdi - vijaye, evaM parAsu - deheSu, evaM razmikrameNaiva, eSA strIH puruSo
kaNThe kSuttRrSAnAzAya, karNodghATana - saJjA krameNaivaM parapurapravezA kva
maNDale gativayoH kITikA ghRtavarNAzca, kRSNaM kRSNaparIvAraM kRSisevAdikaM
sarvamapi kUrparI nyasya jAnvo ko jeSyati dvayoryuddhe? koNAvakSNornipIDyA
khadyotadyutivarNAni grIvA'bhAve catukhi gRdhraH kAkaH kapoto guru-bandhu
nRpAmAtyAH, -  /  / 52 /  /   /  /  156  /  /   /  / 27 /  /   /  / 24 /  /   /
/  134  /  /   /  / 206  /  /   /  / 68 /  /   /  / 180  /  /   /  / 50 /  /   /
/ 46 /  /   /  / 221 /  /   /  /  115  /  /   /  / 94 /  /   /  / 91 /  /   /  /
96 /  /   /  /  102  /  /   /  /  108  /  /   /  /  127  /  /   // 3 //   /  /
109  /  /   /  / 97 /  /   /  /  114  /  /   /  /  72  /  /   /  /  124  /  /
/  /  269  /  /   /  / 224  /  /   /  / 26 /  /   /  / 272  /  /   /  /  30  /
/   /  /  194  /  /   /  / 34 /  /   /  / 196  /  /   /  /  273  /  /   /  / 41
/  /   /  / 179  /  /   /  /  155  /  /  114411  /  / 147 /  /   /  /  225  /  /
/  /  250  /  /   /  / 121  /  /   /  / 222 /  /   /   /  144  /   /   /  /  241
/  /  gRhe rAjakulAdI ca ghaNTAnAdo ratAnte ceda, catvAri vAmahaste tu, catuH
pArzvastha guruyaM, chatra-cAmara - hastya - caturdazadinAnyeva,
candanenArcayitvA kSrmA, candre strIH puruSa sUrye, chardirmUtraM purISaM vA,
janmaRkSagate candre, jaya jIvita-lAbhAdi jAyate dantagharSakSet jihvA
nAsvAdamAdatte taccAra-gamana-sthAnatataH krameNa tenaiva, tataH zanaiH
samAkRSNa, tato'vidyA vilIyante, tathA paJcadazAhAni, tathaiva ca vahan tathaiva
dvAdazAhAni tathaiva vAyau tathaiva vAyau vahati, trayatriMzadahacare,
trayodazadinAnyarka trIn pakSAnanyathAtve'sti, tvarito varuNe lAbhaH, tArI
zyAmAM yadA tAlukampo manaH zoko, taM tatazca taDidvegaM dvAviMzatidinAnyevaM,
dve eva ghaTike sAdheM, daza vA paJcadaza vA, dazAhaM tu vahantrindAvedahane
yuddhapRcchAyAM, dakSiNasyAM valitvA dakSiNena viniryAntau, dinArdhaM dinamekaM
ca, dinaiH skandhakSaye' divA sammukhamAyAnto, dRr3hAbhyAsastata kuryAd dRSTaM
zliSTaM grahairduSTaiH, dhanurmithunayoH saptama dhavalaH zItalo'dhyAtvA
hRdyaSTapatrAbjaM xxi  /  / 240  /  /   /  /  152  /  /   /  /  119  /  /   /  /
210  /  /   /  / 53 /  /   /  / 100  /  /   /  / 190  /  /   /  /  247  /  /   /
/  140  /  /   /  / 87 /  /   /  / 231  /  /   /  / 166 /  /   /  /  158  /  /
/  / 38 /  /   /  / 31 /  /   /  / 39 /  /  118011  /  /  101  /  /   /  / 89 /
/   /  / 98 /  /   /  / 95 /  /   /  /  111  /  /   /  / 116  /  /   /  / 99  /
/   /  / 70  /  /   /  / 233 /  /   /  /  143  /  /   /  /  157  /  /   /  /
257 /  /   /  /  110  /  /   /  / 261  /  /   /  /  126  /  /   /  /  75  /  /
/  / 235  /  /   /  /  183  /  /   /  / 60 /  /  112611  /  / 223  /  /   /  /
150  /  /   /  / 268 /  /   /  / 200  /  /   /  / 207 /  /   /  /  49  /  /   /
/  125  /  /  na cchAyAmAtmanaH narAzvakarikAyeSu, na svanAsAM svajihAM nADI
zuddhAviti prAjJaH, nAbhyabjakarNikArUDhaM, nAbherniSkrAmatazcAraM nAbhau
jvarAdighAtAya, nAsAkarSaNayogena, nAsAdisthAnayogena nAsikArandhramApUrya,
nimittasamaye tatra, nirUrUtsed vahantIM yA, niSkramaM ca pravezaM ca, netra
zrotra- zirobhedAt, nekSyate vAmabAhukSet paJcaviMzatyahaM caivaM, paJcAtikramya
saMkrAntopataGga bhRGga-kAyeSu, pathendorindravaruNau, paracchAyAM parakRte,
pratyahaM pazyatA'nabhre' pratyAhArastathA zAMtaH, pratyAhArAd balaM kAntiH,
pratipaddivase kAlapratipakSa prahArebhyaH, prathamaM nyasya cUDAyAM, prabhAte
yadi vA sAyaM, pravahatyekanAsAyAM, praveza- samaye praSTA''dI nAma prasannaH
sitasadhyAnaH, prANApAna- samAnodAnaprANamapAna - samAnAvudAnaM prANAyAmastataH
kaizcid, prANAyAmo gaticchedaH, prANo nAsAgrahannAbhiprAbalyaM jaTharasyAgne,
pavane vicaratyaSTApAdAGguSThAdau jaGghAyAM, pAdAGguSThe manaH
pApagrahAzcedudayAt, pItena bindunA bhaumaM, pIyUSamiva varSantI, pRcchAyAmatha
lagnAste,  /  /  160  /  /   /  / 271  /  /   /  / 167 /  /   /  / 260  /  /   /
/  256  /  /   /  / 37 /  /   /  / 33 /  /   /  / 19 /  /   /  / 15 /  /   /  /
48  /  /   /  / 199  /  /   /  /  252  /  /   /  /  259  /  /   /  /  119  /  /
/  / 170  /  /   /  /  112  /  /   /  /  77  /  /   /  / 270  /  /   /  / 59 /
/   /  / 219  /  /   /  /  145  /  /  11411  /  / 12 /  /   /  /  129  /  /   /
/ 244  /  /   /  /  217  /  /   /  / 168  /  /   /  /  103  /  /  114611  /  /
227  /  /   /  /  133  /  /   /  / 21 /  /   /  / 13 /  /   /  / 1 /  /   /  / 4
/  /   /  / 14 /  /   /  / 22 /  /   /  /  105  /  /   /  / 32 /  /   /  / 28 /
/   /  / 205  /  /   /  /  251  /  /   /  / 62 /  /   /  / 201  /  /

Page #489 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
||44|| ||85|| ||20|| ||151|| ||137|| ||93|| ||209|| ||67|| ||246|| 1||211||
||202|| ||43|| ||189|| ||212|| ||230|| ||264|| ||128|| ||266|| ||51|| ||56||
||71|| ||35|| ||229|| ||237|| ||42|| ||2|| ||193|| ||187|| ||239|| ||236||
||79|| ||174|| ||122|| ||78|| ||213|| ||161|| ||135|| ||232|| ||73|| At the time
of inquiry, the earth is full of seeds, after performing five prostrations, if
one sees the full shadow, the left side becomes full, filled with the filler,
facing downwards, it creeps through the Brahma door, exiting from the Brahma
hole, then, the fear of the sun's rays, sorrow, pain, suffering, it becomes
severe, on the forehead, for the destruction of that disease, those who are
seized by beings, rain falls on the earth, and the four circles, where the mind
is, there is the wind, it was more beautiful, in the great fire, or the bed,
Indra and Varuna are auspicious, Indra's victory in battle, the transition of
Margashirsha, one month, the sun itself, the deluded mind, the wind, the
practice done there, what is in the stomach, with great effort, what one
abandons, while moving, like this pillar of the house, when it is not seen, when
it is not known properly, if the mouth is open, if the house is sick, wherever
it may be, the red throat-palate sun, the sixth or the third, the sun releasing
rays, full of Rama's kingdom, etc., from purgative, the rising of a wound or
fracture, Rohini, the moon's mark, if the moon is in the ascendant, profit and
loss, happiness and sorrow, in the linga, the navel, and the tuft, if the nose
becomes crooked, Varuna, the production of crops, carrying from the day of
Jyeshtha, etc., ||82|| carrying the inauspicious, ||3|| carrying the left
nostril, ||245|| carrying four days, etc., ||9|| carrying by her ||104|| he
should carry as long as the great east- ||69|| the left hand, the dark
fortnight, ||132|| the messenger being on the left arm, ||228|| the left is
auspicious at the sunrise, in the fortnight, ||5|| the left, there, in the eye,
the lotus, ||120|| the left, the auspicious, etc., ||64|| the wind, going in
three directions, is auspicious, ||74|| the heart-lotus blooms quickly, ||11||
the blooming petal there, ||148|| it wanders in the wind, like that, ||106|| it
exists, desiring to go, ||195|| by knowledge, the thumb of the mirror, ||173||
twenty days, etc., ||107|| the time of the equinox, ||76|| on the top of a tree,
somewhere ||139|| the rising of the wind by the moon, ||66|| Saturn should be
where ||197|| slowly throwing up the eyes, ||169|| from the time of the autumn
equinox, ||80|| starting from Shravana, etc., ||81|| by the path of the moon,
the sun, ||57|| climbing up from the head, ||153|| in the cold, the letter 'ha',
in the exhalation, ||163|| white, the same ||17|| sleeps at the time of the omen
||184|| six days in the middle, ||92|| they say six hundred more, ||262|| in the
sixth month, he dies, in destruction, ||214|| death in the heart with a hole,
||215|| attracted by the virtues of the good, ||176|| from place to place,
excellence, ||8|| thick, suddenly ||141|| the feet of the one who has just
bathed, ||165|| the shade of the smooth ointment, ||45|| he should carry twenty-
seven days, ||113|| the eyes blink constantly, ||159|| the whole, even if it is
arranged, ||142|| if one sees the full, ||220|| when the apana is drawn up,
||7|| it becomes like a half-moon, everywhere two, three, four, the vyana, which
is all over the body, in a dream, the head is shaved, in a dream, one is being
eaten, a thousand, eight, one lives, with anusvara, 'a' etc., in the white
fortnight, at the beginning of the day, the Sushumna-wind, two parts, the sun at
the time of sunrise, the sun, the moon, the eclipse, in the law, below the moon,
the eyebrow, the side, crossing the transitions, the hand, the finger, the
shoulder, the swan, the crow, the peacock, hunger, stool, vomit, urine, the wise
man, knowing the wind, the sixth, light, disbelief in another's country, by the
senses, drawing up equally, here, this, in another's country, of these,
together, somewhere, even after conquering the wind, the mind does not get it,
the navel, the heart, the nose, filling, in the pot, etc., with the same light,
releasing, even in the destruction of the breath, tireless, it is said, in the
body, not having received the heat, that, by that dust of ashes, within that
saffron thread, from that, the enjoyment of the three worlds, from that, seated
on the throne, from that, it goes out of the body, the creation of that eight
actions, eight petals, equal to the horizontal world, one should meditate,
wicked, the karata, the lion, the lotus of the body, and the light of the
mantra, meditation, desiring the law, the sky, with nectar water, in a king, or
in a poor man, the earth should be the fire, in the body, and in the place,
||3|| ||6|| ||1|| ||8|| ||2|| ||4|| ||7|| - ||5|| ||263|| ||267|| ||6|| ||226||
||192|| ||146|| ||248|| ||185|| ||186|| ||25|| ||18|| ||204|| ||138|| ||54||
||10|| ||23|| ||136|| ||203|| ||254|| ||29|| ||154|| ||238|| ||2|| ||26|| ||3||
||20|| ||11|| ||19|| ||24|| ||17|| ||16|| ||10|| ||28|| ||18|| ||1|| ||22||
||6|| ||9|| ||8|| xxii

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ||44|| ||85|| ||20|| ||151 /  /  ||137||  /  / 93|| ||209|| ||67|| ||246 /  /
1 // 211 /  /  ||202 /  /  ||43 /  /   /  / 189 /  /   /  / 212 /  /  ||230||
||264||  /  / 128||  // 266 /  /   // 51 /  /  ||56 /  /   /  71 /  /  ||35||
||229 /  /  ||237|| ||42 /  /  ||2|| ||193 /  /  ||187|| ||239 /  /  ||236 /  /
| // 79 //  ||174 /  /   /  / 122 /  /  ||78|| ||213||  /  / 161 /  /  ||135 /
/   /  / 232 /  /   // 73|| pRcchAyAH samaye pRthivIbIjasaMpUrNa, pUtvA paJca
namaskRtyA pUrNAM chAyAM yadIkSeta, pUrNA saJjAyate vAmA, pUritaM
pUrakeNAdhomukhaM brahmadvAre prasarpantI, brahmarandhrAt niSkramyA'tha,
bAlAdityasamajyotibhayaM zokaM rUjaM duHkhaM, bhavet tu dAruNA, bhAle
tadroganAzAya, bhUtAdibhirgRhItAnAM, bhaume varSati parjanyo, maNDalAni ca
catvAri, mano yatra marut tatra, manoharatarazcAsIt, mahAnase'thavA
zayyAmahendravaruNau zastau, mahendra vijayo yuddhe, mArgazIrSasya
saMkrAntimAsamekaM ravAveva, mugdhadhIryaH samIrasya, muhustatra kRtAbhyAso, yat
koSThAdatiyatnena, yat tyajet saJcaran yathaiSa bhavanastambha, yadA na dRzyate
tattu yadA na jJAyate samyak, yadi vyAttamukho yadyAturagRhasyodhvaM, yatra-
yatra bhavet sthAne, rakto hRtkaNTha-tAluraviH SaSThastRtIyo vA,
razminirmuktAdityaM, rAmArAjyAdisampUrNaH, recanAdudaravyAdheH, rohaNaM
kSatabhaGgAdeH rohiNI zazabhRllakSma, lagnasthazcecchazI sauriH, lAbhAlAbhau
sukhaM dukhaM, liGge nAbhau ca tunde vakrIbhavati nAsA ced, varuNe
sasyaniSpattiH, vahan jyeSThAdidivasAd, ||82 /  /  vahantyaniSTazaMsitrI,  /  /
3 /  /  vahantIM nAsikA vAmAM,  /  / 245 /  /  vahan dinAdi catvAri,  /  / 9 /
/  vahamAne tayA  /  / 104|| vahed yAvad bRhanpUrva-  /  / 69 /  /  vAmapANiM
kRSNapakSaM, ||132 /  /  vAmabAhusthite dUte, ||228 /  /  vAmA zastodaye pakSe,
/  / 5 /  /  vAme tatrekSaNe padma,  /  / 120 /  /  vAmaivAbhyudayAdISTa- ||64||
vAyustrimArgagaH zaMset ||74|| vikasatyAzu hRtpadmaM  /  / 11 /  /  vikAsi ca
dalaM tatra,  /  / 148 /  /  vicaratyanile tadvad ||106 /  /  vidyate gantukAmo'
||195 /  /  vidyayA darpaNAGguSTha ||173 /  /  viMzati-divasAneka- ||107||
viSuvata samayaprAptI ||76 /  /  vRkSAgre kutracit ||139 /  /  zazAkenodayo
vAyoH,  // 66 //  zaniH syAd yatra ||197|| zanairutkSipya netre ||169 /  /
zaratsaMkrAntikAlAcca, ||80|| zrAvaNAdeH samArabhya, ||81|| zazAMka-ravi-
mArgeNa, ||57|| zirovegAt samArUhya,  /  / 153 /  /  zIte hakAre phutkAre,  /  /
163 /  zuklaH samAno ||17|| zete nimittakAle  /  / 184 /  /  SaTkaM
dinAnAmadhyaka,  /  / 92 /  /  SaTzatAbhyadhikAnyAhuH  /  / 262 /  /  SaNmAsyAM
mriyate nAze,  /  / 214 /  /  sacchidre hRdaye mRtyuH, ||215 /  /
satsAdhakaguNAkRSTA,  /  / 176 /  /  sthAnAt sthAnAntarotkarSaH,  /  / 8 /  /
sthUlo'kasmAt  // 141|| snAtamAtrasya hRtpAdau, ||165 /  /
snigdhAJjanaghanacchAyaM, ||45 /  /  saptaviMzatyaha vahet  /  / 113 /  /
spandete nayane nityaM, ||159 /  /  samagramapi vinyastaM,  /  / 142 /  /
sampUrNA yadi pazyet  /  / 220 /  /  samAkRSya yadApAnAt,  /  / 7 /  /
syAdardhacandrasaMsthAnaM, sarvatra dvi-tri-caturo, sarvatvagvRttiko vyAnaH,
svapne muNDitamastiSkaM, svapne svaM bhakSyamANaM sahasra sASTakaM jIved,
sAnusvArairakArAdyaiH, sitapakSe dinArambhe, suSumNA-vAyu bhAge dvau,
sUryodayakSaNe sUrya, sUryendugrahaNe vidhau, somAdho bhrUlatA'pAGga saMkrAntIH
samatikramya, hastAGguliskandha haMsa-kAka-mayUrANAM, kSutaviNmedamUtrANi, jJAnI
budhvA'nilaM SaSThama prakAza azraddheyaM parapure, indriyaiH samamAkRSya, iha
cAyaM parapuraeSAmekatra kutrApi, jitvA'pi pavanaM tannApnoti manaHnAbhi-hRdaya-
nAsA pUraNe kumbhane caiva, sasama prakAza amuJcan prANanAze'pi, azrAntamiti
piNDasthe, upatApamasamprAptaH, tacca bhasmarajastena, tatkesarataterantaH,
tatastribhuvanAbhoga, tataH siMhAsanArUDhaM, tato dehAd bahiAyet
tadaSTakarmanirmANamaSTapatra tiryaglokasamaM dhyAyet, duSTAH karaTinaH siMhAH,
dehapadmaM ca mantrArciranta dhyAnaM vidhitsatA nabhastalaM sudhAmbhobhiH,
narendre vA daridre vA, pArthivI syAdathAgneyI, piNDasthaM ca padasthaM ca,
||3|| ||6|| ||1|| ||8|| ||2|| ||4|| ||7|| - ||5|| ||263 /  /  ||267 /  /  ||6||
||226 /  /  ||192 /  /  ||146 /  /   /  / 248 /  /   /  / 185 /  /  ||186 /  /
/  / 25 /  /  ||18|| ||204 /  /   /  / 138 /  /   /  / 54|| ||10||  /  / 23 /  /
/  / 136 /  /   /  / 203 /  /   /  / 254 /  /  ||29 /  /   /  / 154 /  /   /  /
238 /  /  ||2||  /  / 26 /  /  ||3|| ||20||  /  / 11 /  /  ||19|| ||24|| ||17||
/  / 16 /  /   /  / 10 /  /  ||28|| ||18|| ||1||  /  / 22 /  /  ||6||  /  / 9 /
/  ||8|| xxii

Page #490 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
||4|| ||2|| ||13|| ||14|| ।।35।। ||34|| ||54|| ।।13।। ||8|| ||5|| 1158।। ||74||
।।12।। ||27|| ||23|| ||15|| ।।21।। ।।25।। ||7|| ॥51।। ||7|| ॥62।। ।॥17॥ ॥5॥
||47।। ।76।। ।।60॥ ।।21।। ||25।। ।।4 ।। ||2|| ||10|| ||9|| ||3|| ||5|| ।।16।।
||1|| ।।15।। ।।12।। ||8|| ||14|| ।।6।। ||13|| ||7|| ।।17।। ||4|| ||46।। One
should contemplate the *Ref-bindu-kala*-free, *raga*-free, *Ref-bindu-
kala*-marked, *kama-bhoga*-free, white lion-throned, *shakinya*-*kshudra-
yogini*-free, seven-element-free, *spulinga*-lineage, *varsha-sudha-
sara*-remembered, *nir-akara*-formless, *Su-meru*-like, *ashtama-prakash*-eighth
light, *antar-atman*-inner self, *nabi-kanda*-below the navel, *mantra-
raja*-king of mantras, *ashta-patra*-eight-petaled, *ambhuja*-lotus, *ashta-
patra*-eight-petaled, *sita-ambhuja*-white lotus, *ashta-ratra*-eight nights,
*vyatikranta*-passed, *smarana-matra*-mere remembrance, *arham*-worthy,
*akshara*-letter, *pran-ittham*-thus, *mantra*-mantra, *gana-dhara-dhurya-
avi*-*gana-dhara*-*dhurya*-*avi*, *lakshya*-goal, *sam-alambhya*-taking,
*u*-*kara*-letter *u*, *hridya-ambhuja*-heart lotus, *ena-eva*-this very, *maha-
mantra*-great mantra, *eva-cha*-and thus, *mantra-vidya*-mantra knowledge,
*kanaka-ambhuja-garbha-stha*-golden lotus-womb-dwelling, *kama-dhenu*-wish-
fulfilling cow, *iva-achintya*-like inconceivable, *krutva*-doing, *papa-
sahasrani*-thousands of sins, *kesara-ali*-saffron-string, *svara-mayi*-sound-
filled, *granthin*-knots, *vidarayana*-breaking, *guru-panchaka*-five teachers,
*nama-uttha*-name-born, *chatur-vimsha-patra*-twenty-four-petaled,
*chintayet*-contemplate, *anya-api-enam*-another also this, *janma-dava-huta-
ashasya*-fire of birth-death, *tatah*-then, *sthiri-krata-svantah*-stabilized-
inner self, *tatah*-then, *su-dhara-rasa*-sweet juice, *suta-tatah*-son-then,
*ni-raga-madvesham*-free from attachment-hatred, *tatah*-then,
*bhramta*-wandering, *patra-eshu*-in petals, *tatah*-then, *vishanta*-entering,
*vaktra-abje*-mouth lotus, *tatha*-thus, *punya-tama*-most auspicious,
*mantra*-mantra, *tatha*-thus, *hrit-padma-madhyastha*-heart lotus-middle-
dwelling, *tad-dhyana-aveshatah*-by that contemplation-absorption, *tad-eva-
cha*-that very also, *kramat*-gradually, *sukshma*-subtle, ।।11।। ।।6।। ||14||
||66|| ।।33|| ||69|| ।।59।। ||9|| ||52।। ।।81।। ||28|| ||77|| ।।36।। ||80।।
||19|| ।।63।। ।।37|| ||48|| ।।10।। ||38|| ।।3।। *tatra*-there, *shodasha-patra-
adhye*-sixteen-petaled-in, *trishu-ddha-ya*-with three-purities,
*chintayan*-contemplating, *tasya*-of that, *antara-ntimam*-innermost,
*varna*-letter, *talu-randhrena*-palate-hole, *gachanta*-going, *dala-
sandhisu*-petal-joints, *sarveshu*-all, *dvi-parshve*-two-sides, *pranava-
dvandam*-*pranava*-pair, *dhyayana-atmanam-eva-ittham*-contemplating-self-thus,
*dhyayatah*-contemplating, *anadi-samsiddhan*-beginningless-perfected,
*dhyayet*-contemplate, *sita-abje*-white lotus, *nabi-padme*-navel lotus, *stha-
tam*-dwelling, *nasa-agre*-nose-tip, *pranavah*-*pranava*, *shunyam*-void, *nir-
yanta*-going out, *talu-randhrena*-palate-hole, *nisha-kara*-moon, *kala-
kara*-art-maker, *pancha-varna-mayi*-five-colored, *pancha-tattva*-five-
elements, *pancha-varna*-five-colored, *smaran-mantram*-remember-mantra, *pra-
chavya-mana-sang-lakshyad*-by-being-uttered-sign, *pra-vritti-hetu-eva-
itad*-this-is-the-cause-of-action, *pra-sidata*-becomes pleased, *manah*-mind,
*sadya*-immediately, *pita*-yellow, *stambhe*-pillar, *aruna*-red,
*vasya*-subdued, *purva-asha*-east-direction, *anu-krama-deva*-in-order-thus,
*purva-asha-abhimukhah*-east-direction-facing, *purvam*-east,
*bhisana*-terrible, *simha*-lion, *matanga*-elephant, *bhuta-anta*-end-of-
existence, *bindu-samyuktam*-dot-joined, *mangala-uttama-sharanam-mantrah*-most-
auspicious-refuge-mantra, *pranava-purvo-ayam*-*pranava*-preceded-this, *maha-
tattva*-great-principle, *idam*-this, *yogi*-yogin, *masai-shat-bhih*-by-six-
months, *krta*-done, *mukti-saukhya-pradam*-liberation-happiness-giving,
*dhyayet*-contemplate, *murdha-samsthita*-head-dwelling, *shita-anshu-yat-
padani*-cool-ray-whose-feet, *pavitrani*-pure, *yadva*-or, *mantra-
adhipam*-mantra-lord, *dhiman*-intelligent, *yadi-ichched*-if-desire, *bhava-
dava-agneh*-birth-death-fire, *ref-bindu-kala-hina*-*ref-bindu-kala*-free,
*vaktra-abje*-mouth lotus, *ashta-dale*-eight-petaled, *varna-ashta*-eight-
letters, *vaktu*-to-speak, *na-kashchid-api-asya*-no-one-at-all-of-this, *vita-
raga*-free-from-attachment, *bhaved*-becomes, *yogi*-yogin, *shankha*-conch,
*kunda*-jasmine, *shashanka*-moon, *shatani*-hundreds, *trini*-three, *shat-
varna*-six-letters, *shruta-sindhu-samud-bhutam*-heard-ocean-born, *shashi-
bimba-adi-vo-dbhutam*-moon-disk-like-born, *shat-kone*-six-cornered, *a-prati-
chakre*-unbroken-wheel, *sancharanta*-moving, *nabo-bhage*-sky-part,
*sancharamana*-moving, *vaktrena*-by-mouth, *sphurat-kalyana-maha-
atmya*-shining-auspicious-greatness, *sphurat-sphatika-bhringa-ara-siddha-adi-
chatur-shkam-cha*-shining-crystal-beetle-ornament-perfection-etc-four-also,
*samvatsaram*-year, *krta-abhyasa*-done-practice, *kshira-ambhodhe-h-vinir-
yanti*-milk-ocean-from-going-out, *jnana-vad-bhih*-by-knowledgeable-ones, *sama-
mnata*-declared, *navama-prakash*-ninth-light, *indu-mandala-sang-kasha-
chhatra*-moon-disk-like-umbrella, *jina-endra-pratima-rupa*-*jina-endra*-image-
form, *tirthika-ira-parij-nata-divya-dundubhi-nir-ghosha-divya-puspa-utkara-
akirna*-by-pilgrims-not-known-divine-drum-sound-divine-flower-excellence-
scattered, *nasa-dhyana-ni*-nose-contemplations, *sevyani*-to-be-practiced,
*moksha-shri-sammukhin-asya*-liberation-glory-facing-of-this, *yena-yena-hi-
bhavana*-by-which-which-indeed-feeling, *yogi-cha-abhyasa-yogena*-yogin-also-by-
practice-yoga, *raga-dvesha-maha-moha-vita-raga*-attachment-hatred-great-
delusion-free-from-attachment, *vimuchyate*-is-liberated, *shanta-vaira-ebhi-
simha-adi-sarva-jna*-peaceful-enemy-by-lion-etc-omniscient, *bhagavan*-Lord,
*sarva-atishya-yuktasya*-all-excellence-possessing, *sidhyanti*-are-achieved,
*siddhayah*-perfections, *sarva*-all, *simha-asana-nishanna-sya*-lion-throne-
seated-of, *dashama-prakash*-tenth-light, *anan-ya-sharan-ibhuya*-taking-refuge-
in-no-other, *anadi-anta-sya*-beginningless-endless, *lokasya*-of-the-world,
*a-murta-sya*-formless, *chida-nanda*-consciousness-bliss, *a-lakshya-
lakshya*-unseen-seen, *asmin*-in-this, *nita-nta-ajna-apaya-vipaka-
na*-completely-command-harm-result-of, *ajna*-command, *yatra*-where, *pura-
skrutya*-giving-priority, *ichcha-sampanna-sarva-artha*-desire-fulfilled-all-
purpose, *iti-ajasram*-thus-continuously, *smaran*-remembering, *eva-cha*-and
thus, *chatur-vidha-aihika-amushmika-apaya-tatah*-four-kinds-worldly-unworldly-
harm-from, *viveka-ma-ashritya*-discrimination-taking-refuge-in, *tyakta-sanga-
astanu-tyakva*-abandoned-attachment-body-abandoning, *divya-vanshe-samut-
panna*-divine-lineage-born, *divya*-divine, *bhoga-avasane-cha*-enjoyment-end-
also, *dharma-dhyane*-righteousness-contemplation, *bhaved*-becomes,
*bhava*-feeling, *nana-dravya-gata-ananta-prati-kshana-samud-bhuta*-various-
substance-gone-infinite-every-moment-born, *maha-mahima-sau-bhagyam*-great-
glory-good-fortune, *ya-sampada-arhata*-which-wealth-worthy, *ya*-which ||27||
।।40।। ।73|| ||31|| ||68।। ।।67|| ||70।। ।।65।। ||42।। । 71।। ||23|| 1153।।
||43|| ||30|| ।।1।। ।।18।। ।।45|| ||24|| ||4|| ||44|| ।।79।। ।।61।। ||39।। ।78॥
||57|| ||64।। ||22|| ।।49।। 1155।। ||3|| ||14|| ||1|| ||5|| ||17|| ।72।। ||7||
||8|| ||21|| ||2|| ||6|| ।।11।। ||24|| ।।18।। ।।23।। ।।22।। ।।16।। ||75।। ||56।।
।।12।। ।।15।। ।।16।। ||5 || |॥20॥ ।।32।। ||29|| ।।15।। ||26|| ।।12।। ।।19।।
||13|| xxiii

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ||4|| ||2|| ||13|| ||14||  /  / 35 /  /  ||34|| ||54||  /  / 13 /  /  ||8||
||5|| 1158 /  /  ||74||  /  / 12 /  /  ||27|| ||23|| ||15||  /  / 21 /  /   /  /
25 /  /  ||7||  // 51 /  /  ||7||  // 62 /  /   /  // 17 //   // 5 //  ||47 /  /
/ 76 /  /   /  / 60 //   /  / 21 /  /  ||25 /  /   /  / 4  /  /  ||2|| ||10||
||9|| ||3|| ||5||  /  / 16 /  /  ||1||  /  / 15 /  /   /  / 12 /  /  ||8||
||14||  /  / 6 /  /  ||13|| ||7||  /  / 17 /  /  ||4|| ||46 /  /
rAgAdibhiranAkrAntaM rephabindukalAkrAntaM, vicintayettathA nAbhau, virataH
kAmabhogebhyaH, zvetasiMhAsanAsInaM, zAkinyaH kSudrayoginyaH, saptadhAtu-
vinAbhUtaM, sphuliMgasantatiM dhyAyet, smared varSatsudhAsAraiH, svAGgagarbhe
nirAkAraM, sumeruriva niSprakampaH, aSTama prakAza atha tasyAntarAtmAnaM, athavA
nAbhikandAdhaH, athAsya mantrarAjasyA aSTapatre'mbuje dhyAyed, aSTapatre
sitAmbhoje, aSTarAtre vyatikrAnte, asyAH smaraNamAtreNa, arhamityakSaraM
prANaitthaM dhyAyato mantraM, iti gaNadharadhuryAvi iti lakSyaM samAlambya
'u'kAraM hRdayAmbhoje, enameva mahAmantraM, evaM ca maMtravidyAnAM,
kanakAmbhojagarbhasthaM, kAmadhenumivAcintyakRtvA pApasahasrANi, kesarAlI-
svaramayIM granthIn vidArayan, . gurupaJcaka-nAmotthA, caturviMzatipatraM ca,
cintayedanyamapyenaM, janmadAvahutAzasya, tataH sthirIkRtasvAntaH, tataH
sudhArasaH-sUtatato nIrAgamadveSam, tato bhramataM patreSu, tato vizantaM
vaktrAbje, tathA puNyatamaM mantraM, tathA hRtpadmamadhyasthaM, taddhyAnAvezataH
tadevaM ca kramAt sUkSma,  / 11 /  /   /  / 6 /  /  ||14|| ||66||  /  / 33||
||69||  /  / 59 /  /  ||9|| ||52 /  /   /  / 81 /  /  ||28|| ||77||  /  / 36 /
/  ||80 /  /  ||19||  /  / 63||  /  / 37|| ||48||  /  / 10 /  /  ||38||  /  / 3
/  /  tatra SoDazapatrADhye trizuddhayA cintayaMstasya, tasyAntarantimaM varNam,
tAlurandhreNa gacchantaM dalasandhiSu sarveSu, dvipArzve praNavadvandvaM
dhyAyanAtmAnamevettham, dhyAyato'nAdisaMsiddhAn, dhyAyet sitAbje nAbhipadme
sthitaM nAsAgre praNavaH zUnyam niryAntaM tAlurandhreNa, nizAkara-kalAkAraM,
paJcavarNamayI paJcatattvA paJcavarNaM smarenmantraM, pracyAvyamAnasaGlakSyAd,
pravRttiheturevaitad, prasIdati manaH sadyaH, pIta stambhe'ruNa vazye,
pUrvAzA'nukramAdevam pUrvAzAbhimukhaH pUrvam, bhISaNAH siMha-mAtaMga bhUtAntaM
bindusaMyuktaM, maGgalottamazaraNamantraH praNavapUrvo'yaM, mahAtattvamidaM
yogI, mAsaiH SaDbhiH kRtA mukti-saukhyapradAM dhyAyed, mUrdhasaMsthita-
zItAMzuyatpadAni pavitrANi yadvA mantrAdhipaM dhImAn, yadIcched bhavadAvAgneH,
repha-bindu-kalAhInaM vaktrebje'STadale varNASTa vaktuM na kazcidapyasya,
vItarAgo bhaved yogI, zaGkha-kunda-zazAGkA zatAni trINi SaTvarNa,
zrutasindhusamudbhUtaM, zazibimbAdivodbhUtAM, SaTkoNe'praticakre, saJcarantaM
nabhobhAge, saJcaramANaM vaktreNa, sphuratkalyANamAhAtmyaM,
sphuratsphaTikabhRGgArasiddhAdikacatuSkaM ca, saMvatsaraM kRtAbhyAsaH,
kSIrAmbhodherviniryAntI, jJAnavadbhiH samAmnAtaM, navama prakAza
indumaNDalasaGkAzacchatra jinendrapratimArUpam, tIrthikairaparijJAtadivya-
dundubhinirghoSadivyapuSpotkarAkIrNAH nAsaddhyAnAni sevyAni, mokSa-
zrIsammukhInasya, yena yena hi bhAvena, yogI cAbhyAsayogena, rAga-dveSa-
mahAmohavItarAgo vimucyate, zAntavairebhasiMhAdisarvajJo bhagavAn
sarvAtizayayuktasya, sidhyanti siddhayaH sarvAH, siMhAsana-niSaNNasya, dazama
prakAza ananyazaraNIbhUya, anAdyantasya lokasya amUrtasya cidAnandaalakSya-
lakSyaasmin nitAntaAjJA'pAyavipAkAnAM, AjJAM yatra puraskRtya icchA-sampanna-
sarvArthaityajasraM smaran evaM caturvidhaaihikAmuSmikApAyatato vivekamAzritya,
tyaktasaGgAstanuM tyaktvA, divyavaMze samutpannAH, divyA bhogAvasAne ca,
dharmadhyAne bhaved bhAvaH, nAnAdravyagatAnantapratikSaNasamudbhUto,
mahAmahimasaubhAgyaM, yA sampadA'rhato yA ||27||  /  / 40 /  /   / 73|| ||31||
||68 /  /   /  / 67|| ||70 /  /   /  / 65 /  /  ||42 /  /   /  71 /  /  ||23||
1153 /  /  ||43|| ||30||  /  / 1 /  /   /  / 18 /  /   /  / 45|| ||24|| ||4||
||44||  /  / 79 /  /   /  / 61 /  /  ||39 /  /   / 78 //  ||57|| ||64 /  /
||22||  /  / 49 /  /  1155 /  /  ||3|| ||14|| ||1|| ||5|| ||17||  / 72 /  /
||7|| ||8|| ||21|| ||2|| ||6||  /  / 11 /  /  ||24||  /  / 18 /  /   /  / 23 /
/   /  / 22 /  /   /  / 16 /  /  ||75 /  /  ||56 /  /   /  / 12 /  /   /  / 15 /
/   /  / 16 /  /  ||5 || | // 20 //   /  / 32 /  /  ||29||  /  / 15 /  /  ||26||
/  / 12 /  /   /  / 19 /  /  ||13|| xxiii

Page #491 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
||10|| ||20|| ||9|| ||4|| This is the state of equanimity, subtle, with the word
of the omniscient, endowed with special potency and knowledge, free from
attachment and aversion, and the eleven-fold illumination, the doctrine of non-
absolutism, favorable like the wind, even with the fuel of separation, hundreds
of millions of beings bowing at his feet, this one is ours, his nails and hairs,
roaring in front of him, his autumnal moon-like brilliance, heard first from the
life-karma of the Shruta-dependence, hundreds of arrangements are fierce, the
Asoka with red leaves, thus in diversity, sharp, this is the first unification,
the production, existence, and destruction, etc., are all together, the first,
the one-three-fold, thus according to the Shruta, The noble, the luminous, the
pure, the one who dwells in the mountain, the four-cornered, the people who
revolve, the three umbrellas are pure, like the mind of the one who is hidden,
it burns, and from that, the concentration, the name, the object, only, then,
the action that has arisen, there, from the Shruta, taking one, the three
worlds, the object, from meditation, the gods of the three heavens, the humans,
the name of the Tirthankara, the brilliance, the mass of light, the spread, the
illumination, the staff, the shield, the churning, the god, then, that Bhagavan,
he does not hold health, at the time of entering Nirvana, not upward, from the
absence of the object, the five sense objects, ||4|| ||33|| ||20|| ||27|| ||45||
||4|| ||38|| ||36|| ||42|| ||13|| ||50|| ||29|| ||34|| ||17|| ||2|| ||18|| ||6||
||10|| The three walls are high, ||43|| from previous practice, ||12|| the lord
of the house, the lord of the plane, ||47|| the circle of the sun, the glorious
mockery, ||31|| the death, the famine, ||30|| the five small colors, the rays,
||57|| from the lightness of yoga, ||60|| the word, the mind, the yoga, ||55||
the brilliance of speech, the whole, ||25|| glorious, inconceivable, the
powerful, ||53|| all six seasons at the same time, ||35|| the absence of all
dependence, ||14|| they move, the blooming, ||32|| they cross, without delay,
||16|| the perfect, the only knowledge, ||49|| having attained the only
knowledge, ||23|| they become silent, in that, the ointment, ||39|| by the
seasons, then, by the four, it returns, ||52|| the heaven, the liberation, the
cause, the dharma, ||1|| the beginning, the infinite, the incomparable, ||6||
with subtle, body yoga, ||54|| the knowledge-covering, the sight, ||22|| the
knowable, the diversity, the Shruta, the thought, ||5|| the twelfth
illumination, the softness of the Angas, the cause, ||37|| very fickle, very
subtle, ||4|| or, from the grace of the guru, ||14|| the light hidden within,
||10|| with a distracted mind, it arises, ||38|| attained by the mind of the
self, ||7|| here, the scattered, the coming and going, ||2|| in solitude, very
pure, pleasant, ||22|| thus, gradually, the practice, ||5|| absorbed in
indifference, ||33|| devoted to indifference, ||19|| like a banana tree,
ignorance, ||40|| the instruments, do not stand, ||34|| the karmas, also, the
creators of suffering, ||5|| they take, the objects to be taken, ||26|| the form
of consciousness, the joyful, ||8|| for a long time, the effort, even, ||45||
the mind, also, wherever, wherever, ||27|| from the birth-after-birth
impressions, ||13|| the waking, the dream, the joyful, ||48|| born, in practice,
stability, ||46|| there, in the first, the knowledge of the truth, ||15|| those,
not from the supreme lord, even, ||54|| lost, the mind, all around, ||36|| not
the self, it moves the mind, ||35|| the release, first, the sight, ||31|| the
pranayama, etc., ||17|| for men, the unattainable by effort, ||11|| separate,
the self, from the body, ||9|| outside, inside, and all around, ||25|| the
external self, having abandoned, ||6|| it becomes, indeed, empty, ||49|| the
feelings, touching, even, ||24|| the intoxicated elephant, with effort, ||28||
honey, not sweet, not these, ||52|| liberation, may be, may not be, ||51|| like,
the thousand-rayed, ||16|| what this is, that, not to be said, ||21|| when, as,
where, from where, ||29|| as long as, the effort, a bit, ||20|| who, in the
waking state, ||47|| that, from the scriptures, the mouth of the good guru,
||5|| the form, the beautiful, seeing, even, ||23|| the exhaling, the inhaling,
the holding, ||44|| the word, the mind, the body, ||18|| separated, like, the
soaked, ||42|| scattered, moving, desired, ||3|| from the ocean of the Shruta,
the mouth of the guru, it is heard, the golden nature, ||12|| the inner organ,
having become a thorn, ||39|| close, stable, joyful, ||4|| true, in this, the
non-attachment, the attachment, ||53|| with equal, sense-organs, snakes, ||43||
everywhere, spread, ||32|| ||7|| ||58|| ||9|| ||44|| ||40|| ||11|| ||21|| ||26||
||56|| ||15|| ||19|| ||28|| ||48|| ||46|| ||51|| ||24|| ||3|| ||8|| ||59||
||37|| XXIV

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
  /  / 10 /  /  ||20||  /  / 9 /  /  ||4|| rAgadveSa-kaSAyAdyaiH, viziSTa-vIrya-
bodhADhyaM, sarvajJa vacanaM sUkSma, so'yaM samarasIbhAvaH, ekAdazama prakAza
anavacchityAmnAyaH anukUlo vAti marut, apasAritendhanabharaH api
koTIzatasaGkhyAH abhivandyamAnapAdaH ayameka eva naH asya nakhA romANi asya
purastAt ninadan, asya zaradindudIdhi Adye zrutAvalambanaAyuHkarmasakAzAd,
AyojanazatamugrAH Araktapallavo'zoka iti nAnAtve nizitA idamAdimasaMhananA
utpAda-sthiti-bhaGgAdiekatra paryAyANAM eka-triyogabhAjAmAdyaM, evaM
zrutAnusArAd audArika-taijasakevalinaH zailezIgatasya caturAzAvartijanAn,
chatratrayI pavitrA chadmasthitasya yadvanmanaH jvalati tatazca
dhyAnatannAmagrahamAtrAd, tadanantaraM samutsannakriya tatra zrutAd gRhItvaikam,
trijagadviSayaM dhyAnAda tridivaukaso manuSyAH tIrthakaranAmasajhaM,
tejaHpuJjaprasaraprakAzitA daNDa-kapATe maMthAnakaM devastadA sa bhagavAn dhatte
na khalu svAsthyaM, nirvANagamanasamaye, nordhvamupagrahavirahAda paJcApi
cendriyArthAH, ||4||  // 33 //  ||20|| ||27|| ||45 /  /   /  / 4 /  /  ||38||  /
/ 36 /  /  ||42 //  ||13||  // 50 //  ||29 /  /  ||34|| ||17|| ||2||  /  / 18 /
/   /  / 6 /  /   /  / 10 /  /  prAkArAstraya uccaiH, ||43 /  /  pUrvAbhyAsAt,
/  / 12 /  /  bhavanapati-vimAnapati-  // 47 /  /  mArtaNDamaNDala-zrIviDambi  /
/ 31 /  /  mArIti-durbhikSAti  /  / 30 /  /  laghuvarNapaJcakogiraNa ||57||
lAghavayogAd  /  / 60 /  /  vacana-manoyoga  /  / 55 /  /  vAgjyotsnayA'khilA
||25|| zrImAnacintyavIryaH ||53 /  /  SaDapi samakAlamRtavo, ||35 /  /
sakalAlambana-viraha- ||14|| saJcArayanti vikacAnya ||32||
saGkrAmatyavilambitam,  /  / 16 /  /  sampannakevalajJAna ||49 /  /  samprApya
kevalajJAna- ||23|| samayanti tadabhyarNe, ||39 /  /
samayaistatazcatubhirnivartate ||52 /  /  svargApavargaheturdharma ||1||
sAdikamanantamanupamam,  /  / 6 /  /  sUkSmeNa kAyayogena, ||54|| jJAnAvaraNIyaM
dRSTyA  /  / 22 /  /  jJeyaM nAnAttvazrutavicAra ||5|| dvAdazama prakAza
aGgamRdutva-nidAnaM,  /  / 37 /  /  aticaJcalamatisUkSma,  /  / 4 /  /  athavA
guruprasAdAd, ||14|| antaHpihitajyotiH,  /  / 10 /  /  amanaskatayA saJjAya ||38
//  AtmadhiyA samupAttaH ||7|| iha vikSipta yAtAyAtaM ||2|| ekAnte'tipavitre
ramye ||22|| evaM kramazo'bhyAsA ||5|| audAsInyanimagnaH,  /  / 33 /  /
audAsInyaparAyaNa  /  / 19 /  /  kadalIvaccAvidyA  // 40 //  karaNAni
nAdhitiSTha ||34 /  /  karmANyapi duHkhakRte  /  / 5 /  /  gRhNanti grAhyANi  /
/ 26 /  /  cidrUpAnandamayo, ||8|| ciramAhitaprayatnairapi ||45 /  /  ceto'pi
yatra yatra, ||27|| janmAntarasaMskArAt  /  / 13 /  /  jAgaraNasvapnajuSo ||48||
jAte'bhyAse sthiratAm, ||46|| tatra prathame tattvajJAne, ||15||
tAMstAnnaparamezvarAdapi ||54|| naSTe manasi samantAt  /  / 36 /  /  nAtmA
prerayati mano, ||35|| niHsRtyAdau dRSTiH ||31|| prANAyAma-prabhRti ||17||
puMsAmayatnalabhyaM  /  / 11 /  /  pRthagAtmAnaM kAyAt  /  / 9 /  /
bahirantazca samantAt, ||25 //  bAhyAtmAnamapAsya, ||6|| bhavati khalu zUnya
||49 /  /  bhAvAn spRzannapi ||24|| matto hastI yatnAt ||28|| madhu na madhuraM
naitAH  /  / 52 /  /  mokSo'stu mA'stu ||51|| yadvat sahasrakiraNaH  /  / 16 /
/  yadidaM taditi na vaktuM, ||21|| yarhi yathA yatra yataH, ||29 /  /  yAvat
prayatnalezo,  /  / 20 /  /  yo jAgradavasthAyAM, ||47|| yA zAstrAt suguromukhA
.  /  / 5 /  /  rUpaM kAntaM pazyannapi, ||23|| recaka-pUraka-kuMbhaka- ||44 /
/  vacana-manaHkAyAnAM, .  /  / 18 /  /  vizliSTamiva pluSTami  // 42 /  /
vikSipta calamiSTa, ||3|| zrutisindhorguru mukhato, zrUyate suvarNabhAvaM,  /  /
12 /  /  zalyIbhUtasyAntaHkaraNasya ||39 /  /  zliSTaM sthirasAnaMda, ||4||
satyetasminnarati-ratidaM ||53|| samadairindriyabhujagai  /  / 43 /  /
sarvatrApi prasRtA,  /  / 32 /  /  ||7||  /  / 58 //   // 9 //   /  / 44|| ||40
/  /   /  / 11 /  /   /  / 21 /  /   /  / 26 /  /   // 56 //   /  / 15 /  /   /
/ 19 /  /  ||28|| ||48 //  ||46 /  /  ||51 /  /  ||24|| ||3|| ||8|| ||59 /  /
||37|| XXIV

Page #492 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The five great vows (Mahavratas) are: 1. **Ahimsa** (non-violence) 2. **Satya**
(truthfulness) 3. **Asteya** (non-stealing) 4. **Brahmacharya** (continence) 5.
**Aparigraha** (non-attachment)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================


Page #493 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
"Whatever good deed is done, even a small portion of the **Ratnatraya** (three
jewels), I accept it all. Even following the path, even a little, is a good
deed. Following the path, doing good deeds, whatever I am able to do, I offer my
approval to all. This too is a good deed.  Wherever you are, be there. Whether
your friend comes to you to do good or your enemy comes to you to do harm, be
equal in your vision.  The mind is not driven by the soul, nor are the senses
driven by the mind. When both are corrupted, then they perish on their own." -
**Dvayashriyam Apabhramsha** and **Yoga Shastra**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 yatkRtaM sukRtaM kiJcid ratnatritayagocaram  /  tat sarvamanumanye'haM mArga
mAtrAnusAryapi  //  ratnatrayI ke aMza kA bhI AcaraNa satkarma hai| sanmArga kA
atyalpa bhI anusaraNabhI satkarma hai| mArgAnusaraNa zubhAcaraNa jo bana par3A
mujha se vibho  /  anumodanA saba kI karUM yaha bhI sarasa zubha karma hai| jo
jahA~ hoMtauM so tahA~ hoMtara, sattu vi mittu vi kihe vi hu Avau  /  jahiM vihu
tahiM vihu magge lINA, ekkae diTThihi dogni vi joahu  //  - dvayAzrIyam
apabhraMza: tuma jahAM ho vahA~ raho, tuma jisa mata paMtha meM ho vahA~ raho,
tumhAre pAsa tumArA hita karane tumhArA mitra Aye yA ahita karane zatru Aye una
donoM para samadRSTi rakhanA  /  6 nAtmA prerayati mano, na manaH prerayati
yarhi karaNAni  /  ubhayabhraSTaM tarhi, svayameva vinAzamApnoti  //  -
yogazAstram bicArA mana ! AtmA use prerita na kare, iMdriyA~ usakA kahanA na
mAne, taba ubhaya bhraSTa apane Apa mana vinAza ko prApta ho jAtA hai|

Page #494 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
One form, three parts: Brahma, Vishnu, Maheshvara. These are also called:
knowledge, conduct, and vision.  /  /  Action is Vishnu, activity is Brahma, and
the cause is Maheshvara.  /  /  The one who is complete in action and cause is
called Mahadeva.  /  /  - Haimi Mahadeva Dvatrimsika One form, three parts:
Brahma, Vishnu, Maheshvara. These are also called: knowledge, conduct, and
vision.  /  /  Action is Vishnu, activity is Brahma, and the cause is
Maheshvara.  /  /  The one who is complete in action and cause is called
Mahadeva.  /  /  - Haimi Mahadeva Dvatrimsika  /  /  Whatever is, whatever is
not, whatever is in time, whatever is not in time, whatever is by name, whatever
is not by name, whatever is by form, whatever is not by form, whatever is by
description, whatever is not by description, whatever is by this, whatever is
not by this, whatever is by that, whatever is not by that.  /  /  If you are
free from all faults and impurities, then you are one, O Lord! I bow to you.  /
/  - Haimi Ayogavyavachheda Dvatrimsika  /  /  I bow to the virtuous ones who
are free from anger and pleasure, who are striving to conquer the mind and bring
it to its natural state, who are not attached to the world, who are not attached
to the body, who are not attached to the senses, who are not attached to the
objects of the senses, who are not attached to the fruits of their actions, who
are not attached to the praise of others, who are not attached to the blame of
others, who are not attached to the good or bad fortune of others, who are not
attached to the past, present, or future, who are not attached to anything, who
are not attached to anyone, who are not attached to anything at all.  /  /  -
Haimi Ayogavyavachheda Dvatrimsika  /  /  Those who desire to become free from
attachment must conquer three types of attachment: attachment to pleasure,
attachment to affection, and attachment to sight. Attachment to pleasure and
affection can be overcome with a little effort. But attachment to sight, which
is blind devotion to a person or belief, is very difficult to overcome, even for
the virtuous.  /  /  - Vitaragastotra  /  /  The Acharya is a moving pilgrimage
in the world of mortals, the Acharya is like a lamp in the hand for the
illumination of the truth. The Acharya is like a messenger in the yoga of
liberation, the Acharya is like a direct Dharma-bindu for the learned.  /  /  -
Vitaragastotra  /  /  Do not be negligent in reading this book.  /  /  -
Vitaragastotra

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
ekamUrtistrayobhAgA brahma-viSNu-mahezvarAH tAnyeva punaruktAni jJAna-cAritra-
darzanaH / / kArya viSNuH kriyAbrahmA-kAraNaM tu mahezvaraH / kArya
kAraNasaMpUrNomahAdevaH sa ucyate / / - haimI mahAdeva dvAtriMzikA eka mUrti
usake tIna bhAga - brahmA, viSNu, maheza, arthAt jJAna, cAritra, drshn...|
kAraNa vaha maheza-yAni darzana, kriyA vaha, brahmAyAni... cAritra kArya vaha
viSNu yAni jJAna, aise kArya aura kAraNa kI saMpUrNatA dvArA tIna mUrti svarUpe
prakaTIta tattva vahI mahAdeva vItarAga deva / / yanna tanna samaye yathA tathA
/ yo'si so'syabhidhayA yayA tayA / / vItadoSakaluSaH sa ced bhavAn / eka eva
bhagavan ! namo'stu te / / - haimIayogavyavaccheda dvAtriMzikA kisI bhI darzana
meM, kisI bhI svarUpa meM, kisI bhI nAma se, parama tattva kI upAsanA jo ho|
vaha tattva jo rAgadveSa kI kAlimA se rahita ho to vaha tuma hI ho taM hI hai
yaha niHsaMdeha hai|| deva ! mere nAma tumheM vaMdana... W no rusai no tUsai,
jeUNa maNaM layammi jonento 'mosuM bhavaM viNIaM taM sAhujaNaM namasAmi / /
vayAzrayam - prAkRtam na mana unako namana bhavanirveda se prerita mana kA jaya
aura laya karane ke lie prayatnazIla aura usase roSa aura toSa se dUra bane hue
jitendriya sAdhujana ko nmn...| kAmarAga snehraagaaviisstkrnivaarnnau|
dRSTirAgastu pApIyAn durucchedaHsatAmapi / / - vItarAgastotram vItarAga banane
kI icchAvAle ko tIna prakAra ke rAgoM ko vaza karanA Avazyaka hai| usameM kAma
rAga sneharAga to alpa parizrama se bhI dUra kiye jA sakate hai| paraMtu kisI
vyakti, yA koI mAnyatA kI aMdha-jhanunI bhaktirAga rUpI dRSTi rAga ko dUra
karanA usakA uccheda karanA sajjanoM ke lie bhI duHzakya hai|| sUristIrthaM
jaGgamaM martyaloke, sUristattvAlokane hstdiipH|| sUrimokSa zrI samAyogadUtaH,
sUriH sAkSAddharmabandhu buMdhAnAm / / AcArya mAnavaloka meM jaMgama tIrtharUpa
hai, AcArya tattvAlokana meM hAtha meM rahe dIpaka samAna hai| AcArya
mokSalakSmI ke yoga meM dUta samAna aura paMDitoM ke lie sAkSAt dharmabindu
samAna AcArya hai| MULTY GRAPHICS AL(022) 23873222 23884222 isa pustaka ko
par3hane meM pramAda na kre|

